The Immoralist (André Gide, 1902)
==========================================================
Gide's récit of Michel's liberation into amorality — the book that made him the conscience (and scandal) of French letters. Translated by Dorothy Bussy (1930). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/immoralistnovel0000andr).

2

‘TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY

Dorothy Bussy

_ VINTAGE BOOKS

A DIVISION OF RANDOM HOUSE
York

VINTAGE BOOKS
are published by ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC.

and RANDOM HOUSE, INC.

Vy Poe vee Te ws

WG

PPL Eee Ve ag NS END Cae

i

La me eee

iby

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copy-—

right Conventions.

Originally published as L’IMMORALISTE.

Manufactured in the United States of America

To

MY COMRADE AND FELLOW-TRAVELLER

HENRI GHEON

I WILL PRAISE THEE;
FOR I AM FEARFULLY AND

WONDERFULLY MADE

PSALMS, CXXXIX, 14

n
is

PREFACE

I present this book for what it is worth—a fruit filled
_with bitter ashes, like those colocinths of the desert

_ that grow in a parched and burning soil. All they can

offer to your thirst is a still more cruel fierceness—

_ yet lying on the golden sand they are not without a

beauty of their own.
If I had held my hero up as an example, it must
be admitted that my success would have been small.

- The few readers who were disposed to interest them-

selves in Michel’s adventure did so only to reprobate

him with all the superiority of their kind hearts. It
‘was not in vain that I had adorned Marceline with
so many virtues; they could not forgive Michel for
not preferring her to himself.

If I had intended this book to be an indictment
of Michel, I should have succeeded as little, for no
one was grateful to me for the indignation he felt
against my hero; it was as though he felt this indigna-
tion in spite of me; it overflowed from Michel onto
myself; I seemed indeed within an ace of being con-
founded with him.

- But I intended to make this book as little an in-

_ dictment as an apology and took care to pass no

judgment. The public nowadays will not forgive an
author who, after relating an action, does not declare
himself either for or against it; more than this, dur-
ing the very course of the drama they want him to
take sides, pronounce in favor either of Alceste or
Philinte, of Hamlet or Ophelia, of Faust or Mar-
garet, of Adam or Jehovah. I do not indeed claim
that neutrality (I was going to say “indecision” ) is
the certain mark of a great mind; but I believe that

vill Preface

many great minds have been very loath to . . . con- i

clude—and that to state a problem clearly is not to
_ suppose it solved in advance.

It is with reluctance that I use the word
“problem” here. To tell the truth, in art there are no
problems—that are not sufficiently solved by the
work of art itself.

If by “problem” one means “drama,” shall I say

that the one recounted in this book, though the scene

of it is laid in my hero’s soul, is nevertheless too gen-
eral to remain circumscribed in his individual ad-
venture. I do not pretend to have invented this
“problem”; it existed before my book; whether Mi-
chel triumph or succumb, the “problem” will continue
to exist, and the author has avoided taking either
triumph or defeat for granted.

If certain distinguished minds have refused to
see in this drama anything but the exposition of a
special case, and in its hero anything but a sufferer
from disease, if they have failed to recognize that
ideas of very urgent import and very general interest
may nevertheless be found in it—the fault lies neither
in those ideas nor in that drama, but in the author—
in his lack of skill, I should say—though he has put
into this book all his passion and all his care, though

he has watered it with many tears. But the real inter- :

est of a work and the interest taken in it by an
ephemeral public are two very different things. A

man may, I think, without much conceit, take the SS

risk of not arousing immediate interest in interesting
things—he may even prefer this to exciting a mo-
mentary delight in a public greedy only for sweets
and trifles.

For the rest, I have not tried to prove anything, ©

but only to paint my picture well and to set it in a
good light.

ate. ee Aes >

Wi Seg iw Re ears ae a

Pan AT

bh iy

iG

- te Nis

(To the Prime Minister, Mr. D. R.)

A

S)

g

:

§ Sidi B.M., 30th July 189
= YES, MY DEAR BROTHER, Of course, ds you sup
_ posed, Michel has confided in us. Here is his story.
You asked me to let you have it and I promised to;
i but now at the last moment I hesitate to send it and
the oftener I re-read it the more dreadful it seems.
Oh, what, I wonder, will you think of our friend?
: What, for that matter, do I think of him myself?

... Are we simply to reprobate him and deny the
possibility of turning to good account faculties so
manifestly cruel? But I fear there are not a few
among us today who would be bold enough to rec-
ognize their own features in this tale. Will it be pos-
sible to invent some way of employing all this in-
telligence and strength? Or must they be altogether

outlawed?
f In what way can Michel serve society? I admit I
cannot guess... . He must have some occupation.

Will the position and the power you have so de-
servedly attained enable you to find one? Make
haste. Michel is still capable of devotion. Yes, he
is so still. But it will soon be only to himself.

I am writing to you under a sky of flawless blue;
during the twelve days that Denis, Daniel, and my-
self have been here, there has not been a single cloud
nor the slightest diminution of sunshine. Michel
says the weather has been of crystalline clearness
for the last two months.

4 The Immoralist

I am neither sad nor cheerful; the air here fills
one with a kind of vague excitement and induces a

state as far removed from cheerfulness as it is from —

sorrow; perhaps it is happiness.
We are staying with Michel; we are anxious not

to leave him; you will understand why when you
have read these pages; so we shall await your reply —

here, in his house; lose no time about it.

You know what ties of friendship bound Michel, —

Denis, Daniel, and myself together—a friendship
which was strong even in our school days, but which
every year grew stronger. A kind of pact was con-
cluded between us four—at the first summons of

Fe ee

Wes a pe

the uf boil:

any one of us the other three were to hasten. So when _

I received that mysterious signal of alarm from —
Michel, I immediately informed Daniel and Denis, —

and we all three let everything go and set out.
It is three years since we last saw Michel. He had
married and gone traveling with his wife, and at the
time of his last stay in Paris, Denis was in Greece,
Daniel in Russia, and I, as you know, looking after

our sick father. We were not, however, without —

news, though the account given of him by Silas and
Will, who saw him at that time, was, to say the
least, surprising. He was no longer the learned Puri-
tan of old days, whose behavior was made awkward
by his very earnestness, whose clear and simple gaze
had so often checked the looseness of our talk. He
was ... but why forestall what his story will tell
youP

Here is his story, then, just as Denis, Daniel, and

I heard it. Michel told it us on his terrace, as we

were lying beside him in the dark and the starlight.

At the end of his tale we saw day rising over the —

plain. Michel's house looks down on it and on the .
village, which is not far off. In the hot weather, and

The Immoralist 5

with all its crops reaped, this plain looks like the
desert.

Michel's house, though poor and quaint-look-
ing, is charming. In winter it would be cold, for there
is no glass in the windows—or rather, there are no
windows, but huge holes in the walls. It is so fine that
we sleep out of doors on mats.

Let me add that we had a good journey out. We
arrived here one evening, gasping with heat, intoxi-
cated with novelty, after having barely stopped on
the way, first at Algiers and then at Constantine. At
Constantine we took a second train to Sidi B.M.,
where a little cart was waiting for us. The road comes
to an end some way from the village, which is
perched on the top of a rock, like certain little hill-
towns in Umbria. We climbed up on foot; two mules
took our luggage. Approached by the road, Michel's
house is the first in the village. It is surrounded by
the low walls of a garden—or rather, an enclosure,
in which there grow three stunted pomegranate-trees
and a superb oleander. A little Kabyle boy ran away
at sight of us and scrambled over the wall without
more ado.

Michel showed no signs of pleasure as he wel-
comed us; he was very simple and seemed afraid of
any demonstrations of tenderness; but on the thresh-
old he stopped and kissed each one of us gravely.

Until night came we barely exchanged a dozen
words. An almost excessively frugal dinner was laid
for us in a drawing-room where the decorations were
so sumptuous that we were astonished by them,
though they were afterwards explained by Michels
story. Then he served us coffee, which he made a
point of preparing himself; and afterwards we went
up onto the terrace, where the view stretched away
into infinity, and all three of us, like Job’s comforters,

6 The Immoralist

sat down and waited, watching and admiring the
day's abrupt decline over the incandescent plain.
When it was night Michel said:

v

fz.
i.
a
a
a
yy
a
%!
#]
—-
a
i
al \

FIRST PART |

a

My bear Frienps, I knew you were faithful. You have
answered my summons as quickly as I should have ~
answered yours. And yet three years have gone by —
without your seeing me. May your friendship, which
has been so proof against absence, be equally proof
against the story I am going to tell you. For it was
solely to see you, solely that you might listen to me,
that I called upon you so suddenly and made you
take this journey to my distant abode. The only help
I wish for is this—to talk to you. For I have reached
a point in my life beyond which I cannot go. Not
from weariness, though. But I can no longer under-
stand things. I want . . . I want to talk, I tell you.
To know how to free oneself is nothing; the arduous
thing is to know what to do with one’s freedom. Let
me speak of myself; I am going to tell you my life
simply, without modesty and without pride, more

simply than if I were talking to myself. Listen:

The last time we saw each other, I remember,
was in the neighborhood of Angers, in the little”
country church in which I was married. There were
very few people at my wedding, and the presence of
real friends turned this commonplace function into
something touching. I felt that others were moved,
and that in itself was enough to move me. After we
left the church, you joined us at my bride’s house for
a short meal, at which there was neither noise nor

8 The Immoralist

laughter; then she and I drove away in a hired car-
riage, according to the custom by which we always
have to associate the idea of a wedding with the vi-
sion of a railway station.

I knew my wife very little and thought, without
being much distressed by it, that she knew me no bet-
ter. I had married her without being in love, largely
_ in order to please my father, who, as he lay dying,
felt anxious at leaving me alone. I loved my father
dearly; engrossed by his last illness, I had thought
of nothing else all through that melancholy time but
how to make his end easier; and so I pledged my life
before I knew what the possibilities of life were. Our
betrothal took place at my dying father’s bedside,

without laughter but not without a certain grave joy,

so great was the peace it brought him. If, as I say, I
did not love my betrothed, at any rate I had never
loved any other woman. This seemed to me sufficient
to secure our happiness; and I thought I was giving

her the whole of myself, without having any knowl- —

edge of what that self was. She was an orphan, as I
was, and lived with her two brothers. Her name was

Marceline; she was barely twenty; I was four years

older.
I have said I did not love her—at any rate, I felt

for her nothing of what is generally known as love,

_ but I loved her, if that word may cover a feeling of
tenderness, a sort of pity, and a considerable meas-
ure of esteem. She was a Catholic and I a Protestant
. .. but, thought I, so little of a Protestant! The
priest accepted me; I accepted the priest; it all went
off without a hitch.

My father was what is called an “atheist”—at
least so I suppose, for a kind of invincible shyness,
which I imagined he shared, had always made it im-

i

te al tt rcp | ay Se

~ ita baie EBS

1}
f Aoi ona

mein Sere eed Ji
ea ire as is oa hie

First Part 9

_ possible for me to talk to him about his beliefs. The
_ grave Huguenot teaching which my mother had
_ given me had slowly faded from my mind together

with the image of her beauty; you know I was young
when I lost her. I did not then suspect how great a
hold the early moral lessons of our childhood take
on one, nor what marks they leave upon the mind.
That kind of austerity for which a taste had been left
in me by my mother’s way of bringing me up, I now
applied wholly to my studies. I was fifteen when I
lost her; my father took me in hand, looked after me,
and himself instructed me with passionate eagerness.
I already knew Latin and Greek well; under him I
quickly learned Hebrew, Sanskrit, and finally Persian
and Arabic. When I was about twenty I had been so
intensively forced that he actually made me his col-
laborator. It amused him to claim me as his equal
and he wanted to show me he was right. The Essay
on Phrygian Cults which appeared under his name
was in reality my work; he scarcely read it over;
nothing he had written ever brought him so much
praise. He was delighted. As for me, I was a little
abashed by the success of this deception. But my
reputation was made. The most learned scholars
treated me as their colleague. I smile now at all the
honors that were paid me. ... And so I reached
the age of twenty-five, having barely cast a glance at
anything but books and ruins and knowing nothing
of life; I spent all my fervor in my work. I loved a
few friends (you were among them), but it was not
so much my friends I loved as friendship—it was a
craving for high-mindedness that made my devotion
to them so great; I cherished in myself each and all
of my fine feelings. For the rest, I knew my friends
as little as I knew myself. The idea that I might have

A such matters that even after my father’s death, “a

_ lived a different existence or that anyone could pos- _
__ sibly live differently never for a moment crossed my

- things; we both of us spent so little that I reached —

rich. I imagined, without giving it much thought, that — 3

tent of my fortune; I did so only when our marriage 4 :

_ health. How should I have known this, when I had

mt

10 The lmmoralist HD ar Oe nae oo

a}

My father and I were satisfied with simple _

the age of twenty-five without knowing that we were

we had just enough to live on. And the habits of
economy I had acquired with my father were so great _
that I felt almost uncomfortable when I learned that —
we had a great deal more. I was so careless about

though I was his sole heir, I failed to realize the ex- ™

settlements were being drawn up, and at the same
time I learned that Marceline brought me next to
nothing. “a
And another thing I was ignorant of—even more
important perhaps—was that I had very delicate _

never put it to the test? I had colds from time to time __
and neglected them. The excessive tranquillity of the _
life I led weakened, while at the same time it pro-
tected, me. Marceline, on the contrary, seemed _
strong—that she was stronger than I we were very
soon to learn. 2 ae

On our wedding-day we went straight to Paris "

and slept in my apartment, where two rooms had

been got ready for us. We stayed in Paris only just

_ long enough to do some necessary shopping, then

took the train to Marseilles and embarked at once
for Tunis.

So many urgent things to be done, so many be-
wildering events following each other in too rapid

4 4

a A EASE LE ATE Il

me from feeling it. The enforced leisure on board

- succession, the unavoidable agitation of my wedding —
coming so soon after the more genuine emotion
__ caused by my father’s death—all of this had left me ~
__ exhausted. It was only on the boat that I was able
to realize how tired I was. Up till then, every oc-_
cupation, while increasing my fatigue, had distracted —

ship at last enabled me to reflect. For the first time,

so it seemed to me.
It was for the first time too that I had consented

to forgo my work for any length of time. Up till then —

I had only allowed myself short holidays. A journey

to Spain with my father shortly after my mother's

death had, it is true, lasted over a month; another to
Germany, six weeks; there were others too, but they
had all been student’s journeys; my father was never

to be distracted from his own particular researches;
when I was not accompanying him, I used to read.
And yet, we had hardly left Marseilles when mem- —

ories came back to me of Granada and Seville, of a

purer sky, of franker shadows, of dances, of laughter,

of songs. That is what we are going to find, f thought.
I went up on to the deck and watched Marseilles dis-

appearing in the distance.

Then, suddenly, it occurred to me that I was
leaving Marceline a little too much to herself.

She was sitting in the bow; I drew near, and for
the first time really looked at her.

Marceline was very pretty. You saw her, so you
know. I reproached myself for not having noticed it
sooner. I had known her too long to see her with any
freshness of vision; our families had been friends for
ages; I had seen her grow up; I was accustomed to
her grace... . For the first time now I was struck
with astonishment, it seemed to me so great.

She wore a big veil floating from a simple black

12 The Immoralist

straw hat; she was fair, but did not look delicate.

Her bodice and skirt were made of the same material —

—a Scotch plaid which we had chosen together. I
had not wanted the gloom of my mourning to over-
shadow her. .

She felt I was looking at her and turned toward
me... until then I had paid her only the neces-
sary official attentions; I replaced love as best I could
by a kind of frigid gallantry, which I saw well enough
she found rather tiresome; perhaps at that moment
Marceline felt I was looking at her for the first time
in a different way. She in her turn looked fixedly at
me; then, very tenderly, smiled. I sat down beside
her without speaking. I had lived up to then for my-
self alone, or at any rate in my own fashion; I had
married without imagining I should find in my wife
anything different from a comrade, without thinking
at all definitely that my life might be changed by our
union. And now at last I realized that the monologue
had come to an end.

We were alone on deck. She held up her face
and I gently pressed her to me; she raised her eyes; I
kissed her on the eyelids and suddenly felt as I kissed
her an unfamiliar kind of pity, which took hold of
me so violently that I could not restrain my tears.

“What is it, dear?” said Marceline.

We began to talk. What she said was so
charming that it delighted me. I had picked up in
one way or another a few ideas on women’s silliness.
That evening, in her presence, it was myself I
thought awkward and stupid.

So the being to whom I had attached my life had
a real and individual life of her own! The importance
of this thought woke me up several times during the
night; several times I sat up in my berth in order to
look at Marceline, my wife, asleep in the berth below.

1d etd nie SIRO

jae sto

First Part 13

The next morning the sky was splendid; the sea
almost perfectly calm. A few leisurely talks lessened
our shyness still more. Marriage was really beginning.
On the morning of the last day of October we landed
in Tunis.

I intended to stay there only a few days. I will
confess my folly; in so new a country nothing at-
tracted me except Carthage and a few Roman ruins
—Timgad, about which Octave had spoken to me,
the mosaics of Sousse, and above all the amphi-
theater of El Djem, which I decided we must visit
without delay. We had first to get to Sousse, and
from Sousse take the mail diligence; between there
and here I was determined to think nothing worth
my attention.

And yet Tunis surprised me greatly. At the touch
of new sensations, certain portions of me awoke—
certain sleeping faculties, which, from not having as
yet been used, had kept all their mysterious fresh-
ness. But I was more astonished, more bewildered
than amused, and what pleased me most was Mar-
celine’s delight.

My fatigue in the meantime was growing greater
every day; but I should have thought it shameful to
give in to it. I had a bad cough and a curious feeling
of discomfort in the upper part of my chest. We are
going toward the south, I thought; the heat will put
me to rights again.

The Sfax diligence leaves Sousse at eight o'clock
in the evening and passes through El Djem at one
o'clock in the morning. We had engaged coupé
places; I expected to find an uncomfortable shan-
drydan; the seats, however, were fairly commodious.
But oh, the cold! .. . We were both lightly clad

ete iN yu) ae ANAL TS SRE” Biop O~ bhp mages
ado gin ae ; j toe ae

ie 14 The ener ROO Gr ood Pe tea =
and, with a kind of childish confidence in the Brahe
of southern climes, had taken no wrap with us buta _
_ single shawl. As soon as we were out of Sousse and ES
the shelter of its hills, the wind began to blow. It
leaped over the plain in great bounds, howling, —
whistling, coming in by every chink of the door and it

windows—impossible to protect oneself from it! We

_ were both chilled to the bone when we arrived, and
_ I was exhausted as well by the jolting of the carriage
and by my horrible cough, which shook me even |

worse. What a night! When we got to El Djem, there _
was no inn, nothing but a frightful native bordj.
_ What was to be done? The diligence was going on;
the village was asleep; the lugubrious mass of the ©
ruins lowered dimly through the dark immensity of
_ the night; dogs were howling. We went into a room

whose walls and floor were made of mud and in

- which stood two wretched beds. Marceline was shiv-

_ ering with cold, but here at any rate we were out of

the wind.
The next day was a dismal one. We were sur-

_ prised on going out to see a sky that was one unre-
lieved gray. The wind was still blowing, but less

violently than the night before. The diligence passed

through again only in the evening....It was a —
_ dismal day, I tell you. I went over the amphitheater

in a few minutes and found it disappointing; I
thought it actually ugly under that dreary sky. Per-
haps my fatigue added to my feeling of tedium. To-

ward the middle ot the day, as I had nothing else to —

do, I went back to the ruins and searched in vain for

inscriptions on the stones. Marceline found a place
_ that was sheltered from the wind and sat reading an
English book, which by good luck she had brought

with her. I went and sat beside her.

eT eae eee Ee

ty Ne

oS a Ra Ee eer
. - 5 ; ee ee

First Part =—s15 ©
_ “What a melancholy day!” I said. “Aren't you
bored?” . eaters

“Not particularly. I am reading.”

“What made us come to such a place? I hope you
are not cold, are you?”

_ “Not so very. And you? Oh, you must be. How |

pale you are!”

“No, oh no!”

At night, the wind began again as violently as
ever. ... At last the diligence arrived. We started.
No sooner did the jolting begin than I felt shat-
tered. Marceline, who was very tired, had gone to
sleep almost at once on my shoulder. My cough will
wake her, I thought, and freeing myself very, very
gently, I propped her head against the side of the
carriage. In the. meantime I had stopped coughing;
yes; I had begun to spit instead; this was something
new; I brought it up without an effort; it came in
little jerks at regular intervals; the sensation was so
odd that at first it almost amused me, but I was soon
disgusted by the peculiar taste it left in my mouth.
My handkerchief was very soon used up. My fingers
were covered with it. Should I wake up Marceline?
... Fortunately I thought of a large silk foulard
she was wearing tucked into her belt. I took posses-
sion of it quietly. The spitting, which I no longer
tried to keep back, came more abundantly and I was
extraordinarily relieved by it. It is the end of my
cold, I thought. Then, there suddenly came over me
a feeling of extreme weakness; everything began to
spin round and I thought I was going to faint. Should
I wake her up? . . . No, shame! . . . (My puritan-
ical childhood has left me, I think, a hatred of any
surrender to bodily weakness—cowardice, I call it.)

I controlled myself, made a desperate effort, and

16 The Immoralist

finally conquered my giddiness. ...I felt as if I
were at sea again, and the noise of the wheels turned
into the sound of the waves. . . . But I had stopped
spitting. .

Then I sank, overpowered, into a sort of sleep.

When I emerged from it, the sky was already fill-
ing with dawn. Marceline was still asleep. We were
just getting to Sousse. The foulard I was holding in
my hand was dark-colored, so that at first I saw
nothing; but when I took out my handkerchief, I
saw with stupefaction that it was soaked with blood.

My first thought was to hide the blood from
Marceline. But how? I was covered with it; it seemed
to be everywhere; on my fingers especially. . . . My
nose might perhaps have been bleeding. . . . That's
it! If she asks me, I shall say my nose has been bleed-
ing.

; Marceline was still asleep. We drew up at the
Sousse hotel. She had to get down first and saw noth-
ing. Our two rooms had been kept for us. I was able
to dart into mine and wash away every trace of
blood. Marceline had seen nothing.

I was feeling very weak, however, and ordered
some tea to be brought. And as she was pouring it
out, a little pale herself, but very calm and smiling,
a kind of irritation seized me to think she had not
had the sense to see anything. I felt indeed that I was
being unjust, and said to myself that she saw nothing
only because I had hidden it from her so cleverly;
but I couldn't help it—the feeling grew in me like an
instinct, filled me...and at last it became too
strong; I could contain myself no longer; the words
slipped out, as though absent-mindedly:

“I spat blood last night.”

She did not utter a sound; she simply turned

aie. 2) Ee

| First: Part" .17 se
much paler, tottered, tried to save herself, and fell f:
heavily to the ground. oS eae
I sprang to her in a sort of fury: “Marcelinel
Marcelinel” What on earth had I done? Wasn't it
enough for me to be ill? But, as I have said, I was.
very weak; I was on the point of fainting myself. I
managed, however, to open the door and call. Some- |
one hurried to our help. "
I remembered that I had a letter of introduction’ _

to an officer in the town, and on the strength of this

I sent for the regimental doctor.

Marceline in the meantime had recovered her-—
self and settled down at my bedside, where I lay shiv-_
ering with fever. The doctor came and examined us —

both; there was nothing the matter with Marceline, _

he declared, and she had not been hurt by her fall;
I was seriously ill; he refused to give a definite opin-
ion and promised to come back before evening.

He came back, smiled at me, talked to me, and
prescribed various remedies. I realized that he gave
me up for lost. Shall I confess that I felt not the least
shock? I was very tired, I simply let myself go. After
all, what had life to offer? I had worked faithfully to
the end, resolutely and passionately done my duty.
The rest . . . oh! what did it matter? thought I, with
a certain admiration of my own stoicism. What
really pained me was the ugliness of my sur- —
roundings. This hotel room is frightful, I thought,
and looked at it. Suddenly it occurred to me that in a
like room next door was my wife, Marceline; and I_-
heard her speaking. The doctor had not gone; he was
talking to her; he was studiously lowering his voice.
A little time went by—I must have slept. . . .

When I woke up, Marceline was there. I could
see she had been crying. I did not care for life enough

aa

“eh ne The Immoralist Makara

‘Wat almost voluptuous.

Nex looked very pretty. I saw her fasten up several let-

st ters. Then she got up, drew near my bed, and took >

_ my hand tenderly.
“How are you feeling now?” she asked.
I smiled and said sadly: “Shall I get better?”

brought conviction to me too, and there came over
_me a kind of confused feeling of all that life might
‘mean, of Marceline’s own love—a vague vision of
such pathetic beauties that the tears started from
| my yeves and I wept long and helplessly without try-
a ing” or wanting to stop.
_.~. With what loving violence she managed to get
me away from Sousse! How charmingly she pro-
» tected me, helped me, nursed me! From Sousse to
Tunis, from Tunis to Constantine, Marceline was ad-
_mirable. It was at Biskra that I was to get well. Her
confidence was perfect; never for a.single moment
did her zeal slacken. She settled everything, arranged
_ “the starts, engaged the rooms. It was not in her
! “power, alas! to make the journey less horrible. Several
times I thought I should have to stop and give up. I
sweated mortally; I gasped for breath; at times I lost
consciousness. At the end of the third day, I arrived
j at Biskra more dead than alive.

aaepei = Sr ~

us Tew She was sitting by me writing, I thought she

_ But she answered at once: “You shall get better”
_ with such passionate conviction that it almost

(ia nian gla ds Hee A in ching. Sn oy Pat:

a to. pity myself; but the ugliness of the place eued ‘,
me; my eyes rested on her with a pleasure that was _

isalioat

Nee aE yi i shied a :
ee re ke ean LON. meen See MEr Oy pt pe

[;
Fe

oe
winter

eS

Me pm, &, ¥
he Jet wT’ eT

First Part 19

2

Way speak of those first days? What remains of ©
them? Their frightful memory has no tongue. I lost —
all knowledge of who or where I was. I can only see
Marceline, my wife, my life, bending over the bed
where I lay agonizing. I know that her passionate
care, her love, alone saved me. One day, at last, like
a shipwrecked mariner who catches sight of land, I
felt a gleam of life revisit me; I was able to smile at
Marceline. Why should I recall all this? What is im-
portant is that Death had touched me, as people say,
with its wing. What is important is that I came to
think it a very astonishing thing to be alive, that —
every day shone for me, an unhoped-for light. Before,
thought I, I did not understand I was alive. The
thrilling discovery of life was to be mine.

The day came when I was able to get up. I was
utterly enchanted by our home. It was almost noth-
ing but a terrace. What a terrace! My room and Mar-
celine’s opened out onto it; at the further end it was
continued over roofs. From the highest part, one saw
palm-trees above the houses; and above the palm-
trees, the desert. On the other side, the terrace ad-
joined the public gardens and was shaded by the
branches of the nearest cassias; lastly, it ran along one
side of the courtyard—a small, regular courtyard,
planted regularly with six palm-trees—and came to
an end with the staircase that led down to the court-
yard. My room was spacious and airy; the walls were
bare and whitewashed; a little door led to Marceline’s
room; a large door with glass panes opened onto the
terrace.

~ The Immoralist

Es, H Phere the hourless days slipped by. How often
b hs my solitude those slow-slipping days come back

: Ne to mel . . Marceline sits beside me. She is reading,
Na or. ‘sewing, or writing. I am doing wa ele, look-
: ~ ing at her. O Marceline! Marcelinel . I look. I 8

see the sun; I see the shadow; I see rahe line of
shadow moving; I have so little to think of that I
int watch it. I am still very weak; my breathing is very
ai). bad; everything tires me—even reading; besides,
iF what spond I read? Existing is occupation enough.

Pe
ay

One morning Marceline came in laughing.

“I have brought you a friend,” she said, and I
saw come in behind her a little dark-complexioned
Arab. His name was Bachir and he had large silent _
eyes that looked at me. They made me feel embar-
rassed, and that was enough to tire me. I said noth-

ing, only looked cross. The child, disconcerted by
_ the coldness of my reception, turned to Marceline
and, with the coaxing grace of a little animal, nestled
: ae gatas her, took her hand and kissed it, show-
ing his bare arms as he did so. I noticed that under
his thin, white gandourah and patched burnous he
was naked.
ie! “Come, sit down there,” said Marceline, who
Whaat noticed my shyness. “Amuse yourself quietly.”
| The little fellow sat down on the floor, took a
knife and a piece of djerid wood out of the hood of
his burnous, and began to slice at it. I think it was a
whistle he was trying to make.

After a little time, I ceased to feel uncomforta-
ble. I looked at him; he seemed to have forgotten
where he was. His feet were bare; he had charmingly

~. turned ankles and wrists. He handled his wretched
knife with amusing dexterity. ... Was this really

First Part 21

going to interest me? . . . His hair was shaved Arab
fashion; he wore a shabby chechia on his head with a
hole in the place of the tassel. His gandourah, which
had slipped down a little, showed his delicate little
shoulder. I wanted to touch it. I bent down; he
turned round and smiled at me. I signed to him to
pass me his whistle, took it and pretended to admire
it. After a time he said he must go. Marceline gave
him a cake and I a penny.

The next day, for the first time, I felt dull. I
seemed to be expecting something. Expecting what?
I was listless, restless. At last I could resist no longer.

“Isn't Bachir coming this morning, Marceline?”

“If you like, I'll fetch him.”

She left me and went out; after a little she came
back alone. What kind of thing had illness made me
that I should have felt inclined to cry at seeing her
return without Bachir?

“It was too late,” she said, “the children had
come out of school and dispersed. Some of them are
really charming. I think they all know me now.”

“Well, at any rate, try and get him to come to-
morrow.”

Next morning Bachir came back. He sat down
in the same way he had done two days before, took
out his knife and tried to carve his bit of wood, but
it was too hard for him and he finally managed to
stick the blade into his thumb. I shuddered with
horror, but he laughed, held out his hand for me to
see the glistening cut and Icoked amused at the sight
of his blood running. When he laughed, he showed
very white teeth; he licked his cut complacently and
his tongue was as pink as a cat's. Ah! how well he
looked! That was what I had fallen in love with—
his health. The health of that little body was a beau-

tiful thing.

SRO aaa Trp Wa Uhl Nt >

‘The Inmmoralist are

The day after, he Brought some  caetbiee ey.

wanted to make me play. Marceline was out or she f :

would have prevented me. I hesitated and looked i

at Bachir; the little fellow seized my arm, put the _
Ri marbles into my hand, forced me. The attitude of
_ stooping made me very breathless, but I tried to
play all the same. Bachir’s pleasure charmed me. At

last, however, it was too much for me. I -was in a

profuse perspiration. I pushed aside the marbles and

oe dropped into an armchair. Bachir, somewhat dis-

ing.

i turbed, looked at me.

_ “Til?” said he sweetly; the quality of his voice was

- exquisite. Marceline came back at that moment.

“Take him away,” I said, “I am tired this morn-
A few hours later I had a hemorrhage. It was
while I was taking a laborious walk up and down
the terrace; Marceline was busy in her room and for-

_tunately saw nothing. My breathlessness had made

me take a deeper respiration than usual and the thing

a had suddenly come. It had filled my mouth. . . . But ©

it was no longer bright, clear blood as on the first oc-

_ casion. It was a frightful great clot which I spat on to

‘the ground in disgust.

I took a few tottering steps. I was horribly upset.

_ I was frightened; I was angry. For up till then I had
_ thought that, step by step, recovery was on the way,

and that I had nothing to do but wait for it. This
brutal accident had thrown me back. The strange
thing is that the first hemorrhage had not affected me
so much. I now remembered it had left me almost

calm. What was the reason for my fear, my horror

now? Alas! it was because I had begun to love life.

I returned on my steps, bent down, found the
clot, and with a piece of straw picked it up and put
it on mv handkerchief. It was hideous, almost black

Rg ene nit a First Part 23 4
in color, sticky, slimy, horrible. ... I thought of |

suddenly I was seized with a desire, a craving,

something more furious and more imperious than I _

had ever felt before—to live! I want to live! I will

live. I clenched my teeth, my hands concentrated my ie
whole being in this wild, grief-stricken endeavor to-

ward existence. sn
The day before, I had received a letter from

T ...., written in answer to Marceline’s anxious in- _
_ quiries; it was full of medical advice; T... had —

even accompanied his letter with one or two little
popular medical pamphlets and a book of a more

- technical nature, which for that reason seemed to

me more serious. I had read the letter carelessly and
the printed matter not at all; in the first place I was —
set against the pamphlets because of their likeness —
to the moral tracts that used to tease me in my child-
hood; and then too every kind of advice was irksome —
to me; and besides, I did not think that Advice to
Tuberculous Patients or How to Cure Tuberculosis
in any way concerned me. I did not think I was tuber-
culous. I inclined to attribute my first hemorrhage to
a different cause; or rather, to tell the truth, I did not
attribute it to anything; I avoided thinking of it,
hardly thought of it at all, and considered myself, if
not altogether cured, at least very nearly so... . I
read the letter; I devoured the book, the pamphlets.
Suddenly, with shocking clearness, it became evident
to me that I had not been treating myself properly. -
Hitherto, I had let myself live passively, trusting to
the vaguest of hopes; suddenly I perceived my life
was attacked—attacked in its very center. An active
host of enemies was living within me. I listened to
them; I spied on them; I felt them. I should not van-
quish them without a struggle . . . and I added half

Bachir’s beautiful, brilliant flow of blood.... And _

24 The Immoralist.

aloud, as if better to convince myself: “It is a matter
of will.”

I put myself in a state of hostility.

Evening was closing in; I planned my strategy.
For some time to come, my recovery was to be my
one and only concern; my duty was my health; I must
_ think good, I must call right everything that was salu-
tary to me, forget everything ‘that did not contribute
to my cure. Before the evening meal, I had decided
on my measures with regard to breathing, exercise,
and nourishment.

We used to take our meals in a sort of little kiosk
that was surrounded by the terrace on all sides. We
were alone, quiet, far from everything, and the in-
timacy of our meals was delightful. An old Negro
used to bring us our food, which was tolerable, from

a neighboring hotel. Marceline superintended the

menus, ordered one dish or rejected another. .

_ Not having much appetite as a rule, I did not mind
particularly when the dishes were a failure or the
menu insufficient. Marceline, who was herself a small
eater, did not know, did not realize that I was not
taking enough food. To eat a great deal was the first
of my new resolutions. I intended to put it into exe-
cution that very evening. I was not able to. We had
some sort of uneatable hash, and then a bit of roast
meat which was absurdly overdone.

My irritation was so great that I vented it upon
Marceline and let myself go in a flood of intemper-
ate words. I blamed her; to listen to me, it was as
though she was responsible for the badness of the

food. This slight delay in starting on the regime I had

decided to adopt seemed of the gravest importance;
I forgot the preceding days; the failure of this one
meal spoiled everything. I persisted obstinately. Mar-

ede A SR)

First Part 25

celine had to go into the town to buy a tin or a jar of
anything she could find.

_ She soon came back with a little terrine, of which
I devoured almost the whole contents, as though to
prove to us both how much I was in need of more
food.

That same evening we settled on the follow-
ing plan: the meals were to be much better and there
were to be more of them—one every three hours, be-
ginning as early as half past six in the morning. An
abundant provision of every kind of tinned food was
to supplement the deficiencies of the hotel menus.

I could not sleep that night, so excited was I by
the vision of my future virtues. I was, I think, a little —
feverish; there was a bottle of mineral water beside
me; I drank a glass, two glasses; the third time,
I drank out of the bottle itself and emptied it at a
draught. I strengthened my will as one strengthens
one’s memory by revising a lesson; I instructed my
hostility, directed it against all and sundry; I was to
fight with everything; my salvation depended on my-
self alone.

At last I saw the night begin to pale; another day
had dawned.

It had been my night ot vigil before the battle.

The next day was Sunday. Must I confess that so
far I had paid very little attention to Marceline’s re-
ligious beliefs? Either from indifference or delicacy,
it seemed to me they were no business of mine; and
then I did not attach much importance to them. That
morning Marceline went to Mass. When she came
back, she told me she had been praying for me.
I looked at her fixedly and then said as gently as I
could:

“You mustn’t pray for me, Marceline.”

™ id) 6¥ ba 3 > * \ a 1 ie ey “
roe 4 ton Sg is a
i x AY aa ult : ha ee yee:

26 The Immoralist 0
“Why not?” she asked, a little troubled.

“I don’t want favors.”

“Do you reject the help of God?”

“He would have a right to my gratitude after:

wards. It entails obligations. I don’t like them.”

To all appearance we were trifling, but we made
no mistake as to the importance of our words.
) “You will not get well all by yourself, my poor
dear,” she sighed.

“If so, it can’t be helped.” Then, seeing how un-
happy she looked, I added less roughly:

“You will help me.”

Je

I am going to speak at length of my body. I shall

speak of it so much you will think at first I have for-

gotten my soul. This omission, as I tell you my story,
is intentional; out there, it was a fact. I had not

strength enough to keep up a double life. I will think —

of the spirit and that side of things later, I said to my-
self, when I get better.

I was still far from being well. The slightest thing
put me into a perspiration; the slightest thing gave
me a cold; my breath was short; sometimes I had a
little fever, and often, from early morning, oppressed
by a dreadful feeling of lassitude, I remained prostrate
in an armchair, indifferent to everything, self-
centered, solely occupied in trying to breathe prop-
erly. I breathed laboriously, methodically, carefully;
my expiration came in two jerks which, with the
greatest effort of my will, I could only partially con-
trol; for a long time after that, I still had need of all
my attention to avoid this.

5
®
ee
=
z
:
;
Bs

ate te ye te MO AMEE GN a cece TURN cert <

ioe ey ed id PURSE Parent 270
_ But what troubled me most was my morbid
_ sensibility to changes of temperature. I think, when I
come to reflect on it today, that, in addition to my
- illness, I was suffering from a general nervous de-
rangement. I cannot otherwise explain a series of
phenomena which it seems to me impossible to at- _
tribute entirely to a simple condition of tuberculosis. _
I was always either too hot or too cold; I put on a
ridiculous number of clothes, and only stopped —
shivering when I began to perspire; then, directly I
took anything off, I shivered as soon as I stopped
perspiring. Certain portions of my body would turn
as cold as ice and, in spite of perspiration, felt like
marble to the touch; nothing would warm them. I
was so sensitive to cold that if a little water dropped
- on my feet while I was washing, it gave me a relapse;
I was equally sensitive to heat. . . . This sensibility
I kept and still keep, but now it gives me exquisite
enjoyment. Any very keen sensibility may, I believe,
according as the organism is robust or weakly, be-
come a source of delight or discomfort. Everything
which formerly distressed me is now a delicious
pleasure.

I do not know how I had managed to sleep up
till then with my windows shut; in accordance with
T ...’s advice, I now tried keeping them open at
night; a little at first; soon I flung them wide; soon it
became a habit, a need so great that directly the win-
dow was shut, I felt stifled. Later on, with what rap-
ture was I to feel the night wind blow, the moon
shine in upon me! . ..

But I am eager to have done with these first
stammerings after health. Indeed, thanks to constant
attention, to pure air, to better food, I soon began to
improve. Up till then, my breathlessness had made
me dread the stairs and I had not dared to leave the

28 The Immoralist

terrace; in the last days of January I at last went down
and ventured into the garden.

Marceline came with me, carrying a shawl. It was _
three o'clock in the afternoon. The wind, which is

often violent in those parts and which I had found ~
particularly unpleasant during the last few days, had
dropped. The air was soft and charming.

The public gardens! . . . A very wide path runs ~
through the middle of them, shaded by two rows of —
that kind of very tall mimosa which out there is called
cassia. Benches are placed in the shadow of the trees.
A canalized river—one, I mean, that is not wide so
much as deep, and almost straight—flows alongside
the path; other smaller channels take the water from
the river and convey it through the gardens to the
plants; the thick, heavy-looking water is the same
color as the earth—the color of pinkish, grayish clay.
Hardly any foreigners walk here—only a few Arabs;
as they pass out of the sunlight, their white cloaks
take on the color of the shade.

I felt an odd shiver come over me as I stepped
into that strange shade; I wrapped my shawl tighter
about me; but it was not an unpleasant sensation;
on the contrary. We sat down on a bench. Marceline
was silent. Some Arabs passed by; then came a troop
of children. Marceline knew several of them; she
signed to them and they came up to us. She told
me some of their names; questions and answers
passed, smiles, pouts, little jokes. It all rather irritated
me and my feeling of embarrassment returned. I was
tired and perspiring. But must I confess that what
made me most uncomfortable was not the children’s
presence—it was Marceline’s. Yes; however slightly,
she was in my way. If I had got up, she would have
followed me; if I had taken off my shawl, she would
have wanted to carry it; if I had put it on again, she

First Part 29

would have said: “Are you cold?” And then, as to talk-

ing to the children, I didn’t dare to before her; I saw
that she had her favorites; I, in spite of myself, but
deliberately, took more interest in the others.

“Let us go in,” I said at last. And I privately re-
solved to come back to the gardens alone.
_ The next day, she had to go out about ten
o'clock; I took advantage of this. Little Bachir, who
rarely failed to come of a morning, carried my shawl;
I felt active, light-hearted. We were almost alone in
the garden path; I walked slowly, sometimes sat
down for a moment, then started off again. Bachir
followed, chattering, as faithful and as obsequious
as a dog. I reached a part of the canal where
the washerwomen come down to wash; there was a
flat stone placed in the middle of the stream, and
upon it lay a little girl, face downwards, dabbling
with her hand in the water; she was busy throwing
little odds and ends of sticks and grass into the water
and picking them out again. Her bare feet had
dipped in the water; there were still traces of wet on
them and there her skin showed darker. Bachir went
up and spoke to her; she turned round, gave me a
smile and answered Bachir in Arabic. “She is my sis-
ter,” he explained; then he said his mother was com-
ing to wash some clothes and that his little sister was
waiting for her. She was called Rhadra in Arabic,
which meant “Green.” He said all this in a voice that
was as charming, as clear, as childlike, as the emo-
tion I felt in hearing it.

“She wants you to give her two sous,” he added.

I gave her fifty centimes and prepared to go on,
when the mother, the washerwoman, came up. She
was a magnificent, heavily built woman, with a high
forehead tattooed in blue; she was carrying a basket
of linen on her head and was like a Greek caryatid;

ah 30 ey The ipiorane: Bh

Be ilike a caryatid too, she was sural sped in a 5 ia He
piece of dark-blue stuff, lifted at the girdle and falling

straight to the feet.

As soon as she saw Bachir, she called out to him >

roughly. He made an angry answer; the little girl
joined in and the three of them started a violent dis-
pute. At last Bachir seemed defeated and explained
that his mother wanted him that morning; he handed
me my shawl sadly and I was obliged to go off by
myself.

I had not taken twenty paces when my shawl

began to feel unendurably heavy. I sat down, perspir- _

ing, on the first bench I came to. I hoped some other
boy would come along and relieve me of my burden.
The one who soon appeared, and who offered to

carry it of his own accord, was a big boy about four- ;

teen years old, as black as a Sudanese and not in the
least shy. His name was Ashour. I should have

thought him handsome, but that he was blind in one ©

_eye. He liked talking; told me where the river came
from, and that after running through the public gar-
dens, it flowed into the oasis, which it traversed from
end to end. As I listened to him, I forgot my fatigue.
Charming as I thought Bachir, I knew him too well
by now, and I was glad of a change. I even promised
myself to come to the gardens all alone another day
and sit on a bench and wait for what some lucky
chance might bring... .

After a few more short rests, Ashour and I ar-
rived at my door. I wanted to invite him to come in,
_ but I was afraid to, not knowing what Marceline
would say.

I found her in the dining-room, busied over a

very small boy, so frail and sickly-looking that my

first feeling was one of disgust rather than pity. Mar-
- celine said rather timidly:

& EOP SE EGE IRE
“The poor little thing is ill.” .%
, “It’s not infectious, I hope. What's the matter
with him?”
“I don’t exactly know yet. He complains of feel-
ing ill all over. He speaks very little French. When

Bachir comes tomorrow, he will be able to interpret.

. .. 1am making him a little tea.”

Then, as if in excuse, and because I stood there
without saying anything, “I've known him a long
time,” she added. “I haven’t dared bring him in be-
fore; I was afraid of tiring you, or perhaps vexing
you

”?

“Why in the world!” I cried. “Bring in all the
children you like, if it amuses you!” And I thought,
with a little irritation at not having done so, that I
might have perfectly well brought up Ashour. |

And yet, as I thought this, I looked at my wife; —
how maternal and caressing she was! Her tenderness
was so touching that the little fellow went off warm
and comforted. I spoke of my walk and gently ex-
plained to Marceline why I preferred going out alone.

At that time, my nights were generally disturbed
by my constantly waking with a start—either frozen
with cold or bathed in sweat. That night was a very
good one. I hardly woke up at all. The next morning,
I was ready to go out by nine o'clock. It was fine; I
felt rested, not weak, happy—or rather, amused. The
air was calin and warm, but nevertheless I took my
shawl to serve as a pretext for making acquaintance
with the boy who might turn up to carry it. I have
said that the garden ran alongside our terrace, so
that I reached it in a moment. It was with rapture I
passed into its shade. The air was luminous. The cas-
sias, whose flowers come very early, before their
leaves, gave out a delicious scent—or was it from all
around me that came the faint, strange perfume,

32 The Immoralist

which seemed to enter me by several senses at once
and which so uplifted me? I was breathing more
easily too, and so I walked more lightly; and yet at
the first bench I sat down, but it was because I was
excited—dazzled—rather than tired.

I looked. The shadows were transparent and mo-
bile; they did not fall upon the ground—seemed
barely to rest on it. Light! Oh, light!

I listened. What did I hear? Nothing; everything;
every sound amused me.

I remember a shrub some way off whose bark
looked of such a curious texture that I felt obliged
to go and feel it. My touch was a caress; it gave me
rapture. I remember. . . . Was that the morning that
was at last to give me birth?

I had forgotten I was alone, and sat on, expect-
ing nothing, waiting for no one, forgetting the time.
Up till that day, so it seemed to me, I had felt so little
and thought so much that now I was astonished to
find my sensations had become as strong as my
thoughts.

I say, “it seemed to me,” for from the depths of
my past childhood, there now awoke in me the glim-
merings of a thousand lost sensations. The fact that
I was once more aware of my senses enabled me to
give them a half fearful recognition. Yes; my re-
awakened senses now remembered a whole ancient
history of their own—recomposed for themselves a
vanished past. They were alive! Alive! They had never
ceased to live; they discovered that even during those
early studious years they had been living their own
latent, cunning life.

I met no one that day, and I was glad of it; I
took out of my pocket a little Homer, which I had
not opened since Marseilles, re-read three lines of the
Odyssey and learned them by heart; then, finding in

a saipstaeheias

First Part a3

their rhythm enough to satisfy me, I dwelled on them
awhile with leisurely delight, shut the book, and sat
still, trembling, more alive than I had thought it pos-
sible to be, my mind benumbed with happiness. . . .

4,

IN THE meantime, Marceline, who saw with delight
that my health was at last improving, had after a few
days begun telling me about the marvelous orchards
of the oasis. She was fond of the open air and out-
door exercise. My illness left her enough spare time
for long walks, from which she returned glowing with
enthusiasm; so far she had not said much about them,
as she did not dare invite me to go with her and was
afraid of depressing me by an account of delights I
was not yet fit to enjoy. But now that I was better,
she counted on their attraction to complete my re-
covery. The pleasure I was again beginning to take
in walking and looking about me tempted me to join
her. And the next morning we set out together.

She led the way along a path so odd that I have
never in any country seen its like. It meanders in-
dolently between two fairly high mud walls; the
shape of the gardens they enclose directs its leisurely
course; sometimes it winds; sometimes it is broken;
a sudden turning as you enter it and you lose your
bearings; you cease to know where you came from
or where you are going. The water of the river follows
the path faithfully and runs alongside one of the
walls; the walls are made of the same earth as the
path—the same as that of the whole oasis—a pinkish
or soft gray clay, which is turned a little darker by
the water, which the buming sun crackles, which

Year’ he A! A Pi » 4 eat ea Jog ee ae Se 68? 2 .

ity as Ney eaed ume foe

34 The Immoralist

hardens in the heat and softens with the first shower, ©
so that it becomes a plastic soil that keeps the imprint
_ of every naked foot. Above the walls, palm-trees
_ show. Wood-pigeons went flying into them as we
came up. Marceline looked at me.

I forgot my discomfort and fatigue. I walked on

in a sort of ecstasy, of silent joy, of elation of the

senses and the flesh. At that moment there came a

gentle breath of wind; all the palms waved and we

saw the tallest of the trees bending; then the whole —

air grew calm again, and I distinctly heard, coming

It was a place full of light and shade; tranquil;
it seemed beyond the touch of time; full of silence;
full of rustlings—the soft noise of running water that

_ from behind the wall, the song of a flute. A breach ~
in the wall; we went in.

feeds the palms and slips from tree to tree, the quiet _

call of the pigeons, the song of the flute the boy was
playing. He was sitting, almost naked, on the trunk
of a fallen palm-tree, watching a herd of goats; our
coming did not disturb him; he did not move—
stopped playing only for a moment.

I noticed during this brief pause that another

- flute was answering in the distance. We went on a

little, then:
“It's no use going any farther,” said Marceline;

“these orchards are all alike; possibly at the other end

of the oasis they may be a little larger. . . .

She spread the shawl on the ground. “Sit down
and rest,” she said.

How long did we stay there? I cannot tell. What
mattered time? Marceline was near me; I lay down
and put my head on her knees. The song of the flute
flowed on, stopped from time to time, went on
again; the sound of the water . . . From time to time

: eubeecieese Part: 35%
a goat baa’ed. I shut my eyes; I felt Marceline lay _ a

her cool hand on my forehead; I felt the burning sun,
gently shaded by the palm-trees; I thought of noth-

ing; what mattered thoughts? I felt extraordinar-
1 eee
And from time to time there was another noise;
I opened my eyes; a little wind was blowing in the
palm-trees; it did not come down low enough to reach
us—stirred only the highest branches.

The next morning, I returned to the same garden
with Marceline; on the evening of the same day, I
went back to it alone. The goatherd who played the
flute was there. I went up to him; spoke to him. He —
was called Lassif, was only twelve years old, was a
handsome boy. He told me the names of his goats,
told me that the little canals are called “seghias”; they
do not all run every day, he explained; the water,
wisely and parsimoniously distributed, satisfies the
thirst of the plants, and is then at once withdrawn.
At the foot of each palm the ground is hollowed out ~
into a small cup which holds water enough for the
tree’s needs; an ingenious system of sluices, which the
boy worked for me to see, controls the water, con- ~
ducts it wherever the ground is thirstiest.

The next day I saw a brother of Lassif’s; he was
a little older and not so handsome; he was called
Lachmi. By means of the kind of ladder made in the
trunk of the tree by the old stumps of excised palm
leaves he climbed up to the top of a pollarded palm;
then he came swiftly down again, showing a golden
nudity beneath his floating garment. He brought
down a little earthen gourd from the place where
the head of the tree had been severed; it had been
hung up near the fresh cut in order to collect the
palm sap, from which the Arabs make a sweet wine

36 The Immoralist

they are extremely fond of. At Lachmi’s invitation, |
tasted it; but I did not like its sickly, raw, syrupy
taste.

The following days I went farther; I saw other
gardens, other goatherds, and other goats. As Mar-
celine had said, all these gardens were alike; and yet
they were all different.

Sometimes Marceline would still come with me;
but more often, as soon as we reached the orchards,
I would leave her, persuade her that I was tired, that
I wanted to sit down, that she must not wait for me,
for she needed more exercise; so that she would fin-
ish the walk without me. I stayed behind with the
children. I soon knew a great number of them; I had
long conversations with them; I learned their games,
taught them others, lost all my pennies at pitch and
toss. Some of them used to come with me on my
walks (every day I walked farther), showed me some
new way home, took charge of my coat and my shawl
when I happened to have them both with me. Be-
fore leaving the children, I used to distribute a hand-
ful of pennies among them; sometimes they would
follow me, playing all the way, as far as my own door;
and finally they would sometimes come in.

Then Marceline on her side brought in others.
She brought the boys who went to school, whom she
encouraged to work; when school broke up, the good
little boys, the quiet little boys came in; those that I
brought were different; but they made friends over
their games. We took care always to have a store of
syrups and sweetmeats on hand. Soon other boys
came of their own accord, even uninvited. I remem-
ber each one of them; I can see them still. . . .

Toward the end of January, the weather changed
suddenly; a cold wind sprang up and my health im-

First Part a7

mediately began to suffer. The great open space that
separates the oasis from the town again became im-
passable, and I was obliged once more to content
myself with the public gardens. Then it began to rain
—an icy rain, which covered the mountains on the
far northern horizon with snow.

I spent those melancholy days beside the fire,
gloomily, obstinately, fighting with my illness, which
in this vile weather gained upon me. Lugubrious
days! I could neither read nor work; the slightest ef-
fort brought on the most troublesome perspiration;
fixing my thoughts exhausted me; directly I stopped
paying attention to my breathing, I suffocated.

During those melancholy days the children were
my only distraction. In the rainy weather, only the
most familiar came in; their clothes were drenched;
they sat round the fire in a circle. A long time would
often go by without anything being said. I was too
tired, too unwell to do anything but look at them;
but the presence of their good health did me good.
Those that Marceline petted were weakly, sickly, and
too well behaved; I was irritated with her and with
them and ended by keeping them at arm’s length. To
- tell the truth, they frightened me.

_ One morning I had a curious revelation as to my
own character; Moktir, the only one of my wife's
'protégés who did not irritate me (because of his good
looks perhaps), was alone with me in my room; up
till then, I had not cared much about him, but there
was something strange, I thought, in the brilliant and
somber expression of his eyes. Some kind of inex-
plicable curiosity made me watch his movements. I
was standing in front of the fire, my two elbows on
the mantelpiece, apparently absorbed in a book
but, though I had my back turned to him, I could see
what he was doing reflected in the glass. Moktir did

N38.) The Immordlist. 1 8 ae
not know I was watching him and thought I was im-
_ mersed in my reading. I saw him go noiselessly up to
a table where Marceline had laid her work and a little
‘pair of scissors beside it, seize them furtively, and in
a twinkling engulf them in the folds of his burnous.
My heart beat quickly for a moment, but neither _
reason nor reflection could arouse in me the smallest
_ feeling of indignation. More than that! I could not
manage to persuade myself that the feeling that filled

me at the sight was anything but joy.

_ When I had allowed Moktir ample time for rob-

bing me, I turned round again and spoke to him as

if nothing had happened.

Marceline was very fond of this boy; but I do -
_ not think it was the fear of grieving her that made

me, rather than denounce Moktir, invent some story

or other to explain the loss of her scissors.
ah From that day onwards, Moktir became my fa-
-_-vorite.

2.

Our stray at Biskra was not to last much longer. When
the February rains were over, the outburst of heat
_that succeeded them was too violent. After several
days of drenching downpour, one morning, suddenly,
I woke in an atmosphere of brilliant blue. As soon
as I was up, I hurried to the highest part of the ter-
race. The sky, from one horizon to the other, was
cloudless. Mists were rising under the heat of the sun,
which was already fierce; the whole oasis was smok-
ing; in the distance could be heard the grumbling of |
_ the Oued in flood. The air was so pure and so deli-

Bois!

y a

——- , . i

First Part 39

cious that I felt better at once. Marceline joined me; _

we wanted to go out, but that day the mud kept us _
at home. it

A few days later, we went back to Lassif’s or- _
chard; the stems of the plants looked heavy, sodden i
and swollen with water. This African land, whose
thirsty season. of waiting was not then known to me,
had lain submerged for many long days and was now
awaking from its winter sleep, drunken with water,
bursting with the fresh rise of sap; throughout it rang
the wild laughter of an exultant spring which found —
an echo, a double, as it were, in my own heart. ©
Ashour and Moktir came with us at first; I still en-
joyed their slight friendship, which cost me only half —
a franc a day; but I soon grew tired of them; not now
so weak as to need the example of their health, and
no longer finding in their play the food necessary to —
keep my joy alive, I turned the elation of my mind
and senses to Marceline. Her gladness made me real-_
ize she had been unhappy before. I excused myself
like a child for having so often left her to herself, set
down my odd, elusive behavior to the score of weak-
ness, and declared that hitherto loving had been too
much for me, but that henceforward, as my health
grew, so would my love. I spoke truly, but no doubt
I was still very weak, for it was not till more than a
month later that I desired Marceline.

In the meantime, it was getting hotter every day.
There was nothing to keep us at Biskra—except the
charm which afterwards called me back there. Our ©
determination to leave was taken suddenly. In three
hours our things were packed. The train started next
morning at daybreak.

I remember that last night. The moon was nearly
full; it streamed into my room by the wide-open win-

40 The Immoralist

dow. Marceline was, I think, asleep. I had gone to
bed but could not sleep. I felt myself burning with a
_ kind of happy fever—the fever of life itself... . 1
got up, dipped my hands and face in water, then,
pushing open the glass doors, went out.

_ It was already late; not a sound; not a breath;
the air itself seemed asleep. The Arab dogs, which
yelp all night like jackals, could only just be heard in
the distance. F acing me lay the little courtyard; the
wall opposite cast a slanting band of shadow across
it; the regular palm-trees, bereft of color and life,

seemed struck forever motionless. . . . But in sleep.

there is still some palpitation of life; here, nothing
seemed asleep; everything seemed dead. The calm
appalled me; and suddenly there rose in me afresh
the tragic realization of my life; it came upon me as
though to protest, to assert itself, to bewail itself in
the silence, so violent, so impetuous, so agonizing
almost, that I should have cried aloud, if I could have
cried like an animal. I took hold of my hand, I re-
member—my left hand in my right; I wanted to lift
it to my head and I did. What for? To assure myself
that I was alive and that I felt the wonder of it. I
touched my forehead, my eyelids. Then a shudder
seized me. A day will come, thought I, a day will come
when I shall not even be strong enough to lift to my
lips the very water I most thirst for. . . . I went in,
but did not lie down again at once; I wanted to §x
that night, to engrave its memory on my mind, to
hold and to keep it; undecided as to what I should
do, I took a book from my table—it was the Bible
—and opened it at random; by stooping over it in
the moonlight, I could see to read; I read Christ’s
words to Peter—those words, alas, which I was never
to forget: “When thou wast young, thou girdedst
thyself and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but

First Part 41

when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands . . .”—thou shalt stretch forth thy hands. ...
The next morning at dawn, we left.

6.

I sHALL not speak of every stage of the journey. Some
of them have left me only a confused recollection; I
was sometimes better and sometimes worse in health, ©
still at the mercy of a cold wind and made anxious
by the shadow of a cloud; the condition of my nerves
too was the cause of frequent trouble; but my lungs
at any rate were recovering. Each relapse was shorter
and less serious; the attacks were as sharp, but my
body was better armed against them.

From Tunis we went to Malta, and from there to
Syracuse; I found myself back again on the classic
ground whose language and history were known to —
me. Since the beginning of my illness I had lived
without question or role, simply applying myself to
the act of living as an animal does or a child. Now
that I was less absorbed by my malady, my life be-
came once more certain of itself and conscious. After
that long and almost mortal sickness, I had thought
I should rise again the same as before and be able
without difficulty to reknit my present to my past,
in the newness of a strange country it had been pos-
sible to deceive myself—but not here; everything
brought home to me—though I still thought it as-
tonishing—that I was changed.

When at Syracuse and later, I wanted to start my
work again and immerse myself once more in a mi-
nute study of the past, I discovered that something
had, if not destroyed, at any rate modified my pleas-

ure in it... and this something was the feeling of

} } pi iy A Kiva ane ey stam + ia i “hi ; et hab +i iy
42. The Immoralist | The

Oya the present. The history of the past had now taken
on for me the immobility, the terrifying fixity of
the nocturnal shadows in the little courtyard of Bis-

kra—the immobility of death. In old days, I had taken

ae pleasure in this very fixity, which enabled my mind

to work with precision; the facts of history all ap-
peared to me like specimens in a museum, or rather
_ like plants in a herbarium, permanently dried, so that

____ it was easy to forget they had once upon a time been
_ juicy with sap and alive in the sun. Nowadays, if I
___ still took any pleasure in history, it was by imagining
_ it in the present. Thus the great political events of
_ the past moved me less than the feeling that began to

revive in me for the poets or for a few men of action.
At Syracuse, I reread Theocritus and reflected that
his goatherds with the beautiful names were the very
same as those I had loved at Biskra.

My erudition, which was aroused at every step,
became an encumbrance and hampered my joy. I
could not see a Greek theater or temple without im-
_ mediately reconstructing it in my mind. Every
thought of the festivals of antiquity made me grieve
over the death of the ruin that was left standing in

_ their place; and I had a horror of death.

5 I ended by avoiding ruins; the noblest monu-

ments of the past were less to me than those sunk
gardens of the Latomie whose lemons have the sharp
sweetness of oranges—or the shores of the Cyane,
_ still lowing among the papyri as blue as on the day
when it wept for Proserpine.

I ended by despising the learning that had at
first been my pride; the studies that up to then had
been my whole life now seemed to me to have a mere
accidental and conventional connection with myself.
I found out that I was something different and—oh

weet
a
?

eet

Riese Part . 43

rapture!—that 1 had a separate existence of my own. ue
Inasmuch as I was a specialist, I appeared to myself
senseless; inasmuch as I was a man, did I know my- ©

self at all? I had only just been born and could not
as yet know what I had been born. It was that I had
to find cut.

There is nothing more tragic for a man who has
been expecting to die than a long convalescence.
After that touch from the wing of Death, what
seemed important is so no longer; other things be-
come so which had at first seemed unimportant, or
which one did not even know existed. The miscel-_

laneous mass of acquired knowledge of every kind —

that has overlain the mind gets peeled off in places
like a mask of paint, exposing the bare skin—the very
flesh of the authentic creature that had lain hidden
beneath it.

He it was whom I thenceforward ‘set out to dis-
cover—that authentic creature, “the old Adam,”

whom the Gospel had repudiated, whom everything —

about me—books, masters, parents, and I myself—had
begun by attempting to suppress. And he was already
coming into view, still in the rough and difficult of
discovery, thanks to all that overlay him, but so much
the more worthy to be discovered, so much the more
valorous. Thenceforward I despised the secondary
creature, the creature who was due to teaching, whom
education had painted on the surface. These overlays
had to be shaken off.

And I compared myself to a palimpsest; I tasted
the scholar’s joy when he discovers under more recent
writing, and on the same paper, a very ancient and
infinitely more precious text. What was this occult
text? In order to read it, was it not first of all neces-
sary to efface the more recent one?

I was besides no longer the sickly, studious be-

44 The Immoralist

ing to whom my early morality, with all its rigidity
and restrictions, had been suited. There was more
‘here than a convalescence; there was an increase, a
recrudescence of life, the influx of a richer, warmer
blood which must of necessity affect my thoughts,
touch them one by one, inform them all, stir and
color the most remote, delicate, and secret fibers of
my being. For, either to strength or to weakness,
the creature adapts itself; it constitutes itself accord-
ing to the powers it possesses; but if these should
increase, if they should permit a wider scope, then
. . . I did not think all this at the time, and my de-
scription gives a false idea of me. In reality, I did not
think at all; I never questioned myself; a happy fatal-
ism guided me. I was afraid that too hasty an
investigation might disturb the mystery of my slow
transformation. I must allow time for the effaced
characters to reappear, and not attempt to re-form
them. Not so much neglecting my mind, therefore,
as allowing it to lie fallow, I gave myself up to the
luxurious enjoyment of my own self, of external
things, of all existence, which seemed to me divine.
We had left Syracuse, and as I ran along the precip-
itous road that connects Taormina with Mola, I re-
member shouting aloud, as if my calling could br.ag
him to me: “A new self! A new self!” ;

My only effort then—an effort which was at that
time constant—consisted in systematically condemn-
ing and suppressing everything which I believed I
owed to my past education and early moral beliefs.
Deliberately disdainful of my learning, and in scorn
of my scholar’s tastes, I refused to visit Agrigentum,
and a few days later, on the road to Naples, I passed
by the beautiful temple of Pzestum, in which Greece
still breathes, and where, two years later, I went to

ieee

First Part = 45.

worship some God or other—I no longer know
which.

Why do I say “my only effort”? How could I be
interested in myself save as a perfectible being? Never
before had my will been so tensely strung as in striv-
ing after this unknown and vaguely imagined per-
fection. I employed the whole of my will, indeed, in
strengthening and bronzing my body. We had left
the coast near Salerno and reached Ravello. There, a
keener air, the charm of the rocks, their recesses, their
surprises, the unexplored depths of the valleys, all
contributed to my strength and enjoyment and gave
impetus to my enthusiasm.

Not far from the shore and very near the sky,
Ravello lies on an abrupt height facing the flat and
distant coast of Pestum. Under the Norman domina-
tion, it was a city of no inconsiderable importance;
it is nothing now but a narrow village where I think
we were the only strangers. We were lodged in an
ancient religious house which had been turned into
a hotel; it is situated on the extreme edge of the rock,
and its terraces and gardens seemed to hang sus-
pended over an abyss of azure. Over the wall, fes-
tooned with creeping vine, one could at first see
nothing but the sea; one had to go right up to the
wall in order to discover the steep cultivated slope
that connects Ravello with the shore by paths that
seem more like staircases. Above Ravello, the moun-
tain continues. First come enormous olive and caroub
trees, with cyclamen growing in their shadow; then,
higher up, Spanish chestnuts in great quantities, cool
air, northern plants; lower down, lemon trees near
the sea. These are planted in small plots owing to
the slope of the ground; they are step gardens, nearly
all alike; a narrow path goes from end to end through

the middle of each; one enters ey, like a thief; eee
one dreams in their green shadow; their foliage is as {
_ thick and heavy; no direct ray of sunlight penetrates
_ it; the lemons, like drops of opaque wax, hang per-
_ fumed; they are white and greenish in the shade;
Z they are within reach of one’s hand, of one’s thirst;
__ they are sweet and sharp and refreshing.
The shade was so dense beneath them that I did
not dare linger in it after my walk, for exercise still
_ made me perspire. And yet I now managed the
steps without being exhausted; I practiced climbing
_ them with my mouth shut; I put greater and greater
intervals between my halts; I will go so far without
_ giving in, I used to say to myself; then, the goal
_ reached, I was rewarded by a glow of satisfied
pride; I would take a few long deep breaths, and feel
as if the air entered my lungs more thoroughly, more
_. efficaciously. I brought all my old assiduity to bear
_ on the care of my body. I began to progress.

I was sometimes astonished that my health came
back so quickly. I began to think I had exaggerated
the gravity of my condition—to doubt that I had
been very ill—to laugh at my blood-spitting—to re-
gret that my recovery had not been more arduous.

In my ignorance of my physical needs, my treat-

ment of myself had at first been very foolish. I now
made a patient study of them and came to regard
my ingenious exercise of prudence and care as a kind
a of game. What I still suffered from most was my mor-
i) bid sensitiveness to the slightest change ot tempera-
ture. Now that my lungs were cured, I attributed
4 this hyperesthesia to the nervous debility left me by
é my illness, and I determined to conquer it. The sight
of the beautiful, brown, sunburned skins which some

of the carelessly clad peasants at work in the fields
showed beneath their open shirts made me long to

i

Berens. First Part = 47
: be like them. One morning, after I had stripped, I
looked at myself; my thin arms, my stooping shoul-_
ders, which no effort of mine could keep straight, but —
above all the whiteness of my skin, or rather its entire -
want of color, shamed me to tears. I dressed quickly
and, instead of going down to Amalfi as usual, I
turned my steps toward some mossy, grass-grown. t
rocks in a place tar from any habitation, far from any
road, where I knew no one could see me. When I got

there, I undressed slowly. The air was almost sharp,

but the sun was burning. I exposed my whole body |
to its flame. I sat down, lay down, turned myself
about. I felt the ground hard beneath me; the waving _
grass brushed me. Though I was sheltered from the

wind, I shivered and thrilled at every breath. Soon a

delicious burning enveloped me; my whole being

surged up into my skin.

We stayed at Ravello a fortnight; every morn-
ing I returned to the same rocks and went on ‘with
my cure. I soon found I was wearing a troublesome —
and unnecessary amount of clothing; my skin having
recovered its tone, the constant perspiration ceased
and I was able to keep warm without superfluous
protection.

On one of the last mornings (we were in the mid-
dle of April), I was bolder still. In a hollow of the
rocks I have mentioned, there flowed a spring of
transparent water. At this very place it fell in a little
cascade—not a very abundant one, to be sure, but
the fall had hollowed out a deeper basin at its foot
in which the water lingered, exquisitely pure and
clear. Three times already I had been there, leaned
over it, stretched myself along its bank, thirsty and
longing; I had gazed at the bottom of polished rock,
where not a stain, not a weed was to be seen, and
where the sun shot its dancing and iridescent rays.

48 The Immoralist

_ On this fourth day, I came to the spot with my mind

already made up. The water looked as bright and as
clear as ever, and without pausing to think, I plunged
straight in. It struck an instant chill through me, and
I jumped out again quickly and flung myself down on
the grass in the sun. There was some wild thyme
growing near by; I picked some of the sweet-smelling
leaves, crushed them in my hands and rubbed my
wet but burning body with them. I looked at myself
for a long while—with no more shame now—with
joy. Although not yet robust, I felt myself capable
of becoming so—harmonious, sensuous, almost beau-

 tiful.

we

AND so, in the place of all action and all work, I con-
tented myself with physical exercises, which certainly
implied a change in my moral outlook, but which I
soon began to regard as mere training, as simply a
means to an end, and no longer satisfying in them-
selves.

I will tell you, however, about one other action
of mine, though perhaps you will consider it ridicu-
lous, for its very childishness marks the need that
then tormented me of showing by some outward
sign the change that had come over my inward self:
at Amalfi I had my beard and mustache shaved off,
Up till that day I had worn them long and my hair
cropped close. It had never occurred to me that I
could do anything else. And suddenly, on the day
when I first stripped myself on the rock, my beard
made me feel uncomfortable; it was like a last piece
of clothing I could not get rid of; I felt as if it were

a: ail

First Part 49

false; it was carefully cut—not in a point, but square,
and it then and there struck me as very ugly and
ridiculous. When I got back to my hotel room, I
looked at myself in the glass and was displeased with
my appearance; I looked like what I had hitherto
been—an archzologist—a bookworm. Immediately
after lunch, I went down to Amalfi with my mind
made up. The town is very small and I could find
nothing better than a vulgar little shop in the piazza.
It was market day; the place was full; I had to wait
interminably; but nothing—neither the suspicious- _
looking razors, nor the dirty yellow shaving-brush, _
nor the smell, nor the barber’s talk could put me off.
When my beard fell beneath his scissors, I felt as
though I had taken off a mask. But oh! when I saw
myself, the emotion that filled me, and which I tried
to keep down, was not pleasure, but fear. I do not
criticize this feeling—I record it. I thought myself
quite good-looking . . . no, the reason of my fear
was a feeling that my mind had been stripped of all
disguise, and it suddenly appeared to me redoubt-
able.

On the other hand, I let my hair grow.

That is all my new and still unoccupied self
found to do. I expected it eventually to give birth to
actions that would astonish me—but later—later, I
said to myself, when it is more fully formed. In the
meantime, as I was obliged to live, I was reduced,
like Descartes, to a provisional mode of action. This
was the reason Marceline did not notice anything.
The different look in my eyes, no doubt, and the
changed expression of my features, especially on the
day when I appeared without my beard, might per-
haps have aroused her suspicions, but she already
loved me too much to see me as I was; and then I
did my best to reassure her. The important thing was

hee she none not: diterfere with my renascent life,
and to keep it from her eyes I had to dissemble.
For that matter, the man Marceline loved, the
man she had married, was not my “new self.” So I
hes told myself again and again as.an excuse for hiding
_ him. In this way I showed her an image of myself
_ which, by the very fact of its remaining constant
_ and faithful to the past, became every day falser and
_ falser.
it For the time being, therefore, my relationship
with Marceline remained the same, though it was
ie every day getting more intense by reason of my
_ growing love. My dissimulation (if that expression
__ can be applied to the need I felt of protecting my
_ thoughts from her judgment), my very dissimula-
_ tion increased that love. I mean that it kept me in-
__ cessantly occupied with Marceline. At first, perhaps,
_ this necessity for falsehood cost me a little effort; but
I soon came to understand that the things that are
reputed worst (lying, to mention only one) are only
difficult to do as long as one has never done them;
but that they become—and very quickly too—easy,
pleasant and agreeable to do over again, and soon
even natural. So then, as is always the case when one
overcomes an initial disgust, I ended by taking
pleasure in my dissimulation itself, by protracting
it, as if it afforded opportunity for the play of my
undiscovered faculties. And every day my life grew
richer and fuller, as I advanced toward a riper, more
_ delicious happiness.

-_

SRA fe yale afi g MM §

S.

Tue roaD from Ravello to Sorrento is so beautiful —
that I had no desire that morning to see anything —
more beautiful on earth. The sun-warmed harshness —
of the rocks, the air’s abundance, the scents, the lim-
pidity, all filled me with the heavenly delight of liv- —
ing, and with such contentment that there seemed to —
dwell in me nothing but a dancing joy; memories”
and regrets, hope and desire, future and past were ~
alike silent; I was conscious of nothing in life but —
what the moment brought, but what the moment
carried away. .

“O joys of the body!” I exclaimed; “unerring —
rhythm of the muscles! health! . . .” -p

I had started early that morning, ahead of Mar-
celine, for her calmer pleasure would have cooled
mine, just as her slower pace would have kept me
back. She was to join me by carriage at Positano,
where we were to lunch.
I was nearing Positano when a noise of wheels,
which sounded like the bass accompaniment to a
curious kind of singing, made me look round
abruptly. At first I could see nothing because of a
turn in the road, which in that place follows the edge
of the cliff; then a carriage driven at a frantic pace.
dashed suddenly into view; it was Marceline’s. The
driver was singing at the top of his voice, standing
up on the box and gesticulating violently while he
ferociously whipped his frightened horse. What a
brute the fellow was! He passed me so quickly that
I only just had time to get out of the way, and my
shouts failed to make him stop. . . . I rushed after

x

52 The Immoralist : ad

him, but the carriage was going too fast. I was terri-
fied that Marceline would fling herself out of the
carriage, and equally so that she would stay in it;
a single jolt might have thrown her into the sea... . .
All of a sudden the horse fell down. Marceline
jumped out and started running, but I was beside
her in a moment. . . . The driver, as soon as he saw
me, broke into horrible oaths. I was furious with the
man; at his first word of abuse, I rushed at him and
flung him brutally from his box. I rolled on the
ground with him, but did not lose my advantage; he
seemed dazed by his fall and was soon still more so
by a blow on the face which I gave him when I saw
he meant to bite me. I did not let go of him, however,
and pressed with my knee on his chest, while I tried
to pinion his arms. I looked at his ugly face, which
my fist had made still uglier; he spat, foamed, bled,
swore; oh, what a horrible creature! He deserved
strangling, I thought. And perhaps I should have
strangled him—at any rate, I felt capable of it; and I
really believe it was only the thought of the police
that prevented me.

I succeeded, not without difficulty, in tying the
madman up, and flung him into the carriage like a
sack.

Ah, what looks, what kisses Marceline and I
exchanged when it was all over. The danger had
not been great; but I had had to show my strength,
and that in order to protect her. At the moment I felt
I could have given my life for her . . . and given it
_ wholly with joy. . . . The horse got up. We left the
drunkard at the bottom of the carriage, got onto the
box together, and drove as best we could, first to
Positano, and then to Sorrento.

It was that night that I first possessed Marceline.

Have you really understood or must I tell you

ae
ae

First Part 53

again that I was, as it were, new to things of love?
Perhaps it was to its novelty that our wedding night
owed its grace. ... For it seems to me, when I
recall it, that that first night of ours was our only
one, the expectation and the surprise of love added
so much deliciousness to its pleasures—so sufficient
is a single night for the expression of the greatest
love, and so obstinately does my memory recall that
night alone. It was a flashing moment that caught
and mingled our souls in its laughter. ... But I
believe there comes a point in love, once and no
more, which later on the soul seeks—yes, seeks in
vain—to surpass; I believe that happiness wears out
in the effort made to recapture it; that nothing is
more fatal to happiness than the remembrance of
happiness. Alas! I remember that night... .

Our hotel was outside the town and surrounded
with gardens and orchards; a very large balcony
opened out from our room, and the branches of the
trees brushed against it. Our wide-open windows let
in the dawn freely. I got up and bent tenderly over
Marceline. She was asleep; she looked as though she
were smiling in her sleep; my greater strength
seemed to make me feel her greater delicacy and
that her grace was all fragility. Tumultuous thoughts
whirled in my brain. I reflected. that she was telling
the truth when she said I was her all; then: What
do I do for her happiness? I thought. Almost all
day and every day I abandor her; her every hope is
in me, and I neglect her! . . . oh, poor, poor Mar-
celine! My eyes filled with tears. I tried in vain to
seek an excuse in my past weakness; what need had
I now for so much care and attention, for so much
egoism? Was I not now the stronger of the two?

The smile had left her cheeks; daybreak, though
it had touched everything else with gold, suddenly

Bh SN
ie mates

‘ $4 ‘The Immoralist pa See

be * showed her to me sad ae uae renee the Ae j
a proach of morning inclined me to be anxious. “Shall __
I in my tum have to nurse you, fear for you, Mar-
celine?” I inwardly cried. I shuddered, and, over- _
4 flowing with love, pity, and tenderness, I placed 4
_ between her closed eyes the gentlest, the most lover- _~

_ like, the most pious of kisses. ;

Re DP.
Tax FEW days we stayed at Sorrento were smiling
_ days and very calm. Had I ever enjoyed before such
rest, such happiness? Should I ever enjoy them
again? ... I spent almost all my time with Mar-
_ celine; thinking less of myself, I was able to think
more of her, and now took as much pleasure in talk-
ing to her as I had before taken in being silent.

__ I was at first astonished to feel that she looked
upon her wandering life, with which I professed
myself perfectly satisfied, only as something tem-
_ porary; but its idleness soon became obvious to me;

I agreed it must not last; for the first time, thanks to
the leisure left me by my recovered health, there

- awoke in me a desire for work, and I began to speak

seriously of going home; from Marceline’s joy, I re-
alized she herself had long been thinking of it.

__ Meanwhile, when I again began to tum my at-

tention to some of my old historical studies, I tound

that I no longer took the same pleasure in them. As

I have already told you, since my illness I had come

to consider this abstract and neutral acquaintance

with the past as mere vanity. In other days I had

worked at philological research, studying more es-

pecially, for instance, the influence of the Goths on

aH

hy

53 Sh Se : _ ~ ry ays vy dig Wer ¥ ys in’? ,
WR TS ee ren iri ‘ Pah

3 First Part cre
the corruption of the Latin language, and had ©
passed over and misunderstood the figures of The- —
odoric, Cassiodorus, and Amalasontha, and theiry, i:
admirable and astonishing passions, in order to con-
centrate all my enthusiasm on mere signs—the waste _
product of their lives. og

At present, however, these same signs, and in-
deed philology as a whole, were nothing more to
me than a means of penetrating further into things
whose savage grandeur and nobility had begun to
dawn on me. I resolved to study this period further, |
to limit myself for a time to the last years of the em-
pire of the Goths, and to turn to account our coming
stay at Ravenna, the scene of its closing agonies..

But shall I confess that the figure of the young
king Athalaric was what attracted me most? I pic-
tured to myself this fifteen-year-old boy, worked on
in secret by the Goths, in revolt against his mother
Amalasontha, rebelling against his Latin education
and flinging aside his culture, as a restive horse
shakes off a troublesome harness; I saw him prefer-
ring the society of the untutored Goths to that of
Cassiodorus—too old and too wise—plunging for a
few years into a life of violent and unbridled pleas- |
ures with rude companions of his own age, and dying
at eighteen, rotten and sodden with debauchery. I
recognized in this tragic impulse toward a wilder,
more natural state, something of what Marceline
used to call my “crisis.” I tried to find some satisfac-
tion in applying my mind to it, since it no longer
occupied my body; and in Athalaric’s horrible death,

I did my best to read a lesson.

So we settled to spend a fortnight at Ravenna,
visit Rome and Florence rapidly, then, giving up
Venice and Verona, hurry over the end of our jour-
ney and not stop again before reaching Paris. I found

56 The Immoralist

a pleasure I had never felt before in talking to Mar-
celine about the future; we were still a little unde-
cided as to how we should spend the summer; we
were both tired of traveling and I was in need of ab-
solute quiet for my work; then we thought of a
place of mine, situated between Lisieux and Pont-
L’Evéque, in the greenest of green Normandy; it had
formerly belonged to my mother, and I had passed
several summers there with her in my childhood,
though I had never gone back to it since her death.
My father had left it in charge of a bailiff, an old
man by now, who collected the rents and sent them
to us regularly. I had kept enchanting memories of a
large and very pleasant house standing in a garden
watered by running streams; it was called La
-Moriniére; I thought it would be good to live there.

I spoke of spending the following winter in
Rome, but as a worker this time, not a tourist... .
But this last plan was soon upset. Among the number
_of letters we found waiting for us at Naples was one
containing an unexpected piece of information—a
chair at the Collége de France had fallen vacant and
my name had been several times mentioned in con-
nection with it; it was only a temporary post which
would leave me free in the future; the friend who
wrote advised me of the few steps to be taken in case
I should accept, which he strongly advised me to do.
I hesitated to bind myself to what at first seemed to
me slavery; but then I reflected that it might be in-
teresting to put forward my ideas on Cassiodorus in
a course of lectures. . . . The pleasure I should be
giving Marceline finally decided me, and once my
decision was taken, I saw only its advantages.

My father had several connections in the learned
world of Rome and Florence, with whom I had my-
self been in correspondence. They gave me every

_ First Part 57
facility for making the necessary researches in Ra-
venna and elsewhere; I had no thoughts now but
for my work. Marceline, by her constant considera-
tion and in a thousand charming ways, did all she
could to help me.

Our happiness during those last days of travel
was so equable, so calm, that there is nothing to say
about it. Men’s finest works bear the persistent
marks of pain. What would there be in a story of
happiness? Only what prepares it, only what de-
stroys it can be told. I have now told you what pre-
pared it.

S So)? Ghar, 22 = eae ee DAT a Poe Ae Ben We bs pt SA Sar ah
rs t ypstoy ALT ites Ve Mcp so: < Dee aN eae
wang 7 wih tite 3 . vaRe ii )

te

SECOND PART

nee
4

dae

WE arrived at La Moriniére in the first days of July,
having stayed in Paris only just long enough to do ~

our shopping and pay a very few visits.

La Moriniére is situated, as I have told you, i
between Lisieux and Pont-L’Evéque in the shadi- _

est, wettest country I know. Innumerable narrow
coombes and gently rounded hills terminate near the

wide “Vallée d’Auge,” which then stretches in an un- —

interrupted plain as far as the sea. There is no hori-—

zon; some few copse-woods, filled with mysterious

shade, some few fields of corn, but chiefly meadow

land—softly sloping pastures, where the lush grass is

mown twice a year, where the apple-trees, when the _
sun is low, join shadow to shadow, where flocks and >

herds graze untended; in every hollow there is water
—pond or pool or river; from every side comes the
continual murmur of streams.

Oh, how well I remembered the house! its blue
roofs, its walls of stone and brick, its moat, the re-

flections in the still waters. . . . It was an old house —

which would easily have lodged a dozen persons;
Marceline, three servants, and myself, who occasion-
ally lent a helping hand, found it all we could do to
animate a part of it. Our old bailiff, who was called
Bocage, had already done his best to prepare some
of the rooms; the old furniture awoke from its twenty
years’ slumber; everything had remained just as I

60 The Immoralist — 4
remembered it—the paneling not too dilapidated, 2
the rooms easy to live in. Bocage, to welcome us,
had put flowers in all the vases he could lay hands on.
He had had the large courtyard and the nearest paths
in the park weeded and raked. When we arrived, the
sun’s last rays were falling on the house, and from the
valley facing it a mist had arisen which hovered there
motionless, masking and revealing the river. We
had not well arrived, when all at once I recognized
the scent of the grass; and when I heard the piercing
cries of the swallows as they flew round the house,
the whole past suddenly rose up, as though it had
been lying in wait for my approach to close over
and submerge me.

In a few days the house was more or less com-
fortable; I might have settled down to work; but I
delayed, at first still listening to the voice of my past
as it recalled its slightest details to my memory, and
then too much absorbed by an unwonted emotion.
Marceline, a week after our arrival, confided to me
that she was expecting a child.

Thenceforward I thought I owed her redoubled
care, and that she had a right to greater tenderness
than ever; at any rate during the first weeks that
followed her confidence, I spent almost every minute
of the day in her company. We used to go and sit
near the wood, on a bench where in old days I had
been used to sit with my mother; there, each mo-
ment brought us a richer pleasure, each hour passed
with a smoother flow. If no distinct memory of this

period of my life stands out for me, it is not because
I am less deeply grateful for it—but because every-
thing in it melted and mingled into a state of change-
less ease, in which evening joined morning without
a break, in which day passed into day without a sur-
prise.

Second Part “61
A t

I gradually set to work again with a quiet mind
in possession of itself, certain of its strength, looking
calmly and confidently to the future; with a will that
seemed softened, as though by harkening to the
counsels of that temperate land.

There can be no doubt, I thought, that the ex-
ample of such a land, where everything is ripening
toward fruition and harvest, must have the best of
influences on me. I looked forward with admiring _
wonder to the tranquil promise of the great oxen and
fat cows that grazed in those opulent meadows. The
apple-trees, planted in order on the sunniest slopes
of the hillsides, gave hopes this summer of a magnif-
icent crop. I saw in my mind’s eye the rich burden of
fruit which would soon bow down their branches.
From this ordered abundance, this joyous acceptance
of service imposed, this smiling cultivation, had
arisen a harmony that was the result not of chance
but of intention, a rhythm, a beauty, at once human
and natural, in which the teeming fecundity of nature
and the wise effort of man to regulate it were com-
bined in such perfect agreement that one no longer
knew which was more admirable. What would man’s
effort be worth, thought I, without the savagery of
the power it controls? What would the wild rush of
these upwelling forces become without the intelligent
effort that banks it, curbs it, leads it by such pleasant
ways to its outcome of luxury? And I let myself go in
a dream of lands where every force should be so reg-
ulated, all expenditure so compensated, all ex-
changes so strict, that the slightest waste would be
appreciable; then I applied my dream to life and
imagined a code of ethics which should institute
the scientific and perfect utilization of a man’s self by
a controlling intelligence.

Where had my rebelliousness vanished to?

Bt sO ears was 1. The rising tide of my fev
1ad swept it all away.
Meanwhile old Bocage bustled round us he

iY te reed a feeling himcett indispensable was Hreccine

to go over his accounts and listen for hours to his
a endless explanations. Even that was not enough; I
ad to visit the estate with him. His sententious
isms, his continual speeches, his evident self-satis-
action, the display he made of his honesty drove
ne to exasperation; he became more and more per-
_sistent and there was nothing I would not have done
o recover my liberty, when an unexpected occur-
ence brought about a change in my relations with
im. One evening Bocage announced that he was
expecting his son Charles the next day.
I said “Oh!” rather casually, having so far
troubled myself very little as to any children Bocage
might or might not have; then, seeing that my in-
difference offended him and that he expected some
expression of interest and surprise, “Where has he
been?” I asked.
“In a model farm near Alengon,” answered Bo-
cage.

_ “How old is he now? About .. . ?” I went on,

calculating the age of this son, of Whoss existence I

had so far been totally unaware, and leaving him
ime enough to interrupt me.

“Past seventeen,” went on Bocage. “He was not

ce much more than four when your father’s good lady

_ died. Ah! He’s a big lad now; hell know more than

his dad soon. . . .” Once Bocage was started, nothing
could stop him, ee even the boredom I very plainly
~ showed,

5 taiag f pcsecictl hak eee) (ul Titre

oc ONS ISS Ca
4 =) ar ht A =

ay ret vig ee hed oa Second Port . Wet ah :
T had forgotten all about this when the next eve-

ning Charles, newly arrived from his journey, came _

to pay his respects to Marceline and me. He was a

fine strong young fellow, so exuberantly healthy, so _

lissom, so well-made, that not even the frightful town 3a

clothes he had put on in our honor could make him ae

look ridiculous; his shyness hardly added anything ©
to the fine natural red of his cheeks. He did not look —

more than fifteen, his eyes were so bright and so
childlike; he expressed himself clearly, without em-
barrassment, and, unlike his father, did not speak
when he had nothing to say. I cannot remember ie
what we talked about that first evening; I was so —

busy looking at him that I found nothing to say and _ :

let Marceline do all the talking. But next day, for the me
first time, I did not wait for old Bocage to come and

fetch me, in order to go down to the farm, where I -

knew they were starting work on a pond that had to 4

be repaired.

This pond—almost as big as a lake—was leaking. aa
The leak had been located and had to be cemented.
In order to do this, the pond had first to be drained,
a thing that had not been done for fifteen years. It
was full of carp and tench, great creatures, some of
them, that lay at the bottom of the pond without
ever coming up. I wanted to stock the moat with
some of these fish and give some to the laborers, so
that upon this occasion the pleasure of a fishing party

was added to the day’s work, as could be seen from uh

the extraordinary animation of the farm; some chil-—
dren from the neighborhood had joined the workers
and Marceline herself had promised to come down
later.

The water had already been sinking for some
time when I got there. Every now and then a great
ripple suddenly stirred its surface and the brown

64 The Immoralist —

backs of the disturbed fish came into sight. The chil-
dren paddling in the puddles round the edges

amused themselves with catching gleaming hand-
_ fuls of small fry, which they flung into pails of clear

water. The water in the pond was muddy and soon

became more and more thick and troubled owing

to the agitation of the fish. Their abundance was be-
yond all expectation: four farm laborers, dipping into
the water at random, pulled them out in handfuls. I
was sorry that Marceline had not arrived and de-

cided to run and fetch her, when a shout signaled

the appearance of the first eels. But no one could
succeed in catching them; they slipped between the
men’s fingers. Charles, who up till then had been
standing beside his father on the bank, could restrain
himself no longer; he took off his shoes and socks in
a moment, flung aside his coat and waistcoat, then,
tucking up his trousers and shirtsleeves as high as
they would go, stepped resolutely into the mud. I
immediately did the same.

“Charles!” I cried, “it was a good thing you
came back yesterday, wasn't it?” He was already too
busy with his fishing to answer, but he looked at me,
laughing. I called him after a moment to help me
catch a big eel; we joined hands in trying to hold it.
... Then came another and another; our faces
were splashed with mud; sometimes the ooze sud-
denly gave way beneath us and we sank into it up to
our waists; we were soon drenched. In the ardor of
the sport, we barely exchanged a shout or two, a

word or two; but at the end of the day I became

aware I was saying “thou” to Charles, without hav-
ing any clear idea when J had begun. Our work in
common had taught us more about each other than
a long conversation. Marceline had not come yet;
she did not come at all, but I ceased to regret her

Second Part 6 5

absence; I felt as though she would have a oe

spoiled our pleasure.

Early next morning I went down to the Os to
look for Charles. We took our way together to the
woods.

As I myself knew very little about my estate and
was not much distressed at knowing so little, I was
astonished to find how much Charles knew about it —
and about the way it was farmed; he told me what
I was barely aware of, namely, that I had six farmer-
tenants, that the rents might have amounted to six-
teen or eighteen thousand francs, and that if they
actually amounted to barely half that sum, it was be-
cause almost everything was eaten up by repairs of
all sorts and by the payment of middlemen. His way
of smiling as he looked at the fields in cultivation
soon made me suspect that the management of the
estate was not quite so good as I had at first thought
and as Bocage had given me to understand; I pressed
Charies further on this subject, and the intelligence of
practical affairs which had so exasperated me in Bo-
cage amused me in a child like him. We continued
our walks day after day; the estate was large and
when we had visited every corner of it, we began
again with more method. Charles did not hide his ir-
ritation at the sight of certain fields, certain pieces of
land that were overgrown with gorse, thistles, and
weeds; he instilled into me his hatred of fallow land
and set me dreaming with him of a better mode of
agriculture.

“But,” I said to him at first, “who is it that suf-
fers from this lack of cultivation? Isn’t it only the
farmer himself? However much the profits of his
farm vary, his rent still remains the same.”

Charles was a little annoyed. “You understand
nothing about it,” he ventured to say—and I smiled.

pital is ise ae your tend is slowly l
ts value by being badly cultivated.”
“If it were to bring in more by being better cul-
ed, I expect the farmers would set about it.
, are too eager for gain not to make as much

‘ou are not counting,” continued Charles, “the
increased labor. These neglected bits of land
sometimes a long way from the farms. True, if
y were cultivated, they would bring in nothing or
next to nothing, but at any rate they would keep
m spoiling.”

_And so the conversation went on. Sometimes for
our on end we seemed to be interminably re-
eating the same things as we walked over the fields;

ae Te | eT Te ee et ee ee re ee

“After ail, it’s your father’s business,” I said one

ay impatiently.

- Charles blushed a little. “My father is old,” he
; “he has a great deal to do already, seeing to the

“I should take away all the uncultivated fields
m the tenants,” he ended by advising. “If the farm-
ers leave part of their land uncultivated, it’s a proof
they don’t need it all in order to pay you; or if they
say they must keep it all, I should raise their rents.
_ All the people hereabouts are idle,” he added.

Of the six farms that belonged to me, the one I
most liked visiting was situated on a hill that over-

oy ,
vba te

i atl Wed a en Se a

sats who rented it was a pleasant hig fellow
and I used to like talking to him. Nearer La
Moriniére was a farm called the “home farm,” which
- was let on a system that left Bocage, pending the
landlord’s absence, in possession of part of the cattle.
Now that my doubts had been awakened, I began to
suspect honest Bocage himself, if not of cheating me,
at any rate of allowing other people to cheat me. One .
stable and one cow- Tous were, it is true, reserved
to me, but it soon dawned upon me that they had >
merely been invented so as to allow the farmer to. i
feed his cows and horses with my oats and hay. So. "
far, I had listened indulgently to the very unconvinc- _
ing reports which Bocage gave me from time to time
of deaths, malformations, and diseases. I swallowed
everything. It had not then occurred to me that it
was sufficient for one of the farmer’s cows to fall ill
for it to become one of my cows, nor that it was
sufficient for one of my cows to do well for it to be- —
come one of the farmer’s; but a few rash remarks of
Charles’s, a few observations of my own began to ~
enlighten me, and my mind, once given the hint,
worked quickly. .

Marceline, at my suggestion, went over the ac-
counts minutely, but could find nothing wrong with
them; Bocage’s honesty was displayed on every page.
What was to be done? Let things be. At any rate, I
now watched the management of the cattle in a state
of suppressed indignation, but without letting it be
too obvious.

I had four horses and ten cows—quite enough to
be a considerable worry to me. Among my four
horses was one which was still called “the colt,”
ree it was more than three years old; it was now

being broken in; I was beginning to take an interest

Re 08 The Immoralist

in it, when one fine morning I was informed that it
was perfectly unmanageable, that it would be im-
possible ever to do anything with it, and that the best
thing would be to get rid of it. As if on purpose to
convince me of this, in case I had doubted it, it had
been made to break the front of a small cart and had
cut its hocks in doing so.
I had much ado that day to keep my temper, but
what helped me was Bocage’s obvious embarrass-
ment. After all, thought I, he is more weak than any-
thing else; it is the men who are to blame, but they
want a guiding hand over them.
I went into the yard to see the colt; one of the
men who had been beating it began to stroke it as
‘soon as he heard me coming; I pretended to have
seen nothing. I did not know much about horses, but
this colt seemed to me a fine animal; it was half-bred,
light bay in color and remarkably elegant in shape,
with a very bright eye and a very light mane and tail.
I made sure it had not been injured, insisted on its
cuts being properly dressed, and went away without
another word.

That evening, as soon as I saw Charles, I tried to
find out what he personally thought of the colt.

“I think he’s a perfectly quiet beast,” he said,
“but they don’t know how to manage him; they'll
drive him wild.”

“And how would you manage him?”

“Will you let me have him for a week, Sir? Ill
answer for him.”

“And what will you do?”

“You will see.”

The next morning, Charles took the colt down to
a corner of the field that was shaded by a superb
walnut-tree and bordered by the river; I went too,
together with Marceline. It is one of my most vivid

Second Part 69

recollections. Charles had tied the colt with a rope
a few yards long to a stake firmly planted in the
ground. The mettlesome creature had, it seems, ob-
jected for some time with great spirit; but now, tired
and quieted, it was going round more calmly; the
elasticity of its trot was astonishing and as delightful
and engaging to watch as a dance. Charles stood in
the center of the circle and avoided the rope at every
round with a sudden leap, exciting or calming the.
beast with his voice; he held a long whip in his
hand, but I did not see him use it. Everything about
his look and movements—his youthfulness, his de-
light—gave his work the fervent and beautiful as-
pect of pleasure. Suddenly—I have no idea how—he ©
was astride the animal; it had slackened its pace and
then stopped; he had patted it a little, and then, all
of a sudden, I saw that he was on its back, sure of
himself, barely holding its mane, laughing, leaning
forward, still patting and stroking its neck. The colt
had hardly resisted for a moment; then it began its
even trot again, so handsome, so easy, that I envied
Charles and told him so.

“A few days’ more training and the saddle won't
tickle him at all; in a fortnight, Sir, your lady herself
won't be afraid to mount him; he'll be as quiet as a
lamb.”

It was quite true; a few days later, the horse al-
lowed himself to be stroked, harnessed, led, without
any signs of restiveness; and Marceline might really
have ridden him if her state of health had permitted.

“You ought to try him yourself, Sir,” said
Charles.

I should never have done so alone; but Charles
suggested saddling another of the farm horses for
himself, and the pleasure of accompanying him
proved irresistible.

stead. The sensation of feeling myself on horse-
: was not too strange; after the first few moments,
1ad no tremors and felt perfectly at ease. Charles's
nt was heavier; it was not pure bred, but far
bad-looking, and above all, Charles rode it
. We got into the habit of going out every day;

of the woods; the dripping hazels, shaken by
passage, drenched us with their showers; sud-
aly the horizon opened out; there, in front of us,
the vast Vallée d’Auge and far in the distance
d be divined the presence of the sea. We stayed
oment without dismounting; the rising sun col-

et off again at a brisk toe we lingered a ane
the farm, where the work was only just beginning;
> enjoyed for a moment the proud pleasure of

on them; then, abruptly, we. left them; I was home
again at La Moriniére just as Marceline was begin-
ig to get up.

IL used to come in drunk with the open air, dazed
vith speed, my limbs a little stiff with a delicious
fatigue, all health and appetite and freshness. Mar-
celine approved, encouraged my fancy. I went
raight to her room, still in my gaiters, and found
her lingering in bed, waiting for me; I came bring-
ing with me a scent of wet leaves, Wwhick she said
+ she’ liked. And she listened while I told her of our
_ ride, of the awakening of the fields, of the recom-
_ mencing of the day's labor. . . . She took as much
__ delight, it seemed, in feeling me live as in living her-

ection of "chose: Soe oe Hie me in

“id J dla Mates dik mcepd ecctaptlis hemaitte a

—— a

_ grew longer, and sometimes I did not come in till

ee Sewe | Second Part ae

self. Soon I Oe, on this delight too; our rides

nearly noon. les

I kept the afternoons and evenings, however, as
much as possible for the preparation of my lectures.
My work on them made good progress; I was satis-
fied with it and thought they might perhaps be worth :
publishing later as a book. By a kind of natural re- _
action, the more regular and orderly my life became — iv
and the more pleasure I took in establishing order _
about me—the more attracted I felt by the rude eth- *
ics of the Goths. With a boldness for which I was
afterwards blamed, I took the line throughout my | ui
lectures of making the apology and eulogy of non-—
culture; but, at the same time, in my private life, I —
was laboriously doing all I could to control, if not to —
suppress, everything about me and within me that
in any way suggested it. How far did I not push this
wisdom—or this folly?

Two of my tenants whose leases expired at —
Christmas time came to me with a request for re-
newal; it was a matter of signing the usual prelim- —
inary agreement. Strong in Charles’s assurances and
encouraged by his daily conversations, I awaited the
farmers with resolution. They on the other hand,
equally strong in the conviction that tenants are
hard to replace, began by asking for their rents to
be lowered. Their stupefaction was great when I read
them the agreement I had myself drawn up, in which
I not only refused to lower the rents but also with-
drew from the farms certain portions of land,
which I said they were making no use of. They pre- —
tended at first to take it as a laughing matter—I must
be joking. What could I do with the land? It was
worth nothing; and if they made no use of it, it was
because no use could be made of it. . . .. Then, see-

es The Immoralist

stinate too. They thought they would frighten me by

threatening to leave. It was what I was waiting for.

“All right! Go if you like! I won't keep you,” I
said, tearing the agreement up before their eyes.
_. So there I was, with more than two hundred
acres left on my hands. I had planned for some time
past to give the chief management of this land to
Bocage, thinking that in this way I should be giving
it indirectly to Charles; my intention also was to look
after it a good deal myself; but in reality, I reflected
very little about it; the very risk of the undertaking
tempted me. The tenants would not be turning out
before Christmas; between this and then we should
‘have time to look about us. I told Charles; his de-
light annoyed me; he could not hide it; it made me
feel more than ever that he was much too young. We
were already pressed for time; it was the season when
the reaping of the crops leaves the fields empty for
early ploughing. By an established custom, the out-
going tenant works side by side with the incoming;
the former quits the land bit by bit, as soon as he has
carried his crops. I was afraid the two farmers I had
dismissed would somehow revenge themselves on me;
but, on the contrary, they made a pretense of being
perfectly amiable (I only learned later how much
they benefited by this). I took advantage of their
complaisance to go up to their land—which was
soon going to be mine—every morning and evening.
Autumn was beginning; more laborers had to be
hired to get on with the ploughing and sowing; we
had bought harrows, rollers, ploughs; I rode about
on horseback, superintending and directing the
work, taking pleasure in ordering people about and
in using my authority.

Meanwhile, in the neighboring meadows, the

ing I was serious, they turned obstinate; I was ob-

~~
ag
oe

ee

Second Part 73
Suis were being gathered; they dropped from the

trees and lay rolling in the thick grass; never had ee
there been a more abundant crop; there were not —

enough pickers; they had to be brought in from the
neighboring villages and taken on for a week;
Charles and I sometimes amused ourselves by help-
ing them. Some of the men beat the branches with
sticks to bring down the late fruit; the fruit that fell
of itself was gathered into separate heaps; often the
overripe apples lay bruised and crushed in the long
grass so that it was impossible to walk without step-
ping on them. The smell that rose from the ground
was acrid and sickly and mingled with the smell of
the ploughed land.

Autumn was advancing. The mornings of the last —
fine days are the freshest, the most limpid of all.
There were times when the moisture-laden atmos-
phere painted all the distances blue, made them look
more distant still, turned a short walk into a day’s
journey; and the whole country looked bigger; at _
times again the abnormal transparency of the air
brought the horizon closer; it seemed as though it
might be reached by one stroke of the wing; and I
could not tell which of the two states filled me with
a heavier languor. My work was almost finished—
at least, so I told myself, as an encouragement to
be idle. The time I did not spend at the farm, I spent
with Marceline. Together we went out into the gar-
den; we walked slowly, she languidly hanging on my
arm; the bench where we went to sit looked over the
valley, which the evening gradually filled with light.
She had a tender way of leaning against my shoul-
der; and we would stay so till evening, motionless,
speechless, letting the day sink and melt within us.

. In what a cloak of silence our love had already _
learned to wrap itself! For already Marceline’s love

/ ey
e of

ning now to the new life mysteriously quiver- _
within her, and I leaned‘ over her as over deep
transparent waters where, as far as the eye could
ch, nothing was to be seen but love. Ah! if this was
| happiness, I know I did my best to hold it, as .
e tries—in vain—to hold the water that slips be-
een one’s joined hands; but already I felt, close |
ide my happiness, something not happiness, some-
ag indeed that colored my love, but with the col-
of autumn.

- Autumn was passing. Every morning the grass
s wetter, till it no longer dried in the fringe of the
oods on the shady side of the valley; at the first
_ streak of dawn, it was white. The ducks on the waters
_ of the moat fluttered and flapped their wings; they
grew fiercely agitated; sometimes they rose together,
ling loudly, and flew in a noisy flight right round
: Moriniére. One morning we missed them. Bocage
had shut them up. Charles told me_ that every
autumn at migration time they had to be shut up in
his way. And a few days later the weather changed.
One evening, suddenly, there came a great blast, a
breath from the sea, stormy, steady, bringing with it
cold and rain, carrying off the birds of passage. Mar-
celine’s condition, the business of settling into a new
apartment, the work entailed by my lectures, would
__in any case have soon called us back to town. The
_ bad weather, which began early, drove us away at
once.

It is true that the farm affairs were to bring me

back in November. I was greatly vexed to hear of rs

- Bocage’s plans for the winter; he told me that he \
ee

ee : bing ted
er “J an 4 Ree FN

ih ar iis aM

2 Pisa so he alana he had still a ae deals a :

learn; I talked to him long, used all the arguments

I Gad think of, but I could not make him budge; at

the outside, he consented to shorten Charles’s train.

ing by a trifle so as to allow him to come back a little |
sooner. Bocage did not conceal from me that the run- —

ning of the two farms would be a matter of no small ©
difficulty; but he had in view, so he said, two highly —

trustworthy peasants whom he intended to con e
they would be partly farmers, partly tenants, partly _

laborers; the thing was too unusual in these parts for — :

him to hope ae good would come of it; but, he i
said, it was my own wish. This conversation took %
place toward the end of October. In the first days of

November we moved to Paris.

Py ° as

Ir was in S... Street, near Passy, that we took ~

up our residence. The apartment, which had been
found for us by one of Marceline’s brothers, and
which we had visited when we had last passed
through Paris, was much bigger than the one my
father had left me, and Marceline was a little uneasy,
not only at the increased rent, but at all the other

expenses we should certainly be led into. I countered

all her fears by pretending I had a horror of anything

temporary; I forced myself to believe in this feeling
and deliberately exaggerated it. Certainly the cost

of furnishing and arranging the apartment would

exceed our income for the present year, but our for-
tune, which was already large, was sure to increase
still further; I counted on my lectures foi this, on the
fhe
| eo

76 — The Immoralist

publication of my book, and, such was my folly, on
the profits from my new farms. In consequence, I
stopped short at no expense, telling myself at each
new one that here was another tie and thinking also
that by these means I should suppress every vaga-
bond inclination I felt—or feared I might feel—
within me.

For the first few days our time was taken up
from morning to night by shopping and other busi-

_ hess of the sort; and though eventually Marceline’s

brother very obligingly offered to do as much as he
could for us, it was not long before Marceline felt
thoroughly tired out. Then, as soon as we were set-
tled in, instead of resting as she should have done,

she felt obliged to receive visitors; they flocked to see

us now because we had been absent from Paris dur-
ing the first days of our marriage, and Marceline, who
had become unused to society, was incapable of get-
ting rid of them quickly or of shutting her doors al-
together. When I came home in the evening, I found
her exhausted, and, though her fatigue, which
seemed only natural, caused me no anxiety, I did my

_ best to lessen it; often receiving visits in her stead,

which was very little to my taste, and sometimes pay-
ing them—which was still less so.

I have never been a brilliant talker; the frivolity,
the wit, the spirit of fashionable drawing-rooms, were
things in which I could take no pleasure; yet in old
days I had frequented some of these salons—but how
long ago that seemed! What had happened since

_ then? In other people’s company, I felt I was dull,

gloomy, unwelcome, at once bored and boring... .
By a singular piece of ill-luck, you, whom I con-
sidered my only real friends, were absent from Paris
and not expected back for long. Should I have been

_ able to speak to you more openly? Would you have

noe <cbe aaa

Second Part Hy

perhaps understood me better than I did myself?
But what did I know at that time of all that was
growing up within me, of all I am now telling you
about? The future seemed to me absolutely assured
and I had never thought myself more master of it.

And even if I had been more perspicacious, what
help against myself should I have found in Hubert,
Didier, or Maurice, or in all the others whom you
know and judge as I do? I very soon discovered, alas,
the impossibility of their understanding me. In our
very first conversations I found myself forced to im-
personate a false character, to resemble the man they |
imagined I still was; and for convenience’s sake, I
pretended to have the thoughts and tastes with which
they credited me. One cannot both be sincere and
seem so.

{ -vas rather more willing to renew my acquaint-
ance with the people ef my own profession—arche-
ologists and philologists—but I found very little
more pleasure and no more emotion in talking to —
them than in consulting a good dictionary. I hoped
at first to find a rather more direct comprehension of
life in one or two novelists and poets; but if they
really had such a comprehension, it must be con-
fessed they did not show it; most of them, I thought,
did not really live—contented themselves with ap-
pearing to live, and were on the verge of consider-
ing life merely as a vexatious hindrance to writing. I
could not blame them for it; and I do not affirm that
the mistake was not mine. .. . As to that, what did
I mean by “living”? That is exactly what I wanted to
find out. One and another talked cleverly of the dif-
ferent events of life—never of what is at the back of
them.

As for the few philosophers whose business it
should have been to instruct me, I had long known

When I got back to Marceline, I did not con-
_ceal from her how tedious I found all these acquaint-
es.
_ “They are all alike,” I said to her. “When I talk
one, I feel as if I were talking to the whole lot.”
_ “But, my dear,” said Marceline, “you can’t ex-
each of them to be different from all the others.”
“The greater their likeness to each other, the
ore unlike they are to me.”
_ And then I went on with a sigh: “Not one of
them has managed to be ill. They are alive—they
seem to be alive, and yet not to know they are alive.
For that matter, since I have been in their company,
_ Ihave ceased to be alive myself. Today, among other
, what have I done? I had to leave you about
o'clock. I had just a bare moment for a little
reading before I went out; it was the only satisfactory
_moment of the day. Your brother was waiting for me
the solicitor’s, and after the solicitor’s, he insisted
ee n sticking to me; I had to see the upholsterer with
im; he was really a nuisance at the cabinet-maker’s
and I only got rid of him at Gaston’s; I had lunch in
the neighborhood with Philip and then I met Louis
a café and went with him to Theodore’s absurd
_ lecture, and paid him compliments when it was Over;
__ then, in order to get out of his invitation for Sunday,
I had to go with him to Arthur’s; then to a water-

_bertine and Julie....I came in thoroughly ex-

ee eet Tey FT Te eee ee NT)

color exhibition with Arthur; then left cards on Ae

___ hausted and found you as tired as myself, after visits

Piao

i

Sues 74h it ‘i tnt
ae aot R oe TS oi i ") ip Ae.
is Seecona Part n79

from Adeline, Marthe, Jeanne, and Sophie. ... And

2

it back and live it over again hour by hour—and the
thought of it makes me inclined to weep.” Pe

And yet I should not have been able to say what
I meant by “living,” nor whether the very simple se-
cret of my trouble was not that I had acquired a taste __
for a more spacious, breezier life, one that was less
hemmed in, less regardful of others; the secret
seemed to me much more mysterious than that; it —
was the secret, I thought, of one who has known eos:
death; for I moved a stranger among ordinary peo- |
ple, like a man who has risen from the grave. And at _ a
first I merely felt rather painfully out of my element; |);
but soon I became aware of a very different feeling. —
I had known no pride, I repeat, when the publication _
of my essay had brought me such praise. Was it
pride now? Perhaps; but at any rate there was no
trace of vanity mixed with it. It was rather, for the
first time, the consciousness of my own worth. What
separated me—distinguished me—from other people —
was crucial; what no one said, what no one could say
but myself, that it was my task to say.

My lectures began soon after; the subject was
congenial and I poured into the first of them all my
newly born passion. Speaking of the later Latin civ-
ilization, I depicted artistic culture as welling up
in a whole people, like a secretion, which is at first
a sign of plethora, of a superabundance of health,
but which afterwards stiffens, hardens, forbids
the perfect contact of the mind with nature, hides un-
der the persistent appearance of life a diminution of
life, turns into an outside sheath, in which the
cramped mind languishes and pines, in which at last _

80 The lmmoralist Magia

_ it dies. Finally, pushing my thought to its logical con-

clusion, I showed culture, born of life, as the de-
stroyer of life.

The historians criticized a tendency, as they

phrased it, to too rapid generalization. Other peo-

Wy ple blamed my method; and those who compli-

mented me were those who understood me least.

It was at the end of my lecture that I came
across Ménalque again for the first time. I had never
seen much of him, and shortly before my marriage he
_ had started on one of those distant voyages of dis-
covery which sometimes kept him from us for over a
year. In the old days I had never much liked him;
he seemed proud, and he took no interest in my ex-
istence. I was therefore astonished to see him at my
first lecture. His very insolence, which had at first
held me aloof from him, pleased me, and I thought
the smile he gave me all the more charming because
I knew he smiled rarely. Recently, an absurd—a
shameful—lawsuit had caused a scandal and given
the newspapers a convenient occasion to drag him
through the mud; those whom he had offended by
his disdain and superiority seized this pretext to re-
venge themselves; and what irritated them most was
that he appeared not to care.

“One must allow other people to be right,” he
used to say when he was insulted; “it consoles them
for not being anything else.”

But “good society” was indignant, and people
who, as they say, “respect themselves,” thought it
their duty to turn their backs on him, and so pay him
back his contempt. This was an extra encourage-
ment to me; feeling myself attracted by a secret in-

a e ae Second Part 81

fluence, I went up to him and embraced him before
everyone. Le
When they saw to whom I was talking, the last
intruders withdrew; I was left alone with Ménalque.
After the irritating criticisms and inept compli-
ments I had been listening to, his few words on the
subject of my lecture were very soothing.

“You are burning what you used to adore,” said

he. “Very good. It is a little late in the day, but never
mind, the fire is all the fiercer. I am not sure whether
I altogether understand you. You make me curious. I
don’t much care about talking, but T should like to
talk to you. Come and dine with me tonight.”

“Dear Ménalque,” I answered, “you seem to for- _

get that I am married.”

“Yes,” he answered, “quite true. The frank cor-
diality with which you were not afraid to greet me
made me think you might be free.”

I was afraid I might have wounded him; still
more so of seeming weak, and I told him I would
join him after dinner.

Ménalque never did more than pass through
Paris on his way to somewhere else; he always stayed
in a hotel. On this occasion he had had several rooms
fitted up for him as a private apartment; he had his
own servants, took his meals apart, lived apart; stuffs
and hangings of great value which he had brought

back from Nepal had been hung on the walls and |

thrown over the furniture, whose commonplace ugli-
ness was an offense to him. He was dirtying them
out, he said, before presenting them to a museum.
My haste to rejoin him had been so great that I
found him still at table when I came in; as I excused
myself for disturbing his meal:

“But I have ate n of letting you distur
he said, “and I expect you to let me finish it. If
you had come to dinner, I should have given you —
ome Shiraz—the wine that Hafiz celebrated—but
| too late now; one must only drink it fasting; but
ull take some liqueur, won't you?”

PT ee eee ee ee

“Forgive me,” he said, “but I hardly ever drink
hs ch things.”

“Are you afraid of getting drunk?”
“Oh!” replied he, “on the centrary! But I con-
r sobriety a more powerful intoxication—in which :
ep my lucidity.” 3
_ “And you pour the drink out for others?”

He smiled.
“I cannot,” said he, “expect everyone to have
y virtues. It’s good enough to meet with my
eS,"

“You smoke, at any rate?”

“No, not even that. Smoking is an impersonal,
negative, too easily achieved kind of drunkenness;
what I want from drunkenness is an enhancement,
_ not a diminution of life. But that’s enough. Do you
_know where I have just come from? Biskra. I heard

ou had been staying there, and I thought I would
like to follow up your tracks. What could the blind- __
folded scholar, the learned bookworm have come to
do at Biskra? It’s my habit to be discreet only about __
_ things that are confided to me; for things that I find
out myself, I'll admit that I have an unbounded
_ curiosity. So I searched, poked about, questioned
wherever I could. My indiscretion was rewarded,
since it has made me wish to meet you again; since
_ instead of the learned man of habit you seemed to

Saved bee

i
:
§
‘
r

NN

4 mM
i eeuoee

BL, PV Ber

Wa i neta: Part Bay

’ :

__ be in the old days, I know now that you are... it’s
_ for you to tell me what.” Le
¥ I felt myself blushing. He
| “What did you find out about me, Ménalque?”
“Do you want to know? But there’s no need to_ Be
be alarmed! You know your friends and mine well 1
enough to be sure there is no one I can talk toe
about you. You saw how well your lecture was under- sek
stood?” Bae
“But,” said I, a little impatiently, “there’s noth- © é
ing yet to prove that I can talk to you better than to ‘ak
them. Come on, then! What is it you found out about
me?” an
“First of all, that you had been ill.” =P See
“But there’s nothing in that to...” ia.
“Oh, yes! That in itself is very important. Then)"
I was told you liked going out alone, without a book
(that’s what started me wondering), or, when you ~ .
were not alone, you preferred the company of chil- —
dren to that of your wife. . . . Don't blush like that,
or I shan’t go on.” age
“Go on without looking at me.” oe
“One of the children—his name was Moktir, if [ _
remember right—(I have scarcely ever seen a hand-
somer boy, and never a greater little swindler)
seemed to have a good deal to say about you. I en-
ticed him—I bribed him to confide in me... not
an easy thing to do, as you know, for I think it was
only another lie when he said he was not lying that
time. . . . Tell me whether what he told me about
you is true.”
In the meantime, Ménalque had got up and —
taken a little box out of a drawer.
“Are these scissors yours?” he said, opening the
box and taking out a shapeless, twisted, rusty ob-
ject, which, however, I had little difficulty in recog-

84h The Immoralist

nizing as the pair of scissors Moktir had purloined.

“Yes, they are—they were my wife’s scissors.”

“He pretends he took them when your head was

turned away one day he was alone in the room with
you; but that’s not the point; he pretends that at the
- moment he was hiding them in his burnous, he saw
_ you were watching him in the glass and caught the
reflection of your eyes looking at him. You saw the
theft and said nothing! Moktir was very much aston-
ished at this silence—and so was I.”

“And I am too at what you have just said. What!
Do you mean to say he knew I had caught him at
it?”

“It isn’t that that matters; you were trying to be
more cunning than he; it’s a game at which children
like that will always get the better of us. You thought
you had him, and in reality, it was he who had you.
. . . But that’s not what matters. I should like an
explanation of your silence.”

“I should like one myself.”

_ Some time passed without a word trom either of
us. Ménalque, who was pacing up and down the
room, lighted a cigarette absent-mindedly and then
immediately threw it away.

“The fact is,” said he, “there’s a ‘sense,’ as people
say, ‘a sense’ which seems to be lacking in you, my
dear Michel.”

“The ‘moral sense,” said I, forcing myself to
smile.

“Oh, no! Simply the sense of property.”

“You don’t seem to have much of it yourself.”

“I have so little of it that, as you see, nothing in
this place is mine; not even—or rather, especially
not, the bed I sleep on. I have a horror of rest; pos-
Sessions encourage one to indulge in it, and there’s
nothing like security for making one fall asleep; I

#
ft
N

: a 2 second Part 85
like life well enough to want to live it awake, and
so, in the very midst of my riches, I maintain the sen-
sation of a state of precariousness, by which means
I aggravate, or at any rate intensify, my life. I will
not say I like danger, but I like life to be hazardous,
and I want it to demand at every moment the whole

of my courage, my happiness, my health. . . ue
“Then what do you blame me for?” I in-
terrupted.

“Oh, how little you understand me, my dear
Michel; for once that I am foolish enough to try and
make a profession of faith! . . . If I care little for
the approbation or disapprobation of men, Michel,
it is not in order to approve or disapprove in my
turn; those words have very little sense for me. I
spoke of myself too much just now. . . . I was car-
ried away by thinking you understood me.... I
simply meant to say that, for a person who has not
got the sense of property, you seem to possess a great
deal. Isn’t that rather serious?”

“And what is this great deal I possess?”

“Nothing, if you take it in that way... . But
are you not beginning a course of lectures? Have you
not an estate in Normandy? Have you not just set-
tled yourself—and luxuriously too—in an apartment
at Passy? You are married? Are you not expecting a
child?”

“Well!” said I, impatiently, “it merely proves
that I have succeeded in making my life more dan-
gerous than yours.”

“Yes, merely,” repeated Ménalque ironically;
then, turning abruptly, he put out his hand:

“Well, good-by now; I don’t think any more talk
tonight would be of much use. But I shall see you
again soon.

Some time went by before I saw him again.

ee,

portant for my lectures and which I had to ee at a
me length. The feeling that my first lesson nae

; I was thus led to enunciate as a doctrine what
ha ad at first only tentatively suggested as an ingen-
us. hypothesis. How many assertions owe their
trength to the lucky circumstance that as suggestions a

annot distinguish what proportion of obstinacy
vs have mingled with my natural propensity for
serting my opinions. The new things I had to say
emed to me especially urgent because of the dif-
ulty of saying them, and above all of getting them
iderstood.
But, alas, how pale words become when ~
ompared with deeds! Was not Ménalque’s life,

‘now that the great philosophers of antiquity, ae
aching was almost wholly moral, worked by e

The next time I saw Ménalque was in my own
house, nearly three weeks after our first meeting. We
had been giving a crowded evening party, and he
~ came in almost at the end of it. In order to avoid be-
_ ing continually disturbed, Marceline and I had set-
ted to be at home on Thursdays; in this way it was

Fol

_ easier to keep our doors shut for the rest of the week.

many guests and they used to stay late. I think that _

; Ne slg eek ratte au vee Nt red
ond Part 87

Every Thursday evening, then, those people who
called themselves our friends used to come and see
us; our rooms were large enough to hold a good ©

what attracted them most was Marceline’s exquisite
charm and the pleasure of talking to each other, for
as to myself, from the very beginning of these parties,
there was nothing I could find either to say or to lis-
ten to, and it was with difficulty I concealed my bore- —
dom. Bets
That evening, I was wandering aimlessly from
the drawing-room to the smoking-room, from the _
ante-chamber to the library, caught by a sentence —
here and there, observing very little but looking
about me more or less vaguely.

Antoine, Etienne, and Godefroi were discussing —
the last vote in the Chamber, as they lolled on my
wife’s elegant armchairs. Hubert and Louis were
carelessly turning over some fine etchings from my
father’s collection, entirely regardless of how they _
were creasing them. In the smoking-room, Mathias, _
the better to listen to Leonard, had put his red-hot
cigar down on a rosewood table. A glass of curacao
had been spilled on the carpet. Albert was sprawling
impudently on a sofa, with his muddy boots dirty-
ing the cover. And the very dust of the air one
breathed came from the horrible wear and tear of
material objects. . . . A frantic desire seized me to —
send all my guests packing. Furniture, stuffs, prints,
lost all their value for me at the first stain; things
stained were things touched by disease, with the
mark of death on them. I wanted to save them, to
lock them up in a cupboard for my own use alone.
How lucky Ménalque is, thought I, to have no pos-

egg The Iauiorelie

sessions! The reason I suffer is that I want to preserve
things. But after all, what does it really matter to
Mer: «.2)',

There was a small, less brilliantly lighted draw-
ing-room, partitioned off by a transparent glass door,

-and there Marceline was receiving some of her more
intimate friends; she was half reclining on a pile of

cushions and looked so fearfully pale and tired that

I suddenly took fright and vowed that this reception

should be the last. It was already late. I was begin-

% ning to take out my watch, when I suddenly felt

Moktir’s little scissors in my pocket.
Why did the little wretch steal them, thought I,

if it was only to spoil and destroy them at once?

_ At that moment someone touched me on the
shoulder; I turned quickly; it was Ménalque.

He was almost the only person in evening dress.

He had just arrived. He asked me to present him to

my wife; I should certainly not have done so of my

own accord. Ménalque was distinguished-looking—
almost handsome; his face was like a pirate’s,

barred by an enormous drooping mustache, already

s
= 96

5 Os

ge

orn eR

quite gray; his eyes shone with a cold flame that de- ©

noted courage and decision rather than kindness. He
was no sooner standing before Marceline than I knew
she had taken a dislike to him. After he had ex-
changed a few banal words of courtesy with her, I
carried him off to the smoking-room.

I had heard that very morning of the new mis-
sion on which the Colonial Office was sending him;

_ the newspapers, as they recalled his adventurous ca-

reer, seemed to have forgotten their recent base in-
sults and now could find no words fine enough to
praise him with. Each was more eager than the other
to extol and exaggerate his services to his country, to
the whole of humanity, as if he never undertook any-

P. Second Part 89
_ thing but with a humanitarian purpose; and they
quoted examples of his abnegation, his devotion, his
courage, as if such encomiums might be considered

a reward.
I began to congratulate him, but he interrupted

me at the first words.
“What! You too, my dear Michell But you didn't

begin by insulting me,” said he. “Leave all that non- —

sense to the papers. They seem to be surprised that a
man with a certain reputation can still have any vir-
tues at all. They establish distinctions and reserves
which I cannot apply to myself, for I exist only as a
whole; my only claim is to be natural, and the pieas-

ure I feel in an action, I take as a sign that I ought _

to do it.”

“That may lead far,” I said.

“Indeed, I hope so,” answered Ménalque. “If
only the people we know could persuade themselves
of the truth of this! But most of them believe that it
is only by constraint they can get any good out of —
themselves, and so they live in a state of psycholog-
ical distortion. It is his own self that each of them
is most afraid of resembling. Each of them sets up a
pattern and imitates it; he doesn’t even choose the
pattern he imitates; he accepts a pattern that has
been chosen for him. And yet I verily believe there
are other things to be read in man. But people don't
dare to—they don’t dare to turn the page. Laws of
imitation! Laws of fear, I call them. The fear of find-
ing oneself alone—that is what they suffer from—
and so they don’t find themselves at all. I detest such
moral agoraphobia—the most odious cowardice, I
call it. Why, one always has to be alone to invent
anything—but they don’t want to invent anything.
The part in each of us that we feel is different from
other people is just the part that is rare, the part that

think hey love life.”
I let Ménalque speak on; he was saying ai
yhat I myself had said the month before to Marce-
line; I ought to have approved him. For what rea-
_ son, through what moral cowardice did I interrupt
oe, and say, in imitation of Marceline, the very sen-

came up to take eae he unceremoniously turned
his back on me and went off to talk about some trifle
or other to Hector.

__ The words were no sooner out of my mouth than
I ‘realized not only that they were stupid, but worse
a ill, that they might have given Ménalque the im-
_ pression that I thought his remarks had been pointed
at me. It was late; my guests were leaving. When the
drawing-room was nearly empty, Ménalque came
back to me.

“I can’t leave you like this,” he said. “No doubt I

. ‘misunderstood what you said. Let me at least hope
i \
So.”

“No,” I answered, “you did not misunderstand
. but it was senseless, and I had no sooner said
it han I knew it was foolish. I was sorry, and espe-
cially sorry to think it would make you place me
_ among the very people you were attacking and who,
aol assure you, are as odious to me as to you. I hate
_ people of principle.”
“Yes,” answered Ménalque, laughing, “there is

nothing more detestable in the world. It is impossible

oe eo eee ee ee ne ae xf

NCE), a
to expect any sort of sincerity from them; for they
never do anything but what their principles have

decreed they should do; or if they do, they think they
have done wrong. At the mere suspicion you might —
be one of them, the words froze on my lips. I felt by —

my distress what a great affection I have for you;

I hoped I was mistaken—not in my affection, but in —

the conclusion I had drawn.”
“Yes, really; your conclusion was wrong.”

“Oh! it was, I am sure,” said he, suddenly taking —
my hand. “Listen a moment; I shall soon be going

away, but I should like to see you again. My expedi-

tion this time will be a longer one and more risky —
than any of the others; I don’t know when I shall
come back. I must start in a fortnight’s time; no one —

knows I am leaving so soon; I tell you so in con-

Be Voie eS

fidence. I start at daybreak. The night before leaving _
is always a night of terrible heartache for me. Give ‘ans
me a proof that you are not a man of principle; may —

I count on it that you will spend that last night with — :

me?”

“But we shall see each other again before then,”

I said, a little astonished.

“No; during the next fortnight I shall be at home
to no one. I shall not even be in Paris. Tomorrow I
leave for Budapest; in six days’ time I must be in
Rome. I have friends dotted here and there to whom
I must say good-by before leaving. There is one ex-

>

pecting me in Madrid.’

“Very well, then, I will pass your night of vigil

with you.”

“And we will have some Shiraz to drink,” said
Ménalque.

A few days after this party, Marceline began to
feel less well. I have already said she was easily tired;
but she did not complain, and as I attributed her

“ 92 The Immoralist pee te

fatigue to her condition, I thought it natural and felt }
no particular anxiety. A rather foolish—or rather ig-
- norant—old doctor had at first been over-reassuring.

Some fresh symptoms, however, accompanied by
fever, decided me to send for Dr. Tr . . . , who was

considered at that time the. cleverest specialist in

Paris for such cases. He expressed astonishment that

I had not called him in sooner and prescribed a strict
regime which she ought to have begun to follow some
time ago. Marceline had been very courageous, but
not very prudent, and had overtired herself. She was
told she must now lie up till the date of her confine-

-ment, which was expected about the end of January.

Feeling no doubt a little anxious and more unwell
than she would admit, Marceline consented very
meekly to the most tiresome orders. She had a mo-
ment’s rebellion, however, when Tr... prescribed
quinine in such heavy doses that she knew it
might endanger the child. For three days she obsti-
nately refused to take it; then as her fever increased,
she was obliged to submit to that too; but this time
it was with deep sadness and as if she were mourn-
fully giving up all hope of the future; the resolution

which had hitherto sustained her seemed broken —

down by a kind of religious resignation, and her con-
dition grew suddenly worse in the days that followed.

I tended her with greater care than ever, did my
best to reassure her, and repeated the very words Dr.
Tr... had used, that he could see nothing very
serious in her case; but her extreme anxiety ended by
alarming me too. Alas! our happiness was already
resting on the dangerous foundations of hope—
and hope of what an uncertain future! I, who at first
had taken pleasure only in the past, may have one
day felt, thought I, the sudden and intoxicating

_ Sweetness of a fugitive moment, but the future dis-

Second Part A

-enchants the present even more than the present then _

disenchanted the past; and since our night at Sor- —
rento my whole love, my whole life have been pro-—
jected into the future.

In the meantime the evening I had promised —
Ménalque came round; and _ notwithstanding the —
reluctance I felt at abandoning Marceline for a
whole winter’s night, I got her, as best I could, to
acknowledge the solemnity of the occasion and the
gravity of my promise. Marceline was a little better |
that evening and yet I was anxious; a nurse took my ~
place beside her. But as soon as I was in the street, —
my anxiety gained ground; I shook it off, struggled ©
against it, was angry with myself for not being better
able to get rid of it; thus I gradually reached a state
of excessive tension, of singular excitement, both very
unlike and very like the painful uneasiness from
which it sprang, but liker still to happiness. It was
late and I strode along rapidly; the snow began to
fall in thick flakes; I was glad to be breathing a
keener air, to be struggling with the cold; I was
happy with the wind, the night, the snow against me;
I rejoiced in my strength. ,

Ménalque had heard me coming and came out
onto the landing to welcome me. He was waiting for
me not without impatience. His face was pale and
he looked overwrought. He helped me off with my
overcoat and forced me to change my wet boots for
some soft Persian slippers. Sweets and cakes were
standing on a small table by the fire. There were two
lamps, but the light in the room came chiefly from
the fire on the hearth. Ménalque immediately in-
quired after Marceline; for the sake of simplicity I
answered that she was very well.

ied silent so ae that at last I felt eee i

s I myself could think of nothing to say either,
up, took a few steps, and then went up to him

put my hand on his shoulder. Presently, as
gh he were pursuing his thoughts aloud: ©

ne must choose,” he murmured. “The chief

as to what he meant.
“It looks like it.”
_ “Are you hesitating, then?”

“What is the use? You have a wife and child, so
at home. ... Of the thousand forms of life,
of us can know but one. It is madness to envy
r people’s happiness; one would not know what
with it. Happiness won't come to one ready-
it has to be made to measure. I am going away
_ tomorrow; yes, I know; I have tried to cut out my
ppiness to fit me. . . . Keep your calm happiness
f hearth and home... .”

a! cut out my happiness to fit me too,” I said,

ee joke dc into my eyes; as I found nothing to say,
he smiled rather sadly.

a _ “One imagines one possesses and in reality one
is s possessed,” he went on. “Pour yourself out a glass —

; ie

CNRS S08 sh UD Pa a arm
Second Part 95

ay mn ea =, baer
of Shiraz, dear Michel; you won't often taste it; and :
eat some of those rose-colored sweets which th
Persians take with it. I shall drink with you this eve- :
ning, forget that I am leaving tomorrow, and talk as
_ if the night were long. . . . Do you know the reason _
_ why poetry and philosophy are nothing but dead
letter nowadays? It is because they have severe
themselves from life. In Greece, ideas went hand in —
hand with life; so that the artist’s life itself was al- _
ready a poetic realization, the philosopher's life gee
putting into action of his philosophy; in this way, as
both philosophy and poetry took part in life, instead _
of remaining unacquainted with each other, philoso-
phy provided food for poetry, and poetry gave ex-
pression to philosophy—and the result was admirably —
persuasive. Nowadays beauty no longer acts; action —
no longer desires to be beautiful; and wisdom works _ a
in a sphere apart.” “alla
“But you live your wisdom,” said I; “why do you —
not write your memoirs? Or simply,” I added, seeing _
him smile, “recollections of your travels?” nme)
“Because I do not want to recollect,” he replied. ug
“I should be afraid of preventing the future and of
allowing the past to encroach on me. It is out of the —
utter forgetfulness of yesterday that I create every —
new hour's freshness. It is never enough for me to
have been happy. I do not believe in dead things
and cannot distinguish between being no more and ~
never having been.” (Cas
These words were too far in advance of my
thoughts not to end by irritating me; I should have —
liked to hang back, to stop him; but I tried in vain —
to contradict, and besides I was more irritated with
myself than with Ménalque. I remained silent there-
fore, while he, sometimes pacing up and down like

wa,
Sao

Les

ai
a

aor

: «96 ; The Immoralist

a wild beast in a cage, sometimes stooping over the
fire, kept up a long and moody silence, or again broke
abruptly into words:

| “If only our paltry minds,” he said, “were able to
-embalm our memories! But memories keep badly.

_ The most delicate fade and shrivel; the most volup-

tuous decay; the most delicious are the most danger-
ous in the end. The things one repents of were at first
delicious.”

Again a long silence; and then he went on:

“Regrets, remorse, repentance, are past joys seen
from behind. I don’t like looking backwards and I
leave my past behind me as the bird leaves his shade
to fly away. Oh, Michell every joy is always awaiting
us, but it must always be the only one; it insists on
finding the bed empty and demands from us a widow-

ers welcome. Oh, Michell! every joy is like the manna

of the desert which corrupts from one day to the next;
it is like the fountain of Ameles, whose waters, says
Plato, could never be kept in any vase. ... Let
every moment carry away with it all that it brought.”

Ménalque went on speaking for long; I cannot
repeat all his words; but many of them were im-
printed on my mind the more deeply, the more anx-
ious I was to forget them; not that they taught me
much that was new—but they suddenly laid bare my
thoughts—thoughts I had shrouded in so many cover-
ings that I had almost hoped to smother them.

And so the night of watching passed.

The next morning, after I had seen Ménalque
into the train that carried him away, as I was walk-
ing home on my way back to Marceline, I felt hor-
ribly sad and full of hatred of his cynical joy; I
wanted to believe it was a sham; I tried to deny it.
I was angry with myself for not having found any-
thing to say to him in reply; for having said words

> ee a |
ce
ay

Second Part 97

that might make him doubt my happiness, my love. ©

And I clung to my doubtful happiness—my “calm
happiness,” as Ménalque had called it; I could not,
it was true, banish uneasiness from it, but I assured
myself that uneasiness was the very food of love. I
imagined the future and saw my child smiling at
me; for his sake I would strengthen my character, —
I would build it up anew. . . . Yes, I walked with a
confident step.

Alas! when I got in that morning, I was struck
by a sight of unaccustomed disorder. The nurse met
me and told me guardedly that my wife had been
seized in the night with bad sickness and pains,
though she did not think the term of her confinement
was at hand; feeling very ill, she had sent for the
doctor; he had arrived post-haste in the night and
had not yet left the patient; then, seeing me change
color, I suppose, she tried to reassure me, said that
things were going much better now, that... I
rushed to Marceline’s room.

The room was darkened and at first I could make
out nothing but the doctor, who signed to me to be
quiet; then I saw a figure in the dark I did not know.
Anxiously, noiselessly, I drew near the bed. Marce-
line’s eyes were shut; she was so terribly pale that at
first I thought she was dead; but she turned her head
toward me, though without opening her eyes. The
unknown figure was in a dark corner of the room,
arranging, hiding, various objects; I saw shining in-
struments, cotton wool; I saw, I thought I saw a cloth
stained with blood. . . . I felt I was tottering. I al-
most fell into the doctor’s arms; he held me up. I
understood; I was afraid of understanding... .

“The child?” I asked anxiously.

He shrugged his shoulders sadly. I lost all sense
of what I was doing and flung myself sobbing against

h! how s the future hac

The ground had given way abruptly beneat

h I stumbled headlong.

to her quietly. I never went out without bringing
ier back flowers. I remembered the tenderness with

smiled as though it made her happy. Not a word was

ttered our hopes. .. .

__ Then phlebitis declared itself; and when that got
etter, a clot of blood suddenly set her hovering be-
__ tween life and death. It was night. time; I remember
ee eaning over her, feeling my heart stop and go on
again with hers. How many nights I watched by her
bedside, my eyes obstinately fixed on her, hoping
by the strength of my love to instill some of my own
_ life into hers. I no longer thought much about hap-
_ piness; my single melancholy pleasure was some-
times seeing Marceline smile.

‘Strength to prepare them, to deliver them? . . . My
‘memory of this time is blurred; I have forgotten how
; the weeks passed. And yet there was a little incident
I must tell you about.

____ It was one morning, a little after the embolism; I

___was sitting with Marceline; she seemed a little better, —

_ but she was still ordered to keep absolutely motion-

2¢ , there was nothing there but an empty hole into

celine, however, seemed at first to recover fairly
juickly. The Christmas holidays allowed me a little
‘espite and I was able to spend nearly the whole day
with her. I read or wrote in her room, or read aloud

hanged about the melancholy accident that had ~

_ My lectures had begun again. How did I find |

Te ee ee ee ee ee

4

(ant: Second Part.” 99°

less; she was not allowed to move even her arms.
bent over her to give her some drink, and after she
had drunk, and as I was still stooping over her, she
begged me, in a voice made weaker still by her emo-

tion, to open a little box, which she showed me by a
the direction of her glance; it was close by, on the
table; I opened it and found it full of ribbons, bits of
lace, little ornaments of no value. ...I wondered _
what she wanted. I brought the box to her bedside
and took out every object one by one. Was it this?) cm
That? . . . No, not yet; and I felt her getting agi-
tated. “Oh, Marceline, is it this little rosary you want?”
She tried to smile.’ oa
“Are you afraid, then, that I shan’t nurse you
properly?” Ps

“Oh, my dear,” she murmured. And I remem- _
bered our conversation at Biskra, and her timid re-
proaches when she heard me refuse what she called _
“the help of God.” Care
I went on a little roughly: “I got well alone all ~
right.” Sg

“I prayed for you so much,” she answered.

She said the words tenderly, sadly. There was
something anxious and imploring in her look. ... I
took the rosary and slipped it into her weak hand as.
it lay on the sheet beside her. A tearful, love-laden
glance rewarded me—but I could not answer it; I
waited another moment or two, feeling awkward and ~
embarrassed; finally, not knowing what to do, I said
“Good-by” and left the room, with a feeling of hos-_
tility, and as though I had been turned out of it.

¢
ber:

Meanwhile the horrible clot had brought on seri-
ous trouble; after her heart had escaped, it attacked —
her lungs, brought on congestion, impeded hex

100 The Immoralist a

breathing, made it short and laborious. I thought
she would never get well. Disease had taken hold of

Marceline, never again to leave her; it had marked

her, stained her. Henceforth she was a thing that had
been spoiled.

Je

THE WEATHER was now becoming warmer. As soon
as my lectures were over, I took Marceline to La
Moriniére, the doctor having told me that all imme-
diate danger was past and that nothing would be

‘more likely to complete her cure than a change to
purer air. I myself was in great need of rest. The

nights I had spent nursing her, almost entirely by
myself, the prolonged anxiety, and especially the

kind of physical sympathy which had made me at the

time of her attack feel the fearful throbbing of her
heart in my own breast—all this had exhausted me
as much as if I myself had been ill.

I should have preferred to take Marceline to the
mountains, but she expressed the strongest desire to
return to Normandy, declared that no climate could
be better for her, and reminded me that I must not
neglect the two farms of which I had rather rashly
assumed the charge. She insisted that as I had made
myself responsible for them, it was my business to
make them succeed. No sooner had we arrived, there-
fore, than she urged me to visit the estate immedi-
ately. . . . I am not sure that her friendly insistence
did not go with a good deal of abnegation; she was
afraid, perhaps, that as she still required assistance,

_I might think myself bound to stay with her and

not feel as free as I might wish to. . . . Marceline

Second Part 101
was better, however; the color had returned to her
cheeks, and nothing gave me greater comfort than ©
to feel her smile was less sad; I was able to leave
her without uneasiness.

I went then to the farms. The first hay was being
made. The scented air, heavy with pollen, at first
went to my head like a strong drink. I felt that I had -
hardly breathed at all since last year, or breathed
nothing but dust, so drowned was I in the honeyed
sweetness of the atmosphere. The bank on which 1
seated myself in a kind of intoxication overlooked
the house; I saw its blue roofs; I saw the still waters
of the moat; all around were fields, some newly
mown, others rich with grass; farther on, the curve
of the brook; farther again, the woods where last
autumn I had so often gone riding with Charles. A
sound of singing, which I had been listening to for
the last moment or two, drew near; it was the hay-
makers going home, with a fork or a rake on their
shoulders. I recognized nearly all of them, and the
unpleasant recollection came to me that I was not
there as an enchanted traveler, but as their master.
I went up to them, smiled, spoke to them, inquired
after each of them in turn. Bocage that morning had
already given me a report of the crops; he had indeed
kept me regularly informed by letter of everything
that went on in the farms. They were not doing so
badly—much better than Bocage had led me to —
expect. But my arrival was being awaited in order
to take some important decisions, and during the
next few days I devoted myself to farm business to
the best of my ability—not taking much pleasure in
it, but hoping by this semblance of work to give some
stability to my disintegrated life.

As soon as Marceline was well enough to receive
visitors, a few friends came to stay with us. They

society, int it had ate effect: etna me lea
1ouse with more pleasure than usual. I preferre
society of the farm hands; I felt that with them _
e was more to be learned—not that I questioned 4
m—no; and I hardly know how to express the —
f rapture I felt when I was with them; I seemed

] things with their senses rather than with my _
yn—and while I knew what our friends were going __
say before they opened their mouths, the mere |

‘If at first they appeared as condescending in
answers as I tried to avoid being in my ques-
| 1s, they soon became more tolerant of my presence. —
I came into closer contact with them. Not content
with following them at their work, I wanted to see

est for me, but I shared their meals, listened to
heir jokes, fondly watched their pleasures. By a kind

‘sympathy similar to that which had made my
art throb at the throbs of Marceline’s, their alien

é a ete

fas weary with his weariness; the mouthful of cider

drank quenched my thirst; I felt it slip down his

nee oat; one day, one of them, while sharpening his

scythe, cut his thumb badly; his pain hurt me to the

bone.
He And it seemed to me that it was no longer with
my sight alone that I became aware of the landscape,
_ but that I felt it as well by some sense of touch, which
my curious power of sympathy illimitably enlarged.
Bocage’s presence was now a nuisance to me;

_ when he came I had to play the master, which I had >

“<
io)
=
=}
~
et
teas)
a

ie jo}
=
io)
=
eg
z
as
a
o
2
oO
3
ie}
=

@
=
wn
n
BS
i=}
oO
nv
a

ae SS eee,

ve

~~ no longer the least inclination to do. I still gave orders

_ the precautions I took to accustom them to my pres-

EET ON NT aN ee

se a a - \

PpeeP ir ec high een OCOME: Fare |

va

; Bis Ho be Cou i

—I had to—still superintended the laborers; but I no my
longer went on horseback, for fear of looking down |
on them from too great a height. But notwithstanding

by
Jee,

ence and prevent them from feeling ill at ease in it,
in theirs I was still filled as before with an evil curi-
osity. There was a mystery about the existence of —
each one of them. I always felt that a part of their
lives was concealed. What did they do when I was ©
not there? I refused to believe that they had not
better ways of amusing themselves. And I credited
each of them with a secret which I pertinaciously _
tried to discover. I went about prowling, following,
spying. For preference I fastened on the rudest and
roughest among them, as if I expected to find a guid- _
ing light shine from their darkness.
One in particular attracted me; he was fairly —
good-looking, tall, not in the least stupid, but wholly —
guided by instinct, never acting but on the spur of
the moment, blown hither and thither by every pass-
ing impulse. He did not belong to the place, and had —
been taken on by some chance. An excellent worker
for two days—and on the third dead drunk. One
night I crept furtively down to the barn to see him;
he lay sprawling in a heavy, drunken sleep. I stayed _

looking at him a long time. . . . One fine day, he
went as he had come. How much I should have liked —
to know along what roads! .. . I learned that same —

evening that Bocage had dismissed him.

I was furious with Bocage and sent for him.

“It seems you have dismissed Pierre,” J began.
“Will you kindly tell me why?” |

He was a little taken aback by my anger, though
I tried to moderate it. |

“You didn’t want to keep a dirty drunkare, did

fete

a ‘104 The Immoralist

you, Sir? A fellow who led all our best men into mis- 4
chief!”

“It's my business to know the men I want to keep,
not yours.”

“A regular waster! No one knew where he came
from. It gave the place a bad name. . . . If he had
set fire to the barn one night, you mightn’t have been
so pleased, Sir.”

“That's my affair, I tell you. It’s my farm, isn’t

it? I mean to manage it in my own way. In the fu-
_ ture, be so good as to give me your reasons before —

dismissing people.”

Bocage, as I have told you, had known me since
my childhood. However wounding my tone, he was
too much attached to me to be much offended. He
did not, in fact, take me sufficiently seriously. The
Normandy peasant is too often disinclined to believe
anything of which he cannot fathom the motive—
that is to say, anything not prompted by interest.
Bocage simply considered this quarrel as a piece of
absurdity.

I did not want, however, to break off the conver-
sation on a note of blame; feeling I had been too
sharp with him, I cast about for something pleasant
to add.

“Isn’t your son Charles coming back soon?” I

_ ended by asking after a moment’s silence.

“I thought you had quite forgotten him, Sir: you
seemed to trouble your head about him so little,” said
Bocage, still rather hurt.

“Forget him, Bocage! How could I, after all we
did together last year? I’m counting on him, in fact,
to help me with the farms. . . .”

“You're very good, Sir. Charles is coming home

~ in a week’s time.”

= Second Part 105
— “Well, I'm glad to hear it, Bocage,” and I dis-
_ mnissed him.

Bocage was not far wrong; I had not of course
forgotten Charles, but I now cared very little about
him. How can I explain that, after such vehement

camaraderie, my feeling for him now should be so _

flat and spiritless? The fact is my occupations and
tastes were no longer the same as last year. My two
farms, I must admit, did not interest me so much
as the people employed on them; and if I wanted to
foregather with them, Charles would be very much
in the way. He was far too reasonable and too
respectable. So, notwithstanding the vivid and de-
lightful memories I kept of him, I looked forward
with some apprehension to his return.

He returned. Oh, how right I had been to be ap-
prehensive—and how right Ménalque was to repudi-
ate all memories! There entered the room in Charles’s
place an absurd individual with a bowler hat.
Heavens! how changed he was! Embarrassed and
constrained though I felt, I tried not to respond too
frigidly to the joy he showed at seeing me again;
but even his joy was disagreeable to me; it was awk-
ward and, I thought, insincere. I received him in the
drawing-room, and as it was late and dark, I could
hardly distinguish his face; but when the lamp was
brought in, I saw with disgust he had let his whiskers _
grow.

The conversation that evening was more or less
dreary; then, as I knew he would be continually at
the farms, I avoided going down to them for almost
a week, and fell back on my studies and the society
of my guests. And as soon as I began to go out again,
I was absorbed by a totally new occupation.

Wood-cutters had invaded the woods. Every year

oe car-old copse wood “foe fag
ne Te This work was done in the winter, and the wood-
ters were obliged by contract to have the ground —
ared before spring. But old Heurtevent, the tim- —
“merchant who directed operations, was so slack —
that sometimes spring came upon the copses while 4g
the wood was still lying on the ground; fresh, deli-
cate shoots could then be seen forcing their way
auras through the dead branches, and when at
— last the wood-cutters cleared the ground, it was not
_ without destroying many of the young saplings.
That year old Heurtevent’s remissness was even
_ greater than we had looked for. In the absence of any
other bidde:, I had been obliged to let him have the
-Copse wood exceedingly cheap; so that, being assured
_ in any case of a handsome profit, he took very little
pains to dispose of the timber which had cost him _
Ee so little. And from week to week he put off the work _
with various excuses—a lack of laborers, or bad
_ weather, or a sick horse, or an urgent call for work
_ elsewhere, and so on—with the result that as late as
a the middle of summer, none of it had been removed.
_ The year before, this would have irritated me to
_ the highest degree; this year it left me fairly calm; I
saw well enough the damage Heurtevent was caus- 4
ing me; but the devastated woods were beautiful; —
_it gave me pleasure to wander in them, tracking and
Pa aiding the game, startling the snakes, and some-
times sitting by the hour on one of the fallen trunks 4
which still seemed to be living on, with green shoots
Springing from its wounds. ;

Then suddenly, about the middle of the last fort- id

Has
: a Pt Evin Wve ota 4
Ane eRe.

Po ee ERO Rare
ght in August, Heurtevent made up his mind to |
send his men. Six of them came with orders to finish
the work in ten days. The part of the woods that
_ had been cut was that bordering on La Valterie; gt
"was arranged that the wood-cutters should have their
_ food brought them from the farm, in order to expe- pe
_ dite the work. The laborer chosen for this task was
a curious young rascal called Bute; he had just come. a ms
back from a term of military service which had utterly
demoralized him; but physically he was in admi- —
- rable condition; he was one of the farm hands I most _
enjoyed talking to. By this arrangement I was able
to see him without going down to the farm. For it _
was just at that time that I began going out again. —
For a few days I hardly left the woods except for my 3
meals at La Moriniére, and I was very often late for _
them. I pretended I had to superintend the work,
though in reality I only went to see the workers.
Sometimes two of Heurtevent’s sons joined the
batch of six men; one was about twenty, the other
about fifteen years old, long-limbed, wiry, hard-fea- _
tured young fellows. They had a foreign look about
them, and I learned later that their mother was ac-
tually a Spanish woman. I was astonished at first that
she should have traveled to such distant parts, but
Heurtevent had been a rolling stone in his youth and
had, it appears, married her in Spain. For this reason
he was rather looked askance at in the neighborhood.
The first time I saw the younger of the sons was, 1
remember, on a rainy day; he was alone, sitting on
a very high cart, on the top of a great pile of faggots. —
He was lolling back among the branches, and singing,
or rather shouting, a kind of extraordinary song, which
was like nothing I had ever heard in our parts. The
‘cart-horses knew the road and followed it without
any guidance from him. I cannot tell you the effect

Dies Npoe st
eae oy 2 tea

108 The Immoralist AN tat inc
this song had on me; for I had never heard its like —
except in Africa.... The boy looked excited— —
drunk; when I passed, he did not even glance at me.
_ The next day, I learned he was a son of Heurtevent’s.
It was in order to see him, or rather in the hopes of _
seeing him, that I spent so much time in the copse. =
The men by now had very nearly finished clearing it.
The young Heurtevents came only three times. They
seemed proud, and I could not get a word out of
them.

Bute, on the other hand, liked talking; I soon
managed to make him understand that there was
nothing it was not safe to say to me. Upon this, he
let himself go and soon stripped the countryside of
every rag of respectability. I lapped up his mysteri-
ous secrets with avidity. They surpassed my expecta-
tion and yet at the same time failed to satisfy me.
Was this what was really grumbling below the surface
of appearances or was it merely another kind of hypoc-
risy? No matter! I questioned Bute as I had ques-
tioned the uncouth chronicles of the Goths. Fumes of
the abyss rose darkly from his stories, and as I
breathed them uneasily and fearfully, my head began
to turn. He told me, to begin with, that Heurtevent
had relations with his daughter. I was afraid if I
showed the slightest disapprobation I should put an
end to his confidences; curiosity spurred me on.

“And the mother? Doesn’t she object?”

“The mother! She has been dead full twelve years.
. . . He used to beat her.”

“How many are there in the family?”

“Five children. You’ve seen the eldest son and
the youngest. There’s another of sixteen who's deli-
cate and wants to turn priest. And then the eldest
daughter has already had two children by the father.”

And little by little I learned a good deal more,

ss Second Part 109
so that, do what I would, my imagination began to
circle round the lurid attractions of Heurtevent’s house
like a blow-fly round a putrid piece of meat. One
_ night the eldest son had tried to rape a young servant
_ girl, and as she struggled, the father had intervened
_ to help his son and had held her with his huge hands;
_ while the second son went piously on with his prayers
on the floor above, and the youngest looked on at

the drama as an amused spectator. As far as the rape
is concerned, I imagine it was not very difficult, for
Bute went on to say that not long after, the servant
girl, having acquired a taste for this sort of thing, had
_ tried to seduce the young priest.

“And hasn’t she succeeded?” I asked.

“He hasn't given in so far, but he’s a bit wobbly,”
answered Bute.

“Didn't you say there was another daughter?”

“Yes; she picks up as many fellows as she can
lay hold of. And all for nothing too. When she’s set
on it, she wouldn't mind paying herself. But you
mustn't carry on at her father’s. He would give you
what for. He says you can do as you like in your own
house, but don’t let other people come nosing round!
Pierre, the farm hand you sent away, got a nasty
knock on the head one night, though he held his
tongue about it. Since then, she has her chaps in the
home woods.”

“Have you had a go yourself?” I asked with an

encouraging look.
| He dropped his eyes for form’s sake and said,
chuckling:
“Every now and then.” Then, raising his eyes
quickly, “So has old Bocage’s boy,” he added.
“What boy is that?”
“Alcide, the one who sleeps at the farm. Surely
_ you know him, Sir?”

‘ Gy was arenes astounded to hear Bocage 1a
ni at son. wer

still at his uncle’ s. But it’s very odd you’ve never met —
: him in the woods, Sir; he poaches in them nearly

te seemed satisfied and went on: é
“Good Lord, Sir, of course you know your woods —

, are poached. They’ re so big it doesn’t do much >
harm to anyone.’ .
i _ I looked so far from ies displeased that Bute ©

i glad to do Bocage an ill far: He pointed out one or _
“two hollows in the ground in which Alcide had set
_ his snares, and then showed me a place in the hedge —
_ where I should be almost certain of catching him.
melt was a boundary hedge and ran along the top of
a bank; there was a narrow opening in it through
_ which Alcide was in the habit of coming about six
_ oclock in the evening. At this place Bute and I
amused ourselves by stretching a copper wire, which _
we very neatly concealed. Then, having made me —
_ swear not to give him away, Bute departed. :
: xy For three evenings I waited in vain. I began to. E

cs _ think Bute had played me a trick. . . . At last on
____ the fourth evening I heard a light step approaching.
on My heart began to beat and I had a sudden revela-
_ tion of the horrible allurement of the poacher’s life.
a . . The snare was so well set that Alcide walked
straight into it. I saw him suddenly fall flat, with his _
_ ankle caught in the wire. He tried to save himself, fell s
down again, and began struggling like a trapped —
rabbit. But I had hold of him in an instant. He was 4
a wicked-looking youngster, with green eyes, tow- _

; ‘
4 ae Sp

i Be ET a a ao Se MUM Ste 28 eA 9 Fae ite ho
2 os hi oe ei teaid 4 t
ve te oes 1 SN NAN
ANS. 42 pe fae uy
, rag .
y

wi ‘ MT Jinn
ORE en 4 eh a SPN a

Mere hc a OCCA Lark

colored hair, and a ferrety expression. He started
_ kicking; then, as I held him so tight that he was un-
able to move, he tried to bite; and when that failed,
Phe spat out the most extraordinary volley of abuse — :
‘I have ever heard. In the end I could resist no longer _
e and burst out laughing. At this, he stopped abruptly,
looked at me, and went on in a lower tone: Ea ee
= “You brute, you! You've hurt me something hor-
 rible.”
“Show me where.” :
He slipped his stocking down over his boot and: \\)
_ showed me his ankle, where a slight pink mark was
_ just visible. was
“It’s nothing at all.” pine
He smiled a little; then, “I shall tell Father,” he
said in a cunning voice, “that it’s you who set snares.”
“Why, good heavens, it’s one of your own!”
o “Sure enough, you never set that one.”
i “Why do you say that?”
2 “You would never know how to set them as well
as that. Just show me how you did it.”

“Give me a lesson... .”

That evening I came in very late for dinner; no
one knew where I was, and Marceline had been anx-
ious. But I did not tell her I had set six snares and,
so far from scolding Alcide, had given him ten sous.

The next evening when I went with him to visit
the snares, much to my entertainment I found two _
rabbits caught in them. Of course I let him take them. ©
The shooting season had not yet begun. I wondered
what became of the game, as it was impossible to
dispose of it openly without the risk of getting into
trouble. Alcide refused to tell me. Finally I learned,

_ through Bute again, that Heurtevent was the receiver
and his youngest son the go-between between Alcide
and him. Was this going to give me an opportunity

Fs
wh i
Ns Lee

. 112. The Immoralist

of a deeper insight into the secrets of that mysterious,
unapproachable family? With what passionate eager- _
ness I set about poaching! 3

I met Alcide every evening; we caught great
numbers of rabbits and once even a young roe-deer _
which still showed some faint signs of life; I cannot ~
recall without horror the delight Alcide took in kill- —
ing it. We put the deer in a place of safety from which —
young Heurtevent could take it away at night.

From that moment I no longer cared for going -
out in the day, when there was so little to attract me —
in the emptied woods. I even tried to work—melan- |
choly, purposeless work, for I had resigned my tem-_
porary lectureship—thankless, dreary work, from |
which I would be suddenly distracted by the slightest —
song, the slightest sound coming from the country —
outside; in every passing cry I heard an invitation. —
How often I have leaped from my reading and run —
to the window to see—nothing pass by! How often
I have hurried out of doors. . . . The only attention —
I found possible was that of my five senses.

But when night fell—and it was the season now
when night falls early—that was our hour. I had —
never before guessed its beauty; and I stole out of
doors as a thief steals in. I had trained my eyes to —
be like a night-bird’s. I wondered to see the grass
taller and more easily stirred, the trees denser. The ‘
dark gave everything fresh dimensions, made the _
ground look distant, lent every surface the quality of
depth. The smoothest path looked dangerous. Every-
where one felt the awakening of creatures that lead
a life of darkness.

“Where does your father think you are now?”

“In the stables looking after the cattle.”

Alcide slept there, I knew, close to the pigeons
and the hens; as he was locked in at night, he used

Dei ae

a)

Second Part 113

‘to creep out by a hole in the roof. There still hung
about his clothes a steamy odor of fowls.
Then, as soon as the game had been collected, he
would disappear abruptly into the dark, as if down
oN trap-door—without a sign of farewell, without a
word of tomorrow's rendezvous. I knew that before
returning to the farm, where the dogs recognized
him and kept silent, he used to meet the Heurtevent
_ boy and deliver his goods. But where? Try as I might,
I was never able to find out; threats, bribes, cun-
-ning—all failed; the Heurtevents remained inacces-
sible. I cannot say where my folly showed more
triumphantly. Was it in this pursuit of a trivial mys-
_ tery, which constantly eluded me—or had I even
_ invented the mystery by the mere force of my curi- |
osity? But what did Alcide do when he left me? Did
he really sleep at the farm? Or did he simply make
the farmer think so? My compromising myself was
utterly useless; I merely succeeded in lessening his
respect without increasing his confidence—and it
both infuriated and distressed me.
d After he had disappeared, I suddenly felt myself
| horribly alone; I went back across the fields, through
_ the dew-drenched grass, my head reeling with dark-
ness, with lawlessness, with anarchy; dripping,
muddy, covered with leaves. In the distance there
shone from the sleeping house, guiding me like a
peaceful beacon, the lamp I had left alight in my
study, where Marceline thought I was working, or the
_ lamp of Marceline’s own bedroom. I had persuaded
_ her that I should not have been able to sleep without
_ first going out in this way. It was true; I had taken
a loathing to my bed. How greatly I should nave pre-
_ ferred the barn!
Game was plentiful that year; rabbits, hares,
5 pheasants succeeded each other. After three evenings,

Ay

re Ou ahs an f" our 2 eee expedition
a found only two of the twelve snares we had set; som

ee:

per wire, as ordinary wire was no use.
_ The next morning I had the gratification of
ae ing my ten snares at Bocage’s house and I wi
obliged to compliment him on his zeal. What a1
_ noyed me most was that the year before I had fool
_ ishly offered fifty centimes for every snare that wi
: brought i in; I had therefore to give Bocage five francs.
_ In the meantime Bute had bought some more wire
_with the five francs I had given him. Four days later,
the same story! Ten fresh snares were brought in;
4 another five francs to Bute; another five francs | to
_ Bocage. And as I congratulated him:
. “It's not me you must congratulate, Sir, it’s AL
cide,” he said.
“No, really?” said I. Too much astonishment
might have given me away. I controlled myself.
a “Yes,” went on Bocage; “it can’t be helped, Sir,
T’m growing old. The lad looks around the woo
instead of me; he knows them very well; he can te
better than I can where to look out for the snares.”
fs “I'm sure he can, Bocage.”
tc So out: of ‘the fifty centimes you give me, I ]
_ him have twenty-five.” :
ie “He certainly deserves it. What! Twenty snare:
in five days! Excellent work! The poachers had bet-
ter be careful. I wager they'll lie low now.” |
“Oh, no, Sir. The more one takes, the more on
finds. Game is very dear this a and for the few
sous it costs them .. .”

I had been so eR. diddled that I felt ak

Pa i eee eee | Pare:

ne in the business was not so much Alcide’s three-
c fold traffic as his deceitfulness. And then what did
he and Bute do with the money? I didn’t know. I
should never know anything about creatures like

: them. They would always lie; they would go on dex
_ ceiving me for the sake of deceiving. That evening I

_ gave Bute ten francs instead of five and warned him
_it was for the last time, that if the snares were taken
_again, so much the worse, but I should not go on.

“been out all night and had only come in at cock-
- crow. The fellow was as drunk as a fiddler; at Bo-
cage’s first words, he had grossly insulted him and
_ then flown at him and struck him. . .

23 “And Yve come to ask, Sir,” said Bocage, ©

“whether you authorize me” (he accented the word
a little), “whether you authorize me to dismiss him?”
y “Tl think about it, Bocage. I’m extremely sorry
she should have been disrespectful. Ill see. . . . Let
_ me reflect a little, and come again in two hours’ time.”
we Bocage went out.
_ To keep Bute was to be painfully lacking in con-
_ sideration for Bocage; to dismiss Bute was to ask for
trouble. Well! there was nothing to be done about it.
Let come what come might! I had only myself to
blame. . . . And as soon as Bocage came back:
“You can tell Bute we have no further use for

~ him here,” I said.

‘ Then I waited. What would Bocage do? What

would Bute say? It was not till evening that I heard
_ rumors of scandal. Bute had spoken. I guessed it at
first from the shrieks I heard coming from Bocage’s

The next day up came Bocage; he looked embar- .
rassed—which at once made me feel even more so.

What had happened? Bocage told me that Bute had

pa wet coe
t inclined to suspect old Bocage himself of hay-
a hand in the game. And what specially vexed (7,7

A

116 The Immoralist ate i
house; it was Alcide being beaten. Bocage would
soon be coming up to see me; here he was; I heard his
old footstep approaching, and my heart beat even
faster than when I was poaching. It was an intolerable :
moment. I should have to trot out a lot of fine senti- —
ments. I should be obliged to take him seriously. What _
could I invent to explain things? How badly I should —
act! I would have given anything to throw up my
part! Bocage came in. I understood absolutely noth- ©
ing of what he was saying. It was absurd; I had to
make him begin all over again. In the end, this is
what I made out. He thought that Bute was the only —
guilty party; the inconceivable truth had escaped —
him—that I could have given Bute ten francs! What —
for? He was too much of a Normandy peasant to
admit the possibility of such a thing. Bute must have
stolen those ten francs. Not a doubt of it! When he —
said I had given them to him, he was merely adding —
a lie to a theft; it was a mere invention to explain —
away his theft; Bocage wasn’t the man to believe a —
trumped-up story like that... . There was no more
talk of poaching. If Bocage had beaten Alcide, it was
only because the boy had spent the night out.

So, then, I am saved! In Bocage’s eyes, at any
rate, everything is all right. What a fool that fellow —
Bute is! This evening, I must say, I don’t feel much —
inclined to go out poaching. E

I thought that everything was. all over, when an —
hour later in came Charles. He looked far from ami- —
able; the bare sight of him was enough; he struck me
as even more tedious than his father. To think that _
last year! ...

“Well, Charles! I haven’t seen you for ever so
long!” |
“If you had wanted to see me, Sir, you had only

a
‘
si es
ol

_ livanting about the woods at night.”

es

Caen Second Part 117

to come down to the farm. You won't find me gal- —

“Oh, your father has told you...”

“My father has told me nothing, because my
father knows nothing. What’s the use of telling him
at his age that his master is making a fool of him?”

“Take care, Charles, you're going too far....

“Oh, all right! You're the master—you can do as

_ you please.”

“Charles, you know perfectly well I've made a

- fool of no one, and if I do as I please, it’s because it

does no one any harm but myself.”
He shrugged his shoulders slightly.

“How can one defend your interests when you

attack them yourself? You can’t protect both the

keeper and the poacher at the same time.”

“Why not?”

“Because . . . Oh, youre a bit too clever for
me, Sir. I just don’t like to see my master joining up
with rogues and undoing the work that other people
do for him.”

Charles spoke with more and more confidence as
he went on. He held himself almost with dignity. I
noticed he had cut off his whiskers. For that matter,
what he said was sensible enough, and as I kept si-
lence (what could I have said?), he went on:

“You taught me last year, Sir, that one has duties
to one’s possessions. One ought to take one’s duties
seriously and not play with them ... or else one _
doesn’t deserve to have possessions.”

Silence.

“Is that all you have to say?”

“For this evening, yes, Sir; but if you ask me
some other time, Sir, I may perhaps tell you that my
father and I are leaving La Moriniére.”

And Re eae out, Dowing v very Pie
time to reflect.

“Charles!” . . . He’s right, by Jove! f

- that’s what's leant fe possessions . . ‘Chace j {

_ I ran after him, caught up with him : in the dark and —

Phe called out hastily, as if in a hurry to clinch my sudden 5

determination: -

“You can tell your father that I am putting: La ;

_ Moriniére up for sale.” g

Charles bowed again gravely and went away —

_ without a word. ;

The whole thing is absurd! Absurd!

That evening Marceline was not able to come —

down to dinner and sent word to say she was unwell. —

Full of anxiety, I hurried up to her room. She reas- —

_ sured me quickly. “It’s nothing but a cold,” she said. —

She thought she had caught a chill. 4

i “Couldn't you have put on something warmer?”

ns “I put my shawl on the first moment I felt a

__ shiver.” :

aaa “You should have put it on before you felt a

shiver, not after.” |

She looked at me and tried to smile... . Oh, —

perhaps it was because the day had begun so , badly J

that I felt so anguished. If she had said aloud: “Do —

you really care whether I live or not?” I should not —

__ have heard the words more clearly. a

Oh, I thought, without a doubt, everything in —

my life is falling to pieces. Nothing that my hand s

_ grasps can my hand hold. Ga

I sprang to Marceline and covered her pale face —

with kisses. At that, she broke down and fell sob-
bing: on my shoulder... .

“Oh, Marceline! Marceline! Let us go away. ‘Any-

where else but here I shall love you as I did at —

Sorrento. . . . You have thought me changed, per-

| not cured her eauiaces! but
h clutched at hopel .. .
was not late in the year, but the weather was
and damp, and the last rosebuds were rotting
pened on the bushes. Our guests had long si ce
us. Marceline was not too unwell to see to a

an)

Ms
rales
SMe cede

THIRD PART

4

Anp so I tried, yet once more, to close my hand over
my love. But what did I want with peaceful happi-
ness? What Marceline gave me, what she stood for
in my eyes, was like rest to a man who is not tired.
But as I felt she was weary and needed my love, I
showered it upon her and pretended that the need
was mine. I felt her sufferings unbearably; it was to
cure her that I loved her.

O days and nights of passionate tender care! As
others stimulate their faith by exaggerating the ob-
servance of its practices, so I fanned my love. And
Marceline, as I tell you, began forthwith to recover
hope. In her there was still so much youth; in me,
she thought, so much promise.

We fled from Paris, as though for another honey-
moon. But on the very first day of the journey, she
got much worse, and we had to break it at Neuchatel.

I loved this lake, which has nothing Alpine about
it, with its gray-green shores, and its waters mingling
for a long space, marsh-like, with the land, and
filtering through the rushes. I found a very comfort-
able hotel, with a room looking onto the lake for
Marceline. I stayed with her the whole day.

She was so far from well the next day that I sent
for a doctor from Lausanne. He wanted to know,
quite uselessly, whether there were any other cases
of tuberculosis in my wife’s family. I said there were,

ant
:
,
Ne

and not found it tiring; but Marceline ... And it —

Yt22 0 The lmmoralist 0° 0 Be 4

_ disliked saying that I myself had been almost given —
up on account of it, and that Marceline had pl
_ been ill before she nursed me. I put the whole thing |

_ down to the score of the clot, though the doctor de- _
__ clared that this was merely a contributory cause and —

dine, we started as soon as she was able to bear the —

most entirely prevented us from sleeping. I myself

SY SNE SRE ANS US a Re al ae
SRT ta? amet ete ap a

though, as a matter of fact, I knew of none; but I :

4
’

pcb

that the trouble dated from further back. He strongly

_ recommended the air of the high Alps, which he as-_
_ sured me would cure her; and as just what I myself

wished was to spend the whole winter in the Enga- —

journey.

I remember every sensation of that journey as
vividly as if they had been events. The weather was
limpid and cold; we had taken our warmest furs with
us. . . . At Coire, the incessant din in the hotel al-

should have put up cheerfully with a sleepless night

was not so much the noise that irritated me as the —
fact that she was not able to sleep in spite of it. Her
need of sleep was so great! The next morning we
started before daybreak; we had taken places in the
coupé of the Coire diligence; the relays were so ar-
ranged that St. Moritz could be reached in one day.
Tiefenkasten, the Julier, Samaden . . . I remem-
ber it all, hour by hour; I remember the strange, in-
clement feeling of the air; the sound of the horses’
bells; my hunger; the midday halt at the inn; the raw
egg that I broke into my soup; the brown bread and
the sour wine that was so cold. This coarse fare did
not suit Marceline; she could eat hardly anything but
a few dry biscuits, which I had had the forethought —
to bring with me. I can recall the closing in of the day-
light; the swiftness with which the shade climbs up: 4
the wooded mountainside; then another halt. And

; Fe eT at ee =F nese ian count lbs RMSE
5 nh Sine snp dtm i sal dig mi GAA SRD SOLE hc EO, i i ia ra ea FE Sea Fad

Da td fen

SA lh alr

ee

Third Part 123

stops, we plunge into the heart of darkness, into a —
silence that is limpid—limpid—there is no other
word for it. The quality, the sonority of the slightest
sound acquire perfection and fullness in that strange
transparency. Another start—in the night, this time.
_Marceline coughs . . . oh, will she never have done
"coughing? I think of the Sousse diligence; I feel as.
if I had coughed better than that. She makes too great _
_ an effort... . How weak and changed she looks! In~
- the shadow there, I should hardly recognize her.
How drawn her features are! Used those two black
holes of her nostrils always to be so visible? . . . Oh,
_ how horribly she is coughing! Is that the best she can
‘do? I have a horror of sympathy. It is the lurking-
_ place of every kind of contagion; one ought only to
sympathize with the strong. Oh! she seems really at
the last gasp. Shall we never arrive? What is she
doing now? She takes her handkerchief out, puts it
to her lips, turns aside . . . Horror! Is she going to
_ spit blood too? I snatch the handkerchief roughly
from her hand, and in the half-light of the lantern look
 atit... . Nothing. But my anxiety has been toc visi-
ble. Marceline attempts a melancholy smile avd mur-
murs:
“No; not yet.”
At last we arrived. It was time, for she could
hardly stand. I did not like the rooms that had been
prepared for us; ‘we spent the night in them, how-
ever, and changed them next day. Nothing seemed
_ fine enough for me nor too expensive. And as the
winter season had not yet begun, the vast hotel was
almost empty and I was able to choose. I took two
spacious rooms, bright, and simply furnished; there
was a large sitting-room adjoining, with a big bow-
window, from which could be seen the hideous blue

ww the air becomes keener, rawer. When the coach ~~

124 The Immoralist

lake and a crude mountain, whose name I have for- _
gotten and whose slopes were either too wooded or —

_ too bare. We had our meals served separately. The
rooms were extravagantly dear. But what do I care?

I thought. It is true I no longer have my lectures, but —
I am selling La Moriniére. And then we shall see. -

. . . Besides, what need have I of money? What need
have I of all this? . . . Tam strong now. .. . A com-

‘

~ |

4

hired

plete change of fortune, I think, must be as instructive 4

as a complete change of health. . . . Marceline, of —

course, requires luxury; she is weak . . . oh, for her
sake I will spend so much, so much that... And I~

felt at one and the same time a horror of luxury and
a craving for it. I bathed, I steeped my sensuality in

q

it, and then again it was a vagabond joy that I longed —

for.

In the meanwhile Marceline was getting better

and my constant care was having good results. As

4

she had a difficulty in eating, I ordered the most _

dainty and delicious food to stimulate her appetite; —

we drank the best wines. The foreign brands we ex-
perimented on every day amused me so much that I
persuaded myself she had a great fancy for them;
sharp Rhine wines, almost syrupy Tokays that filled
me with their heady virtue. I remember too an ex-
traordinary Barba-grisca, of which only one bottle was
left, so that I never knew whether the others would
have had the same bizarre taste.

Every day we went for a drive, first in a carriage,
and later on, when the snow had fallen, in a sledge,
wrapped up to our eyes in fur. I came in with glow-
ing cheeks, hungry and then sleepy. I had not, how-
ever, given up all idea of work, and every day I
found an hour or so in which to meditate on the things
I felt it was my duty to say. There was no question
of history now; I had long since ceased to take any

Third Part 125
interest in historical studies except as a means of
psychological investigation. I have told you how I
had been attracted afresh to the past when I thought
I could see in it a disquieting resemblance to the
present; I had actually dared to think that by ques-
tioning the dead I should be able to extort from them
some secret information about life... . But now if
the youthful Athalaric himself had risen from the
grave to speak to me, I should not have listened to
him. How could the ancient past have answered my
present question? . . . What can man do more? That
is what seemed to me important to know. Is what
man has hitherto said all that he could say? Is there
nothing in himself he has overlooked? Can he do
nothing but repeat himself? ... And every day
there grew stronger in me a confused consciousness
of untouched treasures somewhere lying covered up,
hidden, smothered by culture and decency and moral-
ity.

7 It seemed to me then that I had been born to
make discoveries of a kind hitherto undreamed of;
and I grew strangely and passionately eager in the
pursuit of my dark and mysterious researches, for
the sake of which, I well knew, the searcher must
abjure and repudiate culture and decency and mo-
rality.

I soon went to the length of sympathizing only
with the wildest outbreaks of conduct in other peo-
ple, and of regretting that such manifestations were —
subject to any control whatever. I came very near ~
thinking that honesty was merely the result of re-
strictions or conventions or fear. I should have liked
to cherish it as something rare and difficult; but our
manners had turned it into a form of mutual advan-
tage and commonplace contract. In Switzerland it
is just a part of one’s comfort. I understood that

@
i

)

yom

hs
Mi

~~ (ae ¥ pire ’ ¥ eae, SG SE, le a en A lt bee TL af
us ip ¢ ar pam LO a ewe ¥ nis

126 = The Immoralist — eG

Marceline required it; but I did not conceal from her
the new trend of my thoughts; as early as Neu-

_ chatel, when she was praising the honesty that is so _ 9

visible in the faces of the people and the walls of the a
houses.
“I prefer my own,” I retorted. “I have a horror of

i honest folk. I may have nothing to fear from them,

ar but I have nothing to learn either. And besides, they |
_have nothing to say. . . . Honest Swiss nation! What
_ does their health do for them? They have neither

_ crimes, nor history, nor literature, nor arts...a

hardy rose-tree, without thorns or flowers.”
That I should be bored by this honest country:

was a foregone conclusion, but at the end of two

_ months my boredom became a kind of frenzy and

my one thought was to fly. f
__ We were in the middle of January. Marceline
was better—much better; the continual low fever
that was undermining her had disappeared; a brighter
color had returned to her cheeks; she once more
enjoyed walking, though not for long, and was not
continually tired as she used to be. I did not have

_ much difficulty in persuading her that the bracing

air had done her all the good that could be expected

_ and that the best thing for her now would be to go

would completely restore her . . . and above all, To a

down into Italy, where the kindly warmth of spring

had not much difficulty in persuading myself—so
utterly sick was I of those mountain heights.

And yet now, when in my idleness the detested
past once more asserts its strength, those are the very
memories that haunt me. Swift sledge drives; joy
of the dry and stinging air, spattering of the snow,
appetite; walks in the baffling fog, curious sonority
of voices, abrupt appearance of objects; readings in
the snug warmth of the sitting-room, view of the

wy ht
ARTA

Bis agiaeenear Se ET PATE hey
landscape through the windows, view of the icy
landscape; tragic waiting for the snow; vanishing of
_the outer world, soft brooding of one’s thoughts. Pate aui
_ Oh, to skate with her alone once more on the little ‘ ‘
lake, lying lost among the larches, pure and peaceful —
_ —oh, to come home with her once more at night! .. .
i That descent into Italy gave me all the dizzy
___ sensations of a fall. The weather was fine. As we
=a

dropped into a warmer and denser air, the rigid trees _
_ of the highlands—the larches and symmetrical fire- —
_ trees—gave way to the softness, the grace and ease
_ ofa luxuriant vegetation. I felt I was leaving abstrac- |
2 tion for life, and though it was winter, I imagined
_ perfumes in every breath. Oh, for long—too long
-* —our only smiles had been for shadows! My
- abstemiousness had gone to my head and I was drunk
with thirst as others are with wine. My thrift of life
had been admirable; on the threshold of this land of
tolerance and promise, all my appetites broke out
with sudden vehemence. I was full to bursting with
an immense reserve of love; sometimes it surged from
the obscure depths of my senses up into my head and
turned my thoughts to shamelessness.
This illusion of spring did not last long. The sud-
den change of altitude may have deceived me for a
moment, but as soon as we left the sheltered shores
of the lakes, Bellagio and Como, where we lingered |
for a day or two, we came into winter and rain. We
now suffered from the cold, which we had borne _
well enough in the Engadine; it was not dry and ex-
hilarating here as it had been in the mountains, but
damp and heavy, and Marceline began to cough —
again. In order to escape it, we pursued our way still
farther south; we left Milan for Florence, Florence
for Rome, Rome for Naples, which in the winter rain
is really the most lugubrious town I know. I dragged —

oa i etn NOR a i RO ea

~

) “YS
my oI
i y

128 The Immoralist

along in unspeakable ennui. We went back to Rome _

in the hopes of finding, if not warmth, at least a sem-
blance of comfort. We rented an apartment on the
Pincio, much too vast, but marvelously situated. Al-
ready, at Florence, disgusted with hotels, we had
rented a lovely villa on the Viale dei Colli, for three
months, Anybody else would have wished to spend
a lifetime in it. . . . We stayed barely three weeks.
And yet at every fresh stage I made a point of ar-

ranging everything as if we were never going to leave.
ging everything going

- .. Some irresistible demon goaded me on....
And add to this that we traveled with no fewer than
eight trunks. There was one I never opened during
the whole journey, entirely filled with books.

I did not allow Marceline to have any say in our
expenses or attempt to moderate them. I knew of
course that they were excessive and that they could

not last. I could no longer count on any money from

La Moriniére. It had ceased to bring in anything,
and Bocage wrote that he could not find a purchaser.
But all thoughts of the future ended only in making
me spend the more. What need should I have of so
much money, once I was alone, I thought; and sick
at heart, I watched Marceline’s frail life as it ebbed
away more quickly still than my fortune.

Although she depended on me for all the ar-
rangements, these perpetual and hurried moves tired
her; but what tired her still more (I do not hesitate
now to acknowledge it) was the fear of what was in
my mind.

“I understand,” she said to me one day, “I quite
understand your doctrine—for now it has become a
doctrine. A fine one, perhaps,” and then she added
sadly, dropping her voice: “but it does away with
the weak.” .

co 3)

a
vat

Third Part 129
“And so it should!” was the answer that burst

from me in spite of myself.

In my heart then I felt the sensitive creature
shiver and shrivel up at the shock of my dreadful
words. . . . Oh, perhaps you will think I did not
love Marceline. I swear I loved her passionately. She
had never been—I had never thought her—so beau- |
tiful. Illness had refined—etherealized her features.
I hardly ever left her, surrounded her with every care,
watched over her every moment of the night and
day. If she slept lightly, I trained myself to sleep
more lightly still; I watched her as she fell asleep,
and I was the first to wake. When sometimes I left
her for an hour to take a solitary walk in the country
or streets, a kind of loving anxiety, a fear of her feel-.
ing the time long, made me hurry back to her; and
sometimes I rebelled against this obsession, called
upon my will to help me against it, said to myself:
“Are you worth no more than this, you make-believe
great man?” And I forced myself to prolong my ab-
sence; but then I would come in, my arms laden
with flowers, early garden flowers, or hothouse
blooms. . . . Yes, I say; I cared for her tenderly. But
how can I express this—that in proportion as I re-
spected myself less, I revered her more? And who

shall say how many passions and how many hostile

thoughts may live together in the mind of man? .. .

The bad weather had long since ceased; the sea-
son was advancing; and suddenly the almond trees
were in bloom. The day was the first of March. I went
down in the morning to the Piazza di Spagna. The
peasants had stripped the Campagna of its white
branches, and the flower-sellers’ baskets were full of
almond blossom. I was so enchanted that I bought
a whole grove of it. Three men carried it for me.

| ia 04 ROMA ce) Sic]
ilps A

30 The Immordist =
I went home with all this flowering spring. The
_ branches caught in the doorways, and petals snowed
_ upon the carpet. I put the blossoms everywhere, filled
all the vases, and, while Marceline was absent from __
_ the drawing-room for a moment, made it a bower of
__ whiteness. I was already picturing her delight, when
_ I heard her step... ! She opened the door. Oh, ae
_ what was wrong with her? ... She tottered....
She burst out sobbing.

} “What is it, my poor Marceline?” 4
I ran up to her, showered the tenderest caresses
upon her. Then and as if to excuse her tears:
“The flowers smell too strong,” she said.

_ And it was a faint, faint, exquisite scent of honey.
_,.. Without a word, I seized the innocent fragile
_ branches, broke them to pieces, carried them out of
_ the room and flung them away, my temples throb-
_ bing with exasperation, my nerves ajar. Oh, if she

_ finds this little bit of spring too much for her! . . .

I have often thought over those tears of hers and
I believe now that she already felt herself condemned

and. was crying for the loss of other springs. . . . I

think too that there are strong joys for the strong and

weak joys for the weak who would be hurt by strong

_ joys. She was sated by the merest trifle of pleasure;

one shade brighter and it was more than she could

bear. What she called happiness, I called rest, and I

was unwilling, unable to rest.

Four days later we left again for Sorrento. I was
disappointed not to find it warmer. The whole
country seemed shivering with cold. The wind, which
never ceased blowing, was a severe trial to Marceline.
Our plan was to go to the same hotel we had been
to at the time of our first journey, and we were given
the same room. ... But how astonished we were
to see that the gray sky had robbed the whole scene

: Sets He ey! xe es ee ee Pape — il a Ka
a a a a aa a ae a eae =

a ee

ey ce bed Pat ig
_ of its magic, and that the place we had thought so —

q charming when we had walked in it as lovers was —
nothing but a dreary hotel garden!

We settled then to go by sea to Palermo, whose .

< to Naples, where we were to take the boat and where
__ we stayed on for a few days longer. But at any rate,

ae

_ that is not overshadowed by the past.

I spent nearly every moment of the day with
Marceline. At night she was tired and went to bed
early; I watched by her until she went to sleep and

sometimes went to bed myself; then, when her more
regular breathing told me she was asleep, I got up

climate we had heard praised; we returned therefore _

_ I was not dull at Naples. Naples is alive—a town _

again noiselessly, dressed in the dark, slipped out of - Ge

doors like a thief.
Out of doors! Oh, I could have shouted with joy!
What was I bent on? I cannot tell. The sky, which
had been dark all day, was cleared of its clouds; the
moon was nearly full. I walked at random, without
object, without desire, without constraint. I looked
at everything with a fresh eye; I listened to every
noise with an attentive ear; I breathed the dampness
of the night; I touched things with my hand; I went
prowling.
The last night we spent at Naples I stayed out
later than usual on this vagabond debauch. When I
came in, I found Marceline in tears. She had waked

up suddenly, she said, and been frightened at not —

feeling me there. I calmed her, explained my absence
as well as I could, and resolved not to leave her again.
But the first night we spent at Palermo was too much
for me—I went out. The orange-trees were in flower;
the slightest breath of air came laden with their
scent. ...

We only stayed five days at Palermo; then, by a

132 The Immoralist

long detour, we made our way to Taormina, which

we both wanted to see again. I think I have told you

that the village is perched high on the mountainside;
the station is on the seashore. The carriage that drove

us to the hotel took me back again to the station for —

me to get our trunks. I stood up in the carriage in
order to talk to the driver. He was a Sicilian boy from
Catania, as beautiful as a line of Theocritus, full of
color and odor and savor, like a fruit.

“Come bella, la signora!” said he, in a charming
voice, as he watched Marceline go into the hotel.

“Anche tu sei bello, ragazzo,” I replied; then, as
I was standing so near him, I could not resist, but
drew him to me and kissed him. He allowed it laugh-
ingly.

“I francesi sono tutti amanti,” he said.

_ “Ma non tutti gli italiani amati;’ 1 answered,
laughing too. . . . I looked for him on the following
days, but never succeeded in finding him.

We left Taormina for Syracuse. Step by step we
went over the ground we had covered in our first
journey, making our way back to the starting point
of our love. And as during our first journey I had
week by week progressed toward recovery, so week
by week as we went southwards, Marceline’s health
grew worse.

By what aberration, what obstinate blindness,
what deliberate folly did I persuade myself, did I

above all try and persuade her that what she wanted

was still more light and warmth? Why did I remind
her of my convalescence at Biskra? ... And yet
the air had become warmer; the climate of Palermo
is mild and pleasant; Marceline liked it. There, per-
haps, she might have . . . But had I the power to
choose what I should determine—to decide what I
should desire? The state of the sea and the irregular

eth.

cea vce Samirhcoaa

Anta beanie Mad Sey fe ace bye

Se Ne ene
4 a
Boe

Third Part 133

boat-service delayed us a week at Syracuse. All the

time I did not spend with Marceline I spent in the
old port. O little port of Syracuse! Smells of sour
wine, muddy alleys, stinking booths, where dockers >
and vagabonds and wine-bibbing sailors loaf and
jostle! The society of the lowest dregs of humanity
was delectable company to me. And what need had
I to understand their language, when I felt it in my
whole body? Even the brutality of their passion as-
sumed in my eyes a hypocritical appearance of health
and vigor. In vain I told myself that their wretched
life could not have the same flavor for them that it
had for me. . . . Oh, I wished I could have rolled
under the table with them to wake up only with the
first gray shiver of dawn. And their company whetted
my growing horror of luxury, of comfort, of all the
things I was wrapped round with, of the protection
that my newly restored health had made unneces-
sary, of all the precautions one takes to preserve one’s
body from the perilous contact of life. I imagined
their existence in other surroundings. I should have
liked to follow them elsewhere, to probe deeper into
their drunken life. . . . Then suddenly I thought of
Marceline. What was she doing at this very moment?
Suffering, crying, perhaps. . . . I got up hastily and
hurried back to the hotel; there, over the door,
seemed written the words: No poor admitted here.
Marceline always received me in the same way,
without a word of reproach or suspicion, and strug-
gling, in spite of everything, to smile. We took our
meals in private; I ordered for her the best our very
second-rate hotel could provide. And all through the
meal I kept thinking: A piece of bread, a bit of
cheese, a head of fennel is enough for them and would.
be enough for me too. And perhaps out there, close
by, some of them are hungry and have not even that

134 The Immoralist

_ wretched pittance. And here on my table is enough
to fill them for three days. . . . I should have liked
to break down the walls and let the guests flock in.
For to feel there were people suffering from hunger ae
_was dreadful. And I went back again to the port and
_ scattered about at random the small coins with which

my pockets were filled. ae

We Poverty is a slave-driver; in return for food, men ‘es

_ Sive their grudging labor; all work that is not joyous —

is wretched, I thought, and I paid many of them to
rest. “Don’t work,” I said, “you hate it.” In imagina- _

_ tion, I bestowed on each of them that leisure without Me

which nothing can blossom—neither vice nor art.

Marceline did not mistake my thoughts; when I
came back from the port, I did not conceal from her “e
_ what sort of wretches I had been frequenting. Every _

_ kind of thing goes to the making of man. Marceline :
knew well enough what I was trying so furiously to
discover; and as I reproached her for being too apt

‘ _ to credit everyone she knew with special virtues of

her own invention, “You,” said she, “are never satis-
fied until you have made people exhibit some vice.

Don't you understand that by looking at any particu- .
lar trait, we develop and exaggerate itP And that we
_ make a man become what we think him?”

I could have wished she were wrong, but I had
to admit that the worst instinct of every human being

appeared to me the sincerest. But then what did I

mean by sincere?
We left Syracuse at last. I was haunted by the
desire and the memory of the past. At sea, Marceline’s

health improved. . . . I can still see the color of the

sea. It is so calm that the ship’s track in it seems
permanent. I can still hear the noises of dripping and
dropping water—liquid noises; the swabbing of the
deck and the slapping of the sailors’ bare feet on the

Ml

i

Sibel:

, Re ee bard Bare! 135
boards. I can see Malta shining white in the sun—
the approach to Tunis... . How changed I am!
a It was hot; it was fine; everything was glorious.
_ Oh, how I wish that every one of my sentences here
could distill a quintessence of voluptuous delight! |
-... I cannot hope to tell my story now with more bh
order than I lived my life. I have been long enough ©
a trying to explain how I became what I am. Oh, if
+ only I could rid my mind of all this intolerable logic!
_,.. I feel I have nothing in me that is not noble.
g Tunis! The quality of the light here is not
strength but abundance. The shade is still full of it.
- The air itself is like a luminous fluid in which every-
thing is steeped; one bathes, one swims in it. This land
of pleasure satisfies desire without appeasing it, and —
desire is sharpened by satisfaction.
. A land free from works of art; I despise those
who cannot recognize beauty until it has been tran-
scribed and interpreted. The Arabs have this admi-
_ rable quality, that they live their art, sing it, dissipate
it from day to day; it is not fixed, not embalmed in
any work. This is the cause and effect of the absence
_ of great artists. . . . I have always thought that great
artists were those who dared to confer the right of
beauty on things so natural that people say on seeing
them: “Why did I never realize before that that was
beautiful too?”
a At Kairouan, which I had not seen before, and
_ which I visited without Marceline, the night was
very fine. As I was going back to sleep at the hotel,
I remember a group of Arabs I had seen lying out
of doors on mats, outside a little café. I went and lay
down to sleep beside them. I came away covered
with vermin.
Marceline found the damp of the coast very en-
feebling. and I persuaded her that we ought to go on

136 The Immoralist oe
to Biskra as quickly as possible. We were now at the
beginning of April.

The journey to Biskra is a very long one. The

first day we went to Constantine without a break; i
the second day Marceline was very tired and we only
got as far as El Kantara. I remember seeking there, —

and toward evening finding, shade that was more
delicious and cool than moonshine at night. It flowed
about us like a stream of inexhaustible refreshment.
And from the bank where we were sitting we could
see the plain aflame in the setting sun. That night
Marceline could not sleep, disturbed as she was by
the strange silence or the tiniest of noises. I was afraid
she was feverish. I heard her tossing in the night.
Next morning I thought she looked paler. We went
on again.

Biskra! That then was my goal. . . . Yes; there

are the public gardens; the bench... I recognize —

the bench on which I used to sit in the first days of
my convalescence. What was it I read there? .. .
Homer; I have not opened the book since. There is
the tree with the curious bark I got up to go and

feel. How weak I was then! Look! there come some —

children! . . . No; I recognize none of them. How
grave Marceline is! She is as changed as I. Why does

she cough so in this fine weather? There is the hotel! —

There are our rooms, our terrace! What is Marceline
thinking? She has not said a word. As soon as she gets
to her room she lies down on the bed; she is tired
and says she wants to sleep a little. I go out.

I do not recognize the children, but the children
recognize me. They have heard of my arrival and
come running to meet me. Can it really be they?
What a shock! What has happened? They have grown
out of all knowledge—hideously. In barely two years!
It seems impossible. . . . What fatigues, what vices,

A LN CII a

spsgeginlthes Sex

Asti Sot dis: pe bre LEZE TROD RE RE

ere = Se

Third Part 137

what sloth have put their ugly mark on faces that
were once so bright with youth? What vile labors
can so soon have stunted those beautiful young limbs?
What a bankruptcy of hope! . . . I ask a few ques-
tions. Bachir is scullion in a café; Ashour is labori-
ously earning a few pennies by breaking stones on
the roads; Hammatar has lost an eye. And who would
believe itP Sadek has settled down! He helps an elder
brother sell loaves in the market; he looks idiotic.
Agib has set up as a butcher with his father; he is
getting fat; he is ugly; he is rich; he refuses to speak
to his low-class companions. . . . How stupid honor- |
able careers make people! What! Am I going to find
here the same things I hated so at home? Boubakir?
Married. He is not fifteen yet. It is grotesque. Not
altogether, though. When I see him that evening he
explains that his marriage is a mere farce. He is, I
expect, an utter waster; he has taken to drink and
lost his looks. . « . So that is all that remains, is it?
That is what life has made of them? My intolerable
depression makes me feel it was largely to see them
that I came here. Ménalque was right. Memory is an |
accursed invention.

And Moktir? Ah! Moktir has just come out of
prison. He is lying low. The others will have nothing
to do with him. I want to see him. He used to be
the handsomest of them all. Is he to be a disappoint-
ment too? ... Someone finds him out and brings
him to me. No; Moktir has not failed. Even my mem-
ory had not painted him as superb as he now is. His
strength, his beauty are flawless. . . . He smiles as
he recognizes me.

“And what did you do before you went to
prison?”

“Nothing.”

“Did you steal?”

138 2 = The Immoralist (Se Vit
‘He protests. .
_ “And what are you doing now?”
_ He smiles.

“Well, Moktir, if you have nothing to do, you a
must come with us to Touggourt.” And I suddenly
feel seized with a desire to go to Touggourt. a
Bik: Marceline is not well; I do not know what is

_ going on in her mind. When I go back to the hotel 4
that evening, she presses up against me without Say-
_ ing a word and without opening her eyes. Her wide Be
__ Sleeve has slipped up and shows how thin she has _
grown. I take her in my arms, as if she were a sleepy — 4

child, and rock and soothe her. Is it love or anguish

or fever that makes her tremble so? . . . Oh! per- 4
_ haps there might still be time. ... Will nothing
make me stop? . . . I know now—I have found out a
at last what gives me my special value. It is a kind oe
of stubborn perseverance in evil. But how do I bing —
myself to tell Marceline that next day we are to leave _

again for Touggourt? .. .

She is asleep now in the room next mine. The
moon has been up some time and is flooding the ter-

race. The brightness is almost terrifying. There is no
hiding from it. The floor of my room is tiled with

white, and there the light is brightest. It streams =

through the wide-open window. I recognize the way

it shines into the room and the shadow made by the -

door. Two years ago, it came in still farther. . ,

_ Yes; it is almost at the same spot it had reached that o8
_ night I got up because I could not sleep. ... It was

_ against that very door-jamb I leaned my shoulder. I
recognize the stillness of the palm-trees. What was
the sentence I read that night? . . . Oh, yes; Christ’s

words to Peter: “Now thou girdest thyself and goest — 4
where thou wouldest ...” Where am I going? be
_ Where would I go? . . . I did not tell you that the

MS Third Part = 139
last time I was at Naples, I went to Peestum one day
_ by myself. Oh, I could have wept at the sight of those |
ruined stones. The ancient beauty shone out from
_ them, simple, perfect, smiling—deserted. Art is leav-
_ ing me, I feel it. To make room for what else? The
_ smiling harmony once mine is mine no longer. . . .
No longer do I know what dark mysterious God I

serve. O great new God! grant me the knowledge of
other newer races, unimagined types of beauty.

a The next morning at daybreak we left in the
diligence, and Moktir came with us. Moktir was as
__ happy as a king.

4a Chegga; Kefeldorh’; M’reyer . . . dreary stages
of a still more dreary road—an interminable road. I

confess I had expected these oases to be more smil-

2 ing. But there is nothing here but stone and sand; at
times a few shrubs with queer flowers; at times an
attempt at palm-trees, watered by some hidden
spring. . . . Now, to any oasis, I prefer the desert—
land of mortal glory and intolerable splendor! Man’s
effort here seems ugly and miserable. All other lands
- now are weariness to me.
“You like what is inhuman,” says Marceline.
But she herself, how greedily she looks!
Next day it was not so fine; that is, a wind sprang
up and the horizon became dull and gray.
: Marceline is suffering; the sand in the air burns
and irritates her throat; the overabundance of light
_ tires her eyes; the hostile landscape crushes her. But
it is too late now to turn back. In a few hours we
shall be at Touggourt.
It is this last part of the journey, though it is
still so near me, that I remember least. I find it im-
possible to recall the scenery of the second day or
what I did when we first got to Touggourt. But what
I do still remember are my impatience and my haste.

140 The Immoralist

It had been very cold that morning. Toward eve-

' ning a burning simoon sprang up. Marceline, ex-

hausted by the journey, went to bed as soon as we

arrived. I had hoped to find a rather more comfort-
able hotel, but our room is hideous; the sand, the
sun, the flies have tarnished, dirtied, discolored
everything. As we have eaten scarcely anything since
daybreak, I order a meal to be served at once; but
Marceline finds everything uneatable and I cannot
persuade her to touch a morsel. We have with us
paraphernalia for making our own tea. I attend to

this trifling business, and for dinner we content our-
selves with a few biscuits and the tea, made with the _

brackish water of the country and tasting horrible in
consequence.

By a last semblance of virtue, I stay with her till
evening. And all of a sudden I feel that I myself
have come to the end of my strength. O taste of
ashes! O deadly lassitude! O the sadness of super-
human effort! I hardly dare look at her; I am too cer-
tain that my eyes, instead of seeking hers, will fasten
horribly on the black holes of her nostrils; the suffer-
ing expression of her face is agonizing. Nor does she
look at me either. I feel her anguish as if I could
touch it. She coughs a great deal and then falls
asleep. From time to time she is shaken by a sudden
shudder.

Perhaps the night will be bad, and before it is
too late I must find out where I can get help. I go
out.

Outside the hotel, the Touggourt square, the

streets, the very atmosphere, are so strange that I can —

hardly believe it is I who see them. After a little I
go in again. Marceline is sleeping quietly. I need not
have been so frightened; in this peculiar country, one

See 7 ee a |

pail by ax

Third Part 141

suspects peril everywhere. Absurd! And more or less

reassured, I again go out.

There is a strange nocturnal animation in the
square—a silent flitting to and fro—a stealthy glid-
ing of white burnouses. The wind at times tears off
a shred of strange music and brings it from I know
not where. Someone comes up to me... . Moktirl

__ He was waiting for me, he says—expected me to

come out again. He laughs. He knows Touggourt,
comes here often, knows where to take me. I let my-
self be guided by him.

We walk along in the dark and go into a Moor-
ish café; this is where the music came from. Some
Arab women are dancing—if such a monotonous
glide can be called dancing. One of them takes me
by the hand; I follow her; she is Moktir’s mistress;
he comes too. .. . We all three go into the deep,
narrow room where the only piece of furniture is a
bed. . . . A very low bed on which we sit down. A
white rabbit which has been shut up in the room is .
scared at first but afterwards grows tamer and comes
to feed out of Moktir’s hand. Coffee is brought. Then,
while Moktir is playing with the rabbit, the woman
draws me toward her, and I let myself go to her as
one lets oneself sink into sleep. . . .

Oh, here I might deceive you or be silent—but .
what use can this story be to me if it ceases to be
truthful?

I go back alone to the hotel, for Moktir remains
behind in the café. It is late. A parching sirocco is
blowing; the wind is laden with sand, and, in spite
of the night, torrid. After three or four steps I am
bathed in sweat; but I suddenly feel I must hurry
and I reach the hotel almost at a run. She is awake
perhaps. . . . Perhaps she wants me? .. . No; the

room very softly in the dark. What is that noise? ... ;

I do not recognize her cough. . . . Is it really Mar- 4

me arms clutching the bars and supporting her in an up- .
_ right position; her sheets, her hands, her nightdress _

celine? . . . I light the light. a
on She is half sitting on the bed, one of her =

_ are flooded with a stream of blood; her face is soiled —
with it; her eyes have grown hideously big; and no — '
cry of agony could be more appalling than her si-
lence. Her face is bathed in sweat; I try to finda
__ little place on it where I can put a horrible kiss; I feel
the taste of her sweat on my lips. I wash and refresh _
her forehead and cheeks. ... What is that hard
_ thing I feel under my foot near the bed? I stoop _
down and pick up the little rosary that she once __
_ asked for in Paris and which she has dropped on the 4
_ ground. I slip it over her open hand, but immediately __
she lowers her hand and drops the rosary again. . . . -
What am I to do? I wish I could get help... . Her
hand clutches. me desperately, holds me tight; oh,
can she think I want to leave her? She says: .
_ “Oh, you can wait a little longer, can’t you?”
_ Then, as she sees I want to say something, “oa

“Dont speak,” she adds; “everything is all right.”

I pick up the rosary again and put it back on
her hand, but again she lets it drop—yes, deliberately —
—lets it drop. I kneel down beside her, take her hand
and press it to me.

She lets herself go, partly against the pillow,
partly against my shoulder, seems to sleep a little but __
_ her eyes are still wide open. q

An hour later she raises herself, disengages her _
hand from mine, clutches at her nightdress and tears _ :
the lace. She is choking. Se

ould I say?

By
ia
coe
ae

i

nee

5

poo a ea

es

eRe Se ee

Re a unearned Park rags

‘oward morning she has another hemor-—

_ The French cemetery at Touggourt is a hideous
ce, half devoured by the sand. ... What little _
nergy I had left I spent in carrying her away from
that miserable spot. She rests at El Kantara, in the 7)
shade of a private garden she liked. It all happened =
ely three months ago. Those three months have
ut a distance of ten years between that time and

-_ aT have finished telling you my story. What more gs

EY.

3

MicHEL remained silent for a long time. We did not
speak either, for we each of us had a strange feeling
of uneasiness. We felt, alas, that by telling his story
Michel had made his action more legitimate. Our
not having known at what point to condemn it in
the course of his long explanation seemed almost to

_ make us his accomplices. We felt, as it were, in-

volved. He finished his story without a quaver in his

:  yoice, without an inflection or a gesture to show that

he was feeling any emotion whatever; he might have
had a cynical pride in not appearing moved, or a
kind of shyness that made him afraid of arousing
emotion in us by his tears, or he might not in fact
have been moved. Even now I cannot guess in what
proportions pride, strength, reserve, and want of feel-
ing were combined in him. After a pause he went on:

“What frightens me, I admit, is that I am still
very young. It seems to me sometimes that my real
life has not begun. Take me away from here and give
me some reason for living. I have none left. I have
freed myself. That may be. But what does it signify?
This objectless liberty is a burden to me. It is not,
believe me, that I am tired of my crime—if you
choose to call it that—but I must prove to myself
that I have not overstepped my rights.

“When you knew me first, I had great stability of
thought, and I know that that is what makes real

a ns The lear Pi
"men, I have it no longer. But I think it is the fav
of this climate. Nothing is more deoomae aes
_ thought than this persistent azure. Enjoyment _ Here
follows so closely upon desire that effort is impos- —
_ sible. Here, in the midst of.splendor and death, I .
_ feel the presence of happiness too close, the yielding —
___ to it too uniform. In the middle of the day I go and
earn lie down on my bed to while away the long dreai a
hours and their intolerable leisure. Lae
eat “Look! I have here a number of white pebbles. Et

hollow of my hand and wait until their soothing cook a :
ness is exhausted. Then I begin once more, changin 4
the pebbles and putting back those that have lost 3
their coolness to soak in the shade again. . . . Time 4
passes and the evening comes on.... Take me —
away; I cannot move of myself. Something in my a
will is broken; I don’t even know how I had the —
strength to leave El Kantara. Sometimes I am afraid 4
that what I have suppressed will take vengeance on —
me. I should like to begin over again. I should like —
to get rid of the remains of my fortune; you see the —
walls here are still covered with it... .I live for
next to nothing in this place. A half- caste innkeeper q
prepares what little food I need. The boy who ran —
_ away at your approach brings it to me in the evening — 4
and morning, in exchange for a few sous and a caress _
or two. He turns shy with strangers, but with me he _
is as affectionate and faithful as a dog. His sister is an 3

_ Ouled-Nail and in the winter goes back to Constan- _
tine to sell her body to the passers-by. She is very }
beautiful, and in the first weeks I sometimes allowed A
her to pass the night with me. But one morning her 7
brother, little Ali, surprised us together. He showed 4
great annoyance and refused to come back for five _
days. And yet he knows perfectly well how and on —

sist r lives; ie Lae to slat aE it rhekaee
. _ slightest embarrassment, sh ahad Can he

y because I was afraid of losing Ali, I have given |
yoman up since this incident. She has not taken ?
but every time I meet her, she laughs and ie
es that I prefer the boy to her. She makes out
t it is he who keeps me here. Perhaps she is not

ogethe: wrong. ... te

- ANDRE GIDE was born in Paris in 1869
and died there in 1951. He was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1947. Besides
The Immoralist (1902), his major works in-
clude The Counterfeiters (1926), Strait Is
the Gate (1909) Lafcadio’s Adventures
(1914), and his Journals (1939, 1944, 1950).
He also wrote plays, essays, short stories,
_ and books of travel.

THE TEXT of this book is set in Caledonia, a
Linotype face that belongs to the family of printing
types called “modern face” by printers—a term
used to mark the change in style of type-letters
that occurred about 1800. Caledonia borders on the
general design of Scotch Modern, but is more freely
drawn than that letter. The book was composed,
printed, and bound by THE COLONIAL PRESS INC.,
Clinton, Massachusetts. Cover design by ANTONIO
FRASCONI.

VINTAGE WORKS OF SCIENCE |
AND PSYCHOLOGY

ARIES, PHILIPPE Centuries of Childhood
Bates, Marston The Forest and the Sea
BEVERIDGE, W.1. B. The Art of Scientific Investigation
BreBer, I., AND OTHERS Homosexuality

BERNSTEIN, JEREMY The Analytical Engine

Bour, NIELS’ Essays on Atomic Physics 7
Britt, A. A.. M.D. Lectures on Psychoanalytic Payclraies =
BRONOWSKI, J. The Common Sense of Science
Brown, NorMan O. Life Against Death 2 Slee
BUCHHEIM, ROBERT W. (ed.) The New Space Handbook Y
(revised) eS
CHADWICK, JoHN The Decipherment of Linear B

CuHurRcH, JosEPH Language and the Discovery of Reality
DUNBAR, FLANDERS, M.D. Your Child’s Mind and ae
EISELEY, LorEN The Immense Journey

ELLvL, Jacques The Technological Society

EVANS, JEAN Three Men

FREEMAN & Marcu The New World of Physics el
FREUD, SIGMUND Leonardo da Vinci: A Study in Paychos 3
sexuality ;
FREUD, SIGMUND Moses and Monotheism
FREUD, SIGMUND Totem and Taboo totem
Gison, ETIENNE The Christian Philosophy of Saint Au-
gustine

GRODDECK, GEorG The Book of the It
HENRY, JULES Culture Against Man ¥
HERSKovITS, MELVILLE J. The Human Factor in Changing
Africa ,
Hooper, ALFRED Makers of Mathematics

JUNG, C.G. Memories, Dreams, Reflections

KoMarovsky, Mirra Blue-Collar Marriage

KOHLER, WOLFGANG The Mentality of Apes

KROEBER & KLUCKHOLN Culture

KUHN, HERBERT On the Track of Prehistoric Man

KUHN, THoMas S. The Copernican Revolution

LESLE, CHARLES (ed.) Anthropology of Folk Religion, (A
Vintage Original)

LEssER, SIMON Fiction and the Unconscious

Lewis, Oscar The Children of Sénchez

LEwis, Oscar Pedro Martinez

Lewis, Oscar Village Life in Northern India

LINDESMITH, ALFRED The Addict and The Law

LINTON, RatpH The Tree of Culture

Marcuse, HERBERT Eros and Civilization

PIEL, GERARD Science in the Cause of Man -
RANK, Otto The Myth of the Birth of the Hero and Other
Essays

REDLICH, FRITZ, M.D. and BincHAM, JUNE The Inside’
Story: Psychiatry and Everyday Life

ROKEACH, MILTON The Three Christs of Ypsilanti

Ross, NANcy WILSON (ed.) The World of Zen

THOMAS, ELIZABETH MARSHALL The Harmless People —
THORP, EDWARD O. Beat the Dealer, Revised

i< i 4 7 r’ ry x
a ae Ula Py Cot
eR ee a bald

ade

ros
a

>) ; rt BET r lb

catalogue of VINTAGE Books will be sent at your request. Write

intage Books, 457 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022. —
Maree Tah BS WGRE et i Ser "i ,

¥
i

VINTAGE BIOGRAPHY AND AUTOBIOGRAPHY

V-708 AxKsaKkov, SERGEY Years of Childhood

V-159 BEHRMAN, S.N. Duveen

V-250 BURCKHARDT, C.J. Richelieu: His Rise to Power

V-725 Carr, E.H. Michael Bakunin

V-746 DEUTSCHER, Isaac The Prophet Armed

V-747. DEUTSCHER, IsAac The Prophet Unarmed

V-748 DEUTSCHER, Isaac The Prophet Outcast

V-225 FISCHER, L. (ed.) The Essential Gandhi

V-147_ GipE, ANDRE If It Die

V-742. Hare, RICHARD Pioneers of Russian Social Thought

V-268 JuNG,C.G. Memories, Dreams, Reflections

V-50 Ketty, AMy Eleanor of Aquitaine and the Four Kings

V-728 KLYUCHEVSKy, V. Peter the Great

V-280 Lewis, Oscar Children of Sdnchez

V-34 LOWENTHAL, M. (ed.) Autobiography of Michel de Mon-
taigne

V-92 MATTINGLY, GARRETT Catherine of Aragon

V-107 NEWMAN, ERNEST Wagner as Man and Artist

V-373 PAustovsky, KONSTANTIN The Story of A Life

V-744 SIMMONS, ERNEST J. Alexander Pushkin

V-7or Simmons, Ernest J. Leo Tolstoy, Volume 1

V-702 SIMMONS, ERNEST J. Leo Tolstoy, Volume II

V-736 SIMMONS, ERNEST J. Dostoevsky: The Making of a Novel-
ist

V-263 ROEDER, RALPH Catherine de’ Medici and the Lost Revo-
lution

V-133 STEIN, GERTRUDE The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas

V-100 SULLIVAN, J. W. N. Beethoven: His Spiritual Development ~

V-387. Taytor, A. J.P. Bismarck

V-82 ToYE, Francis Verdi: His Life and Works

V-256 WILDE, Oscar De Profundis (Uuexpurgated)

V-122 WILENSKI, R.H. Modern French Painters, Volume I (1863-

1903) :
V-123  WILENSKI,R.H. Modern French Painters, Volume II (1904-
1938)
V-106 WINSTON, RICHARD Charlemagne: From the Hammer to the
Cross

A free catalogue of VINTAGE Booxs will be sent at your request. Write
to Vintage Books, 457 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022.

. sti dior albieerind gk ‘ perf 'S ails ee tlt te

mall.
ete

ear

Wie etES

Paw “rea. %

ed FPL AMS E

ream =

eS EEE I | Te ee ae Lene a eT

a ann Op ai > cw Solid oe

ae a .
“ae . ~ 4
_. André Gide ~ . :

THE INMMORALIST |

Pet ‘ , & ;
«This is the story of the oe of a mind
against the morality of self-sacrifice and the
ordinary civilized standards of personal con-
duct. As sheer story, Mi ain has all
the narrative excitement usuully called forth
“only by tales of physical adveriture. Its ethical
and esthetic significance rai s it to the level
of literature. — Sees -

®
.

; The bracinat Geeelepncls me a t
\e say une ae) of Michel’s mird is Gide’s
“theme. Bu Be ay obscure the ot
_ characters—his wife Marceline, the bailiff iS
his oe See troops of French wi

Arab boy of whom are portrayed with
mastery realistic Cc oe *

How deep and how secure is th paar
—-venver of civilization? What i is the n-sanin
: death “ a man who has never reaiived life
Does man’s duty consist in achieving sd
z social co ise = by the Christian
ethic cf service and self-sacrifice or in follow-
? ing the most imperious dictates, of his own
- desires? These are the questions propound ded —
,; Michel’s story. They are questions Gide
d with for a fruitful lifetime, and The
at [onan has become a classic because of the
. pets which it answers them.

i

” Cover design by Antonio Fraseanee
