— 


DIALOGVE 


concerning Varches 
and Witchcraftes. 


1 n which is laide open how craftely 


the Diuell deceiuet h not anely the Witches | 
but many other and ſo leadeth them | 
awric into many great 4 
errours, 


By George Giffard Miniſter of Gods * 
word in Maldon. 


Printed by John Windet for' | 
hil Hart, and are to be ſold inPatils Chiuch- 
yard, at the Tygers head · 5 9 3. 


g. iu. Web. 1230. * 


. 


TO THE RIGHT VVOR- 
SHIPFYLL MAISTER RC. 


bert Clarke, one of her Mateſties Barons 
of her Highnes Court of Eſchequer. 


WeErtaine yeares now paſt, right 
225 Worſhipfull , I publiſhed a 
©) ſmall Treatiſe concerning 
Witches, to lay open ſome 
of Sathans Qlcighues. and ſub- 
till practiſes, leaſt the ignoran- 
D tcr ſort ſhould be carried a- 
wry and ſeduced more and more by them, The 
errors be farre more groſſe, and the ſinnes much 
greater, into whichby meanes of Witches he ſedu- 
ceth multitudes, then in common opinion they be 
eſteemed, It falleth out in many places euen of a 
ſuddaine, as it ſeemeth to me, and no doubt by the 
heauy iudgement of God, thatthe Diuels as it were 
let looſe, doe more preuail, then euer J haue heard 


of. For when as men haue ſet ſo light by the hea- 
A 2 ring 


. AO NE. cn AAA a9” 


The E&piſlle. 
ring of Gods voice to be inſtructed by him, they 
are iuſtly giuen ouer to be taught by the Diuels, 
and to Are their waies. Sathan is now hearde 
ſpcake, and beleeued. He ſpeaketh by coniurors, 
by ſorcerers, and by witches, and his word is taken. 
He deuiſeth a number of thinges to be done, and 
they are put in practiſe and followed. The high 
prouidence of God Almighty and ſoueraigne rule 
oucrall, is fer forth ſo vnto ys in the Scriptures, as 
that without him a Sparrow can not fall vpon the 
ground. All the haires of our head are numbred. 
The Deuils would hurt and deſtroy with bodily 


harmes. both men and beaſtes and othercreatures: 


but all the Diuels in Hell are ſq chained vp and bri- 
deled by this high prouidence that they can not 
plucke the wing from one poore little Wrenne, 
without ſpeciall leaue giuen them from the ruler 
of the whole earth. And yet the Witches are made 
beleeue that at their requeſt, and to pleaſure them 

by fulfilling their wrath, their ſpitites doe lame and 
kill both men and beaſtes. And then to ſpread this 
opinionamong the people, theſe ſubtill ſpirites be- 

wray them, and will haue them EE confelle 


that they haue done ſuch great things, which all the 
Diuels at any mans requeſt cold neuer doe. For if 
they could, they would not ſtay to be intreated. 
God giueth him power ſometimes to afflict both 
men and beaſtes with bodily harmes : It he can, he 


will 


r RD I ITT WT 


He Pl 2 . 


will doe it, as intreated and ſent hy Witches, but 
for vs toimagin either that their ſending doth giue P 
him power, orthat he would not doethat which . 
God hath giuen him leaue to doe, vnleſſe they 1 
ſhould requeſt and ſendhim, is moſt abſurd. There 
be many diſcaſes in the bodies of men and beaſtes 
which he ſceth will breake forth vnto lamenes or 
vnto death, he beareth the witches in hand he doth 
them: He worketh by his other ſort of Witches, 
whome the people call cunning men and wiſe wo- 
men to confirme all his matters, and by them rez- 
cheth many remedies, that ſo he may be ſought vn- 
to and honored as God. Theſe things taking root 
in the hearts of the people, and ſo making them a- 
| fraide of Witches, and railing vp ſuſpitions and ru- 

mors of ſundry innocent perſons, many giltles are | 
vpponmens othes condemned to death, andmuch f 
innocent bloud isſhed. How ſubtilly he continu- 

eth thele matters, I haue to my (mal skill laide open 

in this ſlender Treatiſe. Thaue done it in waye of a 

Dialogue, to make the fftes for the capacity ofthe 1 
ſimpler ſort. Iambaldeto offer it vnto your Wor- | 4 

ſhip, not vnto one as needet to betaught in theſe 

thinges, being zealouſſy affected to the Goſpell, 
& ſo grounded in the faith ofthe high prouidence, 
that I haue been delighted to heare and ſee the wiſe \ 
and godly courſe vſed vppom the ſeat of Tuſtice by 1 
your Wor(hip, when ſuch haue beene arraigned. ! 

e offer 


6 2 — 
— — 4 
n = 2 N 
- = d as 3 — — 


S * 


1 
n tit 


* | N 


— — ET 


14} The Epiſtle. 

offer it thereforcasateſtimony of a thankeſul mind 
for fauours and kindneſſe ſhewed towardes me: 

and ſo intreat your Worſhippe to new of it, It 
it may doe good vnto any of the weaker ſort 

in knowledge I ſhall be glad. If Lerre 
in any thing being ſnewed it, Iwill 
be ready to correct it. 


Your Worſhjps in all dueties 
to com 


George Giffard. 


0 
ODS 
of e 


8 


3a (Co) 9 
r 


Tur SPIAK ERS. 


Samuell. Daniell. The wife of Samuell. M. B. 
Schoolemaiſter. The good wife R. 


8 Ou are well mette olde ac- 

quaintance, J am glad to 

ſ#youlcoke ſo well, howe 

"5, docall our good friendes 
| in pour Conntrey. 

IJ truſt they be all in 
good health, they were 
when J came from home, 
Jam ſozry to ſ& pou loke 
ſo pale, what haue you bene ſicke lately: 

Sam. Truelp no, J thanke God J haue had my health 
pꝛetily well, but yet me thinke my meate doth me no good 
ok late. 

Dan. What is the matter man, doe you take thought 
and carefo2 the woꝛld ; take hede of that, fo2 the Scrip- 


Sa m. 


ture ſaith, wozldly ſoxrow worketh death, 2. Cor. 7, 70. 


It is a great ſinne riling from vnbelefe, and diſtruſt in 
Gods p2ouidence, when men be ouer penſiue fo2 the woꝛld. 

Sam. In derde my minde is troubley, but not fo2 that 
22 you ſap, foꝛ I hope in God J ſhall not want ſo long 
as Jie, | 

Dan, Js it any trouble of conſcience fo? ſinne 2 Ik it 
be, that may turne to good. 

Sam. O, no, no. J know no cauſe why. 


Dan, Mhp, what is it then, if J may be ſo bold, J pꝛay 
vou 


— in FI HAR FEISTY 


— — — —— — 


1, - 91 
© £ 


you tell me. I thinke you take me fo2 pour friend. | 
| Sam. In deede J haue alwaies found you mp verp good 
friend, and J am ſure you will giue me the beſt counſell 
you can, truely we d well here in a bad countrey, J think e- | 
uen one of the woz it in England. ' 
Dan, Is it ſo 2 I thinke you dwell in a fine countrey, 
in a ſwerte wholeſome atre , and fruitfull grounds, 
Sam. Aire man? I finde no fault 1 the atre, there 


be naughty people: 


— — 


| Dan, Naughty people: where ſhall a man dwell, and 
not finde them ? ſwearers, liars, raplers, ſlaunderers, 
d2unckards, adulterers, riotous, vuthuiites, dicers, and 
pꝛoude high minded perlons, are eucry where to be kounde 

| in great plenty. 
Sam,Nay, J doe not meane them, J care not foꝛ them. 


Thele witches, theſe cuill fauour ed old witches doe trou⸗ 
ble me. | 
Dan. What doe you take pour ſelfe to be bewitched? | 
Sam. No, no, J truſt no euill ſpirite can hurt me, but 
i I heart of much harme done by them: they lame men and | 


kill their cattle, pea they deſtroy both men and childzen. 
© They lap there is ſcarce any towne oz village in all this 
ſhire, but there is one oꝛ two witches at the leaſt in it. In 
good ſooth, J may tell it to you as to my friend, when J 
goe but into my ae „Jam afraide, fo2 J ſee nowe 
and then a Hare; which my conſcience giueth me is a 
witch, oz ſome witches ſpirite, ſhe ſtareth ſo vp pon me. 
And ſometime J {& an vgly weaſell runne through mp 
yard, and there is a foule great catte ſometimes in my 
Barne, which Jhaue no liking vnto. 
Dan. Pou neuer had no hurt done yet, had vou by a⸗ 
np witch 2 
Sam, Truſt me J cannot tell, enen, 
— | 02 4 


— — 


"I 


witches and wi:chcraftes. 


fot there be two oz thꝛee in our towne which J like not, but 


eſpecially an old woman, J haue bene as carefultopieaſe 
her as euer J was to pleaſe mine own mother, and to giue 
her euer anon one thing oz other, and yet me thinkes ſhee 
frownes at me now and then. And J had a hogge which 
eate his meate with his fellowes and was very well to our 
thinking ouer night, and in the mozning he was ſtarke 
dead. My wife hath had fiue oz ſire hennes euen of late 
dead. Some of my neighbours wiſhe me to burne ſome 
thing aliue, as a henne 02 a bogge. .Dthers will me in time 
to ſ@&ke helpe at the handes of ſome cunning man, befo2e 
J haue any further harme. J wold be glad to do foz the beſt. 
"Foggy Haue pou any cunning man hereabout, that doth 

pe: 

Sam. There is one, they ſay, here a twenty miles of at 
T. B. which hath holpe many. And thus much J know, 
there was one ol mine acquaintance but two miles hence, 
which had great loſles, he loſt two oz thze kine; fix hogs, 
be would not haue tooke fiſteene ſhillings a hog fo2 them, 
and a mare, He went to that ſame man, and tsld him hee 
ſuſpected an old woman in the pariſh. And J thin k he told 
me, that he ſhewed him her in a Glaſſe, and tolde him ſhee 
had the oꝛ foure imps, ſome call them puckrels, one like 
a crap catte, an other like a weaſell, an other like a mouſe, 
a vengeance take them, it is great pitty the countrey is 
not ridde ok them, and told him alſo what he ſhoulde doe, 
it is halfe a yeare agoe, and he neuer had any hurt ſince. 
There is alſo a woman at R. H. fiue and twenty miles 
hence, that hath a great name; and great reſoꝛt there is 
daylp vnto her. A neighbour ok mine had his childe taken 
lame, a girle of ten peares olde, and ſuch a paine in her 
backe, that ſhe could not ſit vp2icht Me went to that 
woman, the tolde him he had ſome badde neighbour, the 
childe was fozeſpoken, as he ſuſpected; marry if he would 
goe e bing her ſom of the 3 which the child 


lap 


TT 


— AS * 


_ —— —_ _ _—=—_ 
1 — — OY * . 


Dialogue concerning 


lay in all night, ſhæ wanld tell him certainely, De went 
home, and put a table Napkin avout her neche all night, 
and in the mozning tooke it with him, and ſhe tolu hum the N 
girle was bewitched in deede, and lo told him vhat hee 
ſhould doe, and he had remedy, the g:rle is as wel at this 
day, and a pꝛetty quicke girle. There was another ol my 
neighbdurs had his wife much troubled, and he went to 
her, and ſhe tolde him, his wife was haunted with a , airy, 
J caundt tell what ſhe bad him doe, but the woman is me⸗ 
ry at this howze. J haue heard, J dare net lay it is ſo, that 
ſhe weareth about her Sainct 10.115 Goſpel, 62 ſome part 
of it. 
Dao, If you haue ſuch tunning men and women, what | 
neede you be ſo much afratde? 
Sam. Alas man, J could teeme it ts goe and ſome couns 
ſell me to got to the man at . B. and lome to the woman | 
at R. H. And betweene them beth Jhaue lingred the 
time, and feare J map be ſpoiled bekeze J get remedy. | 
Some wiſhe me to beate and claw the witch vn:ill J ſerch 
d bloud on her, and to thzcaten her that J will haue her han⸗ 
ged, if J knew which were the beſt J would doe it. 
Dan. J percetue pour danger is betwene two Lioles, 
Sam. It is very true, if J had heard but of one, J 
ſhould haue gone ere this time, and Jam glad chat J met 
with pou . J pꝛay pou let me haue pour beſt counſell; J | 
truſt ydu beare me good wil. 
Dan, Truelp J will giue pou the beſt counſell J can, 
which F am lure ſhall doe pou good, if pou will followe it, 
fo2 in dæde J pitty pour caſe, it is moſt certaine pou are 
hewitthed. 
Sat. Bewitched, doe you thinke J am bewitched? J 
tcele no harme in my body, vou make me moze airaide. 
Dan. Nay J doe not thinke that the olde woman hath 
bewitched pou, oz that your body is bewitched, but the di- 
uell hath bewttched your minde, with blindnes and vnbe⸗ 
leke, 


=] = aw 


_— ]], ,., 
— 


% EY 


FL * - 


lefe,tod2aw yon from Cod, even to woꝛſhip himſelfe , by 
lakiighely at the hands ol deuils. It is alamentable caſe 
to le ho the deulil hath bewitched thouſands at this day 
to run atter him:and cuen to offer ſacriſice vnto him. 


Sau. J defiethe deuill, worſhip him? fie vpon him, J. 


hate him with all my hart. Do pou thinke any lerke help at 
his hands: we ſeek help againſt him. I think he neuer doth 
good he hurteth, but he neuer helpeth any. 

Dau. It is not in theſe matters to be taken as wee i⸗ 
magine, but as the woꝛd of God teacheth. What though 


a man think he wozſhippeth not deuils no ſeketh not help 


at their handes, as heis perſuaded, noz hath any ſuch ins 
tent, 's he euer the nere, when as yet it ſhall be found by 
Govs wozd,that he doth wozſhip them, and ſ#k vnto them 
fo; help? 

Sam. Doe pou thinke then that there be no witches 2 
Doth not God luffer wicked people todo harme ? Oz doe 
you thinke that the cunning men doe helpe by the deuill: J 
would be glad to reaſon with pou, but J haue ſmal knows 
ledge in the ſcripturs. We haue a Schoolemaiſter that is 
a good pꝛetie ſcholler, they ſap, in the Latine tongue, one 


M. B. he is gone to mp houſe euen now, J pap pou let me 


intreat you to go thither, you two map reaſon the matter, 
fo: you are learned. 

Dan. Jcould be content, but it will aſke ſome time, 
and J am going to ſuch a place vpon ſpcciall buſines. 

Sam. J p}ap pou let mee intreat pou : Foure oz fine 
houres is not lo much. 

Dan, Vell, 3 will goe with pou. 

Sam. TUulte, à haue bꝛought an olde kriend ok mine, A 
pꝛay the bio him welcome. 

Ihe wile. Deis verie welcome. But trulie man, A 
am angrie with pou, and halte out of patience, that you go 
not to {&ke helpe againſt ponder ſame olde beaſt J haue a⸗ 


nother hen dead this night. Other men can ſene remedy. 
B 2 Here 


” oo - iges 1 * — _ 


Here is G. B. tels me, that the good wife N. al the latte 
weeke could not make her butter come. She neuer reſted 
vntil ſhe had got her hulbande out to the woman at K. B. 
and when he came home , they did but heat a ſpit red hotte, 
and thꝛuſt into the creame ,vling certaine wo des, as ſhee 
willed him, and it came as kindly as anie butter that euer 
ſhe made. I met the olde filth this moꝛning Loꝛd, how ſow⸗ 
erlie ſhe looked vpon me, c mumbles as ſhe went, J heard 
part of her woꝛdes. Ah (quod ſhe) you haue an honeſt man 
to your huſband, J heare hom he doth vſe me. In trueth, 
hul band, my ſtomacke did ſo riſe againſt her, that J coulde 
haue found in my heart to haue flowen vpon her, and ſcrat · 
ched her, but that J feared ſhe would be too ſtrong foz me. 
It is a luſtie olde queane. I wiſhed that the good wife R. 
had bene with me. J pꝛay pou, good huſ bande, let me in- 
treat you to goe to that lame good woman, you map ride 
thither in halke a day. 

Sam. Wife, J pꝛay the be content, J haue intreaten 
this mine olde friend to reaſon ich P. B. fo2 he tels mee 
that we be in a verie foule errour. 

M. B. A ſuppoſe, ſo farre as my learning and capati⸗ 
tie doe extend, that ſmall reaſoning may ſerue. The woꝛde 
of God doeth ſhew plainlie that there be witches, com⸗ 
maundeth they ſhould be put to death. Experience hath 
taught too too mante, what harmes they doe. And if anie 
haue the gift to miniſter help againſt them, ſhall we refuſe 

it? Shall we not dzinke when we are a thirſt? Shall wee 

not warme vs when wee are a colde 2 It is pitie that anie 
man ſhould open his mouth ante way to defend them their 
mpietieis ſo great. 

Dan, Foz my part, I go not about to defend witches. 
Idenie not but that the yenill wozketh by them, And that 
they ought to be put to death. We ought alſo to ſeeke re 
medie againſt them : but as J told my friend, the deuil doth 
bewitch men by meanes of theſe witches , and lead them 


from 


—— - 


| 
' 


from God euen to follow himſelf.to offer ſacrifice vnto him 
to woꝛſhip him, to obey his wil, to commit manie grieuous 
ſinnes, and to be dꝛowned in manifold errours. 

. M. B. If pou haue this meaning, that witches and 
ſozcerers ar bewitched by the deuil, that they fozſake God, 
and follow him, that they wozſhip and obey him, and dot 
ſacrifice vnto him, and commit manie hainous ſinnes, J as 
gre with pou, ko I tak it, they euen vow them ſelues to the 
deuill, oz els he would not be ſo readie to doe them ſeruice. 
But if pou mean that ſuch as ſeek remedie againſt them, o 
wold haue them rooted out, be ſo ſeduced and miſ-led bythe 
deuill, as you ſpeake, J ſap pour ſpeach is raſh and foolifh, 
fo} they that be earneſt againſt witches, be earneſt againſt 
the deuil, they defie the deuil, they ſeek to reſiſt him, and to 
roote out his inſtruments. Now, if pou were a man that 
had any learning, vou ſhould ſ, that contr aries cannot be 
in the ſame ſubiect, at one inſtant, in the ſame part, and in 
the ſame reſpect: how then can a man hate the deuill dete 
the deuill and his wozkes, and yet follow him at one time? 

Dan. J know that witches and coniurers are ſeduced 
and become the vaſſals of Satan: they be his ſeruants, and 
not he theirs,as pou ſpeake. But I mean indeed that mul⸗ 
titudes are leduced and led from God, to follow the deuil, 
by means of witches & conturers : yea, J ſpeak it of thoſe, 
not which are caried of a godlie ʒeale, but of a blinde rage 
arid mad fur ie againſt them, Ik A ſpeake this raſhlie and 
fooliſhlie,as pou ſay,aud pour ſelt learned as pou boaſt and 
I vnlearned, J ſhall be the moze eaſilie onerthzowne. But 
I ſpeake ſo truly, and can ſo well tuſtifie all that J haue 
ſard by the woꝛd of God, that pour learning and beft ſkill, 
ſhall not be able to diſpꝛoue the ſame. Pour logicke at the 
firſt doth faile you, Not that contraries can be in the ſame 
ſubiect at the ſame inſtant, in the ſame part, and in the 
ſame reſpect. But herein pou are vtterly blinde and decet- 
ued, that you name contraries, and take it that the wu of 

_— them 


—_— _ „ — 


"= Ll. _ 2 
 \, 
« " 


chem, s namelt to hate the deuill, to vefie bim and his 
wozkes, are in 
in imagination, — if men lay and think they dete the de⸗ 
uill and his wozkes, and thꝛough blindnes and inftdelitie, 
are euen bewitched, and I'd to followe the deuill, and 


to do his will, doth their ſprach and blinde imagination 

make the things indeed to be in them?TUhat it a pcoʒe beg⸗ 

ger woman ſay and thinke that ſhe is a Quanc;ts te ther⸗ 

_—_ no begger, beging lil per bzead ? o is ſhe rid of her 
ce? 

M. B. Nap, if pou iudge, J haue done. Ik men be tar⸗ 
neſt againſt the veuill, and deſie him any all his workes, 
are ydu to iudge of their con'cience , and to ap they deſie 
him but in imagination, and follow him, and wv o)hip him 
in deede; is not God alone the iudge ouer mens hearts ? 
Actatne,vo you compare thoſe that are in their right mind, 
with ſuch as be mad, oz out of their wits? 

Dan, Jknowe that God alone is the ſearcher of the 
heart, touching the thinges which lie hid in ſecrete : But 
where things are open and manifeſt , the tree is known by 
the fruits, ſo far as we may goe. As ika man pꝛofeſſe the 
faith of Jeſus Chziſt ſoundlie, in all pointes atcoꝛding to 
the woꝛd of God,and doth frame his life thereafter in do⸗ 
ing good wozkes: it is verie wicked foꝛ anie man to iudge 
ol him, that he is an hypocrite, and that he doth! all ok vaine 
gloꝛie. And yet it may be that the Loꝛd, who diſcerneth the 


ſecrete intents ol the heart, ſeeth indeed that he is but an 


hypocrite. On the contrarie parte, where a man pꝛokelleth 
in woꝛdes that he doeth defie the deuill and all his wor kes, 
and yet when it commeth to the triall of Gods word, hee is 
kound to be ſeduced, and wꝛapped in blinde errours ofthe 
deuill in infivelicie,and euill woꝛks, in which he fulfilleth 
the will of Satan, and honoureth him in che place of God: 
Shal we ſap that this is a good man becauſe of his woꝛds 


and injagination.thae be defieth the deuill and his wozks? 
Wo 


zem, when as indeed they are in them biit = 5 


a = 
o 
= 

- 

| 

F 


f 


— 


witches and witchcraftes. 


Wo be to them that cal good euil, and euil good. Efa,g. 
Te map ſay they are in bad caſe, except they repent, and 


turne {rom following Satan. But pet J ſay, that a faithful 
man map erre in {ome of thele thinges through weakneſſe 
of faith,and thzough ignoꝛance. And therefoze, here men 
may not be to ralh in iudgment. And now wheras pou finy 
fault, chat J makecompartiſon between ſuch as be mad and 
thole that be in their right mind it is pour ignoꝛãce, which 
do not conſider that ther be two kinds of madnes, oꝛ being 
out of their right mind, the one foꝛ matters of this wo)lde, 
the other foꝛ thinges ſptrituall and heauenlie. There bee 
which are in their wittes fo2 this wozlde , which touching 
ſpirituail chizgs are as karte awzie in their imaginations, 
as che pode beggar, which thinketh ſhe is a gwvhe queene. 
Doth not the holie Apoſtle ſay, that becauſe men receiue 
not the lcue of the truth God wil ſend them ſtrong de- 
luſion to beleeue lies. 2. | heil.2. And what is that, but 
that Satan ſhail ſe duce, ulude and bewitch their minds, to 
make them belceue that they wopſhippe and follow God, 
when they woꝛſhip and foffowhum ? 

NI. B, Doe pon take that to be S. Paules meaning? 
Doth Satan bewitch mens mindes, and leade them into 
kalſehoode and errour, making them bel eue they woꝛſhipp 
God, when they woꝛſhip denils 2 

Dan. S. Paul ſpeaketh there inded of the comming 
of th? great Antichꝛiſt in the power of the Deuill. Nowe, 
thoſe which are ſeduced and woꝛſhip Aatichyift, think they 
wo2thip God: but marke what . John ſapth, All the 
world wondred, and followed the beait , and worſhip- 
ped the dragon which gaue power to the bealt: & they 
worl ſuppecktße beaſt. Reuelat. 13. And lwke in che 12. 
chapter of the Renelation, and you ſhall find that the Dꝛa⸗ 
gon, which the Poperp doth woꝛſhip inſtead of God, is the 
Dcuill. 


M. B. Trulie J like pour wopdes well, Jam perſua⸗ 
B 4 ded 


9 f 


— 


A Dialogue concerning 


ded the deuill doch ſeduce and bewitch mens mindes: But 
touching theſe that ſeek help at the hands of cunning men 
and women againft witches, J cannot thinke ſo hardlie of 
them. J map be aw, I \& well: J will not be obſtinate, it 
the woꝛd of God ſhew me mine errour Let vs euen friend: 
ly conferre ofthe matter. Be not offended with me, and foz 
my part, J will ſpeake all that I knowe 02 thinke. 

Dan. J muſtintreate you likewiſe to beare with mp 
plain? ſpeaches. And let vs in the matters pꝛocæde from 
one point to another, ſtanding onlie vpon that, wherein we 


Hall be found to differ in iudgment. And let Gods wozd be 


the Judge betweene vs. 

Sam, A like this wel, though J can ſap but litle, J wil 
fit and heare you, 

Dan. What is the firſt queſtion that we ſhal handle? 

NM. B. J heard pou ſap,if à did notmiſtakeyour ſpeach 
that there be witches that woꝛke by the deuill. But pet J 
pꝛay pou tell me, doe pou think there be ſuch? J know ſome 
are of opimon there be none, 

Dan. Jt is ſo eutdent by the Scriptures, and in all ex: 
perience, that there be witches which wozke by the deuill, 
oz rather J may ſap, the deuill wozketh by them, chat ſ uch 
as go about to p2wue the contrarie, doe ſhewe themſelues 
but cauillers. 

M. B. J am glad we agre in that point, J hope we hall 
in the reſt, What ſap you to this: that the witches haue 
their ſpirits ſome hath one, ſome hath moze, as two, thꝛæ, 
foure , oz five , ſome in one likeneſſe, and ſome in another, 
as like cattes, weaſils, toads, 02 miſe, whome chey nouriſh 
with milke, oz with a chicken, oꝛ by ern them ſucke now 
and then a dꝛop ofblood: whome they cal when they be of- 


fended with anie,and ſend them to hurt them in their bo⸗ 

dies yea, to kill them, and to kill their cattell: 
Dan. Here is great deceit, and great illuſion, here 
the deuil leadeth the W people into foule errours, 
by 


witches and wit ficraſtes. 


bywhich hee. dzaweth them healong indarmavie grirucus 


ünnes. | 

NI. B. Nap then J ſe you arc amie, if pou dente theſe 
things, and lay they be but illuſions. They haue bene pꝛo 
ued, and pꝛoued againe, euen by the manifold confeſſions 
ol the witches themiclues, J am out ob all doubt in theſe, 
and cculd in manie particulars lap open what hath fallen 
out. 3 did dwell in a village within theſe fine yeares, where 
there was a man ol good wealth, and ſuddamlie within ten 
daics ſpace, he had three Kine died, his gelding worth ten 
pounds fell tame, he was himſell taken with a gret pain in 
his back, ⁊ a chilo ot icuẽ pears old died. He ſeat tothe wo 
man at K. H. and ſhe ſaid he was plagued by a witch, ad⸗ 
ding mozeouer, that there were thiee women witches in 
that towne, and one man witch: willing him to look whom 
he moſt ſuſpected: he ſuſpected one old woman, and cauſed 
her to be caricd befoze a Juſtice ofPeace and examined: 
with much a doe at the laſt ſhee conteſled all: Which was 
this in cftect; that ſhe had thre ſpirits:one like a cat, which 
ſhe called Light toot, another like a Toad, which ſhe called 
Lunch, the third like a Weaſtll, which ſhe called Make- 
liutr, This L1ghrtoor, ſhe ſaid, one mother Barlicof W. 
ſolde her avoue ſixteene peares agoe, fo2 an offen cake and 
told her the Cat would doe hergod ferutce, ifſhe woulde, 
Ge mighe lend her ol her errand : this Cat was with her 
but a while, but the Weaſtiland the Toad came and efizred 
their ſeruice: The Cat would kill kine, the Teafil would 
ki:itho:fes, the Toade would plague men in their bodies. 
Ohe {cnt them all thife(as ſhe confeiled)againt thts man: 
She was committed ta the puſon, and there ſhee died be- 
fo2e the Aſũſeg. J could tell vou of manie ſuch :J had no 
minde to dwell in that place any longer. 

Dan. You miſtake me, I do not meane that the things 
are nok, hut my meaning is, that the deuill by ſuch thinges- - 


dog beguyle and {ediice ignozant men, and lead them into 
X C errours 


A Dialogue concerning 


errours and grieuous ſinnes . And let vs examine cuerie 
parcell of that which you let down in your lpcach,anv you 
ſhall le no leſſe. | 
M. B. That is it which J would faineſ#: You confeſle 
they haue ſpirits, ſome one, ſome moze, and in luch like» 
W 1 pe errour be the people led into by that? 
Dan .Firſt,colider this that ther be multituds c armies 
of deuils, as we ler in the golpel, mame deuils wer entred 
1 into one man, x Chziſt ſaping, W hat is thy name? anſwer 
is made, Legion, tor we are manie. Matk. 5. Now, al- 
though the deuils be manie, yet they be all caried with luch 
hatred againſt God, with luch deſire to haue him diſhono⸗ 
red and blaſphemed, and burne with ſuch bloudy malice | 
and crueltie againſt men, that they bend their ſtudie all to⸗ 
gether, one helping and furthering another what they can 
intheit wozke: in ſo much that the Scripture doeth ſpeake 
of them as it they were but one deuill: foꝛ S. Peter ſayth, 
Your aduer ſarie the deuill goeth about like a roring li- 
on ſeeking whom he may deuour. I. Pet. 5. And in the | 
Reuelation chapter 12. all the deuils make that great red | 
d2agon: And our Sautour doth ſhewe how clole they ioyne 
in one, when he ſaith, it Satan be deuided againſt Satan, 
or it Satan caſt foorth Satan, how ſhall his kingdom en- 


dure Afatth.12, now then, whether the witch deale, as ſhe 
ſuppoleth, with one ſpirit, oꝛ with manie it commeth all to 
one ellett thus karre, that one dealeth not alone, but with 
the helpe ol others. Do that he oz ſhe that hath familiaritie 
with one deuill it is as much as ik it wer with an hur ndꝛeth. 

Mozequer, the deuils be ſpirits, they haue uo 11 tape 
02 likeneſle but yet can make an apparance of a ſhape, as 
appeareth by the inchanters betoze Pharao, when their 
rods were turned into ſerpents in ſhew. Exod.7, And then 
one deuill can ſ&m to be foure o2 nue, and foure oꝛ fine can 


ſ#me to be one: Jt is theretoꝛe but the craft of Satan, to 
make thewe of moze 02 lefle, 


Dae 


—— 
* 


witches and witchcraſtes. 


M. B. Do you not thinke then that where the moꝛe de⸗ 
uils be, there is the greater power of Satan: 

Dan. Nes, but it can not be diſcerned byhis appearing 
tothe witch in ſhew of moꝛe oz leſſe: Fo2 one can ſme ten 
vnto her and ten can ſ&me one. 

M. B. Well, J doe not millike al this, J Pay you p20s 
ceed fozward. 

'Dan. Then further marke well bete etheholie Scrip⸗ 
tures doe paint out the deuils to beemightie terrible ſpi⸗ 
rits, ſull ot power, rage, and 9 — to a great 
fieric red dꝛagon, Reuel. 12, Agree e grie lion, 
that roꝛeth after the pay, 1. Pet. 5. A 2 Paul 
Pzincipalities, and Powers, the Rule — of — darkneſſe 
of this woꝛld: now, when they take vpon them the ſhapes 
of ſuch paltrie vermine,as Cats, PileToads, and Mea⸗ 
ſils, it is euen of ſubtiltie to couer and hide his migh mighzie 
rannie,and power whichhe exerciſeth ouer the hea 470 k 
the wicked. Jt is moſt neceſſarie foz vs all to know, what 
ſtrong aduerſaries we haue to encounter withall, that we 
may fly vnto the Lozd God,and en to bee armed with his 
power againſt them. 

AM. B. Well, what will you inferre vpon this? Jcan- 
not deny but that the ſcriptures doe paint out the deuils 
to be m:ghtte terrible ſpirits, and ſo they map be, although 
they Pappeare but like Cats oz weaſils. 

Dan. J doe not ſay they be not mightie and terrible be⸗ 
cauſe they appeare in ſuch ſhapes but F attirme that their 
appearing lo, is to couer and hide their mightineſſe and 


ettectuall wolking, which thepexerciſe i 0 the darke harts 
of men. And marke well J pꝛay pou, the power of deuils is 
in the hearts of men, as to harden the heart, to blinde the 
cies ofthe mind, and from the luſtes and concupilcences 
which are in them, to inflame them vnto wꝛath, malice, en⸗ 
up, and cruell murthers: topufte them vp in pꝛide, arro- 
gancy and vaine glozp: to entice them vnto wantonneſle, 

C2 and 


A Dialogue concerning 
and whoꝛdomes, and all vncleanneſſe. And about theſe 
things they wozke tontinnally, and with luch efficacy, thet 
without the power of the gloꝛious yaſſton and relurrecti 
on of our Loꝛd Jelus Chzict, which we haue by faith', they 
ramiot be withſtood, and they will ſeeme to be but meane 
fellow?s, buſted about making Dink that it ſhall not woꝛk 
in the kat, in keeping chæle from running, and butter from 
comming, in killing hennes o2 hogges, 0) making men 
lame. | | 
M. B. Map they not doe both the one and the other? 

DM, Yea,but this is my meaning, that while they be 
occupied avout the greateſt things; as in ſtirring vp Ty- 
rants and wicked men to per TN; Ito repꝛoch aud blaf. 
pheme the Goſpel, which pulleth them downe, to det diui⸗ 
ſton and warres between kingdoms and kings, hatred and 
diſcozd becween man and wife, and contention betweene 
bꝛechzempea, to ſet all in a baoyle and confuſion:they would 
ſme to be buſied about triſſes, and about theſe they buſte 
mens mindes, that they may not obſerue and take heed ol 
them in thoſe other. 

M1, B. J percciue pour meaning, but pet J doe not 
conceive whereynto you chiefly tend:roꝛ do not they which 
looke vpon ee by witches, conkeſſe that che 
deuill doth all thoſe things which you mention? | 

Dan. The igno1ant ſoꝛt, whith are ſo terrified by wit- 
ches, do in woꝛds after a ſozt , confeſſe ſo much as you ſay, 


but when it commeth to the matter, they denpit in effect. 


Foz mark this, the detfils continuallie compalle the ſoule 
of man about, to ſhoot it full of their fteriedarces, Ephet, 6. 
euen to wound it to death with all wicked ſinnes, Ihe de- 
will gaeth about like a roring lion, teeking home hee 
may deuour. I. Pet. 5. And they by this craft which they 
vſe by means ofthe witches, make the blind people imagin 
that they neuer come nigh them but when the witches are 
angric and doe ſend them, and that they are kafilie dꝛiuen 

| away 


* 


witches and witchcraftes, 


away when they do come, as by burning ſome quick thing. 
a3 henne, oꝛ hogge, o2 by beating and dꝛawing bloud vpon 
the witch. Duch people as can thus dꝛiue him away, oz by 
thzuſting a ſpitte red hot into their creame, are farre krom 
knowing the ſpirituall battel in which we are to warre vn⸗ 
der the banner of Chziſt againſt the deuill, much lefſe doe 
they know haw to put on (as S. Paule willeth) the whole 
armour of God, to reſiſt and ouertome him. Epheſ. 6. He 
may deale wth their ſoules euen as he lifteth , when they 
take him not“ piefent but vpon luch lending, and where 
ſuch hurt doth follow in their bodies oꝛ goods . 

AL, B. I doe not demie, but that the deuils ſeeke thielſy 
fo2 to deſtroy the loules of men: But( as J tak it) pou co: 
felle, that they being ſent by the witches, doe alſo thoſe bo⸗ 
dilte harmes: and as pet I ſee no reaſon why they may not 
ſeeke remedie againlt ſuch harmes, and dꝛiue him away by 
ante god meanes: doth the woꝛde of God foꝛzbid vs to ble 
meanes: It J be ſicke, (all I not take phyficke 2 Ik Abee 
thirſtie, call not dyinke 2 Indeed J am of pour minde, 
though I did neuer marke ſo much bekoze, that the veinll 
dealeth ſubtillie in this that by dealing in ſuch ſmall mat⸗ 
ters he couereth himſelfe in the greater as though he came 
not neere, no} did not medle but in ſuch maner: But here 
ſtandeth the cale, J reſiſt him in thoſe greater, may J not 
alſo vſe thoſe helpes which dꝛiue him away in the leller 2 J 
will if I can dꝛiue him away in all things. 

Dan, How the deuils are fent by the witches, and how 
they doe thoſe bodily harmes, wee are not yet come vnto, 
and there lie two of the chiete ſubtilties of the deuill in 
them, by which he deceieth the multitude; But by occaſt- 
on we are fallen into the mention of remedie to dꝛiue them 
away; Becauſe (J ſap) ſuch as thus dꝛiue him away, know 
not the ſpirituall battell, much leſle how to put on the whol 
armour of God to ouercome the deuil: Sꝛder deth require 
that we ſpeak firſt of his ſending, and then of thoſe bodilte 

C 3 | harmes 


Da ogue concerning 


named which he lar t afterward of theſe meanes which 
are vſed to repell him. Let vs therefoze ſtep one ſtep backe 
againe, if vou agræ to the reſt which J haue ſpoken. 

NI. B. With a good will; for ſo we ſhall omit no part. 
But 3 thought we had fullte agred in this, that the wit⸗ 
ches do ſend their ſpirits, and doe manie harmes both vnto 
men and beaſts:becauſe we haue it confirmed by day lie ex⸗ 
perience:and vnleſſe pou will denie that which is manifeſt, 
J doubt not but we ſhall accoꝛde in theſe. 

Dad, J fay the witches do ſend their ſpirits. 

M. B. What chal we ned then to ſtand vpon that point 
in which we are agreed? 

Day. Bes: though we agree that they lend them, yet 
we may dillent in diuers thinges about this lending. As 
firſt, tell me, whether doe vou thinke that the witch oz the 
Deuill is the ſeruaunt., which ofthem commaundeth,any 
which obeyeth 

M. B. how can J tell that: It is thought hee becom⸗ 
meth her ſeruaunt, and where ſhe is dilpleaſed, and would 
be reuenged, ſhe hy2ech him fo} to doe it. The witches the- 
{clues haue confeſſed thus much: and fo2 my part, J think 
no man can diſp2wue it. 

Dan, They that doe the will of God are the childꝛen 
and ſeruants of God, And they which fulfill the luſtes of 
the deuill,and obey him, are his childꝛen & his ſeruantes, 
Joh, 8. verſ. 44. Act. Ig. verſ 10. Are they not? 

XI. B. I graunt all this? 

Dan; The deuilles are the rulers of the darkneſſe of 
this wonld. Epheſ. G. ver. 12. 

Al. B. The text is plaine. 

Dan: The varkneſle of this wo2 1d ,is not meant ol the 
varkneſſe of the night, which is but the ſhadow of the earth, 
but it is th? ſpiritual darknes, which conliſteth in the igno⸗ 
rance ot God, in infidelitie,and, tn ſinne. 

A. B. Jamof pour mind in this alſo, 

Dan. 


\ 
| 


witches and witchcraftes. 


Dan. And doe von not thinke then that the deuill hath 
his thꝛone, his dommion and kingdom in the hearts ok ig⸗ 
nozant blind infidels: 

M. B. J muſt nds thinke he hath , the woꝛd of God 
doth foꝛce me thereunto: ſæing he is the Pꝛince of darke⸗ 
nelle. 

Dan. And is there anie greater infidelitie and dark⸗ 
neſle in anie, than in witches, comurers, and ſuch as haut 
familiaritie with deujls 2 

A. B. J tak it they be the depeſt ouerwhelmed in dark- 
neſle and infidelitte of all other. 

Dan. Lay all theſe thinges together which pou con⸗ 
keſſe, and ſee whether it doth not follow vpon the ſame, that 
the witch is the vaſſall of the deuill,and not he her ſeruant; 
he is Lozd and commaundeth, and ſhe is his dꝛudge and 
obeyeth. 

M. B. Pea, although he be Loꝛd, yet he is content to 
ſerue her turne, and the witches conkeſle, they call them 
koꝛth and ſend them:and that they hire them to hurt ſuch in 
their bodies, and in their cattell, as they bee diſpleaſed 
withall. 

Dan, J am ſoꝛie pon are ſo karre awmie, it is pitie any 
man ſhould be in ſuch errour, eſpectallie a man that hath 
learning, and ſhould teach others knowledge. 

M. B. Nay, J may returne this vpon pou, foz if you 
will denie this, it is but a follie to reaſon any further: J 
will neuer be dꝛiuen from that which J knowe: There was 
one olde mother W. of great 1, which had a ſptrite like a 
a Weaſill : ſhe was offended highlie with one H. M. home 
ſhe went, and called fo2th her ſprite, which lay in a pot ot 
woll vn der her bed, ſhe willed him to goe plague the man: 
he required what ſhe would giue him, and he would kill 
H. 27. She ſaid ſhe would giue him a cocke, which ſhee 
did, and he went, and the man fell ſicke with a great paine 
in his bellie, lang uiſhed and died:the witch was arraigned. 

C 4 ton⸗ 


© - 
* 
1 N 


"4 


Lia ogue concerning 


condemned, and hanged, and did conſeſle all this. 

Dau, I told you befoze that J vo not deny thele things, 
but pou are deceiued about the doing: peu marke not the 
tunning lleights ofthe deuill: Tel me, is net this the truth 
which S. Peter ſpeaketh,that che devil gocth about like 
a roating hon, ſceking whom he may deuoue,1,! et. 5 

A, B. That then? | 

Dan. Wihat then? can pon be ſo ſimple as to imagine 
that the deuill lieth ina pot of woll, ſolt and warme, and 
lairreth not, but when he is hired and ſent? The devils con- 
ſpire together in their woꝛke, they beſtirre them, and ne⸗ 
uer take reſt night noꝛ day: they are neuer wearte, they be 
not atolde, they care net ſoꝛ lying ſoft : Theſe be fwlcrics 


by which hee deceiueth the witches 5 and bewitcheth the 


mindes of many ignozant people: And whereas pou lay 
he is hired, it is but deceit:to2,let me aſke pou two oꝛ tha 
gueſtions 02 moꝛe it næd be. 

A. B. What be your queſtions? | 

Dan, Pon ſay the witch commech home angrie , who 
hath kindled this wiath in her heart but the veniil; Wiho 
inflameth her mind with malice, to be reuenged, and to doe 
miſchtefe but the deuill? doth not he rule in her heart 2 


Tell me what vou thinke of this ? 


V.. B. I muſte nedes conkeſſe hee dirreth her vp to 
men and malice. 
Dan, Then he liech not at home in his pot of wol: no2 
be is not hyꝛed to this: hitherto ſhe ts his d2udge, and o- 
heyeth him, and nat he her, being ied by his lug gedion. 
Then tell me, is not the deuill like a red on fierte dzagon, 
Reuel. 12, burning in malice againſt God, and with all 
bloo die and cruell hatred that may be againſi men? And is 
he not karre rcadier vnto ail den than ante man oz 
woman? 
1, B. Thedenill is moze ficree than any man 0} 


| woman; none con deny this. 


Dan. 


—ͤ—— 2 — 2 


witches and witchcraſtes. 
Dan. Ik none can deny this, and he be the wozker of 


the wꝛath and malice in the heart ofthe witch; then what 


ner deth he to be hyꝛed:he ſtirreth her vp, and if he would, he 
could turn her mind from {ending him, and muſt he he hy- 
red? doth he care fo2 a cock o2 à chicken? Js he hungry oz 
nedcth he ſomewhat to eat? | 

M. B. Nap, but it is thought he taketh thoſe thinges 
to witnelle againſt the witch that ſhe is his. 

Dan. Let it bee, there were ſomewhat in that which 
you ſpeake, yet he hath a karte veper reach; foꝛ the tructh 
is, hee woulde, and dozth perl wade the blind people, that 
he medleth litle, but when he is cuen hyꝛed and ſent, and 
that then his medling is but in ſuch matters: And here « 
upon all is on a byoyle againſt old women, which can any 
wayes be ſuſpected to be witches, as it they were the very 
plagues of the wozld, and as if all would be well, and ſafe 
from ſuch harmes, if they were rooted out, and thus they 
fall a rooting auc iter al care! 15 is thought that 
the witch which hath her ſpirits, is euen lyke a man which 
hath curſt dogges, which he map ſet vpon other mens cat⸗ 
tell, which pet in the nature ol dogs, would neuer ſtyꝛre but 
when they are bidden: and ſo the harmes do come from the 
man which oweth thoſe dogs. They think that the country 
might be ryd ok ſuch ſpirits , if there were none to horſter 
them oz to ſet them a wozke, They imagine that they and 
their cattell ſhould then goe ſafe, Alas pooze creatures, 
how they be deluded? how litle do they vnderſtand the high 
pꝛouidence of almighty God which is ouer all: 

AC, B. Doe pou thinke then that witches ought not 
to be rooted out? oꝛ doe pou thinke it were not much ſafecy 
to the country from harmes, ik it could be rid of them? 

Dan. Fon the rooting out of witches, the Scripture 
is plaine. 1 hou ſhalt not ſuffer a witch to liue: but we 
are not pet come to that poynt. But whether they be tobe 


rooted out that men may 1 * from harmes, as the peo- 
ple 


a= yqT Ss  »- 14,90 


— <i> _ 


A Dialogue concerning 
ple in fury.and blindneſle imagine, that is bt. 

A. B. Men feele the ſmart and the harnfes which they 
doe, and it is no maruell, though they be earneſt to haue 
them roted out, and a good riddance it were ik the whole 
land could be ſet fre from them. 

Sam. Trulie M. B. I am of pour mind, J wold they wer 
all hanged vp one againſt another: we ſhould not (J hope) 
ſtand in ſuch fear of their ſpirits.But J interrupt pou tov. 

The wife. They that would not haue them hanged oz 
burnt,J would they might even witch them vuto heil. Ik 
I had but one fagot in the wozld, J would carry it a myle 


vpon mp ſhoulders to burne a witch, 


Dan. Well good woman , ſpare pour fagot a while, 
and eaſe your ſhoulderg and let vs reaſon the matter a lit⸗ 
cle further: I pzap vou let me aſke pou this queſtion doth 
the witch oꝛ the deuill the harme vnto men and cattell: 

31, B. Why, the deuill doth it at their ſending though 
J conkeſſe it muſt neds be as pou laid, that the deuil woz 
keth al in the mind of the witch, # mooueth her to ſend him. 

Dan. The deuill hath a king dome, but it is in darke- 
neſſe and coꝛruption ot ſinne. He hath no right noz power 
oucr Gods creatures, no not ſo much as to kill one flye, oz 
to take one eare of coꝛne out of ame mans barne, vnleſſe 
power be giuen him. Vou know when Chuſt caft the deuils 
out ot the man poſleſſed, they al ke leaue fo to goe into the 
heard of ſwine. Then tell me, who giueth the deuill this 
power then, when the witch ſendeth him, to kill oz to lame 


man oꝛ beaſt: doth the witch giue it him? Do you think he 


had power to doe harme, but no mind till he mwucd him: 
Oz doe pou take it that her ſending giueth him power, 
which he had not: 

M. B. It is a queſtion indeed woꝛch the aſking : Foz 
doubtleſſe, the deuill hath not power vntill it be giuen him, 
to touch any creature, to hurt, oz to deſtrop the body, but 
onely to tempt and to lead into ſin: I am alſo ſure that the 


witch 


5 . 
witches and witchcraftes, > 


witch cannot giue him power, but onlte God aboue. 
Dan. Lap theſe two together then, that the deuill on- / 
ly hurteth, and that none can giue him power, neither man 
noz woman, but only God, and tell me whether the people 
be not wonderfully carried awzy in a tage. Fo, when ass Þ 
they ſhould conſider, that the deuill is the Lozves erecutio- 5® 5; 
ner: And then finding that he hath any power giuen him 
to moleſt, to hurt and vere them in theyꝛ bop} 1 
now certainly it commeth from the Lozd,dn Ka- 
ther from thence (as the trueth is) that the Loꝛd is diſplea. 
ſed with them fo2 their offences. And ſo ſeeke vnto him. 
humbly crautng pardon and deliuerance from this eneniy, 
ſer king to be armed with the mighty power of faith, to caſt 
him foo2th, and to reſiſt him, as the Loꝛd willeth , 1. Pet. 5 
Here is no ſuch matter, no loking ſo high among the peo⸗ 
ple, but running deper into errour, and into ſinne, as if the 
nuch it, and that it commeth, from che Ir anger and 
net from their owne ſinnes and in fidelity, here is no re- 
pentance no humbling themſelues by faſting and pꝛaper, 
but running foꝛ helpe unto deuilles, vling meanes which 
thoſe devils bythe cunning men women appoint, ſcrat⸗ 
ching and clawing , thirſting often after guiltles blood as 
raging againſt thoſe whomethey imagine to be witches, 
which many times are not, becauſe they imagine, that if 
there were no witches, ther ſhould be no ſuch plagues, As 
| if they had no foule ſinnes noz vnbelefe , oz that there re- 
mapned not a iuſt reuenging God to puniſh, oꝛ as if he hay 
not the deuils (till the executioners of his wzath. 2 π⁹⁰ 20 Feen 
M. B. Truly pour wozdes doe make me affrayd : fo; 
J am euen guiltie of thaſe thinges my ſelfe, if they be fo 
grieuous, as you ſet them out: and by Gods grace J wil 
ö conſider better of the matter: foꝛ A haue counſelled manie 
to ſæk vnto thole cunning folkes, and to vie ſuch helpes as 
they pꝛelerlbe, and you ſay, it is to ſ@ke help at deuils. To 
ſs that point we ſhal come anon: en I wold be reſolued 
| 2 a. 


— ” 


1 


— — 


N 2 .:!!! 11!ĩ„ñũ⁰ñ½] 2 .. 

45 | — ———— j 8. — cer — — | 

N A Dialogue concerning 
about ſomewhat in pour laſt ſpeach; as namely, doe pon 
cleare the witches, becaule God, and not they, giueth the 
deuil power, and doe you thinke that the devils (hould kill 
men any their cattell, if they were not lent by witches: 

Should the harmes ftill follow, ik there were no witches: 

Dan. That Jſay God alone, and not the witches, gi⸗ 

ueth power vnto the deuils to plague and toꝛ ment: it is ſo 
euident as that J ſuppoſe a man ſhall hardlie mecte with 
anie man ſo grofſe but will confeſſe it. But this yocth not 
cleare the witches at all; foz their ſinne is in dealing with 
deuils, and that they imagine that their Spirits do thoſe 
harmes, requeſted and hyꝛed by them: when as inderde the 
deuill where he hath power giuen him to hurt, oꝛ where he 
knoweth death 02 grieuous diſeaſes will follow either in 
man oz beaft, ſetteth the witch in a rage, and moueth her to 
fend him. Concerning pour other queſtion, I ſay, we ſhall 
finde by the Scriptures , that if there were no witches at 
all, yet men ſhould be plagued by the deuils in their bodies 
and gtods. Fo? touching the godly, the Lozd doth vſe Sa- 
tan to afflict them tn their bodies and in their goodes , fo} 
to trie their faith and patience : as the example of holie 


Job doeth teſtifie in ample ma e vile follie and 
bꝛutiſh to affirme, that witches did let on euils to kill 
childꝛen, and to plague hes bodie nd J hold it no mal 


ollie, ſoꝛ ante man to think that the Lord doeth not nowe 
ſcourg 4h childzgy ,. at the leaſt ſome ok them, koz their 
good, bp the dell. There is no doubt, but the deuil hauing 

power giuen him to afflict , vſeth all the craft hee can, and 
will {&k to be ſent by the witch, and ſo 105 will make it 
knowne, becauſe it may ſame to bee nol from Eid 3 but 


2 
* 


—_@_ 


———__—_ 


from the anger of a pooze woman. And now touching the 
wicked , which pꝛouoke God by their wicked ſinnes and | 
vnbeleete, may we not read in the ſcriptures that an euill 
fpirite was ſent of God vnto king Saul, which did haunt 
and vexe him? Was this ſpirit ſent by a witch? Oꝛ the de« 

uilg 


witches and witchcraſtes. 


nils tn the Goſpel, which entred into the heardeof ſwine 
and downed them? Did the Lozy/Fiue them power, and 
lend chem, and ſhall we be ſo ſottich as to thinke , that hee 
{endeth not the deuill now againſt vngodly men, to plague 
and to deſtroy them? Ag J ſaid befoze, here is the deepe 
cralt of Satan, that he will cauet to bee ſent by witches, 
whereas indeed God hath ſent hun, ſ@ing none can ſende 
him but God. Againe, wee muſt conſider that there bee 
| naturall cauſes in the bodies of men and beaſtes of grie- 
| vous tozmentes and diſeaſes, pea euen tauſes of death, 
Nowe, they cannot be ſo ſecxe but the deuill knoweth 
them, and euen when they are like to take effect, Then doth 
| he plie it with the witch, ſetteth her in a furte , the ſendeth 
| him, euen vpon this lending the man oz the beaſt ſuddain⸗ 
lie and ſtrangely are toꝛmented, fall lame, oz die. Then the 
witch is ſuſpected, examined, and confeſſech that ſhe killed 
ſuch a man, o2 ſuch a mans cattell , oz made them lame. 
Here the people are ſet ina wonderfull maze and aſtoniſh- 
ment, as if witches could plague men in their wzath , by 
ſending their ſpirits,becaule they confeſſe.they did it, whT - 
--(their ſpirits doe lie and had no power, but the tozmentes 
came by nattirall cauſes, And to dziue the people into a 
derper madnes in this, c to mak them bel@ue,that ſtrange 
and ſuddaine toꝛments and languiſhing diſeaſes come by 
ö witches, he hath his other ſoꝛt ol witches, the cunning men 
| and women, which tell euen vpon his woꝛde which pou 
know is to be truſted) that they be bewitched, that they bee 
haunted with fayzies, and that ther be thus many witches 
therabout, in euerie town ſome. 

M. B. That is moſt true no doubt, which pou lpeake, 
doe not fo) my part knowe how to gainſay any one point 
thereof, Only J wonder at the craftineſſe of the deuils in 

theſe things where they haue power graunted vnto 
them to hurt; they will be lent by the witches, as if they did 


it hired by them, and that you lay where harmes doe — 
N w 


o 
LI 


— — 


A0Dialogue concerning 


f 

1 | 

5 low men vpon natur all tauſes, yat they tan make ſhew as 
L though they did them. But are pou of this mind, that there 
n ſhould be as manie oꝛ all thoſe harmes done by deuilles, if 


there were no witches, as there be now; Although J muſt 
< needs confeſle,that the witches can giue the deuil no pow⸗ 
p er,no2 he can take none by their ſending: yet may it not bee 
that God giueth them power oftener becaule of thoſe wit- 
ons dealing with them, than ik there were no witches 
at all? 
ö Dan. The crattineſſe ok deuils is ſuch, as without the 
, light of Gods woꝛde, the wiſeſt men vnder heauen muſte 
n&des be deceiued thereby. We ſe there be ſome men ſo 
dep in ſubtilties and can carie matters ſo cloſe, that men 
dan not diſcerne them:how much moze the deuilles, which 
are excœdingly ſubtill, æ craftie aboue the ſubtilleſt men: 
| the queſtton which you aſke is (in my iudgment)ſomwhat 
hard: But this is vndoubted that ik the Loꝛd God do giue 
vnto the deuils oftener power to hurt becauſe of the wit⸗ 
ches, à meane becauſe the deutls doe deale by ſuch inſtru⸗ 
ments it is in his heauie iudgment againſt the wickednes 
of the people. which deſpiſe the true and heauenlie light of | 
his wb2d. As S, Paule (pꝛophecying of the comming of 
the great Antichꝛiſt) ſhewech, that becauſe men did not re. 
ceiue the loue of the trueth, God gaue the deuill power by 
Antichꝛiſt and his miniſters, to ſeduce by lying ſignes and 
wonders. Indeed, J will not ſay that foꝛ the witc 
ill hath power giuen him, but föſthe wickedneſſe of the | 
people , which deſerue that by witches the deutll ſhoulde 
haue power to ſeduce them lurther. Bere pet we multe 
take hee of the common errour which a multitude are ca⸗ 
ried ſbhedlong withall, that they can by no means ſs, that 
God is pꝛouoked by their linnes to Cit the deuill ſuch in⸗ 


ſtruments to work withall, hut rage agLuſt the witch, e⸗ | 
nen as if ſhe could do all, %] 
M. B. Surelte, J ſhould bee a vnetch to denp, that 

| God 


W ITCHCS Aid WILCNCIAT 


God giueth the Deuilles power toplague and to ſeduce 
becauſe of mens wickednes ; but pet J would knowe whe: 
ther a godly ? *apthtull n. man 0 woman map not bee bewit⸗ 
ched ? We i# the deuill had power giuen him oucr Job? 

Dan. This example of Job is not fit to p2wue that a 
godly man may be bewitched,ſ&ing the deuill is not ſapde 
to deale by witches againſt him, but it doeth pzooue , that 
not only the govlie, but euen the molt godly (as holy Job, 
who had none like him vpon earth) may fo their triall be 
giuen into the handes of Satan to be afflicted and temp⸗ 
ted. And as J ſaid, where Satan hath — granted him 
of God, to ſtrike with bodily plagues any of the godly, fo2 
the _ of their fapth and patience he will couet, if he can 
b21ing it about, to bee lent by ſome witch, and to haue it 
knowne that he was ſent. But the faithfull are to turne 
they? eies from the witch, and ro deale with God, ſo} from 
him the matter commeth.Then they be tried;the Lo2d in 
his good time will deltuer them depending vpon him, to 
their great pꝛaiſe and glozp,cuen as valiant ſouldiers. Jt 
is therefoꝛe, ot no great fozce, whether Satan come from 
the witch againſt the godlie, oz whether he haue no witch 
to deale by: ouercome chou the deuill, and thou ouercom⸗ 
meſt all. Jaded among the moze ignozant ſozt he pꝛeuay⸗ 
leth much when he toucheth thole which imbzace the liue⸗ 
ly woꝛd as Tent from a witch. Foz many nowe doe euen 
quake and tremble, and their faith voth ſtagger. Dath ha 
power (thinke they) ouer ſuch as be cunning in the ſcrip⸗ 
tures, then what are they the better fo2 their p2ofeſſion? 
the witch is on their bones as well as vpon others. By 
this it might ſeme, and ſo they take it, that other helpes 
and remedies are to be ſought than by che ſcriptures. And 
ſo they run and ſeke help where they ought not. 

M. B. Then J pꝛay you, though J be already perſwa⸗ 
ded it is naught to ſ#ke to theſe cunning men fo} help a⸗ 


gainſt witches, pet let vs th a little of that, There 
4 be 


0 


— 


Na ogue concernme 


be diuers things which baue perſuaded me to thinke mar 

ueilous well of them, and euen as of ſuch as God hath wy 
nen wifedome and ſkill vnto, even fe2to doe much god, 
Fo2 we ſ& many receiue help by them, and are deliuercy 
from the plagues which come by deuils. And firſt,J wold 
know how they can bee ſo earneſt againlt witches, if they 
deale with the deuill, and ſo be inderd witches theniſfeltes? 
how can they haue any mind in charity to doc giod, to take 


pitie vpon ſuch as be in miſery? Oꝛ how will Satan dziue 


ak Datan ? F 62 they no doubt, dztue out deuilles out of 
ome. 

Dan, J would come to aunſwere your queſtions tou⸗ 
ching the king help at the hands ok cunning men oz wo⸗ 
men, but tell me firſte, are you reſolued touching the ſen: 
ding of the ſpirits, and touching the harms that are done? 
Me think pou {lip to ſuddainly from theſe points? 

A. B. Jcannot tell whether J vnderſtand pour mea- 
ning in euery thing, but ſure, J haue bene in erroz great- 
ly J muſt neds conkeſſe. And if you pleaſe, we map ſtande 
lomewhat longer tn theſe queſtions. 

Sam, Jnded it is my deſire that you woulde ſpeake a 
litle plapner of theſe poyntes ; fo2 J haue marked well all 
your talke, and cannot well conceiue of the laſt things pou 
dealt in, Qith pour leaue CAL, B. J would aſ ke two oz 
thi queſtions of my friend, Here was but leuen miles 
hence at W. H. one M. the man was of god wealth, and 
well accounted of among his neighbours, He pined away 
with ſicknes halfe a yeare, and at laſt died. After hee was 
dead, his wife ſuſpected ill dealing: ſhe went to a cunning 
man, A know not where, and deſired to know whercother 
huſ band died. Me told her that her hul band died of witche⸗ 
tie: he aſked her if ſhe did not ſuſpect any therabout. Dhe 
ſapd chere was one woman Which the did net like, one mo⸗ 
ther W. her hul band and ſhe fell out, and he felt ſick with⸗ 
in tio dapes alter, and neuer recouered again. He "_ 

er 


— 


W es and Witchcrattes. 


her the woman as plaine in a glaſſe, as we ſa one another , 
and in the very apparell the went in at that hower, fo2 ſher 
ware an old red c appe wich cozners, ſuch as women were 
wont to weare; and in that ſhe appeared in the glaſle: Hee 
taught her how ſhe might baing her to confeſſe. Well, ſhe 
followed his counſell, went home, cauſzd her to be appꝛe⸗ 
hended and caried betoze a Juſtice ot peace. He examined 
ber ſo wiſely, that in che end ſhe confeſſed ſhee killed the 
man. She was fent te pꝛiſon, he was arraigned, condem⸗ 
ned, and executed: And vpon the ladder ſhee ſemed very 
penctent, deſiring all the wozld to fozgiue her. She ſaid 
the had a ſpirit in the likenes of a yellow dun catte. This 
catte came vnto her, as ſhe ſaid, as ſhe ſat by her fire, when 
ſhe was fallen out with a neighbour ol hers, and wiſhed 
that the vengeante ol God might light vpon him and his. 
The catte bad her not be aftraid,ſhe wold do her no harme: 
She had ſerued a dame fiue peares in Rent, chat was now 
dead, and if ſhe would ſhe would be her ſeruant. And wher⸗ 
as, laid the Cat, ſuch a man hath miſuſed ther, ik thou wilt 
J will plague him in his cattell She ſent the Cat, che kil⸗ 
led ther bog m any one Cow. The man ſuſpecting, burnt a 

pat ud. her cat wold neuer go thither any 


er ward the kel out with that P. ſhe ſent her Cat, 
who — 3 ſhe had gtuen him that, which hee ſhould 
neuer recouer ; and inderd the man died. Now doe pou not 
thinke the woman ſpake the trueth in all this? Would the 
woman accuſe her ſeife falſelp at her death? Did not the 
Cat become her leruant? Did not he ſend her? Did ſhee 
not plague and kill both man and beaſte ? What ſhauldc a 
man thinke ok this: 

Dan. You p2opounde a particular example, and let 
vs examine euery thing in it touching the witch , koꝛ the 
womaus fact chat went to the wiſe man, wee are net pet 
come to that point. You ſap the Cat came to her when ſhe 
was in a great rage with one of her neighbours , and did 

E curſe, 


— os XX = 


— 


Dia ogue CONCerning 


curſe, wiſhing the vengeance of God to fall vpon him and 
his. 

Sam. She laid ſo indæde J heard her with mine own 
ears,fo2 J was at the execution. 

Dan. Then tel me who ſet her in ſuch a deuiliſh rage, 
ſo to curſe t banne, as to wiſh that the vengeance of God 
might light vpon hun and his? did not the Cat? 

Sam. Trulie Jthinke the Deutl wzought that in her. 

Dan, Uerte well, then you le the Cat is the beginner 
of this play. | 

Sam. Cald you it a play? It was no plap te ſome. 

Dan. Indeed the witch at laThad better haue wzought 
hard than bene at her play. But J meane Datan did play 


the Jugler: Fo2,voth he not otter his ſeruice: Doth he not 


moue her to ſend him to plague the man? Tell me, is ſhe ſo 


koꝛward to ſend, as he is to be ſent: Oꝛ doe younot take it, 


that he ruleth in her heart, and euen wholly directeth it to 
this matten: 

Sam. Jam fulſy perſwaded he ruleth her heart, 

Dan. Then was ſhee his dzudge, and not he her ſer- 
uant, he needeth not to be hired no? intreated,fo2 if her hart 


were to ſend him any where, vnto ſuch as he knoweth hee 


cannot hlirt, noꝛ ſeeth how to make any ſhewe that he hur⸗ 
tech them, he can quickly turne her from that. Uel, the cat 
goeth and killeth the man, certain hogs and a Cow: howe 
could the tell that the Cat did it⸗ 

Sam. How could the tell: why he told her man, and ſhe 
ſaw and heard that he loſt his cattell. 

Han. The Cat would lie, Woölild the not : oz they ſay 
ſuch cattes arelpers. 

Sui. J doe not truſt the Cats wopdes, but becauſe the 
ching fell out lo; | 

Dan, Becaule the hogges and the Cow died, are vou 
{ure the Cat did kil them. might they not die ol ſome natu⸗ 
rall cauſes as pou ſæ both men and beaſts are well, and die 


{ud- 


witches and witchcrattes, 


_ ſiiddatnlie? 

Sam. That were ſtrange, ik they ſhould die of naturall 
cauſes, and fail out ſo fit at the time after he was lent ? 

Dan, It is not ſtraunge at all, as marke what J tell 
vou and you ſhall eaſily ſg. There bee naturall cauſes of 
coztures and griefe,ot lainenes, and of death in the bodies 
ot men and beaſtes, which lie fo hid and ſecrete, that the 
learneddeſt Phyſittans can not eſpte them, but the deuill 
ſ#th them, and can contecture very neere che time, when 
they will take eftect. Then doeth hee ply it, to bzing the 
matter about that it may ſeme he did it. It hee haue any 
witch to deale by, he ſtirreth vp ſome occaſion to ſet her in 
a rage with that partie: and then he will be ſent, and telleth 
her he doeth it. Ik he haue no witch to deale by, vet hee 
will ſet debate betwene the partie and ſome other, whom 
he may bꝛing into ſuſpition , as his greateſt deſire is to 
haue innocent bloud ſhed. Gut 

Sam. Pere is a matter bzought about inded how could 
the Cat doe all this: : 

Dan, I told pou befoze, that che deuilles wozke toge- 
ther, and can ſperdilie and moſt craitilte compaſſe thinges, 
which are debe the reach of mans capacitie. But 
ſometime the detiiithath power ginen him to plague and 
doth the harme. Admit he had power giuen him, and did 
kill the cattell ofthis man: let vs come nowe to that, who 
think you, gate him the power {oz to ſtrike and kill ? Did 
the witch giue him the power 02 the Lozd God? 

Sam, JNayſurelp,the witch cannot give him power, 

Dan, Did he receive power after ſhe ſent him? 
Sam. That cannot J| tell, 

Dan. Tht᷑ mark a litle:he hath-power giuf him to plague 
this man in his goods: he wil do it, but he will doe it crafti- 
ly. The Loꝛd gaue him power ouer the gods of holie Job: 
he wozketh by inſtruments , fox he ſtirrech vp the Sabets, 
and they take away his Oxen, and bis Alles: he raiſeth bp 

bs 2 ano 


o 
* 
: 
. . 1] 
. 


A Dialogue concerning 


alſo the Chaldeis,and they cary away his C N= Job. r. 
Euen lo, hauing power to ſtrike, he wil be lent by a witch, 
he could do it without her, but he gapneth much that way, 
as we ſhall \# when wee come to lpeake of the remedyes 
which men leeke, 

Sam, J wonder then that the man neuer had moze hurt 
after he had burnt his pig aliue: 

Dan, O man, the Deuill can abide no roaſt meate, no? 
no fire, he is affraive,tf they fall aroaſting , that they will 
roaſt him. It they tun at him with a ſpit red hot, they gal⸗ 
ter him ſo ſoꝛe, that his dame ſyal go her ſelf, if ſhe will he 
will come no moꝛe there. But of theſe thinges we are to 
ſpeakt afterward in cheir place. 

Sam. You make the deuill wonderfull ſubtill. 

Dun. He is ſo ſubtill and full of all craft and ſleight, 
that no earthly creature can eſcape from being ſeduced by 
him, without the light of Gods heauenly woꝛd. But let vs 
come now to the other man, whom the witch confefled ſhee 
killed byher Cat. 

Sam. Yea , that me thinketh is moze than che other, 
the woman was told by the cunning man that herhnſband 
was killed by witcherie, The witch confelſed ſo much at 
her death, The Cat told the witch, that ſhe killed him. 

Dan. Here be a compante of credible perſons to be be⸗ 
leeued : the cunning man ſaith the man was bewirched to 
death. ho told him that? 
dan. His ſpirite that maketh the witch appeare in the 
glaſle, 


Dan. That ſame Spirite, what doe you take him to 
be, an Angell, oz a Deulll: 

Sam. Some ofthe cunning men ſap, they haue Poles 
0 Elias, 02 the Spirite of ſome holy nan. 

Dan, The Deuill can turne himſelfe into the likenes 
of an Angell of light. Fo they that doe thinke the cunning 
men n women deale with any other Spirite than Sa⸗ 


tan 


witches and witchcraftes, 


tan, haue no underſtanding. Satan ſaith, the man was 
witched to death, ; 5 

Sam. Satan ſatth ſo, he is not to bee belckued, but the 
witchconfeſſeth it was ſo. 

Dan. Who told the witch? 

Sam. Her Cat that ſhe ſent. 
| Dan, hat is the Cat, a deuill: then remember the 
pꝛouerbe, aſ ke his fellow if he be a there. All the matter 
reſteth vpon the teſtimony ok deuils, and they not put to 
their oath, Nee will not ground vpon mans teſtimonie 
without an oath, and muſt we beleene the bare. wozde of 
demls? | 

Sam, Do you thinke then that the man was not killed 
by witcherie? 

Dan, Jt maybe the Loꝛd had giuen Satan power to 
plague the man in his bodie, and then he vnder a colour 
would be ſent by a witch. But it is moſt like that his bodie 


did languiſh and pine ofnaturall cauſes, which the deuill . 5,., 


did know and ſo would be ſent, and ſeme to do all, when as 
inderd he had no power to touch him, Fo? , although the 
L92d giue the deuill power co ſtrike ſome in their bodies 
fo2 their haynous ſinnes, yet the molt which the witches 
thinke their ſpirits doe kill at their requeſt, doe die ol na⸗ 
turall diſeaſes. 

Sam. Then it ſemeth the witches are deceined, and 
mocked, when he maketh them bels ue he docth kill and 
plague when hee doeth not. And againe in this. where he 
hath power giuen him of God, to ſtrike man oz beaſt, hee 
could doe it, and would without the witch, and ſo vleth the 
witch foz a collour to dzaw on woꝛſe matters, 

Dan. Jam glad you take my meaning ſo right: fo2, 
thinke deeply ofthe matters, and pou ſhall ſer it muſt næds 


be ſo. 
Sam. J interrupted M. B. J pꝛap you goefozward 


now to che reſt. ä | 
E 2 Dan, 


Þ 9 | 


| 
; 
—_ = 
= 
_ : = 
„ 
; 
: 

1 : 


Sg» 


r 


—— REY i 
— * 
= 


a 
| 
= 


- 


A Dialogue concerning 
Dan. Our matter which we come vnto nowe, is the 


7 e helpe and remedie that is ſought fo2 againſt witches at 


the hands of cunning men. And now if it pleaſe you to pzo- 
pound pour queſtions , J will anſwere to them the beit 4 
can. 

. B. Nap truly, I ſæ already all is naught, but yet 
J will obiect thoſe things which haue caried me awe. J 
take it a man is to ſæk remedy againſt cuils, c I thought 
it was euen a gift that God gaue vnto thoſe whom we cal 


cunning men, that they did very much good by. Ulhen a 


ching is loſt, when a thing is tollen, many goe to them, and 
they help them to it. J did know where the Communion 
cup was ſtollen: the Churchwardens rode to a wiſe man, 
he gane them direction what night, and where they ſbould 
ſtand, and the party that had ſtollen it ſhould come hither, 
and confeſſe he had it: and certainly they had it againe. J 
did know one that had a child of fine peares old, a gynle, it 
was taken pitcouſlic: the father was in great heauineſſc, 
and knew not what to doe: ſome gaue him counſell to goe 
to a woman which dwelt ten miles (rom him, and to carte 
ſome of the clothes which the child lay inthe did ſo, the wo- 
man told him that his child was bewitched, and ik hee did 
not ſ&ke remedie in time, the childe would be loſt: Shee 
bad him take ſome olde clothes, and let the child lie in them 
all night, and then take and burne them: and he ſhould ſee 
by the burning, fo2 if they did burne black, that fhewed the 
child was bewkeched and ſhe ſaid further derten 
the witch would come thither! he follo 7 aduice, any 
lure as we be hexe, there came an old woman in, which he 
ſuſpected, euen while they were burning, and made an er⸗ 
rand; the man made no moꝛe avoe, but even lad his clow- 
ches vpon her and clawed her vntill the blood ranne down 
her cheeks, and the child was well within two dapes akter. 
J could tell you of a ſtranger thing, but J haue it but by 
repott, but vet indeed by very crevible repozr; There was 
| ies a 


. n — 5 
21910 ; ; 


a butcher byhts trade that had a boy to his ſonne,his name 
was John, grieuous (ozes did bꝛeake forth vpon him:they 
laid lalues, and none woulde cleaue fo2 to dꝛam oꝛ to taſe 
them. The kather making his moane to a friend of his, he 
told him whether he ſhould goe to a verie kilfull man . he 
did goe and being demanded whom he ſuſpected, ſhe was 
ſhewed him ina glaſſe, an old woman that dwelt not karre 
from him in an houle alone :he told the cunning man, that 
the woman had ſhut vp her doze, & was gone from home 
out of the ſhyꝛe, and ſo he could not tell how to come by her. 
he told him a way how he ſhould fetch her home. Cut off 
the hair (aid he) of the boyes head, and put it in a cloath 
and burne it, and Jwarranc vou ſhe wil come home with al 
the ſpeꝛd He can. Burne it abzoade, burne it not in achim⸗ 
ney, fo! it᷑ you doe, it will make pou all affraide. The man 
went home and did this. The womanſ came home with 
all ſpede, came to his houſe, came to the boy, and ſatde, 
John, ſcratch me, hee ſcratched her vntil the blood follows 
ed, and whereas befoꝛe nothing would dzaw his ſoares, 
they healed of themſelues. That ſhould a man thinke of 
ſuch things ? | 

Dan. Pou tell of ſome,which haue receiued help from 
the hands of cunning men: And no doubt there may infinic 
examples be b2ought.Some haue loſt, ſome haue thinges 
ſtollen from them, ſome are vexed in their bodies: They 
come bythe things againe which were loſt oz ſtollen, they 
are taught to doe certainthings, and are aled from their 
qriefs, But this we mult firſt knowe , ep receiue their 
helpe, ik it deſerue the name to be called help, from the de⸗ 
uill. And do you thinke a man map lawfullte ſcek helpe at 
the hands of the deuill: 

M. B. Some are perſwaded that they doe not ſeke 
helpe at the hand of deuils, when * goe to the wiſe men: 
but that it is a gift which God hath giuen them euen to do 
good withall. 


E 4 Dan. 


as ” :- a -> 1.0 


as. 
. * 
| Selten 0 


Dan, J doe verilte thinke that manie of the people are 
ſo nern what reaſon is there fo it? Doeth God 
by his Spirit tell where the thing is which is lolt, oz ſtol 
lene s it an Angell from heauen, oz the ſdule of ſome man 
that is dead, which appeareth in the Chꝛyſtall, oz in the 
glaſſe, and ſheweth the image of the partie which hath 
tollen oꝛ that is a witch? 

M. B. J had ratherheare what vou thinke touching 
thele things, than ſhew what J haue thought. 

Dan. The deuils did make the heathen people belæue 
that they were goddes, and ſo pꝛocured that they ſhoulde 
wo2ſhip them with diuine woꝛſhip. Thꝛough their crafti- 
nes they had mam wapes to eſtabliſh this: they conueied 
themſtlues into images, anp out of tbem gaue anſweres, 
when they wer demanded herein they vſed'great craft. lo 
whereas they could not tell what ſhould fall out, they fra- 


med the oꝛacle in ſuch ſoꝛt as it was doubtfull, and might 


be taken both waies: and ſo looke which part it fell out on, 
that ſeemed and was taken to be the meaning of the gods. 
Il they did know how things would fal out inderd, as they 
did know lundꝛy things touching the kingdomes and mo⸗ 


narchies of the woꝛld, by the wzitings of the Pꝛophetes, 


ang diuers things by contectures, as the deuill could tell 
Saul he ſhould be flatne, becauſe he ſaw God had caſt him 
off, and the wo of the Jſraelits fainted, and the Philt- 
ſtims were full of courage, thoſe they would tell plainelie. 
Allo they did conuey themſclues into the bodies of men 
and women, and vtrer thinges which ſ&med very dine, 
ſuch (as J am perſwaded) were the P2zophetiTes the Si- 
bylleß among the heathen. Such was the maide at Phi⸗ 
[19pos, which is mentioned in the Actes of the Apoliles, 
which brought great gain vnto her maiſters by yettinti2g, 
out of whom Paule caſt the deuill. This matve touid tell 
of things loſt. of things ſtollen, and ſuch like, and great re⸗ 
ſozt ore was nts her; as men had neede, oz delired co 

1 15 | ly 


WItches and witchcraftes. 


ſee the ſtrangenelle of the matter, 

AM. B. Let me interrupt pou a litle. The deuill can 
not be in all places at once: how could he then, remaining 
in the made, tell what was done in places karre off: howe 
can the demill tel where the thing loſt oz ſtullen is, which ts 
not only farre oft, but hidden? how can he ſhewe the image 
of the thieke oꝛ witch 2 Can he ſit and behold all thinges a 
farre off, and in ſecrete? 

Dan. Me map nat aſcribe vnto Deuils that they can 


be in all places at once , oꝛ ſit in one place and beholde all 


things done a farre off. But they ioyne together in this 


ſpeciall wozke,to ſet vp their king dome, and to dꝛawe the 


people alter chem, toſgke helpe at their handes, and ſo to 
woꝛſhip them. Some ok them be in one place, and ſome in 
another, and from all places doe ſtir vp the faithleffe peo- 
ple to run foꝛ helpe to thoſe cunning men, and chen they 
make the relation. toz they goe thichet alſo, they know the 
thieke whome they mated to the theft , and can make re⸗ 
ſemblance of his face and apparell: they can tell where 
things be that are hid, hauing had a finger in the matter. 
And thus one lpiricegas it agech ſemeztelleth things ſpo- 
ken and done karre o „but! it i  otherwike , there be manie 
that doe it, which reloꝛt from all the places where the 
things are done. 

NI. B. Jam ſatiſfied touching this point. Nou wert 
ſhewing howe the denils did deale among the heathen dut 
cf the J dols, and out of men and women. 

ö Dan, Pea, and they haue ſubtillie wound themſelues 


inagaine among Chziſttans. Foz vſing witches as their 


inſtruments, they make them belæue that they doe manie 
barmes ſent by them which they do not, and whereas they 
haue power giuen them by God to akflict, chey will freme 


o dde it at ;he mach and diſpleaſure of the witch, ſhe must 
ſc1dhim, the matter mult one way oꝛ other appeare, ey⸗ 
ome de v ate ane euen compelled by fo:ceof nth as do av- 

F iure 


+ 


6 


and beste but of our moſt bleſſed Lozde Cod. And ol 


D OgUe 'CONCCr ng 


ture bün ,to confellezh 5 115 ſuch a woman 02 ſuch a man ſent 
him, oz els the witch! mii confeſſe ſo much. Then the peo? 
ple deniſe how thep may be ſafe againſt the witch, there is 
running to the wilardes to learne what they ſhould doe to 
withſtand the kurie of the witch,that ſhe ſend not to them, 
oz if ſhe haue ſent, how they may expel her ſpirit, and kæp 
her from ſending him againe : this is it which the deuill 
would haue: fo; now he vttercth all his wares: he teacheth 
by thele cunning men and women, many hozrible abho- 
minations and foule abuſes of the name of God, by which 
they are made beleeue, that they haue remedie againſt the 
deuils ſent by the witches , and that they are cured from 
their harmes. 

Al. B. I doe not ſ& how any man can indckd 1uſtifie, 
62 maintaine, that the ſpirits which appeare vnto them in 
the Chuſtall, oz in the glaſſe, oz 3 that any way do 
ſpeakt, and ſhewe mae vnta them, be holy Angels, oꝛ 


the ſoules of excellent men, as of Poſes, Samuel, Dauid, 


and others, though J baue 1. that the cunning men, 
take them tobe luch, and thinke they deale by them againſt 
deuils. 

Dan. It is no matter what Satans vaſſals are made 
to beleeue by his ſubcilfleights: it is moſt abhominable fo} 
any Chꝛiſtian man, euer to let it enter into his thought, 


that they doe any ching by the power oz wiſdome of the has 
lie Ghoſt. by any Angel oz good woe 55 that they doe any 


thing againſt the deuill, which wozke'bp the intelligence 
which they haue from euill ſpirits: therfoze hold this, that 
th ey ſtcke vnto deuils,which run vnto thoſe ſouthlayers. 
21, B. Jam perſwaded indeed that they ſeck vnto de⸗ 
uils, uit J we uld ſee ſome reaſan fo2 it out of Gods woꝛd. 
Dan. Touching all ſpirituall matters, as to bear: 
med with power againſt deuils,and to know! how ta auoid 
the daungers which they bing, we are no where to ſeeke. 


him 


Witches and witchcraftes. 


bim we cannot learn but by his holy woꝛd, foz in it he hath 
opened vnto vs allhis whole will. And therefoze, where 
the Lo2zdecommanndeth the people of Jſraell by Poſes, 
Deut. 18. that they ſhould not when they came into the 
land, learn to do accoꝛding to the abhominattons ok thoſe 
heathen, reckoning vp ſundzy kinds of ſuch as were Da- 
tans inſtruments, which he vſed to ſeduce the multitude, by 
deuinations, by obſeruing of times, by augurie, by ing» 
lings with the helpe of the deuill, by vſing familiarSpt- 
rits, ſpirits of deumation, and ſ&king to the dead: he ſet 
teth downe alſo the remedie, ſhewing firſt, that he woulde 
caſt out thoſe nations becauſe they harkened vnto che 
ſouthlapers, and deuiners, pꝛonouncing that enerie one 
which doth thoſe things, is an abhomination to the Loꝛde, 
willing his people that they ſhould not harken to ſuch, but 
that they ſhould hearken vnto him: And then Poles ſaith, 
A Prophet ſhall the Lord thy God raiſe vp vnto thee 
from among you of thy brethren like vnto me, him ſhal 
ye heare. 

M. B. Then you pꝛoue by that place, that we muffe 
ſake only to God, and not to ſuch as wozk by meanes be⸗ 
ſides his wozds. 

Dan. Jfyouread that place, Deut,18, and mark eue- 
ty thinge well, you ſhall ſe it doech not onely p2one that 


they ſæke vnto Deuilles., which runne to theſe cunning 
men and women e Pꝛophetes which God hath 
rayſed vp to declare the Lozds will, commaund vs not to 
doe luch coins Bl 1 Heeläreth eher they bee an abho- 
mination to the Lozde that vſe them, oz that ſ@ke vnto 


them, 
Al. B. I ſæ then it is not onelie a finne , but a moſtr 
horrible ſinne, to ſ&ke vnto them. Alas, manp do not think 
that they ſ@ke vnto deuilles, when they goe fo2 helpe vnto 
them fo2 thinges ſtollen, oz fo; helpe and remedie againſt 
witches. 

F 2 Dan, 


/ 


— — 


- ak | 
A Da gude CONCCTNI 


Dan, No doubt many refuſe to hear the voyce of Gov, 
to be inſtructed by him: they deſpiſe his wo2d, and thertoze 
they be giuen vp to hearken vnto Ocuilles, Such as haue 
ſought vnto any of thele that wozke by the yeuill, and now 
tome ta ſee their offence, ought to ſhew repentance fo the 
lame not as fo? a light ſinne. It is no ſmall abhomination 
ta goe fo2 helpe vnto the deuill: Jt is to ſet him in Gods 
place, and to honour him as God, It riſeth ol infidelity 
and diſtruſt ok help from God, as we may lee in the exam⸗ 
ple ofking Saule, who finding no anſwere noz comfozte 
from God, whome he had ſo wickedly diſobeyed, went to a 
witch. The heathen man laide, F/ectere ſi nequeo Superos, 
Acheronta moue bo. It | cannot intreat the goddes, | wall 
downe among the deuils. 

NM. B. Map, doubtles there can be no defence made foz 
ſuch ſerking help at their hands, which deale with famili⸗ 
ar ſpirits , but Jmule at diuers thinges, as this foz one, 
how the cunning men, tf they deale by the yower of the de⸗ 
uull, ſhould vſe ſich god wor des, 712 them that come 
vnto them to doe all in the name of Chꝛiſt, teaching them 
to vſe woꝛds and ſentences of the ſcriptures, 

Dan. O ſir, here lieth the dep ſubtiltie of Satan,how 
ſhould the people be ſeduced to follow him, if he ſhould not 
vle great cunning to couer matters, as it deuils were dꝛi⸗ 
uen out, and harmes cured that are done by them, euen 
though the name and mightie power ef God, Herein alſo 
lyeth a moe foule abhominatton, and chat is the abuſing 
and hoꝛrible p2ophamng of the moſt bleſſed name of God, 
and the holie Scriptures vnto witcheries, charmes, and 
coniurations, and vnto all deuilliſh arteg. Such an one is 
haunted with a fayzte, oꝛ a ſpirit: he muſt learne acharme 
compounded of ſome r aunge ſpeaches, and the names of 
God intermingled, oz weare ſome part of S. Johns Eoſ- 
pell 02 ſuch like. So agatuft the thiefe, againſt the veutll 
ſent by the witch, the ke is pꝛactized. Whar can Satan 


— 44 92 


deſire moze, than that holie thinges ſhould be thus abuſed: 
/ CEheceis adoe to get him into the glaſſe, to get him into 
the Chꝛyſtall, to get him into the baſen of water:there is a 
doe to binde him as it were by the name c power of Chuilt 
to tellthis thing oz that thing. The coututer hee bindet 
him with the names of God, and by the vertue al Chuſtes 
palſion,gad reſurrection, & ſo mgkeh bim lerue his 5 
And all is his owne wozke ; fo; not conſtrayned, no 
bound, but ſ#keth thus to haue God blalphemed. (wth 
the imple man) this is a good woman, chee ſpeabech 1 
God, and of Chziſt, and doth all in his name: they be god 
wozus which te hath taught me to vle: and what hurt can 
there be in vling good wo2des ? Alas pe man, what caſe 
are they in which mult learne god woꝛds of the dcuul: It 
is not the ſpeaking ol god woꝛdes, 02 the wearing ſome 
part ol the {criptures,that deteadeth from deuils, therein 
lieth che craft of {atan, to haue thoſe holy 0 575 lo toullie 
abuſco v chat tien max put truſt in 22 leuten 
ces p;0a9uncev, but t Nelles are — — onlie by the 
power of faity, wheredhe holie ſcriptures are witten in 
the heart,+ the loule armed with the power of them. From 
this Datan dzawech men by his r, teaching 
them other helpes: Foz the naming : 
ces of ſcripture binde: not ſatan 
btcer thema: 15-1, "if 

N. B. Then home can the deu bear 
minde as to help thoſe that bee in miſery ? 2 Foz manp haue 
helpe by theſe cunning men. The deuill is cruell and bent 
wholly to doe hurt, and that is it which perlwadeth man te 
that things are done euen by the power of God. 

Dan, The deuils be as pitifull as a grby hungrie li⸗ 
on thatraareth arter his pꝛap, and as a fierce Oꝛagan, all 
burning with w2ath and bloody malice: they make thew of 
doing god vnto men,oaly of a moit cruel and murtherous 


yuryole,euen tomaw men 2ggec into the pit of hell with 
F 3 them, 


— . 


e 
— . 


- 


K. 
\ | HlIal5oYT 1 


2 
them. Fo; if they can help the bovie a litle, it is to win both 
bodie and ſoule vnto eternall damnation. Where ſatan 
offrreth his help, it is mote to be fearev, than where he ma⸗ 
nifellly impugneth, and lecketh apparantly to hurt. 

A. B. But this then is mote ſtrange, if they doe not 
deale by the power of God, but by the power of the deuill, 
when they dziue out deuils from hurting , howe one deuill 
ſhould duue out another. Dur ſauiour ſaith, that ſatan doth 
not dziue out ſatan, {02 then his king dom ſhould bee deui⸗ 
ded and could not ſtand. | 

Dan, It is moſt certaine that ſatan doth not dztue out 
ſatan; foꝛ our ſauiour hath ſhewed the reaſon of the con⸗ 
trarit. One deuill is readie to further the woꝛke of ano⸗ 
cher: hut in no wiſe to expel oꝛ to hinder one another. 

A,B. There is it which maketh me to muſe: we ler 
the deuill dztuen out and doeth not returne agame, and if 
it be not wꝛought by the power of deuilles, as you ſap it 
cannot, chen muſt it nel ds be by the power of God, 

Dan. The Deuill is dꝛiuen out, neither by the power 
of the deuill. no; yet by the power ol God, in theſe that are 
healed by cunning men. 


M, B. J like this woꝛſt of al the ſpeach which J heard 


vou vtter yet: Foz if ſatan be not dꝛiuen out neither by the 
power of ſatan, power os God, what other pow- 
er is there to dꝛiue him out? Ik you tan ſhewe a third pow⸗ 
er to expell him, it is moꝛe than euer Iheard of. 

Dan. There nedeth not a thirde power to expell him, 
fo2 he is not dꝛiuen out at all, 

M. B. J told you befoꝛe, il pou denie that to be, which 


all experience doth ſhewe, then is it no reaſoning, There 


be examples in many places, and daylie i is ſane, that 

the deuill is dꝛiuen out of ſome poſſeſſcy;that where he did 

vere and toꝛment men in their bodies, and in their cattle, 
they haue remedie againſt him. 

Dan, J doe not denie but that ſome which are * 

| | en 


ches and WILCACTAITCS. 


ſed and toꝛmented by Satan, haue releaſe: but yet the de- 
uill is not calt fo2th by rhoſe means, but cealeth willingly -»* 0/115 *'. 
euen to eſtabliſh men in errour, and in molt wicked pzo- 5.\,....- 1. w 
phaning of thename 6f God,and wozſhipping ok himſelfe, A * vol 
and ſo entreth deper into them. Sour nel babe 
M. B. J beſ@ch you let me heare how that is, that voi © * I 


willing ly and of his owne accoꝛd „where he hath it vpon a⸗ -- LI So 
nem man:Doth he not deſire to doe hurt? 521 2 de * 
Dan. Ye doeth not let goe his hold which he hath vpon {+ © A N 
any man, but inded taketh faſter holde when hee ſemeth ta £ He 
be caſt foo2th and doth greater hurt:fo2 tell me whoſe deuiſe * . 
is the coniuration: 2 45 * 0 
M. B. Jam out of doubt that conturation is the de ⸗ * 2 
uice of the deuill. 
Dan. Then tell me, hath the deuill deuiſed and taughe 
a way to bind himſelfe, oz to caſt forth himſelfe 2 
CAL. B. That J ſuppole he would neuer doe. 
Dan. Jnd#d if we wil imagine that the beuil is becom 
an old foole; we may think he wold teach that which ſhould 
bind and caſt fooꝛth himſelke: but the ſcripture callethhim 
the old ſerpent; he deuiſed and taught coniur ation, there⸗ 
foꝛe coniur ation doth not caſt him fozth, Bet he ſemeth to 
be bound by the coturer,yea tuen by the kame of God, and 
by the power of the paſſion of Chꝛiſt. The coniuter ſœmeth 
by the ſame power to duue him out ok a man poſſeſſed, 
whoſe body he doth yer c toꝛment. And he ceaſeth willingly 
to tozment the bodie, to eſtabliſh conuration, c ſo to dzaw 
men quite from God, euen to wozthip and to follow him- 
ſelfe, and ſ#ke all helpes at his hands. Euen ſo when men 
are tozmented in their bodies , 02 plagued in their cattelt 
by the deuill, and lake vuto the cunning men and women, 
following the wap that they pzelcribevnto them, and haue 
caſe in their bodies, and no moze harme among their cat- 


tell, Satan doth not giue place as foꝛced, but ceaſeth to do 
4 thoſe 


TA Dialogue con cerning 
thoſe hovilie harmes,thathemay fullie win vnto himlelfe 


both bodie and ſoule. If they ſhould not ſeeme to bee expel- 


led, how ſhould men be dꝛawn to ſek help at their handes 
which deal e by him: how ſhould witches and conturers be 


d awne on moſt hozrivlie to pollute and blaſphcme the glo- 


us name of God? 

C77. B. Then J f@ they bny their help derr which haue 
it at the handes of theſe cunning men, 

Dai, Pea , what can be bought moze deare, than that 
whicht is with the lolle of ſoule and bodte foz euer, by run⸗ 
ning {rom God after denils? 

All. B. What ſhoulde a nran thinke then touching all 
other which deale not with the deuill and yet haue certaine 
wales to finde ont witches, and to vnwitch that which they 
haue bone? 

Dan. Although they deale not directly by the denill, 
J mcane they haue no famtltar ſpirites thet ſpeake vnto 
thein yet they deale by deuilliſh deuiſes which are alſo an 
abhomiaatien to the Loꝛd. Foz all thoſe ſeuerall ſoptes of 
witches which the Lozd rehearſeth, Deut. 1 8. did net deale 

dircctlie with deulls. Fox ſome were obſerversof times, 
which! had their luckie dapes and their vnluckie dayeg.and 
ſotheir howers. It they goe to buy oz to ſell, they choſe 
heir hower to ſet foꝛth in, Some dealt by the intralles of 

Fealls,ans by the flying of birys, by meeting with an hare, 
91 a foxe,apd on whirh hand, a a thouſand ſuch like Dome 
vali 15 th e S1ue and a paire of ſherres , vſing certaine 
wonbs: Some vſe a charme fo2 the tooth ach another foꝛ 


the ague, and fo} ſtopping the bleding at the noſe, allo 
theiz ſpell fo2 the thefe and a thouſande \tich like, when 
butter will not come, whencheete will not runne, noꝛ Ale 

wotke in the fatte: T hele would ſeeme of allothers to haue 
5 1 in the greateſt deteſtation, and in the meane time 
wozke by the deuil themſelues, and may bet termed wits 


Fete. phi 


ID 


} 
4 


WItc ande WItcl aa es. 


Ai. B. Wie doe count them witches whichhane their: 
ſpirits , we doe not take them to be wines whichboeins: 
vſe thoſe things which the cunning men haue taught. Fox 
thep doe not — to doe any thing by the veuill, Pe chin 
keth there — tall them witches. 

Dan!” — of witchcraft toꝛ all that vealeg 
by the power and deuices of the deuill: Na douht ſome are 
moꝛe hoꝛrible than other of the ſeucralt ſoztes of witches. 
yet the lighteſt of them be abhomtnations befozetbe: Lom, 
as we are taught, Deut. 18. andthe ignozance voeth not 
excuſe, Fo2 what though the witch ſuppole it is the ſoule 
of Moſes, which appeareth in his Chꝛyſtal, is he not ther- 
loze a pitch: Vour neighbour, whoſe butter wold not come, 
which heat a ſpit ren hoat and thʒuſt into the creame, vſing 
certaine woꝛdes, doth thinke ſhe did by the power of God 
fray away the deuill, is ſhe not therefoze a witch, dealing 
with that which the deuil, and not Godhath caught? Js the 
not a witch alfo in ſ#king help at deuils > They which. dw 
burne the cloaths which their child lay in, tokmow by the 
burning blacke whether it were bewirched, and to hing 
the witch thither, dealt altogether by the power and dire 
ction of the deuill, ſo in ſcratching, fox God hath taught 
no luch things, thefrare they not witches? By whole ins 
ſtruction, and by whoſe power was the witch fetched home 
at the burning of the hatr of the butchers ſonne you ſpake 
of? Qas not all done by the power of Satan, and by his 
iiſtruction: Are not they then which pꝛactize the thinges 
the Diſciples of witches, æ ſo inded very witches? Thoſe 
which haue their charmes, and their night ſpels, what can 
they be but witches 2J might reckon vp her that dealeth 
with the ſiue and the ſheares, and a number of ſuch trum⸗ 
peries, in all which the moſt holie name of God is pollu⸗ 
ted, and if any thing be done, it is done wholly by the efte- 
ctuall working of Satan. God hath giuen naturan helps, 
and thoſe we map vſe, as from his * — 

„ diſea⸗ 


©, a. - n 


b 


2 


Dialogue concerning 


vileaſes but things beſides nature he hath not appointed, 
eſpeciallic, they be kibiculong tu due away deuilles and 
diſeales. | R:. ö 

24, B. Now you ſpeak of naturall things, we ſe there 
be great ſecretes in nature: the Adamant dzaweth Iron 
vnto it. And why m ay there not be ſoniẽ kodcẽ in theſe nas 
turall chings then? Pr 

Dau. No doubt there be great ſecrets in nature which 
the CkilfullPhyſictans,and natural! hilolophers do find 
out. As the hanging of ſome thinge abcut the necke, may 
haue kozte to dꝛiue away an ague, the wearing of ſome 
thing may haue ſuch vertue to deltuer from the cramp, and 
ſuch like. And from theſe Satan doech take octaſion to 
bzing in his trumperies and curious deut es. As becauſe 
there be ſecretes in Nature, a ring is curtouflie framed ac- 
co2ding to the ſignes in the trmament, this is tied to a 
tchꝛead and let downe into a baſen oz cup of water, and wil 
ſhew great things. Becauſe there be ſecretes in nature, a 
bozthoo muſt be heat red hot and then put into a kettle ſe: 
thing vpon the tire to dꝛiue away the witches ſpirite. Alſo 
he that hath his cattle bewitched, burneth ſome liue thing; 
as hogge oꝛ henne, to dꝛiut out the deuill. Can theſe natu⸗ 
rall thinges expell deuils: Nay, they play the rancke wit⸗ 
ches, which burne any thing foꝛ to expell deuils: foꝛ, hath 
God taught to doe anie ſuch thing: Doe they burne the 
thing to God, oz is it as a verie burnt ſacrince to the De⸗ 
uill:? In the time of the law burnt ſacrifices were offred to 
God: the deuill among the heathen dꝛewe the like to him⸗ 
ſelf; And naw byhis eight he doth after ſome ſoꝛt pꝛocure 
the ba en e nds, which pꝛofelle to be Chziſttans, 
and thu Woörſhip bs him, he ceaſeth from hurting their 
bodies op their tattell, as gaining a greater matter, 

A. B. If it be ſo(as Jam not able to gainſay itthenbe 
there multitudes in all plates which are guiltie of ſoyte⸗ 


vie, and witchcraft: Foz J'ſe many deale in matters by 


| | the 


+ 


/ 


" p U V Si - wh, 


the hely and power of the deuill, which are perlwaded o; 
ther wile. But J meruaile much at diners things touching 
the help which men haue by deuils. Let vs conterre allittic 
about them. The deuill doeth know things paſt, e things 
pꝛeſent, but God oneltc voth know what ſhall bee done in 
the time to come. Ik theſe cunning men doe deale with no 
further power, than the power of the deuull, howe can they 
tell ſo right what ſhall come to paſlle? e 

Dan. It is peculiar ta God alone, to knowWhat hall 
come to paſſe hereafter. But the Lozd God hath reuealey 
by his Pzophetes, and Apoſtles many thinges that after 
ſhould be fulfilled. Satan can giue a nexe coniecture when 
theſe come to be fulfilled, Pee is a moſt ſubtill obſeruer of 
thinges,and will gelſe at manyꝛbut eſpectally, where hee 
hath power giuen him to wozke and to bꝛing any matter 
about,he can and will tell it afozehand, Finally, God in his 
juſt judgement giueth him power to ſeduce the wicked. 

AL. B. J pꝛap pou open your meaning moꝛe fully, 

Dan. Uery welb an which haue you any doubt: 

A, B. J take it the Deuill gelleth at things which are 
pꝛophegied, and is a ſharpe obſeruer of cauſes, But pou 
laid heſ felleth what ſhall be where he wozketh that which 
be fo} th: giue ſome example foꝛ this. 

- Dan, There neædeth no better example, than that 
Which vou tolde of the Churchwardens that went to the 
cunning man, to knope the theete which had ſtollen their 
communion cuppe. t may be {apd , where the cunning 
man bad them go to ſuch a place, ſuch a night, and at ſuch 
an hower, aud thither ſhall come he that ſtole the cup, how 
£9uld the deuill tell, it it were a night oꝛ two chat he 


ſhould come to that place, aud at that hower 7Vou muſte 
note what power the deuill hath in che mind of a theeſe. Me 
ſtirred hun vp to ſteale the cup he ſtirred vp the Church- 
war deus ta ſeeke ta the cunning witch. Pee nameth the 
place and the time, whether, and when he would moꝛte the 

G 2 heart 


na 
AID ue © 


heart of the there to come: And at the time appointed he 
bungeth him thither,foz he that could moue him to ſteale, 
could allo by lecrete ſuggeſtion mœut him to goe thither. 
er The dtuill told that the witch ſhuld come home with ſperd 
that had bewitchen the butchers ſon. Be that had power in 


her heart to make her become a witch, did know Wee 
ne ca: 


e 


baue power to make her with haltr to come home. One 
rieth ſomewhat which a ſick perſon hath lien in to the cun- 
ning man. Oe can tell, it ſæmeth, by t 10 the cloth, 
whether the deuil hath bene in it (if it ifiell like his deuill) 
aud {a tellech, che partie is bewitched. Take the clothes 
etz le which the ſicke partie hath lien in, and burne them if they 
burne blacke, then may you ſe it ig ſo, and the witch ſhall 
come in while they be a burning? Nowe, if the Loꝛd gaue 
him power, and he hath ſtriken and toꝛmented the bodie of 
the ſicke perſons and ik hee haue collourably ſtirred vp a 
witch to ſend him: As it not an eaſie matter foz him to 
make the fire burne blacke , and to mooue the witch to 
comè dt chat pzeſent 2 Dy) if be haue power foz totozment, 
and hath no witch to ſende him his great deſire being to 
haue men guiltie of innocent blood. is it not as eaſie by the 
permiſſion ot᷑ Godſwhich in his iuſt iudgment Fineth him 
power to ſeduce ſuch people as will hearken vnto deuils 
toʒ him to make the fire burne blacke, oꝝ at leaſt to ſme lo 
to them, and to m,ogue Wer de (pected woman 
02 other to come { e no witch” uſande 
ſuch things hee ch in, and as a cunning tuggler can 
tompaſſe and bꝛing thei about. 
NI. B. Jaded an innocent perſon map tome in at ſuch 
a time;but I haue heard, I cannot tell howe true it is, that 
therefoꝛe there is a further thing which they obſerue. And 
that is this, the cunning man biddeth, ſet on a poſnet oꝛ 
ſome pan with naples, and ſerthethem, and the witch ſhal 
ome in while they be in ſathing, and within a fewe dayes 
after,her face will be all beſcxatched with the nailes. And 


I 


* 


» — 


9 : 
— ——— AA TEL Z2T% 
. * 
4 
: 1 


VT THT Wiener ire 


I haue heard that ſome alde woman comming in, her face 
hath indeed bene as it were ſcratched within a few dayes 
after,fo2 the ſhingles oz ſuch like brake fo2th. 

Dan. O the depth of Satans illuſions to make blinde 
people becom witches, and to deale by him. Me doth know 
the toꝛrupted humours in thc bodie, which will bꝛeake out 
into the 5 pockes,02 ſuch like, and if he can pꝛocure one 
to come in which is euen ready to haue them, what a ſhew 


doth he make, as it the nails did it: 


A. B. This were great ſubtiltie of Satan. 

Dan. Rap, we are not able to imagine the depth of 
bis lleights, neither can we ſe the ſecrete foꝛce, wherwith 
he moueth the minds of ignoꝛant people, and ſo bzingeth 
about his enterpuſes.There doth lie the greateſt cunning 
of Satan. 

M. B. Tndeditſ#meth ſtrange and vncredible that 
the deuil ſhould ſo moue the minds of men, and lead them 
vnto this thing and that thing, and inthemeane time they 
doe not know it, but thinke they goe againſt the deuil. But 
now J harte a kurther doubt. J conkeſſe it is an eaſie thing 
foz the deuill to tell where a thing is chat is loſt o2 ſtollen, 
but what power hath he to heale that which is ſick oz ſoze: 
Out of queſtion they be innumerable which receiue helpe 
by going to the cunning men. You ſay he helpeth the bodie 
that he may deſtroy the ſoule. Bee helpeth that men map 
ſ#ke vnto hum, and ſo ſet him, as it were, in the place of 
God. Me thinketh it ſhould not be in the power ol deuilles 
fo2 to helpe. 

Dan. Indeed that is well moned, there lieth a great 
fleight of the deuill in it. Nou lay that innumerable do re⸗ 
ceiue help by going vnto cunning; men. J warrant you not 
ſo many as you are perſwaded, I 

M. B. O verie manie. There be a number which doe 
neuer make it knowne,becauſe it is miſliked by ſome: 

Dan. Pea, and there be _ which comehome _ 

3 wit 


<q 3X a4 fi. 


 JI44OTUE CONMCETTL 


with a flea in their eare , thep.receiue-an auſwere, as good 
as a lin flam . 1 01 | 

M. B. It may be they come to late, the matter is over 
farre ſpent, and if they had come ſooner, they coulde haue 
holpen them. | 3 4303; 

Han. Pea,anumber of luch coſoning anſwers the de⸗ 
uill maketh which ſatil ie ignoꝛant people, which are rea- 
to bel ue all that he teilech, and to daunce aftcr his pipe, 
One commeth to him foꝛ his childe, if he know the diſeaſe 
be deadly, he will ſay it is bewitched', but ſo farre ſpent, 
that there is no help, the chude wil hardlie liue two dates; 
che father commeth hame and findech his child deade, oz it 
dieth within two oꝛ thꝛer dayes after, here the deuill get⸗ 
teth credit. Another is ſicke and grieuoully tozmented, he 
lendeth: Satan doth ſ@ (fo? he ſendeth y mn) that the dil⸗ 
eaſe is euen ſpent, and that the cauſe of it. 5 


in to fail, and 
lo that the partie in a few dapes will recouer, here he pꝛe⸗ 


ſcribeth one paltrie o2 other, they vſe it, the man is recoue⸗ 


red, and ſo ſhould haue bene without the deuils medicine, 
but now Satan hath gottenfurther credite. Another is 
ficke and languiſheth,his neighbours tell him, he may be 
bewitched, it is good to ſend, and then he ſhal know. He ſen⸗ 
deth, the deuill doth not know whether the licke mau can 
eſcape and recouer, oꝭ not. He ſaith, it is like he is bewit 
ched:and teacheth whãt to doe, if there bee any help at all, 
but dotibteth, and ſo whether the man liue oz die, Satan 
ſaueth his credite whole and ſound. And many of theſe an- 
ſweres he giucth.Againe, we muſt note that mans imagi⸗ 
nation is of great foꝛce, either to continue a diſeaſe, o2 to 
diminiſh and take away ſome diſeaſes. And in this allo 


Satan deludeth ſome,fo2 his medicine ſameth to do lom⸗ 


what, when it is but the parties canceit. N. 
CAL. B. Theſe be ſleightes inde de; but mee thinketh 
you ee karre in the laſt, J doe not ſe how a mans conceit 


can help him. b 
| an, 


—— —̃ — — — NNNEES ECTS 
= 
- 


— . ß 


F TTY rarec 


Dan, Imagination is aſtrong thing to hurt, all men 
doe finde, and why ſhould it not then be ſtrong alſo to help, 
when the parties mind is cheared, by beleuing fully that 
he recetueth eaſe? 

NM, B. But pet it is hard to ſhewe that euer anie ſuch 
cure hath bene wought. | 

Dan. It is not hard to ſhew;fox that which me len dur if 
ts pꝛeſumed the deutll can doe the like. And J haue heard 
of a mery companion that wꝛought ſuch a eure. Ther was; 
one in London (as repozt goetch) which was acquainted 
with Feats, Mom, this Feats had a blacke dogge, whome 
be called Bomelius. This partie afterward had a conceit 


Pthat Bomelius was aveuill, and that hee felt him within 


him. He was in heauineſſe, and made his moane to one of 
his acquaintante, who had a merie head, he tolde him, he. 
had a friend cohld remwue Bomelius. Hee bad him pꝛe⸗ 
pare a bꝛeaklaſt, and he would bing him. Then this was 
the cure he made him be ſtripped naked and ſtand by a god 
fire, and though he were fatte ynough of himſelſe, baſted 
him all oner with butter againſt the fire, and made him 
weare a ſlæke ſtone next his (kin vnder his bellie, and the 
man had pꝛeſent remedte, and gaue him afterward greate. 
thankes. 

M. B. I know men haue many fooliſh imaginations : 
but though one imagination may d21ue out ere, 
is not the curing of any diſeaſe in derd, but af an 7 
tion: yet it doth not followe, that where there 5 zan 1752 
rant griefe, chat a maus conteit can heſpe to We, 

Dan, Pes, the conceit voth much, enen w ere is 
an apparant diſeaſe, Aman feareth hee is eb a, 
troubleth al the powers ok his mind, and that diſtempereth 
his bodie, maketh great alterations Im it 4 Wine 
ſundꝛie griefes Nom, mhen pis man 2 {uch i- 
maginations, his bodily: griefe whichg rew.! ou the ſame 


is caſed, And a multitude of Satans cures. ape but luch. 
G 4 M. B. 


- 54 ee 


| | LY 100 4 * 
M. B. Nap, there be alſo euils which be apparant in 
the bodie, and bee cured, which come not of ante feare oz 
mag ination:hom tan theſe be cured by any conceit? There 
is great reaſon that ſuch griefes may be cured indeede by 
quieting the minde, as did growe from the diſturbance of 
Dan. Pea,and that fallerh cut ſometimes in griefes of 
che body, which doeth not growe from imagination, but 
from ſome other paſſions, As J can giue you an example, 
which is watten and repoꝛted by a very reuerend learned 


The knaue lodging there /p2omiſed fox certainty that hee 
would heale them thee did hang a litle wziting about her 
necke, charging ſirictlie, that it ſhould not be taken from 
thence no2 read, no opened, fo2 it any ot theſe were done, 
the could haue no help at all by it. The woman had ſuch a 
confidence in thethinge, and was ſo merry and glad, that 
the left werpinge loꝛ her often weeping and teares had ſpots 
led her eies) and ſo by little and litle, the moyſture ſfape 
ed, and her eies were whole. It fell out that ſhe loſt the 
wꝛiting, whereat ſhe was in ſuch griefe and ſozrowe, and 
weeping, that her eies were ſoze againe. Another founde 
the wziting opened it, and read it. It was waitten in the 
Germane tongue, to this effect tranſlated into Eng liſh: 


The deuill pluck out thine eies, and fill their holes with 


his dung. not this, thinke you, a pꝛoper ſalue fo2 to 


cure her eies? I this medicine had taken effect , her eies 
ſhuld not haue ben healed, but plucked quite out. Ne may 


not think but that Satan hath mo couſening tricks than al 


men in the wozld,fo2 men are but his lchollers. Againe, 
where men faile, he can woꝛke ſomewhat in the affections 
of the parties mindes. And you ſhall heare them ſay, when 
any charme is vſed, vou mit beleeue it will helpe, oꝛ els it 


mill yge you no good at all. Thus if it were well ſcene into, 
| j the 


Phyſiciau.The cure was done by a lewde coſening knaue / 
in Germanie. A woman had bleare cies that were watery, | 


* 


> 


* -S AIICE WIICIICTAITICES, 


the greateſt part ol your innumerable cures, come to bee 
mere toſonages. It 

M. B. Mell, let all this be true as you haue ſaide: 
Pet there be many thinges wherein the deuilles doe helpe. 
hat ſap vou to the boy which healed within few dates alter 
he had ſcratched the witch, whereas his ſoꝛes were moſt 
grieuous beto2e,and could nat be cured ? hat ſay you to 
that which they doe, when butter will not come, o2 when 
dꝛinke will not woꝛke in the fat? Wihat lay yon to the bur- 
ning of ſome liue thing, as hogge oꝛ henne, and the harme 
ceaſſing: And finallte, what ſay you to the helping of them 


where the deuill v both toꝛment their bodies / e v, 


Dan. All thele are anſwered in few woꝛdes, that where 
he hath power to hurt either man oz beaſt, dꝛinke oz butter 
he helpeth only by giuing place, and ceaſing to hurt, which 
as I ſhewed you bete, he doth moſt willinglie, to bꝛing to 
paſle, that men may {ek to him, become euen verie wit⸗ 
ches. If a man be vexed & toꝛmented by a deuil, c men ſeek 


by kaſting & to caſt him feoꝛth, euen inſtantly intrea⸗ 
ting the Loꝛ d chẽ he goeth out with much ado, and vnwil⸗ 


lingly, as ouercome & expelled by the power of Cod. But 
when he hurteth,as pou ſay he did the butchers ſonne, and 
they ſeke to him, and will followe his pꝛeſciptions, as to 
d2aw blood of the witch, he goeth out willingly, J meane 
he ceaſeth from hurting the bodie: foꝛ He goeth not out in- 
derde, but rather goeth turther in, and ſeateth himſelfe der⸗ 
per in the ſoule. And ſo is it in all the reſt How gladlie wil 
he ceaſe to hurte the hennes, ſo that to pleaſe him, a henne 
map be burnt aliue:his helping is no mote but a ceaſing 
from doing harme, ikhe had power giuen him to hurt. 
Sam. This is a ſtrange thing ik it be ſo. There be thott- 
ſands in the land deceiued. The woman at K. H. by repoꝛt 
bath ſome weeke fourtie come vnto her, and many of them 
not of the meaner lozt. But J doe but hinder, J pꝛay pou go 
fozward. 5 


B Dan, 


ea er ww yer finde, of all that haue bene toꝛmented at 


PS. eng 


: 
"4 
- þ CY 
- 


Dan, The veuill can deceiue thouſand thouſands , and 
even the wiſeſt fo2 os wo2ld, when they will not be taught 
of God, but dilpiſe his doctrine, then are they luſtly gi⸗ 
uen ouer to be diſciples of the deuill. | 

CM, B. If there be ſuch deceit in all theſe things, and 
that the witches do not kill no2 hurt, but the deuill craftt- 
lie ſemeth to kill and to hurt when the diſeaſes be ngeurall 
and makeththe witch beleeue that hee hath done al t her 


requeſt, ©} re hdd guy bum power, heſtirreth 
her vp to ſend hin das it Aber & could net, 0) would not 
med dle, vnles he had bene ſent, Seeing all lieth vpon Sa⸗ 
tan, it ſhould ſeeme, there is no reaſon that witthes ſhould 
be put to death:but the ſcripture doth command they ſhuld 
be put to death. 

Dan. The holy ſcriptures doe command chat witches 
ſhould be put to deach: therein pou ſap right: but ik you 
did take it, that the woꝛd of God commaundcth they thall 
not be luſtered to liue, becauſe they kill men and beaſtes,o2 
becauſe they ſend their ſpirits which poſſelle men, and toz 
ment their bodies, vou are much deceiued: F oꝛ you ſhal ne⸗ 
nd, plagued by 
euill ſpirites, that the holie Ghoſte Apetf It pon witches. 
The cauſes why they ſhould be put to death are, that they 
haue familtaritie with deuils, which are the blaſphemous 
enenues of God :and that they ſeduce the people into er⸗ 
rour, to runne after deuils, and deuiliſh pꝛactiſes, and that 
they haue ſuch wicked minds. Although they neuer minde 
to kill oz to hurt any, but to doe them god, as they ima⸗ 
gine, pet if they deale with deuilles they ought to die foz 
ü., 

N. B. Then pou take it, that thefe cunning men and 
women, vnto whome ſo many runne fo helpe, which are 
thought to do very much good, and no hurt at all, ought to 


he roated out, and deſtroyed. Let vs knowe what ſcripture 
there is [02 it. 


Dan, 


witches and witchcrattes. SJ 


Dan. Pea,of all other they dught to die, becauſe they 
due the greateſt harme. Other witches that haue ſpirites 
are thought to dog harm, becauſe the deutz at the appornt- 
ment of God dothharme, MEhe bearetlj in hand hee doeth 
me at t the requeſt of the witch: but theſe that ſeme to doe 
o harme inderd, and that many waycs,as euerie one 
that ght in him, may eaſily (@. And fo2 the ſtripture 8 
which ſhewe that they ought to die, reade firſt- in the 22. 
chapter of Exodus. v ex. i8. and there it is ſaid, 1 hou halt 
notiutter a witch to hue, 
M. B. That place we take to be meant of theſe witches 
which ſend their ſpirits to doe harme: the other be net cal 
led witches. 
Dan. It is that witch chat is there commanded to be 
» | put to death, that is called Mecatshephab:ſuch were they 
aud ſo called, which betoze Pharaoh did withſtand Poles, T* 
and made in ſhewe rods tilrned into ſerpents. So that in 
one kinde the Loꝛd doeth include all ſuch as wozke by the 
deuill, F oꝛ there be diuers others fortes named in Deut. 
g. and they bee all called an abhomination to the Lode: 
and no abhomination is to be ſuſtered to remaine among 
the Lozds people. Alſo in che ſame place, when he ſaith, 
Let there not be found in the any ſuch oꝛ ſuch, as he there 
reckoneth them vp: It is not alone to will that none could 
pꝛactize luch inges, but * rern ad ber reoted 
5 out. * 
Ai. B. I:muſt wes agre'vito that which the: worde 


91 —. 


of God doth ſet down. But this is the yardelt matter of al, 
how tizep ſhall be conutcted. 

Dan, Why doe you take it to bee the harveſt matter, 
how a witch ſhall be connicted: how is athetor a murthe- 
rer tonuicted but by pzoofe ? It there be vehement luſpiti⸗ 
f on, and the party vpon examination conſeſſe the fact , that 


is a ſufficient pzoofe. If the partie doe dente, and two oꝛ 
thꝛer of credite doe teſtifie vpon their knowledge with a ſo⸗ 
{) 2 lemne 


£ 
* 
——ͤ AT TER 
* " : 
8 
þ 


_— — — —— _Cc_u—_—___ 
\ Dialogue concerning 


lene un dat he is guilt e of the fact, that is alſo a ſuf- 
ficient p2oofe, And touching this, God commander by Pa⸗ 


ſes, that none ſhould dy, vn elle the matter were pzoned 
againſt them by two witnelles at the leaſt. Deutronom, 
19. ver, 15. 

. B. J graunt, it the partie do denie, and eſpectally, 
if the matter touch lite, that chere ought by the woꝛde ot 


God tt be due pꝛoke by! two witneiles at theleaſt, This 


map be fo2 murtherers , this may be fo; thæues : but fox 
witches J ſer not how. They deale ſo lecretely with their 
ſpirits, that very ſeldome they can be conuinced by ilat te- 
ſtimomes of men, as to lap directly they haue heard oꝛ ſen 
them ſend their ſpirits. And againe, it is a rare thinge to 
haue a witch cauteſle. Foꝛ it is generallie thought the de⸗ 
nill hach ſuch power ouer vl gb he wil not luffer them 
to confeſſe. 

Dan. © then J perceiue phy you account it the hardeſt 
matter of all to conuict a witch, it both teſtimony. and con⸗ 
keſſion doe faple: but what would you haue further? 

A. B. I haut bene of this opinion, that ik there were 
any likelihood, and ſuſpition, and common kame that it 
was euen pꝛofe pnough, and the beſt dave thaycouly be 
done to; to hang them vp, and ſo to ridde 00 countre p of 


them. 


Dan. Then vou thaught that their fyirites were han⸗ 


ged with them, and lo the country being rid of the witches 


and their ſpirits mens bodies aud their cattell ſhoulo bee 
lafe. 

NI. B. J had a little moze wit than to thinke ſo: but in 
trueth it was but a litle maze, Foꝛ J thought if all the wit. 
ches were hanged that then their ſpirits ſhoulde not haue 


a nie to hire chem na to fend them to hurte eythet man 0 


beaſte, but I ſe mine one follie, and that onlie Gon gi- 
neth the power vnto the deuils to alflitt and trie the godly, 


aud to vere,tozment, and We the wicked, and that they 
tall 


rr 


witches and witchcraftes. 


ſhall da this,though all the witches in the woꝛld were han⸗ 
ged. _ they nerde none to cheriſh them oꝛ to ſet chem 
a wozke 

Dan. But did peu net feare if all ſuſpected ſhould be 
hanged, then ſome guiitles perſons might be put to death? 
As pou ſ# manie that haue bene executed as witches haue 
taken it vpon their death that they were innocent. 

4, B. J will tel ou my thought touching that point, 
which was this. The witches raiſe tempeſtes, and hurte 
cone and fruices vpon the tres, che witches bꝛing the pe⸗ 
ſtilence among men, and murraine among cattell: the wit⸗ 
ches ſend their ſpirits and make men lame, kill their chil⸗ 
dꝛen and their cattell: cheir ſpirits cannot bee taken heebe 
of, no} kept out with de zes and wals as theues and mur⸗ 
therers, but come in when they bee ſent, and doe ſo mauy 
harmes: fo2 this cauſe J thought it a marueilous good 
woꝛke to put all ſuſpected to death, though ſome of them 
were innocent, that ſo ſure wozke might be made to haue 


not one left. 
Dan, Did pou not thinke it a fearfull thinge to head 


innocent blood. 4} 

Nl. B. Vea, but Jchought it much better that ſome 
ſhould be put to death w1ongfully', than to leaue any one 
witch, which might kill and deſtroy many, 

Dan. Then 4 perceiue that this was the reaſon which 
did perſwade you, that it was very good ta put all to death 
that were ſuſpected (although it might fall out that ſome 
of them were innoceut) to auopde greater inconuentence, 
and that is, it ſome few witches ſhould eſcape, which might 
plague and kill many. Better a few ſhould be put wzong⸗ 
fully to death, then many ould bee tozmeuted and killed, 
oz lamed by the deuilles. But are pou ſtill of that mind: 

M. B. No verily. q pou haue put me in minde that 
the wicked ſpirits reteiue their power to plague both mẽ 
and beaſts, ouly from God. They ſæke about, they watch 

93 when 


« 


A Dialogue | concerning 


whe aus where hee will giue them leaue to 55 whert 
God will trie the faith and patience ol the tull by him, as 
he did in Job, he ſendeth him, ik he will be ſent by à witch, it 
is but vader a collour, ſhee giueth him not the power, her 
would touch though te were not. Where God will duke 
aud plague the wicked by him, he giueth him leave , it ts 
not the anger ofthe witch that bzingethit , but their owne 
wickednes SIO they haue poucked God to dilplea- 
ſure, and ſo Rius this enemy power ouer them. 
Dan. Then ſo long as theſe two thinges ſtand, that 
God by Satan will afflict in ſeme ſoꝛt and trie bis chil⸗ 
zen (as you alleage he did Job) and chat he will vſe him 
as his cxecutioner, to plague and tozment the wicked, as 
he ſent an eu:ll ſpirite to vexe king Saule: fo long the 
harme s done by wicked ſpirites ſhall not ceaſe, although 
all the witches and conturers in the wozlde were han⸗ 
ged vy. Looke then to the cauſes, if wee will remoaue the 
effects; As il thou feare God, and Satan afflict thee, ſtand 
kaſt infaith and patience, and waite vpon God fc} thy deli⸗ 
ueraute. It thou endure temptation, thou art bleſſed, and 
Halt be crowned. lam, 1. ver. 12; Ik thy ſinnes haue pꝛauo⸗ 
ked God, and the enemie doth touch thy body oꝛ thy gods, 
tall downe and humble thy ſelfe with faſting and pꝛaper, 
intreat the Loꝛd to turne away his diſplealure: loke not 
vponthe witch, lay not the cauſe where it is uot, ſæk e not 
hely at the hands of deuila, be not a diſciple of witche 8, to 
commit thinges abhominable, by polluting the name ot 
God,andhonouring Satan, no? thirſt not after the blond 
which is innocent, as it falleth out in many. 
M. B. I doe allent vnto al this: and ſurely it ĩs a gecat 
fault to ſheav innocent blood, | 
Dan. Te may learne in the holie ſcriptures , that the 
heading of innocent blood is a veric ho2rible thing in the 
tits of alnightteGod: and a very grieuous thing it is to 


baut a laud n 4221 innocent blood: and that is one 
cpeciall 


\ 


. Qt 


 ſpecialcauſe why Satan dealedh;tywitthes: fot he labou⸗ 
reth to wappe in many guiltleſſe perſons vpon ſuſptti⸗ 
ons, he ſuggeſteth by his helping witches, that ther be ma- 
ny hurting witches in all tolunes, and villages, that ſo hee 
may ſet the multitude in a rage, 4% to ſuſpect vpon cuery 
likelihmd that he can deniſe oꝛ make ſhewe of. And thus 
Whole Juries maſt become guiltie ot innocent hlood, by 
condemning as guiltie, and that vpon their ſolemne oath, 
ſuch as be luſpected vpon vaine lurmiſes and imaginatt⸗ 
ons, and i{luſtons,riſing from blindnes and inſidelitie, and 
feare ot Satan which is in the ignoꝛant ſoꝛt. 

A. B. If pou take it, that this is one craft of Satan, 
to bꝛing manie to be guiltie of innocent blood, and even vp- 
on their oathes, which is hoꝛrible, what wold you haue the 
iudges and Juries to doe, when any art arraigned of ſuſ⸗ 
pition to be witches? 

Dan, What would J haue them doe? J would with 
chem to bee moſt warie and circumſpect that they bee not 
guilty ol innocent blood. And that is, to condemne none 
but vpon ſure ground, and infallible pzoofe, becauſe pꝛe⸗ 
ſumptions ſhall not warrant oꝛ excuſe them befoze God it 
guiltleſſe blood be ſhead. 

M. B. It falleth out ſometimes when a theefe is ar⸗ 
raigned, oꝛ a murtherer, that direct euidence faileth', and 
yet ſuch tirtumſtances are bꝛought, as doe euen enfoꝛce 
the Jurie in their conſcience to find them guiltie: It ſee- 
meth that this holdeth chiefly about witches, becauſe their 
dealing is cloſe and ſecrete, and it is alſo thought that the 
deuill hath ſo great power ouer them, that he will not ſuf- 
fer them to conkeſſe. 

D.n, Pou bung two reaſons to pzoone that in conuic⸗ 
ting witches, likelihods and pꝛeſumptions ought to beo 
fozce moze than about theenes 02 murtherers: The firft, 
becauſe their dealing is ſecrete:the other becaule the veutl 


will not let them conkeſſe. Jnd#de men imagining that 
ID 4 witches 


: witches do wozke ſirange miſchiefes , burne in deſire to 
haucthem hanged, as hoping ther to be free, and then vpon 

ſuch perſwaſions as you meation, they ſuppole it is a very 

good woꝛ ke to put to death all which are luſpected. But 
touching theeues and murtherers let men take herde how 

they deale vpon pꝛelumptiong, vnles they be very ſtron g. 

foʒ we ſe that Juries ſometimes doe condemne ſuch as be 
guiltlelſe , which is an hard thing, efpeciallie being vpon 

them oath, And in witches aboue all other, the profes had 

nerd to be ſtrong becauſe there is greater lleight of Satan 

to purſue the guiltles vnto death, than in the other. Here 

is ſpetiall care and wiſdome to be vled. And ſo likewiſe fox þ | 
their confeſſing, Satan doth gaine moze by their confeſſi-/ 
on, chan by their deniall, and thereſoze rather bewzapeth 
them himſelte, and foxceth them to confeſſion, oftener than 
vnto yentall. 

Au. B. Thele things are beyond my reach, J cannot 
contetue of them. J pap you open it ſo as that I may per- 
ceiue pour meaning and ſe ſome ground of reaſon fo} that | 
which you ſhall affirme. 

Dan. Then is it requiſite to ſtande vpon them moe 
at large. And let vs begin with the latter. 

M. B. If you go firſt to the latter, then ſhew ſome rea⸗ 
ſono2erperiencethatSacan bewꝛapeth the witches, and . 
d2aweth them to . to diſcloſe themſelues rather 


than to conceale and hide their doings, I can tell you this 
befo2e hand, that the common opinion is otherwiſe, which 
ſ@meth to be grounded both vpon realon and experience. 
Dan. J know the common opinion is as you ſay: But 
J do much marueill at ie ſing reaſon and expcrie nce doe 


puoue the contrary as J will ſhew. As firſt, touching rea- 
ſon, pou will grant, that the deuils dealing altogether by 
ſleight and ſubtilties, doe that which doeth moſt lurcher 
their purpoſes and deſires, , 

CM. B. That is the verie reaſon why the deuill would 


| 


by 


$ 9 


2 « 90 ” TE 


by no meanes haue the witches bewjaped,as it is thought 
becauſe he would lurke ſecretely to doe miſchicke. 


Dan. Indeed it were a good reaſon to pꝛoue that gu 


if Satan receiued his power from the witch, oꝛ could doe 
nothing but by her ſending, 02 nerded to be harboured by 
her, oꝛ had no minde to medole, but as it were hired to ſa- 
tiſfie her wzath. But ſeeing al theſe be abſurd, and he vſeth 
the witch and coniurer but vnder a colour to bing in furs 
ther euils, it mult needs followe , that the diſcloſing is fits 
ter fo2 his purpole , than the keeping ſecrete, fo2 if they 
ſhould be kept ſecrete, hom ſhould he make men think that 
he doth ſo many harmes at the requeſt of the witch? howe 
ſhonld he dꝛawe ſo many to runne after deuils, to ſeek help 
at their handes?how ſhould he pꝛocure ſomany to vſe wic 
ked and blaſphemous charms and ſozcertes, and in ſo hoz- 
rible maner to abuſe the bleſſed name of God, and his moſt 
ſacred wozd 2 Oz how ſhould he dzaw the people into ma⸗ 
nifold errours, and to thirſt even in rage after innocent 
blood: All theſe and a number ſuch like hee pzocureth and 


 furthereth,by diſcloſing witches. 


M. B. But how ſhall this reaſon be confirmed by ex⸗ 
perience : No doubt in ſhew he is loath to haue his Dame 
(as ſome ſpeake)diſcloſed. 

Dan. Pou ſay well, that in ſhew he is loath to haue 
witch bewꝛayed: fo2 inderde it is onely in ſhewe, ſering hee 
would make her and others alſo belckue, euen when he doth 


bewzap her by one means oz other, that it is ſoze ag ainſt 


his liking. 

AL B. A pꝛay pou make that euident. 

Dan, When one felcth himſelfe plagued any way, and 
doeth take it to be by Satan, admitit be ſo: he goeth to a 
cunning man, and he ſheweth him in a glaſſe,o2 in a Chꝛp⸗ 
Call the hape of the witch. Who now bewꝛapeth her? 

e 1, B. That is the cuaning mans ſpirite which be⸗ 
wzayeth her, and not her ſpirit which ſhe dealeth with all. 

A Dan. 


4s 
N 


witches do wozke ſtrange miſchief es, "lbs in deſire to 
haue them hanged, as hoping ther to be fre,and then vpon 
ſuch perſwaſions as you meation, they ſuppoſe it is a very 
good wozke to put to death all which are ſuſpected. But 
touching theenes and murtherers let men take herde how 
they deale vpon pꝛelumptiong, vnles they be very ſtron g. 
foxwe ſe that Juries ſometimes doe condemne ſuch as be 
guiltleſſe, which is an hard thing, eſpeciallie being vpon 
their oath, And in witches aboue all other, the pꝛole s had 
nerd to be ſtrong becauſe there is greater lleight of Satan 
to purſue the guiltles vnto death, than in the other. {ere 


= - 


is ſpeciall care and wiſdome to be vſed. And ſo likewiſe for / | 
their confeſling, Satan doth gaine mote by their confeſſi- 
ou, than by their deniall, and thereſoze rather bewzapetb | 
themhtmſelte, any foxceth them to confeſſion, oftener than 


vuto dentall. 

A. B. Theſe things are beyond my reach, J cannot 
conceiue of them. J pꝛay you open it ſo as that J may per⸗ 
ceiue your meaning, and ſæ ſome ground of reaſon fo that | 
which you ſhall affirme, 

Dan, Then is it requiſite to ſtande vpon them moze 

at large. And let vs begin with the latter. 

M. B. If you go firſt to the latter, then ſhew ſome rea⸗ 
ſono? experience that Satan bewꝛapeth the witches, and 
dꝛaweth them to confeſſe,and to diſcloſe themſelues rather 
than to conceale and hide their doings, J can tell you this 
befo2e hand, that the common opinion is otherwiſe, which 
ſemeth to be grounded both vpon realon and experience. 

Dan. J know the common opinion is as you ſap: But 
I do much marueill at it, ſeing reaſon and exptrience dee 
pꝛoue the contrary as J will ſhew. As firſt, touching rea⸗ 
ſon, vou will grant, that the deuils dealing altogether by 
ſleight and ſubtilties, doe that which doeth moſt {tircher | 
therr purpoſes and delires. , 

CM. B. That is the verie reaſonwhy the deuill w_— | 

| : 5 | 


3? 


IV 


— 
- 


by no meanes haue the witches bewzaped,as it is thought 
becauſe he would lurke ſecretely to doe miſchicke. 
Dan. Indeed it were a good reaſon to pꝛoue that gpvyo» 

il Satan receiued his power from the witch, 02 could doe 
nothing but by her ſending , 02 nerded to be harboured by 
her, oꝛ had no minde to meddle, but as it were hired to ſa⸗ 
tiſfie her wzath. But ſeeing al theſe be abſurd, and he vſeth 
the witch and coniurer but vnder a colour to bing in furs 
ther euils, it muſt needs followe , that the diſcloſing is fits 
ter fo2 his purpoſe , than the keeping ſecrete, fo2 if they 
ſhould be kept ſecrete, hom ſhould he make men think that 
| he doth ſo many harmegtthe requeſt of the witch? howe 
| ſhould he dꝛawe ſo many to runne after deuils, to ſeek hel 


Sr ww LY SY ” as 


at theit handes?how ſhould he pꝛocure ſo many to vſe wic⸗ 
ked and blaſphemous charms and ſozceries, and in ſo hoz- 
rible maner to abuſe the bleſſed name of God,and his moſt 
ſacred wozd 2 Oz how ſhould he dzaw the people into ma⸗ 
nifold errours, and to thirſt even in rage after innocent 
blood :? All theſe and a number ſuch like hee pzocureth and 
furthereth, by diſcloſing witches. 

M. B. But how ſhall this reaſon be confirmed by ex⸗ 
perience: No doubt in ſhew he is loath to haue his Dame 
(as ſome ſpeake)diſcloſed. 

* Dan. You ſay well, that in ſhew he is loath to haue the 
witch bewꝛayed: foꝛ inderde it is onely in ſhewe, ſering hee 

| would make her and others alſo belckue, euen when he doth 
b bewꝛay her by one means oz other, that it is ſoze againft 
his liking. 

XI. B. A pꝛay pot make that euident. 

Dan, When one fœleth himſelfe plagued any way, and 
doeth take it to be by Satan, admitit be ſo: he goeth to a 
cunning man, and he ſheweth him in a glaſſe, oꝛ in a Chyp« 
Call the ſhape of the witch. Who now bewꝛayeth her? 

. e 1, B. That is the cuaning mans ſpirite which be⸗ 
wzapeth her, and not her ſpirit which ſhe dealech withall. 
k A Dan. 


8 — . —— W ae ——_— —— a 4 —— , j-. ict R -«. 


0 0 N 
© «4 
KK - — — 5 — 


ik | - 
Dat. Pouare not ſure of that: toꝛ it may be the ſame 
detſill that he vealeth withall , that relemblech her in the 
glaſle: ha ne cau doe it better. 

J B. J dot not thiuke that he departeth away from 


Aw | 
N 


iJan, Dea but vou muſt remember that ſhe which dea⸗ 


lech with a lpirit dealech not with a deuill, but with deuils: 


foz magie doe ioyn together. Ahen one of them departcty 
and carieth the matter to the cunning man, they do not all 
depart. But what il it be as pou ſaid, that ſom other ſpirits 
09 bewꝛap, doe you thinke he doeth it againſt the liking of 
the witches ſpirite? Is Satan demded againſt Satan? 
Tull Satan bewꝛay Satan to his hind)ance? Remember 
what our Hauiour hath taught touching that. 

VB. Then it it be 2 doe you not take it a ſifticient 
pꝛoofe againſt a witch, tuen fo2 a Jurie to linde guilty vp⸗ 
on their oath,if a tunning man by his ſpirite doe bewzap 
anle. : 5 
Dan. It is the moſt inluflicient pꝛwfe that tan bee, fox 
although he doe tell true in bewꝛaying many, as their own 
cõteſſians do witnes:yet he doeth it of an euill purpoſe, he 
is a lytr, and the father ot lies, he dcſireth chiefly to accuſe 
the innocent, that he map bꝛing men to bee guilty of inno⸗ 
cent blood make the people beleeue there be multitudes 
of witches, to ſet them a wozk to learne charmes and ſoꝛ⸗ 
ceries, and chrefip, that they may be bought to ſetke vnto 
bim, as the bewꝛaper cuen in pitie, of luch bad people. 
Non, becauſe he crafrilp bemapeth ſome; to get credite, 


þ 


ſhall mens verdict by oath , euen vnto blood, be grounded 7 


vpon his teſtimony ? Ik a dewull ſhould come in vnto a Ju⸗ 
rie and lap the . about whome pou enquire is a witch, 
could they belæue him, oꝛ wold they ſay let him be ſwoꝛn,. 
nd witneſſe vpon his oath: It not, why ſhould they belæue 
that which he hath ſpoken to the cunning man? 
AB. Surely J am out of doubt he doth all in craft 


vnto 


VVICCACS and VVILCRCTIA!TLS, 


vnto a moſt bad purpoſe, and that no credite ought ta bee 
giuen vnto his teſtimonp when it is voluntarp. But what 
{ay pou to his teſtimonie, when he is euen charged and foz⸗ 
ted in the name and power ol God to tell the trueth: It les 
mech tben he would conce ale, but cannot. 

Dap. The comurer which luppoleth that hee doeth 
bind by the name and power of God ta tell him the trueth, 
is vtterlie deluded, Foz he is not baund, but is glad that 
the moſt glozious name of God is lo hoꝛriblie abuſed; and 
that hee can dꝛawe men into luch a gulle of all abhomina- 
tion. 1. 
1, B. Nap, J doe not meane the coniurer, but when 
ſuch as be godlie go about to caſt him fooꝛth by pꝛaper. 

Dan. This J take to bee your meaning: a man 
0? a woman is poſſeſſed with a Deuill, put caſe it bee ſu 
inde de (to diſtinguiſh them from ſo many counterkaits, : 8 
haue bene ) and men afſemble together where the polle lll d 
is, and cals vpon God, and then charge Satan in the name 
of Chꝛiſt to tell how hee came there, and who ſent him. 

Al. B. I meane ſo indede. Auß fome being polleſſer, 
the deuill being charged to tell who ſent him, he hath con⸗ 
feſſed, chat ſuch a man did coniure him in thither, oꝛ ſuch a 
witch did ſend him. Shall not this be of foꝛce to canuince⸗ 

Dan. When any is poſſeſſed by the fiend, mens tom⸗ 
paſlion, their loue and pitp are to be ſhewed, euen to helpe 
what they can in ſuch a diſtreſle. They onght wich all in⸗ 
tant ſuit to intreat the Loꝛd to ſhew mercy, and to expel; 
him. The doctrin of the holy ſcriptures doth warrant this: 
but fo2 men to talke and queſtion with him, J ſ@no war⸗ 
| rant at all by Gods woꝛd, much leſſe ta commaund aun 
| adiure him to depart.He is the Lows executioner,hehach 
ſent him, wee map tntreat the oꝛd to remmue him, but 

what auchozity haue we to command him £9 depart, where 
God hath ſent him? | 

A. B. Men haue no auchozity, I grant, but they com- 

J 2 mand 


—— 


& 


ͤä„lͤͤͤͤ— 


9 


—_— 4a = = * — YC” —_ _— _ A as «as a — = «©. a ARR erer een A 


Ila OgUe CONCerning 


mand and adiure him in the name and power ofthe Lozd, 
loz to depart. | | 

Dan, That A take ought not to be, ſoꝛ mark this come 
pariſon: the Pꝛince is dilpleaſed with a ſubiect fo2 ſome 
diſlopaltie: An Dfficer1 ſent from the Pzince to attach f 
and impꝛiſon him: ſhall he 02 any other charge this Dfft- 
cer in the Pꝛinces name to let hun alone, and not to med⸗ 
dle 2 Js not their way only to pacifte the ꝛʒince, and ſo the 
P1ince will command the Officer to ceaſe? Cuen ſo, wher 
God ſendeth Satan his executioner, the only way is to ins 
treat the Loꝛd to be pacifled , fo2 then ſhall the tozmentoz 
no longer remaine. 

AA. B. Howe doeth this which you ſpeake agree with 
that which we read inthe Acts of the Apoſtles, howe S. 
Paule commaunded the deuill to come out of a Papde at 
Philippos? 

Dan. The holy Apoſtles and others in the Pꝛimitiue 
Church, had an extraoꝛdinary power giuen them to caſte 


kaꝛuth deuils, and to heale diſeaſes, and they did execute the 


ſame power by the direction and inſtinct of the holy Ghoſt; 
e may not dꝛaw a patterne from that, 
M. B. We ſe that deuils are ſometimes expelled. 
an. They are when the Lo2d is intreated, otherwiſe 
they bur ſ#me to be bound by adiuration and expelled. But 
how tan it be pꝛoued, that the father of lies may be bound, 
and fozced thzough charge and adiuration in the name 
and power of God to tell the trneth 2 And what warrant 
haue we to learne any trueth krom his mouth 2 As to ſap 
we command the in the name of God, that thou tekvs who 
ſent ther. Who ſent ther who ſent thee 2 Pother Joan, Po- 
ther Joan, ſaith he: Alſo we command the to tell vs, who 
ſent thek. L. B. caniured me inhither(ſaith he) Shal wee 
thinke he doeth this euen co d? Oz ſhall we ground 
vpon it fo2 certaintie, that he telleth no lie: 
#4. B. The veuill in a partie poſſeſſed hath ſaid, ſuch a 
man 


* ies — 


man coniured me in hither. The coniurer hath bene put 
to death koꝛ it, and hath confeſſed ſo much. The deuill in an 
other hath ſaid, ſuch a woman ſent mezit hath likewiſe bene 
confeſled by the woman, 

"Dan, All this maketh fo2 that which J affirme. The 
Loꝛd giueth him power to poſſeſſe a man, Me vnder acol- 
lour will be ſent by a coniurer , 02 by a witch: and the one 
thinketh the deuill entreth at her intreaty:the other ſuppo- 
ſeth he doeth euen bind him thereto, whereas he ruleth both 
their mindes, and ſettcth them a wozke. Then doeth hee 
willingly bewzap them, euen foz many ſubtill purpoſes : 
but chieflp,that he may eſtabliſh conturations, witchcrafts 
and charmes,thathe may be ſought vnto, that he may let 
the people a wozke in their calamities to be troublgp about 
witches any coniurers,as thpugh they could plaglie, and 
neuer. abet to God, and that be ewhaping ſome 3 and 
comurers , he may winnecr ae: and be bel:ened, even 
when he acculeth falflie, that he may bing innocent blood 
vpon the land. Let all men take had how vpon their oath 
they giue a verdict, eſpecially touching life, vpon his woꝛd 
howſoeuer he ſeme to be fozced thereunto: all is moſt deps 
craft and ſubtilty in him. 

Sam. J pꝛap you giue me leaue to ſpeake a litle. Vou 
ſap the deuill willinglie bewzapeth 1 and coniurers 
and that foꝛ many ſubtill purpoſes. J haue heard ot diuers 
things done of late which ſ@me quite contrarte, and that 
he takech it grieuoully when they doe conkeſſe and bewzap 
matters. 

Dan. Me will ſeme to take it in euill part, but let vs 
heare the matters, and pou ſhall ſ@ plainely that hee iug* 
gleth, and maketh ſhewe of that which is contrary to his 
pꝛactiſe. 

Sam. Well, I haue heard very credibly, that a woman 
ok late, ſuſpected another woman to be a witch, & that ſhe 


had hurt her ſome way. She pꝛocured a gentleman to ſ * 
23 0? 


H 1a OU CONCC ing 
[02 the par tie luſpected, n charging her in his ae 
ze {cit her to the Gentleman , who taking her aſive; and 
walking alone with her, began to admonich and perſwade 
ber to teaouate the deuill x to (0: lake ſuch wicked wales: 
| Cue he was thus perſwading , and ſhe denying ſtiſtely 
that ſhe was auy ſuch woman; luddainly there appeared 
lone didtance from them, a Wealill o Lobſierre looking 
euen vpon them. Locke (ſaid the Gentleman) onder ſame 
is thy ſpirit, Ah maiſter(ſaid ſhe)that is a vermine, there 
be maay of them euery where. Tell, as they went towards 
if, it was vaniſhed out of light: by and by it appeared a- 
gaiue, and lwked vpon them, Surely (ſaide the Gentle: 
mam) it is thy ſpirit:but ſhe fill denyed, and with that her 
moitth was d2awne awzie. Then hee pꝛelſed her further, 
and ſhe confrfſev all. She confeſted'ſee had hurt and kil⸗ 
led by lending her ſpitit. The Gentleman being no Jus 
tice, let her goe home, and did minde to open the matter 
nto ſome Juſtice: Then ſhe was come home, another 
witch mecteth her, and ſaith, Ah thou beaſt, what haſt thou 
| . bew2aped vs all. UAhat remedy nowel ſaide 
ſhe:) Mhat remedy ſaid the other? lend thy ſpirite # touch 
bam the lent her lpirit, and ok a ſuddain the, Gentleman 
had as it wer a flath of fire about him. He Delifted vp his hart 
to God, and felt no hurt. The ſpirite returneth, and tolde 
he coulo not hurt him becauſe he had faith: what then, ſald 
che other witch, hath hee nothing that thou maiſt touch 2 be 
hath a child ſaid the other. Send thy ſpirit, ſayd ſhe, and 
touch the child:lhe lent her ſpirite, the childe was in great 
paine and died. The witches werk hänged and confeſſed, 

Dan, UWhat is the chicfe thing which you alleavge' 
this fo? 

Sam, To ſhew how vnwilling the deuill was that the 
mitch ſhouts conſeſſe and bewꝛay things No doubt it chuld 
lame, that when the Gentleman was talking with her, hee 
a pyccFed to call her n fear leaſt ſhe ſhould confelle: 

any 


% _— 


997 


1 Is 


w2p:and whea ſhe had coaſelſzd,the deuill complapned vn- 
to the other witch, and made her chide her. 


Dan, The thing is as clear as may be, that he willing 


lie bewꝛayed them: and will pou imagine the contrat ic: 
hy did he appeare in a likeneſſe, but euen to enkoꝛce her 
102 to coufeſſe, both by abaſhing, and giuing the Gentiles 
man cinident notice, eſpecially, when he dꝛew her mouth a⸗ 
wie:? And why did he let on the other witch to monte her 
that ha) contelled to lend her ſpirit, but that he would haue 
the matter moꝛe open, and. bung them both to light. 

Sam, What ſgould moue hun to bewzay the witches? 
what could he gaiue by it: 

Dan, Jay, what almoſt doth he not gaine by it: Now 
all the country ringes of the matter. As it the witches let 
on their ſpirites to lame and to kill: and that the) do net 
meddle, but ſent by them e did knowe what power he had 
from God to afflict an, will deale by witches: he mas 
keth others affrawofthem, that ſo they may accuſe them. 
He findeth meanes to haue all diſcloſed. Bee mueth the 
witches to ſend him againft the gentleman: hee knowerh 
what he can doe: he returneth and ſaith there is kaith: As 
though God did not giue him power ſometimes to aftlice 
the faithfull? ©} as ik he could touch al that haue no kaith⸗ 
Tf he could, che greateſt part ok the wozld uld be deſtroi⸗ 
ed by him. Foꝛ they be very few in the wozld in compariſon 


which haue the true faith. Then muſt he be ſent ta the child 
that hath no faith: doeth not the kaith ok the parents holde 
Gods pꝛotection quer their infants as over themſeliies ? 


Here is Satans craft; either he did know by thinges byg- 
ding in the bodie of the child that it would at (ach time fall 
licke and die: and he would be taken to bee the killer of the 
childe, to beare in hand that He hath ſuch power wil doe 
when he is requeſted, ©! els he had power ginen him of 
God, and wold bying it about this wap. Ik he vid ſtrike the 

4 4 childe 


and when ſhe would not come awap, he dꝛew her mouth a⸗ | 


DEI fol: C 
thilde, do you image he doeth it at her pleaſure ? Oz doe 
you thinke he wonld neuer haut thought of any ſuch thing, 
but moued by her? Doe not all the armies of deuils goe a⸗ 
bout continuallie, ſæking whom they may deuour: Do they 
not waite where God wil giue them power to ſtrike: Shall 
we ſtill be ſo ſimple as to thinke that women neede to hire 
oz to intreat them to doe harme: Leoke vnto God, fox thoſe 
wicked ſpirits play all parts in the play, and delude both 
the witches and others. 

Sam. J will tell pon another thing which was done of 
late, A woman being ſuſpected to be a witch, and to haue 
done ſome hurt among cattell, was examined, and confeſ- 
ſed inderd, that ſhe had a ſpirite which did abide in a hollow 
tre, where there was an hole, out of which hee ſpake vnto 
her. And euer when ſhe was offended with anie, ſhee went 
to that tre, and ſent him to kill their cattell. She was per⸗ 
ſwaded co conkeſſe her fault openly, and to pꝛomiſe that ſhe 
wold vtter ly foꝛſak ſuch vngodly wales: after ſhe had made 
thts open confeſlion the ſpirite came vnto her being alone, 
Ah, laid he, thon haſt conkeſſed and bewꝛaptd all, A coulde 
teme it to rend the in perces: with that ſhe was affrapde, 


and wound away, and got her into company. Uichin ſeme 


few weeks after, he fel out greatly into anger againſt one 
man. Towards the tre ſhe goeth, and bekoꝛe ſhe came at it, 
Ah, ſaid the ſpirite, wherefoze tommeſt thou: who hath an- 
gred ther Such a man, ſaid the witch. And what wouldeſt 
thou haue me doe ſaide the ſpirite ? He hath(ſaith ſhe) two 
hozles going vonder, touch them o2 one of them, Mell, J 
thinke euen that night one of the hoꝛſes died, and the other 
was litle better. Indekde they recouered that one againe 
which was not dead, but in verie euill caſe. Here mee thin⸗ 
keth it is plaine: he was angry that ſhe had bewzayed all. 
And pet when the tame to the tre he let goe all dilpleaſure 
and went readily. 
Dan, Doe pou thinke all is plaine here, Jndeve here 
is 


i 


Witches and WILCNCTATLES, 


is that plaine dealing which deuils doe vſe, Firſt, doe you 
thinke Satan lodgeth in an hollow tre? Js hee become ſo 
la ʒy, and idle: hath he left off to be as a roaring lion ſæking 
whome he may deuour? hath he put off the bloody and cru- 
ell nature of the fiery Dꝛagon, ſo that he mindeth no harm, 
but when an angrie woman ſhall intreat him to goe kill a 
Cow 02 a hoꝛſe:Is he become ſo doting with age, that men 
ſhall eſpie his craft:pea, be found crattier than he is: Alas 
may there not be derp lubtiltie in theſe things: 

Sam. Doe you thinke there is nothiug but ſubtiltie in 
theſe things? 

Dan, Doe I think there is nothing but ſubtiltie:Tel 
me what you thinke, What other end can there be but ſub- 
tiltte? 

Sam, He may haue this purpoſe (as J| think the deuils 


ſtudie nothing els)to do harme. 


Dan. J doe not denie that:fo2 all his craft tendeth vn 
to harme. But what harme meane pou? 

Sam. Nou ſ& here he killed mens cattel. 

Dan. It map be he did: but how know pou that? 

Sam. You ſe he went at her requeſt 4 killed one hozſe, 
and almoſt killed the other. 

Dan. I wold be loath to adventure my hand vpon that: 
Foz who told pou, that he killed the one, and almoſt killed 
che other: 

Sam, The witch her ſelfe hath conkeſſen the whole 
matter. 

Dan. U Uho told the witch ſo⸗ 

Sam. Per ſpirit told her that he did it at her requeſt. 

Dan, Ye is a credible perſon, and kind hee was vnto 
her as it ſæmeth. | . 

Sam, Nap, but we ſce all things fell out accozding as 
ſhe confeſſed. 

Dan, How doe you meane? 


Sam. UUby, ſhe confeſſedher fault the ſpirite was an- 
Js grie 


[ : \ Dialogue concerning 


grie with her,afterward ſhe fell out with that man, and vp» 
on the&h1s horſe died, ſhe confeſſed ſhe ſent the ſpirit, how 
could all things fall out ſo fit: 

Dan. The ſpirite when ſhe came towar des the tre, aſ⸗ 
kedher,whertoze commelt thou?who hath angred the? 

Sam. He did fo, 

Dau. And doe you imagine that the deuill did lie there 
and knew nothing vntill ſhe came and told him: 

Sam. UUhp neded he aſke to her if he did know? 

Dan. Becauſe hee is ſubtill: foꝛ hee wought in her 
heart, and kindled her wzath, and pꝛocured the falling 
out betweene her and that man: he did knowe eyther that 
the hoꝛlſes at that time had ſomwhat in them which wonld 
bing death, oz els that the Lozd had giuen him power foz 
to ſtrike them: he moued and wꝛought in her heart to haue 
her come againe to the tre: he ſemed to be angrie that ſhe 
had cdfeſſed befoze,but was not, but ſought to haue things | 
knowne. Ik he had not knowne that the hozſe ſhould die, 
either by ſome naturall cauſe, which woulde then bꝛeake | 
fo1th,o2 by ſome power ginen to him, he wold not at this 
time haue meoued her heart to goe to the tree. And ik her 
wzath had without his ſuggeſtion caried her ſo karre, he 
could quickly haue turned her: fo2 great is the efficacic of 
Satans wozking in the hearts of ſuch, 

Sam, But J marked one thing which pou laid befoꝛe, 
; that it might be that God giueth ſometimes power to | 
the Deuill, euen at the ſending of the witch. | 

Dan, J ſay that God in iuſtice gineth power vnto 
Satan to delude, becauſe men refuſe to loue his trueth:but 
that maketh not that the deuill obtaineth any power to | 
hurtbecauſe the witch ſendeth, but the fault is in men, the 
ſinnes of the people giue power to the deuill: foꝛ God is 

| offended, and ſendeth (as S. Paule ſaith ) ſtrong vdeluſt, 

on. But haue you any mo examples to p2ooue that the De⸗ 
uill is not willing to haue witches bewꝛayed: 


Sam. 


* 9 —— — — —— ——— — ůů ew —— —.— . . 


— — 


yy = 


Sam, Jhaueheard of many ſuch like, but pou ſay all is 
but craft, and that he would haue men thinke hee docth all 
harmes that are done. 

Dan. TheDeuill would haue men beleene that hee 
doth all, if he could bzing it about: And therefoze, it is fox 
bis aduantage ik he doe hurte, to haue it not kept ſecrete, 
put openly to be made knowne. 

A. B. what ſap you then vnto this, a witch is appꝛe⸗ 
hended vpon vehement ſuſpition, and caried befoze a Ju- 
ſtice: he handleth the matter in ſuch loꝛt that ſhe confeſleth, 
as J heard of one not long ſince: her confeſſion was to this 
effect: She had two ſpirits , one like a Teaſill, the otber 
like a Pouſe. Thele, ſhe laid, did manie thinges fot her. 
Now, ſhe accuſed a woman about ten oz twelue miles off, 
whom (it map be )ſhe did not knowe, and pet could name, 
and not only that, but ſaid, che woman had, as it were, a li- 
tle bigge in her mouth, where the ſpirite did ſucke blood. 

Dan. Jt is a molt eaſie thing fo2 the deuill to tell wit⸗ 
ches, chat ſuch a man oz ſuch a woman is a witch, and hath 
this oz that ſecret marke vyon them. And within theſe few 
peares he hath by witches and cunning men, accuſed ſuch 
as were very religious and godly. Men muſt beware that 
they pꝛoceed not vpõ his teſtimony:he is not to be medley 
withall,no2 any medling which he vſeth , is to be taken in 
good part, ſeing he doth all in dep ſubtilties. 

Nl. B. J do take it, that the teſtimony of the deuill 
ought not of it ſelfe to haue any foꝛce with a Jurie, vnleſſe 
it can be pꝛoued by ſome other firme pꝛokes. But what 
ſap pou vntothis, a witch is condemned, and telleth at the 
gallows not onlie what ſhe hath done, but alſo ot whom the 
firſthad her ſpirit. She doth this in repentance, and euen 
readie to depart out of the woꝛlde. It is to bee pꝛeſumed 
that the will not in this caſe lie, noʒ accuſe falſly: Let it be 
ſome woman in another towne, whom: the ſaith, bꝛot git 
her the ſpirite. This woman * ſuſpected by ſome ot 

2 


Jia OgUe concerning 


her neighbours, appꝛehended and bꝛought to iudgement, 
and ſtifite denieth that ſhe is any witch, oꝛ that ſhe cuer de- 
liuered any ſpirite vnto the other which accuſed her, Nowe 
here is the queſtion, Js not the teſtimonie of the woman 
vpon her death, a ſufficient warrant fo2 a Jurie to find this 
woman guiltte 2 here they haue now the teſtimonie not of 
the Deuill to pzoced by, but of a woman, and though not 
vpon her oath, yet vponher death,which is no leſſe. 

Dan. This teſtimonie may ſeeme to be ſtfficient euen 
to warrant a Jurie to finde guilty, though it touch lite: but 
ik we look well into it, we ſhall ſee it is not. 


M. B. It may be vou take it to be infirme , becauſe it 
is the teſtimony but ok one. 


Dan. Map. not only in reſpect that it is the teſtimond 


but of one, but that it is the teſttmony of luch a one. 

M. B. J put the caſe of ſuch an one as doeth ſhew re⸗ 
pentance, who though ſhe hath bene bad, yet now may bee 
beleeued. 

Dan; J do not meane in that reſpect, as to ſap ſhe was 
a witch, and therefoꝛe not to be credited: but if ſhee repent 
neuer fo much, yet her teſtimony in this is weake, becauſe 
che map be vtterſy deceiued, and think ſhe telleth the truth, 
when it was nothing ſo, but ſhe'vtterlp deluded. 

CM, B. Doe youmeane, that: map make the other 
woman thinke,that ſuch a woman deliuered her the ſpirit, 
and/nener no ſuch matter? 

Dan. Y ea, that is mp meaning. 

, B. It is farre beyond my reach to ſ& how that can 
bee. 
Dan. You muſt cõſider that the deuil doth many waies 
delude witches, and make them beleeue things which are 
nothing ſo. In Germany and other countries, the deuilles 
haue (6 deluded the witches, as to make them bel@ue that 
they raiſe tempeſts of lightenings and thunders, Foz the 
veils do know when thele things be comming, tempeſts 


of 


A a 1 | 8 ** > 


of winds, and thunders,and kaine would he make the blind 
woꝛld belene that thoſe great wozks of God, be not Gods 
but his: And that is the cauſe whyhe coueteth to appeare 
in them. Thele deuils make the witches beleue , that at 
their requeſt they kil both men and beaſts, and many waies 
afflict, when as many of the s fal out naturally, which 
they would ſeme to doe, e reſt in which they haue 
power giuen to wozke, they ſtirre vp the witch but vnder a 
collour fo2 to ſend them. Theſe deuils make the witches 
in ſome places belæue, chat they are turned into the like» 
neſſe of wolues, that they rend and teare ſheepe , that they 
met together # banquet , that ſometimes they flie 02 ride 
in the ape, which thinges inderd are nothing ſo ,but they 


O y ſtrongly delude the fantaſies of the witches: Enen ſa the 


deuill can delude a pore woman with the likeneſſe of ano⸗ 
ther woman deliuering a mouſe oz a catte vnto her, by ap⸗ 
peaxing in ſuch a likenes. Oꝛ he can ſet a ſtrong fantaſie in 
the mind that is oypꝛeſled wich melancholie, that ſuch oz 
fuch a matter was, which indeed was neuer ſo. Men muſt 
be wile in theſe cauſes, oꝛ els may they ſoon be circumuen⸗ 
ted by the craftes of Satan and mawen into great ſinne. 

A. B. Ik it be thus, then how ſhould a Jurie condemne 
by their ver dict any witch: Foꝛ ſhe hath not killed, noꝛ the 
deuill ather requeſt, but maketh her beleue he did it at her 
requeſt, 

Dan. A witchby the wozd of God ought to die the death 
not becauſe ſhe killeth men, fox that ſhe cannot ( vnleſſe it be 
thoſe witches which kill by poyſon, which eyther they re⸗ 
ceiue from the deuill,o2 he teacheth them to make) but be- 
cauſe the dealeth with deuils. And fo if a Jurie doe finde 
p2oofe that ſhe hath dealt with veuils, they may and ought 
to find them guiltie of witchcraft. ; 2; 

M. B. If they find them guilty to haue dealt with de⸗ 
uils, and cannot ſay they ene. lam doth 
not put them to death. 


n 3 Dan. 


) 


| FLALOC t 


Dan, It wer to be wiſhed, that the law were m91e pers 
fect in that reſpect, euen to cut off all ſuch abhe minations. J 
Theſe cunning men and women which deale with ſpirites 
and charmes ſeeming to doe good, and dꝛaw the people in- 
to manifold impieties, with all other which haue familia⸗ 
rity with deuils, oꝛ vſe coniur ations, ought to bee rated 
aut, that others might ſe and feare. 

Ai. B. Pot will not haue the teſtimony of Deuils to 
beof any credit with a Jury, what ſay you then vnto men, 
chere be ſome which die, and take it vpon their death, that 
they are bewitched, and will ſap pꝛeciſely ſuch oꝛ ſuch haue 
done it. Foꝛ that is in che other point touching likelihwds, 

Dan. They are bewitched inderd, fo2 the deuill doeth 
delude their minds: fo2 you ſhall fi nde them able to ren« 
der no reaſon but onlie this, in their conſcience the partie 
is naught and they are out of doubt it is ſo. | 

NM. B. That map bee as pou ſap in ſome , but J haut 
knowne a woman mp ſelfe which many haue counted to be 
a witch, and many things haue fallen out where ſhe hath 
taken diſpleaſure. Do you not thinke that is a firm p2oofe? 
She denteth; but the things which fall out, doe manifeſt 
her to be naught. 

Dan. Pou multſhew the things, and thereby it will 
appeare. 

M. B. She fell out, oz els at the leaſt ſemed to be diſ⸗ 
pleaſed wich one, and he had an hogge died ſuddainlie. An 
other thought ſhe was diſpleaſed with him, and his hoꝛſe 
fell ſicke. A third could not ſit vpon his ſtoole at wozke. 
And within nine oz ten peares ſpace diuers others. One 
ſaw the deuill bigger than a cat with great eies. An other 
was haunted with a ſpirite. An other bꝛewing. the dzinke 
would not wozke in the fatte, An other ſawe a thing in her 
houſe as big as a lambe, playing in the window: Another 
in her grieudus toꝛment ſaw the woman ſtand by her all 
the night, whom ſhe luſpected to bewitch her, and 1 


— r TON | LENNET BU LHR. —— 0005 CC 


- 


witches and witchcrafte 


ſuch like, which were to long to recken vp. Jfſhe were not 
a witch how ſhould all theſe fall out ſo fit: | 
Dan; Jhaue ſh2wed already, that where Satan hath 
a witch to deale by, hee bzingeth it about, that in all ſuch 
things as he hath power giuen him of God, he will ſeme 
to do nothing but requeſted and ſent by the witch. In thole 
things which fall out in ſickneſſes, lamenes & death, vpon 
naturall cauſes, he wozketh in ſuch ſozt, as that he maketh 
the witch beleue ſhe doeth them. And this hee coueteth to 
haue bꝛeake fo2th by her confeſſion, Nom, where he hath no 
witch to deale by, he gaineth exceedingly, ik hee can wozke 
in the minds of ano a ſtrong ſuſpition ot any man a2 wo- 
man. Foz if it be once begun, hee purſueth it with all his 
power and cunning. Ik one bee vilited with grieuous to2- 
ment of ſicknes, and be fo ignozant, and voide of the faith 
in Gods pꝛouidence, that he imagine the deuill doeth it at 
the ſending by a witch, the deuill will delude him, and 
make him bel&ue that the wifchſtandeth by him. The man 
o2 woman ſuſpected cannot tome there: Mho then woz · 
keth that illuſion but Satan? Another is affrapde of the 
deuill to be ſent vnto him, by that partie whome he ſulpec- 
tethtobe a witch: and thus thꝛough want of faith in God, 
*giueth the deuill the moze power over him, either to hurt, 


— —— — 


02 to appeare vnto him. Fo Satan haunteth all men con- 
tinuallie, lacking all occaſions, and ne dech not to be ſent by 
man o2 woman. They be exceding blind which will reaſon 
thus, an euill ſpirit came and appeared vnto me, after J 
had angred ſuch a woman, therkoꝛe ſhe ſent him. Satan if 
he pate Dower to doe harme , oz knowe where ſomewhat 


— 


will follow, is hee not cunning to make the party which 
ſhall receive the harme, to fallout with ſome that hee may 
ſuſpect, and ſo the harme map ſem to come from that par⸗ 
tie: Againe, infeare, in the darke men take ſome litle cat 
oꝛ dog to be an vglie deuill. As not long ſince a rugged 
water Spaniell hauing a chaine, came to a mans dooze 

4 that 


Ma Ogue CONCt 


that had a ſaut Bytch , and ſome eſpied him in the darke, 
and laid it was a thing as big as a colt, and had eyes as 
great as ſau 49 Hereupon ſome came to charge hun, 
and did charge him in the name of the Father, the Sonne 
and the holy Ghoſt,to tell what he was. The dogge at the 
laſt told them, foꝛ he ſpake in his language, x ſaid, bowgh, 
and thereby they did know what he was. Ik he doknowe 
where harmes dofollow vpon naturall cauſes in men oz 
braſts, he laboureth either to make them offended , and to 
Þ fail out with the partie that is ſuſpected, oz at the leaſt to 
perſwade the of ſuch diſpleaſure conceiued, that the harms 
may ſeme to come fromthe ſame. If he do tozment inderd 
hating power to poſſeſſe the bodie, he will not ſticke to lie, 


and to ſ 1 ſuch a woman ſent him. 
M. B. And doeth it not fall out ſometimes, that as he 


ſaith ſuch a woman ſent him, ſo the woman vpon examinas 
tion confeſſeth lo much. | 

Dan, Pea, but J ſpeak where he hath no wttch to deale 
by, but purſueth the innocent with ſuſpicion vpon ſulpiti⸗ 
on, that men may be guiltp of innocent blood. lee tellech 
the trueth ſometimes, to the end hee may be credited when 
he doth lie. Foz let no man be ſo ſimple as to thinke, that 

he will euer tell trueth but koꝛ ſome wicked purpoſe. 

| At. B. Pet this of all the reſt ſemeth moſt ſtrange 
vnto me, how ſo many things ſhould fall out, as it ſemeth, 
after the diſpleaſure of a ſuſpected perſon, and ſome of 
them ſuch appar antly are done by Satan, as in dzinke 
not wozking,o2 in treame, when butter will not come, and 
yet the party ſuſpected is not a witch, 

Dan. Oh ſir the lleights of Satan incompaſſing ſuch 
matters be marueilous. Jknowe it is taken (as they ſap) 
to be dead ſure that the party is a witch, if ſundꝛy ſich 
ſhewes of matters do concurre. But how eaſte a ching is 
it for crafty deuils to compaſſe ſuch matters? 

N. B. Then you doe not thinke that common kame 
is 


— 


N * 


is ſufficient to warr ant the conſcience of the tro), to cow 
demne any. 

Dan, Experiente doeth teach howe heady nuich peo- 
ple are in iudging men 02 women tobe witches vpon cue- 
rie ſurmiſe. Amd the power imag ined to bee in witches, 
which bꝛedech a keare in man, cauleth them to bee crevu- 
lous, Manp go ſo farre, that it they can intice childʒen to 


accuſe their parents, they thinke it a good wozke, 
NI. B. Pou ſap the teſtimony of the deuill is not tob& 


bg | 
uus Tits. 


taken, although it de manikeſt that he doth many times tell 


the trueth , becauſe when he ſpeaketh the trueth, hee doech 
it of a bad purpoſe. And pou hold it the teſtimonp at the de⸗ 
uil, not ouly which he ſpeaketh when ante charge him, but 
alſo which the cunning men & women giue, in as much as 


they can lap nothing but vpon his wozd. $92eouer, vnles 


J miſtake pou, the teſtimony of a witch in many things at 
her death, is not as you ſap any other than the teſtimonie 
of the deuil, becauſe the deuill hath deceiued her, and made 
her belcue things which were nothing lo. Belives al this, 
vou wil haue likelihods and ſuſpitiong to be of no waight, 
noꝛ common fame and opinion ts meoue the conſcience of 
a Jurte , becauſe Satan is exceeving ſubtill in all theſe. 
Then how ſhall a Jurte finde a witch: What pzeofes will 
vou haue? 

Dan. Men are vpon their oath to deale, æ it doth touch 
life, if they doe finde any guiltie of witchcraft, This is & 
moſt waightie matter: whereupon it fulloweth , that there 
mult be eyther due p2ofe by ſufficient witneſſes oz els the 
confeſſion of the witch. For if the teſtimony be ſuch as may 
be falſe,as al chatcommeth from deuils is to be ſuſpected; 
02 if it be but vpon rumoꝛs, and likel;hovs , in which there 
map be excckding fleigits of Satan, as for the molt parte 
there be: how can that Jury anſwere befoze God, which 
vpon their oath are not ſure , but that ſo pꝛocckding they 


map coudemne the innocent, as often it commeth to paſſe, 
L A. B. 


aloe ere 18 


M. B. Pou miſtake one point, ſoz the finding of a witch 
guilty by a Jury doeth not in all cauſes touch blood. 

Dan, Jam not deceiued, foz where the Jurie hauing 
but likelthoovs doth find a man o2 a woman guilty but fo 
killing a beat, it caſtech them into pꝛiſon, ſetteth them vp ⸗ 
on the pilloꝛie, and not only diffameth them foꝛ euer, but 
allo if ſuſpition follow again and arraignment, it is death: 
you { then how nere a way they haue made vnto blood. 
But if it touch not blood, but the party eſcape with the im⸗ 
pꝛiſonment and pillozy,Eneuer againe fall into ſuſpition, 
how grieuous an in? amie is it, to haue bene condemned by 
Jury to be a witch 2 J ſpeake it where it is only vpon ſul⸗ 
pition, oz ſuchteſtimonte as is onelte from Satan, and the 
partie may be clære. 

AV. B. It falleth out ſometimes that vpon luſpition 
and common fame they hitte right, and the partie which 
would not confcſſe ap Ger vpon examination, any 
arraignment, being condemned doth conkeſſe it. 

Dan. Let it be graunted that the Jurp vpon Satans 
teſtimony, oꝛ ſuſpitions and common kame, ſometimes 
hitteth right which pet J feare is very ſeldome, that is no 
warrant befoze God fo2 men that are ſwoꝛne, to) are they 
ſwoꝛne to indict vpõ likelihcods, o vpon knowlevge in that 
which vpon ſound teſtimonp oz conteſſion they ſhall finde: 
I the party be a witch which is lulpected, & yet no pole, 
the Jury daeth moze rightly in acquitting, than in con- 
demning, fo2 what warrant haue they vpon their oath to 
goe by geſſe, oꝛ to find that which they knowe not? | 

M. B. J doe take it men offend grieuouſly, if vpon vn. 
ſufficient pʒołe they condemne the innocent, and eſyccial- 
ly, betaulè they are ſolemnly ſwoꝛne: but il they hit right, 
though it be only by contectures and likelihoods, J cannot 
ſe how they ould therein offend: they condemne not the 
mnocent they do che party no wong. 

Dan. J do not ſay they are to bee charged with any in⸗ 


10: 


mu 


Witches and witchcrattes. 


nocent blood. oꝛ wꝛong to the partie: but J aſke what war⸗ 
rant they haue beſoꝛe God d vpon t vath to touch blood by ſul ; 


pitons. Admit one be arraigned vpon felony , the likelt- 
hoods ar great that he is guiitie ofthe ſame, but pet it may 
be h& is clere. hat is a Jurie nowe to doe? Are they to 
venture vpon the life of a man by their oath by ſuſpitions? 
Let it be he is one that God knoweth to be guiltie, but no 
man tan diſcloſe the ſame, and therefoze they cleare him, 
doe they commit ante offence 2 Are they bound to find chat 
which they cannot know? What innocent perſon then may 
notbe condemned? 

Sam, IA pꝛap port giue me leaue a litle. J doe not wel! 
conceine this matter about finding out and condemning of 
witches. It is ſomewhat firange vntome which pou ſpeak 
J haue my ſelfe ſundzy times bene of the Jurie when wit- 
ches haue bene arraigned, we haue found them guilty vp⸗ 
en common fame, vpon likelihod 8, and vpon ſuch teſtimo⸗ 
nie as pou diſalow. They haue inded taken it vpon their 
deaths that they were innocent, but that neuer made me to 
doubt but that they were witches: ſoꝛ it is ſaide, the deuill 
bath ſuch power ouer them, that he will not ſufter them to 
conteſſe, 

Dan. What ould mee pou to thinke that the deuill 
will not haue them to confeſſe? you ſ& ſome doe confeſſe 
when they be examined, and when they be executed: The 
deuil hath power ouer the molt deſperat theues aud mur⸗ 
therers? 

Sam. Pea but he carcth not ſo nmch though the theuet 
and the murtherers do confeſſe, it maketh not ſo much a⸗ 
gainſt him, as when witches bewzay all. 

Dan. Mhat, doe pou take it he is loath to be diffamed 
02 hardly thought olf: Dtherwiſe what ſhould it make a⸗ 


gainſt him when witches confeffe 2 It is ſome ſtep to re⸗ 


pentance when theues and murtherers acknowledge 
their (mnes, and it he can hinder them, oz hold them deſ⸗ 
L 2 perate 


r 


— 


— _ - OO et A — 


3 


\ i LLOTUC concerning 


| | wb 

perate from canteſung he will. 47 is apparant that he cos 
ur teth to haue witches ty tonfelle . it makech ſo much loꝛ 
him Oe wauld haue men iudge that there be an. hundzed 
fo:ve m ne witches thay there be. He diſcloſechbyhis cun · 
ning men # women, and otherwile. Me coueteth greatiy to 


haue it thought that he daeth all, in tempeſtes, in firarge 


plagues and diſeaſes which light vpon man 62 beat, And 
fo2 this cauſc hee maketh the witch bel&tie and contfeſte 
maze than all that is, that at her requeſt he did that which 
he neuer did noz could doe: vnleſſe we will denie the ſoue- 
raintie, and pzoutdence of God ouer all. 

Sam. Ik Satan game ſo much by dilctoſing them, what 
ſhould be the reaſon that men are generally perfwaded that 
he caueteth to have the thinges kept ſecret, and fo will not 
let the witch confele, | 

Dan. It ariſeth kram falſe perſwaſions, and fro a falſe 
feare that witches doe ſo many harmes , and that at their 
ending and requeſt the ſpirites wozke all. Ik Satan be ſo 
kind and ſeruiceable to the hitch: how is it that he both not 
fetch ber ſome money?! Foz he knoweth where it is loſf, oꝛ 
where it lyeth in mens houſog. Me telleth the witch he can 
make a man lame. He faith he can kill an hoꝛſe. Yea at 
ſometime he will ſay he can and will (if ſhe will haue it ſo 
kill a man. As it it were in his power to doe many great 
thinges, and will not but requeſted. Let vs ſer if ali the de⸗ 


wis can letch one penp aut Ka mans houſe, wycſe horſe 02 


cow they ſay they haue killed, Zhe conuner apth de, can 
tomure him into anton, o2 cat of a man: let hinrernivre 
him but inta a mans cheſt i he can, to ich ſeme what from 
thence, It᷑ the deruls can nat do theſe thinges, then be aſſu⸗ 
red that euder they malte bat a ſhew cf killlug andlo ming, 
as they do in the moſt al ſich harm s. oꝛ ele where they og 
hurt, it is upon ſpecialtleaue from God and not ſrom the 
witches ple aſin e. And to whot purpoſe then cud oll ich 
ugglinas and the worn ſcrue, if they ſend be kept cloſe and 


not 


r 


| 
| 


* 


* 


WI 2 res! . 


not confeſſed. 
Sam. Pet ſoz my better ſatiſfaction giue me leaue with- 


out offence to {ay open ſome particulars which J haue ſen, 
J was of a {urie not many peares paſt , when there was 


an old w2:nan arrained ſoꝛ a witch, There came in eight oz 


ten which gaue eindence againlk her. doe not remember 
euery particular: but the chiefe foꝛ ſome thinges were of 
mall vue. One woman came in and teſtilied vppon her 
dath that her huſband vpon his death bed, toke it vpon his 
death, that he was bewitched, fo2 he pined a long time. And 
he ſapde further, he was ſure that woman had bewitched 
bin. He toke her to be naught, und thought the was augry 
with him, becauſe ſhe would haue boꝛrowed gue ſhilanges 

of bim, and he denved to lend it her. The waman tale her 
oath alſa, that ſhe thought in her conſtience that the old was 
man bu a witch, and that ſhe killed her huſband. There 


cam? ina mm that halted, he tolde a ſhzewde tale. 3 once, 
ſapd he, had both my legges ſound, This old woman and 1 
fell out aud did chide, She ſayd ſhe would be cuen with me. 


Within th2& daies aſter I had ſuch a paine in mp kne that 
I could not ſtand. And ener-ſince J go haulting of it, and 
now and then fle ſame paine , There came in an other, 
a little fellowe that was very earneſt, me thinkes I ler him 
pet. He toke his oath directly that ſhe was a witch: J did 
once anger her ſavde he, but J did repent me: foꝛ J loked 
fo:newhat wouldfollow. And the next night, J ſaw the vg⸗ 
hefſt ſight that euar J fam: 5 awaked ſuddaincly.out af Ry 
Qerpe, andthcre was me thought a great face , as biggo as 


they vſe toſct vp in the ſigne of the Daracens-hcad, loued 


full in my face, J was ſcarce mie owne mam two dapes 
after, An other came in, a waman and her child dued with 
greuous patar;, x he toke her aatq, that in her conſcience 
the killed her child. Then followed a man, and he ſipde he 
could not tell, but he thaught ſe was once angry with him 


becauſe the came to begge a letwpot-hearbes, and he on 
L 3 r 


= / e ou ltt ooo _ 


— — 
Ile OgUC CO! 


her: and p2eſently after he heard a thing as he thought to 
whiſper in his care, thou ſhalt be bewitched, The next day 
he had ſuch a paine in his back, that he could not ſit vpꝛight: 
he ſapd he ſent to a tunning woman, ſhee tolde he was bes 
witched, and by a woman that came ſoꝛ pot · hearbes. But 
ſhe ſapd he ſhould recouer ol it, and ſo he ſayd he did within 
ſome tenne daves. Then came in two oꝛ thꝛœ graue honeſt 
men, which teſtifled that the was by common kame accoun⸗ 
ted a witch. We found her giltie, fo2 what could we doe 
leſſe, ſhe was condemned and executed: and vpon the ladder 
the made her p2aper , and toke it vpon her death ſhee was 
tmocent and fre& from all ſuch dealings. Do you thinke we 
did not well? 

Dan. Nay what thinke pou 2 Are pou ſure ſhe was a 
witch? Bayit not be ſhe was innocent, and pou vpon pour 
cathes fhed innocent bloud⸗ 

Sam. It ſhe were innocent what could we do lefſe we 
went accoꝛding to the cuidence of ſuch as were ſwozne, 
they ſwoꝛe that they in their conſcience tanke her to bee a 
witch, and that ſhe did thole thinges. 

Dan. If other take their oath that in their conſcience 
they thinke ſo, is that ſufficient to warrant men vpon mine 
oath to ſap it is lo: 

Sam. Nay. but you ſer what matters they b:ought, 
which perſwaded them to thinkelo, 

Dan. Might not both you and they be deceiued in your 
thinking, oꝛ may you vpon matters which may induce you 
to m_ fo, pꝛeſent vppon pour oath that pon knowe it 
is ſo 2 

Sam. I witneſſes come in and (weare falſely , the Ju⸗ 
rie p2occeding acco2ding , their teſtunonie is cleare from 
blame, fo2 they goe but by teſtimonie of men ſwoꝛne. 

Dan. It witneſſes doe ſweare direaly that in their 


knowledge a matter was ſo 02 ſo, and ſweare ſalſelp, the 


Jurie is cleare which pꝛocerdeth accozding to their r 
mlelle 


5 


N 


2 


* 


Witches and witcheraftes. 


vnlelle the Jurie do percetue that their oath can not be true. 
But what is that to make the teſtimonie ſufficient where 
men doe but thinke, and can ſhewe no neceſſarie reaſon to 
ground their thought vpon e As let vs ſee in all theſe which 
one could pzaue that ſhe muſt nerdes be a witch. One ſaith 
her huſband toke it vpon his death that the killed htm , be⸗ 
cauſc he would not lend her fiue ſhillings: doth this pꝛwue 


ſhe bewitched him? Can the deuill kill a man at his plea- 


ſure, togratifie the witch 2 Js it not rather to be indged he 
dyed of ſome pining ſickneſſe growing from an cuil con 
ſtitution of body, which the deuill did know , and would ſet 
him at ſome variance with one old woman oz other, that {9 
it might bꝛerde ſaſpition ol witchcraft. 
Sam. Pouſe there were ſome things which could not 
be done but by the dell. 
| Dan, Jndcedethe great face which the man thought he 
ſaw, was the illuſion of the deulll. But is this a god pꝛoſe, 
the deuill appeareth to a man aſter he hath diſpleaſed a wo- 
man, thercfo2e ſhe ſent him? Doth not Satan haunt all 
men continu Alp, and would if he could get leaue from God, 
terrific them with ſuch illuſions f LAhen men are affraide, 
and haue ſtrong imaginations” What reaſon did the wo⸗ 
man ſhew which toke it vpon her conſcience that the olde 
woman killed her child, to pꝛooue that it was ſo 2 If ſhee 
thought ſo in her conſcience, and tenne thouſand moꝛe with 
her vpon bare imagination, was that a warrant fo2 vou to 
ſweare ſolemnelp that it was ſo 2 As fo2 the tellimony of 
the cunning woman that he was bewitched which had the 
paine in his backe, vpon the deniall of pot-hearbes , it was 
the tcfkimeny but of the deuill, as J Ch2wed befoꝛe. And 
what is common fame grounded vpon imaginattons?⸗ 

Sam. Then you thinke we did amiſſe do pou ? 

Dan. J would not vpon mine oath doe ſuch a thing fo2 
to gaine a kingdome. 

Sam. Jt map be ſhe was a witch, although the toke it 

L 4 vpM1 


AD ogue CONCerning 


ypon her death that ſhe was not. 

Dun. At is rather to be thought ſhe was not a witch: 

fo? what ſhould make her deny it vpon her death?! The de- 
wil had accuſed her to be a witch, fo; direct teſtimonie a⸗ 

gainſt her but his. 

$411. You ſap it was the deuill that told by the tunning 
wanan that the was a witch, 

Dan. And do pon thinke it was any other but Satan? 
Sam. Jdidnot at that time thinke it was the derull: 
but now I ler it could be none other. 

Dan, Then be wilcr hereafter, and ſoꝛie fo2 that which 
pon haue done, 


Sum. In derde J haue cauſe to be grerued if ſhee were 
not a witch. 

Dan, If ſhe were a witch pour warrant was ſmall 3 
but ſhe being no witch, you haue taken away both her life, 
and couered her with infamie, 

Sam. AJ was of an other Jurie ſince , and there was a 
woman indicted foz a witch, but not foꝛ killing any man oz 
child, There came in ſiue oꝛ ſtrc againſt her: the firſt was 
an old woman, and ſhe ſayd ſhe had diſplealed her, as ſhee 
thought, and within two oꝛ thꝛœ nights after as the fate by 
her fire, there was a thing uke a toad, oꝛ like ſome little 
crabbe fich which did crepe vpon the Farth, ſhe twke a bea⸗ 
ſome x ſwept it away, and ſuddainly her bodie was griped. 
An other fell out with her as ſhe ſapd, and her hennes began 
to die vp, vntil ſhe burnt one henne altue. a third man came 
in, and he ſavd ſhe was once angry with him he had a dun 
cow which was tycd vp in a houle, fo2 it was in winter, he 
feared that ſome euill would follow , and fo2 his liſc he could 
not come in where ſhe was, but he mult nerdes take vp her 
taple and kiſſe vnder it. Two oꝛ thi other came in 4 ſayd 
ſhe was by common fame accounted a Witch, We fornd 
her giltie, and ſhe was condemned to pꝛiſon, and to the pil- 
lo2te, but ſtode ſtiſte in it that ſhe was no witch, 


Dan, 


ib vo. + __ 


8 * 


_— 


— 


Aa 


R ET" 


W Ic 


- Is 


Dan, Andare you ſure ſhe was one? 

Sam. I thinke verily ſhee was one, although there be 
many of her neighboꝛs which thinke ſhe is none: fo2 how 
could thoſe thinges followe ſo vpon her anger: It [meth 
they were all done by the deuill. 

Dan, He is cunning that can tell that: let it be that it 
was the deuil which appeared to the old woman like a toad, 
02 like a crabbe fith, and that he did gripe her bodic ; doth 
it follow therefoze of neceſſitie that the other woman ſent 
him: He cannot turne him ſelfe into any likeneſſe vnleſſe 
God gue him leaue, as he doth in iuſtice permit that ſo he 
may delude ignoꝛãt perſons: No witch can giue him power 
to appearę vnto any in a viſible ſhape. He had this graun⸗ 
ted hin ir qm God, and Satan by and by will ſet anger, and 
then appeare, that it might ſerme it grew from that, 

Sam, Wee ſc he appearcth vnto witches, and con- 
lurers. 

Dan. Pea but we map not thinke he can at his plca- 
ſure take a likenes foz to appeare in, That he doth appeare 
unto witches and coniurers, it is graunted in Gods w2ath 
to the ende he may ſtrongly delude ſuch wicked people as 
will not heare and obey the voyce ol the Loꝛd Cod, Foz the 
deuils are chatned vp by Gods molt mightic power + pꝛo⸗ 
uidence, and in all thinges ſo farre as he letteth foꝛth their 
chame, ſo farre they p2ocede, one inch further they can not 
pzoceede, Where men loue darkenes moze then light, her 
hath leaue giuen him to do many thinges , Some he terrt⸗ 
ficth with vglep ſhapes, ſume he intileth with faire ſhewes, 
others he plapeth withall in liknes of a Weaſell, oz Bouſe, 
oz ſome ſuch (mall vermine, 

Sam. FJ thought Satan could appeare in what likeneſſe 
be would, and to whom he would, if the witch ſent him. 

Dan, Therein vou were much deceiued: fo2 the ſending 
by the witch can giue him no power, and if he had power, 


he would no doubt in all places appeare vnto many as farre 
P and 


Die 08 e CONCETrmL ng 
amd in ſuch ſo2t , as ſhould beſt ſerue his turne. LARS 
if he appeare vnto any man, let him thinke God hath giuen 1 
him leaue to noe thus farre with me, and let hun call foz 
faith to reſiſt him, and loꝛ true wiſedome that he may not | 
be deceiued no2 deluded by hum. 
Fam. Lint doth he not appeare ſometimes when the 
witches ſend him: 

Dan. Mhere he findeth it is graunted vnto him fo2 to 

appeare, he moueth witches to ſende him il he haue any to 705 
25 deale by: but if there be none, vet will he appeare, 4 deale 
ſo farre as he hath power giuen him. 

Sam, But what ſay pou to the womans hennes 

Dan, What ſhould one ſap to them when they be dead. | 

San J meane doe you not thinke they were bewit⸗ 
ched: 

Dan. Chꝛiſt ſaith, a Sparrow can not fall without the 
will of pour heauenly Father: and is not a hemie as god 
as a Sparroly? 

Sam. Nay Jam fully perſwaded by that which you 
haue ſapd, that the deuill can not touch any thing to kill oz 
to hurt it, but vpon ſpeciall leane from God. They tan giue 

him no power, che thinketh ſhe ſetteth him on, and it is he 
that ſetteth her on woꝛke. Let theſe things be no moze cal⸗ 
led into queſtion: but was it not euident that the deuill kil⸗ 

led thoſe hennes? becauſe aſter the burning of one henne, 
the woman had no mo that dyed. If Satan did it not, how 
could they ceaſe dying foꝛ that? Yon ſavd that he where hee 
bath power to hurt in ſuch bodely harmes, is willing to 
ceaſe, that ſuch wickedneſſe may be p2zaciſed. And then if 
this hurt were done by the deuill, is it not to bee thought 
that the woman was a witch , ſeeing it followed after ſhee 
was angry! Let it be that Satan hauing power to do that | 

be did, would be ſent by the witch fo2 a colour, and to mae 
it euident did ſet anger between her and that other woman, 4 
| - tamakementhinke that be would not deale, but intreated 


by 


he goeth to his woꝛke but lazely.He could kill a great heard 


- 


VYyY1ecnes anda vviItc Ats. 


by her being angry. And fo we could doe no leſſe but finde 


ber a witch. 

' Dan, Theſe be weake foundations to ſet ſuch a weigh- 
tie building vpon. Foz firſt it is not cerfaine that the denill 
killed thoſe hennes .1-Might be they had ſome infection 
which he did knowe would kill them, and he craftily bꝛing⸗ 
eth the matter about, maketh two women fall out ( which 
is the caſteſt matter of an hundzeth) enen vpon the dping of 
the hennes, that ſo it might ſeeme they were-bewitched, 
But pou ſap then, how could it be that vpon the burning 
of an herne, there dyed no moze, if the deuill did not kill 
them? Pay how can you tell but that there ſhouldno moꝛe 
haue died, the line henne had not berne burned⸗ 
What ir! there ſhould no moꝛe die, and thereupon 
moued the — of that woman to vſe that witchcraſt in 
burning a henne, that it might ſme that was a pꝛeſent re⸗ 
medie to dꝛiue away deuils: Oz put caſe he had the power to 
kill the womans hennes, eyther he is a weake killer, oꝛ elſe 


ad — — could he not 
womanhad ſiue thouſand hennes haue killed them all 
ö 
and then one, and ſo was ſcared away befo2e he had killed 
all : 3fhe had power befoze the henne b as burnt foz to kill 
why did he not then when they went about to burne an hen 
kill the rel 7 It map be he did not knowe what they went 
about, he was lapd ſoft in his potte of woll: and comming 
to kill an other henne, he was mette withall, he ſmelt the 
roaſtmeat, and was ſcared, 

Sam. Then vou thinke he did not kill thoſe hennes. 

Dan, What certainetie had pou that he did kill them 2 
Ponfoand it vpon your oath that he killed them, and that 
ſuch a woman ſent him and ſet him a wozke, and pet it is 


an —_ to one ber near hav power din to touch 


P 2 | Sam. 


1 rr, . W 1 


hren caſt re 11 re 


—_— 


\ 11a ogue concerning 


Sam. But vohat can vou ſay to the other? The man 
which could not chuſe but kiſſe vnder his cowes tayle? 

Dan. J ſay he was karre in loue with his cow. Let ſuch 
men learne to know God, x to expell fantaſies out of their 
mindes that the deuill may not haue ſuch power ouer che, 
foꝛ he woꝛketh in the fantaſies of mans mind, and the mote 
ſtrongly where they keare him, as it appeareth this man 
did. Satan did wozke in this mans minde many fooliſh 
imaginations, and to make him beleue he was bewitched 
he maketh him fall out with one that may be ſuſpected. 
And thus you Jurie men take your oath # condemne ma- 
ny innocent perſons, becauſe you belæue the deuill, # ima- 
gine that witches do that which they can not do, 

. B. J haue heard of many that haue bæne condem⸗ 
ned fo2 witches which haue taken it vpon their death that 
they were innocent. And ſundꝛy of thẽ haue had farre wea⸗ 
ker pꝛoofes bꝛought againſt them then theſe that haue bin 
mentioned. 

Dan. Pea that is it which J ſay, men do ſo little conſi⸗ 
det the high ſoueraignety and pꝛouidence of God ouer all 
things: they aſcribe ſo much to the power of the deuill and 
and to the anger of witches, and are in ſuch feare of them, 
that the leaſt ſhew that can be made by the ſleights of Sa- 
tan deteiueth them. The only way fox men that will eſchew 
the ſnares æ ſubtilties of the deuil and all harmes by him, 
is this euen to heare the voyte of God, to be taught of him 
by his liuely woꝛd which is full of pure light to diſcouer 
c expell the darke miſtes of Satan in which he leadech men 
out of the way. and to be armed with faith to reſiſt him, as 
the holy Apoſtle S. Peter willeth, ſo ſuch as doe kozſake 
this way are (ſeduced into groſſe erroꝛs into many abo⸗ 
minable ſſinnes, which carrie mento buen A mut 
now bite vou farewell. 

1 B. Ticonld be content to-heare moze, in chele mat⸗ 
ters, I ſe how fondly J haue erred. But ſ#ing ou muſt 
be 


V } " — ' 7 9s 


be gone, J hope we ſhall mete here ag aine at ſome other 
time, God kepe pou, 

Sam, Jam bound to giue you great thankes, And J 
pꝛay pou when occaſion ſerueth , that you come this way, 
let vs ſ you at my houſe. 

N. B. I thought there had not bene ſuch ſubtill pꝛac⸗ 
tiſes of the deuil, noꝛ ſo great ſinnes as he leadeth me into. 

Sam. It is ſtrange to ſc how many thouſands are ca- 
ried aw2y and deceiued, vea many that are very wile men. 

AA. B. The deuill is to craftie fo2 the wileſt, vnleſſe 
they haue the light of Gods wozd. 

The wife of dam. Hulband ponder commeth the good 
wife N. 

Sam, J would ſhe had come ſooner. 

The good wife R. Ho, who is within, by pour leaue. 

The wife of Sam. J would you had come a litle ſooner, 
here was one euen now that ſayd you are a witch. 

The good wife R. Was there one ſapd Jam a witch: 
vou do but teſt. 

The wife of Sam. Nay J pꝛomiſe pot he was in good 
earneſt, 

The good wife R. Ja Witch? J vefie him that ſayth 
it. though he be a Loꝛd. A would all che witches in the land 
were hanged, and their ſpirits by them. 

CM, B. Would not you be glad if their ſpirites were 
hanged vp with them to haue a gowne furred with ſome of 
their [kinnes. 

The good wife R. Out vpon them, there were furre. 

Sam. life why diddeſt thou ſay that he ſayd the good 
wife R. is a witch 2 he did not ſay ſo, 

The wife of Sam. Huſband J did marke his won des 
well ynough , he ſayd ſhe is a witch. 

Sam. He doch not know her, and how could he lay the 

is a witch? 

The vife of Sam. What though he did not know her⸗ 
did he not ſay ſhe played the witch that hette the ſpitte red 

Þ 3 hoat, 


— — 
LITALUS UL - 8 


hotte, and thꝛuſt it into her creame, when the butter would 


* 


not come⸗ 


Sam. Indede wife, thou ſapeſt true, he ſaid that was a 
thing taught by the deuill, as alſo the burning of an henne 
02 ot an hogge aliue, and all ſuch like deuiles. 

The good wife R. Js that witchcraft 2 Some ſcrip⸗ 
ture man hath tolde you ſo. Did the deuill teach it? Nay 
the good woman at R. O. taught it my huſ band: ſhe doeth 
moꝛe good in one yeare than all theſe ſcripture men will 
doe ſo long as they liue. 

AH. B. Mho doe pou thinke taught it che cunning wo⸗ 
man at R. . 

The good wife R. It is a gift which God hath giuen 
ber, I thinke the holie ſpirite of God doth teach her. 

Ni. B. Pou doe not thinke then that the deuill doeth 
teach her: 
he good wife R. How ſhould Ithinke that the De- 
uill doeth teach her? Did pou euer heare that the deuill did 
teach any good thing: | 

M. B. Doe you know that was a good thing? 

The good wife R. Tas it not a good thing to dziue 
the euill ſpirit out of my creame? 

Nl. B. Do pou thinkethe denill was affratd of pour ſpit? 

The good wife R. I knowe he was dziuen awap, and 
we haue bene rid ok him euer ſince. 

M. B. Can a ſpit hurt him? 


The good wife R. It oth hurt him, oz it hurteth the 


witch: One of them Jam ſure:;foz he commeth no moꝛe. 
Either ſhe cã get him come no moꝛe, bet auſe it hurteth him: 
02 els the will let him come no moꝛe, becauſe it hurteth her, 
Ali. B. It is certaine that ſpirites cannot be hurt but 
with ſpirituall weapons: therefoze pour ſpit cannot fraie 
noꝛ hurt the deuill. And how can it hurt the witch, you did 

not thinke ſhe was in pour creame, did you? | 
The good wife R. Some thinke ſhe is there, t there- 
foze,when they thꝛuſt in the ſpitte they ſap , Ik thou * 
ä cre 


| 


Witches and witchcrafts. 


here haue at thine eie. 

M. B. If ſhe were in your creame, your butter was 
not very cleanly, 

The good wife R. Pou are merrilp diſpoſed IM, B. 
I know p you are of mp minde, though pou put thele queſti- 
ons to me, Foꝛ J am ſure none hath counlelled mote to go 
co the cunning folke than you, 

M. B. J was of pour minde,butJ am not nowe , fo 
I ſe how fooliſh J was. J am ſoꝛie that euer J offended ſo 
grieuouſly as to counſaill any foz to ſæke vnto deuils. 

The good wife R. Why, AM. B. who hath ſchwled 
pou to day I am ſure pou were of another mind no longer 
agone than peſter day. 

The wife of Sam, Truecly goodwife N. I thinke my 
hul band is turned alſo:here hath bene one reaſoning with 
them thꝛer oꝛ foure howers. 

I he good wife R. Js pour huſ band turned to: J wold 
pou might leaſe all pour hens one after an other, and then J 
would ſhe would ſet her ſpirite vpon pour duckes and your 
gele, and leaue pou not one aliue. Will pou come to de⸗ 
fend witches? 

A. B. We do not defend witches. 

The good wife R. Pes, yes, there be tio many that take 
their part, J would they might witch ſome of thẽ euen into 
hell, to teach others to defend them. And you M. B. A wold 
pour nagge might hault a little one ol theſe dayes: ſ@ whe⸗ 
ther you would not be glad to ſ@ke helpe. 

1, B. I woulv ſ&ke helpe, J would carry him to the 
ſmith to ſearch if he were not pꝛicked oꝛ graueld. 

The good wife R. Tuſh pou laugh, It᷑ vou were plag- 


tied as ſome are, you wold not make ſo light account of it. 


M. B. Dou thinke the deuill can kill mens cattell, and 
lame both man and beaſt at his pleaſure: ou thinke if the 
witch intreate him and ſend him he will go, and if ſhe will 
not haue him go, he will not meddle. And pou thinke when 
he doth come, pou can dziue him away with an hoat ſpitte, 


T 4 0} 


Jie glue CONCernin 


| S 
oꝛ with burning a ltue henne oz a pigge. 

Ihe good wite R. Neuer tell me J chintte ſo, foꝛ you 
your ſelfe haue thought ſo: and let them lay what they can 
all the Scripture men in the wo2ld ſhall neuer perlwade 
me otherwiſe. 

NM. B. J do wonder, not ſo much at your ignoꝛance as 
at this, that J was euen of the ſame mind that you are and 
could not ſ& mine owne folly, 

The good wite R. Folly 2 how wiſe you are become of 
a ſuddatne ? J know that their ſpirits lye lurking, koꝛ they 
foſter them: and when any body hath angred them, then 
they call them foꝛth and ſend them. And looke what they 
bid them do, oz hire them to do, that ſhall be done: as when 
the is angry, the ſpirite will aſke her what ſhall J do: ſuch 
a man hath miſuſed me ſapth ſhe, go kill his Cow , by and 
by he goeth # voth it. Go kill ſuch a womans hens, downe 
go they. And ſome of them are not content to do theſe leſſer 
harmes, but they will ſay, gomake ſuch a man lame, kill 
him, oꝛ kill his child. Then are they readie and will do a- 
ny thing: And J thinke they be happy that can learne to 
dziue them away, 

. B. It I hould reaſon with pou out of the woꝛde of 
God, vou ſhould ſ& that all this is falſe which pou ſay. The 
deuill can not kill noꝛ hurt any thing no not ſo much as a 
pate henne. Tf he had power who can eſcape him? Would 
he tarrie to be ſent oꝛ infreated by a woman? he is a ſtirrer 
bp vnto all harmes and miſrhtetes, 

The good wife R. Wihattell you me of Gods woꝛde: 
doth not Gdds woꝛd ſay there be witches, and doe not you 
thinke God doth ſuffer bad people: Are pou a turnccote: 
Fare pou well, J will talke no longer with you, - 

M. B. She is wilfull in dede. J will leaue you alſo, 

Sam. Jthanke pon foz pour good companie, 


FINIS. 


