£cgal  Classic  Scries

VOLUME  OXE

GLANVILLE


Classic  Scries


QLANVILLE

Introduction  by  Joseph  Henry  Beale,  Jr.,  A.M.,  LL.  B.
I

LITTLETON'S  TENURES

Introduction  by  Eugene  Wambaugh.  LL.D.

BRITTON

Introduction  by  Hon.  Simeon  E.  Baldwin.

MIRROUR  OF  JUSTICE

Introduction  by  Hon.  William  C.  Robinson.

also
FLETA,  and  others.


14-6  A
&'1


e  !•


A TRANSLATION

OF

GLANVILLE


BY


JOHN  BEAMES,  ESQ.

•OF LINCOLN'S INN, BARRISTER  AT  LAW


TO WHICH  ARE  ADDED  NOTES


Multa  ignoramus,  qu:e  nobis  non  laterent,  si  Veterum  lectio
nobis  esset  familiaris.  MACROS.


WITH AN INTRODUCTION


BY


JOSEPH  HENRY  BEALE,  JR.,  A.M.,  LL.B,

PROFESSOR  OF  LAW  IN  HARVARD  UNIVERSITY


WASHINGTON, D.  C.

JOHN  BYRNE  &  CO.

LAW PUBLISHERS AND BOOKSELLERS
1900


COPYRIGHTED,  1900

BY
JOHN  BYRNE  &  COMPANY.


TO

SIR  SAMUEL  ROMILLY,

THE  FOLLOWING  WORK

IS  INSCRIBED
AS  A  MARK  OF  THE  HIGH  RESPECT

WITH  WHICH
HIS  ABILITIES, AS  A  SENATOR,

AND  HIS

TALENTS, AS  AN  ADVOCATE,
ARE  VIEWED BY

THE  TRANSLATOR.


A  TREATISE


ON


THE  LAWS  AND  CUSTOMS


OF  THE


KINGDOM  OF  ENGLAND


COMPOSED  IN  THE  TIME  OF  KING  HENRY  THE  SECOND


The  illustrious  Ramdph  de  Glanville,  who  of  all
in  that  age  icas  the  most  skilled  in  the  Laws  of
the  Realm,  and  the  ancient  Customs  thereof,  then
holding  the  helm  of  Justice.

Tlie  present  work  contains  those  Laws  and  Customs
only,  according  to  which  Pleas  are  determined
in  the  King^s  Court,  the  Exchequer,  and  before
the  Justices,  wheresoever  they  may  be.


INTRODUCTION.


BY  JOSEPH  HENRY  BEALE,  JR.,  A.M.,  LL.B.,  PROFESSOR
OF LAW IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY.

I.  RANULPII  DE  GLANYILLE.

RANULPH  DE  GLANVILLE  was  born  in  the  Suffolk
Stratford,  about  1130  A.D.  He  is  believed  to  have  been
the  son  of  Sir  Ilervey  de  Glanville,  Chamberlain  to  King
Stephen,  and  the  grandson  of  that  Ranulph  de  Glan-
ville who  came  over  with  the  Conqueror.  The  family
was  an  important  one,  owning  much  land  in  the  counties
of  Suffolk  and  Norfolk.  Glanville's  public  life  began
in  1164,  when  he  was  appointed  sheriff  of  Yorkshire ;
i\n  office  which  he  continued  to  hold  for  six  years.  In
1171  he  was  appointed  Governor  of  Richmond  Castle,
and  in  117-4,  sheriff  of  Lancashire.  The  Scots  having
invaded  England  in  that  year,  he  led  the  forces  of
Lancashire  and  Richmond  against  them,  and  (joining
the  sheriff  of  Yorkshire  and  his  forces)  surprised  and
routed  the  Scots  at  Alnwick,  and  took  King  William
the  Lion  prisoner.  For  this  victory  Glanville  de-
served, as  he  certainly  received,  the  credit ;  and  from
that  time  no  man  stood  higher  than  he  in  the  favor  of
King  Henry  II.  He  was  sheriff  of  Westmoreland  from

1175  to  1179  ;  sheriff  of  Yorkshire  a  second  time,  from

iii


IV


1177  to  his  death  ;  judge  of  the  King's  Court  in  1176,
and  Chief  Justiciar  in  1180.  He  was  also  employed  in
many  distinguished  public  services.  In  1177  he  was
sent  as  ambassador  to  Flanders.  In  1182  he  led  an
army  against  the  Welsh.  In  1184,  with  Archbishop
Baldwin,  he  was  sent  as  ambassador  to  Rice  ap  Grif-
fin, Prince  of  South  Wales.  In  his  next  "Welsh  expe-
dition, a  few  years  later  (again  with  Baldwin),  he
preached  a  crusade.  In  1186  he  was  ambassador  to
'the  King  of  France,  and  was  active  in  negotiating  the
peace  of  Gisors.  In  1189,  while  Henry  was  struggling
with  his  rebellious  sons  and  writh  Philip  of  France  in
]STormaudy,  he  was  sent  to  Canterbury  to  treat  with
the  Chapter ;  was  soon  again  in  jSTormandy  with.
Henry  ;  and  finally  returned  to  England  to  raise  an
army  for  his  master's  service,  a  work  in  which  he  was
engaged  at  the  time  of  Henry's  death.

These  great  offices  were  due  to  his  personal  merit
and  to  the  great  services  he  rendered  to  his  country ;.
but  they  appear  to  have  been  the  result,  also,  of  the
personal  friendship  and  affection  of  the  King.  He
was  one  of  the  witnesses  to  Henry's  will,  and  a  trustee
of  the  King's  bequest  of  5,000  marks  of  silver  to
certain  religious  and  charitable  institutions,  and  of
300  marks  of  gold  for  marrying  poor  free  women  of
England.  He  Avas  named  by  Henry  as  custodian  of
Queen  Eleanor,  and  as  treasurer  of  his  private  fortune.
A  pretty  picture  of  the  King's  feeling  toward  him
occurs  in  the  account  of  the  arrival  of  GlanATille's
messenger  in  London,  after  the  battle  of  Alnwick.


The  messenger  arrived  at  midnight  and  insisted  on
seeing  the  King.  Being  admitted  to  the  royal  cham-
ber he  boldly  approached  the  King's  bed  and  roused
him  from  sleep.  He,  springing  up,  cried,  "  Who  is  it  ?  "
"  I  am  the  messenger  of  Ranulph  of  Glanville,  your
faithful  subject,  and  I  come  from  him  to  your  highness
as  a  bearer  of  good  tidings."  "  Is  our  Ranulph
well?"  cried  the  King,  moved  less  by  the  promised
good  tidings  than  by  his  love  for  the  sender  of  them.
"  Mv  lord  is  well,"  was  the  answer,  "  and  he  holds

«/

your  enemy,  the  King  of  the  Scots,  a  prisoner  at
Richmond/'

Upon  the  death  of  Henry,  Glanville's  position  was
a  difficult  one.  Henry,  conservative,  though  a  re-
former, had  established  the  government  of  his  king-
dom on  a  foundation  of  law  and  justice,  and  had
created  an  effective  and  pure  administrative  machine.
The  new  King  appeared  to  have  no  sympathy  with
his  father's  principles  of  government.  He  was  rash,
radical  and  careless  of  regular  details  of  administration,
and  Glanville,  in  the  words  of  a  contemporary,  "  In
his  old  age  saw  the  King  doing  many  things  in  a  new-
fangled way,  without  wisdom  or  forethought."  He  was
present  at  the  coronation  of  Richard,  and  was  sent  by
him  to  quell  a  riot  against  the  Jews  which  disgraced
the  ceremony.  About  his  next  acts  we  have  different
accounts.  He  had  taken  the  cross  in  1186.  Whether
he  asked  and  received  his  dismissal  from  Richard  in
order  to  join  the  army,  then  about  to  start  for  the
Holy  Land,  or  whether,  as  another  account  has  it,


VI


he  was  removed  and  imprisoned  by  Richard  and
obliged  to  purchase  his  freedom  by  a  fine  of  15,000
pounds  of  silver,  we  cannot  certainly  tell.  At  any
rate,  he  set  out  for  Palestine  together  with  Baldwin,
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  his  nephew  Hubert,
then  bishop  of  Salisbury ;  the  three  were  placed  in
command  of  the  English  forces  by  Richard  (who  was
obliged  to  delay  his  own  departure),  and  Glanville  in
1190  died  before  Acre,  by  disease,  the  result  of  the
unhealthy  climate.  He  left  one  son  and  three
daughters,  whom  he  had  already  enriched  from  his
great  fortune.  He  founded  the  priory  of  Butley,  the
Abbey  of  Leiston,  and  a  hospital  at  Somerton.

Glanville  impressed  his  contemporaries  as  a  man
strong  both  in  body  and  in  mind.  A  man  of  integrity
and  prudence,  "  most  faithful  in  fortune  or  misfortune,"
"  Wise,  grave  and  eloquent,"  "  The  King's  eye ;  "  "A
name  above  every  name,  who  spoke  among  the  princes
and  was  adored  by  the  people."  He  was  a  man  wise,
just  and  charitable,  whose  fellowship  was  sought  and
opinions  valued  by  wits  and  by  scholars.  One  scandal
only  attacked  him.  lie  is  charged  with  falsely  con-
demning to  death  for  rape  Sir  Gilbert  de  Plumpton,
in  order  that  his  widow  might  be  married  to  Glan-
ville's  friend  and  steward,  Rainer  ;  Sir  Gilbert's  pun-
ishment was  commuted  by  the  King  to  imprisonment
for  life.  The  tale  is  quite  inconsistent  with  all  we
know  of  Glanville's  character  and  with  his  position  in
the  King's  affection,  and  may  safely  be  disbelieved.

His  family  shared  in  his  success. No  less  than  seven


Vll


of  his  near  relatives  held  high  judicial  position  under
Henry  or  his  sons.  Few  other  families  have  rendered
greater  service  to  England  than  that  of  Ranulph  de
Glanville,  ambassador,  administrator,  general,  judge
and  jurist.

[Incidents  of  Glanville's  life  and  character  are  reported  in  all
the  chroniclers  of  the  time.  Especially  valuable  are  the  accounts
in  Hovedeu,  Benedictus  Abbas,  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Newburgh,
Richard  of  Devizes,  and  Diceto.  The  fullest  modern  sketch  of
his  life  is  by  Professor  Maitland,  in  the  Dictionary  of  National
Biography.  Other  modern  biographies  are  those  of  Foss  (Judges
of  England,  i,  376) ;  Thomas  Wright  (Biographia  Britannica,
275);  Lord  Campbell  (Lives  of  the  Chief  Justices,  i,  19);  and
Professor  Gross  (Sources  and  Literature  of  English  History,
315).

Many  interesting  documents  bearing  on  Glanville's  genealogy
and  his  property  are  printed  in  Glanville-Richards'  "  Records  of
the  Anglo-Norman  House  of  Glanville."]

II. THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  TREATISE.

THE  following  "  Treatise  on  the  Laws  and  Customs
of  the  Kingdom  of  England,"  was  published  between
11 87  and  1189  ;  it  mentions  a  fine  made  in  the  former
vear,  and  it  is  filled  with  references  to  Henrv,  as  then

*/  «/ 7

King.  It  had  a  high  contemporary  reputation.  Copies
of  the  book  were  multiplied,  and  many  manuscripts
still  exist.  It  forms  part  of  several  collections  of  laws
made  by  contemporaries  of  Glanville  himself.  It  was
translated,  or  partly  translated,  into  French  imme-
diately after  Glanville's  death,  and  it  was  revised  and
an  attempt  made  to  bring  it  down  to  date  two  genera-


Vlll

tions  later. It  was  finally  superseded  by  Bracton's
completer  and  more  elaborate  treatise.

The  work  itself  is  anonymous,  the  manuscripts  stat-
ing only  that  it  was  composed  in  the  time  of  Henry  II.,
"  Glanville  then  holding  the  helm  of  justice."  Early
tradition,  however,  asserts  that  it  was  written  by
Glanville  himself,  and  that  fact  was  accepted  as  un-
doubted from  the  thirteenth  to  the  nineteenth  century.
Modern  scholars  have  expressed  doubt  of  it.  Little-
ton's objection  (in  his  "  Life  of  Henry  II.'1)  that  Glan-
ville could  not  have  written  the  book  because  he  was
not  in  orders,  may  be  dismissed  at  once.  The  greater
officers  of  the  administration,  whether  in  orders  or  not,
must  have  had  sufficient  Latin  to  dictate  a  Latin
treatise  to  a  clerk,  and  Glanville  was  particularly  com-
mended for  his  eloquence  by  more  than  one  contem-
porary. Hunter's  objection  (in  the  preface  to  his
"  Fines  ")  is  that  Glanville,  at  the  time  the  treatise  was
written,  was  too  busy  in  public  affairs  to  have  com-
posed such  a  work,  and  he  suggests  that  the  author
may  have  been  William  de  Glanville,  a  justice  in  the
next  reign  ;  who  was,  in  fact,  Glanville's  son,  and  (from
1186)  his  secretary.  But  this  is  the  merest  guess.
Professor  Maitland  conjectures  (for  a  rather  fanciful
reason,  perhaps)  that  the  author  may  have  been  Hubert
Walter.  Liebermann,  on  the  other  hand,  defends
Glanville's  authorship.  Certainly  there  is  little  ex-
ternal proof  that  Glanville  was  the  author  of  the
treatise,  though  it  must  have  been  written  by  some  one
in  high  position  and  repute  to  have  obtained  so  imme-


IX

diate  a  success.  The  internal  evidence  does  not  lead
us  much  further.  The  style  is  that  of  a  person  speak-
ing with  authority,  but  not  necessarily  the  authority
of  the  Chief  Justiciar  himself.  The  claim  of  Hubert
Walter  to  the  authorship  cannot  be  dismissed  without
further  examination.

Hubert  was  a  nephew  of  Glanville's  wife  ;  according
to  one  account,  of  Glanville  himself,  Glanville's  younger
brother  having  married  his  wife's  sister.  Whether
Hervey  Walter,  Hubert's  father,  was  really,  as  this  ac-
count has  it,  Hervey  de  Glanville  or  not,  it  is  certain
that  Hubert  was  brought  up  in  intimacy  with  Glanville's
family,  became  his  secretary,  and  was  regarded  by  him
as  a  valued  counsellor.  He  was  made  Dean  of  York
in  1186,  being  succeeded  as  secretary  by  Glanville's
son  William.  He  soon  became  Bishop  of  Salisbury,
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  later  Chief  Justiciar
and  Chancellor  of  the  Kingdom.  He  is  described  as  a
man  of  foresight  and  wisdom  ;  it  is  said  of  him  that
his  heart  was  in  human  affairs  rather  than  divine,  and
that  he  knew  all  the  laws  of  the  kingdom.  He  was,
however,  a  man  "  of  little  eloquence ; "  indeed,  one
chronicler  ridicules  his  Latin  style.

Did  Glanville  write  the  whole  treatise  ?  or  did  Hubert
Walter  write  it  ?  Or  did  they  collaborate  on  it  ?
Perhaps  we  can  reach  a  conjectural  conclusion  by  a
more  careful  examination  of  the  treatise  itself.

The  most  striking  feature  of  the  treatise  is,  that  it  is
based  upon  a  collection  of  writs.  Omitting  the  Intro-
duction and  the  last  book,  on  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  just


X


one-third  of  the  chapters  into  which  it  is  divided  con-
sists of  writs.  These  are  of  all  kinds,  directed  to
Lords'  Courts,  to  County  Courts,  and  to  Ecclesiastical
Courts,  as  well  as  writs  returnable  in  the  King's  Courts.
Later  writers  have  made  free  use  of  writs,  but  here
they  are  the  skeleton  of  the  whole  treatise.  They  fulfil
the  function  of  judgment-rolls  in  Bracton's  book,  and
of  decisions  in  Coke  and  later  writers.  The  collection
of  these  eighty  writs  must  have  been  a  work  of  several
years,  since  some  of  the  writs  were  certainly  of  rare
occurrence.  The  Chief  Justice,  or  his  clerk,  attested
all  the  writs,  and  either  of  them  had  both  oppor-
tunity and  reason  for  making  such  a  collection  ;  hardly
another  man  in  the  kingdom  would  have  been  likely  to
do  it.

A  large  part  of  the  treatise  is  written  in  a  crabbed
and  inelegant,  though  usually  a  clear  style.  In  a  few
passages,  however,  near  the  beginning  of  the  book,  we
find  an  elevation  of  thought  and  elegance  of  diction
often  admired  and  imitated.  The  Introduction,  in
particular,  and  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  second  book,
in  praise  of  the  assize  (which,  according  to  tradition,
Glanville  had  a  hand  in  inventing,  or,  at  least,  in
establishing),  are  worthy  of  a  man  "  sapiens  simul  et
eloquens  "  ;  in  sharp  contrast  with  other  parts  of  the
work,  which  indicate  an  author  who  "  omnia  regni
novit  jura,"  but  was  surely  "  non  eloquio  pollens."

The  first  ten  books  of  the  treatise  are  carefully
written,  the  commentary  is  full,  the  subject  well  de-
veloped. The  last  four  books,  on  the  other  hand,  seem


Xi

to  have  been  hurriedly  thrown  together.  The  propor-
tion of  writ  to  text  is  more  than  twice  that  in  the  pre-
ceding books ;  indeed,  in  the  book  devoted  to  the
County  Courts  (in  which  Glanville  had  presided  for
years,  and  must  have  become  as  familiar  with  the  law
and  procedure  as  with  those  of  the  King's  Courts),
there  is  almost  no  comment.  It  seems  possible  that  a
proposed  full  commentary  on  the  County  Court  prac-
tice, for  which  an  elaborate  collection  of  writs  was  at
hand,  was  abandoned.

The  exact  date  of  the  work  is  fixed  by  the  only  two
dated  documents — two  fines,  of  June  27  and  about
November  1,  1187.  Fines  were  then  novel,  and  they
were  described  carefully.  It  seems  likely  that  the
passage,  which  occurs  toward  the  end  of  the  treatise,
was  written  soon  after  the  dates  of  enrollment.  Both
fines  were  enrolled  in  Glanville's  presence.

We  may  now  conjecture  that  the  author,  or  authors,
of  the  treatise  had  for  vears  been  collecting  writs,

i/

either  for  preservation  as  useful  precedents,  or  possibly
with  the  object  of  composing  a  commentary  upon
them.  The  collection  finished,  it  would  not  be  a  matter
of  much  time  or  difficulty  for  one  who  knew  the  law,
writs  in  hand,  to  dictate  his  commentary  to  a  secretary
also  learned  in  the  law.  If  the  collector  was  Glanville,
and  the  secretary  Hubert,  we  may  suppose  that  the
actual  work  of  composition  was  begun  in  1185,  or
1186;  not,  apparently,  a  time  of  strenuous  labor  for
either.  Passages  of  particular  importance  or  of  espe-
cial interest  to  Glanville  would  be  composed  by


Xll


Lira  with  care ;  the  actual  form  of  the  remainder
might  safely  be  left  to  his  competent  secretary,  sub-
ject only  to  revision  by  himself.  In  1180  the  Dean
of  York  died,  and  the  succession  was  given  to
Hubert ;  and  Glanville  soon  set  out  on  his  embassy  to
the  King  of  France.  In  spite  of  this,  however,  time  still
remained  for  the  completion  of  the  work  in  the  rather
less  polished  form  of  the  later  books.  In  February,

1187,  Glanville  and  Hubert  were  sitting  together  in  the
Court  at  Westminster ;  and  from  that  month  to  the
beginning  of  1189  (with  the  exception  of  Lent,  1188,
when  Glanville  was  preaching  his  crusade  in  Wales),
both  appear  to  have  remained  in  England, without
serious  interruption  from  public  business. The  year

1188,  in  fact,  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  least  busy
of  Glanville's  official life; and,  until his time  was
absorbed  by  the  troubles  of  the  closing  year  of  the
reign,  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  a  continuance  of
the  work. The  last  hurried  chapters  may  well,  there-
fore, have  been  completed  in  1188.

There  is,  then,  nothing  against  the  early  and  persistent
tradition  that  Glanville  wrote  the  treatise,  and  much
in  its  favor  ;  though  most  of  the  actual  composition
may  have  been  the  work  of  Hubert  Walter.

[The  fullest  discussion  of  the  authorship  of  "  Glanville  "  may
be  found  in  Pollock  and  Maitland's  "History  of  the  English
Law,"  i,  1G3.  Reeves'  discussion  ("  History  of  the  English  Law,"
Finlayson's  Edition,  i,  254)  and  Foss's  ("Judges  of  England,"  i,
180)  are  also  worth  consulting  upon  this  point.  Lieberinann
("'  Einleitung,"  p.  73)  supports  the  theory  of  Glanville's  author-
.ship ;  and  in  the  "  Zeitschrift  fur  romanische  Philologie,"  xix,


Xlll


81,  he  gives  interesting  proof  of  the  early  popularity  of  the
treatise.  See  also  Professor  Maitland's  article,  "  Glanville  Re-
vised," in  the  Harvard  Law  Review,  vi,  1.

The  life  and  character  of  Hubert  may  be  found  in  the  "  Actus
Pontificum  Cantuariensium  "  of  Gervase.  Glanville's  and  Hubert's
itineraries  may  be  found  in  Ey ton's  '•  Itinerary  of  Henry  II."]


III.  THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  TREATISE.

"  A  TREATISE  on  the  Law  and  Customs  of  the  King-
dom of  England  "  is  the  earliest  systematic  treatise  on

t,'

law  written  in  modern  times.  A  few  collections  of  law
and  decretals,  like  the  Decretum  of  Gratian  and  the
"  Assises  of  Jerusalem,"  had,  to  be  sure,  been  published
earlier  ;  but  they  were  not,  like  this  book,  regular  expo-
sitions of  an  existing  system  of  law.  Bracton's  work
was  modelled  on  Glanville,  and,  through  Bracton,  Glan-
ville thus  fixed  the  type  of  the  modern  commentary
on  law.  An  imitation,  in  many  parts  an  exact  copy,
of  this  book  was  later  published  in  Scotland  under  the
title  "  Regiam  Majestatem,"  and  the  claim  was  vigor-
ously made  for  a  time  that  it  was  the  original,
Glanville  the  imitation.  This  notion,  improbable  on  its
face,  was  absolutely  disproved  by  arguments  set
forth  in  Beanies'  Introduction.

The  first  edition  of  the  treatise  was  printed  bv  R.
Tottel  in small 12mo, about  the  year  1554. Coke

«/

says  that  this  was  done  by  suggestion  of  Sir  "William
Stanford,  the  learned  judge  and  author.  The  second
edition  was  printed  by  Thomas  Wright  in  IGO-i.  The
text  was  corrected  by  the  collation  of  "  various  manu-


XIV

scripts."  This  edition,  was  exactly  reprinted,  omitting-
the  preface,  in  1673.  The  treatise  was  again  printed
in  the  first  volume  of  Ilouard's  "  Traites  sur  les  Cou-
tumes  Anglo-Normandes"  in  quarto,  Rouen,  1776.
The  last  Latin  edition  was  published  by  John  Rayner,
Svo,  1780,  collated  with  the  Bodleian,  the  Cottonian,
the  Ilarleian  and  Doctor  Milles's  manuscripts  by  J.  E.
AYilmot.  The  Latin  text  is  also  printed  as  an  appendix
to  Phillips's  "  Englische  Reichs  undRechtsgeschichte,"
ii,  335  :  Berlin,  1828.  A  collation  of  Glanville  with
the  "  Regiam  Majestatem  "  may  be  found  in  the  Acts
of  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  i,  133.  An  English
translation  by  John  Beames,  with  notes,  was  published
in  octavo,  London,  1812,  and  is  reprinted  in  the  present
edition.

This  treatise  is  more  than  a  mere  law  book.  It
is  a  monument  to  the  genius  of  one  of  the  greatest
legal  reformers  of  all  time.  Henry  II.  came  to  the
throne,  after  a  long  period  of  anarchy,  to  find  count-
less svstems  of  law  administered  bv  a  confused  and

i  c/

confusing  mass  of  popular  courts  and  feudal  courts,
lie  at  once  set  himself  to  bring  order  and  unity  out  of
anarchy  and  chaos.  lie  made  the  King's  Court  the
common  court  of  the  land  ;  he  determined  its  jurisdic-
tion as  against  the  church,  the  lords  and  the  [sheriffs  ;
and  he  made  it  the  guardian  of  a  King's  peace,  which
should  protect  high  and  low  throughout  the  whole
land.  The  establishment  of  peace  was  in  fact  the
chief  object  of  his  stormy  career.  Glanville's  treatise,
shows  us  the  method  he  took  to  secure  his  object.


XV


By  a  free  use  of  writs  running  from  the  King  or  his  x
Justiciar,  he  limited  the  jurisdiction  of  all  other  courts,
and  subordinated  them  to  the  King's  Court.  By  a
regular  system  of  removal  from  lord  to  county,  and
from  county  to  King,  he  secured  the  gradual  unifica-
tion of  the  law.  The  lord's  courts  had  administered
the  customs  of  each  manor  ;  each  county  court,  too,
had  its  customs,  all  based  upon  the  Germanic  law,  but
differing  materially  in  the  several  counties,  and  espe-
cially in  the  several  ancient  divisions  of  the  kingdom.
The  King's  Court  now  began  to  develop  a  common
la\v,  partly  Anglo-Saxon  in  its  origin,  partly  Norman,
but  molded  largely  by  Henry's  formal  or  informal
legislation,  and  tempered,  as  Glanville  several  times
asserts,  by  equity.

To  increase  the  influence  of  the  King's  courts  and  to
bring  them  to  the  people,  Henry  relied  on  an  already
existing  institution,  the  iter  or  eyre  ;  but  he  so  im-
proved the  system  as  to  make  it  almost  a  new  inven-
tion. The  Kingdom  was  divided  into  circuits,  each
made  up  of  a  number  of  neighboring  counties  ;  and
judges  were  appointed  to  ride  each  circuit,  holding  a
King's  court  in  each  county,  and  thus  bringing  every
part  of  the  Kingdom  under  the  direct  control  of  the
King.  Glanville  himself  became  one  of  the  first  judges
of  the  Northern  Circuit.

One  of  the  most  important  of  Henry's  provisions  for  >
securing  the  King's  peace  was  the  invention  of  writs
for  the  protection  of  peaceful  seisin,  and  the  preven-
tion of  disseisin,  even  by  the  true  owner. These  writs


XVI

put  an  end  to  forcible  self-help,  and  brought  every
legal  dispute  over  dispossession  into  the  King's  Court.
The  writs  of  novel  disseisin,  of  mort  d'ancestor,  and
of  darrein  presentment,  established  by  Henry's  legis-
lation, became  the  basis  of  the  land  law.

Another  reform,  of  even  more  far-reaching  conse-
quence, was  his  invention  of  a  more  rational  method
of  establishing  the  truth  of  facts.  In  place  of  trial  by
ordeal,  by  compurgation,  or  by  battle,  he  provided  the
assise  (soon  followed  by  the  jury)  as  a  means  of  elicit-
ing truth.  Trial  by  jury  in  the  King's  Court,  by  favor
or  by  right,  became  so  popular  as  eventually  to  de-
prive the  other  courts  of  their  litigation  ;  and  so  satis-
factory as  to  cultivate  in  the  people  of  England  a
respect  for  law  and  a  willingness  to  abide  by  its  deci-
sions that  have  been  characteristic  of  the  race  for
centuries.

The  doctrine  of  res  judicata  seems  to  have  been
adopted  at  this  time  as  another  rule  tending  to  the
preservation  of  peace.  When  Glanville  wrote,  it  had
not  been  full}'  settled  that  the  judgment  even  in  a
writ  of  right  was  necessarily  final ;  Glanville's  strong
opinion  that  it  was  so  no  doubt  settled  the  law  as  we
now  have  it.

In  the  work  of  reform  Henry  appears  to  have  found
in  Glanville  an  enthusiastic  and  an  able  helper.  This
treatise  is  full  of  praise  of  the  King  and  his  legislation.
The  peaceful  governing  of  its  people  is  a  great  object
of  regal  power,  it  is  asserted.  The  king,  who  loves
peace  and  is  the  author  of  it,  conducts  himself  justly,.


XV11

discreetly,  and  mercifully  toward  his  subjects.  His
will  is  law,  if  promulgated  as  such  by  the  advice  of
his  nobles  ;  that  and  reasonable  customs,  long  used,,
form  the  Laws  of  England,  which  may  usefully,  in
part  at  least,  be  reduced  to  writing.

IV.  THE  TREATISE  AND  THE  LAW.

IT  is  possible  from  Glanville's  treatise  to  get  a  rather
complete  picture  of  the  common  law  at  the  end  of  t he-
reign  of  Henry  II.  In  the  lord's  courts  were  regularly
brought  not  only  the  suits  of  the  villein  tenants,  but
all  suits  concerning  land  held  of  the  lord.  Suits  of  the
latter  sort,  however,  must  be  begun  by  the  King's  writ ;
if  the  lord  refused  justice,  resort  might  be  had  to  the
county  court  in  all  suits  involving  freehold  land  ;  and
the  lord  might  on  his  own  motion  adjourn  a  question  of
difficulty  into  the  King's  court.  The  county  court  had
original  jurisdiction  of  questions  of  villeinage  and  of
customary  service,  and  of  any  question  sent  to  it  by
the  King's  writ ;  and  it  had  jurisdiction  over  writs  of
right  removed  from  the  lord's  court.  It  apparently,
also,  had  jurisdiction  of  disputes  as  to  title  or  pos-
session of  personal  property.  The  ecclesiastical  courts
had  jurisdiction  of  questions  of  marriage  and  legitimacy,
of  wills,  and  of  disputes  involving  ecclesiastical
questions  only  ;  the  King's  court  would  prohibit  them
bv  writ  from  interfering  in  other  matters.

•J

The  procedure  in  the  King's  court  did  not  differ
greatly  from  the  present  procedure.  A  suit  was  begun
by  writ,  served  by  the  sheriff,  and  enforced  by  the


XV111

distraint  of  the  defendant's  land.  The  most  important
feature  of  the  procedure  was  the  elaborate  system  of
rules  governing  essoins  or  continuances.  By  a  skilful
use  of  essoins  the  defendant  or  tenant  could  prolong
proceedings  on  a  writ  of  right  for  years ;  the  fact  that
in  the  new  possessory  assises  few  essoins  were  allowed,
and  the  proceedings  were  therefore  much  prompter,
contributed  greatly  to  the  favor  with  which  they  were
received.  Final  judgment  in  the  King's  court  was  by
this  time  enrolled ;  and  the  method  of  conveying  land
by  levying  a  fine  was  in  full  operation.

The  law  of  real  property  in  its  essential  features  was
fully  formed.  The  whole  law  of  tenures  and  incidents
i  had  been  finally  settled ;  but  the  rules  of  inheritance
and  of  transfer  by  will  were  still  uncertain.  The  doc-
trines of  warranty  (now  obsolete),  according  to  which
the  grantor  of  a  party  could  be  called  into  a  suit,  or  in
the  technical  phrase  vouched  to  warranty,  and  thus
substituted  for  the  original  party,  were  still  of  the
highest  importance  in  practice.  The  modern  mort-
gage, i.  e.  the  grant  on  condition,  was  as  yet  unknown  :
Glanville's  mortgage  of  land,  like  the  pledge  of  person-
alty in  his  time,  is  a  mere  grant  of  custody  by  way  of
security.

The  law  of  personal  property  was  little  developed.
Doctrines  as  to  pledge  and  bailment,  derived  from  the
old  Germanic  law,  were  applied  in  the  county  courts;
there,  for  instance,  the  absolute  responsibility  of  the
bailee  was  still  enforced.  Through  the  writ  of  detinue
and  the  action  on  the  case,  the  King's  courts  were  soon


XIX

to  take  control  of  these  subjects,  and  to  establish  the
modern  law  of  bailments  and  carriers.

Certain  formal  contracts  were  enforced  by  the  King's
court.  The  writ  of  debt  would  lie  as  a  result  of  a  loan,
a  sale,  or  an  obligation  created  by  charter.  Redress  for
breach  of  ordinary  contracts  could  be  obtained  only
in  the  ecclesiastical  courts,  which  might  deal  with  the
sin  of  deceit.  Not  for  three  centuries  did  the  King's
court  work  out  a  doctrine  by  which  a  party  might  be
held  to  perform  his  simple  contract.

]STo  action  of  damages  for  tort  would  lie.  There
is  as  yet  no  trace  of  the  process  by  which  (working
from  appeals  of  felony  to  writ  of  trespass  against  the
King's  peace  and  actions  on  the  case)  the  King's  court
Avould  eventually  work  out  the  modern  Jaw  of  tort.
So  far  as  there  was  any  remedy  for  torts  it  was  in  the
inferior  courts.

The  King's  court  could  at  this  time  punish  all  felo-
nies except  theft,  jurisdiction  over  which  it  obtained  by
Magna  Charta.  It  was  a  long  time  before  it  obtained
exclusive  jurisdiction  over  felony,  or  took  control,  as
"  custos  morum,"  of  misdemeanors.

Such  law,  it  may  be  admitted,  was  rude  and  unsatis-
factory ;  but  it  was  a  long  advance  over  what  had
gone  before,  and  it  had  within  itself  the  germ  of  the
modern  Common  Law.

JOSEPH  H.  BEALE,  JR.
HARVARD  UNIVERSITY,
October,  1900.


THE TRANSLATOR

TO  THE

READER.


V/F  RANULPH  DE  GLANVILLE,  the  re-
puted Author  of  the  following  Treatise,
Lord  Coke  speaks  in  terms  of  the  highest
encomium.  He  informs  us,  that  Glanville
was  Chief  Justice  in  the  Reign  of  Henry
the  Second,  that  he  wrote  profoundly  on
part  of  the  Laws  of  England,  and  that
his  Works  were  extant  at  that  day.
"  And,"  continues  his  Lordship,  "  in  token
"  of  my  thankfulness  to  that  worthy  Judge,
"  whom  I  cite  many  times  in  these  Re-
"  ports,  (as  I  have  done  in  my  former)
"  for  the  fruit  which  I  confess  myself  to

vii


Vlll

1

"  have  reaped  out  of  the  fair  field  of  his
"  Labors,  I  will  for  the  honor  of  him
"  and  of  his  name  and  posterity,  which
"  remain  to  this  day  (as  I  have  good  cause
"  to  know)  impart  and  publish,  both  to
"  all  future  and  succeeding  Ages,  what  I
"  found  of  great  antiquity  and  of  undoubted
"  verity,  the  original  whereof  remaineth
"  with  me  at  this  day,  and  followeth  in
"  these  words  :  Ranulphus  de  Glanvilla,
"  Justiciaries  Anglice,  Fundator  fuit  domus
"  de  Butteley,  in  Comitatu  Suffolcice,  quce
"  funded  a  erat  anno  Regis  Henrici,  filii  Im-
"  peratricis,  decimo  septimo,et  anno  Domini
"  1171.  quo  anno  Thomas  Becket,  Cantu-
"  ariensis  Archiepiscopus,  erat  occisus.  Et
"  dictus  Ranulphus  nascebatur  in  Villa  de
"  Stratford,  in  comitatu  Suffolcice,  et  habuit
"  Manerium  de  Benhall,  cum  toto  Dominio,
"  e  dono  dicti  Regis  Henrici.  Et  duxit  in
"  uxorem  quandam  Bertam^  filiam  Domini
Theobaldi  de  Valeymz,  Senioris  domini  de
Parham  :  qui  Theobaldus  per  Chart  am


II


it


IX

"  suam  dedit  dicto  Ranulpho  et  Bertce  Uocori
"  suce  totain  terrain  de  Brochous,  cum  per-
u  tinentiis,  in  qua  domus  de  Buttetey  sita
"  est,  cum  aliis  terris  et  tenement-is^  in  libero
"  maritagio.  Prcedictus  vero  Ranulphus
"  procreavit  tres  filias  de  dicta  Berta  (viz.)
"  Matildain,  Amabiliam,  et  Heleicisain,  qui-
"  bus  dedit  terrain  suam  ante  progression
"  suum  versus  Terrain  Sanctam"  The  do-
cument then  proceeds  with  a  minute  accu-
racy to  trace  our  Author's  Descendants,
and  finishes  the  sketch  by  informing  us-
"  quod  prcefatus  Ranulplius  de  Glanvilla
u  fuit  vir  prcEctarissimus  yenere,  utpote  de
"  uobili  sanguine,  vir  insuper  strenuissimus
"  corpore,  qul  provectiori  cetate,  ad  Terrain

"  sanctam properavit,  et  ibidem  contra  ininti-
"  cos  Crucis  Christ i  strenuissime  usque  ad
"  necein  dimicavit."1  The  paucity  of  these
facts  may  be,  in  some  measure,  remedied,
by  consulting  the  Annals  of  our  Second

1  Co.  8.  Rep.  pref .


Henry,  where  the  name  of  Glanville  not
imfrequently  occurs.  We  hear  of  him
in  1171,  as  Fermour  of  the  Honor  of
Earl  Coiian  : l — in  1172,  as  having  the
custody  of  that  Honor,  and  the  Fair  of
Hoiland;2 — and  in  1174,  as  still  retain-
ing the  same  Honor,  and  accounting  for
the  Capture  and  Eansoms  of  Prisoners,
&c.  taken  in  War.3  In  the  latter  year  he
is  said  to  have  distinguished  himself,  as
the  General  who  took  the  King  of  Scot-
land Prisoner.4  In  1175,  he  still  retained
the  Honor  of  Earl  Conan,5  and  filled  the
Office  of  Sheriff  of  Yorkshire.6  In  1176,
he  was  made  a  Justice  of  the  King's  Court,
and  a  Justice  Itinerant.7  In  the  same
year,  he  accounted  for  Westmoreland  by
the  hands  of  Reiner,  his  Dapifer  or  Steward,
a  privilege  conceded  to  the  great  alone.8


i  Madox's  Exch.  439.  2  Ibifl.  203.

3  Ibid.  253.  4  Hume's  Hist.

s  Mad.  Exch.  297.  6  Ibid.  87.

7  Hoveden,  p.  600.  8  Mad.  Exch.  662.


XI

In  1180,  he  was  made  Chief  Justiciary
of  all  England,  as  we  are  informed  by  his
cotemporary  Koger  Hoveden,  whose  words
are  too  remarkable  to  be  omitted.  Hen-
ricus  Rex  Anglian  pater  constituit  Ranul-
plium  de  Glanvilla  summum  Justiciarium
totius  Anglice,  cujus  sapientia  conditce  sunt
leges  subscripts,  quas  Anglicanas  vocamus.1
The  Chief  Justiciary,  presided  in  the
Curia  Regis  next  to  the  King,  as  Chief
Judge  in  all  civil  and  criminal  questions  ;
and  governed  the  Realm  like  a  Yice-Roy,
when  the  King  was  beyond  Sea,  an  event
of  frequent  recurrence  in  that  age.  In
fine,  this  officer  was  invested  with  a  power
that  placed  him  far  above  every  other
subject.  No  sooner  had  Glanville  arrived
at  this  elevated  post,  than  he  exerted  him-
self to  restore  and  confirm  many  ancient
Laws  calculated  for  the  good  of  the
Eealm.2  How  much  to  the  satisfaction  of


Hoveden,  p.  600.  n.  40.  2  Mad.  Exch.  24.


Xll


Henry  the  Second  Glanville  filled  this
arduous  situation,  we  may  infer,  from
finding  additional  honors  heaped  upon
him  by  that  able  and  politic  Prince.  In
1183,  our  Author  held  the  place  of  Dapi-
fer  to  the  King,1  and,  in  the  same  year,
he  was  appointed  Fermour  of  Yorkshire  :  2
situations,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  not  incom-
patible with  that  of  Chief  Justiciary,  which
he  appears  to  have  retained,  until  the  death
of  Henry  the  Second,3  and  that  with  un-
diminished  honor,  if  we  except  the  im-
putation cast  upon  him  for  condemning
Sir  Gilbert  de  Plumptun  to  death,  but
which  seems  to  be  refuted  by  the  confi-
dence continued  to  be  reposed  in  him  by
the  discerning  Henry.4  Immediately  after
the  death  of  that  Prince,  he  assumed  the
Order  of  the  Cross,  and  perished  fighting


1  Mad.  Exch.  35.  2  Ibid.  225.

3  Leg.  Anglo-Sax,  p.  339. 4  Hoveden,  p.  622,  623. Note  10.


Xlll

valiantly  at  the  Siege  of  Aeon  in  the  year
1190.1

But,  whether  the  same  identical  person
successively  occupied  these  various  situ-
ations, and,  at  different  periods  of  his  life,
filled  the  rather  opposite  and  inconsistent
characters  of  an  able  General  and  a  pro-
found Lawyer — a  skilful  Courtier  and  an
enlightened  Legislator,  is  a  doubt  which
has  been  entertained  by  some  very  respec-
table Writers.  Nor  has  it  passed  without
a  question,  whether  the  present  Treatise
was  really  composed  by  the  person  whose
name  it  bears.  Lord  Littleton,  indeed,  is
inclined  to  infer,  that  it  was  not  written
by  Glanville,  but  by  some  Clergyman
under  his  direction.2  These  doubts  may
serve  to  evince  the  ingenuity  of  those  who
have  suggested  them,  but  they  prove
nothing.  When  the  various  situations


1  Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.  Justitia  ;  and  Plowden,  3G8.  b.

2  Hist.  Hen.  II.


XIV

Glanville  is  stated  to  have  filled  are  repre-
sented as  incompatible,  and  we  start  at
beholding  the  grave  Lawyer  divest  himself
of  his  robes  to  girt  on  the  armour  of  the
soldier,  we  forget  the  manners  of  the  age
when  Glanville  norished.  When  we  sup-
pose, that  because  the  work  is  composed  in
Latin,  it  was  not  written  by  a  Layman,  we
beg  the  question :  and,  having  assumed,
that  no  Layman,  whatever  his  parts,  what-
ever his  application,  could  have  been  suffi-
ciently skilled  to  write  such  Latin  as  our
Author  has  employed,  we  pay  but  a  sorry
compliment  to  the  age,  and  rather  too
hastily  conclude  that  we  have  proved,
what,  indeed,  we  have  merely  taken  for
granted.  When,  in  fine,  we  infer,  that
the  knowledge  of  Law  displayed  in  the
Work,  and  the  labor  consumed  in  com-
posing it,  are  no  less  inconsistent  with  the
high  and  elevated  station  of  Glanville,  than
incompatible  with  his  employments,  we
forget,  that  his  rise  was  progressive,  and


XV

"that,  as  there  are  but  few  things  to  which
a  truly  great  mind  is  inadequate,  the  pro-
duction of  a  small  volume  upon  that  Law
which  it  was  daily  in  the  habit  of  dis-
pensing, ought  not,  whatever  the  merit  of
the  work  may  be,  to  be  ranked  amongst
the  number.  It  must  not,  however,  be
concealed,  that  Mr.  Selden  mentions  a  cir-
cumstance which,  at  the  first  glance,  ap-
pears to  go  a  great  way  in  determining
the  question.  "  I  know  the  authority  of
"  that  Treatise,"  says  he,  in  speaking
of  the  present  work,  "  is  suspected,  and
"  some  of  the  best  and  ancientest  copies
"  having  the  name  of  E.  de  N.  which  I
"  have  heard  from  diligent  searchers  in
"  this  kind  of  Learning  affirmed  to  have
'"  been  sometimes  E.  de  Narbrough,  and
"  not  R.  de  Glanvilla,  it  hath  been  thought
"  to  be  another's  work,  and  of  later  time.
"  But  as,  on  the  other  side,  I  dare  not
"  be  confident  that  it  is  Glanville's,  so  I
41  make  little  question,  that  it  is  as  ancient


XVI

"  as  his  time,  if  not  his  work.  The  teste
u  of  the  precedents  of  writs  under  his
"  name,  the  language,  especially  the  name
"  of  Justitia  always  for  that  which  we  now
"  from  ancient  time  called  Justiciarius,
"  (and  Justitia  was  so  used  in  writers  under
"  Henry  the  Second)  and  the  Law  deli-
"  vered  in  it  tasteth  not  of  any  later  age." l
Though  the  latter  part  of  this  Extract
may  be  reasonably  thought  to  furnish  a
sufficient  answer  to  the  doubt  expressed
in  the  former  part,  the  Translator  cannot
but  observe  upon  the  singularity,  that  none
"  of  the  best  and  ancient est  copies  '  are
forthcoming  in  support  of  the  fact  they  are
said  to  prove.

With  respect  to  the  Work  itself  now
submitted  to  the  Public  in  an  English
dress,  it  is  said  to  be  the  first  performance
that  has  any  thing  like  the  appearance  of

1  Selden.  opera  omnia.  1669.


XY11


a  Treatise  on  the  subject  of  Jurisprudence,
since  the  dissolution  of  the  Roman  Empire.1
But  this  is  not  correct,  if  the  Assises  of
Jerusalem,  compiled,  as  we  are  informed
in  the  preamble,  in  1099 — the  System  of
Feudal  Law,  composed  by  the  two  Mila-
nese Lawyers  in  1150,  and  the  Decretum
of  Gratian,  published  about  the  same  time,
be  considered  as  Treatises  on  Law.  It
seems,  however,  to  be  unquestionable,  that
the  present  Treatise  is  the  earliest  and
most  ancient  work  on  the  subject  of
English  Jurisprudence,  from  which  any
clear  and  coherent  account  of  it  is  to  be
obtained.  Dr.  Robertson,  indeed,  informs
us,  "  that  in  no  country  of  Europe  was  there
"  at  that  time,  any  collection  of  Customs,
"  nor  had  any  attempt  been  made  to  render
"  Law  fixed.  The  first  undertaking  of  that
"  kind  was  by  Glanville,  Lord  Chief  Justice
"  of  England,  in  his  Tractatus  de  Legibits

1  See  1.  Reeves's  Hist.  Eng.  Law.  223.


XV111


a


et  consuetudimbus,1  composed  about  the
"Year  1181." 2

It  has  been  thought,  that  Glanville  drew
up  this  compendium  of  the  Laws  of  Eng-
land for  the  public  use,  by  the  express
command  of  Henry  the  Second,  a  conjec-
ture which,  Mr.  Madox  observes,  is  not
only  favored  by  a  certain  MS.  remaining
in  the  Library  of  Corpus  Cliristi  College,
Cambridge,  written  in  a  hand  of  the  age  of
Edward  the  Second,  in  which  there  is  a
Treatise  entituled  Leges  Henrici  Secundi,
agreeing  in  many  passages  with  the  printed
copy  of  Glanville,  but  also  by  the  manner
of  our  Author's  writing,  especially  in  the
Prologue.3  There  is  also  in  the  Cottonian
collection  a  MS.  of  Glanville,  which  bears
the  Title  of  Laics  of  Henry  tlie  Second.
But  Mr.  Reeves  informs  us,  this  manner


1  Robertson's  Charles  5.  Vol.  1.  p.  296.

2  Vide  Infra  p.  198.  Note  2.

3  Madox's  Exch.  123.  and  Note.


XIX

of entituling  Treatises  was  not  then  un-
common.1

The  present  work  appears  to  have  re-
mained in  MS.  until  the  Year  1554,  when,
as  Sir  Edward  Coke  apprises  us,  it  was,  by
the  persuasion  and  procurement  of  Sir
William  Stanford,  a  grave  and  learned
Judge  of  the  common  Pleas,  first  printed.2
With  many  peculiar  circumstances,  how-
ever, to  create  an  Interest  in  its  favor,  the
fate  of  the  work  has  been  most  singular.
Indebted  to  its  intrinsic  merit  alone  for  the
high  compliment  it  has  long  enjoyed,  in
being  looked  up  to  as  an  authority  from
which  there  was  no  appeal,  curiosity  has
given  way  to  an  opinion,  that  whilst  it
was  venerable  for  its  antiquity,  it  was  also
useless,  for  it  was  obsolete.  That  many
parts  of  it  are  obsolete,  it  would  be
idle  to  deny ;  but  that  the  work  itself  is


1  Reeves's  Hist.  Eng.  Law.  1.  213.

2  4  Inst.  345.


XX


by  no  means  so  entirely  obsolete  as
generally  assumed,  will  be  fully  evident
to  every  impartial  and  candid  Reader.
But  were  it  entirely  obsolete,  it  would  not
necessarily  follow,  that  it  would  be  useless,
the  terms  not  being,  at  least  in  the  science
of  Jurisprudence,  either  convertible  or  syno-
nymous, however  fashionable,  or,  more
properly  speaking,  convenient  it  may  be  to
esteem  them  such.  Multa  ignoramus  quce
nobis  non  laterent,  si  Veterum  lectio  nobis
esset  familiaris.  The  Law  of  Modern
Times  is  intimately  connected  with  that  of
our  Forefathers,  and  the  decisions  of  the
present  day  are  not  unfrequently  built
upon  principles  that  are  enveloped  in  the
almost  impervious  mist  of  far  distant  ages.
But  to  these  principles  must  the  Student
ascend,  if  he  would  merit  the  name  of  a
Lawyer;  and,  if  the  labor  be  severe,  he
must  reconcile  it  to  himself  by  reflecting,
that  it  was  submitted  to  by  a  Coke,  a  Hale,
a  Blackstone.  Led  by  the  soundness  of


XXI

their  judgments,  to  investigate  the  earlier
ages  of  our  Jurisprudence,  those  great  men
considered  nothing  useless,  though  it  possi-
bly might  happen  to  be  obsolete,  which
tended  to  enlighten  their  minds,  and  shew
them  the  fundamental  principles  of  those
Laws,  which  they  afterwards  no  less  admi-
rably illustrated,  than  ably  administered.
But  the  brightness  of  the  example  instead
of  exciting  emulation  seems  to  have  de-
pressed it:  and  Glanville,  Bracton,  and
Fleta  have  been  suffered  to  crumble  on  the
shelf,  whilst  Edition  has  rapidly  followed
Edition  of  those  more  modern  Authors,
who  have  advocated  their  cause,  by  draw-
ing so  deeply  from  the  rich  and  inexhaus-
tible mines,  which  their  pages  present  to
the  English  Lawyer.

It  remains  to  speak  of  the  Translation
now  submitted  to  the  Public.  Fidelity  has
been  the  principal  object  of  the  Translator.
If  more  be  demanded,  he  would  shelter


xxii

himself  under  the  high  name  of  Sir  William
Jones.  "  Elegance,  on  a  subject  so  deli-
"  cate  as  Law,  must  be  sacrificed,  without
"  mercy,  to  exactness."  Next  to  fidelity,
simplicity  has  been  aimed  at,  as  most  in
unison  with  the  original,  and,  perhaps,  the
best  adapted  for  transfusing  its  spirit  into
the  English  Language.  Not  that  with
these  two  objects  immediately  before  him,
the  Translator  would  be  understood  as-
conceding,  that  he  has  sacrificed  any  beauty,
any  elegance  of  expression  generally  abound-
ing in,  or  spread  over,  the  original  work.
He  could  not  sacrifice  that  which  never
existed.  The  style  of  Glanville,  destitute
of  every  grace,  and  dry  and  harsh  in  the
extreme,  professedly  aims  at  the  peculiar
qualities  which  characterise  it.  Stilo  vul-
gari  et  verbis  curialibus  utens  ex  industria,
ad  notitiam  comparandum  eis,  qui  hujusmodi
vulgaritate  minus  sunt  exercttati,  are  the
very  terms  in  which  he  describes  his  own
manner  of  writing.  So  successfully  has  he


XX111

accomplished  his  object,  that  he  imposes
upon  his  Translator  a  Task  not  altogether
unlike  that  of  acquiring  a  new  language.
Yet  to  these  difficulties  the  Translator
reluctantly  alludes,  for  though  they  may,
in  some  measure,  atone  for  those  errors  into
which  he  is  apprehensive  he  has  often
fallen,  he  is  conscious,  the  merit  of  his
attempt  is  not  to  be  estimated  by  its  ardu-
ousness,  but  its  utility.

%/

With  respect  to  the  Annotations,  it  was
the  Translator's  original  intention  to  have
confined  himself  to  a  mere  explanation  of
the  obsolete  Terms.  But,  anxious  to  render
the  work  more  extensively  useful,  he  has
not  unfrequently  departed  from  his  first
design.  Among  the  works  occasionally
referred  to,  the  Eeader  will  recognise  the
Kegiam  Majestatem — so  termed  from  the
words  with  which  it  commences.  This
work  has  been  sometimes  received,  as  con-
taining the  genuine  ancient  Law  of  Scot-


XXIV

land — sometimes  rejected,  as  a  mere  spuri-
ous fabrication.  Among  the  names  in
collision  on  this  point  are  those  of  Skene,
Erskine,  Lord  Kaims,  Houard,  Dalrymple,
Craig,  Lord  Stair  and  Dr.  Robertson.  Nor
has  there  been  less  dispute  whether  Glan-
ville,  or  the  Regiam  Majestatem  be  the
original  work.  But  this  question  is  said  to
be  satisfactorily  disposed  of  by  Mr.  David-
son, who  has  published  a  pamphlet  express-
ly on  the  subject,  and  has  proved,  if  it  were
necessary  to  prove,  what  is  rendered  indu-
bitable by  the  internal  Evidence  of  the  two
Works,  that  Glanville  is  the  original ;  ob-
serving, at  the  same  time,  "  that  Glanville
"  is  regular,  methodical,  and  consistent
"  throughout  ;  whereas  the  Regiam  Majes-
"  tat  em  goes  out  of  Glanville's  method  for
"  no  other  assignable  reason,  than  to  dis-
"  guise  the  matter,  and  is  thereby  rendered
"  confused,  unsystematical,  and  in  many
"  places  contradictory."  The  Translator
has  not  been  able  to  meet  with  Mr.  David-


XXV

son's  work,  but  is  indebted  to  the  preface
attached  to  the  last  Edition  of  Glanville
for  this  Summary  of  it.  "  To  this  observa-
"  tioii  upon  the  method  of  the  Regiam
"  Majestatem,"  says  Mr.  Reeves,  "  it  may
"  be  added,  that,  on  a  comparison  of  the
"  account  given  of  things  in  that  and  in
"  Glanville,  it  plainly  appears,  that  the
"  Scotch  Author  is  more  clear,  explicit,
"  and  defined  ;  and  that  he  writes  very
"  often  with  a  view  to  explain  the  other,
"  in  the  same  manner  in  which  the  writer
"  of  our  Fleta,  explains  his  predecessor
"  Bracton.  This  is  remarkable  in  number-
"  less  instances  all  through  the  Book,  and
"  is,  perhaps,  as  decisive  a  mark  of  a  copy
"  as  can  be.  The  other  Scotch  Laws,
"  which  follow  the  Regiam  Majestatem  in
"  Skene's  collection,  contribute  greatly  to
"  confirm  the  suspicion.  These,  as  they
"  are  of  a  later  date  than  several  English
"  Statutes  which  they  resemble,  must  be
"  admitted  to  be  copied  from  them  ;  and


XXVI


'  so  closely  are  the  originals  followed,  that
"  the  very  words  of  them  are  retained.
"  This  is  particularly  remarkable  of  the
"  Reign  of  Robert  the  Second,  in  which  is
"  the  Statute  of  quia  Emptores,  and  others
"  plainly  copied  from  our  Laws,  without
"  any  attempt  to  conceal  the  imitation.
"  These  Laws,  at  least,  can  impose  upon
"  no  one ;  and  when  viewed  with  the
"  Regiam  Majestatem  at  their  head,  and
"  compared  with  Glanville  and  the  English
"  Statute  Book,  they  seem  to  declare  very
intelligibly  to  the  world,  that  this  piece
of  Scotch  Jurisprudence  is  borrowed  from
"  ours."  *  Nor  is  the  enlightened  and  liberal
Historian  Dr.  Robertson  more  favorably
disposed  towards  that  claim,  which  some
of  his  countrymen  have  put  in,  for  the
originality  of  the  Regiam  Majestatem.
"  The  Regiam  Majestatem  ascribed  to
"  David  the  first  seems,"  he  observes,  "  to

1  Roeves's  Hist.  Eng.  Law  £23.


t.


u


,,


u


xxvn

be  an  imitation  and  a  servile  one,  of
Glanville.  Several  Scottish  Antiquaries,
under  the  influence  of  that  pious  credu-
lity, which  disposes  men  to  assent  with-
"  out  hesitation  to  whatever  they  deem  for
"  the  honor  of  their  native  country,  con-
"  tend  zealously,  that  the  Regiam  Majes-
"  tat  em  is  a  production  prior  to  the  Trea-
*'  tise  of  Glanville  ;  and  have  brought
themselves  to  believe,  that  a  nation,  in  a
superior  state  of  improvement,  borrowed
its  Laws  from  one  considerably  less
advanced  in  its  political  progress.  The
internal  Evidence  (were  it  my  province
41  to  examine  it)  by  which  this  theory  might
41  be  refuted  is  in  my  opinion  decisive.
'"  The  external  circumstances,  which  have
"  seduced  Scottish  Authors  into  this  mis-
41  take,  have  been  explained  with  so  much
41  precision  and  candor  by  Sir  David  Dal-
"  rymple,  in  his  Examination  of  some  of
the  arguments  for  the  high  antiquity  of
the  Regiam  Majestatem,  Eding,  1767.


-.1


•it


u


it


it


XXY111

"  -ito,  that  it  is  to  be  hoped,  the  contro-
"  versy  will  not  be  again  revived."  *

In dismissing this subject, it may  be

remarked  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Eeeves,  that
it  seems  unnecessary  to  contend  for  the
originality  of  the  Regiam  Majestatem,
whilst  a  doubt  of  much  more  importance
remains  unsettled — whether  that  Treatise.

/

as  well  as  the  others  in  the  publication  of
Skene,  are  now,  or  ever  were,  any  part  of
the  Law  of  Scotland,  on  which,  as  we  have
already  observed,  so  many  eminent  men
differ.  On  the  other  hand,  the  authenticity
of  Glanville,  as  the  code  of  Law  existing
in  this  country  during  the  Reign  of  Henry
the  Second,  has  been  admitted,  either
expressly  or  impliedly  by  all  the  English
Lawyers,  who  have  florished  in  the  long
interval  which  has  elapsed  from  that  period
to  the  present,  and  never  has  been  ques-
tioned, if  we  except  a  solitary  dictum,

1  Hist.  Charles  5.  Vol.  1.  p.  296.


XXIX

which,  as  it  equally  affected  the  credit  of
Bracton,  and  was  totally  unauthorised,  is
refuted  by  a  thousand  circumstances,  if  it
were  an  object  to  mention  them.1  But  to
return  from  this  digression.

Though  the  Translator  had  not  the  good
fortune  to  meet  with  Mr.  Davidson's  Pam-
phlet, he  was  more  successful  in  discovering
Skene's  translation  of  the  Regiam  Majes-
tatem,  deposited  in  Lincoln's  Inn  Library.
The  Translator  intended  to  have  noticed
such  parts  of  the  Regiam  Majestatem,  as
coincided  with  Glanville.  But,  after  having,
with  some  attention,  perused  the  former
Book,  he  found  the  similarity  between  the
two  works  so  very  general,  and  the  corres-
pondence so  exact,  that  the  Regiam  Majes-
tatem might  frequently  be  taken  as  a  verbal
Translation  of  Glanville,  or,  at  least,  as
another  Edition  of  the  same  Treatise,  in

1  Plowd.  357.


XXX

which  the  writer  had made some slight
additions  and  alterations, and had capri-
ciously amused  himself  in contriving an
arrangement  totally  different, though  far
less  happy  and  systematical. The Trans-
lator has, therefore, generally contented
himself with noticing those deviations
between  the  two  works,  which  were  more
immediately  relevant  to  his  subjects. Nor
has  he  always  stopped  here,  but  has  availed
himself  of  the  Regiam  Majestatem,  when-
ever it  was  less  ambiguous,  or  more  decided
than  Glanville,  which  from  the  very  circum-
stance of  its  being  a  posterior  publication,
it  sometimes  naturally  will  happen  to  be.
In addition to the Eegiam Majestatem,
reference has been occasionally  made  to
the  Grand  Custumary  of  Normandy,  Brae-
ton, Fleta, Britton, Coke, Hale, &c. &c.
Some  of  these references serve  to  corro-
borate— some  to illustrate  the  Text  :  some
tend  to  shew  that  a  Law  was  not  peculiar
to  this  Country,  and  some  that  a  similar


XXXI

Rule  has  been  adopted  even  in  Modern
Times  by  a  neighboring  State.  In  consult-
ing the  Laws  of  that  state,  and  noticing
those  instances  of  strong  or  faint  resem-
blance between  them  and  the  Code  of  Henry
the  Second,  the  Translator  acted  in  defer-
ence to  the  suggestions  of  a  Gentleman,
who,  though  possessed  of  the  most  profound
legal  knowledge,  is  yet  more  entitled  to  our
admiration  for  his  singular  liberality  of  sen-
timent, and  urbanity  of  manners.  If  the
more  enlightened  mind  derive  no  benefit
from  the  plan  which  has  been  adopted  in
the  notes,  and  anticipate  the  Result ;  yet,  it
is  hoped,  the  Student  may  receive  some
advantage  from  it.  But,  if  the  Translator
has  been  too  diffuse  in  some  instances,  he
has,  on  other  occasions,  contented  himself
with  a  bare  reference.  He  has  been  averse
to  swell  the  Notes,  where  a  bare  citation
would  serve  to  direct  the  Student,  if  disposed
to  extend  his  inquiries.  In  addition  to  the
Translator's  own  Notes,  the  Reader  is  fur-


XXX11

4

nished  with  a  few  annotations  extracted
from  a  copy  of  Glanville,  formerly  belonging

to  Mr.  Justice  Aland,  and  now  deposited  in.

•

the  collection  of  the  Royal  Institution.
Yet,  should  it  be  observed,  it  is  not  per-
fectly clear  whether  these  annotations  were
made  by  that  learned  Judge,  or  by  the
Reverend  Mr.  Elstob,  a  gentleman  deeply
versed  in  Anglo-Saxon  Literature.  By
way  of  distinction,  these  Annotations  are
particularised  by  (Al.  MS.)

In  order  to  render  the  work  as  complete
as  the  limited  ability  of  the  Translator  would
allow,  he  has  subjoined  the  more  important,
and  only  the  more  important  various  Read-
ings, as  furnished  by  the  Bodleian,  the  Cot-
ton ian,  the  Harleian  and  Dr.  Milles's  MSS.
The  MS.  of  Glanville  deposited  in  Lincoln's,
Inn  Library  has  not  been  consulted.

The  Translator  concludes  these  cursory
observations  with  a  brief  summary  of  the


XXX111


contents  of  Glanville,  availing  himself,  in
some  measure,  of  that  contained  in  Mr.
Reeves's  History.

Our  Author  in  general  confines  himself
to  such  matters  only  as  were  the  objects
of  jurisdiction  in  the  Curia  Regis,  and
divides  his  work  into  fourteen  Books.
The  two  first  of  which  treat  of  the  Writ  of
Eight,  when  originally  commenced  in  the
Curia  Regis,  and  of  all  its  stages,  the
Summons  -  -  Essoins  -  -  Appearance  -  -  Plead-
ings— Duel  or  Grand  Assise — Judgment
and  Execution.  The  Third  speaks  of  vouch-
ing to  Warranty,  which  with  the  two
former  Books,  comprises  a  lucid  account  of
the  proceedings  in  a  Writ  of  Right  for  the
recovery  of  Land.  The  fourth  Book  is
employed  upon  rights  of  Advowson,  the  fifth
upon  Villenage,  and  the  sixth  upon  Dower.
The  seventh  treats  upon  Alienation,  Des-
cents, Succession,  Wardship,  and  Testa-
ments. The  eighth  is  upon  final  Concords,


XXXIV

and  Records  in  general.  The  ninth  is  upon
Homage,  Relief,  Fealty,  Services,  and  Pur-
prestures.  The  tenth  treats  of  Debts  and
matters  of  Contract ;  and  the  eleventh  upon
Attornies.  Having  thus  disposed  of  Actions
commenced  originally  in  the  Curia  Regis,
our  author,  in  his  twelfth  Book,  speaks  of
Writs  of  Right,  when  brought  in  the  Lord's
Court,  and  the  manner  of  removing  them
from  thence  to  the  County  Court  and  Curia,
Regis,  which  leads  him  to  mention  some
other  Writs  determinable  before  the  Sheriff.
In  his  thirteenth  Book,  he  treats  of  Assises,
and  Disseisins.  The  last  Book  is  wholly
taken  up  in  discussing  the  doctrine  of  Pleas

of  the  Crown.

JOHN  BEAMES.

It  was  intended  to  have  added  the  names
of  all  those  Gentlemen,  who  subscribed  for
the  work.  But  the  list  having  been  con-
sumed in  the  fire  which  destroyed  Mr.  Reed's
Premises,  and  many  of  the  names  having
been  thereby  lost,  it  is  become  impossible.


PREFACE.


ry^

X  HE Regal  Power  should  not  merely  be

decorated  with  Arms  to  restrain  Rebels
and  Nations  making  head  against  it  and  its
realm,  but  ought  likewise  to  be  adorned
with  Laws  for  the  peaceful  governing  of  its.
Subjects  and  its  People.1  With  such  fell-,
city  may  our  Most  Illustrious  King  conduct
himself,  in  the  periods  both  of  Peace  and
of  War,  by  the  force  of  his  right  hand,
crushing  the  insolence  of  the  violent  and
intractable,  and,  with  the  sceptre  of  Equity,
moderating  his  Justice  towards  the  humble
and  obedient,  that  as  he  may  be  always

1  The  introductory  part  of  this  Preface  is  in  imitation  of
that  of  Justinian's  Institutes,  and  seems  strangely  to  have
taken  the  fancy  of  the  law  writers  of  the  age,  since  Glan-
ville  is  more  or  less  followed  by  the  Regiam  Majestatem,

Bracton  and  Fleta.

XXXV


XXXVI

victorious  in  subduing  his  Enemies,  so  may
he  on  all  occasions  shew  himself  impartially
just  in  the  government  of  his  Subjects.
But  how  gracefully — how  vigorously-
how  skilfully,  in  counteracting  the  malice
of  his  Foes,  our  Most  Excellent  King  has,
in  the  season  of  hostility,  conducted  his
Arms,  is  manifest  to  all :  since  his  fame
has  now  spread  over  the  whole  World,  and
his  splendid  actions  reached  even  the
confines  of  the  Globe.  How  justly — how
discreetly — and  how  mercifully — he,  who
loves  Peace  and  is  the  Author  of  it,  has
conducted  himself  towards  his  subjects  in
the  time  of  Peace,  is  evident,  since  the
Court  of  his  Highness  is  regulated  with  so
strict  a  regard  to  Equity,  that  none  of  the
Judges  have  so  hardened  a  front,  or  so
rash  a  presumption,  as  to  dare  to  deviate,
however  slightly,  from  the  path  of  Justice,
or  to  utter  a  sentence,  in  any  measure
contrary  to  the  truth.  For  there,  indeed,
the  power  of  his  adversary  oppresses  not


XXXV11

the  poor  Man,  nor  does  either  the  favor
or  credit  of  another's  Friends,  drive  any
person  from  the  seat  of  Judgment.  Since
each  decision  is  governed  by  the  Laws  of
the  Realm,  and  by  those  Customs  which,
founded  on  reason  in  their  introduction,  have
for  a  long  time  prevailed  ;  and,  what  is  still
more  laudable,  our  King  disdains  not  to  avail
himself  of  the  advice  of  such  men  (although
his  subjects)  whom,  in  gravity  of  manners,
in  skill  in  the  Law  and  Customs  of  the
Realm,  in  the  superiority  of  their  wisdom
and  Eloquence,  he  knows  to  surpass  others,
and  whom  he  has  found  by  experience  most
prompt,  as  far  as  consistent  with  reason,  in
the  administration  of  Justice,  by  determin-
ing Causes  and  ending  suits,  acting  now
with  more  severity,  and  now  with  more
lenity,  as  they  see  most  expedient.1  For  the


1  "  On  these  last  words,"  says  Lord  Littleton,  "  I  would
<l  observe,  that,  as  in  those  days  there  was  was  no  distinct
•"  Court  of  Equity,  the  Judges  of  the  King's  Court  had
"  probably  a  power  of  mitigating  in  some  cases  the  rigour


XXXV111

English  Laws,  although  not  written,  may  as
it  should  seem,  and  that  without  any  absur-
dity, be  termed  Laws,  (since  this  itself  is  a
Law — that  which  pleases  the  Prince  has  the
force  of  Law1)  I  mean,  those  Laws  which
it  is  evident  were  promulgated  by  the  ad-
vice of  the  Nobles  and  the  authority  of  the
Prince,  concerning  doubts  to  be  settled  in
their  Assembly.  For,  if  from  the  mere
want  of  writing  only,  they  should  not  be
considered  as  Laws,  then,  unquestionably,
writing  would  seem  to  confer  more  authority


"  of  the  Law."  (Hist,  of  Life  Hen.  2.  Vol.  3.  p.  315.  Oct.  Ed.)
A  strong  instance  in  point  the  Reader  will  find  in  L.  7.  c.  1.  or
the  present  Translation  p.  149.

1  This  principle,  the  very  basis  of  despotism  occurs  in  the
Roman  code.  (Justin.  Iiistit.  L.  1.  t.  2.  s.  6.)  It  may
very  justly  be  questioned,  whether  it  is  not  here  cited
ironically.  At  all  events,  the  passage  of  our  text  can
scarcely  warrant  the  conclusion  the  celebrated  M.  Houard
has  drawn  from  it.  But  the  Reader  shall  have  his  own
words — Le  Texte  de  noire  Auteur  prouve  qiCapres  la  conquete,
les  Anglois  regurent,  de  Guillaume  le  Bdtard,  les  memes
Maximes  que  nous  avions  jusques-ld  suivies,  d  regard  du
Droit  exclusif,  que  nos  Rois  avoient  toujours  exerce,  de  faire
les  Loix.  (Traites  Sur  les  coutumes  Anglo-Norman des  par
M.  Houard.  1.  378.)


XXXIX

upon  Laws  themselves,  than  either  the
Equity  of  the  persons  constituting,  or  the
reason  of  those  framing,  them.  But,  to
reduce  in  every  instance  the  Laws  and
Constitutions  of  the  Realm  into  writing,
would  be,  in  our  times,  absolutely  impos-
sible, as  well  on  account  of  the  ignorance
of  writers,  as  of  the  confused  multiplicity  of
the  Laws.  But,  there  are  some,  which,  as
they  more  generally  occur  in  Court,  and  are
more  frequently  used,  it  appears  to  me  not
presumptuous  to  put  into  writing,  but  rather
very  useful  to  most  persons,  and  highly
necessary  to  assist  the  memory.  A  certain
portion  of  those  I  therefore  intend  to
reduce  into  writing,  purposely  making  use
of  a  vulgar  style,  and  of  words  occurring
in  Court,  in  order  to  instruct  those  who  are
less  accustomed  to  this  kind  of  vulgarity.
In  proof  of  which,  I  have  distinguished  the
present  work  by  Books  and  Chapters.


:


loolt  3.


OF  PLEAS  WHICH  BELONG  TO  THE  KING'S  COURT,  OR
TO  THE  SHERIFF;  AND  OF  ESSOINS ;  AND  OTHER
PREPARATORY  STEPS  USUALLY  RESORTED  TO  IN
SUITS,  UNTIL  BOTH  PARTIES  APPEAR  TOGETHER  IN
COURT.


CHAP.  I.

PLEAS  are  either  Criminal  or  Civil.1  The  former
are  divided  into  such  as  appertain  to  the  King's  Crown,
and  such  as  belong  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Counties.  These
Pleas  belong  to  the  King's  Crown.2


CHAP.  II.

THE  crime  which,  in  legal  phrase,  is  termed  that  of

1  "  Now,  as  out  of  the  old  Fields  must  come  the  new  corn,  so
"  our  old  Books  do  excellently  expound  and  express  this  matter,
"as  the  Law  is  holden  at  this  day;  and,  therefore, Glamdlle
"  saith, Placitorum  aliud  est criminate, aliud Civile, where
"  Placitum  criminate  is  Placitum  coronce.  and  Placitum  civile.
"  Placitum  commune,  named  in  this  Statute." (Magna  Charta.)
(VideSInst.  21.)

2  LL.  ^Ethelbyrti,  c.  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  &o. (Al.  M.  S.)

I  1


Lasse  Majesty,  as  the  death  of  the  King,  or  a  sedition
moved  in  the  Realm,  or  Army J — the  fraudulent  con-
cealment of  Treasure-trove — The  Plea  concerning  the
breaking  of  the  King's  peace — Homicide — Burning
-Robbery — Rape — the  crime  of  Falsifying,2  and  such
other  Pleas  as  are  of  a  similar  nature.3  These  crimes
are  either  punished  capitally,  or  with  loss  of  Member.4
"We  must,  however,  except  the  crime  of  Theft,  which
belongs  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Counties,  and  is  discussed
and  determined  in  the  County  Courts.5  ^'It  also  apper-

1  "  The  Committers  of  these  Crimes,"  says  the  Regiam  Majes-
tatem,  "  may  be  punished  not  only  for  any  fact  or  deed,  but  also
for  the  intent  and  purpose." (Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.  c.  1.)

2  Crimen  falsi,  an  expression  borrowed  from  the  Civil  Law.
(Vide  Justin.  Inst.  4. 18.  7.  &c.) Our  author  explains  its  import,
L.  14.  c.  7.

3  Cap.  2. Hengham  Magna,  c.  2.  p.  7. LL.  Camiti  R.  secul.
c.  61.  et  Somneri  Gloss,  in  voce  emenda. (Al.  MS.)

The  Law  of  Canute  alluded  to,  is  in  these  words :  Irruptio  in.
domum  et  incendium  et  fiirtum  manifestum  et  ccedes  publiea  et
domini  proditio  juxta  leges  humanas  sunt  inexpiabilia.  (Vide
LL.  Anglo-Saxon.  Ed.  Wilkins,  p.  143.)

4  Among  the  Laws  of  Canute,  are  some  inflicting  the  punish-
ment of  loss  of  members. (LL.  Cnnuti,  c.  15.  33.  &c.)

From  hence  it  has  been  inferred,  that  Canute  first  introduced
this  species  of  punishment  into  England.

Hosvever  that  may  be,  the  Conqueror's  Law  forms  too  remark-
able a  feature  in  his  Legislation  to  be  passed  over  in  silence.
It  forbids  the  punishments  of  death  and  hanging  for  any  crime,
but  orders,  that  the  eyes  of  the  offenders  should  be  plucked
out,  or  their  feet  or  hands  &c.  amputated,  ita  quod  truncus  vivus
remaneat  in  signum  proditionis  et  nequitice  suce! !  (LL.  Gul.
Conq.p.  218.  Ed.  Wilkins.)

s  "  Theft  and  manslaughter,"  says  the  Regiam  Majestatem,
"  belong  to  the  Sheriff  when  any  certain  accuser  appears  :  not
"  so  when  those  crimes  are  taken  up  by  dittay."  (c,  1.  L.  1.)
"  The  Sheriff  in  the  Tourn  (for  that  is  to  be  intended)  held  plea


tains  to  Sheriffs,  in  case  of  neglect  on  the  part  of  Lords
of  Franchise,  to  take  cognizance  of  Scuffles,1  blows,  and
wounds,  unless  the  Accuser  subjoin  to  his  charge,  that
the  offence  was  committed  against  the  King's  Peace.2


CHAP.  in.

CIVIL  Pleas  are  divided  into  such  as  are  discussed
and  determined  in  the  King's  Court  only,  and  such  as
fall  within  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  Sheriffs  of  Counties.
In  the  former  Court,  are  discussed  and  determined,
all  such  Pleas  as  concern  Baronies,  Advowsons  of
Churches,  questions  of  condition,  Dower,  when  the
"Woman  has  been  entirely  debarred  from  receiving  it  ;
for  breach  of  Fine  made  in  the  King's  Court ;  concern-
ing the  performing  of  Homage,  and  the  receiving  of

"  of  Theft,"  says  Lord  Coke. But  this  part  of  his  jurisdiction
was  taken  away  by  17.  c.  Mag.  Chart. (Vide  2  Inst.  30 — 1.)

1  Medletis,  or,  as  in  Harl.  Cotton,  and  Bodl.  MS.  melletis.  From
Bracton  it  is  to  be  collected,  that  some  instances  of  this  offence
fell  under  the  Jurisdiction  of  Lords  of  Franchise,  and  on  their
default,  reverted  to  the  Sheriff  ;  whilst  other  instances  fell  under
cognizance  of  the  cro\vn,  a  distinction  confirmed  by  the  Reg.
Majestatem  (vide  Bracton,  154.  B.  Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.  c.  2.)  The  term
is  said  to  be  derived  from  the  French  mesler.  (Vide  3  Inst.  66.
Spelm.  Gloss,  and  Cowell's  Interpreter.)

'•  The  Reg.  Maj.  makes  this  allegation  a  ground  of  the  Sheriff's
Jurisdiction  (L.  1.  c.  3.)  "  In  this  distinction,  between  the  Sher-
"  iff's  Jurisdiction  and  that  of  the  King,  we  see  the  reason  of  the
"  allegation  in  modern  Indictments  and  Writs,  "  vi  et  armis  "
"  of  the  king's  croiun  and  dignity"  "  the  king's  peace"  and  4i  tJte
"  peace,"1  this  last  expression  being  sufficient,  after  the  peace  of  the
"  Sheriff  had  ceased  to  be  distinguished  as  a  separate  Jurisdic-
"  tion."  (Vide  Reeves's  Hist.  Eng.  Law.  1.  113.)


Reliefs,  and  concerning  Purprestures,1  and  Debts  owing
by  lay  persons.  These  Pleas,  indeed,  relate  to  the
propriety  of  the  thing  only :  concerning  those  which
refer  to  the  possession,  and  which  are  discussed  and
decided  by  Recognitions,2  we  shall  speak  in  their
proper  place.


CHAP.  IY.

To  the  Sheriffs  of  Counties  these  Pleas  appertain :
the  Plea  concerning  the  Right  of  Freehold,  when  the
Courts  of  the  Lords  are  proved  to  have  failed  in  doing
justice,  the  nature  of  which  we  shall  speak  of  in  another
place ;  and  the  Plea  concerning  Villeins-born  :  such
Pleas  being,  in  each  instance,3  sanctioned  by  the  King's
Writ.4

1  Our  author  explains  this  term,  B.  9.  c.  11.

2  Eecognitiones. Upon  the  words  facere  recognitionem, Sir
Edward Coke  thus  comments. — "  Cognitio is knowledge or
"  knowledgemeut,  or  opinion,  and  Recognition  is  a  serious  ac-
"  knowledgement,  or  opinion  upon  such  matters  of  fact  as  they
"  shall  have  in  charge,  and  thereupon  the  Jurors  are  called  Re-
"  cognitores  Assisce,"  (Vide  Co.  Litt.  158.  b.) Our  author  treats
largely  on  Recognitions  in  the  12th  Book,  to  which  we  refer  the
reader.

3  We  learn  from  Bracton,  that  the  Sheriff  was  in  the  habit  of
exercising  Jurisdiction  over  many  Pleas  which  did  not  belong  to
him  ex  officio ;  but,  in  such  cases,  he  acted  by  the  King's  precept,
not  as  Sheriff,  but  as  Justiciarius  Regis,  (Bracton,  154.  b.) The
distinction  is  important,  and  seems  not  unknown  to  the  Grand
Custumary  of  Normandy. (Vide  c.  2.)

*  Breve,  a  Writ.  When  causes  became  so  frequent  that  the
king  was  unable  to  attend  to  them,  says  Craig,  he  remitted  them
to  the  Judge,  by  means  of  Instruments  containing  a  brief  sum-


CHAP.  Y.

any  one  complains J  to  the  King,  or  bis  Jus-
tices, concerning  his  Fee,  or  his  Freehold,  if  the  com-
plaint be  such  as  be  proper  for  the  determination  of
the  King's  Court,  or  the  King  is  pleased  that  it  should
be  decided  there,  then  the  party  complaining  shall
have  the  following  Writ  of  summons.


CHAP.  VI.

"  THE  Kins:  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.2 Command  A.

O  '

"  that,  without  delay,  he  render  to  B.  one  Hyde  of  Land,
"  in  such  a  Vill,  of  which  the  said  B.  complains,  that
"  the  aforesaid  A.  hath  deforced  him ;  and,  unless  he
"  does  so,  summon  him  by  good  summoners,  that  he  be
"  there,  before  me,  or  my  Justices,  in  crastino  post  octa-
"  las  dausi  Paschce  at  such  a  place,  to  show  wherefore
"  he  has  failed  ;  and  have  there  the  Summoners  and
"  this  Writ.  Witness  Eanulph  de  Glanville,  at  Claren-
"  don/'

mary  of  the  chief  points.  Hence  the  name  Breve.  (Craig.  Jus.
Feud.  L.  2.  dieg.  17,  §.  24.)  So  early  as  Henry  the  first  we  find,
that  contemptus  Brevium  was  an  offence,  subjecting  the  person
guilty  of  it  to  be  amerced  to  the  king.  (LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  14.)

1  Clamat. Vide  Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc. Craig.  Jus.  Feud.  L.  2.
Dieg.  17.  §.  25.  and  L.  3.  dieg.  5.  §.  2.

2  Vide  Fitz.  Nat.  Brev.  p.  5.  Ed.  1687. As  this  is  the  first  writ
we  meet  with,  it  may  not  be improper  to  observe,  that,  in  ren-
dering the  writs,  the  Translator  has  for  obvious  reasons  endeav-
oured to  adhere  to  the  technical  phraseology  generally  used  in
that  species  of  process.


6


CHAP.  TIL

THE  party  vrho  is  thus  summoned  either  appears  at
the  day  appointed,  or  makes  default,  or  sends  a  Mes-
senger, or  Essoin,1  or  neither.  If  he  neither  appear,
nor  send  an  Essoin,  his  adversary,  the  Demandant,
should,  on  the  day  appointed,  appear  before  the  Jus-
tices, and  offer  to  proceed  against  him  in  the  suit ;  and
he  shall  thus  avrait  in  Court  during  three  days.  If  the
Tenant  appear  not  on  the  fourth  day,  the  summoners
being  present,  and  alledging  that  thejT  had  duly  cited
him,  and  offering  to  prove  it,  according  to  the  course
of  the  Court,  another  Writ  shall  Issue  to  summon  the
Tenant  to  appear  at  the  distance  of  fifteen  clays  '2  at

1  Essonium,  an  Excuse. Sir  Edward  Coke  derives  the  term
from  the  French  verb  essonier  or  exonier. He  tells  us,  it  is  all
one  with  what  the  civilians  call  excusatio. Sir  Henry  Spelmaii
mentions  the  same  derivation,  and  adds,  ex,  privativum,  soiiig,
cura. The  Greek  word  fZofiwatiai  has  been  proposed  as  another
derivation,  implying  an  excuse  by  means  of  an  oath. The  term
occurs  so  early  as  the  Assizes  of  Jerusalem,  (c.  58.) So  limited
is  the  doctrine  of  Essoins  in  the  present  day,  that  it  will  here
suffice  to  observe,  there  were  five  principal  kinds  in  the  reign  of
Henry  the  second  ;  I  say  principal,  because  there  were  necessa-
rily many  others  of  less  importance. These,  as  enumerated  by
Sir  Edward  Coke,  were  ;  1.  de  servitio  Regis. 2.  In  terrain  sanc-
tain. 3. Ultra  marc. 4.  De  malo  lecti. 5.  De  malo  veniendi;
the  two  last  being  the  same  as  those  ex  infirmitate  de  reseantisa
and  ex  infirmitate  veniendi, so  frequently  mentioned  by  our
author,  in  the  present  book. Essoins  are  said  to  have  been  de-
rived to  us  from  the  Normans. (Vide  Assises  of  Jerusalem,  c.
58.  le  Grand  Custum  : de  Norm, sparsim. Bracton,  33G.  b.  et
seq. Fleta  L.  6.  c.  7. Mirror,  117.  et  seq. 2  Inst.  125. Spelm.
Cowell. Les  termes  de  la  ley,  &c.  &c.)

2  In  affirmance  of  this  period  of  time,  see  Articuli  super  char-
tas,  c.  15.  and  Lord  Coke's  comment.  (2  Inst.  567.) The  Norman.


least,  in  which  "Writ  he  shall  be  required  as  well  to
answer  to  the  original  Suit,  as  for  his  default  in  dis-
obeying the  first  summons.1  In  this  manner,  three
Summonses  shall  issue ;  and,  if  the  Tenant  neither  ap-
pear at  the  third  summons,  nor  send,  the  Tenement  shall
be  taken  into  the  King's  hands,  and  shall  so  remain,
during  fifteen  days.

And,  if,  within  that  period,  he  appear  not,  the  Sei-
sin2 shall  be  adjudged  to  his  adversary,  so  that  from
thenceforth  the  Tenant  shall  not  be  heard,  unless  in  a
suit  concerning  the  propriety,  and  that  authorised  by
the  King's  Writ  of  Right.3  If,  however,  he  appear
within  the  fifteen  days,  and  be  desirous  of  replevying
the  Tenement,  he  shall  be  commanded  to  appear  on  the
fourth  day,  and  he  shall  have  that  which  he  is  legally
entitled  unto ;  and  thus,  if  he  appear,  he  may  recover

code  required  the  same  period  to  render  a  summons  lawful,
Grand  Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  49.  See  also  Bracton,  834.  a.  and
Fleta,  L.  6.  c.  6.  s.  11.  12.

1  It  seems  from  the  Regiam  Majestatem,  that  if  the  summons
were  made  by  one  summoner,  in  the  presence  of  lawful  and  suffi-
cient witnesses,  it  was  good. These  witnesses  were  to  verify  the
summons,  before  the  defendant  could  be  compelled  to  answer.
(Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.  c.  6.)

2  Seisina  "  is  borrowed  of  the  French  seisine,  'possessi'o,'  and
so  it  signifieth  in  our  common  Law." (Cowell  ad  voc.) Craig
concludes,  that  as  we  had  the  term,  so  we  had  the  doctrine  from
the  French. (Craig,  de  Feud.  L.  2.  Dieg.  7.  s.  1.) Sir  Edward
Coke  and  Sir  Henry  Spelman  coincided  with  Cowell  and  Craig
in  the  derivation. (Co.  Litt.)  17.  a. Sperm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.) The
term,  it  seems,  was  used,  both  by  the  canonists  and civilians.
(Cowell  ubi  supra : vide also  Index  ad  Anglo-Sax.  LL.  verb.
saisiare  and  references  there.)

3  Vide  Bracton,  367.  a.


8

the  Seisin.  Should  he,  however,  appear  at  the  third
Summons,  and  confess  the  former  Summonses,  he  shall
instantly  lose  the  Seisin,  unless  he  can  excuse  his  de-
fault by  the  King's  "Warrant,  and  by  the  Writ,  which
he  should  instantly  produce.


CHAP.  VIII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Justices,  Health.  I  warrant  B.
"  who  was  at  such  a  place,  by  my  precept,  on  such  a
"  day,  in  my  service,  and,  therefore,  could  not  be  pres-
"  ent  before  you  on  that  day  at  your  Assizes  ;  and  I
"  command  you,  that  you  put  him  not  in  default  for  his
"  absence  that  day,  nor  that  he  in  any  respect  suffer
"  loss.  Witness,  &c."  1


CHAP.  IX.

IF  he  should  deny  all  the  summonses,  he  shall,  as  to
each  of  them  individually,  corroborate  his  denial  with
the  oaths  of  twelve.2  Should  it  happen  on  the  day

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  36.  37. Ed.  1687.

2  Duodecimo,  manu. The  author  of  the  commentaries  renders
this  expression  eleven,  besides  the  principal,  an  interpretation
which  is  more  or  less  confirmed  by  the  following  authorities :
Co.  Litt.  295.  a.  2  Inst.  44,  and  the  Diversity  of  Courts,  p.  324. On
the  other  hand,  Les  Terrnes  de  la  Ley,  in  describing  the  cere-
mony as  applied  to  the  very  object  of  the  text,  expressly  says,
that  the  principal  should  be  accompanied  by  twelve. (Ibid,  ad

voc.  ley.)

Bracton,  when  treating  of  the  subject,  employs  the  same  ex-


9

-  appointed  that  either  of  the  Compurgators  1  fail,  or
should  the  person  of  either  of  them  be  justly  excepted
to,  and  the  vacancy  occasioned  by  either  of  these  cir-
cumstances not  be  filled  up,  the  Tenant  shall,  on  ac-
count of  his  default,  immediately  lose  his  Seisin.2
But,  if  the  Tenant  thus  completely  disprove  the  sum-
monses, he  shall  on  the  same  day  answer  to  the  Action.3


CHAP.  X.

IF  the  Tenant,  being  summoned,  appear  not  on  the
first  day,  but  Essoin  himself,  such  Essoin  shall,  if
reasonable,  be  received  ;  and  he  may,  in  this  manner,
essoin  himself  three  times  successively ;  and,  since  the

pression,  and  observes,  that  the  land  was  not  to  be  replevied,  be-
fore the  tenant  had  waged  his  law,  nor,  if  he  failed  in  waging
it ;  and  he  lays  it  down,  that  the  Tenant  could  not  wage  his  Law
by  means  of  an  Attorney  constituted  for  that  purpose,  bvit  must
do  it  personally.  (Bracton,  366.  a.  410.  a.)  As  to  the  origin  of
waging  Law,  the  reader  may  consult  Cowell  ad  voc.  Law  and
les  Termes  de  la  ley  ul>i  supra  and  Bl.  comm.  3.  341.  &c.

Before  we  quit  this  chapter,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  observe,
that  Sir  Edward  Coke  refers  to  it  to  show,  that  previous  to
Magna  Charta,  he  that  would  make  his  Law  in  any  Court  of  Rec-
ord, must  bring  with  him  fideles  Testes.  (Co.  Litt.  168.  b.)

1  Bracton  tells  us,  that  it  was  not  necessary  that  the  compur-
gators  should  be  of  the  same  rank  as  their  Principal :  it  was  suf-
ficient if they  were  trust- worthy, and of good characters.
(Bracton,  410.  a.)

2  Mr.  Reeves  observes,  that  the  waging  of  Law  is  not  men-
tioned by  Glanville,  as  a  mode  of  proof  for  the  defendant  in  civil
suits. That  judicious  writer  must  be  understood,  as  speaking  of
that  proof,  which  constituted  the  defence  to  the  Action.

8  Vide  Mirror,  c.  4.  s.  7. Bracton,  366.  a.  b.  368.  a.  b.


10

causes,  on  account  of  which  a  person  may  justly  essoin
himself,  are  various,  let  us  consider  the  different  kinds
of  Essoins.


CHAP.  XL

OF  Essoins,  some  arise  on  account  of  ill  health,
others  from  other  sources.  Of  those  Essoins  which
arise  from  ill  health — one  kind  is  that  ex  infirmitate

ts

veniendi — another  ex  infirmitate  de  reseantisa.1


CHAP.  XII.

IF  the  Tenant,  being  summoned,  should,  on  the  first
day,  cast  the  Essoin  de  infirmitate  veniendi?  it  is  in
the  election  of  his  Adversary,  being  present,  either  to

1  Reseantisa,  from  the  French  reseant,  or  resiant,  or  when
anglicised,  resiance,  a  term  which  Dr.  Johnson  explains  in  his
dictionary,  as  meaning  a  residence,  though,  as  he  remarks,  it  is
now  only  used  in  Law. In  this,  its  simple  sense,  our  author  has
used  it,  in  a  subsequent  part  of  his  work. (L.  12.  c.  7.) Yet  it
assumes  a  different  meaning,  as  used  by  the  old  English  and
Scotch  Lawyers  to  denote  an  Essoin,  when  it  indicated,  as  Skene
expresses  it,  "a  long  and  old  sickness,  or  a  resident,  heavy  in-
"firmity  and  sore  sickness." (Regiam  Majestatem,  L.  1.  c.  8.)
An  observation  in  the  margin  of  our  author  informs  us,  that
this  Essoin  was  synonymous  with  that  de  malo  lecti ;  in  other
words,  this  Essoin  was  resorted  to  on  account  of  such  a  severe
indisposition  as  necessarily  confined  a  man  to  his  house  or  bed.

2  Or  de  via  Curice,  as  it  is  termed  in  the  Norman  code. This
Essoin  was  cast,  when  the  party  on  his  way  to  Court  had  fallen
suddenly  sick,  and  was  thereby  prevented  attending. (Le  grand
Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  39.)


11

require  from  the  Essoiner  a  lawful  proof  o£  the  truth
of  the  Essoin  in  question,  on  that  very  clay,1  or  that
he  should  find  pledges,  or  bind  himself  solemnly,  that
at  the  day  appointed  he  will  have  his  Warrantor  of
the  Essoin ;  and  he  may  thus  Essoin  himself  three
times  successively.  If,  on  the  third  day,2  he  neither
appear  nor  essoin  himself,  then  let  it  be  ordered,  that
he  be  forthcoming  in  proper  person  on  another  day ;
or  that  he  send  a  fit  Attorney  in  his  place,  to  gain  or
lose  for  him.  Thus,  whoever  on  the  appointed  day
may  appear  in  the  place  of  the  Tenant,  offering  to
undertake  his  defence,  whether  authorised  by  his  Let-
ters, or  without  them,  is  immaterial,  if  it  be  known,
that  he  be  allied  to  the  absent  Tenant,  he  shall  be
received  for  him  in  Court,  either  to  gain  or  lose.3  It
may  be  asked,  what  will  be  the  consequence  if  the
Tenant  appear  at  the  fourth  day,  after  having  cast
three  Essoins,  and  warrant  all  the  Essoins  ?  In  that
case,  he  shall  prove  the  truth  of  each  Essoin4  by  his
own  oath  and  that  of  another ;  and,  on  the  same  day,
he  shall  answer  to  the  suit.  If,  on  the  fourth  day,  he


1  "  0?'  on  another,''1  according  to  the  Cotton.  Bodl.  and  Dr.
Milles's  MS.

2  "  Fourth,"  according  to  Dr.  Milles's  MS.  and  so  it  undoubt-
edly ought  to  be,  as  the  context  evinces.

3  Vide  Infra,  L.  11.  c.  5.

4  It  should  seem,  from  Bracton  and  Fleta,  that  such  persons
only  as  were  inferior  in  dignity  to  Barons,  were  required  to
prove  the  truth  of  their  Essoins  by  their  own  oaths. (Bracton,
351.  b. Fleta,  L.  6.  c.  10.  s.  15.) By  the  19th  c.  of  Marlbridge,
even  these  persons  were  relieved  from  the  obligation. (2  Inst.
136.)


12

neither  appear  nor  send  an  Attorney,  let  the  Tenement
be  taken  into  the  King's  hands,  a  "Writ  being  issued  by
the  Court  for  that  purpose,  directed  to  the  Sheriff  of
the  County,  in  which  such  Tenement  is  situated,  which
Writ  is  in  the  following  words  :


CHAP.  XIII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  health.  I  command  you
"  that,  without  delay,  you  take  into  my  hands  the  half
"  of  the  lands  in  such  a  will,  which  J/.  claims,  as  her
"  Dower,  against  7?.  concerning  which  there  is  a  suit
"  between  them  in  my  Court,  and  that  you  make
"  known  the  day  of  the  caption  to  my  justices.  And
"  summon,  by  good  Summoners,  the  aforesaid  7?,  that
"  he  be  before  me 1  or  my  Justices  at  Westminster
"  a  crasti.no  octabus  clausi  PaschcB  in  quindecim  dies,
"  to  hear  his  judgment,  and  have  there  the  Summoners
"  and  this  "Writ.  "Witness  Ranulph  de  Glanville  at
"  Westminster,  &c."  In  addition,  let  the  Sheriff  of
the  County  be  commanded  to  take  the  Essoiners,  as
Defaulters,  and  to  detain  them,  and  for  this  purpose
the  following  writ  shall  Issue  :


CHAP. XIV.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health. I  command  you
that,  without  delay,  you diligently seek,  through

1  Vide  Madox's  Excheq.  c.  3.  s.  3.


13

"  your  County,  A.  who  has  falsely  Essoined  B.  against
"  C.  in  my  Court,  and  that  you  safely  keep  him,  until  you
"  have  my  other  precept.  AVitness,  &c."  The  De-
fendant himself  shall  also,  in  the  mean  time,  be  sum-
moned to  appear  before  the  King,  or  his  Justices,  to
show  why  he  has  not  warranted  his  Essoiner,  and  to
answer  to  the  principal  suit.  Besides,  the  Pledges  of
the  Essoiners  shall  be  summoned,  by  the  following
Writ.


CHAP.  XY.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon  by
"  good  Summoners  T.  that  he  be  before  me,  or  my
"  Justices,  at  Westminster,  in  fifteen  days  from  the
"  Pentecost,  to  show  why  he  has  not  had  /.  before  me
"  at  Westminster,  on  such  a  day,  to  warrant  the
"  Essoin  that  I.  made  for  him  in  my  Court  against  M.
"  as  he  pledged  himself  to  have  him.  And  have  there
"  the  Summoners,  and  this  AVrit.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  XVI.

BUT,  if  the  Tenant  appear  within  the  fifteen  days,
and  be  willing  to  replevy  the  Tenement,  let  him  be
commanded  to  attend,  on  a  day  appointed,  that  he
may  then  have  justice  done  him  ;  and,  if  he  appear  on
that  day,  and  find  pledges,  he  shall  recover  his  seisin,
and  may  retain  it.  If  he  deny  all  the  Summonses,  and


all  the  Essoins,  and  disprove  them  individually  with
the  oaths  of  twelve,  or  if  he  acknowledge  the  first
Summons,  and  warrant  the  three  Essoins,  and  save
the  fourth  day  by  the  King's  Writ  of  warranty,  which
he  should  forthwith  produce,  he  may  also  retain  his
Seisin.  But,  if  the  Tenant  appear  not  within  the  fif-
teen davs,  the  seisin  shall,  on  the  following  day,  be

«/ /  O  i/ 7

adjudged  to  his  adversary,  so  that  the  Tenant  shall
never  again  be  heard  concerning  it,  unless  by  the
King's  "Writ  concerning  the  Right.1  But  the  De-
mandant shall  be  put  into  the  possession  of  the  Tene-
ment, by  the  following  Writ,  directed  to  the  Sheriff.


CHAP.  XYII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you
"  that,  without  delay,  you  deliver  possession  to  M.  of
"  so  much  land  in  such  a  Till,  of  which  there  was  a
"  suit  in  my  Court,  between  him  and  II. ;  because  the
"  Seisin  of  such  Land  is  adjudged  to  the  said  M.  in  my
"  Court,  for  the  default  of  R.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  XTIII.

IF  any  one  desire  to  cast  the  Essoin  de  infirmitaU

1  The  severity  of  this  Law  was  mitigated  by  9  Ed.  3.  c.  2.
whereby  none  were  to  lose  their  land,  by  reason  of  non-plevin.
A  note  to  this  effect  is  inserted  in  the  margin  of  our  Author ;
but  the  reference  to  the  chapter  is  erroneous.


15

de  Eeseantisd,  he  may  thrice  do  it.1  Yet  should  the
Essoiner,  on  the  third  day  preceding  that  appointed,
at  a  proper  place,  and  before  a  proper  person,  present
his  Essoin.  If,  on  the  third  summons,  the  Tenant
appear  not,  the  Court  should  direct,  that  it  may  be
seen  whether  his  indisposition  amount  to  a  languor,
or  not.  For  this  purpose,  let  the  following  Writ  issue,
directed  to  the  Sheriff.


CHAP.  XIX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you
"  that,  without  delay,  you  send  four  lawful  men 3  of
"  your  County  to  see  of  the  infirmity  of  which  £.  hath
"  essoined  himself  in  my  Court,  against  It.  be  a  lan-
"  guor  or  not.  And,  if  they  perceive  that  it  is  a  lan-
"  guor,  then,  that  they  should  put  to  him  a  day  of  one
"  year  and  one  day,  from  the  day  of  the  view,  to  ap-
pear before  me,  or  my  justices,  or  that  he  send  a
"  sufficient  Attorney  to  answer  for  him.  And  if  they
"  see  that  it  be  not  a  languor,  then,  that  they  put  him

111  And  by  two  Essoiners,"  according  to  Cotton:  and  Dr.
Milles's  MS.

2  Skene  explains  a  languor  by  "  a  vehement  sickness  of  body,
"  or  of  mind." (Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.  c.  8.)

3  The  text  is  Homines. The  Translator  submits  that  it  should
be  milites,  a  reading  warranted  by  the  latter  part  of  this  very
•writ ;  and  authorised  by  the  concurring  testimony  of  Bracton,
Fleta,  Grand  Custum  :  of  Norm :  &c. See  also  chapter  28.  of
the  present  Book — where,  a  similar  object  being  in  view,  four
Knights  are  directed  to  be  sent.


16

"  a  certain  day,  on  which  he  shall  appear,  or  send  a
"sufficient  Attorney  to  answer  for  him.  And  Sum-
"  mon,  by  good  Suinmoners,  the  aforesaid  four  Knights,
"  that  they  be  then  there  to  testify  their  view,  and  the
"  day  they  put  him ;  and  have  there  the  summoners
"  and  this  Writ.  Witness,  &c."  It  should  be  ob-
served, that  two  Essoiners,  at  least,  are  necessary  to
cast  this  Essoin.


CHAP.  XX.

IT  should  also  be  remarked,  that  the  two  first  essoins
may  be  cast  de  infirmitate  veniendi,  and  the  third  de

reseantisd.

Should  that  course  be  adopted,  the  Court  should
send  to  ascertain,  whether  the  indisposition  amount
to  a  languor,  or  not.  If,  however,  the  two  first
essoins  should  be  de  reseantisd,  and  the  third  de
infirmitate  veniendi,  it  shall  be  ordered  as  if  they
were  all  de  infirmitate  veniendi,  because  the  judg,
ment  must  always  follow  the  nature  of  the  last  essoin.


CHAP.  XXI.

SHOULD  it  upon  any  of  these  occasions  happen,  that
the  party  himself  should  answer  in  Court,  and  whilst
he  was  present,  a  future  clay  should  have  been  ap-
pointed him ;  if,  at  that  day,  he  neither  come  nor


17

send  an  Attorney,  let  his  land  be  taken  into  the
King's  hands,  and  let  him  be  debarred  the  power  of
replevying  it.  And  he  shall  be  summoned  to  appear
and  hear  the  judgment  at  an  appointed  day — and  thus,
whether  he  appear  or  not,  he  shall  lose  the  Seisin,  on
account  of  his  default ;  because  he  cannot  afterwards
deny  the  summons,  unless  by  the  King's  "Writ,  which
he  should  forthwith  produce,  and  by  which  he  may
save  his  default.  But  although,  on  any  of  the  days
appointed  for  his  appearance,  the  Tenant  should
answer  in  Court,  if  he  lawfully  depart,  he  may  recur
to  his  three  Essoins,  unless  he  has  precluded  himself
by  an  agreement  to  waive  them.  If,  on  the  first  day,
the  party  should  essoin  himself,  but,  on  the  second,
should  neither  appear  nor  essoin  himself,  let  the  Sheriff
be  commanded  to  attach  the  Essoiner,  as  a  defaulter,
and  for  this  purpose  let  the  foregoing  "Writ  be  directed
to  him.


CHAP.  XXII.

BUT  it  should  be  observed,  that  when  a  party  to  a
suit  has  Essoined  himself,  the  Essoiner  may  also  avail
himself  of  a  reasonable  Essoin.  For  if  any  one  desir-
ous of  casting  a  reasonable  Essoin,  should  commission
a  person  for  this  purpose,  and  the  Essoiner  meets  with
some  reasonable  impediment  in  the  way,  by  which  he  is
prevented  being  present  at  the  appointed  day,  he  shall
be  awaited  until  the  fourth  day,  as  his  Principal  wrould


18

have  been ;  and  if  within that  period  he  appear,  his
Essoin  shall  be  received,  on  whatever  day  he  should

«.

come ;  and  he  may  thus  save  the  days  which  are  past
for  the  same  causes  for  which  his  principal1  could.


CHAP.  XXIII.

THE  principal  Essoiner  is  also  at  liberty,  if  so  dis-
posed, to  essoin  himself  by  another  Essoiner.  In  this
case  the  second  Essoiuer  must  state  to  the  Court,  that
the  Tenant,  having  a  just  cause  of  Essoin,  had  been  de-
tained, so  that  he  could  not  appear  at  the  day  appointed,
neither  to  lose  nor  gain,  and  that,  therefore,  he
had  appointed  a  certain  other  person  to  essoin  him ;
and  that  the  Essoiner  himself  had  met  writh  such  an
impediment,  which  had  prevented  his  appearance  on
that  day  : — and  this  he  is  prepared  to  prove  according
to  the  practice  of  the  Court.  By  these  means,  such
Essoiner  shall  be  received,  and  a  day  shall  be  granted
to  the  Tenant,  through  the  medium  of  such  Essoiner,
upon  his  undertaking  to  produce  his  Warrantor  on
such  a  given  day,  when  the  Tenant  ought  to  guarantee
his  principal  Essoiner,  and  to  prove  his  Essoin  in  the
usual  manner.  In  the  same  manner,  the  first  Essoiner
is  to  guarantee  the  second,  unless  on  the  first  day  he
himself  has  proved  his  Essoins,  upon  the  requisition  of
the  adverse  party.

1  The  Tenant,  according  to  Dr.  Milles's  MS.


19


CHAP.  XXI V.

BUT  if  the  Tenant,  desirous  of  proceeding  in  the
cause,  should,  after  his  Essoin  cast  in  Court  and  within
the  fourth  day,  appear,  then,  if  the  day  was  in  the
first  instance  fixed  through  the  intervention  of  the
Essoiner,  and  the  adverse  party  has  under  these  cir-
cumstances left  the  Court,  the  Demandant 1  cannot
recover,  as  he  might  on  the  day  past.


CHAP.  XXY.

THERE  is  another  species  of  Essoin  ;  "which  is  permit-
ted from  the  necessity  of  the  case ;  and  this  happens
when  any  one  casts  the  Essoin  de  ultra  mare?  In
that  case,  if  the  Essoin  be  received,  the  period  of  forty
days,  at  least,  shall  be  given  to  the  party  essoined.
But  if,  by  means  of  this  or  any  other  reasonable  Es-
soin, a  man  would  essoin  himself  for  a  longer  period,
the  usual  course  of  the  Court  shall  be  followed  in
giving  time.

1  According to the Bodleian MS. it  would  stand, he  (the
Tenant)  cannot  recover,  &c.

2  "  There  is,"  says  the  Regiaru  Majestatem,  "another  kind  of
"  Excuse  or  Essoin  which  is  necessary,  that  is,  when  any  one  is
"  essoined  because he is beyond  the water of Forth  or  of
"  Spey  ;  and,  if  this  Essoin  is  found  lawful,  forty  days  shall  be
"  granted  to  him  who  is  excused." (Vide  Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.  c.  8.)
"  The  inconveniences  resulting  from  the  abuse  of  the  Essoin  in  our
"text  were  remedied  by  West.  1. cap.  44. Vide  Sir  Edward
"  Coke's  Comment.  2  Inst.  251.


20


CHAP.  XXYI.

THERE  are  other  Essoins  which  eventually  may  be
resorted  to,  in  order  to  save  the  four  days,  or  one  of
them,  by  means  of  which  Essoins  the  adverse  party
should  be  awaited  in  Court :  as,  for  Example,  a  sudden
inundation,  or  any  other  unexpected  event  which  could
not  be  foreseen.


CHAP.  XXYII.

THE  service  of  the  King  is  also  another  reasonable
cause  of  Essoin,1  and  when  this  Essoin  is  proved  in
Court  and  allowed,  the  Suit  shall  stand  over  sine  die,  un-
til it  appear  that  the  party  has  returned  from  the  King's
service.  Hence  those  who  are  continually  in  the
King's  service,  as  his  Servants,2  shall  not  avail  theni-

1  And,  as  this  was  founded  upon  a  political  obligation,  it  did
not  extend  to  excuse  the  Defendant,  if  in  the  service  of  any
other  person. (Bracton,  336.  b.)

2  Servientes. This  term  was  received  in  many  different  senses.
Sometimes  it  meant,  persons  holding  military  rank — Sometimes,
Vassals  or  Tenants  only — Sometimes,  Esquires. It  is,  in  this
latter  sense,  that  Lord  Littleton  and  Dr.  Brady  seem  inclined  to
think  it  was  more  generally  used  (Litt.  Hist.  Hen.  2.  Vol.  3.  p.  87.)
Mr.  Selden,  however,  has,  in  his  Treatise  on  Titles  of  Honor,
proved,  that  there  were  some  very  material  distinctions  between
the  terms,  and  that  they  were  far  from  being  synonymous. Dr.
Sullivan,  when  he  meets  with  the  word  in  a  Law  of  the  con-
queror, explains  it  as  meaning  "  the  lower  soldiers,  not  knighted,
"  who  had  not  yet  got  lands,  but  were  quartered  on  the  Abbies."
(Lectures  on  Laws  of  England,  p.  266.) Sir  John  Skene  inter-
prets, what  I  presume  is  the  same  Term,  as  meaning  domestic
servants. (Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.  c.-8.) This  is,  I  apprehend,  the  true


21

selves  of  this  Essoin  ;  but,  with  respect  to  their  persons,
the  ordinary  course  of  the  Court,  and  the  order  of  the
Law,  shall  be  observed.  We  must,  however,  make  a
distinction,  with  respect  to  the  foregoing  Essoin.  The
party  desirous  of  availing  himself  of  the  Essoin  per
sermtium  Regis,  will  either  have  been  summoned  by
his  adversary  previously  to  entering  into  such  service,
or  he  will  have  entered  into  such  service  in  the  first
instance,  and  have  afterwards  been  summoned.

If  he  were  in  the  first  instance  in  the  King's  service,
and  in  the  mean  time  be  summoned  to  answer  the  suit,
the  Rule  we  have  above  laid  down  must  unquestion-
ably prevail.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  party  be  im-
pleaded  in  the  first  instance,  and  he  afterwards  cast
the  Essoin  per  sermtium  Regis,  it  is  material  to  ascer-
tain, whether  he  act  by  a  mandate  of  the  King,  or  a
general  or  special  precept,  and  be  from  necessity  in
such  service,  or  otherwise.  If  he  were  called  by  a  pre-
cept of  the  King  into  his  service,  then,  indeed,  the
same  Law  prevails,  as  in  the  former  instance.  But  if,
on  the  other  hand,  voluntarily  and  without  any  such
precept,  he  has  recently  entered  into  the  King's  service,
it  must  be  distinguished,  whether  he  has  gone  beyond
sea  in  that  service,  or  remains  within  the  Realm.  If


meaning  of  the  text,  notwithstanding  that  Servientes,  when  con-
nected with  the  terms  domini  Regis,  sometimes  meant  a  partic-
ular description  of  officers,  residing  in  every  County,  and  pos-
sessed of  an  authority,  perhaps,  not  altogether  unlike  that  of
Sheriffs  or  Coroners,  after  whom,  they  are  enumerated  by  Brae-
ton.  (L.  3.  Tr.  2.  c.  32.)


22

be  has  gone  beyond  Sea,  a  respite  l  of  forty  days,  at
least,  shall  be  allowed  him,  but,  if  he  should  not  return
within  that  period,  the  accustomed  course  of  the  Court,
and  the  order  of  Law  shall  be  observed.  At  whatever
period  he  appears  in  Court,  and  whether  personally,  or
by  his  Attorney,  he  must  immediately  produce  the
King's  "Writ,  to  warrant  his  preceding  Essoins.  But
if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Defendant  be  within  the
Realm,  and  in  the  service  of  the  King,  in  that  Case  it
must  be  regulated  by  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the
King's  Justices,  whether  a  less  or  a  greater  period2  be
allowed  him  to  appear  and  answer,  according  as  it  may
best  suit  the  King,  and  may  be  consistent  with  the
course  of  Justice.


CHAP.  XXVIII.

IT  may  also  happen,  that  a  party  is  essoined  in
Court,  on  account  of  some  indisposition  by  which  he  is
confined  in  the  same  Town  where  the  Court  is  sitting,
having  arrived  there  to  prosecute  his  plea.  In  this
case,  let  the  Court  direct,  that  he  appear  on  the  mor-

1  Respectus,  pro  rnora,  dilatione  vel  continuations  temporis.
In  this  sense,  the  term  frequently  occurs  in  our  old  law  books.
(Vide  Reg.  Maj.  L.  4.  c.  20.  and  Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.) There  is
in  the  Register  a  writ  respectu  computi  vicecomitis  Jiabendo,  for
the  respiting  a  Sheriff's  accounts. There  was  also  respectus  Ho-
magii.  delaying  of  Homage. (See  Cowell  ad  voc.)

2  Tcnninum. "  In  the  Civil  Law, "says  Spelman,  "  it  signineth
"  a  day  set  to  the  Defendant,  and  in  that  sense  doth  Bracton,
"  Glanville,  and  some  others  sometimes  use  it." (Reliquiae  Spel-
mannianse  p.  71.)


23

row  ;  and  thus  let  him  be  awaited  during  three  succes-
sive days — and  for  this  cause,  he  shall  have  a  delay  of
three  successive  days.  If,  on  the  third  day,  he  then  so
essoin  himself,  then  four  Knights  should  be  directed
by  the  Court  to  attend  him  for  the  purpose  of  ascer-
taining, whether  he  is  in  such  a  state  as  to  be  able  to
make  his  appearance  in  Court,  or  not ;  and,  should  they
be  of  opinion  that  he  is  able,  then,  they  should  com-
mand him,  to  attend  in  Court,  and  do  that  which  he
ought.  But,  if  they  should  think  him  unable,  and
should  testify  this  to  the  Court,  then  shall  a  reasonable
time,  a  delay  of  fifteen  days  at  the  least,  be  allowed
him.


CHAP.  XXIX.

THERE  is  also  another  Essoin,  which  is  sometimes
presented  in  Court — I  allude  to  that,  de  esse  in  pere-
grinatione.  But  here  a  distinction  must  be  made,
whether  the  party  who  would  thus  essoin  himself  was
impleaded  before  he  undertook  his  Voyage,  or  not.
Because,  in  the  former  case,  the  course  of  the  Court
and  the  order  of  Justice  shall  be  observed.  But,  if  he
was  not  summoned  previously  to  his  beginning  his
Travels,  then  again  it  must  be  distinguished  whether
he  went  to  Jerusalem,  or  to  another  place.  If  to  the
former  place,  then  a  year  and  a  day,  at  least,  is  gener-
ally allowed  him  ;  but  with  respect  to  other  Travels,
the  time  allowed  must  be  regulated  by  the  Will  and

CJ  »'

pleasure  of  the  King,  or  his  Justices,  who,  keeping  in


24

view  the  length  or  shortness  of  the  Journey,  are  to
temper  the  Kule  as  they  may  think  proper.1


CHAP.  XXX.

IN  the  "Writ  directed  to  the  Sheriff,  for  the  purpose
of  summoning  the  party,  there  is  the  following  clause
inserted,  "and  have  there  the  summoners  and  this
Writ."

"When,  therefore,  the  Demandant  offers  himself  in
Court  on  the  appointed  day,  the  first  inquiry  is,
whether  the  Sheriff  has  the  Summoners,  and  the  Writ
there  present  or  not ;  if  he  have,  and  the  Summons  be
proved,  the  Suit  must  be  proceeded  in,  in  the  manner  we
have  mentioned.  But,  if  the  Sheriff  should  neither  be
present  on  that  day,  nor  appear  within  the  fourth  day,
to  which  time  the  Tenant  must  be  awaited,  then  let
the  Sheriff  be  again  commanded  by  the  King's  Writ,
to  summon  the  Tenant,  concerning  the  principal  cause,
by  a  Writ  of  second  Summons,  and  that  he  himself
appear  to  shew  why  he  neglected  to  make  the  Sum-
mons, as  enjoined  him  by  the  first  Writ.  The  Writ  of
second  Summons  contains  that  which  first  issued,  with
the  addition  of  the  following  clause  :  "  andleyou  your-
"  self  then  there  present  to  shew  wherefore  you  did  not

1  The  Regiam  Majestatem  lays  down  the  doctrine  of  Essoins,
nearly  word  for  word  with  Glanville  :  but  adds  one  species  of
Essoin  not  taken  notice  of  by  our  author — the  being  absent  at  a
public  fair.  (L.  1.  c.  8.)


25

"  summon  him,  as  it  was  commanded  you  by  my  other
"  Writ,  and  have  there  this  Writ,  and  that  other  Writ"
At  the  day  appointed,  the  Sheriff  appearing,  either
says  that  he  executed  the  King's  precept,  or  confesses
that  he  has  not  done  it.

Should  he  acknowledge  the  latter,  then  he  shall  be
amerced  to  the  King.  But,  in  this  case,  the  Demand-
ant shall  lose  his  first  da}7,  and  the  Tenant  must  be
again  summoned.  But  should  the  Sheriff  allege  that
he  had  injoined  lawful  Summoners  to  execute  the  first
Summons — and  they,  being  present,  acknowledge  the
fact,  then  not  only  the  Sheriff,  but  the  Summoners
shall  be  amerced,1  if  they  have  not  executed  such  Sum-
mons as  it  was  their  duty  to  do;  and  thus  again  the
first  day  will  become  useless  to  the  Demandant.

But  if  those  whom  the  Sheriff  nominated  as  Sum-
moners, being  present,  should  assert  that  the  Sheriff
did  not  injoin  them  to  summon  the  Tenant,  we  must
then  distinguish,  whether  the  Sheriff  delivered  his  or-
der to  them  in  the  County  Court,  as  he  always  ought
to  do,  (in  order  that,  if  the  complaint  be  presented
some  time  before  a  County  Court,  the  party  may  be
attached  until  the  County  Court,  and  then  there  may
be  a  full  Summons,)  or  in  any  other  manner.  If  the
Sheriff  gave  his  orders  to  them  in  the  County  Court,
and  this  be  properly  proved,  the  Summoners  shall  be
amerced,  because  they  cannot  contradict  a  fact,  which

1  It  should  rather  seem  that  in  Bracton's  time  the  Summoners
only  would  be  amerced.  (Bracton,  336.  a.)


26

has  been  transacted  in  a  County  Court.1  But  if  the
Sheriff,  being  out  of  the  County  Court,  and  less  pub-
licly than  he  ought,  injoin  them  to  summon  the  Ten-
ant, and  they  deny  that  he  did  so  injoin  them,  the
Sheriff  shall  be  amerced  for  not  having  executed  the
King's  "Writ  in  the  manner  that  he  ought.  For  public
Acts  of  this  nature,  such  as,  the  injoining  Summoners
— the  taking  of  Pledges  for  the  prosecuting  of  Actions
— and  for  Appearances,2  ought  to  be  publicly  trans-
acted, lest  concerning  these  steps,  which  are  merely
preparatory  to  a  final  determination,  a  difficulty  should
arise,  in  itself  the  occasion  of  procrastinating  the  de-
cision. But  if,  on  the  first  day,  the  Summoners  should
not  appear  and  assert  that  they  had  in  a  legal  way
executed  the  first  Summons,  but  should  send  their
Essoiners  on  the  first  day,  who  essoin  them,  and  add;
that  they  had  properly  executed  the  first  Summons,
then  the  Demandant  shall  not  lose  his  first  day,  and

«. 7

they  shall  be  amerced,  because  they  have  not  ap-
peared at  the  first  day  to  prove  that  they  had  execute(
the  Summons  as  was  injoined  them,  unless  they  can
excuse  their  default  on  that  day,  by  the  King's  "War-
rant. We  must,  however,  not  forget,  that  either  the
one  or  the  other  of  the  Summoners  is  permitted  legally
to  excuse  himself  on  the  first  day,  and  in  that  case  the
Demandant  shall  not  lose  the  day  in  question.

1  Because,  says  Bracton,  the  County  Court  has  for  this  purpose
a  Record  (Bracton,  336.  a.) The  force  of  Bracton's  remark  wil]
be  seen  in  the  sequel.

2  Tarn  in  civili  negotio,  quam  criminali. (Bracton,  336.  a.)


27


CHAP.  XXXI.

have  spoken  concerning  the  absence  of  the  Ten-
ant, when  he  is  merely  summoned,  and  no  Pledges  are
given.  But,  if  the  suit  be  of  a  nature  to  make  it
requisite,  that  the  Tenant  should  find  Pledges  for  his
appearance,  and  the  Justices  or  the  Count}7  Court  have
recorded  them,  (which  happens  in  the  civil  matter  of
a  breach  of  a  Final  Concord  made  in  the  King's  Court
before  the  King  or  his  Justices,  and  in  Novel  Desseis-
ins)  then,  if  the  Tenant  neither  appear  at  the  first  day,
nor  essoin  himself,  the  Pledges  are  adjudged  to  be
amerced  to  the  King ;  and  the  Pledges  shall  be  in-
creased as  to  the  principal  Cause ;  and  thus,  should  the
Tenant  absent  himself  on  all  the  three  days,  the  Suit
must  be  proceeded  in  ;  and  if  at  the  third  Summons  he
should  not  appear,1  let  his  Tenement  be  taken  into  the
King's  Hands,  and  retained  in  the  manner  before  ex-
pressed ;  the  Pledges  being  amerced,  who  are  to  be
summoned  to  be  present  in  Court  on  a  certain  day,  to
hear  their  Judgment.  Should,  however,  the  Plea  be
of  a  criminal  nature,  as,  for  example,  concerning  a
breach  of  the  King's  Peace,  then,  the  proceedings
must  be  according  to  the  course  of  the  Law,  as  in  the
above  case,  with  this  only  difference,  that  as  the  party
is  accused,2  if  he  fail  to  appear  at  the  third  Summons

1  There  is  in  the  original  a  marginal  reference  to  the  44th,  for
the  45th,  chap,  of  West,  the  1st.

2  "  Rectatus,"  ad  rectum  vocatus. (Spelm.  Glossar.  ad  voc.)
Rectum  not  unfrequently  meant  an  accusation.


28

his body shall be taken,  and his Pledges  shall  be
amerced.1


CHAP.  XXXII.

HAVING  discussed  those  points  which  more  frequently
arise,  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  the  Tenant,  it
remains  to  speak,  concerning  the  Demandant's  not  ap-
pearing. If  the  Demandant  indeed  appear  not  on  the
first  day,  he  may  avail  himself  of  the  same  reasonable
Essoins  as  the  Tenant,  and  that  by  the  same  means.

If,  however,  he  neither  appear  nor  essoin  himself
then,  the  Court  should  award,  that  the  Tenant,  if
present,  either  personally,  or  by  another,  as  he  ought
to  be,  should  be  unconditionally  dismissed.  Yet  this
is  not  to  preclude  the  Demandant  from  recovering,,
under  certain  restrictions,  the  same  property,  if  he
feel  inclined  to  institute  another  suit  concerning  it.

And,  if  the  Demandant  be  again  inclined  to  implead
the  same  Tenant,  it  may  be  questioned,  what  the  Law
is  in  that  case,  and  how  his  default  should  be  punished?
As  to  this,  opinions  differ.  For  some  sajT,  he  shall  lose


1  Misericordia,  a  fine  arbitrarily  imposed  upon  offenders,  and
so  called,  says  Spelman,  quod  lenissima  imponitur  misericord/a,
heavy  fines  being  contradistinguished  by  the  significant  term,
redemptiones.  (Gloss,  ad  voc.  see  also  Co.  Litt.  126.  b.  and  Ma-
dox's  Excheq.  c.  14.)  In  our  progress  through  Glanville,  we
meet  with  the  misericordia — misericordia  domini — misericordia
vice-comitis,  and  misericordia  domini  regis — Vide  Infra.  L.  9.  c.
11.  et  not.


29

nothing  but  his  Cost  l  and  bis  Expenses,  and  his  first
Writ,  but  not  his  cause  of  Action ;  but  merely  be
obliged  again  to  begin  his  suit.  Others  say,  that  he
shall  forfeit  his  Action  against  the  Tenant  totally,  and
irrevocably,  and,  on  account  of  the  contempt  he  has
been  guilty  of  towards  the  Court,  that  he  shall  likewise
be  amerced  to  the  King.  Others  again  are  of  opinion,
that  he  must  be  amerced  to  the  King,  and  that  it  after-
wards depends  upon  the  King's  pleasure,  whether  he
will  be  admitted  again  to  institute  that  Action,  or  re-
instated either  unconditionally,  or  subject  to  certain
restrictions.  Thus  far  it  will  suffice  to  have  treated,
where  the  Action  is  prosecuted  without  any  Pledges
being  given.  But,  if  the  Demandant  find  Pledges  for
prosecuting  his  Suit  and  fail  to  appear,  either  person-
ally or  by  another,  on  the  day  appointed,  then  the
Tenant  shall  be  unconditionally  dismissed.  And  the
Demandant  shall  lose  his  Writ,  according  to  the  opin-
ion of  some,  and  the  whole  of  his  Cost ;  and  his  Pledges
shall  be  amerced,  as  before  stated.

But  others  think,  that  he  shall  forfeit  his  Action,

1  Custum.  Sir  Edward  Coke,  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Sta-  •
tute  of  Gloucester,  observes,  that  "  before  that  Statute  at  the
"  common  Law,  no  man  recovered  any  costs  of  suit,  either  in
"  Plea  real,  personal,  or  mixt :  "  and  again,  "  this  Statute  was
"  the  first  that  gave  costs,"  (2  Inst.  288;)  In  support  of  this  po-
sition, he  cites  the  present  chapter  of  our  author.  It  is  extreme-
ly difficult  to  discover,  how  this  chapter  corroborates  Lord  Coke's
position.  Our  author  merely  recites  the  opposite  and  floating
opinions  of  others,  and  drops  the  subject,  without  giving  any
thing  like  an  opinion  of  his  own.  Lord  Coke's  doctrine  may  be
correct  ;  but,  assuredly,  Glanville  cannot  be  cited  as  one  of  the
authorities,  on  which  that  doctrine  is  built.


30

and  his  Pledges,  &c.  But  this  is  the  consequence
when  the  suit  belongs  to  the  Demandant  onlv,  as  it

*/ /

generally  does  in  civil  cases.  When,  however,  the
Suit  does  not  belong  to  him  only,  but  the  King  has  an
interest  in  it,  as  in  a  criminal  Plea,  concerning  a  breach
of  the  King's  peace,  then,  as  the  Demandant  cannot
lose  the  suit,  unless  as  to  himself,  but  is  bound  to  pros-
ecute it,  his  Body  shall  afterwards  be  imprisoned  and
kept  safely,  until  he  clauses  to  prosecute  his  Appeal,1
and,  in  addition,  his  Pledges  shall  be  amerced.


CHAP. XXXIII.

"WHEN  it  happens  that  the  Demandant  and  Tenant
are  both  absent,  then  the  King  or  his  Justices  may  at
their  pleasure,  if  so  disposed,  punish  both  parties,  the
one  for  his  contempt  of  Court,  and  the  other  for  his
false  claim.

1  Upon  the  word  Appeal,  as  designating  a  criminal  proceeding,
it  will  suffice  to  refer  those  readers  not  connected  with  the  pro-
fession to  4  Black.  Comra,  p.  312.  et  seq.


aa.


OF  THE  PROCEEDINGS  USUALLY  RESORTED  TO  ABOUT,
OR  IMMEDIATELY  AFTER  THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF
THE  SUIT  ;  AND  OF  THE  DERAIGNING  OF  THE  TENE-
MENT BY  THE  DUEL,  OR  GRAND  ASSISE ;  AND  OF
THE  CHAMPIONS;  AND  OF  THOSE  THINGS  WHICH
APPERTAIN  TO  THE  DUEL  OR  GRAND  ASSISE.


CHAP. I.

WHEN,  at  last,  both  the  litigating  Parties  are  pres-\
ent  in  Court,  and  the  Demandant  has  proceeded  to
claim  the  Tenement  in  question,  the  Tenant  may  pray
a  Yiew  of  the  Land.

But,  with  respect  to  the  time  which  should  be
allowed  him  for  this  purpose,  a  distinction  is  to  be
made,  whether  the  Tenant  has  more  land  in  the  Yill,
where  the  Land  in  question  is  situated,  or  not.  In  the
latter  case,  no  delay  shall  be  conceded  him  :  but,  if  he
has  more  Land  in  the  Yill,  further  time  shall  be  allowed
him,  and  another  day  given  him  to  appear  in  Court.1

1  "  After  the  verification  of  his  Essoins,"  says  the  Regiam  Ma-
jestatem,  "  he  shall  have  fifteen  days  for  vising  and  seeing  of
"  the  Ground  or  Land,")  (Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.  c.  9.)

31


32

If  he  then  depart  from  Court,  he  may  again  avail
himself  of  three  reasonable  Essoins,  and  the  Sheriff  of
the  County,  where  the  Lands  in  question  are  situated,
shall  be  directed  to  send  free  men  of  his  County  to
view  the  Land,  by  the  following  Writ :


CHAP.  II.

"  THE  King,  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command
"  you  that,  without  delay,  you  send  free  and  lawful
"men  of  the  neighbourhood1  of  such  a  Till,  to  view
"  one  Hyde  of  Land  in  such  a  Vill,  which  M.  claims
"  against  R.  and  of  which  there  is  a  suit  between  them
"  in  my  Court ;  and  have  four  of  them  before  me,  or
"  my  Justices,  such  a  day,  to  testify  of  their  view,  and
"  what  day  they  put  to  him.  "Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  III.

AFTER  the  three  reasonable  Essoins  which  accom-
pany the  view  of  the  Land,2  both  parties  being  again

1  Visineto — "  It  should  be  vicineto. Vicinetum  is  derived  of
"  this  word  vicinus,  and  signifieth  neighbourhood,  or  a  place
"  near  at  hand,  or  a  neighbour  place. And  the  reason,  where-
"  fore,  the  Jury  must  be  of  the  neighbourhood  is  for  that  vici-
"  nus  facta  vicini  presumitur  scire,"  (Co.  Litt.  158.  b.)

2  "  After  three  lawful  Essoins,"  says  the  Reg.  Majestatem,
"  when  the  parties  are  passed  from  the  Court  to  the  sight  of  the
"  Land,  the  Pursuer  shall  beware  that  he  give  distinctly  the
"  sight  of  the  same,  conformably  to  the  metes  contained  in  the
"  King's  writ. For  if  he  gives  the  sight  thereof  otherwise  than


33

present  in  Court,  the  Demandant  should  set  forth  his
demand  1  and  claim  in  this  manner  :  "  I  demand  against
"  this  II.  half  a  Knight's  Fee  or  two  ploughlands,  in
"  such  a  Till,  as  my  Right  and  Inheritance,  of  which
"  my  Father,  or  my  Grand  Father,  was  seised  in  his
"  Demesne  as  of  Fee  in  the  time  of  King  Henry  the
"  First,  or  after  the  first  Coronation  of  our  Lord  the
"  King,  and  from  whence  he  took  the  profits  to  the
"  Value  of  five  shillings  at  least,  as  in  Corn,2  Hay,  and
"  other  produce ;  and  this  I  am  ready  to  prove  by  my
"  Freeman  /.  and,  if  any  accident  happen  to  him,  by
"such  a  one,  or  by  a  third  "  (and  the  Demandant  may
thus  name,  as  many  as  he  chuses,  but  one  of  them  onlv

«/  •f  •/


"  is  contained  in  the  King's  writ  of  Eight,  the  writ  may  be  can-
"  celled  as  null,  and  of  no  avail  in  the  Law."  (Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.
c.  9.)

1  It  will  not  suffice,  says  Bracton,  simply  to  say,  "  I  demand
"  such  Land,  as  my  right,"  unless  the  Demandant  make  out  his
right,  and  shew  how,  and  by  what  means,  it  has  descended  to
him. Neither  will  it  suffice  to  allege,  that  the Ancestor  was
seised  in  his  Demesne  as  of  his  free  Tenement  only,  or  in  his  De-
mesne as  of  Fee  only,  including,  as  it  does,  the  freehold  and
whole  possessory  right,  unless  it  be  added,  that  he  was  so  seised
by  right,  which  comprises  the  right  of  Propriety. Nor,  again,
will  these  two  rights  of  possession  and  of  propriety,  or  the  dreit
dreit,  suffice,  unless  the  Ancestor  held  the  Land  in  question  in
his  Demesne  ;  for  if  he  held  it  in  service,  it  will  not  answer  the
purpose. Neither  will  it  suffice,  that  the  Ancestor  was  seised  as
of  Fee,  and  in  right,  and  in  his  Demesne,  unless  it  be  subjoined
that  he  took  the  Esplees  ;  because  a  momentary  seisin  is  not  suf-
ficient, without  a  taking  of  the  Esplees,  to  found  a  Suit  touching
the  right  of  Propriety. Though all  these  requisites  concur,  it
was  still  necessary  to  add  the  time  of  the  king. (Bracton,  372.  b.
373.  a.)

2  Bladis  signifieth,  says  Lord  Coke,  corn or  grain  whilst  it
groweth. (2  Inst.  81.)

3


31

shall wage  the Duel, J ) "  who saw this or  heard
it:  "2  or  the  Demandant  may  use  other  words  thus—
"  and this  I  am  ready  to  prove  by  my  Free-man  /.  to
"  whom  his  Father, when  on  his  death-bed,  injoined
"  by  the  Faith  which  a  Son  owes  to  his  Father,  that  if
"  he  ever heard a claim concerning that Land,  he
"  should  prove  this  as  that  which  his  Father  saw  and
heard." 3

1  The  judicial  combat  appears  to  have  been  the  most  ancient
mode  of  terminating  controversies  known  to  the  northern  na-
tions in  their  original  settlements. For  Velleius  Patercnlits,  (L.
2.  c.  118)  apprises  us,  that  all  those  questions,  which  were  de-
cided among  the  Romans  by  legal  trial,  were  terminated  among
the  Germans  by  arms. It  was  introduced  into  most,  if  not  all,
of  those  European  nations,  whom  the  Gothic  tribes  subdued. In
unison  with  their  passion  for  arms,  it  was  consecrated  by  their

\superstition.  Countenanced  by  their  Princes,  and  sanctioned
not  unfrequently  by  the  Clergy,  it  long  kept  its  ground.  (Mon-

^tesq.  Spirit  of  Laws.)  One  of  the  earliest  restrictions  of  the
practice,  which  is  eaid  to  occur  in  fiistory,  was  that  imposed  by
our  Henry  the  First,  but  this  merely  prohibited  the  Trial
by  combat,  in  questions  concerning  property  of  small  value.
(Brussel  usage  des  Fiefs,  vol.  ii.  p.  962.)  Louis  the  Seventh,  of
France,  followed  this  example,  and  promulgated  a  similar  law.
This  was  imitated  by  St.  Louis ;  but  his  regulations  extended
only  to  his  own  demesnes,  (Hist,  du  France  par  le  Pere  Daniel
torn.  5.  259.)  It  was  reserved  for  the  steady  and  masterly  hand
of  our  Henry  the  Second,  to  give  the  death  blow  to  the  Trial  by
combat,  by  the  introduction  of  the  Grand  Assise — a  remedy
which,  if  my  memory  does  not  grossly  deceive  me,  is  said  by  Roger
Hoveden,  to  have  been  invented  by  Glanville.

2  The  champion  was  relieved  from  the  necessity  of  taking  an
oath,  that  he  had  seen  or  heard  the  fact,  and  that  his  ancestor  de-
sired him  to  deraign  it,  by  the  41.  c.  West.  1. Until  this  altera-
tion of  the  Law  took  place  "  it  seldom  happened,"  says  the  act,
"  but that the champion of the  Defendant  (it  should  be  De-
"  mandant,  a  translation  the  original  French  requires)  is  for-
"  sworn." (2Inst,  246.)

8  It  is  thus,  according  to  Skene's  translation  of  the  Regiam


35

The  demand  and  claim  of  the  Demandant  being  thus
made,  it  shall  be  at  the  election  of  the  Tenant,  either
to  defend  himself  against  the  Demandant  by  the  Duel,1
or  to  put  himself  upon  the  King's  Grand  Assise,  and

Majestatem — "  I  sick  ane  man  sayes  and  proponis  against  N.
"  that  my  Father,  my  guidshir,  or  my  Brother,  or  Sister,  or  some
"  other  of  my  Parentage  or  kindred,  was  in  the  possession  of  sic
"  ane  Land  by  the  space  of  certain  zieres  and  dayes  ;  quliilk  lyes
'•  in  sic  ane  Towne,  be  certain  meths  and  marches,  betwixt  the
"  Lands  perteining  to  sic  ane  man  :  quhilk  Land  I  dame  to  per-
"  teine  to  me  heritablie,  haldenof  our  Soveraine  Lord  the  King,
"  or  of  sic  ane  other  Lord.  Payand  to  him  zierlie  therefore
"  sameikill  and  toothers  sameikill.  Quhilk  lands,  with  the  perti-
"  nents,  perteins  to  me  heritablie,  be  discent,  or  succession,  be
"  the  death  of  sic  ane  other  of  my  blude  and  consanguinitie,  as
'•  my  awin  proper  right.  The  quhilks  Lands,  with  the  perti-
"  nents,  the  said  N.  be  force  and  unjuslie  halds  fra  me,  against
"  the  Law  of  the  Land  ;  to  my  great  shame  and  skeatli  of  ton
"  pounds  money,  mair  or  lesse.  The  quliilk  gif  the  said  N.
"  denyes.  I  aske  an  assise  of  the  indvvellers  of  sic  ane  Towne  or
"  place  ;  and  referres  my  claim  to  God,  and  ane  gude  assise  of
"  neighbours.  Provyding  that,  na  suspect  persons  passe  upon  the
"  said  assise.  And,  mairover.  that  it  sail  be  lesonie  to  me  to
"  say,  mair  gif  need  beis."  (L.  1.  c.  10.)

1  "  The  Trial  by  Champion  in  a  Writ  of  Right  hath  been  an-
"  ciently  allowed  by  the  common  Law,  and  the  Tenant  in  a
"  Writ  of  Right  hath  election,  either  to  put  himself  upon  the
"  Grand  Assise,  or  upon  the  Trial  by  combat,  by  his  Champion
"  with  the  Champion  of  the  Demandant  ;  which  was  instituted
"upon  this  reason,  that  in  respect  the  Tenant  had  lost  his
"  Evidences,  or  that  the  same  were  burnt  or  imbezeled,  or  that
"  his  witnesses  were  dead,  the  Law  permitted  him  to  try  it  by
"combat  bet  ween  his  Champion  and  the  Champion  of  the  De-
"  mandant,  hoping  that  God  would  give  victory  to  him  that
"right  had;  and,  of  whose  party  the  victory  fell  out,  for  him
"  was  judgment  finally  given,  for  seldom  death  ensued  hereupon
"  (for  their  weapons  were  but  batounes)  victory  only  sufficed."

Sir  Edward  Coke  then  gives  the  form  of  the  champions  oath  ; '
and  adds.  "  the  champions  are  not  bound  to  fight  but  until  the
•'  stars  appear  ;  and  if  the  Tenant  can  defend  himself  until  the
"  stars  appear,  the  Tenant  shall  prevail." (2  Inst.  246.)


36

require  a  Recognition  to  ascertain,  which  of  the  two
have  the  greater  Right  to  the  Land  in  dispute.

If  he  elect  the  former  mode  of  proceeding,  he  must
deny  the  right  of  the  Demandant,  word  for  word  as
the  Demandant  has  set  it  forth,  and  this,  either  in  per-
son, or  by  some  other  fit  man.  But  here  we  should
observe,  that  after  the  Tenant  has  once  waged  the
Duel  he  must  abide  by  his  choice,  and  cannot  after-
wards put  himself  upon  the  Assise.1  In  this  stage  of
the  suit,  the  Tenant  may  again  avail  himself  of  three
reasonable  Essoins  in  succession,  with  respect  to  his
own  person  and  of  the  same  number  with  regard  to  the
person  of  his  Champion.2  All  the  Essoins  \vhichcan
with  propriety  be  resorted  to  having  expired,  it  is
requisite,  before  the  Duel  can  take  place,  that  the  De-
mandant should  appear  in  Court,  accompanied  by  his
Champion  armed  for  the  contest.  Nor  will  it  suffice,
if  he  then  produce  any  other  Champion  than  one  of

1  Assisa  is  derived,  by  Cowell,  from  the  French  asseoir,  to  sit.
The  term  lias  a  variety  of  significations. We  shall  briefly  men-
tion some  of  the  chief. — 1.  It signifieth  a  Writ, thus  assisa  of
novel  disseisin  of  Juris Utrum, &c. 2.  It  signified  a  Jury. 3.
It  meant  a  statute  or  law,  thus  assisa  Demi's  ct  ccrvisice — assisa
de  Clarendon,  &c. 4.  It  is  used for  the  court,  place,  or  time,
where  writs  of  assise  were  taken. 5.  It meant  a  certain  num-
ber. 6.  It  imported  a  tax,  or  tribute. 7.  It  was  used  for  a  fine.
(Vide  Spelm.  Gloss.  Anglo.-Sax.  LL.  Ed.  Wilkins,  p.  328.)

2  Campionis. "  Campio  elicit ur  a  campo,  because  the  combat
"  was  strucken  on  the  field,  and,  therefore  is  called  camp-fight,
"  and  he  must  be  liber  homo." (2  Inst.  246.) In  this  derivation
Spelman  concurs. The  reader  may  consult  the  latter  if  desirous
of  seeing  what  he  terms  formula campi sen-  dncUi. (Gloss.)  —
Also  the  mirror,  c. 3. s. 24. 23. Bracton, the  Assises  of  Jeru-
salem, Grand  Custumary  of  Normandy,  &c.


37

those,  upon  whom  he  put  the  proof  of  his  claim :
neither,  indeed,  can  any  other  contend  for  him,  after
the  Duel  has  been  once  waged.

But  if  he  who  has  waged  the  Duel  should,  in  the  in-
terval pending  the  Suit,  happen  to  die,  a  distinction  is
to  be  made.  If  he  died  a  natural  death,  and  this  is
declared  by  the  Vicinage,  (as  it  ought  always  to  be,  if
there  exist  any  doubt  concerning  the  fact,)  the  Demand-
ant may  in  the  first  place  recur  to  one  of  those  upon
whom  he  placed  his  proof,  or  to  another  proper  person,
even  if  he  have  not  named  any  other,  provided  that
such  other  be  an  unobjectionable  Witness — and  thus
the  Plea  may  begin  again.  If,  however,  his  death  was
occasioned  by  his  own  fault,  his  Principal  .shall  lose
the  cause.  It  may  be  asked,  whether  the  Champion
of  the  Demandant  can  substitute  another  in  Court,  to
make  that  proof  which  he  took  upon  himself  ?  Ac-
cording, indeed,  to  the  Law,  and  ancient  custom  of  the
Realm,1  he  cannot  appoint  any  other,  unless  it  be  his
legitimate  Son  ; 2  and  here  it  may  be  observed,  that  the
Champion  of  the  Demandant  should  be  such  a  person
as  is  a  proper  Witness  of  the  fact.  JSTor  is  it  lawful  for
the  Demandant  to  prosecute  his  appeal  in  his  own  per-
son, because  it  is  not  permitted  unless  by  the  interven-
tion of  a  proper  "Witness,  who  has  both  heard  and  seen
the  fact.

1  Vide  Gul. 1. Instituta  Saxonice  in  textu  Roffensi. item
Somneri  Gloss,  ad  LL.  Hen.  in  voce  Bellum. (Al.  MS

2  Vide  Mirror,  c.  4.  s.  11.


38
But  the  Tenant  mav  defend  himself,  either  in  his  own

t>

proper  person,  if  he  chuse  so  to  do,  or  by  any  other
unobjectionable  Witness,  if  he  prefer  that  course.  But,
if  he  has  produced  a  Champion,  and  such  Champion
should  die  in  the  interval,  it  may  be  asked,  what  the
Law  is,  whether  the  Tenant  may  defend  himself  by
another  Champion,  or  whether  he  ought  to  lose  his
suit,  or  his  seisin  only  ?  We  must  here  have  recourse
to  our  former  distinction.  It  should  also  be  remarked,
that  the  Champion  of  the  Tenant  cannot  substitute
another  in  Court  for  the  purpose  of  undertaking  the
defence,  unless  it  be  his  own  lawful1  Son.

But,  it  frequently  happens,  that  a  hired  Champion
is  produced  in  court,  who,  on  account  of  a  reward,  has
undertaken  the  proof.  If  the  adverse  party  should
except  to  the  person  of  such  a  Champion,  alleging  him
to  be  an  improper  witness,  because  he  had  accepted  a
reward  to  undertake  the  proof,  and  should  add,  that
he  was  prepared  to  prove  this  accusation  against  th.>
Champion,  (if  the  latter  chose  to  deny  it)  either  by
himself  or  by  another,  who  was  present  when  the
Champion  had  taken  the  reward,  the  party  shall  be
heard  upon  this  charge,  and  the  principal  Duel  shall

1  The  Cottonian,  Bodleian,  and  Dr.  Milles's  MS.  concur  in
omitting  lawful,  yet,  that  the  true  reading  is  as  it  stands  in  the
Harleian  MS.  and  in  the  Text,  is  more  than  probable,  since  the
son  of  the  Demandant's  champion  was  to  be  legitimate,  and  there
can  be  no  reason  suggested,  why  the  same  rule  should  not  prevail,
with  respect  to  the  Tenant's  champion.  The  Rule  itself  most
probably  resulted  from  the  warlike  spirit  of  the  age,  and  the  de-
sire to  keep  up  the  dignity  of  a  species  of  trial,  in  which  noble-men
frequently  personally  engaged.


39

be  deferred.  If,  upon  this  charge,  the  Champion  of
the  Demandant  should  be  convicted  and  conquered  in
the  Duel,  then,  his  Principal  shall  lose  the  suit,  and
the  Champion  himself,  as  conquered,  shall  lose  his  law,
namely,  he  shall  from  thenceforth  never  be  admitted
in.  Court,  as  a  "Witness,  for  the  purpose  of  making
proof  by  Duel,  for  any  other  person  ; 1  but,  Avith  respect
to  himself,  he  may  be  admitted,  either  in  defending  his
own  body,  or  in  prosecuting  any  atrocious  personal
injurv,  as  being  a  violation  of  the  King's  Peace.  He
may  also  defend  by  Duel  his  right  to  his  own  Fee  and
Inheritance.

The  Duel  being  finished,  a  fine  of  sixty  shillings a
shall  be  imposed  upon  the  party  conquered,  in  the
name  of  Recreantise,3  and  besides  which  he  shall  lose

1  From  the  Norman  Code  we  learn,  that  the  conquered  Cham-
pion was  incompetent  as  a  witness,  as  a  champion,  as  a  juror,
&c. (Le  Grand  Custum.  de  Norm,  sparsim)  which  indeed  coin-
cides with  the  text  of  Glanville,  in  point  of  substance.

2  Qit i  bellum  vadiaverit  et  perjadicium  defecerit,  60  Sol.  emendet
(LL.  Hen.  1,  c.  59  Ed.  Wilkins.) The  Mirror  says  40s.  and  the
Cottonian  MS.  of  Glanville  9s.  whilst  the  sum  fixed  by  the  Nor-
man code 'was  40s.  and  one  penny.  (Vide  Mirror,  c.  3.  s.  23.  Grand
Custumary  of  Normandy  c.  127.)

3  Recreant isce. "  Now  the  ancient  law  was,  that  the  victory
"  should  be  proclaimed,  that  he  that  was  vanquished  should  ac-
"  knowledge  his  fault  in  the  audience  of  the  people,  or  pronounce
•'  the  horrible  word  of  cravent,  in  the  name  of  recreantise  &c.  and
"  presently  judgment  was  to  be  given,  and  the  recreant  should
"  amittere  legem  &c." (2  Inst.  247) '•  And  the  vanquished  is  to
"  acknowledge  his  offence,  in  the  hearing  of  the  people,  or  speak
"  the  horrible  word  of  cravent,  in  the  name  of  cowardice,  or  his
"  left  foot  to  be  disarmed  and  uncovered,  in  sign  of  Cowardice."
(Mirror,  162  Ed. 1768. "If  he  become  recreant,  that  is  a  cry-
"  ing  coward,  or  craven,  he  shall  for  his  perjury  lose  liberam


40

his  Law ;  and,  if  the  Champion  of  the  Tenant  should
be  conquered,  his  Principal  shall  lose  the  Land  in  ques-
tion, with  all  the  fruits  and  produce  found  upon  it  at
the  time  of  Seisin  of  the  Fee,  and  never  again  shall  be
heard  in  Court  concerning  the  same  Land.1  For  those
matters,  which  have  been  once  determined  in  the  King's
Court  by  Duel,  remain  for  ever  after  unalterable.
Upon  the  determination  of  the  suit,  let  the  Sheriff  be
commanded  by  the  following  Writ,  to  give  possession
of  the  Land  to  the  successful  party.


CHAP.  IV.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you
"  that,  without  delay,  you  give  possession  to  JLT.  of  one
"  Hyde  of  Land,  in  such  a  Yill,  concerning  which  there
"  was  a  suit  between  him  and  It.  in  my  Court ;  because
"  such  Hyde  of  Land  is  adjudged  to  him  in  my  Court,
"  bv  the  Duel.  Witness,  &c."

•>

"  legem.  Craven  is  derived  from  the  Greek  word  Kpaw/v,  a  vocife-
"  ratione:  others  nearer  home  of  crying  and  craving  forgiveness.
"  And  recreantisa  is  devised  of  the  French  recreance,  or  giving
"  back  or  cowardice  ;  and  sometimes  it  is  called  creantia,  per
"  antiphrasen,  because  he  that  useth  it  is  not  faithful  but
"  breaketh  his  oath."  (3  Inst.  221.)

1  Dominus  autem  pro  quo  Duellum  subierat  amittet  penitus
quicquid  per  illud  intendebat  obtinere.  Nee  aliquid  idterius  ipse
vel  Heredes  sui  in  quereld  contentionis  de  cetero  poterunt  recla-
mare.  (Le  Grand  Custourn.  de  Normand.  c.  127.)


41


CHAP.  Y.

THIS  is  the  course  of  proceeding,  when  the  Demand-
ant has  been  successful  in  the  Duel.  But  if  he  has
been  conquered,  in  the  person  of  his  Champion,  then
the  Tenant  shall  be  freed  from  his  claim,  without  any
possibility  of  being  again  disturbed  by  him.  Thus  far
concerning  the  Duel,1  where  the  Tenant  should  chuse
or  elect  that  mode  of  defending  himself,  against  his
Adversary.


CHAP.  VI.

BUT,  if  the  Tenant  should  prefer  putting  himself
upon  the  King's  Grand  Assise,  the  Demandant  must
either  adopt  the  same  course,  or  decline  it.  If  the
Demafldant  has  once  conceded  in  Court  that  he  would
put  himself  upon  the  Assise,  and  has  so  expressed  him-
self before  the  Justices  of  the  Common  Pleas,2  he  can-

1  In  taking  leave  of  the  trial  by  Duel,  the  Reader  will  recal  to
mind  Judge  Blackstone's  observation — that,  though  this  species
of  Trial  is  much  disused,  it  is  still  in  force,  if  the  parties  chuse
to  abide  by  it. (3  Comm.  33G.)

2  Coram  Justiciis  in  Banco  sedentibus  is  the  much  controverted
passage  of  the  Text. Mr.  Reeves  conceives  it  to  mean,  before
the  Justices  in  open  court,  observing,  that  this  phrase  lias  been
quoted  by  some  persons  to  shew,  that  in  the  time  of  Glanville,
there  were  Justices  de  banco,  in  the  modern  sense  of  those  words,
a  construction,  he  proceeds  to  remark,  which  this  passage  will
certainly  not  warrant. (Hist.  Eng.  Law,  1.  125.  in  note.) On
the  same  side  with  Mr.  Reeves  we  find  Mr. Madox,  who  is,  un-
doubted!}', a  very  respectable  authority, did  he  not  indicate
rather  too  strong  an  inclination  to  interpret  the  passage,  in.


42

not  afterwards  retract,  but  ought  either  to  stand  or
fall  by  the  Assise.

If  he  object  to  put  himself  upon  the  Grand  Assise,
lie  ought  in  such  case  to  shew  some  cause,  why  the
Assise  should  not  proceed  between  them — such  as,  that
they  were  of  the  same  blood,  and  sprung  from  the
same  kindred  stock  from  whence  the  Inheritance  itself
descended ;  and  if  the  Demandant  take  this  objection,
the  Tenant  will  either  admit  its  validity,  or  deny  it.

*/ 7  «^'

If  he  admit  it  in  Court,  the  Assise  itself  shall  thereby
cease,  so  that  the  matter  shall  be  verbally  pleaded  and
determined  in  Court ;  because  it  is  then  a  question  in
Law,  which  of  the  parties  is  the  nearer  to  the  original
stock,  and  as  such,  the  Heir  most  justly  entitled  to  the

favor  of  his  own  hypothesis.  (Madox's  Excheq.  c.  19.)  Lord
Hale  follows  on  the  same  side.  "  Neither,"  says  he,  "  do  I  find,
any  distinct  mention  of  the  court  of  common  "  Pleas  in  the  time
of  this  king," — speaking  of  Henry  the  second.  (Hist.  Com.  La\v,
p.  142.)  This,  it  must  be  confessed,  is  but  negative  authority;
for  though  it  may  possibly  be  contended,  that  his  Lordship
viewed  the  doctrine  of  the  Text  in  the  same  light  as  Mr.  Madox
and  Mr.  Reeves  view  it,  yet,  it  is  more  probable,  that  he  had
forgotten  it,  or  he  otherwise  would  have  noticed,  if  merely  to
refute,  it.  As  a  strong  supporter  of  a  contrary  doctrine,  we  find
Lord  Coke.  (2.  Inst.  22.  See  also  pref.  to  8  Rep.  and  Co.  Litt.
71.  b.  and  Mr.  Hargrave's  note.)  The  reasons  adduced  by  Mr.
Reeves  and  those  who  concur  with  him,  appear  by  no  means
conclusive  ;  and  I  think  it  would  be  far  from  difficult  to  give  a
complete  answer  to  them,  from  considering  the  style  and  manner
of  expi-ession  peculiar  to  our  author.  But  as  this  is  purely  a
speculative  point,  at  least  in  the  present  day,  I  am  not  anxious
to  balance  it  inpulvere  scholastico,  as  Mr.  Madox  professes  to  do
it,  but  follow  the  high  authority  of  Lord  Coke,  without  pretend-
ing to  assert,  that  even  his'  opinion  may  not  here  be  liable  to
question,  so  very  doubtful  is  any  conclusion  which  we  may
come  to  upon  the  subject ! !


43

inheritance ;  and,  in  this  manner,  the  nearer  Heir  shall
prove  his  title,  unless  his  adversary  can  allege  in  Court
any  reason,  why  such  Heir  has  lost  his  right,  either  for
a  time  or  perpetually,  or  that  any  Ancestor  of  his  had
so  done ;  as,  for  Example,  that  he  has  given  or  sold  or
exchanged  the  Land  in  question,  or,  by  any  other  mode
which  the  Law  permits,  has  alienated it; or  if  the
Heir,  or  any  of  his  Ancestors,  have  committed  Felony,1
and  forfeited their  rights  entirely,  concerning  which
we  shall  treat  more  fully  hereafter. Should  the  suit
on  any  of  these  grounds  be  delayed,  the  matter  mav
incidentally,  through the  Effect  of  Pleading  having
such  a  tendency,  be  regularly  brought  to  the  Duel.
But  if  he,  who  has  put  himself  upon  the  Assise,  denv
all  Relationship  between  him  and  the  Demandant,  or,
at  least,  insist,  that  they were  not  sprung  from  the
same  stock, from which  the  Inheritance  descended,
then,  recourse  must  be  had  to  the2  common  Kindred
of  both  parties,  who  for  this  purpose  are  to  be  called
into Court, in order that the Relationship of the
parties  to  the  suit  may  be  investigated  on  their  testi-
mony. If  the  Relations  unanimously  affirm,  that  the

1  Vide  Braoton,  130.  s.  19,  20.— Fleta  43.  s.  4.  and  Britton  c.  5.
s.  7.  and  Infra,  L.  7.  c.  17.  &c.

2  But  the  Cottonian  and  Dr.  Milles's  MS.  concur  in  stating  it
to  be,  to  the  Vicinage. That  the  printed  text  of  Glanville  is  cor-
rect, seems  unquestionable,  as  lie  mentions  a  reference  to  the
Vicinage,  after  that  to  the  kindred  had  failed. All  this  is  clear  :
but  according  to  the  MS.  alluded  to,  a  reference  must  be  made
to  the  Vicinage,  after  the  Vicinage,  which  is  assuredly  absurd.
To  this  may  be  added,  that  the  printed  text  corresponds  with
another  part  of  Glanville,  where  an  object,  not  altogether  dis-
similar, is  in  view. Vide  L.  5.  c.  4.


44

litigating  parties  have  descended  from  the  same  stock,
from  whence  the  Inheritance  moved,  their  assertion
is  conclusive,  unless  one  of  the  parties  strongly  persist
in  asserting  the  contrary ;  and,  in  such  case,  recourse
shall  be  had  to  the  Vicinage,  whose  testimony  upon
this  subject,  if  it  coincide  with  that  of  the  Relations,
must  be  unreservedly  acquiesced  in.  The  same  course
must  be  pursued,  if  the  Relations  differ  in  their  Testi-
mony ;  for  then  the  parties  must  abide  by  the  Verdict
of  the  Yicinage.  The  Inquisition  having  been  made,
if  the  Parties  be  unquestionably  found  and  proved  to
have  sprung  from  the  same  stock,  from  which  the
Inheritance  descended,  the  Assise  shall  cease,  and  the
suit  must  verbally  proceed,  as  I  have  before  mentioned.
But,  if  the  contrary  should  appear  to  the  Court  and
the  King's  Justices,  then,  the  Demandant  who  took
the  objection,  that  both  parties  were  sprung  from  the
same  stock,  in  order  maliciously  to  prevent  the  Assise,
shall  lose  his  suit.  If  nothing  intervene  to  impede  the
progress  of  the  Assise,  then  the  question  shall  be  as
finally  terminated  by  that  mode  of  decision  as  by  the
Duel.


CHAP.  TIL
THE  Grand1  Assise  is  a  certain roval benefit be-

V

1  Mr.  Reeves  thinks  the  term  magna  in  the  present  passage  an
interpolation,  because  the  Cottonian,  Bodleian,  and  Harleian
MS.  omit  the  word.  It  is  with  reluctance  I  differ  from  a  writer,
to  whom  the  profession  is  under  such  very  considerable  obliga-
tions— but  I  submit.  1st,  That  the  word  magna  had  occurred  in
the  preceding  chapter,  and  all  these  MS.  had  concurred  in  ad'


45

stowed  upon  the  people,  and  emanating  from  the  clem-
ency of  the  prince,  with  the  advice  of  his  nobles.  So
effectually  does  this  proceeding  preserve  the  lives  and
civil  condition  of  Men,1  that  every  one  may  now  pos-
sess his  right  in  safety,  at  the  same  time  that  he  avoids
the  doubtful  event  of  the  Duel.  Nor  is  this  all :  the

f

severe  punishment  of  an  unexpected  and  premature
Death  is  evaded,  or,  at  least  the  opprobrium  of  a  last-
ing infamy,  of  that  dreadful  and  ignominious  word 2


mitting  it.  Sndly,  That  the  connection  of  the  subject  shews  the
Assise  spoken  of  in  the  two  places,  to  be  one  and  the  same  pro-
ceeding. 3rdly,  That  in  numberless  other  passages  our  author
characterises  this  Assise  by  the  termmagna,  and  most,  if  not  all,
of  the  MS.  admit  it  in  such  passages.  4thly,  That  the  Regiam
Majestatem,  the  Mirror,  the  Diversity  of  Courts,  Bracton,  Fleta,
Lord  Coke,  Judge  Blackstone,  Cowell,  Spelman,  Madox.  and
many  others,  always  speak  of  this  proceeding  under  the  term
Grand  Assise  ;  and  lastly,  that  as  the  word  assisa  had  a  variety
of  meanings,  it  seems  no  less  consistent  with  clearness  of  expres-
sion, than  compatible  witli  the  dignity  of  a  proceeding,  intended
in  its  object  to  effect  so  remarkable  a  revolution  in  our  judicial
polity,  as  the  abolishing  of  the  Duel,  to  attach  some  honorable
term  of  distinction  to  it.

Status  integritati  tarn  salubriter.  Our  Author  alludes  to  the
consequences  that  befel  the  conquered  champion  :  he  lost  his
life,  or  his  laiv  &c.  But,  in  losing  his  law,  his  condition  or  state
in  society,  as  a  civil  character,  was  affected,  being  no  longer
capable  of  waging  the,  Duel  for  another  &c.  The  Assise,  says
he,  is  so  regardful  of  the  lives  of  men — of  their  condition,  as
civil  Beings,  that  it  exposes  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  to  any
danger.

The  whole  chapter  is  sufficiently  crabbed  and  quaint :  indeed,
the  most  difficult  parts  of  the  whole  work  are  those  in  which  the
author  has  aimed  at  being  elegant.

This  observation  applies  with  particular  force  to  our  Author's
Preface.

2  See  Note  page  40.


46

that  so  disgracefully  resounds  from  the 'mouth  of  the
conquered  Champion.

This  legal  Institution  flows  from  the  most  profound
Equity.  For  that  Justice,  which,  after  many  and  long
delays,  is  scarcely,  if  ever,  elicited  by  the  Duel,  is  more
advantageously  and  expeditiously  attained,  through
the  benefit  of  this  Institution.  This  Assise,  indeed,
allows  not  so  many  Essoins  as  the  Duel,  as  will  be  seen
in  the  sequel.  And  by  this  course  of  proceeding,  both
the  labor  of  Men,  and  the  expences  of  the  poor  are
saved.  Besides,  by  so  much  as  the  testimony  of  many
credible  witnesses,  in  judicial  proceedings,  preponder-
ates over  that  of  one  only,  by  so  much  greater  Equity
is  this  Institution  regulated  than  that  of  the  Duel.
For  since  the  Duel  proceeds  upon  the  testimony  of  one
Juror,  this  constitution  requires  the  oaths  of  twelve
lawful  men,  at  least.  These  are  the  proceedings  which
lead  to  the  Assise.  The  party  who  puts  himself  upon
the  Assise  should,  from  the  first,  and  in  order  to  pre-
vent his  Adversary  from  subsequently  impleading  him,
sue  out  a  Writ  for  keeping  the  peace,  the  suit  being
already  pending  between  the  parties  concerning  the
Tenement,  and  the  Tenant  having  put  himself  upon  the
Assise.


CHAP.  YIII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Prohibit  N.
"  that  he  hold  not  in  his  Court  the  Plea  which  is  be-
"tween.  M.  and  H.  of  one  Hyde  of  Land,  in  such  a


47

"  Vill,  which  the  said  12.  claims  against  the  aforesaid
"  M.  by  my  Writ,  unless  the  Duel  be  waged ;  because
"  J/.  the  Tenant  hath  put  himself  upon  icy  Assise,
"and  prays  a  Recognition  to  be  made,  which  of
"  them  have  the  greater  right  to  that  Land.  Wit-
"  ness  &c."  If  the  suit  be  concerning  a  service,  on
account  of  which  the  Tenant  has  put  himself  on  the
Assise,  as  he  is  at  liberty  to  do  if  he  chuse,  then,  the
Writ  will  be  as  follows.


CHAP.  IX.

"THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Prohibit  N.
"  that  he  holds  not  in  his  Court  the  Plea  which  is  be-
"  t  ween  M.  and  R.  of  the  service  of  eight  shillings,  and
"of  one  Quart1  of  Honey,  and  two  stikes2  of  Eels
"which  the  aforesaid  M.  exacts  of  the  aforesaid  R.  for
"-the, Yearly  service  of  his  free  Tenement  that  he  holds
"  of  him,  in  such  a  Yillj  for  .which  Tenement  the  said
"  R.  acknowledges  that  he  owes  him  eight  shillings  a
"  year  for  every  service,  unless  "the  Duel  be  waged  be-
"tween  them,  because  R.  from  whom  the  service  is,
"  required,  puts  himself  on  my  Assise,  and  prays  a  Rec-
"  ognition,  whether  he  owes  eight  Shillings  a  year  for
"  every  service,  and  besides  one  Quart  of  Honey,  and
"  two  stikes  of  Eels.  Witness  &c."

1  Sextarii. Vide  Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voceni.

2  Stikis. A  stike  seems  to  be  25,  sic  dicta  quod  trajecto  vimine,
(quod  stic  dicimus) connectebantur. (Spelm.  Gloss, ad  voc.
stica. )


48


CHAP.  X.

BY  means  of  such  Writs,  the  Tenant  may  protect
himself,  and  may  put  himself  upon  the  Assise,  until  his
Adversary,  appearing  in  Court,  pray  another  Writ,  in
order  that  four  lawful  Knights  of  the  County,  and  of
the  Vicinage,  might  elect  twelve  lawful  Knights  from
the  same  Vicinage,  who  should  say,  upon  their  oaths,
which  of  the  litigating  parties,  have  the  greater  right
to  the  Land  in  question.  The  Writ  for  the  summoning
of  the  four  Knights  is  as  follows


CHAP.  XI.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  Summon,  by
"  good  summoners,  four  lawful  Knights  of  the  Vicinage
"of  Stoke,  that  they  be  at  the  Pentecost  before  me, or
"  my  Justices,  at  Westminster,  to  elect  on  their  oaths,
"  twelve  lawful  Knights  of  that  Vicinage,  who  better
"  know  the  truth,  to  return,  on  their  oaths,  whether
"  J/.  or  R.  have  the  greater  right  in  one  Hyde  of  Land
"  in  Stoke,  which  J/.  claims  against  It.  by  my  Writ,
"  and  of  which  7?.  the  Tenant,  hath  put  himself  upon
"  my  Assise  and  prays  a  Recognition  to  be  made,  which
" of  them  have  the  greater  right  in  that  Land;  and,
"  cause  their  names  to  be  imbreviated.  And  summon,
"by  good  Summoners,  E.  who  holds  the  Land,  that

i  Vide  F.  N.  B.  9.


49

"  he  be  then  there  to  hear  the  election,  and  have  there
<{  the  Suinmoners,  &c."


CHAP.  XII.

AT  such  day  the  Tenant may  essoin  himself,  and
have  recourse  to  three  reasonable  Essoins.


And  this,  indeed,  appears  but  right  ;  since,  as  we
have  explained  in  a  former  part  of  this  Treatise,  as
often  as  any  one  appears  in  Court,  and  there  performs
that  which  the  Law  requires  of  him,  he  may  again  re-
cur to  his  Essoins.

But,  then,  it  would  happen,  or,  at  least  it  might  so,
that  as  many,  if  not  a  greater  number,  of  Essoins,  ma}7
intervene  in  the  remedy  of  the  Grand  Assise,  as  of  the
Duel,  which  is  by  no  means  compatible  with  what  we
have  already  laid  down.  Let  us,  then,  suppose,  that
the  Tenant  has  cast  three  successive  Essoins  against
the  election  of  the  twelve,  by  the  four  Knights.  After
these  three  Essoins,  and  upon  the  Tenant  appearing  in
Court,  one  or  more  of  the  four  Knights  may  on  the
same  day  cast  an  Essoin  ;  and,  if  this  be  conceded,  the
Tenant  might  again,  after  the  Essoins  of  the  four
Knights  were  expired,  essoin  himself  afresh,  and  thus
the  Assise  could  scarcely,  if  ever,  be  brought  to  a  con-
clusion. We  should,  therefore,  observe,  that  a  certain
just  Constitution  l  has  been  passed,  under  which  the

1  A  Constitution,  an  Institution,  an  Assise,  were  promiscuously
employed  to  designate  a  Statute  or  Law.
4


50

Court  is  authorised  to  expedite  the  suit,  upon  the  four
Knights  appearing  in  Court  on  the  day  appointed
them,  and  being  prepared  to  proceed  to  the  election  of
the  twelve  Knights.  Upon  this  occasion,  whether  the
Tenant  appear  or  absent  himself,  the  four  Knights
shall  proceed  upon  their  oaths  to  elect  the  twelve.
But,  if  the  Tenant  himself  be  present  in  Court,  he  may
possibly  have  a  just  cause  of  Exception  against  one  or
more  of  the  Twelve,  and  concerning  this  he  should  be
heard  in  Court.  It  is  usual,  indeed,  for  the  purpose  of
saiisf}ring  the  absent  party,  not  to  confine  the  number
to  be  elected  to  twelve,  but  to  comprise  as  many  more
as  may  incontrovertibly  satisfy  such  absent  party,
when  he  return  to  Court.  For  Jurors  may  be  excepted
against,  by  the  same  means  by  which  "Witnesses  in  the
Court  Christian  are  justly  rejected.1  It  should  also  be
observed,  that  if  the  party,  who  has  put  himself  upon
the  grand  Assise,  appear,  although  some  of  the  four
Knights  are  absent,  the  twelve  may  be  elected  by  one
of  the  four  taking  to  himself  two  or  three  other
Knights  from  the  same  County,  if  such  happen  to  be
in  Court,  though  not  summoned  for  the  purpose,  pro-
vided such  course  of  proceeding  meet  with  the  appro-
bation of  the  Court,  and  be  mutually  consented  to  by
the  litigating  parties.  But,  for  greater  caution,  and  to
avoid  all  possible  cavil,  it  is  usual  to  summon  six  or
more  Knights  to  Court,  for  the  purpose  of  making  the
election.

*

1 "  All  the  persons  suspect  to  either  of  the  party,"  says  the
Regiam  Majestatem,  "  shall  be  repelled."  (Vide  Reg.  Majesta-
tem,  L.  1.  c.  10.)  See  also  Bracton  185.  a.


51

Indeed,  if  the  object  be  to  expedite  the  proceedings,
it  will  more  avail  to  follow  the  direction  of  the  Court,
than  to  observe  the  accustomed  course  of  the  Law.  It
is,  therefore,  committed  to  the  discretion,  and  Judg-
ment of  the  King  or  his  Justices,  so  to  temper  the
proceeding,  as  to  render  it  more  beneficial  and  equi-
table.


CHAP.  XIII.

BUT  any  person  may  put  himself  upon  the  Assise
concerning  a  Service,  or  Land,  and  besides,  concerning
demands  of  service,  and  concerning  the  Right  of
Advowson  to  any  Church.  Nor  is  the  party  confined
to  this  remedy,  as  against  a  stranger  merely,  but  he
may  avail  himself  of  it  against  his  Lord  for  the  pur-
pose of  ascertaining,  whether  the  Lord  has  greater
Eight  to  retain  the  object  in  question  in  his  Demesne,
or  the  Tenant  to  hold  it  of  him.  It  is  easy  to  form  a
"Writ,  adapted  to  the  variety  of  circumstances.


CHAP. XIV.

THE  Election  of  the  twelve  Knights  having  been
made,  they  should  be  summoned  to  appear  in  Court,
prepared  upon  their  oaths  to  declare,  which  of  them,
namely,  whether  the  Tenant,  or  the  Demandant,  pos-
sess the  greater  right  to  the  property  in  question.  Let
the  Summons  be  made  by  the  following  Writ —


52


CHAP.  XV.

u  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon,  by
"  good  Summoners,  those  twelve  Knights  R.  and  N.
"  (naming  each)  that  they  be,  on  such  a  clay,  before
"  me  or  my  Justices  at  such  a  place,  prepared  on  their
"  oaths  to  return,  whether  R.  or  N.  have  greater
"  right,  in  one  Hyde  of  Land,  or  in  the  subject  matter
"  of  dispute,  which  the  aforesaid  R.  claims  against
"  the  aforesaid  N.  and  of  which  the  aforesaid  N.  the
"  Tenant,  has  put  himself  upon  our  Assise,  and  has
"  prayed  a  Recognition,  which  of  them  have  the
"  greater  right  to  the  thing  in  question ;  and,  in  the
"  mean  time,  let  them  view  the  Land  or  Tenement  it-
"  self,  of  which  the  service  is  demanded  ;  and  Sum-
"  mon,  by  good  Summoners,  N.  the  Tenant,  that  he
"  be  then  there  to  hear  that  Recognition,  &c."


CHAP. XVI.

ON  the  day  fixed  for  the  attendance  of  the  twelve
Knights  to  take  the  Recognition,  whether  the  Tenant
appear,  or  absent  himself,  the  Recognition  shall  pro-
ceed without  delay ;  nor  shall  any  Essoin  avail  the
Tenant,  because  as  his  presence  is  not  requisite,  the
Recognition  may  proceed  without  him;1  since,  if  he

1  "  The  absence  of  either  of  the  Parties  shall  not  stay  the
"  Assise  to  proceed,  seeing  they  did  consent  that  the  matter
"  should  pass  to  the  knowledge  of  an  Assise."  (Regiara  Majes-
tatem,  L.  1.  c.  12.)


53

were  present,  he  would,  by  having,  when  in  Court,  put
himself  upon  the  Grand  Assise,  be  precluded  from
alleging  any  reason,  why  it  should  be  deferred.  It  is
different  with  respect  to  the  absence  of  the  Demandant.
If  he  should  essoin  himself,  the  Assise  shall,  for  that
day,  be  deferred,  and  another  day  shall  be  given  in
Court ;  because  though  a  Party  may  lose  by  his  default,
no  one  when  absent  shall  gain  anything.


CHAP.  XVII.

the  Assise  proceeds  to  make  the  Recognition,
the  right  will  be  well  known  either  to  all  the  Jurors,
or  some  may  know  it,  and  some  not,  or  all  may  be
alike  ignorant  concerning  it.  If  none  of  them  are
acquainted  with  the  truth  of  the  matter,  and  this  be
testified  upon  their  oaths  in  Court,  recourse  must  be
had  to  others,  until  such  can  be  found  who  do  know
the  truth  of  it.  Should  it,  however,  happen  that  some
of  them  know  the  truth  of  the  matter,  and  some  not,
the  latter  are  to  be  rejected,  and  others  summoned  to
Court,  until  twelve,  at  least,  can  be  found  who  are
unanimous.1  But,  if  some  of  the  Jurors  should  decide
for  one  party,  and  some  of  them  for  the  other,' ^hen,
others  must  be  added,  until  twelve,  at  least,  can  be  ob-

1  Concerning  this  mode  of  supplying  the  Jurors,  termed  in  our
old  La\v  Books  afforciament,  the  Reader  may  consult  the  Mirror,
c.  4.  s.  24.— Bracton,  L.  4.  c.  19.— Biitton,  p.  136.— Fleta,  4.  c.  9.
s.  9.  and  Mr.  Kelham's  Translation  of  Britton's  Pleas  of  the
Crown.  Note  22.  p.  35.


54

tained  who  agree  in  favor  of  one  side.  Each  of  the
Knights  summoned  for  this  purpose  ought  to  swear,
that  he  will  neither  utter  that  which  is  false,  nor
knowingly  conceal  the  truth.  With  respect  to  the
knowledge  requisite  on  the  part  of  those  sworn,  they
should  be  acquainted  with  the  merits  of  the  cause,
either  from  what  they  have  personally  seen  and  heard,
or  from  the  declarations  of  their  Fathers,  and  from
other  sources  equally  entitled  to  credit,  as  if  falling
within  their  own  immediate  knowledge.1


CHAP.  XVIII.

the  twelve  Knights,  who  have  appeared  for
the  purpose  of  making  Recognition,  entertain  no  doubt
about  the  truth  of  the  thing,  then,  the  Assise  must
proceed  to  ascertain,  whether  the  Demandant,  or
Tenant,  have  the  greater  right  to  the  subject  in
dispute.

But  if  they  decide  in  favor  of  the  Tenant,  or  make
any  other  declaration,  by  which  it  should  sufficiently
appear  to  the  King,  or  his  Justices,  that  the  Tenant
has  greater  right  to  the  subject  in  dispute,  then,  by  the
Judgment  of  the  Court,  he  shall  be  dismissed,  for  ever
released  from  the  claim  of  the  Demandant,  who  shall

1  The  Reader  will  remark  the  singular  coincidence,  in  many
respects,  between  the  two  proceedings,  the  Duel  and  the  Grand
Assise.  This  was  no  doubt  intentional,  and  indicated  a  wise
and  political  tenderness  towards  the  prejudices  of  the  age,  still
strongly  inclining  towards  the  trial  by  Battle.


55

never  again  be  heard  in  Court  with  effect  concerning
the  matter.  For  those  questions  which  have  been
once  lawfully  determined  by  the  King's  Grand  Assise,
shall  upon  no  subsequent  occasion  be  with  propriety
revived.  But,  if  by  this  Assise  it  be  decided  in  Court
in  favor  of  the  Demandant,  then,  his  Adversary  shall
lose  the  Land  in  question,  which  shall  be  restored  to
the  Demandant,  together  with  all  the  fruits  and
produce  found  upon  the  Land  at  the  time  of  Seisin.1


CHAP. XIX.2

A  PUNISHMENT  is  ordained  for  those  who  rashly
swear  in  this  Assise.  and  is  with  much  propriety  in-
serted in  that  Royal  Institution.3  For  if  the  Jurors

1  "  Because,"  says  the  Regiam  Majestatem,  "the  fruits  extant
"  and  dependant  upon the  ground  are  part  of the Land  and
"  ground." (L.  1.  c.  12.)

2  It  may  be  here  noticed,  that  the  present  chapter  is  one  of  the
authorities  to  which  Lord  Coke  appeals,  in  support  of  his  position,
that  an  attaint  lay  at  common  Law,  both  in  Pleas  real  and  per-
sonal. '(2  Inst.  129,  236.)

3  In  commenting  upon  the  Statute  de  finibus  levatis.  27.  Ed.  1.
Mr.  Barrington  observes,  "  the  Statute  consists  of  four  chapters,
"  and  the  first  states,  the  great  perjury  which  prevailed  among
"  Jurors  at  this  time,  which  offence  in  a  witness  was  not  now
"  punishable by  any  Act  of Parliament ; it may be perhaps
"  thought  a  reflection  on  the  common  Law  to  assert,  that  this
"  crime  was  totally  disregarded,  but  yet  we  do  not  hear  of  any
"  such  prosecution,  except  the  attaint  of  a  Jury  be  considered  as
"  such." (Observ.  on  Anc.  Stat.  176.) It  will  not,  I  trust,  be
considered  as  a  want  of  respect  for  the  high  authority  in  ques-
tion, to  observe,  that  the  general  position  intended  to  be  sup-
ported, seems  to  be  refuted  by  the  latter  part  of  the  passage,  if,
as I conceive,  the  Juror  was,  in  those  times,  of  necessity  a


56

shall,  by  due  course  of  Law,  be  convicted,  or,  by  legal
Confession,  be  proved  to  have  perjured  themselves  in
Court,  they  shall  be  despoiled  of  all  their  Chattels
and  Moveables,  which,  shall  be  forfeited  to  the  King,
although  by  the  great  clemency  of  the  Prince,  their
freehold  Tenements  are  spared.  They  shall  also  be
thrown  into  prison,  and  be  there  detained  for  one  year
at  least.  In  fine,  deprived  for  ever  after  of  their  Law,
they  shall  justly  incur  the  mark  of  perpetual  infamy.
This  penalty  is  properly  ordained,  in  order  that  a
similarity 1  of  punishment  may  deter  Men  in  such  a
Case,  from  the  unlawful  use  of  an  Oath.

It  should  be  observed,  that  the  Duel  never  shall  be
waged  in  a  case  where  the  Assise  cannot  be  resorted
to.  The  converse  of  the  proposition  equally  holds.


u-itness  :  it  was  part  of  bis  qualification  that  he  was  a  witness,
the  two  characters  being  then  blended.  This  is,  I  submit,  evi-
dent from  the  17th  chapter  of  the  present  book.  A  separation
of  character  seems  to  have  been  the  gradual  effect  of  posterior
times.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  punishment  of  a  Juror,  when  guilty
of  perjury,  appears  from  the  present  chapter  of  Glanville  to
have  been  imposed  by  an  Act  of  Parliament.  If  this  Act,  like
most,  if  not  all,  of  those  mentioned  in  the  following  pages,  be
not  now  extant,  it  is  assuredly  no  small  part  of  the  merit  of
Glanville,  that  he  has  preserved  the  substance  of  those  public
Records,  of  which  no  other  trace  can  be  found.

1  Our  author  seems  to  allude  to  the  punishment  inflicted  on
the  conquered  Champion — such  Champion's  cowardice  being
esteemed  a  species  of  perjury,  as  Lord  Coke  informs  us,  with
which  the  perjury  of  the  Jurors  in  the  assise  was  commensurate.
The  same  principle  pervades  the  Norman  Code — Omnes  autem
illi,  qui  perjurio  vel  Icesione  fidei  surd  infames,  ab  hoc  etiam
sunt  repellendi ;  et  omnes  illi  qui  in  bello  succubuerunt.  (Le
Grand  Coustoum.  de  Normand.  c.  62.)


57

If  the  Land  in  question  be  adjudged  to  the  Demand-
ant, he  shall  be  remitted  to  the  Sheriff  of  the  County,
where  the  Land  is  situated,  in  order  to  recover  his
possession.

And,  for  this  purpose,  he  shall  have  the  following
Writ


CHAP.  XX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you
"  that,  without  delay,  you  deliver  possession  to  N.  of
"  one  Hyde  of  Land,  in  such  a  Yill,  which  he  claims
"  against  R.  of  which  the  said  R.  put  himself  upon  my
"  Assise,  because  the  said  R.1  has  recovered  that  Land
"  in  my  Court  by  a  Recognition.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP. XXI.

\

BUT,  if  there  are  not  any  Knights  to  be  found  in  the
Vicinage,  nor  in  the  County  itself,  who  are  acquainted
with  the  truth  of  the  matter  in  dispute,  it  is  a  question,
what  steps  shall  be  resorted  to  ?

"Whether,  from  that  circumstance  alone,  the  Tenant
shall  prevail  against  his  Adversary  ?

If  this  be  answered  in  the  affirmative,  shall  the  De-
mandant lose  his  Right,  supposing  he  has  any  ?  A
doubt,  indeed,  may  be  entertained  upon  this  subject.

i  This  R.  should  be  N.


58

Let  us  suppose  that  two  or  three  lawful  men,  or  even
more,  provided  the  number  did  not  exceed  twelve,
who,  as  Witnesses  of  the  fact,  should  offer  themselves
in  Court,  to  prove  it.  Let  us,  even,  suppose  that  they
were  of  such  an  age  as  to  be  qualified  to  make  proof
by  the  Duel,  and  should  make  use  of  all  such  words  in
Court,  on  account  of  which  the  Duel  is  generally
awarded.  After  all  this,  it  may  be  doubted,  whether
\.any  of  them  shall  be  heard  upon  the  subject.


ioolt  33J.


OF  WARRANTORS  ;  AND  OF  TWO  LORDS,  UNDER  ONE
OF  WHOM,  THE  DEMANDANT  AVOWTS,  AND  UNDER
THE  OTHER,  THE  TENANT.


CHAP. I.

WHEN  the  presence  of  the  Tenant  only  happens  to
be  requisite,  and  in  itself  precludes  the  necessity  of
any  other  person  appearing  to  answer,  the  order  of
Pleading  which  is  observed  in  Court  is  such  as  we
have  described.

But  the  presence  of  another  party  becomes  no  less
necessary  than  that  of  the  Tenant,  if  the  latter  declare
in  Court,  that  the  subject  in  dispute  is  not,  his  own,
but  that  he  merely  holds  it,  as  a  Loan,1  or  a  Hireing,
or  a  Pledge,  or  as  committed  to  his  Custody,  or  in
some  other  mode  entrusted  to  him  by  another ;  or  if
he  should  allege,  that  the  property  were  his  own,  but
that  he  had  a  Warrantor2  from  whom  he  had  received

1  Commodatam,  locatam,  &c. The  Reader  will  recognise  these
Terms  as  borrowed  from  the  Roman  Law.

In  the  tenth  Book,  our  author  resumes  the  discussion  of  them.

2  Warrant um. Sir  Henry  Spelman  is  inclined  to  derive  this
Term  from  the  Saxon  Primitive  War,  arma,  telum,  defensio,  &c.

59


60

it,  either  as  a  Gift,  or  Sale,  or  in  Exchange,  or,  gener-
ally, found  his  Title  to  the  thing  upon  any  other  cause
of  this  nature.

^

If  the  Tenant  should  declare  in  Court,  that  the
property  is  not  his  own,  but  belongs  to  another,  then,
such  other  person  must  be  summoned  by  another  AYrit,
but  yet  of  a  similar  nature — and  thus  the  plea  shall  be
commenced  anew  against  him.  And  when  such  other
person  at  last  appears  in  Court,  he  in  the  same  manner
will  declare,  either  that  the  property  belongs  to  him,
or  not.  If  the  latter,  then,  the  party  who  had  first
asserted  in  Court,  that  the  property  did  belong  to  him,
shall  thereby  lose  the  Land  irretrievably,  and  he  shall
be  summoned  to  appear  in  Court,  and  hear  his  Judg-
ment ;  and  thus,  whether  he  appear  or  absent  himself,
his  Adversary  shall  recover  possession.  When  the
Tenant  call  a  person  into  Court  to  warrant  the  Landr
then,  a  reasonable  day  shall  be  given  him  in  Court  to
produce  such  person  there  ;  and  thus  he  may  anew
recur  to  three  Essoins,  with  respect  to  his  own  person,
and  to  the  same  number,  with  regard  to  the  person  of

J  cj  A.

Dr.  Sullivan  tells  us,  it  was  derived  from  War,  because,  in  real
Actions,  the  Trial  was  of  old  by  Combat.  Dr.  Cowell,  however,
prefers  deriving  imrrantia  from  the  French  garantie  or  garant.
The  Doctor  notices  the  stipulatio  of  the  Civilians,  but,  as  he  ob-
serves, "  this  reacheth  not  so  far  as  our  warranty."  The  term,
it  seems,  is  of  great  antiquity,  and  is  said  not  to  have  been  un-
known to  the  Longobardi  in  their  original  settlements.  (Spenu.
Gloss,  ad  voc.  and  Cowell's  Interpreter,  ad  voc.  and  Sullivan's
Lectures,  119.)  It  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  these  notes,
to  bi'ing  the  Law  down  to  the  present  day. — The  translator
would  otherwise  have  availed  himself  largely  of  Bracton's  5th
book.  Fleta,  L.  5.  c.  4.  Britton,  197,  &c.  Co.  Litt.  364.  b.  et
seq.  and  Mr.  Butler's  admirable  annotations.


61

his  Warrantor.  The  person  cited  to  warrant  having1
at  last  appeared  in  Court,  he  will  either  enter  into  the
warranty  of  the  subject  in  dispute,  or  decline  it.  If
he  adopt  the  former  course,  he  then  becomes  a  Prin-
cipal Party  in  the  suit,  so  that  the  remainder  of  the
cause  shall  be  entirely  carried  on  in  his  name ;  but  if,
previous  to  this  step,  he  essoin  himself,  the  Tenant
cannot  excuse  himself  by  an  Essoin,  but,  if  absent,
shall  be  adjudged  in  default.  If,  however,  the  person
called  to  warrant,  being  present  in  Court,  should  fail
in  entering  into  the  warranty,  then,  the  plea  must
altogether  be  continued  between  him  and  the  party
who  has  called  him — and  thus,  by  means  of  pleading
conducive  to  such  an  end,  the  matter  may  come  to  the
decision  of  the  Duel,  and  that,  whether  the  Tenant  can
produce  his  Charter  of  Warranty,  or  not,  if  he  be  pre-
pared with  an  unobjectionable  AVitness  to  make  proof,
and  he  is  willing  to  undertake  it.  It  should  be  ob-
served, that  when  it  is  once  ascertained,  that  the  per-
son cited  to  warrant  ought  to  take  that  obligation  upon
him,  the  Tenant  shall  not  afterwards  lose  the  property
in  dispute,  because  if  such  property  should  be  recov-
ered in  Court,  the  Warrantor  shall  be  bound  to  make
the  Tenant  a  competent  equivalent 1  if  he  possess  suf-
ficient means  so  to  do.

1  Escajnbium,  a  term  used  in  Domesday.  Sir  Edward  Coke,  in
speaking  of  a  warranty,  observes,  that  it  is  a  covenant  real,  an-
nexed to  Lands,  whereby  a  man  and  his  heirs  are  bound  to  war-
rant the  same  "  and  to  yield  other  Lands  and  Tenements  (which
"  in  old  books  is  called  in  Excambio)  to  the  value  of  those  that
"  shall  be  evicted  by  a  former  title."  (See  Co.  Litt.  365.  a.  and
51  b.)  It  should  seem  from  Bracton,  that  if  the  warrantor  had


62


CHAP.  II.

BUT  it  sometimes  happens,  that  the  person  called  to
Court  to  warrant  is  unwilling  to  appear  there,  either
for  that  purpose,  or  to  shew  that  he  ought  not  to  war-
rant to  the  Tenant  the  property  in  question.  In  that
case,  upon  the  petition  of  the  Tenant,  and  by  the  order
and  indulgence  of  the  Court,  the  reluctant  party  shall
be  compelled  to  do  so,  and  he  shall  be  summoned  by
the  following  Writ.


CHAP. III.

"  The  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon,  by
"  good  Summcners,  N.  that  he  be  before  me,  or  my
"  Justices,  there  on  a  certain  day  to  warrant  to  12.  one
"  Hyde  of  Land,  in  such  a  Yill,  which  he  claims  as  his
"  Gift,  or  the  Gift  of  M.  his  Father,  if  he  will  war-
not  sufficient  property  to  make  a  full  restitution,  he  was  to  do  so
as  far  as  his  property  extended,  and  the  Tenant  was  to  wait,  until
better  times,  for  the  deficiency.  If  the  Warrantor  had  no  prop-
erty, he  was  not,  from  that  circumstance,  to  be  entirely  absolved
from  making  restitution,  whilst  there  was  any  probability  of  his
inheriting  property  from  that  person,  on  account  of  whom  he  was
called  to  warrant.

On  the  other  hand,  he  was  'not  bound  to  warrant  the  deed  of
his  ancestor,  at  the  expense  of  any  purchase  made  by  himself. —
Nor  was  the  recompense  to  be  estimated,  beyond  the  value  of  the
property  at  the  time  it  was  originally  warranted. — Nor  was  one
of  many  warrantors,  required  to  bear  the  burthen  solely,  the
others  being  obliged  to  contribute,  (Bracton,  394.  b.  395  a.  See
also  le  Grand  Coustoum.  de  Norm.  c.  50.)


63

"  rant  it  to  him,  or  to  shew  wherefore  he  ought  not  to-
"  warrant  it  to  him  ; and  have  the  Summoners  and
"  this  Writ. Witness  Banuph,  &c."


CHAP.  IV.

ON  the  day  appointed,  the  Warrantor  can  either
essoin  himself,  or  not.  If  not,  then,  that  indulgence,
which  is  allowed  to  another  would  be  denied  him,  not
being  culpable  ;  which  would  be  no  less  inconvenient
than  unjust.1  If  he  may  essoin  himself,  let  us  suppose
that  he  has  properly  essoined  himself  three  times  suc-
cessively, it  should  on  the  third  day,  according  to  the
Law  and  practice  of  the  Court,  be  ordered,  that  he  ap-
pear on  the  fourth  day,  or  send  an  Attorney.  If,  on
that  da}7",  he  neither  appear  nor  send  an  Attorney,  it
seems  a  question  what  steps  are  to  be  pursued.  Be-
cause were  the  Tenement  to  be  taken  into  the  King's
hands,  such  a  step  would  seem  an  injustice  committed
on  the  right  of  the  Tenant,  since  he  has  not  been  ad-
judged in  default.

But  if  this  course  be  not  pursued,  then  the  right  of
the  Demandant,  supposing  he  possesses  any,  would  be
unjustly  deferred.  And,  indeed,  the  course  mentioned

1  "At  the  day  assigned  to  the  warrantor  for  appearance,  he
"  may  essoin  himself ,  or  not  essoin  himself.

"  If  he  neither  appears,  nor  sends  an  Essoin,  the  power  and
"  benefit  of  the  Law  shall  be  denied  to  him  which  is  granted  to
"  others  :  for  it  is  an  unseemly  thing  and  an  iniquity  (that  he
"being  summoned,  appears  not  by  himself  nor  by  another."
(Reg.  Maj.  L.  1,  c.  21.)


64

shall  be  adopted,  as  most  consonant  to  the  Law  and
Custom  of  the  Realm.  Because,  if  any  one  should  lose
his  Land,  or  merely  the  possession  of  it,  through  the
default  of  his  Warrantor,  the  latter  shall  be  compelled
to  make  him  an  equivalent  recompense,  and  may,  there-
fore, by  means  of  the  foregoing  "Writ,  be  distrained  to
appear  in  Court,  and  warrant  the  Tenement  itself,  or
shew  some  reason  on  account  of  which,  he  should  be
exempt  from  the  obligation  of  warranty.


CHAP.  Y.

IT  sometimes  happens,  that  the  Tenant,  although  he
has  a  Warrantor,  does  not  call  him  into  Court,  but
takes  upon  himself  entirely  to  dispute  the  Demand-
ant's claim.

If  the  Tenant  should  pursue  this  course,  and  should
lose  the  Land  in  question  by  the  Duel,  he  cannot  after-
wards recover  any  thing  against  the  Warrantor.1

But,  according  to  this,  a  question  may  be  proposed,
whether,  as  any  one  can  defend  himself  by  the  Duel,
without  the  assent  and  presence  of  his  Warrantor,  he
can  put  himself  upon  the  King's  Grand  Assise,  without
the  assent  and  presence2  of  the  Warrantor?  And,
indeed,  he  may  defend  himself  by  the  Assise  upon  a
parity  of  reason  as  by  the  Duel.

1  Having  laid  down  the  same  doctrine,  the  Regiam  Majestatem
adds,  "it  is  so  to  be  understood  of  all  other  things  debateable,
"  whereof  the  Warrantor  is  not  called  in  lawful  time." (L.  1.  c.
22.)

2  Knowledge,  according  to  the  Harl.  and  Bodl.  MS.


65


CHAP.  VI.

BUT  it  sometimes  happens,  that  the  matter  is  de-
ferred on  account  of  the  absence  of  the  Lords,  when,
for  example,  the  Demandant  claims  the  Tenement  in
question,  as  belonging  to  the  fee  of  one  Lord,  and  the
Tenant,  as  belonging  to  that  of  another.  In  such  a
case,  both  the  Lords  must  be  summoned  to  Court,  in
order  that,  in  their  presence,  the  Plea  may  be  heard,
and,  in  the  accustomed  manner,  decided,  least  any
injustice  should  seem  to  be  done  to  them  when  absent.

But  upon  the  day  on  which  they  are  summoned  to
appear  in  Court,  both  or  either  of  them  may  lawfully
cast  an  Essoin,  and  this  three  times  in  the  usual  man-
ner. Should  the  Lord  of  the  Tenant  have  recurred  to
three  Essoins,  it  should  be  ordered,  that  he  appear
personally  in  Court,  or  send  his  Attorney.

If  after  this,  he  neither  appear,  nor  send  his  Attor-
ney, let  the  Tenant  be  directed  to  Answer  and  take
the  defence  upon  himself;  and,  if  he  should  prevail,  he
shall  retain  the  Land  to  himself,  and  from  thenceforth
shall  do  service  to  the  King,  because  his  Lord  shall
lose  his  service  through  his  default,  until  he  appear
and  perform  there  that  which  he  ought  to  do.


In  the  same  manner,  may  the  Lord  of  the  Demand-
ant essoin  himself;  but,  when  he  at  last  appear  in
Court,  it  may  be  asked,  whether  the  Lord  of  the  Ten-
ant can  again  essoin  himself  ?  He  may,  indeed,  until


5


66

he  has  once  appeared  in  Court ;  because  it  is,  then,
incumbent  upon  him  to  allege  some  reason,  why  he
ought  not  to  wait  any  longer ;  and  this  Rule  equally
prevails  with  respect  to  the  person  of  either  Lord.
But  if,  after  having  availed  himself  of  three  Essoins,
the  Lord  of  the  Demandant  should  be  absent,  it  may
be  a  question,  what  the  Law  is  ?  If,  indeed,  he  should
have  first  essoined  himself,  the  Essoiners  themselves
shall  be  taken  into  custody,  and  the  body  of  the  De-
mandant himself  shall  be  attached,1  on  account  of  his
contempt  of  Court ;  and  thus  he  shall  be  distrained  to
appear  in  Court,  that  it  may  be  heard  what  he  has  to
allege.


CHAP.  VII.

WHEN  both  the  Lords  appear  in  Court,  the  Lord  of
the  Tenant  will  warrant  the  Land  in  question,  as  in

1  Attachiabitur.  Attachiare  is  said  to  be  derived  from  the
French  attacker.  It  differed  from  arrestere  in  many  respects.
An  Arrest,  say  the  old  Books,  proceeds  out  of  the  inferior  courts
by  precept ;  an  attachment,  out  of  the  superior  courts  by  pre-
cept, or  writ.  (Lamb.  Eiren.  L.  1.  c.  16.)  An  Arrest  lies  only
against  the  body  of  a  Man  ;  an  Attachment,  sometimes  against
the  goods  only.  Thus  Kitch.  (fol.  279.  b.)  says,  p  man  may
attach  a  cow  ;  and,  in.  another  case,  that  a  man  may  be  attached
by  a  hundred  sheep ;  and  it  is  sometimes  awarded  against  the
body  and  goods  together.  An  Attachment  is  said  to  differ  from
a  capias,  because  the  former  is  more  general  and  extends  to  the
taking  of  the  goods,  a  capias  extending  to  the  body  only.  An
Attachment  is  laid  down  as  differing  from  a  Distress,  inasmuch,
as  it  is  a  Process  enumerated  to  issue,  previous  to  a  distress.
Thus  far  our  old  law  Books,  (vide  Termes  de  la  ley  ad  voc.
attach.  Co  well's  Interpreter  and  Spelmau's  Glossary.)


67

his  Fee,  or  he  will  deny  that  it  is  so.  If  he  adopt  the
former  course,  it  remains  for  him,  either  to  take  the
defence  upon  himself,  or  entrust  it  to  the  Tenant,  as
he  may  feel  disposed  ;  and  whichever  course  he  pur-
sues, the  right  of  each  of  them  will  be  saved,  as  well
that  of  the  Lord  as  of  the  Tenant,  if  their  part}'  should
prevail  in  the  contest.  But,  if  the  contrary  should  be
the  result,  the  Lord  shall  lose  his  services,  and  the
Tenant  his  Land  irretrievably.  If  the  Lord  of  the
Tenant,  being  present  in  Court,  fail  in  the  Warranty,
the  matter  may  be  interpleaded  between  them,  provided
that  the  Tenant  declare,  that  his  Lord  had  unjustly
failed  in  the  Warranty,  and,  therefore  unjustly,  be-
cause he  or  his  Ancestors  had  performed  such  and
such  specific  services  to  the  Lord  or  his  Ancestors,  as
Lords  of  that  fee,  adding  that  of  this  fact  he  has  those
who  have  heard  and  seen  it,  and,  in  particular,  a  proper
witness  to  prove  it,  or  some  other  adequate  and  suffi-
cient testimony  ready  to  be  adduced,  as  the  Court  shall
direct.


CHAP.  VIII.

A  SIMILAR  distinction  must  be  made,  in  respect  of
the  person  of  the  Lord  of  the  Demandant.  When  he
appears  in  Court,  he  will  either  claim  the  Land  in
question,  as  in  his  fee,  or  not.  And  thus  if  he  warrant
the  Title  of  the  Demandant,  and  claim  the  Land  as
within  his  Fee,  it  is  at  his  option,  either  to  hold  him-
self to  the  proof  made  by  the  Demandant,  if  he  be  so


68

inclined,  or  to  take  upon  himself  to  prove  his  Right
against  the  other,  saving  the  Right  of  both  of  them,
namely,  as  well  his  own  as  that  of  the  Demandant,  if
their  party  prevail  in  the  suit.  If,  however,  it  happen
to  be  unsuccessful,  both  the  Demandant  and  his  Lord
shall  lose  their  right.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  Lord
decline  to  warrant  the  claim  of  the  Demandant,  then,
the  latter  shall  be  amerced  to  the  King  on  account  of
his  false  claim.


loolt


OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  ADVOWSONS.


CHAP.  I.

PLEAS  concerning  Ecclesiastical  Advowsons 1  are
accustomed  to  be  agitated,  as  well  when  the  church  is
vacant,  as  when  it  is  not  vacant.  If,  upon  a  vacancy
of  a  church,  he  who  is  seised  of  the  Advowson  should
present  a  Parson  2  to  it,  and  any  one  should  question
the  Presentation  and  claim  it,  then,  it  must  be  distin-
guished, whether  the  dispute  be  concerning  the  Ad-
vowson itself,  in  other  words,  the  right  itself  of  pre-
senting a  Parson,  or  whether  it  merely  relates  to  the

1  Advocationibus. "  Advocatio,"  says  Sir  Wm. Blackstone,
"  signifies  in  Clientelam  recipere,  the taking  into  protection,
"  and  therefore  is  synonymous  with Patronage, Patronatus."
(2  Coinin. 21.) With this concurs Lord Coke — "Advocatio
"  signifying  an  advowing,  or  taking  into  protection,  is  as  much
"  a.s  jus  patronatus." Again  "  In  Britton  Cap.  92. The  Patron
"  is  called  avow,  and  the  Patrons  advocati, for  that  they  be
"  either  founders  or  maintainers,  or  Benefactors  of  the  church,
"  either  by  building,  donation,  or  increasing  of  it,  in  which  re-
"  spect  they  were  also  called  patroni, and the  advowson  jus
''patronatus." His  Lordship  cites  Bracton,  L.  4.  fol.  240. Fleta,
L.  5.  c.  14. (see  Co.  Litt.  17. b.  and  119.  b. Cowell  ad  voc.  and
Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.)

2  Personam,  a  Parson. (Vide  Co.  Litt.  300.  a.  b. Bl.  Cornm.  1.
383.) Cowell  derives  the  word  from  the  French  personne.

69


70

last  Presentation,  that  is,  the  Seisin  of  the  right  of
presenting  a  Parson.  If  the  dispute  merely  concern
thejlast  Presentation,  and  the  Claimant  allege,  that  he
or  one  of  his  Ancestors  had  the  last  Donation  and  Pres-
entation, then,  the  Plea  shall  be  discussed  bv  the

V

Assise  appointed  concerning  Ecclesiastical  Advowsons  ;
and  an  Assise  shall  be  summoned  to  make  Recognition,
what  Patron  in  time  of  peace  presented  the  Parson  who
last  died  to  that  Church  ;  and  concerning  this  Assise
we  shall  speak  more  fully  hereafter,1  when  we  come  to
treat  of  other  Recognitions.  The  party  who  by  this
Assise  proves  in  Court  the  last  Presentation,  shall
thereby  recover  Seisin  of  the  Presentation  of  the  vacant
Church,  concerning  which  the  dispute  is ;  so  that  he
shall  lawfully  present  a  Parson  to  the  Church,  saving
the  right  and  claim  of  the  Demandant  with  respect
to  the  Ri^ht  of  Advo \vson.


o


But,  if  the  right  of  Advowson  be  the  sole  subject  of
dispute,  then  the  Demandant  should  subjoin  to  his
claim,  that  he,  or  one  of  his  Ancestors,  had  the  last
Presentation  of  that  Church  ;  or,  he  should  concede,
that  his  Adversary,  or  one  of  his  Ancestors,  had  the
last  Presentation  ;  or,  he  should  allege,  that  some  third
person  had  the  last  Presentation  ;  or,  in  fine,  that  he
knows  not  who  had  it.

"Whichever  of  these  courses  he  pursues,  if  his  Adver-
sary claim  the  last  Presentation,  as  made  in  his  own
person,  or  in  that  of  one  of  his  Ancestors,  the  Recog-

i  L.  13.  C.  18.  et  seq.


71

nition  sholl  in  every  instance  proceed  upon  the  Right
of  Presentation,  unless  in  one  only  of  the  foregoing
cases,  namely,  when  the  Demandant  concedes  to  his
Adversary,  that  he  or  one  of  his  Ancestors,  enjoyed
the  last  Presentation,  for  then,  without  having  recourse
to  a  Recognition,  he  shall  present  one  Person  at  least.
The  last  Presentation  being  decided  by  the  Assise  or
by  some  other  legal  mode,  and  a  Parson  being  insti-
tuted into  the  Church  upon  the  Presentation  of  the
successful  party,  then  shall  the  person,  who  is  inclined
to  contend  for  the  Right  of  Advowson,  have  the  fol-
lowing Writ.


CHAP.  II.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Command  JV7".
"that,  justly  and  without  delay,  he  relinquishes  to  It.
"the  Advowson  of  the  Church,  in  such  a  Till,  which
"  he  claims  to  belong  to  him,  and  of  which  he  complains
"  that  he  unjustly  deforced  him  ;  and,  unless  he  do  so,
"  summon  him  by  good  Summoners,  that  he  be  on  such
"  a  day  before  us,  or  our  Justices,  to  shew  why  he
"  has  failed  ;  and  have  there  the  Summoners  and  this
"  Writ  &c."


CHAP.  III.

THE  Party1  being  summoned  may  avail himself  of
the  same  number  of  Essoins,  and that  by  the  same

. 1That  is,  according  to  the  Cottonian  and  Dr.  Milles's  MS.  the
person  who  has  deforced  the  advowson  of  the  church.


72

means,  as  we  have  already  detailed,  in  treating  concern-
ing Pleas  affecting  Land.  Supposing,  then,  that  after
having  cast  three  Essoins,  he  should  neither  appear  nor
send  an  Attorney  on  the  fourth  day,  it  may  be  asked
what  the  Law  is  ?

In  such  a  case,  the  seisin  of  the  Presentation  of  the
Church  shall  be  taken  into  the  King's  hands,  and  that
by  the  following  Writ.


CHAP.  IY.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health. I  command  you
"  that,  Avithout  delay,  vou  take into  mv hands  the

«/ 7 »/  »,

"  Presentation  of  the  Church,  in  such  a  Till,  which  N.
"  claims  against  12.  and  concerning  which,  there  is  a
"  Plea  in  my  Court  between  them,  and  make  known
"  the  day  of  the  Caption  to  my  Justices,  &c."


CHAP.  Y.

THE  Sheriff  is  bound  to  execute  this  Writ,  in  the
following  manner :  he  should  go  to  the  Church  in
question,  and  there  in  a  public  manner,  and  in  the
presence  of  respectable  men,  declare,  that  he  had  seised
the  Presentation1  of  such  Church  into  the  King's
hands,  in  which  the  Seisin  shall  continue  for  fifteen
days.  The  Tenant,  if  he  feel  so  disposed,  may2  re-

1  The  Advowson,  Bodl.  and  Cotton.  MS.

2  During  the  15  days,  Cotton,  and  Dr.  Milles's  MS.


73

plevy,1  and  thus  recover  it,  in  the  same  manner as
stated  in  the  first  Book.


CHAP.  VI.

ALL  the  Essoins  to  which  the  Defendant  can  have-
recourse  being  terminated,  at  the  day  appointed  for
the  parties  in  Court,  either  both,  or  neither,  or  one
only,  of  the  parties  will  appear.  If  one  only,  or  both
of  them,  be  absent,  the  matter  must  be  ordered  in  a
manner  similar  to  that  we  have  formerly  explained,  in
treating  of  Pleas  concerning  Land.  But  if  both  parties
appear  in  Court,  the  Demandant  should  then  propound
his  right  as  against  his  Adversary,  in  the  following
words:  "  I  demand  the  Advowson  of  this  Church,  as
"  my  right,  and  appertaining  to  my  Inheritance,  and
"  of  which  Advowson  I  was  seised,  or  one  of  my  An-
"  cestors  was  seised,  in  the  time  of  King  Henry  the
"  1st,  the  Grand-father  of  our  Lord  King  Henry,  or
"  after  the  Coronation  of  our  Lord  the  King  ;  and  being
"  so  seised,  I  presented  a  Parson  to  the  same  Church
"  when  vacant,  at  one  of  the  before-mentioned  periods  ; .
"  and  I  so  presented  him,  that  upon  my  presentation
"  he  was  instituted  Parson  into  that  Church  ;  and  if
"  any  one  would  deny  this,  I  have  some  credible  Men
"  who  both  saw  and  heard  the  fact,  and  are  readv  to

«/

"  prove  it  as  the  Court  shall  award,  and  particularly
"  such,  and  such  persons." The  claim  of  the  Demand-

1  "  Replegiare  is  compounded  of  re  and  plegiare,  as  much  as  to
<;say,  to  redeliver  upon  pledges  or  Sureties." (Co.  Litt.  145.  b.)


74:

ant  being  heard,  the  Tenant  may  defend  himself  by
the  Duel ;  and  the  proceedings  will  accordingly,  from
that  period,  be  conducted  in  the  manner  we  have
formerly  explained.  Should,  however,  the  Tenant
chuse  to  put  himself  upon  the  Grand  Assise,  he  is  per-
fectly at  liberty  so  to  do ;  and  the  Assise  must  then
proceed  in  the  form  we  have  previously  detailed.


CHAP.  VII.

BUT,  although  a  Church  be  not  vacant,  a  dispute
may  arise  concerning  the  Advowson  of  it,  if  the  Parson
of  the  Church,  or  he  who  is  invested  with  that  Char-
acter, derive  his  Title  from  one  Patron,  at  the  same
time  as  another  Person,  conceiving  himself  to  be  the
more  rightful  Patron  of  such  Church,  lay  claim  to  the
Advowson.  In  such  case,  the  following  Writ  shall  be
issued  upon  his  application.


CHAP.  VIII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon,  by
"good  Summoners,  the  Clerk  N.,  Parson  of  such  a
"  Church,  that  he  be  before  me,  or  my  Justices,  at
u  Westminster,  on  such  a  clay,  to  shew  of  what  Patron
"  he  holds  himself  in  that  Church,  the  Advowson  of
"  which  the  Knight  M.  claims  to  belong  to  him.  Sum-
"  mon  also,  by  good  Summoners,  N.  who  deforced  him


75


i;  of  the  Advowson,  that  he  be  there  to  shew  why  he
"  deforced  him  of  that  Advowson,  and  have  there  the
4i  Suinmoners  and  this  Writ.  "Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  IX.

IF,  after  the  Clerk  has  been  summoned,  he  neither
appear  on  the  appointed  day,  nor  send  any  one  to  ex-
cuse his  absence,  neither  on  the  first,  second,  nor  third
summons,  it  may  be  doubted,  by  what  mode  he  should
be  distrained  to  appear  in  Court,  especially  if  he  pos-
sess no  lay  Fee,  to  which  recourse  can  be  had  for  such
purpose.1  A  similar  doubt  may  be  proposed  upon  the
course  to  be  pursued,  should  he,  after  having  thrice
•essoined  himself  in  Court,  neither  appear  on  the  fourth
day,  nor  send  an  Attorney  to  answer  for  him.

Should  either  of  these  cases  occur,  let  the  Bishop  of
the  place,  or  his  Official,  if  there  happen  to  be  no
Bishop,  be  enjoined  to  distrain  the  Clerk  to  appear  in
Court,  or  to  punish  his  default,  by  taking  the  Church
into  his  hands,  or  to  distrain  the  Clerk  by  some  other
lawful  means.

When,  at  last,  the  Clerk  appear  in  Court,  he  will

1  Mr.  Madox  informs  us,  when  speaking  of  the  King's  Debtor,
"  If  he  was  a  Clergyman,  and  had  no  lay  Fee,  whereby  he  might
"  be  distrained,  writs  were  wont  to  issue  to  the  Bishop  of  the
"  Diocese,  commanding  him  to  distrain  such  Debtor,  by  his
"  Ecclesiastical  Benefices.  Many  of  these  writs  had  in  them  a
"  clause  importing,  that  if  the  Bishop  failed  to  make  due  Exe-
"  cution,  the  King  would  cause  the  Debt  to  be  levied  on  the
"  Bishop's  Barony."  (Madox's  Excheq.  c.  23.)


76


either  acknowledge  the  Demandant  as  Patron,  and
admit  that  he  was  instituted  upon  his  Presentation,  or
upon  that  of  one  of  his  Ancestors,  or  he  will  allege
some  other  person  to  be  the  Patron.

In  the  former  case,  the  Plea  shall  cease  in  the  King's
Court.  If  the  Patron  deny  the  assertion  of  the  Clerk,
alleging  himself  to  have  been  instituted  upon  his  Pres-
entation, or  that  of  one  of  his  Ancestors,  and  be  dis-
posed to  contest  this  point  against  the  Clerk,  the  Plea
shall  be  discussed  before  his  Ecclesiastical  Judge.
But,  if  the  Clerk  name  another  Patron,  such  Patron
should  be  summoned  to  appear  in  Court,  which  Sum-
mons he  will  either  obey,  or  not.  In  the  latter  case,

t/ t

if  he  neither  appear  at  the  first,  second,  nor  third
Summons  ;  or  if,  having  essoined  himself  in  Court  the
first,  second,  and  third  times,  he  should  neither  appear
nor  send  an  Attorney  on  the  fourth  day,  it  may  be
asked,  by  what  means  he  shall  be  distrained,  and  how
his  default  shall  be  punished  ?  The  Advowson  of  the'
Church  in  question  shall  indeed  be  taken  into  the
Kind's  hands,  and  thus  remain  for  fifteen  days  :  and

O  *  f

if,  within  that  period,  the  Clerk  should  not  appear,.
then,  the  Demandant  shall  have  the  Seisin  delivered
to  him.  But  what  shall  be  done  to  the  Clerk  himself?
"Whether  shall  he  from  that  circumstance,  lose  his
Church  ?  i

But,  if  the  Party  summoned  appear  in  Court,  he

1  He should  not  lose his church, according to the Regianr
Majestatem,  (L.  3.  c.  33.)


77


either  acknowledge  himself  Patron  of  the  Church
in  question,  or  disclaim  all  right  to  the  Advowson.

Should  he  pursue  the  latter  course,  the  Suit  shall
cease  in  the  King's  Court,  and  the  cause  must  be  dis-
cussed between  the  Patron  and  the  Clerk,  in  the
Ecclesiastical  Court.  But  if,  whilst  the  Suit  be  pend-
ing, the  Church  itself  happen  to  become  vacant,  it
may  be  asked,  to  whom  the  intervening  Presentation
belongs?  If,  indeed,  there  be  no  doubt  moved  con-
cerning the  last  Presentation,  but  the  person  against
whom  the  Right  of  Advowson  be  sought,  or  one  of
his  Ancestors  had  the  last  Presentation,  then,  he  shall
present  the  Parson  in  the  mean  time,  and  until  he  lose
his  Seisin.  It  is  a  consequence  of  the  same  principle,
that  if  the  Advowson  of  any  Church  should  be  seised
into  the  King's  hands  on  account  of  the  default  of  the
Patron,  and,  during  the  fifteen  days,  it  should  happen
to  become  vacant,  the  Patron  shall  not  within  that
period  lose  his  Presentation.  But,  if  the  party  sum-
moned, should  claim  the  Right  of  Advowson,  and
elect  to  defend  it  as  his  own,  then,  indeed,  the  Suit
must  proceed  in  the  order  we  have  already  explained.
If  he  should  prevail,  he  and  his  Clerk  shall  be  freed
from  the  Claim  of  their  Adversary  ;  but,  if  he  fail  in
the  Suit,  then,  he  and  his  Heirs  shall  for  ever  lose  the
Advowson.


CHAP.  X.

BUT  what  course  shall  be  pursued  with  the  Clerk,
the  Parson  of  the  Church,  who  has  declared  in  Court,


78

that  he  held  the  living  upon  his l  Presentation  ?  In
the  King's  Court,  indeed,  nothing  farther  is  to  be  done
in  the  matter,  unless  as  it  concerns  the  Advowson  be-
tween the  two  Patrons.

But  the  Patron,  who  has  recently  recovered  the
Right  of  Advowson,  shall  proceed  against  the  Clerk
in  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  before  the  Bishop  or  his
Official,  under  these  restrictions — if,  at  the  time  of
Presentation,  the  Person  presenting  such  Clerk  was
considered  to  be  the  Patron,  then,  the  Church  shall
continue  to  be  held  by  the  Clerk,  during  the  remainder
of  his  life.  For,  upon  this  subject,  a  Statute  has  been
passed  in  the  Reign  of  the  present  King,  concerning
those  Clerks  who  have  obtained  Livings  upon  the
Presentation  of  such  Patrons  as  have,  in  time  of  war,
violently  intruded  themselves  into  Ecclesiastical  Ad-
vowsons;  and  by  such  Statute  it  is  provided,  that
Clerks  thus  presented  shall  not  lose  their  Churches
during  their  lives.  Thus  is  the  question  above  pro-
posed, resolved.  But,  after  the  decease  of  Clerks  so
presented,  the  Presentations  of  the  Churches  shall  re-
turn to  the  rightful  Patrons.


CHAP.  XI.

As  connected  with  the  preceding  subject,  a  question
arises. Let us suppose that a Patron has,  in the
King's Court, recovered the  Advowson as against
1  The  unsuccessful  party.


79

another;  and  that  afterwards,  in  process  of  time,  the
Clerk  of  the  Church  should  die.  In  such  a  case,  can
the  party  against  whom  the  Advowson  had  been  re-
covered again  demand  an  Assise,  concerning  the  last
Presentation ;  and,  if  he  should  obtain  a  Writ  to  sum-
mon the  Assise,  what  step  must  his  Adversary  resort
to  ?  Let  us  suppose,  that  he  himself  had  never  pre-
sented an  Incumbent  to  the  church  in  question,  but
that  his  Father,  or  at  least  one  of  his  Ancestors,  had
so  done,  and  it  be  objected  to  him  by  his  Adversary,
that  he  ought  not  to  have  a  Recognition,  because  he
had  already  lost  the  Advowson  by  the  former  Judg-
ment of  the  Court,  whether,  it  may  be  asked,  shall  the
Assise  cease  on  that  account,  or  not  ?  It  appears  that
it  ought l  to  cease,  because,  not  having  the  last  Pres-
entation, he  never  had  the  Seisin  of  the  Advowson  ;  but,
it  seems,  that  he  might  well  found  his  claim  upon  the
Seisin  of  his  Father,  notwithstanding  any  thing  that
may  have  been  done,  concerning  the  Right  itself  of
Presentation.  But  if  the  point  of  the  last  Presenta-
tion can  be  again  agitated,  then,  it  should  seem,  that
the  Judgments  of  the  King's  Court  are  not  of  perpet-
ual obligation.  For 'if  the  Advowson  of  a  Church
were  once  adjudged  to  any  person,  it  does  not  appear
consistent  with  Justice  that  the  Adverse  party  should
by  any  means,  which  can  be  subsequently  resorted  to.
recover  any  Seisin  in  that  Court,  especially  against
him  in  whose  favor  the  Advowson  has  been  alreadv


1  The  Harl.  Bodl.  and  Cotton.  MS.  concur  in  introducing  not
into  this  passage.


80

decided,  unless  any  new  circumstance  should  inter-
vene, on  account  of  which  he  ought  again  to  be  heard.
If  therefore,  an  Assise  should  be  summoned  for  that
purpose,  it  should  cease  from  this  circumstance,  that
although  it  were  conceded  that  the  Claimant,  or  one
of  his  Ancestors,  had  the  last  Presentation,  yet  it
might  be  alleged,  that,  if  he  or  his  Ancestors  had  any
Right,  they  lost  it  by  the  Judgment  of  the  King's
Court ;  and,  this  being  proved  by  the  Record  of  the
Court,  the  Complainant  shall  lose  his  cause,  and  shall
in  addition  be  amerced  to  the  King.


CHAP.  XII.

IT  should  be  observed,  that  it  sometimes  happens,
that  one  Clerk  sues  another  in  the  Ecclesiastical  Court,
concerning  a  Church.  Should  they  derive  their  Titles
through  different  Patrons,  the  Ecclesiastical  Court
may,  upon  the  petition  of  either  of  the  Patrons,  be
prohibited  from  proceeding  in  the  Suit,  until  it  be  as-
certained, in  the  King's  Court,  to  which  Patron  the
Advowson  of  the  Church  belongs.  For  this  purpose
the  following  Writ  shall  Issue.


CHAP.  XIII.

"  THE  King  to  such  Ecclesiastical  Judges,  Health.
"  7?.  hath  made  known  to  us,  that  when  /.  his  Clerk
"  held  the  Church,  in  such  a  Vill,  on  his  Presentation,


81

"  the  Advowson  being  his,  as  he  says,  N~.  a  Cleric,  de-
"  manding  the  same,  as  of  the  Advowson  of  M.  a
"•  Knight,  draws  the  said  /.  into  a  suit  before  you  in
"  the  Court  Christian.  But  if  the  aforesaid  N.  should
"  recover  the  Church  under  the  Advowson  of  theafore-
"  said  M.  it  is  clear  that  the  said  R.  would  incur  the
"  loss  of  his  Advowson.  And  since  suits  concerning
"  the  Advowsons  of  Churches  belong  to  my  Crown  and
"Dignity,  I  prohibit  you  from  proceeding  in  that
"  cause,  until  it  be  proved  in  my  Court,  to  which  of
"  them  the  Advowson  of  such  Church  belongs.  Wit-
"  ness,  &c."

But  if,  after  this  Prohibition,  they  proceed  in  the

cause,  then,  they  shall  be  summoned  to  appear  in  the

King's  Court,  and  answer  for  their  conduct,  by  the
following  "Writ.


CHAP.  xiv.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  Prohibit  such
"  Judges,  least  they  hold  plea  in  the  Court  Christian,
"  concerning  the  Advowson  of  such  a  Church,  of  which
"  R  the  Patron  of  that  Church  complains,  that  N.  draws
"  him  into  a  Suit  in  the  Court  Christian  ;  because  Pleas
"  concerning  the  Advowson  of  Churches  appertain  to
*'  my  Crown,  and  Dignity.  And  summon,  by  good
u  Summoners,  such  Judges,  that  they  appear  before  me,
4'  or  my  Justices,  on  such  a  day,  to  shew  wherefore,

i  Vide  F.  N.  B.  89.


82

"  they  held  that  Plea,  contrary  to  my  Dignity,  in  the
"  Court  Christian.  Summon  also,  by  good  Summoners,
"  the  aforesaid  N.,  that  he  be  then  there  to  shew  where-
"  fore,  he  dre\v  the  aforesaid  7?.  into  a  Suit,  in  the
"  Court  Christian.  And  have,  &c.  Witness,  &c."


OF  THE  QUESTION  OF  CONDITION,  AND  OF  VILLEINS-
BORN.


CHAP. I.

OCK  subject  leads  us  in  the  next  place  to  treat  of
Pleas  concerning  the  Conditions  of  persons.  Questions
upon  this  subject  arise,  when  any  one  would  draw
another,  from  a  state  of  freedom,  into  that  of  Yillen-
age  ; 1  or  when  any  one,  being  in  the  latter  state,  seeks
to  emancipate  himself.  When  any  one  claims  another
who  is  in  Villenage  as  his  Villein-born,2  he  shall
have  the  "Writ  de  nativis,  directed  to  the  Sheriff  ;  and

1  Villenagium.  "  Villein  is  from  the  French  word  Villaine,
"and  that,  a  villa,  quiavillce  adscript  us  est." — "  Villenagium  (as
"  in  like  cases  hath  been  said  where  the  termination  is  in  aye)  is
"  the  service  of  a  Bondman.  And  yet,  a  free-man  may  do  the
"service  of  him  that  is  bond."  (Co.  Litt.  116.  a.  See  also
Cowell  ad  voc.  and  Mirror,  c.  2.  s.  28.)

-  Xativnm.  In  the  6th  chapter  of  the  present  Book  our  Author
explains  the  sense  in  which  lie  uses  the  term — nativi  a  primd
nativitate  sua.  "  In  Glanville,"  says  Lord  Littleton,  "  the  nativi
"  are  comprehended  under  the  Term  Villenagium,  which  is  used
'•  by  that  Author  synonymously  with  Servitude,  and  in  opposition
•'  to  freedom,  as  a  state,  not  a  tenure."  (3  Hist.  Hen.  2.  189.)
Upon  the  Term  nattvus,  Sir  Edward  Coke  observes,  "  in  the  com- N
mon  Law  he  is  called  nativus,  quia  pro  majore  parte  natus  est
seri'its."  (Co.  Litt  sed  vide  Craig.  L.  1.  Dieg.  4.  §  6.)

83


84

by  that  "Writ  he  shall,  before  the  Sheriff  of  the  County,
claim  the  Villein  against  him,  who  holds  him  in  Villen-
age.  And,  if  his  Yillenage  be  not  denied  before  the
Sheriff  in  the  County  Court,  then  the  Plea  concerning
such  Villein-born  shall  proceed  before  the  Sheriff,  as
we  shall  presently  explain,  between  the  person  claim-
ing, and  the  person  in  possession,  of  the  Villein.  But,
if  the  Villein  allege  himself  to  be  a  free-man,  and  give
security  to  the  Sheriff  to  prove  the  fact,  then,  the  suit
shall  cease,  as  far  as  applies  to  the  County  Court ;  be-
cause the  Sheriff  ought  not  any  farther  to  interfere  in
it.1  But,  if  the  Sheriff  persist  in  hearing  the  suit,
then,  he  whose  condition  is  questioned  shall  complain
to  the  Justices,  and  shall  obtain  the  King's  "Writ,  in
order  that,  if  he  should  give  security  to  the  Sheriff  to
prove  his  freedom,  the  suit  may  be  removed  before  the
Justices  of  the  King's  Court,  and  in  the  mean  time,  the
party  be  unmolested.  The  "Writ  is  as  follows. —


CHAP.  II.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.2  It.  complains
"  to  me  that  N.  draws  him  to  Villenage,  although  he
"is  a -free-man,  as  he  says.  And,  therefore,  I  com-
"  mand  you  that,  if  the  said  R.  make  you  secure  of
"prosecuting  his  claim,  then,  that  you  put  the  suit
"  before  me,  or  my  Justices,  on  such  a  day  ;  and,  in  the
"  mean  time,  you  cause  that  he  be  in  peace ;  and  sum-

1  In  this  the  Mirror,  (c.  2.  s.  28.)  concurs.

2  Vide  F.  N.  B.  171.  172.


85

"  mon,  by  good  Summon ers,  the  aforesaid  N.  that  he
"  be  then  there  to  shew  why,  he  unjustly  draws  him  to
"  Villenage.  And  have  there,  &c."


CHAP. III.

BY  the  same  "Writ,  the  party  who  lays  claim  to  the
other,  as  being  his  Villein,  shall  be  summoned  ;  and  a
day  shall  be  appointed  him  on  which  he  may  prosecute
his  claim.  But,  if  on  the  day  appointed,  the  person
who  is  claimed  as  a  Villein  should  neither  appear,  nor
send  a  Messenger,  nor  Essoin,  let  the  same  course  be
pursued,  as  that  before  described  in  treating  of  Pleas,
where  the  Pledges  are  to  be  attached.  But,  if  he  chuse
to  essoin  himself,  he  may  avail  himself  of  the  same
number  of  Essoins,  and  on  the  same  occasions  as  we
have  already  mentioned.  But  if  the  party  who  claims
the  other  as  his  Villein,  neither  appear  on  that  day,
nor  send,  let  the  other  party,  if  present,  be  dismissed
unconditionally,  under  such  form,  namely,  that  the
claimant  shall  recover  so  much  as  by  Law  he  ought  to
recover,  concerning  which  principle  we  have  spoken
more  fully,  in  the  preceding  part  of  this  Treatise.  In
the  mean  time,  the  party  who  is  claimed  as  a  Villein
shall  be  in  Seisin  of  his  freedom.


CHAP.  IV.


BOTH  parties  being  present  in  Court,  the freedom
shall  be  there  proved  in  this  manner :  the  party  who


86

claims  his  liberty,  shall  produce  a  number  of  his  nearest

relat  ions  and  kindred,  springing  from  the  same  stock
from  \vliic-h  ho  descended.  If  their  freedom  be  recog-
ni/,ed  and  proved  in  Court,  the  party  who  demands  l
his  freedom  shall  bo  liberated  from  the  yoko  of  ser-
vitude. Hut,  if  the  free  condition  of  those  produced
be  denied,2  or  a  doubt  bo  entertained  respecting  it,
recourse  shall  be  had  to  the  Vicinage,  whose  Verdict
shall  ascertain  the  fact,  whether  those  produced  are
free,  or  not:  and,  according  to  its  decision,  (.lie  matter
shall  be  adjudged.  .Hut,  if  the  party  who  claims  the
other  as  his  Villein,  should  bring  forward  other  persons
to  prove  the  cont  rary,  namely,  thai  such  persons  as  I  he
claimant  has  now  brought  forward  arehis  Villeins-born,
and  that  they  sprung  from  the  same  common  stock
with  him,  whom  he  claims  as  a  Villein-born,  then,  in
like  manner,  should  those  produced  by  both  sides  be
recogni/ed  as  of  common  kindred,  let  it  be  inquired  by


1  ProcZamcrf,  according  to  the  B<><11.  ^\1S,  which I  follow,  ^u-o-

cJdino,  <ti>]>fHt>.  i  >rnr<  ><•<>.  \c. (Spelm.  (iloss.  ;id  VOC.)

-  "  Yet,"  says  the  ]\lirror, "  if  (he  I  >el'eudant  can  show  ;i free

'•  slock  of  his  Ancestors,  cither  in  the  conception,  or  iu  the  birth,

"(lie Defendant hath always been account  eil for  a  freeman,
"  although  his  leather,  'Mother,  I'.rot  her,  and  (\msins,  and  all  his

"  Parentage,  acknowledge  themselves  lohetho riaimiiV's  Vil-

"  leins,  and  do testify  (he  iVI'endant  to  ho  a Villein." (Mirror,
c.  8.  s.  28.')

\\'e  must  Suppose  that  this  was  an  improvement  yio.sVrr/or  (o
t  he  t  imo  of  d'liiiiri/fi',  since  (hough  some  part  of  the  Mirror  was
prohahly  writ  I  en  he  Co  re  I  he  conquest  ,  the  other  part  was  written
subsequently  (o  the  Roij^n  of  Henry  the  'Jnd.  Few  ancicii!  law
books  would  perhaps  stand  higher  than  the  Mirror,  could  wo
clearly  ascertain  what  was  original,  what  was  superadded.  At
present,  ono  part  of  (ho  work  is  often  a  direct  refutation  of
another  part.


87

the  Vicinage,1  which  of  them  are  the  nearest  to  him  ;
and,  according  as  the  inquiry  turns  out,  let  the  Judg-
ment be  given.  In  a  similar  manner,  if  those  produced
by  one  party  should2  deny  in  any  respect  his  relation-
ship, or,  if  a  question  arise  concerning  it,  every  doubt  of
this  nature  shall  be  determined  by  the  Vicinage.  The
freedom  having  been  sufficiently  proved  in  Court,  then,
the  party  whose  liberty  has  been  questioned  shall  be
absolved  from  the  claim  of  him  who  would  draw  him
to  Villcnage,  and  for  ever  freed  from  it.  If,  however,
he  should  fail  in  his  proof,  or,  if  he  should  be  recovered
by  his  Adversary  as  his  Villein-born,  he  shall  be  irre-
coverably adjudged  to  belong  to  his  Lord,  together
with  all  the  Chattels  he  possesses.  The  same  form  and
order  are  observed  in  pleading,  when  a  freeman  is
claimed  as  a  Villein,  or  when  any  one,  in  a  state  of
Villenage,  aspires  of  his  own  accord  to  freedom.  For
this  purpose,  the  party  whose  freedom  is  impeached
shall  come  to  the  King's  Court,  and  pray,  that  the  suit
might  be  removed  into  the  same,  which  being  conceded,
the  suit  will  then  proceed  in  the  form  before  stated.
It  must  be  remarked  concerning  this  Plea,  that  the
Duel  cannot  be  resorted  to,  in  order  to  prove  the  free-
dom of  anv  one  from  his  Birth.8

•/

1  "  It  shall  be  tried  by  an  Assise,"  says  the Reg.  Majestatem,
(L.  2.  c.  11.)

2  "  Acknowledge  1dm, to be  related to  them,  whilst  those  pro-
"  ducedbythe  other  party  should  "—Added  by  Cotton.  Bodl.  and
Dr.  Milles's  MS.

8  "  Or  to  disprove  it."  Bodl.  and  Dr.  Milles's  MS.  The  Regina
Majestatem  is  yet  more  unrestrained — "  But,  it  is  to  be  noted,
"that  single  combat  shall  not  have  place  in  any  plea,  to  prove  or
"  disprove  the  liberty  or  Estate  of  any  man.''  (L.  2.  c.  11.)


CHAP.  Y.

THERE  are  many  modes  by  which  a  Man,  in  a  state
of  Villenage,  may  acquire  his  freedom.1  Thus  if  his
Lord,  being  desirous  of  emancipating  him,  releases
him,  as  well  from  all  his  own  claims,  as  those  of  the
Lord's  Heirs :  or,  if  the  Lord  give  or  sell  him  to
another,  for  the  purpose  of  liberating  him.  It  must,

1  The  Mirror  enumerates  many  other  modes  by  which  a  Villein
was  enfranchised,  besides  those  stated  by  Glanville,  which  ap-
pear rather  to  be  put  for  examples,  than  as  comprising  all  the
instances  of  emancipation  ;  and  the  Mirror  confirms  most,  if  not
all,  of  the  Examples  in  the  text.  (c.  2.  s.  28.)  The  Regiam  Majes-
tatem  informs  us,  that  Holy  Orders  enfranchised,  if  taken  with
the  consent  of  the.  Lord.  The  Villein  was  also  enfranchised,  if
the  Lord  seduced  his  wife,  for  the  Law  permitted  the  Villein  to
receive  no  other  amends.  The  Villein  was  likewise  emancipated,
if  the  Lord  drew  blood  of  him,  or,  if  the  Lord  refused  to  bail
him,  either  in  a  civil  or  criminal  action  in  which  he  was  after-
wards cleared  by  Trial.  (Regiam  Majestatem,  L.  2.  c.  12.)  The
act  of  enfranchisement,  when  not  arising  by  implication  of  Law,
of  which  description  many  of  the  instances  appear  to  be,  was,  in
ancient  times  and  before  writing  was  common,  accompanied  by
much  publicity  and  ceremony.  Qui  servum  suum  liberum  facit
in  Ecclesid,  vel  Mercato,  vel  Comitatu,  vel  Hundredo,  coram  testi-
bus  et  palam  facia  t,  et  liberas  ei  vias  et portas  conscribit  apertas,
et  lanceam  et  gladium  vel  quce  liberorum  arma  in  manibus  ei
ponat.  (Anglo-Sax.  LL.  Ed.  Wilkins.)  When  writing  became
common,  the  method  was,  by  the  Lord's  Deed  expressly  enfran-
chising the  Villein.  Upon  the  subject  of  Villenage,  Fortescue's
words  are  no  less  remarkable  for  the  truth  and  beauty  of  the
sentiment  they  express,  than  singular,  when  it  is  considered
that  they  were  addressed  to  a  Prince.  Ab  homine  et  pro  vitio
introducta  est  servitus :  sed  Libertas  a  Deo  hominis  est  insita
naturae.  Quare  ipsi  ab  homine  sublata  semper  redire  gliscit,  ut
facit  omne  quod  libertate  naturali  privatur.  (de  laudibus  legum
Aiigliae,  c.  42.)


89

however,  be  observed,  that  no  one  in  a  state  of  Yillen-
age  can  purchase  his  freedom  with  his  own  Money  ;
for,  in  such  case,  he  may,  according  to  the  Law  and
Custom  of  the  Kealm,  be  again  recalled  by  his  Lord  to
a  state  of  Yillenage,  all  the  Chattels  of  a  Villein-born
being  understood  as  so  absolutely  in  the  power  of  his
Lord,  as  to  preclude  the  former,  at  least  with  his  own
Money,  and  as  against  his  Lord,  from  redeeming  him-
self from  Yillenage.  But,  if  a  stranger  with  his  own
Money  purchase  the  Yillein's  freedom,  the  Yillein
may  for  ever  after  maintain  his  freedom  against  his
Lord,  who  has  sold  him.  When  any  one  has  released
a  Yillein,  from  all  right  which  he,  or  his  Heirs,  could
claim  in  him,  or  has  sold  him  to  a  stranger,  the  Yillein
who  has  been  thus  enfranchised  may  for  ever  after  de-
fend his  freedom,  as  well  against  the  Lord  himself,  as
his  Heirs  ;  whilst  he  can  prove  the  fact  in  Court,  either
by  a  Charter,  or  by  any  other  lawful  means.  And  the
question  may  even  be  decided  by  the  Duel,  if  any  one
deny,  that  the  party  has  been  liberated  from  his  state
of  Yillenage,  and,  there  be  a  proper  Witness,  who,
having  both  seen  and  heard  the  very  fact  of  Enfran-
chisement, is  ready  to  prove  his  freedom  in  Court.

It  should  here  be  remarked,  that  a  man  may  enfran-
chise his  Yillein-born,  so  far  as  the  consequences  affect
the  persons  of  himself,  or  his  Heirs,  but  not  as  they
apply  to  others.  Because,  if  a  man  born  a  A7illein,  but
thus  rendered  free,  should  be  produced  in  Court,  to
make  proof  against  a  stranger,  or  to  wage  his  Law,  he


90

may  be  justly  precluded,  if  it  be  objected  against  him,
and  proved  in  Court,  that  he  was  born  in  a  state  of
Villenage,  although  his  condition  was  such  that  he  hail
been  Knighted  subsequently  to  his  being  enfranchised.1
If  a  Yillein-born  peaceably  remain  during  a  year  and  a
day  2  in  any  privileged  Town3  so  that  he  be  received
in  their  community  or  Guild4  as  a  Citizen,  he  shall
x  from  such  circumstance  be  freed  from  Villenage.

1  "  Except  he  received  his  liberty  and  was  made  free  with  the
"  Licence,  good-will,  and  special  command  of  the  King." (Reg.
Maj.  L.  2.  c.  12.) Lord  Littleton  ascribes  the  rule  in  the  text,  to
a  jealousy  of  judicial  proceedings. (3  Hist.  Hen.  2.  p.  192.) It
more  probably  originated  from  the  chivalric  pride  of  the  times.
As  the  great  Lords  often  personally  engaged  in  the  combat,  their
own  importance  was  increased  by  keeping  up  the  dignity  of  this
mode  of  Trial.

2  Bracton,  L.  1.  fol.  6.  b.  7.  a. But  even  this  period  would  not
operate  as  a  bar  to  the  Lord,  if  within  the  year  clameum  suum
qualitercnnque  apposuerit. — "If  he  remained  quietly"  are  the
•words  of  the  Regiam  Majestatem,  during  a  year  and  a  day  in  a
privileged  Town  he  became  free — but  out  of  a  privileged  town
seven  years  was  the  period — but  this  latter  prescription  held  not
good  against  the  King. (L.  2.  c.  12.)

3  Villa  privilegiata. Item,  says  a  Law  of  the  Conqueror,  si
servi  permanserint  sine  calumnid  per  annum  et  diem  in  civitati-
bus  nostris  vel  in  burgis  in  muro  vallatis,  vel  in  castris  nostris,
a  die  ilia  libcri  cfficiuntur,  et  liberi  a  jugo  servitutis  sucesint  in
perpetuum. (kL.  Gul. Conq.  66. Ed. Wilkins, p. 229.) "By
privileged  Town  is  meant  a  Town  that  had  "  Franchises  by  pre-
"  scription  or  charter — and  this  communication  of  liberty  from
"  thence  to  a  Villein  residing  among  them  so  short  a  time,  shews
"  the  high  regard  to  the  Law  of  such  corporations,  and  likewise
"  a  desire  to  favor  enfranchisement,  as  much  as  the  settled  rules
"  of  property  would  admit."  (3  Hist.  Hen.  2.  p.  191.  Litt.) This
part  of  our  Author's  text  is  considerably  elucidated  by  Fleta,
L.  4.  c.  11.  s.  11.  and  Co.  Litt.  137.  b.

4  Gyldam,  from  the  Saxon  geldan  and  gildan. Gildare  occurs
in  Domesday frequently  pro  solvere, reddere. (Vide  Spelman
Gloss.)


91


CHAP.  YI.

VILLEINS-BOKN  are  such  from  their  Birth.  Thus,  if
both  the  parents  are  Villeins-born,  the  Offspring  is  a
Villein-born.1  The  same  may  be  said  where  the
Father  is  free  but  the  Mother  a  Villein-born.  If,  how-
•ever,  the  Mother  be  free,  and  the  Father  a  Villein  -
born,  the  same  rule  prevails,  as  far  as  the  purity  of
Condition  be  in  question.

If  a  free-man  take  to  wife  a  woman  born  in  Villenage,
whilst  he  so  continues  bound  to  the  state  of  Villenage,
he  shall  as  a  consequence  lose  his  Law,  as  if  he  himself
Avere  a  Villein-born.2  If  there  be  any  children  result-

1  "  Those  are  Villeins  who  are  begot  of  Villeins  and Niefs  in
"  servitude,  whether  born  in  matrimony  or out  of  matrimony  :
"  those  also  are  Villeins  who  are  begotten  of  Villeins  and  born
"  of  free-women  in  matrimony,  and those  are  Villeins  who  are
"  begotten of  a freeman and  a  Nief  and  born out  of  matri-
"  mony." (Mirror,  c.  2.  s.  28. See  also  Bracton,  fols.  4.  5.)  and
Fleta,  L.  1.  c.  3.

2  From  the  extreme  brevity  and  quaintness  of  the  original,  it
is  a  matter  of  some  doubt,  what  the  true  meaning  of  the  passage
is. Lord  Littleton  gives  the passage  thus. "  We  are  told  by
"  Glanville,  that  in  his  time,  if  a  freeman  married  a  woman  bom
"  in  Villenage  and  ivho  actually  lived  in  that  state,  he  lost  there-
"  by  the  benefit  of  the  Law  (that  is  all  the  legal  rights  of  a  free-
•"  man,)  and  was  considered  as  a  Villein  by  birth,  during  the  life-
"  time  of  his  wife,  on  account  of  her  Villenage." This,  however,
is  at  best  but  a  loose  paraphrase  of  Glanville. His  Lordship  was
aware  of  it,  and  to  confirm  his  representation  of  what  is  said,  as
he  terms  it,  so indistinctly  by Glanville,  he  refers  to Bracton.
fol.  5. Mr.  Reeves  makes  this  severe  penalty  upon  the  Husband
to  arise,  not  from  the  wife  living  in  a  state  of  Villenage,  but  her
holding  property  in  ViUenage. The  fact is,  the  text expresses
neither Lord  Littleton's  Explanation, nor that given  by  Mr.


92

ing  from  the  connection  of  a  Woman  born  in  Villenage-
belonging  to  one  person,  and  a  Man  born  in  that  state
belonging  to  another,  the  children  shall  be  propor-
tionably  divided  between  the  two  Lords.1

Reeves.  I  do  not  flatter  myself  to  have  succeeded  better.  In
Britton's  time,  the  wife  was  enfranchised  during  the  coverture.
(78.  b.)  Vide  Co.  Litt.  123.  a.  and  137.  b.  and  Mr.  Hargrave's
notes  thereon.

1  "  This,"  exclaims  Lord  Littleton,  "  was  absolutely  putting
"  children  upon  the  same  foot  as  cattle,  or  other  stock  on  a  farm,
"  without  the  regard  that  is  due  to  the  inherent  freedom  and
"  dignity  of  human  nature."  (3  Hist.  Hen.  2.  p.  191.)


looh


OF  DOWER,


CHAP.  I.

THE term  Dower  is  used  in  two  senses. Dower,2
in the sense in which it  is  commonly  used,  means

1  On  the  subject  of  the  present  Book  in  general,  see  Bracton,
fo.  92  et  seq.  and  Fleta  L.  5.  c.  23.  et  seq.

2  Dos,  dower. "  Dos  is  derived,"  says  Sir  Edward  Coke,  "  ex
donatione,  et  est  quasi  donarium." (Co. Litt.  30.  b.) Cowell
and  Spelman,  however,  both  deduce  it  from  the  French  douaire.
(Cowell  and  Spelman 's  Gloss,  advoc.) The  real  objects  of  Dower
are  sustenance  for  the  wife,  and  nurture  and  education  for  the
children. (Fleta  L.  5.  Cap.  23.) The  Romans  were  not  in  the^
habit  of  endowing  their  wives. When,  therefore,  Tacitus  met
with  this  peculiarity  among  the  Germans,  he  was  struck  with  it.
Dotem  non  Uxor  marito  sed  uxori  marltus  affert. (Tacit,  de  mor.
German.  18.) Though  Dower  was  unknown  to  the  Romans,  it
seems  to  have  been  in  use  amongst  the  ancient  Hebreics,  (Gen.
34.  12.  Exodus  22.  16.  et  al.) Nor  was  it  unknown  to  the  Grecians,
if  we  may  judge  from  that  part  of  the  Odyssey  where  Vulcan  re-
claims the  Dower  he  had given  to  his  frail  wife. It  seems  to
have  been  known  to  the  ancient  Gauls,  (Csesar  de  bello  Gallico
L.  6.  c.  18.) And  to  the  Cantabri,  (Strabo  L.  3.) Craig,  how-
ever,  doubts whether there was any such thing as dower
amongst  the  ancient  Northern  Nations. (Jus  Feud.  L.  2.  Dieg.
14.) The  Goths  did  not  allow  Dower  to  exceed  a  tenth. (Wise-
goth.  L.  3.  t.  1.  1.4.)

The  Assises  of  Jerusalem  gave  a  half,  (c.  187.) — the  same  por-\
tion  as  the  Laws  of the  Ancient  Duchy  of  Burgundy — (Chass.

93


94

that  which  any  free  man  at  the  time  of  his  being
affianced,1  gives  to  his  Bride  at  the  Church  Door.2-
For  every  Man  is  bound  as  well  by  the  Ecclesiastical

»/  «/

Law,  as  by  the  secular,  to  endow  his  Bride,  at  the  time
of  his  being  affianced  to  her.  When  a  man  endows  his
Bride,  he  either  names  the  Dower,  or  not.  In  the
latter  case,  the  third  part  of  all  the  Husband's  free-
hold Land  is  understood  to  be  the  Wife's  Dower  ;  and
the  third  part  of  all  such  freehold  Lands  as  her  Hus-
band held,  at  the  time  of  affiancing,3  and  of  which  he

consuet.  ducat.  Burg.  rub.  4.  s.  6.  col.  580.)  The  Saxons  (LL.
tit.  S.)prceter  dotemquam  innuptiis  adepta  est,  allowed  the  half
of  what  the  Husband  and  Wife  subsequently  acquired.  A  Law
of  Edmund  gave  the  half.  (LL.  Edm.)  The  Longobardi  allowed
Dower  to  extend  to  the  fourth  part.  (L.  2.  tit.  4.)  The  English,
the  Scotch,  and  the  Normans,  following  in  this  respect  the  Sicil-
ians and  Neapolitans,  have  allowed  Dower  to  extend  to  a  t h  ird.
(Vide  LL.  Hen.  1.  70.  Ed.  Wilkins.— Le  Grand  Custum.  de
v  Norm.  c.  103.— the  Regiam  Majm.  L.  2.  c.  16.)

1  Tempore  desponsationis. Affiance  and  Marriage  seem  to  be
perfectly  distinct  things in  the  Civil  and Canon  Laws.  (Vide
Lyndw.  Provinc.  271.)  but  our  law  books,  it  is  said,  use  the  terms
promiscuously,  as  being  synonymous. (See  Co.  Litt.  34.  a.  and
Mr.  Hargrave's  note.)

2  Or  at  the  Door  of  the Monastery,  say  the  Mirror and  Lord
Coke. (Mirror,  c.  1.  s.  3. Co.  Litt.  34.  a.) The reason for re-
quiring the  endowment  to  be  made  at  the  door  of  these  places
was  to  give  publicity  to the  transaction. (Bracton  92.  a.  Fleta.
L.  5.  c.  23.)

3  Tempore  matrimonii  is  the  expression  of  the  Giand  Norman.
Customary,  (c.  102.)  and  of  the  Regiam  Majestatem  (L.  2.  c.  16.)
and  die  quo  earn  desponsavit  is  the  language  of  Bracton  (92.  a.)
and  Fleta  (L.  5.  c.  24.)  notwithstanding  that  the  7th chapter  of
Magna  Charta  enlarged  the  widow's  claim  to  a  third  part  of  all
such  lands as  the  Husband  is  seised  of  in  vita  sua  or,  as  it  has
been  translated, during  the  coverture  ;  and  thus  it has  stood
ever  since, though not  without having been matei'ially  en-
croached upon,  by  the  comparatively  modern  doctrine  of  Trusts.


95

was  seised  in  his  Demesne,  is  termed  a  "Woman's  rea-
sonable Dower.  If,  however,  the  Man  name  the
Dovrer,  and  mention  more  than  a  third  part,  such  des-
ignation shall  not  avail,  as  far  as  it  applies  to  the
quantity.  It  shall  be  reduced  by  admeasurement  to
the  third  part ; J  because  a  Man  may  endow  a  Woman
of  less,  but  cannot  of  more,  than  a  third  part  of  his
Land.2


CHAP.  II.

SHOULD  it  happen,  as  it  sometimes  does,  that  a  man
endows  a  Woman,  having  but  a  small  freehold  at  the
time  of  his  being  affianced,  he  may  afterwards  enlarge
her  Dower  to  the  third  part  or  less  of  the  Lands,  he
may  have  3  purchased.

But  if  upon  the  Assignment  of  Dower,  no  mention
was  made  concerning  purchases,  even  admitting  that
at  the  time  of  affiance  he  possessed  but  a  small  Estate,

1  For  this  purpose  our  Author  gives  us  the  form  of  a  \Yrit,
Chapter  18th  of  the  present  Book.

2  "  Lest,  by  such  liberal  endowments,  the  Lord  should  be  de-
"  frauded  of  his  wardships  and  other  feudal  profits." (2  Bl.  Com.
133. See  also  Grand  Cust.  de  Norm.  c.  18.) It  is  a  remarkable
peculiarity  of  Legislation,  that  the  same  Law  is  frequently  the
result  of  principles  the  most  different— thus,  the  modern  French
code  tells  us,  that  it  will  not  allow  the  Dowry  to  be  augmented
during  the  marriage. (Code  Napoleon  s.  1543.)

aQuestus,  more  properly,  says  Spelman,  qucestus  from  qucero,
purchased  Lands,  contradistinguished  to  Lands  acquired  by  in-
heritance. (Vide  Spelin.  Gloss,  ad  voc.  and  Co.  Litt.  18.  a.)  pur-
chased Lands  were  designated  under  the  feudal  Law  by  the
feudum  uovam.  (Craig  Jus  feud.  L.  1.  Dieg.  10.  s.  13.)


96

and  that  he  afterwards  much  increased  it,  the  "Wife
cannot  claim  as  Dower  more  than  a  third  part  of  such
Land  as  her  Husband  held,  at  the  time  of  bein°-  affi-

o

anced,  and  when  he  endowed  her.  The  same  Rule  pre-
vails if  a  Man,  not  being  possessed  of  any  Land,  should
endow  his  Wife  with  his  Chattels,1  and  other  things,
or  even  with  Money.  Should  he  afterwards  make
considerable  purchases  in  Land  and  Tenements,  the
Wife  cannot  claim  any  part  of  such  property  so  ac-
quired by  purchase  ;  it  being,  with  respect  to  the  quan-
tity or  quality  of  the  Dower  assigned  to  any  Woman,
a  general  principle,  that  if  she  is  satisfied  to  the  extent
of  her  endowment  at  the  door  of  the  Church,  she  can
never  afterwards  claim  as  Dower  anything  beyond  it.2

1  It  is  curious  to  observe  the  fluctuations  of  Law. Though
Glanville  in  the  text  expressly  lays  it  down,  that  a  Woman  may
be  endowed  of  chattels,  or  money,  which,  indeed, could  have
been  the  only  mode  of  endowing  in the still more  distant
ages  of  Antiquity,  yet  this  was  denied  to  be  law  in  the  Reign  of
Henry  the  fourth,  (7.  H.  4.  13.  b.) The  Doctrine  of  the  Courts
of  Equity  in  the  present  day,  in  admitting  equitable  bars,  seems,
in  point  of  substance,  to  revive  the  law  as  laid  down  by  Glan-
ville. The  doctrine  of  the  text  is  confirmed  by  the  Eegiam  Ma-
jestatem,  and  Fleta  :  but  the  latter  informs  us,  that  Dowers,  of
the  kind  now  under  discussion,  were  only  so  far  tobei-ecoverecl,
as  the  chattels  of  the  deceased  extended. (L.  5.  c.  23.) Hence
probably  they  fell  into  disuse.

2  "  Si  enim  mulier,  quando  ducta  fuerit  in  itxorem,  concessit
et  consensit  se  dotari  del  mobili  vel  de  terra  specificata,  illud  ei  debet
post  decessum  mariti  sui  sufficere,  quod  in  contractu  matrimonii
concessit  se  pro  dote  recipere  et  consensit." (Le  Grand  Coustoum.
de  Normand.  c. 102.) "Because  she  was  first  content  there-
with," is  the  reason  the  Reg.  Maj.  gives  why  she  should  after-
wards be  confined  strictly  to  the  original  designation. (L.  2.  c.
16.)


97


CHAP.  III.

IT  should  be  understood,  that  a  Woman l  cannot,
during  the  life  of  her  Husband,  make  any  disposition
of  her  Dower.2  For  since  the  "Wife  herself  is  in  a  legal
sense  under  the  absolute  power  of  her  Husband,  it  is
not  singular,  if  the  Dower,  as  well  as  the  Woman  her-
self and  all  other  things  belonging  to  her,  should  be
considered  to  be  fully  at  the  disposal  of  the  Husband.
But  any  one,  having  a  Wife,  may  either  give  or  sell  her
Dower,  or,  by  any  other  mode  he  pleases,  may  alien-
ate it  in  his  lifetime ;  so  that  the  Wife  shall  be  bound
to  conform  to  his  will  in  this  as  in  all  other  respects
which  are  not  contrary  to  the  Law  of  God.  And  so
far  is  the  Woman  bound  to  obey  her  Husband,  that  if
her  Husband  chuses  to  sell  her  Dower,  and  she  re-
fuses her  consent,  and  the  Dower  be  afterwards  sold
and  bought  under  these  circumstances,  the  Wife  can-
not 3  after  the  death  of  her  Husband  claim  her  Dower

1  Mulier  is  the  expression  which  our  Author  generally  uses,  to
designate  the  Wife  :  but,  as  Lord  Coke  informs  us,  this  Term  was
anciently  taken  for  a  wife. (2.  Inst.  434.)

2  For  which  Rule  Bracton  gives  two  reasons  :  1st.  Because  the
woman  has  no  freehold  in  her  Dower,  previously  to  its  being  as-
signed. 2Z?/.  Because  she  cannot  gainsay  her  Husband. (Brac-
ton. 95.  b.)

3  I  have  followed  all  the  MS.  and  the  Edition  of  Glanville  pub-
lished in  1G04,  in  admitting  not  into  the  text. I  submit,  that
this  Reading  is  sanctioned  not  merely  by  the  previous  part  of
this  present  chapter,  but  also  by  the  13th  chapter  of  the  present
Book. Yet  the  Regiam  Majestatem  makes  the  validity  of  such  a
sale  to  depend  upon  the  wife's  consent — but,  if  she  made  no  op-

7


98

as  against  the  Purchaser,  if  she  confess  in  Court  or  is
convicted  upon  the  fact  that,  although  she  opposed
her  Husband,  the  Dower  was  sold  by  him.

*


CHAP.  IY.

UPON  the  death  of  the  Husband  of  a  "Woman,  her
Dower,  if  it  has  been  named,  will  either  be  vacant  or
not.

In  the  former  case,  the  woman  may,  with  the  consent
of  the  Heir,  enter  upon  her  Dower,1  and  retain  the-

position  to  it,  it  seems  to  have  been  tantamount  to  a  positive
consent.  (L.  2.  c.  15.  1C.)  From  considering  the  13th  Chapter  of
the  present  Book,  one  thing  seems  clear — that  in  case  the  Hus-
band disposed  of  his  Wife's  dower,  the  Heir  was  bound  to  render
an  equivalent  to  the  Purchaser,  if  the  Land  was  recovered  from
him,  or  to  the  wife,  if  it  was  not  so.  As  to  the  Heir,  therefore,
it  was  immaterial ;  and  so  it  perhaps  might  be  considered  with
respect  to  the  Wife  and  the  Purchaser,  in  case  the  Heir,  as  Heir,
were  solvent ;  but  if  otherwise,  it  was  highly  material  to  ascer-
tain, whose  right,  that  of  the  wife  or  that  of  the  purchaser,  was
paramount.  Bracton  is  more  explicit  than  our  Author  ;  and
from  him  we  collect,  that  a  distinction  should  be  made,  whether
the  Dower  was  originally  named,  or  not.  In  the  former  case,  the
woman  could  pursue  the  identical  Dower,  and  wrest  it  from  the
hands  even  of  a  Purchaser.  In  the  latter  she  was  obliged  to  re-
sort to  the  Heir  for  an  Equivalent.  In  the  first  case,  from  the
moment  the  dower  was  named,  the  woman  acquired  a  certain
jus  et  dominium  as  Bracton  expresses  it,  in  the  property,  which
accompanied  it  into  whatever  hands  it  afterwards  went,  and  gave
her  the  right  of  following  and  reclaiming  it.  But,  if  the  endow-
ment were  general,  and  no  particular  land  specified,  the  Wife
did  not  acquire  any  immediate  right,  on  account  of  the  uncer-
tainty ;  it  being  questionable,  what  identical  allotment  would
fall  to  her  share,  until  the  assignment  took  place.  (Bracton
300.  b.)

1  It  seems,  thf.t  the  Widow  took  possession  of  the  property  in
the  same  state  in  which  it  existed  at  the  death  of  her  Husband,.


99

possession  of  it.  If,  however,  the  Dower  be  not  vacant,
either  the  whole  will  be  so  circumstanced,  or  some  part
will  be  vacant,  and  some  not.  If  a  certain  part  be  va-
cant, and  a  certain  part  not,  she  may  pursue  the  course
we  have  described,  and  enter  into  the  part  which  is
vacant;  and  for  the  residue,  she  shall  have  a  "Writ  of
Right,  directed  to  her  "Warrantor1  in  order  to  compel
him  to  do  complete  Justice  concerning  the  Land,
which  she  claims  as  appertaining  to  her  reasonable
Dower,  which  "Writ  shall  be  as  follows : —


CHAP.  Y.

"  THE  King  to  J/.  Health.2  I  command  you  that,
"•  without  delay,  you  hold  full  right  to  A.  who  was
"  the  Wife  of  E.  of  one  Hyde  of  Land,  in  such  a  Vill,
"  which  she  claims  to  belong  to  her  reasonable  Dower,
"  which  she  holds  of  you  in  the  same  Yill  by  the  free

*/  */

"  service  of  ten  shillings,  by  the  year,  for  every  service,
"of  which  N.  has  deforced  her:  and  unless  you  do  so,
"  the  Sheriff  shall,3  least  she  should  any  more  complain,
"  for  want  of  Justice.  "Witness  &c."

whether  in  cultivation,  or  otherwise,  with  the  fruits,  returns,
and  all  other  things  appertaining  to  it.  (Bracton  98.  a.  Fleta
L.  5.  c.  24.  s.  2.)

1  Namely,  the  Heir  of  her  Husband.  (Vide  Reg.  Ma j.  L.  2.  c.  16. )

2  Vide  F.  N.  B.  18.

3  Among  the  Constitutions  of  the  Ancient  kings,  the  Mirror
informs  us,  "  it  was  ordained,  that  after  a  Plaint  of  wrong  be
"  sued,  that  no  other  have  Jurisdiction  in  the  same  place,  before
'•the  first  Plaint be  determined:  and from thence came this
"clause  in  a  Writ  of Right, Et  nisi  feceris  vicecomes  faeiat."
(Mirror  c.  1.  s,  3.)


100


CHAP.  VI.

THE  Plea  shall  be  discussed  in  the  Court  of  the  "War-
rantor by  virtue  of  this  Writ,  until  it  be  proved  that
such  Court  has  failed  in  doing  Justice,  concerning  the
nature  of  which,  we  shall  speak  in  another  place.1
Upon  proof  of  this,  the  Suit  shall  be  removed  into  the
County  Court,  through  the  medium  of  which,  the  Suit
may,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  King  or  his  Chief  Justiciary,
be  lawfully  transferred  to  the  King's  Court  by  the  fol-
lowing Writ : 2 —


CHAP.  VII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Put  before  me
"  or  my  Justices,  on  such  a  day,  the  suit  which  is  in
"your  County  Court,  between  A.  and  N.  concerning
"  one  Hyde  of  Land  in  such  a  Vill,  which  the  said  A.
"  claims  against  the  aforesaid  N.  as  her  reasonable
"  Dower.  And  Summon,  by  good  Summoners,  the
"  aforesaid  N.  who  holds  that  Land,  that  be  be  then
"  there  with  his  Plea.  And  have  there,"  &c.

1  V.  Infra  L.  12.  e,  7.

2  "  The  Feme,  who  is  Demandant,  may  remove  the  same  by  a
"  Toll  into  the  County  ;  and  also  may  remove  the  same  out  of
"  the  County  into  the  Common  Pleas  by  a  Pone,  &c.  without
"  shewing  any  cause  in  the  Writ,  as  the  Demandant  shall  do  in  a
"  Writ  of  Right  Patent." (F.  N.  B.  15.)


101


CHAP.  vin.

PLEAS  of  this  description,  as,  indeed,  some  others,
may  be  transferred  from  the  County  Court  to  the
supreme  Court  of  the  King  for  a  variety  of  Causes :
as,  on  account  of  any  doubt  which  may  arise  in  the
County  Court  concerning  the  plea  itself,  and  which
that  court  is  unable  to  decide  ;  (and  Avheu  any  suit  is
thus  transferred  to  the  Court,  then  both  parties,  as
well  the  Tenant  as  the  Demandant,  shall  be  sum-
moned.) But,  when  it  has  been  removed  upon  the
Petition  of  one  of  the  parties,  it  will  then  suffice,  if
that  party  be  summoned  wTho  did  not  require  the  re-
moval :  but,  if  the  suit  should  be  transferred  to  Court
by  the  consent  and  prayer  of  both  parties,  being  pres-
ent in  Court  together,  then,  neither  party  ought  to  be
summoned,  because  the  day  appointed  in  Court  is
known  to  both  of  them.  Upon  the  day  appointed  in
Court,  either  both  parties  will  be  absent,  or  only  one
will  be  so,  or  both  will  appear.  We  have  already
sufficiently  treated  concerning  the  absence  of  both,  or
of  one  only  of  the  parties.  If  both  be  present  in
Court,  the  "Woman  shall  set  forth  her  claim  against
her  Adversary  in  the  following  words.  "  I  demand
"  such  Land,  as  appertaining  to  such  Land,  Avhich  was
"  named  to  me  in  Dower,  and  of  which  my  Husband
<;  endowed  me  at  the  door  of  the  Church,  the  day  he

i-

"  espoused  me,  as  that  of  which  ho  was  invested  and
"  seised  at  the  time  when  he  endowed  me." l
1  It  is  thus  as  literally  set  down in  the  Translation  of  the


102

Various  are  the  Answers  which  the  Adverse  party
usually  gives  to  a  claim  of  this  kind ;  in  substance,
however,  he  will  either  deny  that  she  was  so  endowed,
or  concede  it.

But,  whatever  he  may  allege,  the  Suit  ought  not  to
proceed,  without  the  Heir  of  the  Woman's  Husband.
He  shall,  therefore,  be  summoned  to  appear  in  Court
to  hear  the  Suit,  by  the  following  Writ  :—


CHAP.  IX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon,  by  good
"  Summoners,  N.  the  Son  and  Heir  of  E.  that  he  be
"  before  me,  or  my  Justices,  on  such  a  day,  to  warrant
"  to  A.  who  was  the  "Wife  of  the  said  E.  his  Father,  one
"  Hyde  of  Land  in  such  a  Till,  which  she  claims  to  be-

«/  *

"  long  to  her  reasonable  Dower  of  the  Gift  of  the  said
"  E.  her  Husband,  against  N.  and  of  which  there  is  a
"  Suit  between  them  in  my  Court,  if  he  will  warrant
"  that  Land  ;  or  to  shew  to  her  why  he  ought  not  to
"  do  so.  And  have  there  &c.  Witness  <fcc."


CHAP.  X.

SHOULD the Heir, after having been summoned,
neither  appear,  nor  essoin  himself,  on  the  first,  second,

Regiam  Majestatem. — "  I  claim  sic  Land,  as  ane  part  and  per-
"  tinents  of  that  Land  named  by  my  umquhill  Husband  for  my
''  Dourie,  quherewith  lie  indowed  me  at  the  kirk  dore,  the"
"  saniine  day  when  he  married  me,  wherein  he  was  vest  and
"  saised  at  the  time  he  indowed  me  therewith."  (L.  2.  c.  1C.)


103

nor  third  day  ;  or  if,  after  having  cast  the  usual  Es-
soins,  he  should  on  the  fourth  day,  neither  appear  nor
send  his  Attorney,  it  may  be  a  question,  by  what
means  he  ought  or  can  be  distrained,  consistently  with
the  Law  and  Custom  of  the  Realm.  In  the  opinion  of
some,  his  appearance  in  Court,  shall  be  compelled,  by
distraining  his  Fee.1

And  that,  therefore,  by  the  direction  of  the  Court
so  much  of  his  Fee2  shall  be  taken  into  the  King's
hands  as  may  be  necessary  to  distrain  him  to  appear
in  Court  to  shew,  whether  he  ought  to  Avarrant  the
Land  in  question  or  not.  Whilst  others  3  think,  that  his
appearance  in  Court  for  such  purpose  may  be  effected,
by  attaching  him  by  Pledges.


CHAP.  XL

WHEN, at last, the  Heir of the Husband  of  the
Woman,  the  complainant,  appear  in  Court,  either  he

1  He  may,  according  to  the  Regiam  Majestatem,  be  distrained,
or  attached  by  Pledges. (L.  2.  c.  16.)

2  Feodnm. This  word,  which  has  frequently  occurred  in  our
progress through Glanville,  has given  the name to  a  system.
The  reader  has  no  doubt  perused  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone's  account
of  it,  (2  Comm. 44.)  and  the  luminous  Annotation  which  Mr.
Butler  has  subjoined  to  Co.  Litt.  (Note  to  199.  a.) It  may  not  be
amiss  briefly  to  mention  the  leading  divisions  of  Feuds,  as  the
Reader  in  the  course  of  these pages  will  find  some  of  these  di-
visions mentioned,  and  others  alluded  to. 1.  Inproprium  ct  Im-
proprium. 2.  Infrancum  ct  von  'francum. 3.  In  mascuUnnm
et  fernininum. 4.  In  reale et personale. 5.  Jnlaicumet  ecclcsias-
ticum. 6.  In  antiquum  et  novum. 7.  In  nobile  et  ignobile. 8.
In  ligium  et  non  ligium. 9.  In  simplex  et  condifionatnm. 10.
In  divisibile  et  Indirixibilc. (Craig  de  Jur.  Feud.

3  Namely,  says  Dr.  Milles's  MS.  Hugh  Bardolph.


104

will  affirm  the  fact,  and  concede  that  the  Land  in
question  appertains  to  the  Dower  of  the  Woman,  and
that  she  was  endowed  of  it,  and  that  his  Ancestor  at
the  time  he  endowed  her  was  seised  of  it  as  an  appur-
tenant to  the  Land  which  he  named  in  chief,  as  her
Dower,  or,  he  will  deny  it.  If  the  Heir  admit  this  in
Court,  he  shall  then  be  bound  to  recover  the  Land
against  the  Tenant,  if  he  be  disposed  to  dispute  the
matter,  and  then  deliver  it  to  the  woman  ;  and  thus  the
contest  will  be  changed  into  one  between  the  Tenant
and  the  Heir.

If,  however,  the  Heir  be  unwilling  to  contest  the
point,  he  shall  be  bound  to  give  to  the  Woman  a  com-
petent equivalent ;  because,  the  Woman  herself  shall
not  afterwards  sustain  any  loss.  But,  if  the  Heir  himself
neither  admit  nor  concede  to  the  Woman  that  which
she  alleges  against  the  Tenant,  then,  the  suit  may
proceed  between  the  Woman  and  the  Heir.  For  a
Woman  cannot  with  Effect  bring  an  Action  against
any  one,  without  the  Warrantor  of  her  Dower.1  If,
therefore,  the  Heir  should  absolutely  deny  the  Right  of
the  Woman,  alleging  in  Court,  that  she  never  was  en-
dowed by  his  Ancestor,  the  matter  may  be  decided  by
the  Duel,  provided  the  Woman  produce  in  Court  those
who  heard  and  saw  the  Endowment,  or  any  proper
Witness  who  may  have  heard  and  seen  the  fact  of  her

1  For,  as  the  Regiam  Majestatem  adds,  "  the  king's  writ  is  of
"  no  force,  unless  the  warrantor  be  summoned."  (L.  2.  c.  16.)
The  Bodleian,  Harleian,  and  CottonianMS.  add,  that  the  woman
is  not  bound  to  answer,  without  her  ivarrantor.


105

being  endowed  by  the  Ancestor  of  the  Heir  at  the
Church  door,  at  the  time  of  the  Espousals,  and  be  ready
to  prove  such  fact  against  him.

Should  the  Woman  prevail  against  the  Heir  in  the-
Duel,  then  the  Heir  shall  be  bound  to  deliver  the  Land
in  question  to  the  Woman,1  or  to  give  her  an  adequate
recompense.


CHAP.  XII.

IT  should  be  observed,  that  when  any  one  endow  his
Wife  in  these  words.  "  I  give  to  thee  this  Land,  or
"  Yill,  by  name,  with  all  its  appurtenances " — if,  at
that  period,  he  held  not  any  thing  appurtenant  to  it  in
his  Demesne,  nor  of  which  he  was  seised  at  the  time
of  his  Espousals,  and  he  in  his  lifetime  recover  it,  or  by
any  other  lawful  means  acquire  it,  the  Wife,  after  the
death  of  her  Husband,  may,  by  the  Law  of  Dower,
justly  demand  such  appurtenant,  together  with  the
other  property  of  which  she  was  endowed.

1  The  Dower  being  assigned,  says  Bracton,  it  shall,  in  every
sense  of  the  word,  be  enjoyed  freely  ;  and  the  wife  shall  not  be
compelled  to  contribute  any  portion  of  it,  towards  discharging
the  Debts  of  her  Husband,  which  entirely  devolve  upon  the
Heir.  The  Heir  shall  warrant  and  defend  the  Dower,  and  per-
form the  judicial  services  that  may  be  due  in  respect  of  it,  to
the  County,  the  Hundred,  or  the  Lord's  Court  ;  whilst  the  widow,
exempt  from  every  other  care,  devotes  her  attention  solely  to  the
management  of  her  domestic  affairs,  and  to  the  education  of  her
children. — She  shall,  however,  have  her  own  court,  (fo.  98.  a.)
So  effectually  were  the  convenience,  the  interest,  the  dignity,  of
the  widow  attended  to  when  Bracton  wrote  !  !


106


CHAP.  XIII.

IT  must  also  be  understood,  that  if  the  Husband  of
any  Woman,  after  having  endowed  her  as  his  "Wife,
should  sell  her  Dower  to  any  one,  his  Heir  shall  be
obliged  to  deliver  the  Dower  to  the  Woman,  if  he
possibly  can  ;  at  the  same  time  he  shall  be  bound  to
render  a  reasonable  equivalent  to  the  Purchaser,  on
account  of  the  Sale,  or  Gift  of  his  Ancestor.1  If,
however,  the  Heir  be  unable  so  to  do,  he  shall  be
bound  to  make  to  the  woman  a  reasonable  compen-
sation.


CHAP. XIY.

WHEN  the  Dower  of  a  Woman  happen  to  be  so  cir-
cumstanced, that  she  is  prevented  from  obtaining  anv

o  »/

part  of  it,  then,  the  suit  shall  from  the  beginning  be  car-

\  ried  on  in  the  King's  Court,  and  the  person  in  possession
^

of  the  Dower  shall  be  summoned, by  the  following
Writ  :—


CHAP.  XV.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.2  Command  N.
"that,  justly  and  without  delay,  he  cause  A.  who  was
"  the  Wife  of  E.,  to  have  her  reasonable  Dower  in  such

1  An Assignment  of  Dower  carries  with  it  an  obligation  of
warranty  under  the  modern  French  code. (Code  Napoleon,  1547.
1564.)

2  Vide  F.  N.  B.  329.


107

•"  a  Till,  which  she  claims  to  have  of  the  Gift  of  the
"  said  E.,  her  Husband,  and  of  which  she  has  no  part,
"  as  she  says ;  and  of  which  she  complains  that  he  has
"  unjustly  deforced  her ;  and,  unless  he  does  so,  sum-
"mon  him,  by  good  Summoners,  that  he  be,  on  such  a
•*'  day,  before  us,  or  our  Justices,  to  shew  wherefore  he
"  has  not  done  it ;  and  have  there,  &c.  "Witness,  &c."


CHAP. XYI.

"WHOEVER  happens  to  be  in  possession  of  the  Dower,
whether  the  Heir  or  another  person,  the  Heir  ought
always  to  be  present  to  answer  the  Woman  claiming
her  Dower.  If,  therefore,  a  stranger,  and  not  the  Heir,
deforce  the  "Woman  of  her  Dower,  he  shall  be  sum-
moned by  this  "Writ ;  but  the  Heir  shall  be  summoned
by  the  former  Writ.


CHAP.  XVII.

THE  suit  between  the  Heir  and  the  Widow,  may  be
infinitely  varied.  For  the  Woman  will  either  claim
her  Dower,  as  named,  or  her  reasonable  Dower  as  not
named.  The  Heir  also  may  admit  that  her  Dower  was
named,  but  that  it  differs  from  that  she  demands  ;  or
he  may  allege,  that  no  Dower  was  specified.

If  the  contest  between  them  be  concerning  Dower
"which  was  named,  or  concerning  different  nominations


108

of  it,  then,  the  Plea  may  proceed  in  the  manner  we
have  above  described.  But  if  a  reasonable  Dower  be
demanded,  no  specific  nomination  having  been  made,
the  Law  is  perfectly  clear,  that  the  Heir  is  bound  to
assign  to  the  Woman  as  her  Dower,  a  third  part  of  all
the  freehold  Tenements  that  his  Ancestor  held  in  his
Demesne,  on  the  day  of  the  Espousals,  and  this  unre-
servedly, in  every  thing,  as  in  Lands,  and  Tenements,
and  Ecclesiastical  Advowsons,1  so  that  if  there  should
be  but  one  Church  in  the  whole  Inheritance,  and  such
happen  to  fall  vacant  in  the  life  of  the  woman,  and
after  the  death  of  her  Husband,  the  Heir  shall  not,
without  the  Assent  of  the  woman,  present  a  Parson  to
such  Church.  From  the  generality  of  this  Rule  we
must  except  the  Capital  Messuage,  which  cannot  be
given  in  Dower,  nor  can  it  be  divided,  but  shall  remain
entire.2  Nor  shall  a  division  be  made  of  those  things
which  other  women,  who  have  been  previously  en-

1  Vide  Bracton,  97.  a.  where  the  doctrines  of  the  text  are  cor-
roborated, and  the  additional  improvements  laid  down.

2  Yet,  from  the  form  of  the  writ,  book  12.  c.  20.  as  given  by
our  author,  we  may  collect,  that  the  Land  assigned  to  the  Widow,
as  her  Dower,  was  to  have  a  messuage  upon  it,  unless,  as  the
Writ  says,  land  had  been,  in  the  first  place,  specifically  nomi-
nated, 011  which  there  was  no  messuage. This  inference  is  corrob-
orated by  Bracton.  (97.  b.) It  was  certainly  a  qualification  of
the  severity  of  the  Rule,  which  would  turn  the  Widow  out  of
that  House  she  might  possibly  long  have  occupied  with  her  Hus-
band as  its  mistress. The  Widow  had  further  advantages  under
the  7th  chap,  of  Mag.  Car. These  different  regulations  in  favor
of  the  widow,  tended  to  restore  the  common  Law  as  it  stood  in
the  Reign  of  Canute. Ubi  Maritus  habitavit  absque  lite  et  abs-
que controversia, habitent  uxor  et  infans  ubique  absque  lite.
(LL.  Canuti,  70. Ed.  Wilkins.)


109

dowed,  still  hold  in  Dower.1  Besides,  if  there  should
be  two  or  more  Manors  to  be  divided,  the  Chief  Manor
shall  not  be  divided,  but,  together  with  the  capital
Messuage,  shall  remain  entire  to  the  Heir,  so  that  the
"Widow  shall  be  fully  satisfied  from  the  other  Manor
or  Manors.  It  should  also  be  remarked,  that  the  As-
signment of  the  Dower  shall  not  be  postponed,  on
account  of  the  Infancy  of  the  Heir.  In  addition,  should
.any  Land  have  been  given  by  name  to  a  "Woman,  in
Dower,  and  should  a  Church  have  been  founded  in  that
Fee,  the  Woman,  after  the  death  of  her  Husband,  shall
have  the  free  Presentation ;  so  as  to  have  it  in  her
power,  in  case  such  Church  should  become  vacant,  to
bestow  it  upon  any  proper  Clerk.2  But  she  cannot
•confer  it  upon  a  College,3  because,  by  so  doing,  she
would  for  ever  destroy  the  Right  of  the  Heir.

But  if  the  Ilusbnnd  of  the  woman  happen  in  his  life-
time to  bestow  the  Church  upon  the  Clerk,  the  latter
shall,  during  the  whole  of  his  life,  retain  such  Church  ;
although  he  were  presented  subsequently  to  the  period
when  the  woman  was  endowed  of  that  Land.  If,  how-
ever, the  Husband  should,  in  the  interval,  bestow  the
Church  upon  any  religious  House,  the  Church  ought,
after  the  death  of  the  Husband,  to  be  delivered  to  his
Widow,  so  that  in  the  course  of  her  life  she  may  have

t  •/

1  "  The  great  Third,"  says  Skene,  "  shall  not  be  computed,  in
"  the  division  of  a  second  third." (Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.  c.  16.)

2  "  Qualified  Clerk,  in  life  and  literature." (Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.
«.  10.)

3  "  Seeing,"  adds  Skene,  "a  College  never  dies." (Reg.  Maj.
L.  2.  c.  16.)


110

a  free  Presentation.1  But,  after  the  death  of  the  wo-
man, and  of  the  Clerk  instituted  Parson  upon  her  Pres-
entation, the  Church  shall  revert  to  the  religious
/i  House,  and  shall  for  ever  after  so  remain.  It  may  also
be  observed,  that  if  the  wife  should,  in  the  lifetime  of
her  Husband,  be  separated  from  him  on.  account  of  in-
continence, the  Woman  shall  not  be  heard  upon  a  claim
v  of  Dower.2  The  same  rule  prevails,  if  she  be  separated
from  him  on  account  of  Relationship  3 — she  shall  be
debarred  from  claiming  her  Dower.  And  yet  her
children  may  inherit,  and,  by  the  Law  of  the  Realm,
shall  succeed  to  their  Father  by  hereditary  Right.4

1  "  If  the  Husband  gave  the  Church  to  any  Religious  House,
"  after  his  decease  his  Heir  shall  deliver  the  church  to  the  Wife,
"  so  that  during  all  the  days  of  her  life  she  may  have  the  right  of
"  Presentation  thereof.1' (Reg.  Majest.  L.  2.  c.  16.)

2  From  a  Law  of  Edmund,  which  is  in  every  sense  of  the word
a  most  singular  specimen  of legislation, the translator makes
the  following  extract : — .Si  cam  (the  wife) ex  terra  ilia  ducere
velit  in  alterius  Thani  regionem, tune  sponsio  ipsius  sitquam
Amid  paciscantur,  lit  Maritus  ejus  nullam  illi  injuriam  inferat,
et  si  ilia  delictum  commiserit,  ut  possint  esse  propinquiores  emen-
dationi,  si  ilia  non  Jutbeat  unde  compenset. (LL.  Edm.  Ed.  Wil-
kins.) This  was  certainly  a  more  polite mode  of  proceeding
than  Canute  allowed. Under  his  Law,  the  wife,  if  guilty  of  the
offence  in  the  lifetime  of  her  Husband, became infamous, for-
feited every  thing  she  possessed  to  her  Husband,  and  lost  both
her  nose  and  ears. (LL.  Canuti — Ibid.)

8  Par entelam,  (vide  Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.  parentes.)  "  Paren-
"  tage  and  sibness  of  blude  (within  degrees  defended  and  for-
"  bidden,")  (Reg.  Majest.  L.  2.  c.  16.)

Divorce,  generally,  is  a  bar  to  Dower  under  the  Norman  code.
(Le  Grand  Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  102.)

4  Upon  this  Rule  of  Law,  Lord  Littleton  observes,  "  as  the  Ca-
"  ncnical  prohibitions  extended  so  far,  that  divorces  frequently
"  happened,  after  a  cohabitation  of  many  years  in  a  state  of  wed-
"  lock  supposed  lawful,  theie  was  much  humanity  and  equity  in


Ill

Observe  also,  that  when  the  Son  and  Heir  of  any  one
marries,  with  the  consent  of  his  Father,  and,  by  the
Assignment  of  his  Father,  endow  his  "Wife  with  a  cer-
tain part  of  the  Land  of  his  Father,1  it  may  be  ques-
tioned whether  the  AVife  can  demand  any  more  as
dovrer  ?2  If  her  Husband  die  previously  to  his  Father,
it  may  be  doubted,  whether  she  can  retain  the  Land  in
question,  as  her  Dower,  and  whether  the  Father  of  her
Husband  be  bound  to  warrant  such  Land  to  her  ?  3  If

"  this  Law,"  especially  as  his  Lordship  had  just  observed  "  such  a
"  separation  supposed  a  nullity  in  the  marriage,  and  the  children
"  must  in  strictness  have  been  bastardised  by  it,"  had  it  not  thus
have  been  tempered  and  relaxed.  (3  Litt.  Hist.  Hen.  2.  p.  126.)
A  similar  Law  forms  part  of  the  Modern  French  code,  though
clearly  the  result  of  different  principles — "Dissolution  of  mar-
"  riage  by  Divorce,  allowed  at  Law,  shall  not  deprive  the  chil-
'•  dren  born  of  the  marriage  of  any  of  the  advantages  which  were
"  assured  to  them  by  the  Laws,  or  by  the  marriage  contracts  of
"  their  Father  and  Mother."  (Code  Napoleon,  s.  304.)

1  According  to  the  Norman  Code,  if  the  Husband,  at  the  time
of  the  marriage,  had  no  Fee,  but  his  father  or  Grand-father  had
been  present  and  consented  to  the  marriage,  the  wife  might  be
endowed  out  of  the  Land  of  the  Fat her  or  Grand-father,  provided
there  were  no  other  Heirs  : if,  however,  such  Father  or  Grand-
father had  other  Heirs,  then,  she  was  to  be  endowed  out of the
portion  descending  to  her  Husband. But,  if  the  Father  or  Grand-
father did  not  consent  to  the  marriage, she  was  entitled  to  no
Dower  out  of  their  Lands. (Le  Grand Coust. de Normand, c.
100.)

2  This  is  put  as  a  question  in  the  printed  text,  although  the  Cot-
tonian  and  Dr. Milles's  MS.  assert  it  absolutely,  that  the  wife
cannot  claim  any  more  in  Dower  than  that  of  which  she  has  been
so  endowed. That  the  printed  text  is  correct  seems  probable  :
for  we  can  scarcely  suppose  the  doctrine  in  question  was  settled
when  that  contained  in  the  next  following  passage  was  unsettled.

3  The  Eegiam  Majestatem  lays  it  down,  that  the  Father  of the
Husband  shall  be  compelled  to  warrant  the  same  to  her. (L.  2-
c.  1C.) Vide  Co.  Litt.  33.  a.


112

a  woman  have  more  Land  in  Dower  than  she  ought,
that  is,  more  than  belongs  to  her,  let  the  Sheriff  be
commanded  to  admeasure  it,  and  for  this  purpose  the
following  Writ  shall  issue-


CIIAP.  XYIII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  N.  complains  to
"  us,  that  A.  his  Mother,  has  more  in  Dower  of  his  In-
"  heritance,  than  she  ought  to  have,  and  than  belongs
"to  her  to  have,  to  wit,  her  reasonable  Dower.  There-
"  fore,  I  command  you,  that  justly  and  without  delay,
•"  you  cause  it  to  be  admeasured  ;  and  that,  justly  and
"  without  delav,  vou  cause  the  said  N.  to  have  what  he

«/ '  •/

"ought  of  right  to  have  of  his  inheritance  ;  and,  justly
"and  without  delay,  cause  the  said  A.  to  have  what
"  she  ought  to  have,  and  what  belongs  to  her  to  have,
"  to  wit,  her  reasonable  Dower,  least  he  should  again
"  complain  for  wTant  of  Justice.  Witness,  &c."

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  331.


OF  LAWFUL  HEIRS,  AND  BASTARDS,  MALE  OR  FE-
MALE, OF  FULL  AGE  OR  MINORS ;  AND  OF  THE  CUS-
TODY AND  PRIVILEGE  OF  MINORS;  AND  CONCERN-
ING ULTIMATE  HEIRS,  WHO  ARE  THE  LORDS  WHEN
THE  FEE  FALLS  INTO  THEIR  HANDS ;  AND  OF  THE
HEIRS  OF  INTESTATES;  AND  OF  USURERS,  AND
THEIR  HEIRS  ;  AND  OF  MARRIAGE-HOOD  AND  OTHER
THE  DONATIONS  OF  ANCESTORS  ;  AND  OF  THEIR  TES-
TAMENTS AND  DEBTS,  ALL  WHICH  THEIR  HEIRS
ARE  BOUND  TO  WARRANT.


CHAP.  I.

THE  term  Dower  is  received  in  a  different  accepta-
tion in  the  Roman  Code,  according  to  which,  that  por-
tion which  is  given  to  a  Man  with  a  Woman  is,  prop-
erly speaking,  termed  Dower ;  but  this  corresponds
with  what  is  usually  called,  Marriage-hood.1  Every ^

1  Marititgium.  This  Term  is  explained  by  our  Author  more
fully  in  the  18th  chapter  of  the  present  Book.  Lord  Coke  trans-
lates the  word,  marriage :  but,  to  avoid  a  confusion  of  ideas.  I
have  rendered  it,  marriage-hood.  The  term  maritagium  appears
to  have  been  employed  by  our  ancient  writers  in  three  senses.
1.  To  designate  marriage,  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  Term.  2.
To  import  Land  given  with  a  Woman  in  marriage  ;  such  mar  it  a  -
glum  being  either  liber um,  or  servitio  obnoxium,  as  we  shall  pres-
ently see.  3.  To  mean  the  right  which  a  Lord  had  of  disposing
of  his  ward  in  marriage.  (Bracton,  21.  a.  Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.  ,
2  Bl.  Comm.  69.  Co.  Litt.  21.  b.  76.  a.  and  Mag.  Car.  c.  7.)
8  113


114

free-man  possessed  of  Land  may  give  a  certain  part  of
it  with  his  Daughter,  or  with  any  other  "Woman,  in
Marriage-hood,  whether  he  has  any  Heir,  or  not  ;  or
whether  his  Heir,  supposing  he  has  one,  consent  to
such  a  disposition,  or  not — nay,  though  the  Heir  ex-
,  pressly  dissent  from,  and  forbid  it.  Every  one  may
also  give  a  certain  part  of  his  freehold  Estate 1  to  any
person  he  chuses,  in  remuneration  of  his  services,  or  to
a  religious  Establishment  in  Free-Alms  ; 2  that,  if  seisin

D  '

follow  up  the  Donation,  the  Land  shall  perpetually  re-
main to  the  person  to  whom  it  is  given  and  his  Heirs,
if  the  terms  of  the  Gift  go  to  that  extent.  But,  if
such  a  Donation  should  not  be  followed  up  by  seisin,
nothing  can,  after  the  death  of  the  Donor,  be  claimed
with  effect  in  virtue  of  it,  contrary  to  the  will  of  the
Heir  ;  because  such  a  disposition  is  usually  interpreted
by  the  Law  of  the  Realm,  rather  as  a  naked  promise,
than  a  real  promise  or  donation.  Though  it  is  thus,
generally  speaking,  lawful  for  a  man,  in  his  lifetime,
freely  to  dispose  of  the  reasonable  part 3  of  his  Land,

1The  Assises  of  Jerusalem  permitted  a  Fief  to  be  dismembered,
if  it  consisted  of  more  Knight's  Fees  than  one,  but  not  otherwise,
(c.  265.)

^Poterit  etiam  Donatio  in  liberam  eleemosinam,  sicut,  ecclesiis,
cathedralibus,  conventualibus,  paroclualibus,  viris  religiosis.
(Vide  Bracton  27.  b.)  "  Originally  when  Lands  were  given  to
"  the  church,  they  were  burdened  with  military  service ;  this
"  service  the  Bishop  or  Abbot  performed  in  some  ages  by  him-
"  self,  and  in  others  by  a  delegate  :  but,  when  the  necessity  for  it
"  became  less,  people,  in  giving  Lands  to  the  church,  exacted
"  no  other  return  than  Prayers  and  such  religious  Exercises."
(Dalrymple's  Essay  on  Feuds,  p.  30.)

3  It  does  not  appear  from  Glanville  what  was  considered  as
this  reasonable  part.  In  speaking  of  the  Constitutions  of  the


115

in  such  manner  as  he  may  feel  inclined,  yet  the  same
permission  is  not  allowed  to  any  one  on  his  death-bed  ;
because  the  distribution  of  the  Inheritance  would,
probably,  be  then  highly  imprudent,1  were  such  an  in-
dulgence conceded  to  men,  who,  in  the  glow  of  a  sud-
den impulse,  not  unf  requently  lose  both  their  memory
and  reason.

Hence,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  that  if  a  Man  laboring
under  a  mortal  disease,  should  then  for  the  first  time
set  about  making  a  disposition  of  his  Land,  a  thing
never  thought  of  by  him  in  the  hour  of  health,  that
the  act  is  rather  the  result  of  the  Mind's  Insanity  than

\i

of  its  deliberation. But  yet  a  Gift  of  this  description,

ancient  kings,  the  Mirror  tells  us,  that  "  none  might  alien  but
"the  fourth  part  of  his  Inheritance,  without  the  consent  of  his
"  Heirs."  (c.  1.  s.  3.)  Whether  this  removes  the  difficulty,  is
for  the  Reader  to  decide.  The  32nd  chapter  of  Mag.  Car.  in-
tended to  provide  a  remedy  for  the  abuse  of  the  indulgence
stated  in  the  text — which  was  again  affected  by  the  Statute  of
qiiia  Emptores.  The  modern  French  code  restrains  a  gift  to  the
moiety  of  a  man's  property,  if  he  leaves  one  child — to  a  third  of
it,  if  he  leaves  two — and  to  a  fourth  if  he  leaves  three  children.
Nor  does  it  seem  that  a  man  is  free  from  restraint,  though  he
ha  re  no  child,  provided  he  has  Relatives,  either  Ascendants  or
Descendants.  But,  in  default  of  all  these,  the  restraint  ceases,
and  a  man  may  dispose  of  the  whole  of  his  property.  (Code  Na-
poleon, s.  913.  914.  915.)

1  "  And  some  have  questioned,"  says  Justice  Blackstone,
"  whether  this  restraint,  which  we  may  trace  even  from  the  an-
"  cient  Germans,  was  not  founded  upon  truer  principles  of  pol-
'•  icy,  than  the  power  of  wantonly  disinheriting  the  Heir  by
"  will,  and  transferring  the  Estate,  through  the  dotage  or  caprice
"  of  the  Ancestor,  from  those  of  his  blood  to  utter  strangers.
"  For  this,  it  is  alleged,  maintained  the  balance  of  property,  and
"  prevented  one  man  growing  too  big  or  powerful  for  his  neigh-
"  bours."  (2  Bl.  Comm.  373.)


116

if  made  to  any  one  by  the  last  "Will,  shall  be  valid,  if
done  with  the  consent  of  the  Heir,  and  confirmed  by
his  acquiescence  in  it.  When  a  Man  gives  part  of  his
Land  in  Marriage-hood,  or  in  any  other  manner,  his
Land  consists  either  of  that  which  is  inheritable  only,
or  of  that  which  he  has  purchased  only,  or  of  both  de-
scriptions. If  he  possess  inheritable  Land  only,  he
may,  as  we  have  already  observed,  give  a  certain  por-
tion of  it  to  any  stranger  at  his  pleasure.1  But  if  he
has  many  sons  born  in  Wedlock,2  he  cannot,  correctly
speaking,  without  the  consent  of  his  Heir,  give  any
part  of  his  Inheritance  to  a  younger  son ;  because,  if
this  were  permitted,  it  would  then  frequently  happen
that  the  Eldest  son  would  be  disinherited,  owing  to
the  greater  affection  which  Parents  often  feel  towards
their  younger  children.

But,  it  may  be  asked,  whether  a  man,  having  a  Son
and  Heir,  can  give  any  part  of  his  Inheritance  to  his
illegitimate  son  ?  If  he  can,  it  follows,  that  the  con-
dition of  the  illegitimate  son  would,  in  this  respect,
be  preferable  to  that  of  the  younger  son  born  in  "Wed-

1  A  liberty  that  he  was  not  indulged  in  by  the  Laws  of  Alfred,
unless  under  particular  circumstances: (LL.  Alfred,  c.  37.)  nor
by  the  Laws  of  Henry  the  1st  was  this  indulgence  conceded  a

x  Man. Si  Bockland  lidbeat,  quam  ei  parentes  dederint,  non  mit-
tat  earn  extra  coguationem  suam. (LL.  Hen.  1.  cap.  70.)

2  Filios  mulieratos. "When  a  Man has  a  Bastard  Son,  and
"  afterwards  marries  the  Mother,  and  by  her  has  a  legitimate
"  Son,  such  latter  Son,  in  the  language  of  the  Law,  is  called  a
"  miilier,  or,  as  Glanville  expresses  it  in  his  Latin,  filius  mulie-
"  ratus." (2  Bl.  Comm.  247.) With this interpretation  Skene
agrees. (Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.  c.  19.)


117

lock ;  and  yet  the  Law  is  so.1  But,  if  the  person,  de-
sirous of  making  a  donation  of  part  of  his  Lands,  pos-
sess only  such  as  he  has  purchased,  he  may  then  make
such  Gift ;  provided  it  does  not  extend  to  the  whole
of  his  purchased  Lands,  because  he  cannot  disinherit
his  Son  and  Heir.2  Yet,  if  he  has  not  any  Heir,  male
or  female,  of  his  own  Body,  he  may,  indeed,  consult
his  own  inclination  in  making  an  absolute  gift,  either
of  part  or  of  the  whole  of  his  purchased  Lands.3  And,
if  the  person  to  whom  the  gift  be  made  obtain  Seisin
of  it,  during  the  life  of  the  Donor,  it  is  not  in  the
power  of  anymore  remote4  Heir  to  invalidate  such

1  The  Eegiam  Majestatem  lays  it  down,  that  a  man  cannot
give  any  part  of  his  Inheritance  to  his  illegitimate  Son. (L.  2.
c.  19.) The  Grand  Norman  Custurnary  also  expressly  denies  the
validity  of  a  gift,  sale,  delivery,  or  pledge,  by  a  Father,  to  his
illegitimate  Son  of  any  part  of  the  former's  hereditary  Estate,
adding  that  it  might  be  impeached  within  a  year  and  a  day  after
the  Father's  decease. (Le  Grand  Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  30.) We
must  recollect  that  both  these  celebrated  works  were  posterior
to  Glanville— the  Law,  therefore,  had,  in  the  point  now  before
us,  undergone  some  alteration  in  the  intervening  period.

2  \7ide  Sullivan's  Lectures  on  the  Laws  of  England,  p.  149.

3  It  is  observed  by  a  justly  celebrated  writer  that,  in  the  old
restraints  upon  alienation,  which  we  find  in  the  Laws  of  Eng-
land and  Scotland,  no  distinction  is  made,  whether  the  fief  was
held  by  a  military  or  soccage  tenure  ;  and  that,  in  the  same  old
Laws,  the  restraint  upon  alienation  is  almost  absolute,  where
tiie  Tenant  is  in  by  descent,  but  very  loose  when  he  is  in  by  pur-
chase ;  and  the  writer  in  question  concludes  that,  the  Interest  of
t/ie  Heir  created  the  difference. (Vide  Dalrymple  on  Feuds  p.
."-'».) The  writer  just  mentioned  furnishes  an  excellent  comment
upon  this  part  of  our  Author, (c.  3.  s.  1.)

4  Hceres  remotior. Hceres  remotior  has  a  peculiar  signification
in  our  Author. Except  a  Son  and  Daughter,  who  were  Hcernlrs
/ir/i.riiiii, every Heir  was liceres  rcimrtior. See cap.  3.  of  this
Book. No  Heir,  says  the  Reg.  Maj.  being  of  farther  degree  than


118

Gift.  Thus  may  a  man  give,  in  his  lifetime,  the  whole
of  his  purchased  Land  ;  but  he  cannot  make  any  one
his  Heir  to  it,  neither  a  College,  nor  any  particular  in-
dividual, it  being  an  Established  Rule  of  Law,  that
God  alone,  and  not  Man,  can  make  an  Heir.1  If,  how-
ever, a  Man  possess  both  inheritable  and  purchased
Lands,  it  is  then  unquestionably  true,  that  he  may
absolutely  give  any  part  or  the  whole  of  the  latter  to
such  person  as  he  pleases;2  and  of  his  inheritance  he
may  notwithstanding  dispose,  according  to  what  we
have  already  observed,  provided  such  disposition  be  a
reasonable  one.  It  should  be  observed,  that,  if  a  Man,
having  Lands  in  free  soccage,3  has  many  sons,  who
are  all  in  equal  proportions  to  be  admitted  to  the  In-

the  son  or  daughter,  may  impugn  that  gift  any  manner  of  ways.
(L.  2.  c.  20.)

1  Vide  Craig  de  Jure  Feud.  p.  349.  354.  368.  and  also  Somner  on
Gavelkynd.

2  Primo  patris  feudum  primogenitus  filius  he/beat:  Emptiones
vero  vcl  deinceps  acquisitiones  suas  det  cui  mag  Is  i~alit. (LL.
Hen.  1.  cap.  70.)

3  Socagium. Did  poterit  soccagium  a  Socco. (Bracton  L.  2.
c.  oo.) Hinc  est  quod  Sokemanni  hodie  dicuntur  esse  a  succo
etiam  derivantur. (Fleta  L.  1.  c.  8.) .Socaginm  idem  est  quod
servitium  socce,  et  soca  idem  est  quod  caruca  s.  a  sokeor  a  plough.
(Littleton  s  Tenures  Sect.  119.) This  derivation  Lord  Coke  ap-
proves of  (Co.  Litt.  86.  a.) See  alsoCowell  advoc. Mr.  Somner,
however,  disapproves  of  it,  as  too  confined. He  would  derive  it
fro7Ti  the  Saxon  Sue,  which  signifies liberty  or  privilege,  and
agium  to  denote the agenda  or Services  (Somn. Gavelk.  103.
See  also  Bl.  Com.  and  Mr.  Christian's  note  2.  81.) "It  seems,"
s  ivs  Mr.  Hargrave,  "  that  both  derivations  have  their  share  of
"  probability,  which  is  as  much  as  can  be  expected  on  a  subject
"  so  very  uncertain." Mr.  Somner  tells  us,  that  the  term  socage
lias  first  occurred  to  him  in  Glanville,  but  never  as  yet  in  any
Elder  record. (Gavelk.  p.  143.)


119

heritance,  then,  it  is  unquestionably  true,  that  their
Father  cannot  give  a  greater  part  of  his  inheritable
Land  or  of  his  purchased,  if  he  possess  no  inheritable,
to  any  one  of  the  sons,  than  the  reasonable  part  which
would  fall  to  such  son  of  the  whole  paternal  Inherit-
ance.1 But  the  Father  can  in  his  lifetime  give  to
either  of  his  Sons  such  a  part  only  of  his  inheritable
free  soccage  Land,  as  such  son  would  be  intitled  to
upon  the  death  of  his  father  by  the  Rule  of  succession.
Yet,  by  reason  of  the  liberality  which  Parents  are  in
the  habit  of  exercising  towards  their  sons,  or  even
towards  other  persons,  questions  of  Law  frequently
arise  concerning  donations  of  this  description.  Let
us  suppose,  that  a  Knight  or  a  free-man,  having  four,
or  a  greater  number  of  sons,  all  born  in  "Wedlock  of
one  Mother,  should,  with  the  consent  of  the  Heir  pre-
viouslv  obtained,  (in  order  to  prevent  disputes)  give  to
one  of  his  sons — let  us  say,  to  the  second  and  his
Heirs,  a  certain  reasonable  part  of  his  Inheritance-
Let  us  suppose,  that  the  son,  to  whom  the  Gift  has
been  made,  received  Seisin,  and,  during  his  Life,  took
the  profits  and  proceeds,  and  that  he  died  in  such
Seism,  leaving  not  only  his  Father,  but  all  his  Brothers
yet  living.

Very  obscure,  indeed,  is  the  Law,  and  considerable
the  debate  and  contention  among  the  most  skilful  of

1  The  Norman  Code  lays  down  the  same  rule  generally,  and
observes,  that  after  the  Father's  Death,  any  such  Gift  should
te  brought  into  the  general  stock  and  divided  amongst  all  the
Heirs ;  in  other  words,  should  be  put  into  Hotch-pot.  (Le
Grand  Cust.  de  Norm.  chap.  36.)


120

that  Profession,  when  this  point  occurs  or  may  occur
in  the  King's  Court,  in  order  to  ascertain,  who  ought
by  law  to  succeed  to  the  Inheritance.  The  Father
contends,  that  he  ought  to  retain  to  himself  the  Seisin
of  his  departed  son,  and  thus  desires,  that  the  Land
which  had  emanated  from  his  Bount}r  should  again
return  to  him.  Upon  this  question  being  agitated  in
Court,  the  Eldest  son  will  answer  to  the  Father,  in  the
act  of  claiming  the  Land,  that  the  latter  ought  not  to
be  heard  upon  the  subject,  as  it  is  a  general  principle
of  the  Law  of  the  Realm,  that  no  one  can  be  at  once
Lord  and  Heir  of  the  same  Tenement.1  But,  by  force
of  the  same  principle,  the  third  son  attempts  to  repel
the  Eldest  son,  from  the  inheritance  in  question.

For,  since  the  Eldest  son  is  the  Heir  to  the  whole
Inheritance,  he  cannot  be  at  once  Lord  of  it  and  Heir  ;
especially,  if  the  father  of  the  Eldest  son  happen  to  be
dead,  such  son  would  be  Lord  of  the  whole  Inheritance.


1  An  able  writer  accounts  for  this  principle  by  informing  us,
that  the  whole  feudal  system  was  built  on  the  distinct  rights  of
superior  and  vassal,  and  the  blending  these  two  characters,
without  a  necessity  arising  from  the  feudal  relations  themselves,
in  one  person,  appeared  to  be  blending  of  contrary  qualities
together.  (Dalrymple's  Essay  on  feuds,  p.  177.)  Mr.  Reeves
observes,  "  that  in  the  times  of  Glanville  and  Bracton  the  reser-
"  vation  of  services  might  be  made  either  to  the  Feoff  or,  or  to
"  the  Lord  of  whom  the  Feoff  or  held  ;  they  seem  more  com-
"  monly  to  have  been  made  in  the  former  manner  :  thus,  every
"  such  new  feoff ment  in  fee,  made  a  new  tenure,  and  of  course
"  created  a  new  manor :  and  so  the  Law  continued  till  the
"  statute  quia  Emptores  IS.  Ed.  1.  required  feoff ments  in  fee  to
"  be  made,  with  reservation  of  the  Services  to  the  chief  Lord."
(1  Hist.  Eng.  Law.  106.)  See  also  Bale's  Hist.  Com.  Law.  158.


121

But,  then,  by  the  Law  of  the  Eealm,  the  Land  cannot
remain  to  him,  for  the  reason  we  have  mentioned.  If,
therefore,  he  cannot  retain  it  absolutely,  how  can  he
claim  it  by  the  rule  of  succession  ?  By  a  parity  of
reasoning  it  seems,  that  the  third  son  shall  exclude  all
the  others.

A  similar  doubt  arises,  when  any  one  has  conceded
and  given  a  certain  portion  of  his  Land  to  his  youngei
Brother,  and  his  Heirs. Let  us  suppose,  that  the  latter
dies,  without  leaving  any  Heir  of  his  own  body,  and
the  former  seizes  into  his  own  hands  the  Land  of  his
deceased  Brother,  as  being  vacant  and  within  his  Fee,
against  whom  his  own  two  sons  pray  an  Assise,  con-
cerning the  death  of  their  Uncle. Upon  the  suit  pro-
ceeding, the  Eldest  son  may  plead  against  his  Father,
and  the  youngest  son  against  his  Elder  Brother,  in  the
manner  before  mentioned. But  it  is  evident,  that  the
Father cannot by any  means,  consistently  with  the
Law  of  the  Eealm,  retain  the  Land  in  question,  as  he
cannot  at  once  be  Lord  and  Heir. Nor,  indeed,  does
the  Law  admit  of  Land  so  given  again  reverting  to  the
Donor,  when  Homage  has  followed  the  Gift,1  if  the
person  to  whom  the  Gift  is  made  has  any  Heir,  of  his
own  body,  or  even  more  remote. Besides,  Land  which
is  thus  given,  like  certain  other  Inheritances,  naturally
descends  to  the  Heirs  by the  rule  of  succession,  but

i  Vide  Reg.  Majest.  L.  2.  c.  22.  "  Biit  at  this  day,"  observes
Lord  Hale,  "  the  law  is  altered,  and  so  it  has  been,  for  aught  I
"  can  find,  ever  since  13  Ed.  1."  (Hale's  Hist.  Com.  Law.
229.)


122

never  naturally  ascends.1  Thus  the  Plea,  between  the
Father  and  the  Eldest  son,  shall  cease — but  it  shall
proceed,  between  the  Eldest  son  and  the  youngest,  in
the  manner  we  have  already  described.

But,  when  this  last  case  has  occurred  in  the  King's
Court,  it  has  sometimes  been  ordered  bv the  Court,

b

acting  upon  equitable  principles,  that  the  Land  so  given
should  remain  to  the  Eldest  son,  especially  if  he  has
not  any  other  Fee  in  possession,  until  the  paternal  In-
heritance fall  to  him.  Because,  in  the  mean  time,  as  he
is  not  the  Lord  of  the  paternal  Inheritance,  the  Rule,
that  no  one  can  at  once  be  Heir  and  Lord,  does  not
.stand  in  his  way.  But  since  by  the  Rule  of  succession,
he  must  become  Lord  of  that  part  of  the  Inheritance,

1  Descendit  itaque  Jus  quasi  ponderosum  quid  cadens  deorsum.
(Bractoii  62.  b. )  "This  Rule,"  observes  Sir  "Win.  Blackstone
"  so  far  as  it  is  affirmative,  and  relates  to  lineal  descents,  is  almost
•"  universally  adopted  by  all  nations  ;  "  "  but  the  negative  branch,
"  or  total  exclusion  of  Parents  and  all  lineal  Ancestors  fromsuc-
"  ceeding  to  the  Inheritance  of  their  offspring,  is  peculiar  to
"  our  own  Laws,  and  such  as  have  been  derived  from  the  same
"  original."  (2  Com.  209.)

The  Reader  will  recal  to  mind  the  material  qualification  of
this  Rule,  which,  though  it  precludes  the  Father  from  taking
as  Heir  to  his  Son,  by  an  immediate  descent,  permits  him  to  take
as  Heir  to  his  own  Brother,  who  was  Heir  to  the  Son,  by  col-
lateral descent.  (Hale's  Hist.  Com.  Law.  216.  33b.  2  P.  Wins.
613.  Mr.  Christian's  note  to  2  Bl.  Com.  212.)  This  appears  to
coincide  with  the  Rule  as  qualified  by  Bracton  ;  for,  having  laid
it  down,  that  an  Inheritance  never  ascends  the  same  way  it
descends,  he  proceeds,  a  latere  tamen  ascendit  alicui  propter
defectum  her edum  infer ius  provenientium,  (Bracton  62.  b.  See
also  Grand  Norm.  Custum.  c.  25.)  A  different  Rule,  from  that
in  the  text,  is  laid  down  in  the  Laws  of  Henry  the  first.  Si  quis
siitf  liberis  decesserit,  pater  ant  mater  ejus  in  liereditatem  suc-
cedant,  &c.  (LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  70.)


123

it  may  be  asked,  whether  he  is  not  to  be  considered  as
Heir  of  the  part  in  question,  when  he  is  Heir  of  the
whole  Inheritance  ?  To  this  we  answer,  that  it  is  as
yet  uncertain  and  in  contingency,  whether  the  Eldest
son  will  be  the  Heir  or  not.  If,  indeed,  his  Father
should  die  before  him,  then  it  is  no  longer  doubtful,
because  he  is  his  Heir.  Should  it  so  happen,  he  ceases
to  be  the  Owner  of  the  Land  he  formerly  acquired  by
succeeding  to  his  Uncle  ;  and,  then,  such  Land  shall
descend  to  the  younger  son,  as  the  right  Heir.  If,
however,  the  Eldest  son  should  die  before  his  Father,
it  is,  then,  equally  clear,  that  he  will  not  be  the  future
Heir  of  his  Father;  and,  therefore,  those  two  accidents
of  Law,  the  Hereditary  Right  and  Dominion  J  never
•concur  in  his  person.  It  should  be  remarked,  that
Bishops  and  Abbots  cannot,  without  the  consent  and
confirmation  of  the  King,  make  an  absolute  disposition
of  any  part  of  their  Demesnes,  their  Baronies  being
held  in  Frankalmoigne  of  the  Gift  of  the  King  and  his
Ancestors.2

1  Dominium. The  Civilians,  from  whom  this  term seems  to
have  been borrowed,  divided  dominium  into  the  directum  and
"the  lit  He  ;  the first being, where  a person  had  the  propriety,
without  the  profit, — the  latter  being,  where  a person  had  the
profit,  without  the  propriety. (Wood's  Inst.  Civil  Law.  L.  2.  c.
1.) This  division,  however,  was  opposed  by  Cvjacius  and  some
others. (Craig  Jus.  Feud.  L.  1.  Dieg.  9.)

2  The  Rule  laid  down  in  the  text  received  a  partial confir-
mation from  the  Stat.  of  Westm.  the  2.  c.  41. I  say  partial,  on
the  authority  of  Lord  Coke,  who  lays  it  down,  that  Bishops  are
not comprehended  in  that Act. (2  Inst.  457.) "  William  the
'"  Conqueror  thought  proper  to  change the spiritual tenure  of
"  frankalmoigne or  free-alms, under which the  Bishops  held
*'  their  Lands  during  the  Saxon  Government,  into  the  feudal  or


124


CHAP.  II.

BUT  Heirs  are  bound,  so  far  at  least  as  the  Donations
of  their  Ancestors  are  reasonable,  to  warrant  them,
and  the  things  comprised  in  them,  to  the  persons  to
whom,  they  are  made,  and  to  their  Heirs.1


CHAP. III.

OF  Heirs,  some  are  nearest,2  others  more  remote..
A  Man's  nearest  Heirs  are  those  of  his  Body,  as  a  Son,
or  a  Daughter.3  Upon  the  failure  of  these,  the  more
remote  Heirs  are  called,  namely,  the  Grandson,  or
Grand-Dano-hter  descending  in  a  ri^ht  line  from  the

o  o  o

Son  or  Daughter,  in  injmitum.  Then  the  Brother
and  Sister,  and  those  descending  from  them  in  a  trans-

'•  Norman  Tenure  by  Barony,  which  subjected  their  Estates  to
"  all  civil  charges  and  assessments,  from  which  they  were  before
"  exempt."  (2  Bl.  Com.  156.)

1  "  For  where  dedi."  says  Lord  Coke,  "  is  accompanied  with  a
"  perdurable  tenure  of  the  feoffor  and  Ins  Heirs,  there  dcdi  im-
"  porteth  a  perdurable  warranty  for  the  Feoffor  and  his  Heirs  to
"  the  feoffee  and  his  Heirs  ;  and herewith agreeth  Glanville  :  "
(referring  to  the  text) (3  lust.  275. )

2  Phira, says Fleta,  Tteredem  reddnnt  hereditati  propinqnio-
rcm  :  utpote  sexus,  linea,  hereditas  partibills,  pluralitas  fcemi-
namm^  modus  donat ionis  et  sanyuinis. (L.  6.  c.  1.  s.  12.)

3  Yet,  Bracton  reckons  a  daughter  a  more  remote  Heir  when  a
Son  was  living. (Bracton  64.  b.) It  is  clear,  that  author  uses
the  term  comparatively,  and  so  the  Grand  Norm.  Cust.  uses  it,,
(sparsim.)


125

verse  line.  After  these,  the  Uncle,1  as  well  on  the  part
of  the  Father,  as  of  the  Mother,  and  in  like  manner
the  Aunt,  and  their  Descendants.2

When,  therefore,  a  Man  possessed  of  an  Inheritance
dies,  leaving  one  Son  only  his  Heir,  it  is  unquestionably
true,  that  such  son  shall  succeed  entirely  to  his  Father.
If,  however,  he  leaves  more  sons,  then,  a  distinction
must  be  made,  whether  the  deceased  was  a  Knight,  or
one  holding  by  Military  Tenure,  or  whether  he  was  a
Free  Sockman.3  Because,  if  he  were  a  Knight,  or
holding  by  Military  Tenure,  then,  according  to  the
Law  of  the  English  Realm,  his  Eldest  son  shall  succeed
to  the  whole  Inheritance,  so  that  none  of  his  Brothers
can  by  right  claim  any  part  of  it.4  But,  if  the  Parent

1  Avnnciilus. Our  Author  is  guilty  of  an  inaccuracy  in  using
this  term,  which  means,  an  Uncle  on  the  Mothers  side,  patruus
being  the  Uncle  on  the  Father's  side.

2  V.  Somneri  Tractat.  de Gavelkynd.  pag.  42,  et  Bracton  L.  2.
c.  34./0/.  76.  o. FletainLib.5.c.3.s.l5. (ALMS.) On  the  Rules
of  descent  as  they existed  amongst  the  Jeirs,  the  Grecians,  the
Romans,  the  Lombardi,  the Normans,  the ancient  British,  the
Saxons,  &c. I  refer  the  Reader  to  Lord  Hale's  admirable  though
uiifinislied  Tract,  the  History  of  the Comm.  Law,  chapter llth.
On  the  Rules  of  descent,  as  existing  in  tins  Country  when  Bracton
wrote,  which  Lord  Hale  informs  us,  stood  settled  in  all  points  as
they  are at  this day,  except in  some few matters  soon after
settled,  the  Reader  may  turn  to  the  2nd  Book  c.  30.  31.  of  Bracton.

3  The  Norman  Code  divides  Inheritances  into  impartible  and
partible — the  former  appearing  to  answer  to  our  military  tenure,
the  latter  to  our  soccage  tenure. (Grand  Cut-turn,  c.  24.)

4  "  The  Normans,  introducing  their  Feuds,  settled  the  whole
"  Inheritance  of  them  upon  the  Eldest  son,  which  the  ancient
"  feudal  Law  did  not  (as  we  before  have  noted)  till  feuds  were
"  grown  perpetual. The  reason,  as  I  take  it.  that  begat  this  al-
"  teration  was,  for  that  while  the  feud  did  descend  in  Gavelkynd


"126

were  a  free  Sockraan,1  then,  indeed,  the  Inheritance
shall  be  equally  divided  amongst  all  the  sons,  however
numerous,  provided  such  Soccage  Land  has  been  an-
ciently divisible,2  reserving,  however,  to  the  Eldest  son

"  to  the  sons  and  nephews  of  the  feudatory,  the  services  were
"  suspended,  till  the  Lord  had  chosen  which  of  the  sons  he  would
"  have  for  his  Tenant,  and  then  it  was  uncertain,  whether  the
"  party  chosen  would  accept  of  the  feud  or  not,  for  sometimes
"  there  might  be  reasons  to  refuse  it."  (Spelm.  Reliq.  p.  43.
See  also  3  Litt.  Hist.  Hen.  p.  122.  and  Robinson  on  Gavelkynd.
22.)

1  Vide  Spelm.  Reliq.  in  libello  in  script. Feuds  and  Tenures  by
Knight's  Service  c.  27.  p.  43.  and  44. ( Al.  MS.)

2  Soccage  Lands  are  asserted  to  have  remained  partible  long
after  the  Conquest,  and,  as  we  have  no  account  of  the  precise
period  when  the  alteration  was  made  in  the  descent  of  these
Lands  from  all  the  Sons  equally  to  the  Eldest  Son  only,  it  is
probable,  as  Mr.  Robinson  suggests,  that  the  alteration  was  not
effected  at  once  nor  by  any  written  Law,  but  crept  in  insensibly
and  by  degrees,  in  imitation  of  the  Descents  of  Knight's  Service,
and  from  the  pride  of  the  Soccage  Tenant,  emulous  that  his  Eld-
est Son  should  equal  in  state  and  splendor  the  military  Tenant.
"  But  this  alteration  began  to  appear  more  plainly  in  the  time  of
"  Henry  the  2nd.  for,  according  to  Glaninlle,  who  wrote  in  that
"  Reign,  in  order  to  entitle  the  Sons  to  take  equally,  it  was  not
"  only  necessary  that  the  Land  should  be  holdenin  free  soccage,
"  but  further  quod  antiquitus  divisum  " — and,  having  cited  the
present  and  following  passages  of  our  author,  Mr.  Robinson  pro-
ceeds "  So  that  according  to  this  account,  it  is  difficult  to  say,
"  what  was  then  the  common  Law  with  regard  to  descents  of
"  soccage  Lands,  or  whether  every  person  entitling  himself  to
"  them  by  Inheritance,  was  not  obliged  to  set  out  the  special
"  custom  of  the  place. The  same  author,  indeed,  in  other  parts
"  of  his  Book,  speaks  of  the  partibility  of  these  Lands  more  gen-
"  erally,  and  in  such  manner  as  may  induce  a  belief,  that  it  re-
"  mained  the  common  Law  at  that  time  :  Plurium  item  hceredum
"  conjunctio  mulierum  soil,  in  fcodo  militari  vel  masculorum  vel
"  fceminarum  in  libero  socagio. (L.  13.  c.  11.) And,  in  another
"  very  remarkable  passage,  wherein  he  shews,  that  the  Law  so
"  greatly  respected  this  equal  division  among  the  Sons,  as  not  to>
"  permit  the  Father  even  in  his  lifetime  to  prefer  a  favorite  child


127

as  a  mark  of  respect  to  his  seniority,1  the  Capital  Mes-
suage, upon  his  making  a  Compensation  to  the  others,
equal  to  the  value.2  If,  however,  the  Estate  was  not
anciently  divisible,  then,  the  Eldest  son  shall,  accord-
ing to  some  customs,  take  the  whole  Inheritance,

"  to  any  of  the  rest,  by  advancing  him  beyond  his  proportionable
"  part  " — referring  to  the  first  chapter  of  the  present  Book.  (Rob-
inson on  Gavelkynd  24.  25.)  The  t\vo  latter  positions  referred  to
by  Mr.  Robinson,  as  laid  down  by  Glanville,  may  be  accounted
for  by  supposing,  that  our  author  speaks  with  reference  to  Land
"  antiquitus  divisa."  "  Although,"  says  Lord  Hale,  commenting
upon  a  passage  in  our  author's  text,  "Custom  directed  the  De-
"  scent  variously,  either  to  the  Eldest  or  Youngest  or  to  all  the
"  Sons,  yet,  it  seems,  that  at  this  time,  Commune  Jus,  or  Corn-
"  mon  right  spoke  for  the  Eldest  Son  to  be  Heir,  no  custom  in-
"  ter veiling  to  the  contrary."  (Hist.  Com.  Law  226.)  To  conclude,
the  right  of  primogeniture  every  day  making  a  greater  progress
had.  as  Mr.  Robinson  observes,  in  the  Reign  of  King  John  fairly
got  the  upper  hand  of  the  partible  descent,  the  presumption  then
being  that  even  Soccage  Lands  (unless  in  Kent)  were  descendible
to  the  Eldest  Sou  only,  unless  the  contrary  were  proved.  (26.)
Upon  the  doctrine  of  the  text  and  the  subject  of  this  note,  see.
the  authors  referred  to  ;  also  Bracton  76.  a.  Fleta  L.  5.  c.  9.  s.  15.
Mirror  c.  1.  s.  3.  and  Co.  Litt.  14.  a.

1  ^Esnecice — Gall,  aisne,  quasi  ains  ne. The  transition  is  easy
from  the  person  of  the  Elder  to  his  privilege  or  the  right  of  Se-
niority. (Spelm.  Gloss,  advoc.) The  term  occurs  in  the  Statute
of  Marlbridge,  Fleta,  Bracton,  Norman  Custumary  &c. Among
the  customs  of  Beauvoisis,  we  find  a  Law  similar  to  that  in  our
text.  (c.  14.) But  Thaumas  observes,  that  this  privilege  attached
to  seniority  did not  regularly  prevail  unless Sur  Ics Heritages
nobiles  (397.) It  was  clearly  not  so  restrained  with  us.

2  Primum  Patris  feodum  primogenitns  filius  habet.  (LL.  Hen.
1.  c.  70.) From  this  Lord  Hale  collects,  that  though  the  whole
land  did  not  descend  to  the  Eldest  Son,  yet  it  began  to  look  that
way. (Hist.  Com.  Law,  224.) Mr.  Somner,  however,  interprets
t\\z  primum  feodum  to  be  only  the  Capital  Messuage,  according
to  Glanville,  in  the  passage  now  before  us,  or  what  is  called  in
the  Grand  Norman  Custum.  le  chief  de  Heritage  (Anglo-Sax.  LL..
Ed.  AVilkinsp.  266.)


128

whilst,  according  to  other  Customs,  the  younger  son
shall  succeed  as  Heir.1  In  like  manner,  should  any
person  leave  one  Daughter  only,  his  Heir,  then  what
we  have  laid  down  with  respect  to  a  son  shall  unques-
tionably prevail.  If,  however,  he  leave  more  Daugh-
ters, then,  the  Inheritance  shall,  without  distinction,
be  divided  between  them,  whether  their  Father  was  a
Knight  or  a  Sockman,  reserving  to  the  Eldest  Daugh-
ter, the  Capital  Messuage,  under  the  conditions  before
mentioned.  But  it  should  be  observed,  if  either  of  the
Brothers  or  Sisters,  amongst  whom  the  Inheritance  is
divided,  should  die,  without  leaving  any  Heir  of  his  or
her  Body,  then  the  portion  of  the  person  so  dying  shall
be  divided  amongst  the  survivors.  But  the  Husband
of  the  Eldest  Daughter  shall  do  Homage2  to  the  Chief
Lord  for  the  whole  Fee.  But  the  Younger  Daughters,
or  their  Husbands,  are  bound  to  perform  to  the  Chief
Lord  the  services  due  for  their  Land,  by  the  hand  of
the  Eldest  Daughter,  or  her  Husband.  Yet  the  Hus-

1  See Lord Hale's  Comment  on  this  passage,  supra  note  2.
p.  126.

2  Our  author  professedly  resumes  the  subject  of  Homage  in  the
9th  Book. We  shall,  therefore,  in  this  place  merely  notice  that
Craig  makes  the  military  feud  to  consist  in  three  things — Homa-
gium,  fidelitas,  and  scutagium. The  chief  distinctions  between
the  two  former  as  stated  by  that  author,  are,  1st,  The  manner  of
performing  Homage  was  much more  humble  and  impressive,
than  that  of  performing  Fealty. 2nd,  Homage  was  due  for  a
military  Fee  alone  ;  a  Rule  that  if  it  ever  prevailed  was  relaxed
by  the  English  Law. 3rd,  Homage  could  only  be  received  by  the
Lord personally, fealty  might  be  received  by a  Bailiff. 4th.
Those  who  held  by  Homage were  bound  to  sell  or  pledge  every
thing  for  their  Lord  ;  but the  tenant by  simple fealty  had  no
such  heavy  obligation  imposed  upon  him. (Craig.  Jus  Feud.  L.
1.  D.  11.  10).


129

bands  of  the  Younger  Daughters  are  not  bound  to  per-
form any  Homage,  or  even  Fealty,  to  the  Husband  of
the  Eldest  Daughter,  in  her  lifetime.

Nor  are  their  Heirs  in  the  first  and  second  degrees  ;
but  those  in  the  third  descent  from  the  Younger
Daughters  are  bound  by  the  Law  of  the  Realm,  to  do
Homage  for  their  Tenement  to  the  Heir  of  the  Eldest
Daughter,  and  to  pay  a  reasonable  Relief.1  In  addi-
tion it  should  be  known,  that  Husbands  cannot  give
any  part  of  the  Inheritance  of  their  Wives,  without  the
consent  of  their  Heirs,  nor  can  they  remit  any  part  of
the  right  of  the  Heirs,  unless  in  her  lifetime.2  If,  how-
ever, a  Man  leaves  a  son  and  Heir,  and  has  besides  one
Daughter  or  more,  the  son  succeeds  entirely  to  the
Inheritance — from  whence  it  follows,  that  if  a  Man
should  have  married  many  Wives,3  and  by  each  of
them  have  had  one  or  more  Daughters,  and  at  length
an  only  son  by  the  last  of  them,  the  son  alone  shall
obtain  the  Inheritance  of  the  Father ;  because,  it  is  a
general  Rule,  that  a  Female  can  never  share  an  Inher-
itance with  a  Male,  unless  perhaps  a  special  Exception
to  this  exist  in  some  particular  City,  grounded  upon  a

1  Among  the  customs  of  Beauvoisis,  there  is  a  Law  very  similar
from  which  Thaumas  asserts  we  borrowed  our  rule.  (c.  47.) The
doctrine  of  the  text  is  confirmed  by  Henry  the  2nd's  Charter  to
the  Irish,  which  the  Reader  will  find  among  Thaumas's  notes  to
the  customs  of  Beauvoisis  p.  396.

2  Nor  yet  remit  nor  diminish  the  right  of  the  Heir,  but  only
"  during  their  (the  wives)  lifetime." (Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.  c.  29.)

!  Vide  D.  Craig.  Librum  de  Successions  Anglice  versa  p.  375.
<A1.  MS.)
9


130

Custom  which  has  long  prevailed  there.  But,  if  a
man  should  marry  different  Women,  and  by  each  of
them  should  have  one  Daughter,  or  more,  all  the  Daugh-
ters are  equally  entitled  to  the  Inheritance  of  the
Father,  in  the  same  manner  as  if  they  were  all  sprung
from  the  same  Mother.1  But  when  a  Man  dies  without
leaving  any  Son,  or  Daughter,  his  Heir,  if  he  has  any
Grand  Children,  then,  undoubtedly,  they  shall  succeed
to  him,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  have  above  men-
tioned, his  Son  or  Daughter  would  have  succeeded,  and
under  similar  distinctions.  For  the  Descendants  in  the
right  line,  are  alwa}rs  to  be  preferred  to  those  who  are
,  in  the  tranverse  line.  But  when  anv  one  dies,  leaving

*/  *  cj

a  younger  son,  and  a  Grandson,  the  Child  of  his  Eldest
son,  great  doubt  exists,  as  to  which  of  the  t\vo  the  Law
prefers  in  the  succession  to  the  other,  whether  the  Son.
or  the  Grandson.  Some  think,  the  Younger  Son  has
more  right  to  the  Inheritance  than  such  Grandson,  for
this  reason — that  the  Eldest  Son  did  not  survive  his
Father,  and  was  not  in  existence  when  the  Inheritance
fell,  but  the  Younger  Son  did  out-live  both  his  Brother
and  his  Father,  and  it  is,  therefore,  right,  as  they  con-
tend, that  he  should  succeed  to  his  Father.  But  others
incline  to  think,  that  the  Grandson  ought  of  right  to
be  preferred  to  his  Uncle.

For  since  the  Grandson  descended  from  the  Eldest

1  "  This  is  to  be  understood,"  says  the  Regiam  Majestatem,
"  of  the  Father's  Heritage,  descending  from  him  to  them.  For,
"  if  the  Heritage  descend  and  come  of  the  Mother's  side,  each
"  daughter  shall  succeed  to  the  Heritage  of  her  own  Mother.'*
(L.  2.  c.31.)


131

Son  and  is  the  Heir  of  his  Body,  he  would  have  suc-
ceeded to  all  his  Father's  rights  had  he  still  lived,  and
he  ought  therefore  to  succeed.  In  which  opinion  I
concur,  if  his  Father  was  not  portioned  off  1  by  the
Grandfather.

For  a  Son  may,  in  the  lifetime  of  his  Father,  be  por-
tioned off  by  him,  if  the  father  assigns  a  certain  part
of  his  Land  to  the  Son,  and  deliver  him  Seisin  in  his
lifetime,  at  the  request  and  with  the  unrestrained  con-
sent of  the  Son,  in  such  manner,  that  the  latter  be  fully
satisfied  with  such  part.  In  such  case,  the  Heirs  of
the  Son's  Body,  cannot  claim,  as  against  their  Uncle,
or  any  other  person,  any  greater  portion  of  the  residue
of  the  Grandfather's  Inheritance,  than  the  part  of  their
Father,  although  the  Father  himself  might,  if  he  had
survived  the  Grandfather.  Besides,  if  the  Eldest  Son,
after  having  in  his  Father's  lifetime  done  Homage  to
the  Chief  Lord  for  his  paternal  Inheritance,  should  die
before  his  Father,  there  is  no  question  but  that  his  Son
shall  be  preferred  to  the  LTncle.  Upon  this  subject,
however,  a  contest  may  arise,  between  the  Grandson
and  the  Chief  Lord,  if  the  latter  refuse  the  Homage  of

7  O

the  Grandson  ;  or  between  the  Chief  Lord  and  the
L^ncle,  if  the  Chief  Lord  has  warranted  the  Homage  of

7  O

the  Grandson.  In  both  these  cases,  there  is  no  reason-
able objection  to  prevent  the  matter  coming  to  the
Duel,  unless  the  Homage  can  be  proved  ;  for  then,

1  Forisf am  Hiatus  is  aliquem  foris  familiam  ponere,  says  Spel-
man,  (Gloss,  ad  voc.) — a  similar  explanation  to  that  of  the
Regiam  Majestatem.  (L.  2.  c.  33.)— Vide  also  2  Bl.  Com.  219.


132


indeed,  (as  the  Law  now  obtains  between  the  Uncle
and  the  Grandson)  Melior  est  conditio  possidentis.1


CHAP.  IY.

UPON  a  failure  of  Descendants  in  the  right  line,2  then
the  Brother  or  Brothers  succeed ;  or,  if  no  Brothers
can  be  found,  the  Sisters  are  to  be  called ;  and,  these
being  dead,  their  children  are  to  be  called.  After
these,  the  Uncles  are  to  be  called,  and  their  children  ;
and,  lastly,  recourse  must  be  had  to  the  Aunts,  or  their
children ;  the  distinction  above-mentioned  being  alwavs
observed  and  kept  in  view,  between  the  sons  of  a

1  "  If  it  cannot  be  proved,  that  the  Homage  was  made  between
"  the  Nephew  and  the  Father's  Brother,  he  shall  be  preferred
"  who  is  in  possession. For  the  condition  of  the  possessor  is
"  best." (Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.  c.  33.)

2  Si  quis,  says  a  Law  of  Henry  the  first,  sine  liberis  decesserit.
Pater  aid  Mater  ejus  in  hereditatem  succedant,  vel  frater,  vel
soror,  si  pater  et  mater  desint. (LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  70.  Ed.  Wilkins.)

Patri,  says  the  Norman  Code,  succedit  filius  primogenitus :  et
matri  similiter.  Et  si  prior  patre.  decesserit  ejus  Jilius,  et  ejus
heres  $>ropinquior  in  eadem  directa  linea  suceessionis  hanc  succes-
sionem  obtinebit.  Si  vero  nullus  de  linea  primogeniti  reman  serif.
Jilius  post  primum  primogenitus,  ut  ejusdem  linear  propinqnior
decesserit,  successioncm  hereditariam  retinebit.  Et  similiter  in-
telligendum  est  in  aliis  lineis  postnatorum.  Si  ver?  omnes  linea3
eorwn  decesserint,  ad  fratrem  priinogenitum  redit  successio
feodalis,  vel  ad  ejus  lineal  propinquiorem.  Si  autern  fratres
defuerint,  ex  eorum  linea  redit  ad  patrem  ex  quo  linea?  proces-
serint.  (Le  Grand  Gust,  de  Norm.  c.  25.)  I  conclude  this  note
with  the  modern  French  Canon — "The  Law  regulates  the  order
"  of  succession  among  lawful  Heirs  :  for  want  of  them,  the  prop-
"  erty  passes  to  the  natural  children,  after  that  to  the  surviving
"  Husband  or  Wife  ;  and,  for  want  of  these,  then,  to  the  state."
(Code  Napoleon,  s.  720.)


133

Knight,  and  of  a  Sockman,  and  in  like  manner,  be-
tween their  Grand-children.  The  distinction  between
Males  and  Females  is  likewise  to  be  observed.


CHAP.  V.

HEIRS  are  also  bound  to  observe  the  Testaments  of
their  Fathers,  and  of  their  other  Ancestors.  Of  such,
I  mean,  to  whom  they  are  Heirs ;  and  to  discharge
their  Debts.  For  every  Freeman,  not  involved  in
Debt  beyond  his  circumstances,  may  on  his  death-bed
make  a  reasonable  division 1  of  his  Effects,  under  this
form,  as  prescribed  by  the  custom  of  certain  places.
In  the  first  place,  he  should  remember  his  Lord,  by
the  Gift  of  the  best  and  chief  thing  he  possesses :  then
the2  Church,  and  afterwards  other  persons  at  his
pleasure.  But,  whatever  the  Custom  of  different
places  inculcate  with  reference  to  this  point,  yet,
according  to  the  Law  of  the  Realm,  no  man  is  bound
to  leave  any  thing  by  Will  to  any  person  in  particular,
unless  it  be  his  inclination;  for  every  Man's  last  Will
is  said  to  be  free,  according  to  the  spirit  of  these  Laws,
as  well  as  others.

1  Divisam,  derived,  according  to  Spelman,  from  the  French
term  diviser,  to  partition  or  divide. (Spelm.  Gloss.) It  is  some-
times used  for  a  boundary  of  Land — metce  et  rationabiles  rf/Y/.vrr
quceponunturinterminis  et  finibus  agrorum  ad  distinguendam
prcfdia,  says  Fleta,  L.  4.  c.  2.  s.  17. In  this  latter  sense  our
author  uses  it. Infra.  L.  9.  c.  13.  14.  &c.

2  His,  according  to  the  Harl.  Bodl.  and  Cotton.  MSS.,  designat-
ing, probably,  his  parish  church,  and  not  leaving  him  at  liberty
to  chuse,  what  church  he  pleased.


134

A  woman,  indeed,  when  at  her  own  disposal,  may
make  a  Testament ;  but,  if  married,  she  cannot,  with-
out the  Authority  of  her  Husband,  make  any  "Will  of
the  Effects  of  her  Husband.1  Yet  it  would  be  a  mark
of  affection  and  highly  creditable  to  the  Husband,  if
he  concede  a  reasonable  portion  of  his  Effects  to  his
"Wife;  in  other  words,  a  third  part,  which,  indeed,  she
would  be  entitled  to,  should  she  out-live  him,  as  will
be  more  fully  seen  hereafter.  Husbands  indeed,  much
to  their  honor,  frequently  grant  to  their  "Wives  this
indulgence.

"When,  therefore,  any  one  being  indisposed  wishes  to

make  his  Will,  if  he  be  not  involved  in  Debt,  all  his

v

moveables  should  be  divided  into  three  equal  parts ;  of
which  one  belongs  to  his  Heir,2  another  to  his  "Wife,
and  the  third  is  reserved  to  himself.3  Of  this  third,  he

1  The  modern  French  Code  permits  the  wife  to  make  a  will,
even  without  the  authority  of  her  Husband. (Code  Napoleon,
s.  230.)

At  the  same  time  she  is  restrained  from  making  a  gift,  with-
out his  consent,  or  the  sanction  of  the  Law. (Ibid.  s.  905.)

2  "  To  his  children  "  generally,  according  to  the  Reg.  Maj.  c.  36.
With  respect,  however,  to  the  text  of  Glanville,  Mr.  Selden  col-
lects, from  the  Laws  of  Henry  the  first  and  the  Assise  of  Claren-
don, that  the  Heirs  inherited  Chattels  as  well  as  Lands,  as  late
as  the  time  of  Henry  the  second,  and  that  the  Law  was  changed
about  the  time  of  King  John,  by  some  Act  of  Parliament  not
now  to  be  found. (Selden's  Tit.  of  Honor,  part  2.  c.  5.  s.  21.)

3  The  text  receives  considerable  confirmation  from  the  customs
of  Gavelkynd,  highly  probable  as  it  is,  that  those  customs  are
the  valuable  relics  of  the  old  common  Law. "  Let  the  goods  of
"gavelkynd  Persons,"  says  the  Custumo.l  a f  Kent,  "be  parted
"  into  three  parts,  after  the  funerals  and  the  debts  paid,  if  there
"  be  lawful  Issue  in  life. So  that  the  dead  have  one  part,  and
"his  lawful  sons  and  daughters  another  part,  and  the  wife  the


135

has  the  free  power  of  disposing.  But,  if  he  dies  with-
out leaving  any  Wife,  the  half  is  reserved  to  him.1

"  third  part :  and,  if  there  be  no  lawful  issue  in  life,  let  the  dead
"  have  the  one  half ,  and  the  wife  alive  the  other  half."  (vide
Robins,  on  Gavelkynd,  287.)  Lord  Hale  recognises  the  doctrine
in  the  text,  which,  he  tells  us,  was  conformable  to  the  ancient
Law  of  England  and  the  custom  of  the  North  to  this  day.  (Hist.
Com.  Law.  192.  223.)  It  is  likewise  confirmed  by  the  Regiam
Majestatem,  (L.  2.  c.  37)  and  in  substance  by  Bracton,  and  Fleta.
— Yet,  notwithstanding  all  this,  Lord  Coke,  in  his  Commentary
on  Magna  Carta,  roundly  asserts,  that  the  doctrine  laid  down  in
the  text,  never  was  the  Common  Law  ;  (2  Inst.  32)  and,  in  sup-
port of  this  position,  he  cites  a  passage  from  Bracton.

To  that  passage,  I  have  turned.  Bracton  there  confirms  the
text  of  Glanville,  and  tells  us,  that  the  Law  is  so,  unless  in  some
cities  and  boroughs.  —This  leads  him  to  mention  the  custom  of
London,  and  some  floating  opinions  about  its  extent.  He  is  of
opinion,  that  the  will  of  a  citizen  of  London  ought  to  be  free,
and  unrestrained  by  any  such  limitation,  as  \vas  imposed  upon
wills  by  the  common  Law.  But  Lord  Coke  has  hastily  assumed,
that  what  Bracton  spoke  of  the  custom  of  London  only,  related  to
the  kingdom  at  large.  As  this  assumption  fails,  the  deduction
that  flowed  from  it  fails  also.  Sir  William  Blackstoiie,  I  find,
has  mentioned  and  refuted  Lord  Coke's  mistake.  (2  Comm.  492)
as  has  Mr.  Somner  in  his  Treatise  on  Gavelkynd,  p.  96.  To  these
authors,  the  reader  may  refer,  as  also  to  Reeves's  Hist.  Eng.  Law.
2.  334.  335.  and  F.  N.  B.  270.  In  concluding  this  note,  I  shall
mention,  the  course  of  distribution  of  an  Intestate's  Effects
under  the  Laws  of  Canute,  and  the  conqueror.  Under  the
former,  the  Lord  took  the  Heriot,  and  the  remainder  was  dis-
tributed between  the  wife,  children,  and  relatives,  cuilibet  pro
diijtiitate  quce  ad  cum  pertinet.  (LL.  Canuti,  08.)  Under  the
lutttT,  the  children  divided  the  Inheritance  equally  between
them.  (LL.  Gul.  Conq.  36.)

1  Bracton  and  Fleta  perfectly  concur  with  our  author,  except
that  they  use  the  word  children  instead  of  Heir,  adding,  that  if
the  deceased  had  no  children,  then,  the  one  half  was  at  his  own
disposal,  the  other  belongs  to  the  wife  ;  and,  if  he  had  neither
wife  nor  child,  the  whole  was  at  his  own  disposal.  (Bracton,
60.  b.  Fleta,  L.  2.  c.  57.  s.  10.)  Before  we  quit  the  present
cnapter,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  observe,  that  Glanville  has  been
thought  grossly  to  contradict  himself  in  the  course  of  it.  But


136

But  of  bis  Inheritance,  he  cannot by  bis  last  Will
make  any  disposition,  as  before  observed.


CHAP.  VI.

THE  Testament  ought  to  be  made  in  the  presence  of
two  or  more  lawful  Men,  either  clergy  or  lay,  and
such  as  can  be  proper  witnesses  of  it.  The  Executors
of  a  Testament  should  be  such  persons,  as  the  Testa-
tor has  chosen  for  that  purpose,  and  to  whom  he  has
committed  the  charge.

But,  if  he  should  not  nominate  any  person  for  this

this  has  been  inconsiderately  imputed  to  him  by  those,  who  have
not  attended  to  the  context.  He  states,  that  according  to  certain
customs,  which  prevailed  in  particular  places,  a  man  was  bound
to  remember  his  Lord,  and  the  Church,  previously  to  his  making
his  will.  But,  says  he,  whatever  those  customs  inculcate,  yet,
according  to  the  Law  of  the  realm,  no  man  is  bound  to  leave
any  thing  to  any  particular  person,  unless  it  be  his  inclination,
for  every  man's  will  is  free,  over  that  part  of  his  property  which
the  Law  permits  him  to  dispose  of,  namely,  a  third,  or,  eventu-
ally, a  half — When  our  author  laid  it  down,  that  a  man's  will
was  to  be  free,  he  did  not  mean  to  assert,  that  he  was  at  liberty
to  dispose  of  all  his  property.  Should  it  in  the  present  day  be
laid  down,  that  a  Testator's  will  was  fi'ee,  and  that  he  was  not
bound  to  give  any  thing  to  any  particular  individual,  would  it  be
a  fair  inference,  that  a  man  could  devise  his  entailed  Lands?  It
we  apply  this  to  Glanville,  he  is  consistent,  and  will  be  under-
stood to  speak,  with  reference  to  persons,  what  he  has  been  con-
sidered to  speak,  with  respect  to  things.  That  the  division  of
the  property,  mentioned  in  the  text,  did  not  long  survive  the
time  of  Glanville,  is  most  probable.  (See  Somner  on  Gavelk.  p.
98.)  Swinburne  seems  strangely  to  have  blundered  in  thinking,
that  our  author  took  part  of  his  text  from  Magna  Carta,  (Swin-
burne on  Wills,  part  3.  section  16.)  The  passing  of  which  was
an  event  clearly  posterior  in  time  to  Glanville.


137

purpose,  the  nearest  of  Kin  and  Relatives  of  the
deceased  may  take  upon  them  the  charge ;  and  this,  so
effectually,  that  should  they  find  the  Heir  or  any  other
person  detaining  the  Effects  of  the  deceased,  they
shall  have  the  King's  "Writ  directed  to  the  Sheriff  in
these  words


CHAP.  YII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  I  command
"you  that,  justly  and  without  delay,  you  cause  to
"  stand  the  reasonable  division  of  j¥~.  as  it  can  be  rea-
"  sonably  shewn  that  he  made  it,  and  that  it  ought  to
"stand.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  VIII.

N  a  party,  summoned  by  authority  of  this  "Writ,
alleges  any  thing  against  the  Testament  itself;  either
that  it  was  not  reasonably  made,  or  that  the  thing
claimed  was  not  as  asserted  left  by  it,  then,  the  Plea
ought  to  be  heard  and  determined  in  the  Court  Chris-
tian ;  because  Pleas  concerning  Testaments  ought  to
be  agitated  before  the  Ecclesiastical  Judge,  and  decided
according  to  the  course  of  Law,  on  the  Testimony  of
those  who  were  present  at  the  time  of  the  making  of
the  Will.  But  if  the  person,  who  intends  to  make  a
will,  should  be  overburthened  with  Debts,  he  cannot

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  270.


138

(beyond  the  payment  of  his  Debts)  make  any disposi-
tion of  his  Effects,  without  the  consent  of  his  Heir.

Should  it,  however,  happen,  after  payment  of  the
Debts,  that  any  thing  remains,  then  it  is  divided  into
three  parts  in  the  manner  before  stated  ;  and  he  may,
as  observed,  make  a  Testament  of  a  third  part  of  it.
If,  however,  the  Effects  of  the  deceased  are  insufficient
to  pay  his  Debts,  then  his  Heir  is  bound  to  make  up
the  deficiency  out  of  his  own  ;  I  mean,  if  he  is  of  Age.1


CHAP.  IX.2

THIS  leads  us  to  observe,  that  some  Heirs  are  evi-
dently of  Age,  some  as  clearly  not  of  full  age,  but
others  of  whom  it  mav  be  doubtful,  whether  thev

«.  \j

have  attained  their  age  or  not.  The  first  description
of  Heirs  may,  immediately  upon  the  deaths  of  their
Ancestors,  hold  themselves  in  possession  of  their  In-
heritance,3 although  their  Lords  may  take  the  Fee,
together  with  the  Heir,  into  their  hands.  This,  how-

0  7

1  "  If  the  goods  of  the  defunct  are  not  sufficient  for  payment  of
"  his  Debts,  by  the  Law,  his  Keir  should  pay  the  same  of his
"  own  proper  goods." (Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.  c.  39.) This  Rule  was
soon  altered. Quatenus,  says  Bracton,  ad  ipsumpervenerit, sci-
licet, de  hereditate  defuncti  et  non  ultra,  nisivelit  de  gratia,  et  si
nil nl  multo  fortius. (See  Bracton,  61.  a.  Fleta,  L.  2.  c.  57.  s.  10.)
Notandum  est,  quod  nullus  de  antecessoris  debito  tenetur  respon-
dere  ultra  valorem  quod  de  ejas  hereditate  dignoscitur  possidere.
(Le  Grand  Gust,  de  Norm.  c.  88.)

2  Hereoii  generally,  see  Bracton,  86.  b.

3  Vide  Statute  of  Marlebridge,  chap.  16.  and  Lord  Coke's  Com-
ment thereon. (2  Inst.  133.)


139

«ver,  ought  to  be  done  with  such  moderation,  as  not
to  cause  any  Disseisin  to  the  Heirs,  who  may,  indeed,
should  it  be  necessary,  resist  the  violence  of  their
Lords,  provided  they  are  prepared  to  pay  their  Reliefs,
and  to  render  to  them  such  other  services  as  are  justly
due.  But,  if  it  be  evident  that  the  Heir  is  under  age,
and  he  hold  by  Military  service,  he  is  considered  to  be
in  the  Custody l  of  his  Lord,  until  he  attains  his  full
age.

The  full  age  of  an  Heir,  if  the  son  of  a  Knight,  or  of
one  holding  by  Military  service,  is  when  he  has  com-
pleted his  twenty-first  Year.2.  But,  if  the  Heir  be  the
Son  of  a  Sockman,  he  is  esteemed  to  be  of  full  age
when  he  has  completed  his  fifteenth  Year.3  If  he  is
the  son  of  a  Burgess,  he  is  understood  to  have  attained
his  full  age,4  when  he  has  discretion  to  count  Money
and  measure  Cloth,  and  in  like  manner  to  manage  his
Father's  other  concerns.

In  so  extensive  a  sense  have  Lords  the  Custody  of
the  Sons  and  Heirs  of  their  Homagers  and  of  their
Fee,  that  they,  for  example,  exercise  an  absolute  con-

1  Of  the  Custody  and  Marriage  of  the  Minor,  we  may  form  a
genei'al  notion,  when  we  understand,  that  they  were  considered
us  chattels  and  moveables,  which  the  Lord  might  dispose  of  in
extremis. See  Fleta  and  Bracton,  Sparsim.

2  Vide  Craig.  Jus  feud.  L.  2.  D.  17.  s.  17.  and  L.  2.  D.  20.  s.  17.
—Bracton  86.  b.

3  Vide  Craig.  Jus  feud.  L.  2.  D.  17.  s.  37.— LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  70.—
Bracton  86.  b. This,  it  seems,  is  still  the  age  by  the  custom  of
Gavelkynd. (Robins,  on  Gavelk.  185.)

4  At  fourteen,  or  when  he  can  attend  to  his  Parent's  concerns,
according  to  Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.  c.  41. See  Bracton  86.  b.


140

troul  with  respect  to  presenting  to  Churches  in  their
Custody,  in  marrying  Females,  (if  they  fall  into  ward-
ship), and  in  regulating  other  matters,  in  the  same
manner  as  if  thev  were  their  own.  The  Law,  how-

V

ever,  does  not  permit  the  Lords  to  make  any  abso-
lute disposition  of  the  Inheritance.  In  the  mean
time,  the  Lord  should  maintain  the  Heir  in  a  manner
suitable  to  his  Dignity  and  the  extent  of  his  Inherit-
ance, and  should  discharge  the  Debts  of  the  deceased,
so  far  as  the  Estate  and  the  length  of  the  Custody  will
admit.1  Hence  they  are  bound  by  the  Law  to  answer
the  Debts  of  the  Ancestors.

The  Lords  may  also  manage  the  concerns  of  the
Heir,  and  commence  and  prosecute  all  Suits  for  the  re-
covery of  his  rights,  provided  no  exception  be  taken
on  account  of  the  Minor's  Age.2  But  the  Lord  is  not
bound  to  answer  for  the  Heir,  neither  in  a  question  of
Right  nor  of  Disseisin,  except  in  one  instance — when
one  Minor  has  the  Custody  of  another,  after  the  de-
cease of  his  Father.  Should  the  latter  Minor,  upon  his
attaining  his  full  age,  be  refused  his  Inheritance,  he
may  have  an  Assise  and  Recognition  of  the  Death  of
his  Ancestor  ;  nor  shall  the  Recognition,  in  such  case,,

1  The  doctrine  of  the  text  is  corroborated  by  the  Reg.  Maj.  L.
2.  c.  42. "  Every  Guardian,"  says  the  Mirror,  "  is  answerable
"  for  three  things. 1.  That  he  maintain  the  Infant  sufficiently.
"  2.  That  he  maintain  his  rights  and  Inheritance,  without  waste.
"  3.  That  he  answer  and  give  satisfaction  of  the  Trespasses  done
"  by  the  Infant." (Mirror  c.  5.  s.  1. See  also  Bracton  87.  a.  and
le  Grand  Gust,  de  Norm.  c.  33.)

2  The  Translator  renders  the  passage  as  restored  bytheHarU
Cotton,  and  Dr.  Milles's  MSS.


141

cease,  on  Account  of  the  Minority  of  the  Lord.  But  if
a  Minor  be  appealed  of  any  Felony,1  then  he  shall  be
attached  by  safe  and  secure  pledges.  Yet,  whilst  he
continues  within  age,  he  shall  not  be  compelled  to  an-
swer, nor  until  he  has  attained  his  full' age.  Those
persons  who  have  the  Custody  are  bound  to  restore
the  Inheritance  to  the  Heirs  in  good  condition,2  and
discharged  from.  Debts,  in  proportion  to  the  duration
of  the  Custody,  and  the  extent  of  the  Inheritance.
But  if  it  be  doubtful,  whether  the  Heir  be  of  full  age
or  a  Minor,  then,  undoubtedly,  the  Lord  shall  have  the
Custody  as  well  of  the  Heir  as  of  his  Inheritance,
until  the  full  age  of  the  Heir  be  reasonably  proved  by
the  oaths  of  lawful  men  of  the  Vicinage.


CHAP.  X.

IF  those  Heirs,  liable  to  be  in  Custody,  have  more
Lords  than  one,  the  chief  Lord,  that  is,  the  one  to
whom  the  Heir  owes  allegiance  for  his  first  Fee,  shall
have  the  Custody.  But  this  is  not  to  deprive  the
Lords  of  the  other  Fees  of  their  Reliefs  and  ria'htful

<z?

lAppeletur  de  Felonia.  "  Appellum,"  says  Sir  Edward  Coke,
*'  signifies  an  accusation,  and,  therefore,  to  appeal  a  man  is  as
"  much  as  to  accuse  him."  The  word  appellum  is  derived  of  ap-
peller  to  call :  because,  appellans  vocat  reum  in  judicium,  he
calleth  the  Defendant  to  judgment.  (Co.  Litt.  287.  b.  See  also
391.  a.  and  Cowell  ad  voc.)  Appeals  were  known  to  the  Nor-
mans. (Grand  Custum.  c.  68.)

2  This,  though  a  part  of  the  common  Law,  had  been  so  fre-
quently violated,  that  it  was  felt  necessary  to  make  it  part  of  the
Great  Charter.  (2  Inst.  14.)


142

services;  but  the  Custody  shall  remain  to  them  entire^
under  the  form  before  mentioned.  Yet  should  it  be
observed,  that  when  any  one  hold  of  the  King  in
Capite,  the  Custody  of  him  belongs  exclusively  to  the
King,  whether  the  Heir  has  any  other  Lords  or  not ;
because  the  King 1  can  have  no  equal,  much  less  a  su-
perior.2 But  yet,  by  reason  of  Burgage  Tenure,3  the
King  is  not  preferred  in  the  Custody  to  others.  If  the
King  should  commit  the  Custody  to  another,4  then,  a
distinction  is  to  be  made,  whether  it  is  uncondition-
ally, and  in  such  manner  as  not  to  render  the  person
to  whom  it  was  committed  accountable  to  the  Exche-
quer, or  whether  it  is  under  restrictions.  If  it  is  com-
mitted to  him  in  such  unconditional  manner,  then  he
can  present  to  vacant  Churches,  and,  generally,  as  far
as  consistent  with  Justice,  manage  the  concerns  of  the
Heir,  as  if  they  were  his  own.


CHAP.  XL

THE Heirs  of Sock-men upon the death  of  their
Ancestors,  shall  be  in  the  Custody 5  of  their  nearest

1  Bracton  L.  1.  c.  8.  (Al.  MS.)  2  Bracton  fo.  5.  b.

3  Or  soccage,  says  Bracton,  fo.  87.  a. See  Co.  Litt.  77.  a.

4  Vide  2.  Inst.  12.  13. With  respect  to  the  Practice,  alluded  to
in the text,  Lord Littleton observes,  that undoubtedly infe-
rior Lords  did  the  same. It  likewise,  adds  his  Lordship,  ap-
pears by  the  Great  Rolls,  that  the  wardships  of  the  crown  were
sold  by  King  Henry  the  second,  and  mention  is  made  of  that
practice,  without  any  blame,  in  the  charters  of  King  John  and
Henry  the  third. (Hist.  Hen.  2.  Vol.  3.  109.) The  above  citation
from  Lord  Coke  confirms  the  doctrine  of  the  noble  Historian.

5  If, says  a  Law of Ina,  the Husband  and  Wife  have  any


143

Kindred,  with  this  distinction,  that  if  the  Inheritance
itself  descended  from  the  paternal  side,  the  Custody
shall  be  conferred  upon  the  kindred,  the  descendants
on  the  maternal  side ;  but,  if  the  Inheritance  descend
on  the  part  of  the  Mother,  then  the  Custody  belongs
to  the  Kindred  on  the  Father's  side.  For  the  custody
of  a  person  shall  never  by  Law  be  committed  to
another,  of  whom  a  suspicion  can  be  entertained,  that
he  either  could  or  might  wish  to  claim  any  right  iri
the  Inheritance  itself.1


CHAP.  XII.

BUT  if  the  Heirs  are  females,  they  shall  remain  in
the  Custody  of  their  Lords.  If  the}r  are  Minors,  they

children,  and  the  Husband  dies,  the  mother  shall  retain  and
nourish  her  Child.  Six  shillings  shall  be  given  her  to  enable  her
to  do  it;  a  Cow,  in  summer,  and  an  Ox,  in  winter.  (LL.  Inse  c.  88.)

1  Niillus  Heredipeta  sui  propinqui,  vel  extranet  periculoscR
sane  custodies  committatnr.  (LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  70.)  Lord  Chan-
cellor Macolesfield  condemned  this  Rule,  as  not  grounded  upon
reason,  but  as  prevailing  in  barbarous  times,  before  the  Nation
was  civilized. — ('3  P.  Wins.  262.)  On  the  other  hand,  Fortescue,
(c.  44.)  Lord  Coke,  (Co.  Litt.  88.  b.)  Judge  Blackstone,  (1
Comm.  461.)  Mr.  Hargrave,  (note  to  above),  and  Mr.  Christian
(ubi  supra)  approve  of  this  Rule  of  our  Law,  so  opposite  to  that
prevailing  in  the  Roman  Code.  Nor  has  the  Great  Feudist
Craig  withheld  the  testimony  of  his  approbation  to  it.— (Craig
Jus.  feud.  L.  2.  D.  20.  s.  6.)  Dr.  Sullivan,  however,  approves
both  of  our  Rule  and  the  civil  law  Rule,  conceiving  each  adapted
to  the  peculiar  state  of  the  people — the  one,  a  barbarous — the
other,  a  civilized  people, —  (Lect.  on  Laws  of  England  p.  127.)
but  this  of  course  is  applicable  to  the  origin  rather  than  the  con-
tinuance of  the  Rules.

It  was  in  conformity  to  the  rule  laid  down  in  the  text,  that  the
Eldest  Sister  was  excluded  from  having  the  custody  of  her
Younger  Sisters.  (Bracton  fo.  78.  a.  Fleta,  L.  3.  c.  16.  s.  71.)


144

shall  continue  in  Custody  until  they  are  of  full  age,1
at  which  period  the  Lord  is  bound  to  find  them  a  Mar-
riage, delivering  to  each  of  them  her  reasonable  portion.
But  if  they  were  of  full  age,  then  also  they  shall  remain
in  the  Custody  of  their  Lord,  until  with  his  Advice
and  disposal  they  are  married  ;  because  without  the
disposal  or  assent  of  her  Lord  no  female,  the  Heir  to
Land,2  can  by  the  Law  and  Custom  of  the  Realm  be
married.

Hence  it  is,  that  if  a  Man,  having  only  a  Daughter
or  Daughters,  his  Heirs,  should  in  his  lifetime  marry
off  one  or  more  of  them  without  the  assent  of  the  Lord,
he  is  justly,  according  to  the  Law  and  Custom  of  the
Realm,  for  ever  deprived  of  his  Inheritance  ;  and  that
in  such  manner,  that  he  can  never  afterwards  recover
any  part  of  it,  unless  by  the  indulgence  of  the  Lord.
The  reason  is  simply  this — that  as  the  Husband  of  an
Heiress  is  bound  to  do  Homage  to  the  Lord  for  her
Estate,  the  approbation  and  consent  of  the  Lord  is
requisite  for  such  purpose ;  least  he  should  be  com-
pelled to  receive  from  his  Enemy,  or  from  some  other
improper  person,  the  Homage  due  in  respect  of  his
Fee.3  But  if  any  one  demands  of  his  Lord  a  License

1  We  are  informed  by  the  Regiam  Maj.  that  they  were  of  full
age  at  fourteen  complete. (L.  2.  c.  48.) At  which  time,  they
might,  it  was  supposed,  have  Husbands,  capable  of  performing
the  services  due  for  their  Fiefs. See  Bracton  86.  b.

2  "  By  Land  in  this  passage,  he  means,  Land  that  was  held  by
"  military  service." (3 Litt. Hist. Hen. 2. 103.) If  we may
judge from a law  of  Canute,  (LL.  Canuti  72.)  the  marriage  of
"Wards  was  unknown  in  his  time. — Vide  Spelm.  Reliq.  p.  29.

3  "  This,"  observes  Lord  Littleton,  "  appears  to  extend  equally


145

to  marry  his  Daughter  and  Heir  to  another,  the  Lord
is  bound  either  to  consent,  or  to  shew  some  just  cause,
why  he  refuses; l  otherwise  the  woman  may,  with  the
advice  and  approbation  of  her  Father,  be  married,  even
contrary  to  the  Lord's  inclination.  Upon  this  occasion
it  may  be  asked,  if  a  Woman,  having  Lands  in  Dower,
may,  without  the  consent  of  her  Warrantor,2  follow

t/ 7  f

her  own  inclination  in  marrying  another ;  and,  if  she
do  so,  whether  she  shall  on  that  account  lose  her  whole
Dower?  It  does  not  appear  that  she  ought  for  that
reason  to  lose  her  Dower,  since  her  Husband,  by  the
Law  and  Custom  of  the  Realm,  owes  no  Homage  to  her
Warrantor,  but  merely  Fealty  with  an  Oath,  least  if
the  Woman  herself  should  die  before  her  Husband,  the
Homage  should  be  entirely  lost,  no  Tenure  being  re-
tained. Yet  the  Woman  is  bound  to  obtain  the  consent

"  to  all  kinds  of  fiefs  for  which  Homage  was  done,  as  to  those
"  that  were  held  by  Knight's  Service."  (3.  Hist.  Hen.  2.  104.
Vide  also  Craig  Jus  feud.  L.  2.  Dieg.  21.  s.  8.  Bracton  88.  a.)

1  Henry  the  1st  expressly  promises,  in  his  Charter,  that  he  will
take  nothing  for  his  consent,  nor  will  he  withhold  it,  unless  it
be  proposed  to  unite  the  female  to  his  enemy. (Anglo-Sax.  LL.
Ed.  Wilkins  p.  233.) He promises, also,  on the  death of his
Barons,  to  marry  their  Daughters  with  the  advice  of  the  other
Barons,  and  that  he  will  not  compel  widows  to  marry  again  ;
.and  he  enjoins  his  Barons,  to  act  in  a  similar  manner  towards
their  Tenants. These  regulations  were  but  ill  observed. From
the  text,  it  is  perfectly  clear,  that  the  right  of  marriage  extended
to  females  only  :  but Lords subsequently  enlarged  their  claim,
and  exercised  it  also  over  Male  Heirs. This  is  supposed  to  have
grown  up  in  Henry  the  3d's  time  from  a  forced  construction  of,
those  words  of  Mag.  Car.  Her  edes  mar  itentur  sine  disparagatione:
(Sullivan's  Lectures,  p.  130.)

2  The Heir of her Husband, who must, therefore, have
frequently  been  not  only  her  own  Son,  but  an  Infant. This  may
be  considered  as  one  of  the  absurdities  of  the  Feudal  system.


10


146

of  her  Warrantor  to  her  marriage,  or  she  shall  lose  her
Dower,1  unless,  indeed,  she  holds  other  Land  in  Mar-
riage-hood or  by  Inheritance ;  for  then  it  suffices,  if  she
has  obtained  the  consent  of  the  Chief  Lord.  This  Rule
obtains  not  on  account  of  the  Homage  but  of  the  other
Fealty,  which  the  Husband  is  bound  to  perform  to  the
Lord  as  we  have  observed.  But,  if  the  Inheritance  be
within  the  Fees  of  many  different  Lords,  it  is  then  suf-
ficient, if  the  consent  of  the  Chief  Lord  be  obtained  to
the  Marriage  of  the  female  Heir.  If  female  Heirs,
during  such  time  as  they  are  in  Custody,  are  guilty  of
incontinence,2  and  this  be  proved,  then,  those  who  have
thus  erred  shall  be  excluded  from  the  Inheritance ;  and
their  portion  shall  accrue  to  the  others,  who  are  free
from  the  same  stain.  But  if,  in  this  manner,  all  of  them
should  err,  then,  the  whole  Inheritance  shall  devolve

1  Under  the Assises of Jerusalem, the  Widow, generally
speaking,  was  not  to  be  compelled  to  marry  again  ;  but  if  she
did,  she  was  to  ask  the  consent  of  her  Lord. (c.  187.) See  also
the  Mirror  c.  1.  s.  3.  and  Bracton  88  a.

2  De  corporibus  suisforisfecerunt. Forisfacio  is,  according  to
Spelman,  derived from  the  French  forfaire. (Gloss,  ad  voc. )

In  a  proper  signification,  therefore,  and  as  indicating  forfeit-
ure, it  rather  describes  the  punishment  than  the  offence.  The
transition  is  by  no  means  difficult ;  and,  in  its  application  to  the
crime,  it  assumes  a  new  meaning,  by  a  gradation  in  language
not  unfrequent.  The  term  frequently  occurs  in  ilie  translations
of  the  Saxon  and  Norman  Laws.  (Vide  LL.  Ed.  Conf.  c.  32.  10.
36.  12.  and  Gul.  1.  c.  1.  Hen.  1.  c.  23.  Vide  also  Craig  L.  3.  D.  3.
s.  2.  Co.  Litt.  58.  a.  and  2  Inst.  227.)  Lord  Littleton  observes,
"  this  was  a  severe  punishment  for  the  frailty  of  a  single  woman,
"  and  without  example  in  other  Laws  :  but  it  undoubtedly  arose,
"  not  so  much  from  a  rigorous  sense  of  the  heinousness  of  the
"  fault,  as  from  the  notion  of  an  advantage  due  to  the  Lord
"  from  the  marriage  of  his  ward,  which  he  probably  might  be
"  deprived  of  by  her  being  dishonored."  (3  Hist.  Plen.  2.  p.  119.).


147

upon  the  Lord,  as  an  Escheat.  Yet,  if  such  female
Heirs  are  once  lawfully  married,  and  afterwards  become
widows,  they  shall  not  again  be  under  the  Custody  of
their  Lords  ;  although  they  are,  for  the  reason  formerly
explained,  bound  to  ask  his  consent  to  their  marriage.1
]STor,  in  such  case,  shall  they  forfeit  their  Inheritance,
if  guilty  of  incontinence.2

But  the  assertion  which  is  generally  made,  that  in-
continence3 is  no  forfeiture  of  the  Inheritance,  is  to
be  understood  of  the  crime  of  the  Mother ;  because,
that  Son  is  the  lawful  Heir,  whom  marriage  proves
to  be  such.4


CHAP.  XIII.

XEITHEK  a  Bastard,5  nor  any  other  person  not  born
in  lawful  wedlock,  can  be,  in  the  legal  sense  of  the

1  Vide  Mag.  Car.  Cap.  7,  and  Lord  Coke's  comment  thereon.
(2  Inst.  1C.)  See  also  Robinson  on  Gavelk.  160  and  Bracton
313.  a.

~  Lord  Littleton  thinks,  the  reason  for  exempting  Widows
from  the  penalty  was,  that  they,  not  being  under  the  custody  of
their  Lords,  their  incontinence  was  no  breach  of  the  Duty  and
reverence  due  from  a  Vassal.  (3.  Hist.  Hen.  2.  p.  119.)  The
Mirror  coincides  with  the  text.  (c.  1.  s.  3.)  The  custom  of  Ga-
velkynd  is  less  liberal  to  the  frailty  of  the  widow.  (Robins,  on
Gavi-lkyiKl  (195.)

8  Putagium;  quasi,  says  SpelTaam, puttam  agere  a  Gall,  putte,
It;il.  ptitta,  meretrix.  Petrarch.  PUTTA  SFACCIATA.  (Spelm.
Gloss,  ad  voc.)

*  For  the  Common  Law,  says  the  Mirror,  only  taketh  him  to
be  a  Son,  whom  the  marriage  proveth  to  be  so.  (Mirror  p.  70.
See  also  Bracton  G3.  a.  b.)

6  The  Norman  Code  enumerates  four  Impediments  to  Succes-


148

term,  an  Heir.1  But  if  any  one  claims  an  Inheritance
in  the  character  of  Heir,  and  the  other  party  object
to  him,  that  he  cannot  be  Heir,  because  he  was  not
born  in  lawful  wedlock,  then,  indeed,  the  Plea  shall
cease  in  the  King's  Court,  and  the  Arch-Bishop  or
Bishop  of  the  place  shall  be  commanded,  to  inquire
concerning  such  marriage,  and  to  make  known  his
decision,  either  to  the  King  or  his  Justices.

For  this  purpose,  the  following  Writ  shall  Issue : —


CHAP.  XIY.

"  THE  King  to  the  Arch-Bishop,  Health.  W.  appear-
"  ing  before  me  in  my  Court  has  demanded  against  7?.
"his  Brother,  the  fourth  part  of  one  Knight's  Fee,  in
"  such  a  Yill,  as  his  right,  and  in  which  the  said  R.
"  has  no  right,  as  IF",  says,  because  he  is  a  Bastard
"  born  before  the  Marriage  of  their  Mother.  And,
"  since  it  does  not  belong  to  my  Court  to  inquire  con-
"  cerning  Bastardy,  I  send  them  unto  you  command-
"  ing,  that  you  do  in  the  Court  Christian  that  which
"  belongs  to  you.  And  when  the  Suit  is  brought  to
"  its  proper  end  before  you,  inform  me  by  your  Letter

sion. — Bastardy,  profession  of  Religion,  forfeiture,  and  incurable
Leprosy.  (Le  Grand  Custum.  de  Norm.  27.)  Bastardy  seems  to
have  been  a  legal  objection  to  a  witness  under  the  Assises  of
Jerusalem.  (56.)

1  A  different  Law  prevailed  amongst  the  ancient  Welch  peo-
ple, as  Lord  Hale  deduces,  from  considering  the  Statutinn  Wallice
12.  Ed.  1.  and,  he  thinks,  that  the  Ancient  British  admitted
Bastards  to  inherit.  (1.  Hist.  Com.  La\v  219.)


149

"  what  has  been  done  before  you  concerning  it. "Wit-
"  ness,  &c."


CHAF.  XV.

UPON  this  subject  it  has  been  made  a  question
whether  if  any  one  was  begotten  or  born  before  his
Father  married  the  Mother,  such  Son  is  the  lawful
Heir,  if  the  Father  afterwards  married  his  Mother?
Although,  indeed,  the  Canons  and  the  Roman  Laws
consider  such  Son  as  the  lawful  Heir,1  yet,  according
to  the  Law  and  Custom  of  this  Realm,  he  shall  in  no
measure  be  supported  as  Heir  in  his  claim  upon  the
Inheritance ;  nor  can  he  demand  the  Inheritance,  by
the  Law  of  the  Realm.2  But  yet  if  a  question  should

1  "In  the  time  of  Pope  Alexander  the  3rd,  (A.D.  1160— Anno
"  6.  Hen.  2.)  this  Constitution  was  made,  that  children  born  be-
"  fore  solemnization  of  Matrimony  where  Matrimony  followed,
"  should be as  legitimate to inherit unto  their ancestors,  as
"  those  that  were  born  after  Matrimony." (2  Inst.  96.) To  this
Constitution  our  Author  alludes. The  doctrine  of  the  Norman
Code  is  in  conformity  with  the  Canon  of  Alexander. (Grand
Custuin.  c.  27.) The  modern  French  Code  allows,  under  certain
restrictions, of  the  subsequent legitimation  of  children — even
of  deceased  children,  who  have  left  issue. (Code  Napoleon  s.
331.  332.)

2  "  This  decision  of  Glanville," observes  Lord  Littleton,  "is
"  very  remarkable :  as  it  shews  the  entire  independence  of  the
"  Law  of  England  on  the  Canon  and  Civil  Laws  in  his  time."
(3  Litt.  Hist.  Hen.  2.  p.  125.) When  this  doctrine  was,  in  a  sub-
sequent period  of  our History,  attempted  to be  overturned,  it
gave  rise  to  the  celebrated  answer  of  the  Barons  recorded  in  our
Statute  Book. — Et  omnes  Comites  et  Bar  ones  und  voce  responde-
runt,  quod  nolunt  leges  AngHce  tnutare,  quce  hucusqiie  usitatcesunt
et  approbate. (Stat.  of  Merton.  c.  9. See  also  2  Inst.  96.) The
Rule,  thus  memorably  defended, has  descended  untouched  to
the  present  day.


150

arise,  whether  such  a  Son  was  begotten  or  born  before
marriage,  or  after,  it  should,  as  we  have  observed,  be
discussed  before  the  Ecclesiastical  Judge;  and  of  his
decision  he  shall  inform  the  King,  or  his  Justices.
And  thus,  according  to  the  Judgment  of  the  Court
Christian  concerning  the  marriage,  nanielv,  whether

o  t, *

the  Demandant  was  born  or  begotten  before  marriage
contracted,  or  after,  the  King's  Court  shall  supply
that  which  is  necessary,  in  adjudging  or  refusing  the
Inheritance  respecting  which  the  dispute  is ;  so  that
by  its  decision  the  Demandant  shall  either  obtain  such
inheritance,  or  lose  his  claim.


CHAP.  XYI.

As  a  Bastard  can  have  no  Heir,  unless  it  be  one  of  his
own  Body,  a  question  arises  respecting  a  Bastard.  If
any  one  has  given  Land  to  him,  reserving  a  service  or
any  other  thing,  and  has  received  his  Homage  for  it,
so  that  the  Bastard  has  died  in  the  Seisin  of  such  Land,
without  leaving  any  Heir  of  his  own  Body,  Avho  is  en-
titled by  law  to  succeed  to  him,  as  his  Lord  cannot  for
the  reasons  before  stated  ? 1  But  when  any  one  dies

1  "  It  is  answered,"  says  the  Regiam  Majestatem,  "that  no
"  Man  may  succeed  to  him,  but  only  the  King  by  the  reason
"  aforesaid."  (L.  2.  c.  52.)  But  Bracton  resolves  the  question
by  informing  us,  that  in  such  a  case,  the  Land  would  escheat
to  the  Lord  ;  nor,  would  the  circumstance  of  Homage  having
been  received,  alter  the  case,  quia  homagium  evanesctt  Jtcrcdibus
deficicntibns  idiique ;  (Bracton.  20.  b.)  a  doctrine  which  has
been  strangely  misinterpreted,  and  that  by  a  highly  respectable
writer,  who  considers  the  position  laid  down  by  Glanville,  that


151

intestate,  all  his  chattels  are  understood  to  belong  to
his  Lord  ;  and,  if  he  has  more  Lords  than  one,  each  of
them  shall  recover  such  Chattels,  as  may  be  found
within  his  Fee.  But  all  the  Effects  of  a  Usurer
(whether  he  make  a  Will  or  not)  belong  to  the  King.1
But  it  is  not  the  Custom  for  any  one,  Avhilst  living,  to
be  appealed  or  convicted  of  the  crime  of  Usury — but,
among  other  Regal  Inquisitions,  it  is  usually  inquired2

the  Lord  was  precluded  by  receiving  Homage  of  his  claim  to  the
Escheat,  as  not  to  be  relied  upon ;  because,  in  the  very  next
Reign.,  the  Lord  was  ultimus  heres  to  a  Bastard.  In  support  of
this  conjecture,  the  Author  in  question  appeals  to  Bracton.  (Ubi
supra.)  See  Dalrymple  011  Feuds  p.  64.  Bracton  wrote  the  Law
of  the  times  as  it  stood  when  he  composed  his  treatise,  which
was  not  in  the  very  next  Reign,  but  towards  the  latter  end  of  the
Reign  of  Henry  the  third,  the  better  part  of  a  century  later  than
when  Glanville  wrote.  Had  the  fact,  however,  been  as  assumed,
the  conclusion  drawn  from  it  would  by  no  means  be  warranted  :
since,  to  argue  from  what  is  Law  at  one  period  in  order  to  refute
what  was  so  at  another  anterior  period  is  the  purest  sophistry.

1  The  Ancient  Romans  punished  Usury  with more  severity,
than  they  did  Theft. (Cato  de  re  Rustica  Proem.) The  Norman
code  imposes  a  forfeiture  of  all  the  offender's  property,  provided
he  had  been  guilty  of  Usury,  within  a  year  and  a  day  before  his
death. (Grand  Gustum.  de  Norm.  c.  20.)

By  a  Law  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  Usurers  \vere  banished  the
•kingdom,  and  a  person  convicted  of  the  crime  forfeited  all  his
substance,  and  was  to  be  treated  as  an  outlaw.  If  the  Reader
feel  any  desire  to  penetrate  into  the  motives  that  dictated  this
Law,  these  are  the  concluding  words  of  it.  Hoc  autem  asserebat
ipse  Rex  se  qudiisse  in  Curia  Regis  Francorum,  dum  ibidem
moraretur,  quod  Usnra  radix  omnium  vitiorum  esset.  (LL.  Ed.
•Conf.  c.  37.)  The  doctrine,  as  laid  down  by  the  Mirror,  is,  that
the  goods  and  Chattels  of  Usurers  should  remain,  as  Escheats  to
the  Lords  of  , the  Fee.  (Mirror  c.  1.  s.  3.)  The  Reader  will  find
some  curious  disquisitions  on  the  subject  of  Usury  in  the  Ancient
Dialog,  de  Scaccario.  (L.  2.  s.  10.)

2  Our Author  alludes to the Inquisitions made under  the
Justices  Itinerant,  an  institution  generally  ascribed  to  Henry  the


152

and  proved,  who  have  died  in  this  Offence/  and  that  by
the  oaths  of  twelve  lawful  Men  of  the  Vicinage.  "Which
being  proved  in  Court,  all  the  Moveables  and  Chattels
which  belonged  to  the  deceased  Usurer  shall  be  seised  to
the  King's  use,  without  any  regard  to  the  person  in
whose  hands  they  may  be  found.  His  Heir  is  for  the
same  reason  deprived  of  the  Inheritance  according  to  the
Law  of  the  .Realm,  the  Inheritance  itself  reverting  to
the  Lord.  It  should,  however,  be  observed,  that  if
any  one  has,  during  a  certain  period  of  his  life,  been
guilty  of  this  Crime,  and  be  publicly  accused  2  of  it  in
the  Community  where  he  lived,  if  he  desisted  from  his
error  before  his  death,  and  was  penitent,  neither  he,
nor  his  property,  shall  after  his  death  be  liable  to  the
penalties  of  Usury.  It  ought,  therefore,  to  be  evident,

2nd,  and,  as  generally,  imagined  to  have  been  first  ordained  in
the  Great  Council  at  Northampton  in  the  22nd  year  of  the  Reign
of  that  Monarch.  Lord  Coke,  however,  ascribes  to  them  a  much
earlier  origin  ;  and  from  the  Records  in  the  Exchequer,  it  should
seem,  that  there  had  been  Justices  Itinerant  to  hear  and  deter-
mine Civil  and  Criminal  causes,  so  early  as  the  18th  of  Henry
the  first.  Lord  Littleton  thinks,  the  first  appointment  of  Justices
Itinerant  was  made  by  Henry  the  first,  in  imitation  of  a  similar
Institution  in  France  established  by  Louis  le  Gros.  Justices
Itinerant  ad  communia  placita  were  continued  until  the  10th  of
Edw.  the  3rd,  when  they  seem  to  have  given  way  to  Justices  of
Assise,  Nisi  prius,  Oyer  and  terminer,  and  Gaol  deHvery.  (Vide
Madox's  Excheq.  96.  Litt.  Hist.  Hen.  2.  Vol.  4.  271.  Hale's  Hist.
Com.  Law  140.  168—2  Inst.  497.)

1  The  Mirror  confines  the  punishment  to  those  attainted  of
Usury  after  their  decease,  "  but  not,  if  they  be  attainted  thereof
"  in  their  life-time,  for  then  they  lose  but  only  their  moveables ;
"  because,  by  penance  and  repentance,  they  may  amend  and
"  have  Heirs."  (Mirror  c.  4.  s.  12.  See  also  Fleta  L.  1.  c.  20.  s.
28.  and  Dial,  de  Scacc.'L.  2.  s.  10.)

a  Vide  Book  14.  Note  2.


153

that  a  Man  has  died  a  Usurer,  in  order  that  he  may  be
so  adjudged  after  his  death,  and  his  Effects  disposed,
of  as  those  of  a  Usurer.


CHAP.  XVII.

THE  Ultimate  Heir  of  any  person  is  his  Lord.1
When,  therefore,  a  Man  dies  without  leaving  any  cer-
tain Heir,  such,  for  example,  as  a  Son,  or  Daughter,  or
without  any  such  Heir  of  whom  there  can  exist  no
doubt,2  but  that  he  is  the  nearer  and  right  Heir,  the
Lords  of  the  Fee  may,  and  indeed,  usually  do,  take  the
Yacant  Inheritances  into  their  hands,  and  retain  them
as  Escheats,3  whoever  such  Lord  may  be,  whether  the
King,  or  any  other  person.  But,  if  any  one  appear  and
assert  himself  to  be  the  right  Heir,  if  by  the  indulgence
of  his  Lord,  or  by  the  King's  precept,  he  can  effect  it^
he  shall  prosecute  his  claim ;  and  thus  he  may  establish
his  right,  if  he  has  any  such  ;  but,  in  the  mean  time,  the
Land  in  question  shall  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord
of  the  Fee  :  because,  whenever  a  Lord  entertains  a
doubt  concerning  the  Heir  of  his  Tenant,  whether  he
be  the  right  Heir  or  not,  he  may  retain  the  Land  until

1  Sir  Wm.  Blackstone,  when  speaking  of  the  Law  of  Escheat,
informs  us,  that  it  is  adopted  in  almost  every  country,  to  prevent
the  robust  title  of  occupancy  from again  taking place. (2 Bl.
Comm.  10.) See  Fleta  L.  6.  c.  1.  s.  11. "  By  common  custom  and
"  use  only,"  says  Skene,  commenting  on  the  Regiam  Majestatem,
"  the  King  is  the  last  Heir." (L.  2.  c.  55.)

2  The  Translator  follows  the  Reading  sanctioned  by  all  the
MSS.  a  See  Co.  Litt.  13.  a.  b.


154

the  fact  be  lawfully  proved  to  him.1  The  same  rule  is
laid  down,  in  a  former  part  of  this  Treatise,  where  a
doubt  arises  with  respect  to  the  full  age  or  Minority  of
the  Heir.  There  is,  however,  this  difference,  that  in
the  one  case,  the  Inheritance  itself  is  in  the  mean  time
to  be  considered  as  the  Lord's  Escheat :  but  in  the  other
case,  it  is  not  considered  to  be  the  Lord's — nothing1,  in-
deed, but  the  Custody.  But  if  no  one  should  appear
to  claim  the  Inheritance  in  question  as  Heir,  then  it
shall  absolutely  revert  to  the  Lord  as  an  Escheat;  so
that  he  may  dispose  of  it  at  his  pleasure  as  his  own
property.  Besides,  if  a  Female  Heir,  in  the  Custody
of  her  Lord,  be  guilty  of  Incontinence,  her  Inheritance
shall  escheat  to  her  Lord,  on  account  of  her  crime.
And  if  any  person  be  convicted  of  Felony,  or  confess
his  Guilt  in  Court,  deprived  by  the  Law  of  the  Realm
of  his  Inheritance,  his  Land  shall  remain  to  the  Lord,
as  an  Escheat.2  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  if  any  one
hold  of  the  King  in  Capite,  then,  as  well  his  Land,  as
all  his  Moveables  and  Chattels,  in  whose-ever  possession
thev  mav  be  found,  shall  be  seised  to  the  King's  use,

«  i/

and  the  Heir  shall  be  for  ever  debarred  from  recover-
ing them.  But  if  an  outlaw,3  or  one  convicted  of  Fel-
ony, hold  of  any  other  person  than  the  King,  then
also  all  his  Moveables  shall  belong  to  the  King ;  his

!See  BractonTl.  b.

2  How  similar  the  Norman  Code  was  in  this  respect,  the  Reader
will  perceive,  on  turning  to  Le  Grand  Oust,  de  Norm.  c.  24.

3  Utlagatus,  the  outlaw,  or,  in  the  expressive  term  of  a  far  dis-
tant ;day,  the  frendlesman,  or,  as  we should now write  it,  the
friendless  man. (Bracton  128.  b. See  Dial,  de  scacc.  L.  2.  s.  10.)


155

Lands  also  shall  remain  in  the  King's  hands  during
•one  year,  which  period  being  expired,  such  Land  shall
revert  to  the  right  Lord,  in  other  words,  to  him  to
Avhose  Fee  it  belongs,  the  Houses,  however,  being
thrown  down,  and  the  Trees  extirpated.1  And,  gene-
rally speaking,  whenever  a  person  has  done  or  said  any
thing  in  Court  for  which  he  has  been,  by  a  Judgment
of  the  Court,  disinherited,  his  Inheritance  is  accustomed

1  "  The  reason  of  this,''  says  Lord  Littleton,  "  was  a  supposi-
"  tion,  that  the  Lord,  of  whom  the  felon  held,  was  in  some  degree
"  culpable,  for  want  of  a  proper  care  in  the  choice  of  his  Tenant."
(2  Hist,  Hen.  2.  p.  118.)  It  is  difficult  to  feel  the  force  of  this
reasoning,  from  the  moment  fiefs  ceased  to  be  given  for  the  life
of  the  feudatory — for  what  choice,  it  may  be  asked,  was  left  to
the  Lord,  when  fiefs  were  hereditary,  as  they  clearly  appear  to
have  been  when  Glanville  wrote,  and  for  some  time  previously.
Lord  Coke  ascribes  the  rule  to  another  source,  laying  it  down,
that  originally  the  King  was  to  have  no  benefit  from  the  attain-
der, but  was  to  commit  destruction  to  the  property  of  the  offend-
er in  detestation  of  the  crime,  vt  poena  ad  paucos,  metus  ad
omnes perveniat.  (2  Inst.  36.)  But  this  is  as  far  from  being  sat-
isfiirtovy,  i;s  the  reason  given  by  Lord  Littleton.  Because,  as  the
property  had  ceased  to  belong  to  the  offender,  any  waste  com-
mitted on  it  redounded  in  the  first  place  to  the  injury  of  the  Lord,
and  through  him  to  the  public,  who  were  both,  laying  all  techni-
cal fictions  aside,  innocent.  The  punishment  to  the  Tenant  \yas
Hie  forfeiture,  and  not  the  waste  subsequently  committed.  This
cruel  policy,  or  rather  impolicy,  was  abrogated  by  the  22nd  Chap-
ter of  Magna  Carta.  The  Reader  will  consult  Lord  Coke's  com-
ment on  that  Chapter,  and  then  judge  for  himself,  whether  the
year  and  a  day  came  in  lieu  of  the  waste.  That  they  "were  co-
existent seems  strongly  corroborated  by  the  Custumal  of  Kent—
"  The  King  shall  have  the  year  and  the  waste."  (Robinson  on
Gavelk.  284.  See  also  Ibid  c.  4.)  The  Mirror  is  here,  as  in
many  other  instances,  at  variance  with  itself.  But  Britton  ap-
pears to  consider  them  as  co-existent,  (c.  18.  s.  G.)  and  so  does  the
Regiam  Majestatem.  (L.  2.  c.  55.)

Lord  Coke  has  with  his  usual  industry,  collected  the  authori-
ties in  favor  of  his  position.  Dr.  Sullivan  may  be  added  to  them.
(Lectures  p.  348.)


156

to  return  as  an  Escheat  to  the  Lord  of  the  Fee  of
whom  it  is  held.  But  a  forfeiture,  committed  bv  the

J

Son and Heir  of anv  one,  shall not disinherit the

«/

Father,  nor  the  Brother,  nor,  indeed,  any  other  person
but  himself.  It  should  also  be  added,  that  when  a
Man  has  been  condemned  of  Theft,  all  his  Moveables
and  Chattels  generally  devolve  on  the  Sheriff  of  the
County  ;  but  his  Land,  if  he  has  any,  shall  immediately
revert  to  the  Lord  of  the  Fee,  without  awaiting  the
year.1  When  any  one  has  been  outlawed  by  the  Law
of  the  Land,  and  has  afterwards,  by  the  indulgence  of
the  Prince,  been  restored  to  the  Peace,  he  cannot  on
that  account  recover  his  Inheritance,  supposing  that  he
or  his  Heirs  possess  such,  as  against  his  Lord  (unless
by.  the  mercy  and  indulgence  of  the  Lord  himself.)
The  King,  indeed,  is  accustomed  to  remit  the  pains  of
Forfeiture  and  Outlawry,  yet  cannot  he,  under  colour
of  this  prerogative,  infringe  upon  the  rights  of  others.


CHAP.  XVIII.

OF  Marriage-hood — the  one  kind  is  free,  the  otherr
liable  to  the  performance  of  services.2  Marriage-hood
is  called  free,  when  any  free-man  gives  a  certain  part
of  his  Land  with  a  "Woman  in  Marriage  to  another,  so
that  such  Land  be  exempt  from  every  kind  of  service,

1  The  Reader  will  recollect,  that  when  Glanville  wrote,  Theft
was  not  an  offence  against  the  King's  crown. Chap.  2.  L.  1.

2  Vide  Note  1.  c.  1.  of  this  Book.— Bracton  21.  a.  b.  and  Fleta.
L.  3.  c.  11.


157

and  acquitted  on  the  part  of  him  and  his  Heirs,  as
against  the  Chief  Lord.  The  Land  in  question  shall
enjoy  this  immunity,  even  to  the  third  Heir  ; l  nor,  dur-
ing1 the  interval,  are  the  Heirs  bound  to  do  anv  Horn-

O  i  •'

age  for  it ;  but,  after  the  third  Heir,2  the  Land  again
becomes  subject  to  its  original  services,  and  Homage
shall  be  received  for  it,  and,  if  it  be  part  of  a  Military
Fee,  the  Tenant  shall  perform  the  service  of  the  Fee,
with  reference  to  the  quantity  of  the  Land.  But  some-
times Land  is  given  in  Marriage- hood,  saving  and  reserv-
ing the  services  due  to  the  Chief3  Lord ;  and  then  in-
deed, the  Husband  of  the  Woman  and  his  Heirs  must
perform  the  services,  with  the  Exception  of  Homage,
even  to  the  third  Heir.4


But  the  third  Heir  shall  do  Homage  for  the  first
time,  and  all  his  Heirs  afterwards.  But  another
Fealty,5  with  the  interposition  of  a  solemn  promise  or
oath,  shall,  in  the  intervening  period,  be  performed  by
the  Women  and  their  Heirs,  almost  in  the  same  form

1  In  enumerating  these  degrees,  say  Bracton  and  Fleta,  Dona-
tarius  primum  facial  gradum,  heres  ejus  secundum  gradum  &c.
(Bracton  fo.  23.  b. Fleta  L.  3.  c.  11.  s.  1.)

2  Nor,  during  the  interval,  are  the  Heirs  bound  to  do  any  Hom-
age for  it,  but,  after  the  third  Heir, — omitted  by  the  Harl.  and
Bodl.  MSS.

3  All  the  MSS.  concur  in  omitting  the  word  chief.

4  "And  the  third  Heir  shall  make  Homage,  therefore,  Ward
"  and  Relief,  and  all  his  Heirs  after  him." (Regiam  Majest. L.
2.  c.  57. )

6  "  And  another  fealty,  by  making  of  an  oath  and  faith,  shall
"  be  given  and  made  by  the  Woman  and  her  Heirs,  in  the  same
"  form  and  words  as  Homage  should  be  made."  (Reg.  Maj.  L.
2.  c.  57.)


158

and  in  the  same  words  in  which  Homage  is  commonly
performed.

When,  therefore,  any  one  has  received  Lands  with
his  Wife  in  Marriage-hood,  and  has  by  her  an  Heir,
Male  or  Female,  heard  to  cry  within  the  four  Walls,
then,  if  the  man  survive  his  wife,  whether  the  Heir  live
or  not,  the  Marriage-hood  shall  notwithstandino-  re-

'  <_?  O

main  to  the  Husband,  during  his  life  ;  but,  after  his
death,  it  shall  revert  to  the  original  Donor,  or  his
Heirs.1  But  if  he  never  had  an  Heir  from  his  Wife,
then,  immediately  after  her  death,  the  Marriage-hood
shall  revert  to  the  Donor  or  his  Heirs.2

1  What  our  Author  treats  of,  as  a  consequence  of  a  Man's  re-
ceiving  lands  in marriage-hood,  has  received  considerable  ex-
tension in  succeeding  times,  and  has  become  known  by  the  Title
of  the  Curtesy  of  England. But,  as  Lord  Coke  observes,  it  was
known  to  the  Scotch  and  Irish,  and,  he  might  have  added,  to  the
Normans. Craig  cites  a  passage  to  shew  that  it was not  un-
known to  the  Roman  Code,  and  Sir  "VVm.  Blackstone  quotes  an
authority to prove that it was in  use amongst the ancient
Almains  or  Germans. Like  Dower,  it  is  not  a  provision  arising
from  the  compact  of  the  parties,  but  emanating  from  the  liberal-
ity of  the  Law. As  to  the  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  off-
spring,  the  Regiam  Majestatem expressly  coincides  with  our
Author,  (L.  2.  c.  58.)  and  in  this,  is  followed  by  Bracton,  Fleta,
and  Britton. Lord  Coke,  however,  asserts,  that  if  born  alive,  it
is  sufficient,  though  not  heard  to  cry,  which,  indeed,  is  consist-
ent with  reason — for  the  crying  of  the  child  is  merely  evidence  of
life — which  may  as  well be  furnished  by  a  thousand  other  cir-
cumstances. It  is  not  improbable,  that  as  an adherence  to  the
strict  Letter  of  the  ancient  Law,  as  laid  down  by  Glanville,  had
been found extremely inconvenient, it had, therefore, been
silently  abrogated,  previous  to  the  time  of  Lord  Coke. (See  Craig,
L.  2.  D.  22.  s.  40. Le Grand  Custuni.  de  Norm.  c.  120. 2  Bl.
Comm.  125.  and  Co.  Litt.  29.  b.)

2  He  forfeited  it  under the Norman Code by  a subsequent
marriage,  with  another  woman. (Le  Grand Custum.  de  Norm.
c.  121.)


159

And  this  is  some  reason  why  Homage  is  not  usually
received  for  Lands  in  Marriage-hood.

For  if  Land  were  so  given  in  Marriage-hood,  or  in
any  other  way,  that  Homage  was  received  for  it,  theny
it  would  never  afterwards  revert  to  the  Donor,  or  his
Heirs,  as  we  have  explained.  If,  however,  such  Woman
take  a  second  Husband,  the  same  Rule  prevails,  as  to
the  second,  as  we  have  stated  concerning  the  first,
whether  the  first  should  have  left  an  Heir  or  not.
But  when  any  one  sues  for  Land  as  the  Marriage-hood
of  his  Wife,  or  when  the  Woman  or  her  Heir  does  so,
then,  a  distinction  must  be  made,  whether  the  Land  is
demanded  as  against  the  Donor,  or  his  Heir,  or  against
a  stranger.  If  the  Suit  be  against  the  Donor,  or  his
Heir,  then,  it  is  at  the  Election  of  the  Demandant,
whether  he  would  proceed  in  the  Court  Christian,  or
in  the  Secular  Court.

For  if  the  Demandant  chuses  to  resort  to  such
Tribunal,  it  belongs  to  the  Ecclesiastical  Judge  to
hold  pleas  of  Marriage-hood  ;  a  Jurisdiction  he  acquires
from  the  mutual  Troth  usually  plighted,  when  any  one
promises  to  marry  a  Woman,  and  she  in  her  turn  prom-
ises marriage  to  him.  ISTor,  indeed,  is  the  Ecclesias-
tical Judge  prohibited  by  the  King's  Court  from  hold-
ing such  plea,  although  it  concern  a  Lay-fee,  if  it  be
clear  that  the  demand  relate  to  Marriage.  But  if  the
Suit  l)e  brought  against  a  Stranger,  then,  indeed,  it
shall  be  determined  in  the  Lay  Court,  and  that,  in
the  same  manner  and  order  in  which  Pleas  concerning
other  Lay  Fees  are  generally  conducted.


160

Yet,  should  it  be  observed,  that  the  Suit  ought  not
to  be  proceeded  in,  without  the  Warrantor,  as  we
formerly  mentioned  when  treating  of  Dower.  The
Suit,  indeed,  must  be  proceeded  in,  as  far  as  respects
the  Warrantor,  in  the  same  manner  as  a  Plea  in  Dower.
What  we,  therefore,  said  on  the  former  occasion  with
respect  to  this  point,  is  applicable  to  the  present.  It
remains  to  add,  that  the  third  Heir,  after  lie  has  once
done  Homage,  can  1  proceed  in  the  suit  without  the
authority  of  the  Warrantor.

1  All  the  MSS.  concur  in  introducing  not  into  the  text.


iooh


OF  A  CONCORD  MADE  IN  COURT ;  AND  OF  THE  CHIRO-
GRAPHS CONTAINING  THE  CONCORD;  AND  OF  THE
RECORDS  OF  THE  COURT  OR  COURTS,  IF  EITHER  OF
THE  PARTIES  SHOULD  BREAK  THE  CONCORD,  AND
FINE,  MADE  IN  COURT.


CHAP.  I.

BUT  it  often  happens,  that  Pleas  moved  in  the  King's
Court  are  determined  by  an  amicable  composition  and
final  Concord,  but  with  the  consent  and  License  of  the
King  or  his  Justices,  whatever  the  Plea  may  concern,
whether  Land,  or  any  other  thing.  Such  a  Concord
is,  with  the  general  consent  of  the  persons  interested,
usually  reduced  into  a  writing,  common  to  all  the  par-
ties,1 which  is  recited  before  the  King's  Justices  of  the
Common  Pleas,2  in  whose  presence  each  person's  part  of
the  writing,  agreeing  in  all  things  with  the  other's,  is
delivered  to  the  party.  The  Concord  is  in  the  follow-
ing  form

1  In  communem scripturam, a chirograph. (Madox's  Exch.
c.  19.)

2  Justiciis  domini  regis  in  Banco  resident ibus — Vide  ante  page
41. Note  2.

ii  161


162


CHAP.  II.

"  THIS  is  the  final  Concord,  made  in  the  Court  of
"  our  Lord  the  King,  at  Westminster,  on  the  Vigil  of
"  the  blessed  Peter,  the  Apostle,  in  the  Thirty-third 1
"  Year  of  the  Reign  of  King  Henry  the  Second  ;  before
"  Ranulph  de  Glanville,  Justiciary  of  our  Lord  the
"  King,  and  before  II.  E.  W.  and  T.  and  other  faithful
"  subjects  of  our  Lord  the  King,  then  there  present,
"  between  the  Prior  and  Brethren  of  the  Hospital  of
"  Jerusalem,  and  W.  T.,  the  Son  of  Norman,  and  Alan
"  his  Son,  whom  he  appointed  Attorney  in  the  Court
"  of  our  Lord  the  King  to  gain  or  lose,  concerning  all
"  such  Land  and  its  Appurtenances  (except  one  Oxland2
"  and  three  Tofts3)  which  the  said  W.  held  :  concern-

1  This  and  a  similar  passage,  in  the  following  chapter,  afford
strong  data,  from  whence  to  ascertain  the  year,  when  the  present
work  was  written. Admitted  as  it  is,  on  all  hands,  that  it  was
composed  in  the  Reign  of  Henry  the  Second,  and  it  being  a  strong
presumption  from  the  passages  in  question, that  it  could  not
have  been  written  antecedent  to  the  33d  year  of  such  Reign,  it
merely  remains  for  us  to  chuse  between  the  33d,  34tl},  and  35th
years  ;  for  on  the  latter  year  the  Reign  terminated. If  we  follow
Sir  Henry  Spelman's  plan,  and  divide  the  intermediate  period,
we  should  infer  that  the  present  work  was  written  in  the  34th
year  of  Henry  the  Second,  in  other  words,  in  1187. Dr.  Robert-
son, though  without  alleging  any  reason,  says,  it  was  composed
about  the  year  1181. (Hist.  Charles.  V.  vol.  1.  p.  296.) Blair's
chronology  uses  precisely  the  same  assertion.

2  It  seems  by  no  means  to  be  agreed  of  what  quantity  an  Oxland
consisted. (Co.  Litt.  69.  a.  and  Mr.  Hargrave's  note.)

3  Toftis. A  Toft  is  said  to  be  the  scite  where  a  House  formerly
stood  ;  and  is  a  word  much  used  in  Fines. (Vide  Spelm.  Gloss,
and  Cowell's  Interp.  ad  voc.)


163

"  ing  all  \vhicli  Land  (except  the  aforesaid  Oxland  and
"  three  Tofts)  there  was  a  Plea  between  them  in  the
"  Court  of  our  Lord  the  King  ;  to  wit,  that  the  afore-
"  said  W.  and  Alan  concede  and  attest  the  Gift  which
"  Norman  the  Father  of  the  said  W.  made  to  them ;
"  and  they  quit-claim  all  that  Land  from  them  and
"  their  Heirs  to  the  Hospital  and  the  aforesaid  Prior
"  and  Brethren  for  ever :  except  the  one  Oxland  afore-
"  said,  and  the  three  Tofts,  which  remain  to  the  said
"  IF.  and  Alan  and  their  Heirs,  to  be  held  of  the  Hos-
"  pital  and  the  aforesaid  Prior  and  Brethren  for  ever,
"  by  the  free  service  of  four  pence  a  year,  for  all  serv-
"  ice.  And  for  this  concession,  and  attestation,  and
"  quit-claim,  the  aforesaid  Prior  and  Brethren  of  the
"  Hospital  have  given  to  the  said  IF.  and  Alan  one
"  hundred  Shillings  sterling."  Or  in  these  Terms


CHAP.  III.

"  THIS  is  the  final  Concord,  made  in  the  Court  of
"  Galfred,  the  Son  of  Peter,  and  afterwards  recorded
"  and  inrolled  l  in  the  Court  of  our  Lord  the  King,
"  at  Westminster,  in  the  Thirtv-third  Year  of  the

V

"  Reign  of  King  Henry  the  Second,  on  Tuesday  after
"•  the  feast  of  the  Apostles  Simon  and  Jude,  before2
"  E.  Bishop  of  Ely,  and  1.  Bishop  of  Norwich,  and

1  And  inrolled  omitted  by  the  Bodln.  and  Dr.  Milles's  MSS.

2  G.  Bishop  of  Ely,  L  Bishop  of  Nonvich,  and  Ranulpli  de  Glan-
r/-7c,  d-c.  Justices  in  Eyre,  in  the  year  1179,25  Hen.  2.  &c.  accord-
ing to  Bodl.  MS.


164

"'7?.  de  Glanville,  Justice  of  our  Lord  the  King,  and
"  other  faithful  and  trust}1"  servants  of  our  Lord  the
"  King,  then  there  present,  between  the  aforesaid  G.
"  the  Son  of  Peter  and  R.  the  son  of  Reginald,  of  the
"  Advowson  of  the  Church  of  All  Saints  of  Slmld-
"  ham,  and  common  of  pasture  of  Heddon,  con-
"  cerning  which  there  was  a  dispute  between  them  ;
"  to  wit,  that  the  aforesaid  R.  has  acknowledged
"  to  the  aforesaid  G.,  as  his  Right,  the  Advowson  of
"  the  aforesaid  Church,  and  has  quitted-claim  to  the
"  aforesaid  Cr.  and  his  Heirs,  from  him  and  his  Heirs
"  for  ever,  if  he  had  any  right  in  the  Advowson
"  of  the  aforesaid  Church :  also  the  aforesaid  R.
"  quit-claims  to  the  aforesaid  G.  the  Common  of
"  Pasture  of  Heddon — And  all  the  purprestures l
"  which  G.  has  made  in  Shuldham,  in  the  Wood-
"land2  and  Mills  and  Crofts3  and  Turbaries4  of
"  Shuldham,  of  which  the  said  R.  reserves  nothing,
"  unless  that  which  is  necessary  to  burn  in  his  House  for
"  him  and  his  Heirs,  without  making  any  sale ;  and

1  Vide  Infra,  L.  9.  c.  11.  where  our  author  explains  the  import
of  the  Term.

2  Frusseto,  or,  as  Lord  Coke  writes  it,  frasseto,  signifies  a  wood
or  ground  that  is  woody. (Co.  Litt.  4.  b.)

3  Croftis. A  croft  is  said  to  be  synonymous  with  what  farmers
call  a  close. The  term  is  used  by  Ingulphus,  and  derived  from
the  Saxon  croft  or  cruft.

4  Turbariis. This  word  is  of  Saxon  origin,  and  seems  to  have
been  used  in  two  senses  ;  first,  for  the  right  of  taking  turf  ;  sec-
ondly, for  the  ground  from which  the turf  itself  was  taken  or
dug. (Spelm.  Gloss.) The  reader  will  no  doubt  admire  ecclesi-
astical ingenuity,  when  he  understands,  that  turbary  was  com-
prised under  the  term  lignum,  and  Tithe  consequently  claimed  in
respect  of  it. (Lyndw.  Provinc.  p.  100. Annot.  ad  turvamm.)


165

"  all 1  external  folds,2  (except  bis  own)  and  the  bidden
a  days  3  of  external  plougbs,  and  tbe  Customs4  of  liens

1  Forinseca — So  termed,  Bracton  tells  us,  qnia  fit  et  capitur
foris,  sive  extra  servitium  quod  fit  domino  capitali. (Bracton,  fo.
3G.  a.) This  part  of  the  text  is  rather  obscure;  and,  though  I
have  taken  some  pains  to  get  at  the  sense  of  all  the  terms  Glan-
ville  makes  use  of  in  this  Concord.  I  cannot  flatter  myself  I  have
perfectly  succeeded.

2  Faldas. Falda  is  frequently  used,  as  Spelman  informs  us,
pro  libertate  faldagii — -faldagium  being  a  privilege,  which  Lords
anciently,  not  unfrequently,  reserved  to  themselves,  of  setting
up  folds  for  sheep  in  any  fields  within  their  manors,  the  better
to  feed  their  flocks,  and  this,  not merely  with  their own  but
their  Tenants'  sheep,  although,  in  the  latter case,  the  privilege
was  more  usually  called  secta  faldce.

It  should  rather  seem,  that  the  Tenants  sometimes  enjoyed
such  a  privilege  as  against  their  Lords.  Falda  i.e.  homines  villce
debent  ponere  oves  suas  in  faldam  Domini,  are  the  words  of  an
ancient  MS.  relating  to  the  Monastery  of  St.  Edmund.  When
the  term  forinsecas  is  attached  to  faldas,  a  difficulty  occurs,
which  perhaps  may  be  got  over  by  recurring  to  the  doctrine  of
subinfeudation,  so  common  when  Glanville  wrote.  The  privilege
in  question  might  have  been  within  the  boundaries  of  the  ancient
or  original  manor,  whilst  it  might  have  been  external  or  without
the  circuit  of  a  less  manor,  forming  merely  a  part  of  the  original
manor  and  created  in  a  course  of  posterior  subinfeudation. —
This  is  submitted  merely  as  a  conjecture.

3  Prccarias. "  Vide  Somn.  Tract,  cle  Gavelkynd  in  voc.  Be-
iH-rth,  p.  18."  (Al.  MS.)  "  Benerth,  says  Lord  Coke,  signifieth  the
"  service  of  the  plough  and  cart.'' Co.  Litt.  86.  a. Precarice  are
said  to be  day-works,  which  the Tenants  of some  manors  are
humid,  by  reason  of  their  tenures,  to  do  for  their  Lords  in  Har-
\.  'si-time  ;  and  they  are  in  some  placet sailed  bind-days  for  bid-
ili'n-ihn/s, since,  as  it has been  remarked, bidden est  precari.
This  custom  is  said  to  be  plainly  set  forth  in  ihe  Great  Book  of
the  Customs  of  the  Monastery  of  Battei  tit.  Appelderham  fo.  60.
an  extract  from  which  the  reader  will  find  in  Spelm.  Gloss,  ad
voc.  prccarice. Somner,  indeed,  considers  it  a  species  of  Tillage
MTvu-e,  performed precario. (Ubi  Supra.)

1  <  'onsuetudines,  meaning,  perhaps,  customary  renders,  or  pay-
ments, as  Rents.  It  is  well  known,  that  a  period  of  our  History


166

"  and  Eggs.  And  for  this  Concord  and  quit-claim,  the
"  aforesaid  G.  has  given  to  the  said  R.  twenty  marks
"  of  silver."  And  observe,  that  such  a  Concord  is
termed  final,  because  it  puts  an  end  to  the  matter,1  so
that  neither  of  the  litigating  parties  can  ever  after
recede  from  it.  For  if  either  of  them  fail  to  adhere  to
it,  or  to  perform  his  part  of  it,  and  the  other  party
complain,  the  Sheriff  shall  be  directed  to  put  him  by
safe  pledges,  that  he  appear  before  the  King's  Justices
to  answer,  wherefore  he  has  not  kept  such  fine.  I
mean,  if  the  party  complaining,  has  previously  given
the  Sheriff  security,  to  prosecute  his  claim.  For  this
purpose,  the  following  writ  shall  issue


CHAP.  IV.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Command
"  that  justly  and  without  delay,  he  hold  the  Fine  made
"  in  my  Court,  between  him  and  R.  of  one  Hyde  of
"Land,  in  that  Till,  concerning  which  a  Suit  was  be-
"  tween  them  in  my  Court ;  and,  unless  he  do  so,  and

has  existed,  when  most  of  the  Rents  of  the  kingdom  were  paid  in
this  manner.

1  A  similar  description  occurs  in  the  Reg.  Maj.  (L.  1.  c.  27.)
and  in  Bracton.  (L.  2.  tr.  5.  c.  28.)  Lord  Coke  quotes  the  latter,
as  well  as  the  passage  in  the  text,  as  correct.  "  This,"  observes
Mr.  Hargrave,  "  though  a  just  description  of  fines,  according  to
"  their  original  and  still  apparent  import,  yet  gives  a  veryinade-
"  quate  idea  of  them  in  their  modern  application.  In  Glanville's
"  time,  they  were  really  amicable  compositions  of  actual  Suits.
"  But  for  several  centuries  pastimes  have  been  only  so  in  name."
(Co.  Litt.  121.  a.  and  note  1.)  "  For  the  antiquity  of  Fines,"  says
Lord  Coke,  "  it  is  certain,  they  were  frequent  before  the  Con-
"  quest."  (2Inst.  511.)


167

"  the  aforesaid  A.  make  you  secure  of  prosecuting  his
"  claim,  then,  put  him  by  Gage  and  safe  Pledges  that
"  he  be  before  me  or  my  Justices  on  such  a  day,  to
"  shew  why  he  has  not  done  it.  And  have  there  this
"Writ.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  Y.

SHOULD  the  party,  thus  summoned,  neither  appear,
nor  essoin  himself,  on  the  day  appointed,  or  if,  after
having  cast  three  Essoins,  he  neither  appear,  nor  send
an  Attorney,  the  course  in  such  case  to  be  pursued  has
been  already  pointed  out,  in  that  part  of  this  Treatise
which  applies  to  Pleas,  where  the  Pledges  are  to  be
attached,  and  in  the  first  Book.  Both  parties  being
present  in  Court,  if  each  of  them  should  acknowledge
the  writing  (containing  the  Concord  made  between
them)  or  if  the  Concord  is  stated  to  be  such  by  the
Kind's  Justices  before- whom  it  was  made,  and  this  be

o  '

properly  testified  by  their  Record,  then  the  Party  who
has  broken  the  Concord  shall  be  amerced  to  the  King,
and  shall  be  safely  attached,  until  he  find  good  se-
curity that  he  will  from  thenceforth  keep  the  Concord,
by  adhering  to  its  terms,  if  possible,  or  will  otherwise
make  his  Adversary  a  reasonable  recompense.  For,  it
is  a  consequence  which  naturally  results  from  acknowl-
edging a  fact  in  the  King's  Court  in  the  presence  of
the  King  or  his  Justices,  or  undertaking  to  do  any
particular  Act,  that  the  Party  should  be  compelled  to
abide  by  or  perform  it.  If,  however,  such  a  Concord


168

i
\

be  made  in  a  suit  concerning  Land,  then,  the  party

i

convicted  in  Court,  or  confessing  that  he  had  not  prop-
erly observed  the  Fine,  if  a  Tenant,  shall  thereby  lose
his  Land,  but,  if  a  Demandant,  his  Suit.  But  if  the-
parties,  either  the  one  or  the  other  of  them,  deny  the
Common  Chirograph,  then,  the  same  Justices  shall  be
summoned  to  appear  on  a  day  appointed  to  them  in
Court,  and  there  record,  how  the  suit  came  to  an  end
which  was  before  them  in  the  King's  Court,  between
such  and  such  parties,  of  so  much  Land,  in  that  Till,
which  the  one  claimed  against  the  other ;  and,  if  the
parties,  by  the  license  of  the  Justices  and  in  their  pres-
ence, came  to  an  agreement,  under  what  form  the
Concord  was  made.  But  here  a  distinction  must  be
taken,  whether  such  Concord  was  made  in  the  King's
chief  Court,  or  before  the  Justices  Itinerant.

In  the  latter  case,  such  Justices  must  be  summoned
to  appear  in  Court,  with  certain  discreet  Knights,  of
the  County  where  the  Concord  in  question  was  made,
who  were  present  when  it  was  entered  into,  and  know
the  truth  of  the  fact ;  in  order  that  such  Justices  may
make  a  Kecord  of  the  Suit,  with  the  assistance  of  the
Knights,  who  are  to  be  called  to  Court  for  that  pur-
pose, from  the  whole  body  of  the  County,  by  the  fol-
lowing Writ


CHAP. VI.

"THE King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health. Summon,  by
"  good  Sumraoners,  J\T.  and  7?.  that  they  appear  before


169

"  me,  or  my  Justices,  such  a  day,  to  record,  with  dis-
"  creet  Knights  of  that  County,  how  the  Plea  of  one
"  Hvde  of  Land,  which  N.  claimed  against  7?.,  in  that

*/

"  Vill,  and  of  which  there  was  a  Suit  before  them,  on
"  their  Eyre,  ceased  in  my  Court."  The  Sheriff  of  the
County,  in  which  the  Suit  was  decided  before  the
Justices,  shall  also  be  commanded  to  transmit  at  the
same  time  a  Record  of  the  Suit  in  question  to  the  King,
or  his  Justices,  by  the  hands  of  discreet  Knights  of  his
County.  This  shall  be  done  by  the  following  Writ,
for  presenting  such  Record  in  Court —


CHAP.  VII.


"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you,
"  that  you  cause  to  be  recorded  in  your  County  Court,
"  the  plea  which  is  between  such  and  such  person,  con-
"  cerning  so  much  Land,  in  that  Vill,"  &c.  as  in  the
following  Chapter  but  two.


CHAP.  VIII.

THE  Justices  being  present  in  Court,  and  perfectly
concurring  as  to  the  Record,  it  necessarily  follows,  that
their  Record  must  be  abided  by,  neither  party  being
allowed  to  deny  it,  as  we  have  already  observed.

But  if  the  Justices  entertain  any  doubt  upon  the
subject,  and  it  cannot  be  ascertained,  then,  the  Plea
must  be  again  commenced  and  proceeded  on  in  Court.


170


CHAP.  IX.

IT  should  be  understood,  that  no  Court,  generally
speaking,  has  a  Record,  except  the  King's  Court.1  For
in  other  Courts,  if  a  Man  should  say  a  thing,  which  he
would  afterwards  retract,  he  may  deny  2  it  against  the
whole  Court,  by  the  oath  of  three  witnesses,  affirming
that  he  had  not  said  the  thing  imputed  to  him,  or,  in-
deed, by  a  greater  or  less  number  of  witnesses,  accord-
ing to  the  custom  of  different  Courts.  Yet,  in  some
cases,  the  County  and  other  inferior  Courts  are  by  a
particular  Law  of  the  Realm  allowed  to  have  Records  ;
thus,  if  the  Duel  has  been  waged  in  any  inferior  Court,
and  the  Suit  should  be  af terwards  transferred  into  the
King's  Court ;  then,  as  to  the  claim  of  the  Demandant,
the  defence  of  the  Tenant,  and  the  words  in  which
such  Duel  was  adjudged  and  waged,  the  former  Court
shall  have  its  Record  even  in  the  King's  Court ;  but,
in  other  respects,  such  inferior  Court  has  no  Record,
unless  concerning  the  change  of  a  Champion.  For
if,  after  the  suit  has  been  transferred  into  the  King's

1  V.  LL.  Gul.  1.  Norman,  cap.  28. (Al.  MS.) The  Law  alluded
to  is  in  these  words. Qui  placitat  in  Curia  cujuscunque  Curia
sit,  excepto  ubi persona  Regis  est  et  quis  eum  sistat  super  eo  quod
dixerit.  rem  quam  nolit  confiteri,  si  non  potest  disrationari  per
intelligentes  homines  qui  interfile  runt  placito  et  videntes  quod
non  dixerit,  recuperit  juxta  verbum  suum. (LL.  Anglo-Sax.  Ed.
Wilkins,  p.  224.)

2  Recordationem  Curice  Regis  mdli  negare  licet  alias  licebit  per
intelligibiles  homines  Placiti. (LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  31. See  also  LL.
Hen.  1.  c.  49  and  Co.  Litt.  117.  b.)


171

•Court,  a  different  Champion  should  be  produced,  than
the  one  who  has  \vaged  the  Duel  in  the  inferior  Court,
and  a  dispute  arise  upon  this  point,  the  Record  of  the
inferior  Court  shall  by  a  Law  of  the  Realm be  con-
clusive upon  the  subject. It  should  also  be  understood,
wTith  respect  to  the  Record  of  an  inferior  Court,  that
any  one  may  add,  that  he  had  said  more  than  is  con-
tained in  such  Record — and  that  he  did  in  Court  say
it,  he  may  prove  against  the  whole  Court,  by  the  oaths  of
two  or  more  lawful  Men,  according  as  the  custom  of
different Courts vary; because no  Court is bound,
either  to  prove  or  defend  its  Record  by  the  Duel. But
it  is  not  allowed  to  any  one  to  take  exceptions  against
one  part,  and  admit  the  other  ;  and  this  rule  is  grounded
on  a  Law  of  the  Realm  :  since  he  may  from  the  first
deny  the  whole  Record, an  oath being  taken  in  the
manner  before  mentioned. But,  although  a  Court  is
not  obliged  to  defend  its  Record  by  the  Duel,  yet  is  it
bound  to  defend  its  Judgment  bv  the  Duel.1 If,  there-

O  *•

fore,  any  one  should  declare  against  the  Court  for
passing  a  false  Judgment,  and,  therefore  false,  because
when  one  party  had  said  thus,  and  the  other  answered
thus,  the  Court  in  question  had  judged  falsely  of  their
allegations  by  deciding  in  such  words ;  and  that  the
Court  had  given  such  false  Judgment  by  the  mouth
of  N. ;  and,  if  he  were  disposed  to  deny  the  present
charge,  the  other  was  prepared  to  prove  it  against
him,  chiefly  by  such  proper  witness,  who  was  ready
to  enter  upon  the  proof.  Thus  may  the  matter,  and

1  "  By  the  Dud,"  omitted  by  Harl.  Bodl.  and  Dr.  Milles's  MSS.
although  from  the  context,  it  must  be  understood.


172

that  very  properly,  be  decided  by  the  Duel.1  But,,
whether  such  Court  is  obliged  to  defend  itself  by  one
of  its  o\vn  members,  or  may  have  recourse  to  a  stranger,

O  ^J  7

may  be  questioned  ?

It  ought,  indeed,  to  defend  itself  chiefly  by  the  per-
son who  has  passed  the  Judgment  •  2  and,  if  the  Court
should  be  convicted  of  the  charge,  the  Lord  of  the
Court  shall  be  amerced  to  the  King,  and  shall  for
ever  be  deprived  of  his  Court.  Besides  which,  the
whole  Court  shall  be  amerced  to  the  King:.  But,  if

O  »/

the  person  bringing  the  charge  forward  should  fail  in
his  proof,  he  shall  thereby  lose  his  principal  suit.  A
Court  may  also  have  a  Record,  by  the  indulgence  of
the  Prince.  Thus,  if  the  King,  influenced  by  some
reasonable  motive,  should  cause  any  Court  to  be  sum-
moned to  make  a  Record  in  his  Court ;  so  that  the
King  chuses,  that  such  Record  shall  not  be  contra-
dicted. Courts  are  frequently  summoned  to  have  a
Record  of  some  particular  suit  before  the  King,  or  his

1  The  liberty  of  falsifying  a  Judgment  was  allowed  by  the
A ssises  cf  Jerusalem.  But  the  person,  availing  himself  of  this
dangerous  privilege,  seems  to  have  been  obliged  to  fight  all  the
persons  composing  the  Court,  not  merely  the  Judges,  but  the
Suitors,  one  after  the  other.  Under  these  circumstances,  the
privilege  would,  probably,  not  often  be  claimed.  (Assis.  de
Jerusalem,  c.  111.)

^  See  Mirror,  c.  3.  s.  23.  A  Judge,  who  had  given  a  false
Judgment,  is  heavily  fined  to  the  King  by  the  Laws  of  Edgar,
unless  he  dared  confirm  upon  his  oath,  that  he  knew  not  how  to
pass  a  better  sentence.  (LL.  Edg.  c.  3.)  By  the  Laws  of  the
Conqueror,  such  Judge  lost  his  were,  unless  he  could  excuse  him-
self by  the  same  means.  (LL.  Gul.  Conq.  c.  15.)  By  the  Laws
of  Alfred,  he  was,  after  having  made  satisfaction  to  those  he  had
injured,  to  forfeit  the  remainder  of  his  goods  to  the  King,  &c.
&c.  (Mirror,  c.  4.  s.  18.)


173

Justices,  although  they  have  not  from  this  circumstance
any  Record  but  what  may  be  contradicted  ;  because,
bv  the  consent  of  the  parties,  the  suit  may  be  pro-
ceeded in  upon  that  Record.

If  they  agree  as  to  the  Record,  the  Summons  may
be  made,  by  a  writ  of  the  following  description—


CHAP.  X.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you,
•"  that  you  cause  to  be  recorded  in  your  County  Court,
"  the  suit  which  is  between  such  and  such  persons,  of
"  so  much  Land,  in  such  a  Yill ;  and  have  the  Record  of
"  that  suit  before  me,  or  my  Justices,  at  such  a  day,1  by
"  four  Lawful  Knights,  who  were  present  at  the  mak-
"  ing  of  such  Record — -And  Summon,  by  good  Sum-
"raoners,  the  party  claiming  the  Land,  that  he  be  then
"  there  with  his  Plea  ;  and  the  party  who  holds
"  the  Land,  that  he  be  then  there  to  hear  it.2  And
"  have,  &c."


CHAP.  XL

INFERIOR  Courts  have  also  Records  concerning  things
transacted  in  them,  which  are  received  as  such  in  the
King's  Court.  This  happens  when  a  Lord  3  has  a  Plea
in  his  Court,  concerning  which  a  reasonable  difficulty

1  Terniinum—Vide  ante,  p.  22.  not.  2.

2  TJie  Record— Bodl.  and  Dr.  Milles's  MSS.

3  Baro—hoc  est  robur  Iwli,  says  Bractr>n. The  term  was  for-


174

arises,  and  the  Court  is  incompetent  to  determine  it-
On  such  an  occasion,  the  Lord  himself  may  adjourn  his
Court l  into  the  King's  Court,  in  order  to  have  the
advice  and  assent  of  the  latter,  in  determining  what  is
proper  to  be  done.  The  King,  indeed,  owes  this  assist-
ance to  his  Barons,  who  may  on  such  an  occasion,  as  a
matter  of  right,  adjourn  their  Courts  into  the  King's
Court,  in  order  to  obtain  from  the  skilful  men  who
preside  there,  that  advice  they  stand  in  need  of.  But,
when  they  have  been  certified  in  the  King's  Court,
concerning  the  doubtful  point,  they  may  return  with
the  Suit,  resume  the  consideration  of  it,  and  finally
determine  it  in  their  own  Court.2  The  County  Court
has  a  Record,  as  to  the  giving  and  receiving  pledges
there,  and  of  similar  matters.

rnerly  used  in  a  variety  of  senses. — I  shall  mention  some  of  them—
a  Man,  a  hired  Soldier,  an  Officer,  a  Tenant,  a  lesser  Tenant  in
chief,  a  greater  Tenant  in  chief,  a  Noble,  an  Ecclesiastical  Digni-
tary, a  greater  Vassal  of  an  Earl  or  Prelate,  a  Knight,  a  Hus-
band, an  Eldest  Son,  a  Burgess,  a  Citizen,  a  Robber,  &c.  (Vide
Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.  Cowell's  Interp.  Craig.  Jus.  feud.  L.  1.
Dieg.  12.  s.  15.  16.  2  Inst.  5. — Madox's  Excheq.  c.  5.  s.  1.  Index
to  Anglo-Sax.  LL.  Ed.  "VVilkins,  voc.  Baro — and  authorities  re-
ferred to  by  such  authors.)

1  Suit,  instead  of  Court,  according  to  Harl.  and  Bodl.  MSS.

2  Lords,  at  first,  had  but  a  domestic  Jurisdiction,  in  order  to
compel  their  Tenants'  Services,  and  to  maintain  peace  and  order
amongst them. Afterwards, in  imitation of  the  Sovereign's
Court,  Lords  caused  Records  to  be  made  before  their  own  officers
of  the  transactions  which  had  taken  place  in  their  Courts. Butt
as these Records  derived  their  chief  or  rather only  strength,
from  the  parties  voluntarily  submitting  to  them,  the  authority
of  the  Lords  was  gradually  weakened  ;  and,  as  murmurs  began
to  increase  against  the  decisions  of  their  Courts,  a  reference  to
the  King's  Court  became  the  only  resort  of  the  Lords. (Traites
sur les Coutumes  Anglo-Normandes  par  M.  Houard, p. 507.
Tom.  1.)


31-


OF  HOMAGES,  AND  RELIEFS,  AND  SERVICES,  AND
AIDS,  AND  OF  PURPRESTURES,  AND  BOUNDARIES
DISTURBED.


CHAP.  I.

IT remains  to resume the  subject of  performing'
Homages,1  and  receiving  Reliefs.2 Upon  the  death  of

1  Homage,  the  result  of  the  Feudal  System,  was  unknown  to
the  Romans  ;  and  Spelman  thinks,  it  was  unknown  to  the  Anglo
Saxons. (Reliq.  p.  34.) However  that  may  be,  William  the  Con-
queror is  stated  to  have  received  it  from  the  Nobles,  immediately
after  the  Battle  of  Hastings.  (M.  Paris.) It  is generally  derived
from  the  word  homo,  which,  as  well  as  our  synonymous  term
man,  Spelman  asserts,  to  have  been  used  for  many  ages  by  the
German  and  Western  Nations,  for  a  servant  or  vassal. (Spelm.
ubi  supra — sed  vide  Co.  Litt.  64.  b.)  Homage  is  divided  into  liege
and  feudal  :  the  former  was  due  to  the  King,  the  latter  to  the
Lord,  of  whom  the  Tenant  held  his  Fee. "  The  reason  of  Hom-
"  age,  says  Spelman,  was  to  pi'eserve  the  memory  of  the  tenure,
"  and  of  the  duty  of  the  Tenant,  by  making  every  new  Tenant  at
"  his  entry  to  recognise the  Interest of  his Lord,  lest  that  the
"  feud,  being  now  hereditary,  and  new  Heirs  continually  suc-
"  ceeding  to  it,  they  might  by  little  and  little  forget  their  duty
"  and  subtracting  their  services  deny  at  last  the  tenure  itself."
(Spelm.  Reliq.  34.) On  Homage  in  general  see  Bracton  78.  b.  et
seq.  Fleta  1.  3.  c.  16. Littleton's  Tenures  and  Lord  Coke's  Com-
ment. Craig, Spelman, Sullivan,  Assises  de Jerusalem  c.  205.
&c.  &c.  &c.

2  Relief — quia  hereditas,  quce  jacens  fuit  per  antecessoris  de-
cessum,  relevatur  in  manus  hereilnm  et  propter  factam  relevatio-

175


176

the  Father,  or  any  other  Ancestor,  the  Lord  of  the
Fee  is  bound,  from  the  first,  to  receive  the  Homage  of
the  Right  Heir,  whether  the  Heir  has  attained  his  full
age,  or  not,  if  he  be  a  Male.  For,  Females  cannot  by
La\v  perform  any  Homage,1  although,  generally  speak-
ing, they  are  to  do  Fealty  to  their  Lords.

nem  facienda  erit  ab  herede  qucedam  prcestatio,  quce  dicitur  rele-
vium.  (Vide  Bracton  81.  et  Fleta  1.  3.  c.  17.  s.  1.)  Among  the
Laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  there  is  a  singular  one,  respect-
ing the  Relief  of  a  Tenant  who  fell  in  battle.  (LL.  Edw.  Conf.
c.  35.)  It  must,  however,  be  observed  that  Spelman  questions
that  Law,  and  strongly  contends,  that  Reliefs  were  not  in  use
among  the  Saxons.  (Reliq.  p.  31.)  The  Reader  will  find  that
point  controverted  in  the  preface  to  Wilkins's  Anglo  Sax.  LL.  p.
9.  The  Reader,  if  desirous  of  extending  his  enquiries  on  Reliefs
in  general,  may  consult  Bracton  84.  et  seq.  Fleta  L.  3.  c.  17.
Co.  Litt.  76.  a.  83.  a.  Black.  Com.  Sullivan,  Craig,  Spelman  &c.
&c.  &c.

1  "  Glanville,"  observes  Lord  Coke,  "  saith,  that  Women
"  shall  not  do  Homage  :  but  Littleton  saith,  that  a  Woman
•"  shall  do  Homage,  but  she  shall  not  say,  Jeo  Jevigne  votrefeme,
"  but  Jeo  face  a  vous  homage  ;  and  so  is  Glanville  to  be  under-
"  stood,  that  she  shall  not  do  complete  Homage."  (Co.  Litt.  60.
b.)  Having  cited  this  passage,  a  noble  Historian  observes  "  But
"  I  should  rather  think,  that  in  Glanville's  time  single  women
"  did  none,  and  that  the  alteration  in  the  form,  which  is  men-
"  tioned  by  Littleton,  was  an  expedient  found  afterwards  to  ob-
"  viate  the  objection  of  an  indecency  in  their  Homage  :  as  it
"  was  also  in  the  case  of  Ecclesiastics."  (3  Litt.  Hist.  Hen.  2.  p.
339.)  Skene  gives  a  reason  for  the  rule  as  laid  down  by  Glan-
ville :  because  Homage  especially  concerns  service  in  ivar,  (de
verb.  sign,  ad  voc.  homagium.)  He  also  remarks,  that  conse-
crated Bishops  did  no  homage.  The  reason,  says  Cowell,  may
be  all  one.  (Interpreter)  But  Craig.  (Jus.  Feud.  1.  11.  10.)  and
the  Regiam  Majestatem  (L.  2.  c.  60.)  expressly  coincide  with  our
Author.  Indeed,  if  any  doubt  could  possibly  exist,  concerning
the  unconditional  meaning  of  the  passage  in  the  text,  it  would
be  silenced  by  the  latter  part  of  the  present  chapter.  Having
made  use  of  the  expression  liber  homo,  our  author  pointedly  adds,
masculus,  as  if  solicitous  to  prevent  any  possible  misconception,
especially  that  very  misconception  Lord  Coke  seems  to  have


177

But,  if  they  are  married,  their  Husbands  ought  to
do  Homage  to  their  Lords  for  their  Fees ;  I  mean,  if
Homage  be  due  in  respect  of  such  Fees. If,  however,
the  Heir  be  a  Male  and  a  Minor,  the  Lord  of  the  Fee
is  not  entitled  by  Law  to  the  Custody,  either  of  the
Heir,  or his  Inheritance,  until he has received the
Homage  of  the  Heir  ;  because,  it  is  a  general  principle,
that  no  one  can  exact  from  an  Heir,  whether  he  is  of
age,  or  not,  any  service,  consisting  in  a  Eelief  or  other-
wise, until  he  has  received  the  Homage  of  the  Heir,  in
respect  of that Tenement,  for  which  the  service  is
claimed. But  a  person  may  perform  Homage  to  sev-
eral Lords  on  account  of  different  Fees ;  but,  of  these
Homages,  one  should  be  the  chief,  and  accompanied
with  allegiance,1  and  this  must  be  made  to  the  Lord,
from  whom  the  person  performing  Homage,  holds  his
Chief  Estate. Homage  ought  to  be  done  in  this  form,
namely,  the  party  performing  it  shall  so  become  the

fallen  into,  which  is  likewise  refuted  by  a  custom  mentioned  by
Lord  Littleton.  "  From  the  obligation  laid  on  the  Husband  to
"  do  Homage  for  the  wife,  it  naturally  followed,  that  the  Barony
"  of  a  wife,  as  well  as  every  other  Fief  requiring  Homage,  was
"  in  effect  made  over  to  the  Husband  ;  and,  therefore,  in  those
"  days  many  Barons  came  to  Parliament  in  right  of  their  wives,
"  and  by  virtue  of  their  marriage,  were  accounted  Peers  of  the
'  Realm.  It  has  been  observed,  in  this  History,  that  the  same
•'  notion  extended  to  Dukedoms  and  Principalities  in  many  parts
"  of  the  Continent."  (Litt.  Hen.  2.  p.  339.)

1  We  have  observed,  that  homage  was  divided  into,  liege  and
feudal:  it  was  also  divided  into,  liege  and  not  liege,  which  di-
vision corresponds  with  the  other.  Liege  is  borrowed  from  the
French,  as  Thaumas  informs  us.  (Gout,  de  Beauvoisis  p.  255.)
and  seems  to  have  meant  a  service  that  was  personal  and  inevi-
table. (Traites  Sur  Les  Gout.  Anglo-Norm,  par  Houard.  p.  511.
Tom.  1.;

12


178

Man  of  his  Lord,  that  he  shall  bear  faith  to  him  for
the  Tenement  in  respect  of  which  he  does  Homage,1
and  shall  preserve  the  Lord's  terrene  Honor  in  all
things,  saving  the  faith  due  to  the  King,2  and  his
Heirs.

From  this  it  is  evident,  that  a  Vassal  cannot  injure
his  Lord,  consistently  with  the  Faith  implied  in  Hom-
age ;  unless,  possibly,  in  his  own  defence,  or  unless,  in
compliance  with  the  King's  precept,  he  join  his  Army
when  it  proceeds  against  his  Lord  ;  and,  generally  speak-
ing, no  one  can  by  Law,  consistently  with  the  Faith  im-
plied in  Homage,  do  any  thing  which  tends  to  deprive
his  Lord  of  his  Inheritance,  or  to  affix  a  personal  stain,
upon  him.3  If,  then,  a  Tenant  has  in  respect  of
several  Fees  done  Homage  to  different  Lords,  who  af-
terwards make  war  on  each  other ;  and  the  Chief  Lord
should  command  the  Tenant  to  accompany  him  in
person  against  another  of  his  Lords,  he  ought  to  yield

1  In  performing  Homage,  the  Tenant  was  to  name  and  specify
the  particular  Tenement,  on  account  of  which  he  did  Homage,
in  order  that  the  Lord  might  not  be  imposed  upon. (Britton  174.
Mirror  c.  3.  s.  36.)

2  "  In  the  year  1152,  the  Emperor  Frederic  Barbarossa  made  a
"  Statute,  that  in  every  oath  of  fealty  taken  to  any  of  his  sub-
"  jects,  there  should  be  a  reserve  of  the  faith  due  to  him  and  his
"successors;  which  immediately  was  adopted  by  several  other
"  nations,  where  the  feudal  Law  was  in  use,  with  regard  to  their
"sovereigns,  and,  the omission  of  that reserve was punished
"  in  England  by  a  judicial determination  under Edward the
"first." (3 Litt. Hen.  2 p. 111.) This reserve was also re-
quired by  the  Book  of  Feuds  L.  2.  t.  55. Regiam  Maj.  L.  2.  and
Grand  Gust.  Norm.

3  Vide  Mirror  c.  4.  s.  10.  and  11,  and  Le  Grand  Gust,  de  Norm,
c.  14.


179

obedience  to  this  Mandate,  saving  however  the  service
hie  to  the  other  Lord  for  the  Fee  held  of  him.

From  what  has  gone  before  it  is  evident,  that  if  a
renant  should  do  any  thing  to  the  disinherison  of  his
Lord,  and  should  be  convicted  of  it,  he  and  his  Heirs
;hall  according  to  the  Law  for  ever  lose  the  Fee  held
>f  such  Lord.1  The  same  consequence  will  follow,  if
he  Tenant  lay  violent  hands  on  his  Lord  to  hurt  him,
>r  to  commit  any  atrocious  injury  upon  him,  and  this
>e  lawfully  proved  in  Court  against  the  Tenant.  But,
t  may  be  asked,  whether  any  one  can  be  compelled  in
he  Lord's  Court,  to  defend  himself  against  the  Lord
rom  such  charges ;  and  whether  his  Lord  can,  by  the
rudgment  of  his  own  Court,  distrain  the  Tenant  so  to
lo,  without  the  Precept  of  the  King,  or  his  Justices,
>r  without  the  King's  Writ,  or  that  of  his  Chief
rustice  ?

The  Law,  indeed,  permits  a  Lord  by  the  Judgment
>f  his  Court  to  call  upon  and  distrain  his  Ilomager  to
.ppear  in  Court,  and,  unless  he  can  purge  himself
.gainst  the  charge  of  his  Lord  by  three  persons,  or  as
uany  as  the  Court  should  award,  he  shall  be  amerced
o  the  Lord,  to  the  extent  of  the  whole  Fee  that  he
lolds  of  him.

It  may  also  be  enquired,  whether  a  Lord  can  distrain
lis  Ilomager  to  appear  in  Court,  and  answer  fora  serv-

As  the  Tenant  could  not  injure  his  Lord,  neither  could  the
.onl  injure  his  Tenant.  If  the  violation  of  this  obligation  was
'imishc.1  on  the  Tenant's  part,  by  the  loss  of  his  Tenement,  the
.ord,  when  the  Aggressor,  lost  his  Dominion.  (Fleta  L.  3.  c.  16.)


180

ice,  of  which  the  former  complains  the  Tenant  has
deforced  him,  or  of  which  some  part  is  unpaid  ?

The  Lord,  indeed,  by  Law  may  well  do  so,  even
without  the  precept  of  the  King,  or  his  Justices.  And
thus  the  Lord  and  his  Homager  may  proceed  to  the
Duel,  or  the  Grand  Assise,  by  means  of  one  of  the
Peers,1  who  clauses  to  make  himself  a  Witness2  of  the
fact,  as  having  seen  the  Tenant  himself,  or  his  Ances-
tors, perform  such  service  for  the  Fee  in  dispute  to  the
Lord  or  his  Ancestors,  and  is  prepared  to  prove  the
fact.  But,  if  the  Tenant  be  convicted  of  this  charge,

3  O "

he  shall  by  Law  be  disinherited  of  the  whole  Fee.
which  he  holds  of  his  Lord.  If,  however,  any  one  is
unable  to  constrain  his  Tenants,  it  then  becomes  neces-
sary to  have  recourse  to  the  Court.3  Every  free  Male
person  may  perform  Homage,  whether  of  full  age,  or
otherwise,  whether  a  Clergyman  or  Layman.  But  con-
secrated Bishops  are  not  in  the  habit  of  doing  Homage
to  the  King,  even  for  their  Baronies  ;  but  merely
Fealty,  accompanied  with  an  oath.  But  Bishops  elect

1  Parium. Vide  9  Inst.  42.  Spelni  Gloss,  ad  voc. — Pares  enim
sunt  cum  unus  aliis  non  subditur  Hommagio,  Dominatione,  vel
Antenatioue. Hommagio  ut Homo  subdititr  Domino  suo  cui  fecit
Hommagiitm  Dominatione,  ut  Homo  subditnr  uxoris  domino  et
ejus  primogenito  filio :  et  omnes  postnati  ratione  antenationis.
(Grand  Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  126.)

2  This  differed from the Norman code, which,  in  a  tone  of
haughty  despotism,  released  the  Lord  from  the  necessity  of  ad-
ducing any  testimony. Vox  enim  sola  Domini  Curice  in  iisquce
adipsvm pertinent sufflcit  ad  accusationem  snbditorum. (Grand
Cust.  c. 126.) Perhaps  a  worse  principle never  disgraced  an
Eastern  code.

3  That  is,  the  King's  Court.


181

ire  accustomed  to  do  Homage,  previous  to  their  Con-
ecration.1


CHAP.  II.

BUT  Homage  is  due  only  for  Lands,  free  Tenements,
Services,  Eents  in  certain,  whether  in  Money,  or  in
ither  things.  But,  in  respect  of  Dominion  2  alone,  Hom-
ge  ought  not  to  be  rendered  to  any  one,  except  to
he  King.  Yet  Homage  is  not  always  performed  for
very  species  of  Land.  Thus,  it  is  not  due  for  Land
i  Dower,  nor  for  free  Marriage-hood,  nor  from  the
'ee  of  Younger  Sisters  holding  of  the  Eldest,  within
be  third  descent  on  both  sides  3  ;  nor  is  it  due  from  a

1  "  Pope  Paschal  the  2nd,"  observes  Lord  Littleton,  "  allowed
the  Bisho2)s  elect  to  do  Homage,  and  take  the  oath  of  Fealty,
before  they  icere  consecrated. This  was  confirmed  by  the  Con-
stitutions of  Clarendon,  of  which  a  particular  account  will  be
given  hereafter  ;  and,  from  the  words  of  Glanville,  it  appears,
that  about  the  end  of  Henry  the  2nd's  reign  Homage  was  ac-
cordingly done  by  Bishops  elect,  but  he  tells  us,  that  after  they
were  consecrated  they  took  the  oath  of  fealty. This was  a
material  difference  from  what  had  been  settled  by  the  consti-
tutions of  Clarendon  : and  it  is  surprising,  that  we  have  no
account  of  it  in  the  History  of  the  Times." (Litt.  Hen.  2.  Vol.

113.)

2  Pro  Domino  is  the  expression  of  the  text,  which  I  have  dis-
carded—but have  preferred,  what,  I  submit,  must  be  the  true
Muling,  pro  Dominio,  for  so  Bracton  has  it  in  a  passage  corrobo-
itive  of  the  doctrine  of  the  text.  (79.  b. ) And  with  this  concurs
le  Regiam  Majestatem  :  "  Homage  is  not  made  to  any  man  for
his  band  of  maintenance,  but  only  to  the  King." (L.  2.  c.  65.)

3  See  Co.  Litt.  67.  a. The  tenure  oipararje  among  the  Normans,
Inch  seems  to  have  possessed  some features  in  common  with
mt  alluded  to  in  the  text, required fealty  to  be  done  by  the
ounger  to  the  Elder  branch  at  the  sixth,  and  Homage  at  the
jventh,  descent. (Grand  Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  30.)


182

Fee  given  in  Free-Alms,  nor  for  any  Tenement  given
in  any  way  in  Marriagehood,  as  far  as  concerns  the
person  of  the  Husband  of  the  Woman  to  whom  the
property  belongs  as  her  Marriagehood.


CHAP.  III.

BUT  Homage  may  be  done  to  any  free  person,
whether  .Male  or  Female,  whether  of  full  age  or  other-
wise, whether  Clergy  or  Lay.  Yet  should  it  be  under-
stood, that  if  a  person  has  done  Homage  for  a  Tene-
ment to  a  Woman  who  afterwards  marries  any  man,
he  shall  be  compelled  to  repeat  it  to  her  Husband  for
the  same  Tenement.  But,  if  any  one  has  by  Concord
made  in  Court  recovered  a  Tenement  against  another
who  had  previously  paid  a  Relief  for  it  to  the  Chief
Lord,  it  may  be  questioned,  whether  the  person  so  re-
covering the  Tenement  ought  to  pay  any  Relief  for  it.1


CHAP.  IV.

RECIPROCAL,  indeed, ought to be  the  Relation  of
Fidelity  between  Dominion  and  Homage.2 Nor  does

1  He  shall  not  pay  any  other  Relief,  says  the  Regiam  Majesta-
tein. (Vide  L.  2.  c.  67.)

2  The  mutuality  of  obligation  created  by  Homage  is  incul-
cated, not  merely  by  our  own,  but  other  writers. (Vide  Assises
de  Jerusalem  c.  99. Coutumes  de  Bcauvoisis  c.  58. Mirror  c.  4.
s.  11. Bracton  78. Fleta  L.  3.  c.  1C.' Brittonfo.  170.  a.) This
has  induced  Lord  Littleton  (3  Hist.  Hen.  2.  121.)  and  Mr.  Wat-
kins  (Copyholds  Vol.  1.  p.  2.)  to  conclude,  that  the  Feudal  Sys-
tem was  abhorrent  from  Tyranny,  originated  in  freedom,  and
ceased  to  be  free  only  when  it  was  corrupted.


183

the  Tenant  owe  more  to  his  Lord,  in  respect  of  Hom-
age, tjian  the  Lord  owes  to  the  Tenant  on  account  of
Dominion,  Reverence  alone  excepted.  Hence,  if  one
person  give  to  another  any  Land  in  return  for  Service
and  Homage,  which  is  afterwards  recovered  against
the  Tenant  by  a  third  person,  the  Lord  shall  be  bound
to  warrant  such  Land  to  him.  or  to  return  him  an
adequate  equivalent.  It  is  different,  however,  with
respect  to  him  who  holds  a  Fee  of  another,  as  his  In-
heritance, and,  in  this  character,  has  done  Homage  ;
because  although  he  lose  the  Land,  the  Lord  shall  not
be  bound  to  give  him  an  equivalent.1  In  the  case  we
have  formerly  mentioned,  of  the  death  of  the  Father  or
Ancestor,  leaving  an  Heir,  a  Minor,  the  Lord  of  the
Fee  has  no  right  to  the  Custody  of  the  Heir,  or  his

o  *>

Inheritance,  unless  he  has  first  received  the  Homage  of
the  Heir.  But  the  Homage  having  been  received,  the
Heir,  with  his  Inheritance,  shall  continue  in  the  manner
before  mentioned,  in  the  Custody  of  his  Lord,  until  he
has  attained  his  full  age.  Having  at  last  arrived  at
such  age,  and  received  restitution  of  his  Inheritance,  he
shall,  by  reason  of  his  having  been  in  Custody,  be
exempt  from  the  payment  of  any  Relief.2  Cut  a

1  The  Text  seems  to  allude  to  Homage  auncestrel,  and  point-
edly to  inculcate  an  opposite  doctrine. Yet,  Lord  Coke  refers
to  this  identical  chapter  of  Glanville,  in  support  of  the  doctrine
of  Homage  Auncestrel !! (Co.  Litt.  101.  a.) The  Eeg.  Maj.  is
rather  more  consistent  with  itself,  but  assists  us  not  materially.
"  But  it  is  otherwise  to  be  understood  of  him  who  has  Lands  as
*'  free  Heritage,  for  the  which  he  is  not  obliged  to  make  Hom-
"  age :  for,  although  he  lose  that Land,  the  over-Lord  giver
"  thereof  is  not  obliged  to  warrant  the  same." (L.  2.  c.  67.)

2  Similar  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Grand  Norman  Custumary
c.  33.


184

Female  Heir,  whether  she  has  attained  her  full  age,  or
not,  shall  remain  in  the  Custody  of  her  Lord,  until,
with  his  advice,  she  is  married.1  If,  however,  she  was
within  age,  when  the  Lord  received  her  into  Custody,
then,  upon  her  marriage,  the  Inheritance  shall  be  dis-
charged from  the  Relief,  so  far  as  respects  herself  and
her  Husband.2  But,  if  she  was  of  full  age  at  that  time,
although  she  continue  some  time  in  her  Lord's  Custody
before  she  is  married,  her  Husband  shall  pay  a  Eelief.
When,  however,  the  Relief  has  been  once  paid  by  the
Husband  of  a  Woman,  it  shall  exempt  both  the  Hus-
band and  the  Wife  during  their  several  lives  from  pay-
ment of  another  Relief,  on  account  of  such  Inheritance  ;
because,  neither  the  Woman  herself,  nor  her  second
Husband,  if  she  should  espouse  a  second  upon  the  death
of  the  former,  nor  her  first  Husband,  should  he  survive
her,  shall  again  pay  a  Relief  for  the  same  Land.  But
when  a  Male  Heir  is  left  of  full  age,  and  known  to  be
the  Heir,  he  shall  hold  himself  in  his  Inheritance,  as

1  Si  autem  foemince  i n  Custodia  fuerint,  cum  ad  annos  nubiles
pervenerint,  per  consilium  et  licentiam  domini  suiet  consilium  et
coiisensum  amicorum  suorum  et  consanguineorum  propinquorum
prout  generis nobilitas  et  feudorum  valor  requisierint  debent
maritari,  et  in  contractumatrimoniidebet  Us  feodum  custodia  li-
berari. (Grand  Norm.  Cust.  c.  33.)

2  Fleta  enumerates  the  instances  in  which  Reliefs  were  not  to
be  paid. 1.  None  was  payable  for  a  Fief,  acquired  by  any  species
of  purchase. 2.  Nor  on  a  change  of  the  Lord. 3.  Nor  was  a
Tenant for life only, to pay a Relief. 4.  Nor  any  man  who
married a woman who had been  in  custody — but  this  differs
from  the  Text. 5.  Nor  any  one  from  whom  his  Lord  had  re-
ceived a  remuneration,  on  account  of  custody. 6.  Nor  any  one
who  had  once  paid  a  relief  for  his  Estate. (Fleta  L.  3.  c.  17.
s.  5.  et  seq. )


185

we  have  formerly  observed,  even  though  his  Lord  be
unwilling,  provided  he  make  a  Tender  to  his  Lord,  as
he  ought  to  do,  of  his  Homage,  and  reasonable  Relief,1
in  the  presence  of  creditable  persons.  A  person's  Relief
is  said  to  be  reasonable,  with  reference  to  the  Custom
of  the  Realm,  according  to  which  the  Relief  of  a
Knight's  Fee  is  one  hundred  Shillings,2  whilst  that  of
Land  in  Socage  is  one  Year's  Value.3  But  as  to  Bar-
onies4 nothing  certain  is  enacted,5  because  Barons
holding  of  the  King  in  Capite  are  accustomed  to  pay
their  Reliefs  to  the  King,  according  to  his  pleasure,
and  indulgence.6  The  same  Rule  prevails  as  to  Ser-

1  Reliefs  were  in  many  parts  of  Normandy  certain  and  fixed  :
thus  a  Knight's  fee,  or,  as  it  is  there  termed,  feudum  loricce  was
five  pounds,  a  barony  one  hundred  pounds,  land  twelve  pence  an
acre,  and  woody  ground  6d. (Grand  Cust.  c.  34.)

2  Now,  as  a  Knight's  fee  was  valued  at  £20,  the  sum  mentioned
in  the  text  was  a,  fourth  of  it.

3  It  appears  to  have  been  thus  settled  by  a  Law  of  the  Con-
queror. (LL.  Gul.  Conq.  c.  40.  Ed.  Wilkins.) This,  as  Mr.  Wat-
kins  observes,  seems  to  have  been  no  more  than  accounting  to
the  Lord  for  the  profits  of  that  year,  for  which  lie  might  under
certain  circumstances, have  retained  the Lands. (Treat,  on
Copyh.  1.  231.)

*  Dr.  Sullivan  accounts  for  the  advantage  which  the  Knights
had  obtained,  when  compared  to  the  great  Barons,  in  having
their  Reliefs  reduced  to  a  certainty,  from  the  number  of  the
Knights  who  made  the  strength  of  the  Kingdom  and  were  not  to
be  disobliged  ;  and  also  from  the  precarious  situation  many  of
the  great  Lords  were  in,  who  had  been  attached  to  the  cause  of
Stephen.  (Lectures  p.  109.)

5  Statutum. "From  the  word  statutum"  says  Dr.  Sullivan,
commenting  upon  the  Text,  "  I  take  it  for  granted,  this  change
"  of  Reliefs  into  money  was  by  Act  of  Parliament." (Lectures
p.  290.)

6  This  was  remedied  by  Magna  Carta  cap.  2. The  Reader  may
consult  Lord  Coke's  comment  on  the  words  antiquum  relevium,


186

jean  ties.1  If,  however,  the  Lord  will  neither  receive
the  Homage  nor  reasonable  Relief  of  the  Heir,  then,
the  latter  should  safely  keep  the  Relief,  and  frequently
tender  it  to  his  Lord,  by  the  hands  of  respectable
persons.  If  the  Lord  will  by  no  means  receive  it,  then,
the  Heir  should  make  complaint  of  him  to  the  King,
or  his  Justices ;  and  shall  have  the  following  Writ.


CHAP.  V.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.2  Command  N.
"  that,  justly  and  without  delay,  he  receive  the  Ilom-
"  age,  and  reasonable  Relief  of  R.  concerning  the  free
"  Tenement  which  he  holds,  in  such  a  Yill,  and  that  he
"  claims  to  hold  of  him  ;  and,  unless  he  does  so,  sum-
"  mon  him  by  good  Summoners,  that  he  be  before  me
"  or  my  Justices  on  such  a  day,  to  shew  why  he  has
"  not  done  it.  And  have  there  the  Summoners,  and
"  this  Writ.  Witness  &c."


CHAP.  VI.

As  to  the  proceedings  which  are  to  be  resorted  to,  in
case  the  Lord  should  not  obey  this  Summons,  and  the

•where  he  endeavours  to  prove,  the  ancient  Relief  was  certain.
(2  Inst.  7.  and  8.)  Lord  Coke,  in  support  of  his  position,  cites  a
MS.  in  the  Library  of  Archbishop  Parker,  which  seems  almost
word  for  word  to  coincide  with  the  Laws  of  the  Conqueror.
(LL.  Gul.  Conq.  c.  22.  23.  24.)  This  is  the  more  remarkable,  as
his  Lordship  cites  from  a  MS.  merely,  without  describing  the
nature  of  it.  l  Vide  Co.  Litt.  105.  b.  and  Bracton  84.  a.

2  Vide  Co.  Litt.  101.  a.


187

means  by  which  he  shall  be  distrained  to  appear  in
Court,  they  may  be  collected  from  the  former  part  of
this  Treatise.  When,  at  last,  lie  appears  in  Court,  he
will  either  acknowledge  that  the  Tenant  is  the  right
Heir,  or  deny  that  he  is  the  Heir,  or  he  will  doubt,
whether  he  is  the  right  Heir  or  not.  If  he  should
acknowledge  him  to  be  the  Heir,  he  will,  then,  either
deny  that  the  Tenant  has  tendered  him  the  Homage
and  reasonable  Relief,  or  he  will  admit  it.  If  he  con-
fess both  the  one  and  the  other,  he  shall  either  imme-
diately receive  the  Tenant's  Homage  and  reasonable
Relief  in  Court,  or  he  shall  appoint  him  a  fit  day  for
doing  it.  The  same  observation  may  be  made,  although
he  deny  that  the  Tenant  has  proffered  to  him  his  Hom-
age or  Relief,  provided  he  admit  the  Tenant  to  be  the
Heir.  But  if  in  decided  terms  he  denies  the  Tenant
to  be  the  Heir,  then,  indeed,  may  the  latter,  if  out  of
possession,  require  against  his  Lord  an  Assise  de  morte
Antecessoris  sui.  Should  the  Tenant,  however,  happen
to  be  in  possession,  he  may  hold  himself  in  it,  and  pa-
tiently await,  until  it  pleases  his  Lord  to  accept  his
Homage ;  because,  no  one  is  previously  bound  to  answer
his  Lord  as  to  the  Relief,  until  the  latter  has  received
his  Homage  for  the  Fee,  on  account  of  which  Homage
is  due  to  him.  But  if  the  Lord  doubts,  whether  the
person  tendering  the  Homage  be  the  right  Heir  or
not,1  being  for  example  unknown  to  the  Lord  himself,

1  Fleta  tells  us,  that  an  examination  ought  to  precede  the
Homage,  in  order  to  ascertain,  whether  the  person  offering  him-
self, was  the  natural  Son  of  the  man  to  whom  he  made  himself
Heir,  both  with  respect  to  the  right  of  possession,  and  of  pro-


188

or  even  to  the  Vicinage  in  the  character  of  Heir,  then
the  Lord  of  the  Fee  may  take  the  Land  into  his  own
hands,  and  retain  it,  until  the  point  be  fully  cleared  up,
a  course  of  proceeding,  which  the  King  generally
adopts  with  respect  to  all  his  Barons  holding  of  him
in  Capite.

For,  upon  the  death  of  a  Baron  holding  of  him  in
chief,  the  King  immediately  retains1  the  Barony  in
his  own  hands,  until  the  Heir  has  given  security  for
the  Relief,  although  the  Heir  should  be  of  full  age.
But  Lords,  for  a  reasonable  cause,  may  sometimes  post-
pone receiving  Homage  and  Relief  for  their  Fees.
Suppose,  for  Example,  another  person,  than  the  one
who  asserts  himself  to  be  the  Heir,  should  claim  a
right  in  the  Inheritance.  During  the  pendency  of  this
Suit,  Homage  ought  not  to  be  received,  nor  a  Relief
given.  Or,  if  the  Lord  think  that  he  himself  has  a
ri^ht  to  hold  the  Inheritance  in  his  own  Demesne.


o


priety  &c.  &c.  that  the  Lord  might  not  inadvertently  be  deceived.
(L.  3.  c.  16.  s.  23.  24.)

1  The  Reader  will  observe  the  expression,  the  King  retains,
whilst  an  inferior  Lord  seises  or  takes,  the  fee  into  his  hands.
In  manum  regis  delapsa  est  is  the  expression  of  Dial,  de  Scacc.
speaking  of  a  fee  held  in  chief,  upon  the  death  of  its  owner.
(L.  2.  c.  10.)  But  a  passage  in  Mr.  Madox's  Hist,  of  the  Excheq.
serves  to  throw  still  more  light  on  the  text.  "  Every  Honor
"  originally  passed  from  the  King,  and,  upon  every  change,  by
"  death,  or  otherwise,  returned  to  the  King  again,  and  remained
"  in  his  hand,  until  he  commanded  seisin  of  it  to  be  delivered  to
"  his  Homager,  according  to  the  custom  of  noble  fiefs."  As  the
Law.  by  the  magic  of  a  fiction,  cast  the  Inheritance  on  the  King
the  moment  his  Tenant  in  Capite  died,  it  was  merely  necessary
for  him  to  retain  it — whilst  the  Law,  not  interfering  on  behalf
of  an  inferior  Lord,  obliged  him  to  seise  the  Land.


189

And  if  in  such  case  he  should,  by  force  of  the  King's
Writ  or  that  of  his  Justices,  impleud  the  person  in
possession,  the  Tenant  may  put  himself  upon  the
King's  Grand  Assise,  the  form  of  which  proceeding
is  explained  in  the  second  Book,  unless  in  some  re-
spects there  should  be  a  variation,  an  Example  of  whicn
we  have  in  the  following  Writ  for  such  purpose —


CHAP.  VII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health. Summon, by
"  frood  Summoners,  four lawful  Knights, from the

O  O  t

"  Neighbourhood  of  such  a  Vill,  that  they  be  before
u  me,  or  my  Justices,  on  a  certain  dav  there  to  elect,

t/  *

"  upon  their  oaths,  twelve  &c.  who  better  know  the
"  truth  of  the  thing,  and  will  say,  for  the  purpose  of
"making  a  Recognition,  whether  .V.  has  greater  right
"of  holding;  one  Hyde  of  Land  in  that  Vill  of/,  or

O  *•

"whether  7?.  of  holding  it  in  his  Demesne,  which  the
"said  R.  claims  by  my  Writ  against  the  aforesaid  N.
"  and  of  which  N.  who  holds  the  Land,  hath  put  him-
"  self  upon  my  Assise,  and  prays  a  Recognition  to  be
"made,  whether  he  has  greater  right  of  holding  that
"Land  in  his  Demesne  or  the  aforesaid  N.  of  holding
"  it  of  him  :  And  summon,  by  good  Summoners,  the
"  aforesaid  N.'  who  holds  the  Land,  that  he  be  then
"there  to  hear  that  Election.  And  have  there,  &c.
"  Witness,  &c."


190


CHAP.  VIII.

BUT  after  it  has  been  settled  between  the  Lord  and
the  Heir  of  the  Tenant  concerning  the  giving  and  re-
ceiving of  the  reasonable  Relief,  the  latter  may  exact
reasonable  Aids  from  his  Homagers.1  This,  however,
must  be  done2  with  moderation,  keeping  in  view  the
extent  of  their  Fees,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  Ten-
ants, least  they  should  be  too  much  oppressed,  or  lose
their  Contenement.3  But  nothing  certain  is  fixed,  con-
cerning the  giving  or  exacting  Aids  of  this  descrip-
tion, unless  that  the  form  we  have  mentioned  should

1  "  Aids  were,  at  first,  benevolencies  of  the  Vassals,  and  were
"given  during  the  great  festivity,  or  the  great necessity of  the
"  Lord  upon  three  occasions — to  wit — when  his  Son  was  knighted,
"  when  his  Daughter  was  to  be married,  and  when  his  person
"  was  to  be  ransomed  :  but  what  originally  flowed  from  regard,
"  Superiors  soon  changed  into  a  matter  of  duty,  and  on  a  gratui-
"ty  erected  a  right." (Dalrymp.  on  feuds,  p.  52.) — Speaking  of
aids,  Mr.  Madox  informs  us,  that  King  William  the  First  took  6s.
of  eacli  Hyde  through  England — King  Henry the First  took  3s.
for  each  Hyde,  as  aid  pur  fille  marier. But  he  adds, that, for
\v;mt  of  requisite  notices,  he  could  not  speak  distinctly  of  them.
(Hist.  Exch.  c.  15.  s.  1.) The Reader may  also be  referred to
Traites  sur  les  Coutumes  Anglo-Norm,  par  M.  Houard.  1.  265.
518.

2  By  the  Norman  Code  it  was  fixed  at  half  the  Relief  paid  by
the  mesne  to  the  Chief  Lord. (Grand  Cust.  c.  35.)

3  Contenementum,  a  word  of  frequent  recurrence in the old
Books  and  Statutes. "  Mr.  Selden  in  his  table  talk  says,  that  the
"  word  contenemcntu in  signifies  the same with  countenance,  as
"  used  by  the  country  people,  when  intending  to  receive  a  person

'  with  hospitality,  they  say — I  will  see  you  with  the  best  countc-
"  nance.  So  that  the  meaning  of  Magna  Carta  (where  this  word
"occurs)  is,  a  man  shall  not  be  so  fined,  but  that  he  may  be  able
"  to  give  his  neighbour  good  entertainment."  (Barr.  Anc.  Stat.
p.  12.  See  also  4  Bl.  Comm.  378.)


191

be  inviolably  observed.  There  are  also  other  cases,  in
which  a  Lord  can  exact  from  his  Homagers  similar
Aids,  observing,  however,  the  principle  wre  have  laid
down  :  as  if  his  Son  and  Heir  should  be  made  a  Knight,
or  if  he  should  marry  off  his  Eldest  Daughter.1  But,
whether  Lords  can  exact  these  Aids  to  maintain  their
own  Wars,  is  doubtful.  The  opinion  that  prevails  is,
that  they  cannot  by  right  distrain  their  Tenants  for
such  purpose,  unless  so  far  as  the  Tenants  may  feel  dis-
posed. But,  with  respect  to  the  rendering  of  reason-
able Aids,  Lords  may  of  right,  without  the  King's  pre-
cept, or  that  of  his  Justices,  but  by  the  Judgment  of
their  own  Court,  distrain  their  Tenants  by  such  of  their
chattels  as  may  be  found  within  their  Fees,  or  by  their
Fees,  if  necessary ;  provided  the  Tenants  are  dealt
with  according  to  the  Judgment  of  the  Court,  and  con-
sistently with  the  reasonable  Custom  of  it.  If,  there-
fore, a  Lord  may  thus  distrain  his  Tenants  2  to  render

1  Aid  and  relief  do  not  always  appear  to  be  used  by  the  old
Books,  in  different  senses. Speaking  of  the aids,  mentioned  in
the  present  passage  of  the  text,  the  Norman  Code says, Hiijus-
modirelevia  in  quibusdam  feodis  dimidio  relevio  equal ia  : ct  in
quibusdam  feodis  decem  solidos. Hence,  the  ancient  custom  was
to  be  followed. (Le  Grand  Gust,  de  Norm.  c.  35. ) When  Bi-acton
\vrote,  these  aids  were  considered  as  matter  of  grace,  rather  than
of  right,  being,  as  lie  terms  them, customs, not services, and
personal  to the Tenant, not prsedial. (36. b.) Judge Black-
stone  notices  the great  resemblance, which, in the  particular
of  aids,  the  Lord  and  Vassal  of  the  Feudal  Law  bore  to  the  patron
and  client  of  the  Roman  Law  :  the  patron  being  entitled  to  three
aids  from  his  client,  viz.  to  marry  his  Daughter,  to  pay  his  Debts,
and  to  redeem  his  person  from  captivity. (2  Com. 63.) Gene-
rally, see  Co.  Litt.  76.  a.  and  Mr.  Hargrave's  note  1.  2  Inst.  231.
232,  and  Mirror,  c.  1.  s.  3.

2  Homagers.  Bodln.  MS.


192

such  reasonable  Aids,  much  stronger  is  the  argument
in  favor  of  its  being  lawful  for  him  to  distrain  in  the
same  manner  for  a  Relief,  as  also  for  any  other  service
necessarily  due  to  him,  in  respect  of  the  Fee.  But  if  a
Lord  is  unable  to  compel  1  his  Tenant  to  render  his
services  or  Customs,  then  recourse  must  be  had  to  the
Assistance  of  the  King,  or  his  Chief  Justice,  and  he
shall  obtain  the  following  Writ —


CHAP.  IX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.2  I  command
"  you  that  you  adjudge  N.  that,  justly  and  without
"  delay,  he  render  to  R.  the  Customs  and  right  Serv-
"ices  which  he  ought  to  render  him,  for  the  Tenement
"  that  he  holds  of  him,  in  such  a  Till,  as  can  be  reason-
"  ably  shewn  to  be  due  to  him,  least  he  again  complains
"  for  want  of  right.  "Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  X.

WHEN  the  Plea  proceeds  by  virtue  of  this  Writ,  the
complainant  shall,  in  the  County  Court,  and  before  the
Sheriff,  recover  his  services,  whether  they  consist  in

1  Justiciare .  Justiciatio,  says  the  Norman  Code,  est  coarctatio
super  aliqiiem  facta,  ut  juri  pareat.  Having  given  this  defini-
tion, it  goes  on  to  observe,  that  it  ought  not  to  precede,  but  fol-
low the  offence — that  there  were  three  things  that  authorised
it — transgressio  termini  prefixi — contemptus  justicice,  and  irro-
gatio  Injuries.  We  learn  from  the  same  source,  that  this  Justi-
ciatio was  by  distraining  the  goods,  or  the  Fee,  or  by  taking  the
body.  (Le  Grand  Custuin.  de  Norm.  c.  6.)  2  F.  N.  B.  337.


193

Reliefs  or  other  things,  according  to  the  Custom  of  the
County  Court.  And,  if  he  should  prove  his  right,  the
Adverse  party  shall  render  the  reasonable  Relief  to
his  Lord,  and  shall,  in  addition,  be  amerced  to  the
Sheriff ;  it  being  a  general  principle,  that  the  Amerce-
ment which  results  from  every  suit,  which  has  been
carried  on  and  determined  in  the  County  Court,  be-
longs to  the  Sheriff.  The  amount  of  it,  indeed,  lias
been  ascertained  by  no  general  Assise,1  but  is  regulated
by  the  Customs  of  different  Counties;  in  one  County
more,  in  another  less.


CHAP.  XI.

IT  follows  that  we  speak  concerning  Purprestures.
A  Purpresture,  or  more  properly  speaking,  a  Porpres-
ture,2  is  when  any  thing  is  unjustly  encroached  upon  ;3
against  the  King ;  as  in  the  Royal  Demesnes,  or  in  ob-
structing public  ways,  or  in  turning  public  waters  from

1  "  By  the  general  Assise  or  Assembly,"  meaning  the  Parlia-
ment, according  to  Judge  Blackstone. 1.  148.

2  Purprestura  vel  Porprestura — i4  And  because,  it  is  properly,
"  when  there  is  a  House  builded  or  an  Enclosure  made  of  any
"  part  of  the  King's  Demesnes,  or  of  an  Highway,  or  of  a  com-
"  mon  street,  or  public  water,  or  such  like  public  tiling,  it  is  de-
"  rived  of  the  French  pourpris,  which  signifieth  an  enclosure."
(Co.  Litt.  277.  b.) The  term  purpresture  seems  to  have  been  un-
derstood by  our  old  Lawyers  in  three  senses. 1st.  as  committed
against  the  King,  by  a  subject. 2d.  as  committed  by  a  Tenant,
against  the  Lord  of  whom  lie  held  his  fee. 3d.  as  committed  by
one  neighbour,  against  another. (Vide  Craig.  Jus.  feud.  L.  1.  D.
16.  c.  10.  and  L.  3.  D.  5.  s.  6.  7. Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc. Cowell's
Interp. Manwood's Forest Laws. p. 169. 176. Grand Norm.
Cust.  c.  10.  &c.  &c.  and  Traites  sur  les  Coutumes  Anglo-Norm.
par  Houard.  1.  387.)

3  Occupatur. "  Occupationes,"  says  Lord Coke, "are  taken

13


194

their  right  course ;  or  when  any  one  has  built  an  Edifice
in  a  City  upon  the  King's  Street.  And,  generally  speak-
ing, whenever  a  Nuisance  is  committed  affecting  the
King's  Lands,  or  the  King's  High  "Way,  or  a  City,  the
suit  concerning  it  belongs  to  the  King's  Crown.  But
Purprestures  of  this  description  are  enquired  after,
either  in  the  King's  Chief  Court,  or  before  his  Justices
sent  into  the  different  parts  of  the  Kingdom1  for  the
purpose  of  making  such  Inquisitions,  by  a  Jury  of  the
Place,2  or  Vicinage.  And  if,  by  such  Jury,  a  man  be
convicted  of  having  made  any  Purpresture  of  this  kind,
he  shall  be  amerced  to  the  King  to  the  extent  of  the
whole  Fee  that  he  holds  of  him,  and  shall  restore  that
which  he  has  encroached  upon  ;  and,  if  convicted  of
having  encroached  by  building  in  a  City  upon  the
King's  Street,  the  Edifices  shall  belong  to  the  King;
those,  at  least,  which  are  found  to  be  constructed  within
the  Royal  District ;  and,  notwithstanding,  he  shall  be
amerced  to  the  King.

"  for  usurpations  upon  the  king,  and,  it  is  properly,  when  one
"  usurpeth  upon  the  king,  by  using  of  liberties  and  franchises
•'  which  he  ought  not  to  have  ;  and,  as  an  unjust  Entry  upon  the
"  king  into  Lands  or  Tenements,  is  called  an  intrusion,  so  an  un-
"  lawful  using  of  franchises  or  liberties  is  said  an  Usurpation  :
"  but  occupationes  in  a  large  sense  are  taken  for  purprestures,
"  intrusions,  and  usurpations."  (2  Inst.  272.)  The  Reader  may
also  consult  Dialog,  de  Scacc.  L.  2.  s.  10.

1  Bracton  tells  us,  that  it  was,  in  his  time,  an  Article  of  the
Eyre  to  inquire,  de  purpresturis  factis  super  dominum  Reyem,
sive  inferra,  sive  in  mari,  sii'e  in  aqua  dulci,  sive  infra  liberta-
tem,  sive  extra.  (116.) See  also  2  Inst.  272. 4  Chap.  Stat.  de  Big-
amis. Co.  Litt.  293.  b.  294.  a.

2  Patrice. Vide  Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.  also  3  Bl.  Com.  349.  and
375.  and  Mr.  Christian's  Note.


195

An  Amercement 1  to  the  King  is,  when  any  one  has
been  so  far  amerced,  bv  the  oaths  of  lawful  Men  of

* v

the  Yicinage,  as  not  to  lose  any  part  of  his  Honorable
Contenement.2  When  a  person  has  made  a  purpres-
ture  against  any  other  than  the  King,  he  will  either
have  made  it  against  his  own  Lord,  or  against  another.
In  the  former  Case,  if  the  offence  come  not  within  the
Assise,3  then,  the  offender  shall  be  distrained  to  appear
in  the  Lord's  Court,  to  answer  concerning  it — I  mean,
if  he  holds  any  other  Tenement  of  the  Lord.  For  this
purpose  the  following  "Writ  shall  issue


CHAP.  XII.

"  The  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health. I  command  you,
"  that  you  compel  N.,  that  without  delay,  he  appear

1  Having  already  spoken  of  Amercements,  we  shall  here  merely
remark  that  in  the  reigns  of  William  the  Conqueror  and  his  Son
Rufus,  they  were  no  less  immoderate,  than  oppressive. Henry
the  First  was  compelled,  by  the  peculiar  difficulties  of  his  situa-
tion, to make many concessions. — One of which was, that
amercements  should  no  longer  be  assessed,  as  they  had  been  in
his  Father's  and  Brother's  reigns,  to  the  extent  of  the  whole
property of the  offender, but should be proportionate  to  the
crime — sicut  retro  a  tempore  patris  met  et  fratris  mei  in  tempore
aliorum  antecessorum  meorum. (LL. Hen.  1.  c.  1.) If  these
words  mean  any thing, they imply, that Henry merely  re-
stored the  Common  Law,  which  his  Father  and  Brother  had  vio-
lated. How  ill  this  concession  was  observed,  we may  conjec-
ture, from  its  having  been  felt  necessary  to  make  it  part  of  the
great  charter. (See  2  Inst.  27.)

2  V.  Gul.  Sornn.  Notas  ad  LL.  1.  Cap.  1.  p.  176. (Al.  MS.)

3  Infra  Assisam — That  is,  says  Skene,  within  the  time  within
which  his  Action  should  be pursued,  or  else  to  be  holden  as
prescribed. (Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.  c.  74.)


196

"  in  the  Court  of  /.  his  Lord,  and  there  abide  by  the
"  right  concerning  his  free  Tenement,  that  he  hath
"  encroached  against  him,  as  he  says,  least,  &c.  Wit-
"  ness,  &c."


CHAP.  XIII.

IF  the  party  be  convicted  of  this  offence  in  the  Lord's
Court,  he  shall  irrecoverably  lose  the  Tenement  he
holds  of  such  Lord.

But,  if  he  hold  no  other  Tenement  of  the  same  Lord,
then,  the  latter  shall  implead  him  in  the  Court  of  the
Chief  Lord  by  a  "Writ  of  Right.  In  like  manner,  if
any  one  commit  an  encroachment  in  this  way  upon  a
person,  not  being  his  Lord,  and  the  case  fall  not  within
the  Assise,1  the  matter  shall  be  decided  by  Writ  of
Right.  But,  if  the  fact  happen  within  the  Assise,
then,  recourse  must  be  had  to  a  Recognition  of  Novel
Disseisin  to  recover  possession,  of  which  proceeding
we  shall  presently  speak.  In  Purprestures  of  this
description,  the  Boundaries  of  Land  are  sometimes  de-
stroyed and  encroached  upon.  In  such  case,  upon  a
complaint  being  made  in  Court  by  any  of  the  Neigh-
bours, let  the  Sheriff  be  commanded,  that  a  View  of
the  Boundaries  in  question  be  taken  in  his  presence  by
Lawful  Men  of  the  Vicinage,  and,  upon  their  oaths,
that  he  cause  the  boundaries  to  be  as  they  ought  to  be,

1  Infra  Assisam — lawful  time,  says  Skene,  so  that  the  Action
of  Novel  Disseisin  is  not  prescribed. (Reg.  Maj.  L.  2.  c.  74.)


197


and  were  accustomed  to  be  in  the  time  of  King  Henry
the  First :  for  this  purpose,  the  following  Writ  shall


issue


CHAP.  XIY.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  I  command
"  you,  that  justly  and  without  delay,  you  make  reason-
"  able  divisions 2  between  the  Land  of  R.  in  such  a
"  Till,  and  the  Land  of  Adam  of  Byre,  as  they  ought
"  to  be,  and  were  accustomed  to  be,  and  as  they  were
"  in  the  time  of  King  Henry,  my  Grandfather,  of
"  which  R.  complains  that  Adam,  unjustly  and  with-
"  out  judgment,  has  encroached  more  than  belongs  to
"  his  free  Tenement  of  Byre,  least  I  again  hear  com-
"  plaint  for  want  of  Justice.  Witness,  &c."

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  285.

2  Vide  Ante  p.  133. Note  1.


Soolt


OF  THE  DEBTS  OF  THE  LAITY  ARISING  FROM  DIFFER-
ENT KINDS  OF  CONTRACTS,  VIZ.  FROM  SALE,  PUR-
CHASE, GIFT,  LOAN,  BORROWING,  LETTING  OUT,  AND
HIRING;  AND  OF  PLEDGES  AND  GAGES,  WHETHER
MOVEABLE  OR  IMMOVEABLE ;  AND  OF  CHARTERS
CONTAINING  DEBTS.


CHAP. I.

PLEAS  concerning  the  Debts  of  the  Laity  also  be-
long to  the  King's  Crown  and  Dignity.  When,  there-
fore, any  one  complains  to  the  Court,  concerning  a
Debt  that  is  due  to  him,  and  be  desirous  of  drawing
the  suit  to  the  King's  Court,  he  shall  have  the  follow-
ing "Writ,  for  making  the  first  Summons


CHAP.  II.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Command  JT.,
"  that  justly  and  without  delay,  he  render  to  7?.,  one
"  hundred  Marks  which  he  owes  him,  as  he  says,  and
"•  of  which  he  complains  that  he  has  unjustly  deforced
"  him.  And,  unless  he  does  so,  summon  him,  by  good

"  Summoners,  that  he  be  before  me  or  my  Justices  at

198


199

"  "Westminster  in  fifteen  days  from  the  Pentecost,  to
"  shew  wherefore  he  has  not  done  it.  And  have  there
"the  Summoners  and  this  Writ.  "Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  III.

WE  have  sufficiently  explained  the  course  of  pro-
ceeding to  be  adopted,  in  case  of  the  absence  of  either
of  the  parties,  or  of  default,  before  the  suit  is  entered
upon.  We  should,  however,  remark  that,  it  is  not
usual  for  the  King's  Court  to  compel  any  one  by  dis-
training his  Chattels  to  appear  in  Court,  on  account  of
any  suit.  In  such  a  Suit,  therefore,  any  one  may  by
the  Judgment  of  the  Court  be  distrained  by  his  Fee,
or  bv  attaching  his  Pledges,  as  is  usuallv  done  in

»/  vj  CJ  *  *.

other  suits.  Both  parties  being  present  in  Court,  the
Plaintiff  may  found  his  demand  on  a  variety  of  causes.
His  Debt  may  arise  either  upon  a  Lending,1  or  a  Sale,
or  a  Borrowing,  or  a  Letting  out,  or  a  Deposit,  or  from
some  other  just  cause  inducing  a  Debt.

A  Debt  of  the  first  description  arises,  when  one  per-
son entrusts  another  with  any  such  thing  as  consists
in  Number,  or  Weight,  or  Measure.2  When  one  per-
son so  entrusts  another,  if  he  should 'receive  back  more

1  The  Terms  mutui,  venditionis,  commodato,  locato,  deposito,
are  evidently  borrowed  from  the  Civil  Law.  But  we  are  not
from  hence  to  conclude,  as  Bishop  Nicholson  hastily  did.  that
Glanville  apes,  as  he  expresses  it,  the  Roman  Code.  (Scotch
Historical  Library,  255.)  This,  of  all  faults,  is  the  least  imput-
able  to  the  venerable  Glanville. — On  the  term  mutuum  see  Note
1.  p.  204.  Infra.  2  Vide  Justin.  Instit.  L.  3.  tit.  15.


200

than  he  lent,  he  commits  Usury  ;  and,  if  he  die  in  such
Crime,  he  shall,  by  the  Law  of  the  Land,  be  punished
as  a  Usurer,  of  which,  indeed,  we  have  spoken  more
fully  in  the  preceding  pages.1  But  when  any  thing  is
entrusted  to  another,  it  is,  generally,  confided  upon
the  giving  of  Pledges : 2  sometimes,  indeed,  upon  the
putting  things  in  Pledge :  sometimes,  under  a  solemn
promise  ;  sometimes  upon  the  Exposition  of  a  Charter  :
and  at  other  times  upon  the  conjoined  strength  of
many  of  these  Securities.  When,  therefore,  any  Debt
is  secured  upon  the  giving  of  Pledges  alone,  if  the
principal  Debtor  should  be  so  much  reduced  as  to  be
incapable  of  discharging  it,  then,  recourse  must  be  had
to  the  Pledges ;  and  they  shall  be  summoned  by  the
following  "Writ


CHAP.  IY.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health. Command
"  that  justly  and  without  delay,  he  acquit  12.  of  the

1  L.  7.  c.  16.

2  The  Norman  Code  divides  Pledges  into,  simplices,  and  debiti
retinentes. An  example  of  the  former  kind  is  the  following —
Ego  plegio  A.  quod  reddat  B.  decem  solidos. The  effect  of  such
a  pledge  was,  that  it  ceased  with  the  life  of  the  person  entering
into  it,  and  descended  not  upon  his  Heirs. Neither  was  there
any  difference,  in  this  respect,  if  the  pledge  was  given  for  the
appearance  of  another  in  any  suit. With  respect  to  the  latter
kind  of  pledge,  the  Term  was  employed,  when  the  person  enter-
ing into  it  made  himself  answerable  for  the  Debt,  and  thus  stood
in  the  twofold  capacity  of  Debtor  and  pledge. The  effect  of  this
seems  to  have  been,  to  release  the  original  Debtor,  and  to  render
the  Representatives  of  the  person  entering  into  it  liable  to  an-
swer it. (Le  Grand  Custuni.  de  Norm.  c.  60.  89.  90.)


201

"  Hundred  Marks  against  N.,  for  which  he  became  his
"  surety,  as  he  says,  and  of  which  he  complains  he  has
"  not  acquitted  him.  And,  unless  he  does  so,  summon
"  him,  by  good  Summoners,  &c."


CHAP.  V.

WHEN  the  Pledges  appear  in  Court,  they  will  either
confess  their  Suretyship,  or  they  will  deny  it.  Should
they  adopt  the  former  course,  they  are  then  bound l
to  satisfy  the  Creditor,  at  a  convenient  time  appointed
in  Court  for  such  purpose ;  or  they  are  bound  in  a
legal  manner  to  prove,  that  they  are  discharged  from
such  suretyship  by  payment,  or  by  some  other  lawful
means.  But,  if  there  are  many  Pledges,  each  of  them
is  answerable  for  the  whole  Debt,  unless  it  was  other-
wise stipulated  when  they  became  Sureties  ;  and  they
are  all  to  be  distrained  to  satisfv  the  Debt.

V

Hence,  if  there  were  many  Sureties,  and  one  or
more  of  them  prove  incapable  of  answering  the  engage-
ment, the  burthen  of  the  Debt  shall  fall  upon  the
others,  either  entirely,  or  to  the  extent  of  the  Deficien-
cy. But  if,  in  becoming  sureties  for  a  person  indebted,
the  Pledges  assumed  the  responsibility  of  certain  parts

1  The  same  Rule  is  laid  down  in  the  Norman  Code  :  but  the
subject  is  there  treated  far  more  diffusely.  It  seems,  by  that
Code,  to  have  been  an  obligation  imposed  upon  the  Homager,
by  his  tenure,  to  become  pledge  for  his  Lord's  Debts  to  the  ex-
tent of  a  year's  Rent — to  become  pledge  for  his  person,  if  in
prison — for  his  prosecuting  a  suit,  or  appearing  to  it,  &c.  &c.
(Grand  Gust um.  c.  60.)


202

only,  whatever  may  happen  as  to  some  of  the  Pledges,
the  others  shall  not  be  compelled  to  answer,  except  for
their  own  proportion.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  a
dispute  may  sometimes  arise  between  the  Creditor  and
the  Pledges — sometimes  between  the  Pledges  them-
selves, if  any  one  of  them  should  allege  that  he  had
become  the  surety  of  the  principal  Debtor  for  a  less
sum,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  asserted  that  he
became  so  for  a  greater.  For  when  the  Pledges  are
individually  bound  for  certain  parts,  it  follows  of  ne-
cessity, that  the  Creditor  himself  must  sue  the  one,
who  confesses  to  owe  less  upon  his  undertaking  than  he
ouerht.  But,  should  some  of  them  become  Pledges  for

CJ  /  tJ

the  whole,  some  for  certain  parts,  then,  indeed,  it  will
be  requisite,  that  those  who  have  become  sureties  for
the  whole  should  sue  those  who  will  only  confess  them-
selves indebted  in  a  less  sum  than  they  really  owe.

«.  i

How  these  different  points  are  to  be  proved,  will  be
seen  in  the  sequel.  The  Sureties,  having  discharged
the  Debt,  may  have  recourse  to  the  principal  Debtor,
should  he  afterwards  acquire  sufficient  to  repay  them  ;
and  this  by  an  original  Action  of  Debt,  of  which  we
shall  presently  speak.  It  should,  however,  be  observed,
that  if  a  Man  has  become  a  Pledge  for  another's  ap-
pearance, and  he  should,  in  consequence  of  the  default
of  his  Principal,  happen  to  be  amerced,  and  in  respect
of  it  pay  any  sum,  he  cannot  afterwards  on  this  account
recover  any  thing  against  him  for  whom  he  became
Surety.1  Whoever,  indeed,  has  become  a  Pledge  for

1T\\Q  Regiam  Majestatem,  on  the  contrary,  lays  it  down,  that


203

4

another's  appearance  in  any  suit  that  belongs  to  the
King's  Crown,  as,  concerning  the  breaking  of  the
King's  peace,  or  otherwise,  if  he  do  not  produce  his
Principal,  he  shall,  as  a  consequence  of  his  suretyship,
be  amerced  to  the  King,  of  the  nature  of  which  we
spoke  on  a  former  occasion.  But  the  effect  of  this  will
be  to  liberate  him  from  his  suretyship.

Should,  however,  the  Pledges  deny  in  Court  their
Suretyship,  then,  if  there  were  many  Pledges,  either
all  of  them  will  deny  such  suretyship,  or  some  will
admit,  and  some  deny  it.  But,  if  some  admit,  and
some  deny  it,  then,  there  may  be  a  Suit,  as  well  be-
tween the  Creditor  himself  and  the  Pledges,  as  between
those  Pledges  who  confess,  and  those  who  denv  their

CJ  «.

engagement,  according  to  what  we  have  previously  ob-
served.

But,  what  shall  be  the  proof  required  of  those,  be-
tween whom  the  suit  is  to  be  conducted,  is  a  question  ?
"Whether,  for  example,  it  should  be  made  by  the  Duel,
•or  by  any  other  mode  ;  or  whether  the  Pledges  can,
by  the  oaths  of  such  a  number  of  men  as  the  Court
may  require,  deny  their  undertaking?  "With  respect
to  this  point,  some  persons  assert,  that  the  Creditor
himself,  by  his  own  oath  and  that  of  lawful  "Witnesses,
can  by  Law  prove  it  against  the  Pledges,  unless  the
Pledges  will  prevent  him  from  the  oath  ;  and  this  may
now  be  done  when  the  Demandant  appears  prepared

he  can  recover,  (L.  3.  c.  1.)— a  rule  that  is  certainly  more  con-
sistent with  Justice.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Mirror  coincides
with  the  text.  (c.  2.  s.  24.)


204

to  take  the  oath,  though  formerly  it  ought  to have
been  done  before  the  Law  was  waged.

Thus  in  such  case  the  Duel  may  be  resorted  to.


CHAP.  VI.

A  LOAN  l  is  sometimes  made,  upon  the  Credit  of  a
putting  in  Pledge.  When  a  Loan  of  this  description
takes  place,  sometimes  moveables,  as  Chattels,  are  put
in  pledge:  sometimes  immoveables,  as  Lands  and
Tenements,  and  Rents,  whether  consisting  in  Money,
or  in  other  things.  When  a  Compact  is  made  between
a  Creditor  and  Debtor,  concerning  the  putting  any
thing  in  pledge,  then,  whatever  be  tne  mode  of  pledging,
the  Debtor  upon  his  receiving  the  thing  lent  to  him,
either  immediately  delivers  possession  of  the  Pledge  to
the  Creditor,  or  not.  Sometimes  also  a  thing  is  pledged
for  a  certain  period,  sometimes  indefinitely.

Again,  sometimes,  a  thing  is  pledged  as  a  Mortgage,
sometimes  not.  A  pledge  is  designated  by  the  Term
Mortgage,2  when  the  fruits  and  Rents,  which  are

o o ?  ?

-1  dlutuum — quia,  ita  a  me  tibi  datur,  ut  ex  meo  tuum  fiat.  (Jus-
tin. Instit.  L.  3.  t.  15.)  Vinnius  terms  this  bellaallusio,  non  vera
vocis  originatio.  Dr.  Wood  observes,  as  to  the  Term  itself,  it
hath  no  one  particular  name  in  the  English  language.

2  With  this  explanation  the  Regiam  Majestatem  (L.  3.  o.  2.)  and
the  Grand  Norman  Custumary  (c.  113.)  literally  coincide — though
it  differs  from  that  given  by  Littleton,  and  followed  by  Coke,
Craig,  and  Blackstone.  (Co.  Litt.  205.  a.  2  Comm.  Bl.  157.  Craig.
Jus  Feud.  L.  2,  D.  6.  s.  27.)  What  is  the  more  remarkable,
Lord  Coke  expressly  contrasts  the  mortuum  vadium  to  the  vivum


205

received  in  the  interval,  in  no  measure  tend  to  reduce
the  demand  for  which  the  pledge  has  been  given.

When,  therefore,  moveables  are  put  in  pledge,  so
that  possession  be  delivered  to  the  Creditor  for  a  cer-
tain period,  he  is  bound  to  keep  the  pledge  safely,  and
neither  to  use  it,  nor  in  any  other  manner  employ  it,
so  as  to  render  it  of  less  Value.  But  should  it,  whilst
in  Custody  and  within  the  Term,  suffer  deterioration,
by  the  fault  of  the  creditor,  a  Computation  shall  be
made  to  the  extent  of  the  detriment,  and  deducted
from  the  Debt.  Bat,  if  the  thing  be  of  such  a  descrip-
tion that  it  necessarily  requires  some  expence  and  cost,
for  Example,  that  it  might  be  fed  or  repaired,  then  the
stipulation  of  the  parties  on  that  subject  shall  be
abided  by.  In  addition — when  a  thing  is  pledged  for
a  definite  period,  it  is  either  agreed  between  the  Cred-
itor and  Debtor,  that  if,  at  the  time  appointed,  the
Debtor  should  not  redeem  his  pledge,  it  should  then
belong  to  the  Creditor  so  that  he  might  dispose  of  it
as  his  own  ;  or  no  such  agreement  is  entered  into  be-
tween them.  In  the  former  case,  the  Agreement  must
be  adhered  to  ;  in  the  latter,  the  Term  being  unex-
pired l  without  the  Debtor's  discharging  the  Debt,  the

vadium.  Vivum  autem  dicitur  vadium  quia  nonqiiam  moritnr  ex
aliqud  parte  quod  ex  suis  proventibus  acquiratur.  But  assuredly,
if  the  term  mortgage  is  to  be  collected  from  its  forcible  contrast
to  these  words,  Glanville's  explanation  is  infinitely  preferable  to
that  given  by  Lord  Coke.

1  Existente  termino.  This  is  a  palpably  false  reading — it  should
be,  e.lapso  termino,  the  term  being  expired,  an  expression  familiar
to  Glanville.  This  suggestion  is  sanctioned  by  the  Reg.  Maj.
'  the  day  being  bygone.''  (L.  3.  c.  3.) — by  the  expression  of  the  text


206

Creditor  may  complain  of  him,  and  the  Debtor  shall
be  compelled  to  appear  in  Court,  and  answer  by  the


following  Writ.


CHAP.  YII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Command
"that  justly  and  without  delay,  he  redeem  such  a  thing
"  which  he  has  pledged  to  7?,  for  a  hundred  Marks,  for
"  a  Term  which  is  past,  as  he  says,  and  of  which  he
"  complains  that  he  has  not  redeemed  it ;  and,  unless
"  he  does  so,  &c."


CHAP.  VIII.1

IN  what  manner  the  Debtor  shall  be  distrained  to
appear  in  Court,  whether  by  the  Pledge  itself,  or  by
another  mode,  is  doubtful.  But  that  may  be  left  to
the  discretion  of  the  Court,  as  the  matter  can  be  suffi-
ciently expedited  which-ever  mode  is  resorted  to.  It
is,  however,  sometimes  requisite  that  he  should  be

ad  terminum  in  the  sentence  immediately  preceding — by  the
words  of  the  Writ  in  the  next  chapter,  'a  term  which  is  past  '-
and,  lastly,  by  a  passage  in  the  Eighth  Chapter  of  this  Book,
where  our  Author  expressly  lays  it  down,  that,  before  the  time
fixed  for  payment,  the  Creditor  cannot  claim  the  Debt.  Yet  is
the  reading  existente  termino  preserved  in  Mr.  Houard's  Edition
of  G-lanville,  an  Edition  frequently,  but  not  always,  more  correct
than  any  of  those  printed  in  this  Country.

1  Sir  Edward  Coke,  having  been  led  by  his  subject  to  treat  of
conditions,  refers  to  the  present  Chapter  of  our  Author.  From
suct>  plain  and  simple  materials  did  the  complicated  doctrine  of
conditions  draw  its  primary  principles  !  !  (Co.  Litt.  201.  b.)


207

present  in  Court,  before  the  thing  in  question  be  ad-
judged absolutely  to  the  Creditor ;  since,  were  he
present,  he  might  alledge  some  reason,  why  the  thing
should  not  irrevocably  belong  to  the  Creditor.  But
when  the  Debtor  appear  in  Court,  he  will  either  con
fess,  that  he  pledged  the  thing  in  question  for  the
Debt,  or  he  will  deny  it.  If  he  confess  it,  as  he  has  in
so  doing  confessed  the  Debt,  he  shall  be  commanded
at  a  reasonable  period  to  redeem  his  pledge ;  and,  un-
less he  should  comply,  liberty  shall  be  given  to  the
Creditor,  from  that  time,  to  treat  the  pledge  as  his
own  property,  and  do  whatever  he  chuses  writh  it.
Should  the  Debtor,  however,  deny  it,  he  will  then
either  acknowledge  that  the  thing  is  his  property,  but
that  for  some  cause  it  happened  to  be  out  of  his  pos-
session, and  to  have  got  into  the  hands  of  the  other,  as
a  Loan,  or  as  being  intrusted  to  him  for  Custody  or
from  some  other  cause  of  this  nature  ;  or  he  will  con-
fess in  Court,  that  the  thing  is  not  his  property,  which
if  he  should  do,  liberty  shall  immediately  be  conceded
to  the  Creditor,  to  dispose  of  the  thing  in  question,  as
his  own.  But,  if  he  alledge  that  the  thing  is  his  prop-
erty, but  denies  as  well  the  pledge  as  the  Debt ;  then,
the  Creditor  shall  be  obliged  to  prove  against  him,  that
he  intrusted  the  other  to  the  extent  of  the  present  de-
mand, and  that  the  Debtor  in  return  pledged  to  him
the  specific  object  in  dispute.  The  nature  of  this  proof
may  be  collected  from  what  we  formerly  laid  down,  in
treating  of  Pledges  who  deny  their  suretyship.  But,
previous  to  the  period  fixed  for  the  payment,  the


208

Debt  cannot  be  demanded  ;  although,  if  a  thing  be
pledged  indefinitely,  and  without  any  period  being
fixed,  the  Creditor  may,  at  any  time  he  clauses,  demand
the  Debt.  The  Debt  being  discharged  by  the  person
owing  it,  the  Creditor  is  bound  to  restore  to  him  the
thing  pledged,  without  its  having  suffered  any  deterio-
ration ;  nor,  if  the  thing  should  by  any  accident  be  lost
or  injured  whilst  in  his  Custody,  is  the  Creditor  from
that  circumstance  liberated  from  the  Debtor's  claim ;
because  he  is  decidedly  bound,  either  to  restore  the
thing  pledged  or  to  make  satisfaction  for  it,  or  to  lose
his  Debt.  "When  a  Compact  is  entered  into  between
a  Debtor  and  Creditor,  concerning  the  pledging  of  a
particular  thing,  if  the  Debtor,  after  having  received
the  Loan,  should  not  deliver  the  pledge,1  it  may  be
asked,  what  step  should  the  Creditor  have  recourse  to
in  such  a  case,  especially  as  the  same  thing  may  be
pledged  to  many  other  Creditors,  both  previously  and
subsequently?  Upon  this  subject,  it  should  be  re-
marked, that  the  King's  Court  is  not  in  the  habit  of
giving  protection  to  or  warranting  private  Agreements
of  this  description,  concerning  the  giving  or  accepting
things  in  pledge,  or  others  of  this  kind,  made  out  of

1  "  In  Glanville's  time,"  says  Sir  Wm.  Blackstone,  "  when  the
"universal  method  of  conveyance  was  by  livery  of  seisin,  or
"  corporeal  tradition  of  the  Lands,  no  gage  or  plQdge  of  Lands
"  was  good,  unless  possession  was  also  delivered  to  the  Creditor  "
— and,  having  referred  to  this  part  of  our  Author,  he  observes,
"  And  the  frauds  which  have  arisen,  since  the  exchange  of  these
"  public  and  notorious  conveyances  for  more  private  and  secret
"  bargains,  have  well  evinced  the  wisdom  of  our  ancient  Law."
(2  Bl.  Com.  159.)


209

Court,  or  even  in  any  other  Court  than  that  of  the
King.  If,  therefore,  such  Compacts  are  not  observed,
the  King's  Court  does  not  interfere :  and  hence  it  is
not  bound  to  answer  concerning  the  right  of  differ-
ent Creditors,  as  prior  or  subsequent,  or  respect-
ing their  privileges.  But,  when  an  immoveable  thing  is
put  into  pledge,  and  Seisin  of  it  has  been  delivered  to
the  Creditor  for  a  definite  term,  it  has  either  been
agreed  between  the  Creditor  and  Debtor,  that  the  pro-
ceeds and  rents  shall  in  the  mean  time  reduce  the  Debt,
or  that  they  shall  in  no  measure  be  so  applied.  The
former  Agreement  is  just  and  binding  :  the  other,  un-
just and  dishonest,  and  is  that  called  a  Mortgage,  but
this  is  not  prohibited  by  the  King's  Court,  although  it
considers  such  a  pledge  as  a  species  of  Usury.1  Hence,
if  any  one  die  having  such  pledge,  and  this  be  proved
after  his  death,  his  property  shall  be  disposed  of  no
otherwise  than  as  the  Effects  of  a  Usurer.

1  This  may  be  accounted  for  by  recollecting  that  Usury  itself,
though  viewed  in  a  criminal  light,  was  not  expressly  prohibited.
(Ante  L.  7.  c.  1G.)  Nor  was  it  punished,  if  the  party  amended  :
but,  if  he  died  in  the  crime,  the  act  had  then  reached  the  point
of  criminality — the  offence  was  complete,  and  the  punishment
followed.  But,  until  that  moment  arrived,  Usury,  in  strictness,
was  an  act  rather  approaching  to  a  crime,  than  actually  amount-
ing to  it.  The  reasoning  was  founded  upon  principles  no  less
artificial  than  false — the  death  of  the  party  being  purely  acciden-
tal, and  the  crime  itself  being  complete,  without  any  reference
to  such  accident,  the  very  instant  the  party  received  the  usuri-
ous remuneration.  The  doctrine  of  the  Regiam  Majestatem,  in
unison  with  this  reasoning,  and  contrary  to  the  text  of  Glanville,
expressly  forbids  a  Mortgage,  because  it  was  a  species  of  Usury,
(c.  5.  L.  3.)

The  Reader  will  meet  with  some  curious  disquisitions  in  the
Dial,  de  Scacc.  (L.  2.  s.  10.)  where  he  will  find  the  doctrine  of  the
text  illustrated  in  the  true  spirit  of  the  times.


210

\

In  other  respects,  the  same  Rules  should  be  observed,
as  in  pledges  of  moveables,  concerning  which  we  have
already  spoken.  But,  it  must  be  remarked,  that  if,
after  any  one  has  paid  his  Debt,  or  has  in  a  proper
manner  tendered  it,  the  Creditor  should  maliciously
detain  the  pledge,  the  Debtor  upon  complaining  to  the
Court  shall  have  the  following  Writ


CHAP.  IX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Command
"  that  justly  and  without  delay,  he  render  to  R.  the
"  whole  Lands,  or  such  Lands,  in  such  a  Yill,  which
"  he  has  pledged  to  him  for  a  Hundred  Marks  for  a
"  term  which  is  past,  as  he  says,  and  has  received  his
"  Money,  or  which  he  has  redeemed,  as  he  says ;  and,.
"  unless  he  does  so  Summon  him  by  good  &c."


CHAP.  X.

UPON  the  Creditor's  appearing  in  Court,  being  sum-
moned for  this  purpose,  he  will  either  acknowledge
the  Land  in  question,  as  his  pledge,  or  he  will  say,  he
holds  such  Land,  as  his  Fee.  In  the  former  case,  he
ought  either  to  return  the  pledge,  or  shew  to  the
Court  some  reasonable  cause,  why  he  should  not  be
compelled  to  do  so.  In  the  latter  case,  it  shall,  upon
the  prayer  either  of  the  Creditor  or  Debtor,  be  put
upon  a  Recognition  of  the  County,  whether  the  Creel-


211

itor  holds  the  Land  in  question,  as  his  Fee,  or  his
Pledge ;  or  whether  his  Father,  or  any  other  of  his
Ancestors,  was  seised  of  it,  as  in  Fee  or  in  Pledge,  on
the  day  of  his  death  ;  and,  so  it  may  be  objected  to
him  who  seeks  the  Land  upon  the  seisin  of  his  Father.

Thus  the  Recognition  upon  this  subject  may  be  in-
finitely varied,  to  correspond  with  the  Claim  and  the
Defence.  But,  if  the  Recognition  be  not  prayed  by
either  party,  the  Plea  may  proceed  in  Court  upon  the
Right.


CHAP.  XL

IF  the  Creditor  lose  his  Seisin,  either  by  means  of
the  Debtor,  or  any  other  person,  he  cannot  recover  it
through  the  assistance  of  the  Court;  not  even  by  a
Recognition  of  Novel  Disseisin.

For  if  he  was  unjustly  and  without  a  judgment  dis-
seised of  his  pledge,  by  any  other  person  than  the
Debtor  himself,  the  Debtor  may  have  an  Assise  of
Novel  Disseisin.  If,  however,  the  Creditor  was  dis-
seised by  the  Debtor  himself,  the  Court  will  not  assist
him  against  the  Debtor,  in  recovering  his  pledge,  or  in
giving  him  a  Re-entry,  unless  through  the  Debtor
himself;  for  the  Creditor  should  resort  to  an  original
Plea  of  Debt,  in  order  that  the  Debtor  may  be  com-
pelled to  render  him  satisfaction  for  his  Debt.  In
such  case,  the  Debtor  shall  be  summoned  by  the  fore-
going AYrit  of  first  summons.


212


CHAP.  XII.

1  UPON  the  Debtor's  appearing  on  the  day  appointed
in  Court,  if  the  Creditor  has  neither  Pledge,  nor  Sure-
ties, nor  any  other  proof,  unless  the  mere  faith  of  the
other,  this  will  not  be  received  as  any  proof  in  the
King's  Court.  Yet,  he  may  proceed  for  the  breach  or
violation  of  faith  in  the  Court  Christian.  But,  though
the  Ecclesiastical  Judge  can  hold  cognizance  of  such
crime,  and  either  impose  penance  on  the  convicted
party,  or  enjoin  him  to  make  satisfaction,  yet,  with
respect  to  Pleas  concerning  the  Debts  of  the  Laity,  or
affecting  Tenements,  the  Court  Christian  cannot  by  a
Law  of  the  Realm  hold  or  decide  them,  under  the  pre-
tence of  the  party  having  pledged  his  promise.2  The
Creditor  ought,  therefore,  to  adduce  other  proof,  if
the  Debtor  deny  the  Debt  in  question.

For  if  he  admit  it,  then,  he  is  bound  to  discharge  it,
in  manner  similar  to  that  we  have  already  explained,
in  speaking  of  Pledges,  confessing  their  suretyship.3
Should  he,  however,  deny  it,  the  Creditor  may  prove

!Vide  LL.  Gul.  Norman,  c.  28.  (Al.  MS.)  The  Law  here
alluded  to,  the  Reader  has  already  been  put  in  possession  of.  See
p.  170.  note  1.

2  Vide Constitutions of Clarendon. (Anglo-Sax. LL. Ed.
Wilkins.324.)

3  The  Text  is  not  free  from difficulty  which  evidently  arises
from  an  omission. I have ventured to  introduce  the  words,
"should  he,  Jioivever,  deny  it,  the  Creditor." The  Context  coun-
tenances this  conjecture.


213

his  demand,  either  by  a  proper  "Witness,  or  by  the
Duel,  or  by  a  Charter.  "When,  therefore,  any  one
offer  in  Court,  as  proof  of  the  Debt,  the  Charter  of
his  Adversary,  or  his  Ancestor,  the  Defendant  will
either  admit  such  Charter,  or  deny  it.  In  the  latter
case,  he  may  deny  or  controvert  it  in  two  ways :  thus,
he  may  acknowledge  in  Court  the  seal  to  be  his  own,
but  deny  that  the  Charter  was  made  either  by  him,  or
with  his  consent,  or  that  of  his  Ancestor ;  or  he  may
absolutely  deny,  both  the  Seal  and  the  Charter.  In
the  first  case,  when  he  has  publicly  in  court  acknowl-
edged the  Seal  to  be  his  own,  he  is  bound  to  warrant
the  terms  of  the  Charter,  and,  in  all  respects,  to  ob-
serve the'  compact  expressed  in  the  Charter  as  con-
tained in  it,  without  question,  and  to  impute  it  to  his
own  indiscretion,  if  he  incur  any  loss  by  negligently
preserving  his  own  Seal.  But  in  the  latter  case,  the
Charter  may  be  proved  in  Court  by  the  Duel  by
any  proper  Witness,  especially  if  his  name  be  inserted
in  the  Charter  itself.  There  is  another  mode  by  which
the  Credit  of  a  Charter  is  accustomed  to  be  established
in  Court,  namely,  by  some  certain  and  unquestionable
signs.  As,  for  Example,  by  other  Charters,  impressed
with  the  same  Seal,  and  concerning  which  it  is  clear,
that  they  are  the  Charters  of  the  party,  who  denies
the  present  Charter,  because  he  has  openly  warranted
them  in  Court.  If  in  such  case  the  impressions  coin-
cide in  every  respect  with  one  another,  so  that  there
is  no  suspicion  of  any  difference  between  the  Seals,  it
is  usual  to  consider  the  fact  as  proved ;  and,  whether


214

by  this,  or  by  any  other  legal  mode,  the  party  should
be  overcome,  he  shall  lose  his  suit  on  the  occasion,
whether  it  be  a  Plea  of  Debt,  or  concerning  Land,  or
any  other  thing  whatever ;  and  he  shall,  in  addition,
be  amerced  to  the  King.  For,  it  is  a  general  Rule,
that  whenever  a  person  has  said  any  thing  in  Court  or
in  a  Plea  which  he  afterwards  denies,  or  of  which  ho
has  neither  suit,  nor  Warrantor,  nor  sufficient  proof,1
or  has  been  distrained  to  assert  the  contrarv,  or  to  denv

«. /  «/

it  by  sufficient  proof,  he  shall  be  amerced  to  the  King.
But,  if  the  person,  against  whom  the  Charter  is  pro-
duced to  prove  a  certain  Debt,  acknowledge  it  from
the  first,  then  he  shall  be  compelled  to  satisfy  the
Creditor,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  Charter.  When
any  thing  is  lent  on  the  joint  strength  of  many  of  the
proceeding  securities,  then,  from  the  moment  the
Debtor  makes  default,  he  is  liable  to  be  distrained  by
all  the  securities  being  put  in  force  against  him  at  the
same  time.  It  is  on  this  account,  therefore,  that  many
securities  are  taken,  that  in  case  of  the  inability  of  the
Debtor,  the  Creditor  may  more  readily  be  satisfied,
than  if  there  exist  but  one  security  only.


CHAP.  XIII.

A  DEBT  sometimes  arises  when  a  thing  is  borrowed  ; 2
as  if  I  lend  a  thing  to  you  gratuitously,  to  be  made

1  A  similar  Law  is  to  be  found  amongst  those  ascribed  to  the
Conqueror. (LL.  Gul.  Conq.  c.  28.)

2  Commodatum. (Justin.  Inst.  3. 15.  2.) A  Commodattim  dif-
fered from  a  viutuum,  because  the  same  person  continued  to  be


215

use  of  in  your  service.  The  service  being  finished,  you
are  bound  to  restore  ray  property  to  me,  without  dete-
rioration,1 if  it  be  in  existence.

But,  if  the  thing  itself  be  destroyed,  or  has  by  any
means  been  lost,  whilst  in  your  Custody,  you  are  abso-
lutely bound  to  return  me  a  reasonable  price.  But  by
what,  or  whose  proof,2  it  is  to  be  shewn — or  if  anyone
has  lent  his  property  to  be  used  in  a  certain  place,  or
for  a  certain  Term,  and  he  who  thus  received  it  has
used  it,  either  in  another  place,  or  at  another  time,  the
extent  to  which  he  ought  to  make  a  recompense,  or
upon  what  proof,  or  whose  property  it  is  to  be  ad-
judged, are  points  that  may  be  questioned.  The  party,
indeed,  shall  be  absolutely  excused  from  the  imputa-
tion of  Theft,  by  reason  that  his  possession  of  the  thing
detained  originated  through  the  owner  of  the  property.

It  may  also  be  doubted,  whether  the  Owner  can  re-
call his  property  so  lent  to  another,  within  the  time  or
place  allotted,  especially  if  he  himself  should  have
occasion  to  use  it  in  the  interval.3

the  owner,  and  because  the  same  thing  was  to  be  returned,  and
not  another  of  the  same  quantity  or  quality,  as  in  a  mutuum.
(Dig.  13.  C.  8.  and  9.)  "  They  have  different  namesin  Latin,  though
4i  not  in  English,"  says  Dr.  Wood.  (Civil  Law.  Inst. )  To  avoid
the  inconvenience  and  confusion  of  employing  the  same  term  for
each,  the  Translator  has  called  the  one  a  loan,  the  other  a  bor-
rowing. The  distinction  between  a  gratuitous  loan  for  use,  and
a  simple  loan,  occurs  in  the  Code  Napoleon,  which  is  drawn,  as,
indeed,  may  be  observed  of  no  small  portion  of  that  work,  from
the  Civil  Law.  1  Skene  refers  to  Exodus  c.  22.  v.  14.  15.

2  "  By  him  who  gave  the  Loan,  and  by  his  Witness,"  says  the
Kegiam  Majestatem. (L.  3.  c.  9.)

3  "  It  is  answered,  he  may  not  repeat  it  or  seek  it  again,  be-


216


CHAP.  XIY.1

A  DEBT  also  arises  by  reason  of a  Purchase  and

•/

Sale.  "When  any  person  sells  a  thing  to  another,  the
price  is  due  to  the  Vendor,  and  the  thing  contracted
for  to  the  Purchaser.2

But  a  purchase  and  sale  are  effectually  perfected
from  the  moment  the  price  is  settled  between  the  con-
tracting parties ;  provided  possession  of  the  thing  pur-
chased and  sold  be  delivered,3  or  that  the  price,  either
wholly,  or  in  part,  be  paid,  or,  at  least,  that  Earnest*
be  given  and  received.5

"  cause  any  loan  may  not  be  repeated  or  called  back  again,  until
"the  use  be  perfected  and  fulfilled  to  the  which  it  was  lent."
(Reg.  Maj.  L.  3.  c.  9.)  But  the  modern  French  Code  permits  it
to  be  recalled.  (S.  1889.)

1  Vide  Bracton  fo.  61.  b.  and  Fleta  L.  2.  c.  58.

2  Vide  Justin.  Inst.  3.  21.  §.  Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  22.  and  Brac-
ton  61.  b. The two chief obligations  of  the  Vendor,  as laid
down  in  the  present  and  following  chapters,  are  comprised  in  a
section  of  the  modern  French  Code — that  of  delivering,  and  that
of  warranting  the  thing  which  he  sells. (Code  Napoleon  1603.)

3  Quia sine traditione  non transferuntur rerum dominia,
(Bracton  61.  b.)

4  Arrhse. In  the  Civil  Law  the  Arrha  or  Earnest  was  given,
either  simply  as  a  symbol,  or  mark  of  the  Contract,  or,  it  was
given,  as  Vinnius informs us, as a  part  of  the  price. In  the
former  case  the  purchaser  was  not  permitted  to  avoid  the  con-
tract with  the  loss  of  his  Earnest — in  the  latter,  he  was  allowed
to  do  so. The  Vendor  might  recede  with  the  loss  of  twice  the
value  of  it. (Dig.  18.  1.  35.— 19.  1.  11.  6. Inst.  3.  24.  pr.) With
respect  to  the  effect  of  Earnest,  as  our  Law  now  stands,  vide  2.
Bl.  Comm.  447.

5  When  there  is  neither  writing,  Earnest,  nor  delivery,  the
parties,  says  Bracton,  may  retract. (61.  b.)


217

But,  in  the  two  former  cases,  neither  of  the  Con-
tracting parties  can  by  any  means  at  his  own  option
recede  from  the  Agreement,  unless  for  some  just  and
reasonable  cause  ;  as,  if  the  terms  of  the  contract  were,
that  either  of  the  parties  may  with  impunity  retract
within  a  certain  period  ;  then,  indeed,  either  party  may
within  the  period  prescribed  avail  himself  of  the  terms
of  the  Contract  and  recede,  without  being  liable  to  any
penalty  :  since  it  is,  generally  speaking,  unquestionable
that,  Conventio  leg  em  vincit.1  Besides,  if  the  Vendor
sold  the  thing  to  the  Purchaser  as  being  sound  and
without  fault,2  and  the  Purchaser  can  afterwards  satis-
factorily shew,  that  the  thing  at  the  time  of  the  con-
tract was  not  sound,  but  faulty,  then,  indeed,  the  Ven-
dor shall  be  compelled  to  take  back  his  propert}T.  But
it  is  sufficient,  if  the  thing  was  in  a  proper  state,  at  the
time  of  the  Contract,  whatever  may  afterwards  happen
to  it.  But  I  doubt,  as  to  the  period  within  which  this
should  be  proved,  or  complaint  made  concerning  it,
especially  where  there  is  no  special  Agreement.
"Where,  however,  Earnest  only  has  been  given,  if  the
Purchaser  would  recede  from  the  Contract,  he  may  do
so,  with  the  loss  of  the  Earnest.  But  if,  in  such  case,
the  Vendor  would  retract,  it  is  a  question  whether  he

1  Pactum enim  legem vincit . (LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  49.) "Contracts
"  legally  made  have  the  force  of  Law  between  those  who  have
"  made  them." (Code  Napoleon  s.  1134.)

2  If,  says  a  Law  of  Ina,  a  person  has  purchased  any  thing,  and,
within  thirty  days,  discover  it  to  be  defective,  he  may  restore  the
tiling  to  the  hands  of  the  Vendor,  unless  the  latter  will  swear,
that  he  knew  of  no  defect  in  it  at  the  time  he  sold  it. (LL.  Inae.
c.  56.)


218

can  do  so  without  incurring  a  penalty.1  It  does  not
seem  that  he  can  ;  because  he  would  then  be  in  a  bet-
ter situation  than  the  Purchaser.  But,  if  it  cannot  be
done  with  impunity,  what  punishment  shall  such  con-
duct incur  ? 2  The  risk  of  the  thing  sold  and  purchased
generally  belongs  to  the  person  who  has  possession  of
it,3  unless  it  has  been  differently  arranged.


CHAP.  XV.

THE  Vendor  and  his  Heirs  are  bound  to  warrant  the
thing  sold  to  the  purchaser  and  his  Heirs,  if  the  thing
be  an  immoveable  ;  and  hence,  the  Purchaser4  and  his
Heirs  may  be  sued  in  the  manner  we  have  formerly
explained,  in  treating  of  Warranties.

If  any  person  sue  the  Purchaser  with  respect  to  a
moveable,  on  the  ground  that  the  thing  in  question
was  first  sold  or  given  to  him,  or  from  any  other  just
cause  was  acquired,  unconnected  with  the  imputation
of  Felony,  the  same  rule  may  be  laid  down  as  that  we
have  mentioned  concerning  immoveables.  But  if,  under

1  In  Bracton's  time  the  Vendor  forfeited  double  the  Earnest — a
rule  according  with  that  of  the  Roman  code. (Bracton  62.  a. )

2  "  Double  the  Earnest  "  was  to  be  forfeited  by  him  according
to  the  Reg.  Maj. (L.  3.  c.  10.)

3  Quia  re  vera  qui  rem  emptori  nondum  tradidit  adliuc  ipse  do-
minus  erit. Hence — Si  post  emptionem  ante  tradition  em  f undo
vendito  aliquid  per  alluvionem  vel  alio  modo  accrevit  quod  commo-
dum  ad  venditorempertinebit. (Bracton  62.  a.)

4  Emptor,  a  palpably  false  reading,  as  the  context  proves  :  it
should  be  venditor,  the  vendor. See  Bracton  62.  a.


219

an  imputation  of  Theft,1  the  Purchaser  is  sued  for
the  thing,  he  is  bound  in  the  clearest  manner  to  re-
move from  himself  every  such  an  imputation,  or  to  call
a  Warrantor.2  If,  therefore,  he  adopt  the  latter  course,
he  will  name  either  a  certain  Warrantor,  or  an  uncer-
tain one.  If  he  call  a  certain  Warrantor  to  Court,
alleging  that  he  desires  to  have  him  to  Warrant  at  a
reasonable  period,  then  a  day  is  to  be  given  him  in
Court  for  that  purpose.

And,  if  the  person  called  to  Warrant  appear  on  that
day,  and  warrant  in  Court,  both  the  sale  and  the  thing
sold  to  the  Purchaser,  then,  the  latter  shall  be  entirely
discharged,  and  that  so  effectually,  that  he  shall  not
afterwards  sustain  any  loss.  But,  if  he  should  fail  in
entering  into  the  Warranty,  then,  the  Plea  shall  pro-
ceed between  the  Purchaser  and  his  Warrantor ;  and
thus  may  it  come  to  the  Duel.  But,  it  may  be  asked,
can  the  Warrantor  call  another  Warrantor  into  Court?
If  that  be  permitted,  at  what  Warrantor  must  it  stop  ? 3
It  should  be  added,  that  when  any  one  has  so  named

1  Vide  Bracton  150.  b.  et  seq.

2  Vide  Mirror  c.  3.  s.  13. Bracton  151.  b. Fleta  55.  s.  8. We
find  that  Warrantors  were  sometimes  collusively  vouched.

Thus,  Champions  of  acknowledged  prowess  were  named,  who,
being  hired  for  the  purpose,  readily  entered  into  the  Warranty.
When  such  an  instance  of  collusion  took  place,  the  Champion
•was,  according  to  Bracton  and  Fleta,  to  lose  a  foot  and  a  hand—
but,  in  Britton's  time,  the  Champion  and  the  person  citing  him
were  both  liable  to  death.

3  The  Bodleian  and  Harleian  MSS.  say  the  fourth,  omitting  the
mark  of  interrogation  at  the  end,  and  leaving  the  sentence  an
absolute  assertion  ;  which  most  probably  is  the  true  reading,  as
it  corresponds  with  the  Regiam  Majestatem. (L.  3.  c.  13.)


220

a  Warrantor  of  a  thing  which  is  sued  for  as  stolen,  the
Warrantor  is  usually  attached  by  virtue  of  the  follow-
ing Writ,  directed  to  the  Sheriff:  —

O


CHAP. XVI.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command
"  you,  that  justly  and  without  delay,  you  cause  N.  to
"  be  attached,  by  safe  and  secure  Pledges,  that  he  be
"  before  me,  or  mv  Justices,  on  a  certain  day,  to  war-

t/  •• /

"rant  R.  such  a  thing  which  H.  claims  against  R,  as-
"  stolen,  and  of  which  the  aforesaid  R.  has  drawn  him
"  to  warrant  in  my  Court ;  or  to  shew  wherefore,  he
"  ought  not  to  warrant  to  him. And  have  there  the

~

"  Summoners  and  this  Writ,  &c."


CHAP.  XVII.

BUT,  if  the  Purchaser  should  call  an  uncertain  War-
rantor, in  such  case,  if  he  have  sufficient  proof  of  its
being  a  lawful  purchase,  that  shall  discharge  him  from
the  Felony.1  Yet  it  shall  not  protect  him  from  the

1  No  Man,  says  a  Law  of  the  Confessor,  shall  purchase  any
tiling  without  the  City  gate,  but  shall  have  the  testimony  of  the
Prefect  of  the  City,  or  of  some  other  respectable  person,  who  can
be  confided  in.  (LL.  Ed.  Conf.  1.)  A  Law  of  his  predecessor
^Ethelstan  is  nearly  in  the  same  words,  except  that  it  tacitly
permits  purchases  without  the  City  Gate,  if  they  did  not  exceed
twenty  denarios.  (LL.  ^Ethelst.  12.)  Some  of  the  Laws  of


221

loss,  I  mean,  of  the  thing  in  question. But,  if  upon
this  point  he  has  not  a  sufficient  suit,  he  is  in  danger.

Debts  arising  either  from  a  purchase  or  a  borrowing
are  usually  substantiated  by  the  general  mode  of  proof
in  Court ;  in  other  words,  either  by  a  Writing,  or  by
Duel.


CHAP.  XVIII.

A  DEBT  sometimes  arises  from  a  Letting  out  and  a
Hiring : 1  as  when  any  one  lets  out  a  thing  to  another
for  a  certain  period,  in  consideration  of  receiving  a  cer-
tain reward.  In  such  case,  the  former  is  bound  to
concede  the  use  of  the  thing,  and  the  latter  to  pay  the
price.  But,  it  should  be  observed,  upon  the  expiration
of  the  term  stipulated,  the  former  may  lawfully  and  of
his  own  authority  resume  possession  of  his  property.2
But,  if  the  person  engaging  to  hire  the  thing  should
not  pay  the  price  at  the  appointed  time,  it  may  be
asked,  whether  the  other  party  can  in  such  case  forc-
ibly resume  possession  by  his  own  authority  ?

But  we  briefly  pass  over  the  foregoing  Contracts,
arising  as  they  do  from  the  consent  of  private  in divid-

Edgar  are  admirably  adapted  to  effect  the  same  object,  (LL.  Sup.
Eadg.)  which  appears  to  be  constantly  kept  in  view  by  the  dif-
ferent Legislators,  who  preceded  Henry  the  Second.

1  Ex  locato  and  ex  conduct o.  "  Locatio  condnctio."  says  Dr.
Wood,  "  is  one  word."  Locator  is  he  that  lets  out  to  hire,  con-
ductor he  that  hires.  (Justin.  Inst.  3.  25.  pr.)

3  Si  etiam  vacuum  invenerit  et  nan  obiigatam. (Bracton  62.  b.)


222

uals ;  because,  as  it  has  already  been  observed,  the
King's  Court  does  not  usually  take  cognizance  of
them ;  nor,  indeed,  with  such  Contracts,  as  may  be
considered  in  the  light  of  private  Agreements,  does-
the  King's  Court  intermeddle.


loofc  II.


OF  ATTORNIES,  WHO  ARE  PUT  IN  THE  PLACE  OF
THEIR  PRINCIPALS  IN  COURT,  TO  GAIN  OR  LOSE
FOR  THEM.


CHAP.  I.

THE  Suits  discussed  in  the  former  part  of  this  Treat-
ise concern  the  Eight  and  Propriety  of  the  thing,
which  a  person  may  prosecute,  as  indeed,  some  other
Civil  Pleas,  as  well  by  himself,  as  by  an  Attorney1
put  in  his  place  to  gain  or  lose.  But  the  person,  who
thus  puts  another  in  his  place,  ought  to  be  present3  in
Court.

It  is  usually  done  in  the  presence  of  the  King's  Jus-

1  Responsalis. From  some  expressions  made  use  of  by  Bracton
and  Fleta,  it  has  been  conjectured,  that an  Attorney,  an  Es-
soiner,  and  a  Responsalis,  differed  in  some  respects. (Bracton
212.  b.  and  Fleta,  L.  6.  c.  11.  s.  6.  7.) Of  this  opinion  Lord  Coke
seems  to  be. (Co.  Litt.  128.  a.) Yet,  we  must  be  cautious,  in
applying  these  distinctions  to  Glanville  ;  for  they  may,  after  all,
be  the  result  of  a  much  more  recent  period. Nor  is  the  reading
of  Bracton,  in  the  passage  alluded  to,  perfectly  free  from  sus-
picion.

2  Sir  Edward  Coke  ascribes  this  rule  to  "  the  policy  of  the
"  Common  Law,  that  suits  might  not  increase  and  multiply."
(2  Inst.  249.) Whilst  the  Mirror  lays  it  down  generally,  that
it  is  an  abuse  to  answer  or  appear  by  Attorney. (Mirror,  c.  5.
s.l.)

223


224

tices  of  the  Common  Pleas.  But  on  no  account,  other-
wise than  as  having  been  appointed  by  his  Principal,
when  present  in  Court,  ought  any  one  to  be  received
as  an  Attorney.1  It  is  not  requisite,  that  the  adverse
party  should  on  that  account  be  present  in  Court;2
nor,  indeed,  the  person  who  is  so  put  in  the  place  of
the  other,  if  he  be  known  to  the  Court.  One  person
alone  may  be  put  in  the  place  of  another ;  or  two  or
more,  either  collectively  or  separately  ;  so  that,  if  one
of  them  is  unable  to  attend,  the  other  or  others  may
follow  up  the  Plea.  Through  the  medium  of  such  an
Attorney,  a  Plea  may  be  commenced  in  Court,  and
determined,  whether  by  Judgment,  or  final  Concord  ;
and  that,  as  fully  and  effectually,  as  by  the  Principal
himself.

But,  it  should  be  understood  that,  it  will  not  suffice

1  Mr.  Madox,  in  treating  of  the  Exchequer,  informs  us,  that
**  in  general, accomptants  were  obliged  to  come  in  person  to
"  render  their  accounts. If  they  made  an  Attorney  to  account
"  for  them,  it  was  usual  to  have  the  King's  leave  for  it. Some-
"  times, the  accomptant nominated his  Attorney  before the
"  King  :  and  thereupon  the  King  by  his  Writ  commanded  the
"  Treasurer  and  Barons  to  admit  such  person,  as  Attorney,  ac-
"  cordingly. But  sometimes,  especially  towards  the  latter  part
"  of  the  second  period,  the  Accomptant's  Attorney  was  admitted
"  by  warrant  or  leave  of  the  Treasurer,  Chancellor  of  the  Ex-
"  chequer,  or  Barons,  or  one  of  them." (Madox's  Excheq.  c.  23.
s.  5.) Supposing  there  was  a  certain  uniformity  of  proceeding
observed  in  the  superior  Courts, this  extract may  furnish  us
with  an  idea  of  the  gradual  deviations from  the  strict  rule  of
our  text.

2  The  Norman  Code  lays  down  a  contrary  doctrine,  asserting
that  it  was  not  lawful  to  constitute  any  Attorney  in  the  absence
of  the  party,  unless  in  the  presence  of  the  Prince,  whose  testi-
mony alone  sufficed  to  make  a  Record. (Grand.  Cust.  c.  65. )


for  an}T  one  to  constitute  another  his  Bailiff  l  or  Stew-
ard2 for  the  managing  his  Lands  and  affairs,  even
if  it  be  made  to  appear  to  the  Court,  in  order  that  he
should  be  received  in  Court  in  any  Suit  in  the  place  of
his  Principal.3  But,  it  is  necessary  that,  a  special
authority  should  be  delegated  for  this  purpose ;  and
that  the  Attorney  should,  in  the  manner  before  de-
scribed, be  put  in  his  place,  expressly  in  that  particular
Action,  to  lose  or  gain  for  him.

It  should  also  be  observed,  that  any  one  may  in  the
King's  Court  put  another  in  his  place,  to  gain  or  lose

1  Ballivum. It  is  the  opinion  of  Sir  Henry  Spelman,  that  we
received  the  term  from  the  Normans. There  is,  indeed,  frequent
mention  of  such  an  officer  in  the  Grand  Cnstumary. (c.  4.  &c.)
But  Lord  Coke  thinks,  we  received  it  from  the  Saxons. It  oc-
curs in  a  law  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  if  it  be  not  an  interpola-
tion of  a  later  age. (Ed.  Conf.  LL.  c.  35.) It  has  been  received
in  a  variety  of  significations — As  meaning  a  Judge,  an  Officer  of
the  Crown,  a  Bailiff  of  a  hundred,  of  a  Liberty,  and  of  a  Bor-
ough, of  a  Manor  and  of  an Estate. (Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.)
Cowell, who  deduces  the  word  from the French,  thinks our
Sheriffs were formerly called  Bailiffs, as  their  Counties  are
termed  Bailiwicks. (Cowell  ad  voc.) See  Fleta  L.  2.

2  Seneschallum — "Is,  says  Cowell.  a French word, but  bor-
*'  rowed  from  Germany,  being,  as  Tilius  saith,  compounded  of
"  Schal,  i.  e.  servus  aut  offlcialis,  and  gesnid,  i.  e.  familia. We
"  english  it  Steward." (Co well's  Interp.  ad  voc.  Seneshall. See
also  Madox's  Excheq.  c.  2.  s.  6. "  It  is  derived,"  says  Lord  Coke,
"  of  Sein  a  house  or  place  and  schalc  an  officer  or  governor,  &c."
(Vide  Co.  Litt.  61.  a.  for  other  derivations.) See  Fleta  L.  2.

3  Yet,  from  the  form  of  the  writ  which  our  Author  gives  us,
L,.  13.  c.  13.  it  seems  perfectly  clear,  that  a  Bailiff  was  allowed
to  hear  a  Recognition  for  his  principal. The  reason  of  the  dis-
tinction, perhaps,  might  be  found  in  the  different  nature  of  the
functions— to  perform  the  duty  of  an  Attorney  being  an  active,
that  of  merely  hearing  a  Recognition,  of  a  passive  nature— the
one,  requiring  skill — the  other,  not.

'5


226

for  him,  even  in  a  suit  that  he  has  in  another  Court ;
and  it  shall  be  commanded,  that  the  Attorney  shall  be
received  in  such  Court  in  the  place  of  his  Principal,
by  the  following  Writ


CHAP.  II.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  or  to  any  other  presiding
uin  his  Court,  Health.  Know  that  N~.  hath  before
"  me,  or  my  Justices,  put  R.  in  his  place  to  gain  or
"  lose  for  him,  in  the  Plea  which  is  between  him  and
"  R.1  concerning  one  plough-Land  or  concerning  any
"  other  thing,  (naming  it)  and,  therefore,  I  command
"  you,  that  you  receive  the  aforesaid  R.  in  the  place  of
"  the  said  N.,  in  such  Plea,  to  gain  or  lose.  "Witness,
"&c."


CHAP.  III.

WHEN  any  one,  therefore,  according  to  the  form
before  mentioned,  is  put  in  the  place  of  another  in  any
suit,  it  may  be  asked,  whether  Essoins  shall  hold  with
reference  to  the  person  of  the  Attorney  only,  or  the-
person  of  his  Principal  only,  or  with  regard  to  both  of
them  ?  And,  indeed,  the  Essoins  of  the  Attorney  him-
self only  shall  in  such  case  be  allowed,  until  his  ap-
pointment is  revoked.2  "When  any  one,  so  put  in  the

1  Here  is  another  instance  of  confusion,  arising  from  the  inac-
curate manner  in  which  these  letters  are  inserted  I

2  "The  Essoin  of  the  Procurator  only  shall  have  place,  until


227

place  of  another  in  Court,  answer  to  the  suit,  and  does
that  which  appertains  to  him,  it  may  be  asked,  wheth-
er his  Principal  can  at  his  pleasure  remove  him,  and
substitute  another  Attorney,  especially  if  any  great
degree  of  Enmity  should  subsequently  arise  between
them  ?

That  the  Principal  himself,  indeed,  may  follow  up
the  Suit,  the  Attorney  being  removed,  is  unquestion-
able ;  because  every  Man  is  understood  to  put  another
in  his  place,  under  the  tacit  condition,  that  he  himself
cannot  be  present.  The  prevailing  practice  permits  a
Principal  to  remove  such  Attorney,  in  any  part  of  the
Suit,  and  also  to  replace  him  by  substituting  another
in  Court,  in  the  manner  before  mentioned.  A  Father
may  thus  substitute  his  Son,  and  vice  versa :  one  stran-
ger may  also  substitute  another ;  and  a  Wife  her  hus-
band. When  a  Husband,  put  in  the  place  of  his  Wife
in  a  suit  concerning  her  marriage-hood  or  Dower,
should  lose  any  part  of  the  property  of  his  Wife,  or
should,  by  a  Judgment  or  a  Concord,  remit  any  right
of  the  Wife,  whether,  it  may  be  asked,  can  the  Wife
herself  again  agitate  the  question,  or  whether  is  she
absolutely  bound,  after  the  death  of  her  Husband,  to
abide  by  his  Act  ?  It  does  not  seem  that  the  woman
in  such  a  case  ought,  by  the  Act  of  her  Husband,  to
lose  any  part  of  her  right ;  because,  whilst  in  the  power
of  her  Husband,  she  can  in  no  measure  oppose  or  con-

"  the  procuratory  be  revoked."  (Eeg.  Maj.  L.  3.  c.  16.)  Mr.
Reeves  appears  to  have  viewed  the  passage  of  the  Text  in  a  dif-
ferent light.  (Vide  Hist.  Eng.  Law.  1.  170.)


228

trovert  his  Will,  and,  therefore,  she  could  not,  contrary
to  his  pleasure,  look  into  her  rights.1  But,  on  the
other  hand,  it  may  be  contended,  that  those  Acts  which
are  transacted  in  the  King's  Court,  ought  to  be  held
settled  and  unalterable.


CHAP.  IY.

THE  Principal  is  to  be  distrained  to  abide  by  what
has  been  done  by  his  Attorney,  whether  it  be  so  done
by  Judgment  or  by  Concord.  But  what  must  be  done,

«/  tx

if  the  Principal  is  incompetent  to  pay,  and  has  nothing
whereby  he  can  be  distrained,  although  the  Attorney
has?  The  Attorney,  indeed,  must  not  be  distrained.


CHAP.  V.

THE  principle  that  we  have  just  laid  down,  that  no  one,
unless  present  in  Court,  can  effectually  put  another  in
his  place,  seems  contrary  to  what  is  contained  in  the
first  Book,  upon  the  doctrine  of  Essoins.2  For,  it  is
there  stated,  that  if  any  one  should,  after  his  third

/  »/

Essoin,  send  an  Attorney,  whoever  he  happen  to  be,
with  Letters,  he  should  be  received  in  Court.  But  this
happens  by  force  of  the  Judgment.  A  different  Rule

1  Vide  Mirror,  c.  5.  s.  5. — Ante  97.  Not.  3.  and  M.  Houard's
Traites  sur  les  Coutuines  Anglo-Norm.  Tom.  1.  451.  where  lie
adopts  the  same  reading,  as  I  contend  for.  and  observes  that  un-
der the  ancient  Norman  Custumary  the  wife  could  not  reclaim
her  Dower.  2  L.  1.  c.  13.


229

prevails  where,  urged  by  an  order  of  the  Court,  or  by
a  Distress,  a  person  prays  to  put  another  in  his  place
in  a  Suit,  to  gain  or  lose  for  him.  It  should  also  be
observed,  that  Abbots  and  Priors  of  Canons  Regular
are  received  in  Court,  upon  their  own  authority,  with-
out even  the  Letters  of  their  Convents.

Other  Priors,  whether  of  Canons  or  Monks,  if  Cel-
larii l  even  though  Aliens,  are  by  no  means  to  be  ad-
mitted in  Court,  without  the  Letters  of  their  Abbot  or
Grand  Prior.2  The  Master  of  the  Knight-Templars
and  the  Chief  Prior  of  the  Hospital  of  Jerusalem3  are
also  received  upon  their  own  authority ;  but  none  of
their  Orders  of  a  Rank  inferior  to  them  are  in  the
habit  of  being  received.  When  one  or  more  have  been
substituted  in  Court  to  conduct  a  Suit  for  another,  in
the  manner  before  mentioned,  whether  the  one  can

1  I  have  retained  the  original  word,  not  merely  because  I
know  of  no  word  answering  to  the  complex  idea  of  Skene,  but
that  it  is  very  questionable,  whether  Skene  be  correct.  He  thus
interprets  the  word — "  If  they  dwell  in  cells,  separate  from
"  abbies  or  monasteries."  (Reg.  Maj.  L.  3.  c.  18.)  From  other
authorities,  I  should  rather  have  inferred,  that  the  cellarii  were
a  species  of  monks,  invested  with  the  power  of  providing  for
their  Brethren,  and  regulating  the  internal  part  of  their  monas-
teries. But  this  again  is  with  difficulty  to  be  reconciled  to  the
terms,  in  which  one  of  them  is  spoken  of — secundus  pater  in
monasterio,  unless  we  concur  with  Spelman,  who  says,  when
speaking  of  the  word,  crevisse  videtur  in  amplitudinem.  (Vide
Spelman.  Gloss,  ad  voc.)

2 The  Regiam  Majestatem,  on  the  contrary,  asserts,  that  they
shall  be  received,  without  the  Letter  of  their  Abbot  or  Grand
Prior.  (L.  3.  c.  18.)

3  Of  these  Orders  the  Reader  will  find  some  mention  in  2  Inst.
431.


230

delegate  his  authority  to  another,  or  whether  one  of

*/

the  two  can  nominate  the  other,  or  a  third,  in  his
place,  or  in  that  of  his  Principal,  to  gain  or  lose
for  him  in  that  Suit,  are  points  at  least  ques-
tionable1

1  "  It  is  answered,"  says  the  Reg.  Maj.  "  he  may  not  do  so,  be-
"  cause  all  things  are  forbidden  to  a  procurator,  which  are  not
"  expressly  granted  and  committed  to  him."  (L.  3.  c.  19.)


oolt


OF  THE  PLEA  OF  RIGHT  ;  AND  OF  DIFFERENT  WRITS
OF  RIGHT,  DIRECTED  TO  THE  SHERIFFS  OR  LORDS
OF  THE  FEE,  UPON  VARIOUS  OCCASIONS.


CHAP.  I.

THE  preceding  Pleas  of  Right  are,  directly  and  in
the  first  instance,  commenced  in  the  King's  Court,
where,  as  we  have  observed,  they  are  discussed  and
terminated.  But  some  Pleas  of  Right,  although  not  in
the  first  place  commenced  in  the  King's  Court,  are
sometimes  removed  there,  when  the  Courts  of  different
Lords  are  proved  to  have  failed  in  doing  Justice  ;  for
then  such  Pleas  may,  through  the  medium  of  the
County  Court,  be  transferred  from  thence  to  the  Chief
Court  of  the  King,  for  the  various  causes  shewn  in  a
former  part  of  this  Treatise.1


CHAP.  II.

WHEN,  therefore,  a  person  claims  any  Freehold  Ten-
ement, or  a  Service,  as  held  of  another  by  free  service,
he  cannot  draw  the  person  holding  it  into  a  Suit,  with-
out the  King's  Writ,  or  that  of  his  Justices.  He  shall,

i  Vide  L.  6.  c.  8.
231


232

therefore,  have  a  "Writ  of  Right,  directed  to  the  Lord
of  whom  he  claims  to  hold.  If  the  Plea  concern  Land,
such  Writ  will  be  as  f  jLows


CHAP.  III.

"  THE  King  to  the  Earl  of  TF",,  Health.1  I  command
"  you,  that  without  delay,  you  hold  full  Right  to  N.  of
"  ten  ploughlands  in  Middleton,  which  he  claims  to
"  hold  of  you  by  the  free  service  of  one  Knight's  fee
"  for  every  service  ;  or  by  the  free  service  of  one  Hun-
"  dred  Shillings  by  the  Year  for  every  service ;  or  by
"  the  free  service  of  which  twelve  ploughlands  make  a
"  Knight's  Fee  for  every  service  ;  or  which  he  claims
"  to  belong  to  his  free  Tenement  that  he  holds  of  you
"  in  the  same  Vill,  or  in  Mortune  by  the  free  service,
"  &c.  or  by  the  service,  &c. ;  or  which  he  claims  to
"  hold  of  you  as  the  free  Marriage-hood  of  M.  his
"  Mother ;  or  in  free  Burgage ;  or  in  free  Alms ;  or  by
"the  free  service  of  going  with  you  in  the  King's
"  Army  with  two  horses  at  his  own  cost  for  every
"  service ;  or  by  the  free  service  of  finding  you  one
"Cross-Bowman2  in  the  King's  Army  for  forty  days
"  for  every  service ;  of  which  /^.,  the  Son  of  TF.,  had
"  deforced  him  ;  and,  unless  you  do  so,  the  Sheriff  of

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  2.

2  Arbelastarium  from  the  French  arbalestier. In  the  distribu-
tion of  Estates  by  William  the  Conqueror,  the  Arbelastarii  were
reckoned  among  those  noble  and  military  chiefs,  the  Peers  of
the Realm. This  appears  from  some  passages  in  Domesday.
(Spelnian  Gloss,  ad  voc.)


233

"  Northampton  shall,  least  I  should  hear  any  more
"  complaint  for  want  of  Justice.  Witness,  &c."  But
Writs  of  Right  of  this  kind  are  usually  infinitely  di-
versified for  different  causes,  as,  indeed,  will  appear
from  the  various  forms  we  shall  presently  give.  But,
if  the  Plea  concern  a  service,  the  Writ  will  be  as
follows


CHAP.  IV.

"  THE  King  to  N.  Health.  I  command  you,  that
"  without  delay,  you  hold  full  Right  to  N.  of  a  hundred
"  shillings  of  Rent  in  such  a  Vill,  which  he  claims  to
"  hold  of  you  by  free  service,  &c.  or  the  service,  &c. ;
"  and,  unless  you  do  so,  the  Sheriff  of  Oxford  shall  do
"  it,  least  I  should  any  more  hear  a  complaint  for  want
"  of  Justice.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  V.

"  THE  King  to  I?.,  Health.  I  command  you,  that
"  justly  and  without  delay,  you  cause  N.  and  A.  his
"  Wife  to  have  their  reasonable  part  which  belongs  to
"them  of  one  Messuage,  in  such  a  Vill,  which  they
"  claim  to  belong  to  their  free  Tenement,  that  they  hold
"  of  our  Lord  the  King,  in  such  a  Vill,  by  the  free  serv-
"  ice  of  two  shillings  by  the  year ;  or  of  one  Mark
"  Rent,  in  such  a  Vill,  which  they  claim  of  the  free
"  Marriage-hood  of  the  said  A.,  of  which  they  complain
"  that  B.,  the  sister  of  A.,  has  deforced  them,  or  that


234

'"  G.  has  deforced  them.  And,  unless  you  do  so,  the
"  Sheriff  shall  do  it,  least  any  further  complaint  should
41  be  made  for  want  of  Justice.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  VI.

THESE  Suits  are  in  the  habit  of  being  conducted  in
the  Courts  of  Lords,  or  of  those  who  fill  their  places,
according  to  the  reasonable  Customs  prevailing  in  their
Courts  ;  which  are  so  numerous  and  various,  that  it  is
scarcely  possible  to  reduce  them  into  writing.1


CHAP.  VII.

THESE  Courts  are  proved  to  have  failed  in  doing
Justice  in  this  manner.  Upon  the  Demandant's  com-
plaining to  the  Sheriff  in  the  County  Courts,  and  pro-
ducing the  King's  Writ,  the  Sheriff  shall  send  one  of  his
Officers  to  the  Lord's  Court  on  the  day  appointed  the
parties  by  the  Lord  of  such  Court,  in  order  that  the
Officer,  in  the  presence  of  four  or  a  greater  number  of
the  lawful  Knights  of  the  County,  who  by  the  Sheriff's
command  shall  attend  there,  might  hear  and  see  the
proof  of  the  Demandant,  namely,  that  such  Court  had
failed  to  do  him  Justice  in  his  Suit.  That  the  fact  is

1  The  Regiam  Majestatem  and  Bracton  avail  themselves  of  the
same  excuse,  for  declining  to  enlarge  on  the  subject,  though  the
latter  observes,  that  in  demanding  a  view — in  vouching  to  war-
ranty— in  proposing  exceptions  and  in  waging  the  Duel,  &c.
such  Courts  followed  the  King's  Court— (329.  b.)


235

•so,  the  Demandant  shall  prove,  by  bis  o>vn  oath  and
that  of  t\vo  others,  who  have  heard  and  known  the
fact,  and  shall  swear  with  him.

Under  such  solemnity,  then,  Pleas  are  generally  re-
moved from  these  Courts  into  the  Countv  Court,  and

i/

are  there  again  discussed  and  finally  terminated,  with-
out any  contradiction  or  recovery  on  the  part  of  such
Courts,  or  the  Lords  of  them,  or  their  Heirs,  so  far  as
•concerns  the  Plea  in  question.  But  if,  previously  to
;such  Court  being  proved  in  the  manner  wre  have  stated
to  have  failed  in  doing  right,  any  Plea  should  be  drawn
from  it  to  the  superior  Court,  the  Lord  of  the  inferior
•Court  may  take  advantage  of  such  circumstance  and
•on  the  day  appointed  for  the  Trial  of  the  cause  reclaim
his  Jurisdiction  ;  because  his  Court  has  not  been  proved
to  have  failed  in  doing  Justice ;  and  thus  he  shall  be
adjudged  to  recover  it,  unless  it  be  there  proved,  that
his  Court  failed  in  doing  Justice,  as  before  remarked.
It  should,  however,  be  observed,  that  if  a  Plea  has
been  so  drawn  to  the  King's  Chief  Court,  it  will  be  in
vain  for  the  Lord  to  reclaim  it  on  the  day  of  trial,  un-
less, on  the  third  day  preceding,  he  had  claimed  it,  in
the  presence  of  lawful  Men.

But  if  no  day  be  given  to  the  Demandant  on  which
to  make  his  Complaint,  and  he  has  experienced  a  de-
lay, it  will  suffice  for  him  to  falsify  the  Court,  under
the  form  before  mentioned,  in  whatever  part  of  the
Pee  lie  may  chuse,  if  the  Lord  has  no  residence l  within

1  Reseantisam. Vide  ante  p.  10.  Note  1.


236

the  Fee,  it  being  lawful  for  him,  as  Lord,  to  hold  his
Court  there,  and  put  a  day  to  the  Demandant,  in  what-
ever part  of  his  Fee  he  chuses.  But  he  cannot  legally
do  so  out  of  his  Fee.1


CHAP.  VIII.

BUT  the  "Writ  to  be  obtained  ought  to  be  directed  to
him  only,  of  whom  the  Demandant  claims  to  hold,  and
not  to  another,  nor  even  to  the  Chief  Lord.  But,  it
may  here  be  asked,  what  will  be  the  consequence,  if
the  Demandant  claim  to  hold  of  one  Lord,  and  the
Tenant  of  another?  In  such  a  case,  since  the  Lord  to
whom  the  "Writ  is  directed  cannot  take  cognizance  of
the  suit,  and  unjustly  and  without  a  Judgment  disseise
another  Lord  of  the  right  of  holding  a  Court,  of  which
he  is  understood  to  be  seised,  recourse  must  necessarily
be  had  to  the  County  Court,  where  the  Suit  shall  pro-
ceed ;  or,  in  the  Chief  Court,  so  that  both  the  Lords
ought  to  be  present  there  by  Summons,  in  order  that
the  thing  should  be  discussed  before  them,  in  the  man-
ner we  formerly  mentioned  when  treating  of  Warran-
ties.


CHAP.  IX.

To  the  Sheriffs,  indeed,  not  only  belong  the  fore-
going Pleas  of  Right,  when  the  Courts  of  the  Lords
are  proved  to  have  failed  in  doing  Justice,  but  some

i  With  this  concur  the  Mirror, (c.  2.  s.  28.) (Bracton,  330.  a.)
and  the  Grand  Custumary  of  Normandy, (c.  6.  and  61.)


237

other  Pleas.  "When,  for  Example,  any  one  complains
to  the  Court,  that  his  Lord  exacts  Customs  and  Serv-
ices that  are  not  due,  or  greater  services,  in  respect-
to  the  free-hold  the  Tenant  holds  of  him,  than  he
ought : 1  when  the  Plea  concern  a  Villein-born,  as  be-
fore observed  :  or  when,  generally  speaking,  any  other
matter  occur  of  which  the  Sheriff  has  the  King's  Writ,
or  that  of  his  Chief  Justice,  for  the  purpose  of  holding
Jurisdiction  over  any  one,  or  that  he  himself  should  do
right,  unless  another  does  so,  as  before  mentioned  ;
whenever  any  such  Pleas  occur,  it  belongs  to  the
Sheriff  to  hear  and  decide  upon  them.  Some  of  which
appear  from  the  following  Writs.


CHAP.  X.

"  THE  King  to  N.  Health.2  I  prohibit  you,  least  you
"unjustly  disturb  II.  or  permit  him  to  be  disturbed,
"  concerning  his  Free  Tenement,  that  he  holds  of  you
"  in  such  a  Vill.  jSTor  exact  from  him,  nor  suffer  to  be
"  exacted,  Customs  or  Services  which  he  ought  not  to
"  render  you,  or  which  his  Ancestors  did  not,  nor  ought
"  to  have  done,  in  the  time  of  King  Henry  my  Grand-
"  father  ;  and,  unless  you  do  so,  the  Sheriff  shall,  least
"he  should  any  more  complain. Witness  &c."


CHAP.  XI.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health. I command
you,  that  justly  and  without  delay,  you  cause  M.  to

1  Vide  2  lust.  21.  2  Vide  F.  N.  B.  21.


238

"  have  R.  his  Villein-born  and  fugitive,  with  all  his
"  Chattels,  and  with  his  whole  issue,1  wheresoever  he
"  is  found  in  your  Bailiwick,  unless  the  fugitive  be  in
"  ray  Demesne,  after  my  first  Coronation.  And  I  pro-
hibit, least  any  one  unjustly  detain  him  under  for-
feiture, &c.  "Witness  &c."


CHAP.  XII.

"THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.2  I  command
"you,  that  justly  and  without  delay,  you  cause  G.  to-
"  have  his  Beasts  by  Gage  and  pledges,  of  which  he
"  complains  that  R.  has  taken  them,  and  unjustly  de-
"  tains  them,  for  the  Customs  which  he  exacts  from
"him,  and  which  he  does  not  acknowledge  to  o\ve
"  him  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  cause  him  justly  &c.
"  least  &c."


CHAP.  XIII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you,
"  that  justly  and  without  delay,  you  cause  to  be  ad-
"  measured  the  pasture  in  such  a  Yill,  Avhich  1.  who-

1  Cum  totd  sequela  sua. Mr.  Barrington  having  observed,  that
if  Villeins  were  born  within  a  certain  District,  they  and  their
issue  were  the  Bondmen  of  the  Lord,  proceeds  thus,  -"  This  ex-
"  plains  what frequently  occurs in ancient  grants  of  Villeins,
"  cum  totd  sequela  slid,  which,  according  to  Sir  James  Ware,  in.
'•  his  account  of  the  Betaghii,  (who  were  the  Irish  Villeins,)  in-
cluded not  only  Children  but  Nephews, p.  149. See  also  Ma-
"  dox's  Form.  Angl.  p.  416." (Barr.  Obs.  on  Anc.  Stat.  p.  306.)

2  Vide  F.  N.  B.  152.


239

"  was  the  wife  of  P.  and  R.  her  sister,  complain  that  771
"  had  unjustly  surcharged  ;  nor  permit  that  the  afore-
"  said  II.  should  have  in  that  Pasture  more  beasts
"  than  he  ought  to  have,  and  than  belongs  to  him  to
"  have,  according  to  the  extent  of  the  Fee  which  lie
"  has  in  that  Vill,  least  &c.  "Witness  &c."


CHAP.  XIY.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you,
"  that  without  delay,  you  command  R.  that,  justly
"  and  without  delay,  he  permit  II.  to  have  his  Ease-
"  ments 1  in  the  "Wood  2  and  in  the  Pasture  of  such  a
"  Yill,  which  he  ought  to  have,  as  he  says ;  as  he
"  ought  to  have  them,  and  usually  has  had  them  ;  and
"  that  you  permit  not  the  aforesaid  R.  or  any  other  to
"  molest  or  injure  him,  least  &c.  "Witness  &c."


CHAP.  XY.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  prohibit  you,
"least  }fou  permit,  that  R.  unjustly  exact  from  S.  for
"  the  free  Tenement  which  he  holds  of  N.  of  the  Fee
"  of  the  said  R.  in  such  a  Yill,  more  service  than  be-

1  Aisiamenta — from  the  French  aise,  voluptas. (Spelm.  Gloss,
ad  voc. )

2  Bosco. This  word  sometimes  means  the  wood  merely — some*
times  it  includes  the  land  on  which  the  wood  grows. (Co.  Litt.
4.  b.)


240

"longs  to  that  free  Tenement  that  he  holds;  and  that
"  you  cause  to  be  replevied  to  him  his  Beasts,  which
"  were  taken  for  that  demand,  which  he  does  not  ac-
"  knowledge,  as  belonging  to  the  Free  Tenement  he
"  holds ;  until  the  Plea  be  heard  before  us,  and  it  be
"  known,  whether  such  service  is  due  or  not.  Wit-
"ness  &c."


CHAP. XVI.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  I  command
"you,  that  justly  and  without  delay,  you  make  reason-
"  able  divisions  between  the  Land  of  22.  in  such  a
"  Yill  and  its  appurtenances,  and  the  Land  of  I),  in
"such  Vill,  as  they  ought  to  be,  and  are  accustomed
"  to  be,  and  as  they  were  in  the  time  of  King  Henry
"  my  Grandfather,  of  which  12.  complains,  that  A.
"  has,  unjustly  and  without  Judgment,  encroached
"  more  than  belongs  to  his  free  Tenement  in  that  Yill,
"  least  &c.  Witness  &c."


CHAP.  XVII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you
"  that  justly  and  without  delay,  you  cause  to  abide,
"the  reasonable  Division  which  R.  made  to  the
"  Brethren  of  the  Hospital  of  Jerusalem  of  his  Chattels,
"  as  it  can  be  reasonably  shewn  that  he  made  it,  and
u  that  it  ought  to  be  abided  by.  "Witness  &c."

1  Vide  L.  9.  c.  14.  where  a  similar  writ  occurs.


241


CHAP.  XYIII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you,
<;  that  you  compel  I?,  that  justly  and  without  delay,
"  he  returns  to  AT.  his  Chattels,  which  he  claims  that
"  he  took,  unjustly  and  without  a  judgment,  in  his
"  Freehold,  in  such  a  Till,  since  the  Disseisin  which  he
"  did  him,  since  my  Assise,  of  which  he  recovered  his
"  Seisin  before  my  Justices  by  a  Recognition  of  Novel
"  Disseisin,  as  it  can  be  reasonably  shewn  that  he  ought
"  to  have  them,  least  &c."  l


CHAP.  XIX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I  command  you,
"  that  you  cause  a  delay  until  a  certain  fit  time,  when
"  you  can  be  present,  of  the  Recognition  which  is  sum-
"  moned  between  II.  and  J/.  concerning  the  divisions  2
"  of  such  Tills,  which  by  my  Justices  of  those  parts  is
injoined  to  you  and  //.  to  take  before  you  ;  for  the
taking  of  which,  as  it  is  said,  you  have  deputed  others
in  your  place,  because  it  is  not  the  Custom  that  when
"  any  matter  appertaining  to  my  Judges  3  is  injoined

1  Vide  2  Inst.  311.

2  Vide  ante  p.  133.  Note  1.  —  As  to  the  latter  part  of  the  present
Writ,  our  author  surpasses  even himself  in  quaintness  of  ex-
pression.

3  Ad  Justicias. Justicia,  a  Justice,  or  Judge,  or,  as  it  has  in
subsequent  times  been  written,  Justiciarius. (Vide  Selden  op.

16


"


"


242

"  to  others  to  be  executed, that  they  should  transfer

t>

"  over  to  others  again  any  thing  which  appertains  to
"  my  Judge. Witness


CHAP.  XX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  I.  command  you,
"  that  justly  and  without  delay,  you  cause  A.  who  was
"  the  Wife  of  R.  to  have  her  reasonable  Dower  of  the
"  whole  Fee  that  was  the  said  A"s,  exactly  and  in  every
"  thing,  save  to  his  Heir  the  capital  Messuage,  and  that
"  vou  cause  the  said  Wife  to  have  another  messuage,

••  O "

"  unless  any  Land  in  which  there  is  no  Messuage  may
"  have  been  named  to  her  in  Dower ;  and  it  shall  not
"  cease,  because  the  Fee  of  the  aforesaid  R.  is  held  of
"my  Barony,  because,  I  will  not,  nor  does  the  Law  re-
"  quire,  that  the  Wives  of  Knights  should  on  account
"  of  this  lose  their  Dower.  But,  of  the  Chattels  that
"  were  of  the  aforesaid  R.  I  command  you,  that  you
"  cause  them  all  to  be  in  peace,  so  that  no  part  be  re-
"  moved,  neither  to  make  division,  nor  for  any  other
"  purpose,  until  his  debts  are  entirely  discharged  ;  and  of
"  the  residue  there  shall  be  afterwards  a  reasonable  divi-
"sion  made,  according  to  the  Custom  of  my  Land.
"  And,  if  any  part  of  the  Chattels  of  the  aforesaid  R.
"  shall  have  been  removed  since  his  death,  it  shall  be

Omu.  1669.  Madox's  Exch.  24.  &c.)  Mr.  Selden  considers  the
use  of  this  term  hy  Glanville  as  a  proof,  that  the  work  itself  is
of  the  age  of  Henry  the  2nd,  as  we  have  already  observed,  in  our
introductory  address  to  the  Reader.


243

"  returned  to  bis other Chattels  to  pay  his Debts.
"  Witness  &c."


CHAP.  XXI.

"  THE  King  to  the  Ecclesiastical  Judges,  Health.1
''  I  prohibit  you,  least  you  hold  the  Plea  in  Court  Chris-
"  tian,  which  is  between  N.  and  E.  of  the  lay  Fee  of
"  the  aforesaid  R.  of  which  he  complains  that  N.  draws
"  him  into  Plea  in  Court  Christian,  before  you,  because
"  such  Plea  belongs  to  my  Crown  and  Dignity.  Wit-
less &c."


CHAP.  XXII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Prohibit  R.  least
"he  should  follow  the  Plea  in  the  Court  Christian
"  which  is  between  N.  and  him  of  the  lay  Fee  of  the
"  aforesaid  7?.  in  such  a  Till,  of  which  he  complains
"  that  the  aforesaid  N.  draws  him  into  Plea  in  Court
"  Christian  before  those  Judges.  And,  if  the  afore-
"  said  E.  shall  make  you  secure  of  prosecuting  his
''  claim,  then,  put  by  Gage  and  safe  Pledges,  the  afore-
"  said  N.  that  he  be  before  me,  or  my  Justices,  such  a
"  day,  to  shew  wherefore,  he  has  drawn  him  into  Plea

t 7

"  in  Court  Christian,  concerning  his  lay  Fee,  in  such  a
"Till,  as  such  Plea  belongs  to  my  Crown  and  Dignity.
"  Witness  &c."  2

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  90.

2  This  Writ  stands  also  in  need  of  a  Transposition  of  the  Capi-
tals to  render  it  intelligible.


244


CHAP.  XXIII.

WITH  respect  to  the  manner  or  the  right  of  com-
mencing or  terminating  these  Pleas,  or  others  in  different
County  Courts,  I  forbear  to  speak,  as  well  on  account
of  the  different  Customs  which  prevail  in  different
Counties,  each  observing  its  own  peculiar  Customs,  as
of  the  brevity  of  my  proposed  object,  no  Pleas  coming
within  the  scope  of  it,  but  those  which  are  usually  dis-
cussed in  the  King's  Chief  Court.


CHAP.  XXIY.

IT  should  also  be  observed,  that  in  a  "Writ  of  Right
sometimes  less  is  comprised  than  is  inserted  in  the
Count  in  Court,  as  well  respecting  the  Appurtenances
as  other  things ;  but  sometimes  more  is  included.
Sometimes  there  is  an  Error  in  the  "Writ,  as  to  the
name  inserted  in  it,  sometimes  concerning  the  quantity
of  Services.  "When,  indeed,  less  is  contained  in  the
"Writ  than  in  the  Count,  the  party  cannot  demand
more  by  force  of  the  "Writ,  than  is  comprised  in  it.
But  when  more  is  contained  in  the  "Writ,  than  in  the
Count,  the  Excess  which  is  comprised  in  it  may  be  re-
mitted, and  the  residue  may  be  claimed  by  virtue  of
the  "Writ.  But,  if  there  be  an  Error  in  the  name,  then,
by  strictness  of  Law,  another  Writ  must  be  sued  out.
But  when  the  Error  concern  the  quantity  of  service,
the  Writ,  in  strictness  of  Law,  is  also  lost.


245

Yet,  as  it  sometimes  happens,  that  a  Tenement  is  de-
manded by  less  service  than  is  due  in  respect  of  it,  or
than  has  been  accustomed  to  be  rendered  to  the  Lord,
it  may  be  asked,  whether  the  Lord  is  bound  by  the
Writ  to  do  rio-ht  to  the  detriment  of  his  own  service  ?

O

He  is.  indeed,  bound  ;  but  should  the  Demandant  hap-
pen to  prevail,  the  Lord  after  Eviction  may  recover
against  the  party  evicting  him.1


CHAP.  XXV.

IT  should  also  be  added,  that,  according  to  the  Cus-
toms of  the  Realm,  no  one  is  bound  to  answer  in  his
Lord's  Court,  concerning  his  Freehold  Tenement,  with-
out the  King's  precept,  or  that  of  his  Chief  Justice  ;  I
mean,  if  the  Fee  in  question  be  a  lay  one.

But,  if  the  Plea  should  be  between  two  Clerks,  con-
cerning a  Tenement  held  in  Frankalmoigne  of  an
Ecclesiastical  Fee,  or  if  the  Tenant,  a  Clerk,  hold  an
Ecclesiastical  Fee  in  Frankalmoigne,  whoever  may
happen  to  be  the  Demandant,  the  Plea  concerning  the
Rio-ht  ouo-ht  to  be  in  the  Ecclesiastical  Court,  unless  a

o  o  *

Recognition  should  be  demanded,  whether  the  Fee  in

O  '

question  be  Ecclesiastical  or  lay,  of  which  we  shall
presently  speak.  For  then  such  Recognition,  as,  in-
deed, certain  others,  must  be  held  in  the  King's  Court.

1  Namely,  the  services  really  due  in  respect  of  the  Tenement.


OOlt


CONCERNING PLEAS BY  ASSISES AND  RECOGNITIONS.
AND  OF  DIFFERENT  KINDS  OF  DISSEISINS.


CHAP. I.

THE  general  course  of  Proceedings,  as  they  more
usually  occur  in  Court  upon  the  foregoing  Writs  of
Right,  having  been  so  far  treated  of,  it  now  remains
to  speak  concerning  the  steps  commonly  resorted  to,
where  Seisin  alone  is  in  question.  As  these  questions
are,  under  the  beneficial  provisions  of  a  Law  of  the
Realm,  which  is  termed  an  Assise,  usually  and  for  the
most  part  decided  by  a  Recognition,  our  subject  leads
us  to  treat  of  the  different  kinds  of  Recognitions.


CHAP.  II.

THEKE  is  one  species  of  Recognition  which  is  called
mort  D'Auncestor1 — another  de  ultimis  presentationi-
lus  of  Parsons  to  their  churches — another,  whether  a
Tenement  be  an  Ecclesiastical  Fee  or  Lay  Fee — another,
whether  anv  one  was  seised  of  a  Freehold  on  the

•/

day  of  his  death,  as  of  fee  or  as  of  pledge — another,

1  Vide  Bracton  252.  a.  et.  seq.
246


247

whether  any  one  be  under  age  or  of  full  age — another
whether  any  one  died  seised  of  a  certain  Freehold  as
of  fee,  or  as  of  ward — another,  whether  any  one  pre-
sented the  last  Parson  to  a  Church,  by  virtue  of  the
Fee  that  he  held  in  his  Demesne,  or  by  virtue  of  a
"Wardship. — And  others  of  a  similar  description,  which,
as  they  frequently  arise  in  Court  when  the  parties  are
present,  are,  with  their  consent  and  the  advice  of  the
Court,  directed,  in  order  to  determine  the  point  in  con-
troversy. But  there  is  another  Kecognition  which  is
called  Novel  Disseisin.  "When,  therefore,  any  one  dies
seised  of  a  Freehold  in  his  Demesne  as  of  Fee,  the
Heir  may  justly  claim  the  seisin  of  his  Ancestor;
and,  if  he  be  of  full  age,  he  shall  have  the  following
Writ—


CHAP.  III.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  If  £.,  the  son
"  of  T.  shall  make  you  secure  of  prosecuting  his  claim,
"  then,  summon  by  good  Summoners,  twelve  free  and
"  lawful  Men  of  the  Neighbourhood  of  such  a  Vill,
"  that  they  be  before  me,  or  my  Justices,  on  such  a
"  day,  prepared  on  their  oath  to  return,  if  T.  the  father
"of  the  aforesaid  G.  was  seised  in  his  Demesne  as  of
"  Fee,  of  one  Yardland,  in  that  Vill,  on  the  day  of  his
"  death — if  he  died  after  my  first  Coronation,2  and  if

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  433.

2  This,  Lord  Coke  informs  us.  was  the  20th  of  October  1154. (2
Inst.  94.) A  limitation  of  between  30  and  40  years.


248

"  the  said  G.  be  his  nearer  Heir.  And,  in  the  mean
"  time,  let  them  view  the  Land  and  cause  their  names
"  to  be  imbreviated  ;  and  summon,  by  good  Summoners,
"  R.  who  holds  that  Land,  that  he  be  then  there  to
"  hear  such  Recognition ;  and  have  there  the  Sum-
"moners  &c.  Witness  &c."  But,  if  the  Ancestor
was  seised  in  the  manner  before  mentioned,  and  had
begun  a  Voyage,  then,  the  "Writ  will  be  as  follows —


CHAP.  IV.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  If  G.  the  Son
"  of  T.  shall  make  you  secure  of  prosecuting  his  claim,
"  then  summon  by  good  Summoners,  twelve  free  and
"  lawful  Men  of  the  Neighbourhood  of  such  a  Vill,
"  that  they  be  before  me,  or  my  Justices,2  such  a  day,
"  prepared  upon  their  oaths  to  return,  if  T.  the  father
"of  the  aforesaid  G.  was  seised  in  his  Demesne  as  of
"  Fee  of  one  Yardland,  in  such  a  Vill,  the  day  on  which
"  he  began  his  Journey  to  Jerusalem,  or  to  St.  Jago,
"  in  which  Journey  he  died. And,  if  he  began  his

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  434. In  this  Writ,  says  Fitzherbert,  it  sufficeth,
if  he  were  seised  the  day  he  went  out  of  the  Land  and  took  the
Sea,  although  it  was  not  the  day  of  his  death. (Ubi  supra.)

2  "  Before  this  Statute,"  says  Lord  Coke,  commenting  on  Mag.
Carta,  "  the  Writs  of  Assise,  of  Novel  Disseisin  and  Mortdanc'
"  were  returnable  either  coram  rege,  or  into  the  Court  of  Com-
"  mon  Pleas :  and  this  appeareth by  Glanville — coram  me  vel
"  coram  Justiciariis  meis. But,  since  this  Statute,  these  Writs
"  are  returnable, coram  Justiciariis  nostris  ad  Assisas  cum  in
"paries  illasvenerint." (2  Inst.  24.)


249

"  Journey  since  my  first  Coronation,  and  if  the  afore-
"  said  G.  be  his  nearer  Heir.  And.  in  the  mean  time
"  &c."  as  before.  But,  if  the  Heir  be  within  age,  then
the  Writ  will  be  as  follows —


CHAP.  Y.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon  by
"  good  Summoners,  &c."  in  all  respects  as  in  the  fore-
going, except  that  in  the  present  Writ  this  clause  in
the  beginning  shall  be  omitted,  "  if  G.  the  Son  of  T.
"  shall  make  you  secure  of  prosecuting  his  claim."  1

Also  this  clause  in  the  body  of  the  Writ  is  omitted,
"  if  T.  the  Father  of  the  aforesaid  G.  died  after  my
"  first  Coronation."  But,  if  he  assumed  the  habit  of
Religion,  then  the  Writ,  in  conformity  to  this  circura-

o  t>

stance,  will  be  varied  in  the  following  manner —


CHAP.  VI.

«  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  If  G.  the  Son
"  of  T.  make  you  secure  &c."  in  all  respects  as  before,
excepting  that  in  the  present  Writ  there  must  be  in-
serted in  the  Body  of  it,  "  prepared  upon  their  oath
"  to  return  if  T.  the  father  of  the  aforesaid  G.  was
"  seised  in  his  Demesne  as  of  Fee,  of  so  much  Land  in

i  Vide  Fitz.  N.  B.  434.


250

"  such  a  Till,  the  day  on  which  he  assumed  the  habit
"  of  Religion  ;  and,  if  he  assumed  such  habit  after  my
"  first  Coronation ;  and,  if  the  aforesaid  G.  be  his
"  nearer  Heir  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  that  they  view
"  the  Land  &c."  as  before.


CHAP.  VII.

THE  Writ  of  Hort  D'auncestor1  having  been  re-
ceived by  the  Sheriff,  and  security  given  by  the  De-
mandant in  the  County  Court  to  prosecute  his  claim,
the  Proceeding  in  this  manner  comes  to  an  Assise.  In
the  first  place,  twelve  free  and  lawful  Men  of  the
Neighbourhood  are  to  be  elected,  according  to  the
form  expressed  in  the  "Writ,  both  parties  being  pres-
ent, as  well  the  Demandant,  as  the  Tenant,  or  the
latter  being  absent,  provided  he  has  been  summoned
once,  at  least,  to  be  present  at  the  Election.  He  is,
indeed,  to  be  once  summoned  in  order  that  he  may  be
present,  and  hear  who  are  elected  to  make  such  Rec-
ognition. Some  of  them  he  may  for  a  reasonable
cause  object  to,  if  he  is  so  inclined,  and  they  shall  be

1  Though  the  Writs  inserted  in  the  three  foregoing  Chapters
appear  to  be  framed  with  a  view  to  the  death  of  the  Demand-
ant's Father,  yet  we  are  not  from  thence  to  infer,  that  the
remedy,  now  under  consideration,  was  confined  in  its  applica-
tion to  the  death  of  a  Parent  only,  since  the  Ancestor  in  a  Writ
of  mort  d'auncestor  was  intended  of  the  Father,  Mother,  Brother,
Sister,  Uncle,  Aunt,  Nephew,  or  Niece  of  the  Demandant.  But
here  it  ended.  (See  Bracton,  254.  261.  and  2  Inst.  399.)


251

excluded  from  the  Recognition.  If  he  should  not  ap-
pear at  the  first  Summons,  regularly  proved  in  Court,
he  shall  not  be  awaited  any  longer ;  but,  though  he
be  absent,  the  twelve  Jurors  shall  be  elected,  and  then
sent  by  the  Sheriff  to  take  a  Yiew  of  the  Land  or  other
Tenement  in  question.  Yet  the  Tenant  shall  have  one
Summons  on  this  account.  The  Sheriff  shall  cause  the
names  of  the  twelve  persons  elected  to  be  imbreviated.
Having  done  this,  the  Sheriff  shall  cause  the  Tenant
to  be  summoned  to  appear  on  the  day  appointed  by
the  King's  Writ,  or  that  of  his  Justices,  before  the
King,  or  his  Justices,  to  hear  the  Recognition.

But,  if  the  Demandant  be  of  full  age,  the  Tenant
may  essoin  himself  on  the  first  and  second  day,1  but  on
the  third  day  he  cannot  do  so,  since  the  Recognition
shall  be  then  taken,  whether  the  Tenant  appear  or  not ;
because  in  no  Recognition,  where  Seisin  alone  be  in
question,  are  more  than  two  Essoins  allowed.

But,  in  a  Recognition  of  Novel  Disseisin,  no  Essoin
is  permitted.  On  the  third  day,  therefore,  whether
the  Tenant  appear  or  not,  the  Assise  must  be  taken,  as
we  have  observed  ;  and,  if  the  Jurors  should  decide
for  the  Demandant,  Seisin  shall  be  adjudged  him,  and
the  Sheriff  shall  be  directed  to  put  him  into  Seisin,  by
the  following  Writ

1  "  The  reason  why  Assises  were  more  expeditious  than  other
" remedies,  arose  from  no  Essoiu  being  allowed  in  them''— says
Mr.  Harrington,  (Observations  on  Ancient  Statutes,  p.  105.)
which,  from  the  text  of  Glanville,  appears  evidently  to  be  an
inaccuracy,  as  a  general  position.


252


CHAP.  YIIL

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Know,  that  N.
"  has,  in  my  Court,  recovered  Seisin  of  so  much  Land,
"  in  such  a  Yill,  by  a  Recognition  of  Mort  D'auncestor
"  against  R.  and,  therefore,  I  command  you,  that  you
"  cause  him  to  have  the  Seisin  without  delay — Wit-
"  ness  &c."


CHAP.  IX.

BUT,  together  with  the  Seisin,  the  successful  party
shall  recover  the  possession  of  all  the  chattels  and  other
things  found  in  the  Fee,  at  the  time  of  delivering  Sei-
sin. But,  after  the  Seisin  has  been  fully  recovered,
the  party  who  has  lost  it  may  sue  concerning  the  Right,
by  means  of  a  Writ  of  Right.  Yet  it  may  be  ques-
tioned, to  what  time  this  is  to  be  restricted,  after  res-
titution has  been  fully  made.


CHAP.  X.

BUT,  if  the  decision  be  in  favor  of  the  absent  Tenant,
the  Seisin  shall  then  remain  to  him,  without  his  Ad-
versary being  able  to  recover  it.  But  such  Seisin  shall
be  no  bar  to  a  Suit  concerning  the  Right.  Nor  shall  a
Plea  of  Right  concerning  any  Tenement,  prevent  a
Jlecognition  for  recovering  the  Seisin  of  a  person's  An-


253


cestor  in  the  same  Tenement,  previously  to  the  waging
of  the  Duel.  But,  how  then  shall  his  contempt  of
Court  be  punished  ?


CHAP.  XI.

BOTH  Parties  being  present  in  Court,  it  is  usual  to
inquire  of  the  Tenant  whether  he  can  shew  any  reason,
why  the  Assise  should  not  proceed?  And,  here  it
should  be  observed,  that  a  person  of  full  age  sometimes
demands  a  Recognition  of  this  kind l  against  a  Minor —
sometimes  a  Minor  demands  it  against  one  of  full  age-
sometimes  a  Minor  against  a  Minor — sometimes  one  of
full  age  against  another  of  that  description.2  Generally
speaking,  the  Assise  shall  not  proceed,  if  the  Tenant
admits  in  Court,  that  the  Ancestor,  on  the  strength  of
whose  Seisin  the  Demandant  founds  his  claim,  was
seised  on  the  day  of  his  death  in  his  Demesne  as  of
Fee,  with  the  other  circumstances  expressed  in  the
Writ.

But,  if  the  Seisin  only  be  conceded,  the  other  cir-
cumstances not  being  admitted,  then,  the  Assise  shall
proceed  upon  the  circumstance  or  circumstances  not
conceded.  An  Assise  of  this  kind  is  accustomed  to
cease  for  many  causes — if,  for  example,  it  should  be

1  No  one  of  full  age  was  allowed  by  the  Norman  Code  to  prose-
cute a  Mort  D'auncestor,  unless  he  had purchased his writ
within  a  year  and  a  day  after his Ancestor's  death had  been
publicly  proclaimed. (Grand  Gust.  c.  99.)

2  See  Bracton  274.  a.  et  seq.


254

alleged  by  the  Tenant,  that  the  Demandant  was  seised
after  the  death  of  his  Father,  or  any  one  of  his  Ances-
tors, whether  the  Ancestor  was  seised  or  not,  on  the
day  of  his  death  ;  and,  whilst  the  Demandant  was  in
such  Seisin,  that  he  had  done,  with  respect  to  himself,
some  such  act  as  debarred  him  of  subsequently  resort-
ing to  the  Assise — as  if  he  had  sold,  given,  or  quitted
claim,  or,  by  any  other  lawful  means,  had  disposed  of
the  Land  in  question  to  the  Tenant.1

Should  such  a  defence  be  set  up,  recourse  may  be
had  to  the  Duel,  or  to  any  other  usual  mode  of  proof,
consistent  with  the  practice  of  the  Court,  where  the
Right  to  any  property  is  in  question.  The  same  ob-
servation applies,  should  it  be  alleged  by  his  Adversary^
that  the  Demandant  had,  on  a  former  occasion,  im-
pleaded  him,  when  a  Fine  was  made  between  them  in
the  King's  Court ;  or  that  the  Land  belonged  to  the
Tenant  by  the  decision  of  the  Duel,  in  whatever  Court
it  may  have  been  waged  ;  or  by  a  Judgment,  or  by
quit-claim.2  Yillenage,  also,  if  it  be  in  Court  objected
and  proved  against  the  Demandant,  takes  away  the
Assise.2  An  exception  of  Bastardy  has  the  same
effect.3  The  King's  Charter,  also,  in  which  the  Land,
the  Seisin  of  which  is  demanded  by  the  Assise,  is
specifically  named  or  confirmed  to  the  Tenant,  as,
indeed,  the  conjunction  of  more  Heirs  than  one,  of

1  Bracton,  270.  b.

2  Bracton,  271.  b.

3  Bracton.  271.  b.  and  Ante  L.  5.  c.  5.

4  Bracton,  280.  a.  and  Ante  L.  7.  c.  13.


255

Females,  for  example,  in  a  Military  Fee,  or  of  Males  or
Females  in  free  soccage  Tenure.1

Again — if  it  be  conceded,  that  the  Ancestor  upon
whose  Seisin  the  Demandant  founds  his  claim,  had  a
certain  degree  of  Seisin,  namely — one  derived  through
the  Tenant  himself  or  his  Ancestor,  as  from  a  Pledge,
a  Loan  or  any  other  cause  of  this  nature,  the  Assise
shall  not  go  forward,  but  recourse  must  be  had  to  an-
other mode  of  proceeding.

Consanguinity, also,  takes  away  the  Assise;  namely,
if  the  Demandant  and  Tenant  should  have  sprung  from
the  same  stock  from  which  the  Inheritance,  the  Seisin
of  which  is  in  question,  has  descended,  and  such  fact
has  been  objected  and  proved  in  Court.2  Another
cause  has  been  mentioned  in  treating  of  Marriage-hood,
when  the  Eldest  Son  has  given  a  certain  part  of  his
Lands  to  his  Younger  Brother,  who  dies  without  leav-
ing- anv  Heir  of  his  Bodv.3  In  this  case,  as  in  others

O  *J  *s

of  a  similar  description,  the  Assise  we  are  now  treating
of  shall  cease,  since  the  same  person  cannot  be  both
Heir  and  Lord  of  an  Estate.4  If,  also,  the  Demandant
be  convicted,  or,  indeed,  confess,  that  he  was  formerly
in  Arms  against  the  King,  the  Assise  which  he  so  de-
mands in  Court  shall  from  such  circumstance  cease.5'
Bv  reason,  also,  of  Burgage  Tenure,  the  Assise  does
not  usually  proceed.  This  is  in  compliance  with  a  par-

1  Bracton,  272.  b.— See  ante  p.  126. Note  2.

2  Vide  ante  L.  2.  c.  6.  3  Vide  ante  L.  7.  c.  1.
*  Vide  ante  L.  7.  c.  1. 6  Bracton,  272.  b.


256

ticular  Law  of  the  Realm.1  having  for  its  object  great-
er  utility.  But,  if  no  exception  be  taken  in  Court,  on
account  of  which  the  Assise  ought  to  cease,  the  Recog-
nition shall  proceed :  and,  in  the  presence  of  both
parties,  the  Seisin  shall,  on  the  oaths  of  the  twelve
Jurors,  and  according  to  their  verdict,  be  adjudged
to  the  one  or  the  other,  in  the  manner  described  in  a
former  part  of  this  Book.


CHAP.  XII.

BUT,  when  a  Minor  prays  an  Assise  of  the  kind  we
are  treating  of  against  one  of  full  age,  then,  indeed,  the
latter  shall  not  be  allowed  any  Essoin  against  the  for-
mer, because,  on  the  first  day,  the  Recognition  shall
proceed,  whether  the  Tenant  appear,  or  absent  him-
self. And  this  upon  a  general  principle.

For,  whenever  it  happens,  that  the  Tenant,  if  present
in  Court,  cannot  allege  any  cause  why  such  Assise
ought  not  to  proceed,  the  Recognition  ought  by  right

i  We  may  conjecture,  that  this  Law  was  corroborative  of  the
particular  Customs  of  certain  Cities  and  Boroughs,  under  which
the  Citizens  and  Burgesses  could  make  a  Will  of  Lands.

Where  such  Customs  prevailed,  it  was  an  idle  tiling  to  inquire
whether  the  Ancestor  died  seised.  It  seems.  London  and  Oxford
enjoyed  these  Customs.  (Bracton  fo.  272.)  M>.  Somuer  con-
ceives, that  the  utility  aimed  at  by  the  Law  in  question  and  the
foundation  of  it  was.  the  good  of  the  Commonwealth,  by  the
maintenance  of  traffic, which  was  much  encouraged  by  the  liberty
of  a  free  devise,  though  this  is  somewhat  darkly  pointed  at,  as
he  says,  by  Glanville  in  the  present  passage.  (Somuer  on  Gavel-
kind,  p.  97.)


257

to  proceed,  without  awaiting  the  appearance  of  tl - f  ad-
verse party.  But,  if  the  Tenant  were  present,  he  could
not,  as  we  observed,  allege  that  the  Minor  had  done
any  thing  on  account  of  which  the  Assise  should  ce
and,  therefore,  the  Recognition  shall  unquestionably
proceed,  whether  the  Tenant,  being  of  full  age,  appear
or  not,  according  to  the  form  before  mentioned ;  and
thus,  restitution  having  been  made  to  the  Minor  through
the  Recognition,  the  full  age  of  the  Minor  shall  be
awaited,  if  it  be  intended  to  sue  him  concerning  the
Right.  But  when  one  Minor  sues  another,  the  Recog-
nition shall  proceed  in  the  same  manner,  and  without
any  variation,  as  it  usually  does  between  a  Minor  and
one  of  full  age.


CHAP.  XIII.

BUT,  when  a  person  of  full  age  proceeds  against  a
Minor,  the  latter,  indeed,  may  avail  himself  of  an  Es-
soin  against  his  Adversary,  in  the  usual  manner.  When
he  appears,  he  may  pray  a  delay,  on  account  of  his
Age,  and  that  the  Recognition  may  not  be  taken,  until
he  is  of  full  age ;  and,  thus,  on  account  of  Age,  the
Recognition  of  mart  d'auncestor  usually  stands  over.
But  here  we  should  observe,  upon  the  necessity  which
exists,  in  order  that  such  Assise  should  stand  over  on
account  of  his  age,  that  the  Minor  should  allege  him-
self to  be  in  Seisin  of  the  Tenement  in  question,  and,
therefore,  that  the  Recognition  ought  not  to  proceed,

before  he  has  attained  his  full  age :  nor should  he
17


258

omit,  that  his  Father  or  some  other  Ancestor  was  seised
on  the  dav  of  his  death ;  since,  neither  a  Recognition

•<  O

against  a  Minor,  nor  even  a  suit  concerning  the  pro-
priety, shall  cease,  by  reason  of  the  Seisin  of  a  Tene-
ment which  any  Minor  has  himself  acquired  and
retains  only  by  his  own  right.  But,  if  it  be  replied  to
a  Minor,  that  his  Ancestor  died  seised  of  the  Tenement,
the  Seisin  of  which  is  sought  by  the  Recognition,  not
as  of  Fee,  but  as  of  Ward,  then,  indeed,  although  the
principal  Recognition  ought  to  cease,  on  account  of
the  Minor's  age,  yet  another  Recognition  shall  proceed
upon  the  point,  whether  the  Minor's  Ancestor  was-
seised  as  of  Fee  or  of  Ward,  on  the  day  of  his  death  ;
and  the  Assise  shall  be  summoned,  by  the  following
Writ.


CHAR  XIV.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon  by
"  good  Summoners,  twelve  free  and  lawful  Men  of  the
"  Neighbourhood  of  such  a  Till,  that  they  be  before
"  me,  or  my  Justices,  at  such  a  day,  prepared  upon
"  their  oaths,  to  return,  if  R.  the  Father  of  N.  who  is
"  within  age,  was  seised  in  his  Demesne  of  one  plough-
"  land  in  that  Vill,  of  which  M.  the  Son  and  Heir  of
"  /.  prays  a  Recognition  of  the  death  of  the  said  I.
"  his  Father,  against  the  said  N.  as  of  his  Fee  on  the
"  day  he  died,  or  as  of  Ward.  And,  in  the  mean  time,
"  let  them  view  that  Land ;  and  cause  their  names  to
"  be  imbreviated.  And  summon,  by  good  Summon-


259

"  ers,  the  aforesaid  N.  \vlio  holds  such  Land,  that  he
be  tl
&c."


"  be  then  there  to  hear  the  Recognition. And  have


CHAP.  XV.

BUT,  it  should  be  observed,  that  if  a  day  has  been
given  for  this  purpose  to  both  parties,  when  present  in
Court,  then,  the  Tenant  ought  not  to  be  summoned.
But  thereupon,  a  Recognition  shall  proceed  to  be
taken  on  the  oaths  of  twelve  Jurors,  and,  according  to

'  O

their  Verdict,  shall  it  be  declared,  what  Seisin  the
Minor's  Ancestor  had,  on  the  dav  of  his  death,  in  the

\j

Tenement  in  question  ;  and,  if  it  should  be  proved,  that
the  Ancestor  of  the  Minor  had  no  Seisin  on  the  day  of
his  death,  unless  as  of  Ward,  then,  the  Demandant
shall  recover  Seisin  against  the  Minor.  But,  it  may
be  questioned,  whether  this  alone  be  sufficient  to
enable  him  to  recover  Seisin.

It  does  not  appear  to  be  so;  because  this  by  no
means  proves,  that  the  Demandant's  Ancestor  was
seised  in  his  Demesne  as  of  Fee,  on  the  day  of  his
death;  nor  even  that  the  Demandant  be  his  nearer
Heir.  But,  on  the  contrary,  it  may  be  said,  that  this
being  proved,  the  Minor  has  consequently  no  right
afterwards  to  retain  the  Seisin.  But  if  this  assertion
be  correct,  to  whom  is  the  possession  to  be  restored  ?
whether,  in  such  a  case,  must  recourse  be  had  to  the
principal  Recognition  ?  If,  however,  it  be  proved  by


260

the  oaths  of  the  twelve  Jurors,  that  the  Minor's  An-
cestor was  seised  on  the  day  of  his  death,  as  of  Fee,
then,  the  Seisin  shall  continue  to  the  Minor  without
disturbance,  until  he  arrives  at  his  full  age.

But,  in  such  a  case,  can  his  Adversary  or  his  Heirs
on  any  future  occasion  be  again  heard?  He  may  at
least  with  respect  to  the  Propriety  of  that  Tenement,
as  against  the  Minor,  when  he  has  attained  his  full
age,  or  against  his  Heirs.  In  addition,  the  Assise
should  proceed  against  a  Minor  in  that  one  case  only,
which  we  observed,  in  treating  concerning  Heirs
within  age.1  Upon  the  Assise  proceeding  against  a
Minor,  if  the  Seisin  should  be  awarded  to  continue  with
him,  he  shall  not  answer  concerning  the  Right,  until
he  has  attained  his  full  age.  For,  it  is  a  general  prin-
ciple, that  a  Minor  is  not  obliged  to  answer  to  any  suit
by  which  he  may  possibly  be  deprived  of  his  Inherit-
ance, or  by  which  he  can  lose  life  or  member,  until  he
attain  his  full  age.  Yet,  in  certain  other  cases,  he  is
bound,  as,  for  example,  respecting  his  paternal  Debts,
or  his  own,  and  in  case  of  a  Kovel  Disseisin.  Should,
however,  the  Seisin  be  adjudged  against  the  Minor,  in
favor  of  the  Demandant,  restitution  shall  be  made  to
him  in  the  form  before  mentioned,  nor  shall  he  answer
to  the  Minor  upon  the  question  of  Right,  until  such
Minor  has  attained  his  full  age,  as  the  latter  would  not
be  bound  to  answer  the  Demandant.  The  reason  is  of
general  force  :  because,  such  transactions,  as  take  place

1  Vide  L.  7.  c.  9.  &c.


261

with  Minors,  in  Pleas  of  this  description,  ought  not  to
be  held  firm  and  unalterable.

But  if,  on  a  Minor  alleging  himself  intitled  to  the
privilege  of  his  age,  it  should  in  Court  be  objected,
that  he  is  of  full  age,  this  is  usuall\r  ascertained  by  a
Recognition  of  eight  free  and  lawful  Men,  who  are
to  be  summoned  for  such  purpose,  by  the  following
Writ—


CHAP.  XVI.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon,  by
"  good  Summoners,  eight1  free  and  lawful  Men  of  the
"  Neighbourhood  of  such  a  Vill,  where  the  Tenement  in
"  question  is,  that  they  be  before  me  or  my  Justices,
"  on  such  a  day,  prepared  on  their  oaths  to  return,
"  whether  N.,  who  claims  one  Hyde  of  Land  in  that
"  Till  by  my  "Writ  against  7?. ,  be  of  such  age,  that  he
"  can  and  ought  to  sue  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  let  them
"  view  that  Land,  and  cause  their  Names  to  be  imbre-
'•  viated ;  and  Summon,  by  good  Summoners,  him  who
u  holds  the  Land,  that  he  be  then  there  to  hear  that
"  Recognition.  And  have,  &c."


CHAP.  XVII.

IF,  therefore,  the  full  age  of  the  person  whose  age  is
in  dispute  shall  be  proved  by  such  Recognition,  from

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  569.  where  twelve  Jurors  are  mentioned.


262


thenceforward  he  must  be  treated  as  one  of  full  a
so  far  as  respects  the  principal  Recognition,  But,  it
may  be  doubted,  whether,  generally  speaking,  and
with  reference  to  the  suits1  of  others,  he  should,  by
force  of  the  present  Recognition,  be  considered  as  of
full  age,  in  such  manner  as  not  to  be  able  to  protect
himself  under  the  privilege  of  age.  But,  if  such  Rec-
ognition should  find  him  a  Minor,  he  shall  avail  him-
self of  the  privilege  of  infancy,  so  far  as  respects  the
principal  Recognition  ;  but,  it  may  be  questioned,  how
far  he  can  avail  himself  of  it  on  other  occasions  and  in
other  suits.


CHAP.  XVIII.

IT  follows,  that  we  speak  of  the  Recognition  de  ul-
tima presentation??  If,  upon  the  vacancy  of  a  Church,
there  be  a  controversy  concerning  the  Presentation,  it

1  Impetitionem  pro  impetit tones. The  term  appears  to  be  gen-
erally employed  to  designate  a  criminal  proceeding  ;  and,  if  we
meet  with  it  connected  with  the  term  waste — sine  impetitione
vasti,  we  must  recollect,  that  waste  under  the  feudal  law  was
considered  as  a  criminal  offence. A  much  greater  latitude  was
afterwards allowed in the application  of  the term. (Vide
Spelm.  Gloss,  ad  voc.  impetitus  and  impetitio  and Cowell ad
voc.  impeachment.  &c.)

2  Vide  Bracton 237.  b.  et  seq. It  is  not,  perhaps,  irrelative  to
observe, that Lord  Coke  refers  to this  and  the  two  following
chapters  among  other  authorities to prove, that,  at  Common
Law,  if  a  stranger  had  presented  his  clerk  and  he  had  been  ad-
mitted and  instituted  to  a  church,  whereof  any  subject  had  been
lawful  Patron,  the  Patron  had  no  other  remedy  to  recover  his
advowson,  but  a  writ  of  right  of  advowson,  wherein  the  Incum-
bent was  not  to  be  removed. (Co.  Litt.  344.  a.)


i


263

may  be  decided  by  a  Recognition  de  ultima  presenta-
tione,  upon  either  of  the  litigating  parties  requiring  it
in  Court.  On  such  an  occasion,  he  shall  obtain  the
following  "Writ —


CHAP.  XIX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  Summon,  by
"  good  Summon ers,  t welve  free  and  lawful  Men  of  the
"  Neighbourhood  of  such  a  Till,  that  they  be  before
"me,  or  my  Justices,  such  a  day,  prepared  on  their
"  oaths  to  return,  what  Patron  presented  the  last  Par-
"  son  who  died,  to  the  Church  of  such  a  Till,  which  is,
"  as  it  is  said,  vacant,  and  of  which  N.  claims  the  Ad-
"  vowson  ;  and  cause  their  names  to  be  imbreviated ;
"and  summon,  by  good  Summon  ers,  7?.,  who  deforced
"  that  Presentation,  that  he  be  then  there  to  hear  the
"  Recognition — and  have  there,  &c."


CHAP.  XX.

As  to  the  Essoins  allowed  in  this  species  of  Recog-
nition, they  may  be  collected  from  what  has  gone  be-
fore. Upon  the  Recognition  proceeding,  whether  both
of  the  parties  be  present,  or  one  of  them  be  absent,  the
person,  to  whom,  on  his  own,  or  his  Ancestor's  Seisin,
the  last  Presentation  shall  be  adjudged,  is  understood

i  F.  N.  B.  68.


264

thereby  to  have  recovered  Seisin  of  the  Advowsort
itself  ;  so  that,  upon  his  Presentation,  the  Bishop  of
the  place  shall  institute  the  first  Parson,  if  a  proper
person,1  into  the  vacant  Church,  which  he  shall  retain
during  his  whole  life  upon  his  Patron's  Presentation,
whatever  may  afterwards  happen,  with  respect  to  the
Right  of  Ad  vow  son.  For  the  person,  against  whom
the  last  Presentation  has  been  awarded  by  the  Recog-
nition, may  proceed  against  the  other,  or  his  Heirs,
upon  the  Right  of  Advowson,  the  nature  of  which  has
been  explained,  in  a  former  part  of  this  Treatise.  It
may  be  asked,  whether,  from  the  first,  any  thing  can
be  alleged  to  prevent  the  Assise  from  going  forward.
In  order  to  effect  such  object,  the  Tenant  may  admit,
that  the  Ancestor  of  the  Demandant  made  the  last
Presentation,  as  the  real  Lord  and  the  Eldest  Heir,
but  that  he  afterwards  transferred  the  Fee,  to  which
the  Advowson  is  appendant,  to  the  Tenant  or  his  An-
cestors, by  a  good  Title  ;  and  thus  upon  this  allegation
the  Assise  shall  cease,  and  a  Plea  may  then  be  had  re-
course to  between  the  litigating  parties,  upon  this  ex-
ception. Upon  this  exception,  either  of  the  parties
may  desire  a  Recognition,  and  is  intitled  to  have  it.
But  either  of  the  litigating  parties  may  admit,  that  the
other,  or  one  of  his  Ancestors,  made  the  last  Presenta-
tion, but  not  as  of  Fee,  but  of  "Ward,  and  may  demand,
and  shall  obtain,  a  Recognition  upon  this  point.  Such
Recognition  shall  be  summoned  by  the  following  "Writ —

1  "  A  worthy  man,  qualified  in  literature,  life,  and  manners  "—
are  the  words  of  the  Reg.  Maj.  L.  1.  c.  2. Vide  1  Bl.  Cornm.  389.


265


CHAP.  XXL

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon,  by
"  good  Summoners,  twelve  free  and  lawful  Men  of
"  the  Neighbourhood  of  such  a  Yill,  that  they  be  be-
"  fore  me,  or  my  Justices,  at  such  a  day,  prepared  on
"  their  oaths  to  return,  if  7?.,  who  presented  the  last
"  Parson,  who  is  dead,  to  such  a  Church,  by  reason  of
"  the  Tenement  that  he  held  in  such  a  Yill,  made
"  such  Presentation,  as  of  Fee,  or  as  of  Ward,1  and
"  cause  their  names  to  be  imbreviated  ;  and  summon,  by
"  good  Summoners,  him  who  has  deforced  the  Presen-
"  tation,  that  he  be  then  there,  &c."


CHAP. XXII.

THE  fact  being  ascertained  by  the  Recognition,  if
the  last  Presentation  was  made  as  of  Ward,  the  Ad-
vowson  of  the  Presentation  is  at  an  end,  and  the  Pres-
entation itself  shall  belong  to  the  other  party.  But
if,  as  of  Fee,  the  Presentation  shall  continue  to  him.


CHAP. XXIII.

IT  follows  to  treat  of  the  Recognition  to  ascertain,
whether  a  Tenement  be  a  Lay,  or  an  Ecclesiastical
Fee.  Upon  either  of  the  parties  desiring  to  have  such

1  "  And,  in  the  mean  time,  let  them  view  the  Tenement" —
added  in  Cotton,  and  Bodln.  MSS.


266

Recognition,  it  shall  be  summoned  by  the  following
Writ—


CHAP. XXIV.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon,  by
"good  Summoners,  twelve  free  and  lawful  Men  of
"  the  Neighbourhood  of  such  a  Vill,  that  they  be  be-
"  fore  me,  or  my  Justices,  such  a  day,  prepared  upon
"  their  oaths  to  return,  whether  one  Hyde  of  Laud,
"which  N.,  the  Parson  of  the  Church  of  that  Vill,
"  claims,  as  held  in  Frankalmoigne  by  his  Church,
"  against  1?.  in  that  Vill,  be  the  Lay  Fee1  of  the  said
"  j??.,  or  an  Ecclesiastical  Fee  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,
"  let  them  view  the  Land,  and  cause  their  names  to  be
"  imbreviated.  And  summon,  by  good  Summoners.
"  the  aforesaid  7?.,  who  holds  that  Land,  that  he  be
"  then  there  to  hear  the  Recognition,  and  have  there,
"  &c.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  XXV.

NEITHER  in  this  Recognition,  nor  in  any  other,  ex-
cept the  Recognition  of  the  Grand  Assise,  are  more
than  two  Essoins  permitted.  Because  a  third  Essoin

1  Sit  laicum  feodum.  "  A  Juris  Utrum  did  lie  at  the  Common
"  Law  for  a  Parson  against  a  Layman,  and  for  a  Layman  against
"  a  Parson  :  but  no  Juris  Utrum  did  lie  for  one  Parson  against
"  another,  before  this  Act,  (Westnir.  3d.)  because  it  was  the
"  Right  of  the  Church  and  no  Lay  Fee.  And  the  words  of  the
*'  writ  at  the  Common  Law  were,  an  sit  laicum  feodum,  <frc."
(Vide  2  Inst.  407.  and  the  authorities  cited  by  Lord  Coke.)


267

is  never  allowed,  unless  where  it  can  be  judicially
ascertained,  whether  an  illness  amount  to  a  languor  or
not.  As  this  is  not  usually  done  in  Recognitions,  they
necessarily  preclude  a  party  from  casting  a  third  Essoin.
The  Recognition  we  are  now  treating  of  proceeds  in
the  manner  we  have  described,  when  discussing  other
Recognitions.  Yet,  should  it  be  observed,  that  if,  by
the  Recognition,  a  Tenement  be  proved  to  be  an  Ec-
clesiastical Fee,  it  cannot  afterwards  be  treated  as  a
Lay  Fee,  although  it  may  be  claimed  by  the  Adverse
party  to  be  held  of  the  Church,  by  a  stipulated  service.


CHAP. XXVI.

OUR  subject  leads  us,  in  the  next  place,  to  consider
that  species  of  Recognition  which  is  usually  resorted
to,  in  order  to  ascertain,  whether  a  person  died  seised
of  a  certain  Freehold,  as  of  Fee  or  as  of  Pledge.  When
any  one  claims  a  certain  Tenement  to  be  restored  to
him,  as  pledged,  either  by  himself,  or  one  of  his  An-
cestors, if  the  Tenant  does  not  acknowledge  the  Tene-
ment in  question  to  be  a  pledge,  but  asserts  in  Court
that  he  is  seised  of  it  as  of  Fee,  recourse  is  usually  had
to  a  Recognition,  which  shall  be  summoned  by  the  fol-
lowing Writ

CHAP.  XXVII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health. Summon,  by
good  Sunmioners,  twelve  free  and lawful  Men  of


u


268

"  such  a  Yill,  that  they  be  before  me,  or  my  Justices,
"  such  a  day,  prepared  upon  their  oaths  to  return,
"  whether  N.  holds  one  plough-land  in  such  a  Yill,
"  which  R.  claims  against  him  by  my  "Writ,  in  Fee  or
"in  Pledge,  as  pledged  to  him  by  the  said  R.  or  by
"  ZT.,  his  Ancestor."  Or  thus — "  whether  that  plough-
"  land,  which  R.  claims  against  N.,  in  such  a  Yill,  by
"  my  Writ,  be  the  Fee  or  Inheritance  of  the  said  A7".,.
"  or  Pledged  to  him  by  the  said  7?.,  or  by  the  said  II.r
"  his  Ancestor  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  let  them  view
"  that  Land  ;  and  cause  their  names  to  be  imbreviated  ;
"  and  summon,  by  good  Summoners,  the  aforesaid  ./V.,
"  who  holds  that  Land,  that  he  be  then  there  to  hear
"  the  Recognition — And  have  there,  &c."


CHAP. XXYIII.

BUT,  it  sometimes  happens,  that  a  person  holds  a.
Tenement  as  a  pledge,  and  so  dies  seised  of  it.  His
Heir,  also,  by  reason  of  such  a  Seisin,  prays  a  "Writ  of
Mort  D'auncestor  against  the  true  Heir,  who  has  ob-
tained the  Seisin  of  the  Tenement  in  question.  If,  in-
deed, it  should  then  be  acknowledged  by  the  Tenant,
that  the  Ancestor  of  the  Demandant  had  died  seised,
but  as  of  Pledge,  and  not  as  of  Fee,  the  consequence
is.  that  recourse  must  be  had  to  the  before  mentioned
Recognition,  which  shall  be  summoned  by  the  follow-
ing Writ


269


CHAP.  XXIX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.  Summon,  by
"  good  Summoners,  twelve,  ifcc.,  that  they  be,  &c.
"  prepared  upon  their  oaths  to  return,  whether  N.y
"  the  father  of  R.,  was  seised  in  his  Demesne,  as  of
"  Fee,  or  as  of  Pledge,  of  one  plough-land,  in  such  a
"  Yill,  the  day  on  which  he  died.  And,  in  the  mean
*'•  time,  &c."


CHAP.  XXX.

IT  being  proved  by  the  Recognition,  that  the  Tene-
ment in  question  is  a  pledge,  then,  the  Tenant  who  has
asserted  it  to  be  his  Fee  shall  lose  the  Tenement  in
question,  so  that  he  shall  not,  by  reason  of  its  having
been  a  pledge,  recur  to  it  for  the  recovery  of  his  Debt.1
But,  if  it  be  decided  to  be  the  Fee  of  the  Tenant,  then,
the  Demandant  shall  from  henceforth  be  barred  from
any  recovery  unless  by  a  Writ  of  Right.  It  may  be
asked,  whether  in  this  Recognition,  or  in  any  other,  a
person's  Warrantor  should  be  awaited,  whatever  de-
scription of  Warrantor,  or  for  whatever  cause  he  may
be  such,  especially  if  the  Warrantor  should  be  called
into  Court  upon  this  subject  after  two  Essoins  ?

1  The  text  is  obscure,  and  contradictory  :  most  probably,  falsely
transmitted  to  us.

This  is  answered  in  the  affirmative  by  the  Regiam  Majestatem.
L.  2.  c.  35.


270


CHAP.  XXXI.

THE  Recognitions  which  remain  may  be  partly  col-
lected from  the  preceding  Recognitions — and  partly
from  the  Judgment  of  the  Court,  founded  on  the  alle-
gations of  both  parties.  "With  respect,  for  example,  to
the  Recognition  to  ascertain,  whether  a  person  be
within  age  or  not — some  mention  and  notice  are  taken
of  it  in  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  Chap-
ters of  the  present  Book.

In  like  manner,  concerning  the  Recognition,  whether
a  person  was,  on  the  day  of  his  death,  seised  of  a  cer-
tain Freehold,  as  of  Fee  or  of  Ward,  in  the  thirteenth,
fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  Chapters  of  this  Book.  In
the  same  manner,  concerning  the  Recognition,  whether
a  person  presented  the  last  Parson,  in  right  of  his  Fee,
or  his  "Wardship,  in  the  twentieth,  twTenty-first,  and
twenty-second  Chapters  of  the  present  Book.  These-
Recognitions  follow  those  we  have  previously  treated
of  with  respect  to  Essoins,  and  proceed  or  cease  for
the  same  reasons.


CHAP.  XXXII.

IN  the  last  place,  it  remains  for  us  to  speak,  concern-
ing that  species  of  Recognition,  which  is  called  Novel
Disseisin.1  When  any  one,  therefore,  unjustly  and

1  As  to  the  term  novel,  when  the  Action  was  brought  before
the  Eyre,  or  Circuit,  the  Action  or  Disseisin  was  ancient,  whilst,


271

without  a  Judgment,  has  disseised  another  of  his  Free-
hold ;  and  the  case  fall  within  the  King's  Assise,  or  in
other  words,  within  the  time  for  such  purpose  ap-
pointed by  the  King  with  the  advice  of  his  l  Nobles
(which  is  sometimes  a  greater,2  sometimes,  a  less  period)
this  Law  comes  to  the  aid  of  the  person  disseised,  who
shall  have  the  following  Writ


CHAP.  XXXIII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.3 N.  complains
"  to  me,  that  R.  has,  unjustly  and  without  a  Judgment,

if  the  Disseisin  were  done  since  the  last  Eyre,  then  it  was  a  novel
Disseisin.  Bracton  treats  largely  upon  the  subject  of  novel,
Disseisin  160,  et  seq.  See  also  2  Inst.  24.  The  remedy  of  novel
Disseisin  is  also  treated  of  in  the  Assises  of  Jerusalem,  with
some  peculiar  provisions  adapted  to  the  singular  circumstances
in  which  the  Holy  Land  was  situated,  (c.  63.  et  seq.)  The  re-
spectable Translator  of  the  Code  Napoleon  observes,  that  he  has
not  met  with  the  term  novel  disseisin  before  Magna  Carta. —
Amidst  the  attention  of  preparing  his  work  for  the  press,  he
must  have  forgotten  not  only  Glanville,  but  the  Mirror. — What-
ever doubt  may  be  entertained  respecting  the  authority  of  the
Mirror,  yet  Glanville  indubitably  proves,  that  the  term  was  well
known  to  our  lawyers  antecedent  to  the  Great  Charter.  (See
Mirror,  c.  2.  s.  25.)

1  Meaning  the  Parliament, according  to  Judge  Blackstone.

(1.  147.  148.)

2  The  words  inserted  in  this  parenthesis  have  been  thought  to
be  an  interpolation  of  a  later  date. (1.  Reeves'  Hist.  Eng.  Law.
189.) Yet  this  suggestion  may  very  reasonably  be  questioned —
as  the  passage  seems  merely  assertive  of  what  must  necessarily
be  the  fact. It  was  a  consequence  of  fixing  the  time  of  limita-
tion to  the  coronation  of  the  king,  his  Journey  into  Normandy,
or  any  other  event,  that  the  time  itself  must  be  altering  daily.
(Vide  2  Inst.  94.)  3  vide  F.  N.  B.  394.


272

"  disseised  him  of  his  free  Tenement,  in  such  a  Till,
"  since  my  last  Voyage  into  Normandy  ; l  and,  there-
"  fore,  I  command  you,  that  if  the  aforesaid  JW.  should
"  make  you  secure  of  prosecuting  his  claim,  then,  you
"  cause  the  Tenement  to  be  reseised,  with  the  Chattels
"  taken  on  it,  and  that  you  cause  him  with  his  Chattels
"  to  be  in  peace,2  until  the  Pentecost ;  and,  in  the  mean
"  time,  you  cause  twelve  free  and  lawful  Men  of  the
"  Neighbourhood  to  view  the  Land,  and  their  names  to
"  be  imbreviated ;  and  summon  them,  by  good  Sum-
"  moners,  that  they  be  then  before  me,  or  my  Justices,
"  prepared  to  make  the  Recognition  ;  and  put,  by  gage
"  and  safe  pledges,  the  aforesaid  7?.,  or  his  Bailiff,3  if
"  he  be  not  to  be  found,  that  he  be  then  there  to  hear
"  such  Recognition,  and  have  there,  &c.  Witness,  &c."


CHAP.  XXXIY.

BUT  "Writs  of  Novel  Disseisin  are  varied  in  different
modes,  according  to  the  diversity  of  the  Tenements  in
which  Disseisins  are  committed.  But  if  any  Dyke4

1  Sc.  1184. If  the present Treatise  was written  in  1187,  the
remedy  of  novel  disseisin  stood  limited  to  three  years,  which,  of
course,  was  every  day  lengthening  until  a  new  ^ra  was  fixed.

2  Affirmed  by  Statute  of  Merton,  c.  37. (2  lust.  235.)
s  Vide  Note  3.  p.  225.

4  Fossatum.  This  word  occurs  in  Pliny.  It  seems  to  have
been  chiefly  used  by  the  old  Lawyers  in  two  senses — 1.  as  denot-
ing a  camp,  or  intrenchment — 2.  as  meaning  a  ditch,  dyke,  or
moat.  But  it  was  not  always  confined  to  these  significations —
as  the  reader  will  perceive  on  turning  to  the  Ancient  Glossaries,
particularly  to  that  very  valuable  one  given  to  the  world  by
Spelman.


273

•should  be  raised  or  thrown  down,  or  the  Pond  l  of  any
Mill  be  destroyed,  to  the  injury  of  any  person's  Free-
told,  and  such  offence  has  been  committed,  within  the
time  limited  by  the  King's  Assise,  then,  according  to
the  subject  matter,  the  Writs  are  varied  in  the  foilo\v-


ing  manner —


CHAP.  XXXY.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.2  N.  complains
"  to  me,  that  J?.,  unjustly,  and  without  a  Judgment,
"  has  raised  a  certain  Dyke  in  such  a  Till,  or  thrown
"  it  down,  to  the  nuisance  of  his  Freehold,  in  the  same
"  Vill,  since  my  last  Voyage  into  Normandy — And,

«,'  \J o  */

"  therefore,  I  command  you,  if  the  aforesaid  N.  should
"  make  you  secure  of  prosecuting  his  claim,  then,  that
"  you  cause  twelve  free,  &c.  to  view  such  Dyke  and
"  Tenement,  and  cause  their  names  to  be  imbreviated.
"  And  summon,  by  good  Summoners,  &c."  as  before.


CHAP.  XXXYI.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.3  N.  has  com-
"  plained  to  me  that  7?.,  unjustly  and  without  a  Judg-
"  ment,  has  raised  the  Pond  of  his  Mill,  in  such  a  Vill,
"to  the  nuisance4  of  his  Freehold,  in  such  Vill,  or

1  Stagnum,  Sir  Edward Coke informs  us, "  doth  consist  of
•'  Water  and  Land,  and,  therefore,  by  the  name  of  Stagnnm,  or  a
"  pool,  the  water  and  land  shall  pass  also." (Co.  Litt.  5.  a.)

2  Vide  F.  N.  B.  408.  409.

s  Vide  F.  N.  B.  407.  *  See  Bl.  Com.  3.  220.

18


274

"  in  another  Vill,  since  my  last  Voyage  into  Nor-
"  mandy.  And,  therefore,  I  command  you,  that  if  the
"  aforesaid  N.  should  make  you  secure  of  prosecuting
"  his  claim,  then,  you  cause  twelve  free,  &c.  to  view
"  that  Pond  and  Tenement,  &c."  as  before..

If,  however,  the  Disseisin  concern  Common  of  Pas-
ture, then,  the  Writ  shall  be  as  follows —


CHAP.  XXXVII.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.1  N.  complains
"  to  me,  that  7?.,  unjustly  and  without  a  Judgment,
"  has  disseised  him  of  his  Common  of  Pasture,  in  such
"  a  Vill,  which  belongs  to  his  Freehold,  in  such  Vill,
"  or  in  that  other  Vill,  since  my  last  Voyage  into
"  Normandy.  And,  therefore,  I  command  you,  that
"  if  the  aforesaid  N.,  has  made  you  secure  of  prose-
"  cuting  his  claim,  then,  you  cause  twelve  free,  &c.  to
"  view  that  Pasture  and  Tenement,  and  their
"  &c."


CHAP.  XXXVIII.

IN  this species of Recognition no Essoin  is per-
mitted.2

For,  on  the  first  day, and  that  wrhether  the  party

1  Vide  F.  N.  B.  399.

2  But  one  Essoin, and \e default  allowed by  the  Norman
Code  ! (Grand  Custum.  c.  94.)


275

committing  the  Disseisin  should  appear  or  not,  the  Rec-
ognition shall  proceed,1  because  it  spares  no  person,
neither  one  of  full  age,  nor  a  Minor,  nor  will  await
even  a  Warrantor.  But,  if  a  party  should  acknowledge
such  Disseisin  in  Court,  naming,  at  the  same  time,  a
Warrantor,  the  Recognition  shall  thereby  cease,  and
the  person  who  has  so  acknowledged  shall  be  amerced
to  the  King.

»

The  Warrantor  shall  be  afterwards  summoned,2  and
the  Plea  proceed  between  him  and  the  person  who  has,
on  this  occasion,  nominated  him  as  Warrantor.

Yet,  should  it  be  observed,  that  the  unsuccessful
party,  whether  the  Appellor  or  the  appealed,3  shall  in

1  The  Norman  Code  describes  the  whole  proceeding  at  length.
The  names  of  the  Jurors  having  been  called  over  in  open  Court,
the  Parties  are  at  liberty  to  take  any  Legal  Exceptions  to  them.
The  Jurors  are  then  individually  sworn  to  speak  the  truth.  After
this,  no  person  shall  be  allowed  to  hold  any  private  communica-
tion with  them,  unless  it  be  the  Judge. The  Judge  shall  in  the
next  place  solemnly  charge  them  to  return  a  true  verdict,  briefly
stating  to  them  the  object  for  their  consideration. The  Jurors
shall  then  consult  upon  their  verdict,  and,  in  the mean  time,
shall  be  strictly  guarded,  least  they  be  corrupted. Having  con-
sidered of  their  verdict,  if  they  all  agree,  one  of  them  shall  de-
liver it  into  the  Judge  in  open  Court. (Le  Grand  Custum. de
Norm.  c.  96.)

2  The  Norman  Code,  acting,  in  this  instance,  upon  a  more  pure
and  refined  principle  of  legislation,  allowed  no  Warrantor  to  be
vouched  to  justify  a  novel  Disseisin—  Violentum  enim  est  et  nullo
modo  sustinendum,  &c. (Grand  Gust,  de  Norm.  c.  94.)

3  Appellans  sive  appellatus. These  terms  are  generally  used  in
a  criminal  sense. Their  application  in  the  present  instance  may
be  accounted  for  by  reflecting,  that  a  Disseisin,  being  in  the  eye
of  the  law  accompanied  by  force  and  a  violation  and  disturbance
of  the  peace,  was  to  a  certain  degree  a  criminal  offence. — See
Mirror,  c.  2.  s.  23.


276

every  instance  be  amerced  to  the  King,  on  account  of
the  violent  Disseisin.  In  addition,  if  the  Appellor
should  not  keep  his  day,  then,  also,  his  Pledges  are  to
be  amerced  to  the  King.  The  same  Rule  prevails,
with  respect  to  the  person  of  the  other  party,  should
he  absent  himself  at  the  appointed  day.  The  Penalty
inflicted  by  this  Constitution  is  merely  an  Amercement
to  the  King.

But,  in  this  Recognition,  the  party  who  has  proved
the  Novel  Disseisin,  may  obtain,  that  the  Sheriff
should  be  directed  to  deliver  him  the  Chattels  and  the
Fruits,  which  have,  by  the  authority  of  the  King's
Writ,  or  that  of  his  Justices,  been  in  the  mean  time
seised.1  In  no  other  Recognition  does  the  Judgment
of  the  Court  usually  make  any  mention  concerning  the
Chattels  or  Fruits ;  and,  unless  the  Sheriff  has  taken
steps  to  satisfy,  him  out  of  the  Chattels  or  Fruits,  then,
the  party  who  complains  of  it,  shall  obtain  the  follow-
ing Writ —

CHAP.  XXXIX.

"  THE  King  to  the  Sheriff,  Health.2  I  command
"you,  that  you  compel  N.,  justly  and  without  delay,

1  "  And,  moreover,  the  Pursuer, who  has  proved  the  Ejectment
"  may  effectually  desire, that  command  shall  be  given  to  the  Slier-
"  iff  to  deliver  to  him  so  much  of  the  moveable  Goods  pertaining
"to  the  Defender,  or  of  the  fruits  of  the  Land  which  was  arrest-
"ed  by  the  King's  precept,  as  extends  to  the  sum  of  ten  Marks."
(Regiam  Majestatem,  L.  3.  c.  36.)  The  Reader  must  not  start  at
the  modern  term  Ejectment.  It  is  only  the  language  of  Skene,
the  Translator.  2  The  same  writ  is  to  be  found,  L.  13.  c.  18.


277

"  to  render  to  E.  his  Chattels,  since  he  complains  that
"he  took  them,  unjustly  and  without  a  Judgment,  from
"  his  Free  Tenement,  in  such  a  Yill,  since  the  Disseisin
"  he  did  to  him,  since  my  Assise,  of  which  he  will  re-
"  cover  the  Seisin  before  my  Justices,  by  a  Recognition
"  of  Novel  Disseisin,  as  he  can  reasonably  shew  that  he
"  ought  to  have  them,  least  more,  &c.  Witness,  &c." l

1  In  quitting  this  Book,  which  treats  so  largely  of  Assises,  I
shall  make  no  apology  to  the  Reader  for  extracting  the  following
observations  from  Mr.  Reeves's  highly  valuable  work.  "  It  must
"be  observed  of  these  Assises  (for  so  they  are  sometimes  called
"  by  Glanville,  but  more  commonly  Recognitions)  that  they  are
"not  all  of  the  same  kind  ;  that  de  morte  antecessoris  being  evi-
"  dently  an  original  proceeding,  independent  of  any  other;  the
"  rest  (not  excepting  that  de  ultima  presentatione,  and  that
"  utrnni laicuin  feodum  vel  ecclesiasticuin)  being  merely  for  the
"  decision  of  facts  which  arose  in  some  original  action  or  proceed-
"  ing.  Thus  the  writs  for  summoning  Recognitions  of  the  latter
"  kind  were  simple  writs  of  Summons:  they  mentioned  that  a
"Plea  was  depending  in  Court  by  the  king's  writ;  and  they
"were  granted  at  the  prayer  of  either  party:  so  that  they
"seemed  to  be  resorted  to.  by  the  assent  of  parties  for  settling  an
"incidental  questior ,  on  which  the}r  put  the  dispute  between
"them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  writ  de  morte  antecessoris  has
"  all  the  appearance  of  an  original  commencement  of  a  suit.  It
"  issued  only  upon  condition  the  Demandant  gave  security  to
"  prosecute  it,  Si  G.  filius  T.  feeerit  te  securum  de  clamore  suo
"prosequendo,  tune  summone,  and  made  no  mention  of  a  plea
"  depending.  Of  the  same  kind  was  the  writ  de  nova  desseisind."
(Reeves's  Hist.  Eng.  Law,  188.)


278


loofc  |Jf.


CONCERNING CRIMINAL PLEAS WHICH BELONG TO

THE  CROWN.


CHAP.  I.

HAVING  thus  far  treated  of  those  Civil  Pleas  which
are  discussed  in  Court,  it  remains  for  us  to  speak  con-
cerning Criminal  Pleas.  When,  therefore,  any  one  is
charged  with  the  King's  death,  or  with  having  pro-
moted a  sedition  in  the  Realm  or  Army,1  either  a  cer-
tain Accuser  appears,  or  not.  If  no  certain  Accuser
should  appear,  but  the  public  voice  alone  accuses  him,2

1  When  any  one,  says  Bracton, speaking  of  the  crime  of  Isese
majesty,  knows  another  to  be  guilty,  he  is  instantly  to  apprise
the  king,  or  one  of  his ministers. He  should  not  abide  in  one
place  for  t\vo  nights  nor  two  days  ;  but  disregarding  every  other
affair,  however  urgent,  he  should  hasten  to  the  king,  scarcely
daring  to  wait  to  look  behind  him. (Bracton  118.  b. See  also
Fleta  L.  1.  c.  21.  22.  and  Mirror  c.  8.  s.  1.) In  the  latter  Author,
we  find  the  following  despotically  comprehensive  definition.—
"  Treason  is  every  mischief  which  a  man  knowingly  does  or  pro-
"  cures  to  be  done  to  one  he  is  in  duty  bound  to  be  a  friend  to."

2  This  is  a  most  singular  part  of  the  Code  of  the  age  when
Glanville  lived. The  obligation  upon  a  man  to  defend  himself,
when  another  starts  forward  to  accuse  him,  seems  the  necessary
result  of  men  living  together  in  a  state  of  society,  and,  as  coeval
with  society  itself,  is  strongly  enforced  by  tue  municipal  Laws
of  every  Nation. This  seems  to have  been  the  object  of  the
punishment  peine forte  et  d"'.r-:. That  singular  institution  shewed


279

then,  from  the  first,  the  accused  shall  be  safely  at-
tached, either  by  proper  Pledges,  or  imprisonment.1
The  truth  of  the  fact  shall,  then,  be  inquired  into,  by
means  of  many  and  various  inquisitions  and  interroga-
tions, made  in  the  presence  of  the  Justices,  and  that,
by  taking  into  consideration  the  probable  circumstances
of  the  facts,  and  weighing  each  conjecture  that  tends
in  favor  of  the  accused,  or  makes  against  him  ;  because
he  must  purge  himself  by  the  Ordeal,2  or  entirely  ab-

a  strong,  but  rough,  hand  in  the  Legislature,  more  capable  of
directing  its  laws  to  a  good  and  wise  end,  than  nice  or  happy  in
selecting  the  means.  The  proceeding  was  naturally  abolished
as  the  Law  became  more  refined — more  humanized.  As  to  the
passage  of  our  Author's  text  now  before  us,  it  receives  some
light  from  Bracton — a  suggestion,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to
Mr.  Reeves's  valuable  work.  Bracton  speaks  of  an  Indictment
perfamam  pat  rice,  which,  in  all  probability,  was  the  same  pro-
ceeding our  Author  alludes  to.  The  foundation  of  that  proceed-
ing was  a  presumption  entertained  by  good  and  grave  men  who
deserved  credit,  and  not  the  flying  report  of  common  conversa-
tion. (143.  a.)  But  the  subject  receives  additional  elucidation
from  the  Norman  Code.  In  criminalibus  tamen  manifestis  seu
notoriis  maliciis  quos  famd  publicd  seu  fide  dignorum  testimo-
nium  nunciant  cidpdbiles,  non  expectato  Juris  ordine  debent  ar-
restari  et  carceribus  mancipari.  (Grand  Gust.  c.  4.  and  68.)  In
Mr.  Kelham's  translation  of  Britton's  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  (page
18.  Note  15.)  the  Reader  will  find  the  valuable  record  of  an  In-
dictment on  suspicion.  The  Reader  may  also  be  referred  to
Bracton  143. — LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  45. — Mirror  c.  2.  s.  22.  and  Fleta  L.
1.  c.  21.

1  "  At  the  Common  Law  a  man  accused  or  indicted  of  High
*'  Treason,  or  of  any  felony  whatsoever,  was  bailable,  upon  good
*'  security  :  for  at  the  Common  Law  the  Gaol  was  his  pledge  or
"security  that  could  find  none." (2 Inst.  189.) This  serves  to
elucidate  the  text,  which  is  obscure  from  its  brevity. A  similar
explanation  is  given  in  the  progress  of  the  present  chapter,  but
is  qualified,  with  the  exception  of  the  plea  of  Homicide.

2  Per  legcm  apparentem. Alluding  to  the  passage  now  before
us,  Sir  Henry  Spelman  observes,  "  I  do  not  think  it  should  be  un-


280

solve  himself  from  the  Crime  imputed  to  him.  But  if
on  the  trial  by  the  Ordeal,  a  person  is  convicted  of  a
Capital  Crime,  then  the  Judgment  is  of  life  and  mem-
bers which  are  at  the  King's  mercy,1  as  in  other  Pleas
concerning  Felony.

Should,  however,  a  certain  accuser  appear  in  the
first  instance,  he  shall  be  attached  by  Pledges,  if  he
can  produce  any  such,  to  prosecute  his  Suit.  But,  if
he  is  unable  to  adduce  any  Pledges,  it  is  usual  to  trust
to  his  solemn  promise,2  as  in  all  Pleas  concerning
Felony.  Yet  is  it  customary  in  these  cases  to  confide
in  a  promise,  least  by  exacting  too  hard  a  security,
others  mio-ht  be  deterred  from  making  a  similar  accu-

O  *— '

sation.3  Security  having  been  taken  from  the  Accuser
to  prosecute  his  Plea,  then,  the  party  accused,  is,  as
we  have  observed,  usually  attached  by  safe  and  secure
Pledges  ;  or,  if  he  cannot  produce  any  pledges,  he  shall

"derstood  of  the  Duel,  but  the  Ordeal."  This  conjecture  is
countenanced  by  the  87th  Chapter  of  the  Grand  Norman  Custu-
mary,  however  true  it  may  be,  that  the  lex  apparens  was,  in  the
general  sense  of  the  expression,  applied  to  the  Duel.  (Spelni.
Gloss,  ad  voc.  lex  and  his  Reliq.  p.  80.)

1  Ex  regice  dispensation's  bcneficio,  tamvitce,  quam  membrorum
suorum  ejus  pendet  judicium  is  the  original  passage. I  have
availed  myself  of  the  Translation  of  the  Regiam  Majestatem.
"And,  if  any  man  is  condemned of  that  crime,  his  judgment
"  and  punishment  of his life and limbs depend  only  upon  the
"  king's  benefit  and  good  will,  as  in  all  other  pleas  of  felony  and
"sedition  against  the  realm." (L.  4.  c.  1.)

2  Fidei  suce  religionis — "  his  faithful  promise is  sufficient,"
says  the  Regiam  Majestatem. (L.  4. c. 1.) In  the  opinion  of
the  canonists  the  fidei  interpositio  was  equally  binding  with  an
oath. (Lyndwood's  Provinc.  271.)

3  Bracton  gives  the  same  reason. (118.  b.)


281

be  cast  into  Prison.  But,  in  all  Pleas  of  Felony,  the
Accused  is  generally  dismissed  on  pledges,1  except  in
a  Plea  of  Homicide,  where,  for  the  sake  of  striking
terror,  it  is  otherwise  enacted.  The  next  step  usually
resorted  to,  is  to  appoint  a  day  to  the  parties,  pending
which,  the  usual  Essoins  are  allowed  to  be  cast.

At  length,  the  Accuser  should  propose  his  charge :
that  he  had  seen,  or  by  some  other  proof  in  Court,
that  he  perfectly  well  knew,  that  the  Accused  had
conspired  or  done  something  against  the  King's  life;
or  to  move  a  sedition  in  the  Realm  or  Army  ;  or  to

f

have  consented,  or  given  Counsel,  or  delegated  an
authority,  towards  effecting  such  object ;  and  the  Ac-
cuser should  allege,  that  he  was  prepared  to  prove  his
charge,  according  to  the  direction  of  the  Court.2

Should  the  accused,  on  the  other  hand,  deny,  in  due
manner3  in  Court,  every  thing  the  other  had  asserted,
it  is  usual  to  decide  the  Plea  by  the  Duel.  And  here
it  should  be  observed,  that  from  the  moment  the  Duel
is  waged,  in  Pleas  of  the  kind  we  are  now  treating  of,
neither  of  the  parties  can  add  nor  diminish  any  thing
from  the  words  employed  in  waging  the  Duel,  or,  in
any  other  measure  decline  or  recede  from  his  under-
taking, without  being  held  as  conquered,  and  liable  to
the  penal  consequences.

1  But  this  the  Mirror  terms  an  abuse, (c.  5.)

2  See  Bracton  119.  a. Fleta  L.  1.  c.  21.  s.  2.

8  Seriatim  de  verbo  ad  verbum.  (Fleta  L.  1.  c.  21.  s.  2.)  Sufficit
si  communiter  se  defenderit  duni  tamen  de  causa:  (Ibid.)  a
greater  strictness  in  pleading  being  required  on  the  part  of  the
accuser  than  the  accused.


282

Nor  can  the  parties  be  afterwards  reconciled  to  each
other,  by  any  other  mode,  than  the  King's  License,  or
that  of  his  Justices.  But  if  the  Appellor  be  conquered,
he  shall  be  amerced  to  the  King,  the  nature  of  which
has  been  sufficiently  explained  in  a  former  part  of  this
work.

What  penalties  also  and  infamy  he  shall  incur,  if
conquered,  have  been  sufficiently  detailed.  If  the  Ac-
oused  be  conquered,  the  Judgment  that  awaits  him  has
been  mentioned  just  before,  to  which  may  be  added,  the
confiscation  of  all  his  Chattels,  and  the  perpetual  Dis-
inherison  of  his  Heirs.1

Every  free  Man  of  full  age  is  admissible  as  an  Ac-
cuser, in  a  prosecution  of  this  kind.  Should,  however,
a  Minor  bring  an  Appeal,  he  shall  be  attached,  in  the
manner  we  have  before  stated.  A  Rustic2  is  also  ad-
missible ;  but  a  Woman  shall  not  be  received  to  make
an  accusation  in  any  plea  of  Felony,  unless  in  some
particular  instances,  concerning  which  we  shall  pres-
ently speak.  But  the  Accuser  may,  in  Pleas  of  the
kind  we  are  discussing,  decline  the  Duel,  either  on
account  of  his  age,  or  by  reason  of  his  being  adjudged
to  have  received  a  Mayhem.2

1  So  great,  indeed,  is  the  crime,  says  Bracton,  that  scarcely  is
it  permitted  to  the  Heirs  that  they  should  live. (118.) In  speak-
ing of  Treason,  Bracton  warms  with  his  subject ;  and  the  grave
Lawyer  starts  into  the  animated  Orator.

2  A  Husbandman, says  Skene. (Reg. Maj.) I translate  the
\vord  literally,  and  refer  the  Reader  to  the  last  passage  -of  the
present  chapter. Vide  Mirror  c.  2.  s.  28.

3  Maliemium  is  said  to  be  derived from  the  old  French  word,
mehaigne. (Co.  Lilt.  126.  a.  288.  a. Cowell  and  Spelm.  Gloss.)


283

But  the  age  of  the  party,  in  such  a  case,  ought  to  be
sixty  years  or  upwards.  Mayhem  signifies  the  break-
ing of  any  bone,  or  injuring  the  head,  either  by
wounding  or  abrasion.  In  such  case,  the  Accused  is
obliged  to  purge  himself  by  the  Ordeal,  that  is,  by  the
hot  Iron,  if  he  be  a  free  Man — by  water,  if  he  be  a
Rustic.1

1  The  trial  by  Ordeal,  the  favorite  offspring  of  Superstition,
has  been  by  Fleury,  Le  Brun,  and  others,  supposed  to  be  derived
from  the  Ancients,  because  Pliny  (L.  8.  c.  2.)  mentions  a  family
in  Tuscany,  upon  whom  the  sacred  fire,  made  in  honor  of  Apollo,
had  no  effect.  But  M.  Houard,  with  much  more  appearance  of
reason,  imagines,  that  it  originated  from  the  Miracles  attributed
by  the  Christians  to  their  Saints.  (Traites  sur  les  coutumes
Anglo-Normand.  Tom.  1.  p.  577.)  However  that  may  be,  this
mode  of  Trial  existed  here  so  early  as  the  Reign  of  Ina  ;  and
William  the  first  found  it  in  use  in  this  country,  when  he  mounted
the  throne.  His  Normans,  attached  by  early  habit  to  the  Trial
by  Duel,  rejected  a  mode  of  decision,  which  appeared  to  them
as  a  superstitious  formality,  though  it  was  still  suffered  to  be
resorted  to  by  old  and  maimed  men,  and  by  women.  According
to  the  Laws  of  Ina,  the  accused  had  the  choice  of  the  Trial  by
fire,  or  that  by  water.  If.  lie  preferred  the  former,  an  Iron  was
prepared  that  weighed  three  pounds  at  the  most.  No  person,
except  the  Priest,  whose  duty  it  was  to  preside  on  the  occasion,
entered  the  Temple,  after  the  fire  destined  to  heat  the  Iron  was
kindled.  The  Iron  being  placed  upon  the  fire,  two  men  posted
themselves  on  each  side  of  the  Iron,  to  determine  upon  the  de-
gree of  heat  it  ought  to  possess.  As  soon  as  they  were  agreed
upon  this  point,  the  same  number  of  men  were  introduced  ab
utroque  latere,  and  they  also  placed  themselves  at  the  two  ex-
tremities of  the  Iron.  All  these  witnesses  passed  the  night
fasting,  &c.

At  day-break,  the  Priest,  after  sprinkling  them  with  the  holy-
water,  and  making  them  drink,  presented  them  with  the  Book  of
the  Evangelists  to  kiss,  and  then  crossed  them.  The  Mass  then
began.  From  that  moment,  the  fire  was  no  more  increased  :
but  the  Iron  was  left  on  the  embers,  until  the  last  Collect.  That
finished,  the  Iron  was  raised,  and  the  most  profound  silence  was
observed,  in  praying  the  Deity  to  manifest  the  truth.  At  this


284


CHAP.  II.

A  PLEA,  concerning  the  fraudulent  concealment  of
Treasure  Trove,  is  usually  managed,  in  the  manner  and
order  above  stated,  where  a  certain  Accuser  appears.1
But,  if  a  Man  is  accused  of  this  crime  by  the  public
voice  only,  it  is  not  usual,  according  to  the  Law  of  the
Land,  for  him  to  purge  himself  by  the  Ordeal,2
although  by  the  Assise  a  different  course  may  be  re-
sorted to,  unless  he  has  been  first  convicted,  or  has-
confessed  in  Court,  that  he  has  found  and  taken  some-
instant,  the  accused  took  the  Iron  into  his  hand,  and  carried  it
to  the  distance  of  nine  feet,  juxta  mensuram  pedum  ejus.  The
Trial  being  ended,  the  hand  of  the  accused  was  bound  up,  and
the  bandage  sealed  ;  and,  three  days  after,  the  hand  was  ex-
amined, to  ascertain  whether  it  was  or  not  impure,  which  M.
Houard,  thus  explains:  ce  qui  doit,  je  crois,  faire  entendre  que
Von  n'etoit  £>as  coupable,  quand  la  main  conservoit  des  marques
de  brulure  mais  seulement  lorsqne  la  brulure  tomboit  en  supura-
tion.  (ubi  supra.}  But,  if  the  accused  elected  the  Trial  by
Water,  then,  the  Water  was  placed  in  a  Vessel,  and  heated  to
the  highest  degree.  For  inferior  Crimes,  the  accused  plunged
his  arm  up  to  the  wrist  :  for  crimes  of  deeper  dye,  he  plunged  it
up  to  the  Elbow.  In  every  other  part  of  the  ceremony,  the  two
species  of  Trial  by  water  and  fire  agreed.  (LL.  Inae  c.  77.)  The
Mirror  coincides  with  the  text  of  Glanville,  (c.  3.  s.  23.)  and
Lord  Hale  informs  us,  "that  in  all  the  time  of  King  John  the
"  purgation  per  ignem  et  aquam,  or  the  Trial  by  Ordeal,  contin-
"  ued,  as  appears  by  frequent  Entries  upon  the  Eolls  ;  but,  it
"  seems  to  have  ended  with  this  king,  for  I  do  not  find  it  in  use
"  in  any  time  after."  (Hist.  Com.  Law.  152.)

1  Vide  Bracton  119.  b. Britton  c.  17.  s.  1. Dial,  de  Scacc.  L.  2.
s.  10. The  modern  French  Code  gives  the  treasure  to  the  person
•who  finds  it,  if  the  owner  of  the  Estate  :  if  not,  half  to  him,  and
the  other  half  to  the  owner  of  the  Estate. (Code  Napoleon.)

2  Yet  see  LL.  Hen.  1.  c.  63.  Ed.  Wilkins.


285

kind  of  Metal  in  the  place  in  question.1  But,  if  upon
this  fact  the  party  be  convicted,  the  presumption  be-
ing against  him,  he  shall  be  obliged  to  purge  himself
by  the  Ordeal,  that  he  had  not  found  or  taken  any
more  from  the  place  in  question.  In  other  respects,
the  proceedings  are  as  before  stated.


CHAP.  III.

WHEN  any  one  is  accused  of  Homicide,2  the  Judg-
ment is  regulated  by,  and  proceeds  on,  the  distinction
before  laid  down.  It  should,  however,  be  observed,
that  it  is  not  usual  to  dismiss  upon  pledges  a  person
accused  of  this  Crime,  unless  in  compliance  with  the
King's  pleasure.  But  there  are  t\vo  species  of  Homi-
cide. The  first  is  called  Murder  which  is  secretly  per-
petrated— no  one  seeing — no  one  knowing  of  it,3  save

1  At  the  time  of  Bracton,  a  probable  presumption  of  a  man's
having  possessed  himself  of  treasure-trove,  arising  from  his  sud-
den dressing  or  living  in  a  higher  style  than  he  had  been  accus-
tomed to,  was  held  a  sufficient  ground  to  commit  the  party  to
Gaol. (120.  a.)

2  Vide  Fleta  L.  1.  c.  23. Bracton.  120.  b.  134.  a.

3  "  The  name  of  murder  (as  a  crime)  was  anciently  applied  to
"  the  secret  killing  of  another  which  the  word  moerda  signifies
"  in  the  Teutonic  Language." (4  Bl.  Comm.  194.) In  support  of
this  position,  the  learned  Judge  cites  the  present  passage  of  our
author's  text. Other  authorities  may  be  added. Murtre, est
quant  home  est  tue  de  miit  ou  de  repos  dehors  on  dedans  vill.
(Assises  de  Jerusalem,  c.  85.) Porro  mnrdrum  proprie.  dicatur,
mors  alicujus  occidta  cujus  iuterfector  ignoratnr. (Dialog,  de
Scacc.  L.  1.  s.  10. See  also  Bracton  121. Fleta  34.  s.  6. Britton
c.  6.  s.  1.  and  c.  23. — Regiam  Majestatem  L.  4.  c.  5.)


286

the  person  committing  it,  and  his  Accomplices,  so
that  Hue  and  Cry  l  cannot  be  presently  made  after  the
Offenders,  as  ordained  by  the  Statute 2  upon  this  subject.

To  prosecute  an  accusation  of  this  kind  no  one  is
admissible,  unless  he  be  of  the  blood  of  the  deceased,
and  under  such  restrictions  is  this  rule  adhered  to,
that  the  nearer  Heir  shall  exclude  the  more  remote
from  the  Appeal.3

There  is  also  another  species  of  Homicide,  as  ap-
pears from  the  general  Term,  which  is  called  simple
Homicide.

In  this  suit  also  no  one  is  admissible  to  prove  the
Accusation,  unless  he  be  allied  in  blood  to  the  de-
ceased,4 or  be  connected  with  him  by  the  tie  of  Hom-
age, or  Dominion,  so  that  he  can  speak  of  the  death
upon  the  testimony  of  his  own  sight.  It  should  also
be  added,  that  a  Woman  5  is  heard  in  this  suit,  accus-

1  Clamor  popularis  is  the  expression,  which,  on  the  authority
of  Lord  Coke,  I  have  rendered  Hue  and  Cry. Lord  Coke  informs
us,  it  was  known  before  the  conquest. (2  Inst.  171.  172.) It  does
not  appear to  have  been  peculiar  to  this  country,  as  a  similar
institution  seems  anciently  to  have existed  in  some  parts  of
France. (Beaumanoir  c.  67.)

2  "  This  Statute  is  not  now  extant,"  says  Lord  Coke. (2  Inst*
171.)

3  De  multro (murder)  rel  Homicidio propinquior  in  gencre
sequelam  faciendi  retinet  potestatem :  Si  autem  propinquior  in
non  cetate  fuerit  vel  cetatem  transegerit,  alius  propinquior  inte-
resse  poterit  in  sequela,  vel  alias  de  genere  in  quern  consenserit
omnis parentela. (Le  Grand  Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  69. See  also
Britton  c.  1.  s.  11.)  4  Vide  Co.  Litt.  25.  a.

5  "  And  yet  not  of  all  the  wives,  but  of  her  only  who  lieth  be-
"  tween  his  arms,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  in  whose  seisin.


287

ing  any  one  of  her  Husband's  death,1  if  she  speak  as
being  an  Eye-witness 2  to  the  fact,  because  Husband
and  Wife  are  one  flesh.  And  a  Woman  is  generally
admitted  to  be  heard,  accusing  any  one  of  having
committed  an  injury  upon  her  person,  as  will  be  pres-
ently shewn.  It  is  at  the  election  of  the  accused  either

».'

to  abide  by  the  Woman's  proof,  or  to  purge  himself
by  the  Ordeal,  from  the  crime  imputed  to  him.  A
person  accused  of  Homicide  is  sometimes  compelled
to  undergo  the  legal  Purgation,  if  he  was  taken  in

"  he  was  murdered  ;  for  if  he  had  many  wives,  and  all  were
"  alive  at  the  time  of  his  murder,  nevertheless  she  only  is  ad-
"  mitted  to  bring  the  appeal  of  all  the  rest,  whom  he  last  took
"  to  wife  ;  and  the  reason  thereof  is,  because  it  belongeth  not  to
'•  the  Temporal  Court  to  try  who  was  his  wife  of  right,  and
"  which,  in  fact,  and  the  appeals  of  all  others  are  to  be  sus-
"  pended,  pendant  the  same  appeal  brought  "  (Mirror  c.  2.  s.  7.
See  also  Bracton  125.  a.  Fleta  L.  1.  c.  35.  and  2  Inst.  316.)

1  Lord Coke, in  two instances,  cites the  present chapter  of
Glanville  as  one  of  the  authorities  on  which  he  founds  his  asser-
tion, that  previously  to  the  Great  Charter  a  woman,  as  well  as  a
man,  might  have  had  an  appeal  of  the  death  of  any  of  her  An-
cestors. (Co. Litt.  23.  b.  and 2 Inst.  68.) It is impossible  to
conceive  how  Glanville  corroborates  this  bold  position. He  is
a  very  strong  authority  for  the  contrary  doctrine,  and  excludes
expressly  in  this  chapter  and  by  relation  in  the  first  chapter  of
the  present  Book,  a  woman's  right  of  appeal  in  every  instance,
except  that  of  the  death  of  her  Husband,  and  that  of  a  personal
injury. Bracton  also  In  the  most  decided  language  confines  a
woman's  right  of  appeal  to  these  two  instances, (fo.  125,  and
148.) Great  as  Lord  Coke  is,  his  deductions  and  citations  from
the  more  ancient  writers  are  not  by  any  means  implicitly  to  be
relied  upon. His  name  has  thrown  a  lustre  over  many  an  error.
Nothing  would  be  more  easy  than to  adduce  innumerable  in-
stances in  support  of  the  truth  of  this  assertion.

2  For  it  was  a  good  ground  of  defence,  that  the  Plaintiff  was
not  present  at  the  time  when  the  mortal  blow  was  given. (Vide
2  Inst.  316.)


288

flight  by  a  Crowd  pursuing  him,  and  this  be  regularly
proved  in  Court  by  a  Jury  of  the  County.


CHAP. IT.

THE  Crime  of  Burning1  is  proceeded  upon,  discussed
and  terminated,  under  the  form  and  order  we  have
described.


CHAP. V.

THE  Crime  of  Bobbery  2  may  also  be  passed  over,  as
the  suit  has  nothing  to  distinguish  it  from  the  others.


CHAP. VI.3

THE  Crime  of  Rape4  is  that  with  which  a  "Woman
charges  a  Man  when  she  alleges,  that  he  committed  a

1  "  Burners  are  those,"  says  the  Mirror,  "  who burn  a  City,
"  Town,  House,  Men,  Beasts,  or  other  Chattels,  feloniously  in
"  time  of  peace  for  hatred  or  revenge." (Mirror  c.  1.  s.  8. See
also  Britton  chap.  19.)

2  Roberta,  so  called,  says  Lord Coke,  because the  goods  are
taken  as  it  were  de  la  robe,  from  the  Eobe,  that  is  from  the  per-
son. (Co. Litt.  288.  a.  and  3.  Inst.  67.) Cowell  deduces  the
term  from  the  French  robbe,  vestis,  and  Spelman  from  raubas,
meaning  the  same  thing. The  Saxons  used  their  term  reaferar
in  a  similar  sense,  reaf  signifying,  vestis. For  Travellers  had  in
former times rarely  any  thing  but their dress of  which  they
could be  robbed. (See  Cowell  and Spelm.  Gloss.) Under  the
Laws  of  Ina  the  punishment  of  Robbery  was  to  restore  the  tiling
purloined,  and  to  pay  a  fine  of  60  shillings. (LL.  Inge.  c.  10.)

8  For  obvious  reasons  I  have  translated  the  present  Chapter  in
a  general  manner. 4  Vide  Mirror  c.  1.  s.  12.  and  Bracton  147.  a.


289

Violence  on  her  person,  whilst  in  the  King's  peace.1
A  Woman,  having  suffered  any  such  violence,  is  bound
immediately,  whilst  the  crime  is  recent,  to  go  to  the
nearest  village,  and  there  state  the  injury  to  respect-
able Men,  and  shew  the  external  marks  of  violence.2
She  should,  in  the  next  place,  do  the  same  thing  to
the  Chief  Officer  of  the  Hundred  ;  and,  lastly,  she
should  publicly  complain  of  her  injury  in  the  next
County  Court.  An  accusation  of  this  kind  being  made,
the  Judgment  is  as  before  laid  down.  A  "Woman,  ac-
cusing any  one  of  such  a  Crime,  is  heard  in  the  same
manner,  as  is  usual  concerning  any  other  personal  in-
jury which  has  been  offered  her.  But  it  should  be
understood,  tha  it  is  at  the  Election  of  the  Accused
in  such  a  Case,  either  to  submit  to  the  burthen  of
making  Purgation,  or  to  sustain  the  woman's  proof
against  him.  It  should  likewise  be  remarked,  that  if
any  one  be  convicted  in  a  suit  of  this  kind,  the  Judg-
ment will  be  similar  to  that  in  the  foregoing  suits.
Nor  will  it  suffice,  after  Judgment,  if  the  Malefactor
wish  to  take  the  Woman  he  has  injured  to  Wife.  For
thus  it  would  frequently  happen,  that  Men  of  servile
condition  would,  by  reason  of  one  pollution,  bring
perpetual  disgrace  upon  Women  of  noble  birth,  or  that
Men  of  high  rank  would  be  disgraced  by  inferior
Women,  and  thus  dishonor  their  fair  lineage.  But,

1  Vide  LL.  Gul.  Conq.  c.  19.  and  2.  Inst.  180.  181.

2  Visio  aidem  virginis  deflorate^  per  septem  mulieres  viduas
•vel  maritatas  fide  dignas  debet  fieri,  per  quas,  si  necessefuerit,  de
defloratione  veritas  recordetur. (Grand  Custum.  de  Norm.  c.
67. See  also  Britton  c.  1.  s.  30.  &c.)

19


290

previously  to  Judgment,  it  is  customary  for  the  "Woman
and  the  accused  to  be  reconciled,  bv  means  of  a  mar-

/ •/

riage  between  them ;  but  this  step  is  authorised  by
the  License  of  the  Prince,  or  that  of  his  Justices,  and
the  consent  of  the  Parents.


CHAP.  VII.

THE  crime  of  Falsifying,1  in  a  general  sense,  com-
prises under  it  many  particular  species.  As,  for  ex-
ample,  false  Charters — false  Measures — false  Money-
and  others  of  a  similar  description,  which  contain  such
a  falsifying,  on  which  a  person  ought  to  be  accused
and,  if  convicted,  condemned.  The  manner  and  order
of  prosecuting  these  different  species  of  the  crime  may
be  sufficiently  collected,  from  what  has  gone  before.
One  thing,  however,  should  be  observed,  that  if  a  per-
son be  convicted  of  falsifying  a  charter,  it  becomes
necessary  to  distinguish,  whether  it  be  a  royal2  or  a
private  charter ;  because  in  the  former  case,  the  party,
when  convicted  of  this  offence,  shall  be  condemned,  as
in  the  crime  of  laese  majesty.  But,  if  the  charter  be  a
private  one,  then,  the  person  convicted  is  to  be  dealt
with  in  a  milder  manner,  as  in  other  inferior  crimes  of

1  See  Britton  c.  4. Bracton  119.  b.  and  Fleta  L.  1.  c.  22.

2  Of  the  king's  Charters,  says  Bracton,  neither  the  Justices  nor
private  Individuals  can  dispute,  nor  interpret  them,  if  a  doubt
arise  ;  but  recourse  must  be  had  to  the  king  himself ;  and  if  the
Charters  be  defective,  through  rasure,  or  from  a  false  seal  being
attached  to  them,  it  is  better  and  safer  to  decide  the  matter  in
the  king's  presence. (Bracton  fo.  34.  a.)


291

Falsifying,  which  are  punished  by  the  loss  of  members
onlv, according  to the  will and beneficence  of  the

v *  "

princely  disposition,  as  we  formerly  observed.


CHAP.  VIII.

As  to  Thefts  and  other  Pleas  which  fall  within  the
Jurisdiction  of  the  Sheriff, 1  as  they  are  conducted  and
decided  according  to  the  various  customs  of  different
Counties,  they  fall  not  within  the  scope  of  my  present
plan,  which  is  solely  confined  to  the  subject  of  the
Chief  Court.

The  Book  of  the  Laws  of  England  is  finished.

1  Having  already  observed,  that  this  part  of  the  Sheriff's  Juris-
diction was  taken  away  by  Magna  Carta,  I  shall  conclude  these
Notes  with  extracting  a  passage  from  the  Norman  Code,  from
which  we  may  collect  most  of  the  various  branches  of  the  Sher-
iff's Jurisdiction  and  his  duty,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Lawyers  of
Normandy.  Offlcium  autem  Vicecomitis  est  placita  tenere  :  vias
antiquas  et  semitas  et  limites  aperire :  aquas  vero  transmotas  ad
cursum  debitum  reducere,  et  de  malefactoribus  et  seditiosis  mulie-
ribus  et  arsionibus  et  deflorationibus  virginum  violentis  et  ceteris
actibus  criminosis  diligenter  et  secrete  inquirere.  (Le  Grand
Custum.  de  Norm.  c.  4.)


INDEX.


PAGE

ABBOTS  cannot  without  King's  consent  alien 123

of  Canons  Kegular  may  appear  for  their  Order 229

Absence  of  Lords 65

. of  Parties 30

. of  Summoners 26

. of  Tenant 27

. of  Demandant 28

Accusations , 278

Accuser,  certain  or  uncertain 278,  279

Admeasurement  of  Dower — Writ  of 112

Administration,  who  entitled  to 137

Advocatio  (Note  1.) 69

Advowsons — general  doctrine  of,  begins  at 69

yEsnecia  (Note  1.) 127

Afforciament  (Note  1. ) 53

Age,  Writ  to  ascertain  261

Aids  (Note  1.) 190

Aisiamenta  (Note  1. ) 239

Allegiance 177,  178

Amercements 202

in  County  Courts  belong  to  Sheriff 193

Appeal  of  Felony 141

Appellans  (Note  3. ) 275

Appeals,  who  may  prosecute 282

Arbelastarius  (Note  1.) 232

Arrha  (Note  4.) 216

Assisa  (Note  1.) 36

293


294  INDEX.

PAGE

Assise  Grand  (see  Grand  Assise) 44

Assises,  general  doctrine  of,  begins  at 246

Assise  of  darrein  presentment 263

-  mort  d'auncestor 246

-  novel  disseisin 270

-  when  it  lies  not  for  burgage  tenure 255

Attachment  (Note  1.) 66

Attornato  faciendo — Writ  de 226

Attornies— general  doctrine  concerning,  begins  at 223

Attorney  may  cast  Essoins  for  himself 226

may  be  removed 228

Avuneulus  (Note  1. ) 125

B.

Bailiff  cannot,  as  such,  appear  as  Attorney ...  225

Ballivus  (Note  1.) 225

Banco,  Justicii  in  (Note  2. ) 41

Bare  (Note  3.) 173

Bastards  cannot  inherit 147

formerly  inherited  in  Wales  (Note  1.) 148

-  who  succeed  to , 150

Bastardy,  when  bar  to  an  Assise 254

-  Writ  to  inquire  concerning 148

Bishops  cannot  without  King's  consent  alien 123

do  not  when  consecrated  perform  Homage 180

-  do  when  consecrated  perform  Fealty 180

Bladum  (Note  2.) 33

Boscus  (Note  2.) 239

Breve  (Note  4.) 4

Burgage  Tenure — not  entitles  King  to  Custody 142

when  it  bars  an  Assise 255

C.

Campio  (Note  2.) 36

Capital  Messuage  not  allotted  in  Dower 108


INDEX.  295

PAGE

Cellarii  (Note  1.) 229

Champion,  when,  hired,  inadmissible 38

-  if  formerly  a  Villein,  objectionable 89

when  conquered  how  punished 39

—  collusively  vouched  (Note  2. ) 219

Charters,  proof  of 214

-  falsifying 290

Chattels  when  forfeited 152,  156

-  of  Intestate 151

—  of  Usurer 151

-  not  distrained  for  non-appearance 199

Chief  Manor  not  allotted  in  Dower 109

Chirograph 168

Clamat  (Note  1.) 5

Clamor  popularis 286

Coin  false 290

CommodatiiDi  (Note  2.) 214

Concord,  why  called  Final 166

breach  of,  how  punished 167

Concords,  general  doctrine  of, — begins  at 161

Conditions 206

Conductum  (Note  1. ) 221

Confiscation 282

Consanguinity  in  questions  of  freedom 85

in  questions  of  Intestacy 137

bar  to  Assise  of  Mart  d'auncestor 255

Constitution  (Note  1.) 49

Consuetudines  (Note  4. ) 165

Consuetudinibus  et  servitiis — Writ  de 192

Contempt  of  Court 30,  66,  &c.

Contemptus  Brevium  (Note  4.) 4

Contenement  (Note  3.) 190

Contracts  private 221

Counts,  when  they  vary  from  Writ,  effect  of 244

Courts  inferior — when  allowed  Records 170,  173


296  INDEX.


PAGE


Courts,  County — differ  in  their  Customs 244

of  Lords — differ  in  their  Customs 234

Crimenfalsi  (Note  2.) 2,  290

Croftum  (Note  3.) 164

Curtesy  of  England  (Note  1.) 158

Custody  of  Heirs 139

discharges  Relief — when 184

Customs 128,  133

Custum  (Note  1.) 29

D.

Darrien  presentment — Writ  of 263

Debt— Writ  of 198

Debts — Pleas  concerning 198

—  how  proved 213

Default,  how  punished 1&

Deposit 199

Descents,  general  Canons  of 124

•  amongst Grecians, Normans, Lombardi, &c.

(NoteS.) 125

Desponsatio  (Note  1.) 94

Disseisins 270

Distresses 103,  179,  191,  199,  228,  &c.

Divisa  (Note  1.) 133

Divorce  for  Incontinence  bars  Dower 110

for  Relationship  bars  Dower 110

Dominium  (Note  1.) 123

Dower,  general  doctrine  of,  begins  at 93

—  in  what  senses  used 93

ad  Ostium  Ecdesice 94

Ex  assensu  Patris Ill

admeasurement  of 95

how  demanded 101

not  of  land  already  in  Dower 109

its  assignment  not  postponed  for  Heir's  Infancy


INDEX.  297


PAGE


Dower,  barred  by  Divorce  for  Incontinence  or  Relationship.  110

—  Writ  of  Right  of 99

Duel,  Trial  by 33

its  rise  and  decline  (Note  1.) 34

reason  of  (Note  1.) 35

not  allowed  in  questions  of  Villenage 88

not  waged  by  Villein-born  though  Knighted. 89

Courts  not  bound  to  defend  their  Records  by 171

-  Courts  bound  to  defend  their  Judgments  by 171

-  in  Criminal -matters 282

when  only  compromised  by  License 282


Duodecimo,  Manu  (Note  2.) 8


E.

Earnest 216

Ecclesiastical  Court — holds  not  plea  of  Debt — when 212

when  it  has  Jurisdiction  generally. ..  245

Election  of  Knights  on  Grand  Arsise 48

Enfranchisement — modes  of  effecting 88

— under  Saxons  (Note  1. ) 88

Escanibium  (Note  1. ) 61

—  when  Bracton  wrote  (Note  1. ) 61

Escheat  for  want  of  Heir 154

for  incontinence  of  female  Heir 154

for  felony 154

—  for  conviction  of  Theft 156

—  for  Outlawry 155

Essoins,  principal  kinds  of  (Note  1.) 6

—  general  doctrine  of — begins  at 6

—  not  allowed  by  one  of  full  age  against  Minor 256

-  nor  in  Novel  Disseisins 251

-  may  be  cast  by  Attorney  for  himself 226

Essoiners  may  appoint  Essoiners 18

Writ  to  take  as  Defaulters. .  13


298  INDEX.

PAGE

Essonium  (Note  1.) 6

Exceptions  to  Jurors 50

Exchequer 142

Executors — who 136

F.

Failure  of  Justice  in  Lord's  Court 234

Faldce  (Note  2.) 165

Faldcesecta  (Note  2.) ..  165

Falsifying  Judgments 172

False-claim,  punishable 30

Fama publica  (Note  2. ) 278

Fealty 129,  157

Fee,  how  lost 179

Felony — appeal  of 141

-  forfeits  Land 154

Females,  Custody  of 143

Feme  sole  may  make  a  Testament 134

covert  cannot  without  Husband's  consent. .  134


Feodum  (Note  2.) 103

Fidei  interpositio  (Note  2.) 280

Final  Concord— forms  of 162,  163

Fine — bar  to  Assise  of  Mort  d'auncestor 254

Fines — general  doctrine  of — begins  at 161

Forfeitures 154,  155,  156,  179,  282,  &c.,  &c.

Forgeries 290

Forinseca  (Note  1.) 165

Forisfacio  (Note  2.) 146

Forisfamiliatus  (Note  1.) 131

Fossatum  (Note  4.) 272

Francalmoigne 114

Freedom,  how  proved 85

not  to  be  purchased  with  Villein's  own  money. . .  89

means  of  acquiring 88

Frussetum  (Note  2.) 164


INDEX.  299

G.

PAGE

Gifts  of  Land — how  far  allowed 114

defective  without  seisin 114

Grand  Assise 44

-  bars  to 42

-  the  Essoins  it  allows 49

-  concerning  what  things 51

•Gylda  (Note  4.) 90

H.

Heirs— how  far  bound  by  Ancestors'  Gifts 124

how  divided 124

when  disinherited  (see  Forfeiture,  Escheat,  &c.)

— in  right  line  preferred  to  transverse  line 124,  129

Heres  remotior  (Note  4. ) 117

-  Ultimus,  a  Man's  Lord 153

Hiring 221

Homage,  difference  between  and  Fealty  (Note  1.) 128

-  performed  by  Husband  of  Eldest  Daughter 128

—  general  doctrine  of,  begins  at 175

—  must  be  received  by  Lord,  when 177

—  performed  to  several  Lords  for  different  Fees 177

—  liege,  when  due 177

-  form  of 177

-  effect  of 178

•  not  performed  by  Women 176

—  not  by  consecrated  Bishops 180

—  for  what  due 181

to  whom 182

Homicide,  its  species 285

—  properly  so  called 286

— not  bailable 281,  285

Hue  and  Cry 286

Husbands — their  power  over  their  Wives'  Inheritance 129

perform  Homage  for  Wives'  Land 177


300  INDEX.


I.

PAGE

Impetitio  (Note  1.) 262

Imprisonment 279,  281

Incendiaries 288

Incontinence  in  female  Heirs  how  punished 146

divorce  for,  bar  to  dower 110

Infamy 56

Institution  (Note  1.) 49

Interrogations  in  Pleas  of  Crown 279

Intestacy 136,  151


J.


Judgments  inferior  Courts  bound  to  defend  by  Duel 171

-  falsifying 172

in  Capital  Offences 280

Judicium  Dei 282

Jurata 46,  194

Juris  Utrum  (Note  1.) 266

Jurors 50,  194

Justices  Itinerant  (Note  2.) 151

Jnsticia  (Note  3. ) 141

Justiciare  (Note  1. ) 192

Justicii  in  Banco  (Note  2.) 41


K.

King's  Death,  crime  of 2,  278

Peace 3,  27,  30,  &c.

Writ  of  Warranty 8

-  Charters  falsifying 290

Knight's  Heir  in  custody  of  Lord 140

Knights  summoned  as  Jurors  on  Grand  Assise 48

Knight's  Fee,  relief  of 185

Knight,  if  formerly  Villein,  objectionable  as  Champion 90


INDEX.  301

L.

PAGE

Languor  (Note  2.) , 15

Law,  loss  of 39

Laese  Majesty 2,  278

Legacy 187

Lex  Apparens  (Note  2. ) 279

Libertate  probanda,  writ  de 84

Limitation  of  Mart  cV  Auncestor 247

of  Novel  Disseisin 272

Loans „ 199

Locatum  (Note  1.) 221

Lords  may  distrain  their  Tenants 179


M.


Magna  Assisa  Eligenda,  writ  of 48

Mahemium  (Note  3.) 282

Manor  chief  not  to  be  allotted  in  Dower 109

Maritagium  (Note  1. ) 113

Marriage  of  female  Heirs — Lords  consulted  on 144

Marriage-hood,  free  or  not 156

Mayhem  protects  from  duel 282

-  what  282

Measures  false 290

Medletum  or  Melletum  (Note  1. ) 3

Messuage  capital 109,  127

Metal  discovering 284

Minor  when  bound  to  answer  generally 260

must  answer  Minor  in  his  custody 140

no  Essoin  against,  by  one  of  full  age 317

Minority  of  Heir  of  a  Knight 139

of  a  Sockman 139

—  of  a  Burgess 139

Misericordia  (Note  1 . ) 28

Mort  d1  Auncestor,  Assise  of 257


302  INDEX.

PAGE

Mort  cVAuncestor,  bars  to 254

writ  of 247,  &c.

Mortgage 284

when  usurious 209

Mulier  (Note  1.) 97

Miilieratus  filius  (Note  2.) 116

Mutuum  (Note  1.) 204

Murder 285

-  not  bailable 2,  285

N.

Nativus  (Note  2.) 83

Ne  injuste  vexes,  writ  of 237

Niliil  habet,  writ  of 106

Non-plevin  (Note  1. ) 14

Novel- Disseisin,  assise  of 270

-  meaning  of  Term  (Note  1.) 270

-  allows  no  Essoin .250,  274

-  allows  of  vouching  warrantor 275

Nuisances 194,  273,  274

O.

Ordeal  (Note  1.) . . 283

Outlawry 154

Oxland  (Note  2.) 162

P.

Parage  (Note  3.) 181

Parentela  (Note  3.) 110

Pares  (Note  1.) 180

Pasture,  admeasurement  of 238

—  disseisin  of 274

Perjury 55

Persona  (Note  2.) , 69


INDEX.  303


PAGE


Pleas,  how  divided 1

—  criminal  appertaining  to  Crown 2,  278

-  criminal  appertaining  to  Sheriff  3

civil  discussed  iu  King's  Court !>

-  civil  discussed  in  Sheriff's  Court 4,  2:;<>

Pledges 27,  200

-  in  criminal  cases 6,  7,  279

of  Essoiners,  writ  to  summon 13

Pone,  writ  of 100

Possession,  writs  to  deliver 14,  40,  &c.

Prcecipe  quod  reddat,  writ  of 5

Precarice  (Note  3. ) 165

Presentation,  when  devolving  on  Tenant  in  Dower 109

Proclamo  (Note  1.) 86

Prohibition,  writs  of 46,  82,  &c.

Purchase 216

Purgation  by  ordeal 283

Purpresture,  or  Propresture 193

Putagium  (Note  3.) 147

Q.

Qncestus,  or  Questus  (Note  3.) 95

Quit-claim 254

R.

Rape 2,  289

Rationabili  parte  Bonorum,  writ  of 137,  240

Eationabilibus  divisis,  writ  of 197,  239

Eecognitiones  (Note  2.) 4

Recognitions,  general  doctrine  of 246

Record,  courts  of 170

Records,  of  inferior  courts  not  conclusive 170

when  allowed  to  inferior  courts 170

no  court  bound  to  defend  by  Duel 171


304  INDEX.

PAGE

Recreantisa  (Note  3.) 39

Rectatus  (Note  2.) 27

Reliefs 184

Relief  of  Knight's  Fee 185

of  Socage  Lands 185

of  Baronies 185

once  paid  not  again  due 184

when  not  due  (Note  2.) 184

Replegiare  (Note  1.) 73

Replegiare  de  averiis,  writ  of 238

Reseantisa  (Note  1.) 10

Respectus  (Note  1.) 22

Responsalis  (Note  1.) 223

Right,  writs  of 231,  233,  &c.

Robbery 288

Roberta  (Note  2.) 288

Rustic  may  bring  an  Appeal 282

tried  by  water-ordeal 283

S.

Sale 216

Seals 213

:Sedition 2,  278

Seisina  (Note  2.) . 7

Seneschallus  (Note  2.) 225

Sequela  (Note  1.) 238

Serjeanties 186

Servientes  (Note  1.) 20

Domini  Regis  (Note  1. ) 20

Sextarii  (Note  1.) 47

Sheriffs,  their  jurisdiction 2,  4,  236,  &c.

entitled  to  Amercements  in  county  courts 193

Socagium  (Note  3.) 118

Socage  Lands,  how  descendible 126

how  long  partible  (Note  2.) 126


INDEX.  305

PAGE

Socage  Lands,  Relief  of 185

Sockman's  Heir  in  whose  custody 142

Stagnum  (Note  1. ) 273

Steward  cannot,  as  such,  act  as  Attorney 223

Stika,  or  Stica  (Note  2.) 47

Succession,  Rules  of 124

Suits,  how  removed  from  Lord's  to  County  Court 235

Summons,  doctrine  of,  begins  at 5

-  writs  of 5,  48,  &c.

Suretyship 201

T.

Tales 52

Terminus  (Note  2.) 22

Testaments  134

Theft 2,  156,  &c.

cognisable  by  Sheriffs 2

Toft  (Note  3.) 162

Treasure  Trove 2,  284

Treason 2,  278,  &c.

Turbaria  (Note  4.) 164

U.

Ultima  presentatio,  Assise  of • 262

Ultimus  Heres,  a  Man's  Lord 153

Utlagatus  (Note  3. ) 154

Usury,  when  Mortgage  amounts  to 209

punishment  of 151

Usurers,  not  convicted  whilst  living 151

V.

Vassal.. . , ITS

Vicinetum  (Note  1.) 32

View 31

20


306


USDEX.


PAGE

View,  writ  directing 33

Villa  privilegiata  (Note  3.) 90

Villeins-born, 91

Villenage,  general  doctrine  of,  begins  at 83

-  plea  of,  not  held  by  Sheriff 84

—  when  bar  to  an  Assise 254

Villenagium  (Note  1. ) 83

W.

Wardship 139,  258,  &c.

Warrantia  Did,  writ  of • 8

Warrantor,  writ  to  compel  him  to  appear C2

Warrantus  (Note  2.) 59

Warranty,  general  doctrine  of,  begins  at 59

—  writ  of 62,  102

—  vendors  bound  in , 218

Waste  of  Felon's  Lands - 155

Widows  must  ask  Lord's  consent  to  marry 145

—  not  liable  to  custody 147

do  not  forfeit  for  Incontinence 147

Wife  cannot,  in  Husband's  life,  sell  her  dower 97

her  husband  may  sell  her  Dower 97

may  appoint  Husband  her  Attorney 227

Will  of  Lands  not  allowed 115,  136

-  of  personal,  how  far  allowed 134

witnesses  to 136

—  under  Ecclesiastical  cognizance 137

Women  can  do  no  Homage 1^6

-  in  what  cases  they  can  prosecute  Appeals 286,  287

Writs,  Errors  in  the  effect  of 244

forms  of. .  .  .5,  8,  12, 13,  14,  15,  25,  32,  40,  &c.,  &c.


FINIS.


*»••«

*


\PR9 1958


fc

CVi

S


G.
«tf

v,


I


«o


0)


0)


fl)


to


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED
