7 We


AS AB
VEN Pe tts | RATA rh NN aietre Sun Senet ey


eT


= aaee = ———SS— - ae —— —————
EO ee GO arn Se oe ee A ee ee a ee


OEE


nee


ay gayi (evrvreeenimeverbeanesiiy


UA LQEOIVYAOUAVUNAEUR EEE EATER ces


vee ses 1
UA


ae


And Sa Ll percewued that it was Samuel, ang
fouped with his face to the gromvd. and:


omed horns. i Sarmuiel ha $98: pe1 :
ti os e ik koh “Ww. Faith orne. fee


SS


=
a
<3 :
=


cls


DESH) BLYURUTLE


re


4


ANS BUAER


BSS
oteces


il


SS


SISOS SOS 2S


i


Ey


ie


ee


u


VTL ELL LLL LL Lge a


ix


hatne


Wea Le i


Saducifmus Triumpbatus :
OR,
Full and Plain EVIDENCE


Concerning


WITCHES


AND


APPARITIONS.
In Two PARTS.


The Firft treating of their


POSSIBILITY:


The Second of their
Real Exiftence,


ofeph Glanvil, late Chaplain in Ordinary
to His Majefty, and Fellow of the Royal Society.


Che Third Lditfon,


The Advantages whereof above the former, the
Reader may underftand out of Dt H. Agore’s Ac-
count prefixed thereunto.


With two Authentick, but wonderful Stories of certain Swedifh
Witches; done into Englifhby A. HORNEE€K, D.D,


London, Printed for S. L, and are to be fold by Anth, Bajkervile, ar
the Bible, the Corner of Effex-ftreet, without Temple-Bar,
M DC LXXXIX.


PUBLISHER


T.0 wE. HE


READER,


"HAT thou haft no fooner enjoyed this long
expected Edition, thou canft not juftly blame
either the Author or my felf. Not my felf,
for 4 could not publi{b the Book before I had it ; nor


the Author , becaufe many unexpected occafions lee


off his Mind to other matters, and interrupted him in
his prefent defig git, infomuch that he was anes away
by Death before he had quite finifhed it. But though
the | learned World may very well lament the lofs of fo
ble and ingenious a Writer , yet as to this prefent
point, if that wea Ly mitigate thy for row, t# all likelihood


this Boak hed noe [een the light fo [oon if he bad li-


ved, fo many emergent occafh ions giving bins new in-
terruption, and offering him new temptations to fur-
ther delay.

Indeed it had been defirable that it might have had
the polifbing of | his laft hand, as the perufer of his Pa=
pers fi eH his laft Advertilement. But to com-
penfate this lofs, the [aid Perufer , a Friend as well
to


k, yA


:
Sieben eas rng Ste ae oe eae ; eS ge ene oe ee ;
~ : ee ae es = a =
leeds vas . Pe
a a : ia> ¥ tag
eh 2 shee a = ? ie


ah ade pO


Sead
px


a The PUBLISHER


to his Defign as to his Perfon , has digefted thofe
Materials he left, into that order and diftinitne/s,ana
bias fo tied things together, and {upplied them in bis
Advertifements, that, to the judicious Reader, no-
thing cav (eem wanting that may ferve the ends of his
intended Treatife.. Not to intimate what. confides
yable things are added, more than tt is likely had been,
if he had finifbed it himfelf: For, befides the Ad-
vertifements of the careful Perufer of his Papers,
and. thofe two notable late Stories of the Swedifh
Witches, tranflated out of German into the Englifh
Tongue, there és alfo added a foort Treatife of the
true and genuine Notion of a Spirit, taken out of
Dr. More’s Enchiridion Metaphyficum, to exter-
tain. thofethat are more curious fearchers into the nas
ture of thefe things. |
The Number alo of the Stories are much increa-
fed above what was defigned by Mr. Glanvil, though
none admitted, but [uch as feemed very well attefted
and highly credible to his abovefaid Friend, and [uch,
as rightly underftood , contain nothing but what ts
confonant to right Reafon and found Philofophy, as
Ihave heard him earneftly avouch , though it had
heen too tedious to have explained all ; and it may be
- more grateful to the Reader to be left to exercife his
own mit and ingenie upon the reft.. Thefe ave the ad-_
vantages this Edition of Mr. Glanvil’s Dzmon of
Tedworth ,. and his Confiderations about Witch-
craft bave, above any Edition before, though the laft |
of them was fo bought up, that there was-not a Copy of |)
them to be had in all London azd Cambridge, ous |}
the Perufer of his Papers was fatn to break his own to
ferve the Prefs with 5 If shefe tatimations may mes
| thy


tothe READER.


thy Appetite to the reading fo pleafant and ufeful 4
Treatife.

And yet Ican add one thing more touching the ftory
of the Demon of ‘Tedworth, which zs very conft-
derable. It is not for me indeed to take notice of
that meannels of /pirit in the Exploders of Appa-
ritions avd Witches, which very ftrangely betrayea it
felf in the decrying of that well-attefted Narrative
touching the Stirs in M* Mompeftion's Houfe.Where,
although they that came to be {pettators of the marvel-
lous things there done by fome invilible Agents, had
all the liberty imaginable (even to the ripping of the
Bolfters open) to [earch and try if they coula difcover
any natural caufe or cunning Artifice whereby [uch
ftrange feats were done, and numbers that had free
acce/s from day to day , were abundantly [atisfied of
the reality of the thing, that the Houfe was haunted
and difturbed by Demons or Spirits ; yet [ome few
years after the Stirs had ceafed, the truth of this ftory
lying fo uneafie in the minds of the difgufters of [uch
things; they raifed a Report, (when none of them, no
not the moft diligent and curious could detect any trick
or fraud themfelves in the matter) that both Mr.
Glanvil him/elf, who publifbed the Narrative, and
Mr. Mompefion , ia whofe Houfe thefe wonderful
things happened, had confelfed the whole matter to be
a Cheat and Impofture. And they were fo diligent in
[preading abroad this grofs watruth, that it went cur-
‘rent in all the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland,


and Ireland. Av egregious difcovery of what kind of |


Spirit this fort of Men are! which, as I faid, though
it be not for me to take notice of, yet I will not fitck to
igutfie (it being both for mine Intervet, ana the
fignifie (it being both for mine own Intereft, ana the


| A 3 Intereft


d


‘


|


4
;


The PUBLISHER, exc.


Intereft of Truth) that thofe reports raifed touching
Mr. Glanvil and Mr. Mompeiion , are by the pre-
fent Edition of this Book demonftrated to be falfe to
all the World. That concerning Mr. Glanvil, by
his Preface to the fecond Part of the Book, That
touching Mr.Mompefion , by two Letters of his
own, the one to Mr. Glanvil, the other to Mr. James
Collins, which are fubjoined to the faid Preface:
Which thing alone may justly be deemed to add avery
great weight tothe value, as of that Story, fo of this
relent Edition.

But Iwill not, Reader, upon pretence of exciting
thy Appetite , keep thee from the fatisfying it by an
overlong Preface. I {hall therefore add nothing more,
but that I am


Your humble Servant,


a


scene iret rem fee ee)


AN


AGE OUN'S


OF THE
SECOND EDITION
OF


Saducifmus Triumphatus.


“HE former Edition of Saduci{mus Triumphatus,
an Account thereof is given by the Publifher to


rm the Reader, where you may underftand what
preat advantages that Edition of Mr. Glanuvil’s Confide-


rations about Witchcraft, and his Story of the Damen of


Tedworth, has above any former Editions of them. And
now, Reader,.as for this prefent Edition, I think it not
amifs to acquaint thee, as briefly as] may, what advan-
tages this has above the former.

Firft therefore, there isadded to the Firft Part there-
of, An Anfwer toa Letter of a Learned P{ychopyrift, that
is, Of a Philofopher that holds all Created Spirits to be a
kind of more pure and fubtile Fire in fome fence or o-
ther, Wherein this Controverfie is punctually debated,
and the true Nature of a Spirit more fully and convin-
cingly cleared, againft all the pretences of the P/ychopy-
rifis of what Claffes foever, (provided they be ftill Pfy-
cho-hylifts, and make Sperits only a more pure and fub-


| tile AZatter) as before of the Holenmerians and Nall


*f]
As bifts


"a Sas pe eS a Tee Se aes ses


s = Bose J rece
SEE ROME x LU ages


4 Li? Saar yyy =,
ee fe: 4 Ng Eds
NRE i TT i ch nel pt are me


| An Account of the

biffs, ?Tistrue, I have not Publifhed the P/ychopyrift*s
Letter entirely together, to be read at once, but [ hayé
by piece-mieal faithfully interferted it, as I make Anfwer
to it: And fofar I prefumed without confulting the
mind of the Writer thereof. For I finding the Letter


a clofe and well compacted account.of that way of Phi- Bf


lofophizing touching Spirits, and to haye given as good


a Glofs‘of the Doctrine, as the thing is capable of, L Bia


was refolved to take this opportunity to clear the bufi-


nefs. And therefore confidering that poflibly, the Wri- Baw


ters fhynefs and modefty might not.affent to the Publith-
ing of fhat, which his better Judgment and Sence‘of the
common good, might approve of, when once Publith-
ed; I have for the good of the Publick communicated it
tothe World, without acquainting him with my defign.
AndI hope the greateft Hypercritick in Morality, will
not be able to find any flaw in the omiffion of fuch a Ce-
remony to an Anonymous Perfon, (noted only by the
Title of P/ychopyrift, inthe moft refined fence that de-
bars him-not from being a Pfycho-bylift) for anend fo
good, and of fo great importance.

~ For afluredly it is of main importance, that we have
a true genuine and confiftent Notion of the Natire of a
Spirit, and fuch as will not beget a misbelief of their
Exiftence’in fuch as confider it. As I muft confefs, I
think that the Notion of the Wzdibifts and that of the
Hlolenmerians, with any one that thinks freely with him-
felf, naturally does. Whofe Opinions therefore, in my
Difcqurfe of the true Notion of a Spirit, 1 made it my bu-
finefs fully and Clearly to confute.. Sothat my Notion
of a Spirit had no Competitor left, faving this of: the
Pfychopyrifts or the P/ycho-byifis. Which befides that
itis Erroneous, \ find alfo to be ufele/s or rather hurtful:
it declaring the Nature of aCreated Spirit to befuch as
is inconfiftent with the Rercepezve Funttions, and a lafting
Perfonality, as 1 have intimated in my Anfwer to the
Pfychopyrifts. | Nothing in a Philofophical way can fup-
port the P/yckopyraf's belief of Spiriesy but only the meer
uN | ; oe Aiton


Second Edition.


ofa s


. é
- 7


he could eafily
ii] be of my mind in all points; that is, he could very ea-
ill fily quit his Socintani{m. Whence it is manifeft, of what
0 vaft confequence it is to offer fuch a Notion of Invhate-
UN vial Subftance, or Spirit, as is eafily conceivable, nor is
ii) hoyfted up into the contradictious Sublimities of Wwf;
atl bifm and Flolenmerianifm , nor let flag, as that of the
ilil| Pfychopyrifts or Pfychobylifts docs, fo low, asto fink in-
a) to real Adaterialifiz, which is utterly inconfiftent with
i the Myftery of the Trinity, and indeed with the Exi-
if Hence of aGod. And therefore this Addition made to
the Firft Part of Saduci{mus T; riumphatus, ought to make
Ms fecond Impreffion thereof conliderably more valu-
(|) adie.
itt] © The Style of this Anfwer, I muft confefs, may haply
i! Make it to fome Readers the lefs grateful, but the Letter
| Atfelf being in fuch a Scholaftick, Style, it was natural for
‘oi me to follow it in my Anfwer. Nor ought either to of-
owt fend any one, if they will but remember that there are


hi i bundance of fuch there are in Law, in Phyfick., and Chy-
| wefry, and many other -Arts and Faculties. that cannot
Hi ; ; y) 7 ‘ 2 ° ve
is but feem GCzbberifh to thofe that are not acguainted with
{thofe Studies. And therefore they are not to think it
ofitrange, if in a Scholaftick Controverfie they meet with
io (tfome Phrafes that are only ufual imthe Schools.
is Secondly, Ihave madea brief Contixuation of the former
| | | Collection,


|


Sa


ro


inti Er GSS TP lS


% + > am
a Ch, time


nag


Aare snail


10 An Account of the
Collection, confifting of fix remarkable true Stories, all |
of them frefh enough, but fome of them of things hap- |
pening within thefe two or three years. So that they
that are diffident and curious may fatishe themfelvesup- By,
on the fpot, of the truth of Matter of Fact, by fufhaent 4,
Witnefles.

Thirdly, I have added Mr. Glanvil’s Letter written
to my felf, wherein he anfwers to nine or ten, partly
Objettions, partly Queries, fentto him from me, :touch- }...
ing the Stirs of the Demon of Tedworth at Mr. Mompef- f...
fons Houfe, and makes feveral fart and judicious Re- fh


‘fictions on Drollery and Atheifm. Upon which Letter I


have made fome pretty large Advertifements, and touch-
ing fuch things, as I thought it of no fmall concern, for
Men. ferioufly to confider.

Fourthly, Befides that the Learned Doctor Aarhony
Horneck has made his Preface to the Narrative of the
Swedifh Witchcraft more correct and full, he has added
a new Narrative from Swedeland of a marvellous ftrange
effect of Witchcraft, to that he Publifhed before.

And laftly, There is yet one advantage more of the
Second Edition of Saducif{mus Triumphatus above the
Firft, in that my Letter to Mr. Glanui prefixt before the
Book, is freed froma Miftake that went glib with it be
fore. Indeed the Letter was Re-printed before thes,”
Miftake was difcovered,fo that it could not be expunged,
but yet this caution given touching it, is equivalent tom, >
anexpunttion. The Miftake is this, A certain Party’
(who fhall be namelefS for me, it being fo little for hisgy’
credit) that tranfmitted Mr. Smart?s Teltimony to Mr. 0")
Shepherdfon touching the Tryal of Sharp and Watker atqy'


So re ic ne ee rn een " e
22 2 Se ee ee ——— : — = ———————— = >
> SS a : == es = = a
SS —— a Se a — —— aa
2 = E = = : >


Durham Affizes , drew up (whether out of overmuch#y


officioufhefs to Mr. Shepherdfon, or that he would con-#y
vey a dead Fly into the Box of Ointment, I will not be fog}
curious asto enquire) drew up, I fay, a Form that i ae i
not true. Mr. Shepberdfon defiring that Party to takeq pil:


the Teftimony only of fuch as were grown Men then.pp'ti


when the Aflizes was, took it for granted that Smart was


there


ape


Second Edition. rt


ten fuch, whenas he was but a Boy then, and befides,
»i,,fhich is yet worfe, that Affirmation of Mr. Fairhair
‘ns 4S QlVing it in Evidence upon Oath that he faw a like-
‘fi, p48 OF a Child ftand upon Walker’s Shoulders during the
ime of the Trial dwindles away into no more than this,
(hat he heard fuch a thing was true. Which is but a
nt bufinefs.
, | What the meaning of that namelefs Party was in gi-
., ag fuch falfe Information, I cannot peremptorily con-
, jude, but if it was to convey a dead Fly into the Box of
*“\intment, as I faid above, my declaring the thing thus
tall the World, will more than defeat his defign. For
(as folitary Miftake in the matter of the whole being
“"tus freely and ingenuoufly acknowledged, it will ine
rad of a dead Fly in the Box of Ointment, prove only
“, Vauus in Venere, a meer Beauty-{pot in a Face of a
pod Feature and found and fair Complexion. For there
"WS been all Moral diligence ufed, that nothing fhould
lp admitted that was any ways fufpected, or exception-
ple, as you may underftand by the Advertifements,
i Ihich have difcovered whatever flaw might feem to
oe beur in any of the. Narrations, and offered {atisfaction
‘i"puching the fame, leaving the matter tothe free Judg-
ie"jent of the Reader. And fo foon as my worthy Friend
‘“octor F. Davis, by being lately in the North, and
"Peaking with the Parties, had difcovered to me this
i"tiltake, Iwas impatient till I rectified itin the fecond
aM idition. :
| But as he found out the vacillancy of this Teftimony,
j") by being there, he was able the more fully to aflure
lie of the firmnefs of Mr. Lumley’s Teltimony, which
i" ie. Shepherdfon took from his own Mouth, and had his
and fub{cribed accordingly as is fet down, which fuffi-
i*lently {upports the main of this Narration concerning
i(t) "€ appearing of Anne Walker’s Ghoft, after her death
My the Miller. And isa Story of fuch indubitable Truth,
Mat there is nothing, as he obferved, of Matter of Fact
wi Athe North within the memory of Man, more univer-
| 3 fally


vb a
4.4


Sa


=


ite 2. ae


12 An Account of the


fally acknowledged than it. -So that the expunction 7 i
Fames Smarv’s Teltimony is no detriment to the Caufff bi ny
nor the ufe fo confiderable. Which was only 1 in its be@wi
ing an inftance of fome feeing a Spirit, when otner By-ftaiMdc\
ders fee it'not : which fo often occors in Hiftory, thigh)
we can well let this go for nothing ,-there being froipji:(
other inftances an abundant fupply. And therefore fie:
declare that this Inftance of Mr. Fairbair, whereever Bt:
occurs in my Writings, that I would have it ftand a
a mifplaced Cypher, that adds nothing to the numbe#
nor is of any value at all. Hey
Since my Writing this, and my coming hither to Lofty
don, 1 have unexpectedly difcovered another miltakiif jin
which not being in-the body of any Story, but in this,
mere Title, fcarce amounts to-fo much asa Nevus. pony
is in Relat. XXLV. where I putin'the Title Mr: Andreq fic
Pafesal’s name, and make the Scene of the Tranfactio; e
his Mothers Houfe in London in Soper-Lane, as if he hed
been the eye-witnefs of the things there fet'down, whe we
as he only had the Narrative, but withal, all defirab bi
fatisfaction of the truth of i it, from another, who wi bi
the real Eye-witnefs thereof, viz. Mr. F. Newberrie, ong f
of his own Colledge, whofe Father and Mother lived bs
}


mG


\4


or near Maydenhead, not far from Wind/or. But] fing,
_ ing this Storyin my Study, which was written with Mj.)
Pafchal’s own hand, and it-being told fo as from an Ey9 :


witnefs prefent at the ge but. his.n, name e omitted i in a i


took it for sitio he was the on witnefs thereof, ait
finding the place not named, I enquired here of his Bry
ther, a very civil and obliging perfon, where, their FA
mily lived about twenty years ago’; and underftandiifh
it was in Soper-Lane in London, | thought then my Sto)
was complete in due circumftance of place as well as |
time, I taking for granted that Mr. Pa/chal was the Eyl
witnefs of thofe Tranfactions. Which are fo punctual *
fet down in the Narrative that not one fyllable 1 is to Pi

alters ‘


var


yi


mC


a


}
a
a Hy
Mt


Second Edition: E?


_«. [tered therein for this miftake, But onely in the Title,


‘at fohn Newberie is to be put for M* Andrew Pafchal,


Mlhd Maydenhead, or fome place thereabout for Sopere
* Jane in London. So that that Narrative being a Record
‘lade by a careful and diligent Eye-witnefs (as Mr Pa/-
“al knew Mr Newberie to be, and the frame of the Nar-
“itive difcovers as much) it is yet as firm, and convi-
“itive to any ordinary Reader, as if Mt Pa/chal had been
“he Eye-witnefs , and the Title had needed no altera-
on.

t That Flaw in Smare’s Teftimony, and this Miftake in
ne Party and Place in the XXIV. Relat. thus readily have
acknowledged according to that faithfulnefs I hold my
iMGIf obliged to in matters of this nature. But there is
‘i fo an Exception which I heard of; (and it is the only
wi Kception againft any of the fubftance of the Relations,
ia" hich I have met with fince they were Publifhed) touch-
tatthe the Story of the appearing of Edward Aven to Tho-
sills Goddard, Relat. 1X. asif it had been fince difcover-
it, that fome Waggifh Fellow that was like Edward _A-
dito in Feature, had impofed upon Goddard, and made
i0/fim believe he was his Father-in-Law’s Ghoft. Which


Wit, fo fond a device, that faving that I would conceal no-


ing, I fhould be afhamed to mention it. For (1.) it
Wil eafie to confider how improbable itis, that one Man
iinould be fo exquifitely like another in Features, Age,
walliad Statures, as not tobe difcerned by one that had the
otlerfect forma of his deceafed Friend in his mind, to dif-
o@ete from him, or not tobe him. Here therefore, I de-
(iand of the Raifer of this Report, where, and before
i,lyhom of thofe that perfectly knew Old Avon, have they
jstlzoduced this Man, that is pretended to be fo like him,
ieltg did they ever fhew him to Tho. Goddard himfelf 2
(w]2.) Let this Man produced tell from whom he got the
same Cloths, Hat, Stockings and Shoes that Avox wore
,|s#hen he was alive, or what Taylor and other Artifts
(dade him fuch? (3.) How many elfe did this Maock-
(uiliven, thus apparel’d , che being but a Man in Old

| | Avon's


14 An Account of the


Avon's Cloths) appear to, as well as to Tho. Goddarag it!
Let him produce others that fee him fo clad befides TZ |
Goddard. For he being fo apparel’d, how could he mi
of méecting others, and of feeming to be Avon’s Gho:
to them alfo, he fo often being abroad in that Habit
(4.) How came that AZcck,_Avon to imitate the Voie
of Old Avon thus of a fudden, as well as to bear h
Shape? (5.) Would this AZock--Avon have been at tle!
expence of Twenty or Thirty Shillings, or any elfe fog Iu
him, only to break ajeft? (6.) And how fhould th
Mock. Avon know of the Twenty fhillings the true 4u.
owed to Edward Lawrence, whenas this Lawrence faict
that none knew of that Debt but himfelf, and his Wifff bit
and Avon and-his Wife. (7.) And laftly, How cou} ji
the faid AZock- Avon be feen of Geddard, and not of W24 (ul,
liam Avon, or his voice be heard by Welliam Avon, ar
yet his perfon not feen, if what Goddard faw was meer’ Jil
a wageilh Fellow, and not a Gholt ? His
Thefe things offer themfelves at the firft fight to hig tn
that reads the Story, and compares this pitiful Evaficg (ip
therewith. But here again I have fhewed my faithfulnes bu}
in thus giving occafion to any one to enquire further ef mil)
this Afock._Avon, who the perfon is, and how well fitteg:
by parility of feature and ftature, to act fuch a part hin
and how he came by -Avon’s Cloths, exc. Which Fellovig ty)
if he can never be produced, yet in the mean time the fi ln
é&ion of fuch, plainly implies, that the Inventor weg
convinced that Tho. Goddard had areal Object befo1 Wh
him, which he took to be his Father in-Law’s Gholi dij,
and that he neither faw nor difcourfed with a Phantong m\
of his own making. |
That I am thus very induftrious and zealous to fuygt
port the belief of Spirits and Apparitions , and of whaig
ever istruethat contributes thereto, may feem ftranggf th,,,
tofome, and therefore to want an Apology; yet confit)
dering the Szduct/m of this prefent Age, and Atheifif
too if you will; it were a great neglect in me, or amg Mh):
one elfe of my Profeflion, not tohavea-great zeal an
indignatic


<p —
—. =
Ss re


= >
= ee
a


a
=>


——


PE: a=
—
ne


4 <>
| RE: —— os
oo oe oe


emg


=
a


= =
Sie ty agente =


= 1
——-


>
Z aa


i = > “ ~ rg 3


—
eee


a a


Second Edition. ty


‘a indignation againit the {tupour and befottednefs of the


men of thefe times, that are fo funk into the dull fenfe
of their Bodies, that they have loft all belief or conceie
that there are any fuch things as Spirits in the World.
And, whereas the Son of God ftript himfelf, as it were,
of thofe Foys and Glories above, and condefcended to vi-
fit this dark caliginous Globe of Sickline/s and Mortality,
and to bear all the Inconveniencies and Infirmities of our
frail Flefh, to live an obfcure and contemptible Life ;
to be a Man of Sorrows , and acquainted with Griefs ;
to {weat drops of Bloud out of Agony of Mind; to be
Crowned with Thorns; to be mocked and fpit upon;


| to becruelly Scourged, and finally, to be Crucified, moft


ignominioufly, betwixt two Thieves: For the Son of
God, I fay, to endure allthis, out of his dear love to
the ftraying Souls of Men, to reduce them back from this


Valley of Death and Darknefs to the Foys and Glories of


his own Kingdom above, inthe cleareft Heavens, and
Men in the mean time, and that under the voice of the
Gofpel, and thefe Wits forfooth too (the Witches find
Soulsto give tothe Devilto be damned, and the Wits
wifely conceal theirs from C WRIST, left they fhould
be Redeemed.) For thefe Wits, I fay, to have grown
fo brutifh and dull as not to conceive or believe there are
any fuch things as Spérits; or Sows in themfelves to be
faved,
Qu eft tam ferreus ut teneat fe ?

What real Chriftian would not be moved to the height
of indignation, at fo foul and frantick a Scene of things,
and induftrioufly lend his hand to the amending it as far
ashecan. ThisI fhould hope may be a juft Apology


} for my thus zealoufly affifting, and faithfully miniftring
yj to the ferious Defign of our dear Lord and Saviour, for


the recalling of the wandring Souls of Men into the way


yj Of Truth and Everlafting Salvation. And at their peril
q be it, who will not excu/e that zeal and activenefs,


which He that fet me a work, I am well aflured, will
nat failto Reward.
D: £7.


a ee a rn
adn For ban peering” > = a= mS ee en ea =


ieee eet


~ oot py en


ein “Sear cos =f ‘= wnt {eT eee A... i
SS siete tS PP CRIES x INS Cece ease Ee kod ARN Rasa


D H.M. his LETTER,


WITH THE


POSTSCRIPT}


To Mt 9G.


Minding him of the great Expedience and Ufe-


fulnele of his mew intended’ Edition of the’ }


Damon of Tedworth, and briefly reprefenting to


him the marvellous weaknefls and gullery of | re


M* Webfter’s Difplay of Wi itchcraft.
SIR,


new intended Impreffion of the Story of the Dea


mon of Tedworth was, which will undecerve the World Bir)
touching that Fame generally fpread abroad, as if Adr.Mom- |


peflon and. your. felf bad acknowledged the bufine[s to have


been a meer Trick or Tmpofture. But the Story, with your |


ingenious Confiderations about Witchcraft, being fo often
printed already, be [aid, it behoved him totake care how be


ventured on a new Impre(fion, unlefs he had {ome new matter
? ‘ '


of that kind to add, which might make this new Edition the
more certainly faleable ; and therefore he expected the iffue


of that noifed Story of the Spectre at Exeter, feen fo oft for |


the difcovering of a Murder, committed fome thirty years


ago, But the event of this Bufine{s, as to juridical proce/s,


708


aa


“ROMER? ame-ee omen ~


YH E N I was laft at Londoti, I called on your | a
Book-feller, to know in what forwardne/s this Why


SS a> = 3
=> 5S => =
=> oad —s => >


-— = SS
= Ss SS


eta yea iS eape
— >


The Letter of Dr. H.Mi&c. 1 7


| not anfwering expectation, he was difcouraged from making
| ufe of it, many things being reported to him from thence in
| favour to the party moft concerned. But I told him a Story
| of one Adrs. Britton, her appearing to her Maid after ber
| death, very well attefted , though not of fuch a Tragical


|


| Rind as that of Exeter, which be thought confiderable.
| But of Difcoveries of Murder I never met with any Story
| more plain atd unexceptionable than that in Mr. John Web-
| iter bis Difplay of fuppofed Witchcraft. The Book. in-
| deed it felf, Iconfefs, 1 but aweak.and impertinent piece ;
| but thar Story weighty and convincing, and {uch as himfelf
'| (though otherwife an affected Caviller againft almoft all Sto-
| rzes of Witchcraft and Apparitions) 4s conftrained to af-
| fent to, as you {hall fee from his own confeffion. I {hall for
| your better cafe, or becaufe you haply may not have the Book,
{| #ranfcribe it out of the Writer bimfelf, though it be fome-
il thing long, Chap.16. Page 208.
| About the year of our Lord, 1632. (as near as I can re«
0 | member, having loft my Notes and the Copy of the Letter to
“| Serjeant Hutton, but am furethat I do moft perfectly remem-
ber the fubiance of the ftory) near unto Chefter inthe
|Street, there lived one Walker 4a Yeoman-man of good E~
\flate, andaWidower, who had a youn 12 Woman to hws Kinf-
| Woman that kept his Houfe, whe was by the Neighbours fuf~
nyt |Pected to be with Child, and was towards the dark of the
sf il Evening one night {ent away with one Mark Sharp, who was
\i|4 Collier, or one that digged Coals under ground, and one
yili|that had been born in Blakeburn-Haundred in Lancafhire ;
\jand fo fhe was not heard of along time, and no noife or little
oe made about it. Inthe Winter-time after, one James
wi|Graham or Grime (for fo in that Country they call them)
iy { Being a Miller, and living about two miles from the place
gi @here Walker lived, was one night alone very late in the
Mall crinding Corn, and as about twelve or one a clock, at
jymeght, be came down the Stairs from having been putting
{Gorn sn the Hopper, the Adill-doars being hut, there ftood a
“Woman upon the midlt of the Floor, with her Hair about her
i Adead hanging down ard ak bloody, with five large Wounds
B on


ye


i!


— Subuge tn . mt
SAT eaeaagy i z in
Pee Ne aa ea


reas! sil pe
Teak osaanths oe


Leeks TENE x TU
samasiaieisn ST ™


5 Tae v “y


18 The Letter of Dr. W.M. &c.


onher Head. He being much affrighted and amazed, began
to ble{s him, and at laft asked ber who fhe was, and what fhe
1 wanted? Towhich fhe faid, 1 am the Spirit of fuch a- Baw
a Woman, who lived with Walker, and being got with fil
| Child by him,he promifed to fend me to a private place, fit
where fhould be well lookt to until I was brought in |)
Bed and well again, and then I fhould come again and fii
keep his Houfe. di
~~ And accordingly, [aid the Apparition, 1 was one night } In
late fent away with one Afark Sharp, who, upona Moor |
(naming a place that the Miller knew) flew me with a Pick :
( fuch as men dig Coals withal) and gave me thefe five ih 0
Wounds, and after threw my Body into a Coal-Pit hard. Jiri
by, and hid the Pick under a Bank: and his Shoes and: fissi)
Stockings being bloudy, he endeavoured to wath , but  ffig
fecing the bloud would not wafh forth, he hid them fins
there. And the Apparition further told the Miller, that he Vin
mult be the man to revealir, or elfe.that (he muft fiill appear | m\y
and baunt him. The A4iller returned home very fad and. Wimp),
heavy, but {poke not one word of what he had feen, but ef- on
chewed as much as he could to ftay in the Atl within night Bu, 4
nithout company, thinking thereby to efcape the [eeing again Piy\(j
of that frightful Apparition. hy
But norwithftandine, one night when it began to be dark, |
the Apparition met him again , and feemed very fierce and. Yuji
cruel, and threatned him, That if he did not reveal the ii,
Murder, fhe.would continually purfue and haunt him. Yet
for all this, be till concealed it until St, Vhomas’s Eve be-
fore Chriftmas, when being foon after Sun-fet walking in his Bie
Garden, {he appeared again, and then fo threatned him ana |
affrighted him, that he faithfully promifed to reveal it next
morning . |
In the morning he wentto a Magiftrate, and made.the hy,
whole matter known, with all the circumftances , and dili-My,
gent fearch being made, the Body was found in aCoal-Pit, i,
with five Wounds in the Head, and the Pick, and Shoes, andy)
Stockings yet bloudy, in every circumftance asthe Apparitrom | hy,
had related unto the Miller. Whereupon Walker and Marky,"
Sharpay


M i,
Bil


YG


t


Wil


MU


eI


The Letter ofDr.H.M.&c, 9


10) Sharp were both apprehended, but would confefs nothing. At
\\the Affizes following (I think it was at Durham) they were
“arraigned, found guilty, condemned, and executed, but I
Mii |eould never hear that they confeffed the Fatt. There were
‘li \fome that reported , that the Avparition did appear to the
“Ni|Fudge, or the Foreman of the Fury, (who was alive in Che«
ltt {fiber in the Street about ten years ago, as I have been crem
|\dibly informed) but of thar Tknow no certainty,
ll|. There are many perfons yet alive that can remember thos
att Prange Adurder, and the Difcovery of it, for it was, and
Wik Vometsmes yer is, as much difcourfed of in the North-Couns
“iilery, as any thing that almoft bath ever been heard of and
‘ili ee Relatton Printed, though now not to be gotten. I relate
will (hoes with the greater confidence, ( though I may fail in fome
\ i lof the Circumftanses) becanfe I faw and read the Letter
iit at was fent to Serjeant Hutton, who then lived at Goldf.
wi orugh i Yorkthire, from the Fudge before whom Walker
it ama Mark Sharp were tried, and by whom they were con
lini demned 5 and had aCopy of it until about the year 16 58,
i When Ihad it and many other Books and Papers taken from
se. And the I confe/sto be one of the moff convincing Sto=
cuisttes (being of undoubted verity) that ever I read, heard,
or knew of, and carrieth with tt the moft evident force to
yl Wake the moft incredulous [pirit to be fatisfied that there are
wolkeally fometimes fuch things as Apparitions. Thus far
ie. “8


This Story is fo confiderable, that 1 make mention of it in -


iyi iy Scholia onmy Immortality of the Soul, ix my Volumen
.yPhilofophicum, Tom. 2. which I acquainted a Friend of
|) ulline with, a prudent intelligent Perfon, Dr. J.D. he of hie
uitton accord offered me, it being a thing of fuch confequence,
la fend to a Friend of his in the North for greater affurance
WNW the truth of the Narration ; which motion I willingly em-
_|utracing, he did accordingly. The Anfwer to his Letter
\iwom bis Friend Mtr. Shepherdfon, # this ~
i, T have done what I canto inform my felf af the paf-
|, age Of Sharp and Walker. There are very few men that
"wif Could meet, that were then Men, or atthe Tryal, fa-
] B 2 ving
|


0 RE ES i


20 The Letter of Dr. . M. &c.


ving thefe two in the inclofed Paper, both Men at that
time, and both at the Tryal. And for Mt Lumley, he
lived next door toWalker , and what he hath given under
his hand; ‘can depofe if there were occafion: The other
Gentleman writ his Atteftation with his own hand; but
I being. not there, got nothis Nametoit. I could have |
fent you twenty hands that could have faid thus much and
more by hear-fay, but I thought thefe moft proper that


could fpeak from their own Eyes and Ears. 7hus far Mr. | ¥™


Shepherdfon, the Dottor’s difcreet and faithful Intelligen-
cer. Now for Mr. Lumly’s Teftimony, st 4 thu.

Mr, William Lumley of Lumley, beiag an ancient Gen=:
tleman, and at the Tryal of Walker and Sharp, pon the


Murder of Anne Walker, faith, That he doth very welllf iM!
remember, that the [aid Anne was Servant to Walker, andi Mii)


that fhe was [uppofed to be with Child, but would not difclofe:
by whom. But being removed to her Aunts in the fame Town,


called. Dame Carie, told her Aunt that he that had got her ti
with Child, would take care both for her and tt, and bid her4 Miri
not trouble her felf. After fome time {he had been at her} I
Aunts,it was obferved that Sharpcame to Lumley one nighr§ Wi


being a fworn Brother of the faid Walkers, and they two
that ‘nicht called ber forth. from ber Aunts Houfe, which }\i
night fhe was murdered. WwW


About fourteen days after the Murder, there appeared tog M,\\
on’ Graime aFuller, at his Mill, fix miles from Lumley, kt,
the lkene/{s.of a Woman, with ber Hair about her Head, anat jinn
the appearance of five Wounds in her Head, as the faiah\m|


Graime gave it inEvidence.T hat that appearance bid him gos
to a Fuftice of Peace, and relate to him bow that Walker anaq
Sharp bad murdered her, in fuch a place as (he was murder-§


ed: But he fearing to difelofe a thing of that nature againfa pl
a perfon of credit as Walker. was, would not have done it :f |,


but {he continually appearing night by night to him, and pul-
ling the Cloathes off his Bed, told him, He fhonld never ref);
rillbe had difclofed it. Upon which the fad Graime did ged \n,


to a Fuftice of Peace, and related the whole matter. Where-B\\,
upon the Fuftice of Peace granted Warrants againft Walker@ |r»)


ance


| The Letter of Dr. H. Mi &c. 21


itty | and Sharp, and committed them to Prifon. But they found
il), el Bal to appear at the next Afizes. At which time they came
‘itiy| t0 their Tryal, and upon evidence of the Circumstances with
iittis| that of Graime of the Appearance, they were both found


il; | guslty, and executed.
| Will. Lumley.


i The other Teftimony is of A¢r. James Smart of the City of
io Durham ; who faith, That the Tryal of Sharp and Walker
vlad Peas in the Adonth of Auguit 1631. before Fudge Daven-
| port. One Afr. Fairhair gave it in Evidence upon Oath,
woul that he fee the likenefs of a Child ftand upon Walker?s
wivtet Shoulders during the time of the Tryal: At which time the
onl) Fudge was very much troubled, and gave Sentence that night
ive gl) 80¢ Tryal was which was a thing never ufed in Durham
lit Before nor after.
Jing} - Out of which two Teftimonies feveral things may be cor-
Jina) VeELed or fupplied in Mr. Webkter’s ffory, though it be evi-
in dent enough that inthe main they agree; For that is but a
inh {mall difagreement as to the year, when Mr. Weblter fays
4) about the year of our Lord, 1632. and Ar,Smatt, 163 t
4) But unlefs at Durham they have Affizes bur once inthe
ih year, I Anderftand not fo well how Sharp and Walker fhould
| be apprehended [ome little while after St. Vhomas’s Day, as
| Atr, Webhter bas it, and be tried the next Affizes at Dur-
jt ham, and yet that bein Augult, according to Smart’s Te-
| ftimony. Out of Ar. Lumley’s Teffimony the Chriftian
| Name of the young Woman is fupplied, as alfothe Name of
| the Town near Chelter in the Street, zamely Lumley. The
1) Circumftances alfo. of Walkex’s fending away bis Kinfwo-
,) man with MarkSharp, are fupplied out of Adr. Lumley?s
"4 Narratives and the time rettified, by telling it was about
‘| fourteen days till the Spettre appeared after the Murder,
"| whenas Mr. Webfter makes.tt along time.
“") Two Errors alfo more are corrected in Mr. Webtter’s
"4 Warration, by Atr. Lumley?s Teftimony : The diftance of
"the Atiler from Lumley where Walker dwelt, which was
sd Bex miles, not Two miles, as Afr. Weblter bas it. And alfo,
B 3 that


;
t.


So Aa je”


22 The LetterofDr.A.M. &c.
thar it was not a Mill to grind Corn in, but aFuller’s Mill. Yi:
The Apparition noght by might pulling the Cloaths off ee
Graime’s Bed, omitted in Mr. Webster’s Story , may be 9)!"
{upplied out of Afr. Lumley’s. And Atr. Smarts Teftimony ji
puts it out of controverfie,, that the Tryal was at Durham, th
and before Fudge Davenport, which is omitted by Mt Web- hii!
fter. And whereas Mr. Weblter fays, there were fome that
reported, that the Apparition did appear to the Fudge, or Fi!)
the Fore-man of the Fury, but of that he knows no certainty > | |i
This confeffion of his, as itis a fign he would not write any |
thing in this Story of which he was not certain for the main, |
fo bere ts a very feafonable fupply for this ont of Adr. Smart, |
who affirms, that be heard one Mr. Fairhair give Evidence
upon Oath, that be faw the likenefs of a Child fland upow § hh
Walkers Shoulders during the time of the Tryal. It +s likely } im,
this Mr. Fairhair might be the Fore-man of the Fury, and § wi
in that the Fudge was fo very much troubled, that himfelf al- |
fo might fee the fame Apparition as Mr. Webfter fays res § iin
port went, though the miftake in Mr. Weblter is, that it
was the Apparition of the Woman. But this of the Child was | i
very fit and appofite, placed on his Shoulders, as one that was hin
juftly loaded or charged with that Crime of getting bis Kinf= |
woman with Child, as well as of complotting with Sharp ta fiw
murder her. g
. The Letter alfo which he mentions writ from the Fundge be= & wn
fore whom the Trial was heard, to Serjeant Hatton, it 5 B hiniy
plain out of Afr. Smart’s Teftimony, that st was from Fudge Fly,
Davenport ;. which in all likelihood was a very full and in;
punttual Narrative of the whole bufinefs, and enabled M!r. |,
Webfter, i ome confiderable things , to be more particus ¥ hii,
lar than Mr. Lumley. But the agreement is fo exatt for the Bim
main, that there is no doubt to be made of the truth of the Bin,
Apparition. But that this, forfooth, muft not be the Soul of |
Anne Walker, but ber Aftral Spirit,this « but a fantaftick By
conceit of Webfter and his Paracelfians, which I bave fuffic Bi;
ciently {hewn the folly of in the Scholia on my Immortality fy),
of the Soul, Volum. Philof. Tom. Il. p. 384. m li,
T bis Story of Anne Walker I think you will do well to put Wi,


AON oft /


ih!


The Letter of Dr. H. M. &c. 2?


‘Wih) amongft your Additions inthe new Impreffion of your Dx-
wf} mon of Tedworth, zt being foexcellently well attefted, and
imiint fo unexceptionably in every refpect 5 and to haften as faft as
Ninny) you can that Imprejfion, to undeceive the half-witted World,
Nitia,) ho fo much esxult and triumph in the exctinguifhing the bez °
"Vtt) def of that Narration, as if the crying down the truth of that
mit) ftory of the Demon of Tedworth, were indeed the very flay-
ww) ag of the Devil,and that they may now with more gaiety and
inanys| fecurity than ever fing in a loud note that mad drunken
trite ai} Catch,


Hay ho! the Devil is dead, ec. i


ulw| Which wildSong, though it may feem a piece of levity to men-
ili\| tion, yet believe me, the application thereof bears a fober
inl and weighty intimation along with it, viz. that thefe fort of
wile) People are very horribly afraid there {hould be any Spirte,
win) Left there (hould be a Devil, and an account after this lifes
ai) and therefore they are impatient of any thing that implies it,
wiini| that they may with amore full fwing, and with all fecurity
im | from an after-reckoning, indulge their own Lufts and Hua i
(ii) mours in thts. And I know by long experience, that nothing a
ig) rouxes them fo out of that dull Lethargy of Arhei[m and Sa- I
| duci{m, as Narrations of this kind. For they being of a thick
| and grofs {pirit, the mo(t fubtile and folid deduttzons of rea- |
i) fon does little execution upon them ; but this fort of fenfible
4) Experiments cuts them and ftings them very fore, and fo id
si ql} feartles them, that by a lefs confiderable ftory by far than this |
1 Of the Drummer of Tedworth, or of Anne Walker, 2
vit Doctor of Phyfick cry'd our prefently, If this be true, I have a
;,) been ina wrong Box allthis time, and muft begin my
> f account anew. ii
And I remember an old Gentleman in the Country of my it
“yj | acquaintance, an excellent Fuftice of Peace. and a piece of Hl
| & Wathematician but what kind of Philofopher he was, \ou iy
"| may underftand from a Rhyme of his own making, which he t
y(t | commended to me at my taking Horfe in his Yard; which WT


ee


rn as ies aka Nn: li 1 =
os <i At a bs Souk i. ane a: 2, 1


inept


nA
}


Ehyme w this, ht
B 4. Ens 4


See ie,


Se ee es


mi) 24 ‘The


Letter of Dr. HM. &c.


Ens is nothing till Senfe find it out :
Senfe ends in nothing, fo nought goes about.


Which Rhyme of his mas fo rapturous to bimfelf, that at the
reciting of the fecond Verfe, the old Gentleman turned him-
felf about upon his Toe as nimbly as one may obferve a dry
Leaf whisked round in the corner of an Orchard-walk, by
fome little Whirlwind. With this Philofopber I have had
many Difcour{es concerning the Immortality of the Soul, and
its diftinttion from the Body, and of the exiftence of S pirits.
When I have ran bim quite down by Reafon, he would but
laugh at me, and fay, Thisis Logick, H. calling me by my
Chriften Name. To which I replied, This is Reafon, Fa-
ther L. (for fol ufed, and fome others, to call him) but it
feems you are for the New Lights, and immediate Infpi-
ration. Which, I confefs, he was as little for as for the
other , but I faid fo only in way of drollery to him in thofe
times, But truthis, nothing but palpable experience would
move him: And being abold man, and fearing nothing, he
told mehe had ufed all the Atagical Ceremonies ofConjuration
he could to raife the Devil or a Spirit, and had a moft earn-
eft defire to meet with one, but never could doit. But this he
told me, when he did not fomuch as think. f it, while his Ser-
vant was pulling off his Boots in the Hall, fome invifible
Hand gave him fuch a clap upon the Back, that it made all
ving again. Sothought he, now] am invited to the conver fe
of fome Spirit, and therefore fo foon as his Boots were off
ana his Shoes on, ont goes heinto the Yard andnext Field, to
find out the Spirit that had given him this familiar clap on
the back, bit found none, neither in the Yard nor Field next
to it. T
But though he did not, this ftroak, albeit he thought it B's,
afterwards (finding nothing come of it) a meer delufion , |
yet not long before his death it had more force with him than
all the Philofophical Arguments I could ufe to him, though I
could winde himand nonplus him as I pleafed ; but yet all my
Arguments, how folid focver, made 10 impreffion upon bis.


Wherefore


The Letter of Dr. H. Mi&c. 925


Wherefore after feveral reafonings of ths nature, whereby

I would prove to him the Souls diftinttion from the Body,
land its Immortality, when nothing of {uch [ubtile confide-
ration did any more execution on his mind,than fome Light-

“in lgsng is [aid to do, though it melt the Sword, on the fuzzy
in \eonfiftency of the Scabbard: Well, faid I, Father L. though
‘ity Ipone of thefe things move you, I have fomething fill behind,
‘ul \tand What your [elf has acknowledged to me to be true, that
il \anay do the bufine{s. Do you remember the clap on your Back.
il when your Servant was pulling off your Boots inthe Hall?
i, | Affure your felf, faid I, Father L. that Goblin will be the
in firft that will bid you welcome into the other World. Upon
n | that his Countenance changed moft fenfibly, and he was more
‘«teonfounded with this rubbing up bis memory, than with all
\wit\the Rational or Philofophical Argumentations that I could
Wapronute, ee Se Tet , |
niu! ~ Indeed, if there were any modefty left in mankind, the
i Hliftories of the Bible might abundantly affure men of the
wil | exifFence of Angels and Spirits. But thefe Wits, as they lh
wl are taken to be, are fo jealous, forfooth, and fo fagaciouws, i
iy | that whatfoever ss offered to them by way of effablifhed Reli- }

jum) gion , as [ufpetted for a piece of politick Circumvention ;
hile) hich is as filly notwithftanding, and as childifh, as that
ww) €oncert of a Friend of yours when be was a School- Boy in the va
wii Loweft Form of a Country Grammar-{chool, who could not be-
|| lieve fcarce that there were any fuch men as Cato,and FEfop,
wit and Ovid, and Virgil, and Tully, much lefs that they
i wrote any fuch Books, but that it was a trick of our Parents
| to keep ws up fo many hours of the day together, and hinder
:


ns from the enjoying our innocent paftimein the open Airand |
»| the pleafure of planting little Gardens of Flowers, and of i

| hunting of Butter-flies, and Bumble-Bees. -
' Befides, though what is once true never becomes falfe, fo 4
that it may be truely faid 1t was not once true, yet thee
fhrewd Wits [ufpett the truth of things for their antiquity, t!
and for that very reafou think them the lefs credible : Which I
4s as wifely done as of the Old Woman the Story goes of, Wi
Who being at Church in the week before Eafter, and hearing 1


iG


et ee ee ae


“26 ~The Letter of Dr. H. M. &e:


the tragical Defcription of all the circumftances of our Savie Myi
ours Crucifixion, wasin great forrow at the reciting theres Wi
of; and fo follicstous about the bufine[s, that fhe came tothe wi
Prieft after Service with tears in ber Eyes, dropping him a
Courtfie, and asked him how long ago this fad accident bap- Bhs
ned, towhombe anfwering about Frfteen or Sixteen hundred Wu \
years ago, (he prefently began to be comforted , and faid, |
hen in grace of God st may not betrue. At this pitch of tlw
wit 1 Children and Old Wives, is the Reafon of our prom | Gy
feffed Wit-would-be’s of this prefent Age , who will catch
at any flight occafton or pretence of misbelieving thofe things
that they cannot endure {hould be true.

And forafmuch as [uch courfe-grain’d Philofophers as
thofe Hobbians axd Spinozians, and the reft of that Rabble,
flight Religion and the Scriptures, becaufe there is [uch ex-
pre[s mention of Spirits and Angels inthem, things that
their dull Souls are fo inclinable to conceit to be impoffible; I
look upon it asa fpecial piece of Providence that there are
ever ana anon fuch frefh Examples of Apparitions and Witch-
crafts as mayrub up and awaken their benummed and lethare
£ith, Minds into a [ufpicion at leaft, if not affurance, that
there are other intelligent Beings befides thofe that are clad
in heavy Earth or Clay. In this, I fay, methinks the Di-
vine Providence does plainly outwit the Powers of the dark
Kingdom, in permitting wicked mex and women, and va-
grant Spirits of that Kingdom, to make Leagues or Cove-
vants one with another the Confeffion of Witches againft
their own Lives being fo palpable an Evidence, (befides the
amir aculous feats they play) that there are bad Spirits,which
will neceffarily open a Door to the belief that there are good
ones, and lafily, that there is a God.

Wherefore let the fmall Philofophick, Sir Foplings of this
prefent Age deride them as much as they will, thofe that lay
out thetr pains in committing to wreting certain well-atrefted
Stories of Witches and Apparitions, do real fervice to true
Religion and found Philofophy, and the moft effettnal and
accommodate to the confounding of Infidelity and Athei[m,
even in the Fudgment of the Atheifts themfelves, who are


Aas


| The Letter of Dr. H.M. &e. = 27


‘tit as much afraid of the truth of thefe Stories as an Ape is of a
“\\ Whip; and therefore force themfelves with might and main
"Nt go disbelieve them by reafon of the dreadful confequence of
it them as to themfelves. The wicked fear where no fear is,
“lt+} but God isin the generation of the Righteous. Azd he
Wt ghat fears God and has Faith in Fefus Chrift, need not fear
|) how many Devils there be,norbe afraid of himfelf or bis own
Vit Yanmortality. And therefore it 1s nothing but a fowl dark
Nill Confeience within, er avery grofs and dull conftitution of
is Wii! Blood, that makes men fo averfe from thefe Truths.
timi| But however, be they as averfe as they will, bemg this is
| the moft accommodate medicine for this Difeafe, their dili-
Wie] gence and care of Mankind is much to be commended that
Wh) mmake it their bufine{s to applytt, and are refolved, though the
(nneye § peevifbnefs ana perver fenefs of the Patsents makes them pull
iii) off their plaifier , (as they have this esccellent one of the
il Story of the Demon of Tedworth by decrying it as an Impo-
mat! feure, fo acknowledged by both your felf and r.Mompef-
lite} fon) are refolved, I fay, with meeknefs and charity to bind
iia: | #£ on again, with tbe addition of new Filletting, I mean other
it) Stories fupiciently frefh and very well attefted and certain.
| This worthy defign therefore of yours, I muft confefs, I cans
De) not but highly commend and approve, and therefore wilh
in| you all good fuccefs therein, and fo, committing you to God,
dit| take leave, and reft


Your Affectionate Friend


to ferve you,


pk


om


Sep


Poesia ar a


Tate


4) hee i


HIS Letter lying by me fome time before I be
thought it opportune to convey it, and inthe f ti


mean while meeting more than once with thofe § pu


that feemed to have fome-opinion of Mt Webger’s Criti-
cifms and Interpretations of Scripture, as if he had
guitted himfelf fo well there, that no proof thence can
hereafter be expected of the Being of a Witch, which
is the {cope that he earneftly aims at; and I reflecting
‘upon that paflagein my Letter, which does not {tick to |
condemn Webffer’s whole Book for a weak and imperti- §
nent piece, prefently thought fit, (that you might noe fy,
think that Cenfure over-rafh or unjuft) it being an end- § }.4,
lefs task to fhew all the weakneflesand impertinencies of § \,
his Difcourfe, briefly by way of Poft/cripr, to hint the
weaknefs and impertinency of this part which is counted
the Mafter-piece of the Work, that thereby you may
perceive that my judgment has not been at all rafh
touching the whole.

And in orderto this, we are firft to take notice what
is the real jcope of his Book : which if you perufe, you
fhall certainly find to bethis:: That the parties ordina-
rily deemed Witches and Wizards, are only Knaves and
Queans, to ufe his Phrafe, and arrant Cheats, or deep
Melancholifts; but have no more to do with any Evil
Spirit, or Devil, or the Devil with them, than he has |
with other Sinners or wicked Men, or they with the
Devil. And Secondly, we are impartially to-define what
is the true Notion of a Witch or Wizzard, which is ne-
-cellary far the detecting of W¢bffer’s Impertinencies.


The Pofticript. 29


As for the words Witch and Wizzard, from the Nota-


da \tion of them, they fignifie no more than a wife Man, or


1 Pl


=|


viv


|


ivery. firft fight.
| operofe deduction of the name Witch, is from IVit,whofe


awife Woman. Inthe wordWszzard, it is plain at the
And I think the moft plain and leaft


derived Adjective might be Wirttigh or Wittich, and by


| | contraction afterwards W2tch ; as the Noun wiz is from


the Verb to weer, whichis, to know. So that a Witch,


| thus far, isno more than a knowing Woman; which an-
| fwers exactly to the Latine word Saga, according to
\ Iti


tide! general :


that of Feffus, Sage difte anus que multa [ciunt, Thusin
But ufe queftionlefs had appropriated the


Suis} word to fuch a kind of skill and knowledge, as was out


ha non
| |
p> uv UY


ip}
UM
A
aHodbina
p
VALLE


by air?
b Li


“i 3. : = =
M = = =% > =>
Se eS ae ee ee


STS ae


rn Calf
i


“>
Se I AD a a


a


OD a Bi a A


of the common road or extraordinary. Nor did this pe-
culiarity imply in it any unlawfulnefs. But there was af-
ter a further reftriction and moft proper of all, and in
which alone now adays the words Witch and Wizzard
are ufed. Andthat is, for one that has the knowledge
or skill of doing or telling things in an extraordinary
way, and that in vertue of either an exprefs or impli-
cite fociation or confederacy with fome Evil Spirit. This
is a true and adequate definition of a Witeh or Wizzard,
which to whomfoever it belongs, is fuch, & vice verfa.
But to prove or defend, that there neither are, nor ever
were any fuch, is, as I faid, the main {cope of Web-
fter’s Book :. In order to which, he endeavours in his


fixth and eighth Chapters to evacuate all the Teftimo-


nies of Scriptare: which how weakly and impertinently
he has done, I fhall now fhew with all poflible brevity
and perfpicuity. ;
' The words that hedefcants upon, are Deut. ch. 18.
v.10.11. There fhalt not be found among you any one
that ufeth divination, or an obferver of times, or an En-
chanter, or aWitch, or a Charmer, or a Confulter with fa-
miliar Spirits, or aWizzard, or a Necromancer, The firft
word or name in the Hebrew is DNDP OD CKofem
Kefamim] a Diviner. Here becaufe DOP [Kafam] fome-
times has an indifferent fence, and fignifies to divine by
natural


sree


: — mane awe ry Oe
Sym ge GR . yi tA eee "i ~ ” .
easy Oa a Dae eect a ee ars Le


ne es


ya” Tle Ri


natural Knowledge or humane Prudence or Sagacity ; [ji


therefore nothing of fuch a Witch as is imagined to pai


make a vifible League with the Devil , or to have her pec


Body fuckt by him, or have carnal copulation with him,
or is really turned into a Cat, Hare, Wolf, or Dog, ean


be deduced from this word. A goodly inference indeed, ki t


and hugely to the purpofe, as is apparent from the fore-
going definition. But though that cannot be deduced,
yet in that this Divination that is here forbidden, is
plainly declared abominable and execrable, as it is v.
42. it is manifeft that fuch a Divination is underftood
that really is fo; which cannot well be conceived to be,
unlefs it imply either an exprefs or implicite inveagles
ment with fome evil invifible Powers who affift any kind
of thofe Divinations that may be comprehended under
this general term, Sothat this is plainly one name of
Witchcraft according to the genuine definition thereof.
And the very words of Saui tothe Witch of Exdor, are,
AINA 17 NI MO10/ that is to fay, Divine to me I pray thee
by thy familiar Spirit. Which is more than by natural
knowledge or humane fagacity.

The next word is ya [Adecnonen] which though
our Englith Tranflation renders (from py [Guon] Tem-
pus) an Obferver of Times; (which fhould rather
be a Declarer of the feafonablenefs of the time, or un»
{eafonabienefs as to fuccefs ; a thing which is enquired
of alfo from Witches) yet the ufual fence rendred by
the Learned in the Language, is Preffigiator, anImpo-
fer on the fight , Sapientes prifci, {ays Buxtorf, a mY
[Gnajin, Oculus] deduxerunt & YYYO [ Meguonen] effe
eum dixerunt, qua tenet C praftringit ocules, sit falfum pro
vero videant. Lo another word that fignifies a. Witch
or a Wizzard, which has its name properly:from impo-
fing on the fight, and making the by-ftander believe he
fees Forms or Transformations of things he fees not.
As whien Anne Bodenbam transformed her felf before
Anne Styles into the fhape of a great Cat; | Ane‘ Styles
her fight was fo impofed upon, that the thing to her

feemed


The Poft/cript. 31


(ii); eemed to be done, though her Eyes were only deluded.
ili Bue fuch a delufion certainly cannot be performed with-
‘iti byt confederacy with evil Spirits. For to think the
Utwiword fignifies Preftigiator in that fence we tranflate in
WmeEnglith, Fageler, or an Hocus-Pocus, is fo fond acon-
‘id beit, that no man of any depth of wit canendureit. As
ivf a Merry Juggler that plays tricks of Legerdemain at
‘in, t Fair or Market, were fuch an abomination to either
Wii, {he God of J/rael, or to his Lawgiver Aofes; or as if an
Lin (Hocus- Pocus were fo wife a wight as to be confulted as an
viol (Oracle: For icis faid v.14. For the Nations which thou
\inhe, hale poffefs, they confule INYO [ALegnonenim] What,
wes do they confult Jugglers and Hocus-Pocuffes ? No cer-
wid Kainly they confule Witches or Wizzards,and Diviners,
(ninas Anne Styles did Anne Bodenham. Wherefore here is
wet @vidently a fecond name of a Witch.
eg,’ Whethird wordin the Text, is wnia [Afenache(h]
» Which our Englifh Tranflation renders, an Enchanter.
yi And with M* Webjter’s leave, (who infulteth fo over
vp) their fuppofed ignorance) I think they have tranflated
lit very learnedly and judicioufly : For Charming and En-
yh (Chanting , as Web/ter himfelf acknowledges, and the
+j,, words intimate, being all one, the word wna LAzena-
wi (ehe(b_] here, may very well fignifie Enchanters or Charm-
w fers; butfuch properly as kill Serpents by their charm-
wid ing, from wn [Nachafh] which fignifies a Serpent,
.y from whence comes WM} [WVichefh] to kill Serpents or
,, make away withthem. For a Verb in Prhel, fometimes


>


x


4 trary fignification. Thus from ww radix is WW ra-

“" \dices evulfit, from JWI Cinis {DO removit Cineres, from
( ROM peccavit NOM expiavit a peccato ; and fo laftly
"from wma Serpents, is made wrist liberavit a ferpentibus,

'"” \nempe occidendo val fugando per incantationem. And there-
 \fore there feems to have been a great deal of skill and
he et of judgment in our Englifh Tranflators that ren-
| [dred wr3a LAenachefh] an Enchanter, e{pecially when

“(that of Augur or Southfayer, which the Septuagint call
"Orarsl oder


q
;
4


4 Ce{pecially when it is formed froma Noun) has a con- .


32: he Pofteript.


"Oras Giehooy (there being fo many harmlefs kinds of ic);
might feem lefs fuitab'e with this black Lift: For theres hit
is no fuch abomination in adventuring to tell, when the Be,
wild Geefe fly high in great companies and cackle much, Jui
that hard weather is at hand. But to rid Serpents by a fy.»
Charm, is above the power of Nature; and there- fy.
fore an indication of one that has the affiftance of fome }..:
invifible Spirits to help him inthis exploit, as it hap- },,,
pens in feveral others, and therefore this another name
of one that is really a Witch. i.
The Fourth word is, Ww [Adecaffeph] which our. },,,
Englifh Tranflators render, aWsech , for which Ihave }..
no quarrel with them, unlefs they. fhould fo underftand
it that ic muft exclude others from being fo in that fence
Fhave defined, which is impoflibie they fhou'd. Bur |,
this, as the foregoing, is but another term of the fame |, .
thing ; that is, of a Witch in general, but fo called |.
here from the preftigious impofing on the fight of Be-
holders. Busxtorf tells us, that Aben Ezra defines thofe }*",
to be O'DwID [ALecaffephim] qui mutant & transfor- |.
mant res naturales ad afpettum ocult. Not as Jugglersand jf). ~
Hocus-Pocufles, as Webffer would ridiculoufly infinuate, f-
but fo asl underftood the thing in the fecond name- fi"
For thefe are but feveral names of a Witch, who may
have feveral more properties than one name intimates.
Whence it is no wonder that Tranflators render not
them always alike. But fo many names are reckoned up
here in this claufe of the Law of Afo/es, that, as in our
Common-Law, the fence may be more fure, and leave
no room to evafion. And that here this name is not
from any tricks of Legerdemain asin common Jugglers
that delude the fight of the people at a Market or Fair,
but that it is the name of fuch as raife Magical Spectres.
to deceive mens fight,and fo are moft certainly Witches, |.‘
is plain from Exod. 22.18. Thou hale not fuffer aawoy HM
[ Mechaffephah] that is, alWitch to live. Which would be
a Law of extream feverity, or rather cruelty, againft
a.poor Hocus-Pocus for his tricks of pce $ Rt
: € i


The Poft{cript. 32
Jl The Fifch name is mam main [Chobher Chebber}
«,tWhich our Englifh Tranflators render Charmer, which
.,.. {4s the fame with Enchanter. Webfter upon this name is
“\}wery tedious and flat, a many words, and {mall weight
4, {in them. I fhall difpatch the meaning briefly thus:
‘| dhis Tam Tain CChobher Chebher] that is to fay, So-
,, }etans Societatem is another name of a Witch, fo called
. fpecially,either from the confociating together Serpents
“\by a Charm, which has made men ufually turn it (from
ithe example of the Septuagints ireSop traodw) a
\Charmer, oc an Enchanter: or elfe fromthe fociety or
; (compact of the Witch with fome evil Spirits ; which
| Webfter acknowledges to have been the opinion of two
»pwery learned Men, Afartin Luther, and Perkins; and I
Iwill add a third, Aben Ezra, (as Martinius hath noted)
“atwho gives this reafon of the word 721m [Chobber] an
", enchanter, which fignifies Socians or Fungens, viZ.'
| Quod malignos Spiritus fibi affociat. And certainly one
“may charm long enough, even till his Heart ake, e’re
“the make one Serpent aflemble near him, unlefs helpt by
this confederacy of Spirits thatdrive them to the Charme
“ier. He keeps a pudder with the fixth verfe of the fifty
“eighth Pfalm to no purpofe: Whenas from the Hebrew,
ONIN] ONAN AN OWN WD? you R?7IwWR, if
M™lyou repeat xa xowe 21)7 before 7am you may with
“Yeafe and exactnefs render it thus; That bears not the
i yosce of muttering Charmers, no not the voice of aconfede~
i ware Wizzard or Charmer that is skilful. But feeing
“Charms, unlefs with them that are very fhallow and
iM ifillily credulous, can have no fuch effects of themfelves,
‘lghere is all the reafon in the world (according as the
vil wery word intimates, and as Aben Ezra has declared)
to afcribe the effect to the affiftance, confederacy, and
ith (Co-operation of Evil Spirits, and fo aan rain [Chob-
Wher Chabharim] or an AN. [Chobber Chebher] will
il! {plainly fignifie a Witch or a Wizzard according to the
aitrae definition of them. But for ¥. Webjter’s rendring
this verfe p. 119. thus, Que non andiet vocem mufitan-

: C «tam


se


Yee Se a
Nel Sete & (eB, 2 OS a kt ein ee! ~


soe


SEP >


=
= agin
= 2. Gi ve


tium incantationes doiti Incantantis,, which he faith ig fy,»
doubtlefs the moft genuine rendring of the place) lee sf);
any skilful man apply it to the Hebrew Text, and he Bj.»
will prefently find it Grammatical Nonfence. Ifthat had § 7.
been the fence it fhould have been DIND AN aN. Fy
TheSixth wordis, 2x 72w [ShoelObb] which our $
Englifh Tranflation renders , a Confulter with familiar Hs
Spirits ; but the Septuagint "EyyaseluvI@. Which there- F |;
fore muft needs fignifie him that has this familiar Spirit :
And therefore 218 781W [Shoel Obb] I conceive, (con-4
fidering the reft of the words are fo to be underftood ) is:
to be underftood of the Witch or Wizzard himfelf that}
asks counfel of his Familiar, and does by vertue of him J
give Anfwers unto others. The reafon of the name of}
31x [Obh] ’tis likely was taken firft from that Spiriti
that was in the Body of the Party, and fwelled it to aj
protuberancy like the fide of a Bottle. But after, with-4
out any relation to that. circumftance, OB H fignifiesif),,
as much as Pytho, as Pytho alfo, though at firft it took]
its name from the Pythi Vates, figaifies no more than
Spiritum Divinationis, in general, a Spirit that tells hid-4
den things or thingsto come, And O BH and Pytho ale-ge
fo agree in this, that they both fignifie either the divi-#),
natory Spirit it felf, or the party that has that Spirit..§)
But here in DIN 7NW [Shoel Obb| it being rendredl, -
by the Septuagint *Byyaceluvi@ , OBH is neceflarilyg,’:
underftood of the Spirit it felf, as Pytho is Ads 16. 16.5)
if you read zretye ribova, with I/aac Cafaubon , but if) *
ad§ov@-, it may be underftood either way. Of thisg..'
avevua rv0ey, it is recorded in that place, That Pang,
being grieved, turned and faid to that Spirit, I commanas ‘yt
thee, inthe Name of Jefus Chrift, to come ont of her, anagy .
he came out at the fame bour , which fignifies as plainly as#, ”
any thing can be fignified, that this Pytho or Spirit offf)'
Divination, that this OB H wasin her: For nothing§),”
can come out of the Sack that was not in the Sack, asf,
the Spanifh Proverb has it ; nor could this Pytho comemy.”
out of her, unlefS it was a Spirit diftinct from her fi
wherefore


=== = as >
= = = —,
— o


=4
=


= o> :
=) aa


—— — a
—s > —
= = =


The Poft {cript. 35


.\,. Wherefore I am amazed at the profane impudence of ¥.
ni,,. Webjter, that makes this Pytho in the Maid there men-
»,,, tioned, nothing but a wicked humour of cheating and
.» | CouZening Divination: and adds, that this Spirit was
,.| HO more caft out of that Maid, than the feven Devils


ia
La


ot


f
iW
{|


26 The Poft{cript.
ifh Interpretation ? But becaufe ais [0b] in one
place of the Scripture fignifies a Bottle, it muft fignife
io here, and it muft be the Inftrument, forfooth, out
of which this cheating Quean of Exdor does whi/per, peep,
or chirp like a chicken coming out of the Shell, p. 129. 165.
And does fhe not, I befeech you, put her Neb alfo into
it fometimes, as into a Reed, as it is faid of that Bird,
and cry like a Burterbump ? certainly he might as well
-have interpreted axXM7YI [Bagualath Gbh] of the
preat Tun of Heydelberg, that Tom. Coriat takes fuch
{pecial notice of, as of the Bottle.
And truly fofaras I fee,it muft be fome fuch huge Tu
at length, rather than the Bottle, that is, fucha {paci-
ous Jub as hein his deviceful imagination fancies A/2-
naffes to have built; a varéov forfooth, or Oracular
fEdifice for cheating Rogues and Queans to play their cou-
zening tricks in; from that place 2 Chron.33.6. DIR NWWY)
Et fecit Pythonem. Now, fays he, how couid ALanaffes
make a Familiar Spirit, ormake one that had a Famiitar
Spirit? Therefore he made a Fortle, a Tun, or a large
Tub, a pavlécy, or Oracular Edifice for cheating Rogues )h*
and Queans to play their couzening tricks in. Very wifely
argued, and out of the very depth of his ignorance of the
Hebrew Tongue! whenas if he had looked into Bux-
torf?s Dictionary he might have underftood that MWy
fignifies not only fecit, but alfo paravit, comparavit, ac-
quifivit, magni fecit, none of which words imply the B*
making of O B H in his fence, but only the appointing | ty
them to be got, and countenancingthem. For inWeb- § i
fler?s fence he did not make "3y) [¥idegnoni} neither, §'"
that is Wizzards. and yet Manaffes is faid to make them |
both alike. ‘39 DR MWY Ex fecie Pythonem & Maza F
gos. So plainis ic that ax LObb] fignifies Pytho, and § Pll
that adequately in the fame fence that Pyrho does, either. |
a Familiar Spiric, or him that has that Spirit of Divina- §%
tion Butin DRM [Bagnalath Obp] it neceflarily M'
fignifies the Familiar Spiric it felf, which aflifted the BM
Witch of Exdor ; whereby itis manifeft fhe is neil i
called Bf


The Poft/cript. a7


ie) called a Witch. As for his Stories of counterfeit Y’en-
ie) trelogutfis, Cand who knows but fome of his counterfeit
| Ventriloguifts may prove true ones) that is but the
» | thread- bare Sophiftry of Sadducees and Atheifts to elude
« | the faith of all true ftories by thofe that are of coun-
|) terfeits or feigned.
i, | The feventh word is %iyys CFidegnont] which our
wi? Englifh Tranflators rendera Wizzard. And Webjter is
| fo kind as to allow them to have tranflated this word
fa aright. Wizzards then Webjter will allow, that is to
| fay, He-witches, but not She-Witches. How tender the
fy) man is of that Sex! But the word invites him to it,
il WY LFtdeguont | coming from y7" fcire, and anfwer-
y.| ing exactly to Wizzard or Wife-man. And does not
Witch, from wit and weer, fignifie as wella W2/e woman,
as I noted above? And as to the fence of thofe words
from whence-they are derived, there is no hurt herein ;
and therefore if that were all, \ny7) [Fidegnoni]} had
not been in this black Lift. Wherefore it is here under-
{tood in that more reftrict and worft fence: fo as we
under{tand ufually now adays Witch and Wizzard, fuch
wife Men and Women whofe skill is from the confede-
‘“L Facy of evil Spirits, and therefore are real Wizzards
_,) and Witches. In what a bad fence *}'y" [Fidegnons]
‘ot 4s underftood, we may learn from Levit. 20, 27. 4d man
| alfo or woman that hath a familiar Spirit, or that a Wire
} zard [Jidegnoni] fhall be put to death, they fhall ftone
"| them with ftones, &c.
i


oe


~ = Le a > .
NS ee


PTL


——s


The laft word is =Synanr wr [Dorelh Hammerhim]
which our Tranflators rightly render Necromancers ;
“il that is, chofe that either upon their own account, or de-

W" fired by others, do raife the Ghofts of the deceafed to
“} confule with; which is a more particular term than
inf Ds 792 [Bagnal Obb:] But he that is Bagnal Obh,
i may bealfo Dorefh Hammethim a Necromancer,as appears
i gn the Witch of Endor, Here Web/fer by Nan [ Ham-
WN methim] the Dead, would underftand dead Statues ; but
u'Wdet him, if hecan, any where thew in all the Scripture

| . C3 where


|


!


3 ss The Poftfcript:


where the word Gunanm [Aammethim] is ufed of
what was not once alive. Hethinks he hits the nail on
the head in that place of I/aia, ch.8. vu. 19. And when
they fhall fay unto you, Seek unto (MYaNM, that is, to
we mrv7y3, fuch as the Witch of Exdor was) them thas
have familiar Spirits, and to Wizzards that peep and that
mutter, (the Hebrew has it S307 and Syayascn;
that is, that fpeak with a querulous murmurant or muf-
fitant voice, when they either conjure up the Spirit, or
give refponfes. If this be to peep like a Chicken, Ifaiah
himfelf peept like a Chicken, ch.38. 14.) fhould not a
people feck, unto their God ? for the living, LONG WR]
to the dead? where Hammethim is fo far from fignifying
dead Statues , that ic muft needs be underftood of the
Gholts of dead men, as here in Deuteronomy. None but
one that had either ftupidly, or wilfully forgot the fto-
ry of Samuels being raifed by that ax mvya [Bagna-
lath Obb] the Witch of Exdor, could ever have the face J)"
to affirm, that M'nan | AHammethim] here in Jfaiah |
is to be underftood of dead Statues, when Wizzards or
Necromancers were fo immediately mentioned before,
efpecially not Webjter,who acknowledges that 1538 YRIW
[Shoel Obb] fignifies a Necromancer in this Deuterono-
mical Lift of abominable names. And therefore, for-
footh, would have ita Tautologie that Dorefh Hamme-
thim fhouldfignifiefotoo. But I fay it isno Tautologie,
this laft term being more exprefs and reftrict, And be= BY
fides, this. enumeration is not intended as an accurate —*
Logical divifion of Witches or Witchcraft into fo many
diftinct kinds, buta reciting of feveral names of that ill
Trade, though they will interfere one with another,
and have no fignifications fo precifely diftiné. But, as gr
I faid before, this fuller recounting of them is made,that pit
the prohibition inthis form might be the furer fence a=
gaint the fin. And now therefore what will ¥. Webfter
get by this, if Dorefh Hammethim will not fignifie ag"
Witch of Endor, when it muft neceflarily fignifiea Ne-#
cromancer, which is as much againft his Tooth as theq'
ee other 2B Misy


te other? Nay indeed this Necromancer is alfo a Witch


|r Wizzard, according to the definition produced
»|, | AOE.
|. The reft of the Chapter being fo inconfiderable, and

\I having been fo long already upon it, I fhall pafs to the

,, Mext, after I have defired youto take notice how weak
sand childifh, or wild and impudent, M* Webfter has
,.;been in the Interpretation of Scripture hitherto, inthe
,,,ibehalf of his fage Dames, to fence off their reproach of
|, {being termed Witches ; whenas there is fcarce one word

_ }in this place of Deuteronomy that does not imply aWitch

jor Wizzard, according to the real definition thereof.
‘| And truly he feems himfelf to be confcious of the weak-
2inefs of his own performance, when, after all this ado,

ithe fum at laft amounts to but this; That there are no

_ |Names in all theOldTeftament that fignifie fuch a Witch

" [that deftroy Men or Beafts, that makes a vifible compact

“| with the Devil, or on whofe body he fucketh, or with
|whom he hath carnal Copulation, or that is really chan-
“ged into aCat, Hare, Dog, or fuch like. And to fhew
. |it amounts to no more than fo, was the task we under-
“(took in this Chapter.

“| But aflure your felf, if you perufe his Book carefully,
“you fhall plainly find, that the main drift thereof is to
‘| prove, aslabove noted, that there is no fuch Witch as
"with whom theDevil has any thing more to do than with
“any other Sinner; which notwithftanding, this Conclu-
“)fion of his a little before recited, comes infinitely fhort
‘lof: and therefore this fixth Chapter, confifting of a-
“bout 30 pages in Folio, is a meer piece of impertinency.
“") And there will be Witches for allthis, whether thefe
“"W particularities be noted inthem or no; For it was fuffi-
| cient for Adofes to name thofe ijl founding terms in ge-
“i neral, which imply a Witch according to that general
i) notion I have above delivered, which if it be prohibi-

ted, namely the having any thing to do with evil Spi-
‘Writs, their being fuckt by them, or their having any
2" loftful or venereous tranfactions with them, is much
i") more prohibited, C 4 But


‘qo. Ma


But for fome of thefe particularities alfo they may


feem to be in fome manner hinted at in fome of the Pit!


words, efpecially as they are rendred fometimes by skil-
ful Interpreters: for Rwan. CAdecaffeph} is tranflated
by Vatablus, and the vulgar Latine AZaleficus, by the Pil
Septuagint oxeuands, that 1s Veneficus ; which words fig- § Iu
nifie mifchievoufly enough both to Man and Beaft. Be- Fo
fides that Adecaffeph carries along with it the fignificati-
on of Transformation alfo ; and haply this may be the


difference betwixt FWID [Akcaffeph] and wnya [Azeg- | il


nonen | that the former ufes preftigious Transformati-


ons to fome great mifchief, as where Claus Magnus tells } ili


of thofe that have transformed themfelves into Wolves
to Mens thinking, and have prefently fall’n upon wor:


rying of Sheep. Others transformed in their Aftral Sps- } {h
vit, into various fhapes, get into Houfes, and do mif= § imi


chief ‘to Men and Children, as I remember Remigius re-


ports. And therefore it is lefs wonder. that that fharp | ci
Law of Ao/es is againft the MBYIN [Adecaffephah] fach F 9
a Witch as thisis, Thou {halt not luffer a Witch to lives § \i\


this may bea more peculiar fignification of that word.


And now for making a Compact with the Devil, how § »


naturally doesthat name 3am Tain CChobher Chebhir]
fignifie that feat alfo ? But for fucking and copulation,
though rightly {tated it may be true, yet I confefs there
is nothing hinted towards that, fo far as I {ee,. as in-
deed it was neither neceflary that the other fhould be.
But thefe are the very dregs, the Fax Adagarum & Saga-
rum that fink into thofe abominations, againft whicha }
fufhicient Bar is put already by this prohibition in gene-
ral by fo many names. And the other is fo filthy, bafe,
and nafty, that the mention thereof was neither fit for |
the facred Style of Azofes’s Law, nor for the Ears of the |
People. | i if

In my pafling to the eight Chapter I will onely take


rotice by the-way of the fhamelefs impudence of 7. | i
Webjter, who in favour to his beloved Hags, that they §f :,,


may never be thoughtto do any thing by the afliftance B ,
Gig ee ee REIT Pe ee eG OR CS ae of |


}

i
V if} 4
aa


The Poftfcript. Al


ofthe Devil, makes the Victory of Adofes, with whom


li) the mighty hand of God was, or of Chrift, (who was
iit the Angel that appeared firft to A/ofes In the Bufh, and


conducted the Children of//rael out ofEgvpr to the pro-
mifed Land) to be the victory only over fo many ocus-
Pocuffes, fo many Juglers that were, as it feems, old ex-
cellent at the tricks of Legerdemain; which isthe bafelt
derogation to the glory of that Victory, and the vileft
reproach againft the God of //rael and the Perfon of
Mofes, that either the malicious wit of any Devil can
invent, or the dulnefs of any funk Soul can ftumble upon.
Affuredly there was a real conflict here betwixt the
Kingdom of Light and the Kingdom of Darknefs, and
the Evil Spirits thereof, which aflifted the nv"
[Hartummim] the Magicians of Egypt ; who before that
name is named, that no man may miftake, are called
cypw7n [AMecaffephim] fuch kind of Magicians ascan
exhibit to the fight manifold preftigious Transformati-
ons through diabolical affiftance, and are rendred Adale-
fici by good Interpreters, asI noted above; that iS,
they were Wizzards or He-Witches. The felf fame
word being ufed in that fevere Law of Afofes, Thou fhalt
not fuffer a Witch tolive. Are not thefe Magicians then
examples plain enough thar there are Witches that is
to fay, fuch wretched Wights as do ftrange miracu-
lous things by the affiftance or confociation of evil
Spirits ? |

O no, fays Mt Webfter, thefe are only NIN [Cha-
camim | Wifemen, and great Naturalifts, who all what
they did, they did Comwn73, by their bright glitter-
jing Lamina, for fo 1077 forfooth muft fignifie. But
what neceflity thereof that 0n'7 fhould fignifie Lamina ?
there is only the pretence of that one place, Gen, 3. 24.
arm om, whereit is 277 only that fignifiesthe La-
mina, and that of along form, fcarce ufual in thofe ma-
gical Lamina with Signatures celeftial upon them, which
% Webfter would beat , but viv? fignifies meerly Flm-
ma, fo that Canna by this account mult fignifie


ih
'


oe


‘ —— Pofeript. | SS


by their flames, if it be from un% ardere, flammare s
And therefore Buxtorfius judicioufly places the word un-
der 017 abfcondit, obvolvit, reading not Tan Oit72, but
TI7ON73, whichis as much as to fay, occultis [uis ra-
tiombus Magicis, which is briefly rendred in Englifh, by
their Enchantments, which agrees marvelloufly well with
'DWI0 [ ALecaffephim] which is as much as Preftigia-
tores Mdagici, or fuch as do ftrange wonderous things in
an hidden way by the help of evil Spirits. But that the
eEgyptian Magicians fhould do thofe things that are
there recorded of them in Exodus, by vertue of any La-
mels or Plates of Metal with certain Sculptures or Fi-
gures under fuch or fuch a Conftellation, is a thing fo
fottifh and foolifh, that no man that is not himfelf, be-
witched by fome old Hag or Hobgoblin, can ever take
Sanctuary here to fave himfelf or his oid Dames from
being in acapacity, from this Hiftory in Exodus, of be-
ing accounted Witches. For if there may be He- witches,
that is, Adagicians, fach as thefe of Egypt were, I leave
J. Webfter to {cratch his head to find out any reafon why
there may not be She-witches alfo,

And indeed that of the Witch of Exdor, to pafs at
fength to the eighth Chapter, isas plaina proof thereof
as can be defired by any man whofe mind is not blinded
with prejudices, Buthere ¥. Web/fer, not impertinent-
ly, I confefs, for the general, (abating him the many
tedious particular impertinencies that he has clogged
his Difcourfe with) betakes himfelf to thefe two ways,
to fhew there was nothing ofa Witch inall that whole
Narration. Firft, by pretending that all the tranfacti-
on on the Woman of Exdor’s part was nothing but collu-
fion anda Cheat, Sas not being in the fame Room with
her, or at leaft feeing nothing if he was. And then in
the next place, That. Samuel that is {aid to appear,could
neither be Samuel appearing in hisBody out of theGrave,
nor in his Soul ; nor that it was a Devil that appeared :
and therefore it muft be fome colluding Knave fuborned
bythe Witch. For the difcovering the weaknels of his

: see former


| The Poft/cript. 43
| former Allegation, we need but to appeal to the Text,
. Iwhich is this, 1 Sam. 28. v. 8. |
N And Saul faid, I pray thee, divine unto me by the fami-

\iar [pirit , and bring me up whom I {hall name unto thee,
I eg>aipp ; that is, do the office of a Divinerefs, or a
\Wife-woman, I pray thee, unto me, awa [Bebb] by
“'\vertue of the familiar Spirit, whofe aflittance thou haft,
""} not by vertue of the Bortle, as Mt Webfter would have it.
‘Does he think that Damfel inthe Aés which is faid to
“i have had revue av§ovG-, that is, to have had yx LObb]
““ carried an Aquavite-bottle about with her, hung at her
“| Girdle, whereby fhe might divine and mutter, chirp, or
‘| peep out of it, as a Chicken out of an Egg-hell, or put her
%} Neb into ittocry like a Bittern, or take adram of the
“| Bottle to make her wits more quick and divinatory ?

| Who but one that had taken too many drams of the Bot-
‘| tle could ever fall into fuch a fond conceit ? Wherefore
| 313% [Obh] in this place does not, as indeed no where


 elfe, fignifie an oracular Bottle or avléoy, into which
\} Saul might defire the Woman of Endor to retire into,
| and himfelf expect anfwers in the next Room ; but fig-
\) nifies that famuliar Spirit by vertue of whofe afliftance
|] {he was conceived to perform all thofe wondrous offices
“) of a Wife-woman. But we proceed to verfe 11.
a |] Then [aid the woman, Whom hall I bring up unto thee ?
iil || And he faid, Bring me ap Samuel. Surely as yet Saul
i} and the woman are inthe fame Room ; and being the
| woman askt, Whom (hall I bring up unto thee 2? and he an-
ot} {wering, Bring up unto me Samuel, it implies that Samuet
i) was fo to be brought up that Saul might fee him, and
WM not the Witch only. Butwegoon, Verfe 12.


And when the woman faw Samuel, fhe cryed with a loud
voice : and the woman {pake to Saul, faying, Why haft thou
deceived me? for thou art Saul. Though the Woman
might have fome fufpicions before that it was Saul, yet
fhe now feeing Samuel did appear, and in another kind
of way than her Spirits ufed to do, and in another hue,
as itis moft likely fo holy a Soul did, the prefently cryed
ty out


44 The Poftfeript.


out with aloud voice, (aot muttered, chirpt, and peept ab By
a Chicken coming out of the Shell) that now fhe was fure it a 0
was Saul: For fhe was not fuch a Fool as to think her Bi


Art could call up real Samuel, but that the prefence of
Saul was the caufe thereof: And Yo/ephus writes ex-


prefly, "Orr Sea ge wwoy TO cy us toy aid \eo Tey oy % Seomecan Win


TeegTler ey, wx -wej¢ Thy obuy CKmAay sy, Sov, Only, 6 Bags
AtUs Sdva@ 5 i.e. The Woman seeing a grave God-like
many 1 ftartled at it, and thus aftonifhed at the Vifion,
turned her felf to dhe King, and faid, Art not thou King
Saul ? Verfe 13.
And the King faid unto her, Be not afraid, for what
aweft thou? And the Woman faid unto Saul, I faw Gods
afcending out of the Earth, The King here affares the
Woman , that though he was Saut, yet no hurt fhould
come toher, and therefore bids her not be afraid: But
fhe turning her face to Saul, as fhe {pake to him, and
he to her, and fo her fight being off from the object,
Saul asked her, What faweft thou? and hein like man-
ner anfwered, I faw Gods, &c. For Gods I fu ppofe any
free Tranflator in Greek , Latin, and Englifh, would
fay, Saiuovas, Genios, Spirits. And COvTOR fignifies
Angels as well as Gods; and ic is likely thefe Wife
women take the Spirits they converfe with to be good
Angels, a3 Anne Bodenham the Witch told a worthy and
dearned Friend of mine; That thefe Spirits, fuch as fhe
had, were good Spirits, and would do a man all good
offices all the days of his life; and it is likely this wo-
‘Man of Exdor had the fame opinion of hers, and there-
fore we need not wonder that fhe calls them Co‘M7R
[Elochim] efpecially Samue/ appearing among them, to
fay nothing of the prefence of Saz/, And that more than
One Spirit appears at a time, there are repeated ex-
amples in Anne Bodenhams Magical Evocations: of
them, whofe Hiftory, I muft confefs, I take to be very
true.
_ The cafe ftands therefore thus: The Woman and
Sui being inthe fame Room, fhe turning her face from
oe? . | irquee See | Saul,


The Pofifcript. 45
‘\Sanl, mutters to her felf fome Magical form of evoca-
(tion of Spirits; whereupon they beginning to appear
“land rife up, feemingly out of the Earth, upon the fight
“lof Samuel’s Countenance, fhe cryed out to Saul, and
“Irurning her face towards him {poke to him. Now that
"\Saul hitherto faw nothing, though in the fame Room,
““\might be either becaufe the body of the woman was in-
“Iterpofed betwixt his eyes and them, or the Vehicles of
\ithofeSpirits were not yet attempered to that confpifla-
ition that they would {trike the eyes of Sal, though they
\did of the Witch. And that fome may fee an Object o-
™\) thers not feeing it , you have an initance in the Child
““ wpon Walker’s Shoulders appearing to Mr. Fasrbair,
“Vand it may be, tothe Judge, but invifible to the reft of
lM!) the Court; and many fuch examples there are: But I
‘Yt proceed to Verfe 14.
HS And he faid unto her, What form is he of ? and fhe faid,
1) An old man cometh up, and is covered with a Mantle. He
ii} asks here in the Singular number, becaufe his mind was
!) only fixton Samuel, And the womans an{wer is exactly
i} according to what the Spirit appeared toher, when her
S) Eye was uponit, viz. Moy [pt we Ax old man coming
“| up, for he was but coming up when fhe looked upon
| him, and accordingly defcribes him: Bor m7 there is
i} a Partic’e of the prefent Tenfe, and the woman defcribes
il!) Samuel from his Age, Habit, and Motion he was in,
} while her Eye was upon him. So that the genuine fenfe
‘| and Grammatical in this anfwer to, What forms he of ?
iW’ is this, an old man coming up, and the fame covered
j


witha Mantle, this is his form and condition I faw him
| in. Wherefore Saul being fo much concerned herein, ei-
| ther the woman or he changing their poftures or {tand-
‘ings, or Samuel by this having fufficiently con{piflated
sO his Vehicleand fitted it to Saui’s fight alfo, it follows in
|| che Text, .4nd Saul perceived it wasSamuel, and he floop-

| ed with his face to the ground and bowed him/felf.
f O the impudent profanenefs and fottifhnefs of per-
al} verfe fhufflers and whifflers, that upon the hearing

| this

|


A £


See


4
hj
i
id
i
i |
i
ft i}
wy


my Sea


i


awe


The Popifript: —


this paffage can have the face to deny that Saul faw any §*"
thing, and merely becaufe the word [perceived] is ufed, hi

and not [ faw;] when the word [perceived] plainly} i
implies that he faw Samuel, and fomething more,namely,
that by his former familiar converfe with him, he wasp!”
allured it washe. So exquifitely did he appear, and fi!
over-comingly to his fenfes, that he could not but ac- -
knowledge (for fo the Hebrew word yv fignifies) that } i”
it was he, or elfe why did he ftoop with his Face to the } iM"!

very Ground to do him honour ? f
No, no, fays 7. Webjter, he faw nothing himfelf, but }
{tood waiting like a drowned Puppet (fee of what a bafe }
rude {pirit this Squire of Hags is, to ufe fuch language of |i’
a Prince in his diftrefs) in another Room, to hear what | Wil!’
would be theiffue; for all that he underftood was from LE
her cunning and lying relations. That this Gallant of } Mil
Witches fhould dare to abufe a Prince thus, and feign §!
him as much foolifher and fottifher in his intellectuals, as
he was taller in Stature than the reft of the people, even
by head and fhoulders, and meerly, forfooth, to fecure
his old Wives from being. fo much as in a capacity of
ever being fufpected for Witches, is a thing extreamly
coarfe, and intolerably fordid. And indeed upon the
confideration of Sauls being {aid to bow himfelf to Sz-
muel, (which plainly implies that there was there a Su-
muel that was the object of his fight and of the reverence
he made) his own heart mifgives him in this mad adven-
ture, And he fhifts off from thence to a conceit that it
was a confederate Knave that the woman of Endor turn-
ed out into the Room where Saul was, to act the part of
Samuel, having firft put on him her own fhort Cloak,
which fhe ufed with her Maund under her arm to ride to
Fairs or Markets in. To this Countrey-flouch in the
womans Mantle, muft King Saul, ftooping with his face
to the very ground, makehis profound obeyfance. What,
was a Market-womans Cloak and Samuel’s Mantle, which: Pi:
Fofephus calls Saracida iseglintw » a Sacerdotal habit, fo
like one another ? Or ifnot, how came this woman, be~
| ing


The Pofifcript. Ay


|
|


iting fofurprized of a fudden, to provide her felf of fuch
'|a Sacerdotal habit to cloak ‘her confederate Knave in?
lai! Was Saul as well a blind as a drowned Puppet, that he


ii could not difcern fo grofs and bold an Impofture as this ?

41 V Vas it poflibie that he fhould not perceive that it was
s)not Samuel when they came to confer together, as they
;{did ? How could that confederate Knave change his
| Own Face into the fame figure, look, and mien that Sa-


vl aanel had, which was exactly known to Saul ? How could


i he imitate his Voice thus of a fuddain, and they difcour-


‘fed a very confiderable time together : ?
»yi|  Befides, Knaves do not ufe to {peak what things are
nf) Erue, but what things are pleafing. And moreover, this


ta] Woman of Endor, though a Pythonefs, yet fhe was of a
ji very good nature and benign, which Jofephus takes no-
iitice of, and extols her mightily for it, and therefore the


ont COUld take no delight to lay further weight on the op-


inaned


+


«| prefled Spirit of diftreffed King Sau/; which is another
mffign that this Scene was acted bona fide, and that there


|was no couzening init. As allo that it is another ; that


.. (fhe fpoke fo magnificently of what appeared to her, that
tine Law Gods afcending. Could the then poflibly adven-
[ture to turn out a Country-flouch with a Maund-womans


«(Cloak to act the part of fo God-like and divine a Per-


“fonage as Samuel, who was Oco rlw yopglw suar@ , asthe


i woman defcribes him in Fofephus Antiqu. Judaic. lib. 7.
..€. 5. Unto all which you may add, That the Scripture
iit felf, which was written by Infpiration, {ays exprefly,


|v, 20, that it was Samuel. And the fon of Sirach, ch.


| 46. that Samuel himfelf prophefyed after his death, re-
ferring to this ftory of the woman of Endor. But for our
“all new-infpired Seers, or Saints, S. Scot, S. Adie, and if


“yf you will S
|) who thus madly and boldly, againft all fenfe and reafon,
‘ | againtt all antiquity , all Interpreters, and againft the


Webfter {worn Advocate of the VVitches,


}infpired Scripture it felf, will have no Samuel in this


' i Scene, but a cunning confederate Knave , whether the
No ‘| infpired Scripture, or thele inblomn Buffoons, puffed up


with


The Pofifcript ; |
with nothing but ignorance, vanity, and ftupid infide: fj:
lity, are to be believed, let any one judge. |

VVe come now to his other Allegation, wherein we
fhall be brief, we having exceeded the meafure of a Poft-
fcript already. Jt mas neither Samuel?s Soul, fays he,
foinea with his Body, nor his Soul out of bis Body, nor the
Devil, and therefore it muft be fome confederate Knave
fuborned by that cunning cheating Quean of Endor. But I
briefly anfwer, it was the Soul of Samuel himfelf; and
that it is the fruitfulnefs of the great ignorance of F.
Webjter in the found Principles of Theofophy and true
Divinity, that has enabled him to heap together no lefs
than Ten Arguments to difprove this Affertion, and all
little tothe purpofe : So little indeed, that I think it
little to the purpofe particularly to anfwer them, but
fhall hint only fome few Truths which will rout the
whole band of them. |

Ifay therefore, that departed Souls, as other Spirits,
have an avjefécrov in them, fuch as Souls have in this


life; and have both a faculty and a right to move of f...


themfelves, provided there be no exprefs Law againft
fuch or {uch a defign to which their motion tends.

Again, That they have a Power of appearing in their
own perfonal fhapes to whom there is occafion, as Axne
Walker’s Soul did to the Miller: and that this being a
faculty of theirs either natural or acquirable, the doing
foisno miracle. And

Thirdly, That it was the {trong piercing defire, and
deep diftrefs, and agony of mind in Saul, in his per-
plexed circumftances, and the great compaffion and
goodnefs of Spirit in the holy Soul of Sammel, that was
the effectual Magick that drew him to condefcend to
converfe with Saul inthe womans houfe at Exdor, asa }h,
keen fenfe of Juftice and Revenge, made Anne Walker’s §,,'"
Soul appear to the Miller with her five Wounds in her §, 1!
head.


The rigid and harhh feverity that Webjter fancies Sa- fy,


muel’s GholE would haye uled againft the Woman, or
fharp


l 2 Loft /cript.


| harp reproofs to Saul; As for the latter, it is fome-
“what expreft in the Text, and Saul had his excufe in rea-
;,.|dinefs, and the good Soul of Samuel was fenfible of his
:| perplexed condition. And as forthe former, fith the
“| Soul of Samuel might indeed have terrified the poor Wo-
_‘{man, and fo unhinged her, that fhe had been fit for no-
."ithing after it, but not converted her, it is no wonder
lif he paffed her by ; Goodnefs and Forbearance more be-
"Hitting an holy Angelical Soul, than blufter and fury,
-, fuch as is fancied by that rude Goblin that ‘actuates the
Body and Pen of Webffer.
As for departed Souls, that they never have any care


<7


=
>


“or regard to any of their fellow-Souls here upon Earths.


“lis exprefly againft the known example of that great
‘Soul, and univerfal Paftor of all good Souls, who ap-
»tpeared to Stephen at his ftoning, and to S. Paul before
“Vis Converfion, though then in his glorified Body :
lwhich is a greater condefcenfion than this of the Soul of
\\'\\Samuel, which was alfo toa Prince, upon whofe fhould-
‘ers lay the great affairs of the People of J/rael: To o-
“\imit that other notable example of the Angel Raphael fo
m'iealled, (from his office at that time, or from the Ange-
jiical Order he was adopted into after his death) but was
indeed the Soul of Azarias the Son of Ananias the Great,
viliiand of Tobit?s Brethren, Tobit ch..5. 12. Nor does that
‘gulwhich occurs, 70b.12.15. at all clafh with what we have
ijfaid, if rightly underftood: for his faying , I 2m Ra-
phael one of the feven holy Angels which prefent the prayers
iillof the Saints, and which goin and out before the glory of the
\FToly One, in the Cabbaliftick fence, fignifies'no more
mijthan thus, That he was one of the univerfal Society of
imithe holy Angels, (and a Raphael in the Order of the Ra-
‘\i\pbaels) which minifter to the Saints, and reinforce the
«Prayers of good and holy men, by joining thereto their
, /ilown ; and as they are moved by God, minifter to their
yhneceflicies, unprayed to themfelves, which would be an
jabomination to them, but extream prone to fecond the
Petitions of holy fincere Souls, and forward to engage


D in


pC \f


|


sn a a a at ei
=


in the accomplifhing of them, as a truly good man bs
would fooner relieve an indigent creature, over-hearing ff),
him making his moan to Godin Prayer, thanif he beg- }),


ged Alms of himfelf, though he might do that without


fin. This Cabbaliftical account, I think, is infinitely (ae
more-probable, than that Raphael told a downright lye f,,,
to Tobit, in faying he was the fon of Ananias when he Ff 4,


was not. And beit fo, will F. Webjter fay, what is all
this to the purpofe, when the Book of Tobst is Apocry-
phal, and confequently of no Authority? What of no


Authority ? certainly of infinicely more Authority than | me


M! Wagftaff, M' Scot, and Mt Adie, that M' Webfter fo t|
frequently and reverently quoteth. 4

I but, will he further.add, thefe Apparitions were })
made to good and holy men, or to elect Veffels, but King J.
Saul was a wretched Reprobate. ‘his is the third liberal .
badge of honour that this ill-bred Advocate of the ,
Witches has beftowed on a diftreffed Prince. Firft, a J)”
drowned Puppet, p. 170. then a diftratked Bedlam, inthe }


fame Page, which. I pafled by before, and now, af’.
wretched Reprobate: But afluredly Saul was’a brave fp”


Prince and Commander, as Fofephus jultly defcribes him, f'"
and Reprobate only in Type, as J/maeland Efaw; which §,
isamyltery, it feems, that ¥. Webjfer was not aware of, F*'


And therefore no fuch wonder that the Soul of Samuellf”"


had fuch a kindnefs for him, as to appear to him inthe


depth of his diftrefS, to fettle his mind, by telling him: Tt
plainly the upfhot of the whole bufinefs, that he fhouldf
lofe the Battle, and he and his Sons be flain, that fo hes’!


might give a {pecimen of the braveft Valour that ever: gti


was atchieved by any Commander, in that he would not”


fuffer his Country to be over-run by the Enemy while he in


was alive, without refiftance, but though he knew cer- fe


tainly he fhould fail of fuccefs, and he and his Sons dye iy h


in the Fight, yet in fo juftand honourable a Caufe as theg ®t
defence of his Crown and his Country, would give theg!t
Enemy Battle in the Field, and facrifice his own Life fong™s:


the fafety of his People. Out of the knowledge of wie K .
noble


= The Poftfcript. 51


mh noble {pirit in Saul, and his refolved valour in this point,


es, {thofe words haply may come from Samuel , To morrow
yy faale thon and thy fons be with me, (as an aufpicious infinua-
iy | €10n of their favourable reception into the other World)
yD OYA NBO in thalamo juftorum, as Munfter has no-
nef ted out of the Rabbins.
i,j) _Laftly, As for that weak imputation that this opinion
oy {04 its being Samuel’s Soul that appeared, is Popifh, that
{US very Plebeianly and Idiotically fpoken, as if every
nigithing that the Popifh Party arefor, were Popifh. We
,, divide our zeal againft fo many things that we fancy Po-
‘)pifh, that wefcarce refervea juft fhare of deteftation a-
,.{gain{t what is truly fo: Such as are that grofs, rank, and
,,tcandalous impoflibility of Tranfub/tantiation, the vari-
Jus modes of fu'fome Idolatry and lying Impoftures, the
[Uncertainty of their Loyalty to their lawful Soveraigns
.. |by their fuperftitious adhefion to the {piritual Tyranny
|, {Of the Pope, and that barbarous and ferine Cruelty a-
 Againft thofe that are not either fuch Fools as to be per=
\| ifwaded to believe fuch things as they would obtrude
(upon men, or are not fo falfe to God and their
“town Confciences, as knowing better, yet to profefs
“them.
"| As for that other opinion, that the greater part of
ithe reformed Divines hold, That it was the Devil that
"appeared in Sazuel’s fhape; and though Grotius alfo
i feems to be enclined thereto, alledging that paflage of
\WPorphyrius, De Abftinentia Animalium,where he def{cribes
fone kind of Spirit to be, 1éy@- drarnaie oJ C6W$4 Tay]ouog=
MN Wpavle 0 moadtegmov, vmoneneSuoy © Sede % Saluovas x) Luyae
jul breBvanérer. (which is, I confefs, very appofite to this fto-
i'ry ; nor do doubt but that in many of thefe Necroman-
‘tick Apparitions, they are ludicrous Spirits, not the
iSouls of the deceafed that appear) yet Iamclear for the
‘Mlappearing of the Soul of Samuel in this ftory, from the
if: teafons above alledged, and as clear, that in other Ne-
i"eromancies it may be the Devil, or fuch kind of Spirits
Was Porphyrius above defcribes, that change themfelves into
aw. 2 omnif arto


=


aM |
;


“ f Rs, ae
a Sees al


zs aie pen abs
RIVES reer


Sager a3
SL aia patie


ware
"eeate


52 The Poftfcript.
omnifarious forms and (hapes, and one while att the parts of
Demons, another while of Angels er Gods, and another
while of the Souls of the deceafed: And 1 confefs fuch‘a fpi-
rit.as this might perfonate Sammuel,here, for any thing
Webfter has alledged to the contrary. For his Arguments
indeed are wonderfully weak and woodden, as may be
underftood out of what [have hinted concerning the
former opinion. But I cannot further particularize
now. ot ie

For I have made my Poff/cript much longer than my §
Letter, before I was aware; and I need not enlarge tof...
you, who are fo well verfed in thefe things already, and J"
can by the quicknefs of your parts prefently collect the:
whole meafures of Hercules by his Foot, and fufficiently


underftand by this time itis no rafh cenfure of mine ing!"


my Letter, That Web/fer’s Book is but a. weak imperti- 4°
nent piece of work, the very Mafter-piece thereof be-§
ing fo weak and impertinent, and falling fo fhort of the


{cope he aims it, which was really to prove that there Ms


was no fuch thing asa Witch or Wizzard, that is, not#®
any mention thereof, in Scripture, by any name of ove!
that had more to do with the Devil, or the Devil with him,
than with other wicked men; that is to fay, of one who ing™
vertue of Govenant, either implicit or explicit, didig™
{trange things by the help of evil Spirits, but chat there
are many forts of Deceivers and Impoftors, and diverfe per—§ ii
fons, under a paffive delufion of Melancholy and Fancy,g ik
which is part of his very Title- page. fl
Whereby he does plainly infinuate, there is nothing


but Couzenage or Melancholy in the whole bufinefs off


the feats of Witches, But alittle to mitigate or fmo
ther the grofsnefs of this falfe Aflertion, he adds, Axa


that there is no corporeal League betwixt the Devil and theg "i


Witch, and that he does not {uckonthe Witches Body, nor
has carnal copulation with her, nor the Witches are turned
into Dogs or Cats, &c. All which things as you may fee
in his Book, he underftands in the grofleft manner ima~
ginable, as if the Imps of Witches had Mouths of Flefhg
ta


5


abl


hi}


y


| The Poft i fcript ° 53
wjjnt tO fuck them, and Bodies of Flefh lie with them. And


| at thisrate he may uhderftand a corporeal League, as if it


‘inf Were no League or Covenant, unlefs fome Lawyer drew
wert the Inftrument,and engroffedit in Vellum or thick Parch-
wi? Ment, and there were fo many Witnefles with the Hand
i) and Seal of the Party : nor any Transformation into Dogs
4) Or Cats, unlefs it were real and corporeal, or grofly car-
i) nal; which none of his Witchmongers,as he rudely and flo-
‘umf Wenly calls that learned and ferions perfon Dr. Ca/aubon
ort and the reft, do believe.
“their bodily Transformation , betwixt Bodinus and Re-
ay gaigees, Of which more in my Scholza. But that without
i this carnal tranfmutation a Woman might not be ac-
«<i counted a Witch, is fo foolifh a fuppofition, that Web/ter
wit himfelf certainly muft be afhamed of it. |


Only it is a difputable cafe of


Wherefore if his Book be writ only to prove there is


i) NO fuch thing as a Witch that covenants in Parchment


ij) with the Devil, by the advice of a Lawyer, and is really


{\


iand carnally turned into a Dog, Cat, or Hare, ee. and

'. with carnal lips fucked by the Devil, and is one with

\ whom the Devillies carnally , the {cope thereof is mani-

of feftly impertinent, when neither Dr. Cafaubon nor any
'


yt H
|


one elfe holds any fuch thing. Butas for the true and
adequate notion of a Witch or Wizzard, fuch as at firll
{I defcribed, his Arguments all of them are too too weak


1! or impertinent, as to the difproving the exiftence of fuch


4
}) a}
)


7


a Witch as this, who betwixt his Deceivers, Impoftours,


|


| jand Melancholifts on one hand, and thofe grofs Witches he
", idefcribes, onthe other hand, goes away there ney Pace


ase


is a green balk between too Lands of Corn, none of his
| Arguments reaching her or getting the fight of her, him-
ifelt in the mean time ftanding on one fide amongft the


"| Deceivers and Impoffours, his Book, as to the main de-


‘I fign he drives at, being a meer Cheat and Impofture.


C.C,C, May 25. 1678.


| | D Adver-


W2


~ Advertifement.


ae Letter of Dr. More being left amangft other Pa-
| pers appertaining to this new-intended Edition by Mr. |
Glanvil, and I perceiving in a Letter of his to the Dottor,
that be had a mind this Letter fhould be’ publifhed together


with his Book, it ts done accordingly, and prefixed at the }\


beginning thereof, as natural Method requires, the Letter
being hortatory to quicken Ar. Glanvil to difpatch his in-
tended new Edition for the undeceiving of the World, and }
the Poft{cript containing many things of a general influence
upon the whole Book, But that the Dottor may fuffer no pre=}
judice through this publifhing of his Letter and Polt{cript, |
fromthe fharpnefs and fatyricalnefs of them in fome places, I
fhall for the more rightly underftanding bis meaning in the
ufing that mode of writing upon this occafion, tranfcribe ail
paffage of a Letter of his to his Friend Adr. Glanvil, rela= |
ting thereto. Y pray you fend me word whether that


Poftfcrapt will not meet with all the elufory cavils of that § fj,


profane Buffoon, upon thofe places of holy Scripture:
his unworthy ufage of the Holy Writ, and his derifo-
rious Interpretations of it in the behalf of his beloved
Hags, provoked my indignation to fuch Schemes of de-
riding and expofing him, as otherwife I fhould never:
have condefcended to. This ws a fufficient Teffimony of
the Dottor?s averfnef{s from fuch manner of writing. But as
Divines tell us, that Anger and Punifhment are God’s Opusi
Alienum, hy firange work, as being more abhorrent fromm

his nature , but yet for the good of the Univerfe he fteps out’

sometimes into that difpenfation: fo I think it noe misbecom=s

ing good men, fometimesto conde(cend, as the Dottor calls®),
it, to the chaftifing prophane Drolls and Abufers of holyq”
things, by a juft derifion and fatyrical reprebenfion for
their freakifh and impious faucine/s , provided it be donew .
Sincerely, and for the publick good. © |


Sada-}


gue aducifinus Trinmpbatus :
OR,
Full and plain EVIDENCE


Concerning


WITCHES


AND


| APPARITIONS.


The Firft PART thereof containing
Philofophical Confiderations,


Which defend their


|POSSIBILITY.


Whereunto is added,


( The true and genuine NOTION, and
| confiftent Explication of the Nature


OFA


pri Rid>


i: For the more full Confirmation of the
|
|
|
|


| PossiBILity oftheir EXISTENCE.
H


LONDON,
) Printed for S. Lownds, MDC LXXXVIII.
| :


| To the IIluftrious


es ee ee bs re
DUKE of
| Richmond and Lenox.


My LORD, :


iz OUR Grace having been pleafed to command
IE the firtt, and more imperfect Edition of this
/ Difcourfe, I have prefumed that your Can-
hour well accept the Draught that hath had my laft hand
\pon tt. And though I am not fond enough to phancy
any Art or Ornament iz the compofure to recommend
\2t; yet, I know, the Effay zs feafonable, azd contains
\things which relate to our biggelt Interefts ; the de-
\figz being to fecure fome of the Out-works of Religi-
Jon, and to regain a parcel of ground which bold Infi-
\delity hath invaded. And, my Lord, I cannot but ob-
iferve fadly , that while the SeCts are venting their
| Animofities againft each other , and ferambling for
\ their Conceits , azd the particular advantages of
\ their way, they perceive not that Atheifn comes on
\ Oy large ftrides , and enters the Breaches they have


\ wade. Sober and confiderate men fee the formidable -


| danger,azd fome of them have ftrenuoufly endeavoured
\ 40 matntain the Walls , while the fattions within are
N fo bufie aud fo divided, that they cannot attend the
I 7 | defperate


i


The EPISTLE


defperate hazard, and will not join in a Common bi
Defence. Among thofe generous Defendants I defire },
to pitch, azd have undertaken to make good one of the },
Forts wpon which the Enemy hath made impetuous
Affaults, and I hope with no contemptible [uccefs. \

For my part, my Lord, I am very little concerned \ ty
for the {mall pedlaries that fome mens fondnels calls }j,),
Religion, by which that facred thing hath been expo- |,
fed to a great deal of contempt avd difhonour. But }j,;
yet I think it my duty to have a zeal for thofe great


ana certain matters upon which our hopes iz another fj,


world are grounded : And that our expectations of 4


future Being, are mot imaginary ad fantattick, we


have reafonable evidence enough from the Attributes
of God, the Phenomena of Providence, azd the na-
ture of our Souls, to convince any, but thofe who will |,
{tapidly believe that they {hall dye like Bealts, that },,,
they may live like them. I confefs the Philofophick },.
Arguments that are produced for the defirable Artis
cle, though very cogent, are many of them {pecula-


tive and deep, requiring fo great an attention and J} |


fagacity, that they take no hold upon the whifling
Spirits , that are not ufed to confider ; or upon the
common fort, that cannot reach {uch heights of Ar-
gument: Bat they are both beft convinced by the
proofs that come neareft the fence, which indeed firike


our minds fullett, and leave the moft lating impref- 4 '
fions ; whereas high Speculations being more thin and §
fubtile, eajily llide ott even from under ftandings that |”.


are moft capable to receive them. For this reafon, ar,


mong (ome others, I appear thus much concerned-for }


the jujtification of the belief of Witches, zt fuze off pe


ang | tT


DEDICATORY.


: Ying palpable asd current evidence of our Immortali-
\ty, which I am exceedingly follicttous to have made

“| good.

“For really, my Lord, if we make our compute like
|Men, and do not fuffer our felves to be abufed by the
‘Wflatteries of Senfe, and the deceitful gayeties that

 fleal us away from God, and from our {elves, there

ll ¢s nothing can render the thoughts of this odd life to-
\ erable, but the expeCtation of another. And wile

| men have [aid, that they would not live a moment,

of they thought they were not to live again. This per~

‘haps [ome may take to be the difcontented Paradox of

‘amelancholick, vext, aad of mean condition, that

"a pinched by the ftraitne/s of fortune , avd envies

"lN\ the heights of others felicity and grandeurs; But by

"\ that time thofe that judge fo, have {pent the heats of

i frolick youth, and have paft over the feveral {tages ct

Ml of vanity ; when they come to fit down, and make fo- if

""\ ber reflections upon their pleafures and pur{uits, ana Vy

Mt {um up the accompt of all that is with them, and before a

i"\ them, I doubt not but their confidering thoughts will

ii gazake Solomon’s Conclufion, azd find, that tis but
") a mifery to live, if we were to live for nothing elfe.

j\ So that if the content of the prefent life were all I

li were to have for the hopes of Immortality, I fhoula

even upon that account be very unwilling to believe |

ot that Iwas mortal: For certainly the pleafures that He
| refult from the thoughts of another World ix thofe ug

| that not only fee it painted i their imaginations,but #8

| feel tt begun in their Souls, are as far beyond all the la


i
i)
'
{


—


| beyoud the delufive Images of’ Dream. Azad theres


|
| titillations of fence, as a real lafting happinefs 7s
|

I fore


I


The EPISTLE, ec.


fore they that think to fecure the enjoyment of their |
pleafures 4y the infamy of our natures ia-the over- |
throw of our future hopes, endeavour to dam up the |


Fountain of the fulleft 2zd cleaneft delights ; and


feck frsmpid waters inthe ins and puddles of obe JT


Streets.
You fee, my Lord, how my zeal for this mighty in-


gere/t tranfports me to 4 greater length in this addrefs, |


than perhaps usay confit with trict decorum; and I
indulge my Pen the rather in this licence, becaufe pof-
fibly your Grace's name may draw fome eyes hither that
have need of {uch fuggeltions, azd thofe that have
not need a great deal more. It cannot be proper to add


here thofe large accounts which would be requifite in a i,


defign of full conviction : But for the prefent, if they


fhall pleafe to look forward, they neay likely meet Lome } wit
things not unfit for their feriows thoughts, and I ina iv


tena to take a feafon to prefent them others, more par-
ticularly [uitable to what I know 15 as much their in-
tereft, I doubt it is their want.

But, my Lord, I fear Iam importunate, azd bes
feech your Grace to pardon the boldne/s of,


My LORD,


Your Grace’s


Molt obedient Servant,


Fof, Glanvil


=


=


SS


=


sac —


SS


oo


>= =


—s


—. 2


= —r


=


PREFACE.


a


Here are a fort of narrow and confin’d Spirits, who
B = account all Difcourfes needlels, that are not for
||) sat — their particular purpofes , and judge all the World
‘lto be of the Size and Genius of thofe within the Circle of
“ON their Knowledge and Acquaintance , fo that with a pert and
Hu pragmatique Infolence, they cen{ure all the braver Defi ens
wit and Notices that lie beyond their Ken, as nice and imper-
jig tinent Speculations: aa ignorant and proud Injuttice ;
| as if this fort were the only perfons, whofe bumour and needs
| fhould be confulted. And hence it comes to pafs, that the
“ greatelt and worthielt things that are written or faid, do
‘iN always meet with the moft general neglect and {corn, fince
‘i the lefler people , for whom they were not intended, are
| i quick to fhoot ther bolt, andto condemn what they do noe
(,t underftand, and becaufe they do not. Whereas on the other
|| fide, thofe that are able to judge, and would incourage, are
', |) commonly referv’d and modelt im their fentences; or, if
“NW they fhowld feck to do right to things that are worthy, they
i are [ure to be out-voiced by the rout of ignorant contemners.

. i) Upon which accounts I have often thought that he that courts
| and values popular effimation , takes not the right way if

\ be endeavour any thing that is really excellent: but he muft

| feudy the little plaufibilities, and accommodate the humour

| of the MANY, who are attive Minifters of Fame, being

| zealous and loud im their applaules, as they are clamorous

i} and impetuous iztherr oppofitions. As for thefe, r2s

i one of my chief cares to make my felf as much unconcern’d at
i thecr Cenfures, as I am at the cacklings ofa flock of Geefe,
| or at the eager difpleafure of thofe little {narling Animals,
i} that are angry when I go along the Streets, Nor can any
\t man be either wile or happy, tel be bath arrived to that
i greatnefs of mind, that no more confiders the tatling of the
i multitude shan the whiftling of the wind. Nor thar [think


| ihe
'


~+
ii
a ™~


|


OR slam


: : age Serer
WOE wigact emt 2 A alaabed. wk


ae
Bias - Fe gee ea or aretha
AE EI 5 TAME ne Ses aT A


-
Md


WK


Seema sche as


the common people are to be contemned for the weaknefs of oP
their underftandings , es a#infolent meannefs of {pirit ta


that doth that: but when conceited ignorance fits down in
the Judgment Seat, and gives peremptory Verdicts upon
things beyond its Line, the wife man fmiles azd pafleth
by. For fuch (if that may fignifie any thing to keep them
from troubling themfelves about the following CON SI-
DERATIONS) J defire they would take notice from
me, that I writ not thofe things for fuch as they 5 and they |, .
‘will do well to throw up the Book upon this Advertifement, |)

except they will ftay to hear, That though Philofophical Di- |"
Scourfes to juftifie the common belief about Witches, are no-
thing at all tothem, or thofe of their meafure 5 yet they
are too {eafonable and neceflary for our Age., in which
Atheifm és begun in Saducifm: And thofe that dare not
bluntly fay, Vhere.is NO GOD, content themfelves
(for a fasr ftep and Introduction) to deny there are SP 1-
RITS or WITCHES. Which fort of Infidels,though


they are not ordinary among the meer vulgar, yet are they | DL


numerousin a little higher rank of underitandings. And {°"
thofe that know any thing of the World, know, that moft of |"
the loofer Gentry, and the {mall pretenders to Philofophy })''
and Wit, are generally deriders of tue belief of Witches
and Apparitions. And were this a flight and meer [pecula-
tive miftake, I fhould not trouble my felf or them about it.
But I fear this error bath a Core in st that is worfe than
Herelie : and therefore how little foever I care what men be-
lieve or teach in matiers of Opinion, I think I have reafon
to be concern’d in an affair that toucheth fo near upon the
greateft interefts of Religion. And really I am aftonifht
Sometimes to think into what a kind of Age we are fallen, in
which fome of the greateft impieties are accounted but Bugs,
and terrible Names, invilible Tittles, Peccadillo’s, or
Chimeras. The fad and greateft inftances are SACRI-
LEDGE, REBELLION, avd WITCHCRAFT.
For the two former, there are a fort of men (that are far
from being profeft Enemies to Religion) who, I do not know
whether they own any [uch Vices. We find no mention of them }

int


! we O02
iniuliem theer moft particular Confeflions., xor have I obferved
‘Wither in thofe Sermons that bave contained the lar geft Cata-
lin ogues of the Sins of our Age and Nation. ?T were dan-
merous to {peak of them as fins, for fear who fhould be
ypylfound guilty. Bat my bufinefs ar prefent ts not with thele,
»4,,ibue tbe other, WITCHCRAFT, which] am fure was
youl@ Sin of elder times, and how comes it about that our Age,

" hich fo much ont-does them in all other kinds of wickednefs,
idgltfrould be wholly innocent tn this ? That there MAY be
IW IT CHES and Apparitions im our days, notwith-
ftanding the Objections of the modern Sadducee, J believe
have made appear in the CONSIDERATION

folowing ; 1x which I did not primarily intend direét Proof,
bat DEFENCE, as the Title of the firft Edition, which
| Wis reftor?d in thefe later mention'd.

Wa nd if it fhonld be objected , That I have for the moft
ipart ufed only {uppofals and conjectural things in the vin-
ldication of the common belief, and ifpeak, with no point-

“°tblank affurance iz my particular Anfwers , as I doin the
general Conclufion, I need only fay, That the Propofition

, WZ defend zs matter of fact, which the dis-believers impugn

‘iby alledging that it cannot be, or it isnot likely : Jy re-

“ Ieura to which, if J {hew how thofe things may be, and pro-

“libably, xorwithftanding their allegations, though I fay not Ve

“downright that they.are in the particular way I offer, yer ss uf

uh lenough for the defign of Defence , though not for that of a

Proof : for when one faith a thing cannot be, and I tell him i

"Show poffibly it may, though I hit not the juft manner of it, I Hy

MNyet defeat the Objection againft it, and make way for the a

m"evidence of the thing de Facto, which now Ihave added

il NFrom the Divine Oracles, and two Modern Relations that nt

"Ware clear and unexceptionable. WW

WN Thave no humour nor delight in telling Stories, and donot ||

i Ipublifh thefe for the gratification of thofe that have, bur I i

\trecord them as Arguments for the confirmation of a Trath vi

Ai Npbich hath indeed been attefted by multitudes of the like Evi-

'"Nedences in all places and times. But things remote, or long

hpalt, are either not believed, or forgotten: whereas the/e


A
10 ne


a)
aat T\


. being


I
i


.


|
|
i}


ory


being frefh and near, and attended with all the civcumftans.


ces of credibility , it may be expected they {hould have the §. _


more fucce/s upon the ob{tinacy of Unbelievers.

But after all this, I muft confefs, there isoné Argument
againft me, which ts not to be dealt with, viz. a mighty
confidence grounded upon nothing , that fwaggers, and


huffs, and fwears there are no Witches. For fuch Philo- }('


fophers as thefe, let them enjoy the Opinion of their own }
Superlative Judgments, and enter me in the firft rank, of
Fools for crediting my Senfes, and thofe of all the World,
before their {worn Dittates. If they will believe in Scott; |
Hobbes, and Osborne, and think them more infallible thax
the Sacred Oracles, the Hiftory of all Ages , and the full
experience of our own, who can helpit ? They muft not be
contradicted, and they are refolved not to be perf{waded.

For this fort of men, I never go about to convince them of any |
thing. If I can avoid it, | throw nothing before them, left |


they fhould turn again, and rend me. Their Opinions.§ » ,
came into.their Heads by chance, whex them little reafons 4 /


had no notice of their entrance 5 and they mult be let alone }

to go out again of themfelves , the fame way they entred. }

Therefore not to make much nos[e to difturb thefe infallible
Hulfers (and they cannot hear a little for their own) J foft- |
ly ftep by them, leaving only thus whifper behind me That }
though their worfhipful ignorance and fottifhnefs can reli(h
nothing of a Difcourfe that doth not minifter to Senfuality
and Unbelief, yee my CONSIDERATIONS bave
had the good fortune of a better reception from the braver
and more generous Spirits, than my fondeft hopes could have
expetted , and perfons whofe good thoughts I have reafon to
value, have affured me that their kindnefs to my Book bath
gmprovea upon fecond aud more careful perufal:: which I
mention for this purpofe,that thofe that need my Remarques


and cannot feel them ima running reading, may pleafe to $i
turn their eyes back, and deliberately thinkover what Ihave §\ity,
offered , from which courfe I dare promife them more fatisfa= Pili:


étion than from their hafte.
Bath, June’. 1668.


; ©
*


|
|


4
}


|


SOME


|CONSIDER ATIONS


Li


:
¢
]
4
H


ABOUT
Fo |


V itcher afi te


ia Ina LETTER to
|


JROBERT HUNT, Ef.


Ce


4
y


40) Ae SS


Sa ~ (nae aaieninabiaaiiiiommmmimmenaneeeenet


|. SIR, |
iW ee = ‘ P P ° t 7 ees Vii
Alii HE frequent and late dealings you have Had in i
hl the Examination of Witches , and the regards |
hal of one that hath a very particular honour for
“halt you, have brought you the trouble of fome


(CONSIDERATIONS on the Subject. And ae

ithough what I have to fay, be but the unaccurate pro- iI

yduct of alictle leifare; yet I hope it may afford you Hh
(ome, not unreafonable, Accounts of the odd Phenomena

| of Witchcraft and Fafcination , and contribute to the hh
\ DEFENCE of the Truth, and Certainty of matters, aM
. bwhich you know by Experiments that could not deceive, in


ipite of the petty exceptions of thofe that are refolved to ij
pelieve nothing in affairs of this nature. i

: Fabs ° 5% is e i!
} And if any thing were to be much admired in an Age Hh
i} Ye ot ee
li V3


Wh 66
i) of Wonders, not only of Nature, (which is a conftant
i Prodigy) but of Aen and Afanners; it would beto me ff’
| matter of affonifhment, that AZen, otherwife witty and in-
a genious, are fallen into the conceit that there is nofuch |f""
| thing as a Witch or Apparition, but that thefe are the |p"
| creatures of Afelancholy and Superftition, fofter?d by igne- |y*
ait rance and defign , which comparing the confidence of their }}”:
Wh disbelief with the evidence of the things denied, and the E


Confiderations ==


Vi weaknefs of their grounds, would almoft fuggeft that |
| themfelves are an Argument of what they deny, and that
fo confident an opinion could not be held upon fuch in-
ducements, but by fome kind of Witchcraft and Fafcinae \y"")
tion in the Fancy. And perhaps that evel Sporie whofe jh’)!
il influences they will not allow in actions afcribed to fuch fj
Vi Caufes, hath a greater hand and intereft in their Propofi- fj
i tion than they areaware of. For that fubtile Enemy of [}'!'
Mankind (fince Providence will not permit him to mif- |
i chief us without our own concurrence) attempts that by jp!
i ftratagem and artifice, which he could never effect by fh”
ii epen ways of acting; and the fuccefs ofall wiles depend-
ing upon their fecrecy and concealment, his snfluence isne- y's"
ver more dangerous than when his agency is leaft fufpected. |p
In order therefore to the carrying on the darkand hidden |W
defigns he manageth againft our happinefs and our Souls, fj",
he cannot expect to advantage himfelf more, than by in- ff
finuating a belief, That there is no fuch thing as bimjelf, Wn
but that fear and famcymake Devils now, as they did [pvt
Gods of old. Nor can he ever draw the aflent of men to pf;
fo dangerous an aflertion, while the franding fenfible evi-
dences of his exi/fence in his practices, by and upon his fit
inftraments, are not difcredited and removed, i
Tis doubtlefs therefore the intereft of this Agent of MM
darknefs to have the World believe, that the zotion they fits
have of him is but a phantome and conceit ; and in order fi)
Wi thereunto, that theftories of Witches, Apparitions, andl’)
indeed every thing that brings tidings of another World, 49%)
3 are but melancholick. Dreams, and pious Romances. Andie,
of whon memare arrived thus far te think there are no dia- i. ni
| =a mo bolica btn


= SS


about Witchcraft. 67
om| Bolteal contratts or Apparitions, their belief that there
are fuch Spirits refts only upon their Faith and Reverenc:
tothe Divine Oracles, which we have little reafon to ap-
vile] Prehend fo great in fuch Affertors, as to command much
ie from their affent; efpecially in fach things in which
tet} they have corrupt isterefts againft their evidence. So
\ti| that he that thinks there is no Witch, believes a Dewusl
‘tht| @raess, or at leaft upon inducements, which he is like to
| find himfelf difpofed to deny when he pleafeth. And
ihe] When men are arrived to this degree of difiidence and in-
(iw;,) fidelity, we are beholden to them if they believe either
shop) <Azgel, Or Spirit, Refurreétion of the Body, or Immortality
ify OF Souls. Thefe things hang together ia a Chain of con-
nif] MERton, at leaft in thefe mens Aypothefis; and *tis but an
»yf{ Happy chance if he that hath loft one link, holds another.
» i} 80 that the vitals of Religion being fo much interefled in
ert Chis fabject, it will not be unneceflary employment par-
ay €icularly to difcourfe it.
| And in order to the proof that there have been, and
ate, unlawful Confederacies with evil Spirits, by vertue
lof which the helli(h accomplices perform things above their
patural powers: I muft premife, that this being matter
of fatt, is only capable of the evidence of authority and
fenfe, and by both thefe the being of Witches and diabo-
steal Contracts is moft abundantly confirm?’d, All Hiffo~
yes are full of the exploits of thole Iaftruments of dark-
PEs, and the teffimony of all ages, not only of the rude
pid barbarous but of the moft civiliz?d and polt{fh’d World,
“’ ptings tidings of their ftrange performances. We have
"ple atte/tation of thoufands of Eye and Ear-witnefles, and
hofe not of the eafily-deceivable vulgar only, but of
wife and grave difcerners, and that, when no intereft
i fould oblige them to agree together in a common Lye.
ijfay, we have the light of all thefe circumftances to con-=
‘itm us in the belief of things done by perfons of defpi-
) jable power and knowledge, beyond the reach of Art
‘Wad ordinary Nature. Standing publick Records have
yee Kept of thefe well-attelted Relations, and Epocha’s
E 2 made


|


wy


acs0 |
4


68 Confider ations |
made of thofé'uriwonted events. Laws in many Nations [|
have been enacted againft thofe vile practices, thofe
among the ¥ews and our own are notorious; fuch cafes fj
have been often determined near us, by wife and reve- fj
vend Fudges, uponelear and convictive Evidence: and J) j\,
thoufands in our own Nation have fuffered death for their |
vile Compatts with Apoftate Spirits. All thefe I might in,
largely prove in their particular inftances, but that ?cisa ;,,,
not needful, fince thofe that deny the being of Witches,J
do it not out of ignorance of thefe heads of Argument, J}.


ef which probably they have heard a thoufand times ; | |
but from an apprehenfion that fuch a belsef ts abfurd, and
the things impojible. And upon thefe prefumptions they i
contemn all demonftrationsof this nature, and are hard-~#f.,,
ned againft conviction, AndI think, thofe that can be- Fa
lieve all Hiifories are Romances, That all the wifer worlagy
have agreed together to juggle mankind into'a common,
belief of ungrounded fables, That the found fenfes of mul-}
titudes together may deceive them, and Lams are builtff,,
upon Chimeras; That the graveft and wifeft Fudge.
have been Afurderers , and the fageft perfons Fools, o1
deligning Impoftors : \ fay, thofe that can believe this *
heap of abfurdities, are either more credulows than thofqy
whofe credulity they reprehend , or elfe have fome ex |
ir'zordinary evidence of their perfwafion, vez. Fhat tie
abfurd and impoffible there {hould be a Witch or Apparition
Andlam confident, were thofe little appearances remov’.
which men have form?d in their fancies againft the bey...”
liefof fuch things, their own evidence would make it he
way.tomens affexe, without any more arguments thai
what they know already to enforce it. There is nothinj@)
then neceflary to be done, in order to the eftablifhin ’”
the belief | would reconcile to mens minds, but to endeagy i
your the removal of thofe prejudices they have received.
againtt it: the chiefof which I fhall particularly deag,'’
with. And Lbegin withthat bold Affertion, That


SECTI


ban


|


|

T
Biltn)
rl ta
| “h4


i en


‘ ot = .
a ee


z
=


ee tes = a


= =a =
ye en at > a eS


San.


= : => er = —4 =
Pe ae a ee Se a


(a Witches and wi pAaritions.


| nitely reafona


about Witchcraft.


SE CF.
I.


G)rAHE NOTION of a Spirit 2s impoflible and


contradictious , and confequently fo is that of


Witches, the belief of which 1 founded on that Do-
étrine.


T° WHICH OBFECTION I Anfwer,
| C1.) If the motion of a Spirit be abfurd as is pre-
tended, that of aGOD anda SOUL diftiné from


‘© matter,and immortal, are likewife ab/urdities. And then,


that the World was jumbled into this elegant and orderly
Fabrick by chance 5; and that our Souls are only parts of
matter that came together we know not whence nor how,
and fhall again fhortly be diffolv’d into thofe loofe Aroms
that compound them ; aa all our conceptions are but the

thrufting of one part of matter again{t another; and the
‘Idea’s of our minds mere blind and cafual motions, Vhete,


and a thoufand more the groflelt smpo/fibslities and ee


gities (confequents of this Propofition, That the notion of
@ Spirit 1 abfurd) will be fad certainties and demon rate:
ons. And with fuch Affertors I would ceafe to Honus
about Witches and Apparitions , and addrefs my felf to
@btain their affent to Truths infinitely more facred.

And yet (2) though it fhould be ‘granted them, that
a fubftance immaterial is as much a contradittion as they
can fancy; yet why fhould they not believe, that the
Air and all the Regions above us, may have their znvift-
ble intelletual Agents, of Nature like unto our Souls, be
that what it will, and fome of them at leaft as much de-


iil generate as the vile(t and moft mifc hievous among men 2


ill bee enough to fecure the poffibil lity a
And that all the de Stories
are furnifhed with Inbabitants, "cis infi-
ble to conclude, from the analogy of Nas
f3 Lure >


2


This Hypothefis w


of the Uz: Luer fe


69


aren eicaee


none te ee ee
Pane peagertesy 7 a
faa WB AD ig ati i Oe


ee


betas:


eee ee
NPE atsericeiek Le


mes


Fe oR,


ee


Confider ations
ture: fince we fee there is nothing fo contemptible and
vile in the World we refide in, but hath its living Crea-
tures that dwell uponit; the Earth, the Water, the zz-
feriour Air, the bodies of Animals, the flefh, the skin, the Bi!
entrails, the leaves, the roots, the fralks of Vegetables, §"
yea, and all kind of AGinerals in the fubterraneous Regi- §"
ons. \fay, all thefe have their proper Jvbabitants , yea,
I fuppofe this rule may hold in all diftinct kinds of Bodies
inthe World. That they have their peculiar Animals,
The certainty of which, I believe the improvement of |


microfcopical Obfervations will difcover. From whence: § 7):


I infer, That fince this little Spot is fo rhickly peopled in
every Atome of it, tis weaknefs to think that all the vaft
{paces above, and hollows under ground, are defert and uz-


inhabited. And if both the fuperiour and lower Continents vi
of the Univerfe have their Inhabitants alfo, ?tis exceed- f Mt


ingly improbable, arguing from the fame azalogy, that f
they are allof the meer fenible mature, but that they are BY


at leaft fome of the Rational and Intelleflual Orders. ft ltt


Which fuppofed, tiere is good foundation for the belief § I,
of Witches and Apparitions, though the notion ofa Spz- jit
rit fhould prove as a'furd, and unphilofophical, as 1 judge
the denial of it. And fo this firft Objection comes to
nothing. I defcend then to the fecond Prejudice, which
inay be thus formed in behalf of the Objeétors.


poem I


roe Ms a We


If.


as HERE ARE Aéctionszx moft of thofe Relati-

ns afcribed to Witches, which are ridiculous
and impofhible in the wature'of things; fach are (1) Their
flying out of Windows, after they have anointed themfelves,
to remote places. (2) Their transformation into Cats,


yy


me


Poazy \ ER: : j |
Flares, ana other Creatures. (3) Thar feeling al they,


f
1 . ? ° 2 " .
"1 aay yoo 2 hodies which thev have veceived in th
hurts 12 their own hodies which they have received in thofe.


b &
af


(4) Their


about Witchcraft. As
(4) Their raifing Tempelts, by muttering fome nonfenfi-


cal words, or performing ceremonies alike impertinent as ri-
diculows. And (5) their being fuck’d in a certain private
place of their bodies by a Familiar. Thefe are prefumed to
be attions inconfiftent with the nature of Spirits, and above
the powers of thofe poor and miferable Agents. And there-
fore the Objection fuppofeth them performed only by the
Fancy ; and that the whole myftery of Witchcraft ws but ai
illufion of crafie imagination.


O this aggregate Objettion I return, (1) In the ge-
neral, The more abfurd and unaccountab'e thefe
actions feem, the greater confirmations are they to me of
the rruth of thofe Relations, and the reality of what the
Objettors would deftroy. For thefe circumftances being
exceeding unlikely, judging by the meafures of common
belicf , isthe greater probability they aré not fiétiti-
ous: Forthe contrivers of Fiétions ufe to formthem as
near as they can conformably to the moft un/ufpected rea-
littes, endeavouring to make them look as like truth as is
poffible in the main fuppofals, though withal they make
them ftrange in the circumftance. None but aFool ora


-«() Madman would relate, with a purpofe of having it be-
(l) lieved, that hefaw in Ireland Men with hoofs on their


heads, and eyes intheir breafts . or if any fhould be fo ri-


| diculoufly vain, as to be ferious in fuch ati incredible
“1 Romance, it cannot be fuppofed that all Travellers that
| come into thofe parts after him fhould tell the fame
| flory. There is a large field in fiétion ; arid if all thofe
| Relations were arbitrary compofitions, doubtlefs the firft


Romancers would have framed them more agrecable to


‘| the common doétrine of Spirits ; at leaft, after thefe
wl L4ppofed abfurdities had been a thoufand times laugh?d ar,
“nt People by this time would have'learn’d to correct thofe
| obnoxious extravagancies;, and though they have not yet


more veracity than the Ages of Ignorance and Superftiti-


i om, yet one would expect they fhould have got more


cuaning, This fappos’d impoffibility then of thefe per-
| E ;


4 formances,


“7h tst« Connections


formances, feemsto mea probable argument that they are
not wilful and defigned Forgeries, And if they are Fan-
eres, “tis fomewhat ftrange, that Imagination, which is
the molt various thing in all the world, fhould infinitely
repeat the fame concezt in all times and places. ,
_ But again (2) the f{trange Aétions related of Witches,
and prefumed zmpo/fible, are not afcribed to their own
powers ; but to.the Agency of thofe wicked Confederates
they imploy. And to affirm, that thofe evil /pirits can-
not do that which we conceit impo(fible, is boldly to ftint
the powers of Creatures, whofe natures and faculties we
Know not; and to meafure the world of Spirits by the nar-
row rules of our own émpotent beings. We fee among our
Selves the performances of fome out-go the conceits and
poffibslitces of others , and we know many things may bé
done by the A@athematicks and Mechanick Artifice, which
common heads think impo(fible to be effected by: the ho-
reft ways of Art and Nature, And doubtlefs, the fub-
vilties and powers of thole mifchievous Fiends, are as much
beyond the reach and activities of the .moft knowing
Agents among us, as theirs are beyond the wit and abi-
lity of the moft rafickand aliterate. So that the utmoft
that any mans reafon in the world can amount to in this
particular, is only this, That he cannot conceive how
fuch things can be performed; which only argues the
weaknefs and imperfection of out kvowledge and apprehen-
fions, not the impoffibility of thofe performances: and
we can no more from hence form an Argument againft
them, than againft the moft ordinary effects in Nature:
We cannot conceive how the Fetus is form’d in the
Womb, nor as much as how a Plant {prings from the
Earth we tread on ; we know not how our Souls move the
Body, nor how thefe diftant and extream watures are uni=
ted, as I have abundantly fhewn in my SCEPSIS
SCIENTIFIC A. . And if we are ignorant of the
molt obvious things about us, and the moft confiderable
within our felves, ’tis then no wonder that we know
not the conftitution and powers of the Creatures, to whom
. we


H


Fal
“IM ¢esve how they can be performed. . Nor is it a reafonable
Ni) method of inference, firft to prefume the thing impofi-


S


we are fuch f{trangers. Briefly then, zatters of fit well
proved ought not to be denied, becaufe we cannot con-


i


eae


|


| ble, and thence to conclude, that the fact cannot be proz
“\) ved. Orithe contrary, we fhould judge of the ailion by


‘ltl the evzdence, and not the evidence. by the meaiurcs of


l h our fancies about the aétioz. This is proudly to exalt
) OUL OWN opzmions above the cleareft reftimonies and moft
i fenfible demonftrations of fa: and foto give the Lye to


Md


it all AZankind, rather than diftruft the concezes of our bold
‘lil tmagenations, But yet further,


i
MF
i


uy} (3) Ithink there is nothing in the za/?ances menti-


‘ail on’d, but what may as well be accounted for by the Rules:


tl) Of Reafon and Philofepby, as the ordinary affairs of Nature.
| For in refolving zatural Phenomena, we can only aflign
| the probable caufes, fhewing how things may be, not pre-
elit fuming how they are. And in the particulars under our
alti! Baamen, we may give an. account how 7tis po/fible, and
ig) MOC ynlzkely, that fuch things (though fomewhat vary-
il Ing fromthe common road of Nature) may be acted.


ltt And if our narrow and contracted minds can furnifhus


. ni OUrs.


iis With apprehenfions of the way and manner of fuch per-
ot] Lormances, though perhaps not the true ones, ’tis an ar-
sti] Zument that. fuch things may be effected by creatures


wl] whofe powers and knowledge are fo vaitly exceeding
| I fhall endeavour therefore briefly to fuggeft
ji) fome things that may render the poffibiity of thefe per-
wi) formances conceivable,-in order to the removal of this
‘eh Objecizon, that they are contradiftions and impoffible.

kl « For the FIRST then, That the confederate Spirit
ie Should tranfport the Witch through the Air to the place
wf Of general Rendezvous, there is no difficulty in concei-
i ving it; and if that be true which great Philofophers
‘affirm, concerning the real feparability of the Soul from
| the Body without death, there is yet le/s; for then tis
eafie to apprehend, that the Sou! having left its grofs
and fluggifh body behind it, and being cloath’d zine
7 with


|
|
i


A
fn


about Witchcraft. ,, 2


ia ae voy
Maer OWED Sone —e ne


Pelagia ss FS


SBN
Be ies


Se a
Ens a cat,


copes Sees (
‘Wel ee


pease


~~ Confiderations


with its immediate vehicle of Air, or more /ubtile matter,


may be quickly conducted to any place it would beat tts


by thofe officiows Spirits that attend it. And though I
adventure to affirm nothing concerning the truth. and


certainty of this Suppofition, yet I muft needs fay, it doth Bj:
not feem to me wnreafonable. And our experience of ff ta!


Apoplesies, Epilepfies, Ecftafies, and the ftrange things
men report to have feen during thofe Deliquiums, look
favourably upon this conjecture ; which feems to me to
contradict no principle of Reafon or Philofophy; fince
Death confifts not fo much in the aétual feparation of Soul
and Body, as inthe indifpofition and unfitnefs of the Body
for vital union, as an excellent Philofopher hath made
good. On which Alypotiefis, the Witches anointing her
ielf before fhe takes her flight, may perhaps ferve to
keep the Body tenantable, and in fit difpofition to receive
the Spirit at its return. Thefe things, 1 fay, we may
conceive , though I affirm nothing about them; and
there is not any thing infuch conceptions but what hath
been own’d by men of worth and name, and may feem
fair and accountable enough to thofe who judge not alto-
gether by the meafures of the populace and cuftomary opi- |
nion. And there’s a faying of the great Apoffle that’ -
feems to countenance this Platonick notion; what isthe
meaning elfe of that expreilion, [Wether in the body or
out of the body, I cannot tell except the Sex! may be fe-
parated from the Body without death 2 which if it be
granted poffible,. "tis fulicientfor my purpofe. And

(2) The Transformations of Witches into the fhapes of
other Aximals, upon the fame fuppofal is very conceiva-
ble, fince then tis eafie enough to imagine, that the
power of zmagination may form thofe paffive and pliable
vehicles into thofe fhapes, with more eafe than the fancy
of the AZother can the ftubborn matter of the Ferus in the
Womb, as we fee it frequently doth in the inftances that
occur of Signatures and monftrous Singularities, and §)
perhaps fometimes the confederate Spirit puts tricks up- By
on the feafes of the Spectators, and thofe (hapes are only f.,
alluficrs. : But


a ER BP


OE Eee


dit for.


about Witchcraft. 75


But then (3) when they feel the hurts intheir grofs
bodies, that they receive in their airy vebicles, they muft
be fuppofed to-have been really prefent, at leaft inthefe
latter; and ’tis no more difficult to apprehend how the
hurts of chofe-fhould be tranflated upon their other bodzes,
than how di/eafes fhould be inflitted by the imazination,
or how the fancy of the Afother fhould wound the Feta,
as feveral credible relations do atteft.

And (4) for their raifing Storms and Tempefts, They
do it not, to be fure,by their owz,but by the power of the
Prince of the Air, their Friendand Allie, and the Cere-
wmonves that are enjoyn’d them are doubtlefs nothing elfe
but entertainments for their tmaginations, and are likely
defign’d to perfwade them, that they do thefe ftrange
things themfelves.

And Claftly) for their being fuck’d by the Famuliar,
Ifay (1) we know fo little of the nature of Demons and
Spirits, that tis no wonder we-cannot certainly divine
the reafon of fo ftrange an action. And yet (2) we
may conjecture at fome things that may render it Iefs
smprobable. For fome have thought that the Geni
(whom both the Platonical and Chriftian Antiquity
thought embodied) are recreated by the reeks and vapours
Of bumane blood, and the /pirits that proceed from them :
Which fuppofal Gf we grant them bodies) is not un-
likely, every thing being refrefh’d and zouri{h’d by its
like. And that they are not perfectly abfraé from all
body and matter, befides the reverence we owe to the
wileft antiquity , there are feveral confiderable Argu-
ments I could alledge to render it exceeding probable.
Which things fuppofed, the Devils fucking the Sorce-
refs is no great wonder, nor @ifficultto be accounted
Or perhaps (3) this may be only a dzabolical Sa-
crament and Ceremony to confirm the hellifh Covenant, To
which Ladd, (4) That which to me feems moft proba-
ble, viz. That the Familiar doth not only fuck the
Witch, butin the action infufeth fome poy/onous ferment
into her, which gives her Imaginations and Spirits a


“iy
GAT ILCAL


76 Confiderations


magical rintture, whereby they become mifchievoufly in-
jfiuential,; and the word venefica intimates fome. fuch
matter. Now that the zmagization hath a mighty power
in operation, is feen in the juft now mention’d Signatures
and Difeafes that it caufeth; and that the fancy is modi-
fed by the qualities of the blood and fpirits, is too evi-
dent to need proof, Which things fuppofed, ?tis plain
to conceive that the evil /pirit having breath’d fome vile
vapour into the body of the Witch, it may taint her blood
and foirits with a noxious quality, by which her infected
smagination, heightned by melancholy and this worfe
caufe, may do much hurt upon bodes that are imprefli-
ble by fuch influences. And tis very likely that this fer-
agent difpoleth the zmagination of the Sorcere/s to caufe
the mentioned goxecots, or feparation of the Soul from
the Body, and may perhaps keep the Bodyin fit temper
for its re-entry, as alfo it may facilitate transformation,
which, it may be, conjJd got be effected by ordinary and
unaljified imagination.

Thus we fee, tis not fo defperate to form an appre-
henfion of the manner of thefe odd performances; and
though they are not done the way I have defcrib’d, yet
what | have faid may help us to a conceit of the poflibi-
lity, which fuficeth for my purpofe. And though the
Hypothefis | have gone upon will feem as uzlikely to fome,
as the things they attempt to explain are to others; yet
¥ mult defire their leave to fuggeft,that moit things feem
smprobable (efpecially to the conceited and cpinionative)
at firft propofal: and many great truths are ffrange and
odd, till cuftom and acquaintance have reconciled them to
our fancies. And Ile prefume to add on this occafion,
(though I love not to be confident in affirming) that
there is none of the Platonical fuppofals | have ufed, but
what I could make appear to be fair and reafcuable, to
the capable and unprejudic’d,


SECT.


Se ee eet ae eee ae nee? Cae Veneer ae eee ant ad


a


4


about Witchcraft.


SRC TT Ty.
IIT.


Hy UT (AIL) [come to another prejudice againft the be
ing of Witches, whichis, That cis very improbable
that the Devil, who w a wife and mighty Spirit, fhould be
at the beck of a poor Hag, and have fo little to do, ato
attend the Errands and impotent Lufts of a filly Old
Woman. ae
O which I might anfwer, (1) That?tis much more
improvable that all the world fhould be deceiv’d in
matters of fatt, and circumftances of the cleareft evidence
and conviction, than that the Devil, who is wicked,
fhould be alfo wnwife, and that he that perfwades all his
fubjects and accomplices out of their Wits, fhould him-
felf act like his own Yemptations and Perfwafions.: In
brief, there is nothing more ftrange in this Objection,
than that wickedne/s is bafenefs and fervility; and that
the Devil is at leifure to ferve thofe, he is at Icifure to
rempt, and induftrious to ruine.
no nece/fity to believe that the Devil is always the Witches
Confederate; but perhaps it may fitly be confidered,
whether the Familiar be not fome departed humane Spirit,
forfaken of God and goodnefs, and fwallowed up by the
unfatiable defire of mifchief and revenge , which pofii-
bly by the Zaws and capacity of its ffate it cannot exe-
cute zmmediately. And why we fhould prefume that
the Devil fhould have the liberty of wandring up‘and
down the Earth and Air, when he is {aid to be held in the
Chains of darkne/s ; and yet that the feparated Souls of
the wicked, of whom no fuch thing is affirm’d in any /a-
cred Record, {hould be thought fo imprifowd, that they


1,
y Ley
t LLIvy


rT a? : scist way af o. 1ipeétnre ®, - :
I know no fhadow of conjecture. Pm con-
ry againft the belief of Litches


and


J
ident hath prejudic’d man


Pe eee


And again, (2) I fee


warns nS ES cea


er


CS
AR ee par


Soaisages. «Dae tenn pots oe


a


Ce aT


7% Confider ations


and Apparitions; they not being able to conceive tha¢
the Devil fhould be fo ludicrous as appearing fpirits are
fometimes reported to be in their frolickss; and they
prefume , that fouls departed never revifit the free and
open Regions , which confidence, I know nothing to ju-
{tifie: For fince good men in their flare of feparation
are faid to be isayycaor, why the wicked may not be fup-
poled to be icodaivoves in the worlt fenfe of the word, I
Know nothing to help meto imagine. Andif it be fup-
pofed that the Imps of Witches are fometimes wicked
Spirits OF our own kind and natnre, and poflibly the fame .
that have been Sorcerers and Witches inthis life: This
fuppofal may give a fairer and more probable account of
many of the actions of Sorcery and Witchcraft, than the
other Hypothefis, that they are always Devils. And to
this conjecture Ple adventure to {ubjoyn another, which
alfo hath its probability, viz. (3) Vhat tis not impof-
fible but the Famiiars of Witches are a vile kind of /pi-
rits, of a very inferior Conftitution and Nature, and
none of thofe that were once of the higheft Hierarchy,
now degenerated into the /pirits we call Devils. And for
my part I muft confefs, that I think the common divifion
of /pirits much too general ; conceiving it likely there
may be as great a variety of Intellettual Creatures in the
invisible world, as there is of Animals in the vifible : and
that all the /uperiour, yea, and inferior Regions, have
their feveral kinds of /périts differing in their zatural per-
fettions, as wellas in the kinds and degrees of their de-
pravities, which being fuppofed, tis very probable
that thofe of the ba/et and meaneft Orders are they, who
fubmit to the mention’d fervilities. And'thus the fa-
gefs and grandeur of the Prince of darkne/s need not be
brought into queftion.


SECT.


about Witchcraft.


ee ad We
IV.


ey UT (IV) the opinion of Witches feems to fome to ace
i B cufe Providence, and to fuggeft that it hath expofed
' Innocents to the fury and malice of revengeful Fiends ; yea,
band [uppofeth thofe mofé obnoxious , for whom we might
' \moft reafonably expett a more Special tutelary care and pro-
| tection, moft of the cruel prattices of thofe prefum’d Inftru~
~~|ments of Hell, being upon Children, who as they leaft de-
“\ferve to be deferted by that Providence that Juperintends all
““\things, fo they moft need its guardian influence.


hy


—


wi | O this fo fpecious an Objeétion I have thefe things to
; anfwer.
“\: (1) Providence is an unfathomable Depth ; and if we
‘i Mhould not believe the Phanomena of our fenfes, before
“we can reconcile them to our wotions of Providence, we
) Imuft be grofler Sceptzcks than ever yet were extant. The
NM \mifertes of the prefent life, the unequal diftributions of
" \good and evil, the zgnorance and barbarity of the greateft
‘(part of Mankind, the fatal difadvantages we are all un-
ider, and the hazard we run of being cternally miferable
fand undone; thefe, I fay, are things that can hardly
ibe made confiflene with that Wifdom and Goodnefs that
if we are fure hath made and mingled it felf with all things.
ii WAnd yet we believe there is a beauty and harmony, and
WS \goodnefs in that Providence, though we cannot unriddle
i) te an particular inftances , nor, by reafon of our igno-
\¢ ance and imperfection, clear it from contraditting ap-
iw Dearances , and confequently, we ought not deny the be-
fing of Witches and Apparitions, becaufe they will create
lus fome difficulties in our zotions of Providence. But to
come more clofe, (2) Thofe that believe that Infanrs
‘(are Heirs of Hell, and Children of the Devil as foon as
they are difclofed to the World, cannot certainly offer


pat
ih a
LUCE


\


i


So — < Confiderations


fach an Objection , for what is a little trifling pain of aq *\
moment, to thofe eternal Tortires, to which, if theyg”
die as foon as they are born, according to the Tenour ofl”


this Doctrine, they are everlaftingly expofed ? But how-§'!”
ever the cafe ftands as to that, ’tis certain, (3) Thatg:
Providence hath not fecured them from other violencesw**


they are obnoxious to, from cruelty and accident, and|j me
yet. we accufe Jt not whena whole Townful of Innocents


fall a Vittim to the rage and ferity of barbarous Execu-§ *'


tioners in Wars and Maffacres. Yo which I add (4)q™


That ’tis likely the wz/chief is not fo often done: by theg
evil [pirit immediately, but by the malignant influences off *
the Sorcerefs, whofe power of hurting confifts in the fore-4
mentioned ferment , which is izfufed into her by they


Familiar. So that { am apt to think there may. be ay i


power Of real fafcination in the Witches eyes and imagi- i


nation, by which for the moft part fhe acts upon tender


bodies. Nefcio quis teneros oculus ———--—- For thea “i


peftilenrial {pirits being darted by a fpightful and vigorous
tinagination from the eye, and meeting with thofe that are t
weak and paffive in the bodies which they enter, will not
fail to infect them with a noxious quality that makes dan-4
gerous and ftrange alterations in the perfon invaded by
this poifonous influence : which way of acting by fubtileq
and invifible inffruments , 18 ordinary and familiar inalll
natural efficiencies. And tis now paft queftion, that z2—§\')
ture for the moft part acts by fubrile fireams and apor—§
rheéa’s of minute particles, which pafs from-one body tor
another. Or however that be, this kind of agency is asq
conceivableas any one of thofe qualities ignorance hath cal’di'
Sympathy and. Antipatby, the reality of which we doubt
not, though the manner of aétzon be unknown. Yea, the:
thing I fpeak of is as eafie to be apprehended, as hows]!
infection fhould pafs in certain tenuious ftreams through@s |
the Air from one Houfe to another; or, as how the bs-
ting of amad Dog fhould fill all the Blood and Spirits withag
a venomous and malign ferment, the application of theg hy
vertue doing the fame in-our cafe, as that of contact dothag li
ITE


sink axe fecure from the Contagion ;


fe Phus then wefee ’tis likely enough
wit Sorcerefs her felf doth the ws
boil fatto,


—


|
| |
‘eit Chough
wot Which I hext propofe.


al | (V.)


about Witcheraft. $r
in this. Yea, fome kinds of fufcimation ate perform’d
in this grofler and more fenfible way, as by frriking, gi-
ving Apples, and the like, by which the-contagiows quad~
lity may betranfmitted, as we fee Difeafes often are by
the touch. Now in'this way of conjecture a good ac-
count may be given why Witches aré moft powerful up-
On Children and timorous perfons, viz. becaufe their
Spirits and imaginations being meak and paffive; are not
able to refift the fatal invafion » whereas men of bold
minds, who have plenty of ftroag and vigorous [pirits,
5 asin peftiléntial Airs clean
bodies are not fo liable to infection as other tempers.
, that: very often thé
chief; and we know, de
that Providence doth not always fecure us from
One anothers é#juries: . And yet | muft confefs, that
many times alfo the:evil /pirit isthe mifchievows Agent ;
this confeflion draw on me another Objection,


SEQ TA Vik
Y.
HIE N 1 may be faid, that if wicked {pirits eas
hurt us by the. direction, and at the defire of a


MT Witch, one would think they fhould have the fame power to


|"\ do us injury without inftigation or compact; and if this
|" |e granted, tis a wonder that we are not al


ways annoyd


\\ and tnfefted by them. To which


4 | RETUR N, (1) That the Laws, Liberties, and


Reftraints of the Inhabitants of the other world are


“(to us utterly uxknown , and this way we can only-argue
“our felves into confeffions of our tgnorance, which every


prant. It mult be granted by all that own the being,
E


|


nin as muft acknowledge that is not as immodeft.as igno=


| oY
li A G7 >


pow
f


a oa


power, and malice of evil Spirits, that the fecurity we
enjoy is wonderful, whether they act by Weeches or not ;


and by what Laws they are kept from making us a prey, | ,


to {peak like Philofopbers, we cannot tell: yea, why they


fhould be permitted to tempt and ruine us in our Souls, :


and reftrain’d from touching or hurting usin our Bodzes, |


is a myjtery not ealily accountable, But yet (2) though | hs
we acknowledge their power to vex and torment usin }”


our Bodies alfo , yet a reafon may be given why they are f
lefs frequent in this kind of mifchief, vz. becaufe their |
main defigns are levell’d againft.the intereft and happi- f
nefs of our Souls;. which they can beft promote, when j
their actions are moft /ly and fecret; whereas did they |


ordinarily perfecute men.in their Bodies, their agency
and wicked influence would be difcover’d, and make aff),


mighty noife in the world, whereby men would be a>};
waken’d to afuitable and vigorous oppofition, by the:f; *
afe of fuch means as would engage Providence to refcue'


them from their rage and cruelties ; and at laft defeat


them in their great purpofes of undoing us eternally. Uhusif,
we May conceive that the fecurity we enjoy may well c-p-
nough confi? with the power and malice of thole evil Spi- f..
rits; and upon this account we may fuppofe that Lamsi—’’
of their own may prohibit their aulicens’d injuries, not


from any goodne/s there is in their Conftitutions, but ini ‘
order to the more fucce/sful carrying on the projects ofif ."


the dark Kingdom, as Generals forbid Plunder, not out
of love to their Enemies, but in order to their own Suc-g
cefs. And hence (3) we may fuppofe a Law of permifiong
to hurt us at the inftance of the Sorcerefs, may welllf
ftand with the polity of Hell, fince by gratifying theg,”!
wicked perfon, they encourage her in malice and revengesg
and: promote thereby the main ends of their black confe-#)'
deracy, which areto propagate wickedne/s, and to ruine: i


us in our eterzal interefts. And yet (4) tis ‘clear toy:
thofe that believe the Hiffory of the Gofpel, that wicked”
fpirits have vexed the bodies of men, without any 17-8)"


fligation that we read of; and atthis day *tis very likely)"


thatie


about Witchcraft. 83


that many of the ffrange accidents and atfeafes that befal
us, may be the znflittron of evil fpirits , prompted to
hurt us only by the delight they take in mifchief. So
yj] that we cannot argue the improbability of their hurting
hy) Children and others by Witches, from our own fecurity
iyi and freedom from the effects of their malice, which per- |
‘yn Naps we feel in more inftances than we are aware of.


De NAT:
VI.


"| QUT CVI) another prejudice againft the belief of
< Witches, %, a prefumption upon the enormous force
wt Of Melancholy avd imagination, which without doubt can
|| do wonderful things, and beget ftrange perfwafions ; and
ic) £0 thefe caufes fome afcribe the prefum'd effects of Sorcery
| aad Witchcraft. To which I reply briefly; and yet I
| hope fufficiently,


TD a es to refolve all the clear circumftances of
| Fatt, which we find in well-attefted and con-
"I firm’d Relations of this kind, into the power of deceive-
‘able imagination, is to make fancy the greater prodzgie ;
"and to fuppofe, that it can do jtranger feats than are be-
ii “lieved of any other kind of fafcization. And to think
: Mithat Pinas and Nails, for inftance, can by the power of
il" emagination be conveyed within the skin 5 or that imagi=
"“izatvon fhould deceive fo many as have been witnefles in
i Objetts of fenfe, in all the circumftances of difcovery ;
ithis, I fay, isto be infinitely more credulous than the
\wVaflertors of Sorcery and Demoniack Contratts. And by
plithe fame reafon it may be believed, that all the Battles
Vand firange events of the World, which our felves have
otfeen, are but dreams and fond imaginations, and iike
a"ithofe that are fought inthe Clonds, when the Brains of
a |b ithe deluded Spectators arethe only Theatre of thofe fan-
\


=


= <<


ae
F 2 cea


Hy


Hy


toe SIPC Soar ee
mtpetonty: feakt ‘A
REAL Ss


oA Confider ations


ciedtranfattions. And (2) to deny evidence of aé, be-
caufe their emagination may deceive the Relators, when
we have no reafon to think fo, but a bare prefumption
that there is no fuch thing as is related , is quite to de-


{troy the credit of all humane teftimony, and to make all By.)
men liars in a larger fence than the Prophet concluded in J


his bafte. For not only the melancholick and the fanciful,
but the grave and the fober, whofe judgments we have no
seafon to fufpect to be tainted by their smaginations, have


from their own knowledge and experience made reports §,,.,


of this nature. Buttothis it will poflibly be rejoin’d, | L
and the Reply will be another prejudice againft the belief}:
for which I contend, 27z.


VU.


“4 Hat ts a fufpitious circumftance that Witch- :


ie
Rs


are over-grown with difcontent and melancholy, which,
are very imaginative : and the perfons fatd to be bewitch’dif
ave for the moft part Children, or people very weak, waow,


are eafily impofed upon, and are apt to receive {trong im-4 mi


preflions from nothing : whereas were there any fuch thing
really, *tis not likely, but thatthe more cunning and fubtil
defperado’s, who might the more fucce/sfully carry on thes
mi(chievous defigns of the dark Kingdom, {hould be oftner:
engaged in thofe black confederacies, and alfo one would®
expect effects of the hellifh combination spon others thang,
the innocent avd ignorant. |


O which Objeétion it might perhaps be enough tag,"

‘return (as hath been above fuggefted) that no-§”

thing can be concluded by thes and fuch like arguings.§.””
but that the policy and menages of the Jnftruments of dark-B
nef sm”


& ocraft is but a fancy, fince the perfous that arem '
accufed are commonly poor and miferable old Women, whom.


>


De Re RE RE


|
whivil


=~


|
]


|
{


by
VY bye


| cognito: upon which fuppofal ?tis


about Witchcrajt. 85
nefs are to us altogether unknown , and as much in the
dark as their Natures; Mankind being no more acquain-
ted with the reafons and mechods of action in the other
World, than poor Cottagers and Adechanicks are with
the Intrigues of Government, and Reafons of State. Yea
peradventure (2) ’tis one of the great defigns, as tis
certainly the Jntereft of thofe wicked Agents and ALachi-
ators, induftrioufly to hide from us their zxfluences and
ways of acting, and to work, as near as is poflible, iz-
eafie-to conceive a
reafon, why they moft commonly work by, and upon
the weak and the ignorant, who can make no cunning
obfervations, or tell credible tales to detect their artifice.
Befides (3) ?tis likely a ffrong imagiuation, that cannot
be weakn'd or difturb’d by a bufie and fubtile ratiocina-
tion, is a neceflary requifite to thofe wicked perform-
ances , and without doubt an heightued and objtinate fan-
cy hath a great influence upon zmpre(fible /pirits , yea,
and as] have conjectur’d before, on he more paffive and
fufceptible bodies. And I amvery apt to believe, that


“there are as real communications and intercourfes between


ci


hhys


Mf
Vd
4


Our Spirits, as there are between materzal Acents , which
fecret influences, though they are unknown in their aa-


a


IW ture and ways of actizg , yet they are fufficiently feit in


” i


their effeéts : for experience atteits, that fome by the ve-


wi" ry majefry and greatnefs of their Spirits, difcovered by
a nothing but a certain noble air that accompanies them


UM will bear down others lefs great and generows, and make


i y ; is
i" them /zeak beforethem; and fome, by | know not what


wit tH


(" ffupifying vertue, will tie up the tongue, and confine the


sill pir


at
2is


of thofe who are otherwite brisk and voluble.


ii) Which thing fuppofed, the influences of a Spirit poflefled
lof an aétcve and enormous imagination, may be malign and


fatal where they cannot be refifted; efpecially when
iMthey are accompanied by thofe poyfonous reaks that the


i Meudl (pirit breaths into the Sorcerefs, which likely are [hot


Wout, and applied by a fancy heightned and prepared by
jwiaeztancholy and difcontent. And thus we may conceive
| f 3 why


i]


86 Confide rations


why the melancholick and envious are ufed upon fuch oc-
Cafions, and for the fame reafon the ignorant, fince
knowledge checks aud controuls imagination, and thofe
that abound in the imaginative faculties, do not vfually
exceed in the rational. And perhaps (4) the Demon
himfelf ufeth the zmagination of the Witch {o qualified for
his purpofe, evenin thofe actions of mifchief which are
more properly his; for it is moft probable, that Spirits
act not upon. bedies immediately, and by their naked ef-
fence, bat by means proportionate, and fuitable inffruments
that they ufe; upon which account likely ‘tis fo ftridtly
required, that the Sorcerefs fhould believe, that fo her
imagination might be more at the devotion of the muifchie-
vous Agent, and for the fame reafon allo Ceremonies are
uled in Jnchantments, viz. for the begetting this diaboli- |
cal faith, and heightning the faacy to a degree of ffrength

and vigour fufficient to make it a fit zmffrument for the
defign’d performance. Thofe I think are reafons of
likelihood and probability, why the hellifh Confederates |
are moftly the ignorant and the melancholick. To pafs |
then to another prejudice.


SECT. EX.
VII.
(VHL)-g AE frequent impoitures thar are met with in


this kind, beget in fome abelief, that all fuch
Relations ave Forgeries and Tales, and if we urge the:


evidence of a {tory for the belief of Witches or Appariti-4 Ith
ons, they will produce two as feemingly {trong and plaufi- lin


ble, which {hall conclude in miftake or defign; inferring
thence, that all others are of the fame quality and credit.


But fuch arguers may pleafe-to confider,


(i) Thati


A |
i


i
4


3 PW ew.


a


= — = = = = =
A
: = = a - = =< =


c = > —=_
a
ee yet te tn a ae a


ae


oP ee ee.


a


——


about Witchcraft. Sy


(1) eg: AT a fingle relation for an Affirmative, faf-

ficiently confirmed and attefted , is worth a
thoufand tales of forgery: and impofture, from whence an
univer fal Negative cannot be concluded. So that,though
all the Objeétors ftories be true, and an hundred times as
many more fuch deceptions, yet one relation , wherein
no fallacy or fraud could be fufpected for our Afirma-
tive, would fpoil any Conclusion could be erected on
them. And,

(2) It feems to me a belief fufficiently bold and pre-
carious, that all thefe relations of forgery and miftake
fhould be certain, and not one among all thofe which at-
teft the Afirmarive reality, with circumf{tances as good
as could be expected, or wifh?d, fhou!d be true; but all
fabulous and vain. And they have no reafon to object
credulity to the aflertors of Sorcery and Witchcraft, that
can {wallow fo large a morfel. And I defire fuch Obje-
ctors to confider, 3

(3) Whether it be fair to infer, That becaufe there
are fome Cheats and Impoftures, that therefore there are
no Realities. Indeed frequency of deceit and fallacy will
warrant a greater care and caution in examining , and


‘ferupulofity and fhinefs of affent to things wherein fraud


hath been prattifed, or may in the leaft degree be /u/pect-
ed: But, to conclude, becanfe that an old Woman’s
fancy abufed her, or fome reavi(h fellows put tricks wp-
onthe sgnorant and timorows, that therefore whole Afifes
have been a thoufand times. deceived in judgments upon
matters of fatt, and numbers of fober perfons have been
forfworn in things wherein perjury could not advantage
them; I fay, fuch inferences are as void of reafon, as
they are of charity and good manuers.


ae SECT,


Con fider ations


Sob Ts Xe
IX.
Bo T (X.) it may be fuggefted further, That it cans


not beimagin’d what defign the Devil thould have tz
making thofe folemn compacts, fince perfons of fuch de=
bauch’d and irreclaimable difpofitions as thofe with whom he
1s fuppofed to confederate, are pretty fecurely nus, antece-
dgntly to the bargain , and cannot be more fo by it, fince
they cannot put their Souls out of poflibility of the Divine
Grace, but by the Sin that 1s unpardonable; or if they
could fo difpofe and give away themfelves , it will to fome
feem very unlikely, that a great and-mi ghty Spirit fhould ob-
itge himfelf to [uch obfervances, andkeep [uch ado to fecure
the Soul of a filly Body, which %twere odds but it would be
His, though he put himfelf to no further trouble than that
of bw ordinary temptations. #5 by


Py4O which /uggeftéons twere enough to fay, that *tis
: fufficient if the thing be well prov’d, though the
defign be not known. And to argue negatively a fine, is
very unconclufive in fuch matters.. The Laws-and Afé
fairs of the other World (as hath been intimated) aré
waitly differing from thofe of our Regions, and there-
fore *tis no wonder we cannot judge. of their defigns,
when we know nothing of their menages, and fo little of
their natures; - The ignorant looker-on can’t imagine
what the Liner means by thofe feemingly rude Lines
and {crawls which he intends for the Rudiments of a Piz
eure: and the Figures of Adathematick operation are mon-
fence, and dafhes ataveuture, to one uninftrudted in Aé-
chanicks. We are in the dark to ove anothers purpofes and
intendments ; and there are a thoufand intrigues in our
Little matters, which will not prefently confefs their

efign even to fagacious itquifitors. : And therefore *tis
folly and incogitancy to argue any thing one way ‘or
; | ag * other


|


about Witchcraft. 89


jother from the defigns of a fort of Beings, with whom
Hwe fo little communicate; and poflibly we can take no
imore aim, or guefs at their projeéts and deft ¢nments,than
ithe gazing Beafts can do at ours, when they fee the
fraps and Gins that are laid for them, but underftand
‘(nothing what they mean. Thus in géneral. |
| | But I attempt fomething more particularly, in order
‘iito.which I muft premife, that the Devil isa name fora
iii) Body Politick, in which there are very ‘different Orders
vefand Degrees of Spirits, and perhaps in as much variety of
i place and ftare , as among our felves; fo that *tis not
init @ne and the fame perfon-that makes all the compacts
‘yt with thofe abufed and feduced Souls, but they are di-
miwers, and thofe ’tis like of the meaneft and bafeft qua.
iMplity in the Kingdom of darknefs: which being fuppofed,
‘wT offer this account of the probable defign of thofe wicked
il) Agents, viz, That having none to rule or tyrannize over
wii! within the circle of their own nature and government,
they affect a proud Empire over us (the defire of Domi-
Wviton and Authority being largely fpread through the
ai whole circumference of degenerated nature, {pecially a-
‘it mong thofe, whofe pride was their original tranfgreffion)
every one of thefe then defires to get him Vaflals to pay
(ihim homage, and to be employ7d like Slaves in the fer-
igi vices of his Lufts and Appetites ; to gratifie which de-
(fire, tis like enough to be provided and allowed by the
jweonttitution of their State and Government, that every
i wicked Spirit fhall have thofe Souls as his property, and
wiv particular fervants and attendants, whom he can catch in
witach compatts , as thofe wild Beaffs that we.can take in
iM bunting, are by the allowance of the Law our own, and
.fthofe Slaves that aman hath purchas?d, are his peculiar
Goods, and the Vaflals of his Will. Or rather thofe
deluding Fiends are like the feducing fellows we cail
Spirits, who inveigle Children by ‘their fal and flatter-
wing Promifes, and carry them away to the Plantations
v 1: c si ° ,) J ‘ ® ; b Lae

sof America, to be fervilely employed there in the works

oftheir profit and advantage. And as thofe bafe Agents
li } wii
lj


te


|


| - aaa


they are on Shipboard, and without the reach of thofe
that might refcue them from their hands: In like man-4})
ner the more’ mi/chievaus Tempter {tudies to. gratifie, J


pleafe, and accommodate thofe he deals with in this |


kind, till death hath lanch’d them into the Deep, and|f


they are paft the danger of Prayers, Repentance, and En-P iyi


deavours , and themwHe ufeth thenvas pleafeth Him. This


account I think is’ not unreafonable, and ’cwill fully an=-P ive:
) y


{wer the Objection. For though the matter be not asi®j


Ihave conjectur’d, yet twill faggeft how it may be cond wi


ceiv’d; which nulls the pretence, That the Defigz is
unconceivable.


ae Oat ere.


aa
ane


Bo T' then (X.) we are ftill liable to be queftioned, hows *
it comes about, that thefe proud and infolent De-4)


ligners prattife in this kind upon fo few, when one would hy:
expect, that they fhould be ftill trading thu way, and every...
where be driving on the project , which the vilene[s of menmy
makes fo fetfable, aud would fo much ferve the intereft of
their lufts.


P40 which, among other things that might be fugeq.


| gefted, I return,

(1) That we are never liable to be fo betray?d andi
abufed , till by our wile difpofitions and tendencies weg’,
have forfeited the rutelary care, and overfight of the bet-#)
ter Spirits; who, though generally they are our guardig ”
and defence againit the malice and violence of evil An~
gels, yetit may well enough be thouptéjthat fometimes#
they may take their leave of fuch as are fwallowed up


by Afalice, Envy, and defire of Revenge, qualities moltg.'


contrary to their Life and Natare; and leave them ex-§,*
pofedee


about Witchcraft. gt


\'N pofed tothe znvafion and folicitations of thofe wicked Spi-
“Writs, to whom fuch hateful Attributes make them very
We stable. And if there be particular Guardian Angels,
‘las °tis not abfurd to fancy, it may then be well fuppo-
i fed, that no man is obnoxious to thofe projects and at-
“tempts, but only fuch whofe vile and mi/chievous natures
‘i have driven from them their protetting Genius. And a-
| gainft this dereliction to the power of evil Spirits, tis
‘“Wlikely enough what fome affirm, that the Royal Pfalimift
ees ti that Prayer, Pfal. LXXI. ix,x. Caft me not off
‘Win the time of old age; forfake me not when my firength
Mpaaiert. For — They that keep my Soul [ovacosorles rhe
uxt ws, asthe LXX. and the Vulgar Latin, Qui cu-
Nffodiunt animam meam] they take counfel together faying,
| God hath forfaken him , perfecute him and rake him ; oe
Wethere is none to deliver him, Buti add (2) That ’tis ve-
ry probable, that the ftate wherein they are, will not
Weafily permit palpable intercourfes between the bad Genii
band Afankind, fince tis like enough that their own Laws
i, iand Government do not allow their frequent excurfions
Ytinto this World. Or, it may with as great probability
wii be fappofed, that tis a very hard and painful thing for
‘nitthem, to force their thin and tenuious Bodies into a vi-
{ ie ple confiftence, and fuch fhapes as are neceflary for thei
Ndefigus in their correfpondencies with Witches. For in this
faction their Bodies mutt needs be exceedingly compre/s’d,
_ Hiwhich cannot well be without a painful fenfe. And this
ilifjis perhaps a reafon why there are fo fem Apparitions, and
why appearing Spirits are commonly in fuch hafte to be
‘iigone, viz. that they may be deliver’d from the swnnatu-
ial preffure of their tender vebicles ; which 1 confefs
‘biitholds more, in the apparitions of good than evel Sperits ;
wimoft Relations of this kind, defcribing their difcoveries
(Mof themfelves, as very tranfient, (though for thofe the
iitholy Scripture records, there may | be peculiar reafon,
iwhy they are no at to) whereas the wicked ones are not
nieltor ether fo guick,, and baffy in their vifits: The rea-
vo fon of which probably is, the great fubriry and sae
of
|


tions


ed


g2 Confidera


of the Bodies of the former, which will require far 9 \’
greater degrees of compreffion, and confequently of pain, §"
to make them wifible, whereas the latter are more fecu-.§) ,
lent and grofs, and {fo nearer allied to palpable confiften= 9


cies, and more eafily reduceable to appearance and vifi-
bility. |
At this turn, Sir, you may perceivethat I have again §*
made ufe of the Platonick Hypothefis, That Spirits are em- 5
bodied, upon which indeed a great part of my Difcourfe §!
is grounded: ‘And therefore [ hold my felf obliged toa |
fhorr account of that fuppofal. Je feems then to me
very probable, from the nature of Senfe, and Axalogy of
Nature. For (1) we perceive in our felves , that all


Senfe is caufed and excited by motion made in matter , 9%"
and when thofe motions which convey fenfible imprejfious §™


to the Brain, the Seat of Senfe, are intercepted, Senfe is:
Joft:, So that, if we fuppofe Spirits perfedtly to be §


disjein’da from all matter, ?cis not conceivable how they gilli
can have the fenfe of any thing ; For how material Ob- Ml)


jedts fhould any way be perceived, or felt, without vi- |
tal union with matter, tis not poflible to imagine. Nor
doth it (2) feem fuitable to the Analogy of Nature,
which ufeth not to make precipitous leaps from one thing
to another, but ufually proceeds by orderly fteps and gra-
dations : whereas were there no order of Beings between
Us, who are fo deeply plunged into the groffeft mat-
ter, and pure unbodied Spirits, 7twere a mighty jump in
Nature. Since then the greateft part of the World con-
fifts of the fiver portions of matter, and our own Souls
are immediately unted unto thefe, ’tis infinitely probable
to conjecture, that the nearer Orders of Spirits are vie


tally joined to {uch Bodies, and fo Nature by degrees a= BYllt


fcending {till by the more refin’d and fubtile matter, gets
at laft to the pure Nées, Or zmmaterial minds, which the |
Platonifts made the higheft Order of created Beings. But
of thisI have difcourfed elfewhere, and have faid thus |

much of itat prefent, becaufe it will enable me toadd a- §


nother Reafon of the unfrequency of Apparitions and Com. fi


patls, VIZ. (3) Beef


about Witchcraft.
(3) Becaufe ’tis very likely, that the/e Regions are


“5
95


‘iit Very unfuitable, and di/proportion’dto the frameand tent.
val per Of their Senfes and Bodies, fo that perhaps, the


iin Cour fer Spirits can. no more be


ar the Air of our World)


yi than Bats and Ovls can the brighteft Beams of Day. Nor
} can the pure and better any more erdure the notfom fleams,


vi and poyfonous reeks of this Dunghil Earth, than


the deli.


ni) Cate can bear a confinement in wafty Dungeons, and the
uth foul /qualid Caverns of uncomfortable Darknefs. So


if] that *tis no more wonder , that the better Spirits no
Hy i oftner appear, than that men are not more frequently |
fan the dark, Hollows under ground. Nor is’t any more
i Atrange that evi Spirits fo rarely vifit us, than that Fifhes
iy €O not ordinarily BY inthe Air, as *tis faid one fort of
| | them doth; or that we feenot the Barr daily fluttering
iff in the Beams of theSun. And now by the help of what
| T have fpoken under this Head; lam provided with fome
jit things wherewith to difable another Objection, which
| I thus propofe, |


|
ita
:


: SECT. Xi.

i XI.

| ea san

x | CXI.)9F there be fuch an antercourfe between Eyil
I Spirits and the Wicked, How comes it about thag


“there w no correfpondence between Good Angels azd the
af Vertuous ? fince without doubt thefe are as defirous to pro-
A \\pagate the Spirit and Defigns of the upper and better World:
\\@ thofe are to promote the Intereft of the Kingdom of
i Warknefs.
il


if TAY faba way of arguing is {till from our Zgno_
| | rance Of the State and Government of the other
'"WWorld, which mut be confe/t , and may, without pre-
i" Wudice to the Propofition 1 defend. Bat particularly, }


|
|
|
|


fay, (1) That we have ground enough to believe, that


gr oon
4 Gp


i


;


“94 ~~ Confiderations


good Spirits do interpofe in, yea, and govern out Affairs.


For that there isa Providence reaching from Heaven to@},;
Earth, is generally acknowledged; but that th fuppo-4,..
feth all things to be ordered by the cmmediate influence,m, ..
and interpofal of the Supream Deity, fome think, is norg,
very Philofopbical to fuppofe; fince, if we judge by theg’
Analogy of the natural World, alithings we fee are car"
ried on by the Atiniftery of fecond Caufes, and interme .''
diate Agents. And it doth not feem fo maguficent andi, >,
becoming an apprehenfion of the Supream Numen, tom,’
fancy his immediate hand in every trivial Management...)
But ?tis exceeding likely to conjecture, that much off,”
the Government of us, and our Affairs, is committed tom’
the better Spirits,with a due fubordinatjon and fubferviency

tothe Willof the chief Reéor of the D river(e. And tis)”:


not abfurd to believe, that there is a Government runs,”
from higheft to lomeft, the better and more perfect Orders
of Being ftill ruling the zxferiour and lefs perfect. So that #
fome one would fancy that perhaps the Axgels may ma-§'"'


nage #, aswe do the Creatures that God and Nature:g*
have placed under our Empire and Dominion. But how--9*""
ever that is, That ‘God rules the lower World by they"
Miniftery of Angels, is very confonant to the facred Ora- 9."
cles. Thus, Deut. XXXII. 8,9. When thpmoft High di-§™"
vided the Nations their Inheritance, when be feparated the §'
fons of Adam, ‘he fersthe bounds of the people, Kal dedusy t
ayeray Oc, according to the number of the Angels of God, —'
as the Septuagint renders it, the Authority of whichig’”
Tranflation, is abundantly credited and aflerted, by. itsg”)li
being quoted inthe New Teftament, without notice of j
the Hebrew Text; -even there where it differs from it,g%
as Learned men have obferved. We know alfo, that®
Angels were very familiar with the Patriarchs of old;
and Facob’s Ludder is a ALyftery, which imports their #”
miniftring in the affairs of the Lower World. Thus Ori-#
gen and others underftand that to be fpoken by the Pre-#
fidential Angels, Jerem. LI. ix. We would have healed
BABYLON, but fhe is not healed: forfake her, and@r
lecm


Af | let ws go. Like t


itchcratt.


7s


he Voice heard in the Temple before tlic


Hint taking of Ferufalem by Litmus, MeleBaivauky trJedQcy. And
i before Nebuchadnezzar was fent to learn Wifdom and
iin REligion among the Beafts, He fees a Watcher, accord-

ying to the 70. an Angel, and an holy One come down from
hffeaver, Dan. 1V.13. who pronounceth the fad Deerce
ro hagainit Aim, and calls it the Decree of the Warchers, who
Very probably were the Guardian Genii of Himfelfand his


ni sil Kingdom,


And that there are particular Angels that


, Mave the fpecial Rule and Government of particular King-


»taoms, Provinces, Cities, yeaand of Perfons, 1 know no-


(thing that can make improbable: . The inftance is noto-
i tlous in Daniel, of the Angels of Perfia and Gracia, that
. ‘thindred the other that was engaged for the concerns of
wikgudea: yea, our Saviour himfelf tells us, that Children
thave their Angels, and the Congregation of Difciples
jutappofed that St. Peter had bes, Whichthings if they
.,je granted, the good Spirits have not fo little to do
with us, and ourmatters, as is generally believed. And
{Perhaps it would riot be abfurd, if we referr’d many of
jhe Prange thwarts, and unexpected events, the difvppoint
\\pnents and lucky co-incidences that befalus, the uaaccouzt-
|), (able fortunes and fucceffes that atrend {ome lucky men, and
lithe uahappy fates that dog others that feem born to be
“s \patfera'le, the Fame and Favour that {till waits ‘on fome
"without any conceivable motive to allure it, and the ve-


‘eral neglect of others more deferving, whofe
i ekvowledg’d, 1 fay, thefe, and fuch like odd things,


ce


worth is not


Ww may with the greateft probability ‘be refolved into the


(Uy Ae
.


'Wondutt and Menages of thofe invifible Sapervifors, that
“iprefide over, and govern our affairs.
But if they fo far concern themfelves in ovr matters, bow


"Ws at that they appear not to maintain avifible and confelt


2
Aaa |
b


ee oe ee


i Porrefpondence with fome of the better Mortals, who are
i"Nnoft fitted for their Communications andtheir influence ? To
"which I have faid fome rhings already, when I accounted
‘for the unfrequency of Apparitions, and I now add what
intend for another return to the main Objection, wz,


(2) That


960°. COMMeRarONS


_ (2y That the apparition of good Spirits 1s not needfiig j, ,
for the Defigns of the better world, whatever fuch maip ;\


be for the intereft of the other. For we have had thifl,,,,
Appearance and Cobabitation of the Son of God; we hav},
Mofes and the Prophets, and the continued influence off...


the Spirit, the greateft arguments to ftrengthen Faith, theg,.:,
moft powerful motives to excite our Love, andthe oblefhi..
éncouragements to quicken, and raife our Defires anos; .
Hopes, any of which are more than the: apparitcon of arg...
Angel, which would indeed be-a great gratification Om;


the Animal Life, but ?twould render our Faith lefs noble
and lefs generous, were it frequently foaflifted: Bleffech.
are they that believe, and yet bave not feen. Befides which@ ,

the good Angels have no fuch ezds to profecute, as the,
gaining any Vallals to ferve them, they. being meniftrin.§
Spirits for our good, and no felf defigners for a proud auch,’


infolent Dominon over us. And it tay be perhaps nom)...


impertinently added, .That they are not always evam:.


Spirits that appear, aS is, | know not well upon whai oh
grounds, generally imagined; but that the extraordinary,”


detettions of Murders, latent Treafures, falfified and ua: :
fulfilled Bequefts, which are fometimes made by Appari®,
tions, may be the courteous Difcovéries of the betterg.™
and more benign Geni. Yea, *tis not, unlikely, thaif,’.
thofe warnings that the world fometimes hath of apf,’
proaching Sudgments and Calamities by Prodigies, anc@, :
fundry odd Phenomena, ate the kind Informations of fome


other Prodigious Portents that fore-ran its. Deftructior

by Titus, which I mention, becaufe they are xotorious ini
ffances. And though, for mine own part, I fcorn the or 9"
dinary Tales of Prodigies, which proceed from /uper titi’


ous fears, and unacguaintance with Nature, and haveg!


been ufed to bad purpofes by the zealous and the. ignom |i
rant; Yet l think that the Arguments that are broughig'ty,
by i


|
4h
|
|


ie
Nod ia


if '
i}


,
tH tN


.,f and the putting the wor
) find is very grateful to our own natures


i


al Cline th


about Witchcraft.


by a late very ingenious Author, to conclude again{t


OF


é


fuch Warnings and Predictions in the whole kind, are
Short and inconfequent, and built tpon too narrow FE ypo-
»§ Phefes. For if it be fuppofed, that there isa fort of Spi-
rits over us, and about us, who can give a probable
jf guefs at the more remarkable futurities, T know not why
‘AC May not be conjectured, that the kindnefs they have

‘) for us, and the appetite of foretelling ftrange things,


Id upon expectation, which we


> may not in-


em alfo to give us fome general notice of thofe
| uncommon Events which they forefee.


And I yet per-
(ceive no reafon we have to fancy, that w


hatever is done


’ { in this kind, muft needs be either immedzately from Hea-
it


Gi


i IW


=


|


‘Ifo their natural defire to


|ven, or from the Angels, by extraordinar
? He Y y


Co mmiffio 7% AN d


_} Apporatment. But it feems to me not unreafonable co
| ibelieve, that thofe officious Spirits, that overfee our Af
“Wfairs, perceiving fomie mighty and fad alterations at hand,
“tin which their Charge is much concerned,


| i


cannot chufe,


by reafon of their afeétion to us, but give us fome fez-
fonable hints of thofe approaching Calamities: to which al-
foretel range things to.coin>,
May contribute to inclinethem. And by this Hypothefis.


inthe facreft probabilities and ftrongelt ratiocinations again


;


MM
}, Gu
W


y


= ee


it Wpondence. ,
I confefs the proud and phantaftick pretences of many


lifts in thw age, to Divine Can-
WWauncon , have prejudiced divers intelligent perfons a-


WSF the concedted Melancho


ithe way.


iN Prodtgies, may be madé unferviceable, B


SECT. XTi.


Cae


iq Defire it may be éonfidered further,
(3) That God himfelf affords his intimaejes and
M"Wonverfes to the better Souls, that are prepared fo:

al" Wwhich is a priviledge infinitely be


“4


ae


: G


ut this only by


yond Angelical corres


gainit


" Confideratins


gainit the belief of any fuch happy vouch{afement , fo that }, ,
they conclude the Doctrine of smmediate Communion with
the Deity inthis Life to be but an bigh flown notion of | Gy
warm imagination, and overlufcious felf-flattery, and I 9’
acknowledge I have my felf had thoughts of this nature,
fuppofing Communion with God to be nothing elfe but §°
the exercife of vertue, and that Peace, and thofe Comforts q"'
which naturally refult from ze, |

But | have confidered fince, that God’s more near and §'
smmediate imparting himfelf to the Soul that is prepared
for that happinefs by divine Love, Humility, and Refig- §”
nation, inthe way of a vital touch, and fenfe, is a thing
‘poffible init felf, and will bea great part of our Heaven. |
That Glory is begun in Grace, and Ged is pleafed to give
fome excellent Souls the happy Antepaff. That holy men§
in ancient times have fought and glorsed in this enjoyment, |"
and never complain fo forely as when it was with-held, and. §'
snterrupted. That the expreffions of Scripture run infinite- B'
ly this way, and the bef of Modern good men, do from g%
their own experience arte/? it. That thy /piritualizethygy
Religion, and renders its enjoyments more comfortable and pi"!
delicious. That it keeps the Soul under a vivid fenfe of Pi
God, and is a grand fecurity again{t Temptation. That it")
holds it fteady amid the flatteries of a profperous {tate, and If" i
gives it the molt grounded anchorage and fupport amid §"
the Waves of an adverfe condition. That’tis the nobleft gM
encouragement to vertue, and the bicge/t affurance of ang
happy Immortality. I fay, I confidered thefe meighry Bil
things, and wondred at the carelefne/s and prejudice ofipy ity
thoughts that occafion’d my fufpecting the reality of fom’)
glorious a Priviledge; 1 faw how little reafon there is in|
denying matters of inward fenfe, becaufe our felves down
not fee! them, or cannot form an apprehenfion of themig™y,
in ourminds. Tam convinced that things of gu? and re)

_ Lifh mabe jude’d by the fenerent and vital faculties, andig Mi)
not by the vertical excercifes of [pecularive underitandings : 8 ;
And upon the whole, I believe infinitely that the Div:neg
Spirit affords its fenfible prefence, and smmedrate beasitiogy

OHCIAE


| about Witchcraft. 99


“wil Touch to fome rare Souls, who are divefted of carnal
wietelf, and mundane pleafures, abftratled from the Body by
ail) Prayer and holy Meditation » [piricual in their Defires, and
lati Cale in their Affettions » devout Lovers of G od, and vertue,
cwhand rezderly affettionate to all the world 5 fincere in their
ifn 4erms, and circum/ped in their attions, inlarged in their
(Souls, and clear in their Minds: Thefe I think are the
wal\@Upofitions that are requifite to fit us for Divine Commu.
yel2or 5 and God tranfacts not in this xear wey, but with
uspprepared /pirits,, who are thus difpofed for the manifefta-
itson Of his prefence, and his influence: And fach, I be-
eleve, he never fails to blefs with thefe happy foretaftes
sinfl Glory, 3 =
| But for thofe that are paffionate and conceited, turbulent
nud notional, confident and im nodeft, imperious and mali-
| beens 5 “That doat upon trifles, and run fiercely in the ways
(pe aSect, that are lifted up in the apprehenfion of the
i(qllortous prerogatives of themfelves and their party, and
jicorn ali the world befides ; For fuch, Ifay, be their pre-
\eafions what they will, to divine Communion, Illapfes, and
: |Dtfcovertes , 1 believe them not; Their fancies abufe
mem, or they would us. For what communion hath Light
With Darknefs, or the Spirit of the HOLT O NE
"Whith thofe whofe genius and ways are founlike him? Bat
iulPe Other excellent Souls defcribed, will as certainly be
“ Mifited by the Divine Prefence, and Converfe, as the
“ Laryftalline fireams are, with the beams of Light, or the
~ iitly prepar’d Earth whofe Seed isin it felf, will be actu-
ted by the /pirit of Nature.
) | So that there is no reafon to object here the want of
 \agelical Communications though there were none youch-
i Wed us, fince good men enjoy the Divine, which are in-
ialtely more fatisfattory and indearing.
i And now I may have leave to proceed to the next Ob-
tion, which may be made to {peak thus:


G 2


SECT,


Confider.ations
SECT. XIV.
XII.
(RULE bef of Witches andthe monde


things they are [aid to perform by the help of tha |


Confederate Demon, weakens our Faith, and expoferh thy’ :
World to Infidelity «2 the great matters of our Religion. Fou
if they by Diabolical affiftance, can inflict and cure Difeag.
fes, and do things fo much beyond the comprehenfion of ov@)”
Philofophy, and activity of common Nature; What affimq

vance can we have, that the Miracles that confirm our Goy

pel were not the effects of a Compact of like nature, and thag®
Devils were mot caft out by Beelzebub? Jf evil Spirits cag”
aflume Bodies, and render themfelves vifible in humang)


likenefs ; What fecurity can we have of the reality of tlip*”'
Refurrection of Chrift? And if, by their help, Witcheg?™


can enter Chambers invifibly through Key-holes avd lett”
unperceived Crannies, avd transform themfelves at plecgy
fore, What Arguments of Divinity are there in our Say.
our’s fhewing himfelf inthe midft of his Dilciples , whes


the Doors were {hut,and: bis Transfiguration iz the Monnry™ |


Miracles are the great inducements of Belief, and how {hag
we diftinguifh a Miracle from a lying Wonder; a Teft git
mony from Heaven, froma Trick of the Angels of Hell!
af they can perform things that aftonifh and confound om’ \\
Reafons, and are beyond all the Poflibilities of Human Nog’ ht
ture 2 This Objection is fpiteful and mifchievous, but#
thus endeavour to difpatch it.


Se Bs E Wonders done by Confederacy with wickeg?'s,
Spirits, cannot derive a fufpicion upon the uns]
doubted AGracles that were wrought by the Author angi,
Promulgers of our Religion, asif they were performeg
by Diabolical Compatt, firice their Spirit, Endeavours, ang’:
Defigns, were notorioufly contrary to all the 7 endencse®' |
Aims, and Interefts of the Kingdom of Darkue/s, For, a\)
ut


ia
7


about Witchcraft. lor


to the Life and Temper of the blefled and adorable ¥ E-
'5US, we know there was an incomparable /weerze/s in
his Nature, Humility in his Adanners , Calmnefs in his

\ Temper, Compaffion in his Miracles, Modefty in his Ex-
\preffions, Holinefs inall his Aftions, Hatred of Vice and
sii Bafene{s, and Love to all the World; all which are e/-
y(Afentially contrary to the Nature and Conftitution of Apo-
yinqeate Spirits, who abound in Pride and Rancour, Infolence
iy, end Rudenels, Tyranny and Bafenefs, univerfal Malice,
»yiand Hatred of Aden, And their Defigns are as oppo-
| ‘Hite, as their Spirit and their Genius. . And now, Canthe
jy. (S42 DOrcrow its Light from the bortomle/s Abyfs? Can
pifteat and Warmth flow in upon the World from the Re-
[gions of Svow and Ice? Can Fire freeze, and Water
purn ? Can Natures , fo infinitely contrary , communi.
‘ing(e4#€y and jump in projects that are deffruétive to each
|pthers known Interefts ? Is there any Balfom inthe Cock.
ietreces Eog ? or, Canthe Spirit of Life flow from the
yyy enome Of the Afp? Wil the Prince of Darknefs
trengthen the .4rm that is ftrercht out to pluck his U-
jurpt Scepter, and his Spoils from him? And will helend
. iis Legions, to aflift the Armies of his Exemy againft
,pime No, thefe are impoflible Suppofals; No intelli-


_


pent Being will induftrioufly and knowingly contribute
7 Ho the Contradiétion of its own Principles, the Defeature
yf its Purpofes, and the Ruine of its own deareft Ivter-
fs. There is no fear then, that our Faith fhould re-
" ieive prejudice from the ackzowledgment of the Being of
“| Watches, and power of evil Spirits, lince tis not the do-
"Weg wonderful things that is the only Evidence that the
\ely FESUS was from God, and his Doétrine true ;
jut the conjunétion of other circumftances , the holine/s
"iit his Life, the reafonablenefs of his Religion, and the
“pecellency of his Defzgns, added credit to his Works, and i
i Prengthned the great Conclufion, That he could be no other Hah
jan the Son of God, and Savicur of the world. But bee i
wh'ides, I fay,
(2) That fiace infinite Wifdom ardGo dnefs rules the


a


102 Confider ations
World, it cannot be conceived , that they fhould give


up the greateft part of men to unavoidable deception. And


}
f. A
i
i


if evil Angels by their Confederates are permitted to per= .


form fuch afonifhing things, as feem fo evidently to’


carry God’s Seal and Power with them, for the confirma-
tion of Falfhoods, and gaining credit to Impoffors, with»


out any counter-evidence to difabufe the World; Man-§?


kind is expofed to fad and fatal delufion, And to fay!"
that Providence will fuffer us to be deceived in things off |"
the greateft concernment, when we ufe the beft of ourg


care and endeavours to prevent it, is to {peak hard!
thingsof Ged; and in effect to afirm, That He hath no-
thing to do in the Government of the World, or doth


not concern himfelf in the affairs of poor forlorn men.f
And if the Providence and Goodnefs of God be not a fe-§ Mitt
curity unto us againft fuch Deceptions, we cannot be af-#
fured, but that we are always abufed by thofe z/fchre-

vous Agents, in the Objetts of plain fenfe, and in all theq
matters of our daily Converfes. If ON E that pre-§
tends he is cmmediarely fent from God, to overthrow the


ancient Fabrick, of Eftablifhed Worfhip , and to erect «
New Religion in His Name, fhall be borz of a Virgim
and honour’d by a miraculous Star, proclaimed by :
Song of feeming Angels of Light, and worfhipped by the
wife Sages of the World ;, Revered by thofe of the great.
eit aufierity, and admired by all for a miraculous Wifdom
beyond his Education and his Years: If he thall feed mul
titudes with almoft xorhing, and faf? himfelf beyond al
the po/fibilities of Nature : If he fhall be transformed ints
the appearance of extraordinary Glory, and converfe wit.
departed Prophets in their viftble Forms : If He fhall Cur

all Difeafes without Phyfick, or Endeavour, and raife th


Dead to Life after they have ffunk, in their Graves: WB iii


he fhall be honoured by Voices from Heaven, and attrac
the univerfal wonder of Princes and People: If He fhal
allay Tempefts with a beck, and caft out Devils with


—S>


—s
—— —
~ -—s


=


——-.- =
= =—— <= —


<=


3


— oor or
= =


a> a> so ob
ie Z =


word: If He fhall forete! his own ‘Death particularlyg ij.
with its Tragical Circumftances, and his Refurve&ion afte |


if


7


about Witchcraft. 103
| it: Ifthe Veil of the moft famous Temple in the World
| thall be rent, and the Sun darkued at his Funeral - If He

‘oy dhall, within the time foretold,. break the bonds of
itll Death, and lift up his Head out of theGrave: If Afulrj-
whim tudes of other departed Souls fhall arife with Him, to at-
iii] tend at the Solemnity of his Refurrefion : If He hall after
vial Death, viftbly converfe, and eat.and drink with divers
ini] perfons, who could not be deceived in a matter of clear
hii) feafe, and afcend inGlory in the prefence of an aftonifht
it and admiring Multitude: J fay, if fuch a one as this
hilt Lhould prove a diabolical Impoffor, and Providence fhould
mio Permit him to be fo credited and acknowledged ; What
iif poflibility were there then for us to be aflured, that we
:


i) are not always deceived ? yea, that our very faculties
i(| Were not given us only to delude and abufe us? And if
F i fo, the next Conclufion is, That there is no God that judg-
alii €¢4 in the Earth, and the belt, and moft likely Fypothe-
i fis willbe, That the world is given up to the government of
ivy the Devil. But if there be a Providence that fupervifeth
vit BS, Cas nothing is more certain) doubtlefs it will never
4 fuffer poor helplefs Creatures to be inevitably deceived by

a the craft and fubtilty of their mifchievous Enemy, to
if their undoing ; but will without queftion take fuch care,
ad that the works wrought by Divine Power for the Confir-
‘oe Mation of Divine Truth, fhall have fuch vifible Marks
‘idp and Signatures, if notin their Nature, yet in their Gir-
oft CHmftances, Ends, and Defigns, as fhall difcover whence

jl they are, and fufficiently di/tinguifh them from all Impo-
h flares and Delufions, And though wicked Spirits may

# perform fome f{trange things that may excite wonder for
awhile, yet He hath, and will fo provide that they fhalf
VW be baffled and difcredited , as we know it was in the cafe
"Of AZo/es and the e£gyptian Magicians.

4 1 befe things I count fufficient to be faid to this laf,
Mand fhrewdeft Objettion : Though fome, 1 underftand, ex-
peept, that I have made it ffronger than the Anfwer I have
“applied. That I kave urged the argument of unbelievers
"Y bome, and reprefented it in its full fireagth, 1 fappofe

d 34 can


— onfider ations rae


can be no matter of juft reproof: For to triumph over
the weakne/s of aCaufe, and to overlook its frrength, is
the trick of fhallow and intereffed Difputers, and the worft
way to athe a good Caufe, or confuteabadone. Ihave
therefore all along urged the moft cogent things I could
think of, for the intereft of the Objeétors, becaufe I
would not impofe upon my Reader or my felf : ; and the
ftronger 1 make their premiffes, the more fhall I weaken
their Conclufion, if | anfwer them; which whether I have
done, or not, L refer my felf to the judgments of the zn-
genious and confi derate ; from whom fhould be very glad
to beinformed in what particular points my Difcourfe is
defective. - General Charges ate no proofs, nor are they
eafily capable of an anfwer. Yet to the mention’d exception
in
" That the frrength of the Objettion is not my fault, for
the reafons alleda’d : ‘and for the fuppofed incompetency
of my return, | propofe, that if the circum ances of the
Perfons, E Eyds. and Jffues be the beft Notes of Diftinttion
between true Adiracles and Forgeries, Divineand Diabo-
lical ones, Ihave then faid enough to fecure the AGracles
of our Saviour, and the Ffoly men of Ancient times. But
if thefe Objeétors think, they can give us any better,. or
more infallible Criteria, I defire them to weigh what I
have offer’d about A&racles in fome of the following
Leaves, beforethey enter chat rhoxght among their cer-
zainties. And iftheir other marks of difference will hold,
notwithftanding thofe allegations, 1 fuppofe the ingni ff
tive believing world would be glad tokvow.them; and I
fhall have particular obligations to the difcoverer, for the
a with which he willthereby afhit my An/wer.

But till I fee that, 1 can fay nothin g ftronger, orif I

aw it, which I fhall not in hatte evncel | Mould not be
convinced but that the cizcumffances of difference whi ch
have noted, areabundantly /ufficient to.difarm the Objge
étion - > and to { thew, that though Apparitions, Witcherajty
and diabolical} Vonders are admitted: yet none of thefe
can faften any flurre, or ground of dangerous doubt upon

| the


| about Witchcraft. = - 10 a
| : ta
i the miraculous performances of the H. JESUS and his


‘J Apofiles. Mt the diffatisfied can fhew it, I hall yield my
‘Wt felf an humble Profelyte to their Reafons : but till 1 know
ieithem, the’ geveral {uggeftion will nat convince me,
ty Now, betides what I have direétly faid to the main
‘lt W Objettion, I have this to add to the Cbjeétors, Thatt
iti} Could wifh they would take care of fuch Succeftions ;
‘well which, if they overthrow not the Opinion they oppofe,
it} will dangeroufly affront the Religion they would feem
‘itw-{ to acknowledge. For he that faith, That if there are
i WIY CHES, there uw xo way to prove that Chritt Jefus
lui) Was mot a Maguian, and diabolical Impoftor, putsa deadly
tte] Weapon into the bands of the Infidel, and is him{elf next
yi) door tothe SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST :
1Of which, im order to the perfwading greater tender-
il) wes and. caution in fuch matters, I give this fhort ac-
aint COUNT. ation hon | |


—d


oC oT, EN,


if “PHE Sizagainft the Holy Ghoff is {aid to be Uapar-
A A donable : by which fad Attribute, and the difcourfe.
sh } of our Saviour, AMatth. XI. from the 22, to the 33


)
ih verfe, we may underftand its Nature. In order to which


we confider y That fince the Azercies of God, and the


Wit AZerits of his Son, are wafinite, there-is nothing can make
ae |
Hi 4


|
H
|
|
:
|


si 9 Sin unpardonable, but what ‘makes it incurable. and

there is no Sin but what is curable by a ffrong Faith, and
(ha vegorous Endeavour; For. all things are poffible to him
that believeth. So that, That which makes a Sin sacu-
Wrable, muft be fomewhat that makes Faith impoffible, and
| (obftructs all means of Conviction. In order to the find-
jing which, we muft confider the ways and methods the
jQivine Goodnefs hath taken, for the begetting Faith,
Mand cure of Infidelity : which it attempted, firft, by the
"Prophets, and holy men of ancienttimes, who, by the
Meacellency of their Loctrine, the greatue/s of their Atira-


)
Clee
bits,


“106s Confiderations ;
cles, and the holinefs of their Lives, endeavoured the


conviction and reformation of a ftubborn and unbelieve- 4);
ing World. But though Few believed their Report, and xi


men would not be prevail’d on by what they did, or,


what they faid; yet their Infidelity was not hitherto ia- } )yj
ewrable, becaufe further means were provided in the m= 4
niftry of Fobn the Baptiff, whofe Life was more fevere, §


whofe Dottrines were more plain, preffing, and parti-
cular; and therefore *twas poflible that He might have


fucceeded.” Yea, and where He failed, and could not § 4,


open mens hearts and their eyes, the effect was ftill in
poffibility, and it might be expected from Aim that came


after, to whom the Prophets and ohn were but the Twi- §


light and the Dawn. And though Hw miraculous Birth,
the Song of Angels, the Fourncy of the Wife Men of the


Eaft, and the corre{pondence of Prophecies, withthe Cir- | (4


cumftances of the firft appearance of the wonderful Infant :
I fay, though thefe had not been taken notice of, yet


was there a further provifion made for the cure of Infide- }
lity, in his affonifhing Wifdom, and molt excellent Do- §,,.


clrines, For, He {pake as never man did. And when
Thefe were defpifed and neglected, yet there were other
means towards Convittion, and cure of Unbelief, in thofe
mighty works that bore Teftimony of Him, and wore the
evident marks of Divine Power in their Foreheads. But
when after all, Thefe clear and unqueftionable Mtiracles
which were wrought by the Spirit of God, and had emi-
nently his Superfeription on them, fhall be afcribed to
the Agenty of evil Spirits, and Diabolical Compaétt, as
they were by the malicious and fpightful Pharifees in the
periods above-mentioned; when thofe great and laf Fe-
fFimonies againit Infidelity , fhall be faid to be but the §,'"
tricks of Sorcery, and Complotment with Hellifh Confede- |,
rates, This is Bla/pbemy in the higheft, againft the Power 9.’
and Spirit of God, and fuch as cuts off all means of Candie 4.“
ction, and puts the Unbeliever beyond all poffibilitzes of ¥\""


Cure,’ For Afiracles are God’s Seal, and the great and §


lait cvidence of the truth of any Doctrine, And though, ff,"


while"


os
ss +=
a ee —


: = = 3 = =
SS
Pe ee oe —™: a se. ee &


= -
SE eee


+
—S— eS
a


ea RF FE.


— .—
rr ee


— = —
a


cS


=


— etn


= - ~ = = =
. ee = es ==
ee A a Ra RE A RR IE EINE RE ES a ES


>


Se


LS ee RO eee Le SE TP ee ED eee en


peor ec


about Witcherafe. 7 107


while thefe are only disbelieved asto the Fatt, there re-
mains a poffibility of perf{wafion, yet, when the Fa fhall
be acknowledg’d , but the Power blafphemed, and the
effects of the adorable Spzrit malicioufly imputed to the
Devils, fach a Blafphemy, fach an Infidelity is incurable,
and confequently unpardonable. 1 fay, in fum, the Sin
againit the Holy Ghoft feems to be a malicious imputation
of the AZiracles wrought by the Spérit of God in our Sae
viour, to Satanical Confederacy, and the power of Apo-
ftate Spirits; Than which nothing is more blafphemous,
and nothing is more like to provoke the Holy Spirit thag
is fo abufed, to an Eternal Derelittion of fo vile and fo
tncurable an Unbeliever.

This account, as?tis clear and reafonable in it felf, fo
it is plainly lodg’d in the mention’d Difcourfe of our
Saviour. And moft of thofe that fpeak other things
about it, feem to me to talk at random. and perfectly
without Book. But to leave them to the fondnefs of
their own conceits, I think it now time to draw up te
a Conclufion of the whole.


SECT. XVI.


Herefore briefly, Sir, I have endeavoured in thefe
Papers, which my refpect and your concernment


_in the fubject have made yours, to remove the main pre-


judices I could think of, againft the exiftence of Witches
and Apparitions: And Vm fure I have fuggefted much
more againft what I defend, than ever I heard or faw in
any thatoppofed it; whofe Difcourfes for the moft part,
have feemed to me infpired by a lofty {corn of common be-
lef, and fome trivial Notions of Vulgar Philofophy. And
in defpifing the common Faith about matters of faé, and
fondly adhering to ze in things of Speculation, they very
grofly and abfurdly miftake: For in things of Fact, the
People are as much to be believed , as the molt /ubecle
Philofophers andSpeculators, fince here, Senfe is theJudge.


108 Confiderations


But in matters of Motions and Theory, they are not at all
to be heeded, becaufe Rea/on is to be Judge of thefe, and
this they know not how to ufe.' And yet thus it is with
thofe wife Philofophers, that will deny the plaiz evi-
dence of the Senfes of Mankind, becaufe they cannot re-
concile appearances with the fond Crotchets ofa Philofo-
pay, which they lighted on inthe High-way by chance,
and will adhere to at adventure, So that.I profefs, for
mine own part, I never yet heard any of the confident
Declaimers again{t Witchcraft and Apparitions, {peak any
thing that might move a mind, in any degree inftructed
in the generous kinds of Philofophy and Nature of things.
And for the Objections [have recited, they are moft of
tiem fuch as rofe out-of mine own thoughts, which I
ebliged to confider what was poflible to be faid upon this
eccafion.

~ For though [ have examined SCOT?s DISCOVERY,
fancying that there I fhould find the frong reafons of
mens disbelief in this matter, yet I profefsI met not
with the leaft fuggeftion in all that Farrago, but what it
had been ridiculous for me to have gone about to az-


fwer: For the Author doth little but tell odd Tales, and:


filly Legends, which he confutes and laughs at, and pre-
tends this to be a Coxfutation of the Being of Witches and
Apparitions. In all which, His Keafonings are trifling
and Childifh,; and when He ventures at Philofophy, Heis
little better than abfurd :. So that twill be a wonderto
me, if any but Boyes and Buffcovs imbibe any prejudices
again{t a Belief fo infinitely confirmed,. from the Laofe
and Jmpetent Sug geftions of fo weak a Difcourfer.

But however, obferving two things in that Difcour fe


that would pretend to be more than ordinary Rea/ons, |


fhalldo them the civility to examine them, — It.is faid


thea,


peek Sb the Go/pel ws filent , as.to the Being of
| WITCHES, and 7cis not likely ,.if there
were fuch, but that our Saviour or his Apofiles had givea
intimations of their exiftence.’ The other is, (2)


= - sn = ope.


So es Se oR Sls 35 ae £
= ey Se =. =


( nough {peak
if MOn notion isa Poyfoner, But wh
yl der the General one aga
iM Devils, and


wi WITC HES will find it hard to
vit which 1 may add fome


‘render WITC A and WITCHCR AF I’, fhould
'W our Sadducees urge, fignifie onlya CHEZ


it) it


about Witchcraft. tog


(2) \ j Ivacles are ceafed, and therefore the prodigiozs
things afcribed to Witchcrakt are fuppofed
Dreams and Impoftures.


FOR ANSWER tothe FIRST in order, I con-
fider ( 1) That though the Hiftory of the New Te AtaCHE
were granted to be filent in the bufinefs of Witches and
Compacts,yet the Records of theOld havea frequent menti-
on of them. The Law, Exod. XXH. 18 againit permit-
ting them to live (which I mention’d inthe beginning) is
famous, And we have another remarkable Prohibition of
them, Deut. XVIII. 1 Cy T1. There fhall not be found among

yous any one that maketh bis fon or his daughter pafs throught iy,
Fire,or that ufeth Divination, or an Obferver of Times,or an
Enchanter, ora WITC Fl, ov a Charmer, or a Confulter
with Familiar Spirits, ora Wizzard, or a Necromancer.
Now this accumulation of Names, (fome of which are of -
the fame Senfe and Import) isa plainIndication thatthe
FIEBREW WITCH wasone that practifed by com-
pact with evill Spirits. And many of the fame €xpreflions
are put together in the Charge againtt Manaffes, 2 Chron.
XXXII. vz, That he caufed hes Children to pals throush
the Fire, obferved Fimes, ufed Enchantments. and emirch-
craft, and dealt with Familiar Spirits, and with WIP.
Z ARDS. Sothat though the Original word-which we


SAS
F and a
|POYSONER, yet thofe others mentiond piainly e-
the thing ; and I have given an account jn
the former Confiderations, howa WIT. CH in the coni<
y meer Poyfoning fhould
and not be concluded un-
inft Afurder; why meer Leger-
Wh demain and Cheating fhould be fo feverely animadverted
on, as to be reckon?’d with Enchantments, converfe with
Idolatrous Praétices : I believe the Denier o
give a Reafon. To
hard paflages'of Scripture that
yleid


H


havea diftin& Law againtt it,


ly


is


110 Confider ations


yield fufficient evddence in the cafe. The Nations are
forbid to hearken to the Diviners, Dreamers, Enchant-
ers, and Sorcerers, Jer. XXVII.9. the Chaldeans are
deeply threatned for their Sorceries and Enchantments, Ma.
XLVI]. 9. And we read that Nebuchadnezzar called the
Magicians, Aftrologers, Sorcerers, and Chaldeans, to tell
his Dream. My mention of which laft, minds meto
fay, that for ought I have to thecontrary, there may be
a fort of (itches and Magicians that have no Famuli-
ers, that they kvow, nor any exprefs compatt with Apo-
flate Spirits, who yet may perhaps act ffrange things by
diabolick, Aids, which they procure by the ufe of thofe
Forms, and wicked Arts that the Devil did firft impart
to his confederates: And we know not but the Laws of
that dark kingdom may enjoin a particular attendance
upon all thofe that practife their AZyferies , whether
they kvow them to be theiys, or not. Fora great inter-
eft of theic Empire may be ferved by this project, fince
thofe that find fuch fuccefsin the unkvomn Conjurations,
may by that be toll’d on to more expre/s tranfattions
with thofe Fiends, that have aflifted them izcogmto: Or,
if they proceed not fo far, yet they run upon a Rock by
acting inthe dark, and dealing in unknown and unwar-
ranted Arts, in which the effec is much beyond the pro-
per efficiency of the things they ufe, and affords ground
of more than fufpicion that fome evil Spirit is the Agent
in thofe wondrous performances.

Upon this account I fay, it is not to me unlikely but
that the Devils may by their own Conftitution be bound to
attend upon all that ufe their Ceremonies and Forms,
though igvorantly, and without defign of evil, and fo
Conjuration may have been performed by thofe who are
none of the Covenant-Sorceiers and wauches. Among
thofe perhaps we may juitly reckon Balaam, and the Di-
viners.. For Balaam, Afoncaws hath undertaken to clear
him from the guile of the greater Sorcery. And. the Di-
viners are ufually diftinttly mentioned from thofe that
had Familiar Spirits. The Affrelogers alfo of Elder

| : times,


about Witchcraft. Tit


times, and thofe of ours, I take to have been of this
ij, ifort of Atagiccans, and fome of them. under the colour ef
oj ,fthat myftical Science, worfe. And | queftion not, but
wy that things are really done, and foretold by thofe Dr em
uipwtended Artifis, that are much beyond the regular poffibiz
yiffeees OF their Are, which inthis appears to be exceed-
enngly uncertain and precarvows, in that there are no lefs
yy than fie ways of erecting a Scheme, in each of which the
a prediction of Events fhall be different, and yet every one
| ,,}0£ them be juftifiable by the Rules of that Science. And
ithe Principles they go upon, are found to be very arbi-
rary and wnphilofophical, not by the ordinary Declaimers
Hagainif it, but by the molt profound inguirers into things,
who perfectly underftand the whole MMyfiery, and are the
only compecent Fudges,
|. Now thofe A4j/tical Students may in their firft addret.
_,|weS to this Sezence, have no other defign, but the fatisfa-
~~ ietion of their curtofity to know remote and hidden things s
wet that in the progrefs being not fatisfied within the
;,, pounds of their Art, doth many times tempt the curious
,,(quirer to ule worfe means of Jy ormation; and no
Woubt thofe aifchievous Spirits that are as vigilant as the
“"\Peafts of Prey, and watch all occafions to get us within
| heir envious reach, are more conftant Attenders, and
|


‘ "

f\

L

mn i

:
4


iy
A


“/fareful Spies upon the ACtions and Inclinations of fuch, -


Whofe genius and defigns prepare them for their 7 empta-


Wous. So that I look on Judicial diivolegp asa fair


:


introduction to Sorcery and Witchcraft, And who knows
put that it was firft fer on foot by the Ivfernal Hunters,
s a Lure to draw the Curiofo’s into thofe fnares that lie
id beyond it. And yet I believe alfo, it may be iana-
ently enough ftudied by thofe, that aim onlyto under-


| eg a. es ES “pos ip Bl soy?
fand whae it is, and bow far it will honeftly go, and are
“mot willing to conc


| emin any thing which they do not
7 omprehend. Buc that they muft take care to keep
"femfelyes within the bounds of fober ehguiry, and nor
‘i Mhdulge wrregular follicitudes about the Knowledge of
(inings which Providence hath thought fit to conceal from


q
Ub


ala)


My
"


?


,


ae


ay


‘-


81
q
D


ibs %


112 Confiderations


us; Which whoever doth, lays himfelf open to the de-#h"
figns and folicitations of evil Spirits; and I believe thereg #”’
are very few among thofe who have been addicted tag™
thofe ffrange Arts of wonder, and predittion, but haveg*
found themfelves attacqued by fome unknown Solicitors,"
and inticed by them to the more dangerous Aétions andi a
Correfpondencies. For as there area fort of bafe and for—§ i"
did Spirits that attend the envy and malice of the ignorant,
and viler fort of perfons, and betray them into Compas
by promifes of Revenge: So, no doubt, there are a kind
of more airy, and fpeculative Fiends, of an higher Rank:
and Order than thofe wretched Imps, who apply them-
felves to the Curious; and many times prevail with them itil)
by offers of the more recouzdite knowledge. As we knows litt
it was in the firft Temptation. Yea, and fometimes theyg iit
are fo cautious, and wary in their Converfations withg i
more refined perfons, that they never offer to make any
expre/s Covenants with them. And to this purpofe I have
been informed by a very Learned and Reverend Doctor #ittai
that one Mr. Edwards a Mafter of Arts of Triz. Coll. irgiit ii
Cambridge being reclaimed from Corjuration, declared ity
in his Repentance, That the Demon always appeared tcgi|
him like a man of good Fafhion, and never required anygiltts’
Compact from him. And no doubt, they fort themfelves® Ay
agreeably tothe ftate, port, and genius of thofe withgti|
whom they converfe: Yea, *tis like, as I conjectured /Bihiy.
are affiftant {ometimes to thofe, to whom they dare not
fhew themfelvesin any opennefs of appearance, left theyili)
fhould fréghe them’ from thofe ways of Sin and Tempta-§ii,
tion. So that we fee, that Men may act by eval Spirit Ai)
without their own knowledge that they do fo.
And poflibly Nebuchadnezzar’sWifemen nyight be of thi ify
fort of Afagicians , which Suppofal I mention the rather fiw),
becaufe it may ferve me againft fome things that may beg,
objected: For, it may be faid, If They had been in Confer#\,,
deracy with Devils, itis not probable, that Daziel would#\...
have beentheir Advocate,or in {uch iaoffenfive Terms havi fi,
diftinguifhe their Skill,from Divine Revelation, nor fol ae
ee


about Witchcraft. i1 >
‘sift He, one would think, have accepted the office of being
in) Provoff over them, “Thefe Circumftances may be fuppo-
dq) fed to intimatea probability that the Magi of Babylon
itm) Were in no profe/t Diabolical Complot ment, and [grant its:
‘lot But yet they mzghr, and in all likelyhood did,ufethe Arés
inal) and Adethods of Adtion, which obtain Demoniack Co-ope-
‘ull ration and Afiftance, though without their Privity, and
jw 10 they were alefs criminal fort of Conjurerss For thofé
iit Arts were conveyed down along to them from one hand
niliff CO another, and the Succeffours ftill took them up from
wiithofe that preceded, without a Philofophiéal Scrutiny, o£
yin} Baamen. ‘They faw ftrange things were doné, and E-
iit Vents predicted by fuch Forms, and fuch words , Hows
xlthey could not tell, nor ’tis like, did not inquire but
avieontented themfelves with this general account, That
«i’twas by the Power of their Arts,and were not follicitous
efifor any berter reafon, This 1 fay was probably the cafe of
iepmoft of thofe Prediitor¢, though, it may be, others of
\@ithem advanced further into the more defperate part of
ithe Afyftery., And that fome did immediately tran{ack
(yliwith appearing evil Spirits in thofe times, is apparent e+
yaiimough from exprefs mention in the Scriptures I have
fiftalledg?d. | 3 | i
eit And the fory of the WITC H of EN DOR, 1 Sam.
ty IRXVIIL. is a remarkable Demonstration of the main Con=
jyaclufion 5 which will appear when we have confidered and’
removed the Fancy, and Gloffes of our Author about it,
pin his DISCOVERY: where to avoid this Evidence,
ule afirms, Ths 7 IT C H tobe but a Couzener, and the
whole Tranfattion a Cheat and Impofture, managed by her
Pelfand a Confederate. And inorder tothe perfuading:
(4, he tells a fine Tale, viz. That She departed from
mY Tar into her Clofer, “* Where doubtle(s, fays he, fhe had
| oft a Familiar, fome lewd crafty Prie/?, and made Saal ttand
deat the door like a Fool, to hear the cozening Ant{wers.
iW He faith, fhe there ufed the ordinary words of Conju-
" dh’ ration ; & after them Samuel appears, whomhe affirms to
"at be no other than either the et her felf, or her Confe~


der ate.


~


—


i14 | ROONe ane,


der ate. By this pretty Knack and Contrivance he thinks he §}
hath difabled the relationfrom fignifying to our purpofe. f7
But the DISCOVERER might have confide. |
red, that allthis isan Jevention, and without Book, For |
there isno mention of the Wetches Clofer, or her retiring
into another Room, or her Confederate, or her Form of
Conjuration : \ fay, nothing of all this, isas much as inti-
mated in the Hiffory; & if we may take this large Liberty
in the interpretation of Scrsprure, there is {carce a Story in
the Bible but may be made a Fallacy, an Impofture, or any |
thing that we pleafe. Nor is this Fancy of his only ars:
bitrary, but indeed contrary to the eircumftances of the #
Text. For it fays, Saul perceived it was Samuel, and bow-
ed himfelf, and this Samuel truly foretold his approaching §**
Fate, viz. That J/rael fhould be delivered with him into Mt
the hands of the Philifines; and that on the morrow Hep!
and his Soms fhould be in the ffate of the Dead, whichig*
doubtlefs is meant by the expreflion, that Lehey fhould bem
with him. Which contingent particulars, how could thes!"
Cozener and her Confederate foretel,ifthere were nothing
in it extraordinary and preternatural.
{c hath indeed beena great difpute among Interpreters, 8”
whether the real Samuel was raifed, or the Devel in his”
likenefs ? Moft later Writers fuppofe it to have been.anwg“
evil Spirit, upon the fuppofition that good and happy
Souls can never return hither from their Cele/fial abodes; i} lt
and they are not certainly at the beck and call of angi.
impious Hagg. But then thofe of the other fide urge,"
that the Piety of the words that were fpoke, and theg.
feafonable reproof given to defpairing Saul, axe indicati~
ons fufficient that they come not from Hell; and efpeci-
ally they think the Prophecy of Circumftances very accim@.
dental to be an argument, that it was not utter’d by anya")
of the ixfernal Predittors, And for the fuppofal that isa":
the ground of that interpretation, tis judged exceed-pr
ingly precarious; for who faith that happy departed Soalsy
were never employed in any minifteries here below ? Andig™s
thofe diflenters are ready to ask areafon, why they may
nowy” |


— —


—_
——}


——
<o


—=
<o


S>
=a


SSS =
= =


| about Witchcraft. lig
iiwi|f Hot be fent in Meflagesto Earth, as well as rho/e of the
(nitel) Aegelical Order ? They are nearer al/ied to our Natures,


c


i, jo) and upon that account more intimately concerned in our
itil affairs; and the example of returning Lazarus is evi-
‘aml Gence of the thing de fatto. Befides which, that it was
sigifl the real Szeuel they think made probable by the opinion
ile OF Fefus the Son of Syrac, Ecclef. XLVI. 19, 20.. who
ijniff faith of him, That after his death he prophefied and {hew-
yah ea the King his end: which alfo is likely from the circum-
lve dtance of the womans aftonifhment, and crying out when
jibe faw him, intimating her forprize, in that the power
{jf God had over-ruled her Enchantments, and fent ano-
Ither than fhe expected. And they conceive there is no
snore incongruity in fuppofing God fhould fend Samuel
vn CO Lebuke Sau for this his laft folly , and to predi& his
jMnftant ruine, than in hisinterpofing Elias to the Meflen-
iyiBets Of Abazias when he {ent to Beelzebub. Now if it
yumvere the real Samuel, asthe Letter exprefleth, (and the
. obvious fence is to be followed when there is no cogené:
~~ Wreafon to decline it) he was not raifed by the power of
the Witches Enchantments, but came on that occafionon a
iporvine Errand. But yet attempts and endeavours to raife
ner Familiar Spirit, (though at that time over-ruled y
re arguments that it had been hercuftomtodofo. Of
f 1 were as the other fide concludes, the Devil in the
ape of Samuel, her diabolical Confederacy is yet more
palpable.


ARCHING


x ——— s


=e ii uomame, ha dA,


iy HAVE now done with SCOT, and his prefumptie

ovs, and am apt to fancy, that there is nothing more
edful to be faid to difcover the Di/coverer. - But there
i: an Author infinitely more valuable, that calls me to
Monfider him, *Tis the great Epifcopius, who, though he
y "Mrants a fort of Witches and Alagicians, yet denies Com-
Watts. His Authority, I confefs, is confiderable, but let
MS weighhis Reafous, = § H2 His


Oo


“


116 Confiderations | ;
His Firft is, That there is no Example of any of the


prophane Nations that were in fuch Compact , whence he if


would éafer, that there are no exprefs Covenants with evil fi


Spirits in particular inftances. But I think that both pitii
propofition and confequence, are very obnoxious and defe=-B wir


tive. For that there were Nations that did actually wor-4


{vip the Devil is plain-enough in the Records of ancient § ji


times, and fome fo read that place in the Pfalms, The
Gods of the Heathen are Devils, and Sathan we know ism hy
call’d the God of this World. Yea, our Author himfelfig {i
- confeffeth that the Nation of the Fews were fo ftrictlyyp Sinn

prohibited Witchcraft, and all Tranfattion with evil Spt iny |


vits; becaufe of their pronene/s to worfhip them. Butt dy


what need more? There are at this day that pay facri-p iy,
fice, and all facred Homage to the wicked Due ina vifibleg iw,
appearance; and tis well known to thofe of our owmpiny,
that traffick, and refide in thofe parts, that the Caribbi~B i,
ans worhhip the Devil under the name of AZaboya, whoRalyy
frequently fhews himfelf, and tranfacts with them ;. thei j


like Travellers relate concerning divers other parts off; ,


the barbarous Indies: and *tis confidently reported by in
fober intelligent men that have vifited thofe places ,Binyy:
that moft of the Laplanders , and fome other Northersyy);,


people, areWitches.. That’tis plain that there are Na-§i »),


rional Confederacies with Devils; or, if there were none.§ \,
I fee not how it could be infefred thence ,. thatthere aregiyy,,,


no perfonalones, no more, than that there were nevengy;,,
any Demoniacks, becaufe we know of no Nation univer-fyy.,,


fally poffeffed ; nor any Lunaticks in the World, becaufeg,
there is no Countrey of Madmen. But our Author rea-§)),
fons egain, (
(2) Tothis purpofe.; “That the profiigate perfons§
*¢who are obnoxious tothofe grofs temptations, are fall
“enough before; and therefore fuch a Covenant weremy,
“ needlefs, and of no avail tothe Tempters projects. Bh,
This Objettion 1 have an{wered already, in my Re-Bi,.
marques upon the IX. Prejudice, and mind you agairg
here, that: if the defigns of thofe evil Spirsts were onlygy),
ing


a


about Witchcraft. 117


in general to fecure wicked men to the dark Kingdom, it
might better be pretended that we cannot give a reafon
for their temptations, and endeavours in this kind; But
‘it being likely, as I have conjectur’d, that each of thofe
“ON infernalTempters hath a particular property in thofe he hath
ii) feduced, and fecured by {uch compacts , their refpective
| pride and tyrannical defire of flaves, may reafonably be
| thought to engage them in fuch Attempts in which their
iil! | fo peculiar intereft is concerned.

But I add what is more direéf, viz. That fuch defperate
vittili Sinners are made more fafe to the infernal Kingdom at
wi large, by fach Hellifh Covenants and Combinations + fince
i ti thereby they confirm, and harden their Hearts againt
(i God, and put themfelves at a greater diftance from his
wwilill Grace, and his Spirit, give the deepe/? wound to Confci-
wmpence, and refolve to wink, againft all its light and convie
slnilt étzons s throw a Bar in the way of their own Repentance,
yi, titand lay a Train for defpair of Mercy. Thefe certainly


“es iene


= ee
=~ 3 = =
— See ee oo


+


eH


Sah
WG fi


See


ef i. ure ways Of being undone, and the Devil, we fee,
iifhath great intereft in a project, the fuccefs of which is fo
git attended, And we know he made the affault de fatto up~
:jyalfOn our Saviour, when he tempted him to fall dowy, and
\okiavorfhzp, So that this learned Author hath but /itrle rea-
selon to object,
ai (3) That to endeavour fuch an exprefS Covenant is
icontrary to the interefts of Ffell, which indeed are this
»teway fo mightily promoted. And whereas he fuggelts,
ee athing fo horrid is like to ftartle Confcience, and
eiwewaken the Soul to Confideration and Repentance : | Reply,
int. hat indeed confidering man in the general, asa rational
Bet acted by hopes, and fears, and fenfible of the
Woys and miferies of another World, one would expect at


| ni"


Pre TU
pho at
wlNPTE al


thould be fo: But then, if we caft our eyes upon man, as
beally he is, funkinto flefo and prefent fenfe, darkned in
jis mind, and governed by his imagination; blinded by
his paffions, and befotted by fin and folly, hardned by


" Muil Cuftoms, and burried away by the torrent of his inclie
_wpations and defires: Lfay, looking on man inthis mife-

H H 3 rable
H


iM


Confider ations

rable ftate of Evil,’tis not incredible that he fhould be pres
vailed upomby the Zempter, and his own Luffs to act at
a wonderful rate of Adadnefs, and continue unconcerned
and /fupid in it; ztent upon his prefent Satisfattions,with-
out fenfe or confideration of the Dreadfuluefs and Danger
of his Condition; and by this I am furnifhed alfo to meet |

a fourth Objettion of our Author?s, viz.

(4) That?tis not probable upon the Witches part, that
they will be fo de/perate torenounce Godand eternal Hap-
pinefs, and fo, everlaftingly undoe their Bodies and Souls, |
for a fhort and trivial interef?,; which way of arguing will
only infer, that Mankind aéts fometimes to prodigious
degrees of brutifhnefs; and attually we fee it in the in-
féances of everyday. Thereis not a Luft fo bafe, and
{0 contemptible, but there are thofe continually, in our¥
eyes, that feed ze with the facrifice of their eternity, and |p ti
their Souls, and daring Sinners rufh upon the blackeft vil-4
Janies with fo /irtle remorfe, or fenfe, as if it were their:


defign to prove that they have nothing left them of rhatq


whereby they are men. So that nought can be inferred
from this Arguinent, but that humane nature is incredibly’
degenerate, and the Vilenfs and Stupidity of menis really
fo great, that things are cuftomary, and common, whichi
one could not think po/fible, if he did not hourly fee them.
And if men of liberal Education, and acute Reafon, that:
know their Duty, andtheir Danger, are driven by their
Appetttes, with their Eyes open, upon the molt fatad
Rocks,and make all the hafte they can from their God,ancg!
their Aappine/s , If fuch can barter their Souls for trifles,
and fell Everlaftingnefs for a moment, {port wponthe brink
of a Precipice, and contema all the rerrors of the future
dreadfull Day ; Why fhould itthen be ixcredible, that ae | (
brutifb, vile perfon, forted with J ‘gnorance. and drank with
Malice, mindle{s of Ged, and unconcerned about a future
Being, fhould be perfwaded to acccept of prefent, delight~§y
ful Gratifications, without duly weighing the defperata|
Condition ? | Bley)
Thus, I fuppofe, I have az/wered alfo the Argumaee Bh
: tos §


about Witchcraft. 119
| thisGreat man, againft the Covenants of Witches; and
iia fiance a Perfon of fuch Sagacity and Learning, hath xo more
vin) to fay againit what I defend, and another of the fame
} Character, the ingenious Mr. S. Parker, who directed me
|} to him, reckons thefe the ftrongeft things that can be ob-
) jettedinthe Cafe, 1 begin to arrive to an higher degree of
| confidence in this belief; and am almoft inclined to fancy,
itu} that there is little more to be faidto purpofe, which
Hell May not by the improvement of my CON SJ DER A-
nll TIONS be eafily anfwéred; and I am yet the more
ingvi) fortified in my conceit, becaufe I have fince the former
visit Edition of this Book, fent to feveral acute and ingenious
will perfons of my acquaintance, to beg their Objeétions, or
al] thofe they have heard from others, againft my Difcourfe
jo OF Relateons, that I might confider them in this : Sut I
wh €an procure one fave only thofe few I have now difcufs’d,
wii] Mott of my Friends telling me, that they have not met
sii) With any that weed, or deferve my notice.


SS —— aa ar ts = —


SECT. XIX,


- Wi] YQ Y allthis it is evident, that there were WIT'C H-

) ES inancient times under the Difpenfation of the
|} LAW, and that there were fach in the times of the
“GOSPEL alfo, will not be much more difficult to
(ff Make good. Ihad a late occafion to fay fomething a-


i bout this, ina Letter to a Perfon of the higheft honour,


from which I fhall now borrow fome things to my pre-
A fent purpofe.


ie


rail


———
TMS


vi) y SAY then CII.) That there were Compatts with e-
hy \ vil Spirits in thofe times alfo, is methinks intimated —
jt itrongly in that faying of the Fews concerning our Savi-
Meur, That be caft out Devils by Beelzebub. In his return
 tto which, he denies not the Svppofition or Popibility of
“ithe ching in general , but clears himfelf by an appeal to

i the Actions of their own Children, whom they would


| H 4 not


:
}
:


“9200~—t—t«‘«‘«é«‘W on fadevrections


not tax fofeverely. And I cannot very well underftand
why thofe times fhould be priviledged from WIT C H-
CRAFT, and Diabolical Compatts, more than they
were from Poffeffions, which we know were then more
frequent (for ought appears to the contrary) than ever
they were before or fince, But befides this, There are
intimations plain enough in the Apofles Writings of
the being of Sorceryand WITCHCRAFT. St. Raul
reckons Witchcraft next Idolatry, in his Catalogue of the
works of the fle(b, Gal. V. 20. and the Sorcerers are a-
gain join’d with Jdolaters inthat fad Denunciation, Rev.
XXI. 8. and a little after, Rev. XXII. 15. they are
teckoned again among IJdolaters, Murderers, and thofe
others that are without. And methinks the ftory of Simoz
Magus, and his diabolical Oppofitions of the Gofpel in its
beginnings fhould afford clear conviction. To all which,
1 add this more general confideration, in 3


’ €3) That though the New Te/tameat had mention’d flix;


nothing of this matter, yet its filence in fuch cafes is not
the thonfandth part of what he did, and fad, is not re-
corded, as one of his Hiftorians intimates. He faid no-
thing. of thofe large unknown Traéts of America, nor
gave he any intimations of as much as the Exiftence of
that numerous people; much lefs did he leave inftrudtions
about their converfion. ‘He gives no account of the af-
fairs ard ffate of the other world, but ‘only that general
one of the happine/s of fome, and the mifery of others.
Fie made no difcovery of the A/agnalia of Art or Nature;
no, not of thofe, whereby the propagation of the Gofpel
might have been much advanced, viz. the Ayftery of
Prioting, and the Afagner , and yet no one ufeth his fi-
lence in thefe inftances, as an argument againft the be= Jz
ing of things, which are evident objects of fenfe. 1 con= Pli,:
fefs, the omiffion of fome of thefe particulars is pretty Pi
ftrange, and unaccountable, and concludes our ignorance Bis.
of the reafons, and menages of Providence; but I fuppofe, §i
wothing elfe, Ithought, I needed here to have {aid no
i Sisal more,


argumentative. Our Saviour /pake as he had occafion, and’ #ii


about Witchcraft. 12n


“i more, but I confider, in confequence of this Objection,
‘Nit is pretended, That as CHRIST FESUS drove
‘ii the Devil from his Temples, and his Altars (as is clear in
‘ifthe Ceffation of Oracles, which dwindled away, and at
“daft grew filent fhortly upon his appearance) {fo in like
“dgjmanner, *cis faid, that he bani(ht Him from his leffer holds
‘Kin Sorcerers and Witches; which argument \S peccant both
aitin what it affirms, and in what it would infer. For
lj) (1.) The coming of the H, 7ESUS did not expel
‘t@jthe Devi from all the greater places of his refidence and
it) worfhip; for a confiderable part of barbarous Mankind
i) ido him puplick, folemn Homage, to this day: Sothat the
‘mivery foundation of the pretence fails, andthe C onfequence
‘mf without any more ado comes to nothing, And yet be-
nis dides,
i) (2.) Tf there be any credit to be given to Ecelefiafti-
\ea] Hiftory, there were perfons pofleffed with Devils fome
sini} Ages after Chriff, whom the Di/ciples caft out by Prayer,
siuitand the Invocation of his Name: So that Sathan was not
gj ailidriven from his leffer habitations, as foon as he was for-
' 1am from his more famous abodes. And I fee no reas
(Hon
vil, (3-) Why, Though Divine Providence would not al-
i (flow him publickly to abufe the Nations, whom he had de-
wiwligned in a fhort time after, for Subjects of his Son’s
‘(e(\Kingdom, and to ftand up inthe face of Religion in an
open affront to the Divinity that planted it, to the great
‘shesmaeedr ance of the progre/s of the Gofpel, and difcourage-
s@ment of Chriftiae hopes; | fay, Though Providence
qimwould not allow this height of infolent oppofition ; yet
;,, id fee not why we may not grant, that God however per-
, ypenieted the Devil to (veak into fome private skulking holes,
"Hand to trade with the particular more devoted vaffals of
“gfbis wicked Empire: As we know that when our Saviour
a@bad chafed him from the man that was poffeffed, he per-
% mitted his retreat into the herd of Swine. And! might


iad d,


(4.) That


: Confiderations

(4.). That "tis but a bad way of arguing, to fet upimim
fancied congruities againkt plain experience, as is evidently mth"!
done by thofe arguers, who, becaufe they think that #ik
Chrift chafed the Devil from all his high places of worfhipm wilt
when he came; that cis therefore fit he fhould have for-4
ced him from all his other lefs xotorious Haunts: and up- 4 |
onthe imagination of a decency, which they frame, con-4
clude a fait, contrary to the greateft evidence of which}
the thing iscapable. And once more, t

Cs.) ‘The confequence of this imagined Decorum, if it ¥ iii
be purfued, would be this, that Sathaw fhould now be #i
deprived of all the ways and tricks of Couzenage, where- fii
by he abufeth us; and mankind fince the coming of
Chrift, fkould have been fecure from all his Temptations; |
for there is a greater congruity in believing, that, when B jf
he was forced from his haunts in Temples and publick pla- #i
ces, he fhould be put alfo from thofe zearer ones, about
us.and within us in his daily temptations of untverfal Man- By;
kind; than, that upon relinquifhing thofe, he thould be sf {yj
made to leave all profelt communication and corref{pondence yi,
with thofe profligate perfons, whofe vilene/s-had fitted
them for {uch company.

So that thefe Reafoners are very Fair for the denial of
all internal diabolical Temptations. And becaufel durft
not truft them, Ili crave your leave here to add fome
things concerning thofe.

In order to which, that I may obtain the favour of
thofe wary perfons, who are fo coy, and fhy of their a/-
fent, 1 grant; That men frequently out of adefire to
excufe themfelves, lay their owa guilt upon the Devil,
and charge him with things of which in earneft he is not’ »,.
guuty: For 1 doubt not but every wicked man hath Deval >)
enough in his om wature to prompt him to Evil, and §,,°
needs not another Tempter to incite him. But yet, that
Sathan endeavours to further our wickedyefs, and our rz-


diffidens va


about Witchcraft. 123


iM difidene men cannot perhaps apprehend the manner of
“Ml the operation, and from thence are tempted to believe, that
‘(i there’ is really no fuch thing. Therefore I judge it re-
“ni quifite to explain th, and ’tis not unfuitable to my ges
Nl eral fubject. :
‘h) ~=6In order to it I confider, That fenfe is primarily
‘i caufed by sotion in the Organs, which by continuity
RS conveyed to the brain, where fenfation is immedia
jj ately performed; and it is zothing elfe, but a notice ex-
Wl czted in the Soul by the zmpulfe of an external objet. Thus
iit isin (imple outward fenfe. But imagination, though cau-
Led cmmediately by material motion alfo, yet it differs from
ll the external fenfes in this, That cis not from an impre/s
win) derectly from without, but the prime, and original motion
mi is from within our felves: Thus the Soul it felf fome-
itv) times {trikes upon thofe ffriags, whofe motion begets
if fuch, and fuch phantafms; otherwhile, the loofe Spirits
(i\a@) wandring up and down in the brain, cafually hit upon
wilt fuch filaments and ftrings whofe motion excites a conception,
wet) Which we call a Fancy, or Imagination , and if the evi-
{ (nit) dence of the outward fenfes be fhut out by flecp or melan-
tcholy, in either cafe, we believe thofe reprefentations to
Wi be real and external tranfattions , when they are only
tii within our heads, Thus itisin Exthufiafms, and Dreams.
itll And Detides rhefe caufes of the motions which ftir cmagina-
Wtzon, there Is little doubt, but that Spirits good, or bad
oie Can fo move the zaftruments of fenfe in the brain, as to
dete Awake fuch tmaginations, as they have a mind to excite ;
fei and the imagination having a mighty zfluence upon the
wih affections, and they upon the will and external atlions, “tis
id Very eafie to conceive how good Angels may ftir us up to
jt Religcon and Vertue, and the Evil ones tempt us to Lewd-
(Mi aefs and Vice, viz. by reprefentments that they make up-
ton the flage of zmagination , which invite our affections,
Mand allure, though they cannot compel, our wills. :
a) «This Itake tobe an zurelligtble account of temptations,
and alfo of Angelical encouragements ; and perhaps this is
Hthe only way of ¢mmediate influence that the Spirits of
: the


(as Seabees SB catia s  ence


Pawar


ne


i cease erent
alaiaig: POON ER 1 Mahe Saks tsees


W24 Conjfiderations
the other world have upon us. And by it, *tis eafie tog
give an account of Dreams both Monitory, and Tempera-4 Sil)
mental, Enthufiafms, Fanarick Ecfafies, andthe like, asq i)
I fuggelted. F
Thus, Sir, tothe FIRST. But the other pretences ji
alfo muft be examined.


SECT. XX.


OMT ACLES are ceaft, therefore the prefumed |} Ih
; actions of Witchcraft are tales, and illufions.| Wi
To make a due return to this, we maft confider aim:
great and dificult Problem, whichis, What ws areal Ati-Mi
vacle? And for anfwer to this weighty Queftion, I ff (,)
think, bey |


noel ie AT itis not the ftrangene/s, or unaccounta= Whi
blenefs of the thing done fimply , from whence § injy
we are to conclude a J4iracle. For then, weare fo to §y
account of all the A¢agnalia of Nature, and ‘all the |
Myfteries of thofe boneft Arts, which we do not under-
ftand.

Nor, (2.) is this the Criterion of a Atiracle, That
itis an action or event beyond all zatural powers; for
we are ignorant of the extent and bounds of Natures
Sphere, and poffibilcties: And if this were the charaéter
and effential mark, of a Miracle, we could not know what
was fo; except we could determine the extent of natural
caufalities, and fix their bounds, and be able to fay to Na-
ture, Hitherto canft thou go, and no further. And he that
makes this his meafure whereby to judge a Afiracle, is
himfelf the greateft Atiracle of knowledge, or immodefty.
Befides, though an effect may tranfcend really a'l the
powers Of meer nature, yetthere is a world of fpirits that
muft be taken into our account. Andas to them alfol


AA gents


about Witchcraft. i 1g


i “Agents fupernatural. There isno doubt but that evil
‘Wi) Sporéts Can make wonderful combinations of natural canfes,
“St and perhaps perform many things immediately which are
i) prodigious, and beyond the Jlongeft line of Naturé. but
Nitig) yet Thefe are not therefore to be called Miracles; for,
)\ THEY areS ACRED WONDERS, and fuppofe the
| POWER to be DIVINE. But how hhall the power
~ be known to be fo, when we fo little underftand the capa=
N} esties, and extent of the abilities of lower Agents? The
| Anfwer to this Queftion will difcover the Criterion of
wl A4tracles, which mult be fuppofed to have all the for-
wij Mer particulars; (They are unaccountable, beyond the po-
iil wers of meer Nature, and done by Agents {upernaturaly
wii and to thefe muft be fuperadded,
wi,|). (q.) Fhat they have peculsar circumftances that {peak
i them of a divine Oni ginal. Their mediate Authors de<
| clare them to be fo, and they are always perfons of Sim.
wit plecety, Truth, and Holinefs, void of Ambition, and all
ii fecular Defigns. They feldom ufec ceremonies, OF natu-
eilpral Applications, and yet furmount all the aétivities of
\\tatkvown Nature. They work thofe wonders, not to raife
itt admiration, or out of the vanity to be talkt of; but to
i feal and confirmfome Divine Dotirine, or Commiffion, in
 Iuiwhich the good and happinefs of the World is concern’.
Wl fay by fuch circumftances as thefe, wonderful A&ions
jwigare known to be froma Divine caufe; and that makes, and
wilaiftinguifhetha Miracle.
«@il) And thus I am prepared for an Anfwer to the Objethi-
‘yez2to which I make this brief return, That tho? WIT CH.
WES by their Confederate Spirit do thofe odd, and aftonifh-
‘(iljéag things we believe of them ; yet are they no Miracles,
.ithere being evidence enough from the badze/s of their
NLeves,and the ridiculous Ceremonies of their performances,
iiifrom their alice and mifchievous defigns, that the POWs
| WER that works, and the end for which thofe things are
iitdone, is not Divine, but Diabolical. And by fingular
Providence they are not ordinarily permitted,. as much
ylaS €O pretend to any new facred Di/coveries in matters of
| ij = Religion,


426 Confider ations


Religion, or to actany thing for Confirmation of dottrizalf
Impoftures.. So that whether AGiracles are ceafed , Oripi,
not, thefe are mone. And that fuch Atracles as are onlywii,,,
firange, and unaccountable performances, above the com-#


mon methods of Art or Nature, are not ceas’d, we haveq®y,;


alate great Evidence in the famous GRE.ATR AK 3h,
concerning whom it will not be impertinent to add the.
following Account which I had ina Letter from the Re- i.
verend Dr. R. Dean of C. a perfon of great Veracity, Hy.
and a Philofopher. This learned Gentleman then isa,’
pleafed thus to write. a


“ HE great difcourfe now at the Coffee-houfes, andl |
“ every where is about Mr. G. the famous Jrifb@, |
€¢ Stroker, concerning whom it is like you expect an ac-§_


“countfrom me. He undergoes various cenfures here,g


“fome take himto bea Conjurer, andfome, an Jmpoftor,#, ,


“‘ but others again adore him as an Apoftle. 1 confefs If.
“think the man is free from all defign, of avery agree-f°"


“ able Converfation, not addicted to any Vice, nor tow,’
“any Sect or Party; but is, I believe, a fincere Prote-4),
“ fant. 1 was three weeks together with him at my Lord, *


“ Conway’s, andfaw him, I think, lay his hands upon ai, iy


“thoufand perfons ; and really there is fomething in it@,”


“6 more than ordinary; but Iam convinc’d it is not mira-§'"l


“‘culows. Ihave feen Pains ftrangely fly before his hand ij"
* till he hath chafed them out of the Body, Dimne/s clea- 4,
“ved,and Deafnefs cured by his touch , Twenty perfons at §."\


“ feveral times in Fits of the Falling-Sicknefs, were ini,”
“*two or three minutes brought to themfelves, fo as tof."


‘tell where their pain was, and then he hath purfued


“Cit till he hath driven it out at fome extream part ; §,'%


“ Running Sores of the King’s-Evil dried up , and §,)”
“ Kernels brought to a Suppuration by his hand, grie- 9+
“‘eous Sores of many months date, in few days healed ; §)Vi
““Obftruttions and Stoppings removed, Cancerous Knots in Qi
“the Breaft diffolued, &c. i


But


about Witchcraft. 129


“ But yet I have many reafons to perfwade me, that
nothing of all this is Miraculous. He pretends not ta
give Teffimony to any Doétrine, the manner of his 0.
* peration {peaks it to be natural, the Cure feldom fuc-
* ceeds without reiterating touches, his Patients often +e.
W*lapfe, he fails frequently, he can do nothing where
4. there is any decay in Nature, and many Diftempers are
off NOt at all obedient to his rexch, So that, I confefs, I re-
i" fer all his vertue to his particular T emper and Complesi-
sin 0%, and I take his Spirits to be a kind of Elixir, and
 univerfal Ferment, and that he cures as (Dr. AZ. ex-
W"* prefleth it) by a fanative Contagion, Enthufiafm. Tri-
WS umphat. Sect. 58.
‘) This, Sir, was the Firft Account of the Flealer, Lhad
“ifrom that Reverend Perfon, which with me fignifies
“’#more than-the atteftations of multitudes of ordinary Re-
porters and no doubt but it will do fo likewife, with
“all that know that excellent man’s fingular Integrity and
“ Wfudgment. But befides this, upon my enquiry into fome
" 'pther particulars about this matter, I received thefe fur-
‘Sher Informations.
"| “* As for Mr. G. what opinion he hath of his own Gift,
! and how he came to know it? | anfwer, He hatha dif-
SW ferent apprehenfion of it from yours, and mine, and
," certainly believeth it to be an immedtateGift from Hea-
nF ven; and tis no wonder, for he is zo Phitofopher.
NES And you will wonder lefs, when you hear how he came
W "to know it, asI have often received it from his own
mouth. - About three or four years ago he had a
WF ftrong zmpulfe upon his [pirit, that continually purfied
i“ "f him whatever he was about, at his Bufinefs, or De
WMP e207, alone, or in company, that {pake to him by this
ily seaward fuggeftion [I have gvven thee the gift of curing
t if the Evil.] This Juggeftion was {fo tmportunate, that he
(iff complained to his Wife, That he thought he was
wilt haunted : She apprehended it as an extravagancy. of
wt Fancy, but he told her he believed there was more in
Wit, and wasrefolved totry. He did not long want


l


| a4
t


;) &&


.
|


f
¢


¢
1G


At yn]
AAR
Ak
r
5 |


3
Q >
8


toh hh be


GE a RC iS hth)
Os an ae he ee on ea
_ VE ewe Lid LL Vo
bs pa 3


aI
u


aii
128
“opportunity. There was a Neighbout of his gried)/\


“ voufly aMlicted with the Kings Evil, He ftroked herp!


¢ and the effect fucceeded. - And for about a Twelve:
“‘ month together he pretended to cure no other Diftemm


“Cher, but then the Ague being very rife in the Neigh® i!


“bourhood, the fame Jmpulfe after the fame mained
“fpoke within him, [J have given thee the Gift of cum i
“ring the Ague; | and meeting with perfons in thei
“ rts, and taking them by the hand, or laying hii
‘¢ hand upon their Brealts, the Ague left them. Aboug
¢¢ half a year after the accuftomed Jmpulfe became mors
“ general, and fuggefted tohim [J have given thee thi
“¢ Gift of Healing: | and then he attempted all Diteafe;
&¢ indifferently, And though he faw ftrange effects, ye
“he doubted whether the caufe were any vertue tha
“came from him, or the peoples fancy: To'convince
“him of his sscredulity, as he lay one night in bed, one
“Cof his Hands was ftruck dead, and the ufual Jmpulf'
“‘fugeefted to him to make trial of his vertue upon
© himfelf, which he did, ftroking it with his other hand
and then it immediately returned to its former livels:
“Cnefs. This was repeated two or three nights (or morn
**ings) together. |

““Thisis his Relation, and I believe there is fo much
““fincerity in the perfon, that he tells no more than
“¢ what he believesto be true. To fay that this Jmpalf
“*too was but a Refult of his Temper,and that it is but like
“* Dreams that are ufually according to mens Conftieuts
“Sons, doth not feem a probable account of the Phenome:
‘*xou. Perhaps fome may think it more likely, tha.
€¢ fome Genius who underftood the fanative vertue of hii
“* Complexion, and the readine/s of his Adind, and abilit:
“Cof his Body, to put it in execution, might give hing
“6 notice of that, which otherwife might have been fo
“ ever unknown to him, and fo the Gift of God had bees
“tono purpofe. |

This, Sir, ismy Learned and Reverend Friends Req
lation, and I judge his Reflections as ingenious as his Repory

& :


| _ about Witchcraft. 129


‘Wh is fincere. 1 fhall fay no more about it but thes, that
‘ib many of thofé matters of Fact, have Been, fince critically
‘Nie azefpetted and excamined by feveral fagaciows and deep
igi fearchers of the ROYAL SOCIET | >» whom we
Niu may fuppofe as unlikely to be deceived by a contrived Ins
ltl pofFure, as any perfons extant. ' | ,
‘i And now, Sir; tis fit that I relieve your patience .
‘ifand I fhall dofo, when I have faid, that You can abun-
iit, dantly prove, what I have thus attempted to defend :
, liAnd that among the many Obligations your Country hath
mgt you, for the Ws/dom and Diligence of your Endeavours
yn Min its fervice ; your Ingenious Induftry for the Deteéin |
Dikdlof thofe vile Praétifers, is not the lealt confiderable. To
«is, which Iwill add no more, but the Confe/fion who it is
cvththat hath given you all this trouble 3, which I know you
nare ready to pardon, to the refpect and good Lntentia
bat. prs of,


SIR,


L our Afilionsté and Obliged


Elonourer and Servant;


Pr ueapet a DUIS


deh


penta eas


‘Advertifement.


“Wo I:herioveacheth the Author's ingenious Confiderations
iL about Witchcraft. But underftanding by his Let-
ters and Papers, that he intended fomething further to en}
large thw Firft Part of his Saducif{mus Triumphatuss)


which concerns the Pollibility of the Extftence of Spiritsi| ,


Appatitions, and Witches , bat that he bas done nothingas
therein, being prevented by Death; Ithoughe it might prove!
not an unufeful Supplement, to tranflate moft of the two lafil)
Chapters of Dr. H. M. bis Enchiridion Metaphyficum)
into Englifh, and add it to this Firft Part, aa [aitable Ap-ay) \
pendage thereto, Which 1 as follows. a


| AN
APPENDAGE
| To this Firt PART.


Concerning the


FOSST BILITY


| as
APPARITIONS


AND


\
Le es
We B
Gy} oh
bate Poly) »
HAHN faa 1
iy jet
Hite a i
HI ii a anbig >
Ae €
eS 1h eg .
i ‘
ri 1a :
‘aaa be)
Wa
4 Pa *
uae ee ba)
@ ! 4
a Br
| s
; Witte
; Westnet Fe)
aD AL) 4
j
ie) \"
{hf
{
|


Containing


lhe Eafie, True, and Genuine N O TION, La
| and confiftent Explication of the Nature a


ISPIRIT;


‘ne POSSIBILITY of the EXISTENCE
| SPIRITS, APPARITIONS, and .
WITCHCRAFT is further confirmed.


i


' aieeaeiian il | Hi t

| i) a

| LONDON, Ge
|| WANES


) Printed for 5. Lownds, MDC LXXXVIII.


THE
Eafie, True, and Genuine


NOTI


| And Confiftent


EXPLICATION


Of the NATURE of a


SPI


|The Opinions of the NULLIBISTS and HOLEN-
MERIANS propofed.


Hat we may explicate the Effence or Notion of
| Incorporeal Beings or Spirits, with the greater
H fatisfaction and fuccefs,-we are firft to remove
\two valt Mounds of Darknefs, wherewith the ignorance
lof fome hath encumbred and obf{cured their nature.

| And the firft is of thofe, who though they readily ac-
(knowledge there are fuch things as Jncorporeal Beings or


t


Spirits, yet do very peremptorily contend that they are


70 where inthe whole World. Which opinion, though
jjat the very firft fight it an very ridiculous, eee
| : AUUINY


Pi]


i} +


| ’


eee er te a 1 aS Past Spee tens oe m9
ate IEE, ne) Bene Anipe aise tees at : a


Seay


Boos


134 The true Notion of a Spirit.
{tiffly held by the maintainers of it, and that not with.}) ji
out fome Faftuofity and Supercilioufnefs , or at leaf} jp
fome more fly and tacite contempt of fuch Philofopher 7 jw
as holdthe contrary, as of men lefs intellectual and toe )ju
too much indulging to their Imagination. Thofe othe} yt
therefore becaufe they fo boldly affirm that a Sparse iif |ys
Nullibi, that is to fay, Nowhere, have defervedly purq | {i
chafed to themfelves the Name or Title of Nadsbifts. — |) jx
The other Mound of Darknefs laid upon the naturg) {i
of a Spirit, is by thofe who willingly indeed acknowy) «1
ledge that Spirits are fomewhere, but add further, Thaq)¢
they arenotonly entirely or totally in their whole UR) {yi
or place, Cin the moft general fence of the word) bug) ijn
are totally in every part or point thereof, and defcribd |x,
the peculiar nature of a Spsrit to be fuch, that it muap) jy!
be Torus in toto & totus incqualibet fui parte. Which thereqiy
fore the Greeks would fitly and briefly call éotay cacyyepift |
Lan Effence that 1s all of tt in each part] and this preity
priety thereof GH dcmydrop sory ri Gacrpéperay) thy li,
Holenmeri{m of Incorporeal Beings. Whence alfothetp)y,i,
other Philofophers diametrically oppofite to the formers),
may molt fignificantly and compendioufly be called A2cHMiy,)


lenmerians.


_—_a—


rfp wig Oiugl Cote &


That Cartefius 7 the Prince of the Nullibifts, and wheres} 5
chiefly confifts the force of their Opinion. a


oe HE Opinions of both which kind of Philofopherp,,!>
having fufficiently explained, we will now praq,,,
pofe and confute the Reafons of each of them; and firp,
of the Nulibifts. Of whom the chief Authour anm),).”
Leader feems to have been that pleafant Wit Renatus Aq)
Cartes, who by his jocular Aeraphyfical Meditations has tp.“
luxated and diftorted the rational Faculties of fome othe},


wife fober and quick-witted perfons, but in this poit}),
| i)


The true Notion of a Spirit. 135
by reafon of their over-great admiration of Des Cartes
not fufficiently cautious, that deceived , patty by his
counterfeit and preftigious fubtilty , and partly by his
Authority, have perfwaded themfelves that fuch things
were moft true and clear to them; which had they not
wi % been blinded with thefe prejudices, they could nevew
“|? have thought to have been fo much as poffible. And fo
“\ | they having been fo induftrioufly taught, and diligently
‘lili? inftructed by him, how they might not be impofed up-
if on, no not by the molt powerful and moft ili-minded
1 fallacious Deity, have heedlefly, by not fufficiently
‘Wl ftanding upon their guard, been deceived and illuded bi
(i) (if ameer man, but of a pleafant and abundantly-cunning
. and abftrufe Genius; as fhall clearly appear after we
‘tu ave fearched and examined the reafons of this Opinion
init OF the Nullzbifts to the very bottom.
viet - The — force whereof is comprifed in thefe three
ii Axioms, The firft, That whatfoever thinks is Immaterial,
wi) and fo onthe contrary. Thefecond, That whatever zs
ui extended 1s Material. Thethird, That whatever is unex=
‘vill tended is Nowhere. To which third I hall add this
i fourth, as a neceflary and manifeft Confectary thereof,
I wiz. That whatfoever ts fomewhere is extended. Which
| the Nullsbifts of themfelves will eafily grant me to be
~~ moft true. Otherwife they could not ferioufly contend
} for their Opinion, whereby they affirm Spirits to be
| nowhere, but would be found to doit only by way of an
it oblique'and clofe derifion of their Exiftence, faying in-
deed they exif, but then again hiddenly and cunningly
| denying it, by affirming they are zowhere, Wherefore
| doubtlefly they affirm them to be xowhere, if they are in
| good earneft,, for this reafon only, for fear they grant-
| ing them to be fomewhere, it would be prefently extor-
i ted from them, even according to their own Principles,
| that they are extended, as whatever is extended is Mate-
| rial, according to their fecond Axiome. It is therefore
if manifeft that we both agree in this, that whatever Real
attr ing there is that 1s fomewhere, is alfo extended.
L4 SECT


ba Sage op


- :
<= IAS oy a
SNE SS,
aaa nat EE cK aie


336 The true Notion of 4 Spirit.


| SECT. II.
| The Sopbiftical weaknefs of that reafoning of the Nullibifts,, sa


who, becaufe we can concerve Cogitation without concet=


ving in the mean while Matter, conclude, That whatfo= || (si


ever thinks s Immaterial.


V ITH which truth notwithftanding we being) jit
WY VY furnifhed and fupported, I doubt nog but wes) ji
fhall with eafe quite overthrow and utterly root out thisa| jij
opinion of the Nallbifs, But that their levity andl),


credulity may more manifeftly appear, let us examineg) {ir
the Principles of this Opinion by Parts, and confiderg) ji


how well they make good each member. :
The firft is, Whatever thinks ts Immaterial, and on thed ji


contrary. The converfion of this Axiome I will noti)\s»
examine, becaufe it makes little to the prefent purpofe.) x.


I will only note by thebye, that I doubt not but it. may
be falfe, although I eafily grant the Axiome it felif)
to betrue. But it is this new Method of demonftratingy)”
it I call into queftion, which from -hence, that we can}
conceive Cogitation, in the mean time not conceivingy
Matter, concludes that Whatever thinks 1s Immaterial)»,


Now that we can conceive Cogitation without conceiving)


Matter, they fay is manifeftfrom hence, That although},
one fhould fuppofe there were no Body in the Univerfe.})y \:
and fhould net flinch from that pofition, yet notwith-}) | ,
ftanding he would not ceafe to be certain, that there was}


Res cogitans , a thinking: Being, inthe world, he findingy) mi
himfelf to‘be fuch. . But I further add, though he fhouleg j:,
fappofe there was no Immaterial Being in nature (nop »,,


indeed A/aiervial ) and fhould not flirich from that po
tion, yet he would: not ceafe to be certain that there wa);


athinking Being; (no not if he fhould fuppofe himfely ,,”


not to be a thinking Being ) becaufe he can fuppofe ‘nowy,


thing without Cogitation.. Which ] thought worth thi, °


while to note by the bye, that the great levity of |;


The true Notion of a Spirit) 4 37
the Nullibiffs might hence more clearly appear.
) ~ But yetI add further,thatfuch isthe nature of the Mind
)} of Man, that it is like the Eye, better fitted to contem-
lili’ plate other things than it felf ; and that therefore ’tis no
‘tnmil) wonder that thinking nothing of its own Effence, it
iii) does fixedly enough and intently confider in the mean
| time and contemplate all other things, yea, thofe very
| things with which fhe has the neareft affinity, and yer
ii) without any reflection that her felf is of the like nature.
ili Whence it may eafily come to pafs, when fhe is fo whol-
‘wll ly taken up in contemplating other things, without any
jit xeileétion upon her felf, that either carelefly fhe may con-
fider her felf in general as a meer thinking Being, without
any other Attribute, or elfe by refolvednefs afterwards,
and by a force on purpofe offered to her own faculties.
But that this reafoning is wonderfully weak and trifling
as tothe proving of the Mind of Man to be nothing
elfe, that isto fay, to have no other Ateribures, but
mere Cogstation, there is none that does not difcern.


<— =


eS <<
SEES
——,


eT wer ee. ore


= —— 7 £
— : —


=
= =


SECT. Iv.


The true Method that ought to be taken for the proving
that MATTER cannot think.


oo


Sse =


——s


ase eas


ea


Aftly , lf Cartefius with his Nullibiffs would have
walt dealt bona fide, they ought to have omitted all thofe
“wi ambagious windings and Meanders of feigned Ab/tratti-
on, and with a direct ftroke to have faln upon the thing
it felf, and fo to have fifted A4atter, and fearched the
nature of Cogitation, that they might thence have evi-
dently demonftrated that there was fome infeparable At-
vi@ tribute in Adatter that is repugnant to the Cogitative fa-
gh Culty, or in Cogitation that is repugnant to Matter.
| But out of the meer diverfity of Idea’s or Notions of
jp any Attributes, to collec their feparability or real di-
vq dtinction, yea their contrariety and repugnancy, i ae:

a foully


=


138 ‘The true Notion of a Spirit.

foully to violate the indifpenfible Laws of Logick, and
to confound Diverfa with Oppofita, and make them all
one. Which miftake to them that underftand Logick
muft needs appear very courfe and abfurd.

But that the weaknefs and vacillancy of this Method
may yet more clearly appear, let us fuppofe that which
‘yet Philofophers of no mean name ferioufly ftand for and
aflert, viz. That Cogstative fubftance is either Material
or Immaterial; does it not apparently follow thence,
‘that a thinking fabftance may be precifely conceived with-
out the conception of A4atter, as Matter without the
conception of Cogitation, when notwithftanding in one
of the members of this diftribution they are joined fuf-
ficiently elofe together ?


How can therefore this new fangled Method of Carte. Hin


fis convince us that this Suppofition is falfe, and that
the diftribution is illegitimate? Can it from thence,
that A4atter may be conceived without Cogitation, and
Cogitation without Matter ? The firft all grant, and the
‘other the diftribution it felf fuppofes ; and yet continues |

fufficiently firm and fure. ‘Therefore it is very evi- |

dent, that there isa neceffity of our having recourfe to fi,
the known and ratified Laws of Logick, which many })1
Ages before this new upftart Method of Des Cartes ap-


peared, were eftablifhed and approved by the common ff liz
fuffrage of Mankind, Which teach us that in every le- 9) (uf
gitimate diftribution the parts ought confentire cum toto, \y lh
‘e& diffentire inter fe, to agree with the Whole, but dif § x)


apree one with another. Now in this Diftribution that


they do fufficiently difagree, itis very manifeft. Itre- f tn,
mains only to be proved, that one of the parts, namely ff }.
that which fuppofes that a Cogitative fubftance may be § hy
Material, is repugnant to the nature of the Whole. This F tii,


is that clear, folid and manifeft way or method according J


to the known Laws of Logick; but that new way, a kind B hs,
of Sophiftry and pleafant mode of trifling and prevarie # iy


cating.


SECT.M


The true Notion of aSpirit. 39
SECT. V.


That all things are in fome fort extended, demonftrated


out of the Corollary of the third Principle of the Nul-
libifts, :


f S for the fecond Axiome or Principle, viz. That

whatfoever 1s extended is Material: for the evinciy z
the falfity thereof, there want no new Arguments, if
one have but recourfe to the Sixth, Seventh, and Ei ghth
Chapters of Enchiridium Metaphyficum, where, by iin-
an{werable reafonings it is demonftrated, That there is
a certain Immaterial and Immoveable Extenfum ditting
from the Moveable Matter. But however, out of the
Confectary of their third Principle, we thall prove at
once, that all Spirits are extended as being fomewhere,
i the wild and ridiculous Opinion of the Nuli-
ifs.

Whofe third Principle, and out of which immedi.
ately and precifely they conclude Spirits to be no where,
is, Whatfoever ts unextended, is no where. Which ve.
ry willingly grant ; but on this condition, that they on
the other fide concede (and I doubt not but they will)
That what/oever is fomewhere is alfo extended , from which
Confectary I will evince with Mathematical certainty,
That God and our Soul,and all other Immaterial Bein £5,
are in fome fort extended: For the Nullsbifts themfelves
acknowledge and aflert, that the Operations wherewith
the Soul acts on the Body, are in the Body ; and that
Power or Divine Vertue wherewith God aéts on the
Matter and moves it, is prefent in every part of the
Matter. Whence it is eafily gathered, That the Ope-
ration of the Soul and the moving Power of God is
fomewhere, wiz. in the Body, andinthe Afater. But
the Operation of the Soul wherewith it acts on the Body
and the Soul it felf, and the Divine Power wherewith
God moves the AZatter and God limfelf, are together, nor


Cah


40 The true Notion of a Spirit.

can fo much as be imagined feparate one from the other 5
namely , the Operation fromthe Soul, and the Power
from God. Wherefore if the Operation of the Soul is
fomewhere, the Soul is fomewhere, vz. there where
the Operation, And if the Power of God be fome-
where, God is fomewhere, namely, there where the
Divine Power is; Hein every part of the 4Zatter, the
Sout in the humane Body. Whofoever can deny this,
by the fame reafon he may deny that common Notion in
Mathematicks, Quantities that are fingly equal to one
third, are equal to one another.


SEG: Was


The apert confe(fion of the N ullibifts thatthe ESSENCE
of a Spirit ws where its O PERATION 1; and how
ghey. contradict themfelves, and are forced to acknowledge
a Spirit extended.


. A D verily that which we contend for, the Nall-
LX bijts feem apertly to aflert, even in their own ex-
prefs words, as it is evident in Lambertus Velthufius in
his De Initcis Prime Philofophie in the Chapter De Ubi.
Who though he does manifeftly affirm that God and


the Mind of Man by their Operations, are inevery part, | hi


or fome one part of the Matter, and that in that fence,
namely, in refpect of their Operations, the Sou may be ff,
truly faid to be fomewhere , God everywhere, as if that § ..’
were the only mode of their prefence : yet he does ex= §
prefly grant, that the Effence is no where feparate from
that whereby God, or a Created Spirit is faid to be, the |
one everywhere, the other fomewhere , that no man may
conceit the Effence of God to be where the reft of his
‘Attributes are not. That the Effence of God is in Hea-


ven, but that his Vertwe diffufes it felf beyond Heaven, ps

No, by no means, faith he, Wherefoever God’s Power F

or Operation is, there is the Nature of God; forafmuch F
; pasha ae anh ae Ber asia


The true Notion of a Spirit. v4t
as God is a Subftance devoid of all compofition. Thus
far Velthufius, Whence laffume, But the Power or Ope-
vation Of Godis in or prefent to the Afstter > Therefore
the Effence of God is in or prefent to the Master, and is
there where the Matter is, and therefore fomewhere. Can
there be any deduction or illation more clofe and cohe-
rent with the Premifles ? :

And yet that other moft devoted follower of the Cur
tefian Philofophy, Ludovicus de la Forge, cannot abftain
from the offering us the fame advantage of arguing, or
rather from the inferring the fame conclufion with us in
his Treatife De Mente Humana, Chap, 12. where occur
thefe words: Laftly, whenI fay that God is prefent ta
all things by his Ommipotency, (and confequently to alf
the parts of the Matter) I do not deny but that alfo by.
his Effence or Subftance he is prefent to them: For aif
thofe things in God are one and the fame.

Doft thou hear, my Nullibif?, what one of the chiefefk
of thyCondifciples and moft religious Symmyfts of thar
{tupendious fecret of Nuilibifmn plainly profefles, name-
dy, that God, is prefent to all the parts of AZarter by his
Effence alfo, or Subjtance ? And yet you in the mean
while blufh not to aflert, that neither God, nor any crea-
ted Spirit is any where ; than which nothing more con-
tradictious can be fpoke or thought, or more abhorring
from all reafon. Wherefore whenas the Wuilktbifts come
fo near to thetruth, it feems impoflible they fhould, fo
all of 2 fudden, ftart from it, unlefs they were blinded
with a fuperftitious admiration of Des Cartes his Meta-
phyficks, and were deluded, effafcinated and befooled
with his jocular Subtilty and preftigious Abftractions
there: For who in his right wits can acknowledge that
a Sport by its Effence may be prefent to Matter, and yer
be #o where, unlefs the Matter were nowhere alfo? And.
that 4 Spitit may penetrate, poffefs, and aduate fome
determinate Body, and yet not be in that Body? In
ete if it be, it is plainly neceflary i¢ be fome-
witere.


142 ‘The true Notion of a Spirit. |


And yet the fame Ludovicus de laForge does manifeltly
affert,that the Body is thus pofleft & actuated by theSoul,
in his Preface to his Treatife de AZente Humana, whilehe
declares the Opinion of AZarfilius Ficinus concerning the
manner how the Soul actuates the Body in AZarfilius his
own words, and does of his own accord aflent to his
Opinion. What therefore do thefe Forms to the Body
when they communicate to it their Efe? They through-
ly penetrate it with their Effence, they bequeath the
Vertue of their Effence to. it. But now whereas the Effe is
deduced from the Effence, and the Operation flows from
the Vertue, by. conjoining the Effence they impart the
Effe, by bequeathing the Vertue they communicate the
Operations , fo that out of the congrefs of Soul and Body,
there is.made one Animal Effe, one Operation. Thus he.
‘The Soul with her Effence penetrates and pervades the
whole Body, and yet isnot where the Body is, but no
where in the Univerfe !

With what manifeft repugnancy therefore to their o2
ther Affertions the Nudibifts hold this ridiculous Conclu-
fion, we have fufficiently feen, and how weak their
chiefeft prop is, That whatever u Extended 1s Material »
which is not only confuted by irrefragable Arguments,
Chap..6, 7. and 8, Enchirid. Metaphyf. but we have here
alfo , by fo clearly proving that all Spirits are Jome-
where, utterly fubverted it, even from that very Con-
ceflion or Opinion of the Waullibifts themfelves, who
concede or aver , that whatfoever uw fomewhere 1 extena
ded. Which Spirits are and yet are not Adaterial. =


The true Notion of a Spirit, 142


SECT. Vil.


‘ Lhe more light reafonings of the Nullibifts whereby they
| would confirm their Opinion. The firft of which is, Thae
th | "the Sout thinks of thofe things which are nowhere.


y BL we fhall not pafs by their more flight reafon-
* | ings in fo great a matter, or rather fo monftrous.
| Of which the firft is, That the Mind of Man thinks of
“li fuch things as are nowhere, nor have any relation to
“it place, no not fo much as to Logical place or Ubi. Of
"| Which fort are many truths as well AZoral as Theological


MN


>: tand Logical, which being of fuch a nature that they are
"| #owhere, the Mind of Man which conceives them is ne-
» Weeflarily nowhere alfo: But how crazily and inconfe-
"i quently they collect that the humane Soul is nowhere, for
“that it thinks of thofe things that are nowhere, may be
|apparent to any one from hence » and efpecially to the
“, |Avulibifts themfelves ; becaufe from ‘the fame reafon it
iN would follow that the A4ind of Man is Somewhere, becaufe
Mfometimes, if not always in a manner, it thinks of thofe
milithings which are fomewhere, as all Adaterial things are.
it |W hich yet they dare not grant, becaufe it would plainly
(i follow from thence,according to their Doctrine,that the
Mind or Soul of Man were extended, and fo would become
i Ncorporeal and devoid of all Cogitation. But befides,
HT Thefe things which they fay are xowhere, namely, cer-
wlitain Moral, Logical, and Theological Truths, are really
lifomewhere, viz. in the Soul it felf which conceives them :
libut the Soul is in the Body , as we proved above.
Whence it is manifelt that the Soul and thofe Truths
which fhe conceives are as well fomewhere as the Body it
Welf. I grant that fome Truths as they are Reprefentati-

.« jos, neither refpect Time nor Place in whatever fence.
»'iBut as they are Operatious, and therefore Afodes of fome
WSubjett ot Subftance, they cannot be otherwife conceived
Khan in fome fubftance. And forafmuch as there is no

| aes fubftance

'
|


144


The trué Notion of a Spirits |
fabftance which has not fome amplitude, they are ina }}
fab{tance which is in fomefort.extended , and fo by rea- |
fon of their Subjeé they are neceffarily conceived to be


{omewhere, becaufe a Afede is infeparable from a Sub § 4),


ett: a 4 ees a , ASS Str
. Nor am 1 at all moved with that giddy and rafhttergi- #5
werfation which fome betake themfelves to here, whoiy
fay we do not wellin diftinguifhhing betwixt Cogitatiop } rm)
({uch as ate all conceived verities) and the Subjtance of} |
the Soul cogitating : For cogitation it felf is the very Saba) jy
france of the Soul, as Extenfion is of Matter 5 and thaty) jiy
therefore the Soul is as well wowhere as any Cogitationsy) \y |
which refpects neither time nor place, would be, if it) ;,;,
were found in no Subject. But here the Nullsbifts,, who) y..,
would thus efcape, do not obferve, that while they ace} ;,,
knowledge the Subjtance of the Soul to be Cogstationgh ty
they therewithal acknowledge the Soul to have a Sub- { Asif
ftance, whence it is neceflary it have fome amplitude.) jy,
And befides, This Affertion whereby they aflert Cogi | bi
tation to be the very fubftance of the Soul, is manifeftlyg) ;,
falfe. For many Operations of the Soul, are, as theyg
fpeak, fpecifically different; Which therefore fucceed-#
ing one after another, will be fo many Subftances /pecé-f
fically different. And fo the Soul of Socrares will not al-§
ways be the fame /pecifical Soul, and much lefs the fameg
numerical, “han which what can be imagined more de-#
lirant, and more remote from common fenfe? ;
To which you may add, That the Soul of man is <4),
permanent Being, but her Cogitations in a flux or fuccefii),
on; How then can the very fubftance of the Soul be it#y,’:
{ucceflive Operations? And when the Subftance of thi)’
Soul does fo perpetually ceafe or perifh, what I befeecl§,,
you will become of Memory? From whence itis mani;
feltly evident, that there is a certain permanent Subftanc#),
of the Soul, as much diftiné or different from her fucy,
ceeding Cogitations, as the Matter it {elf is from its fueg °""
ecflive figures and motions, tad


SEC TE h


u
herd
Hoy
a)
anc ves
ph

yl
Ohi
iA


: \

74 |
a
}


VAL}
yi
4 i||


Lhe true Notion of a Spirit. 149


SECT. Vil:


"| The fecond reafon of the N ullibilts, viz. That COG In
inst  L ALTLON w cafily conceived withons EXTEN: ;


|
| HE. fecond Reafon is fomewhat co-incident with
i) fome of thofe we have already examined; but it is
“YM briéfly propofed by them thus; There can be noe nx ep-
i) ¢ion, no not of a Logical Place, or Ubi, without Exten= i
si) fiom, But Cogztation is eafily conceived without coi cel-
it ving any Extenfion: W herefore the Mind cogitating, |
ji" exempt from all Extenfion, is exempt alfo from all Lo-
NI) ality whether. Phyfical or Logical; and is {0 loofened
ju) From it, that ithasno relation nor applicabslity thereto:
my AS 1f thofe things had no relation nor aj plicability to


| 1 p
itty Other certain things without which they might be cons
IU ceived, wis Bay bt orice heed
alts The weaknefs of this argumentation is eafily depre-
‘Mit ended from hence, That the Lntenfene/s of heat.or mo-
i tion is confidered. without any re{pect toits esxtenfion, Hy,
im) and yet it is referred to an extended Subject, viz, Toa Hi
it Bullet fhot, or red hot Iron. And though in intent and
| defixed thoughts. upon fome either difficult or pleafing
ott Object, we do net.at all obierve how the time paffeth,
| Hor take the flighteft notice of it, nothing hinders not-
Sf withftanding but thofe Cogitations may be applied to
gi time, and it be rightly faid, that about fix a Clock,
itt! fuppofe, inthe Morning they began, and continued till
0H Eleven; and in like manner the place may be defined
iil where they were conceived, viz. within the Walls of
, i] Sach an ones Study, although perhaps. all that time this
wii fo fixt Contemplator did not take notice whether he
yl Was in his Study, or in the Fields.
i]. And to {peak out the matter at once, From the prec


CCl=
ijion of our thoughts to infer the real precifion or fepar au
jt7on of the things themfelves, isa very putid and pucrile
I. K Sophifm :


146 ‘The true Notion of a Spirit. ss


Sophifin ; and {till the more enormous and wild, tocol- fj {i


lect alfo thence, that they have no relation or applica- P i
bility one toanother. For we may have a clear and di- if jy
Bhi


{tinct apprebenfion of a thing which may be connected }

with another by an effential Tye, that Tye being not.) ,
taken notice of, Cand much more when they are con-4 jj
nected only with a cércumftantial one) but not a full andl) jy,


fatinn


adequate apprehenfion, and fuch as fees through and pe-4) 1,
netratés all the degrees of its Eflence with their proper—4) j.
Ailhny


Vo ties; Which unlefs a man reach to, he cannot rightlyy)
ie judge of the real feparability of any nature from other) ;\;:
natures.

From whence it appears how foully Curvefins has ime) ,,
pofed, if not upon himfelf, at leat upon others, wheny
trom this mental precifion of Cogitation from Extenfion.))
he defined'a Spirit (fuch as the humane Soul) by Cogs4) 5),
ration only, Matter by Extenfion, and divided all Sub-4) ,:.:
lance into Cogitant and Extended, as into their firft fpe-}) ,.,


A cies or kinds. Which diftribution notwithftanding 1:))\,,,.

Teh as abfonous and abfurd, as if he had diftributed Amma Baar.
into Senfitiveand Rational. Whenas all Subftance is ex-\)4,.,
sinded-as well as all Animals fenfitive. But he fixed hit}...
| i Animadverfion upon the /pecifick, nature of the humane).
aa Soul; the Gemerical nature thereof, either on purpolt i
a. or by inadvertency, being not confidered nor taken now ;,.
tice of by him, as hath been noted in Enchiridion Ethinyy)


cum, lib. 3. cap. 4- fect. 3. i


SECT. IX. ai,
i Dh f


The third and laft Reafon of the Nullibifts, viz. That thy.
Mind is confcious to her felf, that thers nowhere, unley Bi
fhe be difturbed or jogged by the Body, he


MW
TT


@ es E third and laft Reafon, which is the moft ingepp


 S nious of them all, occurs in Lambertus Velehufing,.
Viz, Thatit-isa truth which God has infofed into th,
: ala Se See i et * a


Mi t ;


The true Notion of a Spirit. LAF


Mind it felf, That fhe is nowhere, becaufe we know by

| experience that we cannoé tell from our fpiritual Opera-
st tions where the Mind is. And for that we kaow her to
oat De if Our Body, that we only perceive from the Ope»

| rations of Senfe and Imagination | which without the

‘| Body, or the motion of the Body, the Mind caritior pers
ze form. The fence whereof, if | guefs right, is this
| That the Mind by a certain internal fenfe is confcious to
“) herfelf that the is notpbere, wnlcfs fhe be now and then
tM) .difturbed by the motions or joggings of the Body;
M08? which is, as I faid, an ingenious prefage, but not true:

| For it is one thing to. perceive herfelf to be nowhere,
another not to perceive herfelf to be fomewhere. For
fhe may not perceive herfelf to be fomewhere, though
the be fomewhere, as fhe may not take notice of her own
IM Tnaividuality, or namerical Diftinétion , from all other
hel minds, although the be one Numerical or Individual
‘i mind diftinét from the reft: For, as I intimated a-
nuh! bove, fuch is the nature of the mind of Man, that like
{0 the Eye, it is better fitted for the contemplating all o-
vst] ther things, than for contemplating itfelf. And that
itt indeed which is made for the clearly and fincerely fei ng
hid Other things, ought to have nothing of it felf actually
1 yn perceptible in it, whichit might mingle with the per-
wail Ception of thofe other things. From whence the Mind
of Man is not to have any ftable and fixt fenfe of its own
| Effence ; and fuch as it cannot eafily lay afide upon oc-
}cafion: And therefore it is no wonder, whenas the
} Mind of Man can put off the fenfe and confcioufiefs to
} it felf of its own Effence and Individuality, that it can
| put off alfo therewith the fenfe of its being fomewhere,
quill OF NOt perceive it, whenas it does not perceive its own

dN Effence and Monieoeg (of which Hic & Nupe are the

ih 7

|


| known Characters :) d the chief Objects of che Mind
| are Univerfals.

| Butasthe Mind, although it perceives not its Indivda
ih Aealsvy, yet can by reafon prove to herfelf that he ig
» Tome one Namtri¢al, ox Individual Mind, fo the can by
, De K 2 the


448 The true Notion of a Spirit.

the fame means, although fhe by inward fenfe perceives

not where fhe is, evince notwithftanding that fhe is
fomewhere, from the general account of things, which
have that of their own nature, that they are extended,
fingular, and fomewhere. And befdes , Velthufius him- }
felf does plainly grant, that from the Operations of fj wi
Senfe and Imagination, we know our Mind to be in our Pi:
Body. How then can we be ignorant that fhe is fome-
where, wnlefs the Body itfelf be wowbere ¢


S.E.C T.- X,
‘An Appeal to the internal fenfe of the Adind, if {he be not iis
environed with a certain infinite Extenfion, together ii


with an excitation of the Nullibift out of bis Dream, by
the found of Trumpeters furrounding him.


me-H E Reafons of the Wullibifts whereby they endea+ D bis


| = vour to maintain their Opinion, are fufficrently yj,
enervated and fubverted. Nor have we need of anypy
Arguments to eftablifh the contrary Doctrine. _ 1 willy,
only defire by the bye, that he that thinks his Ad@ind 1sqy, ,
nowhere, would make trial of his faculty of Thinking shin
and when he has abftracted himfelf from all thought orp, .
fenfe of his Body, and fixed his Adind only on an Idea off...
an indefinite or znfinite Extenfion, and alfo perceives him-qi,y,:
felf to be fome particular cogirant Being, let him makeqy,
trial, I fay, whether he can any way avoid it, but hey,’
muft at the fame time perceive that he i fornia ‘e
namely, within this aamenfe Extenfion , and that he 1sg,
environ’d round about with it... Verily, I muft ingenu-f
oufly confefs, that I cannot conceive otherwife, and that®
Tcannot but conceive an Idea of a certain Extenfien inf
finite and immoveable , and of neceffary and attual Ext-§
(tence: Which I moft clearly deprehend, not to haveg
been drawn in by the outward fenfe, but to be innate andy
efléntially inherent inthe Mind is {elf and fo to be the)
Stk has genuiney


angie
WHE


}


The tye Notion of a Spirit. 149
genuine abject not of Imagination, but of Intellect - and
that it is but perverfly andwithout all judgment de-
termined by the Mwlkbifts, or Cartefians, thik whatever
is extended, is alfo guvfasty 2, OF the Objett of Imag
nation 4 Whep notwith{tanding there is nothing émags-
nable, or the Object of Imagination, which j is not fenfi-
ble: For all Phantafms are drawn froin the Senfes. But
this infinite Extenfion has no more to do with thir igs that
are fenfible and fall under Imaginatior 2, than that. ‘which
is moft Incorporeal. But of this haply it will be more
porns to {peak.elfewhere.

In the mean time Iwill fubjoin only one Argument,

whereby I may manifeftly evince, that the Mind of Man
is fomewhere, and then I will betake my felf to the dif-
culling of the Opinion of the Molenmerians. Briefly
therefore let usfuppofe fome one environed with a Ring
of Trumpeters, and that they all at the fame time
found their Trumpets. Let us now fee ifthe circum-
fonant clangor of thofe furrounding ¢ Trumpets founding
from all fides will awake thefe Nulibifts out of their Le-


(a) thargick Dream. And let us fappofe, which they will
il willingly concede, that the Conarion, or Glandula Pinca.


‘lis, A, is the feat of the common fenfe , to which at
mn] length all the motions from external Objects arriye,


) Nor is it any matter whether it be this Conarion, or
ivf fome other part of the Brain, or of what is contained i in
‘if 2he Brain: But let the Cenarion, at leaft for this bout,
, wi) fapply the place of that matter which is the common
i if Senforinm of the Soul.
i)


150 The true Notion of a Spirit.


Fig. Ip D


And whenas it #s fuppofed to be furrounded with Eight
Trampeters, let there be Eight Lines drawn from them,


namely, from B,C,D,E,F,G,H,1; I fay, that the g


clangour or found of every Trumpet is carried from the
Ring of the Trumpeters to the extream part of every


one of thofe Lines, and all thofe founds are heard as g”
coming from the Ring B, C,D,E, F,G,H, 1, and per- gl
ceived in the Conarion A and that the perception is ing"
that part to which all the Lines of motion, as toa come Mili
mon Centre, do concur; and therefore the extreami'

parts of them, and the perceptions of the Clangours or I
Sounds, are in the middle of the Ring of Trumpeters,g “i


viz. where the Conarion is: Wherefore the Perctpient®


it felf, namely the Soul, is in the midft of this Ring asa Ti


well as the Covarion, andtherefore is fomewhere. Af-


furedly he that denies that he conceives the force of this |
Demonitration, and acknowledges that the Perceptzom® wii


indeed is at the extréam parts of the faid Lines, and ing}!
the


The true Notion of a Spirit. 151
the middle of the Ring of Trumpeters, but contends in
the mean time that the J4zd her felf is not there, for-
afmuch as fhe is zowhere ; this man certainly is either de-
lirant and crazed, or elfe plays tricks, and flimly and
obliquely infinuates, that the perception which is made
in the Conarion is to be attributed to the. Conariax itfelf ;
and that the And, fo far as it is conceived to be an


Incorporeal Subftance , is to be exterminated out of the
Univerfe, asan ufelefs Figment and Chimera.


§ BG Tu :XP.


Lhe Explication of the Opinion of the Holenmerians, toge-
ther with their Two Reafons thereof propofed.


ND thus much of the Opinion of the Avullsbifts.
A. Let us now examine the Opinion of the Holenme-
yians, whofe Explication is thus: Let there be what
Body you pleafe, fuppofe C,


D, E, which the SouloraSpi- —, D

rit may poflefs and penetrate. Fig.2 <W>.

The Holenmerians affirm, that = x “==
the whole Soul or Spirit does - B® o\
occupy and poffefs the whole cE. A® NE
Body C,D,E, by its Effence; e* e \\
and that it isalfo wholly or all So eo BP


of it in every part or point of
the faid Body C,D,E, as in
A, for Example, and in B, and the reft of the leaf
parts or points of it. Thisisa brief and clear Explica-
tion of their Opinion.

But the Reafons that induce them to embrace it, and
fo ftifdy to maintain it, are thefe two only, or at leaft
chiefly, as much as re{pects the Holenmerifim of Spirits.
The firft is, That. whereas they grant that the whole
Soul does pervade and poffefs the whole Body, they
thought it would thence follow that the Soul would be

K 4 divifible,


752 . The true Notion of a Spirit:


divifible, unlefs they fhould correct again this Affertion’
of theirs, by faying, that it was yet fo in the whole Bo-
dy, that it was totally, in the mean time, in every part
thereof: For thus they thought themfelves fore, that
the Soul could not thence be argued in any fort divifible,
or corporeal, but {till remain purely: /piritual.

Their other reafon is, That from ence it might’ be:
eafily underftood, how the Soul being in the whole Bo-
dy C,D,E, whatever happens to itin C,or B; it pre-
fently perceivesitin A; Becaufe the whole Soul being
perfectly and entirely, as well in C, or B, as in A, itis
neceflary that after what fafhionfoever C or B is affect-
ed, A fhould be affected after the fame manner ; foraf-
imuch as it is entirely and perfectly one and the fame
thing, vz. the whole Soul .as well in € or B, as in
A. And from hence is that vulgar faying in the Schools,
That if the Eye were in the Foet , the Soul would ‘fee in
the Foot. RiatigGyy , pen Te


SECT. XII.


The Examination of the Opinion of the
Holenmerians. |


¥y UT now, according to our cuftom, let us weigh
and examine all thefe things in a free and juft Ba-


Kip


lance. In this therefore that they aflert, that the whole Pyi..


Soul is in the whole Body, and isall of it penetrated of Py):


theSoul by her Effence, and therefore feenr willingly to
acknowledge a certain effential amplitude of the Soud . in


this, I fay, they come near to us, who contend there. is. Bip
d certain Metaphyfical and Effential Extenfion in all Spi= Bij),


7v2tS, but fuch ds is x usyebng xy LUPUS 5 devoid of bulk o«
parts, as Ariftotle definesof his feparate fubftances: For


there is no magnitude or bulk which may not be phy/ically By
divided, ‘nor any parts properly where there is no fuch fi),
divifion: “Whence the Adetaphyfical Extenfion of Spirits, B\,.


is


qq


|


|
;


“ii as rightly uy


The true Notion of a Spirit! ‘15 2


nderftood not to be capable of either bulk or


‘Mt parts, And inthat fenee it has zo parts, it cannot juft-


lity be faid to be a Whole.


In that therefore we plainly


yliifagree with the Holenmerians, that a Soul or Spirit may


Wht be faid by its Effence to penetrate an
Body C,D,E; but in this again we
tli that we dare not affi


d poflefs the whole
differ from them,
rm that the whole $ pirit Or whole Soul


iidoes penetrate and poflefs the faid Body, becaufe that


it} Which has not parts cannot properly. be cal
‘igthough I will not over- {tify contend,
tj ule that word for


ied a Whole by


but that we may
amore eafie explication of our mind,


jutifaccording to that old trite Proverb, Aualissery was elord


Wild 4 Cagesecor asye, Speak alittle more u


nlearnedly that thou


tall waayefE [peak, more intellagibly or plaimly. But then we


ani}
iy Sd ay


NAtiS,


(ged within the point A


:


|


ithe reft of the points of which
\C, E, does confift, that feems an harfh ex-


jare to remember that we do not {


peak properly, though
|More accommodately to the vulgar apprehenfion, but
|\willeenproperly. :

But now when the Aolenmerians add further, That
ithe whole Soul is in every part or Phyfical point of the
~WBody D,C,E, inthe point Aand B, andall


the Body D, See Figure


2. Sec? 11.


Wpreflion to me, and fuch as may juftly be deemed next
door to an open Repugnancy and Contradi@tion : For


when they fay the whoie Soulis in t
fC, E, if they. underftand t
#ucommenfurate, and as it weree


he whole Body D,
he Efience of the Soul to be
qual to the Body D,C, E,
jjand yet at the fame time, the whole Soul to be contain-
or B, it is manifeft that they
y#Make one and the fame thing many’ thoufand times
., greater or lefs than it felfat the fame time; which is im.
jpofible. Butif they will affirm, that the effential Am-
plitude of the Soul is no bigger than what is contained
jq@ithin the Phyfical point A, or B; but that the Effen-


| y\taal Prefence of the Soul is diffufed through the whole Bo-


ity D,C, E, the thing will fucceed nota jot the better.
/ |For while they plainly profefs that the whole Soul is in


the point A, it is manifeft that there remains nothing


of


eS


pia ee a DIN


eae TY


154


The true Notion of a Spirit.
of the Soul which may bein the point B, which is di-4
ftant from A: Forit is as ifone fhould fay, that theres
is nothing of the Soul which is not included within A 4
and yet in the fame moment oftime, that not only fome=4#) /(
thing of the Soul, (which perhaps might be a more gen-4
tleRepugnancy) but that the whole Soul is in B, as iffy)
the whole Soul were totally and entirely out of it felf 4 |
which furely is impoflible in any fagular or individual M yn\y\
thing. Andas for Univerfals, they are not Things, Duta pie
Nottons we ufe in contemplating them. R

Again, if the Effential Amplitude of the Soul is node jim)
greater than what may be contained within the limits Off jy:

a Phyfical point, it cannot extend or exhibit its Effentsahg n,,/,
Prefence through the whole Body, unlefs we iMaBiNEM iA,
in it a ftupendious velocity, fach as it may be car—Piji,
ried with in one moment into all theparts of the Body,#,, ;
and fobe prefent to them: Which whenit is fo hard tog}),)),
conceive in this {cant compages of an humane Body, and¥,,,,


in the Soul occupying in one moment every part there- ,


(eo


ty
tf


{


7
’


of, What an outragious thing is it, and utterly impof_i- Bi
ble to apprehend touching that Spirit which perpetu- iii
ally exhibits his Effential Prefence to the whole World.} ai
and whatever is beyond the World? :

To which laftly, you may add, that this Hypotheficg,,.


f
'


A


i


of the Holenmerians , does neceflarily make all Spirits,
the moft minute things that can be conceived: For if them, >,
whole Spirit be in every Phyfical point, it is plain, thaip
the Effential Amplitude it felf of the Spirit (which che, °
two former Objections fuppofed) is not bigger thas hy
that Phyfical point in which itis, (which you may calli,”
if you will, a Phyfical Aonad) than which nothing iif
or can be finaller in univerfal Nature: which if you re:
fer to any created Spirit, it cannot but feem very ridil
culous ; but if to the Adzjeffy and Amplitude of the de
vine Numen, intolerable, that | may not {ay plainly ree,
proachful and blafphemous. K


ills
- E CG Te " I


. thet


q,)
UE
’ i wy


DN


The true Notion of a8 pirit. 1 55


9 BC): REL.
i Confutation of the firft Reafon of the Holenmerians.


il UT now for the Reafons for which the Holenmeri-
l ans adhere to fo abfurd an Opinion; verily they
“Ay are fuch as can no way compenfate thofe huge difficulties
‘) Mand repugnancies the Opinion it felf labours under. For,

(for the firfty which fo folicitoufly provides for the Zn-
USN divifibility of Spirits, it feems to me to undertake a
vill] charge either Superfluous or Ineffettual. Super fluous, if
MN) Esctenfion can be without Divifibility, as it is clearly de-
isl? monftrated it can, in that infinite immovable Extenfion
iii diftinet from the movable Matter, Exchirid. Metaphyf.
viii cap. 6, 7,8. But dveffectual, if all Extenfion be divifible,
iitilj and the Effential Prefence of a Spirit which pervades and
ii, 3s extended through the whole Body C.D, E, may for
ittifthac very reafon be divided, for fo the whole Effence
sill which occupies the whole Body C, D,E,. will be divi-
vtitlided into parts. No by no means, will you fay, forafmuch
\\ifas it is wholly in every part of the Body.

||. Therefore it will be divided,. if 1 may fo fpeak, into
cit fo many Totalities. But what Logical Ear can bear a
‘| w/faying fo abfurd and abhorrent from all reafon, that a
iy) Whole fhould not be divided into parts but into Wholes 2
i, 14 But you will fay at leaft we fhall have this granted us,
ifthat an Effential Prefence may be diftributed or divided
,tMaccording to fo many diftingtly fited Totalities which
jh Occupy at once the whole Body C,D,E, Yes verily,
gighthis fhall be granted you, after you have demonftrated
(@ifthat a Spirit not bigger than a Phyfical Afonad ean occu-
«py mm the fame inftanc all the parts of the Body C, D,E;
igi but upon this condition, that you acknowledge not fun-
Wary Toralstses, but one only total Effence, though the leaft

that can be imagined, can occupy that whole {pace, and
llwhen there is need, occupy, in an inftant, an infinite


fone: Which the Aolenmerians mult of neceffity hold
touching


{


|


356 ‘Lve true Notion of a Spirit.

touching the Divine Effence, becaufe according to theirg)™;
Opinion taken in the fecond fence, (which pinches they?’
whole Effence of a Spirit into the {malleft point) theg!’
Divine Effence ‘it felf is not bigger than any Phyficalye!
Monad. From whence it is apparent the three Objecti-g4™
ens which we brought in the beginning, do again rectiky)
here, and utterly overwhelm the firft reafon of the Haji
lenmerians: So that the remedy is far more intolerableq)!"
than the difeafe. | ' |


ets = A ESET RT TOES RS RS Dy RR IES RR SNES


SECT: Sve


A Confutation of the fecond Reafon of the
Holenmerians. |


N D truly the other reafon which from this Ho-

LX. lenmerifm of Spirits pretends a more eafie way offfipa
conceiving how it comes town
pafs that the Soul, fappofe ing
A, can perceive what hap=phy
pens toitinC,or B, and alg
together in the fame circum—p ig)
{tances as if it felf were per lliig,
fectly and entirely in C, organ);
B, when yet it isin A; al4
though at firft fthews this@,,,
feems very plaufible, yet iffy,

we look throughly into it, we fhall find it far enough#,,

from performing what it fo fairly promifes. For befidesapy..
that nothing is more difficult, or rather impoflible tom}...
conceive,*than that an Effence not bigger than a Phyficaliliiy,;,,
point, fhould occupy and poffefs the whole Body of ami...
nian at the fame inftant, this Hypothefis is moreover}...
plainly contrary and repugnant to.the very Laws of theg,,.

Souls perceptions: For Phyficians and Anatomilts withi@},,. ”

one confent profefs, that they have found by very folidlf,,,

Experiments, that the Soul perceives only within mf Bis.

: Head, B. ”


The true Notion of a Spirit: a4


i lead, and that without the Head there is no percepti»
si on: Which could by no means be, if the Soul herfelf
‘) ti) Were wholly inthe point A, and the very felf-fame Soul
Hii) again wholly in the point B, and C, nor any where as to
)etilt Effentcal Amplitude bigger than a Phyfical Aonad - For
aie] hence it would follow, that one and the fame thing
ies] would both perceive and not perceive at once; That it
iin would perceive this or that Object , and yet perceive

} nothing atall; which is a perfect contradiction,

|. And from hence the falfity of that common faying is


| detected, That if the Eye was in the Foot, the Soul would
it fee 12 the Foot ; whenas it does not fo much as fee in thofe
\.Eyes which it already hath, but fomewhere within the
) Brain. Nor would the Soul by an Eye in the Foot fee,
Hunlefs by fitting Nerves, not unlike the Optick ones,
} continued from the Foot to the Head and Brain, where
iin the Soul fo far as perceptive, inhabiteth. In the other
gp parts of the Body the Functions thereof are only
vata i vetal. ;
eit. Again, fuchisthe nature of fome perceptions of the
\witSoul, that they are fitted for the moving of the Body ;
iif that it is manifeft, that the very felf-fame thing which
ip perceives, has the power of moving and guiding of it ;
ot) Which feems impoffible to be done by this Soul. which,
‘ laccording to the Opinion of the folenmerians, exceeds
jot the amplitude of a finall Phyfical point, as it may


. fifappear at firft fight to any one whofe reafon is not blir... Ai
» iided with prejudice, |
sl) And laftly, If it be lawful for the Mind of Man to
give her conjectures touching the Immortal Geni, (whe-
iither they be in Vehicles, or deftitute of Vehicles) and
jqoftouching their Perceptions and Effential Prefences, whe-
|, (ieber invilible, or thofe in which they are faid fometimes
“igtO appear to mortal men, there is none furely that can
oledmic that any of thefe things are competible to fuch
_«ipirit as the Holenmerians defcribe. For how cana W4-
" Mtapbyfical Monad, that is to fay, a Spiritual fubftance not
 Mpxceeding a Phyfical Monad in Amplitude, fill out an


hea Effential


|


i


=!


158


The true Notion of a Spirit. |
Effential Prefence bigget than a Phyfical Monad, unlef: iat
it be by a-very {wift vibration of itfelf towards all parts ip at
as Boys by a very fwift moving of a Fire-ftick, make ef by {
fiery Circle in the air by that quick motion. But thaip”
Spirits, deftitute of Vehicles, fhould have no greatesp
Effencial Prefemce than what is occupied of a naked ancy”
unmoved Metaphyfical Monad, or exhibited thereby"
feems fo abfonous and ridiculous 4 fpectacle to the Minog)"
of Man, that unlefs he be deprived of all fagacity ant ad
fenfibility of fpirit, he cannot but abhor fo idle an Opi)
nion, 1 Mlb
And as for thofe Effential Préefences , according ti ps
which they forhetimes appear to men, at leaft equaliigy
zing humane ftature, how can a folitary Met aphyficagy™
Monad form fo great a part of Ait or Ather into hug
mane. fhape, or govern it being fo formed ? Or how caipm’)
it perceive any external Object in this fwift motion of app
{elf, and quick vibration, whereby this AZtaphy/ice pity
Monad is underitood of the Holenmerians, to be prefer
in all the parts of its Vehicle at once? For there can bam
no perception of the external Object, unlefs the Objecymti:
that is to be perceived act with fome ftay upon thagiyt
which perceiveth. Nor if it could be perceived by chip:
Metapbyfical Monad thus {wiftly moved and vibrated cop ity
wards all parts at once, would it be feen in. one place
but in many placesat once, and thofe, as it may happergp Wy
very diftant. Bits (
Bids


Viv
ee |)
Pre
bh


bib LL
of


SECT. XY.
The egregious falfity of the Opinions of the Holenmeriaty


and Nullibiits, as alfo their afelefue[s for any Philofem
phical ends. :


UT verily, Tam afhaimed to waft fo much time if
refuting fuch meer trifles and dotages, which indeeg

are fuch, (that { mean of the Vndibits, as well as thip
; s othe 4


Lhe true Notion of a Spirit.
| other of the Holenmerians) that we may very well won-
‘iii @er how fuch diftorted and {trained conceits could ever
wel €nter into the minds of men, or by what artifice the:

have fo fpread themfelves in the World ; but that the
ovoid Prejudices and enchantments of Superftition and apid
igh admiration of mens Peérfons are fo itrong, that they may
ye Utterly blind the minds of men, and charm them into
yidotage. But if any one, all prejudice and parts-taking
iu Being laid afide, will attentively confider the thing asic
(448, he fhall clearly percéive and acknowledge, unlefs ali
belief is to be denied to the humane faculties, that the
vig {Opinions of the Wulkibifts and Flolenmerians, touching
ttncorporeal Beings, ate miferably falfe; and not that
jfonly, but as to any Philofophical purpofe altogether
Sf Dnjeief Forafmuch as out of neither Hypothefis there
apqflOes appear ahy preater facility of conceiving how the
n(4ind of Man, or any other Spirit, performs thofe Fun-


|
nh walal
i i
Ny INA


" ibeing fuppofed nowhere, than from their being fuppo-
ned fomembere, or from fuppofing them wholly in every
part of a Body, than ftom fuppofing then Only, to oc-


i ey the whole Body by an Effential or Metaphyfical Ex


}


jpetfon 5 but on the contrary, that both the Hypothefes:


inthe Opinions of the Holenmerians and Nuliibifts , %
hope it will offend no man if we fend them quite pack-
ing from our Philofophations touching an Incorporeak
(Berne or Spirit, in our delivering the true Idea or No-
ition thereof.


I


1 59 :


"60 The true Notion of aSpirts


SECT. XVL


That thofe that contend that the Notion of a Spirit 1 fo dif jx
ficult and imperforutable, do uot this becaufe they are of eh i
move {harp and piercing Fudgment than others, but of hw.
Genius more rude and pleberan. Dik


m& YO W Thave fo fuccefsfully removed and diffipatec ii
thofe two vaft Mounds of Night and Miftinefed) ji.
that lay upon the nature of Incorporeal. Beings, and oby
{cured it with fuch grofs darknefs 5 it.remains that wy}
open and illuftrate the true and genuine nature of ther
in general, and _propofe fuch a definition of a Spirit, aq
will exhibit no difficulty.to a mind-rightly prepared ani J)
freed from prejudice: , For the zature of a Spirit is verqy” ji
eafily underftood, provided one rightly and ‘skilfulli} ,;,
fhew the way to the Learner, and form to him true Neg fy,
tions of the thing. Infomuch that I have often wondreg
at the fuperftitious confternation of mind in thofe ment vi
(or the profanenefs of their tempers.and. innate averfeq])),
tion from the.contémplation of Divine things) who. Bip,
by chance they hear any one profefling that he can, watifim),
fufficient clearnefs and diftin@nefs conceive the natung(y) ,
of a Spirit, and communicate the Notion to others, thegy..,
are. prefently aftartled and amazed at the faying, amg.
{traightway accufe the man of intolerable levity or anrogiy, ;,
gancy, as thinking him to aflume fo much to himfelf, angi,’
to promife to others, as no humane Wit, furnifhed wit@},, ”


Mirvs

never fo much knowledge, can ever perform... And tha
I underftand even of fuch men who yet readily acknova
ledge the Exiftence of Spirits. | H
But as for thofe that deny their Exiffence, whocvediiy,...
profefles this skill to them, verily he cannot but aygia,’
peas a man above all meafure vain and doting. Buty,
hope that I hall fo bring it about, that no man fhall ayg,
pear more ftupid and doting, no man more unskilful ari,
ignorant, than he that efteems the clear Notion of By,”
Spings


i
" l
a


SL


——————


=


— SS


f
vb


neve LMI


f
AY. 4


Spirit fo hopelefs and defperate an attempt; and that I
fhall plainly detect, that this big and boaftful profeflion
of their ignorance in thefe things does not proceed from
hence, that they have any thing more a fharp or difcern.
ing Judgment than other mortals, but that they have
more grofs and weak parts, anda fhallower Wit, and
fuch as comes neareft to the fuperftition and itupidity
of the rude vulgar, who eafilier fall into admiration
and aftonifhment, than pierce into the reafons and noa


“Mf tices of any difficule matter,


SECT. XVIL


lil The Definition of Body i general, with fo clear an Expli-


!

|

|
isl” Cation thereof, that even they that complain of the ob/cii-

Witt

|


rity of aSpirit, cannot but confe/s they perfectly under-


a
ith) ffand the nature of Body.


| BY T now for thofe that do thus defpair of any trie
coy Knowledge of the nature of a Spirit, I would en-


iin Creat them to try the abilities of their wit in recognizing
-muitand throughly confidering the nature of Body in general.
i} And let them ingenioufly tell me whecher they cannot


bly


#but acknowledge this to be a clear and perfpicuous de-
ifinition thereof, vz. That Body ws Subftance Material,


sWof it felf altogether deftitute of all Perception, Life, and


wipectly + nor would they doubt of the truth thereof
jiphat we deprive Body of all Agotion fromit felf, as:


“4 I
f


il v

| q e ° gf? 4 CH 2 Pais A is y c co

sjqpnat is, a Being fubfiftent by it felf, not a mode of fon
j a “y ? td 4 l% a rire tia 1 'T a 24 #% A }

.iwelng, they cannot but very willingly admit, and t!


yWanderftand all this (


:
ak
liz a = R | n.. ” Dye ro oe =a “4 Bd , fh. nn $
qeaion, Life, and Perception. But that it is Subfiance
Fa) y


ihddotcon, Or thus: Body x a Subftance Material coale


y -


wimfeent or accruing together into one, by vertue of [ome other
\Wthing, from whence that one by coalition, has or May have


he


Life alfo, Perception and Motion:
I doubt not but they will readily anfwer, that they


Ai ]- eyqr | an
as to the terms) clearly and


4


y


ee


7 ‘hone B.
iO 0


® J
D ib le
Of
la b,
i
€ rn
L al If


if
i}


Lhe true Notion of a Spitit. 164


are


s 4 — . Zz x omer Ne
een Sexy net. ae NN -s
Ramadi Pet pala Sasa


pote


oh
a


ee


sabre niles:


362 The true Notion of a Spirit.


alfo it is a material Subftance compounded of phyjical 9
Monads, or at leaft of moft minute particles of Matter, 1 i,
into which it is divifible; and becaufe of their Jmpene=
srability, impenetrable by any other Body. So that the Mii:
Effential and Pofitive difference of a Body is, that it be #
impenetrable, and Phyfically divifible into parts: But that ,,,
it is extended, that immediately belongs to it'as it is aif),
Being. Nor is there any reafon why they fhould doubé ® ,,,;
of the other part of the Differentia, whenas it is folidly W ..;,
and fally proved in Philofophy, That A/Zatter of its 5.
own nature, or init felf, is endued with no Perception, § pi
Life, nor Motion. And befides, we are to remembery W
that we here do not treat of the Exijtence of things, butg},.,,
of their intelligible Motion and Effence. Hi,

; j Hide |


4.


SECT. XVII


The perfect Definition of aSpirit, with a full Explicationm,”
of its Nature through all Degrees. ft


N D if the Notion or Effence is fo eafily underftoocg,
fe in nature Corporeal or Body, i do not fee but in theg
Species immediately oppofite to Body, viz. Spirit, there@
may be found the fame facility of being underftood If"
Let us try therefore, and from the Law of Oppo/ites Leng"
us define a Spirit, an Immaterial Subjtance intrinfecally en"
dued with Life and the faculty of Motion. This flenderg
and brief Definition that thus eafily flows without anyg)
noife, does comprehend in general the whole nature o@ mul
a Spirit, Which left by reafon of its exility and brevityg "s
it may prove lefs perceptible to the Underftanding, aay"
a Spirit is to the fight , 1 will fubjoyn a more full Ex!
plication, that it may appear toll, that this Definitionp, "':
of a Spirit isnothing inferiour to the Definition ofa Bod ®t
as to clearnefs and perfpicuity. And that by thismethoog”)
which we now fall upon, a full and perfect knowledgi® \\y
and underftanding of the nature of a Spirit may be ati “y.,
tained to. Gop


The true Notion of 4 Spirit: 16 3


Go to therefore, let us take notice through all the
degrees of the Defizitim,or Lbing defined, what precife
| and immediate properties each of them contain, from
ff Whence at length a moft diftin& and perfect knowledge
| Of the whole Defizitum will difcover it felf. Let us be-
gin then from the top of all, and firft let us take notice
that aSpirit is Ens, ora Being, and from this very fame
that itis a Being that it is alfo One, that it is True.
and that it is Good ; which are the three acknowledged
Properties of Es in Metaphyficks, that it exifts fome-
time, and fomewhere, and is in fome fort extended, as is”
thewn Enchirid. Adetaphyf. cap. 2. fect. 10. which three
Jatter terms are plain of themfelves. And as forthe
three former, that Oxe fignifies undiftinguifhed or undi-
vided in and from it felf, but divided or diftinguifhed
from all other, and that True denotes the anfwerable-
nefs of the zhing to its own propér Idea, and implies
right AZatter and Form duely conjoyned, and that laft!y


ee


oo ears


J
\
TS. Qe


‘ * : ns
4 =—--* i
—————————
wa a


———
tere


‘| Good refpects the fitnefs for the end in a large fence, fo


| that it will take in that faying of Theologers, That God
_} ishis own End, are things valgarly known to Logitians
MM and Azetaphyficians. That thele Six are the immediate
Wi" aftections of Being as Being, is made apparent :a the
il above-cited Enchiridion Metaphyficum, nor is it requifite
i" CO repeat the fame things.here. Now every Being is ej-


wl ther Subffance or the Alode of Subjtance, which fome call
|NAdccsdent : But that a Spirit is not an Acesdent or Mode
}Of Subftance, all in a manner profefs, and it is demon-
Hfrable from manifold Arguments, that there are S pirits
WWhich are no fach Accidents or Afodes; Which is made


(good in the faid Enchiridion and other Treatifes of Do-


inctor FL, 17. 3
i} Wherefore the fecond “Effential degree of a Spirit is,
Wehat-it is Subftance. From whence it is underftood to
(MMPab ff by it felf, nor to want any other thing asa Sub-
yece (in which it may inhere, or of which it may be the
idode or Accident) for its fubfifting or exifting. |
jv) Fhe third and laft Effential degree is, that it is Iin-
iH [,.2 matertal.


464 ‘The true Notion of a Spirit.
material, according to which it immediately belongs to § fa
it, that it be a Being not only One, but one by ct felf, of Bie
of its own intimate nature, and not by another ; that 9)
is, That, though as it isa Being itis infome fort exten= § tii
ded, yet itis utterly Indivifible and Indifcerpible into real 9 wi‘
Phyfical parts.. And moreover, That it can penetrate} ini
the Matter, and (which the Matter cannot do) pene= Ff jay
trate things of its own kind ; that is, pafs through Spi # sii
ritual Subftances. In which two Effential Attributes Casi py
it ought to be in every perfect and legitimate Diftribu- 4 i;
tion of any Genus) itis fully and accurately contrary jy
to its oppofite Species, namely, to Body. As alfo in bi
thofe immediate Properties whereby it is underftood tom
have Life intrinfecally in ie felf, and the faculty of mo- ‘—
ving, which in fome fenfe is true in all Spirits whatfo- |
ever, forafmuch as Life is either Vegetative, Senfitrvey
or Intelletual. One whereof at leaft every Spiritual jy),
Subftance hath: asalfo the faculty of moving , infomuchg 4,
that every Spirit either moves it felf by it felf, or the |
Matter, or both, or at leaft the Matter either mediately
or immediately ; or laftly, both ways.. For fo all things) »
moved are moved by God, he being the Fountain of all ji
Life and Motion, ay


a iV
yi )
yw |


ree sere en et I I A I =


That from hence that the Definition of a Body % perfpicu- ,
ows, the Definition of a Spirit » alfo neceffarily per[pi-t»,
CuOHS, ? R


V ‘Herefore I dare here appeal to the Judgment

and Confcience of any one that is not altoge-@),°
ther illiterate and of a dull and obtufe Wit, whetheng,,.
this Notion or Definition of a Spirit in general, isnot as
intelligible and perfpicuous , is not as clear and everym,, |!*
way diftinét as the Idea or Notion of a Body, or of anyg,,'
thing elfe whatfoever which the mind of Man can con- aha
templates)


The true Notion of a Spirit. 16
template in the whole compafs of Nature. And whether


: And the Differentie do illuftrate one
“another by their mutual oppofition ; infomuch that it is
“ impoffible that one fhould underftand what is Afaerial
i Subftance, but he muft therewith prefently -underftand
‘il what Immaterial Subftance is, or what it is'zot' to have
‘i Lfe and Motion of it felf, but he mutt ftraitway perceive
i what it 1s to have both init felf, or to be able to commu-
oi icatethem to others,


“} they both agree in the immediate Genus. to them, ‘to


oC TEx,


iii) Four Objektions which from the perfpicnity of the terms of
ii) the Definition of a SPIRIT infer the Repugnancy of
I) them one to another.
|

j N° R canI divine what may be here oppofed, un-
| lefs haply they may alledge fuch things as thefe,
} That although they cannot deny but that all the terms
| of the Definition and Explicarion of them, are fufficiently
intelligible, if they be confidered fingle, yet if they be
} compared one with another they will mutually deftroy
One another. For this Extenfion whichis mingled with,
wn OF. inferted into the nature of a Spirit , feems to take
witaway the Penetrability and Indivifibility thereof, as alfo
tits faculty of thinking, as its Penetrability likewife takes
i away its power of moving any Bodzes.

1. Firlt, Evxtenfion takes away Penetrability; becanfe
joyjaf One Extenfion penetrate another, of neceflity either
fs i of them is deftroyed, or two equal. Amplitudes en-
iitirely i ee g One another,are no bigger than either
tone of them taken fingle, becaufe they are clofed with-
jin the fame limits.


1 nf
«ll


F se
L 4) wi


ef


ng MMII
oe nse et


Pe Te


stadia SLY.


366 ‘The true Notion of a Spirit.


Ij. Secondly, It takes away Indivifibility 5 becaufe
whatfoever. is extended has partes extra partes, one part
out of another, and therefore is Divifible : For neither
would it have parts, unlefs it could be divided into
them. To which you may further add, that forafmuch
as the parts are /ubftantial, nor depend one of another,
it is clearly manifeft, that at leaft by the Divine: Power
they may befeparate, and fubfift feparate one from ano-
ther. .


Il. Thirdly, Extenfion deprives a Sperit of the faculty


of thinking, as deprefling it down into the fame order
that Bodies are. And that there is no reafon why an § el"
extended Spirit fhould be more capable of Perception than BE


{Matter that is extended.


IV. Laftly , Pexetrability renders a Spirit unable to |
move Matter; becaufe, whenas by reafon of this Pene-


trability it fo eafily flides through the Matter, it cannoé | Ml


conveniently be united with the Matter whereby it may
move the fame: For without fome union or inherency


(a Spirit being deftitute of all Impesetrability) ?tis im lit


poflible ic fhould protrude the Matter towards any}
place. |


The fum of which Four difficulties tends to this, that Lb.


we may underftand, that though this Idea or Notion offi
a Spirit which we have exhibited, be fufficiently plain huge
and explicate, and may be eafily underftood ; yet fronag! ty


the very per{picuity of the thing it felf, it abundantly i


appears, that it 1s not the Idea of any poffible thing, andi a


much lefs of a thing really exiting, whenas the parts# ie
thereof are fo manifeftly repugnant one to another. “f)


SECT"


167


4


The true Notion of a Spirit.


SECT. XXI
An Anfwer to the firft of the Four Objetions.


1. FQ UT againft as well the Nudibifts asthe Hobbsans,
who both of them contend, that Extenfion and
Matter is one and the fame thing, we will prove, that
| the Notion or Idea of a Spirit which we have produced,
i, isa Notion of a thing po/fible. And as for the Null
ii O2ffs, who think we fo much indulge to corporeal Ima-
siyalt Qination inthis our Opinion of the een of Spirits,
(1 J hope on the contrary, that I fhall fhew, that it is only
| from hence, that the Hobbians and Nullibi ifts have taken
ptf all Amplitude from Spirits, becaufe their Imagination is -
‘duet Mot fuficiently defecated and depurated from the filth
an and unclean tinctures of Corporeity, or rather that they
wit have their Mind over-much addicted and enflaved to
uot Afaterial things, and fo difordered, that fhe knows not
if How to expedite her felf from erofs Corporeal Phan-
gi tafms.
q From which Fountain have fprung all thofe difficul-
| ties whereby they endeavour to overwhelm this our Vo-
i) ton Of a Spirit, as we fhall manifeftly demonftrate by
Att | going through them all, and carefully perpending each
of them. For it isto be imputed to their grofs Imagi-
| nation, That from hence that two equal Amplitudes
\ penetrate one another throughout, they conclude that
vl either one of them muft therewith perifh, or that they
‘being both conjoined together, are no bigger than ei-
| ther one of sheti taken fingle. For this comes from
| hence, that their mind is fo illaqueated or lime-twig-
} ged, as it were, with the Idea’s and Properties of cor-
poreal things, that they cannot but infect thofe things
) alfo which have nothing corporeal in them with this
iy material Tincture and Contagion, and fo altogether
} confound this A<etaphyfical Extenfion with that Exten-
fion which is Phyfical. ai from this difeafe it is that


L 4. the


a5


368 . The true Notion of a Spirit.

the fight of their mind is become fo dull and obtufe,
that they are not able to divide that common Attribute
of a being, I mean Extenfion Metaphyfical from fpecial
Extenfion and Afaterial, and aflign to Spirirs their pro-
per Extenfion, andleaveto A4atter hers. Nor accord-
ing to that known method , whether Logical or Meta-
phytical, by intellectual Abftraction preicind the Geze-
vical nature of Extenfion from the abovefaid Species or
kinds thereof. Nor laftly, Gwhich is another fign of |
their obtufenefs and dulnefs) is their mind able to pene- |
trate with that Spiritual Extenfion into the Extenfion
Muaterial, but like aftupid Beaft ftands lowing with-
out, as if the mind it felf were become wholly corpo-
real, and if any thing enter they believe it perifhes ra-
ther and is annihilated, than that two things can at the
fame time co-exift together in the fame Ubi, Which are
Symptoms of a mind defperately fick of this Corporeal
Malady of Imagination, and not fufficiently accuftomed fmt;
or exercifed in the free Operations of the Intellectual Mitt
Powers. |


And that alfo proceeds from the fame fource, That; Bilij,


{uppofing two Extenfions penetrating one another, and

adequately occupying the fame Vz, they thus conjoin= §
. & ; )

ed are conceived not to be greater than either one of J


5 -

them taken byitfelf. For the reafon of this miftake is,
that the Aéind incraflated and {wayed down by the Jma-
gination, cannot together with the Spiritual Extenfion
penetrate into the A4aterial, and follow it throughout,
but only places it felf hard by, and ftands without like
a grofs ftupid thing, and altogether Corporeal. For if


fhe could but, with the Spiritwal Extenfion, infinuate Btn,


her felf into the Adaterzal , and fo conceive them both §
together as two really diitinctExtenfions,it is impoflible |
but that fhe fhould therewith conceive them fo conjoined
into one Ubi, to be notwithf{tanding not a jot lefs than fig
when they are feparated and occupy an Udi as big again s
For the Extenfion in neither of them isdiminifhed, but fy,
éheir Situation only changed, As it alfo fometimespmi,,.
3 : comes. —


The true Notion of a Spirit.


} comes to pafs in one and the fame Extenfion of fome

} particular Spirits which can dilate and contraét their

ji] Amplitude into a greater or lefler Udi, without any

‘(i Augmentation or Diminution of their Extenfion, but
ii] @nly. by the expanfion and contraction of it into anos

eet ther fite.

|


| ~ ee


| SECT. XXIL


VU My


MUL
ving


i That befides thofe THREE Dimenfions which belong ta
| . allextended things, a FOURTH alfo ws tobe admit=
|. ted, which belongs properly to SPIRITS.


ND thatI may not diflemble or conceal any
|


|
r| thing, Although all Adzterial things, confidered
qquijin themfelves, have three Dimenfions only; yet there
itl mult be admitted in Nature a Fourth, which fitly enough,
(iT think, may be called Effential Spiffitude ; Which,
\though it moft properly appertains to thofe Spirits
Tw which can contract their Extenfion into a lefs Ubi ; yet
;,aijby an eafie Analogy it may be referred alfo to Spirits
yPenctrating as well the Adatter as mutually one another :
gO Chat whereever there are more Effences than one, or
(eimore Of the fameEffence in the fameV%: than is adequate
»jyfto the Amplitude thereof, there this Fourth Dimenfion
jonjpis to be acknowledged , which we call Efential Spiffi-
oi ie
i) Which affuredly involves no greater repugnancy than
yilwhat may feem at firft view, to him that confiders the
withing lefs attentively, to be in the other three Dimenfi-
ijons. Namely, unlefs one would conceive that a piece
"qijof Wax itretched out, fuppofe, to the length of an
"MEI, and afterwards rolled together into the form of a
‘oGlobe, lofes fomething of its former Extenfion, by this
"its conglobation, he mutt confefs that a Spirit, neither
iby the contraction of it {elf into a lefs {pace, has loft


jit ee y thing of its Extention or Eflence,but as in the above-
t | faid


i}
|
|


169 :


POL eatery
Ba | MR Mee ae


= are Leap a aca eee
eS NE wee aa


Siege es


STEN NE AES


=


tH)


170 The true Notion of a Spirit.


faid Wax the diminution of its Longitude is compenfa-4j ai}!
ted with the augmentation of its Latitude and Profun--f iit


dity ; fo in a Spirit contracting it felf, that in like man--


}


ner its Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity being le&4


fened, are compenfated by Effential Spiffitude, which the ii


Spirit acquires by this contraction of it felf.


And in both cafes we are to remember that the Site is# Hon
only changed, but that the effence and extenfion are notm hl


at all impaired.


Verily thefe things by me are fo perfectly every wayy i


perceived, fo certain and tried, that I dare appeal to:


the mind of any one which is free from the morbid pre- § ym)


judices of Imagination, and challenge him to try thes im):
ftrength of his [ntellectuals, whether he does not clearly Min:


perceive the thing to be fo as I have defined, and that:


two equal Extenfions, adequately occupying the very any
fame Ubi, be not twice as great aseither of them alone, #4
and that they are not clofed with the fame terms as the #{


Imagination falfly fuggefts, but only with equal.
Nor is there any need to heap up more words for


the folving this firft difficulty, whenes. what has beenif hy


briefly {aid already abundantly fufficeth for the penetra-
ting their underftanding who are prepofleft with no pres


judice: But for the piercing of theirs who are blinded jy).


with prejudices, infinite will not fuffice.


SECT. XXIII.


An Anfwer tothe fecond Objettion, where the fundamental, .‘
Errour of the Nullibifts, viz. That whatfoever t extena®y.


ded is the Object of Imagination, taken notice of.


a T us now try if wecan difpatch the fecond dif-#,,™
ficulty with like fuccefs, and fee ific be not whol-4,."
ly to be afcribed to Imagination, that an Indifcerpible-ex-#\, *'
genfion feems to involve in it any contradiction. As iff,"
there could be no Extenfion which has not parts real a
| anc


4
1
‘|


The true Notion of aSpirit. 190
: i pe properly fo called into which it may be actually
‘Vili divided, viz. for this reafon, that that only is extended
“i which has partes extra partes, which being /ubftantial,
‘iimay be feparated one from another, and thus feparate
Qa fobfift. This is the fummary account of this difficulty,
which nothing but corrupt smagination fupporteth.
tl) Now the firft fource or fountain of this errour of the
(ill Mullibifts, is this ; That they make every thing that is
extended the Object of the Imagination, and every Object
of the Imagination Corporeal. The latter whereof un-
ail doubtedly is true, if it be taken in a right fence;
cpfnamely, if they underftand fuch a perception as is either
iyi fimply and adequately drawn from external Objects; or
aby increafing, diminifhing, tranfpofing, or transform-
‘ijang of parts (as in Chimera’s and Hippocentaurs) is
wimfcompofed of thefame. 1 acknowledge all thefe Idea’s,
iilijas they were fometime fome way Objects of Senfation,
stijfo to be the genuine Objects of Imagination , and the
#perception of thefe to be rightly termed the operation
lof Fancy , and that all thefe things that are thus repre-
isittfented, neceflarily are to be leok’d upon as corporeal, and
yotftconfequently as aétually divifible.
yt) But that all perception of Extenfion is {uch Imagination,
)\d@ithat I confidently deny. Forafmuch as there is an Idea of
\\snfinite extenfion drawn or taken in from no external
lifenfe, but is natural and effential to the very faculty of
"perceiving ; Which the mind can by no means pluck
out of her felf, nor caft it away from her ; but if fhe will
lirouze her felfup, and by earneft and attentive think-
wwiing, fix her animadverfion thereon, fhe will be con-
\witrained, whether fhe will or no, to acknowledge, that
_ flalthough the whole matter of the World were exter-
iminated out of the Univerfe, there would notwithftand-
_(fing remain a certain fubtile and immaterial extenfion
ttwhich has no agreement with that other A/aterial one,


_juifin any thing, faving that it is extended, as being fuch


iMthat it neither falls under fenfe, nor is impenetrable,


- Inox can be moved, nor difcerped into parts; and that
Zz | | CE 1) sie


r


372. ‘The true Notion of a Spirit.
this Idea‘is not only posible, but xeceffary, and fuch ase
we do not at our pleafure feign and invent, but do find|


it to be fo innate and ingrafted in our mind, that we!!!


cannot by any force or artifice remove it thence. Which


is a moft certain demonftration that all Perception of i Mi


Extenfion is not Imagination properly fo called.
Which in my Opinion ought to be efteemed one of the:


chiefelt and moft fundamental Errours of the Nulibifts, Dil!
and to which efpecially this difficulty is to be referred 0 }
touching an Indifcerpible Extenfion. For we fee they con=-§ lit)
fefs their own guilt, namely, that their AGnd is fou iil
corrupted by their Imagination, and fo immerfed into di
ig, that they can ufe no other faculty in the contempla- Blin


tion of any extended thing. And therefore when they
make ufe of their [magination inftead of their Intelled in)
contemplating of it, they neceffarily look upon it as an.


Object of Imagination, that is, as a corporeal thing,: and #titit


aifcerpible into parts.. For as I noted above, the fight}


of their mind by reafon of this AZorbus vacadac, this:
materiows Difeafe, if 1 may fo fpeak, is made fo heavy
and dull, that it cannot diftinguifh any Extenjfion from
that of Adatrer, as allowing it to appertain to another
kind, nor by Logical or Adetaphyfical Abftraction pre-
fcind it from either. |


SECT. XXIV.


That Extenfion as fuch includes in it neither Divifibility


Cen


nor Impenetrability, neither Indivifibility nor Penetrabs= 4 a\n,


lity, but 1 indifferent to exther two of thofe properties.


AN D from hence it is that becaufe a thing is exten= fit

{% ded, they prefently imagine that it has partes ex-

tra partes, and is not Ens unum per fe @ non per aliud, a Pity

Being one by it felf, and not by vertue of another, but |

fo framed from the. juxta-pofitions of parts. Whenas fli...’

the Idea of Extenfion precifely confidered in it felf a }
3 | cludesi


| The true Notion of a Spirit.


‘iti@ieludes no fuch thing, but only a trinal Diftance or folid
‘wiil] Amplitude, that is to fay, not dizear only and fuperficiary.
in Gf we may here ufe thofe terms which Properly belong
lil £0 magnitude Mathematical) but every way running out
wo] and reaching towards every part. This Amplitude fure-
j ly, and nothing befide, does this bare and fimple Es:-
colt) femfron include, not Penetrability nor Impenetrability, nor
iii} Divifibility, nor yet Indivifibilizy, but to either affections
tn] OF properties, or if you will Effential Differences,
jMamely, to Divifibility and Impenetr ability >» Or to Pene-
ws trability and Indivifibility , if confidered ‘in it felf, it is
Hin) altogether indifferent, and may be determined to either
vipitwo of them.
itt)’ Wherefore, whereas we acknowledge that there isa
ai certain Extenfion namely Material, which is end ued with
sqffo ftout and invincible an ’Apzizuzie or Impenetrability,
»(fthat it neceflarily and by an infuperable Renitency ex-
rf “it pels and excludes all other Matter that occurs and at-
i, iiptempts to penetrate it, nor fuffers it at all to enter, al-
jeqtthough in the fimple Idea of Extenfion, this marvellous
a pvirtue of it is not contained, but plainly omitted, as
wiAtnot at all belonging thereto immediately and of it {elf =
thy may we not as eafily conceive that another Exten-
ffion, namely, an Immaterial one, though Extenfion in
lit felf include no fuch thing, is of fuch a nature, that it
-“weannot by any other thing, whether Material or Imma-
literial, be difcerped into parts 5; but by an indiffoly!


die
ineceflary and eflential Tie, be fo united and held to _
(ther with it felf,that although it can penctrate all things,
" jjand be penetrated by all things, yet nothing can fo inG.
Wauate it felf into it as to disjoyn any thing of its Eflence
any where, or perforate it, or make any hole or Pore in
tt? that is, that I may {peak briefly, What hinders but
“dithere may bea Being that is immediately Ove of its own
"Moature, and not held together into one by vertue of
\ylome other, either Quality or SubfPance ? although every
\ MiBeing as a Being is extended » becaufe Extenfion in its
vduprecife Notion does not inc


B i
Ost


173


Bjstebe


SPS


MAE 3 ae


mete


onus wee ae


474 The true Notion of aSpirit.
but the Mind infected with ‘corporeal Imagination, doeg")”
falfly and-unskilfully feign it to be neceflarily there, .


SECT. XXV.
That every thing that 1 extended has not parts Phyfically bt)
difcerpible, though Logically or Intellectually dévifible.


FOR itis nothing whichthe Wwuiibifts here alledge:

while they fay, ‘hat all Extenfion inferreth parts,
and all parts Divifion. For befides that the firft is falfes§”
foraf{much as Es unum per fe, a Being one of it felf, ong!”
of its own immediate nature, although extended yet in-§ “"
cludes no parts in its Idea, but is conceived according
to its proper Eflence as a thing as fimple as may be, andg.
therefore compounded of no parts: We anfwer more-§}’
over, that it is not at all prejudicial to our caufe though@é *
we fhould grant that this AZeraphyfical Extenfion of Spi-§)"


rits is alfo divifible, but Logically only , not Phyficallygmut


that is to fay, is not difcerpible. But that one fhould ad-phim
join a Phyfical divifibility to fuch an Extenfion, furelyg™
that muft neceffarily proceed from the impotency of hisg!4\\
Imagination, which his Mind cannot curb, nor feparateg'
her {elf from the dregs and corporeal foulneffes thereof ;
and hence it is that fhe tinétures and infects this pure
and Spiritual Extenfion with Corporeal Properties. Buti


that an extended thing may be divided Logically or In—gi\w


telletiually, when inthe meantime it can by no means beg! tit


difcerped, it fufficiently appears from hence, That ait
Phyfical Adonad which has fome Amplitude,, though theq'i
leaft that poflible can be; is conceived thus to be divided“
in a Line confifting of any uneven number of Monads,§! i


which notwithftanding the Intellect divides into twoq! P


equal parts, And verily ina Aderaphyfical Atonad, fachig te


as the Holenmerians conceit the Mind of Man to be, andi


to poffefs in the mean time and occupy the whole Body,§' My,


there may he here again made a Logical Diftribution fy,
fuppofe,§


_ The true Notion of a Spirit.


19%


i @fappofe, ¢ fubjectis, as they call it, fo far forth as this
ty WALetaphyfieal Monad, or Soul of the Holenmerians is con-
ceived to poflefs the Head, or Trunk, or Limbs of the
“gBody. And yet no man is fo delirant as to think that


Hit follows from thence, that fuch a Soul ma
into fo many parts,
\y(dubfift by themfelves.


at A


aryl


TF


“dcult


ye
wey
4


i


SECT. XXVIL


ijn Anfwer tothe latter


y be défcerped


and that the parts fo difcerped may


part of the fecond Objeétion, which


inferreth the feparability of the parts of a Sabftantial
Extenfum, from the faid parts being Sub{tantial and ins


dependent one of another,


Rom which a fafficiently fit and accommodate An-
{wer may be fetched to the latter part of this difi-
Y, namely, tothat, which becaufe the parts of Sub-
yiltance are Subjtantial and independent one of another, and
Wabjifting by themfelves (as being Subftances) would infer ~


~ iehat they can be difcerped, at leaft by the Divine Power,


“land disjoined, and being fo disjoined, fubfitt by them-


“elves.
*’ Ipf the whole difficulty, and
"ith cafe file off or blunt.

‘ibhing that is ab/olurely One


Which I confefs to be the chief edge or {ting
yet fuchas{ hope { fhail
For firft, 1 deny that ina
and Simple as a Spirit is,


“Where are any Phy/ical parts, or parts properly fo called,
)"'but that they are. only falfly feigned and fancied in it,
by the impure Imagination. But that the Mind it {elf
"being fufficiently defecated and purged from the impure


i! lregegs of fancy,


although from fome extrinfecal refpect


"he may confider a Spirit as having parts, yet at the


W"pbferve and note, that
mone.


Wy


—


=


hy


1]
i


And therefore whenas it has no


w'ery fame time does the in her felf, with clofe attention,
fuch an Extenfion of it felf has
parts it is plain


has no fub/tantial parts, nor independent one of ano-


er, nor fubfiltent of themfelves.


And


yon REE ED


eet sree os nee F


376 The true Notion of aSpirit.

And then as much as concerns thofe parts which thei
{tupid and impotent Jmagination fancieth ina Spirit, it
does not follow from thence, becaufe they are Sub/tan-
tial, that they may /ub/ift feparate by themfelves.. For


a thing to /ubfift by i felf, only fignifies fo to fubfift,] it


that it wants not the Prop of fome other Subjeé in which
it may inhere as Accidents do. So that the parts of ag hit!
Spirit may be faid to fubfift by themfelves, though theygg tui
cannot fubfift feparate, and fo be fubftance ftill. (


SECT. XXVH.


That the mutual Independency of the parts of an extendeah wil


Subftance may be underftood in a twofold fence; witht “i


an Anfwer thereto, taken in the firft fence thereof.


B T what they mean by that mutual Independency of ’ }


parts Ido not fully underftand: But I fufficientlyg mk:


conceive that one of thefe two things muft be hinted


thereby, .viz. Either that they are not mutual and effe- lists


ctual caufes to.one another of their Exiting, or that
their Exiftence is underftood to be connected by zo ze-
ceffary condition at all.

And as for the former fenfe, I willingly confefs thofé
parts which they fancy in aSpirit, are not mutual caufes
of one anothers Exiftence ;, but fo, that in the mear
time Ido moft firmly deny, that it will thence follow


that they may be difcerped, and thus difcerpt, be fepa-§f}),
rately conferved, no more than the Intelligible parts ong) 5,
a Phyfical Afonad which 1s divided into two by our Rea-§ity.,


fon or Intellect; which furely are no mutual caufes of
one anothers Exiftence: or the Members of the Diftri-]


bution of a Afetaphyfical Afonad, according to the Do-fiy;
ctrine of the Holenmerians (viz. TheSoul totally being#y. .


in every part of the Body) which no man in his . witsfilp,


can ever hope that they may be difcerped, although theg,


faid Members of the divifion are not the mutual caufesfiy,,/’
| 0)


“PN


— i:
Po epee L < —penoaoe _ OD AD INE.


Lhe true Notion of a Spirit. 177
Sf ore alothers Exiftence: For they are but one and the
| fame Soul which is not the caufe of it elf, but was whoily
and entirely caufed by God. ie,
But you will fay that there is here manifeftly a reafon
extant and apparent why thefe. Members of the Diftribn-
tion cannot be difcerped , and difcerpt teparately con-


yy


‘olf ferved, Becaufe one and the fame indivifible Monad oc-


y}
AM


uy Curs in every Member of the Diftribution, which there-
) fore fince it is a fingle one, it is impoflible it fhould be
| difcerped from it felf. Fo whichI on the other Side
~H anfwer, That it is as manifeftly extant and apparent
how frivoloufly therefore and ineptly Arguments are
i drawn from Logical or Intelle@tual Divifions, for the


wai Concluding a real feparability of parts. And I add fur.
wither, That as that fictitious Metaphyfical Avonad cantiot


ibe difcerped or pluckt in pieces from it felf, no more
can any real Spirit, becaufe jt isa thing moft fimple and


win) 740 abfolutely One, and which a pure Mind darkened and
jin poflefled with no prejudices of Imagination does acknow-=


iinMedge no real parts at all tobein. For foit would zpfa
a\infacto be a compound Thing.


4
I
4


ROM whence an eafie entrance is made to the an:
}& iwering this difficulty ‘underftood in the fecond
yplence of the mutual Independency of the parts of a Spirit,


son Se ae ee
SECT. XXVIUH.

i a Anfwer to the Independenty of parts taken in the
3 Second fence,


i frehereby their co-exiftence and union are underftood to
“yidpe connected by no neceffzry Law or Condition. For that


:


"ye
i
|
:
i


ithis is falfe, 1 do moft conftantly affirm without al] de-
ur: For the co-exiftences of the parts, as they call
them, ofa Spirit, are connected by a Law or Condition
bfolutely neceffary and Plainly effentcal s Forafmuch as.a
spirit is a moft fimple Being, or a Being unum per fe &
) M


nO


'
f
q


if
i
ih


|


178 The true Notion of a Spirit.
non per alind, that is, ove of it felf or of sts own nature
immediately fo, and not by another either Subjiance or


Quality, For none of thofe parts, asthe Nullsbifts call
them, can exift but upon this condition, that all jointly


and unitedly exift together ; which Condition or Law is f ),,,


contained in the very Idea or nature of every Spirit.
Whence it cannot be created or any way produced un-
jefs upon this condition, that all its parts be infeparably


and indifcerpibly one; as neither a Rectangle Triangle, J,,,,


unlefs upon this condition, that the powers of the Ca> 9,


shetus and Bafis, be equal to the power of the Hypotenu- Si
fa. Whence the Indifcerpibility of a Spirit cannot be ré-9


moved from it, no not virtute Divina, asthe Schoolmeng


fpeak, no more than the above-faid Property be dif-jc


joined from a Rectangle Triangle. Out’ of all which


hope it is at length abundantly clear, that the Extenfiom rine
of.a Spirit does not at all hinder the Indifcerpsbilitys....


thereof.


SECT. XXIX.


‘An Anfmer to the third Objettion touching the Impercepti- } NH
vity of an extended Subjftance, viz. That whatever isp °


ss extended , avd thar the N ULLIBISTS ancq
HOLENMERIANS themfelves. cannot gsve ¢ i


Reafon of the perceptive Faculty in Spirits, from thesig*!


Hypothefes.
HI. N OR isit any lett (which is the third thing)


Spirits: For we do not thruft down a Spirit by attribu


ting Extenfion to it, into the rank of Corporeal Beings) Ma


)


™


Cty,


fora{much as there is nothing in all Nature which is nog,“
in fome fenfe extended. For whatever of Effence therg
isinany thing, it either is or may be actually prefent ti \*t
fome part of the matter, and therefore it moft eitheg’”


be extended or be contracted to the narrownels of a posit |
3 anig |


me
to the faculty of Percesving and Thinking 14 a


)


| The trne Notion of a Spirit. i79
a qfand be a meer nothing. For, as for the Nullibifts and
ii qll|4Zolenmerians, the Opinions of them both are above ut.
jiqilterly routed by me, and quite fubverted and overturned
ji(ittom the:very root, that no. man may feek fubterfuges
and Jurking holes there. Wherefore there is a neceflity
«fthat fomething that is extended have Cogitation and, Per-
wieepteon in it, or elfe there will be nothing left tha¢
jinas.

rf. But for that which this Objection further urges, that

ifhere occurs no reafon why an exteuded Sperit fhould be
"more capable of Perception than extended Matter, it is
(verily, in my judgment, a very unlearned and unskilful
~ eFgutation. For we do not take all this pains in demon:
*, Wetating the Extenfion of a Sperit, that thence we might
etch out a reafon or account of its faculty of perceiving,
“Nut that it may be conceived to be fome real Being and
"Geue Subftance, and not a vain Figment, fuchas is every
iaing that has no Amplitude and. is in no fort ex-

_lended. |

But thofe that fo ftickle and {weat for the proving

peir Opinion, that a Spirit is nowhere, or is totally int
\wery part of that Vs it occupies, they are plainly en-
| “peed of all right, clearly and diftinctly to rehder a
a" Paton out of their Hypothefis of the Perceptive faculty
"Nat is acknowledged in Spirits , Namely, that they
"faintly and precifely deduce from hence, becaufe a
i Mae is nowhere, or totally in every part of the Ubi it
Cupies, that it is neceflarily endued with a faculty of
iircecving and thinking, fo that the reafon of the con-
gnction of properties with the Subject, may be Clearly
well Hence underftood.


|
1
\|
|


el
“whey are in the Subject wherein they are found.
i M 2 SECT.


¥80° The true Notion of a Spirit.


SECT. XXX.


That from the Generical nature of arty Species, wo reason’


is to be fetcht of the conjunttion of the iflential Diffes |


- rence with a, it being immediate.


Bon fo we are to conclude, that as Subjtance is
immediately divided into Material and Immaterial, § '°


or into Body and Spirit, where no reafon can be rendredl


from the Subftance in Spirit, as it is Subftance, why it# 2"


fhould be Spirit rather than Body, nor from Subftance:


ina Body, as it is Subftance, why it fhould be Body ra—4
ther than Spirit, But thefe Effential Differences ate ime!
mediately in the Subject in which they are found; Soq
the cafe ftands in the fubdivifion of Spirit into meerlyg™


Plaftical and Perceptive, fuppofing there arc Spirits thati
are meerly Plaftical; andtlten of a Perceptive Spirit intay


meerly Senfitive and Intelleftual, For there can be nc
reafon rendred touching a Spirit as a Spirit in a Spirit
meerly Plaftical, why it is a Spirit meerly Plajftical ra.
ther than Perceprive: Nor ina Perceptive Spirit, why
it is a Perceptive Spirit rather than meerly Plaftscat. Anc
laftly, ina Perceptive Spirit Zntellectual, why it is Jntel-


Which f
thay Wy
ae i
ean
i aie i
jai Ui
OE Under


leflual rather than meerly Senjitive ; and in the meerl; i ly
Senfitive Spirit, why it is fuch rather than Yatellectualg
But thefe Effential Differences are immediately in theg" 0)


Subjeéts in which they are found, and any Phyfical an


intrinfecal reafon ought not to be:asked, nor can be gif i
ven why they are in thofe Subjects, as I noted a licelip*'i


above out of the faid Enchiridion Ethicum.


Tbe true Notion of a Spirit. a 8p


|. “SEC Ty XXXL


=
—


inl Lat although the Holenmerians and Nullibifts can give
Di: 20 reafon , why that which perceives fhould be T O-
i) TALLY w every part, or (hoaldbe NOWHERE
| rather than be in any fort extended or {gmewhere, yet
wifi there are reafons obvious enough, why an extended S pirit,,
| rather fhould perceive than extended Matter.
i ¥Q UT however, though we cannot render a reafon
a! why this orthat Subjtance as Subftance, be a Spirit
i tather than Body, or why this or that Spirit be Percep-
ve(tsve rather than meerly Plafical; yet as the reafon is
,. dfafficiently plain, why AZateer or Body is a Subftance ra-
voofther than Accident, fo it is manifeft enough why that
,iwhich Perceives, er is Plaftical, fhould be a Spirit rather
_wathan Adatter or Body ; which furely is much more than
either the Holenmerians or Nuliibifts can vaunt of, For
qoaey can offer no reafon why that which perceives fhould
“' rather be zowhere than fomewhere 3 OF totally in each
Wart of the Vi it does occupy, than otherwife, as may
") dpe underftood from what we have faid above.
| But now fince the Afatter or Body which is difcerpible
iN"nd Impenetrable is deftitute of it felf of all Life and
MI" Motion, certainly it is confonant to reafon, that the
i Wpecies oppofite to Body, and which is conceived to be
i Wenetrable and Indifcerpible, fhould be intrinfecally en-
"hued with Life in general and Motion. And whenas
Matter is nothing elfe than a certain ftupid and loofe
vi"bugerzes of Phyfical Monads, that the firft and moft im-
Inediate oppofite degree in this indifcerpible and penetra-
We Subftance, which is called Spirit , thould be the fa-
lulty of Union, Motion, and Life, in which all the
\ympathies and Synenergies which are found in the World
(tay be conceived to confift. From whence it ought not
' (Pall to feem ftrange, that that which is Plaftical fhould
Ne a Spirit. ; |


te


9
M 3 And


482  Thetrne Notion of aSpirit. |
And now as for Perception it felf, undoubtedly all Mor= }
tals have either a certain confufed prefage, or more pres 4’
cife and determinate Notion, that as that, whatever it;
is in which the abovefaid Sympathies and Synenergees im-
mediately are, fo more efpecially that to which belongsq
the faculty of Perceiving and Thinking is athing of all
things the moft fwbr7le and moft Ove that may be. f
Wherefore I appeal here to the Mind and judgmentij
ef any one, whether he can truly conceive any thingg |
more Subrile or more One than the Effence or Notion of ag
Spirit as it is immediately diftinguifhed from AZatter,and§ tii:
oppofed thereto. For can there be any thing more Oneg mr
than what has no parts, into which it may be difcerped sf fii
or more Subtile than what does not only penetrate A/fat-} lili
ter, but it felf, or at leaft other Subftances of its own tna
kind ? For a Spirit can penetrate a Spirit, though Matq ti
ter cannot penetrate Matter. tho
There is therefore in the very Effence of a Spirit, al nay
though it be Adetaphy/ically extended, no obfcure reafong tir
why allthe Sympathies and Synenergies, why all Perceptag Wii
ons and all manner of Cogitations fhould be referred ratheq Ini
toit, by reafon of the Uxity and Subrilry of its natured byt
than to Afatter, which is fo crafs, that it is smpeperrag tray
ble; andis fo far from unity of Effence, that it confillf this
of juxta-pofited parts. But I hope by this I have aburif ti;
dantly fatisfied this third difficulty. tin


SECT. XXXII


‘An Anfwer tothe fourth Objettion as much as refpetts tht hi...
HOLENMERIANS asd NULLIBIST |),
and all thofe that acknowledge that the Matter w creat)
of Gad. |


h


IV. ¥ ET usgo on therefore to the Fourth and lat .
A which from the Penetrability of a Spirit cow
cludes its unfitnefs for moving of Matter, For it canné


The true Notion of a Spirit.


‘Maj move Matter, but by impelling it; nor can it impel it,
lite) becaufe it does fo eafily, without all refiftence,  pexe~
iti) trate it. Here therefore again ,. Imagimation plays her
wait tricks,and meafures the nature of a Spirit by the Laws of
lod Matter, fancying 4 Spirit like fome Body pafling through
if an over-large or wide hole, where it cannot fick by
} reafon of the laxnefs of the paflage. |
ie) = But in the mean time, it is to be noted, that neither
atid) the Holenmerians nor Nullibifts can of right object this
till difficulty to us, whenas it is much more incredible, that
win either a AZetaphyfical Adtonad, or any Effence that is no
inet where, fhould be more fit for the moving Matter, than
nell that which has fome Amplitude, and is prefent alfo to
MM the Matter that is to be moved. Wherefore we have
<q Now only todo with fuch Philofophers as contend that
il the whole Univerfe confifts of Bodies only: For as for
| thofe that acknowledge there is aGod, and that Matter

wi, &@ Was created by him , it is not hard for them to con-
epig Ceive, that there may be a certain faculty in the Soul,
await Which in fome manner, though very fhadowifhly. an-
iwi fwers to that Power in God of creating Matter, Namie-
wa Ly, thatas God, though the moft pure of all Spirits, yet
wi Creates Matter the moft grofs of all things; fo created
i Spirits themfelves may emit a certain Afaterial Vertue,
aft either fpontaneoufly or naturally, by which they may
" |f intimately inhere in the Subject Matter, and be {uffici-
ently clofe united therewith. Which faculty of Spirits
fin the Appendix to the Antidote againft Atheifm, is cailed
vacwdde, the Hylopathy of Spirits, or a Power of affect-

i ing or being affected by the Matter. But I confefs that
.iM Anfwer is lefs fitly ufed when we have to do with thofe
it who deny the Creation of Matter, and much more when
* al) With thofe that deny there is a God. |


awd


M 4 SECT,


OT a


SP


8p


cba aR


Sabet osstes Mets Gacy calle


esis


rh


CU re


ma ER” 3.


ae


~The true Notion of a Spirits


SECT, XXXII.


An Anfwer to thefe that think there w nothing in the
Univerfe but Matter or Body.


Herefore, whenas we have todo with fuch in-

\ fenfe Adverfaries, and fo much eftranged from
all knowledge and acknowledgment. of Jzcorporeal
Things, verily we ought to behave our felyes very cau-
tioufly and circumfpectly, and fomething more precifely
to confider the Title of the Queftion, which is not,
Whether we can accurately difcern and declare the
mode or way that a Spirit moves Matter, but whether
its Penetrability is repugnant with this faculty of moving
Matter. But now it ismanifeft, if a Spirit could be uni-
ted, and as it were cohere with the Matter., that it
might eafily move Matter; forafmuch as if there be at
all any fuch thing asa Spirit, it is according to the
common Opinion of all men.to be acknowledged the
true Principle and Fountain of all Life and Motion.
Wherefore the hinge of the whole controverfie turns
upon this one pin, Whether it be repugnant that any
Spirit fhould be wzited and as it were cobere with AZatrer,
or by whatever firmnefs or faftening (whether perma-
nent Or momentaneous) be joined therewith.

Now that it is not repugnant, I hope I hhall clearly
demonftrate from hence, that the wastion of Spirit with
Matter, is as intelligible as the wzition of one part of
Matter with another.. For that ought in reafon to be
held an Axiome firm and fure, That that i poffible to be,
in which there 1s found uo greater (not to fay lefs) diffi-
culty of fo being, than in that which we really find to be,
- But we fee one part of Matter really and actually united
with another, and that in fome Bodies with a firmnefs
almoft invincible, as in fome Stones and Metals, which
are held to be the hardeft of-all Bodies. But we will for
the more folly underftanding the bufinefs, fuppofe a

py Fess Body


| 135
| Body abfolutely and perfectly hard, conftituted of no
} Particles, but the very Phyfical Monads themfelves, and
i without all pores.
|. L ask therefore here, By what vertue, or by. what
| Manner of way do the parts of fo perfect a Solid cohere ?
} Undoubtedly they can alledge nothing here befides im.
lit Mediate contatt and ref: For if they fly to any other
‘wl affections which are allied to Life and Senfe » they are
init More rightly and more eafily underftood to be ina Spi-
lil ve than in Afatter; and we will prefently pronounce
ni that a Spirit may adhere to Matter by the fame ver-
it Toes.
But that the parts of Afatter cohere by bare though
itialf Immediate contact, feems as difficult, if not more diffi-
if Cult, than that a Spirit penetrating Afatter fhould cleave
‘tui Zogether into one with it: For the contact of the parts
iwi Of Matter is every where only fuperficial, but one and
eetithe fame indifcerpible Spirit penetrates and poflefles the
ate Whole Matter at once.
(ite) Nor need we fear at all, that it will not inhere becaufe
Jit can fo eafily flide in, and therefore as it may feem,
.niflide through, and pafs OW OVs 45 wctas


Er he Soe A
t |

jor in a Body perfectly folid, fuppofe A, in which we

oMivill conceive fome particular Superficies, fuppofe E,
wits C this Supccficies E; A, C, is afluredly fo glib and

dimooth, that there can be nothing imagined more {mooth


‘send glib: Wherefore why does not the upper part of
Bhis folid Cube C, D, E, by any the flightest impulfe


+


}
i


|


flide


i
id
:


186 The true Notion of a Spirtt.
flide upon the inferiour part of the Cube E,F,C, efpe-
cially if the inferiour part E,F,C, be held faft, while
the {uperior is impelled or thruft forward? Surely this
eafinefs of the fliding of Bodies perfectly fmooth and
glib, which touch immediately one another, their eafi-
nefs, I fay, of fliding one upon another, does feem at
leaft as neceflary to our Imagination, as the proclivity
of the pafling of a Spirit through the Bodies it pene-
trates. Wherefore if two parts of Matter, fuppofe E,
D,C, and E,F,C, which our Imagination doth moft
urgently fuggelt to us that they will always with the leaft
impulfe flide one upon another, do yet notwithftanding
adhere to one another with a moft firm andalmoff in-
vincible union, why may not then a Spirit, which our
Imagination fafpects will fo eafily pafs through any Bo-
dy, be united toa Body with equal firmnefs ? whenas
this is not more difficult than the other, yea rather


‘much more eafie if one would confider the thing as it is, § fojy


laying afide all prejudice. But now fince the Penetrabi- |
lity of a Spirit is not repugnant with its umon with Afat-

ter, itis manifeft, that its faculty of moving Body is not

at all repugnant with its Penetrability. Which is the

thing that was to be demonftrated.

But it half repents me that I have with fo great pre-
paration and pomp attacked fo {mall a difficulty, and
have ftriven fo long with meer Elufions and preftigious:
Juggles of the Imagination, (which cafts fuch a Milt of
fictitious Repugnancies on the true Idea of a Spirit) as:
with fo many Phantomes and Spectres of an unquiet:
Night. But inthe mean time I have made it abundantly:
manifeft, that there are no other Contradictions or Re-
pugnancies in this our Notion of a Spirit, than what#
- ghe minds of our Adverfaries, polluted with the impure
dregs of Imagination, and unable to abftract Metaphy ficaw
Extenfion from Corporeal affections , do foully and flo-j
venly clart upon it, and that this Idea lookt upon in 10§ y).


{elf does clearly appear to be a Notion at leaft of a thingy Hs


Poffible, which is all that we drive at in this pine
Pd SE


Mt SECT. XXXIy.
|


How far the Notion of a Spirit here. defended is counter


panced and confirmed by the common foffrage of all Ad-
verfartes.


ne] FX ND that it may appear more plaufible, we will
ne not omit in the laft place to take notice, how far
iit Gt is countenanced and confirmed by the common {uf.
ial! frage of our Adverfaries: Forthe Fobbians, and what-
ung’ ever other Philofophers elfe of the fame ftam p,do plain-
oli} dy affent to usinthis, That whatfoever really is, is of
hom meceflity extended. But that they hence infer, that there
yo) 2S nothing in Nature but what is Corporeal, that truly
wal they do very unskilfully and inconfequently collect, they
iil ‘by fome weaknefs or morbidnefs of mind tumbling into
sti £0 foul an errour. For it is impoffible that the mind of
yi Man, unlefs it were laden and polluted with the dregs
Me’ and drofs of Corporeal Imagination, thould fuffer it felf
jst to fink into fach a grofs and dirty Opinion.
iyi} Butthat every thing that is, is extended, the Nuii-
| bifts alfo themfelves feemto me to be near the very point
oy) Of acknowledging it for true and certain, For they do
ya) not diffembleit, but thatif a Spirit be fomewhere, it ne-~
‘vit Ceflarily follows that it is alfo extended. And they more-
i) Over grant, that by its Operation it is prefent to or in
i the Matter, and that the Effence ofa Spirit is not fepara-
ait ed from its Operations.
wil) . Butthat a thing fhould be, and yet not be any where
iff in the whole Univerfe, is fo wild and mad 4 vote, and
© fo abfonous and abhorrent from all reafon, that it can-
* «it not be faid by any man in his wits, unlefs by way of
q fport or fome flim jeft, as I have intimated above ;
MI Whence their cafe is the more to be pitied , who capti-
8 vated and blinded with admiration of the chief Author
“yl of fo abfard an Opinion » do fo folemnly and ferioufly
~ ft embrace, and diligently endeavour to polifh the fame. ‘
| | ! 3 And


i
u
ea
iy


The true Notion of aSpirit. 48 7


NPAC ape


pant ie


388 ‘The true Notion of a Spirit.

And Jaftly, as for the Holenmerians, thofe of them
who are more cautious atid confiderate, do fo explain
their Opinion , that it fcarce feems to differ an hairs
breadth from ours. For though they affirm, that the
Soul is in every part , yet they fay they underftand it
not of the Quantity or Extenfion of the Soul’, whereby
it occupies the whole Body, but of the perfection of its
Effence and Vertue: Which however true it may be of
the Soul, it is moft undoubtedly true of the Divsne Nn-
omen, whofe Life and Effence is moft perfect and moft
fall every where, as being fuch as every where contains
infinite Goodnefs, Wifdem, and Power.

‘Thus we fee that this Idea or Notion of aSpirit which
is here exhibited to the World, is not only poffible in it
felf, but very plaufible and unecxceptionable, and fuch as all
parties, if they be rightly underftood, will be found
whether they will or-no to contribute to the difcovery
of the truth and folidity thereof. And therefore is
fach as will not unufefully nor unfeafonably conclude


this Firft Part of Saduci{mus Trinmphatus, which treats
of the Poffibility of Apparitions and Witchcraft, but make
the way more eafie to the acknowledgment of the force
of the Arguments of the Second Part, viz. The many.
Relations that are produced to prove the Aétual Ex;
iftence of Spirits and Apparitions.


Learned Pfychopyrift


Concerning the true


7 YO TION
SPIRI


| Exhibited in the foregoing |
IDISCOUR SE;
| WHEREIN

-~ {Both their Notions are compared, and the Notion in the


i faid Difcourfe defended, and many things difcuffed


f and cleared for more full fatisfaction touching the
| Nature of a SPIRIT.


1 By HENRY MORE, D.p.


LONDON,
Printed for S..Lownds, MDC LXXXVIIL.


READER,
Aving in the foregoing Difcourfe fuffici-
ently declared, impartially difcuffed, and
as I hope, folidly comfuted the opinions of
| the Holenmerians azd Nullibifts , 2
thought ct not amifs to exhibit alfoto thy view the
opinion of the Plychopyrifts, ( for fo I rather call
them than Pneumatopyrifts ; becaufe the word is
izwore compendious and lefs fonorous, and may bear
ithe fame fenfe, Wecew as well as aaveew, fignifying
Spirare, whence the Latin word Spiritus is, and our
\Exglifb, Spirit. Not to add that all Created Spi~
wits, and they only are here meant, are -\uqat in all
probability , and attuate fome matter or other) I
thought fit, I fay, to acquaint thee with the opinion
(of thefe Plychopyrifts, Philofophers that make the
\Effence or Subftance of all created Spirits to be Fire,
for fo the word Pfychopyrifts figwsfies.

It is an opinion whith I have had no occafion to
azeddle with fince my fuvenile Altercations with Eu-
ugenius Philalethes, which is now many years ago.
te beng a Chymift made the Soul Fire, as Ariftox-
Wenus the Mufician and Philofopher, made it an Har-
mony ;


Tothe READER.
mony; of whoue Cicero wittsly obferves, Quod now |
“geceffit ab-arte fua , which-is-as appofitely faid of
Eugenius the Chymift. I was fo confident in thofe
days that no Matter whatever was capable of Cogita-
tion, that whenas that Author avouched the Soul tov
be Fire, and excufed it by adding he meant an Intel-4 4
ligent Fire: I, according to the [portfulnefs of my 4 is
Pen at that age, told him , That he might as welll biy:
have faid the Soul was a Pott , and then excufed v9 wisn
again by adding, he meant an Intelligent Po/t, Somce-4 ihy'
thing to that purpofe I remensber I replyea, for Mk |
have not reviewed thole Writings this many a year. Vil

But in this Anfwer, thou art not, Reader, to. ex-4 hi
pet any {uch Horfe-play 5 neither my age nor the quart tiv ;
lity of the Party who may feem to have efpoufed thish in »


opinion will bear any [uch thing. And befides, thath (vy;


e


opinion is not to be thought fo ridiculous and contem-4
ptible , which the greateft Wits and graveft Author:
may feemto-have ovned. Virgil the Prince of Poetsh By)
and a great Platonift, fo expreffeth himfelf, as if heht),,
held the Soul to the Fire, in thefe Verfes ; wherdtily,
freaking of the Souls of men, he fays, ,


Ioneus eft ollis vigor & Ceeleftis Origo |
Seminibus, quantum non noxia corpora tardaniy
Terreniq; hebetant artus moribundag; membrag jj,


And in another place [peaking of the Purgation 0 7
Humane Souls after Death, be fays they are fo and [1,
exercifed, i)


Donet


Tothe READER? |


aS —


Donec longa dies perfe&to temporis orbe
Concretam exemit labem purumg; reliquit;
#Ethereum fenfum atq; aurai fimplicis ignem:


|. Add unto this that the Chaldee and Magick Ore-
i les call the Sonl Tp Dovevor, Lucid Fire, ana ab-
‘nl fain not from pronouncing that all things proceed
Ws) &v0s uegs > from that one Fire, which is God, as of
ii) that Spirit of Spirits , or Father of all Spirits were
Jl Fire. Nay the Greek Fathers, as he alledges for hima
i Rfelf, are fo confident of the Notion, that they divide
itll Bire without any more to do into Intellective, Senfi-
wil tive, and Vegetative, fo that it can be no blemi(b to
will any ones Reputation to be found among/t {ich choice
mi Company = | ee
wit) Befides that, itis to be confidered, that he who is
imbere ftyled Pfychopyritft, becatife he feewis to be ar
(i E/poufer of this Opinion, is not [0 to be under ftood as
(laf he made this ordinary, crafs and vifible Fire the
 iihEffesce of a Spirit, but that his meaning is more fub-
Neele and refined. But what it is, you will bet undler-
Wiand by reading the following Aniwer to his Letter.
For this Argument is one remarkable part thereof s
,iMaand if I be not miftaken, there are feveral others will
occur not unworthy thy confideration, which to partis
Newlarize in, is needle{s, and will [well the gates over-
wOroportionately to the City. W, herefore I will detain
thee no longer, but leave thee to a Candid perufal of
ithe ex[uing Anfwer, and (o bid thee farewel.


N AN


-ANSWER
eh E TE Rs


lA Defence of the True Notion of a SPIRIT,
i delivered in the foregoing Difcourfe.


4


$$


SECT. I.


What though the Learned Pfychopyrift and the Author be
} agreed in the Fundamentalis Conceptus of a Spirit, that
i at ws 4 Subftance, yet they difagree in the Conceptus
| Formalis thereof.


| SZ R,

"WT Have abftained from writipg to you till now, be-
im caufe I had a mind to get a Book into my hands to
lim perufe fome things in it before I writ, which t got
je but a day or two ago. But now I fhall anfwer, to
loid all tedioufnefs to you or my felf, with all brevity
ican, in the noting where we agree, and where'we dif-
tt in the Notion ofa Spirit in general, or in the ades
lluate definition thereof. For out of the two inadequate
lonceptuss, as you call them (and : intend to ufe your
fhrafes all along which are fuch as occur inthe Writings
| N 2 of


ii


ae


196 A further Defence of the


agreed that it


rer be not real Divifibility an


of Mr. 2. B. asthe Notions alfo in your Letter are very
like the Notions in Judge Hales’s Writings and his) outa fii
of thofe two Conceptws’s | fay, one adequate Concept
does refult, which muft reach all Spirits, and none buti j
Spirits, or elfe we mifs our mark.
adequate Conceptus, which you call Conceptus Fundamen-4 th |i
talis , and acknowledge to be Subftance, we are both
is Subftance. But the Conceptus Formalu:
whereby it is diftinguifhed from all Subftance that is nop it y
Spirit, that we do not feem to hit on alike. For unleft
all whatever is,.is Sperit, we are to give fuch a Subftanceg intiny
to Spirit as is {pecifically oppofite to all other Subftaner

Sn the Univerfe, befides it felf, or elfe we do nothings
Now I demand, whether there be not Jdatter in the
World as well as Spirit, and whether the immediate

known, and univerfally acknowledged Notion of Japan
d Impenctrability of its partite fy


Now for the firft in-


one to another. This is body or matter according to th
common Notion of Philofophers, +2 wean Nacallov oy] Mi yyy,


sumey. And if this be the immediate character of matten


it naturally and logically follows; that the immediaty
Spirit, mult be Indah


DIE Narr


character of its oppofite Species,
vifibility and Penetrability. And. therefore thofe .eflen
tial Characters muft be a part of the Conceptus Formal
of a Spirit, whereby it is diftinguifhed from body or mai
ter. Sothat two Subftances, Adatter and Spirit, ftand of
pofite one to another, fpecifically diftinct,by their imme
diate, effential and infeparable Attributes, the one bein
really difcerpible.and. impenetrable, the other penetrabh
and indifcerpible , fufficiently thus to be difcriminated
before we confider any Principle of Adseiry in eithe


And thus much being conceded, that there.are thefe tig


kinds of Subftances in the World fo defcribed, | appe:
to any mans faculties, whether of the two, Spersts


not the more likely to be the Fountain of all Life arg
Motion, and Afatter a meerly paffive Principle , that®
to fay, unactive of it felf, nor moved but as the oth#,,.'


I hit


mail


fi


Over


fil
wis


Mitiet


0S fn
This
Conenty


fbn
(lf Ant)
Bu


pid Wh


My I


Dbl
ani |
boy


Hf Us


Principle moves it, and modifies it. And thereforify, .


thal


True Notion of a Spirit. 1o7


* “Gi chat the true Notion ofa Spirit in general is, what I have
‘fet down Seét. 18. viz. An immaterial (whichis, a pene-
WN grable and indi [cerpible) fubftance, intrinfecally endued with
NN Life and Motion. Whatever is this, is Spirit, and what-
‘li ever fabftance is not this, isno Spirit, but AZatter. And
“that Life and Motion, and Sympathy and Syn-energy
‘t fhould intrinfecally refultfrom a fubftance that is fo much
‘lone as to beindifcerpible, and fo fubtile, as to be in fuch
i Siifort penetrable, as is there defcribed, rather than from
Wli@aftatter that is the contrary , how rational it is I have
snugintimated in Sed, 31. which Section is worth ones feri-
ul@us confideration and attention.
wohl} “Thus therefore it is, that though we both agree in the
 Nonceptus Fundamentals of a Spirit in general, that it is
iniiWabfrance, yet we differ in the Concepts Formalis, in that
wi/@ou mifs that part which is firft and moft immediate in
{ihe f{pecification of it, which includes its Penetrability
iipiifind Indifcerpibility, that which makes it Ens unum per fe
vit non per alind, which every thing, that is not a Spirit,
iwi, Viz. Ens unum per alind, a thing held together in‘one
vik y vertue of fomething elfe, not immediately of its own
yuiffence becoming one, and therefore is difcerpible, and
lime part feparable from another. a ll |


5


} : Sekt GC Fad ih


oliiit threefold faultine/s in the Pfychopyrifts Conceptus For=
wit Malis of aSpirit;, one of which not only a Miltake, bue
tly 4 Mifchief: And of the neceffity of a Spirits Penetrabi-
ia lity as well as Indifcerpibility , and how natural it is ta
|i conceive, that from fuch a fubftance do iffue the operations


ig Of Life.
r i] ° o 6 ®
ui "A FHerefore your Conceptus Formalis of a Spirit in


general, viz. Virtus vitaliter altiva, perceptiva,

"(Mt appecctiva, feems to me faulty upon a threefold ac-
@punt. Firlt, in that it leaves out what is contained in

| N 3 the


—


198 A further Defence of the
the Conceptus Formalis of a Spivit in general, namely its ¥
Penetrabiliry and Indifcerpibility. And, Secondly, in that)
it puts into this Comceptus Formalis of a Spirit more than,
we can rationally affure our felves to be in every Spirit
viz. Perception: For we have no aflurance that a Plaftecky
Spirit has Perception, but may well be aflured that qua
trenus Plaftick it has none. Otherwife the Soul would!
perceive the organization of her own Body. And,
thirdly and laftly, 1 do not eafily affent to that conceit
ofa Trinity in this Conceptus Formalis, which you make
to confift in Virtute una-trina, Vitali, Appetitiva, & Per-
_ ceptiva: Which makes three no more than Avimal, Homo;
and Brutum make three, or Cupiditas, Defiderinm & Fugay

But this is but an harmlefs miftake, but the omilflion
of Immaterial in your Conceptus Formalis, or which is al
one, of Penetrability and Indifcerpibility, is not only ;
miftake but a mifchief, itimplying, that the Verrus Appey
titiva and Perceptiva, may be in a fabftance though A%
terial, which betrays much of the fuccours that Phileg *“
fophy affords to Religion in the points of the Exiftence cg ™)

a God and Immortality of the Soul, ifitwere true: Bu
that Adateria qualitercunque modificata is uncapable. a
Perception, both the Cartefians all affirm, andl have
think abundantly demonftrated in my Writings.“

In this thing therefore, you and I fandamentally di
fer, -in that you omit, butI include Penetrabslity and In
difcerpibility in the Conceptus Formalis of a Spirit. So th:
nothing can be a Spirit that has them not in the fen
that 1 declare. “Spsrit muft be Penetrative of Spirit ary
of Matter as well as Indifterpible, elfe would it be mo
hard than any Flint ; but its Penetrability makes it mow
pliant and fubtile than the fubtileft: Matter imaginabl§

And toa fubftance of fuch. an Oxenefs and Subtilty is t
tionally attributed whatever Aézivity, Sympathy, Syn

nergy, Appetite, and Perception is found inthe World,

inoted above: Heretherefore is the moft notorious dif
ference betwixt us, in which I am the more concerneg
becaufe it is not only a Miftake, but a Mifchief, as] faa
before. ‘ But I proceed. : : 5. SEQ]


True Notion of a Spirit.


i SECT. UL


Mm
sii) Lhat he that does not admit a diftinkion of fubftance into
Ji) Material avd Immaterial , antecedent to vital powers
tq)  @0a operations, cannot pretend out of any vital Virtues
nit or Powers to be better acquainted with Spirit than
» dt ~~» Matter.


‘my ) y° U fay; you ave your felf far better acquainted with
“dt the nature of a Spirit by that effential Virtus Formals
oq Namely, by that ana trina Virtus abovenamed) than from
.\ the Notion of Subftantiality.. But I demand here, you

oil) Omitting that part of the Conceptus Formalis which 1 con-
\.4 €end for, how does it appear that you do fot entertain

|i matter for the fubftantiality of this Virtus Formalis, and

_ ,@ fo embrace a Cloud inftead of Fuzo, fome modified body
§ inftead of a pure /pirie ? No onecan pretend to be bet-
| ter acquainted with a Spirit by that una-trina Virtus For-

ut Males, Dut he that can prove that thofe Virtues are In-

ut ‘ competible to A4ter, and fo withal that there are two
© A diftin& kinds of Subftances in the Univerfe, Spirit, and
ait ; Body or Matter, and that oppofite Attributes are to be
hi given to thefe oppofite Species, and confequently that

” i Adatter or Body being difeerpible, a Spirit ought to be iz-

iN difcerpible, and Body being Impenetrable, according to

"i the common Tenent of Philofophers, Spirits fhould be

i Penetrable, And laftly, Adatter being dead, and paf-

i" five, Spirit fhould be the fource of life and activity. If

. this be not aneafie, natural, and found method of Phi-

i" lofophifing, I appeal to any ones J udgment. Mie


N 4 SECT.


2 dre REP i Se ae Se =


fateh Deft ofce
SECT. Ty.


W hat Confufion and Repugnancy itis to make Self-motion of
Intrinfick Vitality, paxt of the Concéptus Formalis of
a Spirit, and yet to attribute it.to fome Matter. And
what a flippery bufinefs,. to put Natures Active and
Paflive, injtead of Immaterial avd Material. .


WUT fay you, And yet I dare not fay that aSelf-mo-=
BY ving Principle is proper toa Spirit, But Ariftorle did
not ftick:to fay fo, who made the matter a meer paflive
Principle. And furely ifa Man will follow the common
fentiments of humane Nature, if he acknowledge a Spi-
ritual fubftance diftinét from the material, he will give
Aétivity to the one, and Pafivity or AGuability to the
other. It is a ftrange forceand diftortion to the facul-
ties of the Mind to do otherwife:. But you hold on, Wor
do I confent to Campanella,.De fen{u rerum, and Dr.
Ciiflon chat would make all things alive by an effentiating
form inthe very Elements. Herel delire you to confider
if any Matter have life and motion in it felf, whether all
has not, though varioufly modified. And whether it bé
fair play thus, when there is no reafon for it, to make
Fifh of one, and Flefh of another. All the matter of
the natural World, the common confent of moit Philo
fophers hath made of one Species, which it would not
be if part were /elf-moved, part not.
Befides, when you include life, (of which Self-motion
certainly is an effect) in the Conceptus Formalw of a {pi=
rit; isnot this an horrible Confyfion or Repugnancy ta
fay, it is not proper to a fpirit , and confequently may
belong to matter 2? That which is included in your Con-


ceptus Formalis, which is the /pecsfick, difference of the Ai,


thing, is proper to eat and therefore cannot be
communicated to another. W


herefore we areto deny 4),


Self-motion in the matter it felf every-where, as not be fy,


longing thereto, but to Spirit. But it follows,


I diftinguifh Natures into Adibe and Patthe, and Pat-
i] fibitp ferveth me as well as WMatertality. ButI defire to
{| know,, why it fhould ferve your turn as well as Materia-
“i dsty, when as it is of more laxnefs and uncertainty, and
“Sf therefore may ferve yon a flippery trick. But Adsteria-
“y Sty is a notion more ftrict , diftin&; and {teady, and
‘\ié) belongs only to one kind of things, that is to fay, to
| things Adaterial, but Pafivity to things Immaterial as

} well as Material. But youholdon.


=


SRiGoDas¥:
iu Lhat the Learned Plychopyrift seed not be in defpair of
Went” keowing whence the Defcenfus Gravium zs, whether frons
an innate Principle in the heavy Bodies themfelves , or
from fome Spirit, fith the Author of the Difcour fe touch=


1 lil eng the True Notion of a Spirit, bas fo plainly demonftra.
i Dhl) ted the lateer in his Wi ritings. aT!


al “BS TF whence the Detcentus grabium és, 7 delpair of
sor ll knowing, If you mean whether it be from an in-
jgitimate Principle of the heavy things themfelves, or from
dome Immaterial Principle that moves the Matter of the
wt} World, I will adventure to tell you, the thing is not
apiisfo defperate as you fancy, but bid you be of good cou-
sage ; For it isdemonftrable, that the Defcenfus QP AVi-
wm is not from any Principle {pringing from their own
wihMatter, but from-an Jmmaterial Principle, diftige there.
,jiifrom., Which Principle to be the Mover of, anMatter
«of the Univerfe, I have over and over again@temonftra-
gated in my Enchiridion Maetaphyficum. And particularly,
“/ltwhich ‘was a main Point betwixt that excellent perfon
"udge Ffales and my felf, in the rifing ofa wooden Run-
 ydle from the bottom of a Bucket of Wateiay
“M1 will give you that Inftance for many, which I defire
flyou to canvas from the very firft rife of it, Enchirsd.
Wderaphy/. cap. 13. fect. 4. 7, 8. reading for furenels al]
i | Ree Gee el remy ret ">the


True Notion of a Spirit, 204


A further Defence of the

the Scholia upon that Chapter, Volum. Philofoph. Tom.
J. P. 219, 220, 221, &c. where all the Objections of
Chriftophorus Sturmins ave anfwered, againft this Princs-
pinm Fylarchicum, And if you be: not yet fatisfied,
‘which I think it.is impoflible for any one not to be, that
underftands what I have writ ;! read pag. 363. my Ad-
notamentum vicefimum in Tentamen de Gravitatione, &c.
and my Scholia upon that Adnotamentum,p.369,370,0'¢.
Where you fhall find that excellent perfon, whofe Philo-
fophy notwithftanding much fymbolizes with that which
you feem to embrace, very handfomly, but covertly to
give up the caufe and acknowledge my experiment of
the two Hydroftatical Buckets to perform the feat they
are brought for. Seep. 370. 4. 13. and fo on; and if
you read all the Scholia till pag. 373. and fet your felf
diftin@ly to underftand, you will be convinced whether
you will or no. |

_. And that nothing may be wanting to undeceive you,


read that little Treatife whofe Title is, Philofophematuns | 4


ernditi Adtoris Difficilium Pugetum de Principis Mo-


tuum Naturalium five de Gientiis medits , & de modo | wi


Rarefattionis G@ Condenfationis Exammatio. Where I an«
{wer alfo to no lefs than nine or ten Objections of that
worthy Author againft my Spirit of Nature. And I doubt
not but if he had lived to read what I have writ, he
would have been wholly of my mind, and relinquifhed
that way of Philofophifing , which you as well as he
feem to be entangled in, being thus offered more cleat
Light, iBos I hold on with your Letter. ?


not th,


bwhvae
ie


WM
\p
sane


rn
h
(fi


Hi


y
tf ie
Nik (Vida


nd
| inde


ol


{Ai


faall


k |


True Notion of a Spirit.
SEC To Vi.


That if there be an innate Self-moving principle ix the mata
’ ter of heavy Bodies, their refting when they are come to
the Earth, does not exccufe them from parti copating of the
Conceptus Formalis of 4 Spirit. And that there may
be as much Vitality im Fixednefs, as in Flitting.. The
waft difference ftill remaining betwixt the Pfychopyrift
and the Author of the True Notion of a Spirit, touching
the Conceptus Formalis. 7


A ND if it be true, fay you, of an innate Principle,
I call it not therefore aSpirit, becaufe it is but Pafli-
vorum motus ageregativus ad unionem in quiete, wher
Spirits Motion is ‘ital, and foeffential to them, that the
tend not to union in Quiefcence, but in everlafiing Atlivity ;
Qutefcence in Inactivity being as much againft their N. ALUre.,
as Motion againft aStone’s. To which I fay, (1.) If the
Defcenfus gravium be from an Jnnare Principle, that is
to fay, that the Matter there moves it felf (and if you
are for Effzite media, as the abovementioned Author is,
I have abundantly confuted them in my Examination)
you adjoyn the Property of a Spirit to Matter, as I no-
ted above, which isa plain Repugnancy, that any part
of the Formalis Conceptus of one Species, fhould be an At-
tribute in its oppofite Species.‘ This breaks in pieces all
the bands of Logick. (2) It is not here mere paffivoruim
motws, but heavy Bodies moving themfelves, as is fup-
pofed, they are as much aéive as paffive, and are no
otherwife paflivein this point but as they act upon them.
felves, and Spirits, properly fo called, are paffive in
that fenfe. So that an heavy Body is made a Mungril
kind of thing upon this account, a Chimera or Centaure:
For look upon its Self-aétvity, and it looks like a Spi.
rit, look upon its Aateriality (for it is meer Matter,
actuating it felf according to this Hypothefis) and it is
MO other thana Body. (3.) Ifthey be S:lfmoved, it
) * is a matters


203


et
rea


Pre etigy oe baci


are


neeeiaeEe it


204 A further Defence of the


matters not to what they tend, Body in the mean time
has the property of a Spirit, as I faid before. And
fourthly and laftly, That Stones and other Bodies reft
upon’the Earth, is not by a torpid Inactivity in them,
fortheir torpid Inactivity. would not excufe them from
being flung off by the circular motion of the Earth on
its Poles, as I have plainly demonftrated in my Enchi-
ridion Metaphyficum, but what brings them thither, de-
tainsthem there, vsz. the Ayloftatick Spirit of the Uni-
verfe, whofe detaining them is as vital and pofirrve as his
bringing them thither. And there isas much Activity
in fixednefs of thoughts, asin difcurfive Flitting from
one thing to another. Thus miftakenly is that Vétal
operation given to heavy Bodies, that belongs to the
Spirit of the World. And if you conceit this Motion
or Fixation inthe heavy Bodies themfelves, in that they
defend themfelves from being caft off from the Earth by
the diurnal motion thereof, it is as pofitive Vitality in
them, as their defcent to the Earth. As there is as
much life and vigour required in {topping on the Frets
of a Lute above, as in ftriking below on the Strings.
Thus things are, and yet you conclude in the next
lines, |
So that I think, we ave agreed of the Formal notice of a
Spirit in general, and of an Intellettive, Senfitive, and Ve-
erative in Specie, That there may bea vegetative Spe-
cies without Seafe, and that there is a fenfitive Species
without Jntelect, and that Eternal Jnrellect is without
Vegetation, 1 eafily grant and:am agreed to with you.
Bot there is a vat difference yet betwixt us, in that in
the Formalis Conceptus of a Spirit, you leave out Jimmate-
riality, or whichis the fame Penetrability and Inds{cerpi-
bikty. Which flip, as I {aid above, is not a meer mi-
frake, but a mifchief. This is all that I have to note
touching yout Conceptus Formalis of a Spirit in general.


sEcyT


SECT:


itt, () Dbat Materia and Subftantia d


and what Subftantia proper


that the bare and naked fubftance of
able neither in this life, nor haply in the life to come.
But only Effential Attributes, Habitudes, and Opera:


tions.


wthe tlaand Materia.


either Brutumor Homo.
fie Analyfis.


Je json onan


s
s+ oa
= =


Relatibug:


a ea
= = om. S


f


Accident, tells us not what it is


Vil.


fer as Genus and § pecies;
and adequately'is. And
a thing 1s not know.


Airy Afling to the Conceptas Fundamentals
m Pp But truly Tama a lofs about the Co
iid} MeEntalis, wherein rhe true difference lyeth between Subftan-
Methinks the differe
win} vious to any obferving Eye,
gi) tea and AZatersa differ as Genus and Spectes, foas Animal
and Brutnm differ , and you may.-perfect the divifion
thus, Subftance -is either Adztter or Spirit, as Animal is
I content my felf with {uch e2-
But you proceed.
Do we by Subttantia mean a Conceptus Realis, or oniy
0 fay st doth fubftare accidentibus [peaks
but a Relation directly, and leaves the queftion unanfwered.
} Quid eft quod fubftat accidentibus? To


lt Ens reale, or elfe tells us not what it


wt) €1-) As for that relative fignificatio


¢fo much regard it.


flinhefion, as an Accident does


« @fubiifts by it felf, and ftands as i


» you fay thus,
nceptus Funda-


nce lies very ob-
namely , that Sub/tan-


fay if is not an
, but what it is wor. To fay
wf # does fubfiftere per fe, either faith no more than that ir 3
is that doth fubjift.
n, we do not here
It looks more like that Lo-
ll gical Notion of Subjestum, which relates to Adjuntlum.
,§ ©.) And though to fay it is no Accident tells us noe
‘ji What itis, but what it is not > yet it illoftrates its na-
"if ture by its oppofition, (as that Logical Maxim teacheth
* (G88, Contraria juxta fe pofita magts elucefcunt:) “FheNa-
ture of an Accident being fach that it cannot exift but

" Hin another ; that of a Subftance fuch, that it needs no


in another Subject, but
C were On its own legs.


True Notion of a Spirit.


ts


Fhis


206 A further Defence of the

This is the proper Character of Sub/tance, quatenus
Subftance. What can’ be more plain than this? Anda
Man is to confider whether it be not a piece of *Ava:deve
cia, when fo compleat a definition is given, to inquire
further, what is that which does fubfift by its felf, as if
oneafter he has heard another define A4an to be a rational
living Creature, fhould demand, I but, what is that
which is a rational living Creature? What can be.an-
{wered but, That itisa Man? And fo when we define
Subftance to be a Being fubfifting by it felf, if one de-
mand, but what is that which fubfifts by it felf ? What
can be anfwered but that itis Subftance? . And I will fur-
ther add out of my Enchiridion Ethicum lib, 3. cap. 4.
‘That it is one of the Rules of Prudence to remember in
our Contemplations. Mullins ret intimam nudamve effen-
tiam cognofcs poffe, fed Artributa tantum effentialia effens .
tialefque Hlabitudines, which 1 fet down to ftear men off
from fplitting themfelves on this Rock , as if by any de-
finition, or any way elfe, they were able to difcover
the very bare Effence or Subftance of any thing. Which
I think isthe Priviledge of the fEHOVAH Himfelf
only, the only Wife GOD, and great Effentiator of all
things. But to perceive the bare Effence of any thing
beyond its Attributes, Operations, and Habitudes, is
not given to any Creature, as Iconceive, either in this
otnee or in that which is to come, But we'll pro-
ceed,


True Notion of a Spirit. 207
SECT. VUE


|) Lat words are vot to be prefcinded from their ufwal and
“| Reown fignification, and that the meaning of Materia
an ufe includes Impenetrability , Difcerpibility, and
Self- Inactivity, according to Ariftotle, and the beft ap-
proved Philofophers; With a Note of the Specifically Ain
1.) SPintt Subftance of Spirit and Matter aniecedently, to
“|| the Self- Activity of the one, and the self-Inactivity of


““\| the other.
Lh tlle Uead Notationem Nominis , fay you, diftinét from
AN ufe doth not Materia and Subftantia fignifie the


| fame Fundamental Conceptus? This gueftion is
\'fomething obfcure. I know no Notatip Nominis, but
\"Gthe Interpretation of it from fome Logical Topick,
"(which muft be in words compound or derivative; but
i""\Adaterta isa word fimple. And why fhould we not take
W\G@ords. according to their ufe, rather than prefcind
them from it? You would have thofe two terms figni-
tittle the one no more than the other, or neither more than
w'O what fome one diftin@ive Conceptus Formalis might
ih be joined indifferently. But I fay again, they are not
int Hone, bute differ as Genus and Species, and Materia isthe
culipecies of Sub/Pantia, and includes in it its own Concepts
| I ormales, which is Impenetrability, Difcerpibility and
lelf-Inactivity according to Ariftotle and the beft appro-
ted Philofophers, an Oppofite Conceptus Formalis to that
Uf Spirit. That is the form or notifying difference of
Matter, as Penetrability, Indifcerpibility, and Self- A@i-
ity, of Spirit. But you goon.
| You difference, fay you, Subftance and Matter anteces
Mlently to the formal difference by Penetrability and Impenes
Vi Npabelity Indivifibility and Divifibility. Here, fay I,
ou confound Subftance and Matter, as if they adequately
lignified the fame, when as according to ufe in all ap-
Wtovable Philofophy, they differ as Genus and Species >


Nor


508 A further Defence of the


Nor does Penetrability and Indivifibility, Impenetra


bility and Divifibility antecede the whole formal diffe- § ’ !


rence of Matter and Spirit, whenas they themfelves are
part of the Conceptus Formalis, the one of AZareer' the
other of a Spirit y or are the. whole Conceprus Formalis
of the Specifically diftinct fubftance of each, «antece-
dent to the Aésvity of the one, and Inaétivity of the
other.


Ce CE 1x.


Of the knowledge of the Indivifibility and Penetrability-of”


Spirits 2 this Life, how far tt: may extend. » And that


holy Souls in the other World\are no Affectors of ufelefs'


knowledge.


py T firft, fay you, I defpair of knowing én his Life


how far Spiritual Subftances are Penetrable and Indi=


vifible. I grant you fuch an extenfion as {hall free theta sh


from being Nothing Subftantial, and from being infinite as
Godis. fa Man benot inaright method of conceiving


or ordering his thoughts, he may be in the like puzzleqy «


in the other World that he finds himfelf imthis. But
-3£ he confider that God has created’a Spirit, Ens. wus:
per fe & non per alind, fo that immediately of its own:
nature, if it be at all, it is Indifcerpible; Asa plain
Triangle, if it beat all, hath its Angles equal to two
right ones, he may {afely conclude, even in this Life:
that a Spirit is utterly Indifcerpible, fo long as it is, but
God may annihilate it at his pleafure: |
‘And now for the Penetrability of Spirits, it. is eviden'
even inthis Life, that they can wholly penetrate on:


( Eu
Vine
femal
i Bnd
MAIN
ty) i},
alten
hy I
Alien
Ae

Meet


rnother fo far as their Effence extends, for one mai
have a greater amplitude than. another. And that thigt),
parts, asi may fo call them, of the fame Spirit may, 19)


the contraction of it felf, penetrate one another,


that there may be a Reduplication of Effenee throup; 1 nN


tli


Lrue Notion of a Spirit. 209


i


util the whole Spirit. But as you very well obferve with
li Sealiger before you, a Spirit can neither extend it {elf


\isawl 2 infinitum , nor contract it felf in puntit sdevotnra,
mihi Into the zullity of a point. And though your modefty make
‘rill. Nothing of this, methinks this is fufficient for a Ratio.
veel Nal Creature, whether here or hereafter , forI do not
ft) think that inthe other World holy Souls affect ufelefé


—
a


1 knowledge. In this therefore, we both, I conceive, do
i fully agree, that we are neither of us Nullibifts nor Hoe
“ denmertans.


9 eC Tix,


iii) Dhat Infeparably continued Amplitude belongs to Spirits

| @ well as difcreet Quantity, with an Anfwer to the
moft plaufible objettion againft the fame, Whether Forms
multiply themfelves or no, and in what fence it is true,
yy’ that Generation is the work of Spirits not Bodies, and
uh by what means many Subftances become one.


iQ Econdly , fay you, we Grant Spirits a Quantitas dif.
creta, they are Numerous, Individuate; and Forme
sth iif multiplicant, Generation is the work of Spirits and not
«, Ol Bodies, and how can I tell that that God that can make-
yli@any out of one, cannot make many into one, and unite and
matvide them as well as Matter. This paffage is worth our
jmattentive confideration; wherefore] fay, (1.) If Quan-
" (eitas difcreta be allowed to Spirits, why may not an In-
“jiifcerpible continuance of Amplitude be allowed to
them alfo. You'l reply, it may not, becaufe (and it is
jwpone of the moft ingenious Allegations that I have met
""fwith) that then a Spirit might be meafured bya Ruler
i We Wood or Brafs, and be declared to be fo many Inches
¢ Ipr Foot long or wide, which would argue it not to be a
0" pirat but ALatter or Body. Why? becaufe it is meas
(ared by Wood or Brafs ? What if we fhould number a
o“ertain numerous multitude of Spirits, cafting up their
aa O numbers


“aio. Afurther Defence of the


numbers by Brafs Counters, would it follow that thefe
Spirits are Corporeal becaufe the Brafs Counters are fo ?
The Reafon isas firmin theone as the other, as I have
more fully noted elfewhere. (2.) And now for Forma
fe multiplicant, 1 defireto know what is meant by Forma,
whether the Accidents or Modes of fome Subitance or
fome Subjtances actuating other Subftances. If the for-
mer, it reaches not our cafe, the Argument being of
Spirits that are Subftances. And I fay, no Subftance can
multiply it felf, for if Subftance remaining {fill the fame
entire Subftance fhould multiply into other Subftances,
it were an act of Creation, which is incompetible to a
Creature. But if it fhed, or part with part of its own
Subftance, that in my account is not Multiplication but ¥”
Divifion. (3.2) That which follows is a found and gol+ 9?"


den faying, if rightly underftood, That Generation ist. ;


the work of Spirirs and not of Bodies,for Body or Matter: mn
of it felf is paflive, and.can do nothing but as it is. either
mediately or immediately actuated by a Spirit, as Fire,
and Water and Air, and all other Bodies that are ing
motion are actuated, either by the Ayloftatick Sperit ofm,
the Univerfe, or by their own proper Spirit, as Brute
Animals, Angels, and Men. _ And thus. are all Inani-
mate Creatures, fo vulgarly ftyled , Generated by the
Spirit of Nature, and all particular Animals, Brutes and
Men, are Generated, that is to fay, Formed by them,
proper Souls, the Spirit of Nature, fo far as itis fitting, §K*
preparing, the matter, but all in the mean time depend-§
ing upon that univerfal Creator of all things, God, §."
blefled for ever. hull

But in the laft place, bow 4 man may tel that that Goom "i
shat can make many ont of one, cannot make many into one.§.)
éc. If the meaning be of Subftantial Spirits , it hasg


been already noted, that God acting in Nature, does,"


not make many Subftances out of one Subitance, the ig
fame Subltance remaining ftill entire, for then Generation
would be Creation. And no fober Man believes, thay’,
God aflifts any Creature fo in Natural Courfe, as to en-p si:


: True Notion of a Spirit. 210
ch) able it to Create. Andthén I fuppofe, that he that be-
ll lieves not this, is not bound to puzzle himfelf, why
fim God may not as well make many Subitances into one ag
fil Many out of one, whenas he holds he does not the lat-
ieee ter, but that every Subftance that is Created, is Created
vf immediately from God, And whatever two or more
vi dl) Subftances become one, it is either by Vital [ubordinate
we ot Act uatcon of the Souls and Bodies of Men that makes one
‘inMan, and of the Souls and Bodies of Brutes that makes
ijt fome Species of Brute Creatures > OF élfe for Lnani-
ily Meeate Creatures fo ufually called, as Plants and all other
‘peo animate Bodies that feem different Species of things,
vy yaehey in their particular confiftences are held together in-
«{oftO One by the Spirit of the Univerfe.. And I know no
vq @ther ways, according to the Courfe of Nature of many
iapubftances becoming oné, but thefe.


SEC PF. Xp


OF Gods making many Spirits or Souls into one, and of the
sl Many difficulties that opinton 6 encumbred with, as parti=
'_  Cdlarly 22 that inftance of the Souls of Men being fuppofed
"to be ex traduce.


i ‘BY T’ upon further attention to your laft words, And
NSD divide them as well as ALatter you feem not to make
UMD ftrange an Oxenefs, or myiterious divifion of thefe Spi-
},“@lts as I conceiv’d from your frame of speech at firft, But
hen you add, and unite Gd divide them as well as Mat-
"ir, it implies I confefs no contradi@tion to the power
iii God, that He may holda Company of contratted Spi-
i Mts together or expanded, as well as the S perst of Nature
ws" MCongeries of Particles, and then diflander them again.
6) Mit to fay any fuch thing is done, [fee neither truth nor
w'Mefulnefs in the Affertion. But this we will confider
«,Mitther in what follows, which is this.
WBat sf he fhould, (viz, divide thefe Spirits) thae ee
i | O 2 ¢


212 A further Defence of the


be no deftruttion of their Species as the Mixtorum diffolue |
tio is, but as every drop of divided Water is Water, ana


one Candle lighting many, and many joining inone are aA


the fame Fire, fo much more would it be with Spirits were
they united or divided, and thetr Locality and Penetrabi-
lity are palt our conceit. “Vhis looks plaufibly and fpeci-


oufly on’t at the firft fight, and itis true, that the divi-- sa


ding of thefe united Spirits would be no deftruction off ,,:
their Species, as it is in the diffolution of mixt Bodies +4 ;,,,
but if we look more clofely into the bufinefs, this Af} )
fertion is burdened with great difficulties, and many de


mands are to be fatisfied before it can be allowed. For i


this multitude of Spirits, of Souls fuppofe, made into


one, are yet fo many Individual Souls notwithftanding ai
this union; As fuppofe a Congeries of Phyfical Adonads.f


or {malleft Particles of Matter of which fome Body is
compounded, are ftill fo many Individual or Numerica)f ,;.«,
Particles or Phyfical AZonads notwithftanding this thet} ;, .
Compofition into one Body. Wherefore concerning»)


the Soul of Adam, (for this contrivance feems chiefly tog,


look toward their opinion, that fay the Soul is ex tra’ i
duce, which fome, otherwife prudent and intelligeni}y
Men, do hold.) 7

Firft,I demand, whether this multitude of Souls whiclf,
makes up that one Soul of Adam, as fo many Dropyy,


make up one Bucket of Water, haveall of them Percepqy,,
tion and Underftanding inthemorno, which if they allf;,”
have, their Nature being co-ordinate, they are fo man,’
Perfonalities. And Adams Name might have been Lewy,’
gion, at leaft, as well as the Poflefled Man’s in thi .-


Gofpel. Sak’,
Secondly, If Adam was not fuch a Legion, or ratheg,,


innumerable company of Spirits, which one of thif,, °
company was Adam himfelf ; and who were the reft ci..."


the Company ? Were they all the Souls of Men tha
were to come into this World, befide the Soul of Adan ah
and the Soul of Eve, or was Eve’s Body full fraughiy,”
with Souls alfo? And if fo, m

) i. oe Thirdly# ™)


True Notion of a Spirit.
Thirdly, I demand, what laws of thedding of Souls


21%


lj there is betwixt Male and Female in Generation, and


L


whether the Soul from the Female is fhed when a Female


,, 4 Child was to be born, anda Soul from a Male when a
1; Male-Child was to be born? In which I know no abfur-
 dity in. Nature unlefs it fhould be one, and that fhould
a be implyed thereby, that Souls are Afale and Female s
‘ied, DUt Theology in the mean time would be at a lofs, to
"finda Male Soul in the Virgin of whom was born the

It Meflias. But to let this pafs, we enquire,

“I Fourthly, Whether that innumerable company of


“ ") Soulsin_Adamand E


ve were in an expanded condition or


1 Gontraded, If in an expanded condition, they all im-
“St mediately reaching the Body well fitted, and inactuating
lit, the vigour of the Body muft be increafed according
“(to the numerofity of thefe actuating Spirits in it; what
Vi} a Lufty Young Man then muft this Adamhave been and


ti i Eve what a Frolick Youn


g Virgin, or elfe how hugely


uiilifand tearingly ftrong had they both been, like fome °E-
it) treeyéusv@ poflefled with many Demons ? Pel
sw) Fifthly, What an infinite change would there be in
\i@Adam and Eve when they had parted with fo many of
gtheir actuating Spirits in Venereal Copulation: Adam
iio his Male Children, and Eve to the Female, whicti
aj U@they were fo to diftribute to their immediate Off-f pring
«d@Male and Female, as only to leave their own fingle Souls
‘ij ffor the actuating their Bodies while they lived, other-
‘islfvate if here were any more left behind, what became of


,lfhem at their Death ? and therefore,


is Sixthly, I further enquire, there being a number of
"bouls imparted in Generation, to whether Male or Fe-


ydlmale that are to be born, what becomes
,( ibouls when -a Man or Woman dies and


‘Wied ?


of thofe many
never is Mare


yaa Seventhly, I would have you confider what a diffe-
(jimence there muft be betwixt the vigour of unmarried


‘(iten and Women of fome


| ae this


3


thoufand years ago, and thofe


prefent Age, every one now being reduced to
O 3


tha¢


214 A further Defence of the


that paucity of Souls to actuate his Body in comparifon ff 1!
of what they had fomethoufand years ago, and how uns § i)!


compliable this difference is with Hiftory.

 Ejighthly, If chefe Souls be not all of them in this ex-.
panded condition, but only the proper Souls of Adam
and Eve ; and the numerous Remainder being ina con-
trailed condition, | demand, how all thefe become one
Soul infuch afort as you (if I miftake you not) fancy’


all the Lights of feveral Candles light up together be-4 i


come one Light or Fire? And whether they will not lie ;
inthe Body of Adam and Eve as the little Eggs that!
make up the Roe of aFifh; as alfo whether this Roe of!
Souls or Spirits pafs through the whole Body , or in
what peculiar Veffels are they lodged? And
 Ninthly, Thete contracted Spirits in reality having ase
much Effence or Subftance in them as the expanded, (Celfe
when they inform a Body, to actuate the whole Body,
they muff be inlarged by eeking and patching more fub- ti:\/
{tance to them, which is contrary to the Nature of Spi-§ {yin
rits) I demand, what becomes of them alfo when a Mary
or Woman dies and tranfmits them to no other, by
having to do with the Duties of Wedlock ?

Tenthly, As for your illuftrations of what you willl),
have inthis point, That thefe feveral Spirits or Soul:


may be united into one Soul, as the feveral lights of 4 e


Candle into one Light or Fire, or as feveral Drops ow;

Water into one Bucket of Water,-if that be brought tagj,..
illuftrate the union of thefe Spirits, as well as their Iden}.
tity of Species ftill upon their divifion;, I defire you tag},
confider the nature of Light throughly, and you fhaly.,.


find it nothing but a certain motion of a A4edsum, whoft ‘y's


parts or Particles are fo or fo qualified, fome fuch way§»;


as Cartefianifm drives at. But here is not Subftance#},,


uniting into one Subftance which is your cafe, but mom;
tion communicated from feveral Movers, becoming on‘§}),,
Motion in one Subject; as when two Men thruft one andg},..'.


the fame Body on, or whip one and the fame Toppy,


though there be two Thrufters or Whippers , the Te
: i: | vie


True Notion of a Spirit. 215


but one motion from them two in that one Body or
Top they thruft or whip. Sothat this comes not home
i} to the point. And for the Drops of Water, or feveral
‘MW Flames ofa Candle joined into one, which viewing your
ai words again, I fufpect may be as well your fenfe, though
1) for furenefs you fhould have faid one Flame rather than
(0) one Fire, although this illuftrates well how fome things
‘ij united keep the fame f{pecifick denomination alfo after
i] they are divided ; yet fuch an wzion as that of Water,
() and likewife divijion makes theSoul ofMan,or of any Ani-
gilt mal elfe look not like Soul or Spirit, but Afatter. And
she] there is a Repugnancy in the very fuppofition, to be
, i ne Soul, or to be one Spirit, and yet to be diviliblein-
9 to parts which are feparately Souis or Spirits, as if every
wig Soul or Spirit were an Homogencal Mas of Soul or Spi-
wil rit, as Water is of Water, and Air of Air. ©
i} But to make an end of this Paragraph, when as in
iotld the laft place you add concerning thefe united Souls or
ei Spirits, And their Locality and Penetrability ave paff our
qilli§ Conceit. I defire you to confider whether it be not a
iv, lothnefs and. unwillingnefs ftrictly and clofely to exa-
mine, rather than an Inability to conceive the Penetrabi-
whlsty and Locality of thefe Spirits Chow they mult be in
«St the Body of Adam, or of any Brute Animal, either in an
ijvild expanded or contratted condition, as has been above no-
ted) that makes you fo fhie of medling with their Loca-
ot4ety and Penetrability. For haply, if you had confidered
visldathe thing fo clofely as I have at this time, you might
‘ewitthave found your felf fo fenfible of the encumbrances on
, (aithe opinion, that you would have quite difcarded it,
waland efpoufed fome other that looks more handfomely
“jqfou't, and is better accorded to the old Avofuick Cabbala,
‘qiithat makes the Active or Spiritual principle Indivifible,
yygor Indifcerpible. ‘The Symbol of which Principle is
Light, but is faid to be created inthe firff day, a Afonad
ieignifying the Indivifible Nature thereof. But to fay
‘(any thing is Spivit, and yet can be actually divided into
\liiparts, is aRepugnancy to the Nature ofthe thing, anda
} j Se ae Contrae


216° A further Defence of the


Contradiction to the Sogia Seomaeds1@, the Divinely.
infpired wifdom of the old Cabbala,


Spe art here:


Whether Souls in Generation be produced as when one Candle
lights another : and how that conceit is falfe, as alfo in-
compliable with the Pfychopyrift?s Hypothefis. With
other difficulties touching the Penetrability and Locality
of {uch a Soul as he imagines,


ET have upon fecond thoughts hit your true meaning
{ inthofe words, Oxe Candle lighting many, and many
jowing or joined in one (1 know not which) are all the
fame Five, that you mean only this, That they are fup-
pofed to be put fonear one another, the Candles being
fo cut on purpofe, that the Wicks might touch, and fo
all the Flames join together, this then is no more than
that of the refemblance of the union of the parts of Wa-
ter. But the activity of Fire does ftill more increafe
thofe difficulties, how Mankind fhould {till retain the
like vivacity (and fo of Brute Creatures) that they did
fome thoufand years ago, their Active principle being
fo much diminifhed, unlefs you recur to that common
plaufible Conceit, That as one Candle lights another
Candle without ‘diminifhing its own Flame, fo Adam?s
Soul may give a Soul to Caiz or Abel without diminifh-
ig hisown. But this is agairift your Hypothefis, which
plainly implies, that many Souls are made into one, and
then feparated or divided upoh Generation. Nor is
there any Refuge in this fimilitude of lighting one Can-
dle at another, for the admotion of the lighted Can-
dle totheunlighted, does only put the fulphurous parts
of the unlighted Candle into motion, and leaves ‘the
[pirit of Nature excited by this new occafion to: purfue
its work, till all the combuftible matter be difperfed,
But what’s this to the production of a Soul or Spirit

| | OES A ot Car


True Notion of a Spirit. 217


“iiwhich is a Subftance ? The lighted Candle produces no
“fubftance , but by its application excites the Spirit of
_jithe World to move, which caufes the Particles of Tal-
low to be in fuch a manner moved as they exhibite to
itour view that Phenomenon of Flame. So that according
j{to this, the production of a Soul ex Traduce, would end
‘in meer Materialifm, and fignifie only, that in Genera-
“*@tion fome matter only is newly modified, as the Tallow
"is or Wax when they pafs out of their ftate of Wax or
i Tallow into that of a bright Flame. Which way of Phi-
Hofophizing, -as it is moft fale, fo it is moft mifchievous
iif men fhould be fo fond as to believe it.

And now indeed touching this compounded Soul of
i)tyours made up of numerous Souls united into one, they
m@being fo Crafs and Material, I can fay as well as you,
their Penetrability and Locality ({o as to make up one
imSoul, fuppofe of Adam) are paft our conceit: Not that
‘(Mit is paft our conceit that Locality fo belongs to the Soul

jciui§that it muft be fomewhere, for you your felf allow it
(4janextenfion, but where it fhould be placed in the Body:
iqiFor it felf being Matter, it cannot penetrate Body, and
viut@therefore if it actuate the whole Body, it muft be difper-
(gilffed in innumerable Pores as it were thereof, which con-
‘cien@liifts very ill with the union of thefe numerous Souls ;
wand if they lie altogether in fome one particular place,
itbe refidue of the Body will be deftitute of Soul, with
whe ill Confequences thereof. Which Confiderations
ulimay very well caufe puzzles touching its Locality, or
: idiather the placing of it; and therefore I fhould think it
y.tlimore advifable to embrace fuch Hypothefes as are not


iy Mpatt our conceit. But we are not to infift overlong upon
ye(itone Paragraph,


sg


SECT.


218 A further Defence of the


SECT. XIIl.


That Penetrability avd Indivifibility are mot Accidents of’
a Spirit, bat Effential Attributes thereof: And that it
usa prece of “Araudzvatz, 4s was noted before, to hope to


know the bare and naked f{ubjiance of any thing,


Hirdly, fay you, but were we fure of what you fay
therein, thefe two, Penetrability axd Indivifibility,
Speak but Accidents though proper, and therefore are no fa-
tisfying notice of the notion of Subjtaace Spiritual, as di-
ftind from Mater. To this I fay, that Penetrabslity and
Indivipbility are not Accidents at all, no more than Ra-
tionale is an Accident in the definition of a Man, but
they are Immediate Effential Attributes, as much as any
ate in the World, and at leaft part of the full Concep-
tus Formalis of a Spirit as fuch, or of a Spirit in gee
neral. |
You feem'to require fuch a Definition or Reprefenta-

tion of athing:as fhould exhibit to your Perception the
very naked Subftance of the thing, againft which point
of what Ariffotle calls’Aradevete, nor I know well how
to Englifh it, is that Caution or Advertifement in the
third Book of my Enxchiridion Ethicum, That the bare
and intimate Effence of a thing is not to be known, but
only certain Effential Attributes or Habitudes, as I no-
ted before. And this is a Rule, I think, worth the in-
culcating and obferving. Whenwe fay, Homo eft Ani-
mal Rationale, which is accounted as Effential a Defini-
tion as any we meet withal, and the moft immediate; j
Yet Rationale, which isa {pecifick difference accounted, }
and therefore abundantly Effential, when we clofely
look unto it, it affordsus no more than the notice that
a Man is fuch an one that has the faculty and operation


of Reafoning, but neither the faculty nor operation is the jy,


Effence. Let this intimation fuffce to mind us of the #


limits of our own knowledge, that we do not vainly $f,
ho either'—


True Notion of a Spirit. 21 9


ij either defire or attempt to go beyond the lifts that God
) and Nature hath fet us. Wherefore thefe Attributes
i) which are Immediate, Adequate, and Infeparable from


“IN a Spirit, are as Effential to a Spirit as any Attributes are
@ to any thing, and ought to be acknowledged a fatisfy-
‘el Ing notice of the notion of Subftance Spiritual as diftin&


i from Matter.


A a = oe a


Se Fs XEys


(cil «4 Synopfis of the Pfychopyrift’s philofophizings touching


4 Spirit. The four firft particulars thereof, where a-
mong lt other things the infufficiency of his Reafonings for


i bl) laying afide the ufe of the words Immaterial and Mate-


rial, aud his holding only to the diftinttion of Natures
Active and Paflive, is noted.


| / | May perhaps have been over-tedious already, but yet
4) & becaufe you have been pleafed {till more particular-
i(jly, though compendioufly, to impart to me your


vif thoughts touching this prefent Subject , I fhall beftow
nif fome ftrictures or touches upon each of them in order


yeas they lie, J am hitherto, fay you, conftrained to contain
yi my thoughts in the following compafs.


Firft, Ikgvow Spirits beft by their Virtus vitalis Forma-


jf@ lis Una-Trina. But here 1 demand how do you know


si that this Virtus Vitalis FormalisUna-Trina, does belong


_ 4 to Spirit and not to Afatter, unlefS you have an Antece-


sla Gent Notion of Spirit diftin& from /atter, and know


the nature of Matter alfo fo diftinaly, and the Opera-
tions of that Virtus Vitalis Formalis, that you can qon-


ijclude them one Repugnant to another? Otherwife,
‘ab though you find that Virtus Vitalis Formalis ina Subject,
idgyou know not whether the Principle be A¢aterial or Sp:
* Wiritual, from whence it is, or in which it refides,

ya). Secondly, J hold, fay you, that of created Spirits Sub-


“dbiantia, as notifying a Bafis.Realis, mujt be the Concep-


tus


220 A further Defence of the


tus Fundamentalis. This is found and unexceptionab’e | ,


fo far as 1 can difcern. Whence itis evident, that the
Soul being a Spirit, and a Spirit fubftance, they that
hold the Soul to be ex Traduce, muft hold, that a fub-
ftance may be ex Traduce: Which that fimilitude of a
Lamp lighted at a Lamp does not reach, asI noted a-
bove. And what difficulties there are in the Parents
Soul fhedding part of it felf, to the producing theChilds
Soul, [intimated above.

Thirdly, This word Jumaterial, fay you, fignifying
nothing but a Negation, and $Bateria being by many Anci-
ents ufed in the fame fenfe that we do Subltantia, J ufually
lay by the words. The reafon of the firft I conceive not
fo weighty. For a Negative Particle in compofition
with a word that denotes imperfection, implies pofitive-
nefs and perfection , as in Infinite, Immortal, and the
like; thefe remove the imperfections in Finitenefs and
Mortality, andimply fomething pofitive of a better na-
ture. And fo does Immaterial remove the Imperfectiong |
of Difcerpibility and Impenetrability , and implies the
contrary. As for the reafon of the fecond avoidance ;
Materia indeed may be ufed in fuch a fence with the An-
cients, as Subjectum has in Logick, or Subftantia, quate-
nus fubftat Accidentibus, but as it is precifely defined,
Ens per fe fubfiftens, that van or Ad4ateria is put in liew
of Subjtantia, in that Adequate fence, I believe it is not
eafieto give an Example. But here I mainly inquire,
fince the Definition of Subftantia, and the Definition of
Materia ts fo well known-~in the learned World, why
you will ufe Sabffantia which is but the Genus of the o-
ther, inlieu of Azareria, or of the other Species of Sub-
fiantia, which is Immaterial or Spiritual, when this is
more certain and diftinct, untefs it be out of a fhienefs
to pronounce to what fubject, whether Material or Im-
material fuch properties or operations do belong, or


whether there be any fuch diftinction really and proper-: J iy,


ly, as Body and Spirit in the Created Univerfe. But
you know belt this your felf.


Fourthly, |


221


True Notion of a Spirit.


lint) Fourthly, J hold to the diffin&ion , fay you, between
tail Watures or Subftances, Attive and Pafiive. But there be-
‘jtyil Ing no created Subftances whatever but what is both
ta{\M_aétive and paffive in fome fenfe or other, this is a diftin-
eof tion that thus far confounds all, diftinguifhies nothing.
oa Mt But Subftance fpiritual and material, are certain indeli-
‘iqll ble Characters of two orders of things {pecifically diffe.
\i@ rent. Which diftinct way of Philofophizing is to me


i more fatisfactory than thus to blend and confound the


iit Clafles of things. This looks as if there were fome Pa-
wy Yadoxical Myftery under it, which is better le¢ go than
4 Over-cUrioufly inquired into.


SECT. Xy.


jh Lhe fifth Particular touching the Purity of Spiritual Sub.


fiances, and how prone they are that underftand not the


Subtileft Material Subjfances to confift of Particles to
think what 7s really Material, to be Spiritual.


i 4 FE Ifthly, I diftinguifh, fay you, Spiritual Subftances as


fuch, by the Purity of their Subftances befides the formal


‘Wt differences. ¥ fappofe you mean by the Purity, the Sub-
ll tilty and Tenuity of their Subftances. As the Interpre-
wt i ter of Trifmegift’s Pamander, Cap. 12. renders 70 Aetlo=


LB Hepesa]oy & vans. Portionem puriffimam materia. Puriffi-


| Ma@aque materte portio Aer, Aeris Anima, Anime Mens,


“Mh Mentis denique Deus, The Greek is, *Esw ty 3 oe vans


(, 4 7 Aen ]ousptsaloy, dip, aeoG Se Luba, sLunits Se V85q vs
‘ao Ocds. And yet reawlouspee, fignifies properly the fab-
‘i tilty, Tenuity , or fmallnefs of Parts or Particles of


"which a thing confifts: Which yet the Tranflator calls


WY)


NN Parity, but lam very well affured, that your Parity of
"'@ Spiritual Subftances is not fuch as you conceive confifts of
"Particles, becaufe you do not admit that Hypothefis no


ih nore than Judge Hales,
» D ! Hl


Which is a fhrewd invitation to one to deem what {s
et really


222 A further Defence of the
really Aatertal to be Spiritual, when it is not, meéerly
becaufe it is conceivedto be one continued fubtil Sub-


ftance. Buta man would be loth to admit a conge-
ries of Atomes, be they never fo fmall or fubtil, ‘to be


a Spirit, no more than he would admit the Powder of ‘i


fome crafs Body to be a Spirit, which was fo palpably a
Body before. For magis and minus non variant [pectems
as that Scholaftick Adaxim has it. |


SECT. XVI.


The ficth Particular. That all created Spirits are in fome
. fort Paflive ; That that Spiffitude which is given to Spi-
rits by the Pfychopyrifts Antagonift argues a Spirit to
be Immaterial rather than Material ; That Body fome-
times has alefs grofs fignification than Matter, And in
what fenfe the Pfychopyrift feems to alow created Spi-
vits to be Incorporeal, And what might be the chief
ground of this miftake. ji


Ixthly, Yet, fay you, I doubt not but all created {pirits
are fomewhat paffive, quia Influxum caufe prime re-
cipiunt, and you grant them Spiffitude and Extenfion, which
fignifies as much as many mean that call them Material.
That is to fay, if I rightly underftand you, all created
Spirits, be they never fo pure and refined, yet are not
fo much tranfpiritualized from the condition of Matter,
but that they are pajive in refpect of the firft caufe, and
his influence on them, which I Mhall eafily admit alfo in.
the higheft degree of created Spirits in my fenfe, which
are moft properly and really fucn. To which, viz. To
all created Spirits, though I grant Spiffitude and Exten-
feon,yet the former is granted in fuch a fenfe that it figni-
fies only more fubftance within lefs compa({s,but no hard-
nefs or crafsnefs accrewing from the Reduplication of
the fame fubftance into a narrower compaf{s. So that it,
is as much Spiritual as before, and does not herein Lae
olize


. | rue Notion of a Spirit.


anlgbolize with Matter, but approves it felf contrary there-
iiggito, Matter implying Jmpenetrability of parts, but this
syn Penetrability: And as for Extenfion, that, in it felf, has
| pg@mothing of Materiality in.it, there being Metaphyfical
WExctenfion as well as Metaphyfical Numerality, which be-
|yydong to Entia quatenus Entia, there being no Exs or Be-
in,ing devoid of all Amplitude, or not capable to make
‘Wa fecond, third, fourth, @c. in Number, - Wherefore
lif thofe men mean no more by thefe words of J piffitude
—jjand extenfion in Spirits than Ido, and yet call Spirits
NAdaterial, | muft take the leave to fay, that in my Judg-
ament they mifcal them.
i But cuftom, fay you, having made Materia, but efpe-
winezally Corpus, to fignifie only fuch groffer [ubftance a the
ii, iaebree paffive Elements have, I yield fo to fay, that. Spirits
\« Mare not Corporeal or Material. That Corpus does not a]-
' iways fignifie more Crafly than A/ateriz, but mere Trine-
udimenfion Metaphyfical or Mathematical , is apparent
_ ftom that expreffion of fome of the Platonif?s who call
@that {pace in which the Mundane Bodies move, and
which Democritus and Epicurus termed +3 xevov, they call
Jit, [fay, Seue diac an Immaterial Body, but to have
ikalled it Immaterial matter, had been a contradiction.
“Whence is intimated that Afatrer Fundamentally and
" Ppecifically, founds more crafly than Body. But we will
™ Mot contend about words; that which is moft obferve=
hble here is this, that you feem to concede or imply,
i "Wehat no created Spirits are in any other fence to be
w“@iteemed Incorporeal or Immaterial, but in fuch as fup-
lis“"pofes them of not. fo crafs a confiftency as thofe three
i tbaflive Elements are, Earth, Water, Air. As if Fire
bud e#ther, which are far thinner than Air, were Im-
i “@aterial and Incorporeal Beings, nor any other created
(Beings to be faid to be Immaterial or Incorporeal in any
i )bther fence than they, namely, for the Tenuity or Sub=
wiMilty of their Subftance. |
ii"!] Which opinion, though I have known pious and in-
‘wlelligent perfons to haye been of, 1 look upon as ;
gran


>


=~


©


—


=


a yer mall’
rire rer. Smee


redial


224 A further Defence of the


‘grand miftake arifing from another falfe fuppofition ong {yt
furmife, namely, that the Bodies of the World do not
confift of {mall minute parts of matter, and that Water, (wi
and Air, and Ether, and Fire, are each of them a conti-
nued Subftance,: not a congeries of contiguous Particles
that make up fuch fluid Subftances. This I fay feem

the Fundamental errour of fuch as Philofophize accord.
ing to your mode: Which firft error if they had not@;
{wallowed down, they could not fo eafily have imbibed
this fecond, viz. That there are no created Subftances:
Gncorporeal in any other fenfe than Aether or Fire may

be faid to be Incorporeal, namely, as being freed from 4);
that crafnefs or grofnefs that the three paflive Elements j,,
{eem to have.


SECT. XVIL
Reafons why the Atomick Philofophy is to be preferred,


before that of the Pfychopyrift. And whence be mag,
have [ufficient inftruttion to affure him of fo concerning am,
Truth. fi


UT here we two do very much difagree: For 1g.
conceive that all Bodies confift of Atomes or lit-§.
tle Particles of Matter; The more hard and confiftentg,
Bodies, as Stones, Iron, and the like, of Particles fome
way, fomething more firmly continued one to another 3
but in fluid Bodies, fuch as Water, Air, 7Ether, andi
Fire, of Particles meerly contiguous, and in fome mo~ ;
tion one by another. And this way of Philofophy I think@,*'
I have good reafon to embrace before any other. Firftg
becaufe in this induftrious and fearching Age it is moft
univerfally received by free and confideringPhilofophers..e"
And this is that feculam Philofophicum in which know—§ 4
Iedge fhould abound according-to the prediction offf''
Daniel. pal
Secondly, This mode of Philofophy is the moft u ag


True Notion of a Spirit. 225


1,4 forthe beft ends; and ferves to fupport the main parts
@ of natural Religion the beft; namely, the Exiftence of
|, 2 God, of Geni or Angels, and the Immortality of the
.& Soul, For it-being fo abfurd at-the firft fight, thata
) Congeries or heap.of Particles or Atomes fhould be Capa-
“@ ble of thofe moft noble Funétions of Imagination, Me-~
 mory, Underftanding, nay of Senfe or Perfonality, were
i) it not for this aukward Conceit of Air, and Ether, and
AM@ Fire being, continued Snbftances, and no congeries of
| Particles, Men would immediately be led into a neceflary
“A belief of Spiritual Subftance properly fo called, and then
“all the main Articles of Natural Religion would go
“S| down glib and eafie. But to deny that fuch liquid Bodies
} confilt of Particles, deprives us of fome of the moft con-
__}) fiderable aids that Philofophy affords againfE Atheifny
} and Epicurifm. et yee
_ Thirdly, This mode of Philofophty feems to be the
{ moft ancient (and antiquifimum quodque veriffimum) nay
"9 to have been the old ALofchical or Maofaical Philofophy,
(as may appear out of what I have writ in the Appendix
mGto the Defence of my Cabbala Philofophica cap. I.
i fect. 8.
| And fourthly, and laftly, And which is of mot mo~
"ment to Philofophick Spirits, this Doétrine of Bodies
iil!"@ Confifting of Particles, and that their modification and
iif motion, or fixation, exhibits to our perception all the
ict fenfible Phaenomena of the Univerfe, is demonftrable to
vitany unprejudiced Reafon. Which would be too long
‘es here to make out ; but I refer you to my firft Epiftle to
N.C. fect. 6, to my firft Adnotamentum upon Judge
\ (till Alales his Dificiles Nuga, to the 12h Section of my Ex-
oN aminatio Philofophematum Eruditi Authoris Dificilium Nua
sl garum, &c. Which whole Treatife touching the Effex.
("Meee Adedia, which that worthy Perfon-would bring up,
\(i}fand the manner of Rarefaétion and Condenfation, as alfo
iio his nine objections againft the Spirit of Nature, with my
Anfwers (all which are not pafling feven pages in Folio)
((]2f you have leifure and patience attentively to read and
P confider,


‘i


226 A further Defence of the


confider, 1 fhould hope that Difcourfe with the other § t!
places of my Writings abovenamed, may have the good If i!
hap to undeceive you, and bring you into a fenfe of if wit
things more fatisfactory to your own Mind and Reafonsg in
than you have fallen into yet. And it is worth theg #!!
while for a Man to be undeceived in that point, and tou ats
be rationally affured, that Earth, and Water, and Air,§ ial
and other Bodies of the Univerfe, do confift of Parti
cles, for the reafons I above intimated. But you prog iy
ceed.


SECT. XVIHI.


The feventh Particular, touching the nature of Fire. The \\
Piychopyrifts wifh that Fire were better ftudied, wathi ti
his Antagonifts Wilh added thereto, Vhat Water were
better ftudied. A clear proof chiefly out of Des-Car tt
tes, that Water confifis of certain long, flexible, anal tm
touch Particles, which is a fair Inducement to beli evi hn «,
that other Bodies confift of Particles alfo. id's


Eventhly, fay you, Though I run not into the esece{s od in» »,
‘) Ludov. leGrand, delgne, zor of Telefius or Patrifiy.,,
cius, I would 3qnis were better fludied. As for Le Granam yyy.
Telefius, and Patricins , what they hold touching Fir, ;
TL have not had the occafion to obferve, but it feennmpy,..
even according to your own Judgment, they Philofc#,,;,;
phize fomething extravagantly therein, which make@y,..
me the lefs concerned to look after them, they bein bh,
difallowed by one that feems to think fo over-magnifi Hs
cently of Fire himfelf. i

But now whereas you with that Fire were better findiogy,,
than it is, \ alfo with Cand yet not out of any humoug) >
or f{pirit of contradiction to oppofe you ) thar Watehiy..”
were better findied than it is, and that that Hydroftat ph,’
eal experiment of the Wooden Rundle arifing from thie),


bottom of a Buckerof Water, the Water in the meat a
sim


¢


tf hundred pounds weight, continually perceptible by the
‘iif unintermftted ftretch of the Rope or Weight upon the
‘af cand, one may put under the bottom of the Bucket; I
"ig day I with this experiment of Water were well weighed
\ii) and confidered. Of what importance it is, and how
ila dirmly it demonftrates an Immaterial Being or Spirit,
iff that moves the matter of the World, 1 have intimated
jij} to you above, ‘and how none have been yet able to evade
il the Evidence of the Demonftration, that there muft be
9 fomething Immaterial endued with Properties above any
@.matter, diftinct from the Water and Rundle, and Pe-
4 netrating them both, that caufes that marvellous Pheno-
i) menon.
it) Moreover I would not only have.fuch experiments as
“i, 7§-thefe confidered, but I would have the very Nature of
ii\-Water well fifted and ftudied. And to any one that has
)sG-that impartial curiofity in him that he will ftudy the
iit, @ Mature of Water as well as of Fire, I would commend to


—«


y itthim the reading of Des-Cartes his Afeteors. Where


i-with incomparable evidence he makes out, That Water

it confifts of long flexible Particles, which joined together
yll/fin a more moderate creeping motion contiguoufly one
aitiby another, are the Phenomenon of Water, but being
Guilmore {wiftly agitated as they are in an efLolipyla fet over
the Fire with fome Water in the bottom of it, thefe
,;, i) Aqueous Particles raifed out of the Water and put upon
. ta whirling motion, playing.as it were at quarter-itaff
qOne with another in that part of the belly of the e#0/i-
i Wpyla that has only Air, they contending thus for more
.gidpace, burft out of the orifice of the eZolipyla, and give
' {ithe Phenomenon of a very fenfible, if not a violent

Wind.

“wit ‘That they are exhaled thus, as from the Water inthe
‘| iteZolipyla, by vertue of the Fire, fo from the Sea and
“gitivers, and other moift places, by vertue of the heat of
‘athe Sun. “That according to certain meafures of motion
tor reft, and nearnefs, and remotenefs from the Earth,

1 P 2 they


True Notion of a Spirit. 227


‘i time over it actually weighing it may be one or two


midis : ie
Nara es IIE


Sex


ncaa aE


22 A further Defence of the


they caufe Mifts or Clouds. That certain numbers of $


them cluttering more clofe together ina warm Air,caule:


drops of Rain, but in amore cold, Snow or Hail. Andlf »|
that Water by ftrong cold is frozen into Ice, is apparent


to all. Which is therefore a confiderable firm confift-
ency of fuch kind of Aqueous Particles, that otherwife


remaining {till Aqueous Particles, take upon them theg 4,\;


form not only of Clouds, Snow, and Rain, but alfo ot
bluftering Winds, that whirling motion being imparted
untothem.

Thefe, methinks, are Indications fufiicient, that Wa-
ter is a Body confifting of oblong, flexible Particles:
which may be diffevered by heat, and as the Ice, thought
a firm Body, is melted thereby into that fluid Body we
call Water, fo this Water may have its parts fo relaxa-


ted, as to be rarefied into Vapours, and thofe Vapour j,


fo agitated, that they get the formof Wind. Anda


mongtt other things that hit fo handfomly, it isalfo oba@ ,

fervable,that their eafily being drawn out of a wet Clotifff ,
ex pofed to the Air or Fire,when it is hard to get Oyl omfy,;,
Greafe out fo, argues, that they arelong, {mooth, flexq),...
ible parts, whenas thofe of Oyl are more ramofe, anogy,,,


entangled with the Cloth, and among themfelves.
A man of any Nofe or natural fagacity in Philofoph:


cannot but {mell out the meaning of this, namely, Thay),
Water mutt needs confit of fuch Particles as thefe, whicl#iy.,


Des-Cartes has de{cribed; and that it is not one equally
continued Body, but, though each long Particle beg
ftrongly continued in it felf, yet they are but contiguonm™
in a manner in Water, though pretty firmly continuoui®y,.


in Ice. But if they were alike continuous all over iu


Water, that is, no more in one part than another®,,.
they might pafs the leaft pores, and like the Sun-beamsq#}
at leaft with fome force added, {train themfelves througl
Glafs. Which fhews plainly, that Water is not one
f he fy


¥ \
: ~ \\
mit


alike continued Body, but confifts of long Particles,eacll
being tough, as [ may fay, as well as flexible in it felfi


but they are eafily feparable each from the other. Anof


ri,


we ah


see 7


True Notion of a Spirit.


229


\,,.08 we finding this fo plainly difcoverable in Water,: if we
| @ be not over-affectedly fhie and timorous, how can we
|) well abftain from concluding all other things, as well as
‘Water, efpecially if they be reduceable to a fluidity, to.
“confit of fome kind of Particles or other ? And this, £


lthink, is the genuine Refult of our dili


"4 “the Nature of Water.


Dd bs


X


IX.


gently ftudying


NN) Tbe Advantage of (tudying, and well underftanding of Wa-
ter, forthe better underftanding of Fire ; and that the


y +I
ang


1G


Phenomenon of Fire 4 from the motion of certainParticles


2


as well as that of Water and Vapours out of a Caul-


dron.


ui AN D having dived fo deep into the Myftery of Wa-
om ter, let us now fee whether we have not brought
iO (up a Key for the eafier opening the nature of Fire, which
gi grant is to be ftudied alfo. And this we may very
ive, ironveniently-do by Candle light. For the Fire and Flame
i na lighted Candle, is much what of the fame: nature


Na


riith all-other Fire.


Here therefore let us obferve, that


ltRs Ice hefore, which feems of a firm confiftence, was
amirtt refolved into Water, and that Water into V apours,

wc. That here, I fay, alfo the fixed Tallow, which
vietmfiwers to the frozen Ice, is refolved firft into akind
(lf flaid Oy] or Fat, anfwering to the Water, and after


i@nto a fort of vifible Reek, if we may fo call that which


is fo bright and fplendid; a certain kind of Particles
yjoofened from the Tallow or Wax, which confifts of
em, being putinto motion, as it isin Vapours. It is
“wtanifeft hence, that Flame is nothing but fuchakind of
_gdmpatticles, put into fuch a kind of motion different from
gmat of Water, and in a different manner affecting or
| pmaodifying the medium, whence is that appearance to


i Meee Eye we-call Flame, w


P 3


hich is but a more clofe, but


~ bright


230 A further Defence of the


bright Vapour or Reek. And thus is the whole Candle |
by degrees diflolved into Particles, nor is it the fame in- 4,
dividual Flame, any more than the Water that runs)
thorough {uch aPipe continually, till all the Water be:
runout, is the fame individual Water all the time.

So that we feethe ftudying of Water will make us con-
ceive the nature of Fire the better. And gives us to
underftand, that it is nothing but fuch a kind of motion

id particles that fo modifie the Aledinm of our fight, J i),
chat fuch a Phenomenon appears to us as we call Fire org,
Flame. Flame, when. the accended Particles are vola} ;
tile, but Fire, when they are more fixt, as in the Wick
of a Candle when the Flame is gone, or in red-hot Iron.
Where the parts of the Iron, not at all volatile (as ir
Wax, Wood, and Tallow, and the like) yet are {mart.
ly ¢ibrated againft the Adedium of our fight, and cauf
the Phenomenon of Fire. 1 have ftudied the nature om ,,
Fire with diligence and ferioufnefs, and yetI profefs J...
can make no more of it than thus. But we goon. 5


SECT... AK,


‘Aclofe compatted account of the nature of a Spirit fror
Fire, made by the Plychopyrift, and deduced by his Ang.


raronilt 4 q j j
taconift into feven Propofitions.


R U T this room, fay you, will nor ferve me to fay wha
5 I think of it, viz. of Fire: Light and Fire are roog’
fing objects to humane fenfe, which caufed the generé
lity of the Pagan World to worfhip the Suz for the Sag
premum Numen, and brought them into that grofs erraug

in Religion, and we muft have a care, left Idolizing tll
Phenomenon of Fire too much, it bring us alfo into eg
roursin Philofophly. But youhold on; Bat in brief, Ff
shat knoweth that lenis is a Subftance whofe form is the Pit
tentia activa movendi, illuminandi, calefaciendi, rhaf
as received in Grofs paffive Bodies, being but their Accidcnigl


=.


,


True Notion of a Spirit.


nl) @ll but the Igneous fubjtance in att operating upon the


m, and


imei concerves of Sprrsts but as Ignis eminemter , that is, of a

sil purer fubftance than Ignis 1s, which we beft conceive of,
Wasi ext the formal vertue, by its fimilitudes, I think knows as
. W much as 1 can reach of the Subftance of created Spirits.


Though you thought you were ftraightened in room,
‘By yet methinks you have given a Specimen of a very dex-
§ terous faculty in contriving fo much into fo little a com-


Me X pafs. Whereby I think I am inabled to conceive your
‘i full meaning deduceable as 1 fuppofe into thefe follow-
ll ing Propofitions.


Firft, That Fire is a Subftance whofe form is an Active


~' i power of motion,Light and Heat.


Secondly, That the Motion, Light, and Heat, that


“jj appear in grofs paflive Bodies, are but Accidents all of
“fl them of the faid Bodies, viz. fuch as in a Fire-ftick,
“Wt Candle, and the like.


Thirdly, That there is an Igneous Subftance in act


i from the faid Bodies.
| Fourthly, That a Spirit is to be conceived of but as
| Jgnis eminenter.
| Fifthly, That this Ignis eminenter is a purer Subftance


A than Jgzis.


‘“) operating upon the abovefaid grofs paflive Bodies diftinct


Sixthly, That this purer Subftance than Jens next to


| it bears with the aforefaid Igzis.
} Seventhly, and Jaftly, That he that conceiveth thus


)*4 its formal vertue is beft conceived of, by the fimilitudes


i)" of created Spirits, knows as much of their Subftance as
} you can reach.


235


ER aaa


ob era ES,


232 A further Deferice of the


SECT. XXtI.


Certain Queries npon the foregoing Propofitions to find what

the Plychopyrilt mould be at, and bow much nearer we
are tothe true knowledge of a Spirit by. his illuftrations
thereof from Fire.


a Shall now crave leave to make fome Queries touching
1 thefe Propofitions; As whether in the firft Propofi-
tion, you mean by an Active Power, a Power always
exerting it {elf into Ad, fo that this Fire is always mo-
ving, enlightening, and hot, and in fuch fort, that it
is not only thefe effective, but formaliter, elfe why fhould
it be called Zgzis? And that this Query is to be anfwered
in the Affirmative, feems manifeft from the fecond and
third Propofitions, they implying an Igneous Subftancé
acting upon thofe fubftances or grofs paflive Bodies, that
we call Fire. Now if this Igneous Subftance be really
Subftance, and not one of the Subftantie Media, accord-
ing to Judge Hales his way of Philofophizing, which I
have fufficiently confuted in my Examination, {demand
here what is this new Igneous Subftance mever heard of
before, Is it Material or Immaterial ? If it be Zmmateriab
it is not Fire; if it be Material, a A@sterial Fire diftint
from the Fire of the Flame of a Candle, or from that
of aFireftick, or red-hot Iron, there is no more ground
or reafon for, than fora Adaterial Water diftinct from,
but in the Water of a Well, a River, or the Sea, but
the very matter it felf of the Water, even of that which
we call Water , is modified into this Phenomenon of


Water, and in like reafon the matter of Fire, even of 91,


that which we call Fire, is modified into the Phenome-


non of Fire, without any other Material Igneous Sub- |


{lance operating upon if, “This, to the unprejudiced,
I think will appear very plain and rational. |


The next Query is upon the fourth Propofition, which § *'
ismeant by Ignis eminenter. For if it be to exclude the |


conceit


SS ae ee ss ¢ = Ln
= = se = => 4
or D > <= = =
= we 3 => ee =
<_< a 2 =; ;


SS = OS SS SSO CUS
—, = => =» $ —
= or 3 = =. See


- —-


“Wi tions feem to favour the other fente.


True Notion of a Spirit. 233
conceit of a Spirits being Ignis formaliter, and that it is
only effectively Ignis, God may thus be faid to be Ignis
eminenter, as he may all things elfe, according to the
Orphick, Theology. But the fifth and the fixth Propofi-
That a Spirit is
Formaliter Ignis, but only amore pure Ignis, that is of


| a more tenuious Subftance, as was above obferved, than


that very Igneous Subftance mentioned in the third Pro-
pofition. But this I profefs to me is a Five without
Light, not enables me to conceive a jot better of the
Nature of a Spirit, than if I were without it.

For the grofs vifible Fire is nothing but accenfed Par-
ticles, or fuch a fort of Particles put into fucha kindof
motion; and how does it appear, that there either is
any other Fire but this, or if there were, that it is any
other than more fubtil Particles fo and fo moved ? So
that in allthis Fire and Heat we want Light to difcover
the real nature of aSpiric, And yet the fixth Propoft-
tion fays, that a Spirit next to the formal Vertue, is
beft known by the fimilitude it bears with Jgnisin the
fenfe of the third Propofition. So that if we knew that
Ignis , it were only a Metaphorical iluftration there-
from. Which is no good mode of defining the Nature
of things, but as I intimated above, the Nature of this
Ignis can be no other than a more fubtil confiftency
of Particles, if it be any thing at all, and therefore very
inept to fet off the Nature of a Spirit, whichis Ens
unum per fe & non per alind, asall muft grant that prant
there is any fuch thing asa Spirit properly fo called.
Wherefore I much doubt of the truth of the laft Propo-
fition , that he that thus conceives of created Spirits,
knows as much of their Subftance as you can reach, For
1 conceive you undervalue your own cognitive Faculties
in that Affertion, which I cannot believe but can pierce
further than fo, ashaply I may difcover anon; In the
mean time we pafs to what follows.


SECT.


234 A further Defence of the


SECT. XX.


Of the Greek Fathers dividing Fire into Intellettsve, Sen-
fitive, and Vegetative, and in what fenfe they are to be
underftood, and how the Mode of the Ancient Philofophy
was Enigmatical and Hebraical.


WR ND the Greek Fathers, fay you, that called Spirits
AM Fire, and diftinguilhed Ignem per Formas, into In-
vellective, Senfitive, andVegetative, or Vifible Fire, (as tt
is in Acre Ignito) allowing an incomprehenfible purity of
Subftance in the higher above the lower, (as in Paffives, Aur
hath above Water) I think did fpeak,tolerably, and as in-
formingly as the Notions of Penetrability and Indivifibility,
though perhaps thefe alfo may be ufeful, If the words
and places of thefe Fathers had been cited, I would
more diftinctly and particularly have made anfwer to
them, but now my anfwer muft be more undeterminate
and general.

And firft, fay, Though there is a great deference to
be given to the Fathers in things that lay within their
Sphere, yet that fome of them were none of the beft
Philofophers, is apparent from their making the Earth
flat not Spherical, and their denying Antipodes. But
then in the fecond place, fuppofing fome of them did
Philofophize at the rate above defcribed, dividing Fire
into Inteliective, Senfitive, and Vegetative, I would
here demand in what fenfe they here {poke , whether
they fpoke not of the Immediate Inftrument of Opera-
tion in Intellective, Senfitive , and Vegetative Crea-
tures, which I caneafily agree, that itis at leaft, moft- |
what, Igneous or eAithereal, the Vehicles of Angels be- F.'
ing acknowledged to be fuch; Or, whether they did §.'
not fpeak Symbolically ex Deffinate, or at leait ufing,
out of Ignorance, the Symbolical exprefflion of the An-

cient


True Notion of a Spirit. 235
cient Philofophers for the proper, (who Symbolically
called a Spirit Fire, yea, God himfelf, who is the moft
pure Spirit conceivable) whether it was not from thence
that thefe Fathers incautioufly divided Fire , as if it
were a real Spirit, into Intellective, Senfitive, @c. For
that the ancient Philofophers fpoke e##igmatically,
Clemens Alexandrinus takes exprefs notice, ére tejr@
Tae aiTols F giroccopias EBegixos 4 AwiypaTtodus. In which
faying of his it is implyed, that not only their way of


Philofophizing was ezigmatical or Symbolical, but that-
I 5 g )


alfo the Hebraical Philofophy was fuch.


ee. = OE, tnt vies
a


ee


SHC TT. SAT.


That the Symbolical or FEnigmatical mode of the ancient
Philofophy caufed marvellous fond miftakes in them that
were not aware of it, asin Ariftotle and otwers that
took, the Cortex for the Kernel.


A D the ignorance of that Mode of the old Phi-
lofophers , has caufed ridiculous opinions. As
from the ancient A4fo/aick, Cabbala’s fetting off the na-
ture of things by Numbers, thofe unskilled in the my-
ftery, have afterwards made Numbers the very con/Fitu-
rive principle of things. And Ariffotle, when as Par-
menides {peaking Symbolically, and Mofazcally declared,
that Fire and Earth were the Principles of all things,
which undoubtedly was fpoken in reference to the be-
ginning of Genefis, where Y78) “NS are the two Prin-
ciples of things, to wit, Spirit and Afatter , | fay, Art-
frotle is fo filly as totake Parmenides literally, when as
yet himfelf acknowledges, that Parmenides reckoned his
Earth in the rank of Non-Entia, which was impoflible
for him to have done, unlefs he had fpoke Symbolically.
Thefe two, Fire and Earth, are the fame with the Pytha-
Goreans, as % cxbe@ , Light and Darkne/s, who alto
had partaken of the Aofaick Cabbala. See my Preface-


¥
OePn eral
5’ ne &£ada


i i engl lane
pe ibe i Sestoaaaaas si


ee eee


236 A further Defence of the


eeneral to the fecond Tome of my Philofophick Wri-
tings, Sect. 13. As alfo the Appendix to the Defence of
my Philofophick, Cabbala, Cap. 7. Sect. 5. and I hope
you will acknowledge I have reafon on my fide. Where-
fore the Fathers ufing with the ancient Philofophers the
name Ignis for Spiritus, is no warrant, fince it may fig-
nifieSymbolically, for usto think that Jgnis belongs to
the very Nature and Eflence of a Spirit.


Re eee ae) ME ee ee oe ee ee ee aaa aoeaneeadaaoeal


SECT. XXIV.


That the Chaldee and Magick Oracles call not only the Sout
but God himfelf Fire, but that it 1s not to be underftood
properly, but Symbolically proved by the Gloffes of Mi-
chael Pfellus azd Pletho.


be ua Ignuw is put for Spirit by the Ancients, is plain


over and over again from the Adagick and Chaldee
Oracles; (to fay nothing here of Ezechsel’s Vifion,
where God the Father is reprefented by Fire , which
the Cabbalifts alfo follow) thefe Oracles, I fay, do not


{tick to call the higheft Deity, from which all things —
are, Fire; which] conceive is very grofs and abfurd to -


underftand in a proper fenfe of God. And therefore,
both Pletho and Pfellws upon that Oracle, Biel sévte wu-
ess Ends exzeyaara, All things proceed out of one Fires
The.one fays, && évds aves inros 2& dvds Sef, Out of one
Fire that is from one God; and the other, This, fays he,
is our Doctrine and true. Mavra yae ra tyre oes bye
D8 vmwbsagw taabov, For all things recewed their being
from one God, Where they rendring aie by Ocis, Fire
by God, they queftionlefs underftood God in their pro-
per Philofophical Notion as a pure Immaterial and In-
tellectual Being, or elfe they would make his Nature in-
feriour to that of a Created Spirit: For when a Created
Spirit is called Fire in thofe Oracles, as the Soul is,ex-
prefly termed aie gxewiy, A Ihining Fire; Pletho inter-

prets,


Ss


—


True Notion of a Spirit. 229
i: prets, rve oaevdy, flripping it out of its Symbolical
wn Cortex, Sea rhs dota » voces, certain Divine and Intel.
} fectual Subftance which is here called Fire Symbolically,
#8 as God himfelf is, to intimate its affinity with thé


itil Divinity it felf. And upon the fame Oracle, which,
{og at large is,


"Olt Luxyn rie Sou peeey Duct ies relegs,
"Abavellas ve wSyei 1 Cans Seowores ely.
The fence of which is, That the Soul being fhining
1 Fire, by the power of the Father, remains Immortal, and
WM the AGiftrefs of Life: that is, an undifturbed Pofleffor or
iwi Proprietor of Life in her felf. Upon this Oracle, I fay,
(i Adichael Pfellus Gloffes thus, ‘H huxi au roy oa 0 dodua-
MR Toy TUE Tay CurdtT ay GAwy HTB SAKE oa uael@ eEnenusyoy 20a
§ vallos ecw, that isto fay, The Soul being an Immaterial
iui and Incorporeal Fire (which indeed is to be no Fire, and
it therefore again affures us, that according to the fence of
‘ion thefe Interpreters, God is called Fire only Symbolically)
‘ii exempt from all compofition, and having nothing of Matter
i or Body in its Effence, is Immortal. For, as he fays after.
i? ward, fhe having not out of which fhe is compounded,
(0 fhe has not into which fhe may be diffolved, and there-
a Fore, fay I, is Indiffoluble and Indifcerpible. Which is
. the true Notion of a Spirit, and not of any Fire, all
» 1) which is compofed of Particles and diffoluble. [| might
‘(a inftance in more places, but the thing is fo plain, that
-ie(@ dt is needlefs.
|| Wherefore it is manifeft, that though the Greek Fa-
iva thers fhould run divifion upon that Symbolical term for
ve @ Spirit, viz, Fire, and diftribute it into Intellective,
' la Senfitive, and Vegetative, that thereis no proof hencs
Mthat every created Spirit is Fire, and not properly a
»o WSperee, thatis, fuch aSubftance as is, Ens uinuny per fe
“A | & non per alind, and confequently Indifcerpibles


SECT!


238 A further Defence of the


SECT, XXV.


Of the Incomprehenfible Purity of thofe Fires thar are prez
tended to be Sprrits, and whether the Greek Fathers
poke tolerably in dividing Fire into Intellettive, Senfi= |
tive, and Vegetative.


¥) UT now concerning the Incomprehenfible Purity of
B fubftance in thefe Fires (which mult be fo many
Spirits) one above another, any one.of which, I cannot
think that you conceive may be fo incomprehenfibly
Pure, as tobe the Divine Effence it felf, I would in-
quire here (fince Flame in the firft fenfe, and obvious to
our fight and fenfes is fo apparently , as 1 have above
proved, nothing but fiicha certain kindof Particles in:
fuch a kind of motion) what thefe feveral degrees of
Purification can amount to more \thanthis , That the
Particles will be more fubtil and fubtil, but asarrand ag
Congeries of Particles of Matter as before. Which 1
muft confefs, tome feemsto haveno affinity at all with:


the true Nature of aSpirit. And yet you {tick not-tom hi


declare, that the Greek Fathers in dividing Fire into In-
tellective , Senfitive, and Vegetative , {peak tolerably
and informingly. For 1 will leave out for the prefent;
the comparifon with that other Notion which: to me!
feems to be more precife and Natural.


Wherefore I muft here crave pardon-that I fhall takes an.
the boldnefs, who have otherwife no mind to differ from
any onemore than needs, exprefly.to differ from you ini ti,
judgment in this caufe. For I muft pronounce, that asi li,
you feem to conceive the Fathers to fpeak, that is, nota ii,
Symbolically , Cor-elfe it is nothing to your purpofe)i@ i;
but properly, thefe Fathers {peak neither tolerably nor),
informingly, but intolerably and mifchievoufly, dilute-§ iy;
ly and mifinformingly. «For is it not.an.intolerableg ty),


mifchief, that thofe that fhould be our Guides in ourg


greateft.concerns, fuch as the aflurance of the immor-—#ij);,


tality;


True Notion of a Spirit. 239


g tality of our Souls, fhould broach fuch Doétrine about
| the nature of the Soul as fhould induce Men to believe it
l) Mortal? For if the Soul be really Fire, or if you will,
ih) a Light, how eafily is it blown out when it is removed
ei into the open Air out of this Lanthorn of the Body ?
wit But if it be Fire not flaming, fuchas isin red-hot Iron,
§ cannot remove out ofthe Body, but is extind: in the cold
Rh Corps, as the fire in the Iron when it isgrown cold. So
ini] that the former is the more plaufible opinion, that it is,
iad af it be any kind of Fire, a kind of a fubtil Flame, but
im) how can you fecure its fubfiftence, and defend it from
‘iaitil) the injury of bluftering Winds after its Exiit, you muft
iid) anfwer to Lucretius, for his objection it was of old,
insti} Who thus {peaks of ‘the Soul de rerum Natura, lib. 3.


Flac igitur tantis ubi morbis corpore in ipfo
Fatketur, miferi{q, modis diftratta laboret,
Cur eandem credis fine corpore in Aere aperto,
Cum Validis ventis atatem degere poffe 2


ii) Which Objection is invincibly ftrong againft fuch as
ti hold the Human Soul Fire, feign it as pure and fubtil as
«l@you will, as fubtil asthe primum Elementum of Des-Car«
\@tes, which mult {till be-a Congeries of Atomes. It will
vibe prefently overflown with the Globuli, and go out like
o@the laft Flame of the Snuff of a Candle; and though its
Hanatter be not loft, it will lofe its perfonality by mingling,
\ as Other liquid things do, with the reft of its own Ele.
j@ment. And fo asthe Song of the wicked is in the Wif-
Ndom of Solomon, Chap. 2. We fhall be hereafter as if we
Shad never been : For our life is as fmoak, and alittle {park
. ka the moving of our heart, which being extinguifhed, our
" eody fhall be turned into afhes, and our fririt thal uanifh as
| ithe foft air, Air mingled with Air, and as well Fire
M diwith Five, which is as utter a Mortality of the Soul as
athe Epicureans can believe, or the wicked hope for. And
llyet the making of the Soul Fire, induceth the belief of
Mall this, ifit be meant Literally, not Symbolically. And |
yi 53 | therefore


240 A further Defence of the


therefore this form of {peech fo underftood is plainky§ 9
mifchievous and intolerable, which makes me believe, the§ }:'


Greek Fathers did not fo underftand it, but fpake Symbg.
lically, ox elfe fpake they knew not well and diftinétlyg ,,i;
what. }


SECT. XXVL


Whether the Greek Fathers fpake informingly x the above-t tx,
faid dsvifion. That Metaphors are to be excluded De=§ i
finitions, and why. That Ventus and Fumus might ay,
well have been divided into Intelleétive, Senfitive, ana
Vegetative, a Fire, And how utterly uncapable Fire
as of the Plaftick power, lefs haply , than Froft ano
Cold.


f & ND now that you fay they {peak fo zxformixgly ing).
calling a Spirit Fire, what a dilute and flender§, «


information is this, as to the fatisfaction of our Rea.


fon? Metaphors indeed and Figurative Speeches fill the é


Sails of our Imaginative faculty the moft, and to refem+
ble God to a Confuming Fire and a Glorious Light, may


ferve the well-intended ends of Religion, and ftrike *
greater Terrour, Reverence and Devotion into thof,,,


Minds of the Vulgar, but proper language is the mofff,,,,
becoming found Philofophy and {trict Reafon.  Anc@,,,


when we enquire into the diftinct Nature of things, wey),


are to bid adieu to Allufions and Metaphors: for to enw,’
quire into the proper Nature of athing, is to fearcl§,’”
out the adequate Definition thereof, which is to be don, '


in the moft certain and clear terms that are, accordingmy,....
to Ariffotle. And therefore Metaphors are excluded, *
from ferving ina Definition, becaufe, aay coagds 73 nay.
Ta ustagoewy Aeysuery, becaule, whatever is Adetaphorim—y ©
cally {poken, as he has noted in his Topicks, is ob/cur@,.
and uncertain. Wherefore, I fee not how iaformingl@,,,*
the Greek Fathers fpeak, in ufing the term, rites Bs,

co


True Notion of a Spirit. 2A8
in ff ftead of fome more proper words to have fet out the
«(@ true Nature of a Spirit ; and I muft ingenuonfly declare.
of that they might have as well divided Ventus or Fumus,
im or the Reek of a Cauldron, into Inteile€tive, Seafitive,
f and Vegetative, as Ignis , for any advantage that Tonis
~~ has to fet out the proper Nature of a Spirit.
The main thing is, that it looks as if there were an
 avroxnsia, or Self-moving in Fire, it being in perpetual
.}f motion, but thisis a plain fallacy, for the.parts of the
| Flame are not felf-moved , but they are moved of ano-~
iither: As when you apply alighted Candle to light ano-
‘ther Candle, the parts of the Wick, and Wax, or Tale.
\ iow, are put into motion by the moved parts of the
““@ lighted Candle, and fo ali the Particles of the Candle,
i by degrees, are put into motion by the Particles of the
prefent Flame, the Air alfo affifting, which yee pafs a-
fiway as a River, asI noted above. But if you alledge,
"iiithat Fire and Flame, as long as it is, is in motion, and
HiMtfo fitly fets out the Self-Aétivity of a Spirit, fo, 1 fay,
iMG Fume and Reek_as long as they are, are in motion, and
Sido is Wind efpecially, and the more like a Spirit in this
oiGiregard , it being fo hard to find out what gives it its
ii, motion, fo that it looks more like a Self-moving Being.
iM(So little information is there in calling a Spirit Fire,
pi @more than if it were called Fume, or Reck, oc Wind,
ilelifand therefore the inffruttion muft needs be very flender
Mand dilute. And as no body will fay, Fume, or Reek 5
igor Wind, isofthree kinds, Intellective, Senfitive, and
(y@@Vegetative, but at firit fight it would appear a meer AG/-
ylilenformation, fo as certainly, to fay that Fire is diftin«
yeliliguifhed into thefe Species, Intellective Senfitive, and
ite egetative, would look like the diftribution of a Whole
(imlinto parts difagreeing with the fame Whole,which were
0a foul 14 finformation indeed,and contrary to the known
jgm#kules of Logick. And this I may be the more bold to
weaver, becaufe I have up and down in my Writings. de-
', monitrated the incapacity of Adztter, for fach FunCtions
liks thefe. |
Q. Is


14% A further Defence of the


Is Fire intellective ? Certainly then the Suz as foon as |
any, and fome Afarerialifts would have it fo, but I
think I have proved fufficiently in my Preface to the
Immortality of the Soul, the madnefs and Repugnancy of |
that opinion. Is Fire Senfitive ? I have proved in that ¥
Treatife, that no Matter whatfoever, whether Fire,
Water, or Air, is capable of fuch Impreflions from fen-.
fible Objects, as we are confcious to our felves of. And!
to pretend, that Fire is Vegetative, that is to fay, Pla.
ftical , is wonderfully Repugnant to the Nature of it,,
for whatever Nature is Pla/tical, it is the EvSentyere (En-
delechia) of that Body which it does form and orga-
nize, and therefore it muft atey as wellas éady, it multi i)


hold together and bind as well as move the Matter, when bind


as the property of Fire is only to difperfe and confume,,


for it puts all into an hurry and motion, and that is allig;,,;


that we can rationally conceive that Fire cando, whem


as Froft and Cold forms pretty Devices and gay Flourifhesg }, ;,
in Snow and Ice, and on Windows and Doors of Cellars. an
But it may be you will fay, the Greek, Fathers did noty bln
mean Fire in my fenfe, which bears along with it fuch@,,,,


abfurdities; I defire then to know in what fenfe they un-g) 1
derftood Fire, and if they had not been more snforming.§
if they had defined precifely what they meant by Fire,§y.,,


before they would divide it into Intellective, Senfitive it,
and Vegetative ; but if they will fay one thing and mean...
another, they muft needs bring the Reader into Errounm:,,,.,
and Mifinformation. f they meant Spirie they fhould ii


have faid Spirit, and if they meant Spirit properly fog,
called, they fhould have declared its Nature, that it was},
Subftance Immaterial, or to that fenfe, before they di-g,,.
{tributed it into its kinds. Ay


SECT.R"


True Notion of a Spirit. 24%
SECT. XXVIII.


4
onl Lbat the Greek Fathers in dividing Fire inftead of Spirit
sit,  anto Intellective, Senfitive, and Vegetative, do not /peak,
«(|  % informingly as are the Notions of Penetrability, azd
voit Undivifibility , and that a Specifick Difference ix a
[| Species, zmplies an oppofite Difference thereto, in the
oppofite Species.


bt, 22ers


ie


cM AA ND thus I think I have clearly fhewn, that the
ON Fathers in dividing Fire into Intellective, Senfi-
uitive, and Vegetative, do not {peak tolerably and inform=
(Dangly : whence it will be avery eafie task to fhew, that
iM@ithey do not {peak as znformingly as are the Notions of
init Penetrability and Indivifibility. For certainly unlefs the
\\NGreek Fathers thought all things that are to be Material,
ii which there is no likelyhood in the Earth they fhould,
ithe. Greek Philofophy of Pythagoras, Plato,and Ariftotle be-
efang at hand to inftruct them better) if inftead of Fire they
cic had put Spirit, and intimated it to be a Subftance Imma-
\ilttercal,they had {poke more perfpicuoufly & more zzform-
ili\agly than they did. This I conceive is undeniably true.
jn") And now I appeal to your felf, Divifibiliry and Impe-
ii) !eetrabclitybeing the known and univerfally acknowledged
inlttE fentsal Property or Character of A/atter or Body, how
gMMaturally, or rather, how neceflarily the oppofite Spe-
im@les to Body, viz. Spirit is found to be Indivifible and Pe-
 wiretrable, As in thofe two oppofite Species under Ani-
ial, viz. Homoand Brutum, if it be once acknowledged
idthat Brutum is Animal Irrationale, and that Irrationale
qijs the Specifick difference , its oppofite Species Hlomo
finuit needs be Animal Rationale. Thisis fo plain and
fonvictive, that I cannot here but remind you of your
hidervaluing your cognitive Faculties, and of my pre-
lage, that I fhould difcover that you areable to under-
(‘Wand more of the Nature of a Created Spirit, than you
iid profefs in the laft of thofe feven Propofitions I a-
love deduced from that Paragraph. For you have gone


+ te b- 17
O Pe KOUS


2AA A further Defence of the


thus much further, namely, To the Pevetrability and the !:


Indivifibilaty belonging Effentially and Infeparably to
the Nature of a Spirit in general, (which therefore will
take in Created Spirits) which you cannot avoid the
admitting of, from fo clear a method of Demonitra-
tion.


SECT. XXVIII.


That God can create an Indivifible Being , though of a
large Metaphyfical Amplitude, or elfe he were no


God.


» A ND forthe poflibility of thefe proper and Effen:
: tial Attributes of a Spiit, 1 think I have made is
good in my fhort Difcourfe of the true Notion of a Sports. Kons
againft all pretended Objections. And the greateft diff] /
ficulty touching the Indifcerpibility of a Spirit, acknow-§ i
ledged to have a Metaphyfical Amplitude or Extenfion }
can be none to him that confiders how much more eafied
it is to conceive what is immediately and of its own Ef-
fence one to be indifcerpible, than how that whichis
difcerpible into parts can at all hold together, and ac-
knowledges the Immenfe Effence of the Deity, which
yet is abfolutely Indivifible or Indifcerpible, and the
omnipotence of the fame Deity, who therefore can ea,
fily create Spirits according to the Image of bimfelii@;
though w&h a finite Amplitude, butIndifcerpible, thaw
isto fay, That he can create a Being, (which in that iff!
is a Being neceflarily implies Amplitude in it) which i thy,
Ens unum per fe @ non per aliud, and of fuch an Amplii§i,
tude as is Indifcerpible not upon the account of its final] hey
nefs, becaufe it can be no fmaller, but upon account Ol},
the Immediate union, ot rather onenefs of its Eflence, bok},
it as large as you pleafe. |
Ocherwife God were only able to create Aletaphyficafy,
Menades,, ov Spiritual Points, anfwering to the Phyficam},,.
? Points”


True Notion of a Spirit. 245


ul} Points or Afonades of Matter , than which to a fagacious
Ch and Philofophical Mind.,:that is throughly perfwaded
‘eit of the Divine Omnipotency, nothing can be more ab-
idjg.-furd or ridiculous. And if you willfay, that if he fhould
oni create fuch a Spirit with Metaphyfical Amplitude,
fj which, though fo large, himfelf cannot divide and fever
lf into parts, he would thereby puzzle his own Omnipo-
@ tency; the fame may be faid of the Metaphyfical 1%-
§ vades, and at this rate he fhall be allowed to create no-
ij thing, no not fo much as Matter, nor himfelf indeed to
i be: For that cannot be God from whom all other things
tq are not produced and created. |


Se ee ee


9.B C YT. XXIX.

it Zlow naturally the above-mentioned diftribution in the Greek

wt) Fathers of Fire into Intellective, Senfitive and Vegeta-
tive, belongs to Spirit according to the Definition in the
preceeding Difcourfe of the True Notion of a Spirit :

sal) And that the Effetts of the kinds of Spirit comprized in

wi) that general Definition, are all the Phanomena in the

| World.


et | Herefore thefe things being fo plain, I conceive
i / V it will be no great immodefty in me to hope,
that my Definition of a Spirit being this, (an Immate-
(axial Sab{tance Intrinfecally indued with life and the fa-
ttculty of motion) and vertually containing in it, Penetra-
debility and Indifcerprbility, (for Immarerial includes thofe
Mtiwoas you have feen) willapprove it felf more nform-
‘yqgong than the defining of a Spirit by Fere , which -may
"aig heat the fancy, and fill the fails of Imagination as I {aid
 Wbefore, but inftructs us little or nothing of the true and
WW proper Notion of a Spirit.
'} And then it being noted in that Definition, that Life
tand Motion intrinfecally iffue from this Jmatertal Sub-
daftance, Spirit, here you may fee how fitly the Greek Fa-
| ie er Neg i ye nen Cee


246 A further Defence of the


thers divifion of it (not of Fire) is made into Intelles4 °.


clive, Senfitive, and Vegetative, and what eafie and|
natural fence it will be. Thus I love to Philofophize:
without Tumour, Pomp, or Metaphors. Fire indeed|
is more Phantafmatical, and the Object of Sence and!
Fancy, but Immaterial Subftance more rational, and the:
Object of our Intellective Faculties.

But if we love to have all our Faculties furnifhed and|
filled with Objects, we may remember that this Defini-.
tion of a Spirit, viz. An Immaterial Subftance imtrinfes.
cally inducd with Life and a faculty of Motion, though it:
make no noife in it felf, nor fwells the fancy with fuch;
glaring Notions as Fire and Light, yet this Life and Fa-
culty of Motion in this Immaterial Subftance diftributed|
into its kinds,reprefents all the Pageantry of the World,,
and the Pomp thereof, Fire and Light, and Clouds and|
‘Thunder, and dll the Phenomena of Nature, by its act
ings on the Matter of the Univerfe; Befides the Intel-.


lectual Operations, it performs in the Rational Orders ™


of Being. And part of that Life and Motion compre.
hended in that general Definition, enables me to write:
what I write for a more diftinct Information of you,
than you have from thofe Greek, Fathers, which feem to
have mifinformed you touching the Nature of a Spirit,
if you have not mifunderftood them, and fo mifinformed.
your felf.


SECT. XXX.


The great Ufefulnefs of the Notion of the Yndivifibility,d
or Indifcerpibility of Spirits.


' A ND now I have thus cleared up things, I am per-
£4. {waded if you were again to write your Judg-4 |
ment of my Defcription of a Spirit, you would not fay &
of Penetrability and Indivifibility, Perhaps thefe alfo maym Wi
be wfeful, but you would come off rown Hy, and with® tty
he tee aflurancei


True Notion of a Spirit.


affarance declare, that they are not only #/feful but erze :
For in my judgment, unlefs they be true, they are not
wfeful. For 1am for no Pia fraudes, but for plain deal-
ing, and for tranfacting all things Bonafide, as well in
Spirituals as Temporals. But that they are true, I thin!
[have fufficiently made good already, and hinted fome-
thing before of their ufefulne/s.

For unlefs this be the Nature of a Spirit to be Zndi/-
cerpible, Philofophy affords no. fuccour to N atural Reli-
gion, nor contributes any thing to the aflurance of our
Perfonal Subfiftance after the diflolution of this Mortal
Body. But the Soul being Fire, will mingie with the
fubtil Elements of Des-Cartes, as fure as if it were
meerly Breath, it would vanifh into the {oft Air, as I
noted above. _ But being acknowledged an Jmmaterzal
Being, fuch asI have defcribed, and intrinfecally indued
with Life and Motion, itis able by its Conftrittive facul-
ty or Statick power, to maintain its Vehicle againff the
moft bluftering Winds, and to keep it felf from being
blown into pieces, and difperfed like Fume or Reck,
and from being extinct like a Candie taken out of the
Lantern, and committed to the uncertain blafts of the
moveable Air. This for the Ufefulie/s of the Inde (cerpi- |


bility of Spirits.


x


ST


a SE LEED LEI IEE SASS end


Oi aly an Need, oe 6


The neceffary Ufefulnefs of the Notion of the Penetrability
of Spirsts.


ND now for the Penetrability of Spirits, 1 1
; fo plainly not only ufeful, but necenary
they penetrate the matter, elfe how could ;
Eydcasyeae Endelechie thereof? and inform itand actu-
ate it? And if they could not penetrate their own


aye


parts, how could they be contracted fo as to bec
A


} €


menfurate to the Body of a fmall Fetus in the Womb,


Q 4 which
way “4 Ye SOR WELD


248 A further Defence of the


which, as I have heard from fome skilful Midwives,have
Jometimes been found as little as a Bee, and yet in hu-
mane fhape and form. But unlefs we will patch upa
soul by pieces to enable it to be commenfurate to the
Body when it is come to Mans itature, that very Soul;
nothing added to it that was contraéted into fo {mall a
compafs before, after expands it felf by degrees to the
amplitude of the grown Body of aMan. Which there-
fore plainly implies the Penetrability of Spirits, as well
as {ets out the.u/efulne/s thereof. But it is fufficient to
touch only upon thefe things, | : eee.


apy SEC Re Sy


That Logical Afatter and Form are nothing but Indeter-
-minata Amplitudo and Differentia, the two Tncomplex
Principles of Ens quatenus Ens, and therefore imply no
Phyfical Materiality. a )


’ E are now comie near the conclufion of your
VV Letter, but I will take in your fhort Poft/cripr,
before I confider that. You make a Spirit, fay you, to be
Ens, ideoque unum, verum, &c. And that True denotes
the Anfwerablenefs of the Ti hing toits own proper Idea, and
zmplies a right -Adatter and Form duly conjoined, Upon
this you raife this Queftion, Do not you here make Spirits
Material? But no doubt, fay you, whether to he called
Material or Subftantial, the Form ts not an adjoined T, hing,
but the Form of a fimple Effence is but an Inadequate Con-
ceptus, making no Compofition. To thisI anfwer, That
Ido not make Spirits Material in any fenfe derogatory
to their Nature and Perfections. And whereas'I {peak
of right Adsteer and Form, if you had obferved, that that


Matter and Form I there fpeak of, isa Matter and Form ~ fy,


that belongs to Ens quatenis Ens, you could not imagine
that this would .infer any Phyfical Materiality in Spirits,
becaufe it is Matterina moft general Notion prefcinded
ae | ses } | from


True Notion of a Spirit, 249


“from all particular kinds of Being whatfoever , and
“Nitherefore belongs to Beings truly Immaterial as well as
“Di Material. | | :
IL At isonly Afateria and Forma Logica, that is there
“g@meant, nor isthe Form adjoined ina Phyfical fenfe to
“ithe Matter, unlefs where the Form and Matter are {ub.
vu@itances really diftinét asthe Soul of Man and his Body.
“Sig But they are called alfo Matter and Form, though they
‘ltltbe only mentally diftin@ in fome other Beings; and
“Oiconfequently can be only mentally faid to be adjoined
athe one to the other, as if they had been once two, when
jas they are really but one thing. As you fay well, the
Form of any fimple Effence is but an Inadequate Concep-
itus of the Effence, and makes no Phyfical compofition.
asee my Enchiridion Metaphyficum, cap. 2. fect. 7,9. and
Mélyou will underftand there what I mean by Logical Matter
wnijland Form, which are the Incomplex Principles of Exs
ii\""quatenus Ens, and are nothing elfe but Indeterminata Ay.
Mplitudo and Differentia. So that 1 need no longer here
infift on this matter. | |


at ee ee


erg eS it I a


SECT. XXXII


dhe occafion of the Plychopyrifts Letrer , and this anfwer

i of the Author of the foregoing Difcourfe of the True No-

| tion of a Spirit, and what hopes he conceived of unde-

wl cesving the Plychopyrift by engaging him to perufe that
hn = Lreatcfe. |


Spey


Cyt


=


IN’ W forthe Conclufion it felf, wherein you crave
oi pardon for thefe curt Expreffions of thoughts, which
(ei defired concerning the Defcription of a Spirit. To this,
wal fay, that your Expreffions are not fo curt, but that
i MyOu have fufficiently conveyed your mind to me; If [
i¢(p@ not much miftaken; And therefore pardon isnot
‘(© properly due to you asthanks; and becaufe you had
(fh mind I fhould perufe fome Notions of yours which you

| had


RET


ae
Nae


” = ier
sna re oc, PN


ies mati


250 A further Defence of the


had entertained, to know how near mine and they:
would meet, I defired you attentively and confiderately |
firft to perufe that brief D:fcourfe of mine touching the
true and genuine Notion of a Spirit. Whereby I conceived
you would eafily difcern what agreement or difference
there were in our Conceptions touching this matter.
And having writ fo clearly and diftinctly, fodigeftedly
and coherently, as.I thought, touching this Subject in
that Treatife,‘I thought it alfo hopeful that you would
fully difcern Truth to be on my fide, and that there
were not, nor needed to be, any other Notion of a)
Spirit in general, than what I have fo evidently and ore
derly fet out, and fo carefully defended againft all ima-
ginable Allegations or Pretenfions.


SECT. XXXIV.
The Impediments to true Knowledge, and the full Agree- Tt


ment of the Author of the foregoing Difcourfe with the
Learned Pfychopyrift in the laft claufe of hw Letter,

wiz. If God make us truly holy, we fhall quickly know
more to our fatisfaction.


y UT I leave every one to think as well as he can ini
Philofophical fpeculations, being aflured, that:
every one would get to the Truth if he could reach it;
It being an imperfection and blemifh:to him to be found!
inerrour; Though I queftion whetheiall men take the
belt courfe to attain to truth , but they would gladl
have it, if they might part: with nothing for it. Not


with their beloved Lazinefs, nor with their preconcei-g ,"


ved opinions, which they have a fondnefs for, becaufey
they have chanced fo long ago to efpoufe them, and


cherefore cannot abide to think of a Divorce; not with}
their fenfual pleafures or worldly-mindednefs, nor with"!
that {weet conceit or pleafing prefumption, that whaty ,'\2
they opine.is more like to be true than the opinion off ™%


any f


a |


he
a |
|
bec
ai |
i hed
igh i

Od


A ty wae
aAd Sb nl
a)


jo) 1k


Me |
bf) PF


True Notion of a Spirit. 251
any other man, though they bring no plain demonftra-
tion for it.

For to come to the laft claufe' of all in your Letter,
which is the beft, and in which I moft firmly and heart-
ily agree with you, which is this, 7f God make us truly
holy we (hall quickly know more to our fatisfattion. 1 think
that the Purification of the Soul from all uncleannefs of
Flefh and Spirit , is abfolutely requifite for him that
would fuccefsfully Philofophize, efpecially in Metaphy-
fical or Theological Speculations. And I commend
your Judgment in that you fay , If God make us traly
holy. By vertue of which true holinefs, I fuppofe we
fhall be freed, not only from the dulnefs of Superftition,
and blufter of Exthaftafm, from the prejudices of both
our Education and Complexion, and from the unbridled-
nefs and impetuofity of our own Self-will and defires in
things that look not fo commendably on it; but alfo
from. any vain defire of knowledge it felf, which bears
fuch a fair and commendable fhew with it ; We thall,{ fay,
condemn our felves as of a great folly and mifcarriage,
e{pecially in contemplations Metaphyfical, Theological
and Moral, if we find fucha falfe appetite in our felves
in thofe things, as that we would kvow meerly to kuow,
or (which is worfe) to be kvown.

Which 1s no found conftitution of mind, nor becom-


| Ing an boly Man, who has no falfe appetite to know-


ledge, but only fuch as an healthful and temperate Man
has to his Meat, to eat fuch, and fo muchas inables Na-
ture rightly and firmly to perform all the Funétions of
the natural Life; So all defire of Knowledge in thofe
Contemplations | {poke of before, that exceeds the only
due end of fuch Knowledge, which is to corroborate our
Faithin GOD, andinhis Son FESUS CARIST,
and to. confirm our Belief of a Glorious Immortality
after this Life, to promote true Devotion, Mortifica-
tion, and Regeneration, or the Renovation of our lap-
{cd natures into the loft Image of Ged; All defire of

knowledge


a Ba


252 A further Defence of the

knowledge that tends not tothisend, is but a Difcafe
with a truely holy Man, nor relifhes better with him,
than to feed on Chaff, Feathers, or dry Straw, relifheth
with a natural Man.

And we may be fure, he whofe appetite is thus found
and regular, and defires no knowledge but fuch as is
the real Food of the new Birth in him, fhall not fail to
draw in all wholefome and ufeful knowledge from the
Fountain of alltrue Wifdom, even from the Father of
Lights, from whom is every good and perfect Gifc.
Whenas a falfe Appetite to knowledge, which only
feeds our Pride, will expofe us, befides all Fortuitous
Errours, to the ludicrous impoftures of vagrant Spirits,
that fport themfelves with the vain curiofities of delu-
ded Mankind. Not to add that a Man thus trifles away
that pretious time which is much better {pent in exami-
nation of the fincerity of our own Hearts, and in earnelt
breathings toward God, that he would be pleafed to
free us from that Bondage of Corruption we find our
felyes held in, and would perfect the new Birth, and
confummate the Image of his Son in us, than in teafing
ef unneceflary notions into ufelefs and endiefs Diffinct-
neffes and Multiplicities, and fuch as nothing at all. con-
tribute to our great and everlafting Concern. ‘I fay I
am perfectly of your Mind in this, That he that is thus
truly Holy, willfoonelt know more to his fatisfaction :
For be that feeds the young Ravens that call upon him,
will never fuffer his own Birth to ftarve for want of
due Food inthe Soul of Man. And he that thus Phi-
lofophizes, affecting no Knowledge out of Curiofity,
but only co feed and ftrengthen the Divine Birth in him,
will haply know with eafe more than himfelf had the
Guriofity to know, and more than the Curiofity of thofe
that are out.of this way, are ever likely to be in a capa-
city to reach to .of themfelves, or to receive when of-
fered to them from others, ne


This


ot
1¢
a


fl


CC a -


True Notion of a Spirit. 253

This will not down with all Men, butas many asare
perfwaded of it, it is their duty to improve it to their
prefent fatisfaction here, and everlafting comfort he
after. I did not think to be thus large when | began
my Letter, but one thing has drawn on another I know
not how, but I hope nothing has pafled my Pen but
what may be ufeful to a ferious and intelligent Reader.
Wherefore I leave all to your candid confideration, and


| re{t, ec.


oo)
a


Saducifmus T rinmpbatus :


OR,
Fulland Plan EVIDENCE


Concerning


AND


APPARITIONS.


PAR, T. “Ul,


PROVING


i Partly by Holy Scripture, partly by a choice
Collection of Modern Relations,


The Real Exiftence


OF
MAPPARITIONS, SPIRITS,


and WITCHES.


by Ff OS. GLANVIL, late Chaplain to His
4 Majelty, and Fellow of the Royal Society.


a


LONDON,
Printed for 5. Lownds, MDC LXXXVIIL.


Kyow it is matter of very little Credit to be a
Relator of Stories, and I of all Men living,
have the leaft realon to be fond of the Imploy-
ment. For I never had any faculty in telling of
ba Story, and have always had a particular tndifpoficion
Nand backwardnefs to the writing any fuch. But of all
}Relations of F ait, there are none like to give a Man
Yuch trouble and difreputation, as  thofe that relate to
\Witchcraft azd Apparitions, which fo great a party
lof Men (in this age efpectally) do fo ratlly and laugh
lat, and without more ado, are refolved to explode and
\de/p ife, as meer Winter Dales and old Wives Fables,
Used they will call and account them, be their Truth
Nand Evidence what it will. For, they have unalter-
\ably fixt ana determined the point, that Witches and
JApparitions are things ridiculous, incredible, foppifh,
Mmpoffible ; and therefore all Relations that aljert
Ree? are Lies, Cheats and Delufions, and thofe that
Mafford any credit to them, are credwlous Gulls and filly
Neafie Believers.

Which things , if they [bould not be fo, it would
Wpoil many a jet, and thofe who thought themfelves
Rereat Wits, mult have the difcomfort “of finding they
ere miftaken. They muft fall back into common and
vulgar


i


"The PREFACE.


vulgar Belief, and lofe the pretence to extraordinary | {yi


Sagacity , on which they valued themfelves fo much,
and be brought to be afraid of another World, and be
{ubjected to the common terrours which they defpifed
before, as the juggles and contrivances of Priefts and
Politicians , avd fo mut fee themfelves under a ne-
ceffity of altering their lives , or of being undone.
Thefe are.very hard and grievous things, ana there-
fore the Stories of Witches and Apparitions imujt be
exploded and run down, or all is loft.

This is the cafe with multitudes of brisk confident
Men in our days, fo that to meddle on this Subject, w
to affront them greatly, to provoke their rage and con=
tempt, and to raife the Devil of their Wit and Buf-
foonry. All which confidered, it muft be confeft to be
avery bold and adventurous thing to undertake the © |v,
Province in which Ihave engaged. And befides the}
provocation which it muft needs give to the Huffers' ji)
and Witlings, there is another fort whofe good Opt
wion I greatly value: fome fober and ingenious Spirits,
who upon other grounds doubt of the Exiftence of
Witches, who may be apt to judge me guilty of Credu
lity, for the pains I take in this matter. This alfo
hath been fome trouble and difcouragement.

And upon the whole, I am affured before-hand,that'
no Evidence of Fatt poffible zs {uffictent to remove


the obftinate prejudices of divers refolved Men, anal,


therefore L know I muff fall under their heavy cena4,
fures; of which I have confidered the worft, and am *
I hope pretty well prepared to bear the fevereft of ¥\.,
them. But no Man would expofe bimfelf to allf,
this for nothing , wor have I. There mere reafonsty ’


itt}
Mii)
OF Fi
4 }
/


The PREFACE.
"\" far this engagement , awd they were briefly thefe thai
“follow. hw
“"\ Having been at Mr. Mompeflon’s Houfe in the
"UW time of the difturbance, feex, and heard fomewhat
i my felf, and received an account from Mr.Mompel-
i) fon, and other credible perfons of the whole trouble -
i) Twas perfwaded to publifb, and to annex the full ace
Wl count of it to the fecond or third Edition of my Con-
il fiderations concerning Witchcraft , to which the
t Story had near Relation. This I did, and they paf-
iki) fed two or three Editions together, without much fur-
i, ther trouble to me. But of late, I have heard from all
NWN parts, and am amazed at it, that fo strongly attested
i Relation is run down in most places as a Delufion and
WW Lmpofture, and that Mr. Mompetlon and my-felf,
wi bave confeffed all to be a cheat and contrivance.
Wi Concerning this, I have been asked a thoufand times,
el 22 Ihave been weary of anfwering, and the Queftion-
dM ifts would [carce believe I was in earnest when I deni-
\witl ed it, I have received Letters about it from known
wt Briexzds and Strangers out of many parts of the Three
(il) Kingdoms, fo that I have been haunted almost as bad
iJ as Mr. Mompeffon’s Hox/e. Moft of them have de-
\ clared that it was moft confidently reported, and be-
iii lieved in all the re[pective parts, that the bufine/s was
wil) @ Cheat, that Mr.Mompefion had confeffed fo much,
yi ana I the fame: fo that I was quite tired with deny-
0 22¢ and anfwering Letters about it. And to free my
(in felt from the trouble, I at last refolved to re-print the
id) Story by it felf with my Confutation of the Invention
yi that concerned me, and a Letter I received from Mr.
iit) Mompeffon (ow printed in this Book) which cleared
\ the matter as to him. ~ R 2 This


J
|


The PREFACE.

This accordingly I committed to my Bookfellers
hands fome years fince to be printed. But it being not
done, I was contiiually importuned by new Solicttati-
ons and Queftions; and at length out comes Mr. Webs
fter’s confident Book, in which he faith, That my
Story of the Drummer, and the other of Waitch-
craft, are as odd and filly, as any can be told or
read, andas fictitious, incredible, ludicrous and
ridiculous as any can be, p. 11. Awd again, p. 278.
Muft notall Perfons that are of found underftand-
ing, judge and believe that all thofe ftrange tricks
related by Mr. Glanvil of his Drammer and Mr.
Mompeffon’s Houle, which he calls the Demon of
ZT edworth,were abominableCheats and Impoftures,
as I am informed by -Perfons of good Quality,
they were difcovered to be? R

But neither did this Confidence, nor his Book (1 }\
confels) much move me; for I was very loth to be
troubled any more in this matter. But at laft divers
Eminent Men, and Learned Friends of mine having
taken notice of it, and being troubled to fee fo confider-
able an evidence againft Saducilm, as Mr. Mom-
peflon’s Story is, fo impudently run down by purpofely
contrived lies, they urg’d me very much to re-print
the Relation, with my Confiderations about W itch:
craft ; avd fogive fome check to the Infultation and
Confidence of Mr. Webtter. |

To this I ftood long dif-inclined, but being preft by
the sonfideration that [uch a Re-enforcement might be |
a very confiderable and feafonable fervice to Religion,
again{t the ftupid Saduci{m and Infidelity of the Age, §
I was perfwaded: And having fignified my . being |


BOW. %


‘The PREFACE.


now inclined to the defign, I recerved great encourage
LW) ment from fome of the greateft Spirits of our Age and
“Nation, who earnestly animated metoit. Having
Oe -refolved, I bethought me of making a {mall ColleQtion
li of the most credible and best attested Stories of this
\ kind that were near and modern, t0 accompany the
ON Second I had Printed, and to confirm and prove the
‘ti grain Subject.


a
ee


ne a


Advertifement.
isl OW His isthe whole of the Preface, that was
wl found amongft Mr. Glanvil’s Papers, fa-
j ving five or fix words, which being fuperfluous


‘i to the fenfe of this laft Claufe, and beginning
i) fomething elfe not perfected , I thought better
wa left out. But as for Mr. Mompeffon’s Letter to Mr,
jw Glanvil, which is mentioned in this Preface, and
sl deGigned to be Printed in this intended Edition,
(a it is out of the Original Copy as follows.


M t Mom 2


The PREFACE.


Mr. Mompeffon’s Letter to Mr. Glanvil, Dated
Nov. 8. ..Anno 1672.


Worthy Sir,
WA At Eeting with Dr. Pierce accidentally at Sir Ro-


LVB bert Button’s,be acquainted me of fomething
that pafled between my Lord of R---~ and your felf
about my troubles, &c. Towhich (having but little
leifure.) I do give you this account, that I have been
very often of late asked the Queftion, Whether I have
not confelfed to His Majefty or any other, aCheat dif-
covered about that affair. To which I gave, and ball
to my Dyingeday give the fame Anfwer, That E must
bely my felf, and perjure my felf alfo to acknowledge


@ Cheat in a thing where I am [ure there was nor could


be any, as I, the Minister of the Place, ana two o- |b


ther Honest Gentlemen depofed at the Afizes , upon


my lmpleading the Drummer. If the World will not | i


believe it, it {hall be indifferent to me, praying God
£0 keep me from the fame, or the like affliction, And
although lam fure this moft damnable lye does pals for
current amongst one fort of people in the World, in-
wented only, I think, to fuppres the Belief of the Be-
ing either of God or Devil; yet I question not but the
Lhing obtains credit enough amongst thofe, whom I
principally defire fbould retain a more charitable Opi= |
nton of me, thanto be any way a devifer of it, only to |
be talk’t of in the World, to my own difadvantage |
and reproach, of which fort I reckon you one, and rest |i
in haste, SIR,
Nov. 8. Your obliged Servant,
1672 fo. Movwmpeffon.
Adver-


The PREFACE.


| Advertfement.


Oncerning the Atteftation of Mr. Mompeffox
chi and others upon Oath at the Affizes , the
(J fame is mentioned alfo, and their Names expref-
i@ fed ina Letter to Mr. Sames Collins, which Letter
A from the Original Copy is as follows.


Mr. Mompelfon’s Letter to Mr. Collins, Dated
Aug. 8. Anno 1674.


if ~ SIR,
} Received yours, and had given you an earlier an-
fier, had I not been prevented by fome Fourneys.
\T now give you this; That 2s to any additional part i
| of the Story, I fhall not trouble you with at prefent, |e
\§ wot knowing what is either already publifhed or omit- ae
\\ ted, in regard Ihave not any of Mr. Glanvil’s Books on
‘il by me. I never had but one, which was the last year Hi
0 borrowed of me for the ufe of the Lord Hollis, and w i
ait wot yet returned. But as tothe bufinefs of the Affizes ay
“"h (which is likely to work most on the Incredulous, be- i
""4 caufe the Evidence was gives on Oath) I {hall here
_W ezlarge zt t0 you.

") . When the Drummer was efcaped from bis Exile,
""\ which he was Sentenced to at Gloucefter for a Felony,
‘| T took him up, and procured his Commitment to Salif-

"@ bury Gaol, where I indtited him as a Felon, for this
N. fuppofed Witchcraft about my Houfe. When the Fel- etal
dow fam me in earnest, he fent to me from the Prifon, Hi

A. SAL


Bb


i
fh
{ja


Aorta


sma Aes SIS


te Reon


The PREFACE,

that he was forry for my affliction, and if I would pro-
cure him leave to come to n2y Floufe in the nature of
an Harveft-iman, he didnot queftion but'he fhould do
me good as to that affair. To which I fent anfwer, I
knew he could do me no good in any honeft way, and
therefore rejected it. The Affizes came on, where I
indicted him on the Statute Primo Jacobi, cap. 12.
where you may find, that to feed, imploy, or reward
any evil {pirit is Felony. And the Indittment againft
him was, that be did quendam malum Spiritum
negotiare , the Grand “fury found the Bi upon the
Evidence, but the Petty Fury acquitted him, but not
without fome difficulty,

The Evidence upon Oath were my felf,one Mr. Wil-
liam Maton, ove Mr. Walter Dowle, all'yet living,
and I think of as good Repute, as any this C ountry ¥ Wy
has in it, and one Mr. Jo.Cragg, then Minister of Vj»,
the Place, but fince dead. We all depofed Several | ji
things that we conceived impoffible to be done by any Vw
natural Agents, as the motion of Chairs, Stools and
Bed-flavis , no body being near them, the Beating of
Drumms in the Air over the Houfe ix clear Nights,
and nothing vifible; the fhaking of the Floor’ and
frrongest parts of the Houfe in still and calm nights,
with feveral other things of the like nature: And
shat by other Evidence it was applied to hime.

For fome going out of thefe parts to Gloucefter, |
whilft he was there in Prifon, and vifiting him, he
ask't them what News in Wilts.: To which they re= |
phed, they knew none. No, fays the Drummer, did
gow not bear of a Gentlemans Houle that was troubled |
with the Beating of Drums ? They told him again, of |
fa i that


oe AAS


3 The PREFACE.
\\ that weve News, they heard enough of that. Ay, fays
o@ the Drummer, it was becaufe he took my Drum from
‘\ me, tf he had not taken away my Drum, that trouble
had never befallen him, and he {ball never have his
i guiet again , til I have my Drum, or [atisfattion
CW from him,
Lhis was depofed by one Thomas Avis Servant to
'§ one Mr. "Thomas Sadler of North-Wilts, and thefe
Wil words had like to have cost the Drummer his Life.
‘til For elfe, although the things were never fo true, it
Wi could. not have been rightly applyed to hin more than
Wai to another. I {bould only add, that the before-men~
i tioned Witneffes were Neighbours, and depofed, that
: d they heard and faw thefe things almoit every day or
in gight for wany Months together. As to the Sculpture
wii you tntend, you best understand the advantage, I think
v9 at needle[s. And thofe Words [ you hall have Drum-
weil wing enough| is more than I heard him [peak : I
we Vest


ii), Tedworth Your Loving Friend,
th Aug, 8. 1674.
aye ; ,


Jo. Mompeffon.


AN
INTRODUCTION
TO THE
‘Proof of the Exiftence of Appari-


Ri


tions, Spirits, and Witches.


or


SECT. If.


Whe great ufefulnefs and feafonablene{s of the prefent Ars
| gument, touching Witches, and Apparitions, in fub-
) ferviency to Religion.


met Queftion, whether there are Witches or
not, is not matter of vain Speculation, or of
indifferent Moment; but an Inquiry of very
great and weighty Importance. For, on the
Irefolution of it, depends the Authority and juft Execu-
ation of fome of our Laws; and whichis more, our Re-
Wigion inits main Doétrines is nearly concerned. There
jis no one, that is not very mucha {tranger to the World
but knows how .Athez{m and Infidelity have advanced in
four days, and how openly they now dare to fhew them-
Wfelves in Afferting and Difputing their vile Caufe. Par-
iticularly the diftinétion of the Soul from the Body, the
Being of Spirits, and a Future Life are Affertions ex-
Gtreamly defpifed and oppofed by the Men of this fort,
and if we lofe thofe Articles, all Religion comes to no-
thing. They are clearly and fully aflerted in tes a
| racles,


een


f
i@
a

a


The Introduction.


Oracles, but thofe Wits have laid afide thefe Divine
Writings. They are proved by the beft Philofophy and
higheft Reafon;, but the Unbelievers, divers of them
are too fhallow to be capable of fuch proofs, and the
more fubtle are ready to ‘Scepticize away thofe¥
grounds.

But there is one Head of Arguments: that troubles
them much, and thatis, the Topick of Witches and Ap-
paritions, \f {uch there are, it isa fenfible proof of Spi-
rits and another Life, an Argument of more direct force i itt
than any §peculations, or Abftract reafonings, and fuch
an one as meets with ail the forts of Infidels. On which
account they labour with all their might tg perfwade
themfelves and others, that Wirches and Apparitions are
but Melancholick Dreams,or crafty Jmpoftures, and heré
itis generally, that they begin with the young-men, ,
whofe underftandings they defign to Debauch.

They expofe and deride all Relations of Spirits and |
Witchcraft,and furnifh them with fome little Arguments, J iniy
or rather Colours againft their Exifence. And youth 18 if ht
very ready to entertain fuch Opiaions as will help them tx
to phanfie, they are wifer than the generality of Men. } tt
And when they have once fwallowed this Opinion, and.
are fure there are no Witches nor Apparitiows, they are ht
prepared forthe denial of Spirits, a Life to come, and
all the other Principles of Religion. So that I think it@
will bea confiderable and very feafonable fervice to itj AV
fully to debate and fettle this matter, which I fhall en-
déavour in the following fheets, and I hope fo, as not
to impofe upon my felf or others, by empty Rhetori-
cations, fabulous Relations, or Sophiftical Reafonings, J
but treat onthe Queftion with that freedom and plain-§m
nefs, that becomes one that is neither fond , fancifull§m,,,
nor credulons. |


te
)

é
by

z

at

f
S
4

?

a

:
res
£


=


SEC TAM,


The Introduétion. 269


cE C PETE


if The true fiating of the Queftion by defining what a Witch
| and Witchcraft x.


bil] BF Know that a great part of theLabour in moft Contro.
| | . verfies, ufeth to be beftowed on things impertinent


‘iQ to the main bufinefs, and by them the Minds of both


wi fides are fo confounded, that they wander widely from


wi@tthe point in difference, and at laft lof it quite. It


iii Would quickly be thus in the Queftion of Witcher aft,


(ial and ufually is fo, without previous care to'avoid it. But


wa 1 fhall take the beft I can, that my pains on this Subject


‘leg be not fo mif-beftowed, but clofély applyed to the pur-
ya pofe: And in order thereunto thal] briefly define the


terms of the Queftion, and then fet down what | grant


ytO mine Adverfaries , and what I demand from them,
ett And when thefe Preliminaries are well adjulted, we thalf


yi proceed with more diftinétnefs, and {till fee whereabout


awe are, and know how far what is affirmed or proved,


“qa teaches the main matter in debate. -

,o_ The Queftion is, whether there are Witches or not,

| flMir. Webfter accufeth the Writers on the Subject of de-
,@fect, in not laying down a perfect Defcription of aWitch


yy (@OL Watcherafe, or explaining what they mean, p. 20.
ott What his perfect Defcription is, I do not know ; but I


\ oithink I have defcribed aW%itch or W utchcraft in my Confi-
«liderations, fafficiently to be underftood, and the Con-


\.eeption which I, and, I think, moft Men have is, That


)


"lh Witch ts one, who can do or feems to do Strange things,


‘beyond the known Power of Art and ordinary Nature, by
"| iwertue of a Confederacy with Evil § perits. | Strange T ‘hings,
~ not Adiracles, thefe are the extraordinary Effects of Dj.
wine Power, known and diftinguifhed by their circum-
iftances, as I fhall fhew in due place. The Strange things
ware really performed, and are not all Impoftures and De-
“Wafions. The Witch occafions, but is not the Principal
Efficient,


ae


ba
ee


sha ——
TP ag EAD Ean


270 The Introduétion.
Efficient, fhe feems todo it, but the Spirit performs the


wonder, fometimes immediately , as in Tran{portations |}


and Poffeffiovs , fometimes by applying other Natural |
Caufes , as in raifing Storms, and inflicting Difeafes,,
fometimes ufing the Witch as an Inftrument, and either
by the Eyes or Touch , conveying Malign Influences
And thefe things are done by vertue of a Covenant, OF
Compatt betwixt the Witch and an Evil Spirit. A Spirit,
viz. an Intelligent Creature of the Invifible World, whe-
ther one of the Evil Angels called Devils, or an Inferi-
our Demon or Spirit , or a wicked Soul departed, but
one that is able and ready for mifchief, and whether ai-:
together Incorporeal or not, appertains not to this|
Queftion.


eee


SECT. If.
That neither the Notation of the Name that fignifies tndife i


fervently, nor the falfe Additions of others to the No4 Wy
tion of a Witch can any way diffettle the Authors ae


finition.


His I take to be a plain Defcription of what we
mean by a Witch and Witchcraft : What Mr. (eb-
ler and other Advocates for Witches, talk concerning:


the words whereby thefe are expreft, that they are im- lly,


proper. aid Metaphorical, fignifying this, and figni-
fying that, is altogether idle and impertinent. The
word Witch fignifies originally a Wife Man, or ra~
ther a Wife Woman. ‘The fame doth Saga in theq
Latine, and plainly fo doth Wizzard in Englith fignifie
a Wife Man, and they are vulgariy called cunning Mem
or Women. An Art, Knowledge, Cunning they have
that is extraordinary; bat it is far from true Wifdomg{
and the word is degenerated into an ill fenfe, as Ala
gia Is. a.
So then they are called, and we need look no further; pin,
: A


| Lhe Introduétion. 271
sf] itis enough, that by the Word, we mean the Thing and
‘iinpl Perfon | have defcribed, whichis the common meanin £3
att and Mr. Weber and the reft prevaricate when they make
(it dt fignifie an ordinary Cheat, a Couzener, a Poyfoner, Se»
citi ducer, and I know not what. Words fignifie as they are
si] ufed, and in common ufe, Witch and Witchcraft, do in-
i, (@ deed imply thefe, but they imply more, vz. Deluding,
‘wit Cheating and Hurting by the Power of an Evil Spirst im
iyi) Covenant with a wicked Manor Woman: This is our
tide] Notion of aWitch.
(bl): Mr. Weber I know will not have it to bea perfeé&
(vrai Defcription. He adds to the Notion of the Witch he
wioppofeth, carzal Copulation with. the Devil > and real
\ Transformation into an Hare, Cat, Dog, Wolf; the fame
doth Mr.Wagftaffe. Whichis, as ifa Man fhould define
~~ fan Angel to be a Creature in the fhape of a Boy with
}Wings, and then prove there is nofuch Being. Of all
4Men, I would not have Mr. Web/ter to make my Defini-
qitions for me; we our {elves are to have the leave to tell
/\dwhat it is that we affirm and defend. And I have de-
iiferibed the Witch and Witchcraft , that fober Men be-
Wieve and affert. Thus briefly for Defining.


5


;
\


a


) SECT. Iv.


What things the Author concedes in thy Controver fie avex$
ik Witches and Witchcraft.


|


' ql | Shall let the Patrons of Werches know what I allow
_ (i and grant to them;

c(t. Firlt, I grant, That there are fome Witty and Inge-
'4bious Men of the oppofite Belief to me in the Queftion.
) HWea, it is accounted a piece of Wit to laugh at the Be-
', \dief of Witches as filly Credulity. And {ome Men value
" (hemfelves upon it, and pride them in their fuppofed
’WBagacity of fecing the Cheat that impofeth on fo great a
fart of Believing Mankind, And the Stories of ssp:

i an


0
i


ok st The Introduétion.


and Apparitions afford a great deal of Subject for Wit;
which it is. pity that a witty Man fhould lofe.

Secondly, I own that fome of thofe who deny Witches
have no defign againit, nora difinclination to Religion,
but believe Spirits, and a Life to come, as other fober
Chriftians do, and fo are neither Atheiis, Sadducees, nor
Hobbifts. ‘eaten nicweeie tend its. a4 4

Thirdly, I allow that the great Body of Mankind is
very credulous, and inthis matter fo, that they do be-
lieve vain impoffible things in relation to it. “That cara
nal Copulation with the Devil, and real Tranfmutation of
Men and Women into other Creatures are fuch. That
people are apt toimpute the extraordinarses of Art, or
Nature to Witchcraft, and that their Credulity is often
abufed by fubtle and defigning Kzaves through thefe.
‘That there are Ten thoufand filly lying Stories of Wirch-
craft and Apparitions among the vulgar. ‘That infinite §,
 fach have been occafioned by Cheats and Popi{h Superftie | |

tions, and many invented and contrived by the Knavery Jy)
of Popi(h Prielts. :


Fourthly, I grant that Melancholy and Imagination}


have very great force, and can beget ftrange perfwaft- 4
ons. And that many Stories of Witchcraft and Appare-
tions have been but Melancholy fancies,

Fifthly, I know and yield, that there are many ftranged y:
natural Difeafes that have odd Symptomes,, and pro-


duce wonderful and aftonifhing effects beyond the ufual


courfe of Nature, and that fuch are fometimes falflyg_.


afcribed to Witchcraft.


" Sixthly, I own the Popifh Inquifitours, and otherg), '
Witch-finders have done much wrong, that they haveg,.'


deftroyed innocent perfons for Witches, and that Watch-4, 3


ing and Torture have extorted extraordinary Confefli-g. |


ons from fome that were not guilty.


Seventhly and Laftly, I grant that the Tranfactions off | Oy
Spirits with Witches, which we affirm to be true and§, “Ww
certain, are many of them very ftrange and uncouth. Mt
and that we canfcarce give any account of the Reafons§,*!:

ow


The Introduttion. 273


Q of them, or well reconcile many of thofe paflages to

lj the commonly received Notion of Spirits, and the State
iq of the next World, __ ar 9a Oi? ue
(4 © If thefe Conceffions will do mine Adverfaries in this
§ Queftion any good, they have them freely. And by
“fh them I have already almoft {poiled ail Mr. Webfter’s and

Mr. Wag ftaffe’s, and the other Witch- Advocates Books,
fl Which prove little elfe, than what I have here granted,
~f And having been fo free in Conceflions, I may exped;
“fi that. fomething fhould be granted me from the other
w@ party.


be
4
, (ie
|


Advertifemenr,


On’ D dofe that ave mentioned in the fecond Conceffion,though

. I they are not Atheifts, Sadducees xor Hoboilts ; vee

Mi" Waf they deny Witches, it és plain they are Antifcripturifts,
ithe Scripture fo plainly attefting the contrary,


|


: z ;


SECT. Vv.


yf AT be Poftulata which the Author demands of his Adverfaries
: a his juft right.


“HE demands that I make are > Firft, That whe.
| ther Witches are or are not, is. queftion of Fact :
Por it is in effect, whether any. Men or Women have:
ipeen, or are in Covenant with Evil Spirits, and whether,
\luifhey by the Spirits help, or he on their account performs
wiittuch or fuch things. aR! ;

@ Secondly, That matter of Faét can only be proved by
ji'timmediate Senfe, or the Teftimony of others, Divine
- 1% flumane. Yo endeavour to demonftrate Fact by ab-
«eeract reafoning and {peculation, is, as if a Man fhould.
lotove that Fulins Cafar founded the Empire of Rome, by

rs) Algebra


274 The Introduction.


Algebra or Metaphyficks... So that what Mr. Webjter
faith, p. 43. That the true and proper mediums to
prove the actions of Witches by, are Scripture and found
Reafon, and not the improper way of Teftimony (which
we ufe in the oppofition that Tejtimony ftands to Seri
pire and found Reajon) is very Non-fenfe.

Thirdly, That the Hiftory of the Scrsprure is not all
Allegory, but generally hath a plain literal and obvious
meaning. ,

Fourthly, That fome Humane Teftimonies are credible
and certain, viz. They may be fo circumftantiated as to
leave no reafon of doubt. For our Senfes fometimes re-
port truth, and all Mankind are not Lyars, Cheats, and
Knaves, at leaft they are not Lyars, when they have no
Intereft to be fo.

Fifthly, That which is fufficiently and undeniably
proved, ovght not to be denied, becaufe we know noty
how it can be, that is, becaufe there are difficulties ing /*
the conceiving of it. Otherwife Senfe and Knowledges
is gone as wellas Faith. For the Modus of moft things #94 lit
unknown, and the moft obvious in Nature have inex itt
tricable difficulties in the Speculation of them, as! havegu th
fhewn in my Scepfis Scientifica. ,

Sixthly and laftly, we are much inthe dark, as to the
Narnre and Kinds of Spirits, and the particular conditions ay
of the other World, The Angels, Devils, and Souls:
happinefs and mifery we know, but what kinds are un-4";
der thefe generals, and what actions, circumftances andg)i;,
ways of Life under thofe States we little underftand.J |
Thefe ate my Po/fulata or demands , which I fuppofeg!hy «,
will og thought reafonable, and fuch as need no morey lt
Pproo a Dee


| Proof of Apparitions, Spirits, and
4). Witches, from Holy-Scripture.


|
ee pe E : - ~


! SH WG © POEk


ast) Zhe Authors purpofe of proving Apparitions and Witche
sal) craft, to fuch as believe Scripture, as firft from the Ap-


ew) parition of Angels.
i
i forts that deny their Exiftence, viz. Thofe
\ ~ that believe the Scriptures, and the Wits or
ins Witlings that will zor admit their Teftimony. To the
»iq@Grtt I fhall prove the being of Witches by plain Evidence
(yitaken from the Divine Oracles,and to the other, and in-
deed to both, I fhall evince the fame by as full and clear
pial eftimonies, as matter of fact is capable of, and then
uenfwer the oppofite Objections , and thofe particularly
iglpf the three late confident Exploders of Witchcraft ;
be Mr. Webfter,’ Mr. Wag ftaffe, and the Author of the
uDoétrine of Devils,
f_. Lhe Proof I intend fhall be of thefe two things, wiz.
hat Spirits have fenfibly tranfacted with Men, and
" hat fome have been in fuch Leagues. with them, as to
"tbe enabled thereby to do wonders.
I Thefe fenfible Tranfactions of Spirits with Men, are
Hvident from Apparitions and Poffeffions. The Appari-
lion of Angels, their Difcourfes and Predictions, fenfi-
ile converfes with Menand Women, are frequently re-
{forded in the Scripture. An Angel appeared to Hagar,
wer. 16.° Three Angels in the fhape of Men appeared to
ae $2 Abrabam,


Lie
) Sin


N D having thus prepared my way, I come to
prove, that there are Witches againft both the


276 Proof of Apparitions, &ec.
‘Abraham, Gen. 18. Twoto Loe in the fame likenefs,
Gen. 19. An Angel called to Hagar, Ger. 21.17. and
fo did one to Abraham, Gen. 22. An Angel fpake to
and converfed with Facob in a Dream, Gen. 31. One of
the fame appeared to AZfes in the Buf, Exod.3. An
Argel went before the Camp of J/rael, Exod.14. An
Angel met Balaamin the way, Numb. 22. An Angel
fpake to all the People of J/rael, Fudges 2. An Angel
uppeared to Gideon, Fudges 6. and to the Wife of A4z-
noah, Fudg. 13. An Angel deftroyed the People, 2 Sam.
24. An Angel appeared to Elsah, 1 Kingsty, An An-
gel {mote in the Camp of the Affyrians 184000. 2 Kings
35. AnAngekftood by the Threfhing-Floor of Ornaz,
1 Chron. 21.15. An Angel talked with Zachariah the
Prophet, Zach. 1.

An Angel appeared to the two Adzries at our Lord’s
Sepulchre, A¢atth. 28. An Angel foretold the Birth of


Fohn Baptift to Zachariab the Priel, Luk, t. Gabriel was |


fent to the Holy Virgin,-Luk, 1.26. An-Angel appeared,
to the Shepherds, Luk, 2.. An Angel opened the Prifon
Door to Peter and the reft, Acts 5. Imight accumulate:
many more inftances, but thefe are enough. And many
circumftances of fenfible Converfe belong; to moft of}
them, which may be read at large in- the refpective:
Chapters. And fince the Intercourfes of Angels were


fo frequent in‘ former days, why fhould' we be aver {e: rs
to the belief that Spirits fometimes tranfact with Memgy'”


now ?


oe


Advertifement.


* | Find: among ft Mr. Glanvil’s Papers, the firft Lineaedy -

ments or Strokes of an Anfwer to Mr. Wagttaffe,s, |‘
and to the Author ef the Doctrine of Devils, but more fully,’
to. Mr. Webtter, at leaf? Seventeen Sheets, where he an—§..
fvers folidly and {ubftantially where Ioan read brs Has pi


Ss <2 eat SS oe =

SS = =S >, -
— i —— rang < +>) AX
2 ——— saris est — —_


——a
—- 9 =>
PSS =


fh rom FAoly Scripttre.


il Out 2¢ reaches but to the Sixth Chapter. And in truth he has
at daid about him fo well in thefe Sheets that are publifhed,
that thofe may well feem the lefs neceffary.


i= —-=—


Se Cru


‘Lhe Evafions his Adverfaries ufe to efcape the force of thefe
|| Proofs of Scripture from the Apparition of Angels, with
the Author’s Anfwer.


ad) a are feveral Evafions, by which fome endea-
| vour to efcape thefe Texts; as, Firft the Sadducees
“Tot old, and Familifts of later days, who hold, to Wit,
ithefe, that the Azgels we read of, were but Divine Gram
tces, the other that they were Divine Phantafims created
“igo ferve a prefent occafion, which ceafed tobe as foon
"Was they difappeared. One would think that none that
yaever had read the Scriptures, fhould entertain fuch a
‘idiiconceit as this, that is fo contrary to the account they
iGevery where give of thofe cceleftial Creatures. But there
witifis nothing fo abfurd , but fome Men will embrace to
u\Gfupport their Opinions.
yw Let us confider a little how differently from this vain
isi ancy the Scripture defcribesthem. They are called Spi-
vets, an Attribute given to Gedhimfelf the prime Sib-
(i\WifFence, whois by way of eminence called the Father of
Wpirsts, notof Phantafms. And Spirit imports as much
Subftance as Body, though without grofs bulk. We read
~ If Eleé Angels, and the Angels that /tand before the
Whrone of God continually, and that always behold the
Face of God. Of the Fallen Angels that kept not their
lirft Station, that are held in the Chains of Darknefs -
wind of everlafting Fire prepared for the Devil and his
‘siif4agels againft the Judgment of the great Day. Both
flhad their Order of Superiority and Inferiority, Adichael
itnd his Angels, the Dragon and his Angels. Weare
yammade little lower than the Angels. In Heayen we Ve
i 1 aaah tae phi imei -


SS
: cate we | adie 5
. POT it oP. eee


278 Proof of Apparitions, &c.

be as the Angels of God. Of the Day of Judgment
knoweth no Man, no not the Azgels. Let all the An-
gels of God worhhip him.

Which Defcriptions of the Nature, Order, Condition,
Attributes of Angels, and infinite more fuch up and
down the Scriptures, are not applicable to Phantafms,
but demonftratively prove, that the Angels of whofe
Apparitions we hear-{o frequently there, were real per=


manent fubjiftences, and not mere Phantafms and Sha-
dows.


eee eae ce A ne rR RR Ae ES


SECT. WI.


That the Angels that are {aidto have appeared tn Scripture:
were not Men-Meflengers , but Inhabitants of the:
Invifible World; And whether they ate and drank


Or 70.


UT were not thofe Angels that fo appeared, fpe- Wil
cial Prophets, Divine Meffengers, fometimes in Scri-f
pture confeffedly called Angels? They did eat andi tt
drink with Abraham and with Lot, by which it fhould
feem that they were real Men. But whoever fhall look
over the Inftances alledged of the Apparition of Angels,
and read them in allthe Circumftances of the Text, will
plainly fee that they could not be AZen.
Such could net be the Angel that fpake to Abraham
and Hagar out of Heaven, that converfed with Facob in


_a Dream, that appeared to 4Z/es inthe Burning Bufhy !


that appeared to AZanoah, and afcended, imhis and his}
Wife’s prefence, inthe flame of the Sacrifice, that went)
before the Camp of J/rael, that ftood before Balaam in
the way unfeen by him, that fmote the Army of the 4/
fyrians, that appeared to Zacharias inthe Temple, anag |
to the A4aries at theSepulchre. Thefe muft bea fort of Bew
ings fuperiour to Mankind, -Angels inthe proper fenfeq
who arefometimes in Scripture called Aden, becaule therg
appear in our likenefs. Bu.


i) But whether thefe do receive refection or fuftenance in
e4i their own World and State or not, I will not difpute,
i) It is moft probable, and it hath been the Doctrine both
dit Of Fathers and Philofophers, that they are vitally united
yak to ethereal and Heavenly Bodies, which poflibly may
wilt need recruits fome fuch way, and fo Axngels Food may
‘vit be more thana Metaphor. But certainly they cannot eat
dw) after our manner, nor feed on our grofs Dyet, except in
il appearance only. They may make fhew of doing it (as
j the Angel Raphael told Tobit that he did, Tob. 12. 19,
§ All thefe days 1 dtd appear unto you, but I did neither eat
~} nor drink, but you did fee a Vifion) but really they doit
i not. So that when Abrahams and Lots Angels are faid
} to eat and drink with them, the Scripture fpeaks as to
om them it feemed.. And fo the Yerufalem Targum reads,
‘it and they feemed as if they did eat and drink, And we may
‘4 fuppofe that Men’s Conceptions of Angels were not very
'} refined in thofe days, nor could they have born their fen-
i fible and free Converfes, if they had look’c on them as
.. Creatures of a Nature fo diftant from their own.
0) And therefore afterward, when they were better un-
derftood, thofe to whom they appeared were {truck
‘if with great dread and amazement, and thought that
‘al they fhould prefently die. Nor dowe, asI remember,
read any more of the Angels eating or drinking after
what feemed to Abraham and Lot. Indeed Manoah invi-
ted the Angel to eat, Fudg. 13. 15. but it was before he
i knew he was an Angel, and it is fet down im excufe of
"the offer,v. 16. For Manoah knew not that he was an An-
J gel of the Lord, implying that the invitation had been
i) abfurd if he had known it.
i"). T have faid this in anfwer to the objection, though
"] the main caufe is not concerned. For though fhould
WA grant that Abrabam’s and Let’s Angels were Men, yet
i the other inftances in which that could not be faid or
th fappofed, are more than enough to carry my point.
i A That real Angels, Inbabitants of the Invifible World, did


| fometimes fenfibly appear.
& Sigg § SECT?


a ad


net iy
ie) :
t!


, i


f ——


from Fly Scripture. ey 279 — Be


480 Proof of Apparitions, Sc.


SE Cobol
That Angels ave fill Miniftring Spirits as well as of old.


¥) UT it will be faid, when they did appear, it was

upon Divine Errands, ‘and-God fent-them to férve
the ends of his'Government and Providence; which I
grant. And God Almighty hath the fame ends to ferve
ftill, he governs the World now, and his Providence is
as watchful as ever, and the Angels are the chief Mini-
iters of that Providence, and Miniltring Spirits for our
good. TheGofpel was ufhered in by the Apparition of
Angels, and many things done by them in the carrying
of iton. And why we fhould: think they. may not be
fent, and fhould not appear on occafion now, I do not
fee. But this is more than I need fay yet, being for the
firft ftep only to thew, that Spirits have tranfacted with
Men, (Der god ese ene oc


Proofs from the Apparitions of Evil Spirits, recorded


an Scripture.


rT ‘Hofe I have mentioned hitherto, have been good
and benign Spirits, but evil Spirits have alfo appear-

ed, and fenfibly had to do with Mankind. My firft in-
{Lance of this is one of the firft bufineffes that-was in the
World, the Temptation of Eve by the Dewil in the Ser-
pent. An Argument which thofe that adhere to the Let-
ter of thofe three firft Chapters cannot avoid. Evil An-
gels were fent among the eg yptians, Pfalm 78.49, and
thofe pafled through and {mote the Land. But the De-
{troyers, wz. The Evil.Angels were not permitted te
come into the L/raelites Houfes, Exod. 12. 23... When
God asked Sathan whence he came, ok 1.7. he ankteerad
ie Ma Fee rom


from Holy Scripture. 281


Ofrom going to and fro inthe Earth. By Divine permif-
§fion he raifed the great Wind that blew down the Hovufe
(upon %ob’s Children, v. 19. and {mote his Body all over
« Gwith Boyls, ob 2.7. He tempted our Saviour in an
external fenfible way, carrying him from place to place,
'“fand urging the Son of God to worhip him, AZstth. 4.
“vt But more of this will appear by confidering the fecond
\ghead propofed, vz. Poffeffion of Evil Spirits. |


SECT. VI.


mo Proofs from. Pofleflion of Evil Spirits, and that they were
not Difeafes, as the Witck-Advocates would have
them. OE

inlef PA Hat fuch Poffeffions have been, we find frequently
and plainly delivered in the Hiftory of the Gofpel,
jand fo often, that I fhall not need to recite particulars.
| The Evafion that the Witch- Advocates have for this,
~~ fis, that the Devils and unclean Spirits {poken of inthofe
i places, which our Saviour is faid to have caft out, were
§ itrange and uncommon Di/fea/es, which the Fews thought
wil@ to be Devils , and Chrift who came not to teach Men
1 Philofophy, complyed with their deceived apprehen-
9 fion, and the Evangelifts {peak according to their con-
.ul@ Ceit inthis matter. But if this Anfwer mutt pafs, then

»wp fin the firft place, vee
4.) Farewel all Scripture, it may be made to fay what we
tylt Pleafe ; and if when the Scripture {peaks in a plain Hi-
yh tory of unclean Spirits and Devils, we may underftand
ih Difeafes by it, then what we read of good Angels may be
iii) Graces and Vertues, and what we read of Chrift himfelf,
" t may all be interpreted of the Chri within, and fo all the
“yl Scripture, and all Religion fhall fignifie what any Man

‘ia thinks fit i ‘

| Secondly, The-cure of Difeafes is mentioned in many
|Pof the Texts, diftinctly fom the cefting out of the De-
& vils.


|
|
dl
H


282 Proof of Apparitions, &c.


vils. Thus Afatth, 10.1, He gave the Difciples power
againft unclean Spirsts to caft them out, and to heal,all mane
ner of fickneffes, and all manner of Difeafes. This wasa
different Power from the former, and all manuer of fick-
nefles and difeafes implies the uncommon and extraor-
dinary, which our Sadducees would have the Devils to
be, wz. Difeafes, as well as the ordinary.and ufual ones
are. So Luke 6.18. He healed them of their Difeafes,
and thofe thar were vesced with unclean Spirits, were brought
to him, and he healed them likewife. And mott plainly,
Matth. 4,24. And they brought unto him all fick people,
that were taken with divers Difeafes and Torments, and
thofe that were poffeff[ed with Devils, and thofe that were
Lunatick,, and thofe that hadthe Palfie, and he healed
them. “Vhe Mad-men, and thofe that had the Falling-
Sicknefs, the Diftempers which the Witch-Advocates
make Devils of, are here mentioned apart, and-as di-
{tinct from thofe Devils our Saviour caft out.

Thirdly, Many things are attributed to thofe Devils
that were cait out, which are not applicable to Difea-
fes. The Devils in the Poffeffed among the Gergafens,
Matth. 18. 16. befought Chrift, faying, If thou caft us
out, fuffer us to go away into the Herd of Swine, and he
gave them leave, Mark 5.8. Sure the Difeafes did not be-
feecb him , But perhaps the mex did. Had they a mind
to go into the Swine ¢ and did they enter into them ?
A fort of poffeffion this, that was never heard of, a Beaft
poffeft with a Azan. But St. Luke tells us, they were the
Devils that went out of the 4en, and entered into the
Swine, Luke 8.33. The Men did not go out of them-
felves, and therefore, if what went out was not the Di-
feafe, it was really the Devil or unclean Spirit.

So Luke 4. 33. In the Synagogue there was a Man that
had aSpirit of an unclean Devil, and cryed out witha
lond Voice, faying, Let us alone, &c. Well, but. might
not this be the man himfelf that cryed out fo? There-
fore read a little on, v.35. Aud Fefus rebuked him, viz.
bim that fpake, faying to the fame ftill, Hold thy ae

ath


from Holy Scripture. 283


and come out of him. ‘Which muft be another Perfon di-
ftinct from the Man himfelf, and who was that ? It fol-
lows, And when the Devil bad thrown bim in the miaft,
he came out of bim, the fame Devil that fpake , that our
Saviour rebuked, and commanded to come out , which
could be no other than areal Evil Spirit.

And that thofe ejeéted Devils were not Difeafes ap-
pears farther, Afarth.12.v. 22. There was brought unto
him, one poffeffed with a Devil , blind and dumb, and be
healed him, infomuch (to wit, the confequence of the
ejecting the Devil was) that the blind and dumb both fpake
and faw. The Pharifees, v.24. impute this cafting out

evils to a Confederacy with Beelzebub the Prince of
the Devils, our Saviour there argues, that then Sathan
fhould be divided againft himfelf; namely, Beelzebub
the chief againft the inferiour Devils that he calt out;
who are of his Kingdom, and doing the work of it:
For there it follows, that bis Kingdom could not land,
v.26, Thefe things will be hardly applyed to Défea(es.
And,

Fourthly and laftly, If the Evangelift fhould call Dz.
feafes Devils, and unclean Spirits, and {peak of cafting
out Devils in an Hiftory with all the plainnefs and ex-
prefnefs of Words, and Phrafe, and Circumftance, that
fach an a€tion could be defcribed by, and yet mean no-
thing of it, what would this fuggeft, but that they falfly
afcribed to Chrift wonders that he never did, and con-
fequently that they were Lyars and Deceivers, and vain
Impoftors ? -For clear it is, that whoever fhall read

thofe paflages in the Gofpel without a prepofleit Opi-
nion, will be led into this belief by them, that ourSa-
viour did really caft Devils out of Perfons pofleft. And
if there be really no fuch thing as Poffeffion by Evst Spi-
rits, but only Difeafes by the ignorant and credulous peo-
ple taken for fuch, then the Hiftory impofeth on us, and
leads Men into a per{wafion of things done by the Power
of Chrift that never were. And what execution this will
‘do upon the truth, and credit of the whole Hillory, is
very eafie to underftand. SEC a.


tas i DCR EEET Ce i


234 Proof of Apparitions, &c.


SECT. VIL.


That the Witch- Advocates cannot elude S cripture-T eftimony
of Pofleflion by Evil Spirits, by faying it. peaks accord-
ing to the recewved Opinions of Men. :


yf But the Scripture doth, we know, {peak often ac-
J cording ‘to the received Opinion of Men, though
they are errors, which it is not concerned to rectifie,
when they concern no A@orality or Religion. Pe
But firft, The Do€trine of Spirits and Devils was not
the received Opinion of all the Fews : The Sadducces a
confiderable Sect were of another mind. So that the Sto-
ries of ejecting fuch, muft look to them ‘as Impoftures.
And the Scriptures were not written only for the Fews,
and for that particular time alone, but for all Places and
all Ages. Molt of which have no fuch ufe of calling Di-
feafes Devils, and among them the Hiftory muft either
convey a falfe Opinion , or lofe the Reputation of its
Truth. |
Secondly, Though the Scripture doth not vary from
the common forms of Speech, where they are grounded
upon harmlefs and lefler miftakes, yet when fuch’ are
great and dangerous, prejudicial to the glory of God,
and Intereft of Religion, it isthen much concerned to
reform and rectify fuch errours. And according to the
Belief of the Witch-Advocates, the Doctrine of Poffeffi-
ons is highly fuch. For it leads to the Opinion of Witch-
craft, whichthey make fuch a Difmal and Tragical Er-
ror, Blafphemy, an abominably Idolatrous, yea an A-
theiftical Doctrine, the grand Apoftafie, the ereatelt
that ever was or can be, that which cuts off Chrifts
Head, and Un-Gods him, renounceth Chrift and God,
and owns the Devil, and makes him equal to them, ec.
As the Author of the Grand Apoftafie raves. So4!
And Mr, Webfter faith little lefs of this Opinion in his
Preface, wz. That it tends to advance Superftition and
Popery,


from Exbly Scripture. 8


9 Popery, is derogatory to the Wifdom, Juftice and Pro-
ij vidence of the Almighty, tending to cry up the Power
i of the Kingdom of Darknefs, to queftion the verity of
ny the principal Articles of the Chriitian Faith, concern-
mig INE the Refurrection of Chrift, and generally tends to
f the obftructing of Godlinefs and Piety.

And Mr. Wagftaffe loads it with as dreadful imputati-
sf) Ons in his Preface ; As that it doth neceffarily infer plu-
iyi rality of Gods by attributing Ommpotent effects to more
‘il than one, and that it fuppofeth many Omnipotents, and

{| many Ommifcients. If any thing of this be fo, certainly
¢@ OULSaviour’s infpiredHiftorianswould not have connived
».4 at much lefs would they have fpoken in the Phrafe, that
i. fappofeth and encourageth acommon Error, that leads
ive @ €0 fuch an horrid Opinion.


*
jv pvt, ae


SEC T.. VII.


A An Anfwer to an Objection from Chrifts not mentioning his
cafting out Devils to John’s Difciples, amongft other
Miratles «


Ss


our Saviour himfelf in his Anfwer tothe Difciples
|, 8 Of Fobn the Baptiff?, Luke 7. doth not pretend to the
“,,@cafting out Devils, but only the cure of Difeafes, and
“« #ralfing the Dead. “fowhich I fay, Firft, We may not
| J argue negatively from Scripture in fuch matters, and
\;,@ certainly we ought not to argue fromm filence in’ one
“place, againft plain affirmations in many.
“| Secondly , Our Saviour anfwers in reference to the
“things he was then doing , when the Difciples of John
™ ip came tohim, v.21, And in that fame hour he cured many
(lof their Infirmities and Plagues. Evil Spirits, it mutt be
i @confeffed, are alfo mentioned. Some of thofe Difeafes
i} it is like were occafioned by Evil Spirits, as A@stth, 12.
(8 22.) the blindnefs and dumbnefs of the poffeffed:per fart
i there


i | Bo T faith the Author of the Grand Apoftafie, p. 34.


i
15


286 Proof of Apparitions, &c.


there was. And then the ejeétion of the Evil Spirit ig
implyed, when the Difeafe is faid to be Cured.
Thirdly, The bufinefs of Fobn’s Difciples was to en-
quire whether he wasthe A4effiah, and it was fit our Sa-
viour in his Anfwer fhould give fuch proofs of his being
fo, as were plain and palpable. Go your may, faith he,
and tell John what things ye have feen and beard, Luke 7.
22. They had heard him Preach the Gofpel itis like;
and had feen him cure Difeafes. Thefe things were plain
and fenfible, and could admit of no difpute or doubt.
But whether the Diftempers Chrift then healed, were
inflicted by Evil Spirits, and whether thofe were caft out
in the Cure, did not plainly appear at that time. Our
Saviour therefore did not bid them mention that In-
ftance to their Mafter Fobn, becaufe they could not te-
ftifie it on their own knowledge, as they could the things
themfelves faw and heard. : ,


SECT. IX.


An Anfwer to two more Objettions, the one, that St. John
mentions no cafting out Devils in bu Gofpel , the other,
that tohave a Devil, and to be mad are Synonyma’s.


UT the paflionate Witch-Advocate goes on. St.
Fobn the Evangelift , who efpecially fets himfelf.
upon the proof of the Godhead of Chrift, hints nothing
of his ejecting Devils. Which one would think fhould
be no proof, fince the other three do; and St. Fobz
chiefly fupplyed what they omitted. And fince this
Evangeiift fo particularly fets himfelf upon the proof
of Chrifts Divinity , he mentionsno Miracles, which
were the proof, but {uch as were fenfible.and indifputa-
ble. And our Author himfelf after p. 41. faith, That
the cure of Difeafes was more*for Chrift?s Honour, and
the proof his Godhead, than the caffing ont Devils could
have been. For poffibly, faith he, in that, there might
have


from Holy Scripture. - 287


‘wiihave been fome probable grounds of the Pharifees Blaf-
fphemy, that he caft out Devils by Beelzebub.
iti) So that he anfwers and contradséts himfelf at once:
‘M@For p. 34. he faith, It hath been a great overfight in
Cnt, Fohn to neglect fuch an Argument. If fuch a thing
‘ii\had ever been, this would have proved him to have
\tufbeen God indeed, and his Power paramount above all
\kt(/Principalities and Powers, ec. p. 35. And yet now cu-
(auiiring Difeafes proves it better, and the cafting out De-
wiilwils will {carce do it atall, fince it might, adds he, be
,ite}in fome fort credible, that he did it by favour, conni-
ilotiivance, compliance, complotment ; which is upon the
- (Borders of the higheft Blafphemy. é
ls) Again it is alledged by this Writer, that to have a
wie} Devil, and to be mad, feem to be Synonyma’s in Scri-
sligshpture, p.35- Tanfwer, Poffeffion begot a certain parte
tfuror, and madnefs; and therefore when any were ex-
Stravagant, the fews {aid in common f{peech, that they
“thad.a Devil, aswedo, The Devil isin you, that is, you
fact unreafonably and madly. But as we do not mean by
ithis ALeraphorical Poffeffion to exclude the belief of a real,
ulifo neither did they. Yea, the very Phrafe, be hath a
inDevil, or the Devil is in him, applyed to thofe that
« #act furionfly and unadvifedly, doth imply, that there is
Much a real thing as diabolical Poffeffion, to which madnefs
_ yjjand extream folly are refembled.
aft’ See then how the Patrons of Witches argue, The ews
nefometimes ufed+the having a Devil Metaphorically ;
jtatherefore there are no other Poffejions, or therefore all
‘oyathofe paflages of Scripture, in which they are literally
, aand plainly related, intend no other. Indeed if we ar-
" gagued from meer words and expreffions of having Devils,
“and cafting out Devils, there would be fomewhat ‘of
...g@more colour in our Adverfaries reafoning.’ But fince we
‘infer chiefly from plain circumftances of Hiftory and
duiFact, there is no force atall in it.


fi
;


a EI Ne t


288 Proof of Apparitions, &c:


SECT. «X:


Thel ‘gnorance of the Author of The Grand Apoftafie, i#1}!
lis interpreting the Word Aembysoy.


ry UT what doth this Writer mean, when he tells us
B Ambyiey can fcarce fignifie any thing elfe properly, | 4"
but an uoufual affliction from God , fuch as madne/s;)™'
when all Men and Boys know that Subftantively it is the
fame with Aeiyey Damon, taken already in Scripture in
an ill fenfe for an impure Spirit... Adjectively it fignifies
fometimes Divinum quid, but fo it is not underftood in
the places we difpute about, Luk, 4.35. When the Devil
bad thrown him, the poflefled Man, iz the midft, he cante
ont of him, the word is, 74 Acaxbyioys The fame v. 33.
is called aveipa Saovts dxebdprs. By which and the lat-
ter circumftances of the Hiftory, it plainly appears, that
70 dasubyoy, 1 to be underftood Subjtantively for a Per-
fon, viz. an Evil Spirit. So inthe Story, of the Devils
entring into the Herd of Swine, Luke 8. 33. the word
we Tranflate Devils is ta Seautyia, Called v.29. arveiped
anclagror, and the fame AZ@zth; 8: 29. Aatuoves. Befides
the force of which words, I have fhewn, that the Story
alfo determines them toa Subjtantive and Per/onal. means
ing. or |
But the Author faith, That aapyéyeoy can hardly, with
Propriety, fignifie any thing elfe but: an extraordinary


affliction from God, becaufe of its derivation from Satywy, pM
p- 37, Qne would wonder at the confidence of thefe Meng | ‘\vs
efpecially in their pretended Criticifms, by which they | Fah


would impofe what fenfe upon words they pleafe. acuoy


it.is notorioufly known fignifies Demon, taken often in }l
the ill fenfe; and fo particularly in the place newly mene | "/
tioned, deriving from Sats /cio, which degenerates heres § i


as in Sapa, Witch, Wizzard and the likey and what then § iy
should this Author by this mean ? |


SECT,


from Exbly Scripture. 28 9


SH.C T.- XI.


ie Whether there. were 0 feats performed by the Demoniacks
in the Gofpels, but what Mad-men might perform.


hl WT is further Objected by this Writer, that therc are
< no, -Feats Recorded. of , thofe fuppofed roel
if but what J4ad-mex could perform and.o ften do. In

te 4 which, he confidered not thie Spirits in the P Poffe(t » inthe

A | Country of the Gergafens, Matth.3. 29. St. Adark and
cA St. Luke write Gadarens, the Countries lye near toge-
jit ther. Fofepbus reckons Gadara among the Grecian Cit ties
yi Which, Pompey took from the fews, and according to
A him the people were moftly Syrians. Qf
Inthis Country where our Saviour had not been be-
\.igf LOre, nor after, that we read, two pofleft with Devils,
i who had lived among the Tombs, out of the Converfa-
,,4 tion of Mankind, met him, and prefently cried outs.
\ What have we to dbo with thee, Fefus, thon. Sonof God, art
thou come to torment us before the time? Was there no-
i thing now beyond the rate of ordinary Mad-men in this?-
| How did they, who lived in fuch a difmal folitude among
nthe Tombs, in a place where no, Man paffed, come to
* Oknow this was Jefus, who never had been thereabout
4 “"Gbefore, as far as we can hear ? Or how came thofe Mad-
imen to know, and utter fuch a great truth, which an
“§Saviour did not prefently publith, Thar he was the Son of
iO God ? Did any come near to. whifper this in their Ear ?
"ll Or was this a raving fancy only? St. Afark-writes (who
fe U{peaks but of a fingle Demoniack) that when he [aw Fe-
WM fs afar off, he came and worfhipped him. He knew him
gt ake laf and underftood his true condition before
il moft of the Jems about him; and even fome of his own
(ll Difcip| es did. Could a meer Madman have done fo?

‘ be further they expected torment , and from him, in
‘li@the time to come, though they looked not for it fo
© fjfoon, Art thou come to torment us before the time ?

Ty How


290 Proof of Apparitions, &c.
How applicable is this to the condition of evil Spirits
and their expectations ?

We have alike acknowledgment of our Saviour from
another unclean Spirit, AZark,1, 24. I know thee who thou
art, the Holy One of God. And our Saviour in what he
faith, in aniwer plainly, implies it was the Evil Spirit,
not the Mad-man that fpake, or at leaft caufed the con-
feflion. Hold thy peace and come out of him, v.25§+ And
that the Demoniacks did things beyond the force of meer
Mad-men, is further fufficiently declared in the Hiftory,
Mark 5. No man could bind him, no not with Chains,
becaufe he had been often bound with Fetters and Chains,
ana the Chains had been pluckt in funder by him. \ would
fain know, whether this be not beyond the force of meer

natural madnefs ?


Advertifement.


-“Witberto the Paper was the fame, and the Hand the
H fame, and fo far of the Copy tranfcribed. Afterward
the Hand alters, and # Mr. Glanvil’s own Hand, but
with an Hiatus of above half a Sheet of unwrst Paper be-
tween, but the Number of the Pages 1s continued. Something
there was to intervene, to make a more full Connexion; but
yet what follows, is of the fame [uit, and produced to prove
au of Scripture the Negotiation ‘of Evil Spirits with their
Clients,


| \
slat,
We A


48 bh


i fcribe the manner of the performance. But Mr. Webjter


SE


| from Floly Scripture.


SECT. XI.


“8 Farther proof of the Negotiation of Evil Spirits with their
Clients from the Fiftory of the Magicians of Egypt;


Mr, Wagftalte, Ar. Weblter, and the Author of


The Dottrine of Devils, thecr Evafions propofed and


anfwered,


1) 9N the general , they all fay the fame thing; viz;


18 That the Atagecians were Fugglers, who by their
“| Tricks and Legerdemain, impofed upon Pharaoh and the


. Beeyptians. Mr. Wagftaffe is fo modeft, as not to de-


thus; The Magicians holding a Rod in their hands, and
Sfeeming to throw it down upon the ground, how foon might
ithey throw down an Artificial Serpent inits ftead, and im-
\mnediately and unperceivably make conveyance of the Rod,
p- 154. This is his feat: and for the changing Water
linto Blood, and the producing of Frogs, he faith, they
swere fo eafie to be done after the fame manner, that they


i™ineed not any particular explication, p. 155. This is the
wi'frmain anfwer, after a great deal of Impertinence, and


—


Mr. Webfter hath done his bufinefs.


wh But the Author of The Doétrine of Devils, hath devi-


wed a more particular way for this Juggle. °7% proba-


i lMle, he faith, that thefe Aden having the Art or Knack of
»Adaking, Graving, or Carving the Pittures of Men, Beafts,
Serpents, Reptiles, &c. had the Feat alfo of Colouring,


Wanting, and Fucuffing of them alfo, and fo might eafily,
¥/pecrally in the dark, or by their Fuggling-Feats, a the
Alext intimates, make a Rod look,like a Serpent, &c. p. 114.
But belides thefe Knavith Painters, the Man hath found
ibther Jugglersto help onthe Deceit ; Subtle and politick
st Mratours, who with fallacious Arguments, cunning preten-
tes, and plaufible Rhetorick, could fo difoufe Truth , and
Wourth upon Kaavery and Falfhood , that Falfhood {hould
een Truth, and Truth Falfhood, p, 115.
iW ees a eed Whatever


i
i
;


aa a Ds


aetiamae BESET SK,
—


292 Proof | of Apparitions, 8c.


Whatever the AZagicians of Pharaoh were, any one
that confiders thefe Anfwers, would take the Framers
of them for Colourers, Changers, Perverters of the
Face of things, asthis Author {peaks, cunning Orators,
jugglers, Hocus-Pocus, Hiccins- Docciws, whip! the Ser-
pents,, Blood and Frogsare gone. But let us look a lit-
tle nearer to the bufinefS, and to thefe fubtle Men,
Witches of Orators, and examine what they tell us in
the light of the Text and impartial Reafon.

The Fext faith, Aaron caft down his Rod before Pha-
raoh, and before his Servants, and it became a Serpent,
v.10. And v.11, 12. The Magicians of Egypt, they


alfo did in like manner with their Enchantments. For they


{


} down every man bis Rod, and they. became Serpents, but
\aron’s Rod fwallowed up their Rods. Now, fay the Witch-
rocates, the Adagicians were Fugglers , they did not
in like manner, they did not caft down their Rods, but
made conveyance of them, they were not Serpents but
Pittures. Which are plain contradictions to the Text,


arbitrary Figments; that have no ground. And if Mem J ji


a


may feign what they will, and put what borrowed fenfe
they pleafe upon plain Relations of Fact, all Hiftory
will be a Nofe of Wax, and be eafily fhaped as the Ins
terpreter has a mind to have it;

Secondly, If this were fo, andthe Serpents were but
Artificial Pictures; °tis ftrange, that neither Pharaoh,
nor his Servants fhould perceive the difference between
the Carved or Painted Serpents, and the veal ones ;. ex-
cept-they fuppofe alfo that Pharach contrived the bufinefs ;
in adark Room on purpofe, asthe Author of The Do-


étrine of Devils feems to intimate. And ’tis ftranger | mt


yet, that neither A4/fes nor Aaron that were concerned


to detect the Impofture that’ was: fo’ grofs and thick, A ii,


fhould not difcern it; or if they did, ’tis as ftrange, that f \,,
ore) fhould keep the Jugglers counfel, and fay nothing’) }, ,
of it. tit lh
Thirdly, -Asron’s Serpents are faid to have {wallowed } jp,
up thofe of the Magicians, What, did they {wallow the f ),
— Wiers


from Fioly Sophos:


Wiers and Pictures? It feems they were very atifciall
done indeed, that the true Serpents miftook them for


] real ones, as the Birds once did the Painted Gr pe But

it would be more wonderful yet, if all were but the Ora-

thy tory of the ee for then. the Serpents ate their
‘Words and Rhetorick.

} Fourthly, Mofes and Aaron turned the. Rivers into

Mh Blood, V. 20. and the Magicians of JAgy pt did fo with their

1 Enchantments, Vi 22! They caufed Frogs to.come up, and to

ls) cover the Land, Ch. 8.v.6. and the Magicia ins did fo, and

ie brought up Frogs on the Land of Egypt, VF. ee ‘how


yi, bill f0 what Adofes and Aaron did, and to fhew an Artificial


| did the Jugglers do this, with Painting and Fucu fing ny
or t how, by Legerdemain and Slight of


LF
Hand wer


44 Bec Rivers on the Land; ? To earita
\wil the appearance of Blood, was not che ching that wa


~


i Frog, Two or Three was not bringing up of Frogs on
al the Land of e#¢ypt, which implies, multitudes that co-
\e@ vered the ground. So that the Hocus- Pocus Tricks, and


‘sl Juggling and Painting, will not colour this part of the


iid Story. And I fhould wonder at Mr. Webfter, if he did
e(i@ not afford fo many occafions of wondring at him, when
§ he pafled this fo flightly. over, faying, p P. 155. As to the


it Changing Water into Blood, and the producing of Frogs » they


| wil Were fo eafie to be done after the fanse manner, VIZ. by Wi-
amers and Juggling, that they need not any particular expli-


iBcation , for by this the manner of their performance may
A moft eafily be underftood. How hall one deal with thefe
ya Men, and what will not their confidence affirm ?:

sll ‘Fifthly, *Tis very ftrange alfo how thofe Fugen


| fhould | know what fi igns Mofes and Aaron would Tho,


“Serpents, Blood and Frogs a
“@ithey thofe always in their Pockets


very 1 Miracles firft, that t


land accordingly furnifhed themfelves with counterfei
gainit the time ;* or had
? If not, it was great
Gluck for them that A4ofes and Aaron fhould thew thofe
they were provided to imi-
Hitate.


4


*


#


a


294 Proof of Apparitions, &c.


Sixthly and Laftly , If the A¢zgicians did all this by
Tricks and Juggling, may not one fear what Opinion
thefe Men have of the fame things done by Ages and
Aaron ? Thefe indeed out-did the others in divers fol-
owing Inftances, but may not they fay, that that.was
by their having more Cunning and Dexterity in the Art.
of Juggling? If they ortheir Profelytes have a mind
to fay thus, they may by their Principles, which will
ferve them to elude the Hiftory, in reference to AdZofes
and Aaron, as well as it doth in relation to the ALagici-
ans, Yhey may with as much modefty turn all into Al-
legory and Metaphor.

I chink by all this 1¢ appears, that this fhift of the
Witch- Advocates is very vain, and that what the Afagi-
cians did, was not mere Juggling, much lefs only Poli-
rick Oratory and Rhetorick, As if thofe AZagicians by their
Eloquence could perfwade Pharaoh and his Servants a-
gaint their Senfes, as thefe Patrons of Witches endea-
vour todo by us, they being the greateft Witches in
their own fenfe that are extant, and fome of them are
belyed, if they are not fo in other fenfes.


SECT, XII.


That what the Magicians of Egypt did perform, was at leaft
by az Implicit Confederacy with Evil Spirits.


V Ell! If there be any truth in the Hiftory, the
Magicians were not only Couzeners and Hocus


Potws Men; there was fomething done that was extra- fp


ordifiary beyond Man’s Art and Contrivance, or.the ef-
fects of ordinary Nature. And therefore muft have e¢i- |
ther Gog, orfome Spirit or Demon, one or more for.the
Author. The former no one faith, the Hand of God in


this was. only permiflive. Therefore itis plain the AZ4- |."


gicians did this by. Spirits, Creatures of the Invisible


World. The Text faith, by theix Exchantments, per-are\§ ,


CANA,


from Floly Scripture. 205
I cana, the vulgar Latin reads. Which becanufe it is a
‘ii! general word, Mr. Wag (taffe takes hold of it, and deter-
‘il mines it to fecret and fly Tricks, thofe of Legerdemain
‘Sidi and Couzenage, when as it is.asapplicable to any kind
‘ial of fecret (and foto the Diabolical Art and Confederacy)
Ati} as to his fenfe. And that it is fo to be underftood here,
iii is plain from the matter of the Hiftory. By thofe ar-
il’ cana Cothers tead incantationes, veneficia) they did thofe
ili] ftrange things, viz. by fecret Confederacy with Spirits,
iwi] they obliged them to perform the wonders.
i) - But what did the Spirits do, were the Serpents Blood
j and Frogs real or apparent only ? 1am not obliged to fay,
‘lit who is of one Opinion, and who of another in this, it
igo) matters not. The reality of the performance is moft
i@ eafie, and moft fuitable to the facred Story, and there
it) is no difficulty in conceiving that Spirits might fuddenly
vis? Convey Serpents, with which -4gypt abounded,into the
lel] place of the Rods, which they might unperceivably
il {natch away after they were thrown down; This they
ena} Could do, though the Adagicians of themfelves could
j not. And they might be provided for the performances
i by knowing the Command God had given Adojes and
B Aaron, concerning the things he would have them do;
y which the Adagicians could not know, at leaft not but by
i them. a
yi And for the Blood and the Frogs, they might by In.
i fufion, or a Thoufand ways that wecannot tell, make
the Water to all appearance Bloody, or perhaps really
v, til tranfmute fome (we know not the extent of their pow-
jw ers.) And tobring up the Frogs from the Lakes and the
«ii? Rivers, wasno hard thing for them to effect, though
él impoflible for the A4Zagicians to do by Tricks of Jugg-
net ling. We fee the fence of the Hiftory is plain, and
ii! eafie in our way, but forced, harfh, contradictious,
ii] and moft abfurd in the Interpretation of the Aup-Ad-
(iM vocates. |
will Lo make the Inference from thefe A/agictans to my
“i point, yet more plain and demonftrative, I fhall apie
; 4, take


i


i
s}
L


Ret


496 Proof of Apparitions, &c.
take notice, that if we do not fuppofe a Confederacy,
and formal compact between them and the Spirits they
act by, it muft at leaft be granted, that thofe Magicians
had a way to oblige them to act, either by Words or
Ceremonies, which they have bound themfelves to attend
ig order to further familiarity with the perfons that fo
employ them, and at laft to explicit Compacts: And
even this is fufficient for what } would infer,

I have thus difpatcht a great Argument briefly, and
yet [hope fully, ‘Mr. Webfer is after his manner very
voluminous abontit. But.all he hath faid in Five or Six
Leaves in Folio to the purpofe, is in thofe few Lines I
have recited. » All'the reft is fenflefs, rambling Imper-
tinence, -amufing his Readers with Aétives, and Paffives,
Mecal]aplims, Hartummims, Tale{mans, wonderfal C ures.
and the vertues of Plants, telling Stories:, and citing
icraps-from this Man, and from that,-all which ferve
only for Oftentation , and the Deception of the inju-
dicious, but fignifie nothing to any purpofe of Rea-
foning. ly Tey Tyee as :


—————


es SS a ees


SECT. XIy.


The other grand Inftance of Confederacy with Evil Spirits,
inthe Witch of Endor , whom Saul confulted. A brief
and plain. Narration of the Story. .


‘§ Come to another grand Inftance, viz. That of the
{ Witch of Endor. The Story of her is related, 1 ‘Sam.
28. and is briefly thus. Samuel was dead, v, 3. and the
Philiftines. gathered themfelves againft Saul, and pitcht
in Gilboa,v. 4, Saul on this was much afraid, v: 5. and
enquired of the Lord, but had no anfwer from him, v. 6:
Upon this he bid his Servants find him out a’ Woman
that had a Familiar Spirit, that he might enquire of her,
‘J hey told him of one at Exdor, v. 7.. He difguifed him-
felf,-and with two Men by night went-to her 5 defired
3 | Sale roe fe) ae


from Holy Signe: 297


‘at ther to divitte unto him, by her Familiar Spirit, and to
“bring up him whom he fhould name, v. 8. The Woman
‘Pfirft excufed her felf, minding him how dangerous fuch
ud ‘a bufinefs might be to her, fince Saul had cut off thofe
“gthat had Familsar Spirits, and the Wizzards out of the
@Land. So that fhe was as that this Propofition of
Ail his was a fnare for her Life, v. 9, But Szul affured her by
Mwearing , that no harm fhould come to her for this
iuithing, v. ro.
ft on ) She then askt him whom fhe fhould bring up, and he
tWfaid, Bring me up Samuel, v.11. Samuel “accordingly
si fbegin to appear, and when the Woman faw him, the
pferied with a loud Voice, being much furprized, it feems,
“ato fee Samuel in’ good earnett, whom fhe probably €X-=
i wh pected not, but fome Familiar in his likenefs. By this the
ig Knew Saul, v, 12. He heartens her again, and asks whom
wii the faw. She anfwers, fhe faw Geds afcending out of
et ‘isd the Earth, an ufual He ‘brai(m, the Plural for the Singu-
teliar Num ber , Gods, to wit, a Spirit, v.13. Saul asks
) what Form he was of, fhe anfwered, az Old A4an cometh
hap, dnd bois covered wilh d Mantle. Then Saul perceived
}it was Samuel, and he bowed himfelf to him to the
i ground, v. 14.
Samuel ask’t why he had difquicted him to bring him
@ up? Hedeclares the diftrefs He was in, and his defire
“a C0 know what he was to do,v. 15. Sa umucl re proves him,
jand declares. his Fate, wz. That the Lord had rent the
y Kingdom from him, and given it to David, v.17.
) That the //raclites fhould be delivered into the hands of
ie the Philiftines, and that Saul and his Sons fhould to mor-
| if row be with him,-viz. in the ftate of the Dead, as even-
dah tually it was, v.19. This is the Hiftory, and one would
“ff think it fpeal ks very plainly, but nothing is’ plain to
fl prejudice. The Patrons of Witches labour hard to avoid
oe this evidence, and I fhall propofe and confider their
fl ie and flights of an{wering.


aon wpe f


298  — Proof of Apparitions, &c.


SECT. XV.


The Evafion of Mr. Reginald Scot, concermng the Witches
Clofet propofed and confuted.


Mi Reginald Scot, the Father of the modern Witch-
Advocates, orders the matter thus. When Saul,
faith he,had told her that he would have Samuel brought
up to him, the departed from his prefence into her Clo-
fet, where doubtlefs the had her Familiar, to wit? fome
Jewd crafty Prieft, and made Sau ftand at the Door
like aFool (as it were with his Finger in ahole) to hear
the Couzening Anfwers, but not to fee the Couzening
handling thereof, and the counterfeiting of the matter.
And fo goeth fhe to work, ufing ordinary words of
Conjuration, &c. So belike after many fuch words {po-
Ken, fhe faith to her felf; Lo! now the matter is
brought to pafs. 1 fee wonderful things. So as-Sanl


hearing thefe words longed to know all, and askt her. | iit


what fhe faw. Whereby you know that Saul faw nothing,
but ftood without like a Mome, whilft the plaid her
part in her Clofet , as may moft evidently appear by
the ‘Twenty firft Verfe of this Chapter, where it is
Said, Then the Woman came out to Saal, &c. Scot,
p. 108,

Now this is not interpreting a Story,but making one.
For we read nothing of her Clofet, or her going from
Saul into it, nothing of the crafty Prieft fhe had there,
or of Saws ftanding at the Door like a Fool, like a
drowned Puppy, Mr. Webjfer has it, (very refpectful
Language for a Prince in diftrefs!) nothing of the
words of Conjuration, or of the Womans talk to her
felf, but all this is Whimfey and Fiction.

And according to this way of interpreting,a Man may
make what he will of all the Hiftories in the Bible, yea
in the World. Ifone may fupply, and put in what he
pleafeth, any thing may be made any thing.

But


a ER =


| But Mr. Scot faith, it evidently appears that Saul faw
fnothing, but ftayed without like a Mome, whilit fhe
Yplayed her part in her Clofet. It evsdently appears by
Vivithe Twenty firft Verfe of this Chapter, where ’tis faid,
\TDhen the Woman came out unto Saul. Is it not evident from
thence, that fhe bad aClofet, bow elfe fhould {he come out?
litcuBut the mifchief of itis, there is nothing of coming out
‘Juljin the Text, or any Verfion of it. Our Tranflation is,
Wiel ed the Woman came unto Saul. . The vulgar Latin, Jn-
(obgreffa eff, fhe came iv, which implies that fhe went ome
fief Doors rather, than into her Clofet. The Septuagint
Iyaread eonrger § yuva, being the fame fenfe with the vulgar
jie Latin. The Chaldee Paraphrafe fimply fhe came. So
vsadthe Syriack and the Arabick: But we find nothing of
wigacoming out any where but in the Dsfcoverer. So that
where is a Text made too, as wellas many a groundlefs
‘ya Comment,
wei). But whether fhe only came to Saul, or iz or out to
withim, it matters not much, for it implies only that fhe
intel Withdrew , while Sai communcd with Samuel, out of
iyo refpect , and after the Communication, fhe returned
‘whand found the King in great diforder, and what 1s this
wey CO a Clofet ?


>
=


SECT. XVL


Two of Afr. Webkter’s Arguments for the Witches Clofet
S J
£ propofed and anf{wered.


YD UT Mr. Web/ter purfues the bufinefs in the behalf
i £) of the Difcoverer, Firft, If they were in the fame
Room, and Samuel a vilible Object, how comes it to
"® pafs that Saul faw himnot? Mr Glanvil, faith he, muf
§ pump to find it out, p. 169. But doth not Mr. Webjter
v"'@ know, that itis ufualin Apparitions (and he owns there
"i are fuch) for the Spirit to appear to one , when it is
i" not vifible to another, though in the fame Room, and
: every


—


300 Proof of Apparitions, &c.
every ways capable of feeing? In the Famous Story of |
Walker and Sharp, recited by him, p. 299, 300. which
he confefleth to be of undoubted verity , he faith, it
was reported, that the Apparition did appear in Court
tothe Judge, or Fore-man of the Jury (and I have from
other hands very credible atteftation that it was fo) but
the’ reft faw nothing. Many other well attefted Relati-
ons of this kind fpeak of the like, and ‘there are Innu-
merable Stories of people that have their fecond fight as
they call it, to wit, a faculty of feeing Spectres when
others cannot difcernthem. In which there is nothing,
either impoflible, or unlikely. And why then fhould
there be need of fo much pumping to aniwer this Ob-
jection ?
~~ Samuel: it feems appeared to the Woman a little be-
fore Saul faw him, fhewing himfelf fo, it may be, to
prepare Saal for the terrible fight by degrees, left the
fuddennefs of it might have affrighted him into an in-
capacity of hearing what he had to fay to him. Or it
may be the Body of the Woman, or fome other thing
in the Room might interpofe between Saul, and the
firft appearance of Samuel, or he might be at an unfit
diftance, or out of due light to fee prefently as fhe did.
So that there is no need of fuppofing them to be in two
Rooms on this account. ;
But Secondly, He argues further for the Clofet, or
another Room; The Woman cried out with a loud
Voice when fhe faw Samuel, What need of that, faith
he, if they were in one Room, might not an ordinary
tone make him to have heard her? ?Tis like it might,
but that was not the caufe of her crying out, but her
furprife to fee Samuel Gif it were the real Samuel) when
fhe expected only her Familiar, appearing in fome re-
femblance of him. And 7tis like there were circumftan-
ces in this Apparition, which fhe had never feen be-
fore, that might on the fudden affright and amaze her.
And if it were Samuel indeed, which is very probable,
the fight of him affured her thatthe Inquirer was Sau}.
For


| from Floly Scripture.
uh f For though fhe might not conclude it prefently from his
requiring her to raife Samuel, yet when he really and
4 unexpectedly appeared, it was plain that he was come
“ii ypon fome great Errand, and with whom could he pro-
“lt pably have fuch bufinefs as with Saul ? So that the feeing
Nf him, the importance of his appearance, and the Rela-
4) tion he had to Sa#, brought the King prefently to her
“i mind, and with him her fears, and that this was one
lO Gauge of her crying out, is plainly intimated in the
‘Wit next words. . And the Woman [pake to Saul, faying, Why
Mh aft thon decetved me, for thou art Saul, v. 12. And that
il fhe was affrighted at that knowledge, is implied in Szul’s
‘JM affuring her again, again{ft her fears in his immediate
fanfwer. And the King faid unto her, Be not afraid,
iv. 13. |
| Befides this, there is another thing that may be col-
‘lit Teted from the Text, which might occafidn her afto-
jail nifhment and crying out.. For asfoon as Saul had faid,
i) Bring me up Samuel, v.11. it immediately follows, v.
0 12. And when the Woman faw Samuel, fhe cryed with a
wit Loud voice. At feems he appeared before fhe had per-
ill formed her ufual Conjurations (fo little ground is there
isi for what Mr. Scot talks of her words of Conjuration, and
tl thofe fhe fpake to her felf}) and upon that fhe was fur-
i prifed and affrighted.


J
wily


ee
"


SECT. .XVIE-


m Other Arguments of lr. Webfter for a Room diftinét from
| that Saul was in, propofed and anfwered.


i f V i R. Webjter’s third Argument to prove a Clofet, is

a) that it had been incongruous for Saul to have
‘lg askt, what faweft thou, if they had been in one Rooth.

“tt But what is the incongruity, or what the wonder, if one

“in his condition fhould {peak incongruoully ?

“vit ~ His Fourth and Fifth Arguments , are to prove that’

Saul


302 Proof of Apparitions, &c.
Saul had yet feen nothing, when he askt the Woman up-


on her Out-cry, what fhe had feen. They prove, that
fhe faw the Apparition firft, which is granted, but her


being in another Room, cannot thence be inferred, as


I have fhewn, though that be the thing he fhould make
out, or all is impertinent.

The Sixth Argument is, that after all, Samuel was
but. coming up. 42 Old Man cometh up, which proves
nothing for Mr.Webffer, but again{ft him; For now, fhe
fhews him to Sazl. She faw the firft beginning of his
appearing , which Saw did not. When he was rifen
higher out of the Earth, fhe fhews him to the King,
who, 7tis faid, percerved then it was Samuel, and bowed
himfelf, v. 14. which is very eafie and congruous, ap-
plied to one and the fame Room. And what then makes
Mr. Webjter infult in the Conclufion of this Argument
in thefe wérds; Now let Afr. Glanvil confider, and an-
fwer whether it be not only intimated, but clearly holden
forth in the Text , that either they were in two Rooms, ar
that nothing vifible did appear before Saul, p. 171. His
feeing nothing at firft 1 grant, but the Two Rooms
there is no ground for, and he doth not prove it. Whe-
ther he did not fee Samuel after, I fhall now inquire. Hi-
therto I have nothing to do, but with the conceit of the
Clofet, or the other Room which Mr, Scot made for the
Woman, and Mr. Webjfer endeavours to uphold, with
much good will, but little fuccefs.


poe


SECT. XVIII.


Convincing Arguments brought to prove that Saul faw Sa-
muel, which frufirates the Figment of «wo Rooms.


A.Fter all, if he really faw the Apparition, the Fig-

\% ment of the two Rooms is gone, orat leaft figni-
ies nothing to their parpofe. This the Text irtimates
plainly. She faid,. 42 old Ddan cometh up, and he w co-
yerea


’


al 1139
Ie Wee


Au tn
WI


Allty 0


From Holy Scripture.
nyivered with a Mantle, and it follows, And Saul perceived
,lithae i¢ was Samuel, and he ftooped with his face to the
theieround, and bowed himfelf, v. 14.
i) He perceived it was Samuel, he perceived it, faith
‘imMr. Webfter, by the Defcription of the Woman. But
sthe had only faid , .4n Old Adan cometh up covered with a
i in4antle , “This is but a very general Defcription, why
yoymuft that needs notifie Samuel ? Could the Devil repre~
y,iffent no other old Man in a Mantle, or could none of the
yiji@dead appear fo but Samuel only? By thefe words alone
(Saul could not certainly perceive that it was he. But he
sip ipercesved this fo, that he could not but know and ac-
hiKknowledge it as the Hebrew word feems to imply. |
,, oifay this word [perceived] implies more than bare fee-
aging. °Tis that and fomewhat elfe, viz. that he faw
ggitim fo, as to be convinced that it was he indeed, the
.jeudgment was added to thefenfe. So that Mt. Webfter’s
\@Objection, that the word was not he [faw] it was Sa-
ywauel, is Of no weight, he [perceived] implies that he
i ae it fo as to be aflured. If the faying of the Woman
iyq@aad been all, the aflurance had been none at all, and
jRSaul could not have perceived or underftood any cer
jylitainty of the thing from it.
ive But fecondly, it appears yet further, that his perceé-
;,aving did imply feeing, For he ftooped with his Face to
athe ground, and bowed himfelf. Now, what did Saul
‘make this refpectful reverence to, if he faw nothing 2
Was it to Samuel in his fancy ? Mr. Webfter faith, Surely
—Wtin rational confequence it could be nothing elfe,p. 171. This
iis fomething an unvfual courtefie to bare Idea’s and Ima-
Sginations. But Mr.Webffer gives areafon: All that the
Woman had done and faid, being undeniably lyes and cheats,
"his alfo in juft right and reafon muft be judged to be fo alfo.
® [Which is affuming the thing to be proved.


i


SECT.


304 Proof of Apparitions, Kc.


SE C.T., XIX.


That it was areal Apparition, not a confederate Knave,
as Mr. Webtter fanfies, that Saul faw and did obey+


fance to.


sUT did fhe not turn out her confederate Knave to
act the part of Samuel 2? and was not this he to
whom Saul bowed ? This Mr. Web/fer offers as part of
his anfwer. The Woman vw. 14. defcribes Samuel in the
form of an Old Man covered with a Mantle. Such a
fhape fhe muft have put the confederate Knave into. I¢


may be it was an Old Fellow, or fhe made him look Old,, i


but let that pafs. But where got fhe the Mantle? A Sa-
cerdotal Habiliment it was, according to Fofephus. Had
the Woman a Wardrobe of all Habits for all purpofes ?
or was it fome fhort Cloak of her own, that fhe threw
onhim? Wewill fuppofe either that will ferve Mr, J
Webfter’s turn beft. But how did the Fellow himfelf,,
or the Old Quean for him change his Vifage into the
likenefs of Samuel, or how alter his Voice fo, as to»


make Saul, who fo well knew Samuel, to believe it wasify’


eyen he ? Thefe are hard Queftions.

But if we fhould fo far gratifie Mr. Scot, Mr. Webfter,
andthe reft, as notto prefs with fuch untoward Que-
ries’; yet one cannot chufe but ask how the confederate §
Knave came. to-foretel truly fuch contingent things, as@,.
that the I/raelites fhould be vanquifhed by the Philz/tines,,


and Saul and his Sons flain on the, morrow, as v. 19.8)"
How could the Cheat, or the Woman in another Roomm@,
tell this? Why! faith Mr. Wag/taffe, he {pake it at aig, °
venture, and he or the Witch gave a fhrewd pguefs tom,“
the fequel; faith Mr. Scot. _ But what ground was theres °


for conjecture ?* and fince there was none, the Confede-§,


rate might as well have chofe to have told Sau/, that hes. ul :
and his Sons fhould live and be Victorious; and this,§)"'


a


if he were fo cunning.a Fellow, asthefe cunning Mempi"s
makeg "i


na ee tion nnniny
a


Jrom Fholy Scripture. 305
i] make him, he would have done. For the Witches bu:
@ -finefs and his, was to get by their practice, and the

,§ likelier way to a good reward, had been-to have pro-
“@ phefied grateful and pleafant things to the troubled:

W King ; and if the Prophefier knew nothing of the event.

it he might as well have chofen the good, as the evil fide,

) Which as it had been for his Intereft, it had been alfo

‘9 for the better faving of the credit of his Predictions.

“For if he had foretold the Kings’ good Succefs and Vi-’

1 ctory, the Woman and He; the Confederate, in con-
“Yq fequence had been fure of reputation and favour, and

“4 further rewards, if it happened fo; but no evil could

*@ have befallen them from the contraty fuccefs. For if

““y Saul were killed, the falfhood of the Prediction would

9 be buried with Him (for we read not that the two Ser-

“§vants were at this Communication, (which in all like-

!) | Jihood was private) and no other evil like to enfue. ;

uM) So that if it were a Confederate Knave, as the Witch<

‘sl-Advocates ‘have contrived that made the anfwers, he

Misa Was not fo-cunning as Mr. Scot; Mr. Web/ter, and the

‘uGreft pretend, but indeed a very /illy Fuggler. Hefpeaks

) bivery fevere ahd difobliging things, and fuch as were not

like to redound to his advantage, and indeed fuch things
jithey were, as do not at all look as if they proceeded

w@from a Confederate Couzener. They have that Gras
W@vity, Majefty, Religion and Vertue in them that bes
wieame the true Samuel, and are very unlike the words of

i fa vicious cheating Knave. | ih

i") To which may be added, that this Woman, though

sillfotherwife an illone, feems to have been of a kind and

 hugibenign nature, by the courteous entertainment fhe gave
giithe afflicted Prince, and Fofepbws extols her much for

Mier good nature. So-that it is very probable, that

side would by her felf, or her Confederate, Jay fuch an

yitheavy load of Troubie and Defperation upon the King,

(l@that was infuch diftrefs before, I think all thee things

tiiput together, are abundantly fufficient to difprove, and

F ‘ithame the ungrounded fancy of the Witch- Advocates,


i


if
if


306 Proof of Apparitions, Sec.

that all was done by a Confederate. And confequently
it was a real Apparition that Saul faw, and did civil
obeyfance to.


That it was not the Witch her felf that atted all (as Scot
and Webjter for another fhift would fuppofe) putting
her felf into a Trance, and deluding Saul by Ventrs-


loquy.


Ty 11 T was it not the Witch her felf that acted all? 9,
B Mr. Scot faith, that if the Expofition of the Con- 4).
federate like usnot; he canealily frame himfelf tothe #,,.,
Opinion, That this Pythonefs being a Ventriloque, that ,.
is, {pcaking as it were from the bottom of her Belly, Ji...
did cait her felf intoa Trance, and fo abufed Saul, an- i:
fwering to Saul in SamueP?s name in her counterfeit hol-4_),


low Voice, ». 111. Lo the fame purpofe Mr. Webfterd.s.:


alfo fuppofeth, That what (he did or pretended to.do, was
only by Pentriloguy, or cajting ver felf into a feigned Frances
lay groveling on the Earth with ber face downwards, ands
0 changing her Voice, did mutter and murmur, and peep,
and chirp like a Bird coming, forth of the fell, or that fham
fpake in fome hollow Cave or Vault through fome Pipe, or


v
~~


in a Bottle, and (o amufed and decesved poor trmorous ane
defpairing Saul, p. 165, 166. ,)

What {tuff is this? and how fhall one deal with fuck} ie
Men, as fet their Wits upon the rack to invent evafing.,


ous, and are ready to aflert any Nonfenfe or Abfurdityg.,'"
to pervert the fenfe of a plain and fimple Hiftory :§,,:"
What have already {poke againft the Dream of a Comm) '


ederate, Viz. Saul?s percesving it was Samuel, his bowing®,.

him(elf wpon it; his taking the Voice for the Prophet’s@,
the fuitablenefs and gravity of the words, and the coma,”
trivance of the Prediction, and the truth of it, are ag


ftrong againft this Whim, as againft the other idle fancym


anap


neat slice ATOR


from Fioly Scripture. 307
| 4ndinfome particulars of more force, as will appear to
‘fi any one that confiders the matter duly.
| For Ventriloquy, or {peaking from the bottom of the
— Belly, "tis athing I think as ftrange and difficult to be
Q Conceived as any thing in Witchcraft, nor can it, I be-
Blieve, be performed in any diftingtnefs of articulate
¢ founds, without fuch affiftance of the Spirits, that {poke
‘Hout. of the Demoniacks. I would fain have any of the
'" ‘W Witch- Advocates fhew how it is naturally poffible. So
““Wthat this that they fuppofe, will infer the thing they
gwould avoid. It cannot certainly in any reafon be
jjathought, that the Woman could by a natural knack,
*“#fpeak fuch a Difcourfe as is related from Samuel, much
*wiilefs that fhe could from her Belly imitate his Voice, fo
i Yas to deceive one that knew him as Saul did.
sa + As for Mr. Webfter’s peeping, chirping, and muttering,
‘they are nothing to the purpofe, and his hollow Cave,
Mn'WPspe and Vault, are as arbitrary Figments asthe Clofet,


i"“fand fall under the fame confutations that difprove the
"Pelt of the Chimera’s.


SECT. XXII.


(iit What +¢ was Samuel himfelf that appeared, not the Devil,
i nor a Confederate Knave.


DQ UT the Witch-Advocates have another Argument
"4 to prove an Impofture in this bufinefs. For, fay
a the perfon denoyncing the fate of Sau could not
he the true Samuel, nor the Devil in his likenefs > there-
(a)pre it mutt be either the Woman or fome cheating Con-
(,litderate. Which conclufion follows not, for it is poffi-
jloilile it might be a good Spirit perfonating Samuel. Thefe
vil MVE Scripture affures us, are often employed in Errands
ind Minifteries here below, and on thofe occafions they
, @eath themfelves in humane fhape and appearance,
je that it is not abfurd to think it might be thus get

i | V2 UE


1


iff}
WW
at CVG)
wer
Na


208 Proof of Apparitions, &c. :
but this affirm not. Who actually it was hath been if
ereat matter of debate among Interpreters, and confi- 4;
derable Authors have been on either fide. My caufe:
doth not require that I fliould pofitively determine
who the appearing perfon was, it might be ene of them,
though I cannot tellgwhich.

I confefs it feems to me moft probable, that it was:
the true Samuel, for the Scripture calls the Apparitiong —
fo Five times, that is, as often as he is mentioned.
And when the Woman faw Samuel, v. ¥2. And Saul per-
ceived that it was Samuel, v. 14, and Samuel {aid to Saul\
v.15. Then faid Samuel, v. 16. Then Saul was fore
afraid, becaufe of the words of Samuel, v.20. Whidit”
expreffions are neither from Saul, nor the Woman, bua“
from that Spirit that indited the Holy Scriptures. An...
if after all this, Samuel was a Knave,or the Witch, or thy
Devil, what aflurance can we have in interpreting @
Scripture? I know that it {peaks fometimtes agreeabl if.”
to the deceived apprehenfions of Men, but when it ig...’
fo, there is fomething in the Context or Nature of the’ '
thing that leads us to make this Judgment. And if we”
rafhly fuppofe whenever we have a mind to it, that thy"
Scripture {peaks according to deceived Opinion; wa’


a


ay by this Rule make it fay any thing. The plaig
and moft obvious fenfe is always to be followecg, |":

reis no cogent reafon to the contrary, and If.**

fha] . at i


?


here.

According to the obvious plain fenfe, the words aig.”
interpreted, Ecclefiaftic 46.20. And after his dear Rel
({peaking of Samuel) he Prophefied and {hemed the Ka mt
bis end. And the circumftances of the Story which”
have already confidered , feem to me very plainly | ir
determine the fenfe this way. “Thus doth the furpriig \”
of the Woman, who cryed out with aftonifhment upw i a
the fight of the Prophet, whom fhe was affrighted f°
fee. Her knowing it was Saul by the Apparition, whi;
fhe could not have done by the Devi’s appearing in Hit


i,


likenel


from Fly § criptures


ih teh Tikenefs.. The Expreffion that Saul perceived that it

de) Was Samuel, he did not only fancy or think fo. The

) qf Divine and Majeftick words he fpake, fo becoming the

‘ertiag EYUe Samuel, and fo unlike the words’ of an Evil Spirit.
And the Prediction of events fo contingent as the
Wlofs of the Battle, and the death of the King and his
fe 5Ons,


SECT. XXIL


Md he needle{nefs and impertinency of Mr. Weblter?s Confu-
yi. tation of Samuels appearing with his Body out of the
Wh Grave.


j OW there are feveral evafions, whereby fome en-
| deavour to fhift off this evidence. But if we
vill deal plainly and fincerely, we muft, I think, ac-
©“ iknowledge the force of the Arguments, which I have
pacts and nakedly propofed.

1 But all this Mr. Web/fer pretends to confute thus. Ie
 @vas not Samuel’s Body with his Soul joined, nor his Soul
ifhat appeared in his wonted fhape and habit, p. 172,


Wh 6

yi Wbe av
p

V Ve
a)


GI 7 3.
it “The firft he proves by thefe reafons. Firft, His Body
Hi bad lain too long in the Grave, fo that it muft have
“een disfigured. Secondly, It muft have ftunk. Thirdly,
‘lif here was no Taylor in the Grave to make him a
(Mantle. Fourthly, It muft have been an Omnipotent
‘Power to have done this. Fifthly , A Syllogifin is
/i"rought to prove this contrary to the Scripture, which
fhith, That thofe that dye in the Lord reft from their
WMabours. :
4 Now the Four firft Arguments he may take again, we
Wave no concern withthem. For ’tis fenflefs to think,
wiillllhat the grofs Body came out of the Grave; and if he
ilfaeans the refting of the Terreftrial Body by the Fifth,
sie may take that back too. out indeed as applyed
y. 3 the


i be


-


t
4
iH


310 Proof of Apparitions, &c.


the Body without the Soul, the difturbing of it is Non-
fenfe. Its corruption in the Grave is continual motion,
and more difturbance than the raifing it entirely would
be, if it were any at all. But properly it is none, no
more than is the taking of a Stone out of a Quarry.
Therefore if there be any Argument in this, it falls
under the next Query.

_ The Sixth Argument is a Queftion, viz. Who joined
the Soul and Body again? Not the Wirch nor the De-
vil. The Opinion is erroneous, impious and blafphe-
mous. And for me let him call it what he pleafeth.
His ftrength is in hard words , which here like the
ftones thrown fometimes by Witchcraft | light like
Wool], and here Far alfo from the Mark.


a Sea


SECT. XXIII.


That it was the Soul of Samuel that appeared, without hut


Terreftrial Body, and that it an indifferent Opinions


in which are divided as wel Papifts as Proteftants.


yp UT there isa fecond opinion yet to be confuted,

BD) viz. That it was Samuel’s in his wonted fhape and
habit, p. 173. Hemuft mean his Soul without the Body.
or elfe tis the fame again; and if he means without any
Body, I am none of thofe that mean with him. It is
moft fully and plainly proved by thofe excellent Men,
Dr. C——and Dr. 14——, that Souls departed are embo-
died in Aerial, or /Etherial Vehicles; and they have
largely fhewn that this was the Doétrine of the greatelt
Philofophers, and moft Ancient and Learned Fathers)
And agreeable it is to the Holy Scripture and highefl
Reafon andPhilofophy,as I may have another occafion tc
fhew.Now Samuel appeared here to Saul in this his more
pure Aerial,or e£tberial Body, which he could form into}
fuch an appearance and habit as he had in the Terreftrial
Againit the Opinion of Samune}’s Soul appearing, Mr‘


Webftet


Re
Olt (i
ti Not
Inyt |


Wh |
lew. \


pis)


ly
at the
they


Only )


ip


A ley


\
Wh,
fh!


from Fbly Scripture. 218
SN Webfeer urgeth cogent Arguments, as {till he calleth his;
into they are all manifeft, cogent, trrefragable, unanfwerable,
‘wold? €ven then when they are fcarce fenfe.. He prefaceth to
it, them, by an intimation, that the Doctrine is Popihh;
Jani maintained, he faith, it is by the Popifh Party. His
tall hard words ufe to be his ftrongeft Arguments, But this

2 isonly to raife odeum and prejudice to the opinion. For
it there are Papifts and Proteftants on both fides of this
«DM Queftion. As alfo Rabbins and Fathers have divided
iil Upon it. Some of the Jaft fort, and thofe perhaps of
jes the greateft and moft confiderable having been for it,
oti® as R. Eleazer, R. Saadias, The Writers of the Adidrafh,

\ Fofephus alfo , Origen, Auguftine, Bafil, Ambrofe, &c.
@ as {ome others have been againft.it. So that, I fuppofe,

a Man may freely and without offence declare his Judg-
= ment,thoughit happen to be different fromMr.Webfter’s.


cal


Sic Tt, SN


| Three Arguments of Mr. Weblter againft the appearing of
{ the Soul of Samuel, propofed and an[wered.


re | Herefore to his Arguments, Firft he could not,
nit) iV faith he, come, whether God would or no.
« wfd Right ! Secondly, He would not run on an Errand with-
~ yf Out God’s confent, No doubt. Thirdly, That God
“ i did not command him, he faith, is moft certain. Here
“AY muft ftop. How doth that appear to be fo certain ?
“ul Why ! they never were imployed in Miniftries here be-
" “Milow, becaufe never created for any fuch end or purpofe,
it ip.173. They were never imployed in Miniftries here be-
MMiow ! What thinks he of the Souls of A4fes and Elias, |
7 at the transfiguration on the Mount ? were not they i
"i then employed in a Miniftry here below, or were they ay
“Monly Phantafms? or their glorifyed Bodies without i
("i their Souls? and how then did they talk and converfe :
i) with our Lord? But thefe he will fay were fent on an
ee V 4 extraordinary


ii


ul


312 Proof of Apparitions, &c.


extraordinary occafion. Beit fo, they are fometimes
then imployed in fuch, and fo Mr. Weber muft eat his
words. And if bleffed Souls are, or have been employ-
ed at any time, how is he fo certain the real Sammel was
not fent here ?

Thus briefly to his bold Affertion.. But he pretends
a reafon. They were never created for this purpofe. If that
were fo, what then? ‘The Stars were never made to
fight againft Siferaz, norany one. Nor the Waters to
drown the World.: Nor the Ravens to feed Prophets
or other Men. May not they therefore be ufed in thofe
Services? Again, No jfenfitive Being was made prima-
rily for another, but to enjoy it felf, and to partake of
the goodnefs of its Maker. May it not therefore mini-
{ter to others ? and doth not every Creature fo? All
things ferve him. Thirdly, ‘The Angels are Miniftring
Spirits, he faith, ordained tobe fuch. Doth he think
they were made for that purpofe only to ferve us 2
Fourthly , Reafonable humane Creatures are for one
another. Non nobis folum, &c. Souls are moft proper
to ferye fuch, not here only, but in the next World.
They are tadyferor, like unto Angels, and they are as
proper at leaft for the fervice of Men. They havethe
fame nature and affections. “They feel our infirmities,
and confider us more than abftract Spiritsdo. Which is
the reafon given why our Saviour took not upon him
the nature of Angels, but of Aen. Fifthly, Souls depar-
ted have Life, and Senfe, and Motion, capacity of being
employed, and no doubt inclination to it; and whither
more properly may they be fent, than to thofe of their
own nature, whom they affect, are allied to, and fo
lately came from? Sixthly, The Angels are not con-
fined to their Cceleftial Habitation, but are fent often |
to this nether World, as Mr. Webjfer and the reft con-


fefs, and why then fhould we think that the Souls of the | jy


Jult are fo limited and reftrained ?


And laitly, It is fuppofed both by Jews and Chriftic fy,


ans, that the Soul of the Jdefias appeared to the Patriz Jj.
eee archs, | °


from Holy Scripture. 313


‘Ni archs, and was the Angel of the Covenant; and we
“Know he was pleafed to appear to St, Stephen at his
‘4 Martyrdom, though then in Glory. And inthe vari-
‘S{ ous Apparitions of Angels recorded in the Scripture,
j we have reafon to think that fome were humane Souls,

3 called Angels from their Office.
So that on the whole, we fee we have no caufe to rely


“Ot on Mr. Webfter’s certainty, that Samuel’s Soul came not
‘0 on a Divine Command.


SEG T.. Xxv


ills Other Arguments of Ar. Weblter againft the appearing of
| the Soul of Samuel, propofed and anfwered.


é ‘| UT Mr.Webfer goes on: Fourthly, faith he, Mr.
Glanvilthath only affirmed, not proved it. Which


yoyetl here, in my Philofophical Confiderations about Witchcraft,
iy Seéz. 16. And the frequent affirmations of the Sacred
ji) Text, were fufficient ground for the Aflertion, though


wii) He argues, Fifthly, Miracles are wrought to confirm
iii truth, but this would have confirmed Saul and the Witch
wi in their wicked ways, p,174. 1 anfwer, Miracles are
nf] not always wrought to confirm truth, but fometimes to
{vita Geclare it. And thefe fort are often for that purpofe.
iid Such was this, to pronounce the final Sentence and
iif Doom on Saul, as to the concerns of this World. And
i the Prophet?s appearing fo contrary to the Womans
yea expectation, and before fhe had performed her {pells,
oth itruck her into dread and amazement, and fo fhe could


i@4 draw no incouragement thence, to countenance her
trade of Witchcraft.

t) Sixthly, He faith it is not credible, but that Samuel
(| would have reproved the Sorcerefs. But that was not
yyfbis bufinels, and it is like fhe being one of that vile and


Diabclical


214 Proof of Apparitions, 8c.


Diabolical profeffion was forfaken of God and good
Spirits, and given up to thofe evil ones that were her
Agents and Familiars, Such derelictions we fometimes
read of. And certainly if any courfe of finning occafions
and brings fach a judgment (as fome no doubt do) this
of Witchcraft and Confederacy with evil Spirits, is one
that moft juftly may.

Seventhly, But God had refufed toanfwer Saal by any
living Prophet, and Eightly would not vouchfafe him
his Spirit in the ordinary way, and therefore it is not.
probable he would do it by fending a Prophet from the
dead. Which arguings can only difcover our ignorance
in the Reafons of the Divine Counfels and Adctions.
But yet it may be fzid , God had indeed withdrawn all
comfortable and directive Communications from him,
but this was of another fort, a further inftance of the
Divine Difpleafure , and Declarative of the forfaken
Kings Doom. Which was no favour, but indéed a
judgment to which the Divine Juftice was probably fur-
ther provoked by this his fin of dealing with the Sor-
cerefs.

But Ninthly, Abraham would not fend Lazarus upon
the Rich Man’s defire to his furviving Brethren, p. 175.
Nor can any one think it follows that, becaufe one
came from the dead to an extraordinary perfon, and
upon an occafion that was fuch, that therefore Pro-
phets, or other Souls fhall be fent from thence, ordi-
narily to warn thofe that have other fufficient means of
conviction and amendment. The Tenth is to fill up
tale. Where doth Mr. Glanvil, faith he, find it in
Scripture, or Orthodoxal Divines, that ever any Blef-
fed Soul was fent on a Divine Errand to any here below ?
Which he objected, and I anfwered before.


SECT,


from Holy Scripture.


SECT. XXVI.


dion) That the Soul of Samuel might come of it felf, as weil as be
fent by Divine Command, either Opinion defenjible.


Objections, which he runs out into great Jength
and numerous impertinencies. And indeed his Argu-
ments are often fuch confident Nothings, that itis re-
ally a fhame to go about to anfwer them. But I fhali ne-
ver pafs by any thing of his ftrength.

di But though I have defended the Opinion, that Sa-
mai zauel’?s Soul was fent ona Divine Errand to Saul, againft
i] Mr.Webjter’s contrary pretences; yet is there another
ie] thing fuppofable, which is as probable, wz. That Sa.
(iil) sanel came without any direct command, being barel
ca] Permitted, and that the earneft and importunate defire
-@ Of Saul to have fome Communication with him in his


| T Have briefly recited, and I hope cleared Mr Webjfer?s
q
g
:


q

Q diftrefs, invited and inclined him to it. Thus it might
@ be, and there is no caufe to think, but that bleffed Souls
wil Have fometimes fuch liberty allowed them; which of
vil thefe ic was, I fhall not prefume to determine, both are
it’ defenfible, and either fufficient for my purpofe.


pw ee


sasaheesdndicpenelanancigal a


SECT.) XXVI.


“il Several other Objections againft the appearing of the Soul of
| Samuel anfwered.


.
i

of Bo T there are other Objections befides Mr. Web-
“| féer’s, againft the Tenent, that ic was the Soul of

Samuel’, 1 fhall not conceal any one that hath any force

1 init.

|  Firftitisurged, That Witches and Adagicians have no

+" power over the Spirits of the Juft, and therefore this

() Pyrhonefs could not raife Samuel, Nor do we fay the
| did.


216 Proof of Apparitions, 8cc.

did. He appear’d (as ’tis probable from the Text)
before fhe had made her Conjurations. Which might
be one reafon of her crying out. He came either fent
from God, or of his own inclination. The D:v:/ nor
Witch had nothing to do in it. :

But Secondly, would God fend Samuel at fuch a time,
when he was feeking fatisfaction from Enchantment ?
And. why not as well that, as appoint the Prophet to
meet the Meflengers of Abaziah when he {ent to Beel-
zebub, 2 Kings 1? That King fent to the Idol of Ekroz
to inquire his Fate, and God acquainted him with it by
his Prophet Elijah. Thus alfo when Balak, had requi-
red Balaam to curfe the J/raelites, God put a Prophecy
into his Mouth, and made him blefs them, Numb.
az, Ce.

Thirdly, The Woman faid, fhe faw Gods arifing, a
Company of evil Spirits (fo fome interpret) and what
did Samuel among them? But I faw Gods is more proba-
bly rendred by others a God, a Divine Perfonage, the
plural Number for the fingular to exprefs honour. And
that it is fo to be underftood is fignified plainly by the
fingular Relative that follows, Of what form u be, V.
14. Or if more be meant, why might they not be good
Genii that accompanied Samuel, a great and Divine
‘Perfonage, eminent no doubt in the other World as he
was in this?

Fourthly, Some argue from the Queftion of the Ap-
parition, v.15. Why baft thou difquieted me ? Samuel, tay
they, whether fent by God, or coming of his own ac-
cord, could not be difquieted by appearing. Nor was »
there any real difturbance in it, but the Spirit of the
Prophet fpeaks our Language, who are apt to fancy the
dead to reft in their Graves, and to be difturbed of
their repofe, when upon any occafion they appear a-
mong the living.


Fifchly, But he faith, that Saul and hisSons fhould be |B te


with him, vez. in Thalamo juftorum, which fome think not
unlikely , believing that Saul was reprobate only in
= ype.


Se a ey


=


a ee eee


=> =


5 =


es = Ss


Taz
rad


from Holy Scripture.


Type. But more probably the meaning is, that he
fhould be in the State of the dead in another World, as
he the Prophet was.

Sixthly and Laftly, The Spectre faid, that to morrow
he fhould be with him, which was not true, for feveral
days intervened before the Battle. But the word to mor~
vow need not to be taken in ftrictnefs, but in a Latitude


_ of interpretation for a fhorttime. He was to dye inor


upon the Fight, and the Enemies were now ready for
it, and fo the event was to be within a very little while.
The prediction of which , wasa Prophecy of a thing
very contingent, and fhews that the Predictor was the
real Samuel. | 3


SECT. XXVIII.


An Anfwer to that Objettion, That if it was Samuels Sout
that appeared, it makes notbing to Witchcraft.


PDUT if it were the real Samuel, will they fay, this
Story will then make nothing for the Opinion of
Witchcraft. For Samuel was not raifed by Enchante
ment, but came either of his own accord, or on a Di-
vine Errand. To which Objection, | fay, |
Firft, Here is at leaft proof of an Apparition of a
Man after Death.

Secondly,. Sauls going to this Pyzhone/s upon fuch an
Inquiry, and fhe undertaking to bring the perfon up,
whom he fhould name (at leaft the appearance of him)
intimated v, 11. are good proof that this had been her
practice, though at this time over-ruled, and that fhe
acted by an Evil Spirit. For certainly when Saul intreats
her to Devine to him by her Familiar Spirit, he did nog
mean that fhe fhould deceive, and delude him by a Con-
federate Knave. The fenflefnefs of which Figment I have
already fufliciently difproved. That the Woman was ufed
to fuch practices, will appear fully when I come to prove
Witchcraft from * exprefs Texts, Advertife.


318 Proof of Apparitions, &c.


Advertifement.


% HE expres Texts that he means, I fuppofe are fuch

as thefe, Exod, 22.18. 2 Chron, 33.6. Gal. 5.
20, Micah 5. 12. Acts 13. 6,8. and Chap. 8,9. and
more efpecially Deut. 18.10. Where almoft all the Names |
of Witches are enumerated, namely, of all thofe that are
anveigled by Covenant with Evil Spirits, either explicitly,
or by fubmitting to their Ceremonies. See Dr. H--- M---
bis Poft[cript.


SEP,


They that hold it mas an Evil Spirit that appeared to Saul,
that their opinion may be true for ought Mr. Webiter
brings againft it.


S to the Opinion of divers Divines, that the ap-
pearing Samuel was indeed an Evil Spirit in his ©
likenefs, though I judge it not fo probable as the other
of the real Samuel, yet the interpretation is not abfurd
nor impoffible. And becaufe ldo not abfolutely deter-
mine either way, | fhail defend it againft Mr. Webjer’s
contrary Arguments, which whether it be fo or not fo,

prove nothing. He faith,
* Firft, That this:begs two. falfe fuppofitions, p. 175.
As Firft, That the Devils are fimply incorporeal Spi-
rits. By which if he means Imcorporeal in their Intrin-
fick Effential Confticution, fuch no.doubt they are, as
every Intellectual Being is. But if he mean by /imply In-
corporeal, difunited from all Matter and Body, fo per-
haps Cand moft likely) they are not. But neither the
One,. or the other of thefe. is fuppofed by the Opinion
Mr. Webjter impugns. The fecond falfe fuppofition is,
That Devils can affume Bodies. ‘That they can appear
In


ceca serene illo tat


Petia” ye


i in divers Shapes and Figures, like humane and other
i Bodies, we affirm, and it is plain from the Scri-


i inreference to other Spirits in due place. So that we
may fuppofe it ftill, till Mr. Webjfer hath evinced the
contrary, as he promifeth. How he performs I fhall


a
¢
§ pture, as to Angels, and I fhall make the fame good,
i
t
4
‘


i gonfider in due place.


His Second Argument is, That he is not of their Opi-
nion, that the Devils move, and rove up and down in


| | this Elementary World: at pleafure. Which no one I


know faith. They go to and fro, and compafs the


j miflion, the Laws of the Angelical World, and thofe of


‘| their own Kingdom ; which prevent the Troubles and


~ 4


tl


tl aA


¢


{
f
} Earth, but ftill within the bounds of the Divine Per-
]
|


| Difturbances in the World from them, which he faith
§ would enfue.


Advertifement.


; ioe far runs the Proof of the Exiftence of Appariti-
| ons and Witchcraft, from Holy Scripture, entire.
| The three or four Lines that follow in the M.S. and are lefe
Sout, break off abruptly. But what is [aid, fufficiently fub-
§ verts the force of Mr. Webtter’s Arguments againft their


,, | Openson, that fay it was the Devil that appeared toSaul. F


v9
i


twill only here take notice, that this part which reaches hi-
Rtberto, though it be not fully fintthed, yer it abundantly af


Wfords Proof, forthe Conclufion, namely, for the Exiftence
oY Woof Spirits, Apparitions, amd Witches, from Teftimony
of Holy Scripture, to as many as yield to the Authority
“"Wtbereof. But the following Collection ts a Confirmation of


i)" the fame things, as well to the Anti-Scripturifts, as to thene


\" that believe Scripture.


AIC WH 4
whe i


i Ghope now will prove srrefragable, and unexceptionable, if
ithe Reader retain in his mind , Mr. Glanvil’s Preface to


And the leading Story of the Demon of Tedworth, £


this


|


320 Proof of Apparitions, Sic.


this fecond Part of bis Saducif{mus Triumphatus, and 24p.
Mompeflon’s Letters, the one to Mr. Glanvil , the other
to Mr. Collins, which cannot but abundantly undeceive the
World. So that it 1s needle[s to record how Mr. Glanvil
wrote to Mr, William Claget of Bury, and profeffed, He
had not the leaft. ground to think he was impofed on in
what he related, and that he had great caufe from what
he faw himfelf, to fay, it was impoflible there fhould b

any Impofture in that bufinefs. 7

To the fame purpofehe wroteto Mr, Gilbert Clark iz
Northamptonhhire, as alfoto my felf, and undoubtedly to
many more, as he has intimated in his Preface. Befides that,
to the Parties above-named, he [ent a Copy of that Letter of
Mr. Mompelion, which was wrote to himfelf.

Sothat that groundle{s Rumour being thus fully filenced,
we may now feafonably relate, and that with confidence, that
affured and unexceptionably attefted Story of the Demon
of Tedworth. Which is as follows.


Cc


Proof of Apparitions, S] rits, Sede
W itches, from a choice Co
of modern Relations.


or
o.
aig
aoe

5

5


RELATION I.


) Woich is the enlarged Narrative of the Demon of Ted-
worth , or of the Difturbances at Mtr. Mompeffon’s
Floufe, caufed by Witchcraft , and the villany of thé
Drummer.


ATR. Fohn Mompeffon of Tedworth, inthe County
se of Wilts, being about the middle of March,
2 inthe Year 1661. at a Neighbouring Town
™ called Ludgar{hal, and hearing a Drum beat
i there, he inquired of the Bailiff ofthe Town, at whofe
y| Honfe he then was, what it meant. The Bailiff cold
him, that they had for fome day is been trot ubled with au
llidle Drommer, who demanded Money of the Conttable
yby vertue of a pretended Pafs , ae h he thought was
counterfeit, Upon this Mr. Afompeffon fent for the Fel-
low, and askt him by what Authority he went tup and
«down the Country in that manner with his Drum. The
#Drummer anfwered, he had good authority, and pro-
})@duced his Pais, with a Warrant under the Hands of Sir
WWilliam Cawl, and Colonel Ayliff of Gretenbam. Mr.
Nh Atompeffon knowing thefe Gent eit Hands, difcovered
fithat the Pafs and Warrant were counter feit, and there-
upon commanded the Vagrant to put oes his Drum, and
per the Conftable to carry kim before the next Jue
Altice of the Peace, to be further exami ined and punithr.
| X The


322 The Colleétion

The Fellow then confeffed the Cheat, and begged earn-
eftly to have his Drom. Mr. Mompeffon told him, that
*f he underftood from Colonel -Aylff, whofe Drummer
he faid he was, that he had been an honeft Man, he
fhould have it again, but in the mean time he would fe-
cureit. So he left the Drum with the Bailiff, and the
Drummer in the Conftable’s hands, who it feems was
prevailed on by the Fellows intreaties to let him go.

About the midi of April following, when Mr. AZom-
peffon was preparing for a Journey to London, the Bailiff
{ent the Drum to his Houfe, When he was returned
from that Journey, his Wife told him, that they had
been much affrighted in the Night by Thieves, and
that the Houfe had been like to have been broken up.
And he had not been at home above three Nights, when
the fame noife was heard that had difturbed his Family
in his abfence. It was a very great knocking at his
Doors, and the outfides of his Houfe. Hereupon he
got up, and went about the Hou fe with a Brace of Piftols
in his hands. He opened the Door where the great
knocking was, and then he heard the noife at another
Door. He opened that alfo, and went out round his
Houfe, but could difcover nothing, only he {till heard
a ftrange noife and hollow found. When he was got
back to Bed, the noife was a Thumping and Drumming
on the top of hisHoufe, which continued a good fpace,
and then by degrees went off into the Air.

After this, the noife of Thumping and Drumming
was very frequent, ufually five Nights together, and
shen it would intermit three. It was on the outfides of
the Houle, which is moft of it of Board. It conftantly
came as they were going to fleep, whether early or late. |
After a Months Difturbance without, it came into the
Room where the Drum lay, four or five nights in feven,
within half an hour after they were in Bed, continuing
almoft two. The fign of it juft before it came, was, § },,,
they ftill heard an hurling in the Air ovet the Houfe, | j,,.
and at its going off, the beating of a Drum like that at |.


the | *


nny NiCd


> So


i—<


——-
se sa


= Puan Na! ams Oring


tt


of Relations. 323
the breaking up of a Guard. It continued inthis Room
for the {pace of two Months, which time Mr. A/ompeffon
himfelf lay there to obferve it. In the fore part of the
night, it ufed to be very troublefome, but after two
hours all would be quiet.

Mrs. Aompeffon being brought to Bed, there was but
little noife the night fhe was in Travail, nor any for
three Weeks after, till fhe had recovered ftrength. But
after this civil ceflation, it returned in a ruder manner
than before, and followed and vext the youngelt Chil-
dren, beating their Bedfteds with that violence, that all
prefent expected when they would fal in pieces. In
laying Hands on them, one fhould feell no blows, but
might perceive them to fhake exceedingly. Foran hour
together it would beat, Round-heads and Cuckolds, the
Tat-too, and feveral other points of War, as well as
any Drummer. After this, they fhould hear a fcratch-
ing under the Childrens Bed, as if by fomething that
had Iron Tallons. It would lift the Children up in their
Beds, follow. them from one Room to another, and for
a while haunted none particularly but them.

There was a Cock-loft in the Houfe which had not
been obferved to be troubled, thither they removed the
Children, putting them to Bed while it was fair day,
where-they were no fooner laid, but their troubler was
with them as before. |

On the Fifth of November 1661. it kept a mighty
noife, and a fervant obferving two Boards in the Chil-
drens room feeming to move, he bid it give him one
of them. Upon which the Board came (nothing mo-
ving it that he faw) withina yard:of him. The Man
added, Nay let me have it inmy Hand; upon which it
was fhov’d quite hometohim. Hethruft it back, and
it was driven to him again, and fo up and down, to and
fro, at leaft twenty times together, till Mr. AZompeffon
forbad his Servant fuch Familiarities. This was in the
day-time, and feen by a whole Room full of people.
That morning it left a fulphurous {mell behind it, which
pe was


324 The Collection


was very offenfive. At night the Minifter, one Mr.
Cragg, and divers of the Neighbours came to the Houfe
on a vifit, The Minifter went to Prayers with them,
kneeling at the Childrens Bed-fide, where it was then
very troublefome and loud. During Prayer-time it
withdrew into the Cock-loft, but returned as foon as
Prayers were done, and then in fight of the Company,
the Chairs walkt about the Room of themfelves , the
Childrens: fhooes were hurled over their Heads, and
every loofe thing moved about the Chamber. At the
fame time a Bed{taff was thrown at the Minifter, which
hit him onthe Leg, but fo favourably, that a Lock of
Wooll could not have fallen more foftly, and it was ob-
ferved, that it opt juft where it lighted, without roll-
ing or moving from the place.

Mr. Adompeffo perceiving, that it fo much perfecuted
the little Children, he lodged them out at a Neighbours:
Houfe, taking his Eldeft Daughter, who wasabout Ten
years of age into his own Chamber, where it had not
been a Month before. As foonas fhe was in Bed, the
difturbance begun there again, continuing three Weeks
Drumming, and making other noifes, and it was ob-
ferved, that it would exactly anfwer in Drumming any
thing that was beaten or-called for. After this, the
Houfe where the Children were-Lodged out, happening,
to be full of ftrangers, they were taken home, and no
difturbance having? been known in the Parlour, they
were lodged there, where alfo their Perfecutor found
them, but then only pluckt them by the Hair and Night-
cloaths, without any other difturbance.

It was noted, that when the noife was loudeft, and
came with the moft fudden and furprifing violence, no
1Doz about the Houfe would move, though the knocking
was oft fo boifterous and rude, that it hath been heard
at a contiderable diftance in the Fields, and awakened
the Neighbours in the Village, none of which live very
near this Houfe. The Servants fometimes were lift up
with their Beds, and then let gently down again with-

out


of Relations.
out hurt, at other times it would lie like a great weight
upon their Feet.

About the latter end of Dec. 1661. the Drummings
were lefs frequent, and then they heard a noife like th
gingling of Money, occafioned, as it was thought, by
fomewhat Mr. A¢ompeffon’s Mother had {poken the day
before to a Neighbour, who talkt of Bayries leaving
Money, viz. That fhe fhould like it well, if it would
leave them fome to make amends for their trouble. The
night after the fpeaking of which, there was a great
chinking of Money over all the Honfe,

After this it defifted from the ruder noifes, and em-
ployed it felf in little Apifh and lefs troublefome Tricks.
On Chriftmafs Eve alittle before day, one of the little
Boys arifing out of his Bed, was hit on a fore place up-
on his Heel, with the Latch of the Door , the Pin that
it was faftened with, was fofmall, that it was adifficult
matter to pick it out. The night after Chriftmas day,
it threw the old Gentlewomans Cloaths about the Room,
and hid her Bible in the Afhes. In fuch filly tricks it
was frequent,

After this, it was very troublefome to a Servant of
Mr. AZompeffon’s, who was a ftout Fellow, and of fober
Converfation, This Man lay within, during the greate[t
difturbance , and for feveral nights fomething would
endeavour to pluck his Cloaths off the Bed, fo that he
was fainto tug hard to keep them on, and fometimes
they would be pluckt from him by main force, and his
fhoes thrown at his head. And now and then he fhould
find himfelf forcibly held, as it were bound Hand and
Foot, but he found that whenever he could make ufe of
his Sword , and itruck with it, the Spirit quitted its
hold. | :

A little after thefe contefts, a Son of Sir Thomas
Bennet, whofe Workman the Drummer had fometimes
been, came tothe Houle, andtold Mr. Adompeffox fome
words that he had {poken, which it feems was not well
taken. For as {oon as they werein Bed, the Drum was
A 3 | beat


325


326 The Colleétion


beat up very violently and loudly, the Gentleman arofe
and called his Man tohim, who lay with Mr. AZompef-
fon’s Servant juft now {poken of, whofe name was Fobz.
As {oon as Mr. Bennet?s Man was gone, ohn heard a
rufling noife in his Chamber, and fomething came to
his Bedfide,. as if it had been one in Silk. The Man pre-
fently reacheth after his Sword, which he found held
from him, and twas with difficulty and much tugging
that he got it into his power, which as foon as he had
done, the Spectre left him, and it was always obferved
that it {till avoided a Sword.

About the beginning of January 1662. they were
wont to hear a Singing in the Chimney before it came
down. And one night about this time, Lights were
feen inthe Houfe. One of them came into Mr. Azom-
peffon’s Chamber which feemed blue and glimmering,

- and caufed great ftiffuefs in the Eyes of thofe that faw
_ it. After the Light fomething was heard coming up
the Stairs, as:if it had been one without Shooes. The
Light was feen alfo four or five times in the Childrens
Chamber; and the Maids confidently affirm, that the
Doors were at leaft ten times opened and fhut in their
fight, and when they were opened they:heard a noife as
if half a dozen had entred together. After which fome
were heard to walk about the Room, and one rufled as
if it had been in filk, The like Mr. Adompeffon himfelf
once heard, |

During the time of the knocking, when many were
prefent, a Gentleman of the Company faid, Satan, if
the Drummer fet thee to work, give three knocks and
no more, which it did very diftinctly and ftopt. Then
the Gentleman knockt, to fee if it would an{wer him ‘as
it was wont, but it did not. For further trial, he bid
it for confirmation, if it were the Drummer ; to give
five knocks and no more that night, which it did, and
left the Houfe quiet all the night after. This was done
in the prefence of Sir Thomas Chamberlain of Oxford-

fhire, and divers others.
Oa


Vi)


|
nny % [
, \


q
p ,
I (0 i
'


D


of Relations. 227

On Saturday Morning, an hour before day, az. 10.
a Drum was heard beat upon the outfides of Mr. AZom-~
peffon’s Chamber, from whence it went tothe other end
of the Houfe, where fome Gentlemen ftrangers lay,
playing at their door and without, four or five feveral
‘Tunes, and fo went off into the air.

The next night, a Smith in the Village lying with
¥ohn the Man, they heard a noife in the room, as if one
had been fhoeing of an Horfe, and fomewhat came, as
it were with a pair of Pincers, {nipping at the Smiths
nofe moft part of the night.

One morning Mr. Adompeffon rifing early to goa
Journey, heard a great noife below, where the Children
lay, and running down with a Piftol in his hand, he
heard a Voice, crying 4 Witch, aWuch, as they had
alfo heard it once before. Upon his entrance all was

uiet.
: Having one Night played fome little tricks at Mr.
Mompeffon’s Beds feet, it went into another Bed, where
one of his Daughters lay ; Thereit pafled from fide to
fide, lifting her up as it paffed under. At that time
there were three kinds of noifes inthe Bed. ‘Uhey en-
deavoured to thrutt at it with a Sword, but it till fhifted


_and carefully avoided the thruft, ftill getting under the


Child when they offered at it. The night after it came
panting like a Dog out of breath. Upon which one
took a Bedftaff to knock, which was caught out of
her hand, and thrown away, and company coming up,
the room was prefently filled with a bloomy noifome


‘{mell, and was very hot, though without fire, in avery


fharp and fevere Winter. It continued in the Bed pan-
ting and {cratching an hour and half, and then went in-
to the next Chamber , where it knockta little, and
feemed to rattle a Chain; thus it did for two or three

nights together. i
Afcer this, the old Gentlewomans Bible was found in
the Afhes, the Paper fide being downwards. Mr. Adom-
peffon-took it up, and obferved, that it lay open at the
; X 4 third


328 The Colleétion


third Chapter of St. AZzrk, where there is mention of
the unclean Spirits falling down before our Saviour, and
of his giving power to the Twelve to caf out Devils,
and of the Scribes Opinion, that he caft them out
through Beelzebub. The next night they ftrewed A thes
over the Chamber, to fee what impreffions it would
leave. Inthe morning they found in one place the re-
f{emblance of a great Claw, in another of a Leffler, fome
Lettefs in another, which they could make nothing of,
befides many Circles and Scratches in the Afhes.

About this time I went to the Honfe,. on purpofe to
inquire the truth of thofe paflages, of which there was
foloudareport. It had ceafed from its Drumming and
ruder noifes before] came thither, but moft of the more
remarkable circumftances before related, were con-
firmed to me there, by feveral of the Neighbours toge-
ther, who had been prefent at them. At this time it
ufed to haunt the Children, and that as foon:as they
were laid. ‘They went to Bed that night I was there,
about Eight of the Clock, when a Maid-fervant coming
down from them, told us it was come. The neighbours
that were there, and two Minifters who had feen and
heard divers times, went away, but Mr. Mompeffon and
I, and a Gentleman that came with me went up, I heard
a ftrange {cratching as 1 went up the Stairs, and when
we came into the Room, I perceived it was juft behind
the Boliter of the Childrens Bed, and feemed to be
againit the Tick. It was as loud a fcratching, as one
with long Nails could make upon a Bolter. There were
two little. modeft Girls in the Bed, between Seven and
Eleven years old as I gueft. | | {aw their hands out of the
Cloaths, and they could not contribute to’ the noife that
was behind their heads. They had been ufed to it, and
had {til fome body or other in the Chamber with them,
and therefore feemed not to be much affrighted. I
{tanding at the Beds-head, thruft my hand behind the
Bo fter,directing it tothe place whence the noife feemed
to come. “Whereupon the. noife ceafed there, and was

| hear


of Relations. 329
‘0 @heard in another part of the Bed. But when I had ta-
v4 Ken out my hand it returned, and was heard inthe fame
‘i, Bplace as before. I had been told that it would imitate
it noifes, and made trial by {cratching feveral times upon
‘ll @the Sheet, as 5, and, and 10, which it followed and
Nc till {topt at my number. I fearcht under and behind the
Bed, turned up the Cloaths tothe Bed-eords, grafpt the
‘itt (Bolfter, founded the Wall behind, and made all the
‘, flearch that poffibly I could to find if there were any
. trick, contrivance, or common caufe of it; the like
‘ie did my Friend, but we could difcover nothing. So that
is @l was then verily perfwaded, and am fo ftill, that the
jad fnoife was made by fome Demon or Spirit. After it had
‘tot icratcht about half an hour or more, it wentinto the
‘tut Imidft of the Bed under the Children, and there feemed
‘ie [tO pant like a Dog out of breath very loudly. I put my
iti hand upon the place, and felt the Bed bearing up againft
ily fit, as if fomething within had thruft itup. I grafpt the
lie, BPeathers to feel if any living thing were in it. I looked
i) @ander and every where about, to fee if there were any
‘nis C<Dog or Cat, or any fuch Creature in the Room, and fo
val (we all did, but found nothing. The motion it caufed
yl by this panting was fo ftrong, that it fhook the Room
@ind Windows very fenfibly. It continued thus more

it Ran half an, hour, while my Friend and I ftaid in the
ii (Room, and as long after, as we were told. During the
oy (panting, I chanced to fee as it had been fomething
so which I thought was a Rat or Moufe) moving in a
@¢ @4lnnen Bag, that hung up againft another Bed that was
;{@atheRoom. I ftept and canght it by the upper end

, vith one Hand, with which I held it, and drew it
sit Orough the other, but found nothing at allinit. There
| @vas no body near to fhake the Bag, or if there had, no

. ne could have made fuch a motion, which feemed to

, |fpe from within, as ifa Living Creature had moved in it.
‘io ML his paflage | mention not in the former Editions, be-
‘og fpaule it depended upon my fingle Teftimony, and might
ape fubject to more Evafions than the other I related ;
it but


370 The Colleétion


but having told it to divers Learned and inquifitivespiatd
Men, who thought it not altogether inconfiderable, IM {yi
have now added it here. It willl know be faid by fome,
that my Friendand I were under fomeAffright,and fo fanegitt:
cied noifes and fights that werenot. Thisis the Eternal gs (tt
Evafion. But if it be poflible to know how a Man is af-rilk
fected, when in fear, and when unconcerned, I certain~fima
jy know for mine-own part, that during the whole times 1
of my being in the Room, and in the Houfe, I was un-tina
der no more affrightment than I am, while I write this
Relation, And if I know that I am now awake, and#iui,
that I fee the Objects that are before me, 1 know thati
I heard and faw the particulars I have told. There isyfti iy
I amfenfible, no great matter for ftary in them, butip(i\|
there is fo much as convinceth me, that there was fome-fhifi|
what extraordinary, and what we ufually call preterna-ppe\y
tural inthe bufinefs. There were other paflages at my
being at Tedworth, which I publifhed not, becaule they
are not fuch plain and unexceptionable Proofs. I fhall
now briefly mention them, valeant quantum valere pof-
funt.. My Friend and I lay in the Chamber, where the
firft and chief difturbance had been. We flept well all
night, but early before day in the Morning, I was a-fi
wakened, (and I awakened my Bedfellow) by a great; ,
knocking juft without our Chamber door. I askt whcifltiy,,
was there feveral times, but the knocking ftill continuec
without anfwer, At laft I faid, In the Name of God, what
2s it, and what would you have? Yo which a Voice anf
{wered, Nothing with you. We thinking it had been
fome Servant of the Houfe, went to fleep again. Buty,
{peaking of it to Mr. Adompeffon when we came downitiy,
he affured us, that no one of the Honfe lay that way, on
had bufinefS thereabout, and that his Servants were nol
up till he called them, which was after it was day. Whicl
they confirmed, and protefted that the noife was noi),
made by them. Bx

Mr. AZompeffon had told’ us before, that it would by
gone in the middle of the night, and come again diver,
timog


CHa I


tat
bt}
fee
an


ft


i/\
nail
ybia


1


of Relations. 33R


“mes early in the Morning about Four a Clock, and this
a ppofe was about that time.
“ij Another paflage was this, my Man coming up to me
‘lit the Morning, told me, that one of my Hor-
“Ati}s (that on which I rode) was allin a {weat, and lookt
(64 if he had been rid all night. My Friend and I went
‘iijown and found him fo. 1 enquired how he had been
iilifed, and was aflured that he had been well fed, and or-
Wiiered as he ufed to be, and my Servant was one that
ilitti#las wont to be very careful about my Horfes. The
(;orfe | had had a good time, and never knew but that
inlie was very found. But after I had rid him a Mile or
‘it ivO, very gently over a plain Down from Mr. Afom-
i, itffon’s Houfe, he fell lame, and having made a hard
suiife to bring me home, died in two or three days, no
mane being able to imagine what heailed. This I con-
watifs might be accident, or fome unufual diftemper, but
aci§l things being put together, it feems very probable
hat it was fomewhat elfe.
eit But I go on with Mr. Mompeffon’s own particulars.
lf here came one Morning a light into the Childrens
ywlfhamber, andaVoice crying, a Witch, aWitch, for at~
ig deaft an hundred times together.
yi) Mr. Afompeffon at another time (being in the day)
ceing fome Wood move that was in the Chimney ofa
vi#-Oom, where he was, as of it felf, difcharged a Piftol
to it, after which they found feveral drops of Blood on
jefe Hearth, and in divers places of the Stairs.
yal Por two or three nights after the difcharge of the Pi-
gol, there was a calm in the Houfe, but then it came
(again, applying it felf to a little Child newly taken
jg @rom Nurfe. Which ic fo perfecuted, that it would not
"get the poor Infant reft for two nights together, nor fuf-
fr a Candle inthe Room, but carry them away lighted
.4gp the Chimney, or throw them under the Bed. It fo
‘Shared this Child by leaping upon it, that for fome
(Mours it could not be recovered out of the fright. So
"pat they were forced again to remove the Children ee
i 0


q


TTT * 4


332 The Collection


of the Houfe. The next night after which, fomethingg *
about Mid-night came up the Stairs, and knockt at Mr..p™
Mompéffon’s door, but he lying ftill, it went up anotheng”
pair of Stairs, to his Man’s Chamber, to whom it ap-§"*
peared ftanding at his Beds foot. The exact fhape andg"
proportion he could not difcover, but he faith he faw a
preat Body with two red and glaring Eyes, which fo
fome time were fixed fteadily upon him, and at length
difappeared. i

Another night ftrangers being prefent, it purr?d imp
the Childrens Bed like a Cat, at which time alfo theg!”
CJoaths and Children were lift up from the Bed, andi!’
fix Men could not keep them down: hereupon they respi!
aoved the Children, intending to have ript up the Bed. pi
But they were no fooner laid in another, but the fecondpii
Bed was more troubled than the firft- It continued chusg'itl
four hours, and fo beat the Childrens Leggs againft theg |
Bed-pofts, that they were forced to arife, and fit up alli
night. After this it would empty Chamber-pots intom!i
their Beds, and ftrew them with Afhes, though they
were never fo carefully watcht. It put a long piked#i
tron into Mr. A4ompeffon’s Bed, and into his Mothers at
naked Knife upright. It would fill Porrengers witht)
Afhes, throw every thing about, and keep a noife all
day.

About the beginning of April 1663. a Gentlemanifiiny,
that lay in the Honfe, had all his money turned blackipitty
in his Pockets; and Mc. AZompeffox coming one Morningyity:,
into his Stable, found the Horfe he was wont to Ride,J |;
on theGround, having one of his hinder Leggs in hisi#iil),
Mouth, and fo faftened there, that it was difficult form
feveral Men to getit out with a Leaver. After thisyfiit,
there were fome other remarkable things, but my Ac-fili,
count goes no further. Only Mc. Aompeffon writ meq
word, that afterwards the Houfe was feveral nights ber,
fet with feven or cight in the fhape of Men, who, asfiy. .
foon as a Gun was difcharged, would fhuffle away to-#'}),
gether into an Arbour.


of Relations. 332
iii] Fhe Drummer was tryed at the Affizes at Salisbury
‘aiifpen' this occafion. He was committed firft to Gloucefter
‘a0jsaol for ftealing, and aWiltfhire Man coming to fee him,
vite askt what news inWoltfhire ? The Vifitant faid, he
ugwknew of none. No, faiththe Drummer! do not you
viikear’of the Drumming at a Gentlemans Houfe at Ted-
uchorth ? That I do enough, faid the other. I, quoth
‘fagithe Drummer, I have plagued him (or to that purpofe)
‘nd he fhall never be quiet, till he hath made me fatif-
wi)flaction for taking awaymy Drum. Upon Information
raf this, the Fellow was tryed for a Witch at Sarum,
jj nd all the main circumftances I have related, were
»(fvorn at the Affizes by the Minifter of the Parifh, and
sy@ivers others of the mof intelligent and fubftantial In-
qfabitants,; who had been Eye and€ar-witnefles of them,
»fiaime after time for divers years together,
iit The fellow was condemned to Tranfportation, and
‘p@ccordingly fent away; but i know not how (tis faid
ay Talfing itorms, and affrighting the Seamen) he made
vy thift to come back again. And °tis obfervable, thar
, uring all the time of hisreftraint and abfence the Houfe
\iia(W’'@8 Quiet, but as foon as ‘ever he came back at liberty,
gue difturbance returned.
“ptm He had been a Souldier under Cromwel, and ufed to
Rik much of Gallant Books he had of an odd Fellow,
go was counted a Wizzard. Upon this occafion I fhall
vere add a paffage, which Ihad not from Mr. ALompeffon,
oqqut yet relates to the main purpofe.
“a Tbe Gentleman, who was with me at the Houfe, Mr.
wall, being in company with one Compton of Sommer fet-
‘y@@ere, who practifed Phylick, and pretends to ftrange
fmatters, related to him this ftory of Mr. Adompeffon’s
™ @iifturbance. The Phyfician told him, he was fure ig
*" @fas nothing but a Rendezvous of Witches, and that
'"Bbr an hundred pounds, he would undertake to rid the
‘ Monfe of all difturbance. In purfait of this difcourfe,
“be talke of many high things, and having drawn my
i itiend into another Room apart from the reft of the
Company,


i
Sar


34 The Colleétion


Company, faid, he would make him fenfible he could?”
do fomething more than ordinary, and askt him who he’
defired to fee. Mr. Hill had no great confidence in his
talk, but yet being earneftly preit to name fome one,g™’
He {aid, he defired to fee no one fo muchas his Wifes”
who was then many miles diftant from them at her home.p™
Upon this Compron took up a Looking-glafs that was ing!
the Room, and fetting it down again, bid my Friend
look in it ; which he did, and there, as he moft folemn-4"
ly and ferioufly profefleth, he faw the exact Image ofp bo
his Wife in that habit which fhe then wore, and work-
ing at her Needle in fuch a part of the Room (there respi!
prefented alfo) in which and about which time fhe re-g it
ally was, as he found upon enquiry when hecame homes iti
The Gentleman himfelf averred this to me, and he is 2 ll
very fober, intelligent, and credible perfon. Comptong iii
had no knowledge of him before, and was an uttengltt
ftranger to the perfon of his Wife. The fame Man we
fhall meet again in the ftory of the Witchcrafts of Elizaq Ml
beth Style, whom he difcovered to be a Witch, by foretelif tint
ling her coming into an Houfe,and going out again with thts
out fpeaking, as is fet downin the third Relation. Hopi
was by all counted a very odd perfon. ay
Thus I have written the famm of Mr. AZompeffon?s dif i |
fturbance, whichI had partly from his own mouth relai itt
ted before divers, who had been witnefles of all, anogitt,
confirmed his relation, and partly from his own Lettersa iti
from which the order and feries of thingsistaken, The
fame particulars he writ alfo to Dr. Creed, then Doctor
f the Chair in Oxford. |
Mr, Afompeffon is a Gentleman, of whofe truth inp'h
this account, 1 have not the leaft ground of fufpiciony
he being neither vain nor credulous, but a difcreet, fasfi
gacious and manly perfon, Now the credit of matterig mi
of Fact depends much uponthe Relators, who, if thei,
cannot be deceived themfelves nor fuppofed any way\f ity
interefled to impofe upon others, ought to be creditedi§ty,,
For upon thefe circumftances, all humane Faith ify,
groundedg


| of Relations. 325
ie cal grounded, and matter of Fact is not capable of any proof
iiuifbefides, but that of immediate fenfible evidence. Now
wulfithis Gentleman cannot be thought ignorant, whether
ucithat he relates be true or no, the Scene of all being his
s\ijown Houfe, himfelfa witnefs, and that not of acircum-
sloafftance or two, but of an hundred, nor for once or twice
ionly, but for the {pace of fome years, during which he
inWas a concerned, and inguifitive Obferver. So that it
ileicannot with any fhew of reafon be fuppofed that any of
‘ig @his Servants abufed him, fince in all that time he muft
jwimeeds have detected the deceit. And what intereft
ineicould any of his Family have had Cif it had been poflible |
eietto have managed without difcovery) to continue fo long
senfO troublefome, and fo injurious an Impofture? Nor
iiekean it with any whit of more probability be imagined,
wathat his own melancholy deluded him , fince (befides
.yy@that he is no crazy nor imaginative perfon) that hu-
»\y@mMour could not have been fo lafting and pertinacious.
(f@Or if it were fo in him, can we think he infected his
joaWhole Family, and thofe multitudes of Neighbours and
,q#others, who had fo often been Witnefles of thofe paf-
, ifages ? fuch Suppofals are wild, and not like to tempt
fany, but thofe whofe Wills are their Reafons. So that
,upon the whole, the principal Relator Mr. Mompeffen
“ abimfelf knew, whether what He reports was true or
not, whether thofe things acted in his Houfe were con-
_ydittived Cheats, or extraordinary Realities, And if fo,
what Intereft could he ferve in carrying on, or conni-
“vlving at a jugling Defign and Impofture ?
“E He fuffered by it in his Name, in his Eftate, in all
this Affairs, and in the general. Peace of his Family.
he Unbelievers in the matter of Spirits and Witches
“ook him for an Impoftor. Many others judged the
iPermiffion of fuch an extraordinary Evil to be the
 Bjudgment of God upon him, for fome notorious wick-
\" fednefs or impiety. Thus his Name was continually
i) Mexpofed to Cenfure, and his Eitate. faffered, by. the
i" (Poncourfe of People from all parts to his Houle, by
i toe
|


336 The Collection
the Diverfion it gave him from his Affairs, by the Dif |
couragement of Servants, by reafon of which he could
hardly get any to live with him. To whichif I add
the continuall Hurry that his Family was in, the Af-
frights, Vexations and Toflings up and down of his:
Children, and the Watchings and Difturbance of his:
whole Houfe (in all which, Himfelf muft needs be the
moft concerned ) I fay, if thefe things are confidered,,
there will be little reafon to think he could have any)
Intereft to put a Cheat upon the World, in which He:
would moft of all have injured and abufed Himfelf. Or:
if he fhould have defigned and managed fo incredible,,
fo unprofitable a Delufion, ’tis ftrange that. he fhould if lj
have troubled himfelf fo long in fuch a Bufinefs, only’ \ui
to deceive, and to be talkt of. And it is yet more fo, by,
that none of thofe many inquifitive Perfons that cameg /ip;
thither purpofely to criticize and examine the Truth off &
thofe Matters, could make any Difcoveries of the Jug-
gling, efpecially fince many came prejudiced againft
the Belief of fuch things in general, and others refol-
ved before-hand againft the Belief of this, and all were:
permitted the utmoft Freedom of Search and Enquiry.


And after Things were weighed and examined, fomeg jy,


that were before greatly prejudiced went away full
convinced. To all which I add, That

There are divers Particulars in the Story, © in
which no Abufe or Deceit could have been practifed,
as the Motion of Boards and Chairs of themfelves, thee jj
beating of a Drum in the midft of a Room, and in theg »),


Air, when nothing was tobe feen: the great Heat in aq, i


Chamber that had no Fire in exceflive cold weather, theg}),.
Scratching and Panting, the violent Beating and Shak-4 jp...
ing of the Bedfteads, of which there was no perceiv-4 9,
able Caufe or Occafion: In thefe and fuch like Inftances, i,


it is not to be conceived how Tricks could have been putiigy,.


upon fo Many, fo Jealous, and fo Inquifitive Perfons asf,
were Witnefles of then. :


ff
Tif


of Relatioris.
| .?TiS true, that when the ‘Gentlemen the King fent
i were there, the Honfe was quiet, and nothing feen nor
“i heard that night, which was confidently and with tri-
““f umph urged by many, asa confutation of the ftory.. But
NS .°twas bad Logick to conclude in matters of Fai froma
‘Ui dingle Negative, and fach aone againit numerous Afir-
ili gmatives, and fo affirm, thata thing was never done, be.
ig canfe not at fuch a particular time, and that no body
“ui ever faw what this Man or that did not. By the fame
ij (way O¥ reafoning, I may infer that there were never
tl Vif any Robberies done on Salisbury Plain, Hounflow Heath,
iii or the other noted Places, becaufe I havé often Travelled
ul all thofe ways, and yet was never Robbed; and the
‘00 Spancard inferred well that {aid » Lhere was no Sunin
itil’ England, becaufe he had been fix weeks here, and mever
il fam it, This is the common argument of thofe that
‘idl deny the Being of Apparitions, they have Travelled all
‘i: Hours of the.night, and never faw any thing worfe than
oid themfelves (which may wellbe) and thence they con-
velo Clude, that all pretended Apparitions are Fancies or
\ilatt Lmpoftures. But why do not fuch arguers conclude, that
iii there was never a Cut-Purfe in London, becaufe they
i have lived there Many years without being met with by
wy fll any of thofe Practifers? Certainly he that denies Appa-
§7ttions upon the confidence of this Negative againit the
), valt heap of Pofitive aflurances, is credulous in believing
j(iithere was ever any Flighway-man in the World, if he
iva, (bimfelf was never Robb’d.~ And the Trials of Affizes
;(lfand. Atteftations of thofe that have. (if he will be juft)
qifOught to move his Aflent no more in this cafe, than in
yi (that of Wisches and Apparitions, which have the very
"(fame evidence, ,
it) But as to the quiet of Mr. Mompeffon’s Houfe, when
“jgathe Courtiers were there, it may be remembred and
‘yqigeontidered; that the difturbance was not conftant, but
“ «alitermitted fometimes feveral days, fometimes weeks. So
" lithat the intermiffion at that time might be accidental,or
(perhaps the Demon was not willing to give fo publick a
| Y Teltimony


i
ia
i


f


337


328 The Colleétion


Teftimony of thofe Tranfactions, which poffibly might
convince thofe, who he had rather fhould continue in
the unbelief of his exiftence. But however it were, this
circumftance will afford but a very flender inference’
againft the credit of the ftory, except among thofe who
are willing to take any thing for an Argument againit
oe which they have an intereft not to acknow-
edge.

have thus related the fum of the ftory, and noted
fome circumftances that aflure the truth ofit. 1 confefs
the paflages recited are not fo dreadful, tragical and
amazing, as there are fome in ftory of this kind, yet
are they never the lefs probable or true, for their being
not fo prodigious and aftonifhing. And they are ftrange
enough to prove themfelves effects of fome invifible ex-
traordinary Agent, and fo demonftrate that there are
Spirits, who fometimes fenfibly intermeddle in our
affairs. And Ithink they do it with clearnefs of evi-
dence. Forthefe things were not done long ago, or at
far diftance, in an ignorant age, or among 2 barbarous
people, they were not feen-by two or three only of the
Melancholick and fwperftitious, and reported by thofe
that made them ferve the advantage and intereft of a
party. They were not the paflages of a Day or Night,
northe vanithing glances of an Apparition , but thefe
Tranfactions were near and late, publick, frequent, and
Of divers years continuance , witnefled by multitudes of
competent and unbyaffed Atteftors , and acted in @
fearching incredulous Age: Arguments enough one
would think to convince any modeft and capable
reafon. : :


Adver=}'


Advertifement,


a 2 ese Narrative of the Demon of Tedworth z pub-
aunt lifhed in an Epiftolar Form in the former Impreffions.
wr But the enlargement thereof, that is to fay, the [aid Nar-

} . rative enlarged for this intended Edition » & not in that
(nel “form , and therefore 1s thus publifhed according to Ar.
ils ~=Glanvil’s A4S. in this bare fimple form it was found. We
wal proceed nowto the fecond Relation,


A RELAT. IL.


vay Which is concerning Watcheraft prattifed by Jane Brooks


i. upon Richard Jones, Son of Henry Jones of Shepton
feig = Mallet.


if Q)* Sunday 15. of Novemb. 1657. about Three of
tll the Clock inthe Afternoon, Richard Fones then a
uP a {prightly youth about twelve years old , Son of Henry
ya) Sones Of Shepton Afallet, in the County of Somerfet, being
‘\yjelf 40 his Father’s Houfe alone, and perceiving ene looking
“)f) Inat the Windows, went to the Door, where one Fane
“Brooks of the fame Town (but then by name unknown
\'@ tothis Boy) cametohim. She defired him to give her
“|. a piece of clofe Bread, and gave him an Apple. After
©" Hewhich fhe alfo ftroked him down on the right fide, fhook
him by the hand, and fo bid him good night. The
“'@ youth returned into the Houfe, where he had been ‘left
@ well, when his Father and one Gibfon went from him,

li but at their return, which was within an hour or there-
Wabout, they found him ill, and compiaining of his right
fide, in which the pain continued the mof part of that
(@imight. And on Adunday following in the‘Evening, the
@Boy rofted the Apple he had of Fane Brooks, and ha-
living eaten about half of it, was extreamly ill, and fome-
“ie RS as ¥°2 times


—


349 The Colleétion


times {peechlefs, but being recovered, he told his Fa-
Cher that a Woman of thé Town on Sunday before, had
given him that Apple, and that fhe ftroked him on the
fide. He faid he knew not her name, but fhould her
perfon, if hefawher. Upon this Fones was advifed to
invite the Women of Shipton to come to his Houfe, up-
on the occafion of his Sons illnefs, and the Child told
him, that incafethe Woman fhould come in when he
was in his Fit, if he were not able to fpeak, he would
sive him an intimation by a.Jogg, and defired that his
Father would then lead him through the Room, for he
{aid hie wou'd put his hand upon her, if fhe were there,
After this He continuing very ill, many Women came
daily to fee him.. And Sane Brooks the Sunday after,
came in with two of her Sifters, and feveral other Wo-
mien of the Neighbourhood were there.

Upon her coming, in, the Boy was taken foill, that
for fome time he could not fee nor fpeak, but having
recovered his fight, he gave his Father the /tem, and he
led him about the Room.’ . Phe Boy drew towards Fane
Brooks, who was hehind her two Sifters among the
eather Women, and put his hand upon her, which his
Father perceiving, immediately fcratcheth her Face and
drew Blood from her. “The. Youth then prefently cry-
ed out that he was well,.and fo he continued feven or
eight days. But then meeting with Alice Coward, Sifter.
to Fane Brooks, who pafling’by faid to him, [How do-
you my Honey] he prefentty fell ill again, And after
that, the faid Coward and Brooks often appeared to him.
The Boy would defcribe the Cloths-and Habit they were
in at the time exactly, as the Conftable and others have
found upon repairing to them, though Brook's Houfe. |
was at a good diftance from Fones’s. “This they often, |
tried, and always found the Boy right in his Defcrip-
tions.

Ona certain Sunday about Noon, the Child being in
a Room with his Father and one Gibfon, andin his Fit,
he onthe fudden called out, that he faw Jase Brooks on

the.


> oR = % oa ee Se
Ce a a


— ar


ee ae


>


< =
re Se:


ig aps ARERR


— ae


|


‘
F
F
he


we 4


CW
i


Aas
|

Tit
his
anit (Hi ee
WN ®


|
G


|


5:


of Relations.


the Wall, and pointed to the place, where immediately
Gibfon {truck with a Knife. Upon which the Boy cryed
out, [O Father, cooz Gibfon hath cut Fane Brook’s
hand, and tis Bloody ] The Father and Gibfow imnie-
diately repaired tothe Conftable, a difcreet Perfon, and
acquainting him with what had pafled, defired ‘him to
go with them to Fane Brook’s Houle, which he did.
“They found her fitting in her Room ona Stool, with
ope hand over the other. The Conitable askt her how
fhe did? She anfwered, not well. He askt again why
fhe fat with one hand overthe other? She replied, fhe
was wont todo fo. He enquired if any thing were

it was well e-


amifs with her Hand? Her anfwer was,
The Conftable defired he might fee the


341


nough.
Hand that was under, which fhe being unwilling to thew
him, he drew it out and fouid it bloody, according to
what the Boy had faid. Being askt how it came fo, fie
faid ’twas {cratched with a great Pin.

On the Eighth of December, 1657. The Boy, Fane
Brooks, and Alice Coward, appeared at Caftle-Cary be-
fore the Juftices, Mr. Hunt and Mr. Cary, The Boy ha-
ving begun to give his Teftimony, upon the coming in
of the two Women, and their looking on him, was in-
{tantly taken Speechlefs; and fo remained till the Wo-
men were removed out of the Room, and thenina fhort
time, upon Examination, he gave a full relation of the
mentioned particulars.

On the Eleventh of Fanuary following, the Boy was
again examined by the fame Juftices at Shepton Afaller,
and upon the fight of Fane Brooks, was again taken
Speechle{s, but was not fo. afterwards when Alice Coward
came into the Room to him.

On the next appearance at Shepton, which was onthe
Seventeenth of February, there were prefent many Gen-
tlemen, Minifters and others. The Boy fell into his Fit
upon the fight of Fane Brooks, and lay ina Man’s Arms
like a dead Perfon; the Woman was then willed to lay
herfdand on him, which the did, and he thereupon

| ¥ 3 flarted


Pe
2 *
en
8

E>
iS)
i aa
i
fox
yes
es,


342 The Collection


ftarted and fprang out in a very ftrange and unufual
manner. One of the Juftices to prevent all poflibilities
of Legerdemain, caufed Gibfon and the reft to ftand off
from the Boy, and then that Juftice himfelf held him ;
the Youth being blindfolded, the Juftice called as if
Brooks fhould touch him, but winked to others to do it,
which two or three fucceflively did,but the Boy appeared
not concerned. . The Juftice then called on the Father
to take him, but had privately before defired one Mg.
Geoffry Strode, to bring Fane Brooks to touch him at
fuch a time as he fhou!d-call for his Father, which was
done, and the Boy immediately fprang out after a very
odd and violent fafhion. He was after touched by fe-
veral Perfons and moved not, but Fame Brooks being
again caufed to put her Hand upon him, he ftarted and
{prang out twice or thrice as before. All this while he
remained in his Fit, and fome time after; and being


_ then laid on a Bed in the fame Room, the People prefent


could not for a long time bow either of his Arms or
Legs.

Between the mentioned 15: of Nov. and the 11 of Faz.
the two Women appeared often to the Boy, their Hands
cold , their Eyes ftaring, and their Lips and Cheeks
looking pale. In this manner on a Thurfday about
Noon, the Boy being newly laid into his Bed, faze
Brooks and Alice Coward appeared to him, and told him,
that what they had begun they could not perform. But
if he would fay no more of it, they would give him Mo-
ney, and {o put a Two-pence into his Pocket. After
which they took him out of his Bed, laid him on the
ground, and vanifhed, and the Boy was found, by thofe
that came next into the Room, lying onthe Floor, as if
he had beendead. The Two-pence was feen by many,
and when it was put into the Fire, and hot, the Boy
would fallill; butas foon as it was taken out and cold,
he would be again as well as before. This was feen and
obferved by a Minifter, a difcreet Perfon, when the Boy
was in. one Room, and the Two-pence (without, his

Kaowledge)


of Relations.


iwi) knowledge) put into the Fire in another, and this was
ve) Givers times tried in the prefence of feveral Perfons.
af Between the 8. of Dec and the 17. of Feb. in the Year
..@ Mentioned, divers Perfons, at fundry times, heard in
th the Boy a noife like the croaking of a Toad ,:and a
.) Voice within him faying, Fane Brooks, Alice Coward,
waa twelve timesin near a quarter of anhour. At the fame
8 time fome held.a Candle before the Boys Face, and earn-
4 eftly looked on him, but could not perceive the leaft
..\# motion of his Tongue, Teeth or Lips, while the Voice
| was heard.
On the 25. of Feb. between two and three inthe Af-
“# ternoon, the Boy being at the Houle of Richard Ifles in
“Shepton Mallet, went out of the Room into the
"l Ifles his Wife followed him, and was within two Yards
when fhe faw him rife up from the ground before |


2 €D


and fo mounted higher and higher, till he paficd in the

“i Air over the Garden-Wall, and was carried fo above

“ground more than 30 Yards, falling at laft at one or-

} dans Door at Shepton, where he was found as dead for

? atime. Butcomingtohimfelf, told Jordan, that Fane

‘ Brooks had taken him up by the Arm out of /fles his
‘M'} Garden, and carried him inthe Air,as is reiated.


top of the Room, and all his Body two or three foot
t


¥

a

i" from ground... There he hath hung a quarter of an hour
ate


together, and being afterwards come to himfelf, he
6)


wf told thofe that found him, that Fane Brooks had carried
(wi him to that place and held him there. Nine People
“Mat a time faw the Boy fo ftrangely hanging by tl
wm Beam.
i . Fromthe 1s. of Nov. tothe 10. of March following,


Women were fent to Gaol, he had no morec ‘
Y 4 Fane


a a


344 The Calleétion


Jane Brooks was Condemned and Executed at Charde
Affizes, Adarch 26. 1658. !

This is the fum of Mr. Hunts Narrative, which con-
cludes with both the Juftices atteftation, thus:

The aforefaid paflages were fome of them feen by us:
and the reff, and fome other remarkable ones, not here
fet down, were upon the Examination of feverai credi-
ble Witnefles taken upon Oath before us. Se


Subfcribed,


Rob. Hunt, Foln Cary.


This I think is good evidence of the being of Witches;
if the Sadducee be not fatisfied with it , I would fain
know what kind of Proof he would expect. ' Here are
the Teftimonies of fenfe, the Oaths of feveral credible
Attefters , the nice and deliberate fcrutiny of quick- »
fighted and judicious Examiners, and the judgment of
an Affize upon the whole. And now the fecurity of all
our Lives and Fortunes depends upon.no greater circum-
itances of evidence than thefe. {f fuch proof may not
be credited, no Fact can be proved, no wickednefs can
be punifhed , no right can be determined, Law i: at
an end, and blind Juftice cannot tell how to decide any
thing. ell oer Figs


Advertifement.


FL E moft fit Advertifement here is Atr. Glanvil?s
Tranfition to frefh Evidences, out of Adr: Hunt?s
Examinations, which ws this. Thus far, faith he, the Evi-«
dence of Fatt went inthe former Edstions, but having re-


fe


a


felved upon this Re-enforgement, I writ again to my ho-
xoured Friend Mr, Hunt, knowing that he had more mates
vials for my purpofe, and [uch as would afford proof [afocignt


mw)


: of Relations. 345
80 any modeft doubter. In Anfwer be was pleafed to fend me
4s Book of Examinations of Witches, which he hept by
“Whim fairly written. Ie contains the difcovery of [uch apn
—bellifh Knot of them, and that difcovery fo clear and plain,
thar perhaps there hath not yet any thing appeared to us
““Q with ftronger Evidence to confirm the belief of Witches.
“Wl dud had not his difcoveries and endeavours met with greas
 oppofitzon and difcouragements from fome then in Authority,
he whole Clan of thofe bellifh Confederates in thefe parts had

i been juftly expofed and punifhed. Out of that Book, I have
} Collected fome main inftances, the clearne/s of which I think.

“!): § will be enough to overcome and filence any indifferent preju-
Ndice. But fome are fo fetled and obdurate, that no proof iz

Ui ithe World is fufiicient to remove them. I begin with the
ll) Watcherafts of Elizabeth Style.


-oex


RELAT. Il,


tal ; Which containeth the Witcherafts of Elizabeth Style of
| Bayford, Widow.


a


‘ai PP His Elizabeth Style of Stoke Trifter, in the County
| of Somerfer, was accufed by divers Perfons of Cre-
yg iidit upon Oath before Mr. Hunt, and particularly and
alargely confefled her guilt her felf, which was found by
athe Jury at her Trial at Taunton. But fhe prevented
"@Execution by dying in Gaol, a little before the expiring
jof the term her Confederate Damen had fet for her en.
Wjoyment of Diabolical pleafures in this life. I have
Ofhortned the Examinations, and caft them into {uch an
morder, as I think fitteft for the rendring the matter.
aClear and intelligible.


Ais Exam. Ich. Hill of Stoke Trifter, in the County:

of Somerfer, Yeoman, being Examined
Mupen Oath Fan. 23. 1664. before Rob. Fiunt, E fq; Cne
Hof his Majefty’s Juttices for that County, concerning the


ewitching


346 The Collection


bewitching of his Daughter by Eliz. Style, declareth,
That his Daughter Elz. Ail, about the Age of 13.
Years, hath been for about two Months laft paft taken
with very ftrange Fits which have held an hour, two,
three, and more; and that in thofe Fits the Child hath
told her Father the Examinant and others, that one
Eliz. Style of the fame Parifh appeared to her, and is
the Perfon that Torments her. She alfo in her Fits ufual-
ly tells what Cloths Eliz. Style hathon at that time,
which the Informant and others have feen and found
true.

He faith further, that about a Fortnight before Chrift-
mas laft, he told Sryle that his Daughter {poke much of
her in her Fits, and did believe that fhe was bewitched
by her. Whereupon Francis White, and Walter , and
Robert Thick. being prefent, willed her to complain to
the Juftice againft him for accufing of her. But fhe ha-
ving ufed feveral put-offs, {aid fhe would do worfe than
fetch a Warrant. After which the Girl grew worfe than
before, and at the end of a Fit fhe tells the-Examinant
when fhe fhall have another, which happens accordingly,
and affirms, that Style tells her when the next Fit fhall
come. He informs further, that Adunday Night after
Chriffmas-Day, about Nine of the Clock, and four or
five times fince about the fame hour of the Night, his
Daughter hath been more Tormented than formerly,
and that though held ina Chair by four or five People,
fometimes fix, by the Arms, Legs, and Shoulders, fhe
would rife out of her Chair, and raife her body about
three or four foot high. And that after, in her Fits, fhe
would have holes made in her Hand- Writs, Face,Neck,
and other parts of her body, which the Informant and ])
others that faw'them, conceived to be with Thorns.
For they faw Thorns in her Flefh, and fome they hooked
out. That upon the Childs pointing with her Finger


from place to place, the Thorns and Holes immediately | et


appeared to the Informant and others looking on, And


gs foon as the Child can fpeak after the Fit, fhe faith
that f°


of Relations. 347


; Sithat Widow Style did prick her with Thorns in thofe
,feveral places, which was horrible Torment , and fhe


“Gfeemed to the Informant and others Banding by, to be


in extream pain and torture.
_ tormented and pricked with Thorns four


e Chil


ild hath been fo
- feveral Nights,
ant and many other Peoplk
i have feen the Flefh rife up in hetle bunches in which
_yedoles did appear. The Prick ing heid about a quarter
“of an hour at a time during each of the four Fits, and
hall he Informant hath feen the “Child take out fome of | thofe


Th


a) nt


Yat which times the Inform:


eo
wa


Thorns.


VL


LT TLL 7


The fame Rich, Hill Examined Fan. 26, 1664.1nforms,
“Ythat when he rode from the Juftices Houfe with a War-
Buy to bring Style before him, his Horfe ona fuddain
“}fat down on his Breech, and he could not after ride him,
“but as foon as he attempted to getup, his Horfe would
ific down and paw with his Feet before. He faith far-
ther, that fince Style was Examined before the iene
om icy made her Confeffiont ohim, fhe hath acknowledged
‘Mito the Informant that E the t had hure his Daughter, and
‘ithat one Anne B Bifhop, and Alice Dike: did join in be-
witching of her.


gf@


Oath before me,


Taken upon
Rob. ‘Eiciute F)


liam Parfons Rector of Stoke Trifter,
in the County of snen ths Examined


12. Exam. WV"


i Hehe 26. of Faz. 1664. before Rob. Hunt, E{q; concerning


~\aithe bewitching of Rich. H:i’s Daughter,
(MR Mond ay Night after Chrifimas-Day then laft palt ,
came into the Room when Eliz. Aill was in her Fit, ma-


faith, That on
he


wi§ny of his Fei ple being prefent and looking on, He
(there faw the Child heldin a Chair by main force by


, ialfoaming <


f {


tithe People, plunging far beyond the ftrength of nature,
and catching at her own Arms and ree: hs
iwith her Teeth. This Fit he conceives held about hal


a 19 &


348 The Colleétion


anhour. After fome time, fhe pointed with her Finger
to the left fide of her Head, next to her lefe Arm, and
then to her left Hand, ec. and where fhe pointed he
perceived a red {porto arife with a {mall black in the
midit of it like afmall Thorn. .She pointed alfo to her
Toes one after another, and expreft great fenfe of Tor-
met. Vhis- latter Fit. he guefles continued about a
quarter of anhour, during moft og ail of which time,
her Scomach feemed to {well, and her Head where the
feemed to be prickt did fo very much. She fate foaming
much of the time, and the next day after heg Fit, the
fhewed the Examtnant the places where the Thorns were
ftuck in, and ke faw the Thorns in thofe places.


Taken upon Oath before me,


Rob, Hunt.
Sub{cribed, 2
William Par fons Rector of Stoke Trifter.


3. Exam. RY /cholas Lambert of Bayford, inthe County
of Semerfet,, Yeoman, Examined upon

Oath before Rob. Hunt, Efg; Fan. 30. 1664. concerning
the bewitching of Rsch. Aill?s Daughter by Elizabeth
Style, teltifiech, That A/onday after Chriftmas- Day lalt,
being with others in the Houle of Rich. Hill, he {aw his
Daughter Elizabeth taken very ill, and in Fits that were
fo ftrong, that fix Men-conld not hold her down in a
Chair in which-fhe was fat, but that fhe would raife the
Chair up in fpight of their utmoft force. “That in her
Fits being not able to {peak, fhe would wreit her body
as one in great Torment, and point with her Finger to
her Neck, Head, Hand-Wriits, Arms and Toes. And
he, with the reft looking on the places to which fhe
pointed, fawon the faddain little Red Spots arife with
little black ones inthe midft, as if Thorns were ftuck
in them, but the Child then only pointed, without
touching her Flefh wich her Finger, |
Taken upon Oath before me, Rob. Hunt.

4. Exam,


349


Ichard Vining of Stoke Triffer, Butcher,
| Bei . Examined Fan. 26. 1664. before Rob,
“4 Hunt, Efg, concerning the bewitching of his Wife by
 Elsz. Style, faith, That about two or three days before
") 5: fames?’s day three years fince or thereabout, his late
‘10h Wife Agnes fell out with Eliz. Style, and within two or
‘\@ three days after fhe was taken with a grievous Pricking
N§in her Thigh, which Pain continued for a long time,
i till after fome Phyfick taken from one FHallet, fhe was
mg at fome Eafe for three or four weeks. About the
‘lil Chriftmas after the mentioned S: Fames’s day, Style cane
‘is'@ €o the Examinant’s houfe, and gave Agnes his Wife two
1 Apples, one of them a very fair red Apple, which
} Style defired her to eat, which fhe did, and in a few
| @ hours was taken ill and worfe than ever fhe had been be-
W(fore. Upon this, the Examinant went to one M, Com-
§ pton, who livedin the Parifh of Ditch Eate (the fame
i" Perfon that fhewed my Friend his Wife in a Glafs, as
i Ihave related in the Story of Mr. A¢ompeffon) for Phy-
Wit fick for his Wife. Compton told him he could do her
\@no good, for that the was hurt by a near Neighbour,
iil] who would come into his houfe, and up into the Cham-
@ber where his Wife was, but would go out again with«
Mout f{peaking. After Vining came home, being in the
(| Chamber with his Wife, Sryle came up to them, but
ig) went out again without faying a word. Agnes the
wii] Wife continued in great Pain till Eaffer Eve following,
i(ffand then fhe dyed. Before her Death her Hip rotted,
/tand one of her Eyes {welled out, fhe declared to him
wpithen and at feveral times before, that fhe believed
iM Eliz. Style had bewitched her, and that fhe was the
i Caufe of her Death.


of Relations.


4 4. Exam.


1


Taken upon Oath before me,


|
}
|


Rob. Hunt.
Whilft


350 The Colleétion


Whilft the Juftice was examining Style at Wincaun-
ton, (which is not above a Mile and a half from Stoke
Trifer) upon the former Evidence againft her, he ob-
ferved that Rich. Vining looked very earneftly upon.
him. Whereupon he askt Vining if he had any thing
to fay unto him. He anfwered that Style had bewitch-
ed his Wife, and told the Manner how, as is in his De-
pofition related, The Woman Style upon this feemed
appaled and concerned, and the Juftice faying to her,
You have been an old Sinner, @&c. You deferve little
Mercy: fhe replied, 1 have askt God Mercy for it.
Mr. Hunt-askt her, why then fhe would continue in
fuch ill Courfes ? fhe faid the Devil tempted her: and
then began to make fome Confeflion of his, Actings
with her. Upon this the Juftice fent her tothe Con-
ftable’s houfe at Bayford, which is in the Parifh of
Stoke Trifter, (the Conftable was one Mr. Gapper) and
the next Morning went thither himfelf, accompanied
with two Perfons of Quality, Mr. Bul, and Mr. Court,
now Juftices of the Peace in this County.

Now before I proceed further in the Story I fhall
take notice that here are Three credible Witnefles,
fwearing to the fame Particulars, in that the Child
Elizabeth Hill was fome times in ftrange Fits, in which
her Strength was encreafed beyond the Proportion of
Nature , and the Force of divers Men; that then fhe
pointed to the Parts of her Body, where they faw red
Spots arifing, and black Specks in the midft of them,
that fhe complained the was prickt with Thorns, and
two of them faw Thorns in the Places of which fhe
complained. ‘Some of which Thorns, one {wears that


He and Others faw hooked out, and that the Girl her fy,


{elf pulled ont others; that in her Fits the declared,
Style appears to her (as Fane Brooks did to Richard Fones,
in the former Relation) and tells her when fhe fhall


have another Fit, which happens accordingly; that py, °


fie defcribes the Cloths the Woman hath on exactly as
they find, But notwithftanding, allthis fhall be Melan-


choly


—— a > a — a an
= Se - SS
E = = = >


SoS? VS
< ae = as


=


a |
Z a
Ed * =


>


i: aif the whole Matter at that
(uk Particularas that follow.


nal 7.1664. befo


— of Relations.


““) chioly and Fancy; or Legerdemain, or natural Diftem-

"per, or any thing but Witchcraft; or the Fact fhall be
“denied, and the three Witnefles perjured, though this
|“ Confidence againft the Oaths of fober Men, tendto the
““@ Overthrow of all Teftimony and Hiftory, and the
i yendring all Laws ufelefs.
\UW@ further Proof, and {uch as will abunda

ij this. It is the Confeffion of Style her felf.
NN + Lleft Mr. Hunt, and the other two Gentlemen at the
Ti Conftable’s houfe, where Style was, upon Bufinefs of
nf further Examination, where fhe enlarged upon the
‘its Confeffion fhe had before begun to make, and declared
and two other times after in the


351


I fhall therefore proceed to


vtly ftrengthen


vl 5. Exam. WO Lizaberh Styles her Confeflion of her

Witchcrafts, Faz 26. and 30. and Feb,
re Rob. Hunt E{q, She then confeffed,
(nj that the Devil about Ten years fince appeared to her


lin the Shape of a handfome Man, and after of a black


ill Dog. That he promifed her Money, and that the
il fhould live gallantly, and have the Pleafure of the
e (lil! World for twelve years, if fhe would with her Blood
wi@fign his Paper, which was to give her Soul to him, and
in@obferve his Laws, and that he might fuck her Blood.

i@This after Four Sollicitations, the Examinant promifed
(him to do. Upon which he prickt the fourth Finger of
(@jher right hand, between the middle and upper Joynt
«iQwhere the Sign at the Examination remained) and
-\iawith a Drop or two of her Blood, the figned the Paper
iiwith an [ O.7] Upon this the Devil gave her Sixpence,
-/\and vanifhed with the Paper.


y()) That fince he hath appeared to her in the Shape of a


j


Man, and did fo on Wednefday feven-night paft, but
(Mmore ufually he appears in the Likenefs of a Dog, and
Cat, and a Fly like a Millar, in which laft he ufually
‘waalucks in the Poll-about four of the Clock in the Mor-


fining, and did fo Fan, 27. and that it ufually is Pain to


“fier to be fo fuckt.


That


-F
7, ULI A /


352 The €olle€tioit

That when fhe hath a defire to do harm, the calfs |
the Spirit by the name of Robin, to whom when he ap-
peareth, fhe ufeth thefe words, O Sathan, give me my
parpofe. Shethen tells him what fhe would have done.
And that he fhould fo appear to her, was part of her
Contract with him. be 7 |

That about a Month ago he appearing, fhe defired
him to torment one Elizabeth Hill; and. to thruft Thorns
into her Flefh, which he promifed to do, and the next
time he appeared, he told her he had done it.

That a little above a Month fince this Examinant;
Alice Due, Anne Bifhop and Mary Penny , met about:
Nine of the Clock in the Night, in the Common near 4,
Trifter Gate , where they met a Man in black Cloths:
witha little Band, to whom they did Courtefie and due},
obfervance, andthe Examinant verily believes that this
was the Devil: At that time Alice Duke brought a Pi-
éturein Wax, which was for Elizabeth Hill, The Man}
in black took it in his Arms, anointed its Fore-head,,
and faid, I baptize thee with this Oyl, and ufed fome:
other words. te was Godfather , and the Examinant@,


and Anne Bifhop Godmothers. ‘They called it Elizaberhq


or Befs. Then the Man in Black, this Examinant, 4zaeq-
Bifhop, and Alice Duke {tuck Thorns into feveral places)
of the Neck, Hand-Wrifts, Fingers, and other parts;
ofthe faid Picture. After whichthey had Wine, Cakes@.”

and Roft Meat (all brought by the Man in black) which >"


they did eat and drink. They danced and were merry,jg:


were bodily there, and in their Cloths.
She further faich, that the fame perfons met again, at;
ar near the fame place about a Month fince, when Azne'


Bifhop brought a Picture in Wax, which was Baptized§™ |


Fobn, in like manner asthe other was, the Man in black,‘
was Godfather,and Alice Duke, and thts Examinant God=4 1"
motlicrs. As foon as it was Baptized, Anne Bifhop {tuck a"
two Thorns into the Arms of the Picture, which was for $l
one Robert Newman's Child of Wincaunton. After they hadi”

eaten, drank, danced,.and made merry, they departed. Mi


T hati’


| of Relations.’
jog) Lihat fhe with Anne Bifhop, and Alice Duke, met at
, 4 another time in the Night, ina ground near Afarnbul,
.,() Where alfo mét feveral other perfons. The Devil then
iff alfo there in the former fhape, Baptized a Picture by
athe name of Azne or Rachel Hatcher. The Picture one
7 -Durnford’s Wife brought, and ftuck Thornsin it. Then
»,,. they allo. made merry with Wine and Cakes, and fo de-
9} parted, ys : | k
‘|. She faith, before they are carried to their meetings,
i they anoint their Foreheads, and Hand-Wrifts, with an
_§-Oyl the. Spirit briogs them. (which. fmells raw) and
~§ then they are carried ina very. fhort time, ofing thefé
~ | Words as they pafs, Thout, tout a tour, tour, throughout
4nd about. And when they go off from their Meetings,
“they fay, Rentum Tormentum. | :
') . That at their firft. meeting, the Man in black bids
“them welcome, and they all make low obeyfance to him,
and he delivers fome Wax Candles like littlé Torches,
“which they give back again at parting. When they anoint
\“tthemfelves, they ufe along form of words, and when
“they ftick in Thorns into the Picturé of any they would
"torment, they fay, 4 Pox on thee, Tle fpitethee. ..
i") That at every meeting before the Spirit vanifheth
‘)*faway, he appoints the next meeting place and time, and
}"at his departure there is a foul fmell. At their meet-
“dling they have ufually Wine or good Beer, Cakes, Meat
"Gor the like., They eat and drink really when they meet
tin their Bodies, dance alfo and have Mafick. The Man
jin black fits at the higher end, and Anne Bifhop ufually
wG@next him. He ufeth fome words before meat, and none
oa his Voice is audible, but very low. :
yi]. That they are carried fometimes in their Bodies and
jiitheir. Cloths, fometimes without, and asthe Examinant
ilithinks their Bodies are fometimes left behind. When
only their. Spirits are prefent, yet they know one ano-
sigither. .
ei]. When they would bewitch Man, Woman or Child,
qtithey. do it fometimes by a 3 made in Wax, a
te LAE


tft!
| Jo


354 The Collestion


the Devil formally Baptizeth. Sometimes they have an
Apple, Difh, Spoon, or other thing from their evil Spis
rit, which they give the party to whom they would do
harm. Upon which they have power to hurt the pers
fon that eats or receives it. Sometimes they have power
to do mifchief by atouch or curfe, by thefe they can mif-
chief Cattle, and by curfing without touching ; but nei.
ther without the Devils leave.

That fhe hath been at feveral general meetings in the:
night at High Common, and a Common near Aforcombe,
ata place near Afarabull , and at other places where
have met Sohn Combes, John Vining, Richard Dickes,
Thomas Bofter or Bolfter, Thomas Danning, Fames Bufhi
a lame Man, Rachel King, Richard Lannen, a Woman
called Durnford, Alice Duke, Anne Bifhop, Mary Penn
and. Chriftopber Ellen , all which did obeyfance to the
Man in black, who was at every one of their meet-
ings. Ufually they have at them fome Picture Bap-
tized.

The Man in black, fometimes plays on a Pipe on
Cittern, and the Company dance. At laft the Devil
vanifheth, and all are carried to their feveral homes in
fhort{pace. At their parting they fay [4 Boy ! merry
meet, merry part. | :

That the reafon why fhe caufed Elizabeth Hill to be
the more tormented was, becaufe her Father had faid.
fhe was a Witch. That fhe has feen Alice Duke’s Fami-
liar fuck her, in the fhape of a Cat , and dune Bifhop
fuck her in the fhape of a Rat.

That the never heard the name of God or Jefus Chrifl
mentionedat any of their meetings. |

That Anne Bifhop, about five years and a half fincey
did bring a Picture in Wax to their meeting , whichi§ }};
was Baptized by the Manin black, and called Peter. I0§i »
was for Robert Newmans Child at Wincaunton. i

That fome two years ago, fhe gave two Apples tags,


Agnes Vining, late Wife of Richard Vining, and that),


fhe had one of the Apples from the Deyil, who them,
: appearedif


| of Relations. 3 55


‘it appeared. to her and told, That Apple would do Vining’
: i Wife's bufine fs.


Taken in the prefence of feveral grave and
Orthodox Divines before me


Robert Hunt?


ii 6. Exam. Illiam Parfons Rector of Stoke Triftery
V Examined Feb. 7. 1664. before. Rob.
wet it a Hunt, Efg, concerning Elizabeth Style?s Confeflion, faith,
| That he heard Style before the Juftice of Peace, at the
Hi ill time of her Examination confefs, as fhe hath done alfo
Voy to. the Examinant feveral times fince, that fhe was in
«ps Covenant with the Devil, that fhehad fi gned it. with her
yt Blood, that fhe had been with the Devil at feveral meet-
if Ings in the night, that at one time of thofe meetings,
fy there was brought a Picture in blackifh Wax, which
" fthe Devil in the. fhape of a Man in blackifh Cloths, did
y@ Baptize by the name of Eliz. Hill, that the did ftick in
wi one Thorn into the Hand-Wrifts of the Picture, that
ult Alice Duke {tuck Thorns into the fame, and that Anne
MN Bifhop and Mary Penny were prefent at that meetin g with
ithe Devil.


f


j Taken upon Oath before me


| Robert Hunt,
Sub{cribed,


William Parfons Rector of Stoke Trier.


“~~ This Confeflion of Styles was free and unforced, with- Hint
out any torturing or watching, drawn from her by a i
i oer Examination , meeting with the Convictions of 1 |

ja guilty Confcience. She confeffeth, that fhe defired ea
| Hehe Devil to torment Eliz. Hill, by thrufting Thorns wo

‘into her Flefh, which he promifed, and faid he had done re

Z it. Te


|


Fs
‘
a:
Ps
e
ey
Ve
*
ie
se
‘a
3
He
le
ia
Cz
ee
Se


356 The Colleétion


it. That a Picture was Baptized for her the faid Elizas
beth, and that fhe, thé Familiar, and Alice Duke, ftuck
Thorns into feveral places of the Neck, Hand-Writts,
Fingers, and other parts thereof, which exactly agrees
with the ftrange effects related, concerning the torments
the Child fuffered ; and this mifchief fhe confeffeth the
did, becaufe her Father faid fhe was a Witch. She con-


feffeth fhe gave two Apples to Vining’s Wife, one of


awhich fhe had from the Devil, who faid it would do
the bufinefs,. which futes alfo with the Teftimony of Vé-
ning concerning his Wife.

She confeffeth further, That the Devil ufeth to fuck
her in the Poll, about four a Clock in the Morning, in
the Form of a Fly like a Millar, concerning which, let
us hear Teftimony (the other particulars of her Confef>
fion we fhall confider as occafion offers. )


4. Exam. Ichelas Lambert Examined again Fan. 26,

1664. before Rob. Hunt, Efq, concerns
ing what happened after Style’s Confeflion, teftifyeth,
That Eliz. Style having been Examined before the Ju-
ftice, made her Confeflion, and committed to the Off-


cer, the Juftice required this Examinant, Wiliam Thick,


and William Read of Bayford to watch her, which they


did; and this Informant fitting near Style by the Fire,,


and reading in the Prattice of Piety, about Three of the
Clock in the Morning, there came from her Head a gli-
ftering bright Fly, about an Inch in length, which
pitched at firft in the Chimney, and then-vanifhed. In


lefs than a quarter of an hour after, there appeared two’ f!!tu


Flies. more of a lefs fize, and another colour, which


feemed to ftrike at the Examinant’s hand, in which he ft


held his Book, but miffed it, the one going over, the
other under at the fame time. He looking ftedfaftly
then on Style, perceived her Countenance to change, and


"1
¥
vy


tat


i lie
De


it


in)


to become very black and gaftly, the Fire alfo at the Bim


fame time changing its colour; whereupon the Examt-
Rant,, Thick and Read conceiving that her Familiar was
thea


of Relations. 357
‘iufh then about her, looked to her Poll, and feeing her Hair
lig] thake very ftrangely, took it up, and thena Fly like a
Vth) great Millar flew out from the place, and pitched on the
vw] Table-board, and then vanifhed away. Upon this the
imei} Examinant, and the other two perfons looking again in
“ih Style’s Poll, found it very red, and like raw Beef. The
eco? Examinant aske her what it was that went out of her


ie @] Poll, fhe faid it was a Butterfly, and askt them why -


wd) they had not caught it. Lambert faid, they could not.

ij 1 think fo too, anfwered fhe. A little while after, the
{Informant and the others looking again into her Poll,

(uid found the place to be of its former colour. The Exa-

» (fl Diinant demanding again what the Fiy was, fhe confefled

4, at was her Familiar, and that fhe felt it tickle in her Poll,

jy and that was the ufual time when her Familiar came to
9 her.


Taken upon Oath before me
Robert Hunt,


Unto. Exam. | aah Torwoed of Bayford, Examined Feb. 7:
i 1664. before Robert Hunt, Efq; concern-
‘ang the mark found about Eliz. Style after her Confeflion,
iiepofeth, That fhe together with Catherine White,
“(i Atary Day, Mary Bolfter, and Bridger Prankard, dida
_jmlittle after Chriffmas latt, fearch Eliz. Style, and that in
“.lsher Poll they found a little rifing which felt hard like a
' @Kernel of Beef, whereupon they fufpecting it to be an
“ql mark, thruft a Pin into it, and having drawn it out,
", athruft it in again the fecond time, leaving it fticking in
athe flefh for fome time, that the other Women might
jl WJalfo fee it. Notwithftanding which, Style did neither
lat the firft or fecond time make the leaft fhew that fhe
"Welt any thing. But after, when the Conftable told her
ti the would thruft ina Pin to the place, and madea fhew
"Jas if he did, O Lord, faid fhe, do you prick me, whenag

Hino. one then touched her.
| eee ie nei the


i
i
j


358 The Collection


The Examinant further faith , that Style hath fincé
confeffed to her, that her Familiar did ufe to fuck her in


the place mentioned, in the fhape of a great Millar, or
Butterfly.


Catherine White, Mary Day,Mary Bolfter, and Bridget
Prankard, do fay, that the abovefaid Examination of
Eliz. Torwood. is truth. |


Taken upon Oath before me


Rob. Hunt.


RET AT. IV.


Which is the Examination and Confeffion of Alice Duke,
alas Manning (another Witch of Style’s Knot) of Win-


caunton , 7” the County of Somerfet, Widow, takent


Jan. 27. and Feb. 2,7, 10, 21. An. 1664, before Ro-
bert Hunt E/q;.


rH E Examinant faith, That when fhe lived with"!


Anne Bifhop of Wincaunton,about Eleven or Twelve
years ago, Anne Bifhop perfwaded her to go with her
into the Church-yard in the Night-time, and being come!
thither, to go backward round the Church, which they)
did three times. In their firft round, they met a Man!
in black Cloths, who went round the fecond time with


them, and then they met a thing in the fhape of a great;


black Toad, which leapt up againft the Examinant’s:
Apron. Intheir third round they met fomewhat in the


fhape of a Rat, which vanifhed away. After this theq


Examinant and Anne Bifbop went home, but before


Anne Bifhop went off, the Man in black faid fomewhati


to her foftly, which the Informant could not hear.


A few days after, Ann Bifhop {peaking about theiri


going round the Church, told the Examinant, that
now fhe might have he


wilh


a —a


=> =


—4 ——


ae =
= B


=< =


——SS s — jy try


| of Relations. 259
il wifh for. And fhortly after, the Devi! appeared to
‘hei Ber in the: fhape of a Man, promifing that fhe fhould
want nothing, and that if fhe curfed any thing with
1 A Pox take it, fhe fhould have her Purpofe, in cafe fhe
vid would give her Soul to him, fuffer him to fuck her
i & Blood, keep his Secrets, and be his Inftrument to do
ifuch Mifchief as he would fet her about. All! which,
j upon his fecond appearing to her, fhe yielded to, and
(the Devil having prickt the fourth Finger of her right
{hand between the middle and upper Joynt (where the
mil Mark is yet to befeen) gave her a Pen, with which fhe
i made a Crofs or Mark with her Blood on Paper or
~~ Parchment, -that the Devil offered her for the Con-
ifirmatiop of the Agreement, which was done in the
iprefence of Axx Bifhop. And as foon as the Exami-
ug nant had figned it, the Devil gave her Sixpence, and
i. Went away with the Paper or Parchment. |
"I Forther fhe confeffeth, That fhe had been at feveral
‘, Meetings in Lie Common, and other Piaces in the
TNight, andthat her Forehead being firft anointed with
a Feather dipt in Oyl, fhe hath been fuddenly carriec ££
éto the Place of their Meeting. That about five or he
ug fix Weeks fince (or more) fhe met in the faid Com- a
"mon in the Night, where were prefent Ayn Bifhop, + |i
WY Atary Penny of Wincaunton, Elizabeth Style of Bayford, ie
‘and a Man in black Cloaths with a little Band, whom lg
I" fhe fappofeth to have been the Devil. At the meet- eg
(il ing there was a Picture in Wax, which the Man in
if black took in his Arms, and having anointed its Fore-
§ head with a little greenifh Oyl, and ufing a few Words,
pili baptized it by the Name of Elizabeth or Befs Hill, for
1" the Daughter of Richard Hill. Then the Devil, this
iS Examinant, Ann’ Bifhop, and Elizabeth Style fuck
] Thorns in the Neck, Head, Hand-wrifts, Fingers and
iM other parts of the Picture, faying, 4 Pox ou thee, I’le "
 fpite thee. This done, all fate down, a white Cloath ae
"being fpread on the Ground, and did drink Wine, and | |
eat Cakes and Meat. After all was ended, the Man in
| L 4 black


260 rhe Colleftion


black vanifhed, leaving an ugly Smell at patting. The
reft were on a fudden conveyed to their Homes. -

On Monday night after Chriftmas day laft, fhe met
the fame Company again, near about the fame Place,
and then dyn Bifhop (who was there ina green Apron,
a French Waftcoat and a red Petticoat) brought in her
Apron a Picture in blackifh Wax, which the Devil
baptized as before, by the Name of ohn Newman, for
the fon of Rob. Newman of Wincaunton, and then the
Devil firft, after Ann Bifhop-and this Examinant thruft
in Thorns into the Picture, Aan Bifbop fticking, in
two Thorns into the Arms of it. ~The Picture Ana
Bifbop carried away withher. They wereall there pre-
fent in their Cloaths, and the Devil in the thape of a
Man in black.

_ About five Years and a half fince, the fame Perfons
were at the Baptizing of another Image, by the Name
of Peter Newman, another Son of Robert Newman, both
which are fince dead, and then Ayn Bifhop defired the


Examinant to joyn with her in the Bewitching of Peter


:


and Fohn Newman,’
__ At another time fhe was carried to a Meeting in the
Night, toa green Place near Adarnbull as fhe was then
told, where were prefent Aun Bifhop, Eliz. Style, Mary
Penny, and fome unknown to her. | Then alfo an I.
mage in Wax was baptized by the Devil, inthe fore-
related Manner, by the Name of _4zn or Rachel Hatcher
one of Marnhuil, as the was then informed, After the
Ceremony was ended they had Wine, Cakes, ec, |

_ She likewife confeffeth, that fhe was at another fuch
Meeting, where twelve Perfons were prefent, many of
whom were unknown to her, but fhe took notice of one
lame Man in blackith Hair among them, and of the Dez |


’ a


vil as before. 7


‘She faith that after their Meetings, they all make |
very low Obeyfances to the Devil, who appears in
black Cloaths and a little Band. . He bids them wel- |
come at their coming, and brings. Wine or Beer,
A eR Sa Cs EO i er


li? rit which fmells raw.


of Relations.

Cakes, Meat, or the like. He fits at the higher End,
and ufually Ann Bifhop fits next him. They eat, drink,
dance, and have Mufick. At their parting they ufe
to fay, Merry meet merry part, and that before they
are carried to their Meetings, their Foreheads are a-
nointed with greenifh Oy! that they have from the Spi-
They for the moft part are
carried in the Air. As they pafs, they fay, Thout,
tout a tout, tout, throughout aud about. Pafling back
they fay, Rentum Tormentum, and another word which
fhe doth not remember.

She confeffeth that her Familiar doth commonly fack
her right Breaft abont feven at-night, in the fhape of
a little Cat of a dunnifh Colour, which is as fmooth as
a Want, and when fhe is fuckt, fhe is in a kind of a
Trance. tee


That the hurt Thomas Garret?s Cows, becaufe he re-


fufed to write a Petition for her.

That fhe hurt Thomas Conway, by putting a Dihh
into his Hand, which Difh fhe had from the Devil,
fhe gave it him to give his Daughter for good han-
fel.

That fhe hurt Dororhy the Wife of George Vining,
by giving an Iron flate to put into her {téeling Box,

That being angry with Edith Wats, the Daughter
of Edmond Watts for treading on her Foot, fhe curfed
Edith with a Pox: on you, and after touched her, which
hath done the faid Edith much harm, for which fhe is
forry. |

That being provoked by Swanton’s firlt Wife, fhe
did before her Death curfe her with a Pox on you, be-
lieves fhe did thereby hurt her, but denies fhe did be-
witch Mr. Swanton’s Cattle.

She faith, That wken the Devil doth any thing for
her, the calls for him by the Name of Kobiz, upon
which he appears, and when in the fhape of a Man, fhe
can hear him fpeak, but his Voice is very low. He
promifed her when fhe made her Contract with him,


that


Lamas ae
ar PN


nga xeGnd


5 ae ok eStore ls
et SA


362 The Collection


that fhe fhould want nothing, but ever fince fhe hath


wanted all things.
Taken before me


Rob. Hunt.


a, Exam. i ie 4 Conway of Wincaunton, in the


County of Somerfer, Examined Feb, 12.
1664. before Robert Hunt Efquire, concerning Alice
Duke, informeth, That about twelve Months fince Alice
Duke alias Manning , brought a little Pewter Difh to
this informant, and told him it was good hanfel for his
Daughter. The Examinant willed the faid Alice to
carry it to her, fhe being. within by the Fire, but fhe
forced the Difh into his Hand and went away. Short-
ly after he was taken extreamly illinall his Limbs. Of
which llnefs the Phyficians, whom he applied himfelf
to, could give no Account. When fhe went from him,
fhe was very angry and muttered much, becaufe he
would not fign a Petition on her behalf: fhe hath confef-
fedto him fince that fhe had the Difh from the Devil,
and gave it him on purpofe to hurt him. He hath been,
and is fince in great ‘Torment, and much weakened and
wafted in his Body, which he imputes to the evil Practi-
ces of Alice Duke. |


Taken upon Oath before me
Rob. Hunt.


A Ary the Wife of Tho. Conway, Exa-

LV. mined Atarch 6. 1664. before Rob.

Hunt Efg;, concerning Alice Duke, faith, That her
Husband Tho. Conway abouta year ago, delivered hera
little Pewter Difh, telling her he had it from Alice Duke
for good hanfel for his Daughter, who had lately lain
in. In this Difh the warmed a little Deer-fewet and
water, anointing her Daughter’s- Nipple with it,

_» which


4


ca —T
= :


a>


—s> <


= ——S


=


“—


>


of Relations.


4 which put her to extream Pain. Upon which fufpecting

§ harm from the Difh, fhe put it into the Fire, which

F then prefently vanithed, and nothing of it could after-

wards be found. After, when fhe anointed her Daugh-

¢ter’s Nipples with the fame Deer-fewet and Rofe-wa-

} ter, warmed ina Spoon, fhe complained not of ary Pain.

: She further faith, That her Husband after he had re-

ceived the Dith from the Hands of Alice Duke , was

“§ taken ill in all his Limbs, and held for a long time in
“la very ftrange Manner.


Ts


Taken upon Oath before me
Rob. Hunt.


1 3. Exam. YC Dward Watts of Wincaunton in the County 1)
of Somerfet, Examined Afar. 6. 1664.

iil before Rob Hunt Efg;, concerning Alice Duke, faith, |
That he hath a Child called Edith, about ten years of
Age, who for the fpace of half a year hath languifhed
and pined away, and that fhe told him that treading
one day on the Toe of Alice Duke, fhe in great anger ae
curfed her with a Pox on thee, and that from that time
the Child began to be ill and to pine away, which fhe a
hath done ever fince. 6


a


sr aia SRS Se


iat senee i
re ee Le


eae SSS a et


Taken upon Oath before me


Rob. Hunt.


“a pe i SUSE AAR TE - 2 ee


| Advertifement. |


} » Efid des the plain Agreement betwixt the Witneffes, and
mM the Witches own “Confelfion, at ge) be worth the ta-
i king notice here, how well her Confeffion of having her

| Familiar fuck, her in the fhape of a Cat, agrees “with
|


ih}


364 The Collection


Eliz. Style’s Gonfeffion , that fhe had feen Alice Duke?s
Familiar fuck, ber in that (hape. As alfo how the bewitch-
ing of Edward Watts Child by Alice Duke, her [aying,
a Pox on her, agrees with the promife of the Devil to her,
which 1s exprefly, That if fhe curfed any thing witha
Pox take it, fhe fhould have her purpofe. She alfo tefti-
fying of the Baptizing the Image of Eliz. Hill, and of thofe
forms of words, Thout, tout a tout, avd Rentum Tor-
mentum , at their going to their meetings and departing,
plainly fhews, that thefe are not tranfatted in dreams but in
reality. Tbe Devil alfo, asin other ftories, leaving an ill
fmell bebind him, feems to imply the reality of the bufinefs,
thofe afcititcous particles he held together in his vifible vehi-
cle, being loofened at his vani(bing, and fo offending the no-
firils by their floating and diffufing themfelves in the open
Air.


RELAT. V.


Which is the Examination and Confeffion of Chriftian
Green, aged about thirty three years, Wife of Robert
Green of Brewham, 22 the County of Somerfet, taken
before Robert Hunt, E/g, Alarch 2. 1664. |


His Examinant faith, That about a year and a half
fince (fhe being in great poverty) one Catherine
Green of Brewham, told her, that if fhe would the might
be in a better condition, and then perfwaded her to
make a Covenant with the Devi]. Being afterwards ta-
gether in one Mr. Huffey’s Ground in Brewham Forel,
about Noon, Catherine called for the Devil, who ap-
peared in the fhape of a Manin blackifh Cloths, and
{aid fomewhat to Catherine which Chriftian could not
hear. After which the Devil (as fhe conceived him)
told the Examinant, that fhe fhould want neither Cloths,
Victual, nor Money , if fhe wouid give her Body and
soul to him, keep his Secrets, and fuffer him to fuck
| | her


“} her once intwent
“Q and Catherine Gy
“7 the Man in black
““@ hand; between
'@ fign yet remains,
“his Finger ,
""§ which fhe aft
OMG fpake again j
i ving a f{mell of Brimfton
| Since that time the De
‘0/9 nfually fuck her left Breaft
("ll Morning in the likenefs o
i] did fo on Wednefday Morning laft. She
‘(ful to her, and that


iv tll ds fuckt.


She faith alfo, that Catharine Green
} Agar of Brewham, have told her,


f an Ledg-ho


of Relations.


y four hours, which at laft; upon his
een’s perfwalion, fhe yielded to ; then
prickt the fourth Finger of her Right-
the middle and upper Joints, where the
and took two drops of her blood on
giving her four-pence-half-
er bought Bread
Nn private wi


in Brewham.


365


penny, with


Then he


th Catherine and vanifhed, lea-
e behind.
vil (the faith) hath and doth
about five of the Clock in the
, bending, and
faith it is pain-
fhe is ufually in atrance when fhe


» and Mar caret
that they are in Co-


/venant with the Devil, and confefleth, that the hath


§ been at {everal meetin


gsin the Night at Brewham Com:


imon, and in a Ground of Mr. Huffey’s , that the hath


lj there met with Catharine
Oil three or four times with
i) That in all thofe meetin
jin the :fhape of a Man i
coming he bids them welcome


low.


| That at a Meetin
lfince , at or near the former place,

ie iibrought thither an Image in Wax for E!

(it of Andrew Cornifh of Brewham


tfhape of a


(jit) Mthis Examinan


yilfince the Baptizing of the Picture hath ben taken and


Man in black Cloths did. Ba
w@iftuck a Thorn into its Head ;
; its Stomach,
(oMfurther faith,


Greenand Margaret Agar, and
Mary Warberton of Brewham .
gs the Devil hath been prefent


n black Cloths. At their firft


, but always {peaks very


g about three Weeks or a Month
Margaret Agar
izabeth the Wife
, and the Devil in the
ptizeit, and after


that Azar ftuck one into


and Catharine Green one into its fide. She


that before this time, Avar {aid to her


t, that fhe wo


i miicontinues very ill.
(i She faith, that three or four days before Fof. Falbot


i


uld hurt Eliz. Cornifh, who


of


366 The Colletion


of Brewham died, A4argaret Agar told her, that fhe
would rid him out of the World, becaufe he being O-
verfeer of the Poor , he made her Children go to Ser-
vice, and refufed to give them fuch good Cloths as fhe
defired. And fince the Death of Talbot, the confefled
to the Examinant, that fhe had bewitcht him to Death.
He died about a year fince, was taken ill on Friday, and
died about Weduefday after.

That her Mother-in-Law Catharine Green, about five
or fix years ago was taken ina ftrange manner. One
day one Eye and Cheek did {well, another day another,
and fo fhe continued in great pain, till fhe died. Upon
her death fhe feveral times faid, in the hearing of the
Examinant, that her Sifter-in-Law Catharine Green had
bewitched her, and the Examinant believes, that fhe bes
witcht her to. Death,

That a little before Afichaelmas laft, the faid Catharine
curfed the Horfes of Rob. Walter of Brewham, faying, A |
Murrain on them Horfes to Death. Upon which the |
Horfes being three, all died.


Taken before me


Rob. Hunt.


= a rr renee
aaa -


RELAT. VL


Containing further Teftimonies of the villainous feats of that
rampant Hagg Margaret Agar of Brewham, in rhe)
County of Somerfet.


1, Exam. Wo Lizabeth Falbot of Brewham, Examined}, .
~y March 7.1664. before Robert Hunt, E1q3
faith, That about three Weeks before her Father fo/..
Talbot died, Margaret Agars fell out with him, becaufe4
he beingOverfeer for the Poor,did require Agars Daugh-4
ter to goto Service, and faid to him, that he was og 4
Le) ¥


of Relations. 367
_. OF his living, but {wore by the Blood of the Lord, that
*@ he fhould not long enjoy it. Within three Weeks of

"| which he was fuddenly taken in his Body as if he had been
78 itabb’d with Daggers , and fo continued four or five
““§ days in great pain, and then died.

| Rob. Hunt.


_}2.Exam. JO/, Smith of Brewham, Husbandman, Exa-
" J mined March 15. 1664. before Rob. Hunt
i Sl] Efq; faith, That fome few days before Fof. Talbot died,
WG he heard Afargaret Agar rail very much at him, becaufe
NG he had caufed her Daughter to go to Service, and faid,
i@that he fhould not keep his living, but be drawn out
‘li upon four Mens fhoulders. That fhe fhould tread upon
il his Jaws, and fee the grafs over his head, which fhe
{wore by the Blood of the Lord.


Taken upon Oath before


Rob. Aune.


13. Exam. Ary the Wife of William Smith of Brew-
M ham, Examined March 8, 1664. before

{il Rob. Hunt Efq; faith, That about two years fince ALzr-
Rgarct Agar came to her and called her Whore, adding,
“A Plague take you for an old Whore, 1 fhall live to fee
athee rot on the Earth before die, and thy Cows fhali
Ifall and die at my feet. A fhort time after which, fhe
ifhad three Cows that died. very {trangely, and two of
\iathem at the door of Margaret Agar. And ever fince
dithe Examinant hath confumed and pined away, her Bo-
}dy and her Bowels rotting, and fhe verily believes, that
her Cattle and her felf were bewitcht by Agar :


e


Taken upon Oath before


Rob. lant.


368 The Colleétion


4. Exam. C 4b Green alias Cornifh of Brewham,
i $ _s Widow, Examined Jay 16. 1665. be-
fore Rob. Hunt Efq; faith, That on Friday in the Even-


ing, in the beginning of AZarch lal, Adargaret Agar | A


came to her, and was earneft fhe fhould go with her to
a Ground called Huffeys-keap, which fhe did, and being
come thither they faw a little Man in black Cloths, with
a little Band. As foonas they came to. him, Margaret
Agar took out of her Lapa little Picture in blackifh
Wax, which fhe delivered to the Man in black, who
ftuck a Thorn into the Crown of the Picture, and then
delivered it back to Agar.. Upon which fhe ftuck a
Thorn towards the heart of the Picture, curfing, and
faying, A Plague on you, which fhe told the Examinant
was done to hurt Eliz. Cornifh, who as fhe hath been
told, hath been very ill ever fince that time.

That a little above a year fince’ of: Talbot, late of
Brewham, being Overfeer for the Poor, did caufe two
of Agar’s Children to go to Service. Upon which fhe
was very angry, and faid in the Examinant’s hearing, a.
few days before he fell fick and died, that fhe had trod
upon the Jaws of three of her Enemies , and that fhe
fhould fhortly fee Talbot rot and tread on his Jaws. And J)
when this Examinant defired her not to hurt Talbot, they,"
{wore by the Blood. of'the Lord,: fhe would ‘confound jj °~
him if fhe could. The day before he died, fhe faid to»
the Examinant, Gods wounds, I'll go and fee him, for


I fhali never fee him more; and the next day Talbot 4, lM


died. | |

That the heard Margaret Agar curfe Mary Smith, and}
fay, the fhould live to fee her and her Cattle fall and rot } m
before her face. i


Taken upon Oath before


Rob. Huntc§


5. Exam. |


ie ae ea


369


viol §- Exam. M2 Green of Brewham, fingle Woman,
| Examined June 3, 1665. before Rob.
Ay) #dunt, Efg; faith, That about a Month before ¥o/. Tal-
_ 4, Got late of Brewham died, Adargaret Agar fell out with
‘jeut him about the putting out of her Child to Service. After
«4 that fhe faw a Picture in Clay or Wax in the hands of
<a Agar, which fhe faid was for Zatbor, the Pictung the faw
4 herdeliver in Redmore, to the Fiend in the fhape of a
a] Man in black, about an hour in the Night, who ftucka
_ | Y horn in or near the Heart of it, Agar ftuck another
i. in the Breaft, and Catharine Green, Alice Green, Mary
1, 4 Warberton, Henry Walter , and Chriffian Green, all of
| a Brewham, were then and there prefent, and did all {tick
“| ‘Thorns into the Picture. “
‘vo. At that time Catherine Green {pake to Avar not to a
“I hurt Talbot, becaufe fhe received fomewhat from him a
i often times, ‘but Agar replied, by the Lord’s Blood fhe a
\'} would confound him, or words tothat Purpofe. Ve
“ii, {hata little before Talboe was taken fick, Agar be-
“ing in the Houfe where the Examinant lived, {wore
% that fhe fhould ere long tread upon his Jaws. And that i
Hi) Af Talbot made her Daughter to go to Service for a year, i
WG yetif fhecame home ina quarter it would be time e- |
i" nough to fee him carried out upon four Mens fhoulders,
wl and to tread upon his Jaws. |
‘) That onthe day Talbot dyed, the heard Agar {wear
sii that fhe had now plagued Talbot, and that being in
it | Company with her fome time before, and feeing a dead
00] Horfe of Talbor?s drawn along by another of his Horfes,
afhe {wore that that Horfe fhould be alfo drawn out to
(ii, “| Morrow, and the next day fhe faw the well Horfe alfo
|i] drawn out dead.
| That above a Month before Afargaret Agar was fent
(to Gaol, fhe faw her, Henry Walter, Catherine Green,
| WFoan Syms, Chriftian Green, Mary Warberton, and o- fa
Hithers, meet at a place called Huffey’s-knap in the Foreft ig
, (fin the Night time, where met them the Fiend in the Vie
i Aa fhape Way


of Relations.


=


<2
—_—


370 The Collection


fhape of a little Manin black Cloths, with a little Band,
to him all made obeyfances, and at that time a: Picture
in Wax or Clay was delivered by Agar to the Man in
black, who ftuck a Thorn into the Crownof it, dar-
garet Agar one towards the Brealt, Catharine Green in
the fide; after which Agar threw down the Picture, and
faid, there is Corwi(b’s Picture witha Murrain to it, or
Plague on it. And that at both the meetings there was
a noifom fmell of Brimftone.

That abeut two years fince in the Night there met in
the fame place dear, Henry Walter, Catharine Green,
Foan Syms, Alice Green, and Adary Warberton, ‘Then
alfo Margaret Agar delivered to the little Man in black
a Picture in Wax, into which he and Agar {tuck Thorns,
and Henry Walter thruft his Thumb into the fide of it.
Then they threw it down and faid, there is Dick Green’s
Picture with 2 Pox in’t. A fhort time after which Rich-
ard Green was taken illand died.

Further, fhe faith, That on Tharfday Night before
Whitfunday laft, about the fame place met Catharine®
Green, Alice Green, FoanSyms, Mary Warberton, Dinahy,
and Dorothy Warberton, and Henry Walter , and being:
met they called out Robin. Upon which inftantly ap-
peared alittié Man in black Cloths, to whom all made
obeyfance, and the litrle Man put his hand to his Hat,
faying, How do. ye? fpeal


LV

eaking low but dg. Then all
made. low obeyfances to him again. “That fhe hath feen
Margaret Clark.twice at the meetings, but fince AZargas
get Agar was fent to Prifon fhe never faw her there.


‘Taken before me


Rob. Hunt.


Adver-


of Relations.


Advertifemenr.


‘i PY Efore we pafs to other Relations, it will not be amifs
4 further to remark upon thefe taken out of the Examinas
VS taons of Afr, Hunt: From the poifoned Apples that Jane

‘Witt Brooks gave to Rich. Jones, and Eliz. Style to Agnes

{Vining , azd the poifoned Pewter-Difh that Alice Duke

WN puse tnt0 the bands of Tho. Conway, (which Difh and Ap-
n@ples they bad fromthe Devil) we may obferve in what a peo
Mienlear fenfe Witches and Wizzards are cated gaguarol, Ve-
lnefici and Venefice, Poyfoners. Not that they mifchieve
ini People ordinarily by natural. Poifons , as Arfenick. and the

ike, but rather by fome helifh malignancy infufed into i

inithings by the art and malice of the Devil, or by the freams A

iilef their own Body which the Devil fucks. For the hand of ah

i Jane Brooks ftroaking down Rich. Jones hes fide impreffed i

‘itljee pain thereon. Tae

b We may obferve alfo what an eximious Example of Mofes if

withes Mecaflephah (the word which he ufes in that Law, ie

iT hou fhalt not fuffer a Witch tolive) Margaret Agar i
Ps, and how unfitly fome Interpreters render Mecaflephim,
wiMalefici, from the great mifchief they do and delight in.

\hildad what a great credit this Agar is to J. Webiter and the

Weft of the Hagg-advocates, which would make them to be ee
Ayneer couzening Queans , or melanchalick, Fopps, that-had i

igipeothing to do with the Devil. Asif the Man in black, and i

» Welitele Band, were but fuch another as }.\Webtter, or any me
Wether Hagg-advocate, that in wagcery atted the part of the i
Devil in Hufley’s Knap, or any fuch like place of a Foreft, i
Wend fo after all, quickly and {uddenly recoiling behind a bufh, Hae |

wihina letting fy into the wind, the deluded Flaggs tookit for HH) i |
‘the vanifhing of the very Fiend, and his perfuming the Air ae
Meith the fmell of Brimftone. One that can refolve all the
Weats of the Hartummim of Egypt into tricks of °Le-

\“Merdemain, cannot he eafily delude the Company with

Nach a feat as this, the old Wives being thick of hearing,
Aa 2 and


C|
4


ii


272 The Collection


and carrying their Spectacles not on their nofes, but sn their
pockets ?

And laftly from the Devils covenanting with the Witches
for their Souls, it may be obferved , that the old Flaggs
dealing bona fide; and thinking they have Souls furviving


their Bodies, are better Philofopbers than the buffy Wits of”


our Age that deny diftinttion of Soul and Body. But if they
have not Cas thefe Huffers would bave it) and the Haggs
"think, fo themfelves, it is a pretty Paradox that thefe old’
F opps fhoald be able to out-wit the very Devil; who does not
in bartering for their Bodies and Souls buy a sO Neset
asthe Proverb is, but a poke without a Pig, But Lt rather’
believe, that thefe huffing Wits, as high as they are, may
learn one true point of Philofophy from thefe Haggs and their


Familiars, thefe evil Spirits certainly making thetr Bargainss


wifely enough in covenanting for the Witches Soul.. Which
claufe, if it were not expreft, the Soul were free from the
Familiars jurifdittion after death. Wherefore it ts no con-
remptible argument thefe evil Spirits covenanting for the Soul
of the Witch, that they know the Soul furvives the Body, and
therefore make their Bargain fure for the poffe/].on of it as
their Peculium after death. Otherwife, if the Soul weres
mortal they would tell the Witches fo, the more eafily to pre~
cipitate them into all wickedne{s, and make them more eager
by their miniftry to enjoy this prefent life. But this Dottrine
is inconfiftent with the form of bis Covenant, whereby they
are affured to him after death.


Rip A EVE


fi J
Oj) IM
ie Co
ho |


Ph


fe net
heal
lai q
Houle
ase
Bee
anit
Beet, {
hid:
Alnay
The
lotte\
bet
Athy
ane 19)
le Li
IK Nn
ae
Ua wit


ii
dl


Touching Florence Newton an Irifh Witch of Youghal '


taken out of her Tryal at the Affizes held for the County
of Corke, Septemb. 11. Ann. 1661.


Gj eas Florence Newton was committed to Youghall Pri®
fon, by the Mayor of the Town, Aarch 24. 166118) ,
for bewitching Mary Longdor, who gave Evidence),

againiig


of Relations. 373
wii) againit her at Cork, Affizes, as follows. Afary Longdon
_ it being {worn and examined what fhe could fay againft the
iit Laid Florence Newton for any practice of Witchcraft up-
‘Hw on her felf, and being bidden to look on the Prifoner,
‘wl Ther Countenance changed pale, and fhe was very fear-
Nii} fal to look towards her, but at laft fhe did. And being
im) askt whether fhe knew her, fhe faid fhe did, and witht
tig] She never had. Being askt how long the had known her,
il fhe faid for three or four years. And that at Chriftmas
jist Taft the faid Florence came to the Deponent, at the
visit Houle of Fohn Pyne in Youghall, where the Deponent was
‘vai a Servant ; and askt the Deponent to give her a piece of
, wt Beef out of the Powdering-Tub. And the Deponent
s(ivd anfwering her, that fhe could not giveaway herMafter’s
jnwit Beef, the faid Florence feemed to be very angry, and
i faid, thou hadft as good have given it me, and {o went
(nil away grumbling.
iwi - Lhat about a Week after, the Deponent being going
»wole CO fhe Water with a Pail of Clothon her head, fhe mer
i o@ her the faid Florence Newtor, who came full in her Face,
_/) and threw the Pail off her Head, and violently kift her,
wimg and faid, Adary, I pray thee, let thee and I be Friends,
for I bear thee no ill will, and! pray thee do thou bear
ame none, And that fhe the Deponent went afterwards
yi home, and that within a few days after, fhe faw a Wo-
,alman with a Vail over her Face, ftand by her Bed-fide,
fand one ftanding by her like a little old Man in filk
'Cloths, and that this Man which fhe took to bea Spirit,
~drew the Vail from off the Womans Face, and then fhe
knew it to be Goody Newton, and that the Spirit fpake
{to the Deponent, and would have had her promife him
yyitto follow his advice, and fhe fhou!d have all things af-

,mter her own heart, to which fhe fays fhe anfwered, That
*’ Gi fhe would have nothing to fay to him, for her truft was

llin the Lord.

4) ‘That within a Month after the faid Florence had kift
“ther, fhe this Deponent fell very ill of Fits or Trances,
*witwhich would tae her on the fudden, in that violence,

j


A 2 3 that


ey]


374 The Colleétion


that three or four Men'could not hold her. And in her
Fits fhe would often be taken with Vomitings ,’ and
would Vomit up Needles, Pins, Horfe-nails, Stubbs,
Wooll, and. Straw, and that very often. And being
asked whether fhe perceived at thefe times what fhe Vo-
mited ? fhe faid fhe did. For then fhe was not in fo
great diftraction as in other parts of her Fits fhe was.
And that a little before the firf beginning of her Fits,
feveral (and very many) fmall ftones would-fall upon
her as fhe went up and down, and would follow her
from place to place, and from one room to another,
and would hit her onthe head, fhoulders, and arms, and
fall to the ground and vanifh away. And that fhe and
feveral others would fee them both fall upon her, and
on the ground, but could never take them, fave only
fome few, which fhe and her Mafter caught in their
hands. Amongft which one that had a hole, in it fhe tied
(as fhe was advifed) with a Leather thong to her Purfe,
but if was vanifht immediately , though the Leather
continued tied on a faft Knot.

Thatin her Fits fhe often faw this Florence Newton,
and cryed out againft her for tormenting of her, for fhe
fays, that fhe would feveral times ftick Pins into her
Arms, and fome of them fo faft, that a Man muft pluck
three or four times to get out the Pin, and they were
{tuck betwixt the skin and the flefh. . Vat fometimes ;
fhe fhould be removed out of her Bed into another room,,
fometimes fhe fhould be carried to the top of the Houfe:
laid on a Board betwixt two Sollar Beams,fometimes put:
into a Cheft, fometimes under a parcel of. Wooll, fome-
times betwixt two Feather-beds on which fhe ufed tom
lie, and fometimes betwixt'the Bed and the Mar ‘in her
Matters Chamber in the day time. And being asked how)
fhe knew fhe was thus carried about and difpofed of, fee-.
ing in her Fits fhe was in a violent diftraction? fhe an!
fwered, fhe never knew. where fhe was, till they of the II
Family, and the Neighbours with them, would be ta-§ \
king her out of the places whither fhe was fo care t

andig


of Relations. 275


and removed. And being asked the reafon wherefore
fhe cryed out fo much againft the faid Florence Newton
ill inher Fits? fheanfwered, becaufe fhe faw her and felt
ici «= her torturing.
And being asked how fhe could think it was Florence
Newton that did her this prejudice? fhe faid, firft be-
caufe fhe threatned her, then becaufe after fhe had kift
her fhe fell into thefe Fits, and that fhe both faw and
felt her tormenting. And laftly, that whenthe People
of the Family, by advice of. the Neighbours, and con-
fent of the Mayor, had fent for Florence Newton to come
to the Deponent, fhe was always worfe when fhe was
brought unto her, and her Fits more violent than at ano-
ther timie. And that after the faid Florence was com-
mitted at Youghal, the Deponent was not troubled, but
was very well tilla little while after the faid Florence
was removed to Corke, and then the Deponent was as
illas ever before. Andthe Mayor of Youghal, one Mr.
Mayre, then fent to know whether the faid Florence
were bolted (as the Deponent was told) and finding
fhe was not, order was given to put her Bolts on her;
which being done, the Deponent faith fhe was well a-
gain, and fo hath continued ever fince. And being asked
whether fhe had fuch like Fits before the faid Florence
gave her the kifs, fhe faith fhe never had any, but be-
lieves that with that kifs fhe bewitcht her, and the ra-
ther becaufe fhe hath heard from Nicholas Pyne, and o-
thers, that the faid Florence had confefled as much,
This Mary Longdon having clofed up her Evidence,
Florence Newton peep’d at her as it were betwixt the
heads of the By-ftanders that interpofed betwixt her and ti
the faid dary, and lifting up both her hands together, a |
as they were manacled, caft them in an angry violent Hi
kind of motion (as was feen and obferved by I. Affon) ae
towards the faid Afary, as if fhe intended to {trike at her
if fhe could have reacht her, and faid, Now fhe is down.
Upon which the Maid fell fuddenly down tothe ground
like aftone, and fell into a moft violent fit, that all the wat
| Aa 4 People |


-— = $e 4


=


—= =
= ae =


———SS
ee ee ee es ee


376 The Colleétion


People that could come to lay hands on her could fcarce
hold her, fhe biting her own Arms, and fhreeking out
in a moft hideous manner, to the amazement of all the
Beholders. And continuing fo for about a quarter of
an hour (the faid Florence Newton fitting by her felf. all
that while pinching her own Hands and Arms, as was
{worn by fome that obferved her) the Maid was ordered
to be carried out of Court and taken into a Houfe.
Whence feveral Perfons after that, brought word, that
the Maid was in a Vomiting Fit, and they brought in
feveral crooked Pins, and Straws, and Wooll, in white
foam like f{pittle in great proportions. Whereupon the
Court having taken notice that the Maid had faid fhe
had been very well when the faid Florence was in Bolts,
and ill again when out ofthem, till they were again put
on ber, demanded of the Gaoler if fhe were in Bolts or
no, to which he faid {he was not, but onely manacled,
Upon which order was given to put on her Bo'ts, and
upon putting them on, fhe cryed out, fhe was killed,
She was undone, fhe was {poiled, why do you torment
methus? and fo continued complaining grievoufly for
half a quarter of.an hour, And then came ina Meflene
ger from the Maid, and informed the Court the Maid
was well, At which Florence immediately and chole-
rickly uttered thefe words, She zs zor well yet. And be-
ing demanded how fhe knew fhe was not well yet ? fhe
denied fhe said fo, though many in Court heard her fay
the words, and fhe faid, if fhe did, fhe knew not what
fhe faid, being old and difquieted, and diftracted with
her fufferings. But the Maid being reafonably well come
‘to her felf, was, before the Court knew any thing of it,
feat out of Town to Youghall, and fo was no further Ex-
amined by the Court. (Care a


The Fit of the Maid being urged by the Court with
all the Circymftances of it upon Florence, to have been
a continuance of her Devilifh practice, fhe denied it,
and likewife the motion of her hands, or the faying,
New [he is down, though the Court {aw the firft, and ihe
E ; Bye at A eave ON Sia ose e's cn 2 wor S


of Relations. 377


‘tit words were fworn by one Roger Moor. And Thomas Har-
0i\\rsfon fwore, that he had obferved the faid Florence peep
‘iliffat her, and ufe that motion with her hands, and faw the
‘itll Maid fall immediately upon that motion, and heard the
‘alg words, Now fhe is down, uttered.
‘i LMacholas Stout was next produced by Mr. Attorney-
‘iced] General, who being fworn and Examined, faid , That
Wt @he had oft tried her, having heard fay that Witches
, t@ could not fay the Lord’s Prayer, whether the could fay
tii that Prayer or no, and found fhe could not. Whereupon
vit The faid the could fav it, and had oft faid it. And the
nit’) Court being defired by her to hear her fay it, gave her
diel leave. And fourtimes together after thefe words [give
\lt,@ us this day our daily Bread] fhe continually faid, as me
ail forgsve them, leaving always out the words [and forgive
joc MS OU tref{pafles] upon which the Court appointed one
i Meac her to teach her thefe words fhe fo left out. Bug
itll fhe either cou'd not, or would not fay thems ufing only ae
ile thefe or the like words when thefe were repeated, Ay, Hi
nett Ay, trefpaffes, that’s the words. And being oft preffed to
\\(y utter the words as they were repeated to her, fhe did not.
uf And being asked the reafon, fhe faid fhe was old and had  @
»\yil) a bad memory ; and being asked how her memory ferved ie
‘dea her fo well for other parts of the Prayer,and only fail her j
\(ie@) for that, fhe faid the knew not, neither could fhe help it. ni
Jb). Fobn Pyne being likewife {worn and Examined, faid, re
salt that about Fanuary laft the faid Mary Longdon being his i
a) S€rvant, was much troubled with little Stones that were Hail
gift thrown at her wherever fhe went, and that he hath feen Hh
tt them come as if they were thrown at her, others as if
jit they dropped on her, and that he hath feen very great
‘(| quantities of them , and that they would, after they i
if had hit her, fall onthe ground, and then vanihh, fo that ae
_ (2 Done of them could be found. And further that the
“lt Maid once caught one of them, and he himfelf another, 8
(and one of them witha hole in it, fhe tyed to her Purfe, i
“it but it vanifhed in alittle time, but the knot of the Lea- og
‘of ther that tied it remained analtered. That after the |
Rs Reo re 7 [ftones


i


378 The Collection


ftones had thus haunted her, fhe fell into moft grievous i {|


Fits, wherein fhe was fo violently diftracted, that four
Men would have very much adoto hold her, and that in
the higheit extremity of her Fits, fhe would cry out a-


gaint Gammeér ewton for hurting and tormenting of


her. That fometimes the Maid would be reading ina
Bible, and ona fudden he hath feen the Bible ftruck out
of her Hand into the middle of the Room, and fhe im-
mediately caft into a violent Fit. That’ in the Fits he
hath feen two Bibles laid on her Breaft , and in the
twinkling of an Eye they would be caft betwixt the two
Beds the Maid lay upon, fometimes thrown into the
middle of the Room, and that Nicholas Pyne held the
Bible inthe Maids hand fo faft, thatit being fuddenly
fhatcht away, two of the leaves were torn. . That in
many other Fits the Maid was removed ftrangely, in the
twinkling of an Eye, out of the Bed, fometimes into
the bottom of a Cheft with Linnen, under all the Lin-
nen, and the Linnen not at all difordered, fometimes
betwixt the two Beds fhe lay on, fometimes under a par-
celof Wooll, fometimes betwixt his Bed and the Mat
of itin another Room ; and once fhe was laid on a {mall
deal Board, which lay on the top of the Houfe betwixt
two SollarBeams,where he was forced to rear upLadders
ro have her fetcht down. That in her Fits fhe hath often
Vomited up Wooll, Pins, Horfe-nails, Stubs, Straw,
Needles, and Mofs, with a kind of white Foam or Spit-
tle, and hath had feveral Pins ftuck into her Arms and
Hands, that fometimes a Man mult pull three or four
times before he could pull one of them out; and fome


have been ftuck between the flefh and the skin, where |,
they might be perfectly feen, but not taken out, nor Ji.


any place feen where they were putin. That when the
Witch was brought into'the Room, where ‘fhe was, fhe
would be in more ‘violent ‘and longer lafting Fits than at


Other times. That all the time the Witch was at libers J."
ty, the Maid was ill, and’as foon as fhe was committed |“
and bolted, fhe recovered and was well, and that when §


the


=


>
s


“ 5° SD
os
—


=—s-<—>
— = 5
Z =— - >


=o SS =S=- =>


—r> .


of Relations. . 379


4 4 the Witch was removed to Corke, the Maid fell ill. And
“i thereupon the Mayor of Youghall fent to fee if fhe were


““@ bolted or no, and to acquaint them the,Maid wasill,


“and defire them, if the Witch were nor bolted, they


‘$9 would bolt her. That fhe immediately mended and was
“5/19 as well as ever fhe was: and whenthe Meflenger came


“0 from Corke, and told them when the Witch was bolted,


“i i¢ fell out to be the very time the Maid amended at
“ONG Youghal.


Nicholas Pyne being fworn, faith, That the fecond


“itil night after that the Witch was in Prifon, being the 24
Ol" of ALarch laft, he and Fofeph Thompfon, Roger Hawkins,
i i) and fome others, went to {peak with her concerning the
‘tl} Maid, and told her, that it was the general Opinion of

‘iq the Town, that fhe had bewitched her, and defired her

‘li to deal freely with them, whether fhe had bewitched her
iil! orno. She faid fhe had not bewitched her, but it may be
tli fhe had over-looked her, and that there wasa great dif-
alilt@ ference betwixt bewitching and over-looking, and that fhe
sf could not have done her any harm if fhe had not toucht

ll dher,- and that therefore fhe had kift her.. And fhe faid,


fl that what mifchief fhe thought of at that time the kift
mit her,. that would fall upon: her, and that fhe would not


= 2
se


—
See cin, Oe


SS Shr armen ae Serene ae leap


+


ee


jaa] but confefs fhe had wronged the Maid, and thereupon


| fell down upon her Knees, and prayed God to forgive
her: for wronging the poor Wench. They wiht that fhe
might not be wholly deftroyed by her. to which fhe
faid it muft be another that muft help her, and not they
that didthe harm. And then fhe faid, there were others,
as Goody Half-penny, and Goody Dod in Town, that
could: do thefe things as well as fhe, and that it might
be one of them that had done the Maid wrong.

That towards Evening,the Door of the Prifon fhook,
and fhe arofe up haftily and faid, What makeft thou here
this time:a night? and there wasa very great noile, as
if fome Body with Bolts and Chains had been running
up and downthe Room, and they asked her what it was
fhe fpoke to, and what it was made the noife , and
fhe


ETS aS ge,


pens


=


ge *

20
po
, >
»
tp a

a

f
.
as
Fees
“os

«
ae
Pe
a8
i
e
3
BS 1
js ,
Ae
1s
i |
ay
b af
fs


220.. * The Colleétion


fhe faid fhe faw nothing, neither did fhe fpeak, and if | Bit


fhe did, it was fhe knew not what. But the next day
fhe confeft it was a Spirit, and her Familiar in the fhape
of a Grey-hound.

He faith further, That he and Mr. Edward Perry, and:
others, for Trial of her took a Tyle off the Prifon, next
to the place where the Witch lay, and carried it to the
Houfe where the Maid lived, and put it into the fire till
it was red-hot,and then dropped fome of the Maid’s Wa-
ter upon it, and the Witch was then grievoufly tor-
mented , and when the Water was confumed fhe was
well again.

And asto the ftones falling on and caft at the Maid,
as to the Maid’s Fits, her removal into the Cheft under
the Wooll, betwixt the Fether-Beds, on the top of the
deal Board, betwixt two Sollar Beams, concerning the
Bibles and their remove, his holding one of them in the
Maids hands till two Leaves were torn, concerning the
Maids Vomiting, and calling out againft the Witch, he
agreeth perfectly throughout with Fohn Pyne as before,

Edward Perry being likewife fworn, depofeth, That
he, Mr. Greatrsx, and Mr. Blackwall, went tothe Maid,
and Mr. Geatrix and he had read of a way to difcover a
Witch, which he would put in practice. And fo they
fent for the Witch, and fet heron a Stool, and a Shoe-
maker witha {trong Awl endeavoured to ftick it in the
Stool, but could not till the third time, And then they
bad her come off the Stool, but fhe faid fhe was very
weary and could not ftir, Then two of them pulled her
off, and the Man went to pull out his Awl, and it dropr
into his hand with half an Inch broke off the blade of
it, and they all looked to have found where it had been
ftuck, but could find no place where any entry had been
made-by it. Then they took another Awl, and put it
into the Maid?s hand, and one of them took the Maids
hand, and ran violently at the Witches hand with it,
but coud not enter it, though the Awl was fo bent that
none of them could put ic ftreight again. Then Mr.

fo ele | Blackwall


of Relations.


SC Blackwall took a Launce and launc’d one of her hands an


xt ud ft


‘lap it bled not ar all.


NY, anil
1 OCU
ct thea
ll ule
Wels Oe
ONT
IY to
bh: wal
"

%
Va
t under
ot thei
nino thet
mn Hel
vo the
ft hell


i! pt
Viv)


| Le)
¥ mn | |


Inch and a half long, and a quarter of an Inchdeep, but
Then he launc’d the other hand, and
then they bled.

He further faith, That after the was in Prifon, he
went with Roger Hawkins and others to difcourfe with
the Witch about the Maid, and they aske what it was
fhe {pake to the day before, and after fome denial, fhe
faid it was a Greyhound which was her Familiar, and
went out at the Window ; and then fhe faid, If I have
done the Maid hurt, I am forry for it. And being then
asked whether fhe had done her any hurt, fhe faid fhe
never did bemstch her, but confefled fhe had over-looked
her that time fhe kift her, but that the could not now
help her, for none could help that did the mifchief, but
others. And further the Deponent faith, That after at
the Aflize at Cafhal, he meeting with one Wiliam Lap,
and difcourfing about thefe paflages with him, the faid
Lap told the Deponent , that if he would but takea
Tyle off the Houfe, near the place where the Witch
Jay, and heat it red hot in the Fire, and then take fome
of the Maids Water and drop uponit, that fo long as
this was doing , he fhould find the Witch moft grie-
voufly tormented: That afterward he, Edward Perry,
Nicholas Pyne and others, put this in practice, and found,
that the Witch was extreamly tormented and vexed,
and when the experiment was over , fhe came to her
felf, and then they aske her how fhe came to hurt the
Maid ? and the faid, that what evil fhe thought againft
the Maid that time fhe kift her, that would fall upon her,
and that fhe could not have burt her except fhe had
toucht her, arid then fhe fell on her Knees, and confefled
fhe had wronged the Maid, and defired God to forgive
her. And then they put her upon faying the Lord?s
Prayer, but fhe could not fay the words, and forgive us
our trefpaffes.

Mr. Wood, a Minifter, being likewife {worn, and Ex-
amined, depofeth, That haying heard of the Stones

dropt


JN


282 The Colleétion


dropt and thrown at the Maid, and of her Fits, and
mecting with the Maids Brother, he went along with
him to the Maid, and found her in her Fit, crying out
againit Gammer Nemton, that: fhe prickt her and hurt
her. And when the came to her felf, he asked her what.
had troubled her, and fhe faid Gammer Newton. And
the Deponent faid, why, fhe was not there. Yes, faid
‘he, I faw her by my Bed-fide. The Deponent-then askt
her the original of all, which fhe related from the time
of her begging the Beef, and after Kifling, and fo to
that time. That then they caufed the Maid to be got
up, and fent for Florexce Newton, but fhe refufed to
come, pretending fhe was fick, though indeed it ap-
peared fhe was well. “Then the Mayor of Youghal came
inand {poke with the Maid, and then fent again, and
caufed Florence Newton to be brought in, and immedi-
ately the Maid fell into her Fit far more violent, and
three times as long as at any other time, and all the
time the Witch was inthe Chamber, the Maid cried out
continually of being hurt here and there , but never
named the Witch; butasfoon as she was removed, then
fhe cried out againft her by the name of Gammer New-
ton, and this for feveral times. And ftill when the
Witch was out of the Ghamber, the Maid would defire
to go to Prayers, and he found good affections in her
in time of Prayer, but when the Witch was brought in
again, though never fo privately, although fhe could
not poflibly, as the Deponent. conceives, fee her, fhe
would be immediately fenflefs and like to be ftrangled,
and fo would continue till the Witch were taken out,
and then though never fo privately carried away, fhe
would come again to her fenfes: That afterwards Mr.
Greatrix, Mr. Blackwall, and fome others, who would
needs fatisfie themfelves in the influence of the Witches
prefence, tried it and found it feveral times.. Although
he did it with all poflible privacy, and fo as none could
think it poffible for the Maid to know’ either of the
Witches coming in or going out.


Richard


of Relations.


i il Richard MayreMayor of Youghall,being likewife {worn,
iifaith, That about the 24th of Afarch laft, he fent for
‘SUE Tovence Newton, and Examined her about the Maid, and


4


luig@fhe at firft denied it, and accufed Goodwife Flalfpenny,
‘iiijand Goodwife Ded, but at length when he had caufed a
Boat to be’provided, and had thought to have tried the
‘lag W ater Experiment on them all three,then Florence New-
‘isilfPow confefled fhe had over-looked the Maid, and done her
ttmyweong with a kifs. For which fhe was heartily forry,
‘ougand defired God to forgive her. That then he likewife
xgiExamined the other two Women, Halfpenny and Dod,
({offbut they utterly deny’d it, and were content to abide
pay: Tria!. Whereupon he caufed both Florence, Half-
megpewny, and Dod, to be carried to the Maid. And he
ii, a/told her thefe two Women, or one of them were faid by
inKoammer LVewton to have done her hurt, but fhe anfwer-
“ed, No, no, they are honeft Women, but it isGammer
| eVewton that hurts me, and. 1believe fhe is not far off.
ii¢@T hat then they afterwards brought in Nemton privately,
-egand then fhe fell into a moft violent Fit, ready to be
(j@trangled, till the Witch was removed. and then fhe
ie¥vas well again, and this for three feveral- times. He
,#@urther depofeth, that there were three Aldermen in
yiyWoughall, whofe Children fhe hadekift, as he had heard
,a@ehem affirm, and all the Children died prefently after.
, And as to the fending to Cork to have the Bolts put on
yiawears asis formerly depofed.
‘(ll fofeph Thompfox being likewife fworn, faid, That he
Jivent in AZarch laft with Roger Hawkins, Nicholas Pyne,
@nd others to the Prifon to confer with Florence Newton
@bout the Maid. But fhe would confefs nothing that
dime. But towards Night there was a noife at the Pri
"fon, Door , as if fomething had fhak’t the Door, and
Wlorence {tarted up and faid, What aileth thee to be here at
“ots time of the Night ? and there was much noife. And
“Wehey. asked her what fhe {poke to, and what made the
ppreat noife ?, But fhe denied that the fpake, or that fhe
“Winew of any noife, and faid, if I {poke, I Gid I knew
| not


hig
7


333


384 The Collection


no‘ what. And they went their ways at that time, andl \i/


went to her again the next night, and asked her very
ferioufly about the laft Nights paflage, and the noife.,
And then the confefled to them that it was a Greyhound!
that came to her, and that fhe had feen it formerly
and that it went out at the Window. And then the con-
fefled fhe had done the Maid wrong, for which fhe wass
forry, and defired God to forgive her.

Hitherto we have heard the moft confiderable Evi
dence. touching Florence Newton’s Witchcraft upo
Mary Longdon, for which fhe was committed to Youges si
hall Prifon, March 24. 1661. But April following fheg y/
bewitcht one David Fones todeath, by kiffing his Handi;
through the Grate of the Prifon, for which fhe was In-
dicted at Corke Affizes, and the Evidence is as fol-
lows. :

Elenor Fones Relict of the faid David Fones, being »:
Sworn and Examined in open Court, what fhe knew9 },,
concerning any practice of Witchcraft by the faid Flo-
vence Newton upon the faid David her Husband ? gave
in the Evidence, That in April laft, the faid Daved herj
late Husband having been outall the Night, came home
early in the Morning, and faid to the faid Elexor hise »\,,
Wife, where doft thou think I have been all Night 24)...
To which fhe anfwered, fhe knew not. Whereupon heq;,:
replied, I and Frank, Befely have been ftanding Centinell ;,,
over the Witch all Night. To which fhe the faid Elenorg ;,
faid, why, what hurt isthat ? Hart, quoth he ? marry,
I doubt it’s never a jot the better forme. For the hath)
kift my Hand through the Grate, and ever fince fhe kifti
my Hand, I have had a great pain inthat Arm, and I,
verily believe fhe hath bewitched me, if ever. fhe be-,,’
witched any Man. ‘To which fhe anfwered, the Lord] 4),
forbid. That all the Night, and continually from thatiq},
time he was reftlefs and ill, complaining exceedingly off},,


a great pain in his Arm for feven daystogether, and ati{, .’


the feven days end he complained, that the pain was,”
come from his Arm to his Heart, and thea kept his BF i
Boies Mee ceases Nighi


4


of Relations. 185
Night and day grievoufly afflictedand crying out apaingt
Florence Newton, and about fourteen days ifter he died. .
Francis Be/eley, being Sworn and Examined, faid,,
That about the time aforementioned meeting with the
faid David Fones, and difcourling wich him of the feve-
ral reports then {tirring concerning this Florence Newton,
Cwho was then in Prifon at Youghal tor betwitching
Mary Longdon) viz, that. fhe had feveral Fami jars re-
forting to her in fundry fhapes, the faid David Fenes
told him the faid Francis Befeley, that he hada great
mind to watch her the faid Florence Newton one N ight, we
to fee whether he could obferve any Cats or other Crea- | a
tures refort to her through the Grate. as twas fufpected oe
they did, and defired the faid Francis to go with hin, a
which he did. And that when'they came thither David i
§ Fones came to Florence, and told her, that he heard the i
ii _could not fay the Lord?sPrayer : To which fhe anfwered, Hi
it it] fhe could. He then defired her to fay it: But the excu-
wh@ fed her felf by the decay of Memory th: ough old Age.
I Then David Fones began toteach her, but fhe could not,
| Gy would not fay it, though often taught it, =,
nl Upon which the faid David Fones and Befeley being
hw withdrawn a little from her, and difcourfing of her, not
|\Nti@ being able to learn this Prayer, fhe calied out to David
“nol Fones, and faid, David! David’ come hither, I can.
vali fay the Lord?s Prayer now. Upon which David went
iMG towards her, and the faid Deponent wo :Id have pluckt
.) him back, and perf{waded him not to have gone to her.
{ei But he would not be per{waded, but went to the Grate
jf to her, and fhe began to fay the Lords Prayer, but could
,, mg not fay, L Forgive us our Trefpaffes.] So that David a=
. iB gain taught her. Which the feemed to take very thank- Penn
(fully, and told him {he had a great mind to have kift HO
if him, bot that the Grate hindred, but defired the might
vf kits his Hand. Whereupon he gave her his Hand through a
ithe Grate, and fhe kift it, and towards break of day, |
(they went‘away and parted, and foon after the Depo- og
\inent heard, that David Jones was ill: HH


if XT my rhe
My Bb Where¢ eV


id as


[—


an


g —_ <
=> 2 5 ;


<


= x
Ss -o
=


=


oe oa
=


seen inane wacbad es


>
=


=
<>


Ari) i


386 The Collection


Whereupon he went to vifit him, and found him a-
bout two or three days after very ill of a pain in the
Arm. Which he exceedingly complained of, and told
the Deponent, that ever fince he parted with him, he.
had been feized on with that pain, and that the Old:
Hag had bewitched him when fhe kift his Hand, and
that fhe had him now by the Hand, and was pulling off
his Arm. And he faid, Do you not fee the Old Hag
how: fhe pulls me? Well, I lay my Death on her, the
has bewitched me, And feveral times after would com-
plain, that fhe had tormented him, and had bewitched
him, that he laid his Death ou her. And after fourteen
days languithing, he the faid David Fones died.


Advertifement.


His Relation is taken out of a Copy of an Authentick


Record, as I concerve, every half fheet having W.
Aiton writ in the Margin, and then again W. Afton a
the end of all, who in all likelihood muft be fome publick,
Notary, or Record-Keeper. But thts Witch of Youghall
is fo famous, that I have heard Mr. Greatrix /peak of her
at my Lord Conway’s at Ragley, and remember very well
he told the ftory of the Awl to me there, There 1s in this Re-
lation ateximious example of toe Magical venom of Witches,
Cwhence they are called Venefice) in that all the mifchief
this Witch did, was by kiffing, or fome way touching the
party fhe bewitched, and {he confeft, unlefs fhe touched her, Bi
foe could do her no burt. Which may be called a Magical Fini
venom, or contagion. But how Over looking and Bewitch- } },
ing are diftinguifbed with thofe of thts Hellifh Fraternity,
I kzow not. But that Mary Longdon was bewitch’d by
her over-looking ber, is manifeft. Whether this Over-


looking relares ro ee%aapds BalonavG:, and that the Magi= }},.
cal Venom came out at ber Eyes when fhe kiffed the Maid, fii...


and whether this se0anuds Balenav@ was the firft kind of | ny
| | Witchery


of Relations.
“NW Witchery diftin& from thar of bewitching people by Images
wade of Wax, and afterward any bewitching by meer look-
‘Wing ox touching, was called Over-looking, we will leave to
Ch the Criticks of that black School to decide. ‘As alfo what is
"“Gthat, which in the Witches fhape, fo haunts and torments
the bewitched party. For that it is not the meer fancy of the
‘UG bewitched feems reafonable to judge, becaufe their meer
MN fancy could not create fuch kinds of extream torments to
them, And therefore it is either the Witches Familiar in
NG her fhape, or the Aftral Spirit of the Witch, becaufe the
i i Wareh is fometames wounded by ftriking at her Appearance,
tii) as ae happened in the appearance of Yane Brooks, and alfo
jin that of Julian Cox, as you {hall find in the Relation fal-
Glowing.


a ee —_ Se ee ee


| RBA TY VUE


imi he Narrative of Atr. Pool, a Servant and Officer in the
w WM Court to Fudge Archer ia bis Circuits , concerning the
int Lrial of Jahan Cox for Witchcraft; mh being bim-
ii felf then prefent wa Officer in the Court, noted as fol-
will dows, viz.


ill | Ulian Cox, aged about 70 years, was Indided at
(Ny Launcon in Somer ferfhire, avout Summer Affizes 1662.
yumpetore Judge Archer, then. Judge of Affize there, for
ja@Vitchcraft , which the prattifed upon a young Maid,
hereby her body languifhed, and was impaired of
i@edealth, by reafon of ftrange Fits upon account: of the
_ maid Witchcraft. é
vite he Evidence againft her was divided into. two
(Branches; Firft,- to prove her a Witch in general; Se-
yseondly, To prove her guilty of the Witchcraft con-
nelbained in the Indidment.
"da For the proof of the firft particular, The firtt Wit-
Mets was an Huntiman, who fwore that he went out with
“Mepack of Hounds to‘-Hunt: a‘Hare, and not far from
1 Bb 2 Fulsan


i


388 The Colleétion


Fulian Cox her Houfe, he at laft ftarted aHare. The
Dogs hunted her very clofe, and the third ring hunted
her in view, till at laft che Huntfman perceiving the
Hare almoft fpent, and making towards a great Bufhy
he ran on the other {ide of the Bufh to take her up, and
preferve her from the Dogs But as foon as he laid
hands on her, it proved to be Fulian Cow, who had hee
head groveling on the ground, and her globes (as he
expreft it) upward. He knowing her, was affrighted,
that his Hair on his Head ftood on end ;: and yet fpake
to her, and askt her what brought her there. But the
wasfo-far out of Breath, that fhe could not make him


any anfwer. His Dogs alfo came up with full cry to) bi


recover the Game, and fmelt at her, and fo lefc off
Hunting any further. Andthe Huntf{man with his Dogs;
went home prefently, fadly affrighted.

Secondly, Another, Witnefs fwore, That as he paf-
fed by Cox her Door, fhe was taking a Pipe of Tobacco jy,
upon the Threfhold of her Door. and. invited him tow y,),
come in and take a Pipe; whichhe did. And-as he wasig ;


taking, Fulian faid to him, Neighbour look what ai jii¢,


pretty thing there is. He look’t down, and there was ai jp,
monftrous great Toad betwixt his Leggs, ftaring him y,,,
in the face. He endeavoured to kill it by fpurning it, js,


but-could not hit ic. Whereupon Julian bad him fori i


bear, and’ ic would do Him no hurt. Buc he threw down), ,


his Pipe'and went home, (which was about two Miles,


off of Falian Cox her Houfe) and told his Family what,
had happened, and that he believed it was one of Fulianig \p

Cox her Devils. After, he was taking aPipe of Tobacco...
at home, and the fame Toad appeared betwixt his,
Loggs:) He took the Toad out to kill it, and to hisg;,.


thinking cut it in feveral pieces, but returning to hisy i
Pipe, the Toad ftill’'appeared. He endeavoured to burmgy,
it, butcould not. At length he took a Switch and beang,,


it, The Toad ran feveral times about the Room to avoid§,,,

him; she ftill purfuing it with correction, At length them,
oad: cryed: and: vanifli’t,y: and he was never after trou-ff,.”
bled with it. s ¢i Thirdly.


ee
£


a mas cn tae ty Soin nll Sl AMON EO


of Relations. 389
“| © Thirdly, Another fwore, “That Sultan paft by his
“NT Yard while his Beafts were in Milking, and ftooping
“)'§ down, fcored upon the ground for fome {mall time.
lif During which time his Cattle run mad, and fome ran
li] their heads againft the Trees, and. moft of them died
‘W@ {peedily. Whereupon concluding they were bewitched,
“i he was after advifed to this Experiment, to find out the
OW Witch, viz. to cut off the Ears of the bewitched Beafts
‘ti and burn them, and that the Witch would be in mifery;
‘i and- could not reft.ti'l they were plucked out. Which
ili he tried, and while they were burning , Yulian Cox
lif came into the Honfe, raging and fcolding, that they
|) § ad abufed her without caufe, but fhe went’ prefently to
)Gi§ the Fire, and took out the Ears that were burning, and
Ji then the was quiet.

Fourthly, Another Witnefs fwore, That fhe had feea
sill Falian Cox fly into her own Chamber Window in her
Tn full proportion, and that fhe very well knew her, and ie
bit was fure it was fhe. i.
sie) Fifthly, Another Evidence was the confeflion of ¥x- :
iden Cox her felf upon her Examination before a Juftice ig
«ill of Peace, which was to this purpofe, V hat fhe had been eg

sioften tempted by. the Devil to be a Witch, but never uh
iMconfented. That one Evening fhe walkt about a Mile
Wi@from her own Houfe, and there came riding towards
qiiigher three Perfons upon three Broomftaves, born up
olijfabout a yard and an half from the ground. Two of We
‘f jithem fhe formerly knew, which was a Witch anda a
(Wizzard that were hanged for Witchcraft for feveral a
y@tyears before. The third perfon fhe knew not. He
yfcame inthe fhape of a black Man, ‘and tempted her to Ae |
ylgive him her Soul, or to that effect, and to expref it og
. [by pricking her Finger , and giving her name in her a
) Blood in token of it, and told her that the had revenge i)
jyilagainft feveral perfonsthat.had wronged her but could |
_s@emot bring her purpofe to pafs without his help, and that Wa
weapon the terms aforefaid he would affift her to be re- at
_ouvenged againft them. But Me faid, fhe did not confent ig
BD 3 to she


- aa AGP :
id Tiga /


390 The Collection


toit. This was:the fum of the general Evidence to
prove her. a Witch.

But now for the fecond particular, to prove her
guilty of the Witchcraft upon the Maid , whereof fhe
was indicted, this Evidence was offered:

It was proved, that Fulian Cox came for an Alms to
the ‘:oufe where this Maid was a Servant, and that the
Maid told her, fhe fhould have none, and. gave: hera
crofs an{wer thatdifp'eafed Fulian. Whereupon Fulian
was angry, and tod the Maid fhe fhould repentat bes
fore Night, and fo fhe did. For before Night fhe was
taken with a Convulfion Fit, and afterthat left her, fhe
faw Fulian Cox following her; and cryed cut to the Peos
ple in the Honfe to fave her from: Fulian.

But none faw Julian but the Maid, and al! did impute
it to herimagination only. And inthe Night fhe cryed
out of Fulian Cox, and the black Man, that they came
npon her Bed and tempted her to drink fomething they
offered her. But fhe cryed out, fhe defied the Devils
Drenches. This alfo they imputed to her imagination,
and bad her be quiet, becaufe they in the fame Chambet|
with her, did not fee or hear any thing , and they!
thought it had been her conceit only.

The Maid the next Night expecting the fame conflict:
fhe had the Night before, brought up with her a Knife,,
and laid it at her Beds head. About the fame time of the:
Night as before, Julian and the black Man came again
upon the Maids Bed, and tempted her to drink that;
which they brought, but the refufed, crying in the audi-
ence of the reft of the Family, that fhe defied the Devils:
Drenches, and took the Knife and ftabbed Julian, and,J
as fhe faid, fhe wounded herin the Leg, and was impor-4
tunate with the Witnefs toride to Fulian Cox’s Houfe
prefently to fee if it were not fo. The Witnefs wenta
and took the Knife with him. alian Cox would not let


himin, but they forced thé Door open, and found a jy»
frefh Wound in Yulian?s Leg, as the Maid had faid-§


which did {uit with the Knife, and-julian had been july
a? | dreflin gt


=)


cbeiis oaatisnlhos


ro


pre ee emai Pa Se aaa r=


of Relations. 791


dreffing it when the Witnefs came. There was Blood
alfo found upon the Maids Bed.

The next Morning the Maid continued her out-cries,
that fulian Cox appeared to her in the Houfe Wall, and
offered her great Pins which fhe was forced to {wallow.
And all the day the Maid. was obferved to convey her
hand to the Houfe Wall, and from the Wall to her
Mouth, and: fhe feemed, by the motion of her Mouth,
as if the did eat fomething. But none faw any thing
but the Maid, and therefore thought ftill ic might be
her phancy, and did not much mind it. But towards
Night this Maid began to be very ill, and complained,
that the Pins that fulzan forced her to eat out of the
Wall, did torment her in all parts of her Body that fhe
could not endure it, and made lamentable out-cries for
pain. Whereupon feveral Perfons being prefent, the
Maid was undrefled, and in feveral parts of the Maids
Body feveral great fwellings appeared, and out of the
heads of the fwellings feveral great Pins points appear-
ed, Which the Witnefles took out, and upon the Trial
there were about Thirty great Pins produced in Court
(which I my felf handled) all which were fworn by fe-
yeral Witneffes, that they were taken out of the Maids
Body in manner as is aforefaid.

Judge Archer, whotryed the Prifoner, told the Jury,
that he had heard, that a Witch could not repeat that
Petition in the Lord’s Prayer, wz. [And lead ws not in-
to temptation | and having this occafion he would try the

xperiment, and told the Jury, that whether fhe could
or could not, they were not in the leaft meafure to guide
their Verdict according to it, becaufe it was not legal
Evidence, but that they muft be guided in their Verdict
by the former Evidences given in upon Oath only.

The Prifoner was cailed for up to the next Bar to the
Court, and demanded if fhe could fay the Lord’s Prayer ?
She fatd fhe could, and went over the Prayer readily till
fhe came to that Petition, Then fhe faid [And lead us
into temptation] or [And lead us not into no tempta-

Bb 4.


sks nites et nt iii anand


tion |


392 The Collettion


tion] but could not fay [And lead us not into temptation’
though the was directed to fay it after one that repeated
it to her diftinctly. But fhe could not repeat it other-
wife than is exprefled already, though tried to do it
near ‘half afcoretimesin open Court. After all which,
the Jury found her guilty, and Judgment. having been
given, within three or four days fhe was Executed with-
out any Confeffion of the Fact.


Adverufement.


oy ‘iis 1s a Copy of the Narrative fent by Ar. Pool, Of.
24.1672. to Adr. Archer of Emmanuel Colledge,
Nephew tothe Fudge, upon the defire of Dr. Bright. But
J remember here at Cambridge, I heard the main paffage,
of this Narrative, when they firft were [pread abroad after
the Affizes, aud particularly by G, Ruft, after Bifhop of
Dromore zm Ireland. Nor do J doubt but it is a true ace
count of what was attefted before Fudge Archer at the Affi-
xes. For it is a thing to me altogerber incredible, that -he
that was an Officer, or Servant of the Fudge, and prefent
an the Court at the Examination and Trtal; and there took.
Notes, fhould write a Narrative, when there'were fo many
Ear-witneffes befides himfelf of the fame things, that would
e obnoxious to the difproof of thofe who mere prefent as well
as bimfeif. It may not be amifs here to tran{cvibe what Dr.
M. did writeto Mr. G. touching this ftory in a Letter da-
ted Dec. 26. 1678.

This Narrative, {ays he, hath the moft Authentick conu-
formation that human affairs are capable of, Senfe and the
facrednefs of an Oath. But yer I confefs, I heard that
Fudge Archer has been taxed by fome of over-much credu-
lity, for fentencing Julian Cox to death wpon thofe Evidena
ces. But to deal freely, J fufpect by [uch, as out of their ig-
norance mif-interpreted feveral paffages 1n the Evidence, or
were of {uch a dull fiupd Sadducean temper , iat they

: elveve


of Relations.


‘il elieve there are no Spirits nor Witches. And truly Imuft
\\Gonfefs, that the Hunt{man, though he depofed upon Oath,
‘itt. What when be came into take up the Hare at the Bufh, it
\ii§roved to be Julian Cox, wath her face towards the ground,
lit Ree. bis expreffing of himfelf touching her Globes, aud the
Dogs fmelling, &c. looks fomething humour fomly and ludi-
‘ill roufly omit. Bute I muft further add, that I think it was
{nly that bis fancy was tickled with the featnefs of the Pha-
romenon, not that he would be fo wicked as to tella lie upon
Wath and that for nothing. Sic vita hominum eft, fays
Wally, utad maleficium nemo conetur fine {pe atque
i:molumento accedere. But that thofe half-witted People
thought he {wore falfe, I fuppofe was becaufe they tmagined
\\( bat what be told implied that Julian Cox was turned into an
ly, dave. Which fhe was not , nor did his report imply any
uch real Metamophorfis of ber Body, but that .thefe ludi-
vin erous Daemons exhibited to the fight of this Hunt{man and
inn Weis Dogs the fhape of an Hare, one of them turning himfelf
» (ieato fuch a form, and others hurrying on the body of Julian
wiqenear the fame place, and at the fame {wiftne/s, but interpo-
ying betwixt that Hare-lke Spetire ana her Body, modify-
\wueng the Air, fo that the foene there, to the beholders fight
»ulamas as if nothing but Air-were there, and a fhew of Earth
perpetually fuited to that where the Hare paffed. As I have
ytbeard of fome Painters that have drawn the Sry in an huge
i\MLand-skip, fo lively, that the Birds kave flown againfi tt,
thinking ut free Air, and fo have fallen down. And if Pain=
hters and juglers, by the tricks of Legerdemain, can do fuch
\Mftrange feats to the deceiving of the fight, it ts no wonder.
Uthat thefe Airy invifible Spirits as far furpafs them in all
Yfuch praftigious doings, as the Air furpaffes the Earth for
A fubrilty, :
} And the like Preltigiz may be in the Toad: It might be
Ha real Toad. (though attnated and guided by a Daemon)
\ which was cut in pieces, and that alfo which was whipt about,
"Wand at laft fnatcht out of fight Cas if it bad vanifbed) by
Utkefe Aerial Hocus-Pocus’s. And if fome Fuglers have
tricks to take hot Coals into their Mouth without burt, cer-
i tarcly


394 The Colleélion


‘ainly it 18 no flrange thing that fome {mall uttermpt did nomth

Suffice to burn that Toad. That fuch a Toad, fent by of iil!
Witch, and crawling up the Body of the Man of the Houfa
ashe fate by the Fere’s fide, mas overmaficred by him anag|
his Wife together, and burnt in the fires. Ihave hearad wii
fometime ago, credibly reported, by one. of the Ife of Ely)
Of thefe Damoniack Vermin, Ihave heard other flories al-

fo, as of a Rat that followed a Man fome fcore of Miles,

trudging throne) thick and thin along with him. So littled
difficulty ts there és that of the Toad.

And that of Vatian Cox?s being feen to fly in at ber owm
Chamber Window, there is wo difficulty in it, if it be under.
food of her Familiar, she black Man,. that had transformed
bimfelf into ber foape. For this ts no fuch unufual thing for’
Witches to appear, either in their Aftral Spirits, ox by their
Pamiliars, as tf it were their very bodily Perfons. But when
fhe appeared to the Maid, together with the black, Adan, and\
offered her to drink , it is likely st was her Aftral Spirit,
and Julian’s being wounded in her Body by the wound on her
Affral Spirit, is juft [uch another cafe, -as that of Jane!
Brooks, which you your felf note in your Bookof Witches:
craft.

Lhe moft incredible thing w her eating of Pins, fhe knows
ing them tobe fuch. But they that are bewitched ave not
themfelves, and being poffeffed are abuated in the parts of
their Body, and their mind driven by that ugly inmate in’
them, to what he will ; which is notorious in the flory of Adrs.
Frogmorton’s Children. And for the Pins thus {wallowed, ,
their coming out into the exteriour parts of ber Body, Ex-
amples of this fort are infinite, and far more jirange
than thefe are recorded by Baptifta Van Helmont,: de In-
jectis. ;
Thefe are the moft incredible paffages in this Narrative, |
and yet you fee how credible they are, if rightly underftood. |
But thofe that believe no Spirits, will believe nothing never fom
credible of this kind, and others that have fome natural’ :


averfion from thefe things, will prefently interpret themin® |


the valgar fenfe, and then fweetly [ncer at their own 1ono=— |
rane.


of Relations.


‘irdace. « But I muft confefs, if this be a true Relation of
"mbat palfed in the Court , I do not queftion but the things
‘lWiehat were [worn did [a appear to them that fwore them. Or
“nel fe there is nothing to be credited in buman affairs. But
“Wileoncerning the svuth of the Relatzon, befides what I hinted

iin my laff to you, you would do well to write to fome or other
Mine Yaunton, ec. Thus far Dr. 14.

VW And tf anyone be fo curious as to defire an account of Mr.

WIG. bis further inquiry into this bufinefs, can tell him, that

lhe wrote ro Mr. cunt, who then bufie in fome Court, yer

i made (hife to read the Narrative, and wrote two or three
‘i lines to him back. to this effett. That one principal Evi-
(un dence was omitted in the Narrative , but that ts nothing
iif againft the truth of the reff. But he adds abfos that fome
it things were falfe. Which would ftumble one, and make bim
it think that the credit of this Narrative 1s quite blafted
(9,08 thereby, But this riddle is eafily unviddled by him that
Shit eonfiders, that Adr. Hunt may refpett thofe things that are
unl faid to be confeft by her in her examination before a Fuftice
WA of Peace, For he alfo having fome time Examined her,
‘lw and fhe making no fuch confeffion to him (as Mr. G, hime

§ felf faysin a Letter to Dr. M. that he perufed that Exa-
\Wwil mination in or Hunt?s Book, and there was not any thing
ial confiderable therein) might [pear this in reference to the
yi Examination which be had taken , fhe then not confeffing fo
it Frecly as to fome other Fuftice, whofe Examination therefore

Wa was made ufe of inthe Court. But this cannot concern at all
wi the ref? of the Narrative, whichwas given upon Oath in the

Wl Court in the hearing of all. This I thought fit not to omit,
wit as being defirous to deal with all faithfuine{s in concealing
{i nothing, and not to impofe upon the Reader, but that he

WN . may make bis judgment upon the whole matter.
wil) As for the Witches besng burried along with that Hare-
il ltke Speétre, her being out of breath (as the Hunt {man tefit-
I) fied) makes it moft probable; or at leaft that fhe was hurried

Mk from fome other place on the earth, or in the air (to meet


iM there at length mith the Hlare-like Spetire) but this invift-


as iy et a pilus ee
if bly by that wattoria , or k reftigiatory art or faculty :
Bae taele


396 Lhe ColleEion


thefe ludicvous Daemons, whereby they.can fo modifie the ip 4"
Linimediately next to tbe party they would conceal, that ae V'
looks there like the free Skie, or what Landskip they pleafe,
as when they hew in a Shew-{tone or Glafs, the very Room
én which the party is, the Demon by the power of his Imagi-
nation, fo modifying at leaft his own Vehicle, Which power
fome of thofe of the Athesftick Brotherhood cannot with any
face deny, fuppofing there are Demons, they giving\a prexter
power tothe Imagination of a Many as tf it were’ able to
transform the Avr intoveal Birds or Ahices, or [ach like
Creatures livingly fuch for the prefent. But any thing muft
be believed, rather than the Exiftence of Witches and Da-
W1ONS. 3

Te will not be amifs here te take notice what an eminent Exc-
ample thts Julian Cox 1s of Moles bis Megnonenah or Me-
caflephah taken in the fame fenfe, that ts, of {uch aWaitch
as4s thought by a xre-Lomtz, or Preftigiatory power (though
tt asthe Devil that does thefe feats, not fhe) to transforn
her felf into ftrange {hapes, and ufe other fuch like deceptions
of the fiebt. As abfo itis a notable inftance of the Altra]
Spirits of Witches, bow flrongly, though at a diftanceof
place, they are tied together in a fatal Sympathy with their
Bodies, toe Body of Julian being wounded by a ftab at her
Altral Spirit, as it fared alo in Jane Brooks, and an
Old WemuninCambridge-fhire,who/e Aftra! Spirit coming
into. a Mans Houfe, (as he was fitting alone at the Fire) in
the fhape of an huge Cat and fetting her felf before the Fire,
not far from hin, he ftole a ftroke at the back of it with wa
Fire-fork, and feemed to break the back, of it, but it fcam-
bled from him, and vanifht be knew not how. But [uch an Old
Woman, areputed Witch, was found dead in her Bed that
very Night, with her Back, broken, aw I have heard fome
years ago credibly reported.

That alfo is a marvellows Magical Sympathy in this fory
of Julian Cox, that the burning of the Ears of the Beaft be-
witched by her, fhould put her into fuch rage and torment.
Like the heating of the Tile red hot in the story of Florence
Newton, «ad pouring fome of the bewitched Ataid?s Water

upors


of Relations.


risepon it. Which puts me in mind of avery remarkable ftory
in lof thikind, told meby Mr. Brearly, once Fellow of Chrift?s
iMColledge in Cambridge, who boarded in an Houfe in Suf-
twitfolk, where his Landlady had veen 1 handled by Witch-


i Cae


“i he had followed byw direttion.


wi For an Old Man that Travelled up and down the Country,
‘iiyhand bad fome acquaintance at that Houfe, calling in and
vn asking the Adan of the Houfe how he did and hisWife , He
i Mtold him that himfelf was well, but his Wife bad been a long
time inva languifhing condition, and that {he was haunted


&


int witha thing in the {hape of a Bird, that would flurr near to
iii ber face, and that fhe could not enjoy her natural reft well,


| Dhe Old Adan bid bim and his Wife be of good courage. It


4) was but adead Spright, be faid, and he would put him in
‘ipl a courfe-to rid bis Wife of this languifhment and trouble.
ih He therefore advifed him to take a Bottle, and put his Wives


\\ Urine into it, together with Pins, and Needles, and Nails,


int and Cork them up, and fet the Bottle to the Fire, but be


furethe Cork be faft init, that it fly not our. The Atlan
| followed the pref-ription, and. fet the Bottle to the Fire well


& Corks, which when it bad felt a while the heat of the Fire,
) began .to move and joggle a little, but he for furene/s took


the Firefhovel, and held it hard uponthe Cork, And as he


MW thought, he felt fometbing one while on this fide, another
Ml while-on that, fhove the Firefhovel off, which he ftill quickly


‘put on again, but at laft at one fhoving the Cork bounced our,
§ and the Urine, Pins, Nails and Needles, all flew up, and
a gave a report like a Piftol, and bis Wife continued in the
§ fame trouble and languifhment fill.


‘I Wot long after, the Uld Man came to the Houfe again,
Wand inguired of the Man of the Houfe how hw Wife did.


} Who anfwered, asill asever, if not worfe. He askt him if
Yes, fays he, and told him
the event as ws abovefaid. Ha, quoth he, it feems it was too
A mimble for you. Bur now I will put youin away that will
t make the bufine[s fure. Take yourWive’s Urine as before,
Wand Corkit in a Bottle with Nails, Pins, and Needles,


tl and bury it inthe Earth 5 and that will dothe feat. The


| Man


\@
a


398 The Colleétion
Man did accordingly. And his Wife began to mend fenfibly;


and in a competent time was finely well recovered. But there,
came a Woman from a Lown fome miles off to their Houfes
with a lamentable Out-cry, that they bad killed her Husband,
Dhey aske her what fhe meant, and thought her diftratted;
telling her they knew neither her nor her Husband. Yes, faith
fhe, youbave killed my Flusband, he told me fo on his Death»
Bed. But at laft they underftood by her, thar ber Husband
waa Wizzard, and had bewitched this MansWife, and
that thi Counter-prattice preferibed by the Old Man, which
faved she Mans Wife from langmfhment, was the death of
that Wizzard thar had bewitched her. This ftory did Wr.
Brearly hear from the Adan and Womans own Mouth wha
mere concerned, and at, whofe Houfe he for atime Boarded,
nor ws there any doubt of the truth rhereof.

But it will be move eafie for any-rational Man tobelieve
florces of this kind, than to find outa fatisfattory account of
the operation and effect, or to affure the lawfulne{s of [uch
counter-prathice againft Witchcraft, unlefs they can be re-
folucd into the Sympathy and Synenergy of the Spiritus
Mandanus, (which Plotinus calls 4 piyav zinta, the grand
Magician) {uch as the operation of the Weapon-fulve. and
other Magnetsck Cures ave refolued into, And forafmuch
a the power of atruly Divine Magick, fuch as Prophets
and Foly Lawgivers are tndued with, is too great and au-
gyi to be found in ordinary good Aten that are to bring in
no new Law or Reltgion into the World, the benignity of
Providence is to be acknowledged in that the Villanies of
Witchcraft lte obnoxious to [uch a natural or ratified may
of Difcoveries and Counter-practices as thefe. But how
this obnoxtoufnels of Witches 1s complicated with ther Fa-
miliars [ucking thesr Bodies, 1 a point too nice and prolix
to enter upon here. But 1t « moft fafe not to tamper. at
all with thefe things, and moft happy to bave no occafion
for it. |
Lafily, 4s for Julien Cox, ber not being able to fay one
of the Petitions athe Lords Prayer, the cafe is like that of
Fiopcnce Newton the leith Witch, but unlike.in this, that.

tt


Butts
I i Ht} Hi


ite AN


(i was not the fame Petition Florence Newton (fuck at.
‘wiiitnd I remember when I bad the curiofity with a Friend of
lune, of examining certain Watches at Caftle-bill ix Cam-
lolicidge, the moft notorious of them, who alfowas banged for
iil Witch, offered to fay the Creed and Lords Prayer, as an
iMrgument fhe was noWitch, and fo far as l remember, fhe
ulead the Lord?s Prayer right, but was out at the Creed; nor
hialo I think this. any certain fign of their guilt or innocency,
(vuln therefore Fudge Archer did well to lay no firefs on tt.
iiipput thefe things are of le[s moment, and therefore 1 pafs to
iujitoe next Relatson, which looks not fo much like Witchcraft,
il nhs the Apparition of the Ghoft of one deceafed.


wnWhich is a Relation of Thomas Goddard of Marleborough, ii
§ ia the County of Wilts, Weaver , made the 23 Nov. |


We Oth


jin the Highway near Mr. Goddard’s Ground , about te
_iNine inthe Morning, he met the Apparircion of his Fa- |
|,ther-in-Law, one Edward Avon of this Town, Glover,
.@ivho died in AZay laft, having on, to his appearance,
 @he fame Cloths. Hat, Stockings and Shoes, he did ufu-
jlly wear when he was living, ftanding by, and leaning
Jever that Style, Which when hecame near, the Appa-
ition fpake to him with an audible Voice thefe words,
,WAre you afraid? “Vo which he anfwered, lam, thinking
jbn one who is dead and buried, whom you are like. To av |
“Iwhich the Apparition replyed with the like Voice, I Vee
‘bm be that you were thinking on, I am Edward Avon |
“hour Father-in-Law, come near tome, I will do you no a
jharm. To which Goddard anfwered, I truft in him itl


) @vho hath


Mahal do meno harm. Then the Apparition faid, How


|


i


iV HO faith, That on Afonday the Ninth of this


of Relations. 299


|
}
Le SS aS ee SS ee ‘|
|


RELAT. IX. | |.


ee


ie


ag Sr


Inftant, as he was going to Ogboru, ata Style tf


bought my Soul with his precious Blood, you ii | |


ftand


400 Lhe Collection
ftand cafes at home? Goddard askt, what cafes? Therg yi:
“ataskt him how do Wiliam and Mary, meaning, as hil my,
conceived, bis Son W2lltam von aShoemaker here, ane
Mary his Daughter the faid Goddara’s Wife. Then i
faid, What !,Taylor is dead, meaning, as he thoughtg , ;
one Taylor of Loudon, who Married his Daughter Saralf
which Taylor died about Atichaelmas laft. Then the Apg j)
parstion held out. its hand, and in it, as Goddard conceif yy,
ved, twenty or thirty fhillings in filver, and then {pakd.,..
with a loud Voice: Take this Money and fend it to Sah.
rah, for I fhut up my Bowels of compaffion towards her sik,
the time of my life, and now here is fomewhat for her. Anchi...
then faid, Adzry (meaning his the faid Goddard’s Wiff’.
as he conceived) 1s troubled for me +, but tell her God bath ni:
fhewed mercy to me contrary to my deferts.. But the fais bs
Goddard an{wered, In the Name of JESUS CHRIS
I refufe alt {uch Money. Then the Apparition faid, |
perceive you aré afraid, I will meet you [ome other timed,
And immediately it went up the Lane to his appear},
ance. So he went over the fame Style, but faw it nog?
more that day. YY I
He faith, the next night about feven of the Clock4, ,
ifcame and opened his Shop Window, and {tood in thy),
like Cloaths, looked him inthe Face, but faid noching§,) |
to him. And the next Night after, as Goddard wen\ ae
forth into his Backfide with a Candle light in his Hand,’
it appeared to him again inthe fame Shape, but he beg,
ing.in Fear, ran into his Houfe,-and faw it no mor, “"
then. | i
But he faith, That on Thurfdzy the twelfth inftantg, “
as he came from Chilton, riding down the Hill, betweeng,. “
the Mannor-Houfe and Axford-Farm-Field, he fava,“


fomewhat like a Hare croffed his way, at which his Horfif,,'
frighted threw. him in the dirt, and as {oon as he coulog,
recover on his Feet, the fame Apparition there met himg “
again in the fame Habit, and there {tanding about eigh@,"
foot directly before him in the way, fpake again to hing,”


with aloud Voice, Source (a word he commonly ufeog,"
| wherg


of Relations.


» ,@ When living) you have ftayed long, and then faid to him,
t § Lbomas, bid William Avon take the Sword that he had of
4 me, which % now in his Houfe, and carry itto the Wood as

4 ’ me go to Alton, to the upper end of the lVood by the Way-

| 4 fides for with that Sword I did wrong above Thirty years

i } ago, and he never profpered fince he had that Sword. *And


», eed William Avon give his Sifter Sarah twenty fiallings of


G the Money which he had of me. And do you talk with Ed-
qward Lawrence, for J borrowed twenty fhillings of him fe~
Sveral years ago, and did fay I had paid bim, but I did not
A pay it him, and I would defire you to pay him twenty fhil-

‘N4ngs out of the Money which you had from James Elliot at

- two payments, Which Money. the faid Goddard now

"-Haith was five pounds, which James Elliot, a Baker here,

““Nowed the faid 4von on Bond, and which he the {aid

“QGoddard had received from the faid Eliot fince Afichael-

‘Wanas at two payments, viz, 355. at one, and 3/. gs. at
another payment. And it further faid to him, Teil Mar-
Migaret (meaning his own Wife as he conceived) thar I
“would defire her to deliver up the little which I gave to little
Sarah Taylor tothe Child, or to any one fhe will truft for it.
WBut if fhe will not, {peakto Edward Lawrence to per {wade
i "Mber. But if fhe will not then, tell her that I will fee her very
ifuddenly. Ana fee that this be done within a Twelve-month
"Gand aday after my deceafe, and peace be with you. And
tiff it went away over the Rails into the Wood there in
ult @the like manner as any Man would go over a Style, to his
wilfapprehenfion, and fo he faw it no more at that time.
aAnd he faith, that he paid the twenty fhillings to Ed-
award Lawrence of this Town, who being prefent now,
tiidoth remember he lent the faid Avon twenty fhillings
it @about twenty years ago, which none knew but himfelf
isifand Wife, and Avon and his Wife, and was never paid
| Hi again before now by this Goddard.
gti And this faid Goddard farther faith, That thi very
Fey, by Mr..Mayor’s order, he, with his Brother-in-Law
ywViliam Avon, went with the Sword, and about Nine
ta oth Clock this Morning, they laid down the Sword inthe
a Bs Cec Copfs


if
\#


Re


Fz


402 The Collection


Copfe near the place the Apparition had appointed God-
dard to carry it, and then. coming away thence, God-
dard looking back, faw the fame Apparition again in the
like habit as before. ‘Whereupon he called to his Bro-
ther-in-Law, and faid, Herezs the Apparition of our Fa-
ther, Whofaid, I fee nothing. Vhen Goddard fell on
his Knees, and faid, Lord, open hus Eyes that he may fee it.
But he replyed, Lord, grant I may not fee it, if 1 be thy
bieffed Will. And then the Apparition to Goddard’s ape.
pearance, beckned with his hand to him to come to it.
And then Goddard faid, Inthe Name of the Father, Sou,
and Holy Ghoft, what would you have me to do ? Then the
Apparition {aid to him, Thomas, take up the Sword, and | inin
follow me. To which he faid, Should both of us come, on J itil
but one of ws? Co which it anfwered, Thomas, do you Pity
take up the Sword. And fo he took up the Sword and Pittey
followed the Apparition about ten Lugs (that is Poles)
further into the Copfe, and then turning back, he ftood
ftill about a Lug anda half from it, his Brother-in-Law


ftaying behind at the place. where they firft. laid down
the Sword. Then Goddard laying down, the Sword up-
on the ground, faw fomething ftand by the Apparition
like a Maftiff Dog, of abrown colour. Then the Ap-
patition coming towards Goddard, he ftept back about


lg
two fteps, and the Apparition. faid to him, J have a;
permiffion to you, and commiffion not to touch you; and)
then it took up the Sword, and went back to the place;
at which before ic ftood, with a Maftiff Dog by it asi
before, and pointed the top of the Sword into the;
ground, andfaid, Je this place lies buried the Body of himany
which I murdered inthe year 1635. which is now rotten|
and turned. to. duft.. Whereupon Geddard faid, I:do ad- 4),
june you inthe Name of the Father, Son, and, Holy Ghofts Mrif,,,
wherefore did you do this Adurder 2? And it faid, I tookm
Money from the Man, and be contended. with me, and fo Ty,
murdered bim. Lhen Geddard askt him, who was Con)»
federate with him in the faid Murder? and it aid, Nowe
but my felf... Then Goddard faid, What would you haves),
me'


4 me do tn this thing: e And the Appa arition faid . Thi
Will 38 that the Wertd may know tur P Yauy bed rea a Men, Ana
IM buried him inthis place, in the eur 16 3
So ~ Then the Apparition laid “dewn ‘the gwd rd°on the
‘of Bare’ stound theres wher con grew nothing, but feemed
£0 Goddard to be'as a'Grave “funk 4 th. And then the Ap-
vif partition rufhing further into the Coptey vanifhed; and hé
ifaw it no more. Whereupon Goddard and his Broth her=
‘\4in-Law Avorn, leaving the Sword there, Re coming
Wivaway together; U4ven | cold Goddard he heard-his Voice,
iand underftood what he faid) ‘and heard otlier ;
laine: from His, but could-not uiderftand a wore l of it
i, minor faw any Apparition at all. Which he now + alf pre
u,mifent afirmeth, and all which the Gid Gedi, a then
slieetted under ‘his hand, and affirmed he will d depofe '
udifame when he fhall be thereto’ required.


In‘ the pene _Of Chrift Eypyatt, Mayor, Rolf


AGY
J
Bayly Yown-Clerk, Sof Mal Sacheverell, Rector
of St Peters in Mar orans eh.


Examined by me


Will. B aylys


:
‘3
i |


Ad verufement.
|


| fy Hat Tho. Goddard fawthis Apparition, feems to be
: a thing undubitable » but whether it was his Father-
Wye-Laws Ghoft , that is ie gqueftionavle. The f former is
Yonfirmed from an hand at leaft 1 impartial, if not disfavour-
Le. to the fiory. The partyin his Letter to Aty. G--- writes
i relly to this effect. 1. Lhat be does halite think thar
is Tho. ss, does believe the ftory moft frrongly
iy Manfelf. . That he cannot imagine what inrereft “he
Apould sabe. in raifing [uch a frory, “he bringing Infamy on
i Cc 2 his


6f Relations: Aor


404 ~The Colleétion


his Wives Father, and obliging bimfelf to pay twenty fhil-,
jings debt, which his poverty could very ill {pare. 3. That
his Father-in- Law Edward Avon, was a refolute flurdy,
Fellow in his young “years, and many years a Bailiff ‘to Ar-
reft people. 4. Tat. Tho. Goddard had the repute of az
honeft Man, knew as much in Religion as moft of his rank,
and breeding, and was aconftant frequenter.of the Church,
till about a year before this happened to him, he fell of wholly
to the Non- Conformifts.

All this hitherto, [ave this laft of all, tends to the Con-
firmation of the flory. Therefore this laft fhall be she firft
Allegation againft the credibility thereof. 2, It w further
alledged, that poffibly the defign of the flory may be to make
him to be accounted an extracrdinary fome-body among ft the
Diffenting Party. 3. That be is fometimes troubled with
Epileptical Fits. 4. That the Mayor fent the next Morn=-
ing to dig the place where the Spettre {aid the Murdered!
Man was Buried, and there was neither bones found, nor
any difference of the Earth in that place fromtheref. Fv

But we anfwer briefly 10 the firft, That his falling of toq..,
the Non-Conformifts, though tt may argue a vacillancy of
his judgment, yet it does not any defeck of his external fen-
fes, as if be were lefs able to difcern when he faw or heard
any thing than before: Tothe {econd, That itts a perfects
contradittion to his flrong belief of the ruth of bis own ftory,,
which plainly implies, that be did not feign tt to make bira-
felf an extraordinary [ome-body : To the third, That an
Epileptical Perfon, when be 1 out of his Fits, hath hw ex-
ternal fenfes as true and entire, as a Drunken Man has
when bis Drunken Fits over 5 or a Man awake after
night of fleep and Dreams. So that this argument has note
the leaft thew of force with it, unlefs you will take away thas
authority of all Mens Senfes, becaufe at fometimes they havag )'
not a competent ufe of them, namely, in fleep, drunkenne/s9
or the like. But now lafily, for the fourth, which is mofit
confiderable , it 18 yet of no, preater force than to make uf) MI
queftionable whether this Spectre was the Ghoft of bis Father®."\
or fome ludicrous Goblin, that would put a trick upon Thom)”

| mai"


of Relations. 405


» § mas Goddard, by perfonatino “his Father-in-Law, and by
“1h @ fable pointing at the pretended Grave of the Murdered,
[B make hire ridiculous. For what Porphyrius kas noted, I
| doubt not but ts tre, That-Damons fomerimes perfonate
§ the Souls of the deceafed. But tf an uncoffined Body being
Y laidin a ground expofed to wet and dry, the Earth may in
} 30 or 40 years {pace confume the very bones, and affimilate
N) all to the reft of the mold, when fome Earths will do it in
| le/s than the fifteenth or twentieth part of that fpace: Or
“Vif the Ghoft of Edward Avon might have forcot the cer-
Wp tain place (at being no grateful object of his memory) where
NG he buried the murdered Man, and only gueffed that to be it,
"NG becaufe it was fomething unk, as if the Earth yielded upon
\" the wafting of the Buried Body} thevelt of the ftory will fell
WU paturally import, that it was the very Ghoft of Edvard
i Avon. Befides, himfelf exprefly declares, as thai the Body
N was Burtedthere, fo that by this time it was all turn?d into
"\ duff.
‘le But whether it was a ludicrous Demon, or Edward A-
‘'Gvon’s Ghoft; concerns not our Sccpe. It is fufficient, that
|Jttts a certain infiance of areal Apparition, and 1 thought fit
iil|"as aa the formerfiory, fo bere, tobe fo faithful as to conceal
ni" norbing thar any might pretend'to léffen the credibility there=
jof. Stories of the appearing of Sculs departed are not for
Gthe tooth of the Non-Conformifts, who, as itis faid, if
wAthey generally believe this, it muft be from the undeniable
Mevtdence thereof, nor could Thomas Goddard gratifie them
\"bpinventing of st, and that it was not a fancy, the know-
ledge of the’ tmenty fhillings debt imparted to’ Thomas
MiGoddard, ignorant thereof before, and his Brother Ayon?s
3 bearing aVowediftint from his:in bis difcourfe with the
i GApparition, does plainly enough impl).. Nor was it'God-
yiiidard?s omn fancy, but that real Spectre that opened his (hop.
wimindow. Non-bis imagination, butifomething in the fhape
lof an. Hare, that made his Horfe flart , and caft him into
tithe dirt 5 The Apparition of Avon being then accompanied
i\iwath that Hare, as after with a Maftiff Dog. And laftly,
(ithe whole frame.of the ftory, provided the Relator does verily
i iC 3 think


ry


Ly


406 The Collection


elink st true bimfelf (as MrS. teftifies for him in his Let
ter to Afr. Glanvil, and himfelf profeft be was ready at
any time to {wear to rt) 16 fuch, thar st being not avolun-
tary Invention, cannot be-angmpofing Fancy,


e—orseeoes: PSS on ort


REMATX:


Lhe Apparition of the Ghoft.of Adajor, George Sydenham,
to. Captain William Dyke,/taken out of. a: Letter of
Mr. Yames Douch of Mongton, to 44 Jot. Glanvil


g@ ‘Oncerning the Apparition of the Ghoft of Major
Nay George Sydenham Cate of Dulverton in the Couns
ty of Somerfet) to Gaptain Wallian Dyke (late of Skil
gate in this County \alfo,\and-now-lkewife deceafed)
be pleafed to take the. Relation of it as: shave it from
the Worthy and Learned Dr. Tho. Dyke, anear Kini


man of the Captain’s; ithus: \Shortly-after thei Major’s |


Death, the Doctor wassdefired: to.come: to‘the Houfe,
to take care of a Ghild that was there. fick;:and in his
way thither he called on the Gaptain; \who was: very
willing to wait on shim\ to\the: Place; becaufe he mut,
as he faid, have gone thither that: Night }:though he
had not met withio encouraging an Oppostunity.:. Af
ter their arrival there at: the: Houfe, and thé Civility of
the People fhewn themuin! that. Entertainment , they
were’ feafonably conducted to! their Lodging , which


they defired might be together:in the fame Bed; Where # ki!


after they had Jain.a while, the:Captain knockt and


bids ‘the Servant.bring him two of the dargeft and bigs 4 pli:
eft Candles lighted that:he: could gets »-Whereupon the # tii.
Doctor enquires. what he’meant by sthis,?o>Phe Gapeain |


anfwers, you know, \Coufin, what Difputes' my. Major |


and I have had:tonching: ‘the’ Being of iatGody ‘andthe!


So SS — a —— | = —?


a> oo
= =
= cre


<>


=o> —— aod


—=


SS SS SS
== > = Bs ©?
— SS SSS a


Immortality. of the Soul./. In which«Points} we could i t,,


never yet be refolved) though we\fo much*fought for, if It,


and defired it. © And therefore cit -wascatlengtln fully @ Dj,


agreed |


of Relations. 407


apteed between us, That he of us that dyed firft, fhould
the third Night after his Funeral, between. the Hours
of Twelve and One, come to the little Houle that ts
here in the Garden, and there give a full Account to
the Surviver roaching thefe Matters, who fhould be
fure to be prefent there at the fet time, and fo recelve
a fall Satisfaction. And this, fays the Captain, is the
very Night, dnd I am come on Ptrrpofe to fulfil my


oO
Promife. The Doétor diffwaded him, minding him of


the Danger of following thofe ftrange Counfels, for
wi could have no Warrant, and that the Devil


EES
we PER


Sear Mee


a ae


ee ee Oe


hich we

f might, by fome cunning Device, make fuch an Ad-
lei Vantage of this raf Attempt, as might work his utter
(ul Raine. The Captain replies, that he had folemnly
ged and that Nothing fhould difcourag
‘T


y PF
ro rey
bh isa
d
;


|


y


cate “hat if the Door would wake a while wi |
ia be would thank him, if, not, he might compofe him-
ua felf to his Reft, but for his own Part he was refol-
vm ved to watch, that he might be fureto be prefent a Ly)
ivi) the Hour appointed.. To that Purpofe he fets his Pi
ifs A Watch by him, and as foon as he perceived by it, that i
«fg it was half an hour paft Eleven, he rifes, and taking
iif) a Candle in each Hand, goes out by a back Door, of
i) which he had before gotten the Key, and walks to the |
"fa Garden-houfe, where he continued two ours and an Wi:
‘wit Half, and. at his Return declared that he neither fav
"gl nor heard any thing more than what was ufval. But
Gl T know, faid he, that my Major would furely have come,
' det had he been able. ;
I) About fix Weeks after the Captain rides to Eaton, to
"ald place his Son a Scholar there when the Doctor went
"a thither with him. They. lodged there at an Inn, the nit
“@\ Sign was the Chriffopber, and tarritd two or three at
“i Nights, not lying together now as before at Dulvertor, Hat
i but in two feveral Chambers. The Morning before wa
"T) they went thence, The Captain ftayed in his Chamber Nee
*""@ longer than he was wont to do before he called upon the
P00 Dottor, At length he comes into the Doctor’s Cham-
oh Cc 4 ber,


e
Yet

e e @
LQ TRIEP ey Pitt
ae WIEN pil a


‘ a
s 7 Lan = Bere


elt) Wee ‘ Bs
abe ee


2 «Ft


pita sey


i)
a


ji AM. ane Cale


ber, but ina Vifage and Form much differing from
himfelf, with his Hair and Eyes flaring, and his whole
Body fhaking and, trembling. Whereat the Doctor
wondring, prefently demanded, What is the Matter,
Coufin Captain? The Captain replies, I have feen my
Major. At which the Doctor feeming to file, the
Captain immediately confirms it, faying, if ever I
faw himin my Life I faw him but now. Andthen he
related to the Doftor what had pafled, thus: This
Morning after it was light, fome onecomes tomy Beds
fide, and faddenly drawing back the Curtains , calls
Cap. Cap. (which was the Term of Familiarity that
the Major ufed to call the Captain by) to whom I re-
plied, What my Major ? to.which he returns, I could
not come at the Time appointed, but Iam now come
to tell you, That there is a God, and a very Fuft and
Terrible. one, and if You do not turn over a New Leaf
(the very Expreflion asis by the Doctor punctually re-
membred) You will find it fo. (The n proceeded)
Onthe Table by, there lay a Sword, which the Major
had formerly given me, Now after the Apparition had
walked a Turn or two about the Chamber, he took up
the Sword, drew it out, and finding it not fo Clean
and Bright as it ought, Cap. Cap. fays he, thes Sword
did not ufe to be kept after this Ddanner, when it was mine.
After which Words he fuddenly difappeared.

The Captain was not only throughly perfwaded of
what he had thus feen and heard, but was from that
time obferved to be very much affected with it. And
the Humour that before in him was Brisk and Jovial,
was then ftrangely altered. Infomuch as very little
Meat would pafs down with him at Dinner, though
at the taking Leave of their Friends there was a very
handfome Treat provided. Yea, it was obferved that
what the Captain had thus feen and heard had a more
Jafting Influence upon him, and it is judged by thofe
who were well acquainted with his Converfation, that
the Remembrance. of this Paflage fluck clofe to him,

and


of Relations. 409
“gy and that thofe Words of his Dead Friend, were fre-
“ quently founding Freth in his Ears , during the Re-
i] mainder of his Life, which was about two Years.


Advertifement.


i OR a further affurance of the Truth of the Story, at
i will not be amifs to take notice what Atr.Douch writes
Oi 22h fecond Letter to Afr. Glanvil, touching the Chara-
li) Efer of the Adajor and the Captain. They were both, faith
il be, of my good Acquaintance, Aten well bred, and of a
willl! brisk Humour and jolly Converfation, of very quick, and
ini keen Parts, having alfo been both of them Univerfity and
ia Jens of Court Gentlemen. The Major, I conceive, was
i about Forty five Years old when he dyed, and I believe the


as
pals


. - f q } . 4
oh Captain might then be Fifty, er fomewhat more. I can- |
(\) wot_underftand that the Doctor and the Ca q


ptain had any bila
Difcourfe concerning the former Engagement to meet, after a


iil
pris


the Difappointment at that time and place, or whether the ve i
ii) Captain had after that any Expethation of the Performance 8
(wih ef the Promife which the Major had made him. Thus far :  @

i 227. Douch. _And truly one would naturally think, that a
wil be failing the folemn Appointed time, the Captain would i


§ Confequently kt go all Hopes and Expectation of bis Ap- og
1 A pearing afterward. Or tf he did, that 1t would be at fuch i
“il @ time of the Night as tas firft determined of, and not at |
the Adorning light. Whieb Seafon yet w lefs obnoxtons
yi to the Impoftures of Fancy and Melancholy, and therefore
Wh adds fome Weight to the Affurance of the Truth of the
mn Apparition, J will only add one Claufe more out of that |
wa fecond Letter that makes to the Point. This Story, {aith Pe
‘wih Be, bas and doth fill obtain Credit from all that knew the Ht i]
| A Captain, whait feems was not at all [hie or ferupulous to relate en
(i at to any one that askt bim Concerning st, thot was obferved
Whe never mentioned it, but with great Terrour ard Trepi-
| Mh dation.
4


5 cn
we i
2k ia”


iy,
p |
|

4


—


Being a Polt{cript of the firft Letter of Mr. Douch, coe
cerni ing the appearong of the Ghoft of Sir George Villiers,
Father to the firft Dake of Buckingham.


STR,
S ‘Ince the writing of the pt emiffes, a paflage concern.


JF ing an Apparition of Sir George Villiers, giving
warnin 2 of his Sons (the Duke of Buckinghan? s) Mur-
der, is come into my Mind, which hath been aflured | bY
a Servant of the Duke’s to be a great truth. ‘Thus
Some few days b ae the Duke?s goin g to Por oiciielh
re he was {tabi se ef fon) Ene Ghoit of his Father,
Sir George Vrltiess. aréd to one Parker (formerly
his own Servan t, bit Servant to the Duke) in his
Morning Chamber ibe , charged Parker to tell hig
Son, that he fhould decline that Ea pour and De-
fign he was going upen, or elfe he. would certainly be,
Murdered. Parker promifed the Apparition to do it,
but neglected it. The Dake making preparations for
his Expedition, the Apparition came again to Parker,
taxing him very feverely for his breach of Promife, and
required hit not to delay the oats his Son of the
danger he was in» Then. Parker the next d: ay tells the
Duke, that his Father’s Ghoft had twice appeared to
him, and had commanded him to give him that. warn-
ing, Vhe Duke flighted it, and “told h int, he was an
old Pang Fool. That night the Apparition came to
Parker a third time, faying, Parker, thou haft done
well: . warning my Son of his danger, but though he
will not yet believethee , Go to him once more how-
ever, and tell him from. me by fuch a Token (naming
a priv ate Token) which no body knows, but only he
and I, that if he will not decline his Voyage, fuch a
Knife as this is (pulling along Knife out from under his
Gown) will be his death. This Meflage Parker alfo
delivered


of Relations.


} delivered the next day to the Duke, who when he heard
i the private Token, believed that he had it from his
} Father’s Ghoit; yet faid, that his Honour was now at
‘] ftake, and he could not go back from what he had un-
‘SN dertaken, come Life, come Death. This paflage Parker
) after the Duke’s murder, communicated to his Fellow
} Servant Henry Ceeley, who told it toa reverend Divine,
}a Neighbour of mine, from whofe mouth [ have it.
i] This Henry Ceeley has not been dead above twenty
‘i years, and his Habitation, for feveral years before his
| Death, was-at North-Currey, but three Miles from this
“il place. “My Friend, the Divine aforefazid, was an inti-
\§ mate acquaintance of this Henry Ceeley’s, and affures
Wi me, he was a perfon of known truth and integrity.


sine
st AN


Advertifement.


Py Hs flery I heard (but another name put for Parker)
| “pith breat affurance, and with larger circumftances, |
inl from a Pexfon of Honour, but I fhall content my felf tonote ce
§ only what'T find in a Letter of Afr; Timothy Locket of |
jl) Mongton, to 4r. Glatwil, That this Apparition to AF. i
‘il Parker was ‘all three times towards midnight,’ when he was Bi
eli reading th fome Book, and he mentions, that the- Duke?s Ex- ne
“iW pedition was for the relief of Rochel. The reft is much = |
MN what as Mr, Douch has declared. But I will not omit the
it olofe of Afr. Locket’s Letter. I was confirmed in the truth
al of the premiffes, faith he; by Afr. Henry Ceeley, who was
il then-a Servant with this’ Afr. Parker, to the Duke, and
AM who told me, tharheknew Ar. Parker to be a Religious and
Mt fober Perfon; and that every particular related, was to his i
ch Rgowledge true:


+


a rales


i oat

H aah
t f 4 Hi tal ht |
: Pew eH a
aT

|
|

i


The Collefion


REL Art XE.


Of the appearing of Afr. Watkinfon’s. Ghoff to his Daugh-
ter Toppam, contained ina Letter of Mrs. Vaylor of
the Ford by St. Neots, to .Dr. Ezekias Burton.


STR, |
Y. Service. to youand your Lady. Now, accord- }!
ing to your defire, I fhall write what my Coufin |"
told me: Her name was A¢ary Watkinfon, her Father
did live in Smithfield, but fhe was married -to one Francis
Toppam, and the did Jive inYork, with her Husband, be-
ing an ill one, who did fteal her away againft her Parents
confent, fo that they could not abide him. But the
came often tothem, and when fhe was laft with him,
upon their parting , fhe-exprefled, that fhe feared fhe
fhould never fee him more. He anfwered her, if he
fhould dye, if ever God did permit the dead to fee the
living, he would. fee her again: Now after.ke had been
buried about half.a year, ona Night, whearhe.was in
Bed, but could not, fleep, fhe heard Muli¢ky.and the
Chamber grew lighter and lighter, and the beingibroad
awake, faw her Father ftand at her Bedfide : Who-faid,
Mall, did 1 not tell thee, that.I-would. fee thee once
again? She called him Father, .and talked of many
things; and he bad her be Patient and. Dutiful to her
Mother. And when.fhe told him that fhe had a Child fince
he did dye, he faid,. that.would, not. troubleaher long.
He bad her fpeak what fhe would now.to him,.for he
muit go, and that he, fhould never {ee her more. till they
met in the Kingdom of Heaven, . So the Chamber: grew:
darker and darker, and he was gone with Mufick.« And
She faid, that fhe did never dream of him, nor,ever.did |
fee any Apparition of him after, |
He was a very honeft godly Man, as far as I can


tell.
Adver-


of Relations.


Advertifement.


; ” ive fiory G, Rutt, who was after Bilbop of Dromore,


told me, I remember withgreat affurance, fome Twenty


A years ago, who was not at allcredulous in thefe things. And


wt was fo as Afrs.. Taylor relates to Dr. Burton. The


wy) Meet Relatson fhall be of a Daughter appearing to her Faq
wid ther. 3


eT |


RELAT-. - XII.


“Y The appearing of the Ghoft of the Daughter of Dr. Farrar,.


to him after her death, according to abrief Narrative
fent from Mr. Edward Fowler to Dr, H. More, Anno
1678. May 11.
A His Week Mr. Pearfon, who isa worthy good Mi-
q AL: nifter of this City of London, told me, That his
'.M Wife?’s Grandfather, a Man of great Piety, and Phy fician
"4 to this prefent King, his name Farrar, nearly related (I
>. think Brother) to the Famous Mr. Farrar of Little-Gid-
‘G don, I fay this Gentleman and _ his Daughter (Mrs.
«Ml Pearfon’s Mother, a very pious Soul) made a compact
"] at. his intreaty, that the firit of them that died, if happy,
" fhould after death appear to the furviver, ifit were pof-
“Miible; the Daughter with fome difficulty confenting
NG thereto.
‘\) - Some time after, the Daughter who lived at Gilling-
i") ham-Lodge, two Miles from Salisbury, fell in Labour,
ic" and. by a miftake, being given a noxious Potion inftead
\ "of another prepared for her, fuddenly died.
i") Her Father lived in London, and that very Night fhe
died, fhe opened his Curtains and looked upon him, He
"had before heard nothing of her illnefs, but upon this
\} Apparition confidently told his Maid, that his Daughter
4 Was


i


Ni


“it


geri = meee


AY4 The Collection

was dead, and two days after received the news. Her
Grandmother .told. Mrs. Peavfox. this, as alfo an Uncle
of hers, andthe abovefaid Maid; and this Mrs. Pear-
fon know, and fhe is a very prudent and good Wo-
Man. . | <= 8


RELA‘F.oXIv.


The appearing of the Gholt of one Mr. Bower of Guilford;
to an Highway-manin Prifon, ait is fet down in a Let-
“ter of Dr. Ezekias Burton to Dr. H. More.


‘XA Bout Ten years ago one Mr. Bower an antient Man
Z & living at Guzlford in Surrey, was upon the High-
way, not far from that place, found newly Murdered,
very barbaronfly, having one great cut. crofs his Throat,
and another down his Breaft. Two Men were feized
upon fufpicion, and put into Gaol at Guilford, to ano-
ther, who had: before been committed for Robbing, as.
Efuppofe. That Night this third Man'was awakened
about one of the Clock, and greatly terrified with an
old Man, whovhad.a. great: gafr crofs:his Throat, almoft
from Ear to Ear, and a wound down his Breaft, He alfo
came in ftooping, and halding his:hand on his’ back.
Thus he appeared, but faid nothing... The Thief calls
to his two new. Companions, they grumbled’ at him, but
made no anfwer. = |

In the Morning he had retained fo lively an imprefli-
on of what he had feen, that he {poke to them. to the
fame’ purpofe again, and) they told himit was. nothing
but his Phantafie.. But he was fo fully perfwaded of the.
reality of the Apparition, that he told others of it, and


it came to the Ears of my Friend Mr. Reading, Jultice of [iy ,


‘Peace in Surrey, and:Coufin: to the Gentleman’ that was
Murdered. }
He: immediately fent for the Prifoner; and asked him
inthe: firlt place, whether he was born, or had lived
about


: of Relations. Ale
“about Guilford? To which he anfwered, No. Sécondly,
\@ He inquired if he knew any of the Inhabitants of that
“Town, or of the Neighbourhood? He replied, that
‘Wihe was a ftranger to all thereabout. Then he enquired,
Hif he had ever heard of one Mr. Bower? He faid, No.
LAfter this he examined him for what caule thofe two
fother Men were Imprifoned? To which he anfwered,
she knew not, but fuppofed for fome Robbery.
|. After thefe preliminary Interrogatories , he defired
‘uj him to tell him what he had feen in the Night? Which
vl @he immediately did, exactly according to the Relation
she had heard, and I gave before. And’ withal defcribed
ithe old Gentleman fo by his picked Beard, and: that he
li was, as he called it, rough on his\Cheeks, and that the
‘ini airs of his Face were black and white, that Mr. Reading
wtiifaith, he himfelf could not have given a more exadt de.
iwi fcription of Mr. Bower than this was. He told the High-
simi way-man that he mult give him his Oath (though that
jngwould fignifie little from fuch a Roguey to which the
jt Man readily confented, and took Oath before the Juftice
\aOf-all this.
iti) Mr. Reading being a very difcreet Man, concealed this
wigftory from the Jury at the Affizes, as knowing that this
jdiwould be no evidence according to.our Law. However
aciithe Friends of the Murdered Gentleman had: been very
ilfinguifitive., and difcovered feveral fufpicious circum-
»iitances. One of which was, that thofe two Men had
§wafhed their Cloths, and that fome ftains of blood re»
ygmained. Another, that one of them had denied he ever
nWabeard that Mr. Bower was dead, whenas he hadin ano~
iwather place confeit it two hours before. Upon thefe and
vuatuch like Evidences , thofe two were Condemned and
 dExecuted, but denied it to the lait. But one of them


yfaid, the other could clear him if he would, which the


" s@By- ftandersunderftood not,

i) After fome time a Tinker was hanged (where, the

jgGentleman has forgot) who at his death faid, that the

“yatlurder of Mr. Bower of Guilford was his greateft trouble.
a For


it
iH


416 The Colleétion


For he had a hand init; he confeffeth.he ftruck him aj
blow. on the back which fetcht him from his Horfe, and|
when he was down, thofe other Men that were Arraign-
ed and Executed for it, cut his Throat, and rifled him.
This is the firft {tory which I had from Mr. Reading him-:
felf, whois a very honeft prudent perfon, and not cre-
dulous.

I know you defire to have the Names of all the per-
fons referred to in this Relation, and the exact time and
place, but Mr. Reading cannot recollect them now,,
though he tells me he fent an exact and full Narrative:
of all to one Mr. Onflow, a Jullice of Peace in that:
Neighbourhood, with whom I have fome acquaintance,
and I will endeavour to retrieve it.


Advertifement,


HE Names of all the Perfons, and exatk time ana!

place of all the attions , I find not amongft Mr.
Glanvil’s Papers, but the frory w fo perfekt as tt is, and
fo credible, that I thought it worthy of @ place among/t the:
relt. And this appearing of Ar. Bower, is juft [uch ano='
ther thing as the appearing of Anne Walker. We proceed hi
to the fecond flory which Mr. Reading tmparted to the
Dotior. ]


of Relations. AI?


| RELAT. XV.


‘hin! Another appearing of a Ghoft of a Atan of Guilford, for

vin) the recovery of a Field for bis Child, unjuftly detained by

) bis Brother, out of the abovefaid Letter of Dr. Ezekias
Burton to Dr.H. More.


sah N Inhabitant of the before-named Town of Guil-
a) ford, who was pofleft of iome Copyhold Land,
mi) Which was to defcend to his Children, or in default of
it fuch Iflue to his Brother, diés, having no Child born.
ia And his Wife apprehending her felf not to be with
§ Child (which her Husband’s Brother asked her inimedi-
} ately after his Brother’s death) fhe told him fhe believed
~~ fhe was not, but afterward proved to be. Which when
i the knew, fhe went, by the inftigation of Neighbours,
¢ to her Brother, and told him how ic was with her. He
¢rated her, called her Whore, and told her; that fhe
ya@ had procured fome body to get her with Caild know-
4 ing that fuch a Field muft be inherited by the Pofterity
’ @) OF her Husband, but her Whoring fhould not fool him
ji Out of that Eftate. The poor Woman went home trou-
wm bled, that not only her Child fhould ‘of the Land, but
wi) Which was worfe, that fhe fhould be thought « Whore.
However fhe quieted her felf, and refolved to fit down
with the lofs. 5;
| When her time came, fhe was delivered of aSon he
grew up, and oneSummers Night, as fhe was undrefling
him in her Yard, her Husband appeared, and bid her go
(to his Brother and demand the Field. Which fhe did,
but was treated very illby him. Hetold her. that nei-
ather fhe nor her Devil (for fhe had told him her Husband
‘Mappeared, and bid her {peak to him) fhould make him
Hforego his Land. Whereupon fhe went home again. But
Wome time after, as her Brother was going out of this
4Field homeward, the dead Man appears to him at the
iftile, and bids him give up a Land tothe Child, for
D it


=—


aS


\ ey ce ea <>


i Y


Ais The Collection


it was hisright. The Brother being greatly frighted
at this, runs away, and not Jong after comes to her and
tells her, fhe had fent the Devil to him , and bids her
take the Land, and fo gave itup, and her Son is now
poffeft of it. His Name is at. he lived in the Ser-
vice of Mr. Reading’s Brother for fome years, but he
has forgot his Sir-name , though he knows him very
well.


Advertfement.
ae Hfough the Sir-name of the Party be wanting, yet he

is determinated fo by other Circumftances , and the
Story fo frefh, and told by fo credible a Perfon, that the
Narrative w fufficiently confiderable, as it wu, But of
Recovery of Land to the right Owners, the Story of Mrs.


Bretton’s Ghoft appearing, u an eximious Example, which
us as follows.


ge =


on reoseconenncemcrpeenet irs vemos cpa ne ct A PT A SR A RE A AN ft RAE


RELAT. XVI


The appearing of the Ghoft of Ars. Bretton, for the Re-
covery of fome Lands into the Hands of the Poor, taken
from them by fome Miftakein Law or Right, as it 1s im
a Narrrative fent to Dr. H. More from Mr. Edward
Fowler Prebendary of Glocelter.


R. Bretton late Rector of Ludgate and Deptford,


lived formerly in Herefordfhire, and Married the: § hy,


Daughter of Dr. S---- This Gentlewoman was a Per-
fon of extraordinary Piety, which fhe expreffed as in
her Life, fo at her Death. She had a Maid, that fhe


had a great kindnefs for, who was married to a near fit,


Neighbour, whofe Name, aslremember, was Alice.
Not long after her Death, as wdlice. was rocking her
: Infant


ie


of Relations. 419
iti! Infant in the Night, fhe was called from the Cradie by
‘tall a Knocking at her Door, which opening, fhe was fur-
Sin prized at the fight of a Gentlewoman, not to be di-
sad ftinguithed from her late Miftrefs, neither in Perfon
ef mor Habit. She was in a Morning-Gown, the {fame in
it e@ Appearance with that fhe had often feen her Miftrefs
nay) Wear. At firft fight fhe expreffed very great amazement,

j and faid, Were not my Miftrefs dead , I fhould not

j queftion but that you are fhe. She replied, I am
{| the fame that was your Miftrefs, and took her by the

ft hand. Which Alice affirmed was as cold as a Clod.

| She added, That fhe had Bufinefs of great {mpor-

i tance to imploy her in, and that fhe muft immediately
wh BO a little way with her. Alice trembled and befeecht
«jl her to excufe her, and intreated her very importunately
8 tO go to her Mafter, who muft needs be more fit to be
y fl employed. She anfwered, that he who was her Hus-
iy Dand, was not at ail concerned, but yet fhe had aDe-
‘jd fire rather to make ufe of him, and in order thereunto

i} had feveral times been in his Chamber, but he was ftill

} afleep, nor had fhe power to do more than once un-
—-§ cover his Feet towards the awakening of him. And

i the Doctor faid , that he had heard walking in his

« Chamber in the Night, which, till now, he could give
py HO Account of. Alice next objected that her Husband

jj) was gone a Journey, and fhe had noone to look to her
"Child, that it was very apt to cry vehemently, and fhe
jg Aeared if it awaked before her Return, it would cry
" (Pit felf to death, or do it felf Mifchief. The Spectre

9 replied, The Child hhall fleep till you return.

| Alice feeing there was no avoiding it, forely againft
\@ her will, followed her over a ftyle into a large Field,

4) Who then faid to her, obferve how much of this Field
» 1 meafure with my Feet. And when fhe had taken a
UP i good large and leifurely Compafs, the faid, all this


“a belongs to the Poor, it being gotten from them by
‘wrongful means, and charged her to go and tell her
“jd Brother, whofe it was at that time, that he fhould
eas eee eB ah give


it
3


% =


The Colleétion


- give it up to the Poor again forthwith, as he loved ler
and his deceafed Mother. This Brother was not the
Perfon who did this unjuft act, but his Father. She
added, that fhe was the more concerned, becaufe her
Name was made ufe of in fome Waiting that related
to this Land.

Alice askt her how fhe fhould fatisfie her Brother that
this was no Cheat, or Delufion of her Fancy: She re-
plied, tell him this Secret, which he knows that only
himfelf and I are privy to, and he will believe you. Alice
having promifed her to go on this Errand, fhe pro-
ceeded to give her goodi Advice, and entertained her
all the reft of the Night, with moft heavenly and
divine Difcourfe. When the Twilight appeared they
heard the whiftling of Carters, and the noife of Horfe-
Bells. Whereupon the Spectre faid, -Akce, 1 mult be
feen by none but your felf, and fo fhe difappeared.

immediately Alice makes all hafte home, being
thonghtful for herChild, but found it as the Spectre had
faid, “afleep as fhe left it. When fhe had drefled i it, and
committed it tothe care of a Neighbour; away fhe went
to her Mafter the Doctor, who amazed at the account.
fhe gave him, fent her to his Brother-in-Law. He at
firft hearing Alice’s Story and Meflage, laughed at it
heartily. Burt fhe had no fooner told himthe fecret, but
he changed his countenance, told her he would give thie
Poor their own, and accordingly he did it, and they
now enjoy it.

This with more circumftances hath feveral times been
related by Dr, Britton himfelf, who was well known to
be a perfon of great goodnefs and fincerity, He gave a
Jarge Narrative of this Apparition of his Wife to two:
of my Friends. Firft, toone Mrs, Needbam, and after-
wards, alittle before his Death to Dr. Whichcot.

Some years after | received the foregoing Narrative
(viz. near four years fince) I light into the Company
of three fober perfons of good Rank,. who all lived in
the City of Hereford, and J travelled ima Stage-Coach

three


of Relations, Art


three days withthem. TothemI happened to tell this
ftory, but told it was done at Deptford, for fo I prefu-
med it was, becaufel knew that there Dr. Bretton lived.
They told me as foon as [ had concluded it, that the
pory was very true in the main, only I was out as to the
place. For twas not Deptford, but as 1 remember they
told me Pembridge near Hereford, where the Doctor
was Minifter before the Return ofthe King. And they
aflured me upon their own knowledge, that to that day
the Poor enjoyed the piece of Ground. They added,
‘That Mrs. Bretton’s Father could never endure to hear
vm any thing mentioned of his Daughters appearing after
‘ig her death, but would ftill reply in great anger, that it
;, | Was not his Daughter, but it was the Devil. So that he
»g acknowledged that fomething appeared in the likenefs
| be his Daughter.


<2
ay


>


i ee Maa Dae Oe


—


=


So Fee Ss


This is attefted by me this 16th
of Febr. 168°,


Edward Fowler:


nn a Se nat


RELAT. XVI. |


Nef a Dutch Man that could fee Ghofts, and of the Ghoft he
faw in the Town of Woodbridge in Suffolk.


i


{


ut F R. Broom the Minifter of Woodbridge in Suffolk ,
| meeting one day, in a Barbers Shop in that
“Town, a Dutch Lieutenant (who was blown up with
(0 'MOpdem, and taken alive out of the Water, and carried ree
"to that Town, where he wasa Prifoner at ‘large) upon We
| - ithe occafion of fome difcourfe was told by him, that eee
«ithe could fee Ghofts, and that he had feen divers. Mr. Ht
i|\Broom rebuking him for talking fo idly, he perfifted in ai
i ct very ftifly. Some days after lighting upon him again, a
‘lhe askt him whether he had feen any Ghoft fince his a
Dd 3 coming


| f
HI


ALL The Colleétion


coming tothat Town. | To which he replyed, No.

But not Jong after this, as they were walking toge-
ther up the Town, he faid to Mr. Broom, Yonder comes
aGhoft. He feeing nothing, askt him whereabout it
was? The other faid, it is over againft fuch a Houfe,
and it walks looking upwards towards fach arfide, fling-
ing one Arm with. a Glove in its hand. He faid more-
over, that when it came near them, they muft give
way toit. That he ever did fo, and fomethat have not
done fo, have fuffered for_ic. Anon he faid, ’Tis juft
upon us, jet’s outof the way. Mr. Broom believing all
to bea Fiction, as foon as he faid thofe words, took
hold of his Arm, and kept him by force in the way. But
as he held him, there came fuch a force againft them,

that he was flung into the middle of the ftreet, and one

of the Palms of his hands, and one Knee bruifed and
broken by the fall, which put him fora while to ex-
ceflive pain.

But {pying the Lieutenant lye like a dead Man, he
got up as foon as he could, and applied himfelf to his
relief. With the help of others he got him into the
next Shop, where they poured ftrong-water down his
Throat, but for fome time could difcern no Life in
him. At length, what with the Strong- water, and what
with well chafing him he began to ftir , and when he
was come to himfelf, his firft words were, I will fhew
you no.more Ghofts.. Then he defired a Pipe of Tos
bacco, but Mr. Broom told him, he fhould take it at his §°
Houfes: for he feared, fhould he take it fo foon there, J.’
it would make him fick. 1) hh

Thereupon they went together to Mr, Brooms Houfe, §
where.they were no foorer entring in, but the Bell rang 9 |
out. Mr. Broom prefently fent his Maid to learn who4
was dead. She brought word that it was {uch an One, J ©
a Taylor, who dyed fuddenly, though he had been in ai


Confumprion a long time. And inquiring after theg ™t


time of his death, they found it wasas poe as it §"
could be evens at the very time when the Ghoft oP
: peared.


of Relations. A2?2


peared. The Ghoft had exactly this Taylor’s known
Gate, who ordinarily went alfo with one Arm {wing-
ing, and a Glove in that hand, and looking on one
fide upwards.


SSS SS SES ot


a eal


goers ee SS ee


Advertifement.


His Relation was fent to Dr.H. More from Afr. Edw.
3 Fowler ; at the End whereof he writes, that Dr.
Burton a well as himfelf, heard it from Mr. Broom’s own
mouth. And I can add, that I alfo afterwards heard it


. from bis own mouth at London.


Vee
i


h 4 fh
“Ale
| i

“4


i
al


a


in Veith Story of one that had like to have been carried aa
way by Spirits, and of the Ghoft of a Aan who had
been feven Years dead, that brought aMedicine to the
abovefaid Party’s Bed-fide.


A Gentleman in Jreland near to the Earl of Orory’s,
J-'% fending hisButler one afternoon to buy Cards ; as
he pafled a Field, he, to his wonder, efpyed a Com-
pany of People, fitting round a Table, with a deal of
good Chear before them, in the midft of the Field.
And he going up towards them, they all arofe and fa.
luced him, -and defired him to fitdown withthem, But
one of them whifpering thefe words in his Ear, Do
nothing this Company invites yon to, We thereupon re-
fufed to fit down at the Table, and immediately Table
and all that belonged to it were gone. And the Company
are now dancing and playing upon Mufical Inftruments.
And the Butler being defired to join himfelf to them,
but he refufing this alfo, they fall all to work, and he
not being to be prevailed with to accompany them in

Dd 4 Working,


Saari


Sp ime ica


ase


es


HY
HW
ES bi
eee |)
co 1}
/ ;
‘6
;
exe Ki
a We
4
a3
t Hal
Hs :
arm
; : |
i)
wpe
;


“ SOTA Egy tee twtr e
rs irs pe or
2 ee etear ct eR pees. a


Ar4 —«sS be CT eon


Working, any more than in Feafting or Dancing, they
all difappeared,, and the Butler is now alone. But
inftead of going forwards, home he returns as fait as
he could drive, ina great confternation of Mind. And
was no fooner entered his Mafter’s door, but down he
fails, and lay fome time fenflefs, but coming to him-
felf again, he related to his Mafter what had happened
to him. |

The night following, there comes one of this Com-
pany to his Bed-fide, and tells him, that if he offered
to ftir out of doors the next day, he would be carried
away. Hereupon he kept within, but towards the
Evening, having need to make water, he adventured
fo put one Foot over the Threfheld, feveral ftanding
by, Which he had no fooner done, but they e{fpyed
a Rope caft about his middle, and the Poor Man was
hurried away with great Swiftnefs, they following after
him as faft as they could, but cou'd not overtake him.
At length they efpyed a Horfeman. coming towards
them, and made figns to him to {top the Man, whom
he {aw coming near him, and both ends of the Rope,
but no body drawing. When they met, he laid hald
on one end of the Rope, and immediately hada {mart
Blow given him over his Arm with the other End. But
by this means the Man was ftopt, and the Horfeman
brought him back with him.
_ The Earl of Orory hearing of thefe ftrange Paflages,
fent to the Mafter to defire him to fend this Man to his
Houfe, which he accordingly did. And the Morning
following, or quickly after, he told the Earl that his
Spectre had been with him again, and affured him that
that day he fhould moft certainly be carried away, and
that no Endeavours fhould avail to the faving of him.
Upon this he was kept in a large Room, witha confi-
erable number of Perfons to guard him, among whom
was the famovs Stroker, Mr. Greatrix, who was a
Neighbour. ‘There were befides other Perfons of Qua-
lity, two Bifhops in the Houfe at the fame time, who

: were


‘‘h@ Dut-at length he was perceived to rife from the Ground


of Relations. 425


“I were confulted touching the making ufe of a Medicine
‘Ug the Spectre or Ghoft prefcribed, of which, mention
j will be made anon, but they determined on the Nega-


‘@ tive. But this by the By.


Till part of the Afternoon was fpent al] was gniet,
?
“whereupon Mr. Greatrix and another lufty Man clapt

their Arms over his Shoulders, one of them before
‘i him, and the other behind, and weighed him down
‘tj with all their ftrengeh. But he was forcibly taken up
‘iti from them, and they were too weak to keep their
it@ hold, and for a confiderable time he was carried in the


iit] Air to and fro over their Heads, feveral of the Com-


iv@ pany {till running under him to prevent his being hurt
oid) af he fhould fall. At length he fell, and was caught bé-


‘its fore he came to Ground,and had by that Means no hurt.


ji]. All being quiet till Bed-time, My Lord ordered two


vit. 1of his Servants to lie with him, and the next Morning
y)


mi@ he told his Lordfhip, that his Spectre was again with
will him, and brought a Wooden Dihh with grey Liguor in


ilyegit, and bad him drink it off. At'the firft fight of the
int Spectre, he faid he endeavoured to awake his Bedfel-


intl lows, but it told him that that Endeavour fhould be in
w§ vain, and that he had no Caufe to fear him, he being
qo bis Friend, and he that at firtt gave him the good Ad-
vice in the Field, which had he not followed, he had
isf@been, before now, perfectly in the Power of the Com-
i Pany he faw there. He added, that he concluded it
yi Was impoflible, but that he fhould have been cerried
sk away the day before, there being fo ftrong a Combi-


oa Mation again{t him. But now he would affure him that


(there would be no more attempts of that nature, but he
‘ya being troubled with two forts of {ad Fits, he had brought
"that liquor to cure him of them, and bad him drink it.

He peremptorily refufing, the Spectre was angry, up-


_@abraided him with great difingenuity, but told him,


One
i


SUA


Raa 8


426 ne The ColleEtion


one fort of Fits, but he fhould carry the other to his#,,,,


Grave. The poor Man having by this time fomewhat


recovered himfeif, ask’c the Spectre, whether by the #’


juice of Plantain he meant that of the Leaves or Roots ?
It replied, the Roots.

Then it askt him, whether he did not know him?
He anfwered, No. He replied, Iam fucha one? The
Man anfwered: He hath been long dead. I have been
dead faid the Spectre or Ghoft, feven years, and you
know that I lived a loofe life. And ever fince have I been
hurrred up and down ina reftlefsCondition with the
Company you faw, and thall be tothe day of Judgment,
Then he proceded to tell him, that had he acknowledg-
ed God in his ways, he had not fuffered fuch fevere
things by their means. And further faid, you never
prayed to God that day before you met with this Com-
pany inthe Field, and alfo was then going about an un-
Jawful bufinefs, and fo vanifht.


Advertifement.


His frory was alfa fent from Mr. E. Fowler to Dr. H.
More, concerning which he further adds, by way of
Poft{cript., what Mr. Greatrix told rhis flory to Atrs. Fox.
craft at Ragley, and at her requeft he told it a fecond time
tu ber hearing at the Table. My Lady Roydon being
then prefant, inquired afterwards concerning it of my Lord
Orory, who confirmed the truth of it, acknowledging all the


circamtances of this Narrative to my Lady Roydon to be |
true, except that paffage, That the Spetire told the Man |


that he was that day going about an unlawful bufine/s. And
Ar. Fowler further adds, that fince an eminent Dottor in


this City tald me, that my Lord toldhim, that he faw at bis |


own Houfe a Man taken up into the Ar.
- Laftly; Ifind Dr. H. More in a Letter to Afr. Glanvil,
affirming, that he alfo beard Mr, Greatrix tell the flory at


“—


SSS Sas


=


= -¢


=


a ee a
Z = er

: eF-eee oF =
=> = - <


—— a)
= aS


—


= =z


ss


ah of Relations. 427
ned i my Lord Conway’s at Ragley, and that he particularly in-
Nguired of Afr, Greatrix about the mans being carried up
Yinto the Air above mens heads in the Room, and that be did
J exprefly affirm that he was an Eye-witnefs thereof.

:


RELAT. XIX.


‘"WThe miraculous Cure of Jefch Claes a Dutch Woman of Am-
| fterdam, accompanied with an Apparition.


f HE Narrative taken by a Dutch Merchant from
I her own Mouth, begins thus. A miraculous Cure
‘“G upon Fefch Claes, a Woman about fifty years of Age:
For this many years well known to my felf and the
NG] Neighbours. “This Woman for fourteen years had been
iif Jame of both Legs, one of them being dead and without
feeling, fo that fhe could not go but creep upon the
i ground, or was carried m Peoples Arms asa Child, but
Jnow through the power of God Almighty fhe hath
} walked again. Which ‘came to pafs after this manner,

4 as! have taken it from her own Mouth.
| In the year 1676. about the 13h or 14th of this
| Month Ofober, in the Night, between one and two of
Wl the Clock, this fefch Claes being in Bed with her Huf-
“fli band, who was a Boatman, fhe was three times pulled
wi! by her Arm, with which fhe awaked and cryed out, O
ti Lord ! What may this be? Hereupon fhe heard an an-
w@ {wer in plain words: Be not afraid, 1 come in the Name
wl! of the Father, Sonand Holy Ghoft. Your malady, which
(’% hath for many years been upon you, fhall ceafe, and it
i fhall be given you from God Almighty to walk again.
(4 But keep this to your felf cill further anfwer. Where-
fll upon fhe cried aloud, O Lord! That I had alight, that
) Y might know what this is. “Then had fhe this an{wer,
| 1 There needs no light, the light fhall be given you from
cui God. Then came light all over the Room, and fhe faw
41 abeautifal Youth, about ten years of Age, with Curled
[ Yellow


®

Pi
ie
;
k

f

$

&
a


ee


hagas? Liss ee See cae OD


A2 8 The Colleétion


Yellow Hair Clothed in White to the Feet, who went:
from the Beds-head tothe Chimney witha light, which.
a little after vanifhed. Hereupon did there fhoot fome-
thing, or guih from her Hip, or diftufe it felf through
her Leg as a Water into her preat Toe, where the did
find life rifing up , felt it with her hand , crying out,
Lord, give me now again my feeling which I have not
had in fo many years. And farther fhe continued cry-
ing and praying to the Lord, according to her weak
meafure,

Yet fhe continued that day Wedne/day, and the next
day Thur/day,.as before till Evening at fix a Clock. At
which time the fate at the Fire drefling the food, Then
came aslike a rufhing noife in both her Ears, with which
it wasfaid to her'Stand, Your going is given you again.
Then did fhe immediately ftand up that had fo many
years crept, and went to the door. Her Husband meet-
ing her, being exceedingly afraid, drew back. In the
meanwhile fhé cryed out, My dear “usband, I can Xe)
again. “The Man thinking it was a Spirit, drew back,
faying, You are not my Wife. His Wife taking hold of
him, faid, My dear Husband, I am the felf fame that
hath been Married thefe Thirty years toyou. The Al-
mighty God hath given my going again. But her Hafz
band being amazed, drew hack to the fide of the Room,’
till at laft fhe clafpt her Hand about.his Neck, and yet
he doubted, and faid to his Daughter, is this your Mo.
ther? She anfwered, yes, Father, this we plainly fee. I
had feen her go alfo before you came in. This Perfon
dwells upon Princes Ifland in Amfterdam, |


eS te een meee t


—


Advertifement.


“Pies account vas [ent from aDutch Merchant, procu-
T ved by a Friend for Dr.R. Cudworth, and contains
tie main Particulars that occur in the Dutch Printed Naya

rative,


| of Relations. : 429


»,.Avative, which Monfieur Van Helmont brought over with
“yh. temn to my Lady Conway at Ragley, who, having inquired
pon the Spot when he ws there at Amfterdam, though of
ht Genius not at all credulous of [uch Relations, found the
_|Weeing to be really true. As alfo Philippus Limbergius iz
u@ Letter to Dr. H. Morty fent this T. eltimony touching the
Party cured, That fhe was always reputed avery honeft good
Woman, and that he beli¢ved there was no fraud at all in


athe bufinefs.


-


BREA TS EX


“\An Houfe haunted fome Thirty years ago, or more, at or


“) wear Bow, not far from London, and Strangely difture
“bed by Demons and Witches.


ve Certain Gentleman about Thirty years ago, OF
si more, being to Travel from London into Effex,
“and to pafs through Bow, at the requeft of aFriend he a
““Wealled at a Houfe there, which began then to bea little a
0\0Idifquieted. But not any thing much remarkable yet, ah
‘lMfunlefs of a young Girl, who was pluckt by the Thigh vh
ie At Py a cold Hand in her Bed, who died within a fews days
aiter. ae
chwil Some Weeks after this, his occafions calling him back, ue
ihe pafled by the fame Houfe again, but had no defign to |
ut give them a new vifit, he having done that not long be- an
fore. But it happening that the Woman of the Houfe en
nii(tood at the door, he thought himfelf engaged to ride a
to her and ask how fhe did? To whom fhe anfwered aa
With a forrowful Countenance; That though fhe was im
tolerable health , yet things went very ill with them,
their Houfe being extreamly haunted , efpecially above
itairs, fo that they were forced to keep in the low
Rooms, there was fuch flinging of things up and down, Hee
via Stones and Bricks through the Windows, and putting Hla
wit! WU indiforder, But he could fcarce forbear fauging at
| cr,


f


perumner


ie Py re 6
1 eh a oe Be ede 7 oT


a ee ge ieee Sry ik A ace Weer er
= A . Bes ene ;


430 The Colleétion


her, giving fo little credit to fuch ftories himfelf, and fiji


thought it was the tricks only of fome unhappy Wags;
to make {port to themfeives and trouble to their Neigh= 4 yi!
bours. mm

Well, fays fhe, if you will but ftay a while you may),
chance to fee fomething with your own Eyes. And in= fry:
deed he had not ftayed any confiderable time with her:
inthe Street, but a Window of an upper Room openedf,..
of it felf (for they of the Family took it for granted now s.,,
body was above ftairs) and out comes a piece of an oldif,,.,,
Wheel through it. Whereupon it prefently clapt. tomy
again. A little: while after it fuddenly flew open again,g...,
and out come a Brick-bat, which inflamed the Gentle-4)..,.
man with a more eager defire to fee what the matter #,,.:.
was, and to difcover the Knavery. And therefore hed...

boldly refolved, if any one would go up with him, heqy,,
would into the Chamber. But none prefent durft accom-
pany him. Yet the keen defire of difcovering the Cheat, gy,
made him adventure by himfelf alone into that Room...
Into which when he was come, he faw the Bedding, dy,
Chairs‘and Stools, and Candlefticks, and Bedftaves, and§..
all the Furniture rudely fcattered on the Floor, but up-
on fearch found no mortal in the Room.


a Bedftaff begins to move, and turn it felf round a good!

while together uponits Toe, and at laft fairly to lay it.

felf down again. The curious Spectator, when he had
obferved it to lie ftill a while, fteps out to it, views it

whether any {mall String or Hair were tied to it, or
whether there were any hole or button to faften any fuchi,
String to, or any hole or ftring in the Ceiling above;4.,
but after fearch, he found not the leaft fufpicion of anyy,,,"
fuch thing. 1! le
He retires to the Window again, and obferves a littleg), ’”
longer what may fallout. Anon, another Bedftaff rifesdy, ,”
off from the ground of its own accord, higher into thes,
air, and feems to make towards him. He now begins@.,”’
to. think there was fomething more than ordinary in the), °
bufinefs,§


| of Relations. A431
,)pafinefs, and prefently makes to the door with all {peed,
y;fand for better caution fhuts it after him. Which was
“gorefently opened again, and fuch a clatter of Chairs, and
Stools, and Candlefticks, and Bedftaves, fent after him
‘Hlown Stairs, as if they intended to have maimed him,
put their motion was fo moderated, that he received no
_ arm but by this time he was abundantly aflured, that
“je was not meer Womanihh fear or fuperftition that {o
i “bffrighted the Miftrefs of the Houfe. And while in a
“ fow Room he was talking with the Family about thefe
“UMthings, he faw a Tobacco-Pipe rife from a fide- Table,
“lho body being nigh, and fly to the other fide. of the
“Room, and break it felf againft the Wall for his further
“Sponfirmation, that it was neither the tricks of Waggs,
“for the fancy of a Woman, but the mad frolicks of
itll “Witches and Demons. Which they of the Houfe being
"ally perfwaded of, roafted a Bedftaff, upon which an
id Woman, a fufpected Witch, came to the Houfe,
it\"ynd was apprehended, but efcaped the Law. But the
“floufe after was fo ill haunted in all the Rooms, upper
wsynd lower, that the Houfe ftood empty for a long time
infer. °


Advertifement,


sot ROS EZ 5 Story is found among ft Mr. Glanvil’s Papers,
: ia written to him from Dr. More, who fays, fome
ylioree Months before, be had received it from the parties
igi mouth, that was at the haunted Houfe in Bow, and
(iam the motion of the Bedftaves and T: obacco-pipe, &c. And
j very well remember, that about Thirty or Forty years ago,
jliNbere was a great fame of an houfe haunted at Bow, and
yfMwch like feats as this Spectator faw, was rumoured of it,
yiiad the time agrees with that of this Spectator or E ye-wrtne {s
"iit the above-recited Feats. And a Book was then faid to be
aiibrinted , though I never [aw any but one of late without any


= os


"


PRE a BLE


432 The ColleEion


date of the year, the things then being in Fieri, when it
was Printed. And they feem to refer to the fame haunted
place, though the Pamphlet names Plaiito for Bow. Butt


whether Bow was talked of injiead of Plailto, ir being am hil


place near, and of more note, Iknownot. And Paul Fox
aWeaver, was the Man whofe Houle was haunted in Plailto
according to that Pamphlet.


If the Gentleman that fo well remembers the frange things (\\


be {aw, bad not forgot the Mans name whofe Houfe was
haunted (and the ftrangenefs of thofe things would fix them=
felves tn bis memory, even whether he would or no, when thes
name of the Mafter of the Houfe might eafily, in Thirty or


Forty years time flide out of it) we might be fure whether itm (uniy


were Plaifto or Bow. But I am [ure the fame went of Bow,
though the Pamphlet name Plailto, and that might make thee
abovefaid Party , who told Dr. More the Story, fixe thed tay
Scene without all {cruple in Bow. :


But methinks I hear the Reader complain, that it was aa dyn


great: Omiffion in Mr. Glanvil, that he did not inquire of Ai;


Dr. More who this party was that told him the Story, i@)ljp.
feeming an headlefs piece without that part. Wherefore M\..
find in a Paper (whofe Title 1s Doétor More’s Particularsq)),.,


r


about the Stories) thefe words.in anfwer to. Mr. Glanvil,§)
fhat itis Dr. Gibbs, a Prebendary of Weltminfter, andi,
a fober intelligent perfon, And fome dozen lines after, Dr.
More fays, Dr. Gibbs told the Story to my felf, and tom j,,
Dr. Outram, who brought me to him. And I have told youhmy,
already, that he is a perfon of underftanding and integrity...
He has alfo fome Sermons in Print as I take it.

But forafmuch as it was about three months after Drahy,,
More had received this account of the Story from Dr.GibbsyA\.
that he wrote to Mr, Glanvil, it is not to be expetted that,
he related it in the very fame words , and in every punétiliog\y,
ashe heardit, But I dare undertake for him, that for thasi,°


main, and that which makes to the evincing of WitchcraftAy,.’


and the ludicrous feats of Damons, that he hath committeas


no errour therein, nor fet down any thing whofe {ub/tancal, *


was not related to him by the Reverend Dr. Gibbs. :
RE.


of Relations.


REL AT.: XXI.


far. Jermin’s flory of an Houfe haunted, and what diftar-
Og bance bimfelf WH A Wi time fs of thére, at a Vili es


ali Wifes Sifter.


Ir iMclanchely and asking ake r rahe
vi You fhall knew. to. Morrow Morni
wy"to Bed, there were two Saath

ieharaber, and the next day he nder

(ijmot go into any Room in the F Honfe Ae

sai’ =~ In the Night, ‘while he was in his Bed, he he
iktram pling of many Feet upon the Leads over his head.
jand after that,the going offof a Gunjupon whic hf oltos We
sled a’great filence. Then they came {wiftly oan Stairs

ware NCO his Charnber, where they fell a wreitli: nz and t

pling eaeh Ofne down, and fore xe) pete a gre


of preat buzzy. ‘of Ww ohh he stoi underitand
wit hen one called at the door ,;and faid, Da a
Wome dway. Upon which they ran up Stairs as fait a
«ey could drive, and fo heard no more of then.
(@ In the Morning his Brother and d Sitter came in to him,
be) fhe faid, NOW. Brother, you know why lam fo Me-
wiancholy, a after fhe had’ askt him how he > hadifle ept, and
ine had anfwered, 1 never ielked worfe in iy life, ha-
ving been diftur! bed 3 a great part of the night with tum-
Giiblings and noifes. She complained that her Husband
sjillwould force her to. live there , notwith{tanding their
jipeing, continually feared. Whereto the: Husband an-
fyilawered... Their Difturbers never did them any other
“jmalichie.
i At Dinner they had a Phyfician with them, who was
ign acquaintance. Mr. ¥ermin difcourfing about this di-
 fParbance, the Phyfician alfo anfwered, that never any
| ae Ke hore


oz


FS eadivoaseultcisneny ni tase


a Ea A ea POUT eo ee oer rea cae


:
a
“
.
|
iy
:
4


b
,


434 The Colleétion


hurt was done, of which he gave thisinftance: That:


Dining there one day, there came a Man on Horfeback


into the Yard in Mourning. His Servant went to know!


what was his bufinefs, and found him fitting very Me-


lancholy, nor could he get any anfwer from him. The:
Mafter of the Houfe and the Phyfician went forth to fee


who it was.’ Upon which the Man clapt Spurs to his


Horfe, and rode into the Houfe up Stairs into a long:


Gallery, whither the Phyfician followed him, and fav


—
—_


Sa ote


——
— =
3s. S


= Se


———
od ~~ em =>


c——}
— 4
—= 3

=|


him vanifh in a Fire at the upper end of the Gallery},


But though none of the Family receiv’d hurt at any


time, yet Mr. fermin fell into a Fever with the diftur-
bance he experienced, that endangered his Life.


Advertifement.


A AR. Scot and his Wife heard this Narrative fron
LV ddr. Termin’s own mouth. And I alfo have heare
it from Mr. Scot, who ws a Minifter of London, and tk
Author of alate excellent good Treatife, which ts entitlea
‘The Chriftian Life; @c.


RELAT. XXII.


Contained in a Letter of Afr. G, Clarke, to Mr. M. Ta’


touching a Houfe haunted in Welton near Daventry.


STR,


| Send you here a Relation of a very memorable pied


of Witchcraft, as I fuppofe, which would fit Mi}


More gallantly. I firft heard the ftory related to Sir Fag.
flinian I{ham, by aReverend Minifter, of his own expe


—
Stas
=— =


rience. Sir Fuftinian would have had me gone to th Mo,
place, which I could notthendo. But a little after gaq y


ing to vilfitaFriend, and not thinking of this, my Friem
toll


° ay - :
/ of Relations. 435
"a told me the ftory, the place being near him, and the
vthyl Principal Man concerned in the ftory, being a Relation
nit Of his, and one that I my felf had fome acquaintance
oy With, He had occafion to go to this Man’s Houfe for
. wt fome Deeds of Land, and I went with him for fatisfa-
4,4 Ction touching this ftery, which I had to the full, and
nsf 40 which I could not but acguiefce, though otherwife I
i am very chary, and hard enough to believe paflages of
: i this nature.


|
i if


iy. Lhe Story is this, At Welton within a Mile of Daven-
a try in Northamptonfhive, where live together Widew
iM i Cowley, the Grandmother, Widow Stiff the Mother, ang
“’j her two Daughters. At the next Houfe but one, lives i
Ganother Widow Cowley, Sifter to the former Widow i
——4 Cowley, Mofes Cowley my acquaintance her Son, and Afofes
this Wife, having a good Eftate in Land of their own,
gand very civil and orderly people. Thefe three told a
ime, that the younger of the two Daughters, ten years ue
_,. of age, vomited in lefs than three days, three Gallons a
"| of Water to their great Admiration. After this the el- i
"4 der Wench comes running, and tells them, that now |
"9 her Sifter begins to vomit Stones and Coals. They went
“Gand were Eye-witnefles , told them till they came to
i Five hundred. Some weighed a quarter of a pound, and
_—iwere fo big, as they had enough to do to get them out He
Jof her mouth , and he profefled to me, that he could A
jicarce get the like into his mouth, and I do not know |
Qhow any one fhould, if they were fo big as he fhewed
ln“ ithe like to me. I have fent you one, but not a quarter
{fo big as fome of them were. It was one of the biggeft
dof them that were left and kept in aBag. This Vo-
imiting lafted about a Fortnight, and hath Witnefles
feo {tore.
In the mean time they threw hards of Flax. upon the
i iiFire, which would not blaze though blown, but dwind-
"lt Ted away. The Bed-cloths would be thrown off the Bed.
tS Mofes Cowley told me, that he laid them on again feveral hi
fh gimes, they all coming out of the Room, and go but Mh
ies i Ee 2 into He


aot [de
MANY
yOu)


ld nf am


ie
=


436 The Collection |
into the Parlour again, and they were off again. And a
{trike of Wheat {tanding at the Beds feet, fet it how
they would, it would be thrown down again. Once the
Coffers and things were fo tranfpofed, as they could
{carce ftir about the Room. Once he laid the Bible
upon the Bed, but the Cloths were thrown off again,
and the Bible hid in another Bed. And when they were
all gone into the Parlour, -as they ufed to go together,
then things would be tranfpofed in the Hall,their W heel
taken in pieces, and part of it thrown under the Table.
In their Buttery their Milk would betaken off the Table,
and fet on the ground, and once one Panchion was bro-
ken, and the Milk fpilr. A feven pound weight, with
a Ring, was hung upon the Spigot, and the Beer ming-
led with Sand, .and all fpoiled, their Salt mingled molt
perfectly with Bran.

Mofes his Mother faid that their Flax was thrown out | Mu
of a Box, fhe put it in again, it was thrown out ae f ily
gain; fhe put it in again, and lockt the Box, trying
by the Hafp or Lid (as they ufe to do) whether it
wasfaft; it wasfo. Butas foonas her back was turned)
the Box was unlocked, and the Flax was thrown out
again. Adofes faid, that when he was coming out of the
Parlour, he faw a Loaf of Bread tumbling off the Form,
and that was the firft thing he faw. After, a Womans
Patten rofeup in the Houfe, and was thrown at them.
He heard the Comb break in the Window, and prefently |
it flew atthem intwo pieces. A Knife rofe up in the
Window, and flew ata Man, hitting him with the Haft.
An Ink-glafs was thrown out of the Window into the
Floor, and by and by the ftopple came after it, Then |
every day abundance of Stones were thrown about the
Houfe which broke the Windows, and hat the People,
but they were the lefs troubled, becaufe all this while
no hurt was done to their Perfons, and a great many
People being in the Room, the Wheat was thrown a- |
bout amongft them. |

I was in the Houfe where I faw the Windows which

were


ee
a
-
A
=a
yi
é
Yw
fis
‘3
~
i
ys
wk
coi
2


Pt eo aes


i
?

i
ie
5
reel


sem


——


of Relations. 437


were {till broken, and the People themfelves fhewed me
where the feveral particulars were done. The Grand-
mother told me, that fhe thought fhe had loft half a
dirike of Wheat, and the like happened to fome Fitcheg
inthe Barn, Oné Mr. Robert Clark, a Gentleman, be-
ing hat with the Stones, bad the Baker at the Door look
to his Bread well, and by and by a handful of crums
|, were thrown into hisLap. They could fee the things as
| they came, but no more.
Tiel) At laft fome that had been long fufpected for Witches
s/h] Were Examined, and one fent to the Gaol, where it is
«lio Laid fhe plays her pranks, but that is of doubtful credit.
i Lasked the Old Woman whether they were free now.
wf She faid, that one Night fince, they heard great knock-
{qf Ings, and cruel noife, which fcared them worfe than all
ithereft, and once or twice that Week, her Cheefe was
jo Crumbled into pieces, and {poiled. 1 was there about
i Aday-day, 1658. This is all that I remember at prefent.
iff L have heard feveral other ftories, and two or three no- i
4 table ones lately from Mens own Experience, whichin i
vyreafon 1 was to believe asI did. But in my Judgment ih
jithis outgoes all that 1 know of, it having fo much of
jiptente, and of the day time, fo many and fo credible Wit-
«lnefles beyond all cavil and exception, I will trouble you rk
v,q@gno further, but commending you to the protection of Oe
God Almighty, I take my leave and reft |


E Do se :
= oe es ee


Sat


fee


\/ heal


ba


i Yours, !
'h Loddington, May i
22th 1658. ij


ne peepee ime ey


et ae The Colleétion


RELAT. XXIII.


The Relation of YamesSherring, taken concerning the mat-
ter at Old Gall’s Honfe of little Burton, June 23, 1677.
as follows.


rHE firft Night that I was there with Hugh A4ell-
| §L more and Edward Smith, they heard as it were the

wathing in water over theirheads. Then taking a Can-
die and going up theStairs,there was a wetCloth thrown
at them, but it fell on the Stairs. They going up farther
then, there was another thrown as before. And when
th

xX


t
ley came up into the Chamber, there ftood a bowl of
Nater, fome of it fprinkled over, and the Water look-
ed white as if there had been Sope ufed in it. The


Bowl juft before was in the Kitchin, and could not be:
catried up but through the Room where they were: They


next thing that they heard the fame Night, was a terri-
& } Bits


ble noife as ifit had been a flat of Thunder, and fhortly'


after they heard great fcratching about the Bedfted, and|
after that a great knocking with a Hammer againit the:
Beds-Head, {0 that the two Maids that were in the Bed,,
cryed Gut for help. Then they ran up the Stairs, and
there [sy the Hammer on the Bed, and on the Beds-headl
there were near a thoufand prints of the Hammer which
the violent ftrokes had made. The Maids faid, that:


they were fcratched and pinched with a hand that was@


put into the Bed which had exceeding long Nails, They
{aid that the Hammer was lockt up faft in the Capboardl


—>


<—_. —
< <=


= <>


— i


AHA
u
an
AVA
Was
may d
Bs
1A Al
BL
yt
eo
Sallie
(9)
j
I
Fyn
he
Hh
Gi)


:
WN


95. SSS SSeS es
2 = Mi ia 2 — ee = a
= ae > ¢ (a> —


whéh they went to Bed. This was that which was doneg ’


the firft Night, with many other things of the like na-
ture.


lary were there, James Shéerring fat down in the Chim-


The fecond Night that Fames Sherring and Tho. Hil! iu)


ney to filla Pipe of Tobacco. He made ufe of the Fire-§ “
‘Tongs to take up a Coal to fire his Pipe, and by and byg ).


the Tongs were drawn up the Stairs, and after they
were


of Kelations.


{
} were up in the Chamber, they were played withal as
} many times Men do, and then thrown down upon the
i Bed. Although the Tongs were fo near him, he never
jj perceived the going of them away. ‘The fame Night one
“of the Maids left her Shoes by the Fire, and they were
"ll carried up into the Chamber,and the Old Man’s brought
} down and fet intheir places. The fame Night there
4) was a Knife carried up into the Chamber, and it did
"4 fcratch and ferape the Beds-head all the Night , but
it) svhen they went up into the Chamber, the Knife was
i] thrown into the Loft. As they were going up the Stairs,
‘i there were things thrown at them, which were juit be-
i} fore in the low Room, and when they went down the
iN} Stairs, the Old Man’s Breeches were thrown downlafter
if them. Thefe were the moft remarkable things done
f that Night , only there was continual knocking and
\ |i pinching the Maids, which was ufually done every
Hi") Night.
‘T) - The third Night, when Yames Sherring and T homas
i FZillary were there, as foon as the People were gone to
i Bed, their Cloths were taken and thrown at the Candle,
‘ij and put it out, and immediately after they cried out with
ail a very hideous cry and faid, they fhould be all choaked
ite] if they were not prefently helped. ‘Then they ran up
i, 04 the Stairs and there were abundance of Feathers plucked
wile out of the Bolfter that lay under their Heads, and fome
«til thruft into their Mouths that they were almoft choaked.
i449 The Feathers were thrown all about the Bed and Room.
‘itll. They were plucked out at ahole no bigger than the top
i( i of ones little Finger. Sometime after they were vexed
si with a very hideous knocking at their heads as they lay
wt on the Bed. . Then ames Sherving and Thomas Hillary
‘iit took the Candle and went up Stairs , and ftood at the
‘ Beds Feet, and the knocking continued. ‘Then they
A faw a Hand with an Arm-wriit hold the Hammer which
i] kept on knocking againft the Bedfted. Then Fames


i Sherring going, towards the Beds-head, the Hand and
@f Hammer fell down behind the Bolfter and could not be


&


439


Ee 4 found,


440. Lhe Collection


fou ind. For they turned up the Bed-cloths to fearch for.


the Hammer, Butas foomas they went down the Stairs
the t'ammer was thrown out. into the middle of the


Chamber. Thefe were the molt remarkable things that


W — — that mh


nocking anid 5 asian aS. was afhilly

beth and feventh Nights, there was nothing at

it as quiet as at other Bis ted Thefe were all the
that they weve ther

gs that do fo' ee are what ants Sherring
€ e People >of theHonfe report.
There w as aSaddie in the Honfe of their Uncle War-
ven’s of Leigh » (which it fhould feem they detained
weongta lly from the right Owner) that, asit did | hang
i naPinin the Entry, would come off and come into


he ici: and as they termed it, hop about the Houfe
fro om one place to another, and upon the Table, and!


fo.to. another, which ftood on the other fide af the
Houfe. Sane Gaff and her, Kinfwoman, took. this


Saddle. and caatedé it to Leigh, and as they were,


going along in the: broad Common, there -would be
Sticks and Ston es thrown at them, which made them
very mucit afraid,’ and going near together, their Whit-
tles which were on their Shoulders were knit together.
att carried the Saddle to the Houfe which was Old
Warren’s,and there left ic, and returned home very quiet.
Gut being gone to Bed at Night ,the Saddle was broug ht
back from spare 7h, Cwhich is a Mile anda half at leaft
ia om m Old Gaf’s Honfe) and thrown upon the Bed where
the! Maids lay. After that, the Saddle was very trouble-
fome to them, until they broke it in fma!l pieces and

threw it out ito the Highway.
pec was.a Coat of the fame Parties, who was
‘ee he § Sadd le, wi hich did hang on the Door.in
and. it came off from the place and flew into
Sa lay fome confiderable time, before: they
For it was as much as three of them
could


ecu
ders


shout A
fee ft
Re wit
lnk Re


B fey


a (ior he
Mt oy
| 4


of Relations. 4AL


id €ould do to pluck it out of the fire, becaufe of the pon-


“i derous weight that lay on it, as they thought. Neyer-
"Ml thelefs there was no impreflion on it of the fire.
eh Old Gaf {at at Dinner with a Hat of this old Warren's
_ } on hisifead, and there was fomething came and ftruck it
“Wil off into the Difh where his Meat was.
|] There wasa Pole which ftood in the backfide, about
“S814 or 15 foot. in length, which was brought into ‘the
il] Houfe, and carried up into the Chamber, and thrownon
ithe Bed but all the Wit they had could not get it out
m] of the Chamber, becaufe of its length, until they took
idown a light of the Window. They report, that the
‘im|things in the Houfe were thrown about and broken, to
‘uitiitheir great damage. }
‘tt ~ Qne night there were two of this old Gaft his Grand-
itilfdaughters in Bed together, they were aged, ohe of them
itfabout twelve or thirteen years, and the other about fix.
i, aujgeen or feventeen, They faid, that they felt a hand ‘in
iit(Bed with them, which they bound up in the Sheet, and
| tiiltook Bedftaves and beat it until it was as foft as Wooll,


y


yyeeithen they took a ftone which lay in the Chamber, about


gain,
vaitphe Stone was thrown away,and the Cloth was found wet.

| There were many other things which are too long and
sikedious to write , it would take up a great deal of


This which follows is the Relation of Fone Winfor of
. hong Burton, fhe being there three Nights, taken the

~ Whird day of Fuly 1657,
ys She heard or faw nothing as long as the Candle did
| ‘abarn, but as foon as it was Out, there was fomething
wllvhich did feem to fall down by the Bed-fide, and by and
‘awpy-it: began to. Jay on the Beds-head with a Staff,
“wyellid trike Jone Winfer on the Head. She put fortl
:


i
il


and
y
hey
abhw &


1 th
Eland
Be Gere |


sae
UNE


iy a ee Kester au i
Gane oatatednaueel Simin a ats «pee


RE Se


442 " The Colleétion


Hand and caught it, but was not able to hold it fafte
She got out of the Bed to light a Candle, and there was
a great Stone thrown after her, but it miffed her. When
the Candle was lighted, they arofe and went down to
the Fire. One of them went up to fetch the Bed-
cloaths to make a Bed by the Fire, andthere laya Heap
of Stones on the Bed whereon they lay juft before. As
foon asthe Bed was made, and they laid down to take
their reft there was a great {cratching on the Form that
ftood by them in an extream manner. ‘Then it came,
and did heave up the Bolfter whereon they laid their
Heads, and did endeavour to throw them out, At laft
it got hold on one end of the Pillow, and fet it quite on
end,and there it food for fome confiderable time ; at lait
falling down in its place, they fell faft afleep, and fo
continued all that Night.

The Staff that was fpoken of before was Fone Wind-
for’s, and the fays, fhe left it below in the Kitchin. She |, /.
fays, that which troubled, did endeavour to kill the t
People, if ithad Power. She putthem to it, to know J), ”
the Reafon why they were fo troubled, and they faid,
they knew nothing, unlefs it were about the Bufinefs of 7.
Old Warren. She was there three Nights, and the trou- |.
ble was much after the fame Manner, nothing that was
more remarkable.


This is the truth of what I heard them {peak from J)”
their own Mouths, and they will atteft it if called f."


thereunto.


(a YES SAE ae


Advertifement,


Very confiderable Story this is, and fufficcently cir-
cimftantiated for Time and Place, faving that the

County is not named. The reafon whereof I concesve to be.
that 2t was inthe very County imwhich Mr. Glanvil lived.§ |
to whom the Information was ent, uamely in Somerfethhired *
| Agog


| of Relations.


|
omit And there are Burtons more thanone there, and alfo Leighs,
Whol Out this Burton 2% determined by the {pace of fomething more
| 4 than 4 Mile and an balfs diftance from Leigh. Sothat the
iu L opogr apbical account ws fufficiently exatt. And the man-
“light 267 of the Narrative ws fo frmple, plain, and rural, that i
Wprevents all Sufpicion of Fraud or Impofture in the Rela~
,MEOr.
| The tranfporting of things out of one Room into another,
|, Wand ftriking and the like by invifible Agents, minds me of
‘0 Lr. Lloyds Story, as tts called in Afr. Glanvil’s Papers,
Mwhom in a Letter he tells be may rely uponit for truth, as
“being fent from a Perfon of Quality and Integrity in thofe
yaparts. Itisof an Houfe haunted of one Walter Meyrick
VW lof the Parifh of Blethvaugh, in the County of Radnor,
i" fome Two and Twenty years ago. Where, befides firange
kind of Tunable Whiftlings in the Rooms, where none
WI" was feen to Whiftle, there were Stones flung down out of a
l ° Loft of great weight, the Doors bolted or barred againft
WA them on the infide, when returned from the Church, nobody
i being within. And at Prayers at home, when fome of the
i "\ Women, out of fear, held one another by the Arms, fome
MN invifible\ Power would pluck afunder their Arms, whether
i o they would or no. By [uch an invifible Force, one as he was
WE fitting at Supper, was [truck flat to the Ground, and a
i Trencher firuck,out of the Maid’s band that waited, anda
A" fart Bose on the Ear given to another, no vifible thing be-
(OM ang near that did it. A Purfe loft with two Gold Rings,
WN and Six and Four-pence init, the Party complaining thereof,
the Purfe dropt down from the top of a Room, which had no
Room over it, and Four-pence only in tt. That Men were
 ftruck down withStones,and yet had no greathurt,fhews plain~
| ly they were not flung but carried. But there was one beaten
8 with two Staves blackand blue, but none to be feen that thus
Wi belaboured him, though inthe Day.


Mn We pafs by theFrying-Pan, beaten with a little psece of


‘ 0 Tron, and tinkling over a Man’s Head inthe Night, to his
m being firuck down with a Stick by Day, while he tended the
(WM Goofe roafting, which that invifible Striker feemed to have

1 Oe i a Plot


t~


443


Core ee ee ‘é
SE


ssa


The Collection


“a ‘Plat wpon, as alfo by hes knocking a Pick-Ax againft the
Lid of a Coffer, to havea Defign upon a Bag of Money.
Thefe and the like Feats, that Narratsve relates, which
Mr. Glanvil ¢ calls Mr. Lloyd’s Story, who affures him he
may vely on the Truth thereof, he procuring tt from a Fuftice
af Peace, who took, the Partyes Teftimonie: es that dwelt in the

Houfe, or upon Occafions where prefent there, and were Eyes
W itneffes of the frrange Pranks that were } plaid in the Place.
And there being that Congentracy betmixt. James Sher-
ring’s Story and t this, they mutitally corroborate one ano-
ther,


7 VW Ts
7% | V.
fh Le


Mr. * Andrew Pafchall once Fellow of Queen’s Colledge
in Cambridge, his Narrative of three Nights diftur-
bance at his Father?s Honfein London zz * Soper- Lane,
in Auguit 1661. * Vi,The Account of the 2"Edition,p.1 2«


ryH E firft Nights difturbance;, There was ir
i my Father and Mother, my eldeft Bro

one of my Sifters with a young Maiden Gentlewoman
her Bedfellow (who femed to be principally conc erned)
befides a Maid that lay inthe fame Chamt ber. |
The Gentlewoman beforementione: \, € being in bed
rith my Siiter ina Chamber within that where Ne Fa-
ther and Mother lay, (the Maid ying in another Bed
alone by) there feemedto her, then lying awake, tobe
one. walking in. the Chamber, by a noiie made as of @
long Soe or fome trailing Garment brufhing and |
fiveeping,0 up and down the Room. |
By and ba: there was anoife of clattering their Shoes
under the Bed, witha rab NMtee and tugging of the Mat
wader the Bed likewife. This continued for fome time, my
Siftee being awakened heard it,and fo did the Maid. After
this my Mother be ing called outof the next Chamber
where the was up (to prepare a Chymical water which
required


of Relations.


445


Preqnired t! their being up all Night) came in, they being


nin a great fright.
inl Zone to bed fa C is below.


vf Noite ceafed


jhipat ter they wer
er


ithe Chambe
iwith 2 great


“My Brother went up alfo, who noe
A Candle was brought and tl


ae G4


hile they were in the Chamber. Pre fently

one out again, and the Light removec d,
(which fhuts with diff ficulty) flew to
bounce, it being wide open before, it {hook


udithe Room, where my | Mother was bufied about the afore-


ifaid Preparation.
iby the Bedfide v
tforce again{t a Pre!
pput them to fucha fe ight again,


After this one of the Shoes that was
ae ung over the Bed with a mighty

hat {tood on the other fide. This
that the Gentlewoman


Hrife. My Brother went into the Room again, and fate


(up with them all Night.

|. This. I received fon my
by reafon of foi
Mfirtt in the Family) early the nex ct Morning.


‘iito me, Cwho


oa her, who came to bed


x


IlInefs had gone to bed


I was con-


wffirmed i init afterwards by my Mother, upon wh fe shire


alfaflertion I dare confidently believe a


ilas we a vi


;


i


Ti} e fecon d Night?s diiturban €5


iqved to £0 tob


supper, we all hearda great Noi
«iat he Chath ber. at the
ijming of Chai rs and Stools about
of great Drunks.
eve Came down again:


the F Room.


any thing that fhall


the ee gett ing,
oifé above in
end of the Houte, as it were fling-


Or r emovil np


And going up to fee, all was ftill cill
However the Gentlewoman refol-
od again that Night in the fame Chamber.


My | Sifter wentto bed with her,and the reft to their Lodg
tess: only vy Brother and I refolved to fit up fome time,


(aand e anne he Event.


‘Within a while after we heard


hem knock earneft] ly above, we went both up, they
hold us there had been the fame difturbance as ihe night


( jiepefore and fom —e more.


For belides the tugging of


iiehe Mat under the Bed, the Bed-cloaths upon them were
“oapften tugged and ptlled, infomuch as they were fain to
i@nold them hard with their Hands to keep them from be..


“ving pulled off.


was quict for a little time while we


qwavere in the Cham ber with a Light, but we were no


fooner


P


446 ‘ The Collettion


fooner out of the Chamber with the Candle, but the noifeg j)
under the Bed, tugging of the Mat, pulling of the Bed-
clothes began again. Moreover fomething came intol ij
the Bed, which the Gentlewoman faid ran upon her by} 4
degrees, and feemed little and foft like aMole. Upon
this fhe skreekt out, and we came in again with the:
Candle, then all was ftill again. |
We retired often with the Candle, and prefently theg yj,
fame difturbance returned, together with a low whif
pering noife in many places about the Bed, but chiefly by
towards the Beds-head , which we all heard ftaying ing ),y,
the Chamber, and removing the Candle into the nextij ;,;.
Room. My Father and Mother rife, and there were,
none of us but heafd all or moft part of this, but nothing
appeared tous. The thing was continually moving and
{tirring in fome part or other of the Bed, and mofli
commonly at the Feet, where it ufually came up firft.},.
At laft it came to that boldnefs, that it would maketheq
{ame difturbance while the Candle was in the Chamber.
if but a little fhaded behind the door, fo that we could},
fometimes fee the Cloths pull’d and tugg’d, and we fre-§,
quently faw it heave and lift up the Cloths upon the Beag.,
towards the Feet, in alittle Hill or rifing, which both}.
my Brother and I often clapt our hands upon, percei-§,.”
ving it to move, and withal to makea little clacking@ ,“
noife, which cannot any more than the former whifper-}
ing be expreft in Writing. We could not perceive any
thing more than the Cloths, as often.as we faw them fog.
moved and heaved up. The Shoes were laid up upon theg


Beds Tefter, the fecond Night, to prevent the clatterg.""


ing which was made with them the night before, .anag,"“!
whilft we were ftanding talking in the Chamber, as §;'
was fome diftance from the Bed, one of the Shoes flew”
off and hit me lightly on the Head, my Hat being omg,"
And another came prefently tumbling down after itg’:
none ftirring the Bed. Afterwards the aforefaid littl."
thing came upon the Gentlewoman fo frequently, thai a
if we were but the leaft removed, fhe could not lic quieg
fi


i


| of Relations: 447
Hin her Bed. Then fhe fate up in her Bed with q Mantle
§ about her, which when we were retired was pulled at‘as
ie it would have been plucked from her. Whereupon
,,f fae cryed out again, and I came into the Chamber again,
9 and was defired to hold faft upon the Mantle about her,
~ TP which notwithftanding upon removal of the Candle was
.,,§¢ugged hard again, which I very fenfibly perceived.
| » my Brother
and I continued in the Chamber all that ni ght, till break
““Jofday, with a Candle inthe Room. The tugging of
“Vo the Mat under the Bed, the heaving of the Clothes about
‘ithe Feet, and the other whifpering noifé continuing by
“Wi Fits till light appeared. There was {carcely any of us,
‘Wil) efpecially fhe her felf, that did not Conjure that Whif-
ls“@perer, by the moft Sacred Names, to {peak out and tell
KG us its intent, but nothing was tobe feen, nor any an-


| )\
7d


ha Da!
W
ae


aahotll
pte
ii


| The third nights difturbance; the Gentlewoman re-
ui" folved now to change her Chamber, to try if the diftur-
"bance would follow, fhe did fo, my Sifter {till accom-
A tg panying of her. My Brother fate up as before below,
me mee again what wouldfollow. The fame noife
i!)was heard this third night as the night before above in
i Mat the Chamber. Wehad not fate long below before we
ui were Summoned up with loud knockings again, they
‘tl were inthe fame cafe as before, if not worfe. A while
«titfafter they were in Bed in this other Chamber, there was
(ila clattering heard at the door, prefently after the fame
ip@noife under the Bed, the fame heaving of the Cloths,and
edli@the fame whifpering as before, But towards Midnight,
(ot, that thing which came into the Bed before, came now fo
i$often, with fuch ungrateful skippings up and down up-
fon her, that fhe often skreekt and cryed out. It feemed
fcold and very fmooth as fhe related, and would com-
monly come in at her Feet, and run all upon her, by her
(i lfide to her-fhoulder, Once fhe defired me to clap my
‘thand upon her back near her fhoulder Blade, as feeling
ie@uit juft then come up thither. Ididfoon a pei
: there


}
if)


f
)


a)


}
it
A


\
4


ie
2
8


iy


Pa She Paar a are een Se LE oe 5
(ui mos atiedinantaishliie py ne. meaeatene eT


oe 4


448 The ColleEtioii


there feernéd a cold blaft or puff of Wind to blow upon
my hand juft as I clapt ic on her. And one thing more!
remarkable was this, when the whi{pering was heard aé:
her Beds-head, after we had many times in vain conjured
ic to fpeak and tellus the intent of its whifperings and!
cifturbance, I fpake to it very earneflly to fpeak ont or:
whifper louder. Hereupon it hifled out much louder
than before, but nothing intelligible to be heard. At
laft this difturbance with the thing in the Bed being no
Jonger tolerable to the Gentlewoman, my Mother rife
(lying in the next Chamber, and hearing their perplex:
ity) came into her Chamber, and prayed fometime af
her Bedfide juft by her. Whereupon it pleafed God
within a very fhort time after to remove all thofe noifes,
and that which difturbed hér. After that night, Ican-
not tell certainly, that there hath been any thing of that
nature heard in the Houfe.


Advertifement.


ra is Narrative, though it was not among Mr. Glanea?
vil’s Papers , but I found it by chance in mine owed


Study, yet it being made by an Eye-witne[s, whom I knew ta


=> yy
a


=


be one of Fudgment and Integrity, I thought fit toinfert tg


And the rather, becaufe of that pafface, ‘that when he clap ')
bis hand upon the Shoulder of the Geatlewoman where theg™'
Ghoft was, a cook blaft or puff of Air feemed to bear or blowms™
again(t his Hand. Which is like Adr. Gianvil’s Experiment


=e,


a
SSS = = =—
— 2 — ear —_


of preffing the Linnen Bag in which fome Spirit was movingg!!


wa living Animal. W. hich are notable inftances of thearg )'
eafie percribration through porous Bodies. This troublefomeg
Spirit I fufpect to have been the Ghoft of fome party decealeda )\"

who would have uttered fomething, but had not.the knack off"
[peaking fo articulately as to be underftood, And when theyg. iy


can [peak intelligibly, it is ordinarily ina hoarfe and, lowmg™


V ave.


pm party for about a quarter of an hour :


of Relations.
Voice, ws 18 obfervable in many frories, and particularly in a
very frefh frory of she Ghoft. of one deceafed that (poke to.Ja-
cob Brent,. fome two years ago, an Abprentice. then to one
Mr. Lawrence in the Little Minories ; of which to vive
fome brief account, I think fitting, for the very fame reas
fons , ‘that I have inferted this of Mr, Pafchal., namely
that itis fromde Bye-witnefs, and a difereet and well-dif-
pofed young Alan, as they that know hiin do tefitfie? and I
will fet down no.more, nor fo:much as be hiinfelf declared or
acknowledged, not only to Dr. Gudworth , Ad. Fowler,
ana Mr. Glanvil,. bur very lately to my felf allo, viz.
»- That he had Conference with the Ghoft of fome deceafed
That he bad 4 glimp/fe
of the {hape thereof, being called into the Room where it Was
by aVoice, faying, Here, Here; but that he prejently


‘tual Creed ont, Good God., let me. fee nothing; he: being fo
OT @frighted with the fi ght... But however, he entertained aif-


if


?
imanded fecrecy.in fome fpecial Matters »
\enftruttions, and.made [uch difcoveries,
dove to fome.that had been wronged by


1


courfe.with it for about the time abovementioned 5 received
feveral. things in charge from it to be done, and was com-=

hut it cave, fuch
is right might be
the party deceafed.


{Open which performance of Jacob Brent, the dijturbance o
ithe Honfe ceafed :


But for about fix Weeks before, Mr.


\“ELawrence his Houfe was miferably difturbed , they being
‘i ‘\pnoft pights affrighted wath. Thumpings and loud Knockings
at, the Chamber-doors , fometimes with a firange whir ling


vi" eos fe up and down the Rooms,


and clapping upon the Stairs.


il" And that might Jacob Brent fate up inthe Ketchin, ex pelt


\
pe ive
: ¥ ¥


Pe


tg Some Conference mith the Spirit for the quiet of the oufe,


ye beard the door. of the room above him, that was faft locke,


yn" Zy open, while he was reading inEufebius, and smmediately


A Mv


@ [wift running down the Stairs, and a great knocking at


"he Kutchin-door which food a jarr, and a chinking of Mo-


W/PLTHAL
Yh


|
TA
(ie


ey on the Stairs, ashe paffed fromthe Kitchin towards the
Vining-room over againft it, whofe Door was locke when
i\Mbey went to Bed, but now opened asthe Door of the other
'Meom above the Kitchin. :

| oe , f


i
i
i


Into


449


450 The Collection |

Into this Dining-room he was invited, af 1s abovefard,
by a Voice faying, Here; Here , and there he received,
and after executed, fuch derettoons as gave quiet afterwards
tothe Houle, and he received thanks from the Ghoft after
he had made bis Foirney abroad to fulfil its defire, at his re-
turning home, with a promife tt would never trouble the
Houfe more. And of the sroubles of the Honfe before, the
whole Family were Witneffes, a alfo of the Conference of
Jo Beand the Spirit, that they beard two {peaking in the
Dining-room, though they were not fo near to underftand
what they faid, only they heard J.B. pray to God that be
might fee nothing.

fhat the Houfe was really Haunted, befides what has
been faid already, is farther confirmed by Mr. Bamfield,
syed tolie in the Eloufe [ome days before this


who was defi


Conference of J. B. with the Spirit, who though be heard
no noifes, yer felt bis Clorbs tuckt about him, and bis Hand


kindly Aroaked be being awake all night. And that this could lite
benotrick of J.B: w further evident jrom that great emotion li


of imind le mas in after thes for fome two hours, even almoft ky
10 difkpabl ion, und was fain afterwards to be let Blond. But’
for bisconjtant temper, wexs abferved to be, and I take himmnir'
to be fuch, of a fober's boneft, and fenfible Genius , nor 189
be any Setlarian, butan orderly Son of the Church of Eng= i tiny
land, |
Andif the Injunttions of the Ghoft be converfed with, and
comnion viles’ of Prudence, did not forbid the declaring oft
fone particulars, this is an experiment that might convinces
she moft incredulous touching fuch things. But Mr. Glan-fith
vil complains in a Letter of lis to Dr. H. More, that thm iyi
(hinels ard tender refpett of per fons has hindved him of many
aconfiderable frory, as T have alfo taken notice long. fintes
how mnvilere the fiory of the Shoemaker of Breflaw zs made,
by reafon of Martinus Weinrichius bis concealing the Shoe-iy),
makers Name. But the mentioning of lockt Doors flying opens)
of their own accord, reminds me of Mr. Alcock?s frory of ati),
Chet with three Locks ualocking it felf, and flying wide open ey
and then locking it [elf again. Which is as follows, ai,


“of Relations.


RAL A Ts XXV.


Lhe Story of Mr. John Bourne of Durley ix Ireland, avoxe
a mie from Bridgwater, Cown/ellow at Lam.


it
i
a;
i


} f iy


i 4 ALR. Fobn Bourne, for his Skill, Care, and Honefty,


was made by his Neighbour Yohn Adaller Efg; of


unit Barmore, the chief of his Truftees for his Son Foby Atal.
init dee (Father to Elizabeth now Countefs Dowager of Ro-
ji chefter) and the reft of his Children in Minority. He
had the reputation of a worthy good Man, and was
it COMMonly taken notice of for an habitual faying , by
woiell) Way of Interjection, almoft to any thing, wz. You fay
Wi true, You fay true, Vou arein the right. This Mr. Bourne
‘yh fell fick at his Houfe at Durley in the year 1654. and
jell Dr. Raytoond of Ozke was fent fot to hint, who after
4 a a oe
,w@fome time gave the faid Mr. Bourne ver, And hehad
qi HOt now {poke in Twenty four hours, ‘when the {aid Dr.
we Raymnond , and Mrs. Carlifle (Mt. Bourne’s Nephew’?s
|) Wife, whofe Hasband he made one of his Heirs) fitting
Oy his Bed-fide, the Doctor opened the Curtains at the
»@Beds feet, to give him air; when ona fudden, to the
/j@horrour and amazement of Dr. Raymond and Mrs. Car-
‘Wifle, the great Iron Cheft by the Window at his Beds
meet. with three Locks to it (in whith were all the Wri-
“einigs and Evidences of the faid Mr. afaifet’s Eitate) be-
"gan te open ,. firft one Lock, then another, then the
_ dbbird. Afterwards the Lid of the {aid Iron Cheft lifted
‘App it felf, and ftood wide open. Then the Patient \ir.
' Bourne, who had not {poke in Twenty four hours, lifted
" Mimfelf up alfo, and looking upon the Cheft, cryed,
“ito fay true, You fay true, You are in the right, Pll be
"pith you by and by. So the Patient lay down, and fpake
Iho more. Then the Cheft fell apain of it felf, and lockt
"lt felf one Lock after another, as the three Locks o-
ened, and they tried to knock it open and could not,
mnd Mr, Boxrze died within an hour after. |
ee Eg Adver-


The Collection


Advertifement.


4 Eis Narrative was fent in a Letter to J.C. for Dr. H.
ai More, from Mr. Thomas Alcock of-Shear-Ham-4 ”
pton ; of which ina Letter tothe [aid Dottor he gives oe
Account, Lam, faith he, very confident of the truth of theq”
Story: for I had it from a very good Lady, the eldeft?
Daighter of the faid John Mallet, (whofe Truffce Ar,
Bourne was) and only Aunt to the Countefs of Rochelter,
who kuew all the Parties; and have beard Dr. Raymond,
and Mr. Carlifle relate it often with amazement, being:
both Per fons of Credit. |

The curious may be inguifitive what the meaning of
the opening of the Cheft may be, and of Mtr. Bourne
his faying, Youfay true, @c. Pil be with you by
and by. As for the former, it 1 noted by ;Paracelfusg:
efpecially, and by others, that there are_figns often given of ara


the departure of fick. men lying on thetr Death-beds, 6 ay


which this opening of the Iron Coffer or Cheft, and clofingg” ‘
again, is more than ordinary fignificant, efpecially if we comm’


fider the nearnefs oy Sound and Sence betwixt Coffer anes
Coffin, and recal to mind that of Virgil. (


Olli dura quies oculos & ferrems urget
Somnus ———


thongl thes quaintnels is more than is requifite in thefe Prom


digies prefaging the Sick, man’s death. As for the latter IS th


it feems to be nothing elfe but the faying Amento the prefagag™\x
uttered in bis aceuftomary form of [peech : AS ee he fhoulag \s
fay, You of the invifible Kingdom of Spirits have given tha Mii


token of my fudden departure : And you fay true, I fhaup'ty


be with youby andty. Which he was enabled fo affarealy ti")
affent to, upon the advantage of the Relaxation of bis Sop’:
mow departing fromthe Body. Which Diodorus Siculusif Yin)
Lid, 18. notes.ta be the opinion of Pythagoras and his Falip


lower sg Wy


uf


of Relations,


( jowers, that it ws the Priviledge of the Soul near her depar-=
§ ture te exercife a Fatidical faculty, and to prononince trily
a touching things future,Tesyryvas ney Ta § fuss re paraar'le

NB Heel” Oy ay movegy ey TH TEAcUTA Tey Sav OB caL.aTO yacrousy


Hon rot@yjee, “That humane Souls prognoftick things to
»j@ come at what time they are feparating from their
if p Body.


|
_— ———


eect amare


RELAT. XXVI.


7 he Apparition of James Haddock to Francis Taverner
) near Drum-bridge in Ireland, comprized in a Letter of
Thomas Alcock, to Dr. H. More.


/ T Michaelmas 1662. Francws Taverner, about 25
years old, a lufty, proper, ftout F ellow, then


“Hervant at large (afterwards Porter) to the Lord Chi-


" Yehefter Earl of Donegal, at Belfaf? in the North of Tre-
Wand, County of Astrim, and Diocefs of Connor, riding


| ‘Hate: in the night from Ailbrough homeward, near Drum-


‘Wridge, his Horfe, .though of good metal, faddenly made
a ftand; and he fuppofing him to be taken with the
(Staggers, alighted to blood him inthe mouth, and pre-
ifently mounted again. ' As he was fetting forward, there
deemed to pafs by him two Horfemen, though he could
Wnot hear the treading of their Feet; which amazed him.


_ fPrefently there appeared a third in a white Coat, juftat .


ve is Elbow, in the likenefs of Fames Haddock, for-
tnerly an Iphabitant in Afalone, where he died near five
@vears before. Whereupon Taverner askt him in the
{Name of Ged who he was? he replied, 7 am James
Mapesdock, and you may callto mind by this Token; That
Qabout five years ago and two other Friends were at your Fae
Yee’ s Houfe, and You by your F ather?s appointment™brought
es fome Nuts, and therefore be not afraid, fays the Appa-
‘AMtion. Whereupon Taverner, remembring the Cir-
— thought it might be Haddock; and thofe
Ff 3 two


453


ASA The Colleétion


two who pafied by before him, he thought to be his two
Friends with him when he gave them Nuts, and coura-
gioully askt him why he appeared to him rather than
any other. He anfwered, Becaufe he was a Man of more
refolution than others; and if he would ride his way
with him, he would acquaint him witha bufinefs he had
to deliver him. Which Taverner refufed to do, and
would go hisown way, (for they were now at a Quadri-
Vial) and fo rode on homewards. But immediately, on
their departure, there arofe a great Wind, and withal
he heard very hideous fcreeches and noifes, to his great
amazement; but riding forward as faft as he could, he
at laft heard the Cocks crow,to his comfort ; he alighted
off from his Horfe, and falling to Prayer, defired God’s
aflitance, and fo got fafe home,

The night afcer there appeared again to him the like-
nefsof Yames Haddock, and bid him goto Elexor Welfh, ,
(now the Wife of Davis living at Adalone, but formerly’
the Wife of the faid Fames Haddock, by whom fhe had!
an onely.Son, to whom the faid Fames Haddock had by’
his Will given a Leafe which he held of the Lord Chi-:
chefter, of which the Son was deprived by Davws who)
had Married his Mother) and to ask her if her Maiden-
name was not Elenor Wellh ; and if it were, to tell her,
that it was the Will of her former Husband James Had-
dock that their Son fhould be righted in the Leafe. But:
Taverner, partly loth to gainthe ill will of his Neigh-
bours, and partly thinking he fhould not be credited butt
lookt on as deluded, long neglected to do his Meflage,
till having been every night for about a Months {pace
haunted with this Apparition in feveral Forms everyy
Night more. and moreterrible, (which was ufually pre-
ceded by an unufial trembiing over his whole Body, and)
great change of Countenance manifeit to his Wife, im
whofe prefence frequently the Apparition was, thougha
not vifible to her) at length he wentto Adalone to Da-q
vis’s Wife, and asktwhether her Maiden-name was not
Elenoy Well, if it was, he had fomething to. fay vo her.

SRG


‘


F ie
Lis ho
. Cola
hed

it than
t morell
IS Wa ¥

Xs had


>


ee


Ss. =
=


a


= ET


a


Hereupon 7 averner returned without delivering his Mef-


pedneernr


of Relations.
She replied, there was another Elenor Welfh befides her.


fage. The fame night being faft afleep in his Bed, for
the former Apparitions were, as he fate by thé Fire,
with his Wife) by fomething prefling upon him, he was
awakened, and faw again the Apparition of Fames Had-
dock, in a white Coat, asatother times, who asked him
if he had delivered his Meflage? He anfwered, he had
been there with Elenor Welfh. Upon which the Appari-
tion looking more pleafantly upon him, bid him not be
afraid, and fo vanifhed ina flafh of brightnefs.

But fome nights after (he having not delivered his
Meflage) he came again, and appearing in many formi-
dable fhapes, threatned to tear him in pieces if he did
not do it. This made him leave his Houle where he
dwelt in the Mountains,atid betake himfelf to the Town
of Belfaft, where he fate up all night at one Pierce’s
Houfe a Shoemaker, accompanied with the faid Pierce,
and a Servant or two of the Lord Chichefter, who were
defirous to fee or hear the Spirit. About Midnight, as
they were all by the Fire-fide, they beheld Taverner’s
Countenance to change, and atrembling to fal] on him,
who prefently efpyed the Apparition in a Room oppo-


fite to him where he fate, and took up the Candle and


went to it, and refolutely askt it, in the Name of God,”


wherefore it haunted him? It replied, becaufe he had
not delivered the Meflage, and withal threatned to tear
him in pieces if he did not do it fpeedily , and fo,chang-
ing it felf into many prodigious fhapes , it vanifht in
white like a Ghoft. Whereupon Francis Taverner be-
came much dejected and troubled, and next day went to
the Lord Chichefter’s Houfe, and with tears in his Eyes,
related to.fome of the Family the fadnefs of his condition.
They told it tomy Lord’s Chaplain, Mr. ames South,
who came prefently to Taverner, and being acquainted
of his whole Story, advifed him to go this prefent time
to Malone to deliver punctually his Meflage, and pro-
mifed to go along with him. But firft they went to

| Ff 4. Dr.


455


456 The ColleEtion .


Dr. Lewis Downs, then Minifter of Belfaf, who upon |
hearing the Relation of the whole matter,.doubted at
firft ofthe truth of it,attributing it rather to Melancholy
than any thing of reality. But being afterwards fully
fatisfied of it, the onely {cruple remaining was, Whe-
ther it. might be lawful-to go on fuch a bufinefs, not
knowing whofe errand it was; Since, though it was a
real Apparition of fome:Spirit, yet it was queftionable
whether of a good or a badSpirit. Yet the juftice of the
Caufe, (it being the common report the Youth was
wronged) and other confiderations prevailing, he went
with them. So they three went to Davis’s Fioufe, where
the Woman being defired to come to them, Taverner
did. effectually do his Meffage , by telling. her, that he
could not be at quiet for the Ghoft of her formerHut
band Fames Haddock, who threatned to tear him ip
pieces if he did not tell her fhe mutt right Yobn Haddock
her Son by him , in a Leafe wherein fheand Davis her
now Husband had wronged him. This done, he pre-
{ently found great quictnefsin his mind; and thanking
the Gentlemen for their Company, Advice, and Aflift-
ance, he departed thence to his Brother’s Houfe at
Drum-bridge : Where, about two. Nights after, the
aforefaid Apparition’came to him again, and more plea-
fantly than formerly, askt if he had delivered his Mef.
fage? He anfwered, he had done it fully. . It replied,
that he muft do the Meflage to the Executors alfo, that
the bufinefs might be perfected. At this meeting Ta-
veraer asked the Spirit if Davis would do him any hurt;
fo which it anfwered at firft fomewhat doubtfully ; but
at length threatned Davis, if he atcempted any thing
to the injury of Taverner, and fo vanifht. away in
white. . | ~ fa Sey

. The day following, Dr. Feremie Taylor Bifhop of
Down, Connor, and Dromore, was. to go to keep. Court
at Dromore, and commanded me, who was then Secre-
tary to him, to write for Taverner to meet him there,
which he did. Andthere, inthe prefence of many, he

. “examined


q
|


of Relations.


457,
“Gexamined Taverner ttrictly in this ftrange Scene of Pro.
““Qvidence, as my Lord fti’dit; and by the Account given
“YGhim both by Taverner, and others who knew 7° averner,

‘/yand much of the former Particulars, his Lordfhip ‘was
© Watisfied that the Apparition was true and real’; °but faid
‘ino more there to him, becavfe at Fiilbrough, three Miles
0@@feom thence on his way home,my Lord was informed that
“t imy Lady Conway and other Perfons of Quality were come
“hilt purpofely to hear his Lordfhip examine the Matter. So
‘Wi SE averner went with us to Hilbrough, and there to fatis-


‘itil fie the curiofity of the freth Company, after asking ma-


i iny things anew, and fome over again, my Lord advifed
‘whim the next time the Spirit appeared, to ask bim thefe
vie jQueftions: Whence are you? Are you a good or a bad Spi-
swat ? Where t your abode ? What ftation do you hold 2 How
ili fare you regimented in the other World? And what és the
iit WReafon that you appear for the Relief of your Son in fo fmalt
‘iia matter, then fo many Widows and Orphans are oppreffed
pit tine theWorld, being defrauded of oreater matters, and none
iit Wfrom thence of their Relations appear as you do, to right

Allie bem ce
Wid)» That night Taverner was fent for to Lisburne, to my
te (Lord Conmay’s three Miles from Hilbrough, on his way
yj fhome to Belfaf?, where he was again f{trictly examined
\(- Jin the prefence of many good Men and Women, of the
«it, @forefaid matter, who was ordered to lie at my Lord
(,wiConway’s all night; and about nine or ten a Clock at
wJeNight, ftanding by the Fire-fide with his Brother and
,/it)fhiany others, his Countenance changed, and he fell into
iia trembling, the ufual Prognoftick of the Apparition;
vigand, being loth to make any difturbance in his Lorde

;ihip’s Houfe, He and his Brother went into the Court,

"here he faw the Spirie coming over the Wall; which
i; approaching nearer, askt himif he had done his Met.
millage to the Executor alfo? He replied, he had. and
‘elawondred it fhould {till haunt him. It replied, he need
ede fear, for ic wou'd. do him no hurt, nor trouble him
Pay. more, but the Executor if he did nog {ee the Boy
| fe Lea righted,


45 $ The Collection


righted. Here his Brother put him in mind to ask the:

- Spirit what the Bifhop bid him, which he did prefently.
But it gave him no Anfwer, but crawled on its Hands,
and Feet over the Wall again, and fo. vanifht in white, ,
with a moft melodious Harmony. — it)
- Note, (1) That Pierce, at whofe Houfe and ing i
whofe prefence the Apparition was, -being askt whether
he faw the Spirit, faid, he did not, but thought at that:
time he had a Mift all over his Eyes. (2) What was:
then fpoken to Taverner, was in fo low and hollow at
Voice, that they could not underftand what it faid.
(3.) At Pierce?s Houfe it ftood juft at the entry of al
Door ; and asa Maid paffed by to go in at the Door,
Taverner {aw it go afide, and, give way to the Maid,,
though fhe faw it not. (4.) That the Leafe was here-
upon difpofed on tothe Boy’s ufe, (5.) The Spirit at
thelaft appearing at my Lord Conway’s Houle, revealed!
fomewhat to Taverner, which he would not difcover to}
any of usthataskthim. — :

This Taverner, with all the Perfons and Places mene:
tioned in the Story, I knew very well, and all wife andl
good men did believe it, efpecially the Bifhop, andDean,
of Connor Dr. Ruft.  Witnefs


Your humble Servant
® 9


Thomas Alcock


eee I TC AE


Advertifement.


T will not be amifs to fet down here, what Mr. AL],
cock.adds by way of Pofffcrpt in hisLetter. Thegagy,
ys anodd Story, faith he, depending on this which I canmeiq,:,*
chufe but tell you. The Boy’s Friends put the Truftees ann§,
Executor on this Apparition’s account into our Courts, wheri§, sf
st was pleafant to bear my Lord talkto them on the whol,’
matter


| of Relations. 459
mI ‘) matter. The Uncle and T- vuftee, one John Coftlet, for-
i fwore the thing, railed on Taverner, and made ftrangeim-~
ae | precations, and witht Fudgments mi cht fall on him if be knew
a of any fuch Leafe 3 but the fear of the Apparitions menaces
_ | by Taverner fear’d him into a promifle of Suffice at laff.
‘Ci About four or five years after, when my Lord died, and
‘GO the noife of the Apparition was over, Coftlet began again to
Ni threaten the Boy with Law, &c: But being drunk at Hill-
“Mihall by Lisburne , coming home he fell from bis Hor fe,
00 fed never fpake more. This isa [ad truth to my know. |
‘int dea ge.


Se,


SES:


Pe RED AT. XEVE.


4 The Story of David Hunter Neat-herd to the Bifhop v a
wal’ Down and Connor, at Portmore ia Ireland, 1663 i
it the fame hand. Aone oe


ry, ep Aten


att IT Avid Hunter, Neat-herd at the Bifhops Honfe at ne

eae 2 Portmore, there appeared to him one night, car- |

bull rying a Log of Wood into the Dairy, an old Woman,

i which amazed him, for he knew her not: but the fright

i made him throw away his Log of Wood, ahd run into

ithe Houfe. The next night fhe appeared again to him,

and he could not chufe but follow her all night; and fo

yl almoft every:night for near three quarters of a Year.

| Whenever fhe came, he muft go with her through the

- Woods at a good round rate ; and the poorFellow lookt ih

1s if he was bewitcht and travelled off his Legs. And i @

when in Bed with his Wife, if fhe appeared, he muft |

Nrifeand go. And becaufe his Wife could not hold him a) |

; Min his Bed, fhe would go too, and walk after him till wat

iaigey; ¢ though fhe fee nothing : But his little Dog was fo nae

@ well acquainted with the Apparition, that he would i |

by y | follow see as well as his Mafter. Ifa Tree ftood in her

‘i waik, he obferved her always to go aironep 1 In all
"4, if this while ihe ipake not.


{


4


:


469 The Collettion


But one day the faid David going over a Hedge in-
to the High-way, fhe came juft againft him, and he
cryed out, Lord blefs me, would I was dead, fhall I never
be delivered from this mifery 2? At which, iad the Lord
ble{s me too, fays fhe: It was very happy you fpake firft,
for till then I had no power to fpeak,, though 1 have followed
you fo long. My Name, fays fhe, 1s Margaret ~-——, J
lived here before the War, and had one Son by my Husband,
When he died I married a Souldier, by whom I had feveral
Children, which that former Son mamtained, elfe we muft
have all ftarved. He lives beyond the Ban-water 3 pray go
to him and bid him dig under fuch a Hearth, and there he
fhall find 28s. Let him pay what I owe in [uch a place,
and the reft to the charge wnpayed at my Funeral, and goto
my Son that lives here, which I had by my latter Husband,
and tell bim, that he lives a wicked anda diffointe ltfe, and.
is very unnatural and ungrateful to bis Brother that main-
tained him, and if he does not mend his life, God Almighty
will deftroy lim.
© David Hunter told her he never knew-her. No, fays
fhe, I died feven years before you came into the Country,
But for all that, if he would do her Meffage fhe fhould
never hurt him, « But he deferred doing asthe Appari-
tion bid: him, and fhe appeared the night after as he lay
in Bed, and ftruck him on the thoulder very hard; at:
which he cryed out, and askt her if fhe did not promife
fhe would not hurt him? She faid, that was if-he did her
Meflage; if not, fhe would kill him. He told hier he
could not go now by reafon the Waters were out. She
faid fhe was content he fhould ftay till they were abated;
but charged him afterwards not to fail her. So he did
her errand, and afterwards fhe appeared and gave him
thanks. For now, faid fhe, I fhal be at reft, therefore
pray lift me up fromthe ground , and I will trouble you no
more. SO David Hunter lifted her up from the ground,
and, ashe faid, fhe felt juft like a Bag of Feathers in his
Arms. So fhe vanifht, and he heard:moft:delicate Mu-
fick as fhe went off, over hishead; and he neyer was
nore troubled. This


of Relations.


This acccount the poor Fellow gave us evéry day as


| the Apparition fpake to him, and my Lady Conway
jg Came to Portmore, where fhe askt the Fellow the fame
.'B queftions, and many more. This I know to be true, being

f all the while with my Lord of Down, and the Fellow but
"} 2 poor Neat-herd there.


Thomas Alceck.'


eee:


Advertifement.
: U #5 no {mall confirmation to my Self of the truth of thefe


RIOTS


two laft Stortes, in both which my Lady Conway 1s men-

SG tioned, inthat I received two Letters from that sncompara-
Wl ble Lady ont of Ireland touching them both. The former is
Wi) dated, Lisburn, Adzarch 3. 1662. wherein fhe writes
(thas: YT have {poken lately with two fimple Country
| people who have been much, perplexed with two fevera!
‘8 Perfons who have died lately. The Stories aretoo long to
(wi relate; but the Circumf{tances are fuch, as I know not
‘i how to misbelieve the Stories. The Perfons cannot be
i'd Lufpected to have any Defign , and were altogether un-
si} acquainted in the Families of them that appeared, and


a
1


it; wholly ignorant of thofe things in them that they now
yg gelate, and have charge to follicite the amendment of
ig fome Mifcarriages by fome Perfons intrufted, which
(0'l they could never hear of, asis fuppofed, by any other
| “means.. There are many other Probabilities, but all
jill evaded by feveral Perfonshere. -Andto give you a Tafte
etl of their goodly Evafions, I will tranferibe a Paffage out of
«iM the other Letter of the [aid excellent Lady, dated Lisburn,
bal it April 29. 1663. whereon fhe writes thus: The Relation I
yi fene you of twoin this Country is certainly liable to as
“if ttle exception (There was mention of the Drummer of
<9) Tedworth before) as any one fhall meet with, As may
: \ifappear by the diligent fearch fome have made for a Si
y an


462 "The Colleétion


and Objection againift the Parties, who,after all,they consi jit
fefs,muit needs appear perfectly uninterefled, and impof= 4 jm"
fible to have had from any concerned, what they have de-4 {ii
livered... But they believe that either Drunkennefs, ox pi
defperate Melancholy did by chance enable them toi
light upon greater Truths than themfelves thought of, Jig
Thus far that excellent Perfon. . And it was enough for this Swi
noble Lady onely to recite their Solution of the Phanomenon in

gato Melancholy avd Drunkennefs, it berng fotrifling and»

filly, that it wanted no farther Refutation than the mereq

Recst dbs 3 aa |


That Drink, may difcover the Secrets of him that i
Drunk, a the Poet obferves, is reafonable enough :- butt
that a Dan by being drunk w better capacitated to undere
fland the Secrets of another 24 an, or. of bis Eamily, a fo
wild a Paradox, that no Sober Man can admiti.. And i
what ws Melancholy but.2 natural Drunkennefs wher zt fer-
ments ? And moreover, it being but by chance that Mclan-4
choly orDrunkennefs enables them to light upon fuch things, §)
why may not Sanguine and Sobriety chance as well to do thegin
fame,and nor rather better if there be any berternefs in things min,
by chance ? But if there be any advantage in fermenting ®))
Melanelioly or {trong Drink, it #% becaufe the Soul o moxemilins
excited, and made more ready to difcover its own more. inn
ward Furniture, 2 Men in drink reveal their own Secrets. diihiy.
But the Soul has no innate Ideas of. particular things, and@inyny
therefore the greateft Efferve{cency of Drink or Melancholpg »\
will not a jot beter difpofe her to the knowledge of Particu-sihy ,
lars, but indifvofe her for the reception of them from withes\.
out. So blindly do thefe Witlings Philofophize touching:
things of this Nature. j | !

And yet, 1 dare fay, this was the very bef? of thetr Eva-Aly,
fions : Which being no better againft thefetwo Stories, andigly,
the Stories fo fifted and examined (to fay nothing of others yen.
by a Perfonof fo quicka Wit, impartial fudgment and Sa~f\y.
Lacity, as I know that excellent Lady to bave been, I muftq\y,
Confefs, that to me it % a Confirmation a ftrong as I cam”
Acfine for the main ftrokes of the Stories, of which I We hy.

- is ie


of Relations.

(4 fi memory having heard amore particular Account of them
i from berLady{np prefently upon her return from Ireland fome
ditt fircteen years ago. “Nor do doubt but Adr. Alcock has Apa
“S proved bimfelf a faithful Reciter of them as tothe main: nor
“il (ean there any one rightly be deemed more fit and able, be bea
“Wag prefenr at the Exammation of Taverner, and Awelling at


‘winPortmore with the Bifhop of Down, whofe fervant Hunter


+ AU


RELAT. XXVIII.


(i WM he Confelfions of certain Scotch Witches, taken out of an
iwi <anthentick Copy of their Trial at the Affizes held at Pai-
i, fley #2 Scotland, Feb. ry. 1678. touching the bewitching
, i of Ser George Maxwel.


be | HE Tenour of the Confeffions taken before Julti-
ces: As firft of Anmbal Stuart of the age of four-
»iilkeen years, or thereby; who declared that fhe was
jyproughe in the prefence of the Jultices for the crime of
wn itcheraft , and declared that on Harveft laft, the De-
iwgil in the fhape of a black Man came to her Mother’s
nilftoufe, and required the Declarant to give her felf u
(0 him, and that the Devil promifed her that fhe fhould
,, mot want any thing that was good. Declares,that fhe be-
yaigag enticed by her Mother Fanner Adathie, and Beffie
(ue, who was Officer to their feveral meetings, the
_ put her hand to the crown of her Head, and the other
ae the foal of her Foot, and did give her felf up to the
evil. Declares, that her Mother promifed her a new
jwAooat for doing of it. Declares that her Spirit?s Name was
 Menippa, and that the Devil took her by the Hand and
(hipped her Arm, which continued ro be fore for half an
‘our. Declares, that the Devil in the fhape of a black
" jiMan lay with her in the Bed under the Clothes, and that
\ he found-him cold. Declares, that thereafter he placed
ber neareft himfelf. And declares, the was buen
} neL


y 0 |
i
Ft phe


463


phate Hes


Pa oe
iA AS ES


nibinza
Nowe


N6A +e The Collettion


her Mothers Houfe when the Effigies of Wax wasmade:
and that it was made to reprefent Sir George Afaxwel!


Declares, that-the black. Man, Saner Mathie, the Des jw


clarant’s Mother. (whofe Spirit’s name: was Landlady:
Beffie Wer, whofe Spirit’s name is: Sopha;. Margares
Craige, whofe Spirit?s name. is. Rigerum,+.and Adargarer
Fackfon, whofe Spirit’s name is. Locas,-were all, prefemt
at the making of the faid Efigies; and-that they bound
it on aSpit,.and turned ic before the Fire ; and that it
was turned by BeffieWeir, faying, as they turned it, Sit


George Maxwel, Sit George Maxwel , and that this wasp;


exprefled by all of them, and by the Declarant. Deg}
clares, that this Picture was made in Ottober laft..: -Ancg gy
further declares, that upon the third day-of January
inftant, . BeffieWeir came to her Mothers Houfe, .and ad-f;


vertifed her to come to her Brother Yoh Stuart?s uwporm gt):


the night following. And that accordingly fhe came taf.)


the placé, where fhe found BejieWeir, Adargery Craiged |i
Margaret Fackfon, and her Brother Fobn Stuart, and c4}\\,,
Man with black Cloths,.a blue Band, and white Hand...
cuffs with Hogers, and that his Feet were cloven:. Andi)...


the Declarant fate down by the Fire-fide. with them
when they madea Picture of Clay, in which they placec#yq,
Pins in the Breaft. and Sides ; -And declares, that theygy,:;
placed-one in every Side, and one in the Brealt. Decla§),,


red, that the black Man did put the Pins in the Pichunagy;.
of Wax ;: but isnot fure who put in the Pins in the Piigy,,
étureof Clay, Declares, that the Effigies producéu ara§y,


the Effigies fhe faw made. Declares,that the black Manfiy:


name is Ejoall. This Declaration was emitted beforaf,,.


Fames Dunlop of Hufil, William Gremlaye, &c. , Fan. 294
1677. Ita eft. Robertus Park Wotarios Publicus, &e.


The fecond Confeflion is of. ohn Stuart, who beinggy),


interrogate anent this crime of Witcheraft,, declared},


That upon Wednefday the third day of Fanuary inftant-$y
Bee Weir in Polloéton, came to the Declarant late ath.’


night, who being without doors near his own Houfey
the faid Beffie Weir did intimate to him, that there, wasfiy *
ameet-— *


vy


—


| of Relations. 465


i) @ meeting to be at his Houfe the next day: And that the
4 Devil under the fhape ofa black Man, Adargaret Fackfon,
4 Margery Craige, and the faid Bejie Weir, were ts


Is LO DE

e“@ prefent. And that Beffie Weir, required the Declarant
@ to be there, which he promifed. And-that the next
“Sq night, after the Declarant had gone to Bed, the black
““) Man came in and celled the Declarant quictiy by his
““@ name. Upon-which he arofe from his Hed, and put on i
Ml his Cloths, and lighted a Candle. Declares, that Azur- Hi
“il garet Fackfon, Beffie Weir, and Margery Craige, did en (
‘I@ter in ata Window in the Gavil of the Declarant?s
i Wi Houfe. And that the firft thing that the black Man re-

sig quired, was, that the Declarant fhould renounce

iw Baptifm, and deliver himfelf up wholly to him: Which
iii the Declarant did, by putting one hand on the crown
a lof his Head, and the other on the foal of hisFoot. And
vaniithat he was tempted to it by the Devil’s promifing chat
yw@he fhould not want any pleafure, and that he fhovid cet i
il@his heart filled on all that fhall do him wrong. De- i
ilfclares, that he gave him the name of | onas for his Spi- a
«4; digeit?s name. Declares, that thereafter the Devil required ff
iitevery one of their confents for the making of the Etfigies ‘sz


kof Clay for the taking away the life of Sir George Max-
ytiiwel of Pollock, to revenge the taking the Declarant’s Mo-
Dither Fanner Mathie. Declares, that every one of the
ijiugperfons above-named gave their confent to the making
wip the faid Effigies, and that they wrought the Clay,
jyv'mnd that the black Man did make the Figure of the Head
«mend Face, and two Arms to the faid Efiigies. Declares,
|\iihat the Devil fet three Pins in the fame, one in each
: 1 and one in the Breaft: And that the Declarant did
y, mold the Candle to them all the time the Picture was a
fe sere: And that he obferved one of the black Man?s a
vsgieet to be cloven: and that the black Man’s Apparel
ogvas black: and that he had a b'ueifh Band and Hand-
xulis 5 and that he had Hogers on his Legs without Shoes:
“ugignd that the black Man’s Voice was hough and goulty.


wa(qend further declares, that after they had begun the |)
i Gg forming ve


‘|
.
oy


LB


ae


i"
eS
ex
is
i =
eR.
as
ie
i:
ee
|


aes The Collestion


forming of the Effigies, his Sifter Annabil Stuart, at


Child of thirteen or fourteen years of Age, came knock-
ing at the Door, and being let in by the Declarant, fhe:
ftaid with them a confiderable time, but that fhe went
away before the reft, he having opened the Door to:


fel i
te
dant
iA
art


her. Declares, that the reft went out at the Window#,, ,,


at which they entred. Declares, that the Effigies was


placed by Beffie Weir in his Bedftraw. He further dead.c


@


clares, he himfelf did envy againft Sir George Adixmel§, He


for apprehending Fanner Mathie his Mother: And thaty,...


Beffie Weir had great malice againft this Sir George Adax


wel; and that her quarrel was, as the Declarant con-= a
ceived, becaufe the faid Sir George had not entred herg;,,
Husband to his Harveft-fervice ; and alfo declares, thatq..,,


the faid Effigles was made upon the fourth day of Fa


auary inftant, and that the Devil’s name was Ejoall. Dex}, :
clarés, that his Spirits name was Fora, and Beffie Weirsa., .
Spirit’s name, who was Officer, was Sopha, and that -
Mar caret Fackfons Spirits name was Locas, and thati.,.,’
Annabil Stuare’s, the Declarant’s Sifters was Exippa ; but”
does not remember what A4Zargery Craige’s Spirits nameg,).’'
was. Declares, that he cannot write. This Confefliomg, °
was emitted in the prefence of the Witnefles to the otheng,,,-
Confeffion, endonthefame day. Jtaeff. Robertus Parkg,’,”


Notarivs Publicus, &.


The Confeflion of Margaret Fackfon, Relict of Thom, ,
Stuart in Shaws , who being examined by the Juttices§


anent her, being guilty of Witchcraft, declares, That
fhe was prefent at the making of the firft Effigies an
Picture that was made in Fannet Mathie’s Houfe in Otto-+


ber, and that the Devil in the fhape of a black Man, faa,"
net Mathie, Beffie Wer, Margery Crazge, and Annabsi ; NT
Stuart, was prefent at the making of the faid Effigies#,"
and that it was made to reprefent Sir George Maxwel om,
Pollock, for the taking away his life. Declares, thai,’
forty years ago, or thereabout, fhe was at Pollock{hawa, “
croft, with fome few fticks on her. back, and that th, *?
black Man came to her, and that fhe did give up hem’


fell!


of Relations. 467
suf Self unto the black Man ‘from the top of her Head to
am hen foal of her Foot ; and that this was after-the De.
" : clarant’s renouncing of her Baptifin 5 and that the Spi-


iy


,fX1e's name which he defigned'her, was Loca. And that i |
i:,j,@a00ut the third or fourth of January inftant, ‘or there- i
(by, inthe night time wlien fhe awaked, fhe found a'Man
., #0 ‘be in Bed with her, whom fhe fuppofed to have been
"Kher Husband, though her Husband had been dead twen- ‘|
i: ity years or thereby, and that the Man immediately dif- H
“4appeared: and declares , that this Man, who difap-
s""Wpeared was the Devil. Declares, that upon 7 hurfday, My
“listhe 4th of Fanuary inftant, {he was prefent in the Honfe
ONDE Fohn Stuart at night when the Effigies of Clay was
a ade, and that fhe faw the black Man there, fometimes
_ ultting, fometimes ftanding with Fobn Stuart , and that
“She black Man?s Cloths were black , and that he ‘had
"ivhite Handcuffs. And that Bejfie Wetr in Pollockton, and
a “Menabil Stuart in Shaws, and Margary Craige, were at
‘ihe aforefaid time and place of making the faid Effigies ff
i "EF Clay; and declares, that fhe gave her confent to the | o£
ih Making of the fame’, and declares, that the Devils name, |
vi"~ho compeired in the black Man’s fhape, was Ejoall,
Ne fabfcribitur. Tea eft. Robertus Park Notarins Publi.


4


fis lies, Bcc


Ad Wow follow the Depofitions of certain Perfons agreting with
the Confelfions of the abovefaid Witches.

fai A Ndr, Martin Servitour to the Lord of Pollock, of

bi the Age of Thirty years or thereby, depones,

(a,/#hat he was prefent in the Houfe of Fannet Mathie Pan-

; il When the Picture of Wax produced was found in a

ii@tle hole in the Wall at the back of the Fire. De-


iV
i}
in


and


468 The Colleétion


and difcovered in Faunet Mathie’s Houle. Depones,
that the Pins were placed .in the right and left fides, and!
that Sit George Afaxwell of Pollock his pains, as he under-
ftood by Sir George’s complaining of thefe pains, layy
moft in his right and left fides. And depones, tirat Siu
George his pains did abate and relent after the finding of
the faid Pi@ture of Wax, and taking out of the Pins ai


isfaid. And depones, that, the Pannal Fannet Adathay a


has been by fame and bruite reputed a Witch thefe fe


veral years by-paft, And this is the truth as he fhall am ( !


fwer to God. Sic fubferib. Andr. Martin.


Laurence Pollock Secretary to the Lord of Pollock, {wor iM


and purged of partial Counfei , depones as follow:
That on the * * day of December he was in the Pats


| Dat)
[po


Dns,


a


nel Fanner Mathie’s Houfe when the Picture was found.’
and that he did not fee it before it was brought to ty
Pannal’s door. Depomes, that Sir George Adaxwel ' nC
Pollock?s ficknefs did feize upon him about the fourteent#.


of Ofober or thereby, and he did continue in his Sich


“nefs or. Diftemper for fix Weeks or thereby. Depong ioe


that Sir George his Sicknefs did abate and relent after i)


“e>


finding of the faid Picture of Wax, and taking out


‘phe Pins that were. in the Efigies. Depones, that IF


open bruit-and common fame, fannet Mathie, and Be)


Wer, and Margery Crarge, ate brandit to be Witchap™«


Depones, That the truth is this as he fhall anfwer it
God. Sic fubferib, Laurence Pollock.

Lodovie Staart of Auchunbead being {worn and pu
ged.of partial Counfel, depones, That Sir George |
Sicknefs fell upon him the fourteenth or fifteenth
Otober, or thereby. Depones, that he was not prefag
at the finding of the Picture of Wax; but that he hy
feen Sir George JZaxwel of Pollock, after it was foun)


and having feen him in his Sicknefs often times befou* 1
he did perceive that Sir George had fenfibly recover) mth
after the time that the faid Picture was faid to be fou biG
which was upon the.1:1rh or 12¢h of December. Deporigm'
chat Fanner Adathie, and Margery Craige, two of (Pt


\ Panny


| of Relations.


wna Pannals,are by report of the Country faid to be Witches.
i6 i Depones, that he having come to Pollock, he did fee Sir
sino George Adaxwel, “whofe pains did recur, and that his
i |@ Pains and torments were preatly encreafed in refpect of
jo What they were before the finding of the PiGure of
in Wax. Depones, that upon the 8th of Fannary, when
.), gthey left the faid’Sir George Maxwel of Pollock, the De-
,@ ponent fames Dunlop of Hou/il, Allan Douglace, and fe-
.,@veral others, did:goto the Houle of John Stuart Warlock
if Pollock. fhaw, and there he found a Picture of Clay in
“ithe faid fobn Sruart’s Bed-{traw: Depones, that there
, gwere three Pins in the faid Picture of Clay, and that there
.awasone in each fide, and one in the Breaft: and de- Ne
pones, that being returned to Sir George his Houfe, Sir
“, BGeorge told the Deponent, that he found great eafe of
his pains, and that it was before the Deponent Hou/il
" jand the reft did reveal to him that they had found the i"
“ a Picture of Clay; and further depones,that to his own ih
“-@obfervation he did perceive that Sir George had fenfibly
i Fecovered. Depones,that they took the faid Yobn Stuart
/! Pannal Prifoner with them at the finding of the faid Ef-
“Tigies. And depones, that this is truth ashe fhall an-
it) Fwer God. Sie fubferib, Lodowick Stuart.
‘Gs There follow more Depofitions in the Copy, but
\’Ghefe are the moft for our purpofe, and enough to dif-
hover that the Confeffions of thofe Witches are no Fa-
ili hes nor Dreams. |


oe deus x . get


=


So iadlson cei


ound them; and feveral words there are which I profefs


|  Advertifement.
ie " rHefe Confeflions and Depofitions are tranfcribed
"MR out of the Copy in the fame Scorréfh Dialect that I

4 underftand not, as-thofe for example concerning the

lack Man’s Voice, that it was hough and gouftie: But me |
; the Voice of this black Man be like that of his who Wa


Gz 3 appeared ig


pia
1P\

q|

I


I


r
(
\"
f
|
|
{


|


ik


L


i
4
$
e
AI
ca


DLA IY! we + met ae
BP Re


m


or


47 agai The Colleétion


appeared to the Witches whom: Mr. Aunt examined,
they, may fignifeabig-and dow Voices... :
There is another, Scortefh Tryal-ofs Witches ‘amongih
Mr. Glanvil’s Papers, with the fame general fubfcription
that this has, viz. Robert Adartim Clerk: to. the: Jultice
Court. . Bat. that) is. of too oldiardate,.it being in the
year 1590. tocomply witlithe title ofourSxories. But
it being a: trueCopy. of Retord fo Authentick, though
not fo frehh, it.may baply not be:amifs briefly to name,
fome Effects, Kinds, ov Circumftances, of Witchcraft)
therein mentioned ; fuclrefpecially as:have not occurred;
in: the foregoing Stories ;- as the giving and taking:away q)
power from fundry mens Genital-Members, Sor which@,
Fannet Clark: was acculed: | i)
. That which is obfervable in John Fiene is, what tied yy.
Devil appeared to him «not: in black , but im: white rays ite
ment; but. propofedsas hellifh a Covenant to him! agit te)


thofe Fiends that-appearin black: As alfo lying deadly.
two or three:hours, :atid-his Spivrittane,, (as the Phrafed jy;


in the Record:is) his being carried or tranfported: tom 4,
many Mountains, and;.as he thought, through thég|j),,,
World, according to hisown Depofitions.. His. hearing ii,’
the Devil preachut a Kirk in the:Pulpit inthe night by Mim
Candle-light,. the Candle burning: blue. That in aa,
Conwenticle: of Witches, whofe: Names are fpecified ini,
the Record, he with the reft, at! parting, kifled: the@)y),
Devil’s Breech , the Record fpeaks morebroadly. Hisaiyg..,
skimming on the Sea ina Boat with thofe of his Gang, fy,
and his foretelling the Leak in the Queens Ship by thes
help of the Devil. . His raifing Winds with the reft ata ;
the King’s paflage into-Denmark, by cafting.a Cat into) hy
the Sea, which the Devil delivered to them, and taught,
them to cry Hola when they firft.cafb it: in, His raifingay, .
a Mith at the King’s return from: Denmark, by getting, ;,
Satan toi caft a. thing: like.aFootsbal!l Gt appearing tomy,
Fokn like a Wifp) into the Sea, which made a -vapourmyy, ;
or reek to arife; whereby the King’s Majefty might bem, *
call upon the Coalt of England. His hearing the Devil,

againig -


of Relations. A471


“B again preach in a Pulpit in black, who after pointed
yf them to Graves, to open and difmember the Corps
therein ; which done, incontinently they were tran-
‘4 fported without words. His opening Locks by Sorce-
"ry, as one by mere blowing into a Woman’s hand while
“Ghe fate by the Fire. His raifing four Candles on the
 §Luggs of an Horfe, and another on the top of the Staff
“of his Rider in the night, that he made it as light as
“¥day; and how the Man fell down dead at the entring
“within his Houfe at his return home. His embarquing
“in a Boat with other Witches, and failing over Sea, and
““Wentring within a Ship, and drinking good Wine and Ale
iGthere, and finking the Ship when they had done, with
athe perfons in it. His kifling Satan?s Breech again after
i liganother Conventicle, His being {wiftly carried above
iw/tfin the chafing of a Cat ‘to catch her to caftinto the Sea,
vui@thereby to raife Winds, according to the prefcription
pdf Satan. His pretending to tell any Man how long he
‘Hhdifhould live if he told him but the day of his birth.
welt] “There are alfo feveral things in Agnes Sympfons
wih WW itcheraft , fach as there {carce occur the like in the
sjeamoregoing ftories, Asher skill.in Difeafes. That the
siiiicknefs of William Black was an Elf-fhot. Her hearing
i@lfo of them by Sorcery, and foretelling the party whe-
vji@her he fhould live or die, and others how long they
j{ihould live. Her taking the fick parties pains and fick-
 tiheffes upon her felf for a time, and then tranflating it
Gio a third perfon. Her ufe of long fcriptural Prayers:
; Ave Rhymes, containing the main points of Chriftiani-
_¢timity, fo that fhe may feem to have been not fo much a
wi@vhite Witch as an holy Woman. And yet it is upon
jeaecord that fhe made a Covenant with the Devil inthe
 @jhape of a Man, and in fuch like hellifh manner, as o-
_qomner Witches do, But when fhe fought for anfwers
“sirom the Devil upon any occafion, he appeared to her
‘oa the fhape of a Dog ; but the formula of her difiniffing
(bE him, was, The charging him to depart on the Law he
“oi'ves oz, as fhe did when fhe difmift him after her con-
| | _ Gg4 fulting


|


472 The Collettion !
fulting him about the old Lady. Edmonfton’s ficknels 5 § hi)
but her invocation was, Elva, come and [peak to me, wha
came in the likenefs of a Dog. Her failing with her
Fellow-Witches in a Boat to a Ship, where the (evil
caufed her to drink good Wine, fhe neither feeing the
Mariners, nor the Mariners her. But after all, the!
Devil railed a Wind whereby the Ship perifhed. Her)
baptizing, and ufing other Ceremonies upon a Cat,,
with other Witches, to hinder the Queens coming into
Stotland. Her raifing of a Spirit to conjure a Picture offi
Wex for the deltroying of Mr. Fobn Afof{crope.

' Hitherto I have brought but {mall fhreds out of this:
ancient Record, but 1 will conclude with a full Para-
graph, it containing the Confeffion of Agves Sympfon tot
King Fames then of the Scots: Which is this.

Trem, Fyled and convict for fameckle as fhe confefti
before his Majefty, that the Devil in Mans likenefs met
her going out in the Fields from her own Houfe ati
Keith betwixt five and fix at Even, being alone, and
commandit her to be at Northbervick-Kirk the next
night. And fhe paft then on Horfeback, conveyed by
her Good-fon ‘ca led ‘fobn Couper, and lighted at the
Kirk-yard, ora little before fhe came to it, about ele.
ven hours at Even. They danced along the Kirk-yard!
Geilie Duncan piaid to them on a Trump ,. fohn Fier
muffiled led all the reft , the faid Agnes and herDaughte
followed next. Befides, there were: Kate Grey, Georg
Moilis’s Wife, Robert Greirfon, Katharine Duncan, Belfi
Right, Ifabel Gilmore, Sohn Graymatll,Duncan Buchanan
Thomas Barnbil and his Wife, Galbert Adaceil, Fob. Mac:
gil, Katharine Macgil, with the reft of their Compliceg
above an hundred perfons, whereof there were fix Men
and all the reft Women, The Women made firft theis
homage, andthenthe Men. The Men were turned nin
times widderfhins about, and the Women fix times ip,:
Foku Fien blew up the Doors and. blew in the Lightsg hj,
which were like mickle black Candles fticking rouni
about the Pulpic. , The t evil ftarti¢ up himfelf in th

Pulp)


= —- So


SSS"
= 5S sa ee
= ~— Oo


—4
—_


aS
=>


,—— es =
= = —,


—


SS: =
= . =


=< es Sey
— <<


of Relations. 473


‘thi Pulpit like a mickle black Man, and every one anfwered
‘Wi dere. Mr. Robert Greirfon being named, they all ran
‘tii hirdie girdie, and were angry: for it was promifed he
‘iif fhould be called Roberr the Comptroller , alias Rob the
‘iti Rowar, for exprimingof his name. The firft thing he
‘ti demandit was, ifthey keept all promife, and been good
int Servants, and what they had done fince the laft time
‘ai they had convened. At his command they opened up
ini] three Graves, two within, and ane without the Kirk,
‘uit and took off the Joints of their Fingers, Toes, and
) Neife, and parted them amongit them: and the faid
‘ti Agnes Sympfon got for her part a Winding- fheet and two
il ua Joynts. “The Devil commandit them to keep the Joynts
aif upon them while they were dry, and then to make a
it powder of them to do evil withal. Then he comman-
sql] dit them to keep his Commandments, which were totlo
«iid all the evil they could, Before they departed they kifs’d
eM) his Breech; the Record fpeaks more broad, as I noted
«i before. He had on him ane Gown and ane Hat, which
yl) Were both black: and they that were aflembled, part
@ ftood and part fate : ohn Fien was ever neareft the De-
i vil at his left Elbock, Graymaill keeped the door.
|. I have retained the Scotch Dialect here alfo, for the
£
i


pi large Paragraph, the Confeflion therein contained
a being in all probability a more fpecial occafion of King
i Fames his changMg his opinion touching the Exiftence
ya Of Witches, which he was, as is reported, inclinable to
y@ think to be but a mere conceit before. For he was then
,, i but young, not. pailing five or fix and twenty years of
‘ala age when this Examination was had before him. And
'; (@ part of the Third Chapter of his Second Book of his De-
‘ssl zaonologie feems to be a Tranfcript of this very Confefi-
"on. Wherefore this being fo confiderable an occurrence
“i touching a bufinefs of fuch moment, the bringing in here
‘gto old a Story amongft thofe of frefher memory, will, [
“hope, bring along with it its own excufe.
Thus have we contrived all the Relations in Mr. Glan-
§ viL?s


wf More Authenticknefs of the matter, and have adjoined


sane tee
akin Salt


axdromecii aries: m8


- seers pee ee


4 74 The Collettion


%Ps Papers which were thonght confiderable, into this
fecond Part of his Saduci(mus Trinmpbatus. He once in-
tended to fubjoyn thereto an Anfwer to Web/er, Wag-
aff, and the Authenr of the Dottrine of Devils, as you
may obierve from the firlt Section of his Proof of Appa-
ritions, &Cc. from hely Scripture : but partly by bringing
in already the chief things in that rude draught begun,
into what is here publifned , and partly by ftating the
Queition truly and with right judgment, he has preven-
ted himfelf, and made that labour needlefs. As indeed
in a manner it ever was, their Objections againft Mr.
Glanvil’s Opinion on thefe points, being: wondrous
weak, forry, and fophiftical, and fach as it were pity
that any Man-of Parts, who can beftow his time better,
fhould fquander it away in confuting fuch trifles.

_ ¢There is nothing that makes any leaft thew of ftrength,
but that touching the palpability of the confiftency of
the Bodies of the Familiars of Witches, as if it weakned
our Saviour’s Argument to his Difciples for his Refurre-
ction, where he bids chem handle him and fee, for a
_ Spitit has not flefh and bones as they fee him have. And

he bids Thoma thruft his Hand into his Side, that they
might be fure he was no Spectre or Spirit, but the very
Chrift with his Flefh, Bloud, and Bones, as he had before
his Crucifixion ; and they were as well afcertained: of
this, as fenfe, nay the fureft fenfe, that of a Touch, or
Feeling, could make them, that he hawreally Flefh and
Bones, and fuch a temperament as humane Bodies have.
Nor can any cavil avail againit this from the Familiars
of Witches, that will not as well weaken the affurance
that we converfe with fuch or fuch a Friend, but with
fome Spectre like him; Sothat the Allegation is as week
as peevifh and malicious. And if he fhould doubt whe-
ther it was his real Friend, or fome Spectre, if hisFriend


fhould offer himfelf, as our Saviour did, to be touched, Bixi,,


fearched and felt, would not any body think it were
fufficient aflurance ? But fora perverfeCaviller, or cra-
zy Sceptick, what is it that will fatisfie them?

But


inane


of Relations. 475 ae


ib) But it may be well faid, that there be concomitant
iui COnfderations that will: aflure the party it is his
iid Exiend and not aSpeétre. And are there not concomi-
‘jjy@ €ant confiderations here alfo? The ancient Prophecies,
" and Chrift’s own Prediction that: he fhould rife from the
‘wi Gad out of the Grave. And that; God isa God of truth,
tv and not of unfaithfulnefs and im pofture : Which affu-
i 4 Larice is of a more high and divine Tenour than that of
yeu feeling his Body. And therefore our Saviour faith to
\idel Lhomas ,; THOM AS, becanfe thorn haft feen me thou haft
ih Geliewed , Bleffed are they that have wot [een and yer have
ii Aelieved : For itis a fizn thata more noble and heavenly
eid PLInciple is awakened in them, ‘that’ difpels that thick
wg Mitt of Sceptical ftupor and dulnefs. Iisa fign they
garesof amore holy, pure, and refined temper. And
ig belides all this, What Spectre ever challenged any one K
tO make fuch a Trialas this, to feel whether he was not a
vaglavery Elefh and Bone zis real Men are, when he would
\nefmpofe upon any ? Or how is it proved , though Spirits eh
ean. bring their Vehicle to a palpable confiftency, that 1
, yithey can turn it into fuch as fhall feelof the fame arti-
culate palpablenefs of |Flefh and Bone, and Temperament
«athat are in living Men ? Till this appear by confeft ex-
(aperience to be in the jpalpable confiltecy of Familiars
jor Spirits that tranfact with Witches, the Allegation is
infinitely weak upon th: 3t account alfo, as weak as fpight-
.iifal and perverfe. “But the Hag- Advocates will alledge
_edany foolith thing rather than feem to beable to fay no-
Athing.
rq In the mean time I th ink it here feafonable to ‘declare,
“achat though this intende d Edition of Saduci{mws Trium-
" iliphats had not the happi nefs to be perfected by the in-
' AgZenious Author?s own hai 1d before his death, yet fuch
” daMlaterials he left behind hit n, and the work in fch a for-
IM iwardnefs, that things beix\g put together in that order
“Mand diftinétnefs which they are, the Difcourfe may prove a
Unies #feful for the reclaiming Men from Saduci/fin, though wa |
perhaps not altogether fo 4 slightful, as if h is own gate Lt
i na HE |


sR


é
'


z
*
ry

=
:

}
oa
9
‘4
a


RE aie LARP Immonen. mad santetee
IF 5 aed ee "
iS 5 EC of eo


476 The Colletion, 8c.


had had the polifhing of it. And the publifhing of it
will alfo do him that right in. the eyes of the World;
that, (whereas he was-fufpected haply for fome complai-
{ance towards fome perfons that were over-inclinable to
Hobbianifm, to have fhrank from the fenfe of fuch noble
Theories, with which, his Mind was enlightned in the
Morning of his days) it from hence may appear that
thefe things ftuck clofe to him, and that he entertained
them with a fincere warmth allalong, as is evident from
thefe Papers then private within his own Study-Walls, |
As the profeffion of them broke out from him moft ex-
prefly when he lay on his Death-bed, as his intimate
Friend Mr, Thomas Alcock largely fets down in a Letter
written to Dr. H.Agore. And I think that is the rime;.
if ever that Men will {peak their thoughts freely, as the
Poet hath obferved in the like cafe,


Nam vere voces tum demum pettore ab imo
Ejiciuntur, & eripitur perfona, manet res.


To this Senfe,
Then ’tis Men from their Hearts their Mind declare,
Caft off their Vizards, fhew. their Faces. bare;


ese a RUA > DRE ETI It ASSLT ALLELE LEELA DALLAS LED, | SENSIS LEAS,


OP T-HE


OR, AN


ADDITION


Of fome few \


More Remarkable


AND
| TRUE STORIES


| 8 see


|. Apparitions and Witchcraft.
| By HENRY MORE, D.D. |


—


) Whereunto is added Mr. 7. G. his Letter to Dr. H. M.
} touching the ftirs of Tedworth ; With his Reflettions
i on Drollery and Athei{m, and the Doctor’s Advertife-
| ments thereon.


| LONDON,
Printed for S. Lownds, MDC LXXXVIII.


a


OF THE


COLLECTION.


ee


RELAT. I


\4Tran(cription of aNarrative, out of the Natural Hiftory
} of Oxford hhire, of the ftrange Paffages that happened at
| Woodftock, Anno 1649. when the C ommiffioners for
| furveying the Mamor-Houfe, Park, Deer, Woods, and


§ other Demefns belonging to that Mannor, fate and lodged
i there. .


“HE Commiffioners Offoher 1 3.1649. with their

Servants being come to the Mannor-Houfe,
} “&. they took up their Lodging in the King’s own
Rooms, the Bed-Chamber, and Withdrawing-Room -
jae former whereof they alfo made their Kitchin, the
Houncil-Hall their Brew-Houfe, the Chamber of Pre-
ence their place of fitting to difpatch Bufinefs, anda
@Vood-houfe of the Dining-Room, where they laid the
(Vood of that ancient Standard in the High- Park, known
sf all by the name of the King’s Oak, which (that no-
hing might remain that had the name of King affixed to.
t) they digged up by the Roots. Oéfober the r4th and
4


we
nf
j
r


15th,


eases


eal ii


yA


snepiie MAS
erate


ee


ca C Oe sae BY)
EN Se arse Nay


480 A Continuation


1gth, they had little difturbance , but on the 16th there:
came, as they thought, fomewhat into the Bed-Cham-
ber, where two of the Commiflioners and their Servants
lay, in the fhape of a Dog, which going under their
Beds, did, as it were, gnaw their Bed-cords, But on)
the Morrow finding them whole, and aquarter of Beef,
which lay on the ground untouched, they began to en-
tertain other thoughts. |
Offober 17. Something to their thinking removed all
the Wood of the King’s Oak out of the Dining-Roomag {ty
into the Prefence-Chamber, and hurled the Chairs andl ji
Stools up and down that Room. From whence it cameq ji
into the two Chambers where the Commiffioners andlf tui
their Servants lay, and hoyfted up their Beds Feet fog h
much higher than the Heads, that they thought they lilt
fhould have been turned over and over ; and then let
them fall.down with fuch a force, that their Bodies re-#)
bounded from the Bed a good diftance, and then fhooks
the Bedfteads fo violently, that themfelves confeft thein
Bodies werefore withit, Oétober 18. Something came
into the Bed-Chamber and walkt up and down, and
fetching the Warming-Pan out of the Withdrawing-# i
Room, made fo much noife that they thought five Bells


could not have made more. And Oéfober 19. Trench-f\h»,
ers were thrown up and down the Dining-Room, and atif ii,
them that lodged there , whereof one of them being§y).;
being fhaken by the fhoulder, and awakened, put fortify,


his head to fee what was the matter, but had Trencherqi
thrown at it,


Oélober 20. The Curtains of the Bed in the With ,.
drawing-Room were drawn to and fro, and the Bedfteadgy),;
much fhaken, and eight great Pewter-Dithes, and threep\hj.
dozen of Trenchers thrown about the Bed-chamber a-Mty..,
gain, This night they alfo thought whole arm-fuls Oj),
the Wood of the King’s Oak thrown down in thei,


Chambers, but of that in the Morning they found now,
thing had been moved. Whe.
Oéleber 21. The Keeper of their Ordinary and hiip\,,,

: Bitch} -


| of the Colleétion -


“ti Bitch, lay in one of the Rooms with them, which night
vii they were not difturbed at all. But Odober 22. though
“vif the Bitch kennel’d there again, towhom they aferibed
‘Util their former nights reft, both they and the Bitch were


‘(Gin a pitiful taking , the Bitch opening but once, and


“§ that with a whining fearful Yelp. OGober 23. They
‘Nt had all their Clothes pluckt off them in the Withdraw-
fing Room, afd the bricks fell out of the Chimney into
‘ital the Room; and the 24th they thought in the Dining-
eh Room that all the Wood of the King’s Oak had been
iM Drought thither, and thrown downclofe by their Bed-
Gi fide: which Noife being heard by thofe of the With-
wis drawing-Room, one of them rofe to fee what was done,
sii lf fearing indeed that his fellow Commiffioners had been
wi killed, but found no {uch matter : whereupon returning
{to his Bed again, he found two dozeg of Trenchers
wisthrown intoit, and handfomely covered ‘Withthe Bed-
«lo Clothes. = 6 :
iii) ~ Oober 25. The Curtains of the Bed in the With-
yomdrawing-Room were drawn to and fro, and the Bedftead
),tafhaken as before, and in the Bed-Chamber Glafs flew a-
(bout fo thick (and yet not a Pane of the Chamber win-
“hlidows broken) that they thought it had rained Money.
jelWhereupon they lighted Candles, but to their Grief
@they found nothing but Glafs. Oétober 29 Something
,aiwalked in the Withdrawing-Room about an Hour, and
(il0ing to the Window, opened and fhut it; then going
‘ato the Bed-chamber, it threw great Stones for about
ihalf an hours time, fome whereof lighted on the High-
bed, otherson the Truckle-bed, to the number in all of
qii@bove fourfcore. This night there was alfo a very great
WNoife , asif forty Pieces of Ordnance had been fhot off
yogether. At two feveral Knocks it aftonithed all the
ie Me hbouring Dwellers, which is thought might have
_japeen heard a greater way off. During thefe Noifes,
ifivhich were heard in both Rooms together, both Com-
” finiffioners and Servants were {truck with fo great horrour
|Mhat they cried out to one another for Help: whereof
} Hh one


!


a


48g


| Bae ty ae A Continuation
one of them recovering himfelf out of a ftrange Agony
he had been in, fnatcht up a Sword, and had like to
have killed one of his Brethren coming out of his Bed
in his Shirt, whom-he took for the Spirit that did the
mifchief. However, at length they got all together,
yet the noife continued fo great and terrible, and fhook
the Walls fo much, that they thought the whole Man-
nor would have fallen on their heads. At its departure
it took all the Glafs away with it.

November 1. Something ; as they thought, walkt up
and down the Withdrawing-Room, and then made a
noife in the Dining-Room. The Stones that were left
before, and laid up in the Withdrawing-Room, were
all fetcht away this night, and a great deal of Glafs
(not like the former) thrown about again. . November
2, came fomething into the Withdrawing-Room, tread-
ing, as they conceived, much like a Bear, which firft only
walked about a quarter of an hour; at length it made a
noife about the Table, and threw the Warming-Pan fo
violently, that it quite fpoiledit. It threw alfo Glafs,
and great Stones at them again, and the Bones of Horfes,
and all fo violently, that the Bed-ftead and Walls were
bruifed by them.” This night they fet Candles all
about the Rooms, and made Fires up to the Mantle-
trees of the Chimneys, but all were put out, no body
knew how, the Fire and Billets, that made it, being
thrown up and down the Rooms, the Curtains torn
with the Rods from their Beds, and the Bed- pofts pulled
away, that the Tefter fell down upon them, and the feet J,
of the Bed-ftead cloven intwo. And upon the Servant §,, |
‘inthe Truckle-bed, who lay, allthis time, fweating for fy,”
fear, there was firft a little, which made them begin toy
ftir, but before they could get out, there came a whole 4,”
Cowl, as it were, of ftinkimg Ditch-water down upon'fy,
them, fo green, that it made their Shirts and Sheets of f,,.'
that colour too.

The fame night the Windows were all broke, by’
throwing of Stories, and there were molt terrible noifesi

ini


of the Collestion:


c Fe the three feveral places together, to the extraordi-
“nary wonder of allthat lodged near them ; nay, the ve-
ry Coney-ftealers , that weré abroad that night, were fo
“if affrighted with the difmal thundrin g, that for hafte they
“\iilefe their Ferret in the Coney-burroughs behind them,
‘00%§ beyond Rofamona?s Well. Notwithitanding all this, one
“lof them had: the boldnefs to ask, in the name of God,
iit) what it was, what it would have, and what they had
Qdone that they fhould be difturbed in this manner? To
NU which no. Anfwer was given, but the noife ceafed for a
i@while. At Jength it ‘came again , and, as all of them
“Maid, brought feven Devils worfe than it felf: Where-
Wigupon one of them lighted a Candle again, and fet it be-
\viitween the two Chambers, in the Door-way, on which
wmianother of them fixing his eyes, faw the fimilitude of a
i\toof, ftriking the Candle and :Candle-ftick into the
loliimiddle of the Bed-Chamber, and afterwards making
avdithree {crapes on the {nuff to put it out, Upon this,
j@the fame Perfon was fo bold as to draw his Sword; but
i@uillhe had fcarce got it out, but there was another invifible
tisfand had hold of it too, and tugged with him for it, and
\\n@prevailing, ftruck him fo violently with the Pummel,
ils iithat he was ftunned with the Blow.
iit) “Then began grievous noifes again, infomuch, that
whihey calling to one another, got together, and went into
, it@the Prefence-Chamber, where they {aid Prayers,and fang
be i notwithftanding all which, the thundring noife
i sith continued in other Rooms. After this, November
(ip. they removed their Lodgings over the Gate, and
ycmext day, being Sunday, went to Ewelin, where
«Mow they ef{caped , the Authors of the Relations knew
oi@ftot ; but returning on Monday, the Devil (for that
iavas the name they gave their nightly Gueft) left them
ygtot unvifited, nor on the Tuefday following, which
_dlavas the laft day they itayed.


Hh 2


ees Se


Adver-


Fre


A8 z


484 A Continuation


Advertifement.


ae AT the matter of Fatt is true we have all affurance
defirable, from what theWriter of the Natural Hi-
ftory, of Oxfordfhire, declares before he comes to the
Narrative it felf, viz. That he had feveral Relations pat
into his hands, and one of them written by a learned and
faithful Perfor then living upon the place. Which was
confirmed to him by feveral Eye=witneffes of many of the
particulars, and all of them by one of the Commuiffioners.
themfelves , who ingenuoufly confeft to him, that he could
not deny but that what was written by that Perfon above:
mentioned, wasall true. So that for matter of Fatt there:
canbe no doubt. Onely the Hiftorian makes a Scrupleyy \,
which w much accerding to the Afode of thw Age, whese jy)
. ther all thefe Pranks might not be plaid by Combination. 4 },
\ It being a gentile thing, and much inthe fafhion, not to feemy y),
over credulows that any fuch things are done by any Demonsi }
er Spirits. Yet the nature of fome of thefe Exploits heres)
mentioned, extorts a Confeffion from him, even whether
he will or no, that they are not reconcileable to «Fuge
ling. ,
Sich, fays he, are (1.) the extraordinary noifes beyond, ,
the power of Man to make without fuch infiruments asq,
were not there. (2.) The tearing down and fplitting theq »
Bed-poftsy and putting out.[o many Candles, and fo great@)
Fires, no body knows how. (3.) A vifible (bape feen of fy, '
an Horfe’s Hoof treading out a Candle. And ( 4.) #4),
tugging with one of them for his Sword by an in-q,.
vifible Hand. By which, I [uppofe, 1% meant an unper-qy.
ceptible hand, For the band mujt uceds be invifible, theg ; :
Candle being put out in that feafon of the year. But w@)
was fuch an hand as if the Candle had beén light, coulda.
not have veen feen.. Forafmuch as though he felt in thegn'
dark, that tugging for his Sword, he could not feel ort,”
lay hold on the band or arm, or any part of any palpablagy.)'


per. ot


of the Colleétion.


I Perfon that tugged with him. This may be faid if this tug-
§ ging for his Sword was far inthe Night, about or paft Mid-
§ night, but if it wasearlier in the Night, the Party might
0 have feen the Hand that tugged for the Sword, ‘if it had
“mot been a hand of its own Nature invifible : For the
“Moon was then at leaft feven or eight days old, if I come
‘pute right out of the fecond Ptolemaick Tables in N. Mu
“hig Lerius. Site SSRae
“) Thefeindeed are the moft material Arguments to prove that
WY all here was not Juggling or Combination. And indeed how
could it be a Combination, when as the Story runs upon one
WS Per [on all along,calling it the Thing or Something? So that
NG ee feems all to be performed by one Per fon or Power. Befides,thofe
‘i Arcifts in Waggery, how could they train up a Dog to gnaw
“WE Bed-cords, and forbear eating of Beef, when it lay [o fair-
NN Ly for him onthe Eloor ? And what an operofe Bufinels, and
("K§ how lsttle worth the while for any fingle Perfon to remove all
itu) the Wood of the King’s Oakout of one Roominto anether 2
WiKi and more unlikely that he could make fuch anoife, asif he
alll did it, when he didit not. And the finging of Trenchers
wlll and Stones in fuch Numbers near Aden, and hurting none b
isi them, feems to me not probable to be within the Skill of anor-
Wi dinary Man to perform; as alfo to make fuck a Noife ‘as if
Qwhole Arm-fulls of the King?s Oak, were flung down by
wither Bed-fides on the Floor of their Chamber, whereas not
yn Mone fick was found to be caft there. :
iit The whining alfo and fearful Yelp of the Bitch, was a
ye fign of the Approach not of an ordinary Man, but
of fome evil Thing, as the vulgar call it. And what. a
ily ke Wag muft he be that conld imitate fo the gate of a Bear
as if fuch a Beaft was come into the Rooms or have fuch
witftrength as tocleave the Feet of a Bed-ftead into two, without
\, Wace or Saw ? And did thefe Wags fo combine, as forme to fet
aie to climb to the top of the Chimney, to fling down
| WaBricks, while others play’d other Tricks in the Chamber?
MD be whole Textuce in a manner of the Story 1 fuch, that it
yiMjargues the things mot done by Combination and Waggery,;
Wibat by the Frolick, Activity of fome Spirits or Demons.
ae Hh 3 Ana


485


436 A Continuation


And to conclude, how exceeding improbable is it thar the
Parties inthe Howe; after they bad been twice or thrice mos
lefted, would not make their Doors fo faft that no Afancould!
some, at them, and that they were not fo.well weapaned, that:
no Mun fingle would venture bw Perfon only to play a many)
odd Tricks and Froliuks toterrifie them and [care them,. who
though he .efcaped being killed upon the por, might be.appre-
hended and feverely punifhed, they having got the Power om
their fide, though not the Right, whatever Adr. Hobbs mayy
judge in thefe Cafes. os a
Wherefore its manifeft that thefe Pranks were play’a-byy
Demons, 4 that learned Phyfician Dr. Willis, a goad
many years ago did readily acknowledge to me, and avouch-
ed fuchthings as are bere related in the Story to be undoubt-
edly true, when 1 bad the Opportunity of converfing with

bim at my Lord Gonway’s at Ragly in Warwickfhire. +


— SS SS as = —
=o = = = = =
> # - Ss — =


ry


oe
—


SS Sa SS
= =? —


\RELAT. Tf


Another Tranfcvaptionout of the forementioued Fiftory, of
a ftrange Relation touching the Family: of one Captat
Wood, ate.of' Bampton , ow. Brize-norton , ‘Cap.
\ taininthe lace Wars for the King, What ftrange Kuock-
sangs ufed to. be hearda little before the Death of ‘thof:


of that Family.


7 ———ee =
=> = =
= 2 Se
~ —?


Pye firft. Knocking that was heard, or at leaft obfer-
ved,. was about a year after the Reftauration ©;
the King, inthe afternoon, a little before Night, as il
was apprehended by Mrs. Elewor Wood, Mother'to Cap-}
tain Bafil Wood, who only heard it, none being then by:
or about the Houfe, but her felf; at‘ which fhe was:ver
auch: difturbed, thinking it boded fome ill to‘her or hersi
and within fourteen Nights after fhe had news-of the
Death of her Son-in-Law Mr. George Simith, who dicot
an London. | : au Penh


———— a —— ol
= >


- —- <7 2s
a z = <>
a - —zt > —
<—— — ~y =


Abou!


di


| of the Colleétion. 487 |


| About three years after that, there were three great
i] Knocks given very audibly to all that were then inthe
"4 Houle, viz. to the forefaid Mrs. Elenor Wood, Mr. Ba-
i) fil Wood, and his Wife Mrs. Heffer, and fome Servants.
ini) Which Knocks were fo remarkable that one of the

‘0 Maids came from the Well which was about twenty

“] Yards fromthe Place, to fee what was the matter, And
‘i Mrs. Elenor Wood, and another Maid that was within
ig the Houfe, faw three great Pans of Lard fhake and tot-
} ter fo upona fhelf inthe Milkhoufe, that they werelike

i} to fall down. Upon this violent Knocking Mr. Bafil

iti} Wood, and his Wife, being then in the Hall, came pre-

ww Lently into the Milkhoufe to their Mother ; where find-
wdwit ing her fomewhat difturbed, and enquiring the Reafon,

{ysl fhe replied, God Almighty only knew the Adatter, {he could
» § tell nothing , but.fhe heard the Knocking ,; which being
} within doors, Mr. Bafil Wood concluded muft be for

@ fome of theFamily athome, that pou the Door being for
} a Friend abroad. Which accordingly fell out, three of
} the Family, according to the Number of the Knocks,

if, ) Gying within little more than half a year after, wz.

‘wi Mrs, Heffer Wood, Wifeto Mr. Bafil Wood, a Child of

| 4 Mr. Wood’s Sifter, and Mrs, Elenor Wood, his Mo-

Kull ther.

\) About Auguft 1674. Mr. Bafil Wood Junior, Son of
8 Bafil,aforefaid, living at Exeter in Devon{hire, heard
il the fame kind of Knocking, at which being difturbed,

sijat he wrote word of it to his Father here at Bampton in

ight Oxfordfhire, viz. That on Sunday he and his Wife, and

i her Sifter, and his Brother, did diftinétly hear upona

° ol Table in their Chamber, as they ftood by it, two feveral

‘voit Knocks, ftruck as it were with a Cudgil, one of them

«& before, and the other after Morning-Prayer, a little be-

@ fore Dinner, which Letter was fhewn by Mr. Wood. Se-

“cll nior (as the other Knockings before the Deaths of any

ith that died were beforehand told) to feveral neighbour-

| ing Gentlemen. After which, within about Fourteen
| days, Mrs. Hefter Wood the fecond Wife of Mr. Ba/il

i Hh 4 Wood


Wd
lr yl)


=~
ta a


if
4 i


488 A Continuation

Wood Senior, and about a quarter of a Year after, -her
Father Mr. Richard Liffet, dicd both at Bampton, fince
which time they have heard nothing as yet.


Advertifement.


Py Hefe prognoftick Signs before the Death of [ome Men,

A &% a4 thing noted by Hifforians, and Philofophers »
which are made fometimes by fome Apparition of fome de-
ceafed Perfon of the fame Family, or by fome other Spectre,
fometimes by an audible Voice, calling the Party by Name ;
which | heardte have happened to fome Seamen upon the Sea +
Sometime by Mulick, as I heard crédibly reported of awhole
Family that died one after another in alittle time. and ever
' fome while before any of ‘the Houfe fell fick , there was Mu-
fick heard to go from the Honfe ( thoughnothing feen) play-
ing all along, which feveral People out of curiofity would fol-
low, who obferved it to pafs through the Field till it came to a
Wood,and there they left 1t or loft « This happened in Suffolk,
and was told for acertain to a Friend of mine, by Mr. Sam-
fon, not long fince Fellow of King’s Colledge bere in
Cambridge. Sometimes the Appearance of Lights prefages
the Death of fome of a Family, and the number according to
the number of the Lights. ., Which happened a very few years
agoto a Family of great Qualityin Ireland, three Lights
dancing upon.a place they callFairy Mount. J {poke with
ene that Was a Spectator thereof for half an hour together,
and obferved the Lights, though moved {wiftly, how their
Flames were not café Horizontally, bu weat /traight up to
the Zenith, who noted alfo, that two of the Family, fince


that Sign, were lately dead already, and [ufpetted a third Wy,


would follow, which accordingly fell out the fame year alittle |
while after, The Story I have fet down more compleatly in


my Scholia upon Chap 8. Book 3, of my Immortality of | i


the Soul. So that this hint ts enouch here. ) |
_Paracelfus,. that fanciful Phyfician imputes all to the offte
cronfness of the Stars, thar give thefe Signs. But ang


bal ie


|


of the Colleétion.


Beam of a Star could give fuch a Rap upon a Table, as is
“recorded ro have happened in Captain \Wood?s F amily ? Cer
Wainly thefe things cannot be done bur by the Attivity of
~~/Demons or Spirits. And this prefent Example is as inftru~
\élive, or more than any of the firange Statick or Syftaltick
\Power that Spirits have to give [uch a momentany firmnefs
hand hardne/s to their Vehicles as to make fuch a [mart N. oife
‘Was of tt were made with Wood or Metal. But it is not my
Scope to philofophize here about thefe things, but only to tell
wiGthe Stories. And there is a Paflage in the following Story
ith] (hall fet-down, which is an eminent example of this Syftal-

m@tick Power of the Spirits, viz. an Arm feen from the
iw @ELand to the Elbow ftriking fuch a ftroak upon the Floor, that
siniiee made the very Walls of the Houfeto fhake with it.


mF


Senna eemeeneeees


RELAT. - il.


will remarkable Story touching the Stirs made by a Demon
ili) 22 tbe Family of ope Gilbert Campbell, by Profejjion a


jal Weaver, in the old Parifh of Glenluce in Galloway iz
mim Scotland, _


vivitg © happened in Oétober, 1654. that after one Alex-
nyt ander Agnew, abold and fturdy Beggar, who after-
eWards was hanged at Dumfres, for Blafphemy , had
withreatned hurt to. Gilbert Campbells Family, becaufe he
j@had not gotten {uch an Alms as he required; the {aid
jmGubert was oftentimes hindred in the exercife of his
Calling, all his Working Inftruments being, fome of
age broken, fome of them cut, andyet could not know
joy what means this hurt was done.- Which Piece of
Trouble did continue till about the middle of Novem-
(Wer , at which time the Devil came with new and extra-
' Mordinary Aflaults, by throwing of Stones in at Doors
Mand Windows, and down through the Chimney head,
dtwhich were of great quantity, and thrown with great
‘jiforce, yet by God’s good Providence there was not ra
] SO BI ie ; Perfon


ri
Hal
}
Wy) |


pm 2:


489


aon


Age = SSE


a 3


490 A Continuation


Perfon of the Family hurt or fuffered damage thereby
This Piece of new and fore trouble did neceflitate Mri
Campbell to reveal that to the Minifter of the Parifhy
and tofome other Neighbours and Friends which hither-
to he had endured fecretly. Yet notwithftanding this
his trouble was enlarged ; for not long after he found
oftentimes his Warp and Threads cut'as with a pair opp iil
Scizzers, and the Reed broken, and not only this, burg
their Apparel cut after the fame manner, even while


they were wearing them, their Coats, Bonnets, Hofe.§ iti,
“J re) 4 3 7


Shoes, but could not difcern how or by what méans. On-
ly'it pleafed God to preferve their Perfons, that the
leaft harm was not done. Yet inthe night time they want {kl
ed liberty to fleep, fomething coming: and pulling theidg thd
Bedclothes and Linnens off them, and leaving theing i
Bodies naked. :
Next, their Chefts and Trunks were opened, andall


things in them ftrewed here and there. Likewife theg ty!


parts of the working Inftruments,that had efcaped, were
carried away and hid in holes and bores cf the Honfe.
where hardly they could be found again. Nay, what-
ever piece of cloth or Houfhould-ftuff was-in any part
of the Houfe, it was carried away, and fo cut and abn-
fed, that the Good-man was neceflitated with all hatte
and {peed to remove and tranfport the reft to a neigh-
bour’s Houfe, andhe himfelf compelled to quit the ex-
ercife of his Calling, whereby only he maintained hig
Family. Yet he refolved to remain inthe Houfe fora
Seafon. During which time fome Perfons thereabout,
not yery judicious, councelled him to fend his Childrerg y
out of the Family here and there (to try whom the jy,
Trouble did moft follow, affuring him that this Troublaf |;
was not againft all the Family, but againft fome ona
Perfon or other in it) whom he too willingly obeyed }
Yet for the {pace of four or five Days after, there werd} j,;
no remarkable Affaults as before.


The ‘Minifter hearing thereof, fhewed him the eviij hi
of fuch a courfe, and aflured him, that if he repenteag 4,
notis },:


of the Colleétion. At


‘w@not, and called back his Children, he might not expect
lvlif that his trouble would end in a right way... The Chil-
Pal dren that were nigh by, being called home, no trouble
iith({ followed, till one of -hisSons, called Thomas, that was
wt fartheft off, came home. “Then did the Devil begin
‘ou afrefh ; for upon the Lord’s Day following, in the after-
‘ying moon, the Houfe was fet on fire, but by his Provi-
ii, dence, and the help of fome people going home from
iti Sermon, the Fire was-extinguifhed, and the Houfe fa-
Ki@-ved, not much lofs being done. And the Monday after
«0g being {pent in private Prayer and Fafting, the Houfe
‘a was again fet on fire, uponthe Tuefday, about nine of
wml the Clock inthe morning; yet by Providence, and the
note aD of Neighbours, it was faved before any harm was
iio {ie OnE,
Mr. Campbell being thus wearied and vexed, both in
| ithe day, andin the night, went to the Minifter, defi-
cgiting him to let his Son Thomas abide with him for a
inf time, who condefcended , but withal aflured him that
fl@the would find himfelf deceived, and fo it came to pafs.
» For notwith{tanding that the Child was without the Fa-
“ue mily, yet were they that remained in it fore troubled,
_4@ both in the day time, and in the night feafon, fo that
iif they-were forced ‘to wake till midnight, and fometime
ig all the night over.» During which time, the Perfons
wd Within the Family fuffered many lofles, asthe Cutting
(Of their Cloaths, the throwing of Peats, the pulling
_i-down of Turf and Feal from the Roof and Walls of
4 the Houfe, and the ftealing of their Apparel, and the
“il pricking of their Flefh and Skin with Pins.’ he Pref-
‘if bytery having convened at the place for a folemn Humi-
‘(a diation, perfwaded Gilbert Campbell to call back his Son
. Thomas, notwithitanding whatfoever hazard might fol-
alow. The Boy returning home, affirmed that he heard
| | avoice {peak to him, forbidding him to enter within
"i the Houfe, or into any other place where his Father’s
,, 4 Calling was exercifed. Yet he entred, but was fore
 #abufed, till he was forced to return to the Minifter’s
“1 i Honfe again. . Upon
a


ee


Sat = ee pS Ae Ron SURI ne teat snr aga aah oe


492 A Continuation


Upon Monday the 12th. of February, the reft of thegi’
Family began to hear a voice fpeak to them , but could4!
not well know from whence it came. Yet from evenings
till midnight too much vain Difcourfe was kept- up wich"!
the Devil, and many idle and impertinent queftions4™
propofed without that duefear of God that fhould haved"


been upon their Spirits under fo rare and extraordinaryg!')”
a Tryal. The Minifter hearing of this, went to the *


Houfe upon the Tuefday, being accompanied with’
fome Gentlemen, who after Prayer was ended, heard ag!!!


voice {peaking out of the Ground, from under a Bed,§


in the proper Countrey Dialect, faying, Would you knows Ne


the Witches of Glenluce, J willtell you them, and fo'rela-4 ii"


ted four or five Perfons names that-went under an evillf
Report. The faid Gilbert informed the Company, thatg ll
one of them was dead long ago.’ The Devil anfwered, Jim
Tt ts true, fhe dead long agex yet ber Spirit ts living |i)


with us inthe World. The Minilter replyed,faying, The)


Lord rebuke thee, Satan ,.and put thee to filence, we are@'ii


not to receive any information from thee, whatfoever fame |i
any Perfons go under, thou art but feeking to feduce this |
Family, for Satan’s Kingdom is not divided againff st

rE 6 4
_ After which, all went to Prayer again; which being 9 iyi


ended (for during the time of Prayer no trouble was jit


made) the Devil, with many threatnings, boafted and
terrified the Lad Thomas, who had:;come back that day


with the Minifter, that if he did not depart out of the fini


Houfe, he would fet allon fire. “The Minifter anfwer-
ed, and faid, The Lord will preferve the Houfe, and the


Boy too, feeing he is one of the Family, and: bath God?s |i


Warrant to tarry init. The Devil anfwered, He (hall


not get liberty to flay, he was once put’ out already, and } itn


fhall not abide here, though I fhould purfue him to the


end of the lVorld. The Minifter replyed, The Lord wil Um :


flop thy malice againft bim, |

And then they all prayed again, which being end-
ed, the Devil faid, Give me aSpade anda Shovel, and de-
part


of the Collettion. 493


liipare from the Houfe for feven days andIfhall make a
imGrave and lye down in it , and fhall trouble you no more.
‘init he Good Man anfwered , Not fo much as a Stram fhalt
nyle given thee, through God?s affiftance, even though that.
ilihtwould do ce. The Minifter alfo added, God fhall remove
lilgathee 12 due time. The Devilanfwered, J will not remove
wigfor you, I have my Commiffion from Chrift to tarry and
iy iver this Family, ~The Minifter anfwered , A permiffion
il eben haft indeed, but God will ftop it in due time. The De-
¥ bil replyed, J have (Mes John) a Commiffion that per-
ijeaps will Laft longer than your own. After which the Mi-
yygnifter and the Gentlemen arofe, and went to the place
a the Voice feemed to come from, to try if they
sp(feould find any thing. And after diligent fearch, no- ie
iudthing being found, the Gentlemen began to fay , We ae |
cmitthink, this voice [peaks out of the Children, for fome of
jothem were in their Beds. The Devil anfwered, Tos ait
9, Vl, God fhall judge you for Lying, and I and my Father will a
,jmcome and fetch youto Hell with Warlock Thieves. And by
yjp40 the Devil difcharged the Gentlemen to {peak any
jyMore , faying, Let him fpeak that hath a Commiffion
: (meaning the Minifter) for he i the Servant of God.
“| The Gentlemen returning back with the: Minifter,
ulthy fate down near to the place whence the Voice
, .a4eemed to come from, and then he {pake to them after | @
jiafthis manner, The Lord will rebuke this Spirit in his own 1) &
_ diame, and caftit out. The Devil anfwering, faid, It is |
“written in the oth of Mark the Difciples could not caft him i
out. The Minifterreplyed, What the Difciples could not a
“49, yet the Lord having heightned the Parents Faith for his Mi
’ had Glory, did caft him out, and fo {hall he thee. The De-
',avilreply’d, It s written in the ath of Luke, And he dem
“! Wparted and left bim for a feafon.. The Minifter faid, The
) QLord in the days of his Humiliation, not only got the Viktory
i over Satan in that affault in the Wilderne 3, but when he
J" Neame again, his fuccefs was no better. For it is written,
Fobn 14. Behold the Prince of this World cometh, and
if “ghath nothing inme. And being now in Glory, ert
: “by


im |
ie


494 A Continuation

fulfil bis Promife, and God {hall brmfe Satan-under your
feet [hortly, Rom. 16. The Devil anfwered, I¢ is writs
zen, Mat. 25. There were ten Virgins, five wife and five
foolifh, andthe Bridegroom came, Ihe foolifh Virgins had
no Oyl in their Lamps, and they went unto the wife to feek
Oyl, and the wife faid, Go and buy for your felves , and
while they went, the Bridegroom came and entred in, and
the Door was thut ; and the fooli{h Virgins were fent to Hell
Fire. The Minitter anfwered, The Lordkuows the fin-
cerity of his Servants, and though there be fin aud folly in
us ere, yet there is a fountain opened tothe Houfe of Da-
vid, for fin and for uncleannefs; and when be bath wafhed
us there, and pardoned all our fins for his name fake, he
will caft the unclean Spirit out of the Land. The Devil
anfwered, and faid, That place of Scripture is written
in the 13th of Zechariah. In that day I will caufe the
Prophets and the unclean Spirit to pafs our of the Lands Bue
afterwards it 1s written, I will faite the Shepherd, and the
fheep [hall be [cattered. The Minifter anfwered, Well are
we that our Bleffed Shepherd was [mitten, and thereby hath
bruifed thy head; and albeit, in the hour. of his fuffering, bis
Difciples for fook him, Mat. 26. yet now having afcended
on high, he fits in glory, and is preferving, gathering in,
and turning his band upon his little ones, and will [ave his
poor ones in this Family from thy Malice.

The Minifter returning back a little, and ftanding
upon the Floor, the Devil faid, J kvew not thefe Scrip-
tures till my Father taught me them. I am an evil Spirit, 4%
and Satan u my Father, and I am come to vex this Honfey\
and prefently there appeared a naked Hand and an Arm,
from the Elbow down, beating upon the Floor till the


Houfe did fhake again, and alfo the Devil utter’d a moft Pity;


fearful and loud cry, faying, Come up, Father, come up,
I will fend my Father among you. See there he i bebind


your backs. The Minifter faid, I [aw indeed an hand and) ts
an arm when the ftroak was given and heard. The Devil fii


faid to-him, Saw you that, it was not my hand, it was my
Fathers, my hana i more blackin the loof. Would yon fee}
me §


| of the Collection. 495

d Wore 2 put out. the Candle then, and I fhall come about the
‘NiiTorefe among you like Fire-balls. After which all went to
wiPrayer, during which time it did no harm, neither at
i pny other time when God was worthipped. When
(Prayer was ended, the Devil faid, (Ses Sov) If the
\, mia ood-man’?s Son?s Prayers at the Colledge of Glafzow did
mot prevasl more with God than yours, my Father and I had
wnhliorozeg be a Mifchief here ere now. To which one of the
v(lfsentlemen replyed, though a Check had been given
‘i him before - Well, Well, I fee you confefs there ts a God,
(\ihiad that Prayer prevails with him, and therefore we muft
iiray to God, and will commit the event tohim. To which
i, the Devil replied, Yez, Sir, you freak of Prayer with your
Dnibroad-lipped Hat (forthe Gentleman had lately gotten
ian new Hat in the Fafhion with broad Lips) J will bring a
yileatr of Shears from my Eather that {hall clip the Lips of it
‘i wl little.

Ji) The night now being far fpent,it was thought fit every
yij¢@He fhould withdraw to his own home. Then did the
evil cry. out fearfully, Let not the Atinifer gohome, I

bet burn the Houfe if he go, and many other ways did le
“ibreaten. And after the Minifter was gone forth, the
»;200d-man being inftant with him to tarry; thereupow
“\me returned, all the reft of the Company going home.
if hen faid the Devil to the Minifter, You have done my
iineddeng, Not thine, anfwered he, but in obedience toGod

‘gave Treturned to bear this man company whom thou doft af

: Wa. Then did the Minifter call upon the Name of
,,;maod ; and when Prayer was ended, he difcharged Mr.
“eampbell, and all the Perfons of the Family from open-
“aug their Mouths in one word to the Evil Spirit ; and

vawhen it fpake, that they fhould only kneel down and
peak to God. The Devil then roared mightily, and

‘ Ipryed out, What will ye not {peak to me, I fhall burn the
Oe oufe, I {hall ftrikethe Bairns, and do all manner of Mif-
 Sbhief. But after that time no anfwer was made to it, and
“Wo for a long time no fpeech washeard. After this the
Waid Gilbert fuffered much lofs, and had many fad nights,

| nor


he te


496 A Continuation


not two nights in one Week free, and thus it continued "
till April. From April to Fuly he had fome refpite


and eafe, But after he was molefted with new Affaults,§ y(


and even their Victuals were fo abufed that the Familyg
wasin hazardof ftarving, and that whichthey did eat,§~
gave them not the ordinary fatisfaction they were wont
tofind. . :

In this fore and fad Affliction, Mr. Campbel refolved


to make his Addrefs to the Synod of Presbyters for ad-§


vice and counfel, what to do,which was appointed to con.
vene in Octo, 1655. namely whether toforfake the Houfe


and Place, ornot. The Synod by their Committee ap-f ji.


pointed to meet at Glenluce in Febr. 1656. thought titi ,


that a folemn Humiliation fhould be kept through all theg,,.,
bounds of the Synod,.and amongft other Caufes, to re-4,,,,,


queft God in behalf of that poor afflicted Family , which), ,,
being carefully done, the Event was, thorough the Pray-4},
ers of his People, that his Trouble grew lefs till April 4;
and from April to Auguft he was altogether free. Ar§),
bout which time the Devil began with new Aflaults, andg,,,


taking the ready Meat that was in the Honfe, didj...


{ometimeshide it in holes by the Door-Pofts, and at o-fy
ther times did hide it under the Beds, and fometimesq,;
among the Bed-clothes, and under the Linnens, and avg) «


laft did carry it quite away,till nothing was left there faveg,
only Bread and Water to live by. After this he exer-4,,, ,


cifed his Malice and Cruelty againft all the Perfons of theg,,
Family in wearying them in the night-time with ftirringg,) |
and moving through the Houfe, fothat they had no refti


for Noife , which continued all the Month of Auguf,§,,
after this manner.» After which time the Devil grew,
yet worfe, and began with terrible Roarings and terrify-4,,
ing Voices, ‘fo that no Perfon could fleep in the Houfe ing,


the Night time,and fometimes did vex them with caftingg,, ”

_of Stones, ftriking them with Staves on their Beds imgy,”’

the Night time; And upon the Eighteenth of Seprembeng ,’'

about Midnight, he cryed out with a Joud Voice, I fhall§j

burn the Houfe, and about three or four Nights after/g,
| hog


: of the ColleEtion A497
it he. fet.one of the Beds on Fire, which was foon extins


\\


ici Quifhed, without any prejudice, except the Bed it felf,


‘and fo he continued to vex them.

pene let frets a oth Sieh ie ARs
| | Lp

| Advertifement.


‘His Narrative I have ina manner verbatim Tranfcria
bed out of the Mifcellaneous Obfervations of Afr.G.
w'@Sinclare, which are added to his Treatife of Hydrofta-
Mlgticks 5 Which nothing bur the certainty of the truth thereof,
Hand ufefulnels for the refuting of Saducif{m, could. have
llNtempted him to infert, it being an Onfervation fo Hetero=
Si igeneous to all thereft. And therefore I thought 2 warth
ithe while to reduce it into its more proper place, himfelf ac-
‘litknowled ging it to be fomething an unfuitable prece to the |
LaContescture of the reff of his Book, but that he put tt in, i
ti only to convince the incredulous World of the Exiftence of i
ily “ES parsts, whofe being he conceives it does more than probably
, | that 1s to [ayy demonfiv atively > [uppofing it true. :
Which that st 15. the Narrative it felf feems fuficrently to — My
' ee good, the Stirs there made being fo long, and fo pub-
Rick, and fo repeatedly, and the things writ by Mfr, Camp-
wile? s own Son who knew them exactly, and I have heard the
(ecitrarh of the Story averr?d with all affurance my felf by fome i
Ub, that C ountry. And the Narration is fo fimple and plain,
titled without defion, (ut being rather a Colluiiation of Mes
jnmmonn and the Presbytery on one fide, and the foul Fiend,
‘milivith bis black, Loofs, affifted by Satan his Farber on the
\aieber fide, than any clear Vittory) that that alfo ought to
litaen belief thereto. Not to add that the very abruptne/s of
Hite s enqgng fhews it to be frefh writ, while the thing was dom
ig, and that meer Matter of Fatk was the meafure of the
as WV reter?s Per.
tht Twill conclude ail with the Information of Dr. G, Burnet,
What able and smpartial Writer of the Hiftory of the Refor-
tivation in England, who upon my enquiry told me this, That


ry)


li he We |


498 A Continuation
he living in Glafgow fome years, found all People there,


dad in the Country about, fully per{waded of the truth of
Matter of Fatt, and that he never heard any thing objected


to Mr. Sinclare’s Relation, but that it was too fhort, whenasg *"


all the paffages of that Apparition would make a Volume,
and that there. was a full Relation thereof attefted under the
hands of Eye-witneffes, And to be fuort, Ihave greater
affurance of the truth of this Story than I think fit to declare.
The mojt remarkable paffage in the whole Narrative, 1s the
naked Arm, from the Elbow downwards , appearing by ii
felf, without any other parts of any vifible Perfon, as the
fhape of an Horfe?s Hoof in the firft Story, without any other


“parts of an Horfe. Which puts me in mind of the Apparitiong I


Elkerken, which Wierus makes mention of in his De-Preapu
fliciis Demonum , that ufed to baunt the High-way in an


heathy place not far from Embrica in the Dutchy of Cleyepii
jn the Lower-Germany. Nothing wa feen but a meepg%iid


Hand, which would beat Travellers as they paffed that wayg'
pull them off of their Horfes, and overthrow Carriages, \
As for the cutting and [ripping of things, that ts bagi


what has happened more frequently to thofe that have beex ii


infefted by Witchcraft. . A notable example whereof a Re
werend and Learned Friend of miné told me in a Man
Daughter of North-Cadbury i Somerfethhire, thar fowl
fome Months together, fhe’could put on notlean Linnens nog
Holiday Cloths, but they would be [nipt ana flafht full om)
holes, as ber Father for certain related of her to him. An@'kly
of this {nipping, befides the Narrative of Gilbert Campbelf

there is a frefh Example of it in a Story within thefe thragit:
or four years touching Witchcraft prattifed on the Famit
of William Medcalfe of Leflingham, (Se. 125135. 18.0 |
which & as follows, i)


of the Collection.


. |
| RELAT. Iv.


sae
iti) A true Account bow Alice the Daughter of William Med-
lin —calfe Yeoman, in the Parifh of Leflingham iz Lincoln-
| fhire, was difturbed by an Apparition, with other feats
iui Of Witcheraft praétifed upon that Family, fent from Mr.
vit William Wyche dwelling in the fame Parifh, to Afr:


|


e


ii) J. Richardfon Fellow of Emanuel Colledge in Cam-
i a bridge, |
wot. WN the Year 1678. on the Sunday after Twelfth-
ott Day, William Medcalfe and his Wife went to
eChurch , leaving their only Daughter Alice at home,
q4v§and whilft they, were there the faid Alice heard a noife
/¢qjin the Yard, and looking out at the Window, fhe faw a
/eMian of a middle Stature, with Light Flaxen-Hair,{tand-
ua ik g at the Stable-Door, upon which fhe called out at the
,. Window, and demanded of him what he did there ?
:,;(@4e returned, that he came for a Horfe which he borrow-
eed of her Father. She made him anfwer again, that fhe
/@shew nothing of it, and that he fhould have none till
y@rer Father came home, He received the anfwer, and
(vent away for that day.
‘am 2+ Uhe next day her Father and Mother being gone
vf Sleeford-Market , fhe faw him again at the Sta-
le-Door, and demanded of him as before. He told her,
nee might go look, “Chen he asked her where the Horfes
‘jimvere. She anfwered him again as fhort, told him, He
_ waght go look, Upon this he began to footh and flatter
mer, and gave her many foftening words going towards
The Door as he fpake, as if he intended to go into her :
which fhe obferving, fhe haftened and bolted the Door
pit Upon which he threatned her,( what his Threats were
he cannot recal) but fome body knocking at the Door
jpn the other fide of the oufe, and fhe underftanding it
was a Neighbour, opened the Door, and told her
Neighbour all that had pafled, and upon it they both


br 2 ran
|


Ri


aA . he . ;


5 00 A. Continuation


fan together into the Yard, to fee if he were there,J
but they could not find him, neithér knew they which!
way. he went. 7

3, After this fhe was quiet for fome time, only abouti!
two Weeks before Shrove-tide, one Follet a Cobler, and
fufpected to be the occafion of all that happened,
came to the Honfe, and they did fet him to work.
moved thereto, I fuppofe, by fear, for he had threat.
ned the Daughter, but for what I cannot learn. Whilff
he was working he began to difcourfe to the Mother tog qu!
this effect, that her Daughter fhould die that year} tht,
that he had examined fome Books which he had,.anogtix
that he underftood fo much by them. And when he


had done his work, he bid them farewel, telling thema@ in


He was fure they would think, of Follet when they digit
not fee him. Soon after this, Alice fell fick, and hex
Mother was fomewhat doubtful of her Recovery, bug


as it pleafed God, the was reftored again to her formespit


health, and continued undifturbed till AZay, the Weel
before Whit [untide.

4. And then as fhe was drawing Water at a Well 14
the Yard, fhe faw the fame Perfon again, which | firlim
defcribed, at the Honfe Door, with a great Club, enim
deavouring, as fhe thought, to break the Door openpitt


Upon this fhe called to him, and askt him what he dist}
there. Upon the fpeaking he flung down the Cludiiiy


among a great many Earthen Milk-pans, or Panchingg|j
as they call them, and with fo great violence, that fhigmy)
could not conceive but that he had broken many chy,
them, but afterwards upon examination fhe found thergity;
allwhole. Asfoonashe had done this he went awaygity
and fhe, leaving her Pail at the Well, followed hinmga)
and faw him go down the Street, but at the turnin gil
of the Lane loft the fight of him, and could not recomit
verit. This was on Monday, and fhe.faw him everilti
day that Week, but nothing pafled between them, anugy 9,
feveral times fhe called her Father out, that he migh@ih
fee him, but he never could. {


5. Ol


eaicarre


| of the Collettion. sor
‘5. On Saturday he appeared to her in a more dread
nil ful manner’ at the Hall-Window. When the faw him
i fhe aske him what his bufinefs was there. He told her he
ug Would fpeak with her, She askt him what he had to
‘,afay, and defired him to {peak it, but he faid, he would
ya not yet tell her. Then he fhewed her a Knife, and
ymuitold her it was for her. She askt him then whether -
juifhe had a mind to be hanged, and this was all that
,lilfpafled between them then. On the Sunday fhe faw him
ie@again run by the window, with a Knife in his hand, as
i e@before, and fhe told her Father and Mother of it, and
i, @they both ran out, but could not fee him. On the Monday,
si iw bilft fhe was Milking, the faw him with his Knife, as. be-
iaifore ; and thus he often afterwards appearedto her, efpe-
jy tially at the Parlour-Window, having opened it (which
had not, they think, been opened for many years be-
ore) and holding a Knife, only fometimes it was a
ighorter, and fometimes a longer, but always bloddy,
qyand fo was the hand that held it. - a
9 6. Inthe Week alfo before Whit/untide, one Richard
\(Pofins, a Youth about 18 or 19 years old, and then li-
ding with Good-man Aedcalfe, and now moft common-
iy aY working for Sir Wiliam York, having heard Alice de-
wacribe this Man, which fhe fo often faw, as he was walk-
408 towards Rockfome, a little place belonging to Lef-
(ivagham Parifh, he meta Man which he thought to be
vety like the Man which fhe defcribed. He wenthome
mad told his Mafter, upon which he and his Daughter
walkt out that way, to fee if they could meet him.
hey were not gone far, but the Daughter faw him,
“ qand told her Father, and pointed which way he went,
iat he might fee him, but fill as he went one way
“> fee him, the Daughter prefently faw him go the
‘“Wontrary way, fo that he never could obtain the fight
OF him.
} 7- Once coming from Milking fhe had a good Club


hi her hand, and he met her, and asked her what fhe
MMlid with that Glub. She being more than ordinary
|


li 3 couragious,


502 A Continuation


couragious, told him, fhe had a good mind to lay it:
about his Pate. He made her no anfwer but went
away. | :
8. Another.time in Fuly, as near as they can remem-4
ber, Alice made her a Mefs of Frumenty for her Break-4!
faft: it was made, as fhe tells me, of New Milk, whichi


I take notice of becaufe of what follows. ‘As foon agg"


fhe had begun to eat it, the formentioned Follet came to
the Door, and asked whether they had any Shoes ta
mend; fhe told him fhe thought they had (though in.
deed fhe knew of none, but fpake it out of fear). but
that her Father and Mother being gone out, fhe knew
not where they were. So he went away, and fhe regi
turned, defigning to fall again to her Breakfaft, butg!
found jt turned toa hard Curd. At which fhe was mucl


furprifed, and refolvedto fet it by to fhew her Father Hoa


and Mother; but fhe had no fooner turn’d her back
but the Dith danced about on the Table, till it fell ong).
the ground, and fpilt all in the Floor, which a Neighigm,
bour’s Dog, as they thought, coming in, licktup. 1 haul
fame day, as fhe was raking Hay, fhe was taken Lameginr
and continued fo a quarter of a year, i
g. After this fhe was quiet again for a while, and thigt
next time fhe faw him was when going behind the Barg tat
upon fome occafion, fhe efpied him ftanding at fom in
diftance from her, anda fudden blaft of Wind took hegti
Hat from off her Head, and carried it to his Feet ; Dri
fhe was not much daunted at it, but ran to him and toogtiy
it up, and then he difappeared. tt
10. One Sanday, in the middle of all her troubles pithy;
as fhe was ftooping to take up a Pin, he appeared tl
her, andtold her, that Foller was the caufe of all hey
troubles, and fo left her.
11. Hitherto I have given you as exact an Account «fik)
I could get from them as tothe time. That which, form),
lows, I fet down without obferving the circumftance «Py;
time or order of-action, becaufe I can learn no certain
of ic fromthem, but the matter of Factistruth. im
12. Offa -


of the Cotle 10M. 503


i 12. Often when they were gone to Bed, the inner
i 1 Doors were flung open, as alfo the Doors ofa Cupboard
) which ftood in the Hall, and this with a great deal of
‘itl Violence and noife. And one night the Chairs, which
‘bral when they went to Bed, itood all inthe Chimney Cor-
iid Mer, were removed and placed in the middle of the
sim Room in very good order, anda Meal-fieve hung upoa
wi One, cut full of holes, and a Key of an inner Door upon
wi another. And in the da ay time, as they fate in the Houfe,
wi@fpinning , they could fee the Barn-Doors often flung
go pen, but not by. whom. Once, as -dlice fate {fpinning,
wathe Rock or Diftaffleapt feveral times out of the Wheel
sinto the middle of the Room. Upon which fhe faid fhe
(thought Follee was init. She had no fooner faid the
osmawords, but fhe faw /Foller ride by to Sir Welliam Yorks
fh jHoufe, about tome bufinefs with him relating to him as
m2 Jattice
+ ll . Another time Alice had her Petticoat taken
N Te ay, and a good while after brought again, and feve-
i» |fral times other of her Cloths were taken away, and after
(@ifome time brought again, and laid in fome place where
ithey fhould be fure to fee them... As two Pinners which
§had been loft fome time, were brought and put in a
,,4Panchin which Goodwife Medcalfe had but newly
poured the Milk out of. An Apron was taken away, cut
lin pieces, and brought again, asalfo a Spiggot which
ithey fearched carefully for was brought at laft and plae
‘iced upon five Eggs which Goodwife Adedcalfe had laid
Hinthe Milk-Honfe but the night before; and the next
hight this Spiggot was changed, put into the Barrel, afd
| io which was in the Barrel laid where the other


—


as.
14, About the latter end of the Summer, in the night,
athe Daughter had her Cloths pull’d off, and her Hair
parled and matted together in that manner, that the
iinext day her Mother could very hardly geta pair of SciZz-
lizers into it to cut it off; and fhe does believe fhe was

linear two hours about it.
li 4 1j. Ano-


a


i” ee


ac


—— = = — a
eo ane «<a 8


504 A Continuation


is. Another time fhe felt and faw fomething like
a Cat, fitting upon her, and till it removed fhe was
in pain, and could not ‘ftir to help her felf. |

16, Another time going into the Parlour, fhe faw
again, as fhe thought, a Cat which did fly at her, and
ftruck her down feveral times with great violence, of
which her face, which was much h {welled and black,
was no fimall indication.

Once fhe found a Note wrapped up in an Hand-
Sarchiel, with thefe words written init, J would have:
you co from — After fhe had read it, fhe lockt it up In
her Trunt iK 5 echeimue to thew it to her Father and
Mother when they came home ( for sige! were gone
to Church) but when fhe went to look for it again,
it was gone out of her Trunk, and fhe never law it
a6  aghoate

The Jaft t ing, that happened was this, one Sasa
fad ay night Alc going to Bed, laid a clean Shift in
her Bed, intending to putit onthe next morning ; but ing
the morning lo oking for it,’ fhe could not find ‘it. The
next night ‘fhe borrowed one of her Moth er, and laid
that alfo in her Bed, as before. In the morning, when
fhe went to put iton, it didnot pleafe her, whereupon
fhe gave it to he: Mother, defiring h erto change it; the
Mother took it to ch lange, and opening it, found it cut
and flafhed in nee ine be: and they are both very cer-§ ¢j,
tain that it was whole before. | And the famer MOrningy ii,
when they came into the Hall, they found the other
which was firft taken away, laid upon the Table.

19. Some odd Freaks were plaid alfo with the Fa-
ther, as well as with his Daughter. For Goodman jij.
Medcalfe having received d Eig ght pounds, at Sleeford, forp\,,
Beafts, and when he came Rom put 1¢ into a Purfeg;
by it ‘elf 5 and locke ed it up invhis Cheft; anda Day
or two epibes takin, ome Money out ‘of another
Parke, o buy more Bealts, :when he returned, havina@y


nt
Lid
ken


td


| of the Collection. 505


°“@ to tell that Money which ‘he received at Sleeford, and had
if put in a Purfe by it felf, and found that there was fe-
_f} venteen Shillings wanting, and fome days after, he
“tig found fixteen Shillings and Six. pence of it in his Pock-
fet. So that there was only Six-pence loft.
} 20. And another fuch like feat was it touching . his
Mi) Knife. One Friday having occafion to ufe his Knife,
i he felt in his Pockets for it, but could not find if,
‘@-and ‘fearched -carefully every where for it. On Sun-
i day night he dreamed his Knife was in his Poc-
i Ket, and in the morning told his Wife of it, and
@ they both itnmediately fearched his Pockets, but found
‘til none. Afterwards, he being to go to Sleeford that
il day, he was feeling in his Pocket to fee what Money
i he had, or upon fome other account, and then he


3


) found his Knife in his Pocket.


if ee LS Story, though it contain nothing in it that
vl makes any extraordinary {hew or noife, yet it w con-
“ ‘ fiderable, in that it w fo notable an Inltance, ana fo frefh-
drole Zy happened, touching the little filly /portings ana triflings
lof fome kind of Daemons, and will ferve to confute that
i) Vulgar miftake, that whatfoever is called Spirit or De.
yi vil, 2% fo Great and Augult a Being, that no [mall
W.matters can be the Objekt of his Altivity , whenas, I


Vi


%
tlh 200? confefs, comparing Story with the Syftem of the In-
afi Vilible World, fuch as a fagacious and deliberate Rea-
WW fon would conclude it, I have this long time both thoucht
hit, and not afew times {poke ct, What there are as ar-
yf rant Fools out of the Body, as in the Body: sand 7
wi wilh there were not as arrant Devils in the Body as out
(of it. And therefore I hold this Narrative, though it
i be concerning meaner Perfons, and things not at all de-
‘val fptcable , efpecially Mr. Wyche, who took ax account of
ti


i


y . i epi RTT
$s Ee


506 A Continuation


it from the parties upon the very {pot avouching in his Let-
rers to Mr. Richardfon, that there is nothing contained
therein but what is certainly true. And therefore I think ce
not amifs to beftow fome few fhort Notes on feveral of the Pa-
ragraphs in order as they lie.

Sect. 1. This Man in the light flaxen hair feems to have
been taken for areal Man by Alice, to whom he appeared,
for a good while. But in procefsof the Story, 4 wall be plain
that it was no Man, but an Apparition. his appearing
to her in an alluring humane fhape (as Lendale?’s Wife, wha
was hanged for aWitch here at Cambridge, on Jelus Green,
caufed a Spirit or Demon to appear to her Afaid in the
bape of a proper Yeoman-like Man, and foilicited her to
marry bim, driving on the bufine[s a long time, as the Maid
confeffed to 4 learned Friend of mine, and my [elf ) this
appearing, I fay, inthis fhape, feems tobe atrick to fami-
liarife his converfe to ber, that he might get ber into a fur-
ther [nare.. Whether fuch as Lendale’s Wife intended, I
leave to others to conjecture.

Sect. 3, Whether Follet?s threatning the Daughter was
not from his difpleafure againft her uncompliablene[s with
the A4an in the light flaxen hair, the tenth Seétion will
give more light toconfider, compared with shis prefent Se-
Elion. But aa the mean time it may not be unfeafonable here
to note, what danger there may be inliftening to Aftrologers
or Fortune-tellers for fo this Follet is called by an able
Phyfician in Lincolnfhire, i bis Letter to me.) For a
Man may eafily fuffer hurt if they predift ill, by the Aui-
wity of evil Spirsts with wham they are fome how in Conf ede-
racy, and,with whom it is a thoufand times more eafie to do
mifchief than good, and therefore they will not frick,to dott,
to gaia credit to their Client, viz. the Aftrologer or For-
tuneteller. |

Sect. 4. The flaxen hair’d Adan flinging down his Club


with that violence amongft the Panchins, and yet breaking |


none of them, nor it making any noife when it feemed.to hit
among fi.them(as it was anfmered ta my.Query made touching
this paffage) is an indication, that this was ta the fight

what


= t


RA AO


‘ture himfelf fo oft in view to att this Part.


of the Collection. 507


what that monftrons thumping againft the Door in the follow-
ing Story, Sect. 9. was tothe hearing. That the Senfes in
both were in a great meafure impofed upon by the operation
of thefe Demons. And that therefore here w the firft bint of
this flaxen hair’d Man’s being an Apparition. dnd ano-
ther is alfo contained in this [ame Section. In that her Fa-
ther being feveral times called out by ber to fee this Man, he
never could fee him, though be appeared [o conveniently pla-
ced as that her Father might as well fee him as her felf, as
foe anfwered to A4r. Wyche, upon my Query about that
Pafface.
Sect. 5. His fo frequently appearing to the Maid, aw
manifelt out of thi Settion and the former, and with fuch an
horrid Intention fignified by his bloudy Knife and Hand,
though the Maid by her anfwer here feems not yet to be aware
of it that it was an Apparition 5 yet tis no contemptible ar-
gument that it was. For what Man in bis Wits would ven-
And it is huge-
ly incredible burthat he would have been feen by feveral others
as well as her, if it had been a Man, when he was feen of
none befides ber, faving one Rich. Cofins, who belonged to
William Medcalfe’s Fasily, as is fet down, Sect. 6. Which
feems done on purpofe to put aTrick upon both the Daughter


and Father, whom he dodged when hecame out from home to


fee him, as that Section declares.

Sect. 7. This Paffage alfo intimates that the Daughter
took this Apparition to be a real Man fii. But that there
was Witchcraft in the Bufinefs, the Sroryin Sect. 8. does
manifeftly difcover, For I making a Query upon that Paf-
fage [that fhe had no fooner turned her Back, but the Difh
danced about on the Table | how the could fee it her back,
being turned, fhe did anfwer, fhe turned about, (hearinz,
fuppofethe Noife of its motion on the Table) and there faw
it turn about and fall. The turning her Frumenty alfo into
an hard Curd, ts another indication of Witchery 1athe Bu-
fine{s, and that this Spectre of a flaxen hair’d Alan was fent
to her bythat Art. But (Section the gth) fhe feems to be
well convinced it was an Apparition, her felf declaring, it


difappeared


Feat
eae


on
Sees


pels


ep packitemonaosheua yes


‘oa A Continuation


difappeaved (though commonly, {he faid, in anfwer ta a
Ouery of mine, he went behind ( fome Fonte, Barn, Wall,
or Fredge) ahi he feems (Sek. 10.) to have appeared on
a {udden when fhe ftooped for a Pin. And if Follet was
the caufe of all ber trouble, this Demon did as other Demons
often have done, that is, betrayed their Clients, But the
Law can proceed upon. no fuch Evidence, nor is it fit it
flould, for fear injury be done to the snekaebbe’

But that Wultam Medcalfe’s boufe was haunted or
infelted by Watchcraft, the Pranks fet down in the fol-
lowing Sections of the Narrative’ do plainly enough evince.

And that of the Danchter?s Lockard hair is  fuch an
argument as. no one can poffibly evade tt. But to entangle
things thus is an sik Feat of thefe indicrons. Spirit iS.
And this reminds me of a Story told me by WW. M. many
years ago, of an Houfe haunted fomewhere in aidene
fhire, where it was afisk with thefe Goblins in a Room
wnfurnifoe, untefs.with the Lumber of broken Chairs and
Stools, and old ‘Bed -fteads (in which Room they hung up
their Elanks of tare agatnft theWall) to wind all this Yarn
on thofe old Pieces of Lumber, fo perplexedly and en-
tanoledly, bat they could /6t., without {poling it, endea-
vour to dif-intangle it, but letting it be as they found it,
the next night thefe Goblins of themfelves would take it
off clear without hurt, and make it up in Hanks, and
hang it up orderly as before.

This Magical matting of the Daughters Hair into a
W itch- Lock, and the leaping of ber Diftaff, Sec. 11.
out of ber Wheel feveral times into the Floor, in the fight
of her Mother alfo, befides what happened to be Father,
Sect, 19, 20. fhew plesnly that it was no deluded Fancy
of the Daughter, but the real Effetts of Witchery. Which
will ‘be abundantly more .confirmed out of the following
Story of the Stirs tn Sir William York’s Houfe, efpeci=
ally if that be true which is bruited in the Countrey, that
they came from the fame Hand that the Troubles in
William Medcalfe?s Family did. But be that how it will,
the enfuing Narrative is [o pa'pable an Evidence of things

done


;)§ done by Demons or Spirits, that having got’ into m
“'§ Hands an Authentick Copy of fome of the moft remark~
"h able Paffages of thofe Difturbances, by my worthy Friend
§ 24. Richardfon, though I have heard from more Elands
§ than one how unwilling Sir William was to have the thing
_§ made publick, yet I well prefume_fo much upon his Goodnefs,
§ and Love of Truth, and ufeful Inftruttion of the World,
i as to adventure to di/pleafe bis natural Humour, whilft haply
I may, upon his better confideration, gratifie [ome more no~
i ble principle in him, For I know nothing in the thing that
4 can ture to his difhonour. For the beft of Aten have been
“| affaulted by the Devil in extraordinary ways, and it has been
“§ their glory that by their Faith and Courage , and humble
"I Confidence in the Arm of God, they bave overcome him.
WY Wherefore without any further feruple I hall take the boldnefs
"Ngo fet down the abovefaid Narrative as follows.


REAL Ac aN: ats


wil Atrue and faithful Narrative of the difturbance which was

| inthe Houfe of Sir William York in the Parifh of
wh) Leflingham za Lincolnfhire, fent by the former hand
WW to the fame party.


ir. 9N May 1679. Sir William York, being from home,
in I there was a great noife made by the lifting up of
ifthe Latch of the outmoft Door, which continued with
»/°l great quicknefs and noife for the {pace of two or three
wis hours, till betwixt ten and eleven a Clock in the night.
jo) His Lady then being at home with few Servants, appre-
yw@ hended it to be Thieves, and thereupon they went to
wit the door, and {pake to them, ‘and afterwards winded
ia Horn, and raifed the Town, and upon the coming in
jiJof the Town, the noife ceafed, and they heard no more
Of it till AZzy following.
} 2. And then Sir William being at London, the fame
witmorfe was made at the door as before for two or three
MN x5 nights


i
UB


of the Colleétion. sop J


pe eas Ie


BEE,


jevel oma EES


5 10 A Continuation


nights together, and then they began to believe it to be
occafioned by fome extraordinary means. This was
heard alike by twenty feveral perfons then in the Fa-
mily, who looking out at the Windows, over the door,
heard the noife, but faw nothing. About a Month af-
ter; when Sit William had returned from London , he
being in Bed, and his Lady ready to goin, he heard the
fame noife agai; which held about haifa quarter of an
hour and ceafed, and began again feveral times that
night, the fame perfons being then-in the Houle alfo,
and taking the fame care to difcover it : at the end of
this knocking there was as if it were athrufting with a
Knee, only more violent.

3. About the middle of aly Sir William and his Lady
being both from home, and the Servants fitting up ex-
pecting their return that night, they heard a noife in the
Hall, being the next Room to them, like the clapping
of the door at the feet of the Stairs, and going in, they
found the Chairs all fet-in the middle of the Hall, which
they did fet in their ufual places again, and returned in-
to the Kitchin , and in a little time hearing the like
noife again, they went into the Hall, and found the
faid Chairs removed into a paflage between the faid
Kitchin and Hall.

4. In Anguf, about nine or tenof the Clock, moft of


the Family being in Bed, and Sir William near upon it,, th,


he heard a knocking at the Door under the Stairs, as if jy,
it were with the End of a good thick Stick, at which#},,


being alittle furprized, and going down, the faid NOME yi,
began again, but afterwards he heard no more of it thatq .


Night. a | iN
s. Abdut a fortnight after that, and about ten of theday,.
Clock, Sir William being in his Clofet in the Hall overg|


apainft the faid Door, heard a very violent Knocking afi ii,
the faid Door, and being furprized, could not find the),
Key very quickly, but after he had, he went into thea,’


faid Room or Hole under the Stairs, which the Noifed,
left, and nothing being there, he fate down in the Halll )°
witht


1
if


of the Colleétion. sul


“i with half afcoreof the Family whith hich about half an
* V4) hour, and all continued quiet. And then he went into
“tl bis Chamber, but took the Key of the faid Room under
“Sid the Stairs in his Pocket, being very hard to believe any
‘aj fuch extraordinary thing. And immediately the fame
‘i noife began-again in the fame place, and he immediately
‘itt going down, and into the fame Room again, found all
‘(iif things as before. And the like noife was heard four or
‘lt five times the fame night in the fame place, Sir William
‘il fill ufing the fame diligence to difcover it as before.
ald Note here, that as any one came near to that, or any
itt] other door where the Knocking was, it always ceafed,

yexcept the firff time when it knocked at the outmoft
isle door,

i) 66. About three or four nights after this, about eight
vut@Of the Clock, at which time the noife ufually began, and
(iat the fame place and door likewife where it ufually be-

gan, there was a knocking heard as if it were with a

iialftick with the broken end. Sir William ufed his former
wldiligence-to difcover it. This noife was repeated about
viithree or four times, and left off about eleven of the
witiiCloek. After this Sir William and his Family being af-
(filter this manner fo much difturbed , he refolved to do

beehat he could to find it out. This noife therefore
«(which was heard fometimes every other night, fome-
syilitimes every night, as foon as it began, Sir Wiliam took
. “fall the Family into one Room, that he mi ght be fecured
yilifthat there was no Cheat in it. Which the Servants
olagladly yielded to, being all mightily affrighted.

\) 7. About September the noife began to be greater, and

ito be in aRoom unfurnifhed,defigned fora great Parlour,

(Band was liketo a Man walking up and down, and fome-
iqaatimes running, fometimes like a Man walking on Stilts,
_yaand fometimes ‘knocking at the Cieling, or top of the
», Soom, but not above half a {core ftrokes at a time, yet
’ (aometimes fewer, and fometimes more, {till as he went
“ylitowards it.

‘um 8. Afterwards the faid noife began ‘to be more


i dreadful


12 A Continuation
dreadful and greater yet, and in more places, which
mightily difordered Sir Williams ancient Father; and
his Lady and Children very much. Upon which they
were thinking of leaving the Houfe. Sir Welliam was
willing they fhould, but unwilling to leave it himfelf,
and thereupon they all continued, At this time Sir
Wiliam bad a Plummer putting up Lead about the
Houle, to conveigh the Rain that fell into a Ciftern,
and this knocking was often againft the Lead, and of-
ten againft the Iron that bore it, in imitation of the
Plummer’s knocking in the day time. He had likes
wife Carpenters at the fame time, and fometimes this
noife was like their chopping. at the Wood inthe
Yard, infomuch that the Head Carpenter faid, that if’


he -had not known his. Servants to. be. in the Houfe, Jam:


he fhould have thought they had been chopping. Some;


times it was like the Servants chopping of Coals. mii;
the Coal-yard: fometimes knocking .at the Doors, of Bini


Out-houfes, at the Wafh-houfe, Brew-houte, and Sta-


ble-doors; and as they followed it from place to. place, Jaf,
it ftill immediately; and in one initant.removed. , Thefeg;,


were the ufual noifes that were every night when it came; fal»
which was three or four times a Week, an

9. But fometimes it was,a great deal more terrible, i
particularly when Mr., Browz, a Relation of Sir Wikia sii,
Brother Brown, was here. The. noife began aboutiiy, ,
the ufual time of the night, and,at the ufual place. fy,
Which -faid noife in one place or,.another held, allfy...
night, fometimes at the Door under the {tairs, fome—fy).,
times running up and down in the Parlour, fometimesg,,,
knocking violently at the Woed. of, the W indowsyBisi,
fometimes againft the Spouts, and fometimes. againlt®,,
the forementioned Giftern, and“fometimes. againit, theg,),


outmoft Doors, as if it had been fome great piece Of,’


Timber thrown againit them, infomuch.that the Carty
penters, which were in the Houfe, faid, 1 was ims’
poffib'e for all the Art and Strength of Man to makegy,,"
{uch a noife without battering the doors in pieces, ancgy,

| yer


) of the Colleétion 512


yet examining they found the door. firm and whole, not
) ithe leaft battered or. {trained ,, Sometimes this noife
‘iBwas. like the tumbling of Tiles. from the fide of an
"ij Houfe, alas se: : NRT Ve
Kl) 10. ‘This noife growing worfe and worfe, Sic Wilkamn
“iSiffolowed it, demanding in the Name of God what was
‘i@ithe occafion of it, but received no anfwer ; but {till it
‘iiljremoved to another place, Particularly one night, it
llbeing very extraordinary in the great Parlour, Sir Wile
| Wea kept the Family in another Room, and-with a Can-.
‘li§dle in his hand, walked in the fame Parlour; but heard
silfmothing. . Afterwards. confidering the fame God could
‘it@protect him in the dark, as ‘Well as in the light, he put.
vii ut the Cand:e, and fhut the door, and walked there a
iquarter of an hour, ,hoping fome difcovery might be
, iifM@ade to a fingle perfon, which was not made to. more,
After he had walked a quarter of an hour in the dark,,
usifhe noife began at the Wood of the Window in the fame
i(SfX0om, only on the out-fide. At which he demanded,
obs formerly in the Name of God, what was the meaning,
‘sipE it, Upon which it immediately ceafed in that place,
‘i bod removed to a Dial that. {toed about ten or twenty
Wards from the Houfe, and knockt violently there, and
«OOK the rounds as formerly again. This night Sir Wil-
ita Tkewife opened-a Bible, and daid it in the Roont
inder the Stairs where it began; but neyerthelefs che
\jaboife was there afterwards, and the Bible not altered.
(#After which he went into the Chamber with the Family,
ind having been a little time there, there began a: very,
itmreat, Drumming:at a pair of Wainfcot Doors, between:
qe Hall and the great Parlour, imitating Drummers in
gimbeic feveral ways of beating, and varying it as they
Jually do, but it was.as if it was done with hands a-
* (hain{t the Wainfcot: :
mf a1,. About threesor four nights after this, the noife
WAEknockiog. began as at former times, and Sir Wiliam
vqlaghted a Candle, and fer itin a high Candleftick in the
" dmiddle of the Hall, and went up into his Chamber pe:
i k al


514 A Continuation

all his Family ; and whilft they were above, this drurit-
ming Noife began at the Door again in a very dreadful
manner. They were at their Devotions, which when they,
had finifhed, Sic William went out firft himfelf, and wen
down Stairs, and found the Chairs removed, and the
Candle put out, the Snuff hanging bent down, and the
Candleftick removed into the Paffage between the Kitch-
in and the Hall.

12. This was about the beginning of October, and
the fitting of the Parliament drawing nigh,which requi-
red Sir William’s Attendance, and he being much con-
cerned upon the leaving his Family in fach Difturbances:
and intending to fet forward on Monday before the fit-
ting of the Parliament,which was October 16.his Brothet
Browne and his Wife, Sit William’s. only Sifter, and fe-
veral other Friends coming to take their leave of him!
the Noife was heard at the door under the Stairs thaig!’
Night, but very little to what uftially. And accord |
ingly Sit William went to London, intending that if theg!


Noife continued, ‘his Lady and his Children fhould fol im?
low him, and that hisFather fhould go to Mr. Brown’s aig"


Horblin, but by God’s Blefling from that time to this1i
was never heard any more.


Advertifement,


ma Eis is a very trie and affured Diary of the chief Paffad
gesin thofe Stirs made tn Sir William York’s boufit®
bur withal a very bricf one. Which made me get Angi
Richatdfon to fend certain Ouneries touching feveral Paffr
ges, which were anfwered from a very fure and authentiag Vip,
Hand and in vertue of which anfwers, I fhall be able i#'w,,
give aftop ro all the Tergtverfations of the Incredulous anv
their evaforious Pretences, as if things might be refoluapti,
into wacgifh Combination. As firft on, \


Sect.


of the Colleétion.


Stil) © Sect. 1. Lwas certified (fo that no Man tan pretend that
‘nil the Party that madethat Noifewith the Latch, did upon the
tithl Glowing of the Horn flink away before the Town could come
Wei) 272) that the Notfe continued till the People of the Town
alti Game to the Gate, and that it was impoffible but that if any
wtih Perfon had been within the Yard, they muft have difcavered
‘Nill Bien, becaufe there is a Wall about tem Foot high round the
) Yard, fo that he could no way efcape: And, befides thar,
\y 0 8¢ happened in that time of the Year when it isin a m2nner
(noi all neghe long Twilight, fufficient ro difcover any Perfon, if
hl 4ay were there tobe difcovered , it is not probable, if there
yn) bad been need, but that fome of the company would come with
viet Lanthoras or other Lishts:
iyi Sect. 2. Thofe'Perfons that locked out of the Window to
yi the Place where the Noife was made, could not but fee
sy, 0f there mere any Man thereto make that Noife, ir being
viii 4one by Moon-fhine, (a is anfwered to my Query on this
wh Pallage) fufficcent to difcover if any Perfon had-been there,
tik af not, who it were, And this Diligence being repeated for
, ayome Nights together, and nothing difcerned, it is manifeft
,pnteat the Noife was made by fome Damon or Spirit, not by
yl any Blan.
MWe Sect. 5. Note that the Noife at the Door'of the Raom
Neinder the Stairs, it could not be difcerned, whether it was on
the Infide of the Door} or on the Outfide, as was anfwered
jtolone of any Queries. And therefore Sir Willliam feeing
Nno%body ‘at the ourfide to-canfe that Noife, which he might
Woave-eafily done by the light of bw Candle; if there badbeen
y(dany body, be went into the Room to fee if he could difcover
Wf ” one there. ‘But finding no body, locke the Door; and
In Ayet the noife-began again inthe fame Room, but upon a fecond
‘\ Mfearch, no body found therein And-this Notife and this
W"MDiligence in fearching the fame place feveral times repeated
Wen one night, by one naturally incredulous of any [uch ex-
W" Merordinary things, and receiving full (atisfattion therefrom,
i" Wenethinks fhauld fhake the moft obdurate Sadducee, and make
"Shim afhamed of his fond Incredulity,
) But now for the ceafing of the Knocking when any one
Kk 2 came


ny
{


515


g 6 A Continuation


Came near to any Door where the Knocking was; this was no
impediment to the certain experience of that under the Stairs,
becaufe they bythe light of a Candle plainly though at [ome
diftance, feeing there was no body at the outfide of the Door,
and finding no body within the Roam or Hole, which was
lockt , notwithftanding the ceafing of the Knocking, they
might be {ure that the Knocking was not made by the hand
of any Mortal, Nay I will further add from certain Ins
formation, that there were [carce any of the Houfe but have
feenthe Door at the fame time the noife was made there, and
no body at it; and that Sir William him/felf particularly bas
feen the Door from the top of the Stairs, with a Light in
his hand feveral times, while the Noife was there, which
fometimes continued till he came down feveral fteps, and once:
till be came over againft the Door within ayard of st, or


thereabout, but faw nobody; fo certain an experiment is this:
of Damontacal.oper ation.


Sect. 6. This taking the whole Family into one Roomay,,
was of very good confequence for thereby it was plain thaty
none of the Family plaid thefe Freaks, nor augmented them
by any humour {ome Imitation, And itis increarble any fran
ger fhould venture, as I underftand by the anfwer to my fifth jy
Query. Which affures me, that onthe firft night the Houfeq \,
was fearched every where, and the Doors were always locktigh j,
ana Sir William had the Keys given tohim. What firang-4 |),
er therefore in bis Wits would adventure upon [uch Freaks{hia
Exploits wherein he did bimfelf fo little good when he wash),
in fuch apparent danger to be taken tn [uch a numerous
Family.

Secl..7. Ay fixth Query was upon this feventh Sechion§ ) '
which was this. Was Sir William in the Room whereg ).:
fomething feemed towalk, to run, to go on Stilts ag,
cc. and whether it wasnot fo dark but that he might)
fee if there had beena Manthere? To which was anfwer-§
ed, He fometimes went in with a Candle, and fometimes§,
without, yet could dsfcover nothing , andif any Perfon haem,
been there, it was impoffible for bimto efcape out of the Room@, ”
undifcovered, the Door being lockt. And I may add feat a

them


of the Collection. 517


) the outward doors being lockt , that would have Sufficcently
“i made bim lyable to be taken if it had been a Man.
i") Sect. 8, This Apifh imitation of the noife of Workmen,
UN fhews it to be fome trifling Damon, as alfo that fudden re.
") moval fromone place to another, and its being heard in fo
i) many places at once, plainly argues it could be no Afan, un~
"WN lefs there were more than one, which would make them ftill
“ill the more obnoxious to be taken.
). Sect. 9. The continuance of the ftirs alfo all might, ar=
/@) gues tt not to be probable it was any Adan. For who would
WIN difquiet bimfelf a whole night, meerly to amufe others for
WY porbing. Bur that battering noife at the door demonftrates
109 2¢ was not the Feat of any Mortal. And befides this noife,
i) as Afr. Edward Brown the elder, who mas there this very
(iQ wight, writes to Afr. Richardfon , the Iron Latch of the
Wi reat Loor of the Room, which was juft under that in which
} he lay, feemed to. him to move with [uch wonderful |wiftnefs
ul up and down, and with fuch very great noife, as he could
iil mot think any humane art or dexterity could effect. But he
willl defcribes alfo the battering noife he heard at that door. There
wiih feemed, faith he, fometimes to be fuch extraordinary thump=
ying and knocking againft the faid door, with fuch wonderful
Whi Loud noife, as if fome had managed an extraordinary great
it peece of Timber with the greateft art to give it the greateft
(li advantage to force the door open, or break it in pieces, and
\imih'sa deliberate thoughts I could not conceive how the ftrongeft
» Ml Door, or Walls, could ftand before fuch force as was threat~
wih aed by fuch a very great and loud noife. Thefe two kinds of
Wnoifes, fays he, continued in my hearing till about break of
yWday , wath frequent little intermiffions: And yet in. the
Wh Morning, bork the Iron Latch and Door were found unale
yizered, in the very [ame ftate they were left when we went ta
i Bed. And very intellegent perfons, fays be, in the Family
ifaid, that when they went to the door, or went out in the
yieame of [uch difturbances they could fee no body, nor perceive
wlany motion in any thing on which the invifible Agent did feem
wiht operate. Which isthe very fame which Iheard from the
a abovementioned Dottor of Phyfickin his Letter to me. Ade,
i . 2 3. Brown


f
Lie


Aan!


RI


51 § A Continuation


Brown 72 bis difcourfe to Afr. Richardfon in the Country,
touching this thumping noife at the Door, told him he could
not compare it to any thing better, as to the force thereof,
thanto the Roman Ram, which the Romans buttered down
Walls with. Butit being experiented of all hands, that
the noife feemed to come from a force againft the Door,
that would, tf tt-hadbeenreal, break the Door all in pieces,
and yet the Door fuffering nothing from it, tt is a plain
demonftration that.it\was no Feat of ‘any Man, but a
prefizgious Frolick of fome Damon. And laftly, what one
Man, or many could make fuch anoife on the Top of the
Houfe, asig moft of. the Tiles were falling, and how could
be get down fa fuddenly, as not to be difcovered ?

Section 10, Afy:feventh Query was upon thu Settion,
viz. Whether. when Sir William went into the great Par-
lour.with a Candle in his hand, to walk there, did the
noifé ceafe at his Approach, or before. To which is an-
freved, It ceufed upon hw going in, and as foon as he was
goneput,. it would often begin again. Whence it » plain, if
the noife had been canfed by any vifible Perfon, that Perfon
would have been difcovered by the light, But that which cau-
fedu did not fo much as move out of the Room, in all like
lyhood, in beginning again as foon as Sir William’s back:
was turned.

Se. 11. Ady exghth Query belongs to this Section, and
to fome part of the former, namely, Whether when: the:
Drumming was, andthe Candle pat out, and the Chairsé
removed, the Out-Doors of the Honfe were lockr, {61
that none might efcape out. To which it u anfwered, They
were locke, and Sir William kept the Keys. Which in-


—— ==


ea =


———.


=


deed was every night done, as was noted on the fixth Settion.§ Mi
And therefore it tw incredible that any Man would adven-§ "1


nureto make fuch athundring noife on the Wainfcot- Doors.


smitating the various Beating of Driins, or do any otheng Wik


difcoverable Feats, in fo numerous a Famtly, where therag i


were fomanyto find him, andappreliend him, andthe Doors


fur upon bim, that hecould make no éfenpe. To which yonm WW


widy.add, tiat'the Doss were never obferved to bark, at amy


= >=- S =


=X = =
= ae c > = :


— = =


= —


a


ae Tae kk


of the Collection.
of thefe Difturbances, as mot of the Family affirm, all of


them, that never above once (which % a thing obferved alfa
in the Story of the Devil of Mafchon) and yer the noife
was external, all the Family, and other Watchers bearing
tt alike.

Thefe were my main Queries upon this Narrative, andf
mujt profefs that I am abundantly fatisfied in the Anfwers
sothem. Nor will I omit what.will reach further than to
thefe Queries. For 1 am affured, from the fame hand, that
Sir William being a Perfon naturally incredalous of fuch
things, and impatient of being impofed upon, ufed all poffible
care and diligence to detect the Impoftor, if there had beep


any, and this would reach to more particulars than I could
propofe by way of Query. Wi hich hitherto has been only touch-


,\ og matter of Fatt. But Iwas alfo fo curious as to ask, what
: ll Watneffes there were befides thofe of Sir


W which amount to about Twenty, and I


William’s Fazily,
was informed that
by turns watching there, could witnels to
‘And there were at leaft forty Perfons
or rather Ear-witneffes, rhe diftur-
bance being by Noifes, not Apparitions properly fo called,
and moft of the Servants are fiill in Sir Willians Family
that were there in the time of the difturbance, fo that if any
one have the Curiofity to enquire of the truth of the Bafinefs,
he may eafily get full fatisfaction in the Parifh of Lel-
fingham. |
My laf Query was, Whether any one was fufpected


moft of his Tenants
the fame matters.
that were Eye-witneffes,


to be the caufe of thefe Difturbances, and upon what


But the Anfwer was prudent and Chriftian,
That there might be fome Perfon fufpetted, but the Proof
being not full, he was unwilling to lay fo heavy a Charge
on any one. Nor is that much to my purpofe, unlefs the
Party (ufpetted fhould prove the Cobler that Alice Med-
calfe’s flaxen hair’d V: ifitant affirmed to her to be the Au-
thor of her troubles. For then the certainty of thefe
Difturbances in Sir William’s Houfe, of which there uw fa
full and ample Teftimony, would be a farther confirmations
of thofe things that are [aid to have happened at William

Kk 4 Medcalfe’s,


occalion.


519


nae


So HON


NBS


520 A Continuation
Medcalfe?s, they both being as well from one hand as ia
one Parifh.’ °° rat 4 mage
But ‘in “the mean time thefe Difturbances at Sir Willi-
am York’s having fuch clear and unexceptionable Evi-
dence, that they were not the Feats of any Man, but the
Freaks of fome Invifible Deamon, my communicating this
Narrative to the World, as it cannot but deferve Thanks
of the Reader, fo I hope tt\will obtain pardon of Sir Willis
am, that I have not concealed his Name, no more than
{uppreft the Story tt felf, which would bave been maim with
out it, but have exbibited it in its due-fulne(s for the
convittion of this incredulous Age, and confounding of Sa=
ducifm and Infidelity, without the leaft Blemifh to fo worthy
a Perfan: Who was fo much under the Protettion of the Al=
mighty that this Demoniacal Power was notably limited and
curbed, fora{much as it was obferved that, unle(sit was inthe
‘Hall Cand there was only afew Chairs) the'diflurbance was
never in any Room that was furnifhed. « Andit was alfo com
fined as to time, for unlefs it began at eight, nine, or ten


of the Clock, it came not at all that night, and ufually left Vxy)


off about eleven or twelve, there is only that ni ‘ght excepted,
when Mr. Brown was there. And laftiy, when Sir William
was inthe greateft Straits of all, Sekt. 12: and intended to
have bis Wife and Children come up to London to him, and to
difpofe of bis Father at Ar. Brown’s at Horbiin, to prevent
that trouble, the Difturbance quite ceafed. But Sir Willi-
am’s Chriftian Faith and Courage in the m djt of thofe Diz
fturbances, while they continued, was very eminent and cone
Jpicuous, and I know no Injury done to him or any one elfe, ig


my b anfrtting the memory thereof to future Ages.


of the Collection.


i RELAT. VI.

UiLA Story of the marvelons Condition of one Robert Churche
‘i man of Balfham, fome fix or feven Miles off from
) Cambridge, when he was inveigled in Quakerifm,
i how ftrangely he was poffeffed by a Spirit that |poke
‘) within him, and ufed hi Organs in defpight of him,
Vii) while he was in bis Fits. And how he was recovered
Wi) from bis Errour, and regained to the Church by the
I) Devotion and Diligences of Dr. J. Templar, till AGi-
(oq) nifter of that place, asit w fer down ia his Letter to
wil) a Friend, which is as follows.


io STR,
wi \7 OUR defire to be acquainted with fome paflages
wif concerning the Quakers in this Town, obligeth
iiw@me to give you the following Account. At my firft fer.
wi@tlement here, I found them very bufie in enticing my
u/speople to a compliance with their Perfwafions in Reli-
w@gion, This Defign they did attempt to accomplith
iby difperfing their Papers among them. Two of my
wifParifhioners 1 had a particular eye upon, namely, Ro-
lilibert Churchman and his Wife. They being Perfons of
wwf very good Life, and of a plentiful Eftate, I wasunder a
fear that their departure from the Church might be a
, ameans to induce others to the fame Practice. The firft,
jim many Difcourfes I had with him, did manifeft a ve-
;, ivy {trong inclination to the Principles of the Quakers,
_ (The fecond was fo far engaged, that the Quakers did
commonly report that a Principle was wrought in
ther. | |
\) As I was one day in Conference with the faid Robert
Churchman, \ defired him that when any of their Books
{came to his Hand, he would do me the kindnefs to
bring them to me, that we might read them over to-
Wgether, affuring him of no unwillingnefs in me to
Shearken to whatfoever fhould appear reafonable,


I


Hy hill

VIM

i iis
WAY, \¢


uF


What


A
i
i


ul


Darbar onl REE ES IAG
An pe righ mies,


Sveum eS


A Continuation


What I defired he performed not long after. When iy
1 had received the Paper into my hand, before I began ie


to read, I fuggefted to him, that it would be conve~f ji


nient that. the Perfon who had been the Caule of hisg »
Seducement fhould be fent for, and hear what was re-4i)
plyedto the Contents, which he willingly confented to,J,
When'the Quaker was come,\one Branch of our Dif} iy,
courfe was, Whether the Scripture is tobe owned as a Rule.) iin
which the Quaker denyed, aflerting, that the Rule was bo
within them. After the expence of two or three hoursd gn,
in Difcourfe about this and other matters, 1 defired}),
Robert Churchman to take notice, that the Quakers did Ds
not own the Scriptures for their Rule. Which beforeg jy,
this Conference | had intimated to him, but found him :
unwilling to believe. It pleafed God fo far to biefy }
what was f{poken, that the next time he met his Bro- Whe
ther, Thomas Churchman, he told him of what had paf-f,,...
fed at my Houfe, and that now he was aflured that theg),

uakers did not acknowledge the Scripture for then
Rule, and for his part, he would not be of that Religiaf
on whichdoth difown the Scripture in that particu:
Jar.

Not long after, the Wife of the forementioned Quads,
ker coming to his houfe to vilit his Wife, he met her at,
the Door, and told her he fhould not come in, intimad§ y.
ting that her Vifit wou'd make Divifion betwixt themi), ..
After {ome Parley, the Ouaker’s Wite {pake unto hima,
in thefe Words, Thou wilt wot believe except thou fee al .
Sign, and thon mayeft fee fome fuch. Within a fewgy."
nights after Robert Churchman had a violent ftorm upoug,, ,
the Room where he Jay, when it was very calm in alg
other parts of the Town, and a Voice within him, al»
he was in Bed, fpake to him, andbid him, Sig Praifeshy,
fing Praifes, telling him, that he fhould fee the Glorg,,
of the New Ferufalem, about which time a glimmer,
light appeared all about the Room. Toward the morning,”
theVoice commanded him to go out of his Bed nake@, "
with his Wife and Children. They all ftanding | i
; thi


of the Collection. 5*3


me Floor, the Spirit making ufe of his tongue, bid them
“to lye down and put their Mouths in the Duft, which
‘Shey did accordingly. -It likewife commanded him to
“wo and call his Brother and Sifter , that they might fee
‘tthe New Ferufalem, to whom he went naked about half
Ya Mile.

"Y— “When he had delivered his Meffage, that which fpake
“\“@yvithin him, charged them to denounce Wrath againft
‘them, and declare that Fire and Brimftone would fall
iapon them, as it did- upon Sodom and Gomorrha, if
“they did not obey, and fo he returned to his own Houfe,
“Where, upon the Floor of a iow Room, he ftood naked
‘diijabout three or four hours. All that while he was.acted
it'"in a very unufual manner, Sometimes the Sperie within
iN ihim forced him to fing, fometimes to bark like a Dog.
JM) When his Brother and Sifter , who followed him, were
very importunate with him to refiftit, it bid him to kill
l§them, making ufe of thefe Words. Thefe my Enemies,
(which would nor that I fhould reign over them, bring them
AMMand flay them before my Face. {t made him to utter with
ui@great readinefs many places in Scripture, which he had
ino knowledge of before. The drift of what was fpoken,
aiURwas to perfwade him to comply with the Quakers , and
it named fome which live in the neighbouring, Towns.
ws About three or four hours being thus fpent, he came to
ittihim felf, and was able to give a perfect Account of what

io IMfhad befalien him. |
ji) Several nights after, the fame trouble returned upon
)@him. His Wife was tortured with extraordinary Pains;
yoithe Children which lay in the Room complained that
their Mouths were ftopt with Wooll as they were in Bed.
sjiw'T he difturbance was fo great, that he had thoughts of
i @leaving his Houfe for a time, and made it his defire to be
cilwith me at mine. I prevailed with him not to be fo fud-
widen in hisremoval,but to make fome further trial. It plea-
i (fed God upon a continuance with him in Prayer every
ht iL in the Houfe, that he was at laft perfectly free from
sah fall Moleftation, The Quakers hearing of his Condition,
: gave


ee


524 A Continuation


gave jt out, that the Power of God would come uponifitt!
him again, and that the Wound was but skinned over byg it!
the Prieft. Which made me the more importunateg i
with him to keep clofe to the publick Service of God}
and to have nothing to do with them or their Wri-
tings.

Which direction he followed till November 1661,
and then perufing one of their Books, a little after up-
onthe tenth day of that Month, his T Troubles returned.

A Voice within him began to {peak to him after the for-§ jw:
mer manner. The firft Sentence which it uttered was. pit
Ceafe thou from Man whofe Breath isin his Noftrils, forafi
wherein is be to be accounted ? Yhe defign which he dif-
cerned that it did aimat, was, to take him off from com-in
ing to the Church(where he had been that day)and from
hearing the Word of God. It fuggefted feveral otherglni)
Scriptures in order to the perfwading of him toa com-li
pliance with the Quakers, and told him, that it wouldgin;
ftrive with him as the Angel did with Facob until theg nf,
breaking of the Day, at whichtime it left him. The
two next nights it gave him che fame: Moleftation, fay
ing, Ic muft be with him as it was with David, whowin

ave no fleep to bis Eyes, nor flumber unto his Eye-lids, un-4itt
til be faund aplace for the Lord, an Habitation for the Goda\h
of Facob. Upon Wednefday at night he was very pe-fith
remptory in his refifting of it. When it began to folli-fij
cite him, he replyed, That he faw it was a Spirzt off
Delufion, which he would not obey. Upon which the:
Spirit denounced a Carfe againft him,in thefe Words, Ga,
ye chr fed into everlasting Fire, and fo left him witha very)
great Heat in his Body,

After this, he was, in his own apprehenfion, in ave
ry comf fortable condition, and while he was confidering;
what had happened, a Voice within him {pake to him, sli.
faying, That the Spirit which was before upon him wasi@ ip.
a Spirit of Delufion, but now the true Spirit of God was;
comeinto him. It "acquainted him that the Doétrine of yin,
the Trinity was true, and that God had an Elect People,

and


Ss
= =


aS =
—o~> as
=

=4 >


i


—


ae ae


i


of the Colleétion. 525


‘iijfand that thofe whom the Father Eleéted » the Son
‘Vitlfaath Redeemed, and whom Chrift Redeemeth, the Holy
ithifGhoft Sanctifieth , and told him that the Miniter of the
iG@Town would further inftruct him about the Truth of
‘iWigthefe things. Upon Thurfday morning about Break of
(Jay , ic fet-him upon his Knees, as he was in Bed,
Gand bid him farewel. The fame day it came upon him
intqjin the Field as he was going to , and coming from the
‘tiiii§Market, and prefled upon him to believe that it was the
(liti§igood Spirit which he was acted with, which he. ftill
‘ii@doubted of. One night that Week amongft many Ar-
vi, Zuments which it ufed to that purpofe, ic told himif he
iictifwould not believe without a Sign, he might have what -
omipign he would. Upon that Robert Churchman defired, if
itiitt was a good Spirit, that a Wier-Candleftick, which
»/ttood upon the Cup-board might be turned into Brafs.
yoWhich the Spirit faid he would do, Prefently there
iiwolltwas a very unfavoury Smell inthe Room like that of the
yiisnuff of a Candle newly put out; but nothing elfe was
, done towards the fulfilling of the Promife, :
iyi Upon the Lord’s day following, he being at Church,
\ymé Came upon him. Whenthe Chapters were named,
|, jae turned to them in his Bible, but was not able to read.
(MW hen the Pfalm was fung, he could not pronounce a Syl-
q@mable. Upon Monday morning his Speech was wholly
joel@aken from him, When I came to him, and asked him
Ow it was with him, he moved his Head towards me,
put was not able to fpeak; I waited an hour or twoin
«(he Room, hoping that his Speech'might have returned
yanto him, and that I might have gained from him fome
Account of his Condition. But finding no Alteration,
qi defired thofe who were prefent to join with me in Pray-
ler. As we were Praying, his Body, with much vio-
‘dence, wasthrown out of Bed, and then, with great ve-
".amemency, he called to me to hold my Tongue. When
“ig@erayer was done, his Tongue was bound, as before, till
"Mat aft he broke out into thefe Words, Thine is the King»
"eam, Thine is the Kingdom; which he repeated, I be-
if lieve,


tie
ia
ig
,


'§26 A Continuation |
lieve, abovean hundredtimes. Sometimes he was for-
ced into extream Laughter, fometimes into Singing,
his Hands were ufually imployed in beating his Breaft.
All of us, who ftood by, could difcern unufual heaving:
in his Body. This Diftemper did continue towards theg ir
morning of the next day, and then the Voice within
him fignified to him that it would leave him, bidding:
him to get upon his Knees in order to that end, which
he did, and then prefently he had a perfeé¢ Command
of himfelf. al i
When I came to him he gave mea fober Account offi,
all the paflages of the day before, having a diftinct Re-§)),
membrance of what the Spirit forced him to do, and
what was {poken to him by thofe who ftood by. In par-# tin,
ticular he told me, he was compelled to give me that
difturbance in Prayer, which I before mentioned, thog j,,,
Spirit wing his Limbs and Tongue as it pleafed, contra-g j,,,
ry to the inclination of his own mind. 7
Upon the Thurfday following the Spirit began tagy,;
rage after its former manner, as I was at Prayer witli ¢,_
him, it was very difcernible how it wrought upon his},
Body, forced him to grate his Teeth, and draw his},
Mouthawry. Hetoldme, afterlhaddone, that it bicg
him to denounce Woe againft me. kt pleafed'God, wpong s,:’
continuance in Prayer with him, at laft to releafe himgy,
of all his Trouble, and fo far to make it advantage-y,,;
otis.to him and his Wife, and fome others, which werdf,,’'
too much byafled with the Principles of the Quakersiq)),
that now they have a‘perfect diflike of that way, and dogs)
diligently attend upon the Publick Service of God ingy,
the Parochial Church, Sir, You may be confident om),
the Truth of whatis here related, by


Balfham, Fan. 1. Your aflured Friend,
1682, ii,
Fe LB alng


Adver-}*:


fo Sh aaa


| of sd Collethion.


praca > maaan


“rae teenie peel


Advertifemenr.


wt Fis Story Ithought fit to add to the former Additional
‘ re Storses for thefe three Reafons. Firft: Becaufe I have
Nall defirable affurance of the truth thereof, being per fonally
 Natquanted tiis long time with rhe party that wrote this Leva
‘ll'eer, whom I know to be a learned, piows, and ferious perfon,
Rand fuch as I am confident would not for all the World clofe
WWM bas Letter fo as he has, but that be delivers nothing bur what
lhe knew ta be true, by fuch means as is intimated in the Let-
Nl, leer ze felf ; that ts, either by his own experience, or the in-
i@for mation of Robert Churchman, whow he knew to be a fin-
‘Wiig ular boneft Adan, and utterly devoid of all fraud and guile,
wit, Adoreover, the Writer of this Letter ts fo modeft, that be
| Uilimas always very backward from publifhing it by cz felf, though
Wt makes not alittle to bis repute inthe fatthful and fuccefs-
vn Maal difcharge of bis Minifiry. But this new occafion bemg
samboffered, my importuntty obtained of him, that it might be
ihlpsublifhed in this Colleétion of Stories of this nature, which
ian Meow accordingly is done.
wt) By fecond Reafonis, becaufe it is fuch a notable Example
inf. that danger they put themfelves in, who leave the true
Jwictik burch of Chrift (which bas the Seal and T eftimony of
iChrift, that it 1s for the main commenfurate to his W ord,
ivilas the Church Univerfal was, before the Apoftafie, and
quite Reformed Churches are upon the Rifing of the Witnef-
es) to follow the feducing of any private Spirit, efpecially
‘eyllafuch asthe Quakers were at the firft, being drunk and intox-
geared with the Poyfon of Familiim, which out of a Spirit of
GSaducifm and -Infidelity , believingno- fubfiftence of the
WSoul of Chrift after death, antiquates all things belonging
iyi bo es particular Perfon, asthe Sacraments, Feftivals, his
Unterceffion, and Perfonal coming again to Fudgment, &c.
» Mand makes nothing of any Chrift but what i within us. Which
Nes a perfect diffolution, or nulling of the True Apoftolick,
WChriftian Religion, which yer is tobe Everlaftinz, according


=)


| ire the predsétion of Daniel, And
|


ae


i
y
Fe.


528 A Continuation |
And my third and laft Reafon is, becaufe this Story with
others of Voldervey, Gilpin, James. Naylor, and thet
like, will the- better jujtijie that Satyrical paffage of Jol.,
Glanvil bes Letter to me, wherein he calls Quakerifm !
The fink of Folly and Madnefs, which I conceive he does:
with an Eye to the former times of the Quakers. But that
there is now a more tolerable eftimate to be made of thems
(though fome fordid Badges of Familifm ffl ftick to them,
and indeed all that remains ugly in them is fuch, though


they do not confider it). I {hall notein my Advertifements
on that Letter, which u as follows.


Fidler. to < Raa


BEING


REFLECTIO


ON
DROLLERY and ATHEISM.


Sa eee ACT


Sent, upon the occafion of the


Drummer of Tedworth,


In a Letter to the moft Learned


|p HENRY MORE, D.D.


“


LONDON,
Printed for S. Lewnds, MDC LXXXVII.
LI}


ages ee
FCEVEREND and Learnep


ID HENRY MORE, DD.


SECT. I.


\ His Anfwer to certain Objections and Queries touching the


Stirs made by the Drummer of Yedworth.


Hononred Sir,

"SHE {crupulous care you take in examining the

Story of the Difturbance at Tedworth, is no
;_#- more than becomes a Philofopher. and one
that is not willing to be deceived. And without fach a
Gcautious and particular inquiry you could not anfwer
athe murmurs and petty evafions of wilful Unbelievers,
(* Thole Objettions you pickt up at Cambridge have the
fill fortune to mifcarry in almoft every circumitance, and
mre in no likelihood of being believed but at a great di-
tance. Some of them I could have anfwered upon mine
own Knowledge , and concerning the reft, I have made
ih ftrict enquiry of Mr. Afompeffon himfelf and others,
iwhen I was laft in thofe parts, and upon certain infor-
ation I give youthis Account.
) Tothe (1.) that faith, The Houfe is rented , and
What thisis adevice to beat down the value of it. Lanfwer
(rom his own Mouth, That the Houfe is his own, and
Ho the foundation of this shift is over-turned. The {e~
tond, of thofe that fay » dtis atrick to get Money fr ov.
Cl 2 thofe


if


Quit


bil


ea hee


ee = tie


a


532 Refleétions on
thofe that come to fee the Prodigy, hath as little truth,
but much more malice in the firft Contrivers than the
former. For thisGentleman being a Perfon of Eftate,
I amconfident, {corns fo bafe and fo beggerly a Policy,
and is'fo far from making any advantage, that it hath
done him very material prejudice in his Fortunes and
Affairs. And thofe Strangers that come to fee the Pro-
dig y, ufe to leave nothing behind them except thanks for
the civility of their Entertainments. °Tis true (3.) as
others fay, That the Honfe is boarded without, at leaft a
great part of it. But there are no Cellars as the Obje-
ition adds, fave only under the Parlour, and the diftur-
bance was moft in other Rooms. And whereas (4.)
tis objected, That 2 Knight that offered to go down could
not be permitted. Vis anfwered me, That the Gentleman
might lave gone down had he pleafed, and his Servant
did, who made a careful fearch, but could find nothing
that might be a caufe of the noife, which he affirmed to
be above, and that it proceeded not from the Cellar.
And to difable what other Objecters fay, viz. (5.) That
there was no Drumming in the midft of any Room, but only a
firiking on the Boards as tt were with a Hammer ina corner
of the outfides of the Houfe. \fay, to null this pretence,,


Mr. Afompeffon and others affured me, that the noife wasig')""


oft in the mdf of the Room, and oft over bead, and,
he faith, that there is fcarcé a Man or Child in the Vil-
Tage but hath heard and can witnefs it. And after the;


SSeS SS See Se Ss Sees
——— 4 3 Sat = =
- £ c _ g Sams a z > =


= -—S _— =
- Say


firft Month it was.almoft always within. Thus, Sir, tom ™


fe ce e ify c f ty oo ‘ad envi } Lat > »¢
the Objeétions of others, which you have gathered. And


t IMite RT Owe ape k aiza ¢ 3 ~ SOM LT
@) your Own ml EI PO3 2 bic AU tas return.


Whereas you inguire (1.) What part of the Childrens \)


} . pe Pet j. . ‘Tye st bale Se a i TR a ae 2
Beddid the Damon beat, and what noife did it make ? 7 Vise Mt


t


POU SNS Pees Mee bo he
anfwered, i pat it oe


at againft the: Head and Pofts off
the Bed, and that’ when hands were laid on each fide off
them, at thofe times they would fhake as if they would
fallin pieces, but nothing elfe could be perceived or felt.f
The noife was like to that of ftriking with a Hammer.
And then (2.) To that whether the Drammer’s Dru
was


o—-


Ss SS


——s
>
>


Drollery and Atheifm.


was ever looked on while it beat, or was it only in the dark,
Tam aflured, that it was feen while the noife was made
upon it, both by the light of Fire and Candle. (3. J
To the Query, What were the Boards that moved, by whar
Light was their motion feeny and by whom ? Mr, Mompef-
fox anfwers, They were feen move forwards and back-
wards in the light of clear day, before the Sun was fet,
and by a whole Houfe full of people, And whereas (4. )
you ask, I” what clearne/s of Light were the Chairs {eer
walk about, and by what Witneffes ? Tis anfwered, That
they were feen to do fo by Candle-light, and by divers


=
>


a


‘iol Perfons.


94 Girls that could not well have been fufpected guilty of
' @the confidence of fuch a Juggle, had it been poffible


As to what I was a witnefs of my felf, I add thefe cir-


wil Cumftances for the fatisfaction of your Queries; The
jam Children were in Bed when the Scratching and Panting
vol Was, but I am fure did not contribute to thofe noifes.


i& Ufaw their hands above the Cloths during the Scraping,


ig and fearched the place whence the noife came. ‘To which
“vj Lmight add, That they were little harmlefs modeft


Cit


“Bthey could have acted init. For the Panting, Lam cer


tain there was no Dog in the Bed, for! grafpt it with


". my hand, and felt it in all parts, efpecially there where


(Via


_—


ithe original motion was. The Bed alfo was fearcht une


‘’ider,\but no Dog, nor any Creature elfe could be found
jgehere. ‘The Floor I faid fhook with the Panting fenfibly,


v


'gand yet it was as {trong and fubftantial an one, as ordi-
) Bnarily is feen.


"to be much concerned, having been ufed to thofe and


But the Children indeed did not feem


iruder noifes, and there was Company inthe Room to


“7, aflure them.


i.
6
i


==
LAY
Se)
rr
|


Fi
;


(
5
i
4
i


{
1
i
j
|
it


ian
‘f

FAs :
\

|

$3 ; |
|

it

{

Mi

i]


ae Wabeiase 3 Septal
doesurec ea rissa, eames


5 .4 Refleétions on


SECT. II.


The affetted humour of Drollery one Caufe of the Atisbe-

~ lief of Witchcraft, Apparitions, and Spirits. And
what {hallow Souls the Droliing Humourifts are in points
that require amore fearching Wit and folid fudgment.


Pw-Hus, Sir, I have briefly anfwered others Objeétions,

and your Queries. And becaufe I have an humour
to fay little more, Pll confider (what you know as well
as any Manalive) the Reafons Men are fo apt to cavilat
this kind of Relations, and are rather willing to believe
any thing, than the truth of fuch a Narrative. They
are chiefly I think an affected humour of Drollery and Scof=
fing, and a worfe caufe, -Arherfm.

For the firft, the fubje&t of Witches and Apparitions is
an apt and ampleoccafion. And the Cheats of Impo-
flours, the Conceits of Adelancholy, the Credulity of Zg-
norance, the Tricks of Waggery, the more folemn Va-
nities of Superftition, and the Tales of old Women, thefe
are excellent Topicks for a frolick and wanton Fancy.
And the defire of the Hamourift hath to be fome body,
and to havea name above thofe of common Apprehen-
fion, will be fure to actuate the fcoffing Vein; in the


exercife of which if he have quibled luckily, and made:
Folks laugh, he is encouraged to take all fuch occafions § °™
to prove himfelf a Wit, and to fhew he had a pretty 9 *™


way to play theFool. And when he hath wanton’da
while, and frolickly toyed in his affected Merriments,
his Reafon becomes.an obedient Servant to his Fancy.


SS


a
St


=
A ee


eS SS ees
<>? <> a = rd =~
~ e cr a


\Arang
Pele
A
|
4)


— SS
Res = {=


=


> —4
ca


He makes himfelf believe (by thofe Arguments that at q !


firft were intended only to make him laugh) and in the Mi


end concludes in earneft, that there is neither Witch nor
Apparition, and *tis well if he {top there.


Now thefe, Sir, are the Wits Cif we will believe them)j


and their Admirers take every Jeft for an Argument,,
anda loud Laugh, upon an idle Tale of a Devil or al
Witch


ait —


LIT OUCH YY GNM ZIUNCUTIb 6 way 2


Witch, for a Demonftration of the Non-exiftence of fach
Beings. And thus the Humour propagates, and Saduci{m
j isthe fafhion. Nor is this all, but by the fame method
8 every thing that is facred or ferious hath been expofed,
wie and both Government and Religion made the Objects df
yl) idle and fantaftick Baffoonry.
} * And muft we call this Wit, Sir? I confefs there |
§ are few things that urge me to more indignation than to i |
hear that Name, which deferves to fignifie better, to be 4
fo injurioufly apply’d. Certainly Wit is not an odd
Metaphor, or alucky Simile, a Wild fetch, or unexpected
Inference, a Mimick ation, or a pretty Kzack, in telling
of aTale, but it isa Faculty to dive into the Depth of
things, to find out their Caufes and Relatives, Confo-
,@ manciesand Difagreements, and to make fit, ufeful, and
“fy unobvious Applications of their refpective Relations,
j} and Dependencies. For which great and noble Exer-
fh cifes of the Mind, the Droll is the moft unfit and incom-
“if petent Perfon in the World, and thofe that on this
"of Account aflume the Prerogative of being the only Wes,
Bare of all Men the moft incapable of being fo. For
\" that trivial and Pedling way of Fancy and Humour, to
iM" which they are addicted, emafculates their Minds,
NG] and makes them fuperficial, flafhy and fantaftical, by
)“% employing them upon Effeminacies and little apifh Foo-
\""§ leries. And by thefe darling Entertainments of a too
i fondly-indulged Fancy, the Mind is made incapable of
i ferious and deep Reflections, which give it the nobleft
il and moft valuable improvements. So that | have obfer-
wi" ved that the Drolling Humourift , ave for the moft part
a" yemarkably Defective in clofe Ratiocinations, and the
sl worft in the World at Inference. Which is no wonder,
il fince Fancy is a defultory and roving Faculty, and when
tis not under the conduct of a fevere Judgment, not


ii" able to keep it felf toa fteady and refolved Attention,
i much lefs to make coherent chains of rational Deducti-
| on. So that *tisnexttoimpofliblefor fuch Wts as thefe
wv" to arrive to more than a Knack of f{coffing at what they
, Ll 4 underftand.


Keflections on


mene not. And they are under almoft an invinci -
Pemptation of doing fo, by every thing that ‘is too
gyeat for their comprehenfion, For the’ Hamour that
acts them 1s provd and affuming, and would not have any
thing to be valued; of which it felf is incapable, and
therefore it depretiates all the nobler and more generous
matters which it hath very great‘reafon to defpair of,
and endeavours by ridiculous and infolent Scorn toliftit
felf above chem. | 7
And yet this prefumed Wit, which raifeth them to
{uch an Elevatian in their own conceit, is but a young
and boyifh Humour, and the very fitft Effays of Juvenile
Invention are in thefe Exercifes of Fancy; which the
maturer Spirit outgrows, For you know, Sir; our
Senfes are the firft Powers we exercife and indulge in
our gteeneft years. Fromthem by degrees our Imagi-
jations Brow up, and their Actions and Gratifications
are the Pleafures and entertainments of Youth, which is
eafy to obferve in the little Flirts, Quibbles, and Tricks
of Fancy with which r Students in the Uni.
verfities are fo much tic ndtranfported. But when
Age and Experience ripens the Judgment (whichis the
Faculty’ of floweft Growth) light this Wan.


©


ich the


3


Be Sone ea "oy 8 Oe ee ee ;
na toying of our Fancies, and


® os
my Pa ¥ os ies iat 2 Ege >
s. that are more manly and cot


CALAAS


pply our felves


i
cerning. And
is exercife and pitch,
and filenced the Futilities and Preju-
of Imagination, we are then and not till then
grown inte’Manhsod. “And thofe that never arrive to
this Confiftence, but fpend-their Age in fooling with
their Fancies, they are yet Children, though they have
gray Hairs, and are {till Boys though palt their great
Climatiertcal, !
I confefs, Sir, 1am not fo Cynicaland fevere, but that
I allow evento the more improved Gewinss their Res
laxations and pleafant Intervals. And {age Socrates


himfelffometimes rid the Boys Hobby-horfe. Fanty
wh) x 7 . = | : Ode mre + 7% : rt R « 2 a] or r
mMay-be permitted its plaifance and inoffenfive Railer ies,
eta : {Q


‘\aferved Scorn and Laugh


“i But when Imagination is rampant, ]
#verned, when it knows no Bounds,
“lcorums, but fhoots at random, and i


‘jiiithings that are auguft


ts juft Reprehenfion |


|
ae
“ie > UT
2 mn, to a C


\;@Ememics of Government and Religion, and fhall
pith this Addition, that they are fo of all the better forts


ie ; 1
nt fa Knew Cace.


.
“7 4 ji
< Affairs and Ma


qygemon 2 tne |


la
woh
bofed to the fcorns of th
»mpOicad TO Che Lcorns OF th
:


SananEGnEEEtEeeeeeee


Drollery and Atheifm.


| ng as they are governed by the Rules of Vertue
“Wa prident Fudgment. And no doubt Go


| d himfelf allows
ul fall our Poy


vers and Faculties their Innocent Gratificati-
| Yea and I acknowledge a delightful Pretti
‘gthe refult of amanaged and judicious Fancy, wl
“Wimployed in expofing Vice, and conceited Folli


Y


—e ep OD
“NO


and venerabl
oivitious. and deteftable Excefles :
iiof this Humour, are but a fort of fle

lis, a’better kind of Apes in the jud
ig i@though Wits in their own.


Pring > +5 055 We

ering Buffoous,
Ws er +] AT; f;

gment of the H%/


VEC


if the quibling Debauchees, for their
Irreverence toward Government and Religion. And
what an Abhorrence and Antipathy, they have againft
all noble Theories of Philofophy, which are above the
pitch of their weak Intelettuals.


» Sir, I intimated a greater charge again{t
quivling Debauchees, viz, that they are the


upon the Keverence its Rulers have from the People,


le be tatled and aggravated
iment will thereby be ex-
¢ Rabble, and lofe a great part


538 Reflections on


of its Force with its Reverence. And in this it fuffers in
finitely from the drolling Phantafticks, who blow in the
Sores till they have rankled them with their malitious
and poyfonous Breath, and fhoot Libels at the Govern-f ii


ment till they have made deep Wounds in its Reputatiig dic,
on. and Reverence, and turned every Tongue into fi,


Weapon of War againft it. Thus do thefe Chams dif-Bine |
cover their Fathers nakednefs, and rejoyce to publifh theg iin
Shame of thofe whofe Failures and Infirmities Loyalty /,)
Prudence, and Regard to the publick, Quiet fhould obligag | tic
them to conceal. "
Nor (2) is Religion more beholden to them. For afi 4y


Mind that ufeth to white up and down in the Leveczesbiiis|


of Fancy, will find a very great Indipofition to the Lerde fri
ous and folemn exercifes of Piety. And that will grows,
into an Averfation, which will be fure to prompt the
Hlumourift to t- ke all occations to expofe it , fo that hed fy
quickly jefts at Scripture, and makes a mock of Sin My».


plays with eternal Flames, and fcoffs at thofe that Feary i.


them. As if the facred Oracles were but a Legend o
idle Tales, and Sin but a Name, coyn'd by Fancy anc
vain Fears; as if Ae were but.a painted Fire, and choy,
Religious a fort of timorous Fools that are afraid. 0 |
Buggs, and the Imagery of Dreams, And if thefe ara},
not yet the real Articles of their Creed, their extrava§a
gant Fancies, and vile Affections are like ina fhort tidheg,,,,
to encline thefe dight and impure Spirits to make them
fo. And this fort of Wirs are either Arhecfts, or an
preat Prodigies of Folly, if they are not; fince to believagp, ”
a God that made, fees, and will judge them, and fo :
{coff at that Tremendous Majefty before whom their Brot he


ther Wits below tremble, to think the Scriptures are the,


Infpirations of the God of Heaven, the Laws of Soulsg,,. )

and grand Inftruments of immortal Happinefs, and yeq,, *

to Droll upon them, and to jeft with the Records of Eq,”

ternity, to believe endlefs Torments, and everlafting#y, ”'

Joysin the ftate immediately fucceeding thefe our fhor@,,”

and uccertain Beings, and yet to fport with the Wrat: ny
C


ante


~Drollery and Atheifm. 539


pf God, and to make tricks at Eternal Terrors, to talk FF
"\irivially of beatifical Enjoyments, and to make as bold
~\prith Heaveg as they do with an imaginary Elyfiwm.
“WT hefe, I fay, are Follies, thefe are degrees of Impu- yy
“iilence, beyond all aggravation or poflibilities of expref- |
“ifion, and did not fad experience fhew them, one would
‘"fcarce believe there were fuch prodigious Montters in
ul NN ature. And tothefe things I add ‘
) a (3.) Thefe idle Drolifts have an utter Antipathy to |
“OWIT the braver and more generous kinds of Kzowledge, iF
For that they are perfectly indifpofed for Philofophy and
WML deep Refearches, I have faid fome things that may
‘sPuffice for proof already. And 1 add this obfervation to
ifonfirm it, That among the numerous Youth I have
een bred in a great School, and in the Univerfity, I
o)!ifmave noted that chofe of them who are moft remarkable
ytt'for Wageifhnefs and Jefting, feldom arrived to. any
(0Mreat maturities or capacity for things of confequence
tt and weight. And indeed frolicknefs of Fancy, and folidity
wf Judgement, require difpofitions of Brain that are ve-
“iy different , and fuch as feldom meet in great Degrees,
ut in fome very few extraordinary Tempers. But.ge-
jaufherally I believe the Dro is very unfit for matters of
‘je@bublimity and Subftance, and therefore, as f intimated,
wiendeayours by his Scoffs and Injuries to make them ap-
witifear as much below his ferious notice, as they are im
\:lifleed above hisreach, and inthis defign he hath many
reat Advantages for his Abufes. For the Pedantry of
oyl¥Difputers, that make a loud claim to Knowledge, the i%
Wanity of the extravagant fort of Chymiffs, the fond i @
iiimBoafts of fome bold Pretenders to Philofophy and Expe- 4
ayviment, the Strangenefs of things that foberer Inquifi- a
{itor declare pratticable, but have nor yet fucceeded, the i |
_ giueannefs, and feeming contempriblene{s of many Subjects, MW
gee Experimenter is often obliged to deal in, thefe afford
‘ti@plaufible Arguments for Drolling Harangues, and
-W@thofe Advantages are taken to make the moft ufeful
. (iP heories, and Endeavours appear ridiculous and vain. f
‘ An


Che
aN
oe


a |
i |


agers Reflections on


And for the encouragement of the Phantaffick.in hist
infolent humour of Injuftice and Abufe, there is a cer-
tain Evvy in Mankind againft thofe that attempt anyg
thing extraordinary, which makes men willing to emmy);
brace and applaud that which expofeth what themfelvesg ,,,
cannot act nor comprehend. By reafon of which «i! Na-§
ture inthe generality, yea even of thofe that pretend
to fomething, this kind of Wit becomes the.moft peiti-
lent enemy tokvowledge, and its Improvements, efpect-
ally to Philofophick Wifdom, For Philofophy can fhameg;,
and dif-able all the Rea/ons that can be urged againtt itp”
but Jets and loud Laughter are not to be confuted, andy...
yet thefe are of more force to degrade a thing in theq,,..
efteem of fome fort of Spirits than the moft po-fy,,.
tent demonftrations, And the mifchief of it is, that®,,’
thefe Quiblers and Buffoons that have fome little ferapsd..
of Learning matcht witha great proportion of Confi-}.,,
dence, have commonly the luck to be celebrated amongg,,
the vulgar for Men of great Parts and Knowledge, andj.’


that opinion of them gains credit to their infolencies$,, ’
and abufes. | ia

But, Sir, I perceive my zeal againft thofe Pedlars off,”
Wit hath tranfported me to your trouble. 1 thereforeg,,"
make an abrupt return to my other Reafon mentioned off,
mens Disbelief of the Being of Witches and Apparirions,§


and that is,


|
g
|
He


Drollery and Athei{m.


SECT. Ly.


‘Wtheifm, another canfe of Disbelief of Apparitions and
¢ Spirits. With an Account of his Difcourfe with a pro-
i fet Atheift. And 2tonch on one [pecial caufe of the in-
§ creafe of Atheifm, viz. The placing Religion iz Opi-
f nions.


1
¥


RL
tals TT
b |
}
i


r
Or


4
i
|
1
!
is
1


mae) A TIHEISM, the Folly of which accurfed
| Madnefs, you, Sir, have fo fully difco-
“) @ered to the World in your incomparable Works, and
5 'ijo throughly underftand the Myfteries of that black Con-
“ ‘Epiracy againft Heaven; that it would be fond for me to.
“think to fuggeft any Notion on the Subject which you
“ould not teach. But,Sir, | havea relation about this mat-
ier to make you, which, I believe, you will not be unwil-
Aging to hear; And you fhall have it, when I have taken
‘“Motice, that there is a latent Atheifm at the Root of the
ihil\Baducean Principle. For too many deny (Witches, becaufe
ghey believe there are no Spirits, and they are fo per-
i Bwaded, becaufe they own no Beimg in the World but
(is faerer, and the refults of ALtion, and confequently
"Pan acknowledge nothing of a God.
pei It hath indeed been a2 Queftion, whether’tis poffible
> ffhere fhould be fuch a Prodigy as a Speculative Athei/? in
Nature, and | could. wifh it were fo ftill, But alas!
bur Age and Experience hath ended the Difpute, and


(( Mealment, but bravesthe Sun, and appears in the cleareft
Way. And the Fool is not fo modeft as he was inthe
Ways of the Royal Prophet, to fay only in his Heart,
i. 1s no God. We know a bolder fort of Infidels,
| and


542 Reflections on


and I can fay, Sir, from a particular experience, That?


ofa


there are who deny the Exiftence of a Deity. 1 met with!
one fuch fome years fince in London, who confidently, §%"
and without mincing, denied that there was any fucypi*#
Being, and bid me prove it. I wondered at the boldnefsgit'’
as well asthe impiety of his faying, and becaufe 1 had agit
great compaflion for one in fo deplorable a State, I refi
folved not to exafperate him by Paflion, hard Words, pi
or damning Sentences, but calmly and without feemingy (tlt


Emotion, difcourfed the bufirefs with him. I granted


him all J fafely or reafonably could, and all that might iu
ferve my defign for his conviction, before we began theq!

clofe Engagement, that fo he might have lefs prejudiced tis
againft what was faid by one whom he might fee not to begitin
of a narrow confined Judgment,and that I might not havegitia


the difadvantage of being put upon the impugning of


Principles, which are plaufible by the great Names on i


Reafons of any eminent Philofophers, and that were


not abfolutely neceffary for the defence of the Propofi- ffi)


tion for which I undertook.
¥* Such were the Platonick Anima mundi, the Eternity


and Jimmenfity of the World, which, Sir, though [fii


fhould not affirm, yet I would not at that time deny:
but quietly granted them as Hypothefes, being willing
to permit his belief of thefe in order to the convincing
and difabufing. him in his main and deadly Conclufion.
And by thofe Conceffions I gain’d the advantages I ex-
pected. For hereby he was difappointed of ail thofe
plaufibilities which I perceived he was wont to urge fon
thofe Doctrines. And I faw, that when he was pref
with the neceflity of a Caufe of all things, and a Firft4
his Refuge was, that old Epicurean one of an Eterna
infinite Matter, which when his unwary Oppofites woult:
attempt to difprove, by endeavouring to demonttrate


Kwon,
Modi
Mtn ty
dite
bine
tie


Poni:
wi in


the Beginning and Finitenefs of the World, they gaveqiij,


him the opportunity of a colourable Defence, and di-


verted from the main Thefis which might be evinced.lfiix,:
though the Jmmenfiry and Eternity of the Univer/e wert,


granted :


‘\lifranted: And fo they let him go from an Aflertion tha¢
Ten s moft impious and abferd, to another which Is tolera-
itéitply accountable and {pecious, And the Conclufion would
‘ibe at laft, that fince the Undertaker could not prove
ld che World was not Infinite and Erer7al, he could not
(uiimake it appear there wa a God. By which Procedure the
ie |@Arguer falls froma Propofition which is the moft de.
‘odionftrable one in Nature, to another which cannot be
tiei@leared but by fuppofing the main thing in Queftion.
mail But befides this thift, which my Conceflion made in-
wneMignificant; when my Atheift was urged with the Order,
jeutarmony, Contrivance and Wifdom that is vifible in the
yeu@ereatures, he would betake himto his Anima Mund:,
«ihe Exiftence of which, when thofe other Antagoniits
‘ye had dealt with would endeavour to overthrow, then
wniehey took a thing of harder probation than the main
ins leOnclofion.
ww Ufay therefore, Sir, 1 permitted him to affame thefe


.paPrinciples, and then proved, That though the World
“Ywere Immenfe and Erernal, yet, That tis not poflible
jyneer blind unguided Adaiter fhould fhuflle it {elf into
woilltuch regular and accurate Produétions as we fee are the
. eWefults of every day without the Manuduction of fome
Knowing Agent and Contriver, as you have fally made
jqq@ggood in your-excellent Antidote. “And when he at this
‘urn took fanétuary in an Anima Mundi, asthe Caute of
ail the art and exactnefs in Nature, :I granted him the
 yeing ; but askt him, Whether he took it for a Sub.
: ; he that was Intelligent or devoid of Reafon and Per-
“/deeption. When he feemed.to incline to this latter, I
, quew?d him that fuch a Principle as had no fenfe or krow-
“ gueage fignified no more to his purpofe, than if he had
@tuck in the Hypothefis of meer Atater and Aotion,
"But when he allowed his great Soul to be an éntelleByal
* dpeing, as he at laft did, and that it was Immenfe and E»
‘\@ernal, (as he was forced to do by his Aflertion, that
\"" Mhis Soulwas diffufed through the whole Mafs of his Iz-


my 8
A


i Mwaite and Eternal Matter) I fhewed him, that in effect he
>: was


| Drollery and Atheifm. 543


544 Reflections ont |
was brought by his own Principles to the acknowledg-
ment of a God, though he gave him another Name.


Thus, Sir, I purfued my Infidel into all his Starting-4


holes and Retreats, and drive him from one Affertioni ©
to another, its contradictory ,; and then back again tog,”
the firft Thefis,and fo up and down tillat length he begang |.


to be afhamed of his fhuffling, and confeft, that 1 had§*


faid to him more than he had heard, and fomethingsa ».
that he would confider. He defired that I would giveg’ |
him the Subftance of my Difcourfe in’ Writing, which. -


I prepared for him, and fhall perhaps ere long give anil i
Account of thefe and other dependent. Matters to thea”


Publick. |
After the heat of our Engagement was over, I was
willing to learn by what means he came into that defpe-
rate Infidelity, andunderftood from him, * that he hadi
run through the feveral Stages. of Modern Sects, non
{topping till he came down to that: Sizk of Folly and
Madnefs, QOuakerifm, and thence made a f{tep into 4-
theifm, which is no great leap, For Eaft and Welt ata
long run meet, and are the fame. . And certainly he that
places his Religion in Opinions, and judgeth it now to, lie
in this form of Belief, and.then.in another, when he
comes to confider the vaft variety of Sects, the confi-
dence of each in his own Reafonings , the Pretences.o
all to Scriprure-Reafon , and. Antiquity, the Antipathy,
they have one againft another, and, the doubtfulnefs; aif
not falfhood, of things that each of them hold facredq.,
and certain; [fay , he that takes Relzgion to be an adhesg)
rence to Seéts and Opinions, upon the Accounts mention. “
ned, when he reflects, isin mighty danger of being amg®


Atheiff?. Andexcept he fix at laft-upon the few plain”


acknowledged Effentials of Belief and good Life, Gif heg."
be of an anxious inquifitive Mind, and not obftinatelyg
refolved in the way of his particular Sect ) ?cis a Miracleg
if he ends not there at laft. For he having eftablifhtg,’:


this, That Religion confifts in the Way or Form. off"
fome Party or other, andthen having fucceflively defer-g°')


fed.


ted thofe Seéts that had moft of his favour and affection,
i « fend fo paft from one to another through all the fte
ing Defcent, when at length he is faln out with the la aft, i
Ao Abath nothing elfe to flie to but contempt of ai Religie
Jas a meer Juggle and Impofure.” Vhis | took to be this
\yoentleman’s cafe, and I believe much of the general A-
i ‘thei {fm of our days is to be afcribed:to th is Canfe.
‘tig 2 hus, Sir, I have followed the humour of Writing,
bil ips it led.me, and expect your pardon of this Ramble up-
nd pn the account of that liberty which ufes to be allowed
n Intercourfes of this Natute, and more from that


F Fticndihip with which you are pleafed to honour,


Sir,


| Your Affettionate -


Humble Servant,


| erence 1.


His Letter was left out in the former Edition, the
Publifher confining it to fewer Sheets, that there
4 ‘ati be the more room left for Stories. But the fore-
rt fo particularly fatisfying Objeétions and Queries
uching the ftirs in Mr, AZompeffon’s Honfe, and the reft
ting fo well levelled againit Saducifm and Atheifm (the
wfuting of which is the {cope and defign of the whole
Nok) and it being written with thar {martnefs of Wit
(tillld foundnefs of Fadgment for the main, I thought fitto
ay <¢ it in again'in this new Edition of Saducifmus Tviume
Mm “phatus,


Drollery and Atheifm. 5 ie ae


ps of


tales
eral


ss EES


oe a Meat


- a
Fone OL oes


PPS eS


546 Reflections on


phatus, asa piece fafficiently congenerous thereto. And |
it is publifhed unalteredly in every refpect, unlefs in one } i


word that was rather French than Englifh, and fo not fo
eafie to pafs with the vulgar. And now it is republifhed,
{ think it not amif{S to beftow fome few Aadvertifements
on it, as has been done on {everal other pieces of this
Book.


m


Set. 1.. Thole Objettions you pickt up, &c. Though the ti


more perfect Narrative, inthe laft Edition, of the ftirs a irym


of Tedworth, made this part of this Letter lefs neceflary,
yet if any one confider the particular fatisfaction here:
given toevery Objettion and Query, and compare it with
the aforefaid Narrative, I believe he will confefs it was
worth the while to take in again, in this fecond Edition,
this Letter omitted in the former.

Sect. 2. And muff. we call thu Wit, Sir, &c. Certainly
not Wifdom, nor Wir, in the better fenfe and meaning of
the word, as it fignifies 4 found and able Faculty of thu
Mind, whether natural or improved, to difcern and jndg'
of things. But the Wie that is fo called now adays, ii
rather the Paralytick, motions, or Antick Dances of thai


Dour

CONC {i
| tenet
der
UNIS OF |
COniider
VOrtayy
h the 4
ie,


Ut Neare


Faculty that is properly to be called Wit, than.the gewny ;
nuine operations thereof, the demitting of that to meane Mio,


offices; which God has given us for better purpofes, Ane


as 7.G. phrafes it, toturn Drolls and. Fidlers to the A@ bin,
shes to make his Worlhip merry. Which is a ver@ hy
mean imployment for fo noble a Being as the Rationagiiip,)


Soul of Man.


Sect. 3. For Government you know, Sir, &c. Whe they


the Writer of this Letter delivers in this Section,


worth the mot ferious confideration of all Men, thei,
are not fo well affected to Government as they ought tf} ;.
be. Whofe Authority is certainly molt Sacred, am f,',
their Rule, if it be tolerable, exceeding commendablihy.,,
thofe in high Places having fuch {trong Temptatiogy),
€-om the Flatteries and Circumventions of cunning P' i


rafites and forcible Attempts of Things. whereby thi


are attacqued daily , and too often drawn into ee
befog *!


| Drollery and Atheifin.
‘\ nif before they are aware. Upon which, for others to ine
‘liffult, is a moft favage and inhumane thing, and quite
iti@iContrary to the Law of Charity, which is the indifpen-
“fable Rule of a Chriftian, who cannot bue think fuch
iii Demeanors as courfe and barbarous, as the {porting at a
‘\uGman?s breaking a limb by a fall from an horfe,or his being
Icaft into fome defperate ficknefs. Befides, that to /port
walfat fuch things is to give themfelves the Lye, and when
iit i@hey would pretend them great and heinous Mifdemea-
iia@ours , to acknowledge them more flight, elfe how
‘omiPould they be the due Object of Witand Drollery,.
ich repeat it again, and indéed I have often and
iitm@bften thought of it, that Princes and grand Mini-
‘iteiters of State that may feem to acquit themfelves tolera-
My well, do really acquit themf{elves exceeding well,
(noitfOnfidering the high Temptations, they have, and are
equvOrthy Of all loyal Affection and Honour. How high-
iy’ then are thofe Princes to be honoured, and fincerely
jiaaved, who tule well, and havea real tender regard to
{ge peace and welfare of all their Subjects. The other
(VO parts of this Section are penned down fo full and
(¢lome, and with that brisknefs and Judgement, that no-
pqufing can be added that may not feem {uperfluous.
uc Ma SeCt..4. Such were the Platonick Anima Mundi,’ the
| llternity and Immenfity of the World, which » Str, though
lbould not affirm, yet I would not at that time deny, &c.
| vathis Paflage is fet down with caution and difcretion , in
"(tat he profeffes that thefe Conceflions were only ad ho-
(vem, and made fo good ufe of, that he caught his Ad-
| hi a in his own Net, who being forced by dint of Ar-
a aument to acknowledge that the Phenomena of the.
“World could not but be from a knowing Principle, but
 @lting it upon his Anima Mundi, to avoid the Profeffi-
" 4 of a Deity, by his granting, (becaufe of the Eteruity
al Immenfity of the Adatter) this Animato be immense
Nia eternal, ‘as well as knowing, he was forced to ac=
@Owledge, in aconfiderable fort, a Deity whether he
«Muld or no. Better thus far than to be a downright


Mm 2 dull


547


548 Reflettions on
dull Arhei#. But I muft confefs I do not hold any one
an Orthodox Deift, that does not hold the AZateer created
of God, as well as contrived by his Wifdom into fuch |
Phenomena as appear in the World. ae
Befides, he might have puzzled and confounded the
‘Atheift in demonftrating that the World (being an or; ¥
derly continuance of things in fucceflive motion and du- 4,
ration) could not be ab eterno. Firlk, becaufe it is
plain and undeniable, that in fuccefive duration every)
moment that is paft, was fometime prefent, and there-
fore, fince they all muft be one after another,that all, at
leaft but one,. were fometime to come. Which plainly,
evinces the World could not be ab eterzo. Again, this}
is moft certainly true, that be the World fuppofed as
much ab aterzo as you will, yet according to the order:
of Nature and Time, there was Life before there wag:
any Death, and a Standing of Spirits before any Fall
He might here therefore demand of the Arhez/t how lony
it was eer any Death was, or Lap/e of any order of Bei
ings toa worfe State. Was it an infinity of time befor
that. And thirdly, and laftly, If there has been ag),
eternal and infinite Succeffion of time till now, how com
we to find our felvesin being. For if from #s, fuppot
in the time B, backwards, the Swcce/fion is infinite, it
Tikewife infinite 2b eterno, orfrom A to B, And ashi,
can never come in Succeffion to A, backward from Hf.
becaufe it is infinite, fo fucceflion from A to B, bein
alike infinite, it Could never come to our turn to be J
Being. Nothing but table and un[ucceffive duration Ca} | *
‘be infinite, where there is nothing paf, nor to com a
From this eternal NU NC ST_ANS, wherein theg “"
is nothing to come, and which it is impoflible to be [a
cefive (and therefore nothing by fuppofing it fucceffig:
can be really argued from it) doth /ucce//ive durativ
commence, which it is alike impoffible to be eternal
snfinite. | )
Indeed if the Jxfinity was not in Succeffion, but
once asinfinite Space, grant that we might be in a J
a 0) poi


Drollery and Atheifm. 549


..,@ point of it, which would look like the term of, fuppofes |
,,@ ats Eafern Infinity butting upon us, from which Term |
“@ you might conceive an infinite Line thence Eafward, and
|, {uch as we nor any other moveable thing could get to

‘the end of, it being infinite. And as certain it is, that
" @no moveable thing which took its motion abfolutely i.
« @from the Eaffern Infinity, could ever come tous, or to i
~ “the Point where weare, the length being as infinite for- q
| wards from the Eafern Infinity, as it is back again thi-
““@therward from us, there being the fame diftance, as -Ari-
‘Wftorle fomewhere fpeaks, from Thebes to Athens, and
““ from Athens to Thebes. Which further may illuftrate
' githe Impoflibility of finding our felves here in Being, if
Mgithe fucce/five duration of the World has been ab eterno.
“"W@For it being as infinite from’ A to B asfrom Bto A, it
‘is manifeft ic could never fallto our fhare to exift the
“/)ftime we do, it being an infinite diftance from A and
W@never to be run through. This Point of the Impofli-
i“Pbility of fucceffive Durations being eternal or infinite, it
isti"fis fufficient that I but touch on it here, I having fo fully
sMihandled it in my Exchiridion Metaphyficum, and clear?’d
joi(lfit from all Objections and Evafions whatfoever. See

(cap. 10. and the Scholiathereon. Where alfo you may
‘ith! GCee how little reafon there is to hold the AZarter of the
WW orld infinite, and that it is part of the Effential Santti-
(itlry and fingular Tranfcendency of the exalted Nature of
\i\MiGod, that He alone be Eternal as to Duration, and Ime
Ww Menenfe in Amplitude.

ill} And the fuffering God to be an Anima Mund:, though
ywit ferved ¥, G. his turn at that bout, yet this alfo is
ctoMinugely again{t the Effential Santtity of the Divine A4a-
Mefly, whofe excellency it is infinitely below, to grow,
Jas it were, into one Suppofitwm with the vifible World.
‘(la Which errour might be the main Foundation or Prop of
,anach of the Idolatry of the ancient Pagans. There is 7 |
| ino Anima Mundi, but what is purely a Creature, and | Gg
,i@that is the Spirit of Nature, fo far from being a God, ig
ylifthat it fcarce has any Perception but only an Omniform i.
fs Mm 3 Plaftick i |


i


550 Refleétions on |
Plaftick power, or Vital Laws of ordering the Matter |
of the World, imparted to it effentially from the Wilt |
dom of God. To cali this an Avima Mundi, may be |
Senfe good enough. But the Plaronick Oca juyi, OF
Anima Divina, which aniwers to the Aly Spirit in our
Chriftian. Trinity, they are the third Hypoftafes of they
pure Deity in both, of an eternal, neceffary, and immu-
table Effence and Exiftence, and therefore i in no wife are
creatural, but purely Divine, and were before ever the:
‘World was or could be,

And now the Worldz, there is no need of any Hypa
ftatical Union betwixt the Platonick Divine Soul, and it,
to be confcious of what things happen here, or to mo-
derate the Matter of the World. Forthe jatter is done
by the Spirit of Nature, and the former requires no fuch
Union, fince we our felves have the perception of what!
is no part of our own Suppofitum.. Butas we fee thing:
reflected froma Looking-glafs, our Eye having no Hy.
poftatical Union therewith, fo are all the Energze
of this exterior Creation reflected into the perceptior
of the Deity, without any fuch derogatory Union o}
the Godhead therewith. According as is exprefled in
Pfychoxota, Cant. 1. StanZ. 50.


In this clear {hining Mirrour Pfyche fees

All that falls under S enfe, what ere ts done

Upon the Earth, the Defarts (haken Trees,

The mournful W riage. the folitary woune

Of dreaded Beafts, the Libyan Lions moan,
When their hot Entrails fcorch with hunger keen,
And they to God for Meat do deeply groan,

Fie hears their cry, he fees of them unfeen,

His Eyes encompafs all that inthe wide World been,


Fe fees the weary Traveller fit down

Inthe waft.Freld oft-times with careful chear,
His chafed feet and the long way to Town

His burning Thirfl, F amntnefs, ana Panick Fear,
Becau)


Drollery and Atheifm.


‘Wh Beeaufe he fees not Him that flands fo near,

i Fetch from bis Soul deep fighs with count?nance (ad,
|) But He looks on to whom nought doth dis’pear.
uO happy Man that full per{wafion bad

‘nu OF thus, if right at home nought of him were yarad.


iw) And then again, Stavz. 54. there is more exprefly
‘iia mention of this A4srrour, even for the reprefenting of
weil) Sounds to fet out the perfectnefs of thefe exteriour Per-
4 ceptions inthe Divine Nature, that they are rather 4-
winlt ive than Pa/five, as Scaliger {ays the Sight is, though
«ld other Senfes be not. Whence ée4r,fignifying tranfitively,
vii governs an Accufative Cafe, when other Verbs of fenfe
-iw@ govern a Genitive, as he is pleafed to criticize. But
«gift the abovefaid Stanza is this. a ave


iff (ity


whi Do not I fee ? I flumber not nor fleep,

wit Donot I bear ? each noife by fhady Night,
oy My Wirrour reprefents, when Mortals freep

nt Lheir languid Limbs in Morpheus dall dels ght,
. I hear [uch founds as Adam?s brood would fright.

The doleful Echo's from the hollow Ful,

Mock howling Wolves, the Woods with black delight,
Anfmer rough Pan his Pipe, and eke his Skill,

And all the Satyr-routs rude whoops and fhoutings fhrill.


| According to that inthe Book of Wifdom, chap. 1. Vv.
} 7. For the Spirit of the Lord fills the whole World, aud he
4 shat containeth all things, bath knowledge of the Voice.
|. For.as itis the height of the Excellency of the Divine
8 Effence and Exergy, not only to be infinite in stfelf, but
| alfo to be able to create another Eflence with its Exergy,
it diftinct from itfelf, fuch as this orderly Univerfe is, fo
h @ Gs it Jikewife the Perfection of the Divine Knowledge,
| befides that Intelleftual Omnifciency, which contains all
j the Natures and Ideas of things, and the whole com-
4 prehenfion of Providence, with the Series thereof from
4 everlafting to everlafting all at once, unalterably and
iy Mm 4 immoveably 3


RefleEtions on


yveablys Which Ivtelleétual Life, or Energy in God,
\iay OF the Platonifts, and the true‘Notion of °E-
iy, 1 fay, itis likewife the Perfection of the Divine
cowbedge to have the Perception of all the Energies of
Creation, as well when they are in flerz , and that
they are now én fiert, when they were not before, as in
that Intellectual comprehenfion which is at once from
everlafting to everlafting. For in an infinite Life as Ged
is, there can be nodiftrattion, his animaduerfion neceflas
rily being «finite. And if we do not give this exterior
Perception to him, we cannot be aflired, that he knows
when we pray unto him. Which methinks would bea
foul defect, and.a great damp to our Devotion. When
‘as the other opinion does not only encourage Devotion,
but naturally {trikes alfo a due awe and reverence towards
him in our Addrefies.

I know there are [ome dry Contemplators that would
have God to have no new Perceptions, prore nara, left
he might feem in a Phyfical fenfe alterable or mutable. But
thefe are the very Cobwebs and Ouiquilia of theSchools,


who thinned and {pread every Attribute of God to as ine Eth;


finite excefs as they could, forgetting that one neceflary
Meafure of all his Attributes, That they be no further ap
plied to him than they imply perfettion. ‘Which isa thing
worth our molt ferious confideration: — And certainly it
would be an Imperfection in God if he knew not things
paft that they are paj?, things prefent that they are pre-
jent, and things ro come, that they are yet to come, But
he could not know them to be paft when they were fe
tome, or to be prefent when they are to-come or paft, or
that they are yer to come when they are prefent:, And iy,
therefore you muft either make God ignorant of things # fy,
here below, or make his exterior Perceptions change as
the Scene of things change, ad extra, or elfe his Percep-
tions will prove falfe ;- which is intolerable to admit, |},
either in Philofophy. or Theology. :Thus I have run out 4 he
before] was aware, but hope it is not an ufelefs excur- |)
tion. For nothing can'ineve a Man more to do al] things #y.,
“hig oi od mtu lic with f°


Drollery and Atheifm. - §§3


‘viijwith all Faithfulnefs and Decorum, both in private and
‘“obefore Men, than to remember that the All-prefent \@
‘God is really a Hearer of his Words, and Seer of his |
t8@ Actions. | | |
A) Lbat be had run through the feveral Stages of modern
‘@Sects, not fropping till he came down to that fink of folly and
‘iianadnefs Duakerilin, and thence made aftcp into Atheifm, |
‘sugiécc. This is a remarkable paflage of ,his Letter, and |=
teugworth our confidering. I muft confefs, that his expref-
wmitfion here of the condition of Ouckerifm, is very fharp
injland Satyrical, to call it that firk, of Atadnefs and Folly.
ult hWV hich therefore I conceive he {pake with an eye to their i
|@firit appearance, which was very uncouth and frantick, |
wand not at all like the appearance of the Apoftles of Fe-
wiaifas Chriff, but as it were of fomany Demoniacks. Which
aScene, though true, being fo unpleafant, I will not re-
jiugspeat here, having {poke enough of it in my Affery of
ii, (MG odlinefs, lib, 4. cap. 6. and lib. to. cap. 13. And the
ii\@precedent Story of him at Balfham, that was inveigled
ulin Ouakerifm, is of the fame fuit, But to deal impar-
silftially touching them, if we take our meafures from Ro-
elibert Barklay’s Apology, which reprefents them as they
\ngwere when he wrote, which is not pafling five or fix years
iiijago, they are very much changed from what they were
vi Marit, for the better, and a moft juft and impartial efti-
»(gmate Ihave made of them, and of their way, in my Sche-
yMia Upon my Divine Dialogues, Dialog. 5: Sect. 1.
wNWhich he that is curicus, may perufe in the fecond
«@ Tome of my Volumen Philofophicnm. But that Apology
1 Mof’R, Barclay’s , was many years after this Letter of Fo-
Wepb Glanvil to my felf, which may the better excufe him
yaifor the feverity of this paffage, And how natural and
oWeafie a ftep there is out of Exthufiafm into Atheifm, I
‘allihave noted in my Exthufialmus Triumphatus.
‘ja. But of what danger it is to forfake the Communion
“mof the Truly Catholick Church , fach as is purged from
_oathe grofs dregs of Antichriftian Superftition and ‘Idold-
“ueatty, the example of him at Balfham and this Arheift, MM
i who il


4
ii


Lit


et eet


or
PN eee ae
Te Ue nmege,


pane eee ie


554 Reflections on


whom ¥.G. converfed with, are egregious Inftances. |
To forfake the fentiments of the ancient Apoftolick;
Church (for fuch are the Reformed Churches freed froma
the filth of the predicted Apoftafie, and fuch in a {pecial!
manner is the Church of Ezgland) to follow any private:
Spirit is {uch a piece of folly and giddinefs, that the ex--
travagance thereof is above expreflion, and the danger
{fo obvious, that they muft be yry blind and ftupid that)
difcern it not at firft fight. All are not born to be Philo-
fophers or Theologers, and to havea faculty to decides
Controverfies by the edge of their own Wit and Reafon.
Wherefore it is both their duty and fafety to adhere tot
the fenfe of the Church Catholick before the Apottafie,,
fuch as it was for about Four hundred years after Chri,
Within whichtimethe Divinity of Chrift, and the Iva
unity of the Godhead was pr>felled as publick Articles of
the Church, and the diffinction of Bifhops and Presbyters
owned. Whence it is demonftrable how zzocent the one:
is, and how Orthodox the other. For if the Articles of
the Divinity of Chrift, and Triunity of the Godbead were
falfe, they had alfo been Jdolatrous, and the Apoltafia
had begun much fooner than it is predicted to begin im
that admirable Book of Prophecies, the Apocalypfe. Non
were the late Reformation,which yet certainly itis Cand]
have undeniably demonftrated it in the Second Part of
my Appendage to my Expofition of Daniel's Vifions) the
Rifing of the Witneffes. For they had been ftrange Wit-
neffes that fhould ftill profefs the Divinity of Chrift, ancg
Triunity of the Godhead, if thofe Articles were falfe:
fince it neceflarily foilows that they were ipfo fatto
grofly Idolatrous; or retained Ep:/copacy, if it had beer
Antichrifian, Thefe things are fo exceeding plaing
that no man can deny them that has Parts and Leifure:
and without prejudice confiders them. And if the Seq
éfaries that pretend fo much to the Spirit above others
had the Spirit of interpreting and underftanding Prog
phecies aright, it would convince them of their Erroul
and Schifm. Butif this flowly goes down with them
the:


Drollery and Athei{m. 5 55 ney


Ki@ithey are to examine themfelves, if it be not an Humour
Nihiin them to deny any fuch Symmetral times of the Church,
“for about four hundred Years, that they may ftill find
‘tug matter for erernal Cavils and Schifms.
i) But now the main Articles of our.Faith being thus re-
tut(@doubledly aflured to us, both by the Sysmmetricalne/s of
‘uejthe Primitive Times for about four hundred Years, and
ligithe Teftimonies of the RifenWitneffes, of which Political
eli Refurrection, neither: Quaker, Familift, nor Socintan
vitiif partook of, as appears by the Harmony of Confelfions of
‘w@ithe Reformed Churches, no reformed Church owning
«titheir Opinions, how juft, how fober, and Chriftiana
uuifthing isit for every private Man to adhere to this com-
(Ql mon Faith touching thefe main Articles, and not to com-
(ili mit himfelf to thefe Jgnes Fatui of private Spirits, which
\ilst may lead him fo about as at laft to plunge him into the
hii Dregs of Arheifm, as it happened to this Gentle-
‘eal Man ? |
el) . That Spirit which leads from the Communion of the
jth Ancient Apoftolick Church (which is as a light fet upon
tan Hill, and fo certainly to be known by thofe two Cha-
ull xacters abovementioned) and carries Men into the dark
i \@ holes of Schifmatical Conventicles, is molt affuredly, let
ld them pretend to what they will, a Spirit of Errour, and
it) a delufion of the Devil, and a certain Symptome that
i fach Men are Carnal, as highly as they think of them-
aM felves, having not the Spirit, moft afluredly having not
“athe Spirit in that meafure whereby they become fuch
“Wij living Members of the true Catholick Church, which is
"(dl the Body of Chrift, that they plainly feel what hurts it,
|} at Jeaft what palpably ftops its growth, what wounds
ya it, what hazards the very Life and being of it. Can
‘oll they pretend tothe Spirit of Chrijt, in any due meafure,
ofl that are devoid of this neceffary Sympathy and Senfe of
"tthe common good of bs Body, and the intereft of bys
i") Kingdom, which is Reformed Chriftendom. The enemies
ede whereof what do they defire ? what do they endeavour
"A more than to divide and fubdiyide us? to hurry us into
! Opinions


556 “Reflections on ,
Opinions and Practices as unlike the ancient Apoftolick |


Church as may be; to make us appear as whimzical, and |")
ungovernable as they can, thereby toexpofe us to con-4*


tempt and loathing, and to harden the heartsof the Prine 4 \


ces and Prelates of Chriffendom againtt a juft Reforniati- |“
on, and thofe that have Reformed; tomake them half?”
fick and weary of the Reformation, by Reafon of the}
unfettlednefs and diftraction of the people. Does the
Spiric of Chrift chen lead tothe deftroying, and laying
waite his own Church and Kingdom? Certainly. that
Spirit shat hinders the growth, and hazards the Being
of the Kingdom of Chri, muft be not. the. Spcrit
of God, butthe Spirit of Giddine/s, of Errour and Delu-
fion.
- Wherefore the ancient Authority of the Church,
while it was Symmetral, is to be acknowledged, and
thofe main points, touching Fath and Worfhip, to be ad-
hered to, and profefled, the Holy Ghoft having fet his
Seal thereto in thofe Divine Prophecies of the Apoca-
lypfe, and this deteftable Pride and loathfome Jxgratz-


‘tude (whenas things are fo well fettled by lawful Autho- } i


rity in the late Rifing of the Witneffes) thus to break
from fo Aurhentick'a Conjtitution, and fet up Schifmati-
cal Congregations, is heartily to be repented of, nor
are we any longer to be deluded by that falfe Spirit,
that under pretence of bringing ina more pure and Spi-
ritual Difpenfation, undermines and hazards the very


Being of the true Kingdom of Chrift, by this odious | "


Spectacle of Multifarious Schifms.

It is not the breath of any meer Man that can convey
‘the Spirit of God to us, and it is a falfe pretence of J hu
thefe high-flown Spiritualifts, that think that in their fll
Schifmatical Worfhip they have nearer Communion with |
God, than thofe that adhere to the way of the Ancient | $
Apottolick Faith and Practice. For they in their Meet-
ings are but taught by Adem, and thofe {peaking the fenfe |
of a Private Spirit, they being Stragiers from the Fold |
of Chrift, as having bid adieu to the Ancient Catho-

lick


“jase sinnwwein TT


Drollery and Achei{m. Rg


uihi flick and. Apoftolick Church; Of which yet the Church |
iol OF England, whichthey have forfaken, is a genuine part, |
‘toygtand therefore its Agmiftry more fafe and authoritative, 7 |
yathey {peaking the fenfe. of the ancient Apoftolick
‘oxi Church, not any blind Conceits or Fancies of their own.
eh And for the faving Operations of the Spirit, nothing is
) (More inculcated than that in our Publick Service. Nor
yaigis the Adiniftry of Adan, fo much the Conveyer of it,
gas the Sixcerity of the Party, who defires to partake of
wvivgat. It is the Gift of Chrift to the Sincere, who has told us
icf:i(from hisown Mouth here upon Earth, That bleffed are
wilthey which hunger and thirft after Righteoufnefs, for they
iin fhall be fatisfied. |
} It is not the hearing of a gracious Man once or twice
‘wil a Week, or being prefent fometimes in the Meetings,
, ly) Whether Silent or Vocal, of a Company of fullen AZelan-
wolt CRolifes, or Hiftrionical Adock-Prophets, but a firmand un-
wif faaken Fact in the Power of the promifed Spirit of Chrift,
Me for the fubduing our Corruptions, a fixt and continued
 § Refolution of not offending the God of Heaven in any
“ug thing {mall or great, a clofe Guard upon our Words
wand Actions, as having a fenfe of the Prefence of the
it Divine Majefty all the day long, a perpetual Exercife of
"dM mortifying the Impetuofities of our own Will, and of
“)M extinguifhing all the fweet Relifhes of Self-intereft and
i) Vain-glory, and a conftant endeavour.of wholly refign-
fing our felves to God and his Service, who has wholly
"ie made us Body and Soul, and ftrictly and confcienti-
“i oufly walking according to His Will revealed in his
M written Word, that is the method of attaining to a more
'§ pear Communion with God, and the only way of more
“i fally participating of his Spirit. And this certainly
I" may as well be done holding {tif Communion with the
a" Church of England, as in any new-fangled Way, that
; a either the Cunning of Aan, or Subtilty of Satan can if-
vent. And therefore it is rather a wanton kind of Arype-
i evsfiein Men, or Ixfincerity to true Religion izdeed, that
vil miakes them break from the Eftablifht Religion of the
q


burch


os 5 58 Reflestions on


Church of England, reformed according to the old Symi }


metral and Apoftolical Pattern, than any colour of Ne-
ceflity driving them thereto.


And thus much briefly to thofe high-flown Spirituas |
lifts. But what I now fhall utter is {till more weighty, | he!


forafmuch as it concerns a greater number of Men,


that have an honeft inclination to Religion, but their fit


Education, Parts, and Calling does not capacitate them
to make fo ftrict inquiry into the Doctrines thereof, as
Others may make, but feek fome External Authority to
fopport their Faith,and thereby lye obnoxious to the foli-
citations of . the Emiffaries of Rome, who boaft fo much in
the fafe Anchorage of their Church. To thefe Men there-
fore 1 appeal, what can be more fafe for them than to ad-
here to the Authority and Profeffion of the Ancient Apo-
flolick,, and truly Catholick Church, fuch as it was found
before the -Apoftafie, and is born witnefs to in the Oracles
of the Holy Scripture, as I have above declared; To ad-
here, I fay, and keep clofe to this fteady Rock, and
ftop their Ears againft the vain pretences of any idle
Fanatical New- Lights, or bold Exthafiaffs. Now he
that adheres to the Church of England, does adhere to
this ancient Apoftolick Church, the Church of England,
being reformed to that Pattern, as to the Frame of
Government, and Articles of Faith, and for the Pre-
cepts of an holy Life, befides what occurs in our Li-
turgy, Litany, and Catechifm, they are fo plain in the
Scripture, and fo fully and effectually declared by thofe
of our own Church in Printed Sermons, and feveral other
Writings, to fay nothing of the good Preaching up and

down, that no well-minded Chriftian can want any due

Tnftruction.

_ Thisis a Confideration, the beft accommodate, that

I know, to keep usall in one, which is to acknowledge

the Authority and Undeceivedne/s in matters of any mo-

ment, though not Undeceivablene/s or Infallibility of the

ancient Catholick Church before the Apoftafie came in.

Which true and jaf ground will give us all the Advan-

tages


the k


F latios


cain


lve


Q v


(nyt
eh wp


Drollery and Athei/m. '


“Gnatages and more, than that falfe Boaft of the Roman
““\iChurch, as if She, forfooth, were Infallible, and there-
Nfore irrefragable. When asthat one Tenent of Tran-
WiWubfPantiation alone, fufficiently demonftrates it to be a
Vigifhamelefs Pretence, that Doétrine being plainly aFardel
Vt Nof Impofibilities and Contradittions, to fay nothing of
ii@their infinite Superftittons , Impoftures, and grofs Jdola-
ltti@ltries, and barbarous and bloody Perfecusions, and Adur-
ders, for not fubmitting to them. So that fhe is a
iin (Church all over befmeared with Sordidly-gainful Superfti-
lieions , Idolatries, and Blood. And therefore fhe being
intiideprehended fo grofly and enormonfly Erroneous or Ima
‘ili poftareus and Deceirful, and fupporting all her impious
iitoa@O pinions upon that fingle pretence of her /nfalibility,
iw Ahe has manifeltly forfested her Credit before all the
wwW orld, and moft juftly loft her Authority, that no Man
«(ollican, unlefs hebe bewitcht, lean upon this broken Reed
lof Egype, which is a fictitious and certainly falfe pre-
i, tence to Infallibility by an apoftatized Church fhamelefly
‘wy (tobtruding upon thofe they can deceive, all the Abomi-
\ (nations that are declared againft in Daniel and the Apo-
soiuealypfe, where the Viftons reprefent the ftate of thofe
jwlatimes into.which this grand Apoftafie fell. What
‘we (filindnefs therefore or Madnefs is it in any Man to re-
«, wpofe himfelf on the Authority of fucha Church. God
mopen the Eyes of all Men that mean fincerely in Religi-
‘.,(@on, that they never fall into fuch a foul Ditch as this,
',, But the Church of England keeping to the ancient Sym-
| ultenetral Church, to whom the Divine Oracles bear wit-
" gignefs, is in truth ixfallible in the main Points abovemen-
°! Otioned, and in all things elfe material to Salvation, and


"" Githerefore all forts of People learned and unlearned may
yiMafely embofom themfelves in her fo long as fhe continues


Mach, which I with may be for ever.

Wl) In the time we fee what a mighty Advantage it would

i Bbe if that, as our own Church in particular, fo all the

i”. Reformed Churches would joyntly exhibite the fame unex-

v" Weeptionable Pattern of Antiquity to be followed that
I | bears


ea een SS


159


pete mea = Seton
sls aie. eee At


aT en NTN
Gey oo Gaeis eT ‘e: es
Saleen em


560 — Reflections on


bears a juft Authority with it, which the generality of j
Men may fafely rely on, and that Independency and the |
Guidance of private Spirits feducing Men from the Nati- J
onal Churches fram?d to that ancient Platform, were quite |
out of fafhion in all Reformed Chriffendom, and that all }
Men with alacrity of Mind, and fincerely loyal Affecti-
ons, would fhew themfelves morigerous to their Supream
Governours, For this is the only effectual and warrant-
able way that I can conceive for the enlarging the K inge
dom of our Lord Fefus, and the over-throwing the Demi-
zion of Antichrift. The other Scene of things, as I no-
ted above, hardens the hearts of the Princes and Prée-
lates of Chriftendom, who cannot but think it a forry
Exchange to accept of Presbytery, which wou'd prove
but a Democratical Papacy, for the Order of Epifcopacy,
ora difmal Spectacle, to fee the Body of Chrift moul-
dered into an infinity of Seéfs and Schifms, asa dead Car-
ca{fs diflolved into. a multitude of crawling Worms, and
the decent Grandeur and Splendour of the Church to
dwindle into difperfed Companies of obfcure Coaventi-
cles , and the juft and honourable Revenues of it, to
fhtink into the poor Arbitrarious Pittanciés of either |
the appointment of the State, or uncertain Benevolence of
the Fickle People. That Scene of things, I fay, cannot
but harden their hearts again{ft liftening to never fo juft
a Reformation for the further enlargement of Chrift’s
Kingdom, and hazzard the very Being of the Reformed
Churches. Whenas this way, which! wifh may obtain,
would filence Athe:{m and Fanaticifm at once, and be
the readieft means of bringing on thofe happy times of
the Church which God has promifed and predicted by
the Mouth of his holy Prophets.
But this is the grofs Iniquity andMadnefs of the Secta-
ries, that they think fo goodly and choicely every one
of their own Party, that they think it worth the while
' to hazard-the fafety of Reformed Chriftendom to fup-
port any how, and keep up for the prefent, the {mall
freaks and. conceits of their own felf-chofen Way and
4 Sects


tty


SS a =


Drollery and Atheifm. 560
ya Sect, Than which nothing can be conceived more enor
i»), Mous and outragious amongft the dealings of the Sons of
eo it Men, to bring into imminent danger fo folemn and fa-
ip.) erofanct a Conftitution as the Reformation, for the dreams
sll and opinions of private Spirits, which no fober Chriftian
‘md Would hazard for fmall indifferent difpenfable things,
oyna though they had the ftamp of publick allowanceupon them,
,, @ Which it is, and ought to be, inthe hand of the Sove-
,,) {4reign Power to alter for the common good. And verily
"this Fanatical diftemper is fo heinous and abominable,
,iithat they that are on the right fide, ought to take heed
~ahow inthe leaft fhew they imitate it. Fora Man may
» Bbe fattiou/ly affected, evenina right caufe, and bear an
-; §Over-proportionated zeal for things of {maller concern,
Mout of an over-heightned Animofity againft the prefent
»asects, to the hazarding of the quiet fettlement of the
““WWhole. And, if any one be fo affected, I appeal to the
\“@fober, if he may not juftly be reputed to play the Seétz=
i Wran himfelf, though it be again? the Sectaries. No fuch
“iCure for our Breaches and Wounds as the moft profound
\WAlumility in all Parties, and unfesgned mutual Love and
“Charity. Of which Virtues or Graces whofoever is
“tfound deftitute, let him call himfelf (of whatever de=
“Ginomination) Chriffian, as loud as he pleafe, he has re-
\ Wally in him zor one {park of faving Chriftianity. -
“Thus have I run out again further than I was aware of,
(Gone thing drawing on another. But I hope I have hit
("ln fome things, which if ferioufly confidered, and duly
i fimproved by thofe that are moft concerned, may con-
‘(o"@ribute their fhare, to the peace and fettlement of the
(iC hurch of Chrift, which fhould be the aim and defire of
is ail.


Nn


Of what happen’d in the


KINGD


ow ERR
fy ei,
Bi Apis
g eee Be
i Le Rise
, be
Boe


i io ae a
69, 1670. and upwards.
IN
I elation to fome Perfons that were
acculed for WiTCHES;
AND


‘Tryed and Executed


By the King’s Command.


In the Years 16


ogether with the Particulars of a very fad Accident
h that befel a Boy at Afalmoe in Schonen, in the Year
1 1678. by the means of Witchcraft, attefted by the
f Ableftand moft Judicious Men of that Town.


Both Tranflated out of High-Dutch into Enghifh.


By Anthony Horneck, D. D. |
tl LONDON,
Printed for S. Lowads, M DC LXXXVIII.


THE
- TRANSLATOR’S


IPREFACE


TO THE


READER;


Bhewing what Credit may be given to the


Matter of Faét, related in the enfuing
Natrative.


Hat we are to believe nothing, but what we
a have feen, is a Rule fo falfe, that we
dare not call our felves rational Crean
Mures , and avouch it 5 yet as irrational as the
Waxim is, *tis become modifh with fous Men, and
0/e x0 very mean Wits neither » to make ufe of its
Vad though they will hardly own it in its full Lati-
Mede, yet when it comes to Particulars, let the Rea-
bas to the contrary be never fo pregnant or convine
gg, theyll huge it as their facred Anchor, and
pg at all chofe credulous Wretches, that withoue
a Na 3 [eeing,


| ait. with us; aad. if we think our felves wife for


The Preface.


feeing, ave fo eafily chous’d into an imprudent Cons
fedence. And. this pitiful- Stratagem we find prattiz |
fed tn no affair fo much, as that of Spirits and |
Witches and Apparitions, which muft all be Fane |
cies, and Elypochondriack Dreams, and the Effects of |
diftempered Brains , becaufe their- own are fo dull

as not to be able to pierte into thofe Myfteries. I]
do not deny but the Inagination may be, and is [ome»

time deluded; and melancholy People may fancy they
hear Voices, and fee very ftrange things, which
have no other Foundation but their own Weaknefs,

and like Bubbles break into Air, and nothing, by
their own vanity.


Tet-as wo Man doth therefore take unpolifht Dia-
monasto be Pebbles, becaufe they do look like them, fo
neither muit all Paflages. of this nature, we hear
or read of , be traduced as Self-couceit, or derided
as Old Wives Fables, becanfe fome [mel strong off
Lupofture and Sophiftication. We believe men off
Reafow and Experience, and free from Fumes, whemd
a.Perfon-of ordinary Intelledtuals finds no great crea


fo. doing, why (bould any Man fo much forget him-
Self, as to be an Infidel in point-of fuch Phenome-|
nas, when even the moft judicious Men have had
expericuce in {uch Paffages? It feems to me no lefil
thaw Madnefs to contraditt what both wife and wa-|
wife Men do unanimoufly agree in; and how Fewsy
Fleathens, Mabometans, and Chriftians, both learn
ea. and unlearned, fbould come, to confpire into this
Cheat, as get feems to me unaccountable. If ou
see ent


\
\ 1


The Preface.


“8 few Melancholy Monks, or old Women had feen fuch
"| Ghofts and Apparitions, we might then fufpect, that
what they pretend to have feen might be nothing,
|W but the effect of a difordered Imagination; but
"A when the whole World, as it were, and Men of alt
'"§ Religions, Men of all Ages too, have been forced by
"MW frrong Evidences, to acknowledge the truth of fish
Mil Occurrences, I know not what ftrength there can be in
"the Argument, drawn from the confent of Nations
"22 things of a fublimer nature, if here


WO Efficacy.


Men that have attempted to evade the


Ml Places of
WWirches, we fee, how they are forced to turn ana
Swind the Texts, and make in a manwer Nofes of

WN Wax of them, and rather fqueeze than gather the

iB Senfe, as if the holy Writers had {poke like Sophifters,

Wand not like Men, who made it their Bufine[s to con-

Wilt defcend to the capacity of the Common people. Let

‘ia Man put no force at all on thofe Paffages of holy

Writ, and then try what Senfe they are like to yield.

Tt as (Prange to fee, how fome Men have endeavoured


Bed


ripture , which fpeak of Ghofts and


wl(to elude the ftory of the Witch of Endor ; and as

far as I can judge, play more Hocus-pocus Tricks
han the Explication of that Paffage, than the Witch
\itberfelf did in raifing the deceafed Samuel.
WMizhofe Straits és Fallbood driven, while Truth loves
; i Pliin, and anaifeuifed Expreffions ; and Evrour
Mwai feek out Holes and Labyrinths to hide it felf,
awhile Truth plays above-board, and fcorns the
WM fubterfuges of the Sceptick Interpreter.
wi Brethren, why fbould it feem a thing incredible


‘(with you, that God fhould permit Spirits to appear,
a: i )


The Preface.


and the Devil to exert his Power among Menu on
Earth? Hath God ever engaged his Word to the
contrary? Or is it against the nature of Spirits
to form themfelves new Vehicles and vifible Shapes,
or to antmate groffer Subftances tp few themfelves ta
Mortals upon certain Occafions ?

I am {0 much a Prophet, as to forefee what will


be the Fate of the enfuing Story, wor can I fuppofe
that upon the reading


be much changed from what they Ere ,
have fet up this Refolution ,
that looks like the fhadow of an
the things mentioned here, cannot be unknowa to any
that have been converfant with foreign Affairs of
late Years. And though there cannot be a greater


if they
to believe nothing
Apparition , though


Evidence, than the Leflimony of a whole Kingdoms, |


yet your nicer Men will think it a Dif paragement
to thems to believe it; nor will it ever extort As


feat from any, that build the Reputation of their |
Wit upon contradicting what hath been received by |


the vu lear.

The Paffages bere related wrought fo great a Con-
flernation, not only on the Natives, but Stran-
gers too, that the Heer Chriftian Rumpf, shen


Refident for the States General at Stockholm, |


thought himfelf obliged to fend away his little
Son for Holland, le# be fhould be endangered by


thofe villanous Practices, which [eem d to threaten }


all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom,
doubts of it may be
James’s Park, to whom the Letter was written, And a


And he that


friend of mine in Town, being then in Holftein, ree |


gnembers


of it, Mens Verdicts will |


[atisfied at Dr. Harrel’s in St. |


| The Preface.


“Mj members very well that the Duke of Holftein fent
J a Expre[s to the King of Sweden, to know the
bin truth of this famous W iichcraft: To whom the
“Wl King modestly replyed, That his Judges azd Com-
““iimuffioners had caufed divers Men, W omen, and

Children to be burnt and executed upon fuch preg~
i want Evidences, 2s were brought before them ; but
‘lin whether the _Adtions they confeffed, and which were
“il proved against them, were real, or only Effetts of
i ferong Imagination, he was not as yet able to de-
ii LEV weztne.

Add to all this, that the Circumstances mentioned
whan the ex[uine Narrative, as 1 am informed, are at this
fy Wday to be feenw in the Royal 6) hancery at Stockholm :

uimand a Perfon of my Acquaintance offered to procure me
null @ Copy of them under the hands of publick Registers, if
ol defired it: Not to mention that in the year TS.
wll Baron Sparr, who was fent Embaffadour from the
(wh Crowe of Sweden to the Court of England, did
(apo his Word aver the Matter of Fack recorded

Rhere, to be undoubtedly true, to feveral Perfons
of Note and Eminency, with other Particulars,
jw ffranger than thofe fet down in thefe Papers. 4nd
| ito this Purpofe divers Letters were fent from Swe-
"@den azd Hamburgh to feveral Perfons here in
 WiLondon ; ixfomuch, that foould a Man born tit,
for acquainted with thofe Parts, hear any Perfon dif-
pute the Truth of it, he would wonder where
People have lived, or what fullen Humour doth
 Mpoffe/s them, to disbelieve that, which {0 many


i cs i bh, ‘ ; 0) ch
jig teonf ands in that Kingdom have felt the fad Ffcéi


i Sin


The Preface.


Since the firft Edition, it hath been my fortune tod ,.
be acquainted with the Lord Leyonbergh, Exvoy Exe 4 “il
traordinary from the King of Sweden, living ing’
York Busldings , with whowe difcourfing about thefed')


Affairs, I founda that the Account he gave, agreed,
for the most part, with what is mentioned in the Nuar-


vative; and becaufe his Teftimony, being a publick mu
Perfon, may be of fome moment in a thing relating to |"
that Kingdom, I have here fet it down in his owa i"


Words.


Having read this Narrative, I could do
no lefs, than upon the Requeft of the
Tranflator and Publifher of this Story,


acknowledge, that to my. beft Re: |


membrance, and according to the |
beft Reports that have been made to |
me, the Matter of Fa@ mentioned in
it, istrue, and that the Witches con- | wii
fefled fuch things, and were accord. |
ingly Executed. Witnefs my Hand, |,


Fondon,


‘1682.


=


——~ SS =


> =e


= SS =


SSeS


eae LEYONBERGH, |)


The Preface.
ii) 1 do not take upon me to juftifie the Truth of what
wimthe Witches faid, for dealing with the Father of Lies,
Nip tt’s probable, Veracity is not a Vertue, that they great-
wih fludy, yet that the Devil {peaks truth fometimes, %
wh 4 thing fo far from being impofible, that if we give
iil eredit to the Sacred History, we muft grant that all,
ya Re faith, zs. not Falfe, or Erroneous. All, I defigny
Jini 4¢ this time, ws only to fuggest that it ws not altogether
\, Ih @rrational to conceive, that he, or his Emiffaries are
Wcapable of fuch Aitions and Pranks, as are related
i 42 thefe Papers.
That a Spirit can lift up Men and Women, and,
\WMeroffer Subftances, and convey them through the
i dir, I queftion no more, than I doubt that the Wind
ON can overthrow Honfes, or drive Stones, and other
wi Beauy Bodies upward from their Centre. And were
Wh L-to make a perfon of a dull underftanding, appre-

i Bend the nature of a Spirit, I would reprefent it to
"Whim under the Notion of an \ntelligent Wind, -or 2
ii" ffrong Wind , informed by a highly Rational Soul ;
till as a Man may be called an inteHigent piece of Earth.
wl cAnd this Notion David feemed to favour, when
WM [peaking of thefe Creatures, Pfalm 104. 4. he tells
""S ns, that God makes bis Angels Wind, for in the
il Original 2t’s 7 and most certatnly if they be fo,

N they must be reafonable windy Substances, nor doth

N the Expreffion, which immediately follows, in that

) Verfe, crofs this Expofition, viz. That he makes his
VI) Miniffers a flaming Fire; for it’s no new Opinion,
8 that forme of thofe invifible Subftances are of a Fiery,
W and others of an Aiery Nature, and as we fee, God
WN gives Rational Creatures. hereon Earth, Bodies com-
( pofed of groffer Matter, why fbould it feem incon-
K gruous


The Preface.


gruous for him to give Rational Creatures above us,
Bodies of a fubtiler and thinner Matter, or fuch
Matter, as thofe higher Regions do afford? andi
Wind breaking forth from the Caverns of Hills and
Mountains have {uch force, as makes us very often
Stand amazed at the effects, what Energy might we
Suppofe tobe in Wind , were it inform'd by Reafon,
or a Reafonable Being ?

And though I cannot comprehend the Philofophy
of the Devils committing Venereal AQs, and ha-
ving Children, and thofe Children upon their C opt
lation bringing forth Toads and Serpents, yet I can
very rattonally conceive, that having more than ore
dinary power over Matter, he can either animate
dead Bodies, and by the help of them commit thofe
Villantes, which modefty bids us to conceal ; or fome
other way compound, and thicken Atomes into what
fhape he pleafes, efpecially if he meet with no hing
derance from a higher power. And he that was per=
mitted, aswe fee in the Gofpel, to pofleff and auate
living Men, and-do with them almoft what he pleafed,
why may not he commit wickednefl by fuch Inftru-
ments, and caft Mifts before the Witches eyes, that
they, may not know who they are? And he that could
in Migypt produce Frogs, either real or counterfeit
ones, Why may not he be fuppofed to be able to pro-
duce {uch Toads and Serpents ont of any mis-(bapen
Creatures, and Lumps of Matter, of his own com-
pounding , at leaft reprefent the (bapes of them to
the deluded Witches, that they {hall imagine them
to be really fuch things, as they feem to be.
Nor is this to be admired in the Devil more thay
Tricks are ia Jugglers, who by flight of Art


Cane


~ The Preface:


“inl €a7e veprefent things to the ignorant Spectator,
‘which he {hall be ready to {wear to be real, though
i i they are nothing lef, and I [uppofe we may allow the
‘i Devil a greater degree of cunning, than an ordinary
H | Fug 4 ler ‘.
nih ol However, Spirits that know the nature of mate
tw vtal things better than the deepeft Philofophers, ana
\ wnderfiand better, how things are joined, and com-
ili Pounded ,. and what the Ingredients of terreftrial
wi) Productioas are, and fee things (groffer things
ily ab Leaft)- in their firft principles, and have power
lui over the Air, and other Elements, and have a thouq


wilt fand ways of fhaping things and reprefenting theme


winilt Zothe external Senfes of. vicious Men, what may not
ne they be [uppofed to be able to do, (if they have but


vit God?s permiffion to exert their power) and that God


ii ii 40th fometioes permit [uch things, we have rea-
w lil fon to believe, who read what Signs and Wonders
wl Simon Magus, azd Apollonius Tyaneus wrought
sil 8y the power of darknefS, and how not a few men fin
lt to that degree, that God Suffers them to be led captive
viull &y the Devil, and dooms them to that flavery we read
\\)) Of 22 the Revelation, He that is filthy, let him be
lll filthy fill.
|) Spirits by being Devils do not lofe their nature :
yh aad let any manin fober fadneff confider, what Spirits
‘jl are [aid to be able to do in Scri ture, and what they
_g Pave done, and compare thofe jaa with what is [aid
| 22 the following Relation, and he will not think thofe
il things, the Witches contelfed, altogether impoffible,
Yer fill, aI [aid before, I do not pretend tobe
‘f their Advocate, but hall leave it to the Reader to
: A judge of the truth, or untruth of their Coufefions, as
\ he
it


til
if


ee ie en Sil


Sead iee ee


The Preface.


he fees ottafion, only beg of him not to condemm eve-
ry thing as a fallbood, before due confideration of what
Spirits are capable of doing.

That in fo. great a multitude as were Accufed,
Condemned, and Executed for Witches, there might be
fome who fuffered unjwltly; and owed their death more
to the Malice of their Neighbours, than to their: Skill
in the Black Art, I will readily grant ; nor will I deny,
that when the News of thefe Tranfattions, and how \
the (hildvem bewitched, fell txto Fits, and ftrauge
unufual Poftares, fpread abroad in the Kingdom,
fome fearful and credulous People, if they [aw their
Children any way difordered,: might think they were.
bewitched, or ready to be carried away by Imps + This
happens in all confternations, and our fears make w
See that, which unbyaffed Eyes cannot perceives and Y""
of this, a Gentleman, who was an Ear-witnefs, cave me |
this inftance;of a Minifter’»Child of hit Acquaintance |
not far from Stockholm, who- being told, and alfured
by his Wife, that the Child was carried to Blockula
every night, and convey ad back into his bed azain,refol: ¥
ved to firupwith the Boy; and fee whether any Devil
durft be fa bold as to funtch him out of his Arms:
The Child went to Bed, and between twelve and one
of the Clock at wight, began’ to groum in his fleep,


and feemed: to foiver a little, at the fight whereof ||
the Mother began to weep and mourn, thinking that ey,
the Child was juf? going tobe [natch atay, Jo her ¥
Husband fwiting at the Coneceit, and pleading with |
her, that the Child’s laying his Arms ont of Bed might [toy
be the caufe of thefe fymptomes , took the Child in his Mi
b Tip


Arms, and there kept him till towards two or three of
the Clock, but no Spirit came or meddled with him,


yee


+ ihe
yy eM ee


The Preface.


nnn zee was his Wife fo poffelfed with the conceit, or fear
‘4 \d of Tvanf{portation, that his fivongeft Arguments could
V/carce make her believe. the contrary; and the fame
wotber[on, (a near Relation of the aforefaid Envoy)
winadded, how much Malice and Il-Nature was able to
\hfect, whereof he gave this Example, which himfelf
ifaw, and could teftifie the truth of, viz. how iz the
rear, 1676. at Stockholme, a youns Woman accu
1, Wea her own. Mother of being a Witch, and {wore
,,\oofitevely., that {be carrried her away at night;
',) whereupon both the Fudges and Minifters of the
‘Mlown exhorted her to Confelfion and Repentance ;
\,,ABut foe ftifly dented the Allegations, pleaded Ieno-
ence, and though they burnt another Witch before
| Mer Face, and lighted the Fire, fhe her felf was to
urn in, before her, yet {he ftill juftified her felf,
hind continued to do fo to the laft, and continuing fo,
» bas burnt, She had indeed been a very bad Wo-
Ran, but it feems this crime fhe was free from, for
' Within a fortnight, or three weeks after, her Daugh-
M"Ner which had accufed her , came to the fudges in
tw ie Court (weeping and howling) and confefled thas
Wee bad wronged her Mother, and unjufily out of a
| ppleen, foe had againft her for not gratifying her in
i" thing, {be defired, bad charged her with that. Crime
“Which {be was as innocent of, as the Child unborn ;
“Whereupon the Judges gave order for her. execution
loo.
b There is no publick Calamity, but Some ill People
in bil ferve themfelves of the fad Providence » ana
yi ae ufe of it for their own ends, as Thieves, whew
0" Houle or Town is on Fire, will fleal and filch what
"Whey can; yet as there is no Fable » but hath fome
i


d Foundation


it
i


‘i


a pecaer
antsADien


ea = nae


er eS.


The Preface.


Foundation in Hiftory, fo when wicked people makes
ufe of fuch Arguments againft the per[ons they hate,
it’s a fign there was fuch a thing, that gave theme
occafion. to fix the calumny ; and had not fuch thingsy
been done before, they could not have any colour for
their Villany.
I could add a known paffage, that happen’d in the
year 1659. at Croflen iz Silefia, of ax Apothe-
cary’s Servant. The chief Magiftrate of that4
Lown at that time was the Princeff Elizabethi
Charlotta, 2 perfon famous in her generation. Ini
the Spring of the year one Chriftopher Monigk, J:
@ Native of Serbeft, a Town belonging to the Prin-4
ces of Anhalt, Servant to an Apothecary, died andl
was buried with the ufual (eremonties of the Lutheran!
Church. A few days after his deceafe,a fhapeexattly likes
himin face, cloths, ftature, mien, &c. appeared in the
Apothecary’s Shop, where he would fet himfelf down, }'s:
and walk fometimes, and take the Boxes, Pots, Glaffes pw
off of the Shelves, and fet them agatn in their pla-.
ces, and fometimes try, and examine the goodnefs of Win
the Medicines, weigh them in a pair of Scales, pound} i
the Druggs with a mighty noife in a Mortar, may,’
ferve the people, that came with their Bills to the'
Shop, take their Money, and lay it up fafe in the dw,
Counter, in a word, do all things that a Fourney- 4m;
man in {uch cafes ufes to do. He looked very ghaftly , »
upon thofe, that had been his Fellow Servants, whoww,
were afraid to fay any thing to him; aud his Ma-4i
fier being fick at that time of the Gout, he was of- ¥ i
ten very troublefome to him, would take the Bills that ¥ 1»
were brought him, out of his hand, [natch away the
Candle fometimes, and put it behind the Stove ; At’


laft


The Preface:
hh ea he took a C loak that hung im the Shop, put ip


son and walked. abroad,. bist minding no body in the
I Streets, went along,  entred into fone a the. Ci-
tizens Floufes., nd. throf tbiajel into C company,


oq
wi efpeczally of fu a as he had forre y y kon, yet fe


UE d #O body, HOLS pot €.£0 Ay OPE Hee & fo.a Ma D0}
‘ine Ser' vant, whom be met bara oy the Church. ‘yard, ana
y p) y i <


+ Anh \defired to go hometo. his Maflers baxf:


/, 7) fa Gi; 7 g. 12 “&
(f sf imiaroueed-( barber, where foe would: fz ; :


sp @OLe Ty yeu lures but the i add. ¢ amazed at. the Cobs of


3) fe
Wer, ae: WOCTEU PIN J. Le ddi t. ber 2 “Dp » Oud lefé
Wah 4 mark upon her Flelh with lifi fig br he er, that it
BRAS to be feu fo O7 sf ULE. LLTBE axe ; t he Maid b a-
lh recovered Ler fe elf, went. nome, but fell defpe-


‘elrately fick upon din avid in her “Sdels ef s ifecutred

what Monigk had [aiato hers and accord ngly they
Bleed in the place, fhe had named, but found he hing
iunat an old decayed Pot, mith a Hematites or Blood-
prone in tw. The Princefs. herer upon caufed the
Woungs Man's body ¢ tc be digge d f

i, ig Man's a, 0 ed up, which they found

Ay butrefied with { ourvulent Mat Ler y flowing — from “i: ;

;: :
wad the Maffer | being adviled to remove the young
Man's Goods, Linen, Cloths, and things, he left ae
Wivd him when he a sgl out of the Aoufe, the Spirit

. ,, Merenpor lefi the Ho afe Ca A A was heard of 20 more.
mdd 1 7s [ome people now » living will take their Oath
fe who very well remember they , ay him after

DB pace uf € , and the thing being fo 20-

‘Mortous, there was ix Fituted 4 publick "BY talon of my
| : , ofence from the
Difpat ation about it in the A; aacmy Prefs, there was a

ym ae pen 1g si by ORE H cnry Co ny a f ‘. mifta ke in the for-
i i ai omer S-Bidi¢ions
a ited for Its Do. tor’s ie where it is Wits
vee in we Univerity. vor this temberg.

1


Oo puts


ns. rafE ye. ‘ _


;
if
; <
P
oan


The Preface.
puts me in mind of aw Apothecary at Reichenbachy _
in Silefia, about fifteen years ago (I had it from ng
wery credible Witne[s) who after his death appeared tor
divers of his acquaintance, andcryed out, that tn hiss
Life time he had poifoned feveral Men with his Drugs.|
Whereupon the Magiftrates of the Town after conful-
tation, took up his Body, and burnt it ; which becgg
‘Uone, the Spirit difappeared, and was feen no more.
But if the Stories related in the preceding Book are
not fufficient to convince Men, I am [ure an example
from beyond Sea will gain no credit. I's enough that)
I have [bewn Reafons which may induce my Reader te
be lieve that ‘he is not impofed upon by ‘the following
‘Narrative, and that it is not in'the nature of thofi
Pumphlets, they cry about the Streets, containing ver
dreadful News from the Country, of Arties fighting
dn the Air.


sneer


—. 2 Seas
a er


| ee
IRELATION


[


| 5 pred. yd Vela
| Strange Wirtcheraft
L


Difcovered in the


i
|
v


| Village (Mobra in Swedeland,


ATaken out of the publick Regifter of the Lords Commiffioners,
appointed by his Majefty the King of Sweden, to examine
| the whole bufinefs, in the Years of our Lord 1669. and


} 1670.

re ‘HE News of this Witchcraft coming to the
| : King’s Ear, his Majefty was pleafed to ap-
} 48 point Commiffioners, fome of the Clergy, and


~ ffome of the Laity, to make a Journey to the Town a-
Wrorefaid, and to examine the whole bufinefs; and ac-
jrordingly the Examination was ordered to be on the 1 3th
bf Auguft ; and the Commiffioners miet on the 12th in-
fitant , in the faid Village, at the Parfon’s Houfe, to
Hvhom both the Minifter and feveral people of fathion
ftomplained with tears in their Eyes, of the miferable
ste they were in, and therefore begg’d of them
io think of fome way, whereby they might be delivered


firom that Calamity. They gave the Commiffioners ve-
ity ftrange Inftances of the Devils Tyranny among them;
O02 ¢ how


ul


580 The Collection
how by the help of Witches, he had drawn fome Hun-
dreds te Children to him, and made them fubject to his
powers how he hath been feento go inavifible fhape |
through the Country, and appeared daily to the people;
how he had wrought upon the poorer fort, by prefente |
ing them with Meat and Drink, and this way allured jj
themro himfelf, with other circumftances to be men-
tioned hereafter. The Inhabitants of the Vill age added,
with very great lamentations, that though their Chi.
dren had toldall, and themfelves fought God very earn-4
eftly by Prayer, yet they were carried away by him;,
and therefore begg’d of the Lords Commiflioners tog
root out this hellifh Crew, that they might regain their
former reft and quietnefs; and the rather, becaufe the
Children which ufed to be carried.away in the County on
Diftrict of Elfdale, fince fome Witches had been burnt
there, remained unmolefted.

That day, ae. the 13thof Auguft, being the laftHu-
miliation-day Inftituted by Authority for removing 0}
this Judgment,» the Commiflioners: went to. Church
where there. appeared a confiderable, Aflembly both om:
young and old: the Children could read moft of thems ty
and fing Pfalms, and fo could the Women, though noi
with any great zeal or fervor. There were preacheag\
two Sermons. that. day, in which the miferable cafe oW
thofe people, that fuffered themfelves to be deluded by
the Devil; was laid open; and thefe Sermons were al
lait concluded with very fervent Prayer.

The. Publick Worfhip being over, all the people o
tne Town were called together to the Parion’s Houfe;
near, Three thoufand. of them, Silence being Commant
ded, the King’s Commiflion. was read: publickly in the)
hearing of them all, and they were charged iu ver!
great Penalties to conceal nothing of what they knew)
and to fay nothing but the truth; thofe efpecially; whof
were guilty, that the Children might. be delivered from
the Clutches of the Devil. apey all promifed obediif
ence; the. guilty feignedly, but the guiltlefs weepinyf
and crying bitterly. Oi!


i of Relations. 58a
‘nie confulting how they might withftand this dangerous
ui] Flood ; after long deliberation, an Order alfo coming
“) from his Majefty, they did refolve to execute fuch, ag
‘ig the matter of fact could be proved upon ; Examination
‘i being made, there were difcovered no lefs than Three-
Qi {core and ten in the Village aforefaid, Three and twen-
‘laity of which freely confefling their Crimes, were con-
ii demned to dye; the reft, one pretending fhe was with
‘jt Child, and the other denying and pleading not guilty,
(ag were fent to Fabluna, where moft of them were after-
iotl@ wards Executed.
il) Fifteen Children which likewife confefled that they
vuuii@were engaged in this Witchery, died as the reft;. Six
(and thirty of them between nine and fixteen years of
viluijage, who had been lefs guilty, were forced to run the
ieGantlet ; Twenty more, who had no great inclination,
ii@lyet had been feduced to thofe hellifh Enterprizes, be-
. fem they were very young, were Condemned to be


=


» (ulath’d with Rods upon their hands, for three Sundays to-
iigether at the Church-door; and the aforefaid Six and
jimthirty were alfo doom’d to be lafhed this way once’a
yWeek for a whole Year together. The number of the

,alipeduced Children was about Three hundred.

#@ On the twenty fifth of Augu?, Execution was done
\@apon the notorioufly guilty, the day being bright and
¢liglorious, and the Sun fhining, and fome thoufands of
people being prefent at the Spectacle. The Order and
yiieiethod obferved in the Examination was thus:

‘WA -Firft, The Commiffioners and the N eighbouring Ju-
vigtices went to Prayer, this done, the Witches , who

fad moft of them Children with them, which they el-

\iigher had Seduced, or attempted to Seduce, from four

_yalrears of age to fixteen, were fet before them. Some of

 dghe Children complained lamentably of the mifery and

“moifchief they were forced fometime to fuffer of the

" aYV itches. | 3

| The Children being asked whether they were fure,
| 3 Qo 3 that


%


oes


_ On the 14th of Augu? the Commiflioners met again,


faq maby IES


apg!


7 ea ee ee
pea oe Sa tee pee


582 The Colleétion


that they were at any time carried away by the Devil;
they all declared they were, begging of the Commif_io-
hers that they might be freed from that intolerable |
Slavery.

Herespon the Witches themfelves were asked, whe-


ther the Gonfeflions of thefe Children, were true, and } } |


admonithed to confefs the truth, that they might turn


away from the Devil unto the living God. At firft, J 1


moft of them did very ftifly, and without fhedding the 4 4!
leaft Tear deny it, though much againft their Will and §
Inclination. line

After this, the Children were Examined, every one!


by themfeives, to fee whether their Confeflion did agree Wi!
or no; and the Commiflioners found that all of them, Jl?


except fome very little ones, who could not tell all theg WM
Circumftances, did punctually agree in the confeflion off ili
Particulars. Carter

In the mean while the Commiffioners that were of the'


Clergy examined the Witches, but could not bring them tila


to any Confeffion,all continuing ftedfaft in their denyals,


till at laft {ome of them burft out into Tears, and theirs tie (


Confeflion agreed with what the Children had faid. J ii¢
And thefe exprefled their Abhorrency of the Fact, andl§ jw
begge’d pardon; adding, that the Devil, whom theyig ti
call’d Loeyta, had ftopt the Mouths of fome of them, } fhe
and {topt the Ears of others; and being now gone from
them, they could no longer conceal it, for they now per-
ceived his Treachery.

The Confeflion which the Witches made in Elfdak,


to the Judges there, agreed with the Confeflion they thy,


made at Abra: and thechief things they confefled conf Mut,
fifted in thefe three Points. Ty
1. Whither they ufed to go ? |
2, What kind of Place it was, they went to, called
by them Blockula, where the Witches and the Devil ufed
to meet.


3. What Evil or Mifchief they had either done or de-} hy,
figned there. |


x. OF


t


| of Relations.


! i 1. Of thesr Fourney to Blockwla. The Contents
| of their Conf effion.


Nh VV" of the Province of Elfdale, do confefs that
A y we ufed to go toa Gravel-pit which lay hard
vabtby a crofs-way, and there we put on a Veit over our
yieads, and thendanced round, and after this ran to the '
\joCrofs-way, and called the Devilthrice, firft with a {till ia
\iid@Voice, the fecond time fomewhat louder, and the third |=
fitime very loud, with thefe Words, Anteceffour, come if
«and carry us to B'ockula. Whereupon, immediately he
j;gufed to appear, but in different Habits, but for the
j4amoft part we faw him in a gray Coat, and red and blue
a@Stockings: He had a red Beard, a high-crown’d Hat,
vilaiwith Linnen of diversColours, wrapt about it, and long
@Garters upon his Stockings. :
P| Then he asked us, whether we would ferve him with
laSoul and Body. If we were content to do fo, he fet us
v@fon a Peaft which he had there ready, and carried us
“j«flover Churches and high Walls; and after all we came
Jito a green Meadow, where Blockula lies. We muft
-, procure fome Scrapings of Altars, and Filings of Church
: er ocks: and then he gives us a Horn with a Salve in it,
“ dwherewith we do anoint ourfelves ; and aSaddie, with
"Ha Hammer and a wooden Nail, thereby to fix the Saddle ;
whereupon we call upon the Devil and away we go.
ON Thofe that were of the Town of Adohra, made in a
mimanner the fame Declaration: Being asked whether
i Sithey were fure of a real perfonal Tranfportation , and
‘i A whether they were awake when itwas done ; they all an-
\ Wfwered inthe Affirmative, and that the Devid fometimes
liJaid fomething down in the Place that was very like
jithem. But one of them confefled, that he did only
"Ti take away her Strength, and her Body lay ftill upon the
i’ lf Ground; yet fometimes he took even her Body with
i) him.
wl) Being asked, how they could go with their Bodies
/ Qo 4 througia


—


ay "Fhe Colleétion


through Chimneys and broken Panes of Glafs, they
faid, ‘that the Devil did firft remove all that might
hinder them in their flight, and fo they had room
enough to go.

- Others were asked, how they were able to carry, fo
many Children with them; and they anfwered , that
when the Children were-afleep they came into the Cham.
ber, laid hold of the Children, which ttraightway did
awake, and asked them whether they would go to a
Feaft with them’? to which fome anfwered Yes, others } 1
No ; yet they were all forced to go. -They only gave | ini
the Children a Shirt, a Coat, and a Donblet, which
was €ither red or blue, and fo they did fet them upona
Beaft of the Devil’s providing, and then they rid
away. . A gd aoe : i tg

- The Children confeffed the fame thing; and fome
added, that becaufe they had very fine Cloaths put up-

on them, they were very willing to go. ,

~~ Some of the Children concealed it from their Parents,

but others difcover?d it to them prefently. ~ - a Ei
“The Witches declared moreover, ‘that till of late } i;
they never had that power to carry away Children, but Pi,
only this Year and the laft, and the Devil did‘at this time J jy,
force them to it; that heretofore it was fufficient to
carry but one of their Children, or a Stranger’s Child
with them, which yet happened feldom, but now he })
did plague them and whip them if they did not procure | ’7,
him Children, infomuch that they had no peace nor quiet

for him; and whereas formerly one Journey a Week
would ferve turn, from their own Town to the place
aforefaid, now they were forced to run to other Towns } },,,
and Places for Children, and that they brought with J }y,
them, fome fiftecn, fome fixteen Children every |


night. | be SAD en. a)
__For their Journey, they faid they made ufe of all forts 4 »::
of Inftruments, of Beafts, of Men, of Spits and Pofts, Jj
according as they had opportunity: if they do ride up J 4:
on Goats, and have many Childten with them, thee all | y
FO may


of Relations. 5 585


‘ff may have Room, they fticka Spit into the back-fide of
ithe Goat, and thei are anointed’ with the aforefaid
‘wii Ointment. What the manner of their Journey is, God
| alone knows: Thus much was made out, That if the
‘li Children did at any time name the Names ‘of thofe that
had carried them away; they were again carried by force
‘ either to © Blockula, orto the Crofs- -way, and there mi-
i ferably beaten, infomuch that fome of them died of it:
if and this fome of the Witches confeffed, and added,

oe That now they were exceedingly troubled and tortured
Mf in their minds for it,

The Children thus ufed lookt mighty bleak, wan,
‘Wand pn The marks. of the Lafhes, the Judges
ij@ Could not perceive in them, except in one Boy,. who
@ had fome Wounds and Holes in his Back, that were gi-
ii ven bim with Thorns; but the Witches faid, they
ita) Would quickly vanifh.
|< After this ufage the Children are exceeding weak;
id and if any be carried over-nig ght, they cannot recover
i themfelves the next day 5 and they often fall into Fits,
(ay the coming of which they know by an extraordinary
§ Palenefs that feizes on the Children; and if a Fit comes
me upon them, they lean on their Mothers Ar ms, who fit up
@ with them fometimes ai! [night 5 and when they obferve
vil the Palenefs coming, fhake the Children, but to no pur-
(@ pote
a} They obferve farther, that their Childrens Biealts
“ll grow cold at fuch times 5 and they take fometimes a
a) Durning Candie and ftick it in their hair, which yet is not
q burnt by it. They fwoun upon this Palenefs, which

Swoun Jafteth fometimes half an hour, fometimes an
‘hour , fometimes two hours, and when the Children

y come to themfelves again, they mourn and lament,
Wand groan moft miferably, and beg exceedingly to be
vB eafed : “This two old Men declared upon Oath before
d@ the Judges , and called all the Inhabitants of the Town
§ to witnefS , as Perfons that had moft of them experience
tof this fr ange Symptome of their Children.
. A little


SS


ae


ny
parte:


emewtogs.


\ - ~ 70


ha
Nad
y

‘
e
:


5 86 The Colleétion


A little Girl of Elfdale confeffed, That naming the
name of JESUS as the was carried away, fhe fell fud-
denly upon the Ground, and got a great hole in her
Side, which the Devil prefently healed up again, and
away he carried her ; and to this day the Girl confefled,
fhe had exceeding great pain in her Side.

Another Boy confefled too, That one day he was car-
ried away by his Miftrefs, and to perform the Journey,
he took his own Fathers Horfe out of the Meadow where
it was, and upon his return, fhe let the Horfego in her
own ground.

The next Morning the Boys Father fought for his
Horfe, and not finding it, gave it over for loit, but
the Boy told him the whole ftory, and fo his Father
fetcht the Horfe back again; and this one of the Witch
es confefled. :


2. Of the place where they ufed to affemble, calied Blockula,
and what they did there.


et unanimoufly confefled, that Blockula isfituated | fi
in adelicate large Meadow, whereof you can fee | 4,
noend. The place or Houfe they met at, had before
it a Gate painted with divers Colours through this
Gate they went into a little Meadow diftinct from the o-
ther, where the Beafts went, that they ufed to ride on:
But the Men whom they made ufe of in their journey,
{tood in the Houfe by the Gate in a flumbering pofture,
fleeping againft the Wall,

In a huge large Room of this Houfe, they faid, there
ftood a very long Table, at which the Witches did ft
down: And that hard by this Room was another |
Chamber, where there were very lovely and delicate
Beds. Lo
The firft thing they faid, they muft doat Blockula,wasy } ji;
That they muft deny all, and devote themfelves Body f },
and Soul to the Devil, and promife to ferve him faith- |


fuily, and confirm all this with an Oath. Hereupon they | .


cut


i


ae


of Relations. 587
‘Will eut their Fingers, and with their Bloud writ their Name
‘ll. in his Book. They added, that he caufed them to be
‘lit} Baptized too by fuch Priefts ashe had there, and made
aij them confirm their Baptifm with dreadful Oaths and
it, Imprecations,
| Hereuponthe Devil gavethem a Purfe, wherein there
sw) were filings of Clocks with a Stone tied to it, which
\wit\f they threw into the Water, and then were forced to
iii fpeak thefe words ; As thefe filings of the Clock do never
Nil return to the Clock from which they are taken, fo may my
} Sonl never return to Heaven. To which they add Blaf-
‘til phemy and other Oaths and Curfes. |
{il The mark of their cut Fingers is not found in all of
‘el them: Bot a Girl who had been flafhed over her Fin-
Vit ger, declared, that becaufe fhe would not ftretch out
} her Finger , the Devil in anger had fo cruelly woun-
3 ded it.
|. After this they fate down to Table; and thofe that
i the Devil efteemed moft, were placed neareft to him;
® but the Children muft ftand at the door, where he him-
(wild felf gives them Meat and Drink.
ae The Diet they did ufe to have there, was, they faid,
suet Broth with Colworts and Bacon init, Oatmeal, Bread
ly fpread with Butter, Milk, and Cheefe, And they ad-
‘yal ded, that fometimes it tafted very well, and fometimes
yi very ill. After Meals they went to Dancing, and in the
we(ll wnean while Swore and Curfed moft dreadfully, and af-
“‘i@a terward went to fighting one with another. |
P Thofe of E/fdale confefled, That the Devil ufed to
yd@ play upon an Harp before them, and afterwards to go
i with them thathe liked beft, intoa Chamber, where he
ek committed venereous Acts with them; and this indeed
ult all confefled, That he had carnal knowledge of them,
"ll and that the Devil had Sons and Daughters by them,
which he did Marry together, and they did couple, and
{@ brought forth Toads and Serpents.
One day the Devil feemed tobe dead, whereupon
WM there were great lamentations at Blockula; but he foon
i awaked


!


tee


The ColleEion


awaked again. If he hath amind tobe merry with them,
he lets them all ride upon Spits before him ; takes after-
_ wards the Spits and beats them black and blue, and then
laughs at them. And he bids them believe, that the
day of Judgment will come fpeedily, and therefore fets
them to work to build a great Houle of Stone, promi-
fing, that in that Houfe he will preferve them from
God’s Fury, and canfe them to enjoy the greateft De-
lights and Pleafures: but while they work exceeding
hard at it, there falls-a great part of the Wall down
again,whereby fome of the Witches are commonly hurt
which makes him laugh, but prefently he cures them
again.

They faid, they bad feen fometimes a very great De-
yil like aDragon, with Fire round about him, and bound
with an Iron Chain ; andthe Devil, that converfes with
them tells them, that if they confefs any thing, he will
let that great Devil loofeupon them, whereby all Smeed-
land fhall come into great danger.

They added, That the Devil had a Church there,
fuch another as in the Town of Afobra. When the
Commiffioners were coming he told the Witches, they
fhould not fear them;for he would certainly killthemall,
And they confefled, that fome of them had attempted
to murther the Commiffioners, but had not been able to
effect it.

Some of the Children taiked much of a white Angel,
which ufed to forbid them what the Devil had bid them
do, and told them that thofe doings wou!d not laft long :
what had been done was permitted becaufe of the
Wickednéfs of the People, and the carrying away of
the Children fhould be made manifeft. And they added,
that this white Angel would place Himfelf fometimes
at the Door betwixt the Witches andthe Children; and
when they came to Blockula, he pulled the Childyen
back, but the Witches they went in,


“paling


of ‘Relations. 589


3 Of the Michief or Evil which the Witches promfed
: to doto Men and Beafts.


a Hey confefled, that they were to promife the Des
vil, that they would do all that’s Ill; and that the
iif Devil taught them to Milk, which was in this wife:
ill] “They ufed to ftick a Knife inthe Wall, and hang akind
ieiiql| Of a Label on it, which they drew and ftroaked ; and as
(il ong as this lafted, the Perfons that they had power over
‘lull Were miferably plagued , and the Beafts were milked
‘nll that way, till fometimes they died of it.
A Woman confefled, that the Devil gave her a woods
lel en Knife, wherewith, going into Houfes, fhe had pow-
wil er to killany thing, fhe touched with it; yet there were
iil few, that would confefs, thatthey had hurt any Manog
val Woman.
Being asked whether they had murthered any Chil-
i dren, they confefled, that they had indeed tormentéd
el Many, but did not know, whether any of them died of
4 Wil thofe Plagues. Andadded, That the Devil had fhewed
yd them feveral Places, where he had Power to-do Mif-
nlf Chiefs oc
wll) © Ehe. Minifter of Elfdale, declared, That one Night
,oii thefe Witches, were to his thinking, upon the crown of
' @j his Head, and that from thence he had hada long coiiti-
iwllll nued Pain of the Head. |
wilh ~~» One of. the- Witches confefled too, that the Devil
joRt bad fent her t


o torment that Minifter : and that fhe was

“wilt Ordered to -ufe a Nailand ftrike it into his Head, but it

a would not enter very deep; and hence came that Head-
JQ ach.


wit > Whe aforefaid Minifter faid alfo, That one Night
“if he felt a. Pain, as if he weretorn with an Inftrument,
“\ a that they cleanfe Flax with, or a Flax-comb; and whea
Wl he waked, he heard fomebody fcratching and {craping,
dat the Window, but could fee no-body. And one of
jl the Witches confefled, that fhe was the Perfon that did
Wit, being fent by the Devil. The


i
i
{


ork Tera Yeon teeta trace ee a ee ee


a


5 90 The Colleétion


The Minifter of A4obra declared alfo, that one Night
one of thefe Witches came into his Houfe, and did fo
violently take him by the Throat, that he thought, he
fhould have been choaked ; and waking, he faw the Per-
fon that did it, but could not know her; and that for
fome Weeks he was not able to f{peak, or perform Di-
vine Service.
Anold Woman of Eifdale confeffed, that the Devil
had holpen herto make a Nail, which fhe ftruck intoa
Boy’s knee, of which Stroke the Boy remained Jame
alongtime. And fhe added, that before fhe burnt, or
was executed by the hand of Juftice, the Boy would re-
cover.
They confefled alfo, that the Devil gives them a Beaft
about the bignefs and fhape ofa young Cat, which they
call aCurrser;and that he gives them a Bird too as big as a
Raven,but white. And thefe two Creatures they can fend
any where; and where-everthey come, they take away
all forts of Vidctuals they can get, Butter, Cheefe,
Milk, Bacon, and all forts of Seeds whatever they find,
and carry itto the Witch. What the Bird brings they
may keep for themfelves ; but what the Carrier brings,
they muft referve for the Devil, and that’s brought to
Blockula, where he doth give them of it fo much as he J try
thinks fit. Pall
They added likewife, that thefe Carriers fill them- | jij
felves fo full fometimes, that they are forced to fpue by | Mili
the way., which fpueing is found in feveral Gardens J inj
where Colworts grow, andnot far from the Houfes of | te
thofe Witches, It is of a yellow colour like Gold, and J bi
is called Butterof Watches. ty
The Lords Commiffioners were indeed very earneft, |
and took great Pains to perfwade them to fhew fome of sj
their Tricks, ‘but to no purpofe ; for they did all unani- f til;
moufly confefs, ‘that fince they had confefled all, they
found that all their Witchcraft was gone, and that the |
Devil at this time appeared to them veryterrible, with J th)
Claws on his Hands and feet, and with Horns on his f ty;
Head,


: of Relations. 591
‘\etti| ead; and along Tail behind, and fhewed to them a
‘tio Pit burning, with a Hand put out; but the Devil did
il, el thruft the Perfon down again with an Iron-fork; and
ile fuggefted to the Witches, that if they continued in
iol their Confeffion, he would deal with them in the fame
Hf Manner.

The abovefaid Relation is taken out of the Publick
tba Regifter, where all this is related with more Circum-
hun ftances. And at this time through all the Countrey
inl there are Prayers weekly in all Churches, to the end
ii, ff that Almighty God would pull down the Devil’s Power,
wiieand deliver thofe poor Creatures, which have hitherto

1 groaned under it.


Ate
ue
|


jit dn Account of what happened to a Boy, at Malmoe ix
wei: ‘Schonen, i the Year 1678. fuppofed to be done by
eq. Waeckeraft, and attefted by the ableft, and molt judicious
rie ‘den of that Town. :
site Aving in the Preface to the foregoing Narrative
ff : taken notice of the Swedifh Envoy Extraordinary,
wa at may not be. unfiitable to the Subject, thefe Papers
“xd treatof, togivethe World an Account of avery ftrange
* i Paffage, which the faid Envoy hath taken very great
ail pains to fatisfie ‘himfelf in; and of which he hath the
"ull (Publick Teftimony of the Town, where it was done,
"4 byhim. No longer ago than in the Year 1678, an Al-
“ (a:derman or Senator’s ‘Son of AZalmoe in Schonen, a City
if belonging to the King of Sweden, the Boy being then
4" | about Thirteen Yeats of Age, ‘his Name Abraham ALe-
: -chelburg, going 'to School one-Morning , asthe Cuftom
|" F-isin that place, about Six of the Clock, ftay?d there
| till Eight, and then went home'forvhis Breakfalt, which
je Wwhen he had eaten, he was going back toSchool again,
4") when juft beforethe Door, clofe bythe lowermof!Step,
(tM -thete lay-a little Bundle. of ‘LinneniRags, which the Lad
i "one Of -Curiofity took up \and open?d, «but found ‘no-
| thing


| 592 The Colleétion


thing in it, but partly Pins, fome crooked, fome laid


acro{s, fome without Points; partly broken Horfe-nails, PS’


and Nails without Heads; partly Horfe-hair, and fuch


Trafh, which, when ic anfwered not his Expectation, Pr


he rent afunder, and threw away.

Some few days after, the Boy fell ill, and continued
fo for fome time, no Phyfician being able-to guefs what
ailed him. At Jaflthe began to void little Stones, at the
Orifice of the Pen, which by degrees came forth big-
ger and bigger, fome were: perfect Pebbles of all forts of
Colours, andin procefs of time, there came forth great
uneven Stones like: pieces of Rocks, asi if they were
broken off of a greater Stone, whereof the Envoy hath
two by him, One given him by the Father of the Boy,


and the other by the King’s Chirurgeon, both whichI


have thought fit to give the Reader.the dimenfions of.


Before the Stones came forth, there: was a ftrange f'"?


motion in his Belly, as. if fomething were alive in it,
the Stones feemed to crack within,. and fomething they


heard, as ifa great Stone were violently broken, and at # ui


this:time he felt the greateft pain When the Stones wete
ready tocome forth, the: Pexzs was drawn in fo deep,
that the Standers by could: not perceive any thing of it
and after that, it dropt thofe prodigious Stones; which
feem rather to be fetch’d from Quarries,’ than’ produced
by any Saline or Nitrous Matter in the Body.’ The Stone
I have given the Figure of, is'of a reddifiicolour, with
fome grains of white in it, heavy,;and {uch as lievm
common Roads and Highways: When the Stones:came §"


forth, the Boy felt no pain, the pain being moft upon #™


him, when the Stones within feem’d‘to crack, andalit- 4
tle before ; and the Fit was then fo violent, that four or }™
five Men were forced tovhold him.: The Boy in the #!


mean while flept well at Night, eat, and drank asq” '
heartily as ever, difcompofed at no time, but wheng™»
the Fit of voiding thefe» Stones: was coming upon #4
him. This lafted two years: The Parents had the)!


Boy pray’d for at Church , and. inftantly befouse ,
| | Godai


‘of ‘Relations. 593
iniillod at: home, whenever any of thofe..Fits came upon
tujjm, to turn the ftream and to ftop the Devils Power.
saflhe Boy is now as well asever,rideth abroad,and doth all
iin gs as he ufed to do before this accident befel him.The

wzvoy {poke both with the Father and the Boy, and tells
iiigl€, they are no indigent People, but well to pafs, and
wifrfons of very good Reputation in the Town of A“il-
le, While this Misfortune lafted, the King of Sweder
‘xigging then but alittle way off, fent fome of his Chirur-
iq ehOS to the Place, to know the truth thereof, who
jingere by, when the Lad voided very ftrange Stones at
i wl Orifice of the Penis, and gave the King an account of
wp@s One of them to bethroughly fatisfied, held his hand
der the Pens after it was drawn in, and there dropé
very odd Stone, broad and angular into his hand.
Whe Envoy being upon the place laft Year, enquired of

i People, whom he thought might not be very: cre-
Gilous, who unanimoufly bore witnefs of the thing,
Md upon his requeft gave him the following Account,
hick I have tranflated out of the Original.


AE les A of 2 Satay
UP em ater oor Ne ®
aR aS ig Ra lane ee aha ge ad Oe pia Bee *


:
-


| et. H;
(ill


i 1 E it known, that during the Years, 1678. and 1679.
fio > a very wonderful thing happened in this City of Mal-
Wpe, to one of the Aldermen of the Town, bi name

vf "an-Mechelburg , and his Wifes Abla Kruthmeyer ,
A" God having bleffed them with three Sons, one of them
i“praham by name, a Boy at this time aged about fixteen
wll ars, bath been very ftrangely afflicted with a preternatu-
ili voiding of Stones, infomuchthat during the {pace of thofe
ty years, be bath through the Virga of the Penis voided
yilMberal hundreds of Stones great and fmall, which being
| (i Meghed together , weighed no lefs than one and Twenty
Mund, Aver du poife, ome weighing 6, fome 7, fome8,

Oke 9. Ounces, fullof Angles, and much like pieces of a
liek that?s broken by Force, or Inftruments fit for that Pur-
I Pp pofee


hat TOUb


a The Collettion


pofe. Thefe broken Stones fometimes came forth at the Boyy
mouth, fometimes be voided them by Siege, and the Pareni i
of the Child have confidently affured us, that before this Ati
fortune, the Boy had been fick feverat Weeks together, amy ,
kept his Bed; during which Sickne[s fomething was feeq
moving in bis Body, as if it had been fome live thing
After this Sicknefs there appeared the Stones aforefaidk
The firft that came forth exceeded not the bignefs of ba


a Pea, but in a fhort time after they increafed to a gres


ter Bulk, when they were ready to come away, the Boy com).


plained much of the Spine of bis Back, where, as be fais
he found incredible Pain. While this lafted, he neithe
made Water, nor went to Stool fometimes in two Month
fometimes not in a Quarter of aYear ;° [ometimes the Stoney
when they were paft through the Virga, appeared bloud\
and upon one of them there appeared a kind of Yalcl:
Norwithftanding all this mifery, the Boy continued to ¢:


his Meat very heartily, nor was he troubled with this Pain. }—


all in the night, bur flept quietly ashe nfed todo. About

latter end of this.unezeampled Paffion and Mifery, a matty
‘of 64. Stones, for the moft part mall, came forth vem
fajt , one upon the neck, of another, and fince the 2oth. |

September, 1679. this Misfortine hath totally left bis

and he is as well a ever; noris there, after all thofe To

ments, any Defect to be found, or perceived either im b

Body, orthe aforefaid Member of the Boy, but he continus
fafe and found unto this day,

And wheres, in-all prabability, abundance of Men, @
caufe they have nor been Eye-witneffes, will deride the
Paffaces, as fabulous, we, whofe Names are under-writts
npon the Requeft and Defire of the Lord John Leyonbergs
Envoy Extraordinary of Sweden, bave once more {pokey
and conferred with the Parents of the Boy , who have fhem
us the abovelaid Stones; and given us one of the biggeft,

a Prefent, and do hereby teftifie, that the Paffages relat
gn.the Premiffes, are undoubtedly true, which Teftimony

have alfo figned with onr own hands, that in cafe the afom
faid Envoy coming into foreign Parts, fhall have ovcafil


1 of Relations, 595
ae [peak of thefe things, Men may give Credit to his Relati-


144% Given at Adalmoe, this 20th, of September, 1680.


oF)


| wi Chriftophorus Roftins, Med, D. & Prof.
will Nicolaus Hambraus, Paftor & Prepofitus Malmoy.
iyi Wilhelmus Laurembergius, V.D.M. Malmoy.

ul a Martinus Torftorrius, Comminifter, ibid. —

\y ht Sigi(mund Afchenborn, Conful Malmoy. Primar.
ili Fon Cafpar Heublin. Confil. Malmoy. |

| Ml Ephraim Koldewey, Chirurgeon to the Garifon,


:


Pe ee ee
Sig >: tea ee Gayle


x


the tivo Stone


of


toned in therc pps


sae


Pie


.
it


THLCTL


“3


"y
SS


gr EES


———


The Colleétion, &c.


Advertifement.


X \ 7 Hen the Boy’s Father gave the Exvoy the bigger


Stone, he added this Teitimonial oc Certifi-


cate under his own hand sx


WON the Year of our Lord, 1678. Novemb. 30. This Stone
{ came away from my Son Abraham Mechelburg, through
the Virga of the Penis, weighing three Ounces, and up-
ward.


Malme,
April 26. fp
ie Fobn M echelburg.

The Leffer Stone was given to the Exvoy, by one of
the King of Sweden’s Chirurgeons, that held his hand te
the Orifice of the Penis, and felt and faw it drop into
his hand.


LTS SEE SGC ORE EGEPSS GEL IDL ELE LE PLED LIEB IALEAL GABE LEDER V3 EDDA PEEL LP ELBA EDEL OPA POR AE AEA AA EAE IEEIELE DES


FTN IS.


Nag


Licenfed to be Reprinted
, —— [Saduci{mus Triumphatus : Or, Full


and plain Evidence. concerning
Witches and Apparitions, ]


Fan. 14%
168%,


