The Romantic Comedians (Ellen Glasgow, 1926)
==========================================================
A judge's late marriage and its collapse — Glasgow's sharpest comedy of Southern manners. Public domain. Sourced from the Internet Archive scan 'romanticcomedian0000elle' (https://archive.org/details/romanticcomedian0000elle).

PS 3513 .L34 R6 1926
Glasgow, Ellen Anderson
Gholson
. Romantic comedians


PS 35138 .L34 R6 1926

Glasgow, Ellen Anderson
Gholson

Romantic comedians


— sper ec mammmaes i ners


shed


NASI
NY


) (i/


Kahle/Austin Foundation


The


Reoan an trite
Comedians


The Work of
ELLEN GLASGOW


THE VOICE OF THE PEOPLE
THE BATTLE-GROUND
THE FREEMAN AND OTHER POEMS
THE DELIVERANCE
THE WHEEL OF LIFE
THE ANCIENT LAW
THE ROMANCE OF A PLAIN MAN
VIRGINIA
LIFE AND GABRIELLA
THE BUILDERS
ONE MAN IN HIS TIME
THE SHADOWY THIRD
BARREN GROUND


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


‘Published by DOUBLEDAY,
PAGE & CO., Garden (ity, £1.


The
Romantic
Comedians


Publishea by
DovusLepDay, Pace & Co.
GARDEN CITY, N.Y.
1926


ANDERSON CUi.2E
LIBRARY
ANDERSON, INDIANA


& COMPANY. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES AT THE
COUNTRY LIFE PRES8, GARDEN CITY, N. Y¥.


Pe
BS13
ey
AL
1A ale


Cork RA Cie SB Me


Part One


ANDERSON COLLEGE
LIBRARY
ANDERSON, INDIANA


SACL?


2 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


young sixty-five, he hastened to remind himself.
Beyond the impressive marble angel, the sky was of
a glimmering April blue; fresh young leaves were
sprinkling the gnarled old trees in the cemetery;
a joyous piping and twittering of birds enlivened
the feathery crests of the evergreens; and in his
soul as well, beneath the gloom of his sorrow, there
was this miracle of budding and piping and twit-
tering, as if winter woods had awakened to spring.

Standing there, with his head bowed reverently
over the grave, he searched his memory in vain for
a living image of his Cordelia. To mourn was dis-
tressing, but to endeavour to mourn and fail was
worse than distress. Yet to the casual passer-by,
ignorant of this April burgeoning within, he was
merely an inconsolable widower of fine presence
at the grave of his happiness. Through jewelled
branches, the sunshine wove a golden filigree from
his silken gray head to the wide black band on the
sleeve of his coat. Tall, lean, angular, a little dry
and inelastic in thought, a trifle stiff when he
moved, he had remained sprightly in speech while
he became ceremonious in manner. Behind rim-
less glasses, his benevolent brown eyes were visited
in moments of wistful longing by the bright flicker
of youth. Over his full yet austere lips, with their
splotches of dusky red, the ends of his still dark
moustache tapered down into his trim silver beard.
For the rest, his features conformed to the aristo-
cratic Honeywell pattern. The beetling gray eye-


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 3


brows, the thin Roman nose, the mottled stains
under the eyes that flowed into the sallow flush of
the high cheek-bones, the corded folds of the throat
where his beard ended;—all these marks of char-
acter were subdued to the family inheritance of
prudence, integrity, and reserve. Polygamous by
instinct, like other men, he had confined his im-
petuous desires within the temperate zone of
monogamy, where sober habit had preserved both
his health and his appearance.

In the eighteen eighties, when his opinions were
formed, he had determined to become one of the
advanced minds of his age; and at sixty-five, he
considered that he had kept well abreast of his
time. An upright, even a religious man, with a
rich Episcopal flavour of temperament, he was
disposed to encourage liberty of thought as long
as he was convinced that it would not lead to
liberal views. Though he had lived all his life in
Queenborough, where society had never outgrown
an early stage of arrested development, his repu-
tation as a lawyer had extended beyond his native
Virginia, and many well-spent summers abroad
had cultivated in him what he was fond of calling
‘fan international attitude of mind.” At least he
had not, like the community of which he was a
part, lost the faculty of self-criticism, and stiffened
into a gelatinous mould of complacency. South-
ern in sentiment, yet not provincial in thought,
he had attached himself to the oppressed minority


4 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


which represented, he felt, the urbane and un-
prejudiced South. —

In his ardent though fastidious intercourse with
life, he had seldom failed to respect women, even
those who had shown themselves to be unworthy
of the sentiment. For a man who had been
desperately in love with one woman and safely
married to another, he had kept the grosser temp-
tations outside of his thoughts. Sex as a topic
for speculation was little more than a virgin wilder-
ness in his mind, except those well-cultivated
fields of sex that have yielded such abundant
harvests to history.

A devoted wife, he was musing sadly; for this
was as keenly as he could force himself to regret
the estimable but ashen old lady who had scorned
the temporary repairs of the toilet. For thirty-six
years he had been genuinely attached to her. For
thirty-six years, partly for her sake, he had resisted
temptation. It was a consolation to remember
to-day that he had resisted even in the case of that
alluring young French girl who had returned with
them as a maid, and who, he had soon discovered,
was far from being the serious person described,
with Gallic inaccuracy, in the letters she brought.
Well, even then, though not without a struggle, he
had resisted.

Yes, the phrase slipped more easily than the
thought in the groove of his mind, he was as help-
less without Cordelia as a bird with a broken


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 5


wing. Bending over her grave, on this flower-
scented, thrush-haunted Easter Sunday, he pas-
sionately invoked, not the Cordelia of faithful wife-
hood, but the immortally young and fair Cordelia,
fragrant as the rose of desire, whom he had mar-
ried. For he needed youth. His sorrow needed
the memory of youth to keep it alive. So urgent
was this craving of the withered heart to be green
again, that he would have given all the thirty-six
years, when Cordelia and he were one flesh and
spirit, for a single hour of her lost rose-coloured
innocence.

Not only one flesh and one spirit, but one pres-
ence as well. Except in his office and in his
profound judicial decisions, he had barely pos-
sessed an inviolable life of his own. Even on his
professional journeys she had accompanied him;
and upon the rare occasions when the illness of one
of the children had prevented her, she had never
failed to greet him at the station upon his return.
A remarkable character, a wonderful mother, he
murmured softly, with his gaze on the Italian
tombstone, where even the marble angel, he ob-
served with a wanton flight of fancy, wore the en-
chanting contour of youth. If only she had had a
dozen children instead of the two who had married
and gone to live in other parts of the world, her
life, he felt, might have been as abundant and as
satisfying as she had deserved. Yet, with a dozen
children on her hands, she could scarcely have


6 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


taken such excellent care of him and his health.
For thirty-six years, he had eaten only food that
was wholesome for him; yet so skilfully was it
prepared, under her vigilant eyes, that he could
not have enjoyed it more had it been indiges-
tible. From the day of her marriage she had
trained herself to eradicate the taint of nervous
dyspepsia that had been for generations the hered-
itary curse of his family; and as long as she had
been his housekeeper, he had indulged his ap-
petite with both pleasure and impunity. He re-
membered now, in one of those trivial but tender
recollections, which bring a pang, that after he had
been made ill by mushroom sauce, Cordelia, who
had a preference for it, had never allowed it to be
served again at their table.

“You have to thank your wife for your health
and happiness,’ Doctor Buchanan had said to him
at the beginning of her last illness. ‘“‘She has been
a perfect wife to you, and has worn out herself in
your service.”

It was all true, he acknowledged gratefully. It
was all true; and it made no difference evidently
either to the doctor or to Cordelia that he had not
wanted her to wear out herself in his service, that
he had not, when all was said, wanted a perfect
wife.

“Yes, a wonderful wifely devotion,” he mur-
mured under his breath, while he was attacked by
a curious pricking sensation—could it be one of


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS %


relief?—because he should never again be obliged
to sit opposite to that unselfish solicitude.

He turned away to his car, walking stiffly be-
cause he moved with his stubborn muscles instead
of his agile spirit. As he drove through the ceme-
tery, several elderly ladies enfolded him in the
benevolent look with which women of every age
survey the spectacle of a mourning widower.
Though he bowed with suitable deference, Judge
Honeywell’s glance travelled rapidly over them;
for he had reached the romantic period of life when
elderly ladies are depressing. Not only do women
break sooner than men, he reflected, with the forti-
tude we reserve for the afflictions of the opposite
sex, but they are disposed far more readily to
settle into a rut at the end, and the only difference
between a rut and a grave, as someone had ob-
served before him, is in their dimensions. And if
elderly ladies are depressing when they settle, they
are, as he had reason to know, even more pain-
ful to behold when they refuse either to step
into a rut or to stay there after they are once
safely entrenched. For example, there was his
twin sister, Edmonia Bredalbane, an intrepid
woman of liberal views and loose behaviour.
After one early scandal, she had indulged herself
through life in that branch of conduct which was
familiar to ancient moralists as nature in man and
depravity in woman. Moreover, she had lost her
character, not quietly, as was the custom in such


8 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


matters, but with a loud explosion that had
startled Queenborough and involved her innocent
family. Deaf alike to the whispers of conscience
and the thunders of tradition, she had declined
to remain a picturesque ruin in company with
other damaged virgins of quality. While the
rumble of her fall was still in the air, she had
detached her loosened foundations and sailed by
the next boat for Paris: a city that was regarded
in Queenborough as little better than an asylum
for determined profligates of both sexes. There,
according to transatlantic gossip, she had pursued
the downward path with four lawful husbands and
a long procession of anonymous but affluent lovers.
As he advanced farther away from the discredited
Victorian era, Judge Honeywell’s opinions were
less outraged by her open avowal of infidelity at a
period when religious doubt was more condemned,
as well as more distinguished, than it is to-day.
Yet even after a world war, which had shaken
everything but the unalterable laws of biology, he
could find no milder word than reprehensible for
Edmonia’s flourishing career.

In his melancholy review of her past, he had for-
gotten that she was not only undesirable but im-
minent, and he was stung to resentment by the
thought that she was probably awaiting him in his
library, with the intention, no doubt, of remaining
to lunch. A few days before, she had arrived in
Queenborough, with her old effrontery but fortu-


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 9


nately without herfourth husband. Ralph Bredal-
bane, an impecunious young mooncalf, who had
been tracked down while he was suffering from
the idealistic interpretation of war, had lingered on
in Paris to enjoy his negligible share of Edmonia’s
tainted millions.

“That is what happens when a woman loses her
modesty,” Judge Honeywell mused, as his car
passed through the gate of the cemetery. After
all, the orthodox beliefs and the conventional
standards were safest; and he recalled that his
father, one of the last of the old school, had re-
marked at the close of his life: “If there is anything
wrong with the Episcopal Church or the Demo-
cratic Party, I would rather die without knowing
ag


II


ryNOO democratic to live contentedly in a street

or even a road, the modern inhabitants of
Queenborough preferred the grandiose style of an
avenue or a boulevard.

The Age of Pretence, The Age of Hypocrisy,
The Age of Asphalt, Judge Honeywell reflected,
while his car skirted a plebeian park, where the
best taste of politicians was commemorated in
concrete walks and triangular beds of canna.
What, he wondered gloomily, was the peculiar
merit in the middle-class mind? In what particular
was the tyranny of the inferior an advance upon
the tyranny of the superior? Beyond the few
ancient elms, which had been threatened but not
destroyed by the political axe, he could see the
once aristocratic and now diminished length of
Washington Street merging into the ostentatious
democracy of Granite Boulevard.

The Easter stream, which he had left a little
earlier at the door of Saint Luke’s, had subsided
into rippling pools on the pavement. Here he
caught the outline of familiar gestures, and rec-
ognized faces he had parted from after the morn-
ing service. Where else on earth, he sighed, could

10


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 11


people know as little and yet know it so flu-
ently?

Framed in her doorway, he saw, not without a
faint inner disturbance, the still handsome, still
regal figure of Amanda Lightfoot. Fifty-eight, if
a day, but marvellously preserved, with the bright
blue eyes, the rich colour, the foamlike hair, of a
woman who had consecrated all her resources to a
losing battle with time. He wondered why she
did not darken her hair, and acknowledged the next
instant that he respected her more for disdain-
ing the subterfuge. Most women and a few men
professed to admire gray hair when it crowned
so youthful a face as Amanda’s; but he had
always disliked it, and now, with the essence of
spring filtering into his mind, the vision of his
first love aroused the obscure despondency with
which he stood apart and surveyed the passage of
years. In his early youth, the youth of another
century, he had adored Amanda Lightfoot to the
edge of delirium. At that picturesque period,
she had been what he and other gallants of his
day were fond of calling his ideal; and though
ideals had changed perceptibly since the eighteen
eighties, he realized, with a vague sense of reproach,
that Amanda had retained the earlier pattern un-
altered. In outline, she was to-day precisely what
she had been when he loved her; but it was the
outline, he felt, of a pressed leaf that has grown
faded and brittle. Yet he could not banish com-


12 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


pletely the feeling that he was, in some inexplicable
way, to blame for his own unfaithfulness to his
ideal as well as for the embalmed perfection of his
Amanda.

Thirty-seven years ago, for a few blissful months,
he had been engaged to her. His ecstasy was
as antiquated now as her curving waist. There
was to-day even a tinge of irony in his thoughts,
as if he were ashamed of having been so hope-
lessly in love with a woman who was now no
longer young. But in his youth, before and even
after his marriage, he had been consumed by the
white fire of his passion. She was then, and she
remained for twenty years afterward, the crowned
belle and beauty of Queenborough. In a city
famed for beautiful women, no later belle had ap-
proached her in loveliness. Three blissful months,
and then suddenly, without warning, they had
quarrelled. After thirty-seven years, he was
obliged to search his memory before he could recall
the occasion. Had they actually quarrelled be-
cause Amanda—the middle-aged lady he had just
observed holding her prayer-book—had danced too
often with a young man of attractive appearance
but undesirable progenitors? The episode was a
comedy when he rehearsed it now in his mind;
but thirty-seven years ago it had been tragic
enough. Immediately after the quarrel, Amanda,
who was a mettlesome beauty, had broken her en-
gagement and had fled te Europe, when the Atlantic


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 13


Ocean was wider and Europe farther away than
they appear to the far-sighted vision of the
Twentieth Century. Had her flight been merely a
coquettish gesture, he had since wondered, and had
she expected him to follow in pursuit by the next
boat that sailed? Well, whatever she had ex-
pected, he had intended to follow her. It was on
shipboard some months later, in the very act of
pursuing Amanda, that the versatile emotions of
man had entangled him in an affair with Cordelia;
and almost automatically, it appeared when he
looked back, he had found himself engaged to her.
He had been happy with Cordelia, as a man may be
happy inamarriage with any agreeable woman when
he stops thinking about it; and yet his happiness
had not extinguished his desirefor Amanda. Fora
year or two, before his first child was born, there
was a period of madness which, with his natural
aptitude for evading unpleasant truths, he had
dismissed from his memory. This morning, how-
ever, for the first time in years, as if the resurrection
of Spring had summoned it from the grave, he re-
called the April night when he had rushed to Aman-
da and implored her to go away with him.

Only her steadfast virtue (though this was the
easiest part for him to forget) only her unswerving
devotion to duty, had saved them both from dis-
aster. To-day, in sudden poignant longing, he
lived over again the old torment of his passion.
Well, he was still in love with Amanda; he would


14 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


be always in love with her; but it was with an age-
less Amanda of the mind, not with the well-
preserved lady of the tarnishing years.

Afterward, even when his children had grown up
and married, his knowledge of her hopeless love
for him had run like a scarlet thread through his
life. That she had remained unmarried for his
sake was at first a hope, then a belief, and at last,
as her hair began to whiten, a source of tender re-
gret. Only recently, since his wife’s death, had
this regret become faintly flavoured with bitter-
ness. He could not fail to perceive that, in the
twelve months of his bereavement, public opinion
had been firmly but delicately pushing them to-
gether; and the firmer the push toward Amanda,
the more obstinately he thrust his will into the
ground and refused to advance. It was true, as
he reminded himself so often, that Amanda was his
ideal. Patience, sweetness, serenity, all the Vic-
torian virtues had flowered in her mind and heart.
And that queenly pride, which like most men he
admired more than any other attribute, had left
him as free to follow his later fancies as if she had
not been the one great love of his life. Never, he
knew, would she make the slightest gesture of
allurement. Never would she reveal by the faint-
est quiver of an eyelash that he had ruined her
life. Yes, there was much to be said in favour of
the womanly woman. At least men felt safe with


her.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 15


As he rolled past her gently expectant gaze, he
found himself thinking impatiently that it was a
pity she had never married. Some man missed
happiness, was the way the phrase shaped itself in
his reverie. A wonderful woman, but, with her
silver-gray hair and her fifty-eight years, she must
have put the thought of love outside of her life.
During the war she had become prominent, he was
aware, in work for devastated France; and now,
since distance robes even Armenians in an azure
hue, she was gazing romantically at the Near East.

A few blocks away stood his house, of which, he
was inoffensively proud; a collection of brownstone
deformities assembled, by some diligent architect
of the early ’eighties, under the liberal protection of
Queen Anne. In front of the stone steps, as they
flowed down from a baptismal font of a porch, he
recognized the heavily built figure of his twin sis-
ter, who was engaged in a dramatic monologue
for the benefit of two restless listeners.

“Bella Upchurch and her daughter Annabel,”
he thought before he passed, with fraternal lack of
enthusiasm, to his sister. ‘This reminds me that
I ought to have sent the girl a present at Easter.
Bella must have a hard time managing on her small
income, and she hasn’t asked for help recently.
What was it I heard about the child’s unfortunate
love affair? Wasn’t she engaged to that scamp
Angus Blount, who went abroad to study and
married some French hussy? Well, whatever it


16 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


was, it won’t do her any good to see too much of
Edmonia.” It occurred to him, as he approached,
that it couldn’t be good for any one, including her
twin brother, to see too much of Edmonia. The
mystery to him was that Queenborough society, ©
though it seldom closed its doors to a prodigal
daughter when she returned bearing the fatted
calf on her shoulders, should have opened its arms
to so notorious a sinner. To be sure, her collec-
tion of husbands was as authentic as her fortune,
while the unnumbered hosts of her lovers were
merely apocryphal; but even then, he argued
sternly, it was not only Edmonia’s past, it was her
point of view that was disreputable.

Large, raw-boned, with strong, plain features,
where an expression of genuine humour frolicked
with an artificial complexion, and a mountainous
bosom, from which a cascade of crystal beads
splashed and glistened, Mrs. Bredalbane billowed
toward him, while he thought: “If only she would
dress with the dignity suitable to her size and her
mature years!”

But Edmonia, who had been born with the cour-
age of her appetites, feared to be stout in age as
little as she had feared to be scandalous in youth.
A daring combination of American frankness and
French epicurism, she was fond of succulent food
and of wine, especially when it was red; and she
had lived long enough abroad, he regretted, to
acquire both the taste for gallantry and the horror


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 17


of iced water. Her judgment, which had been
weak in the beginning, had ripened, he admitted,
in the sun of opportunity. Though she had little
wisdom, she had had four husbands; and it is
impossible to have had four husbands without
learning something of the nature of man. In her
later understanding of life, she excelled even Mrs.
Upchurch, who had made a precarious though
eminently respectable living by nursing the vani-
ties of her own and her late husband’s male rela-
tives.

But the Judge, however much he disapproved of
his twin sister, heartily admired Mrs. Upchurch.
Physically, she embodied to perfection that in-
direct influence which had been formed by, and
had formed in turn, the men of his time. Brisk,
plump, pretty, with a way of her own, a short
fringe, which was very becoming to her dove’s eyes,
and an expression of resigned but playful archness,
she had gained by strategy everything she had
ever wanted from life except a rich and indulgent
husband. Though she was below medium height,
with waxen features and miniature hands and feet,
she was endowed with an energy of soul which had
worn down the opposition and the nerves of her
parents, her husband, her lawyer, her family
physician, and the numerous young persons who
waited upon her in shops. While the Judge ad-
mired her as a woman and respected her as an ir-
resistible force, he was never able in her presence


ANDERSON COLLEGE
LIBRARY


ANDERSON, INDIANA SAL?


18 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


to overcome a feeling of moral inadequacy; and for
this reason, in spite of her pleasant face, his eyes
left her quickly to linger upon the charming and
intelligent features of Annabel.

At his first glance, for he had known her too well
when she was a child to be impressed by her sudden
flowering, it did not occur to him that she was more
than attractive. His preference was for a queenly
presence rather than a fragile figure; yet, though
he admired curves more than hollows, he was not
impervious to the subtle fascination—was it only
glorified sex-magnetism?—which the girl diffused
like a fragrance. She was one of those rare women
(he felt this with the dreaminess of the spring)
whose charm is more potent than beauty. Was
it merely her vital radiance, her indestructible be-
lief in love, that brushed her soft eyes and smile
with a wistful glamour, as if, he found himself think-
ing sentimentally, she had walked straight out
of allegory? Or was it simply that he had heard
her pitiable story, and that her solitary passion in
an age of varied inclinations had tinged the dull
complexion of his thoughts with romance?

**T wonder what became of the fellow,”’ was his
next question. “Well, this is what we must ex-
pect, I suppose, when we try to build up the morals
and the reputation of Europe.”

For, notwithstanding his many summers abroad,
he had never lost the distinction between an in-
ternational attitude of mind and a foreign bent in


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 19


morality. French morals (they were free to call
them that if they pleased) had not only corrupted
Edmonia, who was as wax, of course, to any
sinister influence, but they were not derived, he
felt, from a true Virginian reverence for pure
womanhood.

“Anyhow, she is getting over it, poor girl,” he de-
cided at last, after his look at Annabel’s small
heart-shaped face, with its faint golden freckles and
geranium mouth. The dress she wore, a short,
scant frock of green and brown stripes, clothed
her in an odd effect of fields and streams, as if she
were standing in the midst of tall wind-blown
grasses. Where her nut-brown hair was combed
back from her forehead and twisted into two
clusters of curls over her ears, it reflected the
coppery glow of November leaves in the sunshine;
and he felt that this glimmering brightness was
interfused like magic with her fresh young voice,
which held the sparkle of rippling water. He
wondered what the colour of her eyes could be,
and decided that they were gray-green as an April
mist. Her thick black lashes curved upward;
and everything about her repeated this flying
rhythm and sprang upward with her winged eye-
brows; her hair, her smile, her few swift gestures,
the corners of her red lips, and even her smal)
fragile body. As light as a swallow, he thought,
with poetic imagery, as light and graceful as a
swallow in the air.


20 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“Annabel was just telling Mrs. Bredalbane that
she hopes you are coming to her party,” cooed
Mrs. Upchurch, who had a small mind but knew it
thoroughly. “It was the first thing we thought
of.”

“What party?” He had not heard it mentioned
before, and he liked to be definite.

“The one Cousin Amanda Lightfoot is giving
her. Tuesday is Annabel’s birthday. She will be
twenty-three.”

Twenty-three? Well, she looked younger; she
looked, indeed, scarcely more than a child. Yes,
he remembered now. The invitation had come,
and he had laid it aside in his desk and forgotten
to acknowledge it. Cordelia had given up parties
in her later years, when she found that dinners of
rich food brought on a return of his dyspepsia; and
after her death he had spent most of his evenings
at home with a book. Occasionally, he strolled
into the club for a game of chess or bridge; but even
these harmless diversions had palled on him, since
the fatal chill of prohibition had infected his club,
and he preferred, on the whole, the drowsy hours by
his fireside.

“Tm afraid Id be a kill-joy at a birthday party,
Annabel,” he said gently, for he hated to disappoint
her if she had really expected him; and, like most
men, he found it agreeable not to question Mrs.
Upchurch’s veracity.

“It would do you a world of good to go out a


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS Q1


little,’ Annabel’s mother urged when her daughter
was silent. “I’m sure dear Cousin Cordelia would
wish you to keep up your spirits; and how can you
keep up your spirits if you shut yourself away with
your grief? Don’t you agree with me, Mrs. Bre-
dalbane?”’ she inquired suddenly, turning to the
startled Edmonia, who had already wondered what
Bella Upchurch could be trying to get out of
Gamaliel.

“Well, if you ask me, Bella, I believe in taking
all the pleasure you can find,” Mrs. Bredalbane
replied. ‘“‘There isn’t any sense in the world in
Gamaliel’s not going out as much as he wants to.”

“And it would please Annabel.” Mrs. Up-
church was gazing like a pretty pigeon into Judge
Honeywell’s face. “She was saying this morning
that it would please her so much if you would
come.”

Annabel’s defiant laugh fluted gaily above the
cooing murmur of her mother’s voice. “Oh, no,
Mother, you’ve forgotten. I was talking about a
new dress,” she said.

“Annabel!” Mrs. Upchurch exclaimed, and
the edge of her tone had sharpened to a prickly
Sweetness.

Was the girl merely teasing him, or was she
deliberately rude? Her gray-green eyes turned to
gold when the sun shone into them, and her ador-
able mouth, which reminded him of a crushed
strawberry, curved and dimpled into merriment.


22 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


He looked at her as if they were alone in the street,
and while he looked a strange, an almost mi-
raculous thing happened. Suddenly, so suddenly
that the vision came and went before he had seized
it, the playful wind blew Annabel’s striped green
and brown frock like shreds of mist from her body,
and he saw her white limbs dancing against a back-
ground of fields and streams. An instant only!
Then the enchantment vanished in a golden haze,
as all enchantment must vanish sooner or later,
and he realized that he was trembling.

“Well, you know I was talking about a new
dress, Mother.” The girl’s voice was so thin and
faint in his ears that it seemed to drift, like the far-
off music of a flute, across the young green of the
meadows.

“Why shouldn’t you have a new dress, An-
nabel?”’ he heard himself asking with a lump in his
throat.

“Why, indeed?”

Yes, he knew now that she was mocking him;
but, through some natural perversity of the emo-
tions, the knowledge served only to quicken his
interest. “‘I ought to have remembered your
birthday,” he said, after a brief hesitation. “Your
Cousin Cordelia never forgot anniversaries. If it
slipped my mind, you must forgive me.”

It was true that he had intended to look after
Cordelia’s poor relations; and of them all, numer-
ous as they were, there was no doubt in his mind


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 23


that Annabel was her favourite. Not that she had
approved of Annabel, for Cordelia had had little pa-
tience with the follies of the rising generation; but,
though she disapproved, the Judge remembered
now that she was fond of the girl. For Cordelia’s
sake, if for no other reason, it was clear to him
that he must look after Annabel. Encouraged
by the sense of his duty, he continued almost
gaily: ‘You must have that dress, Annabel. T’ll
send a cheque to your mother the first thing in the
morning.”

**Perhaps Mrs. Bredalbane will help us select it,”
Mrs. Upchurch suggested, with artful diplomacy.
For she had seen and heard enough of life, even in
Queenborough, to conclude that women who com-
bine such frailties with such figures are often of
generous dispositions.

‘Well, I’m glad he is opening his purse,”
croaked Mrs. Bredalbane, with the vulgarity of
speech which, as Mrs. Upchurch frequently had
cause to regret, was not a stranger to several of the
best families. “I believe in taking everything
that’s offered you as long as you’re young enough
to enjoy it. You don’t live but once, and you’d
better get all you can out of your single oppor-
tunity. I was telling Gamaliel that yesterday.
There’s no need for him to shut himself up and
mourn like a widow, when nobody expects it of
him.”

At this Mrs. Upchurch’s artificial brightness was


24 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


faintly overcast. She felt that Mrs. Bredalbane,
even for a twin sister, was going too far.

‘Of course, we understand and sympathize with
the dear Judge’s feelings,” she murmured vaguely.

*T am afraid I have let my own trouble absorb
me too much,” Judge Honeywell began, in what
for him was a hurried manner. “It is my duty to
think of Cordelia’s relatives, in whom she took a
motherly interest. It is my duty,” he repeated
earnestly.

*T think you are an old dear, Judge Honeywell,”
Annabel said, with careless sweetness. Though
her voice soothed his ears, he wondered what had
brought the worried look to her brow, as if she were
annoyed by a stinging thought that she could not
dislodge. ‘But you must not let Mother vamp
you,” she added, while her lower lip curved
mutinously. ‘‘When she wants anything she can
charm the birds from the trees.”

“Annabel!” Mrs. Upchurch exclaimed for the
second time, but whether in reproach or interroga-
tion, the Judge could not decide. In either case,
he told himself, Mrs. Upchurch’s conversation
would become monotonous if you were thrown too
much in her company. Strange, as he had already
remarked, how often women become either mo-
notonous or ejaculatory when they reach middle
age. ‘Though it seemed foolish to acknowledge it,
for Mrs. Upchurch was many years his junior, he
felt nearer to Annabel’s generation.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 25


“Oh, you’re both charming enough,” he re-
torted gallantly, with all the sensations of a young
blade.

These sensations, which were as strange to him
now as they were enjoyable, quickened his deliber-
ate gait into a springy step while he followed Mrs.,
Bredalbane’s grotesque figure into the house,


iil


T OUR age, Gamaliel,’’ began the formidable
Edmonia, removing the most startling of
Parisian toques from the ambiguous brown of her
hair, “at our age, it is a mistake to sit down and
brood over the past.”

Turning his dignified head, Judge Honeywell
studied her a moment in silence. It appeared to
him incredible that even his twin sister should as-
sociate their ages together in her mind. He felt,
and he was confident that he looked, at least
twenty years younger than Edmonia.

“As far as my age goes, Edmonia,”’ he rejoined
stiffly, after giving her time to become subdued by
his manner, “you may set your mind entirely at
rest. I never felt better in my life, and my game of
golf is as good as it was at thirty-five.”

“Oh, I feel well enough, too,” Mrs. Bredalbane
retorted, “‘but, after all, we are neither of us chick-
ens, and there’s no use pretending that we are a
match for Annabel, or even for Bella, though poor
Bella has been too busy flattering other people to
spare any of her activity to keeping young. I be-
lieve in enjoying life as, Heaven knows, I’ve tried
to do, but there are some luxuries that are fit only

26


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 27


for young arteries, and nursing grief is one of
them.”

“There are subjects, Edmonia, which I allow no
one to discuss with me.”

“IT know that, Gamaliel, but when I see you

going downhill as you are doing, I can’t help want-
ing to hold you back.”

“You are giving yourself needless anxiety. As
a matter of fact, I consider that I am still in the
prime of life. You must remember that a man
remains young longer than a woman of the same
age.”

She had brought this rebuke upon herself, and he
could but feel that she had richly deserved it.

Mrs. Bredalbane, who was settling herself in
the softest chair in the room, laughed with the
genial insolence which, it seemed to him, Nature
had reserved for twin sisters.

“TI wonder what lascivious old male first in-
vented that theory?” she inquired, with amiable
coarseness. “But you can’t pretend, Gamaliel,
that you have preserved your youth as well as I
have mine? Why, I was just wondering what had
made your hair so white.”

The Judge stared mildly. “And I, Edmonia,
was wondering what had made yours so brown.
But I was not speaking of artificial aids, of which
I do not approve.”

“Oh, I’m not speaking of them, either, though I
do approve of them, or I shouldn’t spend so much


28 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


of my time trying to find out which is best. I
don’t imagine for a minute that they ever fool any-
body, and to tell the truth, the only person I try to
deceive is myself. If I keep my hair brown, it is
because I hate the sight of white hair in the looking-
glass.”

“Well, you must remember that you were al-
ways a—shall I say a remarkable woman, Ed-
monia?”

“No, not remarkable, Gamaliel, merely honest.
I dare say I’m the only truthful woman you ever
knew, which isn’t surprising, when you consider
how few there are in the world.”

“Well, I am glad you have been able to preserve
your good opinion of yourself,” he rejoined stiffly,
resisting an impulse to be more sarcastic. “I sup-
pose most of us, as we grow old, cling to some last
straw of illusion; but I should not have imagined
that veracity was the trait you held hardest by.
Now, Mrs. Upchurch impresses me as a rather
silly but sincere little woman.”

“Bella Upchurch!”’ Mrs. Bredalbane exclaimed;
and she continued with one of those ill-natured
stabs which, her brother reflected disapprovingly,
women are so fond of inflicting. ‘“‘Yes, she’s gone
to a good deal of trouble to impress men that way,
and I suppose it has been worth her while.”

“One of the last things a man ever understands
about women,” resumed the Judge, who was be-
ginning to feel exasperated, “is their inability to


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 29


perceive fine qualities in one of their own sex. You
will tell me next, perhaps, that the little girl is a
dissembler also.”

“Oh, no, Gamaliel, I sha’n’t tell you that. The
trouble with Annabel is that she hasn’t pride
enough to dissemble. Of course, that affair with
Angus Blount would have gone hard with anybody,
and I hope she got rid of some of the bad effects by
talking about them. She is an intense little thing,
and instead of keeping her suffering to herself, she
worked it off by telling everybody, even the woman
who comes to wash her hair whenever she can
afford to have her.”

“What became of the sceamp? Went to France,
didn’t he, and became involved in—in ‘

“In the French manner,” concluded Mrs.
Bredalbane, who was always ready and occasion-
ally accurate.

“Yes, in the French manner,” repeated the
Judge, grateful for any convenient euphemism.

“T hear she has taken it very hard.”

“On the contrary, her mother assured me the
other day that all romantic feeling is dead between
them.”

“Romantic feelings,” breathed Mrs. Bredalbane,
from the abyss of complete knowledge, “‘never die
until they are underground.”

A dull flush stained the Judge’s aristocratic fea-
tures and vanished into his silver beard. “Id
like to horsewhip the scoundrel! To think of any


30 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


man being such a blackguard as to trifle with the
feelings of an innocent little thing like that!”

Mrs. Bredalbane, whose encounter with the
fluent nature of emotion had made her charitable
to all infirmities of character that resembled her
own, sighed as a lover but assented as a philos-
opher. ‘I suppose you are right to be indignant,”
she answered, “‘but I’d scarcely call Annabel, or
any other girl of the rising generation, innocent.
No one would ever have called me innocent, ex-
cept by moonlight, and I’m sure Annabel knows
more to-day than I ever dreamed of when I was
young.”

On the Judge’s face the flush of chivalry paled
to the threatening frown of justice. ‘‘“You must
admit that you were an exception to every rule,
my dear sister.”

“Yes, [may have been,”’ conceded Edmonia, with
a satirical twinkle in her hazel eyes, which had
grown lighter, or so it seemed to the Judge, as she
grew older, “but I could never understand why
ignorance is supposed to suffer so much more than
knowledge. Annabel is a bright little thing, with
a refreshing charm, and in this age a wisp of a
girl is considered attractive. Everything that she
does has a kind of fascination. It’s a great gift,
but I dare say moralists would call it a danger-
ous one.” She sighed, without knowing why she
sighed, and gazed earnestly toward the door in the
hope that a julep—or, if the mint was not yet high


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 31


enough, a cocktail well fortified with brandy—
might appear before lunch. Surely, even if Gamaliel
lacked the proper consideration, Constable, whose
punch she had once christened pasticcio, would
not insult her digestion by the spectacle of iced
water?

But the Judge’s mind was far from drink at the
moment. “Id lke to help the little thing,” he said
gently. ‘Cordelia was fond of her.”

“Well, you’ve promised her a dress, and if you
feel like doing more, you might start her in busi-
ness.”” Mrs. Bredalbane was too amply provided
for in her own right to cherish any qualms about
the generous impulses of another person, even of
her closest relative; but the diminishing hope of
a julep, or—since the mint was not high enough,
she had decided after a glance through the window
—any adequate substitute, deepened the mascu-
line gravity of her voice. “I think that is what
Bella has been hinting for all along. If people
only knew how much time they waste in tactful
approaches! So far as I can make out, in Bella’s
maze of diplomacy, the child has a fancy for land-
scape gardening, or it may be funeral designs,
which would be more original. Anyhow, I know
it has something to do with flowers, and I had
intended to help her myself,” she added, for
Edmonia’s hand was as open as her heart, and
what more, asked the Judge silently, could be
said of her?


32 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


' While he pondered the question, Mrs. Bredal-
bane’s satirical eyes rested upon his silken gray
head, where she could just see the thinning place
on the top. Not unattractive, she thought, in
spite of his dryness, and probably as little tiresome
as a man of his age could be. But her opinions
were less emphatic than usual. Though she had
a generous disposition and a catholic mind, her
interest in elderly persons had never extended
beyond herself.

“The child must feel the need of an occupation,”
the Judge conjectured, as the result of his long
meditation. “That shows character, I admit,
and should be encouraged. About this party,
now, he proceeded with attention, “‘don’t you
think it might be well for us to drop in for at least
half an hour?”

“Oh, I never dreamed of not going,” his sister
replied, “but PI be sure to stay the whole evening.
I never leave until after the music, and then I
remain for ham and eggs if I’m invited, though
I dare say that admirable custom has not been
adopted in Queenborough.”

Judge Honeywell, who had imagined that such
sunrise parties were confined to college commence:
ments and dissolute New Yorkers on the first day of
the year, was uncertain whether it was expedient to
laugh or to frown.

“Would a man of my age, in—in the circum-
stances, be expected to take part in the dancing?”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 33,


“Of course, Gamaliel!’”? The twinkles were
spinning in Edmonia’s eyes. ‘“‘You must not fail
to dance once with Amanda Lightfoot. Consider-
ing she has waited thirty-seven years for you, a
dance at the end is as little as she could expect.”

Her brother’s face, which had looked refresh-
ingly cheerful, became overcast with solemnity.
It was astonishing—it was positively amazing to
him that Edmonia should have lived to her present
age without acquiring the good taste which, like
dyspepsia, was hereditary in the Honeywell
family.

“TI do not understand what you mean by ‘waited
thirty-seven years,’”’ he rejoined haughtily.

“Why, Gamaliel! Are you pretending that you
don’t know Amanda has stayed single all these
years on your account?”

Gamaliel who knew it very well, and wished that
he didn’t, looked depressed but obstinate, while it
seemed to him that he could feel the claws of his
will fasten into the solid substance of resistance.
If Edmonia, with the rest of Queenborough society
was trying to push him in the direction of Amanda,
he was becoming more determined every minute
(it was surprising how this determination had
hardened within the hour) that he would refuse to
be pushed.

“T can only reply that your assumption is un-
warranted,” he returned in judicial accents.

““My dear brother, she was over head and ears


34 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


in love with you, and she has been always. Do
you imagine for a moment that, with her money
and good looks, she couldn’t have married any-
body she had wanted in all these years? Why, she
has been mobbed with proposals. Mobbed—that
is the very word Doctor Buchanan used when he
was talking about her.”

However flattering to his vanity (and what
elderly man could fail to be flattered when he
heard himself described as a Lothario in his
youth?) the dominant emotion in the Judge’s
mind was one of dismay. It distressed his benevo-
lent heart, which wished well to everyone, and
particularly wished well to the women whose lives
he had inadvertently blighted. Yes, Amanda
Lightfoot was still his romantic ideal, he assured
himself again, as far, at least, as it was possible
for a gray-haired lady (this was how he had be-
gun to think of her) to be a romantic ideal. He
sighed while he dwelt sympathetically though pon-
derously upon her frustrated womanhood. It
was, he felt, pathetic, it was even tragic, that she
had never known the complete joy of belonging to
some good man. So deeply moved was he by this
reflection that he would have made a heavy sacri-
fice in order to unite her to any good man in the
world except himself. For his own part, as he
now confided to Edmonia, there was room for no
woman in his life after Cordelia.

“T shall remain faithful to Cordelia as long as I


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 35


live,” was the dramatic way in which he expressed
his resolve.

“Well, I’ve heard that before, Gamaliel,” Mrs.
Bredalbane commented, with her usual levity.
“But you can’t deny, all the same, that Amanda
has been faithful to you.”

“Our engagement was broken thirty-seven years
ago by her express wish.” He spoke with diffi-
culty, for he was opposed to stirring the dead em-
bers of sentiment.

“You know perfectly well that she never ex-
pected you to take her at her word. It was a
lovers’ quarrel, and she thought you would follow
her on the next boat.”? What a disastrous gift a
long memory was! That was why so many women
led disappointed lives, he supposed: they insisted
upon dwelling within the damp shadow—for surely
such sepulchres were damp—of buried happiness.

“IT did ” he began, but checked himself
before he had lost either dignity or sincerity. For
he had recalled suddenly that it was in pursuit
of Amanda that he had fallen—by accident, it
seemed to him afterward—into the willing arms of
Cordelia.
~ “You can’t blame her for not knowing that you
would meet Cordelia on the way,” resumed Mrs.
Bredalbane. “‘And you can’t blame her that,
after thirty-seven years of waiting, she is begin-
ning to show the strain, though I must say that
she has picked up wonderfully in the last two or


36 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


three months. But the trouble with women who
have never married is that you don’t realize how
little there is to it until you’ve tried it at least
once or twice. It is human nature to overestimate
the thing you’ve never had. Why, I remember,
during my first honeymoon, I was saying to my-
self every minute, ‘After all the fuss that kas been
made about marriage, isn’t there something more
in it than this?’”’

She had gone far, though her soft, deep voice,
which made the Judge feel as if he were swathed
in purple plush, muffled the cutting edge of her
words.

“‘T can only say that your remarks are both un-
called for and vulgar,” he replied with severity.
70] Brae

His sentence was never finished, and even Ed-
monia, who could jump at any conclusion within
her range of vision, had not the faintest idea what
it was that he intended to say. For, at the crucial
instant, Constable appeared, though without for-
tifying cocktails, in the doorway.


IV


HE next afternoon, as soon as she had re-
ceived the generous check and visited the
best shops with her daughter, Mrs. Upchurch
called upon Judge Honeywell and expressed her
gratitude with even more than her customary
effusion. Without Annabel, who was trying on a
dance frock of blue gauze at the moment, her
mother was more completely herself, if any woman
can be completely herself who has been obliged
to rely, through an unhappy marriage and a dis-
appointing widowhood, upon the adroitness with
which she has managed the men who controlled
her affairs. Being a cheerful and pretty widow,
with a cooing tongue, she had had little difficulty
after the loss of her husband; though, in common
with other mortal states, the period of widowhood
had fallen short of her sanguine expectations.
Plump, flattering, pink-cheeked, she sat now
before Judge Honeywell, with her small black
velvet hat resting like a benediction on her fluffy
gray fringe, and her satin dress lifted, with a
coquettish though antiquated modesty, from her
prettily turned ankles. Through her veil of
37


38 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


spotted illusion, her merry gray eyes gazed up at
him with an agreeable deference.

**But for you, the Lord only knows what would
have become of us,’ she began in melting tones.
**T must have said that to Annabel no less than a
hundred times. If it wasn’t for Judge Honeywell,
the Lord only knows what would have become
of us! Oh, if you could only realize how my
little girl admires you! You'll never hear it from
her, she is such a shy little thing; but there isn’t
any other man in the world that she respects and
admires as she does you. When she was scarcely
more than a baby and Cousin Cordelia was so kind
to her, she used to say to me, ‘Mother, I hope Ill
marry a man like Judge Honeywell.’”’

With all his legal learning and his heroic vir-
tues, which were numerous, Judge Honeywell was
afflicted with the common infirmity of a sensi-
tive ear, and the oil of adulation was as soothing
to him as it is to most men in his established
position. “‘A great lawyer but a perfect fool,”
was the way Mrs. Bredalbane would have de-
scribed him with the smallest encouragement.

Annabel was a pretty little thing, and it pleased
him beyond measure to hear that such a pretty
little thing admired him. She was, also, a badly
treated little thing; and since he was the pattern
of chivalry, it incensed him that any man in the
world should have been capable of such conduct to
a woman who combined the merits of being both


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 39


little and pretty. He felt as if she were his
daughter, and yet in some profound sense, which
he prudently refrained from analysing, as if she
were not his daughter.

““Cordelia was very fond of her,” he said good-
humouredly, for Mrs. Upchurch always made him
feel on better terms with the universe. ‘‘For her
sake, if for no other reason, I should like to help the
child to some fresh interest. What about this
flower-shop Edmonia was speaking of?”

Mrs. Upchurch smiled beamingly. “‘Not ex-
actly a flower-shop. She has studied landscape
gardening, you know, and she would like to open
a small place where she could work out her designs
and take orders for gardens. I encourage it,” she
continued discreetly, “because the poor child has
had such a trying experience. If she were not a
brave little thing, it would have gone very hard
with her.”

“T hope she is not wasting any sentiment upon
that scamp,” said the Judge, and the flush of
indignation in his face was very becoming. A
remarkably youthful man for his age, thought
Mrs. Upchurch, and one that almost any woman
who knew the world might find attractive, if
he were sufficiently generous. With a fortune
like that (for he was probably the richest man in
Queenborough) you could so easily make allow-
ances. “I could grow really attached to him in
time,” she reflected, though, with her usual sa-


AO THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


gacity, she did not nurse extravagant hopes for
herself. Younger than the Judge in years, she
was not less than a century older in worldly wis-
dom; and she knew that to a wealthy man, pro-
vided he is not committed to a parsimonious habit
of mind, nothing is unattainable in the matter of
age. ;
But the idea of marriage, which has brooded
through the centuries over the narrow field of
woman’s prospect, had not risen above the horizon
of Judge Honeywell’s consciousness. If Mrs.
Upchurch ever entered his thoughts, which she
did but seldom, it was, in company with Amanda
Lightfoot, as an agreeable gray-haired lady, whose
character was above reproach, but whose love life
was well over. And this classification was so in-
tuitive in its processes, was so entirely a product
of the chivalrous interpretation of biology, that no
one would have been more astonished than Judge
Honeywell had it been brought to his judicial at-
tention.

**Oh, no, I’m sure she never thinks of him,’’ Mrs.
Upchurch replied eagerly, almost too eagerly, she
told herself the instant afterward. “But an
experience like that ages a girl and makes her too
mature for the frivolous pleasures of her own
circle.”

Her dove’s eyes were shining with tenderness;
and if the Judge had been endowed with that il-
luminating vision which is confined to the reversed


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS Al


views of life, he would have recognized all the hap-
piness that might have been his in later years
gazing up at him through the veil of spotted illu-
sion. But, with the sad propensity of human
appetite to the unwholesome, the prohibited, and
the immoral, he looked, without even knowing
that he looked, straight over the possible joys
toward some imaginary adventure.

“Well, we must help her to get over it,” he said
at last, while the glow faded slowly from the
clouds at which he was gazing. “She is a brave
child, and she deserves all we can do for her.”

“She says herself that all romantic feeling is
dead in her,” Mrs. Upchurch resumed, after a
moment of hard thinking. “She isn’t in the least
like other girls of her age. I mean, you know,
that the kind of things they enjoy seem silly to
her. You wouldn’t suspect this if you were talk-
ing to her because, as I’ve said, she is so shy, but
she has determined that she will make something
of her life now that romance is all over. That is
why she has taken up landscape gardening. I
think it is splendid of her, don’t you?”

*“Admirable, admirable. We must see what we
can do. Tell her, if she needs help, to come to
me.”

“Indeed, I shall. She will be delighted to have
your advice. There isn’t anybody else, I know,
that she would turn to so quickly in time of


99


trouble. I sometimes tell her’’—a little laugh, as


42 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


soft as a pigeon’s note, rippled from her lips—“‘that
Judge Honeywell is the only man she believes in.”

That odd palpitation had started again in Judge
Honeywell’s breast. Just as in the cemetery, be-
fore the marble angel, he felt that downy wings.
were fluttering within his heart, imprisoned and
trying to break free. ‘‘She’s a dear little thing,”
he said warmly. “‘At her age, you must remem-
ber, hurts are not mortal.”

“Oh, I tell her that so often.” With an air of
victory, Mrs. Upchurch had risen to her feet and
was holding out her small, soft hand. ‘Then
Wwe may expect you at the birthday party? I
want you to see Annabel in the dress you gave
her.”

The Judge laughed with the embarrassment of a
boy. “Oh, [ll be there. Tell her Ill be there,
even if I have to take dancing lessons.”

Mrs. Upchurch caught airily at the suggestion.
“Well, why not? So many men who are no longer
boys are doing it now. They say it is the best
exercise in the world.”

She left triumphantly, and sinking back into
his easiest chair, Judge Honeywell stared thought-
fully over the window-boxes, where black and
purple pansies were blooming. Outside, in the
flushed evening light, sparrows were flying; the
magical scent of lilacs drifted in from the walled
garden; and the vague sounds from the street,
where dusk dropped like a blue shawl, were caught


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 43


up into some mysterious, impalpable zone of the
spirit.

While he rested there against the soft old leather
cushions, impressions rather than thoughts swam
into his mind, and these impressions were as faint
and tremulous as the shadows of leaves on running
water.

The last year had been hard on him. He felt
the loss of Cordelia. His health was not so good
as he had a right to expect. Perhaps he had, as
Edmonia told him, been brooding too much.
There was something in what she said about not
having time to live in the past when you were
beginning to get on in years. Though he felt likea
man of thirty-five, and his golf was as good as
ever, he must remember that he was not so young
as he used to be. New interests. Regular exer-
cise. What was it Mrs. Upchurch, a sensible
woman, had suggested? Dancing? Ah, yes, it
might not be a bad idea to take a few lessons in
dancing. The fox-trot? Was that what they called
itnow? Well, of course, for the exercise. A great
many men of his age were doing it. There was
Colonel Brockenborough, and Frederick Cavendish
—why, Cavendish must be nearer seventy-five
than seventy, and yet he went to every cotillion
last winter. . . . Hearing the clink of ice in
glasses, he said, from habit: ‘Just a thimbleful
of old Bumgardner, Constable.”

In the last few weeks he had heen vaguely


44 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


troubled in mind. It might be a good plan to have
a doctor go over-him. Buchanan would probably
tell him there was nothing the matter. Yet there
were things that you could not confess even to a
physician. Things too trivial to mention; in-
definite symptoms; suspicions rather than certain-
ties. He had been disturbed by the ignoble
character of his vagrant thoughts, and now his
dreams, over which, of course, he had no control,
were distressing him. The slightest contradiction
sharpened the edge of his temper. He had been
always a man of an equable habit of mind; not
easily put out; on good terms with his world:
difficult to make into an enemy; ready to hold out
a helping hand when one was required. But in the
last year, since the shock of Cordelia’s death, he
had felt that his disposition was changing; that
he was, in fine, becoming irascible. Nerves, he
supposed, were at the bottom of it. Everything
was reduced to a question of nerves in this gener-
ation. Yet his father, a robust and bellicose old
gentleman, in spite of hereditary dyspepsia, had
begotten seven sons and five daughters, and lived
to be upward of ninety, without discovering that
he had a nerve in his body. Healthy children, too,
not like the delicate girl and temperamental youth
who had sprung so perilously from his union with
Cordelia, and were now struggling with dubious
marriages in distant parts of the world. Yes,
times had changed, there was no doubt of it.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS A5


Dancing, perhaps, would be the best way to glide
over the slippery transitional period.

It was absurd, for example, the way ahi inci-
dent of two or three weeks ago haunted his
mind. Most men would never have thought
of it twice. But he was of different clay. Useless
to deny that he had been troubled, trivial as the
occurrence had been. He wouldn’t have believed
that he was capable of such animpulse. If you had
told him before it happened, he would not have
believed it. And, after all, what did it amount
to? Nothing. Absolutely nothing. He had gone
unexpectedly into his room one morning, where
Alberta, a bright mulatto girl, who had taken old
Martha’s place while she was indisposed, was
engaged in making his bed. She was a fine, strong
girl, just budding into womanhood, with skin like
yellow satin; and her large bronze arms, as round
as columns, were beating one of the big feather
pillows. At first he had simply glanced at her;
then suddenly, swift as a blow, he had been seized
by an imperative desire to touch her arms. Merely
to touch her arms and discover if they were as
hard as they looked.

“Alberta!” he had said sharply; and his voice
had surprised him by springing from his lips like
that, unprompted, undisciplined by the ruling
principle of his will.

She had turned quickly and stared at him; and
with her look, the look of a servant who is await-


46 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


ing an order, reason was enthroned again in his
mind. =

“Alberta, have you seen my glasses?”’ he had
asked, and had turned and gone out before she
could search for them, before she could even reply
to his question.

A trifle; nothing to disturb his equilibrium, only
he had never been, even in his full vigour, that kind
of man. Thenext day he had given orders that his
room should not be attended to until he had left
the house. ‘“‘It interferes with me,” he had said
irritably to the housekeeper, who had followed
Cordelia. “‘It interferes with my comfort.” Well,
he couldn’t help it if he were getting irascible.
Perhaps, after all, it would be prudent to see Bu-
chanan. There might be some obscure physical
cause. There was, he had read somewhere, a physi-
cal cause for every nervous disorder.

Turning on the lamp, he picked up a jee
brief from the desk, and bent his mind on the
case. Application had been his peculiar gift as a
student, and after years of renown in his pro-
fession, mental concentration had become an
inflexible habit. He read the brief carefully, and
not until he had mastered the finer points of the
argument, did he permit himself to withdraw his
attention and glance at the clock. Well, he would
have time for a nap, after his thimbleful of old
Bumgardner, before he went upstairs to change.

With a sigh of satisfaction, he drank the whiskey


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS AT


and stretched himself on the broad sofa, which was
upholstered, like his chairs, in soft ruby leather.
There was ample time for a rest, he reflected,
while he drew over his knees the dark red robe
Cordelia had knitted for his nap in the library.
Yes, he was tired; he was depressed by the spring
weather. After a little doze, he would wake up
refreshed and ready for his game of chess at the
club. He closed his eyes, and no sooner had he
closed them than an iridescent mist floated into
his mind. He was lost beneath greenish skies,
amid low-spreading boughs and tall wind-blown
grasses, while over the April meadows there drifted
toward him, as in a dream that is more vivid than
dreams, the glimmering ivory shapes of nymphs,
who danced on rose-white feet to the music of run-
ning water. In spirals and wreaths and garlands,
faintly coloured like the earliest spring petals,
they spun round him, whirling, drifting, flying, in
the wind that raced among the low boughs and
the high, blown grasses. Between them and him-
self there was only the green and gold brocade of
the spring landscape. Clusters of women, scarcely
women even, they were so young and slender. Clus-
ters of girls, curving, swaying, bending, advancing,
retreating, and always smiling as they retreated,
into the iridescent mist of April. ;

Starting up, he flung the robe aside and sprang
to his feet. For an instant, his dismay was so
intense that it brushed the edge of a deeper


48 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


emotion. Terror? Anger? No, it could not be
terror. It could scarcely be anger. Had he been
asleep or awake? After all, perhaps it was only
a dream that had startled him, and he was not
responsible for his dreams. He had had them
before. Not like this one, not so vivid, not so
persistent; but dreams had disturbed him long
ago, when he was just growing to manhood. It
was incredible that these early visions should re-
turn now as he was settling down into the tran-
quil brightness of his later years. Visions of the
glimmering ivory beauty of girls that was changing
into the smooth marble beauty of women. Strange,
too, strange and incredible, that his emotional
nature increased while his vitality diminished.
And it was not as if he had been an intemperate
man, or an immoral one. All his life, he had
obeyed every mental and physical law. He had
done no harm. He had never betrayed a woman.
He had, indeed, respected women even when they
had ceased to deserve it. oe

*“Edmonia was right,” he thought, “I have
brooded too much since Cordelia left me.’ Ah,
how he had loved Cordelia! How he had de-
pended upon her! And it occurred to him that
he had never, except in the very beginning, told
Cordelia he loved her. He had lived with her for
thirty-six years, and they had grown to know each
other so completely that they had stopped talking.
What was the use of words when your wife knew


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 49


everything you thought before you had spoken it?
But he had loved her, even though he had stopped
telling her so. Somehow it wasn’t easy to utter
things like that in marriage. It would have been
easier for him to have said, “I love you!” suddenly
like that, to a perfect stranger than to have said
it to Cordelia, whom he had lived with day and
night for thirty-six years.

Yes, he had brooded too much over the past.
He needed a fresh interest in life; he needed some
healthful exercise like dancing; he needed (this was
clear to him) to see more of people. What had
become, he wondered, of the circle of sweet girls
who used to visit Cordelia? Even if they had
scattered, he might make an effort to bring them
together again. For he felt remarkably young
for his years, and after all—he had all tradition
behind him in this opinion—a man is only as old
as his instincts.


Vv


DJUSTING his white tie before the mirror,

Judge Honeywell regretted that society in
‘Queenborough remained still in the infantile stage.
Social rites, though numerous and brilliant, were
restricted, by the value of tradition and the unani-
mous verdict of parents—the only members of the
community who could afford lavish entertainments
—to a dance of adulation before the consecrated
idol of the Young Girl. While he dressed, the
years burdened his heart; but encouraged by a
second thimbleful of old Bumgardner, he medi-
tated upon his distinctions and felt that his self-
esteem was restored.

Even before he entered the Lightfoots’ house,
while he was passing under the striped awning on
the pavement, the dance music, gay and defiant,
floated out and captured his spirit. In the long
drawing-room, with the palm-wreathed walls and
shining floors, he was submerged in waves of
brightness, colour, and sound. The lights, the
music, the spinning airy skirts, like so many holly-
hocks, the rose and ivory of the young girls,
fragrant, blossomlike, ardent, enchanting—all
these wonders transported him as if they streamed

50


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 51


from an inexhaustible fountain of youth. Dis- —
tinguished, impressive, still handsome for his time
of life, with a silken gloss on his hair and beard
and the glow of a boy in his dark eyes, he made his
way through the variegated throng to the place
where his old love was receiving her guests.

A voice croaked in his ear: “There isn’t a girl
here who can hold a candle to Amanda Lightfoot
in an evening gown. Where are the reigning
beauties in this generation?”

It was Edmonia. Of course, it could be nobody
but Edmonia who said that.

“Quite so, quite so,” he assented formally to
a face that reminded him of a cheerful raven.
From her brown locks, which were piled high over
a diamond bandeau, to her aching feet (they must
be aching feet, he decided) in the most eccentric
of French slippers, she was grotesque, if any one
so overflowing with the pleasure of life could be
really grotesque. After all, perhaps that was the
true art of living, to take what you pleased, when
you pleased, as you pleased, and to hold yourself
superior to both comment and criticism.

“That white and silver dress suits her perfectly,”
continued his sister, who, with the recollection of
four husbands, even though three of them had
proved inadequate, could afford to be generous.
“T never saw her more brilliant.” __

For the first time since he had entered the room,
Judge Honeywell looked at Amanda with his un-


52 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


divided attention. Though he had been slowly
moving in her direction, the better part of his
interest had been fastened on the rich profusion
of girls among whom he was threading his way.
Yes, Edmonia was right. One of the most
exasperating things about her, considering how
wrong she was in principle, was her incurable
habit of being right in fact. Amanda, tall, regal,
willowy, in her white and silver brocade, with her
crown of foamlike hair, her bright blue eyes, her
high colour, and her royal manner, was as beauti-
ful, he found himself thinking pensively, as the
evening star. She looked, as Edmonia had ob-
served, brilliant to-night; and even the Judge,
whose mind refused to be hurried into opinions,
could not fail to perceive that some inner flame of
happiness illumined her features.

““Yes, she wears her years wonderfully,” he re-
marked in a tone which he tried in vain to make
ardent.

“It is the first time you have been anywhere, and
she feels your coming,” Edmonia whispered.

Frowning slightly, the Judge was silent because
he could think of nothing to say. Any woman
who talked as incessantly of things that were un-
mentionable among delicate-minded persons, would
be, he concluded, as unanswerable as Edmonia.

“I am glad to pay her the compliment,” he
brought out at last, after a long pause, for this,
in view of the circumstances past and present,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 53


was the least, it seemed to him, that he could
do.

“‘T am sure, if you were to search the world over,
Gamaliel, you couldn’t find another woman who
understands you so well.”

This, also, was true, though the crudeness of
Edmonia’s methods shocked his refined sensi-
bilities. It was natural, no doubt, that she
should rely upon her powers of matchmaking,
since they had been so successful in her own un-
enviable career; but he surmised, with a shud-
der, that the men she had pursued must have
been already hardened to marriage. As for
Amanda, he was perfectly willing to confess again,
as he had done so often before, that whatever his
ideal may have been thirty-seven years ago, she
had embodied it. She had been a_ beautiful
woman; she was still beautiful for her age; but
(though he was not yet prepared to acknowledge
this even to himself) beautiful women who were
no longer young had ceased to interest him.
Though he respected Amanda as deeply as he re-
spected the memory of his mother or the Ten
Commandments, he could not dismiss the thought
that neither the memory of his mother nor the Ten
Commandments insisted upon being romanced
about as well as respected. And, ready and will-
ing as he was to revere his old love abundantly, he
vaguely resented the expectation that he should
be romantic about a belle and beauty of another


54 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


period. He vaguely resented,too, without knowing
that he resented it, the burden of her long con-
stancy, of her long and hopeless waiting.

So he threaded his way carefully in and out of
the dancers, trying to escape Edmonia, who would
not be eluded, and followed, like a tawdry destiny,
upon his heels.

“You will lead the first march with Amanda,
won’t you?” she asked now in his ears.

He turned courteously but stiffly. “If she will
honour me.” Revolt, if it must come to revolt at
last, was gathering within his peaceable soul.

For, notwithstanding his profound respect for
Amanda, an object of respect, he was beginning to
perceive, was far from being the partner with
whom you would prefer to dance. Quite shame-
lessly, he longed to dance with those images of
fire and snow, without corsets and without conver-
sation, who melted to wisps of tulle over soft little
bones and wisps of gold or brown hair over soft
little minds. Not deliberately, for he was a man
of conscience and of rectitude, would he have
harboured such impulses; but, secret, strong, and
brooding, this wish, which was more an instinct
than a desire, welled up from the deep below the
deep in his consciousness. And while it welled
up, it seemed to him that the delicious aroma of
youth was penetrating his spirit.

As he approached Amanda, he felt her happiness
reaching out to him. Soft as the glimmer of the


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 55


evening star in the dusk, her silvery light en-
-veloped him in its beams. But for Edmonia, he
might have been less constrained, he might have
been more fervent in his greeting; but it was use-
less to deny that Edmonia had poisoned his mind.
That was Edmonia’s way, he recalled; she spent
her life poisoning people’s minds; and though she
maintained it was from the best motives, the work-
ing of the poison was as fatal to peace as if she had
been inspired by malevolence. It was Edmonia
who had instilled fear into his thoughts; fear of his
old love; fear of her constancy, of her tenderness,
of her statuesque beauty; fear lest in some way he
should be held responsible for the unchanging
ideal she embodied; fear, above all, lest he should
be expected to be faithful to that ideal.

She looked at him with a luminous but im-
penetrable gaze, and he bowed over her hand,
which was still the most beautiful hand, though
of this he was unaware, that he had ever held in his
own. From Amanda herself, grave, stately, self-
possessed, confirmed in queenliness, wrapped in her
Victorian reserve as in a veil of mystery, he knew
that he should have nothing to fear. The women
of her generation had known how to suffer in
silence. What an inestimable blessing was this
knowledge, especially when it had passed into
tradition! What suavity, what harmony, it inter-
fused into human relations! What protection,
what safety, it afforded the chivalrous impulses!


56 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“T am so glad you could come,” she said softly,
and not a tremor in her voice, not a quiver of her
eyelashes, betrayed-her. Only that: I am so glad
you could come.

Standing there before her impenetrable eyes,
knowing that he was safe with her, that the ideal
he had evolved would protect him, he remembered
against his will how passionately he had loved her.
Nothing had been like that. Not his love for
Cordelia; not his marriage; nothing. Precious it
had been, infinitely precious, and terrible as an
army with banners. And now it was over. It
was over, and never could it return. No matter
what happened to him in the future, never could
he feel again the burning rapture of his old passion.

She had still what they used to call a perfect
figure. Perfect! That was the reason, perhaps,
that she had remained subdued to the queenly
Victorian curves, though she was so slender that
she might have worn one of those straight modern
frocks like Annabel’s without looking ridiculous.
Her mysterious eyes, softened by happiness, and
silver-blue to-night as the evening sky, shone on
him serenely. Beside her majestic height the thin
slips of girls revolving about her appeared as trivial
as painted dolls. The women of her age were
taller, he found himself thinking, and more mys-
terious. Yes, the traditional feminine virtues—
patience, gentleness, moderation, reserve, espe-
cially reserve—were excellent things in woman.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 57


Though he saw that they were excellent things, he
saw also, with the waywardness which rules our
destiny, that they were not the things that he
wanted. He no longer desired the statuesque
virtues of the eighteen eighties; he no longer de-
sired even to be understood as the eighteen
eighties had understood him. He desired (how
clearly he saw this now!) the very things that
were not good for him: the excitement of novelty,
the ringing challenge of youth.

“It is delightful to be with you,” he answered,
smiling into her eyes, which were so mysterious
and yet so safe.

“It is a pleasure to watch young people,” she
said presently, for, besides being charming and
kind, her ideas were so correct that it was some-
times difficult for her to make conversation. 'Talk-
ing must be easier and topics more plentiful, she
imagined, when one is slightly unsound either in
one’s mind or in one’s opinions. There were oc-
casions, indeed, like the present, when she was so
uncertain what the safest and soundest opinion
would be that she discreetly said nothing more
original than, “‘ Young girls are so lovely.”

“Quite so.” Taking her at her word, and turn-
ing his gaze away from her, he watched the dancers.

“Tt seems to me that they grow prettier every
year.” Her voice, as smooth and soft and as ex-
pressionless as liquid honey, flowed over him.

“There isn’t one among them,” he could make


58 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


this declaration with sincerity, “‘as Edmonia has
just pointed out to me, who could hold a candle
to what you were at that age. There were queens
in those days.”

If he had looked at her and not at the dancers,
he would have seen that silvery radiance suffuse
her features. For an instant, she was silent, breath-
ing tremulously with happiness, though she would
be fifty-nine in a few months, and must, in the
Judge’s opinion, have put the thought of love out-
side of her life. ‘Then she murmured in the musical
tone of her girlhood: “‘I am so glad you remember
me like that.”’ It was the nearest that she could
come to losing her self-possession after the stern
discipline which she had endured in the last thirty~
six years. For ideals are difficult models to imi-
tate, particularly when they are the ideals of and
for the opposite sex.

“Tt is the only way I could ever remember you,”
he rejoined gallantly, with his eyes on the wisps of
delight that were drifting before him. Not since
he was a boy, not for thirty years or more, had
he responded so ardently to the allurement of
women, of young girls just blooming into woman-
hood. Strange that all those placid years with
Cordelia should have kept such possibilities of
renewal, of resurrection, he might almost call it,
within his heart! The spirit of youth rushed
through him like a tinted flood, like a river at
sunrise. “I feel as young as I ever felt,’ he


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 59


thought triumphantly, while the music throbbed in
his pulses, and he sipped from the sparkling glass
someone had handed him.

And it seemed to him unfair, it seemed to him a
vicious sport of the years, that, while he still felt
like a boy, or at least like a very young man, he
should be assigned by the people about him to an
elderly woman, to a spinster, too (though hand-
some and well preserved), with gray hair which
she made no attempt to conceal.

““You must be sure to dance with Annabel,” a
voice cooed at his side. “‘She will be disappointed
if you neglect her.”

On his right, in a group of ladies, who wore the
black satin and jet of rapidly diminishing be-
reavement, Mrs. Upchurch fluttered like a pigeon
before it settles for crumbs. Struggling to break
away from her grasp and reach the younger gen-
eration, he recognized the pompous figure and
empurpled features of old Colonel Bletheram, an
octogenarian Don Juan, who, having arrived too
soon at the restful age, was still pursuing, with
brittle bones but unimpaired ardour, the bright
eyes of danger.

‘Ah, there she is! I was just looking for her,”
replied the Judge, as Annabel was blown by as
lightly as a spring cloud in ahigh wind. She was,
as usual, wearing the shortest and thinnest of frocks,
something that reminded him of the colour of love-
in-a-mist. In an instant she had flashed by. Her


60 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


vivid face, so small, so sparkling, so pathetic, and yet
so defiant in its pathos, drooped toward him before
it was lost among the other faces in the dance,
which all seemed, in some strange fashion, to
resemble her. Even that glimpse of her quickened
his pulses. Yes, she was a good little thing, a brave
little thing. He was glad that she would be dis-
appointed if he neglected her, and not for the world,
he told himself, would he disappoint her deliber-
ately. Though his reason reminded him, with the
prudence which makes reason so much less popular
than impulse, that Mrs. Upchurch, who earned her
living precariously, trusted to fancy rather than to
facts for inspiration, he dismissed the warning as
a sting implanted by one of the poisoned darts of
Edmonia. He had no idea of doing anything so
absurd as falling in love with a girl of Annabel’s
age. What he felt, while her face drifted away
from him, was the yearning to be kind and warm
and benevolent, to give happiness to all the soft
little things whose lives had been ruined, or at least
saddened, by unprincipled scamps. And this yearn-
ing to be kind, to give happiness, to fondle gently,
included not only all the soft little things in the
room, but the whole world as well, with the possible
exception of handsome spinsters who had kept—
by Heaven knows what sacrifices!—their late-
Victorian figures. To confer happiness! Surely
this was the highest privilege that money could
bring! The power to give happiness to others, to


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 61


restore wounded spirits, especially young and in-
nocent spirits—what could be nobler than this?
And interfused with his yearning, as starlight in-
terfuses a mist, there was the agreeable recollection
that some women—very young women in particu-
lar, who have been disillusioned by a tragic expe-
rience—preferred older men who have learned to
be kind without being exacting. He had heard (it
was Mrs. Upchurch who had told him this) that
many women approved of gray hair and considered
eyeglasses—rimless ones, of course—distinguished
on a man of fine presence.

But, while he stood there, drawing his tall
figure very erect, dignified, inscrutable, and im-
pressive, looking, as indeed he was, a man of pru-
dent habits and indestructible integrity, no one
would have suspected that such flighty and roving
fancies had been liberated by the punch and the
jazz rhythms, and were flitting through his narrow
head beneath the deceptive gloss on his hair.
Nor, for that matter, would even the most curious
have surmised that Amanda Lightfoot (standing
close at his side, though separated from him by
two dangerous ages) was thinking swiftly, like the
flash of lightning in a clear sky: “Oh, how happy
Iam! Iam so happy to-night that I feel as if I
were a girl again!” For she was holding lilies of
the valley, that symbolic flower of the Victorian
influence, which he had sent to her. . .


VI


HE noise stopped after the abrupt habit of

jazz, and Annabel stood beside him, flushed,
glowing, and so pretty, he decided, with his infirm
but still nimble masculine logic, that she was
obliged to be good. Her pale brown hair, loosened
by the dance, curled enchantingly over her ears;
her April eyes were starry and mocking; the
colour that came and went in her cheeks re-
minded him of the flush of sunrise on ivory—or
was it, he asked himself with an inward tremor,
on apple blossoms?

There are a few women so vital that their very
presence awakens everything around them to an
intenser life; and this was the miracle that Annabel,
breaking off in her wild dance and looking up into
Judge Honeywell’s face, worked upon the petri-
fied forms in his mind. While he gazed down on
her, he felt that his inarticulate longing to protect,
to be generous, to give presents, to fondle gently,
was swelling from a river to an ocean within his
breast. She was holding the gardenias he had
sent her (just as Amanda, only more firmly, was
holding her lilies of the valley) and he recognized
the extremity of his emotion, when the thought

62


_


de a


ee Lee


le tg ae


a eal a


oe


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 63


shot through his frugal mind, “I wish I had sent
twice as many!”

“Annabel, Judge Honeywell wishes to speak to
you,” Mrs. Upchurch began, with maternal inepti-
tude. “I’ve been telling him that he must not
neglect you.”

With a laugh, Annabel held out the bunch of
gardenias, while an expression of gay derision
flickered beneath the black edge of her eyelashes.
“T hope you don’t believe all that Mother tells you,
Judge Honeywell.”’ She laughed again and con-
tinued mockingly: “I wonder why all good women
are so deceitful?”

Though the Judge was shocked, so far had he
fallen from judicial rectitude that the shock, in-
stead of being painful, was pleasantly stimulating
to his new-born vitality. The sensation, he felt,
was instinct with audacity, and audacity is of all
qualities the most youthful.

“Well, it was the way of her generation, I sup-
pose,” he tossed back daringly, almost recklessly.

Annabel frowned, and even her frown was
charming, as if her dark winged eyebrows fluttered
down over her unfathomable gaze.

**Oh, you were all like that, I know,” she replied,
embracing him flatteringly in her mother’s genera-
tion. ‘‘You were all so busy trying to pretend
things were what you wanted them to be that
you hadn’t any time to spare for looking facts in
the face. If you were a woman and a man


64 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


broke your heart,” she added scornfully, “‘you pre-
tended that you enjoyed it.”

Mrs. Upchurch looked distressed and annoyed,
which had become almost her usual expression
since Annabel’s unhappy affair, and Amanda
looked distressed and pleasant in the way she had
practised when she was having affairs of her own.
There had been so many occasions in Amanda’s
past when the social moment, the very surface
of manners, had depended upon the facility with
which she could look both pained and pleasant
at the same instant, that she had learned to achieve
this unnatural union with the utmost dexterity.
It was a matter of regret to both of these good
women that Annabel should be so deficient in
decent reserve; but then, as Mrs. Upchurch had
taken pains to point out, decent reserve was not
missed to-day as much as it would have been
in former years.

“It was so kind of you to select our favourite
flowers,” Amanda said crisply, and her eyes added
fluently, ““You have never forgotten that the
lily of the valley is mine!” For when she was a
belle and a beauty, all the deepest sentiments were
uttered, not with the lips, but with the eyes; and
this language, for one whose eyes are more eloquent
than her lips, has its advantages.

“Oh, I forgot to thank you. It was perfectly
dear of you!” Annabel exclaimed, while he saw,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 65


for the first time, that her face wore a restless and
tormented expression, as if she were driven by
some inner pang and could not be still. In her
eyes, too, there was this look of fear and disaster.

“Is it possible,” the Judge inquired of the in-
visible Powers, “‘that she is still grieving for that
cad who deserted her?”? Edmonia had called her
an intense little thing, but it was inconceivable
to him that any little thing should carry intensity
to an extreme so regrettable.

**What she needs is to have her mind taken off
that fellow,’ he continued earnestly to himself.
“Tf landscape gardening, or even funeral designs,
will help to do this, we must see if we cannot pro-
vide the opportunity.”

“They are going to play an old-fashioned waltz,”
Annabel said, in her enchanting voice, with its
mingled gaiety and sadness. “‘Why don’t you
dance with Cousin Amanda just as you used ae
Everyone would think it so romantic.”

The Judge frowned, and Mrs. Upchurch, ae
responded automatically to changes in other
people’s faces, protested brightly: “You mustn’t
be deceived by Annabel’s manner. She tries to
pretend that she is pert and flippant, but the
truth is that her heart is too big for her body.
Why, what did she do this morning when Mary
Preston lent her her car but take out an old lady
from the Confederate Home. You’d never im-


66 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


agine to hear her that she spends half her life doing
good.”

“Oh, these mothers, these mothers!” the Judge
exclaimed mutely, while Annabel broke out, “Why
does Mother always make me ridiculous?” A
thunderstorm had gathered over her sea-green
eyes (strange, mused the Judge, how the colour of
her eyes altered when she was angry!), and she
added in a flash of temper: “‘Why are parents so
impossible?”

“Well, you really have a kind heart, Annabel,”
Amanda said, with gentle rebuke, “I don’t see why
you should be more ashamed of your good qualities
than of your bad ones.”

“It isn’t that my heart is kind,” Annabel re-
joined indignantly, “but nothing cheers me so
much as to see people who are worse off than I am.
Mother knows that, because, whenever I am dread-
fully depressed, I always beg her to tell me about
some perfect wrecks of women that she has seen
recently. As for the poor—well, she ought to
understand by this time that I can’t abide them.
Now, I am waiting for Judge Honeywell and Cousin
Amanda to waltz.”

The Judge turned deferentially to Amanda.
*“May I have the honour?”’ he asked in the grand
manner of the eighteen eighties.

Amanda’s large blue eyes, which had been
always deep but empty behind her impenetrable
reserve, rested upon him with a kind, though not


ee ae


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 67


too kind, expression. “Not until all the people
have come,”’ she answered, for she was a hostess
even before she wasa woman. “Why don’t you
dance this with Annabel?”

He looked at Annabel, hesitating but solicitous,
and she smiled back at him carelessly, for her
impertinence increased with her mother’s polite-
ness.

“Oh, I don’t mind,” she replied, and the melting
charm of her voice softened the rudeness of her
reply, as she yielded herself to his arms.

The deep but frustrated instinct of fatherhood,
that immemorial need to protect and defend some-
thing, which had never found its natural outlet in
his own children, enfolded yearningly the girl’s
fragile body; for it seemed to him that her spirit
must be as helpless and clinging as the web of ten-
der flesh and bones that enveloped it. And this
instinct of fatherhood, which, bursting suddenly
from a seed of sympathy, had shot up like the fairy
beanstalk in his mind—this prodigious instinct ab-
sorbed all that was tender,as well as all that was
- sublime, in his nature.

They waltzed correctly though stiffly to the
other end of the room, where Annabel stopped and
looked at him over an immense blue feather fan,
which was attached, he saw, to her arm.

“Too bad that Cousin Amanda couldn’t dance
with you,” she said.

He smiled down on her, as he might have smile4


68 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


down on his daughter if she had not inherited
the moral fibre of her mother. ‘“‘I hope she will
later,” he answered, “but this is our waltz,
Annabel.”

For an instant the feather fan waved between
them. Then she furled it slowly and spoke with
an impetuous rush of words. ‘You mustn’t let
them fool you about me, Judge Honeywell.”

“T think I know you, Annabel, as well as they

do,” he answered, and he really thought that he
did.
_ “T haven’t many virtues,” said the girl slowly,
“but I hate shams. That is why it makes me
want to scream when Mother goes on as she does.
I am not a bit the kind of girl she pretends I am,
though, poor thing, she has pretended so long that
I suppose she believes it. But I despise the poor
and I cannot endure the sight of the sick. All
I really care for is beauty—well, and perhaps joy,
if you could ever find it.”

“There is nothing wrong in that. You were
made for joy.”

“Do you really believe there is any of it left in
the world? Didn’t the war kill it?” Her voice
was subdued to a plaintive melody.

“It can never die while youth is left,” he replied.
*““It can never die while the longing for youth re-
mains in the heart.”

She sighed. ‘But youth isn’t happy. Youth
is sadder than age.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 69


“For itself, not for others. You are joy for
others, even if you have missed it yourself.”

She looked down. “Yes, I’ve missed it,” she
said, and her lip quivered.

“Well, you must find it, my dear. We must
find it for you,” he answered, while it seemed to
him that bands of iron were fastened over his
swelling heart. Pious memories culled from his
happy though reverential childhood were im-
prisoned there beneath those bands of iron; and
mingled with these were his sentiments as a vestry-
man on Sunday mornings and his emotions as a
bereaved husband beside the grave of Cordelia.
“You must let me help you to find it,” he added in
an earnest voice.

“Oh, I’m not looking for joy.” One of her
startling changes passed over her, and she lifted
her small bright head with a defiant gesture.
“But Id like, if it isn’t asking too much, to have a
shop in its place.”

**A flower-shop? Of course you shall have it.
You shall have anything that is in my power to
give you.”

Her eyes laughed. ‘‘You’re a good sport, Judge
Honeywell, and you make all those silly boys
look so common. I’d rather have money than
anything in the world!” she exclaimed, and for the
first time she spoke with genuine passion. An
ignoble passion! Yet penetrating the heart in the
wistful charm of her voice. What magic in the girl


70 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


was linked with an ecstasy he had dreamed of, but
never known in reality? Was there some imper-
ishable essence im life, some bouquet more intoxi-
cating than any he had ever discovered?

“Tf you were in need, Annabel, why didn’t
you come to me?” he asked, shocked by the
thought that she had suffered from poverty.
This was the kind of shock, he felt without under-
standing it, that any sordid fact associated with
a woman produced in the sheltered life of his mind;
for he was by temperament, as well as by training,
an idealist in matters of sex, and his desires, even
his dreams, had been sublimated into illusions.

She laughed. ‘Well, I wasn’t starving. That
is, I wasn’t starving for bread. But what is the
use of living if you can never see beautiful places?”
Then, since she was both by temperament and by
the thorough training of adversity, a realist, she
laughed again more derisively. With the sound
of her laugh, a subtle thrill, a deep pulsation of
joy, quivered through him to the secret labyrinth
of his spirit. Something was there beyond, some-
thing that he had missed and that he must capture
at last before it escaped him forever. He had
again the strange feeling of freshness, almost of
surprise, as if he were about to begin anew the
next instant, as if he were plunging into a virgin
wilderness of experience.

“You aren’t unhappy now, are you, Annabel?”
he asked in a whisper.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 71


“Unhappy?” she raised her luminous eyes.
“No, I’m not really unhappy. Only, when I see
beauty, I feel that, if I cannot have love, I shall
die.”

He hesitated, and then spoke more clearly.
“T hope, my dear child, that you are not grieving
for that scoundrel.”

““Grieving?”’ Her voice was as sharp as a blade.
“Who told you that? Not Mother? She wouldn’t
be such a fool. Of course [’m not grieving. I
hate him. I’ve always hated him.” While the
loud music drowned her words, that bladelike
voice reached him with the shrillness of a scream
that is miles away in the cloudy d stance. “‘Why,
I hate him so that I wish he were dead.” Closing
her eyes, she opened them suddenly and stared at
him.

Though the Judge listened to her in distress,
for his was a civilized mind, it was an unfamiliar
distress which was permeated with thrills of relief.
He felt responsible, not only for the violence that
his indiscreet question had provoked, but for the
undisciplined behaviour of Angus Blount and the
whole pitiable tragedy. So heavy was this sense
of responsibility, that he began to wonder what he
could do to mend the poor child’s broken faith.

_ “My dear little girl,” he said, and his fine eyes
were humid with sympathy, “we must see what we
can do.”

“When he went home at two o'clock, he assured


72 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


himself that he was more cheerful than he had
been since Cordelia’s death. A little healthful di-
version was, no doubt, what he needed. Not only
did he feel more cheerful, but he felt younger,
more vigorous, and certainly more active in body
than he had felt for years. While he undressed,
he reminded himself that at sixty-five he was too
young to renounce the innocent pleasures of life;
that he must mingle more with young people;
that he was indeed, thanks to his frugal habits,
at least twenty years younger than most men of
his age. The image of old Colonel Bletheram, in
perpetual pursuit, swam unsteadily before his men-
tal eye; but this shade was scarcely an auspicious
one, since the Colonel, still active in his eighties,
had seldom pursued temperance.

Lying back on the large feather pillows, where
Cordelia’s initials were intertwined with a device
of garlands and doves, he settled himself between
the lavender-scented sheets, and turned out the
night-lamp by his bed. But no sooner had he
closed his eyes than the iridescent mist floated into
his mind, and he saw the glimmer of ivory forms,
which fluttered down upon him, advancing and
retreating, like a scattered flock of amorous furies.

Flashing on the light again, he reached out his
hand for the nearest book, which chanced to be
Cordelia’s Bible, and read himself into a dreamless
sleep.


7 A ee ae Cl Pe! a ae -


ae ee eee ee


= ee


Vil


ee THE morning, he awoke with a dull headache,

which passed away after he had had his bath
and his coffee. While he waited for his second cup,
he looked at the bar of sunshine slanting over the
pot of yellow tulips on the breakfast table, and
felt that the freshness of the day expanded his
heart. Everything ahead of him, his work, the
men he should meet, the dry business of the law,
the game of golf in the afternoon, the game of
chess in the evening—all these ordinary details
of living were irradiated by the beams of sun-
light.

As he took his seat and unfolded the Queen-
borough Post by his plate, he made a facetious
remark to his housekeeper, a withered and in-
corruptible woman, who had lost everything but
virtue and clung firmly to that.

“What we need, Mrs. Spearman, is more bright-
ness in the house.”

Over the coffee-pot Mrs. Spearman lifted her
opaque glance to his face. There was, as she
frequently told Judge Honeywell, nothing wrong
with her sense of humour, only the things other
people laughed at seldom seemed amusing to her.

73


74 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“TI am sure I try to make it as pleasant as I
can,” she replied in a crushed voice; for she was
as suspicious of men as any heroine in early-
Victorian fiction, and she knew what to expect
when gentlemen who had lost their wives began to
be fussy about their clothes. Struggling, that was
what he had been doing in the last few months.
She had seen it with her own eyes, and since there
was, in her opinion, but one end to such struggles,
she was speculating, while she watched him fur-
tively, upon her chance of securing another po-
sition. Something permanent, she hoped, next
time. A bachelor, perhaps, not a widower, for
anything less permanent than widowers she had
never encountered.

“You have done very well, Mrs. Spearman.
I am not complaining. I only meant that we
might find the house less depressing if we were to
have a few young people here, now and then.”

“Maybe your grandchildren will be coming soon
to pay you a visit.”

“In the summer possibly, unless I should go
abroad.” The idea of going abroad had just
occurred to him, and it seemed to be an excellent
one.

“TIT hope you are satisfied with the way I’ve
looked after you, sir. I am sure the house has
never been depressing to me,” remarked Mrs.
Spearman, who was humble but had her feelings.

“Don’t give yourself a moment’s worry, Mrs.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS ° 75


Spearman. You have done a great deal to lighten
my loneliness.”

Mrs. Spearman stared bleakly over the silver
service. “I hope you slept well after your party.
I saw you had your light on until late.”

“Fairly—just fairly.”” The Judge frowned and
turned back to his paper, for the question had
recalled to his mind the fluttering visitations of
the darkness. Yes, it might be as well to have
Buchanan look him over in the next two or three
days. Though he felt so vigorous, it was possible
that there was something wrong with either his
nerves or his digestion. He sighed heavily over
his paper; and Mrs. Spearman, hearing the sigh,
concluded that the battle was lost, and resigned
herself to the prospect of a bachelor, or at least
of a gentleman (this was her secret ambition)
whose wife was hopelessly deranged but harmless.
“Just fairly, sir?’ she repeated, and choked over
the echo.

Judge Honeywell, who respected print and had
done his duty by contemporary literature, could
not have escaped the knowledge that women suffer
from strange delusions and are often the innocent
victims of their sacrificial virtues. There had
been occasions when he had looked earnestly at
Mrs. Spearman’s emaciated frame and wondered
where she found room to hold her suppressed
desires. He would have been grieved rather than
astonished if sex had gained the victory over her.


76 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


one day, and she had become suddenly tempera-
mental with a knife or a gun. But it had never
entered his head-that a mere trifle, a mothlike
instinct and a discredited one as well, could in-
vade the provinces of a seasoned intellect, of a
renowned authority upon jurisprudence, of an in-
ternational attitude of mind. Surely, in these
impregnable defences, if anywhere, there was se-
curity.

‘I’ve tried to do my best, sir,” Mrs. Spearman
confided to her black-bordered handkerchief.

*‘And a very good best it has been, Mrs. Spear-
man,”’ responded the Judge, as he rose from his
chair, and proceeded to the serious business of life,
whieh did not, he was sure, embrace withered and
incorruptible women.

On his way to his office, for he had retired from
the bench into the less arduous private practice of
law, he stopped long enough to send orchids, or, if
orchids were over, gardenias to Annabel. If alittle
thing like that could give the child pleasure, he
ought not to neglect it; and then, since his mood
was benevolent, he noticed lilies of the valley
blooming modestly behind a glass case, and or-
dered a bunch of moderate size for Amanda. Not
until he had stepped into his car did he remember
that Wednesday was his day for taking flowers to
Cordelia’s grave; and turning back, he entered the
shop again and added this order to the others.

“Could you,” he inquired, with embarrassment,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 77


“arrange to have these flowers sent out to Rose
Hill this afternoon?”’ And when the florist replied
that it would be possible, the Judge gave directions
(which were unnecessary since the florist knew his
world) for reaching Cordelia’s grave. It was the
first time that he had broken his habit of visiting
the cemetery; but, overlooking the day, he had
made an engagement for golf in the afternoon, and
he assured himself, as he drove on, that Cordelia
would have been the last woman in the world to
wish him to sacrifice his health on her account.
She would have been, also, the last woman in the
world to encourage unnecessary brooding, or, for
the matter of that, anything that was unnecessary.
Nursing grief was what she had called it, and he
had heard her frequently condemn such useless
rebellion against an Act of God. For Cordelia
had been endowed with that safe point of view
which refuses to be impressed by any rebellion
until it has assumed the dimensions of a revolution.
Acts of God, like amendments to the Constitution,
were respected by her as long as they were en-
forced. There was, she had often reminded him,
as little nonsense about her as there was meretri-
cious appeal. She was before all else—and he had
been grateful for this in his tranquil moments—
a good woman. Sober, intelligent, an enemy to
vehemence and self-indulgence in any form, the
only defect he had ever found in her was her failure
to be amused by his jokes. A deficiency that was


78 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


easily overlooked amid so many perfections; yet,
in spite of (it could not be because of) her moral
excellence, the idea had crossed his mind that the
worst of all possible worlds would be one invented
by good women.

Yes, he had been completely in letter, if in-
completely in spirit, a faithful husband. Faithful,
except for those days in the spring (he could not
deny them now) when he had felt a mysterious
vibration at the sight of a strange face in the
crowd; at the whisper of the April wind in his
ears; or at a gesture that was ended before it
had fulfilled an imagined curve of perfection.
He had had his moments when he was young.
And now at the suave touch of Spring, from some
cause so obscure that it had not ripened into a
definite longing, he suffered again from an inap-
peasable restlessness of the heart.

That afternoon, when civilization had triumph-
antly defeated nature in his mind, he found that
his game of golf was even better than usual. He
played with younger men, and, as he told Mrs.
Bredalbane with pride upon his return, he had
**polished them off nicely.”? His face was still shin-
ing with pleasure when she captured him in the
hall; and though he looked, as she said to herself,
spindle-shanked in his stockings of Scotch plaid,
his appearance, since he was unaware that it could
strike anybody as ridiculous, failed to dampen his
enthusiasm.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 79


“You have a great many compensations,
Gamaliel,”’ she remarked.

This he admitted almost too promptly for a
widower. Life, he pursued cheerfully, was full
of compensations, if you took the trouble to look
for them. ‘You must accept things as you find
them,” he concluded, with the seasoned wisdom
of platitude.

“Well, you look much better since you’ve taken
that view of life,”’ she returned briskly.

“You're right, Edmonia. JI am convinced that
you are right.”

“I just stopped as I was passing to ask how you
are. I know you are dying to get under a shower.
By the way,” she added, moving in the direction
of the door. “I saw Amanda at luncheon wearing
more lilies of the valley. They made her look
fifteen years younger than her age. It is wonder-
ful what lilies of the valley will do for gray hair.”’

Hearing this, the Judge tried in vain to think
of a reply that would be gallant and yet casual.
**For her years she is a remarkably young-looking
woman,” he said at last, and felt that Edmonia
would consider the remark superfluous, provided,
of course, she could recognize superfluity when she
saw it.

Mrs. Bredalbane stopped to calculate, which she
did on her fingers but adequately. “She is seven
years younger than we are,” she said presently.
“That would make her just fifty-eight.”


80 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Just fifty- eight! He frowned while he followed
his sister’s immense hips to the door. Not only did
he dislike an unprofitable comparison of ages, but
he disliked even more the cheerful inaccuracy
with which Edmonia assumed that he was as old
as she because they had been born twins. It was
on the tip of his tongue to try again to correct
this impression; but, being a peace-loving man and
disinclined to wound the feelings of any woman,
he waited until the opportunity was lost in Mrs.
Bredalbane’s ensuing offence.

“What do you do with yourself in the evenings,
Gamaliel?”’

He looked at her thoughtfully, surmising the
end of her catechism, yet hesitating from habit
before leaping to a conclusion.

“I spend my evenings very quietly, Edmonia, as
you may imagine. Occasionally, I drop into the
club for a few minutes.”

“Don’t you find yourself getting lonely?”

“One must expect loneliness in my situation.”

“Why don’t you go to see Amanda Lightfoot?”

For an instant, the audacity of her challenge
shocked him speechless; then he replied with all
the rebuke that his tone could carry: “I feel no
inclination to pay visits.”

“Well, I’m sure it is time that you did. Con-
ventions have changed, and nobody would think
any the worse of you if you began going there every
evening. Especially as everybody knows how


a —


i eS


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 81


faithful Amanda has been to you all these years.”

Even he, with his painful knowledge that
Edmonia was capable of stopping at nothing
behind his back, had hardly expected her to go so
far as this in his presence. “I think, Edmonia,”’
he responded gently, because he was judicially
weighing his words, “‘that, at your time of life, you
might find something better to do than interfere
with the private affairs of other people.”

Mrs. Bredalbane laughed without offence. The
trait that made her invulnerable to criticism, he
perceived now, was her complete immunity from
offence. It is difficult to deal successfully, he
decided, with a woman whose feelings cannot be
hurt. He wondered drily how her husbands had
dealt with her, and remembered that three were
in their graves while the fourth one was a stubborn
fugitive from monogamy.

**At our time of life, Gamaliel, there isn’t much
else that we can do,” she rejoined in her hearty
manner.

*“‘T should have supposed you could find a better
way to employ yourself than in meddling and idle
gossip. There are surely opportunities to improve
your mind and character.”

Mrs. Bredalbane gasped a little, though good-
naturedly. ‘“‘Why, what in the world is the
matter with my mind and character?” she in-
quired. “I had mind enough to catch four
husbands, and I’ve had my character restored


82 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


four times, which is more than most women, even
in Queenborough, can boast of. The trouble with
you, Gamaliel,”’ she added, patting the sleeve of
his leather coat, “is that you did not have enough
sense of humour to stand the strain of being a
Judge and an old Virginia gentleman combined.
We started equal, I dare say, but while my ob-
servations of the world have cultivated my
humour, it has taken every particle of yours to
bear up under the dullness of your life.”

‘“‘Dullness?” repeated the Judge, while a dark
flush stained his pallid skin. Did Edmonia
imagine that his life, either in the seat of justice
or beside Cordelia, had been dull? ‘“ Your obser-
vations we will not discuss,” he said indignantly,
“but I can assure you that a respectable life is not
necessarily a dull one.”

Again Mrs. Bredalbane patted his arm, and he
felt resentfully, through his sleeve, that the pat was
maternal and protective. “Well, I’m glad you
haven’t found it so,’ she answered. “All I can
wish for you, my dear, is that you should have
enjoyed your life as much as I have mine.”

A melancholy frown clouded his face. How
times had changed indeed, and how standards had
fallen! Was this stout and disreputable dowager,
this excessive, this quadruple matron, the frail,
lost sister of his early manhood, the wayward
daughter for whom the lamp had burned and for-
giveness waited in vain? Where was the remorse


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 83


of the sinner? Where, he demanded, almost pas-
sionately, were the wages of sin?

“T have had the satisfaction, Edmonia, of
feeling that. I have tried to do my duty.”

She had passed out on the porch, and her hand
was on the iron railing of the steps, while one large
and determined foot hung suspended in the air.
“You are welcome to all the satisfaction you can
get out of duty,” she responded, “‘and I may say
that you look to me as if you had lived on it.
That is the trouble with all of you in Queenbor-
ough, especially the women. You look as if you
had lived on duty and it hadn’t agreed with you.”

With the solid substance of her person in front
of him, it was impossible to deny her accusation.
She was immoderate; she was indecorous; she was
reprehensible; yet she was again, he felt, in some
absurd and even sinister way, unanswerable. Ac-
cording to the inflexible logic of consequences;
according to all civilized rule of conduct and ever-
lasting principles of morality; according to the pro-
fuse testimony of literature;—according to this
menacing cloud of witnesses, she should have re-
turned unhappy, penitent, and partly, if not en-
tirely, impoverished. In this extremity, which was
the moral as well as the conventional end to her
career (and what were conventions, after all, but
organized morals?) he could have opened his heart
to her with the fraternal compassion an erring sister
deserves. But her attitude was abandoned, he


84 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


told himself, and the extremity a preposterous one.
Her sinful past, for her many marriages had merely
whitewashed it, had not saddened her, had not
sobered her, had not even, he concluded, with his
stern but just gaze on her broad and lumpy back,
diminished her size. She had not only thriven,
she had fattened on iniquity. At sixty-five, a
time of life surely when bad women turn to
remorse, and even good women find little to turn
to but duty, she flaunted (there was no other word
for it) she actually flaunted her brazen past. “It
is the war that has made such conduct possible,”
he pondered gloomily. ‘“‘Before the war no
woman could have been so bold with impunity.”

“IT hope you are more careful in your conver-
sation than you have been in your conduct,” he
said presently.

For, extraordinary as it appeared, the rising
generation in Queenborough, not only accepted,
but gave every evidence to the legal mind of
enjoying Edmonia. While elderly ladies of vacant
memories and unblemished reputations nodded
by lonely firesides, Edmonia was eagerly sought
after by the inquisitive youth of the period. They
clustered about her, he had heard with disapproval,
in candid pursuit of some esoteric wisdom of sex;,
and he had observed, at Amanda’s dance, that
they treated her scarlet letter less as the badge of
shame than as some foreign decoration for dis-
tinguished service.


:
E
1
\


ee Se Oe


a


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 85


Mrs. Bredalbane’s heavy foot descended; but
before it reached the step, she glanced back over
her shoulder. The attitude was not graceful, and
he recalled that, as a girl, Edmonia had had too
thick a neck and a figure which, though vaunting
a wasp waist, promised to be corpulent with in-
creasing years and dissipation.

“You know I never pretended to have an
orderly mind, Gamaliel,’’ she said. ‘All I ask is
to be interesting. So long as the young people
flock to me, I feel that I am a success.”’

“That is exactly what I object to, Edmonia. If
it did not sound harsh, I should say that I do not
consider you a proper example for the young.”

This appeared to amuse Mrs. Bredalbane, which
was the last thing he had anticipated. Her deep,
thick laugh gushed out. “Oh, they aren’t waiting
for an example,” she replied. “‘Or a warning
either, for that matter. You take my advice,
Gamaliel,” she tossed back encouragingly over her
shoulder, “‘and don’t let the grass grow under your
feet. If I were you, I’d go to see Amanda Light-
foot this very evening. You won’t gain anything
by waiting, not after thirty-seven years.” By this
time she had reached the pavement; but instead of
proceeding on her way, she turned squarely round
and looked up at him. “I forgot to tell you how
glad I am that you are going to help Annabel.
People here don’t understand that child, because
they have no feeling for temperament. There is


86 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


a great deal more in her than anybody suspects.”

His face flushed, and since she had grown
far-sighted, his sudden change of colour did not
escape her. Yet he was merely thinking that he
must warn Mrs. Upchurch, with the utmost dis-
cretion, of course, against permitting any intimacy
between Annabel and Edmonia. Twenty years
ago, even ten years ago, such advice would have
been superfluous; but it appeared that even the
influence of fast women was no longer circum-
scribed. He remembered Edmonia in the ’eighties,
dark, flashing, “‘mannish,”’ as her mother had
wailed, in spite of her elaborate chignon, her deep
feminine curves, and the hump that she wore be-
low her waist in the back. The vision, surveyed
through the haze of time, was starched to the point
of rigidity. As stiff as whalebone, he said to him-
self, remembering the inaccessibility of Cordelia in
her wedding-dress of white satin. How, he won-
dered, had sex attraction survived the perils of
the Victorian age? Yet Edmonia in those rigid
styles, with that ridiculous hump, which was the
last word in fashion, had been one of the reigning
belles, though deplorably fast, of her day.

“Tam glad that she has a serious interest,” he
returned. “If more girls would take up some kind
of ladylike employment, their parents would sleep
easier.”

“Yes, it’s a good thing,” Edmonia assented.
“Anything that occupies your time and gives you


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 87


something to think about is obliged to be whole-
some. Annabel seems to be the kind of girl that
would make a success of whatever she undertakes,
and that is why I can’t understand her losing
Angus if she wanted him, though, of course, being
in love puts you at a disadvantage in a love afiair.”’

“IT hope her suffering has not embittered her,”

he said sadly.

“Well, that depends. Some women enjoy
suffering, and some do not.” She was still gazing
up at him, and arrested by a fleeting light in his
face, she added crisply: “Never forget, Gamaliel,
that the wisest man has only the wisdom of a fool
when he tries to understand a woman.”

“You are not in a position, Edmonia, to give me
advice.”

“Tt isn’t advice, Gamaliel; it is a warning. We
can’t remind ourselves, and we can’t remind each
other, too often that there is no fool like an old
fool.”

She moved away, walking painfully on her
French heels, while he looked after her (he was
forced to emphasize this to himself) in pity rather
than in censure. There was no doubt that she
was showing her age. She had become rambling
in her remarks, and she had fallen into the deplor-
able habit of repeating what she had told him the
day before. It was, perhaps, advisable for her to
remind herself that there is no fool like an old fool.

The flushed air was so soft that he lingered a


88 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


moment before going indoors; and it was just as he
was turning away that he caught a glimpse of
Annabel through the web of sunlight and shadow
under the elm boughs. Swiftly, mockingly, she
came toward him, like some vision that is woven
of desire and illusion; like some vision, he felt, that
is as transparent as sunlight and as unattainable
as ideal beauty. And while he watched her, it
seemed to him that youth itself was approaching;
youth as fugitive, as radiant, as hauntingly sad,
and as immortally lovely as the dreams of age.
In his eyes was the vision, and in his ears was that
April whisper of an ecstasy which he had never
known in the past, and which, since he was old,
he could never hope to know in the future.


Vill
] WANT to make something of my life,”” Annabel


said, perching on the arm of one of his leather
chairs, with her slim legs in flesh-coloured stock-
ings swinging beneath her. “I don’t want just to
fritter my time away.”

This was commendable; Cordelia would have
approved of it. There was something in the girl’s
character and in the curve of her chin that re-
minded him of Cordelia in her early years, when
she had been more interesting than admirable.

“You are making a wise decision, my dear
child,” he answered, ‘and you may count upon
my help and sympathy.”

Her smile quivered like an edge of light on her
lips. What was it, he asked himself, that endowed
her with this poignant appeal to his protection, with
this quality which was so touching and so poetic?
In the end, he decided, it was her look of helpless
yet trusting confidence. He had always cherished
a sentimental fondness for things that were young
and small; children just beginning to walk; puppies
not old enough to train; birds when they were
learning to fly; and the sentiment that Annabel
aroused in him was merely a stronger response

89


90 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


to this noble infirmity. Never, indeed, had he
felt more elevated..in purpose, more generous and
disinterested in mind and heart. Leaning back
in his easy chair, he folded his strong and slender
hands on the knees of his tweed knickerbockers,
and fixed his brown eyes, with their expression of
bright benevolence, on her face.

‘“We must find a nice little place for you,” he
continued. “‘A house with a garden attached
where you can experiment with your designs.”

“Why, I never dreamed of that! That would be
wonderful!”

“It can be arranged.” He appeared to ad-
vantage, and this was not lost upon him, when he
was arranging things. ‘“‘ We'll begin looking for
the house to-morrow. There is a small white
house in Littlejohn Street, with a square of garden
at the back. I remember it because one of my
needy relatives used to live there, and last year
she died. I dare say the place can be bought rea-
sonably. It will need some repairs, but there is
a charm about it, and a fine old willow tree near the
back porch.”

Annabel’s face bloomed like a flower when the
sunlight touches it. How responsive the girl was,
and how swift and lovely were the changes in her
eyes! She had never, she hastened to assure him,
imagined anything so delightful as a house—
a real house with a garden, and white too! Did
he say white?


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 91


“You are an angel, Judge Honeywell! How
can I ever repay you?” she asked, and the more
grateful she felt, the prettier (or so it appeared to
him) she became.

“By being happy, Annabel. By letting me see
that you are happy.”

*“But you must be happy too,” she responded in
her rippling voice.

He smiled down on her, for she had slipped from
the arm to the low cushions of the chair.

““My happiness will come from seeing yours,”
he replied. Then, as a shadow crossed her vivid
face, he looked at her searchingly, and added,
with the merest hint of severity in his words:
“But you must promise me to be happy. You
must let nothing interfere with your happiness.”

At the change in his manner, the light faded
from her face. “Oh, amhappy. Iam perfectly
happy,” she rejoined carelessly, and he was dis-
tressed by the tinge of bitterness in her laugh.

“Not like that, Annabel. That isn’t the right
tone.”

“What is wrong with my tone?”

“Tt isn’t a happy tone.”

“Well, I can’t help it. How can I help it?
Nobody would choose to be unhappy.”

“No, but you can nurse disappointment.”
Strange, how infallible he sounded whenever he
used a formula of Cordelia’s! “You can fight
against the tendency to look on the dark side of


92 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


life. After all, you must remember that your
troubles are light compared to those of other people.
You must refuse to allow yourself to be depressed.”

“How can I help it?”’ asked Annabel in a voice
that had lost all its sparkling music.

“You can always help it, if you are in earnest.
It is nothing more than the triumph of your moral
sense over imaginary trouble.”

For an instant, Annabel stared at him muti-
nously. ‘Then her soft mouth grew tremulous with
feeling. “I haven’t any moral sense, but I have
a heart,”’ she said, and burst into tears.

“There, there,” he began pleadingly; but realx
izing, after a moment, that protest was useless,
he leaned back in his chair, and watched her with
a shocked and miserable expression. If she had
been an older woman, her tears would have
irritated him (he had detested tears in his youth,
even from Amanda) but it was impossible to be
irritated by a girl who cried as naturally as a baby;
without apology and without subterfuge. So he
waited in silence, hoping that the flow of grief
would grow lighter and finally cease; and at last
it was Annabel who relieved the strain by holding
out a frivolous bag of green and red beads and
asking him to look for her handkerchief.

““I—I can’t see,” she sobbed, and wept again
more passionately.

“Try to control yourself, my dear child,” he
urged gently, attempting to bring her to reason,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 93


and feeling as helplessly adrift as a man of sense
always feels with a person who refuses obstinately
to be brought anywhere. ‘‘You must really try
to control yourself.”” As he finished he plunged
his fingers into the beaded bag, which seemed to
shrink to a scrap in his grasp.

“Tamtrying. Can’t you see that I am trying?”
she threw back at him defiantly.

“But what is the cause of it? I said nothing,
I hope, to hurt you.”’

“Oh, it wasn’t you,” sighed Annabel, with
weary impatience.

“Then what was it? Do you mean that you
are still letting your mind dwell upon that—that
old disappointment?”

“Tf you knew all, you would understand,” she
answered, and he realized, with a shiver, that she
was struggling against an impulse to confide in
him. Obviously, she had had many such struggles
within the last year, and from what Edmonia had
let fall, he inferred that the impulse had invariably
won the battle. He disliked confidences of any
kind, being subject to them, though only from
corporations, in his profession, and particularly
he disliked confidences of an emotional character.
Notwithstanding forty years of the law and
thirty-six years of marriage, he had never lost a
proper regard for reticence and a moral shrinking
from what he felt to be an indecent exposure of
the emotions. Nakedness of mind or body was


94 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


abhorrent to him, and mortifying episodes had
taught him that when a woman begins to reveal
her soul, she is~seldom satisfied until she has
stripped it bare.

“Try not to think of it, my dear little girl. Try
to forget it,” he urged.

“T feel that I shall have to tell you,’ Annabel
began tremulously, and then turned away and
wept, convulsed by a memory.

Gripping his thin knees in his locked hands, on
which the veins started out like cords, he prepared
himself to listen, with more patience than sym-
pathy, while she plunged incoherently into her
confession. Sadly he reflected that the recital
must be as unpalatable to her as it was to him;
but in this he was mistaken, for Annabel, who
frequently confused her dramatic instinct with her
emotion, derived not a little pleasure from making
a scene.

““He belonged to me. No one else had a right
to him,” she began, with a violence that sounded
to the Judge like primitive fury, though he was
willing to admit that he had only a superficial
acquaintance with the primitive, and an even
slighter one with fury.

“But that is nonsense, pure nonsense,” he
commented in a sanity which was wasted upon
her.

*“No, it isn’t nonsense. We fell in love at first
sight—the very first instant. There had never


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 95


been anybody else for either of us. Of course
we'd had fancies, but they didn’t mean anything.”
She dismissed them impatiently. ‘‘ We knew from
the first minute we looked at each other that there
wasn’t any one else—that we belonged to each
other, that we were in love for good and all a

“But x

“Of course we had our quarrels. That’s a
sign of being really in love. We quarrelled inces-
santly fe

“But, my dear——”

“Oh, quarrelling is one of the nicest parts when
you are really in love. It is so thrilling. And
then the making up afterward! If you have ever
been madly in love, you know that making up is
the best part.”

He didn’t know, and he had never, he inferred
now, been madly in love. Cordelia and he had
never quarrelled (Cordelia was too sensible not to
be satisfied with having her own way about every-
thing) and upon the solitary occasion when he had
fallen out with Amanda, they had never made up
again—at least, not while they were lovers.

**When he was here, it didn’t make so much
difference,’ Annabel resumed, after a sobbing
pause, “because we could always make up quicker
‘than we fell out. But after he went abroad, things
were worse. ‘Then we began to quarrel by letter
and cable, and it is very expensive to quarrel by
cable. You have to pay for it, word by word, and


96 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


if you try to economize—Mother never wanted
me to send cablés—if you try to save words, you
are sure to make things worse instead of better.”
She stopped to wipe her eyes, and continued de-
spairingly, ‘‘He was always writing to me of some
French girl, and you know how they are about
men.” With a shuddering sigh, she rushed on, as
if she were eager to gain the precipitous peak of
her tragedy. “I showed him from the first that I
suspected her of not being nice and warned him
against her in every way that I could. Then,
when I felt that I couldn’t stand it any longer,
I cabled him that I never wanted to see him again
and he had better marry her. It cost frightfully to
do it, but Mother thought I needed some new
slippers—I did, too, dreadfully—so she gave me the
money, and I spent it every bit on cables. Of
course, he ought to have known I didn’t really
mean that, but the very next day he cabled back:
‘Taken your advice and married Yvette.” It was
all just to spite me, of course, and I hate him so
that it feels exactly as if I had a knife in my
breast.”” With this .she began to weep again,
and her tears flowed so plentifully that in a minute
her wisp of handkerchief had melted to a ball of
wet tissue paper.

““Can’t you see, my dear little girl, how foolish
it is?” asked the Judge wearily, for he was feeling
the strain. In this mood, he was able to rejoice
because he had been married to a superior woman.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 97


Temperament possessed its allurement, but for
daily companionship there was nothing that
could take the place of a normal point of view.
His interest in Annabel was entirely paternal, and
since it was paternal, he allowed himself to hope
that she would work this dangerous nonsense out
of her system and become as sensible as her mother.

“I know it is foolish,”’ she assented, “‘but that
doesn’t help.”

“That Angus Blount is a cad—an unprincipled
cad. Though you must have been trying,” he said
judicially, ‘“‘and it is never safe to try a man with
an ocean between you.”

“Tt is having to sit still and bear it that I can’t
stand!” she wailed. ‘“‘I could get over it so much
quicker if I could only hurt him as much as he hurt
me.” And more in the same morbid vein, which
was deplorably human, and remote from all the best
Virginian traditions of true womanliness. Lova-
ble, no doubt, but insufficiently civilized.

“There’s no use my trying to help you unless
you will promise to put him out of your thoughts,”
he insisted. For his mind was firmly made up on
this one point; he would receive no more confidences
upon the unpalatable subject of Angus Blount.

**T’ll try as hard as I can,” she answered sub-
missively, rising to her feet and looking up at him
with a smile which shone as softly as the moon
through a cloud. The tone of authority, he per-
ceived with satisfaction, was the acceptable one.


98 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Her submissiveness was so touching, so softly
feminine in its, appeal, that the disappointing
prelude was obliterated from his thoughts. After
all, women, particularly young and attractive
women, admired the assertion of authority in a
man who was masculine.

‘Then, that’s a promise and an agreement,” he
said, holding out his hand. ‘“‘We won’t think of
him again, and we’ll start to-morrow in the matter
of the house.”

The decorous surface of his mind was still
regarding her with paternal anxiety; but beneath
this well-governed province, in some _ lawless
region of sensation, he felt suddenly a blind and
vagrant groping toward her softened beauty.
His fingers, which had been loosely fumbling for
the bag she held, fastened on the edge of her short
sleeve, and after a moment’s hesitation, he be-
gan stroking the satin texture of her arm between
elbow and wrist. As she only looked at him with
indifferent and miserable eyes, making no effort
to draw away, his hands slipped to her shoulders,
and turning her face toward him, he stooped
and kissed the rich curve of her lips. While a
shiver of delight ran through his nerves, and his
mouth, which had felt old and dry, became warm
and moist with youth, the voice of his inexorable
conscience demanded: “‘Is my conduct in keeping
with my reputation, and with her respect for me?”
At the warning whisper, his arms dropped to his


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 99


side, and he waited in silence while she turned away
to open her vanity case and powder her nose.

“Then, when may I see it?” she inquired, ignor-
ing what had been to him an emotional crisis.

*“As soon as I can arrange it. Perhaps the day
after to-morrow.”

Having returned the vanity case to her bag, she
lifted her restored features to the window. “I
know I look a perfect fright,” she said, “and I
think you are much kinder to me than I deserve.”

He laughed like a boy, while all the delicious
warmth flooded his heart again. “Well, I rather
think so myself!’ he exclaimed.

A little later, he opened the front door for her,
and she descended the steps and passed into the
dying flare of the sunset. With dazed eyes, he
looked after her until her slender, trailing shadow
vanished, as an illusion vanishes, in the silken ob-
scurity of the distance. For a long time after he ©
had lost her, he stood there and watched; but the
fleeting pretence of youth had recoiled into som-
breness and depression.

If only he could settle down for the end! If only
he could be content to grow old! His judgment
whispered that there remained the serene and
ample pleasures of the closing years; yet he felt
passionately, while he winced under the admo-
nition, thet he could find no relish in the compen-
sations of age. ‘‘This will pass with the rest,”’ he
told himself presently, though he knew in his soul


100 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


that he did not wish the flickering flame to die
down to ashes. ~.

Up the long, straight street, the burnished light
was enmeshed in the pale green of the branches.
Faint, provocative scents of earth and flowers
drifted toward him, now approaching, now roving
away, as the wind stirred the fragrance. Warm,
palpitating, amorous, all his thwarted hunger
for life was enveloped there in the quivering
breath of the twilight. The wistful sadness
of spring, so different from the hopeless melan-
choly of autumn, brushed his mood with the
taint, not of decay, but of desire. He felt again
that he had missed the secret of life, the supreme
gift of experience, that he had lost beyond re-
covery something indescribably fresh and satis-
fying. Was it merely his own irrevocable loss,
he asked himself, or was it the universal tragedy
of our mortal lot that the power of loving and the
need of love should remain forever unequal? Was
it an ironic law of our nature that, as the one di-
minished, the other increased for a season?

Turning away, he went slowly indoors, and it
seemed to him that he carried the inescapable
burden of the April twilight within his heart.


IX


EFORE the little white house with the garden
was ready for its occupant, Annabel was
securely enthroned in Judge Honeywell’s heart,
though less securely in his purpose. He was still
able to throw a manner of paternal solicitude
over his tenderness; but in his own mind he had
definitely abandoned both verbal subterfuge and
moral evasion. If there was ecstasy, there was
terror also in the violence of his longing; for with
the passion of adolescence he combined presently
the tormenting suspicions of age. Cautious by
temperament, he became morbidly careful lest he
should startle her innocence by one of his sudden
though brief gusts of feeling. For even he, who
was almost as innocent as Annabel, was amazed
less by the strength than by the brevity of his
emotions; and he asked himself relentlessly if she
would demand of love or life a fulfilment which he
had lost the power to bestow.

For the first few weeks there was sufticient pleas-
ure in the exercise of his generous instincts; and,
though he enjoyed as little as other men the feeling
that he was giving something for nothing, he found
an agreeable, if inadequate, reward in her girlish

101


102 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


delight over his gifts. Once only, when she kissed
him gratefully, he flinched away from her with a
low murmur of pain.

“Oh, I am so sorry. Did I say anything
wrong?” she asked.

‘““N—no. You couldn’t say anything wrong.
I was thinking.”

“Of course.”’ Her eager little face softened to
sympathy. “It was about Cousin Cordelia,
wasn’t it? I know it is terrible the way you miss
her. I can understand,” she continued, with a
depth of insight which amazed him, though it had
so widely missed its mark, “‘because I have those
flashes of remembrance too. Isn’t it strange the
way it all comes back to you? You may have
forgotten all about it for weeks, and then suddenly,
without warning, it will start up again like the
nerve in a tooth that is dying.”

“Do you really suffer as much as that, Anna-
bel?”

She answered with a little strangled moan that
cut into his heart. Though he bitterly regretted
the backward flight of her thoughts, he could see
no hope now of avoiding the rush of her confidence.
The only way to save her was by patience and
tenderness, especially by tenderness, until her
imaginary passion (monomania was his name for
it) wore itself out. Such things, he had heard or
read, did wear themselves out if you gave them
time; yet at sixty-five he felt less disposed than


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 103


at any other period of his life to deal interminably
either with an unbalanced mind or with the
hovering wraith of Angus Blount. By this time,
considering his unlimited patience and almost
unlimited presents, it seemed to him that Annabel
might have at least begun to show signs of re-
covery. Though his heart ached with tenderness
for her, he could not dismiss the feeling that he
deserved some return for his generosity. It was
absurd to maintain that you could not, by a well-
directed effort of mind and a determined refusal to
dwell upon the errors of the past, triumph over a
mistaken affection.

While he looked at her now, he found that he
was not only resenting the way Angus obtruded
himself—or his memory—into their association,
but that he was growing a little irritated with
Annabel. Yet, through some perversity of the
human heart, this very irritation, smothered as
it was in tenderness, inflamed rather than ex-
tinguished his passion to comfort. So ardent had
this passion become that it devoured every fugi-
tive impulse, and he was at last unable to govern
properly what he had thought of, for thirty-six
years of marriage, as the peaceful territory of
his own mind. Instead of his usual equable
temper, he had indulged recently in acrimonious
complaints to the superlative widow who arranged
his creature comforts, after sleepless nights,
with infinite worry. Worse than this, there was


104 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


often a sluggish sensation upon awaking, and a
dull headache after the most frugal evening with
Annabel and her mother.

**You are not keeping your promise, Annabel,”
he said sternly.

She laughed. “I didn’t promise you that I’d
stop hating him.”

“But as long as you hate him so passionately,
you will never find peace. What you ought to
cultivate,” he added wearily, in Cordelia’s dignified
style, ‘‘is indifference.”

“IT don’t want peace. There is time enough for
that when I am too old for anything else. Peace,
like God, will be always there.”

He winced. ‘Do you mind my being so much
older, Annabel?’? he asked, for he could not
bring himself to say just “old.”

“Oh, you’re not old. You don’t look old and
you don’t act old,” she replied, with encouraging
alacrity, ““and, besides, I despise young men!”’

Well, this at least was consoling. Poor child,
she had lost too early the romantic illusions of
youth. The pity of it moved him to the bewil-
dered tenderness that she had awakened in his
rejuvenated heart. The disaster in her look, in
her voice, in her smile, would have been tragic,
he felt, if youth could ever appear genuinely tragic
to age. It occurred to him now, as it had occurred
several times within the last few weeks, that
Annabel needed him almost as desperately as he


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 105


needed her. Not only did she need his help in
material ways (for she must find their meagre in-
come increasingly irksome), but she needed him also
to heal the throbbing wound in her soul. Hadn’t
she just confessed to him that she no longer liked
young men, that she preferred mature minds?
This confession had thrilled him while she
made it, for it had sounded reassuring; and he
had reached the thin-blooded years when impulses
are perishable, and one grasps eagerly whatever
is warm and comforting in human intercourse.
Gradually, for, even if he had lost his head, he was
still holding fast to his prudence, the indecision
of the spring had begun to fade from his thoughts.
With it there vanished the fear lest he should be
unfair to Annabel, and this, to do him justice,
had been his gravest anxiety. But it wasn’t, he
caught himself insisting while he gazed at her,
as if she had had no experience of romance and
might reproach him in the future for spoiling her
life. On the contrary, she had had her adven-
ture, and had been completely disenchanted with
love. She could never accuse him of thwarting
her, of snatching the cup of joy from her lips,
when all he asked was the sad privilege of shel-
tering her in her profound disillusionment. She
needed gentleness, poor child; she craved con-
sideration; and, with God’s help, he would be
gentle, he would be considerate. There were
women, young women (for in his present mood all


106 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


women who were not young were either negligible
or useful) who chose the forbearing caresses of an
elderly husband, provided, of course, he was indul-
gent in other ways, rather than submit themselves
to the imperative demands of youthful ardour. No
doubt these were rare women of delicate natures—
and it was impossible to look at this little thing and
not realize that she was as sensitive as a mimosa
flower—who were made to be worshipped instead
of devoured. The mere idea of that fragile body in
rough hands was intolerable to his imagination.

““My one desire is to see you happy again,
Annabel,”’ he said, after a long silence.

She looked at him with startled wonder, and he
watched the glow of surprise stain her cheek. ‘‘Oh,
but I can never be happy, Judge Honeywell.”

“Never is a long word. When you are older,
you won’t use it.”” He was smiling down on her
with an overwhelming desire to give her everything
that she wanted, and, for the first time in his
successful career, he endured the secret humiliation
of the rich man who discovers that, though pleasure
may be purchasable, happiness cannot be bought
for a price. .

The colour flowed away from her face as sud-
denly as it had come. ‘“‘You forget that he is
married.”

So here it was again, he thought bitterly. Here
it was again, this deplorable moonstruck folly! For
a moment, while he had weighed the moral and


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 107


material advantages for her in a prudent marriage,
Angus had been far from his thoughts. Now, sim-
ply by looking at him with her disconsolate eyes,
she had summoned that ill-starred adventurer from
the shades of the past.

“I wasn’t thinking of that,”’ he answered in a
tone of exasperation, for he could not suppress
the feeling that she was not only childish, but
ungrateful as well.

““Weren’t you? Well, what were you thinking
of?” She turned away with a dazed look, as if
he had plucked her back from a dream.

“T was thinking of what you promised me.”

“T know, but I can’t help it.” Her voice was
humble with a humility that was lost to everything
but one tremendous resentment.

*“Have you no pride?”’ he demanded sternly.

She shook her head. ‘‘Not when it hurts so.
When it hurts so, you can’t think of anything
else.”

*“That’s weakness, Annabel.”’

At this she nodded, determined, he saw, to be
amiable as long as she couldn’t be amusing. “I
know,” she responded in a meek whisper. How
lovely, how endearing to the heart was meekness
in a woman—in any woman except, perhaps,
Mrs. Spearman!

“I am disappointed in you,” he said slowly, for
he wished to prolong a surrender that was so fem-
inine and so gratifying to his sense of superiority.


108 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


‘After telling me that you would do your best to
get over that—that infatuation.”

*T have done my best.”

“Then why can’t you stop talking about it?
Why do you insist upon dragging it in at every
opening?”

“T don’t drag it in,” protested Annabel, too
unhappy to take offence. “I have tried as hard as
I could to forget it. There are whole days and
weeks,” she continued passionately, “when he
never enters my mind, and even Mother thinks I
am cured. Then, all of a sudden, just as it hap-
pens with you and Cousin Cordelia, it starts up
again and begins aching. The worst part of it
is that I never know when this is going to happen.
It may come, with a stabbing pain, at a party, or
while I am having my hair washed, and then all I
can do is to stop and walk about until I am tired.
Or it may start in the middle of the night after
I’ve been asleep

“Tf only you would try not to talk about it.
Don’t you realize that, as long as you allow your
mind to dwell upon it, you are retarding your
recovery?”

He was observing her intently over his spectacles,
which he had put on to glance at a note on his desk
and forgotten to remove, while his rimless eye-
glasses dangled by a black silk cord from his coat.
If Annabel had been less deeply immersed in her
own misery, she might have noticed that his hair


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 109


and beard were trimmed more closely than usual,
especially on the temples and about the mouth,
where the patches of white were conspicuous, and
that the dark blue clothes he was wearing for
the first time, after many visits to his tailor
and an immoderate amount of fussiness over the
details, made him look fresh and spruce for his
years.

“TI do try,”’ she answered, and then asked, with
& plaintive note in her lovely voice, ‘‘Hating him
isn’t so bad as loving him, is it?”

“Oh, no, it isn’t so bad as that,” he conceded,
and felt as if he were condoning a breach of ethics
—or was it merely of etiquette?

““Tt’s just because I can’t forgive him for making
me suffer. IT wanttohurthim. I want dreadfully
to hurt him. And I shouldn’t want to hurt him
if I still cared, should I?” she demanded tri-
umphantly.

“No, I suppose not. I cannot imagine a true
woman wishing to hurt the man she loved.”
Though he was shaken in his emotion, he was still
securely rooted in the inherited principles of be-
haviour.

“Then that settles it!’ exclaimed Annabel, with
a spirited gesture. ‘“‘Only I sometimes wonder,”
she resumed after a pause, “‘if I am really a true
woman. ‘True women don’t seem to be a bit
human.”

“My dear!” There were times when she


110 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


shocked him, but there was never a time when the
shock was anything’but delicious.

“Well, how could they keep alive with things
like this bottled up inside of them? If they never
talked of them, and Mother says they would have
died first, they must have let themselves be eaten
away in secret.”

“IT fancy, Annabel, they did not have such
feelings.”

Conventional to the core as he was, he found,
with surprise, that he was already asking himself
whether the mistake dwelt in Annabel’s intuitions
or in his own ideals of her sex? And, even while
he suffered from the recoil of his sentiments, he
felt, in some primitive fibre, that only by stripping
away conventionality could he release the impris-
oned ardour of his spirit.

“Then what has happened to us_ to-day?”
Annabel’s voice had grown resentful. “‘ Nobody
could possibly want to suffer. We didn’t ask to be
different. It isn’t fair to us to make us like this.”

She possessed, he had discovered with pleasure,
a commendable idea of fairness. This was the
only moral trait he had been able to detect in her,
and, while he classified it, he felt that it compen-
sated, in a measure at least, for graver deficiencies.

“Does it ever occur to you that it is your own
fault?” he inquired mildly, for this was the kind of
thing that had been said to him in the ’seventies,
when he was young.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 111


“Tt isn’t my fault,” she retorted bitterly. “I
don’t believe anything is anybody’s fault.”

This doctrine, which he recognized as one that
was dangerous in theory and fatal in practice, could
not, he told himself; be passed over in silence.

“If my affection means anything to you
he began, and broke off because he saw that she
was not listening.

As he stopped, she turned toward him, and he
said over again very slowly: “If my affection
means anything to you ‘i

She interrupted him with a smile. “It means
everything to me. I don’t know how I could
live without you.” After a tremulous breath,
she added in a tone so low that it melted to air
before it penetrated his thoughts, “You are the
only one who understands me.”

“Tf that is true,’ he could scarcely keep his
voice from vibrating with happiness, “‘won’t you
try to be brave and not nurse this unwholesome
fancy?”

“I don’t want to be ungrateful after all you’ve
done for me,” she returned submissively. ‘I do
try to please you.”

“It isn’t only to please me. I shouldn’t like
you to think that you are under an obligation.
I am begging you, for your own good, not to spoil
your life by brooding over what can’t be helped.
All I have done for you, I’ve done freely without
thinking of gratitude. I wish to help you for two


99


112 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


reasons: one is that you need someone to protect
you and the other——”

He hesitated, and she raised her luminous eyes
to his face. ‘“‘I know what the other reason is,”
she said in a caressing voice.

“You know?” He had not dreamed that he
had let his secret escape him.

“Yes, I know it is because of Cousin Cordelia.
You are trying to do what you think Cousin
Cordelia would wish.”

The blow was so unexpected that, for a few
breathless moments, he was unable to collect his
faculties. He felt a violent revolt from the false
attitude in which Annabel’s artless interpretation
of his kindness had placed him. And in his logical
mind he was not convinced that Cordelia, who had
been penny-wise though far from pound-foolish,
would have approved of his munificence.

“Of course, I cannot forget that your Cousin
Cordelia was fond of you,” he returned, since there
was nothing to do but agree with her. “But I
am fond of you too, Annabel.”

““You’ve been an angel to me,” she said, and he
could see that she meant it. “There isn’t anybody
in the world like you.”

She turned her cheek, as she used to do when
Cordelia was living, and he stooped and kissed her
with outward restraint but inward confusion. At
the touch of her fresh, firm lips, it seemed to him
that his inelastic arteries, as well as his dried and


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 113


withered soul, were charged with the vital distil-
lation of youth. It was all madness, he told him-
self; it was all dangerous madness, for he should
probably awake with a headache and an injudi-
cious temper in the morning. But he knew that he
had lost the power to resist it, that he had lost even
the wish to be saved from disaster. Forty years
of the law had prepared him inadequately, he
found, for close contact with life.

“Wait,” he called after her, as she descended
the steps. ‘Let me see you safely home, dear.”
For he felt that he could not bear to lose sight
of her while this enchanting softness was in her
eyes and voice.


xX


HEN he left Annabel at her door and turned

back into the drifting gold of the sunset, it
seemed to him that he had found a luminous
centre of joy in the vast melancholy of existence.
For the hour, he had risen superior to doubts and
fears; he had risen superior even to the vacillation
of human destiny. Happiness, after all, was a
matter not of age but of circumstances, he reflected
consolingly; for the exhilaration of his emotions
had not subsided, and his retributive headache had
not begun.

Inextricably woven into his thoughts, like a
bright thread twisting through dark brocade, ran
the inspiring words: “I don’t know how I could live
without you.” This single sentence brought home
to him, as nothing else in their association had
done, the idea that he might, after all, be more
than a friend to her. And his eager mind worked
with this bright thread over and over again, until
it had embroidered all the sombre screen of the
future. It was not, he assured himself, as if he
were falling intemperately into one of the selfish
passions that he had seen afflict other men. He
was thinking more of Annabel than of himself.

114


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 115


She was so obviously in need of all that he could
give her, and he could give, thank God, in abun-
dance. He could give her everything in life, ex-
cept the one thing she had had and no longer
valued, the wild flare of youth. Love, sympathy,
tenderness, grotection, and wealth. Though it was
characteristic of him to include wealth as the least
of the cardinal benefits, it was equally character-
istic of him to assign it to its modest but honour-
able place.

As he approached the end of the block, he saw
Amanda Lightfoot leaving the house of old Mrs.
Burwell, who had been ill for months; and stop-
ping in the middle of the pavement, with a curi-
ous feeling that he was lingering in the road to
ruin, he waited for the perpetual beauty to sweep
with her imperial gait down the steps. How fash-
ions in belles had altered, he thought critically,
as if she were a generation removed from him.
Forty years ago there wasn’t a woman in Queen-
borough, as Edmonia had reminded him, who could
hold a candle to her. While she descended toward
him, in her handsome gray satin, worn longer than
the fashion, with a chiffon parasol held over her
stately head and her large, round eyes, which were
as blue as lapis lazuli in the golden light, he was
obliged to acknowledge that she was the living
embodiment of what he admired most in the world.
Everything was there, everything but the fleeting
breath of desire. The curving bosom, the rounded


116 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


hips, the regal carriage, the calm and flowing walk;
—all these feminine perfections, which had been
once so potent to awaken the longings of man, had
lost now, even for the elderly, their ancient allure-
ment.

She turned on him the waxen smile with which
her beauty had triumphed over the years, while
he was enveloped in a funereal gloom that issued
from the source of his memory. A meeting with
her always depressed him, and, for this reason
alone, he tried, whenever it was compatible with
politeness, to avoid her society. She depressed
him, not only in the natural way, because she was
no longer so young as she used to be, but, even
more, because his judgment warned him that both
the everlasting purpose and public opinion had
selected her as his suitable mate. That she was
endowed with every affirmative attribute made no
difference to him, since he no longer even desired
to desire her. Yet he still felt for her the reluctant
tenderness that a man never loses for a woman
who has been faithful to him, without restricting
in the slightest degree his liberty to be unfaithful
to her.

“I’ve just been to inquire after poor Mrs. Bur-
well,” she murmured in her level, and, it occurred
to him for the first time, monotonous voice. ‘‘She
has only a few days to live, her cousin told me.”

**Very sad, very sad.”

He turned, and with an ease that surprised him,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 117


fell, after a few nervous steps, into the measure of
her flowing pace.

“Tm afraid I am taking you out of your way,”
she said, gently demurring.

“Tt is a great pleasure to me,” he rejoined. How
different girls were now, he thought, and could not
decide whether he approved of the change.

“Her death will be a great loss to poor Mrs.
Morland,” Amanda resumed, for she was still
clinging to the safe sorrow of old Mrs. Burwell.
“She lost her only son in the war, you know.”

“Yes, yes.” The mention of the war jerked him
up sharply, too sharply. He remembered it as
seldom as possible, for the recollection brought
with it a creepy sensation, as if he were taking some
unfair advantage of all the young men who had
given their livesin France. Just by living in their
place, and reaping the harvests that they had
missed, he felt, unreasonably of course, that he
was taking an advantage of them.

“T never come up this street that I don’t regret
the old gardens.” Warned by her admirable in-
tuitions that something was wrong, she was mak-
ing, he could see, a noble effort to find a subject as
innocuous as the Christian end of old Mrs. Burwell.

“Yes, we do miss them,” he answered, and
gazed at her thoughtfully. Though she still car-
ried herself with her royal air, he had surprised a
stricken look in her eyes. “‘ Yes, we do miss them,”
he repeated.


118 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Walking there at her side, outwardly as prim and
dry as one would-expect a renowned jurist of
sixty-five years and innumerable honours to ap-
pear, he felt within his soul that he had become a
victim of all the conflicts and cruelties of life. The
last thing he wished to do was to hurt her—was,
he amended precisely, to hurt any woman. He
had never been able even to hurt Cordelia without
suffering pangs of remorse. ‘She must have given
up all those hopes years ago,” he thought, and
shivered because he saw the eyes of Mrs. Up-
church upon him as they went by her win-
dows.

“IT hope dear Cordelia’s flowers are still living,”
Amanda said in her tenderest voice, while she lifted
her melting glance to his face.

“Yes, they are doing well, especially the roses.
I have had them looked after.”’

**And her canary birds? I think so often of her
fondness for birds.”

He sighed. Even Cordelia, for all her robust
common sense, had displayed this feminine pre-
dilection for dwelling upon the past.

“We lost two of her best songsters last winter,”
he replied gravely. “‘They got a chill, I imagine.
Canaries are delicate creatures. I have not yet
bought any to replace them. Perhaps next year

” His voice dropped into silence, and he
thought vaguely of Annabel.

“You might like cne of mine. I have so many,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 119


and I should love to give youone. My first canary
was a gift from dear Cordelia.”

Though he accepted the bird gratefully (what
else was there for him to do?), his antiquated
sense of honour began immediately to trouble him.
Was it chivalrous of him to take this canary from
her when she was, he feared, offering it under the
misapprehension that he might relapse into some
sentimental survival of the ’eighties? Though he
tried his best to become modern and devoid of the
sense of responsibility, the traditions in which he
had been brought up were always ready to strangle
his efforts.

After the future of the canary had been happily
settled, he could not fail to observe that her com-
posure became more natural.

“Will you come in and choose it?” she asked,
as they reached her door, “or shall I pick one out
for you?” |

He shook his head, with a murmur, which, he felt
desperately, she might interpret in any way that
she pleased. He would always admire her deeply
—far more deeply because he was protected by her
invincible breeding—yet this very security placed,
as it were, a debt of honour upon him, and he pre-
ferred, when all was said, to admire her at a dis-
tance. So he told her in his softest tone that he
would send the empty cage in the morning, and
after a few discreet amenities, he saw the door
close behind her, and turned away tothe pavement.


120 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


**A little walk will set me up,” he thought briskly.
“There is nothing like a little walk and a thimble-
ful of old Bumgardner before dinner.”

Wheeling about, he started down the street with
a swinging stride; but, however rapid his walk, he
found that the universal melancholy would not
let him escape. Saturated with the languor and
the subtle agitations of the May evening, this
melancholy floated toward him on waves of twi-
light, until, suddenly, in the midst of his reverie,
the image of Annabel darted, like an evocation of
youth, into his mind, as if a solitary nymph had de-
tached herself from his visions. Though he was
prepared for these rosy temptations before he slept,
they had never until this instant pursued him in a
public street.

“It is because I have been a moral man,” he
thought, embittered by the monstrous injustice.
“Tf I had been a rake, this would never have hap-
pened.”

All the women whom he had respected instead
of enjoying, all the women whom he had resisted,
and (more intolerable still) all the women who
might not have resisted him—these hopeless phan-
toms fluttered back to him from the purgatory of
thwarted desires. He thought irrelevantly of the
frivolous French maid his wife had brought over
and then sent home again because she had turned
out to be “not a serious person.”

“IT need exercise,” he said sternly. ‘I must


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 121


arrange to play regularly. The game yesterday
made me sleep better.”” Glancing up, he saw that
he was approaching Doctor Buchanan’s office, and
his mind added automatically: ‘‘It would be well,
perhaps, to have Buchanan go over me.”

Ascending the steps, he rang the bell and waited,
in the hope that, since it was not his usual hour,
the great specialist might refuse to receive him;
but a minute had barely passed when the door
opened, and the physician himself appeared and
dismissed a patient.

“So it’s you, Gamaliel,” he began heartily, for
they were great friends and played both golf and
chess together. ‘I was thinking this morning that
I should tell you to come round and be thumped.
You deserve a thumping after the way you fin-
ished me off yesterday.”

The Judge flushed with pleasure. “‘My golf, at
least, is as good as it ever was.”

“Well, keep it up. Don’t be afraid to feel young.”

It was impossible, reflected the Judge, for any
one to have a more encouraging manner than
Doctor Buchanan’s. Many people came to him,
especially elderly people who wanted to feel young
again; for he was modern and skilful and very ex-
pensive, and he had a diet list for almost every
taste as well as every tendency.

*T thought I’d let you go over me a bit,” re-
plied Judge Honeywell, a trifle nervously. Why
had he come? he asked himself. Was there a pur-


122 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


pose? Or wasn’t there a purpose? Well, which-
ever way it was, it made little difference. ‘Not
that there is anything wrong with me,” he hastened
to add, “the only thing I can complain of is an
occasional headache in the morning when I first
wake up. At my time of life, I suppose, I may ex-
pect this?”

“Been overdoing it a bit, eh?”

“On the contrary. The fact is, I’ve missed my
golf, as you know, several times in the last two
weeks.”

“That may be what’s wrong. Take off your
coat and shirt, and we’ll see in a minute.”

“I was wondering if you’d advise me to change
any of my habits?” inquired the Judge, watching
the plump professional hands wind a band about
his arm. Was there a purpose in his visit? Or
wasn’t there? Well, no matter. _

**Not unless they are bad habits.”” This was so
neat a retort that both men chuckled over it.
Doctor Buchanan, who was an authority upon be-
haviour as well as upon diet, knew that the Judge’s
habits, supervised by Cordelia, had been impec-
cable for thirty-six years. He knew also, though
his patient was ignorant of this, that a powerful
but stealthy motive was now fermenting in the
Judge’s mind.

“Then you would not advise me to give up drink-
ing or smoking? I take only an occasional whiskey
and soda.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 123


“IT advise but one thing, my dear friend, and
that is moderation. Modetation is the first law of
health, and you yourself are a splendid example of
that. Digestion, heart, lungs, liver, all as sound
as a dollar. Your blood pressure is better than a
man of your age deserves. Does anything else
trouble you?” After his thumping and listening
the doctor looked up.

Did anything else trouble him? A little dazed
by the physician’s assurances, Judge Honeywell
stared back at him with innocent and slightly
blinking eyes. No, nothing troubled him. Noth-
ing troubled him, but, perhaps—yes, but this shift-
ing sensation—this indefinite feeling that he was
losing control of his faculties. Nothing but these
—well, these spells of loose thinking. Ah, that
was the weakness that he disliked and condemned
in the present age; for his own mental state re-
sembled, at its best, a reservoir of opinions rather
than a babbling stream of consciousness. Loose
thinking. Lack of discipline, lack of precision,
lack of proper coédrdination. These absurd and
vagrant fantasies now—what else could you caH
them? Yet even calling them by their right name
did not make them exactly the kind of troubles
you could confide to a physician. Certainly not te
a physician with whom you played golf three times
a week and chess every Saturday night.

**No, nothing that is worth bothering you with,”
he answered at last.


124 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“Well, keep up your pleasures, and don’t be
afraid to feel young. If you’ve noticed any un-
steadiness in your nerves, it is probably the need
of a fresh interest. Seclusion is bad for anybody,
and as a general law there is nothing better than:
Trust in God and keep your diet light.” His
immense laugh boomed out. ‘“‘With religion and a
light diet, you may live to be a hundred.”

The words and, even more than the words, that
commanding voice, summoned order out of chaos
in Judge Honeywell’s mind. What had been merely
a stealthy motive when he entered the office, be-
came a dominant purpose as he descended the
steps.

“T sha’n’t hesitate any longer,” he decided, with
an inspiring sense of mastery over life. ‘‘ After all,
it may be for the best. After all, who knows but
I may make her happier than a younger man could
have done?”


XL
F COURSE I am fond of him,” Annabel said


artlessly. “‘He gives me such nice presents.”

“You must remember,” admonished Mrs. Up-
church, with the sprightly cynicism she reserved
for difficult situations, “‘that only elderly men
give so many presents. Young men are not gen-
erous, my dear.” And she sighed presently,
“They don’t have to be.”

Her words or her sigh had put a new thought into
Annabel’s mind, and in her flighty way, for her
sagacity, unlike her mother’s, was entirely natural
and unpremeditated, she pursued it daringly into
the open. “If only he wanted to marry you,
Mother, it would be so much more suitable. Why,
he is ever so much older than you are.”

““Widowers of his age, my dear, seldom marry
middle-aged widows.”

‘But they are the very ones they ought to
marry. It is so suitable.”

Again Mrs. Upchurch sighed and reflected.
“They usually want young women, Annabel, and
when you have had more experience, you will under-
stand that it is not easy to curb the nature of
man.”

125


126 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


For an instant, Annabel stared at her in silence.
Then she rejoined- with a mocking laugh, “I can
see why men should hold that opinion, but what
I can’t understand is the way the Judge has passed
over a woman who wouldn’t curb him for a woman
who would. Now, you would make exactly the
right wife for a man who has never been curbed in
his nature.”

For the third time Mrs. Upchurch sighed, after
she had ceased to reflect. Annabel, as she was
fond of complaining, was altogether too much for
her; and though she was only forty-eight, and very
pretty still, she had cheerfully relinquished her
prospects of marriage to her daughter. It is
true that she would not have refused any promising
offer; but, after her maiden effort, she had failed to
bring genuine enthusiasm to the pursuit of men,
and since her interest had flagged, she found it less
exhausting to struggle for her daughter’s provision
than for her own. Marriage, as she remembered
it, was a wearing experience; and though she still
besought Providence for a rich and indulgent
husband for herself and father for her child, her
prayers had become simply another monotonous
ritual.

““Of course every woman would prefer to marry
for love,” she said, and qualified her assertion
with, ‘‘at least for the first time. Love fills the
lives of most women, especially the lives of the
women who have never had it. All girls ought to


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 127


have the experience once, if only to find out how
much it has been exaggerated.”

**T wish I could never hear the word love again!”’
Annabel exclaimed, with smothered violence, which
brought a flush to her cheeks and made her
look indescribably lovely. “‘And [ve told you a
hundred times that I despise young men!”

“In that case,” rejoined Mrs. Upchurch erisply,
“there is less reason why you should not marry
an elderly one. After all, every woman has to
choose, if she only knew it, between a young hus-
band who is seldom there when you want him and
an elderly one who is always there when you don’t
want him. I don’t mean, of course,” she hastened
to explain, “that Judge Honeywell is really old.
Only that he is a great deal too old for you.”

“So long as he is old,’’ Annabel declared, “I
don’t care how old heis. It is this horrible poverty
that I can’t bear,’ she continued passionately.
**Tt’s bad enough to be poor when you’re happy,
but to be poor when you’re unhappy is too much
to endure.”

‘TI was just thinking that, Annabel. Of course,
I wouldn’t for the world advise you to do anything
you might one day regret; but it had occurred to
me that, since you feel that you can never be happy
again, it might help you a good deal to be com-
fortable. Now that this last cotton mill has
closed down, and every room we can spare has
been let to a lodger, I really don’t see what we are


128 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


going to do. And the Judge’s wanting to marry
you has in a way complicated the situation. When
he gives so many useless presents, it makes it all
the harder to ask him for absolute necessities.”

“Oh, these lodgers!” Annabel gasped. ‘“‘When
I wake up in the night and want to scream, I feel
that they are suffocating me.”

She glanced about the shabby bedroom, and then
at the door, which they kept tightly closed, even
in hot weather, because of the inquisitiveness of
lodgers. Beyond the door, her imagination passed
into the narrow hall, with its dingy staircase, where
the perpetual odours of food hung suspended.

**TIs this what you call genteel poverty, Mother?”
she inquired in accents of desperation.

“T suppose it is, dear,” admitted Mrs. Upchurch,
and she added presently: “If beggars only real-
ized their advantages!”

“Even if I make anything from my landscape
gardening, it won’t be enough for us to live on.
Not for years, anyhow.”

““And we can’t very well go on taking help from
Judge Honeywell after you have refused him.”

“We can’t!” retorted Annabel, in surprise.
““Why can’t we?”

' Mrs. Upchurch shook her head. ‘Because men
aren’t made that way, Annabel.”

“But he has always helped us.”

“Not to the same extent. Very sparingly, in-
deed, since Cousin Cordelia died. In the case of


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 129


most rich men,” she concluded briskly, “‘ generosity
requires the spur of some other impulse.”

- “Well, if I married him, would he give you a
home—a comfortable house, without lodgers, and
with servants in clean aprons?”

In rare moments, and this was one of them,
Mrs. Upchurch felt that Annabel’s charm brought
a lump to her throat. There was a quality
in the girl’s loveliness, a romantic appeal, that,
she told herself, no man could resist. Yet the
passion of men, she knew, is as uncertain as their
liberality, and in marriage, however disappointing,
the law did make provision.

“You must not think of me, darling,” she an-
swered, with a strangled sob. “I have but one
desire on earth, and that is to see you happily
settled before I die.”

“You aren’t thinking of dying, Mother.”

**One can never tell, my child. Women of my
time of life often develop some fatal malady. In
any case, all I ask is to see you safely settled.”

For a few moments, Annabel pondered the com-
plications of living, and then, since there were
evidently complications here also, of dying. At
last she said, in a small precise voice, “I don’t
know that I should mind it so very much.”

“Mind what?”

“Mind marrying him. Id do almost anything
not to have to worry about money. Do you sup-
pose he’d pay all our bills?”


130 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Mrs. Upchurch answered this question with a
prompt retort: “You don’t know what marriage
means.”

Annabel, who was young enough to dislike being
told there was anything she did not know, and who
had read all the forbidden books she could borrow,
as well as many others, responded in a tone of care-
less confidence, “‘I know more than you think.”

“Do you? Well, you didn’t learn it from me,”
breathed Mrs. Upchurch, from the depths of her
heart. ‘‘That comes, I suppose, of so much read-
ing, and even if reading improves the mind, I’m
sure nobody could pretend that, in these days, it
benefits the morals.”’

Though she had retained few moral prejudices,
and those few were of the major variety, which does
little harm, she was still shocked by the levity
with which the youth of the present picked its dan-
gerous way over the bare rocks of vital statistics.
Amid the decent conventions in which she had been
educated, people dealt only in private, and even
then evasively, with the facts of life; and she could
not divest herself of an impression that the facts
of life were not of a character to bear public ex-
posure. Surely there were some things that God
knew best about.

“*T would not for the world have you do anything
that you might regret,” she repeated nervously.
“But, of course, if you are sure that you have got
over all romantic feeling |


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 131


Instead of completing her sentence, for, unlike
Annabel, she felt that there were some things you
simply could not put into words, she leaned for-
ward and fastened her anxious gaze upon her
daughter.

“The funny part is,’ Annabel said resolutely,
“that I used to think he belonged to Cousin
Amanda. Is there anything between him and
Cousin Amanda? I wouldn’t take a man away
from another woman,” she added, “if he were as
rich as Creesus.”

Mrs. Upchurch hesitated for an instant, and in
that hesitation she was stung by the prick of
her conscience. She knew Amanda’s history as
well as any one, perhaps better, for her pene-
tration was keen in such matters; yet she could
not, in her own mind, decide where to place the
blame for the unhappy end of that old engage-
ment. Such faithfulness was magnificent, of
course, but it was not human. She was sincerely
sorry for Amanda, and she regretted that her own
reduced circumstances compelled her to encourage
Judge Honeywell’s attentions to her daughter; but,
after all, didn’t the whole unfortunate affair only
go to prove how little spinsters really know about
life? To spend more than thirty years preserving
an ideal merely to discover that the old ideal has
been discarded for a new one, was, she admitted,
sufficient to destroy the hardiest perennial among
illusions. But what married woman, above all


132 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


what widow who had been left unprovided for,
would have shown_so little understanding of the
true nature of man?

“All that happened long ago,” she said vaguely.

“Then it did happen?”

“Then what happened?” echoed Mrs. Upchurch,
playing gallantly for time. In her adroit handling
of human frailty, all that she had ever asked of
Providence was a little time.

““Whatever was between them,” Annabel per-
sisted.

“Well, they were engaged. But that was before
he met Cordelia.”

_ “Did Judge Honeywell treat her badly?”
“Oh, no.” Mrs. Upchurch breathed more
freely. ‘No one ever intimated that. Amanda
broke the engagement.”

“‘She must have seen that he wanted it.”

“But he didn’t want it. He was almost dis-
tracted. Of course, I was a child when it happened,
but I remember hearing afterward that there was a
quarrel. It seems so strange, because Amanda
has always had the sweetest disposition on earth,
and never quarrelled with anybody else in her life.
But there’s something in love, especially when it
is very intense, that seems to upset the temper.
Anyhow, she made the mistake of going abroad,
and he couldn’t follow her immediately because he
was a young lawyer with several important cases.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 133


When at last he was able to go after her, he met
Cordelia on the boat and a7

“You mean she caught him on the rebound?”

“Well, that isn’t a nice way to put it. But he
was wrought up, and emotions are queer things.
The most opposite ones, like love and anger, seem
to plunge straight into each other without warning.
It was the time chiefly, and Cordelia happened to
be present. When you know men a little better,
my child, you will understand that it isn’t so much
the person as the time with a number of them.
Even beauty or charm isn’t so important as being
right on the spot.”

**Did it go hard with Cousin Amanda?”

“That is what no one ever heard from her lips.
The nice women of her generation never talked of
their feeling for men. For a year she stayed
abroad with a nervous breakdown, and they
were not nearly so common then as they have be-
come since the war. But when she finally came |
home, she was as lovely as ever. She turned down
every eligible man in Queenborough, and I think,
poor dear, that she got some silly idea into her head
that she had been to blame and that she would
make reparation by being faithful to the past as
long as she lived. Of course, she never mentioned
this tome. She has far too much delicacy to con-
fess that she had been disappointed in love; but
we could see that she has just gone on trying harder


134 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


and harder to be what he had always admired.
She has even gone on, year in and year out, wear-
ing her hair the way he preferred, no matter what
the fashion was at the time, and she has never
worn any colours but blue and lavender because
they used to be his favourites.”

‘He likes red and green now.”

“I know, but, you see, she never took into con-
sideration the way tastes change. She simply
made a fetish of faithfulness.”

**Do you think she has got over it?”

“Oh, she must have. Why, she can’t be far
from sixty to-day.”

“Well, he’s over sixty-five,’ Annabel re-
joined. “I wish he would fall back in love with
her. It would be so romantic.”

“He wouldn’t think so, my dear. Men aren’t
made like that, and they have their own peculiar
ideas of romance—even the elderly ones. If you
refuse him, he won’t turn back to Amanda, but to-
ward one of the buds of next season. Of course, it
is disgusting, but, after all, that’s the way they’re
made, and when an elderly man has once got the
maggot of youth in his head, it takes him a long
time to get over it. If he had never thought of
you, or of any other young girl in that way, he
might have married Amanda, but you never
can tell. You must remember,” she concluded,
with a refrain which was less irrelevant than it
sounded, ‘“‘that he has a great deal of money.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 135


Some young girl will always be ready to marry
him.”

“TY could never do it,” Annabel said resolutely.

The front door downstairs opened suddenly, and
the marching tramp of feet ascended the staircase.
A few minutes later, the odour of a cheap cigar
floated in from the bedroom across the hall.

“You mustn’t raise your voice,” Mrs. Upchurch
whispered warningly. “‘The lodgers are coming
in. Now, about this matter of the cotton mill.
Do you think it would be a lack of delicacy to con-
sult Judge Honeywell?”

Annabel sprang up from the couch were she had
been lounging, and shook down her hair with a
spirited gesture. What lovely hair it was, Mrs.
Upchurch thought while she watched her. Just
enough coppery lights in the brown to enhance
the creamy tones in her skin. And those gray-
green eyes exactly the colour of dawn on the sea!
How foolish she had been to regret that her baby
had not inherited the obvious blue of her father’s
eyes!

“Are you going out, dear?” she inquired, still
watching Annabel divide the short, thick waves of
hair and twist the shining clusters into two soft
rolls behind her pretty ears. ‘Remember to
hold up your head. The curve of your profile is
lovely with your head held up, and, besides, it’s a
good habit and wards off a double chin.”

After powdering her nose and touching her lips


136 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


with a red pencil, Annabel turned away from the
mirror. ‘Yes, I’m going out,” she replied in the
repressed tones they had both used since they had
heard the lodgers enter. ‘“‘Isn’t it simply hell to be
poor, Mother?”

Mrs. Upchurch nodded. “It is not easy, my
child.”

Annabel, who had dipped into the closet,
emerged with a cloche of brown felt, which she
pulled firmly down over her hair and one eyebrow.
Standing there, in the band of sunlight that
streamed through the window over a whitewashed
wall, she seemed to her mother, as she had
seemed to the Judge, the youngest thing in the
world. Not that she was really so young, pur-
sued Mrs. Upchurch, who was nothing if not ac-
curate in her calculations. Twenty-three, even
in these days, was a good marriageable age; but
there was an elemental freshness in the girl’s
nature that kept her childlike in spite of her mis-
adventure in love. And she could never be too
thankful, reflected Mrs. Upchurch, that there was.
nothing of the flapper in Annabel. She did not
drink or smoke; and she had never, even before she
fell in love with Angus, indulged in wild escapades.
She was an earnest little thing, for all her mock-
ing defiance; and there were moments when her
strength of character was almost a shock to her
mother, who liked to feel that she could twist men
and women alike through her capable fingers. It


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 137


was just as if in gardening her trowel had suddenly
struck against a rock beneath the fragile bloom of a
flower-bed. Yes, an earnest little thing, and gener-
ous, too generous for her own happiness, mused
Mrs. Upchurch; for she had not failed to observe
that generosity, though meritorious in principle,
is not a virtue that advances you in the affairs of
the world. Especially in love. Yes, especially in
love, she proceeded, arrested, after the curious
habit of women, by the high-sounding word.
Though she was chaste by instinct and cheerful
from necessity, she had had her dreams, and it
seemed to her regrettable that the hearts of men,
like professional beggars, should thrive better upon
a dole a day than upon a bountiful feast.

Still sighing, she asked in her clear voice, which
cooed only when she wanted something, “Are you
going out, dear?”

Annabel turned and looked at her with one of
those flashes of independent judgment to which
Mrs. Upchurch had never become reconciled.
“TI am going to ask Cousin Amanda if she still
cares for Judge Honeywell,” she answered, calmly
adjusting on her slender wrist a gold-mesh bag the
Judge had given her.

Mrs. Upchurch opened her merry gray eyes still
wider. ‘‘Oh, Annabel, you can’t ask her anything
like that! Haven’t you a particle of delicacy?
Besides, she wouldn’t dream of telling you.”

Annabel shook her head impatiently. “Why


138 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


shouldn’t she? How can you expect people to
know things if you-don’t tell them?”

“But she doesn’t want you to know. Even if
she still cared—and no woman who is upward
of fifty-five would nourish any such feeling—she
would pretend that she didn’t.”

*‘T know you used to be that way,” Annabel said
scornfully, “but I don’t see what good you got out
of it.”

*“My dear child,” murmured Mrs. Upchurch
feebly. ‘‘Even in my day, and I am ever so much
younger than your Cousin Amanda, self-control
was still considered a virtue in women.”

“But what was the sense of making a corner in
virtue, and leaving none for men to exercise their
character upon? If men have become morally
flabby, women like you and Cousin Amanda are to
blame.” ;

“Annabel!” For this was more than Mrs. Up-
church could hear without protest.

“T am sorry, Mother, but you know how I hate
shams. Even if we aren’t any better to-day, we
are certainly more real, and that’s something to
be said for us. Anyhow,” she added gaily, as she
opened the door, “I am going to ask Cousin
Amanda. It isn’t my fault that you are all such
unconscionable liars!”

“Hush, Annabel. Remember the lodgers,”
Mrs. Upchurch whispered nervously.

“Tam remembering them, and Judge Honeywell


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 139


too. That’s why I’m going. Liver again, and
fried!”’ she called back from the head of the steps.
“Why, I wonder, does the frying of the poor smell
so much more opulent than the frying of the
rich?”

On the front pavement, in the very act of turn-
ing into the gate, she encountered Mrs. Bredalbane,
who was obliged to finish her panting before she
could begin to articulate.

“‘T am trying to get up an appetite for dinner,”
Edmonia explained, “‘so I walked up from the
hotel. If your mother isn’t at home, I'll have to
rest a bit, anyway.”

Her voice was hoarse from dryness, and there
was a string of beads on the black down that bor-
dered her upper lip. Musty with age, thought
Annabel, positively musty, though interesting be-
cause of her unusual opportunities.

*“Oh, Mother is there, and she will be glad to
see you.”

Still heaving in distress, Mrs. Bredalbane
planted her feet in the path. She had evidently
no intention of moving until she had recovered
her breath, and the sound that issued from be-
neath her handsome black lace mantle did not en-
courage the hope that her recovery would be a
rapid one.

“T’ve just come from Gamaliel,”’ she gasped
presently. “‘He told me he’d started you in
business.”


140 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“Yes, he was a perfect dear about it.”

“‘Why didn’t you wait until you’d married and
been left a widow?”

“IT mightn’t have been left a widow. Some
people aren’t.”

“You will be, if you marry Gamaliel. But you
will pay a high price for the perquisite. Not that
I am running down the condition of widowhood,
but no woman ought to marry for the first time a
man old enough to be her father or grandfather.
I thought,” she panted moodily after a pause, “‘that
Gamaliel was going to marry Amanda. Heaven
intended him to marry Amanda.”

“Then I wish he’d go and do it,”” Annabel re-
plied with spirit. “‘Heaven doesn’t wish it a bit
more than I do. Perhaps she won’t marry him.
I am going now to ask her how she feels about it.”

Mrs. Bredalbane strangled a husky laugh.
“And you expect her to tell you?”

“Why shouldn’t she? I told her about Angus.
I told everybody about Angus. What is there so
moral or delicate in lying?”

“Oh, you moderns!” Mrs. Bredalbane ex-
claimed heartily. “It’s safer to be modern now
than it was when I grew up and had to leave
Queenborough. But the truth is, I suppose, that
Gamaliel thinks he is too young for her. He thinks
he is too young for me, though we were born
twins. I must say the delusion agrees with him.
I never saw him look better.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 141


Annabel nodded. “Yes, he is a very distin-
guished-looking old gentleman.”

“Old gentleman,’ you minx! Haven’t I just
told you that Gamaliel and I are twins? As long
as I can keep an appetite and am not afraid of
food, I shall think twice before I admit that I am
an old lady.”

*“Well, I don’t care whether he is old or not. I
don’t like young men.”

“You won’t say that twenty years from now, nor
forty, either, for that matter. That’s the worst
thing about growing old. Old age always wants
to pick the wrong associates. Now, Gamaliel has
got the notion that it makes him appear young to
gad about with what he calls his sweet girls, but,
if he only had sense enough to see it, he’d stay
young twice as long with Amanda. With Amanda,
he is a middle-aged man, but with you he looks
what you’ve just called him—a distinguished old
gentleman.”

“TI don’t see why he doesn’t want to marry
Cousin Amanda. It would be so suitable.”

“That’s probably the reason. The suitable is
the last thing we ever want.”

‘Anyhow, I’m going to ask her.”

“Well, run on. It will be improper, but thank
the Lord that you live in an age when you can be
improper without having to go abroad. In my
day, you couldn’t be, though that’s all changed
now, and Amanda can’t do any worse than pretend


142 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


to you, which is the only thing she has done since
she became Gamaliel’s ideal.”

She waddled resolutely up the path on her way
to advise Mrs. Upchurch, who found nothing more
depressing than advice, since she knew her own
mind but needed money, which even the best ad-
vice seldom brought.


XII


| HER dull drawing-room, Amanda sat looking
thoughtfully, though as usual she was not think-
ing, at her gilded bird-cages. Serene, unselfish, with
the reminiscence of a vanished day in her face and
figure, she belonged to that fortunate generation
of women who had no need to think, since every-
thing was decided for them by the feelings of a
lady and the Episcopal Church. Even this matter
of unrequited affection, this very urgent and pain-
ful matter of a broken heart, was eased of confusion,
if not of soreness, by the infallible instinct that
impelled her to pretend it away. She was wearing
a dress of lavender crépe, with a modified late-
Victorian waistline, and her abundant hair, like
powdered twilight, was arranged a la Pompadour.
Neither time nor her blighted romance had been
able entirely to destroy a complexion that, as
Mrs. Bredalbane had remarked almost forty years
before, was the only perfect substitute for intelli-
gence.

““Why, Annabel,” she said, rising gracefully and
bending to kiss the girl’s cheek. “It is so good of
you to come. This is what dear Mother used to
call her lonely hour.”’

143


144 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


**Oh, I like to come,” responded Annabel, sitting
down on the edge of a hard sofa that was up-
holstered in plush. ‘I am fond of you, and I am
fond of the birds.”

“They are darlings,” assented Amanda, in so
musical a voice that the canaries began to pipe
in their luxurious cages.

“Cousin Amanda,” Annabel began courage-
ously, “are you happy?”

“Why, yes, dear.”” Amanda’s tone was tinged
with astonishment. ‘“‘I should be very ungrateful
if I were not happy, with all my blessings.”

“But blessings don’t make us happy,” returned
Annabel, and she thought, “She is so noble that
she creaks. I wonder if they were all like that,
except Mrs. Bredalbane, who is disreputable?”

“They do, if we attune our minds to them.”

“Yet so often they aren’t what we really want,
but what God or other people think best for us.”

*“Well, my dear, who should know better than
God?”

“'That’s what Mother says, and I suppose it’s a
comfort if you can feel like that, though I don’t
see how you ever bring yourself to it. Now, I
know the things that I want even better than God
does, and Id like to be consulted before I am
blessed—permanently, anyhow. Nobody can make
me believe,” she finished passionately, “that it is
good for my soul to live on fried liver and scram-
bled eggs.”


>


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 145


Amanda’s faith, though sufficient for an ample
income, had never been called upon to contend
with the sordid problems of poverty. Smiling as
sweetly as ever, for only a surgical operation could
have altered the prim sweetness of her smile, she
murmured gently that God had been very good to
her, and that even her dear father had been spared
to her until he was ninety.

“IT wish you and your mother could come to
dinner often,” she added generously, for as much
mind as she had was practical, and she honestly
wished to help the needy. “It is a great pleasure
to have you. Mother used to say that Bella’s
sunny temper was worth a fortune.”

Annabel laughed. ‘I wish somebody would buy
it.” For an instant, she hesitated and then re-
sumed her intimate questions. ‘You never get
lonely, do you, Cousin Amanda?”

Amanda lifted her calm eyes, which reminded
the girl of blue enamel, to the portrait of a lady in
an immense chignon and miniature bonnet. “I
miss my dear mother and father, but I have the
kindest nephews and nieces in the world, and they
leave me so little time to myself. This house is
filled with young people all day long. They refuse
to let me grow old.”

‘And you don’t miss anything else? Honestly,
now, Cousin Amanda?”

A shadow as swift as the flight of a bird dark-
ened the stainless enamel. Yes, Mother is right,


146 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Annabel thought, Cousin Amanda is a perfect lady,
and the only trouble with perfect ladies is that
they lie as perfectly as they behave.

“Oh, I haven’t time to think of anything else.
I am kept too busy making people happy about
me,” Amanda responded. “Every morning, as
soon as I wake, I ask God to direct me to the great-
est good I can do that day. Then, almost always,
my prayer is answered before I’ve finished break-
fast. I am sure to hear of someone who is ill, or
one of the children runs in to have a hurt bandaged.
Or there is a distressing case among my poor that
must be attended to immediately. The days pass
so quickly when you are doing things for others.
Dear little Annabel ’’—the level tones rose suddenly
in supplication—‘*‘God doesn’t let you be unhappy
while you are doing His will.”

Didn’t He? Well, what was His will, and how
did you know it? demanded Annabel, who was
sure that she shouldn’t have been made happy by
the will she had seen manifested to her mother
and Cousin Amanda. Nor did Cousin Amanda
appear to be as happy as she said that she was—
not when you were close enough to see the circles
under her eyes. She looked quiet, but she looked
also, in some inexplicable way, hurt, as if God’s
will with her had been firm rather than gentle, and
had given her a moment, at least, of unpleasant
surprise. Oh, if people would only be direct in-
stead of painfully subtle!


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 147


“Then you never, never regret that you didn’t
marry?” she asked abruptly. “I am not just im-
pertinent, Cousin Amanda. I have my reason, a
very urgent reason, for wishing to know.”

Amanda started, for questions like this, even
with urgent reason, were never asked an unmar-
ried woman when she was young.

“Why, no, dear,” she replied with an edge of
frost to her tone.

“You weren’t sorry that you broke your en-
gagement to Judge Honeywell?”

“Why, no, dear. You must remember that hap-
pened more than thirty years ago.” If her face
ached from smiling, there was no sign of pain in
her manner.

“Mother said he was almost distracted. But
you never regretted it?”

“Why, no, dear.”” Amanda hesitated, and then
spoke in a frozen voice. “I broke my engagement
just before I sailed for Europe with my dear mother,
who died while I was over there. I felt that I
could not be separated from my mother and father
as long as they lived. That was why,” she added
unflinchingly, “I never married.”

“You wouldn’t marry him now, would you?”

At this impertinent question, Amanda lowered
her gaze for the first time, while a burning flush
stained her features. For an instant, her throat
quivered convulsively beneath the narrow band of
black velvet.


148 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“Why, no, dear,” she repeated mechanically,
and added with a touch of asperity, “At my time
of life, one no longer thinks of marriage.”

“But he might. Men do, don’t they?”

**Well, men are different.”” It was the proverb-
ial reply to such a question; yet hearing the classic
precept for the hundredth time, Annabel asked
herself if life had been less confusing to people who
lived by a simple formula instead of by intricate
reason. A law of nature might sound less final
than an Act of God, but it was certainly more au-
thoritative, as well as more consoling to religious
minds, than a mere infirmity of man.

“Oh, Cousin Amanda, please marry him!”
she cried out suddenly, with one of her dangerous
impulses.

After all, you were obliged to make an effort
to find out the truth, even if your questions did
slide over the brightly lacquered surface of
Amanda’s manner. There were moments, and
this was one of them, when it seemed to Annabel
that the whole world and all people everywhere,
except herself and Angus, whom she hated, were
only half animate. Was there a sounder reality
beneath this complicated system of living? Was
it possible to make an impression upon that cool,
inviolable texture of good taste? Good taste!
thought the girl scornfully; for, as her mother so
often reminded her, she had thrown not only good
taste but decorum to the winds when she met dis-


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 149


appointment. How could it matter, she thought
passionately, whether you are unhappy in good
taste or bad, so long as you are unhappy? Yet
both her mother and Cousin Amanda put breeding
before happiness even in tragedy, even at funerals,
where the quality of the crépe was more remarked
than the quantity of the grief.

“Why, Annabel, are you out of your head?” A
breeze of exasperation had at last ruffled the
suavity of Amanda’s voice. “Such an idea has
never so much as crossed my mind. Judge Honey-
well and I are the best of friends. The best of
friends,’ she repeated, with firmness and without
emotion, “but as to marrying him or anybody
else, the idea has never crossed my mind. If you
could see how full my life is, with the incessant
demands of my nieces and nephews and all my
charities, you would understand that I have no
time to think of marriage. If I didn’t marry
when I was young and had so many opportunities,
I should certainly not care to assume such re-
sponsibilities late in life. Indeed, I have always
thought,’ she added with an earnestness which
sounded sincere, “‘that it is a mistake for women
to marry late in life.”

Yes, it sounded sincere; but was it? Annabel
didn’t know, and she realized that she could never
know, for the virtue of perfect behaviour lies, not
in its rightness, but in its impenetrability. It


150 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


might be, as her mother insisted, that all good
women of the Nineteenth Century were passive
in temperament, and were, therefore, more dis-
posed to lean back upon the prerogatives of men—
or the Acts of God, if they preferred to think in
dignified terms.

Well, she couldn’t help it, Annabel concluded,
gazing with hurt and hungry eyes at Cousin
Amanda, who was being noble in thought and
attitude on a hard Victorian sofa.

“T wish you would talk freely to me, Cousin
Amanda,” the girl said, as she rose and turned her
cheek for a kiss.

* “Nice women don’t talk about their private
affairs, Annabel,’’? Amanda answered, with re-
covered sweetness. ‘“‘When you are older, you
will know better. Nice women never, never ask
each other such questions.”

“TI told you about Angus. I told everybody.
If I hadn’t, I should have died of the pain.”

Amanda shook her head. ‘“‘Not if you had
governed your mind, my dear. You should
study to control your temperament and govern
your mind properly.”

This was all. There wasn’t any help in Cousin
Amanda. She talked of temperament exactly as
if she meant temper. Yet, in spite of her self-
control and her governed mind and her reliance
upon God’s will, in spite even of her attentive


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 151


nephews and nieces and her vocal canary birds,
she did not look happy. Calm, perhaps; but was
it, after all, merely the calmness of resignation?
One thing, at least, Annabel told herself, she had
discovered: there was little help to be found in
perfect behaviour.


XU


ELL, that was over, Annabel thought im-
patiently, as she descended the steps into the
diffused violet dusk of the June evening.

Not only was she enveloped in this dusk, but
it stole into her breast like a living thing, and ached
there, struggling to break free, as if it were the vital
spirit of summer. Why did she suffer so? What
was there in beauty, and in the longing for beauty,
that tormented her like a flame? Her mother and
Cousin Amanda had not felt like this. But were
they really happier? And what did anybody know
about feeling? Why, for instance, did it die quite
down, and then start up suddenly again from the
dead embers? There were whole days, weeks
even, when she did not think of Angus, or, if she
thought of him, it was merely with the surface of
her mind, where impressions skimmed like shadows,
not with the deep places, not with the deep below
the deep places in her soul. For weeks it would
be like this. Then, without warning, in spring
or summer nights, she would begin to ache again
with the memory of Angus—or was it only with
the longing for love? Was the memory of Angus

152


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 153


inextricably woven with the thought of love in her
mind, and would it be like this forever?

“T can’t bear it,” she whispered, “I can’t bear
summer without love.”

And why was it, she asked herself desperately,
that love or hatred, or whatever the feeling was
called from which you suffered, grew worse on hot
nights, on summer nights when the moonlight was
alive and the scent of magnolia blossoms quivered
in the motionless air, and there was a curious
arrested excitement in your heart, an excitement
that vibrated in circles but never flowed onward
into space. And somewhere in France Angus
was making love. Well, she did not care. She no
longer loved him; but it was strange the way that
hating a person could make you suffer so desper-
ately. Even though she hated him, and wanted
to escape from love as long as she lived, she still
remembered the little things, the foolish little
things, that made him different from everyone
else in the world. His smile, his eyes with the
brown flecks in the gray, his queer frowning look
when he was stirred . . . Oh, well, what did
anything matter?

Ahead of her, in the visionary passage between
light and darkness, spreading elm boughs looked
as diaphanous as mist against the greenish blue
of the evening sky. Beyond the trees, where the
shadows ended, a glaze of electric light fell over
the pavement; and through this glaze, indistinct


154 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


figures were swimming toward her. When they
came nearer, she saw that one of these figures, and
certainly the most impressive, was Judge Honey-
well. As he recognized her, his grave Roman
features were suffused with emotion, and he ap-
peared surprisingly young for his years. Oh,
what did age, what did anything matter when
you were over with love?

“T’ve brought you a bangle I saw at Tiffany’s
the other day,” he said. “It had just come in,
and I thought of you as soon as I saw it.”

“Oh, that was good of you. Of course, I adore
presents!”’ (What was love, after all, and how
did you bear it when it came and went like the pain
in a nerve?)

They went up the walk together, and into the
warm, gas-lighted room, which had been, in the
affluent days of an earlier generation, the front
parlour. Remnants of the esthetic taste of another
century were still embalmed there in the changeless
medium of straitened circumstances; and though
Annabel had made half-hearted efforts to bring
comfort out of nothing, the room had settled at
last into the discouraging aspect of a place where
only the things that nobody would buy were
left.

Under the tarnished chandelier, the table was
already laid for supper; but at the sound of a male
visitor, Altrusa, the coloured cook, who was pre-
destinarian in religion but had a firm hand with


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 155


a crisis, had whisked away every reminder of the
evening meal except its smell. Annabel, watching
the hasty flutter of a soiled apron, and knowing
that the liver waited, congealing in its grease, be-
hind the door, thought quickly, as if it were a
flash of pain instead of an idea: “Anyhow, I’ve
played fair. I gave Cousin Amanda her chance.
Perhaps she didn’t want it. . . . Oh, well,
what does anything matter?”

“It is very warm in here,” remarked the Judge,
which was true but superfluous.

While he commented upon the heat, he was
slowly removing a small white box from his
pocket, and after disengaging it from a shred of
tissue paper and a bit of elastic, he held out a
jewel case of crimson morocco. Having reached
the time of life when even the best men, however
securely rooted they may be as pillars of society,
are obliged to depend largely upon presents in
courtship, he was not unreasonably trying to make
the most of the occasion.

“Tt is always hot here in summer,” replied Anna-
bel, and she added bitterly: ‘Another summer!
I don’t see how I can bear it in this house!”

At her wail of despair, Judge Honeywell opened
the jewel case and disclosed a sapphire bracelet on
a lining of white velvet. As he held it out, his
admiring gaze travelled from the sapphires to
Annabel’s tragic face. :

“My dear little girl,” he said tenderly. “If


156 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


only you would let me take you away! If only
you would let me.take you to beautiful places!”

Annabel was gazing up at him with famished,
resentful eyes, with eyes which had not lost even
for an instant the look of sudden despair that
Angus had brought into them.

‘Would it be a long way off?” she asked
yearningly; for she cherished the general delusion
that you can leave unhappiness at home, like a
discarded garment, when you set out on your
travels.

“‘Anywhere. Around the world, if you wish
i

At this she drew a step nearer; and very gently,
for Cordelia had severely discouraged the pleasures
of love, he enfolded her in his arms.

“Do you know, I am really fond of you?” she
said, smiling down on the bracelet.

Yet, with the words on her lips, she was thinking
how different old arms were from young ones, how
different Judge Honeywell’s embrace was from the
embrace of Angus, who was both impetuous and
violent in his tenderness. Well, she was glad that
they were different, that they were old arms, wooden
arms, like branches of a dead tree, she found her-
self thinking, and there could be no reminder of
last summer.

And while she was thanking the invisible Powers
that he was not young and would not be too
affectionate, Judge Honeywell, clasping her gently


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 157


but ardently to his breast, was transfigured by a
glow, a rapture, a vital flame. For, if his arms
felt like the branches of a dead tree, his spirit
was quickening with the deep pulsations of sum-
mer. Not only the cords of prudence about his
heart, but the very crust of civilization, dis-
solved in the burning magic of that embrace.
Forgetting his age, his dignity, his reputation,
forgetting his secret fear of himself and of Annabel,
he surrendered utterly to a youth that, since it
lived only in dreams, was as inextinguishable as
desire. And forgetting even the realistic tone of
the period, he allowed his ecstasy to overflow in
the grandiloquent pitch of the ’eighties.

“You little thing, you adorable little thing,”’ he
heard himself murmuring in a voice that was as
faint and thin in his ears as the chiming of distant
bells. “I know I am not worthy. I know I do
not deserve such happiness. But I love you. I
love you in a way I did not believe possible. For
the first time in my life. For the first time in my
life,’ he repeated, almost strangled by the fervour
of his emotion, “‘I know what it is to love without
one selfish desire. Your happiness—all I ask on
earth is your happiness. If you will trust me,
my darling—if only you will trust me. I promise
you—I promise you, if only you will trust me i


Upstairs, in her suffocating bedroom, where the
gas sang as it flared from the single jet that was


158 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


lighted, Mrs. Upchurch was laboriously embroider-
ing a frock of blue linen for Annabel, while she
regretted, after her practical habit of mind, that
machine stitching was held in disfavour. She had
paused to wipe her flushed and perspiring brow,
when she heard behind her the sepulchral whisper
of Altrusa.

“Dat ar ole Jedge is down yonder agin wid
Miss Annabel.” For Altrusa, who was old enough
to have escaped the perils of public education, still
yielded to the temptation of dialect in dramatic
moments.

Mrs. Upchurch laid aside her handkerchief and
picked up her needle. ‘Has he come back so
soon?” she inquired, with interest. ‘Well, you’d
better not wait, if it is time for your prayer-meet-
ing. Just leave the things as they are, and I'll
pretend we’ve had supper, and wash up after he
has gone.” Her ingenuity, as usual, was equal
to the occasion. Nevertheless, she sighed as she
ran her needle along the edge of the pattern; for
necessity, which had reconciled her to pretending,
had failed to overcome her deep-rooted objection
to washing dishes.

“Whyn’t you lemme ring de supper bell right
close ter de do’?” suggested Altrusa.

*“No, that would be rude, and we can’t afford to
be rude. Besides, nobody rings bells any longer.
It’s a funny thing,” she mused, ‘“‘that men never
seem to realize that other people have hours.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 159


*“He’s ole, an’ hit’s time he wuz gwine home,”
persisted Altrusa.

**He is a very distinguished gentleman, Altrusa,
of great property,” Mrs. Upchurch returned in an
accent of rebuke. “‘But don’t wait any longer.
Pll go down in a little while and interrupt them.
It can’t do any harm.”

After all, an interruption when things had gone
so far, made little difference. It wasn’t as it used
to be in her girlhood, when she had waited so.
patiently, and resorted to such ingenious ma-
noeuvres, in order to bring Jimmy Upchurch to
the point of proposing. At this recollection she
sighed again, and since there was no one near for
whom she felt obliged to keep up an appearance,
she drew out this sigh to its utmost dimension.
Wasted time, she thought pensively. Wasted
time; but then, of course, no woman knows that
until she has tried it. “If I’?d spent my girlhood
learning some useful pursuit, how much better off
we should be now,’ she reflected, with the calm
judgment of complete disillusionment. “If I
were Annabel, I’d think twice before I gave up
landscape gardening for the richest man in the
world. Whatever you earn honestly is money in
your pocket, but in these days even rich men are
not to be depended upon as providers.”

Fifteen minutes later, with her sewing in her
hand and her artificial smile on her lips, she tripped
down into the drawing-room, where she was re-


160 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


ceived, with open arms and a kiss of filial gratitude,
by Judge Honeywell.

**A miracle has happened!”’ he exclaimed, with
an emotion which seemed to her slightly exagger-
ated. ‘‘Annabel cares for me!”

Standing in the middle of the room, while she
felt her brightness slowly escaping her, Mrs. Up-
church stared back at him, with an impulse to
run away which was strangely like a sensation of
panic. Whatever she had expected, this, she told
herself in consternation, was too much. Yes, men
were unaccountable. There was no use denying,
she continued, with compassion rather than
ridicule, that men, even at the best, were un-
accountable creatures. Could any woman on
earth, could even the sanguine Mrs. Bredalbane,
be so easily deluded? Well, since it had to come,
she supposed this way was better than any other;
but, even though she was prepared for anything,
and most of all for excesses of masculine credulity,
she repeated, with a dazed mind, that men were
unaccountable creatures.


Part Two


J
| Pent the railing of the deck there was a


drift of apricot-coloured light over a sea of
splintered sapphire. The day had been warm for
the Atlantic, and the sun was going down into an
illusion of tropical splendour.

Lying back in his deck chair, with a cap of
Scotch plaid shading his features, which looked dry
and brittle above his pointed gray beard, and his
Jong, thin legs stretched out beneath a peacock-
blue rug, Judge Honeywell gazed placidly over the
quiet sea to the mirage of sculptured clouds on
the horizon. Though he was a little tired after the
fortnight in which he had been an active com-
panion to twenty-three summers, he felt, as he had
reminded himself a hundred times since he had
been on board, remarkably well. Why, this very
morning, slapping his chest vigorously after his salt
tub and his daily dozen, he had exclaimed with
relish: ““Not a day over thirty-five! Positively,
I do not feel a day over thirty-five!”

Turning to the mirror, he had almost expected
to see the firm flesh and enkindled blood of
his youth; and, for an instant, so strong was the
sensation of well-being, he had scarcely recog-

163


164 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


nized the pale judicial countenance and the sallow
skin, which had flushed to brownish purple after
the strenuous rubbing. While he had looked
at his reflection, an unutterable loneliness had
oppressed him; but an hour afterward, striding
briskly up and down the deck in the keen salt air,
he had found that the glow of exercise restored the
damaged pride of his manhood.

Withdrawing his gaze from the sunset, he
glanced down at the empty chair that Annabel
occupied whenever she ceased her activities.
Ever since they had sailed, she had appeared to
him to live in an incessant whirl of agitation. A
few minutes before, after a festive tea with a troop
of college youths, she had flitted by to the games
at the other end of the deck. Well, he was glad
that she was enjoying the trip. He liked to see
her amused; he liked to watch the tragic memory
fade from her eyes and the light and laughter
return. Moreover, he was ready (how ready, he
hesitated to admit even to himself) for an occa-
sional rest with his legs under the comfortable rug,
which he pulled higher as the sun grew fainter
and the evening breeze brought an edge of chill to
the air.

“Your daughter left this book in the smoking-
room,” a voice said at his elbow, and turning, he
met the fatuous expression of one of the college
youths. How unintelligent were the young of to-
day, he reflected, while he held out his hand for


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 165


the book. Why should this immature mind have
leaped to the conclusion that Annabel was _ his
daughter? Why should it have overlooked the
number of men who had married late in life women
much younger than themselves? Indeed, since
men retain their youth long and women lose theirs
early, this was merely one of the many admirable
provisions of nature. Besides, unquestionably,
some women prefer older men.

Picking up the book, he opened it where Anna-
bel had left a small yellow handkerchief between
the pages. Well, he supposed that women, even
young and attractive women, who used to be
shielded from contamination, read everything
now. It was not fair to judge people by what
they read, since most of them, he inferred, read
from curiosity the things that could be said only in
print. But it was an inexhaustible surprise to him
to discover the collection of rubbish, the varied
odds and ends of misinformation that Annabel
had tucked away in her shallow though obsti-
nate mind. Vivacious, intelligent, the astonishing
thing was that any one so soft in body could be so
stubborn in purpose. Delicate as a flower on the
surface, he lamented after the manner of Mrs.
Upchurch, but with a vein of iron beneath. Un-
developed, that was the way she had impressed.
him in the last few weeks; undeveloped yet rich in
the raw material of which character is composed.
Useless to pretend that she was orderly, that she


166 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


was disciplined in habits of mindorbody. Mentally,
indeed, he had assigned her to that prevalent class
which our rude ancestors dismissed as scatter-
brains, but which superior persons of to-day cher-
ish as intelligentsia.

Now, for example, this book with her yellow
handkerchief between the pages. Did this middle-
aged young intellectual who stalked through three
hundred and fifty pages, being solemn about sex—
did he really imagine, speculated Judge Honey-
well, bringing his legal opinion to bear upon the
question, did he really imagine that sex was more
solemn than anything else in the universe? Than
digestion, for instance, or even than dyspepsia? In
any case, the Judge was far from convinced that
the modern mind, with its mastery of vital prob-
lems, was an improvement upon the sentimental
Victorian one, which, when all was said, had had
its own way with sex.

Sitting there alone, with his eyes on the murmur-
ous waves, he was plunged anew into that pro-
found melancholy which differs from loneliness in
being a more naked desolation of spirit. What he
now endured was not the torment of an unequal
passion, though this had left him only in a few
brief moments of self-deception, but the dumb
despair of a heart that has discovered its own
emptiness. Though he loved Annabel, there were
hours when it seemed to him that he was suffocated
less by the flame than by the smoke of desire. He


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 167


was glad to have her near him; when she was
absent, he longed for the sight and touch of her
fragrant youth, of her dewy freshness; yet he was
never so distant from her in feeling as he was when
she stood close at his side. Never so distant, ex-
cept in those instants of poignant longing when he
held her clasped to his breast and felt her fragile
body harden within his arms. For the mild ca-
resses he lavished upon her were too fleeting to ease
the burden of his overcharged heart.

“What do you think of marriage, Annabel?” he
had asked her once, yearning for reassurance, and
she had answered with innocent candour, “‘It isn’t
so bad as I thought it would be.”’ Cordelia, of
course, would never have put it that way. No
woman, indeed, of his own generation would have
responded so tactlessly; but then, as he admitted
disconsolately, times had changed, and not, so far
as he could see, for the better.

And because everything, except the elderly like
himself, was different, he again picked up this
extraordinary book, which Cordelia would have
called impure, and again laid it down, with a sigh,
in Annabel’s empty chair. Well, they were, no
doubt, advanced, these dull and pompous ro-
mantics who found sex so indigestible; but, after
all, his legal mind, trained to exact observation,
concluded precisely, they were advanced only to
themselves and to those who were already behind
them. To future generations their irreverent age


168 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


would appear as backward 1 in perspective as other
epochs.

Even now, he ed have no quarrel with them,
since his was an unpolemical spirit, if they had
not attempted to tarnish with their impure
fiction innocent natures like Annabel’s. For, in
spite of his discovery that Annabel had devoured
voraciously and assimilated imperfectly more de-
pravity in the form of books than he knew even
by name, he persisted in thinking of her as both
innocent and ignorant of evil. Training her
tender mind had been, from the beginning of his
engagement, one of the delights to which he had
looked forward with deep satisfaction. During
twenty, or even twenty-five years, if Providence
spared him (which, considering he had lived with
prudence and sobriety, Providence might very well
be expected to do), he beheld himself training
Annabel’s pliant reason in habits of wisdom, tem-
perance, and fortitude. Gently, of course; for gen-
tleness had become the ruling principle of his
marriage, gentleness and patience.

Gazing pensively at the last faint trail of
opalescent light on the sea, he told himself that
unsound opinions make little difference in a true
woman, since the beliefs of a wife are naturally
formed, or at least influenced, by her husband.
His generation of well-regulated minds had con-
firmed this view, and his dignified faculties would
be the last to admit either that his ewn wife was


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 169


devoid of true womanliness, or that marriage with
himself would not cultivate in Annabel the ad-
mirable qualities it had never failed to develop in
a true woman. What did ignorance, what did
immaturity matter, when she enkindled in his
sentimental heart the rainbow dreams of ado-
lescence? A hard little thing underneath; yet
with her moments, when she gazed on beauty, of an
almost burning softness.

Rising from his chair, and disentangling his legs
from the rug, he strolled slowly along the deck
in search of the unfinished games. It was time,
he decided, after a glance at his watch, to go in-
side and begin preparations for dinner, and he was
longing, with a curious wistfulness, for the piquant
moments in their cabin before they separated
again. Nothing in his marriage had thrilled him
more deliciously than the vision of Annabel dress-
ing or undressing within the narrow space of the
cabin. Though he was a man of precise habits,
who would have died sooner than go to bed before
he had folded and laid away each separate garment
in its proper place, the charming disorder in which
his young wife lived was suffused with romance.
Coming suddenly into the room in the morning or
afternoon, and finding her filmy clothes scattered
over the bed and boxes, he would recapture for an
instant the sensuous delight of his twenties. His
was a benevolent heart, and he longed to confer
rather than receive happiness; yet he asked him-


170 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


self, in these moments, if life were not a simpler
matter for men of tough masculine fibre, who had
learned to pluck the fruit of the world with ruth-
less decision?

At the end of the deck, Annabel was practising
a new dance step with the fatuous but nimble
youth. Glancing up as her husband appeared, she
smiled brightly, and he observed, w th a thrill of
unselfish pleasure, that she was looking much
happier.

“Goin. ITllcomeina minute!” she called gaily.
“TI want to get this step right. We're going to
dance this evening!”

“Then you'll be late for dinner.”

*“Oh, it won’t take me ten minutes to dress,
and even if we are late, it won’t matter, will it?”

No, it would not matter, he assured her indul-
gently, though he was a punctual man, who had
dined at exactly the same hour for thirty-six years,
and who suffered from nervous dyspepsia when he
was forced into irregular habits. Well, if tender-
ness, if consideration, if unselfish devotion

For a few minutes, he stood watching her, withthe
solicitude of a father rather than the pride of a hus-
band. Though heenjoyed her pleasure, he wasnever
so keenly aware of the generations that divided
them as he was when he watched her effervescent de-
light in exertions that bored or wearied h'm as mere
human activities. For instance, those ridiculous
steps! How could any sensible person, even a


19?


|
.
'
i


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 171


young and frivolous person who enjoyed exercise,
find pleasure’ in making an absurd spectacle of her
body? But so long as she did enjoy it, he would
have patience. If she demanded nothing more
than gentleness and patience in marriage, there
need be little fear of disaster.

Turning away, while he waited for her lesson to
end, he was engaged in conversation by several
elderly ladies, who had kept to their chairs in a
sheltered corner, under the impression, as they
confided to him, that “‘a sitting posture is safest
on shipboard.” It was evident that they would
have liked to indulge in a few reminiscences, but,
after a moment of restless attention and a polite
apology, he was able to slip away to the smoking-
room. Estimable ladies, no doubt, but they were
so obviously his appropriate companions that it
was embarrassing to be seen in their company. ~


II


OR the next three months, which were pleas-
ant but exhausting ones, he followed Anna-
bel’s temperament wherever it led her, from
England to the Continent. After a few weeks
of unequal affection, he had realized that patience,
that even gentleness was not enough. Like a
tantalizing dream of fulfilment, her loveliness was
forever near and yet forever unattainable.

And following her vivacious temperament, he
paused now and then, while she sped swiftly
beyond him, to moralize over her disquieting
difference from the sainted Cordelia. This second
wedding journey bore as little resemblance to his
first one as the swallowlike darts and curves of
Annabel’s delight bore to the methodical pilgrim-
age in which Cordelia had pursued culture over
Europe. It was true, he reminded himself, that
methods had deteriorated almost as flagrantly as
manners. In the eighteen eighties a generous
enthusiasm, even for the Old Masters, was dis-
couraged by the best minds, and an attitude of
suspicion toward works of art, however fine, dis-
tinguished the wealthy and cultivated classes in
England and America. But, realizing all this, he

172


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 173


was still impressed by the dissimilarity, even when
the roads were the same, of the two journeys.
Where Cordelia had been hemmed in by tradi-
tions, by exact rules of conduct and reticences of
breeding, Annabel was not only untrammelled by
these restraints, but appeared to find them ridicu-
lous. From his superior eminence, which was that
of the institutional mind, he looked down com-
passionately upon her aimless wandering through
a labyrinth of blind impulses. She was without
reverence, he admitted sorrowfully, for doctrine,
sound or unsound. Indeed, it appeared to him at
times that she was disposed to respect the un-
sound more than the sound, since she nourished
the modern fallacy that whatever is false in the-
ory offers a better prospect of becoming true in
fact. It sobered him for a few days to stumble
upon the knowledge that his wife, however young
and pure, was destitute of the faculty known to
Cordelia and himself, as well as to others of his
age and civilization, as moral principle. Yet
he was obliged to admit presently that, if she
lacked principle, she was abundantly supplied with
the quality of compassion. Her charity exceeded
Cordelia’s, and he was constantly surprised by
some manifestation of a crude, he had almost said
of an inchoate, sense of justice. This bewildered
him because she seemed to divorce justice from
law, and he had always regarded them as one and
indivisible in body. Her feeling for justice, more-


174 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


over, was a spirit, he perceived, rather than a con-
viction. It scorned obligations that he recognized
as imperative, and admitted claims that his judicial
judgment would have denied. For instance, a
sense of justice toward the animal creation! She
treated animals with respect instead of mercy,
as if they were within their universal rights and
not dependent upon an ephemeral impulse of
pity. The poor, too, and the afflicted received a
different consideration from the sort Cordelia had
visited upon objects of charity.

In Paris, where they spent three dazzling weeks,
she blossomed overnight, or so it seemed to him,
into an image of worldliness and fashion. Her
features, which had been lovely but vague, were
sharpened, by what arts he did not inquire, into
a cameolike delicacy. In long jade earrings, which
dangled beneath the lustrous waves of her hair
against the pearly texture of her neck, she had
gained, he felt, in fascination what she had sacri-
ficed in elusiveness. He was proud of her youth
and beauty; yet there was, he had learned since
his marriage, a ceaseless ache in his pride of pos-
session. In his tenderest embraces, she might have
been a vision painted on air, so light, so gay, so
fugitive and insubstantial she felt in his arms.

But there were other moments when he assured
himself complacently that his marriage, though
imprudent, was not without its sweet if perilous
recompense. In spite of the complications and


EL he


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 175


costly discomfort in which Annabel preferred to
travel, in spite of the uncertainty of ever catch-
ing a train or procuring a meal at the proper
hour, he felt younger, at least until his attacks
of nervous dyspepsia became frequent, than he
remembered feeling since he had drifted into the
stormy haven of middle age. This satisfaction
might have lasted indefinitely; it would cer-
tainly have lasted, he thought, until their return
to Queenborough, if it had not been shattered
by the constitutional frailty that had given Cor-
delia so many anxious nights and cost her so
much of the rich and highly flavoured food to
which her healthy appetite had inclined. For
thirty-six years, she had sacrificed her appetite to
his digestion, and the immensity of her sacrifice he
had never begun to appreciate until he had, from
habit, left the ordering of their irregular meals
to Annabel’s perverted taste for eccentric dishes
and dangerous French sauces. In the early
months of their travels, before his dyspepsia had
become chronic, and the distressing symptoms
interfered with his activities by day and his com-
fort at night, he had tried to pretend that he en-
joyed the food. But when the test came, his moral
force was defeated by the infirmity of his stomach.
After three days when he could eat no food what-
ever, and several more when he had lived upon
soft-boiled eggs and very weak tea, they set out for
Vichy, where he drank the water and was attended


176 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


perseveringly but distantly by Annabel. It was, he
felt, a discouraging incident, but he supported it
with the fortitude of a generation that had been
trained to accept adversity, even when it assumed
the form of dyspepsia, as a dispensation of Provi-
dence. The immediate effect of this afiliction,
however, was a smothered regret that Cordelia
could not have accompanied them upon his second
honeymoon. Not, of course, in Annabel’s place.
No, certainly not in Annabel’s place; rather in the
capacity of a ministering angel than of a wife.
After this irksome interlude, when a severe diet
and the healing waters of Vichy had brought relief,
they proceeded to England and Scotland, where
Annabel began immediately to buy gifts for the
people at home. ‘Trailing her pensively from shop
to shop in Bond Street, he reflected, with the salt
of philosophy, that he had never observed her
temperament in action until she started to spend
money. Before her marriage she had _ been
curbed by the lack of money to spend; and her
quick recoil from severe economy to wild ex-
travagance would have chilled the generous ardour
of a husband who was less well off in material
blessings. But he had come to recognize too
clearly that his generosity was his strongest hold
upon her affection to risk the hazardous enterprise
of a remonstrance. Once only he had ventured,
with a mild and playful firmness, to remind her of
the trouble she was preparing for them in the


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 177


tedious business of the customs. “Couldn’t you
buy some of these gifts in New York, darling?
They would never suspect the difference.”

And Annabel, who had bought gifts, not only for
her mother and Cousin Amanda and her girl and
boy friends and Altrusa and the postman, but for
a number of old ladies in the Church Home, and
for the sewing-woman, who had neuralgia, and for
the grocer in the market, who was so considerate
in the matter of bills, and for the charwoman, who
had lost her only real comfort through prohibition;
—Annabel, having remembered all these with
passionate selection, replied emphatically: “But
it wouldn’t be the same thing. It wouldn’t be
the same thing at all. They want presents from
Europe. It means so much more having presents
brought you from Europe. Can’t you see?”

No, he couldn’t see; but since she could, he en-
deavoured to supplement with wisdom her more
inspirational vision. It was, he had learned, as
useless as it was disagreeable to argue across the
disparity of two (or was it nearer three?) gener-
ations. After all, he earnestly desired but one
thing, and this was to make her happy in her
marriage. If spending money was the surest way
to achieve this felicity, then he could only rejoice
because he was provided with a bountiful income.

‘But these shawls, dear, for the old ladies. You
can easily find them in Fifth Avenue.”

“But they’re from Scotland. Don’t you see


178 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


what a difference it will make to them to have
shawls from Scotland? That plaid, too, for the
postman. Why, he was of the Gordon clan, and
he came from Scotland long ago when Mother was
agirl. The thing that will please him most is that
I got it for him in Aberdeenshire.”

With a sigh he surrendered; for he was a care-
ful as well as a kind-hearted man, and the women
he had known intimately had been both careful
and kind-hearted. He had no precedent to guide
him in dealing with a wife who spent money, not
after calculation, but in obedience to mere flashes
of impulse. Impulse, he realized now, was a
quality with which Cordelia and Amanda had been
but moderately endowed. Well, even at sixty-six
(for already another birthday had been celebrated),
and upon a second wedding journey, you had still
a good deal to learn about women. ‘The first es-
sential in marriage, he told himself, was to main-
tain an equilibrium and let nothing astonish you.

And so, very much in love and fortified against
astonishment, he heard with relief Annabel’s decla-
ration that she had finished her shopping and
was ready to go home to show her things.

““Pve seen almost everything,” she said. “Of
course, I enjoyed the galleries most, but, after all,
you can’t take the pictures home with you.”

Fortunately not. Fortunately, indeed, few of
the works of art that she admired most fervently
were for sale to Americans.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 179


“You’ve had a happy summer, dear?”

“Oh, wonderful! Think of what it means to see
Europe for the first time.”

“Then you’ve had no regrets?”

Ob no.

He had hoped for an impassioned disavowal.
She might, he felt, have kissed him of her own
accord after his question; but it was not Annabel’s
way to be demonstrative. A cold little thing,
notwithstanding her artistic temperament, which
he had imagined, from the stress placed upon it in
the lives of the poets, inclined one to affection.

“Tf you have enjoyed it, that is all I can ask,”
he replied, a trifle hurt in spite of his equilibrium.

“Of course, ’ve enjoyed it. Any one would,
seeing Europe so luxuriously. Why, most of the
girls I know had to pinch terribly to come, except
the ones who had the time of their lives in the war,
and even then they didn’t have any money for
rlothes or presents.”

When all was said, perhaps her temperament
was less artistic than her mother had led him te
expect. Perhaps, he mused cheerfully, fostering
the perennial hope that sprouts at marriage in
every husband’s heart, he had won that paragon
of wives, a perfectly normal woman.

The perfectly normal woman, he knew, since
he had already been united to one, was neither
temperamental nor demonstrative; and though
these qualities were attractive in courtship, he sus-


180 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


pected that even men who fell in love with tem-
perament were seldom happy with that aspect of
it which makes trouble in marriage. For marriage
is above all things practical, he realized, and tem-
perament, however impressive in opera, does not
adjust itself easily to the true sphere of woman.
From which it is evident that, though he had mar-
ried in the post-war period, he still thought in the
primitive terms of a world which, like the Garden
of Eden, was unaware of its own innocence.


Il


ILL you be glad to get home, Annabel?”
*“Oh, I suppose so. Won’t you?”

How glad, he had not realized until this moment;
for, after the cure at Vichy, his dyspepsia was
troubling him again, and looking at famous places
and pictures had made him feel very tired. With
his increasing infatuation, which marriage had not
appeased, he convinced himself that, if he could
only have Annabel safely at home with him, every-
thing would be different. The old, dimly lighted
house in Queenborough, which Cordelia had fur-
nished so solidly in the formidable taste of the
Nineteenth Century, where every chair or sofa
invited one to rest upon its firm, plump seat, and
Cordelia herself, upholstered like the rosewood
furniture in handsome brocade, hung over the
ebony what-not in the front parlour;—the re-
current memory of this old-fashioned house was
like the tranquil asylum of a happy marriage.
And so tenacious were the intricate roots which
bound him to each bed and chair, as well as to his
consecrated habits of comfort, that it never oc-
curred to him to regard their home-coming from
Annabel’s variable point of view. He had never

181


182 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


doubted, indeed, that her impetuous youth would
settle easily into the feathered nest of the past.

“Don’t you think you’d better not put up those
heavy lace curtains again?” she inquired carelessly
when they were discussing next winter in Queen-
borough.

He started and gazed at her with a look that
was sharpened by anxiety. “Those curtains?
Why, we’ve always used them. They were made
for us in Brussels almost thirty years ago. It
would be impossible to duplicate them to-day.”

Annabel laughed. ‘“‘Well, fortunately nobody
will want to. Lace curtains have gone the way of
crinoline.”’

The way of crinoline! The phrase shocked him,
and for an instant he brought his mind steadily
to bear upon its significance. For almost thirty
years he had been inordinately proud of those
curtains, and of the handsome carpets, also woven
in Brussels, after a floral pattern which some
offensive wit (Edmonia it must have been, for it
sounded like her) had compared to an august
funeral design. When he had bought them, they
had cost a prodigious sum. He remembered the
exact figures, and he remembered as well that
Cordelia had devoted that summer in Europe to a
consideration of the relative values of curtains
and carpets. No, he would not change them now.
He could not, he knew, be happy in a house that
had been robbed of familiar objects and tender


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 183


associations. How could he feel at home in his
library unless he could settle again into the com-
fortable shape of the old leather cushions? Yes,
he would be gentle and patient, but he would be
firm too. Though he craved youth, it was the
friendly yet adventurous youth of the ’eighties,
not the sharp, wild spirit that was abroad, like a
March wind, in the world to-day. None the less,
he said fondly, “The house will be bright enough
with you in it.”

“Oh, yes. We'll have dinner parties and play
bridge. You’re fond of bridge?”

Yes, he was fond of bridge; but while she spoke,
his mood flattened out until it was like a balloon
that has been pricked. He had had a vision of his
home unchanged but for the sparkling glamour of
youth which would soon brighten the old-fashioned
rooms. Though he longed for his usual chair by
the fire, he could not separate this yearning from
the picture of Annabel buried in the deep arms of
ruby leather on the opposite side of the hearth.
No, what he desired was that each object should
remain where Cordelia had placed it, in the
precise spot, unaltered in feature yet illumined
in aspect by Annabel’s girlish charm. Strange
that he had never realized how he valued his
familiar surroundings until they were threatened!
He was not, he assured himself, what Cordelia
would have called set in his ways. On the con-
trary, he was inclined to the belief that when


184 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


a man becomes too firmly fixed in a place or an
opinion, he is beginning to petrify. But his
very peace was bound up with these inanimate
objects among which his comfortable life had been
spent; and he felt that, if only Annabel would
spare his home, while adorning it with her presence,
he would give way to her destructive youth in
everything else.

“Tf only I can make you happy, darling,” he
sighed tenderly, as he had sighed upon their
wedding day and in every subsequent crisis.

They were on their return voyage, and while she
leaned over the railing of the deck, she gazed out to
sea with an expression that puzzled him. Was it
wistfulness in her eyes, or merely the despondency
of a bad sailor? Since he was never seasick (hav-
ing acquired by long experience the technique of
prevention) and she had been desperately ill, her
suffering had made her dependent upon him in a
way that he enjoyed even while he pitied her. The
privilege of nursing instead of being nursed was
worth all the deprivations and discomforts of ship-
board.

“Oh, I know we'll have a nice time next winter,”
she responded carelessly; and turning swiftly, she
smiled at him with her springtime glance. She
was always sweet to him now, though her thought-
less affection was entirely different from the earnest
solicitude he had learned to expect from women.

As she leaned over the railing, where the sea


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 185


dipped and rose, her profile was cut with gemlike
clearness against the translucent gold of the
horizon. Seasickness had imparted a charming
languor to her features, which had paled to the
colour of ivory; and, while it lasted, her beauty was
endowed with what he thought of as the enchant-
ment of legend. From the collar of dark fur, her
bright head sprang up, as sharp and delicate as a
March flower from winter soil; beneath the sable
toque. the soft waves of her hair flamed to copper
in the sinking beams of the sun; her sea-green
eyes, when she glanced round at him, were veiled
in mystery. (After all, what did he know of
her except that she was young and desirable?
What did he wish to know of her except that her
youth and her desirableness were his own?) There
was the look in her face that he had surprised there
once or twice since their marriage—a look which he
would have called noble and earnest, if these fine
words were not, he felt, inapplicable to Annabel’s
character.

With one of those piercing flashes of insight,
which afflict even the best minds in moments of
tragic intensity, he told himself that he had been
abandoned by youth while his thirst for life was
unsatisfied. His heart contracted in a spasm of
yearning, and then shuddered back to its stoical]
melancholy. What he saw in Annabel, he real-
ized, was more than her loveliness, was more even
than her inaccessible spirit. What he saw in her


186 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


was all the assembled beauty of the world, as a
whole universe of sea and sky and sun is mirrored
within the magic crystal of a ring. While he
looked at her, he became aware of a multitude of
forgotten influences thronging into his thoughts.
These he knew he could never escape, for they
flowed, like a distilled essence of the past, from his
memory into his blood.

‘Annabel,’ he asked suddenly, ““have you any
regrets?”

“Regrets?” Swiftly, as if his question had ar-
rested the flight of her mind, she sparkled into
derision. “What should I regret? Haven’t we
had a nice summer?” She looked down, stroking
her fur, and her lips, which were paler than usual,
curved into a smile.

“TI was just wondering——” he began, and
broke off with a sensation of helplessness, of dis-
appointment. He could not tell for what he had
longed, but he knew that it was for more than this;
and, turning, he looked away from her with an
illogical feeling that he had lost something which
he had never possessed. What was the meaning
of it? Where was it leading him? Why should
this will-o’-the-wisp have flamed in the long twi-
light of his heart, after he had left the sunshine
of youth and passion so far behind him? Were
they merely the inevitable processes of decay, this
fire without heat, this greenness without roots, or
had he alone been selected to suffer the torment of


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 187


a fruitless regeneration? And, after all, why was
he not happy, when he held the radiant material
of happiness within his grasp?

“Yes, we had a nice summer,” he answered,
and felt the surging of an inarticulate impulse
against his lips. When all was said and thought
about emotion, it remained, he told himself, merely
a-single province, a shifting and variegated prov-
ince, of man’s nature. Once at home again, with
the restless pleasures of Europe behind him; once
at home again, where he could eat bread and
milk for dinner without feeling that he made a
spectacle of himself before superior foreign wait-
ers; once at home again, with Annabel settled in
Cordelia’s chair by the fire and on Cordelia’s side
of the bed;—once blissfully at home again, he
would soon find that life had narrowed into a
tamiliar and orderly pattern. His library, his
club, his Archeological Society, his distinguished
position in the community, and his church, of
which he was a vestryman,—all these solid ad-
vantages were unaltered by the moral disturbances
through which he had passed. Nevertheless, in
his heart, he knew that, though these upheavals
had been painful rather than pleasant, he dreaded
the moment when the effervescence would subside
on the dull surface of life. Annabel, like youth
itself, was a source of frustrated impulses and fruit-
less desires, but she was also the last thing on earth
he would consent to relinquish. logical, absurd


188 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


in the extreme, and unworthy of the judicial mind;
yet wanting what was bad for one had been, he
acknowledged, the private history of most minds,
judicial or otherwise.


IV
Ne THE end of the week, as Mrs. Upchurch


sat at breakfast one morning, and reflected,
while she poured her coffee, that her daughter’s
marriage must have been a success since the Judge
was so generous in the matter of her own summer
at White Sulphur Springs, there was a running
step on the porch, and a minute later, a fashion-
able and sophisticated Annabel darted into the
room.

“Oh, Mother, I ran over just to speak to you!”

““My dear child, my cear child!” cried Mrs.
Upchurch, embracing her.

“We got here an hour ago, and I had to wait
until the Judge had finished his breakfast. Why
do men hate so to breakfast alone?”

“T don’t know, darling, but is he still ‘the
Judge’ to you?”

Annabel laughed. “‘I feel impertinent when I
call him ‘ Gamaliel.’”’

“Well, as long as he doesn’t mind. Isn’t it
queer how conventions change? I remember, and
I’m not so old, when no well-bred Virginia woman
would have taken the liberty of calling her hus-
band by his Christian name.”

189


190 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


*“That’s one liberty I shouldn’t fight for. Have
you finished breakfast?”

“No, I was just taking my second cup. Have
you had yours, dear?”

“Yes, but I'd like one of Altrusa’s muffins.”

“My darling child!”” Though Mrs. Upchurch,
who was natural only when she was artificial,
could think of nothing more expressive than an
ejaculation, she was genuinely moved by the re-
turn of her daughter. “Bring Miss Annabel a
hot muffin, Altrusa,”’ she ordered, and added with
difficulty, “‘Come, sit down, dear, and I'll fix your
coffee as you like it. Why, you look almost like
an actress. I mean, of course, a very successful
one—or perhaps an opera singer would be better.
Well, I must say, I am never astonished at what
marriage can do!”

“It isn’t marriage, Mother,” rejoined Annabel,
with the sincerity she had preserved beneath her
external French artifice. “It is Paris and having
so much money to spend.”

Rising like a trout to bait, Mrs. Upchurch
caught at the correction. ‘‘Well, I am still less
astonished at what money can do.”

“Tve brought you the loveliest fur coat, Mother.
Mink that will be so becoming to you and last for
years. And I got you a dress in Paris. Black
velvet, with a little ermine at the neck and sleeves.
I bought presents for everybody.”’

““My dear, my precious child!” There was


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 191


really nothing to add, Mrs. Upchurch felt, wiping
her eyes. ‘My best gift will be your happiness.
What have you done to your hair? Not bobbed
tre.

“No, but I try to make it look as if I had. I
was ever so keen to bob it, only men are so set in
their ideas about hair. Old men especially,”’ she
added as an afterthought.

**All men are set, Annabel. But that little blue
hat is adorable on you, and your furs are so becom-
ing. I don’t believe any of us realized before how
lovely you are.”

““Isn’t it wonderful what clothes can do for
you?”

“But you couldn’t look so well if you weren’t
happy,” insisted Mrs. Upchurch, who had not lost
sight for an instant of the thing that she really
wished to know.

Annabel raised her eyes from her plate and
looked at her mother, while a smile that was gay,
mocking, and a little wistful, played over the rich
curves of her mouth. From a fresh and pretty
girl, she had blossomed, Mrs. Upchurch decided
proudly, into a beautiful woman. Not so beauti-
ful, of course, as poor Amanda, who was merely
the wreck of herself now, but certainly more in-
teresting. Everything about Annabel appeared
to be brightened by a shining glaze; her coppery
hair, with its lustrous tints, which had been
chestnut; her alabaster skin, which had been


192 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


merely pale and pretty; her radiant eyes, which
had become larger and deeper and mysteriously
shadowed by her darkened lashes. Yes, it was
indeed wonderful, Mrs. Upchurch mused, it was
little short of miraculous, what money could do.

“Is anybody happy, Mother?”

Mrs. Upchurch shivered, for this was not what
she had expected. ‘“‘Not many, my child. Most
people are afraid of the word happiness; but I
hope it is different with you.”

Annabel shook her head. “I don’t believe much
in happiness. People just pretend because they’re
ashamed not to, that’s all. But even money can’t
buy happiness. All it can buy is the best substi-
tute, and that’s a sham like everything else.”

“Gh, my dear baby,’ moaned her mother,
‘there are times when you talk as if you’d lived
forever. You frighten me when you are so seri-
ous.”

“Tm not so serious; but I never wanted a sham,
and sometimes I think there isn’t anything else in
life.”

“Is anything wrong? Hasn’t your marriage
turned out well, dear? You needn’t pretend to
your mother.”

Annabel pondered the question, while her winged
eyebrows fluttered together as they did when she
was brooding. ‘“‘To tell the truth, it isn’t so bad
as [ thought it would be,” she answered, and con-
tinued, after a pause in which Mrs. Upchurch


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 193


beamed encouragingly: ‘“‘But there’s too much
fondling in it. I believe marriage must be better
in winter than in summer.”

“Men are like that, Daughter, even the nicest
men. He may grow less affectionate,” she added
hopefully, “‘though at his age you never can tell.”

Annabel laughed, and the flippancy of her tone
grated upon her mother’s delicate hearing. ‘I’ve
heard you say a hundred times, Mother, that
youth and age never match.”

“O my child!” exclaimed Mrs. Upchurch,
horrified beyond words to hear herself quoted with
such inopportune accuracy. ‘That was before—
before——”’

“Yes, of course, that was before I had an old
husband.”

“But, Annabel, the Judge isn’t really old, you
know. After all, sixty-six is only the prime of life
for a man.”

Again Annabel laughed. “And, I suppose,
twenty-three is only the prime of life for a woman?”

It was all disquieting; it was all most un-
fortunate, meditated Mrs. Upchurch, with a smil-
ing face but an anxious heart. Never, not even
when her own husband was alive, had she felt
so urgently the need of a strong moral support.
Religion, yes, but even more than religion, she
craved the efficacious belief in reticence, in refine-
ment, in perfect behaviour. Ifthe world continued
to grow away, not only from God, but from good


194 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


breeding as well, what, she wondered despondently,
could be trusted to keep wives contented and the
working classes in order?

“You will be happier, dear, after you are
settled,” she said in as sprightly a tone as she could
assume. ‘‘We must try to make the house more
cheerful, especially those old drawing-rooms, which
Talways thought depressing.”

‘“‘But he is so particular, he doesn’t want me to
touch anything. He won’t even give up those
horrid lace curtains.”

“Then you must go slowly.” Mrs. Upchurch
changed her advice quickly, though her tone was
as animated asever. “Be careful to go very, very
slowly. So many second marriages are spoiled by
the wife’s trying to change too much.”

“Oh, I don’t care about that,’ Annabel re-
joined carelessly. ‘‘He may choose to live in a
museum of bad taste, if he pleases.”? She rose,
and stooping over her mother’s shoulder, kissed
her lightly on the cheek. “I must show you my
linen. I bought the most wonderful linen, and
embroidery too. Now, I must run away because
I promised to be back to kiss him before he goes
down to his office at half-past nine. Could any-
thing be more absurd,” she demanded, with airy
insolence, ‘“‘than to be obliged to cross the street
and walk two whole blocks just to keep a man
in a good humour by kissing him before he goes
to work?”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 195


“Could anything?” Mrs. Upchurch echoed
earnestly. Gazing after her daughter’s flitting
figure in the street, she finished absent-mindedly


but emphatically, “Could anything be more
absurd?”


V
Bip oe as Judge Honeywell found


occasion to remind himself in the next few
months, the waters of Vichy had enabled him to
begin the winter with an improved digestion.
‘Otherwise, how could he have survived the ex-
hausting pleasure of dining out every night in the
week? Recently, too, especially when a dance
followed the dinner, he had fortified his spirit
against boredom by drinking more champagne
than was good for his joints. To be sure, he had
always indulged his thirst with the grace of a
Cavalier rather than the austerity of a Puritan;
though he had wisely abstained from the more
frivolous, or, as he thought of them, more feminine
French wines. Now, however, he decided that
the French, who had aged gallantly, knew what
they were doing. Only champagne with a gen-
uine sparkle provided the sprightly optimism
required for an evening in the placid society of
chaperons. Here also, he caught himself reflect-
ing, was another advantage gained by his discreet
retirement from the bench; for he could not have
reconciled his conscience either to drinking while
he judged others or to administering what he

196


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 197


{being of independent means and superior to
politics) could afford to regard as a caricature of
the law. With the more affluent part of Queen-
borough society (which had reduced its fortunes
but stocked its cellars in the uncivilized pre-war
days, before the bootlegger had developed from
an outlaw into an institution), he regarded pro-
hibition, without fear and without hope, as a
piece of paternal legislation, designed less for the
benefit of inebriate wife-beaters than to satisfy
the philanthropic thirst of modern Pharaohs of
industry. ‘Prohibition without temperance may
be a dangerous extreme,” he remarked facetiously,
“but dangerous extremes make interesting
history.”

In his dancing days, before he was married
to Cordelia, who had disapproved among other
things of trying to stay young, he had wasted
scant sympathy upon the rows of indomitable
matrons flanked against the draughty end of the
ballroom. But now, while he suffered politely
among them, he was moved to wonder if they also
had discovered that necessity is the reluctant
mother of endurance. On the floor, perennially
flirtatious and recklessly nimble, he seldom failed
to remark several agile septuagenarians, whom
he had known as dashing blades while he was
still a boy. Watching their starved faces and
their desperate trotting, he longed passionately to
be at home by his library fire; yet he refused to


198 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


leave Annabel whirling among the dancers like a
flower in the wind. At their first cotillion, they
had created between them the sentimental fiction
that it gave him pleasure to watch her success
with the inconstant youth of the period.

“Don’t you get tired sitting against the wall,
Gamaliel?” At last she was learning to call him
**Gamaliel.”

*“Not when I’m watching you, dear.”

**But to watch me the whole evening! And at
the cotillions you can’t even play bridge.”

‘Well, there aren’t many cotillions. At the
private houses I can usually make up a game with
other husbands or wives who are in the same
plight. I never noticed it before, but it appears to
be a familiar plight for husbands and wives.”

“I wonder,” Annabel said thoughtfully, “why
women who love to dance so often marry men who
don’t?”

**And men who like poker so often marry women
who prefer bridge?”

“Isn’t there anybody you enjoy talking to?
Cousin Amanda comes regularly, you know,
though she has given up dancing.”

“Yes, but she was never a great talker.” His
face clouded, for he shrank, without admitting it,
from the thought of Amanda.

“She looks so sad. Dm afraid she is begin-
ning to break,” Annabel returned with a worried


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 199


frown. ‘‘Everyone says she is the wreck of her-
self.”

To this he made no reply; but finding himself
beside his early love at the Christmas cotillion, he
looked at her more attentively than he remembered
looking in the last thirty years. Yes, it was true;
she was simply, poor lady, the wreck of herself;
and he wondered sadly, with that evasive idealism
which had become a second nature to him, and
indeed to the entire community in which he lived,
if her numerous charities were not making too
heavy demands upon her strength? Her fine
silver-gray hair was thinner and appeared faintly
yellow in the blaze of light; there were bluish hol-
lows in her temples and beneath her eyes; and her
complexion had lost its transparent glow and
blanched to the colour of a withered rose-leaf.
Worst of all, he felt, there was a look in her eyes
that he could describe only as deserted. It
couldn’t be romance, he insisted defiantly to him-
self. For surely no woman approaching sixty
would permit herself to cling to a romantic illusion.

*“The dances have changed so much since our
day,’ Amanda said suddenly.

He started, for her voice might have come from
the past. “Yes, they’ve changed,” he answered
gently, almost tenderly, since tenderness was safe
now. ‘But not, according to my taste, for the
better.”’


200 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


‘No, the old ones were certainly more graceful.”
She smiled, and he was pained to see the wrinkles
about her mouth deepen like an impression in
wax. ‘Except with Annabel,” she added gener-
ously. ‘“‘Annabel couldn’t be anything but grace-
ful.”

While he listened to her voice, looking away
from her after Annabel’s rose-coloured skirt,
which tossed and whirled and fluttered in accord
with the music, he became aware that a pleasant
sensation was permeating his weariness, as if he
were enfolded in wings of beatitude. Just to sit
beside Amanda, without seeing her changed fea-
tures, just to hear the monotonous music of
her voice talking of trivial things, restored to
him, like a precious gift she had saved for this
one moment, the security, the self-confidence
that he had felt slipping away. Without an
effort of his own, this soothing and beneficent
influence enveloped him. Beside Amanda, he was
no longer elderly, for his being old had never en-
tered her faithful mind. Sitting there, while her
muted tones rippled on, he felt that her sympathy
filtered into his consciousness and pervaded his
reverie. With her, he had not only a past but a
future, because she had never thought of him, she
could never think of him, as finished. Fragments
of dreams, of defeated ambitions, started again
to life in his memory. The book he had intended
to write; the struggle for political freedom which


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 201


had seemed so important; all the splendid lost
causes of which he had once been the champion!
If only it were not now too late! If only he could
begin anew with Annabel by his side! If only
this rhythm of precious influences could encircle
Annabel instead of Amanda! For while he longed
for the inspiration of Amanda’s fidelity, he longed
even more to have it flow through the delightful
vacancy of Annabel’s youth.

**T sometimes wonder,” he heard his voice mur-
mur, “if I might have amounted to more if I
hadn’t spent my life in a small place?”

*“Amounted to more?”’ The lilt in her tone
flattered him. ‘“‘Why, what more could you have
been?”

‘Well, I don’t know.” This was true; for he
had spoken in a twilight pause between waking
and sleeping. Since he was not of an introspective
cast of mind, he could not have told where circum-
stances had failed him, or where he had refused to
yield himself to the adventure of life. A veiled
motive, a wisp of idea, had prompted his words;
yet beneath these vagrant shadows, so far below
the surface of his thoughts that it groped there in
a primeval void, he felt the quiver of some exalted
purpose which had been frustrated before its birth.
Was it possible that, in other circumstances, he
mizht have made a larger or finer thing of his en-
deavour? After all, what could have satisfied this
voiceless craving? Not ambition; not achieve-


202 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


ment; not marriage; not fatherhood. Though he
had been successful, as men value success, he had
never burned inwardly with that triumph over ob-
stacles which is its lasting reward. Though he
had loved three women, he had never thrilled to the
Olympian ecstasy—or was it merely the Hungarian
rhapsody?—of passion. Though he had begotten
children he had missed (by how fine an edge? he
wondered) the inalienable pride of paternity. Hap-
piness, as he looked back upon it in this mood (and
he was sensible enough to admit that his dissatis-
faction was only a mood) resembled some trick of
magic which had failed to work when it was tried.

Out of these subdued influences and emanations,
he became aware that Amanda was still speaking.

“And you never wrote the great book on law we
used to talk over.”’ Thirty-seven years ago, and
she had not forgotten! What long, what uncon-
scionable memories women had for emotion!

“No, I never wrote it. I don’t know why.
Time passed, I suppose, and I was busy making a
career. Sometimes I think that I have been too
comfortable all my life. I’ve had two of the best
wives in the world,” he added dutifully, “and they
have made me too comfortable.”

“But you were happy?”

“Happy? Yes, [ve had a happy life. Per-
haps that is one of the reasons I didn’t write my
book. I doubt if a great book, even on law, was
ever written by a really happy man.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 203


“Well, I waited for it. I always hoped you
would write it,” she said softly; for she belonged to
a devoted generation, and her only hold on life
was to exist vicariously, as some pale ethereal
fluid, in the lives of others. What had nourished
her heart, he wondered sadly, since she had missed
the vital joys of marriage and motherhood? And
why had she never married when every unattached
man in Queenborough for two generations had pro-
posed to her as a part of his culture! Then, be-
cause he had never acquired the new habit of think-
ing of women as detached beings, he returned with
alacrity to his own failure of purpose.

“I suppose there are few men who accomplish
all that they dream of,” he rejoined mildly.
**Annabel has torn her dress again, hasn’t she?”

The girl was dancing in their direction while she
held up the ripped hem of her rose-coloured skirt.
As she drifted toward him, with her loosened hair,
her geranium mouth, and her winged eyebrows,
which brooded over the virginal mystery of her
gaze, his longing to put his hands on her was so
sharp that he drew back as if he had been stung
by her beauty.


VI


RE you ready to go home?” he asked in a
muffled voice. Peace had flown now, he
realized dimly, without regretting his loss. He
was snatched back from the harmony of Amanda’s
influence into a circle of vehement discords, and, it
seemed to him that this confusion in which he was
so swiftly immersed flowed, not from his own na-
ture, but from the magnetic current of Annabel’s
youth. He felt her radiant energy, her joy of
living, her joy even of suffering, less as a stimulus
to his mind and heart than as a dangerous intoxi-
cation of the nerves, a destructive yet irresistible
stream of vitality.

*“Not before supper? You aren’t going before
supper?”’ she asked in surprise. ‘“‘Unless you’re
tired. If you’re tired, [ll get somebody else to
bring me home.”

“Oh, no, I’m not tired. Tl wait for you,” he
answered. Nothing could induce him to leave her;
nothing could persuade him to go home alone.
Still he sat there, with stoical fortitude, though it
seemed to him that he had never in his life before
understood what fatigue could mean. Ever since
his return from Europe, he had felt tired without

204


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 205


relief, and now this exhaustion of the nerves was
approaching a crisis. Abroad he had not been
working, and there had been quiet days, and even
nights, when he had had brief relaxations from
uncongenial pleasure. But ever since his return,
this incessant weariness had stolen over him like a
lethargy. He desired nothing intensely but Anna-
bel, and he desired her only in brief flares of emotion.

While she floated away from him now, Amanda
inquired gently, “Do you grow tired of just
watching?”

“Oh, no, it is a pleasure,” he answered punctili-
ously, though his voice throbbed like an aching
nerve in his ears. He had lost again the inspir-
ing belief that life was not over, and he knew
that it would elude him now until his mind was at
rest. The unwilling chaperon on his right opened
her bag, after a furtive glance in his direction, and
turned to snatch a view of her hair in the long mir-
ror on the wall. Looking over her shoulder, while he
rose to return the scarf she had dropped, he saw the
upper half of his own features reflected; and it
seemed to him that a caged eagle gazed back at him
from his bright dark eyes—a spirit, restless, craving,
eternally unsatisfied, yet with a wild comedy in
its despair. Perhaps, after all, the fault lay in him-
self, not in circumstances. Perhaps he had been
too easily contented in his prime with the second
best of experience. Perhaps he had skimmed too
lightly over the glazed surface of inherited wisdom.


206 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


With a sardonic twist, while his eyes followed
Annabel, his mind sprang back to Cordelia. It
occurred to him as extraordinary that he could
remember Cordelia with vividness only when he
was indignant with Annabel. A flash of temper
was the solitary gleam that illumined Cordelia’s
features, and this magic worked. he had discovered,
only when the flash was directed toward the wife
he now loved in her place. Singular, almost
incredible, he mused, was the way Cordelia had
become alive in his mind after that painful scene
with Annabel over his wardrobe. A _ trivial
episode. Over and forgotten in an hour, with
nothing to remind him that it had ever occurred,
unless his eyes fell by accident upon the fine emer-
ald ring, which Annabel preferred even to her en-
gagement ring with its magnificent diamond. He
was convinced that the emerald had erased all
resentment from her memory; and in his own mind
it had left merely the wonder how he could have
lived for thirty-six years and never quarrelled
with Cordelia. Was it because she had been
more tactful, or he had been less confirmed in
his habits? She had given him, it was true, the
handsome mahogany wardrobe, which Annabel
had offended him by removing from his dressing-
room, but he had scarcely remembered the associa-
tion in his violent recoil from the strange object
he had found in its place.

“What? What?” he had gasped at sight of


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 207


the new cabinet between the two side windows,
where he liked to take one last look at his hair
and beard before going downstairs. ‘‘ Why, where
are all my things? I must have my things where
I can put my hands on them.”

“It is a surprise for you,” Annabel explained,
flushed and excited. “I had it made after the
one you liked at the Ritz.”

“But that was at the Ritz. I didn’t mean that
I should like it for my own dressing-room. I
didn’t want it in my own house.”

“Well, it’s ever so much nicer,” insisted Anna-
bel, who, unlike Cordelia, could never be satisfied
to regain by act what she had surrendered in
argument. “‘Nobody uses those heavy old ward-
robes any longer. You have plenty of shelves.”

“It has always stood there.”’ He was beginning
to lose control of his temper, and Annabel, instead
of holding firmly to hers, as Cordelia would have
done, was rapidly approaching the point where she
would burst into tears. “‘I want it here between
the windows, where I can find my things when I
need them. You must understand, once for all,
Annabel, that I cannot have my arrangements
interfered with. A wife must learn, as well as a
husband, to bear and forbear. I have borne pa-
tiently a good many things, and if our marriage
is to be a happy one, it is time that you should at
least begin to forbear. I have let you make as
many changes as you pleased in your own sitting-


208 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


room and even downstairs; but you must keep your
hands away from my personal comforts.

Since he was just beginning to feel thoratenly
wound up, he might have continued indefinitely
in this strain, if Annabel had not choked with a
paroxysm of rage, and cried out furiously that
she did not want to be married, and that if he
were unkind to her, she would go home to live
with her mother. Her tears, even more than her
words, which were too incoherent to be convincing,
brought him to his senses; and when she fled from
him into the guest-room and locked the door, he
followed ignominiously, and protested through the
keyhole that he had not meant to hurt her feelings.

A regrettable, a most humiliating occurrence!
For the reconciliation, though it had restored the
wardrobe to its sacred use, had endowed Annabel,
not only with an advantage that she did not
deserve, but with the emerald ring she had seen
and admired upon her last visit to Tiffany’s. . . .

It was two o’clock when they went home, and
sitting with his arm about her, as they sped
through the silent streets, he wondered how he
could gather sufficient energy to face his work in
the morning. A chill of depression benumbed
his faculties, and he scarcely responded to the pale
glow of Annabel’s head against the light of the
window-pane. He hoped, without intensity, that
she would be affectionate or at least gentle when


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 209


they reached home. After the tedious emptiness
of his evening, he felt that he had earned a right
to her tenderness.

When the car stopped, she alighted with a danc-
ing step and tripped gaily into the house.

“Do you want anything, Gamaliel?”’

“No, dear. I'll get to bed as soon as possible.”

“Is your dyspepsia bad again? I can fix you
some hot water and soda in a minute.”

“T don’t need that. TP’m a little tired, that’s all.
Shall I put out the light?”

She had already reached the top of the steps,
and by the time he had attended to the doors
and windows, and followed her upstairs, she had
slipped out of her gown into a flame-coloured
kimono. When he entered the bedroom, her
hands were busy with the jewelled band on her
hair, and in a moment the short, bright curls
were floating in a veil over her shoulders.

“T hope you had a happy evening, darling,”
he said tenderly. Could she, he asked himself,
hear without sympathy the hunger that quivered
beneath the guarded tones of his voice?

“Oh, enjoyed it. It passes the time anyway,”
she answered, after a pause; and he felt that to
her also the spoken words were as meaningless as
leaves drifting on the surface of some dark stream
of memory. He longed with all his suffering heart
to draw nearer to her; his remoteness, while he
stood there and watched her, was almost intoler-


210 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


able; yet he knew that no word, that no embrace,
could bridge that dark current flowing between
them.

“You don’t think you are doing too much?”

She laughed. “Oh, no, but it is dreary for you.
Why didn’t you come home earlier and let someone
else bring me back?”

He shook his head. How could he tell her?
How could he make her understand why he had
waited, why he had clung to that jealous sense
of possession which tortured him when he saw her
dancing with younger men?

“Oh, I like watching you dance,” he replied,
with a curious ache in his throat. “It is a very
pretty sight.”

She smiled back at him from the mirror; and it
seemed to him that this reflected smile floated
out from the glass and melted into his being with a
burning radiance. Youth shone through her in
the glow of some hidden flame; through her misty
eyes, through her gleaming hair, through her
ivory shoulders above the drooping sleeves of her
kimono. For an instant his heart leaped, and the
violence of the shock almost suffocated him.
Then, in the very gesture of putting out his hand
to touch her bare shoulder, the flash of desire
went out of him like an extinguished light. He
felt nothing but this inescapable loneliness, and
the thought stabbed through him: “She will look
this way when I am dead!”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 211


Turning slightly in her chair, she folded the loos-
ened garment over her bosom. “Do you feel
better?” she asked sympathetically. ‘‘Have you
got over the chill?”

“Oh, yes. Tm quite comfortable now.” Of
this inner frost, creeping like death over his mind,
he said nothing. “All I need is a good sleep.”

“Perhaps I’d better stay in the other room?”
she rejoined quickly but softly, as if she were
warding off a refusal by her gentleness. “I’m not
ready. There’s ever so much more to do before
I’m undressed, and I don’t want to keep you
awake.”

“But I love to have you near me. It is a com-
fort to know that you are there.’ His voice
faltered because he could not put into words the
way he had looked forward to the hours when he
should have her alone in the friendly darkness.
Only her unconquerable youth protected him
from the fantasies that hovered in the twilight
region of consciousness. Yet he could not put
this into any speech that she would understand.
“You don’t know how much it means to me s
Assailed by a new suspicion, he broke off and added
slowly: ‘“‘Do you mean just for to-night?”” Was.
it merely that she preferred to be alone, asked this
sudden fear, or was the nearness that he found so
comforting repugnant to her untarnished youth?
Had he been repugnant to her from the beginning?
He longed in an agony of suspense to know the


212 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


reason of her avoidance; but he knew that it was
a secret he could never discover.

“Tf you don’t mind, just for to-night?” While
she waited expectantly for his consent or refusal,
a breathless hush dropped over her features in
the mirror. Through this hush he felt—or was
itonly an imaginary torment?—the throbbing pulse
of her aversion.

“T want you with me, but——” Could she
fail to hear the cry of pain beneath the common-
place words?

“Tl keep you awake, and, besides, I must sleep
late to-morrow.” In her eagerness, there was no
room for sympathy, no room even for the thought
of any longing except her own. With the uncon-
scious cruelty of innocence, she devoured whatever
crossed the flowery path of her egoism.

Wounded yet unresentful, he smiled down on
her; and accepting his smile as an unspoken
consent, she raised herself on tiptoe and of-
fered him one of her light kisses, which brushed
his eager lips with the wings of a butterfly. Then,
as he made a despairing grasp at her, she slipped
away from his outstretched arms and across the
floor to the adjoining room. When she had passed
out, she closed the door behind her, and an instant
afterward he saw an edge of light flicker dimly
along the threshold.

That edge of light entered his heart like a blade,
and while the chill of age or of death crept over his


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 213


senses, he walked to the front window and looked
beyond the sleeping city into a darkness which
was merely the shadow of his own isolation. In
the street below, a car stopped, and he heard over
vast fields of silence the ringing cadence of happi-
ness.

“Good-night! It was so beautiful.”

“‘T shall see you again soon. Good-night!”

*“Good-night!”

‘Good-night!”

A door opened and shut, and the car rolled on
into the city. But for hours after he went to bed,
those gay young voices echoed across the encom-
passing desolation.


VII


| Ft THE morning he awoke with a cough, and
before night, Doctor Buchanan had pronounced
his ailment bronchitis.

*“You’ve been overdoing it a bit. Better stay
in bed for a day or two.”

“There are important matters at the office.”

‘No matter is so important as keeping well.
You are falling a trifle below your standard,
Gamaliel. This is what happens when you begin
to neglect your golf.”

“Yes, I got out of the habit last summer.
Annabel plays tennis. It is strange the hold
habit gets over you.”” Though he spoke cheerfully
between his spells of wheezing, he felt tired and
old—older than he imagined he should feel for
the next twenty years. His features, above the
youthful pink and white stripes of his pajamas,
looked as if they were modelled in clay.

“Well, you mustn’t let yourself get flabby. I
never saw you in better shape than you were last
spring. Europe didn’t agree with you as well as
it used to, eh?”

“No, the food was bad. All that French stuff
is apt to upset you. You can’t even order an
egg and have it served as God or nature intended.

214


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 215


I can’t see where the French got their reputation,”
he added brusquely, for he had never been just to
that interesting and versatile people.

Annabel, who had been arranging her hair for
the evening, was wrapped in her flame-coloured
kimono; and from her perch on the foot of the
bed, she remarked brightly, “But Vichy did won-
ders for him.”

At her voice, the Judge turned his head on the
pillow, while a flush enlivened the sombre gravity
of his face. ‘Oh, yes, I was all right after that,”
he assented. ‘“You must break my engagements
for the next few days, Annabel; but don’t give up
any of your parties just because I’m under the
weather. It isn’t anything to make a fuss about.”

“T sha’n’t mind a bit staying at home,” she
answered sweetly. “I shouldn’t think of leaving
you until you are able to be downstairs in your
library.”

The flush in the Judge’s face increased to a
burning red, which filled his eyes with a suffusion
of happiness. There was pride in the glance he
raised to Doctor Buchanan’s jovial countenance.
Had his old friend noticed how attentive his young
wife was to him and how lovely she looked in her
gay kimono, with the cloud of coppery hair on her
shoulders?

“Oh, you needn’t worry, Annabel,” returned
the Doctor, who was more encouraging than tact-
ful. “You aren’t going to lose him so soon.”


216 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“Yes, don’t give up your engagements, dear,”
the Judge urged tenderly, consoled by the thought
that she had offered voluntarily to stay at home
with him. “As a matter of fact, I’m quite fit,
but Buchanan is getting a bit fussy, and I may as
well give in to him.” He had learned by now
that Annabel was one of those charming women
who could make a smile or a single graceful gesture
conceal a multitude of defects. Even to his
uxorious mind, it appeared absurd that so trivial
a sacrifice should make him contented just to lie
in bed and remember, between spasms of coughing,
how happy he was in his marriage.

For the next week, while he kept to his bed, he
saw only, and that with feeble rapture, the best
side of Annabel’s nature. Though she was child-
ishly incompetent as a nurse, the very brightness
of her presence, the warmth and glow of her sym-
pathy, made his sick-room more agreeable than it
had ever been in the days of Cordelia’s efficient
care. Provided, of course, that he was not in
danger, it was more beneficial, he felt, to follow
Annabel with his eyes, while she moved about
making mistakes, than to have his medicine ad-
ministered at regular hours and his broth prepared
by an angel from heaven, even though that angel
were as capable as Cordelia. Discomfort, linked
so long with unhappiness in his mind, made scarcely
an impression upon his grateful serenity. Just
watching Annabel when she ran in at night, after


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 217


hearing him cough, with the flame-coloured kimono
slipping carelessly away from her bosom and her
rosy feet tucked into velvet mules—just watching
her was better for him than the most expert at-
tention. ;

While he remained an invalid, thinking first of
his own health and making only the impersonal
demands of a patient, Annabel was as kind to him
as he could desire. All day she flitted about his
room, intent upon her childish ministrations,
forgetting to shut the door, though he had tried
to teach her that it made a draught on his head
when she left it ajar; reading to him in an
interested voice all the parts of the newspaper
he invariably skipped; reciting with animation
the extravagant gossip she had heard over the
telephone. It was natural, perhaps, since she
had never been ill and Mrs. Upchurch was as
remarkable for her constitution as for her charac-
ter, that Annabel should not have learned what
sounds and sights distract the nerves of an invalid;
yet, in spite of her too redundant vitality and the
unnecessary noise she made in the room, she had
never been more lovable to him than she was while
he was dependent upon her care. In those few
days he grew to understand her nature as he had
never understood it, even in the hours when he had
felt closest to her in affection. ‘There are women,
he had always known (having a wide theoretical
knowledge of character) who, though virtuous by


218 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


instinct, recognize no ultimate authority beyond
emotion. These women, he had dimly surmised,
might have their own exalted standards, however
conflicting they appeared to a balanced mind where
sober reason was in the ascendant. He was begin-
ning now to suspect that Annabel, whose opinions
were merely organized prejudices, might be led by
her devious impulses to unerring decisions. But
even when she was most moral in conduct, it sad-
dened him to reflect how little abstract morality
was contained in her motives. In the deeper
phases of thought, she was, he perceived, occasion-
ally noble but always unethical. The wisdom of
the ages had left her, not only unimpressed, but
defiant; and she still remained after marriage a
pure experimentalist in behaviour. On the few oc-
casions when he had been tempted to invoke the
Stern Daughter of the voice of God, he had re-
frained because of a suspicion that duty was es-
teemed by her as little as Wordsworth was read.
To Judge Honeywell, whose faith, however flexible,
was triumphant over logic (who could recite the
Apostles’ Creed so long as he was not required to
practise the Sermon on the Mount, and could
countenance Evolution until it threatened the im-
age of its Maker), to this perfect pattern of the
conventional mind, it appeared that all women, ex-
cept Cordelia, inhabited some misty area between
inspiration and lunacy. Whenever he argued with
Annabel (which was seldom, though not so seldom


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 219


as he wished it had been) he felt that he was en-
tangled in some exquisite cobweb of unreason.
Yet, in her peculiar fashion, she possessed intelli-
gence of a high order. He was astonished by the
ease with which she contrived, in the absence of
logic, to reach accurate conclusions. After forty
years of social life and the law courts, where his
acquaintance with human nature had comprised
the standard types one encounters at dinner parties
and at the bar of justice, he was scarcely prepared
for the swiftness of Annabel’s flashes of insight.
Well, after all, it was not for her intelligence, it was
not for her character, that he had loved her. It
was not even for her kindness, though she had
proved to him that, when he demanded nothing,
she could be as kind as a daughter or a sister.
What he loved her for was this unfulfilled promise
of an ecstasy which had become less a balm than a
sword in his heart.

On the day when he came downstairs for the
first time, Annabel’s attentions began to wane,
and after an evening or two with a book in front
of the fire, he discovered that she was drooping
from suppressed weariness. Reading was evi-
dently better for one than for two, especially when
the reading was so divided.

“You must begin going out again, Annabel,”
he said after a period of deliberation. “I shall
probably be kept indoors for another week or
so. If I am able to go down to the office for a


220 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


few hours every day, it will be as much as I ex-
pect.” “

“But you will be lonely,’’ Annabel protested,
though she brightened visibly.

“Not a bit of it. I can always amuse myself.
When I learned my letters, people were taught to
read without skipping.”

‘How dreadful!’? she exclaimed, and then,
“Perhaps somebody will come in to play chess
with you. Ill ask sister Edmonia to dinner.”
Animation sparkled in her eyes, and from a mood
of depression, she kindled into liveliness.

“Oh, I can take care of myself. I shouldn’t
bother about Edmonia. She will drop in of her
own accord when she feels like it.”

“Then how about Major Bedgebury? He plays
a good game of chess, doesn’t he?”’

“Average, only average. You needn’t worry
about asking him.”

Even in his youth, Judge Honeywell had been
a reserved man, of few intimacies, and after his
marriage, Cordelia had never encouraged the
casual caller at meal hours. There are not many
friendships, he had concluded, that can be ce-
mented without the durable bond of food and
drink, or perhaps those he had formed had not
been of that independent order.

“Well, how about Mother? You enjoy her.”

“Yes, I-can say truthfully that it is a pleasure
to talk to a sensible woman like your mother.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 221


The very thought of Mrs. Upchurch restored
the lost flavour of life. He had spent an evening
with her in front of the fire, while Annabel attended
a rehearsal of the Little Theatre League, and that
evening still shone with a tranquil light in his
recollection. Cheerful, pretty, adroit in conver-
sation and indefatigable in flattery, there could be
no more delightful companion to a man who had
left the vortex of emotion behind him. Unlike
Annabel, she always agreed with his decisions, and,
unlike Cordelia, she never failed to see the point of
his jokes. For hours, she could twitter merrily in
her discreet and entertaining fashion; for she was
too wise ever to be original and too tactful ever
to argue. To the Judge, who was tolerant of any
views that were not brought into vocal conflict
with his own, there was refreshment in a mind so
sprightly that it was not troubled by convictions.
It was comforting, too, he told himself, in this
unwholesome and indecorous period, to find a
woman who was neither infested with public
virtues nor puffed up with repressions. Yes,
when all was said, he had, however inadvertently,
selected an ideal mother-in-law, one whose char-
acter was still as normal and trim as her figure.

*T’ll see if she can come to-morrow evening,”
Annabel said, and there was buoyant relief in her
tone. ‘Mary Percy is giving a dinner dance, and,
if you’re sure you won’t be lonely, I’d rather not
disappoint her.”


222 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


_ He smiled at her over his book, cheered by the
change in her voice, even though his judgment
warned him that it was dear at the sacrifice he had
made. Over his lowered spectacles, he could see
her burnished head, ike November leaves in the
sunlight, and beyond it a mirror disclosed his
own blanched and silvery reflection, with the dis-
coloured patches beneath the eyes and the corded
and stringy throat between the high points of his
collar. Was it only beside Annabel, he wondered,
that he looked so much older, or had he really
aged ten years since his attack of bronchitis?

“You must go, dear,” he said. ‘‘ You must not
let me stand in your way.” But he was thinking:
“Exercise. That is what I am feeling the need
of. Six months ago, when I got my golf regularly,
I didn’t come within years of looking my age.”


Vill


FTER all, it was the Judge’s sister, and not
Annabel’s mother, who came to dine the
next evening. Little dreaming that she might be
needed, or that Annabel would think of going out,
Mrs. Upchurch had accepted an invitation to
play bridge; and so it happened that when the
Judge measured out his thimbleful of old Bum-
gardner, the dauntless Edmonia seized the op-
portunity and begged to have her drooping spirit
refreshed.

*T hoped that Constable might mix us a cock-
tail,” she said, encouraged by the sight of the
bottle with its distinguished label, “but this is a
very good substitute. All the better because you
don’t waste it in a decanter.”

Beneath his beetling eyebrows, the Judge’s
bright brown eyes slanted after the whiskey. ‘“‘My
. gin gave out last year, and as I have scruples
about bootleggers, I am holding on to my pre-war
whiskey. There! Be careful, or you'll spill it,
Edmonia. Hadn’t you better let me pour it out
for you?”

Mrs. Bredalbane shook her head over the bottle.
“T fancy, my dear brother, that my hand is still

223


Q2A THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


as steady as yours,” she replied, with a laugh.
‘A little plain water, Constable, not soda. That
is one of the things you learn in Scotland, Gama-
liel, never to spoil the flavour of fine whiskey with
charged water. Why, Ive had the Duke of
Dallmally take away his best whiskey and substi-:
tute a second best when he heard me ask for
Apollinaris.” She added a little plain water and
raised the glass to her lips. “ Yes, this has quality,
there’s no doubt of it,” she remarked a moment
later. “I approve of your scruples about boot-
leggers.”

The Judge was surveying her with displeasure.
“TI may be old-fashioned, Edmonia, but in my
day ladies in Queenborough were not supposed to
drink whiskey.”

Mrs. Bredalbane chuckled. “Your day was
happily before prohibition, my dear brother, when
you did not have to take anything for fear of losing
everything. Yes, you are old-fashioned, if you
don’t mind my agreeing with you; but I can over-
look your reactionary views in return for my
appetite. This fish is particularly nice. I sup-
pose you have still the same cook.”

“Yes, we have had her for twenty-five years.
Constable brought her from Ireland and married
her the month after she came.”

“That was sensible of Constable. I must say
I admire your habit of holding on to the best.

And that reminds me that I never saw Annabel


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 225


looking so pretty. The child has learned how to
dress, and that means a great deal. Poor Amanda,
for all her fine figure, never knew what to wear.”

Gazing at her disapprovingly but enviously
over his frugal dinner, the Judge wondered whether
or not it would be wise to afflict her with good
advice. It was evident to him that any one who
indulged herself as intemperately as Edmonia
did, needed good advice in abundance. Without
delving into her character, there was, he felt,
sufficient food for admonition in the recklessness.
with which she endangered her digestion. No
man or woman could eat so heartily, to say noth-
ing of the way she drank, and expect to remain
well. That Edmonia, an exception to every rule,
did remain well in spite of her greediness, was little
less than an affront to his own abstemious diet.
While he watched her, he longed to indulge in a
veritable orgy of rebuke; but, being by judgment
averse from importunate counsel, he contented
himself with the implied warning: “For my part,
I have always tried to remember Buchanan’s-
formula for a long life: Trust in God and keep your
diet light.”

Edmonia nodded approbation over a second
helping of Smithfield ham. “With your chronic
weakness, I suppose you are wise; but it is un-
fortunate that you are obliged to deny yourself a
taste of this ham. It has a delicious savour, and
I hope Annabel has enjoyed it. After all, there is


226 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


no better way to cook a ham than by that old
recipe of Cordelia’s which calls for plenty of
Madeira and a dash of Worcestershire sauce.”

“Ts it possible that you will feel no bad effects?”
he inquired with a tinge of asperity.

“Not a particle.’ Mrs. Bredalbane airily
pooh-poohed the idea. “You must remember
that, in the case of twins, there is usually a strong
and a weak one, and, fortunately for me, I was the
strong one of us two. Besides, as a girl I was
obliged to consider my face and figure, as long at
least as I had romantic aspirations, which are now
comfortably over. Many a time, when I was try-
ing to reduce, I have said to myself, ‘age has at
least two advantages: when you are old, you may
eat as much and cry as much as you please.’”’

For the first time, he looked at her with sym-
pathy. An uneasy sensation assailed him, and
he asked himself, with a sting of self-reproach, if
he could have been unjust in his judgment of her?

“That reminds me that I have never seen you
cry, Edmonia,” he rejoined.

“And I hope you never will, Gamaliel. Before
I felt it was safe to cry, I stopped feeling the need
to. There doesn’t seem anything left in the world
worth crying over.”

“IT am distressed to hear that,” he rejoined,
innocent of satire. ‘Indeed, I was under the
smpression that you had, on the whole, enjoyed
your life.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 227


“Oh, I don’t mean I haven’t enjoyed it. I’ve
had a good deal of fun, and there aren’t many
women, I dare say, who have managed to make
a little happiness go so far. You know I always
had what Mother used to call a pleasure-loving
mind, and I never approved of the sour kind of
duty you pretend to enjoy. On the contrary,
I’ve always believed that happiness, any kind of
happiness that does not make someone else misera-
ble, is meritorious. That, my dear brother, is
what you held against me in Queenborough. You
Episcopalians may have made most of the history
and all the mint juleps in Virginia; but you have
left your politics and your laws to the Metho-
dists and Baptists, and pleasure-baiting has always
been the favourite sport of those earnest Chris-
tians.”

“But, my dear sister!””

“Oh, you know, Gamaliel, that you could have
forgiven my committing a sin if you hadn’t feared
that I had committed a pleasure as well. More
than this, you resented the way I wasn’t satisfied
simply to stay ruined and to stew in a conscious-
ness of sin for the rest of my life. It wasn’t my
fall, it was my being able to get up again, that you
couldn’t forgive ie

“*Eidmonia, I protest

“Well, wait a minute until I have finished.
Now that Mother is dead, I may say what I think
without fear of producing apoplexy in the family


93


228 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


tradition. The trouble is that you are all tainted
with Puritanism, even down herein Virginia, where,
Heaven knows! you ought to have escaped the
blight. But America is an anemic nation, and
the danger with national anzemia is that it runs to
fanaticism in the brain. You are so harassed by
the idea of indecency that, when you can’t find
fresh food for scandal, you resort to the canned
variety. Could anything prove this better than
the fables you invented about me?”

“Were they actually fables, Edmonia?”’ he in-
terrupted hopefully.

“Mainly, Gamaliel, mainly. To be sure, I had
that early fling, but, for the rest, I have lived what
I suppose you would call a fairly respectable life
with four husbands. I had spirit enough in the
beginning not to be ruined, and, of course, that
was an offence against your social tradition; but
the way you hounded me—I don’t mean you,
Gamaliel, any more than the others—simply
shows how indecent the imaginations of decent
people become when the mob instinct is aroused in
them. If I had been as timid as most girls, I
dare say you would have destroyed everything
except the historical scandal; but when the Lord
let me be born in America in the Nineteenth
Century, He gave me a skin thick enough to survive
ite

““My dear sister!”? Judge Honeywell exclaimed
again, and he added, after a pause in which he


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 229


asked himself if there could be more than a vestige
of truth in Edmonia’s belated defence, ‘“‘It pains
me to think we may have been unjust to you.”

“Oh, you needn’t begin to worry about that,”
Mrs. Bredalbane responded cheerfully. ‘“‘ You
enjoyed it, and it hasn’t done me any harm that
is worth speaking of. Only don’t breathe a word
of my confession to anybody. I value my fascina-
tion for the young too much to endanger it, and
it isn’t my actual virtues, but my legendary vices
that draw the flies to my honey.”

That was like Edmonia, he reflected gravely.
Even as a girl she was her own worst enemy; she
destroyed sympathy by her flippant and unregen-
erate—he had almost said, carnal—spirit. Yet,
even while he meditated in this fashion, his culti-
vated mind, which had worked by precedent alone,
was stumbling through a baffling maze of conjec-
ture. Was there a leak, after all, in his taherited
system of prudential morality?

**But that is all over now,” Mrs. Bredalbane had
resumed in a vivacious tone, “‘and the chief thing,
at our time of life, is to continue to find the world
amusing. It isn’t easy to keep amused when
things have ceased to be serious. At least one
important concern is essential to a cheerful life,
and I feel sometimes that I have exhausted my
interests. After love and travel, there isn’t much
left except religion and the pleasures of the palate,
and of course social reforms, though none of these


230 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


make any personal appeal to me. If my digestion
gives out, I suppose I shall have to turn to the
Church,” she concluded, with a sigh of resignation;
‘that is the only thing I haven’t tried; but it has
always seemed to me to lack a sense of humour.”
She sighed more heavily, while her brother, in-
ferring from the sound that her mood was damp-
ened, kept a watchful eye upon his precious Bum-
gardner, which he had discreetly moved to the other
side of the table. |

To his relief, she appeared satisfied with the
plum pudding on her plate; but over the dessert,
with Constable out of the room, she inquired if he
had any of that choice apricot brandy left in his
cellar; and when he replied vaguely that there
might be a bottle or two under the cobwebs, she
remarked, with even more than her usual audacity,
* After all, Gamaliel, your marriage has turned out
better than I expected.” .

The Judge, who was cracking an English walnut,
stopped long enough to stare at her through his
glasses, which reflected the rays of the candles in
a dazzling glimmer.

“Yes, it has turned out very happily, Edmonia.
It was all I could do,” he added, with an accent of
pride, “to persuade Annabel to go out to-night and
leave me alone.”

Mrs. Bredalbane, who was inordinately fond of
nuts, was sweeping the scattered shells on her
plate into a neat pile. Before responding, she


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 231


carefully selected a fresh supply of walnuts from
the silver basket, which she remembered as one
of a pair that she had given Cordelia and Gamalie]
as a wedding present.

“Since she has settled down, I suppose it is all
as it should be,” she responded slowly, intent upon
the nut she was shelling. “But if you had told
me the marriage would turn out as it has, I
shouldn’t have believed it. Annabel seems to me
to be the kind of woman that would turn any
man’s head.”

**Well, as long as she is satisfied to turn mine!”
he rejoined with mild acerbity.

To-night, he found Edmonia, who was always
unwelcome, positively distressing. It distressed
him to listen to her loose talk on serious sub-
jects; and it distressed him still more to see her
make the immoderate meal of an unbridled ap-
petite. For thirty-six years Cordelia had _ per-
mitted him two English walnuts after dinner, and
since her death he had never exceeded his daily
allowance. Having been for so long the master
of his appetite, if not of his fate, he could only
regard Edmonia’s indulgence as a melancholy spec-
tacle, though naturally of a piece with the rest of
her conduct. For even the World War, which had
varnished the reputation where it had failed to
stiffen the virtue of so many soft-hearted women,
had done little, he conceded sadly, in the case of
his twin sister. The charge that he had misjudged


232 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


her had been unable to survive the sight of her
hearty pleasure at the table.

“Have you seen Amanda lately?” she inquired
so abruptly that he was startled out of his moraliz-
ing.

“Yes, I enjoyed sitting beside her at the Christ-
mas cotillion.”

“Didn’t you think that she looked the mere
shadow of herself?”

“Why, no.” He was direct but disingenuous.
**T must say that I did not observe it. We had a
very pleasant little conversation.”

“Well, that was like a man,” Mrs. Bredalbane
commented, and her tone was not flattering to his
sex. How different, he thought, was the consum-
mate tact of Mrs. Upchurch, who respected his
feelings as well as his wine cellar. Next time,
he must warn Annabel not to ask Edmonia to
dine with him. If he must have someone in to
take her place, he preferred Mrs. Upchurch, or
any other woman who was too ladylike to indulge
either in malice or in whiskey however old.

“She could hardly expect to stay beautiful for-
ever,” he said in a tone of remonstrance.

“Not beautiful, perhaps, but at least, poor thing,
she might have been able to preserve her illusion.
With her illusion unimpaired, she might have gone
on being lovely as long as she lived.”

“Her illusion? Did she possess one?” Though


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 233°


his tone was playful, he was attacked by a curious
shiver, as if a snail were slowly creeping up—or
was it down?—his spine.

**Doesn’t every woman, my dear brother, possess
one until she is wrecked? Woman lives not by
love alone, but chiefly by illusions.”

He laughed uneasily. “I never pretended to
know much about women, Edmonia. I was for-
tunate enough to choose the safer and simpler sub-
ject of the law.”

Mrs. Bredalbane nodded. “I agree with you,
at least as far as Amanda is concerned. You
proved that you knew very little about her.”

*“T knew she was the most beautiful woman of
her time. When a man knows that, it is sufficient
for him.”

“Beautiful, yes. As far as features went, there
wasn’t anybody who could hold a candle to her.
Her trouble was that she lacked charm. I suppose
it takes a little sense to be charming, but beauty
appears to get along better without it.”

“IT never missed intelligence in her. With a
woman as queenly as that, all a man could do was
to worship.”

Mrs. Bredalbane went on placidly eating her
walnuts. “It is pathetic the way fashions in
beauty change.”

“Yes, I am sorry to say, the queenly type
appears to be as extinct as the pterodactyl. We


234 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


run to the other extreme to-day. Do you realize,
my dear sister, that nuts are the richest food you
can eat?”

“It doesn’t matter, Gamaliel. Unlike you, [am
not hanging on to anything, not even to my
husband. You will have no real freedom, my dear
brother, until you cease to cling so tightly to
Annabel. Human beings, especially youthful
human beings, are not made to be clung to; it
brings out their worst qualities.”

Even the iron composure riveted over the
Judge’s soul by forty-odd years of the law was not
impervious enough to keep his irritation from
oozing into his voice. “I fail to understand,
Edmonia, why you should imagine that you are
entitled to give me advice.”’ Useless to tell him-
self that her mind, never logical at best, was be-
fuddled to-night by her unwise indulgence.

“IT am speaking from greater knowledge of the
world, Gamaliel. You haven’t changed much in
some ways since you were a boy, and I hope you
don’t resent my saying that you have never lost
the proverbial innocence of a great intellect.”

To this preposterous charge, which he resented
as warmly as any man, young or old, could have
done, he replied with scathing sarcasm: ‘‘Am I to
consider you a judge of innocence, Edmonia?”
Then, observing that she was reaching again for
his Bumgardner, he added hurriedly, “I think we
shall be more comfortable in the library,”’ and rose


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 235


from the table. Was it possible, he asked himself,
that a Virginia lady could be befuddled with drink?
Not only a Virginia lady, but a Honeywell, and his
twin sister! This, he told himself, as he waited,
with dignity, for her to sail ahead of him out of the
room, was what happened in age to a woman who
had forgotten her modesty in youth! For the
belief that Edmonia was reprehensible had become
one of the articles of faith in his Fundamentalist
creed.


IX


FTER Mrs. Bredalbane had gone, leaving

him with the impression that she had held
something back, though less, to be sure, than she
might have held back with propriety, he sank into
his favourite chair and gazed thoughtfully at the
smouldering logs. The book he had intended to
read, the fourth volume of the “Life of John
Marshall,” lay near at hand; but, departing for
once from his nightly custom, he did not open its
pages. Gradually, as if he were sinking into some
gray mist of contemplation, he began to muse upon
the variegated pattern of life—of his own life in
particular. Into these meditations Annabel rarely
intruded; for nothing had astonished him more
in a marriage that was rich in surprises than the
swiftness with which her influence evaporated
when he was once removed from the tantalizing
delight of her presence. Though his passion for
her glowed with a tardy florescence of youth, he
had begun to realize that it lacked the deep-rooted
strength of maturity.

Having replenished the fire, he leaned back in
his chair and asked himself the inevitable question
of the brooding mind: why when he had sought

236


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 237


happiness should he have found only a fugitive
pleasure? Did all men of sixty-six surrender to
this ominous sense of futility, or did it mean that
in his pursuit of joy he had mistaken a decidu-
ous bloom for the everlasting flower of the soul?
Would his life have been a broader and finer thing
in a richer soil and a more stimulating atmosphere,
with opportunity for his pampered intellect to
renew its vigorous growth? Could he have
grown old without this smothered resentment
against fate, this lurking suspicion that he had
been defrauded of perfect fulfilment?

Then, while he was still musing, his head dropped
back on the cushions, and he drifted out into an
unenclosed region of darkness.

When he started up (though not for the first
time, since he retained a dim memory of having
replenished the fire again) there was the sound of
subdued laughter on the porch. A minute later,
a latchkey was slipped into the lock, and he heard
the front door open and shut.

Was it because he had been asleep that
Annabel slipped in, as soft and radiant as his
dream, and stopped to smile at him from the
tremulous shadows of the firelight? Even to his
stil! dazed faculties, there was a perception,
scarcely stronger than the faint glimmer on the
hearth rug, that the moment was charged with
significance, that a magical change had come over
her in the hours since she had left him. Not only


238 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


was she lovelier than he remembered her, but there
was a disarming tenderness, a suavity, in her smile,
as if her gemlike lustre had melted in the vehe-
mence of some inward flame. Her dance frock
of palest primrose was half hidden by a scarf
of amethyst gauze, which trailed from her bare
shoulders to her small golden slippers. Yet it
was not the colour of her dress, it was not the vivid
beauty of her changeable face, which held him
there, transfixed in a gesture of wonder and de-
light. What enraptured him was the discovery
that happiness illumined her as if it were the fire
at the heart of an opal.

“T have made her happy at last!” he exclaimed
inwardly, with a sensation that was strangely flat
and stale for pride of possession.

“So you’re back,” he said aloud. ‘“‘Was it a
nice party?”

“Oh, lovely!” She hesitated, as if she were
struggling to collect her thoughts, and continued,
after a long silence in which it seemed to him that
he heard the fluttering of her heart—or was it
merely the whispering of the flames?—‘‘ Everyone
missed you.”

Her voice, always enchanting, was subdued to
the melancholy strain of dream music. The fire-
light wove a pale nimbus about her hair; and he
felt, with sudden anguish, that she was a symbol,
not only of his lost paradise, but of all the burning
desire of the world.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 239


“It does you good to go out,” he said, and won-
dered if she would shrink away from his caresses
as she had done when they parted. Surely pleasure
must have made her kinder, he thought, only in his
own mind he used the phrase, “more womanly.”

She moved toward him, and the shimmering
amethyst scarf wound after her on the floor. “I
adore dancing.”” Though her voice was caressing,
it was so low that it might have floated across an
immeasurable stillness. A faint dreaming smile
curved her lips, and this smile, so rare, so blissful,
so unutterably sweet, was like the eternal smile
of legend. For all its wistful sweetness, it sep-
arated them as sharply as if it had been not a
smile but a sword.

“Aren’t you tired?” he asked, chilled by her
ethereai remoteness.

“Tired? Oh, no, I am never tired of dancing.”

“Would you like anything before we go up?”

“Oh, no. There was supper at midnight, but I
wasn’t hungry.”

He glanced up at the clock. ‘“‘Why, it is after
two. I must have dozed all the evening while I
was waiting. Yet I distinctly remember making
up the fire once or twice and going to look out of
the window.”

“I wish you wouldn’t sit up. There is really
no need.”

“Well, I shan’t after this once. Perhaps I shall
be able to go with you in a few days.”


240 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“In a few days?” she repeated vaguely, and
added, with what he could not fail to see was an
effort: ““Was Sister Edmonia in good spirits?”

He frowned, partly because she had so lightly
dismissed the prospect of his companionship, and
partly because Edmonia was not a relative upon
whom he could reflect with pleasure.

“The kindest construction I can place upon
Edmonia’s behaviour,” he said, “‘is that she be-
comes unbalanced at times.”

*Unbalanced?”’? With her musical echo in his
ears, he asked himself if she had heard only the
last word of his sentence.

“Well, we'll go upstairs as soon as I put out
the lights and lock up.” As he spoke, she
moved quickly across the room; and he watched
the flutter of her primrose and amethyst draperies
until she had ascended the stairs and disappeared
into her dressing-room. The only reminder of
her presence was a lingering scent, which he found
agreeable though he instinctively disapproved of
the pleasure it gave. Cordelia and her friends
had never used any perfume more encouraging
to the lower nature of man than bay rum; but,
of course, as he reminded himself, Cordelia’s
friends had all been paragons of virtue, whose ap-
pearance and manner invited reform rather than
seduction.

For the rest of the winter, Annabel remained
silent, lovely, and inaccessible. He had never


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS Q4%


found her so kind, so considerate, so unapproach-
able. From the brightened lustre on her hair
to her mysterious smile and her half-awakened
gestures, she seemed to him more exquisite and
more distant than she had been even in girlhood.
At moments of rare insight, it occurred to him
that she was living a hidden life—a life so vivid
in happiness that its secret incandescence shone
through her body.

““As long as she is happy,” he thought a little
sadly, and then, “‘Can it mean only that she has
forgotten Angus at last?”

Now that his strength was returning, he had
begun again to go out with her in the evenings.
After the dreary hours he spent with chaperons,
the feeling of her nearness on the drive home
was almost a torment; and this awoke in him the
sharp craving for sympathy, for tenderness, and
above all for comprehension. But there were no
words, he found, there were no caresses that could
convey what he suffered. Only the old phrases
came to his mind, and the old phrases hung
like moth-eaten tapestries in the enchanted glow
that surrounded her. He could not reach her;
his voice could not penetrate the stillness into
which her rapt and brooding spirit receded.
Simply by withdrawing into her dreams, she placed
the unconquerable vastness of the universe be-
tween them. :

“Have you noticed how happy Annabel is


Q4Q THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


looking?” he inquired of Mrs. Upchurch one
afternoon. “A little self-absorbed, but happier
than I’ve ever seen her.”

*“Y-e-s,”’ Mrs. Upchurch assented. Though she
replied brightly, there was a troubled look in her
face.

“T suppose,” Judge Honeywell pursued, “that
she has completely forgotten that young scamp.”

“Y-e-s."”> While Mrs. Upchurch responded,
three perpendicular lines, as fine as hairs, which
she called playfully “lines of economy,” appeared
between her arched eyebrows. In her small but
compact mind, she told herself that happiness like
Annabel’s, even a subdued and secret felicity, was
not natural in a marriage of expedience; and these
cryptic signs of beatitude had begun to make her
uneasy. Yet, after all, where could one find better
material for happiness than wealth, or a more suit-
able dispenser of it than an elderly and therefore
-indulgent husband? Nevertheless, she was obliged
to acknowledge that Annabel’s invulnerable calm
was disturbing.

““Annabel has become very reticent,” she con-
tinued presently. ‘‘ You remember how we used to
regret her lack of proper reserve? Well, since her
marriage, especially in the last few months, she
has closed up like a clam, and it is impossible to
get anything out of her. I suppose this is the
effect marriage has, and I must say that I think it
is a commendable one.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 243


“Quite so, quite so,” the Judge agreed, for he felt
no disposition to challenge her opinion. ‘“Anna-
bel, I am glad to see, is developing into a woman
of character.”

This was satisfactory so far as it went; and Mrs.
Upchurch reflected hopefully that, since Annabel’s
husband was contented, there was surely no need
for Annabel’s mother to worry. It was possible,
she argued cheerfully, that she had mistaken mere
enjoyment of luxury for the symptoms of a more
dangerous delight. Annabel, as her husband had
just remarked, was becoming a sensible woman;
and what truly sensible woman could fail to per-
ceive the inestimable benefit of wealth and social
position combined? Yet, with her usual ripe
wisdom, Mrs. Upchurch paused to ask herself if
her point of view could be prejudiced? For, in
her own experience, she had suffered so much
more acutely from lack of money than from loss
of love, that, as she would be the first to admit, she
was scarcely a fair judge of their relative values.
Though she was shrewd enough to realize that few
women were so disillusioned, there were instants
when she wondered whether she had become su-
perlatively wise or was merely afflicted with the
myopic vision of impoverished relicts?

“It is a great satisfaction to feel that she is
happy,” he said in a voice that trembled slightly.

“You are so wonderful.” Mrs. Upchurch
smiled at him with an archness that would have


QhA THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


bewitched a younger man. “It is a satisfaction
to me,” she added, “‘to know that you are happy
also.”

“How could I be anything else with Annabel
for a wife?”

Again Mrs. Upchurch smiled, but the arch-
ness of her look was brightened by a flicker of
ironic amusement. “Annabel is devoted to you,”
she responded. ‘“‘How could she be anything
else?”

His face shone, and she was glad that she had
been unscrupulous in giving pleasure. After all,
though religion was a prop in calamity, there were
occasions when she felt thankful that the right of
private judgment had been safely established be-
fore she was left a widow and penniless.

“That is very gratifying to me,” he answered.
“T hope you are entirely comfortable. Remember
that I wish Annabel’s mother to have every lux-
ury. I cannot separate your happiness from
hers.”

Her eyelids fluttered softly, for beneath her
designing purpose there was a sound and grateful
heart. “I cannot thank you enough,” she said,
and she spoke only the truth. ‘“‘No one was ever
more generous.”

On this optimistic note, they parted gaily; and
Mrs. Upchurch, hastening to the Woman’s Ex-
change on the next block, ordered her favourite


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 245


desserts with much of the pleasure and more than
the recklessness of a bride, while the Judge strolled
slowly to his house, where he was confronted al-
most immediately with the brittle nature of human
happiness.


xX


NNABEL was not in the drawing-room,
though a fire was burning and the tea-table
stood in front of the flames. A feeling came over
him, as he glanced round the dignified room, that
his wife had flitted away an instant before he
entered. A savour of youth was wafted to him
from the firelight, as if her fragrance were still
interfused with the place she had left. At this
subtle reminder of her power over him, his heart
beat more rapidly and his senses ached with the
familiar tremor of unsatisfied longing. With the
eagerness of a young man, he turned back into
the hall and went quickly upstairs.

Their bedroom was empty; but across the hall,
in the little sitting-room which she had taken for
her own use, and decorated in what seemed to him
a grotesque fashion, he caught a glimpse of violet
chiffon, and found her kneeling on the window seat,
with her eyes raised to a futurist sunset of black
and red. Some poetic rhythm in her attitude,
in the slant of her small burnished head and the
drooping lines of her shoulder against the trellis
of bared branches and the flaming background of
sky; some flowing harmony of mood and aspect

246


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS Q47


recalled to him a dimly remembered picture of a
Byzantine saint. She had not heard his approach
on the carpeted stair, and while he stood watching
her from the threshold, he felt that the past surged
into his consciousness as the winter twilight flooded
the deserted garden below. All that he had ever
desired! All that he had ever relinquished! All
that he had ever resisted! Nothing had changed
between them; yet the clear contour of her head
against the dark sunset and the hopeless despon-
dency of her young figure, awoke, without a word,
without a gesture, a sadness so profound that it
was a supreme crisis of despair.

“Annabel, what has happened?”’ he called out
sharply, in a voice which was charged with regret
for something that he could not remember, for
something that he had lost without ever possess-
ing.

Her head turned slowly, as if she and the leafless
branches and the vivid sunset and the dim world
beyond, were all under a spell. He watched the
light slip from her gleaming hair to the twilight of
her eyes, and from her eyes to the scarlet curve of
her mouth and the straight folds of violet chiffon
over her bosom. And while this ray of light
glided over her, she looked at him with the mute
disaster that he had hoped never to see again in
her face. As he met the anguish in her gaze, he
thought, with a miraculous flash of insight, “Only
happy people can suffer like that!”


248 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“Annabel!” he said again, holding out his arms,
‘thas anything happened?”

She shrank away from him, and he repeated the
question in a passion of sympathy. “‘My darling,
has anything hurt you?”

If only she would turn to him for comfort!
If only she would yield herself to his arms! So
overpowering was his impulse to gather her to his
breast that it seemed to him she must feel herself
drawn by some irresistible influence. That he
could love at last unselfishly, supremely, and yet
be incapable of bringing happiness to the beloved,
appeared to him, while he waited there in suspense,
to be the ultimate tragedy of the human heart.
That love could not confer happiness! That love
could not even bring consolation! At the mo-
ment, he felt that no other pang could equal the
dull ache of his helpless despair, of his futile
compassion. Yet he knew that she was submit-
ting without a struggle to an agony which he envied
even in his pity because it was the sharp anguish
of youth.

“No, nothing has happened.” Her voice was
so low that he could barely distinguish the words,
and beneath the subdued notes there was a tremu-
lous longing.

*‘Are you ill? Are you tired?”

“Oh, no. Ive been out all day. I just came
in a little while ago.”

**Are we dining out?”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 249


“Yes, we promised the Dandridges.”

“Would you rather not go out this evening?
I will telephone that you are not well.”

““No, there’s to be a dance afterward. I hate
to miss a dance, and, besides, it is too late to disap-
point Molly.”

While she spoke in that strained low voice, and
he asked these trivial questions in the hope that
they might melt her frozen reserve—or was it
aversion?—he heard around him, like a stealthy
murmur, all the superficial sounds in the room; the
singing of the flames; the fall of the ashes; the
droning of the clock, with a curious jerking mo-
notony, as if it were preparing torun down. And
beyond the frosted panes, where the black boughs
were etched now against a paling sky, he became
aware that the wind had risen, and that bells were
pealing far away, now loud, now faint, above the
unquiet streets.

“Tf you have been out all day, hadn’t you better
rest before dressing?” (Did she hear, could she
fail to hear the stifled pain in his voice?)

“IT was just going to lie down. Did you see
Mother?”

“Yes, I met her by accident, and we stopped
to have a few words. She is a wonderful woman,
your mother.”

Annabel looked at him with heavy eyes, which
were encircled by violet rings, as if she had been
weeping. “All women who have learned to be


250 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


happy without happiness are wonderful,” she an-
swered wearily. —

Was that borrowed wisdom, he asked, or was it
uttered from the secret instinct of her own heart?
He felt that he would give his life for her, and
realized the next instant that his life was nothing to
give. ‘‘Sothisis really love. I knowit at last,” he
said to himself, while all other interests, all other
pleasures, were scattered like straws. Only the
joy of loving and being loved in return flamed
against the desolate horizons of life. His heart,
which had been an organ of uniform and temperate
action, trembled like a leaf in the wind as she
moved away from him out of the room.

A little later, while he fitted his studs with
neatness and precision into the holes of his shirt,
he found himself repeating aloud, after some re-
assuring maxim, “‘It meant nothing at all. It
meant really nothing.”” A passing mood. Nerves,
nothing more. Women, he assured himself, with
satirical humour, were subject to moods, and even
more unavoidably, moods were subject to nerves.
Women, especially young or middle-aged women,
were easily agitated, as well as disposed by na-
ture to vagueness and vacillation. To be sure,
there was neither vagueness nor vacillation in
Cordelia’s character, which was, to say the least,
flatly unequivocal. None the less, he found little
difficulty in placing her also in the category of
pure womanliness. For, like most lawyers and


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 251


all vestrymen, he was able to believe automati-
cally a number of things that he knew were not
true. It was owing, indeed, to his proficiency in
this exercise, which conservative people called
“right thinking,” that he had achieved his envi-
able position in an epoch when faith and facts
did not cultivate an acquaintance. So, even while
he adopted Cordelia’s logical methods, he was
able to meditate with comfort upon the nervous
instability of women in general and of Annabel
in particular. For example, what could be more
vague than her manner at the Christmas cotillion,
or more vacillating than her behaviour to-day?
By to-morrow her mood might change and she
might be herself again, he mused, skimming over
the treacherous shallows of conjecture. How
much in scenes like this one was genuine emotion,
he wondered, and how much was _ instinctive
drama? All modern youth impressed him as
more or less theatrical, and Annabel was not
devoid, he knew, of this spectacular twist, of this
leaning toward the quickened movement of
catastrophe. That absurd phrase, for instance,
about women learning to be happy without happi-
ness! Any one with an ounce of logic would
recognize that as pure paradox; but the truth was,
he supposed, that paradox, not reason, was the
natural law of her being.

So he deliberated, and having deliberated, he
finished his dressing and went down into Cordelia’s


252 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


front parlour, where he waited patiently with his
eyes on the memorial designs in the Brussels
carpet. What would Cordelia think? he found
himself asking. For more than a generation, he
had asked this question in every predicament; and
now, even though Cordelia was safe in heaven
and a younger and more engaging woman oc-
cupied her place on earth, he still inquired from
settled habit: “What would Cordelia think?”
What would she think, indeed, of his second wife
and her lack of all the essential qualities of wife-
hood?

This painful uncertainty was in his mind when
Annabel came down the stairs, wrapped in an
ermine coat, with her hair shining as if the after-
glow had left a gleam in its waves; and as she came
toward him, she diffused a radiance, a freshness,
which captivated his senses. He had never seen
her more brilliant; he had never seen her more
gallant or gay; for her mocking smile invited while
it eluded his tenderness. Well, he had been right
after all, and the dangerous mood had vanished
as quickly as it had come. His relief rushed to his
lips; but the confirmed habit of a lifetime was
stronger even than passion, and when he spoke it
was merely to ask, as he had asked a thousand
times of Cordelia, ““Do I look all right to you,
dear?” So fatuous was his state of mind that
he hoped she would reply in Cordelia’s sanguine
verdict, ““No other man looks half so distinguished


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 253


in the evening.’ But, to his disappointment,
Annabel merely tossed back, without glancing over
her shoulder, ““Oh, you'll do very well. Nobody
cares how you look, if you have money.” For
an instant, he hoped in vain that she would turn
and glance at him; for he had cherished for
years a favourite theory that Cordelia was right,
and that the white and black of evening clothes
set off to advantage his dignity, his slimness, and
the patrician character of his features. To-night,
too, he had taken unusual pains with his hair
and beard, and it seemed to him that the glossy
pepper-and-salt made a pleasing contrast to his
bright dark eyes and to the air of belated youth
that lingered in his expression. His appearance
still caused him anxiety; and the fussiness about the
fit and cut of his clothes and the colours of his ties
and socks, which had occupied so many hours dur-
ing his courtship, had never entirely disappeared.

But Annabel, unlike Cordelia, was interested in
her own appearance and not in his, which she felt,
with reason, made little difference one way or
another at his venerable time of life. Humming a
snatch of song, she folded her ermine coat (which
he never saw without remembering how extrava-
gant he had felt when he bought it) over her short
velvet skirt, and tripped, in her silver slippers with
scarlet heels, down the steps and into the car.
Though she was as close to him as his own heart,
she remained as inaccessible as the stars.


254 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


All the evening, seated among the submissive
mothers of insurgent daughters, he watched her
with an anxious solicitude which impressed his
waning sense of humour as maternal. Fatherhood,
he was sure, for he was both a father and a grand-
father, contained none of these vehement alterna-
tions of pride and jealousy. Or perhaps he was
mistaken, and it was not maternal anxiety, but
some new dimension that love and despair had
added to his spiritual nature. Certainly not for
Cordelia, not for any child or grandchild that he
had ever known, could he have endured so pa-
tiently these tedious hours of discord.

“Tf only I can make her happy!” he thought,
attaining, in one brief exaltation, a selfless passion.
“Tf only I can make her happy, I shall ask nothing
else for myself. I will bear any discomfort.”

In that moment, with the very act of relinquish-
ment, there was a break in the clouds and light
streamed into his mind. A faint, thin vibration,
clear as the ringing of bells and luminous as the
sunrise, quivered about him. Was something
there? Was it light? he asked himself. Was it
music? Was it ecstasy? Was it God? For a
single point of eternity, beyond time, beyond space,
beyond good and evil, he surrendered to this in-
corruptible harmony, to this cloudless substance
of being. Light? Music? Ecstasy? Ged? Or
merely a rainbow mist of illusion?

_ The vision, which was not a vision, was gone


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 255


before he had seized it, and the tumult of jazz
was starting the old pain at the back of his neck.
He thought with longing of his darkened house in
the soundless night; but when at last the evening
was over and they had reached home, Annabel
flung off her ermine coat, and dropping on the rug
in front of the fire, dissolved into tears.

“Tt is nothing. Oh, it is nothing!” she re-
peated passionately. Though he pleaded with her
until he was hoarse with fatigue and desperation,
she would answer only, “‘Oh, it is nothing!”


XI


WEEK afterward, when the perplexity had

worn on his nerves, he went to see Mrs.
Upchurch. Even the recollection of the faint,
pure harmony had died away in the darkness.
He remembered it now only in flashes; never-
theless, he remembered it. For one instant of
distended vision, he had found a way out of
despair.

*“Has Annabel seemed to you—well, different
of late?” he asked nervously.

“Different?” Mrs. Upchurch’s tone was sym-
pathetic but dubious.

“We were speaking a little while ago of her
happiness ” Again he paused abruptly on a
note of interrogation, and again she echoed with
bright vagueness,

“Her happiness?”

‘Have you observed any change in her since—
since our last conversation?”

Mrs. Upchurch waited so long before replying
that he repeated his question in a tone of exas-
peration: “I inquired if you had noticed any
change in her recently?”

“TI was just thinking——

256


399


she began, and


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 257


trailed off into silence. Concerning truthfulness,
as well as other rules of conduct, she was, by in-
stinct rather than by theory, a pragmatist. In her
own experience, she had found that few acts and
still fewer reactions were either good or bad in
general, but merely moral or immoral when ap-
plied to a particular circumstance. Falsehood,
aversion from one’s husband, divorce, murder—
yes, dreadful as it sounded, even murder, ap-
peared to her to be justified, or at least palliated,
by certain extremities of desperation. And how
much more excuse was there, she felt, for a con-
scientious objection to the naked truth.

“What do you feel about it?” she asked sweetly
but firmly.

Turning away, he cleared his throat after a
nervous habit that had always irritated her.
Did it irritate Annabel also, she wondered, and
were there other habits, confirmed by years,
which were even more annoying to the capricious
youth of the girl?

“I have been greatly disturbed,” he began all
over again, with an effort which she watched in
alert sympathy.

“Disturbed?” After all, what was there to do
but repeat his words like a parrot?

“Annabel has not been herself. She has
seemed very *? He stumbled helplessly, and
Mrs. Upchurch supplied, with an air of cheerful
wisdom, the label:


258 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“Nervous. Yes, Annabel was always a nervous
temperament.” ~

“Then she has had these spells of depression
before?”

“Oh, often. You must not take them too seri-
ously. Girls are apt to be variable.”

He made a slow affirmative gesture; but, after a
brief pause in which he pondered her explanation,
the harassed look appeared again in his face. ‘‘For
the last week she has been listless and melancholy.
Several times I have found her in tears when I
came home, and I have heard her crying to herself
in the night.”

“TI know. She tells me that she can’t sleep,
that she lies awake and thinks after she goes to
bed.” She sighed, hesitated, and added hastily,
in a rush of courage over discretion: “I sug-
gested to her that she had better try sleeping in
the adjoming room. Indeed, Doctor Buchanan
advised it.”

When she had finished, she carefully looked
away from him into the fire. Though she did not
see his expression, his voice sounded lifeless.

“Yes, we’ve arranged that. Buchanan spoke
to me.” After a moment, he asked wearily,
“Could there be a physical cause for her nervous-
ness?”

“Oh, no. Annabel was always healthy, even
as a baby. She has never had more than a day’s
sickness in her life.”’


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 259


“Yet she is frail looking.”

“Not frail, but thin. It’s the fashion to keep as
thin as a rail, and she won’t let herself take on an
ounce. Girls are like that now.”

Encouraged but unconvinced, Judge Honeywell
gazed at his mother-in-law; and in a mirror over
the mantelpiece, he caught a glimpse of two un-
familiar figures, which might easily have been the
reflections of father and daughter. If he had ever
thought of this obvious disparity in their ages, it
would have depressed him; but his mind, a well-
disciplined organ, refused stubbornly to admit the
idea that Mrs. Upchurch was not an elderly
woman. Only by regarding her as elderly and
therefore incapacitated for romance, could he
maintain his suitable dignity as her son-in-law.
And Mrs. Upchurch, who would cheerfully have
worn a cap and mittens, if wearing them could
have relieved his mind, abetted the charitable
subterfuge to the best of her ability. ‘Are you
sure it is nothing more serious?” he asked
presently.

“Oh, perfectly!” she replied emphatically; for
she was prepared, if he required it of her, to be
sure of anything except downright immorality and
the doctrine of evolution.

Again he cleared his throat before speaking,
and again the hacking sound made her wince.
‘‘Have you heard recently of that young man?”

“You mean Angus Blount?”


260 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


She was playing so recklessly for time that she
was scarcely aware of the asperity in his tone
when he retorted with the question, “‘He was the
only one, wasn’t he?” |

“Oh, yes.” Of this she was fortunately con-
vinced, and for this saving conviction she felt
devoutly thankful. “‘She never cared a rap for
anybody but Angus.” h

“T feel confident of that; but I suppose Angus
is still living?”

“So far as I know. The last news came from
his mother. I met her in market several months
ago, and she told me that Angus and his wife
had separated, and that he had gone to Russia
for some newspaper.” There was little certainty,
if certainty was what he wanted, to be got out of
this; but, as she hastened to remind him, with her
natural aptitude for seeing the bright side, Russia
is a country where anything may happen and fre-
quently does. Russians appeared to her, indeed,
to live in hourly expectation of the unexpected.

“Is it possible that she has heard from him?”
he asked in a voice that trembled.

“From Angus? Well, I hardly think so. She
told me just before her marriage that she had put
the thought of him out of her life, and nothing has
occurred of late to change her mind about that.”

“No, nothing has occurred,” he assented
heartily. “‘However, he may have written to
her, and that would naturally depress her.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 261


_ “Yes, naturally.” It was always easy to agree,
and what agreement was more emphatic than a
spirited echo?

“Is there any way,” the Judge demanded
abruptly, “‘that you could find out, of course
without directly inquiring, what has become of
him?”

She thought quickly but lucidly. “I might
speak in a roundabout way to his mother.”

“That is a good idea. Of course, I have the
utmost confidence in Annabel. The utmost
confidence,’ he insisted sternly, as if Mrs. Up-
church had cast an aspersion upon her daughter’s
character.

“Yes, of course. The utmost confidence. We
both have.” It was all, she told herself furtively,
in the best manner of conspiracy; and since she
was clever at conspiring, and had resorted to it
upon more than one occasion in the past, she felt
that life promised to become almost as complicated
as it had been when she was married.

““We must remember,” he said, still sternly,
*‘that we are trying to help her.”

“T know. Dear child, she is the soul of loyalty,
and she is devoted to you. There is only one
thing more that I wish for her,” she added, with a
sigh, ‘‘and that is faith. During all that trouble
with Angus, I felt it would have been so much
easier for her if only she had had faith to fall back
upon. My dear mother used to say. that silent


262 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


prayer was the best balm for any affliction; but
there isn’t any silent prayer in this age; there is
only outspoken doubt.”

“You are right, and it is most distressing,” he
rejoined, feeling as little inclination as usual to
dissent from her opinion. Though he was not
unacquainted with honest doubt, he was disposed
to tolerate it only in a smothered condition.
Smothered doubts, like buried sinners, were pic-
turesque; but active and unashamed, they seemed
to him asreprehensible as Edmonia. “The world
has found nothing to take the place of duty, es-
pecially in a woman’s life,” he concluded sadly.

“Well, it isn’t her fault that ideas have
changed,” urged Mrs. Upchurch, “and you must
never lose sight of her devotion to you.”

*‘T couldn’t wish for a better wife,” he responded
fervently, and caught himself wondering if he had
been untrue to Cordelia. Why was it that, in
being true to the present, you were so often trapped
into fear lest you had been false to the past?
“My life has been blessed by two good women,”
he added ceremoniously.

Impressed by his manner, Mrs. Upchurch was
gazing at him attentively, though she had taken in
scarcely a word that he had spoken. In her busy
mind, hemmed in by innumerable anxieties, she
was trying to reason out why people are never
satisfied with the troubles they have, but must


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 263


be forever engaged in attaching new ones. With
all the comforts of life to choose from, peace,
prominence, wealth, security, why were Gamaliel
(she was doing her best to think of him as ‘‘Gama-
liel”?) and Annabel beginning so soon to turn
from the sunny path of married happiness into
the shady involutions of a difficult situation?
For Mrs. Upchurch, who lacked dramatic temper-
ament and dreaded situations, except in novels,
where she demanded them, was beginning to feel,
as she expressed it precisely, at the end of her rope.
After the stress of Annabel’s unhappy love affair,
marriage with an elderly man, a man who had
passed the age that requires watchful waiting on
the part of a wife, seemed to Mrs. Upchurch to
be as safe as the grave, if almost as monotonous.
And now it appeared that love affairs die as seldom °
as lovers from sheer disaster. Was Annabel even
more foolish than her mother, who had little
opinion of the child’s common sense, believed her
to be? Where was Angus? Well, wherever he
was, it was natural, Mrs. Upchurch decided, to
assume that he also was bent on making trouble,

*“‘T’li find out all I can,” she promised readily,
‘and let you know in a day or two. I shouldn’t
worry a moment, if I were you. Never forget
that Annabel is devoted to you.”

Annabel is devoted to you! The words sang in
‘is ears, sang in his mind, sang in his blood, while


264 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


he strolled along the deserted blocks in the direc-
tion of home. Even the ceremonial procession of
his thoughts rustled like wind-driven leaves, and
took flight into golden air. The oppression of
age, that bitter sense of an increasing desolation,
which he dreaded more than pain, more than
tragedy, was consumed in this sudden liberation of
spirit. While he remembered that Annabel was
devoted to him, nothing else mattered in life.

As he approached the house, a car stopped at the
door, and Annabel alighted and waved to him
languidly. In the damp air, her face was as fresh
as a flower after rain, and there was a starry
depth in her eyes. What was it? he wondered,
what burning memory, what hope, what desire?

“You have been out,” he said, and could think
of nothing to add.

“Yes, Pve been out.” Her voice scarcely
reached him, it was so low and so charged with an
indefinable quality. Rapture? Pain? Passion-
ate longing?

He put his hand on her arm, and beneath the
mink coat she was wearing, he felt her flesh shrink
away. As they entered the house together, she
slipped past him and went upstairs alone, while
he felt that the chill of desertion was penetrating
his heart.

The next afternoon, the voice of Mrs. Upchurch,
floating over the telephone, requested him to stop
by for a minute on his way back from his office.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 265


As he entered her drawing-room, she received him
with the sanguine yet sympathetic smile that was
so irresistible to all men who were unhappily mar-
ried but hoped for the best.

“Well, he’s safe in Russia,” she announced
triumphantly.

““Safe?”? Even to his disturbed faculties the
word sounded far-fetched.

“Safe for us, anyhow. His mother heard from
him last week, and he said nothing of coming back
to America.”

“There was nothing, then, that could have de-
pressed Annabel?”

Mrs. Upchurch hesitated; but her hesitation
sprang less from regret for the news she had to
impart than from her firm belief that trouble came
from telling men things they did not wish to
know. “Nothing,” she said after a moment, “‘ex-
cept that his wife has divorced him.”

*“Could she have heard that?” He breathed
heavily, and she motioned to a chair while she
dropped back on her sofa.

‘Of course, it is possible, but I doubt it. And
even if she has heard it,’’ demanded Annabel’s
mother, “‘what difference could it make to her
now? After all, she is married, and”’—she pressed
this point in as delicately as if it were a needle—
** Annabel is devoted to you.”

“Yes, I realize that.”” His tone was grave but
tar from emphatic.


266 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“So even if she has been a little depressed, it
doesn’t mean anything. You must remember
that Annabel has always taken things more
seriously than most girls of her age. She never
had light flirtations, and before her marriage she
never gave a thought, I am sure, to any man but
Angus. Now that she cares for you, you can trust
her to put him out of her mind.”

*“T trust her absolutely. No man could ask for
a better wife. If it is a question of patience——”’

“That is all. Only have patience with her, and
everything will be right.”

He promised solemnly, but, after all, it is easier
to promise a virtue than to practise it. Day and
night he had suffered from a jealous suspicion,
and now Angus, who had been as unreal as a bad
dream, was as living as the pain in a tooth. For
Judge Honeywell had been tormented, without in-
termission, ever since the afternoon when he had
stolen upon his young wife while she watched the
futurist sunset; and he was beginning to feel that
the constant ache had worn on his nerves. At
bottom he was an amiable man who wished harm
to nobody; yet he felt, as he descended Mrs. Up-
church’s steps, that he would cheerfully consign
Angus to the nocturnal shadows of Russian free-
dom.

It was one of those early spring evenings when a
mulberry-coloured haze floats in the air after sun-
set. A pale yellow light was still suffusing the


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 267


west. Straight overhead, a solitary star was
burning like a white fire in dim pastures of sky.
Through the windy dusk, waves of memory ebbed
and flowed in an invisible tide. Things he re-
membered in fragments. Things he had _for-
gotten. Things he had never tried to understand
in the past. He had the feeling, while he walked
there alone, that if he could think of the right word
to speak, if he could discover some secret key to
experience, all his difficulties would become as sim-
ple and clear as day. The right word! But what
wasit? Had helostit? Had it ever been spoken?
Closing in about him, he was aware again of this
universal rhythm of spirit. If only he could open
his mind! If only he could let it stream through
his soul, like light, like peace, like that Sabbath
without evening in which his father believed. But
he knew that he was imprisoned mind, heart,
body, in the mould of earth, and that he could not
escape.

He quickened his pace, covered the last block,
with what in a less dignified person would have
been almost a springy step, mounted to the porch,
inserted his key in the lock, and opening the door
softly, entered the hall. Pausing an instant later
to look in a mirror under the staircase, he saw,
through an open door, the reflection of Cordelia’s
drawing-room, where Annabel was tearfully dis-
engaging herself from the arms of a young man
who was not Angus.


268 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Fair, strong, well-favoured, the strange young
man looked at liim from the glass with a pair ol
singularly living blue eyes, while the fantastic
thought sprang into the Judge’s mind, “‘That is
the son I ought to have had!”


XII


RS. UPCHURCH sat thinking before her
fire; and her thoughts, trim, bright, brisk,

were combined with as much determination as
would not endanger perfect tolerance and a desire
to please everybody. In the last ten minutes,
departing from Annabel’s problem, she had con-
sidered the disadvantages, in man or woman, of an
incurably amorous habit of mind. For it seemed
to her that even the insidious irony of the modery
point of view had scarcely damaged the popular
superstition that love and happiness are inter-
changeable terms. Old and young and perennially
middle-aged, she beheld the world enslaved by this
immemorial illusion. Was she herself, she some-
times asked, the only person who had been able to
maintain a true sense of values and an equilibrium
of the emotions? Judge Honeywell with his law
and learning; Amanda with her exalted character
and her simple wit; Annabel with her artless so-
phistication; and now this young man who might
have been but was not Angus—ali this company of
happiness-hunters appeared to be little better
than a troupe of romantic comedians. Of them
all, Amanda seemed to her the most innocent and

269


270 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


appealing; for at fifty-nine, Amanda was still con-
fiding enough to be betrayed. Annabel, of course,
was too sophisticated for that; it put a strain upon
Mrs. Upchurch’s credulity when she tried to imagine
Annabel in the earlier plight of Edmonia. Was it
merely, she questioned, that ruined women, like
fragments of Colonial architecture, ‘‘dated,’’as they
say, a period in history? Or were all moral laws
engulfed in some recent volcanic eruption? Well,
whichever way it was, there was comfort, however
cold, in the knowledge that there was nothing she
could do about it, that there was nothing she could
even be expected to do. The relief she found in
this reminder was dampened almost immediately
by the thought of the strange young man, who was
a stranger only in the part of a lover. She had
known him quite well as Dabney Birdsong, when
he was a little boy wearing knickerbockers, and
with the most marvellous curls. It seemed to her
only yesterday that his mother had wept over
the inevitable sacrifice of those curls. “‘If only he
were a girl!”’ the mother, meeting Mrs. Upchurch
in market some twenty years ago, had lamented.
And now, in so short a time by the calendar of
middle age, Mrs. Upchurch was trying to think
of Dabney, not only with a shorn head, but as
Annabel’s lover. Not her lover, of course, she
mused hopefully, in the discreditable European
sense of the word; merely her lover in the superior,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS Q7t


though more tragic, American fashion. Why was
it that Annabel, with all the wealth she could
desire and an adoring husband, who lived but to
gratify her whims, should have scarcely recovered
from one painful affair before she was plunging
with unslaked ardour into another? None of this
would have happened if he had married me,
thought Mrs. Upchurch.

As she had so often insisted to a conveniently
deaf Providence, she had never been immoderate,
she had never even been exacting, in her demands
of life. All she had ever required of a second
husband was that he should be comfortably, if
not amply, provided for. Birth, youth, breeding,
appearance, character, yes, even character—all
these agreeable perquisites of marriage she would
have exchanged for the permanent consolation
of an established income. But Destiny, as she
had not failed to observe was often the case,
had granted her every opportunity except the
one she urgently needed. As an engaging
widow, armed with a disenchantment so profound
that it was mistaken for softness of temper, she
had been approached by youth without intelli-
gence, by appearance without character, by char-
acter without youth, by birth and breeding
without another redeeming attribute; but wealth,
being the one and only gift she desired, had suc-
cessfully eluded her grasp. In the end, since


Q72 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


she was as amiable as is consistent with virtue,
she had thankfully ceased her struggles, and had
nestled into the less lucrative, and certainly less
exacting, position of mother-in-law to a rich and
generous man.

She was waiting now for her son-in-law, and in a
few minutes she heard his ring at the bell, sharp,
imperative, and not like Annabel’s, a long-drawn-
out jangle, which continued until Altrusa sauntered,
tying her apron behind her, to the front door.
When the Judge entered and held out his hand,
Mrs. Upchurch saw that he was looking tired and
old, older indeed than she had ever seen him.
“Tf men could learn to give up like women,” she
thought, “‘it would be so much more restful.”

*‘T’ve had a painful scene with Annabel,” he
began, roaming away after he had dropped her
hand, and staring down into the small back yard,
where he could see nothing more interesting than
a few clothes’ lines. “‘I should not have men-
tioned it to you if she had not insisted.”

“But it can’t be worse than what I know
already.”

“Tf anything, she is more determined than
ever.”

“Determined? You mean to be miserable?”
It was impossible for Mrs. Upchurch to keep a
rasping note out of her voice.

“Determined to wreck her life. Determined
not to give up this young man.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 273


“And it isn’t even the same young man!”
wailed Mrs. Upchurch.

“No.” He turned his blanched and stricken
face away from the window. “But it is the
same infatuation apparently.”

“You mean she is obliged to have somebody?”

**T mean she thinks she is obliged to have some-
body.”

“But there’s nothing really wrong init. Anna-
bel, with her upbringing, couldn’t be anything but
a pure woman.”

“The terrible part is that she is without regret.
I had almost said without shame.” Fantastic-
ally enough, this sounded to Mrs. Upchurch like
an echo, and she wondered wildly how long it had
been since she had heard that word applied to
behaviour. Had the label, like the fact, become
so antiquated that nobody was ashamed any
longer?

“IT believe,” the Judge continued grimly,
*‘that if anything were really wrong, she would not
hesitate to tell me. She seems to have absorbed
an idea that decent reserve is hypocrisy. She
even boasted of the way she had brazened every-
thing out instead of trying to hide it.”

‘Well, you can’t deny that she is truthful.
That means a great deal,” protested Mrs. Up-
church, who had contrived, through a difficult
experience, to preserve the major virtue by the
sacrifice of the minor.


Q74 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“It appears to mean everything in her case.
But it is impossible to discuss it with her. It is
like trying to argue in two different languages.”

“IT know,” Mrs. Upchurch nodded with sym-
pathy. “They see things so differently now.”

**T fear that our marriage was a mistake. I fear
for her,” he added punctiliously.

“Oh, it can’t be so bad as that. Give her time
to recover. Have patience a little longer.”

“T am willing to have all the patience of the
ages,” Judge Honeywell said, with sorrow in his
voice, in his long white face, and in his silvery hair
and beard, which had lost lustre. ‘“‘I have done
everything I could for her happiness. I cannot
see where I have failed.”

“You have been perfect,’ Mrs. Upchurch re-
turned, and for once she was speaking sincerely.
“IT suppose her affair with Angus awakened her
emotions, and that—and that * Before the
calamity in his face, she felt that she could not go
on without weeping.

“How long has she known this young man?” he
inquired, pausing in his restless roaming and sitting
down in the chair on the other side of the wood
fire.

“Oh, all her life. She used to play with him;
but he’s been away for a number of years. I
believe he first studied engineering at Columbia,
but after he went into an office in New York, he
seemed to feel he wasn’t getting on, so he bor-


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS Q75'


rowed money and went to Paris to the Beaux
Arts. He is doing quite splendidly as an archi-
tect, P’ve heard, and for the last two years, after
he came back to New York, he has been making a
reputation. You haven’t forgotten David Sum-
mers, who used to live here, and then became
famous as an architect in New York. He de-
signed St. Stephen’s Church, you know, and the
Boynton Library. Well, Dabney has been in his
office ever since he came back to America; and
Summers sent him down to Queenborough about
the design of this terminal station. There is noth-
ing wrong with hin—Dabney—I mean. Every-
one thinks he is a splendid boy, and that he has a
brilliant future before him—and his mother says
she doesn’t believe he has ever looked at a girl
twice——” She broke off in confusion, and
continued hurriedly, after a breathless pause: “I
haven’t seen him since he was a child, but I re-
member that he had the most beautiful auburn
curls. It seems only yesterday that I met his
mother in market, and she cried when she told
me she had had to cut them off because the
other boys made his life a burden.” Mrs.
Upchurch was speaking with recovered vivacity,
and before she had finished it seemed to her that
she had offered something in extenuation, if not
in excuse, of Annabel’s conduct.
“Tt is a week now since——”’


“T know.’ She seized his words before he had


276 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


uttered them, so desirous was she of helping, of
understanding. “‘You came straight to me.”

“At Annabel’s request. At Annabel’s urgent
request.”

Mrs. Upchurch sighed. ‘‘You are the soul of
chivalry.”

“‘T have done the best I could.”

“No man could possibly have done more.”

Soothed but not consoled, he turned his grateful
gaze on her; and while these interchanges of
flattery on one side and appreciation on the other
continued, the fancy played in Mrs. Upchurch’s
mind: “‘How easily I could have managed him!”

Aloud, however, she remarked merely, “‘I can-
not feel hopeless. Annabel is so young.”

“Yes, she is young.”” Though he sighed as he
answered, this glamour of youth enveloped his
senses like an inescapable perfume. “She insists
upon talking about it,” he complained bitterly.

Mrs. Upchurch nodded. “I thought she had
become more reticent. After all,’’ she concluded
sternly, “‘there is something to be said in favour of
suppressions.”

He assented drearily. “In my day, we should
have thought so; but, I suppose, we are behind the
times.”

“I believe this goes no deeper with Annabel
than her dramatic instinct. Some women enjoy
unhappy love affairs, you know, though I have
always felt that they are greatly overrated. But


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS Q77


you must remember that Annabel makes drama
wherever sheis. I don’t mean that she is to blame;
but things just seem to happen about her.”

She felt sincerely sorry for him. It was that
unconquerable illusion again. In his own place
and period, he appeared to be endowed with
every requisite of happiness. As the survivor of
an age of urbanity, he was more than impressive,
he was even majestic. If he could but realize
that each period of life has its own essential ar-
dours and enterprises. “‘He is becoming an old
man,” she thought sadly, “‘and yet, in his own
generation, beside Amanda, he would still be only
middle-aged.”” Made wise by sudden vision, she
beheld his disaster less as an individual revolt
against nature than as a part of the universal striv-
ing to break through the stale crust of experience
into some intenser reality than life had afforded.

**You will come and reason with her?” he asked,
with: a pathos that moved her more deeply than
she liked to feel.

“Yes, I will come. Not that there is anything
left to say. I have reasoned with her until I am
worn out; but, after all, isn’t she beyond reason?”
_ He dropped his head into his hands with a
sound between a sigh and a groan. Could any-
thing, she asked herself, be more unmanly than an
elderly man in the clutch of an emotional crisis?
With a fantastic flare of memory, she recalled
his dry-eyed solemnity on the day of Cordelia’s


278 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


funeral. As an example of behaviour, she pre-
ferred the earlier manner, the manner of the
circumspect eighties; yet she was just enough to
admit that it was as difficult to be solemn as it
was to be circumspect in a crisis with Annabel.
And it was even more difficult, she divined, for an
elderly husband to be manly in a crisis with a
young wife. Though she felt deeply compassion-
ate, she had been brought up on robust legends
of the dominant male, and even while she pitied
him with her heart, she despised him with her
intelligence.

“TI have wondered,” she said thoughtfully, “‘if
I ought to give that boy a good scolding. Do you
suppose it would help?”

He raised his face from his hands. ‘‘Oh, I’ve
talked enough. I said some things I don’t like
to remember. I’m afraid I lost my judgment
for a few minutes. It isn’t talk that is needed
now. It is 7

Yes, she knew what was needed; but while she
looked at his bleached and furrowed face, she pre-
ferred not to put this need into words. Every-
thing but youth! Everything but youth, and the
whole world thrown aside! ‘I ought to have
known,” she thought regretfully, “I ought to have
known men! I ought to have known Annabel!
Even more, I ought to have known life!” For it
seemed to her that this undefeated error was the
secret canker at the heart of experience. You,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 279


>


may count upon me to do all I can,” she said
aloud, “‘but our one need is patience. I am sure,
I am perfectly positive that it will be all right in a
little while.”’

He rose hopefully, almost with a spring of energy,
and while he held out his hand, which felt soft
and limp, a whimsical regret flitted again through
Mrs. Upchurch’s head. “If he had married me,
how much happier he would be now.” It was
unrefined, she knew; it was almost an indelicate
idea; yet it entered her thoughts with a definite
sensation of triumph. “Try to remember,” she
reminded him as they parted, “‘that the more
violent a—a passion is, the sooner it blows over.”
For, comforting or not, that was what she had
observed.


XII
HOUGH it was after six o’clock when she


crossed the street on her way to reason with
Annabel, Mrs. Upchurch found, upon questioning
Constable, that the Judge had not returned from
his office. He was still walking the streets with
his disturbed thoughts, she supposed, and reflected
how much more sensible it would have been if he
had accepted this blow as philosophically as he had
accepted Cordelia’s death.

“Is Mrs. Honeywell upstairs?” she inquired,
and after receiving an affirmative reply, she slipped
out of her sealskin coat (a gift from Judge Honey-
well, who was of the opinion that mothers-in-law
should wear only sealskin or mink) and walked
sedately up the curving stairs to the second storey.
While she ascended, she observed, as she had
done at least a hundred times in the last six
months, that nothing had been changed in the
house since Cordelia lived here. Furniture,
carpets, curtains, even Cordelia’s portrait, hang-
ing side by side with one of the Judge—all these
solemn, commemorative objects were exactly
where they had been before Annabel’s marriage.


“Men have queer ideas of loyalty,” she meditated,


280


ane Are vie”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 281


and the deeper she meditated and the higher she
ascended, the queerer they seemed to her. “‘I won-
der if that could have anything to do with it?”
she inquired suspiciously, and decided immediately
that it had nothing whatever. No amount of
loyalty to his first wife would have disturbed
Annabel. “She would encourage, not only loyalty
to the dead,’ Mrs. Upchurch mused, “but down-
right infidelity with the living.” <A minute later,
as she opened the door of her daughter’s room, she
felt that she required all her patience and more for
the scene that was awaiting her.

Annabel, who enjoyed tragedy in any posture
but preferred it lying down, reclined now in the
midst of luxuries which, her mother felt, she
had procured, if not dishonourably, well, at
least under false pretenses. Beneath a coverlet
of peach-coloured satin decorated with garlands
of roses, she was propped upon large, soft pillows,
where lace and embroidery had banished the cool
decorum of Cordelia’s linen. Her bright hair hung
free on her neck, and her nightgown of primrose
crépe was slipping from a shoulder that looked as
if it were carved out of ivory. So young, so deli-
cate, so transparently lovely, she appeared, from
the bloom of light on her hair to her pale hands,
which lay curled, like alabaster flowers, on the satin
quilt, that Mrs. Upchurch caught her breath as she
had done on the day when Annabel returned from
abroad. Surely, by now, she shouid have grown


282 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


accustomed to her daughter’s enhanced beauty.
Yet, whenever she saw her after a brief absence,
she was startled afresh, just as she was when she
glanced out on a flowering pear tree in the garden
across the street. ‘‘She wasn’t nearly so pretty
as this when she was in love with Angus,” she
thought. “It shows what money can do. Her
hands alone show what money can do.” And her
respect for wealth, which had been ample before,
became inordinate while she drew a chair to the
bedside.

“Annabel,” she began in a tone which she tried
to make as natural as it would have been if her
child had remained poor and merely pretty, “isn’t
it time that you came to your senses?”

Annabel gazed at her with eyes that appeared
enormous in her small, transparent face. ‘“‘I’ve
never been out of them, Mother.’’

*‘Have you forgotten that you are married?’

The girl shook her head, and all her coppery hair
burned like flames about the head of a Christian
martyr. “I wish that I could!”

“When are you going to get up?”

“To-morrow.”

*““Has that boy gone away?”

“He isn’t a boy. He is twenty-six.”

“When does he go?”

“To-morrow. He is going to Europe next
week.”


“Then, I suppose, you won’t see him again?”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 283


At this Annabel began to weep. “He is coming
in the morning to tell me good-bye.”

“That is very unwise, my child.”

“T can’t help it. I am obliged to see him once
more.”

Mrs. Upchurch looked at her severely. ‘‘ What
I can’t understand,” she said, “‘is the way you
have got yourself so worked up over a boy you
used to play with in the street. Why, I can’t even
think of him without auburn curls.”

“Well, he’s big enough now, and I hadn’t seen
him for fifteen years.”

“Only the other day you were just as wild about
Angus.”

Annabel shook her head impatiently. “Oh,
that didn’t mean anything. I thought it was real,
but it wasn’t. I got over that months ago.”

“But it was just as real while it lasted, and it
made just as much trouble for everybody else.
Have you forgotten how you behaved when he
married?”’

“Well, even if I did, it didn’t mean anything.
I wanted something real. I am not like you. I
can’t be satisfied with shams.”

*“Can’t you see that, if only you have patience
and exercise self-control, this will pass away just as
quickly?”

A furious sob answered her. “But I don’t
want it to pass away. Oh, Mother, can’t you
understand, even if you haven’t any romance in


284 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


your nature? If I can’t have love, I’d rather die!
I don’t want to live, if I can’t have love in my life!”

While she wept, her mother considered her
gravely and in silence. With sentiments, even
improper sentiments, Mrs. Upchurch was un-
happily familiar, and of them she felt that she had
no reason to be afraid; but confronted with a
genuine passion, especially with a guilty passion,
the kind that people enjoyed as well as feared,
she was as helpless as a wren in a thunderstorm.

“How do you know ” she began, and broke
off disconsolately. Though she had dragged her
mind for an argument, she could find nothing
more pointed than the Socratic method, which
impressed her as threadbare from use and wont.
““How do you know,” she tried again more em-
phatically, “that this is really love?”

Annabel tossed back the drooping clusters of
her hair and gazed at her mother reproachfully.
“Tf you’d ever felt it, Mother, you would know
without being told. It is like lightning when it
strikes you. You don’t have to wonder and
hesitate, as I used to do when I thought I was
falling in love with Angus. You are just caught
up in a cloud of fire, and you can’t help yourself.
We knew it the very second it happened. It was
the first night I went out to dinner without the
Judge. Nothing has been the same since. Noth-
ing will ever be the same again as long as [I live.
I’m in a dream all the time, except when I’m in


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 285


despair. Oh, won’t you try to understand,
Mother? Won’t you try to imagine what it means
to me?”

Mrs. Upchurch sighed, while she struggled in
vain to think of an answer. She had never heard
the divine passion described so fluently; but then,
as she reflected, not many emotions were as ar-
ticulate as Annabel’s. Women of the past gener-
ation, however voluble over trifles, were seldom
able to prattle intelligibly about love. While she
listened to her daughter’s impassioned voice, she
recalled dolorously a phrase she had so often heard
on the lips of her mother: “That is the kind of
woman who is obliged to have a man in her life.”’
To wives and spinsters of Victorian tradition that
necessity had appeared indelicate; but it seemed
to Mrs. Upchurch that nothing was indelicate any
longer, not even the need of a man in your life.
Was it really the war? she asked herself; for her
conventional mind preferred to hold a world war,
rather than original sin, responsible for Anna-
bel’s misguided behaviour.

“Well, I cannot see anything to do about it,
my child,” she said presently. “‘You will have
to make an effort to be brave and think of your
husband.”

But this, it appeared, was the last thing that
Annabel felt an inclination to do. “He has had
his life,” she replied, with an obstinate frown.
**He has had his life, and I want mine.” It was


286 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


cruel, but, like so many cruel things, Mrs. Up-
church decided, it was true also.

“You must not forget, my dear, that you
married him with your eyes open.”

“T didn’t, Mother. He knew, but I didr’t. I
didn’t know how immoral marriage can be.”

“Immoral? O Annabel!’

‘“*When you dislike a person. When you simply
can’t bear to have him near you.”

‘Hush, Annabel! You mustn’t say such things.
I won’t listen to you.”

**T know you would have lied about it, Mother,
you and Cousin Amanda. You would have lied
and pretended; but I won’t. I won’t be a sham
all my life.” With a sob of desperation, she rushed
on: “I know I am unkind, I know I seem ungrate-
ful. When I am away from him, I tell myself
that I will be different. But as soon as he comes
into the room, I can’t think of anything except the
fear that he will want to be affectionate.”

Mrs. Upchurch moaned. ‘I tried to warn you,
my child.”

“Oh, you wanted it, Mother. You can’t deny
that you wanted it. But you shouldn’t have let
me do it. He shouldn’t have let me.”

*‘Are you reproaching me, Daughter?”

“You oughtn’t to have let me.”

“But I did warn you. I told you that very few
girls of your age could be happy with an old—with
an elderly man. I tried to make you see that you


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 287


would get a great deal in exchange; but I warned
you that you would have to give up all idea of
romance. You have had a great deal in your
marriage, and have you forgotten already how
absolutely you had finished with love?”

“TI thought so. I thought so, but you must
have known better.”

““My dear, I finished with it more than twenty
years ago, and I’ve managed to get on very well.
Love isn’t everything. I’ve tried it, and I know
that it doesn’t fill a very large place, as I once said
to you, except in the lives of women who have
never had it. If you only knew how much of its
value depends upon its absence.”

“You're different.”” Annabel’s. voice had risen
above its plaintive melody to a key that sounded
almost hysterical. “You can’t understand,
Mother, because you are not real. But he ought
to have known better. He ought to have con-
sidered me more.”

Mrs. Upchurch shook her head. ‘“‘You have
yet to learn, Annabel, that love makes most peo-
ple, especially most men, inconsiderate.”

*“But how can he be in love at his age?”

“There isn’t any age, my dear, when men can’t
be. I’m not sure about women, because it has
taken a world war to make women begin telling
the truth about themselves, and they haven’t told
half yet. As for men, I haven’t a doubt that they
can fall in love with one foot in the grave.”


288 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Annabel flung out her bare arm as if she were
pushing the thought away. “Oh, Mother, I can-
not live without love!” she cried, dropping back
into her monotonous refrain. “If I cannot have
love, I'd rather to die!”

As she descended the stairs a little later, it
seemed to Mrs. Upchurch that she still heard that
changeless cry echoing from the other side of the
world. Her visit had done no good. There was
nothing that she could say, and, even if she had
spoken words of wisdom, Annabel, in her despera-
tion, would not have listened. It all came back,
Mrs. Upchurch decided, to the lost idea of duty.
“The Judge was right,”’ she thought despondently.
“You can’t hold people in when you take the
sense of duty away.” And not only duty, but
remorse also, which she had found even more effi-
cacious in unlawful love, appeared to have flown
on wings of levity and ridicule. She remembered
hearing once of an aunt of her mother’s who had
been restrained from the fatal step by pondering
Goldsmith’s mournful advice to lovely woman.
Well, if Goldsmith was a convenient household
remedy in her grandmother’s time, Mrs. Upchurch
could only regret that the world had passed away
from such simple antidotes to sin. But what, she
asked, could be more deplorable than the swiftness
with which the high tragedy of one generation de-
clines into the low comedy of the next?

As she was putting on her coat in the hall, the


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 289:


door of the Judge’s library opened, and almost
involuntarily, she turned and entered the room.
She had hoped not to cross that threshold again
until her mind was more at rest; but, in spite of
her sharp recoil from the meeting, she shut the
door quickly behind her and spoke in a sym-
pathetic and imperative manner.

“TI think you have been wonderful. Yes, you
have been simply wonderful. If you can be pa-
tient a little longer, I am sure the strain will soon
be over. He is going away to-morrow, and you
know how quickly youth forgets.”

He flinched, and she saw that the reminder of
youth was like the flick of a lash. Even her
emphasis upon “wonderful,” an epithet that she
had found of inestimable value in dealing with
men, appeared to have lost, in a measure, its
potency. He looked seventy, she was quick to
perceive, though six months ago, a stranger
would have taken him for a man of late middle
age. His skin had faded to the colour and the
brittle texture of old parchment. There were
inflamed pouches under his fine eyes, which had
been so clear and bright for his years. Even his
hair and beard looked as lifeless as scorched grass.
This, she told herself with resentful bitterness,
showed what that destructive passion could do even
to the elderly, even to the well-established in life.

““What troubles me most,” he said in a hoarse
whisper, “is the thought that I may have been to


290 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


blame for it all. I cannot rid my mind of a feeling
of self-reproach.”

At this her tears gushed forth, and she fumbled
in her bag for the handkerchief she had left on
Annabel’s bed. Not finding it, she wiped her
eyes on her glove. ‘That is morbid. You must
not let such an idea take hold of you. You
have been perfect. Even Annabel says you have
been perfect.””> Had Annabel said this? Well,
if she had not, Mrs. Upchurch reasoned, it was
what she ought to have said.

“Does she?” His face brightened.

“Don’t think for an instant that she blames you
for anything. How could she?”

“Tam so much older that I ought to have known
better.”

““Nobody ever knows better when it comes to
marriage. And if she had sought the world over,
she couldn’t have found a more indulgent
husband.”

“Perhaps not. Anyhow, it is kind of you to
say that. But indulgent husbands, like so many
other useful institutions, appear to have gone out
of fashion. Nobody values them any longer.”

“That is what girls think now; but just let
them try fending for themselves as I have done.
It is all a part of the loose talk the war released into
the world.”

He pondered this moodily. ‘It isn’t, I fear,
quite so simple as that. There has been a change,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 291


a readjustment of ideas, perhaps even of stand-
ards. We may have been too strict in our views;
but the pendulum is swinging too far in the opposite
direction to-day. The younger generation has
caught hold of something different, and_ this
difference confuses me. I have even asked myself
if the wisdom of the ages can have been wrong.”

“T think it much more likely that the younger
generation is wrong,’ Mrs. Upchurch replied,
with a tartness of which she was ashamed as soon
as it had escaped her. “It looks to me like sheer
immorality. I don’t mean in fact, of course,”
she hastened to explain, “Annabel couldn’t be
underhand if she tried. She is as honest as the
day.”

“T am sure of that, and I am sure that you
can’t dismiss all this as mere immorality. Im-
morality we have had always with us, but it was
different from this—this—I had almost said this
revaluation of morals. Annabel has her point
of view as clearly defined as we have ours. That
is why we can’t bring the old pressure of authority
to bear on her. It is like the thunder of the pa-
pacy to a Protestant; it thunders as hard as ever
but it fails to strike. The thing that has dis-
turbed me most is that there seems to be some
intellectual basis for the whole attitude. It may
not be a sound one; nevertheless, it is there, and
that lifts Annabel’s motives above the plane of—
of ——”


292 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“TI know, I know.” Mrs. Upchurch spoke
emphatically, for.she felt that this was one of the
occasions when innuendo is the agent of delicacy.
“You are too tolerant, too generous. I don’t
believe there is another man in the world who
could be so—so’’—she hesitated, swallowed hard,
and then brought out with tearful urgency—
*‘wonderful.”

The effect this time was obviously beneficial,
and before she could accentuate it with a firmer
repetition, he answered in a trembling tone, “I
hope I have not been unjust.”

“You could not be,” Mrs. Upchurch assured
him; but she was thinking: “If he would act in-
stead of moralizing, it would be so much more
manly.” Aloud she said earnestly, ““We both
felt, we had a right to feel, that Annabel’s first
unhappy experience had made her older than her
years.”

“She may be older,” he admitted, “‘but not in
the way we thought.”

“And, of course, she loves to talk about her feel-
ing. Not that she has spoken of this to any one
else. I am as positive as I can be that she has
not breathed a word of this to a living soul except
ourselves. She has promised me, and we can
trust her absolutely.”

“IT sometimes wonder,” said Judge Honeywell,
“if I ought to have mentioned it even to you.”

Mrs. Upchurch gazed at him through a mist of


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 293


admiration. “To her own mother?” she mur-
mured reproachfully. “Why, she made you.
You couldn’t help yourself, and, besides, she
would have told me anyway.”

“Yes, she insisted, and I am convinced it is
better you should know.”

“Oh, much better! What I am doubtful about
is the wisdom of allowing her to see Dabney again.
Couldn’t you,” she inquired in Victorian idiom,
*“put your foot down on that?” For there existed
in her mind a tenacious belief that husbands were
still invested with the weapon of authority; and,
like all small women and nations, she respected
violence more than a disarmed neutrality.

Judge Honeywell, who did not share this con-
viction, shook his head with a satirical smile. “I
don’t think it would do any good. Nothing I can
say has the slightest effect upon her. I suppose
it will have to wear itself out,” he added gloomily.

** And that will be much sooner than we expect,”
Mrs. Upchurch responded with recovered opti-
mism. ‘‘ With a temperament like Annabel’s these
things can’t last but a few weeks. It is merely in
her imagination, and as soon as she takes a little
trip or begins planning for the summer, she will
forget all about it. In the meantime, we must
look on the bright side of things,” she urged; for
she had remembered her formula for a cheerful
life, and the mere sound of the inspiring platitude
braced her spirit. ‘“‘Remember that you must not


‘
/


294 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


become morbid and reproach yourself. No woman
in the world could have had a more devoted hus-
band.”

Already he looked better. How well she under-
stood men, Mrs. Upchurch exulted, as she left the
room and the house. How well, how perfectly,
she understood men!

She had reached the pavement, and her feet
were pointed in the direction of home, when there
seized her like a flash of inspiration, like a divine
call to duty, the feeling that, before she said her
prayers and turned to her pillow, she must speak
one last warning to Annabel. “If only I can
make her promise not to see him again,”’ she said
to herself, while she wheeled about and retraced her
steps to the door.


XIV


ONSTABLE was still standing on the thresh-

old, for he had his reasons unrelated to the
domestic infelicity of the Judge for watching the
street; and while he held the door open for her,
Mrs. Upchurch brushed past him without a word
and toiled wearily up the stairs. Her proper
instincts, inured to the consecrated discomforts of
matrimony, had already remarked with concern
that Annabel had moved across the hall into a
room two doors away from the marital chamber.
Though Mrs. Upchurch’s mother had been long
in her grave, and was denied the stringent pleasure
of admonishing a rebellious generation, the daugh-
ter could still hear her saying crisply, “When
husband and wife begin to occupy different
chambers, I expect trouble to follow.’ Well,
trouble had followed here promptly enough to
satisfy any moralist; and yet, though she yielded
to no one, as she often said, in respect for the
Spartan fortitude her ancestors had displayed in
marriage, Mrs. Upchurch could not help wonder-
ing if they had ever really understood the value
of privacy. Having suffered in her brief wife-
hood from the male sense of possession, which

295


296 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


she regarded as excessive, she was inclined to ac-
cept the modern theory that both privacy and
fresh air are beneficial in wedded life. Yet her
mother, who had borne eleven children with as
little difficulty, and certainly with less complaint,
than women endure to-day with one or two,
had sternly condemned, not only separate rooms,
but even twin beds as immodest. “And now it
is exactly the other way,” Mrs. Upchurch mused,
impartial but keenly observant of revolving con-
ventions.

The door of Annabel’s room was closed, and as
Mrs. Upchurch noiselessly opened it, she was dis-
tressed to hear the sound of smothered weeping.
The logs had burned down on the andirons, and
the room was suffused with a melancholy light
from the green afterglow beyond the black fret-
work of trees. In this wan glimmer, which made
sad things appear even sadder, as if they were
drowned in clear water, Annabel was kneeling
beside the bed, with her arms flung out upon the
coverlet and her feet upturned on a white bearskin
rug. Her gown of primrose crépe was one that
her mother had made with fastidious care in
order to save the cost of a seamstress, and at
sight of the prostrated garment, with its frivolous
garlands of forget-me-nots, Mrs. Upchurch felt a
strange clutch at her heart and an almost ir-
resistible impulse to cry. This moment restored
to her Annabel as a baby, and all the dreary years


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 297


of widowhood—the bleakness of genteel poverty,
the shams and subterfuges and deceits that had
served her ends and destroyed her faith;—all these
sordid and ugly facts were swept away by the flood
of maternal passion.

“My baby! O my baby!” she cried, and dropping
on the fur rug by the bed, she enfolded Annabel in
the sheltering warmth of her sealskin coat.

Annabel turned her head, and her mother saw
that there was more than romantic drama, that
there was genuine heartbreak in her eyes.

“My darling child, what can I do? ‘Tell me.
Tell Mother.”

**T can’t live without love. If I can’t have love,
I'd rather die!”

“Youre so young, my child. Wait a little
longer. Only have patience.”

“T can’t wait until I am old. I want it now.
I want my life, Mother!”

**This will pass, dear. Think of other women.”

**T don’t care about other women. They were
just shams. They just pretended to be real.”

*O Annabel!”

“You were all afraid of life, and you called your
fear virtue.”

“My child, what are you saying?”

“TI don’t care. Tm not afraid. I want my life
while I am young.”

“But you have so much. Remember all your
blessings. All the devotion. All the—luxury.”


298 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


**T don’t want it. I want my life.”

“Have you forgotten what it means to be poor?”

“T haven’t forgotten, and I don’t care. I’d
rather be poor. I’d rather beg my bread and have
my own life again.”

““You have never tried begging your bread, my
dear,” Mrs. Upchurch said solemnly. “I have,
and I know how bitter the bread you beg can
taste.”

She held her daughter closer, trying to lift her
into bed; but Annabel broke away from the
clinging arms and sobbed wildly that she wanted
her life again. “It will kill me,” Mrs. Upchurch
thought distractedly, more unhappy than she
had been since Annabel was born. “It will kill
me, but there is nothing I can do about it.”
For, in spite of her infinite resources, she felt,
for once in her adroit experience, completely re-
sourceless.

“Is it really this boy, Annabel?” she asked
presently, unable to believe that so much suffering
could be inspired by so inadequate a cause.

“Tf he goes away, I shall die, Mother. I can’t
live without him.”

“It is easy to say that, dear, but, somehow, we
go on living just the same. Look at all the women
who lost their lovers in the war.”

“But that was different. Oh, can’t you see,
Mother, that was different?’”’

“Yes, perhaps it was different.”” Though Mrs.


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 299


Upchurch couldn’t see how it was, she was willing
to yield anything so long as it was only in words.

“That was different because it meant some-
thing,” Annabel insisted. ‘‘At least they had
life.”

“You will have life too, dear. You are so
young.”

“But I want it now, Mother. I don’t want to
wait until I am old to begin to live.”

Over and over. Was there to be no end to it?
“If you could only see, Annabel, that love isn’t
all of life, that it isn’t even a very large part of it.”

“Tt is all I want. I don’t want anything else.”

*“How can I help you? What can I do?”

““T want to be free. I don’t want to be married.”

“But you are married, my child.”

“IT don’t want to be, Mother! I don’t want to
be!”

*“Hush, Annabel. Have you no regard for your
husband? It is as hard on him as on you.”

“It isn’t. He has had his life. All I want is
my own life. That is all.”

Mrs. Upchurch sighed with weary patience.
“You must have pity on me, my child. I am
worn out.”

“Poor Mother. Iknow youare. Go home and
go to bed.”

‘How can I leave you when you are like this?
Won’t you try, just to please me, to put it all out
of your mind? Eat something and go to sleep.


300 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


I’ll tell Constable to bring some sherry with your
dinner. Won’t you try . . .” She turned
over in her mind the different forms of persua-
sion she might employ, and found them all
useless. Was it true, she asked herself, in sud-
den depression, that not duty, but the fear of
living, had held back youth in the past? In the
earlier generations, how many girls had married
men old enough to be their fathers or grand-
fathers, and yet nothing disastrous had come of it,
nothing, at least, with which husbands, aided by
duty or the fear of living, had not been able to deal.
Women had known then how to live without love,
just as they had known how to live without
beauty or happiness; but she realized now, watch-:
ing Annabel’s bleak despair, that it had been
because they had something else to put in its place.
Something abstract and ultimate! Something as
unalterable and as everlasting as the Rock of
Ages! Even if duty were merely a symbol—well,
a symbol, Mrs. Upchurch decided, is better than
an abyss to fall back upon. A quiver of weakness
attacked her elbows and knees. It seemed to her
that there were no longer any moral properties
left in the world. Experience was reduced to the
sum of pure egoism.

Bending over Annabel, she kissed her tenderly
on the cheek. “Try to be quiet, darling, and re-
member that it is almost as important to look up
to your husband as it is to be in love with him.


ht ne He,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 301


Thank God, you are married to a man you can
respect.”

Annabel’s flippant laugh answered her. ‘Oh,
I could respect him just as much if he were still
Cousin Cordelia’s husband!”

“Will you let him come in and say good-night?”’

A shiver of aversion trembled through Anna-
bel’s body. “No, I can’t see him. I can’t bear
to see him.”

“Well, you don’t have to see him. Go to sleep,
and [ll think what I can doin the morning. AllI
ask is that you will let me have one good night’s
rest.”

But that warning shudder had spoken to Mrs.
Upchurch more poignantly than any words, than
any tears, could have done. “If it is really that,
there is nothing we can do,” she told herself hope-
lessly. “‘You can’t bring moral pressure to bear
upon a physical aversion.”

She stayed until Annabel’s dinner was brought
and she had watched her sip the wine and eat the
wing of a chicken. After a glass of the Judge’s
sherry, she felt that her own hardy optimism was
beginning to show signs of revival. When, at
last, she went softly downstairs and out into the
street, she was able to assure herself that aversion,
like so much else that is unpleasant in life, is
often merely a matter of nerves. After the dose
of veronal she had persuaded Annabel to take, a
sound sleep and a good waking might work won-


302 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


ders. In the morning, Mrs. Upchurch concluded,
everything, even the temporizing of the judicial
intellect, would appear less melancholy. “It is a
pity Gamaliel isn’t just a little more—well, a little
more masculine,” she thought with a sigh; for,
peculiar as it seemed to her, she felt exasperated
rather than consoled by the Judge’s magnanimity.

A little ahead of her, she recognized the stately
figure of Amanda Lightfoot, wearing a coat trim
med with chinchilla, and an odd-looking hat,
which was perched too high on her gray pompa-
dour, after a fashion that had been much admired
when she was young. In the glare of the huge
electric light on the corner, the younger woman
read, as if they had been hieroglyphics of lost
illusions, the faint, innumerable lines that blurred
Amanda’s transparent skin. ‘“‘She has suffered in
her way more than Annabel,” Mrs. Upchurch
thought sadly, “‘but the difference is that she has
learned how to suffer. She has made an art of
unhappiness.”

“I missed you at Mrs. Peyton’s tea,’”’ Amanda
said in a voice of faded sweetness. “You told
me you were going, so I stopped to ask what was
the matter?”

*‘Annabel has a cold, and I went to her instead.
The Judge was obliged to be at his office.”

“Tam sorry. The dear child looked so lovely
at the Easter cotillion.”

“TI am afraid that is how she caught her sore


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 303


throat. I thought she’d better stay in bed for a
day or two.”

“Give her my love. As soon as my young
people leave me free for a minute, Ill drop in to
see her.”

Mrs. Upchurch was gazing at her with genuine
admiration. “‘You are so fond of children,
Amanda, that you ought to have married. Some
man missed an ideal wife when you chose to be a
spinster, and I’m sure no other woman in Queen-
borough ever had so many admirers. Do you
remember the way the men used to stand in line to
watch you enter a ballroom? Only the other day,
I came across an album with those verses Aubrey
Dale wrote about dancing with you. Don’t you
remember the ones beginning, ‘When Amanda’s
queenly form I press’?”’

A flush passed over Amanda’s perfect features;
but it faded quickly, and the wrinkles, as light and
intricate as the tracks birds leave in snow, were still
visible.

“You wouldn’t regret it, dear Bella, if you
could see how useful and happy my life has been.
I have so many brothers and sisters, you know.”

“But they left you.”

**Oh, no, I have them still. The children are
with me every day and I share all their pleasures.
I am sure no woman in the world lives with the
young more than I do.”

Mrs. Upchurch smiled grimly. Living with the


304 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


young had become for her, in the last week or
two, a dubious blessing. Did Amanda, did any
woman of mature years, really wish to sink her life
and her interests into the grasping egoism of im-
maturity? Occasionally, perhaps, when you had
slept well and were feeling composed in mind and
body after a good breakfast. But not always,
not to be perpetually obliged to attune one’s every
word, without merciful intermission, to a jazz
orchestra. While she looked into Amanda’s
skilfully repaired face, she realized that the older
woman’s happiness was a mixture of fortitude and
hypocrisy; and she realized also that Amanda
was aware of her knowledge. “Well, she’s safe
with me,’ Mrs. Upchurch reflected; and she
told herself that, notwithstanding the vast sex-
lore accumulated by the researches of men, there
are subjects upon which women do not give one
another away.

““T’m glad you are busy, dear,” was all she said.
**Run in to see me whenever you have time.”

“Indeed I shall, and I sha’n’t forget Annabel.
That marriage has turned out so beautifully. I
can’t tell you how happy it makes me to think that
my dear old friend has youth to brighten his home.”

Yes, Amanda had fortitude. Hypocrisy alone
could not have carried it off with that accent of
triumph.

After watching the majestic figure until it was
lost in the shadows, Mrs. Upchurch turned away


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 305


and entered her door with a dragging step. There
was an edge of frost to the April air, and in her
sitting-room a bright fire was burning. An ami-
able tortoise-shell cat was dozing before the
flames; from his high-hanging cage by the win-
dow, a canary piped joyously; in the centre of the
dinner table, where the candles were lighted, there
was a blue bowl of pear blossoms; an aroma of
herbs and spices floated in from the kitchen; the
afternoon paper, secure from male aggression, lay
still folded on a little stand beneath the reddish
glow of the lamp. “And this,” thought Mrs.
Upchurch, while she gazed round her at the cheer-
ful welcome, “‘is what they call loneliness.”

Surrendering her coat and hat into the eager
hands of Altrusa, she sank into the softest chair
and stretched out her weary feet to the fender.
Rest, rest and quiet stole gradually like an anodyne
over her aching nerves. She sighed happily; there
was nocrisis here. There was no wild youth. She
sighed more happily still; there was no sentimental
age. There was nothing more agitating than the
tranquil immunity of a mind that had finished
with love.


XV


T NINE o’clock the next morning, fortified by

a solitary night and two cups of coffee, Mrs.

Upchurch had recovered sufficiently to renew the
struggle with youth.

“How are you this morning, my child?” she
asked tenderly over the telephone. “Did you
sleep well?”

To her amazement, a bright voice answered her,
*T’m allright, Mother. I wish you hadn’t worried
so yesterday.”

Worried so! Was this the way the afternoon ap-
peared in retrospect to Annabel? ‘“‘ Well, I sha’n’t
worry to-day if you are all right. Tl stop by
after market.”

For an instant there was silence; then, more
brightly than ever, the voice responded, “Don’t
come this morning. I’ve made an engagement,
and [ve promised to lunch with Nellie Peyton.
Had you forgotten her bridge party?”

“Yes, [remember. Are you really going?”

“Well, I ought to have telephoned her yester-
day, but as long as I didn’t a

“Of course, if you feel like going, dear, I am de-
lighted. It may do you good to get out again.”

306


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 307


“There are to be eight tables, and then we’re
going to tea afterward with Amy Ballard. I
sha’n’t be back till late. Not till after six, any-
way.”

“Very well. Il drop in between six and seven.
But are you equal to that long strain? Have you
sufficient command of yourself?”

“Oh, perfectly! There isn’t a bit of use your
getting excited about me, Mother.”

The sheer audacity of this stunned Mrs. Up-
church, and when she had recovered breath, she
exclaimed, with a touch of asperity, ‘‘ Well, I like
that! However, if you are entirely cured, I shall
try to give a little attention to my own duties.”

“Indeed, you ought to!’’ Annabel trilled gaily.
“Come over this evening after you’ve finished
everything you have to do. Good-bye, Mother
darling!”

Had her ear deceived her, Mrs. Upchurch ques-
tioned the next instant, or had Annabel’s voice
broken with a sob on the last word? While she
wondered, an impulse seized her to run over be-
fore she went to market; but immediately her art-
ful judgment, trained to temporizing, curbed the
motherly instinct. After all, it was better to leave
the child to work out her own problem. ‘Too much
interference, in Mrs. Upchurch’s experience, had
invariably ended in trouble. Only weak charac-
ters needed constant support; and, for all her frail
appearance, Annabel, as her mother had sad reason


308 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


to know, was not without firmness of purpose.
“There’s a vein of iron in her somewhere,” Mrs.
Upchurch mused pensively. ‘“That’s what poor
Mother used to say about me, and I suppose the
child has inherited it. You may talk to her until
you are hoarse, but, after all, talking never gets
very far with anybody who is as determined and as
fearless as Annabel. The only way is to let it wear
itself out.” She sighed as she left the telephone
and began her preparations for market. “I be-
lieve these scenes take more out of me than they
do out of her. In any case, I hope some of her
cheerfulness has been saved for her husband.”
While she attended to the automatic duties of the
morning, and made a few purchases in the shops,
she became gradually aware that a burden had been
lifted, not only from her mind, but from her ex-
hausted body as well. The sudden relief acted
as a tonic upon her heart. Even now, she did
not know what she had feared, merely that her
nerves had waited for some impending disaster.
In the tumultuous state of Annabel’s emotion,
undeterred as she was by the normal obstacles to
a guilty love, Mrs. Upchurch felt tremulously that
anything might have happened. That nothing
had happened, she said to herself with vague
thankfulness, was owing less to human ingenuity
than to the divine mercy of Omnipotence; for at
such moments her feeling overflowed in the ortho-
dox forms of her youth. Tired yet rejoicing, she


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 309


went through her uneventful day, and encoun-
tered nothing more depressing than the unwelcome
sight of Mrs. Bredalbane on her way to the Judge’s
house.

“IT am sorry to hear, Bella, that Annabel has
been under the weather. I was there yesterday,
but Gamaliel would not let me see her. I am sure
I couldn’t understand why.”

“*She is ever so much better to-day. I talked to
her over the telephone this morning, and she said
she was going to Nellie’s luncheon.”

“Tm glad to hearit. The truth is that I haven’t
been altogether easy in my mind about Annabel
for the last few weeks. She hasn’t been a bit like
herself. What she needs is to get away from
Gamaliel for a while. He is one of the best men in
the world and born to be a husband; but that only
makes him the more wearing in marriage. ‘The
theory that a man soon tires of his wife but
a woman can never see too much of her husband
doesn’t thrive any longer, even in male vanity.”

*“‘T am sure that Gamaliel and Annabel are very
happy,” Mrs. Upchurch protested, while her im-
movable smile felt as if it were a plaster on her
aching face. “‘He adores her, and she has a deep
affection for him.”

‘But don’t you think it would be a good idea
for her to go away?” persisted Mrs. Bredal-
bane. “I suggested to Gamaliel yesterday that
she might spend the summer with me. Now,


310 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


don’t put on that startled-rabbit look, Bella. I
assure you that I am even more than respectable,
I am positively ‘distinguished, in Europe. Any-
body who can afford, not only to make bills, but to
pay them, need never worry about her social
position abroad. Why, in my day, which was
both long and glorious, I have turned down, not
only foreign dukes, but international bankers as
well. Like Gamaliel, however, I have always pre-
ferred youth to wisdom.”

“But, my dear Mrs. Bredalbane, I didn’t mean
to imply——”’

*“Oh, I understand, Bella. There is no need to
apologize. I suppose it is natural, after the things
you have heard about me, that you should hesitate
to trust Annabel to my discretion; but, if you take
my advice, you will let her have a little needed
vacation from marriage. It wouldn’t hurt her
to come away with me for a few months. Id
take the best care of her, and she could really
see something of the world. As provincial as you
are in America, it is hopeless to try to make you
understand that behaviour as much as beauty is a
question of geography, and that my respectability
increases with every mile of the distance I travel
from Queenborough. In France, my reputation
is above reproach; by the time I reach Vienna, I
have become a bit of a prude; and contrasted with
the Balkan temperament, I am little more than a
tombstone to female virtue.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 311


Mrs. Upchurch’s smile quivered into a pathetic
contortion of her agreeable features. ‘“‘That would
be delightful for Annabel,” she murmured, “‘but
I am sure Gamaliel would never consent to her
going away without him.”

“I dare say you’re right.” Mrs. Bredalbane
heaved a sigh over such uxorious folly, and then
resumed, on a more cheerful key, “Well, I am re-
lieved that the marriage has turned out this way,
though it is hard for me to forgive Gamaliel when
I look at Amanda.”

Mrs. Upchurch’s dissent was more lukewarm
than it would have been the day before yesterday.
““I suppose there isn’t a doubt that she expected
him to marry her, poor thing,” she said, “‘but you
know what men are, Mrs. Bredalbane.”’

“Oh, I know,” Edmonia assented heartily.
“None better.”

“Constancy doesn’t appeal to them as it does to
women. The trouble is that Amanda has always
lived in some world of sentimental invention. She
has had absolutely no contact with reality.”

“Well, we were all like that a generation or two
ago. You can’t blame her for not pricking the
bubble when you remember the deluge of soapsuds
that splashed over me. It took courage to face a
ducking in those days, and so long as you were
different from the wasp-waisted morality of the pe-
riod, it scarcely mattered whether you were a saint
or a sinner, for both got the same punishment,


312 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


though, if anything, the saint got the worst of it.
The venom with.which they pursued me was noth-
ing compared to the ribald mirth they showered
upon poor Johanna Goodwin, who was as sexless
as an amoeba but had a mind of her own. She
was the first suffragist in Queenborough, and that
wasn’t so long ago, my dear Bella.”

*“Yes, [remember. But she is one of the twelve
greatest American women to-day. They put up a
very small monument to her last year.”

Mrs. Bredalbane chuckled. “Well, we can’t ©
deny that fame wears a sardonic smile! But poor
Amanda, who chose the middle way, got neither
four husbands nor a very small monument. She
has fallen away to the shadow of herself since
Gamaliel’s marriage. Have you noticed that her
mother’s nervous habit of talking all the time in
the same tone has taken hold of her?”

Yes, Mrs. Upchurch had noticed it, and she
looked a little wan as she rejoined, “I wonder if
she really believed that love lasted like that?”

“It was more than love to her. It was a pur-
pose in life.”

“But she broke it of her own will.” Mrs.
Upchurch’s tone sounded almost tearful, for even
her elastic conscience had never been entirely rec-
onciled to the part that worldly wisdom had borne
in Annabel’s marriage to Judge Honeywell.

**A lovers’ quarrel, nothing more. But I happen
to know—this is as secret as the grave, of course”’—


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 313


Mrs. Bredalbane lowered her masculine voice—
“and I shouldn’t like it to go any farther—that he
fell more desperately in love with her than ever
after his marriage. For a time he was threatened
with a complete nervous breakdown, and the family
thought that he would have to give up his career.
I can’t tell you how I heard it, but it came to me in
the most direct way that he went so far as to ask
Amanda to elope with him. Of course, she was
the soul of honour, and she kept him true to Cor-
delia for thirty-six years. What she is enduring
now, concluded the fearless Edmonia, “‘is almost
the inevitable reward of virtue. But, for my part,
I may say that, if she doesn’t have one of those
small monuments erected to her, it isn’t because
she hasn’t deserved it.”

A sensation of dizziness, to which she had be-
come subject in the last trying months, swam
through Mrs. Upchurch’s brain. “I never heard
that,” she murmured in a flagging voice.

“You will never hear it from Amanda. She
belongs to a generation that is sealed tight. I
declare you are as white as a sheet, Bella. Here,
take a whiff of my smelling salts. It is safer al-
ways to have a bottle with you.”

“T’ll go in now,” Mrs. Upchurch remarked
stiffly, as she declined the salts. Walking very
carefully, for she was oppressed by an inclination
to faint, just to give up and drop down quietly on
the pavement, she went up one step at a time,


314 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


and reached the door at the instant when it was
opened by Constable.

“Has Mrs. Honeywell come in, Constable?”

““No, madam, not yet. But she told me to ask
you to go up to her sitting-room and wait for her.”

“Very well. She will probably be home in a
little while.”

She went up slowly, ascending with an effort, as
if her feet were leaden weights, and at the top of
the stairs, she looked into Annabel’s sitting-room,
which was decorated in black and orange, and saw
a tea table laid in front of the smouldering fire.

*‘T suppose I’m still feeling the strain of yester-
day,” she thought, while she sank down on the
couch and slipped out of her coat. ‘“‘And it was
all so unnecessary!”

For a minute, she closed her eyes to a swimming
world and lay back on the cushions. When she
raised her lids again, it seemed to her that every
object in the room was intensified by the flickering
firelight, and gazing through this tremulous glow,
she saw, for the first time, a note placed conspicu-
ously in front of the bronze clock on the mantel-
piece. Rising, she groped her way toward it, and
stopped to read the words “‘For Mother,” with a
sinking heart, before she tore open the envelope.
Her trembling legs failed her, and she dropped
into the nearest chair, while opaque patches floated
before her eyes and her brain was filled with a slow
humming like the music of distant bees. ‘“‘I can’t


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 315


see,” she moaned, fingering for the glasses she
wore attached by a gold chain to the front of her
gown. Even with the glasses on her nose, she
found that these vague smears drifted before her
eyes, and she struggled to see above and below
them. Were the words really as incoherent as
they sounded in her brain? Or was she the victim
of some sudden delusion?


Dearest MotuHEr:

I am going away because I can’t bear it any
longer. There isn’t any sense in letting one mis-
take spoil your whole life. I know now there has
never been anybody in the world but Dabney, and
he feels just the same way. We were made for
each other, and we would rather starve together
than be separated. Oh, Mother, you must under-
stand!

I am not taking anything but a small bag, and if
you feel that you can send me some clothes (my
own old clothes) to the Hotel Blackwood in New
York, I shall be ever so grateful. But if you feel
that you can’t do it, [’ll manage with what I can
get. We haven’t much money, and it will take
almost all for the passage, but don’t worry about
me. I am not afraid of anything but losing Dab-
ney, and for the first time in my life, I am per-
fectly happy.

Your loving,
ANNABEL.


316 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


There was a touch on her arm, and Mrs. Up-
church turned to stare vacantly into Judge Honey-
well’s face. Her lips moved, but no sound came,
and the sheet of paper fluttered from her nerveless
hand into his.

**Annabel!”’ she said at last, and choked over
the name. ‘‘Annabel!”’

He read the letter through, folded it carefully, and
replaced it in the envelope. His face was leaden
in its pallor and immobility; but while she watched
him, she became aware that his weakness of pur-
pose receded before an infusion of strength. Power
had returned to him with the necessity for im-
mediate decision. The crisis, which had enfeebled
her resolution, had. restored energy to his will.

“Tl go on to-night,” he said. ‘“‘ There is time
to catch the eight o’clock train.”” After a pause,
in which she felt the shudder of his muscles, he
continued dispassionately: “I cannot acquit my-
self of responsibility.”

“You will bring her back.” Her quavering
voice was the voice of an old woman. “My baby!
Oh, my little, little baby!”

“T will do my best. What more can I promise?”
His manner was so wooden that for a moment she
was tempted to cry out: ““Why can’t you forget
yourself? Why can’t you suffer as I do?” Then
the mute anguish in his eyes pierced her despair,
and she thought: “‘Yes, he suffers in his way.
Only it isn’t a mother’s way.”


XVI
Rae had fallen in the night, and a sharp wet


wind was blowing when Judge Honeywell
left his hotel the next morning. After a rest and
a carefully chosen breakfast, for which he was
astonished to find he had a good appetite, he
had hoped that New York would present a less
gloomy appearance than the one he had seen
on the short drive from the station. But he re-
membered that tumultuous centres of life are al-
ways depressing, except to the very young, who
carry their sources of happiness within themselves.
As he walked slowly along the blocks in the di-
rection of the small hotel on the West Side where
Annabel was staying, he asked himself why he
could no longer impose his stern but just will upon
circumstances? “I must be getting old,” he
thought wearily. “Only youth enjoys a forlorn
hope, and youth is a long way behind me.” For
it seemed to him that the actual boundary between
youth and age is the moment when one realizes
that one cannot change life.
The strong, wet wind, moaning like the deep
tones of an orchestra, rushed past him; and he felt


that the increasing violence hurled his thoughts
317


318 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


down the long, drab street, where shop-keepers
were taking down shutters and children were
thronging out on the pavements. He knew that
he ought to suffer; yet this paralysis of soul was
what he would have called in his younger days the
opposite of grief. Vacancy? Despair? No, it
was too inanimate for despair.

Still his thoughts raced ahead of him among a
multitude of formless influences. And he felt
that this dark wind, blowing through immeasurable
silence, had changed into the inescapable loneliness
of the grave. Around him there was eternal isola-
tion of spirit. Not the human spirit alone, but
the essence of all spirits. Spirits of men and
women. Spirits of children. Spirits of animals.
Spirits of plants. All immersed and drowning in
loneliness. The loneliness of trees in tropical
jungles, with roots piercing deep into immemorial
darkness; the loneliness of buried rivers stealing
out of the earth and into the earth again; the
loneliness of lost and frightened animals in stony
deserts of streets; the loneliness of the dying in the
wan glimmer of daybreak; the vast, frozen loneli-
ness of stars over remote continents of ice;—all
these invisible aspects of desolation crowded
round him in the chill mist where his thoughts
sped pattering like withered husks on the pave-
ment. It was not pain that he felt. Any pain, if
only it were alive, would have been a relief. What
he endured, he told himself, with his gaze on the


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 319


inclement sky, was the ultimate negation of being,
the encompassing solitude of the end.

He went on slowly, and as he walked, a sound
within his brain, far below in the dark emptiness,
ticked like a clock that is beginning to run down:
“Growing old. Growing old. Old—old—old—
growing old.”’ And over this abyss, on the frozen
surface of his mind, the thought glided: “T’ll take
her to California next month. She has always
wanted to see California.”

Above a shabby front, he saw the name “Hotel
Blackwood,” and he was about to turn in at the
open door when a girl hurrying ahead looked
quickly round, and he saw that it was Annabel.
Annabel, vivid, rose-coloured, still wearing the
sable toque and the mink coat he had bought for
her in Paris. Yet she had asked her mother toe
send her “‘own old clothes”’!' Her absurd sacrifice,
which was only a part of the irresistible variety of
Annabel herself, moved him to a tenderness that
was embittered by sardonic laughter.

“Oh, you!” she exclaimed, and stopped as she
was entering the door. Her hands were full of
parcels, and when she dropped one, he stooped to
pick it up before he responded to her cry of amaze-
ment.

“You must have known I should come for you,
Annabel,” he said, for her astonishment had
seemed to him affected. ‘‘Where can I talk to


you?”


320 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


She hesitated, while he thought that he had
never seen her leok so fresh, so guileless, so en-
chantingly lovely. Even the dampness from the
moist wind that suffused her face was transformed
by some hidden fire into the glamour of innocence.

*“Come in,” she replied reluctantly. “‘We’ve
takena little apartmentupstairs. I can talk to you
there. Dabney has gone to see about our passage.
But it isn’t any use,” she added, with glowing
obstinacy. ‘“‘It isn’t the least use in the world.”

““Let me talk to you and see. I haven’t come
to argue with you—or—or to blame you. I can’t
rid myself of a feeling of responsibility,” he ex-
plained, while the sense of his own generosity
brought a tinge of moisture to his eyes. “I am
older, and I should have known better.”

For the first time she smiled, though not without
a hint of impatience. ‘“‘Well, it doesn’t matter
now, she answered brightly. ‘All that is over,
and there’s no need to begin worrying about who
was responsible.” The lilt of ecstasy in her voice
was like the song of a lark.

She led the way, burdened with her parcels, of
which he had tried punctiliously to relieve her, and
he followed slowly into a hotel which smelled of un-
happy yesterdays. Beneath a smoky ceiling, a
dour-looking clerk sat examining his finger-nails.
A decrepit charwoman was scouring a strip of tiled
floor before an unappetizing restaurant. The lift
rattled as it descended, and a drowsy negro blinked °


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 321


at them from the bars of the ramshackle cage.
And Annabel, who had said that she would rather
die than live without beauty, was apparently
oblivious of the stale air, of the dirt and the
dinginess.

In silence, he followed her into the lift, and in
silence he waited until they stopped at the fifth
floor and she alighted and nodded to him to come
down the narrow passage. With the step of youth
and joy, she flitted ahead of him, avoiding another
kneeling charwoman and her bucket of soapsuds.
At the end of the hall, which suffocated him with
its close odours, she unlocked a door and passed
into a small, musty room, where the electric light
shone by day and the remains of breakfast
had not been removed from the table. Beyond
the stringy curtains of Nottingham lace at the
window, there was a blank wall of discoloured
brick.

She shut the door, placed her parcels on the
hard sofa in one corner, and turned reluctantly to
look at him. Her manner of calm efficiency sur-
prised him even more than the absence of regret or
contrition in her sparkling gaze. What he had ex-
pected he scarcely knew, but he had looked for
something different from this. Hesitation, uncer-
tainty, sadness; not this unruffled confidence
in her perilous adventure.

“T wish you hadn’t come,” she said gently.
Taking off her sable hat, she tossed it on the sofa


322 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


and ran her fingers through the gleaming waves of
her hair. b

“T had to come, Annabel. What else could I
do?”

“There isn’t anything to say. I can never go
back.”

“You don’t realize—you can’t realize what it
means. Itisnotfairtome. It is not fair to your
mother.”

“Poor Mother. Of course, she will be hurt, but
she will get over it presently. She always gets
over things.”

“She has never had anything like this. Can’t
you see that you are bringing disgrace upon us all?
Upon yourself more than all the rest?”

She shook her head with a gesture that would
have been superb, he thought, in a nobler cause.
“T am sorry about Mother,” she answered. “‘If
she had ever lived, she would be able to under-
stand; but she doesn’t know what it means to be
famished for joy. I suppose it is because she has
never known what joy really is. I am sorry for
you too,” she added, with an afterthought. ‘I
tried not to hurt you. Oh, I did try, but you will
never believe it.”

He bowed his head, while he felt his face blanch
and wither beneath her brilliant glance. “I at
least ought to have known,” he replied. “This is
why I can’t rid myself of the blame. This is why
I shall assume the responsibility.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 323


“You can’t. You are kind and generous, but
you can’t do that.” A smile as faint as a shadow
wavered and died and wavered again on her ardent
lips. Was it a cruel smile, he asked himself, or
merely the smile of brooding wisdom?

“Tfonly youcould realize,” he urged passionately,
‘‘what it means to a woman to defy convention.”

“Conventions don’t matter. Love is worth
everything.”

What a child she was still, he thought, and asked
immediately, ““Do you love this—this boy like
that?”

Her laugh entered his heart like a curved blade.
“He isn’t a boy. He is twenty-six, and taller than
you are.”

He winced. “Buta year ago you loved Angus.”

“Oh, that was a year ago! And, besides, that
wasn’t real. I was only pretending because I was
hungry for life. I was just looking for something
I didn’t have. If you can’t understand, it is hope-
less to tell you.”

**And you think this is more serious?”

*‘It isn’t serious. It is—it is solemn. I love
him until it—it is like pain. Do you know what I
mean?”

Yes, he knew. He knew because he had once
been young and had loved Amanda that way—
until it was pain.

“Tf you will come home with me, I will promise
anything. I will give you anything.”


324 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


“There isn’t anything that would make up for
it. There isn’t anything in the world. You can’t
understand, you and Mother. You will never
understand.” There was a running flame in her
words, and he felt that they scorched him with
the smothered vehemence of her passion. ‘“‘It isn’t
only that you are not young. It is that you live in
a different world, and life doesn’t mean the same
thing to you that it does to us. You believe that
it is right to be unhappy, but we know that it is
wrong to suffer. We know you aren’t really your-
self, that you aren’t even alive when you're un-
happy. Somany women chain themselves to their
own fears, and pretend they are being noble. They
call the chain they have made duty; but, after all,
they are not noble; they are only afraid of life.
Poor Cousin Amanda! All her virtues are rooted
in fear. Never once has she dared to be herself,
and she hasn’t dreamed that courage to be yourself
is the greatest virtue of all.”

Delusion? Sophistry? The modern mania for
self-exaltation? Or merely the unconquerable
audacity of youth—of youth defiant, intrepid,
absurd, and indestructible! With sudden pene-
tration, he realized that this new wild spirit of to-
day was merely the cry of an immemorial longing
for joy! Are the young ever afraid of the future?
Do the old ever escape from the fear of shadows?

““T didn’t come to argue with you, Annabel,” he
said, knowing that her words were folly but that


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 325


her spirit was unanswerable. “I came to ask you
to wait a little while—to wait just a little while
longer.”

She shook her head. “‘I want my life while I am
young. Life won’t wait.”

With a sigh, he looked away from her to the
blank wall beyond the lace curtains. Nothing in
the past had prepared him to meet such a crisis.
There was no help in reason; there was no support
in philosophy; there was no comfort in precedent.
He could not any more than Virginian tradition be-
come vocal in the presence of triumphant guilt.

“Tll make any arrangement, Annabel. I'll
agree to any conditions,” he pleaded helplessly.
*T’ll take you to California in May. You’ve al-
ways wanted to see California. I'll give you any-
thing you may ask.” It was fatuous, he knew;
it was abject surrender of every masculine prerog-
ative.

“But you can’t. There aren’t any conditions.
I want to live. I want to struggle. Oh, can’t you
see that money, that having things, isn’t happiness
—it is only a substitute. Now that I have what I
want, nothing else really matters. Not being poor,
not being hungry, not going without——”

“You haven’t tried it,’ he answered, and ut-
tered, he felt, the only sensible words that had
been spoken. She was both foolish and wrong, and
she deserved, he told himself, all the punishment
that would come to her; yet, while he watched


326 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


her in despairing silence, he saw that her guilty
passion enkindled her being. Not as a flower,
but as a jewel, she was alive. The glow of proph-
ecy and vision was in her face, and he realized
that the ancient mysteries of earth were using her
ecstasy as a vessel of life. Dawn and sunset and
moonrise had melted into the gemlike radiance of
her youth. Never in the years that he had known
her, never in the months of their marriage, had he
seen her transfigured by love.

“You can’t fight life,’ he thought. “You can
only endure it.” He felt suddenly that he was
slipping back, back into a bottomless void, and,
against his will, his despair cried out: ‘“‘But think
of me, Annabel! Think of me with everything
gone! Think of me with nothing to hope for, with
nothing to live for!”

Her face quivered and paled. “I am sorry,”
she answered. Only that. “I am sorry.”

For an instant, it seemed to him that he was suf-
focated by his anguish, by this encompassing void
without light or sound. Then he _ recovered
strength and said slowly: “Of course, I shall give
you your freedom.”

She smiled triumphantly. ‘I am free.”

His head ached from weariness. Had _ his
journey to New York—had his whole life been a
failure? ‘“‘You have a great deal to learn. But
what I can do, I will. At least Ican keep you from
the worst hardship. I can keep you from poverty.”


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 327


“You're kind,” she replied, genuinely touched.
“You have always been kinder to me than I de-
served.”

“IT shall still be kind. I may be doing wrong,
but I shall be kinder than I have ever been.”

However mistaken the impulse of benevolence
might prove, in the end, to have been, he felt, while
it exhilarated his mood, that his frozen will was dis-
solving in light. For one moment, so swift that it
was gone before he had seized it, he thrilled again
to that ineffable sense of divinity—or was it only
seraphic illusion? Then the light faded; the
miraculous visitation was over. After all, life was
as fluid as time or as memory. It was impossible
to distil its essence into a more permanent form
than a glow, a perfume, an ecstasy.

“Yes, I shall still be kind,” he repeated before
they parted; but the exalted impulse had van-
ished, and there was only a dull emptiness where
the radiance had flickered and died.


XVII


JN THE street, soft, fine rain, scarcely heavier

than mist, was driving before the wind. He was
without an umbrella, and while he walked on, look-
ing for a taxicab, the dampness penetrated his
overcoat and soaked through his flesh as through
paper. Though he was chilled and wet and miser-
able, he felt a dull astonishment at the blunted edge
of his grief. His world had fallen in ruins about
him; yet he could wonder why there was no sharper
pang in his suffering; he could think dispassion-
ately, “If I can reach home and find my easy
chair, my fire, and my whiskey, I shall be able to re-
gain fortitude.”

At the corner of Broadway, he found an empty
taxicab, and shivering with cold, he directed the
driver to his hotel. There was a train leaving
for the South within an hour, and all his energies
were bent upon reaching the station in sufficient
time to find a seat disengaged. Still shivering, but
fearful lest he should be forced to delay his return,
he hurried into the hotel, and coming out almost
immediately, started again for the station. Every-
thing was driven out of his mind by this desperate

328


aT =? |


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 329


craving for physical comfort, for the inestimable
consolation of habit.

The train was not crowded, and after he had set-
tled himself, with a footstool and the morning
paper, the nervous tension of his mind slowly re-
laxed. He was strained to the breaking point; he
felt immeasurably tired; and he knew that the last
twenty-four hours had extinguished forever the
flickering impulses of youth; yet the numbness
of his emotions had robbed old age, not only of its
terror, but of its repugnance as well. Even decay
appeared more desirable than a futile striving for
happiness. Though he was a temperate man by
instinct and education, he would have exchanged,
at the moment, all the elusive pleasures of love for
one strong drink that could have banished the
aching chill from his marrow. Since hot tea was
the only substitute, he went back to the dining
car and returned presently, slightly sick, but very
little warmer. Leaning back in his chair, while
the bleak landscape rushed past in glimpses of
earth and sky, he sank into spiritual apathy. Pain
was drowned in its flood. Even the recollection of
pain rose merely in fragments to the troubled sur-
face of thought. Nothing was permanent; nothing
was complete; and through this impermanence and
this incompleteness there was an escape from the
conflict of frustrated desires.

All day he dozed in snatches of sleep and waking.
When the chill had passed and the heat of the train


330 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


had dried the dampness of his clothes, his head
became heavy with stupor, and it was pleasant to
drop the burden of existence and drift on and out
into nebylous space. Waking now and then, he
would think dimly, ““When you have done the
best you can, there is no use in worrying”; and
then, while the unfinished thought was still in his
mind, he would close his eyes and yield his will to
the impalpable tide. All his life he had been a
conservative character, as volatile as a judge, as
adventurous as a vestryman; but in this hour of
necessity, he was aware that the fortifications of
faith had crumbled to dust. In one of his brief
spells of consciousness, he found himself asking
drearily, ““Why is there no help in religion? Have
creeds killed the Christ in Christianity?” Only
by reaching outside of husks, outside of creeds,
outside of forms, outside of self, could one, he had
learned, apprehend the spirit of life. Did divinity
reveal itself only in flashes of light, not in crys-
tallized forms? “If I could grasp and hold that
revelation,” he thought, “‘it would be worth every
loss, every sacrifice’; but he knew that the gleam
had fled, and by no effort of will could he recover
the vision. ‘‘Even if it were an illusion, it is better
than any reality.” But was it anillusion? Again
he asked himself, Was it light? Was it ecstasy?
Was it God?

At Washington, he kept awake long enough to
send a telegram to Constable; but when a man he


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 331


knew stopped to speak to him, he found that words
were almost unintelligible. Afterward, in Queen-
borough, when he was warm and his head was
clear, he would begin to think and to feel again.
Afterward, but not now, not until to-morrow, when
a good night’s sleep had enabled him to collect his
faculties. . . . Not now, but to-morrow ?

It was ten o’clock when he reached Queen-
borough, and he emerged, bewildered and shiver-
ing, into a swift, fine rain which was changing
rapidly into snow and sleet. It seemed a hundred
years since he had gone away and left budding
leaves on the trees; but that century was shrouded
in a fog of forgetfulness. Since yesterday, he had
become an old man, and spring had slipped back
into winter.

When his chauffeur appeared and took his bag
from the porter, he called the man “‘Granger,”
though Granger had left him the year before Cor-
delia died. Alone in his car, wrapped in the fur
robe, a chill shuddered through him, and when he
reached his door, the man, whose name was King,
was obliged to help him across the sleety pavement
and into the house. Here he was taken in charge
by Constable, though he had a confused impres-
sion, as he entered his library, that Cordelia would
come in a few minutes to bring him hot whiskey and
water. He was tired; he was chilled to the bone;
and he was older than eternity.

“‘T’ve mixed you a hot Scotch, sir,” the solicitous


332 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


voice of Constable breathed through the fog in his
ears. ‘“‘It was the way you used to like it when you
caught a cold.” >

Yes, he had liked it that way in another life, in
that life which he had once lived with Cordelia,
and which had suffered now a painful resurrection
in time. Though he remembered that Cordelia
was dead, he still glanced with vague uneasiness
toward the door, as if he half expected her benevo-
lent apparition to enter and begin the work of
caring for him where she had left it off when she
fell ill. Poor Cordelia, how devoted she had been
to him, and how unequal was the affection he had
been able to give her!

“Thank you, Constable. Iam glad you thought
of it.”

Like warmth, like blessedness, like the inde-
structible peace of eternity, he felt the hot drink
pervading his body and spirit. Though he still
shivered so violently that Constable was obliged
to hold the glass to his lips, he told himself that
he was cradled in physical ease. The shock, the
chill, the long bleak day, and that suffocating
depression which was worse than either shock
or chill—these images of pain melted in the glow
that saturated his being.

“*T took the liberty, sir, of telephoning for Doctor
Buchanan,” Constable remarked out of the sur-
rounding film of contentment.

“That was right, Constable. You did quite


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 333


right.” Yes, it was fortunate, he reflected, that
Constable was gifted with an infallible instinct for
what was correct in an emergency.

““He told me he would step over at once. Shall
I help you upstairs to bed before he comes?”’

“No, Pll sit here. I always miss this chair when
I’m away.”

How he had missed it! How he had longed for
it during that intolerable day in the train! A
passion for comfort, for bodily ease, for the un-
ruffled velvet surface of luxury, possessed him now
like the craving of love or of appetite. Though
he had lost the fire of youth, he saw that the com-
fortable embers of age were still warm. His fa-
vourite chair, his open fire, his cherished books, his
few precious cases of old Bumgardner, his whole-
some meals, which were prepared with discretion
and eaten with imprudence; his friends, his bed,
his pipe;—all these solid pleasures of age would
become, he surmised, a not unworthy substitute
for the imponderable delights of youth. And
then, suddenly, through the fog in his brain,
he heard the liquid music of Annabel’s laugh
and felt the thrust of a curved blade in his
heart. Was it yesterday? Was it last year? Or
was it in some lost dimension beyond time and
space?

“Here is the Doctor, sir,’ murmured the sooth-
ing tones of Constable out of the humming around
him.


334 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Swimming like a gigantic fish through the fire-
light, he saw the.huge shape of Doctor Buchanan
bending over his chair. Was it really his friend
and physician? Or was it only a vague dream of
him, which quivered and vanished against the un-
conquerable desolation of life?

“So you’re back again with a chill.”” The Doc-
tor was beginning with his suave and superficial
complacency. “A bad chill, ’'m afraid. A very
bad chill. We must get you to bed.”

“IT waited up for you.”” He answered through
the whirling haze of his thoughts.

“There, there, don’t move until I’ve looked you
over. A bad chill, nothing more, but with your
bronchial trouble, it is better to be on the safe
side of the fight. We shall have you all right in a
few days, but you must keep in bed and not run
any risks from exposure. Who is here to look
after you? Where’s Annabel?”

“She is not here, but I have Constable. Con-
stable is a host in himself.”

“Oh, Constable is all right for the day, but you
need a nurse to look after you in the night. I'll
send one who can fix you up and give you your
bath before she goes in the morning. As long as
you are running a temperature, you must not get
out of bed. Now, Constable and I will move you
upstairs.”

In his dreamy condition, yielding to this smooth
authoritative voice was bliss. All the long, quiet


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 335


years when he had yielded himself to the capable
ministrations of Cordelia were gathered in his
surrender now to a luxurious vacancy of mind.
No slow judicial process; no firmly drilled reason-
ing; no logical necessity. Merely a shimmering
void of sensation into which his spirit sank as a
wounded bird sinks in the afterglow.

Wrapped in warm blankets and _ solicitously
supported on either side, he ascended one step
at a time to his bedroom, where a cheerful fire
was burning and his soft bed was already turned
down. While they undressed him with gentle
hands and slipped his blue and white pajamas
over his shoulders, the doctor purred encouragingly
to Constable.

“Hot-water bags. Yes, and plenty of blankets.
Is the bed ready for him? [ll leave a prescription
at Barclay’s asI goby. Until the nurse comes on,
you'd better not leave him alone. This chill will be
followed by rising temperature, and he must be
kept closely in bed. Nothing serious. In a few
days, he will be all right; but at his age a touch of
influenza ought not to be trifled with. Remember,
he is not to get out of bed until I see him to-mor-
row. Se
The warm wool of his pajamas made him shiver
slightly as it passed over his skin. Yes, it was
pleasant to be cared for; it was pleasant to be at
home again. All the troubles and perplexities of
the last twenty-four hours dispersed in the agree-


$36 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


able ruddy glow that enveloped him; and into
this glow the memory of Annabel receded and
vanished with other unfulfilled dreams of his
youth. His head dropped on one of Cordelia’s
pillows, and, with a sigh, he lay back, warm and
comforted, between fragrant sheets and fleecy
blankets, while the Doctor’s urbane presence hovy-
ered over him like an embodied image of congen-
ial habit.


XVII


WEEK afterward, when young leaves inter-
laced the declining sun, Mrs. Upchurch sat
beside Judge Honeywell’s bed, and told him, in.
the cooing notes of a king’s mistress, that he was
the most wonderful man in the world. Withered,
she added to herself, in one of her brief but cutting
flashes of parenthetical honesty, withered and
parched and brittle as a dead leaf; yet, when es-
timated by moral values, which are of course the
only permanent values, a most wonderful man.

“There isn’t another husband in the world who
would have been so generous,” she murmured,
and added, wiping her eyes, “My poor misguided
child!”’

It was agreeable to be told this in such caressing
tones. It was more agreeable still to feel that by his
magnanimity he had merited her praise.

*T cannot acquit myself of responsibility,”’ he
answered in a weakened voice, while Mrs. Up-
church wiped her eyes again and listened respect-
fully. “It may seem that Iam condoning her act,
but I cannot, at whatever cost to myself, let Anna-
bel suffer. She shall have her freedom, and I will!
provide for her future as long as she needs it.”

337


338 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


Mrs. Upchurch sighed as she placed her small,
plump hand onhisarm. “If it is the last word I
ever speak, Gamaliel,’’ she answered, while her
voice broke with a sob, “you are the truest
Christian I know. If the fault had been yours,”
she added, sincere in feeling though slightly
confused in logic, “you could not be more mag-
nanimous. I can only hope my poor child will
never realize all that she has lost.”

“T can’t blame her. She was obeying the law
of her nature. If she had loved Dabney before
Angus, we should probably have been spared that
tragedy also. There is no doubt, I suppose,” he
concluded generously, “that Dabney is the man
who was meant for her.”

“They are desperately in love, if that is what
you mean,” Mrs. Upchurch responded, in a tone
of moral indignation which increased with his
tolerance, “but she ought to have sacrificed her
feeling to her duty, as women used to do when
we put religious principles before personal emo-
tions. I should never have believed that Annabel
had this in her,”’ she continued sorrowfully. “‘The
truth is that too many women are losing all re-
spect for the sanctity of marriage.”

She waited for a rejoinder; but the Judge was
attacked by a bronchial irritation which enabled
him to cough instead of replying. Thirty, even
twenty years ago, he would have felt with her
that the sanctity of marriage was worth all the


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 339


sacrifices that had been made in its name. Now,
however, since his illuminating passion for Anna-
bel, he had become suspicious of any effort to
condense life into a sentimental formula. ‘‘ Well,
I can’t blame her,” he repeated, when he had
recovered his breath. “She was made for love,
if ever a woman was.”

“It is because you don’t blame her that I ought
to,” sighed Mrs. Upchurch. ‘But you must not
let this spoil your life, Gamaliel,” she urged with
tenderness. “You are too fine a man to have your
future ruined by any woman. There ought to be
years of happiness ahead of you yet. After all,
you must remember that you are only in the prime
of life.”’ As she finished, she thought of Amanda,
and the recollection suffused her charming features
with a faint flush of hope. Was it possible that
Amanda’s long-awaited hour was dawning at last?

‘I feel that my life is over, Bella. I have one
foot in the grave already.”

*“You’ll feel differently as soon as you’re up
again. Your life isn’t over yet by many years,
and you will have the thought of your noble—of
your wonderful generosity’—she softly accented
the word—‘“‘to sustain you in the future. It is
my poor, unhappy child who will suffer pangs of
remorse.”

Her tears overflowed, and turning away, she
gazed through the window toward the dark
splendour of the sunset. After all, unless the


340 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


doctrines of piety, unless the precepts of morality,
unless the sanctities of virtue and the sacredness
of marriage—unless all these consecrated beliefs
were merely illusions, she told her trembling heart,
Annabel must reap the inevitable whirlwind of her
betrayal.

Rising and still wiping her eyes, she bent over the
Judge. “‘Promise me, Gamaliel, that you will not
reproach yourself.”

For a moment, his response was inarticulate.
Then he murmured gratefully, “I promise you
that, Bella. I have done the best I could. When
you can honestly say that of yourself, nothing
else really matters.”

“Hold fast to that thought, my dear friend.
I shall see you to-morrow. If there is anything
that I can do for you— if there is any little delicacy
that I can make to tempt you—ask the nurse to
telephone me before she leaves in the morning.
Good-night. I hope you will have the sound
and peaceful sleep you deserve.” Leaning over,
she touched her lips to his forehead before she
turned noiselessly away and went out of the room.

The staircase faced the south, and the light from
the western sky tinged the drifting clouds with the
colour of fire. Unutterably sad she felt; yet, even
in her sadness, her brave and buoyant spirit could
find consolation in the hope that Amanda’s hour
was dawning. How mysterious was the intricate
pattern of life! It was amazing, it was miraculous,


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 341


she told herself valiantly, as she descended the
steps, the way that all the worst things (of which
existence appeared to contain more than its share)
work together for good to those who love God and
keep His Commandments. Surely no one deserved
better of Providence than poor Amanda, who had
been unfalteringly pious and chaste without re-
ward for so many years. And what could bring
home more poignantly to Gamaliel the beauty of
long faithfulness than his experience with the
impetuous cruelty of youth? Already Mrs.
Upchurch could see in imagination the stricken
look fade from Amanda’s delicate face; she could
hear—oh, how thankfully !—the hysterical tension
relax in that mellifluous voice. Yes, it was selfish,
it was unchristian to think only of one’s own
affliction. The brave and noble way was to mourn
for Annabel, but to rejoice with Amanda. After
all, did not this prove how mistaken people were
when they denied the law of compensation in life?


XIX


EACE, soundless peace enveloped him, while

his spirit brooded in silence as if it were his
native element. Between waking and sleeping,
in some inviolable sanctuary of dreams, he lay
with his eyes on the flaming sunset beyond the
green mist of the trees. Out there, in the close
of day, thundered the breathless rumour and bur-
den of life; but here, in this still place, beneath
the wavering pattern of the firelight, he was an-
chored in a serene haven. Here was the deep be-
low the deeps of experience; here was the change-
less beatitude beneath the shifting cycles of birth
and death. Beyond this refuge of dreams, he
was aware that time was flowing onward into
eternity. Swift, fragmentary, glimmering be-
tween snatches of light and darkness, his past
life rushed by him on the waves of an immense
stream of illusion. 'The touch of fever still clouded
his brain; but in the pervading apathy there was
an effortless calm. His life moved beyond him
while he himself was unmoved. He saw his
childhood drift past on these bright, dark pul-
sations of memory. He saw his mother, whom he
had passionately loved, and whom he remembered

342


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 343


as immortally fair and young. From her dis-
solving image there emerged and dissolved again
all the women he had ever desired or might have
desired in his life. Unmoved, he watched them
asthey drifted out of time into emptiness. Amanda
with her tedious fidelity; Cordelia with her un-
bridled virtue; Annabel! with her elusive charm
and her unconquerable aversion. Then other faces
so fugitive that they vanished to mist in the very
act of assembling. Women in the street whose
glances had stung his senses awake; the French
maid to whom he had barely spoken a word in
spite of her furtive advances; the mulatto girl
he had watched making his bed. Inchoate im-
pulses which had shuddered out of life even while
he resisted them. Though they had died in the
flesh, he realized now that they must have lived
on in some submerged jungle of consciousness.
Well, they were finished now; they were over.
There was no emotion toward life left in his heart;
there was no longing even for Annabel. Like all
the others, she had existed as a ripple on the current
of that profound egoism, which is the secret source
of both desire and regret, and like a ripple she also
had subsided and vanished.

He had done the best that he could. Over and
over the soothing refrain occurred in his thoughts.
He had done the best that he could. Not only in
the end, but in the beginning as well, he had done
the best that he could. All his life he had resisted


344 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


evil; he had kept the law; like the Apostle, he had
fought with beast's-and he had conquered. Witha
moderate concession to human frailty, he could
afford to look back, not unworthily, upon an
upright and, within reason, a religious life. He
had earned his rest. He had earned fairly, by
a well-spent prime, the long reward of a ripe and
seasoned age. Yet he would have yielded it all in
return for the briefest gleam of that lost, irrevo-
cable nearness of God. . . . A cloud was
floating over the west; on the window-panes the
flickering design of the firelight was like the trail
of a glowworm; flames were lapping the fresh logs
in the fireplace. For a few quiet moments, sleep
stole over him like an enchantment through which
vague, delightful images were drifting. ;
So profound, so blissful, was this immersion
‘that, when he opened his eyes again, he felt, for
an incredible instant, that he had plunged back
among the vivid perceptions of youth. In that
dreamy interval, before his faculties awakened
completely, it seemed to him that his mother
was stirring softly in the warm firelight, which
glistened on her white dress and on the chestnut-
brown of her hair. Just as he used to do when
he was a child, he waited drowsily for the sound
of her footsteps on the carpeted floor by his
bed and the familiar scent of lavender in her
rustling clothes. Not until the remembered fra-
grance brushed his face, and the vision was bending


THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS 345


over to smooth his pillows, did he awake suffi-
ciently to realize that it was not his mother
but the nurse whom Doctor Buchanan had sent
to him. Strange, that he had never before ob-
served her so closely! Strange, that this resem-
blance had never occurred to him until she stooped
over him in the firelight and the ruddy gleams were
reflected in the brown waves of her hair. Younger
than his early memory of his mother; younger
even than Annabel: the merest slip of a girl, he
saw now, when he looked in her face. Fresh,
spotless, and womanly, in her white uniform, with
the competent hands of a physician and the wise
and tender touch of a mother. Those beneficent
hands and that infallible touch, he supposed, had
made him dream that he was a child again. After
all, was there any grace, any beauty, any virtue,
that could compare with tenderness in a woman?
Gentle and young! Young from her small, round
head, where her short brown hair curled like the
petals of a sunflower beneath the starched band of
her cap, to her slender ankles, in white stockings,
under the neat hem of her skirt. Swifter than
light, swifter than inspiration, while he followed
her with his eyes, the thought darted into his mind:
“There is the woman I ought to have married!”
There, sympathetic and young, obeying her fem-
inine instinct in every exquisite gesture, was the
woman he ought to have married.

The vagrant thought came and went. After


346 THE ROMANTIC COMEDIANS


all, life was over, Or was it never over until you
had gone down into the grave? ‘There were men
who had begun their best work, who had won their
supreme happiness, only when the prime of life
was well past. Beyond the warm room and the
flickering firelight, the vital sap had risen again;
flowers were already putting forth from the green
earth. “Spring is here,” he thought dreamily.
“Spring is here, and I am feeling almost as young
as I felt last year.”

Suddenly, beneath the dark sunset, an apocalyp-
tic light rained from the sky, and in this light all
the tender little leaves of April were whispering
together.


THE END


; Pe
’ =
5
is i. e 1
i = F
uy i] =. T
- =
. ¢
ie 6
7 a
4
®
7 Vw
a '
= '


\


x AN
Natty
Me \


a


el


2h Bee) Efe od ai
y i i ve
eer ‘ . at
e) sts ‘ £ f
Prat a - a
= ; e ‘
si ++ =! ;
cites bts ee ag ah UciRIteR
Hf ‘ premrecseh.
: fee Ue ans
aba ‘ E f
) “ Aq
‘


[edaeareny
y


‘i
WagldarceyAp heaves Sd 4b ; | x « &
‘ i » \ at
SRL COT CC SSsa Emaeae : { } X ue
aseor os |
{ { i. 4
iaaseit 4p3 \


ome
