Astro-Meteorologica (John Goad, 1686)
==========================================================
Goad's 1686 astro-meteorology; thirty years of weather observations matched to planetary positions. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_astro-meteorologica-or-_goad-john_1686).

p I OE...
Wo . _


ASTROMETEOROLOGIC A,


APHORISM-S


A 02
DISCOURSES
Bodies Cceleltial ,

THEIR

NATURES and INFLUENCES.


From the Variety of the Alterations of the Air, Tempe-
perate, or Intemperate, as to Heat or Cold, Froſt, Snow, Hail,
Fog, Rain, Wind, Storm, Lightnings, Thunder, Blaſting, Hurricane,
Tuffon, Whirlwind, Iris, Chaſme, Parelij, Comets their Original
and Duration, Earthquakes, Vulcano's, Inundations, Sickneſs Epi-
demical, Maculz Solis, and other Secrets of Nature.


Collected from the Obſervation at leiſure times, of above
Thirty years ; by F. GO AD.


_— | — —


The Lord Reigneth, — Clouds anc: Darkneſs are round about Him, A Fire goeth
before him, —— Hu Lightnings enlightned the Warld, the Earth ſaw and
TREMB LED, the Hills melted like Wax at the Preſence of the Lord.
Plal. CXVIL
Seek ye the Lord, who maketh the Seven Stars and Orion, ——That calleth for the
Waters of the Sea, and poureth them out on the Face of the Earth, Amos V. |
Who removes the Mountarns, and they know not ; Who ſhakes the Earth out of hts
place, ——Who commanadeth the Sun, and Seals EE: the Stars, —— Who maketh
Arcturus and Orion , and the;Pleiades, and the Ghambers of the Southern Gon-
ftellations, — Who doth GREAT things paſt finding out ; yea, and WONDERS
without number, Job IX. |


'Eis Traouv Thy) yo Sew 6 Ryu envar, uv, is mz megre 7
Unspert; Tr (ucarez auray, Plal. 19.
LOND O N, E


Printed by F. Rawlins, for Obadiah Blagraveat the Black Bear in St. Payls
| Church-L ard, over againſt the Little North-door, 1686.


—
—


—_—


CY aRD COLI,
Q> >
NOV 18 1920
LlEnAR


Rana


To the Moſt Potent and Heroick Prince


JAMES the IL


Great Britain, France and Ireland, KI NG,
Defender of the Faith, &c.


Mot DR E 4D Svuverazgn,


|. FTE R Your Majeſties Miraculous Acceſs to
A the Imperial Crown of theſe Realms, in Peace
and Awful Silence ; After your Glorious En-

deavours to Illuſtrate your Crown and King-

dom, and make the Engliſh N AME Legibleto all our
Gazing Friends and Neighbour Nations ; it needs an Apo-
logy to interrupt your Great Tendencies and Defigns with
a Piece of Paper-Skill, of any pretended Treatiſes of Sct-
ence. But Great S I R, our Argument is as High as the
Outward Courts of Heaven, and Noble withal, fince the
Greateſt Princes Coats of Arms are emblazoned by our
Planets. Theſe Papers, like your Majeſties Royal Mind,
are not confind within the Limits of the Br:tamick Shore ;
but toſhew their Uſefulneſs, they are bound for the Eaſt,
for the Weſt, for the South, and for the Frozen Sea.
They aim at the account of a Fair Wind, and a Storm,
a Thundring Tempeſt, and a Reſiſtleſs Hurricane , and
this, all the World over. They inquire into the Nature
of Vulcanos, Flaming Mountains, which being accompa-
nyed


|-


"The Epiſtle Dedicatory:


nyed often with Earthquakes, are as ſo many Sea-Marks,
to warn the Mariner that he comes not-Aſhore. So the Sub-
ject may not be Unworthy of your Majeſties Able Com-
manders, that they may bring and re-bring their Cargos
ſafe totheir deſired Port. Specially ſince we adventure to
ſearch the Nature of Currents at Sea, that they may be
no longer Impediments un-accounted for ; When the delu-
ded Veflel ſhall find ſhe's ſtolen back ſo many Leagues of
her Voyage, mavegre a {tiff Gale at her Stern. What tends
to Navigation, leads to Empire, or to Fameat leaſt, and
Remark; in caſe your Undaunted Royal Spirit ſhall be con-


| tent with the Hereditary Dominions of your Crown. This


I refle&t on with Comfort, that this Eflay, I cannot ſay,
baskd in the Sunſhine; but, whentime was, it had the
Glorious Fate to be enlivened by a Glance at leaſt of your
Royal Brother of moſt happpy Memory. . Nor can I
be diffident of your Majeſties Sweetneſs and good Liking
when according to my Low Station, under, and with
your Royal Scepter, Iaim at the Publick'Good, Praying
the God of Heaven, whom you Religioufly and Devout-
ly Worſhip, to impart the Bleſſings of Heaven, the
Bleſſings of Earth , and the Bleſſings of the Deep on
your State and Dignity Temporal, and after a Long and
Happy Reign amongſt your Loyal Subjects, who only
underſtand the Bleſhings of Monarchy, to re-Crown your
Royal Head, in the Temple not made with Hands, his
Eternal Kingdom. So Prayeth your Majeſties moſt


 Humbly Deyoted Subyect , and Daily Orator,


Z. GOAD.


To


TIRE


< " d * as we + . F 4
Jan af - vb LNCS. b


| I OM E


Favourable Reader.


HILOSOPHY, I hope, will never be out of date,
neither Natural nor Moral , becauſe they are Lights
that lead us, the one, to admare the Drvine Nature, the


| other to follow it. In Natural Philoſophy the Planets
| and the Meteors teach their part m Letters writ m Light, (bright-
| er than Gold, as more Noble) and therefore viſible to the Vul-
| gar, who all believe a Celeſhal Power , becauſe they ſee it ;
| T his being admitted , They are fairly invited to eve heed to
q the other more Spiritual Light, which ſheweth Good and Evil
| mn their Colours. T never found, but that Contemplation of the


Heavens conduced to the Firſt, and therefore muſt manuduce to the
| Second. A Showre of Rain, and a Fruitful Seaſon is a good Proof
| for a Good God ;; and a Pealing Storm of T hunder, is a Sermon
from Heavens ; the Voice of God, and not of Man : Such a row-
; ſong Leſſon may ſhake even an Epicurean znto a Religious Hor-
| ror ; much more the plainer V ulgar, who are happy in this, that
they have no blind acquired Biafs to counter-ſway them from the
belief of a Deity. The Holy Text rs full of what 1 ſay. The
Poetick, and the Prophetick, Books ring of Aſtrology, and the
Dettrie of the Sphere. Tcould bave filled my Tutle-Page with
Teſitmomes. TheVerſes of the Holy Arab are a Compendium
of theſe Papers. 1 confeſs I had a Fancy for theſe C ontempla-
tuons from my Touth, but 1 hope I ſhould not have followed them,
Recreations though they were, but that the Holy Text enflamed
me thereto: For 1 always had ( =» 4pecam Aw ) a Love for
Holy Writ. The Alteration of the Air comes home to onr
Doors, and the Cauſes ſometimes ſhine im at our Windows ; If
an Influence of Sol, Mercury, Mars aad Saturn, &c. were
as commonly known to the Husbandman or Seaman, as the No-
vi- and Plenilunar Influence, how familiar would our Reſent-

4 ' ments


m__ TJ ;
10 the IA CaQcil


———
TID  _———_— S—_—_ — ———


ments be of Ged s good Pre? dence , how Fr, rect Wi ud be the
| |


ſ -
oy o Oy , » $85 n wu Pr: 2% J , ", 'A1 , 5 »IT OC nN x" Y Res Hey ; _
occaſions 6f Defcourſc LI. f City Is wo KA (1 hats A } * Kelr, IC 071 {IS
Rn bo & 4 | bp . ! 4 ſ  / w 1 7 ; 4 , T/> (8.0
Devetinal 147t je 112 LIC 1 errivle JVLCECGT SQ THLUTS LevVC, Wat
i J - . J ?I a b F- f } J
= ] a 1459 1/7 41 IF : «fart ,7 ”
titude, Admiration from the more Lleſjed Corſeitution Put the
ſ ) / 5 Lap ? day  lIOS {1 P, ' | 227 J , { s;
unluce; - FUNC ie 0j Mechaniim ATHLON, '% T1e CATIIEGLS atid4 0
> - RT T) '{ ELSE Ry Gy / > WE. BEE 1
Nature ( 772 JC Brutiſh Neton ) ATMONS 15 IC L; tear, hinders
”/ 3 Li OOO jap%: 7 > 3 0 AY ON ANS oy Yds
our Wiſh. But T hope this cur Principle 'ts fo much the more prt-
J
| >


4 4 - fy a $5 £ 4 57 ) & Wnt: 44.7
ze, that it CICATLY EVACUAIES 119.1 [:t1 THC,


w


And 1s it not
pity that a Ford in f\lode of Philotop! 1N'g « vewgh tran{l nt with the
Age, ſhould avant h the pre ſent Geueralionsy acfruud us of Ar-
guUicnts for Gods Iluſtrious Providence, ( urged ſo many
Thwmſands cars ago) ad unhinge us | rom the Knowledge cf the
Creator, who 1s Vi{ible aid Pal; ule to us every 24 Hers,
Welfare therefor e thoſe Philoſoj jJC'S of our Age, who made it
thur buſes to appear agati {i Caitelius, Dr. H. More,
Dr. S. Parker, and Others, to whom, in my poor Opinion, Re-
lgton, and the knowledsg of the Creator is imdebicd, We are
Superſtitions (forſooth ) if we are troubled at a Comet, becauſe
'tis Natural ; It may Portend, for all that. They deny Appa-
ritions of Arques 3 Wherefore 2 becauſe they can grve no account
of them. . They may deny as well a Showr of Ram, for any ac-
count they can grve, why it falls , with the Circumſtances of
hic & nunc. Our Philoſophy reaches thoſe very Circumſtan-
ces 3 becauſe we ſtudy God, and His Motuons, the Acceſſes, Re.
ceſſes, Statins, Reſ petts of thoſe Moveables which He hath
Cloathed with Light, leaſt we ſhould ſay, Hehid ſuch Know-
ledge from us. Therefore, tell me good Friend why it Rains
now, why every quarter of an Hour 2 ( for ſo it haps ſometimes )
Why it Snows in Summer, and Thunders in Winter. Progno-
ſticate by your Mechamſms what ſhall be Seven Tear hence.
Nay, if there be a Natural Divination, then there is a Provi-
dence, then there is a God, then there is a Law of Nature (et-
led, which he who is Skill d mm, obtains the Gift of a kind of
| Preſctence. So does Hippocrates foretel the Fate of his Pa-
tient ; an Arab, a Comet, and Thales, an Eclipſe. |

This Knowledge I have endeavour d to ſettle, and to render it
perſpicuous » which muſk require ſome Prolixity » Where the


%


Mountain of a Common Prejudice ts to be removed. Tet I will


Not


TE. a.


TT...


To the Reader.


_——


uct pufitfie my felf 5 1 nmaght have been mere coutrat# perhaps ;
[ may add, ilioat 1 was 3 _ME nclined to ſindy the Arabs; I
fetched wot thts ke” dge from them; When 1 ſaw 1
was engaged to conſult them, 1 kaew here was a Meum &
Tuum even among "them, fo 1gave them their due. 1 have
eften apolcy 2.04 i the fol ow mg P, ape CIS for the Length of the
Dzartes w:(crted, 1 labour d to find the __ of Fon Pl metary
Communic: 20, which 1 have ſhewn to be large. That ts the
chief thing [ pretend to, and 1 hope, if tt brings its Convifli-
7h it w ill be kndlty accepted, To kd , 1wiſh the Rea-
der a diſcerning Spirit mn all Truth he purſues, not only in this,
but in a more Celeſttal Philoſophy. So far am 1 on all accounts


his unfe tgned and abſoluteW, ell-W iſh er,


]. GOAD.


The


The Characters, which are made nſe of in the following
Papers, are thus explained.


[


Sextile


Luartile-——--


EA


The XII Signs of the Zodiack;
Aries — ——
Taurus
Gemint
Gancer —_—


X


Virgo ———
Libra
Scorpio
Sagtttary-—-
Capricorn _ _
Aquary —-——— —


Ir
Leo A
ne
"a.


Trine a


& ÞOXxXoa wwawoauo tro


Oppoſition


A. |. ante Iucem. A. m. ante merid, m.


Terre Mot , or Earthquake.


. Retrograde. Dir, Dires,


mad
| Piſces X


, anoſt part. d. t. die toto, T. M,


EX EE


SG ds ESO


_ , IT
. : Lhe Ws > * AS Sa
Fung _CSytTv_O £ aq


- oY * ” *_ % > £
TP IBIEDF ld EI 44


Þ.


=& *
Woo gd FEIDOO BREE IE ALS
bY 4 b4 Akt + SC Ma. 4 # Sn


_———T_—_—__ 9999-79"
ASTRO-METEOROLOGICA..


ArnoRisms and Diſcourſes concerning the
Natures of the Bodies Celeftial, &c.


BOOK I


CHAP LL


God the Firſt; His Second Cauſe the Heavens, Their admirable Power on
the Sublunary world, on the Air eſpecially, The Cauſes of Meteors
ordinary, or prodigious. Angelick Powers,


>. O D Almighty, the Great and Wiſe Creator, Blefſed
for ever, ( for no legitimate Aſtrology can exclude
Him) is not only in Himſelf, but even in his Works,
Incomprehenlible.
3 $ 2. Amongſt His other infinitely various Ope-
6 rations, He is admirably diſcovered in the conſtitution
of the Air,and its ftrange Viciſſitudes , which the Di-
S * SE s vine Word unqueſtionably produceth by a Second in»
F ferior Cauſe, or Generant,
:


$ 3- The Theatre, on which theſe Alterations are hourly acted, being the open
Air, Mankind hath more calily arrived at ſome little Apprehenfion: of this Second
Cauſe, the Region in which they are preſented being ſo neer and pervious.

$ 4. As reaſonable as it isto believe, that the Sea comprehendeth all the Semi-
nal Cauſes of Her ProduRtons,and the Earth of what is bred in Her Bowels alſo, ſo
natural is it tro imagine, that the Heavens are not Idle, but rather give Spirit_and in-
fluence to all things under their Convexity, viz. the Air, and- its Regions , with


the Globe of Water and Earth, Theſe being bur.minor Orbs, all incloſed within the
N vaſt Embraces of the major ; even as the Fetw is embraced by the Womb,and the
21 Membranes that are agnate to ir,


$ 5. The World therefore in all Ages hath been convinced, that the Heavens
ey no ſmall Power on the premiſes,and every Body within their reſpective Inclo-
[tures. _ , "\\F&DY "ELERY
\ $. 6. On the Aireſpecially, and its Phenomena, the Meteors,-(as they are di-
Ninguiſhed vulgarly into) Real or Apparent. . TE”,

$ .7. Oftheſe latter, none goabonr to deny, that the Heavens are the due Eff-
cient, whether Halo's, Rainbows, Parelia,Paraſelene, Chaſms, Clarities No&urnal,
the Morning and Evening-Blulhes of the Heavens ; to which may be added the ra-
rer appearance of its ſeeming Conflagration,unleſs That prove rather to be Real.
|  _ $ 8. Bur noleſs are they the due Effeftive of the - former, , the Real ones,
8 (though ſome Well-meaners would fain deny -it) ; whether Clouds, Rain, Miſt,
s Dew Fiery Irajeftions, Jqnes fatus, Lightning, Thunder, Blaſting, Froſt, Snow,

Hail, Winds.
$ 9. Andof All theſe, whenſoever they happen,whicther in Meaſure or Exceſs,
B .


Ordi-


Meteors. Prodigies. Exhalation. Book 1.


Ordinary or Prodigious ; and they again whether Homogeneo , (uch as thoſe Dire
Tempeſts called of old Ecnephie, Exhyarie Fiſtule, Plin. hiſt. nat. IT. 48, 49.
(known amongſt us by the names of Sports, Huracans,Tornades, Travades, &c.) or
Heterogeneows , as the Rains of Duſts, Alhes, Milk, Blood, &c.

$ 10, Noother is the Canfe, after all that can be diſputed, of that great ph.s70-
#enon, the Comet, and That not only Sublunar,but Celeſtial.

$ 11. Theſamealfo is moſt juſtly acknowledged the Cauſe of the mction of
the Sea, its Ebbs and Flowes, which ſome great Artiſts would pin on the motion of
the Earth, others on the inward Principle of the Element.

$ 12, Yeathe Heavens (though it may ſcem to be no leſs than a Contradiion)
are to be admitted Cauſes of Earthquakes, Meteors (as they are rightly called) of
the Subterranean Region. Z

$ 13, Powers Angelical, Good or Evil, are no Cauſes ſolitary, or ſuch as do
evacuate the proper Caufaliry of the Heavens. ;

$ 14. Stormy Winds therefore, which are harmful to Countrey or Province,
are no Arguments (whatſoever the vulgar are perſwaded) of Sorcery or Conju-
ration,

$ 15, Herebyit isnot intended todeny that Spirics can raiſe or beſtow Winds
or Tempeſts, and that, it may be,by Arbitrary means, though 1 {ce ſome are willing
toexcuſe LZavland from ſuch Inditement.

$ 16. Showers of Stone, Daft, Aſves, Blood, Corn, Fc. which I call Prodi-
gious,oxt of kind,$ 9. are generated firſt in the Air,(not elevated thicher by any vio-
lent natural Spirit, as ſome think, ſo that if they may be faicly impured to an An-
gelicx Adminiſtration, yet neither can the Heavens be wholly excluded.

$ 17. Concerning prodigious Showres of Creatures Animate, as Frogs, &c.
although the more probable Opinion ſaith they are generated in the Region trom
whence they tall, yet here I am not ingaged co undercake.

$ 18. Noiſes and Apparitions of Armies, with Military Equipage and Tu-
fnvlr, can at no hand exclude an Angelic, and that a Prineipal Cauſe.


AG. th. hh


SR CHAP. IL.


Meteors, their Material Cauſe, and that there is an Earthy Exhalation,
The Air conſidered. ' All Meteors reducible to Heat and Cold, 2s therr
© Efficient ; the Nicety of their Degrees, An account of the Natural
| Progneſticks of weather : they all prove that Heat is the cauſe of Rain, and
the Heavens Dominion over (M oiſture, Concer mng Hail, Snow, .M ift,
; Lightning, Comet, Blaſting, No phznomena caſual. wind, its _
5 not rarefattion, or condenſation , but —_— Iropulſe, The Boay of t
Heaven, as diſtinguiſhed from the Stars, ſignifies nothing,


F. 1. Eteors Real, whether: Aerial or Subterrranean, as to their Cavſe Afa-
gerial, conliſt of Water, Earth, (Simple or Compound) Fire, and
rheir Expirations; theſe in the depth of the Earth, thoſe in the beights of the Air,
as far as the reach of the Atmoſphere. -
© $ '2. "For that the Earth alſo is teſolved into Exhalatioo, is evinced from the
Thunderbolt, yez from rhe Nitrous and Sulphureous Ingredients into (the wiid-fires
Cdeftial) Lightnings. Add rhe forementioned Rains of Stones, Aſhes, Corn, &c.
nay every Fog is {6 fuliginons, as to bear witneſs, a Fog which ſomerimes caſts ir
ſelf imto Threds or Ropes, and by the warmth of the Sun furls up into Goſlamere.
4 3. The Body of the Air ſeems not to be the Reſolution of Terreſtrial or Wa-
-tty Exhalarions, but is rather diſtinguiſhed from Both as their Subject or mediam,
even as the Wateris diſtinguiſhable from its Impurities, or from the faline Spiric
that inhabits the Ocean ' $ 4. For


” "Ie


—


Chap. 2. Air. Warmth Celeſt. Prognoſticks fr. Animals.8&c,


3


$ 4. For the whole Expanſion, Aerial and Xthereal, is one homogeneous Bo-
dy, differing only in Warmth or Cold, Purity or Impurity, according as it is nea«
xer or remoter from the Earth and Water.

$ 5, Ofirſelf, as it ſcems neither hot; nor moiſt, nor cold, &c. but capable
of all : |

$ 6. Sodiſtinguiſhed is the Air from the Water, that Neither can be converted
into the Other, the tour Elements, vulgarly called, being, as I deem, Incorrnptible :
In as much as, although God the Creator was pleaſed , as Afoſes ſeems to lay, to
make the Air out of Water; yet it may be true notwithſtanding, that no Natural
Agent can turn it back into the ſame.

y 7. Meteors Real, asto their Efficzent Cauſe, are naturally reducible to Heat
or Cold, and their Activities ; Froſt, Snow, Hail, to the later : Lightning, Rain,
Clouds to the former.

$ $8. Winds alſo haveno other e/£0/zs.


$ 9g. Here it is to be remembred, that degrees of Heat and Cold are of a minute .


and nice diſq"i(ition, our grofſer Senfories being not always competent Judges z
for we (ee Rivers in depth ot hardeſt Winters, reſerve ſome Heat, where Fith fub-
fiſt, and ſcalding Liquors admit ſome degree of Cold, (as when their Z(ſtuarion is
calmed by a lictle cold Infulion,) and yet remain ſcalding (till,

$ 10. Asnice alſo may bc the conlideration of Drythand Afiſture ; for as the
Coals of dry Fewel, taken trom the. Furnace, burn quick and bright ; ſo from
moiſt Fewel they glow obſcurely , as if they were not as yet rid of their priſtine,
though adventitious, Moiſture.

$ 11, Warmthis the inſtrumental Productive of Cloud and Rain. This is wit-
neſled by the Southern Winds, which bring Both ; by Thaws in Winter, which are
always cloudy, ſeldom dry ; by the ingratetul Savors, moſt hot againſt moiſt Sea»
ſons; belide the convincing teſtimony ot the Thermoſcope.

$ 12. TheSnrvey of the ulual Progneſticks of Kain , from Fire, Water, Ani-
mates, [nanimates,do al) argue the ſame Original of Rain, v4z.Heat Celeſtial, and its
Conſequent, Moiſture,with the ſecret Impreſſions of Both on the Creature.

$ 13, In Animals, the uſual Noiſes obſerved againſt weather, as in the Raven,
the Crow, Cock, C-ooſe, Owl, Peacock, the Pimlico in the Hiſt. of Virginie, a Bird
ſocalled trom her norte, (r00 ſure a Prophet, ſaith Captain Swith, of Wind and Wea-
ther,) Swine, Frog, &c. their crowing, ſcreaming, - croaking, &s. argue not- any
miraculous Divination in the Creature , bur only proteſt the ſenlible diſquiet and
alterations that are felt by them at ſuch times,

Hand equidem credo, quia fit Divinitzs illus
' Ingenium, «ut rerum fato Pradentia major :
Verum ubi Tempeſt. © c. Vertuntar ſpecits animorum; the Poet himſelf was

ſo cunning, Georgic. 1. TA

$ 14. Further arguments of ſuch Alcerarions; are the Water-fowls leaving the
Element, flocking together or betaking themſelves farther ipto the Country , the
poor Earth-worm creeping from his bed , the flying or ſpringing of the Lolzgo(the
Curtle-fith) they ſpeak ot , the-playing of the Dolphins in the waters,all not broo-
king their own Element, Thar and cheir Bodies:being alike diſturbed; - *

$ 15. To ſaylittleof their Stomachs or Appetites extraordinary, Birds com-
ing late from Feed, yea the contemptible Fleas'or Flies more notably ſtinging, 5. e.
biting or ſucking, are hence reckon for Pr . | 46

$ 16. The forced motions and poſtures of Creatures argue the ſame, as'when
Cartel are ſeen skipping odly up and down sndecors laſcivis, as Pliny calls it, as it
twitch'd or pritked by fome thooring or ach in their Limbs, (as vexed by ſome-pain)
tearing their Litter. baud

$ 17. Which pains ſome Creatures endeavour to help, the Beaſt licking. the
Hoof, or againſt the Hair, the Bird picking and pruning its Feathers, ſome weiabay
theraſelves with water, oc fying ſo neer (the Swallow, and Sta-mew) ill they =

B 2 P13 bf thei


H. dominion on Moicture. Meteors reduc'd &c. Book 1.


their Wings point ; the Houſe-cat waſhing her Head with her moiſtned Foot, the
Oxe ſnufhing aloft into the Air, all as it were tor refrigeration-ſake of their Bloud
or Spirits, cooling the little Feavers perceived therein,

$ 18. The poor Ant hiding himſelt or removing his E ggs, the Shelfiſh ſticking
cloſe to the Rocks, or ballaſting ir ſelf wich Sand, ſhew a Kind of natural Prudence,
but no Prophetick Divination, in as much as firſt ey nd the Alteration of their
bodies, before their Inſtin& teacherh them to provide for the conſequent,

$ 19. And as to Preſages from the Water, whatſoever the Ancients ſpeak of
the mnrmuring of the Sea at hand, or the noiſe on the Shore {ide, rhe bubbling or
ſwelling ofthe Sea without noiſe (witneſſed by all Sea-faring men,) the appearance
of the Froth broken or divided, theſe ali betray rhe Dominion of the Heavens on
the Water, and a diſturbance rais'd by the Celeſtial Warmth.

$ 20, Verily, the Dominion on the Water, is as large as that ſeen in the Air,
the Prognoſticks from Animais being grounded principally on the Alterations of
. their Natural Moiſt ure. And if any Frelages are drawn trom Plants , as the Briſt-
ling of the Trefoil &c. hither it may be reduced.

9:21. Idonor mention the Sweating of Wals or Glafs, which may ariſe from
the continual Appulle of the moiſt Arome floating neer the chill /xperficzes 3 but
Plinie's Inſtance trom the Larder;when a Dith which hath been uſed at | able,leaves

a Sweat on the plate whereon it was repolited, argues ſome conſent of the Ambi-
ent's moilture with the moiſture of the Eſculent ; on which account allo . Wood
{wels, Wainſcot cracks, Viol-ſtrings inap aſunder, and we alſo, as other Animals
(no better, nor worſe) are diſquieted with the Excreſcencies of our Feer, ſwelling
and ſhooting againſt Weather, yea the Paroxyſmes of the Gour, and fundry other
Ailments obſerved in the Hoſpital of our Bodies, remember us thus of ſuperior Al»
terations.

$ 22. Yea farther, all the Prognoſticks taken from the Fire i feli,do note(which
may be ſtrange) ſome Dominion over Moiſture, the « celeſtial Action terminating
not on the Flame ſo much as the Fewel, or the Body inflam'd : hence comes the lit»
tle diminutive ſparkling of the Candle, the ſpitting of the Fire from under the Em-
bers, the puffing and murmuring of the flaming Coal, the concretion of Sparks and
Knots inthe Snuff ( Licernarum fangi,) the Adhetion of Embers to the Hearth, of
the Lice-coal to the. Pot-lide , all berokening fome Alteration of the Moiſture,
which betrays it felt by concretion of things contiguous, or by that little ſparkling at
the approach of the Flame, which at'orher times burns quier, and cals for no Obler-
vation, He that pleaſes may conſult Aratzs, Virgil, Pliny, Pluterch , of the Nee»
otericks, Fromond. & Voſſins de Idololatr.

y 23+ KRainandWaindtherctore, for they are not often ſevered , or their exi-
ſtence to Warmth, - |

$ 24. And 'tis manifeſt, whether Haz/ reduceth it ſelf , being the congelation
of Rain, As for Snow, 'tis of a nice craſir, ſtrangely conliſting of a congeal'd va-
pour, and ſome lirrle degree ofa warm Spirit ,vchich helperh to reſolve the continued
congelation, and make it fall into wafers.

y 25. Hence.what is commonly obſerved, whenloeyer it ſnows, the Air remits
of his rigor ; and'again, the greater is the Fleece, the warmer is the Air, and more
bordering on a Thaw, |

- $ 26. .Next,the 24/ alſo belongerh to Cold,ſceing it is a vapor, part moiſt, part
fuliginous, congel'd , juſt as the breath-of our mouth by the Cold of Winter,jis a vi-
fible/Miſt. Miſts therefore do not ariſe from the Rivers brink, as'is commonly
reckon'd; but the Vapour, which. before roſe inviſibly, being congel'd, deſcends, and
by continual aggregation or conflux, puts on a viſible. conliſtence. - -: +

$ 27. Loghening and Thunder need no Herald to derive their. Pedegree from
Hear Celeſtial. _

$.28+ Comets Celeſtial have their conſiſtence alſo from Expirations Celeſtial,
raking ir for granted, that thqSublunar conlift of Expirations Terreſtrial, mingled
with Celeſtial, and inflamed thereby. $ 29, -Blite


#4 a


OY Or maar yn»


el ate et £v-
We ——_—_—


RE .


- - x
w* i. - ga . - = 5 ny — \ $4


"a


YC ————


Chap. 2 Blne, whence. Wind, and its Defanition,


$ 29, Blite and Blaſting in ſome caſes proceed from Heat, as when Fruits are
prejudiced by Lightning, or burning Winds, ſach as the Eaſt-winds are reckon'd in
Holy Writ, | ;

y 30. Again, it oftentimes proceeds from Cold and Hoar:froſts, .as Pli»y
rightly with our Husbandmen define, happening with us about Afay, 7ure, yea in
April, March, whenſoever the Spring is obnoxious to the injury by its unhappy
forwardneſs. |

$ 31. Ofall theſe there is not the leaſt piece of a Phenomenon that is caſual in
reſpect of the Heavens, (though the Learned Kepler can allow it,) but the Heavens
are conſcious of its Original,

$ 32, Nay, as we lhall ſee, there is not the leaſt puff of Wind (though a Re-
flexion of a Blaſt indeed may be termed Caſual) but is Heaven-bred, if we ſpeak of
the dire& iſſue,

$ 33. Howbeit ſogreat and various is the inconliancy of the Winds, eſpecially
with us on Shore , that the Knowledge is abſtruſe and difficult, though neither ſo
pure a Contingent, bur that it may be lur'd to the Rules of Art.

y 34. Seeing Wind ( that we may come to its Definition) is nothing elſe but
the motion of an Earthy dry Exhalation, and that moved nor by Condenſation, or
its own Gravity, but by Impulſe from Celeſtial Heat.

y 25. Somegreat Authors philoſophize otherwiſe, That Wind is made by Ra-
refattion and a Condenſation ſucceeding , the Air condenſed tending downwards,
and acquiring its violence by the heights of its deſcent. Bur 1.whereſoever it hapneth
that there is fuch Condenſation; as in Clonds, Dews, Miſts, hazie Air, Froſts, there
would be always ſome ſenſe ot Winds ſtirring ; but many Clouds and hazie days are
calm, yea nothing is more hutht oft times thana Froſt or Miſt, or more ſtill and
{ilent than the Dew. 2. Winds are indifferent to all Seaſons, Winter, Summer,
ro all Weathers, to all hours of the Natural Day, none have their 2erxes from
ir, not Sun-riſe nor Sun-ſer, Mid-day nor Mid-night , it owes not theretore its Exi-
ſtence ro RarefaQion and Condenſation, ſeeing all Hours, Seaſons, are not inditfe-
rent thereto , for in a Cloudy day, what place is there for Rarefa&tion ? In a brighe
hot Summers day, What condenſeth? 3, Here let the Ereſsax ſpeak : hath not
benign Nature provided that refreſbing Air for the &ſtival tzeart ? and doth not it
riſe at 9 in the morning, when the Hear increaſethz and ceaſe again at 4 in the Even!
4. Wharſoever may be ſaid in Spring and Aututnn, for the viciſſitudes of Rareta-
&on and Condenſation,how comes Winter, which even hath its denomination trom
Wind, to be ſo unquiet, when there are no ſuch ſenſible viciſſitudes ? Nay, how doth
Wind riſe in Wintcr nights ? It cannot be ſaid that the Night condenferh what the
Day hath rarchied: Alas! the Day was all benummed in Froſt,and the windy Nights
often introduc'd a Thaw. How doth the colder Seaſon rarifie, how doth the war-
mer Seaſon condenſe? 5. Upon this Hypotheſis the Wind would blow to, not
from the Points of the Compaſs , and to many Points at once, viz. coming from the
Sun as from the Centre , for the Air, even as Water, riſing up in a Conical tumor;
when rarefied, upon the receſs of the Sun; while it <ondenſeth and recovererh its
Gravity, muſt needs fall inditterently from the vertex to all parts of the Circumfe-
rence, where 1t is not hindred: 4.e. to the Eaſt, North, and South (ar leaſt,) it not
to the Weſt , butthe Wind blows not ſeveral ways at once, nor is confined in the
leaſt, bur tends inditferently from the Sun, aud to the Sun, and on each fide of the
Sun through all the Points of thz Compals,

y 36. Again, Condenſation can give no account of the Winds vidlence, no not
the thouſandrhu part of its rage and fury , as when it is known to rift up Trees,
demolith Buildings : for admit the deſcent of Air to be as forcible as the: deſcent
of Water , though there is ſome difference ſure , eſpecially if Air be rarer
than the Water by a 1 000 degrees ; yet this will not prevail, for in Noah's Floud
- ſelf, the Cataracts of Heaven did not beat down the Trees; as appears by the
Yory.


C y 37. Tis


Wind an-Exhalation Terreſtrial. Book 1,


$ 37. Tis ſaid, that all Heavy Bodies, the further they deſcend, the more vio-
lence they acquire; this is true in Bodies that have their hxed Doſe of complete
Gravity diſproportioned to the mediwn, as in Stones, Metals, &c. and this by vir-
rue of their Generation ; but in Condenſation 'tis otherwiſe, the Body is not con-
denſed ar an inſtant, all at once, bur at leiſure, and by gradual alteration. Propor-
tional thereto mult the Gravication be, and as the body condenſeth, ſo mult ic tub-
ſide in the ſame meaſure, according as the Applications of the Cauſes condenting
are gradual : for as for inſtantaneons Applications of ſuch Cauſes, it will be hard
to aſſign any. Again, from whence ſhoutd the condenſed Air deſcend * from the
lower Region ? then we ſhould be to (eek tor the Violence, the Term 2 20 being
ſoneer. lf from the upper, the condenſed Air would find its eAgmlibrinm, 1s the
Clouds do.

$ 38. Nor doth the Wind make Overture, that it obſerves the Laws of Gra-
vity ; for thenthe latter end of the Blaſt would be moſt vehement, as falli-g trom
the greateſt height, whilſt its proaroms , the antegredient part of the Exhalation
would give notice of the vehemency to be expected by its proportional degree of
force z and men, whoſe intereſt ir is ro obſerve, would be able ro pronounce the
minute of its Approach. Bur we find it not ſo: a Fret of Wind 1s otten quick and
ſudden, and gives no notice of any ſuch Fear. Truly neither is the Hurry ot the
Wind accountable by Gravity or Denlity, the morion whereof is ſoarbitcary , (o
voluntary , ſo indefinite, Here , there , every where, right torward, round,
upward, with ſuch ſtops and pauſes, and interruptions of the Spirir, ſtarting again
of a ſudden into freth tumults and riot, unleſs we can find ſuch infinite variety of
Rarefiers and Condenfers, and that as the hypotheſes defines it, from the Sun alone.
What if ſometimes Wind, however it may gravitate,deſcendeth not, bur aſcends rather
from the Horizon toward the Meridian ? and of this even the Boyes Paper-Kite is
ſome evidence, which feels great impulſes of wind npward when in the height, while
the Attendants below being becalmed, almoſt wonder at-the difference,

$ 39. Wind therefore is cauſed by Impulſe, and the Impulſe of an Exhalation
_ diſtinguiſhed from the Air, as the common Opinion rightly ſers it, the Contents of
the Air being diſtinguith'd from the Continent : and 'tis a noble Argument
of Fromond's, that is drawn from the Afﬀinity wich the vents proce/ioſs, thoſe impe-
tuous All-waſting Whirlwinds and Hurracans, which have the invincible force of
Lightning in them ; and the s»pet«s is the ſame, inſtantaneous, not bearing down
things before it (as Flouds do Bridges) by* perpetual preſſure, bur all ar once,
Now Lightning is an Exhalation to be diſtinguil'd from the Air , even as Lighr,
or Heat, or Odour, or Moiſture , nor can the Air be defin'd a Co//uvier, or Miicel-
lany of all, but muſt be defin'd, preſcinding from all Admiſtions that are extraneous
ro1rt. And me thinks our Ear tells us as much, for ſo like a Showre doth this Exha-
lation drive on the leaves of Trees, that we often ſuſpe& it rains, when it blows on-
ly. Wind being no quantity of continued Air, no more than a Showre 1s of conti-
nued Water.

.$ 40. This Exhalation is moſt part Terreſtrial z for not to vrge the Height
of ſuch Mountains as reach beyond all Territory of Wind, by being {o remote from
the Vale, Fremond from Acoſta asks whence Winds are more vehement on or neer
Shore, unleſs becauſe of the plenty of ſuch Earthy Exhalations, and the ſtronger
Reflexions of the Heat Celeſtial, agitating (the dire& Ray being at no hand ex-
cluded) thoſe dry Efffuvia. But ſecondly we argue thus, Wind is a Dryer, even as
Froſt a Cooler, Dryer, a Whitener, to this the Laundreſs will bear witneſs. As ſure
then as Froſt is a Terreſtrial Exhalarjon, ſo ſure is Wind. Hence the more the Wind
blows inthe Night, the leſs is the Dew,

$ 41. And Wind is generated in the Macrocoſm, as in the Microcoſm , what
cauſeth Wind in the Stomach or Inteſt ines, but a crude Spirit raiſed from the reſo-
lution of the Aliment, driven up and:down by the vital Heat ! what Meats are ge-


nerative of Wind, but ſuch in which a Crude Spirit is predominant ? 1 reckon there-
fore


OT uenurrrny


LR Fd es


a "Ex :


: oo ur, My”


Pn pwn


”"
4 TAIL ac


FI nd


Chap. 3. Antipathie, The IV Winds. State of the Air.


fore the Hot Wines, Seeds, Spices, &c. do expel and baniſh Winds our-of our bodies.

$ 42, For why welhould deny with Fromord, to one contrary the Faculty ex-
pullive of the other, | ſee not. I find Fire to ſpit at thz infeftion of Salt or Water.
A drop of water falling into a Cruſe of melted Metal , diſperſes ir about the
Room : and the Apple on the Hearth is a plain and ſafe Experiment, which having
reccived the contrary igneous Spirit, ejets irs Pulp, and oft times with ſuch a wind
as is ſeen to putt away the adjacenc Embers. There can be no trite of Contraries ,
no Antipathy explicated, without ſuch Expulfive faculty, or, which is all one, fwg 4
contrari.

y 43» Hence Winds which accompany the Reverſe of the Sea, blowing from
the Weſt, ſuch as we are taught are found in Latitude 43, if they have no dependance
on the Heavens(on which all other Blaſts are confecfled ro depend) bur on the Stream,
are legitimate no more than the wind of a Cannon-ball, or the Z-pland Gale,or
the Reverſe of the Water is a legitimate Tide.

9 44+ Thetfour Cardinal Winds are thus defined z the Eaſt and Weſt blow
from certain oppolite Points or Arches ot the Equinox, the North and South not
trom their Poles, but from the oppolite points o: the Meridian.

$ 45- The properties of the tour Cardinal Wiads cannot be univerſally ſtated :
yet on this [ide of the World in all habitable Climes, where the Divilion obtaineth,
and whereabouts they were firit denominated, the South and Welt are warm , the
North chills, the Eaſt cools, then the South or Weſt warmer than the North , and
this on the Heavens part,

$ 46. Wind theretore, as all its Fellow- Meteors, dependeth on the Heavens,
and that in the manner aforeſaid, !3y the Heavens we mean the Giorious Contents,
not one or tWo bur all the Celeſtial Bodies, yea all the Hoſt ot the Fixed Stars that
thine in the Firmament,

$ 47. Forthe Heavens, as diſtinguiſhed from the Stars, have no Operation oc
cu!t or manifeſt,


CHAP. III.


The State of the Air not uſually uniform, The Difformity is adjnirable,
The C auſe,


d. 1. * HE State of the Air is not uniform in all places, no not of the ſame
Kingdom, Province, County ; but is ſtrangely different as to all man-
ner of Weather. Xepler gives notable Inſtances in the uſeful Book of his Epheme-
rides, Anno Chriſti 1621, &c, they of Germany ſeeming moſt pleaſed with theſe
Contemplations.
$ 2. Storm prodigious with Rain at Vienna, at Raricbon onely is a Fog, Fear-
ſul Tempeſt in Bavaria in Suevia, /wne 4,5. and Hail on the other ide of the
Rhine, where Spiers is (ituate, 7wne 5, but ar the Rhine it ſelf a perfe&t Drought
the whole three dayes. This was Am 1621. Inlike manner, Ann 1629, in
May, dieb. 1; and 14+ the Corn was loſt by Flood in Sileſia, contrary in Poland
and Liefland all perilhed by Drought. More of this nature may be had from Kepler
aboveſaid, from Fromond's Eteſian Table compar'd with Kepler's Ephemerzs, trom
Eichſtad, and others. But what need ? when common Arreſtation of wayfaring
men daily witnefſeth this Difformity. When upon conferring Notes, at time of
year, we had no Snow here ſaith one, no Fog (airh another at our Town, no Rain,no
Thunder ; and asfor Hail, you thall ſeldom hear of ewo, chough lirtle, Diſtances of
place, that will agree in its Admiſſion.
$ 3. Weacknowledg this Variety is admirable,when God Hirtſelf hath pleas'd
to give It as a gemarque of his Power, that He cauſes it torain' on one City, arid not
04 another, that which our Eyes in a beautiful proſpe& are ſometimes witneſs of.
C 2 But


Situation neer Sea, River, &c. conſtderable. Book 1.


OY TOC


But ſober Philoſophy is not confounded at the Contemplation of this wonder, as
the Afrologer Himſelf was, who obſerving once at Tubing fume Heat, and a little
Rain onely, but elſewhere, lower in the Countrey, Tontrua horrida, breaks our
into this ſe}f-killing Conclulion, fruſtra i/tu IMeteororum formationes a poſirn A-
frorum exigas, Kepler. Ephem. Anni 162 5, ad menſ. Jun, Philoſophy is rather ex-
Cited to give ſome account of the Divine Power and Wiſdom, which though invilible
in themſelves, are, and in all Ages of the world have been, diſcoverable by ſuch con-
templation and ſcrutiny. HP
$ 4. Wiſer theretore was the Concluſion of the ſame good man, who upon the
like collation of the various Conſtitution of the Heaven, at Zuſaria firſt obſcrving
only black Clouds, and at Glogaw, ſcarce a days journey from thence, having had
intelligence of terrible Thunder, ſpake like Himſelt, in Wonderment, but not Con+
tulion, Ecce, quid Celum, quid Terra, quid Loca poſſunt! Kepl. ad menſ. Sept.
Ann 162 9. |
$ 5. F6r without all peradventure, this variety of the Airs Conſttutions, whe-
ther permanent or tran(ient, muſt be referr'd to the Heavens above, and their Ditte-
rence, hereafter to be conſider'd, joyn'd with the Situation of the Place, together
with the Parts adjacent, and the manifold Difterences there alſo to be. alledged. By
reaſon of which, Thebes differs from Athens, Rome from Tibur ; Athents tenue Ce-
lum, craſſunm; Theb;s. T hus the Mountains Acroceraunis in E pire, tamous of old tor
frequent Thunders, as the Sierra Leona in Africk, witneſſed to this day by the Por-
ruguez, Mariners, who hear as much at 5o Miles diſtance. Thus in Rome and Cam-
pania Winter-Thunders are heard ſometimes, in other parts of 7taly never, as Pliny
hath noted, I. 50, The inſtance from Pers is notable, though far ferch'd, where
Acoſta tells us, that inthe Plains; ten Leagues bredth from the Sea coaſt, it never
Rains nor Thunders ; upon the Szerra's and Anaes, two ridges of Hills, at 5o
Leagues diſtance; running parallel to each other, it rains ſufficiently, on the firſt
from Seprembey to April, on the latter almoſt continually, But nearer home, the
Cities of Hezde/berg 1n the Palatinate, and the Ancient Triers in Germany, from the
Heavens diſpoſition to Rain, have it ſeems a like Nlabby charaRter , ſo the German
City is by ſome call'd, ſaith D* Heylin, the common Sewer of the Planets , Cloaca
Planetarum.
$ 6. This Diverlity, ſay I, muſt be referr'd ro the Qza/zty and Sire of the Place,
whether it be neer the River, Lake, Sea y whether it be Hz or Dale, Sands, Clay,
Aline, and ſome ſay Forreft, which All contribute to the Individual Conſtitution ot
Hot, Cold, Freſh, Pure, Dry, Groſs, Moiſt, Foggy, by way of Cauſe Material, or
reduced to the Efficient,
$ 7. Firſt, for the Sea , 'is a granted caſe,the 2ſaritim places are more ſubject
to Fog, Rain, and Winds,witneſs the Eaſt part of Z:ncolaſvire by reaſon of the Fens:
and certainly all the prodigious Tempeſts ot this our Iſland, noted by our Anceſtors,
are found to lay their Scene in our Maritim Countreys, as Lancaſter, Somerſet,
Dorſet, Hampton in the Weſt, Lincoln, Zork to the North-eaſt , but eſpecially the
Counties of Eſſex, Kent, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge.
$ 8. Sogloriouſly true is That which God Himſelf raught us long ago by the
mouth of his Holy Prophet, that He gathers the Waters from the Sea, and poureth
them on the face of the Earth.
$ 9. The Sea miniſters Matter not only for Rain and Wind, but for Thunder
alſo, if Nitre and Sulphur be ingredients thereto. As for Hail, we know tha it falls
at its ſeaſon in moſt places ; but note it for certain, that all Prodigious Hailſtones,
whoſe ambit reaches five, (ix, ſeven Inches, is found to have faln on places at no great
diſtance from the Sea : the Cauſe is obvious.
$ 10. Rivers then muſt bear their proportion; as Fogs, ſv Daſhes of Rain
are the ſorer, by how much the nearer to them, The Showre, the Scamen fay, ob-
ſerves the River, and flows along with it as in its own-alveus. The Greater Rivers


make the moiſter Air, as the Air of Awſr54, becauſe of the Danow, Kepler ad Sepr.
; TS Annd


bas. om .
_ Lt hat ed


w*


i h mr "vo OT c_—


oy


Chap. 3- Soil. Hill, Vale. Solar Kay reflex'd.


9


Ann 1627. Upon which account Zodon,l obſerve,hath her ſhare in Chronicle for
Tempeſt, becauſe of her Thames ; and the Southern-lide of the City hath com-
plain'd moſt, as the T ower, Bow- Church, poor $. Pauls (now Tetnpeſt-free 1 wis,)
Weſtminſter, becaule of their vicinity to the River : when(whart [I have ſeen my ſelt)
call Spires of Churches have rock'd to and fro, as if they were at liberry, and ſtrong
Iron Bars have hung the head like a broken Stalk, by meer ſtreſs of weather. |

y 11. Nextthe Nature of the Soi/. Kepler hath admoniſhed us of a certain
place neer Vlm in S#2v14 often ſtruck with T hunder, the Reaſon he rightly gueſles
trom the Slate- Q nary es, and other Afinerals there about, which are diſcerned by
the Mineral-waters there in uſe. ad menſ. Mais Snm 1627. Thoſe about Bath
thould inform us of this matter, which, 1t I miſremember nor, is perform'd in the
1 ranſattions Philoſephical. For wy part I always ſuſpe&ed that Horrible Thun-
derbolt, which came into the Church of Fells, Anno 15 96, to have ow'd ſomewhat
of irs ExtraQtion to the Place. This we ſhall find, that All places more ſubject ro
Lightning, are alſo ſubject ro Earthquakes ; but Earthquakes we know proceed
from Mineral, S#/phur, &c. incenſed, Rome and Campania, which were noted bur
now for #4 snter-thunders, | am ſure are Tracts not exempted from Earthquake.

$ 12. This 1s ſo certain,that in thoſe uncouth fowyes of X43lk and Blond, it be-
comes probable, that the Mines of Chalk and Vermili:n contribute alſo at leaſt to
the diſtinion of their borrowed Tin&ture.

$ 13. Thedifference of the Hz and Yale is as conſpicuous : the Hill contri-
buting more Cold than the Vale, yeilding therefore for the moſt part a later Her-
bage. Inthe Mountains of Bohemsa, the Corn at S. Zames tide was blowing,when
in the Plains of Zuſatia it was ready for Harveft, ſaith our conſtant Kepler. Here
note, that in reſpec of the Heaven, Laſatia lies the more Northward of the two :
therefore the Difference ariſes from the difformity of the parts of the Earth amongſt
themſelves, of Hault or Bate. How cold the Tops of the Alps are is not unknown,
of whom 'tis noted, that the Snow melts firſt at the feor of the Hill, |

$ 14. In obſervation of Weather, the Hill many times puts bounds and limits
to the moiſture of the Vale. Inſtance of This I have had the hap to obſerve, what I
have alſo heard, frora the C hi/tern Hills in the County of Bucks, ſeparating That
from its Neighbour O:xforaſb5re, whoſe Duſt hath been ſcarce laid above, while Ox-

ferd/tire below hath been glutred with Wet.

$ 15, That theſe Conliderations exclude not the Heavens, even from hence is
manifeſt; becauſe this Diverlicy of Habit or Proneneſs thereto is bottom'd on the
difference of the Influence Celeſtial, and its Reflexion. For if the Solar Heat be of
any Concern in this Aﬀair, the Reflex5on and Kefratiion of the Ray, by which the
Heat is multiplied and advanced,are not to bt overlook'd. See the 4ſtronomia Optica
for this matter, if the common Burning-glaſs be not Evidence ſufficient. The Vale
refle&s and refrafts the Beams, being the groſler Air ; the Head of the Mountain
(for the Deſcent is reckoned into the Vale) refleRts leſs, being Drier and Purer. Thus
the Pendle in Lencaſtire, 2 high Hill, which when a Cloud lits neer the Top, always
gives a ſure Watch-word for Wet approaching, as Camaen alſo takes notice, is ac-
counted for , the Hill, not as the Narzves will have it in their falſe Hyporhefs, brea-
king the Cloud, but rather ripening it,

9 16. This diſpolition of the Air to Wet,e*c, is yet more evident,where there
is 2 concurrence of the Premiſes : as where a Place happens to be ſituate neer a Hill
rogether with a River. The Acrocerauns are neer the Sea, the Sierra Leona not far
from the Ocean. Heidelberg and Triers have Riversand Hills for their Neighbours,
the farmer beitig hemm'd in round, as they ſay, with Hils, only on one ſide open.

$ 17. This Obſervation begers another concerning the #3nds; and'its Diffor-
mity in reſpe& of the Point of the Compaſs from whence it blows. In ſeveral parts
of the world, from Sea- Journals I have obſerved the contrary Points poſſeſs'd. For in
the year 1662, Apr. 9,in England the Wind was found Southweſt, and at Afaders
North-Eaſt, In the year 1 668, Afay 1, the Wind at London Northerly, under the
Equator then was noted a Southern Blaſt. D $ 18,


10


Difformity of Winds. Conſtit : General, Book 1.


$ 18. Yea, and in reſpe& of the Temperature there is a contcſs'd Dittormiry
in the ſame ſpecies. The Eaſt-wind Dry with us, but in moſt parts of 7ra/y Moiſt ;
Cardan in Prol. lib. 2. yea, at Virginia, faith Captain Smith.

$ 19. The Welſt-wind moitt, not fo in 12a/y.

$ 230. .. The North- wind in nioſt places dry, and fair ; therefore cali'd Bcreas
and Argeſtes : in the Netherlanas Cloudy and Moiſt , as Fromond faith he hath
found by iong Experience,

$ 21. 'The Sonth warm and moiſt in moſt places, in Holand notwichtanding
it oftner brings Froſt than the Norrh-weſt faith the Learned Iſaac F of7ue.

F-22. - The Ground is the fame, v3z. the Difference of Places from which they
breath, The South-wind is ſerene in Afric ſanth P/inyz good cauſe why, It blows
from the Deſert and the Sands : and the (dry) North is there Rainy , becaule it
blows from the Seas : all Winds,as the aboveſaid Author de Idoru AMariem, c.hath
taught us, which blow from the dea are warmer, and from the Land are cooler.

y 23, Here aconcurrence of Circumftances makes work alſo: the Circiza,
the North-weſt Wind, ſo pernicious to the Gaſcorgners, as elfewhere the Huracan,
ows its Extremity, not to the Mountains only, as Scaligey will have it, but to the
veas alſo,which juft on the North-weſt fide fpred into a vatt Bay as I may call it, be-
tween F#ance and Spain, the (itnation of Gaſcosgn,

$ 24. Bur what ? becauſe of theſe proper peculiar Diſpoſitions, is there no
Footing for Science ? becauſe oft-times we may diſcover a Showre ſhadowing a
Village afar off, when the reſt of the Hemiſphere is bright and ſerene, are all Pre-
rences to a Preſcience, grounded on Nature, delnſory and impoſſible? When Rain
falls in 6ne place, is there no nex»s in nature which may warrant us to pronounce it
falls alſo elſewhere ? And again, is not the Heaven as often ho//y clouded, the Air
cloſe, groſs, heavy; ſetled for Wet, extending it ſelf through the whole Hunazed,
Riding, Cinnty or Comnries ? yes verily, a little Intelligence will acquaint us, that
ſeldom any Rain conſiderable happens in one determinate place, but , the like hap-
pens elſewhere, Eaſtward or Weſtward, to the North or'the Sonth , with difference
only in the time or meaſure , (Niceties hereafter to be enquired.)

$ 25. Thelike may be ſaid for Wind, Froſty Air, Remiſſion of Cold, Heat,
Drought, Serenity, ſeldom confin'd to one place, and therefore may be called Gene-
ral Conſtitutions.

$ 26. The more rare Conſtitutions General, are Thoſe who produce Light-
ning,” Thunder, Hail, Fog, in as much as Theſe more vilibly are forged, as I may
call it, in the Mold of the Place : yet we find ſeveral Dayes, wherein Lightning and
Thunder have not been confined to one Quarter ; ſeveral dayes wherein Fog,though
it chooſes to neſtle in a by-Vale, yet ſometimes it ſpreads it felt like Egypt's Dark-
neſs, and hovers over a whole Province.

$ 27. However it may be, it is not to be paſſed by, that in caſe of faslare, if a
Fog for Inſtance happens not in ſeveral Quarters, there is ſomething cognare to it, a
linle Froft perhaps, of thin Overcaſt. Where Thunder is not heard , as in other
places, there may be found ſoultry Air, angry Clouds, ſometimes fiery Traje&ions,
and Paſſant Metcots at Even, Yea Hail it ſelf, which moſt rarely hits, in ſeveral
places,points to cold Rain or Snow, which are but one Remove,with chi] Evenings,
obſervable elſewhere,

$-28: To General Conſtitutions,even in a poſitive ſenſe ſo called,the World can
be no ſtranger; which ſo ofren hath felt »aging Tempeſts; whoſe Fury hath by
Land rooted np Trees, demoliſhed Edifices , which at the ſame time have cauſed
faral Shipwrecks, and vaſt Inondations, Arguments that will extort Confeſſion from
us, Thar ſuch General Conſtitutions are no more to be denied than prevented. Ofr
I ſay hath the World with impatience felt droughry Summers , tharp pinching
Winrers,wet unſeaſonable Suramers,& Harveſts,ſuch as brought a fear at leaſt of Pe-
nurie. Scurcity or Plenty doth evince a Generaliry of the Airs Conſtitution, as to a
Kingdora or Country : wgon Which account we juſtly are,vpon Tempeſtuous Winds,

con-


DO ES


Chap. 4- Stateof the Air depends not. on the Wind, 11


concern'd for all that navigate on the Seas that.are neer us , whether Brizih or
Irih.

$ 29. The State of the Air doth not, as moſt think, depend. on the /3fting of
the Winds, but contrary, the Wind alters or ſhifts, according to-.the Alteration of
the Air : Hence 1 nnd that even in thoſe places,where the Brsze is.conſtant and per-
petual, yet when the Weather alters, the Wind ſhifts; there is.2 priority of Nacure
inthe Conſtitution it ſelf, in reſpe& to the Winds: that atrend- it. - |

$. 30. When it is ſaid therefore that the: Sovth-wind brings Razn, or the North-
wind driveth it away, underitand-ic of the Conſtitution as the-Cagſe of both , reck-
oning the Wind only to, be a S;gn only, orattendant on the Effet, The North-
wind drives aWay Rain, z. e. Rain is driven away, While the North-wind blows,
and that only fox ſych a Country, Paleſtine, &6,. but not all places univerſally, as
hath been noted already, |

$ 31. The precedent Conſtitution.of the Air helpeth nothing: to the Continua»
tion of the ſame, unleſs the Heavens conſpire , for the Air being ot a thin Body,
as it is of an. ealle receptivity forall ſorts of lmpreſſions, lo itealily parts with them,
unle {s continued or renewed by a Cauſe permanent, or ſuppletory. |

$ 32, - In thedefeR of which, we perceive oft-times to admiration, the Conſti-
tution vary fxom one Exceſs to the other, the Wind blopeth where it liſteth.


CHAP. I'V


Acertain Preſcience attainable, Prognoſticks vulgar, The Husbandman's
Prognoſticks.


qr, A*® it is the-Goodneſs of God to vouchlafe us Natural Prognoſfticks of Con-
ſtiturions, ordinary, and violent ; ſo hath he pleaſed nor ro deny a more
Noble Artificial Progneſtich of the ſame.
$ 2, Forthough no finite Knowledge can be comprehenſive of an Effet, great,
or ſmall, in every minute 1:tr3gxe of Nature, or Providence ; yet fo certainly hath
God ſuſpended the Conſtitutions of the Air upon the Heavens, that we muſt aflert,
there is more than a ConjeQural tore-knowledge of the changes of the Air by Day,
or Night, attainable upon Contemplation of Cauſes Celeſtial, and that without F'a-
wity and Superſtition, or the leaſt ſhadow of either , rather attended with a pleropho-
ry of cogent Demonſtration. |
$ 3. This Kowledge may be exerciſed in fore-pronouncing the viciſlitudes of
the Conſtitution , yea and of the Winds alſo, I had almoſt ſaid zo an Hour.
$ 4- The ſame Knowledge may reach to the Perception of Comets, Earth-
guakes, and Peſtilences, as having all unqueſtionable dependance on the Heavenly
Bodics, though theſe three laſt deſerve Treatifes by themſelves.
$ 5. Prognoſtichs of Huchandmen, and others, from Birds and Reaſts, betore
mentioned, as they are uſeful and delightful, ſo they do not ſuperſede our Inquilition,
ſeeing they pronounce from Arguments extrinſecal, Eftets or Signs, and not from
Caules,
$ 6. Progneſticks from Apparences in the Air,from the Halo, Iris, colaxrs of the
Sun-rifing, &c. Clouds, and their differences, prognaſticks ſrom the Moon at three
_ old from fiery Trajectians, as they are not to be negleRed, becauſe of ſome ac-
cidental Connexion , fo they ought not to be truſted upon their lingle report : yet
ſome are more ſpecial, as fiery Traje&ions, when frequent Hgouot 7wy aviger 5 xa -
nol, ſluoting of the Stars, Ptol, II .1 4. do uſually ſpeak ſome Tempeſt at hand ; or if
not, excels of Heat,
$ 7. The Comet alſo (ignifieth infallibly ſome Exceſs , and that laſting ; bur
whether that prove as to Wind, or Drought, or Wer, they do ngt determine , that
Detexmination belongeth to no one Apparence. th
IORY "—— $8, Nay


I'2


The Ground of Prognoſis genuine. Book 1,


$ 8. Nay Comets many times have nothing to do with Prognoſticks, being a
ſign of Wet, or Drought, or Wind, and that a conſequent ſign, teaching us to look
backward only on the antecedent paſt Exceſs,

$ 9. Vulgar Progneſticks, and thoſe Other of a genuine Aſtrology, 5.e. Art,and
Experience; ſtand not on even Ground ; for they reach only Conſtitutions imme-
diately ſubſequent; pronounce for to morrow, or next day : the Other pronounces
at diſtance, at a large proſpeR, and that, if need be, concerning a whole Seaſon. The
moſt ſagacious Birds can give no certain aim at a whole Winters Conſtitution,come
they, or go they ſooner or later. They come upon a natural Preſumption of the
Regularity of the Seaſon, in which the Poor things are ſometimes deceived , as Pliny

uotes the year, where an a Ws 1/9 deſtroy'd many : but the Theory of arc
oretells both the irregular Þ:terruptions of a Seaſon, with the Reftirutions, and that
many Cycles of Years before the Arrival.

$ 20. Progfhoſit Aſtrological that is genuine, floteth not on uncertain Principles,
but knoWeth whereupon it ought to fix.

$ 11. Tempeſtatam, reriimque quaſdam [tata eſſe cauſas manifeſtum eſt. Plin,
TI. 39. This is the Principle on which it fixeth : for certainly the Annual Revoly-
£300, Or recurrence of the ſame Conſtitution, or Inclination thereto, doth uncontro]-
Jably _ ſome Fzxed Cauſe, which maketh the ſame Revolution to meet with
the Effect.

$ 12. Wherefore toall Noble Prognoſtick, Experience muſt be premiſed, Ob-
ſervation being laid up ja lore for ſome years before hand, of the daily, and ſome-
times hourly Alterations,


CHAP. IV.


Some Determinate Dayes, which have a peculiar Charatter and Diſpoſition
'produc'd from the CAntient Kalender, Some Critical Dayes. The Obſer-
vation upon $, Swithin no Superſtition,


$I. HE Ancient Diary of the Egyptians, Chaldees, yea the Ancient Philoſo-
T phers and Mathematicians of the Greeks and Latines, Democritus, Me-


' ron, Euttemon, E uaoxus, Calippus, Conon, Hipparchus, Ceſar, Colmmel, Pliny, and


Prolemy for the Africanes, do incourage us{in our Principle. For as we ſee ſome
Months Regularly, and therefore Naturally incline to Cold, Warm, Dry, Moiſt,
in like manner ſome Dayes of the Month, even of the ſame Month, have their pro
individual Inclination to Cold, Drought, Moiſture, Heat ; of which the Kalendars
inform u5 , not yet out of Date to our purpoſe.

$ 2. Wewill conſider the Exceſſes of Weather throughly noted therein : e. g,
Much Rain Dec. XV17. Much Wind an. X X17. Great Heat Aug. XV. Horrid
Tempeſt from the South OF. x/t. From the North Dec. X ], «C4 ©- mauve, drip ©-
mays, xo wiza,&c, windy Weather, ſtormy Conſtitution : 54ns arr, ae;-
$2015 ,xerara(u xupterh, AigO-dxgaria, ©c, None of which could paſs into ob-
ſervation upon a ſingle Accident. | :

$ 3. Butleaft a ſingle Accident ſhould be pleaded, as unreaſonable as it is, the
frequency of the Conſtitution,with irs Contrary,is bappily exprefled : as in Febr. X.
Eviore Zigven, Welt-wind ſomerimes, but otherwiſe 7an. 1X. for the moſt part South=
winds, and Dec. I. for the moſt parc Turbulent. See Ptolem. opuſc. de ſtel. ſign. In
the Vranologion of Petavins, pag. 71. where you alſo meet with Geminae his Diary
for the whole year, accarding to the Degrees of the Zodzac , That Geminus, we care
not who knows it, who diſputes againſt our Pretenſions, even in Him notwithſtan-
ding occur theſe Memorands. *FuJYa is mi mand, ad If 19 , fair for the moſt pare,
* Aregav1 7 #pchercs as a gonad Cold Winds, and ruffling for the mo part, ad m +

0


Y TY a —


* Er I


ws... c »


Chap. 4- Conſtitutions fix'd to certain Dayes.


— AS. Cn A To.”


oo


SO at V 2 3, [l9azzj zeae, Hail often; and Þ 16 it xſes io thunder , emonuair-ey
g1Xi4 Cgevriy 3 a5 M 4 allo, it »ſes to blow, x17 $125, Agreeable to this is That
in Columel, X Cal. Sept. T empeſtas plerumque,oritur & pluvia; and all thele Kalen-
dar-men, whenever they ſpeak abſolutely without terms oi Diminurtion, there thry
are to be underſtood as to the moſt part, otherwiſe the Obſervation were ridicu-
lous.

$ 4. Shall we take Obſervation nearer Home, and that from an Enemy, within
leſs than 200 years ? Afrandula himſelt hath given us ſome account of Dayes con-
fled Hazardous at Sea, contr. Aſtrol I1[c.13.p.48 2. ſuch as Feb. VI. X11. XV.
XVII. XIX. XX. Mart. 1. FIL. XV. XVII XIX. XX. April 11. (for fo it thould
be read) YV. VI. XIT. XX.

$ 5. Yeanot Jtatians, or Seamen only, but all Nations and FunRions have fo
much [ntereſt in feaſonable Weather, that they take the ſame notice of Dayes extra-
ordinary : Dies quidam apud Belgas (our Neighbours of Brabant) pluviarum atrs,
C infames ſunt, laith Fromond, Meteor, lib. 5, and he names us one, viz. 1F ot
7uly, which he faith they call S* Adartin the Dripper, quem S. Martini bulliertss, ant
pluvii appefiant : This Day I find nor inevery Kalendar, but in our Eng/4s only, and
not without the Inciination ſpecified, Fromond would have pleaſured us theretore,
it he had named the Reſt,

$ 6. -Bur the old Verſes help us, Zune VII, S. Aedard's day,

Humida Medardi pluvias, lax uſque minatur ;
And ſuch dayes amongſt us are St. Zohn Baptiſt, June XXIV. St. Peter's Eve,
XXVIIL, Afary AMagaal. Fuly X XIL who is theretore ſaid, in the homely Coun-
try Proverb, to waſh S. James's Shift, while dripping S. James himſe!f (faith the
ſame Diale& ) Chriſtens the Fruir. Add, ſuch are St. Bartholmew, Auguſt X XIV.
St. Simon and Jade , Ott. X XVII, with the day following, X.X LY. the Powdcet-
Treaſon , Novemb. V. &c.

$ 7. All which Dayes being Feſtival, or notable, for the Annex of ſome Mart,
Fair, or other Solemnit;, could not chuſe but come under notice, with their Cha-
racter,

$ 8. Nor haveour Anceſtors given us days obnoxions to Moiſture only ; we
find other Conſtitutions alſo noted, St. Mark's day, April X XV; with his Neigh-
bour St. Walburg s, April XXF1I; and St. Philip, and James, are marked with an
Obelisk for dangerous times of nipping Winds, and Blaſting,

Nunc caret aura fide, nunc eſt ebnoxia vents ,
ſaith one Verſe : and again,

$1 friger, ſegetes (ubeunt plerumgue periclum.
St, Margaret, 7uly the X X, noted for Thunder,
Reboat mugitibus Ether,
St, Matthias, for uncertain Air, in this remarkable Diſtich,

Matthze, glaciem frangit, ſg invenerit illam,

Nt: frangat glaciem, tum mihi crede facit.

As the Saryr chough ic range, that a man ſhould with the ſame breath blow hot,
and coid ; fo the charaQter ot this Day ſeems as ſtrange.

y g+ Yeathereturns of Conſtitutions are not always conhn'd to ſingle dayes,
bur to ſeries of Dayes ; whence it comes to paſs, that ſome peculiar Dayes, in this
affair paſs into Critical, enabling ro pronounce ſomewhat concerning the future
Harveſt, Vintage, or Winter : for what have we to do with the frivolous Obſervati-
on of the X //dayes in C hriſtmaſs, as if they were a compendious repreſentation of
the Months in the Year, or with the Prognoſticks on St, Paul's day ? ſure no one
Day can give cr4ſis for a whole Year ; but for a month, or a week, a ſhorter term
ir may, Four dayes then there are, whoſe ſerenity pives fair hopes of a Vintage :
Vineent, Apr V. Urban, May X XV. Aſſumption, Aug.XV. and what Origams inter-
poles, St. Barth:lmew :ug. X XIV. For Winter, Purification, Feb. 17. and Cathed.
Petri, Feb X X 1[are allo Critical, If it be fair on the former of theſe, A{ajor erit gls-

E cres


i: Critical days. The Sun decl. the Glory of God. Book 1.


cies poſt feſtum,—_ is every bodies month : if in the latter it freezerh , the
ſame conſtitution holds a Fortnight. Again, Rain on Mid-fummer day ſpeaks
fears of a wet Harveſt ; if on fly 11, Viſit. B, V5rg. wer muſt be expeRted for
a Month, ſaith Origan, though the old Verſe ſpeaks more camelous :
Si plnit, haud poteris calum ſpettare ſerenum,
Tranſivere aliquot ni prius ante Dies.
If on St. Swirhay's day,the cry of England is, it rains 40 dayes after , if on St. Mar-
tin'sday in Novemb. XI, a wet winter is portendesd, faith the Verſe ;, vid. Alfted. ;-
Uranom, p. 490, yea there is one crztical Day recorded ine-£t:45 the Phylician's
time, and that muſt be many hnndred years ago , concerning the then fir? day
of Decemb, on which if it rained for the moſt part (s &m" nov; ) it held on for
37 dayes, Petav.Uranolog. p. 421+
$ 10. Somethat ſhoot without aim, may abandon theſe Obſerves for ſuperſ#-
23944, a5 that of St. Swithuns, in Mr. Parkinſon's judgment is ; but where there is Ex-
perience, and 51ocent Reaſon, there is no ground for ſuperſtitious conceits.
$ 11, Forthe Experience we have ſaid, the moſt of theſe dayes were Feſtival

and fo obſervable for the annex of ſome Solemnity, and thence came 'in the pablick
Experienee, for the reaſon we ſhall give it m due place: in the mean while aſſerting
the truth of St. Swithun's criſis for ſome dayes after, more, or leſs, (which the Vul-
gar made a ſhift to call foxrty) to hold good *s em wav, as the Greek, Kalendars


have it, and T hat's enough, ;
CHAP. V. |
The Sun, the great Light, juſtly admired, Notwithſtanding alone He is not ;
the abſolute cauſe of Heat, no not of the Seaſons of the Year, or the Con- '
fiitution of the Day. Chance excluded. An Objettion ſolved, s
$1. PB is enough for Demonſtration of the Fixed Returns of the Weather, l
and thoſe Returns father'd on the Heavens, by reaſon and conſent univer- :


ſal. Now in the Heavens what but the SUN can produce theſe Effe&ts in their
reſpeCtive Periods ? the Sun being fo regular a Mover , that ſome have ſcrupled to
call him a Planet.
$ 2. And whogoesto debat the Sn of his due ? let not us that contemplate
the Heavens be guilty of it. Let Theologie it ſelf reach us, rhat the Sun is a great
Afaiſter, the Light and Life of the World ; Withont it no difference of Clime, or
Seaſon; no Spring, no Summer, no Auturan , All Time would be Winter, Horrid
Winter ; the Sea a Mountain of ce, the Land a Flint, and Darkneſs would uſurp
his old Dominion over both, But fare God hath, amongſt thouſand of other Stars,
made the Sun appear, and commanded him to tan an eternal Race in his great Olym-
piques. | This Commiſſion, as if conſcious of the Infinite God, he jollily executes,
and Nothing in the Univerſe is hid from His Heat. At his Riſe the Morning-
Cloud vanithes, the Fog diffolves, and the Dew gently exhales. Toward Mid-day
he brighteth the Air into a chearful Saphir, and guilderh the Borders of the very
Clouds with a coſtly /;mbzs. All the Earth basketh in his Light, while the Clay is
calcws'd by his Heat, When he pleaſeth, he 5mprinteth his Face on the Roſcid Cloud,
and decarcinates the Iris with his Pencil. He draweth the Waters as through an
Alembick, and gageth the Depth with his Beam. The Current of the Seas obſerve
his Tekwpha's, and flock All to the place of his Reſidence. Where he keeperh Court
is the greateſt conflux, the Srream makes haſt ro kiſs his feet. Ke raiſeth Thunder: |
in his vertical {trength , and gives fire to the Priming of his Clouds, He raiſeth a b
gentle Briſe in the c/£ſtival Morn, and fameth the Husbandman in the cool of the
Evening, When he mounteth he bani/eth the Froſt, and confineth it, as by the power
of his Spell, tothe Ends of the Farth. The Flowers of the field oper for his Enter-
4 rainment,


Chap. 5. Yet 1s not the abſolnte Cauſe of Heat.


tainment, and the Birds of the Air obſerve his Night-watches ; they give a ſignal,
as from their Watch rewer, and chaunt their Revei/le ro the Sons of the Night, All
the Clients of the Skie flock after him, and retreat diſhononrably at his recicement.
The /ife of Animals ſubſiſts by his Exergy, of our very Immortal Spirits he is the
Union,
$ 3. Notwithſtanding This, (and a lefs Hymm 1 could not make on Him, whoſe
Luſtre dazles us) | fay, that the San alone, this Glorious Creature , cannot be the
Cauſe, the entire Cauſe of the Changes of the Air, and its Viciſſitudes.

$ 4. Becauſe the Sun, conſtder'd alone, All things rightly weighed, requires
thoſe of his Fellow-Celeſtials to conſtitute even the Seaſons of the Year, The Seaſons
differ one from the other in lengrh of Day, or proportion of Light, and the propor.
tion of the Warmth , the Sun alone is the Anthor of the Firl, not of the Latter,
He is confeſs'd a Light All-ſufficient, but that it muſt therefore be a Heat All-ſufh-
cient, is no warrant. A Taper lights the Room, which will not warm it : tor that
the Sun carries the Name of Warmth , Thar argnes that he is indeed the Principal,
moſt Eminent, not the ſole Diſpenſer : So the Genera] carries the Glory of the
Battel, who is far from being the Sole, though he be the Principal Souldier. Accor-
ding tothe tenor of which words mult our piece of a Hymn, on His , or rather his
Creator's praiſe be expounded.

$ 5. Thetruth of this will beclear, when we have conſidered that the Sun's ap-
proach and Exaltation encourageth the warmth of the Spring , and keeps up the
height of Hear in Summer, being the Eminent Caufe of Both. Bur yet neither Dayes
nor Months do always increaſe in, or ſtand, or remit their warmth in proportion to
the Solar acceſs or receſs from the Solſtice. This hath been urged by others, and
may be inſtanced fourty wayes. lt is notorious, that the &ſtival heat even increaſeth
as the Sun declines ; for the Month of 7xly, and part of Auguſt are ufually more
ſoultry than the Solſtitia! month of Zane.

$ 6. Here it is anſwer'd with one accord , that the Heats of 7uly receives their
intenſer degree from the meaſare of the pre-exiſtent warmth ; bur this we have pre-
cluded before, and add, that the Heats ot 7uly have been found as intenſe, when the
precedent ſune hath been contrary affeRted ; every man's memory being able to
prompt an Inſtance of an April, May, or {une beyond expeation co/d, upon which
the common comfort hath been from hopes , that 7u/y and Auguſt would make
amends. Belides, that this holds not in 7wly alone ; the end of Afarch may have
more warmth than April, and April than May ; November warmer than Oftober -
as again, fanaary colder than December, March than February : we may hereafter
name ſome Times when it proves generally fo, therefore the Sun is not the ſole Ad-
miniſtrator of Celeſtia] warmth.

$ 7. Ir may be ſaid again (as it is by ſome great men) in things of this Nature,
that they are Caſual, Bur the word | Chance] in Cauſes Natural, and determinate,
ſpeaks our Ignorance, and it may be ſomething of Injury to the Creator. Bur 2. a
hot ſuly is never caſual, being intended ſo by God's ordinary Providence, for Har-
veſt ſake, That great Providence which workes by the Great Machine of Second
Cauſes. 3. Nothing that is Progmoſticable can be Caſnal.

y 8. Again, if the Sun alone were the cauſe, every fourth year would bring a-
bout the ſame Revolution of Winds and Weather, the Sun being then exaRtly reſto-
red to the ſame place by the Intercalary day interpoſed : but no ſuch Revolution
appears. | find Exdoxus of old gave out indeed to this purpoſe , Plin. 71. 47. but
no Experience confirm'd it from hz time to Pliny's age ; he was only fond of his
own Surmiſe, If it had been fo, we had been weather-wiſe by this time , without
out conſulting Star, or Kalendar.

$ 9g. Conlidering what is behind, it will not be very needful to ſay more here :
only to take away all Scruple, I would anſwer a poſſible ObjeRion,

The Reruras of the Weather being fixed, and determined, 'tis reaſonable as you
ſay, that the Fixed 5aufe be afſigned the Anthor of That determination : but the

2 Sun


oh


The manifold Influences of the Moon. Book 1.


Sun , and nothing elſe, is the Determinate Cauſe, (for what elſe confmes the Return
ro the ſame Day ? ) therefore it mult be the Entire and Adzquate Cauſe.

The Anſwer is ready : if all the Stars inthe Firmament ſhould conſpire with the
Sun into one Tempeſt, they could chooſe no time, but what the Sun, the Lord of
Time, ſhould determine. It followeth not therefore, that it the Sun be the Deter-
minative Cauſe he is the Adzquare, the Sun bearing two places, Phyſical, and C hro-
xological; in the firſt he helps to produce, in the ſecond he circumſtantiates the
Production. Burt if the Identity of the Day's conſtitution be preſs'd, we anſwer,
that the Sun determineth That, not abſo/utely,and entirely, for then the Return would
be #»fal/ible, but on ſuppoſition of the other Cauſes —_— theſe Concauſes met do
determine the Effe&, as it were Aaterially, the San cloling with them ſpeciſies the
time, Thus Diſpurers ſay the laſt Unity is the form of Number, a principal Caule,
but not an Adequate.


CHAP. VI.


The Lunar Influence, and its Hiſtory, Hippocrates doftrine of the Tides.
Diſſent from the Learned Voſlius. Siamatign. Ariſtotle agrees with


Hippocrates.


$ 1, Roceed we then, and let us ſay, that the Changes of the Air cannot be
referr'd to the S,, taking in the Aon along with it, though (to give
the oor her due alſo) ſhe is of great Efficacy, as Prolemy tells us in.that excellent
11* Chapter of his firſt Book : All things, ſaith he, animate, and inanimare, receive
her impreſſion ; the Rivers ſwell or abate according to Her light, the Tides and
Ebbes of the Ocean (ooaYdons ipuigars) way'd by his Riling and Setting ; Plants
and Animals are in poor or better caſe as ſhe waxes and wanes. Upon which words
] would we could comment , we endeavour thus. What the proper quality of the
Moon is, we find Ciſputed : Prolemy, and the Ancients define her to be X58, they
mean (or ought to mean) that ſhe is of a remiſs warmth, to ſuch a dtgree, as is no
Enemy, but rather friend to Moiſture, by Reſolving it, Calling it forth, or other-
wiſe Attuating it by her ſpirituous Ray, according as that fluid, and withall /alr Ele-
ment is capable of zmpregnation.
y$ 2. Andto this one principle of Warmth , will all the various EfteRs uſually
aſcribed to the Moon, be juſtly reducible. For on this account the Sea it (elf ebbs
and flows in all Rivers, Creeks, and Shores, making a Full Sea precs/e/y at what time
the Aon comes to ſuch a Point of the Compaſs, falling back every day as many
minutes (about 48 ) as the Afoor comes later to the ſame Point ; /xxxriating in her
Spring-tides about the Full and Change, when the is dire with the Sun, and jlag-
ging all the L2#arters when ſhe is ar an ob/zgue diſtance. On this account it is thar
Fleſh expoſed 10 the Lunar Rayes ſooner putrifies ; thoſe which walk along by
Moon-thine feel a Doſe in their Heads, the Brains of Animals miſter at New and
Full, Bloodleſs Creatures fuller of Spirit ; that the She/-fiſs of the Sea, Crab accor-
ding to its kind, Lobſter, Oyſter, at the ſame time ſhould be beſt and ſweeteſt , (in-
ſtances atteſted not by Heathen only, but Chriſtian Philoſophers, $S. Ambroſe, but
eſpecially S. Baſi/;in their excellent Diſcourſes on the Hexaemeron :) that Decrepit
men carry (as they ſay) a Prognoftich in their bones, by pains and aches, and ſhoo-
ting of the Humourin ſeveral parts; that Epslepſies expe their dreadful Firs at
the time of the Moon, of which annop, yea and Convullions too, if Ariſtotle
miſ-inform us not , Hiſt. Animal. VII. cap. ult. That Criſs of Diſeaſes,
and Dayes Critical, which Aſtrologers ſay they cannet be baffied out of, keep ſo true
with the Moon , for 'tisnot the Waters only obey, and obſerve her, but All other
called by the name of Hamowrs, even the Blond, the Spirits. What, that Salt Am-
moniack increaſes with the increaſe of the Moon ; not ſo much as an Epg is ſet for
Propagation þut at ſuch time obſerved ? All the Myſteries of Generation, Conception,


Formation, Birth, Purgation, Naturally depends (on the San 'tis true) and alſo on
the


oo TI Err rrp wg
o -


® RA 8 * 7; "A OR *


FP bo.


OY o


a ben +


A, ARORR


20 n—_ CAS EA


oo FO IRIS penn" RS;


_—_ p


o—


-ons ſabiiſe PH X XVII 10, NXVL 32.
0 F


Cha p. 6 "s In Generation. Medicine. Husbandry.


17


2. ES. 4
—_— CR TRI IR 4A VET ERIE


the Moon. The Myſtery of Septenary number, which the Great Fizppocrates ſtands
ſo much upon, being the Hebdomadal/ number, muſt be referred, not as Cardan lu-
ſoects, ro the Planetary, but to the Lunar Septenary. Thus Births are vital at v1 t
Months, at V 1 1 i ſeidom. Teeth are all put torth at v1 i years, s e.'(in Heippocra-
tes Calculation) 350 weeks. Births facilitated at the Full and Change, Conceptions
at the Full, Purgations Menſtrual, every Month (in thoſe which are in Health,)
Wsix077 & T5 punvs: bl es Durzpur w nisowwal,n, the Month (lanh he) hath ſuch [pt»
cial pawer over eur Boates, yea not only Conceptions, Abortzons, Births, but Diſea*
ſes, Dea h or Recovery , have a kind of dependance on fuch Revolutions. Hpp. de
Carmbus, C& alibs.

y 3» And this muſt not be look'd upon as ſ#»erffitious Doctrine by any body
that knows what belongs to a Nurſe (attendant on the Sick,) or toa Midwife, eſpe-
cially when our Age hath been —_— that our Blood cirenlates in our Body every
twenty foxr hours, Hence all Nurles of dying Bodies, with great ſollicitude obſerve
the Lunar Charge , and thoſe which die at Sea (in the great and old Obſervation)
commonly give up their laſt breath at rhe rurning of rhe -lood. P/iz II. 41. Hence
Purgations Medicinal, preſcribed to be adminiltred at the Full. Eyes of ſome Cat-
tle (0 attedted, that the Darkneſs (hall increaſe proportionable to the Moon , yea
ſome pretious Stones are Natural Afoon- Dials ; the Selenite, which Pope Clement
the VIII. (if Cardar may be believed) had among his Rarities. What hall | ſpeak
of thoſe Animals, which are voic'd for the like, or a greater Sympathy ? The Luſtre
of Cats Eycs obſerving thoſe proportions, ground enough tor the blinde£gyprians to
worthip the Beatt, or 1t any Creatures there be, whoſe Fibres or Legs increaſe accor-
ding to the Age of the Moon,'tis reported of a certain Afouſe,and Scarabee oc Beetle,

9 4. Howbeir, to ceaſe your ſmile, all che World knows that Husbanary cannot
ſpare her Lunar Obſervations, (ince the Moon governs the Moiſture, and Spirit of
the Earch, Thence all the Rules for Cartel, their Admnſſures, their Caftration, &c.
at ſeveral times of the Moon , for the Ground, enjoining to dig their ſcrobes , for
the P/anting of Trees at the Full Moon , ſoi/ing their Grounds at the Decreaſes, to
avoid Worms, &c. making the beds, the Seed plats, while the Moon is np ; ſow-
ing Seed, and planting Trees, at the Increaſe , covering Roots at the Full ; gathering
and Houling of Corn, &. at the Ware : ' Plin. XIX. 6. Garlick ſet for the abating
of the Smel] at the ſame time, ereading the 'Wine-preſs While the is under the Hors -
208, In felling ot-Trees tor Timber', when the Ancients have told us, that it muſt be
a Winter-work, in regard ot the Sun, That Oaks cut down in Spring time will pre-
ſently rot : they teach withall, that it is of an s»finste concern to add the Moons ob-
ſervation as well as the Suns , Infinitum refert & Lumarts ratio, Plin. XVI. 39. The
Elm, the Pine, the Nut, and all other Timber-Trees muſt follow the ſame Rule,
that if in the felling you joyn both Obſervations together, v4z. the depth of Win-
ter, 5. e. the Winter Solſtice, and the laſt dayes of the Moon (inter/univm,) the ſtuff
will laſt to perpetuity. And again, Breviſſima 0bſervatio eſt, quod vitits carere velis,
inter{wnio legere : and this upon a point of good Huibandry, if we mean to ſell, they
muſt be gather'd-in the Moon's increaſe, oreſcente enim Lava ſaith the Politique


Motive, Pl;z. XVIII. 3c. ſrumenta grandeſcunt, they are wy to fill the -


Buſhel. 1 et all this be muſtred up 1nto That comprehenſive in theſe words,
Omnia que ceduntir, carpunt uy, condurttur, innecentins, decteſcente Luna, quam cre-
ſcente fieri,” Plin. XVII 32.

$ 5. Inzll which we favour not any uncertain ſtories,or oyercurions,ſuch as are
Thoſe of the Luvitrie, which Cardan (it ſeems) would have befieved, bat more ſober
Herbaliſts queſtion , if not reje& them.

''$ 6. The 6ld trick of riddance of Warts; by touching them at a New Moon,
and burying the Peale, P/in XXV, 28. thought ſeeras to have ſomething juftihable
in it, yetweave evverous of no ſuch Inſtances, mach leſs ſuch as the Heathen them-
ſclves cenfore for /#perſtitions,and AMagical,or with the milder fentence of Obſervati-


y 7. Verily


13


Lanes Influence on the Tides. Books.


'$ 7. Verily much of Natural Hiſtory (as it muſt needs depend on the Hea-
vens) relateth to the Moon z much of Agriculture, Medicines, as it depends on the
Sun, io on the Moon. The increaſe of the Moon you ſee anſwers to the Spring-time,
and the Inter[unzzm 10 the depth of Winter, though of a nice Diſtintion the Con-
templation may be, yet there 1s a Lamar-Spring, Summer, Latter ſpring, Winter,
every Month, as the ſame are Solar in the Year : and fo far muſt we iultifie that Ob-
ſervation of Pro/emy in another « hapter, who teacheth as much.

$ 8. All the pitie is, that the Great and Learned Author of the TraQate de no-
tu Mirium, hath (mall kindneſs for this Diſcourſe, who hath one Chapter entituled


' L#u::4 multa perperam aaſcr bi , lis delign is to deny the influence of the Moon on the


Seas motion,\while he 1imputes it wholly co the Surr and the Nature,or laws of Afotion:
in the Sea it ſelf 3 tor the proof of which, he obſerverh trom 5»fintte Experience (tor
Authoriry is Experience teſtified) that the Ocean runs from E aſt to Weſt, under the
Torrid Z one, pericly according to the Sun's diurnal motion , and he adds, that
while the Sun 15 in the Northern or Southern Signs, this Aorion inclines and glaxces
accordingly, Verily the Work hath obliged not only all Navigators, and Mer-
chants, but all Learned men wharſoever : nevertheleſs | may have leave to imagine,
that T his demos flrates a de: endance on the Sun, which home-bred Definitions have
excludec,ind thereiore are to br oorretted; but who underſtanding himſclt can exclude
it ? the Ancients aid not. Pliny, diſcourling of the Tides, puts the Sun in the firſt
place, and Ptotemy acknowledgeth the San as more abſolute in all the produSions
aſcribed whether to the Moon or any other. 'H di Ts nate /vapus ws xanauw7ter,
Ut N Avtw0} owipyi v3 emowgysCw xamn, |. 2.

$ g- Forthe very Nature ot the Moon, which is a Reflexion, ſuppoſes the ſame,
the Moon being but a Sun reflex'd (as they ſay of others alſo,) whoſe Full and the
Change being the obſervable Phaſes, are nothing elſe but eminent Relations to the
5un: A Relation mult inciude bo.h its Terms, the Sun therefore cannot be excluded:
the Author demonſtrates the Sea. would have ſuch motion, ſuppoling there were no
Moon ; but he may be pleaſed to enquire, and he may find that the Moon carr be
ſparea, ſpared | ſay as to that warmth which the Sax ir ſelf imparts ; tor by Her the
Warmth is modified, temper'd, increaſed, remitted according to the variety of her
Phaſes ; by Her this warmth is made. (o k5nd!y, fo ſuitable to the humid Element,
that without it 1t cannot be governed. . Warmth will rarsfie Water this Author hath
excellentiy taught us, and that the Moon hath a-kind of warmth g#:renu Lucid, he
juſtly defines ; ſo there is not much betwixt us, every warmth Celeſtial we ihall ſee
hath /nfiuexce on the Waters,

$ 10. We haveas good Demonſtration that the Ebbs and Flows depend on
the Moon, as that the borrows her Light from the Sun , the diverlity of the Phaſes
according to her acceſs and receſs ſhew the one, the ſuitable Increaſe and Decreaſe of
the Tides according to thoſe very Phaſes ſhew the other. -

$ 11, Acthe Quarters the Tides are loweſt ( Neap tides,) at the Change and
Full they are higher, ( Spring-tides); in the one the Moon is conjoin'd with the
Sun in Diameter-line making no Angle, in the Other making a Q#aarate, the utmoſt


diſtance trom the £anjun&ion and Oppolition.
; 9. 12, The r ſyppoling, 5z.. that the Tides are loweſt - at the Quarters,
endeavours to ſheWhow they come to ſpring againſt the Change, and much truch


Quarters ? if the Moyo have no Cauſality, they might happen at the Full as well as
at the Quarters ; and if thoſe Low-Tides might have run through all phaſes of the
Moon, and a Forinight after had boil'd into Ecing-rides, then 1 (honld have heark-
ned to the Demonſtration, ſo far as to exclude the - Planet ; but when the Low-
ide is confin'dto the, Juadrate, That creates Suſpicion, We that ſay the Moon
communicates a greater (yet ſtill kindly) warmth to the Air at the Change, Full, and
a leſs ax\zhe Quarters, may eafilyſee why God at firſt ordered the Abatement of


the Waters to the One, and the Increaſe to the Other, if it be true that the Sea "EP


Poe


* ” CO nom open ro er Oy =; 5


Chap. 6. The AquinoGtial Tides. Aw:z2;pWi.


and purges every full Moon, as at other ſer Times of the Year , which accrue to the
Sun's account.

$ 13. *Tis an [lluſtrious Inſtance that is drawn from the Exuberance of the
Tides at or neer the e/£quinottial Lunations, taken notice of even by the [nhabicants
en the Thames lide, below the Bridge at leaſt ; yea of an elder Obſervation, as to
the Ocean in 3trabo and Tacitus. *Tis pretended that in our River they are obler-
vedin February, and Oftober, rather than on the preciſe Months of Ach and Sep-
tember This Obje&ion is not confident ; the very Neighbourhood of the Months
February to March and Oftober to September, creates a Suſpicion of ſome Truth
in the Inttance : for That Difference is ealily accounted for, conſidering that Fall


of Wer makes ſome addition, and that This is notorious in February the Cloſe of


Winter, nor unuſual in Ofober the Prologue thereto, Let March or September put
on the wet Maſque of either of theſe Months, and the Effte& will be the ſame. Se-
conaly, who knows not that the Tides (well, not on the preciſe day of the Lunation,
but wo or three dayes alſo betore and atter ? remembring then the mocion of the
Moon((uppoling it hath no Laticude)'tis odds but within two dayes after, aftey | ſay
the Lunation in Feb: #4ry, the Moon will be found in the Equinottial Sign Y* , as in
Ottober two dayes betore, it is found in =. But it Latitude, as reaſon is, may be
obicrved, the Moon may be found lituate on the equator in either Month, by a
Southern Laticude in the One, and a Northern in the other, For 'tis the whole Cir-
cle &quinoial, not the [nterſeion only, that is conliderable in this Atfir : adding
withall chat the Zquinox /hyſica/ly conlidered hath ſome Latitzde,as every Centre
hath, within which bounds the Ettect proves even the ſame. As therefore the Spring-
Tides in general, happening two dayes before and aiter, are juſtly imputed to the
Lunation in general, ſo the aforelaid Equinoctial Exuberancies in February and
Ottober, are with the ſame juſtice aſcrib'd ro the Equinox : for it we calculate right-
ly, the interval berween them is 198, as it ſeems, a whole Afnth, but only two dayes
dift:rence, in as much as the Sun ina whole Months time gets no more ground
than the Moon acquits in Two dayes, where the Moon overtakes her Leader,
y 14. But the Retardation ot the Tide, parallel ro the Moon's coming to the
South about 48 winates later, the only common motion as is acknowledged to the
Plinet and the Element, is ſuch an Argument... For that Two motions from the
Greation to This day ſhould juſt jump rogether to ſo nice a Calculation of time, and
yet the Bodies moved have no dependaiice one on the other, is not ealily digeſted ;
eſpecially when one of the Bodies is fluid, ealily moved, and as eaſily interrupted,
ditturb'd by Inundations, fury of Winds, Droughts, Froſts, Earrh-quakes : Naty-
ral Motion we know, once ds/order d, will run falſe, like the Index of a Watch, ill
ſome good hand replace it. Sometimes the Tides fas/, ſometimes they pay us with
[uzerfetation : who reſtores Nature in this caſe? the Sun keeps its courſe, differing
lictle from it ſelf and its own Elevations a day or rwo after;/-and yet the Water re-
rurfs to its wont, and forgets its diſorder, compoling its ſelt according to irs meaſure
warrantableby the Age ot the Moon. Here will it not ſuffice to ſay the Moon is an
Index, ſeeing it may be ſo, and yet a Cauſe too, as Excellive Heat ot the Body is a
Token of a Feaver, or a Southern Sun an Þdex of Noon, An Index of the Tides ?
ſo may the Tides vice verſa be Indices of the Lunar motion, and Both be equally
cauſes one of the other, it the Moon be a meer [ndex. 5. e. not a Cauſe. Bur the Moon
is a warm Mover, and That Influence reacheth yea penerrateth, the Element : inſo-
much that it the Sun be conſtituted the Afotor of the Seas, the Moon, het Hiſtory
being atrended, can ſcarce without violence be excluded,
$ 15. Thereisa Notion of Zanacy abroad in the world , yea and extant in
the Goſpel :  Zwnraghuduar, S. Matth. 1, whether ir lignifie Epileptich perſons,
as is certain ſay Phyſicians, from the Symproms, Matth. XY. or the Raving Me-
lancholy ds/traed Perſons, a5 the Syriac expoands it 5 ſee the Learned Afartinirg
wn Lexic. ſuch as we meet-S. Afarth. VII. and S. Afarc. V. they are both fad
Inſtances of the Lunar Zowrinion on Humour - in general , and the Humours of our
2 Tem-


Object : from tbe Tides of Bengala. Book 1.


Temperature, Of th: Epileplie 'tis contels'd, of the Other alſo is as true by the
reſtimony of the Syriack And rhough ſome of the Antients, S. Hier. and Origes
are jealous of this Notion, aſcribing all to Diabelical Ferity and Cunning, leſt we
ſhould raiſe an Evil Reporr, and bring Intamy on Goc's good Creature,it we thould
grant the Moon contributed any thing of diſpolitien to the Diſtemper : yer we an-
{\werin a conciliatory way, With the Generality of the Learned, avoiding Both Ex.
tremes thus : To reier all to the Natweal Caule is one Extreme, to impute All to
the Jyferna! Fiend is the Other, [ here is more danger of Injury done to Religion
in the denial of theſe Natural Evidences, than of Intamy to God's Creature in ad-
mitting them. It would be wrong to the Creature to ſay the contrary, ſeeing This
alſo Lunar Warmth js God's Creation, Therefore the Arabich Tranſ)ator owns
the Philoſophy, and conſtrucs Zexxriaticadpe: to be Thoſe who are tormented and
vexed in princ8pics Plemiluniornum : wherher he means Either or Both of the Diſtem-
pers abovelaid, is to be learned from the Arabian Phylicians, See Gul. Aader, the
pious Critick, on the Diſeaſes mentioned in the Goſpels. R

$ 16, The Experience concerning the Shelfi/h, and their fatneſs at the Inter/#-
num, is evaded, by ſaying that the Tide recruits them, the Freſh water that comes
along with ir. But doth not the Moon conduce to the freſhning 4. e. rarifying and
quickning of that Stream ? Doth it not immit a #ew, or call xp the xarive ſpirit trom
ics receſſes to the very ſurface of the Element ? The Lynar warmth hath a double
Office, not only quickning the Aliment, bpt, as the Philoſopher ſaith , comtorting
the Cold bloodle(s Feeder : his words are theſe: The Shel-filh thrive moſt at the
Fall Moon, not becauſe they feed more wg3d ah n13; ixivres, (quite contrary to the An-
ſwer given) but becauſe the Nghts are warmer by reaſon of the Moon. de part. Ani-
mal. IV. 5. For bloodleſs Creatures {(aith he) are ealily chill'd, and rejoice there-
fore in warmth, Now warmth we know mursbeth as well as Victoals, as we ſee in
Sleep, not excluding the Food , but diſtributing it. Certainly the Zavar Hiſtory
gives Inſtances of its Power over thole Bodies whoſe Nwtrition is not {o facile, as
Theirs ſeems to be, who have a whole Sea to guzle in.

$ 17, But at Cambajait ſeems, at Bengala, 7ava llands, and elſewhere, nei-
ther do the Tides appear at the New or Ful, but at the Qzarters; when the Shel-
fth alſo make their Markets. 4n/w.” Some Difhculties there are (and who can cx-
pe otherwiſe that ſtudies the Univerſe ? ) rais'd againſt the Moon's Soveraignty,
which yer are found to vanith, the nature of the place, be it Sea or Shore, once con-
ſider'd, For whatſoever difference here is found, no doubt is on the part of the Ze-
cipient, according to that good Maxim, Laicquid recipitur &c. and that ſolves all
doubts in this caſe, even the various Fluxes of Exuripm it ſelf, For let the Ocean
flow in ſome places ſor hours, and ebb eight, as with us ; in others ſeven, and ebb
five ; as long as it Hows once in 12 hours, and twice a day, we are ſecure. Do theſe
Spring-Tides obſerve the Qyarters of the Moon invariably ? do they keep their
times tor the whole Perjods rwice a day with other Ports ? does the Succeſſion keep
to its Meaſure, I mean, happen 48 Miantes later every day ? The Moon is the cauſe
even of thoſe Quarterly Floods z yea the Change and Full may be the Cauſe with
Us, while the 2u4drate may bealligned for the Cauſe there ; the Quadrate being
leſs powerful than the Conjunction, bur nor utterly infirm, or of no torce, as will
be (cet hereafter, Who knows then but that the 2uadrare, the eſs in an Intem-
perate Lone, may be equivalent to the greater in a Temperate ? we having defin'd,
that 'tis not Heat in every degree, bus only a Kind and a Temper'd Warmth that is
effeftual.” The Conjuntion and Qppolition may be exceſſive in the Torrid Zone,
and (o unkr to raiſe ghe Humid Spirits., on which account we are taught , that the
{malleſt Tides are perceived under the Equator. Be the Myſtery what it will, ma-
ny Defaaitions are abſolntely True, po ry d to their Clime, which univerſally can-
not hold. The Sun riſeth and (etteth in 24 hours, in Greenland not ſo: the South-
wind blows from the Pole, not jn theſe Countreys : the Ab/ſexce of the Sun cauſeth
Winter with us, but Thoſe under the Line have no Winter but when the Sun is ne«-
reſt them. ; $18.1


he 2 os IO.


hs CIS


Chap. 6. Sacred Teſtimony, Lunar Plants.


21


$ 18. I muſt notconceal, that I have ſeen an Ingenious Afanuſcript concerning
this SubjeR, derermin'd by the Hypotheſis of a third motion of the Earth, with great
happineſs ſolving many New Phenomena ; but yet 1, who have not proceeded fo tar
in Mathematicks, as to eſpouſe Any Thing of that Principle, content my felf with
theſe v#/gar Pre ſumptions, and think I have ſome reaſon {oro do, when | ſhall have
ask'd theie few Queſtions, not determinable I fear by ſuch Hypotheſis. 1. Why
even in ca\m and dry weatherthe Tides from the Change to the Vuartile, from the
© uartile to the Fu), yea the Two Tides of the ſame day keep not their proportio-
nal Increaſe or Abatement? 2, Why the Spring-Tide abour the Fu? of the Moon
molt commonly is /e/s than That about the Change ? 3. Why the Moon's Perigee
ſwels the Tide more than the Apogee, in as mnch as what Dr. C hilarey my late wor-
thy Friend hath obſerved, All prodigious Floods have happen'd remarkable at that
time { 4, Why the Moon commonly loſes nothing at her appulſe tro the Equinox,
at what time ot the Month ſgever it happens. 5. Why it gains in her Applications
ro either T ropick, 1: in her utmolt Laritudes, Northern or Southern. 6, Why the
Moon, on the day of the Laſt Quadrate decreaſing, makes as high a Water , {ome-
times higher than at the Firſt in the Increaſe. 7. Why the Lunar AſpeRts, even with
the Reſt of the Planets, do advance the Tides, yea and her Applications alſo to ſome
of the Notable Stars among(t the Fixed.

$ 19. It may not be amiſs here to glance upon Sacred Authority, where there
is maniteſt Teſtimony of che Lunar Energy : Per Diem Sol non percutiet te , neque
Luna per Nottem Pſalm. X X I. That's the Firſt, The other is in Dent. XX XI1L
where 7o/eph's Blcſling is nor compleat, without the pretiozes things of Heaven, the
Dew,&c, yei not without the prerious Fruits brought forth by the Sun, and the pre-
tious Thing s put forth by the Moon. Whatſoever Senle will be given to the Teſtimo-
nies, the Expreſſion 1s botrom'd on nothing but what we plead for,the warmer Rayes
of the Muon For as tothe Firſt Teſtimony, Khewmes, and Indiſpolitions of the
Head theretrom may be raiſed, it is conteſs'd, by the Power of the Moon ; imputed
to the Faiiing of the Dew, but as juſtly aſcribed ro the Moiſture of the Brain, and its
Fermentation by the Nightly Beam. As to the ſecond, rhe Rare and Choice Fruits,
once growing in the ſeveral Walks of Paradiſe, and ſtill according to the time of
Year pur torth in their Seaſons, is as beautiful a Contemplation as SpeCtacle, owing
their Original to the Night as well as Day, to the Sun, as alſo to the Moon, which
even in Vegetation is Solzs vicaria. My Lord Bacon, | remember, affuring me (0
much. that the NVsght contributes as well as the Day ; as in Artificial Preparations,
ſometimes a quicker, ſomerimes a ſlacker Heat is requilite.

$ 20. Gui. dz Val, Phylician ro the moſt Chriſtian King, who gave us a fair
Edition of «Ariſtotle, A® 1654, tells the Univerlity of Pars News of Plants Solar
and Zu-ar ; thele latter he faith are Brisker, Broader, Fairer, Sweeter, and every
way more pleaſant by Night than by Day : ſuch are the Convolvulums cerulenc,a Bell-
Flower, call'd by Artiſts . Flos Nottis, with another or two of the ſame kind, the
Indian Hogli, tota notte ſub amica Lund flores expandit, tantaque pulcritudine mis
cantet, 110 C& tanta odornens (uxvitate ſragrantes, ut incolas omnes rapiat in (us ad-
mirationem, called Arbor Triſtzs,becaule it hangs like dead and wither'd in the Day-
time. Next, Geraniam trifte, ('tis pity they are Indian Plants) which ſmelleth like
Musk, faith Mr. Parksn/on,(for he alſo bears witneſs to the Curiolity )at Night only,
not at all in'the Day-time, as refuling the Sun's Influence, bur delighterh in the y.

$ 21. As populat an Argument as This is , the Inſtances make out ,
that the Dew gently talling- upon the - Flower , advances the Sent , that the
N ghts have cheir Warmth; - that the Moon when it ſhineth (for 'tis not yet
time roaſlert the Influence of a Star at what time 'tis hidden) hath a ſoft che-
rilhing Beam ; and Reaſon tells us, that what is accomplith d ſenſibly in a Few,
may hold, though /e/s ſenſible, in All, For the aperture and. explication of the wil-
ling Flower, betrays a kindly Warmth breathing upon it from the Ambient, (as
we ſee an Anemone, which cloſes at Night, will open again as in the day-time, by the

| G immerſion


22


Sacred Teſtimony. Hippocrates Septenary. Book 1.


immerlion of the Stalk in warm liquor,) in which warmth the Moon, when it (hi-
neth eſpecially, will be concerned. So that 'tis no Paradox for the Moon to con-
duce to Vegetation, Mataration, Cc. the Sun ripencth, the Moon attempereth aud
diſtributech the proper Juice. The One bakerh, the Other as it were ſoherh (that [
may uſe Paſtery Terms) the Fruits of the Seaſon. Antiquity therefore hath aſcri-
bed Fertility ro the Moon,
( anentes ritt creſcentem face Nottilucam
Proſperam frugum, ſaith the Lyrick,
And another in his tiymn faith well,
Tu curſu Dea menſtrn
Adetrens iter annuam,
Ruſtica Agricole bonts
Tetta frugibus imples :
Which may ſerve for a Commentary on our Words of the Text. There
is one Teſtimony more behind, which may take place in the Zxnar Hiſtory,
ſpeaking our the plain Philoſophy of Hippocrates, or Nature rather, concerning the
Acounts of the Moon, as to Animals, and the ſet times of their Geniture. For as
"tis a fine Contemplation to conlider the Times of the Tear, wherein they are ex-
cited ro Propagation, Spring, Autumn, or Winter. (tor lome ſtrangely chooſe Thar
moſt barren Seaſon, ) which Naturaliſts, juſtly enough, principally refer to the
Sun, Ptolem. 1. 2. becauſe 'tis a ſet time of the Year , ſo from this Seaſon of Propa-
gation there is a Fixed term for their Birth , Yeaning , Calving, &c. juſtly aſfcri-
bed ro the Moon , becauſe 'tis a Term of Afouths , as before was obſerv'd.
Hear the Philoſopher : Knowſt thow the Time when the Wild-Goats, (the Rupica-
prx, lbices) of the Rock bring forth ? Canſt thou mark when the Hinds ao calve ?
Canſt thus number the lmthe they fulfil ? Job. XXXIX. 1,2. Aonths to be
fulfill'd and numbred: now from Months you may as well exclude the Moon's
Courſe as Influence z the Heavens meaſure Motion, but the Sun and Moon are not
bare Meaſures , not in Motions which tend to Zzfe and Vegetation ; they are
Moderators as well as Meaſurers, ſeeing Life con(iſts in Warmth and Moiſture, to
which the Moon is no Enemy. Yea the Number of theſe Months are ſome of the
ESHPD , H. Writ ſpeaks of Gey. 7, not only Politick or Eccleſsaſtical Feſtivals,
the Feaſts of the New Moon, &c. but the word is applied alſo to Natural Seaſons,
the ſet times when the Stork in the Prophet, and the Swallow , and the Crane, re-
cede and return again ; the fer times of the Summer.-fruit, the Olive, the Date, ac-
cording to their Months, ſay the Fews ; the Time of Life, in the Hiſtory of Abra-
ham, Gen. X VI. 1 ©. and elſewhere. And All this is Reaſonable with Ariſtotle,
in that great Chapter de Generat. Animal. lib. IV. 9. who was ſhie in the admiſſion
of any thing which he could gainſay ; his words are Copious, *Evaiyu; N— Rea-
ſonably therefore do Philoſophers define the times of all Procreation,Gravidation,and
Life it ſelf ro be meaſured by Natural Periods. By Periods, | mean, the Day,Night,
Month, Year, and what Greater Times are meaſured by them, as the Leſs ; not tory
getting the Revo/#tsons of the Moon, the Full Moon, the Þnterlunia, and the Qnar-
ti'es, Now the Moon is as it were a Leſs Sun, and therefore it conduces to all Ges
nerations, and their Perfettions, and after That, Corruptions : for the Motions of
theſe Planets do comprehend the Beginning and End of all Three. Thus, and more
the Philoſopher. For the Evidence of theſe things being ſuch as cannot be reſiſted,
no marvel it he applaudeth them, who elſewhere giverh his Teſtimony to the ſeem-
ing-myſtical Seprenary Number , as _— before 4 who treating of Fiſhes,
and the Hiſtory of cheir Procreation, he ſaith, that the Fernale teem ſome of them
not above 3o days, ſome leſs , but none of them go any time, but what may be di-
videdinto, and therefore meaſured by the Seprenary Number. Hiſt. Animal. V1.17.
Underſtand it wuh Allowance, and Exception ſometimes, = 74 ris Sans does lar,
and other inpediments, de Generar. IV, 9. . -


CHAP.


VT _aiy TT 4 mg
= %


EIT mens pan gm og


_—_  ——


VOYTEEeg Wer; omg aero,»
th. _


"7 De _—— 9 OR
3+ >, Fn -” - i.


Chap. 7. Snn and Moon not the adequate Cauſe of &Cc.


33


— =


CHAP. VIL


Sun and Moon , nor ſingly nor jointly the ſole Cauſes of the Conſti«
tution of the CAir.


$ 1. g O have we ſeen the Vigor of the Sun, ſo of the Moon, in order to the
Changes ot the Air, But the Changes of Air, however vigorous theſe Pla»
nets are, tor certain cannot be referr'd wholly ro Either or Both : not to the Sun, as
you have heard, nor to the Moon herſelf, tor allowing the Moon to have ſomething
of the Solar nature, we do not find (what was ſaid oft the Sun) that the Days are
always, or molt part, Character'd in their Conſtitution, according to her acceſſes or
receſſes tothe Sum or Tropicks. Secondly, the Myſtery wouid have been kenn'd
through the Obſervation of 2 000 years at leaft, ſeeing the Motions of the Sun and
Moon are conſpicuous ; but No body hath pretended to find any Specialties herein,
excepting three or four days in the month, and thoſe roo of very remote and uncer-
rain lignification : for the Moon is a Reflex50n, and Keflexions are tied to Laws: Ac-
cording to the Angle of 7ncidente, {0 is the Reflexton, and the ſtrength thereot : but
no Conſtitution ot Air is tied and bound to theſe ſeveral Reflexions, the Weather
returns in ſuch a Month, when there is neither the ſame phaſcs, nor an equivalent.

y 2. Nay, Sunand Moon jointly , are not the complete Caules of the Airs
Alceration, upon ſeveral grounds , foritſo , every XIX years Revolution would
bring with it the ſame ſtate of the Year, and we ſhould be able to ſay what would
be the Face of Heaven to morrow, it we had obſeryed 1 g years age, without any
great Conjuring.

$ 3. Secondly, we argue from the Duration : the Same Conſtitution of Air
ſometimes laſts a whole week, a worth, yea predominates the beſt . part of a year,
while the Moon (alaſs ! ) every 24 hours changes her phaſes; in £29 days runs a
twelfth part of the Heaven, in a donth ſhifterh all her Schemes and Poltures in re-
lation to the Sun.

y 4. Onthe contrary we may conlider the fick/eneſs of the Weather. In zwo
hours, yea in half an hours time, the face of Heaven thall be Mazked, Clear, calns,
enrbulent ; but ih half an hours time the Sunand Moon vary not any conliderable
difference. Sometime it hall rain and ſhine by Fits with ſach variety of ſurprize,thac
if the Moon and Sun had run the Zodiaque in that « 2 hours, the variety could not
have been greater.

y$ 5. Nextmay wetake in the violence and extremity of Weather , for Hear,
ſoultry, melting, tainting Air ; for Wind, the oe T ous, bluſtering,
rocking the lotry Towers, and thaking the beſt and loweſt Archiceture. Of the
extremity of the Hear, the Moon, ſappoling the San never ſo much , cannot be the
Cauſe, the Moon being a Retflexion, as was faid, and a lingle Reflexion : but the
Air is heated beyond the power of a {ingle Reflexian, . as if there were ſome Anthe-
liz, one or two inviſible Suns, as ſome have imagined Antiſelene. The vulgar im-
pure all ro the Sun, and on a foultry day ſay, the Sr is very hot + but ſure the Sun
hath ſome Satel/ites, ſome invilible Company, or Guard, that lie behind the Hya-
tinth-Hangings ot the Heavens. In the fury of Tempeſt, the valgar ſpeak more
feelingly, when they (ay it Rains, as if Heaven 3nd Earth would rticet, and blows as
if it would rend up al} before it :- the Sun #nd Mon atone give them lictle ſupicion
of ſuch prodigious ſtrength, they rather believe a Devit raging in x Stotni, than im-
pute w_ horrid Violences to fo fober and civil « Pair xs the Sart and Moon are ac-
counre \ ” " \ b 4 =— w -

' $ 6. Addthe conrariety of the ſtate of the Ait'+ rhe Smy and Moon tity be
aligned ſome Canſe of Wartnth, but who aſſigns 4 Cafe of Cold? the Sun by his
oblique annual Acceſſes and Recefles inthe Z »4ldc; diſpentes Stitrreier - and Winter ;
as by his Dixrnal motion he diſtributes Day and Night, The Night and the Winter

G 2 are


I


-—


Sun and Moon not the ad equate Cauſ 2 of fic, Book 6.


are acknowledged Both cold, by reaſon of the Sun's Abſence or Diſtance, but whence
comes the Day to be Cold ? an cAſt:val day to be chill? Is the Sun the Cauſe ?
the Cauſe of Contrarteties ? and that, while Preſent ? The Sun cannot be the
cauſe of Darkneſs when che Sun is preſent, neicher can it be the cauſe of Cold when
it affords 1ts preſence. When thererefore a chill Hail-ftorm follows Liovhining and
Thunder, | ask which of theſe Two congeles the Hail ? which kindles the Flath ?
Doth the Moon congele the Storm ? It may be Thar's a repid Planer : 15 it the mid-
ale Region, and the Antiptriſtaſic ? then it would always Hail, not Rain, when ic
Thunders, eſpecially tor the tiotteſt days, the Fitteſt for the Arriperiafes : bur
when the /ower Region we find is chill'd alſo, when it Thunders with Hail, and that
at Mid-ſurnmer, who incourages this Cold ? what enlarges its Confines ? "tis too
late to talk of Reliquie Hremis at Xfia-ſummer or in Fuly, nor to tirn us off with
the blind motion of the Matter. For what is Uncertain and Confuſed, is Caſual, and
Caſualty is inconſiſtent with Science, ſo inconfiftent that it is not to be pleaded by
any Lovers of Learning.

$ 7. Laſtly, the contrariery of the Accident to the Time : when e. g. after a Set
of thſe and muady Days, the Air takes its qu : and clears up at H44-night 3 what re-
moves that Curtain ? *Tis ſcarce the nature of any Night to remove Clouds, her
chill Conſtitution doth rather ſezt/e and fix, if not ſeem to gather them : the Moon
hath not ſvch power, for ſuppoling ſhe be up, the Sun ſometime is hard put to it to
take a Miſt from the Earth, much more the Moon. The like we ſay for Winter,
the 4bſence or Depreſſion of the Sun makes cold Weather, but How come Win.
ters tobe warm ? warm ordinarily for a Month or more,when the Daiſie, Anemone,
the Strawberry ſhall blow, and proclaim a favourable Seaſon ? The Moon tor half
the time is in Wanrer-ſigns, as lowand humble as the Sun. Add , when it happens
thus, that the Day and Night are ordinarily alike as to the Conſtitution; yea the
Winter-Nights have commonly moſt todo, being tempeſtuous at leaſt in the latter
end of Oftober and November, nay ſometimes ſoz/try Nights are found in Novers-
ber, as ſometimes T hunger and T—_ at Chriſtmas. Many a Summer pafles , and
it Thunders not ; can a Winter-Nrght be-warmer than many a Summer * can the
Sun in its loweſt Degree and Abſence withall, be more Potent, than in Preſcnce and
Verticity ? 'Tis more'poſlible for the Sun to raiſe Thunder in the Frozen Zones, it
appearing above the Horizon, than ro play ſuch Pranks in his Winter NVaazr. As tor
the Moon, how can ſhe by Night-or Day operate when he is under the Horizon ?
a Tempeſtuous Night continues and takes no notice of her $Setting.and it may Thun-
der and Lighten in the Winter-night before ſhe riſes : the Moon,as we ſaid,doth nor
ſomach as look as if ſhe liked ſuch Roiſter-company.


CHAP. VIIL


The other five calF'd into the Militia, Planets not made for Illumination
only. Light and Heat the ſame ſpirit, CA the Planets have their In-
fluence, Not all of the ſame Nature or Operation,


$ 1, Here are therefore ſome Satelstes, which we - of, to be taken into
conſideration , thoſe five Lights, which have been call'd of old by thoſe
Heathen Names of Satarn, Jupiter, Jars, Venus , Mercury , notwithſtanding
which, even by Scripture-precgdent may be innocently uſed,
.  $ 2. -., To our purpoſe, 'ris enough that they are Zzghts , for no Star, no Light
in the Heaven was made for /lumination only, few things in Nature are made for
exe lingle end, For how, many Ends was the Tonguegiven Us, or the Feng given to
the Fowl : withoux it the Fowl cannot fight, nor progreate, nor keep its Bill warm,


as well as notfly withour it. For the Planets and other Lights are for half theic
TETRIS >» ' exp * ae time


” PORT
-


I


— «


Chap. 8, All the Flanets hawe their Influence.


25


time 2zv4/ible, they are with the Sun in the diurnal Hemiſphere, as well as in the
efturnal, and therefore were not made, no not the Sun it ſelf, tor a naked Illumina-
tion. Itthe Moon were made-tor Illumination only, ſhe would never appear by


day, when there is no need of her I ight; nor ever diſappear at night, when there 13 ,
need. Sure Afercary, ſo ſeldom ſeen, unleſs in Somhern Climes, was not made tor


Jilumination only 01 chiefly ; to ſay nothing of the Sateliires, properly ſo called.
If an Atheiſt ſhould accuſe ihe diſorder of Nature, and through that pretence deny
the Wiſdom of an Eternal Providence, by urging the appearance of the Moon by
day, or the hiding of I eas, Mercury, Saturn, &c, and halt the Numbers of the
Fixed, which were made for Lights, | would teach him this Truth z T hat no Star
m Heaven was made for Illumination only : they were made for Jrjinences 4. e (or
weare not enzmoured with any occult Qualities) the D5/fributions, the Sn7pp.zua of
Heat as well as Light, For

y 3. Since A/ Boates Celeſtial are Lucid, either by an Innate or Reflex Light,
they mult all of them have a Warmth more or leſs, ar leaſt (ome quality that is þo-
mOgeneons ,O1T,

y 4. I ſaid Hcmogereors, becauſe though Light and Hear do differ increaibly 1n
their Expanlions,, the Spheres of their Attivity being ſo #ncomprehenſibly diſpropor-
tionable (25 we ſee by the meaſures of the Warmth and the 1/umination, the I!iumi-
nation reaching as tar as the Pyramid of its Vilioility, which may be for four or
hve Mile, while the Warmth extends not above fo many Yards): yet they are really
and ſubſtantially the ſame ſpirit, though dittering formally, as they may relate to ſe-
veral faculties lentiive, the one to the Eye, the other ro the Touch.

y F- Th- S$anis the Fountain of Light, the re:t of the Planets , it may be, are
but Reſiexioms : notwithſtanding, if they are no better, thoſe Reflex Bodies, as is
apparent in the Moon, belide their Magnitude and Approximation to the Larth, may
have ſuch Concavities and other Diftormi.ies of Solid Surtace, thar even the Keſle-
xton may conceive Heat ſufficient for what Operation they are deſtined.

y 6. The Smn,'tis true, the Holy Scripture cails a Zzght, but not a naked Light,
for | xperience it (cli tells us, that there is nothing hid trom the Heat thercot : the
Peripatetich Fancy hath no foundation nor in one, nor in the other, nor Scripture,
nor Experience,

$ 7. Mark then, as the Sun hath his Diarnagl and Anmurl motion from T ro-
pique to Tropique, fo the reſt of the Planers have their Dzurnal, Annual, or oth<r
Perwaical motion between the fame termes. Therefore all the reſt have thew Heat
alſo. For no other reaſon hath or can the World give, why the Sun thould move
ts and fro in the Obliquity of the Zogtack, but for the application and ſubſtraction
of his Hear, which I call 17ſ/izence, Ir follows theretore that the ref of the Planets
which are appointed ro the ſame oblique motion, muſt have ſome /uch In/1uence to
apron : *tis a Demonſtration 4 Fize, and ſuch we take, ſuppoiing Providence,to

e 200d. |

y 8, We havenot without cauſe therefore juſtified the Aſtrologer on the Moon's
part, when he makes us believe, that according ro her motion there is a kind 0i £#-
nar Spring, Summer, latter Spring, Winter, according to her Poſſe every month,
50 though the Sun be the chief; as the Roſe in the Polie ; yet every litcle Pink hath
his Sent, and a lirtle Sagacity will diftiriguiſh them.

y 9. Thoſeol the longer Period, h 2; &, to thoſe that are Maſters of Obſer-
vation, ſhall b found to bear rhe fame Proporribtt-making a YVernal Temper (for
their parts) on the efguinox, an e/Xſtival Temper in the Northern Signs , and the
contrary inthe Sowhern. For 2 and Q it is clear, that generally the later is the
Spring when they are behind rhe Sun, and the more early when they 'ſhoor before it.

y 10. But the Heavenly Bodies mult be found of different Natures ſo far forth,
as to favour Cold 24 well as Heat ;' and Dryth as well as Afoiftnre: or elſe no Arc
can give a rational account of 'the Contrariety of the Conſtitations depending
thereon, Thence all Aſre/ogy hath been forced to find ore chiller and colder

H | Planet


26


Natures of the Planets according to Ptolemy. Book 1.


Planet than the reſt, And ſure it is, notwithſtanding their Light and Radiance, that
they are notall of the ſame Energy or Operation. .


_ 4


CHAP. IX,


Natures of the Planets according to the Antients, then according to Truth.
Not h but 1 the Coldeſt Planet. Cold no Privation, The Primum Fri-
gidum. How 4 Lucid Body can patronize Cold. Light is the Spirit of the
Untverſe.


$1. Þ7 olemy hath noe adjuſted the Definitions or Properties of the Planers beyond
E xception.

$ 2. The greater miſery is,that they do not agree, ſo much as I could wiſh, with
modern Experience; let the Curious Naturaliſt enquire, for the Planetary Defini-
tions are the Fandamentals of All Aſtrology , whether Legitimate , or Suſpi-
cious,

$ 3. Ptolemy, and All Aſtrologers after him, ſay thus. Firſt, the Nature of the
Sun conſiſts in a moderate Warmth, and Drought : wergios mined Segwrmnes, ec,

$ 4- Þ natureds Aforſtning,with ſome degree of Warmth : 77 aki vga —
17x u  uereies Ire ud mr ©.

$ 5. H isthe Co/d4Planer, Cold and Dyy ; the Firſt in an snte»/e, the Latter
in a more remws/s degree : 7 ptr Ju egy whior £244, 75 ot Engoy parpiaTegor.

$ 6. 4& is (contrary) Het, Dry, and Burning : x«au5s. dis 78 vyads wn?.

y 7. 2 of atemperate faculty, warm and moiſtning, but rather warming :
Vigpaire dp xv yyalln, id 76 whkev Lau Th Irguir—wrgeany ix vas.

$ 8. 2 'remperateas y, only with this difference ; that whereas y, warms more
moiſtens leſs, 9 only contrary, contributes ro Warmth leſs, and more to Moiſture :
Thy *auThy i500 enpadicy (fc,

$ 9. Y is sndifferent, as to Aforſture or br, ſometimes for the one, ſome-
times for the other , '/ Tov 671 ptr Engairie, rind ved on. Elſewhere he faith
ſomewhat dry, smSng©-, contrary in that to 9.

y 1c. Ptolemy his Evidenccs are from Senſe, and Reaſon, the Difference of
their ſenlible Adfagnitude, the Difference of their Colowy, their Difference of Situ4-
74014 in reſpe& of the Earth, and Sun.

$ 11, Nowthe Swn's Heat he argues (becauſe All Diſputation is plauſible in
its firſt Theoremes) from the Adminiſtration of the I V. Seaſons, the Approaches
of the Sun to the Zenith, witneſſed (as he faith) alſo by his ſingular 14agnis
tude. |

$ 12. The Neerneſs of the y to the Earth, being moderately warm, by the
Sun's irradiations, draws up Aforſtare. He doth not ſay draws it up even to the Lu-
nar Sphere, as if the y were affeCted by the Earth, or thereby formally moiftned ;
but more truly and innocently he ſpeaks of an :ndefinite Attraſtion of the Sublunar
Moiſture; defining no term or height of that AttraQtion, nor is there any neceſſity
of ſuch Definition, no more than in the Sun, which norwithſtanding is artraCtive of
the ſame.

$ :3. Thediſtanceof h, faith he, from the Earth makes him Dry, and the di-
ſtance from the Sun makes him Cold.

$ 14. Whilethe Fiery Conſtitution of & is as evident from his Colour, fo it is
as juſtly concluded from his v5c:13ry ro the Orb of the Sun, which licth next under
him.
$ 15- -The ſituation of y; between the extreme coldneſs of þ , and the burning
of 4, makes him teniperate, 2 not ſo but that the ſubject Spheres of & and © both
bequeath lum a warming Influence, _

| $16. The


> PRAIS Hmo4—


i


Chap. 9. Farther Inquiry into their Natures.


27


$ 16. The vicinity of 9 tothe Sun gives her Warmth, while ſhe contributes al.
ſo ro Moiſture, as the y doth, and that by the greatneſs of her Diſcus, |

$ 17. & 1s a Dyyer, he ſaith, becauſe never far from the Sun in Longitude, and
a Moiſbner allo, in that he bears upon the Moon's Otb, the greateſt Contibuter to
Moiſture. Thus far Prolemy, 1. 22. Tetrabsbl. |

$ 18, Nowasto the Effects, they are put anſwerable to the premiſed Defini-
tions, as may be gathered from Pol. 56, [7 c.g. in which Chapter he treateth of
the Planets in their beſt advantage, their Zordſ>ip he calls it ; and there g (faith he)
becauſe of its Dryth, raiſeth Winds, Lightnings, Thunders, &c.

$ 19. & brings Heats, and Droughts, and T hunders, and Stormy Winds,

$ 20, y healthful and temperate Air, yet with Wind, and competent Moafture.

9 21. & alſo the ſame, remperate and ſerene Air, with Wixd,and fruitful howres
intermixt, in the whole as yy, bur with a greater ſ#avity, peri rAuey©r nrks nd rar? ,
as Ptolemy pleaſes himſelf in the Expreſſion,

$ 22. H producethterrible Cola; and Froſts, and Snow, and Hail , and 26fts :
and Clouds, and dark Air.

$ 23. To the premiſes they reduce the determination of theWinds, when
they make h cauſe the Eaft, g and » Weſt; & South, yy North.

y 24. And what can Obſervation pretend ro more ! and how can -They be
vain, which are ſo ſpecifick and preciſe as Theſe ſeem to be ? And it ſo,how chance
They have not got tooting in the World amongſt other Z;bera! parts of Know-
ledge ? Surely, 'tis more ealte to arrive to the knowledge of their Natures, than
of their Aotions ; yet the World hath advanced to the Latter,and Thas with repute,
and ſcarce as yet to the Former ?

$ 25. I day therefore, toward the Enucleation of the Queſtion, Frf , that the
Planets, in Number vi1, are more than namerically difterent ; That very Ditte-
rence with a modeſt Diſputer, is apt to perſwade there is a Difference in Nature.

$ 26, Seconaly, as to their dsſfance trom the Earth and the Sur, there is ſome
Secret lies in it : 'tis ſo conliderable, ſo deliberate a work of the moſt High Creator,
that | think from hence alone a man may boldly pronounce, that ir is not indifferent
ro the Syfteme of the World's Well-being; whereabout the v1 1 Planets are ſituate.
This, as reaſonable as it is, will be more ſtrongly inforced from the DoQtrine of the
Perigee, &c


$27. Thirdly, ſince the Difference of their Coloxr ariſeth not from the Me-


dium, but from the difference of the Spirit, (as in Camphire and Brimſtone inflamed,
the Flames wear ſeveral Colours.) This muſt argue ſome: Differenee of Conſiſtence :
ſince in ſerenjty of Air, in all Climes; the Moon hath her ſmoorh-faced luſtre, 4 his
fiery beam, and h his dimmer glare.

y 28, Wedonot delire to imagine, that the Planets are ought but Reflexions ,
yer we ſay withall that ſo Vaſt Badies receiving the Ray which they Return, may
be of ſuch ſeveral Conſiſtences, and different Fabricks, that there may be found as
much variety in them as in other Reflexives, 5. e. Plain, Convex or Concave Glaſſes,
of which the one will generate Flame, and the other are too weak for ſuch Gene-
ration. Thus the Tiles and Lead on the Houſe-top, by reaſon of their conliſtence;,
while they retlect the Sun-beams, conceive ſuch Heat, as is not to be endured by the
Palm of the Hand, | | | |

$ 29. . Foxrthly, we ſay that though there be two Contrarieties to be inquired
into, firſt of Hor and Cold, then of Moiſt and Dry, Onrs will be but only after the
Firſt Contrariety, in as much as the Second is an Affix, and an Appendage to the
Firſt. Becauſe it will be very ealie ro ſay, fron what hath been ſaid before,that eve-
ry Planet as it partakes of #/armth, is thereby apt to. produce Afoſture ; whence
the Sun it ſelf being Hor, mult alſo be defin'd to be moiſt : for though the Sun drieth
up the Moiſture-fallen, yerrhe' fame Warmth fiſt arrraGted the Vapor, and the Va-
por ſo attracted, with2 lirrje help from the Contrary Quality, (of which we have
ſaid we cafnot be always fenfiblg chap. 2. $ 9.) condenſeth it into a Drop : ſorhe s

H 2 an


25


Natures of the F lanets defin'd. Book 4;


and Þ both are Moiſt but only by an ex:rinſec Denomination, as much as they
contribute tothe attraction of it.

$ 30. Dry, in reſpeqpo the Earth, the Sun may be called z but in reſpe& of
the Air 'tis a Afoiſtner. The AMeteorologer reſpeReth not the Earth but the Air ;
wherefore though Ptolemy hath pur only Dr7th into the Sun's definition, he cannor
oppoſe this which is ſaid of Moiſture.

$ 31. And thus the reſt ot the Planets alſo, & 9 y, if they prove to be warm,
by the ſame reaſon mult be admitted to be #20;/t alſo, in our ſenſe, though Pro/emy
I ſee ſcarce mentions Moilture for an Effect even of & himſelf, in the Chapter above

uoted. ;
” $ 32. To proceed then, no Planet can be faid to be Dry, 3. e. a cauſer of Dryth,
but what is a Favourer of Co/a , in as much as it Warmth be the producer of Moi-
ſture, Cold muſt be the Reſsſer, as the truth is it dothreſoft , diſſipating. or diſconti-
nuing the fatter vapour, by the immiſſion of a cruder Arome.

$ 33- t hence it follows much to our purpoſe, that Cold muſt be the Parent of
Serenity, Which is briefly proved by thisz that the Cold vpirit is more pellucid
than the more opacous and wnttwoms vapour, which it dillipateth.

$ 34- Since then weare bound 1o' inquire intothe firſt Contrariety of Heat
and Cold, that trom thence we may find out their due Complications with Moi-
ſture and Dryth, we ſay

Far(#, that the Sun is a warm Body, and that of the ſame kind with what is called
Elementary Warmth, |

$ 35. Not that Heis the primwm Caliaum, for That is Fire, or That Diftuſed
Spirit which 1s found indeed in the Sun, and other Celeſtials, but ot confined to them,
rather 4:/tributed through the whole Univerſe to All its mixt or compound Bodies,
the Afines Subterranean eſpecially comprehended.

y 36.. The Moon'hath her remiſs degree of Warmth, demonſtrable as you
have ſeen by many a fair Experiment, making- up Her Hiſtory ; to which I know
the more Curious can add more, that I may not ſay 'tis apparent, it watch'd at ſome
opportunity, even to ſenſe. A Perſpe&tive of 1V+ Foot, taking the Riſe of the Moon
atter the Full in Awguſt, a warm day preceding, (thar the Air may not be Connter-
asſpoſed) (hall ſenſibly-preſent the Planer's warmth to the Eye. The like have | :ound
in a Summer-Even, litting in a Southern Chamber, that the Moon being eight or
nme dayes 01d, when approaching the Meridian, hath intuſed a ſenſible warmth into
the Chamber, though the hun were ſet.

y 37: '>& is foundto be endued with a Heat , if the Effect may judge equal ,
nay to all ſeeming, /aperiexy to the Sun. , yet ſecing he afts by dependance on Him,
a5 all the Reſt do, we muſt compare None of them to their Maincainer.

y 38." Þ hathawarmth more remiſs than & or ©, more intenſe than 9.

y 39. $g her Warmithisſo rewi/s and ſlack, that ſhe ſeemeth to befriend a
Cold Influence. |

$ 40. There is only left Hand wp ; and it is very convenient that the co/d Planet
alligned ſhould be One of theſe Two. It may be ſomewhat for Prolemies reaſon, as
alſa becauſe None of the Planetary Bodies which pretend to Cold,except theſe Two,
can 7wign (I mean ſt5ve) all Night, the moſt fir opportunity. for Cold: v thines bur
part of the Night, and the Þ is too warm for the purpoſe,

$ 41. This ſuppoſeth 1 confeſs, that the NoRurnal Cold is ordered and mana-
ged by the Celeftial Bodies, which is moſt certain, and will be evidenc'd hereafter.

$- 42. + H indeed: (who can outface ſd:Ancient and Loud Tradition? ) goes for
the Coldeſt Planet.: He i dndted of a Tepor ſo low and indiſcernible, that he may
and muſt be reckon'd.av a: Favorrer of Cold, and fo far Experience jultifies the Tra-
dition, ::: th ,

$-42+:;. Bur 3, ('tis well he hath obtained the Charatter of Temperate, as well
as-$)- is (ob let the Paradox be pardoned ! ) the Principal: Cold and crude Planer -:
Altthe Reſt are warm and worſt, though in different' meaſure, only 2 cold and ary,

or


mg RT pr 1 en nm 1


a die. aut. 33 .


7 eoPaTmIy p 44
- .


——
-


nr I


a_


_ >." - -G. ET |


" _


ana i at


II." Os


O_o no er —a_— ' Le
W "Þ * ”


—_— ks - tia —


Chap. WW Jupiter, not Saturn the Coldeſt.


or a Reſiſter of Moiſture, I know 'cis a great Paradox, and therefore to ſome will
be offenlive : but it is ſuch as wanteth neither Apology, nor Proof.

$ 44. Not Apology : for what ? muſt we in earneſt ſubmit to every Tradition
in Natural Science ? There's nought I hope in Philoſophy, but what appeals to Po-
ſterity, as to Senſe and Reaſon, and will abide the Teſt of Natural Scrutiny. Philo-
{ophy is too ingenuousto impoſe upon us, to offer to teceive us by Axthor:ty, I grant
the Authority of our Anceſtors is Greater than is allowed by the Zunior Inceptors
0i theſe dayes : Many are deſpiſed by Us, whoſe Wiſdom we {hall never attain to.
But yet our Anceſtors themſelves have fixed Bounds to their Authoricy : They
[wear us indeed not to corrupt their Books, they do not ſwear us to believe. All they
deliver. We mult aſt betore we ſwallow, eſpecially in that part ot Philoſophy
which lizs beyond the Moon, abſtruſe Theorems at a vaſt proſpe& and diſtance. In
theſe I ought not to follow them hood-winkr, to take All for granted as if They
were Firſt Principles, or'from Infallible Difates z They teach us concerning Hea-
ven, bur they came not from thence. I cannot give them their Due Praiſe, unleſs 1
examine their Theſes; 1 ſhall be a lazy unwiſe perſon, if I do not. I ſhall be loath
to betray the Generations of the World to Security, and Error. What Liberty the
Antients have taken in a modeſt difſent from their Predeceſlors,is left co us for a Lega-
cy. Prolemy himſelf differs from His Seniors the Egyptians.

$ 45. NotPro9of: no not from the Antients themſelves. For firſt , though
They declare him to be Moiſt, yet they teach us alſo that He is a Railer of Winds,
(Prot. I. 20.) which by nature are a Dry Exhalation, and Co/d too, 2, y isthe
only e/£olus that blows up the North-wind, fay both Antients and Moderns, and
they ſay truly, a ſecond Argument that 1 is the Coldeſt. 3, With one mouth alſo
They truly and conſequently affirm, that He is the Parent of Serenity ; bur if the
Cauſe of Clouds and Vapor be Heat, the Cauſeof Serenity is Cold, the Cleanſing
Spirit of Cold. Add, that we ſhall ſee hereafter, how No Aſpe@ Planetary caulcs
Dcyth, but every one of thera more or leſs incline to Moiſture, except yy be one;
therefore if Cold be the Author of Dryth, (Dryth I mean in the Conſtitution of the
Air) wy is that Colder Planet. Yea ſo maniteſtly is He the favorer of Dryth,that he
ſhews this Influence not'only in Serene and open Air, but in Cloudy and dark Air,


where many times he /»ſpezas the Moiſture, and (as the Vulgar ſpeak, when in-


Cloudy Aira Dry Wind blows) It keeps wp the Rain. Nor is it to be conceal'd, that
in All Fogs, and Miſts 2 hath Influence, which argues a dry tuliginous Exhalation
mixt wi.h Moiſture, That Moiſture which is found and maintained ar the Coſt of
the Reſt of the Planets.

$ 46. Colder and Dryer is y than H it ſelf, as much as the North-wind is col-
der than the Eaſt : for though the Eaſt be cold and dry compared to the Weſt , ir
obtaineth no ſuch. cha:ater compared with the North, But yy is confeſſed Parens
Agquilenis, Railer of the North- wind, while þ contents himſelt with the Eaſt.

y 47. And tor Dryth, Aſpects of Hare not found to reſsſ# Moiſture, to cauſe
Serenity, to raiſe dry Winds, to caſt a Fog ; a Cool Conſticution ic may profeſs,
bur with inclination to Moiſture : for admit it cauſeth Snow, I delire it be con-
lider'd, that 'cis one thing to cauſe S»ow, and another to cayſe it to fall : and the Di-
{iinction will be admitted by them that conlider, that how bitter ſoever the Wea-
ther is when Snow hangs in the Air, as they call ir, yet the Weather relents in a ſen-
ſible degree at the fall of Snow : H then may concur tothe Solution of that Cold
Maſs, which yy or ſorve other hath created ; but none conteſts ſo much for Cold as
Þ, % thereiore t5 the Coldeſt, And let thus much at preſent ſerve for the"On,

$ 48. Toward the Ain, how 2, or any other Celeſtial Body can be the Pa-
ret of Cold, we are willing ro declare. Firlt, what is the Nature of Cold, whether
peſutive or meer Privation. 2, If Poſitive, what is the Primum Frigidum, Earth
or any other Body. 3. What relation a Body Celeſtial can have to Cold, if Cold
prove to be a terreftrial E manati in. :

$ 49. Though ſome Philoſophers have ſaid that Cold is a Privation, and it

[ ſcems


ZO


Cold no Privation. Earth the —nagur aprgh


ſeems toagrce to what Prolemy would ſay concerning the Quality attribured to H,
the remorelt of all from the Sun: yea though I think it maniteft, thar ſome things
called Poſitive Onalities, are no better than Privations, as Sicciry, Diaphaneity,
Softneſs, &e. yet I take it, that Cold cannot be ſaid ro be ſuch.

1. Becauſe thongh it be neceſſary upon the removal of Moiſture, I muſt under-
ſtand the Subje& to be Dyy , yet there is not the ſame neceſſity, that on the Remo-
val of Heat, I thould apprehend rhe SubjeR to be Cold. Mence ſome Philophers
have it may be not abſurdly) defined, the Air to be Neither of irs own Nature, be-
ing the Subject and Receiver of Both,

2. Privation may be allowed a principle of Generation, but not of Conſtitution ,
bur Cold is a Conſtituent , as in Merals , Glaſs, &c. ingreaitir opera Nature.
Hence a ſudden Heat violates the Conliſtence of the Glaſs, whereas a Privation may
be removed with Safety and Innocence.

3- Cold is Ative, Penetrative, Expnlſroe of its Conttary , even as Heat,
ARtive and Biting, Penetrative through Glaſs ir ſelf, where neither Air , nor Moi-
ſture can be tranſmitted : whoſe Afton is ſolike that of Heat , that ſometimes we
take ic to be the very ſame. For a.Cold piece of Iron ſeems to buy» the Hand , if the
Senſe of the Touch (not the Eye) be witneſs ; Expnlſrve of the Heat, eyth Na-
rural Heat : This is ſeen in Freezing of Beer or Wine, where the Spirits driven our
of their Cells, retire to their Centre. In the freezing of Fruits, which upon a mil-
der Conſtitution ſuddenly putrifie , the Spirit being not able to recover its former
Manſion, by reaſon of the diſorder created. Add the Ganegren'd parts of Man's Bo-
dies in cold Countreys, &c. the crumbling and ſcaling of Brick and Stone in Froſts
that are extreme, &c.

$ 48. 4ly, a Spirit is no Privation, Cold is a Spirit, of ſuch a Figure, ſaith
Democritus, and not very abſurdly , for the benumming operation of Cold, curiouſly
attended, betrays not the pungencies of the Pyramid, proper to Fire, but the Contu-
lion of a Cubical Figure, whichis the figure aſſigned to the Earth: but that Cold is
a Spirit may be proved, becauſe ſome Bodies enjoy a cool Spirit, Vegetables, as
the Roſe z; Minerals, as the Nitre , and all Infrigidation is, performed by transfu-
lion of a Spirit, as Rooms are cool by ſtrewing of Herbs, Flags, and Aſperlion of
ſweer Water, Vinegar, &c. Wines in- their Bottles are cooled by immerlion into
Water, the Warter tranſmitting the Spirit ſudden]y through the Veſſel. This Spirit
is evident and awakened by the Motion : certainly if Heat be a Spirir, Cold is alſo
a Spirit ; and if the South-wind warms by the introduRion of the One, the North-


wind chills by the acceſſion of the Other : and ſo much for the Firſt, the Nature of


Cold.
$ 49. For the ſecond, we deem that the Earth is rightly aſſigned for the primuns
frigidum, and this may be gathered from the very ſituation it obtains in the Syſtem
ot the World, viz. the very Diſtance from the Spheres of Heat, being as good as in
the Centre of the Sphere ot the Fixed, even in ( opernici his Hypotheſis. For though
Cold be no Privation , yet 'tis not altogether becoming the Order of Nature, that
Oppolites thould have an oppolne place, and be at /+ca/ as well as at formal Di-
{tance. God hath not placed Hear at one of the Poles, it he had, ſure he had fixed
the Cold at the Pole oppolite. Giving him therefore the liberty to place it in the
middeſt of the Globe, the Frozen Zones muſt quarter on each {ide, as far diſtant as
they can, and that is tantamount to Diamerrical. For as to the Subterranean Fires,
by Natures great End placed in the Earth,they can put in no Caveat to our pretence,
ſceing they cannot belong to the Nature of that Element , though therein con-
tained, no more than the Vegetable, or Animal Seeds that lie conch'd in the ſame.
The ſame is to be reckoned of Hot Earths,Lime, &c. They conclude not the Earth
of its own Natore, indifferent to Co/d or Hear, no more than Heot-waters artificially
extratted, or Het Baths for the Natore of the Water conclude any ſuch indifferen-
cy. But that Cold is an Farthy Spirit, whence ſhall we more evidently conclude,
but from the conliſtence of Ice ? {co hath a rerreve Conliſtence, therefore ic depends
upon


” Tr rn OI,


ee EE. he i tet


» OO 7 —_


Pe SH - 2 ——_— a


ad he 6h


- pw eng ©


OS SG ”


RE. te rel nd


wc nee na om 0.0 On 7 9 —_


_—_—


- Parry?
*


Chap. 9. Primum- Frigidum.


zi


upon a terrene Spirit, For ſuch cognation is there between the Conliſtence,and the
$piric actuating, that a man may ſafely conclude the one from: the other, The Ve-
verable Spirit is of the ſame Nature with the Planc , the Merallick Spiric wich the
Metal, the Fumid Spirit with the Qdour, the Earthy Spirit with the Earth. We con-
firm this by conlideration, . that all Perrification is by intrulion of a Terrene Spirit,
as in Wood, and other things. metamorphos'd by perrsfying Streams, is cankeſſed.
And what is Ze, but Water petrifyed ? Add, that Ice becomes fixed by Incrafkitiane
ſo Cold fixes or (tanches Blond by incraflating of the parts. Hence the cod Spirit
or Corpulcle dilating the Body, as in liquor congeled in Earthen Veſſels, burſts the
Veſle], and the Hand benummed with Cold is more /wo/z- and gowty than in open
Weather. .

$ 50. Further, Merals, or Minerals, which are the co/de/# Bodies, are of a
Conliſtence Earthy, as Stone, Lead, Iron, yea Quick-l1|ver , though a ſtrange Bo-
dy, is the Colder, becauſe it is ſodenſe : for we may fately allow an Earthy Spirit
in it, notwithſtanding its Flor, as well as in other Metals, which at leaſt when mel-
ted are fluid, So much it ſeems to have of Earth, that though it be fluid, we fee it
moiſtens not ; the whitiſh Hue I hope is no hinderance, {ince ſundry Earchs are of
a Cretaceous colour,

y 51. Again, every Stupefattive Spirit is Terrene, every Cold Spirit is Stupe-
fative. For what I pray is Stupetying, but Congeling ? the Cold Spirit ſtanches
Blood by Congelation. Thus Dio/corides, (peaking of all Earths uſed in Phylick,
ſaich they are Cold and Stupifying : all Narcoticks, quatenus talis, will be found
inveſted with ſuch a Spirit, Opznz, &c. the Hiſtory of the Torpeas ir ſelf, I believe
will prove it. Yea the Greateſt Obſervers, that have been curious in this point, de-
clare, that as according to the common Preſumption, Heat tends upward,lo the Ce/d
hatha tendency d-wrward, a Heavy Spiric , it ſeems then ta be Earthy.

$ 52. But whether this Spirit be Saline, or Nitrous, or of Quick-lilver, is
none of our intereſt to define, 'tis ſomewhat roo nice a diſcourſe to be ſo parricu-
lar, Saline, or Nitrox, are All Earthy, and, it may be, not ſo much different.

$ 53. Here,l confeſs, our Diſcourſe is ſtrongly checked by ſome of rhe Nobleſt
Obſervers , who ſcruple ro admit any prime Recipient of Cold, as nor necellary
there ſhould be a @g9'nv Jon of all Qualities; for there are None allignable, ſay
they, tor Gravity, Figure, Motion, Colour, Sound, &c.

To the Vindication therefore of ſuch a Principle, let me crave leave to diſtinguiſh,
firſt of Qualities,then of the Prime Recipient ,and ſay firſt,thar in all Qualities, whe-
ther Powers Natural, or thcir Senſible Obje&ts, Heat, Cold, Humour, Siccity, Light,
Colour, &c. as alſo Qualities more Material , ſuch as conſiſt in the ſeveral Textwe
of Matter, Denſity, Rarity, &'c. we muſt carefully diſtinguiſh berween Thera and
their Privations , the rather, becauſe the Philoſopher ſaich rightly, that the ſame
Senſe is Judge of both : for tis no reaſon to look for a Tem Srxnxer of Privative
Beings, but only of Poſiezve. Thus it will be yain ro look for a Prime Recipient of
Stccity ; the Fire being dry, and the Earth alſo, and neither owing that Quality
one to the other, becauſe being a bare careptia and Abſence of Humidity, all Bodies
ſo deprived muſt eque promo rejoice in that Denomination. Thus I rake it, is Rarity
nothing but a Privation of Denlity, Softneſs of Hardneſs, Smoorthneſs of Aſperity,
Fluor of Solidity, Friability of Viſcolity, Leanneſs of Fatneſs, total or partial Pr;-
vations, For the Prime Recipient, though it be commonly a certain /peczes, yet 'ris
not always (0.

$ 54. There are Properties which follow the Genes, as All men muſt confeſs,
ſuch are the known Properties of Onantity, Figure, Place, Afotion, T ime, Gravity,
Colour, Sound ; Figure | lay, for if Vuantiry be ſuch a Property, then Figure muſt
alſo, however it be called Qzality, or otherwiſe a Property of C orpus ſolidiem. Then

Af1tion, for be the principle of Motion what it will, Afartey or Form, or Feniteneſs

vf Nature, tis plain 'tis a common Generical Attribute ro which it is annexed, we

may call it corps, of, it you will, /#bſt.entia finea, Then for Gravity, we have a -_
| 2 nera


—T_ AI


at.


QualitieF bave thtir Prime Recipient. Book 1:


neral:Recipient for That, wherher:inithe zew Philoſophy, which reckons All Ele-
ments't0 be Grav#4,as rending to their Centre, Fire it ſelf ſeeming ro rend upward
only on this account z/ or in the more ſtale Philoſopby, which makes Earth, Water,
Air Gravia in compariſon of Fire , 1 ſay, according to the one, the Prime Recipient
of Gravity is corp Homogeneum, ſuppoling the Heavy ſubſtance our of its place,
and.corpws Oparum according tothe other; underſtanding it here as oppoſed to Lu-
bv: "Frhich feaſeAir Water; Earthare opatons, and therefore Gravitating, as
being deſtitute of Thar Spirit which tendeth upward. © We ſay the ſame of Co/our,
that corpus op acwm, but as diſtinguith'd to peliucid or Diaphanous, is the Prime Reci-
pient ot it ; Colour being nothing elſe but a nice mixture of Light and Opacity,
Yea for Sewnd it ſelf we give a prime Subject, and Thar is corpus Spirituoſui z it be-
ing the Spirir that is the Swbjeft and Vehncle of the Sound.

y'55. Theſethings being premiſed, I ſay,that All 2xa/itzes, truly fo called, po-
fitive Beings,not provarive, have neceſſarily their Prime Recipient in the Species or the
Genus at leaſt : Heat, Cold, Humettation,T aſt,O dbur,All Senſible Qualities,have their
Prime Recipient z it being hard to find Humettation where there is no Water, Cold
where no Earth, Taft where no Salt, Odour where no Oyl, Light and Heat where no
Fiery Spirit. And what do we ſay of the Second Tate Qualities, Craſſitude,Solidity,
Denſity, Hardneſs, Roughneſs ? The Earth no doubt is the Prime Receiver of them
All, fo that where there is So/zdity and Denſity, there is Earth, as Plato ſaith, evenin
the Stars themſelves. For Viſcoſity,unleſs we ſay 'tisa Compound Complicate Qua-
lity,ex pings &arido,and ſo getoff from the neceſſity of affigning a Prime Recipient,
as there is no Prime Recipient of T epor, and mixt Colours ; 1o otherwiſe we may no-
minate a Gate» to ſupply That place, with the ſame liberty as the Chymiſts name
Sulfur, and Salt : for if ir be ſaid that there is no ſuch ſpecies, in which this quality
inheres, no more is there any ſpecies of Salt and Sulfur, the Prime Recipient of Sa-
vours and Odours ; they are Gexerical Natures , common to all Sapid and Odorate
Bodies,

$ 56. Surely, unleſs ſome Recipient be admitted, both in ARive and Paſſive
Qualities, the Family of Nature will be at a loſs. The ſeveral T7:bes of Hor, Cool,
Sapid, Odorate, how manitold ſoever in their Natural Colonies, muſt needs depend
on ſome prime Propagator, as all Families do.

$ 57. 1will not fay this is in imitation of God himſelf, and his Communicati-
ons, (Nature being nothing elſe but a Sciagraphy of Divinity) who being a Creator
hath ordained a Generant, communicating Eflence, and Gifts, and Graces, Him-
ſelf being of them All the Ta ry Jexmur.

$ 58. Andtruly, when upon a juſt Indution made, we may find a prime Sub-
je& for all the ARive Qualiries(truly ſtared,) as Light, Hear, Cold, Humidity, cc.
why we ſhould nor ſeck for prime SubjeRts for All the reſt, which are abſolute per-
fe&tions of the Subje& in which they dwell, 1 ſee not, ſeeing the Fabrick of this


' Great Univerſe, though it be abſtruſe, yet it is ſuch as doth incourage Enquiry (not


diſcourage it) by the Mutual dependance of Cauſes, the Second on the Firſt, and
the Third on Both : the Creator being admirable, not only in the Number, but in
the Order of his Creatures. To find Fire in Filh-bones, Rotten wood, Taſts in
Dews as well as Plants and Minerals, Srenches in Miſts as well as Puddles, and All
through the communication of the ſame prime SubjeR, incourages a Modeſt En-
quirer, and brings him to the knowledge of a rip@ny, the prime Cauſe of All.
$ 55. Neither is the prime Generical Recipient to be thought an Empty No-
tion, as if Univerſal Natures ſubliſted only by the Operation of the Intellc&, and
did not exiſt 2 parte res , fer certainly They are guilty of the Empty Notion, that
make a Nature, not We that find it. Surely the Individual borrows all its Reality
trom the Species, unleſs his Eſſence be a fiction, and the Species in part from the Ge-
214 : the One is a Modification of his Univerſal, the Other a Difference , and thus
tar for the ſecond Enquiry.
$-60, Nov: thirdly, what Relation a Body Celeftial may have to Cold, it Cold
be


F* — To Wy


. GG VOTING


Tv PPT" Wy — Sram”


hn a. AS.


” a. a G.


Chap. 9g. A Cold Spirit inthe H. Bodies, probably.


33


be a Terreſtrial Emanation, is the next Enquiry ; ſeeing Reaſon, as Cardan confeſ.
ſes, makes them All without difference warm, even h it ſelf if he be Luminous.
Reſp. The Nature of the Planet is to be eſtimated, not from his Magnitude only,
and Diſtance, and Light, and Colour ; but much, if nor chiefly,trom its Conſetence,
and Spiriz, if any there be that inhabirs it.

$ 61. Their Bodies, of their own nature, are Opacous, but they are Pervious


roo. This is known for certain as to the D, it is full of Cells and Concavities , of


a vaſt Penetration ; for otherwiſe, neither It, nor the Reſt could ſo viſibly, ſo po-
tently refle& the Solar Incidences. As to the Spirit, all that believe the .Sun to be
of an 1gneous Nature, as 'is high time we ſhould come fo far , do reſolve that there
are Mines of S#/fur in the Sun, which miniſter an Eternal Pabxlam to the Flame, as
the Mines do to our Hot Baths. This is ſo certain, that the Afertors of the {a-
cule Solares know not what elſe to define them, but Sulphureous Fumid Exhalations
ifluing trom it.
$. 62, Again, all that are Curious Obſervers of the-) do aver, not only Afonn-
tains, but Wateys alſo placed there, which cover all the darkith parts of the Lunar
Globe : and why may not God fill the Reſt of the Celeſtial Bodies with a ſuitable
Spirit ? The different Colours both of Planets, and Fixed Stars , do more than pro-
bably argue a difference of Spirit lodged in them. *Tis not impoſſible but ſome of
the Heavenly Bodies may partake of the Cold Spirit in common with the Earth,
as the Subterranean ſpec:es partakes of the Warm Spirit, the Fires that rage therein
common with the Heavens,
$ 63. What Mines of S#/phur may be lodged in 6, what Treaſure of Nitre,
or Camphire, or Yuick-ſilver may be in For % ? the Expiration of Camphire,
even flaming, cools a Room. Who can refell this with any better Argument than a
Smile 5 What know we their Internal Conſtitution, Where were we #n the day o
their Creation, that we ſhould pronounce of their Natures but by their £ fetts ?
If thus jt ſhould be, how facile, how explicate is the Solution of this great Queſtion :
Celeſtial Bodies, though Lucid, though Fiery, may have ſome of them a co/d Ema-
nation, and at their opportunity they may cauſe a Winterly Weather, nor only by
their chill Emanation from above, bur by the conſequett Attration of the Cold
here below , as all Homogeneous Bodies naturally obſerve. one another.
$ 64. Verily we ſeem to flutter neer ſome Truth, when the Scripture it ſelf
ſeems to teach us ſo monſtrous things as Waters above the Heav'ns, placed there,
wot you what but for the tempering of Celeſtial Heat ? or ſome worſe, becauſe un-
known reaſon ? Ger: Vofſ. de 1delolatr. IT. 39. and our own Learned Gregory, belide
the Fewand Ancient Chriſtian : what may there not be contain'd in the Celeſtial
Bodies, (Seas or Mines) it there may be Elementary Bodies in the utmoſt Circum-
ference of the Heaven ? Our narrow Imaginations'cramp the Planets, as far as the
Diſtance diminiſhes them to ſight, not daring to look into the vaſt Continent of
thoſe unknown Orbs, which it may be are as little Homogeneous as the Globe of
the Earth, which ſeems a Globe of Duſt, and ſimilar 41d , to thoſe that have nor
deſcended into the heart of it, to thoſe that have not viewed the Foſſiles, the Afene-
rals, Metals, concrete 7uices, Subterranean Fires, &c. 'Tis clear that the Planers
are not made only tor Reflexton, bur alſo for Aodification of Light and Heat. And
Light, it there be any Connate Spirit in the Lucid Body , 1s apt to convey the
Radiation, as the pazmted Glaſs tranſmutes its Colour along with the Beam , that
{hoots through it : the variety of the Colour, we muſt ſay again, doth argue a diffe-
rence of Spirit and Confiſtence, as in the Yolk and White of an Egg is manifeſt.
$ 65. Bur 2 may becold as the Dis moſt (no Waters, no Lakes, no Seas ſup-
poled) by extrinfecal Denomination, We ſay 2 then, who knows but that Zsghr
and Cold may have kindneſs one for the other ? Tis a great Speculation that is betore
us. When I was arrived in Philoſophy fo far, as to hearken to the diſcourſe of
the Spirics of Natural Bodies, ro which by Afent and Experience Univerſal all
Attivity belongs, and finding that what they call Spirirs, were for the moſt _—
K ug


34


The Adivity of Cold, whence. Book 1.


bur zgneows parts of the Compound, I juſtly cry'd up Avicen the Phylician , who

owns the Elements Actual Exiſtence in the Compolition, as the Exittence of Fire

among the relt : but when I was advertiſed from ſo great Authority as my L* Ye-

r#/am, who ſomewhere tells us, that amongſt Natural Bodies there is tound a C 0/d

Spirit, | confeſs | was at tome Loſs, as to the ſtating the Queſtion Affirmative,every

S4irit being the Actuous part of the Body. Attending farther therefore to whar

was propolcd, concerning Heterogeneous Mixtures found in the ſame Body, by rea-

ſon of which the ſame Vegetable or Mineral may be qualified ſundry wayes, as in

Salt, Pepper, Opium, Gc. conliſting ot a Hot and alſo Crude Spirit, ſubtilty wea-
ved rogether , | began ro admit of a co/d>pirit ; or rather having admitted ir, to
gueſs the Reaſon ot its Activity, as borrowed from the vicinage ot the warmer Cor-
puſcles, as it a Spirit were nothing elſe but the Igneous Particle s#cr#ſted in the
Body ; as if. the Spirit were Active upon one account, and ſeeme. Cold
upon the other. For Cold it ſelf, at leaſt in compariſon of Heat, is but a 4z// and
ſlow Quality ; that ic may be a great queſtion, wherher ſetting afide its Figure and
Gravity, it hath any pure Attivity of Inſlux or Emanation, or no : for the Preſlure
it makes by reaſon of it> Gravity or Figure, is nor Activity of Emanation, ſuch as
is found in Fire, This it owes to Warmth perhaps. So that if God fhuuld annihi=
late the Celeſtial Warmth, there would be no Elevation, or Emanation of a Cold
Spiric, all would fink and ye flat upon the Snrface of its Cold Earth, as in a moſt
unlively Chaos. Hence it may be, betore God was pleaſed to make the Zight or
Heat Celeſtial, the Spirit of God is expreſly ſaid zo move on the Face of the Warers,
ro keep them in their ſerviceable'(and therefore Natural) Fiuidiry, which otherwile
would be ſullen, and put on their lcie, unpliant, and unſerviceable Rigor, For the
Subterranean Fires, too much made of by ſome, canuot ſo much as conliderably ſup-
ply the want of the Celeſtzal; lince 'tis notorious, that on the top of etnairtlclf,
there lies all the year a continual 5now.

. $ 66, The Heat then of Celeſtial Bodies may be ſuch a friend to the Aiviry
of the Cold Spirit, as to raiſe it from its Centre, and keep it up in ſuſpenſe, as under
the Poles it doth, toward the generation of 3nd, Snow, Aiſts, Clouds, &c. whar
the Northern Voyages ſufficiently teſtifie, teſtihe I mean concerning the Heat thar
is many times felt = amidſt the very fountains of Ice. In this caie Cold firit
a&ts by Corporeal Contact and Gravitation of Thoſe Bodies that wade in the Ar-
moſphere : That's one way.

$ 67, But again, the ſame Agent that raiſes that Exhalation, may, if it be in-
couraged, hurry, and drive the Cold Atome, and impart a forced Activity to it, as in
the generation of Hail may be ſeen, and in all cs/d Winds, and eſpecially on thoſe
ſignal times, when Froſt and Tceis found on the ground, the Sky having been Clou-
dy, by the piercing of a harp Wira, bulling all the Night before. That's a ſecond,
$. 6%, Burſure Co/dappears not always under a forced, ſometimes with a pro-
per and Natwal Actvity, being quick, and agile, penetrative, and pungent, like
the Fiery Atome, entring the Body, and tollowing the Leading Atome with a vehe-
ment Ns into the ſame z not by Gravitation only, becauſe then there would be
bur little Froſt within doors, where there is little Gravitation, yea all Congelation
would begin at the top only, when as in Veſſels of Wood and Metal , the tide and
bottom of the Water 1s uſually as ſoon congeled as the top it ſelf,
$ 69, Letus ſee whether Lzght have no Energie in this matter. Surely if any
thing may be entitled ro what Philoſophers call the Spirit of the World, This is it,
the ſmalleſt and moſt A&ive Body in the World ; in tion conteſt ro be Inſtan-
taneous, in ſubtlety incredible, and abſolutely incomprehenſible. The vaſt A#ivity
of Flame 1s ſeen in the force and ſwiftneſs of a Ball diſcharged from Cannon, &c. in
the prodigious Eryptions of Earthquakes ; but Flame it ſelf comes ſhort of Light,
as to Activity, as far as the Sphere of Calefattion, as we have ſaid, is narrower than
that of I/umination. An Inch of Flame, if it multiplies it ſelf but in one ſtraight
line to the Eye, at three or tour Miles diſtance, of how rare , how ſubtle Particles
muſt


, ” Ws Yea oe
W_WTCPT OCR.


Chap. g. Light the Spirit of the Univerſe.


CE_CC——  _-


5


muſt that one ſingle Kay conliſt ? But when that Zucid Inch (as all Luminous Bo-
dies ſpread themliclves Spherically) (hall ſend its Beams through 10900 Lines (0
far protended, even as many as the Eyes, which can be imagined to be placed in
all differences of Polition ; I ſay ic argues the Zight to be, tor [ubt/ ty of Eſſence,
and ſwiftneſs of Afotion (tor the One tollows the Other) 3ncomprehenſible. Hence 1
may argue thus : The molt actuous Subſtance in the world (1 viiue nor whether the
Periparetick allows any ſuch Notion, or no)13 the Spirit of the World, But Light is
ſuch, £7go. Light, or Heat, One of them is ; bur the Premiles rightly conlider'd,
it will be tound, chat (lince Both are Adtive) Light hath not its Activity quatenes
of kin to Heat, but Heat rathcr, quate:44 Lamino:z, From hence doth Heat learn
co ſhed it ſelf into a Sphere of W.mth round abvur, becauſe it is of the [ame Na-
ture with Zight : but Light 15 ihe xg@ny Sxnxty of that Quality, and indeed of a/!
Attivity, at leaſt as much as uſes to be imputed to Heat, b-cauſe in the Competitor-
ſhip for Sprighrfulneſs, we find one fo znfinitely ſurpaſſed by the other.

9 70. This Diſcourſe ſuppoſerth Light 0 be a Body, and may well doſo, for
very many Arguments not to be produced here , ſeeing 'tis enougn that the Pey;-
pateticks | hope can produce no Accident whatſoever, /eparab/e-trom its Primitive
Subjett, or any Migration of the one withour the other : the Power of ater,
and Edaition thencefrom , are meer Words, educed our of the power oi a Verbal
Philoſophy.

'$ 71, Bur then for its relation to Cold : before we ſpeak of That, we muſt con-
ſider, that though the Zight and Hear be ſubſtantially the ſame Spirit, yer tor Do-
Qrines (ake, elpecially bcing different Obje&s of the Senſe, they mult be ſaid to
differ ſpecie, even as Air doth from Water ; though inthe molt probable opinion
it differ only trom it by a vaſt rarefattion or Attenuation, juſt as our Light trom
Heat ; on which account it may be true to fay, that Zzght is the Author of ſome
Action in Nature, which Heat is not : for the Hear and Light dittcr only in renuity,
or rarity, and denlity, the Seat of Fire being neer the center of the Luminous
Sphere, while purer Light is neerer the circumference z the Sphere of Illumination
being ſo Vaſt, the Circumferential parts of the Spirit of ſo incredible Subtlety, mult
of neceſſity be denuded from all manner ot Heat real, and ſenſible, that whatſoever
is aſcribed to the Spirit fo attenuated, may in no wiſe be thought reaſonable to be
aſcribed to any thing elſe, ſuch a vaſt ditterence interpoling. So that it may not tol-
low , notwithſtanding the 1dentiry of the opirir, that if Hear be contrary to Cold,
Light muſt alſo be depured to the ſame Contrariery. Hence there is made way for
a reconcilernent to amity with the Cold Spirit, the Contrariety being removed.

$ 72, Now that Cold hath ſuch amy and acquaintance with the Zuminor
Spirir, I prove, becauſe Cold is an Adtive quality, Ative by way of Emanation.
Thus in Stone-building, that Room 1s the cooler for the walls ſake, the Emanation
from thence infrigidating the place : but it it be ſo ative, whence hath it this Ati-
vity ? we anſwer, from the univerſal Zuminous Spirit implanted in it. This is con-
firm'd,; becauſe Cold is not only att:ve in it felt, according to its meaſure, as Lighr
is, bur it reſembles alſo the manner of the eAtiivity, Doth Light caſt it ſelt into a
Sphere, Cold alſo hath its Sphere (irs narrower Sphere indeed) of her AQtivity.
Place it in the Centre, and all Parts ſhall feel ics Influence, ſo do all things imitate
or rather expreſs the motion of the Univerſal Spirit.

$ 73, Nor can it be otherwiſe imagin'd, ſince into the moſt deep receſles of the
Earth 'cis believ'd the Light of the Sun pzerces through the Opacous Body, giving
Life and Spirit toevery Mineral there in his kind. Then what Influence the Heaven-
ly Light hath on the Animal and Natural Spirits all the World ſceth ; how cheer-
tully and bris4/y our Spirits behave themſelves in a ſerene Sexafon ! How au# and
cloudy in cloſe Air ! what alteration our Bodies find at night! how torpid our
Limbs, and given to heavineſs, compoſed for fleep and darkneſs! A little Light we
ſee raiſes us, wakes us, calls for the Spirit to the Circumference, cheereth the ſick, is
welcom to thoſe that are frighted with Spettres and Phantaſms, the Day _ "

K 2 | 3


It imparts ſome Aftivity to Cold. Book 1.


All, and bids us g&00d Morn. The Morning Cock chants not but upon warning
given by the Light. The very Vegetable Spirit in Darknels 1s a ſleep , (Darkneſs |
mean ot the Time, not of the Place, a great Argument tor our Conjecture,) Hence
the good Houſwite gives no leave ro broach her Liquor in the Night-Seaſon. Add
that the ſubtle mixture of the Cold Soirit delights in the white Colour, Froſt, Snow,
Ice, Hail, Nitre, Quick-ſilver : but Whiteneſs partakes of the Light , by which (1
do not ſay 'tis viſible in dark, but) diſpoted to more vilibility than other obſcurer
pieces, Hence we anſwer an Objetion, becauſe inthe dark recefles of the Earth
no Light is perceptible. Reſp. The Spirit called Light or Heat, is Innominate ot it
ſelf, is only termed Light in relationto the Senſe ; ſo that we muſt not conclude
the Non- Exiſtence of the Spirit from the Non-apparence,becauſe more is required to
the one than to the other. We ſee not the dancing Mores in the Air, but where the
Sun diſcovers them, howſoever they trisk continually by us : no man by Night ſees
the Lightſome Ray of the Luminous Body,jf it run parallel to the Eye. Nature hath
not given us Senſes to perceive all poſſible,bur all convenient Objefts ; no Aicroſcope
reaches All things that are really exiſtenr.

$ 74. As to Coldthen, who knows not that the Brighteſt Night in Winter, and
molt Star-light, are uſually moſt Freſty ? Dixeris Colum eſſe frigiaum, ſaith Ke-
pler, who railes the Objettion, to which he gives little SatistaQtion : nay, that the
vehement Congelations are tound about Day-break.

$ 75. All this concerns every Planet in the Heaven, not the Sun it ſelf excep-
ted. I have wondred often at Winter-time to ſee Relenting Air in the Sun-(hine,
. and freezing in the Shade, I concluded zo things, both that Co/d had its Attivirty,
and that the very Solar-light was no Enemy to 1t, nat the ſecwndary Light, what-
ſoever ir does if in its primary, or more perpendicular.

y 76. Here it will be argued, how comes % Light to be the chief favoxrer of
Cold, fince All Light at ſuch a diſtance from the Centre doth the fame ? Whar ſhall
we ſay ? If 2 were the remoreſt fromythe Earth we had ſome pretence, but Þ hath
that plea for his Title. If we ſhall fay from the difference of his Fabrick and Spirit
therein lodged, and this argued from ies 2375 Light , then 2 will put in an equal
claim. Reſp. Þ is moſt remote, but the Conſiſtence and the Spirit is different. 2 is
brisker to all appearance, H glows darkly and ſullenly z 2 and 2 are bright, and fla-
ming Comer-like, neer to ſparkling and Scintillation, this argues a quick Spirit,while
Þ glows within the Profundity of his Globe. Unleſs you will exrort from us a con-
feſſion, that we do believe that the Reaſon of the crude Light that appears in 2 to
lien the crude Spirit, placed there by Nature, which we are not forced to avow ;
in the mean time ſufficiently ſalving the inſtance from 2, which we make not equally
crude, by her vicinity to our Globe of the Earth, as alſo to the Sun, The beſt of it
is, that Both theſe ways of Explication are hugely reconcileable, ſeeing a Spirit
will ſecretly paſs along with a Beam, yea with a Flame too. So the Sublunar Cold
ſhall be martial'd upon a double account, the Agile nature of Light, and the Fiomo-
geneity of the Spirit convey'd by it: as if it ſhould be thus with the D, ſhe ſhould be
the Lady of Moiſture, upon the ſame twofold reſpect, viz. the T epor of her Beam,
and the Sympathy of the Sublunar Moiſture with the Zynar. Surely this doth not
ſubſtirute v4o/ence inſtead of Nature , when we ſay that the Co/d Spirit may be
ated ab extrinſeco by the Celeſtial Light: becauſe All Zzghr (ſo for want of words
we call that I»nominate Spirit) is of the fame nature, the Light Celeſtial with the
Light or Spirit inbabiting the Sublunar Body z and by reaſon of this Homogeneity
One is naturally governable by the other, the Inferior by the Superior ; ſo is Iron
2arurally, not violently, though ab extrinſeco attrated by the Ifagner.


CHAP,


tt dy Ns;


S A \ 2 a
a Ee. bps ep My


4 —_
EL. aw


Chap. 10, All Conſtitutions &c. accounted for by the vii. 40


CHAP. X.


The five Planets added to the Luminaries ſalve the Phznomena, winds
blowing where they liſt hinder not their Progneſtick. Turbulency of Air
from contrary Cauſes. Jupiter (again) a reſiſter of Moiſture, The Pla-
nets not S1gns only, bat Cauſes. Dominion aſcrib'd to them in Screptare,


O have we indeavour'd toward the ſettling of a CharaQeriſtic of All the Plane-
tary Bodies, conſtituting ſome of a hot Spirit, and They either in a more In-

renſe degree as © 6 g, or Remils as Þ 2 h, all Procurers of Sublunar Moiſture ,
one and but oze, how Lucid ſoever, yeteither, indued with a Co/d and Dry Spirit,
or at leaſt befriending it, no Procarer but a Reſiſter of Moiſture,

$ 1. And now All Variations of Air, reduc'd to the Laboratories of Cold and
Heat, may be ſafely imputed to the Bodies Celeſtial,lince they appear of fo diſtin,
ſo contrary Energies ; e. g. not-only Rains and Thunders ro Moiſt and Warm, bur
the Froſts and Winds to Cold Produttives : the Winds, -I ſay, to Cold Cauſes mixt
with warmer ; if with an eqza! Mixture, then the Winds are Dry, it with an #e-
qual portion of the warm Spirit, then Rain commonly is join'd with them.

$ 2. And whereas our Principles proteſs to give Reaſon concerning the very
Determination of the Winds , what hinders ? for when our Zord faith, that the
Wind blows where it liſteth, He is far from making them Animate ; He means thar
the Winds were indued only with'an 1nterpretative Freedom, thereby excellently
declaring the Freedom of Divine Grace, which often chooſeth its Province where to
blow. He doth not deny its Emblem a Natwal Cauſe either of Exiſtence or Deter-
mination, He only tels us the Origin of the Wind is Inviſible, and the Range of ic
uncertain, not fix'd or bound to any one Poznt, from whence, or any Coaſt on which
it blows ; we know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes, we (ee not the firſt Head.
Spring ot the Inviſible CataraQt, nor how far it runs on drift: He doth not intend
to deny, that the Heavens are the Cavuſe of ir, as in the Trade-winds and Afonſons
are manifeſt, which God bringeth in their Seaſons out of his Treaſures, as the Pfal-
miſt ſpeaks, Pſal. C V. nay he maketh uſe of the very Prognoſtich of foul Weather,
uu faith the Greek, which in its Definition includeth Wind as well as Rain, from
the Angry face of the Heavens, S. MMatth. XVL,

$ 3. Theſethings thus eſtabliſhed, former Argameits that lay againſt the AC
ſignment of the Sun and Moon alone, find their Solution : when we asked if the
Account of the Conſtitution lay only on them Two, whence came the Storm, the
Violence ? it was ſcarce rationally imputable to two Stars only, but ro Five more,
as Porent every whit as They, well it may.

$ 4. Weask'd again, whence came the Duration of the Conſtitution, for the
ſpace of a Week, Afonth, &c ? not from the two Luminaries alone, but from the
Other Axxilsaries , ſeeing & ſometimes is found to keep his Poſture for a week
unchanged, the like may Yand & ; a Week ſaid I? yea a Month almoſt, as % ordi-
narily doth ; yea h may hover about one and the ſame part of the Zodiac almoſt
for the ſpace of 8 Months, in his Stations, Retrograde Courles, &c.

$ 5. Next, as to the Un{uitableneſs of the Conſtitution to the Seaſon, or the
Time of the day. It nor Sun nor Moon alone can produce Warmth in the Night,
the Reſt conſpiring with Him or Them may eafily, If the Sun cannot raiſe Thun-
der in the Winter- Solſtice, or at Chriſtmas, h % d may be fo palited, as to play ſuch
Gambols.

$ 6, Laſtly, whereas we juſtly demanded of Thoſe that make the Luminaries
the ſole Arbirrators of the Changes of the Air, Vnde frigs ? (a Queſtion that ex-
erciſes the Natvraliſt, as much as TVnde malxm ? did the Chriſtians of old ) we


have indeayoured to find it a Terreſtrial Spirit, call it what you pleaſe, N3troz,
L Salt,


35


Jupiter's chill lofi. Planets not bare Signs. Book 1.


Salt, &c. Shis Terreſtrial Spirit, regulated according to its viciſlicudes, from the
Moditication of the Light Celeſtial, chiefly (among the Planets) by the Radiance
of 2 , by 41 ſay, who for the moſt part is found by Experience to incourage
Cold by his Preſence, the others rather by their Abſence.

$ 7. And this cold Cauſe l have conteſs'd Aſtrology is bound to had, {ince there
are Conſtitutions of the Air exiſtent, which manifeftly argue Comtrariant cauſcs
evenat the ſame time : for what elſe are Nocturnal} Lightnings about Autumn,
often in Cold Air ? What elſeare Lighming and Hail, Fire and Freezing ?

$ 8. Hitherto muſt we bring Ail Twrbalency, ſince all Trouble in Nature pro-
ceeds from Contraries, trom Antzpathies and Impatiencies mutual of Several Na-
tures at the ſame time ingaged. Thus (hall we fee a vaſt Cloud , pregnant with
Thunder, bear up agaizft the #ind, and a Superior Cloud ride contrary to the Inle-
rior : ſuch do I undertake all Conſticutions are, which are Droughty, Soulrry, and
yet ſerene : the Serenity and the Drought being imputed to a co/d Original, mixt
with the Contrary.

$ g. - Sothat it is no miracle to obſerve white Froſty Mornings in May or 7uly,
uſhering in a ſoultry Day, yea it is a known Prognoſtick of {uch a day to find a
Fog (proceeding trom a cold Caule. ) blinding our early Proſpe& in the Country:
That and hazy tr , the firſt Zinexments of Milt or Fog, we impute to the Influence
of 2, blended or contigur'd with his kellows.

$ 10. Certainly is he juſtly defin'd the Reſiſter of Adoiſture, being the Parent
of Serenity ; of fuch reliſtance, that when he cannot prevail ſo far as to hinder a
cloudy Sky, he will (and 'tis a fine Experiment) do his beſt then, to make the Cloud
Barre» and Untruitfal.z who if it happen that heis overpowred ſo far, as to admit
a 05ſt Conſtuution obtruded upon him , yet he will maintain his power ſo as to
choke ap che Moiſture with a 2£ft, or niggardly crumble it into a Driſle.

9. 14. And whereas it gay be obſerved by the ſtudious Inquirer into theſe
things, that our Principle of Cold may ſometimes be deeply ingaged in Great and
Violent Rains or dangerous Flaſhing Lightnings, which are Moiſt and Warm Produ-
tions; the Anſwer 1s legible in the Obje&tion, for vyo/ence in Nature many times
preſuppoſes ſome great Reliftance, which for a while ſtaves it off, "till that Reliſtance
like a Dam in a Stream, being broken and overpowr'd, admits the Danger to (hew
it ſelt. 'Tis not often that One Planet is deeply ingaged, (deeply I ſaid, for there is
a difference) at ſuch times, but when ſuch an Hour cometh , the Violence may be
really aſcribed to Caxſes contrariant, their Attion, Reattion, Refiſtance, and Coun-
rer-reſift ance one to the other. All Lightnings are not alike Dangerous ; ſome play
more remote, out of harm's way ; ſome flath angrily and ſudden, near the Earth ;
Experience of the Forge teacheth, that a cold Infuſion addes violexce to the Flame,
This cold Aivity is diſcernible alſo by Hasl-ſtones at ſuch times intermix'd : how-
beit ſuppoſe there is none, becauſe ſome Siruations are no friends to that Meteor,
the Yiolenceyt ſelf ts no obſcure token of contrary Aion, as we ſee commonly in
Thunder-ſhowers, with extraordinary Copiouſneſs ſucceeding the Flaſh or Crack.
T ante molss erat —ſo many and ſo potent are the Celeſtial — tub uſed by Pro-
vidence in the Alterations over head , the Sun, the Moon, and the Reſt, as it ſeems,
of the Number. =

$ 12. Whentherefore God is pleaſed tocall the Lamizaries, and in Them the
Reſt alſo, by the Name of $5gn, he is far from denying his own Ordinance , where.
by he hath made them not $zgns and 4 but Authors and Cauſes of Inferior
Mutations, giving them Rule, Gen. 1. a ignal Dominion over the Earth : Dominion
ſeeming to be a very e/£gyptign word, from whom Aſes in all probabiliry bor-
rowdit; nay thereare no leſs than three words (ignifying the ſame literally and
properly, wo In DID in Hebr. and Chaldee: fo that there is no arguing from
the ſigns in Gen. I. unleſs wecan find in our heart to aver, that the D is a Sign of the

Month, and the Sun a Sign of Spring and Summer, &c. a bare Sign.
$ 13. As weak is the Argument drawn by Learned men, Pscxe, as.
om


Chap. 11. Aſpeis New, rejeSed.


39


the word Expaiyuy, uſed, a5 we have feen by the Ancient Aſtrologers, when they
treat nevertheleſs ot the Efetts : lince every Cauſe not hidden, bur incurring into
Senſe, is apt to ſignifie, as Rains ſignifie Flouds, and Turbulent Winds a great Sea,
Nor could the Ancient Obſervers be imagin'd to watch the Celeſtial Motions with
ſuch care and diligence, but with hopes of obtaining the Canſe,- in which they knew
they had made no {mall progreſs, when atter a little Obleryation they concluded
the $29,


CHAP. XI.
Aſpects, the Old juſtified ; the New rejeted, They depend not ons Har-


monical Proportion, Their Revolution, Duration, and unqueſtionable
Significancy. The ſizgle Aſpedts no abſolute Cauſe, but only Caula fine
qua non. A large Sou! required to the due Contemplation of the Bodies
Celeſtial. ihe Certainty of the Moon's Natural Warmth. That being
admitted, the Congreſſes with Her make way for diſcovery of the Reſt.


6 6s Lanetary A/petts are no vain Terms of a Bawbling Art, but are Myſte-

P rious Schematiſms Of a ſecret rorce 2nd Power toward the Alteration of
the Sublanar World, efpecially the Air, and thoſe Great Iflues that depend thereon,
according to the Natures of the Influences, and the Intluenced.

y 2. Planets therefore, without ſuch Habitude, maſt of neceſſity have their
Energy ; for on what ſhall the Efficacy of the Combina:ion be founded, if the
Terms combin'd be utterly infignificant ? Complication of { 3phres make no tale.

$ 3. Belides'tis unreaſonablero deem, that Two in Configuration thould be
Atttive,and twice two without ſuch Combination be inefeftive.

y 4. The new Aſpects, though the Diligent Kep/er after his Tutor Mich.
Meſtlin aſcrib'd mach to them, are not much to be regarded, unleſs perhaps the
Lincunce and Semiſextile.

y 5- The Quincunce Kepler reduces to the Oppoſition ; by the ſame reaſon
one would think may the Semi/extile to the Conjunition, both differing 30 degrees
from their Principals on each lide, yet the Parity holds not.

y$ 6, Somettmes,the Qx4ntzle makes a ſhew, and it That have ought in it, the
Biquintile will look for ſome Reſpe& ; and it ſo, then the /iginti/e, and Duinde-
ele, and Deci/e, &c. will alſo look to be courted ; while we hope we go on ſuch
Principles, that we fhall neyer be forced to own ſuch Driblets of AſpeRts.

$ 7. Thele when they happen with notable Concurrence, it may ſeem that their
T-ſtimony is not to be refuſed ; bur they very ſeld>m ſo happen, and when they
do meet, there may be found a fufhcient Aﬀtivity without them. As Ang. XX. A®
1621, in Kepler, there is a Record of a grand Effet, Daſting Rains, and Places
ſtruck with Thunder, to vihich there are aſſigned, belide the O/d Aſpetts Lunar and
others, two Luintiles and a Biquintsle: here, ſay I, this Notable Eti-&@ may be
accounted tor without theſe Qzintzles, &c. The Concurrence of ſuch New Devi-
ſes move not, becauſe upon ſuppoſal of even fezgned Cauſes, even thoſe pretended
vaia Cauſes may by Accident concur.

y 8. Yea Aſtrologers are lick of theſe New AſpeRts when referr'd to the Þ, and
That not without Reaſon, fince the Lunar Sexrile, one of the Old AſpeRts, -is /carce
of 2 di/cernible Ethcacy ; whatſoever is /zſs, ſure is Imperceptible. The Senz/ex-
tile, as we have hinted, deing therefore to be diſcarded, yea the 2 uincunce it may be
hath no Activity, but what is founded on a Fallacy of the Cauſe.

y 9. Adultiplying of Aſpett; is tq be taken heed of, proceeding from 3 falſe per-
{waſion, viz, that all tteQs Sublunar are to be imputed to the meer Planetary Habi-
tudes , even Kepler himlelt was offended ar ſome better Principles, whey he firſt
brought in this Aborrive, of which hereatter, | L 2 y 10,


A + a


37


Old Aſpefs maintained. Book FE


_—


$ 10. The O/d Aſpetts, according to Ptolemy , are five: 1. Conjunttion,
whoſe Charaterts f. 2, Sexrile, marked thus, . 3+ Luaarate, DO. 4. Trine,
A. 5. Oppoſuion, &.

$ 11. Conjunttion, when two Celeſtial Bodies are (ſituate at or toward one end
of the ſame Line perpendicular, in the ſamz Sign and degree, which Line being pro-
rended reacheth the Centre of the Earth.

$ 12, Oppoſition, when they are found at the Extremes of the ſame Diameter,
24%, at V1 Signs diſtance. |

$ 13. *T1s hard to ſay whether of Theſe have the greateſt Efficacy , for the
Conjnnttion may be more potent in ohe Refpett, and the Oppoſition in another : the
& is more for Warmth and Moiſture, the & for cool Air and Winds, ſeeing the fur-
ther the Ray is protended, the more ic befriends the Co/d Spirit. Note, this muſt be
underſtood per /e, and of its own nature, howbeit by accident it may prove other-
wiſe.

$ 14. Trineand 2uaarate, where the Celeſtials are diſtant 4 3* or 4" part
of the Sphere, s. e. four or three Signs of X11, have a notable proportion of Attivi-
ty ; inthe one the Rays make a r5ghr Angle, in the other. an ob7uſe, not much wide
troma Right Angle ar the Centre of the Earth : yea'a 7rine makes juſt a Right An-
gle (ometimes, according to the difference of the Ob/iquity of the Z oatac.

$ 15- The Sextile, whereby the Celeſtialsat rwo Signs diſtance, and no more,
make a very acute Angle on the Surface of the Earth , whoſe Lines being proten-
ded cut one the other much on this (ide of the Centre, the moſt imbecil therefore
of All the Aſpects,

$ 16. So the Aſpedts it may be have not their Foundation ſo much on Har-
monical Proportion, as on Phyſical and Optical Principles.

$ 17. Alpes of Planets are in Number xc 111, being diſtributed among the
ſeveral Complications of the Planets.

$ 18. Complicationsare XX, thus exhibited :


Hh» xD» 6d ad 2D Þ& Þ»
hy 23 ds og Pg

bBL BY SL WY

ho to $9

hs yd

h %


$ 19. Theſe Coroplications, let out by their ſeveral Aſpefts, &f & A &c. if
every Planet were alike free, would amount to cv : but when @ with F and g, and
Theſe among themſelves, admit no Aſpe&t but &, the Summe is abated to X C111.

$ 20, Unleſs the #tmoft Diſtances of 2 and gy from the Sun may be reckon'd in,
being tartamomnt to & with him.

$ 21, Someone Or more of theſe Aſpects are extant every Month, to qualifie
or vary the Seaſon according as the Decree Eternal hath Jaid out their Motions.
For if there be no, there may be & , if neither, a n or A &c.

$ 22, Yetthe Periods of ConjunRions are rarer, Þ and % meet © but once in
the Twelvemonth, & once in zwo years, 2 about a Year and half only, & in two
Months, and the Þ runs through every AſpeR with every Planet once in the Month ,
ſo that if an Aſpe& be any thing, or Celeſtial Influence any thing , the Afoon is a
Great Diſpenſer of it.

$ 23. Land gmeectin $ or 9 Months, Þ with d about z years. 2% with 4
ſomewhat more. H 2 & with Land Þ according to their different meeting with ©.
Þ and 2 inno leſs than 20 years, called therefore the Great Conjunttion,

$ 24. Theſbifting of theſe Aſpe&ts every Revolution is obſervable, how they
fall in the ſubſequent year later than in the precedent : as & © Þ later by a Fort-
night, f © % abouta Month, & © & above a Month, & © ? about halt a year;
& © 2, thovgh at 20 years diſtance, ſhoulders out halt a year alſo,
$25, Some-


ham Bd. tas .


VE TT TEST WE,


Chap. 11, Variety of their Periods and Duration.


41


$ 25. Sometime 2 and g falling Retrograde are willing to ſalute and be ſaluted
by one another, and, az it happens, by the Superzors alſo z ſo that an Aſpe& may
be reiterated within leſs than irs ordinary or dire&t Period And wherefore All
this ? bur for the various diſpenſation of Nature, and the moſt of it within tbe me-
mory of Man, though it be not neceſſary the Divine Providence ſhould confine its
Tranſcendent Actions to the ſhort Obſervation of the Small Epoche of one Man's
Life. Howbeit the AG0n's Revolutions are of a ſhort Term, whoſe conftant Viſits,
as we have heard, of every Planer,cannot be zd/e, unleſs we make All a dumb Shew,
nay it were well we did, tor then there would be oft-times Myſtery couch'd. Sure
if there be ſo much of Art or Wiſdom, there muſt be ſomewhat of Natural con-
cern in her various Phaſes.

$ 26, Onething we have not conlider'd yet, of no ſmall concern in this The-
ory , and That is their Duration : for though exa&t Calculation pretends to /cru-
ples, Firſt, Second, yer Natural Cauſes are not fo ſtraight-lac'd ; a Convex-Glaſs
will burn at ſeveral diſtances,

ys 27. Confining therefore the &, and with That the reſt of the Configutations
ro the ſame Sign and Degree, and allowing the Acme of the Aſpett to take place at
the preciſe Aſtronomical Time, with proportional allowance of Vigor or Abate-
ment, according tothe Scruples of Acceſs and Receſs ; yet true it is that the Phyli.
cal Influence of an AſpeR, exerts it ſelf before and after, 5 e. as long as the Heaven-
ly Moveables keep within the Terms of the Definition. Such may be the Motion
of the Planets, that they may keep even to the ſame Degree(though not Minute) for
a conliderable Space. On this account we ſee an Eclipſe, Solar or Lunar, laſts ſeveral
Hours, whoſe exa& Central Calculation is tied ro a Minute.

$ 28. Lo then another Suſpicion, of zo 4/e Conceit, lince Nature hath made
nothing in vain, that of © Þ ſhould laſt about 4 or 5 hours; dog, do h,o oY
3 dayes, d © d 8 dayes, d OL 9. Again,& Pg laſts g dayes, d hs, & 4 & the
like. But & Þh 2 continues 24 dayes. Theſe are the chief, and tor Brevities ſake
we content our ſelves with thetn, |

$ 29. Nowas concerning their Influence, and the Specification thereof, be
pleas d to take notice, that there is a Table goes about, pretending to acquaint us
with their ſignifications, with ſome little Modifications indeed, according to the
four Seaſons ot Spri-g, Summer, &c. but as to the main agreeing with it Self and
Truth. Let the quainter Reader be pleaſed not to nayſeate ir, leſt the Know-
ledge of Celeſtials ſuffer thereby : 1 do nor ſay 'tis exat and beyond Amendment :
1 (hall offer roward ſome Amends my Self, but for the General I ſay, No man's
Art or Experience, Syllogiſm or InduCtion hath yer, or ever (hall, abolith ic,


M e 30, The


th. Pe I" IT + ti.


Aſpefs Energy : partial Cauſes. Book 1.


d 30. The Valgar Table follows thus,
> | WE. 0 0.
h | Pro natura[Venti cum hu- |Plavia. Vents, Pluv, 1's: Venti,
| \aer remiports mid. Imber. Ton. Tonitrw. Grand. Ton, |Tonitra,
ImMutatir. Plnvis. Plavia, 'Venti ficct. Pluv, frig. Vent,
; 5p Freg. remif]. |Frigns rim. - | Nix. Nebula. Frig, rem.
% : Turbid, verti. |Tarb, vel Plu-, Vere. ©
Aeris tempe- |Vent, Temperat, Ton. Tempeſf. | via. Aſtar.
ries, Turb, venti, | Grands. Ton. | Autumn,
Frigus rem. Vents. vel pluv. Hycm,
| i 89 "—_ Turbid. 7 (Fc.
4 6, Hnum. Vent. play. Pluvis f rigida, Pluv, Tonitru
Hum. taler re- Vent. imbres. | Pavia, Tonity, grands.
mif. Vent. nubes. | Pluvia frig. |pluv. velturk,
Neb. Pruins, Vent, wives. | Pluvia. Nix. Frig. remiſſ.
Nubes. Nis. "vÞ |
© |Friges & hum. , Pluvia. ns
minitur. Venti aubiferi,| Imbres.
Xftate tonat. Pluvia.
Frig, rem.


| Hum. vel and, Venti humaadi,
? Calor remiſſ, | #1 nubiferi,
Neb, turb, vel
N1x.
5 Venti interdum
| nubiferi. Ka


$ 31. Of which Table this is the Sentiment : the ©Dv&d are warmly affe-
Red, Þ and 2 moſt qualified for Co/d , and that the Contrary Planets produce their
Efte@ts according to their mixtures. © 9 & warm, for you ſee they bring figs re-
w{[um with them ; but the AſpeRs of h bring no ſuch News, except contigur'd
with & : neither brings Fany ſach remiſſion, except configur'd with ©. F* cold is
turther diſcernible in the produQtion of Hail in the Summer-time,'tts but twice men-
tion'd, viz. in his AſpeRts of © and & , ſo hit ſeems cauſes it. As for 2, 'tis true,
it reaches that he 15 not cold, bur pretty warm, and makes temperate Air, remits
Cold join'd with ©, and heightens it not,neither with $,nor 2, nor Þ.

$ 32. I wouldit were fo, though I feat it will not prove ſo, for this very Ta-
ble, now I look hard upon it, proclaims with me that 24 is a Reſiſter of Moiſture,
there being no mention of any Moiſture, but only Winds and Temperate Air, ex-
cept in that rare Aſpect of 24 and h, which comes 'tis known but once in 20 years.

$ 33. For the reſt the matter is even out of queſtion : who knows not, ſaid
Mr. Digges,as I remember long ago, that f © & brings Winds and Rain, &f or
other Aipe& of 2} © Winds, 24 2 ſerene weather, © h Clouds or Rain, & with Y and
v the like ? There is as much Evidence for them , and connexion natural with the
EffeR given, as in any Prognoſtick can uſually obtain.

$ 34- And Profeſſors mean no more than a Prognoſtick, or a partial Cauſe.
Wiſe men ſtumble ar and reje& theſe Definitions, becauſe they are not abſolute and
znfallible, in that the Event anſwered not one or two poor Obſeryations; ſo diſ-
carding good Knowledg, becauſe it vouchſafes not ro appear, and that in its Meri-
dian Evidence, to a haſty and impatient Cenſor. Raſhly enough ; for 'ris true , thar
a Flint ſtrikes fire, though the Spark doth not always catch : there may be [ndi/po-
ſitions, yea contrary Indications in Nature. For what Prognoſtich, 1 had almoſt 1aid
Definition of Nature is infallible, or 5adefeiſb/e ? I mean what ſengle Prognoſtich ?
for in the Concurrence, there is a Certainty of the Anſwer. But tor (ingle Aſpects
we come not to contradid our ſelves, who have avowed already, that the © and »
(and the like mult be (aid of the other Pairs) however reſpe&ing one the other, are
at


s
”%
be
\
þ
——
ry
W
.


ey


bY


Chap. 12. Energy ſutable to their Magnitudes. « car 43


De —_—


-at no hand Caaſes Toral, or CONE All that we fay is n they are notinſi ig-
" nificant; bur. havetheir” Share; Gas fe fine-quilus non. ©
- . $ 35. TheLanar the meaneſt, the Middle ſomewhat a ſtronger /V fn, the
three Wwperrars the chiefeſt.
_ 9.36, Even themeaneſt, the Lunar Aſpetts, do bode fach and ſuch Yaris
'tions, and that with Truth, for the zajor pare, though a firig! 2 Cauſe i
s$ 37. For we muſt enlarge our Thoughts, and not reckan (at this Leal
-by ourEye Planets are vaf\Bocies, whoſe Dimeniſions exceed the cHlp of
our narrow 'Phantaſms, of ach. diſproportion to our IdaKhat wetannot
xFach them, Aon fi te raperis, quit : to thelethen we muſt allow a FR
nonable Faculcy, commenſurable- ro their Magnitude.
-- 9.38. Leethe I befo many times {ſs thay the Farch, is aus Bodyftill;
for ba who takes not the Earth to be ach, lerhim Sail row the Ter7aqueous
Globe, and then cell me his gpidion: 'then' we mealure' theſe Bodies tight,
when we lbſeour ſelves in the prehenfion." Ff all havegreak Brains with
Tae, 1 apart b+ - fancy the Prarie vgy apr ra of this Iſland; fno'not of 24ngle
County —_— 0 —_ it w uh, Conte of
Yards inca aches, NE Hens Miles. z3atoFurlongs.:
$39. The Warmthof the.2 is not clear to >Senſe 251 aro
bur ro Reaſon it z z fo it is gs evident that I have Poresjn. wy B ©
ble though they be 1 that I have Voftrils. *
 $ 40. Then for its Vicini 2 Eb it ſelf Fjodgey combirng thet Heizh ts
of the © with the 'Y#ſs of th hat it hat t way below t 5H
paxſum 'infomuchthat ſhe Hahn 4M} t hearts, *zand is ©
cally muffled in it; a'fign that her diſtance is: reaſonable, ney iagoeverts-
oned to the flux of 1 Influence ard the Fake | IE]
to


.$-41. Asthe a Natung egreomrd by arte
the Sun, ſo the Nature of the reſt my oy J an pabirnd their


els with the Moon. (1) Becaufe ations occur wich
CS Men evety iS of Aſpect: A Or of © and 2
theres none, nor of 4, bitboth'2 "and 2 wii theſe Aﬀpetts tothe )!
(2) The Planets obſerve their Ailpect to: the @, and with" themfelves;
longer Periods of bir one or more, as you have heard, but the J i


ry Month 3.


CH A Pp. XK. C _YSROGO! (=: UEILDD
- l_ os —


$3f;" Tyme i Seience. hateth- oY ds Lights "0; 3; 4:!' | "Pigar Tab
-* epnſidered,' as to the & ©). '5, 6. No need
& * Lordſbipe in the Caſe... w The' d brings Wind qr Raju Rai fr th whe


"Dart, or Warmth (. the foneien of _ Fl.
| or without warmth Wy ſerene. __ ar cos wy nn
alſo 40 Wind. 14. loot herd repmine _


© Lord Verclant's ſent: "Linſchoten and Drake's reftinwny fo
Weather at a forall >.” ? 1 5:-Evidenct from Diaries for ſever ye =
f


16, 6 #Y, 4.) 2 7 worth obſerving, | 17. Aft bal ay
midnight | - \ midnight.” 18. Three, - days Arte
' fngle Evidence. 21. Partile and "Platick a diſtintion of A


$0). Change of the Mons | | Book I.


"— IT < 205 OS _


 wery y material.” 22. The Orbs, ſo. called; of the Plantts. 2 3. "Se
miſextile and Quincunx.' 24. Vicinity of  *: helÞs to\the credit of
© the New'YV's influence. 25. The Diary. 27, and 64. Rains
7. ry” at. the preciſe hour . of the Aſpef. 30. The Gradual me-
of Nature, from the firſt privation #0 Cont itutions Fempeſtuoin.
roſpet?" of the variety of the Lamar - Contributions for ſeven
ee, 32. How 'we came. to know ''the Nature of the Planets.
33- The: Þ.-not indifferent to Heat or Cold, yet may be fuſpeFed for
-@ Cold Planet. 34. Summer: days, not not Hot on the account of the ©
only. 35. Warmth in Winter days, and SR in Fr
E ' 37. Warmth. "the Congref not always ſo ſenſible. 39, 8
Ape; do zot fo oft miſs as hit. . 45. oo; ſervation de-
Gnde onr., Theory , 4 18 anſwers ObjeFions. Aſpe®s, Single
$a lar though they be, . bring, their Effe® above the A Ya of the


ry _—\ 48. The inclination Aﬀpeits Mechunically illuſtrated.
1 The fatal Stumble of the > Pandas ſavy.” $2. -Change-got- - Hamme


the ut+ or Rain inthe dicjuniive. 54. This
\ fomice 6 'te2y be of ao Rep The Ching e tather KB to
Hef ang So ly Winds.” 6. : : Cauſe of the North Wind 3s

ſn "1 Sor South. Wind a rarity...' 59-.The Wind

(6 on the day of the. New.Þ. .,60: Kepler made $oo little


F "the.d ©), 'revinced by his | own ''Diaries.' 62.: he'd


82k ba nent ws on alÞ Thnndery wil happen ar tha
noted with Kepler. 66.


29


my rs Prog-

Nor] wile int England; wet' beratiſe we are ati. 2 a he.
"Cauſe we are a Norther! Ein: we 65-, Adverſaries calle

_ - exonſtrate_the conir any-40 oh. Pret Wie —_ 1066-7 ?

(il Sor eeeperyor ler et


Is & meat lexſt hack { not main
for all our SIporing, whepwyl Es to ſpeak
to the ch.to.come upon the
by eres Ti cumin, ada COONS = 2
certainties)to be.revinced experience, to expole it (e _k
PI FE for Ridcuows Jothhis Ape
our Table,p.qg2. what Genſtizution bring?
EE Al the Oracle faich here is: that at
s Aer imemutatur. Say you, what's that Natura Tem-
ok OE. Is it according to the Seaſon, z. e. the
the Change in Sumaer 15 hot and ary, in Winter


2.


March, 0d all with-


py afer
I Nay, tor Yer: fo in 7ely,and hot
1 kr be Chung WI Lu-
Summer, is rarely ary. Beſide
Gracion than what


is


Chap. 12. Charafter,  Lordſhips. Trrigons. $6. Ambtole.


45


EE


CEE — ——_— _—


1s foreſtallid in the General CharaRet: of the Ww hole. \Seafon:::if thedays
that amecede and follow the Ape be, -by:yittue of the Seafori; hot and dry
withoutthe Aſpect, what great Arcanum is it to define the Day of = age
to be alike;hot.and dry by virtue of the- Aſpect
_ $3, I& 1£3cc in to the Menebs bo tar thi'd 1d ih March ſhall
Jo Wind, 'in, 1B, 1 Mayfair weather, in June Heat.and Dripping
Pretty welſknd: alible. Bu what te Fo ck of each Month>-is-it Fix
and unalterable ? oris there a-ſecond and y/aperrmduced Nature? if.thenaturs
of the Water is fluids it not by nature aFJuid cgngelable?- As:Waret refpects
the Services Men I gr ne ta +.4pd 45 the-Yeat Proves kunally) the
Nature of; the Months. 3;
ſeaſonable ? What i the Monthproves ye wr a which.Conſtiention'thall
this Af bleryp ?-rhe, Prime Cooltiaacen, ya the Secondary, luperin-
Le if ter, there -45 n0.lighe given us|by che Celeſtial Phenomeaup,
ill wekngwhow 2 Month bil prove af the former, then. all Conti:
tutions at the, Ghange prove ſcafonable, a all uaſeaſonable twerthier breaks
Z wy Change, flat SOFA Experience though, Lonfels; ry
þe Al103, - ; a 07? $. *
$i ie wil be id, i mnough if | comrnon Expefatin looks *Forſuch 2
State, ſeeing that, Expedtating {ic ſelf is-fopnded pon: thefrequency ofthe
Accidents correſponding... .Be it: pe poo thing that yay ar»
the Int = the Greatiph,' and A is Great Fonader © ;buſ bang
SEG mm diſcover -w en the Vu ar: Eixpec cio
be Garand wi mon onuh the: World of- uifeafonableg's weltas


ted ;;


ani rod non


-.$ 5. Liale- re thoſe two Selve't that are brought by thoſe,: _—_

are to {enſible-.of the failars of their 'Prigciple concerning-the Triplcttiesz

and the Lord{b:p of the Planer in chief; 1+ 2 35 ut oben.) on iu

** . $ 6.” But theſe. Anciens hopſres have hittle, I fear, befide their Anti

£0 lead for: 3 iT of: the Tt ou being a fine Ktack:inv Prolevy;

no ſe waaraſure >a ribow ſhall w e.-botiere: fam; —_—
atry,, 5, the 9. Tr. F other HotantlMoifk,oo:

according -WRO are. not) lements.chems

ſve a (qui cates, |


clthe Exny Troy, a.
of © and ) bring co a0 6s fo new then 7. Vot: ay4 Neichbs
"47 Ae twur of the fol -Bor hotmor dry.to; Nowember:;: 2x0 57 LIT t
the Lendhrp, the 4vexiw, and:
pi


had ans LTRG
t'1 *: there
EG - = | one Dor es


do our -bufineſs without an
Conſiderations in liew-of.thit o2d we amino” 1 ws. 0 122
$8. Before we adventure to.declareout Lay ler EIT
_ much-is granted:u$, that: at. d: ©): aft-times
if not both; as Mirandula'sSea-men, yeuſee; have wi ie! do
ſpeak of one Century paſt»Everzin S. Awiroſes Age; much»above-aizc5d
ears ago,. in time of 1t could be ſaid, Erce Neomenia pluvians 'dg-
it, wal we ſhall haye Raingt the Change of the I; ; the Father; 'tis
gently reprehends it with:\\oll-y: 4:#ax ; Not that herxejected the Phil
phy, by which hegreatly illuſtrates the Creators Glory in:that' v I
courſe, but abating rather 4he Confidence, which we are t00'apt to p
ſecond Cauſes, though imperfectly apprehended, Sg. "When


Change bringeth Warmth, Wind; a _ ſt part. Book I


Sg. When it is remembred then chat ' our Ambition reaches but to ww
1#wa3 , ſpeaking of a ſingle Aſpet, as hath beta often ſaid; (nd by;
outof 2 palitick Reſtriction, but with: peaſon, ke the nature of a /iz2le
Cal noheenty many tirpereachednovzeiher = "rmmnnce eng ;
- roken, ye io CHO 6 con gents © avow that-d ©

I .produceth a warmer Air, attended for the moſt part with'Rqyg# or Winar,
bur. whether of deforakes place, excluſive to the other {mult be determined
by the whole conjunture of the ſeven; not by _—_ fiogle Aſpect. |

”” 20, So'that x is 8 Prime produR, the other” CCopeahiink's
that GCardap rele mages Jonger 19 af of-this aobgg wt ow uni ſithificat, $(cou-


raging Toit , ſince it produceth a Dererminate
porn be odron Fro ev and FO ofteti;”:
'S-IT, 'Fis rug we who deal invp proenoftique,; muſt treat” a dents


only; as is ſenfeblrs, bac yes fun 2 eral there is very is very 'oftert #1 " Natnre,
thick is not
mm hich all whey pores


the rye fav ſenſor
Sometimes'we 1M rather


Santi


viz. _ ſome viſible effect; to which the rhe Scale


Wind Rat, ever)
DE


je frns pn -whb. in-


ESE


ced, X tas
quire into Ca
an


Nat thereb)


on
nn thar iti
nd X on Waradb,: aa


Sintheir
on Err Tibornngs Hence
& "Harbinger before


10a; Fol wing At1mal +
mT the eg Poſture of Animals, the dches.and Ma:
Aeoraee r dofore yet disjundtively and undererminately,


6 or Rain; » This argues yl, the #i2y.of the Origin and -0-no


- other


Chap. 12. Linſchoten. Drake. Three days for one Aſpeft.


other. account, even W:zdy Viehts, as Tam informed from the K:ilze , make
the boyling Liquor apt to overflow : To lay nothing of the Teſtimony of
the Baroſcope, where the Mercury falls alike ro windy Weather as it doth
to Rainy. Now for Wind and Gufty Ieather, and their Cognation to the
new ), we reduce furcher if need be, the Teſtimony of Moderns, who
in the Voyages to the Eaſt Indies, complain'd of bad Rodes, by reaſon of a
ſmall Y, Lizſchaten lib. 3. cap. 2. Yea for the IW:# alſo our own Drake
cells us again, that a ſmall Mooz makes foul Weather all the main aloag. Laſt
Voyage apud Purchas.

9 16, It might be time now to produce our evidence, that the Dubious
may be diſpoſed to a further enquiry, if not afſent 3 In our Diary you ſhall
ſee we have allowed no leſs than three Dayes to the Aſpect, that we
might hore ſecurely hedge in Obſervation.

9 17. Tisa perpetual account of VII years ; for if the kind Reader will
admit the like for the Oppoſition, Square, &c. to the Sun, we ſhall not
burden our paper with the ſame Aſpects repeated between h Y & and the
JI, alchough a private Obſerver may perhaps find them not unworthy his
conſideration, they carrying their price in their Foreheads ; eſpecially thoſe
from d VL 2,

9 18, In the Tables obſerve that the Dayes are reckoned after the Ciwl
account, 2.” from Midnight to Midnight, becauſe. Art muſt apply it ſelf
to the Publick, fo rhar tlie Obſerver muſt not content himſelf with the Day
Artificial only , but look through the interval of the natural Day entire, ſince
Nature, when we poor Mortals are compos'd to Reſt, like its Great Maſter,
neither Slumbers nor Sleeps :* Since, if at any time ſoever, be it the Dead of
the Night, a violent Tempeſt hap to awaken the Neighbourhood, wxforeſeer,
the Science is ſure to be indired of, I know not what,uncertainties 3 it beho-
veth therefore that Art on the other fide ſhould be relieved by all the true
Affidavits of Showre or Wind, &c. which may ſteal in at that Interval,
wherein the Major part of the World, buryed in their Beds, will be con-
cerned in cenſuring the Method when it fazls, though unconcerned in its Ju-
ſtification 3 when it h:ts.

S 19. Here it may bethought that three days ate too many for the purpoſe
of pretended Art : Ihaveanſ{wered, Nay, already, to ſecure, ſaid I, the ef-
fet, which 'muſt happen within ſuch 2 Term, for if it falls beyond, the
Effect may not be reatonably owned, of which preſently.

$ 20. Thoſe who contider but oe Day only, muſt be asked, what if an
Aſpe& by its very choſen time, falls out in the very Goxfize and Juncure of
ſeveral Days, at, or about Midnight : Muſt not this Aﬀpect and its pretended
Influence belong to more than one of thoſe Days ſo united? A &d, pur caſe,
may laſt four or five Hours , as by Ecliptical Conjunctions, is manifeſt 3 in
ſuch caſe the 4 may relate to thoſe days, as a Tenement by its Situation
may belong to two Counties or Parithes.

9 21, Once for all we muſt ſpeak out, anda proper Chapter it may make,
that Aſpe#s Planetary challenge a greater duration, than four or five Hours
ſpace, ſeeing the Bodies Planetary are capable of . mutual affection ar di-

ce, not by Gorporal only, when Indiſtant, but by Virtual Contact. In-
fluence, like Streams, ofttimes mingling and blending together , when their
Fountatas are diverſly fituated.

s 22, And if it be wellremembred, this Poftulate cannot be denyed b
thoſe whoallow the Luzar Influence to be Moderatreſs of the Tides whic
iwell and riſe one or two days before and after the Aſpect, as Ptolomy from
and with Experience hath taught. The ſame Experience hath further taughe
us to obſerve the like or greater Interval of two days before and after, in
the Diſſolution of Froſts, as we ſhall ſee in the next Chapter.

O | $ 23. Juſtly


| C———


48 d ©). Aſpefts Platic, Parttle. The S emſextile,&Cc. Pook I.


—


S 2 3. Juſtly therefore Aſtrologers have taken up that famous Diviſion,
making Aſpects to be not Part:/ ony , exact to a Degree and Minute, but
Platic alſo, with enlargement and latitude to more than one or two ſuch


9 24. All the Difficulty is concerning the precsſe Terms and width of this
enlargement : To which the Ancient Arabs have made ſhift ro anſwer. For
logy , we ſhall ſee, lies upon it, that the Terms of the Suns Or,
as they call itz the Orb of its radiation be compriſed in F/fteez Degrees, the
Moons Orb in Twelve, for Saturn about N:e,Jove about Vine or ſomewhat
more,* Mars, Venus, Mercury, about Eight. Summa Anglican. —_
Io. tra. 1, Cap. 5. And fuch Anſwer upon my Word, proceeds from a
great experience, not waz and arbitrary, as in the mutual Afpects of the
other Planets will be noted, where I hope to clearup the matter. Twelve
Degrees you ſee, are aſcribed to the ) 's radiation. Well was I, when
I aw, (and it was long firſt) that the Ancients, the Arabs of old, accorded to
my Method obſerved in the Table : For if XII Degrees muſt be allow-
. ef to the I 's Orb of Radiation, ante & retro , ( for ſo they expreſs them-
ſelves diſtintly ) then a Triduum is neceſſarily engaged in the Lunar Ta-
ble, in behalf of the Þ 'sefficacy and its demonſtration.

s 25. Verily ſome ſuch Salvo, or more than this, muſt be had on the account
of the New Alpeds, the Semiſextile and Quincunx, two of which border on
the d, ( like as Sextiles, 2uartiles and Trines , we know are double.) In be-
half of which we may ſay , that it iseven pity theſe _ are not d?mtted
as well as any 3 (but no more) becauſe, then their itions woul de in a
natural Order, of egual ſucceffive Diſtance z VII. Aſpects defin'd by
the diſtance of Signs, O. , 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The Conjun#ton ar Sign 0.
( no diſtance at all ) the Seaveſextle at Sign 1, the Sextele at 2, the Square
at 3 Signs diſtance, the Trine at 4, the Laincunx at five _ diſtance, the
Oppoſition: laſtly at 6. I confeſs for order and memory fake 'ris pity it is
not ſo. But let metell you unleſs the Sexrrſextele on each fide ante & retro,
be reduced to the d , and the Quincunx likewiſe tothe Oppoſition, as their
Matrices, their Forts and Principals ; the Conjunfttion as preſcinded from
this new Semiſexrile, forſooth, will be found the moſt infignificant AC
pu in the pack. Iprove this from the TX. years of Keplers Diary, where

rook the pains to examine the Semiſextzleand 2uincunx, and the Iflue was

* of as frequene effec, near the time when the I is abour a mbole Sior's
di , as when near the the How of her Gonjun#:ox. Bur no reaſon
in the Earth can be giyen why any Semſextile for Power or Dignity ſhould
take place of his {, nor Phyſical I wis, nor Harmonical. Nature it
ſelf will appear agai fuch bold Innovators, who go to depretiate her great
Inſtrument, the Aſpect of the d , which by crying up Sexrrſextiles, will bo
utterly evacuated as between two —_— when as common Sence tells
us, that whatſoever little pittance may be afforded to ſuch Pretenders, they
muſt at no hand be compared to their Chief, for as much as in all #0» of
Activity the Force muſt naturally, unleſs by accident, be more ſtrong and
Effe#ive nearer the Perpendicular Line, then the Oblique. Sothat when
the AFrvity of the Lunar Congreſs is rampant, the Reaſon is plain, that
Rampancy canby no means be aſcribed to the Vicinity of the Semifextile,
*but contrary the effectuouſnels of the Semilextile , lng accidental ad-
vantages, muſt be referred rather to that efficacy, which, iſluing moſt vigo-
rouſly from the Perpendicular, is not yet extinct in the Oblique Line. Sure-
lythe Obſerver ſhall never find it worth while to obſerve Lunar Semiſextiles
or es, either preſcinding from their Principals : No body as yer
hath himſelf obliged ro do ir. If we find any fuch thing in the other
Planets,we ſhall got Rifle it, but as to the ) 'tis certainly a Fruſtr4 fit per —
py 24.


Chap. 12. Mercury with Þ [wlels the Tide, together with © Y. 49


s 24. I ſpoke of accrdental advantages, I intended thereby ſome even Lunar
Conjunctions with other Planets, d', h ,&c. Therefore let no Man wonder if
I introduce © and 2 here, who are alwaies, ? at kaſt, within two des
march of the ©, and conſequently of the I in her conjunctional Aſpects, fo
the Lunar d with © being ſo near at hand tro the Sun , helps ro cred:t the
Solar Conjunftion with a heightned Influence, which belongs in part to him-
ſelf, and it would be filly to impute an effect ro an Hpftart Semiſextile [angle
Aſpe#, which is palpably reducible to an old confeſled, not /ingle, bur 2
double Conjunction, the one of the > with ©, the other of the Þ with %,
and ſometimes 2. Not but that the Þ hath her Orb of radiation even
here, for © isnot always contiguous to the Lunar Body, but that, as in Mo-
rals fo in Naturals alſo, a Friend may, though at ſome diſtance, ſtep in and
help at a dead lift.

Hencel fairly defire it may be confidered, whether this # and 2, as the
caſe ſtands, may not be ſubſervient to: the Sun and ) in the ſweling of the
Tia:s, ſometimes before, ſometimes after the Ghange, as their poſition hap-
pens. I am ſure I found it ſo, z0t only inthe change ofthe I in Auguft 1676.
when $ being a lictke behind the Sun, the ) tranſiting 2 that Night, raiſed
the Tides above half a yard, ut at ſeveral other times. All objections to
the contrary are of feaſible Solution, by what hath bin hinted concerning
the other Planers and their equal Power, or at leaſt ſome other cauſes affign-


able of the ſame Nature.


ym NY _


fFo»y9. A FABLE


' XVI. Miſty m. Cloudy cold day. N,
anuary. ;

F; J 76. -— Vw 25.
' [V, Very dark m. Fog, Cold. SW.
1671. WY 2I. V j :
; » $5 m. Froſt, miſty m.- Fair, cold d. overcaſt
(XXXT. Dec. Anni preced, Hard Froſt. Cloſe. | "25" 7,1, mand in agro Wieorn. bec ipſo vel
cold Winds. MEE preced. die. NE,
I. ho. 1. mat. H, Froſt, ſome miſt, yieldjng, ho. | yy. gon, cloſe, driſle r p. SE,


o. Nifle 5 P. N. after W.S. W. ow | 77 W 1
II. Wet moſt part. | £12 "II |
| . XII. Foggy, Froſty, overcaſt i p. KW.
—_— £ -———_— ITE 6 m. Fr. Cold and elocmy Air. N,
. Fair, Wi ,

Wind, neS. fog. d = _ SIv. XXIV. Froſty, Cold Wd. Red clouds veſp. Nh.
XXX, ho. 2 p. Cloſe Rain 3 p. H. Wd. Cold VE.

veſp. HOL.F >.
XXXI. H. Wind ante luc, Froſt, Fair, then

Cloſe, Cold Wind. A N,


ANY


I 2, —_— ww . . "
4 Miſt, drile m. & «ve 0, cooler, p. m | 1671. Novi Lunio ſwo caret hocce '


—


February.


Meteor grear prope W 10 p. . W. anna Februarit menſis.
XTX.12 p.Cloſe,damp Walls,Miſle 6 p. &c,NW. :
XX. Some Rain m, Cool, Wer weſp. &c. N. | 1672, X 9,


Vf 28, XVII. Froſty, Fair.


73:
VIE. Hard Froſt, overcaſt, ſtiff Wind. $1. | XVIIL. 3 p. Froſty, bright, cold Wd. N.
VIIL. 2 m. Fair ante m. Tempeſt of Wind, | XIX. Froſty,bright,miſty p.m. & veſp. Wd.NE.


Hail-ſtorm 4 p. & drifle. Cold Night. W. | 1673 V3


IX. Rain much 2a 3 m. Daſh, 7 m. H., Wind, | V. Fair and Froſty. NE, *-
Snow and Miſle 1 p. N E. , VI. 8 p. Froſty, Foggy per diem tor, SE, .
74. X 17. VII. Froſty m. Foggy, dark, clear p.m. NE,
XXVv. Miſty m. Clearing, miſty p. m. SE.S. | 74. X 17.
XXVI. 9 p. miſty andcloſe m. (. offer 10m.E. | XXTV. Wet max. part, and Snow. E.


XXVII. Rain 8 & 9 m. dropping m.p. . E. | XXV. 4 p. Froſty, Snow r p. HK. Wdgop. YN.

75: V 5, XXVI. Froſty, Lowring 11 m. & m SW.
Iv. Cold, cloſe; miſty. N. | 75. X 6.

XV. Cloſe a. m. Sun welcome ro m. Tempe- | XIE. Froſty, Snow & Pail max part, NE.
rate, Cloudy Night, NW, XIV.


Deary of VII. years for 4 © ).


the


_ 6 p. Froſt, Snow 11 m. wetting p. as
xv. [now 9 m. miſle p. m. max. part. E,
fi Cloſe p.m SN . Fs £ W.

. 7 Þ-blu ng ante lac, wetting 4 Mm. 9,
Iv. Fre open, cloſe moſt part, SW. ww.


77. X 13.

XX. Rain 4m. 0. & p.m. much Rain A $ por
mid.

RX1. 13 m. much Wer 7 m.ad gm.R.8 p. W.

XX1l. Rain no#.Wer p.m.throughourt warm,SE,


——_


March.


bis
( 7. Febr, cloſe, miſty. W.
T. ho. 1. m. {. miſt, clearp. m. os > wing.


4.4, above, Windy, Fair, miſt +


V 19. Now erum.
XXTRX., Rain m. Soultry d. hot clear ni, SV,
XXX, 10 m+ Soultry, Fair, Wy. Rain 3 p. SW


XXXL. Warm, Lovrng Wdy Trajettones,SW


1672. we
XVIIL Mild, Rain 9 p. cloſe m. p,


E,
XIX. 3 m. cool m. dry, = 5 Cloudy
in Eaſt, Heat p, m. & br} E.
RR. Bright, dry, ſome Mi s,
1673. X
VII. Fr. cloſe, cold, air, dry. NE.
VIIL. » p.no Froſt, clou *þ $.
IX. Fr. Fog m. cloſe, cold weſþ. $.
74- V 17.
XXVT. Rain m. cloſe, warm, \. miſt. SW.


XXVIL. 8 m. Cloudy m.p. $ W. hottiſh 7

RRYIIL Hortiſh, cloudy.

T5. V 6.

XV. Rain ni. Rainy ab. 11 m,ad 11 p, &c, ®

XVI. 10 m. Snow 1 m. Fair & Froſty 12 p. Z

XVIL Froſt, Fair, miſt, cold brisx Wind. N E

76. X 24.

JIE. R.26 ad 9 m. fh. 11 m. bright n. Meteor
from Props to Canis Min. W.

IV. 10m. open, miſt, clouds promiſe x P.
Winds.


V. Fair m. rain 6 p, Windy, £
Zt: V 13.

IT. Cool R. Hail 3 Windy m. p.

Hail & Thunder $ Ad; Hill W.veſp.E


XXIIL 6 m. Fair M. White CL. Rain 2 p. &8 P.
wet time complain'd of.
XXIV. R. 8 m, &c. dry p. m. coldiſh veſp. wi


April.


I671. S 18.

XXVIL Sudden overcaſt m. offer. windy a. m.
Rain 9 Þ. E,S
XXV1IT. 6 p. Cloudy, Windy,Showr weſþ.S W.
XXIX, Showr my, winds, heat, ſhowr 4 p. &


7 Þ» -” SW.,


| 72, S


Ts
XVI, Wind & wer 6 m. Chill wind, Cloudy as
for Hail, Hail at Stratford, cold n, NW.
ns oo 1 m. Fr. bright, Nly cold, cloudy,ſome
N W.


—_ Cold, dry, miſty beneath, eſpecially
ho. 4p. NE.


73 V 2

VI. Cloſe, windy, miſt, riſle 3adgp. E,

VII. 1 m. warm, of overcaſt a. m. drifle, Hail
OY 1 Þ. wer 23. ads p. Rain 2 p


VIIL. Fair m. cloſe and weltring a. m. N E
but weſp. S.


74. S 15.
XX1V. Offer a. m. Dry p. m. NW.
XXV.. 2 m. high wind, cool, open, NW.
XXVI. H. wind and ſhowring p. ASSY

9 p- wind laid. SI,
75- S 5.
XIV, Fair, temperate, vefy hard. E,


XV. 2 m, cloſe m. fair, warm, dry winds. &,
XVI. Warm, brisk wind, cloſe, mift p. m. E,
76. V 24.
II. Very cold m. cloudy, windy. E.NE.
ITE. 2 m. Fr. Ice, ſomet. overc. ſfoarn. E.SE,
IV. Cloſe m. ſhowring 9 m. open, warm. W.
m. N,. o. Ely. p. m.
S 17,
XX. Rain 9 m. cloſe m. p. miſly, very u_
Sun occid. Wind various.
XR. 8p. clofing m. ſhowr 1 p. Open, E
XXII. Cold m. troubled and miſty Air, f. wer
3 p- Cold complain's of, and imputed ro


h & 27. W.


O—_


May.


I677. If 16,
XXVII, Cool, cloſe m. p. W.
XXVIII. 2 m. miſty Air, ſhowr in proſpe& a.
m. & p. m. ſhowr 5 p. W.
RXIX, Cloſe m. _ - N.
72,
XV. Dry, fair, warn, miſty Air, Halo notable
CIFc. Sun, obſe P, ſy People "ad merid.
NE,
XVI. 7 p. bright, —— cl. Centauri caput
 wiſum ad not, Me NE,
XVIL Bright hotdry clouds in Scenes wind E.
mane,at Temp. pomeran, 8 W. $ E, clouds,ride
contrary from the North,
73. S 26,
y. Cloſe, cool, driſle once or twice. N E,
VI. Cloſe m. p. drifle 6 p. cool winds ſtir.
N. NW.
VII, Very cold m. ofc —p—_—_ dry, N. at PROS
74. I 13.
XXTV, Drifle 5 m. H, wd, cleſe, warm, SW,
RXV. 9 m. very hot, foggy air, f. lowring. E,
XXVI. Warm, H. wd. ſhowrs 2p.s p. SW.


75+ Wa
XIII. Hor, fair, mift, N. mang, veſp. W,


XTV. 4 p. hor, dry, (, inn. overcaſt, Wly.
mane, veſp. E. XY,


Chap. 12.


VII. years Deary. d © )


XV. Froft, cloſe m. open, mp” brisk winds,
C drops '® p. ab orient. ſhowr gy 10p. Eh.


76, By S 22,

I. Showr $5 m. hor, {. whice cl. W.
TI. 6, fair , meteors 11 p. W.NW.
Hl. Cloſe m. cool, fair . m. bright meteor from


HE chrough a - - -ny,4 Weſtward, W.


&& F lowri w y—_ long ſtreak'd
Gufts of wind S 4 $ p- cool day. m
XXI. 10 m. overcaſt, a. m. clear & dry,
wind various. 0 Eve N.
XX11. Suſpicious in {, parts of h. o. H. wd,
a drop, clear Horizon o. miſt veſp. Ely. clouds
SE. &ho:8p.NE,


June.


1671, S 14.
XXV. Fair, lowring o. windy p. m. SWAN.
XXVI. 10 m. fair, dry, wind, overcaſt 4 p. NE.
XXVIL. Cloſe N. m. & lowring, open, windy
p.m. brighc n. W. NW.
7)


0d ae = OR

| 2 m, cloſe m. p. w 3 Þ.

NVI. Cloſe m. we ir, wdy. P.M. SW. |

i . Ul 234
Lowring Air Merid. hot p. m. Fair.

TV. 8. Fair & hot, yer brisk coot wind. E.

V. cpa © = - 3p. SE,


&. he, hoc, wi 12 p.f& lighe-
Fn. rg hos wi ay FIRES. N.


XX11L. 8. Overc. and hopes of Rain. Late-
Wly. veſp. Ely.


crack,
XXIV. Brighe m. Lowring 29.5; 6: i,


Picious 11 P» NW.
S I. |


$W.| 75,


ings


July.


1671, dS. 12,

XXIV. Rainy, obſcure d. brisk wd.

XXV. 8 p. ſhowr 11 m1. @F alias.

. XXVI. Cloſe, f. moiſture ho. — m. "Muſcts
pluiſſe nuntiatum eft,

Sd. 2. KO
fr, Cloſe m. p. cool wind. N.
XIV. 9 m. H. wind ante luc. cold, gloomy.N W
XV. Open, clouds gather a. m, hail, cloſe and


> Towring9 p. N W.,
S 21,


73+

fn Offer 8 m. Delpbin. occ. ſmart owns $
ad 11 p. Weather complain'd of. S. $

IV. 2 =, clouls inSacs, 11m. Horm Can
Thunder 8 p. Rain 11 SW.

V. Cloudy, dark 5 m. Why. open & warm.NE.,

74. ® 410

XXII. Soultry, Fog a. m. R. Low. SE. 4

XXII. 4 m. open;H. wa, $ B- Rat nar: GD
HI. 4 m. H. w n pam.S W

XX1V. Rain 2 m-. 7 m. H. wd. Trajefions


Þ. occ, ELL
9. *
& Hor, | Qonings { miſt, windy weſp. E.
i Be  $loudy, 4. m. windy, warm, uy
XIII. Windy o. fair, warm n. . *N.
76, — SL 17.
XX. Fair, white cl. many Meteors ab Aquila
ad Y. in the. South. \ E.
XXX. 1 p. hor, fair, long cl. ab Auſtro in Sep.
- P- clouds like kembe Flax, —


I Þ»
XXX1, Fair, overc. p. 2" drops, W. .


B-2


TTHh
SY, Cpl, foggy, b—_ Þ. m. ſcarce: ary


75+ Js
RL. Cloſe, drops 3 p. Rainy 9 p. fc. | XIX., Dry, -: AM pale cl. m. hear, tovdg


m.
_ yr m. windy, doſe, cold, light in __
I
XIV. Fair a.m. ſhowr 5p. &8 p. wind. W.
kan If 22.
Front mas. *Rain 8 m. ofr KIT ar


XXIX, Ur nes, =Þ


VNR, 12'Rain 2 m. Rain little a; m. we. an
lowring c clouds.
L 1 wind, drops o. warm, tat


S LP. -
Zi. Fair, \, miſt, lowring o. clouds upper ,


N. lower W. warm, dry wd. red clouds.E.
xx I > on-le, mtg cl. 11 m. ho. 7 p. clouds
fly Eafterly, wind various, Meteor prope


| 73«
A 12 p, ſwarm of Rees EGS. ain ad med. -N


XX1, Miſt m. bright, hear. E,


RX, Hor night, bright, not cloudin the .
{. miſt, y. Hor, Nx:


[| — ,


pf


nl


XXV, Fair = Ga y 4m. arm, drying 6p


72.

W ' PIE © - |. 19-283 u.we.2p
'; K and many ſub wh SW.
XIL 6. Cloſe m. SFr! wring, drille 9 p. wdy


7 Þ. hor p,
XIII, weralght, Ales, 1, winds 6p


Stem


open, wind, coaſting OWTty Bah Es &-1


1


VI. gears Diary.


Book [.


II. m. white cl. aloft, overc. atn. , SW.
HI. Kain Þ or, 0 antea, hard R. 10 m. and
ſhowr 5 p. SW
mM $8, Novilun. alterum.

XXX, Showr 6 m. 6 p. 0.9 P, &C+ 4


XXXL. 8. KR, hard, 9 ms: eſpecially 3 p. AQ &
notF. tot.


Sept. I. Opeti, ſhowr in 00 3P- $ SW.


&% Cloſing, wer 1 #45 NE.

XX1T. 10m. cloſing, __ N.

XXII. Cloſe m. p. ſhowr rop. , * SE.
Te: . 1 28,


XT. 2 m. dark m. fair, ſoultry n.
XII. Dark m. Rain p. m.
76. Tt IS.
XXVII. Cloſe m. open,cool, "—_— It. op
w
XXVIIL 12.p. wetting 4 m. ſhowrs and wind
A.M. O. 2 P+ dark ade of B Jo 9 P- Kigh


winds.
XXTX. Cold, bright, pregnant cl. a NW


T7 SL
XVII. Fog m. ©. overcaſt © orrient foring, |
clouds


m. cloudy m. p. & H, wd. {.dgops
RR _ WI ame 4 P» W.NW.


wy


_ September.
167t. =


XXT. Wet 9 m. © cloſe, ds bright n. NW,


and more winds.


- XI; 5 m. Dark and wer 4. m. Raiff 4 p. Mee |


prope Urſam Maj. 8 p.
XVI. Froſt m. bright, cl. in ſcenes, wind.” "W4


I7.
Rex. Cloſe m. p.drifl,Sunoec &11p.SW |
XXX. 4 m. h. Froſt, bright a. m. ſho.


_— O—


' NW,


OR. 1. H. froſt, fairy Yrops I1 = BE |
ps the Eaft. - 3a


42G;


ION Eh
{in DL Fit. windy Eat eapaney
IR: _— wet ind hack m. cloſe'ar


lowring. ſoulrry, Rains p. we *
6 Hor Sat ho F E.


Ip. dents, fir, H. we nd
+ broad'clou | | NE.


2 m. EP ntiros, * NW. 2


174.
XVIIL Miſty, warm, offer I


XXVII. 11 p- miſt m. Fair, windy, Meteor ab
ore Ceti Rigel verſis. Alterum circiter ipſum
Zenith 10 Pp. E.

XXVIII. Fog, fair above. Fog again 9 m. tem-
perate, winds. E.

77- a 3,

XV. Fog, clouds pregnant, warm. Gofſamere
Meteor prope Aquar, maum. & V8 p. Aliud
in Collo Andromed. & N.

XVI. 10 p. Fog m. Fair, freart daſh ab bo. 84.


ad 10 p. W in M.C. S,
XVII. Warm &. f. drops 9 m. ſhowr 7 p; cold
wind p. m. W,
Odober.
1671. m 9,
XX1T. Cloſe, foggy, colder. N W,
XX1I. 4 m. ſome froſt, fair. NW,


XXII Cloſe.drifle 10 m ſhowringSun occ. 8 p.
wd very high before Sun ſcr, (5 per diem Ae. S,

72. == 27,

IX. Fair m. p. heat p. m. hear drops; —


S Þ-
X, 5 m. {. miſt m. Fila, fair. hota.m. more p.
m. no Dew at n. Great Tide obſery'd. -S E,
XI, S. wet ante luc. (F ante merid. is E.
73: @: Mm 16,
XXVII. Foggy a m. cloſe, driſte 5'p.
XXIX. 4 p. R. ante luc. H, wd. drifle 4 p. nk
XXX, Froſt m. fair, cloſe p m. - - . N:

m 6, KY
$ Vp.
XIX. 3 m. Windy, offer 0. an Sun occ.S W
XX. Foggy and cloudy. threatn. o. warm, Tra-


Xl. «- eb miſt m. ſhowr 1 m. dof; p p. defies Two in the very place of f & 2
being with the 46" NW,

XXL. Vo cod, foe, miſt ar dry p-m. R. 75. L 7
L0 P. CF deinceps. W4] vir. H. winds, cloſe, ma Þ. -* SW.
Tx MM 28. VIIT. 8p. H. wind no, py ng. Pe wrs m. Cloſe
Fea, bright, m, faſbcious at Redc winds... : W.


IX. F "A ſhowr 2 P. miſty air,W. mane, then
| NW.
76.


| m 13.
X XV. . Driſle,s.m. cloſe, miſty, tick wds. N.
XXVI. 9g. Fair, £. clouds, Meteor 12p., NW
RXVIL., Fog, dark p. m. wo N,
77. m 3.
XV. F þ ff ir, W: > cn cloudy, threatn,
I Þ. C 11pÞNW,
N. | "by all contin fr, fog, brick isk wd, very =
y
XVII. Fog, fr. cloſe, S W. J Ms: ho. 0, N. f C,
iſle inp. E.


November.
1671, T7 9.
XX, Cloſe m. p. windy, Guſts Sun occ. W
XXL 0.-warm, cloſe winds. W.


XXII. warm, oft miſle, Gufts of wd 10 P. $ A


—— A


Chap. 12. The genume — A World of Obſervation. 53


.
Ot. oo _—_——


72. m 27. TT
VIII. Open a. m. cloſe p. m. Meteor 8 p. high December.
wind 10 2s * be c
IX, H. win tot, Rain m. p. H. wi ;
overcaſt d. $w, | 1671. W' 9.
X. Miſty a. m. cloſing p.m £ Rain 8 p. SW. XX. Cloſe, cold, windy. E,
73. 2 16. XXI. 6 m. very cold, cloſe m. P- dark pm
E
XXVIL Rain m. warm, cloſe m. p. WG [Þ- XXII Cloſe, cold, fog det p.m. F reez -
XXVIIL 8 m. Fog, warm, wetting m- & p m. and 2 2 28. SW.
winds audible 10 p. w. | 72 2 |
XXIX. Brick wind, cloſe m. p. SW. VIE. Cloſe offer a. m. ſnow 8 Pp. N E.
IX. 5. Fog offer 5 m. cloſe. N.
X, Miſty, cloſe. N E.N.


7 4.
&\. Bright, overc. 0. freez n. overcaſt 11 p.
SW


73: WIT
XVIL Fr. fog, wetring 4 p- Rain Norcherly __ _ = — ad Sun ort, Fr
w 4 £3s *
xvi. Much R. ao. tot. & a. m. wind very XXVIII. 2 m. H. winds noe. prec. R. 6m. Guſts


& Rain 3 p. hard R. 4 ad 10 S W.
high,R. p.m. calm veſp. cold Planchers SW. XXIX. Winds: & R, = bee. A; ſummers d.


. mM 25. |
i Severe, fr. wd. miſt, Wk veſp. NW RS O10 Þ. v6. S W.
vIT $5 m. bitrer fr. fog fair. W. 7. 4 lof; SS I.
VIIL. Froſty, fog, relene p. m. NW, DE Tn | Sly.
76. 7 14 —_— por die tot., _ wind,
XX1V. Froſty, fair m. p. miſt, Meteor on Orion. | ©* q;:06 gu ory Wi, CPeny: tempeſt _
Hum. tr ajettu ſervit 12 P: Ice on Thames.S W ro 7
XXV. 8 m. Fog in Eaſt hindring the youten 73s 24.
of che Eclipſe, fair, froſty. SE. | V- Fog, dry. clearn.


XXVI. Fog, fair, froſty, much Ice on the | VE 5+ Fr. miſt, cloſe m. p. H. wds.& {.R 1P-
Thames, Meteor 9 p. aMarte,Urſam verſus.S.SE VII. Cloſe, dark, warm, H. wind 10 p. W.


TT 3 76. V 13.
XIV. 12 p- Fog. = night, open S$ W. fog o. may . park og, oe, Erol = -
& cloſe 8 E. dark & good ſhowr 3 p. W. Me- | yy Froſty, clote. : : E.
teors prope caput Dracon. FL:


| TT Vp
wan 5M. &c. driſle 1 p. very — Kitt. Cooly clear m!'p | Sfady Ts" FD
7 m. drifle & H. wn - Flaſh of Lightnin
* inSW.&p.ſ. rain. $ p. wet 11'p. I


m. coldiſh, SW. Meteor 5 p.9p
XV. Froſt ante luc. Fog, weering dark day. E


hey” 10 m. Tempeſtuous wd nod. tor. C. __


$ 26. Thus the Table. Wherein you havs an account of . VII. years,
Eby Seven Lunations, and two hundred and fixty one _ Each y of
the ſame Month reduced under-the common Head for 's{ake. .
'$ 27. In which” Table we have not only the ive 0 et (et before
0s, but very often the preciſe hour of the Effe# alſo, 5 the nquirer may
ſer fe Gin Yalae Upon ſo puntual. Account 3 the juſt hour of Rain, VYu
they take place. For in v no Pretence of a Method 1s alued,
but what aims at the alt owr 5 that I may not Tay be rin xe
Exd, the whole and hal


not


m Natures Method. Anatomy of Novilunar Influence. Book: [.
not be amiſs to repreſent to you the Order of Nature, and the whole


Courſe of her Meteors from


to be reduced to Warmth


uſt to Laſt, by which the Reader may be
ſomewhat edify'd, and our future diſc the clearer .

s 30. Now Nature, as far as I
the Privation, the Tohu of cold dark Air. The
and its Degrees, as I may diſtinguiſh them into


ourſe a ,
ve, ſeems to have begun at firſt with


Poſitive but Inſenſible, then Senſible and Vehement z theſe degrees, with the


mixture of Cold wor
ſee. Firſt we have


x. Exceſhve, ſtubborn, unmixt.


on their ſubje&t matter, emit ſuch variety as we


Froſt and cold. Thence Wind from the North-Weſt:
no _ —_ ds.
t Clou
Rain moderate. bs.
2. Warmth inſenfible. Then Wind from the Weſt,
Exhalation inviſible. Thence | 4. Heat Intenſe.
nemings N |
Miſt. ) ind from the Sourh-Eaſt.
Wind from the North from the South-Weſt.
From the North-Eaft from the South. -
Clouds. Hot Days.
Hail, Snow. Hot Nights.
3. Tepor, or Warmth ſenſible, inds Tempeſtuous.
" Dew, Rains Violent.
Bis. Gollamere. | Lightning and Thunder,


. $ 31, Hereabouss, or near 1s Natures Tra#, Caſt theſe Calcu-
Les into Alphabetical Order for convenience fake, and we ſhall ſee into
the very Anatomy of the Novilunar bifiuence. For as for Objections which
may be made againſt this Scheme precedent 3 either they are not very mate-
tial, or at leaſt we cannot ſtand upon thejx ſolution at preſent.


The Total of the days1n the precedent Table.


Cold Fro Days or Nights. — 63.} . { Serene, Fair — —=3r
a Fg Da gn


Traje ions, emom—_ -—


|
| |


IETRTT wa bf
ff ERIE:
wry G FE” ' Þ 28.3 l
-  $'32.' Our Learned Antagonifts, as if our gyetences were of Things im-
poſſible, often ask us how? 0 d:finfly to the Natures of any Celeſti


al Boay, the Sun excepted ; We anſwer, the Method is here before _
| c


. Chap: 12. How we know the Natures of the: Planets.


let Induſtry and Experience gather ſuch} Tables of the Planetary Copgreſles,
( the larger, the better ) and they thall ſee, as. in a+Glafs; 'the Efte&ts-of the
Alſped, and from thence define the Natures of the. Celeſtia} Bodies {o con-
figured, as much as ſerves our turn , ( and we know-no more of - the $uz it
felf ) yea, the Nature and GharaFer of every Degree inthe Eadie, may be
ſo determined , or if they wil: take the pains to adapt a Table for. VII.. years
- ( thats the leaſt ) to each degree from the Appulſe reſpectively. '1--,\__-

9 33. Only our Evidence for Warmth by our own. Fable; ſeems not to
be ſo full and Cogenr as our Intereſt requires; for under the Title Warm,
we find bur 31. Of Hot Days but 28. #2 toto59. What's this to 261;--e(fieci-
ally when the colAays are able to. face chem, whoſe.fum is. 63. antwer,
all the warm, Hot, and Soultry days which occuriin the Jarger Tabie; evex
in Summer . time, muſt needs be aſcribed to: the dwfluence of onr Aﬀpedt.
Nor will ic prove in the end; that the Cold Days ate equal-to rhe Warm,
not in thefe VII. years, nay nor in any 'ohe: of them. : Bur if ic ſhould hap-
pen in 15, or 30. years, as it cannot well,(I think) that the cold days fliould
have the greateſt Poll, I would:makeithe equal Reader judge df chis-Pro-
blem, 'whether Tn this: taſe the Nature of the Y ſtands indifferent ta Fat and
Gold, whether the Lunar Lighr, 1 ſay, can be imagined indifferent, as to thoſe
qualities's z{eeing Light and Heat. are acknowledged rhe ſame thing, ſothat
the Sun it (elf would zat be Hot, but on the account of the Light.

aly. Whether it may not probably be ſaid that Heat therefore is an Effect
Proper, & per ſe, and that Cold is Alren, and per arcrderis; and if- fo,' what
Violence would it do to any man's Intellect, who thall allow the Sun, yea
the Moon-to be endued wich warmth 2 If he ſhould thereupon concede 2
new ſuperinduced warmth upon their '{{n:oz. and. Congreſs; the:Learned
Gaſſendis doth the one, and nor the ather. | =

3ly. I ſhoald fmilingly. ask who knows but that this our Afpe& may be
taken upon ſuſpicion for the very Casſe.of . Ca/4, happening fo critically on
the very day, ſince many of thoſe Days fo noted, are found even in fans
Fuly , againſt the very ature of the Seaſon; eſpecially ſince ſome Phylo-
ophers' I can rel! you, have heretofore ventured to ſay, that the Þ was a
Gold as well as a Mort Laminary. . 1 oo oo -

$ 34. Letus conſidev again therefore as to the Warmth of the Sutnmer
Days here concerned : - That though the Word Sianmer (mells of the Quez,
and ſounds hot and parching, yer notwirſtanding, he who ſhall recolle&him-
ſelf from his own Experience, and-defcetd into Particulars, ſhall find that
every day in che height of Summerir {elfyis.not by any 4#w1olable necefity Hor
or Warin; whoſe Days often prove cool toa great degree,for no fma}l pare of
the time ;- fo that an uſual complaint flies about of za:Smmer many times ,
when Summer is almoſt expired. Therefore whenſocver any Day proves
warmer than-irs Neighbours, it muſt admit ſome Principle of ſuch Hear,
beſides the- gexeral Cauſe; as they cal che Solty Heat. .. And therefore if a
Man ſhould enquire whence the. Heat iſſues, for example, March 29, :30.
Anno 1671 ,- and Sept. 9 10.: Anno*1677. and alſothe intermediate Months
between thoſe rwo extreams of the Aſtiv4l- half year, he may ſeethe AC
pet ſtand'Candidate to bevadmitred' to anſwer: remembring before we
part,thar if the zſtival Day be termed only warm inthe Diary;thac warmth,
though ir ſounds remperately by a' common, though not inelegant Mezofss,
may ſignifi intenſe Heatind tolerable degree, . as Soultry inthe: fs tatera-
- 6 we have'a ſhare even of | Soultry days'to be found in the
Ta » , F 4 | j F P s a? , ' l : .

9. 25, Conſeqently roi'this ler inquiſirion be madeamong the Novikunar
Daysinthe Hyemal moiety'of the year, and we ſhall find warm daysin eve-
ry Winter Month within the Verge of our ARE. "Tis our great Intereſt

t@


. Whether d © ) favours W. armth ? Pook. I.


= CY


to ſecure this prexze inflaence of our Luminary ; therefore we are willing to
point at, * firſt Ofober./9, 10. Anno 1672. noted for Heat, with a great
Tiae ncunpeayine i; Ofob. 13. Anno 1674. Nov. 21. Anno. 1671, Nov.
27. Annd'1673. Warm. Nov. 15. Anne 1677. a warm Night. In Decem.
Anno 1673. Suramer Weather. Decemb."7. Anno 1675. Warm day. | Janu-
ary 29. Afno 1671, ' Fanaary 15. Anno 1675, Welcome and Temperate.
Weather. February 22: Anno 1677.the like. Add Lightning to help out;Decemb
13. Am01677. But what ſhguld T mention the rarer inſtance of L:yghtniag
Thunders 3 I tmight run to a greater Sunt of Nightly Fiery Meteors ;
for howeyer I acknowledge they may ſhoot briskly in their own Region,
ſeen in Froſty Nights, as in NNVowvember's New I iUlrno 1676, Yet I
hope thofe which happen in a more open Seaſon, may be Tokens of a warmth
extending it (elf, however elſewhere hindred, to our lower Mortal Region.
Thus ſhall you find- mr noted, . July 24. Anno 1674; with no more
warmth noted on that day, though but twe&days before there is noted Soul-
try Air and Thunder. And on the. 29th. of the ſame Month many Meteors
marked, Anno 1676..and Heat exprefled not till the Day atter. |
S 36. But the anſwer I take to, is as follows. We muft diſtinguiſh of
warm Days, Days of Expreſſed: Notation for Warmth or Heat, and o
theyare but a few,ſcarce enough to baffle the Cold Chill Days. But I pray
remember. how: many and ſundry times ; may an Obſerver not fand himſelf
to write Warm and Temperate in Spring or Summer time, when
'tis a Natural Conftirition ; When 'tis an Ordinary and Durable , though
_ Preter-ſeaſonable Conſtitution, Cold-Will be fure to be remembred z even in
Winter it pinches:us to make us. remember, and we with it over : But
Warmth-we obſerve. not, unleſs it be Nerys, and note ſome alteration.
The Tedium of Taxtology is odious to every Pen and Ear. Once then for all.
Every Day where there is zo mention of Gold is aſcribed tothe Warm Sac.
inly, all Days of Rain, and ſome of Snow being often fapnd with a
| Tepor : And may I not ſay chat: ,'Eperience being Judge, doth betray a
Cauſe remiſive of Cold and the ity thereof ? —WVebulas neg; tn eſta-
. te, nec in maxim frigore exiftexe, (aith the Naturaliſt. So that-upon the up
we excludenota Day, but thoſe which are abſolutely Cold and Freezing,
with6ut'the leaſt Sign of :Relent or Tingling ( for why ſhould we giveaway
our Right? ) eing TINTING Yielding beſpeaks a contrary Agent, pre-
vailing in at leaſt, /however ſometimes nor getting the Victory.
s 37. Right of the Heavenly Bodies is not ours © ve away,
whatſhall we ſay:to thoſe Novilunar Days, whenno Remion Froſi ſeems
to appear, apd yet ſometimes a Southerly Wind is known to blow : Muſt nor
the-new. ) anſwer'for that Wind: Yea, , and this uſe we make of this Se-
cret in Nature, that, as the South-Wizd is of 2. warms Character , though it
may under a Frefty Conſtitution, even..ſo. , though under ſuch coo]
Comp, now and then, .our Aſpect may challenge the ſamze Chara-
$:38.-And all this: conduces- toward the . Prognoſtick part, unleſs you
would have the Pretender, like theGrow, always beſj 'n, or nk
nothing'is done, with the Vulgar, unle{they ſeea'Showre : Alaſs! There is
no place on the Earth where it rains always. - We, beſure have our w#crſi-
tudes of Temperate and quiet Air, a>Fog, a Cloud, the more ſilent com-
plications acc to Natures ambling pace ſo-that it behoyes an Aftrolo-
' ger £0 trade in dry: Weather ſometimes, and be.content to foreſee a gentle
remiſſion of a (tu Froſt, and think he hath done well, if it falls con-
ſonant to Nature , who muſt novalways be upon the Gallbp. .
S . 39-/ Thus for the Prime Produf. -But now for the Rain and Wind.
Hoe opwe, bic laher. How ſhall we juſtifie that? We have more ways than
' | . ohe


of Maſfwe CCIAV. and of Wind CCXXXIIL


C hap. de. of oÞ. Influence on Ram, &C. Denionſirated.


one to this Wood. What if we ſhould 2cquaine che World, that ſeeing the
Days in the Table exhibired, are treble ro the Aſpects, that 'we-are nor


bound ' it may_'ve, £0 the number of the Days; Ir-s. enough,if we have re-
pe


gard to the at{oever thorter


proportion the ' Effect beareth to che Days, we are fafc


, and then our advantage is this; that Wy
ou


giving Teſtimony ſufficient ro it {elf Thus the Szamar jultly imputes the
Flaw of Wind, andiche Huſvanaman his expected, Showre to the change of
the I.” If ic happen ac all, he thanks I fay the ſaid Configuration, hap it at
what time it will within that Tridwuwr. |
9 40. This may furprize our Adverſary ſofar; that he may cenſure us
as no fair Dealers. - But there is no awvo:ding it, for the Aﬀpe& muſt
conſidered from the beginning to the end,from the M:nimum quod fic, to the
Maximum quod 30n, throughout the whole Territory and Dominion s..


therefore we (ee the Shepherd and the Mariner do not fix thedaybut expe&/


it ovce or twice, it may be, within the Three, and prize their Experience;
counting themſelves zo ſxzall Men, for underſtanding more than ſome, who
are greater Conjurers. «© 87): ir: ff)

s 41. For Alpes then the Table witnefſerh ghus, LXXXVIL Af


are brought on the Stage 3 70 {eſs then LXXL bring Rain with om.


No leſs then LXI. bring Winds. Eb s

s 42. Concerning which by the Way, we acknowledge that- we have
made ufe ofevery Brie ; for we, who do believe there is no Gaſualty in the
leaſt Puff , direfly ifluing, could do no leſs. Every Gale at leaſt, which


may be Serviceable to the Navigatr, ought to be conſidered Bur here


we are conſcious of ſome defect unavoi
not be made on the Top Sazl at Sea 3 a conſtant W
Day. and Night by-Succeſſion, muſt needs tell a different Tale from him
who hath ſlept oura Watch or two, 'in the Hold, or confin'd to his Seden-
tary Cabin. Not but the Seaman is ſometimes 4ecalzz'd at the very new I,


ble, ſociey one Obſervations could:


as I have obſerved from Hackiluit; nor can Linſchoten, or Sir Frances deny'it;.


notwithſtanding they would ay that in ſuch. Gaſes the Caulality.of the Aſc:
pas muſt not be impaired, becauſe of the rarity and diſproportion of the:
nſtance. And who doubts it > Howbeit, as to our deticient Obſervation
of the Wind now acknowledged,we may þe beheved a little,and the defect
ſupplyed from the obſervation of the Ghaxge of the Wind, and its quota,
which nay fairly be reduced under the ſtile of Winds z {ince there cannor
be a Change of Wind where there is no Wind ſtirring. That I fay nothing
of th&Specrfication of Winds, which could not be ſpecifyed where theres
a Dead Calm. | | by
5 43. Butto return to our Razn, I do acknowledge that Rainy Changes
of I are not always of {o high a Sum,they R:ſe or Flag according to the ge-
neral Temperature, to which a-/angle Aſpect mult pay ref] Q z yer ſtill -
Change makes her part good at the long Run. So, thoughin Ke
from the beginning of 1621. to the end of 162g, ations bring
LXXXII. wet oness'*yet in the Diary of 24 years from Norimberg ab 162Þ
to1646. Linations CCCXL bridg CCCVI. of Rainy or Snow 3 of Wi
CLXXIL And of our own Obſervation from >a incluſive. to 1677. of
C II. Changes, or ( becauſe two are miſſing ) CCCXXIT, We have


'$: 44. Now, back Friendsto Aſtrology have a long time exclaim
there.is no certainty in Aſpects 3 for, ſay they, they as ofteFyniſs as hit, |
reckon the /ingle day on which ir, happens by Calculation, and then
think they may Triumph.  Butthey are ſhort in this, that they reck
other Notion of a Day, but the Fersa, the day of the Week : For whar if


atch kepfabove Deck-


exclaimed that


theÞeri4be dry when tlie Moon changes ? Sunday ſuppoſe, on June 1 5-167:
: or,


; , if that AG.
pect affords us its Influence ir azy oe Day of the Ternary,' by that means.


-


lers Diary ©


58


—


Aſpes hit more frequently then m:ſ; at long — Book 1.


, Lood this


hor.'4 Morn. It Saturday night before, it Rains ſoundly, from hor. 9. Fe.
to, 'or toward Midnight, the Fer:a ( the Sunday ) is dry, bur pe Chingeis
not ſo. A day is 24 _ o t comes therefore withmn-12 Hours before
or after, it ms ap the D, the Change. As there is a Lunar Month
conſiſting of 28 or 29 Days? { Fo is a Lunar Day; the World admirs
a triple Lunar Month, Periodical, Synodical, and of Illamination, Ours is
a'day of the Synodical Month, only i in this it is ſingular, that -it comprizes
'as many Hours after the Change as before; the Hour of the Change being
the common Term, halfway of the whole, reckon the Day fo, and then let
them tell me their Mind.
g AA we —_— Yy» prov vided that we be not too haſty, or ſelf-conceited, to con-
ld Rule for one or two invidious Obſetvations of "Gach or
"age 2 Tom, —_— as/it 'may happen, may be extraordinary, as in the year
_ By Keplers Diary we no Rgrn neither in 7anxary, (4 Winter
Month) aor in February, nor in April, the three moiſteft Months” in the
Jr No; not in _ Rn Nell we who look back many Years be-


find that there is great and admrrable Variety in
the Ce 5 frogs Cries 5 2nd that a Gexeral Temperature of the year ſwal-
lows up the tions : muſt the Aſpect therefore be izarferent
to wet or- qrork iled tw*ce or thrice > Can my crazy Bpdy be ſaid


ting Tertia or 2xuartanhold me half a year, do not I retain a Prope/ſtor ro
the Malady, ber pr it z the firſt or ſecond RO ? Sois it here; the Al

at the Loyg Rav. The Neighbour years will

make amends. the year 1621. we have Moift Changes. 9. Anno

.1622, 9. Anpo 24. 1 Anno 1625. 11. and Anno 1623. ( theyear objeded)

ive. together, the Surn will anſwer the Objection:

$ 46. Let me not be reckoned tedious if I give a further Example of our

ous DOG Dey, nch 2. (when we firſt obſerved) the Change in January
irmiion of 3 Cour Cold and Windy z in Mzrch Foggy

rſs) what _ > The 'Inclination to


ad Hoe (a IE ood Fm September, Novem-
| Near ad eto Winds th oe —rans\ While
and\Devember 1


indy. we 7 the next ear, I
Rain ; yo (mark the he imermiſficn 'of Reap ad and March Em the
Ho = jon brought but a oper No Dr Tuly Heatce pereeiveble 3
went, bl September cember ongerm
ſhowved its Influence. - And if Hew:tus had eres bur thus much,
he would haye told us that the I was placed ſo near us, rather for this In-
" thag for the advantage of thoſe who obſerve her Motion to a Scru-


WEL Tr that we forego this Device of the Aſped, and ic
we are te give account {till of ſo many Days concerned ;

cur Cones t, we maintain that there is an Inclwation Viſible

able, to: bear up toward the 1; of the Days , though twice
nd yeh lomber of the Afpe&t. And for this we appeal ta
the Table, which was, ler me tell you, produced for this no to make
this Notable Inclination, and to ſhow the Irrationality of thoſf who will

hot allo 7 The Objection proceeding alike againſt chis,as any other Con-
he fr eems ken thus, Not how many times, but how

ny days do we find concerned in the total of the Lunations > Anſwer,267.
, how many of theſe by rhe Table find for Rain, or Wind ? For
, wefind days 109. to which add what we noted by themſelves, the


Fiolent Rains, whoſe Sum is 28, and the whole aynounts to 137. bay 2
'* ty


Chap. 12. The Aſpetts Influence Mechanically Uuſtrated,


petty Sum to be added for Szaw or Hail, which advances the Sum to 140.
and upwards. How ! Of 261days are there found 140 Drippers by oze ſingle
Aſpect ? And is not the Inclination Palpad/e > For 'tis the propertion of Fitcy
toan Hundred, not confidering the Overplus : Oze Aﬀpect, (and the like we
ſhall find rrue.of any other A ) reaches toa Moyety.

9 48. Forl hope we are not to learn what Mechanical Writers teach
us to good purpoſe, that Power and Inclination ( 1s Motrix ) may be
proport :oned out by Numbers. As toward the Motion of a Bulk of 100
Weight, there may be applyed Movers of ſeveral rates; as of 10, 20, 3o,
40, 59, &c. where the motive force of 100. moves that Bulk izfaliily, be-
cauſe thereby the Ageart is equal to the Patient ; whether this equality be
found in One only, or made up by ſeveral.ratesof ten; (ſuppoſe) 20, 3o,
4. or otherwiſe. which of themlelves, 'ris clear, are not each of them of
sfall:ble Effet, becauſe inadzquate : Yet notwithſtanding, each of theſe
have a real, unequal Share though it be , in that Effet. That of Ten is a
Tenth ;, that of 20. is a Fifth ; that of 40. above a Third part ;, that of Fifty is
a half Sharer, ſince another of rhe ſame rate performs the whole.

9 49. This preſuppoſed , =P to clear our defign of our Table, and the
Conſtitutions there, all which ſay we ( except thoſe which comein by acci-
dent ) the Aſpect reaches, Con/ideratis Gonſfiderandis. For we do nor. ex-
cept it ſhould Snow, or Hail as often as it Rains, nor Lighten, or Thunder
as oft as 'tis Warm 3 (ſeeing the year is not wholly Winter, or Summer, bur
is divided into Lefler Seaſons, where thoſe rarer Conſtitutions happen by


Virtue of that Inclination.
Lay them now in progreſſive Order, and fee whether that will edifie.
mand


1 '-. Lightning or Thunder.

| "16 ET CC CE—_— 19.

Miſt. we ne mntaytrntly —— 8).
Wind. _ ————————1c3.
Rain — ——————tmx—m— —134.


is 8 ea il; 2 Re 2 utS%; : oy |
And isthis Influence of the Change 1zd:fferent,, Now:! Doth ic-not paſt
zncline to Rain? Next, under thar, to Wind, Mift,. Trajetons; &c. Hens
fay I; one '4 © Þ Inclines zo Mrff} Clhuds, Winas,, Rayny and'ro Trajett-
ons (at times) yea; to Thunder it (elf £ Bur to Rain and Wind wot , el £ how
come thele inſtances to exceed? :For:Ratn and Wixd, webave demonſtrared


come not from 'any* unaccountable Motion of Matter,. but at fer determinace


Perjods and Revolutions of Heavenly Bodys... From this difference of the


Account-ih fuck Revolutions, -fay. I, as there is/greater diſpoſition rg Fog, or +


Cloudy, than co Froſty or Serene ; hence in 4 © ) there is ſome real In-
fluence toward Miſt and Fog, and cloſe weather: And if 'there be a greater
aptitude for Wind and Rain, chan cor. Dry and Calm Weather ; ſuch as ſhall
aſpire almoſt ro the Moyayabt Days Comprehended, ( reckoning 2 or 3 to
every Lunation ) then there is: fome known Force and Influence in the Lu-
nation, which being not content with-ſuch-Imperfe& Productions, as Fog
or Clouds; ( though diſpoſitions to Rain, ) help co bring forth abſolute and
compleat Moiſture. UT CELL. Y Ts
. 9 50, Toa Moyrythereforewe arearrived in the days;and that is engqugh
to prove the Aſpe& not to be-indifferent 3 They are as-Popwers of Fifty, to
the Motion of 'an x00. So-'ris anieven Wager it Rains otOne of the 3 days
concerned. And if any ſhould be fo: - 5 engage againſt ſuch an
Event, in his Favour let me-ask; Who ſhallMecide the contraverlie, in caſe
+ Shorye in Proſpe# be diſcerned; . when 'poſhbly it Rains not upon the Spor,
nor (as the Wind-may/ſit') isike-to do./1:Or. ſuppoſe that the Air looks
fuſpicioully; evrhienwe haveyeaſon robalions trains. (ore ws.) within che
C9-01 erge


60


The Fital Paralogiſm. Gallendus treated. —=Book 1.


- doth a Prognoſtick approach the Truth ,. even w


Verne of our Horizon 3- and in this caſe, in ma the V the Waxer is is
not abſolutely and m—_—_— loſt z ſeeing no or Ochers, will
ny always to engage that it ſhall Rain upon his Rivals Head. No, be
e takes his mea(ures from the publique, the: Country round about if it
hah cn oe NOS the Heavens have done their Do, and (©
51. Now , the Fatal Paralogiſm of the Adverſary is thisz He, when

he 3h not ſuch frequency of Activity as he requires, concludes that there is
None. As if becauſe there is not the exceſlive proportions of 60,70,80.6-c.


' towardsthe Motion of a 100, Therefore there is no Activicy or Force at all


in the Agents. Whereas a Motive Power even at 40, 30, 20. hath a con-
ſiderable Force or Strength towards the Effect, although it be not commen-
ſurate to 50,60, &c. Alpedts have no Force, "becauſe , they mils 4s, nay,
more often than they hir. Gaſſendus himſelf fo reaſoneth. Bur 'tis hard to
conclude that an Aſpect hath zo Force , when the objection _confeſlerh that
there is ſome z, and that brings its Effet almoſt; nay every whit as often, as
the contrary. For what elſe, I pray, ſhould make the Succeſs cquipoaderate
with the Failance? Is it notabominable ro conclude there is nothing of
Weight in one fill'd Scale, where it xquiponderates with the other ? If an
Aſpect ſhould contribute beyondrhe Moyety to 70, or 80 times, and fail on-
ly 30, or 20 times, would not the inclination be confeſs' d ? Well then, if it
contributes but 50. is the inclination abol;ed? Pur caſe it contributes on
this fide the Moyery bur 30 0r40 times,it is a great way diſtant from nothing.
Five Pound is Weight, though ic be not Fifty; and Tew Pownd is Weight ,
though it be nor an 100. Five Pound is not Weight of #t ſefto crack 2
Nur; ſhall I therefore infer it hath no Preſſure or Ponderolity toward ſuch
W—_ Comme Expo Lp 2s _ #. Some Sonnzes _—_ I»mpulſe
may be indee ———— ight is the greater.
The Learned ſhould have diſcerned the but P art', and
not abſolutely. denyed, but-confidered oc——_— 2g2in ( _— is more
ona wh in their own CR Fark han the dependencies of the. ferioan's


- $ 52. More we. could 0 ta I 9 Ay Bob

'Rai cloſe Ys fappo a Lowring
Heaven and yet the jolly: Wagerer, ke as ol lm, many tes eng
Air to Overcaſt and Lowre, and pur know
well what to think of it, and cald CN A he anni height Lure ſo near


it COMES many times
thort.


Only this I think may be poſed, rhar regard may be had not to
the Sums of Rain, Wind, {ingly ot jointly compured, \pmdnbn of,
Was fon Efeetof this Ape) a-fo to the Dihun#ive, whether Rain or

they oft times take their turns, amines ol gw
0


mum les XLI Winds without Rain be-
ing noted in this our Table ; and ſo — will laſh beyond the Moyery to
the undeniable rates and proportions, the A being Ju
III —_ as ___ fond of his D encither, fo have,we '
on to forego it, ſince naw diſcourting wy
Pretences, dg@&rages our of the Hed,
the- from the ] of. Birds and and Beufrare mae enjlitc


he, ph ry Se x Now thee Natural propegfions ren
ouſly commended, Armor har inf | 0
Sytnptoms preſeur,qor of an Eflect Future |


Chap. 1 2. 'd © I mmcline to South or Weſtern Winds. 61


they are, hold only in this our D:ſjun#rve. They do not determinately
ſay Rain, but indeterminately Rain or Winds, as we have from Captain
Smith learned before. | —"p ;

$ 54. However for the deter#:3nation of this DisjunRive to Wind, or
Rain, or both, ſeeing it is juſtly expected we ſhould fpeak Gategorically
in this matter, we ſay that chere may be found Rules in Art for that or for
Nothing. In the mean time we gain ſome little Credit toan AſpeR, becauſe
itis confeſſed thac a fingle Aſpect would then not be unworthy of regard.

$ 55. Nor yet have we drained our Table. It bears as if it would give
ſome Light further, w:z. ro the determination of. the Wind.

Let us ſee, the Sums being collated, we ſhall find chat this Aſpect,
apt to cauſe Winds, is apt alſo to determinate them to the Weſt and to the
South, racher than to the North and Eaft 5 which thus I make out ; I take
the Cardinal Winds, ang their Complications ( making VIII. points of the
Compats to ſerve our turn ) and adding the Sums, the account lies before


you thus.
Eaft, 8.7 cWeft, _ 36.9 C North 46.7 CSomth, 56.
XE. Z5. OA 270A E. 25.6 7 We: *
S. E.. 12:2 CS. W. $56.2CN. W. 29.908 W. 56
75. 119. 98. 124, |
So that the inclination is /-aft to the Eaſt, wzore to the North, more than .


that tothe Weſt, and tothe South zroft of all.


$ 56. Here I lament Thad nor the accomodation of the. Pyx:s,or any Hori-
zontal Plate divided into more -points of the Compaſs, thongh I ſee not thar
Natural Knowledge requires ſo exact 2 Pyx as Navigation ſeth ; 'becaule E
boggle at this; that I find the North Catdinal point. gives more inſtances
than the Weſt. To me 'tis a great Secret, the caufe'of the North-Wind 3
how no Planetary A{pedct, except the ozzal was ever dreamt of for that
Cauſe, But rhe North appears when many times V. is ingaged inno Aſpect ;
refore of that hereafter. -
 $ 57. Letno obſerver ask me-why, of all the Winds; the South-Eaft leaſt
frequentsout Horiſon ? Scalzger, I remember, tells us, for France that 'tis a
rare and zice Wind, fo here with us in England. Hereafter, not here, we
ſhall tell whecher we areable to anſwer this Nice Queſtion. .

9 58. Bur, why the Southerly and Weſterly > If any ask, he may be an-
ſwered from the Premiſes; that the Lunarion helps ro warm the Air, and by
Conſequence to the warmer Winds: The Weſt and South; are ſuch.

s j9. The indetermination or Charge of the Wind in the fame Day is
zotable, in my Judgement, the Solution is eafie ; for the e, I find;
makes from the cooler quarter to the warmer : 'Tis to be aſcribed to the
Approachof the I toward the Solat Body, which at 4:/ante ſuffers a North
or Eft Wind to blow. Bur in the nearer application befriends the Air with
a T of her Favour. The » fwift := Motion, by reaſon of which the
was thought to have no great Influence, herein appears to be Krviceable to
the Change of the Wind; which often alters, accotding-to the ) 's #ppli-
cation, or receſs from.the Sun, &7. So Fate will have it, chat what is obje-
Qed to bag profeou,copt ao her Lafre paſtes tion of her Influence.
af Kepler there hftad, &c: cg lietle 'of

BY V to mention -it, except when the ) is found
engaged hb impu


te


d © Þ helpsto all T bunder hapning. at the Chage. Book 8.


to ownany part of his Skill to the leſs myſterious traditzonary way, of ra:
ther wherher he unhappily refuſed right meaſures which offered themſelves:
Ss 61. But could this great Man think,if but from his own Diarys, 4 © V
is infignificant,when in the ſolitary Year 1617.it rained 7 times: on the very
day of the' Aſpect, ( not tomeddle with Wind!) as many. times Aro 1621,
and 1622:VI. times Ano 1623: to preſs it no further. " |
: $62, Only upon the account of Thunder, to which Meteor, as rarely as
it happens with us, we ſay, that even with us this Aſpe& mcl:nes, with a res
mote, yet real Propenſionz and in Germzazy more. On which account we
ask again, does Thunder appear but a day before the change, May 4. Amnd
16ig. S. N. And ſhall thar Change have no influence thereon ? At that time
there was Thunder 'and exceisof Rain with a d © h. Bur he acknowledg: *
es that alone conld not an{wer to ſo great a Produft: No nor, which he is
forced to produce, his 2uincunx of Y and 2. And yet We fic quidem Cauſa-
rum ſatis apparet, as he honeſtly confeſſerh. - All this while ſuffering the &
to ſtand by, bluſhing by it ſelf, becauſe unfalured 3; whenas he might have
obſerved, that not a year ſcapes him in his whole Decade, which brings not
that Conſtitution-at the Change. Once perhaps, Ann 1626. twice Anno
1621..:1628. thrice 479 '1622.. 1627. four tires Ann 1623. 1625. and
morethen once Atv i629, If. Metcoram Driurnum may £0*for Lighning 3
what do-I ſpeak of IX. or X: years; when inthe Nor:axberg- Diary, from
1623. :£0 1646. (2 notable Peice lent me by the Learned Dr. Bernara) there
@ppears but rworyears of Twenty Four, wherein there is no noiſe of Thun-
der heard at ſome zſtival New. I or other. Tn che reſt*ris ordinary to hear
it thrice at one Aſpe&t. Now let any man tell me there is no inclination to
Thunder in the New 3; And if it muſt be granted for Germany , it muſt
-begranted, :though: but a Pin or two lower,-n [Exgland alſo. - But, if ro
'Thunder, - whatinclination hath-it to Rain,[ pray?” Lecthe Adverſary anſwer.
9. 63, The Pretence of the Ys fmift Gourſe and Tranfit is not, fo well,
Eichftad Ephem. For firſt, the Trankic is not fo fudden; ir challengeth 3 or 4
Hours in- ſpite of; Fate. - The Face of Heaven is alterable in leſs time 3 for
rhough it is trye, many times Clouds, by the flow approach of Cauſgs con-
ſpiring, do leiſurely gather into a denſity, while Rain, in the Country Phraſe,
is brewing, yet IThave ſeen Heaven oft overcaſt of a ſuddain, and deſcend in
a Showre, yea Fair Weather,-and anon Thunder -Charged and Diſcharged,
and all in aquarter.of an Hour. F avs bits FEY
S 64. Whatſhall we fay to thoſe Conjunctions which bring their Effect
within the time. of-their Corporal Contract, within 3 or 4 -Hours 3 ſuch
25 January 19. Ann 1671. Fin. 19. Anno 1672, Febr. 25. Anno- 1674.
Febr. 21, Anne 77. | March 30... Anno 1671. April 28, cjuſaem Anni, April
7: Atmo. 1673. April it. Anno 1677. May 2. &c: All theſe with a little
computation'will be found to fall within the terms of the ſaid partil Aſpect,
as manifeſt as the great Daſh on Sept; 10: frotn hoy 8. to 10. Þ which pro-
claims the Change. at the Hour .1c. at Night. Or the exceſs of Wer F:4ru-
ary.21, Anno. 1671; hor. 7. mane. proclaims the Change at 10. Mornvig.
To fay nothing of the ſmart Showers, Fuly 4. 11. hor. Yeſp. -hint'a Lunation
following the next Feria at hor-2: Matutine. -- Yea, nor of theſe Trajections
which have. been” obſerved to ſhoot at this very time, of which we bave
Examplesin the Table,Sept. 27: 4rino 1676. November 14. Anno-1677; ſothat
ris. not the brief Tranſit (which indeed hath adue Exrent ) makes the I in-
[effectual, bur. the: flinching.of the re# when they are ready for Correſpon-
' Gence, he Spunge js full, and then a Light and tranſient prefſſute expreſth
moiſture 3 otherwiſe the Spunge is dry and ſlabborn; and wilt. not- yield
what 43 expected, ont, ets: > 2uld 4+) 2 UTE Wet


Cit
_ - * * "23


Les p
ew bo! lid C4


S 65. Tis


Chap. XII. The Angles Difficulty of. Progn. nEngland, whence.


63


$ 65. 'Tis confeſſed by the experience of E:ch/ad , that the Aſpect hap-
pening in the Angles (z. e.) the Oriental, Occidental, or Meridional, is wont
to bring Rain. But the Courſeof the Y is the ſax:e in thoſe Angles as ellſe-
where z and ſeeing Aſpects Platique arealſo Operative, what Conjunction is
there that doth not viſit thoſe Angles at diſtance more or leſs > The ' Fault
therefore lies in the Principles of thoſe who diſcern not, or overlook,,the
other Cauſes , which are of the ſecret Gommittee, as I may call it, where
this Aſpect ſeems to prelide. | .

$ 66. Poſterity will make up this I=d&#107, if there beneed, from all Eu-
rope,if not from all parts of the World. And whereas maptingenious Men ſay,
our Iand hath no Correſpondence with the Continent, which renders the
attempts of Prognoſtic R:azculous, becauſe impoſſible 3 *Tis but an Excuſe,
"the New I hath the ſame Influence here and there, and all over the World,
Obſervatis Obſervanars ; in the prime produtt , be ſure ; and in its Conſe-
guents, acording to the Capacity of the Region, and the Time of the Year.
Since Fog, Snow, Rain,Lightning are all united in one Original z and though
they be oppoſite ( do you mark me ? ) may be predicted for the /azze day, in
the ſeveral parts of the World, by them who live upon the Spor, and know
the diſpoſition of ſeveral Places.

9 67. What difficulty appears in the Prognoſtic at home, ari ſes zot becauſe
weare an Ifazd, but becauſe we are in a AVortherz Iland : The Weather
is more Reewlar, and of far more eatte PrediQtion, in the Torrid Zone, as all
Mariners will inform you , then in the Temperature , where the Anomaly
isgreateſt, according as the Elevation of the Pole is more or leis. But this
difficulty Aſtrology maſtereth.

£ 68, Thele things rightly underſtood, our Natural definitions will prove
to be no longer of a precarious Greatt, or denyed their acceptation, becauſe
hitherto labouring under the ill Aſpect of a notion Aſtrological, while Preju-
dic: for a whiie, puts us out of conceit with Truth.

s E6. !.2t the Adverſaries of this Principle in the mean while beſpeak the
nex* 25 or 3o years to bring ina coxtrary indication, as if the Heavens under
ths Aipzt or its Equivalent,(for weare (ure of all, as of one) were ina:fferent
to Coid, or Tepid,Moiſt, or Dry. Alas ! when they have carefully watched
the Heavenly Motions they will be brought by their own experience to the
Ola Saw, the Good Wives Tradition, unleſs they beſpeak the © and J
once acatn miraculouſly to ſtand ; Stazd I fay, for if they move either fa--
ward or backward , (though in this latter, I confeſs, ſome confuſion of Seaſons
will happen) yet as to this Propenſion or Influence the caſe will be the ſame.

Let the Reader therefore raiſe his attentions toward Aſpects in general
comprehending not the Lunar only but the reſt, all of which ſtand indicta-
ble for hundreds of grand commotions in the univerſe, recorded in Ghyozreles,
or Hiſtory Marine, {ince even this our Novi-lunar Aſpe& affords us fuck
exceſſes, not Tempeſts only, but other more prodigious accidents, whether
above, as Comets, which we take to be of Kin to enflamed Meteors, or be-
low, as Earthquakes, and Inundations allo, wich follow either Tempeſts, or
Earthquakes : Let thoſe Learned Men, who ſhall write of either Comet, or
Earthquake, look back into Hiſtory, and he ſhall find Truth in the remark.
And to, alchough more may be faid, we are willing to conclude the
Chapter.

$ 70. Oaly there isanother way to work,toclear up the Reputation of the
New ) for a perpetual, and in ſome Station, an Izfallible Influence , we
tried once by the vulgar Months, and they would not comply. *Tis true in
September, OFober and December, you ſhall find it fails there bur once of VII.
times Revolution. What then ſaid we, if we ſhould try in ſome certain
Signs, which make up three Months be mw as far as 30 and 31 days po BO,

though


64


Pos J zn ſuch fans never fai [s,of moiſture. Book I


though they enter not till todays after the appearance of theKalender-Month:
If we canbring certain days in the year, thirty in number, where the 4 @ Þ

never fails as to Rain; then the ) ,as rconftant. as the appears in her Viſor, is
not alway #nconftant in her Influence. Then the beloved Izfallitility of the
Concluſion is come vp, or at leaſt is worth obſerving, when the Effect is not
ſhoxe, but exactly commenſurate to the number of her Revolutions. But
ſoir is, as may appear by the ſurvey of this Table z ſome Lunations in ſuch

and ſuch Signs are fo faithful to their pretences.


8.0)

Sign, Revolution, ; "Event.
"RW VIL——— 4.
o— —VIL— 6, ,
Vn VIL— ——7.
S& _ VIL—— 6.

, VERT VIL— 6.
OB — VIIL 4.
SA VIIL T7.
;| | JENSEN VIL— 7.
WY VII. — 6.
Mn —=—_NL—— F.
þ JE VIL— -6.
Ven —n————WL—————.


The Signs we point atare Y, (z. e.) part of March and April, and part of


aly and Auguſt , 9. part of December and January, but above all corh-
in me to *? moſt ſere and moſt abounding. A New I between XIL
of Auguſt and 12 of September brings Showres 7 times in 7 Revolutions,
Totes, quties, Now this'I hope doth not caffate what we have ſaid, bur


corroborate.


Chap. XIII © © Þ or the Full Moon,


65


CH AP. XIIT.


$ 1. Full Moon gave firſt hint to Aſtrology. 2. No naked appearance.
. 4. Her Septennial Diary. 5. LXXV. in 87, Dripping Full Moons.
6. What, as to Winds. 10.Effe at the preciſe time. 11. Her warmth
confeſſed by Ariſtotle. 13. Senfivle Warmth from the Y diſcernable
in ſome caſes with us. The Thermometer not ſubtil enough to diſcern
it, the Eye may 14. The New ) warmer then the Full þ y day,and the
Full warmer by Night . 16. Plenilunar nic/1s warmer thanNovilunar.
17. Illuſtrated. 19. Compariſon of the Change and Full in their Di-
aries. 20. Full Þ brings more Rainy days than the New. 21. And
more Storms. 22. The New ) produces more Fog than the Full.
23. NoFturnal Guſts, and Rains more frequent at the Full. She, or
ſome other Planet nuſt be up in the Night when there is any Buſtle.
»4. Phyſical and Optical reaſor for the Full Y's turbulency more fre-
went than the New. 26 &* 29. Some Full Moons, npon Courteſie,
Tafllibl as to Moiſture. 28. Fill Moon's Defrnition Aſtrological,
znclines to W. and Southern Winds, leaſt of all to North.


$1,” THe next Aſpect is the ®, a Configuration as notorious as the
3 Conjun&tion, God having pleaſed to beſtow on it an Influence
ſo manifeſt, chat his power in the reſt of the Celeſtia!s might be the more
early regarded; This Aſpect factng us with a Full and Serious look, that
all who have Eyes and opportunity may diſcern the effect of its preſence.
The New » hides her ſelf from us, Envies us that Sight, and Calculation
of her punctual Congreſs, but this offers her ſelf without a Veil, even to
the Eyes of Wayfarers, Shepherds, Sea-Men, and fo firſt contributes to Aſtro-
logy 3 For, fince itis apparent that ſhe hath power over our Bodies z We
Mortals, without the benefit of this plainAſpeR, ſhould have ſnored in dark-
neſs and ignorance,ſmzarting, as the wildBeaſts under the Pole by Gel:ftial Influ-
ence, yet not knowing who hurts us. :

9 2./ Let the Philoſophers after Plutarchdiſcourſe of the Face in the Lunae
Diſcus, whether they be Vales, or Waters, or whatſoever the Faith of the
Hewelian Teleſcope will perſwade. Sure there is ſome final Cauſe of that (as
tothe Vulgar it ſeems) Humane appearance, and That not any Intent to ſtum-
ble the poor Heathens into their pitiable 14olatry, but rather a Deſign of
raiſing our attention tothat Luminary, which ſhining in ics brightneG,thews
no naked Form or Beauty, but ſuch as is inveſted With Power, zot Illumina-
tre, I ſay, but Irritattve alſo; which we come now to evidence, if after
the New »'s demonſtration there be neceffity of fo doing.

$ 3. We have aſſigned in our Table the ſpace ef 3 days for this f as well
as we have already for d , And more perhaps we might 3 for what ſhould
hinder 2 Unleſs we have a kindneſs for the 2:;zcunx, and if ſo; then we
ſhould have ſome regard for the Sexziſextile alſo, bordering upon the Change,
Couch can never be allow'd at leaſt in the Lunar obſervation, as hath been

C1


A Ta-


C\ |


f @) Septennal Diary.


f@> The Duaary.


Fanuary.
1671. WF,
XIV. Froſt, miſt m. cloſe p. m. Rain 4 p.8 p.W
XV. Ho. 1. m. cloſe miſt m. R. 2 p. A
XVI WA and thin overc. 1o p. high ante lac.
&R. ſoar n,
7. VP 2
HI. Cloſe, cold, \. miſt. NF.
IV. 0. Snow ante L, Froſty a. m. cold, dark,
driſling 3 p. E
V. No tr, cloſe, coldiſh, NW. fwd
73: = 73,
XX1I. Cloſe and very dark m. Candles uſed at
the N. Exchange, noted by many. W.
XX[II. 1 p. R. & Snow 1 m, cloſe, drifle 5 p.W }
XXIII. H, Froſt. cloſe, ſnow, m, & 2 p. Cold
wind» N.


_


4.

£7 ror & wer m. NE, KR hard x p. _
cloudy n,

XIF. 5 m. Fair, dry, Moen Eclij/, overc. - m.

ofter 5 p. SW.

X111, R. 5 m. Foggy & miſle p. m, max. part,


Rain earneſt 7 p. SW. NE, at Þ. S,
7. VP 21. |
RXXX1T. Dec. S W. warm, open, Arn. 8.


I. 8. Fr. fair, warm, S E. Moon totally Eclips'd.S

IL.Fair,overc. & Guſts 2 p. Lambs-wool-clouds.
IO P. SW.

XXX. IWIy. wet 9 m, open & ſtormy wind.S W.

RXX1. 8 m. H. cold, drying wd. Snow or hail
4 Þ-H. wd. nod, tot. C d. Hail 2 P. _ he
2 hours 3


P-
I, Febr. $ W, but p.m. Nh, \. froſt, bright ni


ſ. rhick cl.
76. X TO.
XIX. Rainy 2 m. op a. m. H, wd. variable, R


P. M. 83 p. 10P.
XX. 7 p-R.1 m.& 8 m. Cloſe m. p.
XX1. Temperate, open, cloſe. SE.


TT V 29.
VII. Tempeſtuous ne#. ror, H, wel. f. rain. WW.


VIIE. o. R. air 3 m. Q ante. Fr. with Ice m.
W


Froſty, cloudy at n. & fog.
IX. Cloudy, wdy, driſle m. R. 1 p. ad 3p. wd
laid, drifle 6 p. Two Meteors 1 peS, mor, Ely


February.


1671. 5.
XIL. Cloſe m. high oats; ». & 1. Sirius Or.

cum Y, Y , driſle 9 p. S.
XIII. 6. warm m. cloſe & miſt ſub veſp, W.
XIV. Cool, cloſe m. p. S


72.
L Bright, froſty, a Lift &f clouds in che Weff,


——


S. |


Fd


4 P+ _ &wdrurn S, freez n. SE, fine
balo 11

IT, 12, mi ym. froſty, ſnow prerty __ 71
ecc, with Guſts,

HI. Snowing no#. preced. tot. & a.m. R—_
above the Leg calf, Relenr, ſnowing veſp.NW.

X 12,

2 Fair, warm, arite, P.

XX1I, Cloſe m. R. & wd p.m. ad 11 p. &c. £,

XXII. Wd and ſhowr 1 or 2 p. m. open m.p.$,

74- X' 2,

1X, Froſty,bright,muddy @ 3 p. & thin overc.

p. wds. NE,

X, 4+ Froſty, fair m. SW. Snow o, & 10 P.
leſs miſt.

XI. Froſty. ſnow 8 m. bright a. m, ſome c'ouds

S = in W,

w; Garet ſuo plent Iunio ite Februarim,
6. X 10

XVIIL f. rains m. 8 nm. (y alie, miſly wveſp.E,

XIX. 8 m, cold, cloſe mifty m, E, open o. 5,
cloſe p. m. SW,

m. | XX. Cold, , dry, R. 11 m. gently for an hour,


S.


.
þ-» +7


TT 29.
VI. Froſt m. open, H. wd & cloudy m. p. ſome

Rain 9 p. & H. wind. S,
VII. 5 p. Rain midn. & 3 m. with hail. NW.
VIIL Froſt, ice, cold brisk wd, fnown. WW,


March,


I671, Y 4.

XIV. Fog, fair & warm p. m. flying cl, at n. E

XV. 11 m. no fog, cloſe, fair p, m. Hurricane
ar Cadiz, the like nor known. E,

XVI. BF. m. Open, Wy. but p. m, Z/y,

72. X 23.

IL H. froſt. miſty m. p. S«n red, Moan red, and
ſo at n. as if Eclips'd, Narrow Halo, NW.

ITI. 2 p. Froſt, miſty m. & die tor. Sol rutilus,


little wd, Nh.
IV. Froſt, {. miſt, bright m. pleaſanc, Fo
73. a
XXI. Miſling 5 m. cloſe cold veſp. NE,


XXII. o. cloſe, cold.
XXTIII. Very cold, cloſe & miſty, _—__ I p:
Hail ante 6 p» NE,


74. Y 4
XI. Open m. fairer n. E.
XII. 2 m. froſty, ſnow m. p. p. m. ſ. thaw. E.


XII. Froſt a. 1. Rain m. cloſe & warm. IW,


T5» X 24,
XXVIII. Febr, R. 5 m, miſle a. m. R. - apace =


I. Miſt 6. R.m. & a. m. Open p. m. wind turn
Nly, then W.
IL. Fr. fair m, Hail 3 p. 5 p. Hail & R. veſp. NW
V 10,
XXX, RK, early, flying cl, R. 12 p. W.
XXXE.


4 <
+ s 4 L, .
IHE 2. _"-
+ LS Ea ng te :


Chap. 12:


P@OI & eptenal Diary.


67


XXX1 2 m. Rain a midn. ad mer.ſhowres 7 p,
Ely, m. bur p. Ms


M. N.
Apr. 1. Wly. Rain 6 m.Hail half an ho.after 10 | 72,


m. ſhowre 3 p-

76. Y 9.

XVIIL R. 5 & 6 m. cloſe m. p. dark 2 p. we
rj

xe, miſt wetting 4. m. fer tot, & wind E.
bur ar Noon S W.

XX. Open m. cloſe, wind, driſle 8 p. 11 p. E.

77: X 29.

VHI. R. 4 m. cloſe, rain 9 p. S,

IX. 7 m.R. miſt, fair, f. wd 7 p. R.1op. E.

X. Rain ante © ort, & 8 m. H. wdSly. NW


April.
1671. &
xm. H. wd & wer, # * die tot. E.


XIV. 4 m. cold, wdy, bright, H. wd a E
XV. H. wd, rain 1 m. cold.

2, V 23.
TIVany wd & R, a. m. {. ſcuds, n—_—_


Il. « 5 'm. wdy, fr. clouds, H. wind,{.ſhowrs N W.
r,P- mM We
IH. Bright, wind high m, Hail 2 p. 3p» 5 Þ+
wd. various. S. N. W.
73+ .S 11,
XX,” Windy, clear-m .\. moiſture 2p. S.
XXT. 1 m.cloſe, H. wd m. often Jowry, ſome
ſhedding o. SW.
XXIL Fine m. wdy, ofc lowring p. m. So


ping.
& ©,


NE. cloſe a. ni. open p. m- miſty 5 p. mi-
fling 10 p. clouds ride NW. & Sly 8 p. cool.
X, 10 m. SW. ſhowres 11 m. &c,warmer, miſt


SW.

XT. Rain no, R. 2 p. miſt. E,
at ——_—

-—"j Fair m. averc. {. rain —

XXIX. 10 m. £. cloudy, wdy a. m. fair, =y


p.m
RXX, Eh. Clouds in ſcenes, miſt, dry, flie p:
m. clouds 11 p..- NE.
76. S&8.
XVII. E. offer 10 m. ſhowr ante 1 p. cool n.
E.NE.
XVIIL 3 m. Re11m. 4&7 p.
XIX. R. 4 & 4 m.7 & 10 m. &c. open p. m-
miſt. NE,


®. V 28.

VI. Open, fine ſhower-1 p, E.

VII. 9 p Rain 9 m, cloſe and cold, NE.

VHI. Miſty, cold wind, cloſe. N,
May.

I671. It 2,


X11. Very hot miſty air,ſhowreSun or. & R.


—_


XTIIL 7. Fair, ſoultry, ” xd pa cool wd. SW.
XIV, H, wd, cloſe m. ſhowr 2 p. SW
S 21,
XXX, Apr. Cloudy & lowring much t p. _
niſhing, warm. Sh.
9. Daſhof R. 8m. R AX.C. cloſe m.p. red
- Sun occ, warm n. & cloudy. Ely.
IL R. midn. cloſe, warm, ſhowr 2 p. Sly, W.
Plent L. poſter. Tt 20.
XXX. Wly, Fair, hor.
XXX, 0. ovyerc. open, overc. veſp. Guſts 10 p-
NE,
I. Jun. Cool m. ſomerimes thin overc. threar-
ning, clear ſub veſp. NE. E. $S.
Tt 9.
&%. Open, temperate, blew miſt.
XX. 1 p. wdy, cloſe m. p. offering, blew miſt |
raken up. SW.
XXI. Parelia at Womondham in wrctr ſhire
cool wd, {. ſhowr ,- m. SW.
74. S. 28,
VHE. Sh. f. rain 4 m. fair, h. wd. SW.
IX, 9 p- overc. p. m. miſty, wdy, Ely. offer
once or twice o. & p. m;
R. Sh, Fair, white cl. S W, briskwd 1 p.
75+ IC 16.
XXVII. R. ante luc, 11 m. & p. m. E:
XXVIIL. 6 R. ao, tot, cloſe & ſhowring, E.
RXIX., Open. remperare, f., wet, lowring, E.
76._ IC 6,
; XVI. Tempeſt of wd till & acc. circ. ho. 5 +
rain ante m. 05 alias.
XVIE. 10m. ſhowr by coaſt o. (& alias, FO
0Ccs .
XVIII. ſhowr 7 m. bright a. Mm. grear rain &
ail I p. »%
S 26,


TT

v6 —_ m. Þ. Goſſamere 1 Þ+ wa, E.
contrary 6 -

VH. 3 m. clouds hindering the Eclipſe, miſty,


r clouds fulpict 10us by coaffk 'r
beg ool wds B. ad” tk Av


Air ng wholſome. *
vil. ly miſt, fair, dry, C. lowring, btick
wd E. hazie proſpeRt.


.


p_—__


June.
1671. S 0: |
3. fe or clans by Soemes NW.
XiL 10 m. Cloſe, Rain 3 p SW,
XIII Stormy winds, Rain 1 A cloſe, warm. $.
72, S-18.
XXIX. R.8 m.19m-3P. S.


XXX. 3 m. cloſe, driſle mM. &c, greens 7 P+
Ww.


[. Zul. Driſle 5s m. h in M.C. & ) cc. &
10 m., wd, very miſty air, NE, Arn. NW,
73 S 8,

X NIL. R. 5m. #4. m. 8&1 p. Nly, bur P. m,
S. ſhowr 4 p. .-

rem 40s R$ m. cloſe, windy, {. wearing r'Þ P.


T XX;


&. © I Septennual Diary. Book I,

- Bri loudy 0. open, cool, lowring  XXVII. R. m. & 9 mM. wdy die tot N W. wd.

_ -—_ 5 tg N W.SW. | SW.
7+ | __ loud wd = Fai —_ ercafti

VII. Bright m. clouding 9 m. C1oudy Þ. M. - Fair,warm, Cl. a. m. oy ng

N. N W. warm night. gradually p. m. H. winds. E.


VIIL 8 m. cloſe m. p. wd, warm n- SW.
IX. Wy, cloudy ons, {.drifie 0. offer to ſhowr


4 p. wd change p. m. warm N


75. S 15.
XXVI. Wet 5 m. N. Thunder and a great
daſh, & C. hail,a 3 ad 4 p- R eee. W.Clouts
o to the - =
KXVII. 4 — AT lowring, Cl. miſt, =
Ip.inl. a
XXVIIL. Wera Sun or. ad 0. & 4 p.ad 8 p.W
veſp. E.
S #|


76. . B&

XIV. Very hor, {, wd, clouds, lowring p m-
{. drops 9 p. complaint of Heat. w.

XV. 6 p. Hot, fair, f. cool gales, Ely.
long in the Eaſt, ſeen norwirhſtand
Full Moon. ;

XVI, Vety hor, Cl. pretty brisk wd.

7. IT 24.

iv. Cold, fair, cloſing m. p. o. clear Eaſt 6 p
bur thin overcaſt South & Weſt. N.

V. 2 m. Fair, dry, long ſtreak'd clouds, "1


horizon, no _>
VI. Bright, dry, warmiſh. p. m. Ely. W.m.


Meteor
ivg the


SW,


July.


ay hw, _—_ ws 2. m. Rain 4 m.
wr 1 p.ad 3p.R again, s p.Delph.occ.
Thunder 6 p. as Mr. Saunders. : $.
XVI. Cloudy, clouds in ſcenes a. m. dry p.m.

W.


TT S S 29.
IL. Fair, m. cl oudy. overc. ſub
wad $ w.. 4 þ


IV. 6 &


pal


V. Cloudy m. Wd yarious E. N W, warm,
Fair. E,


Q occ. l.
. N. at N,
cloſe m. {. miſt. N. lowry bat with
clouds p. m. bright n. ſcarce a cloud,


Auguſt,


169 I; dl 27

IX. Fair a.m. coaſting ſhowrs n. & wd. thun-
der-ſhowr 3 p. & 4s p R in Nadir2p.
ſhowr 7 p. p "

X, 9 m- open, cooling ſhowr 11 m. 3

XI. Fair, overc; 8 m.
of wd, ſad harveſt,


Pp. S. W.
Rain 0.5 p. 9 p. & guſts
SW


72. mM IS,
| XXVIL. F. jwa, daſhing © & dtifle m. þ.
5 OO ; S. W..
| KNIT. 6 m, Higher wd.driſle 9 m. daſh 10
* Mb


' GS % . . N *4

Lig i lowring, —_ 4.18 W. XXIX. H.wd azte |. & die tor. Rain 5 m. &11
XL 10 p. Powring R> 31» ad © or, ſhowring By m4. S x
4 -S- 0c, OPEN. Aark "» XVI. ſome rain ante 1. ſhowr 2 p. SW.
[I., Cloſing, wet P.M. Per Fo. ne XVII. 11 m. cloſe, lowring 2 p. \. drops 5 p.
in M. C. | ny * SW.


72. A 16, * &
XRIX, 5 p. R. 8 m. gently ſo m. p. d. Ely.
drifle ar n- miſty day. Y or &' occ.;8.m-
VKXX. Rain ante |. ſo Sun or. ome fo7
m. with wd, wet d. & ſtormy wd; ecily


Ar N-
73+ do 5. ;
XVII.Cloſe m.wertring 9 mJ Nadir drifle 2 p


Co SW,


xt var ary, white >
5. Fair, white c
Oaks Thar. |
XIX. Hor a- m. 7 oe. Fane ſoulrry p. m.

ſ. drops 5s m. Jlictle thowr. 'W.

B 24. :

TE Show xp. 394 5 $ Ww.
VIL. 8. R. & hail 9 m. &c. ſhowrs p. m. S w.


Þ nor diſcerned till half an ho. after riſe,


VIII. Showring 10.m. 1 p. daſhing 5 p ad 8.
fere Sly, bur Ely p. m. then again S.* /.
7. 6d. 12.
RXV. Very way. Rain 0. 7 p. 9 Þ- -*W,
XXV1I. 2 p. Faira. mz Rain, Hot, miſſing

Night. W-


a Es 7


XVIII Cloſe, lowring, ſome rain 8 m. warm;
Ai W. NW,

74- 2

V. Bright m. H. cool nd faſpic. 2Þ. NW.


VI. o. N'W. High wd, open.'R. 5 p. 7 p. 10
P. >
VIL. Much R. a. 1. Fair, fog 8 p. N.
$X1V. Cloudy m ied k
. Cloudy m. m. S.
XXV, —_— - S,
XXVI. Cloudy m, open 8 m. wdy. W.


6. TM ©,


X11. {. Rain. q m.. Fair, overcaſt a. m, wd. $,
XII. o. H. wd. flying cl


XIV. ſhowr6s m. 9 m. & before, wdy, cloudy,


77. & 20,
I. Cloſe m, p. & mifling, no miſt, windy,
; S W


II. 1 m. Foggy, rain 9 m. daſh o. Hot then
&c. dark 11 p. & brisk wd. Rain no&. ror,


fi .
by an m. Sun or. & R. contin. ad 6 p.
N.wind year to the Weſt, Stript cl. at n.


Sep


Chap. 1 3: P © » Septenal Diary. 69
September. Ofober.
1671, m 25. 1671, L 2
Vil. Rain "n. ſhowr ſudden 10 m. Storm of | VIL Guſts of wd ante q m. R. 4. m, warm, cloſe
n.SE. E. at


great = & Thunder 3 p. ending in Rain
H. wd 9 N W.

VIIL. 6 p. *Froſt fair cold and briskwd a. m.
Showr 1 p. 3p- ZinM.C. 1 p&Þ ho 3.)
totally eclip/.

IX, Fog, 07) cloſe n. L. wd., S W.'N

at N.

72. 1

XXV. Rain ne#, t. C. werring m. warm $ E,

XXVI. 7 p. dark, wet a. m. p. tot. Showre 5
p. warm. SW.

X XVII. Fog m. cloſe m. p. (. driſle 4 p. 9p.
SW. Ely at n. guſts of wd 10 p.

_ 3.

ES Very cold n. prec. Froſt, bright fl ing
clouds, cloſe n.

XVI. 2 m. R. ante luc. & a. m. ents
rain hard. H. wd'$ p. SW.

XVII. Furious , Tempeſt no#, tot. clear m.
max, part. with low flying cl. H. wd d. tor,
& rain 1 P. SW.

74 WM 22,

IV. E. cloudy a. m. N W, not cloſe p. m. N. '
cloudy n.

V. 4 m. E. Fine day 3 cloſe 5 p. coldiſh m. E.

VL N. Overc. 8 m. lowring. open, {. wet if
cloudy n. 10 p.

it d, = x LILY SW.

XXII. Wind, open,

XXL 8. Rain _ noF, Fair, its wd. Rain
ar n,

XXIV. Rain 4 m. dark m. & 6. warm p. m.
238. H. wd $Þ>-.. S W,

76. m 28. 3

X. Cloſe m. p. open p« m. wind veſp. W.

XL 12. froſt m. {. rain circ. © ort- & 4 p coll
H. wd. N,

XII. Fr. coel, cloſe m. p. brisk wd, no dew
1p. NW.

7 m1g

XT. Aug. H. winds no. tot, &c. many cl.

& dark, lowring circ. o. calmer ſub veſp. red
even. Wly. Clouds N W. bur Wly 10 p.

I.11 x leaving a water in the ————


Il, mz windy, warm,open a licrle,bur _—_ |


10 P. W,
XRIR. Fog 4 m. briak wd. ovefrc. 8 m. driſle
9 M» of wd. a. m. more” at n.rain
4 P- S.SE,
RXX. 8. ſhowring 4 times # m. open þ. m.
int yas clouds contrary to —_ of 1
wd vari ,

1. 04. Fog, bn, fone Froft, fair ſome, os
W.


VIIL. 4 m. ſtormy wds 3 m. Rain nod. guſt 10.
_ Len, warm, f. fog at n» Halo & calm
nd expe&ation. SW.
* Fog m. warm, drops o. & p. m. m. p. N.
ſo Sun occ. & f. Fog, very warm 8 p. Halo
with red limb. narrow.
72, m 13.
XXV. Cnnadylondy in ſeveral pl. Ho. 9.
Air diſpoſed for hail. NE,
XNXVI. 6 im. R. ante - © ort. ad 8 m. =
OVCTC. at n. S.$
XXVII. Miſty & rain a4 © ort. ad 10 m,
ſhowring4p.& 9p. SE m. SW. p. m.
m.2.
&. Fr. miſt, rain 1.p.&c. {6 5 p.1o p.NE. m,
SE. o. SW.


XV. | Tempelt- of wi_auf os. open and


wdy day. SW,

XVI. Mifly clouds” Nt lowring p. m. &

{. werting 8 p. & ant SW;
74. = at.


III. Some wet ante 1. &a. m. H. wd. wet an
occ, & 8 p. with wd.
IV. 8. S E. hben. H. wd. ſhowr 10 m. view:


dark 4 p. S. 2. in M.C. Rainbow, above


ſemicircular Sun ecc. .calm n. S W,
V.-8 W. Fair m. ſhowr 10 tm. R. 4þ."5p,
H. wd. _— S.


75» , _- :IS.--:.
XX1I. Rain at midn. & 8 m. H. wds & ſtormy,


warm, R. 4 p. 4s
XX111. 2 miſt. warm wetting 8 m. rainy | 10.


ad noon. cloſe. |
XXTVv. Stormy wds, daſh-of R. & Aail 7


Storm of R. 6 p. H.wds 5 p. 5 ww


Y+ 0CC« S.S W,
<Q 28, -


76. ;
X. Wer ane |. & m. fog m. & miſty, open


p.m... Freez n. Nly Meteors 11 p. w-J


Lam Verſus.


light, a & C
» fair, fomr. overc. _


XI. 3 Froſt,
XII. C. rain eſs
IT. f. ra m. &a m. wetti 10 Þ.C.

H. Froſt at —— in Ann -


TT
x © rai m/Fog N WH Crain 11 m. ſnow
Clouds 10 p.

XX . lom. Fr. Fair wnnduteg thin Clouds
8 m. overc. & brisk wds 11 m. drifle p m,

& wveſp. N,
XXX1. Fog, hard Fr.' dark m. E. open 0.
overc. 6 p. Froſty n, oyerc. 11 p, nomiſt i
SE.


P-


FD.


OP© 2 Septenmal Drary.


——.—_—_


November.


1671. m 24,
V.. Cloſe, cool, driſle $ p.
VL 2 p. Clear m. overcaſt o. Rain 4 p. N E.
VII. Great Froſt, Ice above the thickneſs of a
crown piece, F _ d. clear. NW.


£m. R. ante |. cloſs + warm,driſlle 11 Þ


XXIV. 5p. cloſe , drifle o. & 4 p- —_—
XXV. Open, clofing $ W. at


NE.
Þ.2
X rt Froſty d.Fair,Fog poiSun occ.N W.S W.
— 6 m. Froſty, Fa NE.
XV. Froſty, Fair, overcaſt p- Mm. & oo
Freez arn.


21.
7. wind ante |. Geltthk 5a 3 hv 7
much Rain.
IIL + p. Showry, ſonnet; open. wd 0. ſo pof


©; oce
TY. Fair m. P- ' once overcaſt, miſty arn; $ W.


$3, Froſty, Pair, ly wd. Ely p. m $a


XX1L,- Froſt,” Kain & 'm- frozeas 1
fell.” Fair flying c. .wd. & black Fr. = |,


XXUl. $ w. then Fog Froſt, cloſe I


76,
IX. Froſt m.-F


-and' 7 P-
X.'9 m.. naing m. £5 m miſt, eloſe, warm
RE. Felt Fog, fair wd. Ely Froſt'12 p.


m 28,
- die tot : great fog m.


I dd ? T7. .

, , foggy die tot. Thaw 9 pþ

Rain. Gentle ſhowr 12 p.
XXIX. 4 m. _ _—_—


SE Wand di


E.
ARK, we fewer mn. p,.þ has: Ae | ps
 XXVIE:; 14: B. 1wd no, rt. cloudy. H. wd
| | & pag >


©4434 «


SW,


Book I.


December.


I671, T7 24.

IV. Rain m. coldiſh, open p, m. clear n. E.
wd 11 Pp. Nly.

V. 12, Open m. Rainand Sun ſhine 1z m.ſhow-


ring by fits 1 p. NE..
VI.” Open & cold. N E.
2. MI


7

XXII. Rain a. m. deal p. H. wd. cloudy
at n:

XXIV. 6 m. various wd arte 1. wd High,overc.
p. m. for a while. wdy, droppy 11 p-S W.

XXV. Fair, H. wd ante. flying cl. 0. S W.

73- m 2,

XII. Clouds a. 1. warm, bright m. p. wd overc,

Lambs wool 8. & a' red circle circ. 'Y., SW.

_ 7- Cloſe m. p. warm, dry, more cloſe ar


SW.
XIV. Wer morn. m. p. miſt, SW. hom


& cooler. \. froſt. NW,
74. 7 21. |
1. Cloſe day. SW,
IL 6 m. W.cloſe, =. fair'p. m: C Froſt ar
n- S, o, at t. SE.
IV. Froſty, fair, miſt SE.
75 "YR
FL, apr We, coudy a.m. Rain p. m, m. p. SW,
dy 'dty. 9.
NT 9 L. : far, wind. SW.


Dieb. 23 & 24 Spe, 9 caft away dt Mans
76." 17 0 Þ 29;


E: ix, - Froſty. _Thamgs near frozen ; ſnow ab _y
no. med.

'E. R: 4.0 ſnowing noF, tot, deep half ER...

Ww.


, fair
Xt Froſty. Oy ave 1: ' offer 10 m. _—_—
- cloſep.m.


» « al w 18
XXVIL Wd wetring a.m. H. wd weſþ.SW,
damp walls and payements, wd & wetti


rem SIT


4 Þ» Higher at n. little rain
SE.W.


XXX. / fr. fog m. & die tot. circ. borizenr,
| | Cold, br he, freezing & calm. Two Me-
Pp . TY | reors t Þ ſhine; _ S;

= ,  Phinitlitia Eighty Seven,

huot' | Days 261. Motety 130.

Number of A eds you ſee Eighty Seven, Firſt, ſt to
VS ler us che te for that” =y of 87 Full Moons there
appear in this Table Seventy Eive Drippers. Now berween $7. and 75.


mY count the differenc


nation. Alas! Our v


very


"
th


e, and the next == you have to do is to deny the


whit , even the Dripping Days reach to the
Moiety , being in number 172. which is 40 days over and above.


$6. We


Chap. XIII. Plemlunar Jefluenco on Winds. Rain.


$6. We reckon but 64 Aſpects for Wind, and 122 Days, which if it
ſeems not ſoround, for the Ful Moor brings Wizdas ſoon as any Aſpect Lu-
nar, atleaſt under publique Notice , impute it tous who have fairly pleaded
that we could not always dwell on the Watch-Tower, or note the Guſts and
Gales in the Night, ſeeing whatever they make , like R:fts or Furrows on
the Water,they leave no durable Impreſſion, bur heal up without any breach.
Only where Wind isnot exÞreſſed, it may ſufficieatly be «zderftood either by
the Change and Variety of the Winds,which yet we have not conſidered in
our Muſter, of by the flying of the Clouds, which we thought fit to admir.
Add the moiſt Days, moſt of them have their Gale , ſeeing every Showre
fich the Seamaz, hath its Winds, and Calm Rains are ſeldom, though Mifts
and Fogs are oft:# attended with ſuch St:U Muſique.

$ 7. Nor ſtill are we to forget our Diſ-jun#:vegeither one or the other, Rain
or Winds : Conlulcing the Table I find about 28 Winds without Rain ; add
them to 172. the number of our Rain, the Sum is 200. which comes within
proſpect of 261. the Number of every Day in the Table. ,

. $8, And let no Man ſay, What day ts there without Wind > For ſuppoſe
there were no Day without , ze:ther is there any Day, almoſt, without ſoxie
Aſpe8 ; there is not a Wh:ff bur hath its « Folus, ſome Aſpe&, or as good 4
thing, ſo hath Heaven provided for the Air, without which it would fag-
nate and be unwholſom, yea, Peſtilential, as the Air of cloſe Pritons and
Dungeons without — We may thank God therefore for every
Flaver of Wind. Bur then neither hath every Day its Gale, that we may
be engaged to enquire the cauſe of the Difference, why fome are 4rh ,
and others dead Calms,though the Vulgar cannot be concern'd in ſuch enquiry.

$ 9. Not but that we have a Sence of High Lofry, more than Bris:
Winds, in number of days 86. in number of Aſpects 55. The former Num-
ber exceeds the latter, becauſe many a time every Day of the Tr:4unzz
proves windy. One thing I cannot bur obſerve, and tis the Concern of the
Table to remember it, that in the year of our Lord 1675. December 23.
That very day was one of the two, when from Monnt-Bay we heard thatno
le than IX. Ships caſt away, and yet the Table notes only a Dry Wind
without any Fury.

$ 16. Here againI beg theReader ro obſerve the Vicinity of the Evenr
to the preciſe tie of the Aſpect , or the Complement rather of the Aſpect,
as January XV. ho. 1. M. Anno 1671. Four Hours before One, you tee it
rains. June 11. 9. M. Four Hours after. Both within Compaſs. Aagn/t
X. $8 m. Three Hours after, September VIII. 6. P. Three Hours before.
OZober VIII. 4 M. Stormy Wind and Rain but an Hour before. s-
ember VI. 2 P. Rain, 1 Hour after. Try another Year. Anno 1672.
ZanxatyTV. 11 m. Four Hours after drifly Rain. February XI. 12. P. Snow
from@ſet ; all the Night. MaylI. ho. g M. Daſhat 8 M. une XXX. 3 m.
cloſe and drifly, Azguft XX VIIL6 mr.drifle 9 nagdept. XX VIIL.7 P.Showres 5P.
Oxob. XXVI.6 m.Rain ante ©is ortumad 5 m.Aowvemb. XXV. 5 p.Drifle 4 P.
Decemb.XXIV.6 m. ante lucem. The Table is before che Reader,if he pleale
to go on, he will find the ſame effect.

$ 11. Now for warmth, that the Full » hath a kindneſs for that, 4r:/fc.
tle hath long ago principled US, "Er mivotAivors EAgevOTE £25 Giva ms NU ym,
the Plenilunar nights voſt waryz. In Greece no queſtion more ſenſible than
in our Northern Situation. But to run toexperience, Thnd in Hacklut in a
diſcourſe of the North-Weſt paſſage. Eait. 1. pag. 601." The Flux of the Sea
determined to theRarefa:oz of the Water by Lunar Heat. And elſewhere he
tells us in a voyage to Gwrzeafrom Men of good Credit, that they perceived
iſſuing from the very beams of the » a ſenſwle Heat. Garniſh's Voyage, pag.
95. inthe year 1584. cis .

uU C 12. And


—


—


72


Full ſenſibly warm. New » þy day,Full,by N. Book 1,


s 12. And without going to theſe hotter Climes, I my felf have appea-
led to experience, if any ſhall have patience to expect, near his Chamber
Window, if fituate toward the South, while the Þ makes her Traz/#, or if
in an Mſtival Night, with the help of an ordinary Perſpe#:wve, we nicely
mark the affection of our Eye, upon the Full Þ 's firſt Emerſion or Riſe
the Eye , I fay, that living Thermometer, of mage quick perception than the
Inanimate,ſhall —_— fair gentle warm Impreſhon from irs Beams.

s 13. So little doth that Objection move us, which pleads the contrary,
becauſe, forſooth, this Warmth is not perceived by the Dead Thermome-
ter, It will be faid, we know, that this ſeeming warmth is perceived by
Fancy, and not by any real ſenſation ab extra, To which I ſhall briefly tay
but this, that if our Intextzon in that Experiment had been to explore the
Lunar Warmth at ſuch timesz Fancy, pofſible, might have 7#poſed upon us,
being corrupted by the Will fo far ,*as to ſay what ke would have. Bur
when our attempt was made only to diſcern the: quantity of the D:ſcss or
Figure of the » in her Perigee, at the 17fant of her Riſe, and unawares
beyond Expectation, a perception of Warmth was found, the Impreyion was
therefore zot Imaginary.

Ss 14. Hereif the Queſtion be ſtarted, whether of the two is the warmer Af.
pe, the Change or the full > That we do not perplex the State of the Queſtion,
it only requires thus much, whether the Air be warmer at the Change, than
at the Full > And the anſwer is, that the New Þ hath the preheminency.
For the Day (ſpeaking of the Arteficral Day ) is warmer at the Change than
atthe Full, Generally : But the V:ght, again, is warmer at the Full, than at
the Change. P ; ;

9 15. Now let us ſee whether this agrees with our Tables? It doth. For
Lo we find ore warm days in the Day of the New », than at the Full :
38. inthe Firſt, but 32. in the Later. Yer, leaſt the ſmall difference may


- not moveus, letus ſum the days of exceſs, and then under the Full findin


about 11. or 12. Under the New » we find 28. The fReaſon isnot (0
much on the I 's part be ſure, as is evident, becanſe of the Awer/ror of its
Beams from us, while the Full glares us in the Face, but becauſe the » in
her Charge acts in conſort with the Reſt, which are Day-Berds for the moſt
part, a are found more frequent and num in the Diuurxal Horizon ,
than in the NoFurral. |

6 16. So for the Nights the Table accords, for ſurveying the Sum of Cold
Nights in the New, [ find amounts to 55. but viewing the Nights at the
Full, I find but 48. which difference if it not wide enough, it may be
made wider, by conſidering that even the Froſts of the Full, are lefs abſo-
lute, than thoſe of theNew,with abatement and limication of ſome Froſt, which
occurs' more frequently in the Full. To ſay nothing of the Szow, which
appearing alſo #off frequently at the Full, argues ſome Le»:ty in the Beams:
Take one obſervation mor Cold Nights at the Ghange run higher in
the Year than the Cold Nightsar the Full. For Anno 1676. at the New »
in April I find a Froſty Night, cruſting the Water with [ce : But it will be
hard I beleive, to find Ice in an April Night at a Full ». The likeI may
fay of Froſty Mornings in the Month of May, I find Oze.in the New, but


one in the Full. ;

$17. Tis _ you'l ſay, that the Inter-Lunium ſhould bring more
Warm Days than the Full, becauſe every body ſees that ir is the Dark Side
of the Half-Euminary which is turned toward our Earth all Shade is cool,
now the » by her Shady-fide Skreens the Light and Heat from us, and re-
verberates it upward. To this we fay, 'tis true, that the » turns her I!u-
Rrriow Side from us, and therefore muſt be Cool. But how ? Not abſolute:
There is a conſiderable Warmth fligs rovnd on all ſides, like Sparkles from

| an


I—G


———_— pm


Chap. XIII. New » warmer than the Full. Influcnce compared.


— ———_ > > ED Ie. Lo WS


-,


f <


"3


an Anvil, and the repercuſſed Hear is ſufficient for all Operations Natural
ro quicken and encourage them, as in the Lunar Hiſtory appears : Yer we
are not driven to fay or believe that the » is perwous, eſpecially as to
ſenſible Heatz but we can folveall Operations of Nature depending on her,
even while under the Inter-Lunium, by this, that the Ray, repercuſled or
refleFed in the perpendiculum is 7edoubled, and lo reouital is made for the aver-
ſion. Obſerve, 21y. that the » is much nearer to the Sun in the d , then
at the Diametral Oppoſition 3-the Full » is brighter than the New », but
ſhe plays at a-greater d:fante from the Sun. In the New » ſhe lies between
the Sun and the Earth : In the Full, ſhe lies on the other fide of the Earth,
twice as far from the Sun; fo hath the Wiſdom of che Creator moderared
the Univerſe and the parts thereof, that what they want in Length, ſhall be
ſupplyed in Breadth, as I may ſay. If the Luminous {ide of the » had
logk'd roward us, as in the Full, the Heat would hgve bin to zea7, Nature
wou!d have bin ſcorched with too grezx Annoyances inſtead of Luminaries,
Therefore inthe New, God hath pleaſed to reverſe the >, making her,as
Skreen or Fan to it teif. In the Night therefore when he hath removedir
ſuch diſtance , that ir wili not burn, we-can afford to fee the Luminous de
rowards us, . and partake of its moderace .Warmth and Influence. But we
have anſwered fully to che qguere, why Nowilunar Days are more and more of-
ten Hot than Plenilunar, not only becaule in the Day time, when the » is ar
Fall, the acts in her fartheſt poſuble dance in the Hemiiphere of the [4--
tipodes; but becauſe in the New » ſhe acts in conſort with the Reſt : She
isnot only nearer to our Fertex, but the acts with and among al! the ot!1c;
Planets that are abroad in the D:uraal Hemiſphere : The Full » being ſolirary
for the moſt part without ſuch Company, which company is x9: bound to
_— her Motion z the Su# is the Prince, whole Mottons they moſtly
attend.

v 18. What is ſometimea Problem in natural Philoſophy, Fw the Breaih
of 9ur Mouth ſeems warm to our Hand, when it lies near the Mouth, and cold
when removed at further diſtance ? Is _—\ reſolved thus : That the Hand ly-
ing near the Mouth, receives the Breath warm from the Laryxx and the Ca-
vitys of the Mouth, bur ar further diſtance the Breath is mixed with the coc-
der Ambient Air, and (o refrigerated therewith, which by Agztation ſeems the
Cooler, The ſame f{olution applyed to our Lunar Aſpects 1s not improper :
The Full » isat greater diſtMce from the Sun than the New, and therefore
her Rays are moreengaged in the Gold Vapours of the Atmoſphere , and upon
that Account muſt give place tothe New » as to the Day;zButif we compare
them in point of Warmth in the Night, though the be at the ſame diſtance
from the Sun,. yet the is nearer us, and upon that account the Plenilunar
Nights may be warmer.

Ss 19. Shall we purſue this compariſon in other Inſtances, and ſee whether
it be worth our while, if any obſervationcan be raiſed, which brings Lizhe
or Uſe with it. The two Tables lye thus |


| P ©). d ©).
Cold Froſty Days or Nights. -56. 65.
Cl ſe or Lowring, [H9z 7 A
Pregnant Glouds, + of &
08.— — —23. 3$.
Mg x Hazze n 36. = 48.
Ho. + Days -I1. _ 28,
" {N; hts Sno. J
Rain, Mor ure. 103. =———
Lafing or Violent —————— —47———— —35. "ry
Rats


— ——


fide, do you think, will lye the advantage > The Nocturnal Luminary is «p


Full » more R. Winds, Snow. New ) more Fogs. Book I


fd © 2. —&d ©).
Rain at N. — 62. 30.
Wind at N, ——— ————1. on=— —g,
Snow.- : — —8.
Trajet:ons. —- 4. — —20.
Warm. —— —J2— 38.
a 7 FO 56.
torms, Gufts.- II—_— 43.
WindChange. — O — 29.
 Thander ——— - 4. 4.
Lightning. — — O,
ail. — — 9. —— 4.
Hal, _————— —5. —O. .
Iri——- I, —O,
@ Eila 97 Goſſamere. I. mw
* Cold Winds. — O —6,
Dark, gloomy.— - © =— I5,
| _ a 4


Strip't Glouds, —


S 20, Here pray view the difference between Wind, Rain, Fog : And
if I miſtake not, we have laid the Foundagon to clear up the difference.
For Rain (Snow excluded) the new » brings-125. the Full » brings you
150. were, here, how comes it to paſs, if the New », aswe pretend,
be warmer, (and Warmth is the cauſe of Moiſture,) that the Full thewetrh
faireſt for Moiſture, Shall we anſwer on the grounds that we have laid ,
that Warmth is but One Parent of Moiſture 3 there muſt be 4xother Parent
for the Birth, iz. A competent meaſure of Gold,which Competence being
found in the Full, rather than in the New, the Fall » muſt exceed in moi-
ſture. ,2uerethe 24. time, how comes it to pals, if the New », as tve pre-
tend be warmer, and Warmth is the Cauſe of Wind , that the Full »
bluſtereth more than the New ? Anſwer as above, The Wind hath two Pa-
rexts, Ative and Paſſrue 3 A competent degree of Cold the paſive Parent,
the Full ) before its warmth being furniſhed with chat Compotency ,,
is Grader and Windyer then the New.

921, And this is confirmed ſtifly from tft exceſſes of Fiolent Rains,
Storms, Winds, which abound under the Full, rather than the New , be-
cauſe where the Gontraries chufe to meet, there will appear the greater


Hurry.

5 5k. Once more then, 4ow comes it to paſs that the New » produceth
Fog more frequent than the Full? Say that the very Mature of a Fog pro-
Claims the abſence of the contrary, I mean the Cold. There is both
Warmth and Cold in the Conſtitution, bu they are in rewsſs degrees, they
make a kind of Tepor, when qualities, though contrary, live in quiet poſle(-
fion 3 upon this gccount Fogs are ſeen for the moſt part of a warmyh, ſlug-
giſh, conſiſtency. Tis eaſie without Violence to ſpeak to the ſeveral
accounts of Szow and Hail, which happen at the Full, twice as many times
as at the New ; there is a manifeit compoſition of two repugnant qualities in
both theſe Meteors. As for the cold part which is ſeen in both, the Ful,
which is the cooler Aſpect, is proper for them.

S 23. I have bin further curious to compare the No#urnal Rains or Guſts
which have happened under the Ghazge and the Full, reſpeively, notat the
Riſing and _ , (for that calls for a peculiar remark,) bur either before
Day, or at Night, or Midnight, yea, or the Whole NV7ght, and on.which


to


——  —— — _—— ——_—  —


Chap. XIII. Plnilenee | Infl. on rough weather illuſtrated.


i ——


co juſtifie it, nor will ſhe deny her (elf, though behind the Curtain, to have
bin then, and there , at the time and place, We find it Rain'd or Ra-
ed in the Night 52 times, while tne New » affords us but 30. which is
ome potable arfference, though again for Raining, bluſtering the hole Night,
the New ) is not fo far out of reach, but the can bring up her Tale equal


with the Full. It may be there is ſome zece/ity that the Mooz, or ſome other.


Planet ſhould be in the No#u7nal Hemiſphere, when it blows or Rains late at
Night, or very early. .If none of the three Superiours be there, the ) alon?
will ſuffice, whereby you ſee the Nature of the oppolice Aſpect iz genzre,
for to tell you before hand, the Planets muſt be #ronely poſited when ever it
Rains by Day or Night,without an Oppojition at large, 'Tis extraordinary.

S 24. Bur we muſt by no means diſlemble that there is another reaſon
why the Full Þ is a more w10lent Alpett than the New, which may ariſe
from hence, that the comprehendeth by her radiacibn, (zeflex ; chough it be )
a greater Archof the Sphere Celeſtial, chan the New I can; and fo by con-
ſequence is apt to af«4 more Celeſtial Bodies, being and Situare in that
greater Portion. As the Eye doth not comprehenſively Ken a Mountzin
(ſuppoſe) when it is near ir,but mult remove zt {elf roa diſtance, for the view
of {o great an Object : The Pyramid of Illuzination, whoſe Lafrs lies upon
the body that termrzates the Ray, enlarges her batis' fo much the more as
the Illumtinor is remote. Now , if the influence be in ſome part, as moſt
certain it is, commenſurate to the Illumination. This, we conceive, ma: be
ws reaſon of its Effect enquired, into, provided we at no hand exclude the
other.

Ss 25. For when Aſtronomy tells us to excellent purpoſe, that the'D is in
her Apogee of the Eccentric or utmoſt diſtance from the Earth, both in
and @, it fiweetly cloſes with what we have hicherto pretended to help to-
ward the Warmch of the New , being {o much zeazer to the Sun, as ſhe is
more diſtant-from thE Earth 3 ason che contrary for the cooler Beam of che


Full >, being fo far the more remote.
$ 26, What we have ſaid may be made ſomewhatclear by this Diagran:


———


76


April Full and others, bring Ram mfallibly. Book T:


Let the point A; be the Globe of the Earth. B. the New » in 4 with the
Sun. C. the Full » in # to the Sun. D,E, F, G. an Arch of the Planetary
Heaven, (as if the Planets moved all in one Circle, for 'tisall a cafe. ) 'Tis
manifeſt that the Triangle D, C,G. comprehends the greater Arch of He:-
"_ and E, B, F. the Leſs. This is the New » Byramid; the other is the

' ) S

sS 27. Have we never another Obſervation before we part ? New and
Full zzclinero Rain. That will be confeſſed,now 'tis proved, yea , but Whar
will you ſay if we producea Full » that is a ſure Cargthatalways raineth ,
That is the Full Þ in April, when for 7 years together it fails not 3 ſo it may
be called upon Goarteſie, infallible. Yea, the Full Þ in Auguſt doth the like.
7 times it rains in 7 years, and more than 7. (or 14 either) if you reckon
days as hitherto we have done, and that no otherwiſe than we thould. If
the Reader will obſerve more ſuch Full Js, he will loſe nothing by ir.
Verily the New ) s alfo in the Month of Axe. bear up equal with the Full Þ s.
Bur che cauſe of this difference, Oh! When ſhall we come to that Text ?
_ 928. It remains now that we ſpeak tothe Winds, and chen raiſe thewe-
haition of the Ape. In the Full > we find from the


Eaft, 53. Weſt, aq North, 35. South, 38.
A, Eaft, 29. MN. Weft,26. S.Eaft, 15. S. Weſt, 80,


Reducing theſe to their Cararnals, thus, ——

Eaft 1 Web, 44.7 North 34.7 F Soath, 38.

Xk = [5 N. IW. x E. mos E. 15.

S. E. 25 S. W. 80. 2=<N. W. 26.2 <S. W. 8o.
97 | 150. = 229,


pn EI


Ss 29. So that the rxclination lies more to the South and Weſt, as the New
did, with ſome Seeming Favour for the Weſt. Hence we may raiſe our
Character : 'v#z, :The Full > is apt to bring Wind and Rain, almoſt as oft
as the New. Yea, ſtormy Winds and daſhing Rain more often, pretty apt
—_ ow and Hy on n F nr ; A O_ leſs:
though here it happevs to no i ty, To Wefter S firſt, or
Lone nk z to Eepr many times ; but leaſt of all ro the North.

$ 30. Now whereas we have hinted that the Full Y 's influence rakes
place oftner thar is there exprefled, 'twill not be amiſs to preſent the intize
Table - may ue the > where =] _ ene gg wage
2 ow oft the miſſes of making g racer, how often
nds : In = ſhe miſles not, in Y ſhe miffeth nor, in & ſhe miſſerh
not, in & and 1 ſhe mifſeth not as far as our Table reaches. In = andV
ſhe brings eight Succeſſes for eight Revolutions, call it certas» then or highly
probable if you hate the Word Infall:ble, The Table ſtands thus,


Sign Revwdl, Event9Þ OO) Sign Revd. Event;
= VI 8. | Rl


Wp £ VII. 7.
Bo VL 4. ne VIII 7.
V VIII. 8. © 7.
S VIII. 7. m VII. 7.
Ir VII. A by VIL 5.
S VIL *; VP - 5.


So doth the Full I (ec; 2-82») give ſome Light to contemplatians of
Celeſtial Influence, CHAP:


z


Chap. XIV. Full and Change of ) diſſolve tedious Froſt


wo,


do> CHAP. XIV. #6)


The Lunar Warmth further deduced, as to the Change and Full, in the
Diſolutions of Froſts : A competent Catalogue of Froſts ſo diſſolved;
the vulgar notion juſtified , yet it is not perpetual, ſometimes other
Canſes ſtep in, ſpecially $I Y, If the Full  drſſolues more
Froſts than the New, 'tis agreeable to our principles. Why the
Froſts are not diſſolved preciſely on the dayof the AſpeZF, but 2 or 3
days before or after.


SI, \ E are indebted farther to ſhew the Lunar warmth in theſe

two Aſpects of Change and Eull, by the periodical reſolution

of tediow Frofts, which ſometimes bekus the Elements, with our Blood and

Spirits in Icy Chains, till a comfortable Relent of milder air ſends out a war-
rant for their releaſe.

6 2, This gentlerSpiric blows as at the d , {o atthe © Let the vulgar notion
and public monuments arreſt it 3 of this ſort is;to run back no further,the Froft
VIIP El:izabethe Ar. 1 a t began,faith Stow,Dec. 21. and laſted cill ourCity-
River was frozen,ſo that ewlearsFefioal was celebrated in warming Sports
and Exerciſes on the River, the zew Thames Street: now as Stew tells us, it
thaw'd 7a. 3. An. 1564. the day after the Ghange.

$ 3. The 24. of that zoted year 1572. famous for the Star in Caſſiep*ta, a
Tedious Froſt from Alhallontide to Twelftrde, This Froſt is remembred
for congealing rains, as they fel! till the arms of Trees overcharged with
Ice, þrake from the Trunk after Twelft:de it took its lezve; -in good
time, for reckoning the hour of the d being Ho. 10. 2o#: Far. 3. the dil-
folucion falls within leſs than three days after the Change 3 A cold fron fol-
low'd it, but that belongs to another condideration.; ,

S 4. A 34. Ar. 1579. ſhort, but by the fall of Snow perilous to Wayfa-
rers and poor Cattel, ſtill mentioned by ſome of our yeariy remembrancers ;
it began Fe. 4. and held gll F-4 10. the d&y:preceding the d.

g \- A 4tv. An. 1598. from Jar 1. to 10. the Thames almoſt frozen, the
Froſt remitted Jan. XI. two days preceding the Change. Further in Decemb.
of the ſame year the Thames almoſt froze again, which, the Week before
Chriſtmas was d:ſſolu'd. Now Seven days = Chriſtmas happened che
aay of the e. Again, after that remiſſion Der. XXVIE it freezes a
34. time, whenlo ! On New years day it relented the verydayof the Ful.

s 6. Another 4. I615.,Facobs T. 13. held a months ſpace from Jaz. XVII.
tO Feb. XIV. yea with lictle remiffion till March V IL That 7th.of March is
the day following the Full. be 'orhey if)

_ $7. An.1621. a Froft from Nov. 24. ad Dec 7. when after a milder ſeaſon


it again. 'T T9:

S 8. An. 1627. * Jan. XX. for three weeks, till Feb. XH. Divers Booths;
not for ſale of Drink only, but other Merchandize upon the place. Bat All
wore on Feb. Ra. _ tees _ of CO: eaſiinss B:

1 Germazy in the beginning! year we find £71848 181 h1/[139um us
ſonticume, 1mamane, Danubine Cnc : but behold a geatle Aſpect of a fall J
bringsa Relent. Jar. 27. St. Vet: |
-.* Note that. in. the Frof ' Ax. 1622. the: Relent was in Germazy not (0
long, for with them the Danow was frozen by Fax. 8. 18; bur the remiſſi-
on. came at the approach of: rhe New Y Faz.. 31. St. N. Fer. 10; Such


difference there is in 7:ce caſes between Regions! By Nicer caſes I intend _
$ S. AY.


hot untverlal. .


78


Continuation of the Froſty Catalogue. | Book T.


&


 $ 9. An. 1623. The Danow frozen the 34. time, the Froſt began Der.
XIV. ceaſed Faz 11. 1624. within three days before the Full.

S 10. Ar. 1626. Now. XXI. Danow floted with Ice, it terminates Dec. 4. the
day next after theFull, Thus KeplersDtary affords us plenty of inftances ina few
years; for more may be obſerved from thoſe Draries, who yet, good
Man, in his account of the zatural cauſe, as is noted before, gives not half
the due to the Aſpe#. :

s 11 Ar. 1635. A great and fore Froft within memory, the ſame which
is celebrated by Poets of the time, began as I remember, about the midſt
of- Dec. ceaſed as a Manu-ſcript cells me Fe. 11. three days after the New ) ,

s 12. Ay. 1645.Froft from Dec.8. complained of by the Parliament-Forces,
{ſo called) as an impeder of their winter-marches , the _ might help


- tohaſten it away, ar. 17. for, de 18. as the Story ſays, the Froſt was newly


pone, and that comes within compaſs of three days before the Fu.

9 13- An. 1659 Decimo Carol: Tas. at the end of theyear, a Froft begun
Dec. XXIX. and although it remitted a little Jaz. XI. in60. and again on
7an.XIIL yetit receeded not till day XVIII. the day after the Full.

9 14. An. 1662. Nov. XV. Froft brought Ice on the River day XXIX.
but Dec. 1. the day after the New ) it thaw'd ,, It returns again, and keeps
irs own, till day XII. which preceeds the Full not above two days. And the
third time Decemb. XXIV. in four Nights the Thames floated with 1+, it
rook its leave on. Vew-years-day, the day after the Ghange.

$15. An. ly: Zan. XXVIIL the >| preceeding the new I, a Fo,
began ( we confeſs, and could have own'd the like before) but if it begins
> new), it exas at the full, with ſome little warning, the day pre-
ceeding. New FRY

S 16. [The 'Winter .of that fatal . year 1665. isnot yet quite forgot, the
Thames was fick of dead pallie for three weeks,it ſeized her firſt Dec.XY VIII.
An. praced; now, what the Comet of that year could not do, the Plenilu-
nar P performed,for, III. days before, the Froft waniſhed. Ir froze again Jan.
XXIX. by the fourth of +), — ke appeared on the Thames Feb. 7.
All diflolveth two days after the Ghange. - 580

S$ 17. Arn. 1667. A ſtrange Froft from Feb. XV. ( at which time we cont-
fort our (elves againſt the Menaces of Cold by the Topickh of the Swrs alt:-
tide, which will-not, fay we, ſuffer ſuch Hyemal Enchroachments at thar
time of year ) when mal-gre what the Sun could do, thahgh in the YVernal
Equinox, there was muchlce intheRiver. Mart. IX 1will- not ask the Artz-
Aftrologer an account of this accident, only acquaint the Reader, that March
XIV. was zew' I, andthe XV. day the bold Face of the Winter changed.

S 18. An; 166g. Dec. VIL A Froſt of XX. days, the b:ittzr Chriſtzmas day
and the Holy-Dayattending were wn:verſally noted, - as intolerable as thoſe two
days where, the +27: was ſenfibly milder © I, and three daysafter the
wind turning to the South, it wore away by Inches.

S 19. 'The fame winter in the following, wiz. As. 1670. Jan. XXV.
Froſt began with the Full > , we ſee when it begun, note alſo when ic diflol-
ved Feb. XI: "the Second day after the op.

$29. An. 1674. Jan. XXIV. Froft began, the Full Þ , on Feb. I. Hada go04
mixd to the d:(olution, the wind turned, fo the diflolution ſucceeded Feb. IT,

'$ 21 Az. 1672, Feb, XXIV. as late as it is in the Winter 3 This Froſt,
like that in 67.held us uncewilly till March XII. on whoſe morn @ © Þ made
ItS PUUEH27HS, 24, 4

$ 22. 4n.. 1677. from Now: 19. Froft.of X:days brought Le on the River,
ate 29. It vanifht, two days after, which fell withina day of the Full.  - *

s 23.: 4n.1678. Dec. IX. ad 18. Nine days it held, and the laſt day was
exaQly the day of the © @ I « . | | ect
> . come


Chap. XIII, &48g » many times diſſolves the Frofts.


79.


'$.24. The 1a#- (and in the name of thoſe that were come to mans eſt;
could almoſt wiſh it were the 1af; T never mer with a» thir could with ow:
might-enqure the [ike again) io, Thas which began preſently after the Slice,
Deg. XIV. 42: 1683. and laſted unmercifully all the Chriſtmas twelve days
with ſome Semblance of relent (accordingas it was predicted, even the flatterizz
Semblance that I ſpeak of) abour 7a. XI. 4 days after the Change burreturned
againand claimed aother Lunar Mozth even till Feb.the 4th.in the Evening of
the day of the Ghange.A Frolt fo terrible all over Europe, that it was matter of
debareat home and abroad to find a parale! , the River being froze even 4elow
the Gity-Bridge as well as above, ( a circumſtance I find 197 mentioned in any
of our precedent Congelations 3 ) but we ſhall have occaſion to ſpeak of this
elſewhere; you ſee when it found its period, and the WH 071d was glad of ir.

9 25. Yea but who takes the pains ro note the Fazlers ? I an{wer 'tisour
Iatereſt to note them, firſt That of Az. 16co. from Jar. 2c, which in
one {e'night had nezr froze the River. Stows Abridgemenr.

$ 26. 21y. Thar of the 5th. of King James I. An. 1607. deſtroy ing Hey-
bage, Fiſh, Waterfowl, of which, Frazte, Ireland, yea and the new-planted-
Engliſh, complain in Capt. S*1th's voyages, parallel in ſome Mens opinions
to that of 1684. but at no hand: to be yielded, becauſe of irs frequent inter-
cuptions, w:z. from Dec. 8. ad 15. then from 22. to 31. again 3 from az. 3:
1608. to 15. and from 24. to 30.

9 27. 3ly. That of 1615. for though we have ſeen above,the 7th of March
of thar year to agree to obtervation z yet we muſt give an account of thar
part which Sogen before Jan. 17. and held till Feb. 14. where no ſuch obſerva-


ble is prerende
9 24. Like as 4. 1621. from ov. XXIV, ad Dec. VII. which bears the


EXCEPtion. | x

. 9 29. 4thly. That memorable Sore and tedious Froſt 47. 1676. from
Nov. 16. to Dec. 23. yea 10days further 3 not inferiour to many for
duration and ſeverity , ſpecially taking in the renew'd Aflault 4 Jaz. 2r.
ad.d. 30 An, 1677. | ;

9 30. Laſtly that ſevere. one for 2 Months (pace (with a few days inter-
ruption ) a Dec. 26. viz. An. 1678. ad Feb.g. An. 1679.

6 31. Icis our Izt-reſt, we fay, to note theſe, not only becauſe we gain
4 little Gatalogue of Frofts, but allo a confirmation of the rule by a paucity of
exceptions z, yet. who knows ndt bur the other Aipe&ts of the I either with
©, or with others may deſerve our glance on them , ( though,not confide-
rable enough to found'an Axiome) as in our Aſpect with & for example ;, for
whereas we find ſome of our Froſts zot terminated at the d or & Lunar,
bat keep aloof at three days diſtance; if that proportion ſeem too wide, we
find the d Mars with I ready to patronize the Birth : Verily there muſt be
ſomething - in it, when 47. 1653. above introduced, we find the 4 & » on


the very day. there noted for the departure of the Froſts. I do not pretend .


that ſo 1t was 47.1623. 1669. but I (ay that Az. 1607-15-20. three of our ex-
cepted years we finda ſupply of the d or ? & with I in the very day, or within
4 day of the Froſts d:fſolution.So on Fan, XXKI. 4. 1602, Feb. XI; XIV. Ar.
1615. 1620. nay Once or twice, (as if this Planet were K:wal to the &) the
Froſt begins with a d , andends with an.#, & contra, wiz. a Fan. IIL as
XV. Az. 1607. & a Nov. XXIV. ad Dec. VII. Az. 1620. yey from a
' very piece and quarter of a revolution alſo, as froma Square to4 4d. So
Fan. XXIV. uſque ad XXX. An. 1607.juſt as we obſerved ſome (horter Froſts,
among the Sol1-Lunar Aſpefts 3 The like will hardly beſhewn with any other
Planet, though 'tis true again, that & hath no finger in the drfolut:oz of the
laſt : reckoning the abſolute diſſolution on Far 3. 47. 1677. for if we ſpeak
of ten days betore, when a kind ofer we made; the yew » claims its right,
eh


vw was


Frofs diſſolves not at the preciſe day, why. + | Book I. |


_ whoſe bounds the drooping world hath hopes of a releaſe in ſuch


ES. .

s$ 32. Now if any one finding upon the ſurvey of this Table, that the Full
Moon diſſolves a Froſt mzvre frequently than the New , ſhould ſtrive ro make
an Inference contrary to the foregoing termination, I believe it will be hard
to accompliſh, becauſe it will be found, perhaps upon this or a longer ſurvey,
that the Frofts which are 4:ſſolved at the Plenilunar Aſpect, ceterrs paribus,
were found of a brisker Solution in the night than in the day, and the Nowi-
luxar Solutions er. ; :

S$ 33. Bur if they perink to eriquire, why fometimes, we nieet not with
the diſſolution preciſely at the Aſpe&t, but more commonly about zt, at 2,nay
3 days diſtance 3 'tis truly anſwered, that when ſuch effects are not unjuſtly
aſcribed tothe Aſpe#, as the more worthy, there appear others, under its wing,
to co-operate with the more noted configuration; as we have faid before, thar
? or 2 with the » help tothe Credit of the chaxge or full: in the'very Spring
Tide, for confirmation of which, be pleaſed to know far a certain, that that
prediction of flattering Semblance before fpoken, in that weariſome Froſt
Ar. 1684. was d:termined not to the day of the Aſpect wy ». butto the 34.
or 4th. dayafrer, the Artift obſerving the Rule now propoled.


— . —_—_}_ —— mz


——


NAP. AV.
OGD


1. Pnadrate or Square proceedeth on a right Angle. 2. Muſica lilu-
tration of the AſpedF is but a fancy. 3. 0 equal to d or @ 5, In-
finence of the d or & being granted, O puts in his claim. 6. The
Tridunm is convenient, though it ſeems to entrefair. 9. The Quad-
rat's right Angle admits ſome Latitude. 11. Diary. 12. The two
Luadrates compared. 14. They come near the full ). 16. Of equal
influence as to the hour. 17. As to ſmart Rains. 18. In ſome
Months or Signs of infallible ſucceſs. 20. © and » in Square make
a fine Figure. 22. Second Square conſidered. 23. Second $ quare
more ſtormy than the firſt. 24. The Synoptical Table of the inflnences
of both. 25. How the, ſecond Square is warmer, and yet more ſtormy.
27. Why warmer. 28. Warmth perceptible in conſort, though not by
it ſelf. 30. Weſtern Angle, warmer corner than the Eaſt. 431. More
Rain in the Poftnoon, than in the Antenoon. 32. The Luadrates,
have influence before and after Sun. 35. Off hafius doubts of the
influence, except in the Meridian and Horizon. 36. The radiation
3s perpendicular though not vertical. 37. Influence perpetual. 38. The

. Bnadrate of the » critical incorporal Diſtempers, noted from experi-
ence of ſix or ſeven years. 43. The Seventh a critical day, and its
foundation. 46. » in Square with the © more powerful by its nearer di-
ſtance to the Earth. 4,7. Proſped of the Quadrates fuiling- or infallible


SI | b- the next place the 2uaarate calls for our conſideration,made much
of by the Aſtrologers, nextto d'and P. Conjuntton, Oppoſition,

and 2uagrate go for Tant-amount inthe Meteorological part : We do not
deny the Rule to have its truth, and the virtue of the Aſpect we have fouti-
ded Archite&-like, on a Rzght Angle, formed'by the Rays of the twa Lu-
minaries


w_—


Chap. XIV*+ Aſpetts not Harmonical: "© Influence manifeſt.


$y


minaries related. "Twas a pretry Pythagoric fan tocompare the Aſpects :


of the Celeſtial'Bodys to the aiwyions of the Mufical Chord. So a Square
to be a Diateſſarop, as the d js an Zſniſon, and the & a Cie Bur this
made way for ſuch a crowd of incroching Aſpects, ({ce Keple4 Se#; de nowis
Aſpe8. in Ephemierid. Anno 1617..) thatevery Pretender would yearly ftrive
to put in a new One 3 till Kepler ingeniouſly confeſſed, that Tempe#ates os for-
Tanao wid tandem deſerentlans eſſe Muſicam : and we always ſu pected it for
a forced Hypotheſis, which -Mathematicians ſometimes may be guilty of
Ss 2. This, Quadrate or Lwartile ins its Drchotomsy, as the Greeks call ir,"iis
preceptible ro ſeriſe as the Fwll Þ is. That, by the Plenary , This by the
alf-Face illiwninated, vulgarly'the Half » 4 and this Afpectreturns twice
in the Month : Firſt in the zzcreaſe or tendency to the Pleniluntinn 4, the Se:
cond in the decreaſe, tending to the Interluninm ; as the half-way-Houte
upon the Rode Backward and Forward. | |
9s 3. Now fince the d and-# and their Influence is undeniable, confeſſed
and granted us even by the- Sryuplers , who have no great kindneſs for the
Ptolemaick Aſtrology, it remains that the Quadrate alſo may produce' its
Credentials, Her Letters Parents{igned by Experience, the Miſtris of Facul.
ties, whole Name and Seal will not be queſtioned within/the Territories of
Sound Phyloſophy. . | |
9 4. Therefore for a double Aſpect we preſent more-than a ſingle Table,
char we might evince to the World, that we are of a gwlthf profeſſion,
not afraid of any Witneſſes in Court q__ us , fo that: the Jury :be
honeſtly empanel'd. The Diary is the verdict of the Countrey. For bre-
vities fake I could have contenzed my ſelf with the accom of One: only,
but that the Reader, Thope, may hereafter tind {ome reafonto the contrary.
9 5. Itmaybefaid, thar wehave already producedour-Tables for -d and
e in vain; for what need we trouble our elves with the-provf of any
conclution whichis granted-? ro which weanfwer, we fear they aregranted
us out of Charity, not as of Det ;, or for our -importunizy; as'aniAlms is
thrown to a clamorous Begger to ſtop the Mans Mouth, who as/2rwve3 nor
the pirrance, alrhough -xzore he expects. Not granted, I ſay, -as our due by
Vircue of our Evidence; becauſe our Evidence may be excepted againſt, as
not Full and Home, by the Faſtidious Difſenter ; we claim therefore, thar
the Reader Serenely and Calmly will be pleaſed upon due conſideration to ac-
cept, or favour our Evidence 3 without which, for all as we know, (tince
there is noocher imaginable Proof,) he may recall his graft, *and plead Non-
Conviction, even about the Influence of the Change and Full. On the
contrary, if he allows our proceedings, and gives ſentencefor the 4 and «+
upon the ſtrength of what hath bin alledged , we hope the (2mc Right wi!!
prevail for chis third Aſpect. Smce the evidence being produced to publique
view, if it be alike for one as for theother, All, or None muſt be-admitred.
Ss 6. To the enſuing Tables we have allowed the farie Number of Days
aS in the precedent AipeCts, 232. three Days to each: It mult be confefte?
in ſo doing we may ſeem to raterfere with the Neighbour Aſpects on one
hand, or the other, which appears to be ſome inconveniences to which
we ſay , Firſt, we found it neceffary tor the comparing of the Aipects
among themſelves, which js intended at the cloſe of this Lunar-Treatile, thar
they thould be allowed all of them an equal Number. I thought it tit once,
I confeſs ( to avoid this Gorxcidence) to produce but one or two days at moſt,
omitting ſometimes the Firſt, otherwhiles the Third, according as thole
Days were found to be of a wider diſtance from the Hour of the Afpe& -
Nay ſometimesT omitted both the extream Days, namely, when the Aſpe&t
oeppaned about Mid-day, reckoning 24 Hours to be a Competent Meaſure
of 1ts duration or Influence, But I found at laſt one 24 Hours could not pow
4


Influence of the Guartile hath its Lati tude. '-- Book.


ſibly involve the total of the Influence, and another da being ond, obli-


ged me to add the third alfo, upon the account thar 'ris better roallow with
the moſt than with the leaſt. is &f |

S 7. This I take to be certain, that the Irfluence of the Quartile Laſs
twice 24 Hours And if fo,' that ſpace of time, unleſs the Abe happens
preciſely at Midnight, is found to exiſt more orlefs, under the Denominati-
on of 3 days. So that ( with the Readers patience ) if the Aſpect happen
on -Friday-Noon, we reckon the compleat boundary of that Aſpect to begin
on Monday Noon, and end at Mid-day on Weaneſday. . |

S 8. This being allow'd, 'twas convenient to produce 3 almoſt entire
days, inregard that Firſt, though the Day may, yetthe Conſtitution, when
Uniform, cannot. be divided : Next, that the cifferent quality of the pre-
ſent Alpect nyſe ſtated z notwithſtanding ſometimes we reckon one and
the ſame Conſtitution to the two Competitors, tz. the Sextile or the
Trine ; the Dignity of the Aſpect, I fay, will be found, notwithſtanding
that common Accethon,by its proper Inſtances,their Number, and Momenc
So have I ſeen the ſame Weight ſucceſſively thrown into toth Scales to evi-
dence the difference of the Body which preponderates. Howbeit, when
an Inſtance falls-our;let ir be reckoned by all means to that Aſpect to which
it is neareſt ſituate.

Sg. Burthow a Rzght Angle ſhould admit ſuch a Latitude as we pretend,
way be another Scruple, but -we know there may be fome Latitude in a
Natural Angle, where there is none allowed in pure Mathematiques. A
Right Angle made by Lurninous Bodies may have a virtual reach to half a
Sign : Fifreen degrees breaks no Squares, at leaft are not diſcerned ro make
ſach ſenfible variation in a croud of other Cauſes, which pretend to co-ope-
rate tothe ſanje Effect. Beſides there may be ſomething conſiderable from the
Vicinity of the Moon, for in other Syzygies except the Lunar, Icannor ſay
the Quadrate reaches lo far. AQuaarare of Saturn or Mars with Sol, loſes
it ſelf in five Degrees perhaps.

$ 10. Furthermore obſerve, that the two Columns of the approaching Ta-
ble. ſerve, the firſt for the former Quadrate, the 24. for the later, which
differ a matter of 14 or 15 days one from the other. |


— —


oO) The Quartile Table. Doc


Jumary, | Tanuary.

1671. vW 28, 1671. = m 13, |
VI. Froſt, ice, wet much p. m- S, | XXII. Tempeſt of wd ante 1. cloſe, guſts, x1,
VII. 11 p. rain ante tac. fair, windy, NW.| wind atn. f. miſle. S w.
VIIL H. wd ante lac. & wer - windy 8& flying XXIIL 3 m. H, wd antel. Fair ſummers d.

cloudyne(s. W. NW.
72. 28 17. XXIV. Froſt, open. | SW,
XXVI. Fr. fair, cold, wdy ; flying white cl. | 72, 2m 2,

clear n. & audible wd. NE. | X. Froft, foggy die tot. taken up8 p. S.


XXVH. 6 m. H. Froſt, bright, oyerc. 4 p- XL. 10 p. Fair, f. miſt, ſhowr 4 mn. pleaſant d
N Meteors 3. neer Caſſip & Urs,Min, E


XXVIIL H. fr. bright, audible wd. N E. | XII Fog, froſt a. m. S. thaw even.
F .


NE.
i _— 73- 22M 20, |
IV. Froſt, white nes 6 1 XXVIII Fr. thaw and. cloſing p. m. Bees
N.| work, Ely.
XY. 10 p. Froſt ſwan, ail 0,1. very dark, | XNIX. 4 p, cloſe, coldiſh NE


yield p.m
XRNNX,


_ kai vd, »


MXMMQ) ww Way


 —


_—_—


Chap. XV. ' Dzary for each Quartile.

XVI. Cloſe m. p. {now 5 p. E.| XXX, Driſte m. cloſe, miſty, C wd. clear p. m
74. WV.25. * NE.
Iv. Fr. hoary ; fair& cold, miſty air. SW. | 74. = m 9.

V. 7 m. froſty, fair. N.S, | XVIL Rain 2 m. ſnow dic to. Nly Thaw - k


VL. E. great fr. & much hoar ; miſt, fair. _ S.


75- = & 14.

XXII. Wly fair a. m. #. 2 p.& apace %
M. C. 9 p. & 11 p. with guſts R occ. S W-

XXIV. 2 m. SW. very warm, open, black
clouding & wd. R.11 p. SW.

XXV.. Wly. windy , wetting 8 m. clear S. R.
rp& 3 p-

76. = 3.

XI. Froſty m. ſnow 4 m. froſt 9. N WW.

XII. 9 p. Froſt m. thaw apace v. N E. cold *
froſty.

XIIL Froſt. Thaw m. cloudy ante |. cloſe mp


ws ww 21,
Ken. Froſty, open. Ely.
XXX, 2 p. mille a. m. rain p. 0. Max. F


XXXI, Fair, froſt. W.NE.


P—_ J—


Febrwary.


2671. WS 27

V. Froſt, hoar ut diet prec.miſt, fair, ſroſty, 0-
verc.g p. Halo g

VI, 9 m. fr. ſnow
m. Halo 9 p.

VIE Fr- ſnow 8 m. miſting & miſling nw _
raw. no wd. SW.


Yo
Grand m. open Nly. fair 1


72, X IT 16,
XXIV. £. miſt, fair, cooler p. m. bright n. _
Nly


X XV, Ho. o. miſty, dry. a. m. cool, _ p-
m., Rain 9 p.

XXVI. cloſe, damp windows ; cool.
73- X It 6,

X1IHL. H. froſt, cold, fair.

XIV. 9 m. (now 4 m. much ſnow o. miſle 6 p-
fair 11 P. SE.
XV. Fine warm m. driſly roward o. & p.m.

. audible wds. S.


NE


74- 2 & 25.
It. Cloſe foggy S W. open 2 p. driſle 5 p. E.
TIL. 1o p. Fr. cloſe m. N E. cold miſty clouds

7 Þ» Wly, bur wd from NE.
IV. H. Froſt & ſnow die tor, with wd. * N E,

Freez, wd atn.
X IT 1

Bn. Cloſe, miſt, ſnow 44 cloſe m. p. E.
XXII 6. Froſty, miſt, fair 3 clouds in -_—


XXII. Froſt, hoar, overc. p. m. Fog, fall $
m. E.
76. X IT 3.

X. Cloſe, wdy p m. rains p. & H,wd., SW.
XI. 6 p. Openm. p. {. rain o. 7 p. S W,
XU, Cloſe, drille 1 p. my Fcg6p. NW.


In Febr. nuſquam reperitur © prior. |


roward n.
XVIII. 11 p. not cold 9g m, overc. 10 m.ſhowr
& H.wd 10p.SW.a.m.SE. p.m.
XIX. Rainy 4 m. & day break with H. wd,


cold, H* wd & ſtorms of R. a. m. S.SE,
75. Vz==& 28,
VII. cloſe, miſty. N.
VII. 2p. Cloſe, miſty, cold wd 4 p. E.


wind make fingers ake.
IX. E. cold, cloſe, foggy wd. very cold atn.E
76. &m 17,
XXVI. Rain ante |. & 9 m. cloſe wd. S.
XXVIL 6 p. S W. fair, overc. and R. 5 p. SW.
XXVIIL Rain ante |. ad 8 m. open, W.SW.,
77+ Wnma7.
XV. Cloudy, Rain ante |, cloſe, C. rain weſp. &
H. wd. S
XVI. 1 p. miſt, froſt, fair, W.
XVIL W. hard white Fr, & foggy. E.S.N .wd

Various. ;


February.
167", X 7 13.
XX, Showr 0. - hail 3 p, werring veſp. _ $1
p Nly a. m. wp. Sly.
XXI. 13. p. Ffoſt vety cold, wd often, ſhowrs
o. & p. m. Light inthe weſt; clear n. Nly.
XXII. Fr, cloſe, rain 8 m. cloſe m. us _ =
Ye
& 2.


I; X
IX. Vchement Fr. cold wd. cloſe, ſnowy = 4
I1


P-
X; 7 p. Snowing and hard Froſt, cloſe, il:


XI. Bright, froſty.


73+ X 2 20.


XXVI!. Wer 9m. cloſe, H. wd ) occ.
yy ox 11 mM. mift m. open,cemperate. SW,
cloſe n.


L. Mart. H. wd. daſhing wer.
74- X 7 8.

XVI. Fog m. open m. p. N. W. bright n. N W.
XVII. o. open , windy, floting ; cl. clear n.


SW.
XVIII. Cloſe & cold. N,
75+ = M28.
V. Fine a. m. over. 1 p. Meteor. 9 p. circa
Cephea in N W. H. wd, rain 11p. SW.
VI. W. lowring 10 m. Nly. coldiſh at n. (now
at mid. night.
VII. Nly, Open, ſhowr of hail 11 m o. 1p»
3 P-
76: IX 7 17.
XXV. Dry, miſt, not clear at n. SE.
XXVI. 2 m. cloſe m. p. lowring o. Meteor 11
p- from S.S E.
XXVII W. miſly, fair m. p. Z' ſeen plain be-
low ? & more Nly. Meteors gp, W-
77. X £7
X11L Froſt m. thaw p.m. rain —_—


NE


N W. Nly.


XIV. 10 p. no fr, bur Rain ante 1. ſtarry 0. W
XY, WEnue, n=, 5


Continuation of the F, roſty C atalogue.


March.


1671, X Il 27, |
VL. Cloſe, ſhowr o. ; NE.
VIL 5s p- Fr. wdy, cloſe N E. ſnow offer'd / my


vill Cold, \. miſt, wd Ely, bright d.
72. VS 15,
nw Cloudy, mift m. warm, lictle wd. cloſe


NW.

XXV. 8 p. Cold, cloſe, wdy. wdy & cloſe 11

P- E. Nly.

XXVI. Cloſe wd Sly. fine ſhowr 4 p. great

rain 8 p. Sly.
VS


7 Jo
is. Warmiſh, bright m. white cl. $ goo
4: 3 Þ. warm, far, overc. 2 p, 6pen, _
O P. E
XVI. Windy, wetting, circ. 6 ms 8. I:
P T Jo


iv F grſt, ai vety why 19 L. wd. N E.
NOW 7 Ps
V. 10 th. Froſty, very cold, open, ſnow 2 P-


VI. Froſty, cold, overc- ) riſe CN L


75. VS 13,
XXIILI. N.-Froſt, ice, cold, open P. m. Halo
Ww,


XXIV. 9 m. rainy m. &a. m. cloſe, ſoulc. W.
XXV. Wly. cloſe m. p. Miſt, warm m. cool o.
76. TVS 3.
XII, Fr. brighr d. guſts 2 p.
X1IIL. 2 p. Froſt, fair dry.


-


XIv. Fog, © rutilus a. m. fair, dry. .  E-Ny


YS 21,


{x White fr m. open. NW. W.
XXX. 6 m. brizk wd. fair,warm. fr. m.Sly.E.
L _ _ OE es che Horizon viſible,cloſe


coldiſh atn. SW.
Tr=_ Hackney.
Foreſt mer. fair, fr.m. rain p. m. per tot, W


April.


1671. VS 26.

= Cold, fair m. \. miſt m. cloſe m. p. NW.
. 3 m.cold m. f. miſt. fair d. E,

Vii Bright, E. wd audible 11 p.

72. SV I4_ :

XXTIIL Overc. a.m. clearing, ſtiff then


XXTV. 4 m. Bright, dry 3
-windy. Halo1 p.

RXV. Dry, COR Sly. fair m. leſs hazie
thenpale the —

73 Rk. © -

XII Vox tk NA, flying cl. SW. Cloudy


Kin 10 4 p.Llole l, C miſt, L. ſhowrs p.


m, Þ. Þ. M,


not fo clear p.m.


|


þ


|


|


L 4 Bright m.


'XXIL. 2 m. C _ Sh hot, ng —_


March.
I671. X 7 13,
XXIL Froſt,hail 11 mlpurmerecy crc. ! ors
much ice for one night


XXII. 2 p. froſty, fatr C, miſt m. at veſp. NW.
XXIV. Ah great Ice, fair, (. miſt m.veſp.


NE;
72. VWw2
X. Snow in ow lies ; wdy, open, H. G—_
clouds, open
XL 3 Pp. White Froſt, ice, fair, miſty cl. at
S E. lowring m. p. w,
XII. Snow on the ground. fog, thaw.


7 TV 20.

_ Cold;H. wd. Rain : p. 2 p.&hail a
or

XXX, mites p. f. ſnow m. dritle hop
T3 p m. bluſtring. S

XXXI. Rain @ 7 m. ad 9g m. H. wd. {. driſle,
I P-'7 Þ»


NW,
TV 8.


7
TP. f. ſnow ante I. ſnowing a. m. very cold
p. m. f. miſle, N
XTX. 3 m. ſnow, rempeſtuous wd ante luc.

& a. m. very old, cloudy.
XX* Snow ante 1. ſhowy e, m. P-

Foggy, H. wd ante luc,

75. X 2 28,
VI. Miſly, windy, dry. Ely H. wd ante luc.
VIII. 10 m.E. Froſt, ice, miſt, wd, dry.
IX. Ely. Froſt, ofc lowring; cold, dry.
= VV 16.

XXV. Miſty, - i & C, wd, brisk. NE.

much rain 8
XXVTI. 10 m. open, wdy. clear n, E. NE.
XXVIL E. fair, _ d. cold wd and rough.


Nly,


& *


T7 Fr. ice, open, þ Ss gp miſty
XVI. 6 m. Froſt, fair, white cl.

—_ Froſt m, fair , fr

$5. berween Cales &

& thunder with Shipwrath,


, White cl. ante d.
Lucas. great ftorm
Ss,


April.


—S 6 #
C. miſt, brisk wd, hor, _—y
heb. weſp.


XXIIL Miſt, fai
uf


72,

IX. Cloſe, miſt ante 1. Clear 4ÞP- N.NW:
X. 8 m. cold m. cloſe, wetting a. m. p. in. &

ſerious Rainat n.
_ CR wetting 9 mM. Nly. open . btack
ouds, wetring 5 P.
77 S 2X 19,
VIII. Cloſe d. f. moiſture 5 p.
XXIX, x m,cloſe m, clear p. m, dry, no mi


XXX.


SG" &S VB Www


2. Ss al? an


DoS eptennial Dary.


Chap. XV.
XTV. Cloſe m .p. 4. in. cold wd, open & warm
P. M. N.
VS 23.

L N E. Fine m. overc 7 m. great cl. &
threarning R. which vaniſh. SW.
=. 7 7 Þ-Wh Cloſe wetting 7 m. & black Hea:

WwW,
Iv. "Cloſe, wetting 10 m.& 1 hs SW.


VWwl
ory Fair, cold, flying cl. TT lowring, E.
XXII. 8 p. N. cloſing and hopes of moiſture z
coldiſh m. oficr wd & rain ec. S W. a.
m. bur veſp. N.
XX11L Nly. Cold, cloudy, rain, hail ante 10
m. Nly after. E.
76. YV 2.
X. Wetting 6 m. hotriſh rain 3 p, &c. Wy,


_— 6 m. open, warm, {. lowriog cl. overc,
w.S.


XII. L. Clouds m. hotn fair, brisk wd. Ely. hor
Wetring $ Þ» S.

77: VV 19.

XXVIIF Warm, many clouds, brisk wd. ſhowr
3 Þ- E. S.

XXIX., by . Warm, H. wd. ſhowr. & or Þ


riſe . allayed veſp.
XXX, _ rain 11 m. & conſtant ad med,


wot, wd Wy. various. SW.'
_ "= 5
May. |
1671. VV 24.


Iv. Open, wds, warm, dark & lowry 4 p. $,
V. 5 p. Windy, daſh 9 m. Yþ or fair, warm.
SW.


= Cold m. fair, hot. SW.
IT Mt 12,

XiL Cloſe wd. £. ſhowrs 7 p. SW.
XX1I1.Cloſe. hotciſh, f. wd. SW. clds fly. NW,
XXTv. Cloſe m. p. Nly veſp. E.

73 IW2,

XII. Very cold m. bright, overc. o. gentle rain
I p- 5 & 7 p. very coldn, N E.
XIHN. 4 m. Cloſe m. wet r2mpore porn. t8t. SW.

bur clds Northerly. S.
XIV. Cloſe, wetting m. cold offering p. m.
74. S ol 22,

1. Sly Showrs. $ m. 10m. ) or, 8&3 p. again R
oce, ſhowr 4 p. more wet at n. cold, {, hail


"iT P: Nly. cloſe wd, R. ms. pt _—"_ m.


R. 6 Þ.
HI. Rain m. H. wd.R. 5 p. SW.
35. IT MM 10,

. Cool m. warm, fair 9 p. E.
XXII 2 m. fair, thick cl, gather 9 p. E.
XXIIL Hor, cloudy 5 p. E.

6, I! \if ©,
Cloſe wd. ſhowr 8 m. 11 m.0. 3 p. $P.


7 Þ-
*.; 6 p. white pr t cl, p.m, Nl mw
brite, pregnant Cl, P. Y Þ-


w. SW.|


XXX, Fair, very hot. oo


NE,
74. S x2 7.
XVI. NE. C. rat m. warm often cl6fin ing

& lowring p. SW.
XVII. 10 Pp. 1 eB p.f. rain 7 p. ''  - SW.
Lay Nly. Cloſe.

| 75. VY VP 26.
V. Rain $s m. & werring 5 m. cloudy. E.


VI. 11 p.E.clouding m.p.low:ing 11 m.Fine d.
cool wd. N..
VIL. E. Fair a. m. cloſe, Hil, high, cold &
red wds, NE.


76. S 2X 14,

XXII, Cloſe m. p. lowring, coldiſh. . N, NE,

XX1V. 8 p_ H. wd, clond, {.drops 5 p. *

occ, W M. C - W.

XXV. NW, Cloſe, lowring, bright n. NW.
m.at n, E, SE* hotriſheven.

77 SX 4

X11T, Cloſe drops 5 p. SE.

XIV. Rains m. &0.& 1 p. 6 p. &by firs 3
p. ſhowr coaſting 7 p. H. wd 11 p. S. SW.

XV. Open m. rain 11 m, ſweetly, with H wd,
ſhowr 6 p. S W.


| My.

167T, If f 9,

XX. Cold m. coaſting R. in the North 9 m:
rainy m- Þ. & veſp. G&c.

XXI. 11 m. Cloſe m. rain 1 p. 3 P- — Alas
p. {. hailo. as Mr. Samy; happily

XXII. Fair, floating cl. warmer eſp. Y; rain
10p. Nly atn. Why.

72: B&W 2


29.
VIE. Cloudy m. bright, dry, coldiſh wd. NE.
1X. 11 p. Cloſe, wasmiſh, offering a drop,mi-
NE


—_ cloſen. .
X. Cloſe, miſty air,. bright, dry, warm. NE.
73. Tt X 17.
X XYIL, Rain 4 & 6 m. cloſe, hortiſh ; ſhowr x
&-3 p. daſh 4 "3
XXVIIL 5s p. brghe mM. overc. f. rain 1 m. &
am. & 1 temp. porn. tot, NW.
XXIX, Cloſe m. P- {. rain 10 m. SW.
74. ACX 6,
X VI. Ely Bright,wet, hot S E. a. m,. SW. no
Meteors 10 p-


NW. | XVII. 2 p. bright, cloudy, ſhowr ©. occ. E.


XVIII. £ ſhow ame4 m. hor, windy. S.S W


75; S 2,25,

V.Warm,mi | rurns.0.cloſe & lowring5.

VI- 15 p. N. much, hot d.' w.

VIL Lowring & « NW.
6. TX 1


9.
_—_ warmybright, ary Ely, beige in NW.


IP.
| XXIV. 6 m. warm, brighr , more dry clouds
then dieprec. Meteor 11 p- 4 Lance For. ad
ſcorpii


o "they Drary.


"Book I


”_—


_


XL Fair a. m. overc. o. £. ram 7 P- on
at N.


77. I 2 18.

XXVIII. Cloſe m. open, ſuſpicious intheS. O.
& troubled air ; cloſe veſp. _ Ta ho b»
midn.

_ 2 Þ. wet 4, i, tot, ad 1 P+ windy yin


XXX, Fair 4 m. many white cl. ® ah, 5 =


Y. in Nadir glancing on & . SW,
June,
1671. II We 23,


IIT. Open , ſometime threatn. Ely clds riſe,
W. Hal Þ cool n.

IV. 6 m. Cloſe, C. miſt m. offer p. m.

V. Warmiſh o. floting cl. cool veſp.

72, S = 10,

XX. >. gentle dropsa. m. ſhowr 3 p. wdy d.

XXL. Lowry m.wdy ir p m.wd various

NW. clouds ride North-ward,wds 11 p.SW,

XXIL. Fl. clouds as for r. N W. $s m. ſhowr'
1 P. windy. Nw. SW

SD= 0,


adn ave 9 9. ha-edmn ch
XI. 10 m. Cool m. cloſe 6. warm p. m. Wy.


El
XII. Cool & cloſem. wetting 10 m. & pm.S.
94 TT 5 Swaar2o,
XXXT. May Ely, open, overc. 11 m.
I. 8 m. Fair a. m.warmer o.8& duſty ; cl. overc.
10 P. NE. N,


IL. Fair, bright, dry, Nly. ſhowr Þ in = 3.


Iterum. SL 18,
XXIX. Cloſe & lowring m. p- NW.
_— 10 m. fhowrs m.. droppy 4 P- 92.20


I. Fol bright m. cloſe & path nates #8}
& dropping. be


Xie H. ad ante luc. . ſhowrs. Nly.
XX. 2 m. Open, thickiſh clouds, (marr __


XXL, Fair 6 m. Wy. fi. cl. ſhowr 4 p. 9 a
IT We 29,


76.
VIII. Cloſe m. ſeeming ſhowr coaſting 59 m. in
the Sourh; f. mers fel Os


IX. 2m. R.3 m.l
R. R's m cloſe Wly "Nly Mer Meteors prope "th


11 Þ+
7. Sa I6.
_ Var? tn heat , miſty , floting cl.


in
ou ln at ooh: cp pai by gh


vm. Cendyanes m. cloudy & cool
clears & warm p.
KXIX. Smerr man fo popd ek co


W.


x


Scorpii Ps Hakan ſeveral rimes ins. WW.
. | XXV.Soulry day , lowry cl. 1p. Stones ſwear,
- Lightning much cv che Northerly parts 11 "£


77. MX 2,

XII. R. apace 4 m. wd;open,warm.Nly SW.,W,

XIII. 7 p. cloſe m. guſts , clody ſprinkling 8
Pp. SW.

XIV. Fine warm, floting bright cl. ſomerioes
lowry.


June.


1671, SY 7.
XVIII. Hor, dry, clear, (. miſt,H. wd p. m.Ely
bur at n, N,
IX. 5 p. Fair, lowring, bright cl. wd. NE,
XX. Fair, dry, fog ante ©) ors. lowr & ſhowr
diſcovred 3 p. ſhowr of half an howr 4 p.
that while rhe wind in the Wcit , then
rurn to N E. again.
72. It. 28
[1 COn_ grear lowring, £ little ſhowr
2 p. hot. S.SE,


"| VIHTE. 11 m.-Hear, R. thunder 10m. V. or. ter-


rible chunder & rain 2 p. SW. N.

IX. f drops 9 m. great quiſt a. m. troubled air
$ p. ſhower. #6 p. extraordinary, Ter-
nados as a Merchanc ſtiled them,


73: SV 15.

XXVI. Cloſe R. 6 m. werring 8 p. R. 11 p,
H. wd. & rain. m. p. of the night. SW,

XXVII. 9 m. R. 6 m. warm, fair, wdy. SW,


XXVIIL, Fl. cl. 8 m. H, wd, clouds in ſcenes,


E.} SIW.


74- SV

Xv. Cl m. Þ- dry. N.
XVI. 5 m. drifle 5 m. o. clade. mn N.
XVII. Nly. overcaſt o. cloſe, a drop at n. Ely.


| 75. X IT 24,
Iv. Cloſe, C rain 11 m. 5 p. wd brisk. WW.
V. 6 m. Floting thin cl. o. warm till at n, Nly,
VI. Fair , warm a. m. coaſting ſhowr o. Nly.


| 76. SY 2,
xt Fair m: cold wd. Why. overcaſt, ſhowr
SW.


I P.
XXL 8 p. R. & thunder 5 m. 5 m. dark 8
m. Rain & thunder 5 p. & R. 8p. NE. 'SE.
SW


»


XXIII. R. 2 m. &c. 7 m. Fair remperate wd
cool. nb $


77. SY 1,
XI. Showr 1 m. 9 m. 11 m- NW, W.
XII 3 m. H. wd, ne#. ror. floting clouds 6 m.
ſ. drops, & offer 1 p. 4 p. ſhowr 6 p. W. NW.
XIII. NW. warm, open, oyercaſts 4 p. open
Wy.


Chap. XV. T he Quartiles Diary.


Tuly.


1671. S 21,
II. Cloſe m. clouds in ſcenes, miſty R, 10 m-.
drowning Daſh o. &' So. ſhowr 4 p. © SW.
III, Cloſe o. rain 2 p. open SW. Smoke ar n,
waves toward NW.
Iv. Fair, clouding p. clouds ride contrary,


SW.SE.
Am_s8.


72. ;

XX. Cloſe m, bright p. m- hot Meteors 11 p.
SW. various.

RX{q, 2 p. Bright,Hazy m. hor. C. gales NW. m.
SE. S. p.m. not hazy even Meteors 3. 8 p.
by D lighr.

XXII, Fair m. warm, overcaſt p, m, & 10 p.
ſhowr 5 p. ſhort Mereors 12 p. SW.

73. S=< 28,

IX. Cloſe, ſome werring. SE.SW.

X. 8 p. Fair m. ({. ſhowring a. m. p. m. open

SW, NW.

XI. Overcaſt, wetting 11 m. 2 p. cloſe SW.
warm m. hot n. and cloſe.

74. Am 16,

XXVIILI. Cloſe a. m. and {. ihowrs,open. H. wd |

. m. S. SW. clouds red Qoccafter S' 7 Y
Hr

XXIX, Clouding a. m. ſuſp. in SE. H. wd. 0.
Meteors 11 p. S. SW, Meteor neer RN.

XXX, H. wd, open a. m. Rain p, m. tat” H wd,


S, SW.
75. AM 6,
XVIII. Cloudy a. m. ſome drops, wd, SW.
XIX. ho. o. Fair, windy,very cold, miſle veſp.


DE —


rainy 9 P» W.
XX. Rain «ſque ad 4 p. fair eyen. SW.
76. S = 27,

VII. Miſt, cloſe, offer 10 m. 0. 2 p. ſhowr 6

p. wd. Nly.


VII. 9 m. great daſh 6 m. I in Nadir. Rain a
midn. by firs ad 6 p. rain 1 p.drifle8 p
Nly miſty.

IX. Daſh 6 m. 11 m. init, daſh 5 p. Nly.

77: SUM 14. |

XXVT. Fair, cool a. m.\. floting clouds , ſupt-


——


cious 7 p. in the W. wd SW. [7


JXVIL 10 m. rainat midn.ſhowring 3 m.8 m,
coaſting ſhowr SW. rain and thunder 11 p.
and ante 6 rain. clouds ride contrary. Meteor
11 p. ab Androm. ad XY 23 bcum coolifh,

N, SW.

XXVII.L Wer a-m.per tot uſque ad ho 1. veſp. flo-

ting cl. open p. m. coldiſh S. 2 Mereors |


7aly.
1671, NA ES 6,


XVII. Moderate, ſome rain near night.


XVTIE. Bright day.
XIX. Cloudy, cloſe a. m. pleaſant p, m.


72, SY 25.
VI. Wet a. m. tot. Daſhes 2 p.p. m. fere tot Circa
6 veſp. ſhowr again (oce.Cygni m1. c,ceti ore
&&c.occ.5 p. ) nadir ſegr. N .
VII. Cloudy m. p. fine and dry. ly.
VIIE. Bright m. cloſe 11 p. and chreatning, 0-
pen p. m. cloſe veſp. and \. drops 8 p. Si.


73. AS 13,

XXV. Cloſe ſhowr 8 m, lowring, ſuſpic. m.
SW. hor.

XXVI. 6 p. cloſe. f. driſle a. m. warm driſle 8
p. and wd. SIW.

XXVII. Cloſe, H. wd, ſomer. lowring p.m.

S


74. AS 2,

X1V. Showr 9 m. ſhowr and thunder 1 p. very
H. wd circa 0. SW.

XV. 12. Fair, dry, f. clouds in ſcenes. $ IW.
warm Mereor below Lyr4 11 P. Wir.

XVI. warm, dry, not clear Ely, cloſe g. and
horriſh,


T5 SY 32,
HI. Bright, dry, C. lowring cl. p. m. Wy.
IV. f. drops 2 p- 4 p. Wly hor day and night.

V. Hog m, foultry afflicting air, lowring. IW.


76. ASL g.

XX1. Hot ni, cooler a. 'm. {, wd. brisk cly circa
veſp. clear mereor 10 p, Wly.

XXII. o. Rain a 10m. ad m. p.d. R.gp.H.
wd. Sly.

XXII. R. 8 m. floating heavy cl. ſhowr 6.and
thunder thrice, ſhowrs 3 p+ SW


7. SS") - 29.

N, Clear, H. wd. 6 m. Wly. boiſterous wd die
tot. Rain 11 m+ I occ. Halo 11 p., Wy
XI. 2 p.rain ab 8 m. ad 1 p. rain againd 5 ad
3 p. R. 10 p. Wly with wd, warmer eyening.
XII. ſhowr 4 m. H. wd, great ſhowr 9 m. open
p. m. Wly, SW, red even.


neer Delph et Aquila N oritur. SW
— | | " -
Auguſt. Auguſt.
1677. Am 19. 1671, MII 2,


I. Cloudy, cool, gentle wds.
I. Flying cl. yet fair,


XVI. Fair, dry NE. 2 Meteors neer p. m. _
XVII. 3 m. maſt m. fair, lowring as for thunder


HI. Hot and cloudy. |


o, ſhow 4 p-- Ely. m.
Aa


The Ouartiles Deary.


Book I.


——
i —_—


72. m2Z $7 2

XIX. Cloudya. 1.R. m. a4 7 m; rainodaſh
4 pÞ-f. rain 7 P- ; Ely. SE.

XX. 75 m-Hazy m-much lowring $ aw_ * =


XX1. Froſt, wd NE. ſmoky air.

m2, <1 26.

Vit. Open. warm. NE.
IX. 9 m. Cloſe m. p. E. NE. cloſe n, open —


X. Cloſe m. p. miſty air E. NE brisk wd 2 p.
hor n. and rain 2p. offering p. M.
m7 14.
Fon. Rain and miſty ad 3 p. : Fs
XX VII. 4 m. Rain 2 m. ad 8 m. fhowr circa ©,
Joud t'wnders, ſhowrs at Branford 4 p. NE-
XXIX. Fair, bur cidy 0.heavy clouds,dropping
&c. Cobweb ſtrings many,Fog like water on
the ground. N. Ely.
5. my 4.
n Fair ,bright all day. Wy.
XVII. Cloudy, bright at o. ſoultry even. Wy.
XV1IL Fair, dry, hot n. _ Wly.
76. AS : |
V, Overc. fog m. fair, warm, wd, white floting
clds, overc. 3 p. wd Ely. NE. Meteors, Two
11 p. One by Y -
VI. 3 p.-Miſty air, fair, hor p. m. black,thick ,
overcaſt as for thunder ; ſhowrs 5s p. wd.
Ely.
VII. Cloudy m. warm clouds p. m.promiſe Red
even, Nly.


—_ mM 27 12,

RX XIV. Cool, open m.\ overc.drops 9 m.cdly
m. p.Wly cloudy 11 p. .

XXV, Cool, dry, fair m. wd, cloudy ® rhe
w. m.and in the S. p. m. warm, cloſe m.p.
Sly. W,

XX VI. Warmer, driſle o. miſt, open with flo-


ring clds Wly p. m. NW,
September.
1671. wm 7.18.
XXXI. Auguſt. Foggy, hottiſh, bright n. Me.


teor coward Pleiad. E.
L Sept. IO Ms Fog, flying thin d. ry
bright nigh, er bright near 2. SW.
Vl. Hor n. fifty Sir m. ; as die prec.
dry Wly. Meteor 10 p-prope I,
<P 6


72, SW:

XVIII. N. Froſt, cloudy, ſhowring 3 p- Nly.
winds Eaſt in time of the ſhowr..

X]X. 2 m. Fog, froſt m, floring cl. miſt - 2


XX. Miſt m. overcaſt p.m.driſle 9 p. NE.


. me 24.
it Cloſe, wdy, rain 4 p. 10 p- and _


VIL 11 p. Fog m. clear aboye, bright n. S.SW.
VIIL Wa nof [. thowri
merid, mM. p.


tet, rain antq 1. 4howring =


- 4... MF 3
V. Fair, dry NE. hot, cldy atn.


XVIIL Dew on crees,(miſt or froſt. )Nly.over-
caſt 8 m. clouds in ſcenes, bright n. Sourh
Horizon {cen at London, 2 Meteors by Ophis-


chus. Nly.
o.S 23,


Sly,
VI. 1 m. ſhowrs 3 m. drilling a, m, tot. hottiſh
p- m. Sly. open, {, clouds 1n ſcenes, clear n.
Sly.
VII. Fair a. m. hot p. m. but cloſe ; f. drops
4 P+ SE. great dew on windows, as if froſt.
7 z; MI 13,
XXIV. Open, wdy, offering 11 p. calm. SW,
XXV. Fair, clouds gather, ſhowr 1 p, SW.
XXVI. Stormy wds and f. wetting 2 p. at
Brainford, SW


7 MIT 1,

XIII. Fog m. dry hear, \. clouds lowring with
miſty air. NE. wd turned ab E. ad N, wd
various.

XIV. Mifty, dry, heat Wly p. m. $ E. at n.

XV, Hor and fair. ' $.

6. S 20,


I. Fair, wdy, clear. Iw.
II. Fair morn, overc. about o. flying clouds.


SE.


w. SW.

IV. Hort day Ely. ſoulrry night, Nly.
6, mn TI .

XX. Clouds in ſcenes m. brick wd., W. SW,


XNI. 6 m. clouding 10 m. fair, cool, Wy,
cool n.

XXII Open, windy, ſhowr o. . rain 10 p. &',
or, wdy,N. wd 7 p. NW,

T7. LS 27,

IX. Fogearly, bright, Ely. wd, but clds Wly.
{. floring bright cl. warm, ſingle cloud ſhow-
ring in the NW. 9 p. Sly.

X. werting 8 m. S. hot a. preced. hor day, yer
cloſe, werring ante 9. 3W. NE,

XL Fair m. overc. 8 a. R. 0. p. m. fere tot
Rain powring 11 Pp. SW


September,
I671, <>S 2, |
XIV. Cloſe, offer 11 p. N W.
XV. 10 m. Froſt, miſt, fair Meteor. NW.


XVI. Froſt, floting cl. fine day, cloſe veſp. and
little wetting, N

7. HI 22,

IT. Lewring, ſuſpicious ante luc. & a. m. very
cold Nly. SW.

IV. 6 m. Cold m. fair, oyercaſto. & ſhowr 2 «


6 P- : . w,
V. _ mu. flying cl. wetting 0. 2 p, rough
W


73 «QS 10.

XXIl Froft a. ice, cold a m. R. o. & p. n.per
tot. SE.

XXII. 9 m. ſhowrs ©07. a48 m.ſo2 p.2.3 p.
wd, high azte luc. SW.

XXTV, very warm m. and troubled air. weſt
at p.m.m.p. ſbort Meteor toward Urſa Majors
head, N, NW.

T4


Chap. XV.


Drary for each Cuartile.


74. AV 12,
XXV. NW. changeable, 1. rain 10 m.o. p. m.
veſp. H. wd weſp. NW. Nly.
XXVI. 4p. cold, cloudy, windy. NW.
XXVIL Cold, cloſe m. p. miſtyiſh N,w.
75. =-VP 2,
XV. Rain $ m. or about that h. fair, warm.W.
XVI. 2 m. fair a. m.cl. lowring, R.s p. W.
XVII. Cloſe, ſomewhat foggy, warmiſh, SW,
76. mV 24.
HI, Fair m. miſt , white ct. brisk wd, no rain,
chough the Barometer ſtood ar 43. when
ar 50. it moſt part raines. W. SW.
NE.
IV. 9 p- Cloudy, hot n. f, wet 5 m. miſty and
rain ©. p. m. & (©) occ. 11 p. SW.
V. Rain 1 m. apace, clouds 1n tcenes. SW.
T7. A2V? 11.
XXII. Warm Rain 2 m. ſomer. clouding fo
Q) occ. very hot n, W.NW-
XXTV. 1 m.clouds warm,ſomet.lowring, dry:
Ww.,


XXV. Brisk wd 9 m. open, warm,


Ofter,


-


1671, EVP I7.
NE. Clouds, rain ©. 2 p. 4 P- _ * >


IL. 4 a ſtormy wd. f. .clds, ſtormy i at 4


SW.

11.wd laid pretty welopen,daſh o.H. wd ; x2
offer 9. R. 6 p.* W.

Iterum, Oftober, M= 17,

XXITX. _ m. p. cooler, bright n. N.
RXX. 95 p. driſle m. cloſe d. |. wd. SE.
XXKX1, © ole Mm, open 9 m. cloſe and freez 9.
ar N. NE.


72. m2 6, |


XvIL Fair, bur miſty air 3 red cl. (000D) 73+


he.

XVIN, mig F
in South,
Mereors 7 Þ.

XTX. Cloſe m. p. & coldiſh ; clouds  cfour'd
as for ſnow, drifle 9 p. NNE.

mW. <=W 24.

* VI. Wind and rain ante |, warmgloſe,dropping


VII. . 4p —— ice ar Putney, Clomding, _
ws N.


m. & a. m. coldiſh, lowring
» & SW. clear in North,


viſt 6: Fr. He, miſt, winterly air.


74: mz1 |
V. Wind, Re 7.1, wlty, di , drifle it þ. R. &
wd 3 p. Lightning, South Eaſt 5 p. Meteor
by North Fiſh, from” the North. * SE.
XXV1. 10 m. bright m. fudden overc. ſhowr


10 m. ſo p, SW wind.
XXVII. Rain ano. med. m. p. ſo 9m. 4 p-


9. ly


thence Furious, terpeſtuous and dri


=D 'O,
I. W. open SW. warm, cloudy n.
XIli. 2 M. rain 4 m. &c. cloſe ſhowr 5 p. SW.


XIV. Fr. cold dew, clear miſt. Nly. H. and
cold wd, ſomerimes threarning. NW, H.wd


10 P.
75. MAI 19.
L. White froſt, fair, warm.


NW.
IT. 8 m. Cold. foggy m. fair and cold, NW,
III. Cloudy m. f. © hot. Nws
76. =S 7,
XIX, Rain m. fair after, NW.
XX. 1 m, wind open m. p. SW,


XXI. Miſt, ſhowr 11 m. fair p. m. miſt. W.

77. mA 26.

VII. Froſtm. cloſe midn. N. fair, afterwards
a very cold n. E. NE.

VIIE. 9 p. Fog, froſt early, dew, brisk
wds, not a cloud in the fie. Meteors 7 P-


IX. Fog, fair, H. wd a. m. lower p. m. a—_
near £\ andPerſves, Two near Engonas, Nlys


OXFober,


1671. mA I.

xi Open, mild m. cloſe offer 9 p. m. NW;

XIV. 7 p. cloſe m. p. ſeems ſome froſt, cloſe
p.n NE.

XY. NW. Cloſe, brisk wd 11 m. cloſe. NE.


72. LS 20.
Il. H. wd no#. tat, wet and daſhing m. _


"4T 1 p. Froſt, fair m. cloudy p. m. h—_ 5 FP.
NW.


IV. Cloſe, cool m.. p. a. m. ſhowr 4 p. SW.


mol 9.
XXL. H, froſt, miſty & cloſe m. p. N. m. =


XXII. 5 p. cloſe, miſty. SW. NW. p. m. ;
XXIII. Windy, wet p. m. tot. SW.


LO: B 239.
i* Fog, open, burmiſhed cl. Ropes, SW.
XII. o. Rain ante lac. 3 or 4 m. & in M.C. in
S& 28. & Y in S.denwing 8 m.open,warm
NW.


even.
XIIL. Ely. Miſt, wetting a. nm. & p. m.


T5- => 19.

XXX. Sept, cloudy m. clear d. SIW.
' 08. 1. 12 p. NW. froſt, ice, fog.

I1. Sly. R. 6.m. fog, cloſe, E,
Iterum, m &\ 18,

XXX. Fog, froſt. > 7
XXX1, 2 p. fog) froſt, f. mille 8 p. NE,


73+


a Drary.


Book I


75+ V& 2,
X1v. Cl. wet m. 10 m. warm, cloſe.
XV. 2 p. Cloſe, warm, f. moiſture 6 p. W.
XVI. Fair, warm, cloſe p. m. miſt, (. wet 5 Pp.
76. <Q 21,

UL S. WA brisk,overc. 8 m. R. 3 p. drops 5 P-

R. 6 ad 10p.
IV. 4 m. miſt, wd, rainy p. M. M. P. alyp.


V, Rain m. 2 p. ſhowr 3 p. & wſÞ. E.

97. m S 10.

XXII Ro warm, LI Horizon, no —_
brisk wd, R

XXII. 6m. Froſt, — fair, wd Nly. "kd
ſtrip: with clouds. S.

X XIV, H. froſt, miſt, winter day. N. S. SE.E.


November.

1671. 2X I7.
XX VIII. Fair, driſle, rain 4P- W.
XXIX. 8 m- R. conſiderable m. cloſe, wafm
wd. W.
RXX, Cloſe, fine, = o.cloſezp. =E.


72. 7 X 6.
XVI. Wd open a. m. cloſing 3 p. R. 4 p. SW.
qo 10 m. miſt m. werting 10 m. yery wet

p.1. wet 7 p. windy d. avd n. $
XVILL Cloſe, fair m. p. cloſe Ws


wy

m2 24,
33 ofe, wetting 8 p, Nly.
VL. 2 p- Cloſe, rain 1 WNW.


VII. Cloſe, miſty, w 8 ſnow 10 m. & poſt
mer. m. p. Nly. Wy 1 P+ My


2X1
Srv. Froſty. {. ſnow 13. L bright, ore


p. m-ſ. ſnow, cold.


XXV. 9 m. Froſty, ſnow a. I. ſnow hard a.m.


fair P. M. OVerc. B. SW.
XXVL Snow a. l. froſty, H. wd. fair. NW,


75. 2X 2

X11. Cloſe, ——_— Wi ff iſt nb _—_
XTV. $ m. Miſt, froſty m. open, mitie 7 p. N.
XV. Milly, cloſe, Eh. colder p. m. W.


76. m 2 20,

L Froſt, H. wd, wetting 11 m. 1p. diiſlem.
p. H.wdn. SW.

II. 2 p. Cloudy, windy, wetting. SW.

III. H. wind no. tot. clouds —_


77: 7X 11,
X, Froſty, fog, open. Ely. N E.cloſe at n.
{. wd. NE. Ely.
XXI. 4. Fog, froſt gone, open. Nly. rain &
fleet 1 p. "ſnow found, clo W.
XXII. Froſt, ſnow found, cloudy.”' > © Ely
fnow o, & p.m.


w.,


-| 1671.


NE,


Cloudy in the South weſp.
I Nov. Miſt, no froſt, cold wd, bright z m-
ſhowr 3 p. wd 10 p. W.


76. m 9L7.
XVIII. Miſt, clouds, dewing 6 p. Nly.
XIX. 8 p. Troubled air, miſt, wd, —_—_— \Þ.


S P-
XX. Miſty m. if not rain carly, —
wd. W. NW


71 == 25.

VII. Fog, driſle 9 m. wd Nly. N E. fo 1p.
drile.

_—_ $s p. Fog, wd and rain conſiderable 5 m.

rifle m. p. d. Nly.


In. Fog, ſome wer 9 m cloſe, f. wet 11 p.
Nly.


_—_____
_—


November,
iMmy
XII. H, wd. nod. tot. froſty , H-and cold wd
| die tot, (© at n. Two ſbips periſh at Tarmouth,
.N.


XIII. 9 p. Fair, froſty, { wd. fog at n, NW.

XIV. Wd and ſnow 1 m. Thaw and warmer
wd. SW.

72. m 4. 20,

XXX1. Of6b.. Cloſe , wetting o. wd. NE.

I, Nov.1o p.Cloſe m.very cold and H. wind NE.
open P. m-

Il. Very cold, fair, H. wds, \. clouding 2 Þ >
OC, Meteors 9 P»


73- 7 Mtg.

XIX, Froſty, foggy m. p. ' NE.

XX. Rain a. m. m. p. droppy 4 P- S,

XXI. Foggy, clear above ; froſty, great hoar.
SE. S m. NE. n.

i.  mnr'28,

IX. Rain 6 m. fogey, » Clearing p.m. Wi.
Mercury in the poinrs ar fair and ctear,


7.e.ar the heightr.Note d © VL.
X. 10 p. Foggy, no froſt, clearing, cloſe. Nly.
XI. NE. Fog, {. rain m. cloſe m- p. Ely.
75- 7 m 18.
XXIX. 12 p. Froſt m. Leads wert,yet no miſt.
W.
"NW.


XXX, Miſt, Leads wer, fair, warm. .
7s 7m7.
VII. Fogfroſty die tot. hoar remains d. t. NE”


SI
XVTII. x Þ. froſty, hoary on the Honſes 2
_ winterly rain, ſnow-broth 2 p. cold,R.
5 Þ. Wly. NW.atn.
XIX. Foggy, froſty, wdy n. faird.
ml 20.
» driſle 9 m. open, ſhowr 2 p. Meteor
bright 6 p.{. neer Caſſiepeia.warm.SE+
VIL 1 L 26 ths Sos m, adqg m. f. rain


NW.
TT
VI. F


10m & 2 p. SW. 2. m. Ely p. m.
VIITr Showr m.warm rain 11 m. open p. m.Me-


reor near Capella, Two under Engonaſin,
weſtoard. _


1671


" © ws A mw a,


D Diary. . Seleography.


Chap: XV.


6.6


OY IL. ROS.
XXVII. Very hard froſt , freezing at n. on
XXVTIL. 7. ſnow m. thaw p. ms --- NE.


XXI1X. Froſty a. m, thaw p. m. open, cloſ
wds audible 10 p. |
77: VV 6. l

VI. Cold, cloſe, dry. NW.
XVII 1o m. Rain 9 m. {. fog a. m. dark and
wetting p. m. R.7 p. ad midn. - : NW,
XVIII. Rain 7 m. and m. p. powring $5 p. SW.
73+ 7 XK 15.
V. Fr. cold d. Nly. cloſe m. p. Ely ar n,
VI. o. Froſty, ſharp, cold wd, open.
wd very high at n.
VII. Extreme froſt, boys (lide in 2 days, miſt,
overc. 8 p. E.m. S. p. m.
74. VV 2.
XXIV Cloſe, {. miſt, warm walking, . 3 W.
XXV. 4 m. Froſt, fair, miſty m. Fog fall 10
m, wetting $ P. 9 P- 1. wd. SW.
XXVI. Strange Chriſtmas weather, warm,calm,
fair. RE


Ely.


75. WT |
XII, Cloud y p. m. Halo, windy: wet night,W.
XIII. 2 P. Much rain 5 m. dark, wdy, R. 2 +
H.wd atn. very warm.  'FE.
XIV. $5 m. R. med.no#. ad 2 m. ſo 7 m. cloſe,
-1 wd, very warm, tempeſtuous n. daſh of
8 P.


—_ 27 X 21,

I. Clowdy miſt, wd. SE,
I. 2m Froſty, miſt, fair, wd. ' E.
III. Froſty, fair, miſt, wd. | E.
Iterum. VV 21.


XXX. E, Froſty;cloudy, miſty, NE. N,
tome ſnow ante luc. milder 11 p.

XXXL. 6 p. Froſty,; cloudy , foggy E. ſeveral

over the Thames from Sr. Mary Dock to

Cold-harbor, :

J. Fan. Froſty; miſty, cloudy, Ely wd.

XX. Tearing froſt, fog, fair. . Ely.NE.

XX1, 2 m. Fog, froſt, Thames froze at Putney.


Fog groſs and ſtinking 4 p. SW. m. SE. eſp. |
XXI1, Froſty, fog, cloſe, much milder. :


December,
1671. Wa T1.

XIL Cloſe, wetting circ;o. cloſe and cold P. m
X1II. 2'm. Cloſe Ely. Froſt. jor
XIV. Froſty, black, cold. miſty. Ely

| 73. 7 WM 20,
XXX, H. wd,R. 5 m. H. wd &R. 8p, 8W.
XXXL. 11 p. H. wd, drille' 8 m. per tor. cldy
| wm Agee SW.
[. Zan, Warm, wdy, offering a. m. clear a. wdy
P. Mm. + SW,


73- Wa 9g,

XIX, Cloſe a. m. R. 2 Þ- S.SW,

XN. 11 m. Windy, dritle a. m. ſtormy and R.

xX1 wind i & &
XI Wind ſtinta. m. open, warm , cloſe, &
{. drops 5 p-. Sy.


Th. - . 7m 2g.

IX, Cloſe m, p. wd. =

X. 5 m. Rainy n.& morn. R. 7 p. H. wds Ely.

XI. NE. f. |. froſt, cloſe m. p. offer 10. m.open

; wd. NE,

Tm Open, a—_ = and

ils wr 10 Mm, - warm

_ fair, SW. '£. fog even. R. hard Lt

XXIX. 12. Rain hard 4 m. ſomewhat open.
SW,

XXX. Froſt m. cool, open, rain 4 p. fog m.

R. 10 Þ. wI


76. VL 7,

XVII. Snow m. fog, froſty. NW.
XVIII. 2 m. Severe froſt. NW,
XIX, Froſty, fair. . NW,


77. 7 me 26,
VI. Fog m.. & a. m. C. wetting, unleſs the fog
onl E. NE.


.- only,

VII. 9 m. Rain ante's m.'dark a. m. cloudy p.

m. ang} cool NE. SW, ar n. Meteors 111, rwo

brighWOnecs 10 p, windy,cloudy. SW,

VIII. f. rain 5 m. 9 m. H, wd and rainm. p.
, Sly.


$ 11. 'Tis not- my defire -to be voluminous; while I introduce both the


Quartiles, but ſome probable ſuſpicion of ſome difference of


each prevail 'd.
S 12. For the compariſon of the


Effect under


Quadrates among themſelves, Reaſon


would ſuggeſt to us a perfe&t Parity of Power and. Influence


are the very ſame Phaſes, the ſame


ſeingt
;mous Seton of the I's Germ pcs


ſame diſtance, differing only in Dexter and Sinifter Reſpects : unlef. the


deformity of the » 's unequal Globe


, m ;
in the reflexion. of the Solar Light — pertaps, ay occaſion ſome difference
that be inquired into by the curious Selewagr


, more than the other. Let


apbers.


. Bb


s 13, Only


&


'Os notable Aſpett, of etal effett. Book 1.


s 13. Only in the 24. Quartile the » is too early for us, ſo.that we have


not attended the Phenomena, Log into the South by- Five in the
Morning, and not riſing before Midnight, when 'ris time for us co obſerve
our Pillow. If we had had ſome 4rews Zunior to have watched in the 'In-
terizs, we believe we ſhould have found fame more Specialities under Oze
Quadrate, which.may come op wy be found under the Other,

9 14. We muſt begin with che former, of which we have a full ſight
about Evening, being con(picyous in the midſt of Heaven. Of theſe we
know LXXXVL. Aipects 3 and if we enquire into the Sum of thoſe who
aze found with a wet-footſtep, who bring Moiſture with them , we ſhall
meet LXXI.  qualifyed. LXXI. of LXXXVI! Doth it not come near
the Full » inthis Point 2 Here.the difference you ſee is fifteen, and there,
the difference was but twelve. Gap. preced. s 5.

9 15. Speak we now tothe number of Days 258. the Moiety of thoſe
2 29. for this we produce you 143. moiſt Days , which will be ac-'
cepted.

: 16. Go we tothe Correſpondence of the Hour, 40-1671. Far. VIII.
wgmeet with Weather apte lucem, the Aſpect being near Midnight prece-
ding Feb. VI. Snow found! in the Morning ; the Hour of che Aipect fel]
upon hor. 7. Mat. March VII. Sgow offered, hor. 4. poft merid. the Af.
pet hor. 5. O#ob. I. morn. Stormy Wind. So Now. XXIX. Rain confi-
derable at the Hour 8 morn. Ther, Anno 1672. May XXII. Hottith Air,
the 0 being turned ro Noon. axe X XI. Winds at Midnight. O80b.XIX.
Meteors within two Hours of the Aſpe&. ' Now. XVII Aſpedt hor. 10.
morn. Rain hor.. nr. Poſt zzer:d, So Dec. XVII. hor. 10. morn. It rains at

morn. Anne 1673. Febr. XIV Snow punctually at 9g. morn. O#0b. VII.

or. 4. P. Showres, &c. We purſue it no further.

' 9 17. Whar ſtore of ſmart Rains, or durable have we toplead for us wee-
ping ? Verily Forty Seven. As many as at the Full »y.—Go thy way for an
Aſpe# Aſtrological, Real, and worthy Obſervation. Bur ſeeing more goes
ro the" definition which we hunt after, we muſt enquire what ſingle Heat the
Aſpect brings,*and there wefind days ſo remarked bur 13. which were very
inconſiderable, bur that the & brings no more 5; for it ſhowes but 11. Hot
Nights 8. and the Full » but 5-—And 'tis not likely that any Omiſhon in
chaſe inſtances (which being Exceffes and Rarities, bring their Memorand
with them, ſhould ſtep in. ,

$ 18. Now, little did I think that our Quadrates would keep an i»fall;-
Be touch withus: I dream't or hop'd for ſuch Authority perhaps in the
New » , &c. Methoughts d find one Month of the at leaſt,
bring a perpttual' dripping F.” Bur as you ſee the Ful! ) is Emulous of
that Glory, ſo are our L2uaarates alſo, neither of them excepted : They
both draw in the Lottery, and both ſpeed. The former ſrarce miſſes in Fe.
bruary: In May and November it brings not one dry A The Later
Mere doth the ſame in Juveand December ; yea, it addsa third Month,

chat is Ofob.. . Verily the Offober Aſpe&t rains VIII. times in VII. years:
os we ARE fall ſometimes twice in a Solar Month. So conſiderable an
is the Quadrate. ;

- 9. 19. Briefly: then, if the Quadrarte, as it doth, brings its proportion of
Warm or Soultry Days, of Rains, &c. If ſometimes ps ſhort of the
#, ſometimes wands 3 always bordering on the reſpective Sums found


anthoſe . z Nay lermeadditas a Truth, Rain in ſome cer-
rainMonths Infallibly ; then the Quadrate is a conſiderable Radiation.


9 20. And the Truth is, .it iSa brave Alpedt, conſpicuous in both its Terms * |


Beautiful, as 'a graceful Eigure in an Heroick Darce , and more frenificant.
For what obſerver is there, who having contemplated the Signal ſtanceof
| C


Chap. XV. Contemplation of the AſpeftiThe later © the warmer. 93


the Luminous Bodys, thus Afpe&ed, is not raken with thelovelySpectackk,
wherein,while one poſſefſestheHeight of theMrd-Heawen,the other is either
peeping above the Brim of the \Hemiſphere, -a5'irwere in' theiSportive pur-
ſuit of his Golleagze; or at the other end* of ithe Hemiſperedrwing our of
his Sight 2 who? I ay, fitting upon ſome high -proſpe& (:the:Summ:t ſup-
poſe of a ſerene Hull ) obſervinga Showre, &::1n the remote Valley, upon
one Or tWOo in repeated, will not be apt-to - fuſpe&& ſuch habitude or
Juncture of the Lucid Bodies for ſuch Effe# happening at thes critical time
Agro the Spectacle, we know that in the 4 the'Sun only ſhews himlelf,;
ept, when ſometimes eclipſed, the I is alfothereby diſcovered. Ar the

© the Moon is only conſpicuous : but at che Quadrates both(as we have faid)
appear on the Stage. | |

9 21, Now, if any ſhall impeach this Fancy of ſome Vanity, upon the
account that the Trine and Sexrile are equally conſpicuous, upon the ſame
Co-appearance of the Terms: I anſwer, yea, but the drfance is wot fo renal,
ſo notable, ſo Angular, Meaſuring our, like ro two Lanagrarks, the Body of
the Hemiſphere 3 the Þ ſhining early in the Mid-Heaven about © riſing in
the aft Quartile 3 asthe © in the Mid-Heaven when the ), riſes 1n the fir
Quartile. For if the Full > ſhews the whole diſtancg of the Hemiſphere,
the Half Moon meaſures outthe Half, Midway, the Semidrameter. . br

$ 22, Letus ſee how near the 24. rate can come in-the(e particulars,if
it doth yielda little to its elder Brother,yer jr may be a Brother ſtill. BucT
ſeeno great precedence. The Reader =_y juſtifie, or at leaſt bear wich me
for gntroducing the Later Quadrate Table, ſeeing contrary to Nature, ic
claims an equality 3 yea, in ſome caſes an upper Hand. + 67

9 23. It comes ſhort in Morfture moderate, it ſcarce comes ſhort in wiolent
Rain ; it ſeems to be equal in Windy 3 inStormry, never truſt me, it exceeas,
as 43. doth 34. and therein equals at leaſt, the New ) , if not the Full. Doth
ie not exceed elſewhere ? Verily ic appears to. be the warmer Aſpect ir
brings fewer Froſty Days or Mornings;more Miſts and Fogzfor as for Halo's,
we have deſired to be excuſed for obſerving-them under the 24. Quadrate;
( which may be as frequent here as any where elſe.) But Aſtronomers muſt
Reſt. Add more curſo of Heat, more Traje#10ns, and in fine more Thunders,
wherefore the later DO is the warmer Ape, :


 $ 24. Bur thisis berter ſeen in the following S1n0p/s of each Table.
d)) d))
O Firf, OD Second, DO Er, D Scwond:


Cold and Froſty T0 II
Morn. or IN. $ 68, 66. TrajeFtons. —— 13; 18-
Frofty Days 45: 31.| | Warm: 37: 33
Lo or Gloſe — 53. 36, | Winds. $3. 77
Ms/t, Hazy. 52 7I. | Winas change. — 71. 53"
Groſſer Fog. — — I9 29. | | Winds ftormy. —34. a

ts —— —— ——1, o. | _— —56. 43,
Hilo.——-——— 6: ©. Weep. 56. 35,
Hot $D955- —13. 24. | | North ————36. 43,

* } Njehts. —— $. 2 | Ih ————2£ 41,
Lightning —————4. . 6. | -| South-Eaſt —— —1g. 20.
'*  Razns. —143. 132.|  South-Weft —— —73:; I7.
» Violent or Durable. — 47. 42. | | North-Eaft. ——4q2. T03;
 Sn0W————17. 11. | | NorthWeſt —— —24; 37:
Hail. — 4.4 + | . .


kc Xa —


Later © warmer.\Weſt, Angle parmer,wby. : . | Book:I,


'$:25. Onthe view' of- this Table the choiſeſ difficuley is'this, How the
later Quadrate-can.be appointed. for the warmer Aſpect, when as it gives
Evidence for'ſtormy Winds mere thanthe Former 3 {ince we have pretended
in the. precedene Chapter that the;Full 3- is more ſtormy than the New,
becauſe it is.ſormewhar the x ſpeRt. -; -.:; I ul
; $26,Reſp.Belides; that] nowhere {ay 'tis the'only cauſe] reckon at preſent
that there ate various degrees:of cold in ſtortny weatheg, wherefore if the
bluſtering under the later 1: be, warmer, -than.eicher the bluſteing under
che-Full, ory iſ Oy: zhexliculcy is (atves; Boy winds general $'>s
Wwarm,even they -w _— 11 excepted, which happen in che 5
therefore Ldid:;not tay cold mult be Predowinant wherever there is ſtormy
winds 3 or that it was Predominant in the Plenilunium ;, I do confels to re-
member ſame ruffling blaſts chat have br oughs Froſt with them , but even
thoſe rarer Haws-were not ſtormy, becaute-CGh:1! in an Ixtenſe degree, but
becauſe as chill as the exhalation, was , it was Ower-maſter'd by a warm one
poflrney: of «.warmer ( Gompardtroely ) though to us perhaps not 10
tenſ1 E. : ds IeY-*4 £2 11341 .

9 27. Now thatthe :Later is warmer hath :been made out, concerning
which wehave ; nem | ro to.countervail ſome ſuſpicions hich may ariſe
to the contrary from e Styles of Warmth, Wind, Weſt-Wind, &c. which
found.in the Column belonging: to the Firſt 3, ſcem co ſurpaſs thoſe of
the 24. as.in- warmth 37. farpdfies 33. and ini. Wind 83: ou 37, and
laſtly, ' 58. in the. Wer point of the Winds outgoes 42. but the Exceſs is
{carce valuable.mthe wo firſt 3 and the later) will vaniſh, or at leaſt be
ſwallowed up, we may ſee,bythe:South-weft-wind;which appearing but 73.in
the. firſt, thews 103. mn the: later-Quadrate. Andico. Confirm you that the
later is more'tepid then the former,” remember I pray, - where the I
15-10 this later: (at. Mid night," When the Nature! day begins, it riſes : Ar
Sun riſe, when the Artificral day. commences, 'tis aloft in the Soxwth point:
Now, it ſtands to reaſon that-the Air ſhould be warmer , when there is a
lower degree of: Warmth prexzes'd to a greater which follows.

$28, Now if. this warmth -15- not _ to us, it may be ſufficient
"tis perceptible rm confort, when the Sun and all the reſt are riſen. I cannot
perceive the —_— of one Horſe to the draughtgt ten thouſand pound werght,
Bring the reft of the Team and I ſhall perceive it* That will be believed ra-
tional, when you abſerve that warm is the day when the Sup, the chief riſes
{aft, becauſe in the Caſe we fuppoſe, all the Ref have riſer before, and tem-
per dand prepaid the Air for that meaſure of warmth which ſucceeds.

s 29. Verily the » is Fice-Roy to the Sun,and keeps her Court,and mounts
ler Throne, and makes her way as well as the beſt, when ſhe is'Aſpected,
the is commiſſion'd to act flichand ſuch things in ſuch a Poſt, and for her .
own part ſeldom fails. Wis. 4
...$ 30. Again,isnot the Weſtern conn to the Do&rine of the An-
tients, a warmer corner than the Eafters > Let the Favor, the Tepid we
ftern Winds witneſs thatz with theit warmer fruictul ſhowres, while the un-
gentle Eaft-Wind 1s accompanyed with unkindly Drought, with unwelcom
Appearances of- Fogs, and Frolts, and blaſtings. A little meditation will
gve usthe reaſon 4 priort, Whatſoever Efhcacy lyeth in the Horizon, (which
Effhcacy muſt be —_—_ without diſpute ) from the Eaſt the Stars every
moment forlake: that advantage more and more, as it were in baft toward


.arther Poſt, while the ſame Sears , be they :more or leſs, having paſs'd the


Mizheaven, every moment draw zearer and nearer ro the Horizon, and ſo
proportionably, - the-coxtrary whereof is. found in the Eaſtern; the Weſt,
Hav, filleth, by what the Eaſt Emptry«th ; the Welt being the Recerwer
whilethe Ez is but the Czveyance, Nony the Þ in the laſt Quartile pol
(eſles.


Chap. XV. Guadrates influence when ſubter Horizontal. -


leſſes the Weg, while the © is wo 'd to his Eaftern Quarter - Both being
preſent in their ſeveral Quarters, muſt needs ſhew ſome effect an{werable m5
their Co-Exiſtence, as we ſee in the Lunar Gonjunfton, which being right-
errand owpared with the nadrate, will give ſome Li = to the heats of :the


te , whichare tobe © equa, ay lurpaſing hoſe of the Conjun-
Ction,. as an Angle is more potent than ght being obverted
tawaryads us in the oma rk half —_ L TX CNT in 7 Conjunction is


reflpcnd Foun «s.toward the Sun.
fr Andrhis Doctrine is {o true that if | miſtake we ſhall by
Tables ooaye wore weather, winds and Rain 'in the Afternoon of the
than in the forepart, though hangs hoſe have. their ſhare roo. For-the farther
proſecution of Myſtery, [let put this Queſtion co my (elf, W hether


the Dnon of Apes be bath any. _ o__ etther of the planets comern', ,
both, are under ag nk {>= |

tQ it upon m Lag rote y the ſurvey of our Inſtances t ,
we _ muſt rm the - to the no ſmall on of the 4ſpef, which


1677. Rain 5 Pp. 10P. we) Rog repetition
f M; he we would ſay : For at Mat a he Sun muſt
be in yy +1 ſo the >, link'c in radiation with him, muſt be about her


ans |
pect,that i $ ect merry Cerca


nee wes et,1t.00 the Surface.of the Earth, 521 Noon oat her |
idvantage of of Refexin all, alſo: | Ps the Sun ir, uniteth.ic,
- with. eth croſs from ect ; tothe Oppoſite
| Arch,” Sh ) pL the ns of a Right 4ngle, or rather & of the. Rays lo
at.


Well then, aſter the Hours of Midnight the Sun quiti the Nadis,

ME 7 » wading under the Hortzoz ; Here is the P:xch,Hath the Quadrate
__ we ſpeak of the Firſt only for breviries ſake ) any blind un- dreamt of In-
fluence, 'when ze:ther of the Laminaries Aſpedted Gy le? Us . It ſcems
ſo ; By all the rather that I find ante lucews und _ {Bl and
that will be he We . to eſtablith, our Opinion. we > at the very entrance
of our Tal we find, ( toſer Wore Miſts ) Rain, and again high. winds az-
te Incem. Jan. FE 1671... #uch hoar froſt, 7an. 6. 1674.2 inſtance x0 be


— - as I a tc Pi I fear I n' lected it many times, as a {light
bſery ation hycfopher ts nothing ) 0.6 . £7, 1671.
It; Snow. £ it fell then ante luceme.. Mop age 1675 *
Ray ne is before Sur riſe, 2m 19. 1675-high wind azte


Incews;


96


D Idfi. ader Horozan. Ofhuſtus brs conſent. Book L.


a - P * 0 ——


——


lucews, and die 9. Rain 3 m. 41.1677. July 27. Showres 3 morn. Auguſt 28.
1674. Rainy 2 in the morn. ad 8 m, Sept. 8. 1673. wind No8e tota, Rain ante
lacem. Sept. 15. 1675. die 5. 1676. die 22, 1677. Ofib. 6. 1673. Oftob 27,
1674. Rain and wet morn. moſt part. Nov. 24. and £6. Stow, ante lncem,
22. An. 1677. Snow found again morn. Dec. 13: 4x. 1675, much rain 5 m.


ec. 20. An. 1676. Snow ante lucem. . | Þ Þ

s$ 34. It may be Cid eſe antelncanamay be impured to ſome other Stats
which emerge above theHorizon,and ſa are rnofepreſent ro their effects. Ve-
rilyl was aware of that, as 2 or? , of which one often riſes befote'the Sun.
bur upon ſearch I do not find itis always fo 3 rio; not upon the 2 firſt Inſtances,
where 2 riſes not tire enough to cauſe rain before day, ſeeing itriſes but
deg. 5. before the Sun : yea, 1n after Inſtances both ſhe and ? riſe after day*
I grant this happens not ſo freqnent as at the Hot of Swn-riſe, which is more
obvious and more pleaſant to confider, becauſe more puntualand with grea-
ter variety,the Sun altering his Hour according to its Month;bur yet that it is
ſo here in » as hath been faid ; I/have reaſon to ſuſpect what the ſeeond [1
doth in this nature, ſee 6 38. mor

S 35. Jofrancus Ofh rus an —_— perſon in his Book 4e*Drwina 4ſtro-
ram facultate, hath taken upon him to forne good purpoſe, to examine the
Principles of the Vilgar Aſtrology ; where he with us the Baſs of the
Quadrate Aſpect on the Right Angle of the tmurual radiations conſpicuous
in that Aſpect : but then withall he ſeerh not how it can be. efficacious, bur
at thoſe preciſe rimes, when one of the Luminaries is poflefſed of the Mia.


us within our Horiſon, keeping
orjated, puſs the Center


which I remember to be the rhe tion of a Line
dictlar: - Let us not miſtake, the Rays of a AﬀpeR are not al
vertical, but yer they 4re always to the Earth cular


5 37. Howſoever for the 4», that the Quzdrate brings Rain at N A
Afternoon, and 'moſt Ft of that A: , Yea, the greateſt part of the
Day, let this lictle Table be our Morutor, _,


| Mn We! 0;
s Noon, ————. di art
5; | & bile $3; > Aft mamas. Y
The whal Aﬀter-3 - Wine aen—Y,
DULLES Whole Day. ———9g.
"White Day— 5. Ame Lucem 30.
38. Hete we ſhonld hive concluded, brat what I havehitherto


; tr py
by irr the d and f, T anter not to difſemble in this Afpe, rhongh.. -
it may ſeentnor -direcny to belong to Altrologers , to 'trear_ of =]


=


2


Chap. XV. Quadrates Influence on our Bodies undeniable;


rn CO


37


Dolors and Difeaſes. 1 Bur {
cipally relate-ro the S


only !Uluſtrated,


—_


bur ui are renewed upon


theſe Phzenomena of our little world do Prin-
their Atpects, whoſe je thereby is not


us by a dayly remembrance, we


preſent this following Account _—_ 2 or three yeats, conſiſting of indiſpo-


fitions ; ſome more trivial indeed


as the Aches of our


s ſome more


revons: Among which we could have inferred the complaining noiſes of
irds, whch are confefſed an Evidence of the Muration-of the Air; (as we


have laid before ) and


indeed arifing from ſome difpoſition of their bodys


in Sympathy with ours. Bur they being omitted, let us atpreſetit obſerve


our 07 Complaints rather at this time.


Anno 1671: Dec. 27. Hyſterical fits.
1672, _ 28. Aches of Limbs and


1673. Sera Ghilarem complain of
Ailments.
July” 7. ce Hip ar
oV. erical fits.
F She? in (pariy
Anno 1674. Feb. 3. Diftempers.


geo ”3* Painsinthe feet.


An. 1675.Feb. 22. Headach, » Hyſteria
Fits, Aches tn Feet.
April, 21. _ Ghilaren [1 chew,


May, 21. Aches.
Dec. 1 3. Ghilaren complain.


An. 16 S.
Merch, 12. pains is the Feet:
April IO, Heads,


Sept. 3. Aches and indifleſtions:


A OF.

Moy: 2 Chiltre 2 tothplain. Now. 3. 3-Y Pains in the Feet.
Aches. Dec. 2. Gorvulf
13. Aches | 4s, 1677.

= 1. Gt wy Aches. "fan. 30. 7 of the

uly 29, 4 Aches. Eh,
ng. 28. Indiſpoſitions. March. 7 Aches in Lambs.

WM: eo ical. 3- | April. 29. Tpaifooſiti trons,
Sept 25 iaren ficken. £4 — Mag. Gout.

Hobs 46. of 24. Indiſpoſitrarts, Gout.
Nov. 25. c Aches, 2 3: Sicking of Children,
Dec. 25. | 3. Gre

1 niece of agedPerſons,

$ 39. So have you alittle ſpital-Bill of Dolors happening at; or within
the : eof the Rect Naedime rene benny = juſtifies the 0 (dobfervarior,
and thoſe Good Men Spure Alpec Sal places hay ſuch wirnefs rothe Influ-
ence of this Aſpet. Honeſt Prſp thereft, whereby the firlful in Me-
dicine may be convinced of the Lun Fower over ors Booys the more


conſpicuous indeed,  —_
in the moſt ſound and hetehk conftcurions


frailty, bur as fure and
the beſt of which have Grime


Yi o#Breach in their Texture.

. And there is no av this Evidexee I find indeed a remarque
Jon $7 ed anEY noted preciſely at hor 9. eſp; ar

what time as 1 er eguanlL rs ve whatthe
Lunar could JS Febr. 3. 1696. 'T madea greater
Obfervable, pers happening her 6 m. at what time % d » were
ol Dons ada in br 10p . the J My” got to the Pleiades, Diffemn-
ible Obferyarions;,”"and
to be aware of his
he” Later Af hee agree T-
the” wy pto te tae
TE inclnech' my


Sun


$ 41; Seeing


Critical days juſtrfied. - Book I |


mo kak Seeing then this Aſpect _ th poreer rontumane Bodys, and
15 undeniably


a. VIIth. _ a Critical vir it may be expected what
would ſay tothe Queſtion, whether ev b. da day,whether it fall in with
the Aſpect or not, as the Phyſitians will have it, may be Gritical, and if fo,


whence comes ſo firange a faculty > Nay, if the Ph Coping aſcribe i it co the


Heavens, we are like to go along with them, The Cauſe is Celeſtial, faith
Sexnert, quoted by the Learned Dr. H. More ; for at the Firſt affaulr there
is ad, asit were, of the þ with the Diſcaſe,when = Sick man's Month be-
gins , "where cn the VII. day, from the firſt compunee of the Patiear, the
» comes to the ay of that - cage of Heaven, where che Morbifick Con-
junction . And isnot this reaſonable to believe, when even in Pe-
Rilential Di Roſes, 'v 56h _ FO leaſt diſcretion of Gretical days, the Influ-
enceof the » conf z not only on the Aſpects of the »._in
the Marrecofme, d _ allo whenever as it pleaſeth God, any Perſon
is taken fick, the whole Famil % ſhut up for the ſpace of 'a Monch. The
Sick Month, the Patients month commencingae the firſt Indiſpofition com-
plained of. Conſequent to which 'tis obſerved oft times, that the reſidue of
an Infefted Habication, who perhaps have continued in Health, do often
Fm _ one after another within a Fortnight, or aWeek, or raetimes 2
eco,

s 42. Torefer this to.the Perigarcal om of the matter, as Cardan doth,
whom of all Men in the World I chought wonld nee'r hays deſerted his
litcle Demi-Gods; the Planets, is nor ſarisfaftory to any, bat thoſe who are
great Haters of 5 icton. For the Zuere which ae ſucha day is
Critical, enquires hyw che matter comes to ſuch a Period ? and the Anſwer
is becauſe i ir doth. The very. word Periodical-ſhews that irdepends on the
Heaveris : For Kingdom I ſhall never go fo far with Bodrz, to admita Period
of States and Kin gprerad by the Heavens, yer; with | honeſt' Old
Galen | aver, determinate times are meaſur'd by the 3, yea, Life
and Death it Nap = Fi Paroxiſzs of Feavers, and other :ndiſpo It) 2 of
which ſome are mentioned. in -the mm (la the Patient be
due Regimen ) are to beaſcribed to. I dovot Jay the Moon always, _— 2.
ſome or Lage ed ny and appulſcs Ceidftial.

g faid again,. thatawharſoever-may be found in the Sob:-Lu-

_ = _ thereis zo ſuch Riebt Angle to be found in this Imaginary 0 of

I, ed ro its poſition ar t he firſt ſeizure of the Malady: The » cannot
be in two plac Fay ſack Ra > nag firſt was 10 the fick account
ſuc 5 poll rr of m0 RG:


but the Objecti rt the pgs —_— |
of a fn ery "Pax INE EE Pati tat pin Rive pare


cove thider fa Ta what = elſe there may be, i

_ in Met otimg Ka poſted in in tha peer. of the
And why may not + theſe Sar De IL the

Wn of the-Moon? And RT e fry Gi, thou thomeh

freely confeſs that I never yet: gps) "orig in] Aſpe@ tothe

(onogge, the P, yn 75 cob apine Bens | par Baka Fe > He e ay

uch irritative z V

fade theweth, tha ee In TE Pong GaN
44.. But then, will nat ths lr in ll the Fark of Copa par

Mus To Their D Directions, Rece &c..2 Reſp. This


we may, be given-as to the conſtine
[5 or, (which will contear them). 1M-;


if the Learned. Phylitian(. bout,


Hea bor Sik to


Chap. XV. Critical day and uts foundation 11 nature.


27


be acquainted wich the Temper and Carriage of the Party ; and that is the
moſt can be made from this Doctrine. Natura amat Septenarios, faith the
Phyſician ( Riweriss in his. Praxis )' and wemuſt believe chem in their Art :
But there can be zo force in abſtracted, . Ideal Numbers ; So 1 believe, yea ,
that neither Phelo-Indews, inay, nor Plats ever intended-it. -I do.not believe
I fay, the Story of the Sabbatical River,. of that the-Sun ſhineth in Rhodes,
always on Weaneſday, becauſe That was the day-of-hisCreation ; (asthe
Zew anſwered-the Philoſopher, in Purcbai) no more<thanthe Viblation of
the X. Commandments is to be ſhewn inan ordinary Appleget I muſtneeds
ſay I do not know but that God hath imprinted. on the Univerſe, and-che
parts thereof, ſome Memorands or Signatures of his Creation : There is no
queſtion, but that there are Umbrages of his Glory in- Light , hiss2wijvi-
lity in the Air ; his pure A# in wiceſſant Matron,his Eternity in Circala# Fignre 3
why may not{ome obſcure Impreflions arid Memorands of his Oeconony in
the Worlds Creation, be left to us to be picked out of-the Septenaryavhich
ſeem to be obſerved by himſelf in the Lewitical Laws of the Leper, and the
Menſtruals;: yea , and our preſent Septenary 'of the place'of the Moods ,
which , as we have heard, anddayly ſee, runs from her Month co het Month
by Septenaries. FT ERUENTTIESETT

$ 45. Septenarius eſt numerus perfeFtanis 4n Seriptarss,,, 'uporu the” account
that the Heavens and che Earth were perfected by that Day, ſay Interpreters,
whoare far enough from Superſtition, whether the Pythagorick, Cabaliſtical,
or Roſecrucianuiz. Jurius and 4inſworth. Now the firſt Seventh day of the
World, and the firſt Quadrate Lunar Phaſis '( it would have been well for
Ghronology if it had been perpetually ſo ) werecoincident, ». being created,


as all agree, in the State of the fourth day. - Rs

$46. After all, though it is ſaid | wwe wh that the Gritrcal Day aRSas 2
Luartile Aſpect, yet we do not-ſay that the Aipect operates as myfteriows.or
Critical, for ſetting aſide all -iatrigues of 'Numbers, there is reaſon why
the Quadrate ſhonld operate upon Humane bodies : though we are beholden
to the Aſtronomer for his warning, v2. that the Lunar Globe according to
Theory Aſtronomicall , ſee Gaſſendws 1hftitur; . is neateſt the Earth wh
in 2 Square Aſpect to the Sun, 'than in any other Phaſis

s 47. To conclude with our one -for confirmation of the Limar
Influence on the Change of the Air, Qblervethat whereas, *cis true, + one
Quadrate alcers the. Air «xfal#bly in ſuch a particular Month : ſuch elti-
mation might be better taken from the place," the Sign where the) is rather
than the time , the Month Lunar, or Solar. And fo it will appear thae (e-
veral of our Squares may be effe#:ve. 6 times in 7. of which ſenary number,
Four only may be fond in che'SolarMonth, and the other two in the Month
following. Such are in the firſt Quartile,of Thoſe in the Month of Apr:l, che
firſt ten days of May, In May, and the Firſt' 10 days of June, in July, Auguft,
Ofober. But inthe later Quarrile for Aprsl not ſo, but in May, Zuly, Ne-
wember tis ſo. Ic will be more expoſed to'view in a Table. Thus then


Cuadpates have their ſucceſs. A AſpeÞ. . . Book],


D 1. | O 2. R:
Loaw® 7), $. Sucefs.Retwrn, Loc. ©), Succ, turn
=Bfor I —6 VIL alle :——5. -- VIL
X It Feb. 5 —& VI X £2 Feb. ——, VII
VS Mar... .—4 * VIIL YWw Mar. = +—4 VI
SL Apr. Sa —6. -VIL Sax pr.  Q —5, VIII
xm May. 8 ——6. . VII Xx x May. 'S —=5. VIL
S=> fun. -© $——7. VIIL SY Jun, R& ——8, VII
am ful > —S. VI AS ful, S ——6, VIE
m2 Aw. '$* —5, VI mI Aug. 2 ——4 VIL
iv Sept, | =—7, VIL >= Sor. EV
mm OZ S  ——6. VIL V.t OF. — 7, * VIL
2, Nov. —— JF VIL im Nov. ——6. VIL
v»\ Dec. 1—— VIL viz Dec. — \, VL


What'remar y be made on the fiens and their mutual couplings,muſt
on bdcF aber, Art preſent you ſee ſomeQuadrates ſuccesful in their
Influence for Rain or Snow 6 times in VII. Revolutions, yea 7 times in VIL
and 8timesin: VIII and this is pretty fair.


—_—_


— ——


.CHA'P. X VI. 49)


$ L. 2. The Phaſes ſeems gibbous and deformed. 3. A Tridunm requi-
red to its confederation. 4+, Sentiſextales and Qnincunxes inconveni-
ences. 6. The Trine equal, 'yea, ' morc potent than the Square. 9, De-
monſtrated w__— /eather. 10. The compendions Summa-
ry of the Table.” 11. The grettneſs of the Aſpet® made ont by Com-
pariſon with the y s Precedent. 13. Twſſes, or Colds Epidemi-

e


cal uot without Czleftial. Influence. 14. Other Singularities in Tides

and Ebbs. 16, Winds fhift round the Compaſs. 17. and 18. The

| ff Trine of September and December, and perhaps Manch never fails.

Second1rins in February, March September,OdFober alike ſucceſsfil.

19. Trines apt for Tempeſt. 20. 21. Their Energy founded on a

-1%ght Angle. 22: A'Trine more tempeſtuons than a Square, the reaſon
of that Paradox, the Antients teach it not.


$1. This Af though © eth not ſucha Name among the vul-

pre. gar, eve. ing »0t 0 ©, cut: ap/Qovier ny nation as the
ate, may yet bronghegacer ter a Famil me y it's

when the ) np Rayon ro Orticular as at the Full, yet illuminate beyond

the halfe Phaſe 3 By reaſon of the dark different Section ſeems Brokez ir

the back ſenting a kind of Two inthe illuminate part.

S2, A P, = of ſome Deformity or ny which it may be, is
_ diſcerned in the later Trine, to my thinking 3 the reaſon may be be-
cauſe things that are then paſt Prize, when compared with their lately en-
joyed PerfeFion, do abate of their Grace, or Lovelines, by diſcovery of ſome
acfe& or ill feature; which before was either ot exiftent, or paltated. As
deformed as it is, it muſt not be diſfreſpeted, when we know the Qual
and Worth of the Family, which muſt be put into the balance wi al
other d&Rs which may be alledged. |


,25 ru 3: ik. VR. a. acnbigs. a6 amo. oc


Chap. XVI. New Aſpefts. Amore potent then Q3.


$ 3. This Quality of the Aſpect ſhould be derived from irs proper Table,
wherein we had alſo produced Three days toward the Comprehenſion of
the Inflaence. For however ſome one off the Days may enterfere, ( as we
have ſaid, Gap. preced.) with the Neighbouring Aſpect, yet at no hand do
we run foul (as in the caſe of tro Women claiming Marriage to the ſame
Huſband) on unterrainties, but we give each Aſpe&t their Right, by 44;z-
ding that term of time which feems to be common to both. Thus, to give
an example, Apri{ VII. and Novem. XXX. An. 1671. ſeem to be claimed
by both the 2uartele and Trine; yer fo, that the Afternoon only thall belong
to the Trine, and the Morning to the 2wuartile, One coming on, while the
other goes off, But neither are we driven to this, except only when the
is in the ſwiftef Courſe, when ſhe runs grad. 15. in twenty four Hours, ac
what time ſhe muſt ſeem to hudalefrom one Aſpect to another : but ordina-
rily it isnot 1o.


$ 4. Some of the New dſpetts, 'ris true, are for the moſt part ſuſpected;
X : :


becauſe they are /:zted ro.ſo narrow a Confine, that if they do bur int
leaſt move forward, they muſt neceſlarily treſpaſs yon their Neighbours ;
beyond all poffible diſtin&tion. So I remember, Kepler being overborn with
Semiſextiles, 2uincunxes mixt with the Antient Aſpedts,is forc'd to cry our,
In tanta turba, quis ovi cuique matrs ſum ſeliget agnum? ad Der. 1627, Bur
in the Antient Aſpes we are never at ſuch a lois, we can give account for
each day whe it is required. Notwithſtanding , as it is ridiculous to cor-
fine Aſpects to an 1ndiwv1/wle point, for fo - Agar never have bin diſco-
vered to this Hour, ſeeing Calculation modeſtly confeſſeth ſhe hath nor bi
able to aſſign the Critical Moment, fo it will be as nice and ſuperſtitious to
determine the meaſure of their Texxres to- ſuch an exatneſs ; which if it
could be done, where of no uſe in Nature, I boldly fay : whereupon this
conſideration helps to acquit our Tables which afſign three days to the AC
pdt, in _ an Aſpect holds at ſome conſiderable, yer underermmate time ,
above one day.

$5. Not So we would make the Þ cont innally engaged all the Month
round, for ſo no day on the »'s part will have any thing to it ſelf peculiar
above another. We have made diſtintion of the » 's fwifter and ſlower
Motion 3 a continued engagement my appear at"ſometime under the O7:,
2nd ſcarce under the Other : The » ſwiftly mooving from a _ to a Trine,
may, forall I know , be engaged all that while, not confounding the Aſpects;
but contrnaing the Influence; as the Celerity of a Boat is continued by x ſuc-
ceſſrve dip of the Oar, the Motion received at the precedingImmertion being
ſlackned indeed; but zot utterly extiz#; However ir be, 'tis all one co
us, who will .impute the Celerity to the Impulſe immediately pre-


$6. Verily theſe Tries, we will not- ſay that they are, Far we fay that
that they ſe:m» to be equal ro the Puadrates , and that is ſomething of
News, it may be, ſince no leſs than the Norimberge Diary thinks it will nor
quit coſt, when it notes the Quartiles conſtantly, to note the Tr:xes once or
twice in a Year. ESL: hos

$ 7. But what do we mince it with fuch moderation, likehappy Game-
ters talke awhile of hopes and probabilities, when they are ſure of the
Game in their Hand; we ſay, for all we know (the Quartiles name is up,
tis true ) Thatof the Tr:nc is the more potent Aſpect. © Let the Board


Judge. |
58. The Table here might come in, but {mce we prefent yon with a com-
pendium of it, we may be diſpenſed with upon the account of brevity, W

- will only remark fome heights and exceffes which call for attention here


there. |
S9, As»


103


Evidences for & Tulences. Book I.


$ 9. As, firſt, in the County of Suſſex, 47. .1671. Sept. INI, we meet
with Thunder, Rain, and ſo much W:ndas toreupr Trees by the Root, Yea,
again, Decem. XXX. XXXI. Tempeſtuous Night and Day, when there
was a general concern for thoſe at Sea. : a |

Next year 47. 1672. July XXIV. and XXV. it blew fo hard that the
lowneſs of the Ezhin the River Thames preſented the Shelfe before St. Mary
Church above 150 paces in length. Decemb, XIX. and XX. News of
Floads in the Countrey by reaſon of Winds and rain

Anno 1673. February XVI. and XVII. Turbulent and tempeſtuous Blaſts,
_ as ſhattter'd Windows and beat Iron : (an Effe&t of Tempeſt which I

2ve not met with more than once. ) Ar. eod. Sept. X. Very high Wind.
Sept. XI. Furious Wind all the Night preceding, and day following three
Houſes blown down in Grvent-Garden, Belides, Ofob. XI, -very high winds


again.
Font 1674. April VII. windy, not expreſled in'our Table 3 but Stormat
Ign-Regrs, with much Shipwrack. WY
* As. 1675. May XXIV. and XXV. Rain and Thuzxaer.
. An. 1676. Auguſt IX. High Wind, Tide- as high, or higher than at the
Change and Full. Again, ept. VII. and VIH. Guſts of Wind here. Very
high Winds at Okehem in Rutland , ſogeneral was the Conſtitution.

Ann. 1677. Augof XI. Turbulent and Windy. So day ure I. great
Daſh of Rainand Hail, with Lightning and Thunder. A ain, Fuly XXIX.
High Winds ,Showrs, Thunder. Auguſt XX VII. High Winds and often
darkiſh. What if I ſhould go on, and bring it home ro our very doors
to the year 1681? ,, Thus then jt accords, Az. 1678. March 22. Winds
very high. 7a. XIX. Thunder, Lightning. Auguſt XVIII. Wind high.

An: 1679. Feb. X. Hi Wind. XI. High Wind with us, and on the
ſame day, a moſt violent Storm; as hath bin known in Meaiterranean(Ga-
zet. Numb; 1388.) July VIIL-Guſts of Wind with ny and Thunder at
Stoken-Ghurch. Auguſt VT. Heat, Storms with Rain and Thunder.

Ar. 1680. Jan. XXX. and XXXL very Tempeſtugus. Febr. XXV1III.
wy digh Wing ns A whiles on the ſame day at Cologne, TY—IP x fell on
the Churc rſula, not. t Damage. Merc. b « 32.
Fee XY. Slp mils, Aon, ome Fran nn by Lina:

azet,— & er T{/7,7,74 XIV. High wi
great Rain and Thunder. Sept. XXIII. Great Rai _ under
on the next day at Madrid, Rain and violent Thuxder and Wind (as faith
the Gazet ) ot expreſſible.


Az. 1681. April XVIII High wind. XV. great Storm of Hail
and Rain. uy XIV. and XV. Rainand High Wind. »/# XIV. Thun-
der and Rain. Sept. XIII. High Wind by guſts. O84. High Wind at


Night, at 1 , Decemb.-X. Windy. On the ſame da 4 bya
—_ S. W. broke up the Banks; &c. Tempeſt at the Ge au tec
days: of which number be days X. and XL

'The other A is {o Like this, that it is theworſe, as we ſay ; let us read
therefore with ſome atrention.

Az. 1671.#Sept. XII. Terrible Sage of wind and Rain”, « 4 m. ad
11 p. much Shipwrack, XII. Ships broken in the River z Fourteen Sail
caſt away on the Coaſt of France. Inundation at Lyn, The XII. little
bone Novemb. IX. great boiſterous Winds worthy it ſeemsof the Ga-
zets Notice.

Az. 1672. I. IL High Winds zo8e tote. The ſame day, the Exft-Inates
were tempeſtuous at Hwar; yea, the next Trine fee to be _

b n


Winds withus. Ofob, XXIX. Then Decemb. XXVIIL High Tide
Thames, ready to run into Weftminfter-Hal. a+
Ree


Pla k-os foo ns IIS REA «a EN x


ly M.A mo,


Pere EEC


Chap. XVI. Emvidence continued. Table of A Influence.


124


K —


An. 1673. May XXV. at London Wind and Wer. At Warwrck Storms,
Rain, Thunder, and Lightning. June XXII at Harwich, again, Rain,
Thunder ſpout like a Pyramid, which broke beyond Land-Guard-Fort. Sepr.
XXI. very wet zoe tota, and High Wind ; Whyſe Fellow Trine, you
have ſeen hath blown down Houles.

An. 1674. Jan. XVI. very high wind with usat Loxdon, on the (ame day
2 Ship loſt on the Goodwin, XXVII. day, vait Flouds by Rain the days pre-
co May XV. Bright, hot, ſome Thander, as the Water-Men infor-
med me. |

An. 1675. Great Hailſtones, nigh winds and Thunder near Windſor. 7en.
T. In the {ame year , the end of Dec. was ſtormy when it came to the
Trixe, What News, day XXVI? Every day fay they at Plivoaih, brings
an Account of great loſſes at Sea; and all choſe Coaſts are full of wrack.
High Wind was noted with us , with a great Storm of Rain. The XX VII.
alſo was noted for breaking of T:les and Glaſs- Windows. And on this day al-
ſo we have noted, Report of Yeſſels caſt away. _

An. 1676. Feb. XXIV. Tempeſt. June XIX. Lightning at 3M. and 10 M,
Harmful at Putney. XX. Rain and Thunder at 3 M. Fuly XX. Lightning
and Thunder-claps, no le(s than thirty three. =

Ar. 1677. March 15. High wind. Ships caſt away by Storms, and Thun-
der between Cales and St. Lucas. Jaly 8. High. Wind and Thunder.

An. 1678. June XI. High Wind, beat the Tiles off again: May thel.
High Winds, zoe tata windy and Rainy, ſad Maying. July XXVIII.
Thunder, (howres. Thunared 7 or 8 times. Aug. XXVI. very hot, Thur-
der hezrd ante horaw 2 P. Sept. XXVI. High winds and Rain, Nowember
XXIII. and XXIV. wet, but very Lofty Furious winds &c. So T hope I
lye under the ProteRtion of, &c. and gono further. © Theſe Inftaxces ſhew,
> 61 op rn be but Oze or Two in the year, that a Tree is apt to admit tuch
memorable wiolences,the Peer whereof is not eaſily found in the 2uadrate, ec.

© 10, But what of the other Inſtances, if we with-hold our Table, we
cannoc be ſuffered to with-hold irs Compendium. - Then thus have you


Q. & 4

Id I, 2. | «6
Cold, Froſty, Entere. 26.. 16.) [Tempeſtuous, — 4 6.
Froſty Mornings. ——— 29.; 47: | | Thander, ——— — ——— 5. 9.
Fog, Groſs, and Thick —— 17.. 26. Winds, —— 02. 91,
Mt Atr.- 47: .34. | | Winds wariow. 3. 43.
Hal. - —-O 3 |. Tempeſtuous and Stormy. —44. 31.
Heb — +, 6 Fo 42. 44-
. ays. mre— dz 1% ON —_— 31. 49
Ht. \ N;ohss. — 5, | Aorth ——— —— ——28. 27.
Warm.—— —37...31.} | South. — 35: 21"
Rain. : X 155; 162, Worth. Eaft. —34., 34.
Rain w1olept or Durable, — 48... 53. | INorth-Weſt, — — 21. 27
$zow. — —— 1: 13.| | South-Eaſt. — 20, 26"
| ., J; ;j South-Weſt. —— 90. 69


" $11; Soif Thaveadventur'dto.cQl it a great Aſpe&,I havenot done amiſs,
for though I have faid'as much. of 4! the reſt hitherto, yerI may properly
enough term Th fo too. '' For the Other, I aſſerted agaiiiſt'thgfe who deny
fuch Realities; and now I aſſert this among thoſe who confeſs the Reſt, and
take no great notice of this Why 2 What is the matter ?. Experiment of
Nature 15not at my. beck, nor is.0ur Table, OIL it hides ghe Head, a For-
| CARS : Doty:


Trines compared. The Tuſſis eptdemic untverſal,@>c. Book 1.


gery: See here ſome Striftures of ——_— Sum 109. ſath the New
under the Stile of Rain; while 103. faith the Fw. Sum 143. and 132. fay .
the Quadrates. Now our Trines, you ſee, ſay 155. and 162. I ſhould ſuf:
pect this Surmount if I did nor find a Szg»larity of Influence in the Figure :
It equals the Beſt of the Aſpects as for Hot Days, both in Number and
Vigor : For the Vigor we remember with a-Heat complain'd of univerſally,

9 12, Another time I remember ſuffocating Gleans of the Sun , »y79;
the Ancients call it; ſuch as I never met with elſewhere bur Once, and thar
was in the ſad Peſtilent year,at the d © » .Jan. 3.1665. In another place [
found the firſt hot Day of the year ſhews it ſelf on the ſame Aſpe&t,Fune 22.
Az. 1675. Oa the contrary, to point out the Singularity, I note, that the
Froſty Days are not ſo frequent as under the 2uadrates, and yet they are as ve-
hement notwithſtanding, as under any other Configuration, as if ( which
ſeems I know impoſſible ) that the ſame Sprrit agitated Heat and Cold ;
For in Gold, ſometimes there is a ſmartneſs and keenneſs of Edge , which
we call #itter Cold: ſuch we found under one of the Firſt of theſe Aſpects
Jan. 29. 1672. Soin Feb. yea March, 1674. in Ofob. as well as Now,
1677. The like in Apri!, begining 4. 1671. yea, and the end, Ay. 1675.
Give meleave to add, for it may be of ſome concern, the like occurrents
in the Later of theſe Trines, which though it ſeem the warmer of the rwo,
yet once I found it made me chill in my Bed, well fenced and guarded againſt
the injurigg of theAir,though in theMonth of March, 4n.1671.ten days after rhe
Equinox, & March XX.) And the year following on the very day of the
Equinox,we had Ice even Bearing,brought to that confiſtence in 3 days,which
we ſay belong, or border on the Tr:ze. Juſt as in Ob. Anno 1677, we
had Three Winter days, abſolute Winter within the ſame confine.  -

s't3. Conſonantto this,we may have occaſion to ſpeak of a notable indi(.
poſition, of which in our ſeven years we met with Two Inſtances ; we
call them Tuſſes Epidemice,: of which the firſt is noted in our Fugitive Ta-
ble. Zan. 16. 1673. the other was noted all Exrope over, Ofob. 27.4%. 1675.
Concerning which, being »#terrogated by a GREAT Perſon, what might be
the Cauſe ? I anſwered Him withall Reſpect, but with all Aſſurance alſo ,
that it depended on the Heavens, an X7:verſal Cauſe in this ſenſe; bur lictle
thought I then, I confeſs, that this Lunar ation might have any Finger
in it, which now appears ronemee from.a redasbled inſtance ; .yea, and from
the Myſterious Change of a Pungent Heat, to a Stupefactive Cold, obſerva-
ble here in this Radiation, and others alfo, which our Bodies, or rather our
Spirits may beſenfible of, when our unwary attendance on our ſelves can
giveno Minute Account of it. Some Phyſitians did impute it, Iremember
to the Change of the Wind over night toward the North, which was've-

true 3 but they will give me leave to/advertthat there may bemorein it
24 ſeveral more hidden Celeſtial Cauſes (forevery Change of the Wind to x
cold part brings not anZ{zmerſal indiſpoſition over all Ewrope. ) of which
we can aſſignno more (as proper to this place) but the Lunar A Radiation
among the Reſt. . AE |

$ 14. We have a double inſtance which may be glanced upon ; we ſhall
ſpeak of the ſtore of Rain preſently, but this 1s the Szngwlarity , expreſſed
by a Great Drop more” than ordinary, more than once, Great Hailſtones ,
which in Tables of obſervation of a widerLaticude do occur a 34 a4th.asth.
rime &c. arguing in my judgement a different mare of Heat ftruck up ac
that time, as in the generation of Hail commonly is ſeen, thongh encoun-
tred, 'tistrue, with a contrary Activity.

$ 15, Of the ſame ſtampis the next conſiderable in the Water-Floods of
our River the Thames, where a High ide is noted, not only in the d'or ?,
but ſometinies 'noder our. Trine alfo. Aug 1676. and Decemb. 1 wn

|


Chap. XVI. Tides. Shifting of W. round the C.


That of the Firſt, this of the Later Trine. Thar of Dec. being as Hich a
Tide as ever was known inthe Memory ofMan,being ready to run into :#-
.minſter Hall, as1 my elf can atteſt ; It had bin a time of Froſt and Snow
and therefore we ſhall allow the conſideration, but withall ſhall ſue our our
Title for the Aſpect, ſeeing upon review of Trae-Obſerwations for ſome years
I find, rt my ſurprize, the Tides ſtart as frequently in each Tr:ze, to a ney
degree of Height, ſometime to equal the Change and Ful), Bur I will nor
pre(s this too much, becauſe it may occaſion a Brangl-, upon confideration
of the Tiats great variety, upon Droughts, Rains, ſudden Thaws, and Riff
Winds intervening 3 ſo that even the Sextile and Quadrate, the Neaptide
Aſpe&, is found at times to uſher in exuberant Flouds: always provided
chat we may renew our Plea when time ſerves, and, that I may not think ir
fortuitous, I found an extraordinary low Ebb with us at Lozaon, noted on
the ſame Aſpect, where ſo great a Shelf appeared at ſo many places, that
the River look't not like it ſelf, when ſome curious Perſons were invited
thereupon to waft thither, and to pace the Dimentions of the Terra Firma,
Auguft 25.1672. Now the uſethat I make of this, is this, the moderate low
Ebb in one part,doth argue a proportionable herght in another, Rye, ſuppoſe,
or Wincheſtea; 'Tis true the Ferrimen imputed this low Ebb tothe Weſtern
Wind,which I reckoned was a careleſs Anſwer, from ſuch as are not inquiſi-
tivePerſons, becauſe I cauld-not obſerve any ſuch briskneſs at that time from
| —— -— pt do many Winds from thatQuarter leave the River

oO naked.

$16. Come we now to the Wizd ; the Singularity here in my Judge-
ment is very entertaining, the Wind not only changing (for ſo it may under
all Aſpe&ts, and lefs here, than elſewhere, ) but wantonly playing 3 fo that
as T have often with Pleaſure obſerved, the Izdex hath whriffed round all the
points of the Compaſs, from whence 1 obſerved by virtue of a Sic paruis—
— the Tornadoes and Whirlwinas may well depend on the Heavens, when an
ordinary Lunar Aſpe# ſhall ſhew us that variety. So May XXIV. and O#.
XXVIIL -1675. April VIII. 1672. Septem, VII. Oftob. VI. 1677. June
XII. 4». 1674. This take along with you, that when the Wind fo ſhifts
and plays abour, 'tisa ſign of Weather approaching in the Horizon, or actu-
ally extent at the ſame rime, ſomewhere elſe;
$ 17. Now, if the Reader pleaſe to like our former Repreſentation of

the frequency of the Effect, Ran I mean in the Quartile Aſpet, as it is
plain and 'not unprofitable, the like weare ready to preſent him here.


G. ©) YI4 Revol. Succeſs. © '» © Revd. Sues,
dn. 2 - 1 VAL. 7} Poon & > VII 6.
Peb, --- i" S VII 5. | | Febr. x m VII, wy,
March. St. - VIE 7. | 1 March N 2 VIE 7.
_ & mT VIIL 4 _ & wv VI. 4.

&y, £& VIL 5.f a xe VI 8.
Fine, $- m VII 6. WP We. S :X VI. 4.
Jak 2 VE: 5. =_ 4 YI 5.
Au. vw vw VI F | = Te  & VE 6.
$68, - 2: & VI 7.1 | Sept: a I VII. '8.
OF, -m x VI 4.| |Otob,, m & YE. 7
Novemb. 7 VV VIE 6. | Novemb, 7 & VII. 6»
Decemb. ww - & VI. 7., UDecemb, wn VL 6:


s 18: Nor unprofitable, whereas before, Phy ſe all Aſpects are nor
alike reſponſible in every Month, no, nor in the ſame Month. Some
but 4 or 5 times, ſome 6. the Happyeft compleat their Number be ie VIL


or VIII, Hence it follows that there are arferent properttes of the Zodacal
19S


Io6


Some 1 keep touch. Tempeſtuous, T he Right Angle. Book 7.


- «


Signs, ALunarTrinein Vt and V 2 you ſee keeps touch, fo far I can
ſpeak for the EzeryTriplicity,and pray overlook not the other. ATrine in & 1!
or SY will deceive a blunt Aſtrologer, which ſpeeds but four: Times in
VIL fothe reſt, yer this is ſomewhat out of place. ;

. 919. Yea, butthe main Srngularityro come to that at laſt, is concernin
Streſs of Weatber, hinted at already, it that be true which we have aſlerted,
or rather commended to obſervation, that the ſhifting of Winds argues
Commotions (omewhere. We have aid that the Pha(is of the T72ze looks
ith ſome deformity, and the Character (\) ſeems to be Myſterious and Ma-
gical, if there be ſuch Power to raiſe Tempeſts, Without fool:7g, it hath
an unexpected, undreamt of Influence towards Tempeſts, whether of Laghtzry
in the capable Months, or of Winds, Furious Ragings, Hurricanes, whic
ſometimes are felt without the Troprques, even in our Septertrional
parts : This being ſomewhat Novel, or near Paradox, muſt, yea, hach been
demonſtrated. : .

9 20. But then what ſhould be the Latent Spring of this Energy, can any
Man tell > If the Muſical Fancy doth nor pleaſe, we have aſſigned a Rght
Azgle in the Quadrate Aſpe&, for the Seat of its ſtrength, it a Man may
ſay it, before ever we Read the more Learned Ofhu/zus. Verily, if we
rightly conſider it, the ſame Angle may be found under che Tr:ze, in as
much as by reaſon of the Obhquity of the Ecliptigne, we lee it fall out that
one of the rwo Planets ſo Aſpected may lie jult under the Meridian, when
the other is on the L:1mb of the Hor:izos.

9 21, Thos: Bring me S and ww, Solſtitial Signs to the Merzataz, and
there you ſhall find bur 3 Signs appearing, which make an abſolute 2ua-
arate : But reduce *t x V, either of them to the Meridian, and in the Ori-
ental part of Heaven you ſhall obſerve IV. Signs, a perfe# Tr:ize emers'd
above the Horizon. [The Equator is uniform, ſhews it go grades conſtantly
on the Eaſtern and Weſtern fide ; the Ecliptigue is not tyed to that conſtant
Equality 3 it is unequally divided ſometimes with 4 Signs of one-ide of the
Meridian, and ny 2 Signs on the other. And this is not all. Letus conſi-
der the Occidenta Mediety of Heaven, let us depreſs 3: SAM to the
Horizon, and we ſhall find neer IV. Signs compriz'd in the Arch from the
#Toiz0n to the Meridran, as before you found it from the Merzatan to the
Horizon. © So then, if inall theſe Cafesa right Angle is diſcerned, the Efh-
cacy of rhe Aſpect may be founded thereon. +. |

9 22, Now, whether theſe Trines, .as it ſeems according to this Do-
Arine, 'owe all their Influence to theſe Critical Cornardences, with Meri-
aan Circle or Horizoztal, may be reterred to its proper, Chapter, or may
be (olved by what propoſed in the [. Ir remains only to ire why a
Trine is more Turbulent than a Quadrate Afpet. And thar will be aſſoiled
by con(idering the wzeaſure of the Angle, by the length of the Sabtenſa.nea-
ching 4 Signs, or 120-gradesz for upon this account is the 2uadrate more
ſtrong than the Sextele, in the ſame manner as the Trine is more Operative
than the 2nadrate, With a barr notwithſtanding, pur in againſt the Quin-
cunx, becaute of its vicinity to its principal, w:z. the P, And perhaps be-
cauſe a Quincunx, as Semiſextile alſo,. are zever found of fo large an Ex-
parſion as to pollels the two, Circles of Horizon and Meriazaz at the ſame
Moment, which yet ,we ſhall ſee a Sextile doth. Burt firſt let us admit the


'Trine Interel}, and view its Books ; the ratherbecauſeI ſeem to advance a
Paradox. For though the Antienshold the 4 to be very perfect, above the


uare or Oppoſicion, ſo that I had thought they had favoured our Plea.


Eſcuid. Tra. 2. dift. 12. Gap. 1. Yer 1 dare not alledge them,leaſt they ſpeak
in relation to Genitures, rather than the Change of the Air : $o that we
muſt wholly: appeal to the experience of our Table, though not extant


here,


#
ff


Chap. XVI I * Aſpett. ſecondary Light, whence.


107


here -.Bur if the Antient Arabs mean the Change of: the Air alſo, well and
good then I am free from the guilt of a Paradox.


Po In


"—_— hed "—_


CHAP. XVIL # 9)


$ 1. The # the fir Liar Phaſſe of ihe Creation. 2. The ſecondary


Light diſcernible in the dark, ſide of the Lynar Diſens, whence £
27% Aſpe operates. 5, 6. Keeps touch at the Hour. 7. The
Moons part ſeems to. lye in the Complement of an Effe®, 2. © 9.


This Aſpe# need not be aſhameA to appear among hex Kindred, 'tis as
ſtormy as one of the Squares, and as daſping. 10. 4 Table declara-,


tive of their Influence. 12. Second * ſeems toout-do them all. 13. I:

* ſtormy Weather of more frequency, but leſs dauger. 15. The Full )
brings leſs moiſture than any of its fellow Aſpe#s. 17. AſpetFs com-
pared as to daſhing Rains. 18. This Aſpe@ takes place in fits of Rain,
returning after * 2,008 intermiſſion. 19, 20, 21. This demonſtrated.

22. Of infallible ſucceſs a: to Rajn, how far the Table. prodnced.
24. -[{nclination )for Wind. 26. Search into the reaſon of its
Tufiuence, whether there be any thing of a right Angle. Some
equality in all AſpeFs. The * iscritical with the Phyſitians not
without reaſon. 29. Gaſfendus his why-not's anſwered. . 13. Suf
frage of the Seaman from our great Verulam.


$1, Y Be Sextile, two Signs diſtant from the d , though the laſt for
| Digaity, 15 the firſt Aſpect in order 3 and makes tome ſhew 3 or
4 days after the Prime,- exl:ghtning about 3 digits of the » 'sdisk, the reſt
being Opogue and dark : The Fir Phaſis of the I , wherein ſhe appeared
ta. the World in the day of her CGreationy not in d and & , bur
about the Sexttle Aſpet, The Firſt d of » being 1magrnary , 2 days
before wn 1919 as the Jews moſt probably reckon. An Aſpect call'd by
the Greeks MyyeeeSJc, UPON 2 vulgar account , unleſs they ſhould have ſome
reſpedt to the Tradition. The Latires call ic, Gave Luna, becauſeit tends
to Orhxcular, the Inner 4rea being:dark and ſhady, fave that in the Grepuſ-
fulim we may diſcern a weaker diffuſion of Lyght in the whole disk, 20:
whpleaſant to behold. | |
_ $ 2, Eſpecially fince we may. wonder how it gets thicher ; The Coperni-
'£aus periwade, that it owes the Original.to her Ciſter Earth, whoſe illum1-
tate out money it Reflexzox thither. Yea, Galil:o moſt ingeniouſly ſolves
the Phoenomenon;; why in the Morn:ngs Later Sextile, this Luſtre appears
ſomewhat brighter than in the Ewverine : wherefore ? but becauſe ſuppoling
that the Earth and Solid Bodies refle& ſtronger, than Water or Flzids ;
Thete is more Land then Water ( the vaſt compaſs of Aſia, ) Eaſtward of
Europe, and more Sea than Land, Weſtward. Thetruth is, if Wit will
do it, the Gopernican Hypotheſis muſt be accepted : biit whether it comes
from the Earths reflexion, or from the Other Celeſtial lucid Bodies, to
+ which (whatſoever Galileo hath obſerved to the contrary, I ſhould as rea-
dily incline) the Aſtrologer is not obliged to determine. F

. $'3, Our engagement lies rather. to aſſert, what Galileo doubts of, that
the Celeſtial perate upon the Iaferiour ( if T have leave to call the
Earth inferiour ) by Light and Motion. Ar prefent, that the » operates in
her Sextile Radiation, Fe | 9 4 Now


——


* no contemptible Aſpets. us Book n


$ 4. Now whereas we” have obſerved in the 'Frine:Aiſpe&, 'one! day of
the Triduum often Lights in common with/''the Neighbour Quartile; and
hat roward the exit or Introit, we confeſs ſo doth the Sextile alſo. But in
anſwer, as before, that this is no viſibleprejudicero either Aſpect 3 their
Characters being raiſed from their viſible Efficacy, thoſe common days, (if
need be) not being conſidered. : MN nat

S$ 5. Add that the Sextile alſo, the poor Laggrng Sextile, in imitation of
the great ones, : gives warning at the Honr, 'and bears Feftimiony to its felt;
within its proper Duration. SAW 51 +

gs 6. Further we fay,. which we-have not yet mentioned, theſe Wlur!
Teſtimonies are more to be remarked; becauſe of rhe exactnels of the-Cal-
culation preſumed in the I, which in _ other Planets will not b&pre-
rended. Greater is the evidence created to our pretenſes by correſpondence
between Cauſe and Effect, fo near, ſo punctual, fo precile. |


97. Hence, the Luminary- is not only demonſtrated to make.One, bur.


alſo to the Curious,their very:Place and Ordergs made known, while the' ap-
pears to be candidate for ave , .yea , for the Ultimate Gauſe , ſuch as gives
the final Complement to the growing Effect : The lift Stroke fells the


' Free, .


s 8. Vertly this Aſpe& upon-a Minute conſideration hath fuffered by pre-
judice and preſumption. - For the VI. part of a Circle ſounding not fo big,
as the Trine or Square,hath beeen fo ſcorntully look'd-upon;even by my (elf,
as well as others, [wo of a fooliſh preſumption that 10 little-an Arch of a'Cir-
cle could not lodge. ſo remarkable an Efcacys As if the Antients bad
brought it in caly for Complement ſake, leaſt they ſhould have bin cthoughe
_ failed rather in the accuracy of their Method, than in any Subſtan-
tial UT S \ : op

$ 9. Now whether our Table be produced or not,” the Sexzzle is no. Chip
in Broth, no -exzpty Name' of "a _ but @a very conſiderable Fn-
gine, 1icrle though it be, to produce Phyfical Effects. Now wedo.not, dare
not fay, *tisequal.to the Treme;- but this we fay, it may keep*company with
the Beſt of the Aſpedts, 'thouglvir may be it hath not half {© fair 3n Eftite,
Therefore let us ſee, and compare, Firſt, if in the former 4\ you had 25
Soultry Days (the moſt probable Method of proving an Aſpect ) even
under our Sextile I find 20, As often Rain, as often ſtormy Winds, as
under the firſt Squaxe. ' Strange ! that two Signs ſhould be as tas 2
nay 4. ſo rare a Contemplation is that of 'Narture, -that it will ſtrike ns
with wonder, to fet an edge upon our Bagny. ns well may we muſe
and conterplar the * for its fertility of Moiſture: we find it a little ſhore
indeed of the L for the moderate Moiſture, but for the swmmodeyate Effuſi-
ons, or violent daſhes our»Sextike out-does; what not? When the Firſt 4\
brings but 48. daſhes, &c. The firſt Sextile brings 60. -For-Snow in like
manner ; For Hail more, ſo that it will be time to look to the Foundation
of this Aſpect, and never leave till we have diſcover it. þ

$10. But we muſt premiſe the Compendium of our Table ; that we
my ſce further what both Sextiles can do, as before we have exhibited the

x" Shag og


Frofty


A. FF wQ a


a KK RD KS ar a0 ac <4 << .


— — - —
"Is


ChapeXV 11. a Saxties panesful, Jecydeſpeceally.


* 33 — We; £55


£29 yg $117 L. * - ALES .: t CE
oy Nuys. —— ————2 © Ig... : ange 0 F; 0 ————— b-; =
Warm Davi.—— ——46, 28. þ | Eaſt "PITS 4 46
Hot and Soultry. comme A © Weſt. 3I.- 45.
Hot Nughts. — —, F. North ——————4z. 44.
Trajetugs. - 7. 20. | South. > £7 Sh 37;
Liehtnings ——— dS 4! | Agth-Eot — — —38. 42
Thunder ————— 5. 7.7 Noth Wit. —————2g,- 18:
Mit ——— wm—_——4j. 43 [ q Sauth-Eaſt. ——» — —Iz .14*
Fog. — 2I. 38.| | South-Weſt. 91,51
ala. etrrem - O. + Ot on Rarn, -— 149 145:
Winds —— ——— 51, 59. | Violent, e&6—— —G6d....27*
Stormy ond High —— —35. 35-| BOW, —— —2...11-
| J TtHail. 1 ——8 5-


s 11. This is .our Sextse, concerning whoſe power 'tis enough .to fay
it equals, or out-does the former Aſpects hicherto treated of, in H-at,
in Pain in Thunder, in Trajetions, in Fog, Wind, Snow, Hail. Muſter
all the Aſpects together, that. you may {ce chem at Exetciſe; and by. thar
you will eafily eſtimate their Sigoificancy 3. where, if you'be ſurprized with
. any appearance contrary to expectation, you will not be the Firſt that have
bin-amuſed. - Ask the New I' how many Hot days ſhe brings?. She un-
derwrites a$. the Fwll, 14. the firſt 01 13. the ſecond 24. the former £
25. the later 16. The Sextile, Former 20. the Later Sextile 36. the Former
Sextile out-does the . Full I, the firſt: DI; the Later L, the Second o0ut-
does them all. wh;

- 13. Fhis makes toward the GharaFer then, a Sextile, at leaſt one inclined
to Warmth .as much as the New ,>. Why-the New, I ſeemsevident ; bur
there is as certain; reaſon for this as that,it not {6 evident, Apordingy under
this former Sextile we meet with, if Lremember, as Hot Weather.for April
as ever was known, 4», 71. ate 23, 24, 25. which is not a pure Chance ,
even our Sextile helps, as- the- Wren. ſaid when ſhe pi6'd in the Oceaz.
For , or the Muger Lightnings, it equals the New, I had almoſt
faid the Full » Traje#zops, I know nat by- what hap, are found to berequal
to the New, or, 24. Quadrate. Thele yield 18 and1g. and our Afpe&t
makes it 20. For Winds, &c. no man thinks that 'tis our turn
how -to cry up the Sexti

is the moſt remarkable xempeſtuous. But that we may not be miſ-conceiy'd,
we underſtand this not by the frequency of Tempeſts,tor fo the Full » is the
woſt Tempeſtuous, by far, before Quadrates or Trines either 3 but in regard,
of the Fury and Rage; A forer Tempeſt is often found under a Lunar 4\,
than under any other: Lunar ©. This is all we fay, till che contrary is
proved. Now our Sextiles in this point for frequency ſeem to be equal to the
New Y, Puaarate, and Trive in either kind, and for Fury it brings one or
two Inſtances. |

$ 13. For better memory the Reader may pleaſe to view the matter again
and ſee what they'underwrite for themſelves.


46 UL: ON. a AK .+£i 41
2%. 36 > 4046 35 35-


| Where you ſee the Full, one Square, one Trine goes beyond ys. All the
* reſt, even the New » not much out-vying our Sextiles, which by ſome
good hap are equal one with the other to-an a2.


_


above the &, which we bave adventur'd to ſay, *


-


ITO


Sextiles hatility for Fits of Rain. — © Book 1.


— ——O—


s$ 14. For Moifture in general, more or lefs, our Sextiles exceed all but
the Two Trines, for 149. and 144. exceeds 10g. and 193. the Suns of
Moiſture under the New, and the Full : and the two Trines here are Para-
»ount- and one of the Quadrates , as may be ſeen by this preſentment,


dj. DH 4L aÞ@--+L
IO9. 103. 143. I 32, IS55. I62, I49. I44.


You ſee your Sextiles are inclined to moiſture, yea, you ſee what ſur:
prizes me, that- the full > brings /zſs moiſture than any of his fellow AC.


$ T5. Notwithſtanding this, -obſerve again that the Former Sextile,
( however the later comes to flag and loſe irs credit ws to durable, or
more violent Rains, and- it comes not off ſo difgracefully neither, when I
ſee the New » buta Piep __ it) the Former Sextile I ſay, Full, Dua-
arate and Trine,*for ſmart an COMee daſhing, cannot do better. Now


if they be asked-what they 'will fubcribe for Dghing Rains, they will an-


ſwerin this order: =
S179 v; CDI, OT AL All; +I +1
"28, 47. "> 4 42-48. $2. ':.-::0v-:.. 377


Where 60. you ſee'undes the firſt Sextile , the-Tale of her Daſtes, our-
px the Full and 2wartiles, and is ſcarce approached unto, bur by sze of the

rines. |

S 16. And here Let us a little view the Wonders of the Creator. Great
and wariow are the Shapes of the Changes of the Air. And be they never fo
many, God hath adapted Cauſes as numerous and:+/ar70u5 to aniwer ghoſe
Effects. All cheſtrange —_ poſtures of our Bodies, .fuch as:you (ee in
Sprightly Youth, - whether it. Sport or Exerciſe, we poor \ as think
they proceed from - the Pliantneſs of our Frames, 1t may be-, or the
freedom of' our Will, but the Learned Anatomift, who hath diſfſefted Na-
ture, knows, thatthere is a proper diſtin& Mwſzle fixed in our Fabrick, to
diſcharge every ſuch Motion. So: is it in the Heavens. We meet with
firms Weather ſometimes, when» the Heavew is, as I may call it, fitted
for Kain, when it ſhall clear up to a pure and brigh Sky, .and.of « ſudden,
ſhowrs ſmartly and in earneſt, and fo continue ſhowreng and clear interchan-
gable for a conſiderable part of the day : Of which fort they occur in our
Table, not here produced, ſeveral Examples. The Celeſtial Philoſ
aſſigns this Aſpe&, That's the Muſcle, as 1t were, which the Creator
made to exert this Motion: For 'tis a ſhort Aſpect 3 and it there be inthe
Heavens any advantagious Poſt above another, it arrives ſooner thither,
_ _ ſmartneſs of the Showre ſhews an Aſpe&,ang the ſuddenneſs ſhews 2

eXtHUE, 4

9 17. Nay,'i6 there be any thing in the Poſts of the Horizox and the Me-
r:41an, a Lunar Sextile by irs _— thereto can give account, without
any other aſſiſtants, of Rain VI. times a day 3 ſo with other help it may


come to twenty times in one day. And of this we had one moſt - notable


Inſtance. /
Ss 18.” The days when it thuSrain'd by ſuch zzterauitting Fits were theſe,
Jan. X. An, 1676. May I. An.' 1674. 4pril VIIL- An. 1676: May VIIL
and IX. An. 1676. &c.
$ 19. Now,A%f on any of theſe days the Eit.catne on Noon, or Sun-riſe,


or Sun ſet, or about two Hours diſtant, then 'tis a clear caſe we aſſign the *


Cauſe of thiy admrrable Product of Nature. But fo it is. For.on 7a. &


4


-*


-$- 4-I3-3-#-23-2--1


Chap.XVII. D, & not ſo apt. Sextiles in ſome $ UNS fail not.


Int


An. 1676. the firſt day noted, we meet with wet Morning, which may
comprehend either ©, or ) 7iſe , or the ſpace between; and again, Rain
6 P. wherein the I in *# of the © is _ on the Meridrar; this is to
begin, The next is MayT. Az. 1674. which being the laſt of the Triduum,
is to be found under Apr:l. Here we tind ſhowres 10 m. and about the time
when the » in Sextile riſes, as is expreſsly alſo noted. The 34. is Apri!
VIIL Az. 1676. Rain 4 P. the Þ then in S. 2. was exactly South. We
will give you a 4th. May VIIL Ar. 1676. it rains hor 4. becauſe the Þ in
Sentle 4.m. $A. o. exa#ly upon the Meridian at that Hour. Thus is God,
Nature and Art juſtified by theſe plain demonſtrations, not to be avoided.
And this I proclaim holds, not only inthe Fr but Second Sextile, though
more rarely, and that not according to the Southing of the Sun 2nd
Moon, bur alſo te the riſe and ſetting 3 witneſs Juxe 20. 77. where art the
»$ fitting hoy 3. exaF, yu meet witha Thunderclap.

S 22, Nor muſt we ſay that a Quadrate and a Trine are apt, as oftez, to
ſtir up Nature, the Negative being plain from the very conſticution of the
Aſpect, which is founded upon the Diſtance of two Signs, and no more
the Influence then of the Stars ſo Aſpected, if they have any, muſt in a
forter ſpace ſhew themſelves, then thoſe who have a larger Tedder. Soo-
ner ſhall the Stars at the diſtance of two Signs arrive to their Critical places,


than thoſe who are diſtant 3 or 4. |
$ 23. Now, our Muſter, according to the difference of Signs, as wedid


before in the Quartiles, ſtand thus. |


Ip * & *
Stens, Quatient, Succeſs. Sens, uotreat, Succeſs,
Eq 4. © FEE VIE s
ec ow VIL «. I | * w» VIL 7.
4 x VIILS. | T a VIILs.
& S VII. 6. = Vis
= &a VES.- , | x Y VIL 4
SS mm VIL. 4 zz S VIL 8
aA £2 VI. 7. J | & = VILs
MM 4 YI-% m S VIL 6.
a £ Vic <= & VILs5.
m wv VIILs. m me VIL 7.
'* a VIL 6. f > VILS
vw XxX VILE 6. WE. i, 3 Fo.


. If the Quota's are not ſo full as in the Quadrates, &c. we may


2
infer that the Sextile is the weaker Aſpedt. Howbeit, there are
probably fron ufallible Belpeakers of a ſhowre. That in Z and &


again ſome near z &
brings 8. for 8, under which I wonld Martial 2 and = in the Firſt, and
and I: with =- and 2 under the Second : buc they ſeem not to fadge. Take
then 5 and & which bring $8 for 8. and thoſe which find 7 for 7. and let
the Reader make his uſe of them. », and Y, and m1, and fi? are ſuch:
Howbeit I muſt not enquire the reaſon or foundation of the difference which


appears, in this place.


S


Gg $ 24. Speak


PF)


TI2


* Winds. Some Equality in Aſpetts. * Critical. Book 1.


S 24. Speak we to the inclination for Winds.
X I. * II. 2. ++ Yi X I. #1, *XI.* IL,


Eaft. 50. 46. Weſt. 31. 45. North. 41. 44. > C South. 21, 31,
A.E. 38. 2.0 AW. 20. 18. ja) N. E. 38. 42.4 S.E. 13.14,


S.E, 13. 14. S.W. g1. 51. A. W. 20. 18.9C S. W.gi. 51.


IOI. I02, -I42. 104. 99. 134. 125.106,


S25. 'Tis pretty to obſerve, that the ſecond # brings 134 Worther]y-
Winds, of dueWef little. The Firſt, 142. Weſterly Winds, of North but a
littlez that the SW. Wind abates from the Quota's found under the 0 or
A, and yet 'tis almoſt double (91) ro any other Quota aſſignable. In a
word, I do not remember that the 4 or © brought ſo much.of Eafterly
Winds, though We, and North, and South, do ſomewhat outb:4 the Ea-


en.

Thus is the CharaQter of the Sextile.

06 26, Neither is there wanting foundation in Natnre for ſo much Effect
Ofhu/zus himfelf cons it realonable that Planers at any ſuch diſtance,
whether they happen, One, on the Mz4heaven, while the other is on the
Hz 120n, may alter the Air, which happens under the Three Poſterior Af:
pes, DA #, Even in this Lacer, in fome parts of the Ecliptique, at or
about Two Signs diſtant, The Sextile is equal notwithſtanding, or equiva-
lent to a we Angle, w:z. to the Equinoctial Angle, which is always the
ſame. And this, as I remember, is happily obſerv'd by Ofþ«7. Rut if
this will-not be admitted as ſufficiext and reſpoxſebls for ſome violent Effects
ſhewing themſelves, what if I ſhould obſerve, that in a manner, all Aſpe&ts
ſeem to be equal, whether D;ametral or Angular: Wherefore as in the &
there is an imaginary, or rather a Virtual Oppoſition, ſince the Heaven is
Circular, and ſhews an oppoſite point affected z fo that you have no ſingle
Aſpect * then, contra, an # is 2 virtual Conjugftion. 50 1s it in the Reſt,
Bring in a Square of © and 2 , One of them to the Meridian, and the Square
is donbled : For there is a Quadrate Oriental and Occidental, 2 poſited
on the Meridian, makes a right Angle with the Sun in the Horizon, and
another with the point in oppoſitzo Solzs. Doth not then- our Sextile (Orien-
zal ſuppoſe ) by the ame Reaſon, make a A occidental? and back again,
2 On the Eaſt, conſtitute a Sextile in the Weſt. DIES

Ss 27. For what pains and indiſpofitions we had noted with their Obelisk
here alſoas in the Quadrate, how duly I had noted them I cannot ſpeak,
but how truly they are noted, I can. So the Sextile is a Critical Af I
ſee, as well, though not perhaps as much, as the Quartile. what
ſhould hinder vs to affert an Antient Truth, and ſo witneſſed by the Lear-
ned Phyſitians, who tell us, that in Critieal Days, 2uartus eft Index Septim.
Now, as the Seventh day is the One, fo the Fourth Day is the other, even
our very Sextile. I know there are other Irritations of Aches and Pains in
our querulous Bodies, beſides theſe Lunar Aſpedts, 2:12. the Rzſes and Ob1ts,
&c. of the Planets fo poſited, co-incident with theſe AſpeQs, which Iam
not certain the Phyſit:an will allow, though they exert their-ſart Influence
at a minutez howbeir, if they like not ro admut of that, I am bound, ne-
vertheleſs, to witnel(s tothe Truth which they deliver.

$28, We cloſe up this Chapter with an Anſwer to Gaſſenxaus, who,
though he dar'd not deny an —_y to the Sun and Moon, conſider'd as
Luminaries, yea, though he acknowledged it rational to believe that =


> 5... SE ig, + HL.


T cn (YH OD NR OOO WW amy


——
s


Chap. XVII. Gaſlenduss Queries anſw. Verulam firvours us.


_— OT


113


Efhcacy is advanced or abated, according to the increa(e or decreaſe of
their Lighe; yer he hath no kindneſs for thele Luminaries ſo united and coz:
more by Aſpect ; for ſarth he,hy ſhould not the ſamete ſaid of 4 > who we

now, now by the Teleſcope, runs through the Series of the ſame —_ as
the > doth, * DA ? Foranſwer, I could tell him 'tis enough fora Mortal
Aſtrologer, iff he make uſe of all that is >:/ivle; I fay all that is preſented
by the NVataral, though non-arm'd Eye. The Speators of the Heavens
are rightly entertain'd by what appears on the Theatre, without prying into
the atzir:izg Room. No man ſpeaks againſt acurious inquiſitor into Nature
by Teleſcope or Microſcope, I appland the invention, bur there may be ill uſe
made of it z when we ſearch after Þrdaen, in the xeele# of Obwinus Truths.
Secondly, though I could ask, whether Gafſexdus hath calculated theſe AC.
petts, and found them void or unactive 3 or decipher'd them only for us,
that we might ſpend our Verdict. (Beſides, that, the Quadrates of 2 are
conſ{ider'd under another Name, wv:z. when the is enlongated ftom the Sun ;
by the ſame token that ſhe contributes ro Warmth. ) Yet where is the
Angle we ſpeak of? Alaſs ! Her furtheſt Elongation zevey ſers her upon the
Meridian, while the Sun is on the Hor:z0v, A Semiſlextile is her utmoſt
Aſpect as tous. When 2 deſcends as low asthe I in Orb as vaſt as the
» or 2 Orb; then Gaſerdus ſhall fee what we will fay : cill then, the
Influence of her Phalis is not ſo conſiderable, but what a juſt Science may
overlook, as Anatomy doth a Capillary Vein or Glandule, which is riot ne-
coliny in the ſubſiſtence of the Body, and therefore may be ſpared its con-
{1deration.

$29. Hetells us more, that if the » hath Influente npon the Earth, ſo may
the Earth on the y . Will it not then be time to conlider that; when we
remove into that Colony 2 No man pretends to prognoſticate the State of che
Air for the Man in the I ; be the » never fo habitable, 'cis /z{ than the
Earth, and {© *tis ficting the Earth ſhould be conſidered before ir. The
plain enquiry with us, is, whether the Eire warms the Hands? Now, to
perpiex this Queſtion by a more curious Problem, whether Eire works on
Fire, is anew way of Philoſophy. Nor can Ijultly infer that Fire was nor
made for that uſe, becauſe perhaps it was made for ſome other Service in
Nacure, If the Earth hath Influence on the >, how much more the » on
the Earth 2 If ic hath no Influence on the », it makes not againſt us. For
the Rain which makes the Meadows green, and the Corn-Fields fruitful,


makes 'not che Wilderneſs fruitful, nor doth it ſweeten the Waters of the
= CES .
* "$30. This rub being out of the way, it may not be amiſs to remind us ,


that great Enquirers bear Teſtimony, in other terms, tothis Aſpedt. Far
whete'is ic that I read, that .the E:fth Day of the » , after long obſervation,
is feared by Mariners, for ſtormy. Perulam hiſt. of Wind, art. 32. par.
17. So faith He. The Fourth rifing of the » 76:4, Now one, if not both
theſe are the Sextile Aſpett. And if what I pretend of the Later Sextile,
holds its own, then the Seamen may obſerve _— with the Fowrth and
the Fifth, the twenty fiſth day of the Y 's age, eſpecially thoſe who are re-
ſolved to leam no further. Better is it to obſerve the ) aloze, thanto
abandon all Aſtrology. Who knows, bur the ſ-zall », rouch'd at before
by Lizſcoten and Drake, may belong to this Alpect more properly rather
than to the Change ?


CHAP,


— —_——


114


——


A (ſpefts compared. Book] \


C H A P. XVIII. Compariſon of Lunar Aſpedts.


$ 8. The Synoptical Table of the Lunar Aſpeds compared. 3. The grea-
ter warmth of the Later 1 * apparently infer a Lunar Warmth.
4. More Froſty days in the Former than the Later 1A *. 5. So
more morning Froſts on the ſqme ground. 6. Aſtrology demonſtrates.
7, 8. New Moon brings more hot days than the Full. Sothe Second
Dnadrate and Sextile 5 a probable reaſon why the Trine doth not the
like. The Later Sextile brings more hot days than all. 9. _—_—
and Charge in perpetual obſervation of TrajeFions, Second Sextile
brick as any. AſpeFs ſeem not wholly deveſted of Influence, though
under Hatches. 10. For Lightning, &c. Second Trine is a buſling
AſpeF. The Sextiles faveur Corruſcations. 11. Lightning may
ſometimes flaſh in greater or lefſer Arches of the Skie, according to
the different extent of the Lawar Aſpe®. 12. Aitna wot unjuſtly
imagined inthe Lynar Globe. 13. Full ) and \\ moſt flormy. 14. #
and \ ſhifters of Wind. 15. The Changes ſhift not Wind ſo oft as
the Full or Firſt 2nadrate. 16. For Rains, and exceſſes of Rain
The leſs Aſpe#s exceed New and Full, the pricr Sextile almoſt doubles
the number. 17. The Change brings the leaſt Snow, the Full » moſt, Hail.
Firſt Square aud laſt Trine bring more Snow than the Change. 18. Rain-
bows made by the Sun not without Aſſiſtants. 19. Former Square
and Trine conduce to a limpid Horizon. 20. Fogs rarer at the Full
than Change. - The Trines have the Feweſt Inſtances. y more incli-
ning to Foe than the Sun. 21. Gloomy days oftsn miſty. 22. Fila,
Goſlamere defined. 23,,24. New y favours South-Weſt Winds,
the Full much more. 25. All the Aſpeds incline to the Weſtern or
— 5 a Winds. 26. 4 Rule. for a iver who expe#s an Eaſt-
ind,


SI, Ly," TE could not have ſo diligent in declaring the Power of the

Lunar Aſpects, bebe Ln re hecefiny of a new cloſing

Chapter, to diſcover ſome other conliderables belonging to the premiſes,

which we preſumed would ariſe from the fu compariſon of the Specs

ſubjoyned in an Univerſal Table, or where all the Aſpe&s march in-a Rank

_ and juſt with cheir Influence, that they naay mutually juſtifie one the
+, | X


ſ


l te


| v


oy Ix pa, 65 pa Re rn


Chap. XVII. Aſpefts compared. Lunar Warmth evidences, I1c


—__—


eee


s 2, Influxuum Lunarinm quoad AſpeFus ſingulos quotquot integra haud ita Pts


dem Septennio obſervats fuere Tabella Synoptica,


, 6 [IO | DO 1.0 2. & 1.12 2.[* 1. * 2.
—— —_— ww — __ _ .
Frofty D. 16-| 26] 34 | 27-|' 26 {26> 28 rg
Frofty, M. Evil 37 | 27 j 31 '{ '26 } 29 {27-1 30-| 26
| Hot D. 238 ]- 11] 13 Toe | 25 F 16 [ao | 376
OBE MESSE EEE ESERRIY
il Lees | ens" þ nas __ Lo—
| Trajetors, I9 4 I2 | & Ws 6:-1-17 '} -3t
| Lyghtnings. O O 4.5 I &-1-:9 5
Thunder and L, * 4 4 4 * 5.4% 6
Stormy Winds; ; 37 | 69 | 34 | 43 | 44 | 31 |33 | 3 |
(Winds varying | 3 5 3 3 Eta 5 I I |
often. | |
Winds chang, | 29 | 55 | 71 | .53 | 43 | 43 | 32 | ar
Razn. 109| 103[ 143] 132} 111 | 162| 149| 144
Riin violent. 28 47 * a7 42 48 52 | 60 27 |
Snow. 7 I 4 16 | - 12 I2 I5 | 13 10-
| Heil. —__— PT. EC] 4 | 45 7.5.46
j}rts. I I I O O I o | o | ©
| Halo T-Joft-z] a1 &| 56] 3 84
Grofſer Fog, 38 | '23 31 29 I7 | 26 | 21 | 38.


Wd 2... þ.45..f: 34 .] 36 | 9-4. 0 8513071] Tel
. We | a4qia | 561 42 | 31 {ap | 3r


North. 40 33 3 41l | 28 [27 | 41 44
_— 18 | --38 22 20 6 : , :

V. zo | 29 | 42 | 37 | 34 | 34] 3 42
N. W. 31 | 26 | 24 | 40 | 21 Þ'27 | 20 | 18:


S. E I6 I5 TTY 20” 26 |] 18 14
SW. | 58 | 8 | 73 | 103


_


|
|


|———


.-$ 3. To begin with Froſty days, a Title which we cannot well miſ-
count. The New », you fee; gives 16 Votes, the Fu » 26. And there
is an exceſs: The Full > then, as we have ſaid, is colder than the ew,
( by Day, viz. ) and we have ventur'd at the. Reaſon. -But now, inthe
Later 0 A *chere is no fuch matter,no exceſs of Froſty days,but the contrary,
2s the Tale ſheweth. Then the Later DA, I ſay, are warmer then
their Mates; Wherefore ? But becauſe the. » riſes before the Sun in the
ck O24, &c. Therefore there'is apparent Warmth in the ) , which di-
miniſhes the Matutine Frofts while it ſhines, and hath not ſo much Power
before it is riſep. Whichyif we have faid it before in part, deſerves now in
fall to be aſſerted agar, becauſe it convinceth thoſe Learned, who pals for
the more Learned by denying ſuch an evident Truth,


Hh $ 4 Bur


= 6 | Aſtrology demwſtrates. yr d. JE 1995 the Firſt. Book I


$.4/ But why the Full > is colder than the New, we have anſwered al-
ready; adding withall, that the ſame Reaſon holds in part herefor O 0+,
the » 45 late before ſhe riſes ; always remembring we ſpeak of the day
time only , when the I more or leſs , as atthe Full abſolutely, hides her


$.5. Here, ;if it be objected, that the Þ at Full ſhews her ſelf by Night,
though not by day,. the Objection is Seaſonable z for it puts us in mind of
what we have determined in the caſe, 2. that ſhee iS warmer tO us.in Ple-
nilunar Nights, than Days.: And this Deciſion of ours appears to be no
quick or ſubtile Evaſion but a Lightſome manifeſt Truth. ' In witneſs here-
of,- the Froſty mornings appear-Fewer,: even although the entire Froſty days
have appeared zore. Conſequently, on the ſame ground it holds here alſo
in the other Aſpects. (though the Froſty Mornings be not always of fo cer-
tain a Cognizance, as the entire days) that the Later 1 A* bring nor!
more, yea, Fewer Mornings ſo qualified, than, their Ghzefs chooſe to . bring,
I mean the Firſt DA. | : or |
$6. Thus we go on with the_ſame certainty almoſt in; Natural Demn-
Prationas is und; in Lizesand Numbers, and therefore Aſtrology is Some Bo.
dy, ſofar at leaſt, as ſhe hath acquaintance with the Sun and », and their
$7. Pais we now to conſider. the Hot Days; where, as we have ſaid be-
fore, we areleſs liable to falter in our Animadverſions. View, I pray, the
Number : The New » brings more ſuch Days than the Plenilunium ; che
Reaſon is plain, -the Þ is 4 Gpvifble, though the be ) \ſhe'is in conſudt
with the Sun.on the Day of her Change, and makes aJhifr.co own and man-
tain the Heat, notwithſtandingher Jark fide, as hath bin ſhewn before... .
_ $8, For the Reſt then, the S-covd Square brings more hot Gays tha the!
Fixft, the Second Sextile alſo, 36. to 20. We are aſhamed fo often to re-
peat the Cauſe; wiz. the » preventing the Sun, and x:/ing beforeg.which- in
theformer 0; * holds not, where the J- follows. :” Bur then here we
et with-an galucky objeRion, for, that qur Secop2 L\ brings Fewer hor.
Days than the Fiz#; we muſt look for ſome” R#s in purſuit of Natural
Knowledge, bus by good hap-this /is #oxe. For if we recolle&- that the
Denomination otmany a hot gaygriſes chiefly from the time aboutNoon to the
How between 3 and 4. and withall conſider that the I in her Later 4 ap-
_ not,butis deſcended and gone in large ſpeaking,almoſt two Hours before
Noon, ' we will eafily grant that the Qualification of the day for Heat muſt
be at a loſs, where the ; Gayſe of the Qualification hath been fo long
withdrawn, In be Square 'tis otherwiſe, the > is but «poz the Horizon,
and fo ſhe gradually-fnks lower and lowet, yet for a confaderall: ſpace doth
ſhemaintain*'Warmrth, inthe ſameproportionas we ſee them maintain ſome
Lzght after their deſcent, while the Sun is poſited about the Meridian, fo the
Critical places agree punctually to that time 5 whence the Dexomination be:
gins. But in *the Later 4 - the Sun hath loſt his Miſtreſs the » even
at gin the Morning ; fo ſhe is diſappearing before he himſelf hath mounted
his Meridian : wherefore this not obſcurely mpake for us, who impute the
atfference of Heat in the Later Afpedts, to the difference of the Apparition
of the », under one, more than the other : wherein, that we feign nothin
let the Later Sextile bear us Witneſs, who brings more hot days than all 0
them only on this account, that ſhe keeps near, as within call, to the Sun ,
and ſets not till the Su himſelf declines in his ſtrength, even inthe cool of
the day. This Sextile ſhews us 36 warm days for her Brother Sextiles 20.
[ ſee other doubts perhaps defire admittance , as why the Firſt Sextile ſhould
7:0t be parile to the Later , &c. But, beſides that this may be anſwered by
what hath bin formerly noted, concerning the Eaſt and Weſt gfe, ,
fin


i $9 FH td 8 WWE TD LE...


Prog 3 FD boi -


"DS


Chap. XVIII. Aſpe#s ſubter Horizontal influence,


117


our. it not prudence, having ſo far to go, to wait on every puny
uple. .. |

*S C The Hot 1Vights we meddle not with, they are but Raritzes, and
have their dependances more material than on the Two Luminaries, The
Traje#ions we {peak not to, becauſe we cannot Imagine they ſhould bedyly
and conſtantly obſerved 3 No one man cando it; It requires the attendance
of. a Society, and. an Obſervatory maintain'd for that, and the'like Notices.
Only *tis ſtrange the Second # ſhould be fo brisk to equal thed and the Q's
Trajections being 19. under the d. 20 under the Later 0. and 21 under
the #. This we gain by it;* It proves the _ are not wholly deveſted
of Influence when «nder the Horrzop, as the {econ # muſt needs be with
both its terms, when'nocturnal Trajections are conſpicuous. Only we may


* note thatthe Number 4. under the Full » ſpeaks but low, becaule the Ple-


nilunar Luſtreenvies us their more frequent notice. In the mean time thoſe
few muſt be look'd upon as Eruptions of Flame greater than ordinary, who
diſcover them(elves even whyle the Airis poſleſled of fo &77ght a preſence ;
and in the zſtival ſeaſon, beſure, ſpeak a glowing conſtitution.

$.20. Immediate to this we may view the Goruſcations and Thuzndeys under
ſeveralTitles,becauſe nlany times they are found ſeparate. The le may berather
conlider'd, in that their Tale muſt be juſt and certain. And Lo! the New
Moon brings but two. The Full, Four. The Quaarates 4. with oneor
tivo Mute: Coruſcations. The Later 4 brings 7. The Later Sextile 6.
So the Latter £\ is conſiderable, and we have ſeen 'tis a 4uſ:ag Aſpect, in
Thunders as well as Storms of Wind. Howbeit, the Sext;les have a grear
kindneſs for Flaſhing without z01ſe 3, ſo that it may be we did well to. con-
Tider Lightnings oo cenſcorions with Thunder, and without, apatt'by them-
ſelves. Verily the Later Sextile which brought 6 Thunders (which Sum is
as high as any þating one unite ) is obſerved to have brought over and above
5 Lightnings. And the fir Sextile, how Low ſoever in its Thunders;
A. brought notwitſtanding 7 Inftances of Flaſhes. Shall we ſuperſede th&


- Enquiry iuto theReaſons for haſts ſake?Only take notice of a ſemblableParal-


el berween Lightnings here, and Trajections before under the Yextile, the
Later Sextile exceaing all the jet here, as there; if we can make out 4
probable reaſon of the Ore, it" may hold in the Other, And we would
venture, bur that the Firſt Sextile comes in with VII. Lightnings, 2nd {6
makes a ſhift ro equal the Later. Some 2ncl:nation, no queſtion, it bears to
it, and let the Gurtous mark, whether or no Lightning hath nor its ſeveral
Arls, and Szgments of a Circle, according to the Drwerfitres of the Aſpetts?
'Tis more than probable a Sextzle may flaſh through two Signs 3 A Q tothe
Midh:awen; a L beygnd it 3 an Oppoſition it may be bur one Sign, a Se-
miſextile Aſpect being reduc'd thereto. * This is commended to future Ob:
ſervation : remembring that I ſpeak of the Signs as they run ohlzque in the
Zodiaque, not of the Equinoctial Doadecatewories. The Planets indeed, in
the Sextile Aſpect lie (o near one to theocher, thatif any cauſe ſhall ſet
it ſelf upoh making Cel-f1al Fire-Works, the Two Plazets will be verypt
to catch, and to keep them alive throughout itsallotred interval of /pa@dr
time. | | |
$ 11. Let it be noted alſo that this may agree to the Sextiles zz Gerere,
z0t Lunar only, though we muſt aſſert the » alſo to have an «#tza in
her, according to the New Selezography, or a force for Lyghtpine ; provi-
ded that no man conſtrues this to obſcure the Powers of the greater Celeſtial
dies.
$ 12. Stormy Winds we have ſpoke to before, the Full I here bears away
the Bell: When the other Hover about the Number of 40. the & © >
alarmes tivo Elements of the Air and Sea about 60 times, and poſſibly more:
every


:
T1
"h of


Winds depend on the Starres. Rams, &c. Book I»


Every guſt we have not reckon'd, nor every brisk gale, or every Windy
Conſtitution, when as if we could have hearkned our, many of thoſe da
in the Seamars Journal (I ſpeakof our Br:ttth Seas only) might have bin
noted for Rough and Ro the Cauſe is not intricate, and hath bin touch'd
already, remembring that the Full I bears precedence as to frequency of
Storms ; For as to Fury, the Trine we have ſaid, feems to go beyond ir. .

12. Now "for Winds variouſly Shifting and Frisking, we have cryed u
the | Bo A. But the Table tells us the Fl » holds its own there alſo; {0
be itthen, if the & egualit, ſhe'is content. _ -

' $14. To the more ſetled Change of the Wind, we have broughe in our
' 9 wta under every Aſpect, the Wind may Ghange we know, every Hour,
bur with a Specialty upon the Hour of the Suns leaviug us ——Fentus cum

Sole xeliguit, faith -the Poet 3 and accordingly in our Diaries the Eweneng- +
Hour moſt uſually preſents you with ſuch an alteratrovy. 'Tis to be imputed
to the Aſpect, according as it appears in the Hemiſphere, or Dsſappears ;
and that again as it is wholeand entire, or as intercepted by the Horizon
about its Aſcent or Deſcent. And this is worthily remarkable therefore in
the Firſt Square, which changes the Wind about 7p times, when the Reſt
ſhew ſuch Fears not much above 50, 4o, or 30. For that Winds come from
the Stars, Oh 'tis a plain caſein all their Periodical Rewolutzors, as the Roy-
al Philoſopher tells us, Eccleſ. Gap. 1. Yea, and inall its variations : It de-
ſerves the attention of the young Philoſopher,how apt theWind is to change,
Morning, Noon, Even, Midnight, under our rate which meaſures out
the Heaven into thoſe equal parts, whereby the One Planet” follows the
Other with a punRual Unitormity, as to the Tranſits by = Horizontal Line
and the Meridian. And this tather in the Firſt; than-the Later Quadrate ,
for ſome ſuch like Reaſon, in proportion. as we haverendred before, of
ſome difference in the Later £ from the Former. Ta clearchis, you ſhall
find, as the Table informs,” that the 4 © » admits the feweſt Changes of
the Winds, becauſe there is no difference of the Luminaries concern'd ,
who riſe together, ſet together, culminate *rogetherz, ſo that. if the can hold
her own after the Hour of their joynt deſcent or diſappearing, ſhe keeps the
Wind at her point for that extire Natural dgy 3 whereas in the Quadrate, and
the reſt of the Aſpects proportionately, if the One be vp, the other is down,
If one be inthe South, the other is in the Weſt or Eft ; which holds in the
Oppoſition alſo, where manifeſtly One of the Oppoſites are in the Eft, while
his Opponent is in the Weſt; One is in the South, the other is in the North,
which makes the Eul! » change her Winds as oftez as any, but our fore-no-
ted Former Quartile. : :

S 15. It will be time now to ſpeak of Rain and its exceſſes, which we
havenot without Reaſon confider'd apart. The Mew and the Full, we have
ſaid carry the Name; but here you ſee all the lefler noted Aſpects exceed
them Both ; The two « yy th the Sextiles, and-at laſt the Later 4.
For thoſe yield 130. and 146. the Later A 160, ſpeaking of round Num-

when the d and & yield but 100, *Tis fo in Exceſſes of Rain alſo;
| d for the moſt part, if not outdone. The New » and one of the Sex-
tiles bring the rareſt Inſtances for violent Rain 3 the Eul! and the other AC-
pects add twenty Inſtances, and the Firſt Sextile is found with dowble the


- number of the New I, which is much, if duly conſider'd. The Conſide-


ration of Rain, Morning, Noon, and Even, &c. We reſerve tothe proper
Chapter of the Horizon and Meridian. Howbeit, we deſire this may
keep their portion in the Table, while their turn comes. The like we fa
of other Hours, with ſome curiofity obſerv'd by us in all the Tables, thoug
all you (ee hadnot leave to be produced.


S 16. Fof


--


*
"4
—


Chap. XVIII. Ratnbow &c. City Hirizon. 'd ©) favours Miſt: ti9


$.16. For Snow, what the New » brings aboue 5. you ſee is doubled,
or trebled by all the reſt. Two Aſpects there be, which are moſt frequent: of
the Squares, the Firſt ; Of the Trines , the Lf. The New ) brings
but 5. while they bring 15. or 16. - I believe we may find, nay we have hin-
ted ſome Reaſon : Or, is it- nauſeous 40 repeat? Lam content toeafe both
my ſelf and Reader. —Hatl brings yoo the ſmaller ſum, of which the High-
eſt is but VIII. and belongs to the Eull >.

'$ 17. Rainbows complain of a defe#ive Obſervation 3 I do acknowledge
the received Dottrine, which ſaith they-are the Sun's Embroidery ona
11d Cloud ; -but we ſhall find that there is ſome Collateral Aﬀiftance from
the I ard others, many times, to make them more-Florid, and ro draw
them.ia a.greater Arch ; Fa we met with one here, which appeared more
chan Semicircular. wet

$18, For Halo's, 'tis pretty to obſerve that the LY's have the greateſt
vogue z That:the Later Quadrate and Sextile accuſe us for want of Zeal,
or early riſing: But we have a good Excuſe, why none are noted under the
New ), becauſe, NVems tenetur ad 1mpoſſibile. |

$ 19. The Mify Sums we havenot omitted, but yet we ſhall not reach
to them here z becauſe the Gtty where thoſe obſervations grew, is ſeldom ab-
flucely free; what with vapid Exhalations from the River, and the Smo-
| therof che Fewel, beſides-the general Conſtitutionof our Northerly Iſland;
Þ thatin all this time I bave.remarked not above 14 days, wherein the Ho-
—__ was'clear and Liwpid;;'of which VIIL are found under the former 0


5.20. The groſſer Fug, therefore, only:confider'd, the ew Þ claims her
Srek-Ga | brings moſt, .w#z. 38. - Only the Later * brings as oftex.
Now go 'l

en while: the, Sag and Þ are both at one Polt, rather than w

they are at two. Far "tis with M5 as 'with Davouk, tele. eriuaphage M

IS 415 OWN, SIN 1411 parts Of the

, the, Eaſt-and efpecially 3 bur the Eul! I /is as a Sentinel fer
other Tampere, by wich ſpect the Miſt is curb'd at-Even, hy by
duight, the-©, and in gn 04mg A


vation ? the Sextile Aſpect bordering upon each. Surely the Trees
Firſt and Laſt, bring the fewsf Inſtances, ,becauſe more remote, and more
approaching to the Oppoſiiton. - And before we ſtir from hence I Aacrermy
f, that] can demwnſtrate alikely Property of the -», from the conſidgra-
tion of the Exceſs in the Later *, Later 4 and it may benot impoſſible,
the Later Quartile alſo. For who can warrant a Table of this Nature not
guilty of the leaſt Omiſhon > Thus then, if the Aſpetts Lunar where the
riſes firſt, - bring the fewer Fogs, while Thoſe wherethe -» gers up firſt,
bring them more frequently 3 then'the I is more inclinable to Fog than the
Sun ; and the Truth 1s, the Concluſion ſpeaks its own probability without

any premiles. :
s$ 21, Mifts ought the rather to be obſerved, becauſe he who can giveac-
count thereof, may give an _ alſo of dark and gloomy days, whic _
1 minoy


190": | Aſpetts all mcline chiefly to the W. and $W. joint. Book 1


©” NR <a
—E


monly-are Miſty , unleſs when a full-ſwoln martial menacing Glowd makes
the Heaven to mourn : He my give'an account alſo of a Red-angry Sun,
Sdiky, bs Kepler, who ers call Sanguineous, anleſs they mean ſome
more terrifying Spectacle. | . I | |
$ 22, Next the rarer Phoznomena'6f the E/a,the Thrids like Gobwets found
onthe Hedges and Herbs of the Ground, together with whiter Strings of
ſeeming Lawn, that fly fo leiſurely in the Autumnal Air ; Goſſamere, I re-
mbmber they call it 3 which is nothingelſe but thevs/cou miſty vapour, fur-
led -up by the warm _—_ of-the Air, while the miſt is removing, or
moſt part withdrawn. I have' a few remarks by me of a Fog appearing on
the Ground the Water , 'of which; if occafton ſhall be elſewhere. :
'$'2#3. There remains -now little elſe to trouble ghe Reader with, except
the account. of the Winds, Conſult your Tabl® you will find that the
Ghange of the Y' brings Eft, Weft, Worth Winds, almoſt indifferently,
VIE as 45: 44. 20. Acodtingy, N E. and N W. winds indifferently , as
30, 31. The South; and South-Eaſt, according tothe beſt of my-obſervati-
on, more rare, as 18. 16. but moſt of all coward the- South-Weſt point,
42. 58. and let this be remembred as a ſupply to the-CharaRter, that for
che ioſt part it favours the South-Weſt, SG T1 L


” -
. ,


$24. The Fat! -» is not indifferent to-Eaſt-Wind,; or North, or South ,
but finds rather for Eaſt than Welt, -wwuwchrather thatyfor Alorth, and becauſe
ſhe brings' many mare Sowtherly Winds thetther's , yerthe $ th-Weft, T
believe, 1s her Favorite alſo, more South Winds wider the Full; thenat the

_ "'S a5. Here we miſt not be #»finite; nor mall-we Fepoar what'T have faid
before, only he who ſhall ſum up the Wef, North-Wep, and South-Weſt
Winds, will find that evety- bears towards the Weſterly and South-weſt.
What then » D6ho:AﬀpeRts ink Cat all ro the Elfiers poine > Thave on

| betievethe hath 0 for the Winds un-


South-fide; tothe South-Eaft'; I have reaſon to'believe that in oor Northern
Climes #o Aſpe8;” Lunar, or her," zurhies to Mbrtherly Winds, becaiiſe no


where almoſt All the Aſpects bring as much, or more of the Eaſt point,
than of the Weſt, except perhaps the ſecond DOA and #, yea, gnd of the
North-Eaſt point, in reſpe& of the North-Weſt , and that in norable
dipetty _ the Second DD , The difference bur of- three may nor be
aderable 1! * Hoo
-. $26, CanIygiveno Rule for an Eaſt-Wind to anEx t Mariner? No
other at preſent bur this upon the » 's account; he muſt regard the Firſt 0,
wb Laſt A. and the Second #.'" If this will not do, the > will nothelp


Morel could fa and more friay a Sagacious Reader fiſh out from the Ta-
ble, or the like of his own compoſing, which may be done from a more ex-
-—: or more extenſive Diary. At preſent I bid all the Lunar Aſpetts Good

ght. £ | :


L I B.


I2I


Sal L I B. II.
CHAP. I. ConjunFion of Sol and Mercury. d © F.


$ 1. The Aſpe&s Dire& and Retrograde. 2, Whether the Phenomenon
« of Retroceſſron be real. 3. The Earth-in the Moſaic Syſteme. 4. The
ntereſt of the Creation,aPlanet Retrogade.TheCopernicanSolutions:the
Fallacy atSence.5.Pretence of theParalax.No proportion between
- the Earths Orbit and the Firmamefit. - 6. Appeal to obſervation.
7, 8. Retrograde Courſe not abſurd in Nature. 9. May be perfor-
med by magnetiſme. 10. Whether the Celeſtial Motrons h abſolutely
incredible ® 11. The Earths Motion, as-improbable. 12. The Sw
muſt move. 13. Light moves i na Phyſical Inftant. 14. The Prog-
noſtic principle, firm. 15. Mercuries motion ſetled by Kepler. 16. v4
little, yet powerful. 17. Powerful, though a Reflexion. 18, Not
a naked Reflexion.. 19. Not the leſs gooſe though ſeldom 2ifible.
20. The jets effefts. W, ind, Rain, Heat. The Antients introduced
Peolemy. 21. Virg, Seneca , &c. being Husbands and Philoſophers:
22. The Arabians. 23. The Moderns. 24. Aſſertion of 7's influ-
ence vindicates Aſtrology. 25. Even Mercurio-Lamar Aſpets are
of great Power, 26. Influence on Lightnizig, &c. 27. '*\ not of an Am-
phibious Nature. 28. The Table. 29. y era abridged in its pro-
per Synopſes. 30, ZI, 32. Demonſtrated thence thro#gh all Conſliv.
tions. 233. Our Aſtrology is noble Philoſophy. . 34. The retrograde
Aſped influential. 35. How p &© and ) bring moreWinds and Rain than
the id: and 4. 236. V more windy than rainy with the Antients,
37,' 38. \ Nantical Obſervations for the Influence of © and 7 on winds.
39,. 40. ObjeFion: anſwered. 41. ' All the Chaldee Philoſophy not ſu-
perſtition. 4.2. Proportion. of the ſucceſs' of the Aſpe@ as to Weather.
43. The retrograde Aſpe& hbriiker than the reſt.and nearer to Infallible.
45. The $ogen 46. ys poco greater than the Lunar, eUtns
ced from the Hail. 47,.48. From Thuuders, 49. A Tableof Thin.
dringConjunTions fromt'5$2. t083. 50. From Keplers Diary. 51: y::
is — a7 Tar at ſeveral diſtances. 55, .&c.% hath. ſome” influence
on Earthquakes. 56. ALift of Mercurial Earthquakes. 57. Platic
ConjunFion of © and 7. "58. The vulgar ObjeFions anſwered the
firſt time. 64. It is not indifferent where 7 is placed. 62. The Aſ-
pets influence on Fiery Meteors. 65. Prodigious Hail, fiery Hail-
ſtones. 66. Planetary Congreſſes conduce to Comets. 69, 70. Friend-
ly collatian with the Diſſenter. 71. Gaſlendus treated at large.
76. The' Power of Aſpe# from ſubterranean evidence. 78. The ſame
day Twelve month is not the ſame day Aſtrologically. 79. Days =
be produced which Rain 8 Days in 9. 81. Diſcourſe with thoſe who
 objed# the contrary tothe Prognoſtic to ſucceed as often as the Prognoſtic
its ſelf. 82. Prediion falls under natural Knowledge, 83. Tri
unph over vulgar Prognoſticks, not ſo generous. 0
0


129 £ y hk really Retrograde. The MoſaicS pſteme: Book II


———_—_—


S 1. QO, with much ado, we take our leaveof the », thenext that riſes
in our Eye, is Mercury : Tis ? d withthe ©. An Aſe# we
meet with (the- Lunar excepted ) moſt frequent; preſenting it ſelf afreſh
every two Months, or thereabouts. Now this Planet, as all others, excepr
the Luminaries, being found ſometimes Retrograde, as well as Direct, meets
the ©, in either courſe alternately, chough with ſome difference ; Firſt,
in Situation, being in his dire# courſe found to be higher than the Sun, and -
Lowermnthe KK: e: Next, which is more conſiderable with us, the dit-
ference of dwratiap or {pace of time 3 for inthe Retrograde the Ape holds
not above 3 days, in the dire#, ſometimes five Ws ays (notwithſtandin
in the ſubſequent Diary I never recount above 4 days, to the no ſmall difad-
vantage of t a bect ). becauſe 'in the Former,they f ourney both like good
Companions, the ſame way 3 in the Later they fly off o'the ſuddain, as they
muſt needs, who go contrary ways.
$2, Whether this Retroceſton of 5 and the reſt, be Real, or Apparent
only, we know 'tis the great Queſtion between the two Syfexzs; and we are
aware how ſcandalous it is to leave the Darling Notron, and adhere to the
Tyohezich, (mice all the great Neotericks have eſpouſed the Gopernicar : In
" Policy alto for my Hyporhetis ſake, that ir might find more ealie admiſſion
in the World. (for no man will receive Truth it ſelf, anleſs he be Gyeerly
cn thereto) TI might fay, "tis all a caſe whether che Phoxnomenort be
O or f1Or. AD 3; > | . F
. 29.3. Thus far] cn; I have reaſon to believe the Planetary Motians to
be-Heliocentrical, Galilco-hath made it out: butT heartily beg Pardon,l have
20 cogentreaſon.to believe that the Earth is aPlenet,moved in the Expanſion
of Heaven, either with Diurnal or 4inual Motion, to ſolve the Appearan-
res. But, (Iſpeak to thaſewho have ſome kindnefs for it ) I know not
why. the Moſaic SyReme fhouldbe renounced. 'I a ee, that Scriptute may
expres it (elf according —_— : bur in our cafe 'tis more
than (o, ons ſeem: on a Primeval Tradition; which
from Adm to Neb, from: Mach tothe Fewsſb Nation (as his YIl-preepes
alſodid ) may reſolve wtaately into Divine Revelation, the vaice of Hz
who beft knows the Univerſe, becauſe hemade it; Known was it of old,
Rondnd


Teal ont on Camres” Nor doth the Batane Geek hee fan
i, on its own Centre. Nor peak here, Serun-

dum captum walgi. And what ſaith the Leading Book of the World, (thac
is) the H:fory ? 1t faith thatar the ———_—_ of Gods own Syſtem, the Earth
as the Waters hung 2 vacuo, for Darkneſs, Privationand nothing'elſe did
encompa£ it, till He was leas'd to ſay Light, which being created for
diſtinction of the Day and {Vight, made it move from the Oppoſite Hemrſphere
(where it was firſt created ) to the upper Hemiſphere of the Eaſtern Coun-
trys, ſo that Evezand Morn made out the day's the Light was not firſt crea-
ted, and then the Earth to move towards it, bur contrarily, He made the
Earth firſt, and the Light to wheel about, fo the Earth was the Gextre of
chat Orb of Light.. 'It the Swz had bin made the fr/ day, all things had
went Mathemat:cally; the Gentre firſt, then the Grrcurmference, Or if this
New Planet the Earth had been made the fawrth day, and bin placed in the
Expanſn with its fellows, who would not have reckoned the Earth among
the Planers? But the en, in whoſe utmoſt Lofts the Planets are pla-


ced, ont 0s arthe (the Teraguzos Globe ) thence divi-
ding and parting thoſe zxferiozr. Waters from the Supercoxr, ſetting them ar


their due diſtance, the Terms of which diſtance are of oze ſide the Earth,
- and thoſe Waters on the ather fide the Firmament. Now, if this Expantion
be uniform, and alike in all Hemiſpheres, I ſee not but that the Earth muſt
hang in the Middle of the Firmamenr. 6 4. Bu


—


| Chap. I. F cruples againſt Fs Modern $ lem. -


9 4. Bur whether chis Explanation hold or no,I athrm 'ris the Intereſt of the
Creation, that the Planetary Motions ſhould be as arre#, fo Retrograde,
Direc, for the ordinary Uniform diſpenſation of the year, and irs Seaſons,
equally diſtributing to all their due S:gzatare and Temper : Bur Seaſons we
know, do ſometimes ſeem ſhort, and at other times are prolonged, Winter
holds longer one Year than another, and Heat rezews it feif at the Latter end
of Summer, in Auguft (ſuppoſe) or September. What is the matter > One
Reaſon is, Planets by Retroceſſions, play their Leflors over again, they walk
ſuch an Arch of Heaven, a ſecond and a third time, which in a dire courſe
they meafure but once. Then the Statzon of a Planet is 4 great occurrence,
and cauſes Extremity of Weather; you cannor dipinto a Dzary but fo you will
find it, the Effect is apparent. The Cauſe muſt be rea}: Nay, faith the
Hypotheſis, not real in zts ſelf, bur real zows it may be, as the Suns Eclipſe
Or, to come nearer, his r1/5ng or ſetting: For do we not ſee, ſay they, that

when we part from ſhore, the Bankſide, and all the Buildings ſeem to recede
\ fromus : yea, when in a clear Night we ferry over the River, do not the

» and Stars fly apace from us? even ſo upon the Motron Annual of the
Earth, the Planets ſeem to recede, when as, indeed, they continue a regu-
lar undiſturbed Courſe.But this doth not yer clear off the Objection; for the
Shore and the Buildings, and the » and the Stars, though they ſeemingly
fly amain, yet withal among themſelves they are found to keep their Sta-
tion and due diſtance one from another: In the Planetary retroceſſhon 'ris
+ otherwiſe, for they alter their Places in their Orbs, and under the Conſtel-
lations to which they are ſubje&t. When I put off from Pauls-Wharfe, the
Houſes recede and fly from me, but at no hand change their Station among
themſelves, their Ground or Diſtance : The Houſes on the Wharfe ru
zot for haſt, behind Pauls Steeple, or come one Inch the nearer, then they
were: Nor do the » and Stars , however haſting away, for azy motion of
mine alter their "reſpective diſtance, among themſelves whatſoever
_ doinorder to me. the Planer ©, whengin his direct courſe he paſſed

the Hyades, as irf the Month of OFob. An. 1677. By bis R de pace
He got engaged in the midſt of them again, 7a. 1678. Yea, in Auguf 1676.
he was palt the Plezages alſo, in the Month following : In September, Oto-
ber, November, he returned and paſſed them a third time 3 and 'twas curious:
©o obſerve how he inched along in the Retreat of his, where his leaſt mo-
tion, in other places not fo ſen{ible, washere more diſtin& and conſpicuous,
being adjuſted by ſuch little Meaſures, v:z. the Petzt diſtances of the Stellule,
of the Pleiades, This being a noble Inſtance, may ſuftce. - © - -
$ 5. To this 'tisan{wered, that the Parallax of the Planet, and the diffe-
rence of Proſpect makes this ſeemingalteration, che Planets hanging-much
lower than the Firmament, ſo that the Earth approching toward the Pla-.
net, caſterh the Sight of its Inhabitannt to one point forward, and when ic
hath aſſed the a caſtetly ro a contrary point. Yea but you ſee therefore
ein h, who, they ſay, hath little or #o Parafax, fo exalted: is
he, and fo near the Firmament, Next, if there be any ſuch Parallax-in
h, then there would be found ſuch difference of Motion even among the
Fixed, fince They allo be in different Orbs , or Heights 3 on which account
ſome ſhifting of place would, even there, be diſcerned. They anſwer,
that there may be made ſome ſuch obſervation in time, perhaps. Kzpl. Epze.
Aftron : So a 1000 years hence we ſhall perhaps, ſee ſomewhat or nothing z
for a 1000 years backward there hath been no ſuch thing. - Ochers deny
any proportion between theEarth,nay between theOr4 of theEarth,(a ſwinging


Circle) and the FE:xe4; No proportion > How comes it to paſs then in mea- .


faring the Univerſe, Miles 60. or 70. anſwer toa d ? A degree, and
that in the Firmament, when the Stars __ _—_ ves Northwaras, o


124


"_


3 Retrograde motion real, not abſurd. Book 11 ;


\ Star, or Conſte


ward, if we walk from eicher fide. How comes it to pals that the Day in-
creaſes, unleſs a Degree in the Earth's Annual Motion arſwer to lomewhat


con{iderable in the Firmament ?


6 6. Ir is affirmed that the Planets, while ſeeming Retrograde, do keep -


on their dire courſe : let experiment be made by ſome Obſervator (with-
in the Tropicks.it muſt be) where the Planets to ſuch and ſuch portions of
the Terraquzous Globe, do ſometime become Vertical, at what time all
Parallax ceaſes 3 whether ariy of the Superiours paring 62 any notable
Fixed Star, be not to be found there where Tycho ſtates him, rather chan
where the Hypotheſis pretegds; whethef it be not found near the Fixed

Flacion, as ly when it receded thither, as when ic firſt
met it in its dire&t motion. This Aftrologers are ſure of, that the ſame


Effects of 'Hear and Rain, &«c. are found in the Retreat, as in the +


March.
9s 7. And why ſhould a Retrograde courſe be ſo abſurd inNature? To avoid


which, we mult Fix the Sun, and Bow! the Earth abour. Do we make the
Planets thereby Antmate, or mov'd by Inteligences ? Or is it 1ndecorum, that
ſuch irregular Motions thould be found in Czleſtial Orbs? Alaſs ! The ©
and »-, the Luminaries themſelves, though they retreat nor, yer they
have their Anomalys, their Apogee and Perigee, Deviations, Latirude, far


from being: Homocentrical, as poſſible the Infancy of the World, with.


Fracaſtorius- ſince might Imagine. We fee afterward they found out Ec-
centriques, and when that would not do, added Epycycles, and ventur'd the
Detorum, which yet they were apt enough, as it were, religiouſly to eſta-
bliſh; for the "Honour, as they thobght, or the Divinity of the Czleſtial


es.
* 6 8/But 21y. Whar is the Return of the Luminaries from the Tropiques,:


buta kind'of Retroceſſion :* From the Hyemal to the Mitival Toagir, th
ced dire; from the Aſtival to the Hyemal they retrear, and g0 back.
whence pens: _ difference is,
and go down onthe Over fi
id, 'tisno retroceflion,þut a progreſſive Motion from the Vorth-Wef, to.
the South-Eaſt, abour its pe Centre : The Anſwer will fit, if the Pla-
netary Motion were _ , meaſur'd by that oblique Circle only ; but
when 'tis a compound Motion , not in a /iwple Circumference, bur in a
Spiral Line, fixe to no material Orb, bur performed ina free« Ztherz how
comes it to paſs that they know. their utmoſt Laticudes ſeverally, the Sun.
not daring to venture fo far as the » doth, or 2 ſometimes. Galzleo juſtly
at Motion Circular'; what then is Elliptical Motion ? What is
Motion with v4#:ety of Latitude > What is Retrograde 2 *Tisall but Won-
der,-and he who ſtudies Nature, meets with nothing more ordinary. |
$9, In my poor Judgement this Retrogragation-gives its own accounts
for it happens at ſuch determinate times, wiz. the Oppoſition of the Pla-
fetto the Sun, which even in'2 and 2 istruez for theurmoſt diſtance is
the quef Oppoſition, So that now tis manifeſt the © is the Gaufſez no fear.
of--raaking the P


Planets Animate: For 'who, almoſt, grants not that there
are Geleſtial Maguenion as well as Terreſtrial; that the Planetsare Magne-
tical Bodys touched by theSun, (Sure it may be (explained) and thereupon:
wove fafter when in d with him, azre&t : So upon the & they may.,.
for allT- know, 'be repelled for a little ſpace, ſeeing 'tis no Newsin a Mag-
net; though Wonderful it is , that Quze- Pole «ttra#s , what the other re«


- $1 ©. Bur whatſhall we do, if the Motion we affign is incredible, the Sun
muſt-move in our Opinion30o Miles,ia the time almoſt that ourPulſe beats,


andthe fixt Stars above: fo many thouſand, which is abomiuable.. R, For


they came «p on One fide,
of the Hedge (the Colure.) Nor muſt it:


TY.0C 2 ESESSFOHSHMSCSD AC DD mp Aw Re ee A


O27 =


Fam.


4 _— FF > |


Chap. © Ob L-ftral Motion mcred:ble, hew. Earths M.


125


— 4


the fixed Stars, I have reaſon to believe that they which bring them neareſt
ro us, take the righteſt meaſures. And Garteſws was fo wile as to ſuſpect
it z Howbeit, the leaſt diſtance aſſignable is ſtupendious, but who ſtands not
amazed at the Contemplation of the Univerſe? TheUmbrage of the incom-
prehenfible Deity ! Where ſhall we allow Wonders, if we ſhall not
allow them in the Heavens above, nay even at onr Feet > Go we- to
the M:croſcope, the leaſt Sand in the Hour-Glaſs muſt conſiſt of thouſands
of Corpulcles leſs than it ſelf ; which you may believe, if youcan fancy it
reſolved into a Fume. How much Fume will Nature require to make up
ſuch a Solid, though little, Subſtance ? But in the Heavens, there 'tis broad
day, where the Vulgar can diſcern Wonder ; and if they objec, that their
Motion is incredible, is not their Bulk incredible, the Drfaxce incredible,
every thing ſuteable 2 The Diſtance of the Firmament in the Fhpothefrs, is
almoſt infinite, zeque puclet faith Coperniers, nor are we aſhamed to fay it,
Bur is their any Circumference ſo great, where Nature hath placed a free
Body, but ſhe-can teach ir td deſcribe the ſame inany time given? Cannot
God make his Works even ? If Nature can create motion, it can accele-
rate it 17 1#finitum, as number .may be augmented; and if circular motion
it {elf is a Miracle, as Ga/#/-o faith right, let him enhance his Wonder in
- the Velocity Actual or poſſible. Our Underſtandings are narrow as our
Expreſſions; we muſt enlarge them. We ſtand amazed at the multitude of
Siphres, and yet we believe the number of Archimedes his Arenarius, There
are ſome things incredible in Nature, Even after oe we ceaſe not our
Wonder, we delire to ſee them again. Inever us'd the Mzcroſcope, bur 1
—_—_ I grant, our Motion therefore incredible, that is to fay, marvel-

3 none of the Copernicans have dared to ſay, 'tis abſolutely falſe or im-
poſſible, God who has made Light to move for thouſands of Miles in an


inſtant, by a ſtreight Line, may make it move a ſemblable ſpace through a
Circle wy ge"


the uſe of the World requires it.
- SIT. The Earth it ſelf, according to theSyſtem, moves goo Miles in an
Hour, Kepler. Epit. part. 5. page 107. upon which account it muſt move
I5 Miles ina Minute, and a quarter of a Mile jna Second, in the twinkling
anEye. And is not this incredible of the Earth, that her old Bones
ſhould move (© faſt, conſidering the Heterogenereity of its Parts, and
want of chohafion. And this is but the Diurnal Mozion, for the Annual

City goesa full Mile at that moment. ;
- $ 12, Add the very Idea of Moon, which,though never ſonatural, if
ſwift, conſiſts in a burry, a difquier of all parts of the Body , tangible
or ſpirituous, from Centre to Circumference, And taerefore they tell us
that our Stars cannot move fo faſt, for fear of flying in pieces, bur their
Earch may move in a trice, Diurna! and Annual , and not a Leaf tremble;
though once or twice aday it muſt give a ſhock too,ſay Some of thema little
op to reverberate theSea,and falve the Tides of the Ocean. Well may they
feign the Earth is an Adamant or Magnet towards the Centre, for irs out-
ward Gravelly Cruſt was not made for Motion, with all its Coal ore and
' #3eral, Lake and River, and Spring ip, its Bowels 3 This we are all
re of,and as for thoſe vaſt Bodys above Weare not ſure, notih the I it felt,
though we are: willing to fancy Water, yet ſure no Grave}, &c. or the
like, nay 'tis agreeable that they ſhould be more Simple Homggeneows, and

of compoture, according to their Medwm where they range, as

aBther:is of purer, more refined Spirit than the muddy Atmoſphere. Ima-
zine but the Plane of the Ecliptec, or EquizoBtzal Real, and the Planet nea-
reſt the Centre(be it what ic will) to move but a quarter of a Mileina ſcru-
on time, and then there is neceflity of Nature, it muſt needs be that the


ixed and the Circumference mult deſcribe fo prodigious a Circle, =
c ; Waoat


—_—


M. of Light mcredible. # C hk ſetled. Book I!


what hinders bur that there may be as mach conſent between the Fixed and
the Planets, as if they were all engaged in a material Circle > The CGopernz.


' can Hypotheſis is not unwilling to fucha Fancy, as fa as h goes, and the


Ptolemaic will not ſtand out. | Dt

s 13. As for the Suns particular, methinks 'tis made for Motion, 'tis
Spherical, "tis Fire, "tisLight, Fire and Light is Sp:ret, the Motion #ncon-
cervable, witneſs Lightning fo ſwift, as the Dr. faith, that a man ſcarce
dare ſay he ſaw it. Nay, by their own confeſſion, the Sun moves too, upon
his Ax - 'Tis impoſſible the Sun ſhould reſt. Pardop me if I fay ordina-
ry illumination, and the zzcredible expanſion of Light makes it out , right-
ly conſidered, moving even in an I7farnt, not ſhaking the Air firſt, and
fo with ſucceſſive Undulation reaching the Organs, as in ſound 'ris manifeſt,
bur preventing all ſuch flow paced Addrefles, foots its way through the
Medium, eluding, if not overcoming all the Reliſtances, Garters himſelf


Aſtronomy is indebted tothe great Mathematician fob Kepler, this is none
of the leaſt, that he venturd to reftifie the Motion of 2 , ſerting it


y agrees

of Heaven is eafily diſcerned z while that of Argo?'s doth nor. In all my ob-
ſervation I do ſcarce remember that I could with our Planet a for-
warder or more backward to anſwer for our Effects. Kepler therefore
when he fluctuates concerning his ownAccount,though not in his Elongation
o_ the © 3 Jet, a 00 ee 25, 00 - to affirm, but gn ay en
take 4 Or 5 degrees in cat. nt. Pp. 15. ante . IG17,
might have ſer his Heart at reſt, in as much as I can affure him , that be
was zever wide, a degree entire, but as vey 5 hed tobe; fothat that flu-
uation of his, as it happened oceeded not from his unaccurateneſs of
the Account, but from want of fight, ſometimes, how to reconcile the
State of Heaven for that day; with that ſingle Aſpe& 3 which, as we have
pronounced: all the way, is vain and impoſflible.: The contrary whereof,
though he, (as we are all found of our own Propofals)yet when he is puc to
it, that he might ſolve the Correſpondence of the Effe& with the Planer,
to alter the Calculation for two days, he refuſed, with reſolution, ANegut
eſſe tantus Error calculs.


'$16. To


- : OO ST TI 4a «a 4 ao dy A Ah aA 513 ol GG MR ic me Sa ., tw 5 ab, Sao as}, a


—


Chap. L tz a Great Inſtrument, though a little Planet.


—_— —_—_


I27


_—_—


16. To the Firſt then, that 2 1s buta liccle Planer, I anſwer; ir may
be ſo, and yer bea great Body init felf. Compared with greater, the Earth
1s but a ſmall Body ; and yet the Earth isa z'aft Body to all that Circumna-
vigate the Globe, yea, or go to the Hzares; yea, to all who travel but
nearer home, mea{uring ſtep by ſtep their Countries Length or Breadth,
and fo widen out onr thoughts to the Comprehenſion of the whole, by duly
confidering the proportional part. 2. A little Body though it be, it may be
a great Inſtrument ;, if we go to the Dimenfton of the Planet, the » 's influ-
ence 1s known to be great, and yet the » 1s certainly leſs than the Earth
by much ; the very ſhadow of the Earth at a great ciſtance from its firſt
_—_ bears a greater Diameter than the Body of the », in allroral
cliples.

- 9 17. Yea, but © is but a Reflex:on, only as the Teleſcope ſhews; it wax-
es and wanes, is horn'd and gibbous as the ) it elf: the like is faid of 9,
Venus | yea, and ſome body elſe, we fear, unlel(s they find Satellites ro help
him out. However the »- will help us , and reach us thar Reflexions
(for whatis ſhe elſe, that hath not cne ſpill of Light of her own! ) May
be potent Influencers. Grant: the. reſt of the Planets tor be as fo maty
Moors, and we need not make Hue and Cry for Foundation of Aftro-
logy. |

9 18, But this will not content us; we challenge for..? a greater Influ-
ence than that of ). Ad @ 2? willdo more thana d 5 », and more
evident. Loye now ! We ſpeak out; becauſe if we donot ſpeakour, few
will attend to what we ſay. Now, if fo it proves, what is wanting in Di-
menſion, may be made up onother accounts; 2:2.H7c1-1ty. to the © grffertat
Motion, the very Conſtitution and Fabrick of the Planet; tor ſuppoſe by
miracle, the Ocean ſhould recede , like Jordan, and we could walk inthe
depths of the vaſt 4lvew dry-foor, ſhould we not diſcover more of the
Make of the Earth, the Roots of the Mountains, and-the ſtrong Barricadois
of the Rocks, innumerous Cells for Minerals, and paſlage for Communi-
cation of Waters? Ask but the Miners in Garmwal, or in the Dominion, of
Germany ; ſearch with the Spamard the Bowels of the Earth for Ore;
down fo low till you deſpair of returning, and tell us the News from the
Centre z muſt we not inall reaſon think thata Planet is more chan a Reflex-
ion from a Pewter Diſh? Of fo vaſt a Circumference, and uniform, folid.
No doubt in this ſenſe there is a World inthe » ,and all theCzleſtial Bodys,
whoſe variety is hidden by their diſtance, and concealed by their very Light.

S 19. Theſe things, though as probabilities only, will-help to ſolve ano-
ther Objection, and encourage me to ſay that the ſeldowr appearance of 5,
though a Potent Planer, agrees very well with the Wiſdom of the Crea-
tor, who thought it not neceſſary that A!7 his Inſtruments ſhould be alike
expoſed toView : For neither isthe d © vilible to the World; 'tis on-
ly aſcertain'd to us by Calculation 3 ſo the greater is the Admiration matiy
times of the Effet, when the Machine is in the dark. As to the Effects
TI even long to have produced them. _ ; ;

Ss 20. Theſe Effets are, we ſay, Wind and Rain ; or incaſe of a more
calm and dry Conſtitution , a zotable and fignal Warmth > By that very te-
ſtimony ſhewing his Power and Promptitude toward the exciting of a tur-
bulent State. And ler no wiſe man think the contrary, till he hath ob-
ſerved one year round, and 6 or 7 at leaſt of theſe Conjundtions ; being
aware of the diſparagement, which inevitably cleaves to all ra, though
great Op:xators, when their Sentiments are diflonant to as great and obvious
Truths, But ſtay, what are we? Seem we not arrogant, and imply that
none hath ſaid ſo before usLet us ſweeren our way by premiſing ſomething
of Authority. Although Ptolexry a = Arabians are not of fo much re-

pute


_ - ethersto this Age, unleſs Experience hath bora teſtimony to che Dictate


ute, Dy right may be done them. In the judgement of the Weather, nei-

her of them are ſo venturous as to pronounce for.each particular day; bur
enlarge their judgements to no leſs than a Lavar Hebdoamade ; the New »,
the Firſt Quarter, &c. Ar which critical times they raiſe a Scheme;and pro-
nounce from the Planetary Dominions therein curiouſly. obſerved, which
Curioſity; though we have had reaſon to diſcard, as being palpably made
up of Imaginary Requilites, or at leaſt Ahez to our purpoſe: Yet we have
Reaſon to lend ſome Ear to what is here and there confuſedly delivered; as
Effects of the ſaid Dominions ; in as much as the Aſpect is always. an in-
gredient into that Notion of Dominion. Ptolemy then is clear that 2 in
Dominiqn is apt to raiſe winds, brisk and boiſterous. #rwwam drxmi th
64a x, evict Gone” W * dv ;
9 21; Bur thoſe who were not ſuch Artiſts, had got the Notioz of the
Planetaty Efficacy, as appears from Seneca, Virgil, both Philoſophers, and
I was goirlg to ſay Huſtanamen, who had kill in the Weather, even withs
outa Scheme; Y:rg:l the Sexzor inſtructs his Pupil co regard all the Planets,
for ſo Igather, when he mentions the two Extremes, Satwxand Mercury,

thathe comprehended all the intermediate, and ſo Sezeca underſtands hiny,

-Beſure he did not exclude Mercary, © | on

uid tempeſtates Autumm & Sidera dicam ,


1.1 Dax vigtlanaa Viris: wel cum ruit imbriferum wer.


- Now what Alpects Planetary doth he bid them wazch and attend > No-
thing but a little Wind; or Rain; or Tempeſt; leaſt the one prejudices his
-Corn, the other his'Herbage :. Nothing. bar a little - drowning of all his
Hopes, and Tearzng his Gora up by the'Roats:- This the honeſt Virg:l. Thus
far got the Roman Aſtrology then: Frigzda guo ſeſe Saturn: Stella receptet, Aut
45s Cel: Cyllentns errat 177 orbes. That's our Mercury;whom the Poet calls


elſewhere Swift; becauſe faith Serv, (a man of Senſe) it ſhews it (elf af-


ter e:gbteen days, when it had *diſappeared before by its Vicinity to the
bh The uſe that I make of it, is this, That the Husbandman in Laly,


.eſpecially in Spring and Autumn, which were noted of old at Rowe for
-more texzpeſtuous than ordinary; having obſerved the appearance of the


Planer, might be aware of the Tempeſt under his Occultation; or diſappea-


-ring. Ol er iimſelf,1!zad 16. tells ns;ſo much as the Autumr is Stormy, .
. but before Fireils time; you fee, they had learned ſome Keaſar.
_ q- amp Eſhall not fright my Reader,[ ſhall mention Albumazar, 700


yearsafter, from his Treatiſe,de Magn. Conjun8. that he agrees fully with


4 our Characer$ which 1 gather not from expreſsWords (for Aſtrology was


not fo diſtm& inthoſe days ) as by conſequence z the Doctrine which he
delivers ſuppofeth his Character. For, if ? brings Wind and Rainin g.

rwns of the Zodaic, and Heat in 6. Then— Bur o it is in E.— There-
And if qoo years after that, Haly goes further,and aſcribesWind or
Rain toXI.of the XII. Signs,as our CountrymanEſc#14us,famous in his time,
(:.c.)above 300 years ns in his great ſumAſtrological,D:/# 4.Cap.
7. (Let the Reader Ju my thin Aſtrologic Library. ) Then, «t ſurss,


- our Character hath ſome Abetrors. Now, though it be true that there is a


great deal of Rif-Raff in theſe. Ancients, Albumazar, &c. ſuch as would
make a Chriſtian ſick to read them, yet this muſt be own'd in theſe and
other Gentlemen, that whatſoever ſparkling, Gems of Natural Truth lies
rudely incorporate. in theſe Arabian Rocks, they ought to be ſevered, laid


- up and poliſh'd,” till their price may be diſcernible. Next, that though ' cis


uſual for Aftrologers totake Aphoriſms «por truſt from hand to hand, even
be from Ptolemy to Albumazar, thence to Haly, from him and


1nce;


Authority of the Antients for our Influence. - Book "


a _ aca © Se MS a


wore Foſs alſo do; yet 'tis very improbable chat theſe Notions ſhould


wa fort. 1 R86«i- coo Aa


OO EE 2 LEY


% : :
ww


> —


Chap.l. TheF ate of our Aſtrology depends on this Aſpe& s Evidence. 'F


29.
Co <w___—__


- Since Experience once aflerting the contrary, thete Detinitions would long
ere this have vanithed into. Arr; and what is more empty, A Lie,
. 9 23. Enough thea for the Antients 3 come we home toour times m

Nalute and ſearch!ang: what do they ſay 2 We have heard already oneg
Man, that cry'd .2u#. zefrit, who knows not the Power'of © and. 2 in'
Conjunction 3 and again, Conjunttio © ad ©, qurrum in Meteors magna Tis
ef, (We read no further) are the Words of that great Vranologer Johx
Kepler, one who thought chat the motions of the Stars were ary Muſ1que ;
dumb Shews, unleſs they were. indued with Cauſalzty as well as Lafre.
And again, 2 commovenats tempeſt atrbus multum walet, de ſtella nova : pag. 40.
and the ſame I bevieve he rropoleth 40 times z, ſo that he doubts ſcoxer of -
the Calculation of the Aſpect , than of the Influence belonging thereto;
Since him the diligent Inquiſitor in Stetzz., who obſerved 20 years and up-
wards, bears witneſs to the Truth in Keplers own Words — Mercurins 142
commoverdis tempeſtatibus (laith he) pluremum walet, Puod & Kepler affir-
mat. Not thereby relying; blindly on his Authority, bur affuring his own
Experience inconcord with it, as the Words careftilly attendeddo imporr.
Nor muſt we make Orts of the Vorimberg Diary for 30 Years by Kyrs-
ax«-r, , whohath annexed together every 4 © 2 amongf the reſt, from
1623. '7 1647. even 150. and upwards; Printed at Gaſel in the German
Language, 4. 1651. from which juſt experience helays his Regula Y. p.
103. on the Definition of this Aſpe&t : Now canany ſober Man, without


breach of Modeſty, ſay, that after 23 years obſervation, a Perſon of Qua- |
lo - |


licy, ſuch as heis ſuſpected to be, and a Scholar, ſhould expoſe him(e
farro the World, as to publiſh ſuch Flazzs ro the World, as his Rules
muſt be preſumed to be, if i]] propounded, in ſuch inſtances whereof, all

the Town, yea, moſt of the German Nation are judges.

"9 24. All the Fate of our Afrology depends on this one Configuration, for

if we carry the Cauſe here, the s br
the Heavenly Bodies, Fixed as well as Erratique3 gain their Current, If

Mercury be granted to fignitie to purpoſe, then not the Su aloxe, nor the -
) alone, are Influential. There is one Mercury hath a proper Influence as .
wells either. And if Mercury then why not $2 ?*Why not & > ec,

"Names I wis of greater Account thanever 2 was in Heaven, Political or:

Aſtronomical, For you remember we are Challenged to prove that any of

the Czleſtials, beſides © and I can do any Feats, This Challenge we come”
now to anſwer.


s 25: Befides the Sun and Moon we aſſert 7 *s Influence, even astheSun*


and as the-Moon. For let us aſpe# Mercury with the'Y, in d or &, (for 8 --
rs all Aſpects toher ) we ſhall find chem to turn to ſuch an account, as
thar the Sin it (elf aſpected to the ) , cannot do more. For to ſay nothing.
of Wind and Rarn , &c. wherein the Mercurio Lunar Aſpect equals the ©
it ſelf, you ſhall find in Keplers Diary, Thunder and Lightning 6 tirhes in
Years, yea, if we conlider the Mercurio Lunar & alſo, we hind the fame”
Ee 3 timesin 4 years, which is not to be found in the Sol7-Lunar Oppo-
tion. i
-. $26, Hear then what Ptolezsy ſaith, whoſe words are, -ſpeaking of 7 's
dominion os, faith he; dreams X) QALY (RS Lightning, FieryMerteor,e>c .2d-
ding what he never faid of the ), that it makes x#owarm, Hiatus Chaſe.
wee, and Trembling, S<-5u3s-, even Earthquakes the moſt horrible of
Prodigies. Ha ! ſaieſt thou ſoold Boy ? I fear before we have done, we'
- ſhall find ſome Truth in this thy Romantegue Piece.
9 25. In the mean time we do not underſtand what the Antients ſeem to
pretend, that he is of an Azzph1570us Nature, conform to all he ſhall meet:
-with ; he Moift with the moiſt, and Dry with the Dry : For his oy
erer-


am is broke, where all the Stream of -


I30-


# not amphibious. The Table. Book 11 |


*
——


mined to Warm,inclining to Morzftare, though ſometimes Cold and Drowth
appears when he is left deſtitute of his Conſorts; or as we may term it,
=_ by a contrary Influence : So doth the Flame givea clear Heat, and
he Chime an acute Sound 3 yet both, often times diverted by the whiſt-
ling of the Wi are leſs Heard or Felt. They might in our Judgement
have pronounced Saturn and & to be of Conſtitutions Izarfferent ; for even


' they are found ſometimes accompanyed with Dry, ſometime with Morf.


But the d © & returning more often than & and h, did more amule the Ob-
ſerver by its more frequent inconſtancy,and that made them defend what is
ſcarce intelligible concerning Z 's Nature, though the ſame inconvenience
of Conſtitution is found in the reſt ; but this nor fo often falling under no-
tice, they thought themſelves pretty ſecure. Proceed we therefore to
Mercury's Table.


TD ——_


TABLE &4c09%' Direct.


L.”March, Fr. m. wer a m. and hail 1 p. & ©


s 29. Fanuary. occ, winds and cold.
Se ® IL —_ wd & wet 4 © occ. ad 11 p. Ot.
26709. & 15. wds layed 5 p. SW.
Ut ; N. | 69 X 13.


XXI. Violent gafts and R. 3 p- . x

XXUIL Froſt ns brighe wds 9 m. threatn as to | IX. Cldy, windy p. m, opcn, wdy veſp. $ W.

a ſtorm of Hail; N. | X. Cldy; miſty, way. SW,

XXIV. 5 Fr. H. wind 8 m. (fc. Littleſtorm | Xl. 3. Cloudy, windy m. p. clear, cold, >
of hail or Snow (© occ. ; N,

XXV. { fr. R. p-m. Tempeſt of Wind 11 P. | ym H, wa. C. florms R. H. wind all n. W,
» © .

' . T5. = I 3. l

TIT rep ny pon XX, Fr. cloſe 1. rain. Aches.


froſty E,
xxvi nt ſnow 5 m. 0+ & p. M. IG XXI. Cloſe miſt, ſnow 9 m. Aches, Hyſterical
on. 'N, | Fits, Head-Aches. | E.
JT wy 25: vr — 6 mY , miſt, fair, clouds in
x R | ® | Scenes led. E,
— re brighrm. p. _ Py Py a FXXIIL Fr. overcaſt p. m. Fog, fair. nl E.
Y. > wer much & mers = * [ XXIV. Froſt, Aches o. f. drops, then werting
= / = _— by g | p-m. p.&6. p. Aches 11 p. SE.
. . P. - . l 76 IX 2T,
VIL KR. aveL. on lt, Wye, FOVe { IL. Cloſe Aches 11 p. cloſe p. m. W.,
5 Fog m. Ep Aches. w  — a l. ſome wet 4 mand 9g E
. » ot . CDES II
I L. Snow veſp. H. wd. a "4 TV. 3 Fr. cloſe m 1. Aches, Ww.,
= re, BH — N. V. R.m. H. wd, open. R w.
Iv. yy op fog again 0. & r.to 9 VI. High wd, R. a. |. cloudy. Aches, SW,
a dark {. rain 6 = = 4- Froſt, miſt, f = rutilis E,
; 1. rand Mm. + 4+ ys, 01 air .
CI I $. | XIII. Thick Fog a. m. coldiſh, red clouds veſp.
. great Fog at n, W. After. E,
_ - Two Lunatick in the Bill.
þ ; XIV, Froft, cold and Fog. Qocc. -
ebruary. XV. Cold, cldy, foggy d. ]
_ Miſt m. froſt very cold z but veſp, mil-
er.
2608, 4 LL wind, | XVI. Mild, drifle 4 m. & p, m+ H. winds a
(0! p
ee. ; Ware Sw |  &iop.
XXVTILI. H. wind, ſtorm, R. & occ. m_


cold wd, driſle. b
RX[N. 5. Furious wds. wettinga. m, & p.


fiormof leet Y occ. Was audible. S. March.


XII. Cloudy, wdy d. wet veſp. SW.


go


a


&


———


Mercurio-ſolar Table, dire8.


March,
1673: V 17:
Aw Haiſ'11 m. R. 4-2.» SE.


XXVvT. Wind, ſhowr 3 p-

XXVYTI. 11 Cloſe, wet 10 m.& p.m m. p* S,

XXV1I1L Fair m. floting cl. great drops 1 p-
miſt very cold, oo

XX1X. Cold, H. wd. R. 1, 2 p-and hail. ſo 4


N,
P+
74. ; a 4 I, , S
VII. Froſty, cloſe, - dull, windy 3 ſnow a 4
ad 9g E.
IX, F 4 4 miſty -m. clear o. Cc. N


X.7 Cloſe m. offer 4 p. Show hail © occ.

brisk wind and enmepome agg bur $ W.4. m.
X1. Open m. p. freez, Acnes.
XII. Froſty, fnowing m. Þ+ f. relent; Aches ,


XVII. _ cloſe, cold wind, .

m.d N

XVIII. Fog, ; KP x p. warmer than yeſter-
day . brisk wd:

XIX; Thick Fog, cloſe, warm; E. o. wr SP-


8 m. and 11


XX. 2 m. thick fog below , clear above, fair
warm p, ms. IV, Meteors ante gp. SE. S,

XXI, Fog, as die preced. © rutilus mane,warm
Pp. m, f, wd. W,

81. X 23,

I. Cloſe, cold wind. : NE.

I. Open E. dark, C. rain 3 p. brisk Winn.


HL. $. Very cold wd, R. and Hail 10m. Hail
Cometa iterum Hage conſpeHus eodem fere
loco.


TV. Snow 1 m. & mane tot, miſle 9 Mm. N*
Y. Cald wind and ſuow, fo 0, Hail6 or 7
times afrer h. 1 p. N
April.
1677. & 18,


NXVIL © clouded ſuddenly, offer m. wdy
- am, fair, rain 7. P. E.
XXVIIL. Cldy. windy S E. ſhowt veſþp. SW.
XX1IX, Showr m. wd, heat ; ſhowr 4 py P.

W,


XXX, Gallant R. m. ſhowr 11 m. H. wd. 0-
pen 4 p-Lighr n. 10 p.arSea going for Diep ,
ſhowr with us 9 p.
2


XXL. Foggy m. warm, cloſe, much Lowr 2 p,
| wd varicus, but Nly m. p.
XXIL. Pleaſant, warm ; wind. N WW.
X XIII. {. drops 7 m. Troubled air, R. 10 m.
cool, N.


|


79. V 25. |

IV. Fog, cloudy, f. wd, darkiſh p.m. NW

V. $5 m. ſhowr circ. s m.

VI. 5 m. R. much no&e, cloudy, cold ; Ar Do
ver R, m. p.ad 7 p. N.

T M. in Picdmont..—

VII. Fog, fair, W. cold $ E. veſp,


May.


IT 18.


»


1679. \ þ


E. | XXV If. Tetnperate ſhowr, ſog p.  W.


XXIX. 8. overc. m. Heat p. m. bright
|XXN. Cloſe, ſhowring 6 - Aches: age «
XXXI, R. m. calm, hear.

fn Coaſting (ho ©5%

XII. i wr; m. it m.2 .
& TR 6 p. p A

XIII. Open ni. threatn ; fair a. to m. &c,

XIV. 8 m. cloſe m. offer 3 p. hazie, W.

XV. Early miſt, fair, warm; cool n. W.

XVI. Hazy, cloſe m: p. warm. ny

6.- 4 9 |
XI. Cloudy, windy, miſt- m. offer ir m. R
1. p. werting m. p. ſhowr 6 p: Þ ec, »-
pu, Werring mh Hoe | "daſhing NW.

XXII. 1 m. wartn, bright Ss bright 1n the
N Weſt,

XXIV. Warm, bright 11 cloud ;
Meteor 11 p. 4 Lance BY Cons
ning &veral rites. FE SW.

—% S 28,

VL Report of Two ) s feen-9 p; long Clouds ;


lowring clouds m. p, Goſſamere ; Hazy 6

| Apoplexy 7 m.

VIE. 3. miſty, pregnant, cl. often ; ſuſp. cool
- wdand various,

VIIL Early miſt, fair, ſome lowring cl. brisk


wd. Hazy proſpeR.
IX. Warm, jowting, open, windy, E-
Showr at Hatfeild, _ d


; 1g |


1668, . S 2. "4,
XI. Daſhing, lightn 11-p. hors Clds. W.
X1IL Hor ante L. ſhowr m, & a. m. wd. Hot &


, & 2 Fog after the Rain Lig!
by m. wetting a. m. & p. m. ſcrious R. X11 3 m. wdy. clds Hy oe iomny Da.
N. NW. F |
= * HT ——_— omg&sp. W. —_— hops © aces © or, w
[. Cloſe, miſty. XV. Showry 10 m. & m Jl w :
XIII. Coldiſh m: cloſe, miſty. KNE, | vw. wad m. Þ. cool wd.
XIV, Cloſe, clearing ps nt. Aches. NE. XYL Dating and chundey, ſpoiling hay. W.


78. S;11,
XN. Great R, ante L, wetting 5 m. daſh
miſty m. p, A


S
wt.
rr! Z


Mk S 12,
XXII. Brighe, hot $ W. wd. 11 p. ve


ſome in the N, NE, Aches, clouds. Eflly
at Ns


M m XX II,


$4


light- 4


Mercurio ſolar-Table, direft.


Book 10.


KX111L Overc. and\ hopes of R. Luceſtiring
crack, dark N. but E. weſp.

XXIV. 1 m. Lowr 10 m.ſuſp, 11 p. SW.

XKXy. Cloſe m. p. miſty air, lowring p. mM.
drop or two. E.N E.NW.


75.  T 27. : ;
VII. R. 0. &c. wind and cloſe veſp. ——_—


on,
VILE. 1 p. cloſe, open. ;
IX, Cloſe, windy night, drops 5 Pp. _ 8 P.


X. Cloſe, miſt, offer rwice p.m. &8 p. N.
81, S 6.
XV. R. avte 5 m. open veſp. Nly


XyI. Lowring wd N W. clouds ride from SW
9p. Dolphins ſporring gn the mouth of
Severn


XVII. 4 m. lowring ſomer. open, miſt ar
N W. n, Hail T. M. thunder art Ferrara in

_ tral. '

'XVTIE. Fr: fair m. p. wd, {. miſt; cool %


N E.
XIX, Lightning ar n. troubled, clouding a.
m. not much moiſture, driſle 7 p. and R. 9
Pp. Meteor. ba 3
News of this ſhowre. wich chunder within 3
Leagues of Lime, by a Ship pur in day 20.
'Soalfo at ork,
$2. Pa "2.1!
XXX1. May. miſt m. H. wd. ante L, &c. heat,
» ſhowr 5. & occ+ ad 10 p. Thunder veſp, E.
TENT S E. SW,
I, 4- H. wd. « M. a drop,
WR. 4 4 m. at : p. Wly. Roan 24. time fi-
red with Lightning. Art Zwick Lightn. and
Thunder. , | |
Hr. Clouds im Scenes , ſhowr o. 2 p. 4 p. n.
Thunder. Hail'ar Dimwich as big as Pigeons


TY" * _-


July.


1672. $\ 12.

XXIV. Bright, dry m. H. wd. open, SW.

XXY. o. cloſe, H. wd, ſhowr, o,,1 p« 5p-!

= Low ebb. * | SW.

XXVI. Cloſe,daſh 9 m. with H.wd —_——
W.


XX\1-Cloſe i $.


= S 27.
VIII. Fair, dry, ovefc. veſþ. and lowring S W.
IX. 2. Cloſe, ſome milling, S E.
X, Fair, L. ſhowre 4m. & p. m. open. SW,
X&. Werrinig 's 1m) 2 p. warm m. hot n. $ W.


Eg
XVII. R. O'vrt; white cl. in Scenes, R. 2 p*
+ i Lightning's p. V. Meteors, d. 15. R. Th. 3


M. 7 mM, |
qe no Brisk wds 9 p. few cl. hot , ſome wer
P» W,
XIX. 11 'm. w. cloudy, Fog, gentle Kain 2


SW,


ad $ P- L
þ. XX, Fairy cooker, few clouds at un. E.


by


21, S 28,
I. E. Cloſe, miſt,open dry, much offer.
II. Cloſe, brisk wind, ſhowr m. 2 p. offer 3 p.


NI. R. 6 m. ſhowry a.m. daſh 1 p. and had
ſtormy and driſly veſp. which'thunder waz
prodigious at Hall in Swevia. $,

IV. S W. Brisk wd, cloſe m.p. dewing 10 p,
R. 11 m. die ſequ. at Baſil, ſeveral Houſes
ſuffer by Lightning.


Auguſt,
I670. M 14,
XXVI. Hor n. fair, Meteor; N


XXVII. Fog, froſty p. m. Meteors, Lightning
twice from S W. Hal coloured at Sr Albans,
y SE.

XX VIII 9 m. Foggy m. ſoultry, bright, Me-
teors. Fax wolans 11 p. S W. j
XXIX. Cooler daſh of R. o. H. wind. W.
XXX, Coldiſh, windy, open, H, wd, cloſe n


TI. L SL 26,
IX, Coaſting ſhowrs 0. wd, thunder, ſh. 3 p


H in Nadir 3 p. &. 5p. ſh9p. SW
X. Coaſting ſhowr 11 At MY
XI. 4-overcaſt 8 m.R.o. 5 p. 7 p. and gufts


XII,- H. wd a. L. and much R. Tempeſtuous:
wind circ. Merid. R. 5 p. greatR. 9 p.

X111. Showr t p. fair the reſt. :

XIV. Froſt, fair, fog m., H. p. m, CL in ſcenes,


76. Y me 24. |
LIL Fog thickiſh, barren cl. warm, Wyſterical
Firs. Meteors III, 9 p. one 11 p, one


V. Fog m. fair, warm, wind, floating Clouds,
' E.NE
VI. Fair, miſty air, hot p. m, Mer. two 11 p
brisk, overc. 7 Þ-
vit.-warm, clouds p. it, and red veſp.
VIIE. Warm,H. wd,very bright n. Meteors Wy.
. E.


IX. Dry, fair, Tide 14 Stairs, Meteors, H.
wds, cold n. Two paſling bells.


77... tg.

XIX. Fog m. cloudy m, p. H. wd m. p. drops
10 m, ſhowr 4 p.

XX. 7 mM. Fr, m, fair. {, lowring clouds 11 p.
pet W.,NW,

XXI. R, 4 m. wind and dropping 8 'm, 8 m.
R $ W.


+ $P.

XXII. Rent. m. p. much a, m. daſh 6 p.
wet, hail.

78, od. 21,

II. Warm, overc. p. m. fleec't clds 9 p. wd
various, thunder 8 p. 10 p.

HI. Many fleecit clouds 8 m. cloudy in N W
h & m.c S$, SW

Iv. o. Miſt, open, warm, cloſe n. W-

V. Early miſt, bur Horiz, clear 5 m.


ONCce


Chap.l.


Mercurio ſolar-Table, drrett,


,_ Cc.


Once overc. p, m. ind prerry brisk 3 warm| X It. E. mutt, werring a. M. & p.m.


, Mm. and nighe Mercors 11 p. |
VI. cldyy brisk wd, R. 7 m. 10 m. hot night,
warm day 3 Mercor ctrc. 9g.


September.


1669. > 3,

XI” Cook, open, great Meteor Eaſtward 8 p.
wd overc. 10 P. E.

X1X. 3 overcaſt m. bright. E.

XV. Bright and cool,

XVI. Fr. brisk wd.

75. dl 12,

XX1I11. R. at midn. fair, ſomer. overc, W.
wd, R. at n.


E. SE.


H. wd 9 P-
XXV. Stormy no#. tot. Daſh 2 m. warm, wet
al. ad 4 P. S
XXVI. Fair, windy, ſhowre 2 p. SW,
XXVIL.Fog m.on the Thames, wdy,pangs 7.W.
6. m 24. ? »
iv. Hot m. Aches 8 m. {. wet 5 m, miſty. SW
and R. o. finer. p. m. and © occ. Aches 6


p. and R.
V. R- 1 m. apace, clouds in ſcenes, Aches 5p.


7 ÞP* FAY, -
VI. .. Rainy 7 m. cloſe, miſty , wind, trou-
bled air 10 p. Aches : N.
VII. Cloſe, very miſty, wetting 3 p. &c.


82, —_—

RV. \; fog, warm, clouds in ſcents, and low-

* ring; very warm N. W.NE.

XVI. Warm n- (. fog, cloſe and warm 8 p. w,

XVII. 7 p. ſome drops 10 Mm. 4 P- R.gentle 6p.
&c. ſo ante 11 p. Rumor of an Igms Fa-
tubs.

XVII. C. drops a. m. & o. lowring p. m. C,
guſts, warm n.

XIX. Cloudy ;m. warm d. flying clouds, ſome-
rime pro.nifing. Ignes Fatuz. W.

XX. Fair, but not over bright; Guſts z p.


* Mereots bright in Cygno Lyra, &c. veſp. ho.
i S W,
* ©
OXober.
1668. == 19,


NX1X, Sept. Great Earthquake atSt. Maloes,
XXX. Sept. Winds, coldiſh, werting. R. 10 p-


1. Warm beginning, wd R.4 L2 p. Light-
ning from a fingle Cloud & p. s,
II. Miſt-m. warm guſts p. m. ſhowre 0. ©


ec. 9 P- a”
NI. Fair m. and miſt, wetting 1 p.R. 4 Þ. &
p. warm. | bog: SW.
TV. Wind a l. H.wd o. offer, drifle 3 p. W.
4. MS... 7
{. Fog, open, burniſhed cl. Fila.


W.'} XIV. 1 m. R. 2 m. mifty, dark. Goſſamere,


XV. 1 m. miſty, dark, opca 16 m. clofing,
Goſſamere, | :
XVI, fl. wd N W, Wly veſp”
XVII. Cloſe, miſt S_ W. winds, ſhowrs q p-

warm. Indiſpoſition.
80. mM 12, antes
XXIl R. m.& p. m. m.p.ſhowrey kk , BE.
XXIIT. Froſt and very cold die tor. NE.


SW |
XI, W.R. ante L, dewing 8 m. warm n.N W,


| XXIV. Fr. m. miſty, cold, overc. 10 m. R.
ante 5 ad 8 p. $,


| XXV. 10 m. Clouds flying, C.R. s p. © © W.


XXVI, Early fog. R. ante o. Þ Nadir, wind
brisk, ar Plymouth ſtormy. |


XXVIL. R. anfe 6 m. very dark, howings


m'lo ante 1 p.atque alias H. wind.


'| XXVIIL. Overc. © ort, open wiy z; C. thi
XX1v. R. 4 m. dark 9m. & ©, warmp. im. |


| clouds at n, | Ely.

' 81 = 22,

| HF. Clofe, ſhowre-4p. wd audible. wW.SW.

| IV. Fr. m. bright ante n. rewperate, ovcre. p.
m. Hurricane, Antigoa, VII Ships deſtroyed,
Some lay Ottobtr 2. *tis all of cafe, *

V. 9. miſt m. very ſuſpic o. & ),

open and cool p. m. w,


VI. Fog, fr. m, overc. ante 1 p, Meteors 9 p.
Red cl, m-


VII. Gr. fog, hempen tl.” dyerc. veſþ, FE.

VIII. C.R 5 m. open, R. circ. 10 p. N E,
at Falmouth ſtormyy **: RMA
$20 vey oi i Niel! cacons »&


x


1672, F NN
etl Colg, fair; ae hed ary
: H 1.7 .0

XXIIL R. ante L:: cloſe, ' wdy , warm; driſfle
Fi Þ. | : 4 ' wy,
XX1V, 2. Cloſe, *driſle o. and 4 p. wdy' n


: WAS
XXV. Open, cloſing SW. N W:all n,'i!


XXV1. Open, wd, 'fomer. overc. 3W.
XXVIL CR aL. cloſe, muddy d ** W,
{Htole, mit i - loſe Hyſte
I Cloſe, miſty,-miſling 0- N E. cloſe Hyſteri-
lil Indic.” ; 6.2
IT. Myſty, cold. N E.
HI.-Cloſe m. Þ miſty, NE.
ey -—_- miſt, Froſt. Aches Hyſterical In-


v. Cloſe, werting p. m. Hyſterical Indiſp.


{ VI. Cloſe. R. 1 p. Aches 8 p. w. NW.
79+ 4. wy 1 I
XIV. Gr. fog and froſt. f. wd. w,


XV. Excreme Froſt, fag , open, wind, wggy v-


XVI. 5s m. thick Fog, froſty E. m.'Sly, 'N,
XVII. Thick fog, tr ke? 9m..A oF.

Whale within 4 Miles of Deal. |
| XVII. Thick Fog,fr.thicker 9 m. froſty d;N.


| -XIX. Extream fog, ror fee ten yards 3" fog
moves from E,


.
[1
|
,


Dee.


by


Mercurw-ſolar Table, retrograde.


Mon te


Derember. XXIX. Fr. fog m. bright above, fog circa Ho-
| riz ocming A
| XXX, Very froſty and fo dark ©. fo
1677. VP 5. p- I circ, Horiz my p yo
XIV. Froſty, cloſe, miſty. ; $ es
XV. Cloſe, froſt, ſnow, yield 9 m; Ely. | 79- Z 26,


XVII. Wet found m. clcſe, werting 9 p.
XVIII Cloſe d.
VP 16


$v. Wer a. L. cloſe, fogey, driſle a. m
R. p. m. & 10 p. coldiſh. W. then Nly.


m.
NE.


&


XXVYI. Fr. 3. m- fog, yield. drill ar x


XVII. 3. Wind and wetting 4. Mm. H. wind
veſp. dark, damp walls, rempeſtuous 1 _ P-
Y-


XXy. Cloudy, foggy » cool, freezar n. E.
mely,


NE.


XXVIIL H. wd, R. n. S E. Wy. Ny,


|


A Comet lately appeared ſwift in Motion.
[V. Great R. 2 m. (. fog, cldy, H. wd. R. 12

&c, I
V. R. ante 1 m. cldy, brick wd, warm. S$.


VI. Great fog © rutilus a, m. fairp mm. W,


VII. s.Cloudy, miſty a. m. cloſe p.
VIILCiog, Joadym. Rwd ©


E.

A froſt, cloudy, {. fog very cold wd and
clds.

Ely


X, H. fr. and cldy, Cl. fog, cold wd.


|


—_


L
A Tei «


167%
XY Snow, Hal LY


dark, yield. E.
: .--- NE.
m. Þ, ſhow E.
mill, "wording 5 p. coldiſh om


79. = 7. :
XXV. Fr. yehement ſnow, ſharp wd, NE.
XXV1, k. Rn fr. H. wd and ___ -
univerſe] complaint, o4erc. p. M. -
XNVII. Brisk and very ſharp wd, Thames al-
.; moſt freze. Cold theſe, two days, as hath


XVI. o. cloſe
& XVII Cloſe,
Os


"A XXVIIIL Fr. yvehemene, L. Snow ante L. NE.
Vo, £ ©.

IX. Miſt, cloſe, , wd, Meteors 2 Eaſtward of

the Pleiades 5 p. brizk wd. W.

X. 9 m. miſt, cloſe, gentle wd. S w.

X1. Miſt, cloſe, open, {. wd. W.

Eebruary.
1671. X 11, f
XVIII. Cloſe, dewing ©, & 10 P. NE.


NIX. 8 m. {, wer m. driſle a. m. coldiſh, N,
XX, Lhd, o. Hail 3 p.werting veſp, Sly, but
a. m,Nly, |
{Grotty L: tinge of cl. Weltmard lent, fine
z Teic
Halo 11 p. SW.SB,
NE.SE.


_ Table Retrograde. 6 © 2


ItI. Stow nof7, tot, & a. m. deep 3 foot, ſo
weſp. relent. N W,

58, X 4.

X1. Miſt m. Wly, ſfommers days, f. overc. n.

XII. 2m. Fog, clouds N E. Ely a. m. Wly.
N We Þ. occ, prope in hanc ſpeciem\Mere-
ors 6p. RN juxta..2 9 p. Aches 5 p.

XIII. Fog, f. wetting 7 m. cloſe, remperate,

| Aches 11 p. Ne


March.


—


1669. Y 16.
XXV, Wind, ſnow 6 m. with hail 8 m. 9 m,
cutting wd. N,


XXVI, 6. Freez and wind awe L. ſnow © «f,


& offer p. m. ſo © occ. N,
XXVIL Froſt, wind, ſnowy winter weather;
ſnow 8,9-p«- -- ; Wly,
70. X 28,
VII. Cloſe m, open, temperate. NE.
her 5. Cloſe m. p. offer in proſpeR p. m. of- »
cr. SW,
IX. Froſt, bright. NE,
XN. Fr, very cold, cloſe, Lightning reported.
76. ==, YA
XVI. Froſty 2 m. warm, wind, lowring, E
XVIII. 2. f. Re 5, 6 m. cloſe m. p. dark 2 p
wetting 10 P. E.
XIX. Miſt, werting a. m. per tt. and wind E,
$ W.o. Aches,


77. X 21,
XXXVIIL Feb. Fr. fair, warm p.m.
I. Mar. Froſt, miſt, Aches.


W,


po


II. 12. miſty m. froſty, ſnow, © occ. &rc. with
guſts.


4


| 1L Fog and froſt m. Cold, brisk wd.


April,


 XXVL. Fair, wd, overc. 11 P.


'. Pook Il.


 Mercurio-ſolar T able, Retr, 135=
; | 7S. S 6,
April. XVII Mifty cl. fair, warm. NE.
XVIIL. 3. Miſt, hear E. C, wd. Indiſpoſ. Thund.
1668. S 5 8.10 p. NE.


X ill. Warm, cloſe m, p. wd, thin, overc. n.
N


X1V, $.Cloſe, wdy, miſt m, wettitig n. N.
XV. Fair m. lowring o. dry. W.
74. S 16,
XXV. H. wd, cool, open. N W.
XXVI. 1 p.H. wd, ſhowringp. m. & 9 Þp.
L. wd, b
XXVIL R. aCrepuſc. ad 5 m.
©. V. 27.
it Hyſterical paſſion.
Iv. Aches m. p.
V. R. 5m. Werting 4. m. cool, E.
VI. 12. Cloudy m. p. cool wd, fine d. Aches.


. E.N.
VII. Fair 2. m. cloſe and Hail o. H. cold wd,
Indiſpeſition, NE,


Et


' May.


1673. Tl 5,
XV. Pleaſant a. m. ſhowre 3 p. 5 p. NE.
XVI. 0. R. 7 m. brisk wd, open p., m.. N W.
XVII. Cloſe 6 m. fair, cool , dry; brisk w__

E,


79: It 17.

XVII. Gr. Fog, cloſe, R. 7 p. hot veſp. Light-
ning 8 p.

XXVIIL. Rain, calm, hot veſp. clds, E, wd;
W., ante L. s

XXIX, R, ſtore 5 m.9 m. NE.


80. S& 27.

VI Fog, cloſe, dark p. m. ſhowr and Thunder-
Claps 111. 6 p. &' occ. daſh 10 p. Rocce. »
2 in Nadir. E.

VII. o. fog, f. wd, drifle m. powring o. daſh
6 p. R.ante 11 ad bo, 2 m. gs | *

VII. Rain ante L. wd change S. cloſe 4 p,
bright Horiz. 7 p. clouds in — P. |


i


Tune.


1671, S 14,
xv. Fair, windy, lowr, clear n W.Veſp. _


XX VII. Cloſe a. m. lowr, windy p. m. _ 1


72. Tl 25,
Iv. Hops blaſted in the beg. of che Month.
V. Cloſe, ſ. rain 8 m, SF.


VL. 3 m. ſhowrm. & 1 p. wd.. S,
VII. Great lowring L. ſhowre 2 p. hot.
YI. Hear and Thunder, S, SE


XIX. Thander, lightnin .$P.6 p.
{. cain. Lightning 9p. RE 0


——_—_—


Zaly.


1670; hl 3.

X1V. Ofcen cloudy, putfs of wd. W.

XV. 1 m. Hot, fair, 'wd H. Wetring, þ. mh.
ſhowre 8 p. ; My W.

XVI. Werand windy ante L. a.m. 3 p.daſh ©
occ, SW.

XVII Lofty wds, ſhowre 2 p. 2&0 ox. w.

76. dl 13,

XXY. S. miſty m. ſmart ſhowr 1p. wd $.

| Harmful lightning to a ſhip and men.
XXVI. 11, Showr 6 m: warm, wdy, Me-


teors Five 11 p. Two juxta Androm, &
SW.
XXVII, Horriſh clds m. p, lightning freque 10


p. R cum Pleiad, Aches & or,
XXVTIL. Rain and much Thunder,


77: S 25,

VL Fog m. wd, bright, f. clds, Indiſpoſitian.

Clouds coming againſt the wd.

VII. o. fog, fair E. a few clouds ride Nly, while
the wd 1sEly.lightn. and thunder in prof;

VIII. Clouds riſe 9 m. H. wd 2 p. troubled

Air, thunder 7 p. offer 8 p.


— —_—c___.


Gmu—_—_—_


Auguſt, -


1668. m2.
XIX, Miſle m. & 1 p. gentle ſhowr 4 p. tris.


W.N.
XX, 3. {. rain ante L. Niſt aures fefellerins; fair,
dry, {. wd, , "Why.
XXI, Miſt m. bright; £. miſt veſp, wd a ©


0CCs : W.
69. d. 20, |
I. Fair, heat. N,
ITf. 4 m. open, ſhowre p. m. W.
Iv. Fair, heat, \ rain reported ante L. W-
74. WT 17.

XXIX. Indiſpoſition Hyſterical.
XXX. Fair, great ſhowre. SW.


XXXNI. 12. Raina2 ad $ m, miſle a. m. wer-
ring 9 p. red Even. . SW.
I, Sept. H. wd no#F. tot. offer 1 p. rain 3 p. H,
wd* Indiſpoſitions. ; : |

75» TFO,

XI, Clears wdy , ſhowre 3 p. & alias
boiſterous rainy £ SW.
XIV. 2 m. cloudy; ſhowrs 0.

XY, Wdy, rainy m. gloomy d. offer,


Nao SL, MM,


Mercurio ſolar-T able, Retr. .


Book I.


Mt 10,


I, 0 n
_. J_ in Bononia T M.which happened


abour the 224'or 23d.
X X11. Fog, cool m.bright, hor, Mer. ante 9.
XXII .Soultry, threarning p. m. lightning


much ante 11 p.L- R. 11 p. W.
XXIV. H. wd, bak clouds, drop. Me-


reors fly apace in N W.
September,
1673. MA3-


y. Cloſe, cool, flying cl. _ E,

VI. Fog, fair, ſomerime dulliſh,

VII. N W. fog, cloſe.

75 i 3, :

XV. Very cold n. Froſt, bright, flying clouds,
cloſe n. : : SW.

XVL.9 Ra. L, & a.m. 4 p. rain hard and wd


8 p. SW.
XVII. Furlous Tempeſt no. tat, H. wd, R.
0 2p... |


< 13.
Rv. very H. wd, R. b2 m. walls , rain


an. 3, much rain and wd no. ſequ,

XXVL 11 R. no#, tor, & (© ort, H. wind and
warm n. ſcud 0, 1-P. 3 P-

. KXVIL. Wd, fhowr 9 in. 5 p.6 p. rain hard ©


occ 75 P- 8 ante 9 P» E,
We 27.

VIIL. Great fog, fair, warm p.m. Liſt of cl. in

South W. N. .

IX, 8 m. great fog, fair, dry, hot 10 p. E.


_ =


OSober.
IM. Frofty and bright. \. fog m.
- XIX.0-Fog m. Fog, cold ; fog n. ;
"XX; Windy and very dark a.m. much rain $


s P- &c. | S W,
7. "= 20,
m. H. wd nof tor. daſhing m. open p. m. SW.


HI. 12, Fr. fair m. cldy p. m ſhowre 5 p.
NW.


TV. Cool, cloſe m. p. ſhowr 4 Þ» S W.
b m 16,

£&vn.. Fog, cold, Cloſe , conyulſion 5 child
ſickning, N E.

XXV1II. 12, Cloſe, brick wd, Fog R. - P-

XXIX, Cl. rain m. & 11 m. ſnow 8 p. fog, N.

70. . 29,

XI. Cloudy, ſuſpic, a. m. open p. m. wW


XII. 1 m. R. fog, nota cl.in the sky. Freez
Goſſamere 5 p. f. Mer. prope W It E.


XIIL Gr, fog, Goſſamere , Halo 9 p. clear. - *


N, ovember.


166g. 7 8,
XIX. Miſt,froſt, yield ;cloſe,miſt caken up ar -


XX, 6 m. Fr. fog, thaw, cloſe wd 7 p. ſmarc
bur ſhort ſhowr 11 p. S,
XXI. Fine R.welcom, warm,miſle, d) MC.Wly.
= 0 3%
IL, {. moiſture m. cool, fair p. m. Fila. yy W,
TV. Fr. ſnow 8 m. fair, cold d prope caudam VP
Freez n. A
V. Fr. oyerc. yeelding 3 wd p. m. Audible n,
{. moiſture Nly m. Wly p. m.


75. 7-18,

XXIX. Clear, warm; cloudy ef, W,

XXX, 1 my, Fop, fair, warm. N W.,
Newburg , Globe of Fire for 3 Hours.

I. Decemb, Fog, cloſe m. p. cool, W,


32. T Ix,


| XXII. Froſty, miſty. overc. o. yield veſp. NW,


XXII. 4 m, Gr. fog, fr. clumſie p. m. fog,
freez at n. Aches. E,
XXIV. Great fog, cald, cloſe,ſ. miſle 8 p. Ely.


em


| * "ENS. December,

1668. WS *

IV. L. Froſt m, cold, cloudy, wd, driſle 2 p.
10 Þ. E


V. 10. Cold, averc. 4 © or. open, drops red in


NE, © oc, X
VI. Cloſe m. p. {. drizle, freez yehement.NW,
73: Vw 2©O, f
XXX, Cold, clear 5 m. R. 7 m. 4 p, wdy, SW,


| XXXI, 2.R. dre to harder 2 p.H. wd. $,


| L on Windy, open, overc, 1 p.H. wind and R.


>
W.


p.S W. N E. weſp.
74 | VF 4.
V. Cloſe p. m. warm, wd 3 Aches, W.
XV. 11+ {. KR. m. cloſe, warm. W.S E.
| XVI. Cloſe.
| 7G. ? 2,
XII. H. fr. clear, Aches. E.
XIH. 8 m. dark and wet 8 m. E.
XIV, Fog ,cloudy, cold n. R. 5p. FE. Nly.
80, * W I4.,
XXII. Rainy and daſh ante 6 m. & 2 p. R.
wveſp. H. wind at n. S.
| XXIV. 2. Wind Nly 1 m. great Halo ( cujus in;*
tra aream  )T wd,R. 10 p. $.


} XXV. Opena. m. H. wd, dark, dewing p. m-
' Tempeſtuous 8 p.Comer ſeen, "oP
81. 4 27.


VII. warm n.yet \.lictle fr.$muxd riſe of Y or,
pleaſant, coldiſh n.
VIII, 8.H.Froſt ,fog fall ante merid; nor (© cold
© occ, SE.
IX. Dark a, m, miſle 9 m. & a. m. ſiveert ſhowr
ante 2 p. C. D occ.very warm wd.W.
Die ſequente. Sea by a ſtrong Weſt wd ar Hague
broke the Banks,and laid 2190 Acrcs under


Water,


oy buy Pa ine, (ns ON hos B00 ac Bis ard. a and ans. ane en


- C
Va:


Chap.I. Aſpefts Influence demonſtrated. |


s 29. A Table of 'the Mercurio-Solar Conjunttions ; as well of his d:-
re# Courſe, firſt noted by themſelves 3 and then of his Retrograde, where
che Aſpects you ſee are XLVIII. Days 252. in the former; in the Later
Aſpe&ts XLV, days but 143, Of which Later Table we hope it will not -
be amiſs to give you, as hitherto the Abridgement 3 thar the Reader may
Ken the Vatare of 2 : Notin a miſt, or thicker Cloud, bur in amore ex-

ditious and clear obſervation. Nor in the mean while can the former

rightly cenſured ſupefluous, becauſe the Faith of the one depends on the

Truth of the other ; ſeeing the Later without the Former may be preten-
ded by thoſe who are apt to Cavil, to be a forgery and feigned Evidence.
Thus then lies the Abridgement. |


Days 252. 143: Days, 252, 143*
Dir. Ret. Dir. Ret.
Froſty Days. 18, 10.) {South — 20, IF.
Frofty Nights. —— — ——30. 1 Fi A. E. —_— IS; 2T,
Gold, —— 10, A.W.— —13. 9%
Warm. — 37. 26. S. E. ——
Hot and Soultry ———12. 9. | S.W. ——40. 25.
Hot Nights. — ——7. 2| | Ran — 78.48.
Trajetons. —T Fa 5*| | Rain Durable, — 96. 19.
Lyiehtnings. n— T-. = I3. 8.
Thunder ——— —— 9. 6 > SBHal —— ——7 2
Mift, — -39. 17 | | Goſſamere —— - 4.
Fog. m—TT,. 20 1nd Ghange ———— IO, I9
alo.— — —_—— |
Windy.— 6 68. 36
Stor my.— - 35. 18.1 |
JO TIT 42. 28 f |
Eft —— w—m———46, 27. FE
Worth. um ”


$ 30. It cannot be faid now,bur that at firſt ſight 'ris Fu le 7 hath an In-
fluence z for here are the ſameNames and I»ftances of feveral States of the
Air , which have bin conſidered in the Lunar Tables : Here is Heat, Fae,
Winds, Rain, &c. as well as there, and inthe ſame conyenient proportions,
the number of the days concernedin the Lynar Tables being about 261. Fn
this preſent the days concerned, are ſomewhat ſhort, +:z, 252. Now if we
begin with Heat Extream and Exceſſive , which we have faidis moſt likely
tO fall under faithful Obſervation, the Number here is XI. But XIL But
then again there are but XI. noted in-the Plemi-Lunar Table: The one is con-
feſſed ro have Influence, why not the other ?' The next Inſtance is of Stor-
my Winds, wherein the Obferyation is leſs liable to make default ; ( ſome
it may,according as it may happen,that the Jeſs curious Obſervator's Library
may be ſituatez ) of thoſe you ſee 35;-the New » it ſelf being but 37:
(To fay nothing of a Sextile or a Quartile, ) who encourages 7 , and bids
him hold his own, he hath paſſed the Pikes of the two Scrutinyes, while he
ſtands candidate to be reckoned an Officer in the Czleſtial Militia He
hath ſued for his right to heat, and hath ic adjudged to him, he hathrecove-
red his right too, as a Friend toe Aolw , being always owned for a Windy
Planet, and it appears ſo.


S31 16


128


A r——


The Aﬀpefts mnfluence demonſtrated. y Chap. ſ.


$ 31, Ir remains we make enquiry into Razy, Their's the Plunge 3 wel!
Y offers for Rain 78. That comes ſhort of the Lunar Aſpect, 'tis true,
even when the D:ſproportion is conſidered between the Sum of the days on
either Aſpect. But, again view the Exceſſive, violent and laſting Showres,
and our Mercurial Conjuntion exceeds the Energy of the Lunar , whoſe
Daſing Number is but XXVII. where our ſtirring ? exhibits XXXIII.

$ 32. There reſts, according to our conſtant Merhod to compare the Þla-
netary Moiſture with the Sum: total of the Days Lifted under its Aſpet. If


' the Moiety be obtained, the Influence is demonſtrated. The days of our


Mercurial Dire&t Aſpe&t, we have given in 252: the Moiety is plain to a
Natural Arithmetique, v:z. 12g. Towards this half Sum 2 muſters u
his days of Moiſture, of the le(6 rate, 48. of the greater Rate, if you pleaſe
to inſpe&t the Table 36. I toto 114. but 12. ſhort of 126. Here I might
cry out 4 Mercury, a Mercury, for ſuch a little difference, wz. 11 or 12,
breaks nodefinitions. But then we have 20days more to add, whereof 13
for Snow, and 7. for Hail ; the total now is 134. and the Mozety is excee-
ded as brawely as inthe New or Full. For the New gathering all her In-
__ of Moiſture, makes 145. for 261. and ? makes 234. for 152,
_
5; 3. In good time be it ſpoken, then Planets have Iofluence, and Aſtrolo-
rightly managed is a real noble Philoſophy. Not onlya d © » is ob»
Rrvable = Winds and Rain, (which all Seazzex know, as well as their 24a-
&raiit. and Compaſs) but a d © 3 ſtarts the like Effets, which the moreLear-
ned ezht ro know and deliver to the Seaman : when they have got it once,
then Aſtrology will lead the Fg Triumphant with Flying Colours : In the
meait.time be 1t writ in Capital Letters upon 2 Pyramid.
'* $'24. Yea, but doth this Method ſucceed in the 43 "hag Alpec al?
Tr.dith - Sum ap. the te: for Rain , Snow, and 3 and the Total
2mortints to the Moicty of the Days, with Overplas : for the Sum being dou-
bled makes 150. and the Total of the Retrograde days, is 143.
* $ 35. Here may be asked the 2ueſt:0v, How 1t com's to paſs that the &
© I brings wore Inſtances of Winds and Rain, then & © 2 elpecially,when
it may be perceived that I drive at the exalring of 2? above I. I anſiver,
it ſtrikes not at ? 's eminence 3 for 'tisa ruled caſe, I hope, that Three are
more Potent than Two. 2? then is ſafe, notwithſtanding the Objection :
Forina d ©) our ? is never far off, not a Signs diſtance, if we ſtretch
himon Tenterhqpks 1 ſo &Þ is athand tohelp on the Lunar Effet. Bur ar
= Mercurial & with the, the » may be two, three, four Signs di-


[. |

s 36. It may be obſerved again that the Antients make ? more a Windy
than a Rainy Planet, whereas we ſeem to make him for Rain, more then
Winds contrary to the rhind of the Antients. I anſwer, I have not travel-

ed 'the world over neither with Columbus, or Linſchoten, our Drake, or
Gavenaiſh, and fo cannot make an univerſal Obſervation ; It cannot be ex-
pected otherwiſe that, I ſpeak for our Climate only, being apt to believe
that the Antients ſpoke gorinng but Truth, relating alſo to their Climate.
Mercury in the more Southern dryer parts, may be more windy, and lefs for
Moiſture ; but where moiſture more abounds, the contrary may obrain in
our Septentrional Countries ; yet what if I ſhould grant the Antients their
Plea, that He is moiſt witha touch of dryth. Iam concerned chiefly for bis
Influence in general,

S 37. I have not travelled, I ſay, but I have not fo few Friends, but that I
can preſent them with ſome glcanings of Nautical Obſervation, which cn
the Seas part will juſtifie our Planets Character for Wind, - and let it be a
necity toenquire to which of theſe onr Planet chiefly inclines, and fo thar
Scruple may be baffled, s 38. As


*” & = =_e wu HT CEE


Chap. I; Demonſtrated from Nautical Obſervation, ” 2 39


$ 38. AsI ſaid, theſeare our Nautical Obſe ations :— n
to the Eaſt Indies. ervations :—Firſt in a Voyage


April, Anno 1662, R. V 24:
. North, 2. Freſbgale SE.


3

” 5 © You” ml gale S &

5. o. Frehbgale,

6. SouthLat. 1. Weak 8 iy

7. I. 30. Freſh gale, good Weather S E. E.


Anno 1668. d@%q R. S.5.


13. North 13. Hardgalesof Wind NE. © un Zenith |
14. Latitude 12. Gloudy, hard gales wy a


I5. II. For5g y, fr NE.
x 9. Farr, Ereb, s "= 7, :


Auguſt, .d ©'%. R. 17.


tg. Seuth g. Fair, Freſh gales, then moderate, S.S E,
20. Latitude. 8. Fine and moderate Gales. S.S E.
"hy 7. Fair, moderate, pretty freſh P. M. SE.


December, 4 © #. * 24 R. |
4. South 34; Fair, ſmall gale , Gy SV. S. CL


5. Latitude24 Smallgales, rig gales, N E.
6, 34 Morn: Exceſſive eg EN, NE,
February. | Anno 1669. d ©*%: *. IC 3. art,


$. 2. Rain, IN. moderate gales, N E.
g. Noth 4 Cloudy, pretty freſh gales, - "2
10. Latitude. 4. Glouay, fr T8 ales.


It. 5. Thith weather fome rain, freſh gales, IN. N
12. 6. "_ Jane Rain and n, feb gat freſh 9c m waſt
* 13, | 7, Thick 7 howres, pretty freſh gales, N E,
March, &d © *'


25. North 45: Cloudy, moderate gales, E. N.
26, Latitude 45. Variable, ſometime freſh gales.


27. a6, Cloudy and maderategalss. N E
28. 46. = Farr, moderate pn of} NE,
Ocober. Anno 1671. d@z; myq.R..


18. North 41. Fery hard gales of wind, cloſe N E. with a great Sea;
tg. Lat. 39. Cloudy, pretty freſh gales. "NN W. -
20, 37. Fair, moderate gales. |


O o Dec.


Influence dcmmſtrated from Nantical ( Obſervation.


December; d © * . M 4. Dr.


12. North 3. ModerateS E.
13. Latitude. 2. Cy ne moderate gales. S. SE.


I4. 1. Some Rain, freſhgales. S. S E.

I5. Cloudy, freſh gales.

16. South. ©. Cloudy, freſh gales. SE.

7, 2 1 Cloudy and freſh gales. S E.

18. 2. Cloudy and freſh gales, SE.

I9. 3. Fair andfreſhgales. _

On the 16th day were ſeen many Fowls fitting on the water,

February. Anno 1672. d@ 7%. 224 R.


I. = 35. Drift, hard gales. NE. NW.
. Lat.


2 36. Driſe freſb gates. SW. NW.
3. 36. FS. Rain,calmer,and ſmall gales P.McwariableW.N. SW,
4 35- Farr, Wetey freſh gales, -


 Apgil, 4 ©?: & 2, Dir.


To. South 15. Cloudy, bit fine fr 'otes., ESE.
11. Lat = Fair M. P. [. PE


X 1 1n, very freſh gales. S E,
12. 12, A little gufty and fas Bank WE.
Dork, abundance of Raiy. E. much Lightning at


CH and moderate 'gatey. N BK. SE.
14. "IG, © © honda: of Run pl. c. Wind wariable, but
© " noderate galer but at'6 m.to1o m.very freſh gales,S E,
Day 11. A. ftrange Fiſh about 7 Foot long, with a long Snout like a
Garfiſh, and ſharp-Forehead, Scales, * © |
Day 13. Saw many Tropich Birds, +


July. 4 © 7. 412, Dis.
22, Ges. Fair NE. veſp. Sly a ſmall gale.
2 oe a Cloudy, ſmall , nora ds ,
25. Rx 8 « Much rain, and wery wnſetled weather, the wind way;
fe S S\ N.N E. SE. moderate” gales moſt part, een Lam


EP
ark, much Rain, and moderate gales $ E.
Guft Nly, in the nature of a Whit Che feds


Abtght, and Rain extraordinary. E. $1 —_
27. Pep mikreb fad Weather , Thunder, Lightning, and
exceſſive, |. freſh gales, and ſometimes Guſts,


November. 'd ©8%. * 13.Dir.


21. .x 19. Thick, Hazy, Tempeſtuous, ſ. Rain M.—E. NE.
. 22; b- is. Gloud 0 <> guts, howres, then fair, and preſs ales, E. NE.
8 23. '3 17. Fair, Hazy, ſome drops, pretty freſh gales. E. N E.
24. x 16, Fair, hes gales,
25. 2 13. Thick Hazy Weather, ufts A. M. freſh gales, E. N E,
26. S 10. Gloudy, thick, rainy, wy fre gales. N. NE.
"27. 9g. Muchrain, ſome guſts, and hardgales, N E.


Ss 29. Thus


Book II. Chaldee Philoſ. not All Superſtution.


s 39. Thus far for the E2ft Indies in the good ſhips called the Lozaon, the
Experiment, Whoſe worthy Commander was my juſtly Dear Friend. I
could add the like for the Weſt Inares Voyages 3 but theſe may ſuffice, the
Obſervations lye indeed with ſome interruption, ſome Conjunctions being
not noted ; but none on our 'part having given a faithful Account wherever
the journal related his Story. |

$ 40. Here I object to my (elf, that all this ramaging of Sea Inſtances
doth not prove that our Dear 2 is yet a W:zay Planet, by the gales of
Wind aſcribed to him; becauſe theſe Gales , we know , laſt the Mariner
from the Time he hath firſt ſer ſail, to his very Port 3 but the d © # doth
not laſt all that while, not for ſo many Months as the Ext India Voyage
requires.

$ 41. Therefore I anſwer, the Objection ſeems reaſonable; but it only
ſeems ſo for want of Experience, or the Knowledge of the true State of
the Queſtion. For the Queſtion is, not whether the d @, ? is the axly Af
pect which raiſes Wind? But whether # be not rightly Character'd by
the Antient Afſtrologers for ſuch a Faculty ? If fo , then wherever he is
configurate with 9 or %, or 2, he may do the like: He may, yea, and
he doth, as will be ſeen in its Place, * Nor do we aflert © the oF + Planer
who is foqualifyed, the Aſpects of the » wehave ſeen, . have their Winds
along with them : So what with Ore Aſpe#, what with Others, as at a
Game at Foot-ball, the Ball comes to the Goal. Sometimes indeed there is
a calm at Sea, the Foot-ball lies ſtill, but it is not long e're ſome Aſpedt or
other meets it,-and accordingly as the Aſpect is, the Gale is fmall and f2czr,
or freſh and brisk, or hard or extreaws. The Mariner comes not to his Port
by Oze Aſpect, but by AZ. ' Neither do the Natives uſe one Method, in.the
the River le { ſuppoſe ) the Boat ſometimes fails, ſomerimes Rows;
ſometimes drives with Stream, ſometimes ſhoots the Cataract 3. ſhooting
the Catara&t ſpeeds one on the way, but it reaches not to the Port, .the
Sail, the Rope, the Pole at due times muſt help to the Arrival.

9 42. Mercury then may enjoy his Character, and no man ſeruple it 3 for
what ſhould hinder ? Is all the Chaldze Philoſophy Super/fition 2 Even as
#:uch as all Heathen Learning is abominable. We ſhall make ſome work if
we throw away Euclid and Archimedes, becauſe Heatbens, and Dioſcorides,
becauſe an «Agyptian 3 we have obſerved before, that Males himſelf threw
not away all the « 2yptian Terms; and Nature it (elf may have in Ghaldee
- Paraphraſle. : ,

6 43. Here,. according to former precedent, we ſhould range a Table
for Prognoſtick of the Rain according to the Srgzs : but here that Method
takes not place, becauſe of the variety of the Days concerned, which in
the Direct d are wore or leſs, as the Motion of } happens to be ſwifter or
flower. In Aquary you fee the.d brings Rain, or Snow, or Wind, 5 days
in 6. 47. 167g. in * 47. 1668 it brings Rain and Wind all its 5 days. In
March 1673. the like. In March 1674 Snow thrice in 5 days, &c. But
it haps not accordingly in the other years under the {ame Signs z ſo that we
cannot as yet pretend to any on—_ Infallible, implying inthe mean while,
what the Planet comes ſhort at One time, it makes amends at another : &
communibus Anais, inthe Direct, it brings 11. of 16. ina certain Sign called
Aquary; and 12. of 19. in X. 14. ot 21. in S, 15. of 24.in &\ after
this Proportion. .


A


142


d © Retr. brisker then the Dir. Book 1I.


——


$— XVI. Days, whereof wet.11,


5 > - — ms I2.
IT : I4.

| < -&. of XXIV. — I5.
4A XX. ——_——
LY XVII. n Io,


About 7. or 8. lies the difference.


$ 43. Thus theDrre#;theRetrocedent Aſpett is brisker according to his more
xe Stint of fewer (z. e. but Three Days) for the moſt part. For I pro-
miſe you here Gommunibus Annis, = Alſpe& brings Razz ( and what wore )
I may fay every day ; in 9or 19 © I find but two excepted that are not
Rainy 3' Once, indeed, I meet with Three. REG 4

S$ 44. Here's Influence then, and ſomething approaching I»fallib:lity ; if
we were as near theLaprs Philoſophorum : as we are to ſome Infallibilicy, we
ſhould be Rich. ;

Ss 45: The reaſon'is given, becauſe * is found to be nearer the Earth on
this Ge the © in his Ketroceſſion, when direct he incedes above it. So the
I»feriour Planets, what they looſe in their Bulk, Nature makes up in their

icinity to the Earth. | | |
$46. Now, that ? makes” a greater impreſſion upon us than the »

iy by the Attentive be obſerved, even from the Hail or Snow ( as well

wig cd Rain ) which appears, though at moſt but ſeldom, yer more eqtial-

irs it appears) w2der our Planer. For if I miſtake not, the Szows un-

der & 's d with © are commonly more hard and whiſtling , then at the


New or Full, except upon a common Engagement with ſome other AfpeR,


the more proper Origine of that Conſtitution. I reckon in like manner, that
the » is not of her own Nature #»cl:ned at all to produce Hat!, 1 meannot
a great drop, as Hail commonly is congealed in the Deſcent. The » is of
a ſofter Light, apt to produce Dews and Msſts, and the more. favourable
Moiſture. There is ſome Axger in Hail, and more Violence in the Heat
which fathers the Drop deſtin'd for ir. And the ſame account for Hail com-
with the Lunar evinceth ; for the New ) brings bur 3 Inſtances, the

d©Yk wa 7. and the @ © and Þ brings no more , which yet in days
exceeds our Mercurial Conjunction.

s$ 47. Nevertheleſs, if that will not do, we may be pleaſed to compare
the Loud Evidence of Thunder on either fide our d thews IX. Thunders
with VII. Lightnings dire& ; Refiex it brings 17. for each. What Thunder
doth d © Þ bring ? Two, The Full, Four. The Squares, Four. The Trines
and Sextiles Lunar are Higheſt : The one of the 4s bringing Sewex z and
a Sextile Six z but we then add the Account of Lzyghtnings and Thunder
together, and our d © Z exceeds all. "x

S 48. Bur it may be I need not Labour to prove 7 to bea more Potent
Planet, becauſe, as I imagine, even the Adverſary upon any Influence ſolid-
ly proved on our Planets part, not unwillingly allow the Preeminence to it,
compared with the 3. We remember here that Ptolemy rold us of his B-+:-
7a} & $1:7-07, Thunder and Lightning, and Fiery Meteors ; we have met with
a few of theſe later alſo, which may be worth the mention. But what
might Ptolemy firſt mean by his 2-14: ? Do we think that he meant that our
Planet in Dominion was Al Wildfre, and do nothing elſe but Ramble in
the Air in Summer time? By no means. He intended not that it Thundred
infallibly, Totzes, Zwuotres ; He knew it might and ought to fruſtrate a
Parſay's Obſervation of the Heavens, who hath obſerved a Summer or =
2


Fl


| ——_— —


Chanp.l. dov n filent Aſpett, ſpeaks lowd.


and finding 29 ſuch Meteor, hath cond-mned Czleſtial Philoſophy, and De-
ciron'd ir. But he "ſpeaking from long Obſervation of Hz:m#ſelf, and the
Reports of his Speculative A4zceftors, gives us to underſtand, that oft-rimes,
not in every Month, not inevery yezr, perhaps not in every place, but only
with them in their Countryes, inevery, or at leaſt moſt years this d gave
Fire. And fo was an Inftrumenr of ſome Divine Power, whom all Na-
rions believe creates that Meteor, the Thunder. Well, you ſee this proved
at large from Germany: Or, will you pleaſe to accept an account from our
own Land? I have by Gods Goodneſs lived ro make the Obſervation, and
"ris pity, it may be, it ſhould periſh, becauſe the Eite of a Liberal Science


. liesuponit. Then Lo! here it followeth, even from the beginning of my
* Obſervation; there is ſcarce a year miſſing, no, not with us here in Exe-


lan who yet are much cooler, I hope, than «Zeypt or Arabia,


s 49. A Tabie of ſuch ConjunFrons of the © and 7 , which have produced
Thunder from Ayo 1652. to Anno 1683.


An. 1652. June 9,10. % Dir. An, 1670. May 12. Drr.
54. Jun. 28, Dir. Aug. 27. Rety.
54. Sept. 5. Retr. | 71.April, 30. Dex.
$5. Jun. 12, Drr. Aug. 9. Dr.
56. Sept. 9. Dr. 72. July, 7. Retr.
58. Jun. 26, Retr. 76. May,24. Dir.
58. Aug. 5. Dr. July, 25, _ Retr,
60. July 12, Dir. 27.

61. -u IT, | ok Y - 6: *
61, Apr. 20. 23, etr. 77. july 7. tr.
62, Febr. 18, © Der. 8,

62. April 5. Retr. 78. May, 21; "
62. Aug. 8. Retr, Fuly 18, \ Retr.
63. Mar. 15. Retr. | 4ug. 3. Dir.
64. July, 3. Retr. * 99. July, 17. Retr,
65. April, 21, Dir. 80. May, 6. ; Retr,
65. May, 15. Retr. July, 3. Der,
66. July,14,15,17.Der. 81, Aug. 13. Retr,
68. June, 11. Dir. . 82. Aug 6, Retr,


16


OFob. 1. oe


The Norimberg Diary makes braver ſport, but we need ic nor.

$50. Even'Keplers Ephemerides br:ngs us, An, 1622, April XXV. wentus,
Nuit, Fulgnra. yn 1623. Jan. V. Aftus, tomut. VII. Galor, Fulgura, ven-
ti, - Aug N. Tonitrua, wventus magn. Pluv. XI. Tonitru, Granado multa. XII,
Tonitrua continua. An, 1625. Fulgura Matutina: Detonuit cam Imbre. July V.
Nebula, Pluit, Fulgura. Ang. XXI- eAiftus tempeſtas. NXII. Tonutt Plu-
it, 43.1626, Jun. XV. Tmber, Tonuit, Plutt, XVI. Aft procella, Pluwia
Large. XVII. Nebula , Tonitrua , Pluvia, Aug. 11, e Aftus, Procella, To-
nitrus, An. 1627. Avg. XVIII. XIX. XX. Intbres, Tonitrua. effiftus wapt-
aus, Nofu Tonitrua, An. 1628. May, I. II. IV. eo Aftuoſum tonitrua. XXV.
IVis. July IV. Nebula, « Miftus, tonuit, pluvie continue. An. 1629. Jun. XV.


Grands Tonrirnua, ,
9 51. This may ſerve for a Taft, and when I was ſo far entered I remem-


bred wichal the Limits of his diſtance from the Sun, and this uſe I made of -


it, that whatſoever Efe# the Sun is guilty of, our Planer muſt havea ſpecial
hand in it, for he is always found in the Sun's Gompazy, and therefore mult


be ſuſpeited, whea any miſchiet is donez The Inſtrument that we molt fre-
P p quently


AS ecret, CC. Thuanus s teſtrmony. Earthquakes. Chap. l.


=F = quently uſe is moſt Miniſteria]. Verily in 5. or 6 years Scrutiny I (aw thar
| of all the 28 gr. which meer out che diſtance of 2 from ©, there is -:
one of them bur is found to raiſe this Tumult, though with ſome diftcrence :
and if there ſhould be any Secret in that, in time, I hope ic will be made our.


7.2; 6,8,12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25,26. And this whether 2 be
before or behind the Sun: of the rwo, the rather before ir.

$.52.; Thenext Inſtance muſt be Earthquakes 3 for I ſhall never forget P:o-
'lemy, & 50vic, faith he; ſome inſtances: we have met with, roo many to be
baffled in- peruſal of Weekly Papers from the Exprre, belide what in the
late turbulent Hurrys flew up and down our Metropolis, And weare in
fair way, having laid this for a certain Rule, That whatever cauſes the Thu
der, yea, or Storms, ts apt to cauſe an Earthquake, more or leſs ; Not fohar
the noiſe of the Thunder ſhaketh the Earth,and maketh che Houſe ro Trem:-
'ble,” as-what every hurrying Coach can do 3 bur becauſe the Sabterrazear
Vulcans are imitated in their {uppoſed.Shops, at the ſame time as the very C1-
clops are,that while,in haſt of their Work. Hence Kepler fancyed che Earth
to bean Animal, (omerimes ſweating, ſometimes ſhaking, by che-Impreſſi-
ons and Commotians of the Ambient eZther, as may be {een in his ac-
counts of May and Augaf, 1621. and 1629. gs

S$.53. Butis it likely, -any whic probable , ſuch a ſquirting Planet as
7 , a:\Lacquey of the Sun; who ſeldom ſhews his Head in theſe parts,
25 if he was in Debt, - not reſponſible for any ſuch great Production /. We
may. aſe to wonder, being to be ordered by our Sence and Reaſon, rather
than by our Conje&tural Preſumption. Beſides, let ® be a ſmall-Lucid


.


on:. Make up the defe& of the one by the ſufhciency of- the other.
Ss 54. Is it certain then that our Aſpect is able to raiſe a ſtorm, or. Pea!


Fires: .: An «tra, Feſuvins, Hecla ; in Sicily, Italy, Friezeland. "Tis now
aboveian 100 years-that our Mariners had experience of this Truth, Her:
flaming was always.a ;Sign of foul Weather. Pwrch.p. 817. ad Annum 3610,
Well then for Earthquakes, do we not always, or for molt part, find Fou!
Weather, Storms, .Lightningfither upon the Spor, the place which Heaves
and Trembles, or in remorer parts, we ſhall ſhew ſome Inſtances; from
whence we learn the Great Power of the Heavens over the Earth confeſſed
by the Sobereſt men, who do not deſpiſe theſe Inſtances. Let what Thuazs
hath left upon record, be read in Court, ad Annmum, 1557, where after the
mention of Tybers prodigious inundation Sept. 14. another at Florence, ano-
ther in France, he adds theſe Words.

Eadens rerum facies pleriſque Nos per Europam eodem ann, & quaſi occulta qui-
dam Geleftis ordinis confeſſione(lege conſenſione) etiam in remotiſſimis, Orienti,
partibus fuit,nam apud Sinas inSanuarta region? tanta diluvwies ex proximis mon-
tibus defluxat,ut Lacum ingentem effecerit guoVIl.Urbes abſorpte ſunt. Pecudum &

p Mortalzum ingens numerus periit puero unico tantum 1n trunco arboris raro fortune
beneficio ſervato, Thuan. p. 278. 379.

$55. Now, the moſt indubicable Original Fwz4, and cauſe of Earth-

quakes are thoſe vaſt Fires Subterranean, which work and wamb/- in the
| Bowelsof the Earth, and break out many times where there is no vent, al-
— ways without fail, where there zs, or near the time of the Earth's Tremor.
| The want of this conſideration made the Worthy Kepler, and thoſe which

follow him, torun toan Occult Cauſe Subterranean for his Meteors, when
; he was at a loſs for his Czleftial Cauſes, whenas nothing is more plain,and
A leGlyable to exception, then that the Swterrarear cauſes, Fires,or other Eva-
porations are ſubje to, and naturally do obſerve, ard obey the Cauſes Cr-
leſtial. 9 56, How-


The difference then is thus 3 After the exa&t Conjunction, the diſtance of


Globe, his Conjun&tion with the Sun, I hope, is got of {mall Conſiderati-


ns with a Showr 2- Then *tis certain that he can blow up the Swterranear ©


. -


2ook IT. Earthquakes fr. 4ſpefts. England concern'd.


-


v 56. Howbeir, let the Rexder expect with all his prejudices, fo he wi!l
be pleaſed ro examine what comes now to be propoſed in that butinels of this
Mercurio-Solar Meecinz. I don't know, bur I find ſuch an Accident as an
Earthquake in Baſil, D-cem&er Anno 1533. three times it was thook in that
Monch. Oace, if I may gue(s ( andche reaſon of my gueſſing I will thore-
ly cell you ) mult be Decexz4zr 11. when there was a d of © and Z, and
whatif d oppoled, we are not about the Dexzyal of our Kindred. Other
Afpects muit be raken in too, bur that d.@ ? is ene. Again, Arno 1538.
Jan. 20. the ſameSn if5-Town thook with an Earthquake 4 © 2 .— 7 being
(if I miſtakenot ) ſcarce 9 degrees diſtant, In September again, Anni ejuſ-
dem, a Famous Tcrre-4:79tus mentioned by Fromondus, die 27, 28, 29. the
diſtance of our Planet is 7 degrees. Yea, fince Italy ſhook, as Eallopiis
notes, for 15 days together, a 4 © # mult happen amongſt 4 or 5 of thoſe
days. Come we to Exelazd in the year 1551. we-tind our Neighbours of
Croyden, Rygate, &c. fo troubled May 25. Stows Annals, 605. in the very day
on which the d © 2 is noted. Another famous one in September Ar. 1563.
which ſhook Aorthampton and Lz:zcoln, noted by Thuarws alſo, who del.
cribes it in its frightful Circumſtances.” There is a d © # in Stadias's
Ephemerides, noted at the end of the Month So are we in Emngland
concerned ia the pretence.

Anno ejuld. Nov. 29. great Terremotus in Iſland, at what time Mount Herlz
Flamed. Purchas. toms. 3. 648. Stadius gives a d © ? the day before. Az.
601. Sept. VIII. an Earthquake enters with the Century, and ſhook al-
moſt all Exrope, though Galv:/zus names only Switzerland, and the adjacent
parts. *'Tis too much for # only to do fo. - But was not he one of them?
Yes, he is one which can do what Archimedes brag'd of, Move the Earth :
For if it be Old Stile, 'tis ours; if not, we have others will ownits and in
the mean time..in the following Earthquake which was at Lonaoz in Dec:
of _——_ year 3 and in Chriſtmas (Stow, p. 797.) d © 2 falls in the ve-
ry Holydays. X

"In the year 1617. Kepler affiſts us with the Fame of an Earthquake, on


Fax 26. or Febr. 7. St. Nowo, he acknowledges Thunder, and Lightning,and


Meteors, but al:: (faith he ) Terremotws: which Fame was very probable,
you ſee by the Circumſtances 3 and who was in the wind buta d © 2.

An. 1618, Aug. XV.a fad Earthquake in the Evening among the Gr:/ors
in Germany, where a vaſt Mountain buried its Neighbour Inhabitants, d;#s
citius, 1500 buried in a trice, faith Calviſ..d © 2 makes one here alſo.

An. 1624. May VIIL at Ratiſbon , where they were in ſome apprehenſi-
ons of *Dooms-day , faith the fame Calwi/ius, our 7 'is 6 degr. diſtant.
Again July IX. or XIX. © is 9 degr. diſtant from the Sun. Bur before
both theſe. March XXI. Terremotus tagens in Argenta, a Town in T1ta-
ly 12 Miles from Ferraria, and the Alps. Galvif. © % are 12 degr.diſtanc.

An. 1625. Peſtilential years ( as 1625, was with us) are accompanyed,
abroad at leaſt, with Earthquakes, where at Norrmberg the Diary obſerves
One. Dec. XVIII. when ic Thunder'd the day before ; the d @ Z well
anſwers both. There is one noted before at the beginning of the year,
Febr. XIT. at Bamberg. There isa £ h &, and © is 10 degr. diſtant.

An. 1626. Febr, 6, A Rock hanging over a certain Lake in Germany
cleft in two by an Earthquake, faith Kepler, 2? being then 10gr. diſtance.

An. 1627. July XXX. St. N. Poor Apsl:a felt a moſt horrible Earthquake
which makes every Man that hath Humanity tremble by conſent, ſeveral
Towns being utterly deſtroyed, and a Bill of 17000. Perſons that were loſt,
It ſeems to be a $:z, to offer any thing like a natural Cauſe : Burt what is
the Stone ? Let us look at the Hand which threw it. God is not to = =

: ciugde


145


"9


Ll


146 2 Eclipſe no cauſe of Earthquake, Our Aſpett he” Book 71


cluded from his own work. Enter, preſenter, Deus ef & ubique potenter, is
good School-verſe: Ihave warrant belide Reaſon, ro look on the Crean
with ſome Fear, even the Gele/tzals, And I cannot but obſerve char our
Celeſtial 5 . though 12. degr. diſtant, is neareſt of allrothe Sun, whether
one way or the other. Nor canT out obſerve that it Thundred in Germany (I
know not what it did in Italy) three continued days before, when 2 was
within $ degrees. This may lead one to ſuſpect thar the Vicinity of 2 is
the cauſe of both. Some may pur in for the Eclipſe Lunar juſt betore to be
a Concauſe , which ( if a free Aſtrology may be allowed) formally
conſidered, cannot ſtand ; for how ſhall a Light obſtructed, or inrercepted
be advanced in Influence ? Whether it be a S;gzor no, we have el{ewhere
conſidered for the Affirmative z for God did not tie that Eclipſe in
vain. .

An. 1629. Another dire Terremotus in the Alps mentioned by Kepler, and
the Norimberg Diary, when it thundred for a week together in moſt places
in Germany, as we lee by the conſent of the Diary the Day is neer upon
Aug. 6. or 16. where there are other Aſpects ( 'ris true) and 2 is r1. or.
from the Sun. Bur before this we meet another, Za», XXV. wich Storms
and thunder, while 2 Retrograde was conjoyned with © the 19. day.

An. _ Veſuvius breaks out with Earthquakes at Maples, on the day
of the d©?. INE

An. 1636. Sept. 16. Terremotus, with Thunder, and a Meridian Iris ar
Norimbergz an exact d © *, and 2 within 9 degr. of both © and » .

An. 1638. July 3. Betwixt Tercers Wands, Lat. N. E. came Eire our of
the ſea, and an Earthquake: before it 8 Days, Sanderſons Elift. James 1. *
was 2 degr. diſtant, and in two days after followed the exa&t d. Again,
Annoeodem, Decemb. XIX. at Norimberg, Terremotus, when lo ! there is 2
'd © 7 the day before, with ſhaking Fit, if it holds 3 or 4 days more, it
may, for all that while 7 is within 4 or 5 degrees.

An. 1640. fan. 25. the German Diary informs us of another accompx. +
nyed with terrible Stormy winds, and much Rain ; in other places Thun-
der, and he fixes it right on d © ® amongother configurations, the d is
noted Day 19. —Agan, March 21. and 24. by the Rhine Terremotus neer
Munſter. d © * is appparent ate 20. Idem.

Thenext year 4s, 1641. O06. 16, at Lzntz, 2 great City near the Da-
now, an Earthquake with Stormy Winds. d © 2 within a day of ir, to
whoſe Influence, with a D of %. the Diary impures it.

An. 1646. In Apulia, May 29. a great concuſſion, an Iris, Rain, and at
Prague, Thunder, 4 © 2 within a day or two at moſt. .

x. 1649. Veſuwoms is very hot in the Mouth, and afflicts Vaplesz an
Earthquake ſwallows up Ships at Meſina. Caloiſ. Append. This I have
reaſon to believe was on Fehr. 10. becaule of ſome reports of Proatgies hap-
pening at Br:/o!, hereafter to be mentioned on thar day. |

An. 1657. July 8. Terremotus at Buckley in Cheſhire, a d-© 7 8 degr,


iſtant.

As. 1668. Sept. 29. A great Earthquake at Pot#ters in Frazce, Lond, Gazet,
N. 302. d © © within 2 degrees.

An. 166g. The vaſt Eruptons of the Flaming Mountain « #tra, areſcarce
forgotten. A vaſt Effe&t, buras greatis the Cauſe, the Cenfpiracies of the
vaſt Czleſtial Bodies. The Second Eruption was on March XXII. where
L ms not above 10 degr. diſtant. The remainder is already preſented in a

able. :

v 57. And what can be ſaid more? Who canbring fronger Teftimony then
etna or Veſuvins ? Now I did reckon once to look back no further on
this account, than the year 1617. becauſe the Calculations before Kepler


from


Chap. I. Platick Aſpects nece(]aty. Iranes defied,


from the Alphonſine or Prutenick Tadles are liable ro Exception $ Stoftey,
St1dins, Maztnns, Leoauittus, cc. fo that the Reader cannot fee what he
Enyes 5 but we find not that either of theſe Computztions are ſo wide, but
that they will come under the Latitude of :o. or 12, degrees, which is ſuffi-
cient for our Expe&ation. Now if ſuch an an Interval be too large an Ar-
eument for the nameof a d. 1 take notice that both Modern and Antient
Obſervers, though they abert molt juſtly the Partil 4, yer they cou'd not
tye themſelves to ir ; being for the moſt part (except about the « Agniz25x )
for all as I (ce, ignorant of it. So the Platique d bore away the credit of
the Partile in former Days.

But 2ly. We have ſaid that there muſt be verily an Enlargement of two
Planets or more, to ſuch a diſtance 2nd Station, as is Mechanically requiſite
ro perform according to expectation: And no other do they mean, if I
underſtand them, by the Orb, but an Out-Ler, wherein the Planer being
found, a&ts more vigorouſly than if he were corporally conjoyned with his
Neighbour, |

0 58, Butthis will not convince ſome Men. For how many &>& xs of © v«
which bring no Earthquakes? If this 7 were of any relation to Earthquakes
we ſhould hear of them often, every two Months, &c. This objection we meet
on every turn; 'tis a Catholique Engine of Battery againſt Aſtrology, and
its pretences, even about the State of the Air, and ſo hath bin anſwered al-
ready : Yet becauſe it will recur even in this very Chapter, about the Ge-
neration of Comets, we will ſpeak to it here alſo. We have faid, we
make xo oze Aſpect an adequate cauſe of the Effte&t; only Eminent and Con-
federable;which muſt be affiſted with its Neighbours:We have other Aſpects
which put in for their Share in the buſineſs; we ſhall ſee them in the fol-
lowing Chapters, and ſarfe:t on them. There is ſcarce a d or & , yea, ſome-
times Aor2, bur ſteps 1n to help ata dead lifr.

$ 59. We doacknowledge that ſometimes an Earthquake ſeazes both the
Farth and us without an Alpes Commiſſion : But not Oze in Tex. As in
Storms and Tempeſts, ſo here. |

$ 60. But © being always under the Sun, no wonder in the Terremotus
you will ſay, ſeeing he cannot be far off atany time : I anſwer, 'tis true, and
therefore I have concluded he is a prime Requiſite. Either the Sun himſelf
can do nothing, nor to Thunder or Earthquake, or it he doth, 2 will be
hardby 1zterwedling. |

S 61, But it may be asked, may it not be indifferent where © is poſited

. I muſt not allow that: for though I acknowledge the Effect may
take place when he lies at any, even his furthe/t diſtance ; yet if any ſhall
argue the Inſtance is viſible in all degrees alike 3 we dehie his Irony; if he
thereupon concludes utterly againft the Influence. Firſt, becauſe the Effect
appears more often zearer the Conjunction, than'furcher off. 2. Becauſe
ic happens more often in the Retrograde Courſe than in the Direct ; which
he, who pleaſes to obſerve, will take ſome pleaſure in. 31y. Becauſe we
ſhall find che like in the Conjunctions of Z with other Planets 3 Conjuncti-
ons, I ſay, rather than Oppolitions. So are webeholden to Ptolemy, or
whoſoever it be, to tranſmit this great Osſervation to Poſterity,

$ 62. But Ptolemy mentions alſo tome notable _—_ Meteors next to his
Seve}, as if they accompanyed the Concufſions of the Earth, which we
find to be true : #0544, he calls them : ſome notable bulky Inflamations
of Exhalation floating in the Air, diſtinguiſhed from the Ordinary 4vorneue;,
the Trajections and ſhooting of the Stars, Bals of Fire, Dragons, Trabes,
&c, which we meet with in Hiſtory, or their more = er Records, and ot
which Meteorologers write. Hither muſt we refer the Phenomenon, ſtrange
with us, of Celu”z ardens, where the Heavens ſeemingly, nay, really burs 3


Q q 'n)


148


4 ; li... DA Free tt <<


Chaſmes. He avens burning. Chap. |


_


of which we meet one Example notable, Az. 1574. Nowvemb. 14. where
our plain diligent Annaliſt tells us were ſeen frange empreſſitons of Fife aid
Soak proceeding forth of a Black, Cloud at Mtdnight, from the North, and fo
contizued till day. Or thenext Night following, Nov. 15. the Heawens 745;
all parts ſeemed to burn Marwvellous Ragingly, and the Flames riſing from the
Horizon round about, did meet over our Heads, doubling and rollin one in ans-
ther, as ina clear Furnace. Stowad Annum 1574. Mr. How's Euit. pag, 679,
Amaſing Sights as we may ſee by'the Annaliſt, which I note to juſtitie the
German Writers, leaſt they ſhould be riatculed for their Memorands, who
call them Ghaſmata, of which ſome are more terrible, others leſs. In Gey-
many they are frequent, ſaith Kepler in his Gomment. de Stel- Now.p. 54, and
in the Southern parts of the World alſo, as I gueſs from the very word
for in all Languages words which ſuffer contraFon are known to be of more
frequent uſe, and according to the often occurrence of the thing {ignifyed.
$a07-u35 NO Contracted is $10317u3s At Sea as far as I have obſerved, they
rarely are met with, unleſs perhaps near the Shoar ; the Reaſon may be,
becauſe the Sea emits more Nitrous and leſs of 'the Un&uous or <7! hu-
rous Exhalation : So Lightning may be frequent at Sea, while thoie tiery
Meteors may benot ſo often produced.

Ss 63. But I am to give account of our Aſpect z Firſt we challenge thac
of our own Climate, above related, we find there d © 2. I muſt confeſs


there is anether Planet too, zz. Old Saturn, but that can breed no Scruple.


And we runnot fo far Southward, therefore let that be diſſembled, we chal-
lenge then 47..1604. Sept. 16. Gelum ar/it, faith Kepler, and a 4 © © not
farr off, Globus ignttns, faith Kepler, ſeen to fall. Ar. 1617. Febr.7, Glulus
ater cum coma lucida. An. 1623. May 31. July 19. 1626. Trabs leniwuma,
Kepler, An. 1629. Ofober 2. Stella magna. An. 1623. Nov. 20. Stele gran-
des, Whats the beginning of theſe Meteors ? Aug. 4. Ar. 1625. Chaſma.
Again, OFob. 13. An. 1626. Decemb. 10. An. 1640. May 14. An. 1642,
Fiery Impreſſions. Aug. 11. 12. But the year 1630. brought 3 Chaſms. Jaz.
21. Febr. 10. Aug. 30. Of which that in az. 21. is noted for terrible Oey


Brennendenhim mel Burning Heaven. Az. 1641, while it Thunders at Norim-


berg, elſewhere Fire is ſeen to fall from Heaven. Fewer 2107 himmel gefal-
len. An. 16 _ Chaſme noted at Egra in Bohem:ia. Ang. 22. and they
fay with us alſo in that year, viz. Zan. 1. and July 11, the later of which is
atteſted by Merlin. Angl.

$ 64. Hither alſo muſt we reduce Clarus Septentrio in Kepler ; for what is
2 Chalme at Norembere, at L:intz was, only a Light in the North . one
while, Dec. 10. Az. 1626, and Ofob. 6, An. 1629. Another while Celun
Sanguinewm, which is made a Prodigy by the ſame Kepler, who knows
beſt, becauſe he was an,Eye-Witneſs.

$ 65. All this Fire have I raked together from Kepler you ſee, and K1ri-
ander, who, I muſt tell you, cries up our Afſpe& for Thunder, and Fire
falling from Heaven before noted, Dec. 17. 47. 1641. but elſewhere upon
teſs occafion 3 for'on every one of thoſe days ſhall you find what we call
ad. @?, within 7,6, 5 degrees, beſure under 10. Blame not the Gey-
mans therefore if they tancy Aſtrology ; and let us hope that we ſhall have
noſuch Cogent Frery Evidences for the Dint of the Heavenly Influences, to
etch in the Belief of a Sczentifigue Concluſion. A great Concluſion, and
Cauſe Natural ; for Nature is a Prodigy, a Miracle ; fo that I donot won-
der atthe Inſtance,not yer mentioned,in the Diary aforefaid,of what happen-
ed at Zicken in Brandenburg, Jan 7. An. 1640. under a d © * , which
bears a Contradiction in its- mention Tearing Hail , Fiery Huil-fones ;
The Diary,” tis true, comes in with his paris, ſed hec (faith he)
ſunt miraculoſa., And far be it from me to Extenuate; any Stupendious
Work


Ms Sc © A


Book II. Comets ortgtnal from Aſpetts.


> 4


— ——


Work of the Creation, but I am apt to believe, that even this is ſuch, I
mean Natura?, and all Circumſtances confidered, hath its Natural Cauſes
yer I grant it heartily in ſome {enſe Miraculous. At Stetzz the ingenious
Erchſtad tells us of Sulphurous matter rained there.But I wort enquirenow
for fear { ſhould find ſome conjuring Aſpect, and, that Sulpher containing
Fire might be called Hail, We that have ventured to aſcribe to the d © 2
a Power of blowing up,or ſhaking the Earth, muſt not baggle at any thing
le, or equal. Ncr have we done yet, ſcarce.

% 66. For Ptol-3zy, as far as I can fee, made no mention of Comets; as
if the 4 of Planers contributed not to the Opening of ſuch Atherial Mon-
ſters: alchough now the Opinion begins to rake, as we may ſee by Lu-
bienec Is Account , that the Planetary Congrefles do give them being.
And ſurely, if they contribute to Earthquakes, Lightnings, Fiery Meteors,
&c. They may reaſonably be thought not to fard out for the Generation
of Comets alfo, which are found always hankering under Earthquakes, and
other Commotions. For what reaion can be given why a Comet ſhould
bodean Inundation at one time, an Earthquake at another, and a 3d. time 2
Plazne, unleſs they are wn:ted in the fame Cauſe, which in common at his
Seaſons and Opportunities produces all Three. Beſide the Comets Mtherial
and Sublunar areall ot a Species, Mortal and Tranfitory, differing in their
Duration according to the difference of their own Dimenſion, as in teaſon
the ZXcherial muſt needs ſurpaſs the Sublunar. © Add that certain ir is,
that the very Trajections, and other Fiery Meteors, Trades and Dracones
are of the ſame Species beſure with Comets Sublunar, at leaſt. Ergo,

6 67. Now thc. ſo it is, under Favour of thoſe Great Men who deem
ws will appear not improbable from ſome Inſtances ready to be pro-

uced.

The Firſt is, A». 1577. a proper literal Comet, firſt obſeryed by the
Seamen, ſaith Tycho Now. 10. wiere 2 is according to Stadrms but 10. gr.
from the Sun haſting to a nearer d. This I ay, _ to Midwife the
mer into theWorld. Irs apyearance was breeding before. WY.

*Az. 1582. The next Coinet in the beginning of March, R:cciolas,. Alm?
Tom.1.p.13. at what time there is commencing d © ? towards the end of X.

Az. 1697. The Third Comet appeared on Sept. 16, Styloweters, On that
day there are viſible Three Aſpects, andone is d © ?, an accident ſo re-
markable, that Longomontanus treating of that Comet, as Rzcrriolus in-
forms, thinks it reaſonable to date that Comet from the Conjun#ion, So
then.

The Fourth is that famous Comet of 1618. where we will ſtretch no-
thing, becauſe there is not that Conſent abour its firſt appearance: Be-
ſides that they ſay there were three or four that year 3 two ſhining at the
fame time. All, which I ſayis, if that be true which Lotrehicus hark decla-
red, who wrote with all Religious Diligence at that time that the Comet
appeared firſt, about the VIE. Calends NVowember, StyloFet. which is out

Fober X XV. it lights punctually uponad © Z. |

The Fifth, (and there is none intervenes) haps Az. 1652. Dec. IX. ſeen
near Ori0n's Girdle : ? wasin Y* 3. So on the matter there wasa d © Z on
the very Solſtice. |

Again, An. 1661, a Comet ſeen at Amſterdam, Jan. 23.4 d © # makes:
one there.

An.1664. Jan. 11. a Comet ſeen in Stiria, ® is but 8 degrees diſtant
An. 1664. Dec 17. There are Stories of Fires falling from above. Dec,
XVIIL in Gerzzanys and I my felf faw with Horror, an Angry blazing
Meteor as big and round as the ), but with no fuch meek favourable


Countenance. A d © * within 3 degrees, 68
Ly ,


150


Of FP ni urft Ejfet, the Heat of the Aſp. | Book 11.


ing under the Wings of the Sun,
et


$ 68. And what folly is in this Principle > When as it is certain that


even the I aſpeted with the Sun, and the Reſt, gives hey Sy:to! roward


the kindling of a Comets eſpecially the Conjunctior with the Sun + And
TichoI remember, thinks it a reaſonable Conjecture in that of 1603. To
conclude this Chapter, 'tis good to know what we hope to make as plain as
Day ; when ſome great Men there are belide Fromond, who favour us,
who refer the Original of a Comet to the Planets, Pofellus , Cateus, Telefr-
us, Bullialdus, Kircher, Schuler, Hevelius and Galzleo, ec. And 1 doubt
whatſoever Lubremec is pleaſed to ſay, Rriccrolus can have no Demonſtrati-
on to the contray 3 which may be ſeen in due place. Thus far Ptolexey.

6 69. 'Tis time now, we advertiſe of Heat, whoſe account ſeems fo Lov,
being but 12. becauſe we reckon thoſe days without Wind or Rain ; other-
wiſe the Sum gets up to 56. with days more for Thunder and Lighrning,
And this may be no ſmallMedtum for conviction of Diſlenters ; for it a
Planet will not be allowed to bring Rain, or Winds, it may be allowed to
bring Heat at leaſt, in Conjunction with the Sun ( for a very Mountain of
Ice joyned with the Sun, will refle& Hear, till ic is maſtered. ) Let che In-
duſtrious Calculator afſure nie that the Luminous Planets do bur meer, and
he may aſſure himſelf without Yzolerce to his Intellect; or (elf-impoſtur e,
that the Warmth he finds art the Gritzcal time ſtreams upon his Head from
the Gonfiguration. Doth not our Ferulax acknowledge fo much in his Inqui-
fition into the Form of Heat? Henceforward ler no man titerefore take up
that vulgar, and ſcarce reaſonable Expreſſion, ſaying, On ſech an Xitival
day the Sw is very Hot, and ready to make one faint, &c. when the diffe-
rence lyes, Elevation contidered, very often in our Planets ſide, who (culk-

| betrays his undiſcerned Preſ-nce by his Na-
tural glowing together with the greater Luminary.

- Wherefore - me beſpeak the Diſlenter, Sir youare a Philoſopher :
Somme of theſe days, you may pleaſe to ſee, are more than ordinary Hor,
as May the 13. Ay. 1621. June7.and g. An. 1623. May the 24. Ar. 1624,
or three depo iogeinee in Bane, An. 1625. or in June, Ar. 1626, I would
know the &, as abroad, fo with us at home, Az. 1672. July 15, 16, x7,
amongcothers ) 3 days hot rogether. Whence comes the Heat ? The anfwer
is made, Oh it is uſual for the time of the year. [Burt this anſwer is not Sci-
entifical, it renders not the Cauſe. If a Philoſopher enquire after the Na-
ture of Sleep, thecauſe isnor afligned by ſaying, It is ulual,or, 'cis the time of
Night 3 the gentle Un&tuous ceol5ng vapours, to bemiſt and charm the Sen-
fory, is the Cauſe : Feaveriſh and Famiſh'd Men ſleep not for all the time of
Night. So, be it never ſo much the time of the year, place the Sun
where you pleale, there's no zeceſſity this day wut be hot with Expreſs or
Exceffive Heat. Thoſe 3 days of Zuly, though inclined to Heat as mach al-
moſt as any. are x0: always found under that Character. If the Enquiry
were, whether a hot day in Summer were a Prodigy? Such anſwer, in-
deed, were punctual : Ao, by no mears ;, 'Tis uſual, and according to the
trze of the year: Bur when the Queſtion proceeds of Cauſe wheres
at that time ofthe year ? Nay, wherefore oz the very day, which might have
proved cola, notwirhſtanding the tzxze of the year : We mult look into a more
tecret and abſtruſe cauſe: I muſt find a Reaſon from the very Conſtitution
of the Pr:2roſe or Violet, If Imean toauſwer the Queſtion of its early Bloſſom.
The time of the year allows only an aptitude or Inclination. TheArgument doth
zet follow from the Power or Inclination,to the A& 3 This day 1s hot, becauſe
7t was probable it would, What then (Sir) is the Gauſe > The Afſtrologer rea-
nay urges, Chance can not be it, for what determines the Effect?
fince all Events, though never-ſo caſual, are ſuch, xet becauſe they have no

determinant, but becauſe 'ris unknown.


71. Gaſes


»” £44a© EE JJ &4 4X2. ic:  +*« 4. _ © _O4A__ 1 Re. SE.


*Ww.Y


_


fp;


Gaſſendus's Objeftions cleared.


Chap.l.


Mt.


d 71. Gaſſendus preſs'd with this Objeftion , denies Chance Ore tex,


* while he cells us,: that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are the gezeral Cauſes of


many Phenomena ; bat beſide thele, ( for he knew generals were inderer-
mined }) He mentions other Inferiour Sublunar Cauſes, Cauſes per ſe (as he
calls them) $:#2wlar, Special, which determine them to Hir & munc, Meteor,
Epicur. p. 944 by which Cauſeif he means the nature of the place, firua-
tion, &c. Subterraneous Fires, and Eruptions of vapours, we admit them
heartily as well as he. But cerrainly, Place and Situation are Circumſtances,
rather than Gaſes, without which the Heavens can do nothing : That we
coufeſs, yet we deny that they _ be called therefore Efficients, Principal
and Singular Cauſes, The Fires Subterrancous ſeem to pur on for Efiicien-
Cy 3, but we profes to believe chat theſe Fires are zot ſo Knrverſal, as Tee
is imagined-by himſelf and others, Agrrcola, &&c. who have not kindneſs
enough for the « Fthereal,

v2 72, Neither, ſecondly, is this Cauſe but general ſtill, and z»determipate,
as they ſay of our Heavens z the Determrnate is yet to ſeek. For ſuppoſe
che Fire ſends forth the Vapours, and the Vapours condenſe into Rain. Stay !
May n0t the Gloud be barren ? The Vapour Dry, Foggy, yea, Pellucid ? As in Se-
renity and Drought is ſeen ; ſeeing by the Teſtimony of the Baroſcope, the
Serene and dryeſt Air makes the greateſt prefſure : What then makes it a
Gloud, ſay I, rather than Serenty ? The Sun ſhines , and the Fires are ar
work, and yet Serenity and Drought continues , many times, for the grea-
ter part of theyear. The arifwer is, the Vapour is condens'd toRain, it ga-
thersintoa Cloud. The ; for the 5:27, ! For if Gold be mentioned to the
generation of Cloads or Rarn; we ask furcher, What encourageth the Cold
a that time? Is it a M:d-Regron > We admit the Notion. - But then, why
doth it not always Rain,or Cloud, according to the Temper of the Region ?
As long as Vapours a{cend continually, why don't they as continually defſ-
cend 2 (What we fay in an Alembric.) The Subterranean Fires workDay
and Night, Winter and Summer, and the Mid-Regror is never Free, be-
cauſe the Superiour (the more remote ) Region is never Free alſo. Nerther
may it be faid, That there ' #5 wariety in the Mid-Region, as not always of


' the ſame Temper 5 ſometimes extream , ſomettmes more remiſs. For fo, "tis


true it may Rain when 'tis remiſs, and Snow or Hail when” tis extream.
But in Frofty days, I hope the Middle Ren is extream3 Why don't it Snow
then> How comes ſo many Serexe and pure Froſts , as all natural and
whol ſom Froſts are? Wart of Supply cannot be pretended ; the Fires dv
their Duty, and at all times alike , for any' thing they know z; whence is it
that the Middle Region is Idle ? For, that ſometimes this Region is guilty
of no Cold ? I ſuppoſe all that cravel the Alps, the Mountain Rhadope
Taurw, Libanus, or, our own Pexmaur ; All, who have heard of a perpe:
tual Snow lying thereon, will not conſent. Surely then'the difference of
the Temper of the Region, dehn'd to be-ſometimes moderate, ſometimes
of an ex:ream Cold,lies not in any confus'd diſorder,or chance, but in Viciſh-
tudes Kegular, with 4zomaly, ſuch as the Seaſons themſelves are capable of,
and no more; a fign that they are governed by Oratnances of Nature, ex-
clading Caſualties. For if ſome Hear, heſide Solar and Subterranean, go-
werns the Tepor of the year, as Cold is a privation, at leaſt, it muſt be
govern'd by the ſame Celef:al Cauſe z nor can we reſt till we have found
that Cauſe inthe Heavens. | a: :

973. Tothis the learned Man Objects thus, If 7t rarns to day, it doth not
rain again the |ame day 12 Month, but ſooner or later, according as the matter
& prepar'd, To which I anſwer, If I ſhould have ſaid that it rains zo at' a"
New or Full », bue ſooner or later, according as the matter is ripe;''I


{tould have E:##a'; ſeeing ris confefled _ it uſually raineth then, who-


r ſoever


=1 62 Matter prepard. The V Il. Planets prepare t Chap.I-


—_— ——_


ſever ripens the matter. And fo, I hope, I may retort in our Aſpect of
© Þ ; that however, matter is prepared at other times, 'tis uſually 4itpo- *
fed for Wind and Rain then. Bur this objection concerns not Alpects, of
which in general enough hath bin ſaid; but israther levell'dat the 4zzual Res
volutions of Stated days : No Queſtion but the matter is prepared for Rain,
zwhen it Rains, but who prepared it fo variouſly, fo uncertainly, uucer ſuch
Difformiry and Diſſonance, (to comply with che Objection ) is the Queſti-
on : The Sun and Moon alone, we have made good, cannot be the Caules
preparatory or determinant of a Showre, &c. nor Can any matter poſhbly
repare it ſelf; as Ice cannot thaw ir ſelf, the very Notion of ayer
eing paſſive. He muſt have excluded Other Requiſites, which he knew
Celeftial Philoſophy pretends to, before he could juſtly inter ſo #z:werſal a
Negative. It doth not rain again the ſame day 12 Month, Ergo, the Sun u ao
the Cauſe, 1 allow it, I will help the Argument, and ſay, t doth not rats
again the ſame day 19 Year, when as the Golden Number tea cheth us, the Sun
and Moon are in the ſame-place,Ergo, the Sun and Moon are not the Cauſes,Bur
ſill the Argument isCripple,which ſaith, Ergo,gzet theHeavens, A blindConte-
uence that {ees not more _ than two in the Heavens, Ir will be
fd, that by the ſame day 12 Month ( or 19 ears rather) the Objeftion wicans
the Sun, Moon, and Fixed Stars : What then? Are not the Planets over-
look't > Do they make nothing of a World ? The Planets 2re Worlds >
They know the Sun is bigger than the Earth, a World Celeſtial; h is a
World, as ſay Pretenders, leſs than the Sun, &+. Now for the Fixed Stars,
what hath the ſame day 12 Month to do with any of them 2 Bur thoſe few:
only . that relate to the Sun and Moon there potted ? If the Objedtor do be.
Jigye, as he doth not, thatthe Fxed are concerned with the Sun, the Cons,
troverlie would be ſoon diſpatctft 3 for the Fixed would al{o be found to
be concerned, which relates to h's or %'s places, &c. And that which is
a high Truth, VII, Companies at leaſt of the Fixed are concerned evrery day,
according to the number of the Erratiques, which tranſic by them : And
if it rains not the ſame day 12 Month, the failure proceeds from the d:fe.,
Feet marſhalling of thoſe Companies. But the VII. are always engaged to
every day of the Month or year. And hence comes the Halr, or delay of
the Weather, which the Obje&tion takes notice of. Moſt times the begin-
ning of March is Stormy, ſometimes the Exd, wot according. a5 the matter is
prepared, as if the Womb of tlie Air teemed ſo many Days, Weeks and
Months before it brought forth, and then by the ſame degrees returned to
its Sterility. Thisis the Grave Idea , which men have of Natures Produ-
ions 3 attributing to Oxe, what belongs to VIE. For Matter may be pre-:
pared and uprepared, and prepared again, as often as the Air is overcaſt,
and the Winds. blow- hollow, and drive away the Clouds. Matter may be
prepared in an Heyrs time, the Wind may turn in an {z/tazt ; verily as foon
35 the Sun is (et, *tis ordinary for the Wind to vere abouc. *Tis ordinary
for one Wind to blow by Night, and another by Day : The Barometer will
ſhew us the Truth of this, which will change in an Hour or two from Fair
to Rainy, and zever ſhews above a day before hand. The reaſon is, when
therearemore Workmen about the Preparation then is imagined, the more
ſudden is the Effect : So that hence alſo comes that Dsſſozarcy of the Wea-
ther. not complyant with the Seaſon. Gold at Midſummer, and warm ar
Chriſtmaſs, becauſe every Planer but the Sun, Fez and Mercury, are ar
liberty. The Sun firſt makes the Seaſon, FYexus and Mercury attend
him; but the » we know, and & Þh and Y may faunter, or make Excur-
#275 wherethey plea {e, ro take up their Winter Quarters by themſelves, .
- the Sun and his Gang, are reteing out the Vernal or Summer
ON.
6 74, Ac-


TT}  * SS. RSS at wt A a Te £eaCC—cco 2c eact.ococm_ ©


= T0 Ah


Book II. Gaſſzndus his objettions. Damps Subterranean,


—_—Fu—


153


0 74. According :othe Mature of the Months, Apr we know, is incli-
ned to Rain, May to Warmth, Juzz to Showres, 7uly and Auguft to Hear,
Fanuary to, Rain, February ro Snow, March to Hail and, Turbulency. Sup-
poſe theſe Months be mingled together, as they are mist by Planetary Mo-
tion, the ſaxzz Weather will the Planets ailuredly make, being found in
che Signs anſwering therero. So that if ic be warm at time of the year,
becauſe the Motion of the Sun chalks out the Months of 7uly and Auguf,
ic may Raz# at that time, becauſe a Fourth Planer may bein ApriPs Quar-
cers, and Hail, becauſe a fifth may be in Marches Limits. And do nor
the Vulzat confeſs that many times One Months Weather is found in ano-
thers ? A verily ! Place now Planets enough in Winter-Signs, and it ma
Froene F March, and Szow in April; yea, as we have heard, nor inns

E 1N "7 #78, |

iy 7; Oh ! But the ſame Planets never meet again the ſecond time 1n the
ſam? Place and Poſture. We anſwer : they may meet again in Equiwalent

2ces. For do we think there are 365. kinds of Weather > Do not-divers
Places in the Heavens agree in the {ame inclination 2 Doth ir Rain ozly in
April> Is not June Dripping, and Nowember, December, &c. So the ſee-
ming great Objection vanithes. Eirher the ſame Planets may meet in Equi-
valent Places, or Equizalent Planets may meet in the ſame Places. Ve-
rily, not Picus, nor Gaſſen4w, with all their Cauſes per ſe, or per what they
pleaſe, can give account_of On: Froft diflolved in Winter, No : Nor after
they have telt the Benefic of the milder Air 3 nor of Q»z- Ghil! day in Sum-
mer, though they have ſmarted by itz much lefs of a folirary Conſticuci-
on, when on&or ewo days ſhall ſtrangely. z5ruf themſelves into a Month of
a Contrary temper. They aqnire and deſpair to find the Reaſon why Win-
cer dare not ſometimes his hoary Heag -( Bald. arial cames,. but ſome-
times not Hoary at all ) and yet at other: times;miarch towards the torrid
Zone, paſs the Line, and Face the Aſtival 'Camp.: "Aa: accaunt , I ay,
can they giveof a White Eaſter, and a Soultry Ghriſtmas'> .Sxiw in Mayor
April, and Thwzder in December. Ao reaſon for Long-and Lafing Rains,
ſeeing the Earths Evaporation is not reſponſible; becauſe the Earth; accor-
ding as the Fires , are continually at work, Evaperates'in Drought as well as
Mozſture. 7 AY, [9:13 re

_ Gaſſendus obſerves indeed, p. 996. that the Workmen'in the Mzxes
preſage Rain upon the riſing of the Fumes Subterranean.  Letithaſe Work-
men, or ſome body for them, be taught to, conſult at Ephemeres, anduchey
may chance to find ſome 4ozny Aſpect ar that time; as wei may ſet in the
Alpedts of the Superiours, which plainly \ ar with-our Hypotheſis, and
reacheth that all nature is troubled at thery Preſence, being irritated more ar
- one time than another. Now that all Nature is troubled, (ro make a di-
preſſion) and the Subterranean Fumes, the Evidences of ſuch Trouble, as
+:ſe at the Preſence of Aſpects, I have mer with a remarkable Inftance or
two, to lead inthoſe who can make Addictions. The Firſt above an hun-
dred years ago, in the Month of Jaly, Ar. 1547. which I ſhall tell in a
Famous Doctors own Words,in the Margin of his Ephemerss. viz. Prizzo Fuli:
apud Harreret Gati duo Longam poſtpugnam, 11 fontem morientes utrique inct-
&erunt, Pater familias, fontem 11 fict iſtts cadarveribus haud cuptens, puerum de-
miſit 1ſtos ut educeret, at puer spſe mortuus extrattus eſt z deſcend:t homo alter,
his m:ortuus ;, etiam terttus taſania correptus , Patris Familzas nomen fuit Ryve
duoaecim mill. paſſ. a Fulburnis faftum. The Later but lately indeed, viz, Ang.
IV. 1679. the day when'moſt parts of Erglazd telt the Dire Lightning and
Thunder co their Coſt. Thoſe of our Neighbour Borough in Southwark,
remember it by a Woman flaig with Lightging, dwelling in Kent Street

; .YEAz


-


len q.3 Aſpetts trouble the Univerſe. The ſame day XII. month. Book 11,


-we produce ſome
'Months; and by #xuch the moſt part, if we conſider the Identity of the de


yea, and by this Story, parallel to the former, when a young man, a ſer-
vant upon occaſion went down into a Well belonging to the Family, {ti-
fled with a Damp, groan'd his laſt. And a fecond deſcending to the relief
of the Firſt, underwent the ſame Fate ; the Third not daring ro be (© cha-
ritable as to deſcend ro eicher. Now that the Heavens were fer at borh
theſe. times fo to provoke Nature, appears by this, that in both theſe we
ſhall-find Aſpe&ts of Hh; yea, arid at both tines h poſited in the Tropic :
The Firſt, in the Winter Tropic, and the Later in the Summers : This is
the ſecond Story. :

6 77. There is a Third Story of -a Damp at the Fatal Seſſions in the City
of Oxford, ot ariſing ſo much from the P7:iſozers Frouzy Bodies, which
might be imagined, as from the Earth, at ſuch a critical time. No lef
than 3oo. are recorded inStow to have perithed,ſome on che Spor,others in a
ſhort time after, An.1557.whow!ll reveal to us the cauſe of {uch aFatal Damp,
then, and there 'ariling ! Ler others ſearch into the Nacure of the Soy]
As to the Circumſtance of te, why then, Oh! if Þh could be found
22ain, at, or ear the Tropic, then we might draw ſome conclution : Ve-
rily zo otherwiſe. H was then, then allo on the Winter Tropic, oppoſiag
p-, at, ornear the other. © See the Ephemerides 3 ſo apparent is ir, char an
Alpect can trouble the Univerſe. Pardon, good Reacer, the Digreliion ,
tis only out of place a lictle, weſhould have troubled you eltewhere with it,

9. 78. Now after all,/ premiſng but one Pofulate, I thall ask a Queſtion ;
the Poſtulace is, that the ſaxze day 12 Month, walgarly fo called, is not the


fameday in Aftrological Notion 3 - which 'is defined By the ſame degree and
11s; Revolution. Fhis degree anſwers not to that day next ytar. This Su-
. pernumerary 'Brſſext#{e Day intrading, 4:ſpoſſeſſes the degree of its Room in
the Bed,' and thraſts-it fo far, [that it lies half out and half i», dividing it
iſelf between two,” rthatT may nor fay three oy ws Caſendus then thould have
. obviated om py ns that by


reaſon of the Intercalary Day,


-while it is in Fiebi the ſame" vulgar aay anſwers not adequately to the ſame degree z
ard different Days may be concern'd in conſiderable parts of the ſame degree but net-


ther atOne,or the Qther doth it rain again the next Twelvemonth;FErgo,the Hea-


- Vens are. not the Cauſe, "Bur he was not (o provided; I confeſs it doth not


always rain the ſam ay 12 Month, if it had, Gaſſezdss had bin an Aftrologer,
and LY od 'Lzarning. - Now for my Queſtion: What, If
ys wherein icdoth oftez Rar next Revolution of Twelve


2 So that: I wonder what day Gaſſezass doth pitch upon > ' And whethet


'he: cotiſulred his own obſervation, or ſome other Diary > It may be heob-


ſerved a yearor two, and when it did not prove the 2d. yea, and a 34d.
time, - he concluded; ''But how hard that is, hath bin ſhewn alteady, eſpe
cially when after a-24.or 34. failer, it holds, as inthe New » harh bin ob-
ſerved for 7 continued yearsafrer. Had he followed his blow, and ſaid, that
All days are aiferent, and alike inclin'd, and for this appeal'd to the Dj-
aries, then he had routed us3 But- we Ghallenge all the World to ſhew that,
or any thing nearir. For beſide the Aztient Diaries, which by the equai
Judicious arenot to be queſtioned, Gaſſendus might have ſeen to the contra-
ry in Keplers : and every Modern Diary will confirm. \
9 79. It muſt be time now to name {ome days if we can, for a Taſt, this
Idoit. Ay. 1621, Ephemerid.. Kepler, T find Wind and Rain. Fay. XI.
Ax. 1622. die eod, Wind and Snow. What would Gaſendus have faid
if he had pitched upon this day ? The 34. year, Ax. 1623. Snow. An. 24.
High Winds on one of the Days ( for here are £wo concerned in the ſame
degree) and Snow on the other, - A”. 1625. Much Rain. Lo! For Five
years together, Rain or Snow. Az. 1626, I find neither, but warm wez-
ther


ACA ed »* F Wy


*


a 9 wa ww. 4a _— WW—_ WW. WM


1, 4. a ds. 1a...


”y


Turbid, Ning. Venti, [et ES Fe


Book II.The ſame day XIL M. ſometimes, the ſame Conſtitution. 4%


ther. But Az, 1625. Some Snow. 47. 1628; Stiff Winds for one of the
Days. And the Ninth year, 4. 1629. It ſnow'd, ——R3ih or Snow-VII.
years in IX. So. have we one Day. I have a ſecond; Feb,” 26, the degree is
X 18. where: it Rainor Shows ( beheve me) VIIL times in IX. years. It
may be worth the Deſcribing in his own Words. February XXVI.


1621, 1622. 1623, 1624. . 1625. |\. 1626, ' (2647, |
Pluit Pluvia Nix Neb. Gelu vents Obſcur. Venu Ning. Ningebat.
No#u. Frigus Nix. Nix. | Nembe New. Nex. © Plutrioſs, * Continenttr.


1628. 1629. F "3


1
Vernat. Tonut,


$80. We need no more, when Thunder gives his voice for'us 3 when the
Heavens themſelves ſpeak out for Aftrology. And the Reader may thir

this pretty feaſible, it, whatis true, everydegree in it {elf as it ſpeaks bur
it (elf, its own 60, integral Minutes; ſo it reſpects two wore, -one on each
fide, as the Liberties of the;Mid-Degree, ro which the Terms of the (aid
Degree do not reach, but::the Influence does. So within Temple-Bar Tam
within the City:'of Logon (within the Juriſdiction of it ) though without
the Walls. Our Aſpect we grant, doth not ſo much as we fee; the Sun,
and ſome of the Fixed can 3 the reaſon is evident, +:z. that, Mercury is. bur
one, and ſome F:xed may be many, a notable part of an Aſteriſm, bur ir
is effectual enough to evince a ſtrong znclinatzon, 'and thereby, by Gaſſezaus's
leave, declare the Nature of a Planet : For excepting the Iaminaries; ſaith

he, they cannot know the Nature of any Planer, nor aſcertainany Predii-
on thereby z for which he appeals ro experience which teacherh us,' Pat-be
the Prediction. what it will, -the Event brings as many, yea' more Fxpeti-
ments to the contrary, and\ therefore good Nrght Aſtrolgeys Screntza'Futilis,


wana & nulla, There's hothing in it. 23
$ $1. This we know is the grand po —_—_— whieh Grtes, not rea-
eto make uſe of this Objecti-


ſons us down. For thoſe Gentlemen who pl
on, I deſire them to conſider again for we are forc'd to repeat, that while
they go to overthrow a mo uſeful Speculation, Wilfthey, Nill they,
They efablih it. For the Words of the Objetion are theſe, The contra-
ry to the Prediftion happens as often, or more often than the Preaiftion. If the
contrary happens bur as oftez (and ſometimes, though but rarely , '»ore of-
tex.) Is not there a great 1nclination of the Planet ? And doth not the prediCti-
on come near, and hover about the Truth 2 Verily he hath a great Aim
that draws the Bow ſo dextroufty that it hits the White 4s often as he miſſes
it. A Preai#on of Art is far from nothing, though it comes but to ever
terms : Probable it muſt be when it ſucceeds as often as Fazls, as it muſt do, if
it fails but as often as it ſucceeds, | od

$ 82. We have proved, the d © 2, the event being obſerved at ſuch
continued times, produceth Rain, as to a Mozety of the Number, that AC-

& being then a Natural ingredient into a Natural Effe&, the Total may
be made up, ſure, by the Inveſtigation of its-Con-Cauſes ; otherwiſe there
would be a Sc:bile, a Concluſion under natural Knowledge without any poſ-
ſible Natural Premiſes, which is impoſſible; fince the Principra effends, 5's
we have uſed to ſpeak are the ſame with Pr:ncipra Gognoſcendt : If ithave
the Firſt, it muſt have the Secozd.. Nor muſt we object the ſyuaring of 2
Circle, or the perpetual Motion not yet found out, becauſe, if we mark it,
they are Concluſions in queſt and purſuit, not yet in being : But our con-
cluſton is in actual Exiſtence, whoſe Principle we enquire after. But we


Sg ſee


" Somethan in {ſtrolopy. Infidels., — Chap.1.


ſee ic Rain again, and againz wherefore if we object to purpoſe, we muſt
Afſfign the Longitude, the diſtance from the firſt Meridian, &c. for we are
all actually poſſeſſed of That, bur for the Knowledge of that Diſtance, I
anſwer, it muſt be poſſible either from the variationof the Compals, &+.
25 hath bin of late profeſſed, or the Hour of the Night being given, and
the verticity of the Moon, &c. ,
$ $83. In vain theh doth the Learned Man Triumph, who after a whole
Winter obſerved, avows his Aſtrologers Predictions to hit bur 6. or 7. in
.136. times: For this we are aſſured of, that all thoſe dayes (130. of them )
were not-d @).or d @?., If he find but 6. or 7 days hit in ſo many
ions with the » or 7, then Aſtrologers muſt not ſhew their
Heads again. If not, they are not quite Bankrupt; they have ſome little


Bank lefr. 2/y. He muſt not deny whar he hath already gratited ; Aſtrolo-
gers , he confeſſerh (or elſe we ſhould have heard of it) ſueceed neer upon


& ctenas they fail. 3ly. Nor muſt he be angry that we have proved in part
that he is zot a Gompetent Jadges For if Three days muſt be allowed to a
Solar d or &@ with the Þ, and Three, yea Four and Frve ſometimes, to d
©: 2 (belide what more might be ſaid if I had his Diary in my Power ) he
might have conſultedbetter the Aſtrologers Credit and his own. Iam ſure
our Engliſh Writers pronounce cautiouſly with ſuch Limitations, not alwa
on a determinate Day, but as or aboat the time; which on the Solar Aſpedts
with h  Z hold-at leaſt a Triduum, but wich & and 2 much longer.
Now,ifin oneor more of theſe days there happen an Hiatws,the Aſpect never-
leſs is righty fared, though the Effet happens butorcrin the Triduum
For ſo we have ſeen the Countryman content himſelf with his Maxime of
:the Lunar Influence, though ſeveral times his expeRartion fails on the day
of the Change, and on the other days alſo ; That which fails may be ſcarce
con{iderable, if fo be at other times he hath amends made him : for what
fails in the ſmaller Obſervations; is wade wp in the larger 3 Other iſe 4
P Philoſopher will ſay the Suns faculty of Warpth is extinguiſhed, be-
c2ule it Szowd at Midſummer 3 and April is not inclined to Rain, becauſe
ſome years havenot met with three drops in the whole Month.

9-84, To conclude therefore, there is nothing in Aſtrology, is very hard,
when, as I am perſwaded ( and no Friend to Yamty ) that there may be
ſomething in Gabals, Gematry, ſomething in the myſterious Force of c
bers , in Gritical Days, Climateric Years, the Dodtrine of Magnetiſms,


patingy and Natural Magic , Tranſmutations of Metals, Doctrine of
M Bod


sinthe Body, Doctrine of S:gnatures of Plants , Dreams, Chiromancy,
Genethliac $kill 3 ( as to Health and Sickneſs at leaſt. ) Let not the Reader
think in the leaſt we will add Geomancy, Stegamegraphy, occult Philoſophy, or
any thing whoſe grounds hide from Mortal ſearch, or have a Sulphurous


Aavour of the unclean Spirit. But I have ſeen from one of the E/prits of


France, a Diſcourſe of Chiromancy, (a Senſele(s piece of Learning as ordi-
narily taught) yet made by him pretty and plauſible. We are Inhidels too
many, delirous of unſeaſonable and immenſe Gorwi#10ns, ſuch as cannot be
advanced. The Good God of Heaven hath provided tor us in a tex:perate
Zone, Places of Habitation and Reſt : Such as are too good for us becauſe
of its Calmnes. Will we nort-believe a Devil unleſs we tee him 2 Nor con-
{ent to an I»fluence unleſs we feel its Fury? Shall we conceit the Heaven
hath no Power over the Earth unleſs ir ſhakes us out of it ? Deſtructive
Tempeſts, Hurricanes , vaſt Deluges , Lightnings, Rain, Comets, Earth-
quakes, Diſmal Darkneſs, Heat and Drought extream and intolerable the
greatneſs of theſe Effe&ts, Foul and aſt as they are, may excuſe the Freguen-
cy, with our Thanks to the Creator for Natures kindneſs to us, and yet
muſt aftord us alſoa fair Item of ſuch Inclinetions, which at times brake in


upon


-_© = a a


A ,


Book II. Conj. of Sol and Venus. | £ T ”


upon us. I confeſs 'tis no matter for enquiring the Caule why lyawe
ſometimes, or why the Ear tragles? I may be weary, or talking, or reſtlels:
Bur 1f, as God defend, I ſink under a dire Fit of an Apoplexy, or Eprleptic
Diſtemper, though but ſeldom it happens, I ſhall be jealous I have an aptz-


3nd? to it.


. -
CS


CHAP. 1I. Conjimiion of Sol and Venus & © 2


4 1. and 2. A noble and permanent AſpeF. 3. Aſpeds, their pretty Vi-
ciſſutudes. 4. The Table of the Diret# AſpeF. 5..The Table of the
trograde, 6. Somewhat prolix, but neceſſary. 7. The 4 contri-
butes to Warmth. 8. And yet alſo to Cold 3 how the Congreſs of Two
Catorifick Bodies may increaſe, yea, and abate Heat. 9g. The Tradi-
tion of the Antients. 10. Juſtified as to bright "Air. 11. As to
Showres. 12. Contignations of Clouds, whence they proceed. 12. Ju-
flified as to High Winds. 14. Thongh the prolixity of our Table be
diſadvantageons to our Mcthod, we find notwithſtanding a Moyety
for Moiſture in the DireF. The Retrograde Aſpe& brings moiſture
once within the Tridumm. 15, 16. Preſentment of ſome days fromt
the Table which brought ſtore of Rain, and not a few, whichrain'd all
the day long. Divine Providence proved thereby. How 9 con-
tributes to ſuch laſting Rains. Aſtrology demonſtrates.17, 18. Fleec'd
Clouds , ſtrip'd Clouds have their detexzrinate Canſe. 19. Some ac-
count of Clouds riding contrary. 20. Of the Morn, and Evening
Tin&ure of the Clonds. 21. Difference of Miſt, 9 inclines to Fog.
22. Platick, AſpeFs explained, as powerful as the Central, whereby
we give an account of the EffeFs andits Duration. 23. Reconrſe to Kep-
lers Diary. 24. Dune and proportionable diſtance is operative as well
= as a Central Conjundtion. 25. Some Light to diſtingniſhthe Effedts
even when the AſpeFs are ro-incident. 26. Onr Aſped contributes te
IWaters. 27. 2 in elongation ſeems to contribute tothe ſame. * 28, Onr
Aſpef attended with Chaſmes, and a parcell of fiery Meteors. 29.Tea
Jome Comets and Earthquakes occur. 30. Shortneſs of underſtanding
it may be, to zmltiply Prodigies ;, to' acknowledge them is None. Nature
2ot wholly excluded from Prodigy. 31. Conje@urewhy Ptolemy aſ-
cribes no Fiery Meteors to 9, &c. 32. Tycho and Kepler favour
onr Pretence, as to the Original of Comets. An attempt to give an -
account of the Duration £4 a Comet. 23. Some inſtances in Flouds.
34. And of Monſtrous Hail. 35. A Hurricane. © 36. The Abſtra&#


drawn fromthe premiſes.


S1. Ti d © 2 wasa great, our preſent d is a glorious Aſpe& ; for

2 1isa farr Star by all confeſhon, White and pure, as the Flame
of Virgin-Wax : Wherefore Nature hach given che more —_—_— Star 2.
agreater Orb in compariſon of the other, (% I mean) that her glories,
might be often' more obſervable. She therefore becomes our Phoſp at


times of rhe year, and bids our Early Shepherd Good Morrow ; not only. his
x Stat,


158 id © 2. amoble Aſpef?. Chap. II.


Star, but his Valentine. At Even, like a kind Companion, ſhe ſtays by
him all the Civil time of the Night, and then 74s her adieu.

' $ 2. It may be judged alſo a Noble Aſpect from the term of its duration,
where the Sun and She, within reach many times, po hand in hand a Fort-
night together. 'So that the experienc'd Aftrologer hath that one grad In-
fluence to manage all the while. I ſpeak of the Part: Aſpect, or what
ought to be called ſo; fincethe Platique Aſpect reaches beyond, far beyond,
as we ſhall ſee immediately. : | :

s 3. The d 'of © and $ are Direct, or _— Hitherto we have
ſpoken of the _ only. In the Retrograde (asin 2.) There are Four
Days will limit ths Influence. In the Plat+gque further. In this Diverſity of
Motion I cannot but takenotice of the pretty YV7crſitudes of Direct and Re-
trograde every To Months 3 ſothat every Second year there happens two d s,
the ohe in the Dire#, the other in the Retrograde 3 and every Fourth year
ſo admirably contrived, that the fame degree of the Zodiack pofleſſed in
the Erft Revolution, you ſhall find it very near inhabited againin the Se-
cond, the One Dire&, the Other Retrograde, & wice verſa, And ſuch
pretty, Methods I remember I might have obſerved in the Conjunctions of
©and ? 3 yea, in the Quadrates of the © and ) 3 but whathave we to
do now but toopen its Evidence.


” # +


—


ConjunCtion of So and Venus,
03 Direct.


Ec An. 1679. 25, * 15;

ag. . XIV. Frotty, ſnow ao@. + #

s $3 Jangary. "_ Be an Thames Bridge ſtop'd gm. , BY
BEL | | KAN narſpoſtt.

An. 1671. Zan. 29. % 21./\ | XVI. br. {. ſhow,obſerv'd m. Snowing p.m, per

XXI. Cloſe, warm ſeaſon, H. wd 1 iS; rot, ad 10p., and fog, mild borgp, N,


(oy * | XVR. Fr. f., relent, offering p. m,
XXIt- Cloſe, H. wd no#. preft. peo XVIIL Fr, cloudy, not wit 4 wh


—_——


wd ante Lac. f. miſle. * | XIX. Fr. Gr, fog, takes up 10 m. NE
XX. H. wd ante L, bright ſummer day 3 | XX, Fr, Cloudy, open, wd. N
Arthes. \$=1 XX1. Sharp wd, warmiſh, C. ſow. © hath
XXIV. Froſt, overcaſt n. "] noroffered. NE
JXV. Kain © ort. Warm ; rain 5 p. & guſts, | XxX11, Redm.inSE. Fr. \. driſling p. m. :
Winds n. ' S$S*| XXIIL No froſt, Cf. ſhow 8 m. ſnow and
XXVI. Fr. m. warm 5 Snow and Rain 1 p. thaw p. #1. p. tot. ad 12 þ. NE.
Werting 1 p. | SW. | XXIV. Sn. ante L, moſt part 8 6 m. thaw p.m.
' XXVII. Some moiſture 4 p. W. | XXY. Fr. ſnow, very ſharp wd. Freez,relent.
XXVIIL Fog, cloſe, wetting day. Sly: Ek NE.
XXIX. Windy, Cf. fog, warm; H. wind u. } xXXv1. Terrible fr, H. wd and cutting by com-
: | Sly. plaintofall. |


XXX. Rainm. & 2 p. H. and cold wd. NW. | yxy1. very 'fharp winds, Thames covered |
XXXI. Fair and Froſt m. cloſe,qH. wd. 6 mh fere. As told as harh been known, Miſty
. ; | Y. ' N of
Feb. 1. Froſty, Nly 2. White Froſt, High _ XXVII. Fr. vehement, L. ſnow ante 1,milder
. miſty round about, though © ſhine, NE
III. Froſty , offer Snow. E. | |
IV. Froſty, Gs ke pot NE T. ag Fort $. George tn E, Indies. |
yY. White Froſt, fair, Halo ) * XXIX, Fr. fog, driſle 5 p. welcom thaw, NW,
VI. Snow a.m. Halo 9 p. Nly. | XXX. Gr. fog dry, Lot S$ W.
oy VIL. Miſty, miſling dze tor. W. | XXXI. £, fog, cloſep. m. N E, much Ice on
: 1. Wertting2. Ol. C poſt, mer. W. the River, Feb, 1, *
W- - X, Wetting a, mt, & m. p. d, |


oo VI. Fair, windy, 44 of R. n. terrible bluſtering.


_—


Chap. II.


d © 2 Dary.


Febrnary,
An. 1655. Feb. 3. == 24;


XXVI. Januar, Warm n. moiſture a. I. R,
all day wd, Ely.

%YXVIL coid, dark, cold wd. Ely,

XX VIII. Fair, froſty, C[. gr. clouds.

XXIX, Fr. ſnow lics.

X XX. : Snow, dcarce freeZz.

XXXI. Froſt, ſnow lies.

I. Febr. Fr. foggy, warm 3. R. n, SW,

II. Windy, mifty, miſling by. fits. . ; © SW.

TI, R.a © ort. & mp. wd, warm.

Iy, Wind geitle R. in, warm, nore -carneft
Rain, . f

y. Miiling, warm.


2 | NW.
VII. H. wd, flying clds, R..o. / , NW.
VIII, Wert a.m. cldy, wdy..// 4 ; NE,


IX, Cold wind, wet m..<l. caldr. ;

X. H. Wind. {. R. a. 1; cold; miſty , —_
' dark. qe 1 .
ATI. R, a: L: ground miſtn. f,drops 10 m+
1663. Die1.% 22 unacum ©&?.
XXL Fan. Fr. fog, clear, a ſhowr 10 p.


" KNIV. & XXV. Foggy, froſt, foggy, dow


XXVI. Fog, fr. cloſe, 1. R. 10m. 4 Þ» 7 P


- XXVIL R.6 m.cloſe.


XXVIIL Fr. ſnow a. m. hail 0. Nly.
XXIX. Hard fr. with ſnow, driflingn. NE.
XXX, Fr, extream, 1, (now m. NE.
XXX1, Fr, f. ſnow 6 p. NE.
T Feb. Fr. extream, cold wd, Cf. ſnow.

JI. Fr. extream white clouds,
III. Snow a. L. fr. fog, cloſe, yiclding o, freez.
Iv. Froſty, fair. «2 .
»y. & VI. Fr. g, much Ice in Thames,


IL. Fr. fog, white clds. Wy,


VIII. Froſty, fair, g HaP 3:


bh


a—_—


7 : ,

©... April,
1658, Apr. Die & g.
JR. X, Xl, **®,


XII. Cloſe m. warm 3 clouds Red, Wind and
guſts, clouds ride NE. _ :
X11. Fr. m. cloſe a. L. and miſty ropes,brighr


warm. NE,
XIV. Fr, m, miſt,ropes, warm, cool wd, blew
miſt © ocs: red art n. N E.


XV. Cloſing a. L. 10 m. deep blew. miſt, cold
© occ, ir dropt. Weatherglaſs promiſed "
N E,


*X VI. Fr, driſling p. m. ſhowres ©) occ. Hail at
Lond. g m. blew miſt taken up , dropping
caſting ſhowres.,

-XVIEL. Cloſe, warm , Ratny m, at Beconfheld,
ropcs, N W,

XVIIL Fr. fair. R, great drops, coaſting. SO ©
vo, N \y,


159


XIX, Fr. ropes, Meteors on WY & fide. SE.
XX. Fr, coid © 0, offering to drop p. m.
cold, guſty. NE.
XXI. Clote , wdy, wetting 4 day break till
night, very colg. N Ww,
XXII. Showr m. warm, cloſe m p. clearing ©


are, N ao ©
XXII. Cloſe m. {. wd, rainy 4 0. ad n. wel-


com. . N E.

XXIV. Warm, dropping 1 p. gr. drops 9 p.
Thund. 3 Claps in the E. 5g p. much Rain
and Thunder, 47G) $ d, I 5.

XXV. Cloſe m. warm, open. o. flaſhes of
Lightning, ſhedding 3 p. SE. SW.


Clouds in Sceres,


| XXVI. Fair, warm, C. lighening N E. and


ſome Meteors, «+ 2 NE.
1666, 16. 56.” * gr.5 thft. ©


VII. B. wind, fair m. oyerc. 8 m. mild and
fine ſhowres o. & 2 Pp.
VII. Sweet R, a. m, tot. R. 2 Pe $P.9 fp. W.


IX.. f. moiſture m. fair m. p. Hail , coaſting
ſhowres 11 m, hail $ p- {. drops.6 p.

X. Fog m. & a. m. Ely. Cloſe die tot, R, 7 Þ-
$ p. cold, rain. - _

XI. Cold drops a. m. miſling o. powring R, 2
P. open 17 p. and freez Wly, © _

XIL Fr, fog, cloſe m. p. gentle rain 11 Þ.

XIII. Cold, miſt m, open n. wetting [t P. 4 Þ.

Oc. R. 8p. W. p. * lo at even; clouds in
Scenes, ”

XIV. Miſt m. cold a.m. R, 6p. ad8p. SW,

XV. Miſt, hottiſh a. m. cool, brisk wind. w.

XVI. Cloſe, wetting ms p. H. wd and wetting
all n, Wy. Nly.


| XVII. Miſty, wdy , ſtormy p. m.R. hard 8 p.


XVIII. R. a. L v:dy, rough weather \ C. dri-
ſling R. p. m. hor. SW. W.S.
XIX. Fair m. bright, hot day ; lighrning, R,
and Thutder 15 p. wd cool, - miſt, wind
blow hottiſh. SW.
XX; Cloſe m. \. dewing , open and hot ;; to-
ward Even clear. | SW,
XKX1, Cloſe, miſty m. fair, hotriſh, brighten.


SE,
XXII Miſt, ſtreaked clds, hot wind,
XXIIL R. © or. fair, white clds. S.
LT |
April.
1674.4 Apr. 12, S 2;


V.S W, open, clouds in Scenes.
VI. Nly. miſtm. ſhowres 31 m. wd change Sly
p. m. then Ely,
VI. N E. Showres 9 m. warm, ſtorm at the
* Wells at Lyn, deep Shipwrack.
XIII. Fair, but f. fhowres, and cold, clouds
fly Ely. Aches 10 m.
IX, Cloſe a, m, open p. m. miſty, Aches,
milling 10 p.
X. Showres 11 m. (3c. warmer, Aches. $ W
XI, R, n. R.2 p. Ely. Aches,
#4 XII, W


6


A


do? Dary.


Book II


XII. Wly miſt, open 2. nm, cloſe p. m. brisk | XVII. Showr a.L. 3 m. warm, ſomewhac


wind. S W. Aches.
XIIL N E. ſuſpicious a, mM. warm, open m.


- Aches.
XIV. Hort and dry, miſty air, caſtle clouds
N E. Aches. .


XV, N E. Fair, dry, hot. ;

XVI. NE. (. R. 5 m. warm, lowring p. Mm.
XVII. $ W. cloſe m. p. {.R. 7 p. Aches.
XVIII. Nly. cloſe. | ;
XIX. Ely. Open, dry , f. wet, warm S - &


XX. Sly. H. wd 4 p andclds in Scenes, *

XX1. Cloſe, miſty , ſhowre 9 m. 10 Mm. at
Iſlington wd, R. 0. Þ. Oc. tempeſtuous, $ W.
bur Ely n.

X X11. Tempeſt a. |. & die 19. SW.


29


Tune.


1653.15 June26. S 15. |

eh LR. 7 cloudy, clear m. miſty, R. N.

XX, Cldy, ſome drops at n. Rain Blood at
Pool, Childrey.


XXI. XXL. Cloudy, f. Sun-ſbine. N.
XX111. Cldy m. , ;
XX1v. Clear, cloudy, windy. N.


RXV. Way, clds, 1. R. n. N.


XXVIL. Dropping A. L. clear m. p. miſty. N. |


XXVI.. Clear m.cldy, rainy. NW.


XXVIL £. froſt, clear, cloudy, windy. W.
XXIX, Clouds, ſ. wd, Ratny at n. Sly.
XXX, Rainy , windy , miſling , " -


L. Fuly. Windy, wet, Open At N. S W.
A Jah. Wind, Gaking Rain all day ſtore,
WI. Clear, a ſhowr eſpyed N. Ely.
Tv. Clearm. ,

V, Fair. }


1661.D. 25. S 12. una cum ©& *,


XVII. Cloudy, fog.
X1IX.- Cloudy 9 m. {.drpps. heat. NE. SW.
XX, Clear all day even cloudy, Rong


ly

XXL. Wind, cold, H. wd m.
X X11, Cloudy, cool m. clear m p. w Y.
X X111.Cloudy,cool,ſf.wd © appears,Even cldy.
XX1V. Cloudy, cold day, windy guſts, Even
cool, cloſe , ſometime , lowring 199"


XXV. Cloud y, cold day. NE.
XXVI. Cloudy, cold m. & 0. hot n. hot p. -1


XRV1I, Fog m. clear, hot day. SW. ug |


XXVIN. C, R- m. cldy m p, Hot day = wehb


XXIX. Cloudy, wind cold, blew miſt n.

RXX, Cloudy m. p. coolo. N

I. Fuly, Cloudy, © appear. hor m. p. N.W.

1669. 22, S 11.

XV. Hear, f. clds, fog m. wd n. SW.

XVI. Hear, clds , overc- 10 P- and probably
Lightning at n. Wly.


Overc. cool wd n.


: Wly. --
XVII. Warm, cool w. pale miſt arn. Wy.


XIX, Miſt, red w, fair, warm, cooler. N E,

XX, Miſt, pale miſt at n. cool. Nly.

XX. Miſt, fair, warm, pale miſt n. Nly.

_ Fog m. fair, fog increaſed 8 m. hot and

ry.

XX1IIT. Miſt m. fog 9 m. at ) riſe, hot, dry,
miſty m. p.

XXIV. Warm, clds gather av o.cloſe n, N E,

XXV. cloſe m. fair, cool. NE.

XXVI. Fog m. f. thin clds. N.

XXVIL Fog m. pale, thick clds, dry feaſo
Aches, \, Wly.

XX. Fog 4. a. m. hot drought , hear, drops
7 p-Ely m. Wly

XXIX. Fog, hor, dry, clouds n

XXX. Clole, Thunderclap 10 m.

1677. Drie19,S 8.

XII. N W, warm , open, evercaſting x p.
Overc. 9 p. W. Indiſpoſition,

XIV. Fair ms/ctoudy 10 m. pregnant clouds,

* warm NE/Fair a. m. much lowting 2 p.

offering 4 p

XV, Heat, drops 6 p. ſoultry even, and thick
in the W, as if Thunder were near, $ W.
m. p. E.atn.

XVI. Floating white clds, warm 9 m. Ely

» butp. m. Wy, eſp. Sly. White clds ride
fromthe N.


XVII. Showr 1 m. & 4 © ovrt. cloſe, miſt, of. |


fer, gentle R. 6 fere ( Þ occ. ar © ocs. R,
11 Þ. hot.


p.

XVIIL Wer 2 m, ſaid the Watchman, cloſe

R. 2 p. H. wd 3 p. hempen clds. Light. in
NW. as if near day.

XIX. Fair, {. miſt , lowring ©. clds appear
Nly. lower Wly. warm, .dry, red clds ©
- wd bright veſp. m. p. Ely clds a N. ad

I


- 11 P.
| RX. Fair m. miſty cl. 11 m. floting, \. low.


ring clds 7 p. clds fly Ely. and wind vari.
ous 3 hetle Meteor over W. 12 p, ;

XXI. Miſt m. brighre , Cmiſt, brisk wind ,
crave Meteors near Pegaſus wing 11 p.
heat,

XX. Miſt , fair, © ſhine; red 1 p. Hear
border clds in W. © occ. hempen clouds ;
red clds"( occ,

XXII. Foggy m. and dry, bright d. wd Ely,


© occ. hempen clds many © occ.blond red”


{.upper fleec'd clouds ride from theW. 8 p,
XXIV. Fog m. clear hempen clouds o. C. lit-


|


tle thick clds in S. not diſcoverable for the
miſt ; hot wd Ely. Qocc. the Heavens round
the Horizon lifted with blew, not cloud , bur
miſt, ſoultry n.


W. |XX.V Miſt, fair, ſoulrry, much Lightning in


E. N. 10 ps Ely.
XXV1. R. ar n. Fair, bright, hear, cool, brick
wd, {. lowring, thick clouds riding Nly.


6 Þ. , as os
XXVII Cloſe 5 m. heat , miſty, lightning in
SE.inN W, and thunder 9 p. Wly. _
T;


CPCs


Chap. II.


d © 2 Daar 'v.


der inter 4 & $5 p. Struck two men at Farnt-
borough. Irdiſpol.

XXVIII. Cloudy m. p. ante8 m. cloudy and
cool Nly ; clearing, warm p. m, Bly. Siy-
wly. Showr ar Deptford 0. 2 p. + ſeems
great in the Perigee,


Auguſt.


1664. Aug. 31. rt 18.
xxl Open, miſty, cloudy, dry. N W.N E.
XXIV. XXV. XXVL Froſt, miſt, on, dry ,


XXVII. Cloſe m. p. = SE
XXVIIL Wind wet rh. miſt, driſling.N. SE.
XIX. Wet midn, & a. m. Lightn. 9 p. and R.
miſt ar n. _—_
XXX, Niſt, wet m. open m. p. Rain n. 5_W.
XXX1. Wer m. þ. R. hard 10 m. ſhow'es p.m.
& 10 p. hot. | ;
I, Sept. Pry wet d. drenching drowning day.
IL R. 4h a. cloudy, cold m. p. #. wd _


IT, Sharp fr, m. bright a. m. cloſe m. p. &
Iv. Miſty m. cloſe m. P. Nly.
Y. C.raina. 1. cloſe m. fair and cool n.

VI. Foggy m. and offering 5 p. - ®-


VII. R. 4 m, cloſe m. p S. m.N W. p.m.


Auguſt


1672. Aug. 28, M15.

XVII. BS tot,

XVHL. ing.

XIXT. M. Thender and lightning Depford. Re
$ Iy. 7 M.


XX. Hazy m. much lowring 5 p- Ely.
XX1.\. +1 froſt, ſmoaking Air. NE. NW.
XXII. C. fr. overc, dry. NE.
XXHIT. Cloſe, dull, open p. m. N W.


XXIV. Cloſe, troubled Air 0. and f. dew-
ing, ſhowres 1 * Wy. ſmoaky.
XXV. Cloſe m. {, lowring at n. N, Weſterly


warm.
XXVI. Cloſe and troubled, warm. Wy.
XXVIL. H.wd daſhing and drifle m. p. SW.
XXVill. Higher wds, drifle 9 m. daſh = 6


XXIX, H. wd, 4.1. & d. tot. R. 7 1m. _
XxX. H. wa. 4.1. ( d.tot. driſle 7 m. C


drops (© occ. :
XXX1. Wind and rain a. 1. wet p. m. Sly.
L Sept, Wind, Cf. rain 2 p. daſh5s p. Wiy-


I. H. wd fair m. p. coafting ſhowre. S W.
Il. Aches a .l. & a- m. very cold, wind

Iv. Cold m. fair 0. 2 p. ſhowre 6 p. ff” Wly-
Y. Cold m. flying Clouds, driſle and werring
©, & 2 p. rough wd, SW,


| ——___—


Anguſt,


I680. 11 Aug. 26. Ml 13.
XIx. Fog, opcn. Ely.
XX, Clote tog. hot, Ely, fair, bright n. 1.
guſts of Wind and dry. Nly & Ely.
SE.


XX1. Gr. early Fog, thin, cloudy Ely. Cf. wind,
warm, bright, blew, miſt Veſp. NE.

XXI. Cloſe m. fair 9 m. {. thin clouds

fair, dry, freſh winds, miſt veſp. © occ. Sly.

XX111. Cloſe m. fair.fricter-c!ds 10 m. H. wd
11m. hor n, prec. hotter than any ; ftripr
clouds veſp. Aches. |

XX1V. Cloſe m. very hot, windy , hot, ſtrea-
ked clds, clds coaſting S E. Heat, drops.
Gr, rain and Thunder circ. midn.

XXV. Open, hot m. Many fleec't clds a ſign
of Wer ; .ſoultry. overcaſt and black. 5,
ward. {. R.,6 p. {. ſhowres'$ p. 10 p.

XXVI. Soultry, hot, cloſe m. p. a- m. f. drops
open p. m. and clouds vaniſh ; lighening


in N E. 9 p. much, though Þ ſhine ; Me-
reors 3, 9 P. one croſs the Heaven 3, miſty


air.

XXVII Fog ni. not very clear, C. miſty, hor,
thick, angry clouds ; cloudy _ z fair
n. Wly. and Ely,


XXVUL Troubled air 9 m. & drops Ely, wet


and Thunder and Lightning $ m. () in


Nadir ) ad hv. 12. merid. very dark all
thar while 3 ſhowres p. m, hot n. Ely


Lightning in E. 11 p. though Þ ſhine.
XXIX, Cloſe m. (. Ro m. =—_ ante 5 p. ab
© occ.. OF ante 9g p. Sly.
XXX. Fair, clds in Sccnes, C. lowring, warm
Lightn. n. fron a cid or two in the N. Cocks
univerſally ante 5 p.
XXX. Clouds in | m. warm , calm
hempen glouds. H. Tydes noted die 30. 31?
| clds fly low © occ. * OUS
[. Sept, Very cool m. & fog thick-: Cobwebs
many un. one Night ; Halo; colour'd 3 m.
il. Fog m. overc. 11 m.*f. drops, long Th.


Y. occ. in $ W\ ſkowr after, cldsride SE.
wd E, .


Thund, ho. 2. clouds craggy ©) occ, Lighrn,


3 p.9P-
UI. Halo 2 m. cloſe, cool, open, warm p.m.
Nly m. Sly p. m, 4


September.


1656. Sept. 2, Wt 20,

XXV. Aug. Wind till 3 m. cold, bright,

XXVI. Overc. a. L. miſt, cloudy, fair,

XXVIL. H. wad, cloudy, AX. wind n.

I windy, cloudy, clear , warm , blew
miſt.


XXIX,


id © ? Diary.


Book II


0. — OO non mm


XXX, Cloſe m. clear m. p.

I. Sept, Claſey {. wd, cool ſhowres 3 clear n.

II. Cloſe m. p. cool wd.

TIL. Cloſe, cold.

IV. Overc. 8 m. wind and lowring 0.

V. Thick miſt, m—_ clouds, variable wds.

VI. Wind riſe, overc. blew clds 9 m.

VIL Cloſe wd, Cf. faine blackiſh clds.

VIIL Fair, overc. wd [. ſhawr o. R.

IX, Clote, fleeting clds; f. wer; flaſh of
Lightn. 10. cloſe, red clds.


lm


November.


1659. CY. £ z- eum 7 .
V, Hard wd , ſharp froſt all n, & d. overc.


2 P.

VI. Fr, very cold,

VIE H. fr. cold, overc. 1
dark, R. fnow 8 p.


VIII. Wind all n. ſnow ante © occ. bright, 0-
pen wd, ſnow. |

IX, Wind 5 m. dark, driſling 10 M.., WET 1 P.

« R,6 o ,

R, l, wy p. Mm. R. n. Lightn. Flu. .

XL. Fair, warm, coolat n.


X11. Very cold fr. gentleR. a © ad 2 p.

XII, Very hard, fr, overc. 3 p. miſty 9 p.

XIV. wid cloſe, driſling 9 m. H..wd g..warm 3
{. wer. | CEVD* .

XV. Wind all n, warm, fleeting clouds', red


p. h. wd p. m-:


veſp. ;

XV1. Fair ſtill. i;

XVII. Driſling, warm rainall d.

XVIIL Fair,fr.

XITX, Fog, fr.-

XX. Fr. fogall day. _

RX. Fr. fog alt d. very great fog. |

XXIL Fair d. fog n. fr.

X'X1IM, Fr. and fog. Et

XXIV. Muddy dark m. fair p. m. *

XXV, Sun ſhine, fafr, wd.

1667. CS >... .

FV. H. wind all n. & d. cold, wetting,

V. Wd a. L. Cf. wetting m. & o. wind at n.

VI.:Cloſe m. p- cold; open 9 p. and unuſual
clouds in furrows. |

VIE: Mild, cloſe, very miſty air.

VIII. Warm, cloſe, miſling 9 p-

IX, Miſt, cloſe, open p. Mm.

X. Fr. fair d. {. miſt m-

XI. H. fr. fog all d. "a

XL. Fr. fog; thaw; wd and ſnow ar fn.

XIIL Fr. wd a. L. {. ſnow, cloſe, cold wd.

XIV. Dark windn. f. mit, cloſe.

XV. Miſt, cloſe, mild, cold wd n,

VI. Dark m. and -; miſt, cald.wd.

XVII. Miſt, cold wds, driſling at n.

XVII. Miſty, werring a. MM. 5now Þ. mm. 7. p.
wind and great Snow. _

XIX. H. ud a. 1. fr. ſnow lying 3 thaw p. m.


wd cloſe p.m.
XX, R. m. miſt, warm, cloſe, open p. m,


A)


| XXX. Q#06. 1. H. wd 4.. L. fair.


November.


1675. Mov. 10. m 28
II. Fog, cloſe m. p. C. miſt 10 p. white (59,


M. Ny,
IN. Fog. R-4s m5 p. Nv,
IV, H., winds 6 m. ſhowr 6 m.
V. Windy , very cotd , ſharp , drying Ny

white froſt m.
VI. Terrible froſt, ice.
VIL Fog, fr. fair.
VUL Fog, fr. chaw p. m.
IX, f. miſt, R. 10 m. miſle 3 p.
'N. Cloſe, warm, h. wd, rain 5 p.
XI. Driſling m. p. very warm 3 £{. wetting 6,


Wiz,
XII. Cloſe. :
XIIL. Cloſe, warm n. {. mille 10 p,
X1V. Miſt, fr. m. open, mille 7 p. wy,


XV, Miſt, cloſe Ely.” colder.
XVI. N W, Fair m, p, cool miſt, wdy. l
XVII Cool, drying, .ctoudy, ſhowr 8, p. vi


IL. W, Fog, cool, R, 9 p- N-k


XIX. S W. Fr. cloudy m, p. cool Hals }
Tunbr, Þ\ * *


83.2.6 D.8. m 26.


N W,
XXXlL, Temperate,cloudy ; H. wd 10 p.Sly,
. Nev. Wind R."; m. tying clds'; H. wind
dhRYindA&m. Wy,
IT. Fr, cold, ſuſpic.2 p. in N W, wd Ny.
(IT. f. r. a. L, cold and lowring clouds, NW,
IV. Powring” R. 5 ni. © He. wd, heavy tt,
R. 4 p. H. wd 10 p. driſle,»+ SW,
V. H. wind and R. 5 m. Iris. a. m. 'Hz wind
} . andcold p, m. Why. ſome' Swediſly ſhips
| caſt away. Relat. extr. .

VE-' Fair, cold, H. wd, few flying clouds. NW.
VII, Froſty d.fair, calm, Aches. Ny.
VILE. Fr. Fog, R. ante .g m. drifting m. þ. þ.

warm veſp. |
IX, (. fail circe midn.: cloſe p. m. wy
X. Driſle, m. pleaſant P: wind. W


XI, Fogrm, Cf. tr. cloudypo m: cold wd Nly,

w,
XII. Fair, averc. n. .. \. Sly,
XHE Clofe, \cool, fog. +: Sly,
XIV; Cloudy, moiſt, ,wd. ., ..;' ..! v%


XV« Foggy d. wettimg 8 m. 11 m1. Wwly,
XVi: Gr; fog a.m. fairp.\.m. cold veſp, Wis

Ely»
X VI. X VIM. XIX. Froſty, £og, coſe. - Ely


April.
1683S Apr. 10; & o. '


L Circa Apr. imtium, divers trees blaſted. SW
ſome wd, open p. m: temperate. Fly


III, Cloudy, cold, ſome guſts, Ni
I y
\,


IL. R. winds riſe 10 m<Y or. cold wind ; 1o *


« £44


GH. SS .i..4 i...”


_— H. wd b. d. and all day, cloſe, cold z fo


Chap. IL


id © 2 Drary.


IV. v. Crain ante L. & m. miſt, cold. Ely.N E.


V. Cloſe, miſty, rem eNE.atn, Wiy.
VI. Warm, fair clou s, contrary 9 Me. Wy,
ar n. Ely.


VIISFog, cloudy , warm. Sly. Ely. and very
Bey veſp. guſt of wd I riſe 3 Delphin


vuL Very cold, fog m. overc. foggy m. P-j
—_— bur ar n. E A
IX. Cloudy, miſty ;


ring ante 4 P. -
R. wh ſhowf 10 m. ly.


XI]. Windy, wetting 9 m. rain ad 9 p. wr.


XIIL Bright a. m. Clouds by bordering in thew ,
H. wd, cloudy p. m. with rain 10 p. fo8 ©
0c. * SI
XIV. H. wind and Rain m. & a.m diy p.m.
SW. (. ſtript clds,
XV. Clouds in Scenes ; a fhowr a. m. & ante
2 p. Sly m. Wly p. m.
XVI. Groſs fog m. cloſe and fi 4 © oc.
A W_, 4 R. of ho 9 A mh m,
ouds 1n Sccaes, [, rain
= , ante o.right p.


XVIIL R. 9 m, G alias. R. weſp. G 9 p. Þ


ſed Del
X11. Showr 10 m. N or. ante 3 p.& 4 p. ? paiel. 5 many Doll ahay
oce, Þ in M. C.
Table Retrograde. gs © 2
Per mteryall. Grad. 3.
Os

$5. January. April. :
1667, 26 30. = 20, 1654; 11 16.56, ,
NV -_———— p- m; Cl. gentle _ XIV, Miſty and driſling m. warm wind, S IF,

XV. Fair and warm
XXIX. Toa falls 9 m. f. rain o, heavy clouds, XVI. Fair ES = wm S. Me .


Ely.


N. Ely.
XXX. Cola, cloſe, windy.


1675; Die 27. =» 18.

XXVI. Open, warm, fair, $ W. Tonbridge. He.
bY. SW..

AXVIL SE. Fr, miſt m: windy, fair, E. m.


n. Why.
X£XvIIL 5 E. Miſty, cloſe, warm, lowring n.
» Tonbr, Halo Þ -Aches.
XX1X. SW. Very þ. wind and rain a, L. ſtor- | X
my wd all d,


168 2
Da Fog, 9, clouby'm.p nf cold wind.


N E. Aches.
XXIV. Fog, froſty, fair, ſharp wd. Audidle
NE


at n- AC
XXV. Fr. - fog, thaw m. cold Aches. -
E.


XXVI. Froſt Y foggy, Fair wd.
AO


td


Febr wary:


16 TO £2 2
at an, Fair, TAK yon n.


ih war ntle warm R.
11, 118, Very fair, Fr. n.


——


XVIL Showrs often, R. warm rain at Bediime.
S.
XVIII Watm n. C. ſhowrs; R. ſome ſtore. S.


April. Ke
1662. I4.
X11, Cloſe, warm. S. SW. 4M
_ gag clds m. fair, warm,
6 m. cloſe m. p. hor, 1. wiliog:
Wetring 11 mM 2 p.6 m. $-
168 IIl.S 1.


IX. Warm, f. ſhowres 1 p. Sly. fleec't clouds


m. wer 11 m. ſb veſp. &c.
X. Wetting g M. wetting mm. . þ: wd audible =<Y.


LE


S 4


XI, Fait, wdy, coldiſh, ſhowr © oec. & 10 op
XII. Cloſe, H. wd, clouds in Scenes, wo


and dry ; Centaur's head bright. -
XI. Cold. 'F
XIV. Not a cloud in Sky-
167 8. Die 9. 26.
YIIL L. s
fit R. 2 4 Shy, Ny. Fre From.


———— p. Wh. Sh, Ky
1x, Miſt m. ſeemed a
& wind 1 p.ſo 3 Þ- AY NN:


Us


&


160 | Pf © Dary. ' Book IL,


*R. ITY clds fly N. aud S. wind Ely.
56, open lowring Weſtward 3 cool clds Sept ember.
ride contrary. Nly. cold n. Wly #7 Þ- _
Ely.


ing 7. 0. 652, |
- XI, m. Þ. 4. M. fair p. m. tni- | 1052+ 5. 22,
Le GEAS Pp: Pr Nly. | IV.C. wd, flows; at n. lo,
V. Cloudy, wiridy, fo ar n. Xi.
_ —— | VI. Fair, windy. . -
; | VIE. Fair, calm, N IW.

June. 1660, Die. m 21,


L Fair, but rain acn.
IL HL Very fair, froſt n.


1657. 25. B 1% Iv.n ,
ot; &riſling and ſoultry R. NN.
xx it. bebo ill WY i ae
XX1V. Exceſſive hot, bright, blew, miſt. 5 w., 7. EU OE Fa
XXV. Hot » cooler wd,ſ. clds o. f. overc. _ x
a bright Meteor.
RKVI 1 fhowring a. m.- T_—_— SW, November. GY
166 22. B 11,
XX1. Cloſe, very hot. Ely. H. wd and.cool. | 1655. I9. 7 7. E-
S W. at n. Ely. XVU..'Clofe, warm, hot. SW.
XXII. Lowring m. a ſhowr 8 m, open, hot m, XVIH.Tlouds, warm, openin veſh, &8W.
and miſty. SW, | XIX. Froſt, warm, fair, wd, fair, * NW.
> +,% H.wd a L. (05 all day; driving wet. N W.


XX11L Fair m. coaſting ſhowre 1p. clondy,


hor, XXI, H. wd all n.calm © ort, eldy, f. ſnow.
: Clouds in Scenes, and ride contrary. NW,


XXIV. Fair, cldy, qoaſting ſhowre 3 P+ - © I671, Dije 14
0c. x " WC rkd bo | XII, Fair. NW. fog n. Ss tic prac, He wed,
3 Two Ships Iſt at Tarmouth, |
— i——_—— —_— XIV. Wind and ſnow-z ny.chaw and warmer, |
2,197 17507 AS Bis 'Y "7 ot wes togay air. | SW, {
. hapiagks ducuf. 42 XV. Foggy air, cloſe driſle io p. wd. _ Wh,
_., _ 206 ya xa; 1 ORG > Wer a. I. & m. cloſe, very warm, Wi,
a668, 1h: 21m on. + 1 | 1979- I5: M1 29,
Fa Whire Flr a _ N W. Ely. IX, R.z L after ſnow; ——— Wa Ny," |
RXRT Frofft, tilt; Ghite clde7 Show?, Ely. —_ _ - ener
L Sept. \. miſt and clds ; bright m. froſt, on _ Ve ry greſ fog, cloſe, froſt, open, ſha
IL-Froſt, cold, cloſe, milly » cool wd. Why xt1 Fog, L Fog, very hard white froft 3 cloſe m, | P. (
Rs | Wy,
,9E X11. nr. Ny. «pen, fog, black froft ; fair anti
Tune 4 oi froſty. Nly. ſharp wd. +... .
+ . : S2 — _ PT , «
s * od ot n i__ ———— F C
1699-18: S 9. - RL XX
- nr” 'b- a.m. Nly. bur: pom. 8ly. | Augaft, | -
wWr4p. ol © .: : . MT
SIR; 5 10..witd 1Twerring T P- OY a LN2 :.. I
RR, Bright, cody 0. lowring 4 P» 2 _} at = 4 Nh, & Zh, ;
+7 36k
NX1. Werting 7 'm. & 9 m, fair,overc. n. Sly. Xi: Angry cls yu Jr en 0p :
Xl Windy, ; woxing Shy. Clouds in Scenes. XXVIL R. a. L. cold, wiridy, very cotd
G56 | b 3-Thde - XXVUL Cloſe, thows fine p. M. Wh. -
jon XXVIIL Showr 8 m. and Cf. ſhowr-0, 2 Þp. XXIX, Drilling ſhowres P. M, & [7
D rele 5 > ant ISEy'D. SW. 7]
. Ac es Epi *L
RYKXIX.-Cold. eight, Pregn. clouds ; 'H. . nd £(
- fAiches extream. re
KK, Fair, cool, {. clouding 3 p. Wh. Aches th
pr. ſhowr ar Bromh. Wh. b
=. RXXX1. Miſty, lowring IT mM. Aches, _


__
& >»


_——


O » ow


- 40A 6 Bod


_


Chap. 11. How a d contributes to Heat, yea aud cold alſo.


161


Ar Ferrara an Earthquake ſwallowed up
Tune Trees Five Milc. So at Lims in France. ©
” | XVII, White froſt, clear moſt part, wds. N E.
, | NIX. Clouds in Scenes, ſome drifle 5 p, Mete-

1631, , Die18, $6. | erwith dtrain 9 p. A tempeſt of Lightning
XVI. Cloudy, ſomerime Jowring wind. Ni. and R' 3 Leagues from Lyme,

Several Dolphins iporring in che mouti Cl

Sewer _
XyIF Lowring m-p. miſt at n, per NW.


$6.1 acknowledge the Table hath its Length, but if it be conſider'd
whar the experience of 3oyears is for iuch an Aſpect as d © 2, the Table
ſhould be look'd on as a Gimelium rather, thana furteiring Swperfluity. Alaſs!


I witht it longer, for he that ſhall ſurvey the Table, will find that there *


are 4 or 5 Months wanting, it requires almoſt another 3o years.

And let no man be grieved here that we have allowed too many days, 13.
or 14. towards the Verge of our Aſpect; not ſo much for ſecurity ſake, in
caſe of a defe#ive Calculation, which in 2 , it ſeems, is not tontroverted :
But for the more ſure comprehenſion of thoſe Effects, which by clear right
belong to the Aſpect, though at the Diſtance of two degrees, fince the AC.

challenges 7 days to it ſelf, even while they are cloſe among themſelves
nm the ſame degree. |

$7. As to the Warmth of this Aſpect, when we have met with days of
Soultry Heat, not ſeldom accompanyed with Lightning and Thunder :
They, who weigh thoſe Effects, and the determinate time of their appea-
rance, will find (forgetting all foolith conceits) our Feminine Planet to be
Maſculine fo far, to be a Virago, partaking of Palas, the Flahing Fiery
Godateſs. :

+ $8. Thus is ſhe a Friend to Warmth, but fo, as ſometimes you ſee, to
Gold, Not as the Toy takes her 3 how then- ſhould we comprehend her
Ficklene(s ? Or bring it under Rule ? But according as ſhe is attended, or
abandon'd by the reſt of the Company. ' Tis no News that the ſame
Planet,under various Circumſtances, thould cauſe Heat, and ad»rt, yea, and
in ſome meaſure acuate Cold. The d @Þ, the d @Z? did fo. For we
cannot diſfemble that in the year 1663. we find Extream Froft tor 13 days to-
gether, even through the whole Period almoſt 3 but we may note, that 'ris
not there alone, but generally all Conjunctions as ſuch, in tome reſpect fa-
vour Gold. 'Even the d © # it fel How fo ? I anſwer, not as 'tis


congreſs of Luminous and Calorifque Bodies, fince 'tis impoſlible but Hear


_ be intended and increaſed by ſuch Union; but becauſe inaf{ Conjun-
there is-a Cq-arctation or Reduction of the Luminary to preciſe
Points and Diſtances, which 'ris certain may and do act more at a leſs confine-
ment inthe I/uzzination of the Medium ; no man to enlighten a-fair Room will


ſet theTapers contiguous,but will 4:fr:ibute them ar a certain and proportionable
Meaſure. The M-4ium: being more exlightned by ſuch diſtribution,than when


Luminous Bodies are contiguous. Well may ſome fo? of the Room
e a Light more than ordinary, but the whole Area thall be darks/h. Juſt
as two Seed-men in a Field , that ſow more ground at convenient diſtance,


than if they walked together in the ſame Furow. The Partrle Congreſs of -


Two Calorifick Bodies doth 1zcreaſe, and alſo abate heat , undtr- ſeveral
conſiderations. Ir increaſes \t as to the porpt, it abates it as to the Grroumfe-
rence, it increaſes it as to theproper place, itabates it as to the Gammon; for
the Congreſs is Lineal, wherein the Planets ſo meeting, are united, ('tis rrucÞ
but they are con{trained and reſtrained to a preciſe point, 2 narrow appart-
ment, whereby the remoter parts being fortaken by that Influence, which


cre ,


_—


162 Bright air. R. moſt part of the d. aſcribed to d © $. BookIl,


erewhile ſpread it ſelf there,is left cold zaked and bars of that Influence which
was more diffufive, when they were art diſtance not unreaſonable.
s$ 9. For the Sentiments of the Antients, what do they declare when Yea
is in Dominion ? Then faith Ptolemy, the makes a fine temperate Air & 52;o
5 dip ivdepO xenuenCd x55, Pure and Fair. She brings alſo many and Fruit-
es, bubest moet x; 291101, Railing, faith he, the Waters : Next, a
windy Conftitution with thoſe ſhowres, 3 T1dus wy grams 3yegrnxl, be adds
alſo y 5eerm5 , the Star muſt be fruitful, if ſhe be 5ye9»nz» , ſhe muſt
Seermt. The Arabs a for all I ſee 3 Albumazar and his Mamareth,
(which I ſuſpe& to be the Dominion ) is much for Rain; and thart in ſtore,
2ubegi moxnct, as Ptolemy calls it, very often. For next to the » our


. Venus is reckoned 3207t,and therefore Benifigue,becauſe moiſt. Tetrab. c. 5. and


therefore again Feminine (he faith) becauſe moiſt. Gap.6. Thar's their realon.
S$ 10. For the Firſt of theſe, that 9. makes a fine Ar, I thought it had bin
2 forced illuſion to the —_ of the Planet, wherein the Fiction of YVerus
Aurea, and ewvu«J%; , muſt have bin glanced at: But when on a review L
caſt my Eye on the Diary, I ſaw there was no Poetical F:#107 in the caſe. .
Our d © 2 oft-times makes a bright Air, and clear, as her Hue pretends.
Nor will we ſtand to Imagine any probable reaſori thereof but this, that what
cauſes the one, that may be the Author of the Other : The Intrinfgue bright-
neſs of the Planet may perfuſe the Air with a ſuitable Gleam. This may ap-
not only in the bright days, or parts of days, which are found under
er, whether Hot, or cold froſty Conſtitutions, but even where ſome wet
may happen. For how clear is the Air many times (except perhaps in Win-
ter ) how Holiaay-like I fay, doth it look, when yet a | wh may ſtep in,
and muffile the azure mirrour ? In like manner, after a morning, Foggy |
though it be, may prove a clear and bright day, when the ſullen Fog may
Call here and there in its ſcatter'd Atoms, apalzng the brightneſs which at
other times may be more 7:4. I ſhall not ſtand much upon this, only
protuce one notable Teſtimony mentioned in the Diary, where I was never
able to ſee in our City Horiſon, the Geztawr's Head but once, and that you
fe ison our d of © and 8.
Ss 11. For what follows in Ptolemy we are ready to prove as tb Showres
and Dropping. She brought Rain in above 200 Inſtances, and that will do.

d Rain or Snow, all, or moſt part of the day, neer 40 times. Once or
Twice ſhe continues the Fog all day ; even therein ſhewing her Partnerſhip
withthe Sun, and how true ſhe keeps to him 3 ſothat if under a d of ©'
and », 6r d © 2 you will plead, you can find the like; I anſwer, Nay :
For if I find our d of © and 2 in any reaſonable Capacity acting at the
ſame time, To our Beauteous Conjunction will I aſcribe the Contmuances
7 perhaps we may find the like in ſome after Aſpedts, who are of asſlow a

QrtiON,

S$ 12, On this accountat is that we often times ſee Clouds as in ſeveral
Stories, Lofts or Scenes, one over another. I do not fix them on this Af
one; Out ſpecially T do 3 fuch Gontrenations of the Clouds do thew rbhy 94s
of Rain is falling, or ready to fall. In all dire Tempeſts we may find

ſuch Bay of Buildings in the Regions above , which when they tall
on our- Heads, make a Rarza Gel: ; the Firſt Heaven doth often tumble
upon our Heads: And in Loud Thunder theſe ſeveral Stories, no doubr,
heighten the. violence of the Eruption, and helps to ſtrike the Lightning
downward, which otherwiſe would fly as innocently as a ſoft filent Vight-
Flame, fadden or ſhooting in the Huſh't Night.

s 13. For High Winds, whereof Ptolemy makes mention, we have a com-
petent Number, which occur both in the Dire& Conjunction and Retro-
grade. I obſerve he doth not ſtick to attribute Winds to 2, though hs

hath


| Chap. II. Treaſures of Ram and Hall, where. © 167


hath aſcribed the ſame to 2 before. All that we ſhall fay is, and no body
will perhaps, gainſay us, thar there is reaſon why 7 ſhould be reputed of -
more windy Influence than his Neighbour Planet, becauſe of his Viciniry,
yea, and thoſe wore often Congreſles with the Sun : bur notwithſtanding this,
we ſhall ſee to be Truth, that many times $ hath her Influence, and zo ſmall
Influence on many Tempeſts, of which 2 carries away the Name. + + .
$ 14. What more remains will come under the more Platique Confidera:
tion of this Aſpect, whoſe Grandure will not be conſpicuous, except we
enter into a larger Field, being not unwilling herein to ſpare our pains. Here
I find the Arabs, Summ. _ ſpeak of 12. degrees _— 'of 15.
which I muſt needs ſay is founded onExperience,as hath bin ſhewn in part al-
ready in # . Nay,{ſome ſpeak of the ſame Sign,but of Thatwe fay little rill we
come to the Superiours. Ar preſent we ſhall produce no-Evidences but what
comes within Compaſs of the firſt Moiety of the Sign, the 15. degree; and
all on this {ide of it. .
$ 15. But we have not done our beſt for our Mo;fure yet ;
Thus then, notwithſtanding we have faid that 13. or 14 days produced for
every Aſpectin the Direct Table is a Prejudice to our accounts, yet eveti ſo
our Mos Days in the Tahle out-vie the Moiety of the Total. This in the
Dere# ; but in the Retrograde , which conſiſts bur of 3 days, what is the
Ifſue 3 What ? Bur this, that there is ſcarce one Aſpect under that Stile, bue
' What finds us with Rain or Moiſture 3 Ozce, if not Tw:ce within the Treduums,
And if fo, pray remember us to Gaſſendus 3 the reaſon we-will tell you, that
in this Caſe, 7. e. when Venus is Retrograde, Venus is nearer us than Merowy it
Elf, So doth Aſtrology demonſtrate. | TT
9 16. Let the Reader favour me fo, as to glance on theſe days following}
and then recur to the Table, Firſt, ;


%
F


Dire8. .

January. ©, Jamuary. 2
I679. ate 22, 1671. ate 28. Feb. 17, 16;

February. 1655. - __ Feb. 3.
1655. ate 5,8, 1679. ate 16. 23, 24,

April. : February,

1658. ate 17, 18, 24+ 1655. ae 2.
1666, ate 9, 11, 13, 14, 17. April.
1682, die 16, 1658, ate 21. 23;
Fune, - 1666, ate 8. 13.16,
1653. die 21, 26, 29, 3% _ ate 15. 21,22,
1677. ae 17, 1682, die 14.
Jul. * Jul.
1653. ate 1653. d4te2,

Augup. —_—
1664. ate 299 | 1664. die 31, Sept. 1, 2,
1672. die 20, 28, 31. &Sept, 1, 16.| 1672, ate 17, 27,29. 31,
:1656. die Septembr. November.

Novem | 1650. ate 16,

1659. dt 9, 10. 1667s die 4. 18,
1683, ate 1, 4, 8, 1682, ate 8.


$17.1 haveread ſomewhat of theTreaſures of Rain, Hail,Snow.and fo have

you z Good Reader, ifyou pleaſe; I will ſhew you oneofthem, the d ON

is one of thoſe Store-Houſes; for the Firſt Columne of the Table preſents

you with Store of Rain, according as way noted by Ptolegy, The 24, ith
N


168


Demonſtration. Clouds riding contrary. Book I.


—


Rain for a conſiderable part of the day, yea, All che Day long, an Effect I wis,

of ſome Conſequence to be regarded by all thoſe who believe 2 Prov;dence,

and Gonvincing all thoſe who believe it not. For lo, on ſuch an Aſpect

reciſely thoſe Gluts' of Rain do fall. See the ſame from Keplers Ta-

ble alſo ready to be produced, leaſt any ſhould ſay,” 'tis meerly Caſual ; no,
(j


- *ris not ſo, but it would protons never have bin difcover'd, but by our Me:


thod of enlarging our Aſpect to a Fortnight, or thereabour. Bur how 2
That's the Queſtion, if it were an Apple we ſpoke of, the Faireſt yields
moſt Moiſture : Butis it ſo amongſt the Stars ? I thought once to diſpatch it
thus that the Planets not Warmth only, but its Motzor alſo is tobe conſider'd,
Llpon the Account of Warmth ſhe is a Friend to*Rain : Upon the account
of her Motion, ſhe keeps even pace with her Sun, as it were, to juſtifie and
maintain the Conſtitution put up. For all Gonftitutions are interrupted by the
Seperations of the Gauſes, which! help to produce them , unleſs when equs-
valent Cauſes ſucceed. Theſe Cauſes are nog ſeparated fo ſoon, where the
Motion is equal, as in our Aſpect is found ; Gontenued Rarns are not found


therefore ſo frequent in d © 5 , becauſe # by his ſwifter Motion bids adieu


to the ©, as » alſodoth, witha Motion mach ſwifter. That this is the Rea-
on, appears, becauſe theſe Rains, whoſe duration laſt an eztere day, are

und moſtly in the Dire& motion of our Planet under this Aſpect, where
this equality 'holds. In the Retrograde, where the Sun and She moving to


| Foray Terms, are ſuddenly parted ; we ſee no ſuch Conſtitution happens,
w


With what juſtice-now. thall a genuine A/rology be counted a vain Pretence,
;whencis evendemonſtrative,” when it rendersa reaſon of an Effe& not con-
temptible, 4 priore> Making as good Demonſtrations, why Rains when they
once Catchare _— laſt bythe equal motion of the Planets, as there is De-
mouftration of a Lunar Eclipſe by the Earths interpoſicion. |

$ 18, There are ſome little Gur:o/7tres, that if they deſerve not our regard,
yet perhaps, may be above our Contempt.

$ 19. Firſt, Concerning the Clouds, ef which there ap theſe diffe.
rences, FlaxenClouds, Elzer'd Clouds, ſome which I call Eritter Clouds, al!
Fom their likeneb, other Striped or Streaked Clouds , lying in irange Fur-


rows as it were.\+ I have reaſon to think theſe belong to the AſpeR, becauſe *


they ace found all of them within the interval of three d » and yet. ac-
cording tothe general Nature of Clouds, ſo diverſified. Gans this with
Clouds in their Lofts or Conti ns, Theſe are abatements of that Fulneſ(s.
Now all abatements do ſpring from the ſubſtra&ion of the Cauſe, as in the
Striped Cloud, which is remarkable as ſometime to reach froxz oze end of the
Heaven to the other, ſomewhat” a:ficult to explain as yet, having advanced
not much in our Theory, but 7#:fib{+ it is, being certain (to the Glory of Pro-
vidence be it ſpoken) that there is no appearance in Heaven without itsCauſe.

S 20. The next is, clouds riding contrary, contrary I ſay to the V/ind, or
contrary tO one another. Who ſexds them, trow you, of ſuch _— Er-
rands? It is z0t the ſame Wind drives the Clouds; howbeic, the Seaman has
advanced fo far, to make his way to conneyy points by the ſame gale. I
uſed to compare it to the tu77 of the Toung at the fide of the River,
when the main Stream runs to Eb. This contrariety happens in ſeveral
Apartments of the Air, Secundum ſub & ſupra, and 'tis cauſed by a new Aſpect
ſuperinduced to the Prior, Semtor, —— Upon the ſame account,
as 'tis uſual for the Wind to veer about againſt a Storm, and when the ſtorm
is done; to return to its o{4 Corner. And upon this account it may be whac
me ay, that Clouds coming againſt Wind are a fien of a Storm, or Thunaer,
and the like. The Cauſe is different as in the Waters, 'tis Young Floud by
che redundant Ocean. The River ebbs by the Pronenels of its Streams; this
is more {cen in .our- Aſpe& perhaps than another, becauſc of its duration ;


ehe


CL. _ Ca wm me B95 mn tn =©B MY _yYwy=


65 2 =» 07 - => <a> =  QOMXNn =: ATV


-


my as


a PR—_—y


* Gn. The Sunil


Chap. 1 I. Bluſhing Clouds, Miſt. Aſtrol. advanced by Platic Aſp. Fo


the longer the day Term is, the more frequent are its Viciſlicudes.
s$ 21, As to Bluſ1»g Clouds obſervable Even and Morn. All ſuch Ti#-
Bare is known tO ow from'a d of ſome fair Planer %  Z.,&c. with the
uſtrates the Vapor, the Ref? x t1ges it deeper ;, ſo in Sounds
we may diſtinguiſh : a Musket in che open Field makes but an haff report,
compared with that rouſing Bounce it gives in a Publick Street, where every
Wall refie#s.and doubles the noiſe. Say much the ſame of Icrdes, Halo's,8&c;
$'22, But 9s 1nclination to Miſt ſhould not have been paſſed by. It
ems to be more than a Curioſity, when we ſhall number Fifty Fogs, and
ſome Roping Ela,befides thinner miſtine(s. Miſt andFogwe willingly refer to
Y ; Veuus and V are ſomewhiat alike in hue; if that will argue any thing
but if their properties be different , as we (hall ſee in ., fo there may be
difference in the Fog for all as I know. *Tis 2 Curioſity for the Hyerome-
ter to explore. A blew fmoaky Miſt is clearly of a deeper Comploinn
than of a pale,whence thoſe few that occur here are imputable to-ſome mix-
ture, Þ beſide other contribute alſo, which when they are peached, will
anſwer. And ſomilich for our Partile Aſpe&, but alaſs ! We have notdone:;
Ss 23. We have ſaid that the Laticude or Amplitude of the Aſpects are not
commentitious, and nothing is more reaſonable. For if two Agents united in
aCentral Union can get a Name, why ſhould they not be thoughe to be ope-
tive at a convenient diſtance, whether anteced:ng that Union, or Gonſe-
qent ? Great is the Sphear of the Planetary A#ivity downwards toward th
Sublunary World. Have they no Adtivicy Zaf, or Wefward ? They muſt +
have, for we ſpeak of a Sphear, nor of a Line of Activity - Light and Hear .
throws'it ſelf round to all parts of the Circumference , whereof the Lumi-
nous Body is the Centre. The greateſt Patrons of a Partile Aſpect will nor -
make themfelves ſo ridiculous as to diſown our Effet (if notable and awa-
king) though*it happens 40. Hours before and after. Burt this cannor be but
by an antedated Union © Their _—_— of Activity are co-:nctdent before
the perfe&t Union. Suppoſe then So/ and Yexws, for example, ſhed their In-
fluence at gr. 12, 10, 8. diſtance : 'Tis but making the Sphere of each to
reach half way, to gr. 6, 5 or 44 Now I will appeal to Experience, which
every Man may try, who is Maſter of any D:ary, whether © and 2 donoc


+ operate at 6, 8, 10, 12 OI (I go not further ) as often; as Not >


As often, I had almoſt faid/as at gr. '2. gr. 1. or the Central d , I am
ſure as Powerfully. For 7ot all ſtupendious Effe#s hap at a Central &-.
There are ciſtributions in Nature moreremote, which will equal thoſe nea-
rer Configurations. Wherefore to gr. 12. diſtance do-we bring a Parcel of
Keplers Obſervation, and the diſtances noted, that the Reader may fee what
we offer. Tis true, he will find there (perhaps ) Three Months Fvallowed
up in the width of this overſtretch't Obſervation. But why muſt Afſtrolg-
be confined to a Megre Aſpect of Ore or Two, in lieu of Thirty Days ?
Wil all the reſt of the following Month lies Fallow. Is it worth the while ?
will ſtudy ſuch Aſtrology ? Tis like ſearching in Tz»-Mzzes for Silver 5

ſome may be found there, but not ſo much as anſwers the Pains. No, No,
the Vein of true Science is richer, and can pronounce for moſt days as well,
as for On: or Two , when All is rightly obſerved : I confeſs 'tis a great All;
and part of that is Obſervation of the Diſtances of © 2 and 2? : The Benefir
of this will be confeſſed, when we hall offer. from the Premiſes ſome Lighr
toward, not only the Produgion of an Effe&, but alſo che Duration, As
of a wet Time,a ſtormy Seaſon: {uppoſe, a Gomet, or SOT, which ſome-
cimes laſt a Month, a Fortnight, ſometimes two 3 ſhall give an example,
Mr. Cavendiſh tells us that there fell many furious Storms from March 6. to
April $. Now in the year 1591. © 2 laſted the whole Month, and at Apy:/


$ lay but at gr. 10. diſtange. Hacklurt Vol. 3, what out-ſtrips the ſaid _
mu


j d© : in ther Amplitude deſerves config. Book IL


| tws appears ? Ii 1621, when the Numbers run on this cloſe


1 iſe; Let not therefore in ous following Table
muſt-be accounted for, otherwiſe : or what if ſome little Fha-
the degrees only, but the days alſo, be noted. F 4 = Aro -

0, 12, 13, 14,6c.Leaſt any ſhould fay we have
24, "A a _ $a gn, arm when thoſe which are nor
mentioned are farinferiour in Number: Well, what kind of Wether have
— Diary? Rain,Thunder,and that gr. 6,7, 8, 9, 10, &c. as well
_ it the Geztral '4 , Rain ſome ſtore, gr. 12. Az. 1617. R. Thunder and
Rin -or. 12. An. 1621. Dir, Ghaſwies , Lightning, gr. 12. Az. 1623. Dec.
_—_ gr. Thunder Rain,'R. 4z. 1622. Agzin gr. 12. April 2. Dir. 43;
24. Winds Rain gr. 12, Nov. 21. Az. 1622, Snow for 3 or 4 days, gr.
1033. Dec 6. An.-1623. R. H. Winds, Rain, gr. 11, 12, Az. 1634. Dir,
Sf wires Funt 16. An, 1625, R. March 11. Rain, gr. 12. Thunder, Rain,
Tun. T, p 1 1626, Der:


t from Kepler, under both CharaGters of the Retro-
——— grade and Dyed.


v


6. Showrs Winds. ———er, Tt;
An. 1617. R. h July, 7: Winds —— gr. I.
June 28. Raz ſome ſtore ——gr. 12. 9: ye coy __ —_ . -
C- 29, Thunder _ at $7: II. 4 Souttry, Rain.
July t. Thunder and _— n 2 x Axa i
_ 1nd Chaſme gr, 1 17,18. Showrs. gr, 3.
6. Heat and | 27 one 20, Thunder ante 4 Merid. gr. 6,
. Heat, Lightning. —gr. 2. 24. Rain, Winds, ©
Heat, Thunder. 7. 4.| 29. Rainfor 8days———7r, -
= __— Winds. 4 "FP 7 30. Thunder, — &Y. 7.
72, Rain gw 19. 9. _—_ 3. ——_ ſome ſtore. gr. 8,
73. Wer. day. yi — —_—
I4. SHOW. ——. I2. Bo —
> —__ . Rainy. —2r, 10.
Anno 1621. Dir. 20, up »/, .
| . .\ . 18. Fog, Lightning. gr. 11;
Ways 1h 1 EIN Kava w_ <q I9. Mech Thad Ra, 12,
| <3 S mtr —— 6 # 20. Rain. —__ 7
29. Hyil. ; __ Anno 1622, R,
June, hyp = mn _ -h 8. April 18.Rainto purpofe.—gr; 17;
* 0 5 « 19. Wh een eoereeeroes _—— . J@Q
9. Hear, much Rain. - : [4 UT. Showres with Hail. — gr. $.
þ Co A OE IM. 6 22. Thunder, Showrs. t—2., 6.
ao * hl ay ws —og 23, 24. Rain ſtore at n.— gx, 5.
13. Hail. © gr. 6. | 25. Rain— I.
15,16, 4 ; ultry. S 5 29. Heat, Lighinca . —£r. $5»
I8. bs furry 7 a - 6 4 May 1. Nodte, "ns FE, 8,
- Rating T empeſt. & 4 2,3-4oFe, ſtore « Wag.a0 I2,
21, Heat, Nath, ————2r, yon d Liehtnins.
24 Windy, Glndy.——gr. 3. | Dec. 13, 14. Cheſme and Lig a
25,26. Heat NotableShowrgr. 4 Fog, Die tor.
9 Jo. 22008 of Wet. _ 2. 27. aſmes, Warm.—— gr, 12,
I. —— OS. ©. :
IR: =


Anno


Chap. IL. Treaſures of Ram , &C. Keplc rs Dear.


Anno 1623.
Jan. 6. Snow. £7. TO.
Jan. 7. Warm, Chaſme. £r. 9.
9, 10. Windy, Snow. Cr. 9.
II, 12, 13. Sz0wy,—— —gr, 8.
16. Snow. —&. 7.
29, 30, 31. Winds,Snow. gr. 4. 3.


29. Czlum ardens. gr.
Feb. 1. Winds, ſome Snow. —gr.
2, Some Snow. gr
3, 4, 5, 6. SNOW, ————gr.
I 3. $n0w. LY,
14, 15. Boiſterous winds. —gr.


17. Snow, Rain. —2r.
20. Szow, Br,
T7, Snow. —
March 1. Rain, Sow. gr
- 2. Snow Or.


11. Winds and Snow. ——gr.
- 12, Much on, Teper: —gr.


I3. Strong Weſt-Winds ——gr.
I5. Snow. gr.
24. Some Rain. —— ——-gr.
- 30: Wind; Rain. £7,
April 1. Rain at night. ——gr.
2. Thunder , Rain. gr.


Ret.

Nov. 21: Wints, Rain. ——gr.
23. Gold Winds, Snow. r.
25: Rain the whole day.—er.

Dec: 1: Fog whole day. gr.
2. Snow; Rats. oY.
6.5now for 4 days.


Anno 1624. Dir.
Avg. 2, FE Some Ram: ——gr:
5, 6. Thunaer, Rain. gr.
7, 8. Rain.
IO. _ Showrs, ſtore. gr.
I2 GI —
I3. Tempeſts, ſtormy. Y,
I ; Horrible | nt EE <q
19. Abundance of Rain. —gr.
— gr,


 I4 Rain: —_——
Sepr. 18, Miſty, Ratny, ——-gr.
20; Rainy, — ——g,


as Br. (


I Red” FR
PH MOQAY ASSP PHOP We,


I2.! 4. Rain, Lightning.
9, 5. Rain, — —g.
6.| 8. SomeWet, | Br. .
3.| 12: Ran ————
5- | © 13: Node, Razz, OY.
TY jg Soine Web. ————.
18. Much Rain. —&r
19. Rainy.—— —gr.
TH. 24. AngryClouds, —— —gpr.
10. | *27. Tgnes cadences, * Fl
9. | 29, NaH — —gr.
9. | 30. Rat ———— gr.
May 4. Wind, Raih. ———gr.
8. | 8. Meteor Ptodigiol—— gr.
7. 12, 13, 14. Thunders——gr. .
7.1 15: Rain, windy. —gr..
2. 16, Wildy,————— p:.
2.| 19. Snowy. Or,
2. 20. Winds. ——
I. | May: 24. Great Showre. —gr.
I. 3". Lightning, Winds. —gx.
I. | June, Rar , |[btnivg. —2r.
.Ratz at might ————er.
I, - Showr of Rain, _— ——gr. 1
2, | 6.'Sforms, much Rain. —egr.
2: 7.” Thander, Rain. —


|


. | June 26. Showres,


21. Some Rain.


—,

24. Furious Weſt-Winds. L. -
Octob. 2. High Winds. gr.
3, 4, Rain. gr.
5. High Winds, — Fig
7. Rar. —— gr.
io. High Winds, Rain—gx.
II. Some Rain. —&r
16, 17. Windy, _——- gr.


21. Winay, Rainy. ———er.
22, High Winds. ——. EE) - >


\


© 29999. YG. Ri y,


IO,
IO,


26, 27. High Winds ——gr 0.11.


Anno 1625. R.


or,
. | July 1. Great Rains. — —g7.
6. Tempeſt, Hatl ———g.
IO. Thunder, -Lr.
11. Cruel Tempeſt ——zx#.
Anno 1626.R.
March rr. Rain, Fr
12.” Mo:ft,


20. Great Wind and Rain. &.”
25, 26. Thunder and Rain.gr.
—


27. Wind and Rain.
28." Wunder and Showres.—gr.
29. Much Rain, ———gr,
3. Razr. —
——r


Yy


ay, bt.
O dy * ,
HE. gÞ


-;
« »©-


Pol wp py M0 SHS Nous


IO.


BY, 12


9. Mach.


d © 2 Drary from Kepler. Book 11. |


172


—


9. Much Rain at night. —gr. I2. Ps
no 1626,


Anno 1627. R.
Jan. t. Snow, W, nd, Iris, —2r,


mo: : Rain, gr. 12. 8 Winds, Iris — —-* gr.
ff Wind aud Snowy + 87 19. a. -"

6 Wind and Snow. gr. 8. - ind, Rain. g
9. Night Windy and Snow. &. 9,
II. 12, Rain, — | T2. HiehWinds, — >


13. HighWinds ndSnowy 7 I5 Abundance of Snow. gx.
16. Snowy, ——— £7, SG. "ELON —=
DT Sept. j- Rainy Night,
Anno 1627. Dir. | t rathed, _— | 6
Octob. 8. Dewrag. gr. 12: | 7. Stormsof Hail ——— gr.
& Much Rain— —2r, IT. 11. Wet. —
; 2. Windy. - yy 4 18. Thunder, Showr. mu
3 wy ' Rain, Hail, | Iris. — T8
"28. Halo ©. —— ——& 9 ' "Anno 1629.
19. Rain. | —8. : May 25 Thunaer, howres,
20. Moift, FAR. ————&Y. 9 bY Bl ck Cloud
- 26. Nig] he Oe even, Rain. 0 1 htning.
3: Kreng. nay. —=8'* «7 fo Eg Razz,
5. Hail, Thupader,


os — 4 |
s Wina = gn? ve > Rai? and Winds,
v. Bey Lr... . a : | 7. Winds. —Lr.
T kg A Bight Fan —" 5 ; WE Rain————— gr.
= Hl
36, .F7. rf. To en = —n


4
0,0


bo 5d ©


aaa


is A cruel T, =. —


2.] 15. Great Showres, or.

- 12. 19. Lightning Threatning. gr.

;T, 21, Thuynatr, UBPVeS, ——gr,

; ©, 22. Abundance of Rajn, —g7,

wy 23. Aka > "4
24. any Air. mong=.—gr.

1, ; 28, Tn Hui. — z.

K | :

2

:.3-

4

» 73

E .


IJ
5 59 RAS o.;. home .


+ 2 T7 Fog continual. —. re.
2Þ Rb2 0g 4
27,28, 29. _High Winds , Raig


or...


4


= A SF.


.
* ES.
__


—
is, P Rainbow gr.


Wi — -
mw ce Wd: eu] 4
\ ad :agradiony 4


'6. - Ez = 7, 2.
"hn, 8 x 9. —_—_ Shown an We,
an: _ ;


ad a Wie”
#37: Prodigiou odigious ORE, 0. , Þ
emb. 19. 9. Parelia, Rain, Skuns. Sf


yo —


Te


| 6.
)2T, Showr.. — 2r..,.6;|
+ cT |
bu 16, Thunaer and Rum —t&r
8.
9.
9.


- « %


24, Men Thunder-Rtrook © 7,
25. Thunder, — =
26, Shawrs, —gr

July 30. It rained, gr.

3h, Thundered——=<> ——g,


> +
7 REID wo Dey: O Es Ly © os Q WU V3 UJ Þ


— —


Chap. IL Apis diftungurſtied even when co-incident.


ut.


Auguſt .Men Thunder-ſtrook. gr. 1. | 6. Showr, Thunaer. -—fr. 9.
2, 3. Thunaer, Showrs. ——gr. 9. 7. Thunder often, Lightning. gr. 10.
4. Lightning. £7, 9.1 8. Thunder. —£Lr. TO.


gr. 9. 9. It Thundred, ————- gr, 10.


5. Thunder, Showr.


s 24. Here I note well the Place of the Zodiack certainly contributes to
the Exhibition of the Effect 3 but withall, ſayI, the Due and Proportional
Diſtance heipeth as an acceſlary requilite, as hath bin heretofore obſerved,
25 toward the manifeſt Duration, or Exaltation of the ſame.

. $0 in this Table, conſonant to, what hath bin deliver'd, wee meet Razz ,
and of that Store. 47. 1617. June 28. at gr. 12; July 10. and 11.at gr. 6.
and 7uly 13. gr. 10.. So Az, 1621; June g, much Rain, gr. 8. Fuly 20...
Ratling Tempeſt, .gr. 4. 74ly 29, 30. Store of Wet, gr. 2. but rainy 8 days
together, Rain 7. Three daysafter, Rain ſome ſtore, gr. 8. and rainy gr. 10.
Let che Reader be pleaſed trogo on, to Razr all day and abundance. of Rain
:nd add ro what hath been gbſerved at home, from abroad in other parts of
the World,. the like in other inſtances. , "P

Ss 25. Here it will be feafonable I remove an Objedtion, which may lye
thus : In ſo _great an Applitude allowed to an Aſpect, how ſhall we keep
our ſelves Honeſt, and nat do wrozg to all other Aſpects of ſhorter durati-
on, which may fall within the Bounds of that under preſent Conſideration?
How ſhall we aſcribe the Effe& to a Platzck, which may with greater tea-
fon to a Partile intervening, (as often it happens in a's © ?. with this of.
$.) To whichI make an{wer, that » great Aſpect happening at the ame
time with another is confounded, or ſwallowed up, but keeps ſome arft1z=.
gwihing Property diſcernable at times even wnder the Ulnion.- As ſuppoſe
it Rains under a 4 ©2, if ? and ? be not far off, or nearer than the Af;
ch : it blows as well as Rains : Again) in.s d © 2. the Rainlaſts
onger; the Thunder abides, Pertorurt, 1a er, the Fog continues; b


this we ken 2 her Influence in relation to the Sun 'is nar expired,: though:


in a Platickdiſtance, becauſe the fame meaſure of che Effect happens as is
found in the Partile. - Not at all denying, but that a meeting of other Af-
pets may prolong a Rain or Thunder. where -2 lies ſepatzte; only clai-
ming this, that the Effe& may be aſcribed as it ought, to 2, when others:
ut not in. | - b
F $ 26. But Ptolemy mentions, we hear, the Riſing of Waters, following
upon his fruitful Showres premiſed, which muſt by natural conſequence have
its Truth, relating to 2: And. Kepler, not dreaming of Ptolemy ; I per-
fwade my ſelf, with a due diligence hath noted down the Riſe and Over-
flow of the River Danow, &c. Fluvins crevit , autis 4menos and there I
find 2 engaged, but not without ? , Aug. 1624. Nov. 1627. - _—
s 27. Yea to deal trulyl find alſo our Planer, rather at,or near her Elongat-
102 as far as that Obſervation afliſts us, to have a hand inthe Rain or Snow
which raifed cheWarers. 'Tis all-but 2,” and an Elongatiod of the Planets
zre not withoue their Effect, being, as we have faid, a kind of Oppoſition z
or unteſsbecauſe there are other Aſpedts befide- 2. which help towards the.
increaſe. Any. laſting d or: ® in fome parts of Heaven will raiſe thent.


The Years in Kepler are theſe.
Anno 2622, Febr. 13. Inundatio Pons ruptus,' 2 clong. 47©. gr. 47.
Anno 1622. March 17. Flavins crewit, 2 gr. 43. ©:
Anno 1623. June 11. Exundabat Danub. admodum. gf. 30.
Dec. 26. Auttus Danub. 7? gr. 30.
Anno 1624. Feb. 18. Auttus Fluy,— 2 gr. 47.


Anno 1625, Jan. 15. Danub. crevit, Þ gr. 30.
Mar


—_——__—_—_


174


2 elong. for Flouds. "© 2 influence on Fiery Meteors. Book 11:


| May 3. Aut amnes, % gr. 38.
May < Auftus Danub. 2 gr. 38.
Aug. 20.Danad. crewit. & gr. 43.

U


Firſt of theſe Inſtances ſhews noRain preceding , wherefore ic my
wenn » the reſolution of the Snow which was difſolved the Week he.
fore, bur fell at the end of January, St. Nov. bur even then our 2 yas
above 4o degrees diſtance, which is in Elongatzon.

$ 28. Next Ptolemies filence in Fiery Meteors I wonder at, he reſeryes
them all for V., there we ſhall hear of them. Bur 2 ſnavity (59%" ) as he
calls it, isgulty of ſuch Terrors many times.:.-Fiery Meteors, Chaſmes,
Comets, Spuriousand Real, and whatelſe comes under the fame generica]
Narure, _ with Jn, Vibrations of Fire— We muſt run
back to former Ages to prove this. :

Firſt, Ano 1556. Jan, XI. wp, of heſeavens, frighting the Inhabi-
tants with Thoughts of the Period the Yorld at Auſpurge”: After which
a Storm elſewhere of Lyn , terrible :* Lyc. ow. d©2 pr.7.

Then Arno 1564. Oftober 7. Lond. North part of Heaven flaming toward
the Mid-Heaven : Night being as bright as] Day. Howes 658. On the
ſame day at Lovain, Ghaſmes deſcribed by Gemma. 11. 42: d © 2 pr. 6.but
withall a 4 © & in 23; >e bY :

Next, Anno r568- Sept 25: Flaming Chaſmsat Lowaiz the whole night;
Gemma 11. 64: - (EY p, - :

Alſo Arno 1570: April 1. Chaſmes again at Lovain : Gemma 11: 67. a «,


©2 gr. 11.4 d © 2875
ali Anno 1617: July 17: Chaſma, Kepler, ſomewhere in Aufria 1623i
Celum ardens at Lantz, Kepler do? gr:i5.d 2 2? pr.q. Jan. 29: |
And Anno 1639. Jan: 30. Chaſma at Noriberg. Kyr |
And A4zno 1648; May 25. Thunder, and Heaven flaming* & @ahd 9 gri
v..d © and Þ: Thisfor mes:


= Then for other Fiery + rare
Anno 1547; Ditember XV: "A Globe of Fire as big as the Sun, ſeen by
the Hamburgh: Marriners at Midnight: Dr. Dee. Arnot. MS. Epheme:
rid: d © 2 gr: 2: with Þ 20 gr: diſtance.
Anno 15 54: Fune 13. Globs 1gnes diſcurrentes, hor: 5: Merid: Lyc. 677:


 'd ©2 gr.6. with others.


E. _ yu April 27. Globes of Fire falling by Night: Kepler,”a d © and
2 Partile. |

_ Mano 1626: on 8. Meteoron prodigioſum: Item what Kepler calls Fulgur:
Aſchavii tardum, Ib: Sd Qand Q gr. 3:


$ 29. Comets again not excepted, for we find——

Arno 1516. ACometin onganing of January, (for fo it muſt be, if it
preceded Ferdinand's Death, who dyed Jar 23.) On the 7th of this Janu-
ary we finda d ©:2, but withala d h G9:

Anno 15 : 3. A Comet at the end of Zuxe, throughout July and AnguPt
2 © © 2, ſothat all-Fuly and Augoſt they were, in a manner, together.

Anno 1557. 6. ad atems St. Barthol. A Comer obſcure and pale:


Stadims, p. 66, _


; Chron.—a d ©? gr- 2.
Ann 1578. May 16.Lyc. 'd © pr. 11. fenec,
Anno, 1582, May 15, Howes, 695. d © gr. 10.


Anno 1597. Fuly. A Comet continuing from the 16:h day, to the 9th of


, Anguft. Ricciol, d ©? inprincip: Ka d YG.


No,


Chap. I. 4d © Earthq. Some ſuch thing as Prodzgy,


_—


No, nor Earthquakes 3 for they alſo occur.

Anno 1552. Sept. 16. at Baſil. Lyc. 9 © $2 prene. =,

Anno 1554. April 30. at Lowvain, Gemma, 11. 23.d ©2 gr. 4.

Anns 1556. Jan XVIII. 19, 20. at Sanxt in Ghina Purchas Pol. 3. 198.

Anno 1575. Febr. 26. Vork, Worceſter, Glouceſter, Briſtol, Hereford, 8c.
Howes, p.679.a d ©. 7

_ 1585. Aug. 4. An Earthquake, Howes, p. 709. 'd © 2 gr. 4. with
an @ .

Anno 156. Perceived at Sea Hak!. p. 810. part 2.0. 2.

Anno 1613. Jan. 13. in Zant, Goryat apud Purchas.

Anno 1642. April 25. in Norico. Terre fremitus ;, (a noiſe heard in ſome
Earthquake.) d @2 in S 15. Kepler.

Anno 1626, April cire. 28, In Galabria: about what time ( with Kepler)
fell the Ignes Gelitus cadentes. d ©.2 Partil.

Anno 1628. Jan 9g. a Fame of an Earthquake. Kepler. d ©.2 gr. g.

Anno 2629. Prince. Auguftt ; In the Alps among the Greſons (Khoetos) ſur-
paſſing that which happened 40 1618. d ©? gr. 9.yea d © gr. 10.
d ©? gr. 11. Kyriander. Now that happened in Aug» 15.0na d © Z.

Anna 1634. April 17, Kr. d@% yn G., :
ow 1637. July 1. at Tours Storms, and at Mor:mberg an Earthquake!

Yr14naer.

Anno 1642 Mart. 27, Turin in Piemont. p. 469. Kyr. d © gr. 7.d hb
pr. 12,

Anno 1643. Sept. 2. in Turin again, Kyr. d ©2 gr. 7. %h 86s;

Anno 1668. Sept. 3: an Earthquake in the Gazibes and Fear of a Hurri-
cane following. d © 2 gr. 4. Gazet, Numb. 304.

$ 30. Now let no man Nauſeate the Names of our Witneſſes here in this
knowing Age , as petty Trades in Prodzgtes,, Objects of the Vulgar under-
ſtanding, becauſe, though it may be /hortzeſs of Underſtanding to Multiply,
'tis ſcarce ſo,to acknowledge ſuch a thing. Our Speculation doth ſometimes
border upon ſuch a thing as Prodigy : but 'tis clear our Primary intention
comes to the erderly Courle of Nature 3 wherein if: God pleaſe to ſhew
himſelf in a clearer Glaſs of his Power, it will be not Piacular, we hope,
to offer at the Cauſe, deputed by the Creator for fuch Effet. For to re-
move the Natureof Prodigies from every Natural Production (under cor-
re&ion ) I fear is a miſtake ; ſince though we muſt not with the Vulgar,
reekon every Effect prodigious , wherein God ſhews his Power, yer
every ſuchExhibition of hisPower andEury joyned,l believe comes zear.For
'tis hard to fay that an Izundation which waſhes away thouſands,or anEarth-
quake which buries as many, ſignifies no harm. it doth {ipnifie Harm,
ec. I gather from thence a Deity diſpleas'd : So us a Prodigie, otherwiſe
the Univerſal Floud had nothing Proazerous, no Leflon read to us thereby -
For Wile Men, I cantell you, give opinion, that even there, ſome uſe was
made of Natural Gauſes ; as alſo in other Deſtruction of Cities by Fire.

by p I ſay then, if we pur the Ghaſmrs and Globs Igner together, there
may be ſome cauſe of wonder why Ptolemy is filent, eſpecially when there
area great volly of Inſtances of Lightning and Thunder almoſt wichin hea-
ring. In like manner for his Sitence in Earthquakes: Bur ? being more
frequent in his Congrefles, fell more frequently under Obſervation, and fo
got the Name; and it may be they were unwilling co believe that -2 could
Frown, ſince we have ſeen her entiruled to g ſoft, ſweet Influence.

$ 32, Butthe Table ſpeaks imparrtially : And Gomets themſelves, it ſeems,
are beholden co 2 - And who will diſpute it, when the great Aſtronomers
who undertake to conſider their Corfe, Tendency, Duration , after all, be-
gin to (uſpect ſome Relation they have to -—* Celeſtial Bodies: __

Z place


176 "By 2 ſhare in Comets, Tycho improved. Floods. Book III,


place Tycho ſuſpects the New Star 1572: had its Original with the New ).
Nov. 5: To what purpoſe, unleſs the d of © » help to light the Taper :
When elſewhere, A7zzo 1577. he carefully obſerves, that the Comet there
{pread out its Train not ſo much within the Oppoſition of the Suz, as of our
Planet -2: When 2 waseven in her Elongation, atign and a half diſtant.
We do not exclude the Sun in our Celeſtial Production : but Tycho obler-
ved right, and we thank him for it. The Comet here tranſmitted the
Raysof 2 ; Yea, but 2 as he ſ(cruples it, hath not ſuch a Potezt Ray. Reſp.
2 exalted and aſſiſted may own ſo much 3; for within a few degrees there

lies another Planet who is called 6, If Tycho had faid, that 2 and the

Planet 9 in 4 hadtranſmitred their united Rayes, he had hit it 5 for as ſure
as Truth, the Comet owes its Original to & and .2 arawing on, trom 12 gr.
diſtance by Inches, to a Partile Gonjun#ton. The Comet began Nowepr.

10. the Partil d of theſe two Planets happens Dec. 2. ſo was the Comer
all that while in good heart, and by proportion muſt continue fo till it come |
to12 [4 diſtance on the Dexter ſide, that is till Ghrifmaſs. Thence I reck- |
on it declines, and much more by what time 2 came to be a whole Sign |
diſtant, (z.e, ) outof the Bounds of Conjunction, preciſely the Comet va-
niſhed, Za. 26. Which very point is remarkable ; though I wot well that

uch an rance, which begins by one Gonjun#ton; or Oppaſition, may be

ed by a {ſucceſſion agreeable to this. Mark what Tycho hath obſerved,
and tis memorable even in R-eevolus his judgement,, who is no Friend to
our Principle, that the Star in Gaſfopeia, Anno 1572. was ſaluted by Al the
Planets, . before itwas extinguiſhed. Let any Manbe Judge, if this be un- (
realomhlenow/Pielt ſo be all thePlanets in their Turns andPoſicions have |
to do with the Generation of New Stars, Rz#c:ol.;p. 769. v7. : And I think I
noted: before that Thzho obſerved the ſame of a. ets Tr74iz,, oppoſite to
\ 7. But of this more elſewhere. Howbeit Kepley calls to be heard, Lib. de
SitL. Now. page 6: Et memurabile eft eundem fuifſe ſitum Solis ad Venerem an-
201572. ſub exortum llivs $1a8)s qui jam anne 1604. recurrit.

$ j3. e camot finiſhthis diſcourſe till we have pointed at the Waters
that yefjamed in with. 4 ©.9;, -remembring always that our Aſpect is re-
ble for. the days preceding the Date of the Flood, leaſt any ſhould
think that Nature raiſed them in an Inſtant from any Su#terrancous Foun-


— 150k. Where the Ebb overflow d, memorated by Lyc. 'd © 2.
.. Anno 1573. the great Inundation in Holland, &c. crm inaudita Glade,
I1.167-and again Sept. 1. gt. 11,
Ammo 1578, Feb. 10, F| in the Thames, Howes 685. d © 9 R.
Anno 1594, May 11. Great Water Flouds in Surrey, &c, by Rain and
Hail, beating down Houlſes,, &c. lip P. 769.
| 1643. Dec. 3. at Thurzagen Kyr. d ©.2 ».
. Azn0 1655, Jab. XX. HiFlouds with us in. Erglard, gr. 3.
n our home-Obſervation we meet with it once or twice at moſt.
S' 34- One or Two Notes/let me add concerning monſtrous Hail, ſome-
times recorded under this Aſpect, ſpecially when it ſpeaks that cold Tem-
per which is often enhaunſed at the Partile Congreſs of the Planets, and as-
corcingeo what hath been noted 3_ and becauſe by reaſon of the Monſtrous
feof Hail it may ſpeak ſome Affinity to Elouds. | |
Ap. 1531, Dec.16. in Gardanae wariet. c. 11, :
1564, Jw# 24. at Loverp of an Oval fize, noted by Fromond from
Gemma 11.52. d ©& 1o, The like: with us at Chelmesford , July
| 17. Ami ejuſdem,
"= ej rs In Ezgland Hail 8 or 9 Inches Circumference, CG. Smith. par,
24, 125,


Ln


S 35. That


Chap. = 0 baratter of the Aſpe. Conj. of Venus Cre Mer. y 77


9 35. That the Hurricane mentioned in Kepl-rs Diary goes not alone z
It is a Twin at leaſt, witneſs Feb.14. Anzo 1627. where Galw/zus tells us of 37
Ships, and God knows how many Thouſand men drowned, d © @ gr. 4.
Bur we have not clogged the Reader with ſuch like Inſtzncesz from one,
vehemence Another may be concluded : What will procure an Earthquake,
can make fuch a buſtle in a Superiour Element.

s$ 36. So have you ſeen in part what our Aſpect does abroad or at home,
That we may ſure to be brief, let us caſt up all into the Short Sum thus;
d © 2 ina State of Deſtitution,brings co! air at all rimes of the year,inWin-
ter, Frofts,Sharp and permanent. In like manner Miſts and Foggs, But,with in-
different or more conſiderable aſi/ance, Warmth, cloudy and cloſe Wea-
ther, Showres, Winds, Rain , con{xderable part of the Day , if not all day
long, ſometimes Fiery Meteors , Lightnings , Thunders. The fair Wea-
ther, though ſometimes hot, we refer to the State of deſtitution:* The ra-
rer accidents enter not into the Character. -So much forthe d @F, a
= Aſpect to our underſtanding, for our Corporal Eyes never
ce If, A


MM


————————


CHAP. III. Conjuntion of the Two Inferiours,
Venus and Mercury.


$ 1.AnAſpedt fam'd among the Antients for much wet. 2.Venus, Mercury
and the Moon the moiſt triad.3.The Influence palpable fromtheir Vicinit
. tothe Earth,and ſomething more.g.Venus a bright Evening Star. 5. She
contributes to cornſcations.6.3he andMercury are ſometimes mad Sparks.
7. Equal to any Aſpe precedent. 8. Evidence from Keplers Diary.
9. AproſpeF of exceſs of Rain, of Lightning from thence. 12. The
Home Diary. 13. Search into forreign Diarys not unprofitable for
Navigation. 14. Platick Aſpe& requiſite to underſtand the Nature
of a Planet. 15. The Forreign Tempeſt-Diary of Sol and Mercury
hitherto reſerved and produced. 16. The uſe to be made of it in
caution and ſelf-preſervation. 17. Some Hurricanes with us. 18.For-
reign Tempeſt-Diary of the Conjuntion of Sol and Venus. 19. The
AſpeFs of Sol and Venus with Sol and Mercury compared, Mercury
more turbulent than Venus.The Devil, whether he may be in any Storm.
| 20. Forreigi Tempeſt-Diary for Venus aud Mercury. 21. Venus
and Mercury as q 7 as Sol and Mercury, How that can be made
out Stormy eſpecially when either of them is retrograde. 22. Ae+
count of a ſtormy conſtitution ſometimes for a whole Month. Magel-
lan's pacifick, Sea, The interchanges of Sol, Venus aud Mercury
commended tothe ſiudious Mariver. 24. Stadius in the Governonr
of Antwerps Hurrican over-looks our AſpeF. 25, 26. A Touch of
Comets. 27. Co-incidence of the ſame day of the Comet Anno
1537. aud again, Anno 1578. very inſtrutive of Gallendus anrl
others. 28. Forreign Diary of Fiery Meteors. 29. The Defign of theſe
Papers is nmniverſal. This Ape muſt be acknowledged as well as any
other. 23o. Some Earthquakes found under this AſpeF. 31. And
inundations. 232. Truth not hearkned to. 33. Our oy
not inferiou to the Forreign. 3. Keplers inſerviceable Aſped#,
35. Some»


et.


The Arabs bodes 1#t on this Aſpet2. Book 11,


"25. Something of the Motion conſidered. 37. The Aſpe# of Venus
and Mercury never return. 38. Motion and Influence both ſet
forth the Glory of the Creator.


61. (Doh of 2 and Þ what do they Effet ? They pretend ſeve-
rally todo ſomething in 4 with @, but can they produce any

thing in d mutual one with the other ? Aſtrologers .ſay they may , with
help eſpecially, Per al:zquot ates _ humiditatis, ventorum nivinm, &c.
2nfere poſſunt, ſaith Eichſtad, Burt Eichſtad'is but yeſterday. What ſay
our Arabian and Indian Aſtrologers, Albumazar, yea Alchindus and Gra-
phar> They fay the ſame ( whether they ſpeak Sence or no, weſhall ſee in
what follows, ) 2uando erit 2 & 7 & ) 1n aliquo iſtarum manſionum de-
rem humidarum, ſign. pluviam multam, ſo Alchind over and over, Cap. 6,
Inſpice, faith he, 1m hora Gonjunttonts, ſi Luna applicuerit cum 2 & * ſign.
enerationem _—_ in illa ſeptimana, Again, f# quando fuerit $ & * in
, vs & Gapricorno aut Aquario cum » ſign. pluviam, For, Planete -
rentes pluviam ſunt, Fenur, Mercurius & Luna, in the beginning of the
Chapter. Wheathe © is in m 20. Thar's a critical time with the Inataz :
Then if the » applyto 2 and ? Jen multas pluwyias in eo anno, Yea for
every New », or if they be found in any of the 16 Manſions, the FF.
fe follows, Thus the One; Now the Other ; (remember he ſpeaks for his
own Climate) or not above 10 gr. Latitude from the Equator. If the
Two inferiours, faith he, apply toa Malevolent, h or &, ſubmerfio & ru-
4a, imbrium aſſiduitas timenda, Sect. 3. Our Moderns follow theſe Men, A-
arian , Vlacg in Ephemerid. Anno 1633. 2uod 6 Y —_—_ acciderit
hora Gonjun#ionis , &c. Luminarium, pluviarum inundationew pariet,
And they ſeem to peak conſequently, becauſe we have met with ſome ex-
ceſsin $ conjoyned with G, which it ſeems, they do not appropriate to
that only, but plead for the like in this, and if it ſhould prove true,
I can tell you enters us into a pretty diſtinct Notion of the Planets,for Þ isa
ſecond Sol, ifhe can bring forth the ſame ſhowres, &c. in amicy with 2 as
© hath proved himſelf to have done, in Conjun&tion with the fame

eRus:

$ 2, We will not thus argue, though the Argument is Legitimate, that
3 Þ and Þ met together in d, have undenyable Influence (as I ſee the
Arabs or Indians alſo have taught) ergo, the ſame 2 and ? by themſelyes
have their certain efficacy. This belongs to the Chapter of Complicate AC.
pets, and our Method engages us yet to ſhow the Influence only of the Sin-
gle and incomplicate. ; |

S$ 3. They are both reflexions confeſſed, they appear horned in their
Firſt and Laſt Quadrate, as we call it, and though both of them are recko-
ned of leſs Dimenſion than the Earth, yea and for 7 part , leſs than the »,
yet it ſeems they are ſo.near, that they can give us a ign of what they are,
and who they be,and thence we mult fetch the reaſon, the Demonſtration,as
I love tocall it, becauſe they are cer. Becauſe they are inferiours, there-
fore they are lo palpable in Effect, even when Dire&t; They are ſtill the
neareſt of the Five. .

S 5. They who look on 2 only as a fair Merning or bright Evening
Star, have other Notions of her, as if ſhe brought always Fine Weather
with her very look , and ſwept away the Angry Clouds with her Train;
bur 2 it ſeems can cowl, and frown, and ſtorm, and mask her ſelf in dir-
ty Clouds, &c. _ :

S 5. But this it not all, for conſulting with the Antients , that I might
ſee the Antiquity of Aſtrological Truths, though hitherto nor much adyan-
ced, Ilearned from the Fam'd A#umazar, that d 2 * to their a and

10OVW-


my


Chap. IT. Venus andV ulcan:Evidence fr. Kepler for Winds,R.L.


_—__


179.


Showres added Corutcations and Thunder tor eighe Signs in twelve. I for
my part thought the 4rab was mad, bur allowing for the difference of the
Climate, He is not much out of the way , for let even Albumazar have
his due, All chings conſidered, he is not to be blamed.

$6. Bur who would have thought 2 and 2? to be ſuch Royfters> As
ſoon would we have believed that Two Diamonds could Fulguratce, or Two
Knick-nacks of the fair Forge thunder on their Wooden Anvil. Did
the Fables dream of this, when they tuaght the World, Venus and YVulcaz
were Familiars?

$ 7. Whether they did or no, the Influence of 2 for Winds, or Rain
and Heat, and Thunder, and abundance of all theſe is not fabulous. What-
ſoevera d © 2 or © 2 hath done, in that will a 4 2 2 match them;
for though Z be greater than the Y, yer 2 fſurpaſleth che I and Earth


alſo.

$8; Now follows the Table, our Evidence drawn from Keplers Diary.

Direct.

High Winds. Tirbo June 18. ventoſum 24. Anno 1621, Feb. 14, 15.
March 13. Anno 1623. Procella June 24. 1624. Feb. 15, 16. March 20.
Aag. 31. Sept. 1. Ventus Dec. 5, 8, 9, 1626. c< 3, 4. Ofober 13, 27.
1627, June. Ventoſum, Tempeſtuoſums 10.1629.

Retrograde.


Dec. 15, 19. Anno 1622. Fuly 18, Oft6b, 22, 26, 27, 28. 1624. Feb, 10,


22, 13, 14, 15. 1626. Dec. 28. 628.


Direct.


Exceſs of Rain. June 20. Tempeſtas perftrepurt. 25, 26, Pluvia: dec
mana. 29. Largiſſime Pluvie. 30. July 1. —_—— 9. 1621. July 4;
cum inundat. pluit largiſſime. 17, 18. 1622, Multa Ntx March 12, Nimxit
copioſe Decemb. 10, 12, 13. 1623. Fuly 24. Auguft 10, 11. cum Inundat. 13,
0-7 Hor. 18. Pluit copioſe 19. 1624. Temp. atrox July 11. 1625, March
29. April 13, 18, 19. Aug. 20,23. 1626. Ningit continenter eb, 27, Ple.
Sept. 19, 20. Ofob. 11. Pluit coptoſe. 26. Auf amnes. Nov. 6. Pl. die n0-


Buque. 1627. April 21,22, 23. Plu. decumana May 1. GataraRe 3,94, 5. Pla,


wulte 10, 11. 1629.
| Retrograde. |
Plruia Dec. Aug. 31.1621, May 24. 1626. Imbres Dec. Aug. 5. 163g.
' - Dire&. A.
Thunder and Lightning May 21, 23, 24. June 8, 19. July g. 1621. May
I9, 20. 1622. Celum aradens fan. 29. une 19, 39. 1623. Aug. 5, 6. 1624,
uly 10. Fulminata, 14,16, 17, 18 , 21. 1625, March 25, 26, 28.i Ap,
Chaſmata Aug. 28. 1626. Apr. 21, Here Kepler confeſles our AſpeR, Horr,
ulmina. 25 , 309. May 7, 25, 31. June 15. 1629. . F
Retrograde.


 Fulminata aliquot loca Aug. 31. 1621, Ghaſmata Fulgetra Decemb, 23. 162 26
Aaa Fuly


Account of the Forrezen ; with Cur home Evidence. Book IT.


180


uly 19, 21, 23. 1624. May 31, Tane I,5. 1626. Sept. 18, 1628, Fulmi-
Job homines. , 1,2, 3, 4z 5, 6- Eulgetra Grebra 7.sTon. 8, 9, 1629.


Direct.
Heat, May 8, 14, 15, 23,24, 25,26, 28, 29, 30, 31. 1621,


s 9. Where we haveexpunged the accounts of Simple Wind; and Rain,
and Warmth, and for brevities ſake have mentioned only Excefles of Hear,
Wind, Rain, and we may add Thunder, to clear the Arabs from their mad-
nels which was ſuſpe&ed, Their Experience, we muſt think, was groun-
ded upon more than 8 or 9 years, and a few Conjunctions therein contain-
ed. - Letany one be pleaſed to view our account, and note, as well as num-
ber thedays, and he ſhall find Mad, or at leaſt Notable doings here and
there. For Fulmina & Eulgetra Grebra, & Loca Fulminata, & Homines
Fulminati, appearing more once or twice, does (peak for the Arab.
Which ſeeing they happen under the Retrograde, as well as the Direct
ConjunRtion, pleads for the Aſpect it ſelf, whether the Arab is Fee'd or
not to ſpeak for it. . Nor can I help it, if the d' of © to either of them
be within a few degrees or. days, what time we meet with Exceſles, for
tis not always ſo. Whneſs; that on May 13. Azz 1622. where the d
of © and 2 1s 17days diſtant, andthe d of @ and # 3o dfys. And yet
even there we meet with a Pluit Largifime, May 17, and 18. Heat and
Thunder, May 19.and 20. to add no more, within 4 days of the Aſpect,
and no other neer of any note, the Lunar excepted. The Truth on't, 'tis
a ſweet Eviction to .ſee Rainand Storm, when the © 9 and 7 are neer
eogether, as the Arab faid now of the » with them, particularly, when in
Auguft 1629. it Thundred above 7 days together. But reaſonable Men have
no cauſe-to doubt, but that our Aſpect, by it ſelf confidered, when the ©
as it were, ſtands and looks on, can ad its part in Winds and Rains, as you
may ſee in the Abſtract gremis'd., .

- 9 10. The reaſon mult be, I have faid, becauſe of their Vicinity to the
Earth, as well as their moderate diſtance from the © z Otherwiſe the J
could claim no intereſt upon her Vicinity to us Sublunars, which we take
tobe confeſſed. And is it not conſonant and conſequent that we ſhould
meet with Pluvie decumane, Largiſſime, minxit, multum & continenter ?
hey ſay 2 is thrice as big as 2 , and ſhe Pe accordingly. Burt is it nor
onant I ſay to what we have obſerved before in her d with ©, when
ſhe watred the ground with ber fruicful Dews the whole, or a great part of
the day ? This ſeems not ſo ordinary in the & of © with ? , excepr per-
haps where 7? moves very ſlow , which coghrms the reaſon given from the
Slow and even Motion of that Planet with the ©, by which he helps to
prolong a Conſtitution, and keep it in Statu gzo. gg

$-11, Muſt we mY you a like taſt from n. Country ? We can-
not ſay nay, becaule it brings us the fulleſt and eatieſt Conviction, as far as
I fee yet, ofall the Aſpects, I am ſure that have been yer propounded.

Bip | | - 13K er}! : *


* ”


' IL Wu -


42% adgr. 10. ' *


1671, Feb. 12, H. Gufts 3 p. 8c; Sly.:,X1V- H.wd, ſhowr 2 p,
XVI. Wind , ſhowr ) South ; fine ſhowr
XX, Sh . hail 3 p. wetri » Sly. 4 Þ-
Nas 2 SD. Weg eh Bo} FIT. Some rajo p. m.
XXL. Often ſhowring ante mer, & p. m. NN, Kain 9 nu, Rainy m.Þ, ;
May 13, ad June 8. Soultry. W. SW." XXL 1p


0 His v Wis; © I


ks SRC


P—


&
= FIG OY BREA TTY,


mm


2 3» Home Evidence,


Chap. TT

XX1. R. 1 P. 7 p hail 0.  XIX. Showr and high _ 10p. SW.am
XXII. Great as o. (with Thunder) fre- E. p. m-

quent P. m XX. Snow and very High wind tip. NW.


XXIV. Coating faif at 0. with thunder- ny”
$8 W.


XX VIII. Showrs in proſpe& a. m. p. m. Wly.
XXXL H. wd, very mnch rain 75 m. 10 mM. 0,

2 6 p- 10P.
4 - Fain Rainy and daſhing dte tot. Thirty
Showrs at leaſt. Circa diem 4. A Church in


Venice was fired by Lightning,
November 17. ad 27,


XX1L. Warm, often miſling,
XXIV. H, wd.
XXVI. Rain ante lucem,


Fune 13. ad July 26.


X11. Thunderclap at Windſor.

XVII. Soultry.

XXVILLR. 6m. ad 8m. Sly 1 p. 6p. 8p.

XXX. Driſle m. p. 3. 7 Jub, driſle p, m. tot,
A high wind, ſhowres ©. 1 p. p. IM. ?ot.

VI. Wer a. m. tot CF fere rot p.

XIX, Soultry.

XX1I. Hor (Eaſon. - |

XXII; Three Meteors, by moonlight two.

XXVI. Daſh of rain m. H. wd.


September 24. ad Oftober 3.

XX1V, Wer 5 p. ad 11 p. Oc. wich fog.
XXV. Rain & mn. {, wetting m. S E.
XXVL Dark, wet 4. m, ta, ſhowres s Pp.
warm. W,
XXVITI. Wer m. \. windy. SW.
XXX, Showre 9 p. and wdy. Sly.
£9205. 1. H. wind alln ſhowr I p. . Pp. Oc.
IT. H. wd all n. wet and daſhing m. SW,


SW.
S W,


1672,


1673. June 24. ad July.
XXV. Wetting lirtle p. m. tot. SW.
' XXVE, Rain 6m.8Þ. &j1 p- &n. m> Lu
wd.
XX VII. Rain 6 m. windy. SW.
XXIX. Smart ſhowr 6 m. 9 m. 5P-8p.1
Thunderclap 3 p.


fp 1 Rain 1 p. Oc. SW.
s at Oxford and Briſtol, and —_ at
Harwich. June 23.


1674. January 6. ad 13. March.
VII. H. wd o. & p. m.R. 9 p. Ely m. S.p.
JL Wer die tot, a 5m. <4 R. Þ- midn
'z. R. ut ſupra. H. wd.

XI. Wet m. rain hard 1 p.

XIII. R. 5 m. foggy and miſle a. mM. m. p. Re-


arneſt 7 p.
XV. Weta 1 p.ad11p , Orc. SW.
XV1, Driſle 8 'm. Rain 9 þ. (fc:
Very High wd, Shipwrack at the Goodwin,


XVIL. R. a. m, Snow die tet fere, Rain —_
n, .”


XII. Snowj


XXI. H. wind b. d.
XXIV, Much rainfa 4 m. ad 5 m. warm. SW.
XXVIL. Rain 8 m. & 9 m. yea dropping m. p.


E
XXVIII Rain 8 m. offer 6 p. Eh
XXIN, Werting m. p.R. 44 p. ad 11 p. |
XXXI, H. Wind $5 m. R. ror,
Feb. YI. Exceſhve froſty. Þ
XI. Much Snow 2 p. ad 5 p. thaw,
XIV. H. wind p. m. R. 5 p. SW
XV. R.fog a. m. 5 p. Sly and Ely,
XXT. Wer and dark a. m.
XXII. Fog, fleet o. wetting 8 p, Ely.
XXIIL R, hard2m.2 p. 9p. SW.
XXIV. Wet m. p. with ſhow. Ely.
March II. H. wind n.
It. Snow all day, a great ſnow. NE.
VII. Windy, ſnow 4 4 ad 5 p. Ely.


X. Snowing hard Sun occ,
M- P.P.M-
XIII. R. m. and apace, warm.


Anno cod, April 18. ad 30.


XX. H. wind and daſhing 4 p. &c. Sly.

XX1. Showr 10 m. wd, rain 6 p. Oc,

XXII, Tempeſt a. L. & die tot. "I coaſting

ſhowrs.

XXII, Showring a. m. Hail at St. Albans.

XXV, H. wd.

XXVI, H. wind a. m. ſhowring p. 1. veſp. &
SW


9 P» .
XXVIPF R.d. br. ad 5 m.
XXIX. R. 5 m. & m. p. d.
XXX, Rain p.


Anno*eod, Fuly 5. 4d 26. Auguſt.


V. Wind, ſhowr 1 Þ. ſmart ſhowring and
thunder.

VI. Showre 1 p. 3 Þ. $

VII. Showresof ran and hail gm. Showrs


P- M.

VI. Showring 10 m. 1,p. p. m- daſhing $Þ
ad 8 p. fere,

IX. Showr 10 m. r p.

X. Showr 7

XIIL H. ink ſhowr 1 p.&8 p.

XIV. Showr 9 m. ſhowr and iter 1 P.ve-
ry H. wind.

XVII. R. $ m. ſoultry, cerrible Lighrning 9 P,
Meteor near Perſeus.

XVII. Much lightnzog , abate art midnight.
3 Mereors 11

XIX, Lightning and thunder 2 m. R. coaſting
ſhowr 1 p. H. wihd. So at Strasburg, &c.

XX. Powring rain -a, & Mm.

XX1. High wind.

_ Soultry fog 2. m. R. 1 thunderclap 1 Þ-


p. daſh 9 p.
vice om at Utrecht, Antwerp, Ghent.
. H. wind, :
XX1V. Rain 2 m. 5 m. H, wiuds, $.S W-


Meteor NY occ, p


SW.


_—


182


2 7's Home-Ewudence,


XXVI. Soultry, yet windy, Lightning much


8 p. (5c. '
XXVIL H. wind, ſhowr o.
XXVIIL f. ſhowres m. H. wind p. ms
XXIX, H. wind, Meteors 11 p.
XXX. R. hard p. m. tot, H. wind.
XXXI1. R. 5 m. & 11 m. wdy,
Auguſt 1. Showr 5 p. high wind.
IL Rain 7 p. R. 4 9 m. ad 2 p. ſhowr 3 p.&
10 P.
IN. Chin m. ſhowr 5 p. 7 p. Rainbow, S W.
IV. R. 9 m. Oc. & 1p.
V. H. cool wind.
VL H. wind, R. 5 p.7 Þ. 10 P.
VII. Much rain a. L.


1675, Jan.3t. adg Feb.


XXX1, H. wind, £ ſnow or hail 4 p+
II. Feb. Rain midn,
IV. R. m. p. by fits, Dir.
V. High wd and R. 11p. S W.
VII. Showr of hail 11 m. 0.1 p. 3 Þ- Rain


8 P.
IX, Wetring and hard ſnow 8.m.
Anno cod...  Aupnſt 20. ad 23. Sept.
XX. {. rainn. windy.
XXIV. Rainy ni. p.m.
XXVIL Windy, rath n.


NW.


XRXXVIH. panes Ryuat 12, SW.
RXIX,R., .M' 5. &7,
XXX1. Great tutricone at Barbadves as eve


, Was. |

Sept. V. Raiff jy p: drops 6 p,

RT. Great rain 2 m. 3 M,

XV. Rain 5m,

XVL Rain gp. '*

XIX. Rain 2 m. .R. 2p.

XXI, Windy, great rain $5 M. 1 P.
nah arc 7a C. Sos *
Arm eod. Now. 24. ad Dec. 5.
XXIV. Windy, {. werting 0. R. 6 p-
XRV.Rainaz p. ads þÞ.
XXVII. Wetring 7 m. & 9m.
XXVIL Warm.


1676. Feb. 21.44 March 6.


XV. R. 11 p.Teinpeſt, after © 0c.
XXVIL Winds "ps Meteors 9 p- Z- feen
XXIX. £, wetting, heat, drops towards ©
* Occ, ee os


Merch II, Rain 6 m. af 9 m. fere, ſhowr 11
S,


"Anno  Aweuſt 2L ad F$ » $.

XXVIIL Showr 8 m. & ©. 2 PÞ+ hn 4 fere
R.7 Þ-H.wind 9p. @c. A

XX IX High wind. o - Wy.

XXX, Rain at Bromley x p. great ſhowr.

TV. Sept: hot nf, wet.s mh. R, ©, finc rain p.
m.& Sun occ. & 11 P.


V.Ranapacg|t I,


1677. March 10, ad Mays.


R. Rain ante (©) ort. & $8 m. H. wind,

XI. Rain 2 m. 4 M. hail 1 p. Meteor, wdy,wer
3 P-ad 6p.

XII. Rain 2, L, ſhowr x p.

[ XITE. Much ſnow 4 m. ſnow die tor.

| XIV.R. m. 0. & eſp.

XV. Great ſtorm berween Cales and Sr. Lucas;
which broke the Maſt of CaptainP:le's Ship,
and a Clap of Thunder broke the ſecond
Maſt, ſo that they were all caſt away.

X'VIIL Rain a. L.f. wet 6 m,

XIX. Rain hard 1 m. 11m,

XX, R. a. L-H, wind.

XX1. Very ſtormy all n. ſtorm of rain and hail
6


P.
_ XXII. Rainy, windy m. p. rain and hail 2 p.


Hail and Thunder 5 p.atForeſft hill.

XX1IL Rain 2 p. R. ante 5 p, & 8 p.roo much
rain complained of. Hail 4 p.

XXIV. Rain 8 m. &c,

XXYV, H. wind all n.

XXVIL Showr 6 p. 7 p.

XXIX. Rain 4 midn, = blow hard.

April I StormWrackt theLoyalMerchante,Lat 4g.

INE. April. Rain a. L. at Foreſt bill 4, Rain a. L


Nly.
VIE. Showr 1 p.
VII. Rain 5m,
XI. {rainim. high wd, driſle, oft R.
XIV. Rain 6 m. & o, 1 p.6 p. by fits 3 p. cot


ſting ſhowre 7. H. wind 11 p. |
XV. Raitt 11 m. (veetly with H, a ſhowrs


6 P-

XVI. Showr 8 m. horn, R.and 4 or $ Claps
of thunder in the SW, 7

XVIL. f. rain 9 m. wind, R. p. m. 4 p. by fity
a Comet.

XVIIL. f. ſhowring o. & 1 FP: ;

XIX. R. 3 p. and prerty ſtore « 6, ad 8 p,


{ XX. {. ram 9 m.


XXII. wet 3 p.
XXII. Cold day, ydy. Percpiſce as Greenwich,
Whale ar Colcheſter.
XXIV. R.m. 10 m. hard 11 m. 1p, 6p. wd.
mn” | SW.
XXVI. R. m. 10m.rain confiderable 11 m.
XXVII. Wet m. wet 6 m. here, and 36 Mile
Northwards. Rain 1 p. $s p. 9 p.
XXIX. H. wind, ſhowr 9m
XXX, Rain 11 m. and conſtant till midnight,
ante midnight rain faſter,
The * Vale of the white horſe in danger of 2
Floud. |
I. May. Werm.rain 11 m.
IL. Rain 5 p.& 9 p. Floud at Timbridge.
ITT. Wer a. m. tot. ſhowr, rain and hail, an il-*
a - 7
no eodem. June 3o. ad to July.
Fuly VA. Lightning and Thunder 1 p. of
VILE. Troubled air, Thunder 7 p. and Rain
IX. Showr 6 am. ſmart 10 m. High wind di
tot,


X. Boiſtcrous wind-die 1#. R. 11 Þ %c.


157%


/et


#


—


-


Chap. I1L


& v5  Home-Emiidence,


—.


183


1678, April 11 ad 18,


XI. R.o m. & m. P.M,
X11, Wetring 0.2 p. & 6p. R.Þ p.
XIV. R. 1p.

XV, Rain 1 & 2 m,

XVE. Driſle m. 5s p. 11 P-

XVII. Drifle 10 m. ſhower 2 p.


1679. Tan 22,44 30.

Y XII. Thawing, drifle, flecc

XX L1I. Snow 8 fere 3 ſome
m. per tor,

XX1V , Snow m.p.tl

X XVI, H. wind and cutting.


Anno eod. Novembr. $8. ad 18.


VIIL 1. rainp.7 #11 p-
IX. R. a. L. poſtea (now.
X, (. rain ante 2 P.


1680. Sept. 3. ad 11.”

HI. Halo 2 m.

V. {. rajtu 10 mM. & 0. h
IX. Gr. Fog, hot 10 p.

X, Gr. fog, wet 10 p- Meteor, 10 p.


. Mm,
| and thaw p.


1681. June 1s, ad 22.

RV. Cl. rain, Sterlin great ſt ym, hail.

XVI. Dolphins in che Severn.

XVIL. T. M. (ſwallowing up Trees at Ferrara.
XIX. C. driſle 0,9 p.Mereor with a Train 9 p.
XX. Fine gentle rain a 2 p. «4 midn.

X Xl. Brave wet day, curious daſh ante 3 p.
XXIE. R. Sun or. winds.


Anno eod, Decemb. 18. ad 8 &eb. 1692.
XV1LL. Very high wind a. L. and much Rain


ſtormy day.
X1X. R. 5 m. ſtormy ad Falmouth,


XX, R. 4 m. rain and wind ante 7 p. Porpiſces |


4 ar Worlwich Reach,
XXL. R. m. & 11 m. Floud ar Copenhagen by
Srorm


XXil. Raina 7p. ad 11 p. ;
XXII. Much Rain no&. precedent. drifle p. m.


m. p. ſnow at Oheham.


XXIv. Plymouth very tempeſtuous, much R, +
XXV. H. wind and much R. ab ante 4 m. ad


merid. ſtormy day & n. ſtormy Tarmouth
6 Veſſels driven back by ſtreſs wearfter.

XXV1 Very ſtormy n. preced. with R. ſtorm
of hai. Stormy by firs.


IX, Wind and wetting m. H. wind 16 P.
X. {.R. m. H. wind n,
| = Minn wd, {. ſnow and
« t, wind N. 7, rain 2 P. 2 Þ, ved, very
high wind n. Shipwrack, C Durch Vellet.?
XIV. Windy, higher weſp.ſ. rain 9 m.
XV, Very H. wind m. R. 10m. & p. m. ſmart
ſhowrs ante 5 p.
XVI, Furious Tempeſt m. tor. & die blowing
Y = = of Houles and Chimneys, =
, R. ante . H.-wi « rai
<p 6 m. H.-wihds, f. rain 6 p.'9 p
X Vil. Scormy wind 'n, tot, cirr. d. h. the Seas
near Holland roic 3 inches higher than 1n
1570, when there was an Inundation.
XIX. Showres ante 9 m. ſtorm of rain and
wd 4 p. H wind at n, Meteors 3 or 4 ante


rain 2 p*


9 P-

XXI. Showr circ. 5 m. & ante 10 m, high ud
ante 2 p. R. ſerious 7 p. 10 p. much com-
plaint of Shipwrack. |


XXII. R. ante $ m.10 m.Meteorby Þ 9 p.
XXTV. Rain hard poſt midn.
| X XV, Rainſab veſp. Inundar. at Datow higher
by 2 foot than 'twas 35 years ago.
XXVI. R. ante 3 p.
H. Feb. H. wind, driving ſnow ante 4 P.

Jan. 16. Ex literis pene e tota Europa, conſtat
omnes undequaque fluvins exundaſſe.. w
XXX, Stockbolm, within 10 miles, T, M. ve-

ry —32—y for halfan hour. Comet ar Lz«


opold.
Feb. VE At Dover a Swediſh Veſſel”
Ships ſcarce ſafe in Falmouth Haven. '*:{ |


XXVII. Rain ante 8 p. m. C. guſts, Rain ante


2 P.
XXVIIIL H. wd , ſcuds of rain ante 5 p. 6 P.
7 P. 11 P. very tetnpeſtuous art Plimouth,

FXXIX. Windy, cold, dark.

XXX. Windy, f. hail ante 11 m. wind and
ſhowrs o. 3 p. 4 p. high wind.

IT Apr. High wind, riſe 10m. W. or,

[V. S. rain ante 8 m. miſt.


Anno ead. Tune 5: ad Faly 25,


V. f. wind, ſhowr ante o. ſer to rain 7 p. ad


XX VIII. Stormy Ly m, R.12 Þ»

XXIX, Wind and R. ante 2 p. & alias.

XXX,H. wind p. m. R. and very high wind,
þ. wind ny,

Zan. 1.11632, R. 2p. ad 3p. ſos Pads p.
H. wind o, & p.m.. ; |

III. Farrows , H. wind, blowing oft Tiles, C.
R. m.

IV. Rain ante 1m.


I1P.
VI. Windy n. {. drops 11 p.f. dewing 9. _,
VIT. Gufty , driſle p. m. 2 p. 3 p. frequent
ſhowring ante 9 p.ſo8 p. 11 p.

VII. Boſton-Seas outragious for 2 days paſt,
ſay the Fiſher-Boars.

X .H. winds, ſhowring m. 10 m. 11m... SW,
XI.H wd n. tot. ( die ſeq. ſhowring 9 m«
Pleiades med.C. 1 p. 3 p. Thunder ſaid,


veſp. :
X11. Winds, coaſting ſhowr 4 p. 8 p.
X1V. Showr and brisk wd,
XV, Wind blowing extream, f. days paſt, ſec-
veral pieces of Wracks and drowhed men 3'


V.R.6p.
VI. Inundation at Amſterdam. ;
VIII. R. and H. wind a, L, & 10 m. High wd


2 P+


at Durham hail and lightning, the like ar
Carlington in Ireland, deſtroying Corn many


many miles round.
B bb XIV.


wracke,


1682: 26. March ad 5 April: -._.;;


Fd


\


+l
—_—y
$%


The World muſt, be ranged for Philoſophy's ſale. Book 11,


XVI. Showr o. rain at Putney for 3 hours;


Daſh of rain ang Thunder 5s p. 2 in Na-
dir,

XVII. Dropping, a.m 47 Mad 1p. Mp.
winds, ERS og

XX1. \. R. 5 m. and high wind m. p.

XXII. H. wd m. p. very often ſhowring 8 m.
& 0.5 P. SP. 9 P- |

XX111, Coaſting ſhowres round, Thunder and
great $s Þ- 494,

XXIV. Maxfeid, Hail and Lightning deſtroyed
the Corn.

XVI. Smart ſhowr poſt 6 p.

XXVIL Bruxel, we have had very bad wea-
ther like co ſpoil our Harveſt.

XXVUL, Rain 30 m. 7 m. SE. Why.|

XL XIX. Very high. wind , f. wetting ante 1p. |
ſo 3Þ. 7 p-10 P-

XXX. H.and ſtormy wds 1 m. ſom. p. R.
circa 4 P» SW,

T Fuly. Stormy and wet 10 m,

I. Showr ante 11 m. wetting ©, 1 P. 2 Þ-H.


III. R. early, die tot, fere.
[1V. H, wind, {. rain, welcom Harveſt day.
VI. Lightning , with, harm done at Sea at
Brighthamſted. Lightn. tore one Houſe all to
pieces, and Fired another. Lightning wich
us 10 Þ. t&rible,
& 1. Lightning, thvndery rain ante-3 m. ſhowr
CIVC, Os, .
XII. Ar Anjou, Dreadful Tempeſt turned ſc-
veral Villages in that Province zopſe-turr:,
XV. Thunder and forte R. ante 4 m.
XVI. Showr 0. & 1 p.
XVII. Wind, brisk ſhowr 10 m. 2p. 5 p. 6p:


IT P. ;

XVIII. H. wind and ſhowring 5 m. N ww:
XX, -Metcor 11 P. wy,
XXI. Werting 5 & 10 m.R. 10 p. &c,
XX11.Showres coaſting 1 p. brisk ſhowrs poſt 3


P-
XX[IIL Showr 1 p. & p. m. Phillipsburg,with.
in 2 mile a Village mgftly deſtroyed by


was a, m.


| Lighening,


© $13. Ha! How'doſt thou like this Good Reader ? Doth it not found
like Drums and Trumpets ? doth it not alarm Thee ? Alaſs ! I have more


been donein old time on theSolid andW


Jlop ers mind is boundleſs, fomerimes his Pen. So the great Naturaliſt
ny,


ſhall produce the d of


ds a Lecture upon the World, and all
Nature,


d 'of ©, & wice verſa, on this account we
agd 7, and Þ in theix feveral Columns, which


done, we ſhall fubjoyn what remains of 2 2 ,
14. And here 15 the benefit of our Amplitude , which we make in an


$14,
Afﬀpec, that we ſhall not be defeated .of our incent by the Calculations of
th er Century, how ſhort ſoever thgy have been; bur our deſign ſhall


be built up, ſtand fureand ſtedfaſt, becauſe in our way we proceed as the
ood Archite&t doth, who knows that the longer is the Beam, the more
Fold it takes upon the Wall, whereas if we ſhould cut roan Inch, or half-
Inch, what with ſhrinking of the Timber, *or the ſerling of the _—
y


Al -would come to Ruine.


Notwithſtanding to confeſs ingenuou


amongſt this Tr:ade of Aſpedts, the d © 2 was moſt welcom to us, be


cauſe of a more certain, and a clearer


Calculation.


—_—_————


The Forreign Diary of dg #5

S 15, Anno Ghrifti. - |

1500. April 23. The Portugal Admi-
miralGapralichis doom in the reach
of the Eaft Indies. Purch. p. 1.
-Pag. 30. |

1517. June 26. Hurricane blew
down Houſes, pull'd up Trees at
WNordling 5 Lychoſt, p. 133, ©


—_——


Tempeſts, reſerved to this place.


I535. May 20. Storms and Tempeſts
chat Ships ſuffered ; FAk/. 119.
212, :

1539. Auguſt 23. Extream Tempeſts,

denger of perilhing; Hak!. 3.
p. 198,

1540. Feb. 11. Tempeſt, a greater

cannot be exprels'd ; Hak/. 2. p.
421


A


185


_


Chap. III. @ 7's & tormy Daarz.


H—  —— —


ny Y


421.From that day to the 20.Tem- 1591. Sept. 5. Storm, Mak. 2. p. 175.


peſtuous 1b. cum d 2 &.

1549. March 14. Wondrous Storms
and Showrs preter modum; Dr.
Dee, Annot. MS. ad annum cum
») f mprim. V.


. 1552. Aug. 21, Hurricane, Lyco/th


625. cum he.

1553. Anguft 3, Lat 50. Near F:7-
mark Terrible Whirlwinds, Hak!.
Þ. 269. |

1555. Auguſt 19. Storms fo terrible
we knew not the like, though we
had indured many ſince we came
out of Englad, Hakl. 1. p. 318.

I557. June 2. Tempeſts and much
Rain, Hakl. 1.'p. 334- CE

1551. fuly 15. Hurricane, rifting
up Trees in many places , Gem-
24 2, þ. 32. great ſtorms at Sea,
near Folga, Lat. 46. Hakl. 1. p.
350.cuam ).

1565. Dec. 24. Furious Winds,blow-
ing open the Gates of -St. Pauls.
8th. Shipwracks on Sea, many pe-
.riſhed in the Thamesz Stow,p. 659.


- 1568. March 28. Tempeſts of wind,


drowning the Tilt-Boats before
Grawes-end, Stow, p. 662.

1569. Auguſt 18. Hurricane , Gem-
ma 2. þ. 65. gr. 12, d enmaliis.
i574, Nov. 18, Very tempeſtuous

Wind all night, which Stow ne-
ver knew the like, p. 679. cum Þh,
1576. March 5. Flaw of Wind from

N W. Tilt-Boat of 21 Perſons
- periſhed , Stow, p. 680. d near
the Equator, :
1582, March 8. Outragious Storms


on the Coaſt of Holland, Galzy/.


cum ).


1585. Dec. 23. Earl of —; =


+ Tempeſt going forRoterdam, Stow,


4 I'%
ichs! une. 13. ad 16. Storm at V:r-
na, c. Smith, 1. 9.
1587, May 27. Fair,. but the P:»-
nace Fore-Maſt was blown over-
board, Davis's Voyage 3 Hak!.
Vol 3. p.


158g. OB, 6, 7, 8. Very rough |-


weather, Hak. Vol. 2:p. 160. d 1n
fine,

i590. Auguſt 1. ad g. Weather ex-
ceeding Foul, much Wind and
Thunder, Hak/. 296,


d in We 21.

1592, O#.21. Wind blew extream ;
Hatkl. Val. 3. p.848.
I593. April 18. ad May 10. Furious
contrary winds, Gaweraiſh Relat.
Purch. 4. p. 1193. d moſt parthf

that while.

1595. OR. 26. Storm at Night, {e-
parated Sir Francis Drake from
the Fleer, Hakl. Vol. 3. p. 483.

1596. Feb. 14. Storm, Hak!. Hal 2.
Pp. 589: d cum als,

1597. May 20. Extremity of fowl
Weather, Hakl. p. 195. *

Zune 2, Extream Storm near the

Bay of Aſſumption, 1b. d 17 fire

0


1606, April 20. Paſcha ventoſum >
in S,


April 21. Vehement Tempeſts all


Night, * with Winds, Rain and
Thunder in a terrible manger. We
were forced to lye at +4wll ,
Purch. 2. p. 686. cum RP 7,


| 1609. Fune 15. Great Storm , we


ſpent over-Board our Fore Maſt ;
Purch. 3. ls 583. d 1nprim,

t610, March 27. Terrible Storm. I
was fain to ſpoon before the Sea
to ſave our Lives, Purch 1. p. 242,
Sept. 21, 22, 23. At Leſbos, Lat.
40. Winds blew m. and Sea ſome-
what rough 3 Mr. Saunas, p. 114.
cum ) Oe,

1612, Dec. 22. to 28. Boiſterons and
ſtormy ; Puzxch; 287." din vv.

1614. Nov. g. Rainy and great winds;
at Luham in Kent; Amnnot. M.S,
d tn fine,

1618, Jan. 10, Foul Weather, &c.

1619. July 26, \Great Tempeſt ar

E. Sail loſt by ſtreſs of Wind

ſmall reſt all Night,Parch 1. p.130
d ind,

1620. July 18, Foul Weather, &c.

2624. Nov. 12. Styl. Nov. Count
Morsfelds Tempeſt, where his
Ship was caſt away 3 Fromond 2,
C. 3. art. 13. Galvif. d in @ Ple-
ades.

1625. 74x. 5. Great Tempeſt, ſome
Boats drowned in our Thames, d


in '?, at the ſame time Storms of
Wind


\


m—_


—_wu— — _—_


; 196  Cautions tothe Navigator about d ©%. * Book 1].


Wind in Norimberg, anda Steeple | 1656. March 27. Rowſing Tempeſt
in Eberſpach ſtruck with- Light- | at Oxford, d cum h &.
ning, |: 1660, May 15: Hurcicane.
1626. Jun. 9. Whirlwinds in Thames | 1661. Fuly 20. Very wet and ſtormy,
near Purfiet, tore up the ground. | 4 cam ) &.
Howes, p. 1042. Dir. 12. Whirl- | 1666. Jar. 24. Hurricane.
wind on the Thames blew up much | Sept. 20. High and extraordinary
Water in the Air, the Boats were | Tempeſts of Winds and Rain arte
# © turned round, Thunder and ha merid, d gr. 10,-
followed , Howes, Ib. ,d cum ;| | 1668, Febr. 16, 17,18, Tempeſtu-
in fine =, ous Winds, &d gr. 5.
1636. May 29. Terrible Storm and | Fehr. 29. Furions Winds.
Whirlwind in Smalcald, Norim-) OF. 13. Stormy Winds.
bere, d m=. | 1670, fan. 25. St. Pauls day, Tem-
&5 :

1642, Feb. 16. Quen Mary engbar- | peſtuous Winds. @ cu h.
quing for England, forced back a- | Sept. 4. High Winds, Rain all
gain by Weather z Sanders on d Night, d cum ». |
camy. 8


$16. I know not whatwill be the iſſue with my good Reader, ſince
ſome may ſay there is too much, and others, that here is not Inſtance
enough. To the Firſt, I ſhall hope 'ris not unpardonable : To the Second,
that it muſt not be ſuppoſed that this can be a Tenth Part of the Evidence
may be produced from the Annals of Exropeans, and that the Maritime Re-
lations of ſeveral Countries , enough to convince Tycho himſelf, and all his
Academic Suſpenders of Afſent. I add further, that if any Man will buc
conſider what an Hurricane is, and the Prodigious Violence wherewith it
is deſcribed by the Atteſtator, parallel co the Force of Lightning and Gun-
wder, which makes the Seaman often complain of fome deſtructive
Fiend engaged in the Star.If a man ſhall conſider the Horror ofa Shipwrack,
or which ſeems to be next, the.periſhing on our Rivers, where a Shole of
Paſſengers by hard Fate, are coop'd up in a Tile-Boat, which miſcarrying
are arreſted by the Dire Embraces of Death 3 He would not chuſe a ſuſpi-
cious day to put to Sea in, nor conſult an Aſtrologer for a day when there
haps a ?, thathe _ then to chuſe, paſs down in the Boar,
I 17. This we may be ure of as to Hurricanes, that though we do not
Feel fuch Dire Commotions here , as within the Tro _ yet we have
inds


{een and Felt ſome not blunt and bruit Violences of » Which have
the Merchants mark of d © ©. |
* $ 18. Now we may take a View of d © 2. As Furious, butnor {o fre-
quent. | o |
= The Forreign Diary of 4 © 9, and the Tempeſt attending.
Anno Chriſti, 1555. Dec. 13. Water mounted 6
1521, Ofob. 24. Magellans Tem-| that we might ſeeit 4 Leagues off,
peſt, Purch 11. þ. 43. cum 2%. Hak!l. p. 100.


1539. Mov. 26, Tempeſtuous winds , | 1556. far. prim. Storms of N. winds
ſeparating our Ships 3 Hakl. p. 407. | from Terra Florida, and diſperſed
cum d Q 7, our Ships in 2 ho. laſted 10 days
Dec. 11, Cruel North winds broke | cam 2 &.
the Ships, Cable, the Ship bulg'd. | 1557. Nov. 10. Ambaſs, Tempeſt ,
Hak!l. p. 720. | Howes, 629.


I565,


LS


9 7 2 TD = WwWe


& Ch 1 TY ws


=


329. :
1596. Jan. 25. Wind ſo great that


-


- »#%.2 —_ #


F


Chap. II. Devil not neceſſarily zn every Storm.


Je


——


181


1565. June 17. Storm forced us to; we could not lanch our Shallop.
cut the Cable , and loſe both An- | Sir W. Raleigh. Hakl. 3. p. 629;
chors andCables to fave our ſelves, | 1597. 7uly 9. Earl of En Fleer
Hakl. Eat: 1. p. 536. bound for the Azores, driven back

1568, O8. 9g. Extream Storm, eve- | 60: Leagues to Plizzonth, Stop, p.
ry hour we feared Shipwrack. | 783. | | .c19

akl. p. 556. _ 1602. :May 11. Stormy weather, C.

1577. July. 19. Divers Storms and | Smith una: cum ).

Flaws 3 'd wna cum d Hakl. Edit. | 1608. Sept. 26, Mighty Storin on

2. Þ. 65. | the Bay of Soldania, beyond the
1580. Sept. 25, 26, 27. Great ſtor- | Southern Troprer, ſplit our Fore-

my Blaſts, Hak!. p. 842. cum 4 | "Courſe, Purch. Vol.1. p. 228.

2 2, The whole Month was | 1610. May 12. A hatd Storm,Purch.

tempeſtuous 15. p. 474. the d la-| T:p. tos, | NT

ſted per totum menl. cum als. 1615. March 9, Cruel Storm -conti-

Ooh. 1.. ad 7. The ſame weather | nued divers days. Purth. Vol. -2. p,

for ate 4. the Cables broke, d | 1.p. 86. wn Id $8. |

cum 7 . 1619. Nov. 29. Hurricane at Burmu-
582 Feb 1. ad 5. Stout Gale,| «das, blew up many- great Trees ,

akl. Val. 3. p. 767. cum d 2 7.| andcaſt awayitheWarwich, 7 17,

1592, Ooh. 2. Stormy Winds at W.; @©-17. 2 14. F: \.

N W. near Lat. South g. Hak/. p.| Notlong after a ſecond, C. Smith

49. * P. I'71.

D:e 4. Storm ( as the poor Sea- | 1620. Sept. 13, 14; Storm at Bermu-
men then phraſed it) beyond all | das with : Snipwrack; C.-Smith,
reaſon, 1b. ; : AISH) . 14) of
O8. 10. Dark Storm with deſpair, | 1627. Febr. 24. Nawes 37. cum 4500
Hakl. Vol. Es 848. homimbu ſulmerſa; Galv.(gr.q.)
O8. 21. Wind extream, H. 2. p. | Dec. 17. Hurricane'v..


$49. em d 2 7k, annum : and we have given it be-


25. Sudden Storms, our boat ſunk fore, &7- 5. ; |
at the Shore , Hak{. Eats. 2. pag. 1635: <<, 6. Terrible bluſtring,cam


$ 19. So have you the d- of © 2 of a terrible unruly Influence, but by
the comparing of theſe two Tables, 'ris hard if -we cannot-make ſome eſti-
mate. It appears that the d of © 2 is more prone to lend-us a Hurricane
then that of -2. Hence ( which I am glad of ) the old iCharacter of #'
isjuſtified, even in Capital Letters ; Thar it is rather an exciter of Twrb«-
lexcy, than 2 : For .2, I ſuppoſe bluſters with ſome quarter, ſends a Boat
on drifr, but the Mercur:al Hurricane hath the dead-doing Influence, Hur-
ryeth a Veſſel tro the bottom, as if in reality the Fiend were there, Abad-


| donor Apollyon who hath the Power of Death : who, though he have not
* 2 hand in the raiſing of theſe viotent Effe&s of Nature, as Bodiz and Hel-


ont will have it, (for I cannot believe that there is a Fiend lodged in eve-
ry blaſt of Fired Gunpowder) yer nothing hinders bur thatthe infernal Spi-
rit may make uſe of a Tempeſt which is raiſed to his hands, always wil-
ling co be one at-miſchief. But this may be out of the way ; only I thoughe
d to Start it, that Men may rightly value and meaſure the Heavenly Bo-
es and their Influences, that we may look no longer upon them as ObjeRs
ofa doting Theory 3 as for the moſt part Aſtrology is cenſured,
9 20. Now let us ſee whatan Handa d 4 $ hath in Storms, premiſing
their Diary alſo. :


Cece” | Tha


188 -


2 %'s Stormy Evidence, Forreign. © Book,


The dQ %-


Anno Ghriftt,


+ 3522, Febr.11 .ANorthW.wind in the


,. em


'**Prow of the Ship would not ſut-


fer us to paſs the Cape of B. Spe-
Tanzd, 2 Pa Lib. 2. p. 452. 4 ©


. '$ per meh}, totums.


1539. Nov. 26, 27+ Northwards
for two days Gortez
his Ships loſe theirCompany, Hak/.


= WW cum. ©.
1540. an. g. &c. Tempeſt from the
; "North, iti


ving back 20 Leagues,


- « Habl, arts. if we had beenin Har-
_ -— ould have


: $594: June 6.


; A e RP
2576 OW, wind blew the
 wernourandFamily in
.-\-off the Bri


; "83h
_—_— cum
Ws 21
1573. Auguſt 2. Tempeſtates


1576.


been caſt a-


w
-V"K way Pe 16. 418. #74 cum ©.
--$edr. 1, W 1


ind-boiftrous, the Sea-


-; men glad trixeturn, H. p. 420.

Febr. 11, Aw! y, A greater
Tempeſt-laxth:- the Seaman cannot

be expreſſed. AIDE
1545.. Fane225; Hurricane in De-
eg! :Trees 0:
S 3
d; Stow, 589. d


Storm, De: Der's 4n-
not. ad men}. —
1553. Aug. 1. Terrible Whirlwind,


we were notable to bear any ſuch,


' Sit H. Willegghy in Hok!. 1.p. 235.


,. Tempe-


into the Water
$tad;us bimfelf rarely eſca
: from beingcruſh'd with the fall of


: 2 Tree, Tab. Berg. 203. d mn fi
_
'7558. May 12. Dangerous ['Tempeſts


Mare Gaſptumfor 44 ho. Purch.


1662, , 22, 23. Horrida wen-


torum Tempeſt as


emma 2. none.
end,
cums Vents aſſiduts, Gemma 2. 169.
d in it cum ©.

Luguf by ad 28, Very much
wind like to loſe our Bark, Hak!.
Eait 2,p. 74, cum Y una cum ©.


1577: July 4: Friezland, Boiſterous
pinch Hakl 3. ps 3 _— |
1580. Sept. 5,6, 7. Happy the Shi
in Harbour, Hake 474. £7 as
Sept. 12. ad 17. Very tempeſtuois,
d @ 8. per tot. anenſ. (o ate 25, 26,
27, Ib:


1582. Dec. 27. Foul Gale of Wind,


Ip. GI #

1586. Sept. 6, Mighty Storm, very
extream, laſted ad diemr 10. . We
intended to cut down our Maſts,
Hakl. Val. 1. p.786. cum h &.

I587. Ofteb. 8. ad 14. Storm, in Six
days drew us turther than we
could recover in 13. Sir W. R«-
leigh. Hakl. Edit 1. 270.

I58g. Aug. 17. Wind blew hard at
Virgima, C. Smith p. 15. Great
Stormeat night, dze 19. Haklarr.

1592. Ofo6. 10. Dark, ftormy, was
furious- with deſpair, Hack, Vol. 3.
P. 148. cum ©:

1594. March 21, Hurricanes , tea-
ring divers Trees , Barns , mon-
ſtrouſly and incredibly in ſeveral
parts of Eegland, Stow, p. 766. 6d.
CINE. Y am ©, © hY.-

1595. Dec. 19. The Foul Weather

 whichSir Francs Drake yerifies to
tas ſmall >», lies-under this -& 197%


cum ©, being ſcarce all three gr.z ,


a noe 21, Stormy Gales'of
Vind, and much Rain, Hakl. E-
att 2, 589. ſeek;
I597. June 17. Stormy Weather",
Hakl. 195. & 17 fine © unatum


O- G

1605. Inter Sept. 26. & Oftober 5,
Storms to our
ing always we ſhould be wracked,
Purch. Val. 4. p. 1257. cum ©:

| 1606. April 21, Vehement Tem-
peſt all Night, with Wind, : Rajh
andThunderterrible. Purch. Val; a.
p. 1686. cum ©. "00

1086. Nov. 24. Storm furious, thi
wedrave before the Wind leagues
Pwrch. 4. 1282,

1609. Dec. 22. ad 27. Boiſterous and
Storms. ?

1610,


at Peril, look-.


. ©» ad Gan So CEE a. 9 IT Org


= 7A «© #*A tC.


ae ML LLC TTY


Lam |
—


Chap. III. Pactfick-Sea. Obſerv. of © 2 % commend. to Seamen.


—


199


1610. April2. A Storm , we were , 1640. Sept. 23 . Stormy wind and
forced to bear up before the Sea, | great Floud in Dreſden. Kyr.


Purch 3. 231. 1640. {Vov. 11. Dark , tempeftuqus
Fuly 15. Very ſtormy,Purcha. 1759. | © when his Majeſty King Charles
d in V. c122 ©. the Firſt eſcaped from Hamproz


1618. March 1. at Jucatraaroſe a| Court. H. I. & gr. 9. cum alir..
T empeſt, Parch.Vol. 1. 677. &d gr. | 1551. | 20g Tempeſtuous us c17z
q ©, d pr. 2.

1620. Sept. 4. Great Tuffon overlet | _ cv. 7. Dreadful Storms at
Ships, and funk them- down ſud- | unbridge, 2 * both R. cum alits

- denly,Purch. Vol. 4. p. 641. d gr.g. d gr. 5. cumQ .

1637. OFob. 7, Great Tempeſt mthe | 1669, OZ. 31, Tempeſt Terrible
*riþan Sea, Kyriander. cam ) f > gr. 11;


$21, Lo! How our d 927 is ſtormy; 'tis againſt the Hair to ſay
thatthata d-2 ? isas ſtormy as d © 2, tor that were to equal 2 with@
which the Syſtem of the World it ſelf will not indure, and Experience
rejecterh, as by comparing the M-rcurizl Tables will be ſeen; $ and 7
conjure up ſome Hurricanes, but © and 2 do more. It will be objected
'that if 2 and © be not fo boiſterous as 2 and *, then ? isbrisker than
.@ himſelf - And that being abſurd, we muſt fay, that 2 and © are
like to the Eye and the Spectacle; the Glaſs is not ter, z.e. Nobler
than the Eye ; and yet the Eye armed with the Glaſs, ſees clearer than
when it is con(ider'd by it ſelf: And in our SYmvle,as there lies much in the
Vicinity of the Convex Glaſs to the Eye of one fide, and the Vicinity to the
Object on the other : So there is much inthe Vicinity of theſe Planets, firſt
to the Sun, and then to the Earth, the obje&tas it were of their Influences
And we promiſed to evince this from thoſe rare Nicks of time, when?
and # areboth Retrograde. or one only, while the other is in his Station -
(I have but two Inſtances as yet ) the Effects are dreadful; wieneſs chat
1620. Sept: 4. and that 1663. ov. 7, aflignd the ane. by Sea, the other by
Land. The reaſon being ng otherthen what we have, that the Retrograde
Courſe argues their Vicinity to the Earth, much more then the Direct:
The Aſtronomers will tell you how many Miles. 1
9 22, 'Tis obvious to note, that as ina-d;o.? ,foina'd 2 2 3 weſomes
times give a fair account of a whole Months Conſticucion, or mores -as for
February, Anno 1522. Jan, 1540. the Mouth of September 1580. we have
given a hint of other Planets that have been guilty of the Ryor, the © and.
»), and ſometimes 4 and h. TO prepate the Reader to expe& Storms
from all Quarters of Heaven; and that thert is nofuch-thing as a Pagfick
Sea under Heaven, as Magellan himſelf alſo found after 3 Months timein
that very Sea which he ſo named. | x |
# 23. Wherefare I reckon I have done not much amiſsto introduce theſe
3 Tables immediately foregoing, ſince the one gives Light to the'acher
d © ? Rages, when, it may be is a. Wetk-willer. "A & © & rages when
7 isnot far off, anda &d © 7 Rains and blu when. © by his Vicinity
ſhews his Intereſt in the Effet. So that I cannot but commend to the Mar-
riner, even after every Storm over-blown, and thanks to their Preſerver,
to conſider as a rutdiment. of Celeſtial Knowledge , how © and ? and
interchangeably bear ro one another. In VII. years time he will ſee liehath
Reaſon to obſerve more chen Lfnar Aſpects come to. For that is well,
etthat is as old as Noahs Ark 3 and what advance hath the Navigator mads
! beſeech him for theſe 3000 years and upwards ? 'Tis Pity.
$ 24. Stadius, I confels, gives away his Hurricane ( for it was no leſs )
to the rifing of and 3 with Artur ſupra Anno 1544; but he had done
no


| Two brace of C. on the ſame day and Month. Book 11.


no wrong, if for furity ſake he had quoted other Witneſles , 212; this of


our preſent Af!
+1 $25, Letus


diſpatch the remainder, for its Influence in Comets, which


are but Few, a] Hery Meteors which are more Plentiful, and then we


-come in fight of a Concluſion.


Comets then have not many Inſtances.
== Anno 1506. April 11. laſted 25 days, Rzcciolus, & @ & gr. 10.cum
h d


Anno 1530. Auguſt 6- to Sept. 3. Riccrolus, d Q & cum alits,


Anno 1557. Auguſt 6.
Anno 1578. May 16.


uſque ad Feſt. Barthol. Stad. Bunting, d © % 7.
rivets d 2% in = mm ©. n


Anno 1582, May 15. Stow. p. 695. d gr. 12. cum ©.
$26. This laſt Comet, though I meet ic not any where but in Stow,
yet we know no reaſon to queſtion it , any more, then thoſe of the ſame
which appeared elſewhere in March, as may appear from our Celeſtial


ear
Evidence, both there and here.
in the day of our Conjunction,


or V
ſome Influence. © Seethe Table of Ta zu
* $ 27. What if a Man ſhould not let paſs the


For three of thefe Comets happened pat


near 3 So that no queſtion here is
n this Head.
incidence of the ſame day


in the Month , Anno 1530. 1557. 1578. 1582. It may bea Meditation for


Gaſendus.


Some Fiery Meteors.


$ 28. Anno Ghriſft:.


1521, Ofober 24. Alvarez the Ports- |


_ gal Admiral for the diſcovery of
the Eaſt Indtes, Tempeſt with 3
Lights, whereupon the Storm cea-
. ſed, Purch. Lib. 2. p. 43. d 2 &


ON

'uly 15. Lightning fell on the Town

; 7 of Fug. G7. \ [FT

1551, Jan. 13. Lightning in many
_— of jor with appre-
-r_—_ of Doomsday , Lycofth.

II,

1554. Febr. 19. Trabs 1gnea in Thu-

riggeen, cum varits Gireults cocleſtts.


Mts 10. At Schalon in France,lg-
nes ardens , cum fulgure , Lycoft.
636.

I5 «1 Dec. 29. At Voitland, hh. 11.
zoR#e, Lightning deſtroying Chur-
ches, fo at Wilenburg , Stanhurſt,


Lyc. 64g. ;
1563. Dec. 1.44 13. Winter Light-
ning unparalleld, d & 2 Þ cum
ales.
1569. July 13. Thunder, with Hai
as big as the Fiſt, Gemma 2. 64.


1582. Dec. 29. Lightning, Thunder,
Hakl.V. p. on

| 1604. Sept. 16. Gelum arſit. Kepl, d,

1607. -_ = Ligtaing at Govern.
rry, with Rain, and unexpeRed
Flond, How, 889g,

1611, fax. 1. In the midſt of Froſt
and Snow , Lightning and Thun-
der, Galvif.

1616, Nov. $. Rain hard, with Light-
ning and Thunder,Purch. 1. p.105,


hd gr. 7.
1618, March 7. Flame over the Pa-
lace of Pars a Foot long, and a


' Cubit broad , fired the Palace
Howes, 1029,

1622. May 21, Meteorum prodigit-
um, as Lefire in Kepler.

ec. 23. Chaims, Lightnings, 1.

1623. fan. 29, Gelum ardens.

Marx. 19. Lightning, Kyriandey,

1624, Aug. 18. Lightning and Thun-
der, Wilsford.

Now. 2, Lightning and Thunder;
wonder d at by Fromond, after
&>ld Weather. p. 67.

1625, Menſe Juln; At Norimbere
it Thundred Days in number 15.


[772


LAG Fq_w HH


AS » 8


—_


Chap. III. 2 » have their Earthg. and Jaund 2.


19%


elſewhere, at Ratis-0n, Lintz. d gr. 4. cum ©:
1635. Aug. 31. Thunder and extreme | 1642. Jaz. 22. Thunder and Fiery

Rain for an Hour, & gr. 7. Meteors,harmful, at Hanover K y-.
Sept. 9. veſp. & noFu, much Light- | riander, d cum altiss.

ning. 7an.27, Thunder , Wind , Earth-
1637. Sept. 10. Terrible Thunder in | quake. 14.

Ep Friezland, K yrtanaer. | Feb, 17: Thunder and Storms, 4
1639. Jan. 30. Chaſma.- are; \\..- |


s 29. Iconfeſs much of this Gear 1s fetch'd from Germazy, which is 2
different Country from ours 3 but:what then-? A Liberal Science is univer-
fal; I write for the World, and Mankind, ifI could doit Service, I ſhould
have my Guerd6n. And let n9,nizn ſay in this or any other Inftance, be-
cauſe d © 2 is always within call, that it is the Aſpect which 1s the Fac to-
1% ; For I ſhall defire thatman only to look on © , and thenon 2, and
then ler him ſay, "whether 2 looks not as Fair, or as Foul ,* or what you
will call it, as Potent as her Lower and 4eſs Copeſmate. © Beſide the
conſequence is good, if © ? , or ©-2 have Influence in Conjunction 3 then
2 2 have the like; For I hope we mult not be put to win our Ground by
Inches. If ſo, we are ready to do it. |

9 30. If 2 and 2 then are fo boiſtrous, then we look for ſome Earth-
quakes here to0.3- Earthquakes and Flouds,


Terr1 Motus. Burgunay, Kepler, d » 9 |
| ' | 1626, Feb. 6. Unarupium Gamundien-.
Anno Chriſts. ; ft tmmunentium findi & 13 contrari-


1559. Sept. 14. Earthquake at Gon- | a deſcedere wiſa eft. Kepl, .
ſtanttmople tor 18 days, Lycaft, d | 1627. Nov. 14. Eraheven,Kyr.d cum
cum altts. ; als. '

1554. March 21. hor. 12. At Lowain | 1629. dug: 1,Great Earthquakein Al-
an Earthquake with great noiſe. pins, Rhetitts, Kyr, d gr. g. cum.

1571. Feb. 17. At mo_ in Here- | 1636. Sept.16. Earthquake, Kyr.'d
ford(hirea terrible noiſe,theGreund | una cum ©.

opened, an Earthquake 4 days; | 1642. az. 27. Thunder and Earth-
Stow, þ. 668. quake; d Fi

1618. March 12, Terrible Farth- | 1644. Feo. Ar Marſeilles, Kyr. d %
quake in the. Indres, d gr. 10. in ? per menſem totum fere.

X , cum altts. 1645. Sept. 12: Earthquake in Thu-


_—


' 1621, May 25. An Earthquake in r:1ngia, Kyr. d una cum &


$31. But the Cloſe of all is Inumndations, todo the Arabs ſome credit.


1501. Aug. 14. The River Albrs, Lycoft. d 2 © cam ©.

1549. June 23. Incepit imber (aith Dr. Dee in his notes on that Month, the
moſt violent fince Adam, a4 Condito Mundo, 4 near the Tropic , cum
O26. SIBOH
Ly 1551, Jaz 10, At Marpurg, great Inundation, Lyc. 611.- din Trop. cum

ts,

1552. Aug. 13. At Buaiſſina near the Sudetes (Mountains) Cataracts harm-

ful, Lyc. 625. Peucer 240. d in A. | —_

1579. May 27. Whitſunday, great Rain and High Water, after a Cold
and dry time, Stow, 788. d in prune. C |
1579. Febr, a Die 10. Continued Rain, cauſed high Fiouds in Weſftminſter-

Hall, Stow,68g. d in X.

D&dd t595


Kyriander, d cum © 8 or 9days | 1646. June 26. Thunder and Rain,


, I92


| Abundant Corviftion. Keplers miſtake, Book 11.


. % ; ,


1595. Febr, circ. 23, Inundation at Frankfort, prodigious, above that of
the year 1573. yea, Inandations throughout ali Germany. d ©9 7,

1598. Gere. Dec. prine. Prodigious Inundations at Rowe, greater than thar
of Ann. 1530. Thuanus, d wnacim ©G in 2. /

- 607. April 16. Strange Flouds at Coventry, unexpefted, Himes, p. 889,

in 12. ©,

1611, Nov. & Dec. By continual Rain, Waters higher than in memory
of Man, much harm done. Purch. L. 3,323. d unacum d per men,

1626. June 6. Ts - ler d gr. 12. d & pr. 10,

1640. _ 3. Greſſer Waſſer gouſt in Dreſden, d prope Equizo8. Kyr.

1643. Febr. 6, The Maes overflows. Calv. Append. d 4 & in = 27,
1645. March 8. Rain, Thunder Flouds, wars ix locts, 'd gr. 3. Ky


Tyanaer: [ :
Sept. 4. Weather extream wet before Spring, d in <>. prize,


And is not the Chara&er made out now concerning Flouds given by 41.
china, andall the Tribe? We that are Well-wiſhers think ic is. :

s 32. And theſe inclinations #re, and have been manifeſted to the World,
though Poor Aftrologers talk to the Winds. | |

$ 33: All this whileI have difſembled the Forceof our home Teſtimonies
from 1676. downwards, for Conſtancy, yea and exceſs of Moiſture; they
ſpeak as home'as Heart or Art could with 5 For do you Find any year to
come ſhort > Doth Anzo 1672. ? Let that be one, how many more ozer
will you find? Do you find = Aſpect to come ſhort? two or three is the
moſt, and'whilſt you look for them, you will find much moiſture inthe
other parts, ſo encompaſling, {o catching, that you will ſcarce havea dry
chred about you. For you cannot but mark the Frequencies of the Showres
the fame day twice, 3, 4 5 times perhaps in an afternoon , ec, I was
vga admit the Sextile of the » to cantribute to ſuch frequencies, and

ing they do, but d 2 2, as / are the Sprinklers, the Water-Pots
of Heaven, which teach the Art of Gardening fo far, that in warm Sea-
fons\we may often irrigate our Nurſeries, Sepe perumgue, as the Salery
School teaches us to moiſten our Bodies.

Next mark the Store, like © and 2, but far beyond it in liberality,
Next the Amplitude of the yo po for 10 degrees betore and behind, juſti-
fying it ſelf by the Pertinacy of the Conſtitution throughout all the Term.

Then for the extremity or Violence, you ſhall find ſome years emulous of
the nwonly oft-rimes,where ? is gn, or Stationary, as
we here obſerved in the Forreign.Nay,I leave the ſearching Reader to find
whether ſome years among us make not as great a noiſe as thoſe from Por-
chas or Haklvit,or any other. To name that of the Cloſe of Anno 1681, and
the Firſt Month of 1682. where we have ſome forreign Inſtances interſper-
ſed, and ſome of our own as cruel as they.

s 34- Now this is the Aſpect that never ſerves Keplers turn, he accepts
not of their Service when they bring Showre and Tempeſt at their Heels,
as July 27. Anno 1625. Parum tribuendzan ( faith he) drfferentie Lititud, ad
4 grad, and yet on the precedent as tells us of Thunder, the next day

onuit Longarw 3 and the preciſe 27. day pertonutt So elſewhere harmful
Lightning, Fulminata loca. Auguft 29. 1621. and then the d agaia very laxe
Wide, and uſeleſs 3 Diſcrepant Plagis Latitudimur, becauſe 7 was gr.
utherly,and 2 gr.6.North.But this is theError of the neceſſity of a cloſe
juction which many times is enervated (ayNby its too neerCohefion. He
reckons aConjunCtion where ever the deſired effect appears nor,to be loole,
though bur at.2 gr. diſtance, as 4:70 1621. May 14. Heat and a Rainboys,
which imply Showr, did not anſwer expectation. But gr. 2, 3, 4, 5.
O


(


——_—_———DnX a oe ooo Si... Mao's at


_—_ ad oa... > ooo to ft cds i carr oc OD oc oo cn dw cot. aw own www _


Chap. II. & Þ: motion. T ychouigue $ "p/temm. ? Þ ReVer reve Ve.


193


of Latitude,, will not evacuate the force of a d. That of Augeſt 29.
above quoted was gr. 3. diſtant, And in March 21. Anno 1623. there was
gr. 4. difference, and that 1# diverſis Plagrs Latitudinum : What? Febr. 26,
Anno 1627. he acknowledges an Apertio Portaruw by a d 2 & at degr. Lat.
9. and that when one was on the North, and the other on the South. And
yet I have not urged frm Fuly 24. Anno 1624. where the Lrs xr magne
15 raiſed, and never another Aſpect nearer, whereupon my Worthy Man
is filenc, and gives no diſtint account ( except for two of the later days )
the whole Monch throughout, And further I take notice where he rejects
-our Aſpect one day, becauſe of a failure on the very day (farſooth ) at the
Months end, Yet now I pray fee howTempefa & horridaFulmina made him
glad to embrace it at. the beginning of the Next. May1. S. IV. 4:n0
1629.
+ $ 35.Mayl now conſider theAſtronomical motions of theſe Planets, then ler
me for a cloſe,take notice of their admirable t d windings,not to fill
up Paper, or increaſe the Bulk of a weak difcourſe, but by the way of En-

, and diſpoſition of the Reader, to clear his Eye-{ighr, that he may be-
hell thoſe Objects which Nature calls great. The Divine Being forefaw
there would reſult ſuch a Variety from ſuch an order, and thereupon ena-
Red it ſhould be. We may remember that both theſe Celeſtial Bodies are
capable of Retrogradation, whereupon they meet rogether, ſometimes in
the Dire& Courſe Both, and other times in the Retrograde, and that for
the moſt part Alternately. And all this for the intereſt of the Change of the
Air, andies Variety; in as much as cheRetrograde P]ace is nearer to che
Earth (as before in 2. ) and therefore more forcible. This you will be-
lieve when you ſhall find that when they are in Conjun&ion, and both Re-
trograde (which had need come but ſeldom ) they make 4 Buſtle, tof
this elſe.rhere. In the more frequent Congreſles where there is a fingleRe-
trogradarion only 3 we meetwith weather ſometimes , I cantell you, ex-
tremealſ>, and every Second year two or three of thoſe Conjunctions, one
on che Neck of another. -Whence let the Aſtrologer note, that when ever
E curning ſhort, happens to ingeminate his Conjunction ia leſs than aMogths
time, as ofc-times he doth z there he may find reaſon to yeckon it a whole
continued Aſpect in all che intermediate Space, the whole Month becoming
his Quarter. |

Fr Who can chuſe but take notice alſo how theſe two Planets, when
in d do ſtact afide one from another 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. in Laticude, eſpecially
2, even ſomerimes to 7 degrees diſtance. And may not I obſerve, in fa+
vour of the Tychanique Syſieeee now, that this extraordinary ſtarting of. 2
doth always accompany her retroceſſion, thence conclude I that the one
may be as real as the other,bur the latter is not pretended to be ſolved by the
motion of the Earth, and therefore, I fancy not the former. |

S$ 37. But that which amazes me moſt is the enquiry after a Revo-
lutionwhena d 2 © ſhall happen in the fame Sign , on the ſame gay of
the year near the ſame degree, {o that © and 2 and ? ſhall all chree lodge
In a Bed; As Feb. 1. Anno 1663. Grad. 22. of Aquary. When ſhall it be {0
again > Perchince hap it may, but with no chain of Revolution. -2 returns
in $ years, 2? in 13. the » in 19. becauſe their Dance fis meted our to
them; bur 2 and 9 with the © cannot eafily meet again till they have run
out their firſt undertaking; wherefore Artiſts that tells us the one. Kepl,
Epit. Afr, VI. Cap. 5. are filent in the other. ;

$ 38.Ar lengch we have done, and preſented the Reader with what we
have to ſay, not any Dreams of fanciful Men, but honeſt Lectures of watch-
ful Obſervers of che great Folio of Heaven, to whoſe Creator from the
conſidering part of the World at leaſt (for 'tis time to cloſe) all —_ for
ever, to which I hope theſe Speculations do contribute, CHAP:


"=


CAA P.IV. Conjantion of Sol and Mars.


$ 1.Trenſction.'. 2. & of a ſore Influence. 3. Tivegas, a quick, ter-
_  rible Planet, of old _ Plato explained. 5. Notwithſtan
1. ding the /Planet is no Bug-bear. 6. Dronghts prodigious, not fre-
. quent. 7. Nor raging diſtempers. 8. Crvility to Irnth » though a
Stranger. 9. A Star) Hot and dry with the Arabs: 10. But al-
ſo inclined to Wet in our opinion. 11. Dry, it may be, but not abſ0-
Imtely ſuch. 12. Some cauſe aſſigned of droughty Rao under this
Configuration. 13. Aptitude to Storm, & 's prime Natural Influence,
14 His flow motion prevents the frequency of his quarelling. 15. g
in. unlgar ſpeaking , hotter than the Sun it ſelf, and more Turbulent;
16. Objetion to that. 17. Anſw. The Dire# Ray with the Reflex;
is more than the Dire@& alone conſider d. 18, 19. FroftyWinters, 8
imder this AſpeF. 20. Are no blot 'in the Martial Eſcocheon;
21. The & proclaims the Planetary Inclination in hard Winters, for
. the time more thana d. 22. the Violence of the Aſped by the kind-
.. 1neſs of Providence is not ſo frequent as thoſe among the Inferiours.
: 23. Therefore in vain do we ſeek for Drowghts, to prove our Aſpeits
\ CharaFer. - 24. The Martial Heat is viſible in Droughts to Senſe, in
-* Storms ' ard Winds, viſible to Reaſon. 25. A fogg y Morn in Stm-
mer, ora ſhowry day infer Heat. 3 acknowledged to tonduce to Fog.
*:26. Evidence of Wet. 27. Brevidte of. the Diary Pefery hand conc,
-. Wet.. 28. Benefit of a Prolix obſervation... 29% -Superiour Planet
,.. ſlow, but: ſure; © 30. Argument to prove our AſpeF goncerned in the
\ Wet. 31.. and'in the Fog.. . 32. The modern Aſtrologers avow Wet in
'. aqueoms Signs ut leaſt, our Opinion of their Method. * '33. Remain-
er of the Breviate. 34. Search into Natural Textnre, imricate,
Fog, &c. imputable to onr AſpeF. 35. The nicety of Nature in ſnow,
Generation of Hail belongs to ©d. 36. Prognoſtic not evacuated by
the confeſt intricacy of the Contemplation. 37. The large Diary.
- . 3B... Mars is malignant Planet. 39. A Forreign miſcellany Table
of the Aſpeits effes. 41. The Violence of Mars more clearly ſhews
it ſelf in the following Configuration. 42. Something of C omets.
43- Storms. 44. Blaſts ſcorching and burning. 45. An eſſay to the
cauſe of the Currents in the Ocean:


$1, 09 have we done with thelaferiours and their matches amongſt them-

ſelves; Let us now ſee the iflue of an inferiour match'd fome-
times, with a Superiour Houſe, # h Y,the Firſt of which in order of nature
and our method is Mars.

S 2. The Planet Mars through all Ages paſt hath been reckoned one of
the Grazdes in Etherial Regions, of a ſore Influence , and thoſe ill con-
ſequences that are wont to take place under Hot, Dry, fervid Conſtitutions.

S 3. The Truth is, if chat helps, it looks Red and Eery, whoſe Name
of . Old was therefore nue/«;, in Plato's Trmeus, and the Modern Hz
brews addicted alſo to Aſtrology ; after the Heathens, have learned to call
him S>x2 from the ſame Rea, Frery hue.

9 4. But there is more 1n it than the Luſtre, there is the Operation and

Experi-


Conjunttion of Sol and Mars. _ Book 11,


a ﬀ a<se Av wc a A Lo. > kk ac wa ar. Oo = ans Cu «© =


A 289Þ ca ai A-<@ R #@ aan cooc&4 @ am as


ed EW. Þ& od.


Chap. IV. The. Planet I no Bug-Bear. | 195


Experienceoft That, the Fervors that ilue trom thencen Spring and Sum-
mer Seatons : For ſo Cicero long ago in bis excellent Book & Nat. Deoure,
having occafion.to deſcribe the Planers, faith of our prelentPianer, Meds
Martrs [Stells]+ncendit, Ignee arn:ntsfque ratuye , (aith, Plizy, the Mouth.
of all his Antiear Predeceflors. /4ve-us ppt; faich Parphyry, Martis Stella
rapax, A Rampant Star, faith another. Frepert. the Aſtrologer in Eucix;'
Tug; 6 flagrante minact Scorpton 11cenars canda, &c. becauſe nt is reckoned
our Planers Houſe 3 whence F772! ali mxkes the Sign or Afterif Stor
pius to be Argens, for Mars's ſake. Bur Tally in the fore<ciced Book, ſaith
of Mars, thatheis Terrible, Rutlus hoverbilifque terres,and Macrobius from-
him 3 which is the Higheſt and fulleſt Teſtimony, though all the precedent”
incend as much, wherein the Philofophers (for tuch was Cicero) pronouns?
ced his own Sentiments and the Ages, without any cautelous reſtriior of
ut aicitur , ut ferunt , and yet not over Credulous to believe every idle re-
port 3 nor in matter of Philoſophy would he have took Plato's Teſtimony
2lone, ( though that alſo is not withaur irs Weight,- as founded on the ex-
perience of Agesprecedent.) had not the following Ages from Plato down-
ward to Cicero's ume agreed in: their Suffrage: Bur Plato talks higher -of
(5&5 & onnie » Which gave occaſion to Fwily's expreſſon, What Fears
you will ſay 21 anſwer,: agreeadle to his Hor, rampant. CharsQer, long
2nd. contumacious Droughts, and Wants. of..:Rain, where: all Verdureby
the immoderacy of aton', 1s parc d& and burnt 3' Lavg ors and Fain-
tings, Feavers a f2g100S7 at CErtain Years depoputatirig Towns and
Cities by Peſtilence, which they actribme ro-the Angry'Heavens, aniong
the Planetsto'Mars, and to Syius among the:Fixed Stars. - All which Pre--
lemy recounts on the Charactrr of &', when in his Dominion, LENS.
$ 5. But ſure the noiſe could not have binfo loud, {ince no'Planet can
be always extream, but that overlooking the more temperate and remils in-


tervals, ine ſure to tranſmit the Fame of the more notable Exrefes
on!


my we, poot Poſtericy ! Believing and admiring thoſe rare
Events, are afraid of the conceived Damenioz of the Phnet,; becauſe we
think he is always ſuch as he is voic'd to be. Bur this Fear oughe to becor-
reed ; forit is eafiero bring, in leſs thanan 100 years, above a hundred
mercileſs Storms, which in their times happen in feveral'parts of the Oce-
an at New and Full ), and yet, for all that, Navigation, with Gods B&E'
ſing, goes proſperoufly on. Becauſe thofe Phaſes of the. » are not always
out of Humour, but for the moſt part ſend merry Gales to the Seamen; ye,
and ſometimes even a Calm. So that” howſoever the: Antients have re-
preſented the Planet & for an ill -o24itron'd Creature, it is not to be un-
d@itood , but that like our Exgzlib Maſtives , they may be ſeen to fawr:

ſometimes upon the Stranger, and have thename of a gentle Creature.
' 9 6. For asfull as the Antients are of the definition, the Meadows and
Paſtures are not always parch'd into a Defart, nor the Graſs Crumble un-
der our Feet ;* Tis not. always the Men or Carttle languith and dy forThirft,
whoſe Watring places have forſaken their Valleys, whoſe Rivers are ex-
alred into a Fuliginous 4tmoſphere : There are but few Inſtances in any parc
of the World of Foreſts Fired by hear Celeſtial; ſome there are, I granr;
beſides, the Story couched under the Tale of Phaeton, as Enſebtus re-

cords it. ne

9 7. Nor do the ſad Revolutions of Peſtulential years always perplex the
Inhabitants of the more intemperate Climes , the more indebred is the
World to a Gracious Deity , that Infinite Intelligence-that moves the
Spheres in ſuch Harmonions Meatures, whole harther notes are often inter-
rupted by Paufes and Reſpete1 ;, yea, and a more equa} wean 5 not too
High, nor roo Low. Belides that, we who live in more Temperare
Eee Chmes


&F not abſolutely dry. . Pook Ti


Climes, are often refreſhed with Rain and Moiſture, and fann'd with coo-
ler Winds iſſuing from thoſe priviledged places, the North parts, thoſe
Purlzws of Heaven, where Planers in cheir greateſt Amplicude- never yer
dare ſhew their Head; where. Clouds obnubilaring the Face of Heaven,
{hall skreen the Sun from us, ang cool Water ſhall be caſt into our Faces,
leaſt we faint. |
$ 8. Bur here's the inconvenience now, we are apt to queſtion all Authors -
tyof our Fore-Fathers, becauſe Ged hath ſeated us #etter than thole Nati-
ons, whole great Obſervers have. teſtified the Truths they have experien-
ced. But can we believe no Trath but whatwwe ſmart under ? Muſt we
not be convinced of the Peft:lextial Infection, till: we are ſnatched away by
the Contagious Converſe ? I have known ſome ſo ſceptical, but they gor.
nothing by it. . If Truth bea Stranger to us, as ſcmetitnes 'ris, 'ris a part of,
Civility to own and entertain a Stranger, as knowing not of what deſcent:
hemay be. Muſt I be uncivitto a Perſon becauſe I am not known to him ?
Who is ſo happy as to be acquainted with all Truths ? He muſt be ſure of.
all PerfeRions,: and have lived: in all places, who can pretend to it. Say:
we, then what is & to us? How Powertul is his Ray or Aſpect ? |
Sg. Truly the fame, perhaps, as with the Antients, a ko and gry Star,
the Antient definitions run moſt upon Droughe,, and make nomeation of,
Rain ſcarce\(we had that it ſeems. under 2 and .? ) and ſcare the Arabs Ta-
ble ſpeaks of Dryth thronghoutevery Sign,-valtus calor Siccrtas aeris,only MM
excepted, and there he will allow us a little manfture , Al;um. apud Eſcuid,
$-10. Now though there be ſome pece/ity of aſſerting G' tobe Friend eo)
Moiſture, as before we have pronounced, Lz6. 1. c. 9. 9 3r. Seeing experi-
ence gives it (inowr Latitude atleaſt): yea ſeeing the Elevation or Mamareth.
of © above 6; brings a competent Moiſture (though the Elevation of &
above ©: ay will have to be droughty ) in the Arabs Tale ; laſtly, ſeeing
Ptolemy himfelf excludes not all Wet, but ſuppoſed Viol f Wind and)
Dalkiogs ( 6453845; his Word ) which muſt imply ſome ce (25 in our?
Loxds Parable of Rain, Floud): when. joyned with s 3/ 7-4 us» 3univo5c rof
ſay nothing of Thunders, which draw in Wer alfo , yet this norwithRan-:
ding I muſt canton that even in our Dropping Northerly Latitude, & ap.


pears ſtill a drying'kind of Planer (as theCourſe:of Nature goes,and Art re-
res no further ) abo , I mean, many times with more days of dry
than wet. - For take our 10-ſaſar Table, and compare it with our'


Home-Evidence of 2 and ? , and the Obſervations ſhall ſeem. as if they
were taken in different Climes, a Dry and a Moiſt, a Northern and Sox-
thern. 'Tisa piece of Entertainment to obſerve the difference. For view
our next large Table, too large, but that ic isin order to ſettle the Notion
and Definition of this Signal Aſpect, where {ome difhculty meets us, and
you ſhall find Dry, Gloſe Weather, and Fog and Hear prevail, only ſome-
times again it mak
Thunder, but ſcarce toequal the Moiety of the many days compriſed in the
Table, or if ſo, far be ſure from the Fecundrtyot 4 and 2 , who have gor
= name for the moiſt Aſpects, and if our Tables be noe vain, de-
erve it, 8-7

S 11. But I can never be brought to ſay, as dry as & is, that He is ab-
ſolutely dry, that he refiſts Moiſture, or contributes to Serenity ; I find
him (© often at a cloſe Air, which dry, though it be, berokens his Months
Mind to ſomething of Moiſture, though he muſt not, as Providence will
have it, always accompliſhe it. ,

9 12, For verily when we meet with an expreſs drouehty time, as Ay,
1667. where the Trees in the Gladome Month of May, looked of a Fu:il.
l:-ae-Mort-Colgur. So 47. 166g. when Rain was deſired in 7uxe, vea
the


es a ſtart intoa Storm or Daſh with High Winds, or ©


my cw ry ao Am wv Wy oc mh


LIO%_


Chap. 1V. #' Aptitudeto Storm. More hot than the ©.


127


the laſt year, * Ano 1684, whea all che Leaves in Summer time hang ſhri:
veld on the: Trees, when poor Cartel were at their Ghr:fmals Fodder, the
ſcorched Graſs preſenting all the bald places of the Earth, I find no fault in
our Aſpect, bur the ſame Remora, or Suſpender of Moiſture, viz. Þ and
2 in the Sign immediately preceding. in both the#Former years 3 and the
mmmediate Vicinity of h V.; Anno 1654. as will be deciar'd in due place ;
fo that we may ſolve it thus, Dryth - and Serenity when the Aſpect is not
diftra,Dryth with an aptitude to Storm when it is-prohivited by ſome coun:
terpoile. | |

$ 13. For an aptitude to-Storm muſt be:altowed to &, and for all as I
know, its przxe natural Iiflwence, ſeeing we are willing, and can ealily ſolve
the contrary appearances, moſtly taken notice of by the Antients, becauſe
of their Hot and'Dry Clime,' and the like.

9 14. For we muſt remember that & is a ſlow-paced Planer, and goes
along with the @,near upon,as 2 doth;ſo that within 5 degrees of each {ide


of the 4 (andT could not allow leſs ) he ſpends a Month at leaſt before he :


is unconcerned with the @. ' Now <& and” 2 would be little Exrtes, if eve-
ry time they met with the Sun, they ſhould gothing but drench the World
with waſhing Rains , or hurry the Atmoſphere with Stormy Winds, or er
the Air on Fire with Meteors fora Month together, Providence hath wiſe-
ly ordered that in that Interval there ſhall happen «arzety of the Conſtitu-
tion, and State of the Air, for Her great ends, unleſs perhaps a FErxed
Month we think of ; but the Monch which we confider is wagrart, and
runs through all the Seaſons of the year, as in the. Table will appear. +

9 15. How Dry Bodies, as all Lucid Bodizsare,ſhould prodace Drought,
s no hard Problem. Bur our Celeſtial Bodies mult be confider'd not by
themſelves as in the Ztherial Region, . for there they produce nothing but
dry Effects, Comets ſuppoſe, &c. ſuirable ro their Emanatiens : Burt they


muſt be conſider'd as Inſtruments to move the Inferiour Regions of the Air, ,


filled wich Vapour and Exhalation 3 and fo, .dry though they be, they can
produce moiſture, ſomewhat like a dry thaw. after a hard Snowy Winter,
producetha Floud, oe 0 SEES

s$ 16.Hence I ſurmiſe that & himſelf under-thisNotion of an Inſtrument, is
tot the occaſion of Drought, bur as deſtitute of. Able Friends, or impeded
by ſome other Cauſe, which we ſhall evidence in Y, ſappolſe, or by indif-
poſition of the Clirfſe ; Thus, All that Tract of Land or Sea under the
Torrid Zone, where 'tis known Rain cometh but at one: or two Months of
the year , Treckon is generally Indiſpoted, whoſe reaſons are nor here to
be diſplayed. And thus &' comes to be ſafamfd abroad for Drought, &-c;
$ $1714 of old, which in our remoter Clime isnot © terrible. |

9 17. For & his Heat in Summer Seaſons, and el{twhere, we have, be-
fide his Tokens of blue Smoky Miſt, Lightning, TrajeCtions,e*c. an expreſs
of above an 100 days, and what more might have bin juſtly noted. Yer I
muſt not,nor doth our own Diary ſeem to give leave,that I ſhould crow af-
ter cheAnrients,and ſay that d' is hotter than ©,leaſt I ſhould pull theWorld
about my Ears; butl fay 'tis, (in vulgar way of ſpeaking) a more violent
Star than the Sun it it ſelf, This will be proved not only inthis, but alſo in
the enſuing Chapters. |

$18, This raiſes expeRation, which we will endeavour to ſarisfie,when
we have ati{wered one Objection, Firlt, that *tis abſurd ro make a Reflex-
ion, a Minor Planet more Potent than the Major. 21y. That 'tis uncertain
whether ourPlanet hach any ſuch heat or no; Tor if fo, we ſhould not(fure)
find Hard, Sharp, Froſty, Cold Sealons, whenfoever our violent Planer is
conjoyned to the Sun.
9 29. Tothe Firlt z 'Tis abſurd if we conſider the Reflexion by its re

ingly


OC OI Io


_— 98 Froſty S eaſons rare + dod. 5 Book II.


ſingly, and disjun& from the Direct : Bur if we. ſuppoſe the Direct Radia-
tion, as in Nature it doth, then Two is morethan one, the Direct and the
Reflex is greater than the Direc alone : So in vulgar ſpeaking (as we (ay
ſometimes , the Son is Finer than the Father, whereas all the Finery he
wears comes out of the Fathers Purſe) dis a more violent Star, becauſe
higAſpects with the 2 7 are-more violent than thoſe of the © with the
fame. How comes thavto now , unleſs &'' may be violent? Thus a Con-
junction of & and 2 latently includes ©. - A-d © 2 doth-notinclude 4,
wherefore if Three be more than two, a d & 2 is greater thana &d © 9,
This in {tri Philoſophy may. not be ſaid; ſeeing the Mzzor hath its Ener-
' oy from the Major 3 but for Doctrines fake we ſuppoſe & to be as it were
ſai juris, independent of the Sun.
$ 20, To the 24. we ſay, Let's ſee them, let's ſee the Froſts, they are
not more than what are found under 4 @Yk, or d©2, and yet they
_ were Spit-Fires, Thunderers and Flaſhers, had
and Violences too, | .
* $21, We ſee One or Two in our own Diary, let's ſee the Reſt ; Firſt,
To run back no. further <_ King Henry the Eighths time, Azz 1536,
We are told that Ice on the Thames hindred the Kings paſſage at Greenwich,
Dec. 24. while '$'is within gr. 2. or 3. of his Syzygie.
* Anno 1598. Dec. 1. ad diem 11. Thames nigh froze at London Bridge;
the Froſt began, for all asI ſee, witha d @&d in 2 Dec. 1.
\ Anno 696. -From Dec. 21. Three Weeks Froſt, preſently after-the Par-
tile d of & and ©, Ayr. , ,

Anno 1662: TheThames caked with Ice in 4 Nights, de 31. and was ſcarce
paſſable; and this within two\days of the Partile as is feen in theTables;
-  Anno'1665, The end of February, and part of March, Froſty Weather!
commenſuratsto.the d © & in X 24. This Froſt is memorable from the
Dire Peſtilegce-enſuing 3- ſo that we need not marvyail at ſome ſtricture of
Froſt occurring in our Sept. Amo 1658. In Novemcb. 1660. In May 1667. In
O8. 1675. in our Fables, for.the Caſe is plain, 4 burns ſometimes with 4
Cold Iron. 4 IE | |

S 22, *Tis fo, but doth this take from the Martial Influence any more,
than you ſee it doth prejudice the Solar to admit Froſts, ſharpand redious ?
Afﬀtrologers do uſually ſpeak,of Debilities : All 7 wy in Winter Signs
are but in a lowTcondition as to o#therz ite, ſo rMiore from the Winter
Tropick : the Setting Sun is weak and cool as a Glow-Worm. and Planets in
the Winter Tropic are ſetting even at Noon (as it were ) by their near ap-
proach to the-Horizon. Apply this to & and thereſt ; as in the Winter
ap Muſcovy, £nno 1681, when the Poli Souldiers ſuffered by the Cold,
Calviſ. All the Planets were in deep Winter Quarters. Howbeit, even

" thus 1n his Weak Eftate our t bears, fome Teſtimony to himſelf by
nows amongſt the Froſt, or by Remiſhon of the Cold, which may be
worth an Obſervers notice , when the -Pladding Countryman overlooks
* ſuch Viciftitudes of Nature, if thort and temporary ; For foI hope none
can ery cous the cruel Winter noted by Geazma, Anno 1568. Secuta ef,
(ſaith he) Hyems aſperrima, but he ſpeaks of no great Froſt until the middle
of ' March, which concerns not a i'd celebrated ten Weeks before, And
what was-the Aſperity ? Winds and Rains, Churches ſtrook with Light-
ning, and Floods, az. 3. before our 4 was expired. No, nor that of
September, 1590. which was, faith Stow, a very cold Month with Snow
nd Sleet 3 bur the ſame Morſth brought Wind, Rain, Lightning and Thun-

er; tO _ for the d.

S$ 23. Addthat theſe cold Examples are very rare, and that the 4 © 4
commonly brings milder Winter Air, fo as whenſoever Froſt appears, you

may


—


their Heats and Droughts,


.


MEOSESS


2 Fey thiw-s


—_! > qa T 5H OG we


TT 2 0 FRE bb B CRAIIoA RA


=> i."


Chap. IV. Gmc. a cold Aſpett. 8 Aſpeft not ſo frequent, why. 1 9, |


may obſerve that is at a diſtance from tiie Sun about a Sign, or two or
rhree , &c. wherein if Communication be nengent z Which keeps it
our, the Cold breaks in 3 not. but that the diſtant Aſpects have their Force,
he Som, Luagrate, &c. but they are not fo Potent , nay, nor fo durable
as & or ®, |
' $24. In this caſe then the Oppoſition more than the Conjun#ion proclaims
the Planetary Heat, in as muchas an oppoſal of 9 and the © very ſeldom
fails of its warm thawing Breath. Put the @ in the Wiater Tropique,
and let & face him in theSummer, though the Planer fo poſited ſhall bo id
under the Earth, you ſhall ſee what Fire he will ſave you on a Winters day;
whereas if & be about the 2x7ncunx of So!, a Sign diftant from the Op-
poſitional Line, he is in a chill poſture , and fo found in thoſe Froſty days
or Seaſons, which happen at that determinate time, ſome abitement being
reckoned for the Northern {fide of our Clime. #4
S$ 25. The Planet may be violent in his hour for all this, and is it nor


© upon that account that the Divine Goodneſs hath retarded his Motion;that


his Configurations with the Sun, and other Planets, the » excepted ,
bein® leſs frequent, the World ſhould be lefs diſtracted > Suppoſe
therefore we ſhould allow (which indeed we cannot ) that Great Br:tarr ,
our dear Country , &c. felt -not» the Smart of this Aſpe, if other


- Countries do, the Divine Superintendency hath irs end. - For God is not 4


God of the North only ; He takes care even for thoſeLarlds which theHoly
Phraſe ſeems to ſay He rakes no care of. / .

- 26. Hence if & doth not cauſe Drought in our Northern Climes, but
when obſtructed by. ſome difearingnllgrace, &c. 'Tis not for us to muſter
up.a Barren ym, > of Hears and Droughts (when Heat ſeems moſtly to
domineer) as our Friend E:ch/tad hath done in his hot July, Anz 15 g6. Hot
Auguſt 1592. allo September 1594. and Ofober 1596. a Remiſſion of Cold
noced in December : Then skip to a hot Juxe, Arno 1605. and July 1607.
Not that we queſtion the Truth of the Tollimony, - but becauſe he brought
it no further, when he wrote about 4»0 1636. for the demand will be, as
he ſaid in the like caſe, where are the Names of the Shipwrackt Seamen
who are not hung up in the Tables of Neptumes Temple > Why isnot the
year 1609. 1611. and ſo on,mentioned to make up & his Triumph > _.

s 27. We therefore chuſe to conſider & his Heat, dry and Wet if dry
thea *tis plain to Senſe; if otherwiſe, to Reaſon. For who knows not;
that after a Storm of Rain in Summer, if the Sky clears up, we find a hot
Day 3 the Traveller confeffing that *tis Hor after the Rainy fo far, that if

intenſe Heat he finds the Groundto dry apace, He progpolticares
more Rainto ſucceed ; yea, that this proves .all the year long; exTept where
Froſt brings Serenity 3 if a Wet day clears up, 'tis Fine and Watm, ex-
cept, yea imes; al beta cool Wind blows. | |

s 's If we muſt allow ts a Summer Fog; we gatialory it if-pro-

rtion, ro. Wert: A Foggy morning introduces Heat and Drought: A wet
M ing clearing op culcp ers Heat and Floating Clouds : That you ſhall
not queſtion & his Warmth, you ſhall find that he caufeth both. (at timgs )

et and Fog, according 2sT gind it es up a piece of-the Character in
e Modern Aftrologers,. 4rgol. &c. which I wonder .at, becaufe it {a-
ours of Novel Experience. -Bur by their favour, I muſtfiere ſay as before
of Drought, that & with us caufes no Fog, but. when debilicated or reſted;


Sis Grazomzed Large, Heis lor pogrring Que his Ioflgence on fuch
| wW


wres or Storms; which, by their Kxcels and Over-dojng bear, his


uf ay: Will the Reader thersfote be pleaſed toride Poſt with me through
| et


For that is the next enquiry from year to year.Raihn with ſtore, and
——


200


& aluſty Friend to moiſture, Slow, but ſure. Book II,


whatever ſays the definition:Verily;4zzo 1652. - Fw ſhall find Show-
ty, V. days together, juſt about the preciſe time of our Aſpect. In 7aly 1654.
VI. days together, to the Prejudice of Hay-Harveſt. In Auguſt, 4»; 16 56.
die 17. Rain powring, 7 #ane, & ate toto. Showres daſhing 4 days together
die 10, 11, 12, 13. belide what more. In September, Anno 1658. Wet and
Coaſting Showres VI. days together. Die 26. Rain for 3 hours, andthe
wholeNight following to © riſe, and.ſo along. |

s 30. Or had he rather ſee the Breviate of our enſuing Table, Thus f


preſent it.
—— Days re inSum 584. of which we find,


Rain, Snow or Hall. 30T. Evemng G — I 2,
Whereof ſofter Rains, — —38. | Noow-tide — — ——; 3.
Immoderate. —t— ——65. Winds. ———— — ——169;
Showres with ſome briskpeſs. —143: | Whereef with Storm and Fury, g7. .


Mornize. ———


$ 30. Here ſee the Benifit of a Prolix Obſervation: Others may repent
it, 7 their Pardon; I cannot. We muſt obſerve as much at home
2s the Antients have done dbroad, if we mean to pronounce : Otherwiſe
we make Science qontemptible; and reduce Books to Waſt Paper, (for Lo


ounow !)
" 32. If our Argument from the Moyety be any thing,our Planer, to then


who will calculate his Influence with poultry and Patience, will prove as
we would have it, a Friend to Wet 3 for 3
which Sum our Total bears ſhort. A Friend I can tells you , and 2 lufty
Friend too, whoſe Vote paſſes for more than a ſingle one; the Modern
Aſtrologers therefore have got it by the-end that he is a wehement Planer.
For is he not a Superiour ? Remember we are- come among the Swperiours,
Inferiours are quick and nimble. Where if'one poſition will not do, ano-
will, the Superioufs are not _in-ſfuch Haſt, they are /ow', bur ſure l
So have I ſeen aGraraas in theAir,fuming as it went along in a ſullen Glence,
and at laſt break and tear all if aThouſand Pieces. And have we here no Vi-
olence? We have 61 immodierate Rains , and 97 violent Winds. If my
Eriendly Reader pleaſeth to contract the Table, by ſelecting their Places
he will find the Violent. Fits and Goncuſions of Nature , at home ant
from abroad, ſome, as the Intelligencers came to our Hands. |
s 33. He will find the Finger of our Aſpect from the Critical hours, not
only as ta the Luſtre of our Aſpet, which paints the Clouds Red in the
Weft, 5 or 6 times, yea to the Mid-Heaven twice or thrice, to the Eaſt it
ſelf from the Weſtern ſerting, croſs the whole Hemiſphere Five or Six times.
Bur further as to its Rainy or Bluſtering Faculty,fince you ſhall findShowres
at Noon, Showres in the Morn, but moſk of all Rain in tlie Eyening or ©
ſer, 20 times. Add that the Continuance,the- Duration ſpeaks the Author, as
we have obſerved before in @and 2, lince- & / as wehave ſaid, as well as
'A% moves al ith the © for ſeveral days. |
$ 33. Andthowe reckon {6 undoubred, that'we are not aſhamed to (iy
thatthisis viſible even in the Debility, when we ſee a Miſt or Fog in the
Morn, and the like again at Even. The Noon-tide is not ſo capable of


it, we man after an interruption, if the Winter Fog hold above half the .


day, 'Tis another caſe. This-we rather mention, becauſewe contend not

ith the Antients here, burwe with them avo heis Dry,even here in the
Northern Latitude, in that he is fo affected, when in his Debilicy, when
not aſſiſted enough by ©, or the reſt of his Brethren, - - -


$ 34. Here


r 301. 15a good Moyety of 600. of WW


OY, M_Y- of VR A CI PIPT  ES


Chap. IV. Watry Signs. Darkteſs Nature nice. 3 for Hick


s 34. Here ler me ſhelter my (elf under the Modern Artiſts, that.I may
not ſeem fond of Paradoxes in the Fundamentals of che Theory. They ac-
knowledge the Dryth of the Syzygie, and they acknowledge the Wet,
only they come off more eafily than I can do, and according to the recei-
veddifference of Watry 'Signs, and Fiery , which diſtinction I with could
do, yea, or that, which with ſome ſeems to carry more reaſon, that in
Spring and Autumn it brings Winds, in Summer Thunder and Hail, in

inter remiſſion of Cold. I fear my Diary, as Prolix as it is, will ſcarce
juſtifie ir, no more then that it brings Darkneſs in Airy Signs, or Signs
Bicorporeal, where as it brings Darkneſs, well aſſiſted, in places near
the Tropic or Equinox, be the Signs of what Diviſions they may ; But I
commend them when they tell us roward his Dryth, that & being combuſt
abateth che Moiſture. Ofr-rimes 'tis ſo,and we have advanced ſome Reaſon
why not he alone, but others alſo may do the like in ſuch a caſe, wheri .
not aſſiſted, becaule a d , to whichthe Combult Planer haſtens, pretends ro
Cold as well as Heat ſomerimes, and by parity of Reaſon to Dryth ; as


well as Wet.
$ 35% The Remainder of the Breviate runs thus. | .
Thunder.———— —— I6, Goſſamere, EY —  ,
TrajeFtons,— —12, | Cold.=— - 18
Mi. = 33. | Cold Wind. _—— —_— di
Blew ſmoke. 9. | Hail ——— cnc e—_
Fog groſſ.,—— —— - 58. | Froſt, ————— a—_
* M:ft Morn. —T12. | lea, wth the days not ſpecified, perhaps.
Fog Morn. —— ————————-36. | as 60,
og Proen. _— EINE» Snow. | — ——_—6;
aq MP. . | Gloſe . —__————— Tz;
Fla, - ——6,


$ 36. All hich premiſes weare to reckon for on the accoutit of 3, and
the different approaches of the Planrs be.


, whether they are imputable to
fore us, and to the various and almoſt unſearchable intermixture of all the
VII. which make a ſeveral Text»re , as it were, of the Heavenly Bodiesz


We are not ambitious to define exactly, ſeeing all enquiry into. Textures is
intricate z But as far as we may without oftenration, we ſay that Cloſe '


Air ſhews an aptitude to Moiſture, Fog being a Participantof both Dryth
and Moiſture ,” may d on our Aſpect-in his different modification,
iccording as it is grofſer or Thinner , more Pal, or more Smoky, Lower
or higher z Ground-Miſt I find.under this A , is anicety 3 Graſs Miſt
ſpeaks a Counterpoiſe, or Defect, or both 3 a Blew Smoky. Miſt favours
, from whence it may draw its Empyreum , In all the differtac e of the
Soil, which contributes much always to be regarded. |

- $ 37. Asto froſt how it may happen even under this or any d, we liavs »
Cleared the difficulty. The Snow: which occurs under this Aſpe& in Winter
Months, ſhews how nice a thing Nature is, which can freez,. and diffolve
the frozen Vapours by Inches, and Scruples, diſſolve the Continuity, and.
yet keepup the Langeanen , whereas ore would think ;-what doth tie
- 08, ſhould do theother , the Vapour being of ſo rare, almoſt a perſpicyons
ſe the Prolixity of the


Confiſtence. As to Hul..let the Obſervation excu
Table, without which we: d have believed only, and not ſeen'the


Truth of che Aftrologers Dictate, that © and & contribute,” whether Por
ſe or cum aliis, Let us nggnow efiquire) co the Moulding of that Pellet. |
$ 38. For though we {aid @ennow thatthe enquizy into the Texture, &


202 Hazl, when to be expetted. 8 © Dary. Book 11.
Niceties of Cauſes, our part is intricate, we had regard only to the Ful]
Comprehenſive Knowledge of the Object, not Evacuating , our deſign in
the leaſt, which muſt content it ſelf here witha proportional part of ſuch
abſolute Knowledge ; I cannot comprehend which mixture will produce a
Fog, or which is.much more difficult, create a Hailſtone ; but Iobſerve
that both Fog and Hail, and Froſt, &c. apppear not ordinarily but when
there is a diſcontinuation of Signs poſſeſſed, or when only III or IV. Signs\
are occpuied, never when V. Now for our | &#

Large Diary of d © ad gr. 5. Inervall..
| —_ _—_ , _—_ moiſture. $'w.
' X ouds ride crol; black at n.
1672. T. 13, May 28. \ fore ſhown. __ x Ys ”" -
. - Clouds, cr » CrOPPINg,
* "A die 4. ad Fun. T4. + {| XXIIL Hail, rain a luc. wind very varia-
VIIL Windy, miſle, ſo at n. Sw. | ble. ;
X. Clear, windy. S, | XXIV. Very cold wd, ſhowring.
XIII. Wind and R.-at n. N, | XXV+-Set to rainat n. N W,
XIV. Windy, rainy, miſt and wd atm, N. | XXVI. Cold wd, inconſtant ſhowring, N ww,
s XV. Miſly m. H. windp. m. N E. | XXVIL R. Sun riſe. and ſome wer m.
XVI. Windy, clear. - NE. | X.R.arn.
XVII. Whire Froſt, clear, windy. N E,
Ho Fog at n. - E. = ——
XN m.-
XXV. Mift m. windy, cloſe, lictle rin ar 1656. mM 3. Aug. 16,
Wn N.
XXVII. XXVIM. XXIX. XXX, Showr Y. So | , « ,
ar n.d. XXVL XXVIL) ( PIT Ab Ang. princ. ad finem,
Fen. IV. H, wind; NE. | © Windriſe 8 m. blew miſt, red cl, © oce.
V.Clear, H. wds— - - hs | INE. ; II. Hor
VII Windy. N. | i Hot, red'wd, fmoake-flies. gW, wa N w.
VILE. Rain, windy. N. | '1-Foggy, very hot, blue miſt, S.W.
Ix.X. ; ſhowrs N. d. 9. $ W. d. 10, Iv. White Fr. foggy extream hot , _—
\ ; - _ V. Very Hit, blew mift, wmd.S w. ſmokes
| vi very han; what hich Þ. a. ew at
| | . 5 p. m. view muUt, SW,
1654 . S 27. Fuly 10. VII. Wind no. tor, ſ. drifle aye Z. H. wds @
A Jun, 2 4 Ful. 27; vill. Miſty "VI SW
. . . m. rains $ .
XXV. Wind and cl. Rai SW |1x.s ind; a
XXV1. Fine Bas Hear, oe Aw 91 Lorena? Sraambns © -
XXVIL Hor, heavy air, { Th.ſhowrs. SE- NW" | x.-H. wds, daſhing of rain 9.m. & 2», *
—_ CoA of R. with ſome Thunder , XL H. webs lbs frac gm. 0.cloud y 1
vale I i NE. | XII. m. R. hard elſewhere, (4
XXX. H. wds, cold , C. drops. N, XIIL Showring and fore of wet.
Fal. 1. Cold, R. wds. NE. | XIV. Winds, {. miſle; R. ro p. S W
IJ. Winds. . | | XV. Rainy x mu. winds $. ſh.H, wd tn, $ wW
TM. Winds ſomewhar gigh, C wet. NE. |*XVI. H. winds, miſty, red-clds at even. ©
IV. H. wd. N E. | XVIL R. powring R m. & die tor, lore of R.
—_ 7p miſt. R .. XFX. Miſtyiſh, Haloar n. q'
at i. . 2 : j
VIIL IX. X. Thunder ſhowrs. $ W. | XXL. Miſt very hoe Gale.
Hear, ſhowrs. NW. þ XX1It Great fop, y
Wind and ſhowrs. XXIV. Fogy very hot of wind r1
XIE. Inconſtanr h. binder hay harveſt. N W. | XXv1. H. Wds, miſty air. Pe
; H. wds, offer ro drop.
—_—_ ſenſible drops. S W. XXvVil Windy, warm, blew miſt, ; |
Fngmpdrp fn = Nw. | SIX. Windggpretry high , blew miſt, $ E.
n. rain little, N W. of 5 4 s


XX, S. tain ante lucem, warm, 3 drops. NW.


©& Home Dary. 203
Il. 2 ſeen 3d part of an*hour pſt © 0 |
1658. = 9. Sept. 22, = __ inclining to ——_ ON
* . oe, x”
V. Fog below, cloſe eve . hos
A Sept. 7. ad OR. 7. O55" a j

VIL Showres 3 m..5 m. dark, warmiſh. SE. | yr 5:41 of Rain SE. vari s

8 VII. Warm n. ſhowring 11 m. very warm Sly. | ry. Thaw, ſome d 1M. 'S EZ. various W.
od mn. 56 py ſtormy even, W,
IX. {. drops 8'm- very warm; dropping 5 p. » H. wind, ſtorm, Hail and R. . »
& 9 P. | SW, "A _ .
= lu —_ a 2 W: NT ndadand rele ; froſt; Hail and H. =d

X1. Hot, cloſe ; \. drops Thunder 3p. SW. | xi11. Cloſe mifi. PER, '

XII, Fog m. gentle winds 10 m. ſh. 1 p. 5 W. XIV. _ _ _ rain 2P. R,5p.N.s.

SE.}| Xy. Werrino mill I

XIII. R. 1 m. & a. m. ground miſt, N E. | XYL Windy lows: gx We

XIV.Miſt, cloſe rain 10 m. and ©, $ indy; lowring, W.

XV. R. a. m. very dark, warm. -

XVI. Wind _ wet 1 Þ- driſle 5 p, S W. Haber

XVII. Windy , ſtormy m.R.-2p.8p. Ely. | 1662,

XV1iI. H. wind, coaſting ſhowrs, wetving 0. ache. Dec. 24
ſh. 5 p. Nly. AD
þ XIX. Fr. fair 3 ſhowrs coaſt p. m. NW. 2 Lee, 5.4 Zan. I 3. 1663,

XX, (ir, m. coaſting ſhowrs R. and hor. E. V. VI. Froſty, fog. S.

N E. | VII, Froft, tog, ſnow m. p. S W.

XX1. H. wd, drop or two; Halo at n. Wy. [X. Fr. ſnow die tot, H. wd, drifle n. NE.

X X11. Coldiſh, Fila, f. miſt E. miſle 9 m. | X. Much ſnow ante L. hard weather,

wer til! 2 p. XI. Froſty, fog. SW.
XXIILF, drop: 0.and n. gentle rait 8 p.E. hi- XII. ſome rain p. m.

deous remp?# of wind 8 p. XIII. Fog,rain 6 ad 8 p, SW.
XXIV. War:n, loſe, miſle n. w, | XIV, Fog m. mild. SW.
YZXVI, H. wd no2. rot, red m, and eyen.warm XV. Fog, rain 1 p. &c. E, ®

R. 4. ad uſque 7 P. XVI. Rain m. p.night. Rain I p. & p. m. 5 p,

XXVIL Rs m. cly, red to the Eaft at n. E.

XXVLHIL. Fog, clear above, wind, warm, SW. H- RR Ely.

XXIX Halo, Þ warm, clds in Scenes ; ground | y;y Cold _ dy NW.

miſt ar n. | —_

XXX, Gr. H. wind and vehement blowing, = yr ut” py * S.

08.1. Warm ; drops 3 Fila. | XXIL Rain m. SBomers, I0 P.

WH. Wind, Filz , bluſh Eaſt, ground miſt. p "—- ppeny p. noe?. prec moiſt m. ſhowr 2
@ 111. Thunder , miſt, Fila ſtore. N E. | xx11 Fo, is P* and S,
' V. R. 4 m. dark; mifty ; wetting m. p. SW, XXIV. Fre ES _ X NE.

VI. Muddy air die tot. R. 8 p. very wet night Fir z fo ent. Ice an inch thick z

following. S W, Te

VII. Store of wer, abundance p. m. till 8 p. XXL ies, fog. ol.

nf SE. _ Snow ante Z, Cakes of tce in the
Iver. NE,.

ES _ _ — _ miſty.

.Cmiſling n. Thames ſcarce paſſable, SW*

1660, m 19. Nov. 1. 7an.l. 1663. Mild, warm miſt, miſly and wd,

IT. Mild, drifle 4 p. R. 9 p. 'S W.

Ab Ofob. 16. ad Nov. 17. HT. Mild, ſome drops, Rain 7 p. 8 p. 9 Pn;

XYL Coaſting fhowrs 5 p. wr, | IV. Rea. 1. Fair. ; W.

XVIL R. ane L. Fila. Nly. SW. V. Miſty, werting and windy 6. warm, 5 WY

NIX, Miſt below. VII. R. a. L. Fair not without Fog, .

XX. Fr. fog N W. at 0. E. _— - n. . SW.
XXII. Clondys windy. Nly. windy even; yer » LMICK FOg a7e fot. E,
"1, a E. 0
XXIV, Fr. fair, windy. S w. Nly. | XI. Fog, froſt, yielding. j
XXVI. Cold , windy, cldy; clear even, yer XII. X11. Foggy, froſty: E.

moiſt wind.. ; . 28g

XXVIL Dry, cold, windy ; Hail and rain t p. 2

TH " 4. March
X XVIII R. offer at R. cloudy, 1665; X 24. IMIArch 4.
XXX. Fr. clear, 2 ſeen plain half an ho,
XXX. Fr. miſt below about Horiz. [. rain » A Feb. g.ad Max. 28.
cloſe and moiſt even. IX, Fr. fair, wdy. W.
No, 1. Cloſe, windy, threatn, W | x. Wind, wet a. m. 5 p. 6 p. ſtormy ar Chel-
ſley reach, Ggg I, Scormy


Chap. TY.


EE


205 & © Home Diary. Book IT.
m. ſhowres 10 m, {XXX. Cold wds. N F,
XI. Stormy wd, and wet 4 PR 4 |
XII. R. ante L. ſhowring a. m. cold, wetting II. Troubled air o, ſerene p. m. WW,
and ſnowing SIy. | IIT. Sound ſhowr © ®- Rh 2m. E.
XIV. Temperate, wetting p.m. {. little ſnow, | 111. R. and hai! coaſting, eſpecially 1 P. 2 Þ:
» R6P5P- $4P-a. M,m P. Sun occ, Frees look'd yellow
XV. Snow ahd rain a. L. ſnow 5 P- W.| before for drought. NE,
XVI. Snow 1 p. {o veſp. . N. | 1y. Miſty, wetting, ſo o. :
XVII. Snow m.5s pÞ. _ N E. | y, Much ado to hold up. . ww»
XV1IIL Fog, ſnow and rain, fine thaw. Nh. | v1. Very bright, and cold ſtormy wind n. E,
RN, **, VII. Windy, ſhowring. Nly,
XX1. Offering ſnow m. IX. Warm, gentle wetring p. m. Sw


XX11. Offering ſnow 1 p. N E. miſt at n. X., Cold m. Showr of hail. at Kentiſh Town ,,
X XVIV. XXV. XXVL S E.|] m. ſtormy wind, C. rain 3 P- S E. Showr ,


XXVIL XXVIIL Very hard froſt, Ws © occ..
March 1. C 5ſe, not ines rm 1.t8.lome- | X1- Cloudy, windy.
m.an .IK. ; ;
Wy n_ wiy. | XII. C lictle werting © or. Wy.
III. Froſt, ſnow lies, vaniſhes, cold wind. E. XI. Cloſe m. p. L. werting 7 m. gentle wet-
Iv. Fr. cold wd, f. miſt. N. ring, H. wd © or.
V. Snow 2 m. till o. winter day. N. | XIV. f. ſhowr a. m. ſtormy wd , ſhowr P. Mm. |
VL Clouds in Scenes 3 nor ſuch froſt known in | XV. Windy, ſhowring a. m. Thunderclap. Wy.
March. XVI. Fog m. and cold ; hottiſh day. S,
VII.C. offer, ſnow 2 p- w. | XVII. Gentle werring a. nu. per 22, {© p. m.
VIII. Snow 4. L. gr. Flaques 0. H. dangerous | X VIE Wer, E. |
wd, cold ſnow ar n. S W. XIX., Cold wind. : Ely.
IX. ſnow a. L. Hail 4 p. ſtorm, ſnow 5 p. SW. | XX. Cloſe ſhowring 10 m. ſo 2 p. 4 Pp. wich )
X. Srorms, ſnow 4'P- S.| N—_— Ely. )
XI. Snow a. L. windy, wet 4 P- 9 P- E. | XI. Gufts of wd, ſhowring 10 m. NE. )
i NIT. Warm and welcome, wer a. m. SW. | XXIl. Warm, {. thowr 10 p, W. þ
X1I1. Warm, overc. and rain 4 Pp. S W.| XXII. Fog',m. dropping 9 m. and lowring
XIV.-Driſling 7 p-f. rain 9 p- TE I 4
driſle 7 p, R. I) MC. 0: W. "
XV. Warm rain 6 m. 7 P- $ x | XXV. Miſt m. hor, wy :
XVI. Warm" : -; XXVIL Foes hot ” y
XVII, H. wind, far, warm, "| XXVIIL Pe ; N. y
XVIII. Cloſe, miſty. E, Hot, {. wer, high winds, N, y
XIX. Miſt m. windy. N. XX. Cloſe. PLS # |
XXl1. Cloſe m. p. warm. IM D
XXII. Windy 10 p. | *| 1669. _ Fa F
XXTII. Storms of hazl o. ] N W. 9 J 9.24. © 12, $
XX1V. Wet m. 0. ſome wetting veſp, SW. A a; X.
RXV. Warm, driſle. Nly. ate 6. ad fuly 9. X
XVI. \. fog, cold. W. = VII Windy, Rainy gm. -- N. X
XXVIL {. ſhowr toward © occ. _ Nly. [ oi =_ _ warm , ſome wetting 8 p. |
XXVIIL. Warmiſh, W. lictle wetting eſp. | vc ” "=" OI | a
XI. Winds, ſhowr 11 m. Sly. X\
. S279. My8.%Y$LinVv, - Hor and fair p, m. W.
1667 7» NLAY O. % _ Hear bright Ground Mift. Wly. =
p - Fogm. hear o.
. W] 44 el 8. ad May 28- XVI, Hear, Overc. IO Þ. and, as1 choke 16
XVIII. Ground-Mifſt ante L. ſad drought. SW. Lightning ar midaight.


RX. Fog a. L. R occ. rain coaſting 1 p. W. XVII. Showr a. L. and 5 m. warm, ſome wer,

XXI1. Very thick fog m. brisk wd , and SW. Wly.

& Vetting 2 p. and welcome ar n. and blu- XVIIL Warm, pale miſt at n, W.
ſtring. XIX. Miſt, red wind, warm,


XXII Showrs and bluſtering 2 m. and a. m | XXII. Fog m.. increaſes 8 m. hot and dry;
ſtorm, hail 3 p. ſtormy © 0:c. N W. N E-+ Rain deſrred. Sh.


XXLIL Cold, windy XXII. Fog 9 mHor, dry miſt. m. $.
XXIV. Ra. L. ſhowring m NE. N w | XXIV. Warm. NE. XXVI. Fog m. N,
XXYV. Cold wind, f. driſle _ 3p : Nly TXXVIL Fog m. dry ſeaſon, Wis.
XXVL. Cold wd. 290 * | XXVIIEL Fog m. and drought ; heat drops .|Þ.
VII. W b | Wy, Ely.
XXVIIL. Miſt in. ry miſt 2 p. WIy- | XXIX. Fog, hor, dry. : Sh. of
XIX, Cold wind p. m. L. R. veſp. Ny. — Cloſe, Thunderclap 10 m. C,rain 0. and p L.
, h;,


/


a ama 7. 7 ad. A.


WE


Chap. IV.


Heme Dar 'y of Fiftcen years,


— —


7uly 1. Cloſe m. windy, wetting,

11. Wettingy 5 m. ad 15 m. with miſts. Sl,

J1{ Windy, dropping 4. m. and ſhowr p« m-

Iv. Shedding m. S.

Y, Hor, dry. W.
Die 2. At London great ſtorms of rain, Thun-
der 2 m. none at Kentiſh Town : News of
grear Rain in che North,


Lf


———


D —


Aug. 3. $\. 20.


A July 13. ad Ag. 16.
Ful. XIII. R. ſerious 5 morning. R. hard 2 p.
4p. WM. C. ;
XIV. Rainy.
XV. Stermy wd, ſome Rain.
VI. Rain ſub eſp,
VI. Very warm and cloſe, 1
XX. Cloſe, windy.
XX[l. Miſty rain m. high windy
XXIIL, Hizh winds,
XXIV. Kainv, drrk, H. winds:
XXV.XXVI. rainy d. ;
XXV1!. R.p.m. many Flies and Piſmires.
XXV{11. Hot rain »ſque ad 3 p. Ms.
XXIX. Hor, r. veſþ.
XXX. Cloſe, hot, rainy vight.
XXX1I. R. Sun or. 43 m. ad 2 þ. drowning
att*rnoon as ever was know N.
dag. LIL. Hor, cloſe air,
Iv Windy, rain p. in,
Y. Warm nighc,cloſe day, V. 4 Sun occ.ad 10P=
VI. Cloſe, windy, warm.
VIE. Warm night.R. 10 m. ad 6 p.
VIII, Warm n. R. 10 m. & p. m. in carneft g p
& 10 Þ.
IX, Coatting Showrs noon, and wind ; thun-


der ; ſhowr 3 p. 5s p. 7 Þ. RN in Nadir-


3 Þ-
X- Coaſting ſhowrs 11 m.& 3 p. SW.
XI. Rain ©. 5 p. 7 p. ſad harveſt. SW.
X1I. H. wind and much rin ; rempeſtuous
rzrca ©, great rain 9 P«


1671,


IXIIL Showr 1 p.


XIV, Froſt ; fog m. hot p. m Wh. warmn. |
XV, Very thick fog.
XVI. Two Meteors.


!9


i... At.
— ——


1673, Sept. 7. Mt 24.


Ab Aug. 23. ad Sept. 24.
»XX111. Drilling p. m. ſhowring 6 p. S E.
V, Showring 1 p. SW.
XXVI. Stormy winds , ſome wet 2 p. at Bran-

ona.
XXVIL R. m, ad 2
$ W. ſhowr 4 p.
XX IX, Windy, ſhowr 1 p. 2 p- and 4 p. SW.


p. Lowring after, winds


XKN, Windy, ſhowr 6 m. g m. 0.6 p.g p.Gc.
SW.


XXX. R. hard 7 m. wet m. p. eſpecially ;
P. & 5. per noF. tor, *
Sept. I.R. no, tot, ſhowr in* proſpe 3


p. &
Ss Þ SW.


II, Rain hard die rv. red in Eaf?. NW,

UL.R. 1 p. daſh 2 and 2 p. with hail; Mereor
NW.

IV. Fog 6 m. wetting 3 p.4 p- froſt m. wdv

SW.

VI. Windy, R.4q p. 1c p. SI,

VII Fog, clear above;

VIIL H. wd. ned. tet. Rain ante lc, a. m. m. p.

$1IV.

IX. Froſt m. warn p. m. SW.

X. Very high wd.werting8 m. & 5 p.

XIy Furiaus wind , wer noF, rot. rewpeſtuous
gay. WI. Houſes blown down by Covent
Garden : wetting m. & p. m. and miſty ©
ACC

XIII. Fog, ſome rain 10 P.

XV, Very cold nighe ; froſt m.

XVI. R ante Lic. & a.m. werting 4 P+- R. hard
with wind $ p. ; W

XVII. Fuurios tempeſt all night » H. wird all
day.R. 1p |

XVII. Wd, hail, R. m. 0. 5 p. S W.

XIX. Guſt of wind 2nd rain ante luc. dark 7m.
wdy. k S W,

XX. Rain'4 p.8 p.10p. S W,

XXI: Very wet all night ; high winds and R.
a. m. per rot. fere: ſhowrg p.6p. NW.

XXII. Fro!t m. R. noon and p. m. S E.

X X1II. tShowrs Sun or. ad8 m.ſo 2p.3Þ
H. wd ante fic, Armies inthe Air ſeen by
thouſands of People ar Poſen in Puland.

XX1V.'Very warm, werring p.m. p. Mercaf
toward urſa Maj. head. N W.


OZ. 16, tv 3,


A Sept. 30. ad Nov, 1.
XXX, *#, 04.1. Froſt, ice m.
II. R. 6 m. Fpg, wd S. then Ely,
HI. Cloſe wd, Indiſpo/it.
IV. Aches, SE.
V. Fog, rhime , Cohbwebs z winds Indiſpoſits
$ Þ. < wet 11 p.
V.S W: ({. rain 5 m. warm, windy; Aches.
VIL. H. wind, cloſe, miſle 9 p. Aches; Hyſteri-
cal fits,
VIIL H. wd die tot. ſhowr 6 m. W.
IX, Fr, ſhowr 2 p. wiſty air 3 Aches NW
XII, x,oſty, foggy, fair ; ſome rclent ; Aches,


1675.


W.
XIII. Cloſe, warm, Ind:ſpoſit, faintneſs 3 Head+
ach. W.
XIV. Cloſe m. and 10 m, warm.
XV, Cloſe, warm ; ſome moiſture 6 p.
XVI. f. wer 5 p. war. |
XVII. Warm, cloſe.*niſtyiſh ſhowre ho 2. fere


I ore. JL in M. C.
XV HI. Gr. froſt; red even; wind variou
bur lirtle. S
XIX, Warm ; Lambs-wool clds. NE.SE.
XX1. Miſt,clole, Wly.Dry weather complained
of. Country men cannor ſow,
XXI. Rainy m. ſhowrs 4 p. 9 p.
X XII. Rain at midn. & $8 m. H. wind and ftor-


my R. 4 p. warm. Wh.


XXIIT.


wy;
W.


Me a it,
———_


©s Home Deary.


; Fog m. & a. m.


XXIII. Miſt, warm; rainy 10 m. ad ©.
Aches.

XXIV. Stormy wd ; daſh of hail and rain 1
p. ſtorm of rain 6 p. H. wd 9 p.

XXV, Wind and rain 1 p. 4 p. 7 P. tempeſt«-
ous and wetting 7 p. Lightning ar Ghent fi-
red a Steeple at N. D. and flew them who
went to quench jt, Gotes 104+

XXVI. Windy a. L. Nly. Inundat. atAmſterdam,
Hague, Harlem

XXVII. Bluſtering no. ror. C. rain 2 p. 4 P-
N E. Aches , Univerſal cough throughout
all Europe,

XXJvIL. R. 11 m. 2 p- 6p. Aches. Ely miſt.

RXIX, Gr. fr.miſty ; dry. E,

XXX. Fog, fr. Aches.

KXX1. Fog, fr. {. miſle 8 p.


Nly.
N E,


Det. 1. 7 20.


A Nov. 14. ad Dec. 20.
XTV. Fog and cloſe, S E. Dark; and a good


ſhowr 2 p. Meteor near Cap. Drat..in {
ſickly Mouth , but no morcality. |
XV. Rain 5 m. (9c. very wet veſþ. uſque ad 8 p.
warm-. S W. at n. Nly.
XVI. Showr in earneſt 5 m. {o 9 m.
XVII. Fog 3 R. Sunor. Nly.
XYIII. Lightning ante 1 & 2 m. fog f. rain
. 10m. Nly.
XIX, Gr. fog ; very cold. Ely.
XXI. Fog, froſt gone ; r. and leet 1 p. &c.
with fog ; rain 9 p. W. Aborttone.
XXII. Snow found, ſoo. & p. m.8 p, Stomack
aked at the Snow 8 p. brisk wd. N E.
XxIII. Brisk and cold wd, ſuowing often ar o.
& p. m. _ Nly.
X%IV. Fr. wd, ſnow, fog 8 m. E. ſnow 1 p.
atk] birrer cold ; hail 1 p. bluftering n.
RXV, H. wd no#, tot, and cutting ; ſnow m.
_ E. Snow driving ſmall p. m. per- ror.
XXVI. Snowing ante L. rain 8 p. Ely.' Hyſteri-


1677.


cal firs ; Ice jn the Thames. s
XXVII. Froſty, fog, mdiſpoſir.
XXVIIIL. Froſty, fog die tot. SW. Rain 7 p.Ely.


gentle ſhowres midnight.


3 XXIX. Fog, mild air, h.wd; rain at - 2


XX, H. wd nod. tot. and wet :dry m, p.cach


day; Rain 6 p. Aches. :
Dec. 1. Fog, bluſtering veſp. and driſle ; Rain |


11 P.

IL. Warm rain c#ca 9 p- Sly. Glaſs roſe 25.
acc. to Progn. .

II. Windy and rainy die tot ab 8 m. warm. Ely.

IV. Miſty wd.driſle 8 m. Great Meteors in a
diſpers'd , cloudy sky. Aches.

V. Daſh, wind and wetting m. p. E.N.

E.NE.


Mereors IIL
- Two bright 10 p.
VIIL H. wd and rain moſt pare, Sly.
IX, Fog, bright above ; rain ſince x m, Me-
reors. Cl ouds contrary ©) occ. R. a. m. &
blow at midn.
R, Kuffling wd anddriſle m, cloſe, windy p.m +


I. Rai ante 9 m. apd dark.


_ 6 m. ©, was vertical where & ang YL
ay.
XII. SE. H. wind and ſuſpic. ante t p, rain > Pp.


R. 6 p. Wly. Meteor neer Cor, SY Lighty,
1m. Melancholy.

XIII. f. rain ante 7 m. H. wa, Lightning 9 p. in
the SW.f, rain 9 p. wet 11 Þ.

XIV. Tempeſt of wind ne. tot. rain 7 p. Mer,
7 P-9 P-

XV. Fog and wetting, cloſe and dark. E

XVI. Fog, cloſe m. p. wd.

XVII. Fog die tot. E. Indiſpoſit.


XVIIL Fr. 2 ) a fine ſighr 5 p.
= Fog, clear above, Ice bears.


1680, Xx» 25, ad Feb, 28,
_


A Jan. 13. a Feb. 28.

XIII. Fog, rain 6 m. wind high 9 p. Laville de
Muſlipatan, ſummerge.

XIV. H. wind no. tot, offering ae 8 m. m.
warm, SW,

XV. Miſt, cloſe. SW.

XVI. Miſt , cloſe, ſprinkle 8 m.\, wet 9 a
warm.

XVII -Warm ſeaſon. Noſegay offered , and
white Cowſlips ; H. wind p. m. |


dr — 2a ſ. rain @nteQ ort., H. floarny
wind,

XIX, Miſt, dark, ſmall rain 9 p. and 10 p.
XX. Miſt. Audible Showr ante 9 p. very warn,
XXI. Rain hard Wly. great fog p. m. $.
XXII. Fog, cloſe, ſharp wind : Red Wy :
ſhowr ante 0. p
XXII. Miſt, cloſe, H. wind, warmer, Wy,


— —


XXIV. Fog, cloſe, brisk wd,warng Wy.
XXV. Cloſe, fog : fog at n. W.
XXVI.X XVII. Fog very great, cold. W
XXVIIL Fog, froſt m. cloſe m. p.

XXIX. Fog, miſting ante 8 m. milder.


1 XXX, Fog, brisk wind de tot. miſle ante g.W,


XXXI, Fog, wind, H. atn. R. 8 m. 4 p. fnow
3 Þ. Very tempeſtuous wind m. p.

Feb. I. Very high winds n. d. tot. froſty, rain 9
p. N W. Three Tides in 5 hours attributed
to rhe winds extraordinary.

H. #ery high winds, blowing and rain. Great
Wracks and loſſes at Sea, even at Deal,

TH. #. wad, ſhowry 2 p. Rain and great flaque
of Snow. Nly,
IV. H. fr..wd, f. drifle 3 p. and 2 5 p. ſho,
ante med. not?.

V. Mift, brick wind, rain ante 2 p. w. F
mouth 4 or 5 days very ftormy,

VI. Nift, H* wd, ſpecially 27rca o. & wveſp. &c,
driſle g p.

VII. Rain ante Sun or. & $ m. cloſe miſt, brisk


wind.
VHI. H. wd die tot. dropping 5s p.& ante g. ye-
ry ſtormy this week paſt 1n and our of the
Channel,
IX. Rain circa © or. ſhowr 8 m. hail ante 11
m.2Þp.$p.45p.ad8,


NW.
XI, Great»


R, Fog morn 8 m.


XI. Rain ante 2 m. windy, warm. Wly, Mexe,


>


, XVI. rroſty , ſoggy air.


- 1682,


/ in rigging.


Chap. IV”


a of XV. Tears.


XL Greart fog below, froſty. Sly © occ.t5 arte*| XX. Windy. ſome rain 10 m. R
Ely.


XIN. Froſty, foggy, dte rot.
X1V. Fog m. ſharp air.

XV. f. wer ©. m. very gr. fog,
XVI. Cloſe, cold, wd.


XVIII. Fcg, froſt, ſharp air.

NI, Warm, f. raing p. a4 6 p. H.wd.
XX. Much rain ante Luc. Aches, fog N.
XX1.Verygreat Fog froſt, werring 4 p.ſhowr


XXIV. Fog, cloſe; Ratn apace ante 11 p


or. Rainy 9
dd Y in MN C. cum S 16. quo tempore


multe Stells fixe Peiſei, &c. M. C. occupa
YHnr,


E, | XX1I, Showr 11 m. 2 P. ;
E.' XXII. R. m. clds in Scenes; rain 7 p; red


clds ad M. C. & Or,
X XIII. Showr 4 p. dropping. Ely.
Ely.
wir


Sly. Ely.


XXV KR. a. L. wetting m.p.Gr. Thund. © p.
Jae R. 111 day break.


| XXVL #. wind , ſhowrs o- ad p. m. Horn.Sly,


apace 7 p. wird high 9 p. S.SE.,
XXII. Fog, rain ante 2p. P ocr. an


XXII. Fog, R. ante o, & p.m. Mm. p.

XX1Vy. H. wad, R. ante © oit. & ©. drille 11
m. warm.

XXV, Very hizh wd, C. rain ante L.

XX VI. Fog, R. circa 4 p: bluſtering p. m. per
rot,

XXVII. Very ſharp wind. Wly. H. wd.

X XVII. Very HE. wd, Wliv. Cologne Th. Lightn-


fell on the Church S. Urſala, Merc. Angl. n.


23.Die 7. Strange Epidemic ticknels @ Caſtle
Num Intell, num. 30.


S 14. Apr. 14.
A March 25. ad May 5.


March XX V. H: wind, cold, ſhowr 10 m. NW,
XXVI1, Very cold, ſome gufis. Ely p. m. Wly.
VXVILR, ante 8 m,ſome guſis,R.ante 2 p.Wly.
XXVIILI. H. wd, ſcuds of R. awe 45 p. >, P-


7ÞP.11 P. |
XXIX. Cold, dark and windy. Nly. Ely.
XXX. Windy. ſome hail circ. i1 m. wind and
frow7rs O. 3 P« 4 P» |
XXXJ Merecor 8 p. near Andromeda, Ely.
KXVIIL. Plimouth very tempeſtuaus for ſome
crime peſt. Ships in the road ſuffeted much


Apr. I. Temperate.


Il H. winds 16 m. cold wind. Ely
Iv. {. rain arte 8 m. and miſt, cold. Ely.
V. Cloſe, miſty, remperate. N E.atn, Wy,


VI. Warm, clouds contrary 9 m. Wly at n. Ely.

VII. Fog, warm Sly. ar n. Ely. very Sly foggy
veſp. Lightening at ' Cologne overturned a
houſe. Merc. Lord.

VIIL. Very cold and fog m.& 9 p.W. NE

IX. Miſt, High wing, gencle thowring ante 4 p.


S,
X. Showr 10 m. V or. windy. Sly.
XI. Windy. wetting 6 m. R. 3p. Wly


X11. Showr 1o m. Þ or. ante 3 p.q4 p. YZ occ.


Y M.C.
XIIt H. wind, fog SunoccR. 10 p. Sly,
XIV. H. wind, rainm &%a m. S IW.
XV. Clouds in-Sqgcnes, ſhowr 2. m. & ante 2
p. Sly m, Wiy p. m.
XVI. Grols fog m. d</þ of rain a Sun occ, ad
9p. E.m. W. p.m.
XVII. f rain arte 0. Wwly,


XVHIR. 9m. & al:«. Rain weſþ. 9 p. Þ op-


poſed Y. near De!phin. S$ W-
XIX. C. rain 9 m. (F alias 4, mr. dropping weſp.
SW


XXVIL. f. rain 5 m. ante 2 p. red cltls even,


. : - Wy,
X XVIII. Showring m. p, gr. Meteor -in+S, ante
W


9 P- eF.
XXIX Hot rain 4 p. and 7 p. SW.
XXN R.4.2 Þ. oh p. &c. with high wd.
VIIL.. Andaluſia neer Corduba (. peltilence,
Dutch Guzet. |
MayT. RR. ante 6 m.a m, m. p. H. wind. Wly
IR. 4 © cc. trill fere 11. Indifpoſ. WIY+
Il. Showring 2 p. Ely»
IV.R. brick 6 m. 2p.8 p. ad 11 p, Wy at n-
Ely»
V. R.1m.&folt 5 m; foggy dietot. - 'Ely.
VI. Ctrca hun: diem in Berk ſhire Oakes torn vp
by .the roots : Corn ſheard as if-it were
mown. Harm at Stanford , Wadley, New
berry.Cartis Intell.153. 2T.M.at Orleance,Bro-
vence, Rhimes, Seilfens, ſhock Churches,and
threw -down ſeveral Spir?s,ho. 2 m. and did
at Paris, Deux ponts, -Bafl, ſo in Hungary,
May 8. deſtroying Houſes, and burning the


Inhabiranrs, & fr. 5.


————————


1684.


4
—


Jane 7. I 26,


A May 21. ad June 24. 10
May XX1. Wind. XXII. H. wind. Ely
X XIII. Brizk wind, red clouds in M. C. at n


Ely.
XXIV, Cold wind. Ely.
X XV. Fog, warm even, Ely.
XX VI. Cloſe a. m, warm, wd, El
XXVII. Miſt m. H. wd p.m. El\*


XXVIII, Clouds gather ſuſpiciouſly | a. m «
warm P. m. Ely.
XXIX, Foggy m. ſtormy wd, gentle raift vejp.
welcome, horriſh. wlr.
XXX, ſome rain veſp. H. wind, Wly,
XXXI. . driſle ante o. fine ſhowring ante 1 -.
p. SW.
Zaue l. H, wd, threaten 14 m, Wy,
W. H. wd, warm, welcom, dropping d. m. m. 7.


Il. Gentle werting once or twice. Wir,
IV. Cloudy, warm. a. mM. I. Sun cc.
V. Horriſh wd. Wly,


VI. Cloſe p.m. L:zhmn. 1c p
VII. Ely cold wd eſp. wonderful, Fall of the
Baro meter in the m.


VIII. Miſt m. ) dark fide very bright.
htle before ir.
IX.X. Warm.
XL. Miſt m. Colds complained of,
Hhh


Ely. Sly.
Ely
I, Warm. *


of ſome malignity to Health. For. Evidence. Book It


XII. Warm, Ely miſt. Ely.

XHr. H. wind Ely. All young Perſons labou-
red with hoarſnes this Fortnight, and with
Eruptions like to rhe Itch,

X1Iv. Miſty morn, bot. Ely.

XV. N. Hor, fair. So XVII. Ely.

XVIV.. Hor, toggy veſp. Sun rutilus , Drought.
Leaves fall off Trees. Cartel fed , Winter
. fodder.

XIX. Miſt m. hot. Ely o. Wly n.


XX. Mift, drop-a. m. ſhowry. W,
XXT. Hor, fine gentle ſhovr 5 p.6 p. Why,

clds ride Ely. :
XXII. Wind, wet 8 m. Clouds ride contrary,
XXI1. Fog, ſuſpicious for Thunder 8 m. h

or, ſoultry. Ely.
Jun. VII. St. N. Continuaſiccitas facit ruſticos *

ingemiſcere of pene lacrymari, (5c.
X XVI. Hot, brisk wd.


Ely. NVV.


' $39. What I had to ſay to this Diary, uſher'd it in : For as for Thunder,


&c. That, is fo obvious from a Martial P]


aner, that it will tire the patience


of any : only to GriefesI {aid nothing, of which fort of Inſtances I find bur
24. and ſome nor of ordinary Note. Ptolemy and the Arabs do not ſtick tg
profeſs ſuch malignancy of d', 2o which Heatheniſm, if we will call it fo,
I muſt abſolutely ſubſcribe and averr a malignity in Planets, and their Mix- |


tures one to the ot


her, as we ſhall ſee.


'Tis not to be diſputed |}


inthe mixtures of the Superidurs with the inferiour. And fo I have done


with our Home Teſtimony.


—


For our Forreign Evidence we will produce only this Miſcellany Table.


$ 40. Anna 1 ST Ho _ in
| t, &c. 14 ſigno I 4
oy: ad July 4; Hook, d ©


&S circ. B 7, Tune 20. Veſuwom
burns, Rzcciol. '

Unno 1515. A Comet is mentioned
like the », paſſing the whole Zo-
diack in a ſhort ſpace. Inundati-
ons followed. Rochbach. Sir. W.
Raleigh, Cap. 4.9 4. d ©& ina
@xical place this year, 17.

Anno 1522, Feb. 11. Stormy tear

. Cape B. ſpe. Purch. d © ,% 21.
Fan. 31.cum d & %. _

Anzo 1530. A Comet in June, Ghrop.
Fax. d OG, Aug, 19. M7.

Sept. 1. T. M. at Gubague with
ſtench of Brimſtone. Purch. Vol. 3.
p. $68. and 952. d © & Aug. 19.

Annor5 32.Comet withd © &
in ->, 4 Sept. 23. laſted ad Nov.1o.
yea, to Dec: 8. Appran. Fracaftor :

 apud Hevelim. -

Anno 1539. Comet a Mar 6. ad
I7. Apptan. apud Heweltrum. d
@©d in S& gr. 12. dit. and alſo

% & Y gr. totidemp.

Auno 1541. April 4. On the Abaſſine
Shore great Storms from N.Thun-
- der, great Hail, which run through
all points of the Compaſs. Purch,


. Þ. 1535. V. 2.
3:


4


— —


April 12. Whirlwinds raiſing the
Sands up into the Air. Scorching
Eaſt winds, as much as Flames of
Fire. 1b. 1135. d gr.$.cum 7.

; Anno 1545. fuly 25, Hurricane over

all Derbyſhire with Hail as big as
2 Mans Fiſt. Hawes, p. 199. F4 ©
& gr.1i2.cwn d Q & pr. 4.
Amno 1547. Sept. 16, F:x ardens mi-
re wart. 4b. or. tn occ. Lente w-
| lans, Dr. Dees M.S$S. d inw.
}


26,

Anno 1549. Ofob.2. Notte venti rabi-
dil. nec potuerunt i wehementiores.

Amno 1557.Dec. 20. Parelia, Lyc.615,
d in 2 29.

Anno 1552, fan 12. Winds , Snow,
Hai), rain , Thunder , Lightning
in ſeveral places in Germany, as if
Doomsday were come. Lyc. pae.


620. Inundations upon it incredi-
ble. Stadrus, Tavl. Genma , With
us at Sandwich, Jan. 13. drowned .


much Cattel. Chilarey, Tran, p.
2066, Y. Perig.d © 0. gr. 7. cum
als,

Anno 1554. Gometa. Febr. 19, Trads
lagens ab utroque latere, Lyc. d gr.
4 2 ?. Dre 10: at Schalon in t-.
1ens ardens cum fragore Lyc. 636.
d gr. 5. una cum allls. |


d ©©& gr. 10. cum | Anno 1556, Comet a Mart. 5. ad fi


HEWG


Wc_=—_wa


I


Chap. IV.


Ef Forreiagn Evidence.


209


nem April, Lyc. Gemma 2. 27. Ga- |
merar, Hewelius d gr. 12. 2 1.1
"= 870 |
Mart, 4. Tornado. Hakl. p. 112 Il.
1, Mart, 5. Continual RMin to the |
end of the Month. Izde ad Apr!l
27. Serenity and Heat; more like |
Tune than April. Kyr. Howes 623. |
d gr. 11. d & Th.
April to. T. M. at Gonftantinaple,
or 3 days;threw down theChurch
at St. Sophia, Lyc. d pr. 3.
April 11. Lowvanit videmus iþft ar-
dentis lampadis inflar magnam 11
celis facems Gemma, Lib. 2.p. 30.


April 23. Tempeſt of Hail at Brux- |


els, extraordinary white:: at Ls-
ow fair Weather. Gemma [b. d
GIF,
April 27. Halo ſuper ». Lys.
Anno 1558. Fuly 11. Art Nottingbam ,


Whirlwind , Thunder , . beating | -


down Churches, Heaving water
into the Air ; Hail, 15 Inches-cir-
| Br Howes , 634. 6d gr.


Fuly 15. Hurricane in moſt parts of |
France, at the Hour of the New
'), throwing down Trees, yea
Turrets and Churches withour
namber. d gr. 9: cum d © Þ and
PLOE,

Amo 1564. Sept. month ſo hot , the


Haulſes. Howes, 677. d 4 ©. &@
h YL.


Anno 575: uly o. dar bs Light
ning, hurting Men and Beaſts
Howes, .680. d @&.


Anno 1577. Inter Ang. 1. and 6.
Storms. Hak!. p. 70.14. 2. d gr. 3.


d-? pr. 8.

Aazg. 14. Wind very great, Snow

« halfa foot deep. p. 72, d gr. o.
FromAugf 24. ad 28. very much
Wind, a fear of the loſs of the
Bark, p. 72. d gr. 4.

Avg. 30. Surge of the Sea ſtroke in,
and the Boat ſwam.

Sept. 1, Great Winds N E. great
Storm, we lay at Hull, every Sea
Overlooking our Poop. p. 73. d
mCL MS

ſnn9 1579.Sept. g. North-Eaſt winds
mak1ng us take in our Sails till the
end of he Month. Hak. p. 544.
Fol, 3. 4 87. 4 | |
In September and Ofober great winds

_. apdFlouds without rain!, at New-
+ Bedford , Ghefterec. Howes,
6 X


Anno 1583.Dec.1. By contrary winds
we were driven to Pl:mouth, Hakl.
p, 134.Fol. 3. d gr.5. d © 2.6
P&9.d hV.

Dec. 18. By fair weather driven to
Falmouth. Hakl, 16.


River ready to boyl; The Filth \ Ano 1586, Febr. 23: Briſtol, very


Dyed 3 our Mga fell ſick. Hak!. p.

331, edit 2. d 1n prince. Oftob.
Sept. 20. Flouds from the Thames ,
.drowning much Cartel, Howes,

657. d gr. 5. .

O#. 7. Heavens burning (of which
before ) Howes. - So in Flanders.
Gemma, d O@& cum $,

Anno 1569. Jan 13. Inundation at
Lowain, Gemma 2, 63. Lightning
fired {everal Towers. Ib. d gr. 0.

Anno 1573. April 29. Lovanu, ©
look'd very pale, from Noon to
hor 2. with a colour'd Halo.Gexzma

 & 163-&.7%. © %. _ :

May 11. Halo with Parelia, I, Gem-
2, 165.

Fun? . Toceſter in Northampton-
ſhire, Tempelt of Hail and Rain ,
with Inundation , drowned much


Catcle, carryed away 6 Country |


-T1 Storm. Hakl. Vol. 2. p. 292.8
Ins,

March 28. Earthquakes mentioned
at large in the Eaft-Indtes.

Ana 1518. May 1. Tempeſt of Rain
and Thunder witch alteration of
Tides and Currents. Purch. p, 1. /.

'2. d Od h.

May 10. Storm from the Weſt, day
and Night, Mr. Ganaiſh in Hak!.
Ea. 2. $22. & © 6.

May 16. Very ſtiff Gales, Ia. as
much wind as the Ship could bear.

May foe. & which ſcattered
ay fine, Tempeſt which f{cattere
—v Ag Fleet Hows, p.1. d
h&g,

Arno 1590. July ab 11. ad 22. Calm
and exceeding hqgt. 'neer Guba.
Hakl. V. 2. p. 240. Nay, in Ger:


'\ many and WNetherland, Eichſar,
C


at, An,


<o Forretgn EmTadence,


Book 11


A7no 1594. Month of Auguſt Hot

gu?” Howes , Ingens GCalor,
Eichſtad,

Sept. Great Rains, which raiſed
high Waters in Surreyand Suſſex ,
upon which the -price of ' Corn

" "roſe, Howes, dd ©?.

Arno 1596.Eichſtad notes great heat.

d od O8. 15.

_ OS. 11. At Nowa Zembla it ſnow-
ed ſo hard that they made a May-
pole of Snow. Hakl. 3. p. 492.

Anno 1598. Prince. Thames almoſt

' froze. d & ©. Dec: 1. it thawed,


_ Dec. 18. gr. 4. |
Anna o__ March 12, Great Storm.


April 28. Storm, no Ship able to
live, L16..3--192.
ay- 3. Another' ſore

"Seas ſhook all our Iron; Work:'

"Ano 1605. Mar. 29. Wind; blew


;. hard at} inza. Gap. . Smith. pag. *


117. d Patil.
& us 11, Ingens 4ſtas.
{ « 12: = IT,


Pay 1607. July 26.
© \KErchſtad. , ;
' Anno 1609. July 24. Moſt terrible
"'Tempelts. Pnrch. p. 1. 1733: d
. gr. 10.. h P. ;
Auguſt 7. So much wind we were
hardly able to keep the Shore ,
. Porch. Lib. 3.9. 229. d 'gr.5.d
BY |
Anno 1611, Auguſt 12. 7427. Much
Winds with Calms , and contra-
| winds with a great Current.
urch. P. Lib. 3. p. 267. at Garaa-
feu. d © h gr. 14, 13,1210: cum


Sept. 21. For 6.days the wind a-
inſt us, which forced us to the
eward, N. Lat. 10. with Strong

Current, Pwrch 3. 278. d & © gr.


2.
OF0b. 2. Much rain Ib. d gr. 1.
Sept. 2. Lao. S. 24. gr. -Berween
ape Bon Sper and Madagaſcar we
found no Weſterly Monſons , but
contrary Ely Winds, with extream
Storihs , Rain, Thunder and
Lightning, CG. Sari s. Purch. 334. d


Eich-


Ingens calor.
e {


Storin ;” the


|
|


|


-
Anno 1620, April 20. A Tait of the


gr. 9. 0 2.7.
S-pt. 10. Lat. Se. gr. 17. Strong!


Current, Wind N'E 334. d Or
6. & 2 or. 2.in =princ.
Sept. 11. Lat. So. gr. A Storm, bb.


the Storm continued with more
Wind in the Night than the Day.


ul 5.

Sept. 12: A Storm, 14. complaint of
the Current. See, if d @& be
not vertical. Purch.

Sept. 16. Strong Current, So 17.
ut ſupr.

Sept. 19. Extrea m Current ſuffered
them not to ſtir , notwithſtanding
a fair and delirable ſtiff. Gale, 1.
Lat. 16.0. uſque ad Oftob, 3, d gr.
3. EY: 17.


Purch.part 4. p.166. dat. 4. 49%. Anno 1613, Oftobris wenſe, many


Chaſms ſeen at Prague and Vienna,
Calzf. December 7. Lat. N. gr.3;.
Very much - Wind and Storms at
"NW. d gr. 8.Lat. 38. there we
lefr the great Current ; Purchas.


Amnna 1616. Jan 3. The Wind riſing
*- We put toSea. Purch. gor.


7an.to. 20.Lat. gr. 53. GreatStream
went South-Weſt. d gr. 2.

Jan 13.23. It blew 1o hard we
were forced to take in our Top-
Sails, ; ;

Jan. 14. 24. About Evening it cal-
med, and that Night we drave
forward with a very hard Stream.
Thouſands of Whales.

an. 15. 25, Latit.55. Stiff Gale.
an. 16. 26, Lajtit. 51. Afﬀlyirg
Storm our of the Welt.

Jan. 17. 27. Very coid Hail and
Rain. d gr.3. & 7 8.

Jan. 4-Frigus refe prediftumHerling


Ano 1618. Mart, 7. A Flame over


the Pallace in Paris. & gr. 2.
ſupra. |
March 12. A terrible Earthquake
in the [zdres. |
April 15. At Mechagreat Heat,that
men could not endure anyCloaths,
not ſo much as Linnen; &d gr. 7.
April 21. Extream Hear with 4
Storm of Wind off the Shore,
Thunder and Lightning vehement,
butno rain ; Purch. p. 624. d. gr.”7.
d Q pr. 7.


Tornados, North Lat. $. Puich. Þ|


723, d gr. 7. & J.11.


47
/\,


Chap. , TY, Forreign Emvidence. Arduous Problemes.


May 9g. We crofs'd the « A'quator 3 dnn 1633. Veſuvixs burns ſeveral.
we would have crols'd it more! years after. Tranſa#, g68.
« Eaſterly,bur the Currentand wind | March 6, Gometa Lancee Inftar :
would not permit. Puzch. 1. 723.) Galwif, 4 gr. 4. +


gr. 2. $4 ; Arno 1635, April 6. Rain and Hig h
June 18. Plutt largiſſime continues, | Winds, d gr. 4. dv pr. wh.

Kepler, > gr. 8. April 17, Tempeltuous Winds and
Anno 1622, June 18. Tempeſtuoſum &- | . Rain. -


0 Kepler, d gr. 4. & + Par-| _— 9. Very turbulent Winds


til. M. . .

Fuly 1, Very dark day Shows all Muay 18. Hot and dry; & gr. 2. 6

night, ate eodem, Fulgur &+ Plutie. | 7 gr. 4. |

Fuly 15. Near the Ladyones the | Anno 1637. June 15, Thunder, a

Tf: frem the South broke two | Souldier flain by it at Gaſſels. Kyr.
Calbes. d cum h d. Purch2. p.| &d Partil.
1853.d gr. 5. June 20. Halo Solis; Kepler.

Tuly 19. Great rain, June 1. Earthquake in Tours; d ©

Fuly 20. Imbres crebri,tonutt ;, Kepler. | Y.d ©& gr.s.

Anns 1524. Auguſt 18, In Norico 7t- | Anno 1639. July 24. Froſt and cool.
p:nfs Squalor Thunder, exceeding |. Aug. 3. Iris Lunaris, Kyriander,
hot and dry. M. S. (fupra d 2 2 ) | Anno 1641. Avg. 25. and 26, Thun-
dad. | " der; j Hh pos a d gr. 3:

Anno 1626. Aug. 28. Ghaſmata, d | Anno 1643 OS, 3. Fiery Meteors in


cum aluis;, d gr.s5. Breſlaw ;, d cum VN.
os 13. Ventus,ſerenum ynirants Kep- | Anno - I'S Jaz. 5. Chaſmsin the N.
ero. M.


| | » © BF.3.

Anno 1628. Nov. 6. Parelia, d gr. | Anno 1650. Veſurvius Burns. Calwif. *
4. | April 29. Formidable Thuanders,

OF. Engehh Fleet at the Iſle of | Rain near Lexcefter eſpecially, M.

Re mer with much Tempeſt. | S. & gr. 3.

Howes, 1044. dte 15, d gr. 10. %

8. |


$ qr. The famed Violence of this Planet will be beſt apprehended when
we have ſeen his Configurations with the enſuing Planets ; yet, even here
'tis conſpicuous in his ſhare of Heat, Storms , Lightning , &c. and the
C_ Veſuwoins, Comets of extra@rdinary Shape, and if any other No-
in.
$ 42. Here we may be excuſable if we bringone and the fame Inſtance
under ſeveral Aſpects; thereby — that the grand Productions
of Nature are owing, not to our {ingle Caufe, but ro many, who are hi-
red out, and employed fof the Service, as may. be ſeen in-all Works of
Nature. So my very Pen moves notnow, but by the Afent and Con-
nt of all thoſe numerous Muſcies, Veins, Arteries, Nerves,. which make
apthe Fingers. We have mentioned nothing in our Table but what we
would willingly ſpeak to ingts turn.
fa Firſt, Comets ſtare in our Faces, as Arno 1511. 39.54. 50. But
the Truth 1s, they do not preſevere ,for we heard of no more, tiil Anno
1633. Wethall ſee wha they will do in the next ia the Two Supertours.
For the reaſon I perſwade my (elf why a Comet thews it (elf, one year ra-
ther than another, and why fo thick and frequent in ſome years, as 1618.
1665, Why Hecla Mountain flamed not from Azz 1558. to Aro 1593. *
. Why Veſuoins ſometimes two years together : Why every Twelve years
the Inarans look for their Tuffon, their Ail-deſtroying Whirlwinds ? (Ar-
duous Queſtions which the Worthy Democr:tts Funor propoles to us.) The
ng 11 | E a


.


— JE. —


Hot blaſts at Sues. The relation of Comets ww. Book 1.


Reaſon in general can be no other but this, though there be eminent Strokes
in theſe Productions of ſome peculiar Czleſtial ; yet there happens, or hap.
pens not aConcurrence of allRequitites in ſuch and ſuch dererminare poſtures,
and Habitudes ; and diſtance, .2u:*us poſztts, the Reſult follows. For if
one or other be wanting, the Effe& gives no gppearanee. Where a Co-
met begins with d & 5, whether alone , or in Company with d $4, I
take this to be an eminent Stroke of our Planet orAſpect.

Þ 43. What ſhould I reckon up the Lightnings, Storms,and Tempetts, for
they aft next, which occurr. Oh, Had our Intelligence been uninterrupted
and uniform ! but the very-Times did not bear that 3 'tis not yet 200 years
fince the Indies were known by Exropean Navigators 3 nor did Navigation
flouriſh with us till Q. Elizabeth. Howbeit more might have been amafled
nyt, but that we judged ſome loſs of time, as Hewelrus alſo complains,
when he ſought out the Hiſtory of Comets. This let us obſerve, that as
deficient as our Table may appear, there is ſcarce a d within theſe laſt 100

years, , but contributes ſome remark favouring our Fiery Meteor.
6 84. Among which there occur once or twice Burning and ſcorching
Winds at the Famous Port of Sues, at the hither end of the Red Sea ;
which put me ſtrait in mind of Ptolemy's rye rm $4pus 5 milizerrs Hot and
Melting Blaſts, and ſhews to. what Climes Ptolezzzcs Charafter may be
properlyreckoned ; and withal that the CharaCter itſelf igno Figment,bur
grounded upon Experience and Obſervation, as all good Learning is.

6 45. Halo's,, Rainbows, and» Parelia are noted ; bur they belong
as hath been ſaid, toa Conflux of Planets. For the Sun alone makes nor
any: Rainbow that is vivid or Illuſtrious; nor doth the » ſolicarily
cauſe an Halo; but the @ and » are afliſted ſometimes by 2 7 @, asin
"leſs matters, when the Evening is red at © fer, and then overſpreads the
Hemiſphere; There is beſide the ©, 2 and ? near the Horizon, or & or
YI be either Eaſt or Weſt, or perhaps :» Meato Gel:.

s 46.1 may add further as to Comets, that alchough they appear nor
within the Verge of what may be calleda 4d g &, yet they appear of.
ten when our Planet is affociated with the reſt, Imean, in the ſame Hemil.
phere ; for we are willing to believe ghar more Comets are kindled in that
ſpace than when he wanders alone in the other, the d being more potent
than the #.

S$ 47. This though we have not mentioned, 'it is certain that the Aſpects
of © and &, eſpecially our. d are of Mal-Influence to Mens Bodies ; and
in token whereof we ſhall find thoſe years complam of Epidemic. Di-
ſtempers, &c. with their 4 of & ©. Yea, even all the very time- of the
Conjunftion : T cqpld have inſerted a large Table to this purpoſe from all
parts of Exrope, and undeniable it is : Put theſe Two Obſervations together,
and the Corollary will be,. rhat __ accoune, Comets may fignifie un-
healthy times, New Diſeaſes, Plagues, &-. even as they do Earthquakes
and Inundxions, | being the Gom-Produ#tons of thoſe Superiour Cauſes
which are the Authors of the aforeſaid Evils. For if it be once granted,
that the Celeſtial Bodies are the Cauſes of ___ with the other , the
Earthquake with the Comet, then che Comet'may be a Sign of the Eazth-
quake, and whatſoever comes in Proſpect with it. Hence upon this account
.many Times, may the Earthquake antecede the Cqmet ( not always follow
it ) becauſe tis not the Comets, bur 'tis a joynt Effet of a Third Cauſe
- according to Natures Method, Producyve of both. Now Nature's Me-
thod is not always the ſame as in Smoke and Fire The Smoke common-
ly precedes ;, true, in Green Combuſtibles, but not in dry and unctuous 3
There the Flame precedes, and the Smoke follows. Now how comes


Smoke to be a Sign of Flame, bur becauſe one common Incentive prog
cetl


*


nm ee eg _


Chap. IV: Earthq. CC. Enquiry mto ( wrrents;


ceth both. A Comet therefore following an Earthquake , though it 100-
ſeth the Premoritory part , yet it looſeth not the Nature of a Sign, be-
cauſe, though fer the moſt part it doth by jis precedency premonith: Yet
it is ſibſequezt too , and\ ſo" a Sign, not of what's future, but what 1s paſt *
As the Footſtep is a Sign of an Ighavicanr. - So much for thar.

9s 44. But we have a greater Task in hand, and that is the Currents of
the Oceay, Now, a Gurrent you muſt know, is ſuch a Tide or Stream
-uq wes tea place that it thall fruſtrate che Mariners reckoning, and ſet
im back 20. or zo. Leagues, when he , (the Wind being nor able co Stem
the Force of the Stream ) thall think he is ſo many Leagues advanced.
The Philoſophic Royal Society to excellent purpoſe have deſired, that all
Navigators ſhould take notice of che Curreat in all parts of the Sea, for the
improving Navigation :- Which the Seafarers moved by their own Judge-
ment and Intereſt,do daily praftice. "Tis not many days fince that I ſtrong-
ly ſuſpected any ſuch Novelty ( for they are not always Conſtant and Un-
changed) to relate to the Heavens. How many Noble Problems will a
good Aſtrology folve ! F I without Envy endeavour the Invention ?
Perhaps it is made our in our Table. What faith Sir Herry Middleton, in
* his Pab-India Voyage,in Purch. Lb. 3. 9 5. From Ayeuſt 12. to 27. (this
'is d 9d time) A great Currengſetling South-Weſt 4 Miles an Hour, fo
*that what we got by a favourable Wind, we loſt thac, and more, when if
fel1 Calm, being tarryed back by the Current. Here's a Forcnights expe-
rience at firſt Introduction. Their Laticude above Gardefeu. Again, ano-

nother Captain, Sept. 21, nearer the time of d @ d , which happene
Sept. 27. = 13. For 6 days together the Wind againſt our will forced us
tothe Leeward (toward Shore) with a Strong Current. Lz8. 3. Gap. 12.S 1.
*p.278. After we had got clear of theſe dangers, we found theCurrent to carry
*xs to theNorthwards ThirtyLeagues,when we thought we had paſs'd butFif-
* teen. lb, O#; 10, 11, 12, we found our (elves to loſe more and more every
day by the Current. 15. Laticude by Judgement 70 Leagues above the Mo-
zanbigue. Third Captain near Aadanatin or St. Laurence Iſle ;, Sept.10.
* Lat. South. gr. 17. A ſtrong Current fetting South-Weſt, having a ſtiff
* Gale we could not but have run cheſe 24 Hours, 24 Leagues, but in the
Evening we made to the If] ind about 4 Leagues off. S*prt. 11. We were
Fcarried by the force of a Current to the Sourhward, almoſt a degree South-
* ward.Sept. 13. The Current yery ſtrong againſt us. Sept. 19. We ſteered
*North-Eaſt, but by the extremicy of the Current we were carryed to the
" Sourhward z fo that we were 1o days, and could not get to the North-
* ward, notwithſtanding we had a reaſonable fliff Gale. Lt. 4.p. 4335. Sept.
21, The Current did ſet exceeding ſtrongly to the South-Weſt, by Weſt,
* ec. Sept. 22, 23. We laboured to ger rid "f the Current. OXfob. 3. We
*cameto an Anchor after much Trouble by Currents. p. 336. That the
Cauſe is from over-head, the Seamen themſelves ſixfpett : ſome have faid
it is the Full J. Purch. p. 192. Others have ſaid, (at times) it is the New
». And they who expect to get clear of them by Alteration of the La-
titude, the depreſſion of the Pole-Stay, and the like: I can make it very
probable chart here at this year, in this Latitude, conſidering in what Sign
our d is celebrated, in an Equinoctial Sign of ==, and this over an Equi-
noRial Latitude , that our 4 of © and & doth trouble the Waters : E-
ſpecially whea the Tavles furnith us with the like Evidence at the ſame d
5 and d in a different Month- and different Latitude, Azzo 1612. Add a
ird Teſtimony froma% in January, in another difference of Latitude,
we felt a great Stream, faith the Seaman. And a 4th. Azno 1620. May g.
the d being found May 16. *Tis out of road to purſue ir further here:
If it proves thus, ir will become our Seamen to be no Strangers to Gonjuntt;-
[LA


214


Ir o_ + ——} _— VI. 20


Maculz Solis, Learned Ricciolus miſtake. | Book IT


' run bver,, as I ſuppoſe. Both Tide and C


V2, to know a New & as well as >, and the d of & and © with them.

et let no man think appropriate it £o a Martial AſpeR, bur I look upon
& as one of the Celeſtials which moves the Sea. And if, then by Gal:
Leos his favour, there will be no need of moving the Earth for the Flux
of the Waters. . To the © » and Stars gt belongs, which ſeems ro be


proved from hence. For if a part of the Heaven move a part of the Sea
(a Current) then the Whole moves the whole. | ;

s 49. And let no man object & his unreaſonable diſtance in my firſt In.
ſtance, v1z. of gr. 14. for that Four Nights time terminates nearer to gr.
12, 10, which we proclaim aloud to be a Legitimare diſtance, fuch as doth
ſtrengchen, rather than invalidate the Influence of the Application, as we
have ſaid before,before ever wedream't of fuch uſe ro be made of ir. But
then ſecondly,we have nearer applications of & fo © inthe other 3 years;
yea in the very ſame. No, let us rather ſee by this how the Celeſtial Bo-
dies irritate the Waters, 3 (Beſide the additions of moiſture which they lend
the Waters) they put them into a Heat 2 Ferment, and make them
; n 4 ae arealoof from

hore, Ordinary and extraordinary, cometo paſs by a Fermentation : ſee
ak hs of eb &eb. 11. 1680. II. Tides in 5 hours on our Home
er. OE |
wr pn To conclude, as the Heaveniy Bodies operate onthe Elements, {
do they-one upon another; to all ſeeming, I mean, as cheSun ſeems ro he


ſe Spots are the Products (I ſpeak probably again) of thoſe ver
Fan tp other Aſpedts, which He with others, proſcribes, Thi the


r. Take we with the Character of the Aſpeft. d © & is apt to Hear,
Cmerimes even in theſe Northern Clirges, to Dryrh ; but more fre-
quently to Lowr, Bluſter, Rain, (gentle or dathing ) ſomerimes ro Hail ;
which though it be rare, is more frequent -under the Martial Afpe& than
in other Aſpe&s. In a weaker Condition it admits, ogainſt its will; a
Froſty Seaſon. *Tis apt to colour the Clouds rifing or fetting With the Sun,
It is voic'd andtruly for ſome malignity of Influence upon our Bodies,
whether (which is to be noted ) it be Summer or Winter, Hot or Cold;
25 to Froſty Seaſons, Witha little Help, it uſes to cauſe ſome Relent, or


Cyap


Chap: V. ©&d Oppoſition


C H A P. V. Oppoſition of Mars & Sol.


Q 1. The Oppoſition and its Diary. 2. The Breviate of the Diary.
3. £ ad "more coldthan 4 & © .4. Becauſe Þ in general is cooler.
5. Becauſe the £ ©& is ſhorter lid. 6. & in Perigee helps to ſmart .
Influence, yet he is but ſolitggy, and therefore not ſo brick. 7. His
Thunders in Summer do not hol4 in Winter. 8. Ninety one days of
118. either Rain, or Find, or Heat. In froſty Seaſons g ſits un-
eaſie. 9. Fog and hazy Air. 10. 4 Tempeſt given, a Philoſopher
may know the Hour of the diy. 11. Forreign Table. 12. 4 an4
& of a like Influence for the Main, 13. Maculz Solis. 14. Thames
flows thrice in g Hours. 15. Suddain motion of the Mercury i:
the Barometer. 16: The Diſmal dark Sunday, 17. Froſts are not to
be enſured. under ©): 18. Why g in Perigee is ſometimes ſeen.


| ty 7 onjnntions we have 4Qoplider'd, but this is the Firſt Oppoſition
C which comes in our way, the Luzar excepted. We will preſenc


its Table, becauſe of its uſe 3 yea, becauſe it is ſhort, and not clogging.


yn
— —


9 —


f & ©. ad intervall. hc mde, grad. 5. k
165 3 m 8. 2 3 May 6. 1. Warm air,ropes, ground miſt, Meteor.N E
IN. Cloudy, windy. Sw. | 1659, MNov. 21.00 9.
Tv. Showry, windy, S w. Fl
V. Very hor, ropes. S W. | XVIIL. Fair, froſt. XIX. Froſt, fog,
VI. Hor. T8. | xx. Froſt, fog die rot,


VII. Hor and rainting rain and thunder at n_ | x1, Extream fog, Watermen loſt cheir way.
S W | XXII Fair, fog ar night, and fr.


VIII. R. m. Windy, W* | XXIIL Fr. fog, ;

IX. Cloudy, ſome wind.  , W. S* | XXIV. Dark morning, fair p. m. ſome rain

X. Some Thunder, wind pretty high. S W-- at night. '
S. blagk froſty mormng, XXV, Fair, froſt at n.


1655. Ffulyn1. $28, I661 Dec. 30. SV? 19.


"


vil. Offer at noon. N. | XXVII. Scorms of rain 1 p. ſhowrs 6 p.
VIIL Lowring m, hor 2 or 3 drops. N 9 p. H. wind. _ P P
IX, Hor, lowring, . N. | XXVIHIL H. wd nod. tor, SW.
XR, Foggy m. cooliſh, high wind. S E. XXIX,. R. no, tot, and ſo noon warmiſh. S E.
Xl. Bright, cool wind, miſt. N E. { XXX. Great rain rm, H. wd SW.
XII. H. wd, bright. 4s XXXI, Fr. cloſe, clear, SE.
XIIL Exceſſive hot, thunder. 1 Zan. Wer N. warmiſh. SE.
XIV. Red m. hor. S E. JIE. Drifling a, m. warmiſh. SE.
XY, Very hot, clear. , IL. Fr. SW,
XVI. Thunder 4 in M. Showring and rum-

bling die tot. 1664. Fl, 3. A 24, 18
- A LA
1657. g Sept. 28, V== I5, Jan, XXX. R. ante luc, cold ſhowr 5p, N.

k Fan, XXX. Cloſe m. p. cold, freez. NE.

XXVII Red clds Eaſtward. - NW. | 7. Feb. Fr. very cold, miſt, mild p. m. wetting
XXVIIL. Wind n. froſt very cold, Nly.| gp. - SW.
XXIX. Stripe clds, cold p. m.{. moiſture © | IT. Warm, cloſe moſt part, brisk wd, $W.

occ. miſty. NE | HL H. wind, ſome wet at Sun ſer. SW.


y o - - -
08, I. Cloſe, dark, cold wd, wetting 2 p. 5 p, | IV. Windy, coaſting hail 1 p. ſome drops 7 p
5, 7» Kkk Y. Windy


& © Home Dary.


| Book 1.


On ——_


V. Windy p. m. and ſome rain SW.
VI. Wind drifle 10 m. great rain 4 p. 8 p .


1666, March8, MX 28.


V. Dry, hottiſh. Wiy.
VI. Hortiſh W, gentle ſhowrs 3 p. WW,
VII. H. wd A. L. fine ſhowres o. 2 p. 5 p. Wly.
VIII Sweet rain a. ms per tot. R.2p.5P-9 P:

; w Yo
IX, C. moiſture m. ſh. a. m. hail 5 p. drop 6 'Þ.
X. Fog m. a. m. Ely. Cold rain 7 p- 9p:


XT. Cold drops a. m. powring rains 2 p. -


uſque 3 _W.
XIL Fr. Ao cl. in Scenes, cold gentle rain 11

P- Ely.
1668, April 17. 5m 7.
XV. Lowring, ſcarce any moiſture, E
XVI. pgs ny thick. E.
XVIL Gr. dew, bright, hot. Wly.
XVII. Windy, cool, bright. N E.


1670. Junz, SW 0.


VIIL Warm, high and cold wind 11 p. Wly.
IX. Warm miſt on the hills ar nighc. Nt,
X. Warm clds fly low. Nly.
XI. Cobwebs, warm, Owl 9 p. 11 p.

XIL Brighr, windy, eſpecially at noon, _


MI. Hor, bright, windy. Nly.
XIV. Windy, ſh. 1 p. daſhes 4 p- why.
RXV. XV1. Hor, fair. Nly.
1672, Aug.30. X M17.
XXV.'Cloſe moſt part, warm, Wy.
XXVI. Cloſe and troubled, warm. wily*


XXVIL High wind , daſhing o. driſle =.s


XXVI1IL Higher wind, daſh 10 m. $\ NW.
XXIX, High winds die tot. rain 7 m. ad bl 1m,
SW,
XXX. Very high wind die tot. driſle 5 m. {.
drops Sun occ.
XXX.. Wind and rain ante L., wet p.m. Sly,
Sept, {. rain 3 p.daſhs6 p. Wly.
ILH. wind a ing ſhowrs at —_—
W.


1674 MNow.3, Sm.

0x. wer die tor. wind, high wind at
nighe. Wly. S E. Aches Index role to L. and
and then returned to 35,

RXKX1, Fair, Wly. Aches.


Nov. T. 2 ſeen here about; miſty, dark i


S. E. Barometer XIV


ng 4P-
and while 1 'Iccked on it it? ſirook to V. Cloudy 4 p. and a ſhowr.


20, circa 5 p. Achss. gour, Hernia.
II, Wert 9 m.o. 2 p.7 Pp. much rain, H. wind
ante L. Sly.


HI. Showring, high wind o, S W,
IV. Niſty ar n. Aches. bw”

V. Fr. bright. N W,
VI. Foggy, froſty, Ely. Aches,

1676, Dec. 16. SY 5,


O «

XII. Fog, ſnow , weſp. Thames even quite
frozen,

XIII. Snow, froſty.

XTV, Bitrer froſt, fog,


XV. Froſty, offer ſn. N,
XVI. Froſt, cloſe, dark. Wly,
XVII. Sn. m. Fog, indiſpoſirions, & wirh
Pleides.
XVIII Severe froſt. NW,


XIX.Fr.fair.NW.Note tharzdays after,it rained.


1679, Jan.21. AS 11,
tou. Fr. \. lictle relenr. Ely
» Fr. not very cold. NE


XIX, Froſt, great fog taken up. 10m. NE
XX. Froſty, wand. Nly.
—_ Sharp wd, fr. not ſo hard, C, ſnow, C,
thaw. .
XXII. Red m. S E. Froft, thawing finely ,
driſle,
XXIII, No fr. ſome ſnow and thaw p. m. per
tor. NE,
XXIV, ſnow m. p. n.again 6 m.


1681,


'

Fn. Fog, bright, rain a, m- per tot, Sly,

XIX, Wert 9 m. ad Noon ſop. m.m.p. R.8 p.
II P. Wy.

RX, Rain m. guſts 4 p. and ſome rain, warm.


Wi.
XXI. R. 1, 2. 5 rs. fog, cold, high wind, Wly


Feb. 22, MX 15.


'Nly.

X * II. Fog, bright, wind, rain ante $ m. & .

m. warm and ſome rain p. ms Ely.

XXIIL Miſt, cold and daying. Nly.

XX1V, Fr. m. miſle m. 9 m. Sly.
RXV, R. ante 8. ſuſpicious p. m.

XXVI, Foggy, ſome rain ante 5 p. Ely.


1683, March3i, '=V 20.
XXIX.S:tormy wds blowing the duſt on high
XXX, Fog m, dry S W, wind. Wly..
XXXL. Little ſh. Noon. wp. Aches.
April L H. winds, {. drops 12 m, wetting
3 Þ. cold, 4
IL. H. wind and ftorm noon Þ M. C. with
Sol and Mars. Storm and drops ya 4 p.
Cold by all mens confeſſion P. MH.” Nw
NI. Cold m. often clouding, NW.
IV. Fr. m. bloftering m. cold, Small Pox, Mea-
zels diſcourſed in London and Windſor,
NW


Aww an. add oi oDmD<-


SB S545 BEST Y6HHyT”T go=r= -—mmwo.


Chap. V. & thongh m Pertg, tolerable with us. - 217
Ss 2.The Breviare of this Table ſtands hereabouts.

| Days 118, | |
Expreſs Warmth.—o— 18. | Fila, — _ — T
Heat. —— —— — —T4:.| Ground-miſt ——-—— AE
Rain. — 33. Thunder. - x hoe 4
Store or daſhing. 16. | Wind,—— | 7
Hail. ——- . 2. | Stormy Wind. 27
Sow. 8. | F-op. ”
Miſt. —— — ——6, | Cold. _ I's
bg. — — 17. | Dark ——- —


$ 3. Wherein you ſee that this Martzo Solar ? is ſatable ro the d , only
2s the Nature of the f requires : You ſeear the Foot of the Table it ad-
mics more frequent Cold ; the Nature, I fay, of an @ in general, admits
of Cold, rather than 4 , upon the ſame account as the Breath of my Mouth
at a diſtance feels cold and rough upon the Hand,which is warm and gentler
when the hand is ſet nearer to the Lips.In like manner as in an® © », col-
der and rougher Blaſts are oftner ſeen, than at the Change.
$ 4. The reaſon is, becauſe & or », or any other Planet in 4 with
©, ads chiefly, Vrrtute rel:quorum ;, for whereever the the Sunis conſpicu-
os IV. or V. of the VIII. Good Planers and Trae, are up at their Day-
Labour ; whereas in the P one of the Planets ( befure) concerned, is a
ſent, and (o is in ſome incapacity of conſpiring as effectually with the reſt,
who then make their appearance.
$5. Add, chart the days concerned inthe @ are fewer in Number than
the PA of the d, where the Planet Aſpected with the Sun being Retro-
grade. 2s & here, is ſooner diſengaged from any reſpect to the Sunz the
one falling back where the other keeps his place.
$6. A man would have thoughe that this & would have outdone the & ;
becauſe of the Per:gee of the Planet in the #, nearer conſiderably to the
Earth, then in the 4. Tychs making him lower than che Sun at ſuch cime,
2nd ſhewing a greater Parallax. No doubt, this difference of Situation ap-
ching to the Earth and to the Sun whom it faceth-, makes the atraque
tter, and the grapple of the Beams morecloſe and compa y but yer, as
we obſerved in the » 's Oppoſztzon, the (olitarine(s of the Planet helps to
ol the Courage, in proportion to the Fortitude it is endued with by
the Approximation. And thetefore our Sums of Rain and Wind fink un-
dr the @, though they did not flinch under the d, that being more able
to be reſponſible for ſo many days, than # for half ſo many.
$7. This is clear and oper 3 we confeſs what we find, wedo nat ſtrive
© wrack up Teſtimonies to make good any anticipated Fancies as I thought
my (elf, when at the Firſt obſervation in Ano 1652. I was groune with
Rainand Thunder'z as Anno 1655. I ſhould find a bloudy Alpect of &.
But & proves not ſo Ter et, the Vicifſitudes of Nature, and the
Northern Climes take off much from his edge. |
s 8. To proceed then, the Sum of our days for Fourteen Oppoſitions, All
which are found in 3o years, amounts to 118, The Sum of our Rains, 51.
What do we ſtand Pedling 2 Rain, or. Wind, or Heat, 91. As to the
Cold and Froſts, we have ſpoken enough already 3 For Thunders:we have
ſcarce 5 or 6, Bur bating the Wiacer Months of 1661. 1664. 1674, 1676,
1679. 16$1. Seven of the Fifteen, you ſhall obſerve that thoſe Months
which Thunder nor, were not zſleep. You ſhall find Rainand Winds, Az.
1657. 1666. 1672.1683.Heat and Soultry Air, Azzo 1670.Ford , take him
where you will,is a vehement Planer, to. which if you will confront us with


Fl


2.1.8 | Hazy Arr. Hour of d. known by a. Showre, &c. Look]]


avehement Froſt, Anno 1676, and ſmile at our Zeal, we have preventeg
That Frump , by obſerving. that & fits uneahie in ſuch Icy Chains, ang
takes opportunity to ſtrike Fire out of the Cold Steel, even in Winter
it ſelf ; and that in our Neighbour Countries ( the like, we preſume in dif.
ferent parts of Lapland, but that I cannot maintain ſo large an Intelh.
gence ) of which we havegiven you, I am fare, one Inſtance from Gey.
#2, and ſhall ſuddenly from Calv1/745, produce another. Howbeic, Lek
Symptoms will argue a Diſtemper of a Planer, than ſuch downright


+ 6. And whereas I once thought it good to take notice of Fo among

ther Concomirants of the Aſpect, I believe now I had reaſon {o to do,
fince I find the Antients to take notice of Humiditas Hor1zontis, among
the Effects of the-Mamareth of and &'. This-I interpret to be Hazy
Air, as the Seamen call it, -when 'tis miſty in the Horizon, and clear in the
Zenith. See the Table in Eſcurd. fol. mibz 33. in the Signs of m we,
This hath been obſerved under the & , but here is Authority to our Expe-
rience. Now if the Arabs allow a Fog.on hazie Air in their more Suu-
:hern Hemiſpheres, how much more muſt it prevail with us in Aorthers
diſtance, where our caſe is ſometimes that of Mov. 21. 1659. when ſuch an
egyptian darkneſs hover'd. over us both by Sea and , that our Day.
Labourer was.benighteJ,/and our Vagabond Waterman loſt in his Boar.

' $ 10. Herewe muſt not _ our punctual Evidence from the Cricical
times of Noon, Sun-riſe, Sun-{er,as before inthe precedent Lunar A lpects;
by which a Philoſopher wp Brag the Hour of the day, many times, by
the Showr 3 for ifit rains about Noon, Ihear & ſtrike as well as cheClock,
unleſs with vulgar People (in matter of EzJipfes) you will believe no Phz
nomenon Celeſtial but what you' fee 3 when as then at Even, or Sun riſe,
I find itrain, &c. A egy wee doth as verily ſee 4 plaring on the Sun,
as he in the Story Saw, by force of Retraction, the Eclipſed » facing the
Sun at the ov = t. KE, hr AOueN to he Table, ms Rouge fo
this purpoſe, ot what Tejpers, NAY 7. A730 1653, t at
m. July 16. Anno 1655. What at Noon, Sept. 24. Anno 1657. and :
pleaſe ro go on:

So we palſsto our vagrant Table.


——ROR


® of ©8 with a Little more Latttude than the former
Table.


t506. & carciter Jan. 26. \. in Germany, the Sitter (a River )
$11. Jan. 15. ad 26. King Philip's, dammedup by an Earthquake.Ly;:
Tempeſt - ſailing from Flanders | fo Mezaldws, p. 245. f © & cum
to Spatn, driven on the Exghh | Y. |
Shore, to which Stow adds, the | 1538. & circa, Feby, 4, 24,
Eagle from the Spire of St. Pauls | Jar 20. Baſil ſhook with Earth
blown down, Lycofe. antedates it. | quake. Lycofth. .
f ©& cum h, &c. Jan 19. ad diew 22, Comet in X
April8, & m, following the Sun. Mszaldus, 4p-
1510. T. M. in many parts in Italy, prian , Gemma, Lib. 1. p. 211, cun
Ly:. 516, the Month not ſpecitied. | &d © 2. circa gr. 10, Lychoſth, mil:
I$31, Gometa Fracaſtoris a Sept. 8. ad | placesit.
18. Riccrolus, p. g. vide PN. |1 540. ® circa Mary, g.1% 12,
Nov. 25. 7 WV, .2, & 3. Tempeſt dangerous.


Mar.


I533.
Koi ate, In the Province of Torgaw Hakl. Val. 3. p. 422.


Chap. VI.


March 8; Tempeit dangerous itill, | 1595. & crrca ofch, 31, mA,
dem. 423. | Ocio%. 26. Storm leparared the Fleer,


March g. Great Wind and Rainz| Sur Fraucas Drake apud Hakl.


&s Forragn Evidence,


SS = — ww _—


* w_aw


SY


wo.


Om OnGcgy To ST


every thing in the Ship wet, 14.
PE © 2. crca h opp.
Mar. 13. Great ſtors of rain ( they
ſay in Gaſſel. ) 1.


Mareh 14, 15. Tempeſts brake two


Cables. _ ;

1632, CGirea April 22, = m,

Contrary Winds that we could nor
reach to New-found-Lazd, till the
VII. of Fune. Hakl. Edit. 2. pag.
240. © OI h,

1644 Circa June 24. 5?

June 16, 17, 18, Teinpeſt of Wind
11 Sundeoy, &c, deltroying Cort
Fields, Vineyards. Lys. _

1550. Girca Dec. 18. SV. mt,

Oa this very Dec. 18. The Thames
flowed Trice in 9 Hours, meni-
oned. by Fromond. Meteor. L:6.
V. Stow. pag, & cum d 2 *,

1553. Grrca Jan 21. =,

GreatHaloabout theMoon for 3hours,
at Ba/ll. hoy. 8.

1566. @ carca July 11, AV.

July 1, . SO much Wind that we


| 16059. & Cn Funels, nol.

| Starr in y_ pettore, in =z 18, Lat.

| $5, N. Kepter de IV. Stella.Jap. 20.

| The Thames almolt froze in Seven-

, nights. Hows, Stormy, Purch 1.

75. Jaz 2.448. continual Rains, Id,

| P9873

1602. Febr. 13 , 14. St. Vet. Terre
Mc:us, W. High Winds, Tran-
ſa. 2c65. © cum 4d Q &.


1604, & circa March 27, >,
April 4.
1608, @ crrca July22, A =,


July 26. Great Thunder, Lightning ,
Rain; Galvif. cam 4 hy.

1640. & circa Otober 6.<=,

Sept. 26. Winds drive us ro the
ſhelter-of a Rock 3 The Tramon-
tana from the Black Sea brings of-
cen with it fuch Storms.

Sept. 1044 OF. 10. Current, Purch-
ddI 2 2 ©, which Aſpects being
ſpeat , the Currents were loſt.

I612, circa Now. 28, 27 11,

Nov. menf. Terre motus in Weſtphalia,
per. 1Megr. men}. Galv. 1. Now. &


{pooned afore the Sea, Frob:/her in
Hal 1H,

1678. @ circa Sept, 26, =V,

0#05. 8. A great Storm. Purch. part
I. P. 50. |

Gometa iterum wiſus eſt in Fronte Pega-
ſp.

1680.

Lat. North 6 ; Contrary Winds |
and Foul till day 18. Hakl. pag.

— ab. Ofob. 2. to Jan. 24. He-
vel.

1582. ©@ cerca Dec. 26. 5.
ec. 18, Fair Weather but ſift Gales.
Hakl. Vil. 3. P. P. 182,

IFI7. > CIA [arch 4. X WU,

Bbr 23. Foul Weather, Hakl. Eatt.
1. Very great Storm. 23. Ano-


Dec.»Contiaual Flouds and Rains

at Stam. Purch. 322. cum P Þ V.
1615: @ circa Jan. 7. VS fine,
Jar. 18. Lat. S. 8. degr. Violent

Current ſet us an hundredLeagues


Þ circa Nov. 18. 2 15 princ. | Jan. 1.


ther great Storm, Hak!. p. 224. E-
att, 1.

Marca 1. Storm at N. continued 3
or 4 days. Mr. Caveadih Voyage.


back, Purch. p. 1. 525.

In Thuringia when other
places were frozen, Storms, Light-
ning , Thunder 3 Galviſ.

1617, circa Þebr, 7.2 A,

Febr. 6. much Foul Weather in the
Downs. Purch. 631.

Jan 29. Tonitu Fulgur, Terre Motas,
Kepl. A Steeple rent with Thun-
der at Spelhurſt, Strashurg Tower at
the ſame time. Kepl.

6621. @ circa April 24, 5m, ©

April 22. Pluit,tonuit 1g Suevia, Kepl.
where he commends ſome of his
poor Aſpects, whereas our ©& lies
within 2 days of it.

Febr. 7. &+ March.- Very foul Wei-


1593. @ circa Aug. 30. RX,
Comet July o1. ad dugyft 21, Hewvel,


Luere, mM OS 7,


ther, Purch 1. 655.
1623. June 23. Formidable Tempeſt
at Straſburg, Fired their Maga-


{\ Zin of BO. Calvif, Kyrian,


I1 June 24.


— — —— — —


P of of akntod. Book 11.


220
June 24. in Galwi/aas are to be reckoned.
1625, © circa Sept. 12, AV May 10, Terrible Storm at N E.
1625.Chaſma, Kor: | 1659. @ cri, Nov gl. 7 10,
1629. @ circa Now, MIT, Nov. 17. Sad, dark, rainy day.


Nov. 14. Heimlichen Erdheben, | 1674. & circa Feby. 4, 2), 24,


Kyrianaer. Febr. 11, Lightning, Thunder.
1629. @ circa Dec. 22, P'S, 1666. & circa March $, * me.
Jas. 1.1630. Here began exceeding | March 3. Macule in the Body of 6

wet M. S. . by Mr. Hk. Tran. p. 240.
1632, @ crrca Jan. 26, 8. 1670. July 12. Great Thunder and
The Americax Fleet routed by Tem- | Rain, daſhing 3 m.

peſts. 1674, @ circa Now. 3, mS 21,
1636. & circa April 7. 8, Mercury in the Baroſcope fell an inch
April 7. Heat, Rain, Thunder,Light- | a inſpeFante. circa hor. 5.

ning, Kyr. 1679. Jan. 20. Terre Motus, accor-


June 11, Thunder and Earthquake in ding to prediction, which happen-
Culabria, | ned in Gwelderland throughout ,


4
1637. May 28. Much Thunder and | cup Fulmine, Tonitru. Lond. Ga-


daſhing. Kyr. zet. numb, 138.
1640. Aug. 11. 4,=,Heat veſp.Thurr | Jaz. 12. Adiſmal dark Sunday mor-
&; Jr. | ning.


1642.  tirta Jan22. VS. Jan. 29. Terre motus at Fort Saint-
OFob. 15. tris Matutina. Kyriander, | George, C. W. Limbry.

1647. © carca Jan. 13. 0, 1681, &@ circa Febr.22, XK Mt 14;

7. St. Vet. Commie toute la nuit it plu | Febr. 25. Another Comet ſeen at


tonte Is pour avec tourmente grefe Lozaon from South-Eaſt, ab 8. ad


& eſclaiers. Moncon Voyage a E- | p. broader than the laſt. *


gypte, p: 151. ſo dre 8, g. . Febr. 7. Terre motus at Mentz,


1649. @& crc Febr. 15. >, Francfort, according to PrediCtion,
Febr. 10. Ienes Cadentes at* Briſtol. | Lond. Gazet.
Hitherto do I conceive the Earth- | March 3. Gometa iterum Hage, >
uake at Meſſina, the Flouds at | dem fere loco,
Ries, and the Flames of Feſuvzus,


$ 12. As the Full I and New agree in Influence, ſo do our ? and d
of ©I. Did the d raiſe Storms, ſeparating Fleets > So doth the #,
Doth the &c contribute to a Fiery Meteor ? So doth the ©. Is there 2
Comet hovering aboutthe d ? So alſo an # helps ro ſuch an Impreſſion,
Inundations I do not find break in upon us ſo much ; bur Comets and Earth-
quakes are frequent enough to gain the Readers Opinion. Bate now the
NewStar in GCygm: peFore; I am not yet ripe for that. One or Two ex-
ceptions will not ſpoil a Rule. Yer, our Currents alſo at Sea do corre-
ſpond in ſome meaſure, it may benot fo oftenas in the d.

Ss 13. Our. Macale do begin to bring in their Witneſs : For, that Spot
in the Body of d obſerved by Worthy Mr. Hock, falls in under the
Verge of our d.

$ 14. As toour Currents, fee them brought home to our Very Doors,
when the Thames flowed thrice in 9 Hours, Dec. 17. 1550. Will I &

ou then, offer to aſcribe that Prodigious appearance to onr & ? I thin
may fafel , eſpecially if we met any ſuch like accident under our 4 be-
fore, as Feb.1. 1680. For what though it be prodigious, as acknowledged
by Froxzord and others ? Prodigious Events have natural Cauſes, is as much


confeſſed ; And I am jealous there is much in the Sign, which whetherit
. prove or not, muſt be conſidered in due place, ſeeing there are no inſtances


abroad of thu ſame Nature.
$S 15.T


a_ Aa_—_ > mm o c.


iy a Ao a> a as


bay 1A YSELm_ C4


Is "= = —_ —— —_—— _—__——— _— ——


1 : þ / I n :
Chap. V. Currents tin the Af, 2 by Dayj-Lzght. 29
$15. Todraw toa Conclulion, I have taken notice of 2 pretty accident


Anno 1674. concerning the quick motion of the 3 in the Zazometer which
at ſuch an hour of the day fel! while I looked on, hor 5. an Inch of the Sud-
den. Fell, Ifay, in the Tube, but roſe in the Curveture, the Air being
of a ſudden levicated ro ſuch a meaſure.-' Let the Learned bear with nie
in my Folly, we have adventured on che Currents Marine; I h2ve
found a Current in the Air proportionable to that inthe Water. For the
Currents in the Sea, as all Tides, are made by Levitation of the Humid
Body, made by way of Tumour, which is always Lightey , and
more puffy, than when the Humour ſuvſides Smetont From whence
having received the Notion'of the Air gravitating, F am by this perty ap-
pearance coafirmed in the opinion 3 Learning withall that it is the Cele-
{tial Bodies, which (according to their various poſitions ) do ferment or
{atten the Air 3. gaining alſo into the; bargain, that the Air is of the ame
Lineage cognate to. Water, aud thoughin the day of irs Creation it was ra-
riged io far (as 1000 times they fay ) as that no natural cauſe ſhall re-
duce it again, yet ſtill it hath'a common Nature and” AﬀeCtion with ir.

S 16. I would take notice of the Obſcuricy of the Heavens ſometimes
appearing more than others, and that in Martial Aſpects. Ir may be the
dark 2nd diſmal Swnday (in the Moruing) is nor yet forgotten : Ic happen'd
not far from an. ? © © , whatſoever elſe frown'd at that rime upon-us.

- $17. To ſpeak of the Cold upon occaſion of the years, -76. -13: isnot
needdful, ſpecially if we Hmembe rthat F as we have ſaid, fits uncatie; fo
that the ſtate of the Air ſtands upon a tickliſhpoine,whend and @arewith
one and the other in a Froſty Seaſon,” and conclude to bring in a Thaw,
as Dec. 21. in the year 1676. as is noted-in the Diary. ' For though an #
be chill of Nature as touched before, and weaker Signs mutt be debulitudesg
yet 2 2X are very mutablefrom oneextream to the other, whenthey
are conſcious they have a Friend at the other Hemiſphere in the. oppolate
Sign. For this is myſterious; as in the Gheſs-board. An Aſpet bareand
naked may do little, but alaf ! it may be' fortified by this or that appullſe,
then the removing of one man alcers the Game. Yy |
s $9 18. Iconclude with the apparition of 2 by day-Light, I have obſerved
Aſtronomers miſtaken in their conjectures in the point , we who enquire
muſt be ſuſpicious 3 what if our Aſpect ſhould help to clear the Air, fo as
romake the plains moreconſpicuons? 2 and &, as © and 2 have a bright-
neſs of air ſometimes attending the ſame Ape, which at other times
makes darkneſs, ſometimes after miſt clarifies the Air. Our Table witnefling
that the Aſpect ſometimestakes up the Fog, Jaz. 19. 1679. which at other
times elſe, fell thick and threefoid : Nay under the ,d as well as: © we
meet with 2 ſhewing her ſelf, Ao 1660, OF, 30.


[5
CHAP.


wy 3 Firſt Square confudered. : Book 1I.


CHAP. VI. Oar 3.


$ 1 The Firſt Square , after the Lunar, deſerves ſome clnfideration in
the former Square, & riſes before the © contrary to what the y, did
in the Lunar. 2. Firſt Squares home-Diary. 3. Nothine anti-
martial in the Diary. 4. In the firſt Square the days are often all of
A ſt, viz. Wet. &. Rain ante lucem, often in the firſt Square,
6.6 is a bluſterer. 7.4 ſtrange Phenomenon of Clouds their ſick foe
ceſſrve orderly generation. 8: Fog no ſtranger. 9. Evident Foot-
ſteps of the configuration. 10. Prognoſtic not evacuated, though it be
ary in one place, while it rains in fother.11. Li ghtning belongs to this
AſpeF. 12. So doth Hail, the Iris. 13. A note or 1wo concerning
the Trine, the Second ont-does the Firſt, 14. Inquiry into the rea-


ſon.
$1. Ith the D of So! and ) we have troubled the Reader , we
K muſt inſtance-in one 2 more, for the Aſpects fake, and
what can be better than a Martzo Solar Aſpedt of that kind? We produce
but one, and that is the Firſt, v/z- That which follows the d . We trou-
ble you not with any of Keplers Diary , much leſs Foreign Collecti-
ons; | Admit one of our own, it may ſufhice. Now concerning this
Aſpect I have nothing to note but only this, that. our Planet, Aſpeted,
ſeeing it moves flower upon the Suns ſwift Departure from-it, riſes
before the Sun in the Firſt Quadrate, &-+. .whereas the » is found to
pe after, which muſt be taken notice of, becauſe we ſhall make ſome uſe
f the obſervation in the timing of the Influence or effect.

S$ 2. Let the Table then enter, that we may (ee whether it gives the le
account, asthe e precedent hath done, if yea, than we ſet & mark up-
on it. F


Ogod gui d ſegy, F


$2; An.53. Jan.21. @n& 12, | X. Dewing ante (© ort. Hail 7 m. ourragious


in {. places; very cold. Nly. .


X'VIIL Rain, calm,  wrack ride - from Sourh.

Rain p. m. : N W.
XIX. Fair, warm, f. rain at night.
XX. Miſling, H. wind, warm. SW.
XXI. High wd , ſhowres, miſt veſp. warm


morn. SW.
XXII H. wd, (, miſlng. SW.


XXII. Windy, {. mille, wd and my >
XXIV, Rain ante luc, {. ſhowrs , freez night.


n. 55. Mart. 8.X 2 27.


EC V. Clds ride NE. winds, drille gm. SW.


VI. R. 4m.calm , firs of ſhowring. NW.
VIE. Storms of hail and rain 2 m. cold; H. wd.
NW


Fits of rain at noon. .
VIIE. Cloſe m. ſome rain Snn, ot. (ad rain.
SW.

IX. Overc, m. clouding ſtrangely, ſome rain.
N W.


XI. Froſt, cloſe, miſty m ; clouds ride con-
erary 3 ſtorms, hail andrain” $W.SE,
XII. Sad ſoking day ; clear n,
An. 57. May22,*mg, *
XVI. Dry, wd overc. 9 p. (. guſts. NE..
a me ſhowr m. miſle 9 m. windy,blew
mik. N W,
XVIII. Cloſe, windy, open, blew miſt. N E.
XIX. Cloſe m. open, warm. NE.
XX. Cloſe m. open, cool wd, mille (© occ.
wind ac 0, N W,
XXI. Fair, high wd, threatning 0, cool wind
at h, cold even. NW,
XXII. Cloudy m. p. cool , {. lowring, N W.
X X11. Cloſe m. p. N W.
XXIV. H. wind, coaſting ſhowres 5 p & ©


occ, hot ſtill pſt © orc. N W.


Js


An. 55,


KL wo


—_———


—_—


Chap. V.


DOaod' Diary.


An. 59. Auguſtio, & I 27.


, VIE. Drifting o. & 5 p. wdy.
London fair and hor, cold n.
VILL. Fair, rain 0. & 5 p. Hot ; Londonut {4pre.
Ix. Blew miſt, wds, wertring 9 p. W.
X. Much wet ante luc. ( die tot. SW
XI. Heavy alr ante luc. rainy 6 p. SW.SE.
XlI. Wet p. m. Tempeſt of wind at n. ſhow-
ring. At London fair die tot. ({. rain 4 —


XIv. Flying cl. offering m. wetting ©


SW.
-


occ,

w.

XV. Lond. Wer a. m. fair, heavy air, hor ,
Lightn, at n. ſhowr 10 Pp.


An.61., Sept. 48. =S 15,


22

— ——_—
V. Tempeſtuous re droge, ſhowr. p. m. &
wel. W. NE,
VT. Rain m. wind and miſle m. pÞ. Nly,


|


VII. Tempeſt of wind and rain 2. m. Wy,
VIE. Miſt, mifling, Tempeſt driving, \. rain
miſle and ſnow 2 p. 4 p.6 p. SW?


j
An:70. Feb. 16. 788,


XII. Bluſtering n9F. tot. R. p.m. ſnowy p

much rain at n. S W
XIII. Rain circa ©) or. freez 4 p. S W.Ely.
XIV. Froſty, fair f. gales. - Ely.
XV. Rain Sun or. freez a. m. thaw ni. thaw


Pp. m. A'y.
Lond, ut ſupra, .
XVI. Froft, wer p. m, Ely. Nly
XV II. Wetrting, foggy d. wet art n. Sly.


X VIE. Fog m. moiſt, open p. m. Eſtly at n.


"XXIV. Cloudy , cold wd, clear m.p. SW. | XIX. Fog m. ſome |. froſt, cloſe m. p. and #
XXV. Rain a med. no#. ad YO) ort. — —_— wiy,
Iris and ſmart ſhoywrs ante 8 m. H. wind, 7 :
t ſtorms of rain 7 Pp. SW. | 43.72. April 16, SV 7,
XX VT. H. wd, ſmart ſhowrs. S W.
XXVIL Stormy wds, frequent ſhowrs Pp: M- | XIL Cloſe, miſty. Nly-
Cold d. GW. | X11. Cloſe, miſtys coldiſh m. Nly.
XXVIIL H. wd, {. ſhowrs m. cold and windy | yr © "ey . NE.
day. EWA b _ be. XV. Cloſe, \. driſle rx p- rain; + SW.
XXIX. Sad rain 43 m. ad 9 m. at” 7 XVI. Wind md wer (fn. fell and them in


XXR, Froſt, cold, ſhowr 2 p. fog op. $.
I. 0#0b, Cloudy, fhowr 6 m. little ſhowr n.


3 SW.
As. 63. Nov: 3. Am 32t
XXX. 0#, Cloudy - 4. m. open. p. m. cold.


Sly.
I. Nov. Wind a. 1. Rain 4 p. hottiſh. Sly,


Y.: H, wind, offer 11 rm. at n, hoctiſh, Sly,
IM. H. wd, cldy, hotriſh, Sly,
Iv, Wind, rain 'O) ort. cloſe. hor. _


V. Rain 9 m. wd, rain 1 P-
( V1. - x} warm, very high wd, rain 11
- -wF, tor.


An. 65:  Dec.5. M7 23.
8. Wind, C, rain ante IJuc. cloudy , no
NL Cloſe, warm, miſt m. drifle a. m. fog &


Pp. &
SE.


N. Froſt, warm, Q clouded , ſuſpic. 4 p.


Y. Cloſe, blew miſt, driſling 4 wetting 3 p,

VL © cloudet , drifle 9 m. wetting, © riſe
crc 1.p. drifle 9 P- SW,

VIL Windno#.rot. ©clouded rain rp. dtille ſub
© orcas.


my
An. 68. _Jen.7. E917.


iy. Windy, driſly a, m. furious tempelt of


— CC aw


' wind and rain
bury 11 p.


#* Fiſe ; Lightning ar Salif-


the Country, and froſty morn this week. '


XVIE. White fr. {. miſt, bright, cold; Wy.
XVIIL Cold, dry, miſty, miſle 4 p. NE
XIX, Bright, dry. Nh.
XX. Cold, bright, dry. NE. "4
XXI. Bright, dry, windy Sun occ, N W.
XXIL Bright day, brick wind, Eh.


Ap. 74 Juh14 AS 1,


X. Br. cl. warm p- m. ſhowr 5 p. SI.
XI. Bright, f. miſt, cloud floating and lowr.

| NW.
XII. Fog. fair, float and lowr, SW.
XII. H wd, thowr 1 p. 8 p. SW.
XIV. Showr 9 m. ſhow and, thunder x p. very


h. wind circa 0. SW.
XVI. Warm, dry Ely. cloſe n, and hotriſh.
XVII. Hor m. f. rain 5 m. NE, ſoultry, clds

in heaps, terrible Lightn.9 p. Meteor neer

Perſeus, 2A » .
XVII Soultry, dry. mach lightning about

med. no. 3 Metcors 11 P. :

XIX, Lightning and Thunder 2 m, rain,
ſting r 1 p. H, wind and cooler,


An. 76.


VII. Cloſe,very miſty,wet 9p. m. 3 p. &cNE.,
VIIL.C. rain m. wetting 3 p. 6 p. miſty, NE.
IX, Rain m. clofe, cool even, windy, N W,
X. Cloſe m. p. open p. m. H. wihd veſfp, Wly.
XT. Froſt m. f, rain circa Sun or. & 4 p- cola

H. wd. 'Nly.
X11. Fr, cool, cloſe m. p., wind brisk 11 p. No


dew11p. though the Full I fhey brighc.
; Ant


Ccoa-


40
Sept. 11, 12 29,


Mmm


:


i ——_


224


Days All of a Sutt. Strange clouding.


Book Ir


yy |


XIE. Dew m- ſad rain ab 8 m. ad 11.
XIV. Rain nod, fere tot, cloſe m, p. miſty. Nly.


An. 78, O8.20, m4 7.


X'VIE Cold fog, rain 1 p. great ſhowre, ſnow

in very great flaques 3 p.
XVIII Fog, cold, ſuſpicicious p. m, Wy.
XTX. Cloudy a, m.cold p.m, Þ ecl.totally,Ha-
lo 11 p. : NW.
RX, Very cold fog a. m. ſtrip't clouds on
Y


XXL H. Fr. ice , great fog, cold p. m. ſnow,

wetting I1 P. , Nly. Why.
XX11. Rain m. H. wind, flying cl. Nly.
XXII Fog, cloudy a. m. open,cool p. m.N E.


'An. 80, Nov. 22, 2 12.”


XIX. R, ante Sun oc6 cloſe, \. driſle 9 m_
ly,

XX.\. rain 5 m. Fog, open m. p. ſuſpicious 11
p. cloſe wind. RS Ely.
XXI. Cold wihd, fog ; brisk wind 2 p. cold
veſp. Ely. N E.
XXIL Froſt, fair. NE.


XXIIL Froſt extreme, C. fog, froſty. Nly.
XXIV. Extreme froſt, cloſe, fog p. m. Nly,
XXV, Fr. Comet at Straſburg 3 froſt , great

fog, dark z warmer weſp. SW,


4.
An. 84.Dec. 25. > 14.4 22.44 27,


XXII. Foggy, coldiſh, Aches 2 p,

XX1Il.-Fog ; wetting a. m. cold. W,

XXIV, Rain m. offer 11 m. cloſe, cold, dark,

XXY, Fog m. warm circa 0. High and lofty
winds & 0. ad merid. Sly. Tropic & Equin,

XXVI, Fair, warm ; H. wind towards even,
SW. Aches.

XXVII.R.and wind m. and dropping, H.wind
and ſhowring p. m. & 9 p. SW,


An$5. Jan.39. mn % 21,427.qdFeb.1,


XXVII. Open ; warm. d. W. N, ſome froſt n.
XXVIIT. Thick fog a. m. tor. & p. m. warm.
E,


XXIX.. hy, cloſe m. Þ. cold n.
XR. {. fog,qwind ©. clds low. N
XXX. Fog, rain 95 m. & 8 m, miſt 10 m. W]

I. Fgp. Froſt, fog, cloſe a, m.Aches concliend


Nly,


Ss 3.Here a cold April,what anti-Martial face of Weather is there ?
Here is heat in ul


74. Auguſt 59.
ary 53. & 85, In
S 4. Asto Rain, pray let


May 57. November 63: and Janu-
ele 'tis expreſſed, in the reſt jan lyed. , Jy
Ie beadverred that the days compriſed in theAL


peck are more than once,all of a Suit,and that is a winning circumſtance with


Gameſters, ſee Anno 53.55.58.61.6 3:
W


wehad beſpoke the two firſt years,


68.6, 50 one would have thought


erein ,' 1h 15 days it rained, not 16,


I confeſs, but 15. itdid : And though ſome other Mon $.may prove dry,
s. Hence


to ballance the connerys yer with
we


t inequality, it Mill


d days 76:1n 122. Nor can you find half 15. days


in our own D
dry canker. This Aſpect, even in April, - Anno 72. the Cold and Dry


Month brought rain twice, and that on the preciſe day.
-$ 5. Buthe who ſhall viewthe Table, the Win
that before day, do plainly ſhew the Power .


and the ſad ſoking Rains,


the furious Tempeſt,


of & in Squarewith the Sun; for in this Aſpect &' riſes early, as we no-


ted before, and is ſometimes got paſt the Meridian, before the
This makes Rain ante Iuccm, Wi


the Horizon.


touches
I ſay or Rain, not on


at © _ but before, a great part of the Night, ' 24, 53. March 6, 7,8,
, I, 1b.


IO. 55.


, 10. 59. Sept. 25, 27, 61. O#


Nov. 1, 4, 5.63. Dec.


2. 65. Jan. 4 . 68, Feb. 12,13, 15. 70. Jul I7, 19. 74. Sept. 11, 14. 76,


OFob. 22.7


. Novemb. 19, 20. 80. there 1s


carce a year (capes : The Cir-


cumſtance of the time firſt is notable, and then the frequency of the re-


ſale-
$ 6, On ſuch Conſideration as this, we juſtly obſerved our Lunar Puiſ.
, treating ofher Square with the Sun,and here with &', the Evidence


is more luſty and buſlin


us to take notice of the Edomite, who


, and calls
is known by wrolemee , Kim, and ſad Rains, which make a fair ſhow in
the Table, the which we do find in the Second Square alſo. Rain there,
Notable after-the Sun ſer, as here ante lucemr.
'H 7: Now follows one moſt notable Phenomenon, but our Table has
not leave to enter, Anno 55. March g. the place was the good Town of


Farnton, where I firſt profeſſed to obſerve , Part of the


eaven toward


the Southwas overcaſt, and towards the North was clear, when Lo! In


the


wn} pw £4 a os aw oe


ov
awe 4 a


Chap. V. Conſtt. everal at the ſame time binder not A ©8..


22


the Foreaoan the Cloudy part ſeemed to increaſe by a ſucceſſive gradual
condenlation, as falt as a Seeds-man ſtrews his Seed, and in the ſame pro-
greflive Order, to my great admiration then, but more ſince, becaule I ne-
ver law the like, nor any other chat I know of, and therefore ic may be in
vain to referr it toany probable or almoſt poſſible cauſe, although the Square
or - and © ſo near the Cardinal points, may be founti to 4&t wonder-
ully.
” 8. In the Table we meet with ſome fog, we know it gets fotting many
times in a Martial Aſpect. ; |

99g. In all the Sum of days 122 , there is not above 3o days but are win
dy, and rainy, or of exprels heat. —

9 10, And whereas by this very Diary it appears that it may be a watm
Conſtitution in one place, as Kepler alſo hath noted, when it is moiſt in
another, as in Auguſt 1654. it happened at Tarnton, when ic was hot and
Dry, moſt part at Lonaor, it evidences that the Planets are warm in them-
ſelves, and that Warmth produces Moiſture, yet not at all times or places
- alike, favivg,notwithſtanding the Credit of our Principle,which doth not ſe-
curely pronounce always but uponExperience given, and knoweth to diftin-

uiſh berweenParticular and General Conſtitutions, the one confined to its
rovincs, the other obtaining all the Kingdom over; through which Cloud
the Method is able to pierce and pronounce with Limitation.

s 11. Lightning we meet with here about 5 times,but they only inzyears,
the reſt ſay little, howbeit *tis not caſual, for Lightning we meet with in
Lepler, Lightning in Kyriander. ;

S 12, If any Hail appears, we ſeize ig. And the, Great Iris, Anno 61,
Sept. 25. may be found to have ſomewhat of 5 Sala in union with the ©;
We may hear more of it. : > 4909

S$ 13. All that ye ſhall obſerve concerning our Trme, which hath not
been (aid before, 1s, that the Second out-does the Firſt without diſpute;
both for Frequenee and Violerice, - - |

Ss 14. The Cauſe is not fo obvious; for  movesſlow , even ſtationary
almoſt in both $ If Artiſts will allow more flow in the Later than-in
the Former, that will help : for upon that account the Later Square of the
» may pretend to its Singular Effet I will not venture,l may be thoughe
topleaſe my ſelfin my reathes at this and the other Probleme, but I have
no ſuch ſatisfaction in ſo doing: All I can do is to recomfnend them both
to Obſervation, to ſee whether, as in the Lunar Aſpe&t it happened, the
L doth not exceed the Square 3 For the Compariſon of one* 4 with the


other, I ſhallnot rake occafion-here to introduce their Diarfes, but even let
them ſhift for themſelves. If the Second 'T74ze doth any:whic our-go the
Firſt in Fiery —_— Halo and Iris , let ſome Celeftial minded Man
ns che Reaſen : I hope it

1a 1OMCE LEY


may be lived upon the Premiles, for I am


226


Sextile of © 8. Aﬀpetts ſubter Horizontdl operate. Book 11.


het es


CH A P. VI. Of the Sextile of Sol and Mars.


& 1. Some notable Occurrences. 2. Sextite compared. 3. More Rains
in the Former 9more exceſſes in the Later. 4. Firſt Sextile rains of-
ten in the Even, the Second not ſo often. Aſpe&s therefore are effe-
Fual even under the Horizon. 5. InbothSextiles the moiſture happens
poſt Merid. why. 7. The Second Sextile Hails more than the Firſt,
the Reaſon. 7. A Note onthe | Rainbow. 8. Clonds furrowd.
9. Blite. 10. Hony Dews. 11. Some mahighity even under the
Sextile.


$ x. ſ\NUr Sextile of Sol and Mars cannot well be paſſed over, without
| Crag done to Nature and itsContemplation, (chough theDiary we
dare not ſhew) ſuch notable Occurrences being found herealſo,as in the for-
mer Leading Aſpe&ts. Did I fay ſuchoccurrences ? Or;. are they ſome
peculiar, and mere rare Effects. that hang on this Combination. —«
' S 2. I compar'd:them both in the following Synopſis, and they yielded.
both of them thus. , .


*X@©s IL qu. &. ante Solem *@& Il inquo & ſolem, d longingat


_, oriiar, ſequitar,
Pace Rong. 1 Rn * * 78
5 LF theſ . ap 22.
. "TVs a 8.37 4 9. |
High Wok =" | b Winds 23
Mor, "OUR * - >
Thunder 4 a; | Hail. |
fats * 4 ; |Thndr, Lyghtn. To
tdes 3. - * rides 2,
Dark ts 5 Dork ter: "
Summa dicwt 110; | Sum. Dier, 105.


-'S$ 3. Where,if > ny Second in the Prior Inſtance for
Number, yet it; Weight they ſeem to be equal; There are more Rains in
Former, more Exceſles inthe Later. In Miſts, in Meteors perhaps, in
Air the Firſt exceeds, in Winds, in Thiunders, in Irides , the Second

Be - IR <1 LY; _—- ++ LS.

S$ 4. But what ſhall we fay to the dibroportion of the Rains 75. to 51:
Tt cannot ſcarce be caſual, and therefore the Firſt will claim, eſpecially if
we obſerve a Circumſtance which ſtares inthe Face of the Reader, where
theRains in the Firſt Sextile are obſerved to ſhow themſelves aboutEven or
Sun ſet, ar after when our Planet & aſpeted with the Sunyhath taken leave
of the Hemiſphere, yea when ſometimes the Sun alſo hath left it : In
the Second Sextzle more ſeldom fo, and yet there we find it 27. times:
'This be ſure is gained from itz that an Aﬀpe& hath a de force or Influence
even while one of the Bodies concerned, (if novBoth) are h:daez under the
Farth, which hitherto hath been with me a Queſtion in the Square, and
Trine, and S*xtile, but now begins to be held in the affirmative. -
Ss. In both Sextiles 1 tn Moiſture happens moſt part poſt me-
riazem, the account ſeems to be eaſter. Sure the Weſtern ſideof the | 4
Y1A14R


Chap. VI. Hail." I is; B Baer, Malin: ancy


95d, in, as we have all already ſaid is moſt inclined to to Rain, and that is the
Scene of all Sextiles, and of all ocher7 Aſpects of Northern Declinationr
except the & and Quincunx.

Ss 6. The Difference of Hail ſeems fo confiderabiFrhar T muſt hunt aſter
ſome reaſon : Is it not becaule that in the later * che Planet riſes after the
Pun, andg in the very Hour of Hail happens to be.ui.the rear alone, and

eſolate. For though the Pjanet be but 2 Signs diſtant, yer, i we obs-
ſerve it, Hail ſeldom happehs in the Evening, or near © ſet, and t erefore

S may be well upon, or 6 the other ſfideof the Meridim,: which if it be,
py 6 ws che Sun” makes irithe cooler Quarter; + ©

$ 7. Now what I find iv common tr thete: Szxtiles. are firſt the appea-
rance of Raigbqws, and\ in,the- Secoog $extulea Reflexion ofa 0 aſe
an Iris reversd, with the Purple-Facing outward, 2s, by Laws of Reflexion
mutt appear, 1.am nor engage! to ſpezk tothe appearance , if 30, depends on
this Aſpect, Treckon it raricy enough.

9 8, -The Next is another paffion of Clouds -in Furravws umiſual , to be
noced the rather, becauſe of that ſtrange-obſſervation of the appearance of
Clouds mentioned under the 1 whole new. Creation.ſeemedas ſuddain,
Fun Generation of, Smoke from the ſurcefhve accenſion of matrer com-

p le.
e NEXL. iS 2 comman Blice in the Firſt Sextile,: Tali 7. Anno 166 r
In * Laſt, 4>#il >0. An. 60. there is copERSE hard to be diſcovered unle(s
by very warchfal Countryrmen and Gard Neths at whar time we find + in the
following Month many Gatyptllers noted$ Had" we not fome ſach inſtance
before ? And doth nor altbhelp? | As the$#/7ep laid, ——

C" Joe, ow let.not dur -Hody-drops tink; noted I remeber Moy4 As.
60.in the Second, Sextile, 2 caſual laſtaaee,.. I confels,-but ſuch as may. be
Hare f, no doubtz;where therys opportunity fox a. curious Obſeryer.
Stench of Miſts 2nd Hoy drop [Nork NOW helong tothe fee Caute. ..

- $111. Our laſt Inftance js cheworſt, fot it bay why beyond dficn,
it brings oft-rimes a fick Interval, in'Mareb74, Func 76, fey 78. os

er.
luc


Firſt: March, An. 73." April, Anno 95. May; An 77. for the
Six continued years with-one and'the.-other\Aiſpect, you'l e, are un
L uſe the Word, al ole Tha ne cali Oh mm dr.wh


you-pleaſe. Poſterity will bel ie .— th me =.,c
- their own "Ob Co 6g res DHS, £2n n end Q _ Marys lar Aſpect;
the Habinide A tw9.Gre "er ular ewe
" \ 1 y io & | b \\M w% Y \ L
MOU 01> .M07511%0% ONTH]/ © Wor wt
« \ "$i y.+\ TH ILES \ KO MYA
1 we þ "> Ro 15s , 4 ) .£ c p 31D I
= | 4 i x bo A v\\ ” | 1% \ 4 i\ LAI?
Os IT FIIIÞ Yiu vs 40S ht rt
. : ” \ As >
a FO Tk d Gd a © - -_ _ 4 — fl \
{\ k 119% \ +
ROE oy ata 2s ; - honnd$) wax Ln val 19 ) C 0/706 ") ali +
$I TO : 3 3h iq , 7 R t3 : Mt IO Y
1 9d7. _ 102 '7 yon 'y. - RT &2 2 17 Wk
$5113 92! 6 2 SN Port | Win no NOI? (15)158, C HA 1:-
bY 15 Q ae 518] I» 1113 . 39V099L toil p: 7 TK,
Th 91 Gh ; fi92 21 * C2 T1BIY © 112qqutl | L


i y } <2 1 F ” 4 J*<Y & mH


a + —4


4.4, PI » i.a«i..e.


> s: s ſome, "Tifible f, for Aſtron. ſake. | BookIl


CHAP.VIl. 4G $9.
Conjuniion of Mars and Venus,


$ 1. This '& takes placebere before & % .2. Tis many times ofible, and

4 fine ſight to ſee. 4 Heathen Theology it is 4 lewd Fable. 4. 'Tis

of uncertain return. . It brings an Apertio portarum. 6. k

commonly brings its fe. 7. The Aſpets GbaraFer. 8. The Home

produced. -oR = Diino -— — i. CE. 4s to

Heat. 12. The Obje&# wy eftimony ro

. Rain. Not bo Blok inthe Fil "hy Tot to the Platic.1 4.The
_ I ow _ Winds , the Obſervation concern, Wind changin

proguſica: OD 17. Halo Pazelia. 18. EF


s 240. of 280. bear the Charader, 20. The |


ELES 21. Who wiſhes well to the the Sea-man, is a well-
wifber to his Coney. 22, Diſtance of 10 Degrees proper to ſtormy
Conſtitutions. 2:3. Account may bt givenof the Duration of a Tex-

; fora Week, Month, &c. 24. Stated or arbitrary. 25.Kep-
er - forced fo CONCHrT. 26. One AſpeZ extinguiſhes ot. another.
27. AN 3s a dire Meteor. The tee «s proper for Hail


a5 any. Thunders. 30. Keplazs 21. Blite?
32. Coven en Degree a pegs Co ing. $2, This
4- * 238. Proved,
go, « wy org pry;

wh
pitbPartile. 20 Garrents cor cllge 4O. | ade


we difference between
. Fonds, Ct | om pernbgr ye
” more 10 zo die and 4+; thar
6.4 Lift of.


fars and Venus
« 49- an Ter. « 50, 4; ap Send Aſtro-
fred 5 Apertio Portarum. 51. Diſſent from the
| tnake the contrariety of the Houſes to bethe cauſe of A-
©ns oe of 54,Apertio Portarum,a hand-
enity of Martial AſpeFs. 56. De-
« large y Fuchs Z — Origine ofthe -— ps is Cele-
hid, Seainſ the diligent Dimmer-Brock. 57. *1s not eating of


F makes the Autumn fekh.


e with
s forla
_ con-


ent it before chat
RR hath bin in the dark.
_ 2. "3% d happens ſome w it ſelf co the publique view in
the NoRuraal Henuſphere { ordering it for A y's fake, that


what


4 operate 4


SS dS io


TT +» nw


* a a, 4


Chap. VII. Ap. Port. « violent Aſp. its Charafter.


729


what could zot be poible in the Diurnal Solar Conjuactions, ſhould be
conſpicuous to all who were givert to obſervation; and a fine Sreze it makes
in the Heavens 3 Jucundum ſpetaculum, faith Kepler, truly, as all muſt con-
fe who regard the Motion and Luſtre,

$ 3. In the Harlot Theology of the Heathen, the Conjundtion of G with
2, makes a lewd ſmutty Story 3 but in the Chaſter Regions of thr «ther,


'Tis a Congreſs of two Glorious Lights paring one with the other tury p


Language as we labouF'r yrefine ro underſtand.
9 4. The Revolution of this Aſpect is ſomewhat intricate, not viſiting
' once in Two years, asthe d & ©, but with more uncertainty and variety.
Variety, becauſe it is found ſometimes to repeat che ſame Radiation oxte of
twice before its departure, as Anis 1854. 1660. &-2- Umcertarnly, be-
canſe we may meet with an £ dQ, anal
one Twelvemonth, and again ocherwiſe, neicher or &d in the ſame
time


9 5. Now, this is fo far from an Ewery-days-AſpeF,chat it is by Aſtrolo-
youched to be free of rhe Sagiery which-bear an Apertio Portarum for
their Motto. A Port-opening openin of | rp of Heaven for Rain and
3nd 5 concerning which Notion, and: The grounds of it, If 1 may ſpeak
freely, we will, at the Cloſe of chis Chapter, declare our Sentiment.
$ 6. The Aipect is wolent, That's Piel, os large effuſion, exceeding
many of its fellow Martial Aſpects and fo the {Veoterrc's tell us, For when
they cone to declare irs Influente, They lay Weight upon their Words,and
lay, Semper fere fert malum ftatum aeris : and others willing to forget the
Fee, (as if there were {ome abſurdity in Semper joyned to Kod )
rtoundly, jSemper. malam, as if the Effect never faild. But who ots to
drive xt ?' No, Solet mowvere, faith Eichfad, and goes no flitther.
infallibiliy of the Effet belongs co the perfection of Aſtrology. We
- now rreatiogbuc of the Rudements only, and firſt Principles confidered
emſelver.
$ 7. Will you know che efitire Charter of this Aſpet from Eichfad's
Experience ? Ic ſeth to bring (faith he) Warmth, Rains, Winds, and in
particular Weff-Winas, and at time of the year, Szows. Not
ting Luſty Coraſcations. And He adds , That this Influarice laſts for ſome
' rats22uartte of, days, as before in © 2 , decauſe the two Planets are of an
Egaul Gate. Ephem, part 1. ad Annum 1636,
$8, We hear him, and therefore we produce our Table fot the interval
of two degrees Diſtance, which relate cw a Week ; and ſomewhat more,
x /ſrimes; yea, as it may happen, tay concern three Weeks, or 8
Monchs time within the confihes bur of two degrees. That's brave advan-
tage for a Learner.


a—_—_ JIN —— ——_ CL


The Home-Diary of 426,


s9, Intra Grad. 2. XXVMt. RXvIIl. XXIN. Condy, high ws,
'* March 1. Wind ſhift S W, NE. windy. N E.


— ——— —


48.4652 * apes uy ths Ano 1654. V 7. Jan. 29. L
XX1. , Rain, Jaitv 5 wihd' changes. N, 49
nn, ng Re W. 5. | XXEV Fair. | $ w.
IL Rain. XX 1; Rain, w andy, 7 NW} KXy, Miſty, Hal +
Iv. Wind various, ing 1c02S! W. | XXVI. XXVIL Fair, miſt, rainy. S;
XRV. XX\YI. Wind. 5 W. ( Wrack rides | XXVUIL. Miſty, clondy ; Io 25. S W.
K | _wy; XXX, Cloſe m. open, SW.
oF


ſo our &, within the ſpace of


v


XXX.


*4


a.


—


XIX.) R6g all m, Hot, foe rain 10 P.


230 d 3 2 Home-Daary. Book Ib
” + XXX. Froſt, Coe m. R S W. : wn
Feb, 1. High winds, ſome wer, froſt m. NW.
WH. High —_ ſome ſnow veſp. froſt m. | lterum Auguft I7. TM 20..7 R.
WL H. winds, cold, threarn ſnow, N W.
IV. High _—_ being cold , threat. _ LS, "fxg "FEyCUERY ph
v. High wind, f. ſnow. XV} TS, hot.
VI. Froſt, cloudy, ſuſpicious. Mo” _ _ wy
i, Clouds ; ſhowry 3 ſo ar night. bers my in at midnight,
' ge e700 » 15. S.: March23. 8 R. Anna 1661. 16. Febr. 25. Tunbreage
XVIII. High winds, cleatitg. As | in Kept,
XXI. Windy. .. &@ NE. XX, Rain :
| 9,m. and m. p. W
XXL. High wind, Opld. hail, Wig, | XX. Rain wie 70r0 3 wer night, great Floud,
3XUL goons ods | XXII. Rain 11-mw. & n. rain 2 2 Þ. NE.
XXIV. Windy, ſome rain at night, '+ NW. CRIT Cleats: warms evens. So
XXV. XXVI. Windy, cloudy, m. p. NW. XXIV. OE ne £ W
[XXV, Windy, rainy 9 m, SW,
Trio, mz 23. Ofob. 5. \XXV1. Storms of Rain and /hail. Halo: 2,
SW,
IL, Rain powring wot. ot. violent wind , ; fi XXVIL Little froſt, fait. VV,
powring veſp. XXVIIL Froſt, fog, miſty. Hab Þ. S$.
IIEL H. es £2 vitiable, wer OR i Ads March 1. Sad rainy a. mm. Rain p. & even. $8
day. SW: [I1. Very rainy, windy. S,
Dr Dir ating, al $6
rainy; a, th. ſhowrey N. [. . WP 28. 12,
VL Wer at evening. SW. divas 1667 3%. Jen. 12 W
'L 4 VIIL Little froſt, Are fog at SW,
0 1656, KHOuſt 2 IX. Fog die tot, nighc.; froſt, Ed
fun 656 | guf we X, "Thick fog oe tot. cold. 4d E:
XX. XX1, Fair, hor, Halo. NW. | X01: 20880 ja. Foes Þs We |
XX Very 4 Wolc S W. NW. XIV. -4 |
X IL: Great 3 Very .
XXIV. For hore Ari of wind It p. _ Foggy, ſome wet 4 py & 10 Þ./ IM
XXV. Wer ill 3 m.Bright, very oval, NE XVIL _ —— a FT UP
XVI. fy ins By oG _y % Þ- Pe ;
x VII High wi y. offering. NE. 293
Vey 2 ' | dana 1664; v8, Neven, 7,
m0 1658." 61 22. July 1 | 14 I govt
, July 3 | XXII, Bard Go froſt, cold, fair. ,. | "i
P XXIV. F ,
—_ Poems 4 rain gm. - XNV. bon” rain \7 'P. E. S' E:: .
dai Meteors, 1) 31S E, | XXYL, Drifling m. cloſe. rains: . / ESE.
nee Sonouar, ors 4 ne” 4 SW. þXXVIL Miſty 3 cain xr, nm. and P. mM. 8&6 p-
XIE. Windy, gating apy; even oY I VII Wer abſ# Suri ns {9 D- 15K |
XIV, High winds ; chreatning, Oyors 22 p- | : «
nel o We XXIX, VVet © ort. ſame vt
XY, Vvindy, driſle m. | bon. XXX, Cloſe rain p. m.'miſty 4 p. ur 'o. |
Pl XVI. Meteors. XVII. Showry. W. | Dec. I. Some drifle at n..: - -
Anno 1660. & 18. June 14. bh 1665. S 3. Ja 18. 2 Stat. :
K=14 * 91. Waltham Groſs.
IX. Open and warm p. m. windy. on C-auew.9 jp 4
X. Cloſe, hor. XIV. Cloudy m. hor. NE. '
XI, High winds, .hot 3 H. winds. ar night XV. Exc mo. high winds p. m. lights. 4
and a |
Hot "SW.'W.| v1. Much Li Blew miſt X
g ning 2 m. Blew miſt exten
Mn. $0 + 2 WOT 1g 7% , ded ovthe Hills, ' 8B:
XIV, Soul. calding air. "f. XVII. Blew miſt over Sun a . cloudy | in S *X
) "| wich two Terrible flaſher and a ' off
/ XVI. Blew miſt, drops 5 Pp» towns kg - er and Rain,from —— ro Edman. :
7 Pp a Lightning with ſtorms, ,©
XVII. Showrs 2 m- ' SW and coaing round = the Horizon P. IN; "2.
XVIII. H. ſhowrs 4 m, Hot. *..900, N VI! i


W.
XX.


-— oo F- _


- WR ew


Chap. VIL on


Home-Dzar }s


X X. Refreſhing raina: break of day; and ar
riſe, cooling Showrs., W,
XXI. Daſh 10 m. Thund, Lond, 11, =—_—


XXII. Cool, High winds , coaſting Go > | x


XX111. C. ſhowrs 4 p. SW.
47 Iterum, S. o. Aug.2g.

X X11. Warm, cloudy, m. p VV;

d $x1. Warr, driſle 6 > pf P- SW,


XXIV. Warm, much Lightning and Thander1q

a ſhowr, S'W,

Miſty m. mile, Rains p. $W.

XXVL Cloſe m. p. warm, llew miſt, oo
b)


FO


Arro 1671, I 27,' May v2.

OR

ns IV. Windy; hor. E.
« Much heat. N F.,

XI. Miſt m. Ropes, ſoulcry. w.


XII, Very hot, miſty, ſhowr at Moon riſe.
X[IE. Soultry, yer brisk cool winds. $ \V,
XIV. A, wind-; (howr 2 p: Dewy n. Sw.
XV. Windy, offer a. m. ſtiowr at Humnſted.SW


XV, VVind, ſhowr, 'Þ ſo, & 4 p. ſhowring.
a9 S VY,


Anno 1673.
to © *


M28, April *


XVT. Miſty air, hear. E,


XX VIL- Watm, fhowrin 8&-8:p.:$ W;! XVIE Far Jay; miſt, Field and Ciry.
K 1 64 Þ. 4 E, XvIL Cloſe morn. offering o. hear, NE.
XXIX, Suſpicious morning, indy, Give NX. High wind and rain m, p. ſhoyr 4 p.


XXX. Windy tot. noc?, offerings

XXX1. Wind, cloſe m.

Sept. I, Froſt, very cold ante © wer'y oo m,
w


S.VV.;
NW,


I. Warm, cloſe.
4HI. Warm 3 miſty m.


dy 1667. & 28, Jan, 10, TR.


* _ 0 thaw, cloſe, Vy
L. Rain at day break. S E.
x. Cold m.p. Rain, gud ſnow. N,

Froſt and (now ; otters die tot. guſlys Fold, |


W:| XX. Windy and rain.
; XX1. Clofe, high wind m. ſhedding Noon.

| XXIL. Wmdy, ſome droppipg Pp. m. SW.
"XXII. Lowring ; High cool wind. Sly.


+ X XIV. Windy. Sly.


XXV. Dritle © m. and Els S.W.,
x XVI. Warm, ſomedrifte 5 & 7 p, S W.
XXVII. Showr o & 4 p. miſt, S.W.


W.


| XXX. Hor.


XXVIIL. Cloſe day, ſome moiſtyre 5 Þ.
XXIX. Cloſe m. no miſt. *- ©


S

NE
N_E.
May 1. Showr.6& m. (oubry,Thupder 4 p. ſtorm


of Hzil and Lightning g p. Ely nf 1y,
m.


*;Þ:
IT. Warm; wet 3 p. NE.
II. Warm, cloſe, miſt, Field and City. N E.


Xt. Froſt ; Thaw no. tot. s
XiI Dark day ; Fog taken up. $,| IV, Cloſe m. p. ſome wer-q. p. Nly.
Iterum, % 28, Ang. 6 Iterum, 5 15. May 21. 2 R.
b
fr. Hor p. m. winds art night. N W. | V. Driſle once or twice: cool.
1H. Hot. NE. | VI, Drifle 6 p. cool day, fome wind, Ne
"i Iv. Fog m. hot. Lightning according to prog- | VII. Very cold m. Nly.
noſtick. W. | VIE. Rain 10 m. brisk wd, P NE.
'V.Fog m. hor, windy. S E, | IX. Coaſting ſhowr = NE.
VL Fog m. melting day 3 yer brick winds. SW. ' X. Some wer, overc N.


B


VIE. Fog m. and falls a. m. hor; hail 2 p.
Lightning. N E, melting day, and fickly rime.
W,

VNT. Hor n. fog 4. Mm aki day, dry ,
Thunder toward L5ndon o. High winds veſd.
Lightning at night in che N E. S$ W.
= Fine ſhowr, ſtormy winds , Meteors iv


kyy


6 p.-
-X, Windy 3 ſhowring 10, m. ad 1 p.


po 2669. S 12, June 23:


Pe. XXlI. Warm, miſt m. W.
Il. Fog 8 m. hot, rain defired. SW.
* XX111. Miſt mw. fog. 9 m. hot; wiſh mn. p. Sly.
XIV. Warm, clotc. © SW.NE.
XV. Cloſe m. cold n, NE.” X XVI. Fog nvN,
EXVII. Fog m. palc thick Clouds 3 a dry


ſeaſon, W,


/


| XI. Clouds , clearing, ſome Rain or Hail 2 P.
N.
XII. Gentle rain 1 p.5 p. 7 p. very cold night.


XIII. Wee p.m. ta, VV, clouds Ide. Ny.
XTV. Werrting m. offer p. m. * Ny.
XV, Showry 3p. 5 p. N E.
XVI. Rain m. brisk wind: *

XVII Brisk wind. NE.
XIX, Temperate, blew miſt. N.
XX . Windy, offcring 3 miſt taken up. SW.


Parelii at Womondham, jn agro Leiceſt.
X XI. fome fhowrs 9 m. SW.
XXII. {. ſhowrs at o. and veſþ. Sly.
—_ Showrs coaſting, and towards m1d-
nigh.
_ Showr. ante 1 Mm. 4 Mm. ſmart ar 0.4:
2 PÞ. . N W.
xXVv? Windy, wetting ante. 9 m. Thunder at
Warwick, Lightning, Rain in che S W. av Y
riſe 3 ſhowrs. P South, S W.
XX YI. Showring 10 m, offer p, m. windy
O9n0O SW


226


Sextile of © 8. Aſpetts ſubter Horizontdl operate. Book II.


het ee


CH AP. VI. Of the Sextile of Sol and Mars.


& 1. Some notable Occurrences. 2. Sextilte compared. 3. More Rains
in the Former 9more exceſſes in the Later. 4. Firſt Sextile rains of-
ten in the Even, the Second not ſo often. Aſpe@s therefore are effe-
BFual even under the Horizon. 5. InbothSextiles the moiſture happens
poſt Merid. why. 7. The Second Sextile Hails more than the Firſt,
the Reaſon. 7. A Note on.the ' Rainbow. 8. Clouds furrowd.
9. Blite. 10. Hony Dews. 11. Some malighity even under the
Sextile. th


C1. Ot Sextile of Sol and Mars cannot well be paſſed over, without -

_--- CI wrong done to Nature,and itsContemplation, (chough theDiary we

dare not ſhew) ſuch notable Occurrences being found herealſo,as in the for-

mer Leading Aſpe&ts. Did I fay ſuch"occurrences ? Or;. are they ſome
liar, |


pecu mere rare Effe&ts.that hang on this Combination.
' & 4. I compar'd:them both in the following Synopſis, and they yielded
both of them thus. ' ;
*@s L quo. &. ante Solem *0©G Il. inquo & folem, 6 longingue
"= A. quits, ©
Rain 5: E', _, *| Reg
xceſſes 19. . Exceſſes 23.
gb Winds 24. - High inds 23:
ffs 23 | Mi 14.
Meteors 8 Aron v4 4-
agate q \0-nw M Lights. 5;
? . 1 F, ihe: / Irides 2,
Dark Arr 5 7 65.40 ' Dork, is &.:1 /
Suxme dicmt 110; Sum. Dier, 105,


caſual,
we obſerve a Circumſtance which ſtares inthe Face of the Reader, where
theRains in the Firſt Sextile are obſerved ro ſhow themſelves aboutEven or
Sun ſet, ar after when our Planet & aſpeted with the Sun;hath taken leave
of the Hemiſphere, yea when ſometimes the Sun alſo hath left it : In
the Second Sext:le more ſeldom fo, and yet there we find it 27. times :
This'be ſure is gained from itz that an Aſped hath a due force or Influence
even while one of the Bodies concerned, (if novBoth) are hiddez under the
Farth, which hitherto hath been with me a Queſtion in the Square, and
Trine, and Sextile, but now begins to be held in the affirmative. -

\ Ss. In both Sextiles —_— Moiſture happens moſt part poſt me-
r1d;em, the account ſeems to be eaſier. Sure the Weſtern ſideof the ;
Tian


Chap. VI. - +) Hadi) I 54 Blas: Malignancy +.


vids, in, 4s we have alt already ſaid is moſt inclined to. to Rain, and that is the
Scene of all Sextiles, and of all ocherr Aſpects of Northern Declinationr
except the & and uincunx.

Ss 6. The Difference of Haii ſeems fo confiderabiFthar T muſt hunt after
ſome reaſon : Is it not becaule that in the later * the Planet riſes after the
Pun, andg in. the, very Hour of Hail happens to be.in.the rear alone, and

efolate.' For though the Planer be but 2 Signs diſtanit,, yet, i we obs
ferve it, Hail {&ldom happehs in the Evening, or near © ſet, and therefore
S may be well upon, or -oir the other fideof the Meridim, which if it be,
the Abſenceof che Sun” makes irithe cdolet Quarter; \: *

$ 7. Ngw what & find 'iv common ro thete: Sextzles. are firſt the'a =
rance of Raigbaw $, and\ in,the Secoog younry Reflexien. ofra Rain
an Ir:s reversd, wi the Purple-Facing outward, '2s, by Lays of Reflexion
mutt appear, Tam not engaged to (peek to che appearance. 3 If 1c, depends on
this Aſpect; I teckon it rarity enough.

$ 8, -The Next is another pafſion of Clouds in Furtaws umifugl , 6 be
vr the rather, becauſe Be that ſtran eoletvation of the appearance of

Clouds mentioned under te. whole new. Creation.ſeemedas ſiddain,
Fun Goneration of, u_ #rom the ſutceflive accenſion of matcer wow


ſible.
9. The next.is 2 comp bY Blice in the Firſt Sextile,) Tal: 7. fam 166 r
In pf Laſt, 4p9il >6. Ar. 60. there is ongEffect hard to be dilcovered unle(s
by-very warchfal Countryrnen and Gardn - at whattime we find in the
following Month many Ga??yp#llers noted'$ Mad we not fore ſach inſtance
before 2 And doth nocatbhetp? ; As the#/7ea faid ——'

:$\10c Now-letnor dur Hody-drops fink; noted I remeber Ma & As.
60. in the Second, Sextile, .a.caſual-laſtayee,..I confels,. but fuch as BY be
ark f, no doubtg;where thery ts.opportunity for curious Obſeryer.
Sench of Milts 2nd Hogy- dro oor Ki ong.tothe ame Cauk.. ..


ZE,


+ $11, Our laſt Inftance is < bit 'feetns 8 to pd [queſtion
it brings of-rimes a fick Interval, robe74,” 76 oor $. tor he
Firſts March, An. 73: April, And 9 255M May, A ms
Six continued years -withone and'the.: AAReR. vol e; are nic y;
Luſe the Wor G, q Wichnows aa digg 4 WCOpdreankiakla dr.wh
you pl ealc olterity © bele) Se wheat Weed Spd me ts

_— one Kevation, Ch th an Beg of the] lar Alpect;
Fol ey III 2 ar eg TRICELLD
4 Ir 3 Þ + 4 4 LID fo _ 's ' no 4 KY Es VAL : \ \ 77 v\\s.
WE 12> .M9Y1:7104 O00130/\ ei wr nt Uo
a . 3% d AwarL 5: S.+\ \ J (2CWENe 2 »d\ ni N EE ot thu itn,
> 2.09116508 0411394 io 13a T\ 1042-22, 1312J
a0 >> Bb. 2 \t Al v1 =_ > 4 At. \Þ wil gl
bs YT '\ þ VBA ? \ c wort I>=IF I 5) %\ Y 1d z\ Vs A
KI INK. 2 2-011 Toma wg  QRRIL
$5 EVAIN\ (1 1 TIF. Y \\ 1 , 4) L
Piling gn nayioms” al tied wail Eng wndkifÞh 3o 5 __— ol ER” 4
(9) '0. C to Th 1 290 Mal Jo0 .ho HG: 1. JAIL /k if ”
30H 9:1 *21 2bnno2 gon wu KD I: Th y {:
T6113 J7 15G ?p! ©11 L3 ori 'Nn.n no NO1? 'D2I&) 7: C H AR oy _
R17&b £9 117% (it 9380 bo {3 - 3nvon3s Stour
A Viv guplfobg 1 13 T9 18 1 O1 TIBIY 2010: c2qgaut > 2 . Þ-
iz 13! & 30} 31 95.1970 CHOU © -4qtimgH F120) 9


= Pe "IL _—Y "7 "8 4.4 tn. AM. thao.


228 EO "488 ſme. viſible for Aſtron. ſake. - _ Book Ib


CHAP.VIl 4G 9.
Conjunion of Mars and Venus,


$ 1. This '& takes pe 3" before & % .2. Tis many times © * and
2 fine ſight to ſee. 3. I Heathen Theology it is 4 lewd Fab Ts
of uncertain We. 5. It brings an Apertio Sa, S k
commonly brings its effe#. 7. The Aſpes GhareGer. 8. The Hom
produced. D, IT. Deſcent me the _ i. E. 4130
Heat. 12. The Obje# wr rg . Þ bri eftimony to
. Rain. Not gorges atile, "er? belong to the 'p ic.14-The
_— 15. The "_ the Obſervation concern, Wind changin
16. Q —— cable CONDO 17. Halo Pagelia. 18. E.
5s 240. of 280. bear the Gharafer. 20. The
: Foray Dow.” 21. Who wiſhes well to the the Sea-man, is a well- |
wifber to his Conntry. 22, - Diſtance of 10 Degrees proper to ſtormy
Conſtitutions. 23. Account may bt givenof the Duration of 4 Tem-
, fora Week, Month, &c. 24. Stated or arbitrary. 25-Kep-


er - forced to concurr. 26. One extinguiſhes not another.
27. 418 is a dire Meteor. 2 » This Aſpect as proper for Hail
a5 any. Thunders. 30s. Keplers onfeſſron. 21. Blite?


"32. Coven en Degree diftance- remarkable for” #. $2, This
oduc wp, +0 35- Proved,


wo Aſpett ped? muſe
nike pr FL 40. Fournier's:
he Lyra yot _—_ 3; aus #Hh Some difference between
Flat, . Flonds, 4:3: Some Floud: without Rain

” more 0 hy and Venus thar
l Bends, 36, Dj of,
«te A

ba Log Venus


57. 43s not eating of


SI. le Conjundion of Mars and Fene ſhould in comp! ich |
Co on, Bethe bur follow thar ? « forla


tion of 8 more con-
_ o before chat


hath bin in
w it {elf co the 5-8 view in
oF ordering it for A y's lake, that


what


me to


«4 4.4 i.4< « 4


A 4


Chap. VII. Ap. Port. 4 violent Aſp. its Charatter.


T29


- -”


what could zot be poible in the Diurnal Solar Conjuntions, ſhould be
conſpicuous to all who were given to obſervation and a fine Srene it makes
in the Heavens ; Jucundum ſpetaculum, faith Kepler, truly, as all muſt con-
fe who regard the Motion and Luſtre

$ 3. In the Harlot Theology of the Heathen, the Conjun&ion of G with


2, makes a lewd ſmutty Story ; but in the Chaſter Regions of thr «ther,


'Tis a Congreſs of two Glorious Lights p«rhing one with the other fury .


Language as we labou ef enrney to underſtand,

9 4. The Revolution of this Aſpect is ſomewhat intricate, not viſiting
'6hcein Two years, asthe d & ©, but with more uncertainty and variety.
Variety, becauſe it is found ſometimes to repeat che ſame Radiation ozre gt
twice before its departure, as Anis 1654. 1660. &- Umncertaraly, be-
canſe we may meet with an £ GL, anFfalſo our &, within the ſpace of
one Twelvemonth, and again ocherwiſe, neicher ? or &d in the ſame


ume. | |
9s 5. Now, this is ſo far from an Ewvery-days-AſpeF,chat it is by Aſtrolo-
youched to be free of the Sagjery which bear an Apertio Portarum for
their Motto. A Part gening, aponle of F* Sluces of Heaven for Rat and
Wind ; concerning which dion, and i grounds of it, If 1 may ſpeak
keely, we will, at the Cloſe of chis Chapter, declare our Sentiment.

s 6. The Alpect is wolext, That's plain, dg large effuſion, exceeding
many of ics fellow Martial Aſpects 3 and fo the Veoterrc's tell us. For when
they cotne to declare its Influence, They lay Weight upon their Words,and
lay, Semper fere fert malum ftatum aeris : and others willing to forget the
Fre, (as if there were {ome abſurdity in Semper joyned to Bert)
roundly, jSemper. #ralam, as if the Effet never faild. But who goes to
- che at ?' No, Solet movere, faith Eichftad, and goes no flitther.

infallibility of the Effe®t belongs ro the perfection of Aﬀtrology. We
- = atgpe of the Raudrments only; and firſt Principles conlidered
emſ(elver. |

s 9. Will you know the entire Charter of this Aſpe&t from Eichfad's
Experience ? Ir »ſeth tro bring (faith he) Warmth, Rains, Wins, and} in
particular Wef-Winads, and at time of the year, Smzoaws, Not |
ting Luſty Coruſcations. And He adds, Thar this Influerice laſts for ſome
' ralttz2uartte of, days, as before in &© $2 , decauſe the two Planets are of an
Egzel Gate. Ephem. part 1. ad Annum 1636,

$8." We hear him, and therefore we produce our Table fot the interval
of two degrees Diſtance, which relate wo a Week , and ſomewhat mote,
x2rimes; yea, as it may happen, may concern three Weeks, or 8

| = pe within the confihes but of two degrees. That's brave advan-
Or 4 LEArner. |


Jake.
—”


The Home-Diary of 4 2 8.


ig Gras. 2 XXVft. Rxvitl. XX1N. Cloudy, high was.
g © Srv Grde 2. March 1. Wind ſhife S W. 3, oe NE.


4x 3652 Y _ February 26. Ann 1654. Y 7. Jan. 29. L

| Re Ba

Oe ran, oy | TY 8 W.
KL Rain. X Xi; Beit; w andy, NW. |} XXy, Miſty, Hah ) +


IV. Wind various, droppings: {.:2S! W. | XXVI. XXVIL Fair, miſt, rainy,
Av, XXvI. Wind, 5 W. ( Wrrack 1


I”


0.


rides | XXVIIL Miſty, clondy ; [o 2s. S w.
-d.W.) | XXX, Cloſe m. open, SW.


XXX.


Fs


*Y


2


>


482 Home-Diary.


Li
—_
=


gl 'Werar evening,


XXKX1. Froſt, cloſe m. S W.
Feb, i. High winds, (ome wer, froſt m. "NW.


IH. High wind, ſome ſnow veſp. froſt m.
TIL H. winds, v Frcs threatn ſnow, N W.
IV. High wi


V. High wind, f. ſnow,
VI. Froſt, cloudy, ſuſpicious.
vs Clouds ; ſhowry ; ſo art night.


Iterum, 15. 5. March23.8 R.


j*
XVIII. High winds, cleatrng. NE.
XXI. Windy. .. &@ NE.
XXII. High wind, cold. '
XXUI High'wind, ſnow, hail. Jo.


XXIV. Windy, ſome rain at night. + NW.
XXV, XXVI, Windy, —_ m.p. NW.


Trtis,.. m.23. Offob.5.


IT. Rain powring wo, tot. violent wind , fd
powring veſp. p . W.
ITE. H. Sues £2 vitiable, wee m. ſtormy


8w;:
IV. Cloudy, rain, mind; Lightning N. p: W.
V. Dark and"rafny; a, in. 6 W.
SW.


ano IG56,  Huguf 24.


XX. XX1, Fair, hot, Halo,
XXII. Very hor, Oapotnes:;
Rs Grear fog 3 very hots

. Fog, hot; ; flrin of wind wy .
XNV, Wertull m.Bright, very £00
XAvL Far N We—afiet/.
vs VII. High. wid Ely. offcring. + \\N E.


Fey 2 1658, 22. Fuly 13.


| Xxry Bard rf froſt, cold, fair. 5,
IX.” Windy, rain 9 m. ——— XIV. F L
X. "Soulery, Ll SW. LT rain fp. - E.SE-
XI. Melting day, Meteors, * © py SE. [XV prin Ng = Ke
XHI. Windy, melting day,' Meredesa TW: NN VICK We A Sd EW "I.


XIV, High winds ; chreatning, GN”! P+.


XY, VVindy, drifle ni. 9 rh
XVI. des, XVII. Showry. W.


Anno 1660. SL 18, June 14.


\


IX. Open and warm p. m. windy. + , IK |


X. Cloſe, hor.
XI, High winds, | hot. 3 H. winds, ww |


. Hot "SW. W.


[L. Soulny, groupd-miſt os :- 0,
XIV. Soultry. -- ATULTC
Xy. Soultry, ſcalding air.


being cold , threat. ſnow,
NE.


| Iterum Auguſt 17. M 20.9 R.


XV1TSoultry, hot.

XVIII: The ſame.

XIX, Hot day, tot. Rain at midnight.
XX. Drille m.. &”


Anm 1661.<q
"Þ Kent.


X XVIII Froſt, fog, miſty. Halo V. S.
March }. Sad rainy a. m. Rain p. & even, $
Il. Very rainy, windy. | S,


Anno 1663. V? 28. 7an. 12.


IX. Fog die tot. and nighe ; froſt,
X. Thick fog ze tot. cold. P
XI. Foggy froſt ; cv Ps 1M,


XV. no ONE & oP.
XVI. Fog, warm. 75


»| XVI Fog: rain 8p G36+m.


Anna 1h64 v 8. Novem. 7.


}
XXIX., VVet © ort. ſame drops 8 NE,
[XXN. Cloſe rain p. m-wnity 6 Þ Py ad 1t

Dec. I. Some drifle at n..- -- Ty:


An. L 2 FE Jap 38. 2 Stat.
| 7


XTVv. ct m. hor.
XV. Exc - iq high (Winds p. m. lighes.,
and a b

XVI. Much Lie tning 2 Mm. Blew miſt exten,
ded onthe Hills. ' 8B}


| XVII. Blew miſt over Sun py cloudy in 8,


wich 'rwo | Terrible flaſhery and a clap! >!


*\.
XVI. Blew miſt, drops 5 Pp ſhowrs, -lighen.


7 P+ Thos
XVII. Showrs 2 m- "7 SW
XVIII. H. ſhowrs 4 m, Hot. 1,


Thunder and Rain,from London to Edwentes,
XVIII Thunder and Lightning with ſtorms,
ad ccaſting round. che- Horizon » p,
e .bift ..N


XIX\. R6g all m, Hor, fine rain 10 P. W.


XX.


Book 1h


Very. hot. Sis,


xvi Fog. rain 10 m.very hot. SW.


16. Febr. 25. Tunbriage ,


XX. Rain, 9,m. and m. p.

XX. Rain fie j0t0 3 -wet night , great Flow,

| XXIT. Rain 11 mw. & n, Fain 2 P. NE.

XXUL. Cloudy, warm even. : SW.

XX1V. Stormy, wet n. 'W.

[XXV, Vvindy, rainy 9 m. $f.
XX 1. Storms of Rain and hail. Halo: 2,

SW,

XXVIL Little froſt, fait. - Ws,


VIIL. Little froſt, fair, fog at n. on


XIL XIIL F froſty

ti XIE Fog, rl 7
S;
W.


TH. Hor.
"i Iv. Fog m. hot. Lightning according tg oe |
ck.


Chap. V1L.


"2 Home-Duary.


Iterum, % 28, Ang, 6.


ft. Hor p. m. winds ar night.


V.Fog m. hot, windy. Q E
VI, Fog m. melting day 3 yer brisk winds, SW,
VIE Fog m. and falls a. m. hot; hail 2 p.
Lightning. NE. melting day, and fickly rime.
W,
WIT. Hor n. fog 4. Mm. meting day, dry ,
Thunder roward London o. High winds KN
Lightning at night in the N E-
= Fine ſhowr, ſtormy winds , th wi
6 P--
XR, Windy ; ſhowring 10, m. ad 1 p. tywv
£no 1669, S 12, June 23:
[0-4


« XXlL. Warm, miſt m. W.
Il. Fog 8 m. hot, rain deſired. SW.


» XXII. Miſt w. fog. 9 m, hot; —_— p. Sly.
EX Warn, cloſe. SW. NE.
XV. Cloſe m. cold n. N E.* XXVI. Fog nd,
XVII Fog m. pale thick Clouds 3 a dry


Meaſon, 4 W,


2


X X.. Refreſhing rainat break of day, and ar ©
riſe, cooling Showrs. W: | Azz0 1671, i -27,' May $2.
XXl. Daſh 10 Mm. Thund, Lond, 11. andifigits | f2_ |
V> p ” y ,
VNHIL. IX, wW & .
XXII. Cool, High nds , coaſting ogy X. Mach _ hor S k
.X1. Miſt m. Ropes, ſoulcry. W.
- = {. ſhowrs 4 p. SW. x1. Very hot, miſty, (howr at Moon riſe.”
X[IF. Soultry, yer brisk cool winds, S W.
7 Iterum, dL.O. Au2.2g. XIV. 4, wind; '(howr 2 p: Dewy n. SW.
| XV, Windy, offer a, m. ſhowr at Hunfted.SW,
XX11. Warm, cloudy, m. p. VV: | XV. VVind, ſhowr, 'Þ fo, & 4 p. ſhowring.
d $x11. Warm, driſle 6 oY 7 Þ-. S W, ay $S VY,
XXIV. Warm, much Lightning and hanger bo | F
a ſhowr, | A
xS. Miſty m. miſle, Rain's p. $ Sw Anno 1673 m2S. April 23s
NXVL Cloſe m. p. warm, llew miſt, Mergors, jo
EE | EVI ok] will, FIZ and 4
XVIL- Watm, fhowrin &-8:p. '$w. t'Zay z mil reid and Ciry.
t : A 4s $ Et X VIIL Cloſe morn. offering o. hear. N E.
XXIX, Suſpicious morning, windy, fairs NEX, gh wind and ran Ms, P- ſhowr 4 þ.
XXX. Windy tat. no&#,. offerings FW: | XX. waſdy and rain. |
XXX1. Wind, cloſe m. NW, SA ge) wind m. ſhedding Noon, 7
: {. Windy, ſome droppipg P. m. W.
Sept. 1, Froft, very'cald' ante (I'Wny T , XXII. arid z High ol wind. Sly.
I. Warm, cloſe. S:VV, ! $&IV. Win Sly.
3 go NW. | XXV. Dritle io m. and SW..
«0 waakiegs. 42 x X VI. Warm, age ett AF & 5 P. S W.
/ XXVII. Showr o & 4 p. miſt, . S.W.
Fyue 1667, * 28, Zan. IQ, F R. XXVIIL. Cloſe day, ſome meiſtyre 5 Þ p.$'0;
| XXIX, Cloſe m. no miſt. * .
Windy; thaw, cloſe, f ; XXX. Hor. NE
L. Rain at day break. S ' May 1. Showr. 6m. (outry,Thuoder { p. es
We Cold m.p. Rain, gud ſnow. N,| of Heil and Lightning 9g p. Ely nf 1y.
Froſt and ſnow ; otters die tot, paſty $ld\} «;P- m.
II. Warm; wet 3 p. NE.
Xt. Froſt 3 Thaw n#. tot. $. I! Warm, cloſe, miſt, Field and City; i E.
XiL Dark day ; Fog taken up.  . $, | IV, Cloſe m. p. ſome wer 4. p. iy.


3 15. May21. 2 KR


herum,


, | V. Driſle once or twice: cool, N
. | VI, Driffe 5 p. cool day, fome wind, N


VII. Very cold m. Nly.
VIE. Rain 10 m. brisk = P4 NE.
IX. Coaſting ſhowr 8 NE.
X. Some wer, overc N.


| XI. Clouds , clearing, ſome Rain or Haul 2 Þ.


N.
XII. Gentle rain 1 p.s p. 7 p. very cold night.


XIII. Wet p.m. 1%. VV. clouds ride. Ny.
XTV.' Werting m. offer p. m. * Ny.
XV, Showry 3p. 5 P- N E.
XVI. Rain m. brisk wind: *

XVII Brisk wind. | NE.
XIX, Temperare, blew miſt. N.
XX . Windy, offering ; mift taken up. SW.


Parelii at Womondham, jn agro Leiceſt.
X'X1. fome fhowrs gm SW.
XXIL {. ſhowrs ar 0. and veſp. Sly.
gore Showrs coaſting, and towards m1d-
night.
_—_ Showr. ante 1 m. 4 m. ſmart ar 0.4:
* NW.


| 4 Þ-
XXv. Windy, wetting ane 9m. Thunder at


Warwick, Lightning, Rajn ip the S W. an W
riſe 3 ſhowrs. Þ South. S$ W.
XX YI. Showring 10.m, offer p, m, windy
O90 SW


TT: ome-Diary.


Iterum, m 25, Dec. 7.


TIT. Wer a. 1. ſhowr 2p.-&p. m. SW.
IV. Raina. |. cold rain a. m. high wind. N.
V. Froſt, cold Nly. bur ar night, E.


VI. Froſty, So at wd. E,
Very high wind

VIL Extreme froſt, miſt, E. m. Sly p. m.

VINL Rain 7 m.& 1. windy, SW.

IX. Raina.m, & at 9 p. SW.


X. Wind, warm, cloſe, ba
XL Drifle 1 p.7 p. .


Anno 1675, 10. Ofob, 27. 1
XXII. VVarm rain 10m. at 0- __—_


XXIV. $ tormy wind, daſh of Hail and ewe I
p. and ſtorm, rain 6 p. high winds 9 p.

XXV, Froſt, yet warm m. wind and rain 1 Þ-

at 4 P. Tempeſtuous and wetting 8- p.

XVI. VVindy a. 1. cold. Inundation in Ellen
Amſterdam, Hague, Qoc.

"XXVII. Bluftering no#, tot. erm} +4 Pp. NE.
Cough univerſal taken

XXVIIL. RS ales E.

XXIX. Froſty, miſt E.


XXX. Fog, froſty. N.
Anno 1677, 23. Sept. 13.
\ on


R, Fog, Meteors 10
Die preced. --3...; Jl the people call rl
ſeen in Moorfields, as big as 20 Merteors..

XI. Fog, wagm, brisk wind _-

XL brisk wind 3; Fila, warm Met


XIII. Fog 3 wind turned from E. to $ E.
9 m. a ſhowr 11 m, driſle 4 p. S VV.

XIV. Rain 2 m. miſty, Meteors 2 or 3. One
near 'V* horn. E,

RV. Thick fogNly. Gofſamere, Meteors az
2 R—_— p

XVI. Fog; violent ae 10 P.

XVIL VVarm, drops 7 m. ſhowr 7 p. cold wa
p. m. wy


'Anno 1678. VN 22. Mays. 8 Stat.


TV. Brik wind, rain 10 m. high wind , m__
SW,


7
V. To CE gz : E.
by . rain ante C. Blaſt at Forefthil/, and


VIL ry es winds, clouds in Scenes, warm.

VIIL Yery bright Meteors ab Ophinch.

IX. Miſty, hot S E. m.S W. hor 11.

X. Hot j all confeſſion 3 Miſt, Meteors 2 near
m & Aquila.

XI. Miff, Ely hot rough wind © ort. Red
Mereors 9 p. Lightning boy, 11 p.

XIL. Miſt, rain m, rain 2 p- —_— —_
wind 11 p.


|


XI1L High wind no#. tot. Rain at 8 m, W,
XIv. Miſty, windy. W.


'y


s  tterum, S 21. June 18,
i10


XIII. Hot n. very hot a. m. Rainya 3 p.adg


p. &11 p. _—_


XIV. Miſty, driſle 1 m. miſty d


NIX. Soultry , Thunder , lightning 4


with rain; Lightning 9 p.
XX. Hor, Clouds in Scenes , Lighaning 4 P.


XX1, Hot, miſty a. m. Rain and tai
m. drowning Highways and Cellars. Wly.Ely,
IT4.at 10 p. Nly.

XXL Lightning ante 4 m. rain, heat. Wlya
m. Ely p. m.

XX1II. Hear, coaſting ſhowrs 5 p. Iris, Thund,
7 p. Clouds riſc 2þ P- Lightning and Thunder
in the Night.

XXIV. Brisk winds p. m. Lightning and
Thunderclap, ſome rain, bor 8. p. Rainbow
N E. with variable H, winds,


XXy. Windy, ſhowr m. __ E.
XVI. Warm. NE,
IT. Warm, miſty, heat. wind. £ Slyar
Ni
XXVIIIL Heat. rain circa 9 p. W,
'XXIX, Cloſe and heavy air a.m. warm, Light-
ning, and dry Thunder.
Anno 1679, == 17. Aug. 15. W


XI. Gentle rain 9 p. Ely at night,

XII. Ely miſty day» © red, warm, offer 3 p.

XIIL Ely. ſome fog, rain- 5 p. —Sly at n.

XIV. Wly. Fiery Meteors 10 p. '

XV. Wy. _ wer in'S. 7 p.rain 9 p.

XVI. Wly Fog, ſome little rain preſum'd 1 p
in the South, warm.


XVII C. rain at 9 m. & 10 m. Brisk wind, rain
2 P- Lightning 9 p. Megeor 5. S,

XVIII. Some rain 1 p. 3 p. cloudy 7 p. Wiy.

XIX. Nly rain, a 6 p. ad er an
miſt, rroubled air a. m.

XX, Fog, rain ante 6 m. & 2p. x


4 2 7. Oftob. 25. 2 Stat.
XXII. High wind , bl. froſt.


XXIV. Roe cold Meteors 3+ NW,

XXVI. Fog dre tor. "'E

XXVIL Fog a. |. dark. E.
Anno 1680. & 21, May 27.

HI. Rain 8 m. very high wind, ſhowrs 3h,

P S.|xx1y. Very high wind, rain 4 p. Wiy


 XXY


looks red ; Hear 10 p.
XV. Sun ſhine red, hear. Nly,
XVI. Miſty, glowing. cl. heat. R
XVII. Miſty, N E. warm,
XVAIIL. Miſty m. hear. E.


RS . . Sa. + Ce. EE EET,


—


. + Wii > ak is A


ao * 7, wg


ny a wet day to get thither. As in our Firſt and Second Inſtance of Fe,


Chap. VII. i 2 Heat m. p. and Wet.


49


Ab


XXV. Very great fog, warm, rain 1© P: SE.
XXVI. Rain 9 m. brisk wind; trouble _ X. Windy, ſhowr 10 m. temperare. $.
y. | XI. Windy, wettin m. cool p, mm. Rain a;
XXVII. Rain a2 m. uſque ad 3 m. anda2p.| gp, | OT Wh,
ad 4 p. hot day, ſoultry night. XI. Showr 10 m. (&F ante 3 p. 0G 4p.
XXV 11. Fog, ſoultry gain a 3 p. ad 8 p. XI. High winds, fog Sun oc, high winds and
XXIX. winds, rain 4g m. ad 2 p. ſhowr | Rain 10 p. | Sly.
3 Claps of Thunder, rain apace ante 1 oh XIV H. winds and rain a. m. cold p. m. W.
y- | XV. Clouds in Scenes; ſhow 2
XXX, Rain hard, fog,brisk wind, ſmart ſhowr [ p, Sly m. W. p.m. Wl pen


8 p. Wly.| xv1 Groſs fog ; clo{
hes | g; cloſe and foggy occ,
XXXL Brisk wind, warm. Wy. _ of rain uſque ad g p. wind E. _
- Ef P. mM.
Ann 182. S 4. April 13. XVIL Clouds in Scenes, ſome rain ante 0. W


VIII. Cold fog. Foggy 9 p. wind. Ely.


$ 10. Peruſing theſe Premiſes, though but of two degrees diſtance,which
is reckoned too little, by Artiſts, for an Aſpe&t of & with 2. I note
theſe particulars ; ſome whereof are omitted in the common deſcrjption;
and what is the Firſt but Heat? © and & have a different Situation in the
Heavensz and what that difference may produce, I have no other way to
acquaint my ſelf but by Obſervation. Verily 9 and 2 alſo are remarka-
ble for this, .which, we have hitherto called che prime Product.

$ 11, The Sum Toral of our Bill is 280. frbmwhence if we deduct the
odd 80. or 90. rather (for ſo many days are exhibited from our Winter
Months, »:z. from Ofober to March, incluſzve) We (hal find bur 200 days,
br 190. The Mvoiety of which is roo. arid toward that we have 8g. (ſay go.)
pres hot days. Be pleaſed to look upon our account of Auguft 1656.

Y


1658. June 1660, hat would men have more ? They are the firſt


Sunimer Months appear in the Table, and they are immediateiy conſequent
one to the other ; for of their kind none have interpoſed in the intermedi-
ate years, none in 1657; or 165 g. to contradict. Try therefore again, not
une only 1660. but Auguſt allo correſponds. So doth the next Summer
onths of 1665. 1667. 1669. 1671. Scarcea Month to be found in diſcord
amongſt all the variety that Nature preſents: Signally theſe. Let it be re-
membred that we find »zelt:2g Weather, Anno 1658. 1667. Stalding Air,
Ann 1660. and exceflive Hear, Azno 1656. 1665. 1671. 1678. and where
not > Except once or ſo, when the Wet hath palliated the Heat, as 1679.


or 1682.
$ 12. The Objeftion of what Gold occurs, we have faid, ought not to
move a Wiſe man; for where is variety, but in the Work of Nature ?
Study it in what Topsgue you pleaſe, and you ſhall find it. This we fay not,as
if we were hindred by the Objection ; for the rarity of the contrary is Ar-
ent enough for us, asin the d © & hath bin obſerved. March 1654.
Ju 1663. Odeber 1679. What iS@hreeto XX VIII. ? Beſide that, 'tis not
nothing that the Two laſt of thoſe Months have foggy Air, joyned
with Froſts 3 which ſhews an abatement of the Cold ; and a Similar Ef-
fke& ofa reſerved Cauſe. For when we ſay Heat , we do not mean every
Day ſhould melt or ſcald us; but ſome ſenſible degrees of the Quality,
more or leſs, and rather for the zore. Therefore you hear that the Cha-
rier of this Aſpect ſpeaks of Sow and Hail at the Seaſons as well as
Rin or Coruſcations, hence Rain and Snow which is next, is not omitted
by the Common Charater. ;
S 13. This lictle Table, (I fo term it becauſe it ſtands upon a little Baſs)
bears a competent Teſtimony to Rain. For even here, He, who ſhall hugr
fora dry Seaſon, as March 1654. Auguft 1656. &c. muſt wade through ma-


Az


IX. H. wind, gentle ſhowrs ar 4 p. S.


254 lnund, proper, where. Rule for the Change of the W mk Book IE.


Anno 1652. & Jan. Anno 1654. is vitible. March it (elf ſubornes two days
Witneſs for us, with Snow and Hail in one day, and Rain m- the other.
To make ſhort, we find 139. wet days, $now and Hail included, of our 280,
which being an abſolute Moiety, {peaks its mind. . For the Flouds or Inun-
dations, the Effects of profuſer Rains , we ſhall ſpeak, in our Larger Ac-
count. For though we find even here an Inundation, or Twojees that of
Amſterdam, Hague, &c. Anno 1675. Yet, they are found  mbre” com-
monly unconfin'd ro ſuch a Scantling of a degree or, Two, (of which alone
this Home-Diary conſiſts. ) Hence that in Fehr. 1661; about Toxbrideecan-
not be imputed to a Szxgle day, but to ſeveral precedent Days at a greater
diſtance by two or three degrees more. Of Flouds therefore in their ro-
per plare 3* Eichſtad (I fay) refers Inundations to' Gf and 7 , bg fa E by
find to be true : but ſo that & and 4 putintoo; yea, many tits arc
very Vick, when & and 2 may ſeem to be the only Sluce-Openers. - ©
S 14. This brings us to the Third conſiderable, which I find is, Fog, ob-
ſervable for 18 days, which, though ir come near a 20% part almoſt of the
whole, yet you know I reckon it not ſo mach to the Inflaence of our AF
pect; #5 to the Half-Izfluence. A Fog being nothing but a wet or dropp]oe
Corftitution, ſpoiled in the making 3 The Firſt Draught and Lieut: of 2
Showr drawn, as it were, in Cole, not by a dropping, bur a more dry Pen-
cil.* And hitherro do we reduce the Fila, theRopes on the. Ground
and the Floting Goſſamere 3 which I have obſerved to be the Frog 0
dc bu Miſt, when thatthemoiſture being exhaled, the clawmy part is left


$15. Winds, 1 would take to be accidental to our Parti! Ape it legft ,
or not fo ſuitable to the Influence, as is found in others, (Though I acknow-
ledge go I es,of which 42 are heard as High and Lofty) In like man-
neras1n © ed with 2, we found not fo much Wind as wich Y.
But the Winds'chazging, which I find Twency times , and upon a more at-
rentive Watch behtye ic might have been trebled - T a not going about
to perſwade, notwithRanding, that it belongs to this Aſpect alone; remem-
brieg what I have {aid already of che » to ſome ſuch purpoſe \ pete may
concern ſome certain Aſpects more than others, - For the Solar Afpect with
any Planet,the ) cxcepird, as we have ſaid, I reckon here to be excluded ;
fince they help to Fixthe Wind antecedenely to the Change. For if the
donot , what elſe can 'be aſſigned 2 The Sun and thoſe which con! Ire wit
with him ſettle the Conſtitution 3 if any other adventitious caufecan alter it,
it may : The Sun, I fay, in Aſpect, or out of Aſpet gives bewy to the
Conſtitution ; theother which are concerned, not with him, but with one
another, exert their peculiar Strength in Weather and Winds ; | provided
that the AſpeGts of theſe different Planets lye at ſome diſtance from the G3
for otherwiſe their Influences like Flames unite. Bur if it fo happen that
the Sun being up, Theſe Aſpects are os in haſt to follow him, becauſe of
their diſtance ; their Influence may be Rparated ſo far as to ſuffer a cooler
Wiad to blow, which upon their Rifing thall vere to a warmer point. For
obſerve it when you will, if the Wind tur»s to a chiller part of the Com
paſs, There is fome retreat of the Heavenly Bodies: They either part One
from the Other, or leave the Horizon. On the contrary, when the Winds
turn from a cold Quarter to a Warmer, Weſt or South, &c, There is
ſome new appearance above the Horizon, or new Application of one to
another. And this, it may be, made E:rchftad obſerve ro us, that the Wind
changed often ro the Welt under this Aſpect; which fo far is true, that it
never changes fromthe Warm Quarter by virtue of this Aſpect; toward
the warm _ it doth (ynleſs in State of Dereliction. )


h ; 6 16. Vetily


-Chap. VII. Parelia. Coruſcations. Charatter of our Aſpett. 236


— —


s 16. Verily, 'tis a pleaſant __ of Art to be able to ſay, as on ſome
certain days we may, while a \ortherly Wind blows, to aſſign, I was go-
ing to ſay the Mizute, when the Wind ſhall twrn. 1 rememoet One In
ſtance of that Nature; I cannot fay 'twas this Aſpect preciſely ; that ozce
according to obſervation, expecting the Wind to turn, I went up to the
Battlements of the Houſe, and Lo ! Within half a quarter of an Hour the
Vane of a Neighbour Church ac a very little diſtance, rurned to the Point
which I was aware of. *Tis well I was alone, for ifany le curious Perſon
had been with me to have atteſted che Event, which is ſober Truth, I


ſhould have been ſuſpeRted for a What d'ye call hiy: *!—— This can the Ob- -


ſervation. of the Planets attain to, as may be ſeen in the Chapter of the Riſe
and Serting of the Stars, a part of this Treatiſe.

9 17. There is another appearance for which this Aſpe& hath a Faxv,
and that is Iris, Halo, Parelia. Of the former we have one great Inſtance
from Letcefteribire, of the Later I fear I have inet with tore than are noted
down : Something I am ſure we ſhall find , though not proper to the AC
pect perhaps, nor cole improper. Kepler hath one remark under the
name of Phaſmata; by which he means ſome ſuch ap Es, aS may be
ſeen by his note of I:s Inwverſa, cryca ſolem ad Febr. 4. 1662; Nay, b
Haloz and Parelia Cary noted, April 25: Ano 1625. Remembring al-
ſo thac the inverſed Iris is a prelude of the Parelium; The Truth is, He
mentions no other Sights-but what we havepointed at : I have reaſon to
think that G hatha great froke, and 2 too, though not always under this
determinate Aſpect, appealing to his Diary of 1623. Or, rather for our
Alpedts ſake, ro that 1622. ere, befides what we have ſeen within two
Degrees, Phaſmata, Parelia, ' Fan 25. Styl. Vet. We meet with them a Se-
cond and Third time at a further dittance both before ahd after the Partile
Aſpe, ar 7 gr. diſtance, 'and 11 degrees; fan. 3, 4, 5. S. i. Now, leaſt
an d at a ventbre tell us, that gr. 11. is too urcireaſonable a diſtance; he
will be put to the Bluſh, when he ſhall be told, that the next Parelt; noted
in Keplers Diary are found once again when & and 2 are atthe fame Di-
ſtance of er. 11. Mart. XXII. 1622.

s 18, Of Meteors, Coruſcations and Thunders we ſhall ſpeake in our
Larger Diary ; we will put {ome up here, and reckon them. Meteors 17,
Lightning 12. Thunders 13. Genuine Off-ſprings of & and 2... In £ft-

Months underſtand; and I add, and in Zitival Poſtures : In ſuch a caſe
"9 is a Fire, 9 is a Vulcanan Ignivomous Globe, ſeattering Flatnes through
the Ztcher ; a Fury, as well as a Beauty. ; |
$ 19. Suppoſe then we add no more; the Charatter of the Aſpe&t will
ſhine from the ſarface of this little Diary : For if the Premiſes have any
Forcein them, we ſhall find in about 280'days, near upon 240. that carry
2 manifeſt Signatbreof & in them. If Hear , if Wind, if Rain, Snow,
Hail; and Lightning, ahd Meteors, if thick Fog; (for Marcial Fogs are
wore Groſs and Denſe than ſome others) if bis and Hato, be fruits of 3
his configuration, Then here we ſee them. Rain with Flouds, and Light-
ning with Blite, Heat with 2 Sickly titre 3 (now all is out, we cannot er
our Wotds:) Then & and 2 in d are not to be lighted; For Floads,
Blite 2nd Sickneſs are hinted , even in this Table , miore largely and more
ſenſibly ro be Ren in che Following Diary, which I have co with
ſome Dilizence, arid preſented to the Reader.


Þpp


d8 9 ForeynDiary.


Book 11.


—_ OY


The Larger Foretgn Tableof £98 0
mn order to the aſſerting of the A peer,


city.


Anno 1500. S 23. May 29.

Br obs Storms ſuddain, funk four
4 Admiral Gapral:s Ships,P <<.1.
y gr. 11.ſ00n after another Iem-
peſt, Þb. gr. 3.

{ani np be ny TR
#4 iN effithiopta. June,
and Tempeſt, being their Winter 3.
Purch. 1. 1047.

5. Great Ran and Thunder at
- Night 3 d- gr- 15.

Anno 1 524- X 18. Fer. 5+: 5p

Loyais. Jenny ,: yea and Feby;Stor-
my: Gemma icoſmocrit.. 193.

Anno 1626. I: 13. May Y Reg

 Onmuz. 11. & 12.


ſeveral days, Pxrch 11. © T0146 ys


2: gr. 11. & © gf. 2.

Few Se. or I
Ufric, OFob. 15, Snow Iar 1'2 or 3
Days, burying Menand Carriages,
 Leodfrs

_ A: 9 S-pt. I®, 2
Ghina, = Prodigious uffon. Purch.
- IT 797. 139
Anno 551.


be
urch 1. i:
\IX61843 . Fg. Jew :


Anno 1556:

17. 218. Tornaab. Foul W.
' and night + Foreton's. Yoyages
igorta 91% 974 4071 ; ;

20, Fow | Wenhers great change |


Juuy


£444


'876. gr. 4-


276 Great ornado Tanner E |


waſh k EI


685 ips. Himilay's!, his


Voyage. 1. $V0c Kg
a gr: 13, age |
Anno 1558. X 13. Jan. I2,


Dover. g. Tempeſt, Hollnſhea. gr.1.
21. Foul Weather. Hakl. Eatt. 1.

12 gr. 9.

= m_ I 7, May 8.

hy ea. 13. Dangerous Tempeſt
or 44 Hours. gr. 6.


aka © or - if ot


att |


4 |. Os, Jp ROrTns 3


| London. Se


Anno 15 94.


Stormy Winds and Rains
and the Platic Capa-


Tertio, VP g. Sept. 29.

OXFob. 5. Weather very foul. Tor-

_erſons TG Third, Hakl. gr. 3.
16. Great Storms at

ken (we loi Foreſail ) continu-
, ed 3 days, G 2 gr.g. -

Anno 1 562, & 11, July

Gaſpian Sea, 122, Stiff Gale, forced
us. to. Anchor ; ; Tenkinſon' $ Voy-
age, Hakl, dd % gr.7. dQ +,

Anna 1570. 7 11. Auk. I5.

5- Terrible Wind and Rain, with
great.Shipwrack, &£. Stow, or. 5.


Anna 1573. S L. Jan. 20.


). | Tocefter..7, Tempeſts and Hailſtones


6 Inches about, Rain, &c. Howes,


I $:gr. 7:

Anmi577. 8. July 10

I. L. 61. Inter July 8. & 16. Cold
Storms:z ,Steerage broke | Maſs


blown. . overboard. obaſhers, 2


Voyage, v, He
Fricelan. 17.18 LE Tempeſt at
yh in, the frozen :Sea. Ha,


_ Pt I579. = O80. 24.( 3 wire,


1e 2
We jock 5, prone Rough
Catner ; £0jb4, . 5.
Anno 1583, I: Febr., - ”
in. and Thunder: WeIkes Voyage,


Anza 1590. I7. Jan.
A Fan. ut Marg 16 Het wa


but Stormy. "Pack I1,. 1674.
Eb. r:10. 12, Two great Stogqs
= ate 5. a1d, gr. 8,
erun, M1 h, princip.
pr. IO.
reg Stop, in
<8
Boon Wind
pt, '6. ons
driving out the Water of the
Thames : Howes, & @ gr. 9-
Sd. 16. July 12.
North Sea, 10. Storm out of the
Weſt. Purch. III. 475. gr-0.


Lozdon. Rain continually - through
June


mary, T Ne


11592.


Chap, VII


d 42 Foretgn Daary. :


Tune and Tuly every Night. Howes.
July 26. 27. Rain extreme, Ba. gr.
Io.
Anno 1596, & 7. Fune7.
May 12. Storm, in which was loſt
our Barks company, Sir }. Ra-
leigh : Hak. Edit. 2. gr. 12.

S. Domingo. May 13. Unwholſome
Ratnz Pxrch. IV. 1167. gr.1t.
Cadiz. June 20. Storm; Earl of EF:
ſex _ Expedition  Hakl. Purch.
r.

2 Iterum, © 12. Sept.17.

N. L. 32. North Sea. Sept. $.-Maſt
terrible Storm at Even. Parch II,
I175. Wavesas high as the "Top-


maſt. gr, 8.

Sept. 27. Blows hard, and freezes
hard, gr. 15. *

Anz 1599. W 17. Jan. 8,


| Arno 1611, m 3, Ofob. 26. :

Mozams. die 2. Much Rain, Purch.].
278. gr. 14. 10, IT; 12. We found
our ſelves to loote.much by a
Current, H.gr. 6.

P Much Rain and guſty time. gr.


I9,2T. Abundance of Rain. ex. 5.
no 1613, © 18, Sept. 13.
Firando. Dee 7. | Tuffon , overthrew
102 Houſes,broke 40 or 5o0Barks
&c. Purch. I. 307. gr. 4. & * 4


Die 30. Extreme Winds, expecte
Anno 1615, a4 Aug. g. & = 15.22


another Tufox. Ib. gr. 10.


Month of Auguſt ſtormy moſt part.
22, Winds Tempeſtuous, while »


Wind hindred, we _ not dotble
the Cap8 of Bonſperanz. Parch I.
118

Anno 1602, 7 15. OF». 17

'Streighrs of Malaca. Ofod- 17. 'g I.
Grand Spouts gowrigg our-of -the
Heayen : Hak/. gr. 17.

Canchin Soath Lat. Inter Of6h, 3.

| Tempeſt, Purch. I. .g973.
Vow 4. No end of Norms, Rain,


. Hail, gr. 6,
Anno 1505; 5. June 2 |
_ Die 19g. Wind ; at Geddes us 4
ſhore. pr. 1. ©


Jap. 11.,-Snow , Hail, Sea High
by reafon af a mighty Current ;


| Arm 1626,


was under the Earth. Parch I, 5 38.
-
As 1620, Y 5. Fes. 23.


W. Indo, A Bd. March 14. Ma-
ny 'Tem P. It I2

Anno 1622; V 18, OS. <

=% ; Sept. 29, 30. Caliginef. ventof.


di. 4.6. Zephyrus walidus. gr. T. |

OF. 14. Nix pluvis, Kepl. gr. 6.

Anno 1624, % Aug. 23.cum ©.
Tenpeſ - gr. 6.


wor
8. Tempeſt orr444. gr. 3.


= Plus oe Kepler.
A 2 July 12.
= July: 6, 7, v. Pluvie mult


Br: 2
Io, ”" WVinelum gr. 1.


Paich. p.816. gr. 6.
a Wt Ab June 26.” 12. Lavte Pluoie, 13: Ventoſunn.
;rormy > , variable, | 15. Imbres. Kepler gr.'2.
it Wand Rain LI IT. +12 Anna £628, - Þ-5, Sept- 2. 2 R.
15, Seorny, ent out Forema « 31; by (eg I,.2. N:nb, gr. '1.
_overooird: ' Hudfors Vo pF pt 5. Atx,Plinnsf. ge. 3.
& Y gr.8


y Iteritn, M 15. "Yi,
ov. 2g. Hard gale of ' pro-
# yu ſtoriny', er, as L.*104.


: ' If Bolemia 2 Phy tePoix


agams. - Sept. 4. NNimub. Granada).
o_ gr. 6.


-
* %


Anno 1631, W 22, Jew; 10. can 7 ,


' Jan'6. - |


Worimberg. Dec. 36, 34. Jay, 1,2


$4+% #


Snow. gr. 10, -


y; = Ninxit. Die 4. i plurd- | Jan. 7:Wind art SHOW. gr. 27
Pan oY tx lets e9,] om {gr. 2:
Toa For pler, apud. Sieh- 25; 36, 27. Deeper Show; gf. 7.
ad. gr. V 14
Den Ii; Tenpeſtuons + ; Wet mean A 1632, V 3 Av, 25.
Ie > - ca days , 1 Nov. 2x. Corey Tod. gr. 2,
a Ran, K1 I634. gr.'5 -24; 25; —_


26


" 5 Wo


i $4... Ivy Mn ttt


7


d 8 9 Foreryn Diary.


April 10.


26. Rain, gr. 0. Kor.

ruping » Vf 24: Aug. 5.

July 23. Smart rain at 11. gr. 7.
24. Rainand Thunder. gr. 7.
27. Smart Rain. gr. 5.
31; Smart Rain. gr: 3-


ey uft 3, 4. Rainy, gr. 0.


Smart Rain, yr. 2.
11, Rain and Thunder, gr. 3:
14: Thunder and Rain or A
18. Tempeſt, gr. 8.
Anno 1637. Sg. les 23.
Jane 7, 8. Smart Rain, gr. 9.
=> 4 18. Thunder , ſmart Rain,


1 Thunder, Rain, gr. 10.

23. Storm.

24. GreatRain, FW |

25, 26, 27. Much Rain, gr. 2.
July 2. Much Rain, gr. 5.

4. Stormy, wet:

9. Much Ain, Jr. gr. IO.
Anno 1639. It 22, May 11. cuxs ©,
Fs Io, Great Rain, gr. 10.


16. OX 18, Snow and Rain. Kyriand.


3.
Mg, 12, Tempeſt, continues 5 days.


leartus, gr. 5.
Ano 1641, I 18, April 12.
March 31. Much Rain, gr..6.
April6, —_ much Snow, gr. 4:
Stormy.
12. Stormy. Po young Prince
of Oraree in danger, gr. 1:
24. Rain and Thunder all Night,


My 2 2. Snow, ſtormy Winds, Lr. 5.
3. Stormy,
Hterun, 2 25+ June 10.


ar _ &c. gr. 6.
30, 31, W ind and Rain, gr. 5.
Jane 1, Rain. 4. Storm, gr. 5.


7. and 10. Smart rt HO 2.
12. Wind, m Rs, I,
I9, Great Rain gr
Anno 1664. "1 6, Reb, 26.
O8. 17. Tempeſt, gr. 5. *
22, 23. ny gs gr. 3
Nov. 8. and 9. Snow Orient, gr.7.|
Anno 1645. Lp t.6. and 20,


Aug: 26, Gearkin o
29, Great Thuader and Rain,gr.$. |O#


[Os


Sept. 1. Rainy, gr. 6
18. Much Rain, Or. 3.
19. Stormy Rain.
20. Much Snow, gr. 4.
22. Much Rain, Storm, Wind: ,
Kyriand,
0 1647. Nov. 11,

Die 11. Dark and Tempeſtno;
Night, when K. Gharles I. eſcapes
from Hampton Court, gr. 10.

I650. il 11,

Die 29. Formidable Thunder and

_ near Lercefter,Wilsford. M. S.


Azze 1654. Y: As” Febr. 26. tnragr,
Feby. 6. Vay High Winds, ſome
Rain at Night. SW. er. 9
7. Much Wind and Rai. So at
Night, Br. 9. |
IO. Rainy Night. W. 11. Rainy
gr. 8
I2, Abundance of Rain, High


Wind,sS E. gr. 6
16. Rainy. 21. Rain and Snoiy 5,
Br. 4 ST ++x
_ 10. Windy,Rainy, Rainbows,
Hick Winds, SW.
11, Rainy, w NW. gr. 7
12. High wind Storm of Hail at
 110f theClock.


Anno 1654. - 7 Jo 29. & March


Jaz. 21. Rainy, wht NE. gr


Febr. 21, Rainy n. _ Thunder,
H. Wind. W. gr

- 24. nay 00 conard Ne t. N.gr.s5.

Nis Rain

rt Bonn


Fer. 2
and
—_ Pryce Em Night, N NE, =6
ainy mo
2; High Wi —_— MALE)


- 27. Nas. ſore of Rain , N.


Br. 3.
| 28. yo ig Wind NESS
<q Rainy


a Wages


Bterum, mr 23. OBob,
24.50me Fits of LM gr.7.


| _
Ea


ob, 11. Windy, wet. gr. 4-


.- © £2.


d4 2 Daary at large. |


Chap. VIE.

Ann 1656. m8. Aug. 2 Serine

Aus. b Dxchhes of Ron 4 m. 8 2 | Jan. 17. Rain 8 p. &c. moſt part of
P. gr. S. Night, SW. gr. 3.
2. Rain hard. 28, Snow a. m. and Hail, gr. 7.


13. Store of Wet, gr. 7.

I5. Rainy 1 m. wind, S W. gr. 6.
17. Rain powring 4 3 m. de tots,
gr. 4.


S-pt. 4. Wind, ſhowrs circa 0. N E.
gr. 7. by
8. Store of Rain toward Londoz,


NE. g:. 9.

9. Flath of Lightning, gr. 10.
Anno 1658, 8. 24. july 18.
Zuly 1. High Winds ate toto, gr. 7.


July 17. Winds and ſhowry, gr. 2.

Anno 1660. 0 18. June 14.

May 30. Wet; hard thowr 4 m.
gr. 7.

x. Coaſting Showrs 11 m. Storms
of Hail. gr. 7.

Juxe 2. Stormy Wind andWet .p.
BI: 3 ERS
6. Storms, Hail, great Rain, win-
dy, gr. BEL WEX |


23. Wet 5 ad 10 p. Wy. gr. 4.
24. Storm of Rain a.m. N E. gr.4.
25. Weto.&p. m. Nly. gr. 4.
26. Wind and wet m. p.Why. gr.s.


' July 3. Wetting per diem tot. 10 at


Night, N W. gr. 6.

6. HighWind;wet ſub © ort.S W.

er. 8.

Anno 1661, © 15: Feb. 24.

Febr. 13. Bluſtering Winds, gr. 5.
14. Storms of Hail and Rain. gr. 5.


March 3. Storms violent, gr. 3.
4. Frequent Storms.
'5, Windy, Rainy, gr. 4.
6. Hard Rain , violent Storms of
Hail at Noon, gr. 4.
8. Rainy,Storm of Hail, W.gr. 5.
9. Violent ſtorm of Hail, gr. 5.
13. Hard Rain for 3 Hours, S E.


gr. 7. ;
I 5. Rain hard, bluſtering Night,
SW. gr. 8. |

18. Rain very much 422.44 5. 5.


_ gr. o.
Anno 1663, YV 28. Jan.12.


Jan. Rain 7. p. vp. | SW. |


We


|


| 29. & 30. Some Snow , gr, $.

Anno 1664. 8, Nov. 27.

Mow. g. Winds ,-wet later half of
Cay, gr- 9. S.
13. Terrible Tempeſt of Wind ,
Rain, Hail 3 m. SW gr. 7. |
= Gentle Rain 6 p. &c. gr. 5.


21, Rain apace a 9m. gr. 3.S. SE.
Dec., 3. Flakes of Snow 1 p. Hail 3
P. gr. 2.
5. Gentle Rain 7 p. &c. gr. 4:
7 & 8. Much Wer, er. 5.
9: Rains ſadly 8 p. Much Rain as
hath been known, gr. 6. |
12, Rain ſadly 4 5 p. ad Midnight,
CC BL. 7.
Lunay Hand. 13. Lightning, harm-
{ul ina Ship thereby, gr. 8.
Anno 1665. S 26. July 17. 2 Stat
& 29. Aug. 29. .
July 5. Showry at 4 Southing, till
Noon ; High Winds, gr. 10.
6. Coaſting Showr 7 p. Storm 8 p.


gr. 9.
8. Showr 3 p. hardg p. gr. 7.
9g. High Winds morning, or. 6,


23. Showring 4 Þ. gr. 3.

24. Showring 9 m. coaſting p. m.
High Wind, gr. 2.

25. Coaſting Showrs, gr. 3.

26, Windy , Showrs © occ. gr. 4:
29. Rain before day, ſo 10 m.


gr-4
31. High Wind, gr. 5:

Aug. 1, High Wind, gr. 5.
3. Very high wind; gr. 5. :
5. Werafternoon, very wet mid-
night, gr. 4.
6. Wet 8 p. at midnight; gr. 5.
12. High Wind, coaſting Showts,
gr. 4.
I}. Furious Tempeſts of Wind
and Rain, gr. 4.
16, Showr 8p. gr. 3.


Sept. 5. Rain 1 p.6»p. 8 p. gr. 2.

6. Showring a6 11 m. by fits, ad 5
P. gr. 3.

9. Dathing 4 Þ. gr. 4.


Q qq 10


4&6 8 Dary


Book II.


10. High Winds. wet a. m. m. p.
daſh 4p. 8r. 4.
17. Stormy rain azte = or. 8.
18. High Winds of A |
Anno 1666. A. 27.
OS. 7. Showing 2 P. © occ. pr. 8.
10. Daſh 11 m. S.
11, Rain moſt part of Night, gt.
6.
13. Showring © occ. ſtormy , gr. 5.
14. Rain awed. No8. gr. 5.
I5. Rain 4 med.nof, ad 0. gr. 5.
16. Rain are toto, g
17. Winds blow bardal allNight,gr.4.
I9, 20. Rain arte © ort. gr. 3.
21. Rain m. Þ: ante merid. or. 2.


Nov. 3. High wind.
7 Kum tey tot. gr.2.


* Br.
7-Daſh 2 p.7 7 P. SW gr.
Rain artelus gr. 4.

22. Very Tempeſtuous, gr. 7.
23. Tempeſt 2 © ort. gr. 7.


20. Stormy wind, » Sonth 10 p,
gr. 9. ;

21. Showring, ſtormy wind al!
nigt, gr. 9.


Anno 1669, $12. June 23.

Tune 7. Windy, rainy gm. gr. 10.
10. Sudden Showrs, gr. 7.

11. Wind, Showr 11 m. gr. 7.
I7. Showrs ante luc. 8 p. m. gr, 4,
*+ #* *

July 2. Wetting 4 7 m2. ad 10 m.gr.5,
3. Great Storms of Rain gr. 4.
10. Great Drought; ſo in Fraxce,
gr. 10,

Anno 1671. IT 29, May 12,

April 30. Sad rainy m. Hail ,
Wind, gr. 7.

May 1. Rain at midnight, gr. 6.
3: Daſh, hw top. gr. 5.

4. Daſh and Showr 4 p. gr. 4.
5. Daſh 9 m. gr. 4.
* +
= 21, Much rain
1. Hail, gr. 4.


High


24. Tem winds,gr. 8.
33: Much rain azte lac. gr. 8.
29. Hurricane, gr. 9.
20. Storm of Ram, gr* 9.

Dec. 5. Much we, gr. 10.


Anno 1667. 28. Jan. 10. ©
Dec. 8. ann pres . (1666.) High
winds, gr. 10. -

P. M. Rain I P.


9. Rain axte 4B Hrgh Winds ,
gr. 10 |

12, 14. High Winds, gr” 10.

16. Snow m.and 1 Þ. gr. 10.

18. Rainand Snow, gr. 10.

20. Froſt, Snow p.m. gr. 9.


24. Snow 4p. IOP. Br. 9.


29. canny' Br: 54
30. Snow and
Jn 4 Las, ligh Winds, £r..4.
s Br. 4.


5 go at © rin: 3.


a.M.gr.g.
Aag.6.
Fuly 27. Neon ram p. after a


_


26. ;. Dropping. þ'w.s gr Cy


Aug.13.Storm of Wind and 00 4.
14. Very windy, wetting, gr, 4.


_ Great daſh, gr. 6.

24. Rain coafting, gr. 7

25. Rain at night, gr. 7

27. Showr a. m. & p. m. gr. 9.
306. Rain at 0.and 1 p. gy. 10,
Anno 1673. I 27. April 23.
tio Rain 10 m.and p. m.gr,


ok High Wind, Rain, Hail, er. 8.
30. "oder m-P. Snow m. bluſtering,


31. "Rat and High W
eo zach £7: 8.


wrs by fits 3 Hail, gr.
Wand, and Snow , ae
5 FR
4. Storm of Hail at 0, gr.6.
5. Shows hard 'm. & 0. gr. 6.


8. Hail ato. andſhowr x p. gr. 5,
I4. Showring m. P.£r.2


May 27. Rain 4 m. & 6 m. 2r.0.
29. WTSP. IN. gr.
Iterum, m 25, Dec. 3, GY


Nov. 19, 20. inn pe r,10,
22, 22-Hiſh Winds and W et, er. $.
Tyde, gr. 14. gr. 7.


_n 26. Wetting m. Þ. gr, 6,
Dec. 3 Showrs, gr. 3. w”


3 +


| I4. Wet. m p.gr. 3:


—y


Chap. VII. |


more at large.


16, Tempeſt o. Wind with Rain

IOP. gr. 4.

I9. S0wy Wind and Rain 8 p.

gr. 6.

| 20, Tempeſtuous Wind 1 m. gr. 3.
Arno 1675, m 10, Oftob. 27.

OF. 21. Rain m. Showr 4 p. gr. 3.
22, Rain wed. no, and morning,

« Bl. 3+


Nov. 3. Rain 6 m. and 5 p. gr. 4.
4. High Winds and Rain 6 m.
gr. 4.
9. Raing p. 8p. gr. 8.
Anno 1677, = 23, Sept.


* + %


T3.


3
4ug. 27. High Winds , often daſh, |


gr. 10, |
Jo. nny day, Rain by fits m. p.


pr. 8,
31. High Winds zof, tat. gr. 8.
Sept. 4. Soultry day, by all confeſſion,


gr. 5. :
9. High Winds a. m. gr. 3.
21, Showring, gr. 4.


June 1. Showry, gr. 4.
6. Rainy ab 0. ad 6 P.gr. 3;
- 8. Rain.
9. Daſhp. m. 11. Rain, ge. 3.
I3. Raina 3 p.ad 9p. gr. 2.
28. At Bloiſe in France a Church
beat down with Lightning ; Hail
as big as the Fiſt. Gazet, 313.
Iterum, June 19. S 22.
| * *
Tune 30. Showrs ante 4 p. gr. 3:
Faly 1. Daſh 4 m.»gx. 3. :
5. Galaxie near the bow of 2
thows as if it were a paliſh Fire,
am -
I9. Rain midnight, ſo6 m. ſerious
rain from 5 to 9. gr. 10.
20, Shovx s3.-Dathes ant 3 p,
Anno 1679, Sh;5:4ug. 15,
faly s Rain are luc. ad 5. gr. 10.
25. Ran 8 P. gr, 10,
26, Rain axte © wt. ſhowring a:


m. gr..9.
27. Ra 7 ha


—_—


23. Rain 3 m.. 26. Rain 4 m.
er.6. LY
28, Good Showr 5 m. gr. 8.
29, Guſty, ſome Rain, gr. y.
30. Showring a. m. gr. 9.
Anno 1678. NV 22. May 4.
fpril 25. Showring ante luc. 5 m.7m.
gr. 10, Winds riſe,
27. Rain all the afternoon, gr. 8.
28, Stormy wind, gr. 7.
29. Rain, Hail, _, gr.6,
30. Rain 6 p. wet night, gr. 5.
My i. Rainy and Winds m. p. fad
maying, 2r. 5.
Rain hard arte 11 p.
2. Raing m. coaſting, gr. 4.


' 16. Blite at Forefth:ll, gr. 3.
17. Meteors 10 p. gr. 2.
18. Meteors, 27. 3.


22, Rain in the South 1 p. 3 Þ.
F, 4"

23 Ralay n-ad8 m.10 m.& 2
South, gr. 4. _ |
24. Some Rain and Guſts 9 p.
BY. 5.


25. Raina. m. daſhp. m. gr. 3.
26. Rain hard 4 0. ad 3 p. gr. 4-
27. Blite, £7. 4.

29. Shawre,hottiſh, Thunder, gr.3 |


30. Rain azte 2 p. gr. g.
Auguft 2, High W. or. 6,
3. Dathes of Rain with Thuyader,


gr. FL ; * CY}

4:\ Great Daſh, circa 3 p. gr s..:

6. Rain, Storms of Rain, gr. g&« A.
=


SE *%*
27. Showring, Storm of Rain gr.


5.
28. Rain ante lar. & m. p. High


Wind a. m. gr. 5.
29, Rain ae fot. Hurricane in ſe-
ing down Houles, Men up in-


to the Air, &c, vide Gazet, gr. 4.
Cop. 2. Ren 4 Rein 5. tel


ar. 7:

6. Rain hard 42 toto, gr. 7.

9. Rain azte © ort. gr. 7. |
I 3, High Wind, great Showr 2 p.
gr.8.

I5, Rain morn x1 m. and a#te7 p.


r. 9.
ua 7 7. Ofieb.25 2 Stat,
OZ. 3. Rain 6p. gy. 10.
4. Adaſhir m.-.2* ort. » p. »'
ort. Rain 0. gr. 10, |
5. Rain hard, gr. 10,
6. Ram arte luc, 8m. 10m, 3p.


$. Very High Wind, gr. 9


241


EIN


d 8 2 Foreyn Diary.


Book II,


10. Rainy n. 42 m. ad 8 m. Tide, |
gr. 16, Muſipatan in the Eaſt Inate's
plus parte ſubmergee. 1500 drown'd.
French Gazet, Fuly 30: 1680.
11.H: Winds, Rain, Great Flouds,
as withinthe memory of Man , at
Hockly by Glerkenwell, Lincolnſhire,
Hereford, Bridgewater , Welſhpool ,
Gazet, 1451. gr. 9-
12. Rain. 14. Rain. 15. Rain,
gr. 8. |;

I6. Rain hard a 5. ad g. &c. gr. 6.
17. Rain, fer ate tot. gr. 5.
18,” Rain. 19. Rain 4p. 21. Rain,


Pr. 5. ;
22.:Very High Winds 3 Tides
to day, 27. 3:

19, News of much. harm by the
Flouds; ſevera-flouſes, Coaches,
Waggons, and Paſſengers loſt. Do-


Anno 1682.


4. Rain 4 m. ad rom. gr 4.

7. Coaiting ſhowrs, gr. 6.

Io. Great Hail near Doway , gr' 7.

11, High Wind.

I2, Daſh 4p. 13. Rain, gr. 7.
S 4. April 13.


March 22. Stormy Winds , much


Snow. er. Io.

Tides atLondon Bridge twice in 12
Hours ; flowed 7 hours a 2 p.

23. High Winds z08. tot' at Har-
wich very tempeſtuous, gr' 10.
24. High Winds riſe 9 p. gr. 10.


25. High Winds, cold ſhowr 10 -


m. gr. 10.
27. Rain arte $ m. 2 p. gr 8.


28. High Winds , Scuds of Rain,
or. 8.


30. Hail 11 m. High Winds,
Showrs, gr” 6.


Die 28. Very Tempeſtuous, at Pli-


meſt. Intell, Num. 31.87 'F« -
mouth Ships ſuffered greatly in the


22. Tide Ran all one way, and


yet the Water role. | rigging. |
mY April 2. High Winds, gr* 6. *

29. High Winds. 4. Some Rain at 8 m. gr 4. |
| |


igh Wind, Rain mor-
31, Very High Wind, wT W 20. Rainy. 21. Showrs, gr* 3;


WE, 27. 3 254 ; Rain: Sh , i
Vow. 2. Rain, gr. 8. 5 Ch -22. NAN. 23. SNOWTS, 27 5, |
-- 3.. Coughs complained of, gri 9. 24. Rain hard, ante 11 p. gr" 5:


25. Wetting molt part , greivous
Raing p. gr 7.

26, High Winds and Showrs,gs 7.
27. Some Rain. 28. Showr m. p.
gr 7.

29. Rain. 30. Rainy a2 p. ad 11


.gr' 8.
My I. Rain, High Winds, gr 9.
2.Raina © occ ad11p. gr 9.


Apo 1680, & 21. May 27.  þ. |
]
\
3
d
d
(
3: Showring at 2 p. gr 10.
l
&
&
ly
ſ


6. Showr, with Thunder at 3 m.
gr 0. 92 »
7. Dark at 6 p. gr. 10.

. 8. Rain arte lacem, gr. 9.
12. Rain ante m. & 10 P. |
;T 3: Cool V ain at 8 m.gr.6.
I6. Rain very: hard ae tot. gr 8.

- :18. Storm of: Rain, Thunder and


' Hail, bigger \than Pigeons Eges,


Br. 4. Fm G <4 | SY
19. Raincerca 3 pad Io. P. gr 4.
20. Rain ante lucem 3 Iris. gr. 3.


Fune 1. High Winds, gr 3.
Vi


$-21. No leſs Epc than this will ſerve to eſtabliſh our Principle 3 ' be
and I wiſh it may. Thoſe who have no need of it, I hope, will not count ic
a Burden : Our Marine Evidence will be acceptable roo, to our Studious vi
Nawvgator ; to whom, while T with well, I reckon I do right to my Coun- th
try : It concergs him, at leaſt, ro know there are Storms and T empeſts ,
and Shipwrack appearing in all its diſmal Shapes and Denominations of P|
Whirlwinds, Hurricanes , Boraſques, Tornado, Tuffon, whatſoever the ti
Portuguez, or any other of our Engl:;h have {marted under. Effects of m


4. Rainy, gr. g. |

About this . in Berkſhire Hurri-
cane tore up Trees by their Roots,
&c. Gurt, Intelligence, 153.


Nature fo intollerable, (to ſpeak with a fellow-feeling of Humane milery ) th
that a Man would be el


ad to know (thou gb it were but the pretended cauſe )
0


I
S3


Chap. V IL. Storm for a Week or Mb. accounted for.


243


of ſuch Extremity. Remembring that while we ſpeak of Tuffors, Whirl-
winds, we have to do with Miteries incredible, which weigh more Grains
Heavier, than ſome other, even intolerable accidents. And how frequent
theſe are at Sea, none knows fo well as they that feel them 3; of which the
1000 part appears not in publick. And therefore what Fats foever is
found in our Table, muſt be imputed to the Rarity , yea, and imperfection
of printed Journals; whoſe Abſtracts moſt commonly of the true Voiage,
give not account of one Tempelt in Twenty ; befide, that toward the be-
ginning of the Later Age, Navigation had not ſpaw#'d into Sholes, as after-
ward; the Time allotted by Divine Providence being not yet come.

9 22, Now, whereas we have owned before-hand that & and 2 perhaps
are not {o ready to excite Winds and Storms, as the Mercurral Aﬀpects are.
I anſwer, There lies a general Exception in caſe of the Platigue Circum-
ſtance. Two Planets ſhall do that at gr. 10, 12, 14, 16.diſtance, toward
Strelsand Violence of Weather, which atgr. 1. or two , they ſhall not be
able. And the Reaſon I have hinted before, is Mechanical: To my fur-
priſe then I found, ſearching into Stormy Weather, the Diſtance of ſeve-
ral Planets, ar, or near 10 degrees. The firſt inſpection I made was of
Feb. 2. 1652. High Winds, faith the Diary, * lies diſtant from the © juſt

. 10. © from 2 11Again,Feb.6.Another fuch formy Day, 2 is indeed gr. 16.
itanc from 7? : bur from 2, & is diſtants, Again, March 2dand 3d
Stormy Days, & is gr. 9. diſtant « Sole, and 2 gr. 11. from 4. Now,
that this ſhould happen to fall upon a d & 2 ,I confeſs is caſual; The reſt i707,
For neither thus do we make this diſtance an Efficient, properly fo called ;
but a due 4+/poſition of it only. And this juſtifies the Burdez of our Larger
Table 3 and, as we have faid, gives the Aſtrologer Room , enlarges His
Proſpect, and finds him wherewithall to take the Altztades of Influence at
ay diſtance. And this holds in other excefles of Rain , Hail , Thunder,
Heat in droughty times. :

S$ 23. We haveobſerved —_—_—— this conſideration gives an account
dthe Severity, together with the Duration of a Storm : in Planers of flow
Receſs or Duration of a day or two indeed, this may be ſolved by a Partile
Apet; ifa Wetck, it may be folved by an allowance of 2 : As
we can have Inſtance from the Lefler Table , ſo Az 1661. there are but
3 quiet days found in 11. Azz 1680. 8 in 9. Rainy. Bur where 100r more
degrees take place, we can give account of a Mozth, or ſox Weeks, accor-
ding as an Aſpect may happen ; or, as it may march its way by leature. So
Captain Smzith cells us from Feb. to March 18. the Weft-Indies were ſtormy :
Anno 1620, the Aſpect happening Feb. 23. So Stowtellsus, Armnorgga. It
rained continually June and July 5 the Aſpect following on July 12, And
the ame hand again tells us of the Month of Septeawber, Ana 1590. out of
wder for two contrary qualifications, Thander and Snow, the Aſpect not
hewing it (&Ff till the peylaning es the next Month. Yea, the ſame year
Mr. Purchas tells us of no Fair V Veather till March 3 the Aſpect will an-
fwer for its ſhare, for happening on Jay. 14. the zdft of the Month it may
very well anſwer for all that Month 3 as many a year before,v7z. 1524. hip-
pening on Febr.15. it may anſwer for that allo. .-

924. Butit 7c one whether the Month be Stated, or Arbitrary 3 if it
ths an account for 3o Days immediately conſequent, "Tis the fame
lung, :

$ 25. Nay, it may ſo happen by accident at the Station or Reg reſs of
Planets, the Aſpect may be anſiverable for 60 or 70 Days at what

lime we ſhall diſcern a Partile Aſpect repeated, like a Perſe in Muſuque ,
whereby the Song extends irs Entertainment ro the Ear. So Anne 1654.
the Aſpect may be queſtioned as — to all the Weather that appears
rr on


244


Kepler noted. Tuffon, Hail. — Book 1.


on the Stage for all Feb. and March, and Az. 1665. from July 5. to Sept. 18,
In which Inſtances, and in ſo many more, they do not only ſtand an{werable
asI ſaid, but alſo have wherewithall to ake good what they are charged
with, out of their own proper Stock, and help of Good Friends. This
may be ſeen by our two Tables when united ; if we ſupply Aſteri/gues of the
Larger, with the Notes of the ſmaller Table. For we were unwilling in
different places to repeat the ſame Diary : And no wonder can this be to
thoſe who ſhall obſerve that even in our Leſs Table, 4 & 2 ſhall laſt a
Fortzight, and all that while be found within- 2 degrees diſtance 3 Nay, in
Tune 1678. almoſt 3 Weeks. Now, leaſt any man ſhould think two De-
grees too much to be allotted: to this Aſpect, as Kepler himſelf dorh in his
Notes on March, An. 1629. Nam Conjunitio ipſa Sf 2 cum ultra gra-
dum diſſideant, faith he, parum poteſt—1ſt, &c. Yet within 7 days after,
when he came to give account of Thunder, day 9. which is Feb. 27, Old
Style, he is forced to impure it to two Aſpects, whereof the one isexpired,
and the other not yet zchoate, Yea Mark, I pray, tothe Neighbourhood
(Vicinie) of & and .2 , when & by his own Calculation then differs much
about 2 Degrees. BBs ;

$ 26. Nor is there any inconvenience that a long-lived Aſpect ſhould
prejudice the many ſhorter which intervene 3 for we have everted that Ob-
jection, by admitting what help and Aſſiſtance offers irs ſelf. Neither doth
one extinguiſh the other, no more than the Sun extinguithes the Light of
Nocturnal Meteor. It is fo far from that, if we ſpeak of Extinguiſhing,
that -\ helps to kindle it. One Aſpect, like one Souldiers preſence, animate
the other. _

s$ 27. Before we leave this, we muſt obſerve that although we have
met with Violences before, yet we havenot ſo many Tuffors before 3 How
terrible ſoever they be, they are , and have been frequent abroad, Famil:
Ir even in the Holy Story, and St. Paul's Voyage : Thrice we have the
Word which the Eaſt Countrys have preſerved to us, 794 :- ſurely (what
the Mariner calls aDew:l) there is a D:94:ty in them. To hurry a great
Ship downright in a Diſmal Gyre,down into the deep; aShip perhaps,whoſe
Neighbour not far off, is in a Gal? Who will not (ee a Planet > Yea,
more thana Planet z ſurely God fpeak not to Job, bur he ſpeaks to us all, in
a Whirlwind, and teacheth us to admire him in his his Armies Celeſtial,
whilſt we trembling adore the Maker, ſeeing Winds and Storms fulfill but


- his Word.


$28. As to our Glutts of Rain and. their Conſequences, the Flouds,
they ſpeak violence enough for a Martial Aipect, and fo doth Hail, as
dom as it appears, it denotes an unquiet Conſtitution, a violence inits very
make, Snow is a pacifique Emblem, it makes no Noiſe ; HailRattles and
Deſtroys 3 Szow , can but. bury us, but Hail may 4:!T. If agreat D
argues a violent Cauſe, Hail doth the ſame. ' This Cauſe Efficient is
amongſt the reſt 3 and, if. have any reſerve for Gl, rather than 3, 4
and -2 united are as proper asany other.

$ 29. Letus now proceed then to our Lightning and Thunder, of which
OCcur 21.
* And for this part of our Larger Table, you ſee it Lighten in your Faces
from ſeveral Quarters.
Anno 1520. June 15. Great Rain and Thunder, Puzrch. 1027. gr. 15.

| mM 6. Sept. 23. |

Baſil, Thunder, &-c. and ſoon as in the Table before. |

9 30. Thunder-Months are commonly from Aprz! to Ofober, and if you


| pleale to ſee the Months have their Load ; view once again and you ſhal!


ſee, November, Dec. Febr. March, All but Jeruary diſcharging one piece


for


RY Ow = Y & 5 EAnASYvDQ. OAT z O53 ND eo Roeld fe Y0&


or


_—_ ww" Yo...


— —


Chap. VII. Grad. 7.for Lightn. Account of ſ. Comets duration. 245


for the Hour of &' and 2. Nay, if it Thunder once in FeZz. upon our pre-

tended Aſpect, you have heard prejudice it ſelf in the Learned Kepler con-

fels the Preſence of our Planets. Bur 'tis not the only time, there hath bin

Thunder heard in F-4r4ary, Anno 165 2. Fez. 21. I remember two Claps : 8

2 ater. 5. diſtance. That I may notgo (o far as Gape Vincent , where Feb.

bY 1558. it Lightned and Thundred all Night, & and 2 art gr. 14. Di-
ance.

$ 31. We have diſtinguiſhed, in the Entrance of this Work, of Blite
or Blaſting, One proceeding from Cold , the Other from Heat : Want of
Rural Opportunities make us not ſo re2dy for the difference. Bur the Later
kind from Heat , may be referred to Lightning ; for the Word ſeems to
come from the Germaz Ylit=, which ſignifies Lightning. And our Inſtarce
I ind communicated from the Country. But 'tis but once , and therefore
may belong to ſome orher AJpect.

9 32, Oneparticular I muſt ſpeak to obſervable in the Degrees of di-
ſtance, and that ſeems a ſtrange one: thar in this Head of Lightning the
Number VII. ſeems remarkable, when at ſuchDiſtance it ſeems to Lighten
more, than at others. (We take notice of all things that may miniſter
Wonder, or upbraid our Ignorance. )

$ 33. For Comets the more Ienquire, I find no Planets forge more than


'© and 7, & therefore and ? muſt in proportion do the like; yet & and


'2 ſtandnot off, but ſometimes produce, otherwhile prolong the Producti-
ons of others. We will preſent the Inſtances of both.

9 34. Anno 1511, Comet in eHeypt and Arabza, voic'd for Terrible, in
& ; from May 3. ad July 3. Hewelins, d & 8 6.

Anno 1590. Comet from Febr. 13. ad Mart. 6: Linſchoten. Purch. t675.
8&4 Q, X 2. Jan. 17.

Anno 1664, Comet noted by Hewel:us, Dec. 4. but ſeen in the Eaft-In-
ares 9 days before, as a Worthy Sea-Captain , then at Sea, hath noted in
his Diary: d & 2 gr. 1. even upon the Partile d.

s 34.As to which Comets I ſay, that they accord to our Doctrine premi-
ſd; the Firſt , that of Amo 1511. d © 2 preceding, by its Warmth
hatch'd it in Apr:l, and it was in good time diſcloſed by our Aſpet of 9
2 about May 5. which alſo helped, the Days before, to its Production.

For the 24. of 1590. from Feby. 17. &c. I fay here, that this Comer
was conceived by d d 2, preceding all the way, and brought to Light by
do #7, cc. Howbeit, our Aſpect ſtood longer by it than d © 2.

To the 34. I fay nothing can be plainer, for the Comet appeared i:1 2
Square to & 2, and in the ſame parallel, zz. upon the Troprque Circle,
the one in = 8, the other in 8, on the Day of its Birth. Ac leaſt let this
be remembred.

$ 35. This for the Production : Now for the Continuation of the Co-
met. |

Anno 1532. a Sept. 23. ad Nov: 10. Comet. d 9 9, < 24. Of3%2 1 4.
ſoif began by ©, you {ee it is maintained all OFober long, by & 2 -

Anno 1577. Comet a ov. 12. ad fan. 10. Gemma, Now d & Q bip-
pens "1 o. ov. 30. fo it is plain our &d reaches the very Firſt day of the Co-
mets appearing with d 2 2, andas plain it is, that it convoys it all along
September to its Expiration. |

Anno 1556. A Comet March 4. of which Hewelins at large, half as big
25 the), in >, gr. 8.” d 6 2 preceded about Fezr. 19. and this Comet 15
owned to lye in adire&t & to &, and if ro & , than ro. allo; to whom
in d it ows its Original. To us Well-Willers nothing can be plainer, than
that Comers are Flammeous, or Lucid Expirations,which are produced by
the Planets, Now, as to the continuation of this Comet to a—_ 23.

where


246


| New Star in Cygnus. Earthy. here. | Book 1].


where it expired in a Partile 4d 5 ©. We own, that ©? diſcloſed it;
s 7, and ©d maintained it to the very Jaſt: but yet we cannot bur ob-
ſerve, that on the very day of its vaniſhing, &' and 2 were ſever'd a
whole Signs diſtance, whereupon our Meteor expired. I ſay, whereupon:
though on.that very day & © Z were all rogether, by a ſecond & of

7. which confirms 'tis the Platique Aſpe& maintains the Celeſtial Pro-

uction : Such being the Relation of © to 4 throughout the Month of
April, tothe day of Expiration. And Secondly it thews , that the Influ-
ence of 2 often takes place, if within the confines of 3o degrees, as will
be found by Experience, though hitherto I have been ſo timerous and mo-
deſt, topointat but 15. or 16. degrees at fartheſt. Furthermore, Ang
1661. Jan. 23. Styl. Vet. we will not pretend that &' and 2 gave being to
this Comet ; Nay, we willallow it to 4 ©, being then within 10 degrees.
Bur we examine what kept this Phxnomenon alive throughout the Month
of February. Is not our Aſpect here within 10 degrees at the begining of
the Month. the Partile d __—_ die 24.? es

$ 36. But, now I ſpeak of modeſty, I fear I ſhall tranſgrefs, if I impu-
dently demand not the Tayled Comets only , but the New Stars alſo to be
reſults of our Conjuniion, The New Star in the Breaſt of Gygzus,ſfuppo-
ſing that it began in Nowember, yea, or December 1660. I do now with
{ome tecurity impute to the d of ds 2, which then happened about Now.
23. This the World, perhaps, may be ready to believe, when they ſhall
conſider with me, what amazing Effects are produced by the Celeſtial Bo-
dies in ſome peculiar parts of the Zodzac. Nor does its large duration de-
terr me from that Fancy, ſuppoling it laſted to Anno 1629. as Argo! will
have it. For there is difference of Impreſſion on the Agerzs part, and
difference of retentive diſpoſition in the Starry Heaven, the Patient : Ner
muſt the Great Hevel:ns tell me, That the Light of the © it felf cannor
reach to the Fixed Stars, for the contrary is as certain a Truth, as that the
© reaches the Stars of the Mzcrocoſwze, the Eyes of our Mortal Bodies :
Now let us ſpeak to our Earthquakes. :

Ss 37. Our Firſt Earthquake which may be qo upon our AſpeR, is
that of Az.1538. where in September Month all Italy was troubled for 15.
days. Falopius apud Fromond : 8 .2 about the midſt of the Month begins
to come into a Platique d , at 12, 11, 10. gr. diſtance, acknowledging 4
O?, &c.

Anno 1552. April 20. T. M. in Germany among the Mountains (Sudetes)
Lycoftb. Fj & 2 about the 17: of May, & 1. our Planet about 11 gr. di-
ſtance 3 as & and ? about the ſame diſtance.

Anno 1554.Aat Lovain,April 20. Gemma Coſm. 2, 23.3 and 2 about gr.12.
diſtant, & with » .for ſhealſo we have heard Fromond confeſs isa Mover of
the Earth, having px advantage of Archemedes, that great Engineer,
V12. a place where ſhe ſhould ſtand. — And before this(though Earthquakes
are rare, and Thunders as the Natives inform us) ate Mart. 21, & 22. hor,
4. poſt mer. T. M. cum mugitu & quaſi clangore, Gemma , Ibid. where 6

2 were upon a Partile d, and $ bur gr. 5. diſtant from %, ſaving
ſtill whatſoever Cauſes Gemma hath produced, which indeed are ſo ma-
nifeſt, that he who looked into the Ephemrerides about the middle of March,
may read it, and fave the Labour of conſulting the Author.

Anno 1570. at Ferrars, on St. Martins day, ov. 11. Fromond. d © ©
about gr. 10. diſtance, and d & 2 nearer.

Anno 1571. Febr. 17. at Kinafton in Hertfordſhira, noted by Stow and
Thuanss too, as I remember 2 7 are ſetat gr. 3. and & 2 at gr. 8.

Ano 1586. April 11. In Ireland Trees and Thickets moved by the Ri-
ver Bair, Fromond from Ribera, He (who looks again) into the Epbemeri

a


_—  ——


Chap. VII. Accounted for. Currents. Mr. Foutfnier. 247


— — — —


ſhall read the reaſon ; yea, though he doth not »#%erfand the Charatter ;
what ſeems to our purpoſe there appears d &# 2 amongſt them.

Amnno 1632. at Norimberg, Nov. 10. On a miſty warm day, & diftant
from 2 gr. 7. the entire Caule is afſigned by Kyriander above diſpute,
where our Aſpect is allowed its ſhare. S

Ano 1637. July, die 1. at Tours in France ſtormy Weather, T. M.
Kyriander reckons it to the Station of ?. He might have vouchſafed d
© 2, Nov. 23. happening on the Day, and our d < 2 bnt Sevendays be-
fore; from which Term there is nothing noted in the Diary bur great ſmart
Rain, Thunder and Storms of Wind, the Harbingers of an Earrhquake
which take up its Quarters cither there ; or elſewhere, as the Train


ES.

$ 38. So haveyou a parcel of Earth-movings imputable to our Aſpe&,
nor can any Scruple riſe from hence, that our Planets Concern fometimes
areat a Platique diſtance , and thereupon ſeem to have leſs Intereſt, feeing
we know not but, nay it begins to appear now, I imagine that a 10, 12.
gr. diſtance, or thereabouts are requitite ro a more potent Influence , than
on the Partile. Howbeit, let it be divided amongſt them, and let the Pla-
tique be Equal in great Motions, at leaſt of Air and Earth. Herel ſhould
fy ſomething to the palene(s of the Solar Body, thoſe Changes which are
counted prodigious,and prove the Heavens Subject to Generation and Cor-
ruption , but weare only upon a hot Sent of this Arcazum ; it may be
we ſhall come to the *Evenzz, Have we not faid ſomething before alſo?

$ 39. A Word or two about Currents, as before in the preceding Af
pets, ſome Experience we have met with in this Quarter, and are willing
to preſent the Reader.

Arno 1605. June 1. Mighty Current violently brought us among the
Mouncains of Ice. Hall's Voyage; Purch. p. 816. —— Juue 11. Freſh gale
made the Seas high by reaſon of a Mighty Current; which ſets through
the Straits. 1b. d & with © 2, &c.

Anno 1609. Juze 3. Currents held us, ſtrong out of SW. North Lat.
58. Hudſons 3d Voyage to Nova Zembla. Purch. 582. gr. 12. Tune 11:
Current from the Northward, deceived us 10 Leagues of our account.
N. Lat. 51. gr. 10. um d © 5.

Anno 1611, OF. 19, 11, 12, a Current. Downton's Voyage neer Zacoto-
ra;cum@ d gr.8. Purch. p.278, OF. 22. Current Weſtward,lb. gr. 2.\Vow.
t. Afternoon we met with a Current, C. Guarda de Fuy, gr.3.cum © 7.
5. Curxent put us ſhort 60 Leagues: Purch. 280. gr. 5. cum d 2 and &,

An. 1662. Dec. 29.Great Current to the Southward:C. Limbery's Diary,
Iv. Lat 36.gr. 7. cum © &. |

Anno 1663. Jan. 9. Hindrance by a Current, V. Lat 28. er 1. cum 8
©. 4te 14. Hindrance by a Current, AV. Lat 21. 14. © being ner the Ze-
mth. 18, Hindrance by a Current, gr. 3. cam & 7.

Anno 1665. July 18, 19. Help of a Strong Current, Lat S. 22. neat
the Tropique, £r. 1. 2 Stationary.—Aug' 11. Great Current to the South-
ward, Lat 37. Southward, 12. 13, 15 Currents ——17. A Ceurrent de-
ceived us by 73 Miles, Lat' 37. Southward. —23. A Current deceived us .
109. Miles, ſince 42.18. d 2 gr. 2. —24. A Current. 25. Current of
18 Miles. —26. Current of 34 Miles. 27. Carrent fee Weſt by North ;
_ Lat” 34. —Sept. 1, 2, 3,4, 5Currrents. Theſe are Currrents with a

itneſs. ©

$40. Mr. For7n1:7 in a particular Chapter concerning thoſe Currents, en-
quiring into the'Caute, tells us, itisa very hard thing to aſſign it. And,as
others before him, refers it ro the ». This we get vy difcarding Aftrolo-
logy, and the Influence of the other \- = yet ſtand dayly in nd of

S | | chem


248


| Foirnier's Opinion: Diſcourſe of Book 1 [


them ! I do not commend theſe Diſputants, who when they could not find
out an #therial Cauſe for ſome wondrous Effects ih our vifible Heaven,
refer'd them to the Exzpyreum: Bur I confeſs, I wonder that the Learned
thought ic bootleſs to overlook the Viſible part of Heaven, the Planers and
their Configurations. Men ſhall never give an accounc of theſe Great Que-
ſtions if they deny our Influences , no more than they can of the Magnet,
denying it efflux, the Queſtion is fo gravelling. And I hope Gopernicax's
will not underrake it, ſupoſing the Motion of the Earth could give account
of the Flux and Reflux : Which Mr. Fournier hath ſhewn; is not done yer
by Gal:lee. There is no medling wtth the Solution of this Phxnomenon by


ach a Principle. The Currents are not Uniform , nor perpetual, as I am


informed by my knowing Friends ; and I am glad on't : Glad of any occa-
fion to make men enquire into a True, though diſgraced Principle; The
Motion of a Trough cannot make the Water boy! and ſwell in the Free
.Ocean. The » anſwers toall the variety of the Tide , and the Planets ro
all the Variety of the Current.—— How comes there a great Current,Dec.
21; 1662.2? L ill yoine you Firſt to & 2, but 7 gr. diſtancez to © and d
bur L.gr- diſtant. 711] point to Þ entring yon its Change , her meeting
with the Sun, yea and & alſo. The-> will be allowed gs; eſpecially, if
2. New ). But why then a Strong Current, Azg. 23. 1665. ? Will a
Square of Þ doit alone? No, d & 2 within 2 degrees. Wehave noted
the Cauſes in the Diary all along, ©G' 2 &. —9© in the Zenith, 2 Stati-


02ATy. | |

'S 4% And Let me note here ſome Diverſity of the. Platique and Par-
tile Aſpect, here it may bethe Later conduces moſt forcible to this Effet,
when as the former may contribute to the Change of the Air; I mean
thoſe which are accompanyed with Turbulency 3 becauſe ſuch State of Air
is more univerſal and unconfin'd, then a Current ſeems to be.—The one
is ty'd to a certain Elevation, the other may reach from one Pole unto the
other. But I define nothing,

$ 42. We are to treat next of Flouds, whoſe Predi#:0z , if it may be

reached, is4 matter of woment to the Publique : He that makes inqueſt into
the Caufe,may confider,that they do not all ariſe on the ſame Spring ; ſome
are Subitaneous, the ProduCt of 24 Hours (or a leſs matter) others riſe by
degrees , and Steal upon the = they invade, by additional Portions :
And ſome I may call ##ixed, ſuch , whoſe appearance is ſudden, and yet
were gradual in heir prone : I meanthole which upon a ſudden Thaw
of much Snow ſucceſſively fallen on the Days precedent , render a large
quantity at once in Water. In this caſe the Enquirer is not to conſider the
preciſe day of the Overflow, but to look back ſome Weeks , more or lek,
that he may, if hecandetermine, or at leaſt rake in the Time in which it
fell. Beſide that ſome Flouds are cauſed (they ſay) in maritime Countryes
by the Swelling of the Sea, and by tempeſtuous Winds , driving the rarits-
ed Brine over its Banks.——Such were thoſe of OF. 14. 1579. &c.
Surely in that of 1608. there are no gluts of Rain mentioned
Cambden : —— And our Wonder may be confirmed when - as we ſha
meet with Flouds, which are ſaid to have happened w:thout any apparent
Cauſe 3 as if Overflows were to be diſtinguiſhed, ſome whereof had, ſome
again had noCaule apparent. But the diſtin&tion muſt on no hand paſs; for
having made ſomeDiligent ſearch into all chat I could read of, 100. in num-
ber 3 I found that they all admirably agree with the ſame Celeſtial Cauſe,
with very little variety of the Species, from whence I am aſcertain'd there
is ſeldom an apparent Floud without an apparent Rain ſomewhere, though
not a drop falls perhaps in our Diviſton;for who knows not. there are _

ains


-—_


—_— m—_—_—


Chap. VII. Flouds and thetr cauſe Celeſtial.


Rains as well as Winds , which will deſcend Secardo 'Flamine, ad betray
the _ FRO was rſt cons m8 mw ; | ka | ns
. 9 43. I-have met with Flouds accompanying Earthquakes, and ſhbrerea-
neous Streams iſſuing from an Hzatus ofa" had ve Moonain CTY
not obliged to ſpeak to thoſe German or Indian Rarities: When Seas may
be ſucked up in a Subterranean, as well as an Aera{ Spout; or when 2
River may be expell'd his Channel by the Ruine of a Neighbour Mountain
- we will allow no Rain in thecafe ; For howbeir , thar uſe which thake
' an Earthquake, we haye found is apt to make a Storm, where the ptate
and the Clime is capable, for-che moſt part : Yet the more ordinary Floods,
whether of the Sea, or of the River, eſpecially the River, isnever produ-
'ced withort its Proportion of Rain , though the Sea perhaps may riſe and
even viſit its interiour Shore when no Laz-flouds may increaſe it : Mati-
ners ſay (and truly ) that it ſwells againſt every Stotm; and therefore all
the Time throughout the Tempeſt : Yea, the Thames doth nor ſeldom .(1I
believe) ſhew us ſuch exuberant Tides , where the fall of MorFare hath bin
ſparing, or none at all ; Jou will ſayat the New », or atthe Full. Right;
- Theſe Aſpedts raiſe the Waters, by impregnation 3 bar not only theſe; but
other Aſpects alſo with them, or without them, (fance' Flouds do not al-
ways happen at thoſe more frequent Lunar Revolutions) have a like Influ-
ence with the © and » (as we have faid already of 2 ) which doth fer-
ment, 7arfie, and raiſe the Waters to an Exundancy. Notwithſtand;
moſt commonly there is ſome fall of Rain, and more perhaps than comes
under notice at; or about this Ebull:tzon of the Sea or River ; I mean thoſe
Rivers which by participation from the Ocean partake of Fhux and Refluxs
One of theſe Cautes is our preſent Aſpect; for its quatiey of Rain you have
heard ; and for its tawefying Influence , you may think fit to grant it , be-
cauſe tumefaF1on is inſeparable from a troubled Sea, whether by dry winds
or Moiſt, 'tis all acafe, _ | |
 $ 44. Now, whereas Erhfad hath given away this Influence from our
Preſent Afpedt to & ©. I have madethe more careful ſearch, and the re-
ſult is, according to the Antient Aſtrologers, that # 2 have the Preemi-
nence ; and well they may, in all thoſe Flonds eſpecially, which grow up-
on us by degrees, the Continuance-of our Planets Aﬀvetted being of;
greater date than the other, will be more reſponſible to the Gradual Increaſe
of the Waters. _ |
$ 45. That we may put our Hand toward the deciding of this little Con-
troverlie, we will firſt produce our Teſtimony for & 2 and we confeſs rea-
dily that & 7 are S:a-ſweling Aſpects, fo far, that Flouds, as Eichftadhath
begun, ought to be reckoned among(t theirInfluence _—For, Firſt we have
the Memorable Floud
” 1. Ann 1530. Ofob.8. Ar Holland, yea, and Rome alſoon the fame day,
M;zaldus and others; d & 7 [5 9. ©sd gr. 7. diſtant; :
2. Anno 1532. In November : In Holland again , Mizalaus ,' Die 15,
d gr. 1.
Pg ja 1947. Auguſt 12. Catarats and Flouds in Tuſtany;Thuanw, d gr. 1:
4 Anno 1552. Tan. 12, In Holand Inundation incredible, Staarus, Tab.
Gemma; >d gr. 4. ©? gr.l. :
5. Anno 1571. Feb.5. Inundationat Lowain, Gemma; & gr. o.
6. vo 1594. Sept. Menſe , at Cambridge , Ware, &c. High Waters ,
d gr. 6. Stow. F
- Anno 1643. Decemb' 3. In Thuringia, d gr 4. Kyriander,
y Anno 1658. Auguſt 22. Art Feverſham High Tides, Ghildres, d gr* 2".
9. Anno 1669. Nov 11, Thames overflows Weſtminfter, Kingſtreet ;


Tranſa? &d gr 2.
$46: Enough


DR —_—


, 250


d 5 .: more Flooding than 4. 8 | Book 1.


1.6.2 gr 8. diff. dic 19.
6, Ann1573. Fel


$ 46. Enough to « denominate this Gozjw2#107 for a Watry Alpes; bir
not to award it froni 4.2. For here Firſt we meet with— — k
1. Anno 1547. Wet and floating Months 'in Tuſcazy , obliging averſed


Parties to a Truce. Appetente Hyeme ; Thuanus, d 3 2 is in being, per


obr. tot. &- max. part. Nowembr. not without d & 7 ſome while mixed


* ©»


with it:


_ Anno 1565. Febr. 2. At Louvain, d & 2 gr. 6. diſt.  ? oppoſ.


3. An 1570. Ofob. 5. England. Several Travellers loſt by the Wa-


- tets, &c. Stow, 6


2 gr.5. aſt © h. | |
4. Annoeod' Nirvenk 1.In HP, Galwiſ. A Foot higher than that of


" 1530.


5. Anno 1571, In Flanders, ab Aug' 15. ad 23. irreparabilt Glade, Gemma ;


rinc, In Holland, &c. Gemma, d gr 4. SI 2 ur:
tow


7. Anno 1579. ' 14. Memorable ſwelling of the Sea, vide


"> or . ©2L.gr 1. ; |
'® $. Anno 1594. June and July, Rain and Flouds; Stow, & 2 gr 2. July 15


'-g. Ajno 1596. The whole Summer Flouds , Howes, In the midſt of
Zwne (for its part) &' 2


3. | |
. -. Io. Arno 1602. Ono I7. Streights of Malaca, great Spouts, &c. Hak!.


4 2 gr ©.


 -11, Anno 1609. Dec 4. In Germany , Ntves plurime wie , » inex licabj-
les, No diſcerning of the Rodes, ſo real Flouds, though not in its Ho


or mali-


ties: Kepler apud Exchſtad; GI & gr o.


"12, Amo 1623. Febr 12.& 18. Danow overflows : Kepl. 4 & gr 8, A-
gain, Mart.17. Danub' Gd $ gr o.


13. Anno 1661, Febr' 21. [n Kent High Waters, 'd gr 2.
14. Anno ay > OZoor 14. and 16,Rain and Flouds, d gr'r5,
15. Anno 1678. June 21. Miadleſex, fudden Cataratts turned High-
Ways into SeaS,and Floated all Cellarage in the City 3 3 2 cum Plerad,
Laſtly, Az 1682. Much Rain , Hail and Flouds throughout England,
April, & ſequent. d I 2, ©5d.
A Wehave not leave to ſay here All that is to be ſaid ina Tractate
ou


ds, a Worthy Topique : The Truth, I hope , may be pick'd out


| from the ſcatter'd parts of this diſcourſe. At preſent we are for our Cli-


ents the Aſpects of 6' 2 2. And the Firſt we ſee, that of & Q, is the
Greateſt over Flouds ; though oft-times they _ in ſight one of ano-
ther : as Firſt, in that All-waſt:ng Deluge of Holland, Anno 1570. beſide,
Anno 1573.Aand elſewhere. *
$ 48. Howbeir, the precedence of our Aſpect is confirmed from hence,
that, we find not the d only , but the of & 2 ro call for a Floud, as on
June 13. Anno1529. A Floud at Baſel ſo memorable, that it was engraven
ona Braſs Monument, as Lycoftenes witneſſerh. Add that of March 29,
1606. where Shipwrack was univerſal, and the Seas over-topp'd the Land,
as Stew tells us. That at Pragueand Auſpurg in July, mentioned in Norim-
berg Diary. A Third in Dreſden, Anno 1642. Sept. 23. A Fourth in Ox-
fordſhire, Ano 1649. Jan. 17. A Fifth, 1645. whereas at an & & Þ we
more rarely meet with Floud, Not that they are of a dry Influence, bor
becauſe they are more Flitting and inconſtant, while & and $ abideby
their Propoſition.
$ go. And, what ſhall I ſay? Muſt I paſs the Tyde obſerved in our
s, Now. 23: Anno 1673. and an Higher than that, Otober, Arno
1679.in our tediousObſervations?Nay, what indeed to that of O8.22. when
the Tide ran all upon the EZb, and yet the Water roſe? What there may
be of Flouds in theOne;or of Currents of the other,Let theReader conſider.


$ 50. The


-. JF


. Intereſt ofus all, L know.nor.


* apen the Cararacts of Heavenand


” © 0
- -


Chap. VIEL Port-opemng, not from contrary Houſes.


”


— I” DC.” Se 4


.<5T;


650. The ient Aftrologers have talked to this purpoſe, long before.
Fa awazar, &c. T - Firſt if a Third Planet (Gich he) .comes
into & 0... Ft guaſt diluwiam apud Eſc wid. 2,7. The other tells ns; that.
in the Mamareth of -2 above &, there happen Exceſſive Rains, be.it in,
what lin oever - Which I look upon no-tham from the Arab, though
cannot ſufficiently wonder why he acknowledges fo little Wet,, except -in
One Sign 7 , when vice verſa, & is elevated above 2 3 there is ſome my-
ſtery in it that I reach not for it is contrary to our Northern Ex Ience.,
Bur the Aſtral ger oes further , and demonſtrates this Influence from the
Contrartety of t omicils, according to the Doctrine of Ptolemy, Tetrab:;
I. 20. Hence oY 2, and with ©, and Þ with ©, are peculiar Maſters
of - why Portarym. . Becaule 2 poſleſles the Signs = and S&, whichare
the Signs confronting the Martial Houſes of * and m. —In like 1 manner,
% inhis Houſes, 4 and X oppoſe 7 and '? , which are 2 's Propriety.
Laſtly, k in and = oppoſe ©, whoſe Houſe 'ris plain is S or A, :..
$ 51. Not-out of any Humour of contradicting Antiquity , whoſe de-
fence I endeavgur where I may, I muſt needs own ſome. difſatisfaRtion,
For I ask any man who is not Whether 2.4 why Truth ſhall not be the
d of & 1] not as Bhd,
ous as ad @&h.; I ſpeak of » clpecialy -_ the Þ a aps! to them. And.-
whe Tacor is not as, prone to W almoſt as a 7”, for they
derſtand the ESE At x =; ell as $ Mains ro ſay noching of
Hear, yea,of Cola ſo, ps laſt; though methinks
hath obtained. Yea,bur I 3k again mort a d, or © h& ſhall be diffars;
ded from an Apertio Portarum, to Rainor . I, &c. or our Neighbour: s 5!
which*we ſhall find to. be « Tearing A anc Now we ſee ok ready to.
e Great 8 Deep Laſt
helps to


y,whatwe of
2 and 2 ,, which is oft-time a.drenching 4
hat be eng, as old. Japhar I ſee hath caught, quoted oe our Core
i, D 6 2, 41ſt” 4. Cap. 4.to ſay no more.
have leave.therefore to offer to confi deration whether or
thi i0gt ns Coeſ * Fo of theſe Co gurations'to Rain 21
Wind, in 5 and. 2., &c,. The proclivity to, Clouds and: Moiſture , in. fs;


' and ©. Winds ind Storms i in the Aſpects of V7 may not he foundedon


other Baſes in Nature, rather than. the Oppoſite diſtances. of their Houſes #
Such are the. differences. of their Globe, or their Ponderoſity, as they, Ul


d (| ence of their'Qualities and Mzotions, the;Diſparity of t
3, vation: Diſtance: from the Earth, with their ſeveral LG


the Syn , from the Fixed Stars; -— Whether ſome orall of thele do

Id contrib Naturally pot withour ſwhornation, td. 2 diverſe Effect?

ing tis 7 a thegreat di of theſe in ſuch diverlicy of
Orger, was AR L es Divine. Wikem, which-ic may, be.

Ne $i cover ed Fn fg, and poſhbly. never will be ExEnGrPE by By ſag.


Contemplation, Iyemember- the "attentive Kepler obſerve
An. 16is That - the VII, d,.., Month, Ne Oonveg ir,


ſub Zodiaco ut.altitudrz men 1 Fs and he adds, Ne fine auBario effetu
Afcribing the nttable EF. ndring Month to; that hare acc


And no- qui 100 our tb Ape T'0 is wote BY ,
wherefore ? But becauſe © their ent Natures , Ne ks and Siru


& is warmer alſo nearer qghan _h... Nearer to us 18
one ahoth GP in 7 A oh of % conduceth fo fo FOO as the


Vicinit af; the Fro Warntt Moiſture, &-c. and the Natyre of...
batethrto tie Yate Effet.” Vicinity tous? Yea, and VER to the Sung.
On which accoynt the d Lynar,. or @ with. 3 1s ſo, conhgerable, &1y!
bi ace: ore. 4... oþ | _— (oy
uney "0 # 53+ IF


Wy


it ſoundsnot fo. well,


 —_v_—


make Flouds,' if


" CR CPE PT UNS GESTURES "1 ILY


PETE VI FT” ah £5 \. 0 . 2


" Malignancy f dQ | Book 1


__ 3. Yeaand % 4 —% #— Þ Y% the GuperiourAſpetts,whatEffects they
have, may be from the difference of their Globes and gp pl (for {0
our Tables make us believe) the Vicinity to one another ,-and their Vici-
nity to the T_ too, for all I know, to ſpeak doubringly i in a | point of
which Iam ſure. For what isit elſe _ the ——— above-quoted do fo}:
licitouſly bid us mark the Eccentricity of Epicyr cycleof VL Hh, the Þ be-
ing in L Ferigas e&-c. Except Experience od. t this Trurh, which 'I
now aflert

$54. What then? WouldT have Apertio Portarum to be rotited > By nd
ineans..-The Terms are fi t, and mn of Art if youll to be TEtai-


tions:
At rethe Word denyed; whe the thing Et
52, Itholdsin % 2, andit ſhall SEES which being
all of contrary Houſe b muſt needs ſay is a happy rongraity, or c&-incidence
bur brings no [tion , no more than the ities which the
Copermcan Syſtern boaſts of, 'canunhinge the Earth, and fetit a running,

955. Co" cloſe up all with the nm of the Aﬀtiiwve Tofluence
ER ber IE La fry fx ie, we find Fea-
eo aemical heartned on by this Hiha , Anno
1667.. Aus T Sk _—— Anno Co Ra 2. lent _


* 7
abroad in wo though


rokabs Are arenot h ene ,1625: ior bis =


)
oy Well then, Annd cam beg gh Mien Dh


abroad,nay at r home, inthe | concerns the


the year :
Phyfitian to obſerve even Petiens becauſe of the Garſext of
the parts of tn avrſ, $00 apparent to be detiyed here; as rode


other Caſes. d May2g. in S, Eved Goethe Chorale; He He e
began before M My, ene Gur Chronicle 3 the King 0


1506. Sorning Sicknek 24 time, Sow ds OF *, J
Fic] eſtilence, Fracaftor* time, hw, 4 OF og
nn, ag S& S 29. wade dt 20. a (Adobe Aba) The The


. a
4 >


17, Bt { 9. 2g ks Sickneſs from Litima wo Mi!


522. Peſlence at Rowe; Kircher © A Plague Ubi Ames nidos re-.


(which 1 notes the Spripg time ; the time of the
Anno


Chap. VI. Malignancy of EF 9.


253.


Anno 1528, Sweati Sickneſs, f Aug.434. & 245 The Logan
by the adjournment of M;chaclmas Term,

Ano 1541. une 19. IT 27, Peſtilence at Conftantinople , Kirs

Ano 1543. Peſtilence at ;ndon, Stow, d os, Sy "fn Ja, ' Hot
| in Augsf, or September it was. It began, probably, in

Anno 1549. Morbas in Paxnonia, quo Serpents in H. fm | eſcolattny
Gemma 1, 100, d Sept. to. = g


Ammo 1551. d Ang.3 Sweating Sickieſs ar Londbp, and 'v 8'
Dec. 23. The ry
nz o5% Yon £5 Longs =, &c. Mortality among


£ ono Men Guiny Yea at Aſftracau in Ru(-
Ye Cline Petlence oftecoes __ enkans cy y om;
repeated ” mr 9. in _
Quartan Agues a there wanted Laborers for Harveſt, as
Ame 1564. 's 3 2 0 Tor 30, <= 17; Felliexce, Thuanus,
Anno 1577. d JulyS. 810. a:que iterian Nov. 30. * 10, Epidemical
Diſtempers in Spa: = (Tawardilla) hab, Now ec. - 1


Sa t. 10, & 13, Nous ffs, Dimer-
wy op 84. May 20.5 7.-Peftis furiof, Furey major Z
, Ann 1586 3. ooka Y 20. at St. . Galentare and Pe-


Atlential
Ann 15 $8. ; FE) Y.1, at Java, on this very day Febr. 21: Cons
flaint of Sickne from the Heart of the place, Gawexc/h
1592, Aug. 21. It ©. Peitlctce ar” Linder = Micheclmaſs Term
Lepr at ww raft, Anim. Stow,
| hltet agg rae, & 16. The Peftilence which Ra Ate peice
0, 2 Account of the Bills of i


Bp. A nd. ug. 2
Anz 1 May 10. 18, bs prin Jani, faith the Journal,

hs 8 ro if fi torthward, Yea, Lavaon,

co —_—_ the Total wisunder 50 56) hg any aneoronrr) Belle


1613:
'  Ant0 1622,
Ann 2 fe
{nnd 1626. July I2. ” va at Am
of the Plagne at Lintz in the Siep
Amo 1628. Sept. 2: 5; at _— tie:
Aut 1630. Flux; Su Peſtilence ar: Ls
* thethbeof whoſe qe ei Gre To, Ble
po! 1632, Nov. is. 4. Sickly,
5, fam0 1635-Aag. 5; S 24, Pefis nom 9
© Ar 1637;'S 9. June 23. Donny
, yer this year was not free. Verily Jae a; |
, viz, 130. Plague aMo-at Gonftantemopte: Prog. 24:1:-235 by
Now IGar: ip April 12; 1118 and Jave =_ 'S 25; Der; 6. m21;. In
April 12. Ge ek > 15x oe Tt
"Ann 1643; Ofd6' nm 6. chivtine'of matic Bill
higheſt; oz. the Firſt and Week w obs 26; Arcount..
"Anno 1645; Offob. 12. 420; London. Whete Oavrrv ofa Was the
higheſt Toral, iz. 175: Pariſhes infeRted 43;


254


Origin of Peſt. S ickly Autumn, whence. * BookIl.


Ann 1647. Adig.:10, 2.11... Nov. 10, 2 15. at London, where Au-


uf 12. brought 209. and Nov. 2:.: 120.
; ny 0s i: 25. 5.16, a———a in Africe, and Valentia in pes


have and our London Sly, Loa The "ARA r
Ano 1656. g-2 m8. Great Peſtilenceat a RY
| Arno 1658. July 13. 9. 23. and Oftober 28, Ire time Graunt:

Aving 1665; be yet forgotten: Our Aſpect was re ted. July 17.
ap en it again Aug. 30.7910, On July 17. the Bill at: 00S
and Auguſt 29, 6000.

All which, if I miſtakenot, helps roconclude the Great ( ueſtion, d 0.
Tigine = and teacheth us that it is from. Heaven.” ; The my Phy-
fitian at imeguer ſcruples to allow ati Aſpect of h and & ; but weare ſo
unreaſonable .as to.challenge more than that Aſpe&, though more Crate g
ous than others. And we defire this our Table _ exainin'd as to thoſe
particulars : - Firſt," Do not the Alpes «h the year? .(2.) Doth it
not keep touch £00. often with _ Reyolut Tions Fane tatdy Succedent ?
Asin 1543. 1549. EG, 1584. 1586. 1588, &-«. JE; Doth ic not
agree tothe Month: 2 Nay (4.) ſometimes to the Hei the Peſtilential
7 See © 1637; 1641. 1643. &c.(5:) Are not the Winter Mon infe-

eS comes in December or I, , Fc, ? Next,
are not py e2rs I where the Aſpe& returns? gain, is it not
i alt. the "World! over ? -Ng; man can' doubt that hath ſeen 1665,
oover his Head, -but that this' Ape; with all its Circumſtances, was 2
i Knotintiue Celeſtial Vhip 3 which here we are not engaged to con-
191315! ,
7: Yea from hes henee: we may diſcern, "Þ an 7 will pleaſe to uſe my
clayrakes makes theAutumn ſo Sickly :.. What blows up.che Coal
for'New diſeaſes to ſparkle among us: It hath þin hicherto fat, eating
£60-much.Fruit!::: But'tis one: thing to ſay; -t9o- much Fruit eareti may
= a Luartan Agee &c. in this or that Perſon ; and another to ſay;


Yoon DRCaTs &Q weh Fruit is che Cauſe ! Tis
the EE iba


=O _ is Ks For oy ors Fruit
t: Perſon eat? e Libor a at appeal to
Pracie of the Skilkat Ph: 1tian';: whether harveſt one in Oogol
Maſculine aged PatenaNe oh yes, that can Salve hcrng
y:eaten? / For:how haps En Eat ruit
year Th fenoeaonen Penh haps) ;demacacns Frue,:,but
areall Fruicl years Sickly.\Wedo on t ſo, nor OTE al Seaſons
Bruicfal _- = reaches ouch fuch. thing.;,He talks of che Monro
and- "Lenrnbd Men are oath to impute- ic.to the Sea-


ſon becaue ence not the-Myſtery why the Seaſon ir felf is Malignant ?


5.4ells us, AllunſeaſonableY eather i is ſuch. Our Table will


thovt i in ſores | what are al t which happen, Augif,
 Biptpanber and ? Donot Lv Wee ew al out in hate Months?
And are not thoſe:Monchs, for Dangers upon a Cele


A account © TheP es wor Commits Aaunodta my ; ahd


do not EverFone cutie and can they on Signs. SUR,
lor: uſt do fo,

The ole Cauſesr pring alſo
a$:the very Table: will iniorn. .Tis1 nor "wich vs las in Jak = other
aces,


0 EY OHOAGE 34a HAS ©


Chap. VII. — Compuuttion ry F-1


places, whi ro. 4 res harigs on the Tree all the ear ns, Fate is Rarkey a
ſometityes of the Year, when # Quartan a e, or the Small Poches le
iag or a Peſtiletic Feaver is not. * © *


. = *
ab. —— a 4
dt . £ a _


CHAP. VII. 43%: a Re ner
© Conjunifioief Mars 4d Mercury. ; hg "1


F*
———
”


x
F* s +
| S127


Parity 0; fRedfor 2. Different Aſpeifs may partake of the ſame
pegs 4: The Aſpe# Cannot he conſic rerd gre 6 ſ 9,

' which wakes bitr Diary prolix, .but is hoped, not nauſeous. 5, The
.. Humonr of the AſpeF not. ſown: but-by an enlarged Diary. 6. Az
* Brologer wit laxe Contemplation of an Aſpe&# will be put t6
his ſhifts, at Kepler. No ſuch thing as Anticipation z the Art betray-
ed by it. 7. Nawel Bffe#s are not Orphans. 8. Further” j»ſtificat;.
on of our protix Diaries, © q, 10. Communication of Planets 43
gr. 10.diftance, to ſay no more. 11. & % CharaFer. , 12, 13. »:

" afign of Diyth ; iu, the Antieats, Opinion, ſome tokens of #hat Dryth.
Locuſt a Sig of Dryth. 144:15- The Aſpe# admits of Cold and;
| har alſo;-116; Which made the Antients perhaps define 5 to be of
brful Temaper. ' 17, 18.-1» 4 ſtats: le mos $ wy *

Heat, which: _ ers not Cold, "= Sf . $0 ouy "North-w;

"is aPnated byYR# 3566 ny Narthers Aﬀteri Ms. COT Ras oy
fs of Rain,, - YA At. The +122 Harmfuland, perniciotts. 3. ;
"ders. reckoned. ,: 244 Not mets 45 Cardanwill have ity Nos
"#v, AY the Planets contribute. Hevelius as ſhy as he 34, his.toi»
ſent thetitoa 26, .27. Account of our Aſpett's imereſt in fore Comets.
128. Sore) Hah he Germany,” ther in Englatd.” '26, 29) 2 Aconnt of


' ſane Eurth ue > where onÞ A if, peck it concerited. '.30.' Qreat Fiſhes
ſtranded ti e diſturbanct of Nature. 3t. 6 oles by /h af argue.

| the Fke.. y 3 yy. Duration. FE Gr one: may be accongted.. jor.
5 Crrrente.ge re. alſo td Aſpett. 34- Some. ifting of:


354 Lhe>tate Dr, = 4. al opinion curious. 36. Som,
ho anGan: 0272." and vir Aſpects contern. » w: 38. - Coricliffs


| pmol «1d Metignmcy of onr Aﬀpect. 9. The Diary:

'u6: The reg of if nll ſurpriſing + owys by fic : 4f. The
"Giatle DWP poſed: fn,

5 I. IX have zaiſed the Readers capa of thy Af t; by

he beforehand what it can do in no mean-Inftanc = <4

this, the Pooh (Ob this. HER Att iotlows theTPreantes: | jk ral ih

YaiNes, ap4 theably)'sd. 4 HRVE of SU 3rtheny (P64 ial 3-have


£ GE 45 wy ib 2716 '& - 4b
The + = egy 1Alpe? eren ea EXPE-
| fied Nature en peu \hich-producd the: my ee:
Nature hath diver is hich graduc the-fawr- _ - oF
ere green, _ DOT Io he -Larkaadtirh fm bog their
» caries  laith Kepters rg rick Lu wh dren in Fane ohm > —_


ature can mgke 2, Spring -when the Sunz3dn 32 -N
IEEES is W; I gean eg of not Pi Cn:
2: whereour Mathematicician i thinks Levi TAE
E'6. $ 3: Noe,


Chap. VIIL Force united ; $ "26.22 ” how: 4 (ſpefts C harafter. : 257
$$, Thus in our Home- , 4® 166g. we find d n; in Congreſs y—


—_ we ge coqrlp nanſh —_ PEAR al fe


rag, Next. remove we backward Fonds y, 7 Þ.9


Hz


before 3 nay, on Day 12. D | where Li
hind < naphqnoy {Yom > Now they _ &, Frig] Dreadful
ſhall conſule the Ephemeris,, and find the /ame 'Af FS .Planers


repeated, One on the- 14th as-well as on the 20th, we xably own
& ? inthe Riots. In-the later 4 was gr. 7. diſtant; ar =.
(leaſt he ſhould be excluded)bur rn Neither then, according to vulgar ac-
count was any of thole great pads kB, , h & thereabours.Forh 5 was at
neareſt 5 degrees diſtant in pe Boer, i farmer the diſtance was gr. 16. ,
Sg At avs hm rp EST - it _— but at 7 it canoe. I
anſwer :. Two degrees diſtance is far from Partile. But, when this Month
ſhall give us Inſtance of - Two ry ny fr Four , and Fee, and Six, and
Sever ; -who can deny but that (pe& ar theſe diſtances caizſes them]
(5. <) Hel ro make thery For thar is all we labour after. For an AC
garly confin'd, is Shackled, and excludesall conlideration of ſenſi-
le approach or Vicinity, iD 25 to make thediſtance of 2 or 3 as
as 3 or 360. Contrary, fay I, toall reaſgn. For though the Gex-
| junction be the Scrongeſt 3 2 Corporeal Conjunction reac _—_
Cordon truly) as far as the aggregate of IS a
Pol.) Yea, and many alſo, ſay I, OYSED not aged ite
have Rayugnd Pro oqpn a of Serength. $s They x Pet One to the
as we wreſtlig, when th
th is. more powerſl,ekave E


of-
every kind of Union, for every delign whatſoever. Es


Nronger than a Company .of Stragl-rs. - But a Rank
ſtronger to DO crirds Beiide the Unity of the Lin, ere
be Unity i he Heatem, 00 mT = Jp
08.r0 vents, or t0 wo |
tina B os ea. DE Fugit, 8 _ pro? —_—_ to the Bulk. Ha ag
Proportion ; atd onal be,”
| CT Le 13 #72. 0f 24. may tn freer PR L
but we have ſpoke to this dy.
S1r. Well, what can & do more then = |


A. cauſe th, job, of iadpand ing ir re

oy 5 Wing Age Age hah becle morEto oy 41 He

" Or for, both the Planets,” Qith

FATPE) Rn g PA Our 'preſenc. nad | Mag Perbaſt's
dren of -


* he xo
debian


= FF - Y "= TS


ab & will
NY fl re-


PT OT. 4


{panes * y.


Lt
| To: RE: —_ EE


4d


J i


| Next, un is Ao 4% rt which:
\ No uw " its, Ne many times fs wort yow
| nothge cine? Yeabby Stealth a5 I may fay, ay


mA A BA eg #/T rv *t HY


'& yp: Tn Cal. Dryth. Locuſt. Book 11.


vl TIO"; or berween that and Midnight - The Meteors obſerved in the
Night; and its ſhare iri Coſnets + whence Cardan, you beatd,- mike Mzrs
Nip, 2 * aſpected br-not; rode the Sire and. -For- runhervbf all Comets,

2p Effe&; or attendent'of &'7', if not; facher an
to &, "with whomfoever / configurate. "To this we

a, "which we know accompanies Fog though this

1g” its ; Finely ſhifting and changiig'ro another poirit. Laſt-

yeh gra not be difſembled ; and left for "the Adverſary tomake uſe

Cb1z and Troll of; intenſe and pungent s for ſo we'find it ins ſpecial! man.

in ſeveral Years, fometimes on the

a Frog ; fo that I'am'x lirtle” reconciled- to Cornelius.

who ronce poke what care ext, when he jmpated 4

'toan Aﬀpettof &
3.-But thc the Diary pur this gs or xd inwyhaod fince 1
yp! you, att engaged t to os to it. © Firſt then , conſul ting my
d rh iſes robe + ear tnatter of News : For the Arab

if  only's et, but of bt 3 Greater Pronghe than w_

tec i cerrain ty the fame roken that they have a conch af Fog

id than a ark Cwhich we have ſeenin'& Q) of 1 Ns ed

one ro'Maty, * The fame ' they repeatin the E] io


frtviries; and ex tonly a but C
VAI ed, "981 have ow + before. ” eu wap rok es
ed 'Deatth, -which _—_— i hories rryes muſt
ol” Es , wh RS


fr from fabul ovr
Chuntrrys ; which T),
r rvens; Tc cer _ ; for o depend Th IE


BC with chralo Ont, i | bg dE tion of 2

LO G92, 1 ae 4 bue ir Diary, FN Gratis
_ abitudes of , ©

Es Inſtances 3 'Here Fi Fodeniy; an on
*-not ro mmention bog 28. '166t;


Barc #* es eli, 2 22 wr


r day of the d d in theend
ot of Jas.


#1661. and


DNaices 45,'# > days about it,
Hou WS 0 Farry yehement pa {hs
1. Ly 1675. Winter days. © O8. 24, 25, .


gs x06 No ok.


"OE 09 ap we <5 in Mb # ve octafibyi? N
| "a FoaPtFuf N ks he cor ſys T .


Lt.


Chap. VIII. Light aftuates Cold. N. Winds, whence.


 -þ


or Cold may take place where an Afpect is deſticute. - But further, I can-
not prevail with my ſelf from the per{wafion, that at times, being a poſitive
Influence where it cannot ſtrike up a-Heat , it will actuate yo Sting of
the contrary, Cold. From the Firſt time I confiderd the 4 © Þ oft-times
commenced on Froſty daysz muchmorein d @ 7, or © 2, &c. Irecko-
ned that the beams of che Planes conjoyned could do the leſs, if they could
not perform the Greater. For I fancy that in a cold, nipping, Froſty Air,
the Atom,(could we ſee it) is in Motzon, elſe fayl, it could nor penetrate the
Gutzs : Heat it ſelf could not affect us if it did not penetrate. Now this
Motion it may receive from the Celeſtial Beam.
$ 18. Iconfirm this , becauſe an Afpe& of % , *and & himſelf as we
ſhall hear, hath £or a Name for ſuch Effects, which E:chfad himſelf
hath confeſt. I add , that h and & met together haye a notable Influence
for the ſame Cold, w:z. Froſt and Hail, more(for otherwiſe I will fay lit-
tle, becauſe Þh you will ſay is a Cold Star) thma d h4, or hY :
Wherefore? unleſs &'s Heat ( or Light) nnited indeed with h, but defti-
tute of its other Companions, ſhews 1ts Influence ſo?
$ 19. I couldask, Whence comes the Activity of the North-Wind, were
Ktime to ask the Queſtion ? In December ſuppoſe the Sun , &+c. may raiſe
the Exhalations, buc why doth it not propell it from the South Point, where
is raiſed ? I folve it thus: The MVorth-Wind never blows but when the
Planets are in ſome Deſ:tute Eſtate, and the Fixed Stars from 52 degr
diſtance on either {ide of the Pole have time then to ſhew themſelves :
They can breath, though they cannot heatus ; ſoit is Heat (infenſible)acu-
ates Cold. Thus may we have leave to d:ſcourſe, where it is not given to us
to comprehend; And if the Fixed are concerned, 'Tis their Light, or Heat,
unleſs you will allow them another Influence, which will be ſaid
only, never prov'd. :
s 20. And now may we return with ſecurity to our Character, -and
bring in our wonted Liſt of Winds , Rains, &c. All that we produce in
the preceding Aſpect. * "F< | |
A® 1652: Rain confiderable, of violent, April 29. May 2. Fane 9, 10.7a-
ly 5, 6, 7. 13. Rain all day, aly 18, & 22;
A? 1654. Fane 28. Faly 1.8. Sept. 9. (Firs of Wet 2t. ) 24; 25.
A® 1656. Fune 9, 18, 24. (26: allday) Fuly 19, 23, 26, 29, 30. Sept. 18
. A® 1658; Ang. 17. (22. all day ) 28, 30. Of. 15, 16,17, 18. ( whole nigh
a7) Novemb. 2,5,18. ” 7 OB "I.E
* 1660, fuly 30. Sept. 5. O3.27. Nov. 7,10.(Rain; Hail frequent 11.)
A® 1661. Jan 15, 17,18, 23+ Febr. 13. Storms by Fits...
- £16683, OS8. 9,23. Nov. 2, 3, 4, 6, 10, 11, 12: (m.p,15. ) 18. (by
Fits 19. ) die tet. 21. | age Jt Ei
A® 1663. an. 26. (by Fits) 28. March 24. Apr. 5; (by Fits 6.) ©,
21, 24. S214, |
& Sans 1665. Jan. 18, 19, 25, 26.Feor.t6 Anno 1676. Marth 25, May 3.(by
its) 7, 8, ro. LT 4
Aneri469 May 30. Fime 7, ta, Aug. 9. (by Fits 10; ) 11, 12,14,30\
Anno 1671; May 16. 20. (by Fits 21. ) 23, 26, 28. ( by Fits 31.) Janer,
2,7, 10,1
Ns 2092; July 28, 26,30, 31. Sept. 12, 16. (by fits 18. ) tg. ( by Fits2o.)
21, 22, 24, 26, 27. Ofober 7,11, 12,13, 14; 17. |
\ Anno 1675: Jaly 19, 21, 23, 25, 26, 28, 31. Ang. 1. Sept. 23, 24, 25, 26
(by Firs 28.) OF. 8. Dec 8, 10, 11,12 , 13, 14,15, 18, 20, 21, 26; 27, 29
M 1676:-Jan. to. by fits. |
A® 1679. Sept. 13, 19, 1;21; 23, 30. OF: 3, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14,18, 22. Dec"


411, 12, 14,25 527% :
XXX A


P *
_—_— —__


" Hermfal Winds under this Aſpeti. Book II.


A® 1678. Feb. 21. (by Fits) 24. March 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 15,16, 17. (by fits
18, ) 20, 21, 23, 29.


A® 1679.* Vow. 27. Dec. I. IO,I1, 15, 20, 21, 25,27, 8. --.
A® 688, Jar. 3, 5, 7. (12. by firs) rch 1, 3. April5,6,8, g. ( by fits
I3.)15, I6, 17,


A® 1682. Febr. 18, 20, 24,25, 28. March 3,7, 9, 12, 13, 20, 5, 27, 28,
30. May 23, 24, 31. Ofthele we find ſome days wet throughout, July I6,
1652. June 26. 1656. Aug. 22. 1658. Nov. 21.1662. July 21. 31. Ang. 1.
1675.

x The Winds raiſe a greater Sum, ——_— (though more there
were without doobt) yet, theſe came to our of Harmful and Perns
cious Report.

A® 1675. Dec. 14, 23,27. A* 1677. O8. 14, 22. A® 1698, March 18, a1,
A® 1679. Dec. 20. A® 1682. March 12, 22, 23.-—19, 20. May 13.


The reſt of theſe follow.


A® 165 2. April 18, 19,20, 24, 27, 29. May 29. Jaly 12,4,18.
A® 1654. June 25. July 3, 4, 19, 24-
A 1956. June 7, 16,17, 18, 20, 21, 25. July 17, 18,19, 21, 28, 29, 30,
. 27, 29. Sept. 6.
Ok 1658. Aug.16, 21, 25, 30. O8. 18, 1g, 25, 26, 29. Nov. , 3, 4, 6, 7,
9,12, I3, 15,22.
A 1661. Jub 30, 31. Aug. 4. Nov. 10,11 , A® 1661. Jax. 3, I2, 13, 15,
18,21, 22. Febr.6. 13.
A*® 1662. Nov. 10. 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 22... A® 3663. April 17. May 1:
 A®1665. Jan. 3,18. Febr. 4, 5,6. A*1667. March 21,22, 25,26, 27,28,


30. May6.
A® 1669. June 9. A® 1671. May 14, 31. June 8, 9,1 3,14.
A® 1673. July 27. Aug. 3. Sept. 12, 16, 17, 19, 21, 23, O8eb.r1, 12,


15, 18.
% 1675. July 24, 25, 27. Sept. 24, 25. O8.7, 8. Dec. 6,8. 15, 17,22, 26,
A® 1677. Sept. 12, 13, 27, 29. OS. 11, 14, 28, Dec. 8, 106, 12, 13,
I4, 27, 28. |
by 1678. Febr. pO BL25- Marchg, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22. April 2,
# 1669. Dec. 8,9, 18; 19, 20, 22, 25,26. 27, 30.
RIO Jan. 2, 3» 4» 5» 7 Marc I, 3, &, 5, 6,8, 9, IO, IT, 13; 14,
I5, I6.
by 1682, Feb#; 18, 20, March 8, 9, 13, 14, 23, 24, 25, 28. April 2,
I. | |
Fo 2. This Evidence is proper, when we ſhall glance on the Hiſtory of
the Harmful Winds, wh po. rhe till the Year 1675. the Firſt Year of
various Printed Intelygence of which we made this innocenc uſe. In the Firſt
we note Harm on dy to our City Buildings. In the Second, IX.
Ships caſt awayat Mount Bay. ' In the 34. A Hurricane, ſuch are always
terrible,” being near Earthquakes , as here. The Next, Ofober 14. 1677,
At Bridlington Bay, Shipwrack , and ate 22. at Swanſey a$ wherein
the Wonder no more harm was done. , And News of Wracks, Oober 18,
with Dead Bodzes caſt upon Shore, 1678, &c. which I deſire might be con-
ſider'd ; how frequent would their mencion have been, if the ſame Publique
Intelligence had been Stirring, . For I will make the Reader Judge, whe:
ther at leaſtevery Raging, Furious, Turbulent, Tempeſtuous Guſt, noted
in the Diary, did not bring, for the moſt part , ſuch a ſad Story, when [
more than once , ſuch unwelcome Informations givenus , ever where
Lictle or no Wind is noted by Obſervation z XII. Ships caſt away isa diſ-
mal Report (We ſpeak of no Forreign Wreck) March 39. 1682. and =
|; 1nd,


_


a1*ch) emis TY TT * ww 0 79 53 * oe on ey w +


Chap. VIII. & # thunder.Comets $ aturnine.QC. acc.to Hevelius. 2 61


Wind noted in the Diary. The like as in. the Swanzey Storm, O#, 22:
1679. For the other greater Sum of Lofty Winds , it may not beamiſs I
ſhould own that I have not reckoned thoſe Days which are termed Windy

ly, which yet would have made the Pomp the Greater, and it may be

right to be reckoned with their Cla. The Winds before day, I
thought it reaſonable roaccount them Lofty ; becauſe either they were yi-
olent, or might be preſumed fo, if but audible to thoſe who in their warm
Beds,or drowfie Pillows, are diſpoſed to hearken toa good quiet Sleep, than
an unquiet buſling Blaſt. They who pleaſe may ſee more to their ſatisfacti-
on in Kepler, or Kyriander, and fo much for the Xnrubigten pair of Pla-
net, & and 2. in Aﬀpect. |

S$ 23. If youpleale to allow the Summer Months, the next is Thaxders ,
&-c. and & © are pretty good Erremen, See them Exercile.

As 1652. June 9, 18, 19, 20, 21 , 24, 25. Fuly 7, 22. A® 1654. June 25.
Fuly 8. Sept. 23.

£1656. June 1o, 12. July 20, 25, 26. Sept. g. 4* 1658, Aug. 14, 17.

M* 1660. Aug. 4. 4* 1662. April,6, A* 1669. Auguſt 8, 9, 12, 27,

A 1671 Sept. 22, 24. 4® 1675. fulyz3.A®*1677.Dec. 1 . A®r682. May22,3 %

Will you _ to = ay * mp elſe yuel dg? pom ehoegd
Tune 19, 21. *,. & ly 27. at #tZ, 28. at {\or « 29.
hy A 4 wy Norimbere. Fane 1,2, 7,8.(9. at — 3.21); os
ad 15. at Lintz. (16,18, at Norimberg. ) 4*1626. July 31, Aug. 16, 31.at
Linz, (4, 11, 12. at Norimberg. ) pr..39.

A*.1628. Hag. 7. Lightning both at Liztz and Norimberg.. December 22;
Gel Ardens in both places, _
© 1632. Dec. 21. Lightning and Thunder at Midnight at Lzntz, /

A® 1635. March 6. April 22, June 3. 14. f

A® 1637. May 15, 16, 17, 22, 23: July 25. Aug. 11, 20, n

A* 1641. April 23.

p$ug Tp no Gardar,, you have heard,pronounces tha :

$ 24-- next 15 Comets. », You have neard, that all
Comers own their production to this Fe Deck: Aceing they are of a dry Ig--
fluence. You ſee what we have ſaid of the Dryth of 7 —_ _
of His reckoned only to make an Aphoriſm. Some Comets are noted-in
his time, which ſhould give him occaſion to ſay ſo; but I wonder whythe
ſhould approprinte itto our Aſpect, ſince he made no-Catalogues 3 for then
he would have ſeen , not- only © 2-4 bur, k 2, ©.2, 2, though: of

iſt Influence, as dry for this jpuener 4.9% Alab! All the Planets
haveſaid contribure to theſe id Productions ; And 25 Good Afro-
ers, perhaps as He, have 4dyentured to, ſort our ſeveral kinds of Co-
nets to each Planet re vely : Some Saturxzne, others Jowisl, ſome Lis:
: A Notion which I thought had bin trifling , bur that I ſee He-weleus:
eſpoaſes it, who is afraid to diſcourſe any thing like an Aſtrologer ,
even where they ought not to be diſdained. He perceived the Truth
concerning their Original. As for their Natures, ' to me,. they ſeem
Extia per Acridens , and ſo cannot brag of any Nature , unleſs it be Rela- ;
tive, a Sign, or ſo, of what follows. .. |

s 25. Bur I hope this great Truth may find reception one day 3 that eye:
ry Aſpect happening within the Terms or Limits 'of a Comets duration,
Concributes ro its Exiſtence; We will endeavour here-in (ome part: to

erſwade this. I remerhber that December 12. 1680. the very. Night that
[ wrote deny ſucmon'd up to view the Comet in the South-Weſt, hors
6. Þ. M. Confulrigg the Ephemveris, I found chere was © h Z in beingand
that the New I the day before uſfier'd it in. But I ſhall hew Carazn 2
greater Comet-Founder than 9% ; and that is, a d, or ©% Gd, —V 2s


dry


- —— - - - —_ mo © uo


C omet-Founders. Diſcant on our proper C. - » Book FT


dry a Planet as Þ 3 though & 2 © are Comet- Ties; many tine.
And what Þh may do, . will be ſeen in due Seaſon. Comets then, ——-

$ 26. 1532; 4 September-23. ad Now. 20. 1 12. Sup, i in © and &.

1539. 4 May 6, ad dtem 17. ſuprain © & *..

1558. Uug : 6. ad diem + - ghony yd ine ibid.

1596. 78h 9.8 14 ad Sept. 15. See it in h and &'. Thuanas,

1647. 19. A Comet 2 days ſeen, and vaniſhed-

1661; Jan, 28. St. Vet. Comet een at tm Hewveltus,

1664. Nov. 24. So again ſupra in & and &

1661, Feb. 25. Comet at London & of 6 and Y in med. X, cut ©.

Earthquakes love to follow oft-times, of which we have met with theſe,

T. M. In Lima fuit animadverſus Kepl, in Jun. menſ. A* 1624. At Rome,
ſaih Kepler, Fun Jalyg. 19. £ 1624.

A® 1643. Sept. 2. uſque ad 6. P

A® 1645. Sept. 12. inns, Kyrianaer,

A® 1667. April 1.

A® 1676. In Moen Januar 5.

A® 1680. Vefuwius ejects Fires _w_ tanes at Vaples, Menſe Martis.

ow 1682. Ar Doncafter, May

$ 27. As ro our Remarks Hick we promis'd : The Firſt Comet i
Sept: 15 2, we know, as before; appeared at d & ©. Weenvy cory hot
Marti vlar d; but we with Reaſon lay, that d - 7 preceding , h
to the Concluſion of this Comet COmnes - a Ee me Preafeſt Writers allowing
ſorke time for their” formation preſentment to the Wy
Believe this when you _ __ num that ,on the Firſt Gay of his a
rance, which is more than I have faid yer, a certain Planet aceth the
ades : We break with Method a little, but I hope it will be pardoned.”

The Next of +539. we have ranked under 4 © ? {Abe Gap d. if firſt
appeared, May 6. We do not here go about to Anoto the Ear,
and ſhew all its parts, —__ lay & and 2, I believe, wil be found d with-
in les than Twelve d ID,.2 and as it happ ©- With, and?

ps, That Confiellation is: 3s-not our Sag
as yer? but it 54 Cpl is, Ther Cola and Aﬀteiſms , £4


The Third 4 of 1558: {6 phe is Of Original, ſo ptain ,. that .the
World to of it. a Great t, quoted
Lin hath thee Work It was fo 2Spik.

+> ves
Fe.”


| ” oppoſitum curſups haburtn, ,
the wo F, and be pre ond og
le -


lot yen i pour 67 ml TERS Fe _ Ni


CN of the Cones on which Cardan, even. now, itil 7


hat of 164 .had &'2 Week before, and & & Three fays after  aſtee oF
appearance - Rays then were engaged when the Meteor

har of 1667. mor weicome, © for it CER & 7 in its WES v y
_—_ about” 'a Fon Fe re,  4cco a) TRScing 5 4s
a- bebe, = our DoCtrine , the & 7e-

peated is the mute rh . Next” we take notice of the Phznomendn.
s Situzte inthe Sign ?, notes

a'Conjuntion: with the Aſpeft., No more


hi


will we ayatels preſet. ce, he Rl : conſulting the. Ephbemerss


for thax time;


ro o rememberwhat we have Lit edf cing th te


his place JE may chance |
The


— a—_


Chap. VII. Proper Comts. EartÞg. Hunt in Vine-Countries,


263


The Comer 1664. Dec. 9. or as we ſaid from Oxford, A's. 24. doth
not owe -1ts Original to our d , we may hearof it in VL &, as already in &
2. Bur what 1sto be noted, is this; that according to our Principle 1c
was nouriſhed and cheriſhed the whole Month of January 1665. through-
out, and che Firſt part of February, fince our Diary reaches to the 10 day ;
Now it chere were n0 other Evidence than our Diary , might not a Man
think there were ſomewhat , when but two Months after I find another
Comer ſhew ic {elf on the return of this very ConjunCtion (rogether wich
© I confels; ) wiich Comer being faii to begin March 31. falls (o
pate for us on Apr:!'s beginning, as if I had enlarged the Obſervation on
purpole to comprehend the Phanomenon. Bur tecing the contrary is not
only true, but aiſo apparent, we have here our Conjunction, the Father of
the Appearance.

That at Moſcow, A® 1682. April6. V5. d 13.% cm © & Q 1n fineX.
as the Intelligence of rhoſe days informed us ; I have reaſon to look inthe
Report for certain, and you lee it falls within our Sphere. I know there
are greater Cont1zurations, burtTI pray & 2} may have their Portion : For
tis with Apes Celeſtial, as with Serpents: They get a Name of Fame
by. devouring the Lels.

$ 28. I ſhould have ſpoke to the Hail that finds a place in our Chara-
Qer 3 ſome, we hve, we {22 under our Aſpe&t ; but Exglandl1 reckon is
not the Celebrated place for Hail z I have met with Hail to my wonder in
the Ryſia Voyages, bur Cold though we be, I find that ſome warmer
Climes are moſt iujcc< ro it, eipecially ſuch as is Harmful to Harveſt, or
Vintage. In Rowe, 25 Fromond Notes, there were apponted Hail-
Scouts., Watch and Ward to give notice ef an Approaching Storm -
What, and + ia ſtate of deſtitution may contribute we have ſaid d and
FE 'which have brought Snow in May, at Norzmbere, in Kyriand. There
may be ſomewhat in the Nature of that Soil : upon which account it iscaſie
to obſerve, that it Hails moſt in the Wine-Countries : Whether a Rhenih
or aClaret Spiric may not} iſſue up to the Regions of Hail ? Wein Ezgland
have but the Shadow of a Vineyard. I ſpeak of the Brisker Wines; for
as for the Spaniſh Countries, whoſe Wines are more ſoft and Uln&uous,
poſſibly the Injusies done by Hail are rarely ſeen. |

S 29. Io to Earthquakes we have ſeen them beforeind @G, ind © 7;
&-. the later of which mult carry the Name, becauſe it is a bulter Aſpect;
and comes upon the place ſeveral times to once of the otherGonjun#top.”Tis
hot to. be denyed , though that & Z are Shakers, as in that at Rome, A?
T624. noted by Kepler, © and & are gr. 10 diſtant, while & and ?' are
upon the very Spot of 1 6. — Yea, before he.tells us of the like obſerved
at-Lma, he names not the day of the Manth :- But happen when it will, it
fills within the tedder of <&. and 7 , being ſtretched byt.z6'degrees. Juſt

Ww we remember a Second Comet happened at. the return of & and ©.
Here we meet with a Second Earthquake happened at the:ſame time; and
Within a Months ſpace in both. eo 7 ger rw hey |

That of A® 1643. 1:ſting for 5 days, we were willing rake much of,
though © and. ; be 7 degrees diſtant;, ſo ,7 from. d"is;þtr twice7de-


grees diſtant thoſe 5 days, in which he abapes that Diſtance.
"2 JOE a Thain A® 1645. Sept. n+; appeared under the 4 & 2,
Yet d and 7 zre but 4 degrees diſtant; .. and fo
' That of A®t667. thew's % and © indegd at 7 degrees diſtance, and &
and ,% at's vt; diſtance. 20's | ,


= -


* A® 1676. lows with that in Worcsfterſhire, & and Y-are wihtin 6
degrees, while % and 2, 'tis tcue, are nearer.


Yyy News!


ms, _


264, Great Fiſhes Fronded 1 note Diſtorbane & $. c urrents. Book 11 IL


Next, A® 1680. Veſuvius Flames, which are tokens, and Earneſt of
T. M. thereabours, is noted within the Firſt 20 days of March thar year ,
and wirhin the Mid-way,. viz. d&, 11 is noted d & 7.

Laſtly, that at Doncaſter, A® 1682. addstoa d © gt.7. d & 3 gr.1t,
diſtant.

$ 30. Ido not add the Legend of Two Gram _—_ ſtranded, or taken at
Greenwich, though I have own that there is fome reaſon to believe that
ſuch Novel Appearances do give notice of ſome diſturbance of the Earth
and its Concomitant Waters, which the Fiſh would avoid ; but I impute
it rather to the Dreadful Thunders which are noted thereabouts, which is
known to diſturb all Brutes by Sea or Land, into which piece of Philoſo-
phy the Pſalmiſt hath hong ago oentred us. For who hath excepted the Fiſh-
es of the Sea from Diſtempers?

This I obſerve, that Fiſhes do ſotnetimes appear in Sholes when
Caghia Cauſes are viſible moving thereto. So ſay the Jotirnals for 10
da __ ab Ob. 25; Nov. 5. 1662, returning from Jawa. Nov. 22.

1 under. this AſpeRt:

$ 32. Here agam we fee the convenience of enlarging the Sheers of our
Aſpect, the Account may be givenat leaſt abroad (for let icbe thankful-
ly ERONTOS Earthq. continue not long with us )They ſay, "tisordmary
ro continue 40 +40 dns v6 Jed, and | ob oqhr himfelf agrees to it, then the enlar-

of an Earth fpect, as before, fo here, to 30. or 4o Days;

fi its uſe and _ fv Nature; Rn where Two Conjuntions

meet: Sothat when One ceaſes , the Second begins; thereby continning ,
mw and as it happens, encreaſing the Puiſſance of the

3. The Next trouble is with Grurrents z I have ſomewhat more


gerias to produce then they cue ters) et, becauſe they arealſo of ſors
aV


ſequence, Inore violent Storm of Wind in Lat:
N. 2. March 31. April. A® 1665, A Current. April2or3. © * ind
onthe Equinox, with with the > on the Þ fon og But again, April 11; A
Current, while the » comes toth x, and oppoſes &' 7 in 4 on
the other ſide. In he manner; EE 1 4.1665 the Ship Laxdoz in her re-
turn from Szrat,Lat. N. 7. was 22, miles more Northerly than
by account, and ” more Weſterly, Days 5 and 6. 17. and 18 miles thore
to the Southward. Die 7. Eleven more, «hd Ls diſtantin Y, are
_— by te ban efornd Die 4. The fame lanets with the » ap-
lying tothe are Ine 3 cage Hol The next tha Og
Cd IT. in


the Ship
NE ded of wha, Our A) Fu pierce, ;
gy ont 7 Die 16. of 27 miles cerarion. & isas —_— Y,
as % is from the ©.———Note that I find a like Current in the Golden
Fleece, at far tLaricude near the Line, abont the time of the Af.
pea, which I mention to perfwade that this is no Error, oro, » 25 ay
pretended. In the mean while we omitted Correnrs,and th
ad O46 1611. Sept. 12, menti by Purchas, where the » v1necb wy Gy,


as happened before.

5 Ie Nowntar vin whichT have look'd —_ 2 greaterArcammmjs the ſhif-
ting of t Ix for example, ſhall Ebb and Flow
Le or ee.h 5M Gre of a few Hours ; fo fo we find it remarked ro us
by our Annals for Prodigious : Such was "that of A® 1550. Dec. 18. "4
1564. Jan. 26, 27, 28. A® 1574. Nev. 6. A® 1609. Febr, 19. A* 169
4A 1654. Frbr. 2, AP 1656, 6, 08. 3. and Two or Three ig our bw


6 35. 'Tis


6 ".* 4.4
—__—


Chap. VIIL Shifting of Tides. Dr. Childrey: Maculz ©. 265


9 35. 'Tis no ſmall enquiry ſince it is taken for a Prodigy z concerning
which point I am not engaged at preſent to ſay ; the Ingenmious Author
of Britannia Baconica, pag. 93. makes it.nothing but the Tyde ar Ebb ;
Leiſurely preceding toward the Sea onward, and beaten back again by a
North-weſt-wind. To this purpoſe he obſerves, that theſe Tydes moſt part
happened when the waters were at Loweſt, about the Quarters of the » 5
Yea, and when ( fo curious is he ) ſhe was in Apygeo; a Circumſtance
which he faith, with Reafon, helps to abate the higheſt Water. And
I would all hard Queſtions could be fo eafily ſolved : For the Truth is, the
Wind blew from the North-Weſt, A® 1654. Feby. 2. and A® 1656. (ay I,
Os. 3: (a North-Eaſt, at leaſt ) which ſha!l break no fquaresz and the
Wind blew hard alſo. The like again, March 22. 1682, Add, May 31.
News came from Lrme, the Sea-Coaſt; There 'tis faid how a Storm of
Wind, with Rain and Thunder, cauſed ſeveral Ebbings and Flowings iri
che Water in half an Hours time. So thatir muſt be granted, that the
Winds, and the Northerly Winds are Inſtrumental in the caſe;

9 36. Bhr to deal ingeniouſly, I believe there is ſomewhat more tn it
which this Good Man would have hearkned to , v:z. ſome leſs obvious
Cauſe thari a Stiff North-Wind falling in with thoſe Circumſtances. Firſt,
becauſe neither is the eap-t:e; nor the North-W:nd perpetual. That of
A® 1564. Jan. 26, 27 ; 28. was withiri a day or two of the Fall; and
that's 1i0 hogle Inſtance ; and beſides that, by his Confeffion che Apogeunt
fails twice 3 I add,and a 3. or 4th:time, March 12. May 31. 1682. bu chiefly


becauſe we are by this Hy engaged to find One every year ; fitice
there is ſcarce a year paſſes, bnt will findus one North-Wind brisk ad ,
blowing at Neap-tide. Next; that we ſeldom find any ſuch Tyde, but a |


Notable Aſpect of © 6 ;® ?, kN, &.Þ bs viſible, and they in Pattile
alſo. . Again, we ſhall find ſome cerram Month not ſo prompt to ſhew us
this Fat 3 Not June, July, 4#guft , bur chiefly che Wintet Moriths ; and.
ly thoſe which are cavable of the Variation of the EquinoRi
Tides; Febrnary, March , Offober and November : and we cannot fpeak
fully to it, ell we come totreat of the Signs of the Zodiack; In the mean


time the Firſt ſuſpicion we had of this hidden Cauſe, aroſe frorh obey |


or Aﬀpe&t caught twice or thrice in the Company. & 7 are more
and Adzquate; but Partial, and ar times of Carrents,


the occafion,they are the Auttiors ; as they.are the Authors, nor Solicary |
Then Th


the witnefleth, that when in Sept. 1663. therehappened an Rquigo- |
tion h March 31. 'Tis not the Son, bu Te Friends of his be pojat |


blank upon the Equinox, our & and . © |
$ 37. And if the Macule , which have bin fo carefully obſerved thoſe


later years , ſhall come to be imputable to our fantaſtick Cauſes,, then the


faid Cauſes may come in ſome repute, or that Effect to be vilitied. Bur
neither is the Effect to be vilified; nor the Cauſes to be diſputed. We have
faid before for 3 2 ; we may venture in the ſame botrom for this Aſpe&t
alſo. *Tis no ſmall matter to give an account of the paleneſs, yea, of the
darkneſs, which is a diſpoſition of the Sun without an Ecliple: Stch was
that Famous Phenorttnon in Herodotus; when Xerxes and his Army march'd
from Sara+3as Gatorfras wilt have ir, began to queſtion his ExcellentChro?
nology on that account,; fo ſetting Sacred Story aſide , I could not imagine
how Day ſhould be turn'd into Night 2 (Which Herodotus afferts) with-
ont ſome eclipſe; or Lunar Interpoſition. But Aſtronomers have colle&

ſome Inſtances which come home, or oo nay © Palliaus is pretty
fraquent in Kepler's Diary, which denotes more than a miſt, fince that is
every where expretted by by its proper terth, The © labours,-an _ a


2 64


The Sas darkned. Pains and Aches of Body. Book 11.


Aurbed at ſuch times, as the Learned Writers of the Macular Obſcurations
conclude , Scherrer and Hewelins, All that I have to fay is,this Inquietati-
on comes from the Heavens. In the Body. of Celeſtial Sphere, one part
affects another. A d, oran & of & and ©, nay with 9 or 5 willhelp
to bring ina Macala into the Body of the Luminary. Nay, the d or &
of the Superiors aſpected together will do the like. And if the Sun be the
Center of the Planetary Heaven, which I am willing to believe from the
Reaſons of the Gopernicans z there can be no ſcruple how it ſhall come to
paſs, ſince every part of the Circumference glances upon the Center,
Thus in Ofober 18, 28. 4® 1642. where Hevelus acknowledges a Macula,
anda Halo; there is an & of 9 7 at 7 degrees diſtagge contributes, with
an P of 4 © ater. 5. diſtance. Fuly 4. Stylo Veters, & 5 at 6 degrees
diſtance, July 16.+at 7 degrees diſtance. A® 1644. June 3. Þh and 4
3 degrees diſtance. July 16. Þ and & 5 degrees diſtance. And any
ore may think it probable, when they ſhall find the Phenomenon
of © Pall:4us, May 1. 1627. and again 5, 12, 13, 15. and 28, 29. and all
within Þ and & oppoſition, at gr. 12, 8, 5, 3, 1,0. diſtance. May 12.
being a Partile Oppoſzt1o7.
$ 38. Here alſo comes at laſt, or a'*little Table of the Male-Influ-
ence noted as it haps by its ſelf : Which if I may ſerve the Student in
Phyſique thereby; I will preſent. I ſhalt not need make a Croſs upon the
Doorof this Aſpect, ſeeing what Peſtilential Influence it hath, for the moſt *
art, is not eahlily diſtinguiſhed from the precedent Aſpect of & 2. I
Jhall only preſent a few Notes of the Years, 1673. 1675. Some of more,
ſome of leſs concern, of Aches, Indiſpoſitions, &c. In 1671. there were
noted but 3. June 18, 21,22. In 16 3. July 22. what more ought here to
be noted, I cannot fay. But in September, I read thus, 13.'Aches 21.
Spaſmes 4 m. Aches 10 at Night. 25. Pains in the Feet. 26. in the
oulder. 29. Scorbutical Sweats. OF. 2. Podagra. 6, 15. Pains in the
Shoulder. 21, 22, 23. Aches. - 24. Pains, Fits. A® 1675. July 4.
Indiſpoſttions.. * 5. Soulery , afflicting Weather. 9. Sickneſs, Feavers.
September 20, 22, Indi{poſitions. -26, 27. Pangs. Oftoter 3, 4, 5. Indiſpo-
fitions. 6,7. Aches in'the Shoulder, Hyſterical Fits 3 Sickneſs, and with-
in7 rugs 9. Aches. So the 12 hor: 3 p.the 13. Indiſpolitions. But
the following one in December is frightful, Dec. 2. Firs of Diſtraction. 4.
ical Fits, terrible: 5,6; 7,-8. Aches in both Shoulders. . 9. Con-
vulfion. 10. Child Sickned 2 m. —11. Podagra. 13. Children Sicken.
15, 16, Aches.. 17. Hyſterical Fits. 22. = 7; EI ad 24. Aches
25. Indiſpoſitions, and 31. Aches. And ſo much for & 5.


Chap. VUL


1652. Ab Apra16 _ |
Ma; 2.

18. High wind, ſhowrs. S.
19. Very H. wind, ſhowring
20, High wind, ſhowry, ſo 22,
SE.


24. H. wind,

27. H. wind,

28. Showring m, **

29. Showry, very Windy,

May 2. 1, Storms at night.
Irerum Fune 6. ad 29,

8. {. cain, windy.

9. Daſh, Thunder.

10, Thunder and Showrs,

14, I$ 16, 19, Red wind.

18, 19, 20, 21, Thunders,

24, 25. Thund, 7

25, Windy,

27. R. way.

28, Some Kain, wdy.

29, Showry, high Wind.
Tertto, July 1. ad 23.

2 Some drops.

3- Dropping, windy, red wd.

4 Dropping, high wind, red

wind.


s. Rainy at night,

6, Showry, wdy.

9, Showry, Thunder,

8. Showry, more wind.

9. Windy, ſome ſhowrs.
12. More Wind, rain at n.


13, Showry.

15. Wind y.

16, Rain bi . E.N.

17. Cloudy, dropping , w
W. than S. vp


13. Dropping; more wind,
22. Thunder, ſhowrs.
23, Cldy at n. and dropping.


rn


MP —


1654. A June 24. 4 July 8,
25. Winds, and ſuſpicious.
26. Winds, 0 fine Showrs ;

Hear.

27, Hot, S.Showrs Night.S E, |
28, Th. Store of rain. NE.!
259. Hor, N.E.
20. H. wind, f. drops. _
Fuly x. Cold Rain and ne
3 Brick Winds, f. Wet. "
4. High Wind. NE,
5s. Miſty, hot. _ .

6. Hot ; ſome rain at night,

8. Th, ſhowrs.

Terun, Plat. 4 Sep. 9+ ad 27.
9, Wind fſhowry-

ic, Dark , ſuſp1c10us N

tt, Miſty m, hot.


44


Mars aud Metcury ;


Home-Dtary.


12. Suſpicious, ſome dops.

17. \. rain.

19. Winds a. |. dark.

21. Firs of wer. Iris more
than Semicircular.


1 22. Hear.


22, rain, Th. ſeeming ar
midnrghe.

24. Rainl. & p. m. wind. S,

23. (, ſtore of rain 10 p.

256, Warm wind , ſuſpicion


ipl
25. Mifty on. warm. I O


1696, Fane 7. ad 27.
7. High wind, {. mifle, -


E.
8. Hort, dry, Wind, {. mille.
N E.
9. Wer 9 m, wind, hot p. m
NE.
ro, Thunder, dry. N E.
17, Hot and dry, E,
12, Very hoc, thunder. j
13. Red wind.
14. Droppi:ig © occ.
16, H, cool wind 3 p.
17. H. wind , fhowrs 4 m. H.
cool wind till d occ.


138 Storms of R. and H. wd.
19. Wind, dropping, coaſting


& m.
20.Stormy wind , ſome wer.
21, H. wind, ſhowr © occ.

N E.


22, Heat,

23. Hear,dry mereor.

24. Very wer, :

25. H. wind, C, dropping.

25, Coaſting ſhowrs ate rs.
27, Gemgle rain 44 p.4d 10 P.
Iteru Fuly 17. ad Adg. 3-
17, H. wind, coaſting ſhowrs.
13, Stormy wind,reddiſh wd.
19. Kigh Wind, ſhowring.
20, Hear, R. Thunder and L.


- þ me
21. H. wind, hear.
22, Wind, gentle ſhowrs.
23, Cain powring hot.
24. Hot.
25, Hot Lightning, Thunder.
25, Terrible L. violent ſhow-
Fs, Hail , ſtormy Wind.
25, Dry wind.
29, K, wind and drifle.
29, y. wind anal ſhowry.
30, H. wind, daſhing.
21. Wind.


4»2, 1. Meteors, blew miſt,


|


2, Rot,red wind (Clouds
trary, _) ( hy”
3. Very hot, blew mift,


, Tertt), ab Aug. 27. ad Sept. 12


27. Offcring todrop , 'H. wd


ar n.
28, Windy, warm, blew miſt,


: NE,
29. Brisk wind, Ely,
Sept. I. Showring. E,


4- Wind, ſhow ,

6. H. wind, CR A

8. Score of rain towards Lan-
dn,

9s Lighrning aFlah. NE,
14 cunes N E. this bout,


—


1658,


13. Thick Fog, hot, dry ws


Ely,

Foghotſho
I re &LarN E ROT IO
8. Windy a. 1. ſprinkling 3 p


17. Showr, Thunder-clap
m. Lat. night.
19. Froſt, windy , ſome wet


4+ P-

20, Miſty, warm , ſhowr » p;

21. Foggy m. H. wind, dri

22, Serious wetgje tor.

23. Warm ſhowr ©) orc.

24. Fog, warm wind, miſling.

25-H. wind, ſ. wer.

26. C_—_ cold m. p.

27. Droppi .

28, Wini and hve

29. R. 4 m. windy at right,

30, Stormy wind no&. rot.pre.
Dry wind. N W,

Iterum, ab Of. 15. ad Nwvte

Duplex &d.

Is. Rainy, warm.

16, Rain a. |. dark, ſhowring
5P-8 p. &c.

19. Violent R. nod, 1:04 Howd
8


S... ,
18, H. wind nc.prec. fowring


5 Pp. Oc,
IS. Wind 14, pre: ſhowr
noon. Gallant Mercor.
20, Cobwebs, z drops.

21, Gloomy.

23, Rain Ely,

24, Rain 4 m.

25, H- wind, drille,
ZZ 7z


\


Ab Aug. 12, ad x
I2, Fogm bw _ wm


Wile


268


4 5 Home-Diary,


Book 11.


ar


/, Nov. 2. Dark, wet n high wd


Xx


' Ig. Hor, dry, rain midg.


26.Wind no, prec,warm,rain


p.&7. Þ.
on. Bede at preced, tota,
29, Cobwebs.
25, Wd bluſtering a. 1. Co)”
webs, NE-
30. Froſty, N E-


3. Stormy wind, Ran.

Wind n0#, tot. with \, ſnow

IO P» a

' Rain $5 p.&c.

6. R. m. tempeſtuous and wet,

7. Bluſtering a, 1. wes 9 m.

8.H. wind; "thowr 4p.

9. Wind a, |. werring p.m,

10 Windy p.m. Cobwebs .

Ii. Some wet,

12, Bluſtering a. l,

13. Bluſtering a. 1.

Raina. Il. dark, windy, driſle,
p- m.m. P.

15+ Turbulent a. 1.

18, Wet 4 4 m. adg m. fo
noon ad 8 p.

22. Wind a. |. offer to ſnow


H, w1
»- 24: Snow and ſmall rain,


—_— —__


i660. A Fuly 28 ad Sept, 1+


uplex d.
22, Hot Meteors at night.
29, Hort Sol rubens
Zo. E. wind brisk, ſhowring.
31. Stift wind z ,ome Mere-
Ors.
Aug 1, 2, 3, Driſle p. m.
4+ Thunder, Lightning, rem-
peſtuous,
5. Windy, driſle
7, 8, 9, 10. Hor a.nddry.
12, Miſling $s m.
13, 14 15, Very hot.
16, Rain 10 m. dry, very hot
I7, 18, Vcry hot.


20, Driſle m,

22. Rainat night.

23+ Very hor.

24. {, rain m.

25. Very hot, gentle rain atn,
I6, 29, Very hot. +

29, 30, 31. Froſt m.

Sept. I. Rain at n.

4. Very hot ; driſling,

S, Rain, hor.

10, Hot. ſhowrs.

11. Hot, driſling.

Tertio ab Of, 20. ad Nov. 13.
20, Fog. N E.
23, Wiudy.


24. Windy. NE.


27, Dry, cold, windy , hail,
rain.

25, Hot Sun riſe,

31. Some rain.

Nov. 1. Threatning.

3. Suſpicious,


5, Fog below.

75. Storms-of Rain n. & E,

9. Some drops, ſtormy. - '

10, Stormy wind , hail and R.
10 P. —

11, Stormy wind-,. ſtorm of

Rain and Hail trequent.


Us]
1651. Jan. ad. 1, ad Feb, 13,


1.F _ ROME

2, Froſty; cloſe, windy , dr

3- Cold, dry, H. wind. of

4. Cloſe, dry, windy.

s. Cloſe, dry, Spring weather.

5. Cloſe, dry, warm, windy,

7, 8, 9» Cloſe , dry , warm
fogp. m. VP 9.

Io. Fog, warm3
night.

11. Dry, windy. Re

12. Stormy wind, driving ,
ſmall rain.

13. Windy night.

14. Windy, myſty.

15. Windy , cloſe; ſtormy at
night,

17, Windy,wet n.

18, A 4 m. Ofc. very wetzwin-


dy. |
9, Windy, cloudy.
20, Slabby, windy. .
21, Windy, dry 3; H. wind n.
22, H. wind, wet ighrt.
23. Wind, rainy ad 9 m. NE*
24. Froſt m,
26., Some dew.
28, Froſt Ely. VP 25.
29, 30. Froſt, brighr —_
mers day. :
31. Froſty,fog about Horizon,
Febr. 1. Windy, cloſe miſt.


dark ; wet


2a


H. wind.
6, Cloſe, high wind & Ely


'NE,


10, Fog, rain,walls ſwear.Ely,
11, Warm rain 12 Þ.
12. Driſle 5 m. 5 p,
13, Fogs warm.
14. Driſle m. warm.
15. Drille 0. & p. m.
16, Very warm.
17, Fog m. warm-
12, Foggy. | F
19. Fog m., wind.
20, Fog,warmyhigh wind g P,
21. Rain a. 1. wd fo veſp.
22. R.a-l.qp.&83p.
23. Much rain a. 1. Meteors at
n. ſeem to lightn.
+ Windy,
« Wer, fog, rain at n,
38, Showr 3 Pp.
29. Rain a. 1.
30. Driſle 5. m,
31. Fog, warm,
Nov. 1, Rain 7 Þ.
2, Rain 1 p. (9c.
3. Rain a 9 m. ad noon.
4. Rain hard a 5 m. ad 1 p.
5. Fog, .
6. Driſle rain ſub weſp. 5c.
8. Warm drops, Meteor,
9. Some Rain.
10. Iris 8 m.Storm of wd and


PR


Ely


Rain 10 P. -
11. Very daik wirh violen
Storms,
12, Rainy m. H. wind.
13.R. a. m, high wind.
14. H. cold wind,
15. Rain m. p. high wind.


16, 17. Fog, froſty. Ely.
18, R. a6, ad 9 p. fog. .
19, Warm, driſle by fits. SE,


20, Fog,

21, Fog, R. die tot.

22. Bluſtering no@. tot,

23. ad 22. Fog, froſty, die 27.
4Jnow a. |.


— —


1663. Fan. 10, ad Feby, 2,
Io, Thick fog die tot.miſling o.
Ely.


7. Scorch maſt ; wer

8, Idem. |

9. Warm, cloſe.

10, Spring weather. . rain a
night.

11. Cold, ſharp wnind p. m


I1, 12313, Foggy; froſty. Ely.
14. Foggy, lect noon. |
15. Foggy, {. drops 4 p. 10 ps
15, Fog, warm.

17, Fogand rain 8 p. (Fc,
18, Snow m. thaw p. m.


12. Cloſe, threatning, Mete-
ors frequetit about Lyra &
Cycnus .

13- Bluſtering wind, Storm
of rain Sun ſer. & 6 p. 8
8 p. Meteors neer + x wh
violent ſtorm 10 p. Þ

Zan. 28. Cometa, Hevelins, |


———_—


1662, Ab. Of, 10, ad Nov. 28.
9, Rain a, 1, |


I9, 20, 21, 22, Froſt, foggy.
23. Showr 1 P.

2 1 © OBBY-

26, Rain 10 m. 7 Þ.
27Main 6 m. EOEE
28. Snow, hail.

29. SNOW.

30, {. ſnow m.

31.Snow 6 p.

Feb, 1, Offer to ſnow.


=


Iterum,


Chap. VL.


I terum, a March 22.ad May 3.
d Duplex.
March 22, 23. Very cold wd
24- Storm of hail 6 p. ad 9p.
25, Ram 1m. & 5 m,
27, Cold wind , pinching. E.
28, Rain 9 pÞ.
29. Rain and ſnow a. ].
30, Nipping; wer, ice.
31. Cold wind , Equinoctial
Tides. XK 29.
Apr. 1. Ice, offer 6 p. 2-
4-R. a. 1. wer m.
$5. Rain m. hard at noon, Ely,
6. Rain by firs, thunder.
8. Showr at noon, warm.
10. Dry.
16. 'Cold.
7. Rrizk wind, rain 2 p,
19. Ratiym. & 9 p.
20, Showring 2 p. Oc.
21, Rain p.'m. tot. V 15.
22, Rain p.m.
24. Rain 9 p* Oc |


25, Warm _ novon, |
36, Dry air tl,


.
 —— OO


27, Rain.

28, Windy.

29. Drifle, | 4Z0
May 1. High wind, Ely,
2,. Hor. Ely.
4, Showrs, SE.


——


Yo


- 2654. Dec, 30.ad Feb.15 An.25,
Aſpetus duplex.

30. Offer to ſnow.

31. Windy oficring.

1655. Zan,

1. Warm wind. Comer.

2, Froſt, windy. NE,

2 Wind not, preced. .nowing
Comer.


& Show 4. I. 7 . N E.
s. Vehement Ft. Comer
. ſeen.


6. Vehement froſt. Comer
ſeen.

9,8, 9, 10,11, 12, 13
Froſty.

16, Hal».

17. Offer'd Snow, Ek

18. R. a.l. & 5 Þ. OF high
wind.

19, Dark and wet FP. m.

22, {. rain 0-

24. Snow a. |.

25. Snow hard, and hail 7 p.
Rain,

25. Rain all night 3 ſlabby,

27, Foggy, wet 3 Mm.

28, Drilic 5 P-


» I4,15,
Elv.


— ——


£9. Offer Snow 1c m. & 5'p
NE.

20, Offer ſnow.

Feb, 1. Offering © cc, E.


3, Snow 10 pa


_—— — —


j 9
FT


dS 2


4+ H. cutting wind,

5. Black Heaven , High wd,
K 3+6,

7. Very high wind « midnight
ad ©; ort,


SNL W, WEL 7 Þ. S Eo


. 8. Windy m. p.


9. Windy,


' Io, Wind, wet a. .m. $ Þ. &


A
It erun, ah Apr. 2, ad 19,
Tins 15 a fad a |
Droug]:t.
2 ®Tuipicious, Ely.
3. Warm, - Ely.
4. Warm m. Comet 4 m. a-
bour Andromeda,


s. Warm. Ely.
6. Drv, hot. Ely,
7, Cot vaniſhed 3 ſuſpict;
OUS, M,
. Miſt, ory S E.& 10.
T1, Warm.
| 12, Suſpicious. :
15. f, drops 11 m. Brisk wd,
15, Suſpicious, NE,
; 17, Froſt , dry day. E.NE.


O00
Fog,


1657, A March 17. ad Apr. 6,

12, Fog, warm.

19, warm 5 ofter 0.

20, Halon.

21. High wind, wetting.

22. H, wind nd, tot, f, wet
&. to

23, Some rain m. wetring,

24- Dropping.

25. Black and clouds ; ſhowr
B p..& p. m. audible wind,

25, Hail 3 H. wind art n. froſt,
Ice,

27. Very eld and high wind.
rrg.t, ice,

28. Audible wind,

29, Warm. |

30. Miſt , gentle driſle Sun
occ,

Apr. 1. Hot. dry , wind at n.

2, {. R. warm

s, Warm.

5, Some hopes of Rain,

7 .Fog, dry. 240.

Trerum ab Apr, 25, ad May 12.


E


' 25, Some drifle,


25, Cold wind.

27, Warm, dry.

23, Miſt m. dry,

29, Some little rain even.

30, Wind, dry.

May 1, Warm, dry,

, Troubled air.

. Showr © ort. Rain, hail 1
p. 3 Þ. 5 p. refreſhing che
Drought.

4. W ctring 0- Fly.

Scarce ho!4 up.


5
ny
»
I


g
-


E,


Home-Dtary.


269


7. Windy and ſhowring,

8, Viarm, tome wetting Sun
0cc. Ke :

19, Hail at Kentiſh Town,


Scormy near Lond9n, 1-


Sr ny


1559. A May 28, ad June 13.
22, Shower noon & 1 P» 2-4
29, Hear p.m,

39. Showring 6 p.

31, Haar.

Fane 1,'Biew. miſt, hear,
2, {. moiſture m. warm,


3- Foggy m. Ely,
4+ Warm. > Windy,
6. Suſpicious.


To Winly, Rain 5 m,


; 0. H. wind, warm.


|


10.5udden Shovrescirc, o P.Ms
Ii. Wind, ſhower 1» m.
Lrerum ab. Aug. 4. ad Sept. nt.
4. (. rain a, 1,

5. Soultry,


|


6, Warm, Elv,
7. Hor. wetting p. m. L. atn.
3. Hor and Lightning,

9.;Rain and Lightrung a. I, R,
and Th. 3 p. &c.

Ic, Rain by fits,

ig. Hor m, ſhowr 2 p. &c,
Mereor.

12, Cloſe, ſome wetring. L.
&Th.Drcaful rain 10p.&c,

[3. Warm.

4.-Da.n2m,o.coaſting ſhowrs,

[$. Miſt m. {f. wer even,

15, Showr before, & a. m.Hot
night,

17. Some drops. Ely

r8. Fog a.l.warmS.ſprinkling.

19. Fog 9 m. coaſting ſhowrs,

ſickly rime.

5, Some wet noon,

3. Fog, warm,

4- Soultry,

25. Mereors, foultry.

25, Hear 2 drops.

27. ficar, miſt. Light: and
Thunder,

22, Miſt, warm,

29. Terrible Th. Sun » :,

30, Fair, coaſting ſkowrs, wd.
Th, clap. Grainpa!):s at
Greenwich,

Sepr. 1, Warm 5 Lat n. Bill of
Morrality 655+


> FI OS


2


1571. A May 12. ad June 25,
12, Very hor, ſhowr.

13. Soultry.

1 4. H. wind , ſhowr 2 p.

15. Shovrr,

15. Showr © Sourh, & 4 p-
18, {, rain p. M..


riſlep.m*


_


19, R$ m- coaſting, d


5, Stor my wind ; driſle. 8m,


Pg


b


aan


270


8 3 Home-Diary.


Book II


20, Rainy m. P. & even.


21. Rain 1, 3,7, 8 p- Chail


NoOoN.
22, Rain 10 P.


23. R. daſh, rhunder-clap at


0, frequenr


—_ i
24. R. coaſting. Th. Clap ar


noon.


25. Drifle m. rain ſ#b veſp.


g£5."Wet a.m.


{


25. Warm,


30. Rain ©. & 1 p. warm. S E.,
31, R. by firs, high wind 4. mM.


Fune 1. Rainy.
20.Showrs ar leaſt.
2. Warm and ſhowring.


3. Threatning Ely. Halo JI.
5s. Morand Church fired by


Lightning art Venice.
7. Rainy ar n.


*tRain 5 p. H. winds midn.


g. Stormy winds, C
ſhowrs 1 p.

10. Daſh 10 m.

12.Rain 3 Þ.


13. Stormy winds, R. 1


28.Showr proſpe& a.m.&p.m.


ww


m. Fog m. Rain 10 p.
"4. Driſle 9 m. & 4 p.
5. Very cold.


wind 8 p.


preced.
18, Rain by firs.


in4Þp.8 Pp. 10 P-


20s


22, Rain ©. & p.m. tot.
wind a. m.
24. Very


27. Wert m. Pp.
28, Gollamere.


S| 08. 1. {. drops-


3. Windy, wetting I P-
at St. Domningo.


| 12. Wind and rain a. 1. wet p.


16. R. a. 1. & a, m. hard,wich
17. Furious Tempeſt noF, tot.


19. Wind an] rain ante Iucem.


1,Mery wer not. preced. H.
ind. Rain a. m. fire u -1


23- Snow Sun ort. ad 8 m. H.


warm , troubled air.
wetting m. p. ſhort Meteor.
26, Wetring 4. m.& p. M.


Ely.
29. Driſle Sun occ. & 11 P-
Plague at Conſtantinople.


4- Cold and winterly T. M.


. daſh | 7- Showr 3 p.& 9p.
OY a uroeny: 9. Foggy 4. _ wetting 10 M,
» Showrs 5 P» P.M. b
_- a S$ E, | 10, Wetting noon. _ |
18. Hot, dry. Ely, | 11. Werting, warin, Rain a.
19. Dry. NE. | & a. m. per tot. Very high
» 29. Showr in proſpe& wd va- | ind.
riable. 12.4Rainy 4 © ort. ad 0, R. Þ-
22, Hot, foggy M» m. Raging wind, E. morn,


23. Soultry, dry miſt m.
24. Soultry, dry,
—————


_—


S. noon.
13. Showr coaſting.


1673. Ful. 15. ad Aug. 4+
16, Hog. Note marginal MS,


15. Hor floating Clouds,
16: Hor,


17. Wetting 9 m. driſle p. m.


2, s P-
18. Dry.


19. Hot a. m. very ſoultry. 2


roPs-
20, Hot ſhowr in proſpeQ.


21, Hot,
22, Hor.

S. 23. Hor p.m.& n.
24. Soultry p. m.
25. Showr 8 m. hor.


26, Driſle a, m. & p.m. warm.


27. H. wind.

28. Showring 10 M.
29. Showring.

30. Wertting 8 p.
31. Werring m.p.


Aug. 1. Rain midnight, coa-


ſting ſhowr.


3- Rain ) riſe, high wind


10 Mm.
4. Warm.


Aſpetus duplex,


Iterum, Sept. 12. ad OF,


16, Wetring 8 p.
17. Showring 9 p-


R. 1p.
19, Wind variable.
22, Miſling,
23. Hor,
24. Wet.
Aches and fits.


14. R. m. p.NE. M.SE-
noon. ;
5, Tempeſtuous wind, #®


18. Tempeſtuous wifid dle tot,


—


Pox at Oxford.


6, Soultry.
To Hot. y
8, 9. Hor, dry, IO
11, Hor, wind even.
12, Wind Ely. warm.


14. Offering 11 m.

16, Windy, R. threatn.
I7.R.9m. & p.m.

18, Some dro


6.
| 2% Rain 4 p.


1675. A July q, ad Aug. 5.
4. C. drops, hot day, Small


5. Soulrry afflicing weather,


Ely
Ely.
Ely.


13. Wind at noon, warm.


19. Very wo rainy 9 Pc.


CA


21, Wer die tot.

22, Rain,

23. Wet 2 p. 3 p. Foreft hill
Rain, Thunder,

24. R. 9 m. very windy dark.

25. Very windy, rain.

26, Rain, dark, hor,

27. Windy die to,

28, Rain noZ, ror,

29. Hot.

31. Rain die tot. fere, Bad
Weather.

Aug 1. Rain &e tot.


2. w_
4- Hor Ely. ſoulery nighr.
Tterum a Sept. 22. 08. 13.
Sept.23.R. at midnight.
24- R. 4 m. 9 m. H,wind,warm:
25. Stormy noF. preced,

2 M, wet 2 ÞP,
26, Showr 2 Þ. 4 P.
27. Fog m. | ,


-


28, Dark m. Rain 3 m. 5 m,


G9 m.

29, Windy.

30. N. F of

Of. 1. Frofft, ice.

2, Rain 6 m, Fog.

5. Fog.

6. Rain 5 m. Warm.

7. 8. wind, miſiing,

8. 7 wind 19. preced, ſhowrs

m.

10. Clouds contrary,

12. Froſty, foggy.

13. Warm. Indiſpoſitions.
Dry weather, the Coun-
try man could not ſow.

lrerum, a Dec 95, ad Fan. 10,


Ely,


76,
2. Fog, temperate.
4- Dark miſt,
5. Fog, dry.
6, Some rain 7 p. H. wind,
Je Fara. dark, warm.
- Stormy wind 4m. R. 75 m.
9. Fog, offer 10 4 ,
9. Rain a.l,2p. 8 p.
10, Rain a. 1. 3 d. warm, wdy;
12. Daſh of rain, windy.
13- much Rain 5 m. Dark,
windy.
14+ R. midnight 12 m, Chim-
neys bipwn down, daſh8 p.
15. High wind at n. warm,
Wet P. Mm,
17. High wind art n, rain 11p;
18. Much rain 4 m. wind,
19, Rain 10 p.
20, Rain 10m, 0. 5 p, &c.
21, Rain p. m. m p.
22, Windy day,
23. Dry, wind, 9 Ships caſt
away in Mounts bay.
24. Driſle 11 m, _
25. Rain 6 p. Loſs at Sea. Ga-


Py


zet,
26, High wind, warm, ſtorm
of rain,


Chap. VILL.


s ? Home-Duary.


27. Rain 4 m.6 m. Hurricane.

29. Rain hard 4 m.

30. Rain 4 p fog m. :

Dec. 11. The Plague very v1-
olenc in che Turkiſh Terrt-
tories,


h, —_


1675. Zan. I. Fo Ely.
3- Werring p.m. Ely.
4. Fog, very dark. Ely.


5.T. M. in Worceſterſhire.

75. Driſle 5 m. N E.
8. Miſty, Ely.
9. Fog ; ſome moiſture 5 p.

10, Some wet mM. 3 P. 6 P.


'W; Ely.


m_— ku.


—


1677. A_Sept. 8. ad 07. 28.
uplex d .


8. Fog Ely. Meteor” ab 0vt. 1n
oce, by Opnuchus,

1, Fog 3, H. wind ; Meteor
neer £\ and 7 ſeus. Two
more neer Enginaſin,
Firedrake in Myrhelds 7 n.

10. Some Fog; Meteor 10 Pp.

11, Fog, warm 3 brisk wind.
Fe -


Ely.
12. Fog, fila, warm 3 baisk
wind, * ©
13. Plague broke, our again
Grand Cairo. Fog,hotriſh,
ſhower 11 m- high wind
1.
14- R. 2 m. Meteors near V
Horns.
s, Fog , warm Meteor abA.
gu; man. ſin, ad Jovem,
, Fog, daſh ah 8. ad 1o p.
17, Warn nighr,ſhowring 7 p.
13, Fog m,

» 19, Fog, groſs.
20, \. Fre 3 Þ.
21, Rain ante 3 M. 10 Mb

Showr. 2 p. dark. I 2
Nadir 2 p.
22. Warm n.f. Jain, wd m.

. g P. : %. "5

* 24. Warm rain 2 p. For

night.

''24. Dry, warm.

| oy Brick wind, warm.

**26, Rain circa 4 m. Plague at

Cracow, Gaz?t. 1242,

*'27, Warm, high wird.

' 28. Rain 5; m.

' 29. Fog m. brisk wd ; ſome

Rain. , 3
39, Showring 3 or 4 times 3


O07. 1. Fog, ropes.
"2 Halo ar night. "4d
3, Fog; {mart ſhowr 4 P+
[
v|
:


SE. | |
' 7, Rainznteg m, 3 Mereors,


Pty. |


| 4+ Froſt, Showr-, Huls 10 p.


$5. Some dew ; rain 9 p.

5, Driſle; wind round the
Hor1zon.

7. Þrille.

2, Fog; wind*anq rain.

9. Fog ; lome wet 7 m., &
It Pp. |

15. Fog: Meteors 11 p. about


'F.« .
11, Daſh aud hjgh wind.
12. Foggy die tot.
13. Rain and hail 2 p.
14. High wind, daſh 10
Mereors. Shipwrack
Bridlint on bay.
15, Fog; hard froſt.
16, Fog, brisk cold 3 wind
very cold by all contefion,
17. Froſt, fog ; drille 11 p.
Ely.
18. R. n, t. & wet m, Horn
fair (pozled,


19. Fog m. driſle 9 Pp. w_ |


22, Rain noon, & p.m. dark,
24. Wir.cer mort, and dry
Cay.


25. Fog, winter day. Ely.
25, Fog, winter day, Ely.
27, Fog. NE


28, Brisk wind, fog 2 p. NE.
Die 22. Storm at Swanſey :
nor the like , yer no great
damage. zo


——_—_@


"Ys


— _—


ſrerym a Dec, 6, ad 31.
6. Fog. Ely.


2 bright ones.

8. Some raing m. & 9 m. H,
wd m. P-

6. Fog, rain.a 1 m, Meteors ;
rain and blow much.

10, H. winds n8,. tor. ruffling,
driſle. |

11. R. ante 2 m. Mereor 6 m,
faring.®

i2, Fog $ E. ligh wd, r. hard
3 P Metgor near cor 0,

3, . rain ante 5 m, high wd,


rifle 0.


| A flaſhof Lightning 8 p.


14. Tempeſtuous wind noe
ks Fora, rain 5 m. Mereor 7 p.


9 P. ;
't5. Fog, wetting z dark day.
Ely.


16, Fcg. NE.
17. Fog. Bly.
18, Froſt m. NE.


19. Ice ; fog below. ys 3.

2c, Tearing Froſt, fog, Ely.

21. Thames froze at Putney 3
!tinking groſs fog.

22, Froſty, fog.

23. Wind p, m,


Ely. ſome
rain, ;


þ


|


|


# 1578.
ac


1*"-chitss' -  Aaaa
{Y


4. Wer a. l. foggy , ſome rain
yo. h


25. Foggy Ely. Rain ar night,

25. Foggy. El-,

27. Wind and wetting a. i,
damp wall. Tempeſt 11 mw.

28. High wind,

25. Froſt; fog m-. and die t:t,
2Mereors; though ) fhine-'

30.Grols tbg ; froſt and dark.


a Feb 16. ad Apr. 3.
Duplex d.

15, Miſt m,

17, Mitt, Nly.
18. Froſt, miſt. Ely. Meteors


8 p.

19. Froſt, miſt; C{. dewing 11
P. rain.

20, H. wind p. m. & m. p.

21, Rain m.o. 7 p. 11 p. high
winds.

22, Wind,

23. Miſty, wd.

24. Rain 4 m. 5 p. Ely.

25. High wind n.t, Snow 5


m.

25, Sharp wind, Metcor 5
m. tears VP,

27. Froſty, vaſt Halo 9 p.


El y.

28, Fog, dark.

March T. Showr 10 m. dark
P. M.

2, Some drops 8m. & 8 p.
warmer.

3- Some rain, coaſtivg ſhowr,
ſhore Mereor,

4- {. rain 5 m. ſnow 10 m. &


I P.
5+ Snow a, |. cutting wind, ſn,
Hail 1 p.


| 6, Wind and ſhowr 4 p. 11
7. Miſt, dry. Ely. Variable. has


8. Brizk wind N R. driſle,

9. High-wind, wetting p. m.

10. Rain 4 p. S. ſcarce-.ſenſi-
ble drops, SE.


I;. Rain 2 m. Meteor he
Corona. n
12, Warmer miſt m. Meteor.


under preſepe, Bright Me
reor 'L ace,

13. Miſty.

14. Miſt m. Ely,

15. Brick wind , very high.
R.1 p.2P.

16. Rain a. !.& 1 p. coaſting
p. m. m, p. H; wind.

17.R. 4.1. 10-m. Gc. wind p.


m.
18. H.wind. Showr 1 p. 2'p.
/ 6 p.news of wracks caſt up,


7 with dead mena die 15: -


March 19. Rain p. m, 5 Þ. A-


i Q


&y Home-Diary.


N Book II.


20+ Rain 8 p. ſtormy wd and
Rain. S E.

21s ou rain ante 4 m. high
wa, .
Elizabeth of London caſt a-


WAY»
22, Gr. hail r m. Very ws wd,
yer fair.
23. Great rain anteq m —_
coaſting ſhowrs 7 p. Ely.
24. Very warm a. Mm. Aches.


Ely.
25, Very cold. Ely.
25, Cold wind. Ely.
27. Froſt m. cold, Indiſpoſ.


Ely.

28: Miſty,fine rain 10p. Ely.

29.Black Heaven, ſome drops
offer, ſnow 7 p. Ely.

30. Froſt, ice, Sun rutilus,Ely,
Meteorsante nonamzone near
Pleiades,

31. Cold , miſty, coaſtin
moiſture CO” E Ly

Apr. 1, Werri

2. Some mot HA Sg
m. brisk wind, Hail; Me-
reor ante nonam.

3. Cold,high wd, little ſcuds


9m.3p- 459%


—_—


z


b—


A® 1679. Dec. 9. VP Il, 4
Novemb, 27. ad Dec. 25»


27. Gr. fog, driſle ante 8 m. &
El _ & 5 p. miſle 9 p-


I P-
28, Fog, cloſe m. Sly.
29. Sharp wind, ſome _


30. Cloſe fog , cold »eſp. cola
, foes” mane; driſle 0.
P. m. & m. p. Ely
J(C IF-1. Fog, wer m. p- hw
2. F froſty day. Sly.
3+ Fog, tog s Sun rutilus,
froſt m. at
Very great z Ice two
N inches thi
5. Very great fog. Ely.
6. Very great . Ely.


7. V t fog; rain a.l,
hen {cm ante 5 p. Nly.
8. Fog, cloſe m. p. H. wd 4
Wly.

' 9. Rainand wind 1 m. Wy.
NG & 9 m. ſharp


Wly.

II. —=m_ 2 Þ.& 2. Nly. Ve-
ry wind 9 Þ Sly.
12, F .., Nly.
13. Froſt. offer Snow. 10 m.


& 0. miſle p. 4, = | =,
I4 Very great Og thaw,


Is, Fog, wetting my P+ Mel
Wy.


16. Very great fog, froſt, 4
fle o. 5 p. _
17. Very great Fog , driſle
antes m. Wl
13. Warm, high wind, dew-
ing 10 p. Wly.
19. Warm, brisk wd. Wy.
20, Fog, H. wind ; rain 1 m.
21. Fog, froſt ; ſnow 10 m,


m. C.
> ma ——_— wd,ſnow "ds
Nly.

4 Froſty,ſharp wind. Tow-
er-ditch frozen ; very gr.
Fog. Y-

Extream froſty , hail circa

6 m.

Dec. 10, Storm for three days
and nighrs 3 ſeveral Ships
caſt away, Holy head Gaxet.
1468,

$. Bruxels very great fog.Ga-
zet 1468,


Y.


SY


| 4* 1686, March 11. X 24,


a die 2, ad 20.


March,


3- Froſt & m. Bidvv , hail, mu
circa 1 P+ NE.
4- Hard froſt , ſtreers froze.
NE.
5, Froſty, bright. W. SW.
6. Froſty, ſome hai). and R.o.
again 2 p. Cloucls in W,
with Hillocks.
7, Snow and hail wnte 9 m. a-


gain 10 mſharp wi oh
8. H. wind, ſnow at Sun vcc,


—_ —_


cutting wd. y-
9. Fr. high wd , rain and in.
circa ©, P. il Wwly.


op cold winds 1. as ©


1: Hard fro cold fhurp ud,


= 2 Þ. ad Sun _

Aches.

13. Rain 8 m. wet day,H wd,
ſome ſnow Sun occ. NW,

14. High wind ns, tot. and h.
froſt, ſnow 7 m. & 10 m.
very cold and duberng,


5. Fatr, white Clouds, "hoes
miſt p. Sun occ.
16. Miſty, cloudy,fair ; _
cold ar n.
17. Fog, Clouds fly low.8 z m,
Ely.


18: Fog, ropes on ground. E.
15. Fog, overc, 11 m, cloſe
p m, H.


Lo" and cold ab xy = *


20, Rain a, 1 & Sun ort, Oc,


ren? ſhowr 4 p. In 7ork.
re (now up to the in
24hours,


Iterum Platick. dr i in "7 |


A* 168;:, Feb. 26, XK 29.
A die 18. ad Apr. 2.


Feb, x'8. High wind, ſome R


I Fa. and 10m, Sly.
19, 'Warm, Sly.
20, Warm , f. wetting 4p. 7

F.. farn. Ely.
2x.C. rain 8 m. H,wd AnditpoC

R.8 p. Sly.


2'2, Fog, warm rain 4 5 p.


| 23+ Fog, ſhowr circa 2 p;


24+ Grear fog.rain a 9 m. h

inNadir) per diem tot. Aches
ly.»

25. Rain n. & a. m. cloſe 4

m. and Foggy, diſtempers;

Small Pox in the Country.


Ely.

26. Rain m. miſty.
27. Cloudy, ſome rain ante
4m Nly.
8. Dark 0.rain 2 P. diſtemp.
Wy.
March 1. Fog, — "1


2. Scarce open m, cold ud


3. Fr. m. rain. "A

4. Great fr.

5. Froſty.

6. Some hail and rain Ws |
2 P


5. Snow, hail ante 9 m. ſo 10


m. p. m. Aches,
_ wind and ſnow med,
prec. ſome ſhow ante


© occ. cutring wind.
9+ H. wind, R.and ſnow o. &
& p. m. Wiy.
10. Very cold wd, little ſnow


« Suu 0cc. NW,

I1, Fr. wd. Aches. NW.
12.R, gentle a 2 p.ad Sun occ,
NW,

13. Very wet o, cold, H. wd,
wet P. m. NW.
14. H. wind no, tot. ſnow 97
m. & 10 m. NW,

I < 1 _ ſicken. NW.
oO E,
17» Fog: cold, Aches, Ely.
18. Hs ropes, warmer, A-


Ely.

I9. Fog.
20, Rain a. |.ſmarr ſhowr 4P-
Ye


>|


——


21, Some wettirg 4 Þ. 6 Þ» |
I0 P. Wy.


Chap. VUL


Diſſenter poſed.


Faintneſs.
22. Much ſnow, ſtormy wd,
feels with a winter face.
NE.
23. High wind nf, tot. rem-
at Harwich,
23. H. wind 9 p. &, Wy,
25. H, wd, r 10 m, cold.
N W,
26, Very cold day, Ely m.
Wiy p. m.
27. Rain ante 8 m. & ante 2 p.
Wly.
28, H. wind, rain ante 5 p. 6
NE.


7 .
29 Gala, dark , and windy,


Nly.Ely.
30. Hail - 11 m. wind and


ſhowr o. 3 p.
31. Cold nl flying clouds,
- 6a 8 p. near Androme-


April 1. Cloudy m. ſome wd,


np. m. Ely.
2. Cloudy m. open, H, wind
Y. or. _— SE.


Ireram, May 24. o 3.

A May 17, ad 31.
19. Clouding, brisk winds, 7
ris. SE:
18, Warm, fair ; brisk wind.
Wy.
19. Fog m. hot. E,
20, Clouds gather as for rain;
ſome wind. Wl.
21, Hor miſt m. miſt at n. E/y
22, Miſt m. Thund.and Light.
ning on this fide M1, in

the Horizon. E, arn.


Ely, 23. Cloudy m. C, rain a. m. &


£


for { trivial a thing as an Atpe&? Truly u


ante Sun ort, 6p. & 7 p.

24. Cloſe m. wertingab 9 m.p.
m. W. and T7 caſt ſuch a
luſtre on the clouds, as if
the Moon were up.

5 on m. cloud ing.

26. Cloudy, open wind, and
alicele rain. w.

27. Cool wind, ſome clouds.

28. Fair, dry, warm ; C. rain
P- m. W. and arn, $;

25. Dry, fair, ſoultry p. m.

EEE Is | E Ely.

30. Hor, miſty air. SE.

3r. Miſt m. H. wind ante 0,
8c, heat 3 Clouds gather
in N W. ſhowr at & oc,


rill 10 p.with Thunder ; wd
at n, and eloudy!


Have not we ſomewhart.to do to bring ina Table of 853. days
t account I


3 Columns; that it might noc ſpread ir ſelf, though the Reader kns


Clap it into
ws my


mind, that I count notany Aſpect a trivial thing, the Treatiſe will belame
and murilous after all ; yet I would not have it deſtiture of a Limme that
was ſubſtantial, or one of its vital Parts. Every jot of the Table will bein


Seaſon whenſoever our Two Planets greet one


another ; eſpecially to the


careful Obſerver of Inferiour Nature and its ſubordination to the Superi-
our, I was willing wich the Antiencs to vote a Dryth in the Planer ? , but
- wag mg more or les, our Aſpe brings Moiſture almoſt 500 days


of the 850. in the Total.
+ $41. I would venture to one
this ſpe ſhould produce firs of We, as is ſeen s 20, and ſomething


puted to 7, either his Nature, or
when he ſhifts into another degree,


Conjecture before we part, wherefore


muſt


his motion Annual, or Diurnal,
Thi, while he takes his turn, {a-


hand in hand with his Conſert, or as in ſome


im
vhs, wh Cardinal Point
Country-Dances an Handkerchiet may be between them. But by what


hath bin aid in the Lunar Sextile, the Fits of Rain, I believe, are juſtly


ble to the Nature and Motion of all


: Annual in the) and Zg


Dera in the reſt ; for the ) 's ſhifting for her part, is undenyable, ont


of dry into a Wet


Corner. In the mean time, let us have leave to ask our


Diſſenter, what is the reaſon of thoſe ſudden Storms, which by firs ſurpriſe


vs, when the former Showr being blown over, a Second a
more violent than the Firſt > What is thereaſon of this D


when the Clouds are fo often


oft


-times
s Celeſtial,


dropping, and can't hold, he has heard how


weGANT of Motions and Aſpects &c. I would be glad to hear him


ſpeak to it intelligibly.


"4


%


—_— —


& YL Home-Dtary. Book II.


CHAP.I%. doh
Conjundionof Sgl and Saturn.


$ I. hH beforey,, by Laws of Method, muſt be diſcourſed of, being the ea.
frer Planet. 2. Saturn of' ia dull Viſage , and yet called paway ,
with thereaſon. © 3. A vaſt Planet, 4. The A ſpe appears once in
| a Twelvemonth. 5. Our Anceſtors have not left #5 a Diary of 30
Nears for Saturn. 6. The Aſpe#s Charatter. 7. Virgil, Seneca,
Epigines, ec. Teſtimonies. 8. Charafer made out. Anungqueſti-
onable notion of Dominion. 9. & 10. In Winter Signs v» and x,
it cauſes Froſt nay Froſt grows upot #s, as d paſſes from tm down-
ward. . 11. Some Froſts in Auguſt. The Table. 12. How Saturn
mingling with the Sun can cauſe Cold. 13, 14, 15, 16. Cold ſeems
to be a privation, is indeed a Spirit . Some offer of proof. 17. S$4-
turn js not ſo horribly cold with us, for he Rains more than Snows,
I8. h finds a time for cold Days in Summer. 19. And yet hecan
and Lighten,and that with Danger. 20. Prodigious Hail,


Thun
The AldeFt cauſes Snow at diſtance from the Partile AſpeF. 21. Red
Cds Rahors, Forixd 2 Ws and Winds s/4 as Epigenes
hath noted. 23. Foreign Evidence remitted to another place.
24. Some Sober men are of our Principle , Vicount St. Albans,
' Sir Walter Raleigh, and Gerard Voſhus.


S1, Cs is the Higheſt Planet, of incredible diſtance 3 fo high, that
it ſcarce admits any ſen/ible Parallax, as Artiſts periwade 3 and yet
we are forced, though we ftrainour ſelves, to reach at him out of Courſe,
by the due Laws of Method , which preſcribes us to premiſe, what is
of more eaſie Confideration, that way may be made for what is more aif-
ficele, Such, we reckon is the Planer of Jupiter : for though Jove be the
Inferiour, and ſo ſeems to be leſs remote from our preception, yet that if
noneceſlary conſequence in Nature, as we may ſee in the motion of the


Neighbour - Planet 4 , which though it be leſs remote than % or h, is
_ to be underſtood. Mature is fond of a Kot ſemetimes, though ſhe


hath made none ina Bulrsſh. [But the Nobler Vegitablesare fo full of them
_ without them there is no Frartfu/neſs; no not a Bud ſhows its


S 2, Saturn , if we ſpy him.in his Orb hath zo promiſing Countenance,
a dull, heavy Aſpect, of a Palih or Leaden Gleam 3 upon which account
they aſcribe that Mztal to'this Planet : fo that if an Aſtrologer ſhould tella
Novice , pointing to that Star , that it had a conſiderable Influence, he
would tacitly pronounce the Dictator more dim-/zghted than his Star. So
that I wondred why the Antients call'd him Phe707 ( gaizuy ) but that
Achilles Tatias tells us, that he is called by fo __ a Names, though he be
the dulleſt Star,( wi7o: duaveiz&- 4) for good Omen lake, (wr 33 warms)
by the Greeks and « Fegyptians.

s 3. However , the Novice may be admonithed, therewithal to beget
an Opinion of H, that the Antient Aſtronomers reckon him to be even
as vaſt a Star as 3 and while the Moderns ſay he is twice as big as YL,
and ten times as big as the Earth 3 that is, 5 times, (for 'tis Keplers opinion
we pointat ) as big as &, we ſee it may do mighty Fears.

$ 4. Tis


Chap. IX. h cold, Seneca, Epigenes. Don:nton.


A es


>


6 4. 'Tis abou: 30.years. that this Planet runs his courſe in the Zodiack,
and therefore his Co'njuntion with the Sun throughout all the Twelve
Signs caniiot- be obferyed , but by a Long-lw'd Obfervation , for which
we offer up our thanks to Heaven. Howbeit, once inthe y<ar the © and
h do faltite us, and invire us to-note that Influence, which the well-un-
ployed. Agesof che World inold time have fo often experiey: ed, ©

95. ATable of 30 years Revolution would have bcen a Kusity 30 years
ago; For our Anceſtors have left us no ſuch. Legacy hotline, at Jeaſt nor
to the publick 3 therefore however the Rexcer ſhall value it, I muſt, offer
again my Solemn Thenks to the Great Author of Liie, who .a:h enable
hiszpoor Hoxrager to perfect it; N

$6. The Character of our Aſpe&t from Ptol:zry and others lies thus ; Ir
produceth Cold, and Froſt, and Miſty Weather, Clouds and dark Air,
with Srow!\, where he, mentions Rain, Hail , Inundations, cc. Diſeaſes
proceeding frem Cold,Deach of Antient Men, &-c. that we mention no
more.— Albymazar admit$all that of _Ftolemy, but he harps upon Drytch
more, k being reckoned a Dry, as well as a ColdPlaner. -

* $4. Noris it Ptolemy only, we hiye ather Contemporaries. or Szniors,
which ſpeak on this faſhion;as before wehad Poets and PhiloſophersY:rg:!,
Horace , Seneca,:pigenes, Figulus, in Lucan, &c.and the Greeks As ma-


.By as have reckoned h noxious, have reckoned him Cold, Sallaft 5 Por-


phiry. Upon this account //irezls interpreter to ſhew his Learning, expounds
FrigidaSaturniStella i.e. Nocens,ſaith he; fo for theColdsInfluence,No body
doubts the Antients minds , nonor for the Rain, Hail, Inundations; for
Eguls in the Poet tells us, that Þ in =% may cauſe Flouds, Summe [3 fri-
g£19a clo Stella nocens nigrosSaturnt accenderet 1gnes(aVerſe where h is pain-
ted in his colours) Deicalioneos fudifſet Aquarius ignes. Lucan. Lib. 1. And
whereas the Poet bids his Ryſtick be ſo Weatherwiſe as to to obſerve Þh,
and ? in ſomeVerlſes thforequored Serw1us,l profeſs giyesLight to his Poer,
by telliug as under what Signs Þ brought Rain fos [taly, zz. Gapricorn il-
luſtrating Horace from thence. Heſperre. Gapricornus wnde. Where he fur-
ther cells ns of aSign for Hail, Hail inScorpio,Grandines, Epigenes,who learned
whatghe had from the Chalgdean, enlarges our Character after he hath
told ns that Þ <', h ), h @,arecold and windy,and help to inſpiſſate theAir,
even togaccording to hisPrinciples,the Kgaming of aComethe adds that the
Oppoſition of © and h may Thunder. FTle promiſe you, if 9 ſtands by
and confents, apud Sence. A. Qurft. L1h.VTL in the fame tone is Servrns allo.

9 8. That which may be made out by-our Table is the Ga, the Froſt ,
the cloſe muddy dark Air, or Miſty or Hazy , as Ptolemy and Albumatzar
agree, For that Ihave ſaid is the Humartas Horizontrs, found in the Ma-
mareth of Sol over h. Eſchuia. fol. mihi, $3. «

This Character, I fay, may be made out; for thqugh the Definition, as
worded in the Antients, makes a great Noiſe of F194 Horrendum, and
Sickneſs, and Famine, and Murrains of Beaſts,yer this is to be underſtood,
not in our Country, nor of every Conjun#on at what time of the year (0-
ever, bur of thoſe only where the Planet hath Domi7102 (7. e. ) ſome advan-
rages by its Situation in reſpect of the Earth,(a Dead-Winter S/gz,{uppole,
or the like ) under which Notion no man of Sence can deny Donor, bur
maſt admit it for Antiquities ſake,at leaſt as a tolerable Experiment. And
not without 1eaſon 3 for if the I and the Stars gover# the Night, and that
be well (aid, becauie the Night is the more illuminate by their preſence,
than the © and h, when in a Hyemal Conjunitron, govern the Winter ,
atcoule Wintee is the Colder for that familiariry. $2 far am I an

Yay, |


Bbbb $ g. For


a


276


Long Winters.


Book 11.


$ g. For how comes it that in Decemb. 4® 1667. you meet wich Horrid


Froſt ; and Jandiry

and Jan. 1669.'an

comes it that the Froſt
deally, towards the


Febr. 16


s upon every


1667, which is the very next Syzygie, Bitter Froſt :
70. if you pleaſe toconſult the Table : and how
d h ©, as itdeſcendsby m 7
inter Tropique, where uſuall


(not always, I


confeſs for February and March perhaps, is capable of a Saturnine Cold; )


uſually I ſay 3 you meet with long ,
$10. T * tis ſhould be moſt;


the Table at the Cloſe of Sept :


might lye together, and be


firſt


fierce , tiring Winters.
parent to our good Readers , we have


t all the Winter Months


ſented. Which Diviſion reaches from


Mszchaelmas to April 22.(fucha Portion of che year being capable of Snow,
may be reckoned Winterly.) Now, if it be obſerved, I ſay, How Froſty


Mornings or Days


companies the ©


w upon our Clime in thoſe Months wherein h ac-
_ herd that wan be og way Y and
in whatſoever may hap at other titges:

that the Froſt ſtarts in the oftner upon ſuch b. «Bib


X, we may look for
He may acknowledge


$ 11, What if in Augwf Month we meet a Froſt, and the Firſt Froſt of
the Year ? IThope (though we ſtand not much upon that) under thed © h.


See the Table.


—_—


# 1657. Sept. 026 ag,

10. Very wet 2 and -4.m. very
ET ve; th

IT. M vg;

=_ Y 3 | 3 =


N
14. Wet ante & GY .
: N
I5. Clouds fly low. h__
_; overc. m. White


1 NE.
17, Cold, mifling Þ» Mi. NE.
18, Wet circa Sun oft. N W.
cold. Wd blew
Downs.N W.
20, Miſt, froſt, cold. white
cl. thick o. Ely.YE.
21, Fr. bright. Very high wd
ſab occ. © but calm.E, SF.
22, Fr. miſt, very cold and
h, wind. cloudy m. p. ſpe-
cially at n.


25. Much rain ante Lover and
Bluſter p. m. not (0 much
ar Wic . /

26, H- wind no#, tot. Dark,
offer a, m. red cl, at _


25. Wind audible a. L. froſt
m. '{. overc, red clouds ;
Eaſtward Sun occ.

28. Wind nodF, Fr. clear,very
cold wd, NW.


ns Gan one NE.
0. H. wind}, driving ſhowrs
, 2 Þ. cold. "" NE.
1 Ofob. Dark, cold wind.NE.
2, Cloſe, milder. Fi

miſt, Meteor, NE.


29. Cobwebs, ſame rain 1 p.
N W.
28, Winds and wet 3 m. N W.
29. Warm , ſome driſle m.
SW.
30. Warm, Cobwebs , overc.


SW.

Vehement wd blowing down
Trees.

0.1. Warm , drops , Cob-

webs. .

2. Wind, Cobwebs, overcaſt ,

Ground-miſt. NW,


N W.


d © kh mira Grad 10. Hyemal part.


3- Froſt, miſt, with ropes ſtove,
cold, overc. 4 N E.
4+ Cloſe m. cold , fair m. P-
: NE.
Rain 4 m. dark, miſty, wer-
ting m. p. & W. NW,

- Cloſe, muddy air d. 2.
8 P- very wer,lec. $ .
7. Store of wet , abund, p. m.
ill 8 * 1 SE.
8. H. wa, overc. o. goaſting.
wrs Sun occ., NE
9g. Froſt, bright, cold, wind;
Mereors fly, Wiy.
10, Froſt, ice, ropes , warm.


NE.
i1. Froſt, miſt, ice, cobwebs,
chickfog 9 p. Why.

12, 'Fog m. moiſture.
12, Dark and cool, miſli
m. blew miſt. b
14. Some driſling , wet 2 m.
ſo o. & p. m. .
Is. Rain dre tot. warm, black
Thunder, clouds ; oyerc. n.
Sly.


_—


Ely.
P»
Y.


A* 1659. OF. 17, mM 3.
Ab OF. 6. ad 28.
6+ Fair, Rain and cloſe.
7- A glorious day, rainn.
8. Very fair, Sun ſhine , cold
nighr.,
9. Warm, rhick Skie and rain.


Is


— 5 —_ _—


Chap. I'X.


© h Daary.


10. Cloſe warm weather

11, Cloudy , warm 74n ar n.

12. Some rain.

IE, Froſt, and a glarious day

14- More warm, {. rai.

14. Rain a. m. fair , © fhine

. M,

216, /Fair , cool a. m. overc.
p. m. High wad ar n. ſome
drifting, Why.

r7 Rain 3m. & 2. m. clouds
ſtored, dropping 1 pſhowr


29. Fr. r. curdled clouds, N


30. Fr. fair; 2 ſcen half an
an hour afrer San or.

31- Fr. miſt below, abour Ho-
rizon 3 ſome rain, cloſe &
moiſt even.

Nov, x, Cloſe, cloudy, windy;
dry, yet threarning. W.


2.Fr. ſeen half an hour
afrer Sun riſing, MN W.
Miſt, ſame clouds exen m-
dining ro moiſture, .. $ W,


*


5 Þ. H, wind. * ; & Cloſe and cloud W.
8: Cloudy m. p. ſome drops Fo 5. Fog below, fleecy clouds.

© occ. Ely* | SW,
19+ Fog m. cloſe p, m. wet- / 6. Fair,windy. N.


ting 4 p. 6 p. Wh.
2c, Fog 3 m. fair, dry. N W.


7--Open; windy, ſtr of R.
| 15 th SE.


21. -o_ 10 ni, faif, ape 8. Fr. and fair ; freez hard
ar N. w.
- 'Fog:cloſe openingap:NE.
23- Cloſe m. lo ip. m. |] — +4 m——_
cold ; dropping 1.5, Lyne a
Shower. Ely. | 4* 1661, Nov. 8, 1 26,


24. Fair n. fr. c:bwebs, clouds
lowoverc.p. m.&7 p. NW.
25. Wd nof. tot. wet 42,
cloſe, ſome rain p. Ely.
26. Fair n. warm ; gentle R,
\ 3 p. red clouds at E.S W.
27. Fog ni. tot. & o. groſs
Cobwebs 3 much Gofſu-
mere ; fog 9 | Strawber-
rics riſe on {loping _


28. Fog, cloudy,open, So
ſome wind : Meteors wr/2.
Shy.


———_


& 1660. Ofob, 28. M rs.
Ab 0# 16. ad Nov. 8.


» Cloſe m. p. coaſting ſhowr
"ſome places s p.” SW
7, Rain a.l. fair,ſomer. over-
aſt Nly.
18. Fair, ſome clouds. N VE.
19. Fair, fr. oyerc. 10 m.Nly.
Miſt below. NW,
to, Fr. TT 0. E.
NE.
21, Frok, black thick clouds
in S. © -occ, clear and fair.
E.N.
22, Froſt, clear , @me wind.
N E.
23. Cloudy , windy, Nly. =


om .
24. Fr. fair, windy. SW.
25, Fr. cold, windy, cloudy ;

frequenc clouds 18 $, S W.

NE.


26, Fr, Clouds ACRIor—"
Y
27. Dry,cold,wdy, Hail Ray — R.


I p. a ſhowr 3p.
23. Rain offer midn, cloudy,


Ab. OF. 30. ad Nov. 19.
02, Some clouds Sun or.


| Gd 1s "Windy, rain 8 m. rainy


Sw.

p inmſ d. m. p.warm d.

S W.

tg t.Miſty,dabby ROY.


2, Rain $ ot =
warm 3 ſtinking fog 9 p.ſo


9m. 4411. uſqne.ad ©) Lo


3 —_ $s m.rain die —


aver rainy mM. 4d 10 fre-
quent ſhowrs ad 2 p, S.


g. Very rain s ads m.
5 indy, bluſtering, wet d. &
6. Windy, cloſe. $ w.
7. Cloudy, windy m. $W.
8. Cloudy, windy,miſty _
{. ſhowrs.


9. Fenn PPT"
3 and 4 p. ſome _— $ Þ-


10. Cloudy, windy , ate;
Rainy 4 PF» &c. SW.

I Is

| cloud 3 ſtormy 10 m.
cold N. clear, W, SW.
12.Fr.and cold m. W.S.
13. Fr. cold p.m.even bright
w.S,


14. R-H.wind midnight, ſmart
ſhowr p.m. Mercors,Light-
nings 7 P. W,

15. Miſty, wetting,very _


16, High wiud , very gy 1
Rain. |
17. Fr. yery cold, ſome Kain


8


—_


w.-|4* 1552.


—


Bluſtering wind and |


18, Cloudy, cold, windy. My.
19. Cloudy, Halo + N.


_——


Nov: 2o. © 8.
A Nov. 11. ad 28.


11, Rain 5 m. dark a. m wet:
Very dark,, with violenc
Storms of wind and rain
at N. I p. ad 3 p, ſnow in
the Cquntry, S$ W,

12. Rainy my, bigh wind, cold
freezing, 'SW.

13. Fr. fog,. cold rain a. m.
H. wind. SW.

14. Fr. H, cold wd,[freezing.


SW.
15. Rain. p, H wind : a


16. Fog, fair, cold ; As
$ W,

17. Fog, froſty. SENE.
18, Colds foggy, rain a 6 p,
ad 9 p. Nly.
19. Warm. cloſe , driſling p«:
m.&s p SE.
20, Fog, warm, ſome clouds.


SW.
2I, Ma, rain 17 m. &


ae tot.
22. —mnſ,


S W
”— cold. Hwd,
Open 3 Þ,


w,
23» Cloudy, cold , rain 2 P.


S W
24- Rain hard 5 m, A


25. Fog, froſty, clear n. NE,
26. Fog, froſty, Clear n. NE,


27. Fog, fro; ſome ſnow a. 1.


SW,


A® 1663. Dec. 1. 27 9s
A Nov. 20. ad Dec, 10*


20. —_ ary wg
21, Ciolc aad foggy. Wy,
22. Cloſe and drilling, y


23. Ram roward © or. R5in,

: Wy.
24, Fr. fair and miſt. Nh,
25. Fr. fog; rain ar o. cloſe.


Nh,
26, Fr. fog, cſpec.towards ©,


27. Gloſe 9 p.
28. Open, nor over coldiſh.
N.
29. Cloſe.
30. Rainn. cloſe day, E.
Dec. 1. Miſt m. ba
2. Miſt rain m. cloſe p, mo
p.adgn
3» = m. cloſe day, high =
3 E:
«hon m, open 0. R. 9 n,sp:
$ Rain


14 Þ © Deary.


Book IL


_—_———D—_—_


CO Ca EE EE


»


2H}


"I


»


6 Rom, wer a 2 p. high =


6:Fr. with ſnow \, H. cold
'wd, wy __ N.
7, Snow n. freezing dre tot.


Snow 10 M. . - oy 1


8. Froſty m. dropping 8 n.
windy. : Sh.
9. Fog , cloſe, wind 3 ſome
moiſture a. m. _ Sh.
10, Fog, cloſe, moiſtning
damp. Why.
A® 1664. Der. 1. VP o.
*ou 30. Ad Dec. 22.
Nov. 30.Cloſe, mild, rain p.m.
wetting 6 p. 4d 11 p.
Dec 1. Cloſe, mild, ſome
driſling at n. E.
2-Some wer ante |. fog, col-
_ diſh, cloſe, nnld. N W.
2 Fog, cold, wetting, flaques,
. ſnow rp. hailzp-. E-
4- Fog, h. fr. ſmall ſnow ir
L


$. Very h. black fr. R. genele


- 7 P+ Kc. ;
6::MiR,, cloſe _
5. Miſt, R. ante £L., &' 4 m.

- wet 4. M. & P.M. S,
8.-Much wer 4 m. 7 M.S W.
9. Cloſe, wer m.R. rain ſadly

. 8 p. &c. ! Sly.

. Much rain as hath been
10. Cold wind, cloſe. N E.N.
11 Fr. ſome drops 4 p. walls

ſwear. | S

12, Wetting ante (ort. & Mm.

R. ſuddenly 4 5 p+ ad med.


mY, &c.


13. Miſt, cloſe, warm. S.
14.Cloſe miſt, cool , open day

commended. SE.
rs.'Fr. cloſe, mild. S E.
I6, Miſt, cold, open. N.
17. H. fr. miſt; rain 2 p- &

P. m- SW.
18. Cloſe miſt, warm. 5$.


19. Aches 6 m. Flaring Co-
met $ E.in M , above an
hour high, warm, wetting
FE Þ. SW.NW.

go. Comets 5 m. cloſe m. Þp.

N W


21. Cloudy, cloſe,mild. NW.
22. Cloſe m. bright driſle 10
P- SW.


C—


———


A® 1665, Dec. 20, VP 11,
Die 11. ad Jan. 2.


It, Fr, cloſe d. cold _
E.,

12, Cold and drying p. m,
R NE.


13. = wind nog, tot. cloſe,
col NE. |


p. E-;


|


14. Cloſe, cold, brisk wd, lis -
tle ſnow 9 p.circa ance 5


15, Roaring wind no#. tor.fro-
ſty, ſharp, windy 3 firs of
ſnow a. m. 9 P. opt

Yo


16, Froſt and ſnowing de tot.
ai)

17 .Bard froſt , ſnow _ b
VO

18. Feoſty and fair. Ely.
19. Froſty and fair. Ely.
20, Wind,miſt m.&veſp.o.Ely.
21, Hard fr. cloſe p.m. N.


22, H.fr. miſc ice onTh.Wly.
23. H. fr. miſt m. Wly.


24. Fr. ſnow, Þ or, miſt. N.
25. Exccſhve fr, cloſe m. p.


Pp. m. ; Y.
26, Cloſe, mild, wind. Sly.
27. Miſt m. warm. W.&S.
28, Fog, litttle fr. warm. Sly.
29. Fr. miſt, cloſe m. p. SE.
20, Cloſe, mild, .'werung.


and miſt.

Fan. 1. Rain a. 1. wind wa
Store of wer 7 p. ;
2. Rain m. p. not. warm, win-

dy, dark. &) Ww.


D—


A* 1667, Fan 2. VP 22.
- A Dec, 22, ad Jaw 14

22, Snow A, L froſty.

23. Froſty, high wd m. Nly.

24- Vehement fr. ſnow 4 P.
10 P. . Nly

25, Severe fr. bright wd.Nly.

26, Froſty, rain 8 £ Nly.

27. Fr, miſty, miſle x1 m. ſa,


« Uoc.
28 $aiR. fr. miſt 10p. Nly.
29+ Foggy; cold; rainy. N W.


30. Snow m. then rain. N W.
r. Froſty. 6
an. 1. Birter fr. ſhow, Nly

2, Bitter fr. ice 0n.Tho Nly.

3. Bitter fr. Ice in bread, ſn.
ſub veſp. | Sly.

4 Froſty, ſnow, h. wind and

cold.


Nly.
'$. Fr. ſnow, dark wds. Nly.
6. Warmith,ſnow conſiderable


Y.
7, Wind, cloſe , fine owe


ly.

8. Rain day break. S E
9. Cold m. p. rain and ſnow,
wind a. 1. wly.
10. Fr. and ſnow de tg. Nly,
12. Miſt m. fr. dark, fog ta.
ken up. Sly.
13: Miſt, ſuſpic. a m. Ely,
"#1 miſty die tot. h, wind.


/L Sly,


._——- —Agiaky m.' warm |


_——


A® 1568. Fan. 14. 2/4,
A Jan. 3. ad 24. ;
3. H. wind a. |. warn, milling
m. &- veſp. N W.
4- Windy, dropping 3 ſhare
but furious Tempeſt-&'*. gr,
w


ly.

Lightning at Salisbury 4s
Bagſhot 11 p. Dr. C#ilarey.
5. Tempeſtnous nod, & d.ſome
ſhowrs p. m. Wiy,
6. Riin m. wind and miſling


m. Þ. Nly,
7. Tempeſt of wind and rain
a. 12. Wiy.
8. Tempeſt driving vain &
ſnow 2 Þ.-4 p-6 p. SW.
9. Fr,witdy a. |. N,
10. Stormy cutring wind a. L.
& die tot. ſnow a. L. - :
11. H. fr. cloſing, wly
12.H. fr. mild, NW,
13. Werting 1 p. warm.Wiy,
ke, Bright, warm, ſummers


miſle 5 p.

18, Cloſe, miſlin

19. Dark, cold
bur n.-:


N E.
, miſt.

avors NE,
SW,
20, Fog m. & p. m. cloſe,
Sly,
21. Foggy m. p. cold wind,
fogn. Sly
22, Wertting a. L. & wveſp,- -
22, Fog, warm, ) near X#-

quinoR. b
24-H. cold audible wind,
miſt. $ ) »


—— — ——— —FcC


A® 166g. Fan. 25, 2» 16.
F A Fan. 13, ad Feb, 5,
13. Hard Fr. ſnow p, m. with
Hail, ſnow n.

14. Fr. witdy, more or lefs
die tat.

15. Cold, dark day , ſnow a
little p. fr. continued,

15. Fr. obſcure air, little wd
ſtirring.

17. Cloudy, cold, thaw p. £
Hail and Rt'6 p. m.

18. Cold, cloſe, froſty ; Star-
Iighe night.

19. Froſty m, driſlfng ſnow n.

20, Froſty m. thaw p. froſt ac
nighr.

21- H, fr. cutting air.

22.Fr.brake,miſty cold driſte,

23. Rainy, dark day. |

24+ Bright m. Rain and wind
P. Storms of hail 3 p.

25. Winds,


Chap. IX.


d ©h Drary byemal.”


25. Winds and rain.

26, Froſty m. pleaſant day.

27. Cold, windy, moiſt, driſle,
- 18, Pleaſant day, Halo D.


26. Moderately pleaſanc.
30. froſt, wd N. Halo


).
31. F ny = windy, cloudy
, at n. dropping.
Feb. 1. Pleaſant m. wdy, clou-
dy Þ. Rain a night.
2. Cloudy, moift, hail p-wdy,
cold n.
3. Terrible winds and rain day
and night, *
4. Srear winds continue,fome
rain. day and night.
$. Froſty, but variable.


ST


1670, Feb. 6, 3% 28.
A #4 Jan. 25. ad Feb. 17.

24. Rain þ. in. Tempeſt 11 þ.
with Snow, Nly.

26. Tempeſtuons noF. tot. ſome

ſnow m. . Ely.

Blaftering cill Even.

j 27. Snow 9 m. 0.& p.m. N.
28. Snow mM. P» 200
29. Snow 6 mh. p.m guns |

Y.


P- .
I, Bluſtering, froſty. Thaw
p ſhow ante 11 Þ


Feb. 1. Buſtering Mm. "T1


2. Bluftering nof3. tat. Urive

froze, Stormy wd. NE.
3. Ychement fr. ſnow 9 m. &

I p- Birter. NE.
4 Snow a, 1. Taps froze. Nly.
$. Vehemenr Fr. ſnow p. m.
6. Great ſnow a. 1, m. Nlyo.
9, Hard fr. NE.
8. Snow 8 m.&11p. NE.
9. Urine froze, ſnow m. & 11


M. P-
10. Snow a. m. per tot, Nly.
'Til., Mauch ſnow P. m,
H. wd, thaw. ;
72. Bluſtering no#. tot. wind
and rain p. m. Snow and
Hail 4 p. Much rain 8.
and 11 p.
13. R. circ, Sun ort.freeZ 4 P.
T4. Froſty, windy. Ely.


14. ' Rain Sun or, Freez upon
it, and glazethe ground 3
Thaw p. m Ely


16, Froſt m. wer p. m. ; Ely.
17 Foggy day, wes at night,


ſy


| 1671. Feb, 18. 10. «Feb. 9;


| 7. Snow 8 p, Milling die tot,


12. H. Guits 3 p. &c- Driſle /


ad March 1.
6. Snow a. 1. Hals 9 m.


8. Wetring a. m. & p.m.


2 |. H. wind at night.


10, Wetring m. p.
11. Dew on the Windows.


9 (4
we: arm m., cloſe, miſty
14. Cloſe mM. Pp. cool.

Is. Cloſe m. p. wd, lowet
at Even.

I6, Weng 3

17, Fog, very warm p. m; E.

18. Cloth, dewing ©. N E.

19. {. wet m. drific a. m.cold.


20, Snow oO. Halo 3


21. Froſt m. wind, often
ſhowr o. & p.m. MNly,
22. Froſt m. RK. 8 m.


23. Fog, driſle even,


N,

271. drops. Nw.

I Sicktte(s ar Barha-
's, Gazer.


1672, March2. XK 22.
A Feb. 20. ad March 13. ©

20, Fr.-m. NE.

21, Miſt m. rowards
Sun ſer. Comet at Dansh
Tranſa&ions 4017,

22, Cloſe, warm wind.

23. Miſty air, warm. ;

EI

25 m. 9 P-

2 oe damp ;
cool, NE.

27. Werti

28. Indiſpoſitions.

29, H.wd 2. I. cold, cloſe,


March 1. Ice. NE.
2. Fr. Sol rubens (Luna, NW.
. Miſty die 18. © rubens
: froſt m. ;

4. Fr. Pleafanr.


s. {. miſt, offer p.m. & 7 p.
& 10-P.


9, Warm and cloudy , winds |


 $. Snow flabby 11 m. cold
wd. : _

6.Rainrp. 2p. 5p. N

7» br. cloſe, cold, _—


B. No fr. cloudy. *
9. Fr. fog m. cloſe and cold.
10, Warmith, wer p. DID
I1 P. 1
11. Clbfe m. p. mift, dry,
NE.
12. Snow and rain veſp. ad
midn. E.
13. Prop.o. cloſe, open _
W.
14.Warmiſh $ E. 3 Childreg

complain.

15. Warm. SE.
16. Windy,wetting circ. 6 Ms


R 11m
19, Windy, Rain 7 mM. 10 Þ»


wd..
22, Hyſterical firs 3 m. cloſe,
"Ve cold, cloſe maſy.
23. Very b
Hail ante 6 p, a
2 . W j P- 1 T0 ;
4 Werting 3 10.
25-Hail 11 m.Rain2 p. SE.
26. Wind, ſhowr 3p. NE.


—_——


1674 March 28. V 18.
A die 19. ad Apr. 1.


197. Rains pggcEly. diſtem-


pers.
18, Snow a. 1. NE. ſoa. mz
very cold p. ——


19. Snow a. 1. T
a. l. very ſharp Re Re
Aches.
20, Snow a. 1.& m. ft »
High wind a. I1.Ac
21. cold and fog . N E.
22.F02,0fferſnow,Aches.N E.


i


6. 3howr 8 m. warm.
7. Snow 0. & ns


8.Snow hard p. m. tot.

9. Froſt, ice. W.
10. Y. wind. ;

11, Ice, miſty, lowring m. p.


23- Fog, variable wind, A+

24. Cloſe fog, Aches.
ches,

25. Very warm, Cf. miſt.

26. Rain m. warm.

27. Warm, hotriſh.

28, Horriſh.


Cccec


Ely.


Eee
12, Fog, thaw.
13. Gr. fr. miſty , cloſe m. p,
wind. .
1673. March 15, V 5.
AMarch 5. ad 25,
.


FE © Diary eſtival,


Book II: |


,
=


4


” a Fog 3 hor.


Ely. z
30. Brisk wind, fog, Ely.
31. Fair. | Ely.


Apr. 1. Froſt , wind Ely. A-
ches. :


2,N E. Fr. threatning rain ,
vaniſh ; Aches. Variable
wind, -

3. Cloſe, wetting 9 m. H. wd.

FR Cold, wetting 10 m.& 1 p.

s. Showrs 11 m. Ely.

9, Showrs 9 m. warm E. firs,
Aches. .

8.: Fair, Ely. Aches.

9. N E. Cloſe, offer p. m. A-
ches. |

7. Storm at Wells, Shipwrack
at Lyn,


_—_—


1695. Apr. 11. S x.
A March 31. ad Apr. 23.
31. Rain a midnight ad merid.
Aches. r
Apr. x. R. 6 m. Hail 10 m.
3 Þ. Aches, cold. Nly.


--_


2. Cold daſh a. 1. Aches. - -
3+ Ely. Cold; Hyſterical indiſ-
. poſitions. *4 :
4- Cool wind, Aches m. p.
«-Ely.R. cools '
6Wp)y. Miſt, cool wd, n_
of it . . .
9. E. Hail noon, cold winds,
and red wds, __ ”
8. E. Froſty, very cold re
p ſty, ; ery NE


wd. -

©. Ely. Froſt n. L

x0, Warm,werting 4. m. brisk
wind


IT, Warm, wind coaſting 3
- ſhowr, and 5 p. Aches. R.
& 1


22. f. drops 1 p. Aches,
13» Cold, Aches NE.
14. Windy, hazy.  FEly.
Is, Warm,dry winds ; _—
16, Warm, drywind,Aches E
195.warmwd, Aches, Sunvcc,NE
18, E. Warm, dry.
19. Ely. Cloſe, miſty. Ely.
20, E, Warm. Complaints,
- Aches.
21. E, Aches, ſickneſs, miſty,
22, Cold, rain Sun occ. Aches.
23.N. R. Hail ante 10 m0.
Aches.


—_— i


1676. Apr. 28. S 15.
Ab Apr. 13. ad May 7.
13- Some wer 5M. 9 M. 0+
rk, Sly.
14 Rainy 4 4 m1, ad 1 p.
Rainy againat6 p, NE,N,
Gour.


c
«29.
A
' 30. A drop or two diſcerned. |
 - <> ny night. N. ſhowr 11
p. hot m. Aches,


15. Open N W. miſt Ely. p.
m. fr. m.

15 , Miſty, cloſe. E,

17. Offer to rain 10 m- ſhowr
4 1 p.cool night, head-aches.

18. Rain 11 1m. 4 P+7 P»

19. Rain 4 m. 5 Mm.-7 mM. 10M.
Oc. Open N E, miſt, A-


| ches, : :
20. Cloudy 3 p. (. offering +:
6 |


-Þ- 0: .

21. Cool m. warm, mifty,Me-
reors 9 p. Ely. Aches.

22- Dry Nly..N E, colder at


vighr. pet
23.Cloſe m. p. coldiſt,N.NE.
24+ H. wind, ſome drops 5 P.
Nly.

25. Cloſe, Indiſpoſitions.
26, Hot night W. $ W. Aches.


Gour.
275, Hors Mereors., 4d cad.


61, 10 p. N. Indiſpofici-
ons. x oY ION >
28. po hot night. .Ely A-


S.
Showrs Wly. wind, hot,
C F


May 1. Showr $ m. hot. Wly.


2: Fair, Indiſpoſitions. Wly.


Meteors. 9.
3+ Cloſe, cool, fair and brisk
wind, Meteor-N E. Aches,
4. Cool'd. m. wind p. m. E,
Aches. -
s. Fair, dry wind. Ely.Aches.
6. Hot, wind, brisk noon,(5c.


of Great dro


6 P-
7, Hi Rad « die tot, miſty in
Mfc W.SW.


*2.,
A. ad.


1677. - May 10. S 29.
Ab Apr. 28. ad May 22.
28, Warm , trisk wind, C lit-

tle ſhowr 3 p. Sly.

29. Warm, high, wind, ſhowr
9 m. IndiſpoſifÞns.

30. Rain 11 m. and ing
till midn. wind. w,
Vale of White hors in dan-
ger of a Floud.

May 1. Wert m. rain 11 m.


Such a May Day not known. |


SWm.NW.n.
2, Cloſe, cooler, rain 5 p. 9p.
N W. Driſle 75 m.. at Fo-
reſt Hill 3 p. at Urbridge
Floud at Tunbridge.

3. Wert 4. m. tot. fhowr of
Hail and Rain with an illu-
ſtrious Rainbow ; driſle
9p. Ely. m. Sly o. YVly p.

4.Showr 1 m.& 5 m


s ls
5. Cool m, whuce froſt. VVIy.!


FY
—_—_


-16 8.


after Ely, various,
6, Lowring m. Þ. ſome wind.
Ely. Apoplexy 97 m.
7. Miſty, brisk cool wind, Ely,
various.
8. Miſt carly. brisk wd. Ely.
9. Warm, windy. E. Showr
at Hatfield,
10, Warm wind, Wy,
It, Warm; wind variouſly,
Ely..Sly.
I2, Rain apace 4 m. wind and
S


OPEN. . S.
13. Cloſe m. guſty, ſprinkle
'8 oY S
14.Fine warm day. Wy,
I5.{.litcle rain 7 m, warm wd.


Wwly.
16, Miſt, very hoc and brick
wind, Ely.
17. {. wind, Meteors -10--p
foulrry. Boys ficken.
18. Thunder, with daſh of
Rain 4 p: I
19% Dropping 3 p.ſhowr 4 p.
and ſerious 6 p. clouds
contrary.
20, Foggy, guſt of wind 2 p.
$ P- Ely. Vatious wd.cool.
21. Wind various, overcaſt a.
E.


m.
22. High wind, a drop - or 2

afar off, miſty ar night. Ely,
I0, Rain, x m. Meteor 10 p.
. ab Oph. Cap.ad Lyram uſque,


i —


—


May 25; I 14.

A May 13. ad Fune 5
13- High wind no#. ts, wdy
m. Wly. Rain ante 8 m.
hor 10 p. Nly.
14. Miſt, wdy. NW,
15. Miſt, brisk wd circa 7 m.
cold m. confeſſed ; cloſe


m. Pp. |

16. Miſt, lowring. w

17. Miſt m, Wly. p.m. Ely
Indiſpoſitions. Hot wind,
Meteor,

18, Miſty, windy, open Ely.
Red in the E. cold. night,
Meteors. 10 p. very windy.

19. Miſty m. cool E. great
fr. m. hor, Aches.

20, Leſs fr. hotter, lirtle wd.

Wwly.

21. Warm, brisk wind. S W.

22. Rain, cloſe, hottiſh ; rain
m.S. 1 p- rain 3 p. ſome
rain 7 p. Ely. dark.

23. Rainy night ad 8 m, 10
m. cloſe Ely. warm.

24. Some rain and guſt: 8 p.


Nit-
25. Rain 2 m, & a. m. daſh

P- 5p. wd Sourtherly.
25, Clole 4, m. and mijtr, rain
apAcc


Chap. IX. 4d 0Þ Dtary ejtival acc. to ſucceſ], of Stgns.


apace 0. ad 3 p. at night
Wy. ſome drops 8 p. wd
riſe 9 p.
27. Windy, open 3 f. (mall
rain; Blice ar Foreſt bill.
48. Ely. Rain 7 m. cloſe, hot-
tiſh, Nly.


29. Rain 5 m. & a. m, cloſe
m. p. ſhowr 4 p. and driſle
Aches, morn Th.

30. Fair, warm , ney 4 Þ«


31, Miſt m. Wly, high wind,
offer, clouding p. m. hot 9
p. ſhowr 10 p.

At Blois in France, a Church
beaten down with Thun-
der, much more harm m
that Neighbourhood : Hail
as big as a mans Fiſt. Ga-


Wr+310-
Fune 1. High wind and ſhowr
4p-6 p- 7 Þp- drifle &c.
Wly.
2, Miſty, open, ſome wind 5
ſome drops 7 p. Wly.warm

at night.
3. Some driſle 5 m:79 m-.


cloſe m. p. {. drille 2 p-&
veſp. wd. Wly..
4 Open, miſty , cloſe m. p.
ſoultry, wd. S,
s. Somewhat warm,cloudy 11
P- E]y.
1679, Fune g. IT. 28.


A May 28, ad Fune 21.


28. R. m. 0. hot eſp. wind.
wy.


29, Rain ſtore n. & 5 m. again

5g m. little wind, 6pen-NE.

30. Fog, wet m. p. P- MyJVIy.
WEEDS. n


C
dui. f, wind Wly. 2 drops 8
m, - + ,
June 1, Brisk wind SW. -
Heaven. w


4. Cloſe, rain 5 m. drifle 7
m. brisk wds, rainweſp. &


10 p-
$. High, cold wd. Wwly.


6. Srormy wind. SW,
7, Windy. N W, Open
8. Fair, wdy.


9, Wdy. Nly:


10, Cloady , and ſuſpicious
quarters. ;
12. Warm, © brisk wd, offer

weſp. (. diſtempers.

13. Some wind, oftcr a. 8.
hor $. warm n.

14. Open, driſle 10 m 1,2 Þ.
wind riſc. S,
Warm although windy,

is. Warm wind Sly. clouds
ftripr. Gripcs, headaches.


15. Wd, warm, open, thowr.
S. cloſe p. m. wetting 8 Þ-
Nl!


L Yo

17. H. wd, ſhowrs S. $ W. wd
laid Sun occ.

18. Showr 4 8 m. 2. ſmart

" ſhowrs 10 n. high wind.

Sly.

19. Rain a, m. & p, m. {. daih,

rain Sun cc. ant? Sun 0c.


Its duplex. Sly.
20, Rain lirtle circa 10 Mm,
warm 4. Mm. Sly.


21, Wind brisk, | clear m-
cloudy.ofrenrimes lowring,


PS "2 Niy.


1680. Fane 23. © 12.
A June 11. ad July 5.


11. H, wind; mifling 19 ms
4P-7 P:
r2Hhoh wind,rain,daſh 10 M»


13. Rain Nly. Fog, brisk wd.
14. Cool wind ,, rain 2 P-+


Ely.

15. E. Miſt, wd.

16, Brisk wind, hot nights

17. Driſling, hotriſh.

18, H. wd, driſle.

19, Clear, ;

20. Brick wd, dry ; Hail as
big asan Egg. Thunder in
Haſia neer Marpurg,

21. Brisk-wd, ſouxrry. E-

22, Clear Ely. Sourherly.

22: Grear Fog, froſt m. hot.

Ely.
24+ Brisk wind, hot. Ely.

25- Harmful Thunder ar Ve-
nice,

26, Ely. Clear, ſoultry.

27. Ely. Soultry, little ſhowr
Thunder $9 p. Clouds con-
rrary.

29, Bfisk wd, foultry.

| 29, Clouds contrary. Lightn.


» | 30. Ely. High wind , dew 7


m {ome mil-dew obſerved,

blaſting.

| Tuly 1. Ely. Dry, cooler.

2. Brisk wind, rain 2 p.

3.-Rain 6 m. daſh 1 p.
Thunder , ſtormy wind ;
Plague ar Andaluſia.

4 Brisk wind, rain.

5, R. (marr ſhowrs,


———_—


1581. Julys. © 25,
A Tine 27, ad Fuly20.
27-Showr 11 m.hor and faint
Lightning 9 p-
28. Hor n. fog m. ſhower 11


m.
29. Rain o, ad 4 p,


30. Very wer ante Sun, ad 9,
Nly.
Die 27. Daighefter, aboutTwo.
mites from ir, Globe of
Fire burnt Trees to aſhes,
Fuly tr. High wind, rain 8 m.
and 11 m. NI .
2, Cool fine day. , Nt
3. Trdnlied air 11 m. WM.”
5s bog m. Harmful 1;
In, W, 19.p. _—_
6. Th. R. W. circa 2 m. gen-
tle (howr 4 p, Nly.
7. 'Hort n, ſome rain Gtirca 0,


#16. Rainy ie tot,


1. Fog in Fields, ſoulery ti.

Nly.
9. Cooler. ' NW.
10. H., wind m. NW,


it. Ran 2m, 1 p. Tempe-
rare,


12. High wind , ſome rain P.
m. & 10 p.

13. High wind, calm ar n. |

A High wind 5 m, Rain


15. High wind , ſome drops


IS, Some rain
windy ze/p; Sod
17. 'H. wind, drifle 9 m. and
Il m,
18. Dry, ſome rain 1 p. Nly.
19. Dry clouds, warmer. NW.


15.Plague broke our at Mag de-
. butg.


1 1652, Jin 15. OL 2,


A July 3. ad 26,

. Dropping, red wind. N E,
4+ Dropping, H. red wind. N.
5. Red wind, rainy at night.

N


5. Showry. windy. MN W.
7-- Showry, Thunder at nighc
| . NW.
3, Sheyvry,more wind, calm
arnighr,
g. Windy, ſome ſhowr at n.
11.Rain-like,ſome wind. S E.
12, More wind, rain at night.
13. Showry , miſty ar nighr.
SE.
1s, Windy. SE.
17. Dropping m. at n. wind
change.
18. Dropping, more wind
miſty ſtill ac n. a
19. Miſty m. windy n. then
E


20. {. wind, miſtyn. N E;
21. Miſty m. cloſe.
22, Thunder, ſhowrs, ſh. ar n;
| N.
23. Dropping at n.
24. Shorvrs


en neon


©” "a 1d h © Diary eftival acc. to Suce. Signs. Book 11s


24» . Showrs, clouds contrary- 25. Some rain, cold wind; | 44Fine ſhowrs, miſts. $ w,
windy.


blew miſt. A _— $5. Hotriſh and ſtill, ſome wd

25. Windy, dropping- 27. Rain a. |, blew m1 s P. Mm, NW,

f : d 28, Coaſting Showrs, hor. 6. Wind, ſome drops, miſt
# OP 29, Cold = coaſting _— — & SW !
— 30. A Showr. N W. | 7. A ſhowr diſcovered, Some

A 31. Gentle rain die tot, lietle wer at night, $ W,
1682. wot 23s = hr Ang. 1. Some rain, wi lady's. 8. Wind, good ſtore of wet,

A Fuly 11. ad Ang. 4+ 2, Rainy, windy , th er 1 Sw.

11, Showr early 3 cloſe » ye | ſhovr. 9. Fair, bright air. SW,

hot. Hurricane at Anjou. -—_ H, wd, ſhowry. A Wind , froſt, rt

I2. Hot. er. W.

. Hot n. ſoul m $s. Windy, ſhow 11.R. OY ping, C,

5, Fog, ky trick wind. | 6. Idem, Flaſh of] Lighcning. | firs of PPing,

NE.| 9. Windy, ſhowry , _— 12, Thunder m. high wind;

15. Hot n, Thunder, rain ante | 9. Some wd. w N W. much wer, ſo at night. Th.

3 m. = Lictle wd. N W. S W,

16. Showr o. & 1 p. ſome | 13. Moſt violent wind , with


drop rain. f. ſay Thunder, $ W,
17, Wind 4 brat, firs of rain. 1683. Ang. 6. 0X. 23. I ——_—_ __


18. H. wind and ſhowr 75 m.
drop 1 p. very cool. 4 ful 27.04 Ang, 17. I5. - Wind higher, Normy cj tis


19. High wd, cool. 27. Foggy air ; ſome guſts?

n, ſhowr ©, Mereor warm. : 5. Cool, .—— not ſo

= -—o 28. Foggy, dark but no Rain. —_
21, Wetting. Rain 10 Pp. on Ely, | 19. Cool m. eold, ſhowring,
22, Showrs coaſting, cool, | 29. Foggy, hot, high wind. - NW.
windy. Ely. | 18. Cool; wer at Sun ſer,wet
23- Wind and drops 11 mM. | 304088)» winds dry. Ely. ro purpoſe. NW.
ſhower 1 p. fe p.m. gre © | Bl MW. Warns "Ely t9. Very cold mind, miſt ar


NE.

ram Lightning at Phil Ang. -——__ ſoultry rain 4- | 20, . Hot, muddy auth, Bs
'NE.

24, Early errng dry 3 pins 2. col ſhowrs p. m. ſoul- | 2x, Hor ground mift at ©.


NE.
2 'E —_— NW. 4 Fog, ſhowr hor, brisk wd. | 22. Miſty m. —— R.
= Fog m. hor, Meteors 2 by | 4 Brisk wind,cool ſhowr. Sun occ. N E.
T. M.at Friburg. | $+ Brick wind, ſhowr. 23. Blew wh red clouds ar

27. prom, mam, > ate _— Ny. n NW URI +
warm, ſome . 24. Fair ,w CLOU .
_ L 7 Rain m. p. by firs. high wd | cion, clear wd., " NE.
die tot. 25. Hot, fair 3 fewer white ;


cold veſp. Mereors. 9. Some rain, coldiſh. oy. ſome audibl!» wd., SE.
0» EN great Halo, - Hard froſt, miſt. guſts, no 2 6
9 Br gentle rain2 p.| Rain. —


8p. 11, Hot n. wetting Mm. - $Y
Die 28. + Hail at Burdeaxx ,| 12. Cold , high wd, _ A* 1655. Aug. 27- Me 13-


: Ab Aug. 16, ad Sept. 7+
as _- Windy, lowring p.m. —_—— ignea delabitar | | hain L. and Sun te
2 Fr cola m. 13+. driſle, cool even. - wet die tot, S E.SW.


Zo ©'Ts ' 17. Dark and ſhowrs. SW.
4- Cold, great dew , clouds - - wa darkrhorrhigh 18, Showring 3 p. hot, W.


comrary- 19. Very wer, hot, S$S W.
_ , rainy Mm. Pp. ?

. —_ 20, Wet m. ſo at I. Thunder

—_ 16, _ m. ſome drops, {. plac NW.


s ly 30. SL 16. coaſting 21, Wind and wet, ſome
19 4 4, at Ange 10. wu Miſty Ls %x=q cleari " NW.


ng.
22. Clearing,ſome ſtorms and
I9. _ y_ wind. = 3 E x ng Le
wo a 4 NE. 23. Dropping, miſt at mide.
; Ww.
— "ax EE 7 ws "yp 444 - = 24. Miſt m.Rain with us,none


elſewhere ; Rain hard, a
23, High wind, cold , ck I. __ wind, high _— _ Floud = fy | _-
24+ Hot, calm. N E 2, Dry, Sun eclipſed 7 of " 25. Miſt, Sun ſhine. a ©
25, Miſty m. hot, rain, Thun- oy


26, Hat. W.
7% der. Y. Wind and red a, fl 27, Fr. clear m, miſt, lowring


Chap. IX. h .Cold; The Nature of Cold.
inſome reees: N.W. =o 3 7 ; 8: Sore liecke( (ſhowring a
28. High wd ,, flying Clouds A? 1636. Sept. 8. np.36, ſtore of Renilpe, Cvd Ne.
- and darkiſh, TRL Mo all Sen "| 9. Cloſe, fving dlouds, loy-
25Maip-Sun or.ſhowring.tlea- | 44: 35:08 Septrse 7 1 Hal of Lighenjng,
', Fiygar B. (1 11 3571 GV; 25. Wind n. nll 3m. chen' ©1367 "RE
> Fair, Norms of rain, 3n- calea, cold, wind riſe, | 'q 10, Clofr, red/Fhouds/Elyc/ar
4,5 7 oa EE w, | 25. Overc. a.-1. NW, wilty-.] Sun gcc. axe. "4 NE.
31. Scormy wind - p.m. and | iſh Clouds; fair, + ' NE, | 11. Cloſe, Jowring, ſore wd.
- driving rain. H. wind at n. | 27- H. winds, offering, high” le ay NE.
Sept, 4, Showrs. , high wind | 18d at 9. NE. ] 12. Re ox. fr. miſt, flying
- &wghr. .$w, | 23 Myc yoflopdy SE: NE} chouds, NE.
2. Tempeſtuous 'a. |. Rain , | 29+ Overc. blew miſt. 'S E,.| 13. Froft,. rpiltfalls.8.m. Ay-
p nifty H. Halo at tn, SW. NE. | ing. clouds. wag
re, Joh m b) NW. —_ J. 1419e rain a. 1,'fo afer Sun
+- F6- m. ſome, gencle | 3% Overgafi,m, -| w.zangp.”' '&W.
oj <4 Tents Jetops. a o f 5g. 3: Clo S. W, . cool , ty. Rajn a. I, wind, cold,clou-
a+ 4 2 - w x


4..Clayds fly low; rain, thun- Cloſe m, p. and a. #H. 5. Some citing Sun Be
$ w;, rain,thun- | 2 Vice m, Pp, Ott. "ELY. | 16, Some drilling Sun gfc.
R @ $ w. MN W. | 3- Cloſe, cald, \.. Efy. Nw
LN coaſting ſhowrs. MW. | 4- Wand and-1howrs abovr ©. | 17. Overc, m. clouds fly loky,


6,Lowring,ſome ſhowrs,thun- | blow away. NE. | N WW.
d 2s SW. { 5+ Thick miſt m.Hempen clds | 18. White clouds, ſome licele


SF. 20. Fr. blew miſt, Hala $YV


&Ts s ;
4. Froſt, bright, low miſt; , | lircle, yer variable, garh@ing ar n, W.
- ſlypory+ \ Sw. | 5. Wind gife, blackiſhclouds, 4 19. Some miſting , open 10
(2- I's! -— SW. m. reddiſh clouds. Ely, A

| 7. Cloſe,faint,hlackiſh clouds. wide Hela.


1-4 12, Saturn'nad never been kgown for a Gold Tnflux, but by his Ape,
and Firſt with the $7. Now, tis a pretty Problem, how h mixing with
-the Sun, a Glorious Fiery Furnace,  ealily Juggle as.to Prachice
Cold by ſuch a Cong: (5 ** As Cardan faith, He can Bom. ir na n
the San, and thera leſs degree of Warmth compared with.a greater, 3s aþ-
folyre Cold : As in Water.of a low xemiſs , Warmth, faith he, caſt into

. aboyling Pot, ic allayes rhe wambling of the Liquor, in Pzol; L:6. XII-
'2 8 23. No queſtion bur Þ is higher than any of the Planets, becqulc he i
voner diſcover'd upon the recets of the ©, than thoſe whichare near. I
would it were as wellagreed, how high he is,how emidiameters of the
Earth he is remore from us; 'Tis no queſtion alſo but this height of h helps,
'or contributes to get him the ame of 2 Gool Planet ; and { ro favour
thoſe no mean Philoſophers, who explicate Gold by the nature 0 rea Ga
ides


-


ora leſs Agitation of the, Spizits in,or from that which isdenominated a
Body, compered to the agiracion of theSperits in the Warmer. Burbe
that thisNotronſeems not roagree wichColdhurpWind,where the chillSpiritjs
more agitated than theSprrits of theBloud orffiges. Ti all one to us,whet
it belea,or Nay; yet fince we have ſaid the Cold is a Spirit, an Efluviuw(as
what Body hath not ? ) ſudden,not always dr: and gradual in its Qpergie-
#3, but both ſudden and paizful. Now Pain is Solutto continu, and there-
fore Gold muſt penetrate, and ſeparate, (even where no Wind is {ealtole)
and Expel! the Contrary Spirit, which accordingly retreats, and is repell'd
| y. The Toach of Brafs, Silver, in cold Weather, will force us to
weitharaw our Hand ; and: for the Regt of the Spirit, who hath nor
ſeen a Gold Plate laid on the Neck, ſtanch the bleeding at the Noſe ? For
Gold is an Enemy to Heat, of which Enmicy the Spzret is ſealible, and re-
fiſts, For whereas tis (aid, char Gold Eonſtringes che Pores - I rather think
it is the Anmal Spirit ſhrinks from the approach of its Enemy firſt , and
then Nature ſhuts up che AvEngesto hinder entrance.

914. 'Tis to be conſidered alſo that Gold ſtrikes up to the Head
from the Sole of the Foot, though well Shod and Arm agajalt it ,
if we walk ona Marble Pavements wing ſhews, one would think, ſome


Atrvity


" 0 4 ID | Natzre of Cold. Book 11:


A #ivity upon the Organ of Sence at ſome diſtance 3 as a Torpedo benum-
ming the Fiſhers on Shore, when the Fiſh is in the Stream ; And for
refrigeration fake to mix a cool Spirit with Wine, we immerge it in
Warter, or lay itin Earth + There is a manizeſt Penetration of the Cool!
Spirit, where the caſe of wy itation will ſcarce hold ; for the Glaſs
Bottle, it may be , is as cold as the Earth, or Water either. Fl

$ 15. Now - No? bon thatir repells cheSpirit,appears that after the handling
of Snow the Senſory isWarmer,becauſe theBloud returns wich advantage to
thoſe Extream parts from, whence it was driven ; there is a Perceprion in
Nature,and Contrary doth ſmell irs Contrary. To this purpoſe I remember
long ago in a hard Winter, where our Colledge Ale, (for that was our Li-
quor) being conglaciated into a Capacious Veſlel, upon a Thaw never re-
turned to its ſelf, but was found fo wuch infipid Ice, with'this difference
only.that in theCenter there was lodged about aQuart of much StrongerLi-
quor, than any was put into the =. A manifeſt Evidence that Spirits be- .
ing beſieged by the Ambient Froſt, retreared thicher as to their Cirrade|,
The like is to be obſervediin. Fruics, which upon the Solution of greatFrodſts
are known to pytrifie, becauſe the proper Preſervative, ſome would call
it the Balfannick Spirit, of the Fruit is diſlodged by the Cold, fo that the
Warmth.returning finds nothing there but che Carcaſe of the Apple M.
Rohault an ingenious Carteſian, meeting I ſee , with this Objection, confel:
ſes there is a deſtruction of the/Vexus,and Site of the Parts : and what Parts
can thoſe be but the Spiricuous 2 Add likewiſe the Inſtance of Morrtificati-
--on of the Members of our Body, fo ordinary in Maſcovy and other Coun-
tries; which could not be if che vital Spirits did nor retire from the ſurface,
and return again, not of a Sudden, but by degrees: Namely, if upon their
approach to Fire they lay Snow, as the Story goes, upon the part affected,
to prevent the fam'd Putrefaction. :
S 16. I muſtnot be long in this diſpute, only this I ay, we cannot ſhew
a Corpuſcle in the Privation, which darkens the Air , &c. But in agreat
Eroſt we can thew the Cold Atoms Fluttering about us : For in a Froſty
morning the pruinous Atoms lye ating in the Air, and the Traveller ga-
thers them in hisFroſtyLocks,oft-times hoary- before his timez we can gueſs
alſo of what ſize the Arome is, and that it inclines to Gravity ; we
can tell to which of the Poles it is fled when warm weather comes; I mean
no more þat this, [Part is ſent up into the Air commonly called the Cool
Region, and Part, funk into the Earth 3 that Earth which is as @ool as
Ice, and therefore helps to keep it all the year long for the Palates of the
Delicate. Cold is a Privation of Heat, as Sickneſs is a Privation of Health
when One comes, 'Tother goes, both are politive, |
S$ 17. Now let us, if we dare enquire, How hÞ has acquitted himſelffor
a Chill Officer, whether he be ſuch a Plumbeous Blew-noſed Planet as
Antiquity marks him. In our Wiater Partition we muſt not expect that
there falls under h 's Dominion more Snow than Rain ; no not in Winter,
I Gay, for Winters are moſt of them Black, rather than White; and not
one in twenty inthe Courſe of Nature is fo rigid ; and the like is to be faid
in Froſty Conſtitutions 3 Nature is kinder than ſo to us in this Corner of
the World, if it be but for the Travellers ſake, and the Beaſt under him.
For hard would be their Condition, if a Horſe after 20 Miles rugged way
hardly paſſed, mighe not have his uſual Drench out of the River : Ir is
—_— re that h ſhews his ſullen Influence more than 4 or ©,&c.
The Number of the Days we are ro account for, are 401. videlicet, from
September 27. to April 23, Now, becauſe Snow is found ſometimes {o ear-
{ » as theend of September, and (© late in the year, as April 23. we cannot '

* look it ſhould Snow every intermediate day upon h 's account, nor come

up to a moyety, as he does moſt fairly, if you put Snow and Rain together;


fok


w wo


WE EDI EE LS EF


——-..


Chap. IX. Harmful Lights. here. Snow at G5 6. gr. diſt.


_—


_— O_


for ſoyou ſhall find under the Style of Razz , and fore of Rain, 149 days z
add the 56 days for Snow and Hail, and you have a liberal half of 451.
$18. To Anotomize this cold Serpent alittle further, I find the Sum-

mer thus , Cold days 52. (without ſenfible Froſts ). Froſty Mornings 80,
FroſtyConſtiturions of the Entire days 54. to which I may add Cold Wind
12. It istrue, we meer witha matter of 60, under the Style of Warmth,
expreſsly ſuch ; but then for exceſs of Hear, I take notice that we find but
3 hot days under this Aſpe&t; in 30 years under that Diviſion, where
Oftober and March, and the greateſt part of April is concern'd. In the
Summer Partition from Apt:l 23. to September 25. within which Interval,
Snow ſeldom appears, in Ezelazd at leaſt, we find hot days 46. and remiſs
warm, 24. which may adminiſter a 2ere; as alſo ro hot nights, a piece of
2 2uere, (till z but even here we find cold 21. Froſty Mornings abour 16.
Cool or Cold remitted, 18. yea, and 3. Froſty days, extraordinary Eros
morn. and Hail 4. Froſty Mornings in the Month of May are frequent, an
ſometimes they nappey inthe Month of Augnf. SUS

- 9 19. They tharpleaſe to conſult the Table, ſhall find what Influence he
has on Winds, -Fiery Mereors, Lightning , Thunder 3 what upon Fogs,
and Hazy and Dark Air. In the Winter we hear of no Thunder, but of
Lightning: nnder boch Diviſions, and in the Summer. Partition about 80
times Thundering 3 we cannot ſay rhat is too much for Saturn, if we


* could confront our Aſpect with an AſpeR of © and 4 upon 60 years Evi-


dence, (for ſo many years muſt be introduced to equal this of h and ©. )
He ſhall find a wide difference ; or if that will not Content, then we muſt
begin to learn, that notwithſtanding the difference of the Planetary Cha-
racers, in ſome Signs they may be all alike for Hear, Thunder, &-«., onl
we are bound to take Notice, that in the Summer time we meet Wit
Harmful Thunder under this Aſped ; yea, and Harmful Lightnings as
many times ; when the Total Sum of Lighening was but 6. or 7. C-
ther this miſchief ariſes from ſome peculiar Caule diſcoverable iri the fiir-
therScrutiny of that Effz& at ſuch time and place 3 or Whether ir ariſes
from rhe Exaſperation of the Heat, according to our ordinary Philoſophy?
Which thay paſs for a reaſon alſo till we can get a better, perhaps, why h
and >brought more days of exceſſive Heat,than of remifſiveWarmth : But
Tar our © and H can do brisk Feats, we have heard before from

1genes. : h | |

9 20. Verily I do reckon it areaſon , why we find. thrice mention of
Prodigious Hail in the Summer Diviſion, and yet ordinary Hail but twice.
But we have occaſion for the like Obſervation, when we come to the AC
pect of the © and. In themean time let me obſerve,as to the appearance
of Snow, that it may fall, 'ris true, on the =_ or upon the Skirts of the
Day, upon the preciſe Aſpe&t. Bur again tojuſtifie my enlargement of our
Evidence, we ſhall find, that Snow as naturally falls 3, 4, 5,6, 7, yea 10
days from the Aſpect : Satarx's remote diſtance in the Perpendicular con-
tribuces to Cold, bur it ſeems that an Obliqu-Angular diſtance of the Pla-
net does very well ; but yetunder a reaſonable confinement,within which
h may hear and comply. And this I make no queſtion holds in the # of
©and h, with ſome little difference, which here we are not ſuffer'd to
enquire: For if the d becool, the ® by our Principle, muſt be coolee.

9 21, I have little elſe to trouble the Reader, only I cannot difſemble
that I have not choughe that H at ſuch diſtance from © could have contributed
tored Clouds, to Iridez, or to Halo's; gt ſome Inſtances of all three ap-


pear in the Table.


9 22, Yea, or as Epigenes , whom I have a value for , to Wind, a
{ach diſtance, when as # bears away the Bell, becauſe of irs Vicinity, an


ve


286


AM ——_—————


h © FA Winds. Great Men favour us. "Book 11.


we think itis reaſonable : But if © by his Bulk will make ainends for
: hhathis dances or if his Azſule, or Aurt that the Tube may ſee we
by artily acknowledge our Obligation to their. Diſcoveries, we know nor
os nd the Santaer Divi 10n above an 150 -Inſtances of Wind,
70 of gt han High Winds 3 andif Þh cannot challenge a ſharein them, who
can > This muſt be unqueſtionable, the Greater mult the Influence be, the
funter tie? Inflaence is derived 3 wherefore if h be any hi ar at All,
2 yaſt ſublime, Creature, "placed aloft in a Sphere ſo high, that we
we beli Te. but that we 0p Thquianch of — > .
. For our Aſpects Forreign Evidence, perhaps we may ſee ſome-
what th afrer the Chapter of Saturn and Mars ; or if we balk it, let it not be
pated to Le ſome Forreign Inſtances we meet in the Diary already de-
pre Bl wie whereby we {ee Þ © can Thunder, &-.
| is. but _ Obje&jon lies in our Way, which upbraids us,
Fd, Chr ina we 0 of our Opinion, anſwer, the Objecer , if need
be, will make one ſober Man, it our Evidence at leaſt be ſober 3 but 2h
Have 1.00 not. vored myLord of S. Albaxs,and might I nor have added to him
| ie/,and to him a mime Vofigs,as Sober and Reverend
Men 3s the W Nor affords. Sir ember bears Teſti to us


the Heatsof © and &, wd Fats 5 Heathen Idotarry tells ns.
|  Alpedd, Irficularly the .3-2 St aptts cls locis jungantur tmbres ge-
| Ken emma ©& h aca reohls nubitum & turbidum,
oe ee A nay be ITS bios Fixed too, and withal
Ly © in prixciptro A, Ann,

GN rate, ence raged in man parts of
II.C 47.0 to which he puts > his al, At ang uns
other parts of our ology per oth not
upd that theſe Notions nn krue,


<"_ -_ - O_o _———— we


== | Bier LEAED ky


-— -
- _— _ ”_—_—_
—_ PI 5 OS WIPY g
— Ro _ ” ”
+44


(4 th mes oe 2. h:

3- The Hel fo Ny in the Pbertoey 4l 6 Thc

pes © 5. aratively-a calm Aſpe@®.' ory

eſs it beg for Cold. 7. Cold and ry eIſitudet;, eqer
are dealt ont by the Planets, 8. 1: leur Aſpee |
np ens 4 ihe Moon. 9. Freſt, foe, |
tick Diftetce, under hv at « Pattile;

ihe Ape repre


t00 remote, encourage cold. 11. - This

in the Tridunz ; yoa &t 10 degrees

greet The $row: for cqutirkSipn 2 Ae Wop,
3.


metry and
one AſpeF) does al 14. NE te munſiraten
et, and its moi 114 The donor


2.5
than Snicircaley. wo Irides contentrical.
contribute 8 Why femer Irides in Winter than Jn Gunikves,
_ Aſpe®s Hail. 17, 18. Meteors' and Lightwii
7; ry 5 give ns no ſuch Item. 20. Several
Lge into Fiery, Aierg, Watry, &6. 1
ve.1F '% rery Sign. The true reaſon A Fiery,


ces. 21. Some Rules or Stray OT:
PI Some Gr n=


Ira


fad Rr oe Fond _ obſerve 2 LY ſhe isa z Lhe wt OE-
Nonk wich qu) beOriental, when She Liſts 5- and - whoſoever ll


we ns year void of his Aſpet gu attoy 676. oats
welvemonth, as


in men that, gpm we meet the Aſpet


the year 1653. in uly. the year 1654.

iſtance. ” } = oj 1655. wry: i
inead of thatihe makes + that ix'is found in Jub,
Moarths before, and reaches not Ninember ll Two ears after; **!
| A Here it is pretty to obſerve(and whiere is the Wiſdom of God mote
Ce Fork ba qo ary oo, og ent

erks bac pace of a Month or Two, W
before, yet ſhe isalways found ay to is bat with + o Grant ove
So that in Fuly, A 1655

than ſhe had got in Sz: ler Momiof the ve the yea?
cedeac.

93. * CIO RD SULCTLJUE
five Courſe the 4/pe# will be ſometimes but axtcina Sign, -ome-
times more than Once, wiz. Thrice z or, (os tor cake in a Platique AC

, four times , £2008, _ 1664. or that the Diſtance of Twoitn-
eAlpedt (hal ſomerimes ]ye about 20 hopes, and fomerimes not
& Quarter of CORES
Eeee $ 4 A-


5


Firi


Winter Cold dealt ow by Blanets, —FPook dh


r 3 coo! Planets. Ac-


uce 1n
5 N"/arfn and


2. 28ain.. we
Id. p I65 oe pd


"and 1563, int
CAT hy Nt $>a71


7 poly i |
" S164 3b | WE 1K


10, I2, x3. Wi 14 LEN


leoyeth h dir of the Celeſtial Alpeds, becauſe the
and Hear, muſt can quench
cel the Ocean is fy nc


Moiſture. I will not ſtrive to make out the Cold of h and $, butb


=


"_ P_ Fax _ wE MC” ===


Ubip/X. +34 Dion of: $1010: Kquntrhucy) Bee thei >


Hun © lp what di-
6,7, &c. yo 9s what cold is pap) je v
RN]

[4


Theireafon ES |
to Cold, ,burby yoorws


, or d
CE a havent Ren £7.08


re,


Re tary I aha
un: Herbs none 401] 6s rgort ;: =_
were mo Foxcund, in kn: =

they, would havs as 6c gifferetcs invhe


& 63.:d k $iin-f
times in n2 days, #
da#/r3. Noris it: £
Fiery Sign


days (For no lels it com
554 but he-Tblem

| £33%6* {4RITDD 95:1; 1
py


—
—


©.” _ -»
Ws —_——


'$. Fable. More Rainbows t


290 dh


A Gen ries,


1


ITIINTLTES T3-S


®


Ipv2a op wuFIwH


As. _— . ——_—— —_
* v


and ? in every Sign of the, Zodiaque for 30
PPearing at
$:. | Gr.


8'2.


Fs


3


5


5]


+»
>


4


becauſe


|


;


Sf


re.


Y


]


or


:


5
g-


2,
ri


Chap: X. h 9 can Thunder Drviſzan of the Signs into Fiery, &c. 29 1


— —


h hear of it under this Aſpect,more eſpecially Mar.16. 1672. June 1.A® 1675,


May 25. A* 1677. but May 18. Shattering Windows at Higheate, ec,
July 23., At Epſom, ſuch as hath not been wichia Memory. 4® 1678. and


A® 1682. = wg the Fruits of the Ground, June 24. and Day 29. tec-
O


rible at Rocheſter, Auguf 18. a Ratling Storm.


r.2 , whoin certain Signs I find , 252,. from


- 9 17. 'Svlec Ws remand
& to M, kindles Metors, tayl'd and-trayn'd Meteors, but more frequeet-


ly breaks our into Lightning and Thunder, as in all choſe Days where the
Hail is mentioned 3 yea, . and many others notunfit-ro be noted, accofding


co their Signs.


918, Firſt, in the Sign--&, Thunder. May (1675. ) 24, 25, 31. March
1677..22. much Lightaing. = | ci

In zz, May 17. Much ightning 18, 25, 26. Rain and Thunder, '* A?
1677... July 15, 16, 19, 22,, A* 1678. May 8, = Str Or ae->
In 5, July 3.at Home, and from abroad, News of Harmful Lightning
from Bajal,'&c. ſo again, day 14. at Leuſden. nd 3s |

In 9; Faly 25. A® 165 3. Aug. 23. 30. befides Dec, 24. A Globe of Fire
3 hours at Newburgh, and Sept. 6.a Meteor from the North ro the South-
wards , ſeen in our Moorfields, hor. 16.P. M. with a Train of Six Incheg
Breadth. A® 1681. A® 1682. ar. 24. at Maxfield, 29. at Rocheſter. . .A*®
1683. Sep. 5. & 6. So much for 9. | by |
k In W. A® 1655. July 16. Showring and Thundring the whole day. 1656.

ept. $. | 4
In. A® 1658. Azegnſt 17.

In m, Dec. 16. A® 1660. much Lightning, fo dze 18. alſo. A® 1661. OF.
2, Harmful Lightning,

s$ 19. Theſe Inſtances ougti not to be difſembled, becauſe few give -us
any Itexz of Thunder and. Lightning from h and 2, no; nor from Fiery
Signs z whereas in theſe-Signs preceding, h and 2 can-Work- at the
Forge, or ſome Hireling for them. | ett)

9 20. Furcher Diſpuring about the Signs, let it be referred to its place.
In the mean time no body is ſuch a Bruce as to deny to be a Fiery Sign,
the Evidence now brought will ſpeak-to ict. Buc where is V and 2 ?
2ly. What have we to do with Earthly Signs? & ſurely was never Dry,
nor 7? over Cold. 3ly. What if a Sign be Airy and Watry ro0? & for
one. *'Tis impoſſible. Laſtly, That any one Sign ſhould equally partake of
any one Character ; when as one and the ſame Szgx 3 Y ſup &. by all
Men's confeſſion, ſhall be moiſt in ſome parts, rather than > ner There-
fore 'cis the Multitude of the F:xea, and the Situation of the Arch of the
Zodiack and the various Relation to the VII Planets. produce Fiery, Watry,
Windy Influences. | |

921; If Þ 2 and © be in theſame Sign, there may be Thunders ; Nay,
rather if h. and 2 beat a _ or Two Diſtance, before or after, This
Table ſhews a Storm is impending. If h and 2 bein.r, when the © is
in 4, as above, A* 1678. orbein 1, when the © is almoſt in ==, as A®
1681. 1683. fuch a Conjunction, like a Kot in a piece of Timber, makes
the Piece the Stronger, which hath itsggdue Strength and Weight in the
ther unknotty parts, precedent or ſubſequent.

g 22. If any (hall ſay, that this agrees not with the Premiſes, where we
term'd this Afpe&t one of the gextlef Configurations , we anſwer, we
ſpeak only comparatively; in relation to thoſe who are more brisk atid
ative; and have reaſon o to be. . _

9 23.Bur if again it be ſaid, we had no ſuch doings ni d © ht, as if we
made this the more Maſcul:ze Aſpect :- we have faid what we could to
tuch Objection fin the precedent CHE ſo the Table follows: 4 : >


on. — — YO Ons IC


& h 2 Diary according. tothe


"Book 11.


M 1632. May24. © 26.
A die 16, ad ' $
16. Windy.
17. Little froſty, clear, why.
18, Clear,ſome vindſog a a
N E:
-n9. Miſt m. clear, N E-
20. Clear; calm. 'S E+
21. Clear, ſome wet , miſty
at.
22. Miſty m. clear, $ Wa
23. Clear m. S W
iſt ar n. SE.


26. Be cat ſo ar n. wind.
S” W. morn. W,


1, Miſtyiſh n. }
Fane I. Tloady m. ditr; *
2. Wind turn at night. N E,
i FOE M- clear.


- .
<—


emprgos +


San clap. in_ a miſt, red
HRT "—


16; NE.
#4. Hot, ſorke fprinſling ar |
I " NW.
$8. A -ſhowr. NR.
bs Cold red wind. N E.}


20. Some rain, roo little. NE.
22. Windy , pretty =
Hot.


22, Hot and dry ſcafoti. H,wd
at n.
23. Figh vind.cold and loſe.


29. Cold m. coating ſhour


rn


£4
GH —TT—I—


M® 1654. Sept. 20. M

A die 11. ad 28. *
t1. Mifty m. hor. NW.
12. My, cloudy ; ms.


13. "Wind before Sunciſa


|


12. H. wd and cool.


d kh 2 Diary:


14» » ?
15. Froſt, fair. SW gr
16. Froſt, cold, bright night.
17, Winds, datk cld. SW.
18. Fair 4 |, clear


19. Winds a, 1. ark, cloudy
Moon appearing at _
SW


20, Cloudy in. clearing. 8 w.
21. Some firs of wer, Rain-
—


22. þ ROE! |
23- Wihds obſcure , Thuvid.,
ſeem robe ar midn, |

24. {. rain a 1, wet p.m.
28. (. ſtore of rain 10 at N.


25, Clear diy, warm. $ W.
27. Miſty m, warm.
28, Wind at 5 m. fair, W


—————


Crrr l—


FA "High wind, troubled oy |


5+ Soute moiſture 8 _ My
SW.


- | 6. Cool wind, ſome nag


at N.
7, Tower Three drops, offer


'8. Hor, Twe or.Three arops


s. Fair, hor. N.

10. Foggy m. high wind. SE.
x1. Some white clouds. N E.
NE.
13 Efceflive hor. Th. S E.
26, Hot, clear, cloudy.


© ,


Cat A lictle clote m.


80. Cloſe m; clear p. m. NF,
31, Bright day, Ely,
Sept. 1. {. wind,_- cool, ſhow.
Ely,
'- cold.


3. Cloſe, cold. | Ely.


' 4- Winds and ſhowrs abo


Yo
Sw. | 11: Cloſe, lowritg ; forme wet,


F 1654. Faly I'2, mn 8. a i
die 3. ad 22.
3. Fair, hox. S W:


. blows away ; fair. N
$. Thick, mj w. yariable,
6, Warm, faint blackiſh Q

S W.
, Cloſe, faint. S W,
8. Fair, ſtore of raitni toward

Ty N
.$. Flaſh of Lighthi NE.
10. Cloſe, - am > A clou-

d N E.


| NE.
12. Red m. froft, curious d.


N.
w. | 13: Froſt, miſt, blackiſh cl,
14 Rain a, 1, fo afrer Sun


riſe.
IS. Rain a. 1. dro N w,
16.Fairgblackiſh clouds. Ny,


A
a.


—


1657. Nov. 2. L148 die26,
1 OR. ad T3» Nov,


26, Cool, ſhowring a. m. SW.


27» Overc. m. cosl. S$S W.
28. Hot, dry, p 4 SW#
29. Farr, hor, N W.


W, | 30- Fair, hor, dry wind.NW,

Nov. 1, Winds threatn. m,
fair p.m.

2. H. red wind, threatn, NE.

3. High wd, higher p. m.NE.


: SE.
4-High wd, obſcure and wd
ar n. N.
5. Cloſe m. threatn ; muddy
cl. ar n.


16, Thunder 4 m. ſhowring
and rumbling all day.S W.|7
EG. CG


18. Miſt ; ſore Ss... ear.
NE.


19, Windy, ſome ſhowrs.NE.
IG no notable wea-


21. Mift, fome lowring.NW.
22, Hot,


1656, Sept. 6. me 26,
A die 26, Ang. ad 19. Sept.


9, Clear a. 1, blew miſt.S E
TY


I


5, Cloſe, threatn. moiſt,
hv, ſome wind , clear


8. Fr " fair _—_
9. Hard fr. ice, eavings


%
11. Cloudy a, 1, ſhowring
10m.


12. Cloſe m. warm, offering”


P-
ro, Fr. fair, pret


|


to dro

13. Wind a.l. aud all day.

14. Stormy and cloſe rain.

15. Bluſtering wind , ſome
moiſture.

16, Rain a. 1.


1658,


12


12


Chap XK...


F eeceſſion of the Tear.


1658. Aug. 26. = 16, a die


17. Aug. ad Sept. 4.


17. Showring , Thutderclap


10m. Light. ar i;
18; Cloſe m.p.clouds tchir
19. fr; windy, (one wer 4
' SW.
20. Mifty 4 m: wartn; ſhowrs


7 Þ-
21: Foggy m. cold :H, winds,
T 178 - . W.


. Cloſe , ſerious wet all
—- SW.
23; Fair, warm, a ſhowr ar
Sun ſer. $ W.


24- Fair m. fog 1 fil watm
wind,

Milling mu. high _

26. my , aicolndorcae

cold. SW.

25. Cool, open m. dropying


7 Þ:
29, Rain, warm , wy 4 n po
6


25,


Pp.
29. Rain 4 m. High wind at
W.


30. plaſtering and ſtormy all
n. dry. N W.
21.. Fair m. wind riſe.


Sept. x. Open, cold, ſhowrs.


Ely.
2. Froſt, ſnow, wer. Wy.


3.Cotd, cloſe m. ſhowrmyp 10
4+ BE. cleſem. ground mift


IO BD. NE.
: vs
& 1659.08. 23. M1 4. a die
ts. Of. ad 1 Nov.


Is. Rain, fair, open.

Is. Fair, cool z High wind
at nigh.

17, Rain 3 Mm. & 4. M. re


18, _ m. p. ſome drops
Sun E,


ig, oy windy.
20, Gloſe, windy 4. 1. x "the


21. "Pre cool. Wly.not _ |
22, Fr. fait, ſhowr 11 p.Wly,


23. Cloſe, wer, windy, warm.
WI


Ye
24 Wind high a. 1. fair 4. m,


wikdy.
26. f. rain 10 m.' open.


25, Hard fr. foggiſh.

2. Fog m. cloſe Nly.
28, 29, Fogg\ all days

30. Cloſe miſt, warm. * N.|
31. Cloſe rain. Sly.


Nv. 1, Bright, cold. N W.


—F—


_—


16$0; Dec. 15, th 20. a "die


ad 6. ad 25,
6, Miſt mv, fair. |
7. Thin miſt m, 's.
8* Clofe; but fair m. W;S.


9. Fair, H.\ſtorrky winds.SW,
10. Fair, cold m. VY.
It. Rain a. |, ſtormy wind.

yV


12. Fair, H, — wind.

$9

"EN Froſt , fog _ fo

anit 'rt., S'E,

14. Fr. fog m. day —
W.


rain. E. |

igh wind, forms

much Lighrh. Vy,

17. Rai , windy day, SVV,

18. Clear tilt 5. then clobds-3
Lighen.

19. Rainy a; 1, Vy,

-_ Cloudy : abonr- 9, rainy

a4Y -

2x. VYiniy, fair mn. SV g

22. Fair m. ramy 1

23. VVindy,
whote


Is. Fr. fog,
16, Cs


. DS the

24- Cloudy, cloſe 5 _ -
ven.

25. VVer,rainy m. A I Y Y


Pp. m.
26. Fig 5 aſhowr. SYVV.


156r:08.8. M 23.4 tie 29,
ad 16, 04


29. Sad rain a3 m. adg m

30. Fr. ſhowr 2 p.

08. 1. Showr 6 m. cold.

2, Threatning 8 m. dropping
ſhowr. Thunder, and 4
Houſe Gurne By Lightning. | -

3. Fog. warm Even, o

4- VVarm 8 m. miſt, E.

s. VVarm, fog fall.

6, Cool m. dry, warm.

7. fair warm. miſty arn.

4 Cloudy Mifty, warm.

- Dry m. ſome oe r— of


IO, Fog, warm 3 colder.
11. L. rain 2 m. cold, miſt.


Yo
12, Sur afp. all _ P-


m.
13.1. fog m. ſome w__g -
miſt fall
14. |. froſt m, - bat a clear d.
a
14. Fr; ground mi wr
x NVY.
16, Froſt, miſt, cold, N YY.


-


* [7. Much rain & 2 m. Rain T


1652, Dec; ent 9: 4 ite
26, ad Dec, 13.

26. Fog; frbfh, Beat h;

27+ PS, froſt, forge ſow


28. Ss |
29. Fog: fi
39. Fog, 'f ſone wer,


1 | E.
Dec. 1. Ftolt; * ſome rain


Po VV.
3. {. (0oW a. {. Pl
4, 5- —_— fog.

5. Froſty, fog, fatr :
7. Froft, fog, ſnow m; po


8. Froſt, fop, tear
c, Fr. ſnow al day, high w


Tyy, -


10. Show a. 1. hard OS


11. Froſty, fait; fog. ©

| 12. Thaw ''4ntl $—

t5 ; wah thy 3 rai $.
ad "Po id


———————


RD —


1853; Pttt:0f: 21, 4 15.4


die 308. atl 11. Nov. |
3.Clofe, drifi $m £6. &

> -—-Hong —_—
4. Fog atat wer 5 fe drop |

5. Sun ſer.
$. Rain # Surtrife 3 rin 4p

&rr p. =
6. Rain 4a Sun riſe & p. m.

and <1 fer. Sly.


Sly.
8. Rain a Suri riſc a4 roy k


2, Frir, cool. SVY. /
| fo. f f. r2in 2. m. fog. E.
tr, Raina. 1. E.3SE,


| 12. Rainy a. m. &p. m-
1 _ Cold m. open, drifling 5
| ESE.
| 14. T Moiſem: wer p.m. SVV.
15, Miſt, ſome wer, Meteors.
- IVF,

16, Fair a. 1. much wet.
17. Froſt, fome wer. high wd+
S VV,
18, Fair, driſling't p. & 9 p.
$ VV,


19. VVind all n Rain A,


20, {. rain about Sun riſe, &


2 Þ. SVY,
21, Cloſe, but no rainor wd.
W VYVs


22. Cloſe m. daſh o. S. $ w.
23. VVarm, open at « W VV.

24. Cloſe,” opening, dry.
25. Miſc


h 2 Diar 'Y ACC. to the


—— —_—— —


po Book 11.


25. Miſt m, rain 0.
26. Storms all n.cold. S. S E.
NY WF-r ſome lonting,old,


"FE b
28. Cloſe m, drifling 3 ſome
in © SW


SE.


_ Rain 0, -... .
29, Miſt, froſt, fair. S W.
30. Miſt, froſt, cold; fair. SW,


31. Cloudy, cold a. m. Sly.
Nov. 1. Wind a. |. rain 4 m.
hocriſh.' Uy.

' z High. wind,-offering 11 m,
-- hortiſh, Sly.
3- High wind, .hottiſh. Sly.
4+ Wind, rain, ! _ $8.
5. Rain 5 m. wind, rain. S W;
6. Warm, high wind , rain
IT P-, : SW,
7. Very H. wd, rain p. m.ſtor-
_ mY, W.
8. H. wd-veſp. bluſtering n.
SW.

©. Stormy, rainy. SW.
10. Storm of rain 2 m. wind.
SW.

11. Cloſe m. p. __ P-


47


=—_


1664, Jan. 21. £ 2
a die 9, ad 31, bs


9. Froſt, fog, daſh, S.S E.
,10, Wet m. wind, wetting 0.
; S W,

11. {, driſling SASRNs P-
| w


12, Cloudy 3 driſling Sun ſet.
13. Wind a. |. {. rain,driſling

Sun ſer,
14-H, wd all n. wet,ſtorm 7 p.
SW.


Is. f. wet, threatning. S.

x6, Cloic m. wind warm. S,

17. Cloſe, windy, flying cl,

38. Drilling 1 p. and Sun ſer,
Rain 10 p. S,

19.Cloſe moiſtm.Sly,

20, Miſt, cloſe, moiſt. .

21. Fog, fair.

22. Fog m. fog at n.

26. Foggiſh and milling, £


W .
24 Hard fr. fog.
25. Clear Fr.inow, thaw.Nly,


26,$ ing cl.
27 Snow m. B- m. Thaw |


Rain.
28. Froſty, high wind. N,.
29. Hard fr. fair, wetting 3 p.
30. R. a. l.ſhowr 4 p. N.
31, Cloſe m.p fair ar n.freez.
E.NE.


Do —


1664. Nov. 18. Z 27. a die
10, 8
10, Froſt, ice,


28.
miſt, fair,SW.


11» Fr. ice, foggy,freez at n.

12. Rain m, fair , cool rain
10 P.

13- Tempeſt of wind a R.
Hail 3 m. high wds:

14- Open, fair wind.

15- Overcaſt, cloſe p. m. f.


rain 4 p. & 7 p. $ W.
197+. Fair m. p. wdy ;- freez ar
n, Rain 1 m,


18. Fr. cold miſt, gentle R.
6 p. &c.

Is. Fair, bright n.

20,: Fr. Ice, fair. $. SE.

21. Miſt, froſt, ſ.ice; R.4 9

gm. ad 11. w.

22. Hard white froſt, ice ,
bur fair. |

23. Hard hy

24+. Fog, trolty, fair 3 Jeez at

, lake . of

25, Hard
I1

26; Driſling m. raw, miſt arn

27. Miſt , raw, rain 11m. &
p.m.&6p.


fr. thaw 0. and rain
-::./.CE.


W. |} Te bee: 'S$W,


1665. AſpeFu wacat.


—


—


1666. Fan. 16» VP I& a die
71! a5 .-


Zan. 7, Warm, fog, wetting |.
b ” E


tom, :
8. Miſty,miſting die rot, N E.
9. Miſt, rain Sun occ. & 9 p.
Ely.
10; Miſt, mild, freez' ar h.
11, Miſt, coldiſh,wetting 9 p.
12. 'Rain Sun ort, & 6 p. col-
diſh.
13- Cold, freez 8 p.
L4- Rain Sun riſe, & a. m. fog


at N.
15. Miſty, Sun had not ſhined
mapy days.
16, Fr. miſt.
17. Fr. open m. ſnow 8 p. 12


18! Froſty, ſnow, ſhowr 11 p.
19. Froſty, offering to ſnow.
20, Froſt m. wet 2

21, Fair, high winds.

22, . rain a. |. mild.

Mes = MO emfal d
24.Tempeſtuous ut wds,
"Rain, ſtormy daſh.


Trerum Nov. 12. VP 17. 4 die
2, ad 23. |

2, Warm, C. drop 1 p. My.

3. Cloſe m. open and mild p.

m. N.N W.

4: Fairand warm, ſome guſts,

| W,


5. Wind and rain n.fair. Wly,
| 6. Froſt m. Meteors 7 p.Wly,
| 7. Warm, ſhowr 2 p. and S\tn
ſer, & 7 p. Wly,
8. Foggy m. and all day. $ly.
9.Cloſe and miſtyiſh, Mereors


9 P. Sly.
©. Rain a, 1. daſh of rain. 11
m. atn. 11 p.

11-Rain m. p. hold up p. m.
fog ar n. Sly
12. Fog m. ſhowrs a. m. & a,
*, Sly.

13.- Wer m. ſhowri
ward Sun ſer. s ”
14- Rath after midnight, and
fo till o. SW,
I5. Rain after midnight, and
4. m. SW,
16. R. after. midn.and all day ;
Flonds. -$W.
17. Wihd blows. all n. hard;
R. a. m- w,
18, Fr. fair;curions day.NW,
19. Wind and rain « Sun riſe,
; ci Wiy.
x Rain & Sun riſe, miſtying
21. Rain ſtill a. 1. &m. p. &
a. ms . : Ely.
22, Moiſture a, m. R. p. m. &


7P-. Wwly.
23 Far, calm m. wind riſe
o. ſhowr 2 p.


—


NN CO


1668, Jan, 1. 2. a die 2%
Dec. 1667. ad 10 Zan.1668,


23+ Miſt, cloſe m. thicker &


24. Fr. miſling, fog 8 p.. Sly.

4 Froſt, may Ae Dd clear at
night.

26. Cloſe, no wind, fog n.

25. Foggy, warm ; miſling m.
ſo at n.

| 28. Cloſe m. wind riſe P. Mm.
driſling at n.

29. Fr. cleat m. þ. _—_


Wiy,

20. Fr. ſtorm of hail. Ely.
31. Fr. fair m. p. Wly.
Zan. 1, Murrain of Horſes a-
bout Kentiſh Town. Smalf
Pox, diſtraRions ; Rain a.


2, Fair a» m. ſome wetting,

3- High wind a. 1, miſling m.

£ N W,

4- Windy, dropping, driſling
a.


m.
$. Tem s all n.& die
tot. toward even 3 {. ſhowrs


m. Wly at n. Nly.
v , 6, Rain


[, wetting Mm. bluſtering n;
Wy: ;


(


Chap. X.


d h 2 Home-D:ary.


—


6. Rain m, wind riſe, miiling


m. P-
7, Tempeſt of wind Rain a. m.
8. Wind audible, ſhowr 2 p.

W,


o


4ÞPS Pp.
g. Fr. cal, fair m. bur win-


dy 0. Nly.
Io, H. ſtormy ; wind a. 1. NE.
(


1655, Fel, 29, XD 20,4 die
18, a4 8 March,


18. Warm winds, ſhowr 2 p.
II P. Sly.

19. Offering at n. to ſnow-

20, Froſt, offer to ſnow. Nly.

21. Fog, open. NE.

22, Fog. may miſle. Elyz

23 Fog, open.

24- Winds and clouds, offe-
ring. |

25. Miſt, open.

26. Cold wd Nly.l. or no moj-
ſture, |

- y Cloſe, wer, wdy.

28. Watm wds , ſhowr 2 p.
Il Sly.

March 1, warm z ſhowr and
wind 2 p.&11p. SW.

2, Fr. miſt a warm at n.

Sly.
3. f. wer 6 m. warm, Wy
4+ Fr. coldiſh' wind, wer 0.
Nly.

$. F a.m; & n.. Nly - at
night. 4y.

6, Thick fog, warm , fog ar
night.

9, Fr. warm, open, SW.

8. Rainy, wdy , Thunder in
in ſome places.


4


Þ.


Dernm Dec. 20.. D 22. a die
8. ad 28.
8. Hard fr. winter 3 cloſe


m- P.
9. Cloſe, mild p. m. wetting,
high wind.
10. Cloſe brisk wd. Nly daſh


m. ;
1 i" Froſt, miſt m.
12, Froſty, fair, ſome miſt ar
night.


13- Water free, in a Baſon.
N E. fair, high wd.

14. Froſty, {, miſt m, cloſe ar
night.

15. {, rain 4. |, then freez,fog
thaw,

16. l. miſt, miſle ni.

19. Wd b. d. fr. freez. Nly.

18, Froſty, bright. Nly.

19. Fr


; doudy m. clear


p.m,
Sun riſe red , offer inow
6 m. H.curting wd and os.


21. High wied and froit, (0
ar n. E:y.
22, { (now Mk
23. Froſt,
24. Froſt and ſnow all m.
25, Whire fr. Thaw, NE
63 Vehement froſt , ſcarce
Erolerable. NE.
27. Equal froſt m. milder, no
thaw.
28. Fr. but more cloſe, high
wind as 0.


—


A® 1671. Feb. 14. X 9.
A Feb.6. ad 21.


6, Fr. ſome ſnow found m-

open. Nly.{ Halo g p. Wiy.
7. Fr. ſnowing m. miſty and
miſling die tot. —_— I P.


8. Wetring a. m. & p. m.
9. Cloſe, windy at n. warm,
ITE, Sly.
10, Cloſe ; wetting a. m. &
m. p. ſos p.11P.
11. Fair wind, overcaſt p. m.


Ely.
12. Clofe m. h, guſts 3 p. &c.
driſle 9 Þ. Sy.
13. Warm m- cloſe and miſt
roward even.
14- Cool, cloſe m. Sly.
is. Cloſe m. p. miſt even,
Ely.
16. Cloſe m. p. n—_— Pp:


17, Fog open , very —
m. ; S
18, Cloſe ; dewing o. & to p.

NE.


19. {. wet ma. drifle a. m.
cold, cloſe.

20. Showr o. hail 3 p. wet-
ring veſþ. Sly.

21, Very cold ; open wd, of-

. ren ſhowring,Lightn in the
Weſt. Nly.


1692. Apr. 12. X 27.

| Ab Apr. 3+ ad 20, inclifive.

3- High wind p. m. Wly. Hail
2 $s Þ-

4+ Ck. ring 0. h.wd ;
cloſe veſp.

$3, Cloſe dropping m, & a. m:
windy, |

6. Cloſe, werting a. m, ſhowr
O. P.M. 11 P. |

7. Dropping 9 m. o. ſhowr 6


P- j Nl .*

8, Werting 4- ad 8 m, ole
' bverring 11 P» . Nly.
9, Cloſe miſc m. Nly.


10, Cold m. cloſe, v 2,
M, P.M, rain n. N VV.


11. Cloſe, werting 9 m. Nly.


12. Cloſe, miſty. N!y.
t 3-Coltih m.cloſe,miſtyNly,
14- Cloſe. NE,


15. Cloſe, (. drifle tt p. SW.

15. Wind and wer 5 m. cool
wd; coldn.

17, Whice fr. cold, C. mitt.

18. Cold, miſty. NE.

295, Windy, mifty, NE,

Apr. 16.Hail and ſnow in the
Country, News of ſeveral
Frolts this week. 4 T. M
fele in Venice, bur much
harm inArimint in Italy,


23- Open, cold, windy. Nly.

24. Snow@ m. & 1 p. h. fr,
N E. High wd. a. m. & n.
cold, freczing at n.

25. Hard froſt, ſharp wind,
overcaſt p. m. & n. |

25, Hard froſt, cold wind,


Ely.
27.Hoar fr.yer air is not hes
miſt ; ice in Thames. .
28. Hoar fr.thaw,clofing p. m,

Ely


z9. Cloſe, coldiſh.
30. L
wind, E.,
31. Fr, ice, wind cloſe 11 p;
NE


Cl
—4


NE
Drifle m. clofe, miſrys


Feb, 1. Cloſe m. open, miſty.
. 'N E,
2+ Fr, hoar, miſty m. & even,


NE.
3. Cloſe m. p. NE. froſt m. Cf.
ice.
4- Froſt and cold, froſty n.
5s. Froſty. N E. freez atn.
6. Froſty. foggy all day. $ E:
7. Froſty m. foggy, cloſe b
N


m.
8, Driſle 6 m. 6'p. cloſe, fog-
gy 3 miſlingp.m. . SW,
9, Open, overe. 0. ſome wd:
- NE.

10. Open a. m. cloſe, _ þ»


m. E,
T. M. at Cologn and Bon 3 p.


—_———————_——


a


YO ——


167 Apr, x. 18;

A Mech 23. ad APY, 10.
23. Fog, wind m. Nly. SW

Aches. -


24-Cloſe fog,ſome wind. Wly.
N VVY. Aches. > as
. V [#) - m 1

OA.

26. Rain*m. cloſe, warm £
miſe.


Gg88


1673. Feb. t. V @ «©
A Jan. 23. ad Feb. 10, 19


Gaxet 759. Tf


S$S VV.NI
27 Cloudy 4 y


296


£ —


SY


d h 2 Diary according to the


Book *


\9


9. Cloudy m. p. 5W+ warms
ge horciſh. - Nly.
28. _ N W. n__—


29. Fog, hot.
30. Open m. p. fog, _—_
brisk wd.


Apr. 1. Froſt, bright wd. Ely.
Aches.
> Rod wind m- Aches. SW.


4 Cloſe, wetring 7 M- High
wd.
4. Cloſe , wetring 10 m. b


Open. SW.
6. Miſt m. ſhowrs 11 m. Sly.
7. Showrs 7 M. Warm,open,
"a Aches.
$. Some wind , Aches £h,
>. Cloſe a. m. offer p. M- Mi-
: ſty ; Aches 5 p-cool. $ly-
IO. Showry 11 Mm mY ;


Aches.
ER. ar the Wells and in,
deep Shi


© ———


678. May 29». & 9.
M4 Fey 18.4 ad June 1.


——————————


TEonderclap


1 p. ſome wer 6, 8, 10m. |.
25+ Rain ro m. wind , ſho


24. Hot rain 9 Pp.


W-
Thunder, hom 7


26. OLI.
9 Þ. hard 11 p.

27. Raina. |, 11 m.& p.m.
miſt. Ely.


Indi;


ring,


"tk - many 3 Þ. why. In-
difpoſtrions.

4 Cloſe, {. rain 23'm. 9 P.
wind brisk. . Wiy.


» Nly.
SJ yn hg Y y
03:


= windy-oven, &
af Indiſpoſir.
8. Cloſe, opens. - - 'Nly, NE.


my


I3 -Fr. Ely.


—


1676. March 20, © 11.
A March 12. ad 29.


12. Fcoſt, guſts of wind L p
Firs of Convul-
fion. 1 iſpoſitions,

I4 - Fog N E. Meazels break
Our. -

15. Fog, warm. Wiy. Sly.
16, Fr, m. warm, f. i


19. . "Mb m. warm wind, SE.

iadiſpoficion.
18. Some rain 5,
pw


6 m. cloſe
10 P» Ely.
, werring 4 M- wd.

Ely ar 0. SW.
20, Open Mm. cloſe wd, Ty.


. Open, warm.
22. Some miſt, warm 3 =
Lig hen. at Limehouſe 10
23+ Eloſe,; cool, drisk & wind;


ſhowr 4
Se. brick wd uk


wee and
0 Rs >


1677. May 20, T Fo |
A May 10. ad 29.
10, Warm, windy. Wiy. R.
1 m.10 P. «b Oph. cap. «d
Lyram.


11. Warr, overc. as B. Ely.
L, F
12. Rain apace 4 mW. wind o-
Warn. SW.
25.Coiem. gully 3 Somme
I4 Frarm . Wy.
15- Some little R. 5 1. warm |
wd. why. Ely |
_ = very wo


19, Dropping 3 þ howr 49
;/ nr
20. Foggy, of wd 2 pÞ.


7+ Brisk wd, hor p. m. & ve.
red Heaven.


_ ere mw. wind vo


22. High wd. A drop or 2-
ſeen afar off. Indiſpoſici-
onsz miſt ar n. Ely

23. Some wd.
24- + Un a.m.hot day, =


25.Hor,gr. Hail,R.Th.3 p.Nly.
26, Some miſt » Fhgeve 81 p.
Lightning.


ow _ drops 9 p. 8 p.wer-


Ing.
10 P. midn.

29» Wet 4 M. fot, ad 1 p,
windy.

Die 18. Great Hail at London,
and Highgate, broke Win-
dows.

19. Short Mereor about Lyra.


1678, 16, TT 20,
A July 6, ad 26,
$. Brisk wind, hot p. m. red
Heaven all over 8 p. Wly.
N W.


8. Brisk wd, miſt. w:


2.A th.1m.cool brizk wd.NW.


10, Brik wd,miſt,cold wind,
warm D. m-


It. Brisk wind W. warm p.
m, ſhoulder -uf +
ſhoulder


13, Brisk wind.
In
briskwind. W. warm

14 Brick wind W. warm. Sly.
Lightn. 10 p.

15- Hot night, Lighening ms
High wd g p. Meteors in
Lf Fx,

I6. Very hot n. warm day;

' Lightning 12 p.


ig. Rain oy 6 Mm. ot A
werting, wich Th. ſerious
raina gs, ad 9, Sly.

20. Showr'10 m. ant? 8.% 10
P- Daſh ante 3 p. with a


$W,

24. Miſt ; 2 dr wide
Rs of bas WES
nel ygh ob within the


Td, mes


25. - Miſh, Rain im. Cf. _—
ting LL i. H, wds veſÞ-Sly,
26.R.


ay Nil,


'd


I...


Chap. X.


F ucceſſun of the Tear.


_—


26, Rain 3 m. brisk wind,


ing ante3 p, R- $ P.
coaſting 3 Pp wh


Mn SO


167 . May 9. Tt 24»
46 Ape. 29, ad May 18.


29. Fair Nly. red even. |
30. Open , cloudy , {. wind ,
Wly. Mertcors with 4

Train 9 p
May 1.Gentle wd,very _
ſome wd,


2, Open, cloudy ;
Heat. ly.


Fl 3. Hear, ſome wd , overcaſt

Pp. Sly.

4- Some fog, heat, brisk wd.

Wly.

5. Warmn. ſome rain m.SW,
wertring 4. Mm.

6. Rain m. driſle 5 m. wind.

Sly. Rain apace o. & 1 p#

75. Cloſe , ſame wd. Sly. lir-

tle ſhowe. ante 9 m. offe-


ring 1 p.
8. Cloſe. Nly. Thunder 4
rimes 4 P. rain, warm.
Wy. at n. Ely.
$9. Cloſe rain 3 m. and 7. dri-
p. m. Aches. NE
10. Rain 6 m. great
8 m. Ely. cold vw


m. Pp.
11, Cloſe, C, wd,C. miſt, brisk
wind. Ely.
32, Cold we, Colick , 12 P.
14: ya ſome wd, Ely.

cold m.


35. Open, gentle wind, _


, Cloſe
doſe


m. Y.
16. {. wind Sly. cloſe fome-
times P. m,
19. Hot p, m. arid pp" »
Y.
13. Warm day. $ W. H. wd,
lowring p. m»


_—_—


©


1680, uly 9. > I4
A Jud: 30. ad ful. 18.


30, Miſt, H. wind , dewing 7
m. ſhowf 11 m., claſe wd.
Nly. {. mildew obſerved by
the Country man, blaſting
where it lights.

Ful. x. Cloſe miſt , open m.

_ much cooler.

2.0, brisk wd, ſhowr m.
warmer rain 2 p. & offe-
ring 8p.

3. Miſt, col wind, ſhowring
a. m. Daſh 1 p. and Thund,

Stormy wind and driſle,

ve/p. : S W.


1


1


|


|


The Plague at Andaluſia and
at Prague, dye 5 or 800,
inone Week,

4- Brisk wind, cloſe m. p.C.
dewing 10 P. SW,

5-Rain 9 m. ſmart ſhowr 5 p.
dewing ad 9 p. wly.

Roterdam Gaxet. Bafil feveral
Houſes endammaged, and
Fields by Thunder and
Lightning.

6. Brisk wd , cloudy, open.


Wly.
7. Gentle wind, open ;, clote |


$ Þ. Rain p. ad 10 p.


S W.


8. Rain 5 m. Ely Fog. A Me-
reor 12 Þ


9. Fog, bright; hotn. SW"


"10. Fog; Mereor 10 p. Sly.
11, Brisk wd, warm, Ely.
12, Fog, clote, hot Meteors,


Ely.
13- Brizk wd, cloſe, R. ante


1m &6 p. & 8p. hot
though cloſe. wly.
ar Dunkirk, Extraor-


Relations. N. 60.


up. Gat. 1531,
I5. Open, mille 10 m. ſhowr
'. IT 87. Daſh aur 4 p. offer


16. Brick wd, open, _—
Rain p.m. 1 pe


Y.

17.Rainzm & 6 cm. H, wd,

cool n. Rain 8 p. miſty ; C.
'ram It P.

18, Rain 1 m.

7 Þ. Raindte tor,


daſh tom. &
NE.


1681, Sept. 2. 6 3.
Ab Aug. 22. 4d Sept. 12.


22, Cool m. hot Meteor ant*


9 P-
23. / oF day 3 Very mnch
_ ante 8 p. Thund.
|. rain ad 11 p. W.S.
24+ High wind die tot. $ W,
fly a in N. &
E. Newburgh. A Body of
Fire-Globe, burning in the
Air for 3 hours.
25. Mifle 7 m. Rain 8 m. hor
n. H. wd; aſhowr 5 p.
#: H. wind a. 1. & die to,


cloudy m. p. wly.
27. Rain 8.m. loſe &darkiſh.
28, Open, cloſe 0. a drop.
Wly. warm.


|


|


yp 4
8 |af> Cool


29. Open a. m. warm, clofng


5s P-driſle 7 p. 8 p. S. p.m.

3c. Warm n. cloſe, fmarr
ſhowr 20m. { wd, flaſh of
Lightning ante 11 p.{.drops.

31.Showr 7 m.ſhowring hard
10 P.

27. Whale in Fluſhing taken.
Hurricane.

Sept. 1. Showr coaſting 5 p.
& wd. SW,

2. Showr 12 m. & ante veſp.
ad 11 p. open.

3- Rain ante 3 m. ad 11 m.
Meteor 9 p. Wy.


4- Ramy a. m. brisk wd. Nly,
5. Cool, high wd, offer yh,


| Þ- Wy. rain p. m. clofe


6. Cool m. overcaſt p.muWly,
Meteor feen in Moorfields
he. 10 p. Ab Aro in Merid,
wich a Stream 5 inches
broad, Gazet. A Comerfor

3 _ ,hog.inSE.

7. Clote m. p.:drop 6 a.


8. Cloſe m. ſhowr antes m.
H. wind.


ing ante x ſo ſub
nk
Nv,


"71, KH. vwd, fair. )
12. Cool m. -wd, overcaſting
p. m.cloſe 11pÞ. NW,


0 WE _—_— as — tr


1682. Jawe 29... 6.


| f Forne 191d Fubp 5. incluſore,


19. Wanner, {. wind. Wy.
pÞ- 4d Sun acc.

and brisk wind m-
hoe, drifle circa 3 p. and


9 P-
21. Some rain 6 m. H, wind
m. p. pretty warm. S W,
22.High wind m.p. veryofren
ſhowring 8 m. & ©. & 5 p.

6 p. 9 p. warmitſh.
Geralsrocs ow the
by the exceſlive R,
that hath fallen here. Ben-

thins. N. 117.

23. Warm m. {. wet 5 m. wd
brisk m. ſhowr 11 m. Gr.
daſh of Rain and Thunder,

N W.
24+ Cooler , ſhowr 10 m. &


poſt 2 p.

Maxfeld, Hail, Thunder and
Lightning deſtroyed the
Corn, hurr ſeveral Perſons.


25. Showr 11 m. 1 » 6 p.Sun
ace. Gufts of winds riſe 3 p.
SW


| 26. Cool, guſts of wind tp.


ſome


IC


259


h 2 Duary acc. to the $ ucceſſwn, &c.


ſome gales 9 m. ſhowr dif-
cover'd 2 p. ſmart ſhowr
afrer 6 p. red even, wd m.
27. Raing m.& 5s m , open,
ſ. wd N W.


wd.

Bruſſels, we have had very
bad weather here like to
ſpoil our Harveſt, Gazer,

28. Warm, cloſe, ſome drops
poſt 8 m. Rain 10 m- ſome
R. paſt 7 n. SE. "-

29. Cloſe , guſty 3 very hig
wind 7 p. {. werting ante
I p. fo ante 3, 7, 10 P. In-
diſpoſition atn.

30. Cloſe, H. and ſtorm
wds 1 m. ſo m. p. eſpecial-
ly p. m. Rain czrc, 4 p 1 R.

SW


7 P- .

Before the 25th of Fane XI,
Froſts at Chelſex Garden.
About the 4. or 9. ſuch as
injur'd the Melons and Cu-
cumbers,

29. Rocheſter. Terrible Hail,
Thunder and Lightning,
Benskins 116. ,

Ful. 1. Cooler, windy, driſle,
ſtormy and wet 10 m.Wly,

2. {, wetting at or, before Sun
riſe; ſhowring 9 m. ſmarr
ſhowr ante 11 m. wetting

'" ©, I P- 2 p. High wda. m.


9. Rain early, ' (pf die tot. fere,


ſhowr8 p. S E. m.S W.
P- m. Guſts of wind 10 p.


gentle Rain 11 p.
4. High wind, ſome Rain 3
P. N W:
6. {. guſts , ſuſpicious, open
p.m, cloſing veſp. open n.
Wly.


—


1683. Aug. 28, OL 26,
Ab Aug. 13. ad Sept. 6,


13. Cloſe a. m. f. driſle, 0-
pen P.
14- Rain m. Rainy o. cloſe,
hor, wetting,H. wind. SW.
Is. Foggy, rainy m. p. m, &
a. m. High wind, cold.
16. Cool m. {f. drops a m.
ſhowr $5 p. Brisk rain 7 p.
N W


19. Miſty m. ſome rain, coa-
ſting 0. & 1 p.

12, Open, cold wind m. ſho.
Oo. Th. 3 or 4 Claps. A
Ratling Storm. Some R.
and Hail. N W.

19, Cloudy , wind audible ,


open.
20, Some miſt, ofren clouding
and cloſe, W.


21, Foggy m. cloſe m. p. {.


drops 3 p- Sly.
22, Foggy, warm, 1. a”


t ly,
| o_ {.clouds m. ſ. wd,


|


24. Miſty, lowring, very hox
day, |. wind. Sly,
25. f. wetting 3 m. & p. m,
warm, f. wind. SW,
26, Miſty m. H. wd, wetting
8 m. SW,
27. Miſt m. high windsſinarc
ſhowr ante 4 p. (. drops
6 PÞ. S W,
28, Cloudy, very high wind,
N W. W,

29. Cloudy, very high wind,
NW.SW,

30. Cloudy, windy, open ar
nighr. SW


31- Miſt m, cloſe m. p. hot-
riſh. Sly,
Sept. 1. Overcaſt, open, calm,


wly,

2, Fr, m. Fog. Clouds Sly.
Wind Ely. SE,

3- Cloudy a. m. with guſts ;

4 RaininSE, Foggy p. m.

Wy. Sly,

4. F m. & a. m. cloud
veſp. hotriſh then. Ely, |
Wly clouds,

5. Lightning, 3 Claps of Th.
from the 8. 1Op. R,S W,
wind Ely die tot, .

5. Foggy m. ſoultry wd,cool,
open p. m.clofing veſþ. with
Lightning ante 5 p. One
Thunder-Clap, daſh of R.

Sly;


"Upon Second Thoughts and advice of Worthy Friends, who value Ex-


perience, u
years


eration


t it is-1


in gathering, and that 3o
are better than 3o years refuſed , I have added this Table


alſo, in which we have bis, Sept. 20. 1654. and 77. T. M. Apr. 4. 1672:


Feb. 73. Shipwrack,4pr. 74-Great Hail, 77, 78, 82: Hurricane. 81. Whale,


©. Meteors with Trains, &c: July 29, 82. and ſowe proceed to thenext


Chapter.


CHAP.


Chap. XI. d tv Charafter, ©


CHAP. XI. d RE.


ConjunTion of Saturn and Mercury.


$ 1. y a Planet of great Employment, and therefore is ſwifter. 2. Cont-
monly Dire@ in this AſpeF. 3. Its Charafter for Wind and Rain.
4. And for Dark Air. 5. The Influence proved for both Wet, and
Dark Air. 6. And for Cold. Tet a Saturnine 4 cannot introduce
a cold Seaſon by its ſelf. 7. 6 h * may introduce Froſt, but 10
ſuch as may ſpoilVintage. Our monſtrais Winters, not only upon hs
account ;, Colds being variouſly diſperſed by the Celeſtials. 9,10. hy
Otob. 157 2. was tedious and Cold. 11. Notable difference between
Frofts under h ?* and h &. All Froſt comes not with a Wind, Mx.
Hobbes there miſtaken. 12. 2 and 7 diſtintive CharaFer will
be perceived by comparing their Tables. 13. Effes of Planets diſtin-
gniſhable. Some Showrs Saturnine, ſomre Martial, &c. 14. Conticu-
ations of Clouds whether aſcribed to h % . Ground Miſts. 15. Are
not the iſſues of the Earth without their cauſe from above. 16. Slen-
der —_— 17. Variable Winds. 18. Sometimes a Curious day.
and no Prejudice to the CharaFer. 19. Not given to Flouds, what-
ſoever it may do in Arabia, 20. The Table.


Ss 1, Ta League between h and 7, though allowing ſome Effe& be-
tween fuch Alliances, cannot be thought to be of any great
Moment, becauſe of their I»:eſe Diſtance 3 for What Influence can
there be upon the Ocean, on a ſuppoſed League berween the Thames and
the Straits of Magellan ? Mercury isa little Planet, and a Nimble One,
* thereby portending that he cannot be long of a mind, ſuppoſing he doth
confer to ſome Amity. But we have labour'd before to poſle(s the Enqui-
rer, that the very Swittneſs and Agility of 2 may not Leflen the Planer
in account, but rather aggrazaiſe him, ſeeing the Swiftneſs of his Motion
in its Orb is a probable hint to us, that he had #zof bulineſs ro do, which
otherwiſe, withour ſuch Agility, could not be diſpatched. He muſt over-
take the flower Planets, He muſt return, and Re-ſalate them again ; for
for { it is order'd,that his buſine(s goes on,even while he goes backward 3
Venas hath done fo before, with d' and Þh, and 2 will not ſtand our.

9 2. Now, as we aid, Vezus not being bound to obſerve h, 2 alfois
at the ſame Lock : He meets wich h ſometimes before the ©,ſometimes
behind, and thatar fartheſt Diſtance 3 with the © , his pace commonly
is Dfre#; but now and then flow, yea ſometimes Retrograa: 3 as Dec. 4®
1662, the © being gr. 11. diſtant.

9 3, Yet all this {1gnifies nothing , except we obtrudea Character up-
on the World and fabber about an Influence of Wind and and Rain in
Spring and Summer-time z Wind and Snow in Winter 3 Wind and Clouds
in Autumn; 'Tis Magirus his Deſcription, which I ſee others willing to
tranſcribe, Adrian Vlack. Ephem. 4® 1663. and others. Nor is it amils if
welay Rain in the F:r/t piace, and then Wind, ſeeing Þh and. ©, yea, and
= Reſt for the moſt part, anſwer to Raz more frequently, than to

ind, | |
9 4.Maginus added, whereſoever he had it , ſome mention of Teebro-
ſus Aer , originally from the Aravs, no om and truly che very

view


of Care m Definitions A /trological. Book II.


view of the Diary minded me of thar, whica mide me Priz2 Muginus the
rather, to whom Ezrchſtad accords, Turbulentum & ſub frigidum azrem, faith
he ; our Table oft-times ſpeaks of Cloſe , ſometimes Dark and Muddy
Air : and trueas Truth is it, that ſome Planets do contribute more than
others, toxzaſk the Air, and darken it at ſome ſpecial times 3 but Þ and ?
ſeem to be more frequent; (othat I have reaſon to think that if Þ were
poſited in &'s Orb, he would make more rainy Weather than &, becauſe
even at ſuch diſtance he rouſes up the Air, and Frowns upon us.

9 5. And what ſhould we ſay more, when, who pleaſes to account the
Wet days with the Sum Total, whether weallow 2 or 3 days, or Twetwve,
and more, according to our Enlargement of the Proſpect, ſhall find that
it will anſwer ExpeCation, which muſt neceſſarily prove our Influence,
whether on the nearer account becauſe of the Proxinity of the Effect to the
Cauſe propoſed, or in a more enlarged account, becauſe no reaſon can be
aſſigned why Gommunibus Annis, in 500 days it ſhall rain every 24 Day,
ſince that Effe& is not obſerved upon Equal Terms, every other day, feclu-
ding our Aſpet. Verily Þ in his Statzon at leaſt, is noted by EichRad to
be a Tenebrons Planet. Statco h prima wel ſecunds tenebras acrti


aff ert.

$ 6, But they joyn Gold with dark Air ; and to that I ſay yea, at time of
the Year : andunder limitations, fome ſuch as have bin mentioned. Here
our Predeceflors give us a ſmart Note or two, for the uſe of the Plazrer
or Husbanaman ;, they tell us, 4® 1572. atthie end of Ofober, there came
a tedious Cold ſeaſon, as Appran hath recorded in Tycho's Progymnaſm. Yer
what great harm that could do, Io not fo readily imagine. Bat in the
year 1520. Werner aflures us,that there hegpannd ſuch a Froſt in the Month
of May, that ſpoiled the Hopes of the Kher Vintage, the Buds were fo
forely nip, that they never recover'd for that Year, £:/ad, p. 37.

Ss 7. Whether Maginus had this or any more Inſtances to bottom upon
I skill not, bucl ſee he hath ventur'd to put it into its Character. Wt pla
rimum efficit hujuſmod: coneveſſus fregtattatems non parum fru#ibns nocituram :
Though others ſince have adviſedly left it out. I fay Firſt, that this ought
not to be put in to the Character. Aſtrologers at beſt are counted zo9/y Men,
and I woald not have them make a noiſe where they betray chemtfelves,
and their Art. Neither do I find any Aſpet bur a \@h, a At?
that are intended for that rare Effet ; 1o was I blank, well knowing that
the £4 alone cannot do ſuch miſchief. He knows lictle how Cold is di{pen-
{ed by the Superiour Bodies, who thinks there is no Cold but what pro-
ceedsfrom. h. Is there not % ? Not 2 ? Have we not ſeen & himfelf
mock us witha Torrid Froſt > Do not all Interruptions and Gaps make a
Chill Air 2 Are not all Gomjuni#rons apt thereto ? Eſpecially © and 9 ;
yea, S and 2 alfo, with .fach limitations, as here, wiz. in a Crude

zely Sign of. , when there was never Planet to the Right or Left.

S$ 8. Theother Inſtance I admit, A® 1572. for I find d © $ about the
end of OFober, not a L, buta d ; for, Confonant to this I may oblerve,
that H and Þ m Wimntertimes, put in for hard Froſts, without the Verge
of rhe Conjandtion. In Dec. A 1662. for 16 days. In Jar. 1653.twice
7 Days, with an Thatus of 4 days between. 4® 1667. Jan. XI. days.
What do I ſpeak of Winter > When we have a Midſummer Month, A*
1582, with Eleven Morning Frofts, noted from the Chelſey Gardez, t 1

, 15Nnot near enough to warm us 3 which is ſaid according to the Mind
of Nature, ;and-no , becauſe'tis well known Hh, belide his diſtance,
is in his remoteſt Apogee in 4 with # , &«c. when in the Oppoſition he is
drawn nearer :iniis Perigee,


(g. h


——_—_lUUA\..


Chap: XI. The Hiatus. Mr. Hobbes. C. onttUnatzons of EE:


3ZOL


s g. h thenis an [cy Cold Planer ;T anſwer, no otherwiſe then as har!
been declared, for theſe Cold Winters are but few, and where h i;
found in a ſtate of Deſertion, which may come to paſs when ſome of his
Fellow Celeſtials are coo far off , and others too near; and this is the very
Cafe of Ofoter 1572. when ©, 2, Þh were crouded together, while
others ſtood aloot oft, ©, ?, hin m, > in W, no Planecin 2 thein-
cermediate Sign to M1 and W. - There's the Hratus, there's the State of
Deſertion. And this E:zch/ad takes notice of expreſsly , imputing ti:e
Cold not ro: Þ and ©, but to © hk & united, which too ſtraic Union i;
the Cauſe Effeive, or DefeQive, (I fay both the oneend the other ) ©f
Cold, and thus ſhall we ſee below.

9 10, Now, it wemay benice in diſtinftion, we may perhaps obſerve,
that though Þh and 2 may cauſe Cold, as h 2 before it, yet there m:y

ſome difference in the Energy, not ſeldom obſerved ; for Froit
and Cold are not all of a fort, there are ſome calm Froſts, ſome accom-
015.097 with chilling Blafs ; the Aſpe& with 2 the more Windy Planer,
rings Oz2, the Aſpe& with 2 , &c. brings the Other. So much miſtaken
was Mr. Hobbs whenhe imputed all Froſt to a Wind 3 of which he is ex-
cellently admonithed by the Noble Mr. Boyle. And thus may we Philo-
ſop"ize, if webe puttoit, concerning the Winters under this Aſpet ; for
as for the Froſty Winter Azzo 1682. we may defer that till wecome to
hand Y., that we may not do wrong to the Aſpect.

9 11. And this will better be done, if we ſhould conſtitute a Compariſon
between d h $, and h 2, as to theſe certain Heads of Hear, Hi
Wiads, and Smart Rains, Snow, Hail, Froſty Weather, &-c. we ſhould
confirm our Pretences againſt rhe ambiguous Nature, and ſettle Z fo, that


we may know his Character almoſt, before we ken his Motion. Bur I


muſt haſten. |

$ 12. Some pretty Faxcres further preſent themſelves upon a ftraiter
peruſal of the Table. For why ſhould I meet here alſo wich Clouds fly-
mg Low, Clouds at a great Diſtance, (in height Perpendicular, for that is
meant) Clouds in Scea2s, Two or Three Stories high, 2nd under this Af
pe, fo off, as to invite us toa remark z and ſpecially if we may ſuſpe&
that ſundry of the like Inſtances may have ſcaped our Notice : May not
this Diſtance of the Clouds Inferrour and Supertonr, favour of the Diſtance
of their proper Cauſes? Yer I ſhall not fay, that Hh, the Higher Planer,
aiſed the Higher Story, and 2 the Iferiowr, the Lower'; That would be
©00 palpable. Burt what. if on the! other fade, © ſhould attract the
'Aigher apartment, and H raife the Lower? (For the Sun, we ſup-
poſe , without which neither is effe&tual ) - h*s cooker Ray may ler cheln-
feriour (Cloudy) Pavernent deſcead : 2 's brisker Ray may elevate it nea-
rer to its ſelf. I aflert nothing, but if I may prompt the Curious to fur-
ther Enquiry.—This I can {ay ,that Experienced Obfervers may diſcern and
diftinguith the Diſpoſicions of the Planets by ſeveral Circumſtances and
Adjunct proper and peculiar to each. A man' ſhall be able to fay, This
is h 's Showr this is 4's. Thisis from © $ this From @ +, or Y, with

eater Evidence than we-can fay of Comets, which yet Heveltm, you

ve heard, thinks is far from Ridiculous. A Showr with a Pale Fog may
be h, with a deeper Blew may be &', with Wind 7 , without, c ſome-
times or 2. And many other appearances there are inthe Air, Fleec'd
Clouds, Curdicd Clouds, Clouds like Hemp ſtripd, Fog, Hazy Air,
Ground Miſts, which are not to be found at all times, nor under every
Afve&t,Ground Mitts I ſay, which I fad even here in the years of my Rural
Obſervation (2nd might perhaps haye bin before heeded,ftnce I remember
ſome objection I made to my ſ(eif azzialt their Ooſervance.) Þh and 2? in
Morning


© —


302


Ground-Miſts depend on Supertour & auſes.. Book II


Morning andEvening,not being able to ſuſpend them,but that they fall upon
ten


' the Land, Arable or Meadow : As in Winter time we may obſerve 0


2 deeper Fog with us below, yet upwards may fee it clear, though other-
wiſe it appears cloudy upon the receſs of a Miſt ; ſo different are the Effects
= THOE_gs of the Celeſtial Cauſes. Bur of this before I remember,
þ, II. Cap. 2. 5 9.
$ 13. The Objection that I made was,that Ground-Miſts are the Iſſues of
the Ezrth only, and ſo could not claim any ethereal Relation. But the
Contrary is ap t, for if Dews are, notwithſtanding their Or:g:nal, dif.


- penſed by the Heavens, Msf alſo muſt be fo dealt out 3 for to make up our


Sorites, if no Mift, no Dew, if no Dew; no Showr hath an «<Zthereal Re-
lation 3 and ſo we fall back to Mechaniſms, and the miſty Speculations of the
Carteſian, where we may blunder all dayes of our Lives, and envy Owls
and Moles, who can diſcern ſomething in the Dark. |

s 14. Of this Nature it may be, is the {lender Offer of Moiſture here al-
fo obſervable : Offer to miſle ſaith one day, July. 18. 1655. Three drops.
Another, 7aly 19. 1654. Rain ſcarce ſenſible ſaith a Third, July 15. 1655.
It agrees with 2 , and with what we have obſerved before, that he isa dry
- ou , and therefore not always fruitful in Wet, but inclined to

inds.

9 15. Winds wartable, which are here remembred, may, next to the
'»,, be imputed to 2, the next in ſwiftneſs of Motion : *Tis true, if they
vary when he is found Stationary, then we lay noclaim to that Effect ; bur
we ſcarce find it fo, (I ſpeak at adventure. )

$ 16. Sometimes I have met with the Weather under this Aſpe&
applauded. A Gurious day, a Day commended , &c. Tis no Fallacy in
it its turn to impute it to this Aſpe&, which is fair and ſeaſonable (as
others) when by its ſelf, and at time of the year, and under fuch Circum-
ſtancesz and muſt needs be commended, fince Health it ſelf is nothing but
Temper, &c. This hinders not that Chara&ter of his, which ſpeaks D:ſtex:-
perature: For the difference of Circumſtance reconciles all : ſeeing they
are apt enough to take occaſion to ſhew themſelves more Intemperate ;
which appears by this,lIf the preſent day under h and ? be commended, it
argues the precedent were not (0 commendable,when the precedentDiſtempe-
rature was on the- Gold.Side. Then 'tis eatie to ſay, the approach of the
d did allay it, agreeable to that common Nature of &, and the proper

haracter of our Aſpe& under Confideration. ..

S$ 17. As to Albumazar, I find him talking of Flouds, and Plenty of
Rain in ſome certain Signs, as V, M, Y, = and * , and ſometimes as
little Rain, yea, much , as in & and =>, Viciffitudes of Wer and'
Dry ny agree well Gong Howbeit, but one Floud appears in our Ta-
ble, that upon a Singular Concourſe of Cauſes ; not imputable there-
fore to Þ and 2, with any Eminence or ſpecial Note. © and ? 'tis true,
may challenge that which is a more frequent , and therefore to all ſeeming
a more Potent Cauſe 3 moreapt to fall in with ſtronger Congreſſes by its
Jew Pempuar mg What the Arabs add of paucitas pluwiarum, and yer In-
undatio mults, more than once, wiz. in & and 2, as I may hope 'tis no
Contradiion real in divers Signs, as to their Clime 3 fo ſuch Exotick
Conſideration is not worth my while.


d h 7


— WW 9 Vw WW


_


—_—


Chap. XL


d h 2 Home-Daary.


A® 1682. Ful. 23 od. 3.
Ah Ful. 18. ad 28


18. Cloudy , dropping, more
wind, miſty veſp..

15. Miſtm. cloudy, wd vari-
able, miſt veſp.

20. Cloſe m. p. miſt ar n.

21+ Miſty m. cloſe m. p.

22+ Thunder, ſhowrs, ſhow-
ring at n. |

23+ Overcaſting, dropping at
on, wd variable.

24- Showrs, clouds contrary,
wds.

24. Windy m. {. clouds,drop-
ping.

26, Windy, dropping, ſome
rain atn.

27, Some cl.


28, Thunder ſhowrs , windy, |


ſhowrs ſo at n.,wd variable


A® 1653. Faly 21. Ss,


1%. AJ. 15.4d 26,


15.Rain inſenſible m.

16. Red wd, C\.clouds.

17+. Hor, f. ſprinkle veſp.
OY, offer at miſle, a


Wr.
19. Cold wd, cloudy m. red
wd


20. f. rain. Too little,

21. Windy, hot.

22. Hot, dry ſeaſon, winds
high:'--


23+ High winds at night, cold
—_ .
24- Bair, hor.
25. Mifty m. hat, rain and
Thunder coaſting,
26. (. rain, ſhowr ar n. cold
wd, muddy, blew miſt.


Iu


—


A® 1654. Fuly ys. xk 27.
A July 13. ad 26.

13. Cool wd , unconſtant
ſhowrs ſpoiling Hay-ma-

- king,

14. Heat. ;

15. Overcaſting, wd, f. inſen-
ſible drops.

16, Wet, thunder very hot.

17, Wet and wind p.m.

18, Bluſtering n. hor, ſomer.
ſuſpic.

19. Rain a. |. 3 drops, warm-

20. Hot , hjgh wds, [. mot-
ſture


21. Cf. wd, clouds contrary ,
hoc, ſome ſhowrs at n.


303


d h 2 Daary-


22. Clouds contrary , ſome
drop.
23. H:il, rain a. 1. cool wind,
very variable, hail.

24. Very cool wd, [. ſhow-
ring

25.Cls. gather,ſet to rainat N.

25, Milling nf, tot cold
wd, and inconſiane ſhow-
ring.


LURES" Ir


A® 1655. July 25, it g,
Ang. 11. Xt 10,
A July 15. ad Aug. 21.


y Ret.


15. Very hot, cloudy Weſt-
ward,

16, Thunder 4 m. ſhowring
and grumbling de to.

17, Wet morn. & mM. p.


18. Miſt, f. coaſting moiſture.


19. Miſt, wdy,, f. ſhowrs.


21. Miſt, white cl: lowring
clouds.

22, Winds, offer ro miſle,hor.

23. H. winds, \. miſle,

24- Miſle, much rain p. m.

25. Fair m. ſhowring p. m.

26. Wind, much rain m.ſhow-
ring, cold.

27. H. wd, cool, white cl.

28, Cloudy, windy.


29. Warm, moiſt p. m.& n.


Iamis fatuus.

30. Mifling, ſtorm o. wind.

31. Wind and mifle 0,

Aug. ejuſd.

1. f. lowring* cl. Cobwebs 3
overc. h.wd veſp.

2. Rain a. 1, high wd, miſle,
m. p. *

3. H. wd. thick whitiſh cl.
ſlormy,one Thunder-clap.


4-High wd, cool ; ſome drops.


5. Somerimes lowring, wind
drop at n.

5, Some wet m. clear, overc.
night,

7, Cloſe, darkiſh ; offer at R.


1om.& © ot.

8. Cloſe m. wd.

9. Wind, clouds, drops veſp.
ground-Miſt at n.

ro. Hor, yellow m. offer ar R;
n.& 0,


; It. Hot, dark ; ſtormy ©. &


n. much Thunder. |
12. H. bluſtering and ſharp
wd


m.


13. Miſt m. lowring and mi- |


le m. coaſt.


|


14- Showrs inconſtant, and b
coaſts, 4

15, Miſt n. inconſtant firs of
ſhowring.

15.Rain a.l. 8& Sun occ, wet die
tot,

17. Dark, Thunder and ſome
ſhowrs.

18. Showring m. p. hor.

19. Very wer, f. wd, hor.

20, Wer m. ſoarn, Th. in C,
places.


*| 21, Wd and wer, clearing,


> H—


Do —


A® 1656. Sept. 10, Mt 25.
A Sept. 4. ad 16.


4. Wind, fhowrs circ, merid.
$. Thick miſt m. hempen cl,
little wd, yer hs + roy
6. Wind riſes, oyercaſt,warm,
blackiſh cl. !

7 _ wd , faint, blackiſh


cl.

8. Some little ſhowring 0.
ſtore of rain towards Lon-
don,

9. Cloſe m. flying clouds,
lowr. flaſh of Lightning.
ro, Cloſe m.red clouds, Eaſt-

ward ad Sun occ,

11, Cloſe, lowring, {. wind.

12, Red m. fr. miſt, flying cl.


13, Fr. miſt falls 8 m. winds,


ſomerimes high , blackiſh
clouds.

14. Fine rain ante I, & a Sun
ore. high wind.
Clouds ar a great diſtance,
Rain 4 PÞ.

I5. Rain ante 1. cold, cloudy,
dropping.


| 16, Drifle Sun occ,


A® 1657. Sept. 8. == 9.
A Sept. 2, ad 15.
2, Wer m. coaſting ſhowrs,


warm, clouds.S W, {. mitle
drives. N E.


\ 3. Rain hard midnight, & an-


te |, warm 3 coaſting
ſhowrs,clouds. S W. ſmoke
N E,


4. Overcaſt about Sun occ, wd
and gentle rain. |

5. Some moiſture m. flying cl.
wind and wet 1 p. ſhowrs
coaſting p. m.

5s; Warm wd, freſh at Graves
end, ;

7. Cold wind, ſome driſle


9 Þ*


Iilil 8, Shovyr.


d


A


a C.. _—_———.


i.


d kh # Home-Daar 'y


'F


* 22, Cold,


8..5howr 8 m.wings variable.


9, Wet ab 8 m. ado, ſhowr


4 Pp: miſle 8 p.
10, Very wet 2 & 4 M, very
violent Rain8p. NE.
11. Cloſe, muddy, offet, wd.
12. Clofe m. p.offering,miſle,
43- Wer an. cloſe, muddy ,
mift;
14. Wer a, l. cloſe, miſty.
15. Clouds fly low, lowring n.


— ——


——


A® 1658. Sept. g. > 18.
A Sept. 1, ad 16.


ge Cold; coaſting ſhowrs;


2, Fr. ſnow, wer. DEE
3. Cold, ſhowring, Ground-
miſt 1o p.


4-Froft, cloſe m. Qy. Ground-
amilſt, |


-


dropprmg 9
5. Fr.”


Southward a flaſh of Light-
ning at n.

5, Showrs 3 m. & $ m. dark,
warm,

8, Warm m. ſhowring a- Mm.
very warm, Red even.

9. Some drops 8 mM. very
warm z "wind $ p.'drop-

1g 5 .

7 Very ca Lightning at
nmienre.

II. Hor, cloſe, fome drops m.
—_— 3 P-

12, ms e wer 10
——_ wie

13, Rain 1 m. miſt and rain a.
m. Ground-mift 11 p.

I4. Miſt, cloſe, rain to m. &0.

I5. Raingn. wer dark, arm.

IS, Overcaſt '©) ore, {. wer
I Þ. driſle 5 p.


Trerum, Platic d Þ %
Ab Of. 17. ad Nov. 6.


17. Miſt, Rain , violent wd
s m. drifle p. m. high
wing and rain 5 Þ. _

18, Wind nm. tot. warm,high
wd.\.ſcuds p.m.ſhowrg 7p.

19. Wd nofF. tot. clouds low,
ſhowr o. Gallant Mereor.

20, Clouds in Scenes,cobwebs,
3 drops.

21. Gloomy, windy.

mift.

23. Cold, cloſe R. f. drops
3 p. gentleramn 8 p.

24. R,4 m. cloſe, ;

25, Cloſe wind 4 m. H. wind,
{. driſling p. m.


p. |
ound miſt, Thunder.


|


|


warm rain 4p. ad 7 p.
27. Rain all night rill Sun
riſe; ſtorms, cold wd.
28, Froſt, ice, cobwebs, clds
in-Scenes p. m.

29. Some bluſtering b. d- fr.
ice, Cobwebs.

30, Hard froſt all day, overc.


$ Þ+
31. Overcaſt 9 p. thaw.
1, Ice, cleſe m. not overcaſt,


& cold winds, variable. S.
| 2, Dark, wer; cold a. m. H.


wds.

3- Cold ; ſtormy wind ; rai
.9 p. fr. roaring wd.

4 Wind mutrering all night ;
cold ; {. fnow 10 p.

gs. Fr. ſnow lies; Rainat $ p-
ſo all nighr hard.

6. Rain m. windhand wet Þ.
m. till night ;* Tempeſtu-
ous was at N.


I m—— m——


1659, Plat. gr. 3. diſt. a Sept.
| * 4. ad 27.


Rain m. and wd.
oa


Ts ting ſhowr pgm. ſtorm


with ſome wd 4 p. &c.

9. Clouds in Stories, warm,
coaſting ſh. 9 p. cobwebs.
7. Froſty, tow miſt, cobwebs,

cold, H. wd.

8, Rain a. he How:

1 m. and Sun ſet; 7
Dl 9 p. Rain and wd,
ſpoiling Harveſt.

9. Very hard, terrifying wea-
ther a day-break ado. high
wd and driſle 4 p.

10, H, wd, ſome wetting Mm.
cloſe. |

11, Cloſe, offering m. (ad R.


Pp. Mm. &n. s

12. Rain a. 1. mawd (a Floud )
R. tot. n.

13. Rain a. I. cloſe, ſome


wd.

14. Cloſe m. p. driving wd.

15. Rain a. |. much R. a.m.
tot.
( Floud riſe) wds var.

16, Fair m.ſhowry o. & p. m.
ſtore ar London,

17. Fr. high wd at Sun riſe,
& a.m. coaſting ſhowrs,

18. Cold and wind at n.

19. Fr. ſhowrs 2 p.&4 p.
dropping wds gp. & 10 p.

20. Winds 4 m- |. ſhowring,
ſo 1 p. werring art night.

21. Bright m. H. winds 9 m,

. Clds, wdy ; Halo at n.

22. Fr, wd mifling 9 Mm. wet
ad 2 p.

23. Guſts of wd cloſe,wdy,
varm,


of wmds blowing down
Trees,


ſhowrs 2 p- high wd,


25. Rain m> cobwebs, &c,wd,
milling rain at night. .

26, Wind tet, n, clouds bluſh
ar n,

27. Clouds red ro the Eaſtat

night.


| ——


Ab Ottob. 24. Nov. 5.


24& Fr. cool wad, clouds riſe
2 P-

25. Wind tot..n. ant wer 6.
2 m. ſtore; C. rain 7 p,
wds variable,

25, Warm, gentle wer 3 p:
red clouds at E. ( along
with Fog'8'p.. )

27. Fog tot n. & 0. groſs Coh-
webs 3 much Goſſamere,
warm, fog.


Mereors near Urſa.
23. Dark, clofe ; fog 8 p. near
Urſa.


at n.
4 Pp. groſs Cobwebs., fog


P.

1.5 m. dark , drifling 10m»
wd 1p. rainG p,

2, Warm , cloſe, dark p. m.
wd high, wind ar n. offer
driſe.

3- Warm, {. wind o.R. 7 p
&C.,


4. W.f. wet m.cold {. ;
and bluſtering,

s, Storm, Hail; ſnow at Lon-
don m. Hard froſt,ſharp wd.

6, Froſt, nor ſo cold.


mem _


—_————.,


1660. M 1g. 04:b. 23, ab
OH. 22. ad Nov. 5g,


22. Froſt, ſome wd,
| 23. Clhudy, wdy.
24. Froſt, fair, wdy.
25. Fr. cold, cloudy, wdy.
26. Fr. H. clouds curdled ;
cloſe day.
27. Dry , cold, windy; Hail
| and rain 1p. a ſhowr 3 p.
28- R, offer. midnight, clou»


dy.

ag. Fr. Cf. h. curdled clouds,
freeez n.

30. Fr. 2 ſeen plain halfan
ho. after Sun riſe.

31. Froſt, mift, 'curdled clds
above, yielding 9 m, cold,


{, rain.
1+ Clofe


4


24. Moiſtning o.& n. Tempeſt


 Iterum Partil db. 30. Ms, |


28. Fog, cloudy, warm , (. |


30. Cloſe, clouds , Meteors
| 31. Cold n. {. fr. fog a. 1. "


ce A + —


—


Chap. Xl.


dh 2 Home-Diar :


1. Cloſe, wdy,dry,yert threat-
ning.

2. Fr. three quarters of an ho.
and above afrer rifing, Sun
ſhine clear, ſome tleecy cl.

3.Miſt even.inclining to moi-

ure.

4. Cloſe.

5. Fog below, f. h. fleecy

clouds, cloſe evcn.


A? 1551, Mt 25. Ofob.. 28.
Ab 0f0b. ad Nov. 4.


21, Fog, cloudy d. wdy, but
Warm.

22, Cloudy, warm,

23. Cloudy, warm.

24. Cloudy, cobwebs p. m-.
warm d. even. colder. tog
in Meads ; Halo. :

24- Cloudy, cobwebs, High
miſt ; cold, ſome few clds,
miſty n.

26. A ſhowr 5 m. miſty for n,
wdy , driving ſh. warm,


P. Mm. freezing.
27. Fr. little fos 3 warn,


cloudy,
28, Warm day, cloudy.
29. A ſhowr 9 p. myft F, much
R. ad 11 p.
| oy nt rifing as in mift, warm


ay. ;
31. Cloudy, windy, Rain ®\


m. rainy ad 10 p. m.

1- Miſty.

2. Rain m. a ſhowr 10 p.m.
Warm. |

3. Warm, miſt 9 m. and rainy
moſt part ad Sun ſer, fog.

4. Very rainy m. ad 10. fre-


quent ſhowrs ad 2 p, cloſe.


4.


4+ Preram 7 9g. Dec. 2+


A Nov. 25. ad Dec, 23.


25- Fog, froſty, clear n,

25. Idem,

27. Fog, froſty, ſome ſnow a.
l


22, Fog, froſty, hard.

25, Fog, froſty, hard ice upon
Thames. p

30. Fog, froſty, ſoner.

1. Fr. fog, ſome rain p.

2. Fog, cold rain 7 p*

3- Some ſnow a. |. froity,
fog. .

4+ Froſty, fog.

$. Idem.

6. Frofly, fog.

2. Froſt. fog. (n. m. p.

8. Fr. fog, clear 4bove 10 ny.

g. Froſt, ſn tot, d. H. wird
withir.


10. As much ſnow a. 1. H
Winter, {. little thaw.
11. Froſty, fog,


12. Thaw, f(. rain p. m-


13. Thaw 3. n. fog, rain 5. |


ad 8 p,

14. Fog n. Sun ſhine o, (. fly-
ing clds,

1:5. Rain, fr. m, fog.

15, Rain W. P.

17. Rainy,

12. Rain a. |. fair m. p. cold,

19. Cold andcloudy.

20, Cold and wetring,

21. Cloſe, miſty, werring 10


P-
22. Rain m. p. n. cloſe, moiſt,
ſhowr.
23. Fog, rain 1 p. and cold.


Es
—_


1662. {© $5. 0. 28. ab 0%,
20, ad Nov. 6.


20. Fog, flying cloud, warm
H. wd.

21, Wind and rain a. 1. rain
even ; H. wd.

22, Rain a |, cloſe rain 4 p.


$ p.
23. Much raina, |. clds, wd,
Mereors at n.
24. Fr. wind, cold at n.
25. Fr. threatning 1 p.
26. Fr. cloudy, wdy.
27. Fr. wet fog o. Rain to. n.
28, Fair m. ſhowr 3 p.
29, Rain a. |, cloudy m. p.
30. Driſle 7 m.
31, Fog, wd, warm.


—


1663- £ 21.Dec. 18. a Dec.
10, ad 25,


10, Fog, cloſe, moiſtning »


damp. ,
11. Fog, cloſe, dampning ,
windy.
12. Fog, cloſe,moiſtning,wdy,
|


cold.
$. Windy, rain hard ab1 p.


ad g P-

14. Much fr. cold , rain 3 p.
m. cloſe.

15, Blow high tot n. with
moiſture ; bluſtering day;
daſh 23 p.

16, White fr, clear.

17. Froſt, cloſe even, (. dew-


| ng.
{ 18. Rain a. 1. overcaſt o. then


R. m. p- P.M. 0
19. Cloſe day, f. moiſtning,


op.
20, Cloſe days fog, froſt m.


'2 1, Cloſe m. coldiſh, fr. m.


. 22, Cloſe tot, d. muddy p. m.
cold.


305


| 23. Muddy, cold fr. m.

| 24. Great tog, ſtinking, cleat
above.

" 25, Yery cold, cloſe tot de. '


”


—_—


= — ”


| 1564, P. VF Dec. 17. 4 Dece
10, 4d. 22.


10. Cold, wdy, cloſe.


Walls ſwear.

12, Wetting befo re Sun -riſe
& a. m' Rain fadlyagp,
ad midnighr,

13. Miſt, cloſe, warm.

14. Cloſe, miſt, cool d. com-
mended,

15. Fr. cloſe, mild,

15, Mift, cold.

17. Hard fr. mift. rain 2 p. &
P. m.

18. Cloſe, mit, warm,

Ic, A #laring Comet toward
Eaſt in Mt 3; warm, moiſt,
werring,

20, Comer ſeen $ m. cloſe m.
P. Warm.

21, Cloudy n.Comert not ſeen.

22, Cloſe m. evercaſt at


1655. V* 10. Dec. 18. @ Dec,
9. ad 21,


9. L. froſt, muddy,flying clds;
overcaſt. '
10. ik cloſe, cold; £, brisk


W

11+ Little froſt;cloſe day,cald
wd, C 1. clouds at n.

12. Cloſe, fl; clouds m. cold
and dropping.

13. H. wd, cl. n. cloſe, cold
and drying.

14. Cloſe, cold, brisk wd, ſn,
at 9 P.

Is. Roaring wd tot n, H, froſt,
ſharp, wdy d.

16, Very cold and froſty day
Syn riſing tor. 4.

17. Hard fr. ſnow.

18, Fair, bluſtering day, over-
caſt,


Ig, Idem.

20, Hard fr.miſt m. (ſo arn.)

wds, fair.

21. Some thaw, miſt ; Hard
fr. Sun ſhine a. m. overcatt,
cloſe p. mz


1665. VP 20. Dec, 14. 4 Dec:
7, ad 23.
7, Fair m. cooler, fog at Y
riſing, overcaſt, driJing.
8, Cloſe, wdy, high wd p, m.
| Rain 10 Pp. cold a, Ll. .


11. Fr. cloſe, ſome dropping,


+


——_
FF
OF...
& 67 -
SID


d h Þ Home-Daary.


Book 11.


"9. Rain a. 1. clear n.


10. Fair n. hoar froſta.m.clds


flying.

11. Froſt, fine m. ſuddenly a.
1. offer Sun riſe, cloſing m .
p. freez hard tot n.

12. Froſty m. freezing.

13. Froſty, ſharp ,air, Cf.
overcaſt 10 p. Dy
14. m.froſty,yielding,driſling

7 p- &c


15 Warm , yer cloudy, ſuſ-
picious p. M. driſle 4 p.
wind audible.

16, Cloſe, cold wd.

17. Cloſe, cold , offering to
ſnow, wda. l. |

18, Some rain, freez.

19. Froſt m, ſnow lies, thaw.
ſome more ſnow, wd 10 p.

20» Fr. ſnow 7 p. yielding a.
m. yer-ſnow a. m. freez.

21. Froſty, fair, ſnow.Jies.

22. Snow a.l.froſty,thaw Sun,

ET IEE. .

23. Froſty, ſnow lies. © . ©.


—_—


 —_—


1569, Vf 43+ Jan, 20. a Jan»
1. ad Feb, 10. 2. VP 26,
Feb. 1.R.


x; Bitrer froſt, ſnow lies over
the Thames, fog lies.

2. Bitter froſt, ice over the
Thames.

3- Bitter froſt, ice in Bread.

4. Froſty, ſhow, wd audible;
H. and cold wind, offcring


m., .

$ + Fr. ſhow, cloſe, dark wds.

6. Thaw, warmth, ſnow.

7, Wd. cloſe, thaw.

8. Rain ar day break,- thaw,
cloſe.

6, Cold m. p. rain and ſnow,
wd tot. n.

10, Froſt and ſnow m. offe- |
ring tot, d.

11, Thaw tot. n. froſt.

12. Miſt m. dark day, froſt,
fog. q

13. Miſt, ſuſpicious a. m.cldy


» Ns

WM - ro.miſty die tot H, wind,
cloſe. =h

Is. Fog, m1

16, Fog, fog ſub veſpere:

17. Rain m. cloſe, warm.

18, Very windy, cold.

I5. Rainy, cloſe a. m.

20, Fr. fair, freez.

21. Vehement, froſty , wet,
Rainy 10 P»

22, Very rainy, cloſe.

23. Windy, cloſe, freez, and
at i.

24. Fr. break day; H. wind,


4


| 25. Very high wd, tot n.more
rempeſtuous day, ſhowr n.

26. Cloſe rain ab o, ad 3 p.
m. H. wd.

27. Fr. fair and bluſtering.

28. Cloſe, gentle rain p. m.
&7 p.&gp. _

29. Fog a. m. ſome rain.

30. High wind a. l. &a.d.
cloſe, cold, ſo to n;

31. Cold, dull, cloſe m. high
wd tot. d.

1, Cold, Scots miſt,miſfling m.
wetting p.m.

2. Cloſe m. 2 drops 3 milder.

3. Mild, fog m. cloſe at n.

4- Foggy tor. d. ſome milling
10 P.

"A Clote, ſome rain m.

6. Blew fr. cold, cloſe and
high wd 11 p. freez n.

7, Fr. ſnow a. 1.Cloſe, cold,
wdy ; cloſe at n.

8. Froſty, cloſe m. p,

9. Froſly; cloſe, rſt ; Crhaw
p. m. ſnowing p.

' 10, Fog, rainm. 1 p. & wſp.


0
1668, 7. Feb, 4. ad Jan. 28.
a Feb, 10,


28, _ m.p. Fr. and High
w ., h

29. Some fr. much wet and
miſt m. p.

30, Wera. m.

31. Miſty, wer by firs tot d.
and n. ſtorm, high wind.
11. Froſt, miſt ; cloſe m. cloſe

and wdy n.


Wer mM.

3. Rain, ſtorms, ſtorm all p.
Sun riſe ; ſtormy firs 0. p.
M, Even,

4+ Rain, wd p, m. cloſe, and
wd audible.

5. Fair, warm a. m- Sprin
forward ; miſt, Galing :
wind riſe 1c p. wet. 7 e
& 106 h,

6, Cloſe wd, wet4 p. & wd
at nighr.

7. Fair, but high wd,

8. Cloſe m. p.and guſts z wds
at night,

9. Cloſe, offering a. m. and
miſling 4 p. high wind
tot n, |

10, Winds, cloſe, milling m.
ſo at o. & 9 p. ſtormy wds
P. Mm. & n.


DE —


1669, 19. Feb.2d. a 7qp. 27.
ad Feb. 8, fe”


cloſe n, wind at n,


»


2, Fair m- P. 2, Cloſe wds & |
y firs,


1570, 27. Zan 31. a Jan. 25,
Ad Feb, 5.


25+ Some fr. cloſe a, m.R. p.
p.m.rempeſtuous wd.

25. Tempeſtuous wds tot n. C.
ſnow, froſty ; cloſe, bluſte-
ring day.

27. Froſty 3 ſnow 9 m. 0. &

m


28: Fr. cloſe; ſnow m. p,
thaw a. l. freezing a. m,
ar n.

29. Froſty and ſnow 6 m, ſad
Lighen.

39. Yellowiſh cl. winds at
nighr.

31. Bluſcring tot. n. H. fr. (.
ſnow 11 p.

1. Bluſtring m. froſcy, cloſe,
bluſtring tot. n.

2, Bluſcring , froſry , bitrer
high wds,

3. Miſling. 10. calm Weather,

4+ Ny pn fr. cold ; (now
a.

5. Vehement fr. yield, ſnow

- Þ- M, H, was,


A® 1671. Fen. 30. X® 9, ite-


134 Fan. 24. ad March 30.
24. Fr. open. SW.
25. Rain Sun ort, cloſe,warm,
guſts. Rain 5 p. wind.Nly.
26, Fr, warm, ſnow and R.,
I p. wetting 10 p.
27. Overc.p.m.ſome moiſrure
4 P- : W,
28. Fog, wetting m. cloſe 8&
wetting d. ſome guſts 8 p.
Sly.


l
P Windy, foggy, warm 3
| wd at n,
30. Rain m. cloſe rain 3 Þ
H. wind, and grows col
NW
31. Fr. m. cloſe, H., wd a, |.
cold wd.
Febr. 1. Froſty, open. Ny.


.
.


2. Harder fr. fair. Ely,
3. Froſt , cloſe, offer ſnow.
Ely.


3- Froſty, cloſe m. p. NE.
5. Fr. and ice, miſt 3 Froſty,
Halo 6 p.

6. Fr. ſome ſn. found m.open,
Nly. Halo 9 p. Wly.
7. Froſt, miſting and miſling
die tor. R. miſt,wertcing 8 p.

W.SW.


8, Wetting a. m, & p.m. '
g. Cloſe.


= Feb, 19. X 10. duplex


o


,


Chay. XI.


d h 9 Home-Duary.


—


9. Cioie wd,wdy art n, warm. {


Sly.
10, Wetring a. m. & mv p.
d. (09,11 p. cloſe, *
11, Wd, overc. p.m, Ely.
12, Cloſe m.H. guſts 2 p. &c.
driſle 9 p. Sly.
13. Fine warm m. cloſe and
miſt towards even, Wy.
14. Cool, cloſem. p. Sly.
15. Cloſe m. p. miſt even.Ely.
16, Cloſe p. m. wetting p. m.
SE.


16, Fog and very warm p. n


Ely.
18, Cloſe, dewing o. & 10 p.
'NE


19. Some wet m. and driſle
9 m, coldiſh, cloſe, N.

20, Showr o, cold hail 3 p.
wds Sly. a. m. Nly. wveſp.

21. Very cold , open, wind,
ofren ſhowring o. & n.

22. Froſt, cloſe, rain 8 m.
cloſe m. p. Sly.

23. 5og, cioſe , ſome ſenſible
driſle even,

24- Cloſe, ſome drops 4 p.

25+ Cloſe, wetting towards 0.
cool p, m. N.

26. Whute froſt, miſt ; eloſe
p- m. driſle 5p. Nly.

27.Cloſe, ſome drops o.NW.

a8. Cloſe Wy, Sickneſs at
Barbadd's. Gazet.

March 1. Some miſt, coldiſh
wd, miſt even. SE.


28, Miſt, wdy, miſt at even.
S. Zh.


3- Miſt ; wiad open, ſhow-
ring 7 p. high wd. SE.

4- Some miſt, cloſe, wdy ;
ſhowr 3 p. S W.
s.Drifle 10 m. ſhowr 1 p.
Wiy m. Nly r p.

6. Cloſe, ſhowr o. NE.


{ Fr, wdy, cloſe N E. ſnow


offer 4 p-
Cold, miſt, wind. Ely.
$. Some mift, cold wd. Ely.


Shoulder ake 10 p.
10- Fog, froſt, cold ; Rain 2p.
M. tor. $}


| Yo
I1. Fog, cloſing; wind rari-
able


12, Much wet b, d. wet It m.
& p. m. tot. 6


ly.
IJ» Fl. cl. cloſing .m.R.5 D.
oc. E N 2


14-Fogsfair &p.m.warm. Ely.
Is. Cloſe, fairp. m. Ely.


not known 3 m.
16, Rain m. open, Wly. cloſe
even , wd 11, p. wd yar.
17. Cloſe, cool wd.N E. A.


daſh
Rain x1 p,
1}. Some miſt, N E, windy


at Sun ſcr; H. wind mid-
night,

19, H wd, clofe, cold at 0.
wetting 1 p. Rain and in.
even. H, wind, N E. wind
variable.

20. H. wind, ſnow m. thaw
p. m. freez ar n. Ely. cold
in Bed.

21, Gr. fr. ice; cloſe, ſnow-
ing; freezn, Ny.

22, Tearing froſt, hail 11 m.
& p. m. freez, Meteor 11
p. much ice. ;

23. Gr. oſt, froſty, {, miſt
m. v& "Io \ . _

24. Froſty, with great ice, 1.

Tait m. & wveſp. NE.

25. Froſty; {. miſt , cold =_


%*

29. Warm fog 11 m, heat;
drops w. | SE

27. Werting m-. ſhowr 0.
warm, Cloſe. W.S W.

28, Warm, cloſe, werring m.
p.m. tot. &6 p. 7 P» very
varm wd, ſoulcry n,

29. Soulrry day, rain m. SW.


Os Soulrr wind , 7 PÞ-
= Y, Y ” W.


b—


— —


1692, Match, 23. X 25»
A March 11, ad 29.
19. Cloſe, , miſt, windy 11
m. ſhowr and Rainbow 6


P. Ely.
19, Open Ely. C. rain 1p.
warm, cl m.p.
19, Cool m. dry. Ely. bright


and hear p. m.
20, Some miſt. _ Sly.
21. Froſt, cloſe fog. miſt. 0-


penq4p» Why,
22+ Cloſe n. air, nota-


ble fog 3 p. clole. Nly,

23s _ cloſe, drifle _

table fog 7 p. y

24. Miſt m. warm ; 1, w.NW.
cloſe n. ;

25. Yery cold, cloſe, windy.

Ely.N E.


26, Cloſe wd. Sly. fine

pas ſhowr 4 p- or
27 Wind warm, cloudy, __
28. Cloſe , ſome miſt, ra


9 m. Daſh 10m.
29. Cloſe miſt , n__


1673. March 22, V 6. 4A
March 16. ad 26.


16, Windy , wetting circas |
m, rain 11 m, open p. m,


17. Winlv, ſome rain 9 mw,
ION,O0.<P.g Pp. SE
12, 5ome mit, cloudy, fair
P. M. wily.S W,3reat Hal)


19.Showwr coaſling 0.1} owring
3 P. S E. Siv.

2c, Bright m. fine warm day.

N W.

21. Miſting 5 m. cloſe. NE,
cold even.

23, Cloſe, cold. N E. great
Hyſterical fir. -

23. Very cold, cloſe, miſty ;
lowring 1 p» NE, Hail ante
6 p.

74+ Cloſe, wetting 3 p. and
R. ad 10 P. iS Eo

25, Hail 11 m. Rain2 p. 4 p.

8


25. Wind, ſhowr 3 p. NE.


JE CE


1674. March 19. V 17.
»s A March 13, ad 24.


13. Fr. b. d.cloſe, and warm
w


14. High wind and rain a. ms.
ſtormy wd p. m. S W.
_ Aches. c =
15. Miſty, overc. ſome wind;
Ss ;


| 15, Rain circ. midnight,ſhow-


ring 7 m. & a. m. & p. m


Ye

19. Moiſture b.d. & a. m. R
conſiderable 6 p-& Co cy
diſtempers ; Rain ac midn-


13, C. ſnow b. d. ſnowing &
m. very cold p. —_


m

19. {. Snow b. d.Tempeſtuous
wdb.d. and very cold and
ſharp wd. Nly. Aches, wd
cont


20. Snow b. d. ſnowing m. p.


Nly- 1088, Aches art n. He


| 21, Cloſe, cold and fog.


22. Fog, cloſe y open a line
p- m N E. Aches; f. offer
—_— -

23- Fog, w Mm, N1y. EVER»

% w, Aches.

24. Cloſe fog,l. wd.Wly.NWe

Aches.


1695. March 20. V 29.
March 31. S 0, ? Rd”
plex d, A March 12. ad


Apr. 14.
I 2+ F s miſty. NE.
13. Froſt, cold , ſome mit.
NE.
14» Cloſe, \. hails m. Rain
apace 10 p. Thames low,the
TIES


15, Rein


——_ Abu.


308


d hy Home-Diar 'y.


— _—— —


Book 11.


15. Rain m. rainy 4 6.4d 11,
IM. 4d 11 P. (Fc. Ely
15, Snow m. open, Ely.Aches
 Froſtat2p.
17. Froſt, cold, miſt. N E.
brisk wd. |
18. Fr. fair , wetting ; wind
Ely. Aches and Sickneſs.
19. Rain ahd ſnow m. cloſc,
celd. Ely. aq merry
20, Cloſe, cold. Ely. aches.”
21, Rain and ſnow 57 m. dloſe,


colp wd. Y.
ef £2, Cold, miſty. N E. open
IO P. Nly.

23. Fr. ice 3 cold, open
lo 9 p. Y.
24+ Rainy m,' & a. m. cloſc,
Wly.
25. Cloſe m. p. and miſt;
warm m. cool Oo, very


3 Ha-
WI


warm 75 P» |

26. Very warm, clouding m.
Pp. S.SW,

27. Miſle 3 p. ſhowr 4 p-daſh
s Þ- warm. Ely.

28, Very warm, jult ;

 Halow. wy.

29. Cloſe m. p. wetting 6 p.
Gc. Indiſpol.

30. Rain berimes m. rain 11
p. Wly. Aches.

31. R.a midn.ad o, ſhowr 7 p.
Ely. Aches.

Apr. 1. Rain 6 ms hail half an
hour afrer 10 m.ſhowr 3 p.
cold, Aches.

2, YN m. a_ of K

2 rorm Hail ,
cold. it Wly.

3. Lowring m. p. cold. Ely.

 Indiſpol.


A.


cool.
6. Cloady m. p. cool wd.Nly.
Aches.
9. Cloſe, hail o. H. cold wd.
and red wind. N E. Indiſ-
2 >—xy cold,
.F n. & tn. very
Red wd. NE.
9. Hard white froſt, —


ſome


14- Fair and temperate 3 wdy


Iterum May 10. © 4
Ab Apr. 28, ad May 18.


28, Fair m. rain a.l.& 6 P.
Ely. Aches.

29. Cloudy, fair, windy p.m.
NE. Aches. Clouds 1n
Scenes,

30. Miſt, dry , Achcs 11 P.
and cloudy.

News of T. M. at Amboyno
in the Gazer.

May 1. Cloſe m. and eſp.
ſomer. open , Aches p. m.

2, Rain midn. ſome drifling
ſhowr 5 m. & 11 m- rain
1 p. then 6 p: SE.

3- Rain 4 m. cloſe m. p. N.
Aches. :

4- Cloudy m.p.at n.miſt. NW.

5. Warm, miſty. SW.

6. Lowrjng, much air, wind
variable. Aches.

7. Lowring and miſt. N W.

8. Fair, dry, ——_ Nly.

wW


9. Windy a. m. ſomer, overc.
cold veſp. N W.
10, Cloſe m. p. miſt , very
cold m.drops 8p. NW.
.11. Warm, open ; H. wind,
Indiſpoſ. 11 p. Wy.
12, (. drifſle a, m. 1c ms 11
mM. 4 Þ. & 6 p, Wly.warm,
foggy. Aches.
13+ Hor, miſt. wy.
14- Hot,dry, f. lowring. Wly.
veſp. Ely.
15, Cloſe m. open, cooler 3
brick wd 8 p. 2or gun
owr 9


8 p. from the E.
p- 10 p. Aches.

16. Wert m. p.d.Ely. Indifpo-

fitions.


17. Cloſe, cold, Aches.
18. Cloſe. fair. 5 W. lowring
oft merid.


—C


——__


1676. Me. Ii. & Ky

Ab Apr. 29. ad May 16,

29. Bright, hot. Wly. Aches-

30. Hot, adrop or two diſ-
cerned Ely, ſhowr 11 p.wd


2, Fair, Indiſpoſ. Meteor -
Wiy.


brighe Meteor N E. Aches.
4. Cool a. m. wd p. m. . Ely.
5s. Fair, dry wd. Ely. Aches,
wd variable.

6. Hot m. wind brisk 0. oc.
S E. great drops 6 p.

7, H. wd die tot. lowring?


HaZy. | 9 Ely.


- is $a.


8, Showr 11m. 4 p. 4
bong 4 P-6 p. W.,
$. Cloſe wind,ſhowr 8, x1 1
O. 3, 54 7 Þ» Ww,

10. _ clouds, Aches,
11. Some rain 5 p.

wd o. Wly, wd. ay
12.Opcn, dropping m. ſhowr
3 P: 4 P- ſhoulder 5p,
Wy,
13. Windy, cloſe, offering 4
p- ſhowr 5 p. dropping 11
P- Wiy,
14. Cloſe, ſhowr 8, 10 m.
hortiſh 4 p. Halo 11 p,
Wiy
15. Showr 6 m.8 m. 10 m. &
alias, ſhowr © 3 p. h. wd,
Indiſp. cool n. wy.
15, Tempeſt of wd ill about


& ſer 5 p. C.rainq m.
alias, Wy,


n


— — ——


1677, May 8, & 29


A May 3, ad 13,


3. Wet 4. m. tot. open p. m
ſhowr of Hail as artLarS
_ Tlluftrious Rainbow 3

rifle . Ely m.
Wiy p* P- Ely m. Sly ©


May r. Showr s m. Hot. Wy. |


P- |
3. Cloſe m.cool ; brisk wd ;


4 Showr 1m. & 5 m.

5. Cool m. white froſt, wy.
R.2p.&6 p.

6. Goſſamere 1 p. \. wd, Ely.
white fr. Apoplexy 9 m.

7+ Open, yet miſty, brisk cool

Lift, fome lowring ole;

X » ſome low ;
brisk wd, —_—

9. Warm , open and windy;
ſhowr at Hatfield 5 p.

10. Fair, warm, Wly. windy,

11. Warm, overcaftart o. Ely,
Sly Gout.


I2.R a m, wd,
warm _— ym,


13. Cloſe m. guſty, ſprinkle
8 P- S W.

6. Report of 3 Suns ſeep
Long Cloud from Sommey-
ſer-houſe ro St Mich. Corn-
hil at Sun oc,

10. R, : m. Meteor ab 0p%«
Cap. ad Lyram.


Y.


1678, May 6. TT, 11,
Ab Apr. 30. ad May 12.

39 Brisk wind E. cloudy,
warm p. m. Rain 6p.

May 1. H. wind mw. tot. dri-
fle 7 m. rajny and windy
m . P- Rain hard ate 11 p-

2, Driſle circe t mW. rain 9


m. miſty, Wy.


wm. coaſting, dropping 1 P
$ 077 Nw!


Chap. XI.


d h  Homc-Duary.


N W. briszk wd, miſty an-


re 8,


3. Miſty m. wer, W. op-n ;


Red wd.
4- Bri:k wind, S W. Rain 10
m; high wd, ſhowr 2, 5 p.

S W.

gs. Miſty m. S E. wet ante 10


m. & 10 m.Open p- in, wet


10 P.

6. Miſty, rain a. |. Bliue at Fo-
reſt hill, warm. Sly. brisk
wind,

7. Miſty, wer. brick wind ;

warm. . nt.

8. Miſt, wer E. warm. Wly.
Red wd. N E, Bright Me-
reor.

9. Miſty, hor; overcaſt o.

SE.


10, Miſt, wet ; C. wind, hot.
Indiſpoſition z Metcor 11


P.
I 1.,Miſt,hotzbrisk wind,rough
wd, Sun occ, Meteors 2 Þ-9
p-Lighrning inTW.Red wd.
12. Miſt, rain m. 1 p. ſtormy
wd 11 p. Sly.


-_—— — ener eg,


1679. May 16. TI 21.
Platique,
A May 2. ad 30,
2. Open, gentle wind. SW.
3. Fair Sly. heat,overcaſt we/p.
. wind.
4- G ſog. Sly. heat, brisk wd,
SW.
s. Warm n.ſome rain m. SW.
fine werting a, m. to 8


ſhowr 4 p.
6. Rain m. Arie 7 m. Sly. R.
apace 0. 1 P.&a13


7- Cloſe, ſome wd. Sly. ieele
ſhowr ante 9 m. ſome offe-
ring 1 p. Thunder.

8, Cloſe. Nly. ſome rain ;
warm; Wly arn. Ely.

6. Rain 3 m. ad 9. Ely. cloſe,
miſty z driſle p. m. and A-
ches. NE.

10. Rain 4 m;grear fog, cloſe
8 m, Ely, cold wd, _

E 0


—


m. Pp. Ely.
11, Cloſe, {. wd. Ely. miſt;
brisk wihd. SW.
12, Fair. Ely. cold wind.
13: Fair, white flying clouds,
dr El


h Y.
14. Open, ſome wd Ely.cold
m.
15. Open, gentle wd, froſt m. |
&


16, Fair Sly. cloſc, lowring
veſp.

17. Hort p. m. and overcaſt.

oo go 2

12, Warm d.S W. high wd


og


19. Op:n, muſty. N W. tine /25. Brisk wd, very foulcry.


brisk wd.


Rainbow.


cloſe, high wd.


24- {. wd Wly. cold wind, {.


Rain 8 weſP.
11 Mm.


fere tot. hor veſp.
27. Grear fog, cloſe rain 9 p.
Ely. hotriſh weſp.


29. Rainſtore n, & $ m. rain
again 9 m. NE.
30. Fog, wetp m., & m.p.
wly dark p. m.


Tierum, Fuly 1. BD 0.
A June 22. ad July 7.


22. Fair, dry. Nly. Indiſpoſt-
rions.

23. Clear, dry, warm. Nly,

Hor n.

24 Hor, overcaſt. N E.Ely.

25. Fair, cloudy 8 p. wd ritc


P. Ely.

25. Great mift and dew 4 m.
Ely.

27. Foggy, hot p. m. SE.


28. Windy, cold, but hot d.
NE.
29. VVindy, wind riſe p. m,
Lightning 10 p. & nozF. tor,
& tome rain. _
309. Rainy m. Thunder ante
8m. ad 10 m. Dalh 3p.
and Lightening, © - -/ -
Ful. 1, Overcaſt , lowring wd
veſp. wd., Sly.
2. Wind and wet 1 p. & 2 P-
S


| Ye

3. H. wind 6 m.$& de tot.open.
_ -$ly;
4- Wind pretty high, cloudy
SW.


Mm, Þ»
$. Clear m. fair, dry. Sly.
6, Open p. m. ſhowr ante 5 p;
Weathergall ante 8 p,
7. Foggy $ W.f. drops coa-


ſting 7 p»


a


1680, June 28. Þ 13,
A Fune 24. ad July 33.


24+ Bright, hor, brisk wind-


25, Miſt, gentle wd. ſoulrry.
5 » 8 SL


cloudy P- m,


Ely.
20, Open,gentle wiad Sly. hor
Wy,

21. Hor, fair day, hor night.
Sly.

23+ Drops $s m.brisk wd Sly.
Hor tſhowr «5 p. hor weſp.


23+ Rain 5 m. &6 m. foggy ,


25. Cloſe, high wind. Sly. R.


26. Cloſe, brisk wd, r. a. m.


28, Rain m. 0, hor veſp. Wly,


x


27. Miſt, very foulrry, a lictle
 ſhowr poſt Sun vc. Thunder

and Lightning 9 p.Ely 8 p.
29. Cloudy, brick wd, ſoul-
$W.
25- Open, hor, ſone wind ;

Flaſh of Lightning per 8 p.


cry,
&F ante 1m.
Niy


che Councryman , blaſting
where it lighrs.


cooler. Sly.

2. Cloſe, brisk wd, ſhowr m.
warmer. Rain 2 p. and of-
fering 8 p. Sly.
3. Miſt, cool wind, ſhowring
a. m. Daſh 1 p. Thund,
ſtormy wd and drifle veſp.
Sly. The Plague at Ardali-


ed 700, or 8co. in one
Week,


16817, June 26. $ 24.
A Fune 20.ad Faly 1.

20, Cloſe, gentle rain a 2 p.
ad midnight.

21, Wert day , daſhante 3 p.


22. Rain Sun or?. wind, doſe
wind 7 p. SE.
23+ Showr Sun ort. 4o m- p.
m. 6 p. Nly.


-_


3 Þ» :

25. Warmer, fair ; ſome low-
ring. : Sly.
25. Rain a, 1. fog m. open ,
warm 3 ſhowr '8 p. warm
even, Lightning.

27. Showring- hor n. Fog m.
ſhowr 14 m. hot, Lightn.


9 P.
28. Hoe, fog m. ſhowr 11 m.
29. Some miſt m. rain a © ad

4 P- Wly.

3. {. R. very wet ante Sun or,
ad 0. cloſe, cool. Ny.
Fun. 21, Hurracane at Late
burg, ho. 5 p.core up Trees,
unt1l'd Houſes, rock up
men into the air.
27. Dorcheſter, Globe of Fire
(above 2 miles from the
place _) which falling a-
mongſt Tufs.of. Trees,burn
at Two or Three to A


Fun, 21. Monmauth, Lately


Hail and rain lodges the
Corn for ſeveral Miles. D*


4
w*


I


30. Mift, high wd, dewing 7
m. Showr 11 m. cloſe wd.


Some Mildew obſerved by


Zuly 1. Cloſe miſt, open,dry,
ſome mildew again, much


fra and at Prague, there dy- ,


P
24. Rain Sun or?, {6 5 m; Rain -


_—_—


ZIO


_— CT” WD cer er ewes = %


d hy Home-Dzary.


Book IL


20, A Barn fired with


htnj


ng.
Fuly 1. Some rain 4 p. H. wd,
R. 8 m. Nly.


1632. June 25. 0X 6.
A Fune 18. a July 3.


18, Some wind, miſt m. mir


ſling 3 p.


Wly-


19. — =_ wd. Wly-
4 Pad Sun occ,

My 4 os this Month
in the Apothecaries Phyſick
Garden,

20, Cold and brisk wind m.
cloſe drifle circa 3 p. & 9


p- Wly. Gripes. |


21. Some rain 6 m. high wd


I. P.


warm. S W.


22. H. wind m. p. ofren ſhow-
OSS 6 P. 9 P-
S W. warm

Strasbourg. Graſs rots on the


Ground
Rains that have fallcn here.
Benskins N. 117.


the exceflive


23. Warm m. wind brisk m.


ſhowr 11 m. daſh-2 p. coa-


ſting ſhowrs,great daſh and


I this 26. of Fun\ 11
EFreſts at Chelſey Garden.


|


—


ſome wind,

Bruſſels, We had very bad

- Weather here like ro ſpoil
our Harveſt. Gazet.

28. Warm, boy-fick, cloſe, f.
drops poſt 8 m. Rain 10 m,
cloſe day, ſome rain poſt 7
at n. S E, Wly.

25. Cloſe, guſty, very h. wind
7 P- ſome wetting, ante 1 p,
ſo ante 3 p.7 P-10 p. SW,
Indiſpoſitions ar n.

30. Cloſe, high and ſtormy
winds 1 m. ſo m. p. eſpe-
cially p. m- Rain czrca 4 p.
S W. ſome rain 7 Pp.


Fane 29. Rocheſter. Terrible
Hail, Thunder and Light-
ning. Benskins 116,


Ful. 1. Cooler, wdy, driſle
ſtormy and wer 10 m. cold
theSeaſon conſidered. Wly.

2. Some wetting at, or be-
fore Sun ort. ſhowr 9 m.
ſmart ſhowr ante 11 m.
wetting 0.1 p. 2p. H, wd
a. m. eſpecially.

3+ Rain carly & die tot. fere,
ſhowr 8p. SE.m.S W. p.
m. of wind 10 p.

© rain 11 P.


27. Rein poſt 4, & 5 m. open,
NW


|


|= bo


1683. Aug. 20. 6 25.
Ab Aug. 4. ad 24.


0.
LL Brisk wind bl
I2 ©. & after 2 p, m. H.wd.

Wly.
6, Some rain 10 M.0. 4 P. 9


| x. Wind brick and cool


Wly.
m


|


|


cloudy m. p. Nly,
8. Rain a's. ad 8 m. & m, p,
rain ante 8 p. and (erioully
I1 p. hottifth m. high wd,
Sls,

9. Some rainm.& 11 m. 1
diſh. Nly,
10, H. fr. brisk guſts, cloſing,
11, Hot , ſome wetting m,
cloſe m. p. wly.
12, Cold, high wd , ſhower
circ, 1 Þ. wetting 10 p,
N


13. Cloſe a. m. ſome driſle;
open p. Wiy.
14. Rain Mm. rainy ©. Cloſe,
hor ; wetting ; high wd,
wWw


3W.

Is. Foggy, rainy m. p. m. &
a. mn. High wd, ne" 1

16, Froſty m. ſome drops a.m.

wr ante 3 Þ. brisk rain


7 P- NW.
17. Miſty m. C.rain coaſting o,
Lo ans a
18, Open cold wind m,
ſhowr o.
Thunder 3 or 4 caps and
a ratling Storm ; (. hail &
Rai N W


n. 4
19. Cold, cloudy, wd audible


: wiy. Sly.

23. Some miſt and wd. hor p,
m. and fair, SW.Ely.
24-Miſty,very hor d. Lw.Sly.
Cloſe and ſome; wetting a.
m. & p, mn. warm, {, wind,
SW.


” 4


Chap. XI. Forem Diary of h, &C; with Remarques.


Forein Diary of t with the . Iuferionrs, and Remargues therewpon.


Annd

1500. Comet in April for 18 days;
the Ephemerts points out d © 2 ,
but ic alſo puts downa d h 2 :
He who takes notice of the Afe-
riſms where they meet, will be-
think himſelf of the Plezades. In
one Word, Rh ©? arein S, and
if the 18 days were not the very
Firſt of the Month, Z would
be there with them.

1506, Comet again in Azguf, from
ſeveral Authors, in Hewelims,
where M:covims names the day,
Aug. 8. Die Saturni, laſted till day
14. Thus he (though ſome ſpeak of
September.) "This thort liv'd Star
owes its Original to RO? 3 fo
being within grad. 3. of h, and
grad, 14. diſt. from 7. 'Tistrue
d 2 inMzis a great Ingredient,
but that © Þh a hand in it;
believe when you look back on
Apr. Anni ejuſd. and find another
Comet had been there on the. ac-
count of Þ & in A. If we

-ſhould proſecute this more minute-
ly, we would amongſt the reſt
h in$S. S.of Y,but no mo
of _ 5 Pantiveple, Earth

1509. Qept, 14. Lorſrarntizople, x -

uake threw down Wails of -the

ity, thoſe next the Sea + The
Sea diſturbed; ſo that it threatned
the City 3 Lycofth. It held for 18
days. Here's h © 2 ?, allabout
the EquinoRtial 5 Þh Ifay, for'
' © # may meetthere 3 or 4 times,
' before h once. Therefore our
Superiour hath a main Influence :
-Lycoft. Some ſay 13000 Men(lain.
Fromond. \ Is ER

1510, Garda tells us this year of Fi-
-ery- Meteors; and Stones fell from
Heaven, ſome 60 Pound rn,
ſome 120. de Variet. Plyny indeed
we account a Lyat, but not Gar-
dan as yet. "No Author queſtions
it  Keckerman', Lubienes, and 0-
thirs believeit. » Oh that. Gardan
had mention'd the Day or Month ;
I ſhould have ventur'd at the Rea-


| .


ſon. But hap ic when it will; þ
near the Equinox helps to -make ,
or bake that Stone which weigh-
ed fo many Pounds. For that
ſuch things may be , ſee Calri/aus
his Teſtimony of his own Age ,
upon the occalton of that which fell
- A®1492,

I520, fan. 5. Vienna, Three Suns,
with an {71s at © riſe. ate 6. hoy. 3.
Two Hals's about the Sun. This
15nQ great matter of Influence
only © hare together wth 2 7,
Fiveof in them ,cnough to draw
the Sun's Picture, becaule they are
at it again Two days after.

1526, Sept. Menſ. Thunder at Bafi!
fired their Magazin 3 Lycof Q +,
V = circa medinn Oftobris, on At-
las Mount, Snow burying Men
and Cartel, Leo Afer. apud Purrh.


574. |
IS a p Floud at ons, M;-
zald. 2 2 oppoled ztragr.
5. fed le Y JS. | -
Intra in Or ro menſe Junts ap-
parut Gometa,Ecftorm. e Ghron.Sax.
h © ? all in: wen. princ. at the
endia@d 2%, allin Sz; fo the
Heavens are ripe for 4. But the
Truth is, the Comet is only atte-
ſted by.one Saxon Record: It may
be, 'twas a Sublunar 'Comer, nor
of General Appearance. This we
ſee is the memorable year for
Waſting Flouds; wherefore Aug.
finds us another Comet. for . that
matter. If that in Z«ze be rightly
ſet , then the Flouds' were poin-
ted at by a double Monitor : and
what we have ſaid 1s right, That
Flouds and Comets depend on a
Common Celeſtial Cauſe contre: -
ving them, though not always
bringing forth at che ſame time.
' For. behold the great Inundation in
Norembere, (o dire, ſo lamentable
happened, whenas © and were
in =: ſo wichal apon Þ $ 2? , be+
ingin X 2, (Satwzin x, the 0-
; ther{Twoin the Oppolite.)
1538; Spt- 27, 28, 29. Putcole in
| LIT! Gam-


- Sh


tt
hb Fo orexen Diary, with Nm


Book II.


Ganpaniss 'X place w an = _—
from the Me
y_ AI T. M Elly in
omzond, ſpeaks of 15 $ toge-
ther ; others for the greateſt part
of Two years. For this of Sept.
isnot Þ on the Equinox? © and
3 not far off? More minutely is
notO h Vin Gardezal Points ; but
15 is out of its place ? I was oath


to loſe the Obſervation. And-


before we part with this year,
what ſhook Baſil, Fan. 20. in Ly-
coſt. Is not Þ there alſo? Yes :
For as ſaon as the » got of the
one (ide of £-, and Þh ſtayed on
the other, the Ciry nandies But
cone nn08 Sept. in the midſt
of whi happened Sohma's Tem: | ds
peſt of Wind and Saows h and
Abbe bn
1539. ter 23: & Sept. 7. my
4 la tols'd with Tempeſt,


Fi


—


'* our Þ $2 had a hand there, ap-
pears from » joyning with 2 to
ſalute h

Again, Di 19. A monſtrous Storm,
never faw the like, Þ 9 ut ſupra.

So Sept. 2. apud ay pe Hurri-
canes, Thunder, Lightning, Inun-
dation 3 of which the Inhabi-
rants wrote 2 Narrative, Gap. 8,
Tis our hÞ 2 ,for .9 is Stationary
again at the time; and Sept. 5. in
a little Town of March, Chaims ,
or Many Fiery Meteors. Lyc. He
mentions a voice from Heaven,
but that muſt be a Story when the
> gap was None. R 9 at


ſupy
O84 6 Acies Geleftes, Lyc. h won-
derfully opppoſes © 9 ? with an
tion {orare,that it confttrms
Fu report.
Nov. 10. Storms extream on the Sea
—— Stow. h 2. in Y= (hill.


m—_—_—


bound for Galifornia. de Lact. Gap. . OSob. 5. Lat, At Yay foul,

6. h Y an fine, bur ſee %.& "hinS oppo

alſo. th une 2. or Hak!. Ea. 1.

1540.08. 29.New Þ Crue! Tem-| h2 in S&, and $ Stationary.

peſt, IV.Veſſels broke; 686.Per- | Oo. 5. Very foul. Hakl. 129. 4.$

"Co,
web, 3. 25 a 4 I3. erous Tem
Evidence. Þ 2 © all in = ; but | 44 hoursat the Caſpran Sea. Pur-


there is more Evidence if the E-
phemerides be conſulted
. theſe IIL. guilty.
tein.” Veſil on :
diſtroyed by. —— Storms
-and Rain. gomay | 7 rt


to prove
the We


5


EN
FI. Jas. 23.
places, T


a. 38- Libor , Fer Fare apa 68


ſs ; % & then accuſed, but H
PS all. in x2. He is Potent
i5 p_ ET Weg _ &
3 Er 5 (1
LE JAR: _ h2 in -moky
ieg


hin Tem-
peſt oor the Town. Lye.


OY


chas 198. ſupra in d 2 +3 bur
* hO? 2 are within gr, 15.in S


fine.

1559. May 13. Caſpian Ses, a fore
Storm, Hakl. 327. 15. Another,
we had much = to hve. 358. h
©FL came, & op

1567, Feb I6, I7, 18. t Storm

G the Coaſt of England, Hakl.

inet hf © 8. 27. at Flores Iſle

Rain fell. ſuddenly, Hakl.


|


's Voyage.
ro | uk, I4." Leaconotus Tjehemens Fru-
menta Sternens, Gemma 2. 357..©
P m-S, d h 2 inprixc. m,
EL 28. Tempeſt of wind
drowning Boats, Stow, © #, V.
RL MX,
Sept. 25. . Rocunat A Chaſih fuaning
Ca. 2: NR
>


Ofober 9. Storm, akl. 556. h 4 ©


2 in ©,


I 569:


—_—__c_wx


Chap. Xl. Hh Forern Dzary oueh Remarques.


312


OO


1569. March 12. Iris noftnr z a, Gem.
2. 64. Gelu proargioſum, Ib, © © h
? cums 1 h Y.

14. T. M. Lovain, circa hor, 12. Co-
lores tn Celo walde terrik iles. I.

Sept. 1. Gelum Sanguineum hoy. 11.
zo, but fo bright as any thing ,


might: be read. 14. 2. 65. Stellz aif- |


currentes, © h abont the Equator,
with Y. d 27 laxa oppoſitione.
1Nowemb. 8. Horrible Comet, Gem.


hL.

1570. Ofeb. 8. Wind, Rain, and
much Harm with Flouds. Hel-
kngſb.Stow, h © 7 at the end of =,

1571, Sept.11.Chaſma flammeum,Gem:-
#42. h 7 ira /Equator.

1572. Nov. 18. Star in Caſſopera :
We ſhall meer with % 4 oppo-
ſed, but alſo we 'find Þ & in m.
Scorpro, fay I, hath great Influence
on ſuch Phenomena.

1574. Nov. 14, 15. London. Heavens
burning, Stow. h © 2 in 2. Even
{o thels Planets in Z fired all on

| Cocar ts % in S over their
Heads ; and owe Fires al on the 0-
ther fide;anOcular Demonſtration !

1577: July 4, 5, 6. The Fatal Damp
at the Sethons at Oxford. You
may remember , mentioned be-
fore in our diſcourſe of © Þ 3 there
were other Aſpects upon that
place 3 but h © were great Mo-
vers, who can deny it, when a
Month after © h $ comes and
deſtroys 20 Perſons by Lightning,
Hows 682. hI fay, for 2 1 Statt-
onaryz No danger bat when the
Thief fad. : :

. 1578. June 28. Freezland, is cover d

all over with Snow. Frobiſhers os
Voyage. 630. Hideohs Fog, Ice
infinite. 631. h ME

1581, Jan. 5. Tripoli, Ten Ships
wracked by Storm. Newberg.


Parch 1. 41 NS Ty |


met aſcending South-

and deſcending North-Eaſt. Purch.
I. 121. h & + in ®;- Note, this
Comet appeared not in Hevelzas's
Catalogue. Note alſo this Year
there is News of a Fd:450 Fla-
ming at the Weff-Indies , Guatrana-


cofta and others. Burt they envy

| us the day of the Month. So Þ or
{ome otherGood Planer loſes byir.
I5S5. 4 March 19. for fo you muſt
read it 3 ad April 14. Mr. Ca-
wendiſh (eparated from Sir Walter
Raleigh, Hakl. 734. Wonderful


la, Angoarfio, Iſcland. From A-


that then began d hg in Y' 8.
and about that time in April, ©
had got out of the Sign.

1587. April. 16. Eaftes: Day, very
Great Storms for 3 days. Cables
broke, Hak/. 759.9 2 oppoſ.inm x ,
h © 2? 1n S. andbefore that Apr.
12, Foul Weather, E. of Gumber-
land. Haklut.

t596. Febr. 8. Great Tempeſt. We
loſt the Foreſight. Drakes Voyage,
3. hLinMand x.

1597. Ang. 24. Fon! Storm , moſt
intenſely violent 5 or 6 hours:
Parch. 1943. d 2 &, but h 0d
at in 7; and Sept. 19. 20. h ©
On. = Soi f Magella

1599. Sept. 7. St S © ellan,
Storms, forced Cpr.Wirtz to ſtay.
In 2 Months not one fair day: our
Principle refuſes not to give an ac-
count if need be of thoſe Two
Months , Suffice at prefenc that it
began at a New 2, near the Equa-
tor of one fide, with Þh 7 deep in
< on the other fide.

1680, OFvb. 17. Streight of Mamil-
la, Storm had almoſt rob'd us of
our Maſts and Sails. R@Z$ in mn,
and 7? within call.

1606. June to.Shoteland. All afternoon
and Night following, thick and,
_ eather. Purch 3. 823.

Dver5.Lat. 56.deceived by an Order-
[4 nnachay 22. Storms. Parch. h
© Z in Trop. Ry

July 6, 58. A Southerly Curr

urch. $.Die g. A violent Current,
Et. 60. Isnot the » added now to
h © 7; Dre 19. Mighty Current,
2 7 4

1607. Decepeb.8 Frofts till Jar. 15.
thence to Feby. 15. It began h 7
af _—_ 2 on the

ay it firſt appearedzto ſay nothing
of 2 ,being come within che retm.

1608, June 18, C. de Agullias Tem-
peſtas &+ Frigus Maximum _

@ 2


—


TE —


314


_ = OE Diary with the Infertors, and Remarques. Book IT.


1609.


h@) in trop. die 26. Tanta vis
wentorum ut aliqui umbilico tenus
aquis inſtiterent. 1d, h © *.

July 2. New-found-Land, Ar
night much great Rain, Wind
ſhifting. Purch 3. 184. h 2 G ate
$. we caught 118 great Gogd Fiſh,
and ſaw great Sholes of Herr:ngs,
hd 2 8. Die10. Great Current,
and yet no ground , at 170 Fa-
thoms, Lut. 41. h4 2 5.


1610. Gire, ful. p_ we had a
Storm, our Men fell {tick ad fretum
Davis. Purch. Lat. 78.

Aug. 2, A great and whirling Sea,
whence I know not. Ib.

1615.March 15.About G.Gomorin we
ſaw 3 Spouts of Water not far
from us, one whereof continuing
about half an Hour. Parch. 1.515,
©? YL ».NnV.

Die 28. Mazellan Streights, Wind
and Tide forced us out, Purch. 17


i i |

16 's March 16. Terrible Storm in
the Bay of Portugal, 5 days and
Nights.

3617. Marth 21, Ventus Decumanus,
Keplerz h $2 in S, juxta Pletad.

May 1. Parela, K. >@% in S.


Die 1. Li ,K. hg? in S. |
OF. 22. $ Pallits, K. whether Þh


do not contribute by way of Op-
poſalof the ©, and ® with the


I , by way of Oppoſal to Þh, in- |


quirendum eſt. |
1618. April 21, Thunder very vehe-
ment,. but. no Rain $5 Extream hot
at Night, d 4d @©2 in S&. Dze
16. Hot. They cannot endureto


wear {Oo much asLinnen, h ut Jopre.
VU,


161 9. ful I. Pluvie Continue.
hg inT, Yd oppoſedin V
Dez. 16; A Current to the North-
ward, - which uſed” to be Sourh-


Eaft, Purch. 1. 1629. if that uſual
Current came not


former Current may
the Tropique.


HRhOF in SB,


1621, June 20, Tempeſtas perftrepuit K.


| from 'the
Streights. "Tis not- impoſſible that


conſidering
that h©O2 2? are all oppoſed in


29, 30. Largifiime Pluvie , Ib. h ©


27: 1nS,


Dec. 23. 24. Parela, h © 7 in vw
GG, .


wv


1622, Gire, Anm Priac. in Poland,


Comet and Earthquake: Purchas
Val. 5. ROY, SV.


þ,


Die 25. Phaſmata, in Norico, Arcus


inverſus in Francoma, K. & Q in
XxX. h@OnSWY,


1626, Sept. 4. Iris, ante ortum. Kepl.


hd 9 inm,
1627. an. 18. Veutus decumanus, nix
coptoſa. h 2 in MX,


Feb.g. Ad Francie oram ingens Tempe-


os Rh © 2, 2 Stationary.

arch1, @ Palliaus, h © in MX,
A Feb. 22. ad March 6. Macule
likewiſe RO? in MX,

April 2. Nix multas, h 2, MX,

Aug. 13. Grampiſce, at Woolwich,
Y F; +2 , out hand oy che
end of it , do alone proclaim a
Diſturbance of te


| Febr, 14. Nawes 37. ſubmerſe cum mi-


libus Hominum. Galviſ. d ©% 3;
but oppoſed by H.
1628, Ofiob. 2. Weſtminſter Hall
Floated. h © 7 in the laſt De-
cade of =, the Oppoſition of &.
and Y. helps to ſwell the Waters,
but our other 3 Planets wring
them down. Not unlike was the
Weather in S:l{ia, - as appears
from Bars Ep ; m—_—_ Tmbres
continu for Two days togeth
the end of September. IT
Sept. 7. Nimmbi Grandinoſs.
Ofober 28. Parelia, bY ) in Vx"
there's & and © in m to0. Per.
as that's the Principal Contri-


cor. | |
1629. April x. Continual Rain. Kep!,
ho©? inthelaſt Decade of <>,
Die 16. Winemburg, Parelia, h Q v6


in = fine. & V.,

Die21. Tempeſtand Horrid Thun-
ders. K. h 9 2 in = fine, e+

Sept. 17. Rain the whole day. h © 9
in=Soar 19.hO? 7. now Y
it got in.

Die 20. Sol Palidns, bQQ 3G, in
to me nothing Plainer, the Sun's
Satellites, and Rh Glow upon the


_


| Sun.
Dec,


*
a. oo}


Chap. XI.


h Foreign Diary with Remargques.


11 _j


1630. May 7. Noxious Thunder ,
epler, hQLY, ME,
1636. 7an. 4. Rain and Storms, h ©
2 1n VP,
Die6. Much Rain.
Die 21.Vicl.St.Rain faſt,Durchazs.
Kyr. © $ helps to rain the whole
y, we have heard. Here they


| Dze 28. Rain a weſp. ad med. no.

Dye 30: Sad ſhowr, Hail and Storm
of. Wind, moſt violent Lightning
in the South-Eaſt, Many Ships
loſt in the Mediterranean. Calvif.
Append. To all this anſwers: not :{o
much Y. and &, as Hh's oppoſing
of ® near the Tropique.


are found in = , but hand 9 in | 1650, Warm Winter ,. many Plants


 V contribute.

May 14. Ghaſme. th 2 in WS,

June 6. Heat, Thunder, h © in S
ze 15, Frightful Thunder and great
Rain, RF in VS,

Fuly 1, 2. Rain and Thunder, h ©
in SY,

1639. Febr. 21. Trawano's, Whirl-
wind, Mazdelſlo, Lat. 21. © 2,
X; hY in Xx.

Aug. 9. Near Mp, Graſhop-
pers deprived us of the Sight of ©
& 2, oppoſed by hin =,

wy: 22, Moyſon, came unexpected-
y.

_ Ob. 16. At Danube Stream,
corm and T. M. Kyr. X 6. h
m 28. 2. |

1644. Nov. 17. Parelia , London. C.

arton

Die 18. Snow all day,and alſo Thun-
der. Kyr.

Die 25. Halo y. «

1645. April 16, 18. Sol ſanguineous,
4 O 2 {ſolves it Jreuy well ; but
withall h oppoſes them near the
Equacor.

1646. Febr. 11, Thunder, Meteors,

yriander. S and 2 we allow be-
forez but alſo h 2 in V and
= nearly oppoſed.

1648. Nev. 13, 14, 15. Rainy and
Windy.

Die 19. Near the Ifle Andro, a
Spout half a quarter of an Hour,
14. h oppoſing 2 ? in 7 T.
Dze 28. Very violent Storm. 1a.
ec. 2, 3. Fortune tres-vtolente all the
Night. 4.

Die 14, 15. Very violent, 14, Þ
oppoſes 2 7 1» princ. Tropicks,

Dre 18. Currents, h oppoſes 2 ad


fin, 7,
Strong Tempeſts of Winds


Green. For December and Jarua-
ry the aforeſaid Configurations
may be noted. Feſuwins burns.
Tranſat. 68. h on the Tropic
point,or near it, the year through-
our.

Dec. 10. T. M. in Northamptonſhire,
Rh oppoſed © Z All in Tropic,

1655. July 29. Ignis fatuus, Varnton.
R 22 1n Mm,


|


Sept. 2. Tempeſtuous. R@Z in


m.?R.
| 1656. March 28. Much Thunderand
Rain , yet windy day. R2 » in


m, whereupon came Flouds.
April 3. Sad Rain maze toto, Þh Q'
I in MX.


Dz#2 14. Flouds at Yaraton, never
ſohigh. Þh at ſupra.

"I . Feb. 20, Very Cold, bitter ,

uſtering. h oppoſing 2 2.
April 14. Rain aze tot. h and E
near the Equinox.

I658. March 29. Powring Rain. © 2
oppoſed by Þh in 1,

I660. May 28. Hot, Thundring, h 7*
ins m, ZFR.

I665. Between Apr:l the 3. and May,
8. VII. or VIII. Gollers ftifled with
the Damp.TrarſaF. p. 44.Add this
to our Relations of this Nature at
the end of Gbap. 3. Lb. 2. which I
brought in to evince the Czleſti-
2l1Powers of theſe great Movers zz:
genere; but hereIclaim them for h 's
proper Influence, which to me,they
ſeem to demonſtrate : and I was
willing to fancy here is a con-
firmation. For firſt, is not Þ in
the Tropic , the Critical , Car-
dinal Poſition inall thoſe 35 Days?
Well! And 2ly. Were not ſome
of theſe Cole-Miners ſuffocated on
the firſt and laſt days, between


Die 23.
and Rain, tot. ate, 4 hin El 2,
De 27. Hail and much Lightning,


which the reſt of the Numbet
caught their Death? Then faylI ,
Mmmm h 1s


th.


316


h Foreign Diary with Remarques.


Book T


H is concerned. I know there is

and # in d; But is not Þ
alſo Raiſer of ſuch PeſtilentDamwps
at ſuch times? Becauſe if there be
no e extant , there's ?'s D, and
thatduple. Not #® alone, but
 » with him in prize. V, which is
2 perfect Square. But then for
Oppoſition : Doth not 2 make all
the haſt ſhe can to the Cardinal
Pf of h > What think you of
May 8. the laſt day of the Fixed
Term? Do we not find there a
Partile Oppoſition between Þh in
w,and 2 and Y in Sz thetwo
extream Days concur, R2 2 2
Duartile ar the Firſt, an Oppoſite-
62 at the Later. I have more yet
to ſay, when h according to our


Doctrine, enters = upon a 3o.
gr: diſtance, which we may call a
Re ESE
uckilyfor our pretences; 2 .
cauſe I reckon it ſuch, I willc

nur emp ts and wade no further
in the Complementof this Diary,
undertaken only to the
Power of H ,the leaſt, to view, of


all the Planets: Only this
me in mind to take into confide-


—


as well as to diſturb the more
Spirituous, Sulphureous, and Ar-
ſenical Exhalation. And there is
an Inſtance from Gorftantinople, 4*
' 1509, which brings roo _muh E-
vidence, Thirteen Thouſand Men
{lain by the Ruine : Preparing the
Grave firſt , and then deſtroying
the Perſon to ſtop irs Mouth.
There is.no vitible Cauſe fo con-
ſpicuous as 2 © 2 near the Au-
tumnal Equinox. All that time
no hd. noVY and &, &c.


1669. Febr. 26. The late Famons E-


ruptionat eftnra. d h 2, & 16;


7, Partile 5 again, March r,
1680. Dec. 30. Naples, Terrz Motu:,
Þ in S, oppoſing © ? Retr. Ler
this ſuffice, I preſuppoſed that &


| and V were Potent Stars; I was
not ſo fure of h. Wherefore
having ſome hints before from his
d with his Inferiours; I was en-
paged by —_— to the ſear of

+ Truth, to beſtow ſome hours y
on ſo warm a Sent; and behold
to me, he is as great as the Grea-
teſt {ranographer can make him;
and ſo muſt we reckon him; Let
Calculators define his Place and


ration whether h with the Minors | Magnitude at their Peril. Ir atiC
may have Influence on the Body of | fies us that he is ſo big as to cauſe
the Earth, as well as the Spirit. | fo great an Influence.
To ſhake the maſſie tangible part |

Comets Saturnini et Peſtes.


1505: Sept. 4. About Mzchaelmas
and the New 3, a great Meteor
as big as the Moon, hor. 4. Matu-
tina, HL in &, as well as Þ ©

and hin Mt: .

1512, Marchand April; CometSar
guinet colores. h Y © in oppoſet. pro-
pe Equat. Add & Y Q in thepre-
cedent Sign Xx. "Tis the Signs


=p s and contribute their

1521. April 8 SpeRabilis Gometa tn fine
S. » Dichotome familis. Hewel.

| oppoſed 2mm, Y oppoſed Z


in 27;
1526, ab Aug. 23. ad Sept, 23. h © 7


|


were oppoſed about the Equinox
long before its Ex tek Ergo
it was generated by the approch
thereto. _

1529. Four Comets this year, h is
in S all the year long, except the


. very þ

1530. In Jure, et, hY iQ 7,
od 2.7% after, in S.

5 33: une prince. Comet in TT, prope
Perſeum, deinde Retrograde. h 2
in SB; © 2 not far off.

t556. March 15. h4& Q % oo, allin
V. Sat eft, And where did it be-
gin? In fomiſtra ala mt , Heveltus,

how far is that from the pre-


Cile


Chap. XI,


R F, orergn Deary with R eMATQUES,


ciſe Oppottte Point of the Zodiack
to: h, or” 9, pofttion > _

I557. Menſe Ofobris, a Comet. Is
it-enough to fay hisin &. No,


- - but there are 3 Planets in P to Þh |


m S&, wiz, ©? 2, and thisis e-
nough.

1558. Comet in Auguf; I muſt not
ſay Þh wasin & ; we ſhall find it
under the Jovial Comers. Bur I
may ſay he was in & , ſeeing he
was Lodgd with the Famed
Plerades. :

1559. Comet at the end of May,
homns, d oppoling tt R.

1569. Comet, Decemb. 28. h hada
hand here, ported in 2. 18. as
ſure as » was in the fame Sign
with Þ on the day of its firſt ap-
69. Com bout the ogy ing of

I 569. Comet, about

November, there are other confi-
derables to be obferved, but with-
all Þ and © werein =: ſee in


{ of A® 1652. & A® 1661. E
$N 52 1661, Feb. 7,


I625. A Comet, Far. 26. St. NM.
obſerved by Schickard , Kepter,
h 2 mn princip. Me x.

Thus was I willing to examine Eps-
genes his Dod&rine, who aſcribed
the Gerefis of Comets to our Pla-
net, and you fee not without rea-
fon. Seneca re was too
wife 2 Man to attaque Eprigepes
hereabours.

Note always that this Draught is
concerning h, only engaged with
che Inferiours © % z with the
Superiours & and Y, he will ſhew
yet further Power.—And now let
us conſider his Malignancy, if any
there be ; he ow, may have
in irritating Epidemics Peſtilen-
ces, &c. For I hope he is more
m te as to that yer, white joy-
”_ to the Inferiours, then el(e-


® 1577. whena Comet |


ere. 3
1508, Peftilence. Dsmerbr. 1


and &, A

ſhewed it elf in Peru, long before
it viſited Earope, 212. Novem, 1. |
as Arofta Witneſſes. Here, leait I f
ſhould forget it,let me note aGrea
Afﬀrinity between the Planetary
Poſition here, and 1577. for here
we ſhall find twoin 2, two in ==,
and one in W. There, two in -
three in =>, and one in w. May,
if we find any other Mould for
Comets but the Planetary diſpoſi-
tions in ſuch Signs and Degrees of
the Zodiack, I am much abuſed.

1585: Ooh. 18. A Miſty Star obſer-
ved by Tycho ; I ſee % & oppoled
in Z 2 3 but withal I deſire it may
be noted that the Star appeared but
5 degrees diſtant (at firſt) from H.
Ir was therefore created by © op-
poſing Þh in that place.

1596. Faly 9. St. N. A Comet. h

" and 9 12 proncip. Me.

1607. Sept. 15. St. N. A Comet, tho'
is was 9 Months, belongs to other
Configurations ; yet note, Hh in

_ vw, and withal where = 1s |
ſtrangely poſſeſſed; a lucky Pla-
net in Y* will help to forge a Co-


56.

h 2 in TT. Fly.
? in 77, Auguft. |
1510, In Galt#a. Drimerbr. 1
in = aenf. Sept. h 2 ih. 1
I514. 7. Drm. 59. h 2 in =

went. Auguft. |
I517.SweatingSicknefs from Lyammas
to Mz:chaelmas. Hex. VT. Stow,
Ic belongs to Þ% &, yer h $2 were
oppoſed in Tropical Signs, down

to the midſt of Faly.
T5AL, CRE: Death in Angled Hen.
Fl, ©%-3 oppoles
by Hh in =, July & princ, of Aug.
1522, Peſtis atrox Rome. As the
ear before in England, fo now at
| ne 2% » oppoſed by h in
x2, in the Month of 7zly. Note

2 Peſtilential face of Heaven.

1525. Winter Mortality at Londor.
Howes. It belongs to Y, for O#.
Nov. &c. but the firſt Indiſpoſiti-
on might well be in Sept. @ 2 E
oppoſed by Þh in V. Are not our
aſſigned Cauſes conſonant ? for in
1521. ©2 2 are by k in


.


59, h vi-


=2, as herein V. And if 1526.
were ſomewhat infected, as Fal-
lopius witriefles , we have © and


met, but this by the way. See A®
1560. likewiſe As 1569. then that


? at leaſt in Septemb-r, oppoſed
toRinVY,


1538


Sickneſs Epidenucal.


1568. Peſtis crudelis, we ſhall find in
hd.
Fuly Months. But @R? mn
Auguſt are concerned ; .and h © ?
for September. _

1540. Great Mortality, Ague, Flux,
Peſtilence. Stow h d in->; for June
and July, hs 2 for Auguſt. Þ
2 7 in = for September.

'J

'3 uly 12. h we ſhall find with &,

cis true 3 but in July he alſo oppo-

ſes © 2, then 2 again and again.

And note Þh in =, for Dange-

rous it ſeems in thoſe years, where

the Eſtival Planets in a knot, or
immediate ſaccefſion face him in
od.

1556. Feavers, whereof don many
Aldermen, Stow. The like is no-
ted in an Old Ephemeris velSoging
to a Prelate in thoſe times. Epzſc.
Orcadenſ. And d h & is pointed
out as the Cauſe 3 but that d
enters not till November. Yet there
tl Vu | = om

, 25 Stationary em-
= O#ober : to fay nothing of
© and ® inthoſe Months.

2567. July. Peſtilence, Lowarn,Gem-
2:4: Þh 2 were oppoſed in mzer/.
Fuliz, R ©E in Auguſt and Sep-

ember


577. Bruno Gallicus ſroe novs More


"Tis true, as to June and|


r. Sweating Sickneſs at London, |


vie Lues, Dimerbrock,
Rin w, 2 1n S Stationary ; all


Zuly and Auguſt.


1578. Liſbone, Bienni ſpatio, 70000.


interiere. Untzer, We ſhall have
have it under % and &, bur h's
place in fize ought to be obſer-
ved, fince © 2 5%; face him- in
Zune. © and % m-aly, which co-
operate with the beforeſaid Con-
greſs of Þ and &.

1580. Nowus Morbus Luneburgenſss ,
h iSin 2 again, and oppoled 2
in Jare, © in July. of h'$
being in =, we have ſpoken be-
fore.

1609. S. Peſtilence in Loxdox. Other
APSY , Dive Account of Be
preceding Mortality. But for
September S. IV. we Bn h in 22,
oppoling ' 2 , and ſomewhat of 2.

1610, Some Itifection in London,
Briftol. Auguſt. St. N.

hin = oppoſed 2. © and 2 in A;

1630. Some —_—, Lend h
Circ. prencepe m Oppoling 2
- S hold all March, bool Mays

tationary. © coming to the
ſcrap inMay and Bag | pad be-
fore that, other Aſpects take place.

1636. London. Peſtilence began in
May. @ Þ 2. in Tropique Signs.
In Juze © and & are oppoſed by
Saturn,


Chap. XII, Conjunttion of Sol and | upitet, 319
CHAP: XIL '$%; vic ©; re ch
ConjunTion of Sol and Jupiter. ? '«- 's be 4


| $.1. The Planet v. unanimouſly defii'd by the Antients to be temperate,
. 2, 3. Andizct aThunderer as the Two other Super-ors. Remplian
The Charaier for the Planet is not a Greek Z. 4. His Hue pro-
_ Lightning, Þa:Sav. 5, 6,7; Defined to be Warm ant
Moiſt, tt, ſometimes he-is buſie with the Coll. 8...4 Favoirer: of
Drought,” 9. Contept with a:Miſſe or Driſle.or Showr only coaſting
the Country. Tis. wonderful when it rains in one place, and not in
another, yet that Obje1on doth not rout Prognoſtique. 10. Philoſo-
phy gives account of as wonderful things. 11, Moiſture, and the
 Reſiritonif Milne muſt come from ſeveralP rinciples. 12. Fro-
ty Morn.' under y, » as under hy. 13. Eichſtads Suffrage for
the Cold of I. 14. The Satellites may have Inflience with Jove,
but not hinder his Relation toCold. Awarm Gleam rebated may yet
aTuate a chill Exhalation,proved by the FreezingExperiment with Salt,
and the cracking of a Bottle immerged in the Depth of the Sea.
I 5. Light the Spirit of the World ;, in no need therefore of any In-
herent Frigorific in the Planets. 16. The Antients.drew their warn
. Charafier fromthe d of Jove with Sol. Which 16,17. is Warmer
' than the Oppoſition. 189. RetraFion of the Theſis which makes
 Jove theCooler Planet. 19.The Diary. 20. Jove of. it ſeif 4
Varm Star; . 21. Ponderous and Violent. . 22. His Lightning
 ſearce Innocent. 23. How y, is Cold; what Evidence for it.. *Tis
at any natural *Emanation of the Planet , but wholly Accidental.
25. Paralogiſm retraffed. . 26 .h ircolder, but neither"is he intrin-
fically ſuch. *Tis Accident here alſo, and Reſtraint or Deſcrtion,
27. Whether \. be Parent of the North Winds, or Serenity. 28.Evi-
dence of the Premiſes. 29. h appears not Cold, butin caſe of Des
ſertion, notwithſtanding his Diſtance. 30. Difference of Froff.
31. Jove ſcems after all, to be a back Friend to Moiſture. 31. Sore
Solicitude in obſerving this Planet.


$1, Tedd pe of Jove with Hand the reſt hath bin deferred to the laſt;
becauſe weare the Firſt that I know of,have ventur'd on the Pa-

radox, to aflert this our Jowve to be a Planet of ſome cool Influence, as
well as the Famed h. The Sentiments of the Ancients is generally, -that
He is Temperate, Ptol. Lib. I. Cap. 4. 20. Lb. 2. Gap. g. on which account,
they reckon him with 2 and ), a benefique Star , 44 nv wneezoies &/npyy
becauſe of their Temperareneſs, Pol. I. 5. So he in Lucan, 4 Jove t-wpe-
'7ies, Lib. X. 4.207. Before him Cicero de Nat. Deorum. Lb. 2. Stellatrumn
tantws eſt concentus ex diſſumulibus motibus ut cum ſummun Saturnus refrigeres,
media Martis accendat, His interſerta ours illuſtret & temperet. The lame
Notion in Plizy, Ideoqte hujns (Martts) ardore nimio + rigore Saturn inten-
rtum anibobus ex utroque temperars Jovem ſalutaremque fiert, Lz6. 2, Gap. 8.
[Where you have the Temper, and the ſappoſed benefique Influence foun-


h ;
N—_ns Nnnn S 2, In


| Reinphan. Whether = be Cool ? "5: Makk Wi


' $ 2. In ſach agreementall ſeems to be well,and fo it may, if it can accord
with what is deliver'd elſewhere by Plz»y, concerning che Three Superi-
ors, that They, of all the reſt, are the moſt nored Forgers of Lightning,
= amongſt them eſpecially Fove, who is ſeated in the midſt. Pliny, Lib.2.

Pp. 20. |

\ $ 3. Thar Fupjter, the Supreme God of the Heathens, ſhould Thunder,
is no great Marvel, whoin all Ages and Nations out of the Pale, hath bin
Worthipped for ſuch. But chat the Planet ſhould aſſume the ſame Thun-
dering Title, deſerves conſideration : It ſeems ſome ſuch thing hath been
obſerved heretofore, coming from him, as well as from & and Hh. Pliny,
Lb. 2. Gap. and though we cannot ſay that the Star of the Heathen God,
Remphan in the Greek, Tranſlation of the Prophet, doth ſignifie Jupster,
or the Thunderer, as c_ will have it, fince Remphaz is the Coprique '
Name for Saturn, as Kircher and Bochart, from the Coptique Lex:cons do
aſſure us; yer this we know, that the Chara&er which ic hath obtained
among Aftrologers,rightly drawn,reſembles the Three-fork'd Dart, which
in Sculpture paſſerh for Lightning , as Scalzger rightly ; not the Firſt Ler-
__ Zevs » _ name , as P. Naun;w hath conjetur'd, followed


in Solinum.

S 4 And truly there is Lightning in his Face,as alſo in Fezws, (though the
Antients take no notice of that ) h is called of Old but par Wig buc
Y. ſomewhat more, vat wy, pai 361, xaict Adm, 1 He chi, Bright and Illu-
Rrative, as Plizy faid burnow : Yet Y. 1s defined by no Fury or Exceſs of
Warmth, but moderately and temperately Warm, which may be ſome
Argument to evince, that Aſtrology is for che ſound part, not founded on
Fabulous Gentiliſm 3 but upon long and weary Experience.

$5. Bright, Warm, and Tomperate, be conſequently Moiſt, and
Oo Proleny gives it, not only in the place quoted before, bur elſewhere,

etrah,Gap. T, where for 2 » he expreſſeth himſelf thus, IagoyaZle oy durais
# #03» g 53219221 Moiſt then he is,but with Moderation : In his Dominion
ke moiſtens the Fruits of the Ground ; and Ptolemy ckie encreaſe the
Rivers by his Moiſture,,uusres; moderately, Tetrab. IT. Gap. 9. Y then is
Moiſt and Warm and temperate in both. But we have aſſerted
zlfo'to be a Cool Planet ; where ate we now ?

S 6. For, can Jowe be like the Man in the Fable, who, to the Amaze- *
ment of the Poor Satyr, from the ſame Mouth breath'd Hort and Cold ?
No, we intend not for any Fancies fake of our own, to affront Sence,
Reaſon and Experience : To dear Warmth to that Planet whoſe very
Globe proclaims ſuch a Celeſtial Glow ; who is found upon the Faith of
our own Tables to maintain his Title of Thunderer in ſome parts of Hea-
ven, asalſo for Warmth and Moiſture, to bring in a Quora, ſuch as may

ihe the Antients Denomination. -

Ss 7. Nay, but when Aſtrology diſcourſes of a Cold Planer, ſhe is far,ic
may of from believing any inherent Qualicy, ſuch as ſhall challenge more
property in the Planer, then Light or Warmth : No, Lucid and Warm

_——_ of and as ſuch to be eſteemed. Yet they may have
' withall a Faculty cohabiting with Light and Warmch, which, when time

is a Friend to Cold ; whether that Faculty be diſtinguiſhed wholly
from Light, or is noching elte but the remiſſer, weaker, or leſs affiſted
Beam, as we rather lay it. |

68. Weſhall e prove that V., unleſs heightned extreamly, is
Cold, like h , upon; the account that he is a Favour of Dryth. Al-
though our Experience is fo full, that we diſdain Authority in the Caſe,
yet it may not be amilsto remember in the mean time what is granted by


Cardaz:


%


Chap. XII. Rats in one place not in another,falls underRule of Art. 321


—_—


Caraan :. Conſtant, ſaith he, gudd & & ©, imo & UV & 2 exſtccant © and
then 'tis a Qyeſtion worth while, adds he, how they can Exficcate cum ſont
humidi, CGardan de VII. Stellis errat. Gap. 10. de Saturne.

© 9. And when the very Antients confeſs He is but moderately moiſt,
as we have heard, it ſeems there is ſome Obſtruction in Y, that hinders
che meaſure that other Planets give.—Secondly, another obſervable which
I attend to, is ſome abatement of Moiſture, which atrends it, and the
Showr which ReCounpymgs calls a coaſting Showr inour AlpeR,running
round the Heaven, and ſerving the Neighbour Villages, in the mean time
none of his bounteous Dole falls upon his peice of Ground. Such a diffe-
rence there is of Showrs, is manifeſt, whereof ſome more liberally expand
their Vail over all the Hemiſphere 5 others, more enviouſly confine theni-
{elves to ſuch a Border, or Skirt of the” Horizon. The Obſerver ſhall
find that chis Showr, or the Confinement rather, I had almoſt ſaid isfre-
quent under this, or ſome other Jovial Aſpect ; whichif ic be , I beſeech
the Reader, to obſerve, that it may not march for an Obje&ion any
longer, how ſhrewd ſoever it hath hicherto ſeemed , that all Predictions
muſt needs be vain, inaſmuch as our Eyes themſelves are Witneſles how it
Rains often-cimes in one place, while not a drop falls in another and this
wichin Sight, within the very Ken of the Wizard, whereas the Wizard
hath goc a diſtin Principle, which he advanceth, to give an account of
that Excellent Phanvmenon, viz. whea Rains ſhall fall General, and
when Tropical. ;

S$ +0, Tis Excellent, we grant, and the Creator we heartily believe is
to be admired in it, according as Nature and Holy Writ teach us!
Bue we ask what _—_ is 1t in Philoſophy to give ſome a
account of (everal things juſtly wonderful - In Geometry, Optiques, Mecha-
mcks, Miracles are allowed. Are they a Su tural Philoſophy ? Ve-
rily . Aſtrology had been no Diverſipn or Study of mine, but that it trea-
ted of Wondrous Cauſes, in order to Wonderful Eftecs.

- 11, Now this I have called reſiſting, impairing, diminiſhing, and
from which I argue, that Moiſture it ſelf, and the Reſtriſtion there-
of muſt come from ſeveral Principles z 'tis not the ſame Principle that
cauſes Rain in one part, and at the ſame time Serenity round abour the reſt
of che Hemiſphere.

«12. You have ſeenthe Proof which we offer'd at before, Lb. 1. Cap.
2s that he is che Fautor of Serenity, and ſo confeſſed by Aſtrologers, Gar-
dan, Ptolemy , Kepler , Eichftlad : Men of Experience, and not of impli-
cire Faith only. 2ly. From the Strange Product of the Northerly Winds,
which it ſeems alſo by the ſame unanimous Voice to belong to this Body.
Ptolemy makes it out by a ferch of his ownz bat be that attempt of his
paſſable or not, the 37 is true. + 89: I have been curious to obſerve the
Aſpects of h and Y., each with. the » 3 and I find Froſty Mornsand
other Tokens of Cold, even as often under the Later, asunder the For-
mer. Icryed alſo in Keplers Nine Years Diary, and I found Nothing bur
Agreement. Ir will be (aid, and ſoit will prove in the Aſpects of & with
the ). I anſwer, Nay : Letany make Experience who hath Obſervati-
ons by him, or, for Want of them, in _ Diary. '

Ss 13. We want ſome Authority to back us now ,. there being Few or
hone who tell us that he hath a Chill Influence : Yet we are not altogether
Deſticute of that Experienced E:chſtad's Suffrage, who, though he tell us,

+ (pag. 38.) V and & are hot, yet he tells us (pag. 40.) char ſome Tranhits
of U caule an Eaſt Wind, and a Cold Air, at leaſt by Night, and a _
-


Air by Day: Buc more hame a lictle before, that even the AſpeR by
| a


322


No frigid emanation Planetary. Book II


and 4 ſometimes being Medtecre Gelu, becauſe of the-North- Wind that
accompanies it, - So much doth Ptolemy's Fetch ſtand him in ſtead.

9 14. What have we to ſay but this(leaving the Myſtery of the Satellites,
if they have Influence conſiderable, as I believe they have none, no more
than a new. ſingle Star, in Gygzws ſuppoſe, hath 3) but that owe. ſingly con-
ſidered,. with, or without thoſe Attendants, though he be Warmer than
H, doth .not abandon his Intereſts in frigid Impreſſions ; fince Warmth
it (elf, when qull'd and rebated by the Afﬀuence of the contrary, is not
wholly bound up, bur may and doth exert its Power according to its Stinr,
inexciting the chill Exhalation: Thus in the Freezing Experiment, the
mixture of Salt with the Cold Water helps to Congelation , the Salr in-
vigorating the Cold of the Water, and ſo conglaciating the Snow. To
which I refer the other Newer Experiment, wherein an Empty Bottle
ſgpt cloſe, and ſunk awhile in the Depth of the Sea-Brine,- recurns again
either with a Crack or Flaw, or with the Cork forced into the Neck of
the Bottle. So-great is the Condenſation of the Air, as I reckon, from
the Coldneſ5'of -the Water invigorared and actuated by the ſale Ambient
frame: --i1-::15 6 :
we 15: How-to unriddle this better I know nor, for I am not fond of a
Hertergpeneous Principle lodg/d in the Planer, though 'tis ſuitable enough
ta nn NT; ro make a Luminous Planet Fraught with
ſtore, of Heterogeneous Emanations, Cold and Moiſt, Nitrous, Sulphu-
rous; yea, and theſe reaching not 2 or 3 Miles, but 2. or 3000 Miles, if
the proportions ;afſhigned to the rarefaction of late; take place , which ma-
keth Air to exceed Water in rarity 1000 times according to which 4 miſle
of Vapour or Fume-, may be extenuated into, ſome hundreds at leaſt. Yet
leaſt Iſhould be forced to make uſe of the ſame Hypotheſis in the Fixed
Stars, whoemit all the way a Warm Emanatjon as certain as they do Ly-
cid One; For. a Frigid Efflux I will not undertake, only ſay, as you hear;
that Light or Heat, ' from ſuch a Body ſo diſtanced, ſo circumſtantiated,
inay have ſome Intereſt in the Cold Atome : Cold being not cauſed, as
Aftrologers define, from the meer abſence of Aſpects, but often from the
preſence of ſuch- determinate Aſpects of Þ and Y. ; or, as we may after
_ from the Planetary Bodies Poſition, in relation to the Fixed, whe-
cher they be mutually among themſelves Aſpetted or not. I ſaid ar the
beginning, that Light was the- Spirit of the ' World ; and the Learned
Iſaac Vofſrus 1 ſee (ince, is much of chat Mind. |
- $116. The Truthis, the Antients, as i have reaſon to believe, drew the
Character of Jupiter from their Obſervation of the Conjunction only ,
and therein I confels moſt roan end he is found Warm and Moiſt, and the
reaſon may be, becauſe in Conjunction with the Sun he becomes Diurnal,
and ſo partakes of the Additional Steams of thoſe Celeſtials, which al-
ways attend the Sun. As a Man is always warmer in a Croud ; Six,
E:ve Planets may be, Four muſt be above the Horizon at Noon, when
Conjunction with ove. "=

9 17. Nor is this all, for Joves Motion in Conjunction wich the Sun, is
more deliberate and flow-paced, than in Oppoſtion , &c. thereupon he
may ſeem ro imbibe a greater ſhare of the Solar Warmth, then by a

further diſtance. -,

- ..9 18. To this Effect ſome years agoT have diſputed;but what aySecond
Thoughts ſince? They (ay,that cheFirſt,beſure,is theCerraincy of Prognoſis,
wavers not, for Þ is cool, and % many times ina Cold Fit , and the re-
wrnof chat Fit comes under Cogniſance. ' But then I find by what follows,
chat I may be obliged toretra&t any Superioſity in this kind given to Jove,
as if he was cooler than Hh, for albeic owe doth play his part as often =
Frolt,


3 "SY SS Ws WW Yu. =— WT WT V7 "ow


d— \v


TY wn _ &Y


-


m_


\


—_—


YL © Duary decides a Controverfee.


Chap. XII.


—


323


Froſt, even as Þ perhaps yet Jove isa much warmer Star, and Cold on
ly by accident, which is far a more fac:l- and ſmaoth way of Procedure.
Here we will firſt conſider from the Experience of theDiary,theWarmrh;
and ſettle that and then for the Cold atcerward. The Diary ia this place
ſeeing a Controverlie is to be decided thereby z hopes to be more wel-


com then ordinary.


% © Diary. The Hyemal Parr.


A® 1661, Of. 5, = 24
Sept. 25, H. wd,miſt m. ſome-


times ſhowrs. SW:
27. Windy a. m. and clear
ſtormy wd, and frequent
ſhowrs ; cold d.
28. H. wd, f. ſhowrs m. cold
cold and windy die tot.
SW,
25.Sad rain 3 m. ad 9 m.
clear p. w. cold n, W.
3c. Fr. cold. {. dreps, ſhowr
0. fog n. S.
OS. 1. Showr 6 m. cold, L.
ſhowr veſp.
2, H. wind, cold
Lighcening much , and Th.
8 p. ad 10 p. then violent
Hail, Harm done by Lightn.
E. N.
Fi 3. Fog, warm, cloudy eyecn.


E.

4 Warm, cloſe miſt m, «d
I1 ji. : Ely.

$. Clear m. p. and warm, tog
falln, E


6. Suſpic. ſome wd, cool m.
warm. N E.
7. Clear m. p. fair , warm,
1 veſp. NE.


8. Niſty a. m. warm, cloudy.
E


9. Cloudy m. p. dry, f. wet-
ting I1 P-

#0. Fog, cloudy, warm, col-
der p. m. Ro


——— {


——


1673. 08. 11, © 28,
2H.Froſt,lowring m-P.Aches,


1


$W.
ſhowr 34 2


|


4- Fr. m. windy and wetting
x p. $ W. Armies in the
Air at Poſen in Pokand, cen
by 1000 of SpeRarors.

4- Froſt m. lowring 4 p. cold

and Winterly-nuſty.

Great T. m. in S. Domingo.
Gazet. 127.

[3 a ice m, Wly, froſty

* da


$ Wind and rain 4 1, warm,


.
.


dropping 2 p. SW. Aches.
7. Froſt, ice at Putney, ſhowr
S929. EB
8. (. froſt, faig, miſt, winter-
y Arr, N
9. Froſt , cloſe, foggy a. m.
wetting 10 m. & p. m. Sly.
10, Wetring 0, ſome Rain a.
L $


11. Warm Rain ante {, & ante
noon per tot, very H, wds.
S.SE,
12, Rainy a Sun ort. ad 0. wd
higher, raging with rain
p. m. E. m.S, 0. W. vſp.
13. Bright a. m. coaſting
ſhowr 1n the South and W.
HS
14. Froſi, miſt, rain 1 Pp» 5 P-
10 p. Lightning and Thun-
der, Aches. N E. m.SE.o,
S Wika

15. Open and windy day.


1652, Nov.6. Ml 24
04.28.Fair mſhowr 3 p.SW,
29. Rain b. d. wW


39. Driſley m. open, faj
cloudy Sun fer, _ ,S *
31. Fog, brighr day , warm
wi E


Nov. 1, Froſt m. fair, cloudy

p. m. fain 7 p. Ely.
2, Rain x p. &c. S E,
3. Bl. clouds m. Rain 9 m.

ad 6. Sly.
4- R. hard a 5 m. ad 1 p. Sly,
$s. Fog, cloudy. Nly..
6. Cloſe” m. p. wind, SE
95. Cloſe p. m. rain cowards


w., R. þ
9. Fair m. cloudy 1 p. and

ſome rain, clear n,
10. Cloudy, Iris 8 m. ſtorms


” __ p. Sy


_


1674. . Nov. 10, A 28,
r,S E,Miſty, dark chill wind


Sly. |


|


and offer 4 p. wer ab8 p,
ad 10 p. Barometer, fink fr.
14. 4d 20,
2. Some wer 9 mM. 0. 3 P.7 P.
much R, high wind a. 1.S.
3- S W. Showring, kh.wd o.
ſo Sun occ, $ W. SE.
4 Fair m. p. overc. miſty n.
Aches 7 p.S W. Theſe 4
days high wind on the
Coaſt of England.
$» N. Froſt,brighr, cold NW,
6, Foggy; froſty, clear above.
Aches 11 yp. E.,
7. NE. Cloſe fog, rain 10 m,
' ſhowr 1 p. 5 p. N. Indiſpo.
8. W. rain m. fog, warm, R.
3 P- and wetting 9 p-11 P.
9.W.Rain 5.m.foggy,clegring.
p.m.Aches 11 p. Indiſpof,
10, Foggy, no froſt, clearing,
cloſe. Aches 11 p. Nly.
11.NE. E. Fog,ſome rain m*
E. ſome wd, Aches veſÞ.05*
no.
12. Dark fog, offer twice p.
m. wd p. m. NE.
13. *N E. Some wer ante L.
clouds flying, Aches 10 p.
cold, freez n.
14. N. Foggy die tot. wd p,m_
SW. cold froſt, ice night


OO IE IEC ——


1663, Dec. 9g. £ 26.
Nov. 29. Cloſe.

30. Rain n. cloſe day. W.
Dec. 1. Miſty m. cloſe. E,
2. Miſt, rain m. p.m, m p.


| apgn. W.
3- Rain m, cloſe d, high wind


9, SE.
4- Rain m. rain 91. 5 p. SE.
$+ Rain hard 23 m.cl


p-hi ad ad 7.N.

wer 22 p-high wi 7.N.

6. Fr. fleet a6 mw. 2 or
fleeces of fn. © acdul


N
7. Sn. freezing die tor. ſn. 10
m. N.
8. Froſty m. dropping 8 n.
wy: Ke

9. Fog, cloſe wd, C.moifture


4,M, Sy.
0009009 19%


_—


nn Ia


[om


324


2 Hyemal Dary.


| Book It


10.Fog,cl oſe,moiſtning damp.


Ys
11. Fog , cloſe , dampning.
wl


—_— < nk Fay
12. Fog,clole,moiſtning, wdy,
a " SE.


—


1675, Dec. 12. V ©.


. $ W. Fog, fair, cloſe m.p.
: ">.
4+ Dark miſt, cloſe, wind. S.

SW.


$. Fog, dry , Hyſterical firs,
Aches. . W.

6. Miſt, froſt , cloſe m.
wd, ſome rain 7 p. H. w
W. Aches 9 p.

7. Cloſe, dark, warm. Wly
veſp. Aches 9 p. High wind
10 P.

8. —_ wds 4 m.rain 7 M.
H. wd, open.

9. Fog, cloudy m.p. offer 10
n, wd. N


SW.


1665, FJan.8. VP 29.
Dee. 31. Froſty, windy, offe-
ring. Nly.
1, Freez m. open and warm,
Comet (cen. W.N.
2. Froſty, windy, Comer (cen
clear. N E. Nly.
3- Froſty,windy no?t.tor. \now-
Ing a. M- NE.
4. Froſty , ſnow, _—_


ſn. 7 Þ+ .
$. Vehement ſroſt, freez por


. | by the Fire: Comer ſcen,


and ice upon the Thames.
Nly.
6. Vehement fr. Comer ſeen.
7. Vehement froſt , Thames
frozen, red clouds at n.
8. Froſt, miſt, Sun ſo warm
as to melt ſnow, freez and
fog at n. s,


10. Rain a.l. ſo 2 p. 8 p.H.
wd n. Children complain,
11.Rain a. 1. windy, warm ,

R, 2 p. Lightning -_


12. Daſh of rain, fair, miſt,
windy. ._ W.
13- Much rain 5s m. dark,
windy, rain 2 Þ. h. wind
at n. Boys ſicken, SE.
14. Rain midn. & 2 m. 5m.
high wd, very warm, tem-
peſtuous n, daſh & p. ws


15. Cloſe, wet p, m. Aches
10 p.S W. high wind o.
16, Very warm,dark winds ma.
Powring rain 11 M» _

W.


—


bt


1653. Faq V 24.


26. Myſtyiſh n. miſle. N W*
27. Mifle m. ſome froſt ar n*


28, Fair, f. wind. S W-
29 Rain, freez and miſt ar


night,
30. Fr. miſt, cloudy,windy at
ni


x. Clouds, high wd. S W.
4n. 1. Mild, fair, windy.
w


| S$W.
2. Rair-like, f, wds, {. clea-
ring. SW.


3-Wind and rain p. m.ſomert.
freez. SW.
4. Fr. clear, Cf. wind ; windy;


wer 1. SW.


s. H. wind, cold rain, \.freez.
6. H, wind rain, fo Sun occ.


9. Froſt hard, miſt. N.Ely.
10. Hard fr. miſt, open, (. bl.
clouds 4 Pp. SE.
11. Vehement froſt. T?ames
even frozen, fair. SE.
12, Hard froſt, giving p. m.
freez at n. but cloudy. NE.


'C


1677. Jan, 13. * ' Þ

4- H. wd, daſh of raing p-
warm n.

$, W. Windy, ſomert. oyerc.
warm. SW.

6. W. Rain 10 m. & p, m.?

IP veſp. N. mind 11 p, W.

g+ TEmpeſtuons noF. tot. prec.
H. wind, rain, W. Gour
EXtreme.

8, W, Rain circ, 3 Mm. O& ante,
Froſt with ice, freez in
ſhade, bur cloudy, and fog
at n. Gout extreme.

9. Cloudy, windy, drifie m.
wind and rain 1 p. driſle
6 þ Gout, Two _—


SP... .
| 10.H, wind nw. prec. drifle
driſle m.Tepeſtuous {e tor.
Meteors 3- near SL”,
11. W, Clear. cloudy, «wha
m. 2 Þ. 4 8 (9
12. Harnifat mort a6.
C rain 3 p.6 p.8p. ,W.
13. W, Fr. yery high wing,
_ hail 2p. 4 p. Rain
P-
14. H. wind, fog, open,Gour.
w


15. W. Cloudy. tain a. 1. C,
rain veſp. and H, wind 7 p.


Gout, Aches, SW.


7. H. windz Cl. ſnow, fleet,
P SW.


16, W. ns, froſt, fair, dry*+
w-


17. W. Very hard white fr.
and fog m. fo at o. with
Rain, fo 7 p. Nly. Indiſp,


 —  —_—  —


— - —


1654. Feb. 7.. XY 29.


Jan, 29. Fair, ſome wind.
S W.
30. Clear,miſtyiſh, flees. SYV.
31. {. clouds,
Feb, 1. H. wind W.f., freez,
windy n.{. I. wet. N,
2, Bl. froſt, high wind, very
cold, ſome ſnow.
3+ _ fr. ſnow-like , freez


rd,

4 Fr, buſtling cold winds,N,

s. Fr. ſome ſnow ante I, N.

6. Fr. cloudy, rain-like, thaw,
N


7. Showrs, ſo at n,
8. Some rain, dropping at n.
S


9. Dropping at n.freez h.NE.
No wind.


10, Fair, cold, freez, h. at n.
4x S.


4. —_—


1666. Feb, 13. X 4. ©
Feb. 3. Fr. clear,bright Sum


mers day o. ſnow m. p. p


m.&n. , .
4. Hard fr. ice, clear d, & 0
n m. bl. Skie, yery cold,
recZing at n. Sly.

$s. Cloudy m. before Sun riſc.
6. Very cold,Sun ſhine, open,
fine Summers day, R.6 m.
7. Miſt, cold, overcaſt, ſcarce
any Sun ſhine, miſting ar
p- m. & m. p. SW,

8. Some moiſture 5 m. SW,
9, Cold, cloudy, open 10 m.


cloudy p. m. ſharp wind,
clear n. Wy,
10, Overcaſt m. cloudy, open,


N. P: {. clouding.

11, Thick fog till z z m. over-
caſt at mi. L, driſling by
fits. S W. Sly.

12. Thick fog,miſling m.ſharp
wd, lowring die tor.

13. Thick fog, miſt m. cloy-
dy, overcaſt, coldiſh. NE.

14. Fog, clear, Sun ſhine 0.
Summers day. The Sick-
neſs increaſed this when

E.

Is. Miſt m. cloudy, ar

S clear, fine and pkeaſanc


24h : Nly
1. Fair a. 1. mift, froſt, fair*
overcaſt n. Nly


1578-


=
—


" « a# 3 _&£ -: 4+ 4 & + BB. 4. 2K 5


Chap. XII. u. © Diary Hyemal : Aſtrval. 325


. | Fſtival Part.

1578, Feb, 18 X 10. 1557, March 22. V 11. Li April 22. S 12

| . t << .
8. Plcafanr a. m wdy 0. 1d? 13. Froſty , ofierirg ſnow | 13. Rain 7 m. 2 p. Bail p. m
m. p, W. Rain 1p. 11 p. fo mewhar open, ca:m. | in ſome places. Kain Surf
PR 1 m, cloudy m. p. | 14+ Fr. guſts of wind, miſt & ort. S wW
rifle 8 p. W, WinterlyWeather.freeZ N. | 14, wind and hard rai ;
. rain alln.,
10. Cloudy, miſty, drop or SE. | FC. coaſting ſhowrs. "Floud


2. W. Aches, indilpoſ, | 15- Froſty and ſn, a. |. thaw, ev |
11. Miſt m. open , Samumars miſty thick air. $S.SE. _ ck > ge Halo Su
ay. W, | 15. Cloſe, thaw,rain a, m. m. om. cold. E. wp. __
12. Fog, cloudy. N E. a. m. | - p- calm, Thames much ice. | 16, Rain ante L Ps. wly.
Wy p. m. then N W. bo. though Sun in Equinox. | 17. Cloſe, foggy —_ Sun fe.
Meteor 6 p. prog® Þ g | 17: £08, midn. cloſe, miſty, , warm, coaſting ſhowrs o. #


iſh, Sly.
cor $\.+ ho. 5g. prope  & hy mage ng S W. E-
Siri. dekes 6 18, Fr. ice, fair welcome = we + m, warm rain p. m.
13- Fog, ſome wetting 9 m. ; _ - W.
I Sn i1p.N. ED _—_— hmm _—— Gann Ying —
T 4+ Tags —_— y, fr.m.coldiſh\J 20. Grafs fr. fair and welcom 20. Red m. warm..._nonelo
L ) 6p.a fine ſight. NW: ay, fine Gales, Halo at n. drops 2 p. : ow" W


Grear Meteors circ, 8 p N W. |
15. Miſt, Aches, cloſe, windy | 21. H. wd, wetting, . — "a __—_ _
= "= ; - 22, H. wind nod. tot. f. : ; Ps SW.
16. Mitt m. cloudy, win1 N. wet 2. |. W.NW. | 22. $
arn. W, * 23. f. Rain, cloſe miſt, wer- 5 _ Oy IE
17, Miſt. Aches 8 m. Wly, ting, calm. Nly. Red cl. fr. Weſt og,
cloſe p. m. miſt 5 p. N. | 24. Fair, mild, pleaſant day, | Heaven,
NW


Aches. freez at n . ift.hioh wi
_ 4 _ cleat above, hr 25, Fr. oe 2. m, blew clouds | * IIA A
iſh, Aches. .| andſh. p.m. |
Two Meteors bo. 8.one by R | 25-Fr. ice, very cold wind 3 .” —— em 7
the ocher juxta Sirium, Hail 0. 7 p. H.cold wind at | 25, Bright m. foultry , Frogs
19. Some froſt. miſt, fair a-| Nly. croke,
bove, overcaſt p. m, dew- 26, Red m. lowring C. places,
ing 1 P. __ — miſty clouds,


20. H. wind, £, drops o. rain


Þ. m. m. P. ; $. S March 25+ V 16, many s
21. Rain m. & ©. high wd, | 15. Gr. fog, bright broad cl. 1668. April 28, S 18


. R 7opnp S.| o.coldn, and day. SE-.

& ind, cloudy m. p. $ W | 18- No fog, cold wind, wet- j _—_ WW
| ring m. p. $. ' 25+ Fair "white cl. warm, f.
= png 19. Grear fog, rain 5 m.driſfle | ——> SW.
WO $ E. ſharp wind and cold | *5; Miſt in proſpe&, windy,
p1555- March, 17. V 6. n. rain 4 P- Nly. | 1 ſhowr 2 p.  Wiy
8. Sad ſoking rain. S 20. (. rain ante 7 M. N. | 27+ YVindy m. f. ſhowring a.
6, Strangely clouding, (. 1.R. | 21. f. fog, Rain'ab bo. 5. med. m.\. dropping p. m. VV.


28. Cool, driſle 8 m.&c,miſt,
a droparn. N VV.
29, VVer m. . wetting p.m.


$ W. Clauds as in hail. veſd. uſque ad 7 med. fair
to, Dewing ante Sun ort. hail | m. R.6 p. Iis.
7 mm. very cold. N E. | 22. Clear Wly. Rain ab bo. 6.


11. Froſt, cloſe, miſty m.ſtor- | ad 8 p. $, | 39. Fr. m. very cold a. m. N. |
my R. Hail. . $'W.SE. | 23. H. wird, no fog, R. circa | ail, clouds p. m. cold
12. Sad ſoking day, cleer n. | b». node. fair p. m. NE.
13. Froſt m, wind riſe 10 m. | 24. R. hs, 31m. clear, no fog. £ \
- clouds low. N = . a _ Wt —_— —
13. Rainy tm. p.m. . by | 25. No fog, c . C ſnow |
rs, clear n SW.| antes m. cold, Win 680. May 3. & 2%


15, Bright m. wind riſe,cold, Ye. » | April 24. E. Mift. clear; ſome
” ru S W. | 26. [. fog, froſt, cold, ſharp yen veſp,
Lic Er
wholſome,cool. | 27. Fr. grear fog, c A warm, E.
— $Sw.| warm _ _” , 26. E. Very hot n. by all con,
17. Cloſe, warm, {, moiſture | 28. Some og, froſt. S. feffion 3 ' warm day, col #.*


oP.
216. Fair m. clonds ride con-


ar n. S W. | 20, Gr, fog, freez, clear aboye, | wd,. Aches 11 p. E
£8. Cloſe and cold m. warm& | very cold. E, | 27. Clear aboye, fog below,

cloſe d. S W. | 30. Gr. fog, clear above. $S, oy warm ſickly. Paſbing
19. Cloſe, wind, cloudy, dry. | 31. Rain bo. 3 m. cold,m, | Bellss p. »E
-20, Some wer 3-m. cloſe and | warm p. Mm. S. | 28. Clear aboye, ſmall windy

dry, ſomer, open. ſoultry. E.
21. Fr. bright, cold wd. NE, 29. Es


+. ad. At. At.


.'Lo Diary &ſtrval.


Book II.


29. E. Some thin cl. hot,brisk
wind. _ SE
30.8 E, Miſt, very high wd,
ſomewhat cooler. . E.
May 1. E, Cloſe, cool wind,
miſt, ſuſpic. Snn ort. clds
contrary Sun occ. _
2. E. open, cool, brisk wind,
Country wiſh rain, Cater-
pillars begin to appear. |
Hail, Thund. Ground-miſt,
not a Cloud in the Sky;ſul-
Pic. overc. Sun occ,


3.


* 4. Rain a. 1. G&c. E. cloſe,


cool wd, dewing 8 m. E.
$. E. Fog, clearing 7 M. War-
mer, cloſe de tot.
6. E. Fog, cloſe, dark p.m.
ſhowr with Thunder-claps
Three, 6 p. & or. daſh10


Þ. &c- Þ occ. Þ or. &@ in
N adir. ;

5. N E. Fog, Cf. wind y driſle
m. & 0. daſh 6 p, rain ante
11 P. Oc.


GIS


16579, May 13- IT 18.
20. Cool wind, mille Sun occ-
wind at n. NW.
21. Fair, high wind, threatn.
o, cold eycn. NW.
22, Cloudy m. p. cool. N W.
23. Cloſe m. p. N W.
24 H.wind,coaſting ſhowrsp.
Sun occ, hot,calm a Sun occ.
25. Cool wind, ſomer. overc,
Bees ſwarm, and reruty &


gain,
26. Miſt Suh or, Ey-Ery pat


25, Cloſe m. {. ſhowrg hem-
pen clouds Sun oce., SE.”
m_ hor, blew mift,N.
29. m. wind. \. drops 3”
P-6 Þ. SW.
30. Lowring m. p. f. drops


"I


————


i669. June 4. IT 23.
May 25.Cloſe, norcold,calm 3
. fog at n.Wlya


orc,


32s Ofen ſhowring Moon a,


|


wht |


Ge. Sun occ, and after R.
bow,
28. Temperate, ſhowr o. 4 p.
bright, Nly.
29. Some overcaſt m. heat p.
m. bright n. Siy.
30. Cloſe , ſhowring 6 p. A-
ches. Sly.
31. Temp. calm. :
June 1, Calm. open,blew miſt,
Heat 11 Þ-
2, Some moiſture m. warm,
bright n. Sly.
3. Fog m. Ely. warm, fair.
S W.


4 Fair, warm, overcaſt at n.

Wly.

5. Fair, windy. Nly.

6, Suſpicious m. calm, cool
in ſhade.

7. Windy, rainy 9

p. m. and at n+ chill,


8. "ih flying clouds, wd,


1681, Fune8, Il 27,


28, Heat, clouds promiſe a.
m. clear up p. m. W.

29. Hear, ſtrip'd cl. W.

30. Heat, 1. white cl. lirtle
Stars z H. cool wind. Small
Pox rife.

31. Very high wind, clear p.
m. cold 10 p. W,


tle rain 8 p. |

3- Hear, miſt, Giir E., white p
W. pregnant clouds, wdy.
w


4 Fair, windy m. ſtrip't cl.
* £ offeratn. W.
$5. Fair m. windy d. lowrin
and ſtormy wds 6 p. a.
ſud, W.SW.
Fair m. hard fr. cloudy o.
driſle. ſmart ſhowr 6 p.


" Sun occ. Showrin 4, . :
and wir a 10 p.cos | "_ << —_
31. i rain 11'm.' : :
Fi by w___ —_ 8. =p offer 1 od, 7
' TOP. a I » Cloudy, windy. NW.
x. Cool m, clear, which | 7 TAY» WING
your A wt , W 10, Cold pen p- m. ſome
—_ {. drops, A 11- Cold ms fair. Nly. wind
3- Cool, Cl. ;Cwetnear ye |
_ bales, SE wk Cloſe, guſty.


1658. July 5. S 22.
25. Fune, Clouds ride con-


, 0 . .
66, Far, blew with Thund:


Sly.


2, Fair a. m.ſtrip'd cl, gen?
W.


.*,
.


|


NE.


27. #air, blew miſt, ſhowrinp
7 Þ. S E.

28.Warm, drop a.m. fhowrs ©,

29. Bright m. threarn.o. hear,
clear. N W. Sun occ. bluſh
Eaſt,


. 20, Miſtying cl. hor, Thund.


10 m. dr, winds, bluſking

cl. Sun occ, S W.
1 7ul. Cool and high wind

die tot, little Chowr © m.

ſhowr 1 p. S W,
2, Showr o. gentle gales,

Ground-miſt. S W.
3. Cloſe m. cold day. $ W,
4+ Very hot, fair. S W,
5. Fair, hor, ſhowr 6 p. Hea-
vens red, N,
Kog ante Sun ort, fair, H,
wind. w,
7. Open, dry, cool. W.
8.Miſle 5 m. H.wind and cool,

hempen cl. red cl. Sun occ,
9. VVindy, rainy 9 m. open,


T1 S VV,


16 70s


Fuly g. SB 26.
June 29. Gufts ofw. cloſe m.
p. f. drifle, Nly. cloſe at n.
30. Open, pregnanc clouds,
cloudy at n. Nly.
July 1. Warm, open, cloſe
at N. Y
2. Warm, cloſe m. p. cloſe ar
night. Nly.
3- Warmer, fhowring 10 m.
and coaſting 2 p, £, wind.


: Nly.

4- Fag m. fair, warm, N E.
$. Hot, fair, ſome miPar wh

Ely.

6, Hot, {. lowring o. dry, Fe

hle gales 8 p. Meteors;

Hor d.windy,calm oo

75.Hot d.windy E

1, Cool wind. Sly. wit at 4

9. Fog till 8 m.hor. Fog at n,


W.

10. Glaſs finks, bright, h
ſome Gales. A, Sly
II Hot n. open, fog 7” m.
ſoultry air. Wly.red clouds
'12, Showrin mj-
fi before , 6
13. Wetting 5 m. ſhowring p.


m. Meteor at 3 * in W-
putis of wd,,


-


ud


1682, Ful 15.) 2.


Faly 4. H. wd,ſome rain,wel-
comHaryeſt 'd.the reſt. NW.


$- {. guſts, ſomer, ſuſpic. open


aaa 4


Pa — ” _—


L a warm Star.


Chap. XI.


5 Miſty m. hempen cl curious
harveſt, Lighrning 10 p in
the weſt, terrible in M.C,
hoc n. tot, wetting a. m.

9. L. Thunder and Rain ante | 2. Froſt, windy, fair.


ous veſp. SW.SE.


N W.
N ur,


3 m. {. guſts, ſhowr circ. © [g2.Froſt mi.ſer ro R.z p, 5 W,
drille inSW.8p. W. b& Froſt. windy, warm, Me-
8. Angry clouds in m. places | reorsar ni. S VV.


bur ſcarce any wet. W. E. | 5. H. wind, ſome rain 5 p.
9. Jrear fog , early 3 clouds | Tempeſtuous wd at nighe.


contrary 9 m. dry p. m.W. SVY.
"10, Gteat fag ome ſhowr | 6. Bluſtering and ſome rain 2.


ahte 4 p. hot evett, W.S. | |. cleatitg p.m.
tc. Miſty , ſhowr early & | 7+ Far driſling , ſhowrs 0.
riſe ; cloſe , yer hot, S. & 5 p. windy; wetting veſ.


S$VV.
12. Fair, hot , overc. bas 8. Fr. R.o and in C. places g


p. clear mh, p. hor.
9. Fair, blew miſt, werting 59


SE.


13. Fair, white cl. ws


' 24. Fog, fair, ſoulery, brisk

wind. NE

15. Hot n. Thutder and ſome
rain ante 4 m. circa d
occ. brisk cool wind. W.

16. Cloudy a.m; and wind,
ſhowr 0. & 1 p. winds bris-
ker p.m. | Heaven overcaſt
art n. Except 4 yards ſpace
fr. W.tcoNE

x7. f. rain 9 en; 10m. 2
$Þ.6 p. t1Þ. wind _


P.
10, Much wer a. 1.


1671, Aug. 11, SY 28.


2. Cloudy, cool, gentle wds*
3.Flying clouds,yer fair.
4. cloudy, hor aif.
5. Very windy, ramy.
6. Cloudy, windy, threatn. R.
th Rainy, 7 ou, windy

; miſty, floarmg cl.


- 10 m. & p. tt, drops 6
18. H. wind EF Fua, _ Þ. R. ſerioutly g p. wh.
drop 8 m.. 1 P:. very eool W.
and tem 9. Coaſting ſhowt o. an wd.
, 6. Harm done in 1 Surrey. | Thunder ſhowr 3 p. ſhowr
x1. Arjok, Dreadful Hurricane} $5 Þ.9 p.
turned a Rock and ſeveral þ 10. ” Coafting ſh. 11 *. P.
a Topſide twrvy, SV
+ Ea 16, it. 3 p- overcaſt L, ko
Le 5 P. 7 P- Guſts of w
a_ ſnare. .. Vy.
7 12, High wind a. I, and muc
1639. Ale 7% OY 23. "R.Tem {t circa merid,with |.
? ' Fly 29. Coafting ſhowr. XIk R. Daſh 5 p. great rain 9
Mexeors. NW


P-
13; Showr 1 p. fair the teſt.
14: Kr. fair, jog mc hot p.m.
| Clonds in Steties 0. dry,
mn + Wiy.


29. Ol. wit, ſhowr 2p
Meteo NW


"3% Warth, ſore ralti 1 [IN


31. R. ante 1, ad 0, temp eſtu-/


Aug. 1. Tempeſt of wind no. | _


—


p


id


Sept. 6. ne 24»


Avg. 27. Vers hot and fair.

28. Dry, cooler.

29. Fr. m. fair.

30. Froſt m. fair.

31. Fr, m. fair.

Sept. 1. Fair, R. at

2 Fair, fr. at n.

3. Fair, very cold.

4 Soulrry, drifle, rain.

5. Driſle, hot, fair p.m»

5. Froſty m. fin d.

7. Dry.

8, 9. Fair.

10, Hot, f. driſle, ſhowrs.
j


1572, Sept. 10, Mt 28.


1, H. wind, open, C\. rain 2p.
daſh 5 ls atLondon, VVIy.
2. H. wind, fair m. p. coaſting
ſh. ar North, lowring at
L1ndon S yV
3- Suſpicious a. 1. and 4. m.
very cold, Aches. VV
$ vv.
4- Cold m. _ 5 Overc. ©,
ſhowr 2 p. 6 þ. Wly.
Ss Hite clds. drifle
wetting ©. 2 p. f h
wind, 2» " $ vv.
6s wmmegh wag 2 Þ. ty
SV


7 Cloſe, , very high wind 6
R. 3 4, S$ VV,
8. Sh. 2p. wdand R.q paSW.
9. —_—_— mum. Pp. ibs
prolpet, coaſting 2 p, SW.
10. Fr. bright m. ſuſpicious;
-+. Dark atid wet a. it. open
Rain 4p. Sly.
Sly. Meteor near w/a minr.
12. Froſt m. bright, clouds j
ſtories. Yyiy
13. Showt 2 p. 5 p.
14 Mift;cold m.bright fair d.
OvCrc, Mp. pam. (. coaſtiig
drops. S$ VY.


\ $ 19. Front this Diary 1 it py pt that Jove, notwithſtanding ſome Cold


a peeping, is
Winter,
latic ; tonameno more
:Seaſon, and:chat according td his
ſting your Eytnpon Det. #*
11678. ee. cortiþaring the *
Dry, &c: SRI Ayr a1, IP, is afi
alread hey A offer'd,, the eader'rh
Ujuſt Surtinet 'Air ev7% ip
- 9 20; Mari hath cy


x Peck


1663; 1695. with
Warm Air vAh. AC


exception,


| is always free from vio!
ba Ofteh, 7,8: by 1667.


but belade;
qy dia I F L ane of the Monchs above-faid,


wn-right warm Star in Surnmer, yea andi
Gin that according to his pon pion 3 in gh nw


Maginw, e pecially ar


ebates and remirs the Cold of the
This you may diſcern by <-


1653.5 1676, Feb, i654.
old; che Wer with the
the Evidence


e 6 jay Plane, but Liaape find that v
'aty Month in t
0. 5, 46 1656;


ne year, elpecially inthe &,


13.\F3, 14, 15-1668.
D


ef;


326


NY a violent Star. Cold, in what caſes. | Bookll.


Dec. 13. 1657. Jan. 21,22. 1659. Zan. 16, t7. 22. 1671. Feb. g, 21. 22,
23, 24. 1660: Marth 10, 13,15, 16, 17 18, 30, BT, 24, a6. 166, March
I7, 22, 24, 25, 295.30, 3t. 1678. ec, 25.1601. March 4. 1684. Not
only for Wind and Wer, but as we ſaid from Pliny and the Antients,
Hail, Lightning , Thunder 3 Winter-Thundgy, in ſome ſpecial Signs,
which Signs by the Virtue of ſome juggling woFus, and the Powder of an
Oppoſition, make ſuch Coruſcations and Tempeſt in the Air, in Now. Dee.
&c: A Diametral Ray. metes the Circle of the Heavens, and unires Car-
dinal Points, brings M:aſuwmer at Ghriſtmas,and makes January taſt of the
Py &ſepe, and February of the Lyon. In our Diary for the d you may ſee
- e viglence, if not in Winter : See I ſay there, and. believe me in

e other:

s 21. And here I belfeve it will appear, that Jove's Lightning is alſo
more minacious; doth more tetrible Execution than uſual, nog out of the
ſtrange Pyrotechny of the Planets Conſtitution, bur, (as incaſe of & and
7 Stationary) from the Exceſs or Diſproportion of the Emanartion,w hich
makes the Scale fly up beyond all compariſon. 4A

S$ 22, Somuch in the I, place for the Warmch, now we have leaves
ſpeak to the Frigid Planer. Yes ſurely,if he inclines to theNerth-Wind,if he
inclines to fair Weather, if he iticlines co Fog, if to Dryth, and abating of


* Moiſture, a Miſle, a coaſting Showr, if he brings as many Froſts as h,
- he muſt be allowed amongſt thoſe who juſtly admit of more Frigid Stars
' than one. Now that he furthers as many Froſts , muſt be evidenced þ


comparing him with h , in hard times, and Winter Seaſons, which will
be done in due place ;vand ſome of theſe Produtts are ap from the
Table, :z. that of Fog and contracted Moiſture, yea ſome Froſt too, and
Cold Winds are found far and near. For the Sums lye thus, Miſt yielgs
$5. Fog 49: 1x toto 114. Froſt 86. Not to ſay that @ DO A areall conſonant,
true to theſe Stiles notably and frequently. |
$ 23. But now—after all Cariotiry ang minute Search poſhble,I find at
laſt that All this is, Imay ſay, even Accidental to our Planer, 7.e. falin
out in caſe of ſome Deſertion ; Hiatus , Co-ar8ation of Him, or the Reft, '
or Both to a narrower limit. True it 1s, that it doth Rain in one plae a.
not in another 3 thata Showr coaſts the Country, and ſingles out, as w
Kid, the Ground in which it will ſhed its Influence, but then 1, for in-
ſtance, a Star Potent enongh at Lzberty, when refrained or forſaken, can
do no more, than he can do , can reach no further than a Topical Showr.
The Planets bode a Showr many times, when they give warning alfo, that
it ſhall be Topical, confined to a Pagſh, to an , to a Wapentale,
yea to one fide of an Houſe, and not another : On the ſame account we
make the World believe we ;can tell when a Meteor will Flare, and
deſcribe an Arch like a Flaming Arrow in the Air , and when it will frike
out of a ſudden, asan Arrow, when near the Ground upon Sight , fixes ;
the fame is our reaſon for Hail, we ſee ſome Watry Meteors will be pro-
duced, __ we ſee not vigour enough to ſecure their freezing. -
9 24. I rhus argued re, eve produceth Fog, but Fog is'2
with ſome degree of elation , to make it viſible, ergo, Jowe is
Cold. I conſider the Dew and ay are 2 things, the one may
proceed from the Stars, and the other from the Nitrous Atrome, which 5
ready to break in, (bei 8 kept out by main Force) on all occafions, w
the Pla Watch doth not diſturb .it, as in all Warm Weather
it doth ; the Planets do not emit this Atome, but at preſent they are not
in the Capacity to Expatiate and hinder its poration. | |
s 25. For, have we not made. out how all d s do tend to Cold ?: And
doth "This not hold in %, which holds in others, & it (elf? And s nor
—S there


_ = ©. ©. _ <>. Ms. a Ts


Oh


"8. 5p") »


ths


Chap. XII. How u :s Parent of the N. Wind or $ erenity


there the ſame reaſon inthe & asin d ; for when in ® they are confined
toa Diameter Line, they may warm one the other, but they cool the Air
and #3 then how nauch more may the reſt of che Aſpes contribute ro 2
Comparative Cold ? Is chere never a Lunar 0 or L will contribute ro
Snow? Verily Y. is commonly more Warmer, and Violent at diſtance;
than neerche Partyle ; when h, we obſerved; was cooler at diſtance, as

ou may remember : A Sign that Hh is more frigid than Y , by reaſon of
is greater remove,which WU cannot pretend to. But neither 1s Þ - it (elf
cool upon any other con(ideration, than his Rexzoze, and want of Conſene
of the reſt : nor doch he affe&t us with any ſenſible Frigidity ; bur in caſe


ot non-aſſiſtance of his Fellows, as may eafily be proved; . So then V. is


a Frigid Plariet, much after the fame manner as H 1s, which the Antients,
it may be, ſhould have obſerved; whenceſoever it falls out, they did nor
give us ſuch Aim : perhaps on confidered the Partile Aſpect only, the
T/:4«um, or thereabouts, and fo defin'd hima Temper ſuiting him to his
Poſition betwen the two Planets, where the one was moſt Remore; the
other next to the Fountain of Heat. Here it may be objected, that this is
to make & ascold as V, and fo put no difference in cafe of Deſertion or
Deſticution, and fo AU is loſt. 1 anſwer, where is 4 in Cold Weather ?
Where are all the Planets in Froſt and Icy Conſtitutions? Mars, Venus,
Mercury, are they a-ſleep? or a cold? as we ny Where isSun it ſelf,
when the Snow melts not under his Gleam. e know that the Planets
fnpiropalader'd may come ſhort of ſuch an Effect in thisand that Clime

ut we ſpeak of Aſpets ,Synods,and Schematiſmes, for advantage of Influence
Czleſtial, and obſerve, that eyen they want their Vigour when oy Tons
their Friends about them, Martial Aſpe& not excepted; Yet ſtill rhe dif-
ference is preſerved of Planetary Influence, as Aſtrology teacheth, in that
a Martial Configuration happens to be more rarely ſo deſerted, as to go
away without Teſtimony : a manifeſt Argument of the true ſettlement
of the Planet's Natures, as every one who will take the pains to confute
Pretenders, (hall find. One Difhculty I have not ſtarted , and that is this,
ſuppoſing the Truth of the Premiſes, how _ though more remote than
Mars, ſhould not be'as warm, or warmert he, becauſe of his Greater
apparent Diameter, and if he be either .Equal or Superiour in. Warmth,
how he can repreſent more cold Weather than d ? The anfwer I confeſs
I muſt ponder upon it, for it is a new raifed 2were, and muſt be bid to
come another time ; in the mean while 'tis apparent that I oblige my ſelf


h tt ſelf- creates no Fr. but upon ſuppoſal of vacuity. Book IT,


find both Wind and Weather abread in the Air, where neither ove nor
his Aſpects can pur in.


| it ſelf tothe Application to Japzter for that day , but thegrand Reaſon
hich holds for all pps days concerned, is the crouding of 5 of the Pla-


any : the other confideration, I-fay, of approach to V. Ln =_ = in
« I; ETeE W


tween © and V., though That helps, but the crouding of 3 together in fo
lictle a cho Fake one more in Dec.6, 7,9. 4 166 3. where we find Froſt


not only from the Company, but forgotten thetn too; only when it
lights on the Common & toall IV. i | 2 I
$ 28. But doth the caſe ſtand thus with Satar2 alſo ? Even the fatne,allow:


: I boldly fay, 'tis: not the Conjuriftion of So! and Saturn alone
that Froſt; bu I


of Jove from the four, and the Lunat
and with ſome other Confiderables ;
fucky, that the Firſt Inſtance ſhould fall
} the Froſt of the 3p

| and Saturn, bur alſo fi
from the 4 Planers in Litrs, and poſſeſ:


We \add the approches of Mars
which muſt be no wonder to atiy ter believes yr ye


- , Creates aFroſt,
$f former is. a” the 'other loves it;
witnes Nev . 1668. and. m |
when time way] ithmy (elf Tan itio
cooker than the. that according d the


chat aners run in 2 biaddle into a narrojv confine,
KX.15 manifeſt: there ions #H'Fiers, In like tmanher, as at


yz 25
_


—_ | like


Chap. XII. 4 Naturaland a Mongrel Froſt. 331


like unhappyCommanders in an Army,they conſent not with the whole;to
keep out theEnemy,by maintaining their Poſts andPaſſes at ſuch proportion
of Diſtance, that they communicate one with the other,the Cold Conftitu-
tion, like che Enemy, will come in at a Gap, unlef there be ſome todiCſ.
pure it with him. We ſhall not trouble the Reader with a Diary for the
P, forl reckon that diſcourſe is fo plain, ir carryeth its Manifeſto with it;
All this while we make not Cold a meer Privation, but Poſitive being,nor
15 pure Darkneſs, but as a Miſt, &c. which will be fure to incroach w

a ſufficient Heat doth not diſpel it.

s 29. Allthis confiſts with my Fancy, that a Lucid Warm Body; which
cannot maſter a Cold Conſtitution, may add ſome adw/ertitiows Strength to
it, as we have often ſaid, and w—_ to illuſtrate by experiments ; ſee
$ 14.when a Jove may be concerned, for though he carry Lighnioe in his
Face, yet he isa Tame, Cold Glow-worm: in his Retirements, as to our in-
feriour Regions 3 neither muſt we Imagine his Erradiation to be Idle. He
may tickle the Cold Atome below, and help to Inflame upwards. So
have we ſeen Comets appear in _ Winters.

$ 3o, I wont ſtretch too far, and (ay that our Planet upon this account
may agitate the Cold Atome more than Saturn, becauſe of its nearer Situ-
ation, and asto ſight, a greater Diameter : what difference then may be
in Froſts, I ſmell noc ; ſome are pure,and have a ſirblePerrnay others |
may be extreme for the while, and all of a ſudden change the into
Storm and Tempeſt of Lightning, &&c. Where I reckon, belide others,
the Planet which had a ſhare in the one, was concerned in the other;
Strongly afliſted at Oe time z a Natural State of Deſtitution in the Other.
There is a Natural,and there is a Mongrel Froſt. The like I may fay of h;

Whether Jove may have ſome Reluctancy to Moiſture, I muſt


S 31,
ſay, I believe it, though I (ee for the moſt this happeneth not
_- a State of Defticurion too, fo it may be lnpotence which we


call Refance : but when I meer with fparing:Moiſture, with few

2 Miſle, a Driſic, a Showe in Pa wn oe To _ Heaven is
Serene, 2a an overcaſt Heaven wns, but nor;
2 Miſt, a Fog, and the like, 2 =5in the Diary, attending the Af
pect Jovial : I ken not what to ſay, but thathe is a Slug as ro Moiſture,and
mult be rouſed and wakened; I fancy many times. For when he cauſeth a
Fog , or a lowring Heaven, if Mars, fayI, were in is place, he would
produce a juſt Moiſture, a Pointelſewhere to be proved.

' S 32, Thus _ I obſerved and meditated : the Reader perceives —


d I caſt about, what I could todiſcover the Tem


difficulty :
EET LITOL EIS
1Ng,V1Z.27.7.
= eckenianthara Planet jo Warmer Effect after


873+ n es. :
grels, than before, becauſe according to our Principle, the cold Conſtitu-
greb, than before, becaule pdt Su go which contraction


Qaqq CHAP,


Aſpett of Y 7 mot always Windy. Book ILI:,


—_—


CHAP. XII, 'dYL EF,
ConjuniFion of Jupiter and Mercury.


$ 1. The Aſped# of \% and 4 cryd up forWinds, as if abſolutely depen-
ding thereon , Cardan, &c. 2. But Columbus , Eichſtad, 4nd
Verulam 3 yea, ard Old Giafar —_— are reſtriive and wary,
2. Platick diſtance, Congreſs of many Planets in one Sign, with ſome
e affeting that Congreſs,or ſome other Planet,8c.mmſt be conſidered
as to Winds. 4, 5. The Square AſpeF agrees,more gy" 7 any are produ-
ced. 6. New Method of Diary for this Aſpe@, p 4 thereby we may
diſcern its, Nature more conveniently. 7. The /Þ:ftival Part with
this AſpeT brings more Wet than Hyemal. 8. The Diary. 9g. Jup.
procures Blite. A Liſt of ſome Bliting Wind. 10. Some Bold in-
truding Fog after a Serene Morn. Text. 11. Obſervations about
the Square. Y. inthe Centre of a Halo. Text. 12. Obſerv. about the
Sextile. AGreen Halo.


$1, | Frau mage tothis Aſpect of V. © is the Configuration of v. & ,
reckoning the difference of Motion, 2? in Dire& Courſe mo-
ving faſter than, ©, cry'd up for Wind. Hear Maginw, Magna ut dicant
Aftrologi Portarum Apertio, ad Ventos, and more we could quote that are
uick and confident in che Points and What comes of it? Every body ſees
e Fault to this day of Profeſſors, whenthey judge a Conſtitution by ons
Symptom. - _ - | ©*4.1. |
s 2. So did Gardan long ago aſcribe the Bluſtering Stormy Winds ;
when for their violence they could not pals the Streets to our one Aſpe,:
'A® 1552. In Ptol, Lib; II. $ $2. but even Old Giafar was wiſer, for when
he had faid that Y: with © and' 8. were raiſers of: Wind, and that he who
will prognoſticate a Wind, muſt attend 2 3 he adds, becauſethe » when
after the Solar Congrels; ſhe applies to ? , 'and fo joyns with him Sab eo-
dew nexut 1n contraria manſione, ventorum nunciat diſcurſus. He teacherh
not his Scholar to preti&t upon the bare Aﬀpe&t,but ſo and ſo: And again,
Mercurius Jovi applicans aut Veneri in manſione wentos figurante, wentos pro-
ducit propittos, If there be more required to 2 Prediction , then more
is required to a Definition, the Ground of the Prediction. Commend me
to Golumbus, whole Skill in Aſtrology look'd' after Complicate Caufes,
as Parchas tells us, Lb. 1. Cap. rt. Text. 5. where being arrived in America
he would not put-to Sea, becauſe he found an Oppoſition of % and ©, Þ
and'?. 'Twas not a fingle Aſpect neither of ' © near ? , nor I, but all
-together. Erchfadis as caurelous;” who mentions the New or Full », co-
incidence to make . things hold together, one way or other.” The Great
Ferulam in hisHiftory of Wihds'gave a hearing co this Aſpe, though he
twas very wary and {paring of making it. an Aphoriſm ; no queſtion becauſe
hefaw it uncertain , and nor'to' be truſted::+/The beſt Philoſophers are
moſt wary. |
_ $3. Well allow the Ancient Aſtrologers that % and 2 , when
Alſpected, have natural aptitude to Winds; but our Buſineſs is to ſpeak to
the 4#, when they are in Conjuntion Platick , when there are twoor
three in the ſame Sign, with,% in V or &, S, >, m, for foIfind the
, Dec. 22. A® 52. ©V 2 in Y, andthelatter three degrees diſtant from
Y. Again, Febr. 25: £* 54. OW & in X, 2 three degrees diſtant on
both days, a Lunar Oppoſicion of ſome diſtin&t Planet. So, March 7. A*
SS


——_—


Chap. XIII. Requrfates tolfind. v * Moiſter in thelEſtival part. 3233


55. 2 2 2 in and May 12.4® 56. IV.in &, 2 grad. 2.diſtant from V.
June 15. IV. in S. July 23. ©d 2 & in M,Y in = oppoles them all. Ag
for Garaax's Storm, belide our Afpe&, there are IV. in , and Fowe knows
what more. |

S 4; Burir may be it holds in the Square Aſpect ; we nmſt ſay it holds»
but wich ſuch limitations of a Platick Aſpect, and oppoſite Sign or Aſpect,
or Sizns Cardinal, but above all the Poſition of Planets in a continued
Order, in Four or Five Sign. So A® 1656. Ang. 27. & 29. it bluſter'd,
but when the Intermediate day , the day of the Aipe&t was calm, tell me
the reaſon, ſome Aſtrologer; for no body-elſe can do it. -.

95. Therefore to, crack of Aſtrological Verity abfoluteiy, is not {0
well, without, or contrary; to Experience, Aſtrological Verity ſon:etimes
conſiſts of , as Matthiolw's great Antidote , a 100 Ingredients. 4® 1662;
Feb. 3. a Square of V and 2? the Second day was. windy ; the firſt, a
Stormy Wind doing much harm, beſides the diſtance Platick, there's a
Square of & and ? in Cardinal Signs. . 4? 64. April 16. there haps the
Aſpet. Die 15: there was Wind, 2 who was configurd with % , had
Two Planets joyned with him in the ſame Sign. Likewiſe Nov. 10. High
Wind appeared 4e 9, 11. here the Aftrologer will tell you the reaton
why on theſe days, and not on the middle. Die 10. 2? the affected Planer;
had Companions with him im the ſame Sign (or in the Oppoſition) all the
three days, bur an Oppoſition (fometimes required) is more viſible on the
9. and 11. than on the 10. ',. ap |

$ 6. Now for the Winds tum Siccitate, which they ſpeak of, I willing-
ly hearken to them, having always had thar Notion of Y for Dry, before
I met ſuch favourable exprefſions of the Arriſt to that Nation; bur I fear,
upon enquiry it will be found that this haps, moſtly when there wants Aſi-
ſtance, Extenffue or Inten/rve, our Diary, you will ſee, favonrs it; bur;
as you may ' note, the Diary's drawn contracted into a 6x ke Compals
than uſual, (partly to avoid ſeeming Prolixity,, but eſpecially ) to diſcover
the Nature of the Atpect (ingly, and by its (elf, referring Thofe Aſpedts
which fall in with" % and © , or with V and 2. to their proper Heads.

* 7. But this ſeems to hold more in the Hyemal part .than the Mſtival ;
where not many days about the Partile Aſpect bring any moiſture, yea and
the whole Sum ſhall frequently yield but a malignant Moiſture 3 for where
ie proves otherwiſe, to be ſure, there is ſome juncture of AſpeRts more
than requiſite, as in che year 7+ (where to our Conjunction.of.- VL. and :2,
thereis a forked Oppoſttian-ot 4, with a Tooth for each, making III,
Aﬀpetts in Aftrologic account) is more than, evident z notwithſtanding
which I could not refer-it elſewhere, as I do with our Afpe&tsat preſenr,
which were coincident with % ©.2 , for then I ſhould reter away all the
Diary preſently: - So hard a thing is it togive an AlpeR its true Definition,
becauſe Ir is ſe!dom or never found Diſtinct and. Separate from thoſe that
pretend to Influence, as much as they; +++ 5 ONOMELES

9 8. Yea, .but why the Summer part moiſter than the * Hyemat > To
thisI anſwer, the XitivalPart may find ſome" other Aſfiſtances, ar, Vige-
rous Poſitions, beſides Co-incidences of © , which are-:on-purpoſe ex-
cluded, or rather ;:becaule the ZMſtival Parrof” Heaven does more invigo-
rate thoſe Planecs which attend the ©, not-only by their bigher Exalratzon
or* Approches 't6- Vertidty , but alſo bythe greater Glories, and thicker
Niber of theFixed that rakeup their Statiqns:in the EſtivalHemiſphere,
exther than in .the Hyemal, which is in-part confirged-fram hence, that
theſame Exre(sof Wet hojds allo inthe Precedent AſpeQ of, © and VL,
(even though che proper Diary was. not drazvn tp after rhis, bur the uſual
manner :) Oa thi fame accovat. as July and 4ug4f; you may know, are

. OG KY x! -i na-


334


VL Diary Hyemal.


Book IT.


rally hot, and dry Months,
—_— chitandivg theſe ſaid


H. and M. Notwit
ourAſpe&,which ha
be ov ed, by
Months yield Rar;


by virtue of thoſe Fixed that are found in
_ of & or mt ( as incaſe of
every12years,or thereabours)if they ng to
meeting. of ſeveral;even Dry Planets, tho

and Storms inſtead of 2 dry P umice-Conſtitution.


eHarveſt


4.4 Diary. Hyemal Part.


A* 1661, OF. 9. to 24,
M® 1662. 00b. 195, 1 20.


12.Cloſe, drifling 5 p. ſome
wane FAE


x8. (Overcaſt 2 m. Belman )
cloſe, foggy die tot.


——_—


A* 1663. Dec, 23. © 29.
18. R. b. d. overc. 0. R. mp"


21. Cloſe m. « lirrle open
m. coldiſh. Er.
22, Cloſe die ret. muddy m.
cold. NE.
$3 Cloſe die "=
Ye
24. Some Sun m. clear 3 great

Fog as ever was -
\£


x. —_—


OI IInrnnne


M* 1642, Dec. 20, Al.
x5. Clear, f. wd, ſtar appearv
freez. ' SW


x6. Cloudy ſomer. ſome wet »
Comer, freeZ. NE.
29. Clear, C. w. cly at n.freez.
Cw. N E.


At 0.
—— ctearing, (. =


20, Clear, f. w. cloudy and.


- "Len freezing 2 lir-
21, Miſty,


Fo NE.|
oats, lng. cons |


—.——


——


———


M® 1665. Fan. 1. 3 27
27. Dee, Miſt, fog, £ ny


, mm. -
28. Cloſe m. cool, drifling,
6 P. Nly.


Ao 1666, March 11. X ite
6. iſt, warm, white Clouds,
clear n. dry. W.
95. Miſt =. coldiſh, & Gone
8. Rainy 7 mM. une 5 mM.
clear 0.hoar froſ,very cold.


Ye
to, Hard fr. clear m. _—_


ries, cloſe m. p» Ely:
12. Froft , ice, miſt , cloſe
Mm. Þ» E.


LR  ——_—


——


A® 1654. Feb. 27. K 4
22. Windy, cloudy, f. Sun 0+
y m. Þ. fre: NW.
23« \.clds, £ rain ſome pla-
CCS. N.
Rainy, w. clear. ,
26. Very high wind, rain and
Nanny 02


A 1655. March8. If
V. in % L ©
& 1657. March rg. V to,
| V, Mm OW-
A® 1674. OR. 30. MN 26.


24, Rams m. 2 m, m. p. &
die tor. Aches , rain m.


n, and bluſtering d)


25- Rain 9 m. miſty, driſle 1
—_ and winds 1 P-
ighrning S E. gp. Mete-

reors by North, froſty. N.
26, Bright m. ſudden overc.
and ſhowr 10 m. fo - P.
W.


27. Rain « midn. m. p. rain


7 m. wind and rain 4 | oo
rious rempeſt , and flying
clouds. A SW,


28, Bright and windy. 5 W.
29, Froſt, bright m. windy ;
83, Wet die tot. and wind H.
at n. Aches. SE,
31, Froſt, fair, Aches 8 p
. Wiy,


A* 1675. Nov. 15. 2 24


rer | Wy.
8. Fog, thawp. mh. NW,
$9. Some miſt, rain at 10 m.
and o. Aches, SW.
10, Cloſe, warm, high wind,


R.4P- $ p-8Þp.
Il, ng Mm. p, very warm,
{. wetting 0. Wly.
12, Cloſe, warm» Wiy.
13. Cloſe, warm, miſt, ſome
miſle 10 p.
14. Froſty m. open. |
I'S. - 7 Nly.
A® 1676, vacar.


A® 1697. Jan. 14. vide in
Þ ©.


=_


w. | 4* 1698. Jan. 25, X 4


| 20. Great ſtorms of wind and
rain 3 m. ſtorm O. 2 Þ.
Mig 7 Þ-

. ram m. open
| At Fg Nly.
22. Fair m. cloudy a. p. miſt


m. {0 6 NW.
23. Hoar troftfur, foggy.NE.


'D &


EPPS Ss


>=


—_— ——— —_


u 7's Diary Kſtival.


335


EE eee es A i


Chap. XIII.


4* 1675. April 2. V 18.
March 29, Great fog, clear a- ,


bore. Ely.
30. Grear fog, clear above.
Sly.


21, R. ho. 3 m. cloudy , cold
m. warm P. m.

April 1. Rain conſiderable p.
m. dark, ſhowr. rain 11 m.
& 6 P-

», Very clear m. ſhowr 0. 5

3, Rain 11 Mm. & 2 p.m. SE


Part AMftiual.


A® 1556, May 13. & 17.


o. Fr. very cold,red wd. Ely.
10. Froſt, fair, cool wd,Frogs
croke,  - SE,
11, White clouds. flying low.
12. Some froſt, fair m. red w.
2 or 3 drops. N E.
12. Rain 100 miles N. ward, ,
froſty, cold wind. NE.
14. Fr. clear white ſircaks,
Red. bliting. NW. N E.
Wind, blew miſt.


———
I


—_—


A® 1668. May 25. S 24.
20, Cloſe, coldiſh, offering m.
| -, Ely.Nly.
21.Coldiſh wd, open. SE.NE.
22, Wer die tot, and n. threatn.
Flouc's. | NE,
23. Cloſe, drifting m. p. wind
at n, J near &qu1nox.N EF,
24. Winds, coluilh , mifling
m. p. cole n. Ely.
25. Warm, open, ſome low-
ring. ; N,
26.. Cool m, with clouds,
warm. Wiy.


Cm i —rn—


A* 1657. May 18, IÞ 14,
15.Dry wd m.ſtreak'd cl.N E.
15, Dry vd , lights , cloudy
winds, |. guſts. N E.
17. Cloſe m. a gentle ſhowr,

ſ. milling 9 m. blew miſt,
N.NE.

18. Cloſe, windy , cloudy,

 blewmiſt. NE.


A? 166g. May 31. It 22,
28. Temperate, ſhowr 0. 4 P.
bright n. Nly.


29, C. overcaſt m. heat p. m*


bright n. Sly


30.Cloſe,ſhowring 5 Aches.
DO


31. Temper, calm day.


A®16 58. June 4. Þ Starionary.


1. Windy, coal. S W,
2. Much rain, S W,
3. Rain, Lightning. Sw;
4+ Much rain. SW,
5. Cloudy. SW,


— —


A® 1570. Jun S
2. Cool wind, open, , offer 0,


ſ." wetting Suft oc. &c, |


Aches 11 p.
3- Open, offering, warm.Wiy,
4» Soulrry a. m. wd brizk,
much Rain and Thunder 4
4 P. ad Sun oc. rhen 2 gr.
ſtorm of Light, n. $ W.


5. Fair, windy. Wly.


5. Cloſe and drilling.
7.Cloſe m.p.and fair p.m.wdy
8. Cloſe m fair p. m, FM. and


cool wind 11 p. Wy ;


9. Warm, open, f. bl, d.l.
miſt, ſoultry ar n.


A? 1559, July 30. dl 22.


26, Fair m.driſling ſhowr,hor,
IW.


guſts of wind.
27, Wer 2 m, and a, m.Wly,
28. Claudy, a coaſting ſhowr.
12 Meteors. N W,
29. Cool wind, a ſhowr 2 p.
ſome Mercors, NW,
30. Clouds in ſtories, warm ,
{. rain 1 p. N W.
31, Rainy day break, at o.
tempeit,wind at even. SW,
SE.


_— I
———


A 1671, Aug. 11. $\ 28.
V. in YN ON
A® 1660. Ang. 5. Me 17.


20. Showring a. m. cloſe,

lowring 1 p dropping we/p-

NW,

31. Cloſe m. ſtiff wid, mijty,

open, Mereor n, NW.

I, 2, 3. Cloudy morning p.
driſle.


4- Thunder and Lightning,


Tempeſt inKent,much R.n.
$, Drifle m. fair p. after, and
dry Lond. |
5. Fair and cloudy Lond,


A® 1672. Aug. 16. TR 20,

11. Showr in proſpe& 1 ps
& 2 p- 3 p-Rainand many
Thunder-Claps, H. wg 2P


12. Cloſe m. p. and lowring,
driſle 9 p. SW,
13. Wert n. cloſe a. m. H. wd,
R. 6 _ . SW.
14. Clofe, ſhowr 0+ & wer-
ting P. M. Mm. Pp. windy,


S W.
15. White. lowring clouds,
ſhowr 4 p. NW


15, Fog, froſt, clole m. P.
white froſt m. Ely.


 D—


| 4* 1673. ON. 21, M 0.


15. Miſty, cloudy. NE.
| -Lowring p. m. and ſome
; werting 8 p.f. wetting a- 1,

. SW.
; 17.Fair a.m, cloſe p.m.ſhowrs


[|
Os .


P.
'18, Tempeſtuous die rot, over-
caſt noon, and rain 1'p.


| 19. Froſt, fair, very miſty.


20, Miſt ar n. '

; 21. Hard froſt, miſty and cloſe
m, p. Aches.

22. Miſty, Aches, rain 8 m.

5 W., NW.


n_—_


A? 1680, April 8. S 17.

3. Rain ante Sun ort.miſt,cldy
H. wind, wetting a. m. &
ante 4 P. -

4- Rain, dark, H. wind m. lit-
le wetting circa 1. & 4.
ſhowring 7 p. NE.

$5. Rain a1, a4 8 m. N E.fog
brick wind, red Heaven,
nifling 7 goa p-1gnis Fatu-
ws at Waltham Abbey.) SE.
; Ely.N E,

6. Some miſt , gentle wind,
rain 4 3. ad 4 m. fog,cloſe.

NW,

5. Dark fog, cloſe, W and 7
ſcen hora 8,

8. Brisk wind , dewing cirea
8m, rain ante 0, with Kail,


W., 1 1522. videin V. Q.,


Rain I p. :
$+ Open, brizk wind , dewing
7 P. Rain 10 0p. SW.


___—


—_—


A? 1681. June 13, IE 28.


10, Cold m. clo:dy, open Þp.
m. dry, f. vin

11. Cold m. fair, few white
clouds, wind variable.

12. Cloudy and ſuſpicious,


cloſe, guſty. Sly.
13+ Some drifle 5 m, H, wind
and cloſe.


14- Very high wind, brighe
air,vd and wetting 10 p.
welcome. N W.


Rrrr Summa


Some Enquiry into Bliting Winds, = Book Il-


_— wm co —


Summa Dierum.


Part Hyemal. Part &ſtival.
gs 72. | Days 68.
et 34: et 42.
Wind G 2, | Wind 25. |
Froſt and Gold 29. Froft and Gold 14.


As we were ſaying, there are more Wet days,and forer in the « &ftiwal
Part. We find 42. under 68. days here, and there, (in the Hyemal!) we
find but 34. under 72. wegave the reaſon as to 1M, which holdsin-the #
alſo, as to ſmart Rains in J=ly and Augsft 3 Fulyand Auguſt abroad are the
Hurricane Months.

S g. Blite .is a Country Obſervation, taught me at firſt by the Huſ-
bandmen, often-times accompanyed with a blew Tin&ture of the Air, or
Red Wind, as they call it, bringing not ſmall Prejudice to Vegetables,
eſpecially in the firſt blowing of Fruit, Corn, &c. It became my Dili-
gence to mark it, for it concerns the Publick, which weall labour after ;
and I find it tobelong _y to a Configuration of Jove with Mercury,
with Sol, with Mars. y 12, 13, 14. 4® 1658, under the Conjun&ion
with Mercury. FJaly 19. A* 1653. under the #, under the 0, 7ar. 16.
'A® 61. But as proper as it doth feem to a Meteor, I found in queſt,
that not ſo much as Yea is excepted 3 yea, eve alone ſtrongly poſited
with ſome great Aſjeriſm Pletages, Hyades , Gaput ceti. Ir happens un-
der a North, or an Ezft-Wind, or a South-Ezft for the moſt part; for the
Inquirers ſake we'll give a Liſt:


A® 1652, June 5, 6, 7, 8. May 7. 12, 13,14;
wpe 15, 16, 16, 18. une 13.30.
uly 3, uly 1, 2.

A® 1653. July 19. 5, 6, 7. 12.

MA 1654. Aug. 1. Aug 2.

Fo Ly A® 1657.

A® 1656, << 12, 18; | March 10. 22, 23.

April 24, 25, 26, May 14.


Some other Concurrents there are which concern the other Superiors
who ſhow themſelves at the ſame time. They who love a Garden, will
attend them.

$10. For Fog, Ofob, 18. A® 62. Sept. 24. 4* 63, we meet with ſuch as
were unfaralell'd, nay we finda Miſt hovering over the Medium, not left
as a Relique of Night, but rudely xe + a clear Morn, maki

Intruſion under thecountenauce of this Aſpect, Nov. 2, A* 68. And
Ths is the Conjunction : the like I obſerved,Fe4. 25. A* 75. with a pretty
attendance of Roping thread Cobwebs, appropriate rather to the Months
of Sept. and Oftober.

S 11, We have learned before'that the # is a conſiderable AfpeR, it
y__ to be ſuch in this Claſs, it brings Wind more than any of its fellow
A ; and ſome ſtreſſes of Weather, as to Wind and Rain , and more
particularly Hail, as may be ſeen by its Inventory, not here produced,
Only we muſt not let paſs the Greex v noted in a Miſty Froſty Night,
ho.9 p. Dec. 25. 4* 1655. It was Novel to me, nor have 1 met or heard
of a Parallel 5 on which I mufed, the rather, becauſe conſidering that in
the Natural Change of Colours, a Light Red fades intoa Dark, That in-
to


Chap. XIII. _ Green'Halo. A Touch of X und OY &.


337 _


to Blew, This into Green; 1 wondred that I never obſerved the next
immediate Precedent Colour of a Nocturnal Vapor, v:z. the Blew ; nor
.doI expect it ſhould be obſerred, when as a Reddith TinQurein an Halo
is frequent : What the Propinquity of # may do, or our concerned Pla-
net V. inthe ſame Sign, Tknow not; Iam glad I find ſome'whom I may
rake upon ſuſpition bor the Cauſe; the Speculation is pleaſant 'enbugh,
and will deſerve the Divertiſement of the Learned. This I learn, thar
although the Colours of the Celeſtial Bow ate refle&ed from a Rorid
Cloud, yer we muſt not neceſlarily infer, there is any Rorint Vapor a
cending, whenſoever theſe Colours are prefented z for in'dry Sealdas be
Solar Halo's are ſometime tin&ed with'red, and'in'the Parelia, by all Fait
of Story, ſeveral Florid Arches or Bows appear, which have not any Fa-
vour for the Inſtant Generation of Rain or Dew. Now of the Sextzles,
the Firſt indeed hath this peculiar Diſcrimination from the TI. that *tis'ob-
ſerved to cauſe Rain at Night, I niean about © ſer, 'or after, more often
by half than the Lacter. |

9 12. Inthe year 1678. when the Firſt 7 haps to hold out about, or
above a Fortnight; in the Month of June we meet with Lightning thrice
in that very term, 12. 711. 22. 24, 29.48d dry Thunder twice, v:z. June
23, 29.and not only there , but in Au2.52. and Apr. 69. under Quadrate
24, Trajections in Apr. May, Sept. Bluſhing Tincture of the Heaven inthe
Eaft, moſt part- under C3. 1. As July 8. 4® 57, Sept. 27. 4*58. May 17.
A® 78.yea ul 20. A®68. a Purple Border round the Horizon. Rainbows
or Halo's one or two, though not found in the forrtier AſpeRs, we ſcarce
mention, except one Halo may be ſerviceable tous, viz, OF, IV. A® 77.
under the II. Square, ſeen at that Hour, when not only the » was in the
Centre, but our Planet V within the Circumference : Where, if the »
decircinares the Circle, our Planet helps to fupply the Vapid miſty Conſi-
ſtence wherein it is ſeated. Before we leave theſe Quadrates, this is pal-
pably evident, that the Second doth lefs Fears, by far, than the Firſt.


—


CHAp.IV. d % 9. Conjun#ionof Jove and Venns:


$1. 2.2 #s voicd to brine Fair Weather, Cardan's rag it;
2. Serenity hath every man's good Word. 9. Fair Weather ſtridly,
or at large. 4. A Serene Aſpe& ſeems to be dry. 5. And Coot;
but that 3s hardly granted, for R 's ſake. 6. Tet A [trology makes not
V2 as warm as , ©. 7+ The Diary muſt ſolve that. 8. A Dia-
ry of more Aſpedts than one. 9. % 9 are ſlippery Aſpetts, profeſs
a Calm, and meditate a Storm. 10. Proved from Kepler's Diary.
11. Our oj Home-Diary produced. 13. The ſame iſſue in Efti-
wal.14.4 Hyemal Part. 15.As mich almoſt for HI asSerenity.
16.How \. get the name forSerenity.1 7. How.or in what caſe their Fe-
renity or Dryth is undoubted.18.Ocular Demonſtration from the Hyemal
Part. 19. The ſame from the FEſtival. 20. Rule to know Fair
Weathtr under this Aſpe. 21. Rule for Frofty Morping in the
Hyemal Part. 22. Thoſe Rules hold in \y 7 alſo. 23. Reſumyp-
tion of the Violence of this Aſpe , hitherto not taken notice of.
24. The CharaFer. 25. Sudden Alterationproper to Jovial Aſpetts.


'$1, 5 he Aſpe& of : and 2, ſay Aſtrologers, finiles in our Face,


*} ene Air 3 We ſhall not wanton it with Poetique
prod ing Seren Z ANCEIne


YL 2 if farr, is a $ lippery Aſpet? * Book Il,


; 35


luſions to thoſe Feigned Deities, giving countenance to Heatheniſh Inſticu.
tions, or the Diſcredit of our Principle: We will labour to avoid thoſe
Syrtes, Major & Minor. But we hearken to the. voice of Experience,
which unanimouſly cries out, Serenitatem affert, it clearethup, and bring.
eth that Fair Conſtitution, which, 'ris picy, (faith the Proverb) ſhould do
any Harm. Gardan will give the Reaſon : Jupiter non proceatt 1ſt ad Sexe.
mitatem, ſaith he, eo guod 172 calore vix excedit temperamentum, De VT],
Planet. Lib. V. pag. 371. But Intricacies of Nature are not folved with
every pretty Come-oft; for then all Temperate Air ſhould be Serene, and

| Serene, Temperate : No mild Weather cloſe ; no, not in April or
nds No fair Weather intemperately Cold, no, not in aziury and

ebruary. ; ER

s 2. Serenity carries the Name, becauſe of its Bright and Lovely Sky.
Colour'd Coat, whence, though it is not fo frequent as could be wilh'd,
yet it is more obſerved, and mentioned with more regard. be

S$ 3. But, what do they mean, Serenity mixt, or pure? Not the Pure
and Bright Gonſticution, I fear, when a Man, even in the Northern Cli-
mates cannot dilcerna Cloud, or ſo much as a Lock of a Vapour through
the whole Canopy : Nor the Glorious inviting Face of Heaven, where
the Azure is inter-ſpread with Bright Clouds, repreſſing the Light from
their Airy Surface, But Fair Weather in a large Sence as tis oppoſed to
Dirty, when the Heaven may be, notwithſtanding, tinged with Fog, or
overcaſt with a Cloud adequate to the whole, when the Air may Lowr,
and be Muddy at times, fo it rain not 3 This, with Serenity ſtrictly call'd,
_ be the Fair Weather which % and 2 have a ſhare in, andare voicd

or {uch. x

s 4. On this account I reaſoned with my ſelf, as Thave declared already,
which here,upon' this point ſtarted;may be remembred again,concerning the
Planets Influence. If it be ſo that V. cauſe Fair Weather, muſt nor Y. be
of aDry Complexion rather than a Moiſt > Muſt not he be Dry, if he be
—_ =p Weather? Dry, as well as Tempcrate 3 and fo Cool as
well as. Dry. |
$5. Verily, I look'd thatthe Aſtrologer ſhould have profeſs'd that an
Aſpe&tof Y with 2 ſhould have favour'd Cold allo , and that, by Force
of Evidence from his Diary. |

S 6. This I will fay for them, thar they do not pretend that Y. and 2
do remit or abate the Cold of Winter, as % with ©, and & with 2
doth : And 'tis ſome wonder that % and &, notwithſtanding their allow'd
abatement of Cold .in Winter-time, ſhould by cu..fefſion (as we ſhall hear)
bring Hail or Snow at peculiar times, and yet Y 2 tendnothing thereto.

6 7. This gives occaſion ro produce our Diary, to enquire thefe, and
from thence if it may be, deduce the Truth of our Pretences to Cold, and
to Serenity, or the contrary.

$ 8. For now, the Nature of our Enquiry being ſuch , as: in Reaſon
abridgeth the Diary to fewer Degrees far, than hicherto hath been made
uſe of; Greater Arches in the Heaven being concerned in a Storm, than in
a Calm ; In Hot Weather,then in Cold ; We ſhall have the more Liberty
ro call in All, or moſt of the Aſpects, not for any other reaſon, but to
ſettle and confirm the Character of the Aſpect either Pro or Gor.

$ 9g. Tortell you before hand, what I have found by Experience before
the Tables are introduced, when All comes to All, the Aſpects of Y and
2 though they favour Cold and Serenity in ſome mealure,yet they are alſo
Slippery Aſpects, will Fawn and Frown : I do not _ of bringing Cold
in Winter, and Heat in Summer-time, but they will bring you Cold and
Heat, Calm and Storm, (not at one Inſtant, but ) in the ſame Term, in
' one


Chap. XIV. | Jove and Venus have their Filece. " 339


one Senary of Days 3 and, as we have before owned, in X'©; is a vi
A i,

$ 10, aradox do.I broach now? Muſt we not all believe
For who can diſſembleKepler's No per pluit tn 1622; Pluit large, py
with Gontinua Pluvie to-boot. Nix multa,t1625. Nix Copisſe, 1629. Nix+
lt, again, at the end of the ſame year, Dec. 8. This for Wes For
Wind the like buſtle , Ventus Tirpetuoſus, A® 1625.. Ventoſum &- Auſtro-
zeph. Valid. A* 1626. Ventus Vehemens,. 1629. All Three Summer Months
and two of them Thunder. The © agreeing with the &.. Snow 5 days
together. A® 1623. Rain 2 days, 4* 1634. Snow 2 days. 4® 1625. Hail 2
days.together, A® 1627, with Cataracts not long after. Rain 2 days toge-
ther, A® 1628, Thelike, A* 1629, Lightning once, and Thunder ewice
A® 1629. Hortid Thunders, 1627. And what do we call this ? Is not
this Violence > But - this is not All. Lo ! Somewhat more. Storms
of Hail and Cold; and yet, on the ſame day Horrid Thunder. There's
our Paradox, our Jove and Venus, Tis ordinary, I profeſs I find it ſo;
and no whereelſe, unleſsin a Zowial Aſpect : And even in % and 2. All
this may be ſeen in Keplers Diary under d and f, V2, |

9 11. But let us ſee our own Diary. Home is beſt, and firſt of the


e/&ftival Part.
d 4.2 Diary.
e/£/ttval Part;


4* 1655, May 28. © 21. 42 1671+ Jane 23. $Y 17, [| 4® 1660. Jterum, Aug.31,M 24;
27. Bright m. clouds lowring | 22:,Fog m. fair, hor , dry, | 30, Fair; a hoar froſt m.
8 m we, ſhowr 9 p. ſome-| | ſoukry p. m. - Ny. | 31. Fair, a hoar froſt m.
Lightning, N W, | 23- Miſt m. fair, dry. 1 Sept. Fair, but rain n.
28. Fair m. wd, Nor 3 Þ. ie Tg opening, miſt, =_
ſhowr, rain hard. & W. hd y. | 4216 ſt
25. Cool, windy, a ſhowr Sun | 25+ Fair, a” 26 = = —— 8
« L . .
occ, black n. y P: a |
A® 1667. May 18. V 24, | © 1682. June 19. S 26, —_— Ang n. fair Þ.
17. Cloſe , gentle rain a. nis | ** _ lowring , {. wind- | 29, Fog p. m. dry, bright n;
'per tot, miſt, ſome wer p, | , My Mb rem rate. Mereors, Lightning, ſome
m. wd, rain 11 p. Ely. 12, Warmer, {.wd. Wy. rain, colour'd Halo:
: : 20, Cool and brisk wind m. | 28, Foggy ti. ſoultry, br. d.
SW.


18, , cold wind, —_

w_ ww, bop :Thun: driflectrca3 p. & 9 Þ. Meteors at n.
derclap- SEEly.]

19. Brisk cool wind, audible | 4* 1560. Zuly g, TR 12. A® 1661, Sept. 10, Oz 18,
II Ps 75. Wind a little, ſhowr 8 m- | 8. Miſt m. cloudy, ſuſpic. d.


clearm. p»>  SW-{| rainawhile8p. NE,
A® 1658, June 13. B t7, | 8. Fair, windy, warm, —_ 9» — clear m. p. ſome

" |; 3P... . clouds, hor day, a tlath of
12, Cloſe m. wd, —_— 9. Fog ante Sun or. dry, trou- | Lightning. ; w
1 wd.codl coaſting howrs | , "3 F . W. , 10. Smart ſhowr, cloudy n\
—— <oſ_iY g Mowers | 10. Fair, cold , clouds "ride | _ hor, rain 8. & W. Ely.SW"


_————


7 - ; .
I4- Cool, miſling p. m. wer- CEE /NW.SE a+ a 0 nb,
ting 10 Þ W. N W. an Ara > >
A® 1659. Augaſt 31.9), 25+ or veſps Ys 4 c
A® 1669. Fane 9. If 24. 30, —_ , Raiv, Gay 'p Jo.
. . . aid T A _

8. Fair, flying clouds, _ 31. Windz forms of [is | A® 1692, Sept. 7. H©® 29.
| H. wind, cloſe, warm,ſome | © 37*- Rain, coot wind, coef - ng, werting 2 p. very
” waning 1 Pp. heavy air n. ing Ws —_— warm N. SW.
io. Sudden ſhowrs p. m. Rai "_ | *[ 4, Cloſe m. H. wind o. rain 3
warms CO OR daſhes of wer p. p. very warm wind, & W.
m. & 5. | 8. Cloſe m, open 9 m; coa-
SCC ſting


Jove and V enus the ſame bere.


| Book I].


ling hows, wind, _,


”*Qouds.
Wage


[þ _—_— m. one in

ts SLY on W.
& 1674-Set. 20. m7
ry. 1 br. =. rain 2.m, &p,
20.


, Cloudy; PR
20 ſly, cloudy;
__ —__— io + © "Rain


"


L T——_——


Part Hyemal,


A® 1662. Nov. 26. \ 29-


24, Rain hard 6s m. NE.
4 Fog, froſty, clear Ds NE.
25, Fog, frofty, clear Nn.

27s Fog:roſly, ſome h_ &L


— —


A® 1673+ Nov. 22. "\ 9.

21. F clear above, fr*
_—y SW. m.N W. pat

22+. wid nel 6 m, wet P-m.

& Sly. Ely.

23»

MK 1553. Decemb. 17. £2 17,

Is; Foggy, moiſt and warm.


16, Wds 2 L. clear, ſ. wd. R.
at n.

17. Rain a. |. Sug tdins; i; &
great Halo circa Sun.

18, Fair, fr. ſore


S.
clear.
NE.


A 1664. Dec, 8. vp 22.
5, Miſt, rain a1. & 4 m., wer


a. m. & p. m. Sly.
8. Much wet 4 m.Dog fet 8p.|
riſc. SW.
9. Cloſe wet m. rain hard 8
pd, Not


A*® 1679. Dec. 4 £7 28.


*


|


j


17. A blaſt of wind Fun occ.


3- Fog, fair, wet, cloſe m. p.
SW.


Fr3: C_—_ ſee is IA


4 Dark, miſt, doſe wind. % 1.5. |
$. Fog, dry, clear n. fr. Wiy.


A 1619. Dec. 23. 5 27.


22. Fr. fog, cloudy, yony 7


24 "Wet a. 1. cloſe,
drifle; f. rain p. m. Wy.
28. Cloudy, foga. 1. cooldry,
Ely.

Fama uvad.


# 1653. Feb. 15. IX 4.
14- Cloudy, ſome wind,warm
4 be | Y, P.


ry.
I9. _— wind, Sum-
merweather W,


16. Clouds, C. wd, Sun
fair and warm. NW.


N,


A* 1664. Feb. 3. VP 8.


2, Brizk wind, cloſe m. p.
warm.

3- Cloſe m. p. h. wind, ſame
we Sun ſhine. S W.

4- Fair, windy, cloudy. o, coa-
ſting hail e p. £ drops 1 F:


. Cloudy, windy p. m. &C.
1 es


A® 1666. Feb,28. X 8,


27. Cloſe miſt, offer a. m.
ſtorm of hail NE,
28. Bitter froſt m. ſnow lies,
_ offer m. cld; af. for


A® 1677. Feb, 12, Y 13,
20, Rain 4 m. rain hard $ p.
Wiy.
I. Much wet 9 papa -


_ warms WY.


wnd Thunder 1 8. . Aug.

I7. I8.1 O, 1659.
——— Ave 31, Pte of Jt hening,
Sept. 2. Fax oy Az. 25, Li


Sept. 9. Smart Set Sept. 10.


266g. Sept. 7. 1673.


Air, which argues a


Re


| 4* 1655. March 6. VY 3


5+ Clouds ide N 'E. =—_ &


ing 9
6, Rain "very ſtill —_
wer vooly
. Showrs of hath, rain 2 m.
' cold fr. . wind, ſome firs
of rain m, _—
8. f, rain Sun or. a ſad ſoking
R. SW.


A® 16 45. March 30, It 5.
29. Winds, cold and cloudy,
{. moiſt m.
30. Cloſe, ſome wind - T1
cold, lawring, clear n. H,
wiad. SE.
31, Wind a. 1. cloſe, very
cold, miſty} m. white |
flying clouds from W.
A® 1663, March 20. I& 9.
17. Cloſe, cold, windy, fair
=. Y 2 make a fine


W.
18. Br. cool wd, riſe 10
not fo brisk. SE.
19. Brick wind, audible n,
Ely. Nly,
20, Fr. for the laſt fortn;ghe
in London, Fair, dry, »
under Lenx B,


A® 1679. March 12, V 13.
11, Fine ſpringing ſhowr ante
I


P-
12. Some fog, rait.ed 7 wF#..
SE,
13. Some rain m. ſome fog,
cold froſt, ' - By,


A® 1681. Apr. 6. If x3,
4- Cloudy, miſting i p, % ?
e a fine. 8 \y Ely,
$+ Bright, fair, brizk wind,
Ely.
6. Fair, ſome wind, warm.


Ely.
Jo _ air, clear above, atd


W.

8. Fail, hot; high-wind. $W.
9. Fair m. miſt, windy, clou-
ding a. m. gentle rain 3 p-


ir Hog Diary, and do we not meet with
next. A* 1656. Rainall the Forenocn


the next dayWind and
ept. 1, Daſhes of Wet,


Tins irs; 27. 1670. Lightning,
Wing June I3. 1658, June 9.


Air, June 22, 2671; to: 28, 1670; T thing of
ny olay nothing of troubled


"Tis a great Stone which


upon


—


Chap. XIV. Jove ang Venus _ abſolutely Fair,but wn l- caſes.”


44.1,


upon injection mudds the Water ; I need nor pray you ro vbſerve the


,


.ightning, NY, and 2, we _ faid; carry it in their F


9. 14. The [rains har


ſtore 25 hath not been known, A® 1664. Wet ants tus. Der. 24 An:
. Summer Weather in the mid{ of Fibe. AF 1653. Warn in the bo
ning of Fer. 1664. with High Wind for Two days after. \- Hail, Feb. q..


366: and Febr. 27z 28, A® I . which Hail ins Theory we produce 25'A


Mark of Violence, &-c. Rain batd, much wet, Rain the whole Afternoon;
Febr. 20, 21, 22,4*1677. At the fame tone inMarch,A® 1655/Rain, Hail,un-"


quiet Weather, a ſad ſoking _ 6, 7, 8. Fine Showr, March 17.


A* 1679. High Wind and Heat, Apr. 8. 1681.

Days in the Hyemal Part 5.4. | In the « #f:wal Part, Days 46,
Rain 26, Ran —————27.
Brisk Influence, or Vio- Valence I5.
lence. —— I5. | Eo —————— 4
Foft - II,


$ 15. The Account you have received;the AfpeRts are but ſhort,howbeit
they run the Zodiaque orce round, and That brevity will be pardoned in me;
who conceal nothing for fear of being diſcover'd. You may ſee by the Sum,
g H that according to oux Method, the Aſpe& conduces, F had almoſt
{aid; as much to Moiſture as Seremry. .

$16, How comes it to pals then that 1} 9 havel heen voic'd for Fair
Weather ? Is it becauſe of the difference of the Climate ? Is it be-
cauſe Serenity, as I faid, -is more taken notice of ? ' ( One Fai
Day making amends for Two Foul Dep) or 1s it becauſe at the clo
of the Fair Day, 4 ? appearin the Weſfern Angle, arid make” a fine
Spectacle ? ſo amp\iating une Serene oy rn by Illuſtrious Cloſe:
(V and 2 making che moſt notable Congreſs in the Heavens, the Fair
Couple of the Celeſtial Court ) or, Is it becauſe in the Hour of Serenity .

hele Two Stars add to the Glory of the-Serene Day, helide” what che
ſurping Sun challenges ro himſelf, chough, the Truths, "Tis we alcribe
All to the Sun, which the Sun challengerhnor. | | prong

S 17. For ſhame will ſome fay, Doth not d Þ 2 make Fair Weather ?
I have anſwered, and I cannorrrecall it. In tuch Circumſtances of Non-
aſſiltance, Vacancy of a mediate Sign, or co-ar&ation of Place. So  $
_ ware Boys,and bring you ſuch Lovely Weather, as makes Life jr (elf

weeter.
S918. Now try the Truth of what is now obſerved, Auguſt the 30. and
31, A*® 1660, the firſt pleaſant. days in the « #fiwal Table See before
your Eys no Hiatus, but ſtraitneſs of place.
"2 17. ©. 22. Þ. 23. 9. 6.0. 9.%.m8. h, 11. ).

Not only % 2 together, but © is crouding with them in 7, nor onl
that, but & and ? nulling rogether in==. Again,ſhall Moy 19. 1667. go fora
Fair day ? Then you have not V% $ alone din VY, but & and © in d:
inz, I fay nothing of a Gap:

ws h. $L 22. gon 24. WV. 25. aha 20, Y. - 4K, On
ly. A® 1669. June $.Here js © V 2 together again 1n TT anc not
off; yea ga the VILwithio Us. degr hich is far from that diſtribu-
tion which is-required toMoiſt Weather, for thus they l;ft.
X 25. N. 27. Ab: $28 Y. 27 ©. f- 2 - v. o
' S 19. Son the Hye ec. 18. 1653. Here, not only V 7 are 10 Con-
grefs, but h is Faces them in the other Hemiſphere withun the confine


of poor 3 Degrees. I


"4d;
| Nov. 14.62, and? ov. 22. Ar }. Rainy ar:
Night and Wet Morn. Dec. i 17, A® 1653. Then Dec. 7, 8. be Rain in!
1677


C—_— ES


342


py Rule for FairW. or Froſt under this Aſpeft. Book Fil


S 20. But is it thusin the #, and DO, and A ? Thus andno otherwiſe ;
he that will not be aſhamed of his Prognoſtick of Fair Weather, muſt not
pronounce abſolutely on Fove and Venws's Square, bug with the limitation

ſcribed 3 I would rather urge this, becauſe when the Artiſt promiſes
Fair Weather, and Rain takes Place, the Miſtake is fosler , and more piti-
able,than when declaring for Rain it ſucceedeth not : Becauſe there may
be a Fog, yet an overcaſt, a pr t Cloud, or a lowring Sky for 2 while,
that may make ſome weak Apology for the miſtake. But when Rain ap-
pears, after a man of Skill has promiſed fair Weather, Expectation is fru-
ſtrate,the Journy or Viſit is defeated, ſo All who meant to enjoy the ptivi-
ledge of the ſmiling day , turn their Anger they conceived againſt the
ſpiteful Heavens upon the Scrol;ft. Therefore letthem attend the Aﬀpet,
if they pleaſe, whoſoever are curious this way, but withal carefully inſpect
how the Planets concerned are accompanyed, how the reft. are poſited 3
If, with the neareſt, there's one Regui/ite good , which we call co-arFation
of place 3 if, with the fartheſt, above 3o degrees diſtance ſuppoſe, then
there's a 2d. Requiſite, which we call an Hyatws, or Vacant Sign. Some
otherPun#:lio's there are(burt theſe are the main)where we may pronounce
Dry or Fair Weather, and fo pleaſe himſelf, and his Client.

9 21, Weneednot multiply Examples, the Rule is moſt part perpetual;
I add that the fame Method is to be obſerved for the Prediction of Froſt,
whether for the: Day, or for the Morn at leaſt ; the Reaſon is, becauſe
few Fair or Dry Days are found in the Hyemal part of the Year , which
are not accompanyed with Morning Froſts. Such were the days whoſe
Dryth was now conſidered» A® 1653. Dec. 18. for the Hyemal Table. —
And A® 1660. Aug..30, 31. for the Mftrval.

S 22, Note withal this ſame Doctrine would haye been good in the Al-
or of 3} 2, 'but 'tis more ; ne ood with this Aſpet 2,

ving greater kindneſs for fair Weather, tor ſome ſuch reaſon as we have
ventur'd at, or.for ſome Better.

- S 23. To draw to the Character then, They, who follow Maginus, Argol,
AarianVlacg tell you nothing of m_ TI talk of gentle Rains, and te
_ of abundance (forſooth) of Fertility, as if $2 were always a good Girl.
t'we have ſeen her Spirit in the preceding Aſpects, with or 6 at leaſt ;
and ofr-times ſhe is the ſame when ſhereflects on V. ,ſo that not only Gentle
Windsor Rains,butHigh and ſmart alſo ſhe procurerh: Yea,and I ſhould add
you ſee Thunders a Lightnings, had no body faid fo as yet. But well

e Eichftad, who hath ſaid ic before me.

S$ 24. What then is the Character of our Congreſs? I anſwer with the
Road, Serene, and Fair, and gentle breathing Wind, bur apt to worſe, to
Frown and Muffle her ſelf, to put on her Maſque in a Fog or a Muddy Air.
She Favours alſo Cold and Froſt, but ſo, as ſhe is eaſily alterablle to fi
the contrary. Now ſince from Heat comes all Violence, ſhe raiſes =
Wind ſometimes, and ſparkles in Lightning. Difference you muſt chink
Gare is in the Poſts, Degrees, and difference of Aſſiſtance, and fo it comes


ut.
+ 25. Now, ifit be faid that a ſudden Alteration is obſervable in other


; and therefore not proper to the Jowral. I anfh ither {
den, nor fo conſtant. An Pos in inter Moarhs hall _ wks


Froſts ſo often as % and 2 oppoled. Surely nota 0 ora A it may be, fo


much as ours. Our Eyes teach us ſome difference of ' and 2 from
others 3 the Faireſt Planets in the Heavens, -of the greateſt viſible Dia-
meter 3 {© that if they have any kindneſs for Cold, which Experience tea-
etl, ny may be allowed, ay ſtrange as it is, to beealily reconciled ro


Foreign


_ PI.


Chap. XIV.


——_—


———


347


Foreign Miſcellany Diary for the Aſpeits Jovial laſt paſt,and Remargyes


FRereom.


1500. Peſtilence at the beginning of the year, Hows. Wewill refer it to
h and &', though in Feb. YO? are all in *,.-which alfo fotind
matter for the Floud in Lovasn, Feb. 11. ; "

I _ Prafil, Lat. 32. April Cold and Tempeſtuous, Þ © # in V.in prize.
menl,

1502, April 4. ad 9. Dangerous Tempeſt. South Let. 52. It made Ame-
ricus Veſputius return, de Bry Relat. Nawig. Yea Lopez's Tempeſt is _ much
out of t Ley: Ants, bs WET RY

1506, Comet appeared in the Month of Auguſt die e&awo, runni
through the Signs 91 and 't near #rſaMijor. Michowius apud Hewel, %, Zin
m,'? h © preceding in A.

1508. April Menſe, T. M. tnundat. ex ftatione 7 , ſaith Eichſtad, 1
know not, I fe FN OLYtInEg,

1510. eAitis maxim. Y in V opp. © & 17ter eos 7 flat, |

1512. Comet, Coloris Sanguinet in March and April, Ricciol, N 7 in.

I516. Julio men|. Calor & Siccitas, Exchſtad, 2 h Y, tme © 1n fine S
& prixc. S\, |

Cometa in Jan. 'T was þgot under Y% &', but © @ Þ accompanies ir.

1518. Sweating Sickneſs in Brabazt,and Germany. inAgg, Lyc. Stow,
POE iam:

I521. Comer at theend of April, Lune Dichotome fpmilis. Ricciol if H
& is 0n the place, but © % Þ in I & 2 ſtands by; let that be remem-
bred when you come to h & Bead-roll.

Fane 28, Thunder fired the Magazin at Milain, Lyc. £% 2 in w, 8;
Peſtis Rome atrox, Kircher, Gem. h d with % 9 for May, Y 2 for June,

uly in f %, When h's Al enter, and VÞ accompanies them. Then

ware of: Se2 another Inſtance in the nexr' year, 1522. For
to the Peſtilence and Famine noted by M:zalaw in his Gometograph. we

_ that % Aſpects were followed by Saturnixe in June, July. See in Þ &,
alſo. |

1525: Dec. princ,Rain with N.Wind,Parch. IV. 1554. Þ 7.7%. 526. m;

1526. July 20. At Zay (apud Tugios) among the Switzers, Puluss Pyrizs
Fulmine tafius, Lyc. If 14. V 22. YL.

Nov, Dec.& Jan. (following) Flouds, Howes. The Rule holds here alſo,
For the © & V and the reſt, go hand in hand with Þ & in Aw. & Dec.
% ©, &c.in 2 It, :

1527. Peftis Rome, Untzer. 1169. Juno menſe, YO % in S.

aly 1, Great Storm, near Mountains of Ice (New-found-Land) #0

in S. VL in 7 prixc. opp. & in 1 24.

Dec. 11. Comet, Gem. 2, 10. YinS. Oz 2 in V. Noted for the
Teſtimony of that frighrfal Age , ſpeaks tragically of .it, whicl) our more
nr woolen uw anſwer with a _ a =- Bat _ ors
we have produced are great, ©, &c. if that in the beginning of the year
following! be another, the ſame Godfathers ſtand. _

1528. Altus Gometa wiſus ef 18 Piſcibug tn opp. Saturnt.

2. Great Drought Julyand Auguft, YG ©2 Y ind. Lic. |

Fune 17. ad 21, At Apalaken in the Weſt Inates, Thunder ſtore, threw
down Trees for ſeveral Miles, the Trees being moſt-part cletr from one
end tothe other, Porch. 3.1502. © % % onthe Trop.-point of 'S. See the
Ephemerides. - Gaffarel makes believe the Voiume of the Heavens is.Le-
Bible, 'ris a fancy, if not worſe 3 but here, you may read the Storm in
"Character plain : The Alphaberthas lpgretendad, not. Jul

crc wy


344 % © 2 # Miſcellany Diary Foreygn, with Book II:


' July 19. Great Hailſtones at Awſpurg. % 7 are in S ſtill,

1529. Comet, a Chaſme Jar. g. Pontams. PN 2 Y. add hd in & m;

Eb. 24. Tempeſt of Wind at ratiſlaw, Lyc. 4% Y._ .

1530. T. M. Sept. 1. on the Coaſt of Gamaza, near the Ifle of Cubagus
in the Indies. Purch. II. 868. 2 in =:

1532. April 11. Parelia, Venetits. Lyc. Fromond. 406. 'd © YN Q,

Dz 25. tn Helwetia, Halo circa ©. SY ©V®.

Sept. 25 . ad Now. 20, Comet, a > YL 21a m,Ly inm,
moſe ſegu.Note alſo the III. in 9.,@ 9 2? conſpiring. Reckenback therefore.
faith it was kindled by d © &. Wt .

1533. Comet in July 17. 20n procula Perſeo in TT. Leowit. The place, on
Procul a Perſeo points out the Author.” % 4 17. % Þ $ 1n.S. V's Oppo-
fition kindles it in the Aſteriſm Extrazodiacal, back't by the 11I. following
in the next Aſteriſm. ;

t535. July 25. Terrible Thunder about Zurich, fired Houſes, Lyc: #

?2inm& xXx, hot int M |

1537. Dec. 12. Lighzieg foes the Caſtle at Rome, near Pont lime.
Lyc. it comes under h &, butadd alſo W 2; ; |

1539. May 11: Comet, Mizald. 233. At what time Baſil was troubled
with a great, yet harmleſs Earthquake: © © V are in i. but ler the good
Reader add the Two Superiours Square in Cardinal Signs, which ſhook
{taly in the year before in Sept. ( Falop. apud Fromond.) And ſhakes Ms/5na
again this year, June 13. not without help of Þ © in S, &c..

Fuly 27. By the Ifles of Xal:ſco, on the back-fide of America, extreme


Fempeſt, we thought we ſhould have periſhed, Hakl.*398. VG 2 7 in


S. You may find it under % &, but you ſee there isIV. have Title to it,


and not Two only.


Dec. 17. For Two or Three days, great ſtore of Rain, Hak. 414. \ in

S off. OZ F. | T

1540. July, «Afiſftas ficca, Lyc; 2 % ind. |
: _ Mortality, London, Ague, Flux,Peſtilence 3 Stow YL. © % in & 3

in =>,

1541. Feb. 19. Rain hard near Maſua in the Abex:i» Country, Purch,
11.1129.

Feb. 20. Wind fair atE. at the beginning of the 24. Watch, we fell on
a ſudden on very Whit Spots, which did caſt from themſelves certain
Flames like Lightnings 3 this Novelty made no impreſſion on the Pilots of
the Country. A 22. opp. 2 9 Stationary.

1544. Aug. 21. Comet ſub forma Draconts, Rockenb. © % in m, |

208 Aug. On St. Laurence Eve at Mechlin, fo many Barels of Powder
fired with Lightning, 500 men ſhin, Lyc. Gems. 2. 102. Fromond; Y. at the
end of with the y, Y © in A, DEE + |

1547. Sept. 20. A Star which direQted us to Mount S:zaz, ſay the Tra-
velers in Pyrch..1380. which Mr. Parchas has pleaſed to deride with his
Wu amant, 1þf3 [tb1 Tamils fingunt, with what Charity, let the meek Reader
judge. To ſay nothing how husVolumes would dwindle away,if all ſuch fto-
ries muſt be marked with an Obelisk. I bs no reaſon to let it paſs, be-
cauſe the diſpoſition of the Heavens lye fat for ſuch appearances. III
Planets in =, OD of Y h in Cardinal Signs, and which is to our purpoſe,
an * V2 in Mt ,, Add thac we hear of a Comet within a Month after,
nay we hear ofa Meteor nearer,* but 4 days before, for ſo ſays my Manu-
ſcript. Sept. 16. hora gh. not. Fax ardens mire Longitudins ab or. in occ. lente
wolans ejuſdem cum Y. altitudints, Dr. Dee. There's no man dreams of a
Parallel to the Star of the Eaſtern Sages, in Sacred Writ z Neither muſt
we deny God's Signal Providences may be interpreted in an > i-

_-” criour


—_


Chap. XIV. Some Remarques thereon,


345


feriour Convoys, many things as God would have ic, oft-times falling our
according to our wiſh. |
Acies Geleftes, Oftob. 1. Lyc. Stationary in * , oppoſing firſt 2. on
this fide theAutumnal Equinox, 2 back't with & and 2 ; and within a few
days we hear of a Comet, which gives ſome hint, that borh: Comets and
Phaſmes Celeſtial,have ſome dependance on. our Theory, what ſoever. ore
the Later may challenge. A Star ſeen by Dr. Dee, as he teſtifies inhis
Manuſctipr. Bs | 7 NI
- 1548. Aug. 4. Pluv. tmber vehemens , cum 1ngentt Tonstru, Lovain. Dr.
Dee. 28. Þ.Y 20. Þ.
Sept. 5. Aufter Vehemens nofte circa horam 7. cum Tonitru magna. Dr. Dee.
£ 27. P.V 1% YL. 7 ctiam un =>, ;
1549. March 13. Pluit toto die, Die 14. Wondrous Storms and Showry.
Die 16. Vehementif. went. timber. © 2 in V;
April 5, Nofte, Magnus vent. & Pluviacontin. Y 7 in S;
May 24. Vent: V-hementiſ,  » 2% in 5, & hed Pp.
1559. OR. 21. Foul Weather, and change of Winds, Hakl. 98. d © % #7


Dre 25. Much Rain and foul Weather. 27. Very high Winds :4. 98. d %


©? x. |

Nov. 7. The Wind continuing SE. which has not been often ſeen (onthe
Coaſt of Ferro) Hakl. gg. © in m.

1566. April 10. T. M. in Conftantinople, Lyc. % 2 4. $ in fine S. $6
etiam in S, die 8, Lampas. Gem. 2. 30.

Dye 23. Dire Tempeſtates Bruxellis, cam alih1 aura ſerena foret 1h,

Nov. 10. Storms extream on the Scotch Coaſt, Stow, Þ © in 2.


Dze 20. Tempeſt for 12 days and more Ler:us4 Nave, Braſil, » © in


2, add h © opp.

Dec. 6. Parelia, Lyc. Y OY in 23 hs inopp.

D:e26. Tonitrua, Lyc.\ Stationary in 2, h & in opp:

1558. 7an.g. Tempeſt continued 4 or 5 days, @&Þ in VP.

June 9. Tempeſt after Calats was deliver'd, exceſſive for 4 or 5 days;
which was cailed, the Wind that blew away Galars ; Hollinſh. die 25;
Extream Current Eaſtward toward the Line, Hak, 128. & in & & =x,

560.Menſe April,Comet in Galltis, Eckftorm. © Yin V, add h& 8.

Se. 25, Parelia, cum arcuyzroerſo, Gem. 2.28, Yin V. P @r2 Y in;

1567. Terrible Tempeſt toward Parts , rooting up Trees, and drowning
Beaſts, T. P. 31. m7.28.%V; ;

13568. June 6. Ipſo Pentecoſtes ate, ſanguine pluit per miilta Brabantiz Loce!
Gem, L. PZ Lins add hd in M. |
- TheCo-incidence of h & with the Aſpects of Y are here,and elſewhere
to be noted for great Produdts of all kind foever. See 4® 1521, 1522.

1569. Jan. 13. at Lowvain, Inundations High and ſwelling, Gezs. 2. 63.
%Y ? inTrop. ? Stationary.

May 14. T. M. Bruxels, Gem. 2.64. % @ $ in Trop. hands are ſcarce
guic of. Oppoſition. |

1570. Aug. 4. Chaſma, Gem. 2. 67. P% 7 ©M, cum hd in,

I571. Sept. 11, Ghaſma flammeum, Gem. 2. 69. Lin Xx © & Q;

1572. Nov. 1. Sharp Froſt from the Firſt to Twelfride, © 2 ,add Hh »:;

Princip. Now. Stella nowa tn Afﬀteriſm. Gaſſiopete quam deſeripſit, Gem. 113;
Y 21. Y= 12, 2, Lumetiam ad h weird una referenda eft,

1576. July 14. Lat. 61. The Vehemency of the Wind broke our 'Fore
Yard, Hakl. 617. OV 2? in, cum & 4 SW,

Aug. 18. In to Hours it froze rqund about the Ship, Hakl. % 2 & very
near to one another in «1, | ;

Die 21. Show zoe, 1 Foot thick on our Hatches, 16. 621. d % © p, ;

ept,


—_ PEIP—Y


- _


T he Diary Forem for "JoL x Book 1.


—__ M@


Sept. 7. Lat. 63. A very terrible Storm, one of our Men blown over-
board, but that he caught hold, Hak!. 1. 621. Y © 2 Y in M opp. by
in-X . I hope I need not bid the Reader mark it. |

1578. Apr. _ Storms, Thutider and Lightnings, Hakl. PY ©8 7)

1579. p nk 24. Snow a Foot deep, Stow. WL in 1 opp. ©) Z.

Sept. &- O8. t Winds and Flouds, (not any Rain) drowning Men
and Cattle, bearing down Houſes at Newport, Beafora. Stow.% & in madg
& Y in =. .to particulariſe no more. | .

_=—_ Apr. 6. Great T. M. Stow, 687. Thuan. in 7, 2 tn fine & ad
hd n=


Miy 1. T. M. in Kent, Stow. Surmary, YyinZ, £2 & 5 in =,
Hence we ſee our Aſpect hada hand in the Earthq. 3 Weeks ago.

Die 24.' Hills cover'd with Snow, Barroughs Voyage, Lat. IV. 41. Y in
7 in opp-@ Z in . Sure they are not always cover'd with Snow in
Lakes a. -

Tune 6. Lat. N.58. Very cruel Storm, Hak!. % opp. © Þ in It ad h
2 opp. in 2 & 9, :

Menſe , Nvous morbus Tamebergenſfs, Dimerbr. %. opp. ©2 © in
Trop. yea h & on the other fide claim a . Add, attheir Heels Þ
opp. © 2 F in &\. theRule we have given before, 4® 1521.
1585. Dec. 23: Earl of Leicefters Tempelt going for Rotterdaws, Hows.
28.2 © 1.%.add©2& in. |
1586. Jan. 2. Parelia. From. $1, %. 2 20. YL.
(fu -/A Flaw of Wind took me, 1 faw a Whirlwind take up much

ater for 2 or3 hours together, Hakl. 1. 781. YT inSprn.gind,
20; 4 Bprem. .

bv. 17. Diſeaſe in the Belly extreme, but ſhort. Earl of Gumberlanas
Voyage, 793. #2. in Þ & SB. ;

ec. 23. T. M.in Guatimals, Purch. 3.939. % opp. © 7 in Trop. Signs
An Oppoſition of h & isentring alſo. |

A te 25. ad Jan. 12. 87. Though the © was near, yet was it Cold, and
wind rarable as in England, Lat, S. 32. Hakl. % & © % in Trop. Signs,
a .

1587, June 24; 27. ad 30. Lat. N. 67. Extreme hot. Lat. 70. © above
the Horiz. about 5 degrees. Hak!. i17, & 191. © © &% in S, add &,


in ==,

Faly 12; Lat. N. 73. Mighty bank of Ice, the Wind would not ſuffer
us to double, 7h. © Þ & in fin. S.

ze 13. © hot, ſhining on the Ice, yet melted ic not, 7. 791. © % 5%
at ſup. & in +, : |
ze 25. Marvellons hot, Lat. 61. #6. 79. Y ©) 7 in, |

A Drought, that Corn to wither in Virginia, 14. Y in S & 0;

1518. Aug. 4. Arrived at Harwich, having been 2 or 3 days toſs'd with
a mighty Tempeſt, Hak/. 2, 603. % ©in 9, h » in Antſcro.

Sept. 2. Tempeſt caſt the Spantaras on Ireland, Hakl. 607. © % in mM;
$ & ? Retrograde.

1589: Feb. 15. 4 Ro Benin, Current Weſtward, Hakl. 163. © inme* .
_ D#18. Clole, droufie, Thunder , Lightning and Rain, 24: 2. 127.
YPO7 in M&X,

Die 24. St. Ft. Great Storm, exceſſive Rain, 3 Corpo Santos, Linſchet.
167. % X opp. partile; © 7 in X, add h&.

ug 1. London. Greateſt Thunder and Lightning as had heen known,yer
harmleſs, Stow. % Fin, ©) & 2 Q, withapieceof f h&.

Die 17,18, Wind hard ME. in irginias gr. Storm «jc 18, Capt. Smith:
% @


Chap. XIV. . With ſome Remargues: p 4 x


LO? 2? in mM) in X, See the lame Scheme of Heaven before, 4* 1576.
Sept.7. (let me intreat you.) |

Sept. 25. Great Tempeſt roſe ſuddenly in the Night, Hak!. 2. 159. % ©
ÞF inproxe. =, 2 infiez; add hd innz,

O8. 2. At Tercera, Two men lain by Lightning, Linſchot. © % Þ in =:


add h &.
Die 6, 7,8. Near Tercera, very rough Weather, Hak. 2. 160. % in =
prine. @ 3 1m fine, |
1590. Sept. 15. Wind fo exceeding high,tkatwe were forced to lye a tr \
294. © 2 inprenc, ©, Y 13 fine.
Sept. Menſe. Thunder and Snow, Stows Summary, © 2 at fuprs.
1596.Dec. 1 gg + at theCathedral of Well whilt theDodtor was
diſcourſing of Spirits, as Stow thinks fit to obſerve, page 782. & 1, Þ m
6.2, Add od ZinZ.
 Die7. Great Storm of Snow, our Sack froze, Purch. 3. 495. % &, » ©


in m, Re,

Die 18. At W:ftram in Kent, T. M. Hows, 783. Yy9inS, Y in m;
aſign that % and 2 had a hand in the former Thunderball , ſeeing the
Approach of the » to in that degree of theZoavrac moves the Earth it ſelf

je 20, Great Storm, and Snow. Our Houſe cover'd with Snow,
Parch. 3. 495, YY ins, 2 inn.
1597; March, Extreme Cold, ? circa fin. , % circa & 10,
pril cold and howry, YL @in S&, cm hd in Mea x.

May cold and dry, 2 % in S, cum HS ut ſupra. |

June 5, 15. Great ſtore of Hail, Snow. Purch.4. 506. Y © 2 in T7;

1598, April 10. Much Wind at the Straits of ellan, Parch. 2, 130i
All April wonderful much Snow and Ice, 4 % 2 in 1: Retrograde.

Aug. 7. Tempeſt as tarbulentiſſima, atjete Naves inter Gabo & Madagaſcar:
N%2mnsS, hd in =

1599. Aug. 10. Great Storm, OY 7 » in AN,

1601. Feb. 1. Sunday morn, Tempeſt of Wind beyond St. Gile's ii the
Fields, a Windmill broke. Stow. P 2 in * & tt,

Aug. 14, 24. Imperuous Winds, Whirlwind fink ſhips , Purch. 1604.
UN E in equator, OG in, d & LinSs.

Aue. 29. Sept. 8. T. M. Celeberrimu. From V. % © prope « Fiquatorenn. ,

1606. Jar. 11. Hot Weather, 19 Whales and Porpoiſes, % © 2 in 2+
(Þh I opp. in Trop. ; -
pn 6-4 Wind, Rain; very high Seas, V opp. © Z in A. Þ opp. 2 in

rop.

1607. Ang. 12, 13, 14; Rain without Intermiſhon, Perch. 1, 796. £ % 2
Od) in. QOhuY:; |

1608. March 15, Current, Y ©? ja V, add hd in wm,

Fune 2, 3, 4. Thunders and Rain felt by the Diſcoverers of Virginia , {0
that they called the Iſles; Limbo, Capt. Smith, pag. 56. 2. % in S; add
Hd in =, |

1609. May 3. St. No. At Nere, very great T. M: not noufual there, (but
yer __ comes without its Commiion) Purch. 717. Y@? » in Sz

2 inWT.

Dve 13. Very much Ice, ſtiff Gale, #. % © #2 prove. MT,

Die 26, A Great Storm, we were notable to maintain a Sail, 2b. 3: 581;
Yotinz, add d2 ins.

une 12. T. M. in Nera inſulaiterum Arthuſns, d % *'; ON
Tv. 29: Hard Gale all day, it proved a Storm at Night 5 Purch.1. 204:
Y in If opp. @Yin7. _ : Ed 4

Dec. 8. St. N. Glacies ubi nullus aſpeFu6, faith Kepler, apud Eichſtad, \ in

It opp. © & in 2, there is Aſpect enough, Aunu 161 6;


-


_ 546


Y os + Miſcellany Diary Forem, with - Book Il


1616, Jan 16,26, Flying Storm out of the Weſt, Wind high , and /lew
Water, Lat. N. 55- Purch.1. gi. VL $ in 4 fine.

1617. Hyems tepida, Kepler. © 2 in V. VL of the Planets lie in this
order,inGapricorn Three,in Aquary One,P:ſces one,and this Laſt ina growing
Oppoſition of & in MX Stationary. 'So little need is there of Kepleys occur
Cauſes, if he had-marked theTepor are19. where he would have ſeen the
»in'S covering the Three in V. |

wi” St. Vet.6, 7,8. Neb. continua.. % 5 in V.
ay 26. St. V. Tonitru Imber, K. V in = princ. opp. 2 in S fire.

Fane 5. 15. Tempeſtas Horrida, Fulgura, Tonitrua: continua. Let any one
note it, Friend or Foe, Y Both Statzonary, in . Oppoſition, in & =
prize, More of the like nature, ate 12, 13,&c. Þ $2 4 1n opp.

Tune 23. July 3. Pertenutt, imbres, L © 2.

Tune 29. July g. Tonut, mbres,Y © 2.

7uly I, IJ, Tonutt, Tempeſtuoſum, [a.

Dre-16. Squalay & Ghaſma, Id...

Die 7,8. 17,18. Tonittru 1mbres. V © Þ 2.

Dze 10, 20. Pluwia Goproſiſſe N &-9.

Aug. 19; Iris L. Vf, opp. 2 in prove. A.

Aug. 25. The Water of the Sea ſeemed almoſt as white as Milk, and
{o continued til} day 30. (Note, No Ground could be found in that Water)
C. Pring, Purch 1.631. * 22. V.S 27.4% & in prince. Add bh with the
Pleztades & 24.09 print. nm. | | % |

1618, March 7. Meteor near. the Pallace at Paris, Howes 2 24, %. + g,
2 f4t.13. 2.28.0... . | p

July 14. 24.T wo days after we were horribly.toſS'd, Trigaut. 1619.
6. OPP. &% 1 21. "Xx of a
Ave. 15. ad Sept.15. Famous Comet, while 7 is near as 2 is far, VL
OPP. © 2 14 prince. MY tnfing ,  .- SITE: +

. Die:16: Comer, Hewel.' 10 * opp. 2 © ©. SY
1620.Novemb. intra dies 14. Diluviuum in monteFerratenſr,quo pagt integrt
hemneſque won pauct aqua: ſutmer(s Galois, N in = opp.@ » * ma prone. 4.

Die 26. At New-England, Rain's or 7 hours noFe,Capt. Smith = 27, 9
F12.%Y;Addotinm, hin. =,

. Die 27, 28, 29. Comet in New-England, withFroſts ; Thames was froze
with us, PV & 7ntraer. 14. |

:1621, May 21. In Burguadia, T. M. which Kepler faith -was-the Pro-
duct of h &, but weallo find Tf 5.” % 27*'2. but8 gr. diſtance.

1626, March 29... Pluwvia eſis. ful wra, Y opp. ©Y +.

April 25, 26. 28,29. Tonitr« PH ales. Imbres;'% opp. ©7 © in

Girca diem 28. T. M. in Calabria,you heard.of it before in &© 2/,"but you
mgy give % leave to oppole,thern,, from == 23. they lying jn''16.
* Sept. 4. Iris ante Sun ort. Ke $ 4 Y.gr. 5. diſt. Add h & /in Me:

Sept. 5. Ventus Decumanw, Kept. % 2 intragr. 4; * gr. i274

11629. June 27. Iris, Kyr. 23,1, & 2.9 V1 0. Stationary 5,

| Dec. 17, Ventus Horrivilis Strages dedit SyFearian , & Elifiorum per
Bohemiam, Kepl. © gr. 18. © gr. 23. diſtant from V. - NC T3 v.97

1628. June 8. Tempeſtuof, Tonitrua, Kepl. VN opp. ©.% in F._ V+ |
1 June 16. T. M. at, St. Michaels, and a New Iftand , Oleas.  » 1» fine
7 opp. ® © in 41. This is the Month wherein Kepler confeſſes the Influ-
ence of Tempeſtuous Fixed Stars, with an occult SubterraneanCaule betide.
For-it ſeems there was ſo much wet throughout the 'Month,that ic hindred
the Harveſt in Bohemia, Theſe occult Cauſes is a skulking Principe.
+7 Pec. 13. Awa Pluoin, % © tin | |
: 629. 717, 14. Sea Tempeſtas, * 5. : S 11.9% .cum opp. J indN. |

June 23. July 3. Tonitr1aGrebra,  Y% 7, add he&, &c. ons: '


—


Chap. XIV. Some IK mArQUES therecn.


3,
TA
\9


_ —_C————


Brie 28. July. 8. Tomtpraa, G7) ando, W » OPP. GT ++

Dze 30. July 10. Jrris, & V % «

Joly 12; 14, 15: Tonitrutmbres, ©% @RN Et,

Dre 24. "Ang, 3. Fulminati Homines, % » opp. © 2 1n®\. Bir >

Arg. Perſertitur ex Alpilus Rhetiis montem Shua, terre #16! uitque fu
agros late runs texifſe, \ 29.'% .' 9 18. ©. 26. 4. The very day on
which K: -pler. notes, Men were lain with Thunder. As in the former
EarthquzkelI ſpake of, che ſame Hand notes , Globes of 1.705 Such are
the Created Powers above ! |

1630. fan. 25. St: Vet. Chaſma' terr1bile fer ardens Calum, N 5 = 1m ©

1636. Jaz. 27. Much Rain and Floud wwe. Kyr.Y £7120, "X. OPP.
© priae, X,

Dz- 30. Rain, Snow, Thunder, 276 !-T.M. A537. Y opp. 2, &r.

Feb. Menl Betis 1nUndans mm magna ftrage , Fromond, V OPP. 2 » Ut)
& © 5.

May 30. Heat, Black Rain, Chunder, Lightning, % 2 in A. Add © 3 in

Tune 8,9, 10. Heat, Thunder, Liz hrning, Rain, Linc

Ye 15. Night Thunder and great Rain. So die 25, U $ intrevy. I2.

July 1, 2. Rainand [lhundef, W'9 72 price. me

Dre 5, AY 10. Much Rain; and Storms of W ind; Y 2-t ſupro.

Ye 20. Much Rain and great. 2 V $.
We 30.Tempeſt, at Petſora, Olear, * % & in-m.

Ays. 7. Tempeſt forced us to calt Anchoy:- a 3 itt fin. A YL þ PIE. mM;

D:-11.Current forced the Ship tothe Shore,Olear.z mt 11... <+ 4. 9 fat

D:- 27. Mueli Rain, % © cr7ca med, MM,

Sept. 7. ad 9, Tempeſt anda Violent — *t17. Y E 29.9,

Sept. 14. Tempelt tozced us'to caſt Anchor,. Þ 2 % 12 fine Tr, ;

L:- 16. Irrs, Storm and Lightning, w ich gr. Kain and TM. Kzr. VL 2 in
fine m7 @ 2 prope e/Equatorem::. i

O23. 22. Tempeſt laſted 5days,Olear.% 20 in fine Ww,


1637. Sept L. Terrible Floudsin Eaſt Frieſand, Kyr. % © 1p prince, £
in. 7,


© + ;
1638. March 7. Very great Tempeſt zoe; :Qlrar, Þ W $ inm. 2 fat.


Dre 19. 44.24; F.M. in Galzvria, Kyr.. i 2:in m S739 Station,
Nate it laſted'a Week, .in whidt ume the”y affects all the e Planets concer-'


ned, h excepred z-forit: oppbies 4 are 17; 18.) 1t opp. . #15 19, 20. it ©


joyns with % the next 3 days, and opp.-*2;-and the aff Gay 3 ic joyns with


o, the. 5; s ewthe fame: placEhere, as It was at the laſt Farthiqua emthe,.


lear 1636.0n Sept. 16, bbs.
May 3; Aſceaþon Day, J Falaneford Ch ureh fited by Lighrdin, ” Fl forbd
OW 2 1#tid v3. 9. - r2blunite 4


Jare:;38, Lp dr in Calatnit again, cls Thund6r;"4 Nh * OPP. © int


Tropic. Veas He: app='$-at 20 &r.cattance, lt.


F639: Mayi13&Qt MF Ar MNipdhte t! Ie Wind/ſ{6v iolent,' ay if rh Element fi


were neag tbecheſgduton into their bed Ghags. 7 0-V Gi, 24


Sept. 232 $3: Mz 3r:#aly 5 Kyr1:d » W3P- cevee prince. 7 v * Here dre the


Fixed that are concerned; 0: opp. -t1i6 Pleiadeviliand i, the Hyades: * Sb
did; Y/opp;tþ8&Þ leiades inan Earthqute} ©. - 19. in the-year before
W hich we WYyidngly emitted, becauſe theres fo othe r riotable Circunt:


ſtances concerning Y . F191.
O#ob. 15,16, 17. Very Sree at Heats; Lit.'S #6; Y'9 it ' — 8 in 0
Olear, 4 m7 mma ] Þ-; 4 "_4 wy UV) iu 424d '
O#.>1. Great Firy Cha! ſme, Ky. 2 8, L 16. 3 2? add &.Þ ma
Dre 24 . Ghaſma, knw. a * 8 Yo Qt, Fits HRW 4 .*


Af" '


_ Oftabrrs menſe, Ina! ad: tiork; K v-. % Y In &. $7;


Dee.6. AS torm, Otcar, Y © 7 in 2, De


—_—


350


The Diary Forem for %©% *. Book II.


ets... AM


Die 24. A dreadful Tempeſt, infomuch that 24 Shipscut off their Maſts?
being in the Downs, Olear. ©) 3 in V. UN 2 in 2, Þ Stat. |

De 27. Lambeth. A Violent Tempeſt, that many of the Boats which
were drawn up to Land at Lambeth were daſht in pieces 3 the Shafts of
Two Chimnies were blown down upon the Roof of the Archbiſhop's
Chamber ; one of the Pinacles of Groydon Church was blown down 3 and
another at Canterbury. Dr. Heylix's Hiſt. Presbyt. and R. B. S. pag. 64. & 65.
AL 2 circa Trop. hL in 2,

1640. June 12. Iris, P' © ex una parte, 2 ex altera.

Die 26. Thund. Wolkenbrack, Guits and Catarafts, & 2 & in Trop.
Ra h &. This Rule holds for Flomis, for the like comes again in a Fort-
night;

T6at. Zan. 25. Thunder. 25, Y 21, 7.

Feb. 7. Aufter Validus & Frigidus, VP 29. NY. 2 6,59. :
Aug. 24. ad 31. Much Rain, with Thunder and Lightoing, jp PL 2 10
Dre 29. Iris. Sept. 18, weſp. Lightning and Rain. prime 2 &-&\
es os -; Frog wy Spatyn,n 12, 7,T ©. %V.,

ov.17.Parelia tria int,

Dze 18, Snow and Storm. MES. TW IGLS. 4 pe

1645. July 3. Thunder, Hail and much Rain, % 77 21, 5 prize. S;

Nov. 15. Diſeaſe in the Parliament Army near Exeter , died 7, 8, 9 on
a day, Sprig. S 4. Þ.8. 2. |

1646. May 4. Harmful Thunder, © 15. 7, % 5. S, Add hQ ind,

Dze 20. Iris, T. M. in Apalia & Galabria, Tt 20.,9 S 12, %,

1646. June 23, Terrible Thunder, Z 20 F. S 16. V. addIllin &,

fub 24. Great Current, gr. Meteors a6 occ. tz or. % © ? 17 fine S,

7e 11, 12. Thunder, S 17. £.20 V. 28. Q:

Aug. 10. High Wind and a very greatSea, 6 V4 in S,

Die 17. Marſeilles, Lightning kill'd 3 Men in the Port, S 27. V 24. 2:
1647. Sept. 29. Mare in Perf, , Hevel. mo. % 28.5%.
1649. Feb. Fire reported ſeenat fel, and it rained Blood at Gloucefer,

OY. 2 near the Aquinoxz add d & Y.

- I ſhall make no Aﬀidavit tothe Truth of the Report, I well remember

I he it not impoſſible in ſuch prodigious Regicide times to put us in

mind 2 little of what we are guilty. The Afﬀpe, Fle tell ye, favours the

Affirmative : For the like Inſtance we have met before, + 1568. But

we all Bnet ths po gNor- ——_ "es Joan
I659, . 29. Formidable Thunder ain near cefter eſpecially,

Wikford, <2y T2.%.add d@2ind. f
Dec. 10. Northampton, T. M. Galwiſ, Appenarx.  ? © in 28. 7 11. &c,
1652. Comet about Orior's Buckler 2nd Shoulders, © 2 & in We S,

add PV Hh, 12, years hence you will have the like, A* 1664. a Signthar

Y. is one that belongs to the Miri. See in VG. Some there are that

have thought it is the ſame with that in 1665. Tra»/e8. p.18.That is tolay,

as theThames is the ſameRiver which it was twelve year ago,no otherwite.

They may as well lay mm —_ atſuch a diſtance are the ſame.
I655. May 1, 2, 3. ve Hot, Y.Y in V, ec.

; 1656. May20. Rain'd Wheat at Eardington near Oxford, of a Blew Var-

niſh, and a Sulphurious traſt. 4d Y © 7 5 add d h &, This I Gw, and

the like we meet with elſewhere. |

O36. 17. Tempeſt of Wind, d Y 7 2.

: ay Candle in Oxfordſhirea Man ſlain with Lightning, d % 2

in Trop. F

1658 Zune 4. Violent Showrs, d VL &,, &c,

Faly 1.9. Frequent Meteors, d'% 7, add d 9 8:


1660,


Chap. XIV. Seme K eMArquEs thereon. 347


1660. O34. 3. AcHull 2 m.A great Sheet of FireS E. it grew Loght,char
they could read a ſmall Print half an hour, A: mirab. d % 7 10 =, This
(I ſuppoſe )) is what the Germans call a Chalme. _

Dze 30. In Hertforathire Gelum Ardens, Annus Mirab. d V. 2 add d h&,

Nov. 11. Rain, High Wind and Hail frequent, d V 2, add & & ©,

1661. April 11, Frequent Lightnings and Meteors, f YL 9.

Sept. 29. Sad Rain and Inundations in Severn, © 7 in, 2 ad fin.V. v
Tranſat. 2067.

O#-6. 11. Houſe burnt by Lightning, 4 L © ©.

1664. June7.Harm done by Lightning near Ghar:ngGroſs, *  $.d © Hh:

Dre 19, Great Thunder and Hail2p. YL ©?.

1666. July 31, Clouds riding againſt the Wind, proved a Storm of Rain
and Thunder, f VL 2 #2 «AMquatore.

1668. Dec. 17, Hail, Rain, Thunder, Lightning, dY &.

Die 18. Rain all Night, Flouds in the Morn. d V 2.

1669. July 10, Drought, (o in Fraxce. Yin VT, ©& 2% 1n S,

Dec.24. A moſt noted intolerable Froſt this,and the day before, P %. 2 5;

1670. /an.7.HarmfulTempeſt about day break,SW. 98. Y.wro, y 23.

Faly 7. Heat, Sickly Time, Feavers, Sly. S 26. %.24. ©- Zand » in
prince. S\, 7 Retr.

8. Daſh of Rain and Thunder 2 p.

I, Iris. pF: Showr 6 p. |

I5. Cold, daſhing 5 p. $SW.Y S 28. © ? prone,

18, Lightning #ofe. YL 7 S 29. © 12 prime. A, ?

1571. Jan. 17. Very Tempeſtuous night and day, % 9 opp. @Q 3;

22, Tempelt of Wind ate lucem, 1dem Aſpect.
1675. Jaz; 1. Thunder near Windfer, 7 13. V1 11. 7 20. ©,
12, Much Rain a 9 p.ad 12. VL 2 rmtra gr. 20.

1677. Jan. 1. Froſty, Hundreds paſs over the Thames, Y 27 prix. = gr. 9g.
diſt. a 9. Þ% er. 19.

1678. jan. 18, Tempeſt of Lightning, Thunder, and Hailſtones very
large. Narratirre. Soatthe Downs. Y * 2.: % mtragr. 10. $ in fire;

ie eodery, 17 Men {truck with Lightning a Shipboard at Cowes by the
Iſle of Wight.

Die 31. Falmouth, very tempeſtuous, Y Z prime, VN Retr.

1678. Septembris fine, Inundation, Tranſa8. p.9. PUG XxX mw,

11679. April 6, 16. News of an Earthquakein Piedmont, a Town called
Rojia funk into the Earth,about a Hill. Two Perſons of 200 eſcaped,Gazer.
1401, YL © infin, V; "% |

April 15, Comet. V 21. BF. © 16. 5 ec.

1680. March 23. V:ſuwv14 throws out Fire and Stones. Y 13. & 26. »
Y 27. V 13. ©. Both © and 2 within the Bounds that I aflign for In-
fluence on theſe great Products,

April 9. News from S-zyrna of a T. M. which overturned a Hill, and
overwhelmed a Village; W 2 in fin. S. © in prix. Here ſay I, our Pla-
nets had 2 hand in both Earthquakes, or neither. .

168c,\Now. 21. Comer, YL in Tf opp. @F In 2, :

1681, March 27. High Vind, Cold,Snow 7 and 8 m. Winter Weather,

$1 2,Y 11,9mM 26D hg.

Apr.1 RomaSeptentrion.werſusGometa major luctdiorgie nupero, 2 1 8. 12,

April 16. Halo circd Solemycum aliguitus minoribus Iridum inſtar. Extraora,
Relat. Numb 35. % 15, If 22. 9. |

Die 22, Ex inferiore traftn Albis Ruricole quieruntur ex anns ſucitate, gran-
tiem Scaraleorum invaleſcere numerum, qut delicatum Arborum florem atradit.
Drocefis Bremenſis triſtias conqueritur ae 1nuſitato murium Numero,qut ſegetens


Uunu radi-


ate
C4


/


_ — — ————


Forem Diary. Book Il.


radicitus abradunt. Relat. Extraord, Nun. 32.2! 16. % 29. $.% in T 1Sapt
to bring a Drought. —

May 1. One lain with Lightning at Stepzey. It 18, V, $6, &.

Dre 3. Ly M. in Zealand, and Star extraordinary for 3 Nights,
IT.10.%.D 7. *.

Di: 5. This Night following a general Bl:te which blited all the Wal-
nut Trees.

Die 22. At St. John's Town in Scotland,unuſual Hail,Rain with Thunder,
T. M. for a quarter of an Hour. Ben5k:#'s Incelligence. w 23. xz 11. ©.
opp. by > in 2. Yea, add h Y.


Some few Additionals.


1527. May 27.Heidelberg,the Old Caſtles Magazin fired with Lightning,
Lyc. T 28, % 13. ©- 2 & 2% inprizc. S,

1542. Aug. 5. Lat. 41. Weſt-Inates, a Tujon from the South, the Winds,
Rains ſeeming wore than Natural, we threw all into the Sea , cut both
our Maſts overboard. Our Bark next day ſplit ona Rock. Purch. III. 263,
VU 29. M 16. ?. not without Þ and & in m,

1655. May 17. In Thuringia and elſewhere, a Floud fo Famous, that
the Writer Lyc. in his declining Age reckons it thrice, deceived, I ſuppoſe;
by the Variety of the Places from whence the News come. © 7 prince. 11.
2 in fine, W 1nprinc. S,

I557. Fane 2. Yarmouth, Tempeſt and much Rain, Jenkznſox in Hak/:
334 94. Y.T 6.9 20.0 23. 5.

1589. Ofober g. Tercera, 11 Ships ſunk by foul Weather, the reſt ſcat-
tered by a Storm. Parch. 1'/. 1673. =4. Þ 25.0 28. 2,

1591. Apr. 17. I ſaw four great -_ in the Afternoan, but thanks be
to God they came not near us, Hak/. 132. Y in m opp. @$ in S&. not
withont Þh and & Þ ina Tropical opp.

1596. May.Foul Weather, Drake in Hakl. 3. 58g. VV 25.9 imprinc,'s.

I597. June 5+ St. IV. Foul Weather, with great ſtore of Hail and Snow,
near =" <5" Ag Parch. III. 536, $28. %.U 2 2, 12, Y 14, ©. Add

h ? mfpine 7,

1599. May 27. WhitS. Great Rain and high Winds. Stow. 9, 2 20.%.

1601. Sept. 10, 20, Encountred with a Terrible Tempeſt, Perch. Ill.
72. = 2,V%. M7. 0.24. Y.

1627. April 18. Thunder, Rain, Kyr. % © © opp.

May 5. Rain and Thunder, Kyr. % © I opp.

7, 8. Thunder, Rain, % © prope Plezad.

21. Thunder, Rain, Wolkenbruck, % <.

30. Thunder and Rain, Kep!. m 23, Y.S 5.9.

Fune 5. Thunder and great Rain, V2 ?,

I3, 14. Thunder, and Groſs Waſſer Schlag,  Q 7.
-. - 1628, June 20,” Storm, Wind, % © 2.

22, Rain zofe tot. VOY ».

24. Thunder and much Rain, % © Z.

ov. 30. Much Snow, YL © Zz.

Dec. 7. Much Rain, Y © £-3.

1629. June 21, Thunder and Lightning. % © 2 ).
1630. Aug. 21,22. Thunder and much Rain, % © #.
1634. July 13,14. Rainy, Y@E ). ;

1635. June 24.& 29. Stark Rain and Thunder, % © 5.
1637. O06. 6. Stark Rain and Thunder z08e. % © ».
1638. Sept. 20. Stormy and Rain, V. 7.


26. Muck -


Chap. XIV. Turbulent Configur. reducd to their Claſles,


449


26. Much Rain Throx2h and Through, lays the Dutchman, Ayr. V $ .
30. Much Snow, L ©? ».
OF.6, 18, 20, 21. Stormy. Y OY.

9 1. So have ye our Forein Diary, with ſome glances by the By of ſeve-
ral Inſtences, perhaps not unworthy Cont{1deration ; now chat the Reader
may ſee we are in earneſt ; let him be pieated to trace this Diary by theſe
Steps the leading Aſpectis Y and © x here you hnd Storms, Arg. 4. 1588.

9 2, The next Stepis % 2, here we find Storms, 4® 1548. 1549. April
Io. 1610. Feb. 1. 1616. Jan. 16, 1618. July 14. 1526. Sept. 15.1636. Jul
L 7,8, 10, 1638, March 7. 1629. Dec. 27. 1646. Aug. 10. 1660. Now. 11,
n Number 15.

v 3. The: 3d. ſtep is Y © 2 3 here we find Storms , 1655. ov. 7.
1636, OF. 22.1639. May 13.

6 4. Next comes = , and he makes ſome busfle too. Firſt,” with alone,
as may be ſeen, 4® 1525. 1529. Feb; 4. 1558. june g. 1601, Aug. 14. 1641,
Feb. 7. 1638. Sept. 20.

*5, And yet more busfling with © and V .4® 1501.1527. Zuly .Onceor
twice, 1549. A* 1555,and twice in Aowemb. 1556. Once in far. 1558.
then in 1576. 1580. jJuze 6. A® 1587, July 12. 1588. Sept. 2.1589. Feb. 24.
1590. Sept. 15. 1606, Aug. 4. 1609, May T6. and ANov. 19. A® 1626, Dec.
17. 1636, Aug. 7.1630. Jan. 7.

6. L © 2 ?. Now this is according to our Doctrine premis'd, Congreſs
of manyPlanets in oneSign,Ghap.13. v3. And who knows but chePlaner may
be termed, 4.3; 43:46 upon an aud:ble account from his raiſing of Winds
(in theſe Circumſtances) as 1rss is a meſſenger upon a more F7/zble account.
Some good Learning may be produced to back this Fancy, but we pals it,
and rzke notice, that if YL © and 7 raiſe Storms, wet or dry, befure
© 2 and ? will raiſe their Tumule. 4® 1539. Dec. 17. 1541. Fc6. 19;
A® 1555. 1639. Dec. 6. & bis in Jan. 17. 1671. % © and & 95. out-does
the reſt you tee, and thenextiS VN 2 ins 2, :

9 7, Further, Y@2 Z and ), Five of the Planetary Conſort, cannot
be wanting to diſturb the Air, as 4* 1502. 1576. Sept. 7. 1589. Aue. 17.
1639. Dec. 24. Nay they would do more than any Congrels yet meni-
oned, but that Reaſon telis us, that. Four or F:we can't agree to- meet, to
ealily as Two or Three can.

9 8. Other Mixtures there are, which muſt not be thrown away : as
VL 7 3,1629. Jane 14. Þ 2.3,1596, & WL. $2 Þ, 1636. July 30. Sept. 7;
bu. 1656. OF. 16. L © © Y.1599. Aug. 10. 2 & », 1549. 1567. Sept. 7.

9 9. Now ſeeing we have allotted the Preeminence, where 'cis due, we
may conlider the Aſpects promiſcuoufly , fince they all agree in Turbuien-
cy and Storm. Here, blowing Men overbord, breakzng their Fore-yards,
M 2in yards, and in 4:(p-r/ing Fleets , which too often never meer. Storms
that throw down $prres of lofty Towers, A® 1529. Tempeſt that Roots
up Trees. Sept- 7. 1567. and demoiiſhes Houſes a Kingdom throughout,
1627. That makes poor Mariners yield themſelves to Mercy, when they
ly a Try, as they call it, a arift, I think they mean, not able ro main-
428i a Sail, 1609, Tempeſts threatning a Reſolution of the Univerſe into
the Old Chaos, 163g. ſuch things will be,notwithſtaading 2 's dwarf Stature,
and the others Smooth face, ſometimes rake place. :

v 10. There is a Hurricane or two would not be pafled over ; One
Freach, ThreeEneli, A® 1567. Sept. 7. 1576. 1601. and the Lambeth Hur-
ricane. For the Firſt, we have heard of it before in h © 3; now, in. 2,
not without ©. For the 24. we (hall find itin R d, which then it ſezms
could do nothing withour Y 2. Mazch 7. 1576. The Poor Miller, which
in the 34, Hurricane had % $, with © and 9 to Divorce his >

"7%


Engliſh Huracane. Omens. S pouts or Cat. Book IF


Febr. 1601, Add that dreadful one in Bohemia, A® 1627. Dec 27.

$ 11. But theO:in0us Tempeſt at Lambeth A®163g.was the firſt that con-
vinced me;that there may beHurracaneseven in England. I have trepaſsd
againſt ſome learned Men, who will admit of no ſuch Heathen Trumpe-
ry, as an Ozen. But I ſpeak the Sence of the Learned Reporter who
was anexcellent Hiſtorian, and may be, made as much uſe of itas ano-
ther. Yet our buſineſs is to aflign the Cauſe, which we ſay, (as far as it
is to be diſcourſed of here) was h and 2 , ſuper-added to Land £.. No
other Conjunctions are near. A great Inſtance. of the Impertection of
that Aſtrology, which reduceth all ro Partile Aſpedts 3 when, the Lunar
excepted; there is not a Partile Conjun#10n or Oppoſition within 3 Weeks
on either fide. But, according to our Hypothelis,if there can be noStorm of
the moſt inferiour rate, without a #zeeting , ( beſides © and * , for they
are ready at all times) I was going to ſay of the Syperiors , one or more ,
either with themſelves, or with the Inferiours , within Thirty degrees:
You may gueſs: that an Aſtrologey has enough to do in a Large and No-
ble Field, ſuch as (to Propheſie for once) joyned with good Literature in
after Ages may be valued. If this be an excurſion, ler it be pardoned,
Proviſe , that we remember that our Planets have the great hand in this
remarkable Tempeſt, as will infallibly appear by the Moons place, where?
But in Oppoſition to them Both. Tn what Signs? In I: and 2. And have
I not defired our Geztle Objectors but _— , to ſtudy the Sign 17? Doth
not the more geztle Reader remember thoſe Arch: Birds have been often
brought before him for Riot and Tumult ?

Ss 12, As to the Rains and Flouds,which appear, we impute them as we
do the Winds, toour Aſpects, not {1mply, bur under ſuch Circumſtances
met. I. Such as A® 1551. May 17. before Whitſunday at Kitting , Gheſen-
fort, Rottolſee, &-c. Lyc. 613. Il 23, $.S 3, V. Jan.13. 1569. at Lowais,
V% 5 Tropic. ' ;

2. - 1599. May 27. Whitſunday Great Rain and High Winds , Hows,
D 9. 20, V.

3. 4® 1636. 7an. fine, the Dutch have it Groſs Waſſer Fluch, Kyr.Fromond
ſpeaks of one in Sparz, in Febr.*X 1, 2. Xt 1; V. So Sept. 1. 1577. in Eaf
_— Ws .

s 13. But the "Spouts, the Cataradts, 1591, Apri [ 17. 1627;
May 21.6 Aug. 14. the Dutch call them Wolkenbrucks. What er \
Philoſophy can give an account of them > Who dares venture on
them ? Tis enough [to make a Peripatetick confels: the ſhortneſs of his
Notions, enough to break a Novel:ft ; eſpecially in thoſe at Sea, where
the Water-is ſeen to run up in a Body through an Airy Cylinder , as if ic
were one of Archimeaes's Engines. Who ſays tis done with a Whirlwind
may ſpeak Truth , but doth not ceaſe to wonder, I hope. For if a pro-
found Vortex of Air by its Force, though not by its Denſity; canprop up
a Lake of Waters in the Armoſphere?, how can it infingare it (elf into the
Profundity of the Sea, to bear up ſuch a quantity into its unnatural place ?
But Ianſwer, tis an Iz»mane Force, for to we read at home, as well as
in France, that Whirlwinds have torn up Trees ; nay, andremoved them 3
twiſted che Trunks fo torn, and folded up the Leaden Coverings of Chur-
chos. Is all this Natural? Who knows bur ic may, if it be Celeſtial ?
Now, 4* 1591. April 17. our Planets are oppoſed : (o are -hey again, June
26. 1640. not withoat Þ and &', as the Table Confeſles,

S 14. This puts in mind to run over our Thunders, and here we find
and © to bring us about IX. years, iz. 1586. 1627. 1629. 1641. 1645.
_ . "we 96 ws Too pk SSeY do exceeda lictle, and bring

. I520, I519. 0, 1590. 1027. 1620. 1630, 1646. 1664. 1670. 1675,

While % # (odds though itbe, Two to Three)bring XXII W1Z, + 21,


I 526:


——wr


Chap. XIV. Immane Force. The Thunder-Ball at Wells.


3S1


1526.15 35. 1537. 1548. 1596. 1617. 645. 1618, 1636. turbulent years, and

{o on in the Table.But the reaſon of this Exceſs we have given,becauſe 2
and .2 meet oftner than Y.@ and # can; pleaſe you to ſee the other mix-
tures of Y © I, that brings us ſome murmurs, 4? 1627. 1681, % @2
bring us IIL ('% isalways ſonear at hand, when © 2 meet.) % © ? bring
us XL. L ©? » as many, Y ©2 ? TIV.,Wee'! tell you but one Story
from Hak{nit, (of which our Diary is ſilent, Sept. 18. 1591). of a Clap of
Thunder at Sea, that” flew Four Men outright, their Necks being wrung
alide 3 and of 92 Perſons not one untoucht, Lancaſters Voyage, Part 2.
pag. 104, This is what I called Immaze Force, and I aſcribe it to the
Immane il|uſtrious Bodies over our Heads. Here is not only 4 of and
2. which may be, has got ſome repute now, bur alſoan © of h and & ;
of which Complicate Congreſs you have had ſome late great Examples,
This we do not to foreſtall that Af pect when it comes,but to prepare us for
it, and to do ſome kind of Right to VN and 2. TI tell ycu rother
Story, from Lyc. Feb. 10. 1548. I: Saxonia ems Cel:ftis wifms in alignat
UHrbes tncidere. Here is the ſame accident, a d of % and 2 again, ſecon-
ded by an Aſpe& of h and & ; the laſtwas on #, andthisad Firing of
Magazines is ordinary 3 we have 4 or 5 Inſtances.

9 14. Our Eyes opened by ſuch Inſtances, made me affirm that Y and
2 carryed Lightning in their Faces. They have a Nitrous Aſpe, which
helps to the quickneſs of the Flame, eſpecially Þ 3 for 2 ſeems to have
a more unuous Creamy Flame 3 as I fancy in the Brighter Trajections,
while the Smaller Meteors look red and coaliſh , but no Trajeftion me-
thinks reſembles Y.

s 15. I am not engaged to diſcourſe the Thunderball whichentred the
Church, nor of the remarkable Chance, that at the Very time,the Di
courſe of the Doctor was concerning Spirits. The Vulgar are apt to make
wrong Conſequences from fuch Premiſes. Divine Wiſdom had reafor
fo todo, it may be, to convince ſome Sreptical Auditors from ſuch co-
incident Circumſtances.

s 16. More is it to my ſe, to defire you to obſerve what Dr. Dee's
Ephemeris tells us, That the Fax ardens was ſeen under % , of the ſame
Altitude (in reſpe& of the Hcrizon) and Longitude. Tis a great Note,jard
T have often obſerved the like ro my great ſatisfaction and conviction,with-
out any Item: given from the Annotation. Where note thar the diſtance
of YL and 2 at that Meteor, Mire Longituainis, as he calls it, was Co-
metical; the ſame I mean,as is found oft-times, when Comets are produced z
becauſe we are next to ſpeak of Theme.

s$ 17. Now leaſt any ſhould think the Diſtance of our Planets, here ob-
ſerved, is unreaſonable wide, I ſhall offer an Inſtance in- Feb. 7. St. Ao.
1617. where V and 2 are 28 degrees diſtant on the day when it Light-
ned, anda great Fireball is noted by Kepler : and anſwer, I ſhould have
thought ſo too, but that I find again in Feb. 12. 164z. a Thunder, noted
whenY was in Y 29.and 7 in =? 15. I acknowledge This is not fo wide a di-
ſtance. But do not the Winters Thunder ig the ſame February, near the
fame day in the ſame Signs, though not quite the fame diſtance, argue
ſomewhart for us > It muſt needs do ſo. For Wand 2 are found in theſe
Signs but once in Twelve year, and twice in_24 year; -we find ſuch
Poſitions to Thunder in February. Is there no Contribution then toward
ſuch an unſeaſonable Tumult? Never let us 4iance it 3 no, notatthe Di-
ſtance of 28 degrees, {ince'tis the ſame diſtance as is noted for Turbulent,
under the Notion of One Planet at the entrance of a-Sign , and another
at the Cloſe : Yea, note again a good time that w and = in February, as


wand St in Auguſt, are Potitions diſpoſing to Thunder, Witneſs one Evi-
XXXX dence


552


Comets Riſe, Duration Pook II,


dence more from 4*1649: in the Thunder at Mechliz; that Mechl:iz which
isnoted twice for the ſame Meteor in our Table.

$ 18. Bat what ſhall we do for the ITI. Gorpo Sazto's ? for I ſhall with the
Vulgar Mariner abroad, take them to be Saints too, bpt for the Dimneſs
of Veeir Light, and perhaps their Superfluous Number, if there be no Na-
cural cauſe for them, more than the working of the Ship, and the Pirchy
Eftuwia of the Board and Tackle ; for then in all mighty Storms they
would be con{picuous,and fo diſabuſe the diſtreſſed Seaman from his Super-
ſition, bur ſeeing 'tis-not ſo.,,' there is fome more ſecret diſpoſition of the
Air toward the Generation of ſuch Lights. Iam willing perhaps to re-
duce it to other AſpeRs 3 but when I obſerve the Situation of our d in
X and 7, I cannot exclude our Configuration. Some Obſervers, nicer
than I, would take ſome notice of an Inſtance of Harz:l:ſs Thunder, Great
yet Harmleſs, 4* 158g. And again, Harmleſs Earthquake. Well farethe
Principle, ſay I, that will give Light to- Mortal Eyes in this Afﬀair ! Ob-
ſerve'tisa d firſt, whichis leſs Violent thanan P. Secondly , 'ris in So-
litary Alpes, for when others are in place where , Thunder is Harmleſs,
as in May 4. 1646. But what it may be more, I promiſe nothing, for Terce-
ra's, and other places ſakes. See OF. 2. 158g.

Now for Comets. 9 19. How ? Stella Nowa, A® 1572. among them > Do
we make no more of it then than ſo ? As beforep. 3 3.chat's a newDevice,
and a bold one. Rzcc:olus is more wary,who treateth of them apart with grea-
ter Caution; I anſwer, He doth well, and ſo doothers it may be. Bur
who can help it, if a new Star degrades it elf fo far as to appear in the
company of a Meteor : He muſt ſtand ro all hazards , and come by ſome
diſgrace thereby, unleſs he hath ſomewhat to ſhew of a higher Original -
Even the caſe almoſt of the Gooſe and the Sway, if the Swan can thew no
more thana longer Neck, He may be taken for the ſame Species. There-
abouts lies the Deciſion. :

$ 20. But before we come to this, let me ſeparate the Meteors, the Co-
mets, Iſhould ſay, of this Table, into two ferts , e'rewhile upona &d,
otherwhile uponan @ of our Planets 3 perhaps the new Star in Caſſiopera
will make ſome amends for the Readers Patience. Go to then : The Firſt
Conjunctional Comet noted, happens to ſhew it ſelf in «1, and tend to
m7, 4* 1506. Comets with us, and with every man elſe,are nothing but the
Effuvia of thePlanetary Bodies,at ſuch times,and at ſuch Poſitions,as are apr
to make ſuch Impreſſions. And fay from our Table ; Is not our d % 2 in
in the Sign m, Grad. 13. 2 Grad, 20. %. Shall we before thedue time

ive you the whole of this Comet where the Star firſt appeared ; We ſhall

ut betray his Original, for @ h and Þ arein 1,Y%Y and2 inm, din
=, an intermediate Sign. Are we not taught chat the Comets paſſed
from III. Planets to IL then as the Train lay, from A ro m. And did it
not firſt ſhew it (elf 4ug.8. when the I came to fortifie 4 by Oppoſition?
You will ſay I aſcribe it ro AZ; very good: and therefore I prove it of
each. Atpreſent of d Þ $, and that in *M. Now this Comet appea-
red upon Gonjunttions moſtly, but one Oppoſition, and that Lunar, It
comes into my head , that theſe Conjunctional Comets, generated by
meer Conjun&1ons, I ſay, for the moſt part are but ſhort liv'd. This laſted
but its Week. FORE

Now, ifany,not exerciſed in the Doctrine of the Sphear, ſhould ask me
how this Meteor ſhould be ſeen, being in the {ame Sign with ©, the
Globe will inform him, that though the parts of the Sign near the Eclip-
tick, or the ©s place, ſet with the ©, yet inthe Horizon of Eurepe , the
more Northern parts nearerthe Ecliptical Pole, never deſcend under the
Horizon. A great Aotandum for thoſe who take Pleaſure, to obſerve the


Depen-


Chap XIV. And Expiration.


Dependants of theſe Meteors upon their Sources, the Planets, which very
y=um are found to appear in the ſame Sign, as they do often in the Oppo-
1te.

- 9 21. The next,4* 1512.0f which we have no diſtin& account,only that
it appeared in March and April ; mark, if ad % 2 doth not happen, and
that in the Sign X 3 yea,was not the laſt in m7 > Whichevery 9/1
is oppolite to * 3 and therefore is in part the ſame (the two extreams be-
ing united in the Radiation.) Now if it laſted longer, my obſervation
takes place here alſo, /z. that it is not a meerly Conjunctional Comer,
ſince we find an Oppoſition of © and H 2 2, as by the way, you may
note, there was before d of the ſame © h, bur ds do not give fo long
aate we have faid.

s 22, That of 1516. brings not any particular account with it,and there-
fore cannot expect any from us. The-general Truth is moſt plain, for 'tis
not only a Single ? of oY ; bur a Triple. Y to @, 2 and Lins
and w, And folet our Table be corrected.

9 23. That of 1521. in the Month of Apr:l, has an Oppoſition of % and
2 in T and 2, an4 o it got into our Table. But the Place of the Co-
met conlider'd, is {aid to be che end of 5. And is not the Planer
& at the entrance of tlie Month, at the exd of S, ant the beginning of
- oppoſed by i ? By the greater right therefore ic ſeems to belong to
that ®,

S$ 24. For that of 1527.Dec.11. noted by Greuſſer in Gemma, The Reader
may gueſs what Faith we give to the report,wlizn he ſhall find with us, that
the ſame Celeſtial Cauſes areon Foot, as were found bulie 11 years ago,
viz, Y £@%7 in S and , Bur the Truth is, upon betrer Inſpecticn,
they allow this Meteor to be bur of ſhort continuance. And that Terrible
Appearance to date it (elf in 4ug. as perhaps we may fee in V. and &,

9 25. For that which the Table rakes notice of, 7a. 18. 1528. we have
aſſigned it the ſame Original with char in the cloſe of the laſt year, and tru-
ly the Illuſtrious £ V and 2, 2 far. does highly perſwade. But the Co-
met appeared in *, Well and good ;, for on the 18th day & 1s as near the
Fiſhes in 22, as he was near the other Comet in 1, 4® 1521. Belide,
Comets, asI take it , ule to lodge berween their Planetary Sires, as here
between 2 and h.

$ 26. The next is that of 1532, Sept. 23. which laſted to ov. 20. That's
well and particular ; yea, to Dec. 8. fays Fracaftorius z which according to
Appian, who has deſcribed part of ic, it began in *t, and by O#. 14. got
into >, by rhe beginning of Now. into 1, a Star thrice as big as VY.
How many Proofs have we here of its Original, common to other Fiery
Meteors > Which ought to be argued 3 Firſt, from the Concomitants of
ſuch Appearances, as Inundations , &c. if we may believe the report of
Rochenback, Next, fromthe d © & in =, atthat time obſerved, not by
us, but by the Age thenin being, happening on the very Birch-day of the
Meteor and the Obſervation proves to be good, only (to accompliſh it ;)
they ſhould have ſaida d of © and& (Partile) and ? ( Platique though he
be) for Three Planets in = , as well as other Signs, 4lmays conduce :,
Then comes our Planets, 2 in the-beginning of m Stationzry, and V to-
ward the end, viz. mM 24. Who hath ſo good a Memory to remember
that part of the Eclyptique which it reſpects, and what 'tis joyned with?
And doth not Apptaz's Obſervation tell us, that beginning in "7, it pals'd
through =>, and as far as the 3. of m. This was Nov. 8. within gr. 8. Lon-
git. of Where would you have Comets to be? In tie Mouths of the
Planets ? Is there not ſufficient Neighbourhood betwixt the Gezerazt, and


Generatum | Truſt me,our Planet $ runs back toa d with & in " _
olds


Star "i Caſhopeia no New Creation. Book 1.


holds there till the 25 of ow. the ſame are the Cauſes of Exiſtence, and
Conſervation.But why ſhould it begin in”? I anſwer, tis well if I can gueſs
why it ſhould make haſt into =,then, to m. I don't pretend to be a Revea-
ler of all Myſteries.I have faid that Comets usd to be generated in the 9:4
place,between the Planets.I con{ider'd,that Two hours before the @riſe,the
I was the ſame Sign with H, as well as in the ſame Sign with . The
beginning of M,where theComet firſt ſtarted, is xquidiſtant from S 21.(the
place of the ) at that time in the morn)and 4 with @on the other hand. For
the expiration of the Comet, Dec.8.con(ider that in the end of Now. 9 and

7 were ſcarce paſt that degree of m,where V. kindled it; but about Dec. 8.
when W and 2 were paſt the Oppoſal of the Hyages , and & knocking
off, there the Fewel fail'd. Yea, but this ſeems a-Conjunctional Comer,
and fo by our Principle it ſhould not laſt ; I anſwer, I am not over-fond of
that Notion of mine, and then I ſay it may be reckoned Oppoſitional, in
reſpec of the Fixed Stars, Plezades and Hyades, which carry a great ſtroke
in the Nativity and Life of this Meteor, as any man who obſerves the Er-
ratick Motions, may confeſs.

$ 27. The Comets of 1533. & 1539. we paſs by, becauſe they may
challenge ſome other place ; the firſt, an @ of Þh and V, the latter a D.
For Appian puts this laſt Comet Five days ſooner, &/z. May 6. If it be
the latter, There are III. in S. |

s$ 28. Then, 4® 1541. Aug. 21. A Comet tayled like a Dragon, as ous
Author Phratles it ; Ir ſeems to be of ſhort continuance, we'll be as ſhort
withit, Y © in M, a Conjunional Comet ; the more Conſpicuous
is it, becauſe the I[T. Conjunctions are all noted in the ſame Month.

9 29. The Comet 1560. happening in Dec. not in Apr:l, poinrs oat a
different cauſe from what is aſſigned in the Table, w7z. f h and © in Trop.
Signs 3 but the more material I reckon to be the Interpoſition between'
in V on one fide, and Þ in 7 on theother. This, I fay, Itake to be the
moſt material, although the Comet which laſted but 28. days may ſeem
to expire at the Expiration of © and h, which according to our Princi-
ple, laſted tothe end of the Month.

$ 30. Now for the year of Grace, 1572. and that great Star in Gaſſiopera's
Chair, the Wonder of the World thez, while the Poets of the Age, Bezs
and others noted it for a Secozd to that Sacred Star which ſhene ont to the
Eaſtern Mag: ; and it ſtill ſhines in Records, illuſtrated by the Noble Ty-
cho, and diſcourſed of by all the Learned fince, who love the Beauteous
Theory of the Heaven over us. 'Tis this Star claims to know his Kin-
dred, Family and Original; for we are far from believing ita Star of the
firſt Creation, but of the ſame Deſcent and Linage, as other new Lights ,
whether it havea Trainor no 3 Though who knows , as ſome ingenious
Men have quzried, whether it may not have ſome Train upward into the
ether, oppoſite to the right Line which paſſes its Center? We know other
Learned C———— do not reckon them amongſt Comets ; Rzcc10-
lus, Hevelis, becaule they wander not, but keep their Station like one of
the Eternal Fixed, Bur if the Comets and New Stars have the ſame ſprea-
ding Train,the difference of F:xat on,will be but accidental ; Now That it
was of the ſame Production, I ſhall not infer from thoſe Attendants that
uſually accompany Comets , whether they be Droughts, &-c. or diſtem-
per'd Airs, from Gemma's Coſmocriticks, and others, referring that to
another place, but from the conſent of the Learned, followed and confir-
med by Hewelis , and from the Particular Evidence which Inow intro-
duce, while I advance % and 2, their @ noted about the 14. of Nov. in
the Ephemeris 3 but it began, Enguirers ſay, at the entrance of Nov. or
theend of OFob. So have vrea Platique Aſpect of 10 degr. diſtance, which
is


Chap XIV. Comets, E art. dependance demonſtrated.


is no ſmall advantage, and withal 2 Statrozary : For fo I call it when it
is Three or Four days in Oze degree ; whether it be upon the Refi-x or
Dire# Courle; And was not 9. in the ſame Circumſtance (as 2 alſo when
time ſerves) in o:her Comets under this Aſpect? | |
9 31. The ſecond Inſtrance thall-be concerning the conſervation of Comets
by this, and other Aſpects hinted aiready 3 as in that we read of £Þ 15 11.It
began in the end of May ; there's H&d and 2 ,IILin to kindle it ; after the
midd!e of June, peeps in the P of 2, Y. being in =, and after 7uly's
beginning, (conſonant to what we have already deliver'd) 2 and 2 draw
near to a Partile d, and fo the Comer exprres. 4
s$ 32. Ler the next come for confirmation, A® 1527. ſeeing ic laſted
but an Hour and a quarter, it will not be much Trouble. Yea, but it
was of no duration 3 the anſwer is, the Oppoſition was Partile ; Parrtile
Pf or d alone will not do, they have no Lyfe in them. |
5 33.And whar need we ſay-after 4® 1572.but that a few being behind,
we muſt ſpeak to them All. Truly 1618. is as Famous almoſt as 1572.
Here in Au2.15.44 S-pt. 15.we find a Comet,which laſted about aMonth.
It began upon a near meeting of © ©, while %. exactly; I may ſay, oppo-
ſed both ; buc Exa#t and Partile Aſpects will not do,lay we,without more
Lax and Wider-{pread Radiations to ſupply theLighrt or Flame of theMe-
teor 3 and Theſe, Lo ! agreable ro the Obſervations juſt now made,for 2 is
oppoſed by Y ad grad. 28. Diſtance, .which is the meaſure of a Sign, the
Diſtance of a Prov:dore ; who looks abroad into the Country for the ſup-
ply. of his Charge, ſeeing the Country forage neer home;will not maintain
a Comer. |
S$ 34. The Sum for our Earthquakes we have inthe precedent Tablein
theſe years, viz.1508.1539.at Baſil,1556. Gonflantinople which held Three
days, and threw down the Church of San#a Sophia. 4® 1569. at Bruxel,
with hoarſe noiſe, ſtrange Colours in the Air,ſome faid,Spectres. 1580. in
London, where it continued but one Minute. On the Sea Coaſts in Kent
extreme, felt 3 times, hora 6, 8, 9. A® 1586. Weſt-Inates again, 1596. We-
Pram in Kent. 1601. 1609. at Nera once, and again, A® 1621. Burgundy.
1626. in Calabria, 1629. Among the Alps. 1636. at Norimberg. 1638. in
Calabria once or twice. 163g. in ſome other part of Italy, 1646. in Aps-
lia. 1650. Northampton. 1679. at Piedmont. 1680. Veſuviu Flames.
1681, in Zealand about XXL.in the Total.And is not That a great Total ?
- © 35.Hence am I as ſure as I write, that this Phxnomenon, as great and
Stupendious as it is, depends upon this Celeſtial appearance, 2 or ? with
V. . Thoſe who believe that Comets have Influence upon Ezrthquakes,
which is an opinion hovering ahout,and bordering upoz Truth, may think
I believeno Improbabilicies,lince our Bright Planets and 2 do not much
ablude from ſome kind of Comets. Yet why (houldT crifle ?
. Is it not plain, that for ſeveralyears our Planets are both in the Came
Sign, what have we buta d of Yand 2, A* 1609. 1679. _ 1680,
In likemanner ad of V and 2, 4® 1530. 163g. 1681. within the ſame
Sign, I ſay, or within ſo #zany degrees, which is all one; and this with
great Variety, ſome at a diſtance of 28. ſuppoſe, ſome 24. ſome 16. ſome
at 8. ſomear 2. and I, hope that will pleaſe our Partile Cuſtomer.
. $36. But the our-goes the d, and there's reaſon for its witneſs 4®
156g. 1580. 1636. 1638. which is alſo viſible in the Complicatjons, for
whereas there are but Three on the Conjunctional fide, w1z. 4® 153g.
1621. 1650. the Oppoſitions are more, 4® 1508. 1556. 1580. 6591.
1626. 1628, 1629.
_ Forif and 2, or 7 have their Effe&, it ſtands to teaſon-as we
have (aid, that %Þ 4 and? have ſomething more. So theſe Earthquakes
Yyyy may


256 Startling Obſerv. in Barthq. of Italy and France. Look. 11:


Ce NE ee —_—_—_——______—_—_—_


CEE OD — T—_ ——


may be reduced to their Clafſis,as well as the Storms and the Lighrnings,

9 37.Here I muſt note again,purſuanc ro what hath been faid 2iready in
the like Notion, that in the #, the wider is che diſtance, (fo ic be with.
in compaſs ) the greater is the Diſpoſition of Firing the Subter7 474,
Train 1n the nds) y. as before the Atherial Train of the Concer,
Therefore as it may be confeſs'd, an Earthquake ſhould be produced ;r
degrees or 8 diſtance; fo 'tis more than potſible it ſhould be produced ir
14. gr. diſtance, as in the ſecond Inſtance of 4® 1580. or at 20 pr. cif}; 2;
in the Kentih Earthquake, 4* 1596. And ſomewhat yer further, 5 the
Enquirer into particulars will obſerve. © _ |

s 38. We cannot define for certain which Sign of Heaven, or Mon:!;;
in the year are moſt apt to produce Earthquakes; Our Information from
our Fore-fathers being defeQtive, even as R:ccrolws juſtly complains, abour
Comets, part. 2. pag. 23, 24. but this we ſay,that Sand m are ſometimes
remarkable 3 as may be ſeen in the Garabrian Earthquakes, A® 1626. and
1638. Faly XL. in both which years VL anc 2 were ſo near the ſame Pofici-
on, that a Candid Reader will ſtartle at the Obſervation. For how 2 (aith
he, a 2d Earthquake at the end of 12 years, which is known to be v'
Period ? Ther tis likely that V is one of the Inſtruments of tharMorion. And
withal doth it happen, faith he, to be in the ſame place in both years
Then 'tis probab gen that 2 in ſuch a degree of the Zodiack, conlpi-
ring with certain others, is endued with the ſame wotrve faculty,

9 39. To ſeehow Truth will juſtifie it (elf, nor only as to the General,
that theſe Tremors of the Earth are imputable to the Heavens, bur thar
theſe Aſpects wherein we are at preſent engaged, are their Cauſes Eftici-
ent, for the News from Maples in the Gazer. O3ob. 1685, the Inſtant
on which I write, tells us, that Sept. 23. O8. 3. their Mountain Veſuwing
within theſe few days began to bury again, caſting out Flames and Athes
with a Terrible noiſe, and the laſt moiety of the Month ; What are the
Aſpects but a '& of V% 2 and 2 ? Shall I gratifie our Friends Les Scavans
in Fai, and fo cloſe this tedious diſcourſe. Tis not much out of the
way, they tell us that the City of Pars owns but two Earthquakes ; the
Firſt, Mpr:16. 1580. and the other May 12.St. AV. 1682. In the firſt Earth-
quake, © and * areattheend of Y, and 9 is upon the Plerades, In
the Second, 7 is attheend of V, and © and 2 very near the Pleiades, [
could make an abſolute Rule of it, but this place don't allow me to run
upon the ceſt of the Parallel : In 102 years ſomewhat of the ſame Revoly-
tion may come abour.

s go. Concerning the Parel:a, though we ſhall ſee them happen under
other Aſpects, yet the Revolution of this Aſpect , co-incident wich
the Variety of the Appearance, doth beſpeak the curious to make further
enquiry z we cannot here digreſs about the matter which reflects the Lighr,
whether the Vapor be Dry, or Icy, as Dej-cartes juſtly imagines 3 only
we ſay, the Luſtre reflected is not meerly Solar, but borrow from ſome
other Aſtral Radiations 3 for cough the Secondary Suns muſt by courſe of
Nature be leſs brave and bright than the chief Luminary, yet it doth nor
always prove ſo, they ſay z Upon no other accout ſure, but upon that of
other Luminous Bodies, which help to advance the weaker Reflexion.

S$ 41. And ſuch was thatatFenice,of which Gardan gives an account, 4
1532. And who knows but Mathematicians may find, conſidering the
Situation of the Suns in the Vertical Circle, that the brighter of thePare-
Ga belongerh to 2 , the other to Þ# ? Certainly 2 and 2 were much abour
the ſame diſtance from the Sun, One to the W:f, the Other to the Ef,

S 42. That of Jay. 2, 1586. I haveno reaſon to believe bur that our Op.
poſitron was Influential. He who ſhall read Rothmar's Deſcription in Fro:

W1N-


— ——> —— _<— -


Chap XIV. = Purclin, Milk-white Sea, by Night.


357


mundus, how clole the Parelta lay oneach fide of the Sun, may probably
{uſpedt the rear Conjunction alſo of & and ? ro help to ſuch Impreſſions.

9 43. Thar of 1550. icen in the Dutchy of Brunſwick, finds Y and 2
within 6 degrees one of the other 3 and if there be any thing in that, V in
the ſame place now, where we found 2, 4® 1532. & wice verſa,and 2 in
che ſame pizce now, where we found Y ,1586. interchangeably.Something
there muſt be : for conſulting my Notes,l found Clouds ſtrangely colour'd
with Rain-bow Tincture, May 15. in Gem. A? 1556.whered is in the ve-
ry ſame degree, &c. but that belongs to the ſucceeding AﬀpeR,, it is true 3
yet we ſee how the Heavens will anſwer if they be ſpoke to.

s 44. I confe(s I leem to talk at random, as Men are wont to do, that
are arm'd with a ſtrange Fancy, and lull themſelves in a Security, that one
will undertake che trouble of their Confutation. Yet I muſt needs own
tle further I go, I like my ſelf the better. For the Inſtance of Sep. 25.
A® 1560. where you meet with a Parel:um, and a reverſt Ir& ; what can
I ſay different from what is ſaid, when we ſhall contemplate with, or
without Gemma's Figure, 2 and © newly riſen together ; ro ſay nothin
of 7 'sreadinels to peep, and Y ſetting in the Wef> Can this Arcus an
Parelium ariſe from any other Concourſe of Cauſes, It ariſes from the
& alone the Ante-blanetary will ſay 3 but well he, zl he, 2 is within
2 degrees of this all-doing ©. Science muſt not ſpeak vulgarly ; the Sha-
dow that my Body caſts under a 4 of © and 2, vulgarly would be cal-
led the ©'s Shadow only,but exa&tly to ſpeak it is not fo ; for 'tis known
2 can caſt a Shadow by her ſelf; Bur then why an inverſt Shadow 2? I could
ſpeak to thar,but I wonnt graſp roo much. For the Irides our Forein Dia-
ry ſpeaks {ufhcient,

s 45, I hall not pleaſe my (elf in ſpeaking to the Currents under this
Aſpect, but ſhall reter ic ro a Further place. Only my Idle Head asks
the queſtion about the White Milky-Waters, what may be the Reaſon
and becauſe, I confels, I have a Months mind to impure its appearance
to the Heavens. For Firſt, it is but an appearance, though laſting for a
Night or (0; at Day Light it vanithecth. If it were any mixture of any
Whitiſh Fer-ezt,it would be fenflefs to think of an AcherialProcurement.
But the Field 1s too large for any ſuch Mixture, the Ship being under Sail
all che rime-of its Obſervation : hence there is no thinking of any
ſuch Salvo. We hail therefore conſider next, whether this appearance
is obſerved at any times more remarkable than others, as to the Heavenly
Poſitions; and if that proves, we may next conſider, whether it be Non-
ſenſe to ſay, That the Heaven may own ſuch Effects on the Water, as it
hath in the Air ? The Sun can Guzld the Clouds, and the I can paint
them with a Pale hue : The others, we ſee, can make their Ir:des and
Hals's ;, yea, help to the Colouring of a Solar and Lunar One. Why may
not this Wh:114 hue of the Water be an Impreſſion from Y and 2, and
others,analogica!ly to the appearance of the Halo ? As for the Poſition,
and? are extraordinarily circumſtantiated, by relation one to the other,
and by the Station of Yerus each of the 3 days ſpecified, A® 1617. Yea, 4®
1616. I have met with che ſame appearance before, VU and 2 not in P


{ *ris true) but in a Aſpect,which is a chance that calls for our Attention.


YL and? have Brightneſs enough to make a Ne#luca of the Sea, and all
agreeable to thoſe Principles, which the Votable Author of that Diſcourſe
2dvanceth. We ſhall ſee further, it may be, and if I ſpeed here, I ſhall
begin co ſuſpect that our Aſpect might be the Cauſe of the Whitnefs, the
extraordinary Whiteneſs (for ordinary is not to our purpoſe,it may be) as
ſme have obſerved long ago in Hail whiter than ordinary, which proves
to fall under our- Aſep&t. Howbeit ro the Whiteneſs of the Sea, pray
look back to what isnoted inthe Diary, A*® 1541. $ 46, What


356


Phaſmes ; of Armies m the ir. Book. 1I-


$ 46. What we have to ſay of Phaſmes and Apparitions in the Air,
which we do meet with in unqueſtionable Records (whatſoever may be .
expected) we thall ſay but little. Des-Gartes, we lee, aſcibes all ſuch
Stories to theFancies of SuperſtitiousPeople,and ſo ſome otherLearned of
our Men who have followed him. But we,who heartily believe Spiritual
Subſtances Good and Bad ; believe, faid I > Nay; we lay in the Name of
Mankind, we account the Evidence ſuch,that whoſoever refliſts it, while
he denies Truth,confirms it 3 Why ſo? Will you ſay,Even becauſe Humans
Mature cannot, I think, acquire ſuch a proud Antipathy to a confeſ,'d
befide D:rvine, Truth, withour ſome black Veil caſt over their Eyes. We
I ay, who admit theſe Subſtances,confidering the report of Heathen, 7ew-
4 and Ghriſtian Hiſtory, can eaſily admit ſuch appearances, as Armies,

amps, Ships, Noſes; Trumpets, fo far forth that the Truth is, They
come not under our Cognizance,no more than other Pranks of Demozs
do, unleſs, as is, confeſſed in Lanactes, the Sprr:tsof the Air,Jwho, (no diſ-
grace to zatural Science) are better Philoſophers than our ſelves ; know
the ties and Seaſons fitted to their uſe' by the admirable variety of the
Courſe of Nature. And this I avow to be highly probable, as ſhall be
made good in the Cloſe of this Diſcourſe. Here under % and 2 we
meet with that of July 19. 1550. ſeen at Treb1ntum in Saxony,not far from
Wittemberg, Armies and Noiſes heard, with Bloud ſpilt; Lycofth.Fixcelius.
OurAſpect,befide that of ©and Þ is paramount here; d % 9 Partile about
ITT 20. or 21, Another ſuch Spectacle in Saxozy again, (I would He had na-
med the proper place) he gives us of a Hearfe ſeen, and Mourners, and
Trumpets heard,O#.1.1 541.here;to y nothing of I] L.in=>,before as obſer-
vable 1n rare Efte&ts 3 our Planet'V from * 3.oppoſe ? in * 27. There's
2 Third, 1554. Aug. 5.9.P. M. near Stelpez 3 Armies with ſhooting, and
Lightning Cw whiles 3 which though I pur no ſtreſs upon, becauſe
the Adyerſary may be apt to ſay, the Military Noife was nothing bur diſ-
iſed Thunder; I anſwer, if Hiſtory ſpoke only of Noiſe, &c. They
Cid ſomething. *But when they add Inſtances of Fighting, Bloud, Shou-
ting, Trumpets, which are not fo eaſily repreſented | nn : When
they add Horſes,Naval Forces, &c. as in that before the Spaniſh Invaſion,
mentioned by Fromond, ſeen by thouſands ; we mnſt not allow that Truth
in part, ſhall paſs for the whole Truth. The whole Truth imp!ys both
Phyſical and Hyphyſical Agents in the Aﬀair. Bur of this hitherto ;__—
only for the Truth of the Phxnomenon, if you defire the Jewih Hiſtory,
ou have the Maccabees Story 3 If the Heathen, you have, beſides the
gets, Pliny , Appian, Valerius Maximum, and others. And for Ghrift1an,
= have among the Antients S. Gregory; if the Moderns, Melanchtan,
Eincelivs, and Snellivs, Where we don't introduce Hyperphyſical Cauſes
to defeat Natural,but only ante them, and make them agree ;z thereby
confirming us in the Rational belief of that good Record, which tells
Stories of Spirits, making uſe of Nature for natural Effects, ſuch as
Whirlwinds, &-c. What Angel vras that, what V/:/ible Angel, which 7e-
ruſalem's King ſaw {laying his Subje&ts? And what Motto was that which
Conſtantine ſaw written in, or near the Solar Body? Are they not hither-
ro to be reduced 7 A Supenatural Power cloathed in Nature, may be Le-
ible, as Viſible. : : E.

S 47. Let us ſhut up this Aſpe& with Froſt 3 'tisnot enough,ic may be,
to fay, thatan Aſpect of Þ and 2 is foundin all obſtinate Froſts; as in
that ſevereWinter,which,they ſays,kill'd up the Birds and Beaſts, 4® 1502.
though h and &.were in Play before; yer in February camein Y and Q.
So, 4® 1581. a Winter, which in Poland Gangreen'd the Bodies of Milita-
ry Men, Galeiſ. d Gd h,d % 2.

P,


Chap XIV. Inſtznces of Froſt. The Frozen Lone, &C,


352


A? 1520. in the Month of May,which was ſo cold, that all the hopes of
Vintage was nipt in the Bud notoriouſly, upon the account not of & and
and 2 conjoined, but of % being oppoſed to both. _

A® 1572. in O06. early, long and untimely Froſt, Echfad, t 39. upon
h 2? long Conjun&ion for a Month together, with VL and 2 in V
and > oppoſed. Which Froſt, by the way, introducing the new Star in
Caſſiopera, Evidences, that It alſo was of the Nature of Comets, which not
ſeldom are produced in Froſty Seaſons.

A* 1587. So in the Months, out of Winter quarter do we meet with a

yemal Conſtitution, June 19. 4® 1557. and Þ opp. © 9 2 . Sept. 4. 1587.

hen it Freez'd, Bluſter'd, Hail'd, Snow'd, fairh cur Engl1h Annals ;
upon the account, chiefly, I confeſs, of h and & in & and "1, but alfo
onthe account of our d $2 even in 0. |

A® 1597. Mayagain, Cold and Dry,Stow and Hakl. Part. 3. p. 195. tells
us of exiream Cold Weather, manifeſt on Y in d with ©2 2. Yet,
for all this on the other ſide, the ſame Planets ſtrongly affiſted may contri-
bute to Heat. So the Seamen complain, they were half refed the 10th
of June, 4® 1660. Lat. North 65. while Y and 2 werein if, And 7uae
if not July alſo, 4* 1645. on near the ſame accident is recorded for a Hot
Seaſon. The Firſt being in 77, the Second in S, but within Bounds. The
Reaſon of Froſt and Cold we have declared to be either the Reftraizt of
che Planets to few Signs, 3 or 4. Or, 2ty. an Hiatm in their otder, or which
is equivalent, a width or diſtance above the Signal Term ; viz. grad, 30:
Note, that the q_ Sign coming in place inſtead of rhe oy 1s
next door toah Hratw. One or more of theſe Condicions are found in


every one of theſe Chill Years; unleſs there be ſome Myftery in the Poſi- .


ture of Þ and % to be mentioned in dne place. Tips :

9 48. Þ 2 arenot ſo notable, becaufe of ſhorter Cormptehenſion, Yer
they alſo miniſter ſome occaſion to ſpeak a Word of this Conſtitution.
We have both kinds here, Cold and Hot. For & is no Aftrolo-
er, who cannot ſwallow ſuch ſeeming Contradiction, that eſtabliſherh

th upon the ſame Caule in ſeveral Circumſtances, v:z. When Solttary,
and When in Coxſort. If Snow and Storms, Av. 18. 1644. If Snow
for 4 days in March be any Argument ; If Snow a.Foot« deep found
at London at the end of April can move us 3 If extreme Snow
Chery Ile on May 16: 49-+607: Pwreh.5:5326. ortt Srow with
Cold, as the Mariner calls it, Purch. 3. 504. if, an extreme Cold, March
and April, and May to boot, will beſpeak us 3 the Table will furniſh you
with the years, 79. 97, 1644. for 2 's Influence in his Solitary Capacity.

$ 49. Hitherto may I add the Ice of the Northern Seas in «A#ftrval
Months, from the years 1527. 87. and thelike. And let no man wonder
that I fail to the Frozen Zone, upon the account that theſe (I have almoſt
ſaid) Eternal I:e-Barnks take place, only from the abſence of the warm Sun,
t ikg no room there for the ſmall Game of This or that Planet ;
orſhip the Sun as well as another man, yet atter careful Ob-
ſervation, I, tor certain found the contrary to this moſt certain Principle :
For it is known that the Northern Seas are not always of a Temper: Some
Winters the Ice makes inrodes upon the more Southern Climes 3 ſometimes
again it recreats, till itis Coop'd up almolt ro the Polar Grrele; Concer-
ning which, ſee the Iflanders Late diſcourſe in Hak/. Edt, 2ly. That
Author m eli umMes.. + war}
merimes again we ſhall find Ice 100 Fathom deep, as Pwrch. 3. p. 38.and
that in Lat. 60. which difference of years cannot proceed meerly from the
Suns abſence, which in all Winters is on and the ſame ; but from theſe

ZZ Z petty


mm


= Tha bes of « None Paſo Book th


petty Skip-Jack Alpets which have to do (and have Patent to thew for.
'1t) where ever the Sun hath to do. I have made it my buſineſs to ob-
ſerve it ſcrupulouſly, the rather becauſe in times of Tore, as of late the Ex:
4 glih, with other Nations; have had. an ardent deſire ( if that would

carry them through) to find a Aorth-Weft, Paſſage to the Eaft-Ip-
dies ; wherein our Frobihers, Hudſons, Dawiſes, have taken immortal
Pains but as ( unlels encouraged by an Aſpe&t) Golumbrs had never
found - the Wef-Izazes , neither ſhall the Nortb-Wef paſſage ſucceed
without: the ſame Clew. Marti» Frobiſher by hap , through its
Influence , as then aſſiſted, 4* 1587. found ic Hot, Extreme Hort,
in Lat. 70. as Haklvit witneſſeth, p. 117. but he found ic not 6
in his Firſt Voyage, A® 1676. when he met with Ice at a nearer di-
ſtance, Lat. 61. our d  Y __ the ſame at both times; What do we
peak of 61 > When under the ſame Aſpect we find Mountains of Ice in
our own Latitude (in New-found-Land, I mean) where it appears; A® 1527.
We cannot encourage the ordinary — to any of thefe Voyages z
no, not in thoſe years where % and 7? meet in Summer Signs ; becauſe we
find the Afiftance fo rare , that our Aſpect ſeems to favour Ice , in two
years of three: and the third only to give the Mariner ſome fluſhing hopes
of thediſſolution of the ice, which was yet, notwithſtanding the warm
Reflexions, in vain expeted. However the difference of the Extenc of

the Frozen Sza, doth depend on the Heavens ;-I appeal toany one who -
ſhall pleaſs ro compare the well-ſet Full-bodyed Ray of Heaven in the
Warmer yeir, from the Shatter'd Order and Poſitions of the Planets in
ths Colder Years. Small hopes therefore of a N W. paſſage; and yet
there is Diftzrence of years, fame leſs deſperate than others, of which la-
ter kind, if my Augury fail not, the preſent year 1686. will be remarka-
ble, But this will occur again, it may be.


361


L I B. II.


CHAP.TL
Of the Three Superiours mutual Configurations. And firſt,


Of SATURN art! MARS.


$ 1. The Three Superionrs call for Wonder. 2. Whether h and 8, have
any Tragical Conſe qucnces.3.30 or 40 days by right are to be allowed
for the view of this AſpeF. 4.&+ 7. Eichſtad, e*c. to ſecirre the Art,
are cantelons in rendring the CharaFer of the AſpeF. 5. Maginus
alſo puts in his Limitations. 6. All Concurrents allowed, the Influ-
ence of the Configuration is plainly diſcernible. 8. The Vehemency
f the Aſpect ſeen in Tempeſts, Lightning, Hail. 9g. Not ſo many
nundations here, as elſewhere, to repreſs thoſe who ſay, We know no-
thing of the Stars. 10. Aſtrologers therefore do not put up this Aſ-
ped fora conſtant Rainer. 11. Oft-times dry, and ſometimes Fro-
ſty. 12. As in Southern Signs. 1% Let its inclination to Rainrea-
ches near the Moyety of 30 days. 14. Tea they have their exceſſive
harmful Fits a Wonder in th, ſo remote a Planet. The Sun's Ex-
altation alone, produces not Lightning. 15. Fiery Meteors brief
under this AſpeF. 16. How, for Snow. 17. Other effe&s of this
AſpeF , Irides, Halo's, interthangeable clearing and © clouding.
18, Miſts of a deep Llew. * 19, Miſts progreſſive creeping in the
Vallies. 20. Bluſhing TinTure of the Clouds even from this Aſpe.
21. Dark Air. 22. The Diary. 23. Some Additionals to the Di-
ary. 24. The Character of the Aſpect. 25. Diary Forein of
Storms, Hurricanes, Rains, Thunders, Flouds. 26. Neceſſary to
the greatneſs of the Argument. 27. Its Theory OS. 28, The
utmoſt Platick diſtance with the Quincunx and Sernlextile have their
Effet. 29. hand & ate engaged in all violent Effe@s, El poſ-
ted within 3o degrees. 30. Evidence from the Table, the Famous
Stormy year of 88. conſidered. 31. Further Evidence. 32. A af
covery of the Cauſes unknown to the Learned Kepler. 33. Onr Aſ-
| ped# engaged in the acconnt of 40 days Turbulency. 34. h and 9
has no Name for Inundations. 35. A Liſt of Comets proper to h.
and &. 26. Their Planetary Original proved from the Conrets, 4*
1528. 1538. 1558. &*c.' 39. Not th and & only, it h with Q,
ec. 40:Tea h and © but rarely. 41. More frequent in h ands.
2. Kecketman's Obſervation 5 Comets appear near their Autumnal -
HEminox; the Reaſon. 43. Comets us'd to appear dlſo about ..Why
they ſo often ſhew themſelves near the Feet of Urſa Major. 44.
and 2 carry the greateſt ſway. 45. Comets of 1528. and 38.
though at the ſame time of the year, and the ſame plate of the Zodi-
ack, are rot the ſathe. Moſt Comets appear abont January. 46. he
TOS whith


Book III


which were ſaid to oppoſe h , did oppoſe & too. 47. Aſtrolegers of-
ten prediff Comets. 48. T.M. and Comets under h and 6 of equal
Number.49. A Lift of Earthquakes proper to this Aſped. 50. Some Af.
firity between Comets and Earthquakes. 51. Why Comets univerſally
appearing , are ſometimes viſible to Afia ſooner than to Europe.
52. Sickneſs and Peſtilence fear'd to have relation to this Aſpe@.
53. No danger to Religion. 54. There are ſome Aſpets Malignant,
the Vulgar confejſing the thing, though not 1n Terms. 55. A Liſt,
of Sickneſs Epidemical,and Remarks thereon. 56. Some Ghoſtly Coun-
ſel. Whether all years are Sickly. 57. Sickly years are too fre-
quent. 58. Phyſitians accord with us. 5g. Eclipſes no natural
Signs of Peſtilences. 60. Why Sickneſs in one place more than ano-
ther > A noble Enquiry. 61 Some emollient Obſervations to lay
our Fears. Tropical and Equino@ial Signs moſt Critical. Scorbute
Epidemical, not indifferent at Sea every year. 62. Peſtilence ariſes
not from meerly ſupernatural Cauſes. Dimerbrock anſwered.
63. New Diſeaſes therefore preter-natural,is no Conſequence. Tet God
ſometimes puniſhes Miraculouſly. 64. Obſervations HA Currents
Marine. They are produced by all the Planets. 65. Evidence for
our aſſertion. 66. The Learned Amthor, de Motu Marium, ec.
extolled and conſider d. 67. 'Tis not the Sun alone that moves the
Sea and Winds. 68. The Stars come in. 69. Diſtinttion of Cur-
rents. 70. Heats and Froſts. 71. Fiery Meteors. 72. &c.
Irides, Halo's, and Parelia notable under this AſpeF. 75. An Ob-
jeion about the unreaſonable diſtance of the Cauſe aſſigned, anſwe-
red. 76. Sol Pallidus. 77. His rarer and greater Obſcuration.


78. Maculz Solis. 79. &- 80. Stranding of Monſtrous Fiſhes.
The Mermaid may be a Spedre.


$1, Hat Preparation ſhall I make for the Aſpe&t of Saturn and

Mars Names of great Moment in the Book of Nature,
where many a Paper is fill'd with. their Story, their equal Effets and In-
fluences. The Three Superiour ; Planets make Three Congreſles &F.
SATHRN and MARS ; SATHRN and JUPITER; FUPITER and
MARS, deſcribed juſtly in Capital Letters, to call the Eye of the Rea-
der to attend their Greatneſs. _ I leave Aſtronomers to tell you their Mag-
nirude, their Diſtance, their Proportion to one another, and to the Earth,
&e. And when you have read them with me, before we have done, we
may wonder as much at their Influence, as their Dimenſion, &-c,

9 2. Aſtrologers call theni the Two Infortunes, and ro prove That
ire, They Alarm us with Wars, and the Death of Princes (among other
fad Events) which ao man: of 'Honefſt Morals or Politicks, delighes-to
hear of. Now, though I verily preſume that this is no Oracle, at leaſt nox
of: God'sor Nathre's: For let the Arabs, or ſomebody for them, produ
the Sebraules, whereby a Free-born Natural Tncelle&t may be Arbors
of fuch prezences, before they -cxa& our belief 5 yer I muſt needs owh
thar All ghings me, no Bribery can make me abſolutely 4cquir ctheth
from the Jmpuration'ef ſome. unfortunate, or unavoidable Influence tothe
wg ey nai kin or ner » Naa t; Sonnet rnibarhle to tre
or: Td E , XOTCE , ſh the. DEgionNg: of "a Unapter. - Whas
Tragical Confe it is guilty of, we- will got entreat of on

Jv he


©


——


Chap. I. IWh. th d be Infortunes ? Aſtrologers wary.


363


goingAſpects 3 where if wechance to hear of Earthquakes, vickneſles,
and Morrtalities, we will not impoſe npon the World, or Frown them in-
to our belief; but we will humbly and honeſtly produce our Schedule, ſhew
our Teſtimony under Hand and Seal, and make Mankind the Judge ; who,
if they throw the Bill out of the Houſe, we thall be contenred,in cate thar
they will do themſelves the Right, ro thew the Forgery of our Evidence.

v 3. The AipeCtreverts ordinarily but once in two years, the @ taking
place every ſecond Year, and according to the Laxity of gr. 10. diſtance,
which theAantients allow inEſch1id.ſochallengeth aboutr3o or 40 days,which
15no unreaſonable Width . For whois there initiated in Aſtrological ob-
ſervation, that wil! grudge to allow a notable Eftect toa d h &d, if it fall
within the Month. We will give you leave to wonder at us, if we ſhould
talk of the Operation of an Aſpect ; yea, or a Comet, at the 2, 3 nay
20 year diſtance; but 3oor 40 days is but a moment paſſed,and may,yea mzuft
be granted us: for at gr. 10, diſtance we often find ſuch Efforts of Weather
even here,as hath been remembred in © ,&c.For theStare of theAir we muſt
ſpeak co hrit, before we haraſs our Reader with louder Peals of Mortality,

9 4. Now, becauſe this Aſpect being fo Ponderous, raiſeth a great
expectation,a3s to the very State of the Air,l find the ModernWriters ſome-
what timorous in rendring the Charaer , being aware of the Scoffers
Bolt, (toon ſhot at thoſe who are fo aflured of their old faſhion'd Theſis)
yet perchance cannot fo well make our the Truth againſt the Capti-
ous. Nay , ſaith he, if your d h &, your grand Superiours , the Fam'd
© Enemies ro Mankind, and to one another, many times fails of its Feats
* what Truſt is there to be given to ſuch Old Doting Principles ? E:chfad
therefore, unreaſonably mixes -the Aſpect of Þ with it. Unreaſonably I
fay, for how long mult a Proſelyte ſtay till the Aſpe& of WY is co-incident;
And wil: he warrant that it ſhall bring then Wind or Rain ? Froſt or Snow,
or A'ubilum Celum? He will nor. 2__ more warily ſays, that they
operate according ro the Quality of the Syg75 3 yea, and what is more;
in my Judgemeat,the F:xed Stars, who are found with them ; Not a Word
of which hath bin mentioned hicherto in the Conjunctions of an Iaferiour ,
But beginning with the Signs he labours to ſecure his Art, at leaſt, in the
momentous conjunctions by ſuch Limitations and conditionsz3 the Reafon I


ſuppole,I have oftered, with the Tenderneſs he had for his Art,and his En- |


deayor to ſtand by it,as to theſe main Foundations orPj1lars on which it reſts.

9 5. Faram I, you may believe, from quarrelling at the Fixed. Stars 3
but I contend that the ſame Limitations ought to be put to all the Forego-
ing Aſpects, on the ſame Exigence and neceſſity, as to the Superiors. To
one,2s much as to the other, Otherwiſe the moſt frequent AipeCt, d © 2.
will not convince faſtidious ſelf-conceired Perſons nay verily,nor the Lu-
nar neither, 2s we have ſhewn before, but that we have the Tradition and
Experience of the Husbandman , and the Seaman on our {ide , who are
the Strength of the Kingdom. What ſaith Mag:nus on this very Aſpect
concerning, Hail,S1 cetera concurrant ; Yea, that's Right, That's like a Phi-
lofopher 3 Whar are thoſe Concurrences, and where z for if a fingle Aſpect
be.All ; every man laying the Planetary Table before him, may profels (a
ridiculous ſort of Prognoſtique, which is not to be endured for the Learned


{ike. | ; 4
s 6. Andif icbe asked How we ſhall know the Character, blended
amongſt the Concurrents ; Ianſwer,not every Property perhaps,is {0 ealily
ditcernible in ſuch different Mixture, but the moſt Signal are difcerned b
the Violences w hich often are produced, either upon, or near the preciſe, ..
Aſpect ; Or, at leaſt, before its Expiration : Which Violences notably, and


&-


5


tle laſt Act, not till the cloſe, as hitherto hath bin obſerved in the fore. _


}


64


: Cardan- Intervals for Froſt and Temperate Air. Rook III.


frequently iterated upon the return of the Aſpet, have conftituted
the Character deliver'd down to us from our Anceſtors.

S 7. As wary was Gardan of old, who tells us, Fhat It inclines to Hail
and Rain, S; cetera juvext. What they would all ſay, is this, That the
Aſpect Laſhes out into ſome Exceſs of this Nature before it takes its leave.
And this as tothe Firſt, 24z. Rain is for certain, whether within 6 days,
as they ſay, or within my more unreaſonable Width of a Months ſpace,
which may be confeſſed, perhaps : And then the Vehemence of that Ef-
fect ſhall, I avow,be diſtinguiſhable from any Showr, &c. that falls afar off
without the Verge ; except upon another equiyalent Influence.

6 8. Herel do not intend to tie my {elf to any one Individnal Aſpect,
but of the whole Swlgge. Let ſome Number of our Aſpets be conſi-
dered, and upon compariſon fo it ſhall be found. Say the ſame of Tem-
peſts, Harmful Winds, Deſtructive Lightnings, &c. which our Table
affords. Nor muſt it be argued that we have ſaid as much before of
others, and poſſibly may again : For what hinders that at ſeveral times of
the year, according as they take place ig their admirable Succeſſion, they
may all ſhew their Vehemencies, and yet be diſtinguiſhed by kim who
litsro obſerve and compare. Beſure Tempefts , with and withour Light-
nings, muſt be added as well as Hail, which though it comes not halt fo
frequencly, muſt not be left out of the CharaRter.

» 9. In the mean while it may be true, That as the Quantity or duration
of the Effect , Þh and & may not be ſo copious as ſome others ; for I find
not ſo many Inwaations, indeed but few in compariſon with the Aſpect
of & and 2. Markthat, Who then ſhall Gay hereafcer that we under-
ſtand nothing of the Stars ? We forgive thoſe Learned Men who have
adventured to wrong us heretofore ; but hereafter let them avoid ſuch Ob-
loquies 3 Let them ſhew as many Flouds under Þ and &, and we will be
confured.

s 10. This makes me take notice of thoſe Words in Maginw, which
are ſeaſonable here, Martis cum h applicatio Nabes & Ventos multiplicat,
Imbribus detrahit aera corr-&c, Our Honeſt Countryman,Eſcurd. Dif.4.traF,
1. Gap.4. tells us from Derotheus the ſame Words : Whoever was the Au-
thor , the Words are Senſe, and agree with the Hiſtory of the Aſpect
exhibiced in our Diary, where I find many Dry Days and Fair, with 2
Brightneſs of Air, Curious Weather , Amer Soles, as Kepler hath it, yer
oft-times overcaſting, and lowring, and looking ſuſpitiouſly, as ſometimes
again, opening after a cloſe Air. This you may pleaſe to obſerve when the
reſt of the Concurrents are not met, and the Aſpe& is Solitary z Then
the Weather will ſavour of the Contemperation of the contrary, and be
Placid and Temperate. 7

$11. And this at times of the year will lead in Froſt, for that Cauſe
which tempers the Zſtival Air, will freez us up in Winter; and for
this you mult look the Old Arabs will bear witneſs for h's ſake, which
they make to beas cold as Friendſhip ic ſelf. Wherefore if it happen in Sigao
Terreo, faith Meſahala. fign. Nves & gelu, et fortitudinew fregorss aud Bf
ea, aift, 2. tratt, 1. Gap. 19 |
' S 12, Forthe Proof of the Premiſes , to begin with the laſt Inſtance,
our Froſty Days, not of Mornings only : we hear of them in the years
56, 60, 64; 66, 68,70. Froſty mornings every Revolution, from 54. to 70,
Yea, and after, in 4* 74. But the Diary will not conſent to Meſshala,
as to his Eerthly Sign, only #2 and , fince > m 7 *,, for Airy, Watry,
and Fiery Signs , make up the account, as well as the Earthly. How
= eaſter 15 it to fay in the Southern Signs, it makes Froſt many times,
Ee,
$13. Now


_—_—


Chap gz: harmful at Diſtance. Fiery Meteors rife here,


365


CO OE oe — OO


© 13, Now the Inclination to Rain holds about the Moyety of the 30.
and odd days, bur. with ſome difference of Signs. For Hail, we hear of
it but 11 times. in Mm VV A, Five Signs; and when I have reaſon to
beiieve the like of the Oppoſite, we cannot poſitively exclude any.

» 14. Now for exceſs of Rain , more orleſs, wehave norOre Aſpet
eſcaped, And how ſmart many of them were, the Diary will not conceal.
The high Winds we muſt proclaim, becauſe by their Harmful Impulſes
They will be ———— they will not ſleep till they have miſchief
wrouzht on the place. That # or $ ſhould be ſore upon us , may be at-
tributed ro their Vicinity 3 but that Þ ſoremore thould be Harmful, there
I prote(s ro wonder at the Venerable Footſteps of a Deity, in the Worlds
great Syſtem, and the parts thereof ; for we found Þ harmful wich ©,
and therefore no wender with & ,as we have before obſerved. Do Aftro-
logy Juſtice, h is a Superroar, and perhaps there isno violent ſtroke from
Heaven wichout the Edge and Dint of ohne of the Superiours.
Wherefore now let us view the Tempeſt, 1658. Sept. 39, And thoſe
Guſts on the Thames, OF. 26, 21. which were reported harmful. Let us
view thoſe of uu. 11. 1662, O65. 29, 30. 4* 1664. Nov. 28, 29. A
1666. and Aw. 12, 1668, And what need more ado ? Here are Three
Blaſts of this ſmall number, which blew down Trees in the Coun-
try, and the Chimnies in London, Sept. 30. A® 1658. Nov. 11. A® 1662.
Nov. 28. & 29. 4® 1666, The Aſpect ſucceeds but 10 times in 20 years;
and rherein,1o times it is ready to Luck us on the Head. Such Accidents
come not often, they had not need, I remember, noted in the Diary,
that after ſore Rains, Þ and & have been ſeen together within a Span,
ec. as on Now. 24. 4* 1670. Nature I ſay, and ſay it agary, is loath we
ſhonid be 701-44: of her admirable O:conomy, and therefore it ſhews
it us : and when it doth not, we thall not be credulous accounted; if we
believe that Lightning according to our Method.and the nature of the thi
alſo, is ailyed ro Furious Tempeſts ; for ſo at Lunay INand we meet wit
Lizh:ning, and harm done to a Ship there, when with us there was Terri-
ble Tempeſt oni'y of Wind, Rain and Hail, without any Fiery Meteor,
Abw. 13. 1664, Now of Harmful Lightning we meet further in the
years, 674. 1676. 1680. in the Signs, Y & S z or if it will Edifie more,
in the Months of Zune and Angnft ;5Thole are the Paramount Months beſure,
the Mitival Monthsy bur that che Sun alone produces them becauſe of ,
his Exaltation, is a Prodigy of a Paradox, and will never be believed till
Alithe rett of the Lights be extinguiſhed. Aſtrology wants Records to
ſearch; If the had them from the Conqueſt, ic were well. Bur the 13h
of Av. 1664. juſt now mentioned, ſhews that it isnot the Sun's exaltati-
on producerh Flaſhing by its ſelf; for in November he is not Exalted ;
unles the Preſence of h and d (which is true enough) do help to
exalt hin.

s 15. Upon this account the Fiery Meteors of thg Night are pretty
rife under tijs AipeG, For in the year 1672. I obſerved them 4 or 3
times. In 1674. Three. In 1676. 5 times. In 1678. 8 times. In 1680,
& 1682, four times each, They have been more rare in 1654. 1656.1662.
1670. The Time of the year where no obſervation was made,
were Winter Months ; and I could not be at the Charge of the Watch.
An Ingenious Sea Captain, who kens the Conſtellations , may contribute
much ro our Theory, by engagiag his Night Watch to look upward , not
neglecting veirher the Courie ot the Ship. ; :

> 16. Asto Snow, we tind it as rare or more then Hail, but 9 tirhes in
All. In the year 1668 1670. 1672. In the Signs = and #. They were
the Signs of the A{pe&t, Bur the Solar Sign was £ only, the Snow falling
inNowember, 9 17, There


” CO und I ee er im en ro we en


26 6 | Great Low-creeping Miſis bode ſ. Storm approch: Book II


$ 17. There are many other pretty things occur in the Hiſtory of h
and &', ſome whereof are common to other Conſigurations, others may
ſeem to be more proper. Clouds , and Paſſions of Clouds, bluthing co-
ward the Eaſt, Ir:des, Halo's, Lowring, Suſpicious and Threatning, with
a ſuſpended Effet, While no Rain falls, Miſts, Fog, Low Ground Mitts,
&c. Concerning which I muſt needs ſay, I have obſerved theAir
under this Aſpect to clear and cloud interchangeably for ſeveral Days. Ye
will ſay, ſo it doth at other times: It doth fo, and not without Cauſe ;
which Cauſe, if a Man can render then or Now,what Harm is it?Saturz and
Mars is a great and permanent Aſpect,*whereby the Air is for a long while
more ealily alterable (as when a Diſeaſe hangs about.us, our Bodies are
more incident to a Fi:) when there happens a more full and ſmart Concur-
rence, as we fee it not ſeldom dy with.

v9 18. Note that the ſudden Miſts under this Aſpect put on an extraordi-
nary Hue, noted for their deep Biew, as well under the Oppoſition,
as under the Gonjun#107:;

9 19. Wehave ſpoke of the Ground Miſts before, and ſome Inſtances
we have here (o frequent,as if they ſeemed to belong to h ;even as I ventur'd
to conjecture. Of theſe we meer, One in the year 1652. 3 in 1658. 4
in 1660; and 2 in 1666. and amongſt theſe, one moſt notable, 4s 1666.
Nov, 21. where Iobſerv'd it making a creeping Progreſſion in the Valleys,
hor. 9. mane. remember elſewhere, where a Low Miſt, by a leiſurely Pro-
grels, hath ſhifted irs ground, ſtole from a Meadow into a Cloſe, and
with afilent Inundatiog, overflowed the Ne ighbour Paſtures. Tell me,
ſome good Philoſopher, the Cauſe! I meditated, and chought the Water
mighc attract, but the Motion was from the fide of the River ; and that
of Nov. 1666. was diſtant 2 or 3 Miles from the River Thames. I con(ul-
red, and found it was a Szgz of a Tempeſt ; for the Wind roſe to an au-
dible Height the Night and day following, and fo continued 3 or 4 days
very Tempeſtuous, h and & (yea Y and 2 rather than fail ) were all
together; now the Cauſe of the Tempeſt muſt be che Cauſe of that Sign:
and that theſe Planets were the Cauſe of the Tempeſt, may appear by the
Premiſes, and the further Griter:uxz (were it time to ſhew ir) at the time
of the Planets ſetting, hor. 8. veſp. of the gext day, at which ctime-the Air,
=qp=7 my to the Diary, was very Tempeſtuous, and as it had been before
at © ſer. os |

$ 20.As for Ir:des and Halo's,we jight upon them ſometimes,and they are
not altogether accidental to an Aſpect either of h and &, as we have
ſeen before. Nor to This, becauſe they are Notable here for Numberſor
Circumference : Add that they contribute toa like Paſſion of the Clouds,
712, that bluſhing Tincture in the cor that not only when the Aſpect
is Situate about the Weſt , but alſo when nearer the Zenith, Luere,Whe-
ther not ſo when in the Vadrr > Or the other Hemiſphere. Yea, laſtly
what if we ſhall find that Notable Paſſion of Parelium tound under this AL


v.21. For a Dark «th: I thought I might impute it to H, and ſome-
times to & upon different accounts, but when I conſulted the Diary, 1
found the Effect confin'd to certain Signs, Artes, Gazcer ;, and once, P:ſces,
Vixgo, Leo. So this note muſt be reſerved for the Tropickh, and Equinox,
or they ſcemto be the Critical Places.


Chap. I.


h & Drary Hyemal


367


T he Home Drary of 4 hd.


C 22, A® 1658, Of. 12.1 m.
= 22,


io 6, Cloſe, muddy air die tor.
very wer 8 p. Or.

7. Store of Wet, abund. =
rills p. SE

8. Overc. 0. coaſting ſhowr in


proſpeRt , ſhowr —
9. _ bright, cold —


hy Fra ice, ropes,warm. N 4
11. Fr. miſt, ice , cobwebs,
thick fog 9 w.
12, Fog m.overc. moiſt air n.
E.


3- Dark and cool,miſle p. *
"Flew miſt

14. Drille, wet 2 m.0.%p
m,

I5;. Raincirc. dilucal. m_ ;
black Suramer Clouds and
OPEN, OVeETc, Nn. S.

15. Wind alln. rain a.l. «d
wſque 8 m. dark and wer P.
m.5p.3p.

17. Miſt, violent rain at mid.
night, ac 5 m. driſle p. m.
H. wd, rain 8'p. SW.


a 1660, OF. 25. MM 14


20. 2o-Fr.NW. pr be-
low. NE.
21. Fog m. cloudy, viedy,
warm.
22, Fr. fair, {. wet. NE
23» Cloudy windy, fair 5 m.
windy, clear veſp. N.
24- Froſt, fair, {. wer,wdy.N.
25. Cold, cloudy, hn T3
frequent in S. and $ W.
_ Clear even, yer wd, moiſt.
NE.


26. Fr.fair, high —_——
_ an "an

27. w , 7.1
fhowr 3 p. N E. p

28. Rain s Sk nelT, cloudy, |-.

E.N E

29. NE. Fr. clear.

$0. Fr. W, carded clouds,
het.


4 1662. Nov. $. F 6.


1. 04,Fog,bright m__—_— |
3  wd.


2 Nov. Fr, m. fair, _
,Þ- mm. rain 9 P+
2, Overc. raimir-p.&c. SE.


4 Rain hard « 5 m, ad 1 p.S+
5. Fog, cloudy, ſomer. _


6. Cloſe m p. wd. SE
7. Cloſe p. m. driſle, rain, 0-
vercaſt veſp. (Fc. SW.


8. Open, warm, clouds low,
ſ, coaſting drops, wind,
Mereor « Pleiad. ad Capell.
9. Fair m. clouds 1 p. _


of wind
Sh.


10. Ir#8 m. ſto
and R.8 p. 1


A® 1664 . Nov. 12. 4 27.


8. Fr. cool, fair wind. 8 W-
9. Fr. overcaſt , wd and wet
per tor. S.
to. Fr, ice, miſt, fair. SW.
11, Fr, ice, very foggy , So!
rutilus, fre ez tn. SW.
12. Rain m.fair, cool;R. wh


13. Dreadfal Tempeſt, hind
Rain and hail 2 m. windy,
. $ W. bur after the
ſtorm N-W.Harmful Lighe- | /
ning in « Ship at Land).
14. Open, fair, wind: SW.
15. Overc. cloſe p. m. {. rain
4& 7p. SW.
16, Fair m. rain 0, ar A |
R. 10-p. SW.
179. Rain a; 1. 2 m. aieavidy,
freez SW.


2 | i
A® 1664. Nov. 39. VP 18,


I$ Froſty, fair.
16, Froſty, ſharp day. | E.


17. Froſty, fair, fog, h-S 2


_ yield. wind 11 p. &


SW.

W. | 19. Warm, open, forte.
'ringy 'H, wind a. 1; . :'Sh.
E. | 20. Drife a.l. miſty, werting,
'(o mms cate} -


21.Mift creeps in the Valleys
"SEEN ge


bn - Wider n. cle "wiſty,


wind 3 very

ous ng occ. & $
etpetuon . eccid. ear.

loſe m. P-


pike. Or *. trop F'


$- Blew. clouds m, Rain a9
m, 44 0, S.


1b. Clos Cloſe, ſome W414


A® | a Nov. 23s = 9.


19 Windy and wet 6 m. Ge.
ſome rain 10 p. h & ſen
rogether.

20, Hard froſta. m. freez n.

W.

21. H. froſt,clofing,miſty,wer
ſtore,p. m. & n. W.

22. Cold wind a.l. —


2.m,
23. Fr, fair, cold. _ NE.
24- H. fr. open m. cloſe p.m.
rain 4 p. cloſe and cold


wind. NE.
25. Thick fog m. p. Sol ruti-
lus. cloſe 11 p. E.


26, - FO88Js. driſle or ſaow ar


27. Foggy cl cloſe, cold, driſle
Cocks crow 9 Pp.

28. pn rain m, much rain n.

— Wiy. NW,


A1670. Nov, 26, X I,


'S, Wirids'all' n. driſle 9 m.
* very fliff guſts, and C. rain
Sundcc, h & A


23- Coldiſh a. im. rainy C
Cc. wind audible. *

24..rain 9 m. Tempeſt: p.t5c.
{. rain p. m, Meteor 9 pWh.

25. Rain ante Sun orr, clou-
ding ofren, cloſe n, N W.

26, Fr. ice, miſt m. o_—_—
wd audible.

27. H. fr, f. overc. fair. —_
bitte)


A® 1672, Nev, 18 K 26.


I 2. Froſt, fog. g.00.. open. Ely.
y 4 Fx. clole p.m. and dark
P. H.


rain $s Þ.. 8- -Þ. 9
_ ps
14. R.a. |. wetting s. m. & p.
ee eed.
EY we


16, VVi
17


P-icain 4
mu cloſ, wetting ICs


py & Diary Eſtival.


Book 111.


- 368


$ Wind, ſhowr rx p.


m.very wet 1 p. windy d.
and n. | |
18. Fair m. p. cloſe veſp &


19. Muck rain a. 1. an
cloſe.

20; Cloſe m. p. driſle 5 W.

21, Much rain 5 m. and Sigh
wind, cloſe.

22. Cold, air, over. cold


at i. |

22. R. a. |, cloſe, vindy,warm,
drifle 11 p. W.

05-C, driſle 0. & 4 Han
at n


f 24. open,cleſing. SW. —


NW.

Dec. 26,29,'2&.Lightaing much
at Graveſend.

29. Tenterden Church and 8

Houſes fired with Lightning.


Pars Mfftroa.
A? 1674+ Jud. V 28,


7 Mm. Mertury a, offering,
* fone 7rina gy _—_


ſmarce

Hall and Thad,
ſlaying Men and Cattle at
Newington, Bleebingly, Nar-


rative: ow
s d

DER "he.
TIS,
8. Showring go m. 1 p. & p.
m, deſbing 5 p. ad 8.fere.
; Sly. Aches.


9 ſhowr tom. 1p. SW.
10, Warm p. m. ſhowr 7 p.
S W. News of a Plague at


nr”, 1]
wed, cl,
I'2, ps! he gs


and fowring.
13:8 vnk ſhowr 1 p. Reſt
2 C
A® 1676. Ful 1g, & 24+


0. Cloſe NS
In. ri
C few cl.


Hards p. Delphin «r. Aches.


16. Cloudy Sly. clouds <
Scenes a. m. dry 1
Aches,


19. Hot a. m. and, \
 ackes, be yk W.
18. Hot, bright, ſcarce a cl,
Aches. N.


19. Hor n.carly fog, bora 9 m.
ſoultry day, hor n. Wly m.


20, apart arg cloading
9 P. Lightning twice, Rain
and Thunder 7 33 Cleps,much


Lightni (A
Tz
A® 1698. Yalh 31. Tf 21,


26. Rain 3 my, brisk wind, ca-
ſting ante 3 p. Rain 5 P-
w


A y
25. Rain, brisk wd, high 5
|


ſh. 3 p-

28. Gr, clouds, floating, &
10 m. 2þ.inNE.
Th. ante 6. rain, hail, coa-
ſting ſhowr ante Sn occ.


Weathergall in SE. Wly.
S


h.
29. R. brizk wand, coaſting 2
P+ R. and Thunder —_


30. R. m. clouds
Lightning 3 p. qeber ra ras


1.R. gr. daſh i p. Th. R.8
S ——_ behibd 28s bh
WP cauda, and below Arc-
turns, Kly n. with a miſt.
I Ang. Rain 1 \ Hg os air
warm, cl. in s, Mete
as, Lighen. 10p. Ely.
dey harp
2. Warm, fleec'd clouds 7 p.
_ 10 p. wd various,
_ & 10 p. Wiy.
a cl. 8 m. oyerc.


' Meteor ante 9 P+ Wiy,


A® 1680, Arg. 20, B 19,


A's 3 m. ſtormy wind,R.
8 m. ſtotm circ, merid. Sly.
| 15-9. 11 m. 0.1 p. dark
act SOV: AC,
eth, 26 2 ej =
2 SER ſ Fa | =


|


;


17, Miſt, early, ſtriped cls,


Meteor bright a 9 p.
18, —_ wd, Mereor


near N.p, Z a9 p. Ely,

go Vil in Saxony infe-

Qed, Gattt. Num. i543.
19. Fog, © Ely.
20, Fog, hor, C. = Nly.


Ely.N E.
21, Great, catly fog, warm,
blew miſt veſp. NE.


22, Fair, freſh wind , So


23- Fair, fritter-clouds, hich
winds, hot n. rot, Cocks g


P-

24. Very hot. windy, ſtrip'r
clouds, coaſting,heat,drops,
gr. R. and thuad. circ.metid,

25, Hot m. - clouds,
ſhowr 6 P. 8 Þ. Wly.

26, Soultry, _ drops, Lighr-
ninginNE.9g cors

<7 1 croſs che Ew

27. "Peg m. hor, f, angry clds.

wly. at n. Ely,

29. Th. and Lightn, L


A® 1652, Ang. 10. SL 5.
$. Clear, cloudy, little wind.


N W.

6, Rainy me. clear, cloudy,win-
dy at hf. NW.

7. Clear, cloudy, ſame art n.
windy. S W.
8. Clear, cloudy, windy , ſtill
at SW.
9. Cloudy, windy, rainy at n.
Ww.


10. Shovry, (. Sun, Its


11. Clear, cloudy, 1. wind
clear 2. any _ W.
12. Clear, cleud N,
13. —__ iy : bY N.
cloudy, NE.

is clir, cloudy.


bg 1682, Sept; 12.6 16,
7. Fog cloſe m. p. *--
8. © clouds lowring, Cl. gaſh


old 10 p.
». Cold m. high wind, wh.
” mc 8 m. from SW.
to NW, wy.
10. Fog m. cloſe, brisk wind,
ante 5 Pp. Ely.
I1, Wert 11 m. and __—


h.

12, Clouds riſe 8 m. of Vrine

_— cloſe and —
E


13, 'Fok, miſty, not drying,


warm .


Chap. I.


h & Diary Eſtrval.


warm 9 p. Aches and fick-
—- | _ NE.
14- Fog n, taken up » cloſe,
warm n. wly.
15. Warm, cl. in Scenes, low-
ring, very warm n. Nly.
15, Warm n. {. fog, cloſe and
warm 8 p. wily
195, Gentle R. 6 p.&c. brisker
ante 11 Pp. A talk of Tonry
Fatuus neer Mbemarl Houſe,
13, f, drops a. m. & o.
{. guſts, warm night, Wly.
?. Sandwich. Tempeſt driving
back the Ships that failed
out of the Downs. Mon-
ſtrous Fiſh 7 foor long ta-
ken on the Coaſt, &c. Loy-
al Mercury from Bofton.
Num. 27.

A 15 Sept. 3. it 2.
as 28. Overc. clear, overc.
clhuds, ſtorm. S.
29. Bright, very cold m.
bright d. N E.
30. White fr. bright d. ſome
wet, rare harveſt, N W,
31. Overcaſt, (. wer, clearing,
NW


Sept. 1.Miſty m. 1 or 2 drops
S W,


ar ni.

2, H. wind b. d. wet d. coal
Stars ſhoor n. SW.

g--Unconſtarir coaſting, wer,
winds.

4. Hail , wind. b, d. cool,
ſhowrs of hail and R. Stars
ſhoor.

$. Stormy, ſome ſaid Thunder
m. SW.

6, {. wet im. Lightning &t n.
Srars miſty.

», Gentle rain from break of d.
till o. cloudy, Lightning,
frequent at n. SW,

8. Cloudy m. *clouds pleaſant,
with 2 orz drops diſcove-
red. $W.


A® 1584, Offob. 3. Et 12.


<5,
Sopr. oY Cloſe, warm,wet m. |,


39. Cloudy and black, lowring
N W.


Oob. tr. Cloſe and wet m. 2.
m. p. hoctiſhatn, NW..

2. Cloſe, ſometime lowring,
warm. NW.

2. Fleec'd clouds 8 m. {drops
4 5 p. and miſty, ſhowr

0c. _ Wiy.

3. Froſt , clouding and off.
ringiſcveral rimesp.m.ſhow-
ring ante 11 P.

4+ Very great daſh circa 2 m-
dafh 11 m. ſhowring p. m.

. & ante Sun occ.

, Rain a. |, clouglym. (. wd.
: ho. Wi. NW.
6. Cloudy, cloſe m. p.

75, H. wind, R. miſt a 4 m.
fair 2. my, cloſe and wer 4
p. ad 11 p. Sly.

8. Rainy, dark from laſt n. bs,
6 p. withour ftint cill 9 m.
lowring clouds. Wy.

9. {. froſt, clouding «nd 1dw-
ring, cold n. Fleec'd clds
Sun «cc. Nly.


4 1656, Sept. 24. TN 28.


18. Fair, br. wh. cl. CL. ga-
chering ar n. W.

19. Cloſe, \. mifling, opening
10. m. threatning black
mift, reddiſh cl. Eaſtwards,
a wide Halo.

20, Froſt, w. v. gathering,
blew miſt, Halo. SW.

21, Miſty m. fair, {. wind, no-
rable warm wd, overc,

22, Miſty, very blew miſt fair,
{, cl. growing 2 Semicircle
with Rainbow Colours 9 m.
alm. vertical, "op

23. Thick fog, wit $
Cobwebs all inan_ of

24. Sun ſhine, h. wd, wh. d.

. C. miſt, w.p. m. cl, and firs

ſhowrs Sun cc, warm. SW.

24. Rain 1 m. froſt, fair, Halo


0. 5 p« (xe SW*
S 23. A® 1688..Sepr. 23, Hi
ag rempeſt of wd $W


Þ+
25. R. 4 mm, miſling R. n.S W,


16, Wind noft, tor,


29. Halo ) » ground miſt
39. Harmful wi l-
ok —— Aer.
» 2.Bluſh E, ourid mi
- ſtore. an
$- NAIN 4 Mm. dark, 5 :
ting 4 P. Wy; wee
18, H. w. ſhowring 7. p. Ge.
19. Wind no. ror,
gallanc Meteor.
26, Wind no#. tor.


Additional to. the Hyemaal Pwr
the fair Days cndired, :


A® 1660, 9.C. lis .
ſhowr "ay ive coafting


4


P-
13. Cobwebs and & e
14- Rain3 p. 6 p. and8 p.
15. Werring m. p. fad rain &
SP.adgp
18. R, ante Iacern,
Nov. 7. Windy, ſtorm of R,
11m :
9- Srormy eſp.


10H. wind (i -

"7" » Normy Hail &
Its H, wd and R. frequen
nem of rainy HR. wd
we


Pp.

A® 1662. OB. 20. W

wind 9 p. a
21. Wind and rain a. 1.H, wd

and rain veſp. H. wind did
| harm upon the Themes. SW,
22.R. 2-l.4p.8p. SW.
23.MuchKR.. 1.Mereors v. SW. '
27. Wer, R. no&7. tot,
29. Rain a. l. Nly.,
Nev, 11. R.gs m. very dark,

with violene ſtorms of R,


Chimnies blown
12, Rany mu H, winE& SH,
13. Cold rain a. m-H.wd. SW.
I4 HL. cold wd. Sw,


p. "AS Wy. 5 15. Rain m.p.H.w'd1it m.SW.
28: Miſt m. warm, cloſe, Ely | 28. f. wet midnight, wd ne#, | 18. K. 4 w - ad vg p.

M- P. ror, dark, miſling by Coaſt, | 19. Cloſe, driſling p. m.'s p,

29. Much rain # 3 m; a4 9m. ' $W. | 21- Rainy m. ( die tor. har-

| Wly | 29. Wind |. dark, dropping © der 5 p.

> CC Gl

iS for This Table view'd will yield ſome fuch Character of the Aſpect:

R & are of a long continuance, help to ife the Air


for a Month at leaſt; the diſtance of 10 degrees , before.


and behind,


through which ſpace ic producerh not always furious Effects; buc is mode-


rate many tunes,


temperate yea,


clining to Froſt and Fog. It is apt to Storm and


and yiolence Notable, upon adyantage taken, to Thunder, Lightning:
Tis


at man


A of the year in-


in with Vehemency,


 ——  — -
—_—  — — —


270 | Fora Duary.


—_—


Book I.


- inclined to Hail, though ſomewhat rarely, yet more notably than
— Ir thews IT many times 11 a Rain-Bow, &c. Some
exceſſive Rain falls either near it, or within the terms deſcribed. More
of its Violence in the Forein Table, which fo lows. _


re Forein Diary. d, & hs.


s 25. Anno Chriſti, 1500. Storms { 302. The 34Storm again drove us
ad ares Rains , Flouds, ack the 3d time, Ib, d in =. h
Thunders, Chaſms. «IF. |

F-b. 11. Floud at Lovain, Gem. Felp. I, ad 8, Il Weather, Hakl,
Goſm, Lib. 2. Cap. 4, in Mar-| 420.
ging. d h&,NV. _ | 10. Veſp. Tempeſt dangerous beyond

Dc. 20. Great Floud again, Gem. tb. Expreſſion, p. 421.

e 1n princip, 11, | De 23. Northern Winds wonder-

1511. A 34 time, Floud at Lovarn.| ful, p. 422.

If he means February, or therea- | Die 25. TertibleSea ; the farther we
bout, we find then in V'=. went, the more the Winds in-

England. 1526. November , Decem-| creaſed. The Winds could not be

er, January , February, Let wore ; -N - Roy yop- they

Rain ouds,deſtroying Corn-| aid, in the Winds, (& = gr. 10,

Fields , Paſtire, Beaſts,c-c. Stow, | diſt. ”
March 2, 3. Tempeſt dangerons.


P10 V==.
1528. Febr.Nunnez Admiral's Tem: | 9. Bad weather, p. 493.
peſt; Ramw, Vol. 3.p.310.thed | 19. Srove, of Rain, like the Rain


VT fire. : 1n ee,
1529. January 29. Ghaſme,Friſtſch: - | 14. North-WefWinds broke Cables,


153 May 27. ety U 1- d = pr. 13. asft,
= Voyage, HaRl. V. 3.p. 202. d | Near Red Sea, 1541, March 11.
or. 11.{eeitin PG. _:,. | Storm raiſed Sand toward Hea-
Neer Garata. 1536. May 16. Tem-\ ven. Purch. 1302. in VY and =>;
peſt, Hakl. V. 2.p. 230. d A gr.4 aift.gr. 19.
 deftunt. ; } Die 20, Noth-Wind troubled the
Rome: 1 $37: Dec. 2. Harmful Thun-| Sea.
der, Lyc. dt gr. 20. diſtant. . - | April 4. Great Storms at"North-Wef,,
Back fide of Amerita. 1539. Nov. ante merid. after Thunder and
9. ad 15. Storms ard great| Hail, Purch. 1185. &d gr. 10. diff.
Franc. de Ullog, apud Haki..496.| hint.
£ 4. . Die 12. Whirlwinas raifing up the
26, 27, Bluſtering Winds ſepara Sands , Storms and Calm with-
in 2 Stones caſt, p. 7138. @ pr.


407. #3 4 I7. R ,

Dee. 1. Cruel North-Wind ; Cables x5 42. 4ug. 5. Tempeſts with Ship-
broke the Trinket , and Miſer} wrack, Purch. & m gr.22, diſtant.
rent aſunder , Hakl. 's gr. 19. | 12, Tuffor, with Wind..and Rain ;
diftant. s ſeeming more than Natural,
17. Twoor Three days great ſtore] Purch. &d gr. 25. dift.'in m,
of Rain, Hakl. 414. d gr.17.4f.| March. 23. Snow for 4 days, d in ©
hin =14. | mpr. i diftarnt.

1540. fan. 10, 1, 12.,FuriousNorth: | Juze 14. At Bida, Tempeſt, and the

- Winds, Hol. 416. d yr. 1:| top of St.Stevers Church ſuffered
| REL: $4 * by it, Lyc. 'd in . gr. 2. aiftant.

16; Fierce Winds drove-us back, | Jeruſalem. 1546. Fan. 14. Huraca-
 Hakl. an. --- --+ 1 rs, Thander, great Rain, T.G.

Dec. 24. Tempeſtuous Winds| P.t Burr. d in 2 gr. 13. diftant

drove us 20 Leagues beck, Hak.| Add 7 20. hwTSY. Mii

1ſmos


C "hap. [.


_— nn OO —— D—-


v F by
- - , } DP a* 41 | || by
/ (d C T5 67 $ ' l, [? \Q -


Mzlnia, bebr. 10. Chaſme, Lycoſth.

8 "Br. 5. aditart,

I547. Tune 5 CT. _ hay Procelis, CAC.

Dr. Dee, Annot id Annuw,

Or. 2T. e:ftant.

A; ack 28. ArMiſecaaCathedra! ſtruct I

Thunder, hor. 5. P. Ly
P 10 © Yours 'C. gr. 5. diſt,

fan. 27. Pluorioſa tota. d in
» princip dem, d in V gr. 15.
Fehr. 21. Rau | M ay 9, Pens Pl

V1, Grand: ts lmperes , I. 6
in? gr. 6. aft,
Mit. t 0 Pluv Il 17 walide, E! ate I'9,
Iwiol, I, 6d in V vr.
5. diftant,
9. Anil 5. Rein continual, @ in
F, © or. 27. diſt.

6. Stormy Rain. 12. I»-
bres. 21, Tempeſtuors, in W;
> 20,”gr. art, 18, Boiſtrous
Winds. 26, cat ray eS, £11992
CONL;NGs Plavia, P Cr. 26. "if

. Ventt Fehementes ant? mertd,
22. Plurna per tot. d12m,c un Ton-


1548.


walde 3


F
-


tr, @ gr. 17. aiftant. From
June 1. ad 21, Unnacural (as they
Caiid it 1n thole __ ) unti-


Tune 6, Mighty
is of Wind-and Rain, Fae
, fairh che Doctor.
ls, [res Vhementiſſin1.

Vb:mentifſ. In
b; es en; Grandin? , hor. 5. P aiff.
Oat ! &7, ! ©, Ld. in wy 27. Fune 21.
The ceeveſt Winters could be
no for! ler day. Dis 2 Iztber a
Gai? 41t9 Tiundo Vehem: a au-
t per ortum Saoitart, cum ton.
77 ſize, Dr. Dee. d in ” gr.21,


VA,


Tran
MM. 'Y 3s "0% 5 hem? #LEfS.
ts Vehem: nt. FX; Sol oft.
I55O. tan. 19. 4 5 hora 10. oF. fta-
F197 Ventns wine CC eſcebat. 23. Hb.
I. G7 2690, Pliwia , 4 V gr.18,


£ ly VW eather.
Sr (OI! {!
aliventer
Dri: 12.


7 —# -
20, JS3.7.\ 't "Our


CAl 14997


a ox ig #1


24. Fen-


Fl; . I4. A mt riate mirum ereſeebat
Ven! us, nofte ceſſavit, d WIDE PrIve.
Febr. 7. bar. 4. min. 30. Tonitrua, Plu-


wa Dies.


1551, Circ, Mai! 15. Ante feftumPen-

my ſtes,Great lInundation in Germa-

\ (d in ** gr. 15. diſtant) and

= Neizhbour parts of France .de-
(cribed by Lyc.


E
|


July 24. Br Yatque or FF r1swinds,

Canger of drowning,Parch. 1576.
bl

A [1-02


j
Tyly 21 . River overflows, when ic


had not raine va Month before,
d gr. 28. al, 7
1556. F/ - 1”. ' Wind = th-1 eff:
ſornado, Th under , \ Vind and
Lis! nin, d in X or TO. arſe.


20. Viuch Change of Winds. Foul


Weather.
27. <00-gaphs with much Rain, d in


pr. 11, aff.
w ch 1. Tornado, Towſon in H:ikl.
112. & in gr. IC. diff.


Dec. 26, Thunder, Harmiu! in Swe-
14 and Boberrra, Lye. & in
O-or. 6. 41ſt,

1557. Jai. 13. Sea went fo high
on the Shore, Xn t we could
nt Land, Hak!. Edit. 1. P. 114.
Die 31, Foul Weather , Hak,
I21.

Febr. 7. Wind, great Guſts of Rain,
Lightning and Thunder ; bur the
Guſt down, Wind came to N PF,
Hak!l. Edit. 1. p. 122, @ grad, 11,

Tune 2. Tempeſt and Rain.

11. Stift Gale, Took in the Shrowds;
Storm laſting till the 16th day,
Borouehs Voyage. Hakl. Edit. 1:
d gr. 16,

= Wind N W. fain to ſeek Har-

z0ur.

24. Great Miſts and Darkneſs,
in e/£7u1mt.

1558. March 26. Whirlwind: C in
S princip. gr. 3. ft,

April 1. A Flaw all day at E. where
ordinarily it is , W. Tonrſor's
Voyage, Hak. d in & 22. gr.
ah.

1556 Hyemi, Jan.and Febr.Ventoſa ar
humida.


London, Sept. 1. Thunder Terrible,


Stow. 1013. P i 2 gr. 19.

1562, June5. Tem »eſtuous, Hail and
Thunder, Gez.. d in S, gr. 14.
6iPtant.


Lowain- 1565. Jn. 6. Inundation,
Gemm. 2, Þ 1:74 gr. 3O.


F-b. 11. Inundation Gear. Y 23. &,
R.1% Os


| 1566. July 18. Winds, Lightning,


Gemm. d in? gr. Il, &:/f,


5 1559


h & Forem Diary.


Book III.


1569. March 10. Horrible Chaſm,
4 in X gr. 20. diſt,

Holland. 1570. Auguſt, Dire Inund3-
tionz 40000. periſhed , Grm-


ſtone ,


tl,
London. 1574. Sept.4. Storms of Rain
4. P. M. Stow, d in 2.


|


1586. April 2, Winds to fing and
bellow.
May 21, Hard Gale, and Rain.


| 1587. Jan. 3, 4,5. DangerousStorms,
d.h 2 in = fere, Par-


Purch. T. pag. 58, 59. £N = gr.
28, aiſtant.

10. Three Anchors broke.

20, to Febr, 23, Many Flaws.


Graveſend. 1576. March 5. Flaw in | Febr. 15, 16. Much Rain, Wind,


the Night, drowned a Tilt-Boat,


with 31. Perſons , Stow, d'ln m


gr. 13. 4ſt,
L. NN. 63. Auguſt 21, Snow a Foot
Thick, Frobiher. d in 2 gr. 7.


|
'


Cold, Hakl. £ > gr. 24. 4ift,
. L. 52. 4uz. 14. Stormy, many
Whales ſtopt our Fleet in a


Storm, Davs. ef in S& m gr. 10,
arſtant.


ww. | .
Lat. 61. 1577. a June 8. ad July 4. | 21. Tempeſt, Admiral forced tocut


No Night but ſome Storm. June


his Cable, £Sm gr. 5.


and July Boiſterous, with Wind ' 1588. May 16, Vehement Storms


and Snow,and Hail, Frob:hers 24
Voyage.


-1581. July 21. Great Blaſts and


Storms, ad Diem 28. uſq; & in
2x pr. 12, diftant. 1582, h Y.
1583. Aug. 16. Foul Weather, © in

X gr. 17.4if, 21, Stormy. Hak!.


102.
1585. July 7. Whirlwind taking up
"ax into the Air for 3 Hours,
Hakl. 783.


4 June 15. ad _ Many Tempelts ;


P vel VC. hs.

July 8. Cold Showres 10 at Night,
much Lightning, P gr. 20. az-
ftant N =.

July 2. 12. The Night before much
Lightning round abour. {

16, 17, 18, Great ſtore. of Whales,
Hakl. 783. Tuffon, the Waves
ſeemed totouch the Clouds, L:n-
ſchot. f in V © pare. gr. 15. at-
ftant. : $11

26. Strong Winds, Sea high 5 @ in
Y i gr. IO,

Aug. 18, Foul Weather.

Avg. 19. Snow at Night, with much
Wind and Foul Weather.


Aug. 28. ad Sept. 12. Very great |'


Storms, @ gr. 7. in V =>,
Gre. Lat.60. Aug. 23. Very Stormy
day, Hakl. 780. © V = gr. drft.g.
aTViIS,
Sept.1o.At Night very greatStorms,
ſeparated our Shi Davis's Voy-
age for the North, Hakl. Eat.
I. p. 786. & gr. 20, drff.


for a Day and Night, d in &
fine, gr. 7.

16. Much Wind as the Ship could
bear, ,d S 21. gr. aift,

24. Tempell which ſhatter'd the 47-


mada.

July 6, Tempeſt, d gr. 22. dif.

1589. Fehr. 18. Thunder, Rain, Light-
ning, d in & gr. 14.

Die 24. Great Storm, III Gorpo Sar:
to's, Linſchet.

March 5. Great Storms, broke the
Rudder,Gorpo Santo, # in 8. m gr.
I


3.

18, Storms, broke our Main-Yard.

31. Storms for Two Days and Three
Nights.

21. Great Storm continued till Aprz/
g. 8, Mm pr. 20. aft,

April g. ad. 14. Storm forced us back
again.

18. As great a Storm as ever.

Auguſt 4. A very dangerous Storm,
P pr. 22.

Virginia. 17, 18. Blew hard, @ gr.
I6


I589. Sept. 16. Store of Rain 208,

on E. of Cumberland ; much
ighrening zoe. 17, Great Fiſh

Ita Die 25. Great Tempeſt, Hak!.

*. 20.

O#. 2. Two Men ſlain with Light-
ning, PMI,

1591. April 7: Rainy. Three Spouts,
1


My) 3. TerribleGuſt withLightning,
tore our Fore-Sail , & in Tropic.
or. 6; 23


Chap I.


hb 8 Forem Teſtimony.


373


23. Cruel Guſt of Rain.

8. Fog and Tempeſt, 10th. Great
Storms diſperſing our Stups,
Hak!l.

From April 18. to May 10. Furious
Winds, Parch 3. 1139. & in Tro-

of or. 8. diſtant.


ay 13. ad June 1O, Nothing but


Tornaag's; we could not keep our |


ſelves dry -Three Hours, Ha.
103. @ in Tropic.

Sept. 30. Cruel Storms, as if the Sea
would have ſwaliowed the Iile
Tercera, Linſchot. & I 7 gr. 5, dt-
ftant.

Gorve. Sept. 11. ad 14. Storms Un:
paral:iF'a, Purch. 3. p. 1629. & 1n
Tropre . 8. 8, 41/tant.

Near Sz/ly. O46. 6. Winds andRain,
gr. 11. #:

Circ, Ofob. 11. Extream Storms,
gr. 14. 57


and Lightning, terrible and dan-
gerous, Purch. I. p. 148. Our M:-
ſea was broke and {plit in the
middle, Pyrard's Voyage, Parch.
114. Toll ame,

1602. Sept. 20, Tempeſt terrible, dc


in "1 fize, gr. 7. diſt.


| Inter O#. 3.6- 31. Tempeſt and Cur-


rent ro the South, >d gr. 16.
; 1605. May 27. Blew hard, C.Sw:th.
'Þ. 19. ft 2 gr. 6. diſtant.
Viietna, June 11, Cold, Snow and
Hail, & 12 fine S gr. 6. aft,
1606, April 1, Much Rain.7.Great
Storm. 26, Much Srormy about
a Fortnight, d gr. 28. Difazt.
May 4. ad 14. A Storm, d gr.
26, «iſt. [rye SS.

July 24. Rain and Fog. 25. Blows
very hard all Night, d gr- 26.
Auguſt 4. Wind, Rain, very high

Sea. 10, Marvellous high.


1595. April 13. Thunder, Lightning, | 30. Blows very much, gr. S. 4//. in


(Die Paſchatts ) ſtored with Rain ,
ye: very Cold, & 5 gr. 7. ait#ant,
1595. Aug. 23. Store of Lightning
and Rain. 24. Blows hard, d mt


14.gr. ). ;

30. Boittrous South-Wind,and great
Snow.

Sept. 4. Blows hard. 7. Wind
high, Purch. 1175. 8. Very
Dangerous Storm, Waves as high
as the Top-Maſt, 4 & gr. 20.

1597. April zzeaſ, Cold Showrs. 6.
day, Foul Weather, ſtif Winds,

16. Foal Weather, @ i gr. 8. aft.

May 2. Storm, foul Weather, and

reat Winds. 7. Foul, and Snows
ard, OM gr. 15. 4ſt.

May 24. Great (tore of Snow, & mM
gr. 15. Gf. :

1598. Aug. 7. Diſjete Naves Tem-
peftate h & in ©, Viae LES,
Lonaon. Sept. 5. Harmful Thunder,

d >gr.ir. Diſt. [
Girc. fin, Sept. Many high Winds and


Rain.
O#0, $. Admiral loſt a Boat and
a Man, ef wel VC.

1599. Atril and May,Cold and Dry,
Pin $5 and V.

May 2. SuddenGuſts of Wind about
this time of the year, are very
Fruitful, with Storms of Thunder


roptc.
1607. Jun. princep. Guſts of Rain 11,
6 or 7 Whates, @ gr. 6.4,
I4. Snow, much Wind. 15. We lay
at Drift, £V gr. 4.41}.
99. Rain and Fog. 23. Hard Gale,
great Rain, as in England.


25. About Noon, Three Gramporſes,
| ;


P in Tropre. gr. 4. diff.

28. Hard Gale 29. The hardeſt
Storm inthe Voyage, & gr. 11,
15. A Mermaid. Die cad. VII Whales

and Porpiſces, © S gr. 17. -
Io. Procella,lmbres. 13. Still Gale,
P gr. 6.
July 12. More Porp:ſces than before.
1 Yay much Rain and Eaft-
in


16. Rain and Storm, e S gr. 10.

G. de Agwilla, 18. Tempeſt and
great Cold. 4; thul.

20. Grando mixia Ton, & Fulgur.
Arth. d gr. 18. & S gr. 22.

26. Tanta vs ventorum nt aligus Um-
bilico tenmus Aguts inftiterint, Ar-
thuſ, & S gr. 26.

14. Froſt and Snow, # gr. 27. 7

April 2. Mighty Storm for 6 hours;


in x,
Ab April 4. We lay driving to and
fro in the Sea, d growing all the


whe.
May


—_—


RR CTR -—— Vi TEEparn ern ern


h 8 Forem Teſtimony Book III.


May 2. Hard Storm at South, &d gr.
7. aft,

1608, June 2,Thunder and Lightning
Vide ſupra in  & $.

5, Great Showr of Hail.

Kent. July 26. Thunder, Light-
ninz, Rain,

1609. Fuly 24. Storm unparalell'd.
27, Go-po Santo's.

1612, April 12. Wind blew hard,
NW. & gr. 9.

I615. Avg. 11, We labourd to get
to Land-

14. Much Rain, Thunder, Lightning.
I:4ian Moſq ae (plit with a Thunder
bole PV == gr. 19.

20. Wind blew the white ſalt from
Oft fe Sea. "Of gr. 12,

Augu/t 5onſe, cc, Boilterous Winds,
AM i197 110! ſteady, 1 V =.
22, Winds Imperuous while the »
was uirter the Earth, & gr. 11.
23, St. .Vo. Ar Rio de Tumba in the
W--# I: 1:0, Storms, Rains, Thun-
ders haunted chem till Sept. F
that they couid not find the Ifle
Co342% in 5 degrees. Spulzergen 1n
Purch, 1. pig. 84. NV 27. h. =

9.0.

Ab. Aug, 19. ad 24. Blew very hard,
Storms and Thunder, @ gr. 13.
Sep:. 3. A great Sea , but little

Wind, E.& gr. 4.

10. Much Rain and a Corpo Santo,
Foul Weather followed, the Sea
racked our Ships.

Sept. Water as white as Milk , @
gr. 1, diff.

23. Thunder, Lightning , © gr.
12. diſtant.

1616. April 6, Rainy and Smooth
Water, &d gr. 24.

Io. Blew hard, a great Show.

16. Tornado's from all parts of the
Compaſs: Stinking Rain, & gr.


I5.
May 3. Many Tornads's, d gr. 6.
arftant.
1617. 41. 25. Water white, P gr.22:
1618. April 21. Storm, Wind, Thun-
der, @O gr. 23.
May 1. Storm for 3 Nights.
June 10, Foul Weather, d gr. 7.
in I prenc'p.


1619. Sept. 27. All Night Tempe-
{tuous, terrible. "Thunder and 3-
bundance of Rain , Eaft-Izates,
Purch. 1. 660. 4 10d, 122,h,
Y opp. 7 .gr. 10. © gr.5.

O74. 1. A Night of Wind, Rain,
Thunder and Lightning, as either
before or {1nce, I never taw, 2 13,
&, 33, h.

| 1602. April 20. Tornade's, d gr. 17,

July g. Storm , great Extremity ,
d gr. 17. in Þ prizcrp.

26. Tempeſt terrible, abundance of
Rain.

27. Stormy and dangerous, d pr. 22.

28, Ad Aug. 1. Wind increaſed ſti!],

Streights. Nov. 19. Great Tein-
peſts, @ gr. 18,

1621, Ob. 22; Vent furentes, Kepl.
PVS pr. 18,

Strerohts. Now. 19. Great - Tem-
peits, f gr. 18.

1625. March a 22, ad 24. Pluit ds:
noFegues & [ive VC. Kepley.

April 27. Fulger Matuttoum, Kepl.
e gr. 7.
May 8. Ghalma, Kr. & Partile in
LL *, 18, Hail, Snow, [þ.
July Mezfſe ;, I ovbſerv'd it Thun-


derd no leſs than 15 days, apad
Kyr. @ gr. 26. June 11, Terrible
Thunder, Kyr. © gr. 13.

_ Fuly 3. Pluit weF. tot. d gr.27.


/ .
7. Frigide Pluvie multe.
23. Procelle, Tonit. e Aftus , cujus
cauſam 1enorare ſa fatetur Keplerns,


P or. 18,
31. Tonit. largi imbres, > gr. 12.
1627. May 21. Toz. Cataraiie, in
mx gr. 7. arftait.,
1628. Sept. 7. Ninbi Grandinoſs, d
in => gr. 3, a1ſtart. |
1629. May 3. and 4. Cataratte && 1l-
luotes proatgioſa demontih, Sudetics
Kepl. © (= pr. 13. diſtant,
June 14. Sava Tempeſtas, P gr.
I9.
19. Fulgura minacia, & gr. 29.
23. July 3. Tonitrua Crebra. þ. 348.
PL16 h, S11G,
WNorwich, 1630. Ofob. Great Ship-


wracks by Storms, d in prixc.
| 1631, May 18, 19. Thunder, Plaſh.
ns


WS off wut ©


7 |
loſt, Calv. Append. 1644. Aprel 23. & 24. ad 30. Froſt


Chap. | Great aſe of the Forem Intelligence.


31s...


&


ing Rain, Ky. © & 1 gr. 12. Sept. 2 2. Storm of Wind, and *


une 14. Thunder and Plaſhing eat Water-Guſt, 4 h d wx,
ain, Kyr.P gr. 11. Fob. 18. Ghaſmata.


Hambureh. 1632. O#. 11. Inundati- | 1641. Aug. 25. Audib. Thunder ,
on,


orimberg, Ephemr. PMA gr.5. |
1634. O#6. 11, Inundation, Kyr. d | 1643. Sept. 2. a4 6, Much Rain, Kr
7 gr. 10. where 6133 men were | © gr. |
OF. 11, 12,.13, 14. were nothing | and Snow, d h & gr. 25.in x.
but rainy, yr. May 3. Ch ma, Kyr.
1635. May 19. Plaſhing Rain and | 16,17, 18. Thunder Harmful, 4
Thunder, @ Z 2 gr. 5.4. in Y gr. 10.
Fune 27. Great Tempeſt of Hail, | 23. Men flain with Thunder, 4
&c. Ayr. in Y gr. 6. :
Zuly 26.Thander, Lightning,Rain. | 1645. Sept. 4. Extreme Wet. Fazr-
Auguſt 10 m.Lightrung ab Oriente, | fax's Soldiers and Horſes dyed,
P ſrve QY, Sprig. 9, & gr. 19.in = & S&,
1636. Ofob, 22. Tempeſt laſted 5 | O#.Extreme Wet, the Ways un-
days at Afrachan,Olear. d in  9.| patlable for Military Carriages,
Y. and 2 d in 7 26. S$prieg. © BS. pr. 18.


Kov. 11. Tempeſt, Olear. 188. 1646.May 4. Thunder Harmful Kyr.


13. Tempeſt continues. 26. Thunder and Hail, Ky.
I4. Tempeſt abated a little, ir| Juze 23. Terrible Thunder.
grew again; we loſt our Anchor, | July 1, 19. Thunders.


udder and Maſt,1. 1647. Nov. 11. Darkand Tempeſt
1637. June 15, Thunder, then a} ous Night, when his Majeſty
Showr. -Kyr. Charles the I. eſcaped from Þe.


1638. Oeb. 21. Dry, Tempeſt of | toz Court, @ in © gr. 18.
Thunder and Liahening: 1648. Nov. 9, 19. Near Arnaros Ile,
1639. Aug. 29. We had thoſef a Spout near a quarter of an
Storms ( call'd Travads's) which | hour, @ h &#:; 1660. O#, 30. In
are quickly over, Olear. Mande- | Hertfordhire, Gelum ardens, &


ſlo's Voyage, bd in w &- A, | & FG, ſoprainYÞ 2.
1640. May 17. Harmful Thunder r 568. Dec. 17, R. Hail Th.Lightn. <>
and Lightning, II, h, 27. wide ſapra in Y. Q.


 $ 26.Great is our Subject,and great muſt be the Care and Pains to Ma-


ſteric : Wetravers'd the World, the Reader ſees, to diſplay our Aſpects
Greatneſs. We could with we had COmmnprgnens the Globe, and ta-
ken Obſervation all the way. -Great uſe, inthe mean while, may be


made of the Mariners Journal, to teach us to look up to the Stars -


and Bright Aſteriſms, ro learn, not ſo much their Number, as their
Power. Note inthe mean time the Table preſents the Oppoyſtron moſtly;
for Brevities ſake. | |
$ 27. Wehave already labour'd to preclude ali Objeftions that we ſul.
pect may be brought againſt cheſe Tables, their Imperfection, or their
rolixity. , 'Tis in vain to ſtruggle with the Lityan Hercslzs, we lift our
Adverlary up into the Air, and he muſt expire.
$ 28. As to our large extent of the & ,even to a Semilextile, Let ic
e its Fate ; let the Cenlurer of theſe Papers, as in ſome Tradeſmen's
Bills, abate what ſeemeth unreaſonable, fo he allows us ſomething for our
Pains. 'Tis not the farſt time we have done (o ; yea, we are required to
allow ſo much in ſome grand Eftetts. E:rchftad, upon his own Obſerva-
tion, I fee, hath oe, the Quincunx, whole Influence, when he found,
he was in haſt to arreſt it 3 and thereupon mm ( though out of place )
5 | Fl


=
_


mma
F& ]
276


h d Effefts. Kepler at a ſtand. Book 11I-


- 2 Notandum at the end of his Calculation, 4® 1644. We havenot given


you our Word here, but ſome Evidence alſo, though not ſo often as we
might, __ for the one and the other. We might do as much for the
Semiſextiles.

s = And now, what ſhall I lay > What New Thing comes under Ob-
ſervance! Storms are no News, nor Thunders, nor Rains: The Effe&s
are common, ſpread over the Face of the Earth ; But the Man of Experi-
ence, with the Man of Science; the Mariner and the Student knows not
that Þ and & are many times the Signal Cauſes of ſuch Effets; yea ;
and have ſome Cauſality more or leſs , according to their Stage 3 fo that
whereſoever they be, in AſpeR, or out of Aſpect within 30 degrees, or
G_ they know they are engaged , as ſure as the Sun kzows his going

own.

$ 20. And this is viſible in our Table, to thoſe who will pleaſe to ponder
the frequency of the Fits of the Weather that return within a Months
time. As in 1540. 1550. &c. in Febr. 1556. In Jan. & fune, 1557: or hall
weigh the Obſtinate Conſtancy ofa Churliſh z yea, ſometimes of a Savage
Conſtitution, as in June 1549.In Zune and Fuly,r557.Add 1585.where Fuly,
Auguſt and hs er are troubled with Cold; or May and Zune 1588.which
year the Enghſh and the Spanzard will never forget : wherein we would
not be thought to derogate from the Firſt Cauſe, but only as we are now
engaged, do afſert his Wiſdom by not abrogating the Second, created and
atmed by himſelf. ;

$31, Nor do weſtay here: For March and April, 1589. April and May,
1591. Autuft and September, 1596. April and May again, 1597. Sept. and
Ob, 1598. May and Auguſt, 1606. June 1607. are extant in the Table,
And what need I wade further ?

9 32. 'Tis Want of this, made Kepler at a ſtand, when he profeſſes he
anderſtood not the Cauſe of Wind, Rain, Storm and Thunder in the
beginning of Aug. 1626: In:tium (faith he) cut aſcribam #07 babeo, When
as there are fy Cauſes, ſome nearer, ſome remote. Amongſt the re-
mote, the diſtance of Hh and &, 18 degrees at furtheſt; andis it not rea-
ſonable to think ſo > When he finds 7 near upon as diſtant from 6 on one
fide, as Þ is on the other. Such Curioſity there is in the Planetary diſtan-
ces, as we have before admoniſh'd. The like loſs he is at for his Plu:t tota
mote, July 3. Anni cjuſdem. For though h and & be 27. degrees diſtant,
they are not excluded from their Share in the Effe&; for they find ſeveral
ways of Union, as in our Natural Body it happens, not ſo obvious to be
remarked. Little thought he of the @ of & and 2, but at 6 degrees
diſtance ; Little thought he of the Moon's epytication to the Oppolite of
H, in proceſs of the whole Night. Ir fine, Little thought he of the nu-
pms then and there poſited, which'connecs & and h berween

14. and 'Z 11,

g $008 Igiveyou one Inſtance more in A® 1627, We find Lightning,
and Rain, and Cataracts —_ dayes in the Months of May and Juze, in
which while Thunder and ghrning 14 times. Amongſt other Aſpedts
we find our ef of hand &. pler, whom Inever mention without an
Interiour Honour, flies to the Nature of the Soil, to the exudations of
O:ly Plants, and Minerals, and Fofſiles , which he faith are full of Yitrio!
&c. Whereupon he produceth a like place of Medicinal Waters and
Quarries of Slat, which more frequently tuffer by Lightning allowing him-
felf only one Thundring day to our Aſpect. Now inall this 4o days there
is not an Aſpect likely, but an e YL and®, YN and, anda * of

h and Y, ro which # he makes his recourſe, conjecturing, that 3 or
Aſpects could not ſhew themſelves fo illuſtriouſly, bur that this # opene


the


Chap. I. Storms great and durable accounted for;
the Earth, ro emit its Exhalations for half a year together. But omitting
that manifeſt ſabter-fuge of an halt-year-Aſpect, for the account of 40
days; an Aſpect that isnot ſo moiſt, or ſo impregnative with Moiſture;
nor (o Potent, ſeeing tis but a #. He ruſt have an hard Forehead thar
will deny an @ of Y. and 2 to have an Hand in theſe Exceſles, when he
ſhall ſee Tozrtrua horrenda, upon the very Day, and Cataracts the day af-
ter. Then he muſt be very Reſty that will not allow it for probable at
leaſt, that the meeting of vor of h and 4, with this f of Y and Q,
did not contribute to all thoſe numerous Thunders within thoſe Limits;
Does not Nature it {elf reach us to enlarge thele Aſpets, and make them
comprehenſive of theſe Celeſtial Tumults, that they may be laid at their
Door ? Single, neither one nor the other can do ir, but mixed, they may 3;
for at theend of 40 days Þh and & are but 23 degrees diſtant, Whoſoe-
ver therefore ſhall ſay, h and & did none of this, neither by themſelves,
nor by the help of others, Y had as good tell us there. are no ſuch things
in Nature, that they are upſtart new invented Tezms, that there is no ſuch
thing as Arad, that there is no ſuch Man as Kepler, that He; and all
that look upwards, are, and have been Fops and Simpletons 3 or if this
laſt beno great abſurdity, them-let them but confels what they fee with
their Eyes, that Y oppoled the Pleiades, and % not far off from them
Stationary all the Month 3 and if he knows not what this {1gnihes, twill
become a man to learn. ; |
9 34. There remains a doubt about Inundations, which I have ventur'd
to aſſert, do not break in fo often under this Aſpect; as under ſome 0-
thers, Yet, ſo it haps that the Three Firſt Inſtances of this Table are
ſolely concerning Flouds. The Atpe&t with 2 mult carry away the name
for Flouds ; ſometimes with ©; ſometimes with * bur. moſt with &.
That Þ and & mgy ſometimes wer their Feet, or wade deep into the
ſame, muſt not be deriyed. Bur we muſt enquire whether it be ſo fre-
quent, & and & ſhall cauſe an Exceſs of Wet in more parts of the Zodi-
ack then and & ; their Situation here ſhews the reaſon. V and >, Xx
and Mm are the Signs, for the moſt part, where a Floud appears under h &,
being the Equinoctial Signs. In; 08
ext, it may not be amiſs fo ſee whether, when a Floud happens under
our Aſpect, an Aſpect of 4 or © with 2 be not as Paramount there as
h &d can be? If fo,the Efle& muſt rather be imputed to that Cauſe which
ofcner obtains 3 though he who hath che fewer Votes muſt not be exclu-
ded. But h and@ doth not come near the! wringing-wet Influence ( as
Houſwives call ic ) of & and 2; Ergo.—Take therefore the firſt Inſtance
of Febr. 11. 4* 1500, There's d h & in &. There is {o. Now ſtretch
it as far as you are able z when all is done, there will be found d © 2 (re-
member, an Aſpe& which is next to d 2 for Exceſs of Wet) which
ſticks cloſer, and reaches further : That Aſpe& then muſt war mens
the main procurer of the Effect. The Rain and Snow which contribute
to the Floud, fell in Nowemrer, December, or January, or in the firſt week
of February, or in all together ; I find in Nowember © & diſtant but gr.15:
In Dec. De 10. bur gr. 8. diſtant 3 In Zazuary but one degree; In Fetruary
when the Floud came, but 7 gr. diſtant; while h and .& comenot in Play
till the midſt of Detember ; from which time They are allowed to contri-
bure, bur not to evacuate the Right of the other Aipe&t. The ſame An-
ſwer mult ſerve tothe 24 or 34 on S. Thomas Eve, Gem, Lib. 2. For k
and # were oppoſed /tis true,and in a Critical place,cz prizc. T.But who
bur & and 2 (I ſay nothing of her being Retrograde the while) were
conjoyned all the preceeding Month 3 and on the very day of the f h &


was within lefs than 15 degrees diſt. ſo that the © of h& in d "__
9ue


% =


_—


E 378 FRB more proper elſewhere ; t 8 Comets. Book III


tique of & & , which Nexw our Planers one with another in a Triple Cord,
ler me tell you, UP Exceſles of all kinds. The 34 of A*® 1511. if it
were in the Month February, as the word Rurſus in Gemrma's Margin may
import, Lb. IL p. 151. That falls under the Signs V and =, So, 4*
1629. May 3.and 4 Otherwhile & in >, as 4* 1570. Aug. 1. but 4*
1627. cOnomreny which we have ſpoken already as to irs Cataradts,
(whichare Flouds in another term) the Signs were #* and "Tr. |
- *Tis true, £ 1551; & kh S in K=,but © and 2 were within leſs than
half a Sign, in Apr:!, which muſt contribute ro a Summer Floud. Thus
with ſuch Remarks as theſe, we affoil the Difficulty.


6 35. The Comets we ſhall repreſent as. they ſucceed orderly with the
Places of our Planets in the Dexter Margin, whether 4 or ? preſuming
it obſervable, if they be at that time within the Compaſs of a Sign (7.e.)
30 degrees, though the Terms of that diſtance lye under ſeveral Denomi-

nations, as & x S, yet they are asin the ſame Sign.

A® 1500. Comet in April tor 18 days Others, four Months) in Sp. one
ſub Signo ?, ſaid to be Horrende Magnitudinis , atteſted by ſeveral, Ly-
_— Funccixs, &c. our Planets lye at 28 gr. diſtance, viz. Þh 23. S&,

21, WT,

A® 1505. Gire. Feſt. Michaelis & Novilun. Nowvembyis, A Comet like
the > butnor ſobright. Ic laſted till Shrovetrae the following year. Lix-
turics 4pud Labienec. Now in Sept. 27. our Planet lay thus at gr. 16, di-
ſtance, h S 29. I dA 15, ; /

A® 1506. April 12. Gometa per 5 Dies ( others 25.) ſus ef, Galwiſ. our
Planets gr. 2.diſt. h 10. A. & 12... |

A® 1513. A Dec. fine ad Febr. 19. An ſequent. our Planets are ſetat gr. 2,
diſtant, h 23. m, & 21,m.

A® 1516. Comet faid to ſhine a little before the Death of Ferdinand
King of Spain: which muſt be about January, h13. 7.96 g. 2.

A® Large ny Cometa 1n fine 5 Riccrolus, h = l5. S$ 5. A;

A 1528, 7an.18. ta iz X*, inthe Oppoſition of h, ſaith Ricius
Hevel, Sd in Vo. h in V 27. 3

A® 1538. 4 Jan. 27, ad 21. Comet obſerved to appear in * gr. 5. Lat.

Bor. 87.1 7. in 1pſo Pegaſi Gollo, alſo in oppoſitione Saturn, faith P. Surdw,
apud Riccrol, I 27. $\, h 20. =. ; Sy;
A® 1556. Sub initio Martis Gomets equalis fere Lune Dimidio. Cardan de
Variet. It was ſeen Die i ſupraSpicam juxta alan Virgins finiftram. Die
9. Jaxts arturum, Ricciol. Ducaoit ad finem| Aprilts, hit YV. d 4.

A® 1557. 4b. Ave. 6. ad 24; Cometin 2, Stadiws, p. 66. Bunting th $.


I 36, Con-


_—


Chap I; Comets Starry Origmal demonſtrated.


_
4 » «7 %
-

F

P


. $ 36.Concerning which Comets, if itbe not 1%, it Will be a Plain Caſe,
that they depend on the Sears : the former Age perceived it:For from thence
Rzccrolus had his Obſervation that the Comet 1528. lay in Oppoſition to H,
And again,that of 4® 15 38.fromP.Surdas,it was oppottte to Þ, In like man-
ner another Hiſtorian of the Geaueſe Aﬀairs, teaches us , that the Fam'd
Comet, 1558. was fited in ? to 4, Bizay. apud Hevel, Now, whether
Oppoſition be taken in an exact Mathematical Senſe, or in a Vu'gar, for
any Diſtance of Two Bodies ina right Line : as I fee thele Authors take
the Word at large, for the one and for the other ; I ſay either of them
proves the Dependance of the Phznomena from the Planet. Thus, That
in the Conſtellation of X (the Sotherz of the Two) was Oppoite Dia-
metrically, as Sardus faith , to h then polited in M 20. See! to the Sun
it is zot Oppolite, no, not by accident ;z to Þ he #. It owes its being then,
(z. e.) its Luſtre, for a great part to Þ, as the Full » owes its Luſtre to the
Oppoſtion of the Sun. Inlike manner doth the Fam'd Comet 1556. owe its
Exiſtence to the Oppoſition of 4 ,Mars being then in the beginning of Y,
the Comet thewing it ſelf in the Oppoſire =. Yea, grant chat the Sun
was not far off abont + 20. Yet who will not ſay, but that the Sun it
ſelf is,in ſome ſorc,accidencal to the generation of the Comet, ſeeing Theſe
Comets are generared in the Oppolite Point. To end Diſputes, let us at-
tend ro the Sun, if you pleaſe, on the One (1de of this Comer, and h in
V 11, on the other fide, and between them che Three, © Rh. Tis as
clear as Light, that the Comer draws his Original. |
- 9 37: That for further Proof, if need require, let the Reader Caſt his
Eye on the Comet, 15 16.there he ſhall find h and within gr. 4.4271 15 12,
x560. within gr. 2 one of the other. And how could the Former Century
chuſe bur obſerve, at leaſt, leave it as remarkable to Poſterity, if they
perhaps may make ſome Concluſion from thence. Now, whereas in
other Comets recited, our Planets lye at remoter diſtance ; Idefire it may
be obſerved, that Thoſe who lie within gr. 8, 13, 16. &c. the moſt remote
are found within the Compaſs of 3o degrees , the Confine of a Sign;
which are not therefore tobe, by a Carelets Preſumption, reckoned for
nought, but to be ſtudioutly remark'd 3 in as much as we ought not to
confine Nature to our Shallow Pedantique Dictares, but to follow and
trace her in ail her Liberties the takes, which will be found to have their
terms of Confinement, as the Hunted Hare, which,notwihtſtanding all its
Breathing, is known to keep within fuch a Compaſs. So that the Firſt
Comet of 1500. where h was in & 29. and & in 21, is owing to the
Neighbourhood of three Planets; as fure as thoſe whichare found when
h and & ſhake hands within a degreeor Two.

- 9 38. Say we the ſameof Thoſe 2 or 3 Comets which fall under the
Oppoſition of Þ and &d', Arn: 1521. 1529. 1647. On which weenlarge
not, becauſe we hope-there isnoneed, = ;

9 39. Eſpecially when 2 lends her helping hand, with Þ and & ſo we
find it about 4 or 5 times in our Beacrol immediately preceding in the Lea-
ding Comet, 4® 1500.In the following one of 1505. In the Third of 1556.
In the Fourth of 1596. In which let me tell you Þ and $2 are found
moſt pare of neater ConjunRion,thea h and & ,v:z. within 2 or 3 degrees,
As A® 1500. when h and & are almoſt withina Sign Diſtant. So 4® 1656,
when h and & were 7 degrees atunder. 4A* 1596. Þ and 2 within
$ degrees, and & diſtant ewice Five. I leave itto your Choiſe ; whether
you will pleaſe to fay, that Þ and & aſſiſted -h and 4 ? Or Vice verſa
though without Controverſie the Lels 1s Acceſſory, and the Greater is P7in-
cipal. The Truth is, and that 'twill come to, Comets, and all other Pro-


ductions Celeſtial , depead upon the Conkux of the Heavenly a
z an


—_—
——


" Lo Cancer Autunmal Equin. why. Near Urſa Maj.wby. Book IL


and certain Pofitions : though we have been forced in a more Prolix Me-
thod to Drill the Reader on, as we have often faid; if he would grant us
foze parts of Trath, before we could expect him fo liberal as togrant the
whole, An £ h 2 (cems to occur more rarely in this Aﬀair * the d
of Z with h Platique, does often occur. Plariquel fay, for as for the
Partile, 'tis in vain to pronounce, till the Age ſhall think it worth irs
while to give us the Motion of & for ſome Centuries paſt.

'_ $ 4o. Ourhand is in, and we intendno repetition of the ſame: What
ay wethen wo Þ and © ? They put in at d and © alſo, and therein chey
ſeem to ſurpaſs the Aſpe& of 2 ; Bur yet, I know not what an exater
Search may find, Þh and © appears but thrice in the Cometical Scene, and
by but twice. The Firſt, A® 1500. May 20. 1o gr. diſt. & 28. h ut 8,
©. (See before in & and2) Thenext, A® 1506. in Aug. Þh and © in
A. The 3d 4* 1633. June 19. h and © in S. The @ on April x:
1512, toward the end of Y and ==, and again in That ſtill Famous 161g;

ov, 14. in the beginning of IT and 2.

s 41. An Obſerver would make more uſe of this Table: For Firſt;
our Planets are near enough, I tro. A® 1506. 1513. 1516. 1556. 1560.
Why, inall theſe, h and & are within gr. 8. at fartheſt ; yea, but 4.

ea, but 2 diſtance conjoyned. But A® 1557. and 1559. they lyeat diſtance
ut fr: & oppoſed. And here by the way, obſerve more ent Effects
at d than ®,

s 42. Obſerve, 21y. that you find # and Þ both in V* twice, A® 15292;
1556. and learn what Keckerman hath obſerved, That Comets, love to ap-
pear near the Equinox : and thatnear the Autumnal Egurzox, rather than
the Vernal. reaſon we have blurted out oft enough : The time is

et to come that h and & have appeared in =, rocaft a Comet in Y :
What was done in former Countryes troubles me not: 1000 years ago is
another Cale. :

$ 43. 3ly. That you find Rh & in m, and in & but not both in &.
Aly. - h and & are found in & together, A® 1506. and in &
with his Neighbour Equinoctial Sign #7. A*® 1538. The EquinoGti-
al Sign puts us 18 mind of Keckermar again 3 but 6 putsus in mind of an
Anſwer to a ſerious exception 3 wiz. Why do fo many Comets ſherv
themſelves near the Feet of the Great Bear > Have recourſe to Hevelims's
"Table, and you ſhall ſee this verified in that of Aagsf, 1506, What is

of 1521. i» fine S ? Bur letting that paſs, come to 1531. 1539. 1558.
2582. 1596. 1607. that Famous one of 161g. and the laſt that ſhewed it felf
eo us, Aug. 16. 1682. "Tis odds but you will fiad ſome Celeſtial Wayfa-
rer hous'd in 4, or Aﬀedting it with S it may be, before, or w after,
Surely where the Comet appears in the Months, ow » July or Augeſt, 'tis
2 plain caſe ſome Planet muſt be near &. in thoſe Months. Beleive me,
in Three or Four ofthe other Months we find 2 Planet in =, which is the
facing Signof $3 even YU that great Planer.

$ 44. Obſerve, 4/9. that Tz and its oppoſite 2 carry the greateſt Sway
- this Aﬀair, concerning which we cannot opportunely here en-

ge.

Ss 45. Obſerve, 5hz that the Comets of 1528. and 1538. ſhewing them-
ſelves at the ſame time of the year, and in the ſame place of the Zodiack,
with the ſame note of an @ ro h, would give occation to think it were
one and the ſame Comet , whoſe Chronology was multiplyed Two for
One: Bur the contrary is true; Two they were , ke one another, bur
like Brothers born at 1o years diſtance.' iS miniſters another occaſion
co tell,that there are more Comets appear in Jexuary than in any other
Month : Ang for the Summer Months, che greateſt Total appears in Ave.


Chap. I. _ hs Comets. Earthq. and C omets felluw often. 481


So that our Notion of -> and &. is confirmed : And that'of the Equino-
Rial Sign 17, See Riccrolus's Fable, Almageſt, 1. Part. pag. 23.
$ 46. Inthenext place, Thoſe. Comets who are re

ſed h, might as well have bin ſaid ro oppoſe &. Certainly if it appear
in #, as 1528. it comes asnear to the beginning of Y, as tothe end. So
in the other of 1538. & 27, which is. &'s place, comes nearer, x 5,
then Mz 26. doth, which is. the place of h. "Tis true, inthatof 2556.
They were {o near together, One can make no Compariſon. Only this
-——_ be at; if © may not beexcluded, d I hope ſhall be taken notice


$ 47. No more of this Gear will I trouble the Reader with in this place,
only ler us keep in remembrance, That Three of theſe belong, indeed,
tono exe Aſpect of the Superiors,but to a![Three. On which account, Aftro-
logers have the Heart to predict them ſometimes, and with Thanks to the
Arab1ans they hit for the molt part.

Ss 48. As to Earthquakes, I obſerve that their Number ſeems to be equal
with chat of the Comets, which thews that Þ and & deal in ſuch Trade,
and are apt to give Fire to one as well as the other. I do nor find thar
This always is joyned with That, or that with This. Some years bring
one without the other, ſame contrary. But withal ſome years uſher in
Both; fach were the years 1500. 1506. Cometical years in the Firft, of
which Feſawis is noted to have Flam'd by Rzccrolus, and Gonſtantinople to
have Trembled, Rochenback, The like they teſtifie, A® 1516.and 4* 1595.
which two laſt I have ſpecified in the Tablez becauſe they ſeem more
determinate then the other, falling nearer to the Epoche of the Comer;
for fo I reckon that which followed the Comer in Fly, 1595. to have
ſhewnir ſelf in S:c:ly, about September : much concerned the mean while
that the preciſe Daysare not ſpecified by the leſs Curious Hiſtorian;


Of Earthquakes.


$ 49. A® 1506. Peſtis & max, T. M. Conftantinopoli, Rockentach.

1508. Menſe Aprilis, T. M. Eichftad, (h 7. M, & 10. *t,) pag. 42.

1516. T. M. near Noremberg, Rockenbach. |

1531. 7a. 36. Liſ-2n : 1500 Houſes overturned, Mzzaldus, 244. laſted
$days, Lycoft. h 8. 27, & 22.72. |
- 1536. April 1. e Fitna Flames, Lycoff Yeſuvixs butns all the year, # 22. S;
h 17. \.

1548. V:fuwins fam'd thrice this year, Rockenbach.

1540. January 25.At Ghemmtz in Myſnia, Lyceft. 572. h 8. =, &' g, i,

1542. At Conſtantineple, Erchſtad.

1548, Febr. g. At Baſil, 12. w, h 14. W.

1551. May 25. In Surrey, Stow, h 22. =, & 13. ot.

1554 March 21, 22. At Lovain, Gem. h 21.X, & 1%,

1556. April10. T. M. h 18. V,0& 3. 5.

1580.-4pril 6. 11. May 1. Great Earthquake throughout England,Stow;
takennorice of y > wy , Thuanus, &c. Þ 16. 2, & 27, =,
| 1585. Aug. 4. Notingham, Kent, h V 19. Sd = 15,
1586. Dec. 23. T.M. Deſtroyed moſt part of the City of Guatimals,

wrecb. and a Vulcan had 6 Monthts vomited Flame,  h 18. V. & 7 29.
p 1591, From July6. to Aug. 12.1n the Ifle of St. Michael, Porch. p.1677.

24. 2, h 10. SD. TER

1955-4. M. inAfes, faljowing the Comer ſeen in Jab, Hf. Sicul. apud


CCLOLUS,


1596. Ia Mcxico, July 22. Augs 39, Septeriber 4. h Mt 14. I & 4. A
05,


[0


282 Obſerv. of Comets Luciferous. Second Cauſes of Peſt. Book 1IT.


1606. O8. 13: Not long, bur terrible; h w 2, # vw 22,
1632. At Naples, OFo6.8. h m 27. & 27. m.

1636. Sept. 16 Kyr. CT 1& 2; kt 7. V.

1637. July 1. Toars, S $14. h 22. P.

1638. September 7. & 2,7, h 8. =.


a - pp . :
1646. April11. May2g.0 3. 12. 5,
26. Gr. Tremblement, De ” "ny ; |

1667. July 18. Bickley, in Oxfordſhire, I Vf 19, h 2. |
gp 677 ov. 13. In the Ifle of Palma. Mr. Hookes Lectures, 27. h, 2 7.


1680. Heveltus, Jaly 24. Aug. 6. Milain, 60 Perſons loſt, & 1. 5;
H15.S,
March 13. Veſwvius throws out Fire, [3h & in Trop. 7

S$ 50. He who ſhall pleaſe but to Canvaſs this Table after the Method

ointed at in the Precedent, ſhall ſee all things Conſonant and Conſequenr.

e ſhall ſee the Hiſtory of Comets and Earthquakes. They beth lye
in a Belly: He ſhall ſee that the ſame Signs, for the moſt part, Faſhion
One, and produce the Other. They mult neceſſarily do ſo, where they
come upon the Stage at the ſame time (z. e.) within a Month or Two, more
or lefs, as the Parturient Pangs are more or leſs tedious. He ſhall ſee
that the d sand #5 Platique are to be regarded; though in ſome determi-
nate Places, even the Partile d givesa great Lifr. He ſhall ſee this, that
(if I miſtake not) Nature is at more coſt to make a Comet, than to move
the Earth : Seeing the Earth is moved but in part, an Iſland, or a Pro-
vince 3 but your Stupendious Comets are univerſally viſible all the Earth
Over.

s 51. Scarce any difficulty remains about them(at leaſt which I can hope
to maſter ) but this : Why Comets univerſally appearing, ſhould be viſt-
ble roAfa,before they are obſerved in Europe: Why,in ſome parts of Europe
before others. So I find it opens 3 and Hevelus (I remember ) takes
notice of ir.If all Comets were ſublunar, as Rzcc10lus thinks it poſſible;then
ſomething might be hammer'd out far a kind of Anſwer. Bur ſeeing that

eat Artiſts will not have it ſo, let me propoſe that Doubt which I cannot

lve. The Reader, I hope, doth ſee ſome reaſon why we admire, though
in Proſpect, the approathing Superiour Planets ; I look'd on them with
Veneration, as I do a Mountain-, ſeeing plainly a Footſtep of That Im-
menſity whoſe Conſideration ſwallows up the Conſiderer.

s$ 52. In regard of which I come the more unwilling to the Introduction
of Peſtilences, leaſt I ſhould be thought ſuch a Patron for 24 Cauſes, as
in the leaſt co preſume upon the prime Being. As he who ackgowledgeth
a Greation , confeſles the prizze Cauſe; ſo he who acknowledgeth Pro-
widexce, muſt confeſs a Second, And what are the the Planets > They
are no Idols, nor the Work of any Strange God to us. Jannes and Jambres
did not make them.NoMiraculous Magique placed the leaſt of them in the
Firmament;nor can any Charm (whatever the befooled Heathen Imagine)

|l them down. They are the Creatures of the pure Virgin Creation,be-

ore ever it was beſmear'd with the unwholſom Miſts of Heathen Idolatry,

- But what chen ? = dog God ule his goodCreatures ſometimes to ſcourge
us? We cannot ſay but we have deſerved; and that the Divine Wiſdom
hath good ends in it, moſt Commonly to the Sufferer, always to the Sur-
viver, that the Generality may ſee the Fairneſs of God's Creation, leave
oa Arms Defcnlive or Offenſive, againſt a Daring Preſumptuous

ebel.

S5Þ


\J)


%


-— HOtD_CD net. ets *


Chap. I. 4 Rel 1g10n ſafe, hd Peftil. with remarks.


25;


—_=


$ 53. If God hath ordained Sideration of- Plants, or blaſti
muſt we accuſe the Creation ? For if God pleaſe , upon juſt Provocation
to ſtrike 2 Sinner dead with Lightning; or Petrifie him as a Monument of
Salt Stone, Aer Hon 5 Who (hal char Ee Him, or the ' Work of his
Fooliſhly. _ Tis the fame Caſe of an Aſpet. They are Malig


nant : What-hinders more, then that a Verarnooogagh ſhould beMa-”
C


© lefique? 1ta,, 4ut. a Malignant Aſpe&t comes of ne ; and fo ſee-
: mach to evacuate Religion, and the Great Duty of Prayer, - fnce come it
muſt, and will ſtay its time, whether we regard Religion or no.—Come
it -zuft : grantit : Andlit is Fatal. It may iz aSex/e be ſo. Bur here is
Room for Religion : For God can Deliver, even in Fatal Dangers. A
om, chat is unavoidable, Purad adventum ; Duoad Eventum, aut exitum,
may be ſafely paſſed. A Storm is Fatal, and the Mariners know that ſuch
2 timeof year in ſuch a Reach, it muſt be Tempeſtuous. - But then by
grace dong to Religion, God may carry them through. IfI go toSea, let
me live Religiouſly , ot in hopes, it may be, that God will zever ſend 2
Storm ; bur that in caſe of ſuch danger, I may Weather it. There's Fruit
enongh of Religion 3 ye3, in caſe of Shipwrack, If I come ſafe to Land ;
= _ of my ſelf Demonſtrates, that I do not ferve God for

ought

$ 54. If this Rabb becleared ; for I dare not be ſo much an Aſtrologer,
as to bean Enemy to Religion ; then I fay we pretend to nothing but w
isclear and confetſed ; even by the Vulgar themſelves, bur that they are,
not uſed to ſpinning of new Concluſions from a Plain Thread, w:z. that
the times of the year unſraſonable, are unhealthy, That an exceſs of
Heat, even i» Seaſon , much more out of Seaſon, is dangerous to all Bo-
dies. This Diſtemper proceeding from the Planer, which the Vulgar
themſelves, that can ſpell the Word, will not deny. Nothing hinders but
that 'an Aſpect of the Superiour Planets may be reckoned more or lefs
dangerous at certain times. Foggy Air is unwholſom 3 Harveſt time is
obnoxious to Feaversz and a Hot May makesa fat Church-yard. Pur
this into.terms of Philoſophy and it ſignifies an AſpeRof h and & are ſome-
what Equivalent ro Malignant about ir and ©, brings Feavers, and an
Aſpe& of hand & inn S = in May time, kills us up. &d hk % brings
foggy, choking Weather.


ms


Mortorum F pidem. Gatalogus 4 Genturia Proxime Elapſe princepio uſque ad
Anrum 1683. quotquot ad h & Aſp.reduct poſſe videantur.


1500. Great Peſtilence, Stow. The 1510. In France, D:merbrock. p. 159.
King(Hezry VII.) went for France. | Dec. 7. 8. The Aſpett fell in the
May 8. The Sickneſs then threat- | Cloſe of the year preceding, bur
ning. & by Retrograde Courſe retur-

Note, that the increaſe occaſion'd | ned into the ſame” Sign with Þh,
the Kings departure, May 8. while } or at leaſt within gr. 20. and there
h and & were at that preſent with | held till Auguſt, which is remark-

- ingr. 30.the d happening Febr.10. | able.


\S 17. 1518, & 1519. Winter Sickneſs
1506. Sudor Axglicus, noted ſecunda | throughout the Land, Stow.
wice, Stow. Now. 8. w S, Nothing more ma-


Febr.V.\ 27,Thed 2s in theMargin, | nifeſt, ? Þ & in Tropical Signs,
but from thatFe4r.to July,wherea- | all Now. Dec.and January,5c. tol-
bours the Sickneſs likely was rife, | lowing. Let any manconſult che
h & continued within gr, 30.417. | Ephemerides , and mark the Mo-
as before. F5 tion


/


of Fruits,


- __———


8 :
-
+
-
.


*


FI


Sickneſs Epidemic, coincident with the Aſpef®. Book 11d:


tion of & , the Saternine Motion
of #. A Cauſe that comes as


rarein ſucha critical place, asa


Winter- _
1521, Great Death in England,
Fan, 10. A.%, The Oppoſition fall
10. AL, e Oppoſition falls
in January , but &, as is uſually
by Rer e courſe, recovers
the AſpeR in Spring time, and


hath ſcarce foregot it in July
but before that time 2 plays the
art of Þ in the@ h ; look upon
er motion, and ſpeak.

1522. AtRome andGenoa,Peftts atrox,
Gem. 2.249.

PU & begins in July, MwWS;z ®
& h comesnotin rill Sep. = S.

1525. Was Peſtilential by Falloprus's
reckoning , who hath noted the
Duration <8 my for Six
years together, wrz. from 1524.
ro 15 3O. 4pud Dimerbr.p. 136,

The 4 Þ Y. ſcarce expired 1n Juze,
when lo! long before the @ h d
was on Foot, which holds all 7«-
ly; at what time to lack no help
£Y & wasalfo in being, Here's
the Nexus before ſpoken of.
2527. At , amongſt the
Soldiers, in 3 Months ſpace Thou-
ſands dyed, Untz. 1169.

From June and Fuly, £ hd in S&


m,
1534. I Gallia Narbonenſs Valeriola
meet
The ppens in May, and that in
S too, which introduceth a fick-
ly Summer 3 but thereare more
Irons in the Fire.


1538. Peftis crudelis , ab excrementis | 7,


tellarum , notante Paracelſo, apud
D:merbr. p. 13.

Fane 13, & 12, The & falls inhigh
Summer, and that in the Equino-
tial Sign TM. Note the Sign, it
bodes no good you know.

1540. Peſtilent Flux, Ague, ſub Her-
ry VIII. Stow.


Tuner, d in, No good expe-
&ed from an Aſpect in =. ' "Tis | 7;


an Equinoctial Sign with m7. "Tis

* hard to ſhew a year free at ſuch a

_ exritical accident 3 when I ſee I
ſhall ay (asat all times) 4xcy113s


|


|


|


F


|


5 #&, Bleſſed is he who fitteth in
the Circle of the Heavens.

Morbus quo vipere & laterts in

wm. corporth. gignerentur Gemm,

159. h& in WS, Norexpired

till Zuly, which may onde.

the time.

1551. At Shrewsbury Sweating Sick-
nels, DHoul I5. and at Londen, July
I2. Sub Edvard VI. How.

Tune 9. 3. The & falls in Mid-
ſummer, and before it expires ;
v2, at the end of Jaly ; it is re-
newed by freſh Comers from the
ſame Signs till September.

1557. Gatarrbus Peſtil.per totam Enro-
pam Valleſ. in Hippocy. prog. p. 99:
Thuanus, p. 346. At Delf Thou-
ſands dyed before Month of May,
Forfter.

Jan. 13. V = 21. The & holds

ſtrongly from January to March,

April, May. This fingle Inſtance is

demonſtrative : for before May

I had bin {low motioned ; yea

the @ returns again, in &m

July.Mark ! and forget not Totaxrs


=

1562, Laes pecoris infanda, Gem.

Mgy 7. S 2. The d falls in May, in

the Tropick of S 5 but expect
d hY.

1566. Morbus Ungaricus hoc anne
mundum intract, Dimerbr. p. 22.
June 7 Tn 27. The &d preciſely at

Midſummer.

1568, IzGallia, Menfe Julto, Plater;
apud Dimerbr. p. 80. & 102, Lo-
wan etiam Gem. ( 62.) ad wagis
118 PrOXIMOS Pages.

uly 12, Mt 23, The ages hap-
pens in the very Month wherethe
Aſpect is parti] ; beſides the Infa-
my that lyes upon the Signs, it
and =, See A*® 38. 49.

1570. Peſftis truculenta totam: Italiame
envaſat Tridentum, actnde Veronams,
hinc Venetias ubi centum M. hom:-
nes tnterrempt: : tandem Mediola-
num acceſſit, Kirch,

uly 12. > 13, The 'd is in the
Margin. "Tis true, with a Ven-
Snee; what was ſaid of 2 and

Jr,


I5


CA
.


1574


Chap. L


The Aſpets arrargned for $ ickneſs Epudem.


I 574. Lovain, Gem. LL. p. 48. |
Au2.5.7 1. The d 25 inthe Mar- |


160g. Some Peſtil. Rill, Bell ut ſup.
The .# haps in- ay, ſcarce a Month
beforethe height.


gin, Ic haps-at the worſt time of | 1610. Very . moderate Peſtilence,


the year, Auguſt and September are


the Months whea Heaven reck- | 7
| May, =. It will ſufficeronore;char.


ons with us, ſed vide P bY.


1577. Bruno Gallicus (iſte nova Mb- |


ravie Laes) quem five Annus pepe-
rit, Demerbr. p. 22.


May, in the Tropical Sign, S.
1538s. Maxch 15. 25. Scorbute in the
1


Marchs m, The Finmand ©,
the very Month. |

1590. In Mauritania, Parch.

4 in 27, I would know the Month.

. If it were in April, May, June, or
{4, we have the d ina Tropical


ign.

I591. 4 Rome , Peftis &, Fames ,'

rm,

March 27. Tt 7 23, The @ as inthe
Margin, and September 17. again,
it is found {till on the 'Tropica
Signs [StelTÞ is to benoted.

1598. Great Plague ar Morocco. -

Auz. 16.in =, The d in >, and
happens in Auguſt. uid Pluya ?

1599. April 16. 26, Scorbute on Ship-
board, 4 dyed per ater.

April, \ =, This @ in V and =

this Month.

1606. Ar London, BelPs account. So
at Frankenftal in Sileſia. Dimerbr.


9

She >. The d at the Height in
September, in a Tropiral S1gn.

1607. Some Sickneſs in Lozaex. Sa
in Pwrch. 'tis noted at Sea, that
Sickneſs made them return, Jun:z
princip.

Fune 20, V* 5, The & at high Sum-
mer. The Margin thews the
Signs,and the veryMonth of Jae.

_ Some Peſtilence ſtill ar Loz-|

. don.

The d in April, in which Month
Mult: « Aerotantes, faith Arthufs-
4s. Bur the Heights of this Sick-
neſs were obſerved in Sept. and
O#. when Þh and d were with-
in gr. 10.


there dyed under 1cco, inthe
whole year.


there was d in
ax _


My, in the Sign


© | 1618 At No War, Grant p.58.Sick:”
May 28.  S, The © in the end of ; "Ss p.76.5 :


ly in &aglaxd, I.

June, in N. The' d h & in Jwr,
and in a Tropical -Hign,

1619. At Grand Cazro, Gr. pc 164.

Ozos. 13. MX 2, The & in Tropec
Signs, QF. 13. ſedwide Þ NY &,
CN478,

1620, m—_ FIT, Grant. |

It 27.; The i in Func a in 2
Tropical Sign. ___

1621. Otobris princip. Peſtilence:
Purch, III. 1658.

Of0b.26, SW 20, The &# inTropsc


Signs.
1622, At Amſterdam, Grant.


1] Zuly 11. S 25. The d ha in


. July, and (till in a Tropze Sign. Ju-
ly ts kzown to be as catching as


Auguſt,

1624. At Amfterdams London (ickly
at the ſame time, Graz.

Aug. 6 A. This is plain by the
AſpeR on Awe. 3. & 22. Yet take
inthe great d © Y,

1625. Art London.

May, = &. This Dire year of 1625.
wasnot found without our Afpect
in N and =; bur, oh ! Remem-
ber the other Superiour Afpets
Coppin, {uccedent. See in


VL YT,

1626, Ar Amſterdam, Grajit, At
Lentz. in Germany, Kepl.

Aug. 25. M 17. Not without a &d in
ne, pray remember 7? once more;

1627. At Amſterdam, Grant.

mx. The hd in May and


Jane, not expired. After which
an @ of another Superiour with


&,

1628. At Amſterdam, Grant,

-Our © ſtrengthens it ſelf in Anguf
and September, and that about wr


>
b,


or which of them you like


1636.


Whether every, year "op Sickly 2


_—c.ÞwdAl


Book [I


. A Plague of 10000. and odd 5

"Lond. The Higheſt Week, h

and Sun in + and gr. 13.
aft, Pray note it.

= Ar Landes dyed 1317. Bell's
2ccount. Our d was in "1.

1637. Ar Conſtantinople, Plague,

- while London was Sickly, Grant.

INIT

-1n July, ropic ;W

held part of June 3 4 J , and

. part of- Auguft, ot Dn 1

to the Tropique, _

1640. At London,the HigheſtWeek
ſept. 20. Total .331. Plague 105.
Hh and d were int = , WI 4
degrees ; the Truth of it is, who
_ tee - On noflow-
er than h a

1641. A Peſtilence of 30000. Þ

-are in X'121n Augsf. |

1646. At London. .

June 14-;d'S.. The Sd h. and &
goes as faras July, where it'is met

y another Superiour AſpeR.
1645: The Total is under 2000. the
{pe& in S& 1 at the end of Sept.
\the hi Week Ag.-28., Ler
any Man conſult the Ephemeris.

2648, Valencia in'Spain , at Gonftan-
t:nople, in July. - In Africk allo.
Kirch, Se. 1. Gap. g.

June 28, d It 11, The &d is tim'd
for a Summer Month, and in a
Tropical Sign. It laſts all July, and
-not quite ceaſed in Aug.


|


_—_
—C


es oy key

ickly in _.

The 'd :in'4daguf ,, in privcipis $1; -
Yea,orherAlpetshave'their th:
% Table. Aug. d in a.

26.08 en, Grant.

_ 'Sickly in ,

Sept. 3. dM 2. h & draw toward
d in July, celebrated in the Sign
6. 3 10 Jept. prencep. vide, Ph Y

nk; le P!

I656, At iVaples, a great at
at , at Genoa, Kyrcher Sicks
in , Grant, .”


Sept. 24. it 28. hs ap
but in


where?
Sept. The ——_ d within


OF.


the
fin. ca

1661; Sickly, Lonao .

June 26, *m 5, . Our Planets are op-
posdaboutMidfummer,which we
ſee by ſundry Examples premiſed,
bodes ill. Yea, the very AſpeR
_— Aug the _ |

1665. That, I hope,never to al-
lel'd Peeileoke , of ns th.
nerals. ..

h & in Trocal Signs in Faly ; there
is one String of the Scourge. Bur
our killing © of % G3 holds on.


| $.56. Have Lnot aid too much ? is it not too plain ? 'Tis not too much


for a ſober-Melancholly Conſideration. It were Wiſdom
thoſe Fears which Azzaually fall

by ſeeking a more
Gountrey above this Elementary World. I did |
make this uſe of it, and then I have nor ſaid roo much. The new
no queſtion, as ſome have happily miſtak


ſecure our ſelves agai
every Summer or


in us, if we could


y £211 upon us, almoſt
healthful-Air, and a 4etter
not but ſome may


Atlants
en- coticerning the Situation of


Paradiſe, is above the Moon, be above h and &, and all malefique In-


Auences, real, or ſeeming : But this by the way.——1 am aware of
juſt cxcoprion gens ſuch Diſcourſes as theſe, which ſeem to make every
year, almoſt, Peſtilential ; for ſo the curious Reader will quickly find,


that what with one AſpeR, and what with another , we mak


years to pals free; ſince not a y
theſe Aſpects


e few
goes over our Heads, was ſhall


meet witha d h &, oratleaſtan & : and if Y yunic bogs that
being quenched by the


ove inoffenſive, their Malignity


the Seaſon of the time, or by their Stare of Deſertion, then another Ma-
lignant Combination of U with & ſuppoſe, exerciſes the ſame Maligni-


ty as before, To this, the Phylitians will anſwer for us, that there is dif-


(of


Chap I; F ickly years frequency tmputed w the H


ference between Peſtilences, as in Motions of Warter,
or furious-3 ory alechough at the inauſ” pens woe

we fear, yet, God be thanked, we do not often feel its Fury. There is 2
difference I ſay, ad the yearly Bill ſhall fcarce ariſe to 10000. from
that higher year which raiſes it to 5 times, ;yea, ten times as much - When
a year brings 5000.or 6000. in the whole, . and the other as many in
the Week. And the Thaſcgns tell us a that there is difference
tween abſolute P Diſeaſes that may have ſome pic of Maligni-
ty, and therefore calld Pef:lential, becauſe of their Cognation, and too
near Vicinity. Nay, further, we take it in a more large Signification 5
nap; you pleaſe, Forgoe the 'Nameand conſider the years that are Sickly,
and found to be ſuch, when as yet the Citizen, notwi ing it not
his Intereſt to remove from 'his employ whereby. he ſubſiſts wy Here I fay,
Not only the Groks Altrol r, the Phyſitian c
Virtuoſo himſelf takes notice frequently of ad _ them upon


ſuſpitton of Malrgnety.

9 57. Now, if ev ſickly year (which yet I do not believe ) had ſome
manifeſt Gr:tertum of Malignity in it; you need not be afraid to look into
2 Liſt evenof ſuch years, at leaſt, if they were only of Forein concern -
We can eaſily believe that Conſtantinople, or Grand Cairo is never free,
eigen troubled at the report. But if we are concerned , as I

think we ought , for thoſe that are abroad alſo; and if we keep Corre-
ſpondence in moſt parts of the World, whether we like i it, or 0, 'We-
[1 ind, that ſomewhere or other, ſome Sickneſs, not unworthy the
Note of the Curious, is brisk upon our Mortal Bodies. That theſe Con-
figurations are diſpoſing, or if you will, 129:/poſing Cauſes of our Humours
and Spirits, will be plain, if KY. not already; and the very frequency of
their return either by d Lf e , does confirm fis, W imputes
thoſe Maladies to thoſe Configurations, For 'what eagtwe ſay, when we
find thoſe Configurations. in ing, when.the Diſtewper reigns? Whar
will you ſay whea you find the Diſtemper to ſtart out within a t,
or Week of the preciſe Alpe&? Whar will you (ay, if when the
ſeems to expire, ic thall not aþſolucely ceaſe ? | Suppolng the to
continue, tilþic hath introduced - another in its Room to maintain he lg
moſs, by. the Eixf. What wal x ou ſay when che
Nl Gomes a che Salo conſider) in the
Ed nn
eliques "00 mper , but a cont 100s of -a-/
durle Ca which may be,will not expire, no0,not inthe year otowing.”
and {o unite two. —_ Summers together by a never dying,
a cheri Relique z So that 3a oO» 4 of the ſucevding year
ſball write as: Peſtilencial, as the cloling Months of the


were but moderate years, tistrue z but yet within tis Cn. AY
years are rec Peſtilential... Andi


2900. 01610, 25 CONT a Taj
Former Ceacury , 16, . You nored as muc
ote ,no Bro! bers Fay yee you ſee what I offer is too true. It
Ve but the weighty Truthy chat Peſtilential-or >he:


anity nor N
ars, are as Ne 00 as the Superſticious P

are the Cauſes, is ascertain in Nature, .as that Giey 4
ig thoſe very times: Nay 'the change is tively ; prov

. Since P, poiion of Air upon:
and Exorbitances'of Weather ei to Heat t, ſomerimes to Cold;
and Wet, w pew ot. Weath be aſcribed to nothing but the Heayens over us.

9 58, What "therefore Fahy I quote Authors of our fide, when thePhy(i-


clans them(elys5 appear for it? YYho Jer 2re not commonly'Well-willers
| 3 12,


0 are got raging


1t10n


Id (thoug


Few Tears abſelately Free. The Scorbute, Book ne


to the dacanabgn, Erroniouſly thinking that there is no other Science
confucing way Practice,but what they are Maſters of. Time hey Tothe;
if God ſhall give leave, thar we ſhall pointour, not only Aſpe&s, but Af
Conſtellations in the Firmament that are Malefique z as Prolemuy
hathwnoſt truly deliver'd down to us.
$ 59. Asfor Eclipſes, if they happen near a Peſtilential Seaſon before,
or after, I think ſome uſe may be made of that Concurrence ; but for
any determinate Cauſe; or ſo much as Sign of Peſtilence, with Cardar's
leave, I underſtand not. But Aﬀpets_ Aſpe#s of Superiour Planets,
they are our Scourges. Have we not aid there is ſome Sickneſs or Mor:
tality, yea, and that for the moſt part within Europe, ſomewhere or other,
every year ?
s 60. How it comes to pals in one place,rather then another > Were we
= to —_— is not hereto be treated. Why the Sweating Sickneſs here
1d begin , A* 1551. at Shrewſbury _ the A and not
ſeize ws _ Loxon till Faly 12. is a Queſtion ſeems to be above a
Mortal Reſo - Sroke In like manner, that Notable n_ Epidemical
in the year 1580. noted in no worſe an Author than Gal»is/rs , which in
we invaded Sicily, In Jam Rome ; In dugef, Cm __ Vemce x
n September, Germany and. Hungary s In Fob omeranta; In Novem-
ber as December Denmark and Swedeland ; and is a Noble ,ft for a
Council of Philoſophers ; and what if I ſhould fay, with the ſatery, nay
with the advantage of Religion, and the awe of a great Creator, may be
adventur'd upon in our T
s 61. Bur let us obſerve what is more obvious: Firſt; that no Sign Ce-
a þ = = not & __ _ > reſt come wn ir PRng eh
roPi Equinoctial Signs, w we cannot it, (no more then
we can help our Mortality ) have their Danger. ' But let not the Woma-
niſh Spirit of any be cheated by an Equivocation : For a Sickly year doth
net fi the XII Montlis trouble 3 there's reſpite moſt commonly IX.
Months in the XII. nor doth it fignifie an Univerſal Diſtemper. Nor 3.
do we pretend u_ Plagues every year , — dar wah for Italy
ic felfis free from ſuch P , many times, 20 years together. Nor 4/y.
mine wh ad os my t at times: If th hey fall about &tli-
or Autumnal:-Months : Nor then neicher G9) Lf og by the
AA of Powers Noxious pical Sign this Vircues
and rag» _—_ —— ; are warm and Comforts:


mn be | the World know, that no Sign is

All, the Topiqus and Signs are moſt notable, Here i in Sick-

; as before in 'Tempeſts, Comets , Earthquakes. Next, pray note

bow ſure we LE to bez ye, how manifeſt - our han om _

rain-years ; (ee-I pray, among many others, that of 1540. with all irs Bre-

8 Toe the Caterrh A* 1577. And before, That of the Winter

'£ 15+8; 3ly. That Tha: thoſe Obſerv Obſervations muſt go to Sea, as well

ve 00 xs on the Shore. Forthe Scriute, or whatſoever Malady reign'd

iSC er theſe Rules. Even the Lone it

ffs no an &- Sy mide ifiere be Have: Diftemperdtare above it 1

ant aS tie > +a may diſpoſe to a Srorbute.in this or

that Individual Line may be paſſed (afely, and Freefrom a _
buts,' Epidemical, as " may call 2 except, as before excepred.


may- term it a Healthy Spring , although here one, and there _ be
(cize


Chap. IT. New Diſeaſes not Preter N, Anſw. to Dimerbr.


ence, when by Capt. Grants Obſervation, our own dear Country ſhall
many times have $ edeives of a Diſtemper , atwhat time other more re-
mote Cities ſhall ſuffer under Peftlexce : Viſited, 1 might have faid, for
God's hand ir is ; but yet this very Obſervation alſo ſhews, that God doth
not ſcourge by New, preter, or ſuper-natural means, whatſoever my well
meaning Phyſician imagines, Dimzerbrock de Peſte, Prob. 1. whom I leave

to be confured by the Learned of his own Faculty, from his Medical
Principies and Experience, which are,in my ſhort Sight, plainly againſt Him.

9 62. For if the ſame good Man had ſeen our Evidence , he would not
have condemned thoſe Learned Chriſtians , Mercurialis , Sennertus, and
others, for ſubſcribing to ſuch Pagan Principles, as are here advanced ;
aſſuring our (elves that there is nothing hereby caught contrary to Law or
Goſpel, rightly and ſoundly underſtood : though perhaps the Solucion of
theſe Knots, and the Explication of thoſe Authorities are not ſo proper for
an ordinary Underſtanding. In the mean while, That we may anſwer his
Aſtrological Argument about the N:zreguen Plague, 1635. and 1636; We
ſay, that he confeſſeth there wasa 4 h & in Sept. and that in i. Pra
reviſe our Table, and ſee whether ir ſounds well,that 4 h & in -which
(if it be any thing) is a Vatural Cauſe, can be the proper Harbinger to a
Preter-Natural Poiſon , for fo he calls the Peſtilential Poiſon. Next we
fay, That he confefleth there was a d4 h & in mr, OF. 20. 1636. Do
you hear? "Tt, andin an Autumnal Month, O#ober ? Tea, but then it be-
gan to decline: I anſwer, if it had not been for that d , ir would (by
Gods Grace, which muſt always come in, Cauſes, or no Cauſes) have
declined ſooner. Ir began to decline then, a Fortnight ago, I warrant, it
wasat the Height : Then was & in the Very Tropique of Vw, within 8
degrees of Hh, inthe ſame Tropical Sign.

9 63. And whereas with ſome Plauſtbility he prefleth us with new Di-
ſeaſes unknown to our Anceſtors, which have broke out de »ovo into this
Plaguy Age , { Hoc n:ftrum ulceroſurs ſeculum ] whoſe Cauſes were nor
created at the beginning. Such the Sweating Sickneſs. 4® 1436. the Yere-
rial Peſt. A® 1556. the Hungary Diſtemper. A® 1566. the New Plague at
Moravia, & 1577. New Diſeaſes at Lounenburg, 1581. ec, ——S0 pre-
ſumptuous do we ſeem,that we profels to lay out the Caules of theſe from

and the Stars; the Celeſtial Scourges. Witneſs our precedent Table,
where we mention one or two of thefe Plagues. But how eafie is it to
deny this Inference, they are new, therefore Preternatural > For certain-
ly if Curable by Natural Succours, they are Vatural. If the Remedy hap-
ily found our for theſe Diſtempers were not preter-natural, neither were
| the Diſeaſes o to be accounted. I ſhall not ſtick to allow that the Divine
Power may, and doth ſomerimes Puniſh averaculouſly , as in ſome Judge- -
ments,as Story faith of Perjur'd Men,ſuch as have exprefsly challenged the
Divine Power to do its worſh, if they atteſt a Falſehood. ', And I ſha!l ac-
knowledge char Gods Hand is more viſible in a Diſeaſe incurable, of
2 ſudden Death, then otherwiſe yer, I cannot allow them co be A!! pre-
ternatural. I acknowledge Gods Arm more Terriblein a ſweeping Pe-
ſilence, whien thouſands weekly are nyumbred to Confuſion : But who
can tint God's Power (o far, as to rel} us what he can do by Natural
Means 2? and what He cannot : Who is ſo comprehenſive a Philoſopher to
Define? -— Aſtronomers are fain to divide the Diameter of the World into
100000 parts. Alas ! We'ſcatce know the 100000th part of the Creation.
He knows littie of Nature, who knows not irs Effets may be prodigious. A
Diſeaſe may be new and ſtrange for Its Signs, _ oms, and other Ar-
$0


rendants, but yet it may come wichin the Compa Nature, an _
rom


ſeized with an Ague. 4/y. Obſerve how Univerſal is rhe Celettial Tn ©


383


=


390


Myſtery of Ones Marime, unfolded. Book 111


from her Magazin; and as ſuck may be reducible to a certain Head of
Tropic. Every year almoſt ſhews us a different Diſtemper, and the re.
rts of that difference are Nice 3 ſome from w:thiz, and ſome, take my
ord, from without ; Between One and the other, there is no new Creg-
ion, for God hath made the States of his Creatures as well as their Beings :
and the Reſults and Conſequences of theſe in their Several States are part
of his Creation-Decree ; that Things corruptible at {uch times,or in ſuch
Caſes ſhall corrupt and putrifie. For , the conſequence, ſay I, andreſult
of theſe Corruptions, are part of the Creation , the Horrid Taſt and
Stench, and other Noiſomneſs, as well as the Subſtance before Corruption.
Now, how many Spices of Diſtempers , Diſſonances, Contrarieties, Poi-
ſonous Qualities, may ariſe from ſeveral Cs of the Bloud, God
* only knows. It never appeared before, theretore 'ris a New Creation.
By that reaſon Gunpowder and the Loadſtone would be newly created.
New Diſeaſes are like new Phaznomena , New Stars, luppoſe, never ap-
pear before, and yet all Natural z New Diſeaſes , like ExtraQts of
Chymiſts, are pre-exiſtent in their Cauſes.
9 64. Now though h and & can produce Inſtances of Currents,(which
is the next particular) from ſome certain Diarys, as we ſhall ſee preſently ;
et I think I may ſafely now affirm, Once for all, every Planet hath its
Hae by their Carte; the lalbrions, ©L 2 ), the Superi hug.
Yer here it is to be neted, that there ſeems, at leaſt, ſome difference in
the meeting of the Planets in order to that Effe& ; that the Combinari.
ons of the Superiours among themſelves, whether: becauſe their meeting
is more ſeldom, or for any other Reaſon , are not fo ra. bulie in the
faid EffeR, as the Inferiours, whether combined among themſelves, or the
Superiours. h.© and ? areoftner ſeen in a Current, then h and&, or
& and Þ. Thereaſon is rendred fromthe rarer return of the Aſpect ; -
which reaſon holds in & meeting with $2 or ? , for though they meet bur
every ſecond year, no more than h and & , or & and. do : yer being


the
Y, who ndpen make OY interchanges. Juſtly therefore we have,
ought to have Jaid theſe Effects at the ve, or


New and Full, ashath bin rruly imagined. But the Scanty Philoſophy of


this Age ſpoils All. For 'tis not the 4 of » with ©, or to


wh

produced, ſo called. Add the d. or of them all with the 2, and it
may be only Thoſe, not Laaarates or Trines, &c. and when thou haſt ex-
pigred This, commend it to. the Mariner 3 (the Man who ventures his
ite for little Philoſophy , ad leſs Wages.) - And yet I have not done:
What morecan I ay? You remember, I trow ,, what a pother we have
kept of the Tropic and EquinoGtial Points, ot . Portions: . Ther: , There,
keep you to that, and thou haſt the Myſtery of Currents. Suffer usto
repeat theſe Words, Tropic, &«. if their nicety. be ſuch as cannot be ex-
preſſed at one diſcourſe : Take in the Equivalents too, and if I were to
makea Treatiſe of the Sea-Curreats, I coyld got ay much —_ The
quiva-


Chap. I. Carats reſolved. If: Volhus,


a I,


—


Equivalents to the Tropical Poſition are, & gr. 24. ad finem, and It prin-
cipro. Next the end of S, and the beginning of «1, the end of V. I
ſhould have ſaid firſt, a. gr. 26. ad finem, while the Equivalents of the Equi-
no<tial Poſition, are the entrances of # and S&, with their Oppoſites.
When we have proved this, we'll trouble the Reader no more with the
Subject, as new and difficult as it hath bin conceived, For the proof then
let 2 examine the lub{equent Inſtances, two or three for an Hun-
Qrea.

65. The Firſt I meet with is in Grzey Voyage in Haklut , atthe end
of the year 1554. where in Febr. in the next year, 1555, day 15. we
hear of Currents from Gaftel del Mina, to Gape de los Palmas : $9 a6 be-
Livecn Cape de Monte, and Gape de VerdgreatCurrents which deceive many.
And it ſeems to be an account of two Months Sailing, v:z. part of Febr.
all March, and part of April, not above 4, 5, 6. degrees Northward from
the Line. Now the Heavens lye thus. Fevr. 15.


12. 7, K 9. G,28, h, M24 d,V 3.2, m5.N; 216. »;
Where an # h & you ſee isjuſt upon the Aquinox in X and , 2 again
within 3 degrees. Yea, VL and © by our Paper, lye in the Equivalents,
the earrance of m1 and X, to note no more. But the whole Month of
March, you will ſay 'tis an Equino&tial Month, the © is there, 2: is there,
2 is there, Slow and ſure, h is there, YU as before, and # oppoling 2
thereabouts. We muſt only make a fcruple how far the Aquinoctial ad-
vantages reach. And what . improbable Groundleſs Fancies ſhall we
promote, if we deſire it may be obſerved, that theſe Gold-Coalt Voyages,
while they give us ſuch Caveats for the ſlippery Currents near the Line,
had all the Planers, at ieaſt 5 of the 7. Perpendicular; or Vertical over
them, 2nd char for all the Month. |

A® 1566. Dec. 19. Capr. Towerſou's 24 Voyage. In height of Sierra Le-
044, we ran thwarc certain Currents, which fer to the Weſt-ward, as if it
had bcea the over-fall of a Land; making a great Noile, like to a Stream,
whea the Water is Shole 3 but we had no ground at a 150 Fathome; The
Heavens thus, |


B12,0, V18.h, Nal.2, 226 6, 21.%; WT0, 417, I.


Decembes isa Tropical Month, as March is an Equino&tia}, accordingly
we have © 2 Y. Tropical, 2 inthe Equivalent, about m 21. If 3 £s of
of the I conduce any thing, let others Enquire. Howbeit h & are bur
6 degrees diſtant from an Oppoſition. , | ;

» 66. But hath not the. Learned Author of the Treatiſe 4« motu Mar.
& Veni3rus', opened our Eyes in the Doctrine of Currentz, and ſolved
them ail, wichoutrecourle had to Alpetts or Influences, the Sun excepted.
Reſp. Todo that Author right, I muit acknowledge it is a Great Piece ,
ſhewing the Diligence, the Sagacity,, the Judgement of an excellent Pen;
AWork that will make him greattoall Poſterity,who ſhall haveany thing
to do with Philoſophy or Commmerce. He,who ſhall find the ſo much dett-
red Longirude, ſhall not oblige che World more than he hath done. And
what Returns his Countrymen have made him, I know not : I do envy
them the ute thac They make of his Work ; the manifold Advantages in
Navigation that thereby accrue to thoſe who will learn-what he hath plea-
{©d*to Dictate, not only to them,but to the World. Though I do believe
therefore that the Ocean under the Torrid Zone, in its Diurnal Motion,
moves from Eaft to IWeft round the Ven wich tome Inclination North-

= $ Ward;


—


392 - Diſſent from the Learned If. V offius. Book III:


ward, or Southward, according to the Suns Declination Though I do
believe a 34. Motion contrary to thoſe, w:z. from North to Eaft, to make
reſtitution at the ſame time for the Stream which hath forſaken his Shore
by his Wefern Progreſs, and thank Hm: for it : I do believe further , thar
this Back ſliding Motion is that which gives Life and Being to ( though he
ſcorn to take notice of it) what is vulgarly called che Current. Burt 1
cannot hear him, when he excludes the » , or, ( as in his Epiſtle) the
© Starry Influences; The Motion of the Sea would be ſuch as it is (Sicuati-
©5n of Land confider'd) whether there were ) , Starry Influences, or no ;
faith he. For how raſh is that Hypotheſis ro make the Sun alone (ufficient,
without the Starry Aſſiſtance. When the Sun is incircled with ſo many
Stars 3 when the Stars are ſo many Suns more, or at leaſt Reflexions of
that Solitary Agent. If Reflexions from below the Earth it (elf, contri-
bute to Tempeſts, &c. Why not Reflexions from above ? The Sun may
carry the Credit of it, as we have faid ina Conqueſt, the General is cry-
ed up, but if youenquire more minutely into the Aﬀair, Many a Brave
Officer doth his part. | And chis hath in part appeared; not only in Tem-
peſts; and ſomewhat elſe, but alſo in the Motions of Tides. Somewhat
hath bin ſpoken of a Moon, of a Mercury, &c.

'$ 67. Tis the Sun aſſiſted with the Stars which makes the Sea to move.
*Tis by their Influence that he ſpreads the moſt of its Motive Power on the
Equinox, and 40 degrees on either fide of ir. And if we ſpeak of Vegeta-
tion and Animal Life, 4o degrees yet further, even to the Frozen Zope,
Whar's a little Glimmering ? To fave Nature's Credit there muſt be ſome
more abſtruſe Virtue , then what is obvious to the Firſt Senſation : more
abſtruſe, and of more Moment. Shall I ſay that Nature hath made
Wine only to warm the Tongue ; yea, 'tis made to little purpoſe unleſs ic
chears the Heart alſo. The very P:ſs-bed. a Star though it be, in its kind,
is made to little Purpoſe, if it only reſembles our Heavenly Body. Belide
This therefore, 'tis known to have a greater Virtue, as the Exz«ive and
Saccory, to be refrigerant. Bur the Number, the Vaſtneſs , the Myſtical
Order of the Stars I am amazed at, a World of Wonder arifing thence.
Why on the Equinoctial > Why on each {ide of it ? Why on the
Tropick 2 Why on the Ardick and Arctarctique Circles > Why near
the Poles ? *Tis acknowledged that the Sun can do much [poſited on
the Equinox, Gap. 28. Doth the Sun arrive thither alone > The Au-
thor knows that $ and & cannot be far from him. Beſides that, are there
no Stars there ? He acknowledges it to hold rather in the Autuznal Equis-
nox 3 He may pleaſe to obſerve that there are more of the Fixed: in the
Autumnal Equinox, then in the Vernal. There is the Afﬀteriſm in <1 of
one fide, and Mt on the other : When in the other Hemiſphere + and V
are more naked Signs : The Motion of the Winds, and Motion of the
Sea are Conſequent one to the other. Let it be ſoz fo the Motion of the
Heavens be antecedent in Nature, and Co-incident in time. Which on
the Sea's part he ſeems to grant, Gap. 21. Notwithſtanding elſewhere He
aſcribes the Turbulencies of the Air to the turning of the Ocean, which
Nature then labours with. In like manner the Navigators Aſcribe thoſe
Turbulencies tothe ſhifting of the Mozſoons, thoſe Winds, which, with
the Waters turn an oblique Courſe toward the Sun : neither of which do I
underſtand. Collifion of Seas or Winds inſtigated by different or
Contrary Cauſes, I grant may make ſome Buſtle; as in the Torzaao is evi-
dent, where the Winds blow from all parts of the Compaſs. Bur here is
no Colliſion, here no contrariety 3 the Sun is not contrary to its ſelf, A
Converlion there is, and a Change of the Stream. - Bur a Gradual Change
may be performed in Tranquility for all that I know, . e.if the _ the

. . ropic


Chap. I. Currents diftiuguiſhed,  Froſts, Heat.


> —


Tropic Cauſe the greateſt inclination of the Stream, the nearer he comhes
to the Equinox, the more ſhould he incliners an Indiffi } tobede
termined to one part according to the Solar receſs from it.= 2956
- 9 68, To the Stars therefore in the Plural, Thoſe Motions of Seas atid-
Winds will be imputed 5 which he will fiad himſelf obliged ro believe;
if we ſhall produce Reaſons from the Aſteriſnt of Heaven, and ſhew'the
very Cauſes, the true primary Caules of all thoſe brave Enquiries , wWhith
he by his Principle refolves. Why Hurricanes are perceived; yearly-al-
moſt, near the Coaſts of America > Why again in that Sea- which flows
berween the Vorthern part of Ghina and Japan, &c. I could add why the
time of the year is Stormy in any part of the Ocean > Why it raitis {6
conſtantly and exceſſively, as to find the great A:lus and its overflowing.
Why Magelanns was becalmed 70 days together ? The Reafons and Cauſes;
of which being ſeen, will be the very Light ; ſpeak the Truth of our
Aſlertion, and the Ineftable Glory of the Creator.

9 69, Currents then may be diſtinguiſhed into Subſtance and Circum-
Nance, as they are Streams diſtin and fevered from the General Warers;-
or as they run with tfach a degree of Swiftneſs as is more than Ordinary ;
with Noiſe,or without Noife,deceiving the Mariner ſometimes 20 Leagues
in 24 Hours , or keeping him back with a Stream inſuperable; when if
they cannot ſtem the Tide, though under a ſtift Gale, the former is to be
impurced to the Heavens in its ordinary Conſtitution 3 or ,, to ſpeak with
the Learned Yo/ſius, to the Sun: The later muſt be acribedro the Aipedts;
ſome not ordinary Conſtitution Celeſtial. For if the Heavens are the
Cauſe of the Original Motion of the Sea, and its acceleration;*which at
ſeveral rimes is acknowledged to differ, Then it muſt be the Cane alſo of
that Motion which reſults from the Original ; the Sire or Mother of the
Currents. The like in the Winds : For though I fee ſome difficulty there;
and though I acknowledge the Air to be of an eaſier Agiration then is ima-
gined, yer I cannot think that the Mozfcor (though in part it is) is nothing
in the World but 2 Conſent of Motion with the Stream, excluding the
Heavens. So am I ſure the Stormy Winds procted from a new Coition
of the Cele(tial Bodies, and thereupon conitantly upon ics Approach the
Monſoon for the while changes.


_——  — _ - — am—_— — — --


— OO ——
—_ ll ..oo


s 70. The reſt of the Inſtances abroad let us difpatch, and we have done”
The year 1520. cells a Tale of a Froſt which hurt the Vineyards even iff
September ; Eichſtad imputes it to an' © kh & in Wand S, Platique; and-
the reſt of the Aſpects mingling with Þ , which we will not. diſpute.

# 1599. Cold and Dry April and May, @ in V and. April 25;
impure it to © and & ſooppoled, and wichal deſerted.

4® 1607. 7uze 1 2. A Midiummer Froſt on the preciſe day of the Sum-
mer Solflice. Fromzrd reckons it rare, and the Truth is, © & and 2
are all three in the towring height of 5, Yea, Þ from the Oppokite
Sign, irradiates berween & and & fo poſited *Tis the more obſervable
not for any Miracle, but to ſhew Þ's chilnels, 2712. his diſtance. If the

>, which is nearer , had been in Þ's place, it would ſcarce have-been:


CO ——


. For Heat, H and & arenoted to cauſe a great Heat at Liſoz , even
in Dec. A® 1528. Purch. -

A®* 1540. Hot Summer; upon the account of our P'anetsin =, when as
S 4M were poſſeſſed, which Peucer weakly refers to an Eclipſe, April 5.


Which in Truch is neither Caule or Sign,


M*


2 94. Heat, Fiery Meteors ; Halo's, &c. Book ILL


2 4


tom.


A 1558. Great Heat, © vertical, May 11. © was Vertical, bu*
© Was Greanhand in his Verticity by the Neighbourhoods of other Pla-
nets, & the reſt, platiquely oppoſing h , who allo is ſtrengthned
by 2 Friend in-the ſame Sign. WE” - |

A* 1589. 4 Eby. 3.44 March 6. Extream hot. —-Our Aſpect helps, an
4d Platiquein & and m1, bur there is, beſides, other AſpeRs'in extraordi-
ary Circumſtance of ſloweſt Motion.

A*® 1585. e very hot, f-in Y=, Tis'plain toSence; for all the
Signs that be taken up for hot Weather, are ſped.

A* 1607. Great Heat, © h & in Trop.——lI was honeſt, when ſtart-
led even now at the ſurprizing Difficulty of a Froſty Morning on the So!.
fice : * Planers, faid I, being ſo poſited. You ſee my ſcruple had ſome
ground, for this following Month had Warmth enough.

A* 1608.  Eftas Calidiſſima noted even when our d is in a Winter
Sign, wiz, 2, Well, that comes accidentally, if the Summer Sign «1,
and its Neighbours will ſhew all the Caras in their Hands , and out-face
or oppoſe the Winter-Gentlemen, Rare though it be, 'risno Miracle.

A® 1615, 4ug.2.4d 27. Warmer than atany time of the year.Impute it to

the Approach of the of & toÞ in >, then and there conlidered with, &-c.


a
Go —_—


D ———


s 71, Wehave ſome few Fireworks belongs to us, ſome only Sher
others miſchievous.

A® 1520.Fax ardexs, Sept. 4. Lyc. & in and S, Platic.

A® 1546. Chaſme, Febr. 10. Lyc. d h & in fine 2.

A* 1548. Febr. 10. again Fiery Meteors, d in V 13. |

A*® 1559. Sept. 1. London , Terrible Thunders, '& in 7, 7 gr. 19. if,
yung as milder Aſpects to be obſerved, but even ours alſo ſhoots from

, rights us. | |

A® 1595.Paſch.April 20Thunder,Lightning 3 yet very cold,and fo conti-
nued to theMonths end; fin and=; the Cold may be reduced to its place.

A 1598. Sept. 5. Harmful Thunder at London, flew ſome Men, Step,

Mm <Q:


ES Of Haelv's, Irides, Parclii, &c.


S 72. Halo's. are ſometimes colour'd like Irs, and the Parelia are
always ſtriped with Iv:ides ; which that they depend on our Prin-
Ciple appears , as elſewhere we have contended in the like caſe,
from _ gy the buſie time in Heaven , from the frequency of
Aſpects, not of or Concourſe. I ſhall inſtance inone, not menti-

oned in the following, of ſtrange Parelsa,ſeen at Norimberg, March 22. on a
Good-Friday (I mention that to ſecure the true day and year) where no leſs
than$ dsor &s are found ina Fortnights time. . A® 1554.

Firſt, 2514. Jan. 12. in Ducatum TY 3. P. M.

. 1520. Vienna, 0 SW 24 hs.

15323. May 2. Pareha, at Zurich; ht & within gr. 6.of Oppoſition, nt

X 5 L isin-d with H, only gr. 9. between them. *Tis ſtrange, if acci-

dental to the Effe&, that theſe ſhould be counter-link't within 9 degrees ;
but the like occurs, May 18. 1627. Kepl. & Iris, die 2g. Yea, Paviine
anp—_— | |
1532. At Venice, April 11. Parelia, Fromond. Lyc. d in it 26. *Tis as
ſtrange again, that our Planets ſhould meet in Partile Conjunctions, and
' know nothing of the Spectacle.
1554: March 6. Ingolſtad't, circ. 8. & g. morn. Lyc. d in * 20,
1550. March 30. Falmarup in =g. h.X 7.6.
| 1554s


Chap. I. Parelia, a Lift of them. |


-


CC ONLAHOSY |


I554. April g. Paraſelene at Sumerfield, *% 24. h, V 17.0,

I595 Eibr. 10. Parelia at V:naria, Lyc. 4d h & #4, and MM 3m fine,

Nay, now 'tis probable that our Aſpe&t can make ſuch
Heavenly Counterfeits , Hyporritical Suns ; here are three Witnelſes.

1556, Dec. 6. Parelia, h and & in V and =; gr. 11. dif, either the
Platique Aſpect hath Influence; or elſe neither Partile, nor Platique : and
if neither, then we poor Men ſpend bur rime finely, In the mean while
tis a pleaſant Cheat, and weare loath to be difabuied. PE

A* 156g. Die May 21. Paraſelene, Bunting, © 4. h. V 29. &.

A® 1573. Parelia cum Iridib. May 11. Gem. h m 23, I 3. |

MA 15 $7-July 28. in Suntgoy, 58. Hh. m 8.9 !So beforegdic 21. cjuſa.menſ

A* 1585. July 19. Rainbows, k & & in V and = gt. 14. diſt. .

A* 1552, Febr. 19. © with Halo and Irs, Lyc. we meat a dry Iis, fach
as are {een-with Parelia, d in = pr. 3. dif.

A* 1551. May 21. Paraſelene, counterfeit Moons and Irides, Þ 2nd & in
& and = pr. 11. diff. ;

A® 1569. March 12. hor. 13. Irts NoFurna, Gem. th © and * are plain-
ly eugaged in -the Begiobing of Y ahd >, yea , and our Platic, though
hereata tnartherly diſtance, for all its modeſty, is guilty of the appearance,
the hour 12. at Night ſhews the © hathrodo, though from the Oppoſite
Hemiſphere 3 and Þh hatch rodo with the Picture, for that the » in = is
not yet aſcended.

$ 73. Add to theſea few from our own Obſeryation. |

A® 1656. Sept. 2. Yarntoninear Oxford : Semicircle with Rainbow Co-
lours 9 m. d 1» five 17; as before; A® 1555. SO near was I to have ſeen
a Parelium, but it was not thy Lot. |

A* 1662. Nov. 10. Lond. Irs, d in print. 7, ; |

A® 1678. July 22, Two Rainbows, d is Tf gr. 5+ diſtant, beſides Halo's
Lunar, Sept. 20. 25. A® 1556. Sept. 29. 1658.and Nov. 2. 1656.

9 74. Admir alto theſe from Kepler.

A 1621. Aug. 16: Halo ), S17. h.W1.4.,

4* 1623. May 14. Pareli2 cups Halone Solis ate 15.


las. | |

A 1621. Jan. 7.5 1. h, 25, £,—®, Mayn5. Ss. h, 26. © d.
Faly 13. 8 13: h, No. gd,
A® 1623. May 3o. 916. d, 2. h,@.

#® 1625. Sept. 20, X 27.6, Mg. h, ©. Er ;

A® 1626. July 8. I\ 17.'d; M12, h. d Sept. 4. Iris ante ortums Solis;
mui1g. h, 24. d; d: ©1454

A® 1627. June 16. M22, h, V 1709, @.

A® 16:8. Aug. 14. 2 23, d, =g.;h,d.

4® 1629. Aug. 26, = 1. &, O10, h,&d:. | |

Parelia; May 14. 1623. cum halone Solts, die prox. = 9.0, ol 25. h &.

s 75, Ic vill be (aid,rhefe diſtances are roo unreaſonable , we may com-
prehend, whatnot? at fo great a Liberty. The anſwer may be, that 'ris
hot perpetual: There are ſome Neighbourly diſtances. 2. For all as I ſee
the greatnels of the Diſtance conduceth to the Effect, provided 3odegrees
be not exceeded. For to paint a Sun, or a Lucid Globe in the Water,
25 the Parelium may ſeem to be, requires many a Ray iſfuing from Arches
of 2 Circymference, ſome leſs, ſome greater , which Suſpicion of mine
will be found true, if we go no further then attending co, and comparing
thoſe very Inſtances, fax. 17. and May 15.1621. Sept; 20; 1625. But we
haſt. This is not a place for it. Only this by the way, it we: were
to treat of the Parelia purpolely, we tee " thould here alfo find the.

5


Tropiques and Equrnoxes: $ 76, Yol


ms;


P32 _——_


a.


Suns univerſal obſcuration. Maculz. Bopk LUI.


396


6. Si Pallidus noted in Kepler's Diary , whatſoever it ſignifies , .is
Ws. different from the Halo, &r. the Cauſes and Diſtances vf thoſe
Operants are near alike.

Eirſt, Nov. 20,4* 1621, S 20, h, 2 8.0,
April1. 1629. 3. d, S 28. h.
May 15. £1627. M21. h, *X 24. &.
' Tune 11, £® 1627, 1 23, h, Y 13.6.
* Aprilng. A*1625, & 19. d, ol 25. h. EIT)”

H and & in ſome SignsI find conduce to a Myſtineſs , as may be obſer-
ved by our Domeſtique Diary, if © Pall:zdus be no more, nor the-Celun
Sanguinewn, twice met under Tetritories of Þ and & ; the matter is not
m thongh not unworthy. of a Remark,O#0: 13. 1635. Gelum Sayguin.
and before that any 2 ang 24. 1623, ? 4. d 28. h. ;

C57. This it may be runs higher than we imagine 3 for of Old in the
former Century; we meet with in Apri! 1547. Quniverſal News of Sol
darkned for 3 or 4 Days, die 22. &c. That itwas a prodigious Spectacle
throughout all France and Germany, ſome ſay Britain, (though our Chro-
nicles are filent) noted by Gelviſ and Fromond from Lyceft.and Friſchive,
when Writers do believe that the © was cloſe Mourner for the Prince:
Eleor Frearick being taken: Whatloever the matter was , that which
we regard at preſent is, the place of - > 2 5. contributing to the Phens-
»nenop, and & in I fie, not much above 5. grad. diſt. from a. compleat
Oppolition. & I ſay, near B, and the > alſo oppoſiing Þ in the beginning
of 5, I chought it once had been a Flaw in Galv2xe's Chronology ; thar
he could not give an account of a Vernal Eclipſe of the Sun in the 7th
year of Nerxes, Anno Chriſti Nat. 478. for I reckoned there could beno
Solar Obſcuration otherwiſe, except miraculous; bur I ſee there may be
ſome rarer Phanomenon of this kind from Natural Cauſes, beſide a pro-
per Eclipſe; ſuch arg procured by Kepler, Epit. Aftron.

s 78. For the Maculz Solis, whether they be diſtinguiſhed from the for-
mer Obſcurations, or not, I have a few ſtragling Inftances.

I don't mention that of Mae a5F becauſe the diſtance is of gr. 20.

Nor that of May 19. becauſe the diſtance is of gr. 17.


, 9
Yet a fond Man would mark the Identity of thoſe diſtgnces, eſpecially
when there haps a third, and who knows how many more. |

$ 79. But I produce May 1. 1625:and ue 8.2 noted ſpace for the Month,
wheſtin our Aſpe&ts ſweetly reign in 1 and =,

I produce 2aly. the Month of ure, _, where ſome Learned Men
have ventur'd to teach that the Month was Cold, becauſe of the multitude
of the Macule which rebated the Solar Heat. Then which there cannot
bea pa Demonſtration of our Principle 3 for we have here d h & un-
der the Equinox, which will give a ſhrewd Eflay to tinge the Sun with
their Impreſſions 3 bur there is a Triple Conjuntion, Fluſh of Three in
X. They, the Tn which ſay we , can aid the Mwlts:g4i-
mem Macularum; yea, the Cold too. For what Communication of:
direct Rayes is there between the place of the 3 pn and the Place
of the ©, $ or 2 f That is the True Cauſeſof the Cold ; and He may
= tis Heart nr _ thinks i oy any _ Ay from the OS
ule, or any that concerns un in its ſolitary Capacity. (Theſe
Inſtances from Riccrolus I produce.) 3dly. Sept. 1643. S.N the moſtof thar.
Month is taken up by &@ h & alike tripled; th as before in the Con-
junCtion, ' ſhall only point at a Spot which came into Play, ate 14. S. WV,
the place of & in «> 1, of h in Y 5: you ſee, how near the Cm

b& <5 ; is


- — > > G—


ChapTI. Monſtrous Fiſh diſturbed. The Mermaid,


COS OTE ——_—  — — —


ww — ww *


19.they met again in ours only; in Z4#2 tterum co alutrez, and whether this
day appears notto be the day of the preciſe Aſpect. The 4th of Juze,


This Maculz afterward, ſaith Hewelus, was divided into many,” andon day”


” HS ES Varma F bh
Ss
—
-
-+


A® 1614. a New Macula appear'd, and held out 6 or 7 days within 3 days *


of the preciſe « in Y 48. whe the foul Weather fereen'd it from the di-
ligent Obſervator z when that 3 days after the Weather was fair ; the
fame Macula was (cen again, and wot without a1Pantner,  Hetnlius, Ap.


pendixi0 his Selenography. .


tt... = 7 Abs % L £
& EE —_—_ —_—
0 —_ —_— ? - —_— —— —— —_—k
d + »


m_—_—_—


$ $0, For a Farewel to Þ and' #,* Tt would ttot be convenietttwethould
take leave of our Forein Diary nill we have noted the extrerficy of
ſome Conſtitutions, arid the fingular accidents cherein mentioned. To
find Hurricanes, yea Tvffos, Storms which are tertned unparallel'd, ihicre-
. dible, beyond the reach of Natuge, The Truth is, Z1urricanes and Tuffors
eſpecially, come with ſuch Violence, chat ordinary. Nature ſtands amazed
at them. Then the great execution of Lightnings too often, which pro-
ceeds from no mild Cauſes, but great and angry Inſtrunients of a Divine
Power. The Singularities which I mean,are;befide the Parelea and Irrdes,(the
hft thing we treated of) The White Waters and ſhining Sea, which I
would fain attain ro- the Caule of, if it cngper to be Celeſtial. The
Diſturbance of the Creatures. Marine, 4, .2nd other Monſters, I do
impute, (Ido nor (ay 'tis perpetual )'30 our Aipet 3 the Reader muſt be
Judge of all that is offer d. Thus then. |
* 1574. July g. A Monſtrous FiſhI hear of at tlie Iſle of Thaz?t, ſhot

himſelf a-thore, Stow, 4d m18, &, 7 2. h.

A® 1607. Fane 11: VII Whales, £716, h, S 10. 6. |

A® 1608. April 20.-d W 25, 4, 20, h,

_ May 15. 7 Whales and a Mermaid, d 2 ©. h, 15.0:

A* 1615. +" 25. Great Fith ſtruck his Horn into the Ship, &c. eV

24, m 8.0. X
Th 1626. Aug. 13. Grampaſs at Wookwich, d &\. 10. &, 16. h:

A® 1639. April 2 Whales, @® *1, 8, 25. h.

s 81. I reckon'that Fiſh are diſturbed when they (wim viſibly above the
Water, they find themſelves ill at eaſe in the Element, and ſeek eaſe elſc-
_ All Animals labour under the fecret Influence of a not ſecres

{e. |

9 82, The Merma:d, I take it as I fand it; I will not diſpute, whether ic
were a Reality or a Spectre z I can prove Spedtres are ſeen at Sea ſome-
times 3 and I can believe alſo that there are ſuch Mockages of Humane
Nature by Sea, as an Ape is on the Mountain. There were Whales ſeen
with it,and that's ſufhcient. And Thus much for the great Superiors;Satur:


and Mars.


= Sa GR.


| uw


CHAP. Il.
Aſpe# of JOVE and MARS.


& i. Ar AſpeFF to be heeded with a ſober Obſervation as the Precedent.
2. Great, ox divers accounts. 3. & 4. What Tifluence it hath on
Cold. 5. The Hyemeal part of its Diary. ' 6. It has a great Hand in
Monſtrous Froſts, particularly in that,;"yever tobe out-done, of 1684.
The Arabs conſent in the Caſe. 7. Some Frof even in Eſiival Mor-
ings. 8. Cold Weather not alway; Wholfom. 9g. The © oftimes
Turbulent even - the _ 10. Whether ſo in Summer ? 11.What
Influence #pors Drythi 12. Maginuss Note, concerning Heat, i
MS Los in eadem Quarta with ©, juſtified. 13. Fore: |
difference of the Aſpe@&, when wy. prevails, and when 8 prevails, not

fo clear. 14. Whether this AſpeF# condiires to Firet, 4nd Corfigu-
rations ? 15. To Sickly Seaſons it does conduce. 16. God having
wade all things Good, hinders not the Malevolency of the Creature
agdinſt Sinners. 17. Sickneſſes of the Seaſon, depend upon the Sea-
ſon it ſelf. 18. Inſtance in Catarrhs, Note on the Univerſal
Tuſhs 3» Ofob. 1675. 19. A determinate prognofis of a Di-
' airned dt. 20. The {Uſtival part of the Diary. 21. Fog
belongs to this Aſpet, Not always anunung, XY a declining Sun ;
ſome Curioſities _—_ 22. Monſtrous Hail. 23. This Aſpett
is a Cooler. 24. Some Inſtance from abroad. 25. More abundant
Inſtances from Kepler's and Kyriander's Diary, to which the Rea-
der is referrd. 26. This Aſpe# brings Cold in March, April;
and ſometimes, May. 27. Tet our Aſpet# as to Cold is a falſe
and uncertain Configuration. 78. Y; arid & no welcome Aſpedts.
How we are to be afraid 4 the Signs of Heaven. 29. The Chara-
Fer of the Aſpe®. 30. Zeal for a well-founded Aſtrology. 31. 4n-
cient Times muſt be reviewed 32. Forein Table of Tempeſt, ec.
323. Aſpe#+ of the Superiors more Signal than the pure Inferiors.
4. No amazing Extremity without the Superiors. 25. Twoor
Thres days Weather is nothing under a Superiour AſpeF. 236. They
= bring Two, Three Months diſturbance. 37. Some Dire Inun-
ations may happeir under this Aſpe®. 28. An honeſt Monitum for
the Low-Countries , about Iymmdations. 39. Another for Rome.
o. A Liſt of Flouds found under this Aſpe®F. 41. & 42. Dire
mundations admoniſh ( thoſe who may be concerned ) to conſult
Aſtrology. That Conſultation will not be fruitleſs. 4.3. In Inw-
ations, Waters arerarified, as well as augmented. 4.4. Nt claſhing
with the Premiſet. NY, and & in their private Capacities are one
thing.intheir publick, another. 45. Catalogue of 1 G's Lightning.46.

. The AſpeFin a ant Eſtate knows no moderation. 4.7. Some mon-

ſtrons Inſtances of Lightning. 48. Thunder all Summer long. Ns
Thunder without an Je, 49. Comets Planetary Original proved.
50.


Chap.T. Aſiron. calculated, 4ſtrol. make uſe of the H, 39g
50. Three of the four Comets in 1618. belong to our Aſped#.
51. & 52. The Comet, Anni 1531. 53.6c. Ar Account of the follow-
ing Comets. 62. New Star in Serpentarius. Thuanus and That
Age make it of Planetary Original. 63. Summary of the Comets
under and 3. 64, 65. Earthquakes and Vulcans wider. 1, 3 5
their Table with Remarks, Van Helmont's arguments againſt the
Earthq. Plaxet ary Original anſwered. 66. The balefid Circumſtan-
ces of Earthquakes not mentioned. . 67. Firing of Cole-Mines,. Ana-
togous to Vulcan's. Earthquakes lye deep. 68. Diſeaſes imder yy,
& &, with Remarks. 60. Something of Currents. 70. Parelia,
Halo's, Irides, enumerated. 71. And ſpoken to. 72. Claritas
Septentrionalis. 73. Sol Pallidus. 74. Maculz Solis frorShei-
ner, Hevelius, accounted for. 75. Prodigions Rains, Sangumis
Frumenti. 76. Dronghts, Plagues of Locuſts and Mice, &c.


$1. A Sthe Afpetts of h tod were to beregarded, becauſe they are
Ain and Alliances of Syperiour Planets; upon the fas ace .
count are theſe Habitudes of Y. and & to be heeded with a ſober
compoſed Obſervation. For Aſtrologers juftly crack of great things procee--
ding from their Sapcozowrs, though not every-moment falling out, yer re--
corded abroad, and ſome of them comfyirehended within the Memory of
Man, yea,it may be,hapning every 7 yes in h and & hath bin obſerved.'
. $2. The Aſpetof Y and & we. ſuſpected to be Great, even before
the ———— of any Influence, only becauſe iswifits us bur ſeldom,once
in two years:A d ot & will make us wait fo long; till they return 5» ſpetie
again: For ſuch is the Incerimof 2 Conunirons or Oppaitiens In this later
there is.(omeVariecy or Deſign rather in Naturesfor if f haps to be Retro-
de, theſe Two Superiours will face one- another twice or threce before
Fhu6y corhe bf fo a great part of the year will be ſometimes daccord-
ing to Us in.one coaſiderableA ſpect. There's a certain Law in che Heavens,
we have ſaid, which none but Aſtronomers contemplate 3 none but Aſtro-
logers make uſe of. The Firſt, look-on it as @ perplexed bufine( : The
other, a Wiſe and Powerful Oecohomy. Bur, why, of all Mathemeti-
calDiagrams ſhould theCeleſtialScheme be leaft uſeful?He,who looks upon
Architecture and Fortification to be only Trangenims, is aWile Man, of
t Experience and He who thinks the Diftanct and the Motions of the
lanets with all — My wc either 4s ro themfelyes, or ro the reſt,is only
Siphre, and damb Shew,ſhall fir next to him, Ar preſent, that we'rhay nor
undertake too much in our diſcovery,we will content our (elves with the di-
ſtance of about gr. 3. before and afref, reſerving what falls beyond co our
more grand View of*Forein Accidents, as we have done before, we hope,
with ſome Satisfaftion.  - ava ; |
\ S 3. But letting alone that Dead-doing Influence of U and &, which
will ſhew its (elf in the Cloſe, to the ama t of all pretended
Reformers of Science ;, let us confider firſt , : its leaſt offenſive Influence
toward Cold: and fot this purpole preſent the Diary Bipdrtite, Hyemal by
its ſelf, and the « #fiwal. a 7, 2 Tf loa bs
$4. The R may make. one glance, and ſee what thoſe two Pla-
netscando ; the Fir{-whereof-hath Fluſhing in bis Face 3 the Other a
Flame glowing in the Centre. |


( © "ie: Hithud


% & Home Drary.


' Book 10


;


a 1656. Dec. 21.S m,


27. Fr. cold, ſnow p. wds p.
18, Fr. wd, ſnow 8 m. d,
wd d ft. ſnow.
19. H. fr. bitter cold, h. wds.
20, H., wd , dark, offer, ſnow
thin all n. rain 11 p.
21. Thaw and wd, Aeon Halo,


"_ adn Vapann
22. Fr. and foggy de tot.


23. Fr. @ 1. thick 6.
ily, oP, 10 Þ.(n.8 p.


6 REIN - ſhow m.

"EL wind a 1. dark, cold

25, H. a. L cold”
clearing, clouds low.


H 1659. March, 2, 0.52 3.


- 26, 29. Froſt, cloudy,” |


ak. Very fir and


M* 1668. Jan. 5. D256.
Dec. ay C. fr. _—
«m. ſtormy, fair
96, re Fr: offer m.florws, hail,
before Sun riſe.
ET aeren: we, fair m. p.
= IT miſty |
2; Fair «a clouds, Cl. wer-|


9" "
in | 31H. aol driſly a. 1. tot, H.
- Þ'-"wds, cloudy p-m. :


[£1674 March 9; 2 Il x94


Hyemal Part, -
14. Froſt, cloſe m. bright
ſammers day.


# 1670, Nov.g. SL 17,


Otfob. 30.Cloſe, {. miſt, warm.
31. —— warin, wd, rain


Nov. 1. © Froſt, cold , bright,
ar nighr. - __
2, Ice, bright, cold, overc.


might.
3. £, moiſture m. cloſe, cold,
fair.


4+ Kee, {. ſnow 8 m, fair, cold.
5. Ice, wd p.m. {. moiſture.
6. H, wd a. 1. and die ror. mii-

ty m. dark at Syn ſcryvery


E.| 1672, _ - ings 17.


22, Cloſe , 2 Þ. rain

AP very RT 10P.
up 2

oudy night. P


r, oury' fair , Ho


1 25. Fair, H, wd 2.1. ying
| lodids.
126; Rain 2 m. af p; San


L FLEETS 0. &


ce a5 ever, =


ay; Tom. high wind, |. 3


InP.


1 28. Winds , rain ——


(36.8, wd, rain-g 0 H. wind,


a £5 Froſt, overc. { fiff winds.


p. wening 1p:
-


Es Arie 66M. night.
A <p dark 7
m. filorm of ſnow and

miſle 1 p. H. winds 11 p.
10, H. wd, fair a. m. col


warmer at B.
11. Froſt, miſt, (air a, my of


rp. m,


| me Byes Sicken.


12, Froſh, ice fair, miſt, win-

Y.

13. Fr. ice, yieldi ms
AS ark” vg Þ-


14. Froſt, ice, white clouds,
doe Ln
15. Fr. ice, ſnow, hail a. mw.
k, Claſc. ,
6. Offer, _ m. p. and (n,


5p.
17. Cloſe, miſt, wetting 5 Ps


coldeſt about Sol «cc.
18, Some driſle 5 m. fog 1
p. miſt.
19. Cloſe, mifling 2 >. aa ,
20, Cloſe m. p. nuſty. 27:
| flung 6 p. JL
A® 1681. Nov. 29, VP S 1
Nov. 25, Coldiſh, dark, C. K
4 Pp: werring q»
26* Cloddy, co cold, risk wind,
{. moiſture m,
27, . wind a. 1. withimoi-
ſtuce 2 p. 4Þ-B- 102, 10-p. Mer
teor 7 p. cold +


28... ear fair, _ a, m
cold b

29. Fr, —p wetting 0. free:
ZWig 11 P- goa Fo late»
ly broke forth in Barb

Nov, 20. m2 of 0 the
Erih, .


Dec..8. News of a Comet 1h
Lituanis.

10+ Eothnuale in the Coun-
tfy.of Cleve.

30. H. froſt, fair; ſcarce a cl.
A tw, wet ante Sun ſcr,and


Dee. 5. Windy, cloudy\ſcarce

Sun ſernarm

»- Whinn clouds flyiig unde.
a.- black 'Heaven ; warm pf


"ITY 4
A® 1684. Fan, 26: W654
ore ww

open m 1
t: aparalleltd , ſnon,
and: veſp. intolerable.


oy *Fr.' unfufferable ; fnow


—— —_—


j mn. 1 p: p. Sun ſer,wd. L.


25+ Some ſnow a, m; pc. It
x =p en |


— end. Thames paſſable below
Bridge.


29. Froſt , bur yields a. m-
| freeZ ar n, ſharp wd.


Chap. Il. | Ye forFroſt, Cold Conſtat. not always wholſome. 40%


$ 6. I can ſcarce caſt my Eye on this Table, but I meet with Froſt, or
Ice, Froſt and bicter cold wd, Dec, 1656. Froſt, Snow, and cutting Wind,
Dec, 1667. and Jan. 1668. Froſt, tharp Froft in Febr, and March, 1659. Ice
in the entrance of Nov. 1670, which is not very uſual. Froſt at the end
of Nov. 1681. Only Dec. in the year 1672. is free. But the year 1684.
will be remembred for Templ--Street-fake, the unparallel'd, unſufterable
Froſt ! the Hiſtory of which Froſt throughout the World, had- not been
an unworthy undertaking ; ſo. much did I hear of it. Here you may fee
the terms of enſufferable- and unparallel'd, falt in the-Sphere of our AC
pect - ſo our Aipedt helps ro the Obſtinacy ; That'sall we obſerve. . And
tis not the firſt rime that Þ and & are foundoppos'd in Monſtrous Froſts;
even in our Age : For on this. our Afpect I meet with Danub1u concretus
& frigus 1m74aze ;, bur this, in Kepl. A 1621. and again as we ſhall fee in
due place, Dec. 1634. Finding fore littte-Glimple of this ſtrange Truch;I
have magnified honeſt Ezch#ad, bur he is forc't to put irroff from the Na-
ture of thePlaner, and expoſe it to the»Northern Wind chen blowing;
In the rean while I ant nor liccle pleaſed, that the Antient Arabs ſhould
vouchſafe this Truth, whichnone of our Moderns , for want of Experi-
ence; . have. dartd to accept; . I was not little pleaſed, I fay, to obterve
that thoſe Pagar Friends of ours, who.fpeak of the Inundations of Tygrw
and Ewpbraths trom this Aﬀpect found in one certain Sign (in-which Lknow
_ ſpeak true; by the way.) ſhould tell us that in other. Signs X-and &.
7 - rear! Colds in Y,' Snow in Sz great Cold in & ,: Aſtrol. Angle.
if. IV. Lobo.

$ 7. Surely the Summer Months tlien are nor quite free, for in May,
1661. we firid Froſt, Morn ; yet hot day cored; 4* _ Menſe Fun,
Hail 3 or 4 times. . In Sept, 1665, Notable Froſty Cold Weather.
In March 1675 , Icy-Froſts., Hail.” Hail die $: - Snow dre gi yea,
Froſt; Ice, Srow and Hail, all on Die15. But Sept. 20. Shews- black
Froſt in 1699. And this moves us eafie People to believe Ola Traattrors.

$8, Iſaid we would beginwith the leaſt offenlive Influence, and that
was Cold; I hinted thereby ( contraryto che valgar Prefumption ): that
Gold is not always a wholfom, innocent Conſtitution 3-no, not in Winter : ;
In Summer perhaps it wil be ſaid, chic ir-is unſeaſonable, and therefore
may not be agreeable. Forl fancy 1' may diſtinguith & to ſpeak rudely )
two Spzrtts of Cold, the-one proceeds: by Narure',- the other by the
Chymiftry. of the Heavens, 7. e. by mixing Two Hot Ingredients to pro-
duce Gol4; as our Noble Pjroph1las offers. The Cold proclaimed under - ous
Aſpect; or its Equivalent; an{wersto this later Production, Two Lumi-
nous Planers conſpiring to: eftect irs: I. remember inthe'year 1665; a year
which we ought all corremnember,whowereconcerneds. when in the Monch
September there came” Notable Frofts,” Gald and ON__y Weather :

men gladded themſelves wich chis-Conclution;Tharthe Plague would

ceaſe: I doubced ir then, having found'/by Obſervation; that % and &
had a Hand in Both 5 and the eventwas too true , the Sicknels ab2red not
upon it, but rather rofe to its Faral Height, Whenthq Cold came by
the ordinary way of Nature, 7. e. Separation of Calorific Bodies ; then,
God bethanked, we thought of returning to our dear Native City, bur
before thar de Obferver.durit not venture. Now for the Winter, 'even k
there we find Froſt ; and 2 Cold Der.:and yer great Sufpicions 'of Hurt- |
ful Influence, our Afpe&being confeſt;as may appear by the Murrainer of
Nas Fo in that time z and the Eruption-of Evil in Youth, which accompa-
nyed it. | Y 2219 FITD ,. Joi

$ 9. Now though our # ( to ſpeik of thar alons ) may ordinarily pro-
duce a Froſt, and help to continuethe-fame, put up by other Canfes, yer


[ I


Maginus. Fortitides of Pl. Of Fires. Book 111-


402


the Hyemal part ſhews the Turbulent Nature of our Planets:jn Winds, not
only cold and cutting, but High and Deſorderly: Twice gr 'Thrice do we
meet with Fury arid Damage : often with Lofty and Nurtying Guſts,
The beginning of 1668, and the Cloſe of Dec. tellsus of Light-
ning inthe Holy os. Bulaains Towers of Churches. As for the great
Tidenoted about that time; it ſeems bur a fingle Inſtance ; but we may

reckon for it, or the like in our Doctrine of Inundations. |
$10. How turbulent are we in the Summer then 2 Winter, I nope; is
the more Turbulent Seaſon : November, December, January and February,
and March alſo: For all Obſervation gives in Aovember and December to
be notable for Turbulency, witneſs our Hyewal Brewat, fo of the reſt :
yet in the Summer-rime; as ſhort as our Notice is {for the Longer will cell
you another Tale) % and & bring then, I ſay, High Winds and Rain;
Zune 1652. and Store of Thunder at the ſame tirhe. Store of Rain in
Sept. 1654: and Thunder on the 23d. day. Sad Rainy Day,4pril 26. 1661.
with Heat. after. 4 1663. Thunder and Hail, violent Storms in Jure.
Stormy in Sept. 1665. Heat and Meteors all June, 1677. Rain and Light-

ning; Hard Rain and Flathes of Lightning, Sept. 1679, _ .
F 9S 11, —_— not - et the _ 3 wm a award
uceth toa tate of Air, in Summer eſpecially. e eof Leo
ſhould be Dryer


may be apt to condemn
ch wethink obſervable,


will be of my


before we have done. But I underſtand not the Mamareth, or Ele-
vation of the Arabs 5 or if I do, I fee not the ſuitable difference of the
Effe : Fortitudes and Dignities of Planets, are Terms not to be wholly
exibilated 3 for a Planet the Horizon is more frong than below ; Of
Northern Latitude they or mere teak; than Southerw, concerni
t yet, as


the
which in another place. are vulgarly tanght (If __
our Aﬀair) They are tome ure , I find no Footin is [| was
willing to do 3 what Ptolemy and Others ſpeak of Dominion of a Planer,
to apply it to a .d, or ſomegreat Aſpet, & or D, andI fonndit to ac-
cord. For a Planer or irritated, if it have any Influence,muſt
ſhew ay r=» -ppromaae naman Now ſuch Irritation is found in the


S 14. The like I ſay of Erres and Conflagrations, which are imputed to
this AſpeR, eſpecially 3 I know not but P: may mean, only the ac-
cident of Firing of Trees and Woods by exceſhive Heat in his more Sou-


; thern Countreys , as hath bin touched before ; or Firing of Buildings by
ma


bin
Lightning 3 and this y be r00 re then, and ſince in thoſe places. And
if true,it helpsto abert the Iwortal Influence of Planers,which are the Di.
yine Inſtruments of Veogeance : but if otherwiſe he means, _—_
all


Chap II. No Sacred Autverity againſt Malign. Configurations. 4go3


” CG OS WO


ſh1!l no: g9 abour to deny ſome ſeeming Evidence which may be brought,


therefore, I ſay, I am not engaged to meddie in it 3 nor do I believeir can,
or will be ever made out : The Effects which we teach have a zatsral de-
pendance on their Cauſes 3 as Rain depends on Hear, as the Colour of the
Rainbow depends on Light. :

9 15. But to make amends,for Jens Seaſons, Accute Diſeaſes,*c.which
Maz1aus adds, Ler the Learned World pardon me, if I doagain averr jr,
and ſtrike the Nail homer yet, than have done already, with all fafery to
our molt Holy Religion, and the bleſſed Author of it

v 16. For 1s itnot a Gh:la;þ Argument to fay, God made al things
Good (:. e.) conformed to his own Iaes ; therefore, there is no Malefigue
Creature 2 Not toenquire curiouſly, what thouid have been the natural
Courſe in the Innocent State,we ſuppoſe our Apoſtacy and Rebellion towards
God, and fo we believe with' Strec:des ,' that Fire and Teerh of Wild
Beaſts, and Stings of Serpents were made for Vengeance ; that che San
may now burz us by Day, and the » annoy ns by Night; that the Stars
of Heaven may be Worm-wood, and have a bitrer and «3kiz4 Influence.
The © conduces to Feavers, and the » to Frenzzes and Epilepjies.

$17. And vetily, This Obſervation found me when I thought it nor,
came dre(s'd to mein its own Light, white I was attending to the various
Shapes and Changes of che Air z no ſuggeſtion to my remembrance of


any Aftrelogers, Antient or Modern, taughe me go ſuſpe# what I afterwards +


found,that rheDiſtempers of the Seaſon _ apon what the Seaſon it ſelf
depeads, the Aſpe&s and Poſitions of the Celeſtials. Galez alſo fo long ago
ſaying the ame, Feavers, Catarrhs, Small Pox, Fluxes, Peſtilence , &c.
according to-'the difference. of the Clime, and the Pawert; do annoy us,
when the Heavenly Bodies Tranſt, or take up Station in ſuch Parts of the
Zddiack. Theres no denyal of it. ; | .
. $18. Kepler in his Diary bath obſerved, it ſeems, amongſt his Germazs,
Gatarrhs and Conghs. AtLyntz. 4* 1621. April 20.Coughs atSaganum: inSele-
{ia, F-br. V. & 1629. Catdtths: Who would faſpec ſuch a Malady hadeny
relation to thePlaners above?ColdAir,and aMoiſt Brain+.Theſe are Phy-
fical Cauſes internal of Cararrhs. Bur of late, ſtrange 0ny pry ow caughe
us in London, yes, all Europe, that, ſaving all fuch internal and proximate
Efficiency, ſome ſtrange Aſpr&,. Single, or-Complicate, difturbs the Hu-
Tour. For the Caſe was of one'Night , ever of Ore, wherein 2 mani-
feſt barking Cough had (eiz' the generality 6f Young and Old, OFod. 26.
1675. Verily, there was ap Aﬀpe& of 2 and &, wich an & of h,
which occurring'as' rately as its pretended, Effe& , may. be ſuſpetted for
ſome Cauſe of it :'However;' this ws: > ran, ber the Catarrhs of Gey-
any (no body 15 ſo fic to acggin ushereih as Kepler) gy our Jove-
Martial-Aſpe8. In both thele feveral years ahd Months we (hall find; &
-% & 5 the Firſt; Fa. 22:the Second, Febr.. 10th. and that you may ſuſpet
h ao hey were a Cauſe, you ſhall figd-riv other Coughs'or Catarrhs
elſewhere {p Yea Laws +», iba
-: $-19. To proceed; flefe. Gatarrhs are noced to! have. happened withina
* "the very. day. of the Co ation-z where I deſire


.diy or” Two,” if not
the-good” Readers favour while. He nn labour after


aDeterminate PunQual P72, even of 'Milagies, as well as Conſtita-
tions of the Ajr,we da not” pronounce. Haemingely, þ. Ang Have the De-
termination of cheEvenre9 its;pro wn Cau Father it,w


'X happens. upart” its: meraded Aſhenation * Thar is the Hagar impertedt
Yay 7 "bas Meath ch Efﬀe to t pra acknowledging no Poſtu-
nous Brood ubour Midwifry : Ther, and. there, appeared me Effect, not

at = .5 022 (64 Sy 1-74
ſooner, nor latef;"- of Oabich


——_—_——u_
ws


jp CEE


424


% 6 Diary. Eſtival Part. Book Hl.


#* 1652. Jane 37, W Bs.
A Fune 23, ad July 2+
a3- Cloudy, clear, fwd.


{ 24- Cloudy, ſtore of Thund.


ſhowrs at n.
25. Cloudy , rain, f. Thund.
25. Windy and cloudy rt n.
29. Clouds, {, rain, wdy.
28. ſ. raif, wdy, cloudy arn.
29. Showrs, high wds.
39. Showrs and wdy.
Faly I, Clear, wdy,


A*® 1654. Sept. 19. ad 28, X
MM 16.


19. Winds b. d. dark, cloudy,

20, Cloudy m. clouds overc.

21. Cloudy, (. firs of wer wea-
cher


{ 22, Flying elouds, hear,wind


23. Winds, dark, cloudy, Th.
ar midn.


Rain.
2+ Rainin,C. lore of R.
26, Cloudy m. clear d. audi-
ble wds, r. ſuſpicious
29, Miſty m. warm.


- A® 1661. April 28. © 6.
- > Clondy, fomerimes ſhow-
I, Clear even.
25. Cloudy, wdy
wer
- 26:C


- hail p- m.-rain at. 5. m.


"28. Fog m. clear up, cloudy.
p.'m, clear a bs
29. Bright m. cloudy roward


eAftival Part.


| dropping 6 P- :

20. Fair , dry , ſome flaſhing
clouds, overc. 10 P-

Fuly 1. Rain Sun riſe, C daſh-
ing o. fair and hear p. m.

2. Dry, warm, bluſhing
quarters H. p. m.

3. Cloſe m. p.


A® 1563, Sept, 13, 2). 127


13.Froft, fair, cool wd, warm,
Sun ſhine, overcaſt n. |

14, Froſt, cloſe m. p. dry 4 P-
gentle rain m. Pp.


Is, :
16. Notable froſt, - fair, cool,


cloudy.
17. Storms of Rain and wd.
| 18. Very cool, h, wd, ſuſpi-
2jous abour Noon ; coaſting
fhowrs veſp and Sun ſer. _


C rain 2, 3, 4 P-
+20. Calm, cloſe, {. fhowrs
Sun riſe , weeting mift


rain $ 0


Riff wds.


t, miſt,


g . tant:
19. loſe, miſt. mertng 5 Þ
LES _—_ fog m-P-


©. violent ſtorms of Hail ,


19. Hail, froſt m. doudeful,
cloudy , cloſe , wintcrly,


at
all
21. Cloſe m. p. {. dropping,


A® i655 March 13. £ It 19+


k mn. =
16 les cloſe m. p. f. fnow


t9. Cloſe, miſling 2 p. 9 p.
20. Cloſe m. p. miſty, driſle
6 P+ ol


#*1671. June 15. SY 27.


10. Cloſe, m. «d ©, open
and no miſt. Metcor 10 p.

 intheearthand Air.

11- Showrs a. m. 9 ms. n. m.

I 2+ Wind n floating clds »


m. >. ing and offe-
ring 1 p. 4p- ſhowr 6 p.
13+ Warm, open, overcaſt i þ.


open, overcaſt 9 p.

14- Fair m. cloudy 10 m,
pregnane clouds, warms.
15. Fair 6.8 m. much —

2 ring 4 pÞ- drops 6
» fouky Sen, thick re,
16. Floating whire clouds 9g
m. and 8p. ovcrc.
19. Showr 1 m.and Sun riſe,
cloſe, miſt, hor, offer. KR.


IP.

18. Wer 2 m. faid the Watch»
man, clofe, rain 2 p. high
wind 3 he” "Ne

19 Fair, miſt, lowring

Gs. clears up Nly.lowr.Wly.

20. Fair m. miſty,cloſe 11 m.
—_— lowring clouds 7
p. wind various.


21. Miſt m. bright, C. miſty :
brick wd., Metcors pl
Pegnfns.


A® 1679. Sept, 16, G1 g,


12. Cloſe miſt,. cloſe moſt
wdsgrene ops 2 |
13. High winds great ſhowrs
3 dro} poorercaſt,cloſe,
grchr' |
14 Cool m: cl ;
Erik, ſaſ \ —_
15 Cloſes fog, rain a. m1 1 m.
$. Cleay, iter, rain 5
16. F> rain 9 at.
{11m-'6-3 high wind;
5 of Oigheaing ave 10.
*t'4s 3. doudy, high w,
cool. rain, 3 ante 5. fhowr


cool, clouding
& 12.& 5.2 yer


$ 3k.


20. Black'fre
rain
igh we;


Chap. II. Fog not always ft. a declin. ©. Other Cari ofit ies


21, As for Fog, though 'tis regardabie at Sea or on Land, yer we have
balked ir, becauſe 'tis no Rarity , out of eaſe to our ſelves ; yet an In-
ſtance or rwo found us in the Summer eſpecially. That of 7uly 5. 1578.
termed, Hideous Fog and Miſt in the Journal, and {6 continued for a
Fortnight, Hakl. p. 41. = 5. %, 7.9. we may read the Caule in theſe
Ciaradters; the cauſe of the Darkneſs and Gontinuance. That of Aug.
A* 1580, in the Night (in North. Lat. 69. though it be) we ſee is not procu-
re but by conſent of Alpe&t, 5 19. d, 7 4.%. Butyoul ay, one In-
{rance proves nothing. True, if I pronounced any pretended Truth from
a Naked Inſtance. Alas ! I ſuperſeded toproduce more for Brevity Gake.
Let us take ewoor three therefore (ſince they are call'd for) from Kerleys
Diary ; Sept. 2. 1625. there is noted, Nrbuls fetida ; inanother place, Ne-

ula Pernox. Nev. 15. 1627. Yea, Nebule continue for 5 or 6 days;
from Nov. the 25. 1629. Dec. 1. Anni cjuſdem. All which Kepler a
to the ature of the Month, fecluding the AſpeCt : When as we find ia
every one of theſe, without exception , either Oppoſetion or Conjun#ion,
Platique or Partile. We don't go to deny that Sept. Nov. Dec. are Mifty
Months, and that upon Keplers Account of So! Cadens, or declining, or
ſtance of the Sun : Therefore Scotland is more Obnoxious to Fog than
gland; and England more than France or Spain; The Occafzon of
Gondomar, fam'd n—— when he left us in Winter tume,whobid us re-
wember his Serwice to the Sun, the next time we ſee him, for he had not
ſeen the Gentlemax a long time. Bur though Fogs are more frequent and
permanent in Winter, than Summer, yet the Declixation of the Sun is
not the Plenary perfect Cauſe 3 for how then come Miſts in April, May,
wae, July, it a declining Sun be the abſolure Cauſe? How come Miſts in
inter to fall on. the Leſs, and Vary in the Greater Declination ? How
come they to fall ſometimes, zot in the Vrght , nor toward Morning , but
: toward /Voor, at hor. g. or 10. in the Morning ? How come Miſts to clear
up at Midnight ? If a Miſt falls in Sept. yea in dag. upon a Declining Sun,
it muſt laſt till the end of March atleaſt z for March 15s a Mifty Month:
No, no : the Peregrinations of che © and I , which I chink coaſticute the
Nature of the Month, abſtracted from the Other Planets (unleſs we ſhall
reckon 9 and 7 to the Sun) diſpenſe zor Cold, or Heat, Miſt nor
Clarity, without the Conſent of the Keff. Tis they help to continue; and
continuing to excraſſare the Fumid Vapour, according as Sumwer Miſty
Alpedts take place. For 'tis not always alike Miſty z no, not near the Pole,
as the NorthWeſt Voyages inform us. And 'tis clear from this, that it is not
perpetual Fog with us in Winter, Yet the Sun is farther frotn the Zenich
than the Pole Artique is from the Tropze. Nay, I fancy 'ris not a perpetual
Fog there (though 160 degrees be a great Reach) no, nor in Winter. For
as hath made the » to give Lighr to __ &c. and the other
moſt NorthernParts for half the Month,as'the ©for haltthe year ; 'ris likely
then, that *tis got always aHideousFog,fuch 25 can wholly intercept theLighr.
God hath a care even fa the Wild Beaſts. Ir concerns then our Mariners1o
acquaint with theſe Principles. * A d of % with any Planet will ord marily
* make a Miſt ny where,ex under the Line: There,I have not met with
any.But within'2 few degrees Latitude 7 or 8.T find Hazy Air, #1662:in C:
John Limbereys Joutnalz and. withal 'an # of Y and &. "Tis fo of the
reſt, as certain 25 4ny thing in Nature. Bur we are concerned with our
Aſpect inhatid.. Of whict 1 ſhall defireat this time that we obſerve only


this, How the Hideous Fog, ſpecified front Hakiurt i s 3d Voyage ,


falls under the-ſame Aſpe&; and the ſame degrees in both Places : 'Sepr. 2.
in Kep!. £1623. being Y 4: & 4. and Fhisin Hakt, 5-27. Where, is
the Difference? * © , 5 52Ths


_—_—


4oc


go6


Y & conduce to Cold im j-c caſes.


* Book III,


$22. 2. The next ſhall _ the __ Hail, noted firſt at Auſpurge, July
19. 1528. Lycofth. 9\ 3. &

A® 1521. Sept. 4 at Baſil, Sr Hail as deſtroyed the Vintage, Ly coſth.
226. Yz © 1.

A 1557. Lan " Tempeſt cum Ton. & Grandines, ſuch as was not in
the Memory of Man, Gems. 2.131. 7 12.0. 28. V.

A® 1559 Fuly 7 near Lovain, Winds, Hail, Thunder , Ge. 2. 65.
It 12, V4. Y.

A* 1600. Jane 18. at Riff in Norfolk, Tn as big as Walnuts, threw
down the Wheat, Stow, 1 20. UN, MM 10.04


For the Hal. What ſhall I ſay? That &' helps to the dyop , the great
drop, and Y. to the Cold. This hath bin ſaid before. This I will fay ,
that though I was no Eye-Witae(s of theſe Hail-Storms fo many years


ago, ao am ſure their Memorand i
yeofthenes , that others may witnels for themſelves. It deſtroyed the


Vintage in one! ' place;


is True; and fo far the Witneſs of


the Corn in azother (theſe are no ſmali Admoniri-


ons to Mortal Obſervers). I conſalt not the Author to embelliſh the Sro-


; oy Frigntiel, ry


ſe Superiour A
” 23. There


being already perſwaded, that great are


, and as an(werable are their Effecs.
Fee nothing, as I take it, but that we conclude with a


cooler. V% and & yorcs been found of late in fuch a Pofirion to favour,
yea,' to prong 1 ak, No wonder that it produceth Hail in a Sum-
mer Storm ; V. is retnore, - but That will not ſerve to explicate his chill
Influence 3 Ae Y they ſay,is Moiſt,bat He may be as dry in ſome Circurg-
ſtances ; andif & attempers him, 'S is but one, He cannot alone repreſs


the- Crudity of tha os LI” Celeſtial, but either conſent to it, or is

conquer d by it. T hall produce ſome evidence to chis Truth before I

havedone 3 nor 3o) I reckon it 40g pa 1 lets us into the knowledge

of the abſftruſe Nature of V3 or if you will, the Hidden Operation that

Lightor Warm thhath i in theDiſpenſarion of Gold; whichto meis aÞPoſitioe

Quality,though I ftrive as much 2s can'to Captivate my Judgement to my
Betters, who teach the contrary.

Pp Y &
S 24. 1 42.Dee. 17Snow hard,much |, 1579. Febr. 4.44 10. Froſt and Snow,
Coldar Ghracca Purch, Þ-3Þ-X544- wherein many e perithed ,
[-- | and Travellers loſt , "Stow, 625,
& x5.d, M1 13. V.

« | Nov. 1 . High Winds Northerly,

wasa great Froſt, with much

- Icen the River Aſtrac wean, br 3


| M4 2, 1/26, ed
var till Arenſun. O fate $
. X11. 0, 5.0.%: enim eld Sur


5” OWE: oo foe
1538: Jaz. 28. Port St. Julian Latit. m; '% &'in a demanr all th firſt
13 or 2 or 8. Tales Lat | 7 | h AS bers Ol
Port, two Months follow | deſerves a meati;
act ow Nan Depth | on it nl ir ain, Co
"of Water, Fol. 3: 753. ® 1599. w
Jp: S ep thi fepagancd | x cel IT which it
I59 ,.00
vendiofarty of th ey renders, Cold Cold Wind Apritzo
| Mleanans, Ha « Þ, 40, 41, —>ol and May followipg; X 0. T2 52


*


_-


Chap. IL v8 Eviulence for Cold, though warm accounted.


Y.; and May 11. X 15. &,27.VL.

1598, Jax. 1. ad 10, "The River
Thames near frozen over, Stow.
138, 2 6. V,22 0G,

Dec. 1. ad 18. Thames almoſt frozen,
Stow, p. 788. 7 19. d, S 17. Y.
pinching nearer and nearer.

1600. Jan.20. Froſt over the Thames
almoſt in one Seven-night, - began
here. Hows, p. 035-0 ,10.%Y.
March 23. Snow: on Eafter-Day,


and ſo continued extream Cold : |


Snow'd again ate 3o. &L 1, & WV,
IO. Y.

Ap-il 4. Snow, Month: Cold and
Dry every Morning, Hows. p.790.
A 3..d, 10 V.

May 1. Cold and Dry' in April and
May, but two days Rainy, ot 8.
Ez:37-X. |

1609. 7a. 12. Virginia River frozen
near half a Mile, C. Smith, \ 13.
o, £6.%.

1620. ow. 27, 28, 29. Extreme


—-_


4.07


—_


Cold in Aew-England, C. Smith,

! UL 2 oppoled, butalſo % &d. en

| tring on Oppoſition , whence ſe-

veral Days in Dec. were noted;

| 1622. fan. 24. St. N. Frigus inten-

fiſimum lejit vitum 1pſas radices, m
FE $3 & >

1625. Dec. 17. Frigus htrridum.

. D:c.19.Glactes 18 Danubio. 10;

F908, 236, Ys

| 1626./Vov. 24.44 29.FrigidumCruſte
1n Danubio. M18. &, 15, Y,

Dec. 26. Frigus acre, m 22.%, Z
24. d,

1634. Dec. 6. Froſt continued all
Winter Solſtice, which with
Drought before ,- fo ſunk the
Thames, that Barges could not
come'to Lox. the like not known
in 1co year; yea, People went
over the Thames, ſaith Perkins, v?
29, d, A 2. V.

1645. Dec. 15. Froſt , bitter Cold,
Spree. So fan: 6, 9, 12. 1d,


$ 25. This may ſeem enough to Well-Willers : Yet becauſe it is a piece


of a Paradox, that ewo Warm Stars (forfooth) ſhould produce Froſt; we
ſhall bring in a heap of Snojw-balls; and ſturdy Ice, to perſwade ſome
kind of Afent.co This ſtrange Thefss;, and -when we have done , thall
put in our Caveat. Our further Evidence may be drawn out of a continu»
ed Diary, from 1621. to 1646. without Interruption; unleſs when h
and % interdict, as belonging co their Royalty , or when the preſent Al
pegt happ2:s in the Summer half year.


21. Nix plavia, 22, Gelavit.

® Yy . x7 .
25. Golida, pluvia, 29, Nimbt
Granaino(.


30. Ningidum, 1. and Aprilt,


. j |
1621. 7an.14.S. V. Frigas inten/i/i-
mn.
Ang
I5, 36. Ai2141m.
I8, 19. Aticut.


22, ad 26, Frious 1mmane.
Febr. 14, 15. Ningidum. 25 Gelavit,


March 16, i7. Vent: frig. gelavit.


Ntwoſa, Grando , Tonuit.
ſo on as it occurs in the Book to
which we refer.


Ig. \inxit. 20. Frighs.


All This will not fatisfie a near Inquiſitor, who will obſerve to
me the greatneſs of the Stride and Diſtance between the Former and the
Later Chill, or Froſty day. For example, 4® 1621. Jan. 26, Frigus im-
»aze, but no news again of any thing like it, till \ingraum , Febr. 14. or
Gelavit appears Fetr. 25. a month after; and that a poor bare Inſtance till
the midſt of che Month following. I queſtion Such Obſervers. Thus ——
Will not you allow ſome extraordizary accident which makes an entire
Month warm in Winter? When That, whatever it retires; the Aſpect
returns to its Oid Wort, -(noron Felr. 25.for that is but one Lonely Day,
but) on March 16.whereyou ſee we have Cold and Froſt for 5, or 6 days,
being the end of Mareh; yea , and 6 or 7 days not far off in April. For
what ſhould I mention Winter Months ? T_T though we ſtand.in it; that

15 inter


4 4®; »*


| 408 Reliquiz Hyemis, «pretence. 4 falſe Configuration. Book III


Winter brings no Froſt without a Winter-Poſition and Aſped ; yet we
will. put others in Nomination. ; : ; |

s 26. March, A* 1638. for our Adpett's fake, brings Frigus Hyemale, di:
5.and 6. the very Term Hyemale ſhews the Cold unuſual:Yet dic 9. and 10.
appears Frigus intenſuz, & Nx copioſa, the very day of the Equinodtial
Sun. Nay, in ApriUs firſt Week, Flaques of Snow twice or thrice.

March again, 4* 1629. Snow the day prong the Equinotial, and
Froſt 3 or 4 days after. Nor is it News, for 4* 1631. we March his
Noſe drop with Froſt and Snow, Die 13:& 16. Yea, a Month after,
April 10. Rain, Snow , and Sleet. April the 10th did we fay ? We
havein another year, April 12. & 16. Rain and Snow. Nay, if you love
me, or my A 0 look upon March and April 1640.

* \ Yea, May Id, A® 1639. at Norimberg. Schloſſen, much Snow, and
Regen Sleet; Snow and Rain for 3 days together. Here, I hope, it is noe
time of the year for Szow. No Aquarizs in May. If the Night be
Chill , and the Mornings make the Cow quake, as the Country Saw -
has it, the Days methinks ſhould not Frown. But the Old excuſe may
ſerve for March, when Cold appears, What? but Hyemis Relignie;, and
ſo perhaps they will pretend for Apr:! too, but with an inward Bluth, at
leaſt, diſcovering the unreaſonableneſs of ſuch pretence, at ſuch diſtance.
But for the endof May, when the Sun is thinking to mount his Tropick
Circle ; if the Sun alone orders all , there can be no Reliques of Winter

ſerved fo long in the Air. There is no Subterranean Repoſitory there ro
keep icez There isa Work-Houſe ro make Snow and Hail in Summer
Months,but no Repoſitory to keep it. Fove therefore muſt be a Gooler ſome-
rimes, and % and& muſt contribute as much as h and s to Winter Wea-
ther; and that inPlatique A as well as Partile ; whoſe Chill Influence
is ſometimes diſcernible in July and Auguf : Of which ſee, if jc be worth
the while, July and Auguſt, -1627. 1630. 1644. Yea, June and July,1641,
Compare, I pray, the Memoirs of the late Springs and Cold Summers,
1573. 1587. L995 1660. |
s 27. My Caveat therefore now is to my my , that they heedfully


Jook about them,whea they undertake the 15 of the Conſtitutiog of
the Air under this Aſpe&. For it is a v__ e Configuration, not fare
to a fide, as we have admonithed before many times leaves his Ex-
pectant in the Larch ; but you muſt obſerve his s and Goes, and fo
you will find him out. For according to thoſe Viciſſitudes, He will pre-
cend to Winter, Winter, Snow and Hail, and Cold 3 days together,
and on the 4th Thunder. I have given one example of many, viz. April
I. 1621, where Kepler recordson the ſame day, Niwoſs, Grande, & Tonuit,
And this agreeable ro what hath been obſerved in % 2 5c. before.

* . $9 28, Here then take the Character of the Alpet. The @ of V and
# in ordinary Circumſtatices, produces as ye have heard , Cold froſty
Mornings in Winter; yea, and not feldom in Spring time. With a little
more encouragement, produceth Snow, Cold Rain,Sharp.cutting Winds.
In Summer time all manner of Weather, Dry, Miſt, Clouds, Winds,
Heat,Rain,Hail,Thunder oft-times with Violence, a Taſt of their Superi-
ority. Apt to Turbulency and 'Tempeſt alſo in Winter , not Lightning
—— mow d y much of the {ame Strain, only perhaps for Cold,

a le
S 29, But enter Fove and Mars, the ſecondtime , the 24. of the Supe-
riours.. They make a fine Sight when they come withina Span Breadth
in the Firmament 3 but like the Car in the Camp , they are beautiful,
but zerrible. They bode miſchief more frequently than a Gomret; yea , and
Gauſe it too. We conſider it preſcinded from no Syzygrte, but that of the


Two


A


Chap. IL How we muſt not be afraid of the $ 1gnsS f H,


vo...


Two Higheſt, Þ and Þ. It ſwallows up, we have ſaid, the Alpes of


LeG Duration, as a Serpent doth Worms and Toads, ang is noarithedby
them 3 though thoſe Minor Configurations are nor deſtroyed, bur liveand
move in the Belly. We are not glad, nor do we boaſt. in telling the
World ſtrange News to 4ggran4:2: the Art , or the Profeffors. All thas
we wiſh is, That the World may know the syport of what it ſeeth,
when they believe, or ſmart under the Effe&s, may Learn to F-ar,to come
tro ſome, at leaſt, Natural Theology ; {tace he faid not amiſs, who hath
taught us, that Fear and Terror firſt created (or Refrethed)- the Idea of a
Deity. Nor hath God inyhis Qtacles, forbid us 7s be «afraid of the Ygns of
Heaven, if the-Prophet means the \\aturet Gomgreſſes of the Heavenly Bos
dies. He forbids us not, ay, to be afraid avſolutely, though tro Vulgar
Interpretation it may feem fo, but only +4 3, ſuch a Conloonagion and
Emotion of Mind that is' found in Heathens, who ordinarily look-no
higher chan the 2d Cauſe. As_in ſundry 'places he bids us not to care and
Cark for the things of the World,nor ſear the Perſecutor who kells the Body.

9 30. To thoſe who are not convinced from the Faith of our Teſtimony,
nor from our Weak Reffexions thereon, we draw in this further Evidence,
being Zealouſly affetted toward the advance of a Vatura? Aſtrology ; be-
lieving, orelſe I ſhould be heartily ſorry, that it conduceth to the advance
of Rel:gion, and che Glory of the Creator, whoſe Worms we are, what-
ſoever Philoſophy takes up our Brains, Old or New.

s 31. Our former Tablesof this Aſpe&t was but the Sofe IP of the
Organ 3 This is the Loud one which makes the Lofty Curvature of the Ce-
leſtial Arch to ring, and (hone out the Praiſcs of wy be whoſe Temple
all theſe great Things are Tranfacted. He who will know Truth, muſt
look back into paſt rime : If che World were but of yeſterday, and made
by the Concourſe of Aromes, it were but Venial to be an Infidel : bac
when ſo many years are rs Over our Anceſtors Heads, and the
ih now 25 before; I (ay , nothing bur this, that He who


ſame Nature ho | ;
minds Truth, muſt not deſpiſe the Light which the paſt Ages have left us.


The Scrowle of paſt Times, which remindech us of Tempeſts as far as


180 years, runs backward, part of which we have already preſented, the


Reſidue now ſacceding is, as follows.


—_—
46a
—


—_—
—_—


$ 32. A Table of Tempeſts, Rain, Hail, Snow, Winds.


1527; Ab April 12, ad Tune 3 Rain
Day and Night, fo that Corn fai-


L—_—


Anno "= Fo
1517. June 26. Tempe, Hail, with


T. M. at Nordlingen, Lyc. 9. 17.
OS, 3. Þ.

1520, 7aly 11.K. Heary's Temporary
Banquetting Houſe, built for the
Emperours entertainment, with
all ics Pomp, blown down, Stow.
"7. Oli, fy hs llane Tempeſt

I521. - 24. etane 1 empeit,
and 3Lights on the Shrouds, Purch.
7 5.6 ,23. Y:;

1526. Girc. May 10, 11, 13. near
Otmar , extream Darkneſs, and
rage of Weather, laſted cill May
= Parch, 1,p. 1114. & 29. Y 26.


led, Hows, -p. 527. & 530. @ in
It 7 ; ſome tranſpoſe this to 15 28,


1528, July 19, Auſpuree, Great Hail-
ſtones , Lye. 535. Yand d in &
princ.

I5 jþ Hyeme imminente faith Calwif,

arvaroſa's Shi pwrack near the
Acerocerauntt, 2000 Men loſt. S«-
rius, p: 671. In Nov. Y. and op-
poſed in Tropical Signs, as % and
oy © a5. Has thi

I539. Uire, Aug. 23. EXLTeme 1em-
peſt near the iſſes of Nuliſco, on
the back-fide of America, with

dang


410


v3 Lowder Notes.


Book III.


—_—_— ——_—


danger of periſhing , Frobiſter ,


\Hakl. 398. 5 8. &, 15. VL.

1541. Sub Hyemem Ceſar feds Tem:
. peſtate aa Argieram Africe jaftatus
-1## Magno Diſcrimize werſatus
\eft. Hill prefat. & Galviſ. ad Nov.
"exit. Þ and d'in Mt fine.

Fane 30. Wind blew hardatE.SE.
Red Sea Mouth, &\ 25. Þ,*17.
's, Þ 7 in andre, ts

I 547. July 20.LiboNotws wehements(].
'Dr. Dee Annot. ad Menſem,9\ 22.

d', X 12. VY. | |
Aug. 1. Africus Vehementiſſ. & Plu-
714 continua 4 4 hor. ad 10. P, M.

Init. MS x, 10, Y.

Aug. 14. Procella cum Africo Fehe-
mentif]. ut Gelum —_— Great-
#14, X 0. }.M10.Gy cn © &


5Y',
Sept. 11.Sand in the Air likeSmoak


carryed with the Wind.
1548. May 1, 2, 3. Exceeding Boi-
ſerous. 0:


| Dec. X 14. &. 19. Y.


Die 8, 9, 10. Stormy, Cold, Rain,


.


X 19. &.V 10...


Dre 11. Grando'cum magna pluvia |


= 13. Pluwuſe tota.


je 14. Rain from Midnight to110. |


m. 14. d 16: ”.

-Fuly 6, 7. Miſt, Rainy Lowazn.

ec. V 19. %Þ, So. 07.
1549. O06. 15. & 25. Ventus, m 3.
I, 5 23. Y, 1d.

Nov. 10. Ventus Vehementifſ. 1d; in m
and & 20.
Die 13. Boiſtrous as might be, and
Rain, 2d, - = (IY.
Die 16. Ventus longe Vehementiſ.

25 P: Aug. 5. Tuffon near Landry.
itſch. It g, & ,24. %. Add S 6.
'2


Tune 11, 12, 13. Stormy, that thoſe
which were on ſhore durſt not re-
turn, Lat. 65. 'Hakl. 314. " 27.
KN, 2-16 &. - * ;

Dt: 18. Wind Northerly conſtrai-
ned us to go back, 1b.

OFober. 5. Lat. N. 41. Very foul
Weather,with Winds,Rain, Tow-
erſon, Hah. I29. 2 26. d,Y2.%.

Dze 16, 17. Near thelfle of Wight,
Great Storm, Towerſon, Hak!. p.
130, din V 4,


Nov. 10.Ruſian Embaſſadors Veſ:
{el caſt away on the ScottihCoaſts
the Embaſſadour ſcarce eſcaping,

 Stw, d in , and 2 25. $,
v8.%Y. ns

1558. July 15. Horricane through a-.

great part of Fraexce,quo tempore exatte

Nowilgntum fuit, Gem. Hak!. 9.23.
Y $2.09,

Die 15. Near Volga, great Storm at

S E: Jenkens, Hak|. p. 350. @ ol =,

Aug. 13. Gaſptan Sea, Storm from
the Kaſt for 3 days, we thought

we ſhould have periſhed , H/

Þ. 351.

1562. Jan. 21, 22, 23. Horrida wei;
toſa, Tempeſtas, Gem. \ 24. ,:
22, V. Again, <h 11. d 10
& 26,

Totius anni ftatus Tempeſtatib. wento-

« rum & procellis infeſtus, Gem.2. 37.
Y. with & 5: Signo codem ad Mais
finem uſque cum Þ & 7 uſque ad June,

1668. Otteber 9. Extreme Storm,
tor every Hour we feared Ship-
wrack, Hawkins in Hak/. p. 556.
m21.6, 1 9.%.

1576. Jaly 1. Much Wind, ' we
ſpoon'd before the Sea. So ate 8.
again, Hakl. 618. 23. &,A15,
p's


1577. Nov. 30. Two Barks Compa-
ny loſt by Tempeſt and Fog, Hak.
Þ. 39. M12. d, 22.%V.,
ie 30. A Surge of the Seatook
the Maſter of the Gabrze! over-
board, Hak!. 3. p.72.
Sept, 1. Storm very great , every
. Sea over-raking the Poop. .Hak!,
« Þ. 72. Frobiſher, M12, & ,22.%,
te 23. Coaſts of  Cornwal, very
foul Weather, Frobihher, m 22,0,
26. Y. '

O#. 16. Great Storm, W.S W.
within a days Sail of the Iſle of
Wight, Towerſon, Hakl. 2. p. 51.
Q2.%.1109.

Nov. 13. Sir Francis Drake depar-
ted from Pl:iwouth, and next day
was in great danger , his Maſt
broke. Arthuſ. p. 8. 7. % ,29.&.

1578. Jan. 20.Frieſland cover'd with
Snow, Frobiſher, Hakl. 3. p. 752.
X 25.9, =5.%


I, 25. %Y.
Faly 2, Stormy carryed the Ship 'in


Chap. IE .


% 4 Louder Notes.


the midſt of the Icy Mountains,
ITakhl. p.4o, 41. V 1.4, =6.%.

Juli Menſe, Snow and Hail, Fr0-
biſher, p.48. VL and s oppoſed,
and not wholly the Diſtemper of
the Country, as Frob. imagines.

Zuly 26. Terrible Tempeſts, with
Snow , we could not open our
Eyes, nor hand the Ropes, Hak!.
I.42.19,%.\ 17.09.

Aue. 31. Outragious Tempeſt, ſepa-
rated M. Frob1ſhes Fleet , continu-
ed a long time; the Fleet met
not till Hh 20. The wholeMonth
ſtormy, Hakl. 3.44. and 92. V 13.
&, £216, V.

Sept.1.Loſt Anchor andCable. Hak/.
Mov. 1. Terrible Tempeſt, Parch. |
I. p. 42. V 13.d, m 2G, and;
d op m, _ its ©

1579. Febr. 4. aa $. diy, SNOW, tWO
Foot in the ſhallow, Stow, d in


S 13.

Of.” Sea {well'd;, Merchants
loſt their Goods on Shore, many
drowned, Stow, 686, = 22. &,
m 19.6,

1580. 7»y 2. Wind blew very much,
reat Fog, Hakl. 1. 469.
ze 23. Very much Wind, Rain,
and Fog, 1b.

Die 27. Snow all Night, and much
Wind. UPS

Aug. 2. Very much foul Weather,
P.M. & ne tot. |

Die 5. Rain and very much Wind,
&c

Die 13. Blew very hard, great
ſtore of Snow. We lay
Hakl. 171.

Die 15. 16, Windy and Rainy.

Sept. 2. Winds variable atall points
of the Compals 3 ſo much Wind
in this Night we lay at ZHul, near
Foulncſs. | |

Sept. 5,6, 7. Very foul Weather,

akl. 1, p. 474. Happy the Ship in
Harbour, & It 7 prixc. |

Die 23. 27. Norway, very much
Wind with Rain and Fog, Hak!.
Ib. # ut ſupra.

OXob. 1. ad 7. Very much Wind,
and Vehement Blaſts z Foul Wea-
ther, eſpecially the 4th. when our
Cable broke. Nor is it poſſible


more Wind thould blow, Hakl. x.
475. © 12,

Ofos. 17. ad22. Mediterranean Sea,
Horrid Tempeſt. Proſper Alpiz,
Africt Vents eo tempore flare ſolemt
procelloſs, 1b.

Ottob. 8. ad 24. Flouds, Catarrhs;
Fog, Rain 18.

Dec. 3. So much Wind, that we
could bear but our Fore-Courle ,
Hakl. 16. 7 &, 7 24. V.

Die >7. Snow all Night, with much

I


nd.

I551. March 7,8.Procelloſa Wawgatio
Alpin, Purch, it 22, Sd, g. V.
April 5.ad 11. Very great Winds
and Storms, Purch. 1. p. 1411.
and & in W and 5,

1586, June 12, Great Tempeſts ſe-
ver'd Fleets, Arthufſ. Occad. ind,
þp.8.M 6. 5,24. YL.

Tune 13.Virginia, an unuſual Storm
for 4 days; Hakl. p. 746.1: 8, &,
25. Y., Great Billows and Showrs
Liuſob. p. 373.

A 16, ad 29. Many Tem
Storms, Hak!. 1b. it o. & ,25. V.

July 7. Whirlwind , takes up the
Water, Hak!l.

Ab Aug. 28. ad Sept. 1. Lat. 50. Twe
very great Storms , Hakl. p. 785:

S 10VY, 26. &,

Sept. 6. ad 10. Mighty Storm, which

unrigg'd our Ship 3 Cable broke,


{o that we ex d to be driven
mg 786. S 22, VN,


on Shore,

ok FT nhappy;
ept. 3. Long Voyage, unhappy,
Gavenaiſh apud Hakl. Very great

corm; loſt the Sight of the Pin-
nace, which Pignace never retur-
ned, Hakl. Ib.> 11. %, & 2.0,
{0 8. Tempeſt, Winds , Seas

ilowing. X® 24. &, So. V!

Deg. A Gorpo Santo, I.

1588. Sept. 2. Tempeſt caft part of
the- Armado on the Irih Coaſt,
where many Ships periſhed,Purch,
109. Ll 14. d, M2. Y.

Sept. 8. Pliouth, Terrible Storms,
tearing Sails, Oars. Hows $13.
A 18. 6d, MA. Y.

1598. 7an. 1. ad March 14. Stormy
Weather, ff V= cum 2 it


Ns


*
Sept,


411


% & Louder Signals.


Book mT


Sept. 14,15. Storm, Hakl. 294. d
in = #874 cum (©.

1595. Zune 20. Foul Weather, Stow,
V 21, ©, I4. Y.

April 18. Furious Tempeſt, broke
Cables, and loſt rs, Hak!.
p. 582. 1.%.60.,

1590. Of0b. 5 &8.Blew hard,Purch.
24 6, SB. Y.

Dze 18.Great Storm and Cold, m


3.9, S 0. VY.
Dre 31, Great Snow; Mm 12,09,


-— % 9
Nev. 13. Foul Weather, une
Snow, Parch. m1 21. &, &8. YN,
1597. June 21. Ifle of Blank, much
Wind atE. Hakl. 3. p.195.S 5.
Sd, ES.
D:e 24, 25. Plimouth , extreme
foul Weather, Purch.
Dze 26. Blew hard-from South.
Fuly 19.Earl ofEſſex Fleet from the
Azores,60 Leagues from Pl:wouth,
driven back by a Storm of 4 days.
Howes, p. 783. 526.%, 710.0,
'Aue. 1.Wind hard, Waves hollow.
Dre 1. Storm, Purch. 1. p. 709.
Die 17. Englyh Fleet diſperſed,
with many Storms and foul Wea-
ther. 114.  &. Sept. 5. met at
the Azores, Hows, 783: |
Doe 28. Wind blew hard.
04.14. great Storm, danger of
drowning, Parch. 3. 1212. I 15.
YN, S8.&.
O8. fin. on theCoaſt of Suſex,great


Storm,Purch.1945. :
1598; ms Lands. having

endared many Storms, which en-

danger'd them on the R of


M. Bay, Purch. 1. p. 77: 4 ind.
D;- 11,” Continaal Rin, 2nd di-


vers Storms, ad 17. in Maurice
Bay. Purch. 1.74: 8. & ,19. W.
Febr. 22. St. N. Fearful Storm. S
— > * 0"
I599, In fine Aug. A greatytOrm,Lut,
54. it continuing »ſque ad Ofober
5. 88.0, 4L10.VY.
1600. Jun218. ArRyſſe in Norfolk,Hail-
ſtones like Walnuts, broke down
the Wheat, Howes , 790. ®\ 19.
Y,X 10.0,
Sept. 9. Storms in two Months not
one fair day, Purch, 1. 79. $15.
gs, 1 IZ. - |


|


O04. 4.Storm loſt our Anchor, 5
28. ©, $1 16. YN.
O#+. 18. Much Wind, our Fore.
ſail blew away,
Dre 27, 29. Storms,s1 7.6, r9.%*
Mov. 1. Much Wind, urch, 9.
&, 20. YN,
Die 4. Storms,. Purch. 1072:
Die 27. Very much Wind, Purch:
« Þ.130. $15. &, 21.%,
ec. 23. Boiſtrous Winds , over-
_— Tides, blown Leads of
Churches, Stow, 78g. &L 14. G,


24. YL.
Dee. fine. Storms finiſh'd the Month
and year, 0 18. Y., a1. &.,

1601, Froft 4 Febr. 19. ro April 12,
(Eafter-day) Wind neither Weſt,
nor North. We impute it to the
Aſpect, which then, ſecundn: nos,
expired, M 12,%,16.&,

1602, May 3a: Fog and Snow, great
Whirlwind, Current, mt 17. &.
> T1: Þ.

June 6, Much Rain.

Dre 15. Much Rain; Wind and
Fog.

Nov. 12, Pleaſant Gale, and very
mach Rain, Parch. 225,

1608. Dec. 24. Creat Showr, high
Wind, S E. Capt. Smith; at Var-
gima, V 6,6, S5,Y%, ©

Dre 30. Vehement Wind, much
Rain 6 or 7 days together, 1h,

1609. Dec. 21. Sub notem Tempeſtas,
Kepl. m 27,G, I 12. %.

I610, Jaz. 10. All the time before
che Wind having bin W. S. W.
blew Storms Eaſterly.

1615. Ooh. 1, Aﬀer much Sea
trouble, they had Sight of Land,


but the Sea wrought ſo ould
not Land, Purch. 1. p. w__


S. N. Ventus decumanus.
= 6. Ventt Valias, $. N. 7, Nim-
. I3: Plutt tot. die, 22, Nix.
24, 25. Pluit Goptofe.
27, 28, 29. NNunbi crebri,
_ I3, 14. Pluiz Largiter, v? 15;
XV 2


: :
18, Pluit tots die,
20. Pluit tota Nofe;
28. Pluit Goproſe.
1618, Dec. 14. Beaten back, croſs
Winds hlow'd us back. :
I019,


— A.
yy


1619. May 26. Aſtracan. A great
Tempeſt, Purch, 1. p. 130. Wt 29.
S, V9.%Y:

1620, 4 Febr. ad March 14. Many
Tempeſts, and foul Weather ,
Capt. Sz:ith,. d in V.

March 20. Great Storm , many
Corpo Sants's in the Indies, Purch.
L. p. 620.

Dec. 28. Rainy, Rain p. m. freez
and Snow all Night, Capt.Smzth,
238, =25. dS, S 11. %,

162f. E. Dario Kepleriano , St- IV.

Zan. 2. Much Rain, and dirty. _

14. Nox Pluvia. 25, 26. Ningt-


C40, :
Febr, To. 14. Ventus Validus, & m
I3.
= 21. Ventas decumanus,
22, 23. Ningraum. :
24. Prodtgtoſus ventws, Fienne, &
luwvia, 7-3
27, 28. Pluit largiter. '
March 3, 4. Numbi quos mputat Pict-
nie magnt Fluvi , cum % & 6
grad, tanto duob, diſtent ab Oppoſitt-
04. |
21, 22, Pluit Largiter.
23, 24, 25. ANoftes pluvie.
April 2. Ningidum larga pluoia, & 23,
Y, m22.09.
Dre 8. Alimbi Granaimoſr, m 21.0,


S 21, YL.
May 14. Temp:ſta5, Grando, mn 17, |
&, I-I.V. : 53g
1625. O7od. 23. Veatus Teprdus & tm- |
petuoſus. _
Otob, 25. entus magnus.
Nov. 16. Ningidum.
Dze 17. Pluvia continua;
Dec. 6..;1mbi Grandinofe.
Dre 18. Rune Nivium. Fl |
1626. Jan. 5,6: Vent: Galias & Nt
Ves,


Chap II. 7 Superior Aſpetts more Powerful then bf. :


Dye 10. Ventus decumanus,

Dre 13, 14. Ventus Galidus continau
os _ "oo

12e 19, 19, £471 1\itoes aggerantes;

Fetr. 6. Pluvie Mule. _
Dre 20, Veatus Galtdas.

Dre 22. Nineidum.

Dre 24. Veatus Valiaus,

Wiairch 2. Nenxit multum;

Lie 5, 6. ex alta, |

C0. 1. ad 4. Euri Validi,

Dze g. Veatus Validus,

Dze 13. Eurus Validus.

De 14. Ventorum impetus, Nimbi
HIUIUM,

Dre 24. Ventus eeris ningidus.
£'ov. 27, 28, 29. Vent Validi,
30. Vinerdum.

Dec. 7, 8, 9. Nimbi creori.

1628. Jay. 2. S. N. Ningidums.

24, 25. Nrx Goproſiſſima.

March 1, 2, 3.VentiValidifſimi,

Dze 19, 20. Nzx Gopioſa. |

Dre 29. Nox Ventus 1mpetuoſa,

April 7. Ventus Validgs.

e 9. Feda Pluvia,

Dye 14. Niwofe Granaines,

Dre 17, 18. Grands nives.

De 19. Feds Pluvia.

Ab April 27. ad May 3. St. Vet. Plu
via, & aum 2 & ©periFixas Tem-
peſt uojas meant , Kepl,

May 11. 12. Plar Coil,

Dre 13. Tempeſtas.

' Dee 23. Grand.

Dec. 17. Plut largiter.

Dre 18. Veztus Validus,

23. Dies atra Pluvia.

1648. Dec, 30. Sad - Showr , Wind
= Hail moſt violent, Lightning
weſp.

1651. Sept. 4. Very Wet, while K;
Gharles the IL fat in the Royal


ak,


$ 33. To raiſe our Thoughts up to the Bulk of our Ponderovr Planers,
cis wh firſt to make uſe of Kepler's punctual Diary,where you thall meer


with, not only V:z7bi, Grebri , Plurt Goproſe, largiter,
Ventus magnus , Impetuoſus, Decumanus , Tempeſtas , Atrox , Hor
Now though the ſame hath been pretended in the Inferivur Ai


tota ate, Ntx Plavia,
Horrias, &c
3 VET


this I ſay, that Thoſe Aſpects ſo powerfulthen, though we confider'd them
Solitary, for Methods ſake, in Nature were zot fo 3 when they mounted
ſo high as to produce Extrem:ttes, they were united and backed with


Equal ; yea, with greater Aſpefs than


Truth that the Aſpects of the Super:ours, the Pure Superiour Aſpects, -


themſelves. It beingan undoubred


413.


; "Sands of Superior Config. demonſtrated. Book 11.


of anere ſignal, more Majeſtick Influence , then the Pure Inferiours; or
when a Superiour is mingled with one below him. For, as, beſide the
Vote of Holy-Writ , it is apparent that in an Elephant or Whale, the
Power of God is more ſtupendiouſly ſeen inthe very Buik and Dimenſions
of the Animal, and the Proportionable'Strength z ſo is it among the Ce-
leſtial Bodies, the Congreſſes and Oppoſitions, &c. of the Superiours; the
Behemeths and Lewiathans of the «Ether, _ of greater Bulk, of Hea-
vier and Graver pace, carry more of the Celeſtial Creator's CharaQter
and Impreffion, on the Meaner fo far, that as the Strength of the one,
the Moateots Animal, &c. ſo the Strength of the Other, the Planet is
tncredible.

' $ 34. And therefore be ſure to reckon always, when you ſee any ama-
2zing Extremity of Weather, that the Superiour Planets have the greateſt
Stroke, either by their #z#xt, or by their p&re Concatenations.

s$ 35. Obſerve ſecondly, the repeated frequency of the Extremity, Two
days, Three, Four, Five, Ten, &c. which according to the Narrow In-
feriours Principle, will not hold fo long in any AſpeR of 7 , (except per-
haps, once in 10 or 20 years upon a Station ) and therefore muſt be impu-
red to-a more laſting Radiation. Thus, A* 1621. in March we find Three
Nights together, Rain (we make nothing of 2 days) 4* 1627. Far. 14,15,
x6, Nixcontinua, A® 1628. March 1,2, 3. 4® 1629. Jan. 16, 17, 18. Blu-
ſtring. Dec. 24, 25, 26, 27. — As before, 4® 1625. Dec. 14, 15,
I6, 17. the ſame. Now for Five, Febr. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Stormy, Rai-
oy and Sleer. ;

$ 36.'Tis eafie to parallel thisour of the Table of the Storms recorded,
long before laſt Century: For even A* 1526. we meet with excreme
Darkneſs for 10 days, 4® 1597. Ag. 17. Our Englih Fleet were difperſt,
{o that they met not till September 5.—4® 1598. Jar. 8. lands the Seamen,
having indured many Storms. 4® 1615. Ob. the 1. after 22uch Sea Trou-
bles had Sight of Land. Nay on Sept. g. 1598. the Weather was ſad and
Stormy, that in Two Months they had notone Fair day. Time was when
we thought 5e days too much (when it rained ſo that Corn failed with us
in Ezgland, 1526. ) and yet our AſpeCt or Table is yet more unmerciful 3
for in, ſome years, with ſome interruption more or leſs, we often meet
with 3 Months Diſturbance. Joly, 4 of, September 1547. and 4* 1548,
May, Fane, Fuly.—Add Sept. Novemb. Dec. 1557. and 1577. Func, July,
Aug Sept. (4 Months) 4* 1578. So when Gemma tells us, that Totius Ann:
fatus, -A® 1562. was infeſted with Tempeſts and Storms; our Afpet of
x and anſwer for the firſt 5 Months, found twice in the ſame
Sign in that while. But may TI not muſtake x07 Gauſs, pro Cauſe ? I anſiver,
not well amids ſuch Teſtimony. Ile reach you but one Inſtance ; T he 50
days Rain when Corn failed, we ſcruple not to aflign ro our #, as a Cau-
ſe. Nor will any man elſe, when he ſees the Bodies concern'd, lodged
in X and 2, notexcluding the P of Y and 2 5 but we aflert our Aſpect
to make one, and a great One, and that fo confidently , that by this we
dare convince Lyzofthenes of a flip, who poſt-pones that wet Spring to
7528. becauſe there is no ſuch drenching Aſpects appear in that after year 3
of which Slips there are too many, ſaving the great uſefulneſs of the De-
ſign. ButI do not pretend to convince all by Aſtrology. Concluding
there are more obvious means by comparing 'other Records', &-c.
However this ſlipI evince by this Method.

S 37. The Length and the violent Starts of this Aſpe& being conſide-
red, we need not wonder, if we find prodigious Inundations too often un-
der it, where among others, that at Home, and in Holland, A* cod. though
nor the ſame Month, and our Home Inundation ig Somerſerſtire, ar the be-

ginning


CT


\


Chap. IL leans. 4 Caveat for the Low C untries, &e.


415


pinning of this Century, will never be forgotten by the places CONCer-
red. | |

9 38. Now, ſhall not-we who pretend co great things ſay tomewhiat t
That oor following. Table, Fir(t,and miſerable deluge in Hollins A
ſo many Towns were fwallowed up, tops of whole Turrets to this Day
peep out of the Water, I know .nog on. what account. omitted by ſome


Annalifts, where 100000. People were Drown'd. Iam not ſich an Acheit


as to mapnitie iecond Cauſes to the »prejudice of the Firſt ; In my Philo-
ſophy They illuſtrare his Glories, nqu/Ecliple them, I wouit advie there.
fore, ſome of our beloved Neighbours of the Low Countries, to watch the
Czleſtial Poſitions of «hat cimezin particular there, is ;aconcourlt of ow: naps
Sup*riours.in /; Eſpecially if about the beginnang of Av. which, chey
m2y know, 15 3pt to Floods. For in this year 1521. Y and & .arefound
in * te oneia-he beginning of the. Sign, the other at, the-End,. And js
nor that, Firſt, according to our Principle > And again, is there any, ocher
Aſpect near, that is Conſiderable? And yer again,” his being nocour On-
ly Inſtance in % and &.as weſhall ſee, Who knpWws but a lictle infighe in
Aitrology may fave 100000. Lives ? | a

9 39. The Next dire-laundation at Rowe, where.the waters were Rai-
ſed che depth of the Longeſt Spear 3 They may pleale to take heed. of 2
Congreſs of the Planersin ©, if rwo ofthe Supenouts.be amongſt chem ;
for fo we finda d 2. & in the beginnungi of ,-=,. not. without, alliſtance,
when their Inundation happen'd; and Lo! about a Month after, : whac
with Winds and Rain,Nov. 6.ſuch another Floud, 2 Telluris obrate Glaats,
& pecorum & homines interit us, non ſatis deſcrih1 poſit, ſaith Gemma, -.


Flouds by % &.


$ 40. Arno

991 . Now. 1, Dire Inundation in | at Lowazn, in the mean time fair
Hollarzd , 72 Villages drowned, | Weather, Gawazs 2, 30. 512,06,
Framond. Met. Lib. 5. Stow, P11. 4 2.%s3 add M.3S Be
&, 24. Y. ; 1557: Sept. 10.1n Languedoc, Thunder

1529. Ji? 14. Baſil in Switzerland, | Lightning, Hail, and Floud upon
Rains continual, and Flouds ;z re-| it, which was not in Memory of
membred by a Monument, Lyzc. | Man, Gem. 2,31. Yandd inz,
oL 22. Y, 2 16. ©, E Paradino. f. 14. At Rome,

1530. Oe. 8. Inundation of Tider | and Recorded, Thuanus. And (o
at Kowe, Mizald. hor. not. 11. at the Eaft-Indies,

Nov. 1. Deluge in Hellandand Flan- | 1571, [Eowain , Febr. 5, Great In-
ders, Gem. 1. 183. Grimfton, =g.| dations, Gems. 2, 68, = 28, y,
Y, 7. d. ſupram& 2 , þ. 249. X 6, f,

1532. Aw. wen}, Inundation in Zea- | 1579. Febr. 10. Aﬀter a deep Snow,

nd, Mizald. Surizs, mn 16. d,| continual Raina long time, ſo that
4.42, 23.2.6 2 p. 249. ſupra. | Weſtminfter-Hall was Floated ,
1551.Marowg, Jan. io, Great In-} Stow, m 12. % R. S518, &,
undarion, breaking down the | 1607. an. 10, Vaſt Inundation in
Stone-Bridge of the Country, | Somzerſethire , after a- great Rain
Lys. ® 22. Y, 29. &. Add $ | and Spring-Tide; in ſome places
and Y in . | 20 Miles in Length, Hows, Gal-

F-br. 20. Inundation after the. » re-| wſ. X 7. %, V 2. |

cover'd from the Eclipſe, laſted 1627. Sept. 10, Daxutius Y1pas egreſſus


almoſt two Months, Peacer, 385. pl, m 26. %, I 4.0,
I 21. NY, S 1. FI | Die 18. Roc Waler, Kor.


$556. April 23. Bruxels: Tempeſt | 1629,0506, 2. + eftminſter Hall es
3 [


of Hail, harmful, and Flouding


erve


our Advertiſements, Book ul.


: 416 Intereſt of the Low C. to obſe


ted, 27. ; S 11, &, Floud
in Holſatia. (High Spring Tide,
Gbilorey, Tranſat." 2063.) Yea,
and Mex:co. 3nd (4
1£168;' 'Jan. 23, 24, 25: Norimberg,
Muck ' Rain and


1649. une 17. Rain all Night, High
Flouds, M16, d, = 9g, 6.5
1627. Sept. 9. In Franconia nube rup-
ta tants aquarum is deciatt-ut 1#
al:quot pagrs dowus everſe, homines


Ky. = 4. YL, 196; |


offer Huth, |


cum armentis ſubmerſi, &-c, Galvil.


To theſe we add, which have eſcaped ColleBion,


#1 128. June 14; Floud'at Baſil in
— Lyr. 538. 4 22. %,
229'T6 PR


421547. 4ug.12.CataraRtsandFlouds,
X'g9.'%, M1, Af S'; |
1555: Sept: 21. Weſftminfter-Hall floa-
red; Stow, & 22; 23. Chilarey, m
5 es.  £ WT ;
1670. Marth 10; Inundation, Chrl-
dyey; TranſaR. z2 9. %; SL 23.9.
1571. Dec. 17. Inundation ar the
mein Nemetibas5' at the Rhine
in'France, * 16. Y; 7 26.8.


Wars. | oy
1579. Ofteb. 14. Sea (ſwell'd, Hows,
© 22,d, M19. %. ſupra & $
p.250. |


s
find the ſame Con
Whatſoever other /


1599. Nov. 4. & 14. No end of
ſtormy Rain,Hail and Snow, Hak!.
A 11.09,20U. .

I61 9. Fillit menſe, Plevie fere conti-
nue cum Inund. in Thuringia, Galv,
V 14. V,26, &.

1649. Sept. fire & Ofob: Groſs Water-

louds, IM ©. NY, S o6;

1652. 7un.20GreatFlouds at Doa»:0x-
ton in Glocefterſhire, 5, .,5 2.0,

1668. March | Lenny pl Wind, 0-


verflowing K:2gs-Lyny, & 5. 4%,
m 15.0,


1670. Offober 9. At Bridgewater,


at Welrhpool;, & 6. 1; m 20, @.
680. At Oxford, Inuncation, and
elſewhere, in Zune, Þ din prixc.


x


1. Now hete to continue where we were intercepted 4 t530. we
the & in <= holds on ſtill, arid III. of the VIL in 2:
ts fall in, which we may know by their Livery :
for we find a Superiour in i, and two,


I may fay, in 7 ; That's the


Badge of a Drowning Planet, oppoſing to irs Correlate, 2..


further; ſuppoſe an experienced Obſerver ſhould
have faid;Y and G Jr in 2 ,are dangerous; may not he have rea-
ſonto think he hath obliged the Perſons concerned, when within 4 © years
after,he hears that in Languedor,there happened ſuch Flonds from Exceſſive
Storms of Hail 'and Rain, as merited a place in the French Chronicler ,
Paradin; ſuch Flouds as were not within the memory of Man : While
the Caiiſe, Yands were found again in the ſame Sign. They may ſay,
What are they concerned with the French Chronicle ? I anſwer, I was
willing to make an Obſervation for their uſe. Concerning the Intereſt
that the Sign 2 hathin Inundations, which = may the more eaſily be-
lieve; if it be bur for this, that their Flouds often happen about OF. and
N6v.where tis odds bur ſome Planet or other is lodg'd in 2 .Nay,l can pro-
duce them threenoted Immaations more, Firſt, 4® 1565. 74an.6.where & and 2
arein 2.4 1570. Nov. 1.6 and 2 in 7. And before thatA®15 52. Now. 19.
beſide the © of Hh and &', two Planets were in 7, the Þ making the
Third, two or 3 days before the Floud. What more we have to ſay, we
may expect it in ournext and laſt Aſpet. In the mean while if they like
to obſerve the Polations of this Aſpect, as they are preſented in his Table.
| happening in other Signs belide 2, it my not be fruitle. Better be
. Falſe then be Surpriſed opce,


$ 42. And to wade no


alarmed twice or rin


$4}. We


Chap. II. How v & are for Inund, Monſtrous Pofuture of Super. 4 -


 — — — —


CE EE... ts
6s 43. We note the Difference between Land- Flonds and Inandations Ma-
r1ue;the Firſt are cauſed by exceſſive Effulion of Rain, Hail,Snow, reſolved
on a fudden. The other is cauſed by the ſame haſty Augmentations of the
Sea,at what time theBody of theSea is ſwell'd and rarified,as well as diſtur-
bed.Swell'd I fay, by the Warmth,as well as tofs'd with the Winds, where
'tis more apt to forget it ſelf by overtopping its Bounds ro a more furious
Eruption. Somewhat to this purpoſe I have ſaid before,” diſcourſing of
the Tides, and their encreaſe. I gather my proof at preſent from the
Hour of the Invation, which was , faith Gr:#-/fcae , in that of 1536 at
Noon, at which time, not the. © alone, but * and & with him, were
on the Meridian: this raiſed and diſturbed the Waves to that unpreventi-
ble Height, as they overflowed All, though the Spring-Tide wanted two
Hours of its Height. And thus much for a Touch at Flouds and Deluges.
9 44. Now, remembring that I make Y, in ſome Caſes, a Refſiſter of
Moiſture I may be asked how ke comes to be a FloudingPlaner ?As by our
Table ic appears ; I anſwer, The Character of the Planet is not to be
drawn from the extraordinary Poſition. There are ſome Monſtrous Po.
firions in Heaven, where you may not know what to fnake of the Celeſti-
al Body , unleſs you define it by Fury : There happens a certain irritation
ſometimes among{t theſe Celeſtials,wherein they teem'to differ from their
ordinary Temper: Y may aſſiſt or abite the Moiſt Influence of this or
that Planer, but you muſt not imagine He. can give Check to them Al;
He may deal with one, be ir & it {elf 3 He cannot oppoſe an Army :
When they are indifferently inclined, he grudgeth the Moiſt  effet. He
cancrumble a Showr into a Drifle, or Dult it into a Fog, &c. But when
they are in a heightned elevated Eſtate , He is ſc #far from Moderati p,
that he Aggrivates the Effet ; ſo a Good Horſeman; by a ſeaſonable
Check; etirves his Beaſt from ſtumbling ; and in a greater Hazard,
where he cannot tecover that Stumble, his own Weight adds to his Fall.
We met with ſome few Flouds under % and 7, and ſome under Wand
?, and more; now, under % with #. All we can conclude hence, is,
 thar this later Aſpect is more apt to excels of Rain, thanthe two former,
which mult be granted, as by his Prerogative above 2 and 7. Buta truly
Moiſt- Influence conduceth to a kznaly, 2s well as a HYiolent Moiſture; as
ind and?, 2 and?, Oand?, 6s. is manifeſt. TheObjecion Ile aC
ſure you, is no ſurprize; for Ialways obſerv'dit, that Y is the only Pla-
net of a Singular Speculation; where he cannot prevail, he doth as the
reſt ; and being a Superiour, addsno ſmall Weight to the Production. TI
call a Moxſftrous Pohtion, ſuch as Firſt, is not Tranfttory, bur laſting, and
that, of tedious , extradrdrnary , unmeaſurable Length. Secondly, I call
that Monſtrous, which within the term of its duration, mixes and incor-
potates it (elf with Aſpets of the ſame Excels and Fury. On the Firſt ac-
cbunt all the Superiour Aſpects are concerned , becauſe of their lsng dura-
tion,from whence it comes to pals, that whenſoever the Teferiours, ſuppoſe,
Fe ſet tos Extraordinary Rain, They being not expired, fall in with the
reſt, and where they light,they fall heavily. On the ſecond account,which
is thenext notion- (for Monſtroſity oft-cimes is founded in Mixture ) we
find our preſent Aſpect, of it (elf not ſo furious, for exceſs of Wet, bur
where he is mixed with Configurations of & , of as great Inclination. So
in thoſe Monumental Flouds at Baſil, wiz. 1529. an f of Y and &, not
Solitary, but wixt; & oppoſing 2 as well as %, V conjoined with 2
as well as oppoſing 4: In that of Zeland, Now. 1532. there's d concer-
ned with 2, and & again with 2. Seep.250. Add a 34. at Marpurg,
7an.10. 1551, There's & and ? , the Flouding Aſpect, as well as V & the
Provoking. Again ; 1566. April 23; at Breſels, ye thall find 4 mixture of


Y 5 Lightn. and Fiery Meteors:


h and 8, on &'s part; and V. and 2
that at Languraed, Sept. 10.1557. YE
& with our Aſpet. And whatif th


temporary, 'tis the ſawe Caſe. This he ;
Aſpe&t. The Power reaches further when he is jorzea, as it were, in Com-
m1//iz with another, Grandee (for of them we only treat now,then when


they at by themſelves.


1


on V's part. To add no more
ſhall find a Commixture of Hh and
be not mingled ? If they be con-
call the publick Capacity of an


Lightning, Thunder,  & , Ignita Met.


Li 45. Anno F - |

1526. April 20. Lightning fired Ma-
gazin in Helwetsa, Lys. & 21. &,
24. Y.

1528, 7a. 17. ad 21, At Apalechen

inthe Weft-Indies , Tempeſt of

Thunder , threw down Trees,


' Porch, 3.p. 1502-S 13, 6 ,28,%.


15 j Dec. 16. Frightful Tempeſt of

ightning and Thunder, Garew de

Variol. 271, N 25. d, Mm 17. V.;
Add h ? Stat. Ir 2.

1537. May 26. Heydelberg Magazin
fred "me Lightning, Lyc. S 9.

13. &, | |

1547.Sept.8.In theProvince ofGuat:-
zalaa Town of that Name whol-
þ overthrown by Lightning ,

nſchot, Here's a Mixtore, V
oppoſing & in * Mt, and © joi-

_ ned with & Partile d in * 24.

I5 $7 e 4. Tonitrs cum vehemente

e. Dee, V g. 3, 15. Þ. Mix-
Ju he. Wo. ju
ly 7. Lovain, Ho. 4; Tor. Ingens,
14. 19. , 51.4. Add h
oppoſ: © 2 in S.

1551. Jaz. 13. In many places of
Germany , (ach Rai hunder
and Lightning, as if Dooms-day,
in the Peoples fears, were approa-
ching, Lyc. It 21, Y%, 28. &. &c.

1558. Sept. 1. Tempeſt of Thunder,
Gem, 1.p. 31.9) 23, *VÞ.2 0.
Yea, @ Y. $ Partile, with other
Mixture.

1569. July 15. Fulmen, grando pugno

+, Gem. 2, 84. Il 19. d, vv?
5 RS  Ligh ing Hartnful

1575. July 3O. cnn ll,
Hailſtones 7 Inches, Hows, 608:
%S 27. Y, dl 9. s.Add SL 1


1577. Aug. 4. Sunday 9m. at 7A
25 mv Lightning rent the
Church Wall, ſcorching Eyeral,


——


flaying 20 Perſons, fo at Buzgey,
from Norwich 9 Miles, Hows 612.
A 24. &, M16. Y.

1580. Ju 17. Showr and Thunder,
Th, Voyage, Hak!. 7 5. %, &


Io, 4,
i598, March. 26. Great Lightning,
Thunder, Hail, ſtill Cold, Hak!.
Coles. How, 1302.0 12. %, S
10. d,'
1602, June 30. Sandwich in Kent ,
ightning and Hailſtones,7 Inches
about , lay a Foot deep on the
Ground, Hows, $12, = 2, 4,12,
1609, March 13. Venti Pluwvia Toni-
<4 per, biduuys Arthuf. 5 13. %,


18, &,

1610. Shifting of Tides, Thunder
with Rain, Ghilarey, p. 99. Tf 10.
Y, Vo.d;

1616. July 6. St. N. Rain, Light-
ning, Thunder, Schouten, Purch. 1.
I03. 2 21,%, T 42.6, with
Mixture of Tf 20. $.

21. eſp. much Rain , Thunder and
Lightning, 2 19. %, If 16. &;
im Lat. 1. 4g. I3.

30. Thunder, Lightning, ſo that the
Ship ſhook, and ſeem'd to be on
Fire, with a Showr of Rain, never
the like, 14. 7 19.Y, 22, d.

Aug. 8. A. L. + Rain hard with
z NF ightning, 2 18.

, 28, &,

1617. April 24: offtus, Ton. Plat,
pl. w” I. %, &\ 26. & Stat, h
in


©

30. Toxuit, Kepl. = 1.%, 0 27.
& Stat.

Dec. 15.Ventus valid, Tonuit, ? 25;


d, 2 5.%V.
I619. July 21.A Perſon ſtruck dumb
e, with a Flaſh of Light-
ning, Purch. p. 659. V 12. %. >
Io, &, Y in Trop, Stat.
| Part


Chap. II.


VS Thunders and Lightmngs.


———


419


Part 2.


I621, March. 31. & die ſeq. Niwoſa
grande & tonut, Kepl. & 23. %,
_.
April 14. Tozitru Pluwia, S 26.
Y; 1 18.0, with a Mixture of
? with the Pleiades, *

20, Large pluit, Tonutt, Kepl. & opp.
V and 2 witha Mixture of ©.
22, Gelhaum pluit, Tonuit.\L & ut ſup.
Faly 22. Frigus pertonutt tot. die,
21. NV, 10. d |
29. Tempeſt, grand. fulmen. m 21.

YL, 5-14. 09.


1627. Fuly1,8,9,10,12,16,17,18,1 9, |


21.22. Lightning , Thunder; m21.
Gy TS:
Aug. 3. Tonitrs, |
10, Tewpeſftas horr1da, 22. V., &-


21.0,
Sept. 9. Nifſe in Sieſta, Turris ful-
mine Tatta & Galorſ, m 26.


I'3.0. | |
Dec. 18. Prage, Fulmina, S 21.%
-" #-3%. &S. |
1628. April 13. Stelle mage, Kepl,

Vw. 3.%, $8.09, |
April 23, 24. Tonitrua, fo at Norim-

rg, Y 2,.%, © 14. 0.

9. Hatford in Berkshire, Great Th;
and Noiſes, ſometimes a retreat.
Hs, 1043. \* 3. V, $6.0.

28. Fuleura, io at Norimberg; V 2.
V,>S 17.0; |

30. Thunder at Nor:mberg, 14em.

May 16. Ventt, Frigus, fulgura, V6.
YL, S 27. &, with a nearer
mixture of 2-S15;


$|


Dec. 22. Gelam ardensfo at Norimn-
berg, © 23. 6, 14%,
1629: Febr: 27. Tonuit, 10 at Norim-
berg, 28; %, = 14. &, with
2 X 16, |
-pt. 12. Virge Calum ardens, 10 at
orimberg, ” 27. %, S 2.4&.
Ooh. 1. Stelle magne, Kepl. V? 27:
.%, S 11. &; |
Fune 5. Thunder and Storms, Kyr.
H 22.4; X 12, VÞ.,
17, 19. Lightning and Thunder, |
X 12. Sd ,M 4. W.
5-Rin and Thunder,. X 12. % ,”%
4:0...


Fuly 3, 8,10, 14, 16, 18, 24. uſque
30.cum :
. Aug. 1. Thunder. & in X and mx,
1631. May14, 18,19. 25. Thunder.
June 1. Thunder, with a Mixture
of h and &. Wy b-T-
Jaly 24, 31. Thunder, with a mix-
ture of . Þ and &.
Aug. 11, 17, 19. 1V. Thund.
O74. 6. Lightning, oL 28, %., m2,


g. I rk

1637. Jan. 25.Storm, Wind, Snow,
Rainy, Thunder: .

1639. April 6. Thunder.

. May 9; Blite, 21. Blite. | |

1640. Jax. 24. Terrible: Storm of
Lightning;.. . LP'Þ Werke

April 2, 4. Meteor, Thuiider.

I6. Schlofſen Doznier. .


* 25. Thunder, Rain, ; Kyr,


7an. 8. Baſil, Lightning,
Febr, 6. Lightning, Baſal.
Febr. 23,25, Thunder:


March 15, 16, 31. :
| Thunder;


April 1.

My 4  -.. |
1641, June 10,19, Lyc; Donner, +

_ Rain chroughout, with Thun:

<6,

July 2, 3, 21. Thundef,

25, 28,30. Lightning.
Avg. 6; Thunder..
1644. Jan. 16. Schloſſer. .

27. Thunder -and Schloſſer.

28, 29, 30. Thunder. _ + __..
Jaly 1, 2, 3,5, 17, 18, 19. Thunder.
20, Lightning at n.

22, 30. Thunder. _

Aug. 1,7: Thunder.

16, Thunder.

29. Thunder.

30. Lightning, Thander,

31. Great Thunder and Rain,

Sept. 3, 4. Thunder.

20, Lightning. __

21, Lightning at Night:

22, 23, 24,25. Thunder.


1646. Aug. 8. Thunder.


16, 17. Stark Thunder: _..
1648, Dec.25. Much Li ning Hail
1650. April 295 FormidableThunder


near


1
EEE. f:


1651. Aug. 22, Memorable Thunder
and Lighen. at Worcefter ;yea moſt
part of , nc) m ar gp 7 2:%;

5 .


Wha:


P


——


— ibis


4.20


Influence Czleſt. with a Vengeance. Book II


 $ 46. What if I ſhould/letthis Table take its Fate, and ſhift for it ſelf
preſuming that no man can be ſo fait aſleep, who will not awake at ſuch a
Peal of Thunder, fo thick, - ſo continued. For when 4 1621. our ſecond
Part, or Diary; takes place,unleſs in the years reſerved for h and Y., there
is ſcarce a year wanting;which anſwers not ' and X , both which we have
termed /iolent. All the Superiours may be well mer for Moderation ;
They know not what i &, when Rampant ; Enpaſſant, "They are quiet
enough. Tonttru Ingens , July 7. 1548. Great Lightning, May 26. 1537.
Tonitrua weulta, June1.&t. 16,17. 1627. and Allday long, Fuly 22. 1621. and
421644.—Not with Flaſh only,or Noife,but with harm at Prague, for that
Kepler means by Eulmina, Dec. w8. 1627. for 'tis not Topeit, ror Fulgara,
nor To#itru ; that Learned Manis Diſtin&t; If the Reader ſhall confulc
the place, he will ſee more by the Neighbour Yentas horrib:les, throughour
Bohemia, which roots up Trees, and tears down Houſes, which is nothing
but a Dark Lightning, the Violence of Fire wrap't up in Winds, which
Notion, time was, I admired in Fromona; but fince I {ee Ariftorle himſelf
owns the Cognation, He may be applauded for it. You have thelike
Inſtance here:, Jane 17, 1528. and more you ſhall meer, April 20. 1526,
May 26. 1547 Sept. 9. 1627. |

s 47. Weread of Lightning 747 por the Ground in the Moſaic Records.
It may glifter fer off, and, it may be t60 zear us, to embrace us, to lick us
into our Diffolucion 3 -fuch Lighrning , where che Ship ſakes , and ſeems
to be on Fire; July 30.1616, And ſuch Lightning that ſtrikes a Mortal Man
dumb, and Lame, July 21.1619. which.is a Mercy , compared to thoſe
who are Slain Qutright. Aug. 4. 1577. Lightning accompanyed with Hail,
here 7 Inches abour. July 36. 1575. Hailſtones 7 Inches abour. June 30.1602.
Lightning as if Doows-day were coming. June 13. 155t, Nay, where it
* come, 1 ſhould think; at Guat:azala (as of old at Sodow)where the whole
Town was deſtroyed,and 120 even Gbrif:ar Inhabitants, 4*1 547.Thele are
the Angels of God 3 the Drad-doing Aſpects of Heaven, the Watch-


' Word and Sign given when Vengeance takes place z the Armies Celeſtial


of which Dominus Zebaxth is Lord, who terrifies us, not with Noiſe on-
ly, of Canon or Drumy April 9. 1628. but with Fire and Sword , and
ows from the Celeſtial Artillery. |

s$ 48. All the harm 'tis like' is not remembred, ſee the boldneſs, the fre-
quency and familiarity of the Vie, view 1627, 1628. 1629. *Tis Germa-
zy indeed, but by Keplers leave, we have faid, Germany never heard
Thunder but from the of an Aſpect ; See then again; 1640: 1647.
ſee and admire, 1644 All Sumwzwer long it Thunder'd, ſometimes 3. ſome-
times 4 days together z and where was our Aſpett all theſe 4 Months,even
at the breech of the Canon, No man ſhall deny ir, but he who ſcorns to
be contin A mans —_— Er ISIS

9 49. That Comets have we have ſaid; appears
from hence, that they are found commonly under a Conflux of Planets
in the ſame Sign, IIL or more. Secondly, That they are found at the time
when the Planets Halt, that is to ſay, when they are Retrograde or Stati-
onary; in particular 2 , who is the greateſÞGriple, 3ly. Under Apes of
Planets, eſpecially Saperiour , we are engaged only to the Later ; bur for
the Readers more abundant Confirmation,- we may have leave to note the
reſt as they $3 LORIN 4 |

5 50: Ther 1618; ſaith Riceiolar,, belide ſeveral Flaming Appearan-
ces, preſents the World with 3 or 4 Comets. Now I takeit, we need
g0 no further for Evidence , becauſe no lefs than 3 of the 4 fall under
the Aſpe&t of % and &. The Firſt, we confeſs, do's not belong to us;
for we are not {© injurious as to graſpall. The Second, whateyer -- Was,

omer


p


Chap II. A  Martio- Jovial C umets conſider d.


421


Comet or Meteor, ſeen by Shickard in Wittemeerg, Ofteb. to, 20, or at
Galen, by Urſin, Ofob. 20, 30. or by others; "Tis certain we find an @
and & Partilein & and =, and therefore not far removed on the days
following, from ev. 12, 22. ad Dec. 3,13. 228, Y, tg. 6d, 11 degr,
diſtant. The Third, which is call'd THE Comer, known by our Fore-
Fathers in England by the Death of Queen Az, that followed, began when
% was in '? 21. and dentring into X. This laſting to Jaz.. to, 2o. And
does not our f of % and & then expire 2 Comets that uſually begin at
2 Lutncunx, may expire at a 2uincunx. Will you know = ap I ay
that this Comet depended upon Y and &, you may ſee by its Retrograde
motion 3 for beginning with Mm, it never reſted till it came to M, which
was about the 10, 20. of Dec. by Ricciolus his Table: To & and S 'tis
true, in J«z. but that is upon new ſupplies. Or, if you'l ſay, . that's a Pre-
rence; then, I pray, nark this ; that on the very laſt day, v1z. Jos. 1,11.
1619. of its apparition,our Alpett of % and & is expired. Now for that of
1664. ſee h and V. Let us view. them further from the following Table,
9 51, For the Firſt, A* 1531. from the beginning of A, directing his
Courſe to =, his Northern Laticude decrea{ing leads us to affign che time
of their Conception and Expiration . it began Azg. 6. Bur is not S the
immediate Sign before s. poſle(t the Comet-Founder and Arenot $.
and alike prepared 3 © % ? are all together there. But mark the AC
ped ro which the Comet haſtensy, our V -Congrels with & in <>, which
about the time of Extinction were in a Partilez and Does not this agree r0
what we have plainly ſaid? Fey”
s 52. I havenothing to lay to the ſhape of this, or 'tother Comer, which
is pretended to be That of a Dragon. We leave that co the excellenc
evelias's Induſtry 3 *tis plain 'twas of no long continuance. There's lic-
tle elſe faid of it. A {mail Comer, % © and 2 help to blow itup 5
but nothing could have been done, had not & been a Signs diſtance before
Em. . |
. . $ 53, That of A* 1557. in the Month of Ofaber, while & was in 7
the firſt 11 days, began in the z:ckof our Partile d,, and appeared in the
very Sign 2 , where, I fancy , whea one Sign! is poſſels'd with Pla-
nets on one fide in m , and our ſuppoſed Planets on the Tropick of
on the other {ide,there's room for a Comet to appear in the muddle, and
dance, as it were, ina Ring, whilſt his Frogeaioor ſtand and look on.
' 9 54. Thenext of 1621, is rightly r@rr'd by Obſervers of thoſe times
toa d of LF and 7 nor could they avoid it, ſecing thoſe Aſpects
ply at the very day for the ext Fare: Nature writes plain, ſometimes,
ro encourage us to ſtudy her Faf-hazd. It continued 18 days, even to Bar-
tholomew-tide, and appeared in w, (for when others ſay m7, I fear a miſtake
of the Character) and there's reaſon for it 3 but becauſe we have not any
certainty of the Meaſure, the duration prolonged by ſome beyond A4ug.24.
I won't ſhoot one uncertain Arrow to find another. Now; this Comer
is a Planetary Original, 7. e. with the Fixed,becaule it appeared under Comes
Berenices, which is a due diſtance from its Progenitors, & and © in 1,
and %. oppoling. - | ; ;
$55. The Faces dap of 1577. Nov. 2. laſted 3 Months; it l#gins
with a Partile Aſpe&t of Y. and 2, but & and % are within Terms of
the firſt Month, and therefore according to our Method claims Title to
the Comer. It d had nor been in, with the other two! ; the Ternary
had failed, and the ſazze Sign had not bin poſſeſs'd. We have ſaid that a
Conjun#1ional Comet laſts not long 3 That Rule hath its Limication, unleſs
the Planets concerned be Syperiours , and unlefs, 2. there be equivalent
Supplys3 among which I reckon # Stationary for two Months, &c. _


—__—


—_—


is Catets: Natures Toxt-Head. - Book IIÞ


1 wontreckona D of h and VU; leaſt then it may be fonnd to belong to
thenext. - All that I ſhall ramblingly note here, that this is the Comet
which Tytho obſerved caſt its Train on the averſe fide, directly from *
rather than the © ; but Thcho durſt not believe his ownEyes, for the Length
of the Cometical Train, . could nor (faith he) proceed from 2 , and with-
out queſtion he was there in the right ; but How came & tobe overlook'd,
and , Do's not he-grow toward a d with 2 , doe's not thar alter the
Caſe-? When the Comet was a Month Old, & ahd 2 were in 4. Co-
mets arEmoſt diligently decypher'd by this Learned Age in the Geometri-
cal way (where again I applaud Hewvel;us) Yer, may be there would be as
much Fruit, if the Aſtrological way were not wholly negleted. Again,
if it appeared atthe beginning of 5 was- it not of Planetary Deſcent,
when h*was thereat thar Inſtant > Did it not expire juſt where & and 2
came © a Partile Aſpect? Tr 1 |

$ 56. For that of 1578. They give this account of-rt,” that 1t was ſeen at
ho. g. of the Night,witha long Train toward the North,and the two lefſet
Comets followed it, with” ſome other Meteors, but -quickly vaniſhing,
They givEus no account of the Sign, much leſs the degree where this Co-
met appeared, or how long it laſted; If our Anceſtor had been fo kind, —
it had beta no harm. T ſpake lately of Aſtrological Confidence, this Co-
met appeared, it ſeerns, to the South-Eaſt at 9 at Night; then ler any
man fee "whether it.was" not todg'd in? andit fo, firſt our Planetary
Original is evident , for the © with his 2 and 2 newly entred It; do be-
get their Like in the Oppoſite Sign, but they could not be fo fruicfl, till
our Aſpe&entred, and 'being Stationary near the Equinox, I muſt not ſay
with our-Author, that'Þ was in d with V at that hour; but I avow the
Influence, yet omit itz for if I ſhould conſider ever the Lunar Influence,
I ſhould'nievet' have done. 4 99 |
* 9 57. Here before we ſtir, we have another AſpeR of V & ready for
our Purpoſe, in the Month of Ofoer this very year; we are obliged
with the day of 'its riſe; where we find d Stationary in the beginning of
Y, oppoſing Y (to {ay no more) at the end of =. This Comet is omir-
red by Hevelrus, but the diligent Lubiziec from Fabricius and Echſtorm pre-
ſents it; '' This Comet laſts to the. years end; Nay, we hear of it in 7az.
1579. Now; by my reckoning, our __ of Y & laſts all that while ;
and forall as I ſee, expired at thg.end of the Month , when it came to 4
Partile '@ 3 ſuch as theſe 1 call®Oppoſitronal Comers. Fabricius tells us
it appear'd in the place where the Formet vaniſh'd.

9-58,” The-preat Comer of 1580. hath { if you be pleaſed to remem-
ber what T have ſaid) as great and Illnſtrious Original, the © with his 2
and %in == (you ſee there's no denyal of our Principle ) with our great
Aſpect of % and & are great Signs, and laſt to the 14. January, StiloVe.
ters, where ſome ſay;it ended. The Continuation is not obſcure ; eſpeci-
ally, when- Y and 6 are ſcarce dif-ingaged : or if they be, the Comet
rhereabout expired.  -

- 9 59. The next of 1585. begins with an f of © © , the Comet appea-
ring oppoſed to ©, conſequently near to h , which is Natures Text hand,
ſo plainly Legible; ic laſted abouta-Month from Q#9. 8. becauſe of the
Aipe&in It and 2, &c. but not longer thana Month , becauſe I find not
©? *?, orany II. in oneand the fame Sign.

$ 60, £ 1590. The Comet holdsa matter of 12. days. No Planet Re-
trograde, no concourſe of III. in the ſame Signz only Two in.Y, and
Guy in 2, which it ſeems is not ſufficient, except % and &# be amongſt
them.

s 61, £1595, Three Planets are gettidg into 1, and that is pret

. we


C2


Chap. IIS tar in$ erpentartius cribed to . & : Summary of the C. 42


-)
x


well, with our Aſpe&t of Y and &, the Comet ending by that time they
came together tothe Partile d.

9 61. A® 1607. A Comet of about 50 days duration, an oppoſal, % ©
began ir, but enheartned by our Oppoſition of V and & 3 nordo's a Par-
tile P faila Comet, if on the Equinoctial Point V , as Potent as a Pla-
tique. .

” 62, We have a New Star alſo to be aſcribed to this Radiation , that
it may not be out-done by the precedent Aſpect of V 8, viz. Thatof
OXfob. 1604. in Serpentarias ; of which Kepler, among others, wrote a
Diſcourſe. Nor do I fo much as doubt in the leaſt the Truth of this Af-
{ignation. For have we not ſeen a great one, That of 1572. relating roa Pla-
netary Congreſs ? But that which makes me the bolder js, that I have
Friends to back me, ſothat if we runthe Riique of a Cenſure, we ſhall
not ſuffer alone; for Thuanus delivers, that it was the general per{waſion of
all who look'd upward , 20d 17 Conjuntione Fours + Martis, Il. Kalend.
OXfos.contingtt hoc Phanomenon acctnſumggc.and Thuanys had moreWit than
to gainſay ir. Only to aFoid repetition, we muſt nor diſcourſe of ir here;
but defire ic may be demur'rd to the greateſt and laſt Aipe&t of h and Y.,


A Summary of the Gomets of W and @.


$ 63.1531. 4x8. 6.44 Sept. 3. 27.0,


£- 20, VU. Krecrolus Milichins, del-
cribed by Appar.
1541. Aug. 21: A 8.d, mg. 14.
Q, Cometa in forma Draconts,Gau-
aa loner tenea, Ecftorm, Labien.
1557. Menſe.O Fob in Signe 7, cerca
PU FS 1n fine I, aut V prive.
* _ conjeflure deturlocus,

I558. Aug. 6. ad 24. in &\, actenſus,
X28,Y, A6.0.

1577. Nov. 9. Europe. Nov. 1, Pe-

_ Srl. Vet. >=4. N, 24. d.

I578., y 16, V7.9, *=:2, YN,
of 9. poſt occaſum Soles.

Oob. menſe, iz ſronte Pegaſs tterum
wiſus eft. Cometa obſcurus atque pallt+
aus, NV 2. &, £- 22, We

1580. Oftob. 2{ ad Jar. 14. 7 11.%,


If 15, &;

585. 0a, 18-44 Now.5. 72 8.0,
IT 10, V, .

1590. 4 Feby. 23. Styl. Vet. ad March

6. Hevelins, = 14. VL, 18.0.

1597. Ante Jul. 16. ad Ang. 9g. = 24
7 T 9g.%Y,


1607. Sept. 15. St. Vet. ad Nov. 5.
4, Y, 7 12.0.

1609, May 19. & 10. &, 11. Y.

1618. Comets Br emus Aug. 25, ad Sept.
5. Cometa altera, Of. 10. 4d 20:
= 28, Y, m8, 6, Kepler, Ric-
er0lus, Draco volans,per caput An-
oxy , Schichard apud Riccto-
PA

Cometa tertius, Nov. 12, 22. ad Dec.

13. 2 28, Y, 29.06.
ov. 1. Igneum M:teor.incyrvatum;
— , Z 7. Spire , Conreta wiſus
th.

Cometa quartus, 4 Nov, 14, 24. ad
Zan. 14, 24. & 29. Þ, i 10, 6
1664. Dec. 4. per 3. menſes, Hevelins,!

1de ſub h &
MO tie hd wnpe ante
g as bigas '5 angry and ter-
rible. Nor could al wy Epicu-
rear Pond les applyed to my fan-
cy perſwade me to the cont
TCD. os
1681. News of a Comet in Lithu-


ani, Dei. 8.8  Y 8. Vide ctiom
£3 i


5 64 Now it will betimeto turn'the Scenes fromAdmirition toFear 30r
admire ſtill; ifour Aſpect be of an EarthShaking Spirit , and it ſeems *


- for we have at hand a Table of Earth-movin


as Copionsas need to be ,


have not beſpoke the Aſpe& ar the fime ofthe Concuffion; nor have I þy
an Engine, or Helmonz's Spirit In


t mov'd the Earth at the time gf
Q-5


——


—_—_—_


=


% s Dire Earthquakes. by


> Book I1I.


theConfiguration : I have only ſtudied part of Natures Alphabet, and
made a fe to put the Letters together, and interpret by Hiſtory.


$ 65. We begin with the laſt Cen-


S206 Veſuuius Flagrat ardente Go-
axta, Ricciolus  W 4 are found
in July; W and & in Aug and


t. Ee.

1577. June 26. Nordling in Germany
527. Jane Ruin of 2000 Houſes by
T. M. and Hurricane, Lyc. %
in joyned with as great Movents
viz, Rh opp. ©2 2% in Trop.

1530. At Cubagua, Sept. 1. The Sea
roſe 4 Fathoms from its ordinary
Courſe. The Earth did in


many places, whereout ſprung
=s 5p Water as black as Ink,
&-c. Many Houſes feil, Parch, III
$68. 2 0in=, Yea, % and &
on each fide the tor.

1531. Liſbon in the Month of Fer.
You heard of before in Þ &', bur
in Zuly un, Mszald.

eyou) an


Lyc. There (Ipromiſe


3. Lal ſhook for 15 days, % and
1538, Italy or 15 days, % an
- were entred already in Mah,
and ata competent diſtance, ſuch
2s makes Work in the Earth, be-
fides other Aſpects.
1527: Mount «AMina flamed , ſaid
tfchius, who heard the news.
Lycofthenes puts it the year be-
fore, April 1. and tells us that
all ry near the Puteol;,
were {o haraſs'd, that there was


therefore

in Smuſt be allowed ;

the nextis our Aſp. £%& in
= ad gr. 20, aft,


1551. Jan. 28. Liſton. A fatal day
for beſide terrible Meteors an
Rain of Bloud, faith Fryt)chiws,an
Earthquake beat down 200 Hou-
ſes, and kill'd 1060 perſons ; d
returns Retrograde to joyn with
Y atthe end of 77. Other pla-
ces ſuffer this Month by Tempeſts
and Inundations. Piclences ſel.
dom come alone, Add the Hill
Pacatepec, whoſe Mouth or Grater
was half a League over ; this Hill
had not emitted any thing for 10
years before, Purch. III. 1124. Al-
ſo at Ga:x0s, 70 houſes were ſunl;,
Parch. II. 1695. See the conſenc
of the parts of the World ! Some
=_ more diſcernible than others.

iſely noted by Thuanus before:

I556. April 16, Gonftantinople, T. M.
threw down many Towers ; and
the Church of Sar#s Sophia ;
of a Truth % & are juſt entred
on their Aſpet, S& 3. VU, 7 3.8,

1570, They fy Ferraria in Italy had
fits of ing for two years to-

gether, From. In the former of theſe

years, 412. the preſent, I have an

P of U & from the end of Fey.
to the midſt of Fuze, & goin
Retrograde on purpoſe to oppole
Y,, and when that expires, a ;d
of Hh and & begins 3 - Theſe two
Afpects we have told you are un-
quiet when _y meet.

1571. The ſecond of theſe unguiet
years we meet with an Earth-
quake of our own, at K:naftor
in Herefordſtire , Feb. 17. Stow,
668. Þ X 1, & 17. the midſt of X
© alſo in the beginning of the
Sign, 2 and Z at end. Our
AſpeRt alone do's not effect ir, zor
isit done without it.

I 7 {mg 1. At Venice, thence to

lorense, thence to Gortray in Gal- +
lia Togata, deſtroying that City,
once the fineſt in Italy, Thuarnus 3

V% and & in * Mr, in the

middle. See elſewhere for this

year inthe Iſle of $. Mzchael, (4*


1591.) Purch.
«5871,


Chap. IL =


+ 1581, Angoango a Village of Peru,was
ruin'd chus,a great part thereofwas
rai{ed up, and carryed away,many
of the Inatans ſmothered , and
that which ſeems incredible, the
Earch that was ruined did run
and ſlide upon the Land, as if it
had been Water or melted Wax,
which I, by the way, note for St.
Peter's fake, who mention the
melting of the Elements > But
the Month isnor ſpecified; all we
can ſay is this, if chis direful
Calamity was inffited on thele
Sorcerers and Idolaters ( for ſuch
they are noted.) In the firſt half
year we thew God's Celeſtial
Scourge in our Aſpe&,the ſaddeſt
cri:icalplace of Heaven, w:z. its
Tropical Purliews.

1586. July 9. June 29. T.M. in the
Grvidad Real the RoyalCity in the
Weft Indtes,which run170 es
along rhe Coaſt, and overchwart
inthe Sterre,50 nes, it ruin'd
a great part of the City, the Sea
ran two Leagues into the Land,
riſing above 14 Fathom. Acoſta,
Fromond. &&- Purch. lil. ggt. Let
the Reader be judge of our Super-
ſtition, our Aſpect now is in dc
of the Tropical Heights, as be-
fore it was in #.  Beheve this
when you (ce chat the fame, % and
S at the ſame year, cauſed an
Earthquake, and a dire one too ; |
for all che City fell, and ſome
People flain at Guatzmala, Purch,
11T.929. even on Dec. 23.

1586. At the chief Town in Jaws
Major, ficuate near a burning hill,
fays Dr. Heyltn. This year the
Hill brake forth exceedingly, op-
preſſed infinice numbers of men,
and caſt - great Stones into the
City for 3 days together. . But
now & is got in a Cardinal [1:0 -
Ar@Squares alſo (by theway) of
ſuch Power ? . Ask our Famous
Gveadiſh whether within three
Moaths after he felt noe another

uake 3 (how did the Shore
tremble when he felt che. concu(:
fioa ar S:a?) Lat. 33. on March

22, Hakl. p. $10, at what time V


% & Prodigious Earthquates.


I werenot far from the 0a Car-
dinal 7. But wemuſt not med-
dle with 2uaarates,tmuch lefs with
Trixes, ( as but now. Only let
the Reader fee how vaſt are the
Inlers of a Due Aſtrology.

1591. In the Ifle of St. Michael, Pay-
chas p. 1677. we meet with an
Earthquake which lafted a Fort-
night, from Jaly 26. ad Aug. 12.
It belongs to Þh and &, as plain
as Nature can write, being op-
poſed in Tropical Aſpect ; but in-
formation ſends us back to ſuch
another Farthquake falling 20
years agone 3 which if it happe-
ned in the laſt Quarter of the
year, we Will find ſureties ro make
it good for Planers oppoling =
_ =, ſee 4® 077: pejore, | ws
if it happened about Fuly and Aug.
we havea Cardinal O between L
and &, which helps us beyond ex-


pectation.
—Y m_—_ O06. 13: Aboue
night an Earthquake very ter-
rible for the time, Purch. I. 385.
hd inw, YG entring ond. I
muſt not fay Well met.
1606. Dec. 13. At Bantam , about
Midnight, T. M. Purch.1. 385. d


in fin, =,

1609. April 2.St, N. Near Teraltas
inthe Ea/f-Indzes, a Rock burning
inthe Sea, always ſmoaking, Yer-
huef. \— Parch. I. 717. 5 17.%,
I 1, &,

May 3.St.N. Great T. M. at Neza,

" not unuſual (in thoſe parts) the
day before the Dutch built their
Caſtle there, Purch.L. 717. & 24.
YL,T21.09,

1610. June 1, 11. Hecls caſting out
Fire, Purch.817. All the PI:
engaged; V and G notind or,
bur in Cardinal DO.

r616. uly 29. St. NV. Under theL:ze
we had an Earthquake which
made our men run out of their
Cabins , our Ship ſeeming as to

rike 4ga:nft the ground, when,ca-

' ſting our our Lead, we found
none, Schouten's Voyage about the
World, Parch 1, 105: the & is
almoſt Partile in the Tropical
Height, _ Die


D uv & Dire Earthquakes.


Die 7. St. N. A high hill caſting
- Fire andFlame from the top there-
of, got far from Guinea, Purch. 1.
7 21, Y, Z6, &d, which


103.

Al is- camplicated with 2 al-
Apes 9 this is the
third or fourth time of this


Al-
ia its Rampant Height.
i618, Marc I3. hy be St. N. 6
and Y. are engaged.
1619. January 29. Near Franck ford
ad Menum. It belongs to Y
and 2., their Congreſs in * but


2 and & are engaged to charge
one the other in the Ent of their
Oppolal. Again, at Katrſvoe ,
T. M. ſub obſcure antmadvuerſus, "1
6, &, S 12. Y%. 7
May 13,21. In the Burgar-
aia and Alſatia. + Kepler agrees


,309. near the
8e, but the next
yeat.


feyeral Towns. in poor Apudya,


|


 —_— ae
where Kepler diſcovers no Cele-


;


le(tial Cauſe, and I fancy no Cau-
ſes bur Celeſtial, for -the Subter-

_ ranean Fires are but the marter
on which our Cauſes operate. Ler
any one that cares for an Epheme-
ris, mark whether Þ is not po-
ſired at the end of me. TI hope
that Celeſtial cauſe may be pro-
ved from the foregoing Chapter
of the Saturnime Earthquakes.
Mark, ſecondly, whether the Þ
dont oppoſe him at the entrance
of x ,thac Iftle Cauſe is not ridi-
culous:but to ſay no more, let him
mark whether % be notStationary
in 121. and & oppoſed in & g.
Now nr21.'is not-far from m 24.
Say no'more.

Nov. 14. St/Vet. Norimberg , T.
M. Kyr. S.'2g. 6, 2 9.%; The
truth 'is,''&. opp. Doe ea 3
penetrates; not into the Aſpect,
that thinks:ic only brooght a lic-

. tlefair Weather ar the beginning
of the Month. Here is a double

. Earthquake again this year, before
this Aſpect has taken its leave.

628. A- Fame of an Earthquake,

Zan. g:Keph 8 and '% lyear this

diſtance, &.24. S&; @ 22. VN. I

can ſcarce* forbear giving my

Judgement, why I think: the re-

port was*true, there need no


great ſtudying the point for- 2 22.


| - and S 24.*tis bur looking with-


Ne. at one |, _ ly on their Faces, and when you
ir. - Febr. || + meet them; you'l know them a-
: _Gamun- | gain. tho %
ens iminentis 8 contra- | 1632. Oftober 8. at Naples, \ & 24;
CE et end 6 AT SONG:
"'V , tO portenad | 16 chin; Ire motus'
. the Sion of he Ser which 44s Heimon.
. allowed rhat Omen- we 1645. Jan. 19. Norimberd, T. M:
nof, £0, that now. but. we hope || - with Thunder, Snow ;' Kyr. >
© that the Reader will ſuſpect with |! - 21, %,2t 117. & 3 fo ar Paidters,
v5, thatthe | f;of | and & por- | in Frame” T. M. with: a horrid
(tended the arth! ul on j'-T : Me; SAIL,
27. Juy.20, 30, AT . r | 1650. Feſuw. ' burns, 'TranſaF. g68. i
" ned Lin oy gin Gas ny at leaſt ||  happerisig March, April or May,
for 8 WS, ww eat the OE ED ant, /
 +4.3o60 e NUDE, ; !21665. ear Oxford, Jar. 19. Tranſa7,
: CE Enrthoate, deſtroyed || - p. 166.:'%'& in-=, ſee 4 hY.


29. In


11668.Sept.3.Garibeelſes
4 [YL 3G x 7
1669+


Chap. II. Gr. Eearthquates lie deep.

1669. May 12. Fejuvus, Calt out,
Smoke, Sawnaerſon, d UN & ina.

1676. Febr. 3. Colepit Fires, Tra nſatt
YL and din V.


427


pieces of Clay like Musker. Bar
rel. So at Goſco one and twenty
miles off; and Fith in ſome ponc's
thrown up dead upon the. banks.
A wonderful number of Herrings


1670. At Kenebunch inthe Province
. of Mamapiece of Clay Ground
thrown up by a mineral Vapour
over the Tops of high Oaks into
the River, ſtopping its plage,
the hole 4o yards Square, where-


caſt up at high Water on black
point harbour for a mile together.
Zoſelia, % S in Tropical ſigns.
& retrograde till Autumn, then
comes an f of h Y beſides: a
d of h d in X,


in were thouſands of Clay Bul-
lets as big as Musket Ball , and


- $66. We have not been all the way Sollicitous of the Circumſtances of
T. M. wecannot brook a Frightful Story that is over long 3 Our Spirits
droop, and our Bloud runs into Serum with no vivid Colour in-it. Frights
we know, diſpoſle(s ſome, of their Wits 3 They diſturb the moſt obdu-
rate Heatt z Who can hearken with Pleaſure to the Doleful Note of the
Screech Owl? Yer Iconld not paſs over ſome dire Circumſtances, which
uſually appear upon the Stage when the Gacodemor enters. *Tis enough .we
have noted it before, to thew their conjunct dependance on the Heavens.

9 67. The Cognation alſo berween the Subterrangn Fires breaking
forth from Hecla, or Veſuwvins being confels'd, we fee no-reaſon bur the
Colepit which the Tranſa#1ons tells us fired on ſuch a'day, ſhould be redu-
ced under this He2d, and that with probability, not only from the like-
neſs of the Phenomena, bur the likenetsor Identity of the Aſpect. -Even
the Back- Friends to Aftrology, we have ſeen, confeſs the Heavens have
Power on the Mines of Germany, &c. Iwould fain know where they have
not, 1-will not ftrerch a Text to the Center, which only meant perhaps the
Surface. There's nothing hid from the Solar Heat : bue when Earthquakes
at the Inares,run ſo many leagues,yea,and at home ; as the laſt inQuforaſhire 3
fhall runin a Chanel as it were, as far as Berbary 3 the Convulfion muſtlie
deep, and contracted into a leſs circumference, that-it-may diffule ir:{elf to
the greater. | ' 57!2 © ; S8i1


s 68, Here we muſt take notice of one inſtance ſupplied from Yaz .
: Helmont. "286 Hh |

That Helmont , who, under the ; - ous Spirit, of incomprehenſible
name of the Schools, makes no- | Force; that - ſipiving within ber
thing to run downall Philoſophers | wemb diſcompoles the Eaxth.. To


before him; @r chat, - faith he,no |
Exhalations, nor Vapor, nor Sul-
phurovs Spirit hath anything to-do
, In the Earthquake 4-buronly fome
Fiend or Cacodemor is fployed by
Comtniffion from Heaven: . Now
the Yeſwoit and the « Xtne, the (e-
veral Vulcaxs fizming round about
the World ; and the indiſputable
4ffiniry berween the Earthquake
4nd the monitrons” Eruption ,
which the Schools zeach , might
." have kepr Him to' Tights. For


_ of Sulfur,
_ whole Low-


- *tis not any Leviry , or'a Wipd en- |
*\. cloſed, bur a vaſt Nitro-Sulphure-


cf


this he preſently comes uponus and
asks us, Fir, Is there: 4 vein


-&:; thro t. the
>ountries3for all A
land Trembled,iand - Flanders ; to


boot. I anſwer, there may be,for
all that he knows. Agricola lh
Fires


- fwades that the Subterranean


are as copious, eſpecially in Mari-
time places, where Earthquakes


. moſtly PPear's and this is witnel-
g


{ed by Sulfureous Stench, -which
hath been obſerv'd, whereever


the Vapour . gets yeat, Yea, 23
R5 ſome


.


Va Helmonts Objettions


——— _— __—_


Book In:


ſome have deliver'd, a diſ{-colou-
ring of the Air, as it were, by ſul-
fureous Fumes. Nay, 'tis beyond,
Fax it were] for wherefore do the
poor Birds fall ro the Earth ? Burt
that being taken giddy by ſuch
ſaffocating Steams. 24ly. He
cannot intend ſulfur refin'd, and
depurate 3 then by his own Prin-
ciples he muſt allow Sulfur to be
every where, in every com-
pound Body, or in their Matrices,
_ theplaces where they take their

being. E Peble is itu-
'red of ſo many Grains of Sulfur,
and our Gaftle-Coal, we fſee,betrays
zes conſtitution by yellow
fame $_ mixed with the darker
Soot. Every thing then will-melr
hatch Sulfur in ir, and what will
noe melt in thoſe all-diflolving

Heats of theSubegrraneanFurnace?

The Earth will melt like Wax,
- and run many a Mile in a fufile
conſtitution, and yet we ſpeak at
Large, for if it be a Bitumen of any
kind or color, if it be P:tch, if it
be Naptha, if irbe Goo, *tis Sulfur
to'us, whereever there's ;
or hot Baths, or Medicinal Wa-
ters, or Metals, or of
Stone, there's Sulft Salt, &-.


So that 'tis imvain to anatamize
the Regions


of the Earth to the


 offer'd nothing that 1
y the ſeat of the Tre-
be,where he acknow-


Oyls, Sulfur, Sls, Mer


whatſoever : aname, and ozc


thoſe impatiently —_—


ro
other ;, nor 1 it,
but that if leaſt drop
EIT IE

c pa-


He asks,
on is {0 tranhient,


|


|


it re by firs. Oh, to that T
ſay, that the Planetary Poſicures,
as they require Critical places, fo
they watch their Critical Hours-
Did not this 'T.M. happen at Mid-


night ? _ A |
He asks, thirdly, why the Earth-


query in 1640. and that of three-
core years before happened
both , in April, I could ask
him why his Angel or Devil chu-
ſes to {care us That Mogth, Yet
we ſay that the Sprixe is the time
of the year ; and ſeeing it happe-
ned that there were but 12 days
difference berween that of 1580.
April the 6th. (the time that I be-
lieve Mechliz trembled,as all Eng-
land did) and 1640 ; It manifeſtly
ſhews that theſeEarthquakes come
under the Philoſophical Rules. He
asks 4ly. what extraordi heat
Was there; to e the
Earthat thoſe preciſe times,which
was not found in the Intermediate
years, adding,that, that night was
2a very cold night, with: a Chill
North-Wiand, and much Snow the
day before. How ? fayI, doth a
Chymift call for a ſenſbl:Heat toall
» Operations ? Nothing
more again his own Experience,
who tells us in one place of his
fellow-Travellers Shoulder burnt
by the Suns imperceptible Heat
as he over the Alps,as plain-
ly as if he had been ſtang by Gazx-
tharides, and teaches us in another, *
I ounce ofSa! amnzac mingl'd with
4 ounces of AqueFortss ſhall break
the glaſs preſently ; and how ? bur
by an inviſible And
what great beat is in the In-
gredients ſeparate,He knows beſt.
An Exhalation,you ſeeby his ow
can make a ſtrong glaſs
fly in pieces. Burt I anſwer, the
Schools call it Heat (hould fay
nce, or his own Ga, which
es place in cold Weather as well
asHot.As we ſee and feel oft-times
the Inflaence of the Heavens =
_ upon our Bodies, while that
eat is not diſcerned by our Sen-
fories. There may be Commu-
NiCation»


Chap II. Anſi wered. D


iſtempers under % I.


nication between Homogezeals,
Fire and Fire, « Ztherial and Sut-
terranean, when there may be no
Communications berween Fire
and Earth; I mean our Corporeal
* Organs. Yea, I come cloſer to
the matter, and ſay that Planetary
Warmth in a remiſs degree, as in
Weak and Calmer Earthquakes,
may actuate Cold, as well as en-
courage the Grofler Warmth,may
ſtir the Nitrous Spirit, as, well as
enflame the Sulfury Particle z for
it is zeceſſary ( that's more than
{rs ) that all ſuch zmmane
iolence muſt be founded upon
thoſe Hotzlitie: of Nature, which
we call Aztipathy. When we are
agreed about this,then Ile point at
the Influence with my Finger, and
ſhew him our Xthereal Hear in
d of h and © atthe firſt Earth-
quake, anda d of Y and & at
the Second. And theſe Alſpedts
in Critical places, which do not
Occur every year: , 'Tis well if
they meet 1n 12, in 30, and. even
then, if they want any one requi-
fite, the Effect is blank. We grant
him, that the final Cauſe of the
T. M. is the awe of the Divine
Menace. And upon this account
whatever others think, I value our
Theory, being engag'd in matters
of ſo ponderous concern. But we
do no think that the Divine Pow-
er afts immeaitely in thoſe Ef-
fects which are Per:oatcal ," and


Diſeaſes unders % and & |


. Anno 1500, Inthe Saturnine Table, the Century
lence in H. VII time; and the Aſpe&of Þh and& is truly noted, but
September , thereabouts t :
brings ari ©  & with other help, .evea in the Extremity of *


perfectly. For


|


have their Revolutions , though
they be ſtrange. We dare not
grant the Creation ſo imperfe&,
that the Divine Power whic
made the Univerſe, as as much
without a created inſtrument, as
with ir.

Bur this 'ris, for Wiſe Men to lay a-
fide the conſideration of the No-
bleſt Parts of the Univerſe , (©
overlooking and ſetting at nought
thoſe Wonders of the Xther, the
Fixed Stars and Planets, to run
higher into Heaven , or lower in-
co Hell, to borrow Angelical Spi-
rits from thence , to make up the
Planetary account ; thereby crea-
ting to themſelves, fantaſtick Ar-


ticles of Religion or Philoſophy, +


to avold Superſtition falſly fo cal-


ed. |
1668, Sept. 3. T. M. in the Garwee
Iſlands, & in T and 2. . +


D;e 29. T.M. in France; a ſinele.


Earthquake won't ſerve. our
turn, Aſpects 2 28. &, T 11: V,

1676, Febr. 3. News of a Cole-Pit
taking Fire,. Tranſa#, What will
my curious Reader fay, if he finds

' ad of-% and & here? Wehave
no Y:ſwvins, Heaven be thanked;
yer Cauſes hit ſtrangely to their
pretended v

1681. T. M. inthe County of Call
with a in  Lituenis two
days before. And now we come
unwillingly to


”-


begins with the Peſti-
not
the Peſtilence rages moſt, that
and mt,


Polyaor, Vire. (ets this Peſt at 1499. Nor doth the contrary appear from


Stow. Our account is however that it fell ia 1500. and withou


© all que-


ſtion, whatever the precedent year might be, r 500 was Peſtilential. See


the Table of h &:


1506, Sweating Sickneſs in London the Second time. Not ſo violent;
as A® 1485. the I. of K. HenryVI. For hk you have heard: Add %


& in 7, nobetter


Sign. |
1508, Peſtilence, nds, 2.156; hand & in July, Þ & lye in wait


Auguſt and September.


1511,


429.


_ CE


ie,


_


439.


YL 3 Epidemic Diſtempers. Book LIII,


1511. Peſtil.ex Fracaftorio, Dimerbr. 89.nothing of Þ & ,but Y and & in
&. and 2, Fuly, Aug. Sept. | : ; wn
- 1517. Sweating Sickneſs from Aug. 1. ro Michaelmas, IV.in M,of which
Yand & are two of them. The Winter Plague that followed, ſee in h &.
2B a Cruel Peſtilence in Row? , Germany, f NG begins in July
in and 5. |

1527. At Rome, For AſpeR; &c. VN & in TropicalSigns. __ .

1528. Sweating Sickneſs reigning 3 the Term was adjourn'd Jaz. 17. to


'M:ch. Many dyed at Court, Stow. YV and & on each fide of the Sum-


mer Tropick, in the Month of aly,In S, &c. 9. Nothing plainer z hardly
find an innocent year. If the Superiours are found in S in July, they are
after found in vv. 75 IN

1529. This Ezel:h Plague was found in Germazy alſo, this following
year z the Whip is much the ſame twiit.. 2% & oppos'd in Aug. &c.

1538. The Cruel Peſtilence mention'd by Paracelſus ; brought h 4 wich
it, but I fear it made not haſt away in the Declenſfton of the year, be-
cauſe of  # Tropical oppos'd in Sept. OFed. at leaſt.

1544. Peſtilence at Gonflaminople, Kireh. V and & in m,entred in, & in
Aug. though refer it to thenext of the Superiouys.
. 1548. The Mortality in London, ſub Edw. VI. Stow, & in V,not ſepa-
rated 30 gr. till Aug. med. | |

1551. Whatſoever we have ſaid of h & ,certain it is,it began at Shrews-
bury, April 15. that W & are on either fide of the Summer Tropick,and


. within Terms. Now it began at Loyaoy, as ſaith Stow, Fuly 12. &c.qhere's


a d of our Yand 7, a Secondary &, when in ſow motion entring , as


ye ſhall noteelſewhere. Yea, there'sa ſalute of h 2, Allnaught. -


. 1558, Negay in Ruſia, Never the like Plague there, Hakl. 348. %


'inA=, July, Aug. Sept. Loridon, Zuartan Ague, Stow. All tothe ſame


Aſpect, with Aſſiſtance. - INS no 34
1566. A Turbulent Plague in Italy, faid Krcher, where we conſider
that the & VN. & 'was ſcarce expired in Juni princepro, and a d of a Se-
— & in July and Awg.This is not the firſt time, and therefore we (ing
ur M:ſerere again. $e5s .
:T567. A Dry and Peſtilential time at Lovazy, to the midſt of 7uly;from
May; #4 & evento the midſt of July. | £
1569. Peſtilence in Lox4oz 3 adjourned Michaelmas term to Nov. 3. and


| thence to Hilary next .year ; Stow. Not Y and © only, bit .% & were


encred in & Tropical in Jah. Diginus Det is plain with another Fin-
ger, Oh YN, ful. ;

I571.- Febreg, Funeſtiſime, Dyſenteria, Y. and & end of Aug. oppoſes
©2 2 in X "7, bur beſides; they would not be ſo rampant, had not 4
entred before the laſt a&t, even in September. — _

1576. Dire Peſt at Venice, Padua, from May to Jar. of 6v000. Untzar
e Forefto h 6 within Terms of one the other in v. Where, I beg, that
I's Motion may be trac'd, 'tis flower than H, as we have elſewhere no-
red ; burir laſted till the beginning of the Subſequent year.Doth not % and


'& comein at OFob. to back h and d on the Staxge.


1578. At Lisbon, within the op of 2 years, 7000 dyed. Untzcr, e
Linſchot. We need not conjure for f  & , and that in Signs Equinoctial,
for they ate up above grouud, Partile P, July; in Mt *.

- :1580.Epidemic Diſtemper,by a Catarth with Cough all Ewrope over,CGal-
W4/.3By a particular account know it came into Italy in June; to Rome ini
Zaly ;, to Venice, Conſtantinople in Auguſt, to Germany, ungary in Septem-
ber, to Pomerania in Ofober, to-Denmarkand Sweden in November. Here


Our Principle deſires it may be confider'd , whether, firſt, 2þ had not


a hand


Chap. IT. % #4 Sick. 4 Live Peſtilent Coal from Tear TI 4


-


Fl


a hand in All this : for as for Sly, we find & Þ 2 , which, when 2 is flow-
motion'd, we may call it £ % & ,and that inTropic Signs; As roRopee's part,
we find YL oppoled to9 2 2 zaccording to our reckoning 3 then V. & entring
on an®P.As to Venice and Confantinople, we find our P rampant, Þ and in
Ir and 2.In S-pt:m5er, right rampant the ſame Aſpe& ; nay, the ſame
Company holds. Pray conſult the Ephemers, even for Ofober, November,
December. Oh, that Evidence (o clear, ſo wonderful, hath not been diſ-
cover'd heretofore; Ys in @, through the faltring Motion of &, all
choſeMonths, Otter. Now. Dec. beſides tome Months preceding. | That we
may learn to look up,and laving a{1de ourCovPrejudices,may confeſs Nature
to be ſtupendious, and this being acknowledged, to make a right ule of it.

1581. Novus Morb, Lunatergenſis, Dimerbrock, @ % & Tropical in
April and May which diſpos'd, at leaſt, the Body to admitthe Influence.

1586. S. Domingo, Caleatare, 700 dyed, Drakes laſt Voyage , Purch;
Vl. 4. p. 1182. VN & in It, June, July, Auguft.

1593. Belongsto eP Þ U, but |

1594. When the Plague was not ceaſed quite, the Total though being
under a Thouſand,to the & h Y, comes in at 7uze,.an & % & in the ſame
Signs.

, il Tune, Sickneſs on the Engl:h Fly-Boats, in the Voyage to the
Azores, Purch.  & in © R. |

1599. Belide the P h &, we have an unlucky Concourſe of O hv
in Card.'Signs.

1604. Lo-4on, Total 896. Pariſhes infefted, g6. d RW 2, cx: & in
2 menſe Septembris. | |

1606.In h & we cannot deny butthey are join'd in ,ancO2ed. the High-
eſt week of that year : but withaH, as to our Principle, &d enters into the
{ame Sign; I mean into the diſtance of gr. 33. but a Fortnighe after; on
which acconnt this very later end of O#0. thews 100 of the Plague,
though in ov. it flept, becauſe'Þh & are even unhing'd.

1607. We have ſaid before of this year, and the Month of June, how
h s weredomineering there, but note, that June this year was not tobe
compared to September and Oftober, where  & are oppoſed in EquinoGti-
al Signs, and the Torals, though the Plague be moderare, is three to'one.
Now what Live Coal is it which continues the Peſtilence, from Nov. 1:
the preceding year,where h & fell off, to che Spring of this Inſtant year ?
What but our Aſpe& of V &,; which held 4 Months, to bring that
along thicther through the Winter Months, -of Aowemb. Dec, Fan.
Febr. when! S:rpents themſelves can ſcarce ſting. Any further we do
not enlarge. .

1609. h & graſp all; but hath Y & nothing in this year ? Yes,
25 much as the 4 fir{t Months come to: They are but Winter Months
but we ſpeak of a glowing Coal in Winter, an OV & in Febr. 18. on
which every Week by ſome means or other, ſecondary Agents, the Total
appears 40. in the Plague, Mr. BelI's Account.

1610. Now if the Peſtilence continues as to our fore-cited Account, till
this year be expired, all of a piece with the former ; 'onr Aſpect takes
place in Dec. paſt, and Jaz. and Febr. of this inſtant 3 and that in Tropi-
cal Signs. We find, 'tis true, no Maſter-Peſtilence, but the Toral is high-
er in that very Janmuary under % d, than in April under h and.d.

1617. At Rome and Naples a Murrain of Cattle, Kzrch. s 1. Cap. g. Þ
% all along, and Y & in March, April, May. In June, July, Augaft, Sep-
tember, I confels, 'tis 2 and *, which by their Pace ſeem to be &'s
Subſtitutes, according as we have hinted before,though in Sep. OXob.'h &
inches in, and they will challenge thoſe —_ 'Tis between _ an

5 | rit


4.32


% 8 Note for Populous Cities. \. Book Ii s


Writ as I ay in Capital Letters, to thoſe who read the Alphabet of Na-
ture; and is to much purpoſe taken into our conſideration, becauſe there
is ſome Affinity between the make of the Bodies of Brutes, and us :
wherefore there tnuſt be ſome Affinity in our Maladies. Sure I am, thac
Kircher notes a death of Infants at the ſame time.

1618. Plague at Norway, faith C. Grazt, and fickly year. in England.
For the Spring and Summer, May, June, July; we have own'd, h 4 be-
fore. For Auguſt, we have V. oppoſing © 2 7, which will do no good
when & lies perdieu, for an oppolal in == and ©. in the following Months.

1619. At Grazd Gairo 72500 ſwept away in X Weeks, C. Grazt.

A Diſmal Effe&t of a dire Cauſe 3. for I have learn'd co tremble at the
Aſpects of the Superiours, as they may be ſer high or low : Now ſuppoſe
as Story faith, that the Plague with them in « #gypt ceaſes when the Sun
enters into A, *Tis a Secret, but I obſerve our f YN & was, dire and
high-ſer above 10 Weeks before the © 's entrance into 9. Dire, I fay,
and high ſer, in flow, but ſure Motions, and Equrzoctral Signs.

1620. Sickly England, G. Grant. The Aftrologer Anſwers, if the Spring
were Sickly, you have % and & in Equinoctial V\ 3 if the Summer, we
have noted before.

1622, Another, Grant, in New England, Capt: Smith, h V &.

1625. For this 1625. we muſt conſult h NY, yer we can ſcarce honeſtly
refer you thither, without wrong to % & 3 the Weekly Bill will inform
us; Buryed (faith the Bill) of all Diſeaſes, 5205. the Higheſt Week, en-
ding Aug. 18. and where are our Planets? Read and Judge. On Aug. 18.
One of our deſtroyers is in == 3. and the other in x. They differ 2 de-
grees from Diametrical Oppoſitionz and that in the commanding part of
Heaven , the Grrculus Maxemins, which we have often call'd the Equator


. or EquinoGtial Circle, and is famous wich us Superſtitious People for Re-


marks of Nature. Here I zote, and forget not that this was the 24 Inſtance
which convinc'd me.
1627. At Amfterdam, Grant ;, the P h. is acknowledged in its proper
Tables which tells us of another Superiour joyn'd with & this year, and
thatis V, in Auguf we know its & in S and mn, 'Tis eafie by the
way# to note Amſterdam to be none of the beſt Air inthe World, becauſe
of its frequent Infe&tions : The Truth is, no Town or City ſeated rear the
Brackiſh Waters of 'the Sea, can be pure, and agreeable. For the Air
muſt have its ill diſpofition from the Waters , as the one not Potable, fo
the other not Potable alſo , for the Lungs and Spirits do draw as well as
the Stomach ; I would it were as eafte for Them to obſerve the Aſpedt of
the Superiour Planets, that they may be cautious under them, and learn
to fear, not the Planets, but the Divine Rod, which, wil we, zl we, hangs


- © over Populous Cinies.


1630. Some Peſtilence at London and at Cambridge, above r0co. dyed
that year 3 if the Saturnine Aſpe& with & in the former Table comes to
cloſe in the year, w1z. in Sept. 27. Qs it doth not, then ſee how you will
like our & in July and Auguf, in * 7, This is clear, thatthe Higheſt
Week-in July 29. was nearer our Jowral, than the Saturnize Aſpect.

1636, We find it in our other Table, but withall we find Y. in the
higheſt, which is within 3 gr. of 2. Bur what is that to & > Yes, 2
Stati is Tantamourt : anew leflon at firſt, but now anold one.

ax: Coais little Peſtiferous year; 30ooinallz the higheſt Week was
Tune 29. near the Aſpeft of h, we would deal impartially ; yer nothing

inders, but we may note withal D % & in Cardinal Signs.

1641. Is found in Þ before; but as the year exhibits an Aſpect of Hh
in Augaf, it premiſes an Aſpe&t of % with & in 7uly's begining 5 ad

what


. \ *


—  — —


Chap. I. $. ACCOKNT of Sickacfſes paſt, as Ao 166c,


435 _


what time ir increaleg 5 inthe Toral, and 50 Pariſhes more infected. *Tis
true, the height appeared not, [703] till S-pt. 2. at what time we find
P ho at large ; or, Which is as Potent, Þh and ©, when 5 is Retro-
grade. Yea, & V? exatt in the beginning of & and =2, whoſe Influ-
ence we cannot as yet dilcourle of.

1644. Aliccle Vita” *0n,not much above a 1000 Total,the higheſt Week
ended Ofob. 3. d % & , receded in 1, and was not expired at the Height
of the Diſtemper.

1646. We noted'he 4 of h to have endured till the end of July, or
the firſt Week in Augs/ ; and then we pretended another Aſpect of the
Superiours entred ; Thar's our preſent Aipe&t, where I flatter my ſelf that
tis not unworthy con{ideration, that whereas the one AſpeR, according to
us, ſeems expired, Aug. 4. the other, this of Y and & enters about Axe.
13. ſo careful are the Heavenly Hoſt in their Watches, to relieve one ano-
ther when in a State of Hoſtility toward us. In the higheſt week,Sept.2-then,
befure,  d are within Terms; alſo note his 4 with 2 would be ſcarce
Innocent. Bur this is not all ; To ſee that our Aſpect will be owned,as we
have more then once obſerved:theAſpet which entred about the middle of
Aug. runs throug $ &, and falls not till almoſt Aug» enters again, cone-
Eting the Peſtilences of thoſe years, and twiſting them into one Thrid
(though the Winter perhaps, be a little morg Slender, and the Aſtival
more Cadle-like ) in my mind, who Plead for co-exiſtence of Cauſes with
Effects 3 This is conſiderable, others may enjoy their Principles 3 where I;
poor Groſſe-Teſt , can find no Footing. Alals ! Who can walk upon the
Water ?

1649. Sickly Lozdon, Graunt, d VL & in July, &c. That is too pat.
liſt not to ſpeak of the Peſt at 4xzterdam , and Harlem, becauſe they
not under any Afpect of the Superiors. For, as conſiderable as they are,
they donot exhault all the Doctrine of the Caules of Peſtilenceover-head;
Thy are to be produc'd ina Planetary Tra# rather. Only this agrees and
ſuits with what4s before deliver'd, that on September the 27th. which pro»
ved the Higheſt Week, we can point out one that is guilty, and ſcarce flies
for the ſame. A ND, thoughnot d YG. | ;

1658. Sickly City in Lozaon, Grant. I want the Weekly account here;
and perhapsthere is nonecd of it, Y% & togerher in S at the begi ing of
Summer, which leaſt they thould cool, in Zaxe and July are renewed by a
deputy Congreſs of 5 initead of &. 2 Stationary or Retr. we have (aid,
is as Malefiqueas any 5 of them all. | IG

1661. In h's Table it may be objected that the Bill did not ſtare upinto
500. &«. till h and & were expired : be it fo. But have we not Gaid even
now, that ? Stationary is _ to &', and that is entred upoxfa d.
with Y. before the Start, and laſts till 4 Þ 4 comes in at Oigber, who are
met in "1. But that d is innocent in compariſon of what we advance,
d VL © Stationary in Tt, the higheſt Week, whoſe Total was 600. Ang.
27. under the ſaid d V 2 Stationary.

1665. There remains A® 1665. & r00000 Perſons: more it may be than
are born in a years time throughout Exglazd, (Tam not pleaſed with Aug.
1690. nor perhaps July 91. nor May , &c. 92. but I hope London will ne-
ver taſt the like.) There were Councils of War , and Parties, and Am-
bulhes, and Retreats 3 'tis a wonder to ſee the Myhtrary Diſcipline. There
were Þ 2 in Tropic, @ in May, There was Þ and 2 in the fame &;
There we had h oppoſing 2 2 both Stationary in June, Do you hear,
or underſtand our Terms? There was hk 2 oppoſing 2 2 ſtill Stationary
in July, where © got into Oppoſition with &, and now the Thouſands are

!0wn up into a Dwelling Toial 3 % & inflames the Morcality —
Wwancn


434


Anatomy of the P. Tear 1665. Book.111.


when ef  & mingles, which begins, according to us, in the midſt of
Aug. In September % 3 with 2 ho'ds up the Malignity. And Oh unhappy,
bur too true obſervation, at the time of the # think you , the Bill was at
higheſt, after it pleas'd God it decreaſed. And -

How many think you 2 Even 1809. in the next Week,becauſe theAſpe&t
after the Congreis 1s Weaker in the Receſs than in the Accels , as in other
caſes hath bin {aid, bu: the ſucceding Week proved not ſo ; the meaſure of
abatement was not half the former Sum, toſhew, it is not the Declep-
for of the Sun only, or the Time of the year in general, for then it would
have abated in Proportion 3 but 'ris ſome other more particular diſpoſition
of that Woful year 1665, Howbeit in the midſt of OXober , it re-
mitted by 1800 again, in f though ftillz yer upon leaving the Mſtival
Sign «1, (which Signs Mſtival are the Lzife of the Death, the Vigour and
Sting, next to Sin,) is the cauſe of all: Here I obſerved, that if it had
abated a 1000, per week by Aovembers midſt, there ſhou!d have been bur
twohundred, or ſay 3. or 460 Funerals; but in the midſt of Av. we find
1300. and the following 9<o. becauſe, in my opinion , rhe Aſpe&t was
not diſengaged till that time ; Ther it was, and lo! the Week was content
with a pretty reaſonable and ordinary Sum of 5co and odd, To them be
it, who make ill uſe of theſe Diſcourtes, who can believe a Prime Cauſe,
and yet admit no ſecond, or will not Worſhip him, unlefs he acts by Mi-
racle. No man ſeems to magnihe the Deity, more than an Ezthuſisft ;
but the Sober Principle reſiſting no Light , Loves and fears God as He is;
and as heſhews himſelf, not ridiculous either to Chriſtians, or Heathens,

Thus doth the Peſtilence walk in Darkneſs, the Sickneſs defroys! at the
z00n day, 137 & 0p, Not two Evil Angels, as the Talmuarſts, yea the
Chalaee Paraphraſe, Septuagint conſenting, but the Striking Influence, D:-
wraal, Nofturnal. Thoſe Arrows from Heaven that fly by Day,and Thoſe
Mortal ſurprizes that enſnare us by Night z whence the Pſalzz is called 4
Song of Evil Occurrents ; for as the Prime Cauſe makes ht Sun to Shine
onthe Juſt and the Unjuſt 3 ſo he makes ht Planets and Fixed Stars to
burn us wherehe pleaſeth. For no body tells us that in Contagious Di-
ſeaſes , Nights are more. eaſily paſſed than the days ; the Celeſtial Influ-
ence; being-equal, as in the Chaſme, Motion of the Seas, Tempeſts and
Earthquakes is.apparent. Where upon I was apt tothink that Thoſe He-
brew Doctors, - for their imperfe& Notices of things, increaſed by a glimpſe
perhaps of the Wafting Spirit in the Word thereuſed , might conſtrue it of
Spirits which was to be interpreted of Influences. So I fay that wharſoe-
ver Truth there may be in the Jew Glofles of That and other Places
in Holy Wrir, ſeeing it owns a Deſtroying Angel, and Evil Angels
2re ore buſie, not only in Temptations, but alſo Miniſterial Executions
of Wrath, I muſt, whatſoever becomes of Tempeſts, not be engaged to diCſ-
charge out Influences The year 1665. was generally noted for a Dry,
Miſty-yearz-if-the Influences cauſed that Conſtitution, they had a hand
in the Malady. |


Currents under Y and &,


s s 69. For Currents, &-c. I am aware that I may ſeem like a Horſeuſed


tothe Road; and cannotgget out 3 but-when I conſider that I do hereby
advance a Stock toward the Diſcovery of the Cauſe, whether Celeſtial,
or no; 1 ſhall find ſome Mitigation of Cenſure. Here we have but a
few to trouble the Reader, as |
- 1609. Febr. 19. High Water at Loxdon-Briage, when it ſhould have
been Dead Low. Chilarey, p. 95. S 10. 6, 11, . '
S-4


1616,


VJ——_—_—
———.
—


Chap. II. V & Curronis. Parelta. | + > Bl


1616. Ang. 7. Calm, and ftrong Current, 2 18. Y, S4, 4, dQ +.

1618, Dec; 19. Great Current fell, the Admiral in danger of Ship-
wrack, 7.4. Þ, 22.7. 6d On. DhY.

1620, March 5, A Current, V 13. &, 19. V.

May the 8. A Current, S 4.%, 19.4 .-d@?;
1635. O66. the 8th. a Current, 41 28.2%, m4. d, NIN. ins,
O20. 27. A Current, M1.%,15. &.

1648. Dec. 18. Currents. Mcnconys, M14. So 8, Y.

And I do not inſiſt much upon theſe, as if the Aſpect had any eminent
Power in the Streams, becaute I fee other Caules nearer the @, and nea-
rer home, to the Earth I mean, that challenge this Province ; and whe-
ther They, or Theſe do exert remarkable Influences, unleſs in ſome
places of Heaven poſited , is to be enquired: as alſo, whether among the
Superiours, h may not have more Power, though remoter, than VU in
the Motion of Waters > The Seamen uſe to adjuit their reckonings, by
allowing for Impediments, wherein, beſure, Currents are comprehended ;
Notwithſtanding , I have nored none but where the Current made them
ſpeak out ; and have none of the Moderation above premiſed ; in themean
time I defire compariſon may be made between the two Superiors in the


caſe. |
Parelia.


. $70, Something is contributed, but other Aſpets may be more :
Y and 2 perhaps, may multiply che Images of the © before oby rene
Aſpe, becauſe 2 Pranks ir more than & ſeems todo; howbeit take
our few Inſtances of Parel:a with Hals's. |

1528, May 16. Halo crrca Solem, Lyc. if 22. 6, S 22. V. -

1550. Aug. 11. Norimberg, & alibi, in a fair day, Irides, and othet

henomena, Lycoth. 607. it 13. &', 26, V.

1551. Magdebnre, Paraſelene (een, with VII. Iriavs, Lyc. 612. at Wit-
temberg 90, deſcrib'd by Lycofth. p. 613. 615. Gem. 1: p. 194. © 5. WU;
&L II.O0. |
_ 1559. Febr. 28. Antwerpie, Tres Soles cum varits atque drverſis cireulis Vi-
frſunt, Lycofth. 614. TM 22,V%, 03.4, ®

1607. Dec. 13. Iris tot. ate, 22. %, ©4. 6G:

1617, May 1. Parelia. = 1, A 27. 4.

1619. Menſe Matti, Tres Soles, & &,

Dec. 13. bis tot die, Kepl.? 22. 9, 2 4;
1621. Aug. 18. Halo », Zo.ds, IT 22. V;
1623. Lincts Paretia, Kepl. May. 18, 16. &', S 26. %.;
May 30, bs; K. wv» 16. &, $ 28. Y.
Nev. 24-Halo y; Ky. mo. Y%, * 3.06.
1625: July 6. bis, 25. %, X 27.0,
Sept. 20. Iris,et clarus Sept. X 27, & , 2 10. Þ,


Ob. 14. Gelum Sangumeum, Kepl. ? : :
. Dec. 8. Oldenburgi; Parelia, in Coron, Regus  Ferain, 3. die, Kepl D 25,


Y; Yro;%.” | |
1627. O64: 18. HaloSalis,Kyr. & Kel. 7 4. %, 2 6. 0, 15. bis, Kept-
Nov. 12. Halo y, Ky. & Kepley, 5 29.0, 1 9.%.
Dec. 14. Parelia, Kyr.in Bavaria, S 21, &, 7 21. %.
1928. Jan 2; bis, Krpl.-Kyr. S 27. .- -£ 30 VÞ.
March. 18. Iris, Kyr. * 3.%, $ 11. &. | 62k
fpril 13. Iris, Kyr. 3:8 9:8 25. igKepl. & Kyr.w 2.%, $15.6
My 14. Iris, Kepl. + Kyr. 1. %, & 26.6. 23. bis, Kyr.
'* 1629.


March 24. Halo ). K. & Kyr. = 1. %, X 3.0. |
T5 1631;


436


Parelia bel. to this Aſp. Deſ-Cartes we. Book LIT.


1631. March 4. Irs, Kyr. V 9. %, 21. 6.
1635. Jan. 14. Halo, 4 = 29. Partil &. |
1637. Febr. 9. Halo ©, Kyr. * 26. %, = 4. &, 10. Tres Soles cum
Iviae. Kyr. *
March 2. Paraſelene. = 1.%, V 19.6.
April 19. Tres Soles cum Iridd, Kyr. A GJ.
Ave, 13. Halo ) & GColamne, Kyr. = 17. 6, Y partie,
Dec. 10. Halo ©, = 25.%, 29.6.
Dec. 20. Halo ), Kyr. m2.%.6.8 . 23. bis, Kyr.
Fetr. 2. Iris, Kyr. m 4. %, 15. &;
March 18. Halo ©. = 23.%,V 15. d. |
1640. April 27. Irs Matut. Kyr. V7l, £5.60.
1644. Aug. 17. Parehia, Kyr. & 29. %, Wg.6. eh
1646. Aug. 25. Iris, Parelia, & 3. d, 28. Y. Hue. 29. bis.
1672. May 15. Halo ©, 10 mane,laſted near an hour it 9g. Y,25.V &d,
S 71. Concerning the Halo, the Iris, we muſt not repeat what has been
ſaid; we are in the mind till that there's more Pencils go to the draught
of ſuch Images, as we ſhall ſee in the Cognate Phenomenon of the
Claritas Septentrionalis, which happening in the Night time, cannot then
ariſe from the © alone. As to the greater appearance of the Parel:a, and
Paraſclene, we have here a conſiderable number, a Dodecage of ſuch Ra-
rities:and ſuch aNumber,in ſpite of fate,proves they have ſome dependance
on the Aſpect in hand, however we caſt about to make it out.. Thegreat 7o-
ſeph Scaliger on Euſeb14s, was engaged by his Argument to give us ſome
Chronological Notes of theſe Phenomena ; bur he ſcarce tells us the Month,
much leſs the Day : A Fault that more are guilty of, beſides him, having
no Opinion of Celeſtial Philoſophy. We do not trouble our ſelves here
about their ſignification. Fromond modefily takes off Gemma for his Va-
nity;in that reſpec 3 He propoſes perhaps, his own Fancies for ſfanding
Rules. They can't well reconcile 4r:/fotle, and others, who make the Pa-
rel;a to be the Forerungers of Tempeſts and Showry Weather, with Def;
Gartes his opinion before commended of a Solar Reflexion from ſome Icy
Particles, which at that time may hang in the Air. For nothing hinders
but that ſhch Particles may ina cold clumſie Air, as well as a Sheet
of Snow, 'tis certain, floats e 'tis portion'd into Flakes, Secondly;
becauſe I well remember that upon the report of three Suns ſeen at Ox-
ford ona certain day before noon, which I neither had hap to ſee, nor yer
£0 record; I took notice that morning was cold : Nor does any of
theſe appearances ſhew themſelves at Sea, but under a chill Latitude. &
by a good token Scaliger tells,us that his Holanders ſaw it in the Latitude of
71. All which ſweetly agrees with our An: of YL and&, which we
have owned, and ſhall farther prove, of a Dry and Cold Energy.


Claritas Septentrionalis, wr


$42; The Nocturnal Brightneſs , whether in the AVorth or in the
Eaſt, may deferve to be confider'd 3 which we have faid cannot come from
the © alone, but from ſome new acceſſions of Light from thoſe Bodies
which are as moveable as Torch-Light, ſometimes together, ſometimes
aſunder : which.though I am affured it ſprings from a Conflux of Celefti-
als ſo poſited ; yer I you 'tis hard co find ſuch an appearance without
our Aſpe& of Y and 4 .——Days noted in Keplers Diary , are—
. 1625. Auguſt 28. September,20, = 5. YL, V 3.d.

1626, June 16, Claritas neFurna, m 0.%, S106,


#628,


Chap IT. Clarity NoftFurnal Explicated. Solar Paleneſs.


1628. Dec. 10. 11, YL, 2 14. &.

Dec. 16, 2 18. &, V 12. V. =

1629. Sept. 11. 27. V, S 2.6. Sr.
OXfob. 6. Vf 28. Y., S 12, &. Sr.
O#o6. 19. ? 28. YL, S 14. &, ps oy

In moſt of theie days we find 2 Congreſs of three Planets or more.

Kepler hath obſerved that the Clarity uſed to happen ata d © », and
though obſerving two ,. he was ina fair way for three, yet he did nor de-
liver. it to poſterity. Þ © & are 3. Aug. 28.S. V. 1625. Sept. 20. © %and

.Þ are 3. 1626, fan,16. © 7 and 3.are 3. 9 and ) 's Latitude being con-
{ider'd, not far from one another, 1628. Dec. 10. © % = are 3 too, never
to be queſtion'd ; and one the 16th. the 3 makes 4.1629. O#0b.6. © hand »
areowned tobeind. Nor is the » too far diſtant on the 10th.day. Some-
times we meet 4.engag din two, bur more commonly z.engag'd in oze Triple
d. Inall theſe YL and & are concern'd. We meet with one exception,and that
is Febr. 25.S. V. 1645. if 2 gr. width can put'them out of caſe. 'Tis not %'s
Brightneſs only,no queſtion,but the proportion alſo that he bears to the reſt
that are upon the Ycene. This will be granted, I hope, that Planets in 5
SL? can eaſily dart up their Light above the Horizon on certain days and
hours z andyou thall find that this Clarity never comes to paſs , but when
2 or 3. if not more, are poſited .in theſe Signs, or their Oppoſites : Yea,
and the Months thatare above ſpecified, do accord. Verily, as to % & ]
muſt own that Kepler has noted a Splendent Air in the day-time 3 a Spu-
rious Serenity, as in the Notes of- x

Septembe; 8. 1624. } F, Jan. 18. 1626.

- + January 9.1626, J > | |
A Brightnels of tuch conGRency as bodeth Wet; this is certain, that the
Nocturnal Clarity ; among the Country .People, is a fign of Rain ; and
he that pleaſcs to look over the placesquoted in Kepler, will find it fo.


fas Tine 7 | 2
., $73. When we meet with © Palidw here 9g. or 10. times ; we may
think it iscauied by that Influence which % hath upon Miſt, which accor-,
ding to the differerice of its Dentity, does FRrcſene the .o. (and the »).
now red, now pale, as a more Watriſh Cloud makes hitn: ſhine Watry 3
_ They who look nearer into the Diary, and obſervehow Judicious a
erſon Kepler -was, may be apt to think there is ſomething more.in it,
thana Miſt or Fog, wheni-be ſhall find that Miſt is a Stile by 1t.ſelf ; and.
© Pulidus, for the moſt part,by its (elf: Tis true,if this diverſity ſhould.
ariſe only; from the Medium, it were., ſcarce worth the mention ; but
if there ſhould be at the time a perfe&: Serenity, it would imply ſome
other Pafſion of - © , co-exiſtent perhaps , with that Craffitude of: Air,
expreſſed only A® 1617. got elſewhere. , Now if. it were through a Miſt,
I "way 'tisa wonder £o.me that. Kepler ſhould obſerve {© maty Miſts:in.3
years, 4 1632. 1623: 1624, atd never 2 © Eallidus all the time. *Tisnor
unprobable therefore, but ix may be $5? drnan—g of the Macule near -
the Disk of: the ©, together with ſome diffirbance of the Mearum, if
any ſuch were, nearer to us: Sure Tam, that theſe Macile Solares are re-"
corded at, .or-near. the, very-times where wor of the(e Solar Paleneſles-
aremention 3-and fure'I am that &' and'Þ.in 4 or #, are of ſtrong and


{tubborn Influence. The, of YL and'& ; will makea Miſt 3 a & or #,
not excluding.the Minor Alpects of © with-? , &c. can do more, _ 'Th
days-3bove ſpecified, are thele. nf.” | =
1617. March 3,435. © Palidus, 25. %, A 21.0...
.-- 1626. Sept.18. M20, 2," .3. %,0 4. &, =7. ©, 28, 7.


: 094, :


—_—. a - My


The Cauſes of the Solar Macule. — Book IIE;


OXob. 13. M25, h, M2.d,12.%,4 5, 17. ©.

1627. july 18, mn 21. YL, S809,

O94. 28. 76. Y, 1 4.0.

1628, April 6, w 3. %, $5.9.

May 1,2. W 22. S 19. @,

May 18. &4.h, V1.%, B2g.d, M7.0, S17. 2.

Dec.8. > 21. h, W1o.Y, £ 13.6, 27.9, 10, 2; m 16. 25
Dec. 18, * 13.%, 2 20.0. |

1629. September 20. W 27, NY, B6.d. | —-

I do not go about to deny, I ſay, there may be Miſts and Fog in the
caſe, bur I ſurmile alſo another more intimate Sullage to contribute, tho'
pr by it Self, except by the curious, /zſs obſervable, By zt ſelf, I tay ,

ſs obſervable, yet in ConjunRion with another may 2z2cyeaſe the fickly
appearance; So ule we to ſee in a Damp Air and a moiſtned Eye, a bright
Nocturnal Iris about Light in our Chamber. Neither can we ler pals the
Bloody Hue wherein the © appeared, Sept. 29. 1571. throughout a great

art of Germany, though worth the notice of Thuanus, an &f of V 2
ell near the day , Sept. 20. bur, befides a d Þh 2. in a critical placez we
have our Aſpect of YN & has taken faſt hold, A 22. & 24. and weare
ſure that theſe Cauſes affigned have their realty , becauſe other Prodigies
alſo happen abour che ſame time, rationally concluding , that where Na-
tare breaks oucinto rare Symptoms, there ſhe is difeated. _ |

9 74: For the Marule, we need not be fo punctual to let out their Line,
or to take thent ihort, as in Comets; otherwiſe I would ſay, that beſide
diſtance betwen © © and 2 3 wekand Y. and & oppoſed at the end of x
and 2 for thoſe Spots which appeared from Sept..26.S. IV. ad O80. 6.
in the Roſa Hrfina; and thoſe that ſucceeded from Oo. 5. tothe r5. The
reafon feems to be, becauſe we meer with the Macala, when onr two
Planers were in the critical place of xt 25. 2 22. and we hear nothing of
all the year before, from Jaz. to Sept. whilſt yer the P was in being moſt
of the time: Another reaſon may be, becauſe while G' receded from
the £Y. ; he applyed to & H, the reaſon why we have another appea-
rance, ab Otfob. 25. S.N. ad 31. A* 1622, a May 15. ad 21.
Sheiner. and 2 Rb ad 26. _ _ a7 think, that a the
appearance anets the ingreſs 7, in S;5 the Vicini-
ty of & did contribute, _C the 20. day there's a new appearance,”
upon the account (now) w_ in- 2 ,our twe Planets, and the ©.
appearance from June 10. ad 14. We do not without reaſon impute to'
and & joined, amongſt the reſt, when the Aſpect ſalures us, Ju. 2. S. IN.

A# 1624. 4 13. Sept. ad 25. We have a d V & within the term, and
they contribute, joined one with the other, 2s well as 2 joined with
©, of which d ©? , Iwonder, if She:ner have taken notice; I fear
he harh not : bit as ® hath bin ſuſpected to have been a Maculs, ſo 2
maybe as pry to cauſe one 3 to me 'tis obvions.z Certainly on the x7;
day, %and & are as near as $ can be, and what Influence may they have
35: rhe next appearance from day 22. a4 OFob. 6. at what time onr Planers
are but at $ degrees diſtance *': Verily, They both hold to the next ap-
pearatice of Sept. 28. aa Ofob. ta. ' s

The next, 4® 1625. From ap. 8. ad. 24, S. N. where 'tis reaſon.tobe-
BETENNG che tormer Principles, that 2 and & Stationary both, do help
to beſmur the ©, while Þ and d are within 10 degrees of & > ſurely
when they come within 3 degrees, Zune 29. we hear of other Macale,
Scheiner, 149. What, that the next Month Fuly ſpeaks as plain as Nature
Can ſpeak to the poitir, ' So that now FT arrive to ſome certainty, © 2 2?
all i one Sign; & and 7 being Stationary for their parts , CP

ances


—_ - -—— _— " @”—


Chap II. Maculz © mt alwzys the reaſon. 450


—  — —
—


ſtances of Nature which theGar19f are to attend,vnlefs they mean to cur out
Work for Philoſophy only, and nor help to diſpatch itz and thenour
Planer's ina Partile critical ©. See Scherer, Roſe U!rfine, 241.245. 253.
& ali. Nay, if yet a following Month of Auguſt does not.conſent, ler
Schertner on one hand be conivited , p. 247.249.35 1, with the Ephemeris on
the other hand : I might ſay, I am haunted with the Phezomena, and they'll
never be Jaid : no,got in Sept.Scherxer, 255. 281. 283. as long as the Charm
of the of u & are within the EquinoQuial Circle. Pos:

Nay, if they come again, A® 1626. for a whole Month of January, S. N.
and a piece of Febz. I thall rhink there is ſome virtue in Characters, even
a d VL & not being without their Fruit, Scherrer, according to report of
the curious obſerver, 341. 345. to quote no rhore.

So far for Him: if Hevelrus be as lnclky. The firſt in O0). 9, 19.
1643. we meet with a Macula ; Hewelins his Addirament to his Come-
rography, when © was in d Gd, and Y oppoſing both. Is not this hand
plain to read ? Surely, 4® 1644. 7: 16, 26. we meet with a Macula when
2 is Stationary, arid YL and & are conjoind in =, within 5 degrees, the
» being got into &, ForShe allo, the would have you to know,is call'd
to the Birth ſometimes of theſe Phenomena, One or two-Inſtances more
would have done usno harm z but Hewelins is weary z and I am not ſorry
for my Vacation. - How beit, for 2 Farewel, it 1 yet can take my leave,
For more I enquire, the more we are encouraged 3 as particularly by
what he ſays, that bating the Foul days, he obſerved the © without any
Macule or Facule, for three Weeks together , which according to us,
may well be, for # and 2 are not always Retrograde z nor do they al-
ways throng into a Signz nor do Aſpects of the Superiours always happen
Nor are all Aſpects of the like force to this Effect ; and whereas he would
gladly know when there is any Macule appear in Wet and Cloſe Wea-
ther ; let me alſo propoſe it to the Curious, to ſnatch an Obſervation now
and then, when the © perchance ſhews it felf at times , ina Seaſon other-
wiſe Rainy. For, in my Opinion, though every courſe of the Solar Ma-
cale does not mudd the Air, yer, when ever the Airis ſo muddy, the So-
lar Diſcus will have a touch, as it were, of the ſame.


Prodiguus Rain, Saneumns, Frumenti, &c.


_ © 75. This Head provokes the Smile of the conceited Reader, but a
raſh Smile ſhews nothing but Indiſcretion. I know not why the Affirma-
tive may not beas confident as the Negative : As far as I ſee into Nature,
tis oftner ſo, than otherwiſe. The confidence of the Aſſerter, if it be
well grounded, has this proper in it, that it puts the Sceprique into his ſe-
cond thoughts, which the Proverb fays, is the way ro Wiſedom: - -But if
any man denies it, He may pleaſe ro know he has ſome Company. There
have been other Infidels in the former Age as well as He : Vulgar People
( for ſo it haps that a Reforming Stiolift fides with the Iezorant) were
afterward convinc'd by their Eye, the only- Gertsficate of the Infidel, and
unlearned. If no one ſhall believe Mozt-g:hel Flames ; but they that go
to ſee it , how would the Twrkze Merchants laugh at them ? Theſe Porrents
are as uriqueſtionable, though not ſo fixt. Hear what Gemma ſays of the
Rain, O#ov. 1572. fve Miles from Embden in Eaft-Frieſland;, Multi in vet
memoriam plenos Gyathos aſſeruarunt,Gem. 2. p. 105. S0 again, May 15. 1556,
where he notes ſome that {aid there was 20 {uch matter , but upon en-
quiry it was found to be true, L4. 2. p. 30. In the former of cheſe it rai-
ned Blood for five miles together : beſides other Examples we had-before
under another Conftguratien. To theſe, and the like, we ma a 1 ay

or p
though


-.
-


there is in the Air, myoomgui, 4 — Hererogeneous See
3


— KC


Pluv. Sanguinis, Frumentl, &'c. = Book 111;


though in ſome places more, and ſome lefs, according to their differen:
Tinctures 3 Now the Reſolution of theſe Mites in ſome may be more ea-
ſie, in others more difficultz as a Bloudy Showr ſuppoſe, 1s more eafje,
than that of Milk; in that the Red Earth may be more reſolvable into
Minims, than a Whrte Ghalk, or Marble. That which is more ealily di(-
ſolvable, as in Chymiſts Operations, is content with a gentle Heat ; that
which is more difficult, requireth a keener Flame. Now the AſpeQts differ
likethe Chymiſts Fire : wherefore theſe rare appearances belong to the
Stronger Fires, the glowing of the Superiour Heats. For raining of Athes
we own them, perhaps, to be nothing elſe but the deſcent, in a calmer
Air, of what was before raken up by a Turbulent : as in the Arenade, if
we remember z but theſe appearances found only under the Superiour AC.
pes, do commonly argue a more intimate Influence into the Effet, not
only by raifing the Arome more copious, and to a greater Height, bur al-
ſo tempering the Colour by helping it, as it were, to incorporate into
the Moiſture percolated through the Inferiour Armoſphere ; though ir
ſeems too, by the rarity of the Ked Szow , communicated to the ever No-
ble Mr. Boyle, chat the tinged Atmoſphere reaches beyond ſome part of
that Region, where thoſe Watry Meteors are found.

The ſingle Inſtance of that Hony-Dew which fell May 12. 1550. at Ba-
fiand Bern, mention'd by their Countryman, which he ſays, was follow-
ed as uſually by a Murrain of Cattle ; I ſhall not exerciſe my poor Phi-
loſophy upon it 3 only obſerve, that the Superiour Planets do exert their
Influence in ſeveral parts, which Singly, or Conjun&ly argue their Influ-
ENCE.

We have one rarity more, and that is raining of Wheat; yea, and Poul/z
With it,if we may hors Lycofthenes,and that in a time of Dearth : Muſt
we not haye recourſe here to our Panſpermia,and aVegetable Spirit as well
as a Mineral? For a great Showr I cannot ſpeak - but for fome Sprinklings,l
remember there was a report atOxford, May,19.1656.at what time I gathe-
. redſome my ſelf upon theChurch-Leads at Eardington nearOxford,where I
believe they are preſery'd as Rarities by the NobleLady to whom T preſen-
ted them. Some Airy Fancies would ſay, that they are generated by the
Influence of the Yirgins Spike. If fo , They were the more proper Pre-
ſent ro a fair Lady. But Ithink that our Aipe@ of Jupiter a rs may
rather challenge ir, and fome Impreſs it might have of Planetary Heat 3
although ir wasjuſt Grain, with a perfect white Flower within,yer one end
thereot was more Gay than the the other,burniſh'd with the Light ſhining
Red, mix'd with a eableBlew. Add, that a Flower taſted odly,
With a'Smatch of Sulphur, fo that for my part I imagined it never came
out of any Ear. :

The places of V% and &, March 15. 1551. forthe Wheat Shower, was
T 23:%, S $8. $. Theplacesfor the Honey-Dew, was S 25. &, 2 r.
%. The places for the Bloudy Showr, May 15. 1556. was (would you
thinkit?) & 27, &, 2.0. Y.. Who would not be inquiſitive, when we
ſee the fame year, within 8 days ſhew it ſelf in ſuch ſtrange appearances ?
The place for the Bloody Showr in 1571. is LL 11, &, * 13. Y, unleſs
two degrees di e will rob us of. this Inſtance.


 Droughts, Plagues of Locufts, Mice, &c.
$ 76, Such as ££ 1527. a Jan. 27. ad April 12. Stow, 527, V 11, %,
I o "Þ , - 4 , _
Ws r528. Siccitas in 4ftate ut videtur, Lye, 535,
- £t327.1a Job. ffus toriaw, Dr. Dee,


%


More


— x —— —_


Peſts of Locuſts, F lice, and whence,


44!


_— — —— ———— —— —


Chap. II.


More we may hear of upon Y.'s account in the next Aſpect : to make up
this Head therefore, the Plague of Locuſts is bred by Drought 3 of which
we meet ſeveral Inſtances, which Chronicles tell us ſwarm in Droughty
years, Which we may not con{tder in this place, though under our Aſpect,
ſeeing the greater Alpect of k and V. forbids. There we ſhall meet
with this Peſt in the year 1504. and 1542. the ohne for Drought, the other
for che Inſect,chat infected Italy, Germany, e&c.in Sept, Otob. Nov. &c. wit-
nefled by Lycofthenes, Surtus and Gemma, &c.

Galwifsus rells us from the Turk: Annals that A® 1586. in Tune , Locuftis
Plutt, It rained Locuſts.I thall be willing to allow from Profane,yea Sacred
Story, that they were brought thither by a Wind z as in Padolza it happe-
ned, A® 1576. foit rained Locuſts, as it rained 2wazles, But again they
mult firſt be muſter'd, before they can be conveyed to their Quarters.
There was ſome Goe/trtution whereby they were generated, ſome Siccity,
or Urea, &c. of which 4% & in 1 was a caſe Co-exiſtent with the
Month of June, when this Rain fel].

Our Exglikh Annals tell us of the like Peſt of Mice, which did much
harm about Nov.3. 1580.the ſtanding durable Aſpect is plainly Legible, for
the precedent Month, or Months if need bez an £1 & in 2 & being
Stationary , as We lay; for ſuch a purpole.


ts


CHAP. II.
Of the AſpeF Tres-Grand between SAT UR Nand JOVE.


$1. The Higheſt Superiours Enquiry into the Council of God,
why t 1 meet but once in 20 years; many 4 prank do they play in the
mean while. The Lifeleſs Hypotheſes of the preſſure of the) touch'd
at. 2. This Congreſs is dangerous. 2. Tet the Congreſs doth by no
means portend all That ſhall happen inthe next 20 years extent ; yet
the d comprehenſively ſtands for all the reſt of the Aſpe&s,' - 4: Not
All Extremities from the Minor Planets. $. Aſpe&s whatſoever
fall within the Terms of this. our Supreme, are reckoned as co-inci-
dent, to avoid Prolixity. 6. The Aſpet, asuſually, firſt conſider d
in Little. 7. Where it ſhews its Teeth ſometimes. 8. The CharaSer
accord. to Aſtrologers, ſpeaks mainly of Drought. 9. Drought, an-l
oft-times Miſt and great Dews. 10. Kepler's conſent."11. The
Conſtitution of  \, be it Dry, or otherwiſe, is of notable duration.
11. Evidenceof Cold and Dry Influence from A* 1622: "ind feqq.
the AſpeF repeats it ſelf, . becauſe it deſires to be taken notice of.
12, Platic Width muſt be allowed in t 4, ffnce —_— it ſelf
owns it cannot calculate it to a day. One degrees diſtance holds a
Fortnight, and ſo proportionably.. 13, 14. Kepler #o Friend to
Platic Influence, forced here. to confeſs it." | 15. Diary\ Keplers ]
of 1622, 23. for Winter Cold, and Aſtival _— 16.. Evi-
dence from Germany, fromiheEngliſh Collomtes of Droughty Year -
 thevery Thunders Fiſtival being Dry and Barren + Wind#\and no
- Rain, »ot of an exhaxſted Earth, as Kepler fanffed. - 17." The Year


16 43. thongh n0t for our turn here, yet our AſpeF gives us many 4 n0-
table


———_—.


—
442


Aſpets of am and Jove. Book 111.


table Cold touch. 18. The Tears 1662. much,and 1682. too mnch
or our turn. 19. The laſt intolerable Froſt begianing at Novem-
ber's Cloſe, 1583. and laſted till Candlemas, 1684. tonched, not de-


ſcribed. This Froſt predicted wpon the account of this Aſpe# : Kepler


at a loſs: Crude Air may, but Cold Winds, Froſt and Snow are not

cauſed by the melting of the Snow on the Alps. 20. A Froſt paral-

lel to our Laſt great Froſt, 120 years ago, upon the ſame account.

21. And ts trade in Lightnings and Thunder at other times at

large , fairly demonſtrated from Keplers Diaries ; Lightning

not always attended with Thunders ; They make Stridorem, but not

Boaturni. 3o, 31, Hence the Influence of the Pair demonſtrated to-

ward the generation of Comets. 32. The Arabians = rom ridicu-

lous in the point. 33. h more than half the Fathers of their
proper Comets. 34. Further proof from the Comets about 1503.
where we note that our Planets were in the ſame Sign as in 1682. and
the Comet in the ſame place i. e. neer Urſa Major. 35. Proof Conti-
red from d k , 40,15, 24. - 36. From theyear 1544. 38. From

A* 1564. 39. From 1583. 40. From the Star in Sexpentarius:
1604. 41. The memorable Tranſit of that Comet by all the Planets.
42.ad 47.Ricciolus's Argument againſt theArabian Do@rin anſwer'd
43, 4445.4 Table of Comets which have happened within the Verge of
the d h and Y, fence the Incarnation. 45, Comets ma 2y be predi-
Hed. 46. Whether an Aſped is leſs operative, becauſe it is not abſo-
lute, but, wholly comparative , its Eſſence conſiſting meerly in Relati-
onto us 5 no fondneſs ſometimes for a Copernican Subtilty. 47.Whe-
ther h and Y. canproduce any Stars as big as themſelves. 48. Con-
junitions maxime inthe Fiery and Watry. Trigons, withthe great Mu-
tations of the World introduced thereby, are above our reach. 4.9. &c.
'Þh and yy, as they cauſe Drought.ſo engaged in ſome Company they cauſe
Floxds. 50. Pencer refers the Influence of our AſpeT to a Solar Eclipſe.
Conſpiracies Planetary. 51. Some account of Stanhurſts lamentable
Flood. 52. The Catara# at Budiſtina. 53. Water in Flouds rai-
fed alſo by RarefaFion. 55. Gemma's Lamentable Floods, and his
opinion of Fermentation of Waters by melting of Snow, kindly re-
ceived. 56. An unparalle'd Fleud in Holland , ec. An: 1572.
Evidenced from thence.that the new Star in Caſſiopeia is homogeneal
to the Bearded Comet. 57. Some Home Flouds.Tis the Spirit makes
the Waters prond. 58. A juſt admiration of the greatneſs of the Aſ-
pedF 3 the Principleis far from Superſtition. 62. The Anthor delights
10t in baleful Relations. 63. Kepler's Subterranean Cauſe pitied, but
the Man admired. 64. Kepler unhappy, when he teaches there is no-
thing inthe Sign. 65. The Floud of 1642. in Holland, juſtly re-


. ferd to our Aſpe# by Kyriander, but no Anticipation will paſs.


67. Flouds at Northampton. 68. The late Flouds of Holland de-
ſcribed from the French. 69. The late news of 20000 Carcaſes
floating, makes the Author affeFionately wiſh, that theſe who are in
Power in theLow-Countrics would find « Profeſſor of Aſtronomy,obli-
ged


Chap. III. | Tres-Grand Aſpet? of Saturn and Jove:


ged to Study our Theory. 70. Þ of h and y. brings as many Comets
asa d. 71. Earthquakes heard of once in 10 yeers. 72. The flu,
pendious AſpeF once more admired. t however fancied Old and
Decrepit, is a high and mighty Planet. 73. An. 1554. Three Earth-
quakes. An. 1563. It Thunders at London, and the Earth quakes
at Wand. An. 1612. 1. M. »pon the Land, while a Stormy Chriſt-
mas wracks 60 Veſſels in one Spaniſh Port. An. 1632. Kyriander
«ſcribes Veſuvius's Flames to ow Aſpect. An. 1628. No greater
evidence for any Concluſion in Nature. An. 1642. Anticipation
OHCce more rejected. An. 1643. @ of h and muſt uot exclude
the Aſpe# of h and YN. 74. &c. That the Superionr Planets
cauſe Earthquakes, i: no news; Pliny teacheth it from the Babyloni-
ans. Notes pon the Chapter in Pliny. 75. Pliny's Teſtimony for
the Cardinal Signs, agreat Iruth 5 with other notable Notes concer-
ning Earthquakes. 76. Contizuation of the Ithe Notes. 77. An
Earthquake may laſt 40 days ;, nay, 4 year or more by fits, with the
reaſon. 79. Inmdations and Earthquakes oft-times go together by the
Antient's confeſſuon. 80. Inmdations, Earthquakes, Comets, Pe-
ftulences hang all on one Thread. Objection anſwered. 81. Our Aſ-
pet malignant as to Health. 82. The beſt Phiſttians conſent, h
and , are more to be ſuſpeFed.than any other, which anakes ſome
Aſtrolegers venture to predid a Peſtilexce 3 the reaſon why our Aſ-
ped ſeems tobe moſt ſuſpicious. 23. Some notion of Dominion it
thecaſe. Cardan bids ws enquire into Eclipſes, to little purpoſe.
84. ec. Evidence of Aſpets Malignity. The Sweating Sickneſs, An:
1563 Vicinity ſtrongly ſuſpeFed, even beyond the Tedder of 30
Hegrees, An. 1623. 1643. Twoor Three Peſtilential years together
united under our AſpeF. 85. Whether h and N, are malignant
without the AſpeT of h and 4. 86. Aſpets of the ſame malignan-
cy in leſs Dijeaſes, Agnes, Variolz, Scorbutes. 87. ec. Di-
ſtempers wore or leſs correſpond to the revolution of our 4 and &
every imentieth or tenth year. 89. ComtsEOc.attended with ſ.Diſt er:
pers.90.The Kings of Englands emtrexce upon their Reign doth not u(#-
ally, rmnch leſs always introduce 4. ence, as Phanatiques chatter;
92. Some good News to lay the Objetion gohich ſaivh, I ets every Xth.
gear Dangerous. 93. Peſtilences may hanker about a City 3 or 4.zears.
S 1; WE are arrived at laſt through, many a, weary. ſour Stepby Sea
 , VY and Land(notwithour the Divine Afſiſtance)to the Plys:
Aſpect of the Two 1mmediate Supertours, h and V They, are.P
of Stately, Slow, and Majeſtique Motion : they careſs. not one agother
every day; the Globe of the Univerſe: knows They Meet but once in 20
years, Iftthere be no Myſtery in thar-{befide the Majeſyof it, for-Princes
meet bur (elkdom)Lam fowly loſt: For,can-a /wallReyolutiets of x4 orTer
Moors of matter produige a Maz; and does the God of ature,in a $ydereal


Revolution of Twents-Years produce nothing ? What 2 neither off, war?
Wellis it, if it doth nor produce a'Maniter ; both-imthe Mycroand the.
Microcoſm:s. For tell-me, you that believe (I ſpeak no c0.others) that ll .
things were made for the Intereſt of, Humane Natyre;: what cntda.the

p 3 | m


-


444 Preſſure of Atr. This Aſp. portend wt forXX. 7 Book. III,


end of is Divine « Counſel , ſuitable ad nes Rik, i, of uch ex EX-
_ ? in any moveable whatſoever, w otton

ne ind any thing in any moveable the Wind, the Blood,
Es, ogy Breath, Gireulate, 4 Advance for the execution of ſome
Miniſteries which they perform b y the way. There is work for them to
do beſides Daxcing ; Their Motions are to be weighed and fels, as weli as


meaſur d. i me to ſee Learned Men of Preſſures of Air, and
thereby ſove ow no Coun Den Flow. There is lit-
wv woul nep and Y. ſhall be allowed any Influence (for Pr:ſure is not


any 7 when it is ——__ tothe Moon , the Image and Reflex of the
They ſeem to me .to deny the Aion of L; t and Heat, AndI
would fain know what elſe is 4#:ve ? whether or no the Motion of the
cannot be a ay accounted for without thoſe Lsfeleſs Hypo-

ot bs of Balk 2nd e:ght. I (peak only of things which are Lucid. Alas !
Alaſs! there is many a ſad TranſaQion to be Tous” by theſe our two
(cos Cond of the firff Mover (ever to be ador'd ) before the return to a


le Me, Men have o_ have ſev away amidſt all their LT ſelf- > + Sr
SD; — = -— 177 Re ad Congrels of Migh
$2 muſt repeat again,is a Tres- 475-4 's)
ty OT ſpreading its Wings —_ mp gfe W:#, and my m_ us
Fl or two, 3 or 4. nay, almoſt 5 ſometimes, before et clear
of boon ho bin SS Two great Ships on the Main, on a foul anne. e6-
danger all the Paſſengers.
s 3, Fam not of their Mind, I muſt own, who perſwade, this grand Con-
>., junHton. portends all the Ghanges Political or Natural, that bappen in the
World within its Revolution; for that Evacuates the intermediate Conki-
gurations,. diveſting them of their Influence , the # DA & of theſe ve-
ry Planets, all whuch have their ſeveral Stations ; z Jew __ 4 erexces of
Influence; Some more forcible, others leſs. Nay rather thoſe great
bs Events natural which are to the —_ and ders by hem:
ſelves , the Greateſt which probably can qo within the Abe of XX.
Years, falls within the time or term of a ignal AſpeR, s. ce. about rwo
 Y years or ſomewhat more, before and after what we call the preciſe Con- '
: junction, Or f, which is nextthe &d in all its Virtue and Efficacy : ougt
the Severe we have (oe, Bi eng ud w—_ an Artiſt ay that by
He means the wp, 1 Abed, and chen I am content.
g a This wef SS our Laney for though we have dinn'd
the LITER Comets, Earthquakes, ence , &c.
the Minon Abe we muſt know that h and V have
I mean,) and Territories which belong to them,
wuch Miſchief as in any other parts; $o there


wer ie fother wi
order'd it ſo,that what belongs to our Af


| 7 the for the time be-

. ing; '&E d Mortasſed like the yg Feel.
9 be bath been hitherto our Method, which, I hope upon due
conſideration will be taken in good part 3 we muſt conſider this onr ſu-
prearg


Chap. III. The Chara. of the Aſpeft from Fwy Elders.


445


me Configuration at the wrong end of the perſpeQtive, tz. with its
dcevience a, and after furvey it in its farther extenr.-  -
$ 7. The abbreviature will ſhew us the Nature 5 Little, and nd
ſtanding afford us ſome Extravagances ſometimes , whereby 2 tuſpici
wilt be raiſed of ſome. Stranger, and ſtronger Power that lies Crockane
between the configur'd Pair.
$ 8. My Reader would, I fear, be at a loſs, if I ſhould trancribe the
Charader of this Aſpect from our Elders, as from Gardan , the
- of hand faith he, as to che qualities of the Fixed,and the Signs, w
- it ha does afe8 the Air for wany days with fair Weather, or Rap
© or Winds, Gomment. in Ptol. if the Luminaries at leaſt be Aſpected
he not almoſt ridiculous ? But that he hath a Sz/vo from the Sign and the
ro Stars which determine the Dis-junfive, Regiomantanus faith, For
any days before and after, it brings a great Drought in Y #1 2 the Fiery
: «Signs - and in Watry +, ay m >, it brings Rains, Flouds, Inundati-
* ons, & Particularis Dilwoia, This is very well, Bur then in Aerial
Signs, I hope, it brings Winds, in :==, In Earthy Signs, Froſt 'and
Snow, & MV, Regromont. dare flor lay fo of this, whatſoever he hath
ſaid of an AſpeR in General. Magrnas is as cautelous, c confiuthrases
che Drought and Flouds: but paſſing by the other r Morry of he
mination of the Signs, —_— + the Quarters of the year ; and tells
us that, In Spring it _ curbid Clouds, and moiſt Air ; In Sewer:
Hail and Thunder. - In Autumn, Winds and Rain ; In Winter, Turbid
Air again. Tagltarozzo accords, only he reftrains the Turbid Conſtirurs-
on to the Spri the Hail to the Summer,che Rains and Flouds to Autians,
andthe Turbid Air in Winter , to the Humid Signs only, in which
the other ſeems to be indifferent, regarding only the Diverſity of the
Seaſons. Eichſftad, after all, (He wentby hisown 1ence) ventures not
on the premiſles or their varies 2a erts, th not from his own ex-
ann tb bard )chat hand , hath an Influence for
Droaghs, while he Gif Erther in Keplo 1516.1614.of which in due place,
and expreſſing _—— nn hu An. who fancies that een
d of the Superiours hind ioct the
attra# the Waters of che Oc
 $g. We, Ihope, more intel
Coaſtiturion, becauſe ir


often Drought
n nity A BY #1, confeſſed leaſt in Winter. Bur Argol,
who hath ICE of os mint bn teins bn Aiennt Le
de Lager i: would riot forget, put in great Dews, more often
z -or atter wm,

$16 And this I take tobe meant by Kepler, when he faith, Þ cum 7o-

ve vapiduy: ex Galentibus pro latebris educit acrem, qui in producendss mete-

oris , ingentes babet wires, in Ck TO. 2h 274. quoted alſo by E:chfad,
wherel do not pretend to underſtand his Philoſophy 3 either the

Reek out of CC w1/ble


lefs that Mifts have fuch
but 1'do aſſert the Trath of the Aphorilm that Þh and V is = ob


Fd Fogey Congreſs very frequen
SIT, In the whe. are cold our AlſgeR brings a-Settlewent as
32s to


Great is the Term of h % Cotit. Rain or Shine, Book ll:


to whathappens, Razz, or Sh: ne, for many days 3 but they leave the poor
Diſciple to determinethe Number himſelf. Alaſs / how many 20. years
muſt a Student paſs to determine That 2 Notwithſtanding, they are not to
be reproved : for the variety of Motions and Habitudes of the Planets are
ſdadmirable, that »o determinate number will fit. The year 1682. with
1683. ſaw 3 d's meet inone, and fo it continued 9 Months in the year
and the like we ſhall ſhew preſently in 16a2. &c.

$12. Now, to make out our Cold and Dry Character, what with In-
telligence from Germany, and my own Experience, I could produce four
of theſe Grand Gonjun#ions with their reſpective Diaries, Entire ; the
firſt whereof and 24 we ſhall prone ; the firſt ConjunRion; though it be
Celebrated in the Month of July, and in the Sign A, a Sign, belides
other diſadvantages, which hath no great favour for Cold ; for Heat ra-
ther, Thunder and Lightning 3 yer. we can be content to make no excep-
tion againſt it, bur all things conſ1der'd, to admit it. The Conjunction
lies at the Door of July 7, 17. but how many degrees we ſhall expatriate be-
fore or after the day of the Conjun&ion in this our Minor Table; which
we make przvious to the following laFer Diary,That is a Queſtion ; for
ſundry reaſons I have pitch'd upon 8 degrees/ of _ Diſtance, not
more ; becauſe I would not overcharge the Reader : nor Leſs, leaſt I ſhould
wrong the Aſpect, eſpecially when the Aſpect for fear it ſhould be wrong'd,
ſeemrs to me to repeat its Motion, not being content, as ,we may ſee, to
pals patt of Septemrber, Oftober, Nowember, December entire, A*® 1622, bur
Gommences again, at April 1. 1623: and fo holds on to Ofober 4. Yea, a
third time; from about the end of March, 1624. 'to the beginning of May,
the ſame year. So falls it out that we have ſome taſt of this AſpeR, not
only the SummerMonths of J«ze and 7uly(where we find little of his cool-
ing Influence ) but of the early Spring Months, yea, of the later Autumn
and Winter. 475 | |
s 12. For, what are AſpeRts tyed, do. we think; to pretiſe Minutes and
Moments ? the Vanity of - that appears from this Grand Conjunction. An
Aſtrologer muſt be loſt in-a, Miſt there, .not knowing whether he goes,
when Aſtronomy it ſelf confeſſerh She is uncertain, and does but conjecture
* at the Moment. Hear Kepley's honeſt cenfeſhon : Planete valid: & tar-
at non contrahunt ſuos effefius. ad moments minuta conjuntonts Plenarie(ſpea-
king of this very ConjunRtion) #t ae qurbes adhuc ipſa Aſtronoma incerta eft,
propter ſubtilitatem. Calculators will differ above a Week in the Point.
Whar ay you, if VIL daysſhall not wake above one degree diſtance. Jf
VII. days before differ but'one degree from the preciſe ConjunRion, then
VII. days after differ-no- mare from the; i0n : So there is a fort- .
night EIN within 4 's ſpace 3 and a Month within two de-
ck ſpace, rec&oning on each fide to; and: from the Copjunfion. How
this ought to be extended even in meaner- Aſpects,, we have before
ſpoke our Mind. we make nothing even of tex degrees Diſtance ; we
have ſeen & and 2 Rain exceſſively, evento Flouds at Five, yea VII. or
VIIL degrees diſtance. Nay, if we have proceeded further , which muſt
not be denyed, 'tis certain, if we enlarge upan any Conhguration , we

may ſafely, upon Hh and %. pd 2/4T%} 26
- 9 13. This weſhall prove even from Kepler himſelf. (though he be no
Friend to Platrck Efficacies) While he allews an Influence of th and. Y. at
ſuch Diſtance 3 ' He, where he reckons they have took leave one of another,
= upon the intervening of a Third Planet, finds no ſuch matter. For
! 1nhis account of May, 1623. having told us Faithfully, that for the
ſpace of 12. Days the Weather was in Mor: uniform, z. «. Cold and
Rainy all the while, He tells us withall that the Interyentign 0 © _
and


Chap. III.


h and V.(a Sexti/zhe means ) was the Caule : which is the rather to be
marked, becauſe the Inſtance is at the Cold Influence, Frigus & Plutioſum
there, yea and at Lzztz too; for there we find Veztt {rigrdr, Gelu, Plus.
oſum. Yea, Ntves, on May 11, 21. which is ſomewhat of the Premiles;
And where is h and Y. then ? Abour 5 or 6 degrees diſtant.

9 14. In another place being over-loaded with Evidence from the Exal-
ted Influence of the Aſpe&t on OFeb. 7, 8, 9. He cries out, till I hear him,
Wor ſjuffctunt AſpeFug in huzc diem, What ſhall we do then?Will nor a zigh-
ty Sextile of ht, UN =, h ©, falling thereabouts on ſeveral Days, do
the Feat ? No : Nor ſulicinnt. Bur we muſt even fend fora d h VN to.
make theſe Sextiles ſo Potent, Now Þ and YL on thele Gays are grad, 7,
diſtant, at leaſt. *Tis true, This belongs nor to the Cold Influence : 'Tis
a'l one for that, Þh and Y's Aﬀpectis /etch'd from the Dead to anfiwer for


h Y Chill, Aliſty, Dry Infiuence, 447


Pranks committed, asif they were Living.
S rs. It will be time now to procuce tome of our Tables. The Firft


then may be as follows.


A Tableof kh Y rntreGradc8. S223. LY, An. h.


© 1622. Iatra grad. 8.
Hept. Styl. Nov.
I4 Nebulz.
17,18. Neb. Of.
20, 21, 22, 23. {cren. 24. Atul,
28, 29, 30. Acnle.
O06. Stiyl. A. 2. Prumna.
5, 6. Frigws, 7. Nevule.
8, 9,10. Galiginoſum. 11, 12.Frig:-
aum.
17,18, 19. Nebule, Frigidum.
20, 21, 22. F-18619. \'ix in Coll;tns,
26, 27, 28. Frigidum, 530. Frigus,
Nov. 2. Styl. N. Errevs.
3, 4. Pruina. 5,6, 7. Gal:ginaſum.
9. Fetiaa aura. 10, 11. Netile,
I3, 14. Frigtdum, I5. Neb. Nix.
I9, 20. Niwof. 21, 22. Frigidum.
28, Nebulz. 29, 30. Frictdum.
Dec. 2. Pl. N. 2. Gelavit, Nix.
4. Frigus, 5. Nebule, Nix.
. Nebule Denſiſime.
'y Nebule, Nix 11 Nix 2. Neaxit,
13. Ntzxit pb tot. diem. 14. Gelu.
15, 16, 19.Frigus. 19.Gelu auravit,
21, Frigus. 22, 24, 25. 1X.
27. Ninxit. 28. Nives. 29. Frigus,
S 26. V,MN 3. h. _
1623: Jan. 1, 2. Styl. Nov. Ir:gus.
3. Neb. denſiſſima, tot. ate.
6. Friews intenſum, Nebule.
8, g. Frigus medrocre,
I4, 15. Frigus Keftauratu...
1624. ab April 7. St. IN. ad Ofc. 4.
10. Ventus Frigidus.
11, Gelu, Sol Palliaus,
12, Gelu,Tonitru.14.Sol Sanguinens,
I6, 17, Geliduxz, 20.S0l Pallidus,


May St. NN. 1623. 3. Nebulz.

14. Atulz. 17, 19. Fenti frigiat,
19. Gel:ainm, 21. Plavif, Niwes,
2,22. Frieral, & Hat dies.

26. Granainof, A. B. ab 11. ad 21;
tot un? texipus 18 Norico pluviol. &
Frigid. Nebule iz Oceano Brittan-
nico, Kepler, ad May 1623.

Note, that in Summer the Scene
changes not for Drought, though
for Heat it may.

Tune 14. S. N. {Vevule.
15, 16, 17. Squalores;
25, 26. Frigida Aura.
July 4. St. IN. Squalor.
5, 6, 7, 8. Galores. 9. Squalor.
II, 12, 13. Galores. 14. Squalor;,
I7. Grande. 19. Squalor,
26, 3O. Squalor, 31. Stccrtus,
Aug. 1,2. «Aſtus magit.
2, 3, 4. S1cCItas. 5. S$-ualer
I1. Grande. 18, 19. Squalores intol.
erandl uſque ad 26,
Oe. 3, 4, 5. Frieid. Nineid.
3, 4. \rngidum, 6. Gely.
7. Prutna, Nrwis inſtar.
1624.March 30. Here now;the Spring
is cool. :
31. Nx.
April 1. St. N. Ving:idum,
2. Frigns. 3, 4. Gelu, Ninxit.
5. inxit. 7. ANtneidum.
8. Ventus Frigidus. 10. Frigtdum;


I I . Pruta.


* TT mz =


h VL Vote ofineſt for Cold. Book.III-


s 16. From which Diary take Notice how every Month which is more
capable, hatha cold mark 3, and thoſe which are ſcarce capable, feel the
impreſs of the Aſpect by Droaght : (for the overflowings of the Dazow
in June, 4® 1623. toward Midiummer, I hope, is a Rarity , and in July
we ſcarce finda Drop of Rain z whence Kepler with Reaſon concludes
the Diary of the Month with S:ccrtasz which isno ordinary Style in that
Book. Surely in Vew-England we find a Drought noted from Jure's be-
pinning to the end of July, Purch 4. p. 1866, Yea, in Germany all July

ong. Even the very Thunders brought no Rain with them , according
to what is before noted, Dry Thunders are an effect of Joves Dominion 3
and yet according to the Diary, 1t Thunder'd five or {ix times. To pro-
ceed, Winds inſte2d of Rain, ſays Kepler, not upon the account of; an
Exhauſted Earth as he imagines, but on the account of thoſe Planets,
that being met, reſiſt Moiſture, and ſeparate ir. Thete are a matter of
330 days that we are concerned in for the :»wef1gatton of this Aſpe&, the
Fair Days and theDry being reckoned,which are omitted in the Table 74.
in the firſtDiviſion,121.in the 24.and 20. in the3d.make even up 200.0f F >
Total (330.) And 75. for ſo many Cold Days occur exprefly i» the Table,
han the Influence is manifeſt 275. of 330, bear Witneſs to a Dry, Cold,

o_ Our next ConjunRion falls by Courſe in the year 1843. on Fetr.
16. here we ſhall ſeem to be at a loſs, not where the Aſpect falls ina
Winter Menth 3 for there we are not to ſeek for Gold, Mit, Froſt, Snow,
&c. each Month having its proportion. Dec. 4® 1642. gives 26. and 4?
1643. Jan. gives 21. Febr. 22. March 15. April 17. but before that,
from May 22. to Aug. 2. when They come within 8 degrees in Suinmer
Months, where the Aſpe&t doth not ſeem ſo much for our turn, the Grits-
cal Poſition, . as it uſes, altering the Caſe. Well, it will yield us the more
Inſtances under the Style of Heat, Moiſture, Storms, &c. Yet, evenhere,
we meet with the German Drary, Froft at the end of May, [art Ref
Cool Weather ; yea, Cold on Juze, 21, 25, 27. with Snow, or Clouds
ready for Snow,if I read the Dutch right, Rait TUind Schnee TUolken,
ſo hard is it an for Aſpect in theVariousChanges of the Celeſtial Motions,
not to ſhew its Teeth, See Kyrianaers Diary.

-$ I$. But thenext d of 1662. is quite for our turn ,. and the next 20
years after too much for our turn ; when firſt that of 1662. brought Cakes
of Ice in the Thames at the end of Nowember, December's beginning, abour
a Fortnights time z and Renew'd then a 24 time at December's end, ar
what time the River was ſcarce paſſable. - At zt again, 4® 1663. where ex-
treme Froſt, and hard Winterly Weather in the Cloſe of 7azuary,brought
much Icea third time upon the River ; when, beſides Froſts in the m
ſpace, appear'd Cold and Chill Winds Sr Spring at the end of
March, April too was much upon an Eaſterly ind; by the ſame token
that my Memorialtells me, on May 2. I faw hÞ and % within two degrees :
T ſuſpected ſomething even then that they were ſome Caufe of that Con-
ſtitution following, whatſoever I thought of the Cold preceding. The
Truth is, the Aſpect laſts all the year within 8 degrees Compaſs, and To-
kens thereof may be diſcerned in its Cold Influence : I mean in the Froſt
of = die 11, 13, 20, 21, 22, 28, 29, 30. in September, Ofoter, De-
cember. ;

S 19. But That of 1682. according to my terms of grad. $. begins about *
Faly 10. and ends not till a year after, Aug. 24. 1683. By my Notes I find
a Cold Night in-the midſt of July, 1682; yea, and Froſty Cold Pinching
Mornings, beſides the Day time, A»gft 3. and 4. and fo S1gral was it two
Months before Chrifmaſs, that I remember according to my ane

tlemen


Chap. III. D:ſcourſe of the Liſt Memorable Froſt, Sos:


449


tlemen got on thier Upper Coats and Cloaks, in ſpight of the Cuerpo mode,
to defend their Shoulders from the Cold. But in NVowrember of the
ear 1683. There, There began the Winter which told us a heavy tale;and
aſted, with a ſmall Interruption of 4 or 5 days, till the New -» after
Candlemaſs, 1684. That is the Winter under which we groan'd a Twelye-
month after; whoſe farewell had a Sting ; for bringing a dry Summer
after it ( a Badge of h and Þ when they are not maſter d ) the Markets
forgot their Plenty of Fleth and Fiſh, the later being kill'd by the Froſt, and
the former by the Drought, Cattle being pinch'd in their Paſture,the poor
Vegetables periſh'd, fcarce a Salard to be feen, the Grape 1ntercepted ,and ©
the Artichoke deſtroyed 3 Roſemary and Bays became mew Exolick Plants 3
This was the Winter that clos'd up the Thames, and made it Terra Firma
when his Majeſty of Happy Memory being So!licitous for Ice at the end
of November before, was told, His Swans would have Ice enough before
that Winter was over; the W:zard intimating That Froſt , which upon
the Poſition of Þh and Y, he ſaw, would be:{o ſevere. The Truth of it
is, the Planets are not within the compals of 8 degrees. Alaſs! we ſtated
that number for Ruaiment - and Introduttion fake , we confin'd our ſelves
to it at firſt, only to r2troduce, not toexclude the greater Diſtance. Know
therefore that at this d They were both in M, above twice 8 degrees di-
ſtance, and the better Artiſt muſt conſider them both nearer and further;
che oze ſometimes , at 'other times the other taking place. Andic isno
News, for thus we find in Keplers Diary Forty years ago, when the two
Planets met in A. Honeſt Kepler is ata loſs for the reaſon of a Cold
Winter; eſpecially of the Hyemal Cold in March. 1621. Alaſs ! Good
Man, how doth he turn every Stone? How doth he conjure for it out
of the Earth , but it azſwers not > The Superiour Aſpe&ts have been in
Play for two year before, as we could prove from his own Annotations :
the ſhort is, March proved fo Cold, that it minded the Goodman of his
Country Proverb , which counſels the Old Men to put on their Swords t
arfend them from the tharp Afſſaults of the Air. H and? V are bur
10 degrees diſtant : but he not dreaming of ſuch Marrtialiſts , hath
recourſe to the Nature of the Month. But what is the Nature of the
Month 2 *Tis he himſelf who asks the Queſtion 3 and 'tis a worthy Queſti-
on, 2ux poteſt eſſe natura partis anni, aut que eſt ſubſtantia temporis, what
Body hath time which is indued with ſuch Working Faculties? 'Tis the
Sun Characters a Month zz fpecze, and the reſt with the © characters it in
1adividuo; He impures it to the melting of the Snow on the Alps, which
cauſeth, he Jaith, thoſe Gold Winds which bring the Winter Froſt. Buc
why is it conſtantly ſo every March ? There's Snow on the Alps every
Winter. We findnot (4® 1621. A? 1622. 1623. 1624. we find Þ and U )
A® 1626. we find no ſuch thing again. As for thereſt we muſt remember
there are other Cool Aſpefts of YN, belides h and V. Nay, 2. I
could never diſgeſt the pretence of Gold Winds from welt;ng of Snow 3
Flouds and Waters I underſtand, and a Crude Air : but that melting of
Snow on the Mountains ſhould caſe Froſt and Snow in the Valleys , I pre-
tend not tounderſtand, For Wind formally confider'd, riſes not from the
moiſtned Earth, nor fals by its own Weight, the Coldis its own Proper-
ty, which it lendeth , and borroweth not. Again in Snow its ſelf, Air
relents, how much leſs does it Freez when the Snow Thaws 2 Motor is
the Formality of Wind, but Motion requires an Application of a zew
Cauſe.Thereis Maſter,l grant inthe Armoſphere,PlentyzwhenSnow'melts,
2s there is in the Bellows deducted ; but there wants an zx7pulſe, an Aſpect,
a Conſtellation, as we have detin'd it at the beginning,ko make a Wind.


9 20.Now why may not I look beck into the former Century,l do amiſs
in


450


—


The gr. Froſt parallel d. hv Infl. on Lightn. Book Ul,


in ſparing the Labour 3 in the year 1563. 1564. you ſhall find a Froſt paral-
el ro that of ours,120 years after 3 about Ghrr1ſtaas (as with us) it was un-
ſapportable, the Ears of the Poor,their Hazds,and other parts gangreer'd';
the Nut, the Pear , the Peach, the Roſe-Tree, the Vines, all but Roor
utterly extinguiſh'd. Death of Man and Beaſt, Dearth of all things fol-
fowed, Gemma Coſmac. 2, 44. And would you know now where our Pla-
nets were? You will find them upon the matter in the ſame places, One
in an the other in then, and Both in 2? now, Þ being but newly
Eatr
S$ 21, Paſs we now from Frof to Flame, to ſhew that handY in d,
712, from the exact Aſpect fo call'd, to the Lurrcunx, hath an Influence
ſometimes more, ſometimes leſs, on all Lightnings, Thunders that have
been heard in Summer or Winter, and bordering on the &d for the ſpace
of Vyears together. How,ſay you ?Even ſo: I know 'tis no ſmall enterprize:
Tis ſuch as will amuſe Aſtrologers themſelves, till they pleaſero calmly con-
ſider what hath,or ſhall be ſaid. Yea, but this needs aProof. Keplers Diary is
extant for ſome years when this happened. Heis a man of Authority, who
making inquilition into Aſtrology, as many ingenious Perfons at this day
do, hath left us his Notes. From them we Demonſtrate our Thetis, we
demonſtrate that this, 4 Þ V% haps in 1622. in 1 6. July7, 17. Now, we
are not going to ſay that the Heat, and Thunder a Twelvemonth before,
Fune 2, 3. St. N. depend on the Superiour Confaguration, as. poſited in
that very Sign or degree, 16.(though that Congreſs were then,and not be-
fore, in its perfect Complement) but we ſay that when Hh and Y. in pro-
ſpect of ſuch Conjunction, entred within ſuch Barriers, as thall render
ow within 3o degrees diſtance, there can nothing happen all that live-
long-while, but muſt be imputed, more or lefs, to thote Planets fo ap-
proximate. For Example, take me the Toxurt of Jur. 2, 3. aforelaid,
5, 51, and H place in 6, 43. Þh and YL. areon the Luincanxs are They
not ? If I prove V. then is concerned in that Thunder ; then % and Þ
both being ſo Afpected, are not quit. Now that Y. is concerned, any
man that is but ſomoderate as to grant us, that a Concourſe of Planets in
the ſame Sign is apt to beget ſometh:ng, ſhall find that %,and © are bur
gr. 6, diftants then V-and 9 are but gr. 4. diſtant; fo there are 3 Planets
in X,, andthe I in 2, which is Azti-Gemznr, and oppoling both 2 VN ©,
Y being ſtreogthned by the Vicinity of © and 2, and ſomewhat by its
Vicinity to h. Letnot the Reader think we have ſaid all, ſhewn all the
Cauſes : Nay, we ſee but a part in which h and Y. have a ſhare. To
make this more probable, know that the ſame Method gives account for
the next Tozitru, Jun. 8, 18. and therefore we ſcape that. We meet with
next ferventiſſimum tonutt , plutt. Moiſt, ſoultry Air and Thunder, day
19, 29. ſee, if ? 2 © are not poſited all between Hh and Y, fo that H
and Y. arethe Bounds and Shedds, as it were , to coerce them ; bur if
any of the Planets ſo coerc'd are Operative, the extreams Coerced cannor
be Idle. To ſay none are Operative, is aga:7ft our Suppoſition z for no
moderate man but will, in this caſe, grant that @ 2 and Þh , all Three
in their Tropical Heights can raiſe Fervours in the Air: This is {o eaſe,
ſo evident, that I would begin my Pains here to teach That Man Aſtro-
logy, 2. e. to look upward. |
9 22. The next is a Temmpeſtuous Day with Thunder, 7ur. 9, 19. as yet
we do not ſay that our Planets Influence is ſo legible, as others of the Mi-
nof Rank ; for @ 2 » ? are all within 10. grad. one of another; II. in
the end of S, theother II. in prizc. A, Now (note that 'tis the New
I, theday of the Change ) I arguethus 3 if any of theſe IV. had Influ-
ence as the New Moon, at leaſt is granted, toward the raiſing of wn
| peſ?


-


” _


( .hap. TIE. Þ u Contribution to T hunders, demonſtrated piece-meal. 4cl


peſt, then all theſe IV. had the like. Well, ſtill che © and 2 have ops
ration tn the end of 5, and thall not Þ in the middle of the fame Sign?
And if th have, ſhall not Y alſo, being near the fame Tropique heighr
on the Left fide, as Þ on the Right ? Belides, that he its now gotrhree de-
grees nearer Y., then at the laſt time. There comes two more Torts be-
fore this Monch is done ; for they are like to be thick on the acconnt of the
Tropical Height of our Planers, which are the firft in the Paſs, and chere-
tore ſtrike up the firſt Heats. Lers balk a Thunder or two, and come
to Mach Thunder. Ang. 19, 29. « ftus Pertonuit plutt 3 fo the Diary
Here, to make thore work, W is concerned, if ic be Thunder , the while
YE 15in T, &< is in Anti-Gemnr : thall f's wide @ to YU be efficacious ;
and ſhall h's 4 co UL be ineffectua! 2 Þ and % now approach 5 degrees,
more the One where © is at /uzes beginning, than the other, where ©
is ſtarion'd at the end of Fare.

$ 23, Well, the Sun begins to decline, as Kepler uſes to fay, and there-
fore Thunders begin cofleepin ther Embers: Howbeir, there js 2 pacting
blow, Sept. g. St. IV. 1621. ſome places Fired, or ſtruck with Lightning :
We lee, and cannot chuſe but fee where 2 and 7 arepolited; that
YL is ſonear, appears by his Height, 11 23. by this ſtrong oppoſal from &,
as was ſaid before; and by the »y's d with Y, partaking with tho
Heights, and receiving that ftierce from the Martial Starz W% I fay,
who is approzch'dto h, now ftx degrees of the Thirty. Thus much for
the Firſt year. |

9 24. No news of any Thunder now, till Aprz/ of the year following,
1622. Then comes a Clap 2 days together, dre 7, 8. where 1s Þ trow we?
In his Tropique Height ſtill, 2! 22. Where is Þ: 2 Fallen back a little ro 5
T5.nearer the Alritude Tropick. h and YL are come nearer now by a degree;
and if thac will not unite them, the » will, Die 7. the » wades berween
h and Y for that day, and the day after fortakes him not; This is fo
plain, as if we read with a Feſcue.

v 25, h and Y noware almoſt within 20 degrees ; a great approxima-
rion for the Superiour Planets, as hath appear'd before, even in the Mt-
nors : See by the way, whether the Stars be not Thunderers? For &,
which but now raiſed Thunder by @ of Y, is at the fame Sport in the
s with the ſame X 5; the One art the Entrance, the other at the Ext
Ot 4,

s 26. So certain, I ſay, that the I cannot come to & but it Thunders
again, 4® 1622. May 1, 11. the ) 5 Y, Three Cothrades in T, and Þ
within 20 degrees of the neareit of the Three,

9 27. All chis may go for Gratis drum : But will any Man's Obſtinacy
ſay, that the « Ffus, Tonitrna, May 19, 20. were not cauled by h and YL
as to aſhare, when WU hath got into Sz a Sign of the ſame Denomi-
nation with h, and bur 18. degrees diſtant > Then let them fay that & or
Y makes no heat on thoſe « Z/uant days, and let them prove ir, becaule
the Sun makes none when it comes into the ſame Sign. Here the Planets
in S ſtrike up the firſt Heat, © and & continues them 3 % and Þ inche
higheſt 44/55 Finith. |

v9 28, So willl leave 4 Y and h in S attheir Rains and Thunders, all
Fune and Jaly, St. N. Azguft, % and Þ feem alone, but within ten de-
grees now, where 2 muſt paſs, if Þ and Y. lie in her wayz Three Pla-
netsin ©, we have heard bave Thunder'd already in Zune and July, h %
&,and the like can Þ Y * doin Aug. = ; :

v 29, There's one Toznit in September, die 15, 25. tounit largiter pluit, Þ
and Y are but 7 degrees diſtance, and though the year is declin'd, yer the
I keeps v5 che Summer inclination hy that day, while ſhe rides in 2x,

5 in


*


__


4.52


Winters Thinder. Lightnings without Thund. Book 11] L


in S, Þ in ,and 2 alſo, & & in M,& Yet further, Ob. g. St. N.
Tonuit, Pluvie, Grandines : (ee whether the » be not in Aztigemini, h VN,
&c. as before. |
£56 I ſhould m_y my ſelf, and my Reader (which is worſe) if I
ſhould follow this trade in Juze, Fuly and Auguſt; 1623. when © and the
Reſt croud into the ſame Signs, what with « Z#us, Squalor, Tonitru, that
they come to Tonitrua continua before they have done, three days together,
Fulgura continua aWeek after;andSqualores tntoleranat,for about a Week
together 3 and ſo we have done : Now what's the matter with Chaſmes
and the Lightnings in Winter, 747. 2. & 7, 17. 1623. (we are indebted to
ſpeak to Winter) firſt there's two Planets in Anti-Gemins, and two in Az-
ts-Gancer, which bolt upon Y, lying quiet till they come in grad. 27. of
S, wherehe being prim'd by thoſe 4 in the other Hemiſphere, Fires Þ
his Superiour, who lies but at 8 degrees diſtance. Therefore inthe mnt
this hapgens, while Þ and Y are up,and aſcending the Meridian. Judge
this to be true, when you ſee three Planets in Ant:-Carcer firing V's
Beacon, Far. 7, 17. while he tranſmits that Flame to h and the » , which
by this time is got to, and beyond them 3 bur ſo as to play his Game till
with them.
$ 31, Here I muſt take notice that in the Premiſes there appears Light-
nings, I mean «dry Lightnings, pretty frequent z Lightnings without Rain,
ina ſerene Air; and Lightnings without Noiſe, although by Congreſs of
Planets and their Mixtures, Lightning moſt commonly is accompanyed
with Thunder ; yer there are ſome Poſitions of Heaven that produce a
quiet Lightning , preſent themſelves only to the Eye. I think Ihave mec
with ſome who aflert that all Lightning carries a Thunder with it, though
by reaſon of Diſtance, ſometimes not ſo audible. But the contrary is
evident both by Day and Night, even in Cloudy, much more a Serene
Air. Iwill grant the ſudden Eruption of the Flame does create ſome noiſe,
bur all noiſe is not Thunder. Every Flaſh may make Str:idorem at n01 bea-
tum, there muſt be reſiſtance, a Cold, Denſe Exhalation, {which muſt
keep the Flame in , likethe fides of a Canon, till it breaks out at ſome
ifice, 2s we may call it 3 it muſt be ſome relucancy in the compoſition
of the matter, as in the Materials of Gun-Powder, ſome Moiſture as well as
Drought, which Moiſture is ſupplyed by the other Planets, © 4 2 Z , not-
wi ing where Þh and Y. are in Mutual Regard, it happens that the
Dy Lightmings take place oftner than otherwiſe ; which is no. contemp-
tible t of the Drought of Y. at leaſt, in favour of our Princi-
ple. Such Inſtances we have inthe few Days underwritten. June 8. July
I6. Aug. 18. 30. A* 1621, Then =— I5, 29. May 1g, 20, 22, 23,24, 25.
Func 1, Aug. 8. Dec. 23. 1622. Then April 3, 4. May 21. July 8, 10, 11,
12, 16.in the Month of the Partile Aſpect ; Aug. 8, 9. 1623. _- 23,
24, 28. May 7, 27. June 1. July 23. 1624. Laſty, in the Chaſms, Dec. 23.
27.1622. Jan. 7, 29. 1633. thoſe Lightnings mores eſpecially, which are
noted to be continual, 4ug. 8. 1623. Chiefly that in the beginning of
One when the Heavens Lightned and Burned all Night without a
p of Rain or Hail, 7a. 2.1623. St. N. Celum ardens,within the Month.
$32. This being ſoaccording tothe Philoſophy of the Antient Aſtrolo-
ers Þh and % may have Influence in the Generation of Comets, becauſe
ey have a dry Emanation. The Arabs are known to predict Comets
from the d of h and Y, and they are laugh at for their Pains : We
would laugh too for company, but that in our little Dealing we have ob-
ſerved that the Old Pagan Gentlemen did ſpeak ſome Truth, if the Court
would be pleaſed to hear them. It may be they are not exac always, be-
cauſe they tye themſelyes to the Partile ConjunCtion, and thea look up-
Ont


———


Chap III. & hb % 7s more then half ihe Father of a Comet. 4523


ned when Þh and % were in 41, & YL within leſs chen X. degrees one from
another z So I meddle only with Notorious Phenomena, which have the
publique Sramp upon them, and have their Diaries recorded. As thoſe
thac were ſeen afrer the ConjunCtion in 7 , 1664. about Ghri/tmas, at what
rime Þ and YL were both in #. Three Comets then ſeen by my ſelf, and
all the World belide, (we know, this may be mention'd before; un-
der the 4 h &, yer that muſt not hinder che greater Conjun&ion.) We
havebefores , you tee, already favouring the 4rai4an fabulous: furmiſe,
who did not mean fo, as ita d of © and Y werea private Aſpe& 3 They
knew it was I»p:rtral , of a large extent and Dominion, Martialling
Minor Aſpects under ic ; and upon that account ought not we Chriſtians to
deny that theſe Conhgurations often bring Comets with them. Ye ſee here
are two together ; Firſt, that in 1664. then that in 1682. What ſhould
we cavil ? I acknorwiedge it is not XX. years punctually,” buc they both
rome within the Verge of the 4 . The ſame d comes but once in XX.years
may be, bur it {tretcheth irs Wings forward and backward, fo that the
—_ may come ſooner or later, either about the 22. or 18, years Di-
{tance.

» 33. Well, but 'tis a Chance, "tis ſuch ſuch a Chance as has chanced be-
foremy fcantling time : For how came the 47ab1azs to dream of it ? Bur
enough of that. Go we backward ; have we known any Comet abour
1644. Verily none appears, we muſt be content then. Let us retreat to
the year 1625. where Þh and Y are but a Sign diſtant, which to.me is as
good as if they were about half a Sign, or XII. degrees diſtant, ſeeing
there is difference of Communicationot one Planer to another, according
to the difference of cheir Station inthe Firmament, We have ventur'dto
ſay theInfluence runs beyondzo degrees ſometimes; of which we may per-
haps in due place give ſome account. 'Tis a Wonder, and no Wonder ;
None, becauſe a Comet is not accompliſhed without the concurrence of
che Inferiours; and yet a Wonder, becauſe h and Y carry ſuch a ſtroke
with them, that they ſeldom are without ſuch Iflue 3 being more, as we
ſay, than half the Fathers ot it.

v 34. What a Drudgery 'tis toconvince an Adverſary ! Come, for his
ſake let us begin at the firit Stzge of the laſt Century 3 Ar the end of A*
1503. there was 2 notable 4 of the Three Superiours 3 In 7uze 1504. it
came to the turn of h and Y ro meet alone about the endof S. I am
not ſo zealous for my Grony Alpects,as to put up 3 Comets,or 4. inthe year
1504. 1505. 1506, Thar of 1504. though extant in Hewelzus and Lubie-
nec, tothe beſt of my ditcretion, mult be diſcarded, proceeding from the
Miſ-underſtanding of A'phus his Words, quoted by Gardan, who tells us


aot of any Comet appearing, A* 1504. the very year of that Tripee s
2%9,;


F: of
th


No News for h YN to bring One, E Book It i


h % 8, but only referreth a Comet of 1506. to that marvellous & pre-
cedent, though 2 years after. For M:zaldus faith not, with Hewelius his
leave, that Helter obſerved any ſuch Comet in that year. For if that very
Authors Preface be conſulted, found in the ſame Volume with M2zala,
his Cometography, he manifeſtly diſtinguiſheth the 3 years, as I have
faid, andonly tells us that the Comet in Auguſt, 1506, was that Gujus Ha-
litum prioris Anni Eclipſys.(1505) & magna Gonjunttio contraxiſſe putantur
The confe(s'd Comet we diſpatch firſt, and ſay with thoſe Old Good:-fel-
lows , who made up the [ Pataztur | that itisa Product of the Congreſs
of h and YN: Not of the Partile Conjunftion working at two years di-
ſtance, but of the ſelt-ſame Þh and Y. at the diſtance wherein they are
found at the time of the appearance, which the Ephemeris gives us at
ſcarce 3o degrees, at which Diſtance we have ſeen they operate, as well
xas at nearer approach. Now let me ask, this Comet of Aag. where did it
appear ? In the Signs © LM; here , above Hrſa Major; Aﬀer', under
it, as Hevel;as gives us ſatisfaftory Teſtimonies. Let me ſee, where was
the Planets H and Y. in the year 1682. when the Comet appear'd abour
the ſame Conſtellation > Were they not in the ſame Signs > This Comer
was Call'd Gauda Pavozis. We are not arrived as yet to ſo much exaR-
neſs, as to expe the ſame Figure at ſeveral times ; the ſame Celeſtial
Station is pretty well proportion'd to our Pretences. But there was another
in April for 5 days at leaſt, which was drawn out by Werner of Norimberg.
If there were, which I donot much queſtion ; belide h and & do coun-
renance it with a Partile Aſpe&t; Þ and Y are nearer than they were in
Aug. But was there no Comet in 1505. then ? There was ; and that in
Sept. about New » at Mzchaelmas: Note the Planets, Onein S, two
in 4, two in MM, twoin =, Oh! that they had been fo good as to
have communicated the place to Poſterity. I have faid enough for the
production of itz as & was within 30. grad. of h, ſo h was within 20.
grad. of Y. So much for our firſt entrance of H and 1, in defence of
the Truth of our Arab:ar Brethren 3; only note that the firſt of theſe Co-
mets was look'd upon to be attended wtth Siccity.

$ 35. Now taking a XX. years Leap to the next d , which happened
about the 10. degree of X , and near the beginning of Feby. lst us ſee whe-
ther our Arads are always Lyars? Nay, we have Rockenbach to affure us,
yea, and M:zaldus too, brought in by the diligence of Hewelius, who te-
ſtifies that there was ſuch a Saturnine Comet, as he calls it ; and that Fa-
mine and Peſtilence did fer two years ſpace afflit his Countrymen. But
It is left at large, they do not tell us Day nor Month. I do not know, Þ
and Y. were in due Diſtance, April 1522. And if that but anſwer, 'tis
enough. Bur A® 1523. we have more fatisfaftion, for there, about the
end of OFober, or NVovembers Entrance, a Comet was juſtified by a great

* Tnundation, faith Lycofthenes, and Pretorivs. Great Inundation ? Thar
is but a little Word: a Dire Inundation of 32. Miles, Men and Cattle
innumerable {wept away, inthe Kingdom of Maples, Yuarto, Kal. Now,
H and V. 10.grad. diſtance; a Dire Congreſs, and a Dire Effet. The
Partile of this d happened about + 11. Feby. 1524. I would this were
the only Dire Effect that belongs to our Aſpect ; my Fears have not been
Aain, we ſhall not find it fo.

9.36. The next Parti! d fallsin Sept. 1544. about the end of 1m, Now,
whether 1543. ſhew usa Comet, or anything like it ( for by our Princi-
ples we are indifferent) will be ſeen from Lycofheres,followed by Senneri
and Fromond, who tell us that IV. Nonas Mait in the Marguiſate of Ba-
den was ſeen, bor. 4. P. M. A Fiery buineſs as big as a MilRone ; the
Tail of which, (or ſome other Meteor fo call'd) deſcended,and {woop'd

up a


-


S.


_, —__—_—


Chap. III. h % zzore then H. the Fathers of Comets. 455


up a River ; the likelyhood of which deſcent , Scxlizer is call'd in to at-
teſt, Exerc. 79. the Reader ſees we acquieſce with Lybzenize, and while
we ſtand not for the ſtrict acceptatian of the Word, bur a remarkable ef-
fet we think muſt be own'd bv ſome Cauſe or other, the Diſtance with-
in bounds of Þh and %, ate = 20. M 16, And by the way, Comets and
Fiery Meteorsate cognate. |

9 37. For 4® 1535. if there were any Comet, as from Rackenbach they
fake itup, and Heweltus brings ſomewhar of confirmation from Gamera-
7145, I ſhall nor ſtand upon it, feeing it ſeems to be like the precedent with
the Story of Izars Cagens, and no time is ſpecified 3 bur if there were,
we have h and Y. in 2 will (tand for Wirtnels.

S 38. So move we on to 1564. and its d of Þ and Y. in April, S 28,
my _ wemeet a Comet onthe Feaſt of St. Jamzes, July 25. no more is
aid of it.

9s 39. Another Step brings us to d Þ Y,, 4® 1583. in # 22. the year $3.
hath no Comet, but $2. fails us not. They give it out to be of immenſe
Magnitude (they mean the Train) May ity etween Worth and South af-
ter - ſet 3 noted by Ticho, Kepler, &c.. Its Train ſtreamed before Auri-
g4's Right and Left Shoulder, laſted from May 14. to 28. This Light be-
ing given us, we {ee its Original by its place in t, where © is with 2
and £ both Rerrograde near him, which we grzeve not to acknowledge;
have the moſt vilible concern in that appearance; but yer, that h and
havealſo their ſhare, appears 3 For it began preciſely when the » was
firſt conjoin'dto Þ , and laſted 15 days, ſay ſome , until the » came in
P to h. Note we from Mr. Gambaen's Etiz. that this Comet was at-
tended with a Deſperate Tempeſt, not only of Thunders and Storms, but
of Hail 3 Inches about, ſome Stones being form'd Star- faſhion, or like the
Rowlsof Spurs, a rarity from Þ and Y $s Anvil. |

$ 40. So, at laſt weare entred into our Century, now current, in good
time, for now we are come into d Þ and Y., and a Comet, O#. 1, #
1604. Yea, and that Comet prea;&ed by ſome Arab, upon the accaunt
of the Conjunctionz and of this Kepler in his Dzſcoarſe of the New Star;
is a competent Witneſs, who tells that many Afrolaggers with Herl:-
cius foretold this Phazomerow, And have they not Reaſon? Hath any
great d as yet mils'd for the ſpace of a ico years? This is the6th. 4, of
which not above one that hath flinched, but brought forth according to
expectation. For we have precluded the Objection from a new Star he-
fore, which if ic be, the Argument is the $tronger, $90 Up heory more
ennobled , if even ths Novelty depend on a Planeta pet. A
New Star is more than a Comet; fora New Star heſyre is Mtherig,
and fo the Comets are Sublunar. We know right well, that this New
Star has bin produced already under the Confatration's YL &, and we
might vapour of ſuch a Phezopzeron, which began.on a.d of Þ &, Sept;
2. By a good token that a Gentleman given to Metoraſcepy, looking on
the two Stars in d, ſaw tree; 1o gear was the Efte&t to.the-Caule 3 byr
at no hand muſt a great d exclude a greater; h and & are in Parnle 7 4
h and VY were within X. degrees: ſo h Y & were all three in the ſaxze
Sign to evidence the Aſtrological Concluſion : The Triple d 1s a Triple
Chord ; 'tis three Witneſles. Have we not met the like before, a Co-
met imputed to the Three Superiours in ® ? How Potent is the Heaven-
ly Militia! This Comet was among the F:xea, as appears from the inmo-
bility, ſeeing it budges not, at leaſt from its firſt Diſtance, in reſpect of
the Stars in Optuchas's Leg and Foot ; from whence it appears, that if the
Planets can reach to the Seat of the Fixt upward, then they may reach to
our Sublunar World 3 There, lying in the Midway, may receive the Tn-

A6 fluence,


—_—_—


6 56 Ricciolus's grand Objettions againſt the Arabs,anſ vered Book. Il! [


fluence,as in a Racket and ſend it down to the Subter-Atherial Globe ; bur
This by the way.Ler us enquire how long this New Star lafted> Ar what
time it was extinguiſh'd > A year , beſure , That is agreed on; and
O06. day 8. A* 1605. ſawirt. The Truth is, we would have it fo; yet
after that; there is little News of it : It decreaſed roo faſt ; Three Planets
produce itz but Two, Þ and V helpto continue it, poſſibly tothe end of
the'year 3 bur its 2#rncurnx is not yet ſpun out till then. In March after,
for certain, there was no ſuch appearance. b_ LN LY |

S 41. How Signal is our Conjunttion ! How much concerned ! Ac
with expiring,” a Comet expired. Hence comes that memorable Note
of Kepler, as Ricciolus juſtly call's it, that Every Planet in the Heavei;s
made their Tranſit by this Comet before 1t was extinguiſhd; Wand & dwelt
with itin its Cradle, and Þ for two Months together : All help, but we
ſee who are the Principal. WY 2 Ss 0G |

. $ 42. Yea, butdo my hear,ſaith R:cciolus, Lib 8. 5 2.c.18.how many Os.
je8:0ns lye againſt the Opinons-of the Arabs? Not one, I hope, as we
have ſtated it. Yes, Firſt, faith he, How many Conjunttons hawe paſſed
© 445 without any New Stars? "Twas but one, faith he, v2. that in the yeat
© 1604.anſwered the Prediftion, but one event fortunate, cannot make a
Fixed Rule. Right, but what means Oze only event > Did the Arabian
Sages Found their Rule upon that of 1604. who liv'd ſome of them
above a thouſand years before ? No queſtion they obſerved themſelves, or
had obſervedto their hand, many ſuch an Attendant on the d of H and
%. Molerus and Grabb, were not ſuch Ofes to predict a New Star 1604:
unleſs back't by ſome Trazition ot precedent Experiment. 2ly. Ofiander
hath ſeen plenrifully that there is ſcarce a &d Hh and Y fince 150. but hath
brought its Meteor 3 to ſay nothing of H and &, or Yand 2 before
na And therefore we give the Fuet leave, cry'd up by Kepler,

cciolus and others, to callus Afrologaſters ; bur by his leave, we do not
in this caſe tell a 1000 Lyes toore Truth,we appeal to Conſideration.

$ 43. Here my Zeal forced me to look back on the former Centuries, by
the excellent Table of the Great Conjun&tions from the beginning in Ric-
ciolus, Lib. 7. And there I find 4® 1464. 4 in * 11.attended with a Co-
met; A Comet, 4® 1465. Another on the very year 1444. the d in S,
the Cometin 1, and when? at the day of the Solfzce;, fo h Y ©, &c.
were inthe Scrapez The.d 4® 1405. in * 2. was beſet with Comets 1403.
and 1407. That of 1365. in >, was ſqurred in by a Comet on March the
It. laſted above5 Weeks. Thar in 1345. in &, attended by a Comet in
'Azg. and laſted two Months. That of 1306. may bring three for all as I
know. One 4* 1304. 1305. Which was Horrende magnitudinis, faith
Hewvelins And another, 1307. and 1286. brought one about 1284. '——
The & 1266. was ſ{quiredin by one of 1264. and |d 1246. with one 1245,
And let this be enough, unieſs the Reader hath a Thirſt to look to onr
Saviours time z and Lo ! we wereof-the ſame mind, comprizing all the
Gonjan#ional and Gometical years as they are recorded,


A Ta-


tc ts a ons


Chap. II. Comenical T able from the Incarnation, demonſtrates. : | 40"


A Table of Comets which have happened On, or within the Verge of d BY
fence the Incarnation. Fn


——————_
re
—


—


| Ann Anni \\ Anni Anni | | Anni Ann
Chriſt. | Comet. | Chriſt. Comet. |; Chriſt, | Comet.
I5 | 14 | IIO07 | r186 VP, 1504 | 1505 . :
55 54 XY. | 1147 | 1145 S. | 1506 S,
75 76 1 | 1146 S, 1524 | 1521
214 | 218 1167 | 1165, fiz. G. | 4028 |
353 | 335 M. 1168 VP, | 1523 X,
373 | 370 © V. 1226 | 1223 Y. Iv 26
393 | 392 MN. | 1246 | 1245 WM? fin, 1544 | 1541
396 1266 | 1264 V pr. 1542 MN,
112 O09 fare S, MI} -> £ I .
, oF . 1 1268 | Ee: Anno S.
532 | 531 T. 1286 | 1284 V pr. 1564 | 1568
571 j 570=. 1304 == pr, | 1583 | 1582 a
G11 |' 613, * Y.j| 1306 | 1305 ©, 1585
684 | 683 mn, 1307 1603 | 1600
730 | 729 FX. 1345 | 1347 Y. i £04.4770 7 +
750 | 749 fi. 1365 | 1362 pr, 1623 | 1625 ol fin,
829i: 8300, 1385 | 1382 It, I643 | 1647
869 | 868 2. 1405 | 1403 2, 1661
| 908 | Eod.armnoV 1407 X, 1663 | 1664 7.
928 | 930 / fin. | 1425 | 1426 mn, 1665
948 | 945 A. 1444 | Eod.anno 5. 1680 '
{ ICO8 | 1005 Jrve 1464 1463 X, 1683 | 1682 &. 4
[ IC09 d. |
| 1028 | 1027
| | 1031 } |


Which Table proves more fortunately favouring our Principles, theft:
could be expected : for ſeldom do we find the Comet or New Star ap-
pear 0n the precſe year, as it happened A*® 1603. but a year or two beforz
or after 5 where Þh and Y. are half a Sign diſtant ; yea, and ſometimes
more, as we have ſaid; and could prove even from the Table; but even
Good way is tedious, if the Miles be lozg.. And note; I pray, how juſtly
welſtated the Queſtion with the df junttrwve,Conſequent or Concomitant.
For the years Precedent are too often found furniſhed with a Blaze of 2
Meteor, as well as the Gonſequent, that we may ſafely aver there is foun-
dation in Nature for ſuch appearance ſo circumſtantiated. And don't let
pals thoſe years which repeat their Effe&ts in the ſame kind, ttemrng as ic
were, 3 years together ſometimes, and /y:ng Fallow at other times. The
'6 4®1306. is. own'd by the years 1304: 1305: 1307. The & 1524. is
alike owned by the bright Iſſues of 1522. 1523. 1526. Juſt as in our own
time, the d 1663. is own'd by 1661. 1664. 1665, Hence we ſee what the
| Arab1ans muſt mean : They could not intend their prediction from the pre-
cile year,ſince we find no {uch Inſtance from the time that they fAonrith'd.
For after Ptolew1ies Luadripartite was by the command of the Saracen King
turn'd into Aratrch, then we hear of Meſſahala and Albategnius, A® 889.
and Alfraganus, A® 950. Haly, 4* 956. Alphard, 980. Haly Aben Rodoan,
1024. Alkindus , 1100. Alpetrag. 1149. Albumazar , 1166, _ p_
ave


_ "+ Ricciolus. Cannets: may be predifted. An 4 ſpeft,what. Book na


I have ſet down, that we may ſee what were thoſe very Comets obſerved
by the Arabians, every man in his day; upon which they founded their
(I think I may call it) Excellezxt Rule; fo that TI wondred that the Learned
Ricc:olus ſhould tell us but of one Inſtance; who gives us a Gatalogue of all
Comets; and a Chronological Table of Aftrologers ; by compariſon of
which his own Works, he might have inform'd himſelf better. Bur grear
Men who fail with the Stream, have no apperiee toany thing that is -:ght
Aſtrology, though in it (elf never ſo Noble 3 though it give account of
ſuch Arcanethey confeſs they deſpary to find our. "$9
| $ 45. His next Argument proceeds not ſo much againſt the Thefrs, that
the Great Conjuntions are produftive of New Stars , as againſt the pre-
tended method of Predictions, the tzmre or place of the appearance, by the
Obſervation of the degree of rhe Zodiac and the preciſe Day z Bur the
preciſe day is not yet agreed on, ſome approaching ſooner, ſome later, as
1nd 1603. there wasobſerved among the Mathematicians near a fottnights
difference. All this we know to be true, and the vanity of the Arabs was
ro talk of Degrees and Minutes , forſooth, in caſes where there is no xeceſ-
ſity, as we ſee it uſual with them in Prognofticks of Rain, when they would
be thought zot to ſay nothing; They propoſe Methods Nice and Scrupu-
lous, which it may be they ſcarce believe themſelves ; I am ſure can ne-
ver be made out. But what is this to the Theſss ? The Conjun&tion may be
a Cauſe of an effe&, though we know not when that Cauſe will be pro-
duced to a#, Not that I deny that Comets may be prea:Fed to a Month,
yea a Day; why not as well as an Earthquake ? But then 'tis by Chriſti-
an, not Arabick Method 3 by —— the Ref how they fall in with
+ Gyranaces Alpected, contributing each One their ſhare to the common
Product.
$ 56. The third thing: An Aſpect of Þ and V. cannot produce a New
Star, becauſe the Agent is only comparative, and in relation to upon
Earth ; It is not abſolute in its ſelf, nor in Relation to the Fixed Stars 5
for in ſuch relation Þh and V are always in &, ſeeming in a righe Line
drawn through their Centres, whereſoever they are,will term:zzate on ſome
part of the Firmament; and fo there muſt be Comets everlaſting, Ax-
fwer, this Argument proves that no Aſpe& in the Heavens can produce
either Wind , or Clouds,” or Showrs of Rain 3 no, nor the very New
'I 3 for the Conjunction of of © and Þ is an Aſpect only in ce
20 #5, not in its {elf, nor in reſpect of the Fixed. Why is it not in its ſelf >
Is there noSpecialty upon a perpendicular Ray terminated on the Earth, and
thereby redoubled? Is there - no difference of the Angle of Incidence,
though it make Summer and Winter > A Line drawnthrough two Planets,
lace them where you will,terminates on the Firmament for one extreme;
Far ſhall it terminate on the Earth for the other? But theArgument ſtrikes
at the Dorine of Aſpedts in general, which ſtand as ſure as Philoſophy
and Geometry can make them. 4 _ zs ſomewhat in compariſon to
% , Ti nothing in its ſelf faith he : A meer Fallacy. For though for
Examples ſake, a Solar Eclipſe be nothing in its ſelf, ſince all its defici-
Ency is gugad nos; and fo the diftintion may be allowed ; Yet the ew:-
bra diviaentia may ſometimes tumble in Oze Belly. Some things there
are that challenge 60th ; the New I is dark quoad 70s, the Full » is Lu-
Cid 772 ſe, & quoad 0s alſo. For what doth This make of As, or the Earrh-
ly Globe? (1 ſpeak not to the LearnedOppozert,but to theArgument,which
is a Gopernicax Subtilty, tofay the beſt.) Was not the Univerſe Celeſtial
made for Xs ? T know how indifferent the Goprnicans are ; but I ask my
ſelf, was-not Heaven,and All that is therein, made for Mezs benefit > The
Zodiack, I hope, was; I ſpeak according to their own Sentiments 3 How
| came


Chap. II. The Planets Aſp.can produce a Star as great” «Them. 4 7 |


—c


came the Lumpith Earch to deſcribe it ſo exatly> Was it. not for
che benefit of irs Inhabitants > Planets placed where you will, have
Influence, bur not Influence of Aſpe&ts. The One is General, the Other
Special 3 by the Geyeral they illuſtrate and Cheriſh; by the Special they
moderate the Seaſons of the year, and qualifie the Days, pretenting Or-
—_y and Extraordinary Meteors according to the Law of the firſt
over.

.. 9 47. The /aft and beſt Argument ſpeaks thus, VL and Hh cannot be the
Progenitors of that Star which is bigger then themſelves : but the New
Star 1603. was bigger than VL by much 3; the Mzzor is confirmed from the
great diſtance of the place from whence it ſhone, even the Firmamenr
far above Y and ©. But theapparent Magnitude ſeeming roequal V, ic
is known it muſt be in ir ſelf much bigger. Tanſwer, the Argumenc
fmells well of Learning and Reaſon, and deſerves a fair aflent,
or a fair Solution: and this we take to be ſuch, while we give twa
Reaſons : Firſt, chat Þ and V are intended not for the ſole Progenitors of
the Star, butonly the more notable , or Eminent Contributors toward
the ſame: for who can exclude the Su# > Who, & 2 For ) it (elf > In
Branching Comets 'tis clear the Sun hath ro Co; by the Proje#ion of the
Tail therefrom; We have heard ſomething of the Reſt alſo, having ſeen
Comets appear at the Triple d of h % & 1n that great year 1524. when
the » in 3? hours ſpace made her Tranſic through them all, the ike where-
of, ſaith eper, perhaps was never known ; and we preſume the Arab1-
axs did not deny ſuch explication of their mind. But 21y. we have a grea-
ter Reſerve 3 To the Erratick, we add All the Fixed that are affected by
ſuch Erraticks 3 and how many Thele are within the Zodiack , our for-
mer Diſcourſes adventure to ſhew; the Fixed are quite other things,
plainly Immerſe Globes of Light, ſhining with their owx Native Flame,
and big enough, upon irrication of the Planets, which is always neceſlary,
to make Stars as greatas themſelves z. T ſons can make a produdt equa!
co any Srngelar , more muſt not be ſaid in this place, but the very Roving
of the Comets ſhew the one, and the E:xedzeſs alſo infers the ſame. The
New-Star does not Budge from the Stars in phiuchas , Tt argues their in-
timate connexion. Shew me a New Fixed Star in a bare place, and we
ſhall demurr : but that in 1572. was not 3 nor that in 1603. WE.

| 9 48: There remains no more to be ſaid on this head I take it ; forto
meddle with the d hk %, whichare call'd Maxime, and the Diſtinions
of the Fiery, Watry, &c: Trigons, performed in 994 years ſpace, with the
Great Mutations of the World, pretended to be introduced thereby. The
Foyle of our great Sirez The Days of Exch ; The Floud; The Law
of Moſes ; The Foundation of Rome z our Bleſſed Saviour; Charlewargi:
&+c. as they ſeem to be fine Speculations exhibited after the Arabrans had
muſter'd tne ſuch obſeryables in Kepler and Rzcciolus 3, 1 do with all de-
liberation leave chem as I found them, in as much as my ambition is ra-
ther to contribute a Mite toward the advancement of the Gele}:al Philoſo-
phy, and the Student whatſoever, who ſhall think fit to take ſo uſeful a
Theory into his Excyclopeay : On which account TI liſt not to enter a dil-
pute, or.to pals my Judgement of the Star at the Epiphany of our Lord,
chough Kepler fixed it upon a d of Þ V. de Nowa Stella, My Employ is
about matter great enough for my undertaking, without Soaring fo high
as Aliaco and other Profeſſors. |

s$ 49. With what face can aa Aſtrologer, who lately contended for

Drought, now talk of Flouds, but we have ſaid tis no contradiction, for
the _ isldem,qua 1dem, —PBut now the caſe is altered ; and you will pleaſe


co remember the Oracles which ſpoke of Droughts , mentions Fouds
B 6 alſo;


—_———


__—


4.60 How h % have a hand in Floods. Book 111.


alſo. We have beendipt in Flouds before,but there is no avoiding them:
They return upon us again in the name of &d Hh Y.

The Firſt Floud we find is in the Kingdom of Naples, uther'd in, as
TunFine will have it, by a Comet, V. Kal. Now. 1523. the Floud it ſeems
following the Summer after, 1524. in which time the Summer being full
of Cataradts , as Alfted hath it, a dire Inundation reach'd and made Ha-
vock of Houſes, Villages, Men, Cattle, as far as the reach of 32. [tal:-
ar Miles. Lycofth. and others. The Conſtitution of the Summer fo Vi--
lent and ſo portracted, ſhews a Commenſurate Cauſe, which can beno
other but the Long-Spun Aſpe&t of Þh and V. , with the Hits of the
Reſt. For in 4uevf they lye within 20 degrees one of the other. In June
bur 15.in both diſtances apt enough ; though a good Diary of that Drow-
nipg Summer would be worth Money.

S 50. A® 1534. Lyc. notes Flouds in Poland (he notes the ſame thing
twice, I ſuppoſe, p. 553. 555.) In the later page he takes notice thar
All Europe beſide labour'd under Drought. Inund. Max. furre Ceteris ter-
74s per Europam areſcentibm. Not unlikely this, for Þ is oppoſed to H in
in ſuch a qu, that it may bring forth a Drought, that is out of queſtion
with us ) that this Drought may not in ſome places obrain, is as unque-
ſtionable with Obſervers : Now the others may believe what the Lear-
ned ſay in this Matter, that a Drought in ſome places is a Sign of a Tem-
peſt in another 3 more eſpecially a 74p:4, not a temperate Drought : So
much may places differ. Now this,you muſt know 1s an #.

Bur the ſame Author reports before,Dire Inundations, as he calls them,
in Flanders, about Antwerp, &t. A® 1533. Þ in fine S, VÞ in V prixcep.he
is not diſtin for the time, Ifix it on Dec. for I am loath to loſe ir. Nor
only difference of Clime, but difference of Poſition changes the Influ-
ence. And the Fruth is, Drought is the natural product of this Aſpect
for many days. Flouds from Rain exceſſive, or Hail, are but the Exacer-
bations, as we have ſaid, of Nature, cauſed not from our Planets, but
by the mixture of ſuch Potent Influences with others ſer and prepared for
ſuch Effect ; be yrs ge give me leave to note the One as well as the
Other, ® as well as d, as they take place 3 or behold the next Oppoſi-
tion of our Planets _ entred. Peucer tells us that there was ſuch a
Drought after the end of Aug. that very Ponds were dryed up, and the
Fruits of the Earth mourned, p. 382. He impures it (Good Man) to the
Solar Eclipſe, Aug. 31. A® 1551. But it were worth knowledge whether
the Drought was not extra ſuas cauſas , before the Eclipſe ; if but a day or
two before, 'tis enough; for whatſoever Gardan ſomewhere fancies, thar
ſvch Effects may anticipate their Cauſes, Credulity it felf cannot believe
ic; Though it be then the ingreſs of of our Aſpect this year, yet 'tis 7a-
7xary following 1552. wehear of many Flouds, Lycoſth.and it was day Jaz.
12. {aith Gems. Flouds in January may come by a Wer Weather, or
by Snows diſfolv'd. True, but exceſs of, Wer and Flouds come not , no
not in Winter without ſome Exteriour Cauſe, or Conſpiracy of Cauſes :
Conſlpiracies ſaid I ? I look'd _ the Ephemeris, and I found the Luck
of my Expreſſion ; for here, it ever, there was a Conſpiracy of @ $ z«

& Allin , and Yin S. All the Inferiours engaged againſt V.; whoſe
Moiſture, while he reſiſts, he enforceth or increaſeth. New, if theſe
be allowed of one hand oppoſing WV ; then Þh muſt be allowed on the
other hand, lying at the ſame Poſture and Diſtance on his fide, as 4 © 2
s do on theirs. Nay, if you here confeſs five of the Planets, you muſt
confeſs the Reſt. For W. is, 'tis true, Superiour, but Hh is Higher. See
the Truth of our Pretenfiors, Þ V% of themſelves caute Drought, mix'd
and engag'd over Head and Ears, cauſe Floyds.


S51.1


—— —_— —_—_— er 9 {OO RO CO —


Chap JJ. A Spout. Waters Rarefatiion. Fermentation.


-———— — — —— — - 2 — > RES 9 —— -— —


461


S 51. I cannot in conſcience call for thoſe manifeſt Overflows which
happen'd at Whritlontide the precedent year, which Stazhur/# lays, Non
fine lacrymis T1dtmns, though I do believe Þ and Y in immediate Signs
even beyond a Luincunx, profels their inclinations : but thediſtance is
too wide, nor is it our intereſt to prove our Planers to have a Natural ren-
dency to ſuch Exceſles : yet becauſe the Reportsare 10 large, p. 613, 614.
we refer themtothe © h & in il and =, and to the Planets in S, in S
I fay, of which U isthe chict.

9 52. I need not force in any Inſtances, the Rhine will bear Witneſs,
A® 1553, June 19. to ſuch Exceſſes, endamaging all the Cities ,I think,(for
they ſay, They were infinite) tliat are fituate near its noble Stream.
Take Notice if you pieaſe of Y and © 's Congrels, but withal note thar
Y. and h are in Oppoſitional Quincunx, A 4. * 4. Lyzco#h. 616. Yea,in
Aug. A® 1552. Die 13. Budiſſina, Pewer's Native Country felt the ſmart of
a Catarat ; they call ir a piece of a Cloud, a Spout they would fay, that


drown'd all for the ſpace of 2 miles, with 3omen loſt, Feucer, p. 340. A


ſtrong @ of h and Y wich other Planets to back him; or, (ſeeing we
have heard of the Phraſe before now) to make +a Conſpiracy. Soozer or
later doth not vary the Species ; a Spout there, is a Floud which the
Seamen deſcribe to be a Cloud with a Tail like a Serpent, drawing the
Waters in a Smoak or Miſt ; and wherever it falls, Woto the Sea- arer,
Hak!l. Vol. 2.p. 106. One of theſe in Aug. XXVII. Another, O#ob. XX.
p. 110, In the Firſt a Partil & of Þ and V ; inthe ſecond; X. degrees
diſtance.

0 53. A® 1564. Sept. 20. Our Thames overflowed, and drowned much
Cattle. Let any man look into the Ephemeris , and take notice how ma-
ny of the VII. are in ->, IV. of VII. yea, or the 20. day, V. reckoning
V toits oppoſite Sign. A. notable Inſtance of what we have aflerted
about Equinoctial Tides, and the Railing of Water by Rarefaction, which
our late ingenuous Theoriſt of the Earch con{tdered not, when concerning
the Floud he afthrmed there wasno Water m Nature ſufficient for it.

S 54. A® 1565.in January and February,at Lovarin,the River Dilia over-
flowed in that Prodigious Winter which ſcarce ended before April, The
later of theſe, Fetr. 11. did much harm, Ges. 2. 42, 43. & and 2 are in
d we havelaid before; bur fo is YL and i, which hath Influence not on-
ly on that over-long Winter, but alſo in the excels of Snow or Rain, ac-
cording as they were provok'd.

$55. The next £ lands us on 1573. in & and Mm, upon which account
the years concerned are famous upon Record. Comets, Flouds, Peſts.
Why, I tell you, the New Star in G/iopera as ſure asyouare there, is the
Offspring of h and Y. Ler mediſpatch che Flouds, and I will prove it.
Bur Oh the Flouds ! If ic be bur that at Lowarn, 7a. 8. 1573. where the
Waters roſe upon the Thaw above 17. Cubirs high z fo deſcribed by
Gemma, by ruining of Houles, Trees, Bridges , Mills, Pillars, Floating
of Beds , Trunks, and all manner of Houle-hold Goods; Conſternation
and Shrieking of all Sorts and Sexes, thatic brings a cold Steam upon the
Heart of the Reader, ſo prodigious,that an Aſtroioger though he be,allow-
ing the Snows and the Thaw, and all thar, ſtill wonders at the Caule, and
offers at ſome Fermentation which he imagines to ariſe from the mixture
of Snow-Water, &c. A Point which ought to be confider'd; but neither
ſo was he yet ſatisfied; He might have been fatished had he confider'd the
pure fermenting Power of ow Aipe&t, opened by the Appulſe of & and

» (for there was neither Ghange nor .2xarter in reſpec of the Sun) if he
had conſider'd the Keach of our Aſpect, which is conte(s'd in in its Par-
tile Eſtate to cauſe Ficuds and Inundations z which it Concerns usto —_—

or


Tragical Flouds. $ ome Religious Awe of G. Book lt:


462


for the Relator himſelf was almoſt drowned, in common danger, though
the Floud coming by day, God be thanked, not above 8 or 9 were loſt.

v 56, But there is more Wo yet, In the ſame year, and in Summer
time, inthe beginning ot it ſelf, a Deluge happened not in one City
or ſo, but the Country it ſelf, Hofand with Frieſeland were plagued; Inau-
dita Clade, Gem. 2. 167. where the Learned Man tells us that the New
Star in Caſſopera was at that time abared of its Greatneſs and Splendour,
yea but h and VL were under no abatement. They were ina d Partile not
above a Month before : we muſt not dare to mention the Pleiades enga-
ged between them. Bur ſo it was, whether our Planets (ignifie any
thing or no, that we in England heard of a harmful Floud ar Tocefer by a
Storm of Hail and Rain, June7. which gives us a little taſt what was the
Conſtitution of the moſt .part of 7«ze, which raiſed ſuch Flonds there,
and elſewhere. Let the Reader be pleaſed to conſider , and he will al-
low ſomething to our Alms-Basket; eſpecially when there comes a 34. or
ath. Inundation'in Weft-Frieſeland as rueful andas maſterleſs. In the mean
time let me tell him my Opinion, that theſe and other ſuch like Acten-
rendants of the New Star are manifeſt Indications of irs Nature Homo-
geneal to that of the Bearded Comet, which will we, nil we, are tog
oft attended only with ſuch Retinue. en a OS

S$ 57. We hear of no Flouds till about the next P, which takes nie
remember that the & is better at ſuch Tragical Sport, than the d, and
firſt with our ſelves; 4 1594. we meet with Rain very fore for 14 hours,
April 11. which is anunlucky Prologue to what we hear of May 2. great
Water-Flouds in Swſex and Surrey, Jun alſo being as much a Treſpaſler as
[May : Nor does it ceaſe in July;though it pleaſe God to ſend a fine n Fon


Both oneand the other werethe effect of our Aſped, even the Rain from


=3 and 41; as well as the fine Weather 3 (to fee what Providence can do)
though it return to its wet again the Month following, where we reckon
adouble Influx of h and V. , yea, and of the reſt roo in their proporti-
on, a generative Facnlry of Wet, when all Requilſies are ſuppoſed, and
Q Spirit communicated to that Wet, whereby the Moiſture is Proud and
Swelling , apt to. clime and outrun its bounds; As the Bubble in a
ſmart , and warm Showr, is a Sign of a Spirit which ſtarts up, and
carries with it a Film of, Water Fatter than ordinary; Leaſt any
ſhould fay, that ſeeing we like Gemrmea's Philoſophy of ſome Ferment in
the Waters, we thould therefore - i our Planets were not contri-
buters to the Moiſture as well as the Tumor ; which we muſt aflert
they do. Burt our Treſ{-Grand-Aſpe&ts are not fo eafily got off; for A*
1595: the Scene lies in Germany, the Rhine, the Maes, the Meze, the
j | the Danow, all with one conſent obey their Superiours;and make
ſach Work about Golfer, Mentz, Francfort, worſe than they did A® 1573.
of which before at Lovarn, cc. Many Carcaſes here Floating, which we
heard notin the former, the Mies in one Night ſwelling thirty Foot, and
the Rh:ze thirty nine; | | |
| $58. Anddid1 not fay deſervedly that theſe are GREAT Aſpets
For i hope the Reader is almoſt convinced by this time. Are they not
GREAT Bodies, and as Great CAUSES thar move over our Heads?
The effeQs of them are ſuch that we ſhould not believe them; though we
ſaw them: as the Poet ſaid of Troy, Vi#amque quanruis videat haud credit
ft potuiſſe vince : So Dire; ſo Amazing, - that our Infidel-Will be-
pins ro queſtion the Maker of All, as if he could not find in his Heart to
ſoextremely ſevere with his Sinful Creatures. Ir preaches tome xRe-
ligious ſence of him that makes the Seven Stars, and Or:oz ; yea, h and
% allo, and calleth' for the Waters of the Sea, and poureth them our


Upon


—


Chap. UI. Waſting Inunaations 5 Attention not amiſs.


upon the Face of the Earth , as the Prophet feaſonably preacheth, if
Flouds be meant. I 2m concerned for my Neighbours of the Low-Coun-
treys : I have offered ſome Items before to take heed to the Heavens over
their Head. For 'tis Childith to call a Noble Science Superſtition, if it
leads you to the Knowledge of the Creator 3 The Saints and Prophets of
Old were not ſo peeviſh. We may lafely go 2s far as they. Suppoſe they
knew not the Niceties of the Microſcope, and therein come ſhort of us ;
They knew the Gloriesof the Fixed, and the Erratique, and therein they
went beyond us. es

$ 59. Thenext we meet 7» prin, 7, A® 1603. Here we glad!y ſee that
we find ſome reſpite. Except we ſhall go far toward Eaſt-Irates , .as the
Bay of Aztozgrl, where Sir f. Laurence and his Fleet Wintering, found
A? 1601. &c. much Rain, and great Flouds overflowing the Country.
Purch. Tom. 1. p.101. To thedrinking of which Waters, he impntes the
Flux that troubled his men, being not wholſom, as in moſt places, faith
he, in thoſe ho: Countries: h and V are entred for Jan. and Feb.
1602, though L falls back afterward. It makes no noiſe to meet a high
Tide, oneor two, about this Winter with us. But will not a Spoue bd
conſiderable ? Ang. 17. a Whirlwind taking up the Sea, Parch. 2. p. 813.
A Greax Spout powring out of the Heavens in the Itland of Malaca.
Or a Tide higher than in 4o years before, Ghilarey in the TranſaFions, page
2065. Theſe are ſome Symproms of our Dead-doing Influence, and we
are glad we have no more to produce. This was the Conjunction. :

9 60. But the # in # and M, A® 1613. cannot wipe her Mouth, ſhe
is guilty on Record of what ſhe cannot waſhaway, fince in Thuringia
chiefly 3 yea, and Behemra, Saxony, Auſtria and France, the Corn was
loſt by Hail and Lightning, and many Inhabitants together with their
Houſes were loſt, Galwi/. This happened on May 29. while h and %
were 15.grad. diſtant.

9 61. This is for Europe, and 4® 1613. But the Eaft-Iadtes, A® 1614. in
the Month of Avg. 2 greater Floud than has been feen in 29 years, which
draveaway Salt Hills and Towns, faith Paurchas, and many 10co of men
and Carttle.The placeis call'd arſa par Peta,while a Neighbouring Town
had about 4020 Houles waſh'd away , the Stone-Bridges, as finely built 2s
Rechefter-Bridge, which were three Fathome high above Warer, proved
three Foot under, Tows.1. p. 326, Hath h and V. nothing to do in Elouds,
when 29 years 2g0, which muſt be 1585. there was a Floud, and a Con-
grelsof our great Celeſtials: and this years Aaguft, ihe @ lay butat XII.
grad, diſtance. . i

9 62. LThave not been ſo punctual in deſcribing Earthquakes, becauſe I
lovenot (whatſoever the Reader may miſcolle&) I delighrnor inthe Ra-
ven-Notes that do befal Recitementsar large of thoſe Subje&ts which'T am
engaged to treat of; for Who deſires to be reckoned a valeful inauſpici-
ous Bird 2 Only here in Flouds I am the more particular, if by any
means can I procure an awful Eſteem,andnot a flight contempt of the Di-
vine Hand ; ye3, and if I might conſult the Intereſt of Mankind, fo far
as thele Papers will reach, to give them ſome lictle Glimpfe or Infight in-
to eminent Dangers ; for though every Patient cannot be his ownPhyſician,
yet nothing hinders but that a Nurſe by ſome Notes attentively hearkned
ro,may ger {ome Skill in Medicine.

9 63. I am weary of multiplying of Inſtances, and yet my Journeys
end being in proſpect, I cannot {tt down. We have not heard much of
the Diaries of our Century 3 Let us bring the Floud home to our Doors;
Threeſcore years ago then, Kepley tells us of two Inundations of Da-
zow within one Week of 1622. with the Bridge broke, and the ſame

C6 force


Kepler pitted and admired. Thouſands drowned, Book. 11:


ICE "p0lt, I [ure ann uſa, where Kepler recurs to his Subterranear
Cave, cry foricking his berter Principle. In June he refers it moſt-
ly -v the -ppultes of the 2, Five Lunar Oppofitions happening within 24.
Fours, RHow meniteli'y doth he own the Planets Siruate in a Poſture
eal:eto be irrirared ! Five of them within 20 degrees, All inS, amongſt
them as Suprezm,, h and Y gr. 15. Lo! wheta ſhift the poor man is pur
irro by bis dil-iavcur to our Solid Principle. He found the whole year
viclert, and for the Solution of that Grand Problem, he is forced
to beipezk his Subterranean Cauſe z without which (ard that muſt laſt as
long as he hath need of it, zz. the whole year ) point blank hetells us
the Conſtellations cf Heaven couid rot effc6&t fo n.uch. Whar a great
Man had he bin, roo great, if he had not Kvumbieo ac this in his way? Oh!
that I underſtood the Conſtellations as well as he did, the Motions, &c.
Bur he proceeeds, AVthil hinc fitum in Natura Signt : There's nothing in
ti:e Sign 3 no, not in the Sign S. Let any wan Judge , who hath atren-
dd to the menricn of the Sign : If it comes incur wey, we will again
ren.ember the Reader, In the mean time will rot our Cave ?ffigned
which ps rtevercth the whole year throughout in the Sight of a!) Men, an
ſwer beticr than a Cauſe in Hrgger-Mugger, of which ro mar ſpall ever
here to give an account? I hope it will. EutI muſti.ce dell here,
for


64. The P, 4* 1633. in 2 and I, ſcapes not. Ky71ander helps us
here, April 24. 1633. Groſſe Gewaſſer, ſauh the Datch. But higher than
thet in the beguning of Ofoter , Gewaltrge Spriag-flutn & Frgieſſungen,
in F:o:/-4d and Zealand, In the former year is grad. 6. Ciſtaiit, In the next
gras. 24. Giftant, and withal X in S, There we have mer with Kepler
oire.ty, who made us believe there was nothing in the Sign toward a
F ouds v bin the the very next Initance tells ns that there is Gewaltige
$71. flut:n, We have but 3. or 4. more, and we have done.

65. Whar coes 3642. the d in #. Amin woutd with Þ and Y far
encuyn (and they are of the farcheſt remote of all the lanecs) if ir be
true what the Diary ſays, that on Nowemter 14. (Aowerter is a Flouding
Month ) Mm dicſe zett 1 Hiſpanien az Huſs Evro etz groſer regen und er-
gi:ſlung einkomwen daruber a; dre 4000. Solaaten el-naiylih erfoffen , And
abut the end of Nevember from the River Foo, a terri>le Irundation of
Waters, wherein many Thouſands of Men were drow n'd, in lraly, Kyr.
This K1rriander acknowledges to be from d hU in +, fo far he is an
Aſtroicger. But what ſhall he do > The Partile 4 comes nor till Felry-
ary next year, Oh! but iris an Anticipation of Þ and %, which Phi-
lotophy I have piryed already, not derided: for he who reads theſe Stories
Cai be inno laughing Vein. My Heart aked for fear I ſhould meet more of
theſe uneaſie Narratives, and I Divine, I think, I ſhouid find the like in
the Netherlands, Jan. 4. 1642, where the Diary tells us that ſuch a Flou-
ding time hath not been obſerved, as men judge for many 100 years be-
fore - whereby I believe they note the monſtrouineſs of the Phanome-
non? ſha!l I call it,rather than conſultthe Univerſal Hiſtory of the World;
I have realon to believe our Reports to be as true, and may be 4s great
ſome of them 3 and how great in the mean while is the Cauſe , the Cauſe
from whence they Spring 2 So that now our Heart is hardned, and we
can take notice of a Groſſe Waſſer, yet again in December, 1643.

9 66. That @ in the next decade, 1653. brings no Flouds with it, un-
leſs you will reckon that in Glocefterſhire at Dodminton, June 20, menti-
on'd by Dr. Gh:larey, p. 66. for the Truth is, Thoſe were dry Years ; in
which nothing hinders but there may be an Anomalous Floud , or Gluc
of Wet in ſome places, aud I amglad of it.

n 9 67. For


Chap: III. The Shracads Fliuds of the laſt d hY in Holland. 465.


« 67. For all asI fee, the d 071662. is the like. Imeet with Violen-
ces of Fiery Meteors, &c. bur ro Flovcs can I ſet Eyes on; if there be
any, 'tis our Gain. If not , Admire with me the all-wiſe ciſpofition of
the Heavenly Motions, wv hich are. m?ce not only to Puniſh at the time
appointed , but ſometimes to give us reipite. Tis the Divine goodneſs
to {end no Flouds, where he pleates ro order a Peſtilence. In wrath he
remembers Mercy. Howbeit, ry Licry, upon peruſal, informs me thar
even there, 4* 1663. May 5. There aroſe Flouds at Northampton : A
place it ſeems more apt {or ſuch Waters, then ochers. And lee Fevr. 28.
1673. we had New's of great Flonds at Thoren , (Thuringia) in Germany
on the breaking up the Ice. But not, oniy fo, But in Summer, beitde a
Spout f{cen to break at Harnich , near Lard-guard-Fort, jan. 24. 1673.
Flouds for certain in Oxfu-o/tive, :nd Brrfto!, nor the like for many years,
with great Lok, fay :ny Oi ſervations. There remains but of That 1682.
for whoſe fake we wz:ied {0 far, or elle we had let down one Sluces.

$ 68. The d of 169$2. The Firſt is from Ireland, Great Flouss in moſt
parts. This is $7. 2g, i and © grad. 7. Clilant. Þ in S 2:7. ro meet
again with geec Aepicn, ho was wifer. From Þ; ayzrouth ſuch a Floud
that the Waves vere !c2:ce peſicble, Aw. 2. % 1< where he was. Lee,
18, at D:nnot in Er: Before that, from the Fiagu, ©=; by a ſtrong
Wind broke the P:tks, arc 12i.1 2400 Acresof LandSuades W arer, Dec,
10. and from Gopeb agen, the Seaby reaion of 2 Sicrm, rote {0 hich,that
itis the Wonder of we Age, faich my Intell;gence, ana hath dcre rrreat
Harm. But this year being, expirec!, I would the Aipect v ould be faitsff-
ed with this. Hearken to the Irezcþ Account. From Bruxels, T1 is is
but rocher day, Jaz. 27. St. Vet. Vingt ctng as principaux Villages ds Elan-
are, aut eſte ſubyergez, From Amſterdam, Les dymmages extras dtnarres que
les wents & les de hordemen d's eaux ont cauſez ex Flanare , dans le Brabant,
enHollande & Lealana Luelgues Uns aſſeurent que ces dommages a noſt2 egard,
montent a plus de errquanteMilitans, We can ice only theSteeple(/-Clocher juln
la Ville deTolen,le la wille de Brmamenegc.& ceſt le plus triſte ſpeFacie qui ſs ſatt
v4 de pris pluftenrs frecles. Where is ,but inS,higher chan he was before,
nearer the Tropical Height,in S 11. before he was in S 17. In May our
Domeſtique Incelligence reils us the Country is ſo floared there is no Tra-
velling, nv accels to Lozdez ; Travelling Coaches periſhed. Ar Deal the
Sea overwhelmed the Banks, Drowned much Cattle, May 16. 1682.
News allo from Scrcely of Torrents breaking down Trees , Villages de-
troyed by the Flouds, May 28. Gazet, 1742. Fuly 7. with us at Shrop-
fre, much Dammage at a Village 7 Mile from Bozal:y, the Floud run in
from Jaz. 3o. to 7z!y 4. the like not within Memory. Floud a'ſo 6 Mile
from Grveztry. In Aug. 18. there was a Water-Spout near Harwich in
the Shape of the Monument at London-Bridge, mounting up in the Air,
then fel] down with a moſt incredible force, made the Sea (mole, Thomp-
ſors Intel!igerce. Yea, all the time of the Dreadful Adamant Froſt,
Reme mber, and Jaz. 1683. & 84. "Tis for certain by Merchants Let-
rers, that there were great Rains and Flouds in the Guadalgurwrr, the
River in Azaalu/a.

9 69. We thall now have done ; for A® 1684. Sept. 10. we hearof
Flouds in Leopo!, Rufſia, In Nov. g. St. N. A Floud neer the Iiles of Obe-
50n, Rhee, - Broage, beyond Memory of Man, as we have it in the extra-
ordinary Relation from Germany. |

I acknowledge that there were ſtrong Aſpects heretofore noted, mix'd
with our great d in ſome parts of this Drowning Seaſon ; but the Aſtro-
logical Reader mult do right, and with me acknowledge the Line of the
de (tretch'd over theſe 3 or 4 years. Thoſe Countries therefore which


ſhall


—_—_— _ ONES _ — _—_


—_—


Inund, keep pace with our C, onfugurations. Book IITF


ſhall think it worth the while, muſt watch theſe great ds, and their
Mixtures. Nor would ut be an unwile part, if amongſt other Learned
Profeſſors at the Univerſity 'of Leer, or elſewhere, there were a meer
maintainance order'd for a Profeſſor of Aſtronomy, mixed with Afſtro-
logy, if any ſhould fancy ſuch an Union of Science, togive ſome , it may
be, more than probable warniag of ſuch Infandous Caracly(mes, Pictures,
and Afjurances of Noah's Floud , that ar leaft the life of Thoutands may
be ſaved. For as I remember we had an accountof twenty thouſand
Carcales, Wreck's of Mortality, Floating on the Remortleſs Deep.
Upon which account if it be Fealible, 'tis worth the while z butI muſt
leave it to diſcretion, Theſe Papers thew, I hope, that our Speculation
is not a Vanity, ſince the Flouds hold on, ana keep pace from Month to
Month, and from year to year, with our violent Conjuncttions. Mark
thac. They hold and keep pace, ſtarting out ar their Opportunities in the
Winters, yea in the Summers. I do acknowledge there may be Flouds
when our Aſpect is diſſolved, as we have admonihed uthciently before.
But I deny that there can be ſhewn any ſuch Infamous Years together for
Frequency of Flouds, as this and ſome others precedeac, uale{ under our
cctielns Configuration.

s 70. Now whereas my kind Reader may, Iconfeſs, with bluſhing, ju-
ſtly cenſure me tedious, I muſt nor make an Apoiogy, becauſe it incre:-
ſes che Tedium, I tell them one only , I was ſhorter in the Comets, for
if the ſame right had been done to this Aſpect there,we ſhould have found
25 many blazing under the @ as we have done under the 4. Comets
under this d, if the & be conſulted, will double the Number.


Terre Motus, & Vulcano's, or Fiery Meteors,


| $71, Wejointhem together becauſe of their known Afizity, as hath
been ſaid, whether they belong to 4 or P. And ler no man think we
have Earthquakes to preſent every New-lear, as every New year, almoſt,
hath its Diſtemper. Nay, God be thanked, Earthquakes grow not ſo
common 3 neither can they be expected here under this Aſpect (whichre-
turns between d and & in their Partile Acme) but every !o year. They
which will hear more of theſe Dire Agitations of the Earth, muſt re-
turn to Þ and  —V and 4 ,— which have their fpecial Table of ſuch
youu Accidents, where Þ and V. ſtand nnconcern'd oft-times, as to their
5 or &.
y: $72, They,who will create to themſelves an Awful Idea of this matter,
which we be to beget- in our Celeſtial Theoriſt, may be pleaſed ro
mind theſe great Effeds, and ſhew them to the next concourſe of People, -
like Monſters fetch'd from the further parts of the Earth for our Admi-
ration. Nothing fo 4tre is there, which doth not by frequency become
Familiar, and careleſly regarded, by a Reader eſpecially. Though we
therefore preſent but one Species here, yet, if the Grand Effects be bur
mixed I ſay, and confider'd together , an Earthquake here, an Inundation
there, a Peſtilence yonder, a Hurricane elſewhere, and ſome more fright-
ful Appearances; all raking their Eſſence and Exiſtence from the Cele-
ſtial Influence, eſpecially our Superiours, h and 4 — Y and 4 — h and
%, whoſe very Names we repeat with ſome Awe, as they bear Relation
to the Glorious God, we may poſſibly think with the Chriſtian Aftrolo-
ver, thatthey are indeed, great Names, an{werable to their Stupendious
Bulk and Influence. I have heretofore hinted thus much, and I owe it :
H isagreed to be the high Planet of the VII. Conſider him nor, I be-
ſeech you, according to his //mple Character of a Szcle [| h ] for what - he

rnen


w—__


Þh Y% Earthquakes or Vulcans.


467


then but a Fir? which according to- the dead Deſcription of an Old
6ereprt Greybeard , 1s znnocent, becauſe of his Weakneſs and Diſtance:
For I do not find but his Diſtance argues his Greatne(s , his Exaltatioz ra-
cher than Remove , as Porent as if he were zearer the Heavens, the fur-
ther he lyes frozz us. And of great Influence upon Earthquakes, even
without % Aſpetted.— Þh and © I cannot but-obſerve do thew How
weak the Globe of the Earth is in their Hands, at leaſt, as to its. parts;
whether Oze or 42th can turn the Earth round by its Beams, as the CGo-
pernican teacher, I cannot ſay, but the parts of the Earth zre in the Pow-
er of the Sun, &c. and h too, to move and ſhake , and Fog them at


their Pleaſure.
|


S 73. Begin we then with a Vulcaza,
Ternate Ifland is ſuch, A* 15 11. It


Flames often, Purch. p. 168. 182.


Wetind 0 Þh %, buc This is but a
Trine.

1516. Earthquake is noted with a
Comet, Rockenbach.Now if it hap-
pened in the firſt IV. Months of
the year, we have h and U. (the
excels allowed) ro an{wer it.

1523. Earthquake 1» Autumne,atter a
Comer again, and a waſhing Sum-
mer. Lycofth, d in = "fine, X
DYIXC,

1533. New. 26. The River S:tter
damm'd up by the Fall of a Moun-
tain into the Stream, @ 1n Tro-
pick Signs.

1536. eAtna flamed a whole year.
Chronol. Account in the Tranſfa-


ions, Fol. 4. 968. Rh Þ in MX
for January and February, continu-
ed by h and &, Lyc. notes ic on |
April T1. |

1538. Sept. 27, 28, 29. Terrible Tu- |
mours of the Earth, Fires break |
forth near Awverzo in Italy. Bur!
this is a 2 in Cardinal Signs.

1542. After d h &,, faith Erchſtad,'
T. M. at Conſtantinople, The d
was double ; the Firſt at Februa-
ary's beginning, the Laſt at the
end of May. Both in m. If
the T. M. happened in September ;
yea, if after June, as it (eems not
much {ooner by Eichſtad's Words,
Poſt Conjun#iozem. We can pro-
duce £ h % with, or without
Allowance.

t552. Sept. 16. Baſil ſhook 2 little,
hora 6. P. M. Lycoft. © inAand=.

Eodem Arnnr, In Miſnia, and-other
places in Germany, dem.


Before this, April 20. The Tract
of Gerzzan Hills call'd the Sudetes,
Lycoft. Withallowance it holds.

1553. 4.17. Along the River Elbe,
a great T.M.fallsin theMouth of a
Partile & in # mM,

1554, March 21, Midnight, cum tre-
more mMugitus 1n8ens, ac velut ahe-
neus clangor multorum Gurruum, gut
concitato agiine preterirent, Gem-
wa, 2723.

Another, March 22, hor. 4. P. M. Bu
walide ſubſuliente Solo.

A Third, ſtronger yet, April 30. hor.
5, P.M. At Lowarz All three. All
the Planets (as Gemma obſerves)
and I could not but obſerve, were
in theend of X, near the Equizox,
and Yin the P. That weregard
at preſent, is oaly our f;—And
thoſe who have a kindneſs for the
Partile # rather than thePlatique,
will think it credible, when chey
ſhall ſee the third Earthquake on
April 30. to happen on that nice
Point about the end of * and mM.

1563. Jannary 17. At Lowarn, an
Earthquake, which Gemma lays,
he foretold, by a long ſtreak un-
der the '© on Ghr:ftmas day , and
ſuch like fancies. Bur I rather
ſhould fancy , beſides an @ of
and & in Tropical Signs, a <
of our Superiours in 1 and S,
eventhe ſame,which abouta week
before), caufed the Hurricane and
Lightning in Leiceſter, as Stow and
Holl:iah:ad tell us, overthrew
Houles, &c,

ov. 29, Midnight, a Light from
Heclz ; an hour after the whole
Ifland crembled as if it ſhould have
been mov'd out of its place. A

D 6 horrible


h Y muſter-roll| for Earthq.


Book 1II.


horrible noiſe of Ordinance , in-
credible,c.wethought the whote
Frame of the World would fall.
The Sez went back two Leagues,
and remained Dry , Purch. III.
648. h and Y (Hear me) are
cloſe together; in the beginning of
A. We have noted elſewhere the
Thunders at Lozaon of a Fort-
nights continuance , before the

inter Tropick. It may well
Thunder in Ezeland, if the Earth
quake in IJſand , as we elſe-
where note. We may fee how
far Northward the Planets can


reach.
Fodems Anno ; The Fulcano in Terra
Del Fuego, had like to have burnt
all thellandLand, Hak/.448. Eat. 2.
1564. 4zg. 20. About Evening in
Sophors, Al:quot oppida cum Fags
vicins abſorpta ſunt, adeo ut multa
weftigia domorum extent. It laſted
from Aug. 20. 4d 6, Sept. Garceus.
In the ſame year in Sclavoma under
the Dominion of the Veretrans, the
City Gataro, June 6. was harrafled
Idem. In the formet, Þh and V
in 1, aif. grad. 12. Inthe Later,
in princ. s\, aft, | tr 6.
2569. May 14. Midnight, Lowaris,
cum rauco murmure, Whe adds,
that there are SpeFres ſeen wan-
dring in the Air. This is but a ©
| as th bquake at lork
I575. Feb, 26. Eart e at lor
/ftoland Gloucefter. Books fell
down in MensStudies; Bells toll'd,
and Chimneys fell, Stow. &f h Y
Br. Aporl 21. at Angoangs, See
1581. 21. at Angoango, it
before in % and d. Yet the
two Superiours came under conli-
deration , if our allowance be


ed. =

_ February 5. T. M. in Perſia, =

5. YN, X ©, h.

Eodem Anne, An Earthquake , over-
threw the whole City of Arequr-
pa, Hcofta, apud Purch. III. gar.
See before in YL. &..

1583. Fuly 30. At Blackmore in Dor-
ſethhre, 3 Acres removed, Stow.
8 27,VL,X 8.h.


1601, Aug. 29. St. V. In Germany,
Italy, France, Aſia , South and
North , almoſt throughout
the World. YL © in M, but Þ
and Y. are not above$ gr. in ex-
cels, Keckerm. apud Fromond.

1612, Nov. menſem integrum,
T. M. in Wefphalia, & in * and
mM, gr.12, diſt, Calviſius tells vs
of ſuch a Stormy Chriſtmas at Sea,


that 60 Veſlels periſhed in one
Spaniſh Port, above a 1090
Carcaſes on Shore.


They, who have not the Heart to

ask whar's the matter : If they will

believe in our Aſpet, may ſee
God is viſible in the Character of
Nature.

1613. Zant, January 13. an Earth-

. quake continued for 5 or 6 days to-
gether, Gortat epud Purch, II. pag.
1811, in M and X,gr. 11, dif.
See, Ipray, the Celeſtial Powers,
there 1s bur 8 grad. aft. berween
the laſt in November; and this in


January. | |

1622. April 25. May 5. Terre fremi:
tus in Narito , when two days be-
fore Pluit in Miſnia ſcrupos Chara-
Reribus Plumatis, Kepl. ad Annum


_
Imputed by Kyriander to A ho,


in Jantery, as Kep-


jo finem Ann,
, nn.
163 : One. 5 Veſuvins near Naples


Earthquake,with
moft part of the Month, and Rain.


in declaring the Caſe z and a man
may ſwear it was the Cauſe, with-
out danger of Perjucy. Ir is a
Noverint wntverſ; per preſentes, as I
uſe 'to call it, , and a Flouriſh


| of an Aſtrological Charater. The
TranſaRtions


Chap III.
Tranſactions taking notice, that
V:ſuvius burn'd for ſeveral years
in January 1633. where our Pf ex-
pires not : fee Vol. 4. 968.

1634. April 17. St. V. There ſeems
co be an Earthquake (Eradtoden)
and the f of our Superiours in
Tropic Signs, is much concerned.

1638. March 17. ad 24. Earthquake
in Galabria, and Tempeſt of Thun-
der all the while. The Like Storms
in Nether Saxony, day 5. and el(e-
where, day 12. I thought fit ro
mark it upon the account alſo of
the Partile 0) of h %. Again,
Sept. 3. Kyr. Upon the account of
the fame 0 Platick, ure 2. ter-
rible T. M. throughout New Erg-
{and, Joſelin. "Tis a bold word
to ſay, I would be glad to (ee, Pur
all together,a greater Evidence for

any luftion in Nature,
> O#0b, 16. Stormy Winds and
| r


—_ — —


chquake ; Kyr. refers ic to a |


C] of Þ with @© and 2 conjoin'd,
but our Superiours challenge their
(]. having bur 3 gr. excels.

1642. Jan. 27. Tempeſtuous , and a
| ap; of an Earthquake , fays
Kyr. Our Superiours are got nea-

rer, = 23. L,* 12. h, Again,
March 31. Earthquake in Twrimo,
by the Station of ? , ſays Kyr.
and an Aſpect of © and h, but
he takes no notice of © and 2 ,nor
dreams he of our d, * 7. Wl, 19.
h. Again, November 18. Farth-
quake at Eranctort on the Mere,
with other milchiefs done b
Flouds in the ſame Month. 'Tis
an Aaticipation, ſays Kyr. of h
and yea, but he may know,
they are but 9 grad. diff,

1643. January 20. ad 24. More Earth-
quake, and Earth-break , with
miſchief up and down , in Kyr,
Our Superiours are but 3 gr. df.
but remember 'ris at the end of X.
Anno Eodem. Sept. 2. ad 8. Earth-
quake again, Kyr. refers it to an
Pfof hd —<h 2g —h@—YEt.
So do we heartily; but we alſo
point to our two Superiours,found


5s 74. Now let not the World admre and (ay
deal of News ; I arrogate it not to my felt; to


— C_


on re Ao Jae_wy a ————


hu proper Earthquakes.


both planted in V.

1644. In March, at Nifſa de Provencs,
tinErad-heben, Kyr. d % $ , but
withal, Y 10. h, & ©. Þ% with-
in 20 degrees.

mo Great Earthquake in New-

ngland. Note, thatif it happe-
ned in the laſt 6 Months, it found
a Cof hand YinSand®).

1662. 7an.26.c-28, T.M.in/Vew- Exg-
gland, 6 or 7 times in the ſpace of
3 days, 1 13.%, 2 4 h.

1663. Several Earthquakes this year
in New-England, d hY in 7.

1665. Janzary 19. T. M. near Ox-
Jord, Tranſaftions, p. 166. V? 4.

"+ % 7V

1668. April 3. T. M. New-England,
an exa&t Quartile of Hh and V.

1680, Ave. 3.St.N.T.M.not far from
Baſl,Gazet of Rotterdam, 10.2% ,

S 27. h.

Avg. 16, Milaiz, T. M. with Thun-
der and Lightning, wounded Six
Perſons, and kill'd an hundred.
"Tis h & and h % withexceſs of
2 degrees.

1681, 747. 3.T. Mat Weis and other
parts, with h 2 Stationary,
whichisa %,; or what you pleaſe,

Die 277. T.M. at Bzfil, the ame with
February the 8.

February 3. & 7. T.M. according to
expectation. I muſt not fay
preatttton.

May 22. T. M. St. Johnftons. Again.

June 17, Ferraria, T.M. which (wal-
lowed up Trees, IT 2g. Y., S 23.
Rh. Burnore, that Þ andV init
Vo by oY ſpeak

iceties,z they can co One
another; as if within Terms.

Note again, that notwithſtanding this
and more Evidence that may be
brought froin the former Centu-
ries, yet theEarthquake which was
preditted , and happened accor-
ding to expectation, was 70: -pro-
duced on the account of the Two
Superiours , but upon the Order
and Poſition of — -
nary, which belongs to after-Spe-
culation.


that I tell them a great
r fo old is this Dogtyine,


» Ntands not upon


1


Ouaint,yet Antient, Learning. Chaldees,and Pliny. Book 1I11-


470


at the Books are zot extant which firſt taught it the World, as I after <1-
oa And yet All this cloſe obſervation of Earthquakes in the Tables
precedent, eſpecially this Later, may paſs with favour , for a piece of a
Commentary on that great Naturaliſt, whoſe Enquiry into Earthquakes
cof him his Life. Tit Tenents of the Babyloniars, faith he, do hold
that Earthquakes are cauſed by the Influence of the Planets, ſed zIlorum
Trium, but eſpecially of thoſe Three who arethe Procurers of Thunder.
Lo you, they are our Three Superiours, Saturn, fove, and Mars, L1b. >,
cap. 79. What News is it then to tel] of Saturz and fove,— owe and
Mars, —Saturn and Mars? The Planets which the old Batlonians did
#zear, or they meantnothing. For ler any be pleaſed to ſurvey our Ta-
blesof Earthquakes under Saturn and Mars,— fove and Mars, ]aying Pl:-
ay before him, he ſhall forthwith be convinced ; and how would he be
overwhelmed with Evidence, if we were Maſters of ſo much Chronolo-
gy and Calculation Aſtronomical, as to name the firſt Earthquake frox:
the Floud, and aflign the Aſpe@t 3 a Task which I have rendred the more
eaſie, if it were to be expected, by enlarging, or rather vindicating the
Dominion of the Aſpect, of its. own Mature fo enlarged.

s 75. Theſe Earthquakes, ſays the Naturaliſt , are made by the preſence
of the Planets aforeſaid with the Sun, or their Conjuntion, or if you
will, Gongruenty , becauſe I ſuppoſe the Old Ba+ylortans included the
Oppoſition , tro which our Tables bear plentiful Teſtimony. Now This
chiefly, ſaith he , happens Gzrca m_ Mandi. A great Note, and
reinsnothing elſe but the Gardinal Signs near the Tropick and the Equinox.
Who would not be proud to redeem {uch a glorious Truth from the Rub-
biſh under which it hath bin buried ſo many thouſand years in the negle-
ced Fields of Antiquity > Hppocrates hath long ago given us the ſame
Note about Sickneſs and Maladies, which the happy Roxzaz Pen hath pre-
ſerved to us about Earthquakes, and yet We love to be inthe dark. Gemma
Nith the ſame of ſomeComets circaTroposEquinoita E1 12.and yet Aftro-
Jogers forſooth ſpeak nota Word of Senſe. Bur to proceed, what he tells us
from Ariſtotle, Earthquakes appear .- inCalms,wedon't find to be true in
our Northern Regions, Germany, and the like. Nearer the M-4:terraxe-
an, it may be true, with Regard to the Wind, though not with Regard to
Lightning ; it being agreed on as Pl:7y ſtates the Queſtion, neque aliud i;
terreno rn quam in Nube Tonitruum. Earthquakes and Thunders are
near a Kin. For whereas they take it for certain, that Wizas are the Cauſe
of Earthquakes, they muſt mean Sp:7r:ts 3 there is no other way to re-
concile the Antients to Truth. But Pl:zy tells us further , that Earth-
quakes may be predicted. So they were , by Anaximander and Pherecy-
des. He means PrediQions Philoſophica), Conjefures taken from ſome
certain Signs, and that, it may be, is eafie in places that are Obnoxious
thereto. But I don't hear any of his early Chaldeans have foretold it by
Aftrological Predidtions, by ents taken from the Gaxſe, though up-
on the Truth of their Principle,they might. He tells us in the next Chap-
ter 80. of the Dire Effe&ts, Throwing down, Swallowing up, Ras/mg
Hills , Letting out Streams , Springing of Hot Baths, Ketreats of the
Ocean ; Of which our Tables are not {ilent, and might have made more
Noiſe; but Then to let paſs the admirable account he gives of the ſe-
veral Noiſes that are heard, according to the variety of the Event, he
tells us that they are felt oftner in the V;ght time, then in the Day; yer
ſometimes at Noovy. He mentions alſo Morning and Evenings for Gri-
zical Hours, all which frongly declare a Celeſtzal cauſe. The Su I mean.
and He, you muſt know , is never without his Retinue. Conſequently,
he cells us chat Earchquakes happen many times at Ecl;pſes. And have


nor


> &


Do em mt


Chap. 11]. De/ cant on Pliny. C onnexion of Comets, T. M. &c.


not we prov d that the Moon, New and Full, has Influence on - Thunders
Mchereal, Subterranean, &c. at which Congrels , if Eciipies and Earth-
quakes be ore noted, by ſo notable coxſext of Heaven and Earth,whence
-— var is more Illuſtrated , I reckon that That Providence hath its
End.

6 76. In the next Chapter $1, he tells us , that at Sea allo they are ſen-
fible of Earthquakes, that they fee] the Stroke. And where is it, that
in the Colle&ion of this Table, ] meer with a Paſſage where a Shipin
an Earthquake {cle (uch an im-pulte, that they thought fe had ſtruck on
ground; bur when they heaved the Lead to explore the truth of their
Suſpicion, the Author ſays, they found no Bottom, Puzrch. p.l. p. 105.—
How wide, yea, how 4eep 15 the Train laid in recefles of the Earth,which
ſhall move a heavy denſe Abyls, fo quick, that it ſhall xmulate the hard-
neſs of a Rock ? What an Eruption would there have been, if it had
| beenin Szceo, on a 4) Surtace? How ſtrange, yea, how incomprehenſi-
ble are the pexetrations of the Ceieitial Influences! He tells us further
of a certain Sign in the Air, when a thin Cloud in a Serene Sky thall be
ſtretch'd to a vaſt ſpace, the very Token by which Gemma predicted an
Earthquake, as Fromoman aliv noteth ; Where, though Froxcozd, per-
baps juſtly, maketh tight of this Token, yet, this I can {ay upon Recol-
lecion of my icif, that I, vho-perhaps have obſerved that Token as ofren
as Fromond,do remember that there was more than ordinary to do among
the Planets at iuch appearances, and fo they may be reckon'd Signs remote
and in-adxguate, as the Eclipſes are confel(s d to be.

9 77. Inthe g2. Chapter, letting paſs ieveral Conſiderations, for we
write not a 7 re:tile of this Subject ; He tells us an Earthquake may laſt
Forty days, nay ſome a year, yea two year throughout. Thethree Pla-
nets that the Chald:ans ſpoke of, may be twin'd together fo long, Þ and
may, appears by their ſJow dit-ingagements, and many times by their
freſh returns deforethey are abſolutely Dit-engaged.

vs 78. In the 83. Chapter, He tells us of Smoke and Fire ſtarting out be-
tween two Mountains in Matiza, when Martius and Julins were Conluls ;
maniſeſtiug the Kindred between the Flaming, and the Quaking Moun-
tain. See Cap. 88.

9 79. To proceed, in the next Chapter 84. He informs us of Inunda::-
025 and Earthquakes that they go together, even as it may be noted in Ar:-
fotle himſelf, which is no uncruch , and may be proved from the Premi-
ſes, whether che Inundation be as I may term it, wet or dry, cauſed by
Rain and Wind, or by Spirit and Inflation only, As we have conlider'd
before, when we treated of the RarefaCtion of the Watry Element,which
in Flouds join'd with Earthquakes is moſt certain : and in Flouds in di-
ſtant Countrys muſt be pretumed in ſomeProportion,if not from theHear
below, at leaſt by the Heats from above, whence the Sea is allowed to
tumekie againſt every Storm, by the Influence of the 2 , or other Pla-
ner.

$ 80, Now, if we may obſerve here, what alſo we have before aſler-
ted, that Comets go along with thoſe Earthquakes and Inundations, as be-
ing united in a comzm07 Efhcient, where matter is diſpoſed, though Pliny
hath no ſuch Hint, we ſhall conclude: Only I am ſenſible that here ic
will be ſaid, That this isold Stuff z Earthquakes , Inundations, Comets,
and Peſtilences, I warrant, to make them All hang on a Thread, agrees
not with the New Philoſophy. I may anſwer, if it agrees with Proof
and Reaſon,we are well enough. I think I can prove that they hang all in
one Thred, Three of chem ; and for Earthquakes connexion with Peſti-
lences, Fromord hinmfelf admits it __ coubt or Suſpicion, oo

d 99F 4


-


EET


_472


h Y Aſpet moſt dangerous to Health. Book II].


"that I believe you know that Earthquakes are the Cauſes of Peſts, bur


that the Three Superiours, as the Chaldeans have faid of Earthquakes,
are the Cauſes, under God, of Epidemical Diſtempers, Agues, Feawers.
Nor will it conclude againſt this Doctrine, that ſometimes our Earth.
© quakes appear without an Inundation 3 a Comet, without an Earthquake ;
© or Plague, without a Comet, therefore their meering is Caſual; For ma-
oy things in Nature are not reciprocal, which yet have Connexion one
with the other,though the Connexion always appears not. To Inſtance in
nothing but what belongs to our preſent Diſcourſe, . Flaming Eruptions
are of kin to Earthquakes, yet not always doth an Earthquake follow.
Why not > Why, 'tis obvious to ſay , and the Anſwer is good here, All
things are not ready, the matter is zo: prepar'd, &c. much lefs Vice werſa,
doth it always Flame when the Earth Trembles ; The Reaſon is, becauſe
it cannot break forth , according as before we have Inſtanced in Light-
ning, and its Conſequent, Thunder; Thunder, and its Conſequent, Rain.
Lightningand Thunders and Rain hang all on a Thrid, yet it doth not al-
wy Rain when it Thunders, nor, I am ſure, always Thunder when it

2108s.

$ $1. Now as we haye attempted before to ſhew Hh or Y. affeted with
& to have no benzgr Influence, upon Health now it may be expected, we
ſhould ſay the ſame of h and Y. 3 and verily we muſt ſpeak as we find,
nor is it difſonant from reaſon, for the Superiors Influence met rogether,is
too unkind and diſagreeable, roo much diſproportion'd to our Nature, our
Bodies being nothing in their Hands, like a Yenzce Glaſs by a rude touch
quickly complains. As the Mar , ſos his Strength ; and the DeduQtion
is Strong. For if Þh or \ united with &d' , the leſs erzatic; can diſturb
our Frame and Temper ; how much more can hÞ and, unqueſtionably
the two vaſter Bodies, put us our of order ? All Diſeaſe is nothing but
Diſturbance and Diſtemperature of our Tenour of Life, our Bloud,Spiric
and Humour ; and I hope we need not beg any Man's Belief of the leſs
Concluſion, when we have demonſtrated the greater. Thoſe Planets
which we have demonſtrated to beInceendiaries,Perturbers of Heaven and
Earth, may , for that while at leaſt, be ſuſpected and preſented, for the dit-
turbance of Man an :»firm part of the Univerſe.

$ 82. The beſt Phyfttians conſent, even thoſe who otherwiſe arenot fo
Aſtrologically given, which is a probable Argument of the Truth, when:
{ever a Profeſſor is fain to run abroad out of his own Juriſdiction, to
give account of what is done at home : Their Eye chiefly, 1 confeſs, is
upon Þ and &, with reaſon enough, if the Premiſes be crue - But they
do not mean that Conus inany excluſive Senſe. Hzppocrates meant
All by his 3 @&, that concur to the Chara@er of the Seaſon.
Now our Two Saperiours are more to be ſuſpected in impoiſoning the
Fountains, and corrupting our Maſs of Bloud, becauſe of their Pertina-
cy and Perſeyerance, as he that onthe Stage hath the longeſt part*, is moſt
concerned in the Plot; the Terms of Duration in h and Y are more
protracted than any other. Þ and &, by the Repetition of the Aſpect,
may fometimes diſturb the Ambient above a year : h and % by playing
faſt and looſe, ſeldom diſturbs us leſs than For or Eve in which face
of time, they create ſuch immethodical variety,and inequality in the Air,
ſo'alien from the kindly natural State andSeaſon,that our Bodies yield like
Fleſh freſh and (weet, in a hot Air, and are ſenſibly expoſed to Putrefa-
Ction, and That which follows Stexch, which is a Token of the Diflolu-
tion, and as it were the Deora;nation of the Compound : And to make
ſome improvement of This, I reckon that even the Malignity of a D:-
ſemper isnothivg but the Enmiry that takes place in the ——


475


Chap. III. Some Foreſight of Peſtilence. Dominion.


the curious parts component are at diicord, the Mal-Effets of Diſcord
being Infinite. I confirm my felf by this Conjecture, that there is fuch 2
Proportion between the L:ve-Fl, and the Garcaſe, that as the Eextor or
Stench of the one is infectious, and thereupon abominable - Even fo is the
Effuvium or odour of the Infected Perſon as malignant and pernicious,
though not ſo obvious to Senſe, becaute the Spirit of  Life-Bloud is more
Subtile and Minute, than the crafler Spirit of Carcaſe-Gore. Be ir
how it will, Aftrologers venture {omerimes to predic Epidemical Di-
ſtempersz they venture their Credit roo, when they hazen a Good City
every foot with ſome ſuch Nuſance ; but when they pronounce on the
account of our Aſpect, they have ſometimes ccme off with Credit. Co-
mets have been ſeveral times predicted, and 'tis owned, by Herlicius Appi-
an, and others. In like manner I remember the Peſtilence of 1665. was
given notice of by Mr. Edl:z in his Aſtrological: Treatiſe of our dc pre-
ceding. It may be ditputed, I confels, whether we had not better be ig-
norant of ſuch a future Evil Day ameng other Reaſons , for that, he thar
proclaimeth ſuch unwe!com News, will thereby make himſelf hateful ro
his Country, as hard-hearted, pitylels, if not dealing with Evil Angels,
ſeeing in the FewsTheology They are concerned here,unleſs perhaps he hear-
tily loves the Publick, and is to obliging, that he counterpoiſes that Sul.
picion by his known Innocence and Merit. Alafs ! Is not the Milery,I fear,
ot ſo much the Aſtrologers $k/!, as an unwillingneſs to prepare 2gainſt
an Ewil Day, which the beſt of us, 'cis true, defire to put off. I fear it,
I was going to fay I know it z for 'tis a clear caſe, if upona ſurprize, we
may ſometimes, though too late, with we had foreknown the event : Ic
is Conſequent then,that 'ris a deſirable Science,that inables us to foreknow.
For, put caſe the Prediction fails, inſtead of ridiculing the Obſervation, ir
might be much better to thankGod for his long-ſufferance,fince what uſually
hath been; might have been once more, nor was it improbable, howſoever:
9 83. Here the Aftrologers put in their note of Attention to obſerve
which of the Two Planets have Domzinton or Elevation one above ano-
ther ; for if h have Dominion, 1ay they, then Nothing but M:chief, if
%, the contrary, or ſomething better. And when Haly, or who is it >
detines one way of Dominien over the other to be, when a Planer thall
be on this fide the Mearum Gel:, or nearer to the Weſt, ( and fo Cardar: in
Ptol. Lb. III, Gap. 14: ) while the other is under the Earth. IT muſt own
thus far, that there is ſome difference between a Planets Application to,
or the Separation f-0-: another , as to the State of the Air ; Every Agent
being more fortified in the Augmentation of its Force then in its Dia;
zution , though alike gradual. But for Sickly Times I don't find, that as
many Diſtempers, or to ſpeak plain, Peitilences, ſucceed the Alpect as
go before it: How it is in the 4r41an, or other Climes, I know not 5
bur conſulting Eſcurds Table, which is the Compend of Albumazar, I tind
Erit Mors inter homines, when our Aſpect haps in $U under h 's Domini-
on; and the ſame Mors multoruws Hominum with greater Men, when
has the Dominion. Gardaz bids us enquire into Ecliples, two years be-
fore, or a little more. Nay he will give us an Example of a great Peſti-
lence at Mzlarn, 4® 1524. which followed the Eclipſe in Aug. 4® 1523. I
turn to the year 1524. and there I fand another cruel Cauſe of a terrible
Peſtilence, what d'ye think ? Our very d of Þh and Y. He rells us of
'Z with 2, unfortunate in the & of the I, &c. and & reſpecting h and
> from m. I tell him Fruftra fit per plura, evenif what be ſaid were all

unqueſtionable. ;
9 84. For our Evidence we will not vapour and run back to the Incar-


zation, as we ſeem'd todo in the Comet, which mechod indeed was =p
a Mer-


474 hHY Peſtulential made out by Induftim, Book. HL.


a Mercurial Finger, if any ſhall delight to Travel on the like Defign. We
will come nearer Home, and content our ſelves with the beginning of the
former Century, where the firſt 4 which appears compleat, is found in
S 20. fune, A® 1504. what Sickneſs do's attend, Gemma anſwers, for
Bruſſels, Peftis Virulenta, A® 1502. Again, 4® 1505, in Flanders, Gem, 2.
249. and our Sweating Sicknels the ſecond time in Loxden, A® 15c6. faith
Stow. Note that in June 1502. Þ and Y are bothin 2, in 1505. both
in A, in 1506. within Terms. This forthe kt,

I. The Second Congrels of our Superiours after 20 years paſt in the

ear 1524. X 10, for the year 1524. we may remember, Honeſt Cardar;

furniſhed us with one exawple from Mzlatz 3 and before that, 4® 1522.

Kz»cher informs us of 2 cruel Peſtilence ar Rowe, our Planers being with-
in Terws in 413! ar leait, and Ofover, which inſtance being far from So-
litary, gives us juſt Cauſeto fuſpect that the Vicinity of Þ and 1%, even
beyond the Tedder of 30 gr. isot dangerous f1gnification, which is corfir-
med preſently fron the Winter Mortality noted in London, 4* I525.
where our Planets ore 10 degrees diſtance, but ſecretly link'd rogerher by
their mutual Approaches to the Equinox, even on % 's part, not here to
be treated of. ;

2. The third meeting of Þ and V. inSeptember, 4® 1544. about m 27;
Here is Peſtilence at London again in the Month of July, as Stow.informs,
our Planets within 20. degr. diſtance.

3. The next meeting is found in the end of S, Ang. 1553. Tn the

ear 1562. a Strange Murrain of Cattle, fays Gemma; This was in the

a: inning of the year, and our Planets were out of Bounds; only in O#.
I find a note of Yariole & Mortilli , Small-Pox, &c. with another Mur-
rain, it {could ſeem. But in 4® 1563. a great Plague in Germany, faith
{lntzer, our City of Lozdonnot eſcaping that time. Add 4® 1564. Pe-
ſtilence at Bruſſels, ſays Gemma, at the end of the year, Yea, 4* I566,
the Strange Plague in Hungary within the Terms of our Planets, or nor a-
bove 4 degrees excels.

4. The Fifth d happens about * 20. Apr:l, 1583. and we meet with 2
new Diſeaſe at Lunenburg (Fuly 1581. ) as Dimerbrock informs us. Now
though the time of the year does bur border upon our Aſpect, and h and
& anſwer for the Diſtemper, yer we have ſaid that even bordering years
are dangerous upon the account, that though our Planets be without their
Bounds or Limits, yet they may be fetch'd to life again ( as it were) by a
Third Planer ſtepping in berween the Extreams, and a good ſhift too, as
we ſee practiſed before, s 14. of this Chapter ; for verily both 7 2nd g
from the oppoſite Quarters do ſo face h and YN , that they unite them
for the preſent, and force their Contributionto the miſchief. This I do
not mention for lack of Inſtances for we find a furious Peſtilence in 1584,
but becauſe I ſee 'ris of great concern in my Judgement to ſolve the ap-
pearances often occurring. |

5. The 6th. d _— about Ghriffmas, A® 1603. in 2 10, And here
we meet with a Peſtilence in Loxaon, as it pleaſed God o to order it in
the firſt year of K. James, the firſt of that Name ; any one may ſee it
was our two Planets h and Y, in the hand of the great God (unleſs all
we have ſaid hitherto is Vanity) by the New Star, and the Froſt that
followed theyear enſuing, proper Attendants on our Aſpe&, which, I
_ we have made out 3 and can further evince it by running back intro
P turies 3 yea, or Ch:l:ads of time. Note here again, A® 1604.
while London was clear, (faith Stow) other Cities, Villages and Towns
Corporate were extreamly viſited,

j


l; 6- Go


—_— - — ao


Chap. III. Whither h % are n0Xtous without @.


«.£.£


6. Go wenouw to the year 1623. and obſerve the Congreſs in the be-
inning of 41, in the Monthof July. Threeſcore years ago is within
emory, when our City (marted under the farewell of our Planets in
me. Weknow to what great purpoſe we have beſore obſerved,the Equi-
notial @ of Y and & in the hotteſt time of this Viſication ; but we are
not bound therefore to put out our Eyes, or ſay we do not ſee, that this
grand Fatal d, or Politure of the ewo Supreams by commiſſion from
Heaven, doth conſpire with the like fatal Poſiture of the Third Superi-
our. We will not anotomize the year, but we may diſcover the Foot-
ſteps of our Aipe&t by the Droughty Summer noted in New England,
A® 1623. Purch IV. 1866. by the Fire-ball that was ſeen a!l Germany
over. By other Meteors, mention'd alfo by Kepler, A® 1624. not to for-
get the Macule Solares which Hev2liss has left upon Record were more
frequent in that year, than ever any he met with.

7. All this while we forget the © of h and V, at Mrdſummer, 1513.
in the beginning of m and &, at what time Exeland labour'd with its
Metropolis, ſays Mr. Stow, We take nonotice of thoſe Diſtempers men-
rion'd by Fracaſtorius, A® 1511. or that ſtrange Murrain mention'd by
Þexnelins, ue Solas Felrs corripurt.

8. In the next f, we find Peſtilence in France, A® 1534. mention'd by
Valeriola apud Dimerbrock.

9. The next @ we hear not of, But that of 1573. before Midſummer,
in mand ©; Gemma will tell us, for his Country , laſted two year, A®
73. & 74. the cure of which he diſcourſes. And may we not ſay the
New Star in Ga/ſopera is a Concomitant of this P > Yes,even as the New
one in Serpentarius was of the d.

10. We (hall name but one more in the 36th. year of Q. El:z4beth,
A* 1593. which is acknowledged fora Peſtilential year in this Ciry.

9 85. Well, it ſeems our Aſpe&t may be Peſtiferous w:th the helpof
his Neighbours z Ir may be enquired whether w:thout his Fellow-Mar-
tial-Aſpss , I fear we ſhall find it abſolutely ſo; Let the Reader Judge:
Some Peſtilential or Sickly Years ſeem for a while to appear when & is
conjoined with neither. As perhaps, 4*® 1502. when a Peſtilence raged
at Bruxe!s, 2nd 509 perithed in a Day - the 4 of H and & fell off be-
times, v/z. in the Month of May, betore probably the Peſtilence began :
But bzho!4 we lee a d of Þh and V thenenters ; ſo there isa d h and
F preceding, and d h V following , 4® 1505. h and V preceding 3
Þh and 4 come not in till the end of Auguf, A®1543.an & h & pre-
vails, and falls off in May, but h and Y hold their own. To ſpeak
therefore as I tind, ſeeing 'tis rare to find a d or f of h VÞ, without
ſuch an Aſpect of h and & , We may not poſſibly pronounce upon
the whole year, wichout reckoning in the Martial Aſpe&s, which if they
precede, may Ciſpoſe or co-operate to the common Nulance ; The d of
h and & ina Spring, yer, or Winter Month (February ſuppoſe) may
2/ter the matter, and corrupt it, followed by an Aſpect of Þ and YL.
How much more when they arePlaited and Breaded together in the ſame
Twine, znd at the ſame Hour, as it oft-times happens.

9 86. 'Tis eahe to note, that we may proceed in the ſame Method in
the # ; "tis enou2h we have pointed at itz but for Brevities fake we ab-
{tain, a5 we do much againſt our Will; Concerning Agues, Fluxes, Smal!-
Pox, Scurweys, which aretaken at Home and Abroad, by Sea or byLand,
whea the greater Plagnes don't apoear. *Tis long ago, I remember ic
ſtill, when in a Droughty January and Fezruary, the Savall Pox was rife in
the County of Oxford; it came into my fanſite the P hand VL compleat
in February, might be the under- Cauſe, reaſonably impuring the unſea(o-


nablenets of (lis Wearker to have Influence upon the Malady, and caſting
F 6 abou


h Y Malignance in relation


Book III,


about me, I ſuſpected the Planetary @ to be the Cauſe of the Dry
Conſtitution 3 then which nothing is more certain, whether we repect
Drought, or Malady.

s 87.1f then, what between the d and #, weſhould find every XXth.
Year more of leſs, ſhould prove with us in Englazd, (if not Peſtilencial )
yet a Sickly Year, & Tice verſa : Then I ſay, we ſhould believein Aſtro-
logy. Nay, God forbid we ſhould have ſuch Cogent Commanding Evi-
dence : for then it were as certain as a Mathemarical Principle. But what
if our Evidence Flutter near ſuch a place, ſhall we not think it hath 2
Neft thereabout? Try we our Home-Spun Annals from the beginning of
che Laſt Century, and let us viſit the d and #, that we may ſee how
they ſtand affected to us Exgl;h. They are unkind at the beſt, but ler


us believe in our Principle no further then we find.


The

$ 88, Firſt then, 4* 1504. S 20. |
Fune, our Planets meet in S 2.
the year 1503. was a Dry Sum-
mer, ſaith Stow. No Rain nota-
ble from Whitſontide to our Laay-
Day in September. And 4* 1506.
before Planers are gotten clear
off, the Sweating Sickneſs al-
faulted us a ſecond time.

1523, Next, A® 1524. in * 10.


in February, Now A* 1521. was!


2 great Mortality in Londoz, and
other places of the Realm,
2 Dearth. This is on one fide of
the d , and again on the other
fide, 4® 1525. Thoſe two Years
were very Sickly, ſo that Msrha-
elmas Term was adjourned,and the
Chriſtmas kept in the Countrey.
7544 Third, 4* 1544. 10 Sept. m
28. A great Peſtilence at Lonaop,
whereby Michaelmas Term was
adjourned to St: Albans this very


year.
«|


7563. Fourth, 4* 1563. in S 28.
Plague and Peſtilence, firſt at
New-haven, and then after inLor-
arr,of whichDyed 23372. where-
of of the Plague 17404. this ve-
ry year, Stow. Ho

1583. Fifth, 4* 1583. April, in *

21. The year 1582. brought forth

a Comer, May a5 Year 1583.

Earthquake in Dorſetſhire ; and if


none with us, it brought a Plague '


elſewhere, and chat a furious one.


beſide |


|


A 1593. P in May,


The &.

1513. So A* 1513. the ® in June,
in 1 and & 7. A Great Morta-
lity of Peſtilence is noted in Eng-
lana, and about Londor eſpecial-
ly, the very ſame year wherein
the P happened. It may be to
ſome purpoſe tonote theDrought.


P in Febr, SB 21,
A* 1534. No News with us of
Sickneſs; howbeit, for the AL.
pects ſake, we muſt note that o-


ther places ſaw Comets, and
Earthquake.


4* 1554. @ in July, 229, Now 4*


1551. (a matter of a year before,
as we obſerved the ſame diſtance
in the Conjuntion, A® 1523.)
Sweating Sickneſs in the North
parts of Englazvd, and London,
On the 12th. of 7uly it was vehe-
ment, it kill'd in 24 Hours, or
les. Note, that the Comet in
1556. appear within the Verge
of this @.


A* 1573. @ in June, m S 22, Earth-


quakes. A® 1571. & 1575. a New
Star. 4® 1572. with a GreatWin-
ter, and Dearth, Heavens burning
twice. As it brought forth all
theſe,ſo noPlague did we hear of.
vYS 22.
Plague in Lozaoz, of which ſeve-
ral Aldermen are noted to have
dyed. Of all Diſeaſes, 17193.
of the Plague, 10695.

1607,


CO —_—_— —{Cuuwoa


( .-hap HI. To us im England y among the Reſt.


———————— ———————— ———


477


A® 1613. PX i 12, Sept. and A®


1603. Sixth, 4* 1603. Decemb. d |


in £ 9. Another New Sfar ;
Peſtilence in Lonaon, whereof in
One Week, in 7uly, Dyed 857.
of all Diſeaſes, 1103. This was
but one Week. Nor was 1604.
quite free; for in that year Dyed
of the Plague 896. Plague alſo


noted in Offend, &+c. 1603.

1623. Seaventh, d in &t 6. 4?
1623, The great Plague Year
within remembrance , whereof
Dyed about 3000 in one Week
in Auguſt, 7:12. from the 11 th. to
the 18th. Preceded, 4*® 1621, &
1622. with a great Froſt.

1643. Eight, 4® 1643. February, +
25. Now in 1642. Dyed of che
Plague 1824. And in 1643. 996.


1663. Ninth, 4® 1663. Ofober, &
in 2 13. This Year, and the fol-
lowing were, as to London Heal-
thy ; but abroad not. Several |
Come:s appeared in ,. and before :
1665.at the mention of which we |
tremble. And though it may be ,
pleaded our Aſpe&t was diflol-
ved, yet it was no wide Diflolu-
tion, at the Heighth not above 9g
degrees expired : ſo crue is my
{a{picion of an Enlargement of
their Boundary. Note , Small
Pox, Jan. 1664. and Meazles, rife
in March toiiowing.

1632. Tenth, 4® 1682. in OFober,
in & 19. d. The year 1681. was
none of the Healthfulleft. I will
not diſpute, there was ſome Peſti-
lence; but without diſpure the


Sums of 400. 500. yea, 600. per
Week , are not delirable Sums.
Surely from May to Se tember |
there paſt nota Week under 400. '


1612, X Wt 28, Auguſt ; the years
were clear of the Plague, as by
Bel”s Account appeareth. Inun-
dations we meet with 1612. in the
Later Part of the Year, but the
Summer Dry, and little Hay.
Inundacions again, 1613.


1633. The P in 2 and i 7, A®
1633. Mario meaſe, all clear till
1636. and that comes not within
our Verge. Ir belongs (toadmi-
ration) to Y 23 their Motion,and
height of che SickneG confider'd.


165 3. July, A & 14. Droughty
Fectr, I remember, and a Sickly
Seaton in the Country, as is elſe-
where noted. The year was in-
troduc'd by a Comet at the end
of 1652.

A? 1673. fin V and== 15, Aug?
This year goes for a Healthy year,
bur in all its Parts I find ir other-
wiſe, for the Spring complained;
4.27. 354. March 10. 688.


eor. 3. 418. I7. 695.
IO. 430: 24. 568.
I7. 537. Mar. g. 547.


24. 510.

The Sums are high in F-45raazy and
March; our Two Planets were
oppoſed near the Equator. So
thoſe Months were lickly, though
the year was well,God be thank'd;


This for us. Bur in America, the French Gazet tells ns the Swall Pox
raged among the Inatans, as the Plague doth among the Ezropeays. In


Spatn alſo a Plague, which ceaſed the year following,
M* 1682, In June, we hear of great Mortality of Catcle in the North


parts of Scotland,


| In Aug. Plague in Algiers Rages, faith theNews from Parw.
In O#ob. Flax rages in the Gariſon of Oras for ſome cime paſt. At
R-r22udts a Deſtructive Feaver, mortal to many in two or three days.


A* 1683.


A. at... PIR ————r—— A Me th. a
i. ml”


47 8 Whether Peftil. enter always with the K. of Engl. Book III.


A® 1683. January , Plague broke out ar. 3. St. N. in Caſchaw in Up-
per Hungary, ſo that Teckley was forced to remove in March. From /-
enna we hear of a Contagion among the Turks, Thouſands being found
dead betweed Belgrade and Buda, In May 13. From the French Kings
Army, a Cough and Grawedo Peforrs, which, in a few days march'd off
a000 of the Army. Relat. extraord.

From L:»tz, in July, a Diſſentery was fo rife, that the Emperors Ar-
my was forced to move to Vienna, Relat. Extraord. |

In Sepremtber,the ſame in Holſatia, Lunenberg, ec. Feaver in Spain,ſcarce
a Houſe free. .

Burt one d fails, and not many Oppoſitions.

9 89. Thus it is, and the more we enquire, the worſe we ſhall find it :
for where ever any e fails, 'tis to be feared that other places have nor
bin ſo happy, at what time the City hath been ſo ſecure : whether we
take the Word in a good or bad Sence,'I mean them no harm. If I have
mention'd ſometimes , Gomets, Droughts, Flouds, we, intimate thereby
that ſuch arethe Attendantsi of Diſtemper'd years, and therefore imports
ſo much: Comets, I ſay, among the reſt, imply an unhealthy Conſtitution,
of Diſtempers extant , and co-exiſtent with it. I could contirm the
Premiſes by a further review of Chronicle, even from the Conqueror :
yea, from the Incarnation ; if the Table of the mean Conjunctions will be
ſerviceable to us, as they muſt be, becauſe the Equation of h and Y. art
moſt is not above gr. 10. if I remember right. |

$ 90. It may be asked me what I will ſay to thoſe who give out that Pe-
ſtilences come in with our Kings Reigns : A New King brings a Peſti-
lence. Ianſwer 3 ſuppoſe it were ſo, what Inference will they make?
What abſurd intollerable Inference will a Phanatique (for 'tis their Obſer-
vation, they ſay) draw from thence > What Black Mouth can {ay, that
K. James the Peaceful ; or, K. Charles the Martyr were Plagues, (for
that's the Exeliþ of it) tothe Nation ? The Martyr ſhews that the Nacti-
on, the Predominant part, were rather a Plague to him : The Guile of
which is not yet expiated; and God knows when it will.But that grand de-
lafve Principle whereby —_— themſelves (God help them) to be
the only peculiar of God, es them beſpatter any one who is not of
their Lay-Communion , though Better and Superiour. An Anchriftian
Diviſion z yet they call themſelves the Church , the Salt of the Narion,
and yet :nfatuate, If a Monarch perhaps through his more generous
Education, ſees himſelf Bound not to Truckle under them , or connive
at their Self undoing , They are what not > But they fee 70 Sin in them-
ſelves. If they did, with how much greater Probability might they ſay,
that God ſends a Viſitation at the entrance of a New Prince, to reckon -
with us for our Miſdemeanors under the O!d ! He ſeems to chuſe us that
Critical Time to ſhew we have been in arrear. But fo they fill upthe
meaſure of their Fathers, with their Proverbs, like them ; That Princes
eat ſour Grapes, and the Proples Teeth are ſet an Eape. "Tis a Fallacy of that
Accident wich Providence ſuffers many times, to prove us, whether we
will make raſh, heady, unworthy, ſelf-Juſtifying Concluſions, fo proclaim
our ſelves to the World for a erſe Generation. Becaule God ſaid
once, 1 gavea King in my Wrath, therefore ſaith the Diſſenter, 4/1 K:ngs
are from the Wrath of God, Thar's an Inference from the {ame deluſive
Spirit, which wheedles many a Poor Soul to their Ruine. Buc ler them
look back and compare, the Firſt Eleven Kings came in w ith Health, even
William the Gonqueror, and King John» brought no ſuch Memorandum ;
No, nor King Rz:chard the 34. nor King Herry the VIII. nor his Daugh-
rers, Lueen Mary, no more then Queen Elizabeth. Bur VI. of XXVI


Kings


Chap. II. Mercy with Judgment,


489


Kings can be thus flandred. Now we uncer God, in Philoſophical Spe-
cularion impure it to ſuch and ſuch Afpe&ts; We have ſeen That of 1603,
of King James; and 1623. under King Charles T. his entrance, hung
upon the Revolution of cur Afpe&t: So did that at the entrance
of K. H. VII. 1485. It falls manifeſtly within the Verge of h and V.
I grant that God's Wiſdom and Power is ſeen in Circumſtances and Co-
incidences of Events ; but we muſt take heed of Fallacious Arguing, leaſt
by the Rule we ſay the ſame of the Plagues coming in at the Firſt
Parliament, feeing the Monarch uſually calls one at his Entrance.

$91, Bur the Truth I have cold chem already, Heaven ows us a Payment
for all the Week, and then as ſome Parents do, they chaſtiſe their Chil-
dren at the beginning of a Kings Reign. Tis we are fer down in rhe
Black: Book, incorrigiblel fear, and therefore we ſmaxrr.

$ 92. But another ſore Objection aflaulrs us, as if Wee made Peſtilences
too frequent, every X. or XX. Year. Ianſwer, Mercy ſteps in, and de-
nies the Conſequence. Truth ſays there is Danger , and Conſcience fays
We acſerve it ; but we fee, with thanks to Heaven, 'tis not always o.
Sometimes 'tis not oncein XX Years,. though it cannot be denyed bur
that abuur once in that Term there is ſome reaſon to fear : for fo the Ta-
ble begins in the 4 Column, 4® 1504. 1524. 1544. We do not love to
hear of Death : that's true. Yet no man will give above VII. years for
a Life; that's leſs than X. nor can you make a Deed to any purpole ,
without mention of Mortality. So let the ObjeRion ceaſe, and inſtead
of reviling with fad Truths, let us remember our Enemy, and prepare
co meet him. Memento homo quod pulvis es, muſt not be abolith'd.

9 93. The Truth of this Hypotheſis appears from the continuance of
112. Peſtilences, and from their Proaroms, Feavers, Fluxes, &c. *Tis 2
ruled caſe amongſt us, That the Small Pox growing more Rife than ordi-
nary, bodes ſome worſe Diſtempers enſuing, If in the Spring, then the
Summer is feared ; If in the Summer , then the following year is ſuſpe-
Red. And this is fairly accounted for with us, who put up the Afj
for two year, nay for more 3 A Peſtilence may laſt, I do not fay , Kaze,
Four Years, on the Account of Þh and %. It did ſo. The Cityof
London was not abſolutely free for 8 years together. There Dyed above
2 1000 per Annum each of thole 8 years. In 1643. indeed it reaches bur
996. IV.of them, wiz. 1641. 1642. 1643. 1644. are imputgble to our
Aſpect ; Only the later part of 1644. takes in the next Malignant Congreſs


of % and d.


G6 CHAP.


_—_ i _.


| 490 FS nnd] Par of Saturn and Jove. "Book HL


_—


. CHAP. IV.
Of Saturn and Jove, Appendix to the Precedent Chapter.


& 1. We muſt do right to our AſpeF before we part ; the want of Prin-
&ed Diaries amongſt us for 40.0r 50 Nears at leaſt, is a great Deſe-
deratum. 2. A Summary of all the Years of this, and the lat Cen-
tury, that are concerned either in whole or in part, in the two Chie
—_— of h and y. 3. The Difference of the troubled State of the

ir, found in any of the Years aforeſaid (wbatſoeveri\ Minor Ts
ſhews it ſelf) muſt be aſcribed to this Tranſcendent AſpeF., 4. Ma-
auduFtion to the uſe of all our Diaries premis'd, toilluſirate the Tn-
fluence of our ſo great AſpeF. 5. Our Planets Calm and Silent
: whenthey lye in cloſe Quarters. Hence Stoeflers ignorant and unhappy
Eſſay at the PrediFion of a Deluge, when al] the Planets met in the
Watry Sign X , An. 1524. whereas Planets | diſtributed to their ſe.
weral Poſts] can Drown, or Burn the Inhabitants of the Earth. A
Notable Story from Purchasof Fire and Deluge in the Years 1 542.
&- 82. Good meaning Men may be fully miſtaken in the cenſure
F Superſtition. h and wy, the Longeſt, and Luſtieſt Fingers in
ature. 6. Preſentment of our AſpetFs moſt notable Influences in
a continued Series, ( of ſome time at leaſt ) judged convenient for the
comparing of Later and Former AſpeFs, as they may concern us in
England. 7. Produced therefore from our plain — for the
Tears 1562. &C. and the d there found. 8. From the Tear 1570.
&cc. and the Þ there found. g. From the Year 1582. and the 4
there found. 10.The Influences of the d of our Age,An. 1682. not ſpa-
ringly related from our own ColleFions. 11. The Tears introduced
are found ſtrangely to agree in Comets, Flouds, Lightnings, Peſt;
lences, though our Tears relating to the laſt, as to Peſtilences, have
beento ws in England happily exempted. Conſent of the Habitable
part of the World as to Inundations, notorious about the entrance of
1682.45 Thuanus heretofore had noted in his time. 12. Mr.Stow's
Notes of what happened in the Years 1591, 92, 93, &C. may be pro-
bably a kind of Speculum, to let ws ſee in ſome meaſure, what may
happen to us ſeven Tears hence in 1992, 93, 94, 95- 13. Warning
given for a touch at Monſtrous Births. 14. A View of Froſts and
Droughts relating to our Aſpe@. 1 5.Some Tears infeſted with Vermin.
Whether it ever rained Locuſts at Conſtantinople? 16.4 C, oncluſrve
diſcourſe about Parelia.their relation to this AſpeF, ſaving theCarteſi-
an Swppoſition.17.Monſtrous Hail.18.FareweltoComets,&c.He that car
tel Twenty,nmſt be convinced. 19. Exa# Enquiry eſtabliſhes know-
ledge. 20. h Y manytimes miſchievous and unſupportable, a Con-
ftderation of Damps, reſumed upon Cardan's Story. 21. Our Aſ-
ped has a hand ſometimes in Armies Fthereal,as in monſtrous Rains.
22, As Superſtitions as we are, we don't undertake to reduce we
icies


d


Chap. IV. Want of Deary Aſtrolog complain d of.


421


digies to the Viſible Heavens, Not the Phaxnomenon of Croſſes fal-
ling upon Garments, nor every Incredible Monſtrous Birth. 2 2. Mou-

rous Births that are more uſual, are juſtly aſcribed to the Heavens,
particularly to the AſpeTs of the Superiours. 24. Not only Corporal
Diſturbances but Diſtraions and Diſlurbances of mind are found
not created , but heightned under ih;s AſpeF. This 3s ſeen in
DiſtraFed People, Turbulent Spirits , yea , and Falſe-Prophets :


Proof by Appeal to Hiſtory. 25. Concluſton, with a Fore-taſt of


the ſecond part, and a Rule or two to judge of the Weather,to ſtay
the Readers Stomach.


$1. COmetinag more is to be ſaid of this Aſpect, but what is fit to be
ſaid, is no ſmall 2zere with me ; for thall h and V's Aſpe& be
my Great, yea , Tres-Grand Argument, and ſhall I ſpeak leaſt toit ? I
ſhould have afforded ir a juſt Diary, what I found meet to do for ſome of
the Reſt, and not put off our Aſpect with a Fragment or two, which it
cannot take kindly at my hands. But what could I do, if the Tedder of
the Configuration reaches us, as in our Theory it ſeems to do, to4 or 5
year, and that with a juſt Claim > Could my too free and profuſe way of
Tranſcription copy out ſo many Years, andinſert it here ? Alafs ! thzr
would yield a Specter but of one Aſpect 3 He muſt obſerve a ſecond Re.
volution at leaſt, who means to draw either new Concluſions, or eſtabli;h
the Old. Some ſuch wy | is wanting to the Celeftial Philoſophy, ſome
ſuch Volume I mean, that ſhould giveus 4 or 5 Revolutions from Kepler,
Kyriander, and what Brits Obſervations could be colle&ted toward half
a hundred years, or more, if our Age were yet {o happy. I | novee my
ſelfmuch with the Fancy, how ſuddenly the Celeſtial Knowledge would
be advanced, if our Anceſtors defe&t herein conld be made up by ſome
private Re-ſearch, or Voluntary Contribution; for, for a right uſe made
of it I queſtion not, as long as the Theory is innocent, though novel,
and ſo many Learned Men amongſt us, that believe a God in Heaven,
and his Glorious Providence. The Truth is,I once thought upon juſt Mc-
tives, omitting the Fair and Calm Conſtitution, toexhibit a Compendious
View of theAſpet in all its Shapes z and beingaware of the Prolixicy, I
thought to correct thatFault by the mixture of ſome not unprofitable Obſer-
vations as I went; but being not {o far enamoured with my Atrcempr,it dyed
in theBirth. Muſt I leave then this Momentous Aſpect uncultivated,unregar-
ded ? Nay I ſhall give the Reader at preſent, ſome Directions how to make
uſe of the Former Obſervations , for the Benefic of this preſent AC
Let him be pleaſed to View what follows : See , 'cis no leſs then a
Summary of all the years concerned from the Fountain-Head of our Col-
leRions, and when he has viewed them, let him mark what I ſay.


$ 2. A Summary of all thoſe Years from the beginning of the laſt Gentury, where
h and Þ, d or @, according to our Sentiment, hath to do,


d | P
'A® 1502.46 initio Mari ad anni finem. | I512. aprine, Mair, ad fin. Septemb.
1503» I513. 4 prince Marti ad fin. aunt
1504. I514. -
1505. 1515. ad Junit finem:


I516,


—_—_——


Proſpet# of Tears concerned mhY dand &, Book [I].


d
1506. ad finem Auguſti.
1522.4 Feb. med. ad Matt fin.
4 Princ, Oftob. ad Anni fin.
1523.
152 I.
—_ ad Tun medium,


1542. 4 med Aug. ad fin. annt.
1543+
I544-


_ ad fin Februar.


x562. 4 princ. Marti ad fin, ann.
I563.


1565. ad med. Nov.
1566. 4 med. Maii ad Juli med.


1581, a princ. Dec.
1582:
1583.
1584. E
1585. 4d med Maii.


1601. ab Ofob. med,
1602, ad Martr finem., _ _
4 med. Junii ad fin. ann.
1603.
I604.
1605. ; ;
1621. 4 med. Apr. ad fin, ann.
1622.
1623.
1624.
1625. ad med. Of,


1641. a wed. Febr.ad med. Juli,
ab Ofvb. med, ad fin. anni.
1642.


2643. -
1644: ad med. Jultz.


I661. 4 med, Auguſtt ad fin, anm.
I662.
1663.
1664.


| +
I516.4 princ. Jan. ad Maii med,
I532.4 prince. Decemb. ad finem.
I533. ad finem Fulit,
Ab Oftob. med. ad anni fin,
I534-


I535.
1536. 4d finem Feb,
a med. Oftob. ad anni fin,
I537. ad med. Januarii

I55I, 4 Princ. Aug. ad fin. anni,
I552, 4d fin, Februarit:

a princ. Junit ad fin, anni.
I553-
I554. 4d med, Nowemb:
I555. 4 med, martit ad Of, med.

I571. 4 unit med. ad Julit med.
1572. 4 med April ad fin anni.
1573-

1574. 5
I575.4d fin. Tunit,
1576. a Feb. princ. ad fin. Apr.

I591.4 med. Decemb.,

1592. ad fin. 'Funit.

a med. Novemb, ad fin. anni,
1593.
1594. FA
I595. 4 med Aprilis.

a med. Aug. ad fin. anni.
1596. ad Fin. Febr.

I610, 4 princ. Aug. ad fin. anni.
IGI1, 4Pprinc. July ad fin, anni,
1612, |
I613,

I614. ad wed, Nowemb.
1615.4 med April ad fin, Sept.

1631.4 prize, Mai: ad med. Ofteh.

1632. a Martii princ. ad fin, anni


1633. |
1634. ad fin. Jults.
1635,4 princ. Jan, ad med, Junii,


1651. a med. Jan, ad med Mais.
1652. 4princ. Jan. ad fin, Aug.
a wed Oftob. ad fin. ann.
1653.
1654.
I655. ad fin, Marti:
a aned Ooh. ad fin, anni.
I656. ad med, Feby,
1670. a July fin. ad fin. anni.
1671. ad med, martii.
4 princ, Juni ad fin, anni.


|


| m—_ |
1673,


—_—— ———_—


Chap. IV. Cupertors concerned where the Inferwors pretend


CP————


-493


| t———


1665. ad med Marti, 1673.
1674. ad med Nowemb.
1675.4 prin. Junii ad fin, Sept.
1680. 4 med. Julii ad med. Sept.
1681. 4 prin. April ad fin. ann.
1682,
1683,
1684,
1685. 4 priac. Maii ad med, Aug. \


 $ 3. Whatſoever Heigths or Excefſles are found in the ſtate of the Air;
Natural, as I may term them, or Prodigious, in High Winds, Hurricanes,
Dark Air, more gentle laſting Rain, or Violent daſhing Showrs, deep
Snow , Showres of Hail of uſual or pernicious Size, whatſoever
Flouds or Inundations , the Attendants of the Premiſes; Whatſcever
Tempeſts of Lightning, Thunder, Chaſmes, Fiery Meteors, Comets,
Earthquakes, Peſtilences, Parelia, Phaſmes of the Air, Prodigious Rains
of Bloud (lo called) er.

Oa the contrary, whatſoever Cold, Froſty, or Hot Droughty Air 3
whatſoever Miſt , or Fog, or Smoaky Air, Bliting or Blaſting, Mildew,
Threads or Cobwebs, Goſſamere, Gaterpillar, Locuſts, &c. mentioned in
any of our Notes Domeitick or Foreign, to happen in any of thele years,
within the terms ſpecihed in the Table ; (What narrower Aſpect, or A(-
pets ſoever may bear the N2me) they belong to the d or Pot h and YL.
aſſiſted or deſerted,as well as to the Minor Aſpect ; they muſt all,I fay,be
laid before theDoor of chis Configuration,that we may ſee how Rzch it is.

$ 4. Let me wait upon the Reader back through all che Tables, till we
come to the firſt , that which is appropriate to © and *?, pag. 131. that
we may in ſome meaſure be, not acquitted only,but, juſtified, for our pro-
fuſer Tranſcripts of our Diaries.

What do we tind in March, 4* 1673 ? Wet and High Winds : It be-
longs in all reaſon, as to the Congreſs of © and ?, foalfo to our #.
The ſame we tay for the Snow and Hail, 4® 1674. Add it you will, the
Acies, Hyſterical Fits, Even They are to be aſcribed, ſays the Afſtrolo-
ger, tO Cand 7, co-incident tothe f of the Supremes. And ler no
ma1 queſtion it that will ſearch our thoſe limitations , which are eafie
to be found by obſerving Monrhs and Signs, or ſuch like Circumſtauces ,
whichas yet were not proper for me to {earch after. Do the like wich
the following Years compriſed in the Table. Go we then to February,
A*® 1655.in © and $2 Diary, pag. 159: The Warm Weather we find
there, 4? 3, 4. the meaſures of Rain on the ſame days, the Dath of
Rain and Terrible Bluſtering, belong to © and 2 , andour & of the
Superiours alſo not yet expired ; while on the contrary, the Froſt extreme
on the 1. of eb. 4® 1663. belongs to © and 2 (and 2& ) corincident with
2 d of the Two Superiours. We will give but an example or two out
of the Foreign Diary , the firſt of which belongs to © and 2? ; p. 184:
We read there from Hackluit, May 20. 4® 1535. Ships ſuffered by Storms
and Tempeſt, d of Qand 2, f of h and YN. A 2d time, A® 1552,
a Hurricane, Aug, 21. 4 © 7 Platic, Þ of Þh and Y amongft the reſt.
A 34. 4® 1574. {\ow. 18. Tempeſtuous Winds all night at Loxdon, d
© and & with our @ (for theſe years are ſpecihed in the Summary.)
AdG March 8. 1682. outragious Storms on the Coaſt of Holland, ſuch as
deſerved a mention by Gu/wi/ins, d of ©.7 , and withal d of h v.

Thus may any one, if he pleaſe , make uſe of our Notes which we
have preſented tothe World, not to _ 7 the Bulk of the Yolume,

us


WA


OT.


More Light in 1682. then was in An. 1582. Book II],


but to ſave the Pains of the Diligent Obſerver in a point of Knowledge
now ſo much defired.

$ 5. We have made you believe that the CharaGter of this Aſpect holds
forth Cold and Froſty Seaſons, (Winter atleaſt) and Droughty Seaſons
with Cold or Heat, as they happen. And 'tis admirable to ſee, that nor
only before, but, after we know the reaſon, how Cool, Calm and Civil
the Aſpect is at times, atother times as huffing and boiſtrous 3 yea, wild
and prodigious, and inſupportable. For what noiſe , I pray, does the
P h % makeE.gr. joined with the & of Þ and 2, for 18 days together
in May 1 652. pag. 292, How loud is he in July 1653. while oppoſed in
s. and zz. What in Sept. 1654. or 56. a Miſty Morning, and a Showre
or two in the firſt, Red Wind, ſome Rain, (too little , ſays the Note)
in the Second. Rain-like, Dark Air, fome Fits of Rain in the Third.
What does Decemb. 1662. bring, but Froſts ( p. 293.) Alaſs! Froſt is no
Influence, 'twill be ſaid, but a ſuſpenſion of Influence, a long Vacation,
(Froſt or Fog) as in Fannary and Nowember 1664. But ſee ! theſe Planets
are not 4;ftributed , they are too near one another, whether Three or
more, to ſhew any remarkable Influence, as we have ſaid. *Twas 2
great miſtake therefore of Poor Steefler, to alarum all the Country with
fears of a Deluge, when time was, to make the Country build, or pro-
cure boats tor their ſafeguard, or fly to the remote and higher places, in
Febr. 1524. becauſe all the Planets, forſooth , #zet in the Watry Sign *,
(as they are apt enough to'do, if the Superiours wart for them there ) for
what was the Iflue, to the Infamy of Aſtrology, through ignorance and
ill management, the whole Month proved Fair and Serene, as in ſuch
caſe, according to. our Principles, 'tis very apt todo ; On the other fide,
when D:fributed, what do they not ? Shake the Earth, Burn it, Drowz
it, raiſe Mountatns out of the Sea (for zew Iſlands muſt be ſuch) bring
Lakes out of Mountains, abolih Cities , exterminate Inhabitants , burying
them alive in Earthquakes, and waſhing them away in Flouds. Concer-
ning which take one Paragraph in Purchas, when he comes to ſpeak of
Guatimala, a fertile Province and City of the ſame Namein the Weſt-
Izaies. Hetells us that the City was once Situate at the Foot of a Fulcar,
but was removed Two Miles thence, becauſe in the Year 1542. (one of
our years) on December 26. A Lake hidden in the Bowels of that Hill,
forth in many places with ſuch Violence, that ic ruined moſt part
of the City. But (mark'ye) All is well for a matter of 4o years, ſo one
'< is harmleſs, yet in the year 1581. ( which is a Borderer, as we call it)
there iſſued from another Vulcan two miles off, ſuch an Eruption of Fire,
as threatned to conſume all before it 3 and ſuch a Showr of Aſhes as both
filled the Vallies, and almoſt buried the City. Now the nexc year 1582.
(a year claimed by our Aſpedt) there iſſued for 24 hours ſuch aStream of
Fire that burned the Stones and Rocks, drank up 5 Streams of Water.
He adds this remarkable Note, that before that firſt Eruption of Waters,
ſome Indtans came and told the Biſhop, that they had heard an incredible
Noiſe at the Foot of the Hill z The Ghr:f1an Bithop reproved them, that
they ſhould not trouble themſelves with vain, yea, Superſtitious Fears.
Burt about the Honr Two in the Morning , that Deluge appeared, which


- carried away many Houſes, and whatever ſtood in the way , wherein 520


Spaniards periſhed, Purch.Vol.V. Gap. 14. $ 2. Sothat ſometimes we ſee good
meaning may cenſure us unjuſtly of Superſtition z but the _ of theſe
Papers is togive more light to us that have ſeen 1682. then thoſe Good
Men who lived in 1582. Now at none of-theſe Terrors, T wis , when-
foever our Superiours thez were, can we find the reſt to be placed in the
fame Sign, neither Watry nor Frer: , but a:fributcd at their ſeveral Poſts,

as


Chap IV. Natures Mechanicks. Stow s Reports for 1 563, &c.


2s if they were ſczt out upon duty to execute their orders for in all ſuch
great Products, Nature uſes her Mechanicks , her Diſtances, her Lines,
her Angles, of unequal Meafures and Proportions. All the Planets lye
not in one Concentrick Orb, as neither do the Fixed. Wherefore by
the Rule of the Ve#:s, the higher Planer Geterrs Paritus muſt have the
greater Force. I ſee ſome Emblem of this in my hand, the Rrength of
that Organ lies in the unequal meaſure of che Fingers, of which the Lit-
t!c Finger is the weakeſt, and the Longeſt is the luſtieſt.

© 6. Afterall this, the Proweſs of our Two Superiours, I fear, wont
be diſcerned fo convircingly , by d:ffraed Inſtances hitherto preſented
intheir re{pe&tive Tables, as by ene cozt:aned Profpect in their more uni-
red order and ſucceſſion , whereby we may fee how they exert their
heavy Influences according to the Serres of time : Wherefore we may fur-
ther think fic ro preſent you an example of Two or Three, for the Moſt
part from our own Eng{;h Annals, wherein we are more zeerly concer-
ned : that by comparing our laſt 4 h Y in 1, with that of 1582, where
the iid P:aners are in oppoſite Signs to the former, or elſe with chat of
1563. where chey are about the ſazze Signs, which we tell you is 1, we
may {ee them coguation.

9 7. 4? 1562. Peſtilence at Aewhaven, when an Exgl:h Garriſon,where

they were ſcarce able to bury their Dead.

4® 1563. Peſtilence in London, of which dyed 23600.

Jul. 8. Lightning deſtroy'd one Woman,(here I am punQual,becauſe we

are at Home, and it concerns us to underſtand where we live) while

in Eſ-x a man, Stow ſaith, was torn in pieces, Stones and Trees rent

in many places. |

Earthquake in divers places, Lincoln, Nottingham, &c.

Dec. 1. ad 12, Continual Lightning and Thunder , ſpecially day 12. at n;
This Month at Gr:mesby in Lincolnſhire was driven aſhore a Fiſh, in
Length 19 yards, his Tayl 15Foot broad,s yards between his Eyes,c+c;

f® 1564, Great Floud from the River Thames, many Cattle periſhed.

Ob. 7. The North parts of the H. ſeemed to be covered with Flames.
proceeCing toward the middle of the Firmament, and afcer an hour ic
deſcended Weit, and All the Night, being the next after the Change,
ſeemed as Light as if it had been day. ;

D-c. 21. Froſt, Thames paſſable from the Bridge to Weſtminſter, hereto-
fore remembred in our Kalexdars, till That of 1683. drownd it and
its mention,

'A® 1565. Jar. 3. It thaw'd, and on the fifth day no Ice to be ſeen, which
cauſed great Flouds, many Travellers drowned.
wly 16, Thunder, Lightning and Hail frgm 4o. g. p. ad ho. 3. mat. which
deſtroyed the Corn, untii'd Houſes, beat down Church Batclements
at Ghelmesford, Leeas, Cranbrock, Dover, ec.

Dec. 24. Tempeſt of Wind {ſo raging, that the Seas, yea the Thawes
overwhelmed many Perſons , and blew open the Gates of the W:# end
of Sr. Pauls Cathedral.

The Terms of our Alpett if they be out, tis no prejudice toomit it, tis
2 Borderer ac leaſt. This for the d. Let us approach now to the
years which are adjacent to the &,

68. 4 1576. is but a bordering year. Nordoth Stow mention any thing

but (which is roo much, if ichad ſopleaſed God ) a General Peſtilence
there was throughout Exrope, at Venice above 60500 deceaſed.

O#, 5. Terrible Tempeſt of Wind and Rain, much Shipwrack, many
Houſes and Villages overflowed many Women ang Children loſt,

Fo


-


496


Continuation of Stow $ Reports. Book, III.


” — — _


A® 1571. Feb. 7. Earthquake at Kinaftoa' in Hereford|tire for 4 days ,
certain Rocks, with a piece of Ground removed , carrying great Trees
and Sheep-cotes. It overthrew K:ng/tone Chappel,;the Ground in all was

- 26 Acres. Ar firſt it made a Terrible Noiſe. A new Hill of 20 Fa-
cthom high. Which Circumſtances I relate the rather, that we may ſee
how our Country is obnoxious as well as others. | |

'A® 1572. Nov. 18. Star in Gaſſiopeta, for the ſpace almoſt of 16 Months :
Great-Froſt and ſharp Winter from before the Feaſt of 4 Saints
till after Twelftide , with great and deep Snows , and ſometimes
Rains; a Late Spring,the Wind continuing N.ande. till after the Aſcen-
{ion, with ſharp Froſt and Snows.

June 7. Hailand Rain at Toceſter in Northamptonſhire , whence Flouds,
whereby 6 Houſes were born down, &c. many Sheep drown'd, lying
in the High Hedges ,where the Water-Flouds left them, the Hail ſquare
and fix Inches abour.

About Lammas Dearth at Lonaor. .

4® 1574. July g. At the Iſle of Thanet, A Whale ſhot himſelf on Shore, ho,
6 p. Lengthzz yards. Any Man might have crept into his Mouth.

Sept. 4. Storm of Rain, &c. ;

ov. 6. Two great Tides in the Thames, the Firſt by Courſe, the other

- overflowed the Marſhes.

Nov. 14. About midnight following , ſtrange Impreſſions of Fire and
Smoak out of a black Cloud in the Aorth , 708. jeg. that in all parts
it ſeemed to burn with marvelous rage, the Flames did double and rol!
one on another, as in a Fxrnace, the Flames roſe from the Horizon
round about, and met over head.

Nov. 18. Stormy and Tempeſtuous out of the South, ſpecially after mid-
night till next morning. I have not known the like from any Quarter,
ſays our Annalift, +

A® 1575. Feb. 14. Cold and Hard Froſt ; after a Floud, which was not
great. Great numbers of Flies and Beecles came down the River
of Amwon ;, at Tewksbury a Foot thick above the Water.


Feb. 26. Between ho. 4. & 6 p. m. Great Earthquake in 1ork, Worſter .


Glouceſter, Briſtol, Hereford,

July 30. Great Tempeſt of Lightning and Thunder,wherewith in divers
wap ery and Beaſts were ſtricken Dead. Great Hail alſo 6 or 7 In-
ches abour. 8


' Sept. 26. In the City of Lozxdov, A Woman deliver'd of four Female


hildren, who followed all in Health and good liking their Deceaſed
Mother, who died a Month after 5 which whether I had reaſon to tran-
ſcribe will be ſeen toward the Cloſe of our Papers. I muſt obſerve that
they were coxcerved, (if not born) under the Aſpect.
'A® 1576. March. 5. In the Night a great Flaw of Wind from the N. W.
ruin'd a Tilt-Boat with 31 Perſons, one Boy excepted.

July 4, 5,6. The Faral Seifions at Oxford, where ſo many Men were de-
ſtroy'd by a Damp. We have referrd itto kh ? , and weabide
by it as a parcel-Cauſe, but we are willing to reduce it alſo among
other notable Cauſes, to our @ ; for 'tis certain 'tis a Borderer : h 4
are within Bounds; and & oppoſing Y., delivers up Þ alſo, linked
with it. *Tis no little matter that kills 500 Perſons by a Breath.

A® 1582, May. 13. Comet, hora 10 p. deſcending in the N VW. the Beard
ſtreaming S W.

Ang. 12, Lightning, Thunder , Whirlwind , with hail faſhioned Jike
Spur rowls, two or three Inches about in Norfolk, beat the Corn flat
to the Ground, rent up many Trees, and ſhiver'd them into pieces, &«

writ!


%


Chap. IV. Summary of cecurents under the laſt 4 h VL;


wrich'd them like Wirhs 3 the Top of Hendez Ghurch was lifted up, 5
Webs of Lead ruftled up together like fo much Linen Cloth.

1583. Jen. 13. Blackmore in Dorſetſbtre, a.piece of Ground of 3 Acres,
removed from its place 600 Foor.

OXob. 1 o. Caſter in Norfolk , a Fiſh by Force of the Eafterly Wind dri-
ven athore, whoſe Tayl was 14 Foot iff Breadth. |


Summary of the Occurrents happened at, or abont the laſt d h Y,, 1682, and
ſegq. from our own Collet;ons,


6 10. 1611. April 1. Rome Septentrionem werſus Gometa major Luctdtorg;
mupero qui Neapoli wiſus eff

Dre 22. Ex iaferiore traftu Albis Ruricole queruntur ex anni ficcitate,gran-
dem ſcarabeorum invaleſcere aumerum qu delicatuw arborum florem abradit.
Droeceſis Bremenſis triſtinus congueritur , de 1nuſitato Murium numero qui ſeee-
tem radicitus atradunt, Relats Colon. Num. 37.

May 3. 13. Lately an Earthquake in Zealand, and Meteor of an extra-
ordinary bigneſs, for 3 Nights in Amſterdam Horizon.

Die 5. This Night following,. a great and general Bliting Wind, the
Walnut-Trees felt it, Middleſex. X

Die 20. Hurricane lately at Barbaad's.

- Die 22. St. Fohnſtox's , Hail, Rain, Thunder and Lightning, unuſual

circa5 p. T. M. for a quarter of an Hour. B-»5k2s Intelligence.

Dte 27. Drought, not within memory, Exgl.

Die 30. Near Laxcafter , Lightning and Hail as big as Walnuts for
two Hours , damaging the Corn.

7uze 18, About a week ago, Rained Wheat in Deax Foref.

Di: 13. Oxford, lately happened Lightning, &c. which fired a Houſe:

D:: 16. Do/phins ſporting in the Mouth of Severn,

17. Ferrara, Thunder, Hail, Eartliquake.

20, Lime, A Vellel putin, which ielca Tempeſt of Thunder, Rain,
and Lightning, never the like.

20. Lately at Lyons in France, terrible Earthquake.

29. Dorch:jier , within two Miles, a Globe of Fire falling among a
Tutt of Trees, burnt ewo or three to Alhes.

Fuly 3. Sheernefs, Whale lately (een in the Mouth of the Thames.

5. Weſt-Cheſter, a Man ſtroke Dead with Lightning.

6.Chicheſter, about-3 m. Trumpets ſounding a Charge , &c. Thunder,


C
16. Hamburg, Plagne broke ont at Magacburg.
23. Friburg, Thunders, Armies , Squadrons, Battalions, &c.
25. Thunder bolt clove a Woman in 4 parts, a Man had no hurr.
26. Portugal Row, near Hide Park, Thunder 8 m. ſhook the Houſe,
ſo till 11 m.
T. M. in Lorraia, 6 Stately Houſes deſtroyed.
Sr. Colombs Church {uffered by Lightn.
Aug. g. Francofurti ad Viadrum Locuſtarum peſts.
II. Lurs epidemica Dreſae, & tmreliqua Miſa.
16. Jerſey , Comet SW. azte 5 m. with a Train of 3 yards.
27. Whale in Fluſhing taken , 3o Foot long.
4 Newts in Indra cord, Hurricane. Two Briſtol Ships loſt; 4 or 5 at
atteoa.
Sept. 6. Meteors ſeen in Mcor Fields, with a Stream 6 Inches broad.
13. Veſwvins burns for four days, T. M. in Vaples, two Shocks, Gazer.


Numb. 96.
vg I 6 14. Lives


ar.


=—— =


4.95


Summary of the late occurrents under d h&%, Book III.


—_—


14. Lues Epridemica in Calabria.

16. Peſtilence continues at Hamburg.

20. Great Storms of Hazl., then Swarms of Flies for 3 Hours , paſs'd
Eaftward with the Wind.

OF. 2. Hurricane at Jamaica.

6. Comet lately appeared in = 13. (wift in motion.

10. At Falmouth for ſome Days, Very Stormy Weather, fo at
Harwich.

16, Plague 1n many parts of Sparn, ſeems not yet to be decreaſed.

23. Star laſt n. with a large Train, but the Clouds hindred.

29. Dreadful Storm at Dover Rode.

30. Portland , Diimal accounts from ſeveral places of this Stormy
Weather.

Now. 2. Weymouth, ſuch a Floud from the continued Rains, that the
Ways are hardly paſlable. |

4. Near Lincoln, Lucid Circle in the Air like a Rainbow, reverſed.

6. Deal , a Zeland Veſſel caſt away in Tempeſt. |
: I - Weſtcheſter, Monſtrous Fiſh lately taken like a Crocoatle, Domep,

ztellig.

13. Plague not quite ceaſed at Magdeburg.

29. Sickne(s lately broke out in Barbary.

30. Violent Storms ſince day 26. at Hague, ruin'd part of the Fortifica-
tion at Varden,

Dec. 10. Hague, Strong S W. Wind, broke up -the Banks, and laid
2100 Acres under Water.

8. Eilmouth, many Shipwracks. |

Decemb. 15. Summer Weather, and much Thunder p. m.

21, Copenhagen, Waters ſo high, that 'tis the Wonder of the Age;

30. Great Flouds in the Country.


1682, Jan, 13. Turin, Comet appeared. like that laſt year, yet more
dreadful. |

16. Furious Tempeſt 208, tot. & ate, blowing down Tops of Houſes and
Chimneys, without Rain. |

Amſterdam, Inundation there, tres difficile reporter, ſays the French.

17. Very high Tide in the Thamez, over all the Buſhes.

18. Inundation near Holand, 3 Inches higher than 4® 1670. at Br:ll,
Rotterdam, &c. many People and Cattle drowned.

21, Inundations in Ireland, Gonnaught, c>c.

25, Inundation of Dazow, higher by two Foot then it was 35 years


ago.

31. Stockholm, yeſterday within 10 Miles, T. M. very Terrible for half
an Hour. |

Feb. 6. Winter Weather, blowing, Raining and Snowing near Sal:{-
bary, but near Azaover no (1gn of it.

12. Weſt Riding in Vorkshire Snow Kanee-deep in 24 Hours time ; at
Worthington, Tides have altered to the amazement of the Seamen.

March 6. Comet at Moſco.

19. Plymouth, ſmall Veſſel caſt away , 7 Paſſengers drowned ; and at
Duzkirk Storms deſtroyed their Sea-Work, blowing down ſeveral Hou-
ſes in the Town, and part of the Steeple, killing 6 Men.

22. Tides at LondoxBridee thrice in 12 Hours flowing 7 Hours from 2 p.

April 1. Trees blaſted.

29. T. M. in Hungary, deſtroying Houſes, and burying the Inhabitants.

May 1, T. M. at Pars in the Night, F
2, At


Eee e——_ —_  ——— — —— —— — — —


Chap IV. E; ripartſon with d 4 bendred tears fre:


2. At Deux Poiits, Baſel, exc.

4. Hereabouts in Berk/-ire, Trees torn up by the Roots, others torn iti
gone , Corn ſhared as if 'twere mown, Stazaford, Wadely, Newbery,

j antage. |

13. Bruſſels , Storm of Thunder and Lightning, demoliſhed many
Stately Buildings.

16. Doncaſter 'T. M. inter horam 2 & 3.mat. & 12. minntes.

29. Hague, weather fo dry, that all the Ground loſt by the Inundation

15 recovered.

31, Lime, Great Storm with Rain and Thunder, cauſed feveral Eb-
bings and Flowings in half an hours time.
At Everſtam in Oxforahire, Hailſtones and terrible Lightning tore up

Trees, &«.

June 3. Duzwich, Hail, ſuch as hathnot bin known for ſeveral years paſt.
14. Mortality of Cattle continues in the 97th parts of Scotland,
15. Durham, Hail, Thunder and Lightning, deſtroying Corn.

Tuly 11. Anjou, Dreadful Tempeſt, turned feveral Villages of that Pro-

Vince Top/ide-turwy.

Ayug.'6. Not far from Hereford, two Houſes conſumed by Lightn.

11. Plague rages much at A4lgrers.

15. Plague razes at Hale, 300 dying each day, Loyal Mercury 319.

16. Veſlel ridins at Anchor in Dartmouth Port , the Main Poſt Fired
by Lightning.

19, Comet in N W. 8 p. a Tayl of 3 Yards fere.

This Comet (een at Tunbridge, day 16.

Sept. 23. Graveſend Tilt-Boat caſt awaytand ſeverai drowned, ſo other

Boats on Thames.

27. Feavers up and down the Country about Vorthampton.
Oo. 5, Excerer, a Child bora with tewo Heads. Relation Printed by

Vil. Dazss. e
O44. 7, Deſtrutive Feaver , Mortal to many in 3 days, ſpecially in

tntcmperate Bodies.

12. So far our various Intelligence ceaſes, various indeed, if Thad
reported all; If Half this were true, tis enough to thew the juit notion I
have of the Superiors Þ Y.. What then if there be {carce three mifre-
ports ia the whole 2 I was going to ſay, I &aw the main to be Truth
may we not then ulcfully compare our Years of the Later Century, v2.
I562. with this 1682. upon the Evidence they give ? Is thereno {1militude
of Influence diſcernable of 1582. with our 1682 2 Our Collections are
more exuberant than Srow's , and good reafon, for he wrote a kind of
Annals, and We DUtaries, which are deſtined tor the Record of Influen-
ces. This Conlideration being allowed, compare Thoſe Years
together, as to Comets , Flouds, Lightnings , Earthquakes 3 the
Comfort is, we cani:or match them as to Peſtilences, the more
are we indebted to the Grear Moderatorz though fome parts of the
World, we fee, were vitited with Epicemick Diſtempers. We have
hitherto eſcaped. When we have made our Compariton, then we may
pleaſe to note the Cloe of the Year, 1681. and Entrance of 82. do pur
us in mind of That C/-at of the Parts of the Univerte, fo long ago, as
we have ſaid, obſerved by Thuanus in his time, when Holand , Germany,
Ireland, yea all Enrope, as is elſewhere noted, complain'd of Inundari-
ons 3 Some Conlpiracies Planecary are conhnd to a Province only, while
others again extend themſelves through the whoie Empire.


$ 12, Nov


— —— —_  I— —


500 Some Aſpetts paſt a Speculum | orthe next Fire d. Book III.


$ 12.Now though I would give occa{ton to none to act Stoeflez ,and make
himſelf ridiculous by vain Predictions ; Yet it muſt not be denyed , that
if a Year paſt and gone , be found upon ſuch reaſons to repreſent and re-
peat 2 preceding year ina Floud, in a Hurricane, Rural Earthquake,
Monſtrous Birth, or ſome ſuch rarer Event ; Why may not the next A
pect of our Supremes be interpreted for the Future, where we can find a
Precedent to compare it by ? I confeſs the demand is Reaſon, and to
ſhewlT like it, though Divinatory Philoſphy, unteſs grounded on a mani-
feſt experience,is rarely precarious nor can I ſay I pronounce upon a labori-
ous Examen oft particulars,yet in general,and by a confuſe Lighr,I may ſay
that the years of Q. El:zabeth, 39. &c. i.e. the year of our Lord, 1592,
93, 94. and part of 95. are a kind of Speculux?, whereby we may read
ſomething which may ſucceed 6 or 7 years hence, 4® 1692.93,94,95. h and
YN. being near the fame Signs, as in thoſe years of the Lueen. Not tharTl
would haveany make falſe Apprehenſions , and by the Multiplying Glaſs
of his Fanſie,think the years will be nothing but Tempeſtuous. c.But that
there may ſome of the ſame Events revolve again 1n thoſe Years, be it
Comet Huracane, or ſome Diſtemper as hath been already hinted,
$ 13. But what have we todo with the #zrd-Officers of a monſtrous Birth.
If that be not a Freak , a midwifery I much marvel: I confefs, 'tis uſual
with thoſe who advance a Principle co draw it, and ſtretch it with ſome
violence, to make it ſpeak to every Caſe; and 'tis a Fault, E.gr. to intro-
duce a Magnetiſmor a Vortex with our Learned Countryman G:lbert, or
Def-Cartes, when there isno need. We will ſee whether we are guilty
very ſuddenly, but we have ſomething to diſpatch firſt by way of peruſal
of our former Chapter concerning ſome Inſtances found there.
$ 14. As tothe Froſt, we have faid a little, crrc. pag. 447. &c. But by
way of Appendix we may know the other Froſts are in theſe Papers pro-
duced to whoſe Extremity Þ Þ did conduce.
$ 15. The Parelms we have met with before inthe Aſpe@ of h &, pag.
394.in a competentCatalogue,which no doubt,in ſome certain Situation at
leaſt, caſt their Luminous Influence upon the Celeſtial Imagery ; we find
it ſointhe Ir&, and we muſt admit it here. For as we have given a hint
in thoſe of May F at Zurich, A® 1523. that h d are concerned; fo we
wonder, if h % be not alike concerned, when of 15 Inſtances, 9 ſhall
be found in Amity with our Aſpect (not conſidering the Paraſclene) to
which we add 1614. May 13. at Prague, from Galviſrus, 4® 1622. Jan. 22.
& F+b.8. St. Nov. at Lintz again, Feb; 19, 20. (from Kepler.) Ar Rome,
March 11. from Argol, P andoſ-ſpher. At Lintz again, March 25. from
Kepler ; then April 14. 4® 1625. & Sept. 20. anno cod. laſtly, 1684. March
18. from Trig's Calender for the following year. When 9 I lay appear,
Any man may ſuſpect, though the Art will be to make it out, that our
Planets are not idle at that time. Forif @2, 04, G4 Q,V% tk inthe
foregoing Papers do preſent us with theſe appearances, what can be ſaid,
but that All have their own, and the Superiours, a ſuperiour ſhare. Who
can deny firſt, that: & 2 have a ſhare in the appearance on May 11. 1573.
& May 20. 1673. though at a hundred years diſtance, where © & are
near in the firſt, and & 2 in the ſecond. Or, at a lefs diſtance of 9 years
May 13. 1614. & May 18. 1623. when 2 ? (hall -be near in the one, and
I 2 in the other. Who can deny it, when he finds thoſe Famous Pare-


lia, A® 1 5 20. to commence under © V 2. as pag. 344. yea h too being -
r


not far from a Partile ©. Who cannot preſume,when he ſees a Croud of
theſe Mock-Suns, no leſs then Six,in 2 Months time, A? 1622. where we
find two, 4* 1625. the Year wherein the King of Polazd ſaw Six at a

time,


CO


_— Fn


0%


Chap. IV. Paraſcleae. H. can ſtone ts to deat. Cen, XN. TV.


time, as Deſ-Cartes was informed. I will give but one Provt more, 72.
when he ſees P/:/azata, the > being in 7, facing U, Fez. 4. 1622. and
Parelia, Fez. 8. when the faces h. Phaſiata and Parelia are akin. Well,
when He comes to joyn with Y. in Tas but now the oppoted him in 7 ,then
we find thele appearances paſim, in levers] Places, W mult needs be
concerned here, for Phaſmata is more then Parelia;, muſt needs be concer-
ned, I f&y, when he ſhews the Appearances two days together:

And what can be learned by Moon-light ; let no Man think we exclude
the Sun, projecting the Parel:uz, though we talk of Collateral Affiſtants.
The Analogy of the Paraſeleae will evince that, if it needed any fuch Ar-
gument to corroborate. Burt neither doth the » exclude her Adjutants,
for in that of A® 1554. Apr. 9. meation'd before > is in Owith ©, © not far
off, 3 2 near one another in the ſame Sign. And the Pazaſelene in Calr.
A® 1622, Feh. 8. ſeenar Heidelberg, had Þ.in 0 with@o, &' 2, hY, all
above board, which ſtrengthen the » by their ſeveral Imprefions, where-
by the may be able to make her Reflexion diſcernible. This I preſume
holds in thoſe alſo that are Alien to our Atpect, as that of 1551. May 21.
which belonzs not to RV, but hd, where the Phenomenon muſt
happen, while the » is in Tropical © with V, which if it doch nor ſtreng-
then the » inher Projection, I never ſaw the like. I don't go about to
give account of the Grux 4tra, taken notice of in the midilt of the J,
unle( I liv'd in Gezm-azy, where there is frequent talk of chem, becauſe
tis eaſily evaded by thoſe who will admit no Portents ; I regard the fim-
ple plain reſemblance of the © or 2 , and I accuſe thoſe Philoſophers that
impuceall to the Luminaries non-aftiſted, while they may , with as good
reaſon condemn me for being roo minute, Alais ! I do bur hint, there
are more Cauſes than one, I cannot, nor thall I be allowed, to
ſay all , only here is one pretty Problem: how comes it to paſs, that on
Feb. 4. 1622. of Keplers Diary, I find firſt, © in Quincunx with Þh, an
LO with Y, and a Fortnjghte after 2 in Quincunx with h , and 4
with Y , in this later there's Parelia, in the former there is Phaſmata.
Now Phaſmata , we have ſaid, is Parelia, and ſomewhat more.

v 17. Harmful and Prodigious Hail lies ſcattered up and down in the
foregoing Pages under © & , April 4. 154t. July 25. 1545.Under © 2,
A® 1565. July 24. Under & 2 , 4® 1573. June 20. 1661, March 9g. Un-
der © h ,A® 1680. June 20, 1682. July 28. Under h $ ,4® 1672. March 16.
1682. June 24. ag. & Ang. 18. 4* 1675. June 1. Under 2 % 1682.
Fane I5, 24. Laſtly, nnder % &, A® 1575. July 30. & 1602, June
30. See what h Y d cando when in Signs immediate one to the other,
and any two of them in a {tate of Co-arctation ; they caſt you Hail in a
Mold of 7, yea 9 Inches about, and the Scene lies in Ezgland too, that
we may ſee 'tis poſhble that Heaven ſhould ſtone us to Death.

$ 18. For Comets, Earthquakes, Peſtilences, we have troubled the
Reader too much, eſpecially if not yet convinced 3 but let me tell him
once for all, if he pleate to count a Score, yea, a halt ſcore of years, he
will find the Tallies agree. For if you view the two laſt Columns of
our Cometical Table, pag. 457. you ſhall find that to every twenty years
therein contained,there an{wers two or threeCometical Years,and we have
diſcourſed of them in thePages before. Add theOppoſitions,and then *twill
be every tenth year,and let any Man try whether the years 1512,1532, 52.
72, 92. 1612, 32, 52. 72. don't bring the Comets in the Neighbour-hood.

A* 1512. brought one in Marcy and April. 1513.brought another in Dec.

1532. bronght one in S-pt. 1533. another in fuze, p. 174. & 208, not
to omit that of 1531. in Aug.

1562, found you one 1n 1554. P. ..


I572


$02


Comet. Miſchief, Damp. Book. IL.


/
#


A® 1572. brought, and brought again a New Star , which is as good as
a Comet every inch of it.

1529. Lighted up that in July 10th. 1593.

_

1632. brought one like a Launce hanging over Barcelona.

1652. brought you a Comet in Dec. p. 149.

1672. brought one in Febr. at Dantz:ck.

Here is but one year Failer, and will not that be allowed to be poſſible,
when as much as our Planets appear, They will do little without the Reſt,
which inthe variety of the Heavenly Motion,may,l hope, furniſh you with
one Exception in above a hundred years, and who knows whether it were
an exception? For Hevelimu and the Poltfh Gentlemen forſook me inthe
years 1632. & 1672. till the Continuator of Galvi/zw furniſht me with
One from Barcelona; and the worthy Oldenburg, with that at Dantzick
in the TrarſaF. mention'd above pag. 279.

$ 19. Thus, will an exa&enquiry make our Aſpects to keen a true time
to the harſh Muſick of Earthquakes and Peſtilences, which I leave to
the purſuit of the Diligent Phyſitian, or other Naturaliſt.

S$ 20, The like I (ay, of ali the miſchief that we meet with (we have gi-
ven you a little Specemen, compact together in chis Chapter) that will
come to your hand ſcatrer'd up and down in theſe Papers or elſewhere. I
can't acquit the reſt, leſs durable Configurations ; but under Theſe I have
met with too much ; let me name them and take my leave ; Pernicious
Lightning that dallzes not with us , but ſtrikes dead, or petrifies us , or
fires our Houſe about our Ears. In Whirlwinds, Tuffozs , that turn up
the Roots of Trees, Foundations of Houſes , that take up Water into
che Air , and hurry down Men into the Waters depth , that ſet the
Heaven burz1ne over our Heads , and teach us the Faith of a Doomes-
day ; nay more, Theſe Planets ſometimes ſuffocate us ina Moment with
a Damp, and ſtrike us in common with a dire Apopiexie (of which by the
way there is extant one Story in Lycofthenes, A® 1554. which, becauſe the
Inſtances are rare, I would not loſe) yea otherwiſe that hare us, and 4;ftra#
us with Horrour ; (o that we ſuſpe&and fancy,nay ſometimes ſee Spectres
or Spirits in the Air, whoſePortion is Tempeſt and Brimſtone ; (o that ſo-
ber Perſons,when yet nothing can be ſeen, believe 'tis their Hour, Gemme,
ec. If I find Hh and Yengaged, I content my ſelf,that I know the under-
Cauſe, þy which the miſchief is done, which is not done without ſome
Inſtrument elevated to ſuch purpoſe. To inftance in the Damp only,
"Tis Lycofthenes tells us, that atMzlain, July 23. 4* 1554. a Vault having
been made for a Drain, 20 days after , wiz. Aug. 12. they went down to
take up the Centres, as they call them, that ſuſtained the Arch, the F;r#
Man, when he was half way on the Ladder, fell down Dead ; the S--
cond ventur'd , and at the ſame place fell down dead alſo; a Third, when
he came ſo far, encouraged the Standers by, and promiſed that he would
ferch up his Fore-Men, but inſtantly when he put his Head under the
Brick-work,down he fell ; ſo did a Fourth Man , when a FE:rfth Luſty Fel-
low went, and drew up one of the Dead, fo being emboldned, he deſ-
cended a ſecond time, and when he put his Head under the Arch, down
fell healſo, who being pull'd up preſently ( as they had provided for fear
of the worſt) and with much ado they brought to life. At this Fear
Gardan was preſent, and it muſt be added to the like relations above, pag.
153. & 154. where the Doctor's Damp, and the Seſſions at Oxford,
Zuly 4. 4® 1577. as they are to be attributed to PhY or ho© z fois
this of Mzlatz to be aſcribed to h % on one fide, h 2, h 2 on the
other, I need not reyive my old Notions, to tell you one was in The:

Pic


=


Chap. IV. Acies Cceleſtes. Croſſes found on Garments, avave us. $03


—


pick , the other in the Equinox. Finally, to compleat this head, Will
it be worth the while chat in thoſe two Damps of 4g, 4. 1679. pag. 153.
and another, 4 1665.in4pr:l,pag.215.that ourSupream was po{ited in the be
ginning of S inthe former, and w in the later, I leave it to fair opinion.

s 21. What hand our Planers have in the Axmies Arhereal, the Spi-
rits that muſter them, know right well ; be they Good, be they Bad Spi-
rits, Aſtrology is never the worſe, though the D:vel underſtands it , no
more than my Holy Fazth is depreciated , becauſe the Fiends #el:eve, Bur
be they Evil, or Good Spirits, as the Learned think, this I can ſay , that
the relation of Lzns and Horſe-Men , and Towns belieged , 7uly 3.
A? 15 34. from Peacer, if it be no Fancy , hath our @ of the Superiours
to favour it; and it is the firſt that is mention'd by Lycoftheres in the laſt
Century. Again, May,z7. 4* 1535+ formed Armies in a Serene Air
were ſeen, and Martial Noiſes heard, 'tis our & ſtill.

The Third Relation, Of#05. 1. 1547. belongs not to us, that is not to
this Aſpect, but whether it belongs nor to our Planets, when Þ is in the
Tropick , and 2 in the Equinox, betide other Obſervables, we cannor
here diſpute. A® 1553. June 5. at Goodurg, Phd, & hY, A® 1554,
Fune 11. five Miles from Vorrmberg, a noted Skirmith of Horſe-Men for
two Hours, put Men into a Doomiday Conſternation. + And the Aſpe&t
of Þh  (o Parties, fo Critical, will confirm any Inquirer in the belief
of the Story, belide the fair play they give us for two Hours together ;
and, (which I think I have reaſon to rake notice of ) in theſe two laſt In-
ſtances, there is mention of Showres of Bloud , at , or near the timeof
theſe appearances. (Prodigies oft-times draw in a Chain, and make a
Train.) Theſe appearances come again, Ave. 5. pag. 358, for I will not
take notice of what is reported, at 1o at Night, July 24. how Armies mer BY
and ſhouted once, twice and thrice z neither muſt I paſs them by,becauſe of oþ
the Identity of the Celeſtial Poſitions, which create the ſame Faith to
each one as to any. Now , Is it not a pretty chance that Three of theſe
Scenes ſhould be exhibited in one year ; If the Relations be true , as the
Conrents are rare, the # h Y. in the « #quizox comes as rare,

9 22, It appears by the Premiſes, that we are willing with other Phi-
loſophers to give ſome account of Rains of Bloud, We obſerved bur
now, that they happen ſometimetimes with other Prodigious Appearan-
ces, as of Three Suns, and the like. Bur, as Superſtirious as we are, we
labour not to give account of every ſtrange Circumſtance ; Nay, we ra-
ther think with good meaning People, that ſuch Phenomena may por-
tend ſomewhat, though reducible to a Natural Cauſe, by reaſon of thoſe
AmazingCircumſtances which attend.I Inſtance in Bloudy Crofles, A®1501.
which have fallen upon Mens Garments , and mark't them in ſeveral pla-
ces with Red ; there's no denying of the Fact, ſince Gardax ſtrives to fetch
the reaſon from the very Textureof the Garment, the Woot lying acroſs
to the warp. Butas Fromond notes, if we ſprinkle Bloud upon a Gar-
ment, the experiment will not prove ; wherefore he juſtly refers itto
what muſt be owned , the D:w1xe Finger pointing ar ſomething that is
ſhortly to ſucceed. For the Story ſpeaks not of a bloudy Showr, nor of
any Rain properly ſo called; Nay, they =_ of ſuch Figures found in
Veils of Churches, and Garments under Lock and Key , nor of Crofles
always of one Colour. What is the Ifſue 2 There followed a Plague, ſays
Fromond, after thoſe ominous Tokens, in the you 1503. Thelike is re-

rted for the year 746. And Famine,after thoſe of 4® 96g.Here Imay ay,
| fume he St. Ghriſoftome himſelf cakes notice of ſuch a Prodigy in his
time,upon which heTriumphed,as a Sign from Heaven of the Exaltation of
the Crucitied Zeſw, With him ſhall my Aſtrology Philoſophize, even tho'

ir


* 504 | Carteſius. Bloody P onds. Monſtrous Births: Book III


it ſhould prove that A® 1501. 15 34. were years that belonged to our be-
loved Aſpet. The like I may fay in ſome meaſure of che Fiery Hail
we have met with inthe Papers before, though comprehended within the
Clutches of our Planets. What follows is of lefler concern , bur
ſtrange ſtill ; Hail which was faſhioned like Spur-rowls,c-c. I commend
Garteſiuss Diligence , but I applaud not his De/jgn. Aſſuredly not all
Phenomena in Nature can be ſolved excluding Miracle ; or not, if you
will bear it, without Planets and Angelical Subſtances. And yet I
heartily allow that our Philoſophy , whatever it aims at, ſhoots
ſhort. Ponds or Fountains turned into the appearance of Bloud, may be
accounted for, by the Theory of Damps 3; (when the Earth being diſtur-
bed from the Heavens , is apt to fall into a quaking Fit) a diſpoſition to,
or a Conſequent of the Earthquake ; This perhaps may tinge the Water.
*Tis poorly done of Sorpaieng to deny whatſoever they cannot give ac-
count of; yea, or of others who ſet themſelves againſt received Truths,
and are forced to refuſe Authentick Authority. Heis hard beſet, who,
becauſe he does not believe any Portent in Comets, or other Athereal
Phaſmes, will queſtion Joſephus's Hiſtory of the taking of 7eru/alews.
Where He Inſtanceth in Monſtrous Births alſo, ſeen before the War, and
therefore in all probability portended it; the Heifer which broughe forth
the Lamb before the Altar , might ſigniftie that God was bringing ſome
ſtrange thing upon the Nation 3 Iown I cannot give any account of Such.

Tn Theſe Births there is more than a Planet.
$ 23. More than a Planet, that is, a Signal Exertion of God's abſolute
Power, contrary to the very Grain of Nature, or,which is all one to me,
© his own Decree , by which Nature is eſtabliſhed. More of which kind
occur in Writings, if Men have need. of Arguments to believe a Deity ;
But we deſcend to a Lower Sphere, Births that are he/zde, not againſt the
courſe of Nature , where the Species is ſafe : yet remarked with ſome
exorbitancy or Defe#cither to the pity or the affr1ghtment of the Beholder.
The Cauſes of theſe are aſſigned to be the Plaftick Virtue (be ſure) the
Imagination of the Mother, to which he ſhould add Ferrors, Aﬀeright-
ments, the Conſtitution of the Country, the difference of Dyet, and ,
which I did not ſuſpe& would be confeſſed, the Sidereal Influences, Schot-
tus, Lib. 5. Cap. 28. We cannot accuſe Schottus of unkindnels to the
reſt of the Stars, though he proves it only from the Moo. Some good _
men may think I have graſped too much already, and that I need not wade '
into this deep,I can ſay for this particular, I was not fond of it, nor was I
invited thereto by any Aſtrologer, not by Ptolermies Chapter de Monſtre,
T'it aſſure you, for in this place the Conception is to be regarded, and nor
the Nativity, or its proper Scheme, as Garden alſo notes. Bur, like the
Merchant that trades abroad,I was offex'd a Pennyworth, the years preſez-
ted themſelves to me , and bid me take them upon Suſpicion 3 what Suſ-
2 picion I had will appear preſently. I am not going to ſay that every ſtrange
* Birth, none excepted, was conceived under Þh Y. ; but I ſay the Contin-
gency is ſo frequent, that, it may be, it deſerves to be noted by thoſe who
underſtand better. Take notice that we refer to the Conception, and
then we begin with a young man in Arles , with f1x Fingers on each
Hand 3 15 years old was he when Yalericola ſaw him, in the year 1561.
whence he muſt be Bozn 4® 1546. and conceived in A® 1545. one of the
years ſpecified above, pag. 492.1 will not run back as far as the year 1446.
much leſs to the year 1274. where we meet with Births of deformed Hands
and Feet , but keep my {ſelf in w Bounds ; fo then, A*® 1537. not far
from Wurts, by the River Molds, Natus eft Infans fine Peaihus, Lyc. The
like again at Widensbach a Mile off Schleuſmmg , ending in a Pyramiaal Fi
gure,


+
*
 R_—_ - . *% 4 < TS.44 ell "43-4 bv A "xe. £24 >, Veg alt. 4 wa. 17


9. _—— — —— wc oO OC ee eee _


i TT. oe ROWE oldies 23a ('; . ES
(ia TEL 4 me 4 4 Fo HT SF ONS DIVEDS WC ha


——_________—©>_ — —— OD"— — <— ——


Pure, £1552. 16. Again , , i 1556. a Birth = the ſame Figure, 4lari-
2 ; t Baſs! 2 Man-Child dorn without Ears, Lye. A 1593.
a; Nonnneiterg with a Hare's Ear, Schenckins, A® 1503. An Infant with-
our Nottrils; Þ yes or Ears, Lye. A® 1554 at Stet:y, with an Arm co-
ing out of bis Ear, Loc: 1514. Mzy 10 A Child born withour 2
Note or Noſtri s, Gem. I lame year at Bononia, 2 Girl with four
Eyes b2ptized, and lived four Days, Amatu Luſitanus. A* 1554. A Head-
Jet Infant,” with Eyes in the Breaſt, Frakel, apud Lic. . 4 1615. Prelius
Satts grandis fone Caprte, only a Mouth and Teerhin the place of the Neck.
Anot! cr, A 14 G24 iN Italy, whoſe Eyes, and Note, and Mouth were ir-
the aforet(216 Pe Aldrreand, A®1 1544: at Milain, Nat fa ft Pucle Br.
cops, Cardan, Lib. XIV. de Far. £1514. in Mazch, the like, Rhodrgrs.
A* 1536: nt Zurich, an Juf. nr born with two Heads, Three Arms, end
ne many Fer, Loc. 553 . in Maa the like. Lye. A” 1515. in Ba-
arra, tht beg it 1pand down 26 Years = Pareus, 4* 1552. in Hs/-
rH * # 1536, 4 double Dirch jou: d togerhicr , though but one Heart bc-
riveen chem: Crew, The 1tKe A IFFF. my oT'. A 1593. Another at
"tererſtalt.. _ \agt ave we not-2 20 Inſtance in this very C hapter of rhe
» Miſc -arriage, for. io I may cail a Monſtrous Birth 2 Verily, if I hai
not mer with juch t pectacle among the Prents at the very Threthold of
Our any in tie) r150 3. thar year Being charged with a ſecond un-
fortunate Birth 3 if That nor met with two other (ad Prins at the year
Fo P-I5IA. asat _— 4; It I had ſomething of this Nature in Man
Or Beair the next 4, 4* 1523. and a ſtrange one befide 4 1525. Iz cu-
is Corpuſculs altnd preterea Corpus prependebat ad Genuaſque, who lived,
and was the wed up and dc "WH 1 Fairs 3o years after. If the next #,
1533. thews you a Monltrous Animal at leaſt, Lepuſculum cum o5to pe-
eirhus, gu3r 4%: | qit2:407 12 dorſo exatnebant. zel1de that, A* 1534. I meet at
tl:© fame Pirt! , £70 ſhort: livd Twi 1s joyned together in the ſame fleſhly
Co-2!ition as I mer with 30 years before in the dC 3 if yet again I find
ano! ner king of Pirth, 4*,1537. if between the year 1543. & 1544. we
neet with 3 Or 4 fuch monl trous Productions, (to proceed no further ) Is
It not enout. tomnake my poor Head teem with monſtrous Thoughts that
theſe Events belong to Þ Y: } ipecially where [»:a27zatron comes in 3 then
You lee | an n haun red with theſe Apparitions, and invited to follow them.
Now my Su{prctons vi Er theſe, fiuce Þ YX in the hour of their Engage-
ment (a {27 hour) produces fuck wondrous and monſtrous things i n the
Univerſe: why may not their diſturbance be w-1rerſal , and reach our
-Tumane Bocies , pur rhem into Ditorder , by God's Permitton of
Commiſiton , Ty boti1 ? Whether, we leave to Divines to deter-
wine. Content between | the Heavenly and Humane Bodies is manifeit 5
Conſent between « / th veal and Jnrmal Spirits is manifeſt ; fuch 2 \Wiud


SI


blows, the 1:0 oo 1s fected, as Tradition and Experi rence hat!) tatight EVEls
the V ulg2: e ANtEnt Phytitians every where proclaiming it , then hers
muſt He fomet bing 111 1:,becaute ris oblerved {ome years more tiiati « (ct re.
They quore -Rat \foj-;,noting theSicg/tan Women, Duodax: 4nr) tems

wes & þ 7 » LPT pe; : erifſe, Schottws, Lib, .Gap.2.Such a kind ofye:
w:s the :! te of Cueen £E!:24 2th ng Sir Richard Baker hath tiothd, 2d


the year 1615. in Crerwia, zy, as Galvifns hath noted. And donoc we per-
ceive ime vears robe more Fruitful, of thete Anomalies, than others;


we have 25 good 2 named them twice, ratlier than fail, 4* 1503. 1514,
1536, 1537, 52, 54, 56, 93. But furcher, the probability © this may ap-
pea: 1107 thee years, the fame Deordination is found m Ani
mai? , 4 , arcs, Caives, whote Examples [| forbear to mu!t!


L 6


oO


-


»


506 $, ome account of F renſies Book, IL


ons,


1 might add ſome Monſtrofity in Vegetables, of which here and thece Ex-
amples will occur. :

Butnow to come a little nearer, that I may explicate my ſelf; I conſi-
der the Fornaces of « Fgypt, andthe known manner of hatching of Chick-
ens, not by incubation of any Female, but by hiding them in Dung, whoſe
Warmth is ſupplyed by the Fornaces; and which is much to our purpoſe
ſeeing Warmth applyed by 4rt, can hard!y obſerve the even Hand, a
the gradual M of Nature, many of theſe Chickens proved Moz-
ws , redundant or defeQtive in Leg or Bill, &c. Now the Heats or

nfluences of theſe Years where our Planets are concerned, way be, nay
*is plain , «re unkind, unſuitable, if not intemperate 3 the only ſecond
ſe (as far as I underſtand that matter ) of Peſtilent Contagion : Where
I C5 no reaſon , there my Aſtrologers lead me not; as in the
caſe of Frres , notwithſtanding ſome unlucky co-incidences of the pre-
rended Effet of the Martial Aſpet. But where we have ſome Sem-
blance of Reaſon, ve propoſe our Thoughts, and ſubmit them to the
Learned.

$ 24. 'Tis noqueſtion but over the Body it hath Powfr = over Ina-
nimals; Metals will not run ſometimes ſo freely, and Buick: ver will not
work. Thoſe who are concerned gwondring at the Reaſon. We beſare, tell
them 'tis an Ape, to get Credit to our Principle. As for the Ani-
mal, Let any obſerve our Diary of © and Y. As many as fall into this
our Aſpe&, they preſent us with Aches, Diſtempers, Hyſterical Fits ,
in ſome ſpecial Signs at leaſt. But we have further to go: The Mind,

- and its Faculties are liable to be diſturbed by a Celeſtial Meetin
All grant it poſſible I remember, by the Intimacy of the' Facu
ty with the Spirit, and the Propinquity of that to the Body : Now if I
miſtake not,I have obſerved various Alterations and Exnotions of Spiritun-
der Þ %, Viſible in Melazcholly,Griefs, Diſtr a&tons,Phrenſies,Lunacies, &-c.
Not that the Stars cauſe Frenſie or Diſtraction, Heaven forbid ; but be-
cauſe our Minds, Sickly, and Crazy , and Diſtemper'd by our natural
Weakneſs, or willful ſelf-Corruption, Antecedent to the Celeſtial Ener-
gy, the ſecret judgment 'of God, not interpoling are not able to ſtand un-
der the harſher temptations of the Planets. This being the true {glution
of crazed Intelle&s, as the Midſawmer Moon, as they call it , our Heart,
like a fore part, cannot endure to find it ſelf touched , or treated ſo rude-
ly by Natural Agents, who have no power to check themſelves, but at
according to the utmoſt of their Strength. I have no other proof bur
what is drawn from Obſervations of the Weekly Bills, which though I
know , looks as Baleful 'as the fight of a SpeQre in a dark Night wal-
King over the Graves of the Dead ; yet even the Melancholly Secrets of
Nature may be pryed into, if perhaps we can reach them. Thoſe unhap-
py Felo's de-ſe,that make away themſelves by what kind ſoever ; I do ſul
pe are the worſe in the Sence now explained , through the Potency of
the configuration 3 as the Phyfitian knows the Delirium of his Feavouriſh
Patient is heightrned by the Intemperance of the Weather. And this is
a Demonſtration to them who eafily Infer , that if the Celeſtial Bodies
are the Cauſes of the one Intemperance, They have ſome unhappy ſhare
m the other, the Intemperance of the Planets. . But what can be obſer-
ved from the Bills of Mortality, where the Periods of Men are 0zly
mention'd ?- You1do well not to ask. You grantit ſeems , that there are
ſome Fatal Diſeaſes of the Mind there recorded. Then, ay I, the Peri-
ods of thoſe Perſons betoken the herzght of their Paſſion under which
they labour and ſtruggle, and are throws at laſt ; I obſerve then that
many times DiſtraRions and Lunacies from ſeveral Quarters meet [> the

rave,


_ —_—_—C_
ul ET


Chap. IV. Lunacies, Impoſtures, F alſ el Trophets.


Grave ; the ſame Week which mentions a poor Melancholic that hath
laid violent hands on himſelf, ſhall mention the Difeafe of a Lunatick,
and another who dyed with Grief ; and let no man call me cruel, I pity
them as much as any. But I muſt confeſs I reckon [mmoderate Grief , un-
der which Head too many are found in the Bill, to be a kind of Difra-
ion; That Grief, Lunacy, and the Melancholly Deſperado are carryed
forth in the ſame Weekly Sheet ro be buryed. And whatif we ſhall
meet ſometimes, not only #-ore than a {ingle Inſtance in one Week , but
a ſad pompous Succeſſion of (uch fatzl Exits, for a Month or more together.
Thus in the year 1680. in the laſt Week of March we find one (elf-mur-
therer with the Knife ; the firſt Week of April by Poyſon ; the ſecond,
by the Nooſe, the week which is dated (rom the 20th. day, tle Noofe,
or Fatal Knot ; from day 27. the like, with a Lunatick belide. From
May 4. Grief, and che Halter; from 11, the ſame, with a Lunatick, yea
from the 18th, the ſame again. The Succeſſion holds entire for one Month
together, and if it had not been dif-continued by a fingle Intermifſion, ic
had held out Two. I cannot deny, but that other Aſpe&s may ſometimes
be unhappy , but I chance to obſerve it firſt in Þ V 3 the Potency, the
Name of that great Congreſs call'd me to look toward ſome materiate
Cauſe, if Religion and Philoſophy wilt bear the Specularion : I rook no-
tice of two Lunacies in the Diary of © 2? in the Month of Febr. 1682.
two together ſtru:k me, I referr'd them with a reſerve notwithſtanding,
for a more ſtri& enquiry to the Co-incidence of that Solar Aſpedt to Þ
Y.I am ſorry I am ac a loſs for the Mortality-Bills even of that Year ; but
in the year 1681, I have Inſtances from May 17. of killing Grief; from
May 24. of felf-murcher 3 from May 31. of Grietand ſelf-murther; from
Fane 21. Lunacy, and felf-murther. Afterward, theſe black Exits came
not {o thick, till OFober 18. there we meet with all theſe, (elf-murther ,
Grief,and Lunacy ; ia the next week,OFover 25.4 Lunatick again,the firſt
ofNov.ſelf-murther. WhatRule can we give,when we may fear,and prevent
( I ſpeak to thoſe who have Catholic or Univerſal Charity) ſuch fatal
Events? Conſider, to keep to our Aſpe&t, when HY arein d, when a
third Planet joins with either , or approaches the Equinox, or is frongly
poſited (Suppoſe the Plezades) eſpecially if & 2 & , oneor more be Re-
rrograde : Theſe, or moſt of thele are found in the Inſtances premiled,
The laſt Fortnight of May, and the firſt Week of June, h Þ were
newly entred ; a third Planet, 2 forſooth applies to h, another Planer,
© applies to Y, © is ſtrongly poſited in the mid-Week atleaſt, G9 2 are
together, which is not uſual, Retrograde. I ſhould have mention'd the


Tropick as well as the Equinox, and then I have given the Rudtments *
of a Rule at leaſt , which I could confirm, but 'twill be more ſatisfation |


to an Inquirer to believe his own Eyes.

And what ſhould I meddle with Diſcords, Tumults, Seditions, Wars,
Rebellions, Treaſons , Impoſtors, Sectaries, Falſe-Prophets. *Tis con-
feſled-in The/7,that all theſe proceed from aDiſeaſed Mind and ungovern'd
Paſſion ; a Zeal that cannot be juſtified, Pride, Envy, Wrath, Heady,
Hair-brain'dTemper , which the Spirit exprefly tells us, help to make
Dangerous times; we mention none , becaule our deſign is to Edifie not
co provoke ; to poſlels the more Learned, who have great advantages over
others tobe Sober, Virtuous, and Sons of Peace, upon the account that
the contrary Party, Enemies of Peace , have Whimfies in thetr Heads,
voularneo ui, as Theodvet confidently exprefles himſelf comeerning no leſs
a Man than A7:5,(ro this day admired by ſome Anti-Ecclefiaſtiques, ) they
are betwatled jn their Ulnderſtandings , tainted with a Spirit of Madzeſs,
and Dictates of a private Spirit , unhappy here, whatever they ſhall be


hereafter,


%


—_— rg eh AFR oe non ne. A,


———  —


ON


08


+


”


Sober Admonitions to the Concerned. Book I I ;


_—  — —
_


hereafter. Now 'tis pretty to fee if we take a Chronology (Gal/wrs
ſuppoſe) and obſerve the Occurrents of this kind for the moſt part of the
Years before ſpecified; and he ſhall find ſome enterrcainment as to what is
mention'd , as if the Planets were make-bates, whereas the Fault is in us,
who will not ſuffer our Inclinations,Prejudices, Poſlefiions, how unhappily
ſoever bent,to be cured byGod'sGrace,through ſound moral principles,and a
HolyReligion,beingProud and ſelf-conceited;condemning others, buc (illily
never {0 much as ſafpeRing our (elves, or Parts, though perhaps ignorant,or
ill-natur'd,than w hich nothing can be more pitiable.It will be ſaid chatTrou-
blesare ſeen in moſt Countries every year. Yea,but they do not break our
afreſh every year 3 Seeds of Diſturbance are ſown by the Enemy , and
they live in our Hearts, a 7a,k Soy! ; but as we ſee that Graſs grows all the
Spring, yet a warm day or two makes itgrow an end; fo isit here : A
Configuration may indiſpoſe an infirm mind, and caule it, if not checked
to run zealouſly to its Ruine. To conclude therefore,I am aware that ſuch
is the Variety which may be found by our curious Enquirer, that the Per-
ſon who puts himſelf to the trouble, may reſolve, that This is bur a Fanſie,
(like that of the Year ClimaQterical , which hath much to be ſaid Pro
& Con, So many dying. oz that year, ſo many dying w:thout its reach.)
Now, though under Correction I think there may be more in it than fo,
becauſe the Doctrine is conſequent to the Premiſes , and becauſe we have
other Tantamount Configurations accuſable on the ſame Score, to render
an account of other Years, which are Forein to the preſent, (and This
the Opinion for the Climarerick cannot prerend to) yer I will not ſickle.
In the mean time, tt will be good Counſel if we can take it, that we def
cend into our ſelves, diſcern our own Spirits, and ſo cauteloufly, with ſuch
Circumſpection, that nothing from within, or without may irrevocably
precipitate us 3 as a prudent temperate Man fo orders his Body, that the
moſt Critical times of the Year, Spr:ng nor Autumn may call his Life in
queſtion : This thould be preach'd to the Mole in a Loyal-Field Con-
venticle, and Prayer before the Sermon that hey may have Ears to hear :
then will it be true, That a wiſe Man will havze Dominion over the Stars,

S 25. And thus far for the Energy of the Aſpects Planetary, Simple
and Complicate , which laſt Member required a diſtin&t Chapter by ir
ſelf, but the Intricacy of the Speculation is ſuch , that it will not come
ro its turn, as yer, to be the Subject of our Diſcourſe. The Zodiack and
its Signs and their Degrees perhaps with the Equinoctial, the Two Tro-
picks, the Horizon, the Mer:atan, &c. are to be premiſed, with all thoſe
Glorious Lights hanging in the Blew /Vei! of the Heavenly Tabernac!s,
though we have not lefr our good Reade to ſeek, but have ſhewn him
that there «, and ut be complication of the Aſpect even there, where
we ſeek for the Nature of the Single and Incomplicate Afpe&. Bur is
all this Paper ſpent, ſays my Friend, and am I never the near ? So ſome-
times Ignorance'is diſ-appoinred, The Man thought that fo many Load
of Bricks would Build his Houle , and they were all ſpent in laying
the Foundation ; here's ſome Foundation laid, I hope 3 to much we are
thenearer. Well, hut we have ventur'd in our Diſcourſe to give you
ſome Rule from the Lunar Atpects , which we call Izfalible , as far as a
Ser of Years could vouch for Infallibility. Bur if you will be impatient,
and have me fore-ſtall the Second Part, becaule there is no ſuch Book
yet in being, and Age begins to faint, be pleaſed to take notice; what we
have ſaid before, that the Planets lying in. 77meatate order, well a:/tri-
buted through 4 or 5 Signs, are apt to bring Warmer and Moiſter Wea-
ther, then when they are diſcontinued, or lye-in a lefler Arch: Sczcopaly ,
though Planets lye in continued order , and well diſtributed, they ſhall


_— —


Chap. IV. A Taſtof ſome Rules Progn. for « Choſe 509


ſeldom bring any Moiiture, without Pof Y, ſee pag. 75. L. 10. or rather,
one of the Superiours, together with ſome Lunar Aſpect. Thirdly,when
the Planets are diſcontinued, that is to ſay, above 3o degrees diſtance,
the Weather is the Cooler , the Dryer, the Wholfomer, a Northerly
Wind is apt to biow in the Summer, and Froſt in Winter. When the
Planets lye continued, without any # irom a Superiour Planet, if the Sun
riſes firſt, the Morning is the Colder, if it riſes laſt, the Warmer. For
Summer , the nigher » comes to the Planets well diſtributed, in the
Northern Hemiſphere, the Warmer is the Day 3 the further it receeds
from them inthe Southerz Hemitphere, the cooler is the day.

The Planets muſt lye in Six Signs, or 5, or 4, or 3, or 2, or I.

When th2 Seven Planers lye in Sx Signs, for you muſt know they
cannot lye in Seven, (the Seventh being oppolite to ore of the Six, muſt
therefore be reduced to ir.) Ir cannot well be cold,but it will be Cloudy,
ſuſpicious. If they are compriſed in 5 Signs, which way foever, they have
their Weight, to Warm, Clondy and commonly Wet Weather.

If in Four Signs, obſerve chele Numbers in the Margin, 'tisno Stega- xy Con
nography, it comes not from Trithemms, it denotes only the number and wo
the order of the Signs poſſeſſed. Example, in V 3.in S 1.in YU 1.in S
2. crinV1i.S1.1 2,98 3.

If in Three Signs, mark the numbers in the Margin. Il. S;

IF in Two Signs, mark the numbers afhigned. If I fay you attend 87
to the Planets Poſition under the Conditions before expreſſed, of Diſtance 3 ?
and Diſtribution, it will not repent you. You will ſee that you arein a * * 5
Prognoſtick way, and that there wants nothing bur a lictle Obſervation,
to bring itto perfection, all the Exceptions or Failers will Iye, upon the
account of Y. , and the Planet engaged to him, or immediate to him,
for VL and h immediate, or Y I, if they lye firſt or laſt in order eſpecially, > 5
they defeat us of our Moiſture. Neither muſt we be roo ſevere with
theſe Rules, bur reckon it ſufficient if we ſee the Effect one of the Days,
though the Rule holds for ewo, the Rule being nakedly propoſed, without
any Ties or Reſtrictions, which are neceflary ſometime, ſeeing the Quar-
ters of Heaven are not alike dCi{poſed, witnets the Month of March, which
is commonly dry footed.

There remains now nothing but the Readers Favour to glance upon the
Errata , which will drup in a Work of this Length, and uncouth Argu-
ment. Yea, before he caſts [iis Eye thither, let him pardon the grand
Erratum, the Bulk of the Book.


Sanftus, Santtus, Santus, Domus, Deus Sabaoth,
Pleai ſunt Gelr c> Terra Gloria tua


Hojzna in Excelfis,


M 6s | Recop-


x


RECOGNITION.


| fie Author willing to rid himſelf of his Cumberſome Papers, com-
mitted ſome part of them to the Preſs above ten years fince, and it
will be allowed by all fair-{poken Perſons , that we may rectihe an opini-
on, under a longer experience. What hinders, but that he may take no-
tice of an Inſtance or two, which are to be read cum gran Sals, or to fave
that Charge , to be retracted. The firſt of theſe, concerns prodigious
Showrs of Duſt and Aſhes, which I ſee fince, are not generated in the
Air, as pag. 2. is reported , but elevated thither. Neither do I know,
whether it be the more probable Opinion that the Frog is generated in the
Airy Region. The Thunderbolt alſo, mention'd v9 2. Cap. 2. I have
been taught, is not any body aggregate of Earthly Particles, but only the
dint of Harmful Lightning, call'd by that Name by the Vulgar, notwith-
ſtanding ſometimes, it mult be granted that Stones have fallen from the
Clouds. Burt the chiefeſt Contradiction that requires a Conciliator, is,
that we make ove colder than Saturn, pag. 29. and yet after make
him a Warm Star, pag. 327. 'tis the hardeſt Word in all the Scroul of
Heaven, and yet if we look on it, it is writ in Capital Letters.. 'Tis
hard to fay, I confeſs, that Y is the Coldeſt , when he is nearer than H,
and to ſight, greater. So there we eat our Words , and let h be the
Coldeſt, for his remote diſtance , and his leſs Diameter. All this while
we ſpeak of Cold in a Comparative Senſe, not denying, but what is
comparatively Cold, may be abſolutely Warm. So Hh himſelfis Warm
to0: and the Cold we impute to a ſtate of Deſertion, for reckon H 's di-
ſtance as high as you pleaſe, in d to the © in Summer Signs, unleſs in ſtate
of Deſertion, he's a warm Planet. Tis but a folly to diſſemble, in all
Cold Winters V as his part as well as Þ , and the moſt Prodigious
Winters ſucceed under their mutual Aſpe&ts. So let Y be the next Cold
to h. Nay, I muſt ſpeak all; whoſoever deals in Prognoſtick, ſhall
find V to be a Reſiſter of Moiſture, more than any z and how ſhould
be dryer than h, and notwithſtanding have no Title to be eſteemed Col-
der , let greater Men determin : Sure all diſtinct minute Prognoſtic
ſuppoſeth V to be dry and cool, and the Planetary Influence acknowledges
it,as:is remarked in the foregoing Treatiſe.


oo —


Addend, Pag. 377. lin. 33.


Of this we have had too late a Proof in the fad Floud at Hambureh,
Dec. 7. 1685. where there is a notable Co-incidence of h &, fo poſited
with © # in the other moſt critical place, the cloſe of 7, which we
have wiſhed thoſe Countries to obſerve, if they pleaſe.


An Advertiſement.


He Trueſt and Beſt approved Weather-Glaſſes , both Baroſcopes and Ther-

mometers are accurately made by John Warner, a Maker of Mathema-

#ical Inftruments at the Eaſt end of Portugal Row, aear adjoining to Lincolns-
 Inn-Fields, Lonaos.


Frrats.


—_ —


( Cup. IV.


#


—
—— ——


CO EAA, oat —


T aſt of ſome Rules Prozn. for a Cloſe.


$09


Page 42. H I
% read L,
ages 2
d d,

45-1. 34. Þ Frery, being,

59. |. 20. expedt.


60, |. ©. Fatal Paral,
7d, 1.45. no leſs than XLI.
64. 1. 23. and N pare,
id. I. 24. Vypart of
74. 1. 32. Competence,
20.1. 24. Muſical ill —
|. 20. Chap XV,
81. |. 10. per-—
82, 1. 8. Tueſday,
02. |. 28. ts.
ICl. |. 27. were,
10s. |. 19. Winchelſey,
Ic7. þ ab. Mnvardvc.
II,


\ 20

32 . oppoſcrio.
2 . 2 oQr "Jo
2
.ult


21 le.

25. Cohxiion.

» 35 \ Velocity.

» 37 . of morion.
I.tl. $ 42» 15.

1 44. 1.16. irritated.
145. |. 10, Damp Jily 4

L. 14. 1577.

I. 15. © &C. at
I6 1, -- 9 19. Bedford,
163. - - APY, » 1670.
165. |. 32. actuate,
174. 1. 6, Snautty.

175. |. 12. 1522+

S 30. Traders.


Ou...


#3


ERRAT A.


; Page


175. I. 3 i, Elbe.

I. alt, 1518.

1b, N, England,
178. |. c, Bode Wer.
201. I, 40. Empyreuma.
211. |. 15, Cables,
215el. 10, 1532,


3b 3c. produce,

. 1-27. certa Rom,
ps; 2. I 5, may.
» I. 13, Drcught,
I. 3 25. Sentiment.
l. 25. wary.
|. 23. Topical.

l. 31. gele,and.

I. 45+ © in Conj—
I. 51. dele the
|
|
l,
Is


www nD 0


49


« 39. Wapentahe.
« 44+ Contr alled.
1. dicunt,
25. © 7. Þ,. M28.T7,
7. h ins princ,
Is Jan, 18. alugs C—
- 1535 Sept. 25. lege 23,
3. July, lege June,
ro Lyc. add Stow,
1544. lege 1541.
1545. ) Þ- OY in.
345+ 1559. lege 1555.
1556, lege 1556,
Nov. 10, YOY In Io
Nov. 20. VONs
1557. add Sejt. 7.
45, 1585, © in fin. þ.
347.1. 14-2 Ny, add þ4 in
-8. 1.
lege of <oin'd.
384.1. 34. ina.


4)


'49


dele Dext, Marg.


————


Page
l. 39. ad lege at.

394-1. 35. one, lege ſome.

I. 37. dele of,

395- |. 53. 1525. add, where
the 11s 1s decircinared
with more than one Afſ-
onus ſtanr.

34. Trangums,

. 21. Gondomar's,

« 48.17 1s.

« 27. aggravates,

. 19. then thar.

» 39. aMMOniac.

- 37. immediately.

» 11, Bratum,

+» Z7. Sore.

I. 40. why is it not.

I. 44. digeſt.

|. 52, Mafter, lege after.

452. I. 30, 31. boatum, add,as
has been ſaid.

453-1. 36. Verilly if.

454. |. 16 were.

455+ I. 41. fo the, lege ſome

458. 1. 28. thing, /ege thus.

450. |. 9. prorated.

404 I. 31: iflued forth.

50. 1. 19. Midnighr Officers.
I. 20, Midwifry, lege
Caprice, .

$OlI. |. alt. 1562, lege 52.

502. |. 3. 1529. lege 92.

504. Valeriola.

50s. 1. 0, dele Birth.

Genua uſque. +

506. I. 35. at the Midſummer
Moon.

507. I. 34. with the Pleiades.

508. I. 3. Specified, yea,
from our Bl Sayiors time,


) 23 I


+ + + ++ 49
ho mw C(
COSI v3 vw


- . .
nm res 4 pod woe poo Hook heed


n vv 10 ov


that's more,


Books


A ns


Books Printed for Obadiah Blagrave at the Black Bear 17
St. Pauls Ghurch-Yard.


Odor Gell's Remains 3 being ſundry pious and learned Notes and Obſervations on the

whole new Teſtament, opening and explaining all the difficulties therein; wherein

our Saviour Jeſus Chriſt is yeſterday, to day, and rhe ſame for ever. Illuſtrated by that
Learned and Nekious Man, Dr. Robert Gell, ReQor of Mary Aldermary, Lindon, in Folio.

Chriſtian Religions Appeal from the groundleſs prejudice of the Scepricks ro the Bar of
common Reaſon 3 wherein is proved that the Apoſtles did not delude the World, 2. Nor
were themſelves deluded. 3. Scriptute matters of Faith have the beſt Evidence. 4. The
Divinity of Scripture is as demonſtrable as the being of a Deity. By Fobn Smith, ReQor
of Sr. Mary in Colcheſter, in Folio.

The Caſe of Miniſtring at the Communion Table when there is no Euchariſt, ſtated and
diſcuſſed ; upon occaſion of a Treatiſe entituled, Pariſh Churches turned into Conventicles, (5c.
together with Tome preliminary Refle&ions made upon two Papers in anſwer to that Trea-
riſe ; in 4®.

Weighty Reaſons for render and conſciencious Proteſtants to be in Union and Communi-
on with the Church of England,and not to forſake the publick Afcmblics ,as the only means
to prevent the growth of Popery 3 on ſeveral Sermons on 1 Cor 1.10.That ye all ſpeak the ſame
things, and that there be no diviſions ameng you, but that ye be perfely joyned together in the ſame
Mind, and in the ſame Judgement, on Heb. 10.25. nor forſaking the aſſembling our ſclves to-
gether, as che manner of ſome is 3 in 82 large. :

The Pſalms of King David paraphraſed , and turned into Englifh Verſe, according to the
common Metre, as they are uſually ſung in Pariſh Churches, by Miles Smith ; in 8® large.

The Evangelical Communicant in the Euchariſtical Sacrament, or a Treatiſe declaring
who is fit to receive the Supper of our Lord, by Philip Goodwin; in 89,

A Fountain of Tears, emprying it ſelf into three Rivulers, viz. Of Compun&ion, Com-
paſſion, Devotion 3 or Sobs of Nature ſanRified by Grace, Languaged in ſeveral Soljloquies
.and Prayers upon various Subje&ts, for the benefir of all thar are in Afﬀflition, and parricu-
larly for theſe preſent times, by Fobn Featly, Chaplain to his lare Majeſty.

A Courſe of Catechifing, or the marrow of all Authors as have Writ or Commence
on the Church Carcchiſm 5 in 82, |

A more ſhorter Explanation of the Church Catechiſm , fitted for the meaneſt capacity ;
in 89. price 2 &. by Dr. Combar,

The true bounds of Chriſtian Freedom, or a Treatiſe, wherein the Rights of the Law
are vindicated, the Liberties of Grace maintained ; by Sam. Belton, D. D

Fons Lacrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears 3 from whence doth flow England's complain,
Feremiah's Lamentation, paraphraſed with Divine Medirtarions, by Fobn Quarles, in 89.

Gregory Father Greybeard with his Vizard pull'd off, or News ſrom the Cabal, in ſome Re-
fle&ions upon a late Book, entiruled, The Rehearſal Tranſproſed after the faſhion it now obtains 3
in a Letrer to Sir Roger L'Eſtrange ; in 8*. :

A Reproof to the Rehearſal tranſproſed in a diſcourſe to its Author, by Dr. Parker; in 8®

A good Companion, or a Meditation upon Death, by William Winſtandly; in 129.

Sele& Thoughts, or choice Helps for a Pieus Spirit , a Century of Divine Breathings for
a Raviſhed Soul, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jeſus : To which js added the Brea-
things of the devour Soul, by of. Hall, Bifhop of Norwich; in 122.

The Remedies of Diſcontent, or a Treatiſe of Contentation ; very fit for theſe preſent
times 3 by 7of. Hall, Biſhop of Norwich, in 129.

The Curtezan unmask'd, or the Whoredoms of Fexebe! painted to the Life, withan An-
tidote againſt them, or Heavenly Julips tro cool Men in the Fever of Luſt ; in 8»,

The admired piece of Phyfiognomy and Chyromancy, Martapoſcopacy , rhe Symmetrical
proportions, Signal Moles of the Body fully and accurately explained, with their natu-
ral and predi&ive fignifications both ro Men and Women, being delightful and profirable ;

with the Subje& of Dreams made plain : whereunto is added the Art of Memory 3 by
Richard Saunders; in Folio : Tlluſtrated with Curs and Figures.

Obſervations upon Military and Political Aﬀairs z Written by the moſt Honourable George
Duke of Albermarle ; in Folio: Publiſhed by Authority.

Modern Forrtification, or the Elements of Military ArchiteQure , praRiiſed and deſigned
by the lateſt and moſt experienced Ingeniers of this laſt Age, Italian, French, Dutch and Zn-
gliſh ; and the manner of Defending and Beſfieging Forts and places: with the uſe of a
Joynt Ruler or Se&8r,for the ſpeedy deſcription of any Forrification; by Sir Zonas Moore Kr.
Maſter Surveyor.

A General Treatiſe of Artillery of Great Ordinance :. Writ in Italian by Tomaſo Morety of
Breſcia, Ingenier 3 firſt to the Emperour, and now to the moſt ſerene Republick of Venice,
tranſlated into Engliſh, with Notes thereuppon ; and ſome addition out of Frexch for Sea-
Gunners. By Sir Fonas Moore Knight : With an Appendix of Artificial Fire-works of War
and Delight ; by Sir Abrabam Dager Knight, Ingenicr : Illuſtrated with divers Cuts,


The


Books ſold by Obadiah Blagrave:


The Art of War, and the way that it is at prefenc prattiſed in France, both for Horſe

and Foor ; in Three parts; in 8* large. |

' A Mathemarical Compendium , or uſcful Praftiſes in Arithmetick , Geometry and Aftro-
nomy, Geography and Navigarion, Embatteling and Quarrering ef Armies, Fortifications
and Gunnery, Gauging and Dialling ; explaining the Loyerthius with new Judices, Napers,
Rhodes or Bones, making of Movements, and the Application of Pendulums : With the
proje&tion of the Sphere for an Univerſal Dial. By Sir F3nas Moore Knight,

The Works of that moſt excellent Philoſopher and Aſtronomer Str George Wharton. Baro-
ner : giving an account of all Faſts and Feſtivals, obſervations in keeping Eaſter ; Apotelef-
ma, or the Nativity of the World of the Epochs and Ere uſed by Chronologers : A Dif-
courſe of Years, Months, and days of Years ; of Eclipſes and Effes of the Criſes in Di-
ſeaſes : Wirth an excellent diſcourſe of the names Genius and Species , efficient and final
cauſes of all Comets 3 how Aſtrology may be reſtored from Morinas ; in 8* large, cum maltis
altls. |

The praQtical Gauger, being a plain and eafie method of Gauging all ſorrs of Brewing
Veſſels ; whereunto 1s added a ſhort Synopſes of the Laws of Exciſe : The third Ediricn
with Additions : By John Mayne.

A Table for Purchaſers of Eſtates, either Land or Houſes ; by William Leybourne.

Leyborn's Platform for Purchaſers and Builders; in 8® large. |

Sir Jonas Monre's Arithmertick, with new Mathematical TraQs, in 8? large.

Blagrave's Introduction to Aſtrology, 1n three parts; containing the uſe of an Epheme-+
rides,and how to ere&ta Figure of Heaven ro any time propoſed ; alſo the fignification of the
Houſes, Planers , Signs and Aſpeds ; the explanation of all uſeful rerms of Art: With
plain and familiar Inſtra&ions for rhe Reſolution of all manner of Queſtions, and exempli-
fed in every particular thereof by Figures fer and judged. The ſecond treaterh of EleRtions,
ſhewing their Uſe and Application, as they are conſtirured on the Twelve Celeſtial Houſes,
whereby you are enabled ro chooſe ſuch crimes as are proper and conducible to the perfe&ion
of any matter of bufineſs whatſoever. The Third comprehendeth an abſolure remedy for
re&ifying and judging Nartivities; the fignification and portance of Direfions ; wich new
and experienced Rules rauching Revolutions and Tranfirs, by 7o. Blagrave of Reading Gent.
Studenr in Aſtrology and Phyfick ; in 8* large. . ; |

Blagrave's Aſtrological Praiſe of Phyſick 3 diſcovering the true way to cure all kinds of
Diſeaſes and Infirmities which are naturally incident to the Body of Man, in 8* large.

Gadbury's Ephemerides tor thirty years, 20 whereof is yer to come, and unexpired, in 4*.

Philoſophy delineated, conſiſting of divers Anſwers upon ſeveral Heads in Philoſophy,
firſt drawn up for the ſatisfation of ſome Friends, now expoſed to publick View and Ex-
amination ; by William Marſhal, Merch. London; in 8* large.

The Natural Hiſtory of Nirre, or a Philoſophical Diſcourſe of the Nature, Generation,
place and, artificial Extrattion of Nitre , with its Virtues and Uſes, by William Clark, M.
Dof#orum Lodinenſis,

The Sea-mans Tutor, explaining Geometry, Coſmography and Trigonometry, with re-
quiſite Tables of Longirude and Latirude of Sea-ports , Travers Tables, Tables of Eaſting
and Weſting, Meridian miles, Declinations, Amplirudes, Refrafions , uſe of the Compals,
Kalendar, meaſure of the Earth Globe, uſe of Inſtruments, Charrs, differences of ſayling
eſtimation ofj a Ship-way by the Log, and Log-Line Currents. Compoſed for the uſe of
the Mathematical School in Chriſts Hoſpital, London 3 his Majeſties Charles IL. his Royal
Foundation. By Peter Perkins Maſter of that School.

Mr. Nich, Culpeppcrs laſt Legacy, lefr and bequeathed ro his deareſt Wife for the publick
good, being the choiſeſt and moſt proficable of thoſe ſecrers, which, while he lived, were
locked up in his Breaſt, and reſolved never to publiſh them ill after his Death , containing
ſundry admirable experiments in Phyſick and ;Chyrurgery, The fifth Edition, with the
Addition of a new Tra& of the Anatomy of the Reins and Bladder, in 82 large.

. Mr. Nich. Culpeppers Judgement of Diſeaſes , <alled Symoteca Uranica ; alſo a Treatiſe of


* * Urine, A Work uſeful for all rhar ſtudy Phyſick, in 8® large.


Mr. Nich, Culpeppers School of Phyfick, or the] experimental pratiſe of the whole Arr,
wherein are contained all inward Diſeates from the Head to the Foor , with their proper
and effeual Cures : ſuch Dyer ſet down as ought to be obſerved in ſickneſs arid in health,
in 8* large.
. The complear Midwifes practiſe enlarged, in the moſt weighty and high concernment of
the Birch of Man, concaining a perfe& Direftory or Rules for Midwifes and Nurſes; as alſo,
a Guide for Women in their Conception, Bearing and Nurſing of Children , from the ex-
perience . of our Engliſh, viz. Str Theodorer Mayrn, Dr. Chamberlain, Mt. Nich. Culpepper
with the Inſtructions of the Queen of France's Midwife to her Daughter, in 8* large. If
Iuſtrared with ſeveral Cuts of Braſs. ;
Blagraves (uppliment or enlargement to Mr. Nich. Culpeppers Engliſh Phyſitian, containigg
a deſcription of the form , place and time , Celeſtial Government, of all ſuch Plants as
grow in England, and are omitted in his Book called the Engliſh Phyfitian, printed, in th-
lane Volume, (© as it may be bound with the Engliſh Phyfirian, in 8* Large. :


Bus fold by Obadiah Blagrave.


De Succo pancreatico, or a Phyſical and Anatomical Treatiſe of the nature and office of
the Panecratick Joyce of Sweer-Bread in Men, ſhewing irs generation in the Body, whar
Diſeaſes ariſe by its Viſitation 3 rogerher wich the Cauſes atd Cures of Agues and inter-
mirting Fevers, hitherto ſo difficulr and uncertain , with ſeveral other things worthy of
Norte, Written by that famous Phyſitian D. Reg. de Graff. Illuſtrated with divers Curs in
Braſs ; in 8* large.

Great Venugunmaskr, being a full diſcovery of the French Pox or Venerecal Evil. By Gideon
Harvey, M. D. in 8® large. | ,

The Anatomy of Conſumptions, the Nature and Cauſes SubjeR, Progrefs , Change;
Signs, Prognoſticarions, Preſervations , and ſeveral Merhods in curing Conſumptions,
Coughs, _ ſpirring of Bloud ; rogerher with a diſcourſe of the; Plague. By Gidton Har-
vey, in 8*® large.

Elenchus of opinions concerning the Small Pox ; by Tobias Whitaber, Phyfitian to his Ma-
zeſty ; togerher wich problemical queſtions concerning the cure of the French Pox ; in 122,

The Accompliſht Cook, or the Art and Miſtery of Cookery, wherein the whole Art is
revealed in a more eafie and perfet merhed than hath bin publiſhed in any Language ; ex-
pert and ready ways for the drefling of all ſorts of Fleſh, Foul and Fiſh, with variery of
Sauces proper for each of them ; how to raiſe all manner of Paſt , the beſt direfions
forall forrs of Kickſhaws 3 alſo the rerms-of Carving and Sewing, An exat account of all
Diſhes for all ſeaſons in the year, with other admirable Curioſities, approved by the five
and fifry years experience of Robert May iv his attendance on ſeveral perſons of great Ho-
nour ; 1n8* large.

The Queens Cloſer opened, incomparable ſecrers in Phyfick and Chirurgery, Preſerving,
Conſerving, and Candinz; which was preſented unto the Queen by the moſt experienced
perſons of their times ; in 12® large.

The Gentlernans Jockie and approved Farrier ; inſtruQing in the nature , cauſes and
cures of all Diſeaſes incident to Horſes, with an exa&t merhod of Breeding, Buying, Dic-
ting, and other ways of ordering all forts of Horſes; in 8® large.

' The Councrymans Treaſure, ſhewing the narure, cauſe and cure of ail Diſeaſes iucidenc
ro Cattle, viz, Oxen, Cows and Calves, Sheep Hogs and Dogs , with proper means to pre-
- venttheir common Diſcaſes and Diſtempers, being very uſeful receirs, as they have been
praiſed by the long &perience of forty years; by James Lambert, in 8* large.

St. Foyne improved, a Diſcourſe ſhewing the utility and benefir which England hath, and
may receive by the Grafscalled St.Foyne,and anſwering all obje&ions urged againſt ir ; in 4*.

Pharomand, that famed Romance, being che Hiſtory of France , in rwelye parts 3; by the
Author of Cleopatra and Caſſandra ; in Folio.

Parthaneſſa, that famed Romance. ;

A ſhort Hiſtory of the lare Engliſh Rebellion 3 by M. Needham, in 4*.

The ingenious Satyr againſt Hypocrires 3 1n 4*. :

Wirs Interpreter, the Engliſh Parnaſſus, or a ſure guide to thoſe admirable accompliſh-
ments that compleat the Engliſh Gentry, in the moft acceptable qualifications of Diſcourſe
or Writing ; in which briefly the whole myſtery of thoſe pleaſing Witchcrafrs of Eloquence
and Love are made cafe, in divers Trads 3 in 8? large.

Myſteries of Love and Eloquence, or the Art of Wooing and Complementing, as they
are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide Park, and other places ; in 8* Jarge.

The Maiden-head loſt by Moon-light, or the adventure of the Meadow 3 by Foſeph Kepple,
in Quarto,

- — a new Droll ; compoſed on occaſion of the prerended German Princeſs.in 49.

Meronides, or Virgil Traverſly, being a new Paraphraſe upon the fifth and fixth Book of
Virgil's Aneas in Burleſque Vert: 3 by the Author of the Satyr againſt Hypocrites.

Gerania, a new Diſcovery of a little ſort of People called Pigmies, with a lively deſcrip-
tion ef their ſtature, habir, manners, building, knowledge and Government ; by Zoſhus
- Barns of Emmanuel Colledge in Cambridge, in 8%.

The Woman is as good as the Man, or the equality of both Sexes : Written originally
in French, and tranſlated into Engliſh.

Cleaveland's Genuine Poems, Orations, Epiſtles, purged from many falſe and ſpurious
ones which had uſurped his name. To which 1s added many never before printed or pub-
liſhed, according to the Authors own Copies 3 with a narrative of his Life; in 82 large.

Newly re-printed the exquiſite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday , the late admired Tranſla.
ror of the three firſt Volumes of Cleopatra, publiſhed by his Brother Mr. Anthony Loveday


zn 8* _ | a 0

Troades, a Tranſlation our of Seneca ; in 8®.

Wallographee, or the Britan deſcribed, being a Relation of a pleaſant Journey into Wales ;
wherein are ſer down ſeveral remarkable paſlages that occurred in the way thither, and alſo
many choice obſervables and notable commemorations concerning the ſtate and condition ,
the nature and humour, ations, manners, and cuſtorns of that Country and People, in 82,

Troja Rediviva, or the Glories of London ſurveyed, in an Heroick Poem, in 4?.

Wir and Drollery, Jovial Poems, correfted and amended with new Additions ; in 8* large

Adaga Scholica, or a Collegion of Scotch Proverbs and Proverbial Phraſes , in 12%. very
uſcful and delightful. =

c


Books ſold by Obadiah Blagrave.


The Batchelors Banquer, or fifreen degrees of Marriage, in 4*:

The Inſtitutions, Laws and Ceremonies of the moſt Noble Order of the Garter ; ador-
ned with many Sculptures in Copper ; by that Noble and ingenious Gentleman Elias Aſh
mole, Eſq;in Folio,

The perfe& Stateſman, or Miniſter of Stare; wherein are briefly ſet forth the true Na-
rure of rhe SubjeR, the endowment inherent to the perſon, the method of his Ele&ion ,
Inſticurion and Receprion z the obie& of his Office diſtinguiſhed under ſuch principles as
are ny requiſite ro the Eſtabliſhment of a Commonweal, by Leonard Willin Eſq;
in Folz2,

A Treatiſe of Taxes and Contributions, ſhewing the Nature and Meaſures of Crown
Lands, Aflefſments, Cuſtoms, Poll-monies , Lotterics, Benevolence, Penalty, Monopolies,
offices, Tyths, Raiſing of Coins, Hearth-money , Exciſe; and with ſeveral interſperſt
Diſcourſes and Digreſſhons concerning Wars, the Church, Univerſities, Rents and Purchaſes,
Uſury and Exchange, Banks and Lumbards, Regiſters for Conveyances, Buyers, Inſurances,
Exportation of Money and Wool , Free Ports, Coyns, Houfing , Liberty of Conſcience :
by Sir Willem Pette Knight ; in 49.

England deſcribed through the ſeveral Counties and Shires thereof, briefly handled ;
ſome — alſo premiſed to ſer forth the Glory of this Nation, by Edward Leigh Eſq;

England's Worthies, Sele& Lives of the moſt eminent perſons from Conſt antine down to


*this preſent year 1684. by William Winſtandly Gent. in 8? large.


The Glories and Triumphs of his Majeſty King Charles the 1I. being a Colle&ion of all
Lercers, Speeches, and all other choice paſſages of Stare ſince his Majeſties return from
Breda, «ill after his Coronation, in 8® large.

The Portzgal Hiſtory, deſcribing the ſaid Country, with the Cuſtoms and Uſes among
them, in 8* large.

A new Survey of the Turkiſh Government compleated , with divers Curs, being an exat
and abſolute diſcovery of what is worthy of knowledge, or any way ſatisfactory to curioſity
in that mighry Nation, in 8* large.

The Antiquity of China, or an Hiſtorical Eſſay, endeavouring a probabiliry, that rhe
Language of the Empire of Chin«, is the primitive Language ſpoken chrough che whole
World before the confuſion of Babel; wherein the Cuſtoms and Mauners of the Chinegns are
preſented, and Ancient and Modern Authors conſulced with. Illuſtrared with a large Map
of che Country, in 8* large. |

An Imparrial Deſcription of Surynham upon the continent of Guiana in America ; with
a Hiſtory of ſeveral ſtrange Beaſts, Birds, Fiſhes, Serpents , Inſe&s and Cuſtoms of that
Colony, 1n 4®.

Ethice Chriſtiene, or the School of Wiſdom. Ir was dedicated ro the Duke of Mon-
mouth in his younger years, 1n 1 2®,

The Life and A&ions of the lare renowned Prelate and Soldier Chriſtopher Bernard Van
Gale Biſhop of Monſter, in 82.

The Politician diſcovered, or conſiderations on the late prerenfions that France claims to
Englan1and Ireland, and her defigns and plors in order thereunto ; intwo ſerious Diſcour-
ſes in 4®.

The Conveyancers Light, or the Compleat Clerk and Scriveners Guide, being an exa
draught of all Precedents and Aflurances now in uſe, likewiſe the Forms of all Bills, An-
ſwers and Pleadings in Chancery, as they were penned by divers learned Judges, Eminent
Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both Ancient and Modern, in 4o large.

The Priviledges and Pratices of Parliaments in England , colleted out of the Common
Law of this Land, in 4%.

A Letter from Oxford concerning the approaching Parliament thei called 1631. in vindi-
cation of the King, the Church, and Univerſities, in 4®.

The Antiquity, Legaliry, Right, Uſe, and ancienr + bk of Fines paid in Chancery, upon
the ſuing our or obtaining ſome ſorts of Original Writs retornable into che Court of Common
Pl-as at Weſtminſter, in 4®.

Brevia Parliamentaria Redivive, m 13 Seftions, conraning ſeveral Caralogues of the
thumbers and dates of all Bundles of Original Writs of Summons and Ele&ions that are
now in the Tower of London, in 4®.

The new World of Words, or a general Engliſh DiQionary, coraining the proper ſignifi-
cation and Erymologies of Words , derived from other Languages, viz. Hebrew, Arabick ,
Syriach , Greek , Latin, Italian, French, Spaniſh, Britiſh, Dutch, Saxon, uſeful for the ad-
vancement of our Engliſh mos 3 together with the definition of all thoſe rerms thar con-
duce to the underſtanding of the Arts and Sciences, viz, Theology, Philoſophy, Logick,
Rherorick, Grammar, Echic, Law, Magick, Chyrurgery, Anatomy, Chymiſtry, Boranicks,
Arithmetick, Geometry, Aftronomy , Aſtrology, Phyliognomy, Chyromancy, Navigation,
Forrification, Dyaling , cum multis aliis, in fol.

Cocher'# new Coppy-Book, or England's Pen-man, being all the curious Hands engraved in
£8 Braſs Plares 3 in folio. :

Sir Robert Stapletan's Tranſlation of Fuvenals Satyr, with Annorations thereon ; in folio.


The


Books ſold by Obadiah Blagrave.


The Rudiments of the Latine Tongue, by a method of Vocabulary and Grammar ; the for-
mer comprizing the Primitives, whether Noun or Verb, ranked in cheir ſeveral Caſes; the
larter reaching the forms of Declenfion and Conjugation, with all poſſible plainnefs : To
which is added the Hermonicon, wiz. a Table of thoſe Latin Words, which their ſound and
fgnification being meerly reſembled by, the Engliſh are the ſooner learned thereby, for the
uſe of Merchant —_ School, in 8* large. |

Indicutis Univerſals, or the whole Univerſe in Epiromie, wherein the names of almoſt all
the Works of Narure, of all Arts and Sciences, and-their moſt neceſſary Terms are in En-
gliſh, Latin and French, methodically digeſted, in 8* large.

Farnaby's Notes on Juvenal and Perfus, in 129.

Clavis Grammatica, or the ready way to the Latin Tongue , containing moſt plain Demon-
ſtrations for the regular Tranſlaring of Engliſh into Latin, with inftructions how ro conſtruc
and -" = Authors, fired for ſuch as would artain to the Latin Tongue , by T. By School-
maſter.


The Engliſh Orator, or Rhererical Deſcents by way of declamation upon lap<e nocable
Themes, both Hiſtorical and Philoſophical, in 8* large.

M. Tulli Ciceronis Epiftolarum Seleftarum Lib i tres, in 8*.

Fax Nova Lingua Latina, in 8* large.


| Mapps.


A New and exa&t Mapp of the whole World , with the late neweſt Diſcoverics of al!
the parts of Perſia, with a Deſcription thereof in French and Engliſh.

A new Mapp of d.

A New Mapp of the Royal Exchange. . L

A large Mapp of the Ciry of Lon and irs Ruines, fairhfully ſurveyed, wherein is de-
clared irs Original , Anriquiries, Monuments, Cuſtoms, Knights, according to the Ancient
Charter, granted ro the ſaid Ciryby former Kings of England. |


An Advertiſement of an Excellent Water for the Preſervation
of the Eyes.


7 by is ſold by the ſaid Obadiah Blagrave, a Water of ſuch an extellent Nature and Operation
for preſervation of the Eyes, that the Eye being but waſhed therewith once or twice a day, it not
enly takes away all bet Rheumes and Inflamations, but alſo preſerveth the Eye after a maſt wonderful
manner; a Secret which was uſed by a moſt Learned Biſhop : By the help of which Water he could
read without the uſe of Speacles at go Tears of Age. A Battle of which will coft but 1 s,
