An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, Vol. II
William Godwin (1793)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): William Godwin's 'An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, and its Influence on General Virtue and Happiness', Volume II (first edition; Dublin: Luke White, 1793). Scan via Internet Archive. Runs complete through the work's conclusion. This 1793 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

POLITICAL JUSTICE,
| AND
I'T'S:.1N FLU ENCKE
GENERAL VIRTUE AND HAPPINESS,


WILLIAM GODW IN.


IN TWO VOLUMES” -


V-Q L. @%


D UB: LL


| »
PRINTED FOR LUKE WHITE.


1793+


*
*
*
-
* S
„ -
\ a 8
a a 2 : |
2 7 — .
BY
— * N f
3 13 * -
* =. * *
” — 4 rn
N 2 *
_ 2 . *
* 1 * I» -
| . *
na” _
Y -
. * %
| : 4 4
E 8 LOWE 5 :
" < |
3 * > *
- "Sk. " | ; .
1 4 > F > *
- 8 2 4 0 5 |
: : - as N *
- F4 |
5
1 F 5 | *
g = ©


a | i
: N 22
wr I 4 |
- * * « 4
£4 > _
w 5 I # .
, : :
<4 * - . -
mY Js — 4 * — 1 2 . 4 * 5
| We” 4 4 +4
1 »* N *
2 "%, * ex=4 ö :
bY * N £ : ” -
J * 4 bs 8 N
— N N ;
* 1 2 -
5 *
A * 18 - | $
7 * 8 N 8 |
4 p
*
* 3 * 0 . — ho! a 2 1 1 : :
** . , 8 * 3
* .
4 2


4
9 4
- * *
1
*
- F
#
e
**
”
*


1 aA _ - 1 * ; a f \


* * wo * 4 — . *
* 4 "WE © 4 - y > m 0 * \ * * , 4 F . ” — 5 @
Cd © % . * 1 3 = LI . —
0 > "= * 4 ” , —" py : ry .
4 /
« > * = *
* ” 5 *
P * ”_ 1 19 . : a
. 1 % . = % : $ 1 * 1 1 * , : I f be N | * . .
1 : F 6 6 1 4 7 " Ws
Þ :
. ” *
* 5
” . F ; 1 * 0 8
4 ” , 4 a | E 2 0 [Wes
£ * * N * « . 6 IJ 4 0 "7 , .
pe : *

1 " . ; —

i Li

* N ; : e

- » _—— N „ ht *
1 4 P


*
* * \
ww. kk 0 , 1 , , % » * 2 N
4 *.% . — : 1 N ; , * :
2 7 #* © 8 94 ” "+ C
. + A 4 4 * a 4 8 0 AY
: r F I4.%
4
* 4 1 -
©
* . = 9


„ Ae: Pu...
OF LIMITED MONARCHY.


LIABLE t moſt of the preceding objedtions—to
farther oljections peculiar ta itſelf. —Reſponfibili-
ty conſidered. — Maxim, that the king can do no
wrong. Functions of a limited monarch. Im-
Mobility of maintaining the neutrality required.
—Of the diſiniſſion of mmifters,—- Reſponſibility *
of mimifiers—- Appointment of miniſters, its im-
portance—its difficulties —- Recapitulation.——
: Strength and weakneſs of the human ſpecies.  _
__


c H A
or A PRESIDENT wITH REGAL POWERS.


Enumeration of powerin—that of appointing lo infe-
rior offices—of pardoning offences—of convoking


IE 1 * a veto to their


Prees.


—


CONTENTS.


decrees. —Conclufion The title of kin g eſtimat- :
ed. — Monarchical and ariſtacratical ſyſtems, ſimi-
larity of their effedts, | Fage 13


. A ö
OF HEREDITARY DISTINCTION.


| Birth conſidened as a phyſical cauf as a moral
cauſe — Ar: NMocratical eſtimate of the human ſpe- |
cres,—Education of 1 whe * great: —Recapizulation.


19


4 „
MORAL EFP ECTS OF ARISTOCRACY.


8 of practical juſtice —S hectes of mjuſtice
_ which ariſtocracy creates. — Eſtimate of the inju-
2 aaa nme, 8 5 ee eee


CHA P. XII
TY NI L F..


The « ori iin and e- heir miſerable abfir p
oh FER the my N AIG reward o + merit.


31
Ar *
OF THE ARISTOCRAT ICAL CHARACTER.


LED I


As 1 f | ties


CONTENTS.


21e. its vices —— Ari Nocratical di EIT: of
e e by which it is maintained
avarice it engenders.— Argument againſt innova-
tion from the preſent happy EL 4 affairs
confidered. — Conclufion. W Page 35


eee XIV. 8
GENERAL FEATURES OF DEMOCRACY.


Definition. Suppoſed evils of this form of govern-
ment—aſcendancy of the ignorant—-of the crafty
—mconftancy—raſh confidence—=groundleſs ſuſ-
picion.— Merits and defects of democracy compar=-
ed.—Its moral tendency OY of truth.—
II | 45


"ws H A. E, 5 XV.
OF POLITICAL IMPOSTURE.


Importance of this topic. —Example in the Herrin 7
eternal puniſument.— Its inutility argued from
Hiſtory from the nature of mind. — Second enam
ple: the religious ſanttion of a legiſtatroe ſyſtem.
mT }s idea 1 is, 1. in ſtrict conſtruction imprac-
ticable—2. injurious. —T hird example: principle
of political order. Vice has no eſſential advan-
tage over virtue. Impoſture unneceſſary to the
cauſe of Juſtice not "Oe? to the nature of


mam. ( 54


a i A Po TR.
OF THE CAUSES OF WAR.


Ofenjive war contrary 10 the nature of democracy.
— Defenſive war exceedingly rare.—-Erroneouſ-


32 v


rr
1. of the ideas commonly annexed to the 27 60


our country. Nature of war delineated. —Inſuf-
ficient cauſes of war—-the acquiring a healthful
and vigorous tone ta the public mind tlie putting
A termination upon private inſults—the menaces or
Preparations of our neighbours——the dangerous
Conſequences of concęſſiun.— Tuo legitimate cauſes
of war, | Page 65


.
OF THE OBJECT OF WAR:


The repelling an invader. Not reformation-—-not-
reſtraint—not indemmnification. Nothing can be
4. ſiſficient object of war that is nat a ſufficient
cauſe for beginning it.— Reflections on the balance


of power. _ 75


of


r XV
OF 'THE CONDUCT OF WAR.


Offen/ove operations, —Fortifications.—General ac-
ion. —Stratagem.— Military contributtons.—
Capture of mercantile veſſels Naval war.-—
Humanicy.— Military obedience, Foreign poſe
E

| CN A-P.:. "XIE


\


OF MILITARY..ESTABLISHMENT'S AND
| P ;
A country may book for its defence either to a tand.
ing army or an univerſal militia.———The former
condemned. Ilie latter objetted to as of immoral
tendenq as unneceſſary—either in reſpect to cou-
rage—-or aßſcipline.— Of a commander. Of
r | ti
CHAP.


CON r K „ 1 .


CH AP. XX.


* OF DEMOCRACY AS CONNECTED WITH THE
TRANSACTIONS OF WAR.


External affairs are of ſubordinate confideration.—
Apphcation, — Farther objettions to democracy—
1. 2t ig incompatible with ſecrecy—this proved to
be an excellence—2. its movements are tos
3. 70% precipitate.— Evils of anarchy confidered.

Page 94


SES N K *Þ; XXI.
OF THE COMPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT.


H. 2 of aſſembly.—T his inſtitution unjuſt.— Deli-
berate proceeding te proper antidote.—Separati-
on of legiſtative and executive power conſidered.—
Superior importance of the latter. — Fundlions of


Mimſters. 102


r.. wa


OF THE FUTURE HISTORY OF POLITICAL,
SOCIETIES.


antity of admin tration neceſſary to be maintained.
—Objetts of admmiſtration : national glory
rroalſhip of nations. —Inferences: 1. complication.
of government unneceſſary—2. extenſive territory
Juperfluous—3. conſtraint, its limitations. — Pro-
Ject of government : police—defence. 109


CHAP.


—


e ON TE N T S.


aA P, TAME ..
OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES.


They produce a fiftitious unanimity an unnatural


uniformity of opinion, —Cauſes of this uniformity. |


=== Conſequences of the mode of deciſion by vote—1. »
ber verſion of reaſon—2. contentious diſputes


3. the triumph of ignorance and vice. — Society in-


capable of acting from itſelf —of being well con-


dutted by others. —Conclufion.—- Modification of


democracy that reſults from theſe confiderations.
| „ Page 118


C H A P. XXIV.


OF THE DISSOLUTION OF GOVERNMENT.


Political authority of a national aſſembly—of juries. 5
—Conſeguence from the whole. 1.


BOOK


CO ON TEN T S.


i e VE


OF OPINION CONSIDERED AS A SUBFECT OF
POLITICAL INSTITUTION.


CHAP... ©


GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL SU.
PERINTENDENCE OF OPINION.


Arguments in favour of this ſuperintendence.—
Anfwer.—T he exertions of ſociety in its corporate
capacity are, 1. unwiſe—2. incapable of proper
ect. —Of ſumptuary laws, agrarian laws and
rewards. — Political degeneracy not incurable.—
3. ſuperfluous—in commerce in ſpeculative en-
quiry—im morality.— 4. pernicious as under-
mining intellectual capacity as ſuſpending intel-
lectual improvement contrary to the nature of
morality—to the nature of mind. Concluſion.
| Page 129
F II.
OF RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS.


Their general tendency. —Effefts on the clergy :
they introduce, 1. implicit faith — 2. hypocriſy :
topics by which an adherence to them is vindicated.
—FEffetts on the laity.— Application. _ 150

N 1 775 HAP.


C O NT E N Arr,ᷓ S.


nn


OF THE SUPPRESSION OF ERRONEOUS OPI-
NION IN RELIGION. AND GOVERNMENT.


Of hereſy. — Arguments by which the ſuppreſſion of
hereſy is recommenaed.— Anfier .— Ignorance not
neceſſary to make men virt uous.— Difference of


opinion not ſubverfive of public fecurity.—Reaſon,


and not force, the proper corrective of fophiſtry.
—Abſurdity of the attempt to reſtrain thought—


to reſtrain the freedom of ſpeech.—Conſequences
that would refult.—Fallibulity of the men by whom
authority is exerciſed. —Of erroneous opinions in

government. —Iniquity of the attempt to ręſtrain


them —- Tendency of unlimited pos dt fur |
| fon. 90 I 56


9 FN .
OF TESTS.


Their fuppoſed advantages are attended with 15
tice—are nugatory.—Illuſtration.— Their diſad-
vantages—they-enſnare—example—ſecond exXam-


fle-—they are an uſurpation.—Influence of teſts


on the latitudmariat—on the ** —Conclu-
fon. | | 167
© 503: if A F.-Y.


OF OATHS.


Oaths of Mice und duty.—Their abſurdity Their


immoral a O F evidence leſs
atrocious.


0 O NE NI s.
2 atrociouu. Opinion of the liberal and rſelued
reſpecting them.—Their eſſential features: con-
rempt of veracity—falſe morahty.— Their par-


tar ſtructure.— Abſtruct prmciples aſi by
OWE ee EE


0 ep i _ 175
ee H A P. VL
0 LI L 8.


Public libels.— Injuſtioe of an attempt to preſeribe
the method in which public queſtions ſhall be diſ-
cuffed. Its pufillanimity. — Invitations to tumult.
Private libels.— Regſons in favour of their be-

ng ſlbjected to reſtraint.— Anſiwer.— 1. Jt is
nmeceſ wy the truth ſhould be told. —Salutary ef-

ecke of the unreſtrained inveſtigation of charac-
ter.—Objefion : Freedom of ſpeech would be pro-
duotiue of calumny, not of juſtice. — Anfwer.---

Future hiſtory of libel. —2. It is neceſſary men

faule be taught to be ſincere.— Extem of the evil

which ariſes from a command to be inſincere. Thie


mind ſpontaneouſly 5 from the proſecution of
4 libel —Conclyfion. 180


C HA P. .
OF CONSTITUTIONS.


Dj huren, F regulations. conflituent and legiſlative.
ed charatter of permanence that ought

to be given to the former — inconſiſtent with the
nature-of mam. Source of the error.,—Remark.


—Aofuraiy f the ſyſtem of permanence.--=-Its
| futility.


CO NITTE N TS.
futility Mode to be Hur furd mn framing a conſti-


rution.Conſtituent laws not more important
than others. -In what manner the conſent , the
diſtricts is to be declared.--Tendency of the princi-
ple which requires this conſent.---It would reduce
the number of conſtitutional articles---parcel out
the legiſlative power---and produce the gradual
extinclion of law:---Objeftion.--- Anſwer.


Page 195
' OF NATIONAL EDUCATION. _


Arguments in its favour.--- Anſwer .---1. It pro-
duces permanence of opinion. Nature of preju-

dice and judgment deſcribed.—2. It requires uni-
Formity of operation 3. It is the mirror and
Tol of national government. Jie right of pu-

bing not founded in the previous functian of in-
rern


C


2


or PENSIONS AND SALARIES. |


Reaſons by which they are vindicated. Labour in
its uſual acceptation and labour for the public com-
pared.---Immoral effetts of the inſtitution of ſa-
lartes.---Source from which they are derived.

_ Unneceſſary for the ſußſiſtence of the public func-
tnary---for dignify.----Salaries of inferior offi-
cer may alſo be ſuperſeded.-==-Taxation.----

Qualifications.  _ 215

88 CHAP,


x | | N


C O--N+T+E;'N T S.
E P. X.


or THE MODES OF DECIDING A QUESTION
. ON THE PART OF THE COMMUNITY.


*


« Deriſion 5 hot, ts origin——founded i in the 8
of arſcretionary rights----1mplies the deſertion of
_ duty.---- Decifion by ballot----inculcates timidity


and hypocriſy.---- Decifion by vote, its recom-
mendations. 1 . 224


% n OO! KW
of CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS.
E AE


LIMITATIONS OF THE DOCTRINE OF PU.
 NISHMENT WHICH RESULT FROM THE
© PRINCIPLES OF MORALITY.


Dee f Ade g Nardi of 888
Retributive juſtice not independent and abſolute---
not to be vindicated from the ſyſtem of nature.
"A a chimerical property.===Conclufion. 229
CHAP


\
* 4 4 * * $ 5 . 5 | . % *
2C ON N res
1


„W
GENERAL DISADVANTAGES OF COERCION.


Conſcience in matters of religion confidered---in the
conduct of hfe.---Beft practicable criterion of duty
nat the decifion of .ather .men---but , or 0.
wnderſtanding.---Tendency of coercian.— Ils va-
riaus claſſes conſid eres. Page 237


OF THE PURPOSES. OF COERCION.


Nature of defence confidered.---Coercion for reſtraint
--=for reformation.----Suppoſed uſes of adverſity
===defeftrve---unneceſſary.---Coercion for exam-
ple---1. nugatory.———The neceſſity of political


- coercion. ariſes from tlie Mefeths of political inſti-


fution.---2. unjuſt.--- Unfeelng chiaracter of this
| ſhectes of coercion. 1


Fc NAT IF
OF THE ApPLICATION- OF COERCION.


Delinquency and coercion incommenſurable.---Exter-
nal wile ee Feriminal amimadver-
an. far capable of proc ==—Inzguity of -
2 /tandard = . *
Propriety of a retribution to be meaſured by
the intention of the offender confidered.-=< Suck a
project would overturn criminal law-=-wwouldabo-
Ae coerauon.---Inſcrutability, 1. of Motives.---
 Doubifulteſs of nſtory.---Declarateons of ſuffer -
ers. -2. of the future conduct of the fender
e uncertainty


CONTENTS


uncertainty of evidence either of the facts
or the intention. Diſadvantages of the defendant
in a crimindi ſuit. Page 255


C MN MF V0


OF COERCION CONSIDERED: AS A TEMPO-
RARY EXPEDIENT.


Arguments in its favour. === Anſiver.=--It cannot fit
men for a better order of foctety.---The true re-
medy to private injuſtice deſcrived---1s adapted to
immediate practice. Duty of the community in
this reſpect.--- Duty of individuals.—-Iluſtration
from the caſe of war---of individual defence.
Application.--- Diſadvantages of anarchy---want
of ſecurity---of progreſſive enquiry. Correſ-
pondent diſadvantages of deſpotiſin. ——Anarchy
awakens, deſpotiſm depreſſes the mind. Final
reſult of anarchy---how determined. Suppoſed *
purpoſes of coercion in a temporary vieno for-
mation--cxample--retrant.=-Conolf on. 267


CG Hd A F. vs
SCALE OF COERCION.


Tits ſphere deſeribed.----Its ſeveral claſſes.---- -Death
with torture.---- Death abſe hrs 10 Origin of


this policy-in the corruptneſs 0 politiral 22
tions-—in the mhumanity of the inſtitutors.
Corporal punt/hment.--- [ts e — , , bs.
ciouſneſs.--= Privation of freedom.-== Duty of re-


Forming our neighbur gn inferior confideration in,
„ C = _


C O N T. E N EE


this caſe.--Its place defined. Modes of reftraint.-=
. Indiſcriminate impriſonment.—Solitary impriſon-
ment. —-Its ſeverity. — Its moral ęſfects.— Slavery.
--Baniſhment.--1 . Simple baniſhment.--2. Tranſ
portation.—3. Colonfſation.— This project has
miſcarried from unkindneſs—from officiouſneſs.—
Its permanent evils.— Recapitulatiun. Page 284


. A F. VL
oo fr EVIDENCE.


Difficulties to which this ſubjject is liable —exempli-
fied in the diſtinction between overt actions and in-
tentions.— Reaſons againſt this diſtinction.— Prin-


ciple in which it is founded. 298


nA F. -
F LL AVE.


Arguments by which it is recommended. — Anſwer.
au ts, 1. Endleſs---particularly in a free
ftate.---Cauſes of this diſadvantage.—2. Uncer-
tam.---Inftanced in queſtions of property. Mode
in which it muſt be ſtudied.---3. Pretends,to fore-
tel future events.---- Laws are a ſpecies of pro-
miſes-=-check the freedom of opinion are deſtruc-
live of the principles of reaſon.---- Diſhoneſty of
layers. An honeſt lawyer miſchievous. Abo-
lition of law vindicated on the ſcore of wiſdom---
of candour---from the nature of man. Future
tuſtory of political juſtice. Errors that might
ariſe in the commencement. Its gradual progreſs,
Its effects on criminal lau. un property.


30


CONTENTS
e Ha ip:
OF PARDONS.


Thei abſurdity. Their ori Nun. ===T heir abuſcs.—
Their arbitrary charatter. . F mo-
rality. Page 317


33 0 VIII.
OF PROPERTY.


C HA Fe) KL


- GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY DELL
NEATED.


Importance of this topic.-==- Abuſes to which it has
been expoſed.---Criterion of property: Juſtice.---
Entitles each man to the ſupply of his antmal wants
as far as the general ſtock will afford it---to' the
means of well being. Eſtimate of Juxury.---1ts.
pernicious effects on the individual who partakes of
it.---Jdea of labour as the foundation of property
conſidered.---Its unreaſonableneſs.---Syſtem of po-
pular morality on this ſubjett.--- Defects of that


Syſtem. | 323


c2 CHAN H.


 CONTEN T 8.


.


BENEFITS ARISING FROM THE GENUINE
| SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. | |


Contraſted with the miſchiefs of the preſent ſyſtem,
as conſiſting— 1. In a ſenſe of dependence.— 2.
In tlie perpetual ſpectacle of injuſtice, leading men
aſtray in their defires—and perverting the inte-
grity f their judgments.—T he rich are the true
penfoners.—J. In the diſcouragement of intellec-
tual attainments.—4. In the multiplication of
uice—generating the crimes of the poor —the paſ-
ions of the ric/;—and the misfortunes of war.—


5. In depopulation. Page 334


| OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS SYSTEM
| - FROM THE ADMIRABLE EFFECTS


—


fr LUXURY,


—ͤ—
—


. . ſ0 ⁵ͤuß e oe IO
2 mam . n — end} 0


— — — - ens = =


Nature of the objection.— Luxury not neceſſary—
erther to population—or to the improvement of the
mind. Its true charatter, 348


OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS SYSTEM
FROM THE ALLUREMENTS OF SLOTH.


The objeftion ſtated. —-Such a late of ſaciety muſt
have been preceded by great intellectual improve-
ment. Thie manual labour required in this ſtate

will be extremely ſinall. — Univer ſality of the love

e diſtinction. —Operation of this motive under
the ſyſtem in queſtion—=qwill finally be ſuperſeded
by a better motive, | .


i — r en. ED OTE
* 8 *


9


EG HBN


OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS SYSTEM FROM
THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF ITS BEING
| RENDERED PERMANENT.


Grounds of the objection. Its ſerious import.
Anſiber.— The introduction of fuch a ſyſtem muſt
be owing, 1. Toa deep ſenſe of juſtice—2. To

a clear inſight into the nature of happineſs as
being properly intetleetnal—not conſiſting in ſen-
ſual pleaſure-—or the pleaſures of deluſion. — In-
fluence of the paſſions conſidered. —Men will not
accumulate either from individual foreſight—or


from vantty. Page 361


S N AEM


OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS SYSTEM FROM
THE INFLEXIBILITY OF ITS
REST RIC TIONs.


Nature of the objection. Natural and moral mnde-


pendence dijiinguyhed—the firft beneficiar—-the


fecond injurious. —Tentency of reſtriction proper-
ly fo called. — The genuine ſiſtem of property not
à ſyſtem of reftriftions—does not require cammon
labour, meals or magazines. Such reftricitons
abſurd and unnecefſary.— Evils of co-2peration.—
Its province may perpetually be diminiſhed. —Mg-


nual labour may be extinguiſhed, —Conſequent ac-


tivity of intellect. Ideas of the future ſlate of
co-operation. — Its limits.--1ts legitimate province,


Eile


N TEN T


—Evils of coſiabitation and marriage. — Jhey
oppoſe the development of our faculties are ini-
mical to our happineſs and deprave our under-
* ftandings.— Marriage a branch of 'the prevailing
' fuſtem of property. —Conſequences of its aboliti-.
Education need not in that ſtate of ſociety be a
Jubjet of paſitive inſtitution; —<T heſe principles
do not lead to a ſullen individuality.— Partial at-
tachments conſidered. — Bengſits accrumg from a
uſt affettion—materially promoted by theſe prin-
ciples.— Ilie genuine ſyſtem of property does not
prohibit accumulation—implies a certain degree of


appropriatim—and droifion of labour. Page 371


E AT


OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS SYSTEM FROM
THE PRINCIPLE OF POPULATION.


The objcttion flated. —-Remoteneſs of its operation.
—Conjettural ideas reſpecting the antidote.
Omninipotence of mind. — Illuſtrations.— Cas ſos f
duecrepitude. — Toutſi is prolonged by chearfulneſs
 —by clearneſs of apprelienſion and a benevolent
charatter.—The powers we poſſeſs are eſſentially
Pragreſive.— Effects of attention.—The pheno-
menon of ſleep explained. —Preſent utility of theſe
reaſonings.—- Application to the future ſtate of


foctety. | 391


CHAP,


06 n r


E NA N


OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING THE
GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY.


Apprehen/ions that are entertained on this ſubjett.
—ſdea of niaſſucre. Inference we ought to
make upon ſuppoſition of the reality of theſe ap-
prehenjions. — Miſchief by no means the neceſſary *
. attendant on improvement. Duties under this
circumſtance, 1. of thoſe who are qualified for
public inſtruftors—temper—/mcerity.— Pernici-
ous effects of diſſimulation in this caſe.—2. Of the
rich and great. Many of them may be expetted
to be advocates of equality. Conduct which
their intereſt as a body preſcribes. 3. Of the
friends of equality in general.—-Omnipotence of
truth. Importance of a mild and benevolent pro-
ceeding.—Connexion between liberty and equality.
— Cauſe of equality will perpetually advance.
Symptoms of its progreſs.—ldea of its future ſuc-
cefs.—Conclufion. Page 404.


„ A |
E N QUI R x


POLITICAL iu


BOOK v. |
or LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE
POWER.


CHAP. VIII.
OF LIMITED MONARCHY.


Liable to moſt of the preceding objections— to far
| ther oljeftions peculiar to itſelf. —Reſponſibility
conſidered. — Maxim, that the king can do no
rung. Functions of a limited monarch.—
Impoſſubility of maintaining the. neutrality re-
quired, —Of the diſmiſſion miniſters.— Reſpon-
ſibility of minifters. — Appointment of minifters,
its importance—its difficulties —Recapitulation.
 —Strength and weakneſs of, the human ſpecies.


1 PROCEED to conſider monarchy, not as it
exiſts in countries where it is unlimited and deſ-
potic, but, as in certain inſtances it has appeared,
a branch merely of the general conſtitution.
Here it is only neceſſary to recollect the ob-
jections which applied to it in its unqualified
33 B ſtate,


2 or LIMITED MONARCHY.


ſtate, in order to perceive that they bear upon it
with the ſame explicitneſs, if not with equal
force, under every poſſible modification. Still
the government is founded in falſhood, affirm-
ing that a certain individual is eminently qualified
for an important ſituation, whoſe qualifications
are perhaps ſcarcely ſuperior to thoſe of the mean-
eſt member of the community. Still the govern-
ment is founded in injuſtice, becauſe it raiſes one
man for a permanent duration over the heads
of the reſt of the community, not for any mo-
ral recommendation he poſſeſſes, but arbitrarily |
and by accident. Still it reads a conſtant and
powerful leſſon of immorality to the people at
large, exhibiting pomp and ſplendour and mag-
nificence inſtead of virtue, as the index to gene-
ral veneration and eſteem. The individual is,
not -leſs than in the moſt abſolute monarchy,
unfitted by his education to become either reſpec-
table or uſeful. He is unjuſtly and cruelly "4
ed in a ſituation that engenders ignorance, weak-
neſs and preſum 8 5 after having been ſtripped
in his infancy all the energies that ſhould de-
fend him 3 the inroads * theſe adverſaries.
Finally, his exiſtence implies that of a train of
courtiers and a feries of intrigue, of fervility,
ſecret influence, capricious partialities and pecu-
niary corruption. So true is the obſervation of
Monteſquieu, that we muſt not expect under a
monarchy to find the people virtuous “.“.
a wy But


* 40 [1 weft pas rare qu'il y ait des princes W mai: il ef


| tres eee nul P ve {os


OF LIMITED MONARCHY. | 3


But if we conſider the queſtion more N
we ſhall perhaps find, that limited monarchy has
other abſurdities and vices which are peculiarly
its own. In an abſolute ſovereignty the king niay
if he pleaſe be his own minifter; but in a limited
one a miniſtry and a cabinet are eſſential parts
of the conſtitution. In an abſolute ſovereignty
princes are acknowledged to be reſponſible only
to God; but in a limited one there is a reſponſi-
bility of a very different nature. In a limited
monarchy there are checks, one branch of the g
vernment counteracting the exceſſes of another,
and a check without reſponſibility is the moſt
flagrant of all contradictions.

There is no ſubject that deſerves to be more
maturely conſidered than this of reſponſibility.
To be reſponſible is to be liable to be called into
an open judicature, where the accuſer and the
defendant produce their allegations and evidence
on equal terms. Every thing ſhort of this is
mockery. Every thing that would give to either
party any other influence than that of truth and
virtue is ſubverſive of the great ends of juſtice.

He that is arraigned of any crime muſt deſcend a
private individual to the level plain of juſtice. If
he can bias the ſentiments of his judges by his
ſeſſion of power, or by any compromiſe previous
to his reſignation, or by the mere ſympathy ex-
cited in his ſucceſſors, who will not be ſevere in
their cenſures, leſt they ſhould be treated with

ſeverity in return, he cannot truly be ſaid to be
ref alle at all. From the honeſt inſolence of
deſpotiſm we may perhaps promiſe ourſelves bet-
ter W than from the hypocritical diſclaimers
=” of


4 of LIMITED, MONARCHY.


of a limited government. Nothing can be more
pernicious than falſhood, and no falſhood can be
more palpable than that lich pretends to put a
weapon into the hands of the general intereſt,
which conſtantly proves blunt and powerleſs in
the very act to ſtrike.

It was a confuſed feeling of theſe truths, that
introduced into limited monarchies the principle
«that the king can do no wrong.“ Obſerve the
peculiar conſiſtency of this proceeding. Con-
ſider what a ſpecimen it affords us of plain deal-
ing, frankneſs and unalterable ſincerity. An in-
dividual is firſt appointed, and endowed with
the moſt momentous prerogatives, and then it is
pretended that, not he, but other men are anſwer-
able for the abuſe of theſe prerogatives. This
pretence may appear tolerable to men bred among
the fictions of law, but juſtice, truth and virtue
revolt from it with indignation.

Having firſt invented this fiction, it becomes
the buſineſs of ſuch conſtitutions as nearly as
poſſible to realiſe it. A miniſtry muſt be regular-
ly formed ; they muſt concert together ; and the
meaſures they execute muſt originate in their
own diſcretion. The king muſt be reduced as
nearly as poſſible to a cypher. So far as he fails
to be completely ſo, the conſtitution muſt be
imperfect.

Wat fort of figure is it that this miſerable
wretch exhibits in the face of the world ? Every
thing is with great parade tranſacted in his name.
He aſſumes all the inflated and oriental ſtyle
which has been already deſcribed, and which in-
deed was upon that occaſion tranſcribed from


the


OF LIMITED MONARCHY: «5;


the practice of a limited monarchy. We find
him like Pharaoh's frogs © in our houſes and up-
on our beds, in our ovens and our *
troughs.”


Now obſerve the man himſelf to whom ar |


this importance is annexed. To be idle is the

abſtract of all his duties. He is paid an immenſe
revenue only to dance and 'to eat, to wear a
ſcarlet robe and a crown. He may not chooſe
any one of his meaſures. He muſt liſten with
docility to the conſultations of his miniſters, and
ſanction with a ready aſſent whatever they de-
termine. He muſt not hear any other adviſers,
for they are his known and conſtitutional coun-
ſellors. He muſt not expreſs to any man his
opinion, for that would be a ſiniſter and uncon-
ſtitutional interference. To be abſolutely per-
fect he muſt have no opinion, but be the vacant
and colourleſs mirror by which theirs is reflected.
He ſpeaks, for they have taught him what he
ſhould ſay; he affixes his ſignature, for they in-
form him that it is neceſſary and proper.

A limited monarchy in the articles J have de-
ſeribed might be executed with great facility and
applauſe, if a king were what ſuch a conſtituti-
on endeavours to render him, a mere puppet re-
gulated by pullies and wires. But it is perhaps
the moſt egregious and palpable of all political
miſtakes to imagine that we can reduce a human
being to this ſtate of neutrality and torpor.
He will not exert any uſeful and true activity,
but he will be far from paſſive. The more he
is excluded from that energy that characteriſes
wiſdom and virtue, the more depraved and un-

reaſonable


"nt OF LIMITED MONARCHY.
reaſonable will he be in his caprices. Is any pro-

motion vacant, and do we expect that he will
never think of beſtowing it on a favourite, or of
proving by an occaſional election of his own that
he really exiſts? This promotion may happen
to be of the utmoſt importance to the public
welfare ; or, if not; every promotion unmerit-
edly given is pernicious to national virtue, and
an upright miniſter will refuſe to aſſent to it.
A king does not fail to hear his power and pre-
rogatives extolled, and he will no doubt at ſome
time wiſh to ey their reality in an unprovoked
war againſt a foreign nation or againſt his own
citizens.

To ſuppoſe that a king and his miniſters ſhould
through a period of years agree 1n their genuine
ſentiments upon every public topic, 1s what hu-
man nature in no degree authoriſes. This is to
attribute to the king talents equal to thoſe of the
moſt enlightened ſtateſmen, or at leaſt to imagine
him capable of underſtanding all their projects,
and comprehending all their views. It is to fi
poſe him unſpoiled by education, undebauched
by rank, and with a mind ingenuouſly diſpoſed
* receive the impartial leſſons of truth.

« But, if they diſagree, the king can chooſe
other miniſters,” We ſhall preſently have oc-
caſion to conſider this prerogative in a general
view; let us for the preſent examine it in its appli-
cation 'to the differences that may occur between
the ſovereign and his ſervants, Tt is an engine
for ever ſuſpended over the heads of the latter
to perſuade them to depart from the ſternneſs of
an Ates ry. The compliance that the king


demands


1


OF LIMITED MONARCHY. 7


demands from them is perhaps at firſt but ſmall ;
and the miniſter, ſtrongly preſſed, thinks it bet-
ter to ſacrifice his opinion in this inferior point
than to ſacrifice his office. One compliance of
this ſort leads on to another, and he that began
pechaps only with the preference of an unwor-
thy candidate for diſtinction ends with the moſt
atrocious political guilt. The more we conſider
this point, the greater will its magnitude appear.
It will rarely happen but that the miniſter will be
more dependent for his exiſtence on the king,
than the king upon his miniſter. When it is
otherwiſe, there will be a mutual compromiſe,
and both in turn will part with every thing that
is firm, generous, independent and honourable
in man.
And in the mean time what becomes of re“
ſponſibility? The meaſures are mixed and con-
founded as to their ſource, beyond the power of
human ingenuity to unravel. Reſponſibility is
in reality impoſſible. © Far otherwiſe,” cries the
advocate of monarchical government: © itis true
that the meaſures are partly thoſe of the king
and partly thoſe of the miniſter, but the miniſ-
ter is reſponſible for all.” Where is the juſtice
of that? It were better to leave guilt wholly
without cenſure, than to condemn a man for
crimes of which he is innocent. In this caſe
the grand criminal eſcapes with impunity, and
the ſeverity of the law falls wholly upon his coad-
jutors. The coadjutors receive that treatment
which conſtitutes the eſſence of all bad policy :
puniſhment is profuſely menaced againſt them,
and antidote is wholly forgotten. They are pro-
pelled


3 OF LIMITED MONARCHY.


pelled to vice by irreſiſtible temptations, the
love of power and the deſire to retain it; and
then cenſured with the rigour altogether diſpro-
portioned to their fault. The vital principle of
the ſociety is tainted with injuſtice, and the ſame
neglect of equity and partial reſpect of perſons
Jrill extend itſelf over the whole.
I I proceed to conſider that prerogative in limit-
ed monarchy, which, whatever others may be
given or denied, is inſeparable from its ſubſtance,
the prerogative of the king to nominate to public
offices. If any thing be of importance, ſurely
this muſt be of importance, that ſuch a nomina-
tion be made with wiſdom and integrity, that
the fitteſt perſons be appointed to the higheſt
truſts the ſtate has to confer, that an honeſt and
generous ambition be cheriſhed, and that men
who ſhall moſt ardently qualify themſelves for the
care of the public welfare be ſecure of n
the largeſt ſhare in its ſuperintendence.
This nomination is a moſt arduous taſk, and
requires the warieſt circumſpection. It approaches
more nearly than any other affair of politi-
cal ſociety to the exerciſe of diſcretion. In
all other caſes the line of rectitude ſeems viſible
and diſtinct. Juſtice in the conteſts of indivi-
duals, juſtice in queſtions of peace and war,
juſtice in the ordination of law, will not obſti-
nately withdraw itſelf from the reſearch of an
impartial and judicious enquirer. But to ob-
ſerve the various portions of capacity ſcattered
through a nation, and minutely to decide among
the qualifigations of innumerable  pretenders, muſt


after


OF LIMITED MONARCHY. 9


after all our accuracy be committed to ſome de-
gree of uncertainty.

The firſt difficulty that occurs is to diſcover
thoſe whom genius and ability have made in the
beſt ſenſe candidates for the office. Ability is
not always intruſive ; talents are often to be
found in the remoteneſs of a village, or the ob-
ſcurity of a garret. And, though ſelf conſci-
. ouſneſs, and ſelf poſſeſſion are to a certain degree
the attributes of genius, yet there are many
things beſide falſe modeity, that may teach its
poſſeſſor to ſhun the air of a court.

Of all men a king is leaſt qualified to pene-
trate thele receſſes, and diſcover merit in its hid-
ing place. Encumbered with forms, he cannot
mix at large in the ſociety of his ſpecies. He is
too much engroſſed with the ſemblance of buſi-
neſs or a ſucceſſion of amuſements to have lei-
ſure for ſuch obſervations as ſhould afford a juſt
eſtimate of men's characters. In reality the taſk
is too mighty for any individual, and the benefit
can only be ſecured by the mode of election.

Other diſadvantages attendant on this prero-
gative of chooſing his on miniſters it is need-
leſs to enumerate. If enough have not been
already ſaid to explain the character of a monarch
as growing out of the functions with which he
is inveſted, a laboured repetition in this place
would be both tedious and vain. If there be
any dependence to be placed upon the operation
of moral cauſes, a king will in almoſt every in-
ſtance be found among the moſt undiſcriminat-
ing, the moſt deceived, the leaſt informed, and the
leaſt heroically diſintereſted of mankind.


Such


20 o LIMITED MONARCHY.


Such then is the genuine and uncontrovertible
ſcene of a mixed monarchy. An individual

placed at the ſummit of the edifice, the centre
and the fountain of honour, and who is neutral,
or muſt ſeem neutral in the current tranſactions.
of his government. This is the firſt leſſon of
honour, virtue and truth, which mixed monar-
chy reads to its ſubjects. Next to the king
come his adminiſtration and the tribe of cour-
tiers; men driven by a fatal neceſſity to be cor-
rupt, intriguing and venal; ſelected for their
truſt by the moſt ignorant and ill informed of
their countrymen; made ſolely accountable for
meaſures of which they cannot ſolely be the
authors; threatened, if diſhoneſt, with the ven-
geance of an injured people; and, if honeſt,
with the ſurer vengeance of their ſovereign's diſ.
pleaſure. The reſt of the nation, the ub) ects
at large

Was ever a name ſo fraught with degradation
and meanneſs as this of ſubjects? I am, it ſeems,
by the very place of my birth become a ſubject.
Of what, or whom? Can an honeſt man conſi-
der himſelf as the ſubject of any thing but the
laws of juſtice? Can he acknowledge a ſuperior,
or hold himſelf bound to ſubmit his judgment
to the will of another, not leſs liable than him-
ſelf to prejudice and error ? Such is the idol that
monarchy worſhips in lieu of the divinity of
truth and the ſacred obligation of public good.
It is of little conſequence whether we vow fide-
lity to the king and the nation, or to the nation
and the wy ſo long as the king intrudes him-
ſelf


OF LIMITED MONARCHY. 11


ſelf to tarniſh and undermine the true ſumplicity,
the altar of virtue.

Are mere names beneath our notice, and will
they produce no ſiniſter influence upon the mind?
May we bend the knee before the ſhrine of va-
nity and folly without injury ? Far otherwile.
Mind had its beginning in ſenſation, and it de-
pends upon words and ſymbols for the progreſs
of its aſſociations. The true good man muſt
not only have a heart reſolved, but a front erect.
We cannot practiſe abjection, hypocriſy and
| meanneſs, whithout becoming degraded in other
men's eyes and in our own. We cannot © bow
the head in the temple of Rimmon,” without
in ſome degree apoſtatiſing from the divinity of
truth. He that calls a king a man, will
tually hear from his own mouth the leſſon, that
he is unfit for the truſt repoſed in him: he that
calls him by any ſublimer appellation, is haſten-
ing faſt into the moſt palpable and dangerous
errors.

But perhaps © mankind are ſo weak and imbe-
eil, that it is in vain to expect from the change


of their inſtitutions the improvement of their
+ , Character.” Who made them weak and imbecil?


- Previouſly to human inftitutions they had cer-
tainly none of this defect. Man conſidered
in himſelf is merely a being capable of impreſ-
ſion, a recipient of perceptions. What is there
in this abſtract character that precludes him
from advancement? We have a faint diſcovery
in individuals at preſent of what our nature is
capable: why ſhould individuals be fit for ſo
much, and the ſpecies for nothing? Is there any


thing


12 OF LIMITED MONARCHY.


thing in the ſtructure of the globe that forbids us
to be virtuous? If no, if nearly all our impreſ-
lions of right and wrong flow from our inter-
courſe with each other, why may not that inter-
courſe be ſuſceptible of modification and amend-
ment? It is the moſt cowardly of all ſyſtems +
that would repreſent the diſcovery of truth as
uſeleſs, and teach us, that, when diſcovered, it
is our wiſdom to leave the maſs of our ſpecies
in error.

There is not in reality the ſmalleſt room for
ſcepticiſm reſpecting the omnipotence of truth.
Truth is the pebble in the lake; and however
ſlowly in the preſent caſe the circles ſucceed each
other, they will infallibly go on till they over-
ſpread the ſurface. No order of mankind will
for ever remain ignorant of the principles of
juſtice, equality and public good. No ſooner
will they underſtand them, than they will per-
ceive the coincidence of virtue and public good
with private intereſt : nor will any - erroneous
eſtabliſhment be able effectually to ſupport itſelf
againſt general opinion, In this conteſt ſophiſtry |

will vaniſh, and miſchievous inftitutions fink
quietly into neglect. Truth will bring down all
her forces, mankind will be her army, and op-
preſſion, injuſtice, monarchy and vice will tumble
into a common. ruin.


CHAP,


111329


% AF: IX.
OF A PRESIDENT WITH REGAL POWERS. .


E numeration of powers—that of appointing to
inferior offices—of pardoning offences—of con-
voking deliberative aſſemblies—of Mixing a
veto to their decrees. —Conclufion.—The title
of king eſtimated. — Monarchical and ariſtocra-


tical ſyſtems, Jy of their effects.


OTILL monarchy it ſeems has one refuge left.
We will not,” ſay ſome men, © have an he-
reditary monarchy, we acknowledge that to be
an enormous injuſtice. We are not contented
with an elective monarchy, we are not content-
ed with a limited one. We admit the office
however reduced, if the tenure be for hfe, to be
an intolerable grievance. But why not have
kings, as we have magiſtrates and legiſlative
aſſemblies, renewable by frequent elections?
We may then change the holder of the office as
often as we pleaſe.”

Let us not be ſeduced by a mere plauſibility
of phraſe, nor employ words without having re-
flected on their meaning. What are we to un-
derſtand by the appellation, a king ? If the office
have any meaning, it ſeems reaſonable that the
man who holds it, ſhould poſſeſs the privilege, -
either of appointing to certain employments at

| | 7" 2p


o A. PRESIDENT


his own diſcretion, or of remitting the decrees
vf criminal juſtice, or of convoking and diſmiſ-
fing popular aſſemblies, or of afhxing and re-
fuſing his ſanction to the decrees of thoſe aſſem-
blies. Moft of theſe privileges may claim a re-
ſpectable authority in the powers delegated to


- their preſident by the United States of America.


Let us however bring theſe ideas to the touch-
ſtone of reaſon. Nothing can appear more ad-
venturous than the repoſing, unleſs in cafes of
abſolute neceſſity, the deciſion of any affair of
importance to the public, in the breaſt of one
man. But this neceflity will ſcarcely be alledg-
ed in any of the articles juſt enumerated. What
advantage does one man poſſeſs over a ſocie
or council of men in any of theſe reſpects ? The
diſadvantages under which he labours are obvious.
He is more eaſily corrupted, and more eaſily
miſled. He cannot poſſeſs ſo many advantages
for obtaining accurate information. He is abun-
dantly more liable to the attacks of paſſion and
caprice, of unfounded antipathy to one man and
partiality to another, of uncharitable cenſure or
blind idolatry. He cannot be always upon his
guard; there will be moments in which the
moſt exemplary vigilance is liable to ſurpriſe.
Meanwhile we are placing the ſubject in much
too favourable a light. We are ſuppoſing his
intentions to be upright and juſt; but the con-
trary of this will be more frequently the truth.
Where powers beyond the capacity of human
nature are intruſted, vices the diſgrace of human
nature will be engendered. Add to this, that
the ſome reaſons, which prove that government,


ö a wherever


WITH REGAL POWERS. «ug


wherever it exiſts, ſhould be directed by the
ſenſe of the people at large, equally prove that,
wherever public officers are neceſſary, the ſenſe
of the whole, or of a body of men molt nearly
approaching in ſpirit to the whole, ought to
decide on their pretenſions.
| Theſe objections are applicable to the moſt
innocent of the privileges above enumerated,
that of appointing to the. exerciſe of certain
employments. The caſe will be ftill worſe if
we conſider the other privileges. We ſhall have
occaſion hereafter to examine the propriety of
pardoning offences, conſidered independently of
the perſons in whom that power is veſted : but,
in the mean time, can any thing be more in-
tolerable than for a ſingle individual to be autho-
riſed, without aſſigning a reaſon, or aſſigning a
reaſon upon which no one is allowed to pro-
nounce, to ſuperſede the grave deciſions of a2
court of juſtice, founded upon a careful and
public examination of evidence? Can any thing
be more unjuſt than for a ſingle individual to
aſſume the function of informing a nation when _
they are to deliberate, and when they are to
ceaſe from deliberation ?
The remaining privilege is of too iniquitous.
a nature to be an object of much terror. It is
not in the compaſs of credibility to conceive,
that any people would remain quiet ſpectators,
while the ſenſe of one man was openly and
undiſguiſedly ſet againſt the ſenſe of the national
repreſentative in frequent aſſembly, and ſuffered
to overpower it. Two or three direct inſtances
of the exerciſe of this negative could not fail


tO


[


16 OF A PRESIDENT.


to annihilate it for ever. Accordingly, wherever
it is ſuppoſed to exiſt, we find it ſoftened and
nouriſhed by the genial dew of pecuniary cor-
ruption ; either rendered unneceſſary beforehand
by a ſiniſter application to the frailty of indivi-
dual members, or diſarmed and made palatable
in the ſequel by a copious effuſion of venal emol-
 Hents. If it can in any caſe be endured, it muſt
be in countries where the degenerate repreſenta-
tive no longer poſſeſſes the ſympathy of the
public, and the haughty preſident is made facred,
by the blood of an exalted anceſtry which flows
through his veins, or the holy oil which the
repreſentatives of the Moſt High have poured
on his head. A common mortal, periodically |
ſelected by his fellow-citizens to watch over
their intereſts, can never be ſuppoſed to Poſſeſs
this ſtupendous virtue.

If there be any truth in theſe reaſonings, it
inevitably follows that there are no important
functions of general ſuperintendence that can
juſtly be delegated to a ſingle individual. If the
office of a preſident be neceſſary, either in a de-
liberative aſſembly or an adminiſtrative council,
ſuppoſing ſuch a council to exiſt, his employ-
ment will have relation to the order of their
proceedings, and by no means conſiſt in the
arbitrary preferring and carrying into effect his
private deciſion. A king, if unvarying uſage
can have given meaning to a word, deſigns a
man upon whoſe fingle diſcretion ſome part of
the public intereſt is made to depend. What
uſe can there be for ſuch a man in an unpervert=
ed and well ordered ſtate? With reſpect to its
internal


WITH REGAL POWERS. 17


internal affairs certainly none. How far the
office can be of advantage in our tranſactions
with foreign governments we ſhall hereafter have
occaſion to decide.

Let us beware by an unjuſtifiable perverſion
of terms of confounding the common underſtand-
ing of mankind. A king is the well known
and ſtanding appellation for an office, which, if
there be any truth in the arguments of the pre-
ceding chapters, has been the bane and the grave
of human virtue. Why endeavour to purify
and exorciſe what is entitled only to execration?
Why not ſuffer the term to be as well underſtood
and as cordially deteſted, as the once honqura-
ble appellation of tyrant afterwards was among
the Greeks? Why not ſuffer it to reſt a perpe-
tual monument of the folly, the cowardice and
miſery of our ſpecies ?


——— —


IN proceeding from the examination of mo-
narchical to that of ariſtocratical government,
it is impoſſible not to remark that there are ſe-
veral diſadvantages common to both. One of
theſe is the creation of a ſeparate intereſt. The
benefit of the governed is made to lie on one
ſide, and the benefit of the governors on the
other. It is to no purpole to ſay that individual
intereſt accurately underſtood will always be
found to coincide with general, if it appear in
practice, that the opinions and errors of man-
kind are perpetually ſeparating them and placing
them in oppoſition to each other. The more the

Vol. II. C governors


8 OF A PRESID ENT, &e.


governors are fixed in a ſphere diſtinct and diſtant 4
from the governed, the more will this error be


cheriſhed. Theory, in order to produce an ade-
quate effect upon the mind, ſhould be favoured,


not counteracted, by practice. What principle


in human nature is more univerſally confeſſed
than ſelf love, that is, than a propenſity to think
individually of a private intereſt, to diſcriminate
and divide objects which the laws of the univerſe


have indiffolubly united? None, unleſs it be the


efprit de corps, the tendency of bodies of men
to aggrandiſe themſelves, a ſpirit, which, though
leſs ardent than ſelf love, is {till more vigilant,
and not expoſed to the accidents of ſleep, indiſ-


poſition and mortality. Thus it appears that,


of all impulſes to a narrow, ſelf- intereſted con-


duct, thoſe afforded by monarchy and My


are the greateſt.


Nor muſt we be too haſty and undiſtinguiſh-


ing in applying the principle, that individual
intereſt accurately underſtood will always be
found to coincide with general. Relatively to
individuals conſidered as men it is true; rela-
tively to individuals conſidered as lords and kings
tit is falſe. The man will be ſerved by. the ſacri-


fice of all his little peculium to the public intereſt,
but the king will be annihilated. The firſt ſa-


crifice that juſtice demands at the hand of mo-
narchy and ariſtocracy, is that of their immuni-
ties and prerogatives. Public intereſt dictates
the laborious diſſemination of truth and the im-
partial adminiſtration of juſtice. Kings and

lords ſubſiſt only under favour of error and op-

1 They will therefore reſiſt the progreſs
of


2 . froand proat® hot


\


or HEREDITARY' DISTINCTION. 19


of knowledge and illumination ; the moment
the deceit is diſpelled, their occupation is gone.
In thus concluding however we are taking
for granted that ariſtocracy will be found an ar-
bitrary and pernicious inſtitution, as monarchy
has already appeared to be. It is time that we


ſhould enquire in what degree this is actually
the caſe.


r
OF HEREDITARY DISTINCTION.


Birth conſidered as a phyſical cauſe—as a moral
cauſe. —Ariftocratical ęſtimate of the human
ſpecies —Education of the great, —Recapitula-
ton.


A PRINCIPLE deeply interwoven with both
monarchy and ariſtocracy in their moſt flouriſh-
ing ſtate, but moſt deeply with the latter, is that
of hereditary prekeminence. No principle can
preſent a deeper inſult upon reaſon and juſtice.
Examine the new born ſon of a peer and a
mechanic. Has nature deſignated in different
lineaments their future fortune? Is one of them
born with callous hands and an ungainly form ?
Can you trace in the other the early promiſe of
genius and underſtanding, of virtue and honour ?

"EOS We


20 OF HEREDITARY DISTINCTION.


We have been told indeed that © nature will.


break out*,” and that


„ The eaglet of a valiant neſt will quickly tower
Up to the region of his ſire“;“


and the tale was once Pele But mankind
will not ſoon again be perſuaded, that one li-
neage of human creatures produces beauty and
virtue, and another vice.

An aſſertion thus bold and unfounded will


quickly be refuted if we conſider the queſtion 2


priori, Mind is the creature of ſenſation; we
have no other inlet of knowledge. What are
the ſenſations that the lord experiences in his
mother's womb, by which his mind is made
different from that of the peaſant ? Is there any


variation in the finer reticulated ſubſtance of the


brain, by which the lord is adapted to receive
clearer and ſtronger impreſſions than the huſband-
man or the ſmith ?
“But a generous blood circulates in his heart
and enriches his veins.” What are we to un-
derſtand by this hypotheſis? Men's actions are
the creatures of their perceptions. He that ap-
prehends moſt ftrongly will act moſt intrepidly.
He, in whoſe mind truth is moſt diſtinctly i im-
preſſed, who, underſtanding its nature, is beſt
aware of its value, will ſpeak with the moſt heart-
felt perſuaſion, and write with the greateſt bril-
liancy and energy. By intrepidity and firmneſs
in action we muſt either underſtand the judici-
ous and deliberate conſtancy of a Regulus or a
Cato, or the brute courage of a private ſoldier,


which


* Tragedy of Douglas, AR iii.


"


s , ad aim of


um hal Wwe J OE oo Er ß] ̃Ü—P-:!!:!:!;; SE oy AY On WT I OO


— —— n


OF HEREDITARY DISTINCTION. 21


which is ſtill an affair of mind, conſiſting in a
flight eſtimate of life which affords him few
"nifihing: and a thoughtleſs and ſtupid oblivion
of danger. What __ the blood to do with this ?
Health is undoubtedly in moſt caſes the pre-
requiſite of the beſt exertions of mind. But
health itſelf is a mere negation, the abſence of
diſeaſe. A man muſt have experienced or ima-
gined the inconveniences of ſickneſs, before he
can derive poſitive pleaſure from the enjoyment
of health. Again, however extravagant we
may be in our eſtimate of the benefit of health,
is it true in fact that the lord enjoys a more
vigorous health, experiences a more uniform
chearfulneſs, and is leſs a prey to wearineſs and
languor than the ruſtic? High birth may inſpire
high thoughts as a moral cauſe; but is it credi-
ble that it ſhould operate inſtinctively and when
its exiſtence is unknown, while, with eve
external advantage to aſſiſt, the nobleſt families
ſo often produce the moſt degenerate ſons? Into
its value then as a moral cauſe let us proceed to
enquire.

The perſuaſion of its excellence in this re-
ipeCt 1 is an opinion probably as old as the inſti-
tution of nobility itſelf. The very etymologyof
the word expreſſing this particular form of go-
vernment is built upon this idea. It is called
ariſtocracy or the government of the beſt [f.
In the. writings of Cicero and the ſpeeches of
the Roman ſenate this order of men is ſtyled
the “ optimetes,” the virtuous,” the © liberal,”
and the © honeſt,” It is taken for granted,
that the multitude is an unruly beaſt, with no


ſenſe


22 O HEREDITARY DISTINCTION.


ſenſe of honour or principle, guided by ſordid
intereſt or not leſs ſordid appetite, envious,
- tyrannical, inconftant and unjuſt.” From hence
they deduced as a conſequence, © the neceſſity
of maintaining an order of men of hberal edu-
cation and elevated ſentiments, who ſhould either
engroſs the government of the humbler and
more numerous claſs incapable. of governing
themſelves, or at leaſt ſhould be placed as a
rigid guard upon their excefles, with powers
adequate to their correction and reſtraint.” The
greater part of theſe reaſonings will fall under
our examination when we conſider the diſad-
vantages of democracy. $0 much as relates to
the excellence of ariſtocracy it is neceſlary at
preſent to diſcuſs. #
'The whole: proceeds upon a ſuppoſition that,
_ © if nobility ſhould not, as its hereditary con-
ſtitution might ſeem to imply, be found origi-
nally ſuperior to the ordinary rate of mortals,
it is at leaſt rendered eminently ſo by the power
of education. Men, who grow up in unpoliſh-
ed ignorance and barbariſm, and are chilled
with the icy touch of poverty, muſt neceſſarily
be expoſed to a thouſand ſources of corruption,
and cannot have that delicate ſenſe of reCtitude
and honour, which literature and manly refine-
ment are found to beſtow. It is under the
- auſpices of indulgence and eaſe that civiliſation
is engendered. A nation muſt have ſurmounted
the diſadvantages of a firſt eſtabliſhment, and
have arrived at ſome degree of leiſure and proſ-
perity, before the love of letters can take root
among them. It is in individuals as in large
bodies


or HEREDITARY DISTINCTION. 23


bodies of men. A few exceptions will occur;


but, bating theſe, it can hardly be expected that


men, who are compelled j& every day by labori-
ous corporal efforts to provide for the neceſlities
of the day, ſhould arrive at great expanſion of
mind and comprehenſiveneſs of thinking,”

In certain parts of this argument there is con-
ſiderable truth. The real philoſopher will be
the laſt man to deny the power and importance
of education. It is therefore neceſſary, either
that a ſyſtem ſhould be diſcovered for ſecuring
leiſure and proſperity to every member of the
community, or that a paramount influence and
authority ſhould be given to the liberal and the
wiſe over the illiterate and ignorant. Now,

ſuppoſing for the preſent that the former of
theſe meaſures is impoſſible, it may yet be rea-
ſonable to enquire whether ariſtocracy be the
moſt judicious ſcheme for obtaining the latter.
Some light may be collected on this ſubject
from what has already appeared reſpecting edu-
cation under the head 'of monarchy.

Education is much, but opulent education is
of all its modes the leaſt efficacious. The edu-
cation of words is not to be deſpiſed, but the
education of things is on no account to be diſ-
penſed with. The former is of admirable ule
in inforcing and developing the latter; but,
when taken alone, it is pedantry and not learn-
ing, a body without a ſoul. Whatever may be
the abſtract perfection of which mind is capable,
we ſeem at preſent frequently to need being
excited, in the caſe of any uncommon» effort,
by motives that addreſs themſelves to the indi-

vidual.


24 OF HEREDITARY DISTINCTION.


vidual. But ſo far as relates to theſe motives,
the lower claſſes of mankind, had they ſufhcient
leiſure, have greatly the advantage of the higher.
The plebeian muſt be the maker of his own.
fortune; the lord finds his already made. The
plebeian muſt expect to find himſelf neglected
and defpiſed in proportion as he is remiſs in
_ cultivating the objects of eſteem ; the lord will
always be ſurrounded with fycophants and ſlaves.
The lord therefore has no motive to induſtry and
exertion; no ſtimulus to rouſe him from the
lethargic, © oblivious pool,” out of which every
finite intelle& originally roſe. It muſt indeed
be confeſſed, that truth. does not need the alli-
ance of clrctunihinde; and that a man may arrive
at the temple of fame by other pathways than -
thoſe of miſery and diſtreſs. But the lord does
not content himſelf with excluding the ſpur of
adverſity : he goes farther than this, and pro-
vides himſelf with fruitful ſources of effeminacy
and error. Man cannot offend with impunity .
againſt the great principle of univerſal good.
He that accumulates to himſelf luxuries and
titles and wealth to the injury of the whole,
becomes degraded from the rank of man; and,
however he may be admired by the multitude, |
is pitied by the wife and weariſome to himſelf.
Hence it appears, that to elect men to the rank
of nobility is to elect them to a poſt of moral
danger and a means of depravity ; but that to
conſtitute them hereditarily noble is to preclude
them, bating a few extraordinary accidents, from
| all the cauſes that generate ability and virtue.


The |


OF HEREDITARY DISTINCTION. 25


The reaſonings we have here repeated upon the
ſubject of hereditary diſtinction are ſo obvious,
that nothing can be a ſtronger inſtance of the
power of prejudice inſtilled in early youth, than
the fact of their having been at any time called
in queſtion, If we can in this manner produce
an hereditary legiſlator, why not an hereditary
moraliſt or an hereditary poet“? In reality an
attempt in either of theſe kinds would be more
rational and feaſible than in the other. From
birth as a phyſical cauſe it ſufficiently appears
that little can be expected: and, for education,
it is practicable in a certain degree, nor is it eaſy
to ſet limits to that degree, to infuſe poetical
or philoſophical emulation into a youthful mind;
but wealth is the fatal blaſt that deſtroys the
hopes of a future harveſt. ' There was once
indeed a gallant kind of virtue, that, by irre-
ſiſtibly ſeizing the ſenſes, ſeemed to communi-
cate extenſively to young men of birth, the
mixed and equivocal accompliſhments of «chi -
valry ; but, ſince the ſubjects of moral emula-
tion have been turned from perſonal proweſs to
the energies of intellect, and eſpecially ſince the
field of that emulation has been more widely
opened to the ſpecies, the liſts have been almoſt
uniformly occupied by thoſe, whoſe narrow cir-
cumſtances have goaded them to ambition, or
whoſe undebauched habits and ſituation in life
have reſcued them from the poiſon of flattery and
effeminate indulgence, |


CHAP, :


* See Paine's Rights of Man,


26 MORAL EFFECTS


MORAL EFFECTS OF ARISTOCRACY.


Importance of practical juſtice, —Species of injuſtice |
which ariſtocracy creates. —Eftimate of the in-
Jury produced, Examples.


!


— |; 45g

TREERE is one thing, more than all the reſt,
of importance to the well being of mankind,
juſtice. Can there be any thing problematical
or paradoxical in this fundamental principle, that
all injuſtice 1s injury ; and a thouſand times
more injurious by its effects in perverting the
underſtanding and overturning our calculations
of the future, than by the immediate calamity it


may produce?


All moral ſcience may be reduced to this one
head, calculation of the future. We cannot
reaſonably expect virtue from the multitude of
mankind, if they be induced by the perverſeneſs
of the conductors of human affairs to believe that
it is not their intereſt to be virtuous. But this is
not the point upon which the queſtion turns.
Virtue, is nothing elſe but the purſuit of general
good. Juſtice, is the ſtandard which diſcrimi-
nates the advantage of the many and of the few,
of the whole and a part. If this firſt and moſt
important of all ſubjects be involved in obſcurity,
how ſhall the well being of mankind be ſubſtan-

bb tially:


OF ARISTOCRACY. 27


tially promoted ? The moſt benevolent of our
ſpecies will be engaged in cruſades of error;
while the cooler and more phlegmatic ſpectators,
diſcerning no evident clue that ſhould guide them
amidſt the labyrinth, fit down in ſelfiſh neutrality,
and leave the ſcene to nn its
own denouement.

It is true that human affairs can never be re-
duced to that ſtate of depravation as to reverſe
the nature of juſtice. Virtue will always be the
intereſt of the individual as well as of the public.
Immediate virtue will always be b to the
preſent age, as well as to their poſterity. But,
though the depravation cannot riſe to this exceſs,
it will be abundantly ſufficient to obſcure the
underſtanding, and miſlead the conduct. Human
beings will never be ſo virtuous as they might
eaſily be made, till juſtice be the ſpectacle per-
petually preſented to their view, and OP be
wondered at as a prodigy.

Of all the principles of juſtice there is none ſo
material to the moral rectitude of mankind as
this, that no man can be diſtiaguiſhed but by his
perſonal merit. Why not endeavour to reduce
to practice ſo {imple and ſublime a leſſon? When
a man has proved himſelf a benefaQor to the
public, when he has already by laudable perſe-
verance cultivated in himielf talents, which need
only encouragement and public favour to bring
them to maturity, let that man be honoured.
In a ſtate of ſociety where fictitious diſtinctions
are unknown, it is impoſſible he ſhould not be
honoured. But that a man ſhould be looked
up to with 3 and awe, becauſe the king


has


28 OF. ARISTOCRACY.


has beſtowed on him a ſpurious name, or deco-
rated him with a ribband ; that another ſhould
wallow in luxury, becauſe his anceſtor three
centuries ago bled in the quarrel. of Lancaſter
or York; do we imagine that theſe iniquities can
be practiſed without injury?

| 8 thoſe who entertain this opinion converſe.
a little with the lower orders of mankind. They
will perceive that the unfortunate wretch, Who
with unremitted labour finds himſelf incapable
adequately to feed and clothe his family, has a
ſenſe of injuſtice rankling at his heart,


One whom diſtreſs has ſpited with the world,
Is he whom tempting fiends would pitch upon
Io do ſuch deeds, as make the proſperous men
Lift up their hands and wonder who could do them,*”


Such! is the education of the human ſpecies. Such
is the fabric of political ſociety.

But let us ſuppoſe that their ſenſe of injuſtice
were leis acute than it is here deſcribed, what
favourable inference can be drawn from that ?
Is not the injuſtice real ? If the minds of men be
ſo withered and ſtupefied by the conſtancy with
which it is practiſed, that they do not feel the
rigour that grinds them into nothing, how does
that improve the picture:

Let us for a moment give the reins to reflexion,
and endeavour accurately to conceive the ſtate of
mankind where juſtice ſhould form the publc
and general ene In that caſe our moral
feelings would aſſume a firm and wholſome tone,
for they would not be perpetually counteracted
wy examples that weakened their energy and

tal: 4:5; confounded


1 Tragedy of Dal, ACt ĩii.


O. FT ARIS TOC RAC. 29


confounded their clearneſs. Men would be fear-
leſs, becauſe they would know that there were
no legal ſnares lying in wait for their lives. They
would be courageous, becauſe no man would
be preſſed to the earth that another might enjoy
immoderate luxury, becauſe every one would
be ſecure of the juſt reward of his induſtry and
prize of his exertions. © Jealouſy and hatred
would ceaſe, for they are the offspring of in-
juſtice. Every man would ſpeak truth with his
neighbour, for there would be no temptation to
falſhood and deceit. Mind would find its level,
for there would be every thing to encourage and
to animate. Science would be unſpeakably im-
proved, for underſtanding would convert into a
real power, no longer an ignifſatuus, ſhining and
expiring by turns, and leading us into floughs
'of ſophiſtry, falſe ſcience and ſpecious miſtake.
All men would be diſpoſed to avow their diſpo-
ſitions and actions: none would endeavour to
ſuppreſs the juſt eulogium of his neighbour, for,
ſo long as there were. tongues to record, the
ſuppreſſion would be impoſſible; none fear to
detect the miſconduct of his neighbour, for there
would be no laws converting the ſincere expreſ-
ſion of our convictions into a libel.

Let us fairly conſider for a moment what is
the amount of injuſtice included in the inſtitution
of ariſtocracy. I am born, ſuppoſe, a Poliſh prince
with an income of Zoo, ooo per annum. You
are born a manorial ſerf or a Creolian negro,
by the law of your birth attached to the ſoil,
and transferable by barter or otherwiſe to twenty
ſucceſſive lords. 2 vain ſhall be your moſt ge-


Nnerous


£/ — *


30 OF ARIS TOCRA Cx.


nerous efforts and your unwearied induſtry to
free yourſelf from the intolerable yoke. Doomed
by the law of your birth to wait at the gates of
the palace you muſt never enter, to ſleep under
a ruined weather-beaten roof, while your maſter


ſleeps under canopies of ſtate, to feed on putre-


fied offals while the world is ranſacked for deli-
cacies for his table, to labour without moderation


or limit under a parching ſun while he baſks in
perpetual ſloth, and to be rewarded at laſt with _


contempt, reprimand, ſtripes and mutilation.
In fact the caſe is worſe than this. I could en-
dure all that injuſtice or caprice could inflict,


provided I poſſeſſed in the reſource of a firm


mind the power of looking down with pity on
my tyrant, and of knowing that I had that within,
that ſacred character of truth, virtue and forti-
tude, which all his injuſtice could not reach.


But a ſlave and a ſerf are condemned to ſtupidity


and vice, as well as to calamity. Is all this
nothing ? Is all this neceſſary for the maintenance


of civil order? Let it be eee. that for this


diſtinction there is not the ſmalleſt foundation in
the nature of things, that, as we have already ſaid,
there is no particular mould for the conſtruction

of lords, and that they are born neither better
nor worſe than the pooreſt of their dependents.
It is this ſtructure of ariſtocracy in all its ſanc-


tuaries and fragments againſt which reaſon and


philoſophy have declared war. It is alike unjuſt,
whether we conſider it in the caſts of India, the
villainage of the feudal ſyſtem, or the deſpotiſm
of the patricians of ancient Rome dragging their


Aobtors into perſonal ſervitude to expiate loans


they


or [TETL BY.” 21


they could not repay. Mankind will never be
in an eminent degree virtuous and happy, till
each man ſhall poſſeſs that portion of diſtinction
and no more, to which he is entitled by his per-
ſonal merits. The diſſolution of ariſtocracy is
equally the intereſt of the oppreſſor and the
oppreſſed. The one will be delivered from the
liſtleſſneſs of tyranny, and the other from the
brutaliſing operation of ſervitude. How long
ſhall we be told in vain, © that mediocrity of for-
tune 1s the true rampart of perſonal happineſs?”


C144 Þ 2
OF TFELES.


Their origin and hiflory. — Their miſerable ab-
furdity.—Truth the only adequate reward of


merit. ©


TRE caſe of mere titles is ſo abſurd that it
would deſerve to be treated only with ridicule,
were it not for the ſerious miſchiefs it impoſes
on mankind. The feudal ſyſtem was a ferocious
monſter devouring wherever it came all that the
friend of humanity regards with attachment and
love. The fyſtem of titles appears under a dif-
ferent form. The monſter is at length deſtroyed,
and they who followed in his train, and fat-

tened


*
3


w= | OF TITLES.


tened upon the carcaſſes of thoſe he ſlew, have
ſtuffed his ſkin, and by exhibiting it hope ſtill
to terrify mankind'into patience and puſillanimi-
ty. The ſyſtem of the Northern invaders, how-
ever odious, eſcaped the ridicule of the ſyſtem
of titles. When the feudal chieftains aſſumed a
geographical appellation, it was from ſome place
really ſubje& to their authority; and there was
no more abſurdity in the ſtyle they aſſumed,
than in our calling a man at preſent the go-
-vernor of Tangiers or the governor of Gibraltar.
The commander in chief or the ſovereign did
not then give an empty name; he conferred an
earldom or a barony, a ſubſtantial tract of land,
with houſes and men, and producing a real reve-
nue. He now grants nothing but the privilege
of calling yourſelf Tom who were beforetime
called Will; and, to add to the abſurdity, your.
new appellation is borrowed from ſome place
perhaps you never ſaw, or ſome country you
never viſited. The ſtyle however is the ſame;
we are ſtill earls and barons, governors of pro-
vinces and commanders of forts, and that with
the ſame evident propriety as the elector of Han-
over and arch treaſurer of the empire ſtyles him-
ſelf king of France. |
Can there be any thing more ludicrous, than
that the man, who was yeſterday Mr. St. John,
the moſt eloquent ſpeaker of the Britiſh houſe of


commons, the moſt penetrating thinker, the


umpire of maddening parties, the reſtorer of
peace to bleeding and exhauſted Europe, ſhould
be to-day lord Bolingbroke ? In what is he be-
come greater and more venerable than he vras ?

In


OP inn 33
In the pretended favour of a ſtupid and beſotted
woman, who always hated him, as ſhe uniform-
ly hated talents and virtue, though for her own
intereſt ſhe was obliged to endure him.

The friends of a man upon whom a title has
recently been conferred, muſt either be wholly.
blinded by the partiality of friendſhip not to feel
the ridicule of his ſituation, or completely de-
baſed by the paraſitical ſpirit of dependence not
to betray their feelings. Every time they eſſay to
ſpeak, they are in danger of blundering upon the
inglorious appellations of Mr. and Sir.“ Every
time their tongue faulters with unconfirmed
practice, the queſtion ruſhes upon them with
irreſiſtible force, What change has my old friend
undergone; in what is he wiſer or better, hap-
pier or more honourable? The firſt week of a
new title is a perpetual war of the feelings in
every ſpectator, the genuine dictates of common
ſenſe againſt the arbitrary inſtitutions of ſociety.
To make the farce more perfect theſe titles are
ſubject to perpetual fluctuations, and the man
who is to-day earl of Kenſington, will to-mor-
row reſign with unbluſhing effrontery all appear-
ance of character and honour to be called marquis
of Kew. Hiſtory labours under the Gothic and
unintelligible burden: no mortal patience can
connect the different ſtories of him who is to-day
lord Kimbolton, and to-morrow earl of Man-
cheſter; to-day earl of Mulgrave, and to-morrow
marquis of Normandy and duke of Bucking-


hamfhire.


Vor- II. D The


* In reality theſe 3 are little leſs abſurd than thoſe by
which by are ſuperſeded. |


—


34 | OF TITLES.


The abſurdity of theſe titles ſtrikes us the
more, becauſe they are uſually the reward of


intrigue and corruption. But, were it other- ' |


wiſe, ſtill they would be unworthy of the ad-
herents of reaſon and juſtice. When we fpeak
of Mr. St. John, as of the man, who by his elo-
quence ſwayed contending parties, who withdrew
the conquering {word from ſuffering France, and
gave forty years of peace and calm purſuit of the
arts of life and wiſdom to mankind, we fpeak of
ſomething eminently great. Can any title expreſs
theſe merits? Is not truth the conſecrated and


ſingle vehicle of juſtice? Is not the plain and


{imple truth worth all the cunning ſubſtitutions
in the world? Could an oaken garland or a gilded
coronet have added one atom to his real greatneſs ?
Garlands and coronets may be beſtowed on the
unworthy and proſtituted to the intriguing. Till
mankind be ſatisfied with the naked ſtatement of
what they really perceive, till they confeſs virtue
to be then moſt illuſtrious when ſhe moſt diſ-
dains the aid of ornament, they will never arrive
at that manly juſtice of ſentiment, at which they
are deſtined one day to arrive. By this ſcheme
of naked truth, virtue will be every day a gainer ;


every ſucceeding obſerver will more fully do her


Juſtice, while vice, deprived of that init with
which ſhe delighted to gloſs her actions, of that
. gaudy exhibition which may be made alike by
every pretender, will ſpeedily link 1 into unheeded


Ho


CHAP.


E


R
OF THE ARISTOCRATICAL CHARACTER,


Intolerance of ariflocracy—dependant for its ſucceſs
upon the ignorance of the multitude, —Precau-
tions neceſſary for its ſupport.— Different kinds
of ariſtocracy.—Ariſfocracy of the Romans : Its
virtues—4ts VICES. —Ariflocratical diftributi on of
property—regulations by which it 1s maintained
—avarice it engenders.—Argument againſt in-
novation from the preſent happy eſtabli . of
affairs confs idered. . |


ARISTO CRACY i in its proper ſignification
implies neither leſs nor more than a ſcheme for
rendering more permanent and viſible by the

interference of political inſtitution the nequality

of mankind. Ariſtocracy, like monarchy, is
founded in falſhood, the bf "= of art foreign
to the real nature of things, and muſt therefore,
like monarchy, be ſupported by artifice and falſe
pretences. Its empire however is founded in
principles more gloomy and unſocial than thoſe
of monarchy. The monarch often thinks it ad-
viſable to employ blandiſhments and courtſhip
with his barons and officers ; but the lord deems
it ſufficient to rule with a rod of iron.

D 2... 'Both


36 OF THE ARISTOCRATICAL CHARACTER.
Both depend for their perpetuity upon igno-
rance. Could they, like Omar, deftroy the pro-
ductions of profane reaſoning, and perſuade
mankind that the Alcoran contained every thing .
which it became them to Rudy, they might
then renew their leaſe of empire, But here again
ariſtocracy diſplays its ſuperior harſhnets. Mo-
narchy admits of a certain degree of monkiſh
learning among its followers. But ariftocracy
holds a ſtricter hand. Should the lower ranks
of ſociety once come to be generally taught to
write and read, its power would be at an end.
To make men ſerfs and villains it 1s indiſpenſibly
neceſſary to make them brutes. This is a queſ-
tion which has long been canvaſſed with great
eagerneſs and avidity. The reſolute advocates
of the old ſyſtem have with no contemptible
foreſight oppoſed this alarming innovation. In
their well known obſervation, ce that a ſervant
who has been taught to write and read ceaſes to
be any longer a paſſive machine, is contained
the embryo from which it would be eaſy to
explain the whole philoſophy of human ſociety.
And who 1s there that can refle& with pa-
tience upon the malevolent contrivances of theſe
inſolent uſurpers, contrivances the end of which
is to keep the human ſpecies in a ſtate of endleſs
degradation? It is in the ſubjects we are here ex-
amining that the celebrated maxim of © many


made for one” is brought to the real teſt. Thoſe


reaſoners were no doubt wile in their generation,
who two centuries ago conceived alarm at the
blaſphemous doctrine, © that government was
inſtituted for the benefit of the governed, and,


OF THE ARISTOCRATICAL CHARACTER.. 37


if it propoſed to itſelf any other object, was no
better than an uſurpation. It will perpetually
be found that the men, who in every age have
been the earlieſt to give the alarm of innovation,
and have been ridiculed. on that account as þi-
goted and timid, were in reality perſons of more
than common diſcernment, who ſaw, though
but imperfectly, in the rude principle the in-
ferences to which it inevitably led. It is time
that men of reflection ſhould chooſe between
the two alternatives: either to go back fairly
and without reſerve to the primitive principles
of tyranny; or, adopting any one of the axioms
oppoſite to theſe, however neutral it may at firſt
appear, not feebly and ignorantly to ſhut their
eyes e countleſs hoſt of conſequences.

It is not neceſſary to enter into a methodical
diſquiſition of the different ſpecies of ariſtocracy,
ſince, if the above reaſonings have any force,
they are equally cogent againſt them all. Ariſto-
cracy may veſt its prerogatives principally in the
individual, as in Poland; or entirely reſtrict them
to the nobles in their corporate capacity, as in
Venice. The former will be more tumultuous
and diſorderly; the latter more jealous, intole-
rant and ſevere. The magiſtrates may either re-
cruit their body by election among themſelves,
as in Holland ; or by the choice of the people,
as In ancient Rome. 0

The ariſtocracy of ancient 8 was incom-
parably the moſt venerable and illuſtrious that
ever exiſted upon the face of the earth. It
may not therefore be improper to contemplate in
them the degree of ERFORENES to which ariſto-

cracy


33 OF THE ARIS TOCRATICAL CHARACTER.
cracy may be raiſed. They included in their
inſtitution ſome of the benefits of democracy,
as generally ſpeaking no man became a member
of the ſenate, but in conſequence of his being
elected by the people to the ſuperior magiſtracies.
It was reaſonable therefore to expect that the ma-
jority of the members would poſſeſs ſome degree
of capacity, They were not like modern ariſto-
cratical aſſemblies, in which, as primogeniture
and not ſelection decides upon their prerogatives,
we ſhall commonly ſeek in vain for capacity,
except in a few of the lords of recent creation.
As the plebeians were long reſtrained from look-
ing for candidates except among the patricians,
that is, the poſterity of ſenators, it was reaſonable
to ſuppoſe that the moſt eminent talents would

be confined to that order. A circumſtance which
contributed to this was the monopoly of liberal
education and the cultivation of the mind, a
monopoly which the art of printing has at length
fully deſtroyed. Accordingly all the great lite-
rary ornaments of Rome were either patricians,
or of the equeſtrian order, or their immediate
dependents. The plebeians, though in their
corporate capacity they poſſeſſed for ſome centu-
Ties the virtues of ſincerity, intrepidity, love of
| Juſtice and of the public, could never boaſt of
any of thoſe individual characters in their party


that reflect luſtre on mankind, except the two


Gracchi : while the patricians told of Brutus,
Valerius, Coriolanus, Cincinnatus, Camillus,
Fabricius, Regulus, the Fabii, the Decii, the Sci-
pios, Lucullus, Marcellus, Cato, Cicero, and in-
numerable others, With this retroſpe& conti-
- | nually


BF THE ARISTOCRATICAL CHARACTER. 39.


nually ſuggeſted to their minds it was almoſt
venial for the ſtern heroes of Rome and the laſt -
illuſtrious martyrs. of the republic to entertain
ariſtocratical ſentiments.

Let us however conſider impartially this ariſto-
cracy, ſo incomparably ſuperior to any other of
ancient or modern times. Upon the firſt inſtitu-
tion of the republic, the people poſſeſſed ſcarcely
any authority except in the election of mani
trates, and even here their intrinſic importance
was eluded by the mode of arranging the aſſem-
bly, ſo that the whole deciſion veſted in-the
richer claſſes of the community. No magiſtrates
of any deſcription were elected but from among
the patricians, All cauſes were judged by the
patricians, and from their judgment there was no
appeal. The patricians intermarried among theme.
ſelves, and thus formed a republic of narrow
extent in the midſt of the nominal one, which
was held by them in a ſtate of abject ſervitude.
'The idea which purified theſe uſurpations in the
minds of the uſurpers, was, that the vulgar
are eſſentially coarſe, groveling and ignorant,
and that there can be no ſecurity for the empire
of juſtice and conſiſtency but in the decided
aſcendancy of the liberal.” Thus, even while

they oppoſed the eſſential intereſts of mankind,
they were animated with public ſpirit and an un-
bounded enthuſiaſm of virtue. But it is not leſs
true that they did oppoſe the eſſential intereſts.
of mankind. What can be more extraordinary
than the declamations of Appius Claudius in this
ſtyle, at once for the moral greatneſs of mind
7 * they were dilated, and the cruel in-


tolerance


40 OF THE ARISTOCRATICAL CHARACTER,


tolerance they were intended to inforce ? It is
inexpreſſibly painful to ſee ſo much virtue through
ſucceſſive ages employed in counteracting the
juſteſt requiſitions. Ihe reſult was, that the
patricians, notwithſtanding their immeaſurable
ſuperiority in abilities, were obliged to yield one
by one the excluſions to which they ſo obſtinately
clung. In the interval they were led to have
recourſe to the moſt odious methods of counter-
actions; and every man among them contended
who ſhould be loudeſt in applauſe of the nefa-
rious murder of the Gracchi. If the Romans
were diſtinguiſhed for ſo many virtues, conſtitut-
ed as they were, what might they not have been
but for the iniquity of ariſtocratical uſurpation?
The indelible blemiſh of their hiſtory, the love
of conqueſt, originated in the ſame cauſe. Their
wars, through every period of the republic, were
nothing more than the contrivance of the patri-
clans, to divert their countrymen from attending
to the ſentiments of unalterable truth, by leading
them to ſcenes of conqueſt and carnage. They
underitood the.art, common to all governments,
of confounding the underſtandings of the mul-
titude, and perſuading them that the moſt unpro-
voked hoſtilities were merely the dictates of ne-
ceflary defence.

The principle of ariſtocracy is founded in the
extreme inequality of conditions. No man can
be an uſeful member of lociety, except ſo far as
his talents are employed in a manner conducive
to the general advantage. In every ſociety the
produce, the means of contributing to the neceſ-
ſities and conveniencies of its members is of a

certain


OF THE ARISTOCRATICAL CHARACTER. as


certain amount. In every ſociety the bulk at
leaſt of its members contribute by their perſonal
exertions to the creation of this produce. W hat
can be more reaſonable and juſt, than that tae
produce itſelf ſhould with ſome degree of equality
be ſhared among them? What more injurious -
than the accumulating upon a few every means
of ſaperfluity and luxury, to the total deſtruction
of the eaſe, and plain, but plentiful, ſubſiſtence
of the many? It may be calculated that the king
even of a limited monarchy, receives as the 1a-
lary of his office, an income equivalent to the
:abour of fifty thouſand men. Let us ict out
in our eſtimate from this point, and figure to our-
ſelves the ſhares of his counſellors, his nobles, the
wealthy commoners by whom the nobility will be
emulated, their kindred and dependents. is i
any wonder that in fuch countries the lower or-
ders of the community are exhauſted by all ye
hardſhips of penury and immoderate fatigue ?
When we lee the wealth of a province fpread
upon the great man's table, can we be ſurpriſed
that his neighbours have not bread to ſatiate the
cravings of hunger?

Is this a ſtate of human beings that muſt be
conſidered as the laſt improvement of political
wildom ? In ſuch a ſtate it is impoſſible that emi-
nent virtue ſhould not be exceedingly rare. The
higher and the lower claſſes will be alike corrupted
by their unnatural ſituation. But to paſs over the
higher claſs for the preſent, what can be more
evident than the tendency of want to contract
the intelleQual Gr The ſituation which the

wiſe


Taking the average price of labour at one ſhilling per diem.


42 OF THE ARIS TOCRATICAL CHARACTER.


wiſe man would deſire for himſelf and for thoſe
in whoſe welfare he was. intereſted, would be a
ſituation of alternate labour and relaxation, labour
that ſhould not exhauſt the frame, and relaxa-
tion that was in no danger to degenerate into
indolence. Thus induſtry and activity would be
cheriſhed, the frame preſerved in a healthful
tone, and the mind accuſtomed to meditation and
reflection. But this would be the ſituation of the
whole human ſpecies, if the ſupply of our wants
were equally diſtributed. Can any ſyſtem be
more worthy of our po ine ies than that
which converts nineteen-twentieths of them into
beaſts of burden, annihilates ſo much thought,
renders impoſſible ſo much virtue and pee
fo much happineſs ?
But it may be alledged, © that this argument
is foreign to the ſubject of - ariſtocracy ; the ine-
quality of conditions being the inevitable conſe-
quences of the inſtitution of property.“ It is true
that many diſadvantages flow out of this inſtitu-
tion in its ſimpleſt form; but theſe diſadvantages,
to whatever they may amount, are greatly aggra-
vated by the operations of ariſtocracy. Ariſto-
cracy turns the ſtream of property out of its


natural channel, and forwards with the moſt


aſſiduous care its accumulation in the hands of a
nam 4 few perſons. The doctrines of primogeni-
and entails, as well as the immenſe volumes
of laws of transfer and inheritance which
have infeſted every part of Europe, were pro-
duced for this expreſs purpoſe.
Alt the cer that it has endeavoured to
* the acquiſition of permanent property


5 difficult,


OF THE ARISTOCRATICAL CHARACTER. 43
difficult, ariſtocracy has greatly increaſed the


excitements to that acquiſition. | All men are
accuſtomed to conceive a thirſt after diſtindtion
and pre-eminence, but they do not all fix upon
wealth as the object of this paſſion, but variouſly
upon {kill in any particular art, grace, learning,
talents, wiſdom and virtue. Nor does it ap
that theſe latter objects are purſued by their vo-
taries with leſs aſſiduity, than wealth is purſued
by thoſe who are anxious to acquire it. Wealth
would be {till leſs capable of being miſtaken for
the univerſal paſſion, were 1t not rendered by
political inſtitution, more than by its natural in-
fluence, the road to honour and reſpect.
There is no miſtake more thoroughly to be
deplored on this ſubject, than that of perſons,
ſitting at their eaſe — furrounded with all the
conveniences of life, who are apt to exclaim,
„We find things very well as they are; and to
inveigh bitterly againſt all projects of reform, as
the romances of viſionary men, and the decla-
mations of thoſe who are never to be ſatisfied.”
Is it well, that ſo large a part of the community -
ſhould be kept in abject penury, rendered ſtupid
with ignorance and diſguſtful with vice, perpe-
tuated in nakedneſs and hunger, goaded to the
commiſſion of crimes and made victims to the
mercileſs laws which the rich have inſtituted to
oppreſs them? Is it ſedition to enquire whether
this ſtate of things may not be exchanged for a
better? Or can there be any thing more diſgrace-
ful to ourſelves than to exclaim that All is well,”
merely becauſe we are at our eaſe, regardleſs of


44 OF THE ARISTOCRATICAL CHARACTER.


the miſery, degradation and \ vice that may be
occalioned in others:

There is one argument to which the advocates
of monarchy and ariſtocracy always have recourſe
when driven from every other pretence ; the
miſchievous nature of democracy. © However
imperfect the two former of theſe inſtitutions
may be in themſelves, they are found neceſſary,”
we are told, *as accommodations to the imperfec-
tion of human nature. It is for the reader who |
has conſidered the arguments of the preceding
chapters to decide, how far it is probable that
circumſtances can occur, which ſhould make it
our duty to ſubmit to theſe complicated evils.
Meanwhile let us proceed to examine that de-
mocracy of which ſo alarming a picture has
uniformly been exhibited. |


„ „ e JAP.


1


CHAP, XIV.
GENERAL FEATURES OF DEMOCRACY.


 Definition.—Suppoſed evils of this form of go-
vernment—aſcendancy of the 1gnorant—of the
crafty—inconſlancy—rafh confidence—ground-
leſs ſuſpicion. — Merits and defects of democracy
compared. It moral tendency. —Tendency of
truth. ao ene .


D EMOCRACY is a ſyſtem of government
according to which every member of ſociety is
conſidered as a man and nothing more. So far
as poſitive regulation is concerned, if indeed
that can with any propriety be termed regula-
tion Which is the mere recognition of the ſimp-
leſt of all principles, every man is regarded as
equal. Talents and wealth, wherever they exiſt,
will not fail to obtain a certain degree of influ-
ence, without requiring any poſitive inſtitution
of ſociety to ſecond their operation.

But there are certain diſadvantages that may
| ſeem the neceſſary reſult of democratical equa-
lity. In political ſociety it is reaſonable to
ſuppoſe that the wiſe will be outnumbered by
the unwiſe, and it will be inferred “ that the
welfare of the whole will therefore be at the
mercy of ignorance and folly.“ It is true that


the ignorant will generally be ſufficiently willing
to


4 GENERAL FEATURES
to be guided by the judicious, « but their very


ignorance will incapacitate them from diſcerning
the merit of their guides. The turbulent and-
_ crafty demagogue will often poſſeſs greater ad-
vantages for inveigling their judgment, than the
man who with purer intentions may poſleſs a
teſs brilliant talent. Add to this, that the de-
magogue has a never failing refource in the rul-
ing imperfection of human nature, that of pre-
ferring the ſpecious preſent to the ſubſtantial
future. Ibis is what is uſually termed, playing
upon the paſſions of mankind. Political truth
has hitherto proved an enigma, that all the wit
of man has been inſufficient to ſolve. Is it to
be ſuppoſed that the uninſtructed multitude
mould always be able to reſiſt the artful ſophiſtry
and captivating eloquence that will be employ-
ed to darken it? Will it not often happen that
the ſchemes propoſed by the ambitious diſturber
will poſſeſs a meretricious attraction, which the
ſevere and fober project of the diſcerning ſtateſ-
man ſhall be unable to compenſate ?

« One of the moſt fruitful ſources of human
happineſs is to be found in the ſteady and uni-
form operation of certain fixed principles. But
it is the characteriſtic of a democracy to be
wavering and inconſtant. The philoſopher only,
who has deeply meditated his principles, is in-
flexible in his adherence to them. The maſs
of mankind, as they have never arranged their
reflections into ſyſtem, are at the mercy of every
momentary impulie, and liable to change with
every wind. But this inconſtancy is directly
che reverſe of every idea of political juſtice.

* Nor


\


OF DEMOCRACY. 47


« Nor is this all. Democracy is a monſtrous
and unwieldy veſſel launched upon the ſea of
human paſſions without ballaſt. Liberty in this
unlimited form is in danger to be loſt almoſt as
ſoon as it is obtained. The ambitious man
finds nothing in this ſcheme of human affairs to
ſet bounds to his deſires. He has only to dazzle
and deceive the multitude in order to riſe to
abſolute power.

« A farther ill conſequence flows out of this
circumſtance. The multitude; conſcious of
their weakneſs in this reſpect, will, in propor-
tion to their love of liberty and equality, be per-
petually ſuſpicious and uneaſy. Has any man
diſplayed uncommon virtues or rendered eminent
ſervices to his country? He will preſently be
charged with ſecretly aiming at the tyranny.
Various circumſtances will come in aid of this
accuſation, the general love of novelty, envy
of ſuperior merit, and the incapacity of the
multitude-to underſtand the motives and charac-
ter of thoſe who ſo far excel them. Like the
Athenian, they will be tired of hearing Ariſtides
conſtantly called the Juſt. Thus will merit be
too frequently the victim of ignorance and envy.
Thus will all that is liberal and refined, whatever
the human mind in its higheſt Rate of improve-
ment is able to conceive, be often overpowered
by the turbulence of unbridled paſhon and the
rude dictates of ſavage folly.”

If this picture muſt inevitably be realiſed
wherever democratical principles are eſtabliſhed,
the ſtate of human nature would be peculiarly
0 No form of government can be


deviſed


38 GCENERAL FEATURES
deviſed which does not partake of monarchy,
ariſtocracy or democracy. We have taken a
copious ſurvey of the two former, and it would
ſeem impoſſible that greater or more inveterate
miſchiefs can be inflicted on mankind, than
thoſe which are inflicted by them. No portrait
of injuſtice, degradation and vice can be exhi-
bited, that can ſurpaſs the fair and inevitable
ien from the principle upon which they
are built. If then democracy could by any
arguments be brought down to a level with ſuch
monſtrous inſtitutions as theſe, in which there
is neither integrity nor reaſon, our proſpects of
the future happineſs of mankind would indeed be
deplorable.
But this is impoſſible. Suppoſing that we
ſhould even be obliged to take democracy with
all the diſadvantages that were ever 'annexed to
it, and that no remedy could be diſcovered for
any of its defects, it would be ftill greatly pre-
ferable to the excluſive ſyſtem of other forms.
Let us take Athens with all its turbulence and
inſtability ; with the popular and temperate -
uſurpations of Piſiſtratus and Pericles ; with their
monſtrous oſtraciſm, by which with undiſguiſed
injuſtice they were accuſtomed periodically to
baniſh ſome eminent citizen without the im-
putation of a crime; with the impriſonment
of Miltiades, the exile of Ariſtides and the
murder of Phocion :—with all theſe errors on its
head, it is incontrovertible that Athens exhi-
bited a more illuſtrious and enviable ſpectacle
than all the monarchies and ariſtocracies that
ever exiſted. Who would reject. the gallant
love


OF DEMOCRACY. "


love, of virtue and independence, becauſe it was
accompanied with ſome irregularities? Who
would paſs an unreſerved condemnation upon
their. penetrating mind, their quick diſcernment
and their ardent feeling, becauſe they were ſub-
je& occaſionally to be intemperate and impetu-
ous? Shall we compare a people of ſuch incredi-
ble achievements, ſuch exquilite refinement, gay
without inſenſibility and ſplendid without intem-
perance, in the midſt of whom grew up the
greateſt poets, the nobleſt artiſts, the moſt finiſh-
ed orators and political writers, and the moſt
diſintereſted philoſophers the world ever ſaw,—
ſhall we compare this choſen ſeat of patriotiſm,
independence and generous virtue, with the
torpid and ſelfiſh realms of monarchy and ariſ-
tocracy ? All is not happineſs that looks tran-
quillity. Better were a portion of turbulence


and fluctuation, than that unwholſome calm


which is a ſtranger to virtue.

In the eſtimate that is uſually made of *
cfacy, one of the moſt flagrant ſources of error
lies in our taking mankind ſuch as monarchy and
ariſtocracy have made them, and from thence
judging how fit they are to legiſlate for them-
ſelves. Monarchy and ariſtocracy would be no
evils, if their tendency were not to undermine
the virtues and the underſtandings of their ſub-
jects. The thing moſt neceſſary is to remove
all thoſe reſtraints which- hold mind back from


its natural flight. Implicit faith, blind ſubmiſ-


ſion to authority, timid fear, a diſtruſt of our


powers, an inattentiof to our own importance


and the good purpoſes we are able to effect,
— E © theſe


© GENERAL FEATURES


' theſe are the chief obſtacles to human improve-
ment. Democracy reſtores to man a conſciouſneſs _
of his value, teaches him by the removal of
authority and oppreſſion to liſten only to the
dictates of reaſon, gives him confidence to treat
all other men as his fellow beings, and induces
him to regard them no longer as enemies againſt
whom to be upon his guard, but as brethren
. whom it becomes him to aſſiſt. Thecitizen of a
democratical ſtate, when he looks upon the mi-
ſerable oppreſſion and injuſtice that prevail in
the countries around him, cannot but entertain
an inexpreſſible eſteem for the advantages he
enjoys, and the moſt unalterable determination
at all hazards to preſerve them. The influence
of democracy upon the ſentiments of its members
is altogether of the negative ſort, but its conſe-
quences are ineſtimable. Nothing can be more
unreaſonable than to argue from men as we now
find them, to men as they may hereafter be made.
Strict and accurate reaſoning, inſtead of ſuffering
us to be ſurpriſed that Athens did ſo much, would
at firſt 2 us to wonder that ſhe retained ſo
many imperfections.

The road to the improvement of marking 5 is
in the utmoſt degree ſimple, to ſpeak and act
the truth. If the Athenians had had more of


cis, it is impoſſible they ſhould have been ſo


flagrantly erroneous. To tell the truth in all caſes
without reſerve, to adminiſter juſtice without
partiality, are principles which, when once rigor-
oully adopted, are of all others the moſt prolific,
They enlighten the underſtanding, give energy
to 'the judgment, and firip miſrepreſentation of

* its


OF DEMOCRACY. 51


its ſpeciouſneſs and plauſibility. In Athens men


{afſered themſelves to be dazzled by ſplendour 3


and ſhow. If the error in their conſtitution
which led to this defect can be diſcovered, if a
form of political ſociety can be deviſed in which
men ſhall be accuſtomed to judge ſtrictly and
ſoberly, and habitually exerciſed to the plainneſs
and ſimplicity of nk; democracy would in
that ſociety ceaſe from the turbulence, inſtability,
fickleneſs and violence that have too often charac-
teriſed it. Nothing can be more certain than the
omnipotence of truth, or, in other words, than
the connexion between the judgment and the
outward behaviour. If ſcience be capable of
perpetual improvement, men will alſo be capable
of perpetually advancing in practical wiſdom
and juſtice. Once eſtabliſh the perfectibility of
man, and it will inevitably follow that we are
advancing to a ſtate, in which truth will be too
well known to be eaſily miſtaken, and juſtice too


| habitually practiſed to be voluntarily counter-.


ated. Nor ſhall we ſee reaſon to think upon
ſevere reflection, that this ſtate is fo diſtant as
we might at firſt be inclined to imagine. Error
is principally indebted for its permanence to ſocial
inſtitution. Did we leave individuals to the pro-
greſs of their own minds, without endeavourin
to regulate them by any ſpecies of public foun-
dation, mankind would in no very long period
convert to the obedience of truth. The conteſt be-
| tween truth and falſhood is of itſelf too unequal,
for the former to ſtand in need of ſupport from
any political ally. The more it be diſcovered,
eſpecially that part of it which relates to man in
2 ſociety,


52 _ GENERAL. FEATURES


ſociety, the more. ſimple and ſelf evident will it
appear; and it will be found impoſſible any
otherwiſe to account for its having been ſo long
concealed, than from the pernicious influence of
politive inſtitution.

There is another obvious conſideration that
has frequently been alledged to account for the
imperfection of ancient democracies, which is
worthy of our attention, though it be not fo im-
portant as the argument which has juſt been ſtat-
ed. The ancients were unaccuſtomed 'to the
idea of deputed, or repreſentative aſſemblies;
and it is reaſonable to ſuppoſe that affairs might


often be tranſacted with the utmoſt order in ſuch


aſſemblies, which might be productive of much
tumult and confuſion, if ſubmitted to the per-
ſonal diſcuſſion of the citizens at large“. By
this happy expedient we fecure many of the
pretended benefits of ariftocracy, as well as the
real benefits of democracy. The diſcuſſion of
national affairs is brought before perſons of
ſuperior education and wiſdom: we may conceive
of them, not only as the appointed medium of
the ſentiments of their conftitutents, but as


authoriſed upon certain occafions to aQt on their


part, in the ſame manner as an unlearned parent
delegates his authority over his child to a precep-
tor of greater accompliſhments than himſelf.
This idea within proper limits might be entitled
to our approbation, provided the elector had the
wiſdom not to relax i in the exerciſe of his own

| underſtanding


* The general grounds of this :oftitution have been ſtated, Book
III. Chap. IV. The exceptions which limit its value, will be ſeen
in the twenty-third —_— of the preſent book.


OF DEMOCRACY. 63


underſtanding in all his political concerns, exerted
his cenſorial power over his repreſentative, and
were accuſtomed, if the repreſentative were unable
after the fulleſt explanation to bring him over to
his opinion, to transfer his deputation to another.

The true value of the ſyſtem of repreſentation
is as follows. It is not reaſonable to doubt that
mankind, whether acting by themſelves or their
repreſentatives, might in no long time be enabled
to contemplate the ſubjects offered to their ex-
amination with calmneſs and true diſcernment,
provided no poſitive obſtacles were thrown in
their way by the errors and imperfection of their
political inftitutions. This is the principle in
which the ſound political philoſopher will. reft
with the moſt perfect ſatisfaction. But, ſhould
it ultimately appear that repreſentation, and not
the intervention of popular aſſemblies, is the
mode which reaſon preſcribes, then an error in
this preliminary queſtion, will of courſe infer
errors in the practice which is built upon it.
We cannot make one falſe ſtep, without involving
ourſelves in a ſeries of miſtakes and ill conſe-
quences that muſt be expected to grow out of it.

Such are the general features of democratical
government: but this is a ſubje& of too much
importance to be diſmiſſed without the fulleſt
examination of every thing that may enable us
to decide upon its merits. We will proceed to
conſider the farther objections that have been
alledged againſt it.


q


CHAP.


L- $6 Þ&


CHAP. XV.
OF POLITICAL (MPOSTURE.


Importance of this to opic.—F N in the doctrine
F eternal puniſhment—its inutility argued fron
 hiftory—from the nature of mind. Second ex-
ample : The religious ſanction of a legiſlative
ſyſtem. —This idea is, 1. In ftrict confirution
impratticable—2. Injurious.—Third example :
Principle of political order.—Iice has no efſen-
tial advantage over virtue —Impoſture unneceſ-
 fary to the cauſe of juſlice—not — to the


nature of man.


Arr the arguments that have been employed
to prove the inſufficiency of democracy grow
out of this one root, the ſuppoſed neceſſity of
deception and prejudice for reſtraining the tur-
bulence of human paſſions. Without the aſſump-
tion of this principle the argument could not be
ſuſtained for a moment. The direct and deciſive
anſwer would be, Are kings and lords intrin-
ſieally wiſer and better than their humbler neigh-
bac; Can there be any ſolid ground of diſtinc-
tion except what is founded in perſonal merit ?
Are not men, really and ſtrictly conſidered, equal,
except ſo far as what 1 18 perſonal and inalienable
* darm to differ? To theſe queſtions there


Can


or POLITICAL IMPOSTURE. 33


can be but one reply, Such is the order of rea-
ſon and abſolute truth, but artificial diſtinctions
are neceſſary for the happineſs of mankind. With-
out deception and prejudice the turbulence of
human paſſions cannot be reſtrained.” Let us
then examine the merits of this theory ; and
theſe will beſt be illuſtrated by an inſtance.

It has been held by ſome divines and ſome po-
liticians, that the doctrine which teaches that men
will be eternally tormented in another world for
their errors and miſconduct in this, is“ in its


own nature unreaſonable and abſurd, but that it is


nevertheleſs neceſſary, to keep mankind in awe.


Do we not ſee,” ſay they, that notwithſtand-


ing this terrible denunciation the world is over-
run with vice? What then would be the caſe, if
the irregular paſſions of mankind were ſet free
from their preſent reſtraint, and they had not


the fear of this retribution before their eyes?”


This argument ſeems to be founded in a ſingu-
lar inattention to the dictates of hiſtory and ex-
perience, as well as to thoſe of reaſon. The an-
cient Greeks and Romans had nothing of this
dreadful apparatus of fire and brimſtone, and'a
torment © the {moke of which aſcends for ever
and ever.” Their religion was leſs perſonal than
political. They confided in the Gods as protec-
tors of the 4 and this inſpired them with
invincible courage. In periods of publie calamity
they found a ready conſolation in expiatory ſa-
crifices to appeaſe the anger of the Gods. The


attention of theſe beings was conceived to be


principally directed to the ceremonial of religion,
and very little to the moral excellencies and de-
fects


56 OF ' POLITICAL IMPOSTURE.


fects of their votaries, which were ſuppoſed to


be ſufficiently provided for by the inevitable ten-
dency of moral excellence or defect to increaſe
or diminiſh individual happineſs. If their fyſtems
included the doctrine of a future exiſtence, little
attention was paid by them to the connecting
the moral deſerts of individuals in this life with
their comparative ſituation in another. The
ſame defect ran through the ſyſtems of the Per-
ſians, the Egyptians, the Celts, the Phenicians,
the Jews, and indeed every ſyſtem which has
not been in ſome manner or other the offspring
of the Chriſtian. If we were to form our judg-
ment of theſe nations by the above argument,
we ſhould expect to find every individual among
them cutting his neighbour's throat, and hack-
neyed in the commiſſion of every enormity
without meaſure and without remorſe. But they
were in reality as ſuſceptible of the regulations
of government and the order of ſociety, as thoſe
whoſe imaginations have been moſt artfully ter-
rified by the threats of future retribution, and
ſome of them were much more generous, deter-
mined and attached to the public weal. |
Nothing can be more contrary to a juſt obſer-
vation of the nature of the human mind, than
to ſuppoſe that theſe ſpeculative tenets have much
influence in making mankind more virtuous than
they would otherwiſe be found. Human
beings are placed in the midſt of a ſyſtem of
things, all the parts of which are ſtrictly con-
nected with each other, and exhibit a ſympathy
and uniſon by means of which the whole is ren-
_ dered- intelligible and as it were palpable to the


= 7 mind.


OF POLITICAL IMPOSTURE.


mind. The reſpec I ſhall obtain and the happi-
neſs I ſhall enjoy for the remainder of my life
are topics of which my mind has a complete
comprehenſion. 1 underſtand the value of plenty,
liberty and truth to myſelf and my fellow men.
I perceive that theſe things and a certain conduct
intending them are connected, in the vifible
ſyſtem of. the world, and not by the ſupernatu-
ral interpoſition of an inviſible director. But
all that can be told me of a future world, a world
of ſpirits or of glorified bodies, where the em-
ployments are ſpiritual and the firſt cauſe is to be
rendered a ſubject of immediate perception, or
of a ſcene of retribution, where the mind, doomed
to everlaſting inactivity, ſhall be wholly a prey
to the upbraidings of remorſe and the ſarcaſms
of devils, is ſo foreign to the ſyſtem of things
with which I am acquainted, that my mind in
wain | endeavours to believe or to underſtand it.
If doctrines like theſe occupy the habitual reflec-
tions of any, it is not of the lawleſs, the violent
aud ungovernable, but of the ſober and con-
ſcientious, perſuading them paſſively to ſubmit to
deſpotiſm and injuſtice, that they may receive
the recompenſe of their patience hereafter. This
objection is equally applicable to every ſpecies
of deception. Fables may amuſe the imagination;
but can never ſtand in the place of reaſon and
judgment as the principles of human conduct.—
Let us proceed to a ſecond inſtance.


It is affirmed by Rouſſeau in his treatiſe of the)
Social Contract, *-thar no legiſlator could ever
eſtabliſh a grand political ſyſtem without having |


recourſe to religious impoſture. To render a


people /


/


1
f
;
.


pulſion, and perſuade without conviction“.


58 OF POLITICAL IMPOSTURE.


5
1 people who are yet to receive the impreſſions of
political wiſdom ſuſceptible of the evidence of that
wiſdom, would be to convert the effect of civili-
{ation into the cauſe. The legiſlator ought not


| to employ force and cannot employ reaſoning; he


is therefore obliged to have recourſe to authority
of a different ſort, which may draw without com-


Theſe


7 22 Pour qu un peuple naiſſant pit gonter ſaines mariner de la poli-


tigue & ſuivre les regles fondamentales de la raiſon de Þ 6tat, il faudroit
gue Þ effet put d: venir la cauſe, que Neſprit ſocial, qui doit &tre Pouvrage
de Pigſlitution, prefiddi a Pinflitution mime, & que les hommes ſuſſent
avant les lois ce quits dvi vent devenir par elles. Ainſi donc le Iegiſlateur
ne pouvant employer ni la force ni le raiſonnement ; c't une neceſſite
il recoure a une autorite d'un autre ordre, qui puiſſe emrainer ſans
violence, Q perſuader ſans convaincre. Du Contrat Social, Liv, II.
Chap. VII. i OY |
Having frequently quoted Rouſſeau in the courſe of this work,
it may be allowable to ſay one word of his general merits as a mo-
ral and political writer. He has been ſubjected to perpetual
ridicule for the extravagance of the propoſition with which he
began his literary career; that the ſavage ftate was the genuine
and proper condition of man. It was however by a very flight
miſtake that he miſſed the oppoſite opinion which it is the buſineſs
of the preſent work to eſtabliſh. It is ſufficiently obſervable that,
where he deſcribes the enthuſiaſtic influx of truth that firſt made
him a moral and political writer (in his ſecond letter to Maleſherbes),
he does not ſo much as mention his fundamental error, but on
the juſt principles which led him into it. He was the firſt to teach
that the imperfections of a were the only permanent
ſource of the vices of mankind ; and this principle was adopted
from him by Helvetius and others. But he ſaw Erther than this,
that government, however reformed, was little capable of affording
ſolid benefit to mankind, which they did not. This principle has
fince (probably without any aſſiſtance from the writings of
Rouſſeau) been expreſſed with great perſpicuity and energy, but
not 7 by Mr. Thomas Paine in the firſt page of his Com-
mon Senſe. |
Rouſſeau, notwithſtanding his great genius, was full of weak-
neſs and prejudice. His Emile is upon the whole to be regarded
as the principal reſervoir of philoſophical truth as yet exiſting in
the world, but with a perpetual mixture of abſurdity and miſtake.
| ; In


or POLITICAL IMPOSTURE. ' 59


Theſe are the dreams of a fertile conception,
buſy in the erection of imaginary ſyſtem, Toa
rational mind that project would ſeem to promiſe
little ſubſtantial benefit, which ſet out from ſo
_ erroneous a principle. To terrify men into the
reception of a ſyſtem, the reaſonableneſs of which
they were unable to perceive, is ſurely a very
indirect method of rendering them ſober, judi-
cious, fearleſs and happy
In reality no grand political ſyſtem ever was
introduced in the manner Rouſſeau deſcribes.
Lycurgus, as he obſerves, obtained the ſanction
of the oracle at Delphi to the conſtitution he
had eſtabliſhed. But was it by an appeal to
Apollo that he perſuaded the Spartans to renounce
the uſe of money, to conſent to an equal diviſion
of land, and to adopt various other regulations
the moſt contrary to their preconceived preju=
dices? No; it was byan appeal totheir underſtand-
ings, in the midſt of long debate and perpetual
counteraction, and through the inflexibility of
his courage and reſolution, that he at laſt attained
his purpoſe. Lycurgus thought proper, after the
whole was concluded, to obtain the ſanction of
the oracle, conceivitig that it became him to
neglect no method of ſubſtantiating the benefit
he had conferred on his countrymen. It is in-
deed hardly poſſible to perſuade a ſociety of men
to adopt any — without convincing them


that


In his writings expreſsly political, Du Contrat Social and Confide-
rations ſur Ia Pologne, the unrivalled ſuperiority of his genius
appears to deſert him. To his merits as a reaſoner we ſhould not
forget to add, that the term eloquence is perhaps more preciſely


— of his mode of compoſition, than of that of any other /
writer that ever exiſted,


fe OF POLITICAL MrOSrURE.


that it is their wiſdom to adopt it. It is difficult
to conceive of a ſociety of ſuch miſerable dupes
as to receive a code, without any imagination
that it is reaſonable or wiſe or juſt, but upon this
ſingle recommendation that it is delivered to
them from the Gods. The only reaſonable, and
infinitely the moſt efficacious method of chang-
ing the inſtitutions of any people, is by creating
in them a general opinion of their erroneouſneſs
and inſufficiency.
But, if it be indeed impracticable to W
men into the adoption of any ſyſtem, without
employing as our principal argument the intrinſic
rectitude of that ſyſtem, what is the argument
which he would delire to uſe, who had moſt at
heart the welfare and improvement of the per-
ſons concerned? Would he begin by teaching
them to reaſon well, or to reaſon ill? by unnerving
their mind with prejudice, or new ſtringing it
with truth? How many arts, and how noxious
to thoſe towards whom we employ them, are
neceſſary, if we would ſucceſsfully deceive ?
We muſt not only leave their reaſon in indolence
at firſt, but endeavour to ſuperſede its exertion
in any future inſtance. If men be for the pre-
ſent kept right by prejudice, what will become
of them hereafter, if by any future penetration
or any accidental diſcovery this prejudice ſhall
be annihilated ? Detection is not always the fruit
of fyſtematical improvement, but may be effected
by ſome ſolitary exertion of the faculty or ſome
luminous and irreſiſtible argument, while every
thing elſe remains as it was. If we would firſt
deceive, and then maintain our deception un-


impaired,


Or POLITICAL IMPOSTURE. 61


impaired, we ſhall need penal ſtatutes, and licen-
ſers of the preſs, and hired miniſters of falſhood
and impoſture. Admirable modes theſe for the
propagation of wiſdom and virtue

There is another caſe ſimilar to that Rated
by Rouſſeau, upon which much ſtreſs has been
laid by political writers. Obedience, fay
they, © muſt either be courted or compelled.


We mult either make a judicious uſe of the pre-


judices and the "ignorance of mankind, or be
_ contented to have no hold upon them but their
fears, and maintain ſocial order entirely by the
ſeverity of puniſhment. To diſpenſe us from
this-painful neceſſity, authority ought - carefully


to be inveſted with a ſort of magic perſuaſion.


Citizens ſhould ſerve their country, not with a
irigid ſubmiſſion that ſcrupulouſly weighs its
duties, but with an enthuſiaſm that places: its
honour in its loyalty. For this reaſon our go-
vernors and ſuperiors muſt not be ſpoken of


with levity. They muſt be conſidered, inde-


pendently of their individual character, as deriv-
ing a ſacredneſs from their office. They muſt
be accompanied with ſplendour and veneration.
Advantage muſt be taken of the imperfection of


mankind. We ought to gain over their judg-


ments through the medium of their ſenſes, and
not leave the concluſions to be drawn, to the
uncertain proceſs of immature reaſon “.“


This


* 0s algo is the great common place of Mr. Burke's

reflections an the Revolution in France, of ſeveral ſucceſſive pro-
ductions of Mr. Necker, and of a multitude of other works upon
the ſubject of government.


S9
6,


62 or POLITICAL IMPOSTURE.


This is {till the ſame argument under another
form. It takes for granted that reaſon is inade-
quate to teach us our duty ; and of conſequence
recommends an equivocal engine, which may
with equal eaſe be employed in the ſervice of
juſtice and injuſtice, but would ſurely appear
ſomewhat more in its place in the ſervice of
the latter. It is injuſtice that ſtands moſt in need
of ſuperſtition and myſtery, and will moſt fre-
quently be a gainer by the impoſition. This
hypotheſis proceeds upon an aſſumption, which
young men ſometimes impute to their parents
and preceptors. It ſays, Mankind muſt be
kept in ignorance: if they know vice, they
will love it too well; if they perceive the charms
of error, they will never return to the ſimplicity
of truth. And, ſtrange as it may appear, this
barefaced and unplauſible argument has been
the foundation of a very popular and generally
received hypotheſis. It has taught politicians
to believe that a people once ſunk into decrepi-
tude, as it has been termed, could never after-
wards be endued with purity and vigour*.

1s it certain that there is no alternative between
deceit and unrelenting ſeverity ? Does our duty
contain no inherent recommendations? If it be
not our own intereſt that we ſhould be temperate
and virtuous, whoſe intereſt is it? Political inſtitu-
tion, as has abundantly appeared in the courſe
of this work, and will ſtill farther appear as
we go forward, has been too frequently the parent
of temptations to error and vice of a thouſand
different denominations. It would be well, if

_- _ legiſlators,


* Book I. Chap. VIII.


OF POLITICAL IMPOSTURE. 63
legillators, inſtead of contriving farther decep-


tions and enchantments to retain us in our du
would remove the impoſtures which at preſent s
corrupt our hearts and engender at once artifi-
cial wants and real diſtreſs. There would be
leſs need, under the ſyſtem of plain, unorna-
mented wrath, than under theirs, that “ every
viſt& ſhould be terminated with the gallows}.”
Why deceive me? It is either my wiſdom to
do the thing you require of me, 'or it 1s not.
The reafons for doing it are either ſufficient or -
inſufficient. If ſufficient, why ſhould not they
be the machine to govern my underſtanding ?
Shall I moſt improve while I am governed by
| falle reaſons, by impoſture and artifice, which,
were I a little wiſer, I ſhould know were of no
value in whatever cauſe they may be ä
or, while my underſtanding grows every day
ſounder and ſtronger by perpetual communication
with truth ? If the reaſons for what you demand
of me be inſufficient, why ſhould I comply ?
It is ſtrongly to be ſuſpected that that regulation,
which dares not reſt-upon its own reaſonableneſs,
conduces to the benefit of a few at the expence
of the many. Impoſture was ſurely invented
by him, who thought more of ſecuring dignity
to ” himialf, than of prevailing on mankind to
conſent to their own welfare. That which you
require of me is wiſe, no farther than it is rea-
ſonable. Why endeavour to perſuade me that
it is more wiſe, more eſſential than it really is,
or that it is wiſe for any other reaſon than the
true? Why divide men into two claſſes, one of
which is to think and reaſon for the whole, and


the
+ Burke's Reflections. N


64 OF. POLITICAL IMPOSTURE..


the other to take the concluſions of their ſupe-
riors on truſt ? This diſtinction is not ind |
in the nature of things; there is no ſuch in-
herent difference between man and man as it
thinks proper to ſuppoſe. The reaſons that
ſhould convince us that virtue is better than
vice are neither complicated nor abſtruſe; and
the leſs they be tampered with by the injudici-
ous interference of political inſtitution, the more
will they come home to the underſtanding and
approve * to che judgment of very
man.

Nor is the Aachen leſs i injurious, than it
is unfounded. The two claſſes which it creates,
muſt be more and leſs than man. It is too much
to expect of the former, while we conſign to
them an unnatural monopoly, that they ſhould.
rigidly conſult for the good of the whole. It is
an iniquitous requiſition upon the latter, that
they ſhould never employ their underſtandings,
never penetrate into the eſſences of things, but
always reſt in a deceitful appearance. It is
iniquitous, that we ſhould ſeek to withhold from
them the principles of ſimple truth, and exert
ourſelves to keep alive their fond and infantine
miſtakes. The time muſt probably come when
the deceit ſhall vaniſh ; and then the impoſtures
of monarchy. and ariſtocracy will no longer be
able to maintain their ground. The change
will at that time be moſt auſpicious, if we
honeſtly inculcate the truth now, ſecure that
men's minds will grow ſtrong enough to endure
the practice, in proportion as their underſtand-


ing of the theory excites them to demand it.
CHA P.


65 1


-C-H A R= 1


OF THE CAUSES OF WAR.


Offenſive war contrary to the nature of democracy.
— Defenſive war exceedingly rare.—Erroneouf-
neſs of the ideas commonly annexed to the phraſe,

our country. — Nature of war delineated.—

 —Tnſufficient cauſes of war—the acquiring a
healthful and vigorous tone to the public mind—
the putting a termination upon private inſults —
the menaces or preparations of our neighbours —
the dangerous conſequences of conceſſion. —Two
legitimate cauſes of war.


Excrusvery of thoſe objections which
have been urged againſt the 1 ſyſtem
as it relates to the internal management of affairs,
there are others upon which conſiderable ſtreſs
has been laid in relation to the tranſactions of a
ſtate with foreign powers, to war and peace, to
treaties of alliance and commerce.

There, is indeed an eminent difference with
reſpect to theſe between the democratical ſyſtem
and all others. It is perhaps impoſſible to ſhew
that a ſingle war ever did or could have taken place
in the hiſtory of mankind, that did not in ſome
way originate with thoſe two great political mo-
nopolies, monarchy and ariſtocracy. This might

Or. I. - F have


* 4 p T *
P .


6 or THE CAUSES OF WAR.


have formed an additional article in the catalogue
of evils to which they have given birth, little
inferior to any of thoſe we have enumerated.
But nothing could be more ſuperfluous than to
ſeek to overcharge a ſubject the evidence of which
is irreſiſtible.
What could be the ſource of miſunderſtanding
between ſtates, where no man or body of men
found encouragement to the accumulation of pri-
vileges to himſelf at the expence of the reſt? A
people among whom equality reigned, would
poſſeſs every thing they wanted, where they
poſſeſſed the means of ſubſiſtence. Why ſhould
they purſue additional wealth or territory? Theſe
would loſe their value the moment they became
the property of all. No man can cultivate more
than a certain portion of land. Money is repre-
ſentative, and not real wealth. If every man in
the ſociety poſſeſſed a double portion of money,
bread and every other commodity would ſell at
double their preſent price, and the relative ſituation
of each individual would be juſt what it had
been before. War and conqueſt cannot be bene-
ficial to the community. Their tendency is to
elevate a fe at the expence of the reſt, and con-
ſequently they will never be undertaken but where
the many are the inſtruments of the few. But this
cannot happen in a democracy, till the democracy
ſhall become ſuch only in name. If expedients
can be deviſed for maintaining this ſpecies of go-
vernment'in its purity, or if there be any thing
in the nature of wiſdom and intellectual im-
provement which has a tendency daily to make
truth prevail more over falſhood, the principle
: of


or THE CAUSES OF WAR 55
of offenſive war will be extirpated. But this


principle enters into the v
chy and ariſtocracy. 1
| Meanwhile, though the principle of offenſive
war be incompatible with the genius of demo-
cracy, a democratical ſtate may be placed in the
neighbourhood of ſtates whoſe government is
leſs equal, and therefore it will be proper to en-
quire into the ſuppoſed diſadvantages which the
democratical ſtate may ſuſtain in the conteſt.
The only ſpecies of war in which it can con-
ſiſtently be engaged, will be that, the object of
which is to repel wanton invaſion. Such inva-
ſions will be little likely frequently to occur.
For what purpoſe ſhould a corrupt ſtate attack a
country, which has no feature in common with
itſelf upon which to build a miſunderſtanding,
and which preſents in the very nature of its
government a pledge of its own inoffenſiveneſs
and neutrality ? Add to which, it will preſently
appear that this ſtate, which yields the feweſt
incitements to provoke an attack, will prove a
very impracticable adverſary to thoſe by whom
an attack ſhall be commenced, |

One of the moſt effential principles of politi-
cal juſtice is diametrically the reverſe of that
which impoſtors and patriots have too frequently
agreed to recommend. Their perpetual exhorta-
tion has been, Love your country. Sink the
perſonal exiſtence of individuals in the exiſtence
of the community. Make little account of the
particular men of whom the ſociety conſiſts, but
aim at the general wealth, proſperity and glory.
Purify your mind from the groſs ideas of __

"TS. MY


ery eſſence of mionar-


ons


68 OF THE. CAUSES OF. WAR,


and ele vate it to the ſingle contemplation of that
abſtra& individual of which particular men are
ſo many detached members, mie dal for
the place they fill“.

The leſſons of reaſon on this hed are preciſely 1
oppoſite. « Society is an ideal exiſtence, and not
on its own account entitled to the ſmalleſt regard.
The wealth, proſperity and glory of the whole
are unintelligible chimeras. Set no value on any
thing, but in proportion as you are convinced of
its tendengy to make individual men happy and
virtuous. Benefit by every practicable mode
man wherever he exiſts; but be not deceived by
the ſpecious idea of affording ſervices to a body
of men, for which no individual man is the
better. Society was inſtituted, not for the ſake
of glory, not to furniſh ſplendid: materials for
the page of hiſtory, but for the benefit of its
members. The love of our country, if we
would ſpeak accurately, is another of thoſe ſpeci-
ous illuſions, which have been invented * im-


poſtors in order to render the multitude the blind
inſtruments of their crooked deſigns.”


Meanwhile let us beware of paſling from one
injurious extreme to another. Much of what
has been uſually underſtood by the love of our


country is highly excellent and valuable, though


perhaps nothing that can be brought within the


ſtrict interpretation of the phraſe. A wiſe man will
not fail to be the votary of liberty and equality.
He will be ready to exert himſelf in their defence
wherever —_— exiſt,” It cannot be a matter of
5955 indifſerence


is %
,
” * . 0 7
* ” 3 4 1


* Du Conbbet bell. &; c. 9, c. "We. :


or ur CAUSES/ OF WAR. 6g
indifference. to him, when his own liberry and


that of other men with whoſe excellence and


capabilities he has the beſt opportunity of being
_ acquainted,” are involved in the event of the
Aruggle to be made. But his attachment will be
to the cauſe, and not to the country. Wherever


there are men who underſtand the value of poli-
tical juſtice and are prepared to aſſert it, that is


his country. Wherever he can moſt contribute
to the diffuſion of theſe principles and the real
happineſs of mankind, that is his country. Nor
does he deſire for aux country any other n
than juſtice.

To apply theſe otigcioles to the ſubject of war.
And, before that application can be adequately
made, it is neceſſary to recollect f a moment
che force of the term.

Becauſe individuals were liable to N ad
ſuffered their apprehenſions of juſtice to be per-
verted by a bias in favour of themſelves, govern-
ment was inſtituted. Becauſe nations were ſuſ-
ceptible of a ſimilar weakneſs, and could find no


ſufficient umpire to whom to appeal, war was


introduced. Men were induced deliberately. to
ſeek each other's lives, and to adjudge the con-
troverſies between them, not according to the
diCtates of reaſon and juſtice, but as either ſhould


prove moſt ſucceſsful in devaſtation and murder.


This was no doubt in the firſt inſtance the extre-
mity of exaſperation and rage. But it has ſince
been-converted into a trade, One part of the
nation pays another part to murder and be mur-
dered i in their ſtead ; and the moſt trivial cauſes,

| a »-luppoted


'F
x
Z

j
N

'
U


r , —


70 or THE CAUSES OF WAR.


a ſuppoſed inſult or a ally of youthful ambition,
have ſufficed to deluge 0s 2 with blood.
We can have no adequate idea of this evil,
unleſs we viſit, at leaſt in imagination, a field of
battle. Here men deliberately deftroy each other
by thouſands without any reſentment againſt or
even knowledge of each other. The plain is
ſtrewed with death in all its various forms. An-
guiſh and wounds diſplay the diverſified modes
in which they can torment the human frame.
Towns are burned, ſhips are blown up in the air
while the mangled limbs deſcend on every fide,
the fields are laid deſolate, the wives of the in-
habitants expoſed to brutal inſult, and their ehil-


dren driven forth to hunger and nakednefs. It


would be deſpicable to mention, along with theſe
ſcenes of horror, and the total ſubverſion of all
ideas of moral juſtice they muſt occaſion in the
auditors and ſpectators, the immenſe treaſures
which are wrung in the form of taxes from thoſe
inhabitants whoſe reſidence is at a Annes from
the ſcene.
Alter this enumeration we may venture to en-
quire what are the juſtifiable cauſes and rules of
war.
It is not a juſtifiable reaſon, © that we imagine
our o people would be rendered more cordia}


and orderly, if we could find a neighbour with


whom to quarrel, and who might ſerve as a
touchſtone to try the characters md diſpoſitions
of individuals among ourſelves*.” We are not
| at

The reader will eaſily perceive that the pretences by which the
people of France were inſtigated to a declaration of war in April


1792 ?


OF THE CAUSES OF WAR. 70


at liberty to have recourſe to the moſt complicated
and atrocious of all miſchiefs, in the way of an
experiment.

It is not a juſtifiable reaſon, that we have been
expoſed to certain inſults, and that tyrants per-
haps have delighted in treating with contempt
the citizens of our happy ſtate who have viſited
their dominions. Government ought to protect
the tranquillity of thoſe who reſide within the
ſphere of its functions; but, if individuals think
proper to viſit other countries, they muſt then
be delivered over to the protection of general
reaſon. Some proportion muſt be obſerved be-
tween the evil of which we complain, and the
evil which the nature of the propoſed remedy
inevitably includes. |

It is not a juſtifiable reaſon, © that our neigh-
bour is preparing or menacing hoſtilities.” If
we be obliged to prepare in our turn, the incon-
venience is only equal; and it is not to be be-
lieved, that a deſpotic country is capable of more
exertion than a free one, when the taſk incum-
bent on the latter is indiſpenſible precaution.

| It


1792 were in the author's mind in this place. Nor will a few
lines be miſpent in this note in ſtating the judgment of an impar-
tial obſerver upon the wantonneſs with which they have appeared
ready upon different occaſions to proceed to extremities, If policy
were in queſtion, it might be doubted, whether the 9
kings would ever have been brought into action againſt them,

it not been for their precipitation ; and it might be aſked, what
impreſſion they muſt expect to be made upon the minds of other
ſtates by their intemperate commiſſion of hoſtility ? But that ſtric
juſtice, which preſcribes to us, never by a haſty interference to
determine the doubtful balance in favour of murder, is a ſuperior
conſideration, in compariſon with which policy is unworthy ſo muck
3s to be named,


T RS or 6.4 X -
£ 7 g 4 83 - 54 * 2 hw. * 5 \ va TACT 3 < *
— * 4 i r i 7 pronto | rn nee WE Oe 16.44... > 2 % = " * —_
2 / 3 1 x ITO 4 do. itt hot DDr
. —_— K 8 > 1 N „ 4 ay 7 we C br eee . — wh, — 2 * ren 4
3 _— +. Wh * * * * « — * as - 4 N


52 OF THE CAUSES OF WAR.


It has ſometimes been held to be ſound reaſon-
ing upon this ſubject, “ that we ought not to
yield little things, which may not in themſelves
be ſufficiently valuable to authoriſe this tremen-
dous appeal, becauſe a diſpoſition to yield only

invites farther experiments *,” Far otherwile ;
at leaſt when the character of ſuch a nation is
ſufficiently underſtood. A people that will not
contend for nominal and trivial objects, that
maintains the preciſe line of unalterable juſtice,
and that does not fail to be moved, at the mo-
ment that it ought to be moved, is not the peo-
ple that its neighbours will Wu r to urge to
extremities.

„The vindication of national kako?” is a
very inſufficient reaſon for hoſtilities. True
honour is to be found only in integrity and juſ-
tice. It has been doubted how far a view to
reputation ought in matters of inferior moment
to be permitted to influence the conduct of in-
dividuals; but, let the caſe of individuals be

decided as it may, reputation, conſidered as a

ſeparate motive in the inſtance of nations, can
never be juſtifiable. In individuals it ſeems as
if I might, conſiſtently with the utmoſt real in-
tegrity, be ſo miſconſtrued and miſrepreſented
by others, as to render my efforts at uſefulneſs
almoſt always abortive. But this reaſon does
not apply to the caſe of nations. Their real
ſtory cannot eaſily be ſuppreſſed. Uſefulneſs
and public ſpirit in relation to them chiefly be-
long to the tranſactions of their members among


themſelves; ;


This pretence is fuſtained in Paley' 8 Moral and Political
Philoſophy, Book VI. Ch. XII.


OF THE CAUSsES OF WAR. 73
themſelves; and their influence in the tran ſac-
tions of neighbouring nations is a conſideration
evidently fubordinate. The queſtion which re-
ſpects the juſtifiable cauſes of war, would be
liable to few difficulties, if we were accuſtomed,
along with the word, {ſtrongly to call up to our
minds the thing which that word is intended to
repreſent.

Accurately conſidered; there can probably be
but two juſtifiable cauſes of war, and one of
them is among thoſe which the logic of ſove-
reigns and the law of nations, as it has been
termed, proſcribe; theſe are the defence of our

on liberty and of the liberty of others. The
well — objection to the latter of theſe caſes,
1s, „that one nation ought not to intertere i in
the internal tranſactions. of another; and we
can only wonder that ſo abfurd an objection
ſhould have been admitted ſo long. The true
principle, under favour: of which this falſe one
has been permitted to paſs current, is, “ that no
people and no individual are fit for the poſſeſſion
of any immunity, till they underſtand: the na-
ture of that immunity, and deſire to poſſeſs it.”
It may therefore be an unjuſtifiable undettaking
to force a nation to be free. But, when the
people themſelves deſire it, it is virtue and duty
to aſſiſt them in the acquiſition. This principle
is capable of being abuſed by men of ambition
and intrigue; but, accurately conſidered; the
very ſame argument that ſhould induce me to
exert myſelf for the liberties of my on coun-
try, is equally cogent, ſo far as my opportuni-
ties and ability extend, with 1 to the liber-
ties


14 OF THE OBJECT or WAR.


ties of any other country. But the morality
that ought to govern the conduct of individuale
and of nations is in all caſes the ſame.


CHAP. XVIL
OF THE OBJECT OF WAR.


The repelling an invader. Not reformation=4
not reftraint——not indemn:fitation.— Nothing
can be a ſufficient object of war that is not a

 fefficient cauſe for beginning it, —RefleFions

en tbe balance of power,


LET ws poſh from the eanſes to che objects f
war. As defence is the only legitimate cauſe,
the ohject purſued, reaſoning from this prin-
ciple, will be circumſcribed within very narrow
limits, It ean extend no farther than the repell-
ing the enemy from our borders. It is perhaps
deſirable that, in addition to this, he ſhould
afford ſome proof that he does not propoſe im-
mediately to renew his invaſion; but this, though
deſirable, affords no ſufficient apology for the
continuance of hoſtilities. Declarations of war
and treaties of peace are inventions of a barbar-
ous age, and would never have grown into
eſtabliſhed uſages, if war had cuſtomarily gone
no farther than to the limits of defence. :

| at


or THE OBJECT OF WaR.


It will hereafter appear that what has been
termedthe criminal juſtice of nations withinthem-
ſelves, has-only two legitimate objecta, reſtraint
and reformation. Neither of theſe objects applies
to the caſe of war between independent ſtates;


and therefore ideas of criminal juſtice are altoge-


ther foreign to this ſubject. War, as we have
already feen, perhap
offending fide in the ſentiments of a nation, but
of a comparatiyely ſmall number of individuals:
and, if it were otherwiſe, it is not in a reci
cation of hoſtilities that good ſenſe would teach
us to look for the means of reform.

Reſtraint appears to be ſometimes neceſſary
with reſpect to the offenders that exiſt in the
midſt of a community, becauſe it is the


of ſuch offenders to aſſault us with 9


violence; but nations cannot move with ſuch
ſecrecy 28 to make an unforeſeen attack an object
of conſiderable apprehenſion. The only effectual
means of reſtraint in this laſt caſe is by diſabling,
impoveriſhing and depopulating the « country of
our adverſaries ; and; if we recollected that they
were men as well as ourſelves, and the great maſs
of them innocent of the quarrel againſt us, we
ſhould be little likely to conſider theſe expedients
with complacency.

Indemnification is another object of war which
the ſame mode of reaſoning will not fail to con-
demn. The true culprits can never be diſco-
vered, and the attempt would only ſerve-to con-
found the innocent and the guilty: not to men-
tion that, nations having no common umpire,


the ee in the concluſion of every war,
to


*


s never originates on the


1


76. ' off THE: oBJECT OF WAR.


to thi juſtice of the original quarrel and the in-
— — O which the parties were entitled,
would be à means of rendering the controverſy
endleſs. / The queſtion reſpecting the juſtifiable |
objects of war would be liable to few difficulties,
if we laid it down as a maxim, that, as often
as the principle or object of a war already in
exiſtence was changed, this was to be ane
ed as equivalent to the commencement of a new
war. This maxim impartially applied would
not fail to condemn objects of prevention, .
demnification and reſtrant.
The celebrated topic of * balance of Gower
is a mixed conſideration, having ſometimes
been propoſed as the cauſe for beginning a


Wa, and ſometimes as an object to be Banden


in à War already begun. A war, undertaken to
maintain the balance of power, may be either
of defence, as to protect a people who are op-
preſſed, or of prevention to counteract new ac-
quiſitions, or to reduce the magnitude of old
poſſeſſions. We ſhall be in little danger of error
however, if we pronounce wars undertaken to
maintain the balance of power to be univerſally
unjuſt. If any people be oppreſſed, it is our
duty, as we have already ſaid, as far as our
ability extends, to fly to their ſuccour. But it
would be well if in ſuch caſes we called our
interference by the name which juſtice preſcribes,
and —— againſt the injuſtice, and not the
5 All hoſtilities againſt a neighbouring
— becauſe” they are powerful, or becauſe
we impute to them evil ans which they have
not TW begun to carry zin execution, are an
ed enormous


enormous a. of every 1 of mora-


lity. If one nation chuſe*to be governed by the


ſovereign or an individual allied to the ſovereign
of another, as ſeems to have been the caſe of
the people of Spain upon the extinction of the
elder branch of the houſe of Auſtria, we may
endeavour to enlighten them on the ſubject of


government and imbue them with principles of


liberty, but it is an execrable piece of tyranny

to tell them, You ſhall exchange the deſpot
you love for the deſpot you hate, on account
of certain remote conſequences we apprehend


from the acceſſion of the former.” The pre-


tence of the balance of power has in a multitude
of inſtances ſerved as a veil to the intrigue of
courts, but it would be eaſy to ſhow that the
preſent independence of the different ſtates of
Europe has in no inſtance been materially ſup-
ported by the wars undertaken for that purpoſe.
The faſcination of a people deſiring to become
the appendage of a ſplendid deſpotiſm can rarely
occur, and might perhaps eaſily be counteract-
ed by peaceable means and the diſſemination of
a few of the moſt obvious truths. The defence
of a people ſtruggling with oppreſſion muſt al-
ways be juſt, with this ſingle limitation, that
the entering into it without urgent need on
their part, would unneceſlarily ſpread the cala-
mities of war, and diminiſh thoſe energies, the
exertion of which would contribute to their
virtue and happineſs. Add to this, that the
object itſelf, the independence of the different
ſtates of Europe, is of an equivocal nature.
The deſpotiſm, which at preſent prevails among

them,


——
LY;


»
4
gy — L — wy we .. OY . — .
: 5 PF Yo i nr 5
8 - 7 af — 4 - i
par 1 2 en yy es - 3. 04 #4 * _—
8 — 19 1 | "4s = P- —


—


|
1
9
if
|
|


—* 2
4 „


78 OF THE OBJECT OF WAR.


them, 1s certainly not ſo excellent as to make.
us very anxious for its preſervation. The preſs
is an engine of ſo admirable a nature for the
deſtruction of deſpotiſm, as to elude the ſaga-
city perhaps of the moſt vigilant police; and
the internal checks upon freedom in a mighty
empire and diftant provinces, can ſcarcely be


expected to be equally active with thoſe of a


tyrant. The reaſoning will ſurely be good


petty
with reſpect to war, which has already been


employed upon the ſubject of government, that
an inftrument, evil in its own nature, qught


never to be ſelected as the means of promoting our


purpoſe, in any caſe in which election can be
practiſed.


CHAP.


1 75 3


CHAP. XVIII.
OF THE CONDUCT OF WAR.


Offenſive operations. — Fortiſications.— General ac-
tion. —Stratagem.— Military contributions. —
Capture of mercantile veſſels — Naval war.
Humanity.—Military obedience. —Foreign pof-

sion. | WT


ANorHERR topic reſpecting war, which it
is of importance to conſider in this place, re-
lates to the mode of conducting it. Upon this
article our judgments will be greatly facilitated
by a recollection of the principles already eſtab-
liſhed, firſt, that no war is juſtifiable but a war
purely defenſive; and ſecondly, that a war al-
ready begun is liable to change its character in
this reſpect, the moment the object purſued in
it becomes in any degree varied. From theſe
principles it follows as a direct corollary, that
it is never allowable to make an expedition into
the provinces of the enemy, unleſs for the pur-
poſe of aſſiſting its oppreſſed inhabitants. It is
ſcarcely neceſſary to add that all falſe cafuiftry re-
ſpecting the application of this exception would
be particularly odious; and that it is better un-
diſguiſedly to avow the corrupt principles of
policy by which we conduct ourſelves, than
hypocritically to claim the praiſe of better prin-

' _ cipleg,


8o OF THE CONDUCT OF WAR.


ciples, which we fail not to wreſt to the juſtifi-
cation of whatever we deſire. The caſe of re-
lieving the inhabitants of our enemy's territory
and their deſire of obtaining relief ought to be
extremely unequivocal; we ſhall be in great
danger of miſapprehenſion on the ſubject, when
the queſtion comes under the form of immediate
benefit to ourſelves; and above all we muſt re-
collect that human blood is not to be ſhed upon
a precarious experiment.

The little advantages of war that might be
gained by offenſive operations will be abundantly
compenſated, by the character of magnanimous
forbearance that a rigid adherence to defence
will exhibit, and the effects that character will
produce upon foreign nations and upon our
own people. Great unanimity at home can
ſcarcely fail to be the effect of ſevere political
juſtice. The enemy who penetrates into our
country, wherever he meets a man, will meet
a foe. Every obſtacle will oppoſe itielf to his
progreſs, while every thing will be friendly and
aſſiſting to our own forces. He will ſcarcely
be able to procure the {lighteſt intelligence, or
underſtand in any caſe his relative fituation. The
principles of defenſive war are ſo {imple as to
procure: an almoſt infallible ſucceſs. . Fortifica-
tions are a very equivocal ſpecies of protection,
and will oftener be of advantage to the enemy,
by being firſt taken, and then converted into
magazines for his armies. - A moving force on
the contrary, if it only hovered about his march,
and ayoided general action, would always pre-
ſerve the real ſuperiority. The great engine of
military ſucceſs or miſcarriage, is the article of

proviſions;


OF THE CONDUCT OF WAR. 81


proviſions; ; and the farther the enemy advanced
into our country, the more eaſy would it be to


cut off his ſupply; at the ſame time that, ſo
long as we avoided general action, any deciſive |
{uccets on his part would be impoſſible. Theſe


principles, if rigidly practiſed, would ſoon be
ſo well underſtood, that the entering in a hoſtile
manner the country of a neighbouring nation
would come to be regarded as the infallible
deſtruction of the invading army. Perhaps no
people were ever conquered at their own doors,
unleſs they were firſt betrayed either by diviſions
among themſelves or by the abje& degeneracy
of their character. The more we come to un-
derſtand of the nature of. juſtice, the more it
will ſhow itſelf to be ſtronger than a hoſt of foes.
Men, whoſe boſoms are truly pervaded with this
principle, cannot perhaps be other than invin-
cible. Among the various examples of excel-
lence in almoſt every department that ancient
Greece has bequeathed us, the moſt conſpicuous
is her reſiſtance with a handful of men againſt
three millions of invaders.

One branch of the art of war, as well as of
every other human art, has hitherto conſiſted in
deceit. If the principles of this work be built
upon a ſufficiently ſolid baſis, the practice of
deceit ought in all inſtances to be condemned,
whether it proceed from falſe tenderneſs to our
friends, or from a defire to haſten the downfal
of injuſtice. - Vice is neither the moſt allowable
nor effectual weapon with which to contend
againſt vice. Deceit is not leſs deceit, whether


the falſhood be formed into words or be con-
VOL: Ib G | veyed


. : Z *
n bi nt n 3 Wk Sy i a tf <a « — n
3 — CS ns 2 „ * * "AVE 2 n / „ hy + \F = A *gB% 4, 1 2 if F * Bo, of 2a "Re rt : ane Fe n "A, « wo ua wv 11
”" Wn a — ND * 7 S e e . 245, 4-680 4 r . L ©, 8 r — 1 - 8 —
0 1 bY r VE FX, ASS 420 = 2 * * — — re! e A U . * — * — — "4 — A - £06
— e 259 e e __—. nn. 5s OI: fe = n . „
, 2 - WY * . os U — So $70 Pre. «i 1 , a » & MN


—
r -


* * I -
Ne LET” *


\
=


. Rn LAKE — 4 ＋ Mg * I ge 2 AX ,
C — <>. — — 2 - 3 5 "Ws whe «074 4 wut. — — P 8 T To, * ee.

__ 2 ye OR: ons k . Zr -
— Cnr tx ou E r

- Mer * * _—
1 * 5 e *
8
—


& * js p 1 : .


; rages
N


32 or THE CONDUCT OF WAR.


veyed through the medium of fictitious appear
ances. We ſhould no more allow ourſelves to
miſlead the enemy by falſe intelligence or treach-
erous ambuſcade, than by the breach of our de- |
clarations, or feigned Gesc of friend-
ſhip. There is no eſſential difference between
- throwing open our arms to embrace them, and
advancing towards them with neutral colours or
covering ourſelves with a defile or a wood. By
the practice of ſurpriſe and deceit we ſhall of-
teneſt cut off their ſtraggling parties and ſhed
moſt blood. By an open Kfplay of our force
we {hall prevent detachments from being made,
{hall intercept the poſſibility of fupply without
unneceſſary bloodſhed, and there feems no rea-
ſon to believe that our ultimate ſucceſs will be
leſs certain. Why ſhould war be made the ſcience
of diſingenuouſneſs and myſtery, when the plain
dictates of good ſenſe would anſwer all its legi-
timate 3 984 The firſt principle of defence
is firmneſs and vigilance. The ſecond perhaps,
which is not leſs immediately connected with
the end to be attained, is frankneſs and the open
diſeloſure of our purpoſe even to our enemies.
What aſtoniſhment, admiration and terror would
this conduct excite in thoſe with whom we had
to contend? What confidence and magnanimity
would accompany it in our own boſoms? Why
ſhould not war, as a ſtep towards its complete
abolition, be brought to ſuch perfe&ion, as that
the purpoſes of the enemy might be utterly baffled
without firing a muſket or drawing a ſword?
Another corollary not leſs inevitable from the
principles which have been delivered, is that


the


OF THE CONDUCT or WAR. $4


the operations of war ſhould be limited as accu-
rately as poſſible to the generating no farther
evils than defence inevitably requires. Ferocity
ought carefully to be baniſhed from it. Cala-
mity ſhould as entirely as poſſible be prevented
to every individual who is not actually in arms,
and whoſe fate has no immediate reference to
the event of the war. This principle condemns
the levying military contributions, and the cap-
ture of mercantile veſſels. Each of theſe atro-


cities would be in another way precluded by the


doctrine of ſimple defence. We ſhould ſcarcely
think of levying ſuch contributions, if we never
attempted to paſs the limits of our own territory;
and every ſpecies of naval war would perhaps
be proſcribed.

The utmoſt benevolence ohgkk to be practiſed
towards our enemies. We ſhould refrain from
the unneceſſary deſtruction of a ſingle life, and
afford every humane accommodation to the un-
fortunate. The bulk of thoſe againſt whom we
have to contend are comparatively ſpeaking in-
nocent of the projected injuſtice. Thoſe by
whom it has been moſt aſſiduouſlſy foſtered are
entitled to our kindneſs as men, and to our com-
paſſion as miſtaken. It has already appeared


that all the ends of puniſhment are foreign to


the buſineſs of war. It has appeared that the
genuine melioration of war, in conſequence of
which it may be expected abſolutely to ceaſe,
is by gradually diſarming it of its ferocity. The
horrors of war have ſometimes been apologiſed
by a ſuppoſition that the more intolerable it was
* the more quickly would it ceaſe to infeſt

G 2 the


pn. * *
* <A: _
r ot

LR" —


- n * * 2 *
0p" 4 GE
A Ew * , 1


— 2 *
* gp ah


A
© 1
+!
5
=


— —


N
2. „
J p
+4
10
of.
R
£8
Ib.
Tn |
129
"BY
|
|
1
*
1
14
Jt.”
15
9
va
*


'


% or THE CONDUCT OF WAR.


the world, But the direct contrary of this is the
truth. Severities do but beget ſeverities in return.
It is a moſt miſtaken way of teaching men to
feel that they are brothers, by imbuing their
minds with unrelenting hatred. The truly juſt
man cannot feel animoſity, and is therefore _—_
likely to act as if he did, ,
Having examined the conduct of war as it
reſpects our enemies, let us next conſider it in
relation to the various deſcriptions of perſons by
whom it is to be ſupported. We have ſeen how
little a juſt and upright war ſtands in need of
ſecrecy. The plans for conducting a campaign,
inſtead of being, as artifice and ambition have
hitherto made them, inextricably complicated,
will probably be reduced to two or three varia-
tions, ſuited to the different circumſtances that can
poſſibly occur in a war of ſimple defence. The
better theſe plans are known to the enemy, the
more advantageous will it be to the reſiſting party.
Hence it follows that the principles of implicit
faith and military obedience will be no longer
neceſſary. Soldiers will ceaſe to be machines.
The eſſential circumſtance that conſtitutes men
machines in this ſenſe of the word, is not the
uniformity of their motions, when they ſee the
reaſonableneſs of that uniformity. It is their
performing any motion, or engaging in any
action, the object and utility of which they do
not clearly underſtand. It is true that in every
ſtate of human ſociety there will be men of an
intellectual capacity much ſuperior to their
neighbours. But defenſive War, and probably
every other ſpecies of operation in which 1 it will


be


O THE CONDUCT OF WAR. 35


be neceffary that many individuals ſhould act in
concert, will perhaps be found ſo ſimple in their
operations, as not to exceed the apprehenſion
of the moſt common capacities. It is ardently
to be deſired that the time ſhould arrive, when
no man ſhould lend his aſſiſtance to any opera-
tion, without at the ſame time exerciſing his
judgment reſpecting the honeſty and the 2
ed event of that operation.

The principles here delivered on the u
of war lead the mind to a very intereſting ſub-
ject, that of foreign and diſtant territories.
Whatever may be the value of theſe principles
conſidered in themſelves, they become altogether
nugatory the moment the idea of foreign *
dencies is admitted. But in reality what ar
ment poſſeſſing the ſmalleſt degree of planfib ty
can be alledged in favour of that idea? The
mode in which dependencies are acquired, muſt
be either conqueſt, ceſſion or colonization. The
firſt of theſe no true moraliſt or politician will
attempt to defend. The ſecond is to be conſi-
dered as the fame thing in tubſtance as the firſt,
but with leſs openneſs and ingenwty. Coloni
zation, which is by much the moſt ſpecious
pretence, is however no more than a pretence.
Are theſe provinces held in a ſtate of depen-
dence for our own ſake or for theirs ? If for our
own, we muſt recollect this is ſtill an uſurpation,
and that juſtice requires we ſhould yield to others
what we demand for ourſelves, the privilege of
being governed by the dictates of their own rea-
ſon, If for theirs, they muſt be told, that it is
the buſineſs of aſſociations of men to defend

themſelves,


.


86 OF THE CONDUCT OF WAR.


themſelves, or, if that be impracticable, to look
for ſupport to the confederation of their neigh-
bours. They muſt be told, that defence againſt
foreign enemies is a very inferior conſideration,
and that no people were ever either wiſe or
happy who were not left to the fair develop-
ment of their inherent powers. Can any thin
be more abſurd than for the Weſt India iſlands
for example to be defended by fleets and armies
to be tranſported acroſs the Atlantic? The ſup-
port of a mother country extended to her colo-
nies, is much oftener a means of involving them
in danger, than of contributing to their ſecurity.
The connexion is maintained by vanity on one
ſide and prejudice on the other. If they muſt
ſink into a degrading ſtate of dependence, how
will they be the worſe in belonging to one tate
rather than another? Perhaps the firſt ſtep to-
- wards putting a ſtop to this fruitful ſource of war,
would be to annihilate that monopoly of trade
which all enlightened reaſoners at preſent agree
to condemn, and to throw open the ports of
our colonies to all the world. The principle
which will not fail to lead us right upon this
ſubject of foreign dependencies, as well as upon
a 4 others, is, that that attribute, how-
ever ſplendid, is not really beneficial to a nation,
that is not beneficial to the great maſs of indivi-
guals of which the nation conſiſts.


CHAP.


1:09 1


CHAP. XIX.


mo


OF MILITARY ESTABLISHMENTS AND
TREATIES.


A country may look for its defence either to a fland.
ing army or an univerſal militia, —T he former
condemned. The latter objected to as of immoral
tendency—as unneceſſary—either in reſpeft to


courage or Al cipline —Of a comman er, —Of |
treaties,


Ty E laſt topic which it may be neceſſary to
examine as to the ſubject of war, is the con-
duct it becomes us to obſerve reſpecting it in a
time of peace, This article may be diſtributed
into two heads, military eſtabliſnments and
treaties of alliance, |

If military eſtabliſhments in time of peace be
judged proper, their purpoſe may be effected
either by conſigning the practice of military
1 to a certain part of the community,

r by making every man whoſe age is ſuitable
for that — a ſoldier.

The preferableneſs of the latter of theſe me-
thods to the former is obvious. The man that 1s
merely a ſoldier, muſt always be uncommonly de-
praved. War in his caſe inevitably degenerates
from the neceſſary precautions of a perſonal de-
fence, into a trade by which a man ſells his {kill
in murder 4 the ſafety of his exiſtence for a


pecuniary


88 OF MILITARY ESTABLISHMENTS


pecuniary recompenſe. The man that is merely
a'ſoldier, ceaſes to be, in the ſame ſenſe as his
neighbours, a citizen. He is cut off from the
reſt of the community, and has ſentiments and
a rule of judgment peculiar to himſelf, He con-
ſiders his countrymen as indebted to him for
their ſecurity ; and, by an unavoidable tranſition
of reaſoning, believes that in a double ſenſe they
are at his mercy. On the other hand that every
citizen ſhould exerciſe in his turn the functions
of a ſoldier, ſeems peculiarly favourable to that
confidence in himſelf and in the reſources of his
country, which it 1s ſo deſirable he ſhould enter-
tain, It is congenial to that equality, which
muſt ſubſiſt in an eminent degree before man-
kind in general can be either virtuous or wiſe.
And it ſeems to multiply the powers of defence
in a country, ſo as to render the idea of its fall-
ing under the yoke of an enemy in the utmoſt
degree improbable.

There are reaſons however that oblige us to
doubt reſpecting the propriety of cultivating
under any form the fyſtem of military diſcipline
in time of peace. It is in this reſpect with
nations as 1t 1s with individuals. 'The man that


with a piſtol bullet is ſure of his mark, or that


excels his contemporaries in the exerciſe of the
ſword, can hardly eſcape thoſe obliquities of
underſtanding which theſe accompliſhments are
calculated to nouriſh. It is not to be expected
that he ſhould entertain all that confidence in
reaſon and diſtaſte of violence which ſevere truth
preſeribes. It is beyond all controverſy that
War, though the om of it under the preſent
ſtate


AND TREATIES | 89


ſtate of the human ſpecies may in ſome inſtances
be unavoidable, 1 is an idea pregnant with calamity
and vice. It cannot be a matter of indifference,
for the human mind to be ſyſtematically fami-
liariſed to thoughts of murder and deſolation.
The diſciple of mere reaſon would not fail at
the ſight of a muſket or a ſword to be impreſſed
with . ee of abhorrence. Why expel
theſe ſentiments? Why connect the diſcipline
of death with ideas of feſtivity and ſplendour;
which will inevitably happen, if the citizens,
without oppreſſion, are accuſtomed to be drawn
out to encampments and reviews? Is it poſſible
that he who has not learned to murder his neigh-
bour with a one 18 imperfect in the trade of -
man?

If it be replied, © that the generating of error
is not inſeparable from military diſcipline, and
that men may at ſome time be ſufficiently
guarded againſt the abuſe, even while they are
taught the uſe of arms; it will be found
reflection that this argument is of little ——
Though error be not unalterably connected with
the ſcience of arms, it will for a long time remain
ſo. When men are ſufficiently improved to be
able to handle familiarly and with application of
mind the inſtruments of death without injury,
they will alſo be ſufficiently improved to be able
to maſter any ſtudy with much greater facility
than at preſent, and conſequently the cultivation
of the art military in time of peace will have ſtill
fewer inducements to recommend it to our
choice. — To apply theſe conſiderations to the
preſent ſituation of mankind.


We


9% OF MILITARY ESTABLISHMENTS
We have already ſeen that the ſyſtem of a ſtand-


ing army is altogether indefenſible, and that aa


univerſal militia is a much more formidable de-
fence, as well as infinitely more agreeable to the
principles of juſtice and political happineſs. It
remains to be ſeen what would be the real ſitua-
tion of a nation ſurrounded by other nations in the
midſt of which ſtanding armies were maintained,
which ſhould nevertheleſs upon principle wholly
neglect the art military in ſeaſons of peace.
In ſuch a nation it will probably be admitted,
that, ſo far as relates to mere numbers, an army
may be raiſed upon the ſpur of occaſion, nearly
as ſoon as in a nation the citizens of which had
been taught to be ſoldiers, But this army, though
numerous, would be in want of many of thoſe
principles of combination and activity which are
of material importance in a day of battle. There
is indeed included in the ſuppoſition, that the in-
ternal ſtate of this people is more equal and free
than that of the people by whom they are in-
vaded. This will infallibly be the caſe in a com-
pariſon between a people with a ſtanding army
and a people without one; between a people
who can be brought blindly and wickedly to the
invaſion of their peaceful neighbours, and a peo-
ple who will not be induced to fight but in their
own defence. The latter therefore will be obliged
to compare the ſtate of ſociety and government


jn their own country and among their neigh-
bours, and will not fail to be impreſſed with


great ardour in defence of the ineſtimable advan-
tages they poſſeſs. Ardour, even in the. day of


battle, might prove ſufficient. A body of men,


however


AND TREATIES. gt
however undiſciplined, whom nothing could in-
duce to quit the field, would infallibly be victo-
rious over their veteran adverſaries, who, under
the circumſtances of the caſe, could not poſſibly
have an accurate conception of the object for
which they were fighting, and therefore could
not entertain an invincible love for it. It is not
certain that activity and diſcipline oppoſed to
ardour, have even a tendency to turn the balance
of ſlaughter againſt the party that wants them.
Their great advantage conſiſts in their power
over the imagination to aſtoniſh, to terrify and
confound. An intrepid courage un the party thus
aſſailed would ſoon convert them from ſources of
deſpair into objects of contempt.

But it would be extremely unwiſe in us to
have no other reſource but in the chance of this
intrepidity. A reſource much ſurer and more
agrgeable to juſtice is in recollecting that the
war of which we treat is a war of defence. Battle
is not the object of ſuch a war. An army, which,
like that of Fabius, by keeping on the hills, or
by whatever other means, rendered it impracti-
cable for the enemy to force them to an engage-
ment, might look with ſcorn upon his impotent
efforts to enſlave the country. One advantage in-
cluded in ſuch a ſyſtem of war is, that, as its very
eſſence is protraQtion, the defending army might
in a ſhort time be rendered as ſkilful as the aſſail-
ants. Diſcipline, like every other art, has been
repreſented by vain and intereſted men as ſur-
rounded with imaginary difficulties, but is in re-
ality exceedingly fimple ; and would be learned
much more eftefally in the midſt of real war

than


92 OF MILITARY ESTABLISHMENTS
than in the puppet ſhow exhibitions of a period


of peace.

It is defirable indeed that we mould have a
commander of conſiderable ſkill, or rather of
conſiderable wiſdom, to reduce this patient and
indefatigable ſyſtem into practice. This is of
much more importance than the mere diicipline
of the ranks. But the nature of military wil-
dom has been greatly miſrepreſented. Experience
in this, as well as in other arts, has been unrea-
ſonably magnified, and the general power of a
cultivated mind been thrown into ſhade. It will
probably be no long time before this quackery
of profeſſional men will be thoroughly exploded.
How perpetually do we meet with thoſe whom
experience finds incorrigible; while it is recorded
of one of the greateſt generals of antiquity, that
He ſet out for his appointment wholly unacquaint-
ed with his art, and was indebted for that {kill,
which broke out immediately upon his arrival,
to the aſſiduouſneſs of his enquiries, and a care-
ful examination of thoſe writers by 'whom the
art had moſt ſucceſsfully been illuſtrated* ? At
all events it will be admitted, that the main-
tenance of a ſtanding army or the perpetual diſ-
cipline of a nation is a very dear price to pay for
the purchaſe of a general, as well as that the pur-
chaſe would be extremely precarious, if we were
even perſuaded to conſent to the condition. It
may perhaps be true, though this is not altogether
clear, that a nation by whom military diſcipline
was pwholly * would be expoſed to ſome

| CHA N bar


£6 Ciceronis Luculle five een Liber Secundur, init.


AND TREATIES. 5 83


diſadvantage. In that caſe it becomes us to weigh
the neglect and cultivation together, and to caſt
the balance on that fide to which upon mature-
examination it ſhall appear to belong. 5

A ſecond article which belongs to the military
ſyſtem in a ſeaſon of peace is that of treaties of
alliance. This ſubject may eaſily be diſpatched.
Treaties of alliance are in all caſes wrong, in the
firſt place, becauſe all abſolute promiſes are wrong,
and neither individuals nor bodies of men ought
to preclude themſelves from the benefit of future
improvement and deliberation. Secondly, they
are wrong, becauſe they are in all caſes nugatory.
Governments, and public men, will not, and
ought not to hold themſelves bound to the 3 injury
of the concerns they conduct, becauſe a parch-
ment, to which they or their predeceſſors. were
a party, requires it at their hands. If the con-
cert demanded in time of need, approve itſelf
to their judgment or correſpond with their incli-
nation, it will be yielded, though they were
under no previous engagement for that purpoſe.
Treaties of alliance ſerve to no other end, than
to exhibit by their violation an appearance of
profligacy and vice, which unfortunately be-
comes too often a powerful encouragement to the
inconſiſtency of individuals. Add to this, that,
if alliances were engines as powerful, as they
are really impotent, they could ſeldom be of uſe
to a nation uniformly adhering to the principles
of juſtice. They would be uſeleſs, becauſe they
are in reality ill calculated for any other purpoſes
than thoſe of ambition. They might be perni-
cious, becauſe it would be beneficial for nations


as


94 OF DEMOCRACY. AS CONNECTED WITH


as for individuals to look for reſources at home,


| inſtead of depending upon the * com-


pathon of — 89


H A r. Xx.


*


or DEMOCRACY AS ; CONNECTED WITH THE
Non Rennen OF WAR.


External affairs are of Aber nate confi, eration —
Application. —Parther objections to democrac
1. It ts incompatible with fſecrecy—this proved
to be an excellence—2. Its movements are too
" flew—3. Too ö vils of anarchy
confi 9 ;


"JEN thus endeavoured to reduce the ſub-
ject of war to its true principles, it is time that
we ſhould recur to the maxim delivered at our
entrance upon this ſubject, that individuals are
every thing, and ſociety, abſtracted from the in-
dividuals of which it is compoſed, nothing. An
immediate conſequence of this maxim is, that
the internal affairs of the fociety are entitled to
our principal attention, and the external are mat-
ters of inferior and ſubordinate conſideration.
The internal affairs are ſubjects of perpetual
and hourly concern, the external are periodical

and


THE TRANSACTIONS OF WAR. 95

and precarious only. That every man ſhould
be impreſſed with the conſciouſneſs of his in-
dependence, and reſcued from the influence of
extreme want and artificial defires, are purpoſes
the moſt intereſting that can ſuggeſt themſelves
to the human mind ; but the life of man might
paſs, in a ſtate uncorrupted by ideal paſſions,
without its tranquillity being fo much as once
diſturbed by foreign invaſions. The influence
that a certain number of millions, born under
the ſame climate with ourſelves, and known by
the common appellation of Engliſh or French,
| ſhall poſſeſs over the adminiftrative councils of
their neighbour millions, is a circumftance of
much too airy and diſtant conſideration, to de-
ſerve to be made a principal object in the inſti-
tutions of any people. The beſt influence we
can exert is that of a ſage and upright example.
If therefore it ſhould appear that of theſe
two articles, internal and external affairs, one
muſt in ſome degree be ſacrificed to the other,
and that a democracy will in certain reſpects be
leſs fitted for the affairs of war than ſome other
ſpecies of government, good ſenſe would not
heſitate between theſe alternatives. We ſhould
have ſufficient reaſon to be ſatisfied, if, together
with the benefits of juſtice and virtue at home,
we had no reaſon to deſpair of our ſafety from
abroad. A confidence in this article will ſeldom
deceive us, if our countrymen, however little
trained to formal rules and the uniformity of
mechaniſm, have ſtudied the profeſſion of man,
underſtand his attributes and his nature, and
have their necks unbroken to the yoke of blind


credulity


96 OF DEMOCRACY AS. CONNECTED WITH
credulity and abject ſubmiſſion. Such men,


inured, as we are now ſuppoſing them, to a ra-
tional ſtate of lociety, will be full of calm confi-
dence and penetrating activity, and theſe quali-
ties will ſtand them in ſtead of a thouſand leſ-
ſons in the ſchool of military mechaniſm. If
democracy can be proved adequate to wars of
defence, and other governments be better fitted
for wars of a different ſort, this would be an
argument, not of its imperfection, but its merit.

It has been one of the objections to the ability
of a democracy in war, * that it cannot keep
ſecrets. The legiſlative aſſembly, whether it
poſſeſs the initiative, or a power of control only,
in executive affairs, will be perpetually calling
for papers, plans and information, croſs examin-
ing miniſters, and ſifting the policy and the juſ-
tice of public undertakings. How {hall we be

able to cope with an enemy, if he know pre-
ciſely the points we mean to attack, the ſtate of

our fortifications, and the ſtrength and weakneſs
of our armies ? How ſhall we manage our trea-
ties with {kill and addreſs, if he be informed
preciſely of the ſentiments of our mind and
have acceſs to the inſtructions of our ambaſſa-
dors ?”

It happens in this inſtance, that that which
the objection attacks as the vice of democracy,
is one of its moſt eſſential excellencies. The
trick of a myſterious carriage is the prolific pa-
rent of every vice; and it is an eminent advan-
tage incident to democracy, that, though the

Sroclixity of mind has hitherto reconciled this
ſpecies of adminiſtration in ſome degree to the
keeping


THE TRANSACTIONS OF WAR. 97
keeping of ſecrets, yet its inherent tendency 1s
to annihilate them. Why ſhould difingenuity
and concealment be more virtuous or more be-
neficial in nations than in individuals? Why
ſhould that, which every man of an elevated
mind would diſdain in his perſonal character,
be entitled to more lenity and toleration, if un-
dertaken by him as a miniſter of ſtate? Who is
there that ſees not, that this inextricable labyrinth
was artfully 1nyented, leſt the people ſhould un-
derſtand their own affairs, and, underſtanding,
become 1nclinef] to conduct them? With reſpect
to treaties, it is to be ſuſpected that they are in
all inſtances ſuperfluous. But, if public en-
gagements ought to be entered into, what eſſen-
tial difference is there between the governments
of two countries endeavouring to over-reach each
other, and the buyer and ſeller in any private
tranſaction adopting a ſimilar proceeding ?

This whole ſyſtem proceeds upon the idea of
national grandeur and glory, as if in reality
theſe words had any ſpecific meaning. Theſe
contemptible objects, theſe airy names, have
from the earlieſt page of hiſtory been made the
oſtenſible colour for the moſt pernicious under-
takings. Let us take a ſpecimen of their value
from the moſt innocent and laudable purſuits.
If I aſpire to be a great poet, a great hiſtorian,
ſo far as I am influenced by the diQtates of rea-
ſon, it is that I may be uſeful to mankind, and
not that I may do honour to my country. 1s
Newton the better becauſe he was an Engliſhman,
or Galileo the worſe becauſe he was an Italian?


Who can endure to put this high ſounding non-
Vol. II. H ſenſe


98 OF DEMOCRACY AS CONNECTED WITH


ſenſe in the balance againſt the beſt intereſts of
mankind, which will always ſuffer a mortal
wound, when dexterity, artifice and conceal-
ment are made topics of admiration and ap-
plauſe? The underftanding and the virtues of
mankind will always keep pace with the manly
ſimplicity of their deſigns and the undiſguiſed
integrity of their hearts.

It has farther been objected to a democratical
ſtate in its tranſactions with foreign powers,
« that it is incapable of thoſe rapid and deciſive
proceedings, which in ſome ſituations have ſo ;
eminent a tendency to enſure ſucceſs.” If by
this objection it be underſtood that a democrati-
cal ſtate is ill fitted for dexterity and ſurpriſe,
the rapidity of an aſſaſſin, it has already received
a ſufficient anſwer. If it be meant that the re-
gularity of its proceedings may ill accord with
the impatience of a neighbouring deſpot, and,
like the Jews of old, we defire a king“ that
we may be like the other nations,” this is a very
unreaſonable requiſition. A juſt and impartial
reaſoner will be little deſirous to ſee his country
figure high in the diplomatical roll, deeply in-
volved in the intrigues of nations, and aſſidu-
ouſly courted by foreign princes as the inſtru-
ment of their purpoſes. A more groundleſs and
_ abſurd paſſion cannot ſeize upon any people than
that of glory, the preferring their influence in
the affairs of Europe to their internal happineſs
and virtue, for theſe objects will perpetually
counteract and claſh with each other.

But democracy is by no means neceſſarily of
a 4: rm character, or obliged to take every

propoſition


THE TRANSACTIONS OF WA Rx. 99


propoſition that is made to it, ad referendum,
for the conſideration of certain primary aſſem-
blies, like the ſtates of Holland. The firſt prin-
ciple in the inſtitution of government itſelf, is
the neceſſity, under the preſent imperfections of
mankind, of having ſome man or body of men
to act on the part of the whole. Wherever
government ſubſiſts, the authority of the indi-
vidual muſt be in ſome degree ſuperſeded. It
does not therefore ſeem unreaſonable for a repre-
ſentative national aſſembly to exerciſe in certain
caſes a diſcretionary power. Thoſe privileges,
which are veſted in individuals ſelected out of
the maſs by the voice of their fellows, and who
will ſpeedily return to a private ſtation, are by
no means liable to the ſame objections, as the
excluſive and unaccommodating privileges of an
ariſtocracy. Repreſentation, together with many
diſadvantages, has this benefit, that it is able
impartially and with diſcernment to call upon
the moſt enlightened part of the nation to deli-
berate for the whole, and may thus generate a
degree of wiſdom, a refined penetration of ſen-
timent, which it would have been unreaſonable
to expect as the reſult of primary aſſemblies.

A third objection more frequently offered
againſt democratical government is, “ that it is
incapable of that. mature and deliberate proceed-
ing which is alone ſuitable to the deciſion of
ſuch important concerns. Multitudes of men
have appeared ſubje& to fits of occaſional inſa-
nity : they act from the influence of rage, ſuſ-
picion and deſpair : they are liable to be hurried 1
into the moſt unjuſtifiable extremes by the artful f

. practices


160 OF DEMOCRACY AS CONNECTED WICH
practices of an impoſtor.” One of the moſt
obvious anſwers to this objection: is, that we
muſt not judge of a ſovereign people by the
example of the rude multitude in deſpotie ſtates.
We muſt not judge of men born to the exerciſe
of rational functions, by the example of men
rendered mad with oppreſſion, and drunk with
the acquiſition. of new born power. Another
anſwer is, that for all men to fhare the privileges
of all is the law of our nature and the dictate
of juſtice, The caſe in this inſtance is parallel
to that of an individual in his private concerns.
It is true that, while each man is maſter of his
own affairs, he i is liable to all the ftarts of paſſion.
He is attacked by the allurements of temptation
and the tempeſt of rage, and may be guilty of
the moſt fatal errors, before reflection and judg-
ment come forward to his aid. But this is no
ſufficient reaſon for depriving men of the direc-
tion of their own concerns. We ſhould endea-
vour to make them wiſe, and not to make them
ſlaves. The depriving men of their ſelf-govern-
ment 3s in the firſt place unjuſt, while in the
ſecond this felf-government, imperfect as it is,
will be found more falutary than any thing that
can be ſubſtituted in its place.

The nature of anarchy has never been ſuffi-
ciently underſtood. It is undoubtedly: a horri-
ble calamity, but it is lefs horrible than deſ-
potiſm. Where anarchy has flain its hundreds,
deſpotiſm has ſacrificed millions upon millions,
with this only effect, to perpetuate the igno-
rance, the vices and the miſery of mankind.
* is a ſhort lived miſchief, while deſ-

| potiſm


THE TRANSACTIONS OF WAR. 101


potiſm is all but immortal. It is unqueſtionably
a dreadful remedy, for the people to yield to


all their furious paſſions, till the ſpectacle of


their effects gives ſtrength to recovering reaſon:
but, though it be a dreadful remedy, it is a ſure
one. No idea can be ſuppoſed, more pregnant
with abſurdity, than that of a whole people
taking arms againſt each other till they are all
exterminated. It is to defpotiſm that anarchy
is indebted for its ſting. If deſpotiſm were not


ever watchful for its prey, and mercileſsly pre-


pared to take advantage of the errors of man-
kind, this ferment, like ſo many others, being
left to itſelf would ſubſide into an even, clear
and delightful calm. Reaſon is at all times pro-
greſſive. Nothing can give permanence to error,
that does not convert it into an eftabliſhment,
and arm it with powers to reſiſt an invaſion.


CHAP.


Pg C * — ”
— — — — — — < — Ns . 2 8
| - „ ü | F ; : * . 2 x . o 2 —— — — —
— * — ns 4 — 14 . py ES : : * 5 | | x. 5 | 2
- — vg . . * T0 ; = p 2 7 922 * y A — * - ** — [4 S * 96ꝙ6tr . - —— — aA — 8 * 2 2 * —
ne — 5 — . — — — 7 | 0 12 , Bed
: — . 2 - - — ” = — — — f . . -
22


L 102 J


C HAP. XXI.


ox THE COMPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT.


N ———
— gs


LD 2 2


Houſes of afſembly, —T his inſtitution unjiiſi. De.
liberate proceeding the proper antidote.—Sepas
ration of legiſlative and executive power con-

fidered.— Superior importance of the laiter.—
Functions of miniſters. |


—_ TTY


—_


ONE of the articles which has been moſt
eagerly inſiſted on by the advocates of com-
plexity in political inſtitutions, is that of
checks, by which a raſh proceeding may be
prevented, and the proviſions under which man-
kind have hitherto lived with tranquillity, ma
not be reverſed without mature deliberation.”
We will ſuppoſe that the evils of monarchy and
ariſtocracy are by this time too notorious to in-
cline the ſpeculative enquirer to ſeek for a re-
medy in either of theſe. © Yet it is poſſible,
without the inſtitution of privileged orders, to
find means that may anſwer a ſimilar purpoſe
in this reſpe&t. The repreſentatives of the peo-
ple may , diſtributed for example into two


CO” 22 *
n


- —
— k — EI I TINA 2 — —

— — — * _ — vx =
2 ä — — — —
5 8 — — —

— — — P — —
—
:
.


aſſemblies ; they may be choſen with this par-

ticular view to conſtitute an upper and a lower

houſe, and may be diſtinguiſhed from each

other, either by various qualifications of age or
fortune, or by being choſen by a greater or
| | ſſmaller


OF THE COMPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT. 103


ſmaller number of electors, or for a ſhorter or
longer term.“

To every inconvenience that experience can
produce or imagination ſuggeſt there is probably
an appropriate remedy. This remedy may either
be ſought in the dictates of reaſon or in artificial
combinations encroaching upon thoſe dictates.
Which are we to prefer? There is no doubt that
the inſtitution of two houſes of aſſembly is con-
trary to the primary dictates of reaſon and juſtice.
How ſhall a nation be governed ? Agreeably to
the opinions of its inhabitants, or'in oppoſition
to them? Agreeably to them undoubtedly. Not,
as we cannot too often repeat, becauſe their
opinion is a ſtandard of truth, but becauſe, how-
ever erroneous that opinion may be. we can do
no better. There is no effectual way of improv-
ing the inſtitutions of any people, but by en-
lightening their underſtandings. He that < Sea
vours to maintain the authority of any ſentiment,
not by argument, but by force, may intend a
benefit, but really inflits an extreme injury. To
ſupp oſe that truth can be inſtilled through any me-
dium but that of its intrinſic evidence, is the moſt
flagrant of all errors. He that believes the moſt
fundamental propoſition through the influence of
authority, does not believe a truth, but a falſhood.
The propoſition itſelf he does not underſtand, for
thoroughly to underſtand it, is to perceive the
degree of evidence with which its accompanied;
thoroughly to underſtand ; it is to know the full
meaning of its terms, and, by neceſſary conſe-
quences, to perceive in what reſpects they agree

r diſagree with each other. All that he believes


is,


104 OF THE COMPOSITION
| 1 is, that it is very proper he ſhould ſubmit to


uſurpation and injuſtice.

, lt was imputed to the late government of
France, that, when they called an aſſembly of
notables in 1 78 7, they contrived, by dividing the
aſſembly i into ſeven diſtinct corps, and not allow-
ing them to vote otherwiſe than in theſe corps,
that the vote of fifty perſons ſhould be capable of
operating as if they were a majority in an aſſem-

| bly of one hundred and forty-four. It would have

1 been ſtill worſe, if it had been ordained that no

meaſure ſhould be conſidered as the meaſure of
the aſſembly, unleſs it were adopted by the unani-
mous voice of all the corps: eleven perſons might
then, in voting a negative, have operated as a
majority of one hundred and forty-four. This
may ſerve as a ſpecimen of the effects of diſtri-
buting a repreſentative national aſſembly into two
or more houſes. Nor ſhould we ſuffer ourſelves
to be deceived under the pretence of the inno-
cence of a negative in compariſon with an affir-
mative. In a country in which univerſal truth
was already eſtabliſhed, there would be little need
of a repreſentative aſſembly. In a country into
"whoſe inſtitutions error has infinuated itſelf, a
Negative upon the repeal of thoſe errors is the
real affirmative.
The inititution of two houſes of aſſembly is
the direct method to divide a nation againſt elf.
One of theſe houſes will in a greater or leſs degree
be the aſylum of uſurpation, monopoly and pri-
vilege. Parties would expire as, ſoon as they
were born, in a country where oppoſition of
ſentiments and a ſtruggle of intereſts were not
alllowed _


OF GOVERNMENT. 108
allowed to aſſume the formalities of diſtinct! in-


ſtitution.

Meanwhile a ſpecies of check perfectly ſimple,
and which appears ſufficiently adequate to the
_ purpoſe, ſuggeſts itſelf in the idea of a flow and
deliberate proceeding which the repreſentative
aſſembly ſhould preſcribe to itſelf. Perhaps no
proceeding of this aſſembly ſhould have the force
of a general regulation till it had undergone five
or ſix ſucceſſive diſcuſſions in the aſſembly, or
till the expiration of one month from the period
of its being propoſed. Something like this is
the order of the Englith houſe of commons, nor
does it appear to be by any means among the
worſt features of our conſtitution. A ſyſtem
like this would be ſuthciently analogous to the
proceedings of a wiſe individual, who certainly
would not wiſh to determine upon the moſt im-
portant concerns of his life without a tevere ex-
amination, and ſtill leſs would omit this examina-
tion, if his deciſion were deſtined to be a rule
for the conduct and a criterion to determine upon
the rectitude of other men.

Perhaps, as we have ſaid, this flow and gradual
proceeding ought in no inſtance to be diſpenſed
with by the national repreſentative aſſembly.


This ſeems to be the true line between the func-


tions of the aſſembly and its miniſters. It would
give a character of gravity and good ſenſe to this
central authority, that would tend eminently to
fix the confidence of the citizens in its wiſdom
and juſtice. The mere votes of the aſſembly, as
diſtinguiſhed from its acts and decrees, might
ſerve as an encouragement to the public fune-

| tionaries,


106 OF THE COMPOSITION


tionaries, and as affording a certain degree of
hope reſpecting the ſpeedy cure of thoſe evils of
which the public might complain; but they ſhould
never be allowed to be pleaded as the Jegal juſti-
fication of any action. A precaution like this
would not only tend to prevent the fatal conſe-
quences of any precipitated judgment of the
aſſembly within itſelf, but of tumult and diſorder
from without. An artful demagogue would find
it much more eaſy to work up the people into a
fit of momentary inſanity, than to retain them
in it for a month in oppoſition to the efforts of
their real friends to undeceive them. Meanwhile

the conſent of the aſſembly to take their demand
into conſideration might reaſonably be expected
to moderate their violence.

Scarcely any plauſible argument can be ad-
duced in favour of what has been denominated
by political writers a diviſion of powers. No-
thing can ſeem leſs reaſonable, than to preſcribe
any politive limits to the topics of deliberation in
an aſſembly adequately repreſcnting the people ;
or peremptorily to forbid them the exerciſe of
functions, the depoſitaries of which are placed
under their inſpection and cenſure. Perhaps upon
any emergence, totally unforeſeen at the time of
their election, and uncommonly important, they
would prove their wiſdom by calling upon the
people to elect a new aſſembly with a direct view
to that emergence. But the emergence, as we Hall
have occaſion more fully to obſerve in the ſequel,
cannot with any propriety be prejudged, and a
rule laid down for their conduct by a body prior
do or diſtin from themſelves, The —

| 0


OF GOVERNMENT. 105


of legiſlative and executive powers, however in-


telligible in theory, will by no means authoriſe


their ſeparation in practice.

Legiſlation, that is, the authoritative enun-
ciation of abſtract or general propolitions, is a
function of equivocal nature, and will never be
exerciſed in a pure ſtate of ſociety, or a ſtate
approaching to purity, but with great caution
and unwillingneſs. It is the moſt abſolute of
the functions of government, and government
itſelf is a remedy that inevitably brings its own
evils along with it. Adminiſtration on the other
hand is a principle of perpetual application. So
long as men ſhall ſee reaſon to act in a corpo-
rate capacity, they will always have occaſions
of temporary emergency for which to provide.
In proportion as they advance in ſocial improve-
ment, executive power will, comparatively ſpeak-
ing, become every thing, and legiſlative no-
thing. Even at preſent, can there be any arti-
cles of greater importance than thoſe of peace
and war, taxation, and the ſelection of proper
periods for the meeting of deliberative aſſemblies,
which, as was obſerved in the commencement of
the preſent book, are articles of temporary regu-
lation“? Is it decent, can it be juſt, that theſe
prerogatives ſhould be exerciſed by any power
leſs than the ſupreme, or be decided by any
authority but that which moſt adequately repre-
ſents the voice of the nation ? This principle
dught beyond queſtion to be extended univerſally.
There can be no juſt reaſon for excluding the


national


* Chap. I. p. 353.


—


0 — — — —. hs
— — . ]§⏑—— —— . ˙ nt os % *


— — — — ‚ . —‚§—7ß67⁊s m ̃˙ h HOI oi . = Oe err
= . 2 DB 5


— — and
— 2 5 8


11
—
4
1
—
2A
+
| {
„


> a 8 = oma
_ = 3 0 = = =
— -_— oC — — —— an — = _ * . * 1 5
1 F: — _ * — —— — — — — —
: - A — RE. ns : - — = — 2 —
N — 2 — —


be 9-4 "2p" 4 >> =
—— — Gun een oa om ne —— mnt tte mp —- —
— . ——— — as
=. N 0


5


on
_ _ _ \ = = SS — 5 —
: — 2 = —— * — > \ * by — oy *
+ * p —— — * . 9 * - 4 A
- _ "8 . 2 -4 . X -
i — 1 a —— r - — —
hy * - - 4 = — — —— * _ — * — ——_— — —— - — . — — —
— — — —— — 4 — e — A * 0 *
*
*
*


CY i —
e ON. on ws On


2 — by


108 OF THE COMPOSITION, &.


national repreſentative from the exerciſe of any
function, the exerciſe of which on the part of
the ſociety is at all neceſſary.

The functions therefore of miniſters and ma-
giſtrates commonly ſo called, do not relate to
any particular topic, reſpecting which they have
a right excluſive of the repreſentative aſſembly,
They do not relate to any ſuppoſed neceſſity
for ſecrecy ; for ſecrets are always pernicious,
and, moſt of all, ſecrets relating to the intereſts
of any ſociety, which are to be concealed from
the members of that ſociety. It is the duty of
the aſſembly to deſire information without re-
ſerve for themſelves and the public upon every
ſubject of general importance, and it is the duty
of miniſters and others to communicate ſuch in-
formation, though it ſhould not be expreſsly
deſired. The utility therefore of miniſterial
functions being leſs than nothing in theſe reſpects,
there are only two claſſes of utility that remain
to them; particular functions, ſuch as thoſe of
financial detail or minute ſuperintendence, which
cannot be exerciſed unleſs by one or at moſt by
a ſmall number of perſons}; and meaſures, pro-
portioned to the demand of thoſe neceſſities
which will not admit of delay, and ſubje& to
the reviſion and cenſure of the deliberative aſſem-
bly, The latter of theſe claſſes will perpetually
diminiſh as men advance in improvement ; nor
can any thing be of greater importance than the
reduction of that diſcretionary power in an indi-
vidual, which may greatly affect the intereſts
Vr fetter the deliberations of the many.


aa


} Chap. I. p. 354-


[ 109 3 | 8


© H A P. Xn.


OF THE FUTURE HISTORY OF POLITICAL
SOCIETIES.


Quantity of adminiſtration neceſſary to be maintain-
ed.—Objefts of adminiſtration : national glory
rivalſbiß of nations, —Inferences : 1. compli-
cation of government unneceſſary—2. extenſive
territory ſuperfluous —3. conſtraint, its lumita-
tions, —Prijed of government : police—defence.


y y E have now endeavoured to deduce certain
general principles upon moſt of the ſubjeQs of


legiflative and executive power. But there is


one very important topic which remains to be
diſcuſſed. How much of either of theſe powers
does the benefit of ſociety require us to maintain?

We have already ſeen that the only legitimate
object of political inſtitution is the advantage of


individuals. All that cannot be brought home


to them, national wealth, proſperity and glory,
can be advantageous only to thoſe ſelf intereſted
impoſtors, who, from the earlieſt accounts of
time, have confounded the underſtandings of
mankind the more ſecurely to {ink them in de-
baſement and miſery.

The deſire to gain a more extenſive territory,
to conquer or to hold in awe our neighbouring
ſtates, to ſurpaſs them in arts or arms, is a deſire

founded


—


zo OF THE FUTURE HISTORY


founded in prejudice and error. Power is not
happineſs. Security and peace are more to be
deſired than a name at which nations tremble.
Mankind are brethren. We aſſociate in a par-
ticular diſtrict or under a particular climate, be-
cauſe aſſociation is neceſſary to our internal tran-
quillity, or to defend us againſt the wanton
attacks of a common enemy. But the rivalſhip
of nations is a creature of the imagination. If
riches be our object, riches can only be created
by commerce; and the greater is our neighbour's
capacity to buy, the greater will be our oppor-
unity to fell. The proiperity of all is the 1 in-
tereſt of all.
The more accurately we underſtand our own
advantage, the leſs ſhall we be diſpoſed to dil-
turb the peace of our neighbour. The ſame
principle 1s applicable to him in return. It be-
comes us therefore to deſire that he may be wiſe.
But wiſdom is the growth of equality and inde-
pendence, not of injury and oppreſſion. If
preſſion had been the ſchool of wiſdom, the
improvement of mankind would have been in-
eftimable, for they have been in that ſchool for
many thouſand years. We ought therefore to
deſire that our neighbour ſhould be independent.
We ought to deſire that he ſhould be free; for
wars do not originate in the unbiaſſed propen-
fities of nations, but in the cabals of government
and the propenſities that governments inſpire
into the people at large. If our neighbour in-
vade our territory, all we ſhould deſire is to
repel him from it; and for that purpoſe it is
not neceſſary we : ſhould ſurpaſs him in PE
ſince


OF POLITICAL SOCIETIES. EE


ſince upon our own ground his match is unequal.
Not to ſay that to conceive a nation attacked by - "i
another, ſo long as its own conduct is ſober, |
equitable and moderate, is an exceedingly im-
probable ſuppoſition.

Where nations are not brought into avowed
hoſtility, all jealouſy between them is an unin-
telligible chimera. I reſide upon a certain ſpot,
becauſe that reſidence is moſt condutive to my
happineſs or uſefulneſs. I am intereſted in the
political juſtice and virtue of my ſpecies, becauſe
they are men, that 1s, creatures eminently capa-
ble of juſtice and virtue; and I have perhaps
additional reaſon to intereſt myſelf for thoſe who
live under the fame government as myſelf, be-
cauſe I am better qualified to underſtand their
claims, and more capable of exerting myſelf in
their behalf. But I can certainly have no inte-
reſt in the infliction of pain upon others, unleſs
ſo far as they are expreſsly engaged in acts of
injuſtice. The object of found policy and mo-
rality is to draw men nearer to each other, not
to ſeparate them ; to unite their intereſts, not to
oppole them.

Individuals cannot have too frequent or unli
mited intercourſe with each other; but ſocieties
of men have no intereſt to explain and adjuſt,
except ſo far as error and violence may render
explanation neceſſary. This conſideration an-
nihilates at once the principal objects of that
myſterious and crooked policy which has hither-
to occupied the attention of governments. Be-
fore this principle officers of the army and the
navy, ambaſſadors and negociators, and all the

. train


. _—_—_ *
DEE = N * *
*


. — 1
LY = 9 W OY - pany, _ _ = - PRETTY — - = = > = - \
2 * = —— = = Ti, * E 4 £ _ 4 w ac, +, n * 1 n — DA 2 a2 - _— : l ee =
- 4 OY * FR * bag _—_ ON 2 ett us oh - b * =_ —_—y = = = 1 _ 2 F : had —
_ by 1 * — 9 " — 4 "gy * - i — -,- 3 2 r > — _ 2 — SS + — —
F Ac wo wg — - — — — — = DOC NEWER — £ ODE — —— . IS L.-5s
4 . . b 5 7 A ns coor © — — . — r 5 — — = — IC a PS - 8 - + —
- v 3 Fe , þ N . — 2 C5. 8 i 4 r. 0 1 2 wi a * m_— *
— . " r I 1 — 2 — un {nn geen — r eggs ——— — nr — — — — — — * * CR Mid... N W
4 — — — —— Do > 4s — . — — - - - — = — — * ** — RA . — —————_—_ A _—_ — rt — — — — —
* — 4 . vr, : — — ; 5 — — — 2 -= — = — ;
1 — < * * — * * " - 4
3 * - * : » 4 — * * * e


112 OF THE TUTURE HISTORY


train of artifices that has been invented to hold
other nations at bay, to penetrate their ſecrets,
to traverſe their machinations, to form alliances
and counter alliances, fink into nothing. The
expence of government 1s annihilated, and to-
gether with its expence the means of ſubduin
and undermining the determination of its ſubjects.
Another of the great opprobriums of political
ſcience is at the ſame time completely removed,
that extent of territory ſubject to one head,
reſpecting which philoſophers and moraliſts have.
alternately diſputed whether it be moſt unht for
a monarchy or for a democratical government.
The appearance which mankind in a future ſtate
of improvement may be expected to aſſume, is
a policy that in different countries will wear a
ſimilar form, becauſe we have all the ſame fa-
culties and the ſame wants; but a policy the
independent branches of which will extend
their authority over a ſmall territory, becauſe
neighbours are beſt informed of each other's
concerns, and are perfectly equal to their adjuſt-
ment. No recommendation can be imagined
of an extenſive rather than a limited territory, 6
except that of external ſecurity. f
Whatever evils are included in the abſtract
idea of government, are all of them extremely


aggravated by the extenſiveneſs of its juriſdic-


tion, and ſoftened under circumſtances of an
oppoſite ſpecies. Ambition, which may be no
leſs formidable than a peſtilence in the former,
has no room to unfold itſelf in the latter. Po-


pular commotion is like the waves of the ſea,


capable where the ſurface is large of producing
. the


ir


OF POLITICAL SOCIETIES: 113


the moſt tragical effects, but mild and innocuous
when confined within the circuit of an humble
lake. Sobriety and equity are the obvious cha-
racteriſtics of a limited circle. —

It may indeed be objected, that great talents
are the offspring of great paſſions, and that in
the quiet mediocrity of a petty republic the
powers of intellect may be expected to ſubſide
into inactivity.“ This objection, if true, would
be entitled to the moſt ſerious conſideration.
But it is to be conſidered that, upon the hypo-
theſis here advanced, the whole human ſpecies
would conſtitute in one ſenſe one great republic,
and the proſpects of him who deſired to act
beneficially upon a great ſurface of mind, would
become more animating than ever. During the
period in which this ſtate was growing but not
yet complete, the compariſon of the bleſſings
we enjoyed with the iniquities practiſing among
our neighbours would afford an additional ſti-
mulus to exertion“.

Ambition and tumult are evils chat ariſe out
of government in an indirect manner, in con-
ſequence of the habits which government intro-
duces of material action extending itſelf over
multitudes of men. There are other evils inſe-
parable from its exiſtence. The objects of go-
vernment are the ſuppreſſion of violence, either
external or internal, which might otherwiſe de-
ſtroy or bring into jeopardy the well being of
the community or its members; and the means
it employs is violence of a more regulated kind.

Vol. II. ; I _


* 'This objection will be er diſcuſſed in the eighth book
of the preſent work.


OO — — AE


*
0


„% or THE PUTURE HISTORY


For this purpoſe the concentration of individual
forces becomes neceſſary, and the method in
which this concentration is uſually obtained, is
alſo conſtraint. The evils of conſtraint have been
conſidered on a former occahonf. Conftraint
employed againſt delinquents or perſons to whom
delinquency is imputed, is by no means without
its miſchiefs. Conftraint employed by the ma-
jority of a ſociety againſt the minority who
may differ from them upon ſome queſtion of
public good, is calculated at firſt fight at leaft

to excite a ſtill greater diſapprobation. RE.
Both of theſe exertions may indeed appear
to reft upon the ſame principle. Vice is un-

queſtionably no more than error of judgment,
and nothing can juſtify an attempt to correct
it by force but the extreme neceſſity of the caſe*,
The minority, if erroneous, fall under preciſely
the ſame general deſcription, thongh their error
may not be of equal magnitude. But the ne-
ceſſity of the caſe can ſeldom be equally impreſ-
five. If the idea of ſeceſſion for example were
fomewhat more familiariſed to the conceptions
of mankind, it could ſeldom happen that the
ſeceſſion of the minority could in any degree
compare in miſchievous tendency with the hoſ-
tility of a criminal offending againſt the moſt
o6bywus principles of ſocial juſtice. The cafes
are parallel to thoſe of offenſive and defenſive
war. In putting conſtraint upon a minority,
we yield to a ſuſpicious temper that tells us the
oppoling party may hereafter in ſome way ityure
ANN | | "us,


+ Book II, Chap. vi. 125 ; BA
* Book II, Chap. VI. Book IV, Chap. VT.


OF POLTTIAL SOCIETIES: 115


us, and we will anticipate his injury. In put-
ting conſtraint upon a criminal, we ſeern to repel
an enemy who has entered our territory and re-
fuſes to quit it. 1 „
Government can have no more than two legi-
timate purpoſes, the ſuppreſſion of injuſtice a-
gainſt individuals within the community, and
the common defence againſt external invaſion.
The firſt of theſe purpoſes, which alone can have
an uninterrupted claim upon -us, is ſufficiently
anſwered by an affociation of ſuch an extent as
to afford room for the inſtitution of a jury, to
decide upon the offences of individuals with-

in the.commnnity, and upon the queſtions and
controverſies reſpecting property which may
chance to ariſe. It might be eaſy indeed for an
offender to eſcape from the limits of ſo petty a
juriſdiction; and it might ſeem neceſſary at firſt
that the neighbouring pariſhes or juriſdictions
ſhould be governed in a ſimilar manner, or at
leaſt ſhould be willing, whatever was their form
of government, to co-operate with us in the re-
moval or reformation of an offender, whoſe pre-
ſent habits were alike injurious to us and to them.
But there will be no need of any expreſs com-
pact, and ſtill leſs of any common centre of
authority, for this purpoſe. General juſtice and
mutual intereſt are found more capable of bind-
ing men than ſignatures and ſeals. In the mean

time all neceſſity for cauſing the puniſhment of
the crime to purſue the criminal, would ſoon at
leaſt ceaſe, if it ever exiſted. The motives to
offence would become rare: its aggravations few:
and rigour ſuperfluous. The principal obje& of
00 puniſhment


N *


: = 4 af at
bg re IE I ˖——— — — * Y -
” < — XC. — * bg
en ne ů — — — —— — —
*


—
—
— — — 4
— — —
— — —


2 32 —— —
F F
!


.
[|
1
„
= i
*
*
» of
14
3
; :
zz
4 *
—
”
. 0
1
wy.
.
9
1
3
: i
'F
*
*


— 2 — iy
** tu = = - —— 7 3 *

A — 27 222 8 — — — — — — — — — — I II > —— — — — * 8 = 5 - — — *
. — — — = . — CARES; —— — — T7 2 —— 2 bh CES - 1 FIN — —
e — . _ — 2 r voor. _ hv 2 „ a — q — _ 7 — IIENTY

a 90
— * Ya _ * « — — a 4 4
not 4 . LS — wo by ebe r A en Ine — + fre 1 * —
, N 4 3 — — — 1 * * N 6 *


K AS EW» Ae abr 2 „»


116 OF POLITICAL SOCIETIES.


puniſhment is reſtraint upon a dangerous mem- i
ber of the community; and the end of this re-
ſtraint would be anſwered, by the general in-
ſpection that is exerciſed by the members of a


limited circle over the conduct of each other, and


by the gravity and good ſenſe that would cha-
racteriſe the cenſures of men, from whom all
myſtery and empiriciſm were baniſhed. No
individual would be hardy enough in the cauſe
of vice, to defy the general conſent of ſober
judgment that would ſurround him. It would
carry deſpair to his mind, or, which is better, it
would carry conviction. He would be obliged,
by a force not leſs irreſiſtible than whips and
chains, to reform his conduct.
In this ſketch is contained the rude outline of
political government. Controverſies between
pariſh and pariſh would be in an eminent degree
unreaſonable, ſince, if any queſtion aroſe, about
limits for example, juſtice would preſently teach
us that the individual who cultivates any portion
of land, is the propereſt perſon to decide to which
diſtrict be would belong. No aflociation of men,
ſo long as they adhered to the principles of rea-
ſon, could poſſibly have any intereſt in extending
their territory. If we would produce attach-
ment in our aſſociates, we can adopt no ſurer
method than that of practiſing the dictates of
equity and moderation; and, if this failed in any
inſtance, it would only fall with him who, to


whatever ſociety he belonged, would prove an
unworthy member. The duty of any ſociety to


Fugen offenders is not dependent upon the hy-
: 1


8


OF POLITICAL SOCIETIES. 117


pothetical conſent of the offender to be puniſhed,
but upon the duty of neceſſary defence.

But however irrational might be the contro-
verſy of pariſh with pariſh in ſuch a ſtate of
ſociety, it would not be the leſs poſſible. For ſuch
extraordinary emergencies therefore proviſion
ought to be made. Theſe emergencies are ſimi-
lar in their nature to thoſe of foreign invaſion.
They can only be provided againſt by the concert
of ſeveral diſtricts, declaring and, if derart, in-
forcing the dictates of juſtice.

One of the moſt obvious remarks that .
itſelf upon theſe two caſes, of hoſtility between
diſtrict and diſtrict, and of foreign invaſion
which the intereſt of all calls upon them jointly
to repel, is, that it is their nature to'be only of
occaſional recurrence, and that therefore the pro-
viſions to be made reſpecting them need not be
in the ſtricteſt ſenſe of perpetual operation. In
other words, the permanence of a national aſ-
ſembly, as it has hitherto been practiſed in
France, cannot be neceſſary in a period of tran-
quillity, and may perhaps be pernicious. That
we may form a more accurate judgment of this,
let us recollect ſome of the principal features


that enter into the conſtitution of Aa national
aſſembly.


+ £ |
 . 1 BY


—


o 7 o 2 2
4 Wer, 2 2
—— — bo 5 — — 4
et — = N —— — Ty arts - —
— | — — I *
- 7 - — - —_ o =
5 — — —U— — * - 2 ——
4 — — — : - — IE —— — ** ve — PI
— ————_ * — cp, * 8 .
——— «
4 — : 1 —


nen


eee e Ar. XIII


OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES.


They produce a fictitious unanimity——an unnatural


uniformity of opinion, — Cauſes of this uni-
b ry. 94 — of i wake of deciſion
by vote—1. Perverſion of reaſon—2. Conten-

© thous diſputes — 3. The triumph of” ignorance

and vice. Society incapable of acting from it-

fe. being well conducted by others. —Con-
cluſion.— Modification of ens that A
from * conſiderations.


Is the firſt place the exiſtence of a ""
aſſembly introduces the evils of a fictitious una-
nimity. The public, guided by ſuch an aſſem-


bly, acts with concert, or elſe the aſſembly is a


nugatory excreſcence, But it is impoſſible that
this unanimity can really exiſt, The individuals
who conſtitute a nation, cannot take into conſi-
deration a variety of important queſtions, with-
out forming different ſentiments reſpecting them.
In reality all matters that are brought before
ſuch an aſſembly are decided by a majority of
yotes, and the minority, after having .
with all the power of eloquence and force of
reaſoning of ach they are capable the injuſ-
tice and folly of the meaſures adopted, are


obliged 1 in a certain ſenſe to aſſiſt in carrying
them


or NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES. ay


them into execution. Nothing can more directly
contribute to the depravation of the human uns
derſtanding and character. lt inevitably renders
mankind timid, diſſembling and corrupt. He
that is not accuſtomed excluſively to act upon
the dictates of his own underſtanding, muſt fall
infinitely ſhort of that energy and ſimplicity of
which our nature is capable. He that contrie
hutes his perſonal exertions or his property to
the ſupport of a cauſe which he believes to be
unjuſt, will quickly loſe that accurate diſerimi-
nation and nice ſenſibility of moral rectitude

which are the principal ornaments of reaſon.
Seccndly, the exiſtence of national councils
produces a certain ſpecies of real unanimity, un-
natural in its character, and pernicious in its
effects. The genuine and wholſome ſtate of
mind is, to be unlooſed from ſhackles, and to
expand every fibre of its frame according to the
independent and individual impreſſions of truth
upon that mind. How great would be the pro-
greſs of intellectual improvement, if men were
unfettered by the prejudices of education, un-
ſeduced by the influence of a corrupt fate of
ſociety, and accuſtomed to yield without fear to
the guidance of truth, however unexplored
might be the regions and unexpected the con-
clutions to which ſhe conducted us? We cannot
advance in the voyage of happineſs, unleſs we
be wholly at large upon the ſtream that would
carry us thither ; the anchor, that we at firſt
looked upon as the inſtrument of our ſafety, will
at laſt appear to be the means of detaining our
progreſs, Unanimity of a certain ſpecies _
| 8


220 _ OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES:


be the reſult of perfect freedom of enquiry, -
and this unanimity would, in a ſtate of perfect
freedom, become hourly more conſpicuous. But
the unanimity, that reſults from men's having a
viſible ſtandard by which to adjuſt their ſenti-
ments, is deceitful and pernicious.

In numerous aſſemblies a thouſand motives
influence our judgments, independently of rea-
ſon and evidence. Every man looks forward to
the effects which the opinions he avows will
produce on his ſucceſs. Every man connects
himſelf with ſome ſect or party. The activity
of his thought is ſhackled at every turn by the
fear that his aſſociates may diſclaim him. This
effect is ſtrikingly viſible in the preſent ſtate of
the Britiſh parliament, where men, whoſe facul-
ties are comprehenſive almoſt beyond all former
example, are induced by theſe motives ſincerely
to eſpouſe the moſt contemptible and clearly ex-

ploded errors.

Thirdly, the debates of a national aſſembly
are diſtorted from their reaſonable tenour by the
neceſſity of their being uniformly terminated by
a vote. Debate and diſcuſſion are in their own
nature highly conducive to intellectual improve-
ment; but they loſe this ſalutary character the
moment they are ſubjected to this unfortunate
condition. What can be more unreaſonable,
than to demand, that argument, the uſual qua-
lity of which is gradually and imperceptibly to
| 3 the mind, ſhould declare its effect in
the cloſe of a ſingle converſation? No ſooner
does this circumſtance occur than the whole ſcene
changes its character. The orator no longer en-
* quires


or NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES. 121


| enquires after permanent conviction, but tranſi-
tory effect. He ſeeks rather to take advantage
of our prejudices than to enlighten our judg-
ment. That which might otherwiſe have been
a ſcene of philoſophic and moral enquiry, is
changed into wrangling, tumult and Precipita-
tion.

Another circumſtance that ariſes out of the
deciſion by vote, is the neceſſity of conſtructing
a form of words that ſhall beſt meet the ſenti-
ments and be adapted to the preconceived ideas
of a multitude of men. What can be conceived
of at once more ludicrous and diſgraceful, than
the ſpectacle of a ſet of rational beings employ-
ed for hours together in weighing particles and
adjuſting commas ? Such is the ſcene that is per-
petually witneſſed in clubs and private ſocieties.
In parliaments this ſort of buſineſs is uſually ad-
| Juited before the meaſure becomes a ſubject of

public inſpection. But it does not the leſs exiſt;
and ſometimes it occurs in the other mode, 10
that, when numerous amendments have been
made to ſuit the corrupt intereſt of imperious
pretenders, the Herculean taſk remains at laſt to
reduce the chaos into a grammatical and intelli-
gible form.

The whole is then wound up with that in-
tolerable inſult upon all reaſon and juſtice, the
deciding upon truth by the caſting up of num-
bers. Thus every thing that we have been ac-
cuſtomed to eſteem moſt ſacred, is determined,
at beſt by the weakeſt heads in the aſſembly, but,
as it not leſs frequently happens, by the moſt
corrupt and diſhonourable intentions.


In


122 OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES.


In the laſt place, national aſſemblies will by |
no means be thought to deſerve our direct ap-
probation, if we recollect for a moment the ab-
ſurdity of that fiction by which ſociety is con-
ſidered, as it has been termed, as 8 moral indi-
vidual. It is in vain that we endeavour to coun-
teract the immutable laws of neceſſity. A mul-
titude of men after all our ingenuity will ſtill
remain no more than a multitude of men. No-
thing can intelleQually unite them ſhort of equal
capacity and identical perception. 80 long as
the varieties of mind ſhall remain, the force of
ſaciety can no otherwiſe be concentrated, than
by one man for a ſhorter or a longer term taking
the lead of the reſt, and employing their farce,
Whether material or dependent en the weight
of their character, in a mechanical manner,
juſt as he would employ the force of a tocl
or a machine. All government correſponds in
a certain degree to what the Greeks denomi-
nated a tyranny, The difference is, that in
deſpotic countries mind is depreſſed by an
uniform ufurpation; white in republics it pre-
ferves a greater portion of its activity, and the
uſurpation more eaſily cenforms itlelf to the
fluctuations of opinion. b
The pretence of collective wifdem is the moſt
palpable of all impoſtures. The acts of the
ſaciety can never riſe above the ſuggeſtions of
this or that individual who is a member of it. Let
us enquire whether ſociety, conſidered as an
agent, can really become the equal of certain
individuals of whom it is compoſed. And here,
without ſtaying to examine what ground we have
| : do


OF NATIONAL: ASSEMBLIES. 23


tw expect that the wiſeſt member of the ſociety
will anal take the lead in it, we find two ob-
vious reaſons to perſuade us that, whatever he
the degree of wiſdom inherent in him that really
ſuperintends, the acts which he performs in the
name of the ſociety will be both leſs virtuous and
leſs able, than under other circumſtances they
might be expected to be. In the firſt place, —
are few men who, with the conſciouſneſs of
being able to cover their reſponſibility under the
name of a ſociety, will not venture upon mea-
{ures, leſs direct in their motives, or leſs juſti-
table in the experiment, than they would haya
choſen to adopt in their own perſons. Secondly,
men who a& under the name of a ſociety, are
deprived of that activity and energy which may
belong to them in their individual character.
They have a multitude of followers to draw after
them, whoſe humours they muſt confult, and
to whoſe ſlowneſs of apprehenſion they muſt
accommodate themſelves. It is for this reaſon
that we frequently ſce men of the molt elevated
genius dwindle into vulgar leaders, when they
become involved in the buſy ſcenes of public
life.

From theſe reaſonings we are ſufficiently au-
thoriſed to conclude, that national aſſemblies, oz
in other words aſſemblies iaſtituted for the joint
purpoſe of adjuſting the differences between
diſtrict and diſtrict, and of conſulting reſpec-
ing the beſt mode of repelling foreign inva-
ſion, however neceſſary to he had recourſe to
upon certain gr wg mo to he employed as
Paringy as the nature of the caſe will admit.


They


_ l —
r


— > — — Sw —— 2 = — —
* r — 4 ——— —


—


—_ 9 5 = = = => _
= \ = 1 —— — = n = r 7

ry 3 - &F Ta Ye, is 7 CIR * 1 = <Y \ — —

— A —— EET — —_ = 7 Ep a EEE 2

. K 90 OY A its TRY. Os I bo AO * * * : ** Wers — — =
- 0 : q Manda” 2 <ﬀW 7 . . 212 Ee. s S * *
- . N * * e „ N K , . —
= N 2
— —
*
e
*


124 | OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES.


They ſhould either never be elected but upon
extraordinary emergencies, like the dictator of
the ancient Romans, or elſe fit periodically, one
day for example in a year, with a power of
continuing their ſeſſions within a certain limit
to hear the complaints and repreſentations of
their conſtituents. The former of theſe modes
is greatly to be preferred. Several of the rea-
ſons already adduced are calculated to ſhow, that
election itſelf is of a nature not to be employed


but when the occaſion demands it. There would
be no difficulty in ſuggeſting expedients relative


to the regular originating of national aſſemblies.
It would be moſt ſuitable to paſt habits and
experience, that a general election ſhould take
place whenever a certain number of diſtricts de-
manded it. It would be moſt agreeable to rigid
ſimplicity and equity that an aſſembly of two


or two hundred diſtricts ſhould take place, in


exact proportion to the number of diſtricts by


| whom that meaſure was defired.


It cannot reaſonably be denied that all the ob-


jections which have been moſt loudly reiterated -


againſt democracy, become null in an applica-
tion to the form of government which has now
been delineated. Here is no opening for tumult,


for the tyranny of a multitude drunk with unli-


mited power, for political ambition on the part
of the few, or reſtleſs jealouſy and precaution


on the part of the many. Here no demagogue


would find a ſuitable occaſion for rendering the
multitude the blind inſtrument of his purpoſes.
Men in ſuch a ſtate of ſociety would underſtand
their happineſs _ cheriſh it, The true reaſon
why


OF THE DISSOLUTION, &c. 125


why the maſs of mankind has ſo often been made
the dupe of knaves, has been the myſterious and
complicated nature of the ſocial ſyſtem. - Once
annihilate the quackery of government, and the
moſt homebred underſtanding will be prepared
to ſcorn the ſhallow artifices of the Rate juggler
that would miſlead him.


C HAP. XXIV.
OF THE DISSOLUTION OF GOVERNMENT.


Political authority of a Ae afſembly—oof ; Ju-
eee re from the whole.


It remains for us to conſider what is the de-
gree of authority neceſlary to be veſted in ſuch
a modified ſpecies of national aſſembly as we have
admitted into our ſyſtem. Are they to iſſue
their commands to the different members of the
contederacy ? Or is it ſufficient that they ſhould
invite them to co-operate for the common advan-
tage, and by arguments and addreſſes convince
them of the reaſonableneſs of the meaſures they
propoſe ? The former of theſe would at firſt be
neceſſary. The latter would afterwards become
ſufficient. The Amphictyonic council of Greece

poſſeſſed


*


| ns OF THE DISSOLUTION


4 oſſeſſed no authority but that whichAerived
rom its perſonal character. In proportion as
the ſpirit of party was extirpated, as the reſt-
leſſneſs of public commotion ſubſided, and as
the political machine became ſimple, the voice
of reaſon would be ſecure to be heard. An ap-
peal by the aſſembly to the ſeveral diſtricts would
not fail to obtain the approbation of all reaſon-
able men, unleſs it contained in it ſomething
fo evidently queſtionable, as to make it perhaps
defirable that it ſhould prove abortive.

This remark leads us one ſtep farther. Why
ſhould not the ſame diſtinction between com-
mands and invitations, which we have juſt made
in the caſe of national aſſemblies, be applied to
the particular aſſemblies or juries of the ſeveral
diſtricts? At firſt, we will ſuppoſe, that ſome
degree of authority and violence would be ne-
eeſſary. But this neceſſity does not ariſe out of
the nature of man, but out of the inftitutions
| by which he has already been corrupted. Man
is not originally vicious. He would not refuſe

4 to liſten, or to be convinced by the expoſtula-
1 tions chat are addreffed to him, had he not been
| accuſtomed to regard them as | hypocritical, and

to conceive that, while His neighbour, his pa-
rent and his political governor pretended to be

actuated by a pure regard to his intereſt, they

were in reality, at the expence of his, promot-

mg their own. Such are che fatal effects of

myſteriouſneſs and complexity. Simplify the

= focial ſyſtem in the manner which every motive
3 but thoſe of uſurpation and ambition power-
i fully : recommends; render the plain dictates of

juſtice


—— — 2 * S «
on fer ett. ˙ ( —— On 3 r —
- = — r I =


LY — _ - -
J - —_ on” — NS * r Zo ——
r I TS 2
= — — 1 — — — — tp pq — —
. 5 8 2 = *. PISS
8 >> == 0 by —— n . *
X _ — *
—— — —— N — *
os 4 * - ,
C ͤͤ⁰ r ary” ay a= eS
8 ** >
” —
2 \


OF GOVERNMENT. uy


juſtice level to every capacity; remove the ne-
cefſity of implicit faith; and the whole ſpecies
will become reaſonable and virtuous. 'It will
then be ſufficient for juries to recommend a cet-
tain mode of adjuſting controverſies, without
aſſuming the prerogative of dictating that ad-
juſtment. It will then be ſufficient for them to
invite offenders to forſake theit errors. If their
expoſtulations proved in a few inſtances ineffec-
tual, che evils ariling out of this circumſtance |
would be of leſs importante, than thoſe which.
proceed from the perpetual violation of the ex-
erciſe of private judgment. But in reality no
evils would ariſe, for, where the empire of rea-
ſon was ſo univerſally acknowledged, the of-
fender would either readily yield to the expoſtu-
lations of authority; or, if he reſiſted, though
ſuffering no perſonal moleſtation, he would feel
ſo unefſy under the unequivocal diſapprobation
and obſervant eye of public judgment, as wil-
lingly to remove to a ſociety more congenial to
his errors.

The reader has probably anticipated me in
the ultimate concluſion, from theſe remarks.
If juries might at length ceaſe to decide and be
contented to invite, if force might gradually be
withdrawn and reaſon truſted alone, ſhall we
not one day find that juries themſelves and every
other ſpecies of public inſtitution, may be laid
aſide as unneceſſary? Will not the reaſonings of
one wiſe man be as effectual as thoſe of twelve?
Will not the competence of one individual to
inſtru his neighbours be a matter of ſufficient
notoriety, without the formaliry of an election?


| Will


.

4

f

4

, ;
T2


128 OF THE DISSOLUTION, ec.


Will chere be many vices to correct and much
obſtinacy to conquer? This is one of the moſt
memorable ſtages of human improvement. With
what delight muſt every well informed friend of
mankind look forward to the auſpicious period,

the diſſolution of political government, of that
brute engine, which has been the only perennial
cauſe of the vices of mankind, and which, as
has abundantly appeared in the progreſs of the
preſent work, has miſchiefs of various ſorts in-
corporated with its ſubſtance, and no otherwiſe


to be removed than by its utter annihilation


4 N : ,


E N Qu 1 R TT


' CONCERNING


POLITICAL JUSTICE.


ee.


— —_—
— —


B o OK VI


OF OPINION CONSIDERED AS A SUBJECT
OF POLITICAL INSTITUTION. | |


CHAP. d


GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL
SUPERINTENDENCE OF OPINION.


A oatinents in favour of this faperintendaguons
Anfwer.—The exertions of ſociety in its corpo-
rate capacity are, 1. unwiſe—2. incapable of
proper effett.—Of fumptuary laws, agrarian
laws and rewards.—Political degeneracy not

incurable.—3. Superfluous —in commerce—1n
ſpeculative enquiry—in morality.— 4. Pernici-

ou at undermining intellectual capacity -a:
ſuſpending intellectual improvement—contrary
to the nature of ne * nature i
mind. ane ion.


Ar PRINCIPLE, [nablncs * 1 dowly
into the ſyſtems of the writers! on political law,


is that of the of governments to watch over
Vol. II. K the


"HIT:


130 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL


the manners of the people. Government,”
ſay they, © plays the part of an unnatural ſtep-
mother, not of an affectionate parent, when ſhe
is contented by rigorous punithments to avenge


the commiſſion of a crime, while ſhe is wholly


inatteative beforehand to imbue the mind with


_ thoſe virtuous principles, which might have


rendered puniſhment unneceſſary. It is the
buſineſs of a ſage and patriotic magiſtracy to


have its attention ever alive to the ſentiments of


the people, to encourage ſuch as are favourable
to virtue, and to cheek in the bud ſuch as may
lead to diforder and corruption. How long
ſhall government be employed to difplay its
terrors, without ever having recourſe to the
gentleneſs of invitation? How long ſhall ſhe
deal in retroſpect and cenſure to the utter ne-
glect of prevention and remedy ? Theſe reaſon-
ings have in ſome reſpects gained additional
ſtrength by means of the lateſt improvements
and cleareſt views upon the ſubject of political
truth. It has been rendered more evident than in
any former petiod, that government, inſtead of
being an object of fecondaty conſideration, has
been the principal vehiele of extenſive and per-
manent evil to mankind. It was natural there-
fore to fay, © {ice government can produce ſo
much politive W rely it can do ſome
poſitive good.”

But theſe views, Feeder bs Pockous and e-
able they may in the firſt ee appear, are
hable to very ſerious queſtion. If we would
not he ſeduced: by viſionary good, we ought
"ws more than ever, to recollect the principles
8 chat


SUPERINTENDENCE-OF OPINION. Þ 131


that have repeatedly been inſiſted upon and
illuſtrated in this work, that government is in
all caſes an evil,” and '@ that it ought to be in-
troduced as ſparingly as poſſible.” Nothing can
be more unqueſtionable than that the manners
and opinions of mankind are of the utmoſt con-
ſequence to the general welfare. But it does not
follow that government is the inſtrument by
which they are to be faſhioned.

One of the reaſons that may lead us to doubt
of its fitneſs for this purpoſe, is to be drawn
from the view we have already taken of ſociety
conſidered as an agent“. A multitude of men
may be feigned to be an individual, but they
cannot become a real individual. The acts
which go under the name of the fociety, are
really the acts now of one fingle perſon and
now of another. The men who by turns uſurp
the name of the whole, perpetually act under
the preſſure of incumbrances that deprive them
of their true energy. They are fettered by the
prejudices, the humours, the weakneſs and the
vice of thoſe with whom they act; and, after
a thouſand ſacrifices to theſe contemptible in- m-
tereſts, their project comes out at laſt diſtorted
in every joint, abortive and monſtrous. Society
therefore in its corporate capacity can by no
means be buſy and intruſive with impunity,
ſince its acts muſt be expected to be deficient 1 in
wiſdom.

Secondly, they will not be leſs deficterit in
efficacy than they are in wiſdom. The object
at which we are ſuppoſing them to aim, is to

2 improve


* Book V, Chap. XXIII, p. 122.


132 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITI CAL.


improve the opinions, and through them the
manners of mankind; for manners are nothing
elſe but opinions ate out into action: ſuch:
as is the fountain, ſuch; will be the ſtreams that
are ſupplied from it. But what is it upon Which

opinion mult be founded? Surely upon evidence,
upon the perceptions of the underſtanding. Has
ſociety then any particular advantage in its corpo-


rate capacity for illuminating the underſtanding >


Can it convey into its addreſſes and expoſtula-
tions a compound or ſublimate of the wiſdom of
all its members, ſuperior in quality to the indi-
vidual wiſdom of any? If fo, Why have not
ſocieties of men written treatiſes of morality, of
the philoſophy of nature, or the philofophy of
mind ? Why have all the great fteps of human-
improvement been the work of individuals?

If then ſociety conſidered as an agent have no
particular advantage for enlightening the under-
ſtanding, the real difference between the 4aifa
of ſociety and the dicta of individuals muſt be
looked for in the article of authority. But is
authority a proper inſtrument for influencing
the opinions and manners of men? If laws were
a ſufficient means for the reformation of error
and vice, it is not to be believed but that the
world long ere this would have become the ſeat
of every virtue. Nothing can be more eaſy
than to command men to be juſt and good, to
love their neighbours, to practiſe univerſal ſin-
cerity, to be content with a little, and to reſiſt the
enticements of avarice and ambition. But, when
you have done, will the characters of men be

en by your precepts? Theſe commands have
been


SUPERTENDENCE OF OPINION. © 133


been iſſued for thouſands of 'years ; and, if it
had been decreed that every man ſhould be hang.
ed that violated them, it is vehemently to be
ſuſpected that this mere not have ſecured their
influence.

But it will be aufirced; te that laws need not
deal thus in generals, but may deſcend to parti-
cular proviſions calculated to ſecure their ſucceſs.
We may inſtitute ſumptuary laws, limiting the
expence of our citizens in dreſs and food. We
may inſtitute agrarian laws, forbidding any man.
to poſſeſs more than a certain annual revenue.
We may proclaim prizes às the reward of acts
of juſtice, benevolence and public virtue.” And,
when we have done this, how far are we really
advanced in our career? If the people be pre-
vioully inelined to moderation in expence, the
laws are a ſuperfluous parade. If they are not
inclined, who ſhall execute them, or prevent
their evaſion? It is the misfortune in theſe cafes,
that regulations cannot be executed but by indi--
viduals of that very people they are meant, to
reſtrain. If the nation at large be infeſted with
vice, who ſhall ſecure us a ſucceſſion of magiſ-
trates that are free from the contagion ? E if
we could ſurmount this difficulty, ſtill it would
be vain. Vice is ever more ingenious in evaſion,
than authority in detection. It is abſurd to ima-
gine that any law can be executed, that directly
contradicts the propenſities and ſpirit of the na-
tion, If vigilance were able fully to counter-
mine the ſubterfuges of art, the magiſtrates, who
thus pertinaciouſly adhered to the praQtice of
their duty, would not fail to be torn in pieces.


What


—


134 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL |


What can be more contrary to the moſt rati-
onal principles of human intercourſe than the
inquiſitorial ſpirit which ſuch regulations imply ?
Who ſhall enter into my houſe, ſcrutiniſe my
expenditure and count the diſhes upon my table?
Who ſhall detect the ſtratagems I employ to
cover my real poſſeſſion of an enormous income,
while I ſeem to receive but a ſmall one? Not
that there is really any thing unjuſt and unbe-
coming, as has been too often ſuppoſed, in my
neighbour's animadverting with the utmoſt free- |
dom upon my perſonal conduct. But that ſuch
regulations include a ſyſtem of petty watchfulneſs

and inſpection; not contenting themſelves with
animadverſion whenever the occaſion is preſent-
ed, but making it the buſineſs of one man con-
ſtantly to pry into the proceedings of another,
the whole depending upon the uniformity with
which this is done; creating a perpetual ſtruggle
between the reſtleſs curioſity of the firſt, and
the artful concealment of the ſecond. By what

motives will you make a man an informer ? If
by public ſpirit and philanthropy inciting him
to brave obloquy and reſentment for the ſake of
duty, will ſumptuary laws be very neceſſary
among a people thus far advanced in virtue ? If
by ſiniſter and indirect conſiderations, will not
the vices you ptopagate be more dangerous than
the vices you ſuppreſs ?
Buch muſt be the caſe in extenſive govern-
ments : in governments of ſmaller dimenſions
opinion would be all ſufficient ; the inſpection
of every man over the conduct of his neighbours,
when unſtained with caprice, would conſtitute a


cenſorſhip


SUPERINTENDENCE. OF, OPINION. 135


cenſorſhip of the more irreſiſtible natyre, But
the force of this cenſorſhip would depend upon


its freedom, not following the poſitive dictates


of law, but the ſpontaneous deciſions of the yn-
derſtanding.

Again, in the diſtribution of rewards who
ſhall ſecure us againſt error, partiality and in-
trigue, converting that which was meant for the
ſupport of virtue into a new engine for her ruin?
Not to add, that prizes are a very feeble inſtru-
ment for the generation of excellence, always
inadequate to its reward where it really exiſts,
always in danger of being beſtowed on its ſem-
blance, continually miſleading the underſtanding
by foreign and degenerate motives of avarice and
vanity.

In truth, the 8 ſy ſtem of ſuch regulations
is a perpetual ſtruggle againſt the laws of nature
and neceſſity. Mind will in in all inſtances be ſwayed
by its own views and propenſities. No project
can be more abſurd, than that of reverſing theſe
propenſities by the interpoſition of authority,


He that ſhould command a conflagration to ceaſe
or 2 tempeſt to be ſtill, would not diſplay more


ignorance of the ſyſtem of the univerſe, than he,
who, with a code of regulations, whethes gene-
ral or minute, that he has framed in his cloſet,
expects to reſtore a corrupt and luxurious people
to temperance and virtue.

The force of this argument reſpecting the in-
efficacy of regulations has often been felt, and
the concluſions that are deduced from it have been
in a high degree diſcouraging. © The character


of nations, * has been ſaid, © is unalterable,
or


WWW


4
"Y \
: x
”
2

(,
A
J
3
1
2
+#
£
+ 4
"4
*1
8 Cl
57
4
1
1
4
4
=
[
7
>
4
1
*
"ud
*
iS
+
* ;
4
7
o 4
4
4
:
* ut
i
1
#3
T4
u_
*
ol
}


D * *
8


"AIRY:


1 38 fs Ws n
7


E


336 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL


or at leaſt, when once debauched, can never be
recovered to purity. Laws are an empty name,
when. the manners of the people are become


corrupt. In vain ſhall the wiſeſt legiſlator at-


tempt the reformation of his country, when the
torrent of  profligacy and vice has once broken
down the bounds of moderation. There is no
longer any inſtrument left for the reſtoration of
ſimplicity and frugality. It is uſeleſs to declaim
againſt the evils that ariſe from inequality of
riches and rank, where this inequality has already
gained an eſtabliſhment. A generous fpirit will
admire the exertions of a Cato and a Brutus ;
but a calculating ſpirit will condemn them, as


inflicting uſeleſs torture upon a patient whoſe


diſeaſe is irremediable. It was from a view of


this truth chat the poets. derived their fictions.
reſpecting the early hiſtory of mankind; well


aware that, when luxury was introduced and
the ſprings of mind unbent, it would be a
vain expectation that ſhould hope to recal men


from paſſion to reaſon, and from effeminacy to


energy*.” But this concluſion from the inefficacy
of regulations is ſo far from being valid, that
in reality, :

A third objection to the poſitive interference
of ſociety in its corporate capacity for the pro-
pagation of truth and virtue is, that ſuch inter-
ference is altogether unneceſſary. Truth and
virtue are competent to fight their own battles.


They do not need to be nurſed and patroniſed


n che hand of power.


The
* Book I, Chap, vin.


SUPERINTENDENCE 'OF OPINION. 137


Ihe miſtake which has been made in this caſe,
is ſimilar to the miſtake which is now univerſally
exploded upon the ſubject of commerce. It was
long ſuppoſed that, if any nation defired to ex-
tend its trade, the thing moſt immediately necel.
ſary was for government to interfere, and in-
ſtitute protecting duties, bounties and mono-
polies. It is now well known that commerce
never flouriſhes ſo much, as when it is delivered
from the guardianſhip of legiſlators and miniſters,
and 18 built upon the principle, not of forcing
other people to buy our commodities dear when
they might purchaſe them elſewhere cheaper and
better, but of ourſelves feeling the neceſſity of
recommending them by their intrinſic advan»
tages. Nothing can be at once ſo unreaſonable
and hopeleſs, as to attempt by poſitive regula-
tions to difarm the unalterable laws of the
univerſe.

The ſame truth which has been felt under
the article of commerce, has alſo made a con-
ſiderable progreſs as to the ſubjects of ſpecu-
lative enquiry. Formerly it was thought that
the true religion was to be defended by acts
of uniformity, and that one of the principal
duties of the magiſtrate was to watch the pro-
greſs of hereſy. It was truly judged that the
connexion between error and vice is of the
moſt intimate nature, and it was concluded that
no means could be more effectual to prevent
men from deviating into error, than to check
their wanderings by the ſcourge of authority.
Thus writers, W political views in other
reſpects have been uns e enlarged, have

told


138 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL
told us © that men ought indeed to be per-


mitted to think as they pleaſe,” but not to pro-


—


pagate their pernicious opinions; as they may


be permitted to keep poiſons in their cloſet, but


not to offer them to ſale under the denomination
of cordials s. Or, if humanity have forbid-
den them to recommend the extirpation of a |
ſect which has already got footing in a country,

they have however earneſtly adviſed the magiſ-
trate- to give no quarter to any new extravagance
that might be attempted to be introduced f.—
The reign of theſe two errors reſpecting com-
merce and theoretical ſpeculation is nearly at an
end, and it is reaſonable to believe that the idea
of teaching virtue through the inſtrumentality


of government will not long ſurvive them.


All that is to be aſked on the part of govern-


ment in behalf of morality and virtue is a clear |


ſtage upon which for them to exert their own
energies, and perhaps ſome reſtraint for the pre-
{ent upon the violent diſturbers of the peace of
ſociety, that the efforts of theſe principles may
be allowed to go on uninterrupted to their na-
tural concluſion. Who ever ſaw: an inſtance in
which error unaided by power was victorious
over truth ? Who is there ſo abſurd as to believe,
that with equal arms truth can be ultimately de-
feated ? Hitherto every inſtrument of menace or
influence has been employed to counteract her.


. Has ſhe made no progreſs ? — Has the mind of


%


man the capacity to chuſe falſhood and reject
1 truth,


* Gulliver's Travels, Part II, Chap. VI.


+ Mably, de la Ligiflation, Liv. IV. * III: des Etats
Unis d *. Lettre III.


SU PERINTENDENCE OF OPINION. 129


truth, when her evidence is fairly preſented | ?
When it has been once thus preſented and has
gained a few converts, does the ever fail to go
on perpetually" increaling the number of her
votaries? Excluſively of the fatal interference
of government, and the violent irruptions of
barbariſm- threatening to ſweep her from the
face of the earth, has not this been in all in-
ſtances the hiſtory of ſcience ?

Nor are theſe obſervations leſs true in their
application to the manners and morals of man-
kind. Do not men always act in the manner
which they eſteem beſt upon the whole or moſt
conducive to their intereſt ? 1s it poſſible then
that evidence of what is beſt or what is moſt
beneficial can be thrown away upon them ? The
real hiſtory of the changes of character they ex
perience in this reſpect is this. Truth for a long
time ſpreads itſelf unobſerved. Thoſe who are
the firſt to embrace it are-little aware of the ex-
traordinary effects with which it is pregnant.
But it goes on to be ſtudied and illuſtrated. It
perpetually increaſes in clearneſs and amplitude
of evidence. The number of thoſe by whom
it is embraced is gradually enlarged. If it have
relation to their practical intereſts, if it ſhow
them that they may be a thouſand times more
happy and free 'than at preſent, it is impoſſible
that in its perpetual increaſe of evidence and
energy, it ſhould not at laſt break the bounds
of ſpeculation, and become an animating prin-'
ciple of action. What can be more abſurd than
the opinion, which has ſo long prevailed,
« that juſtice and an equal diſtribution of the

means


4 P
'TY
$ i
. 11 1 *
4
.
*7
i
4
'
'
FE
| A
34
*
oF
4
*
*
Fr t
'

Ty
TAY
IF

＋.
*
*
+
16
13
10
5
1
116
: : G
f
13 b.
: :
:
+
ä ,
1 57
7 Ld
1
Watt +:
Ke
. *
1
"KM
PE
3
17
*
52
a4
| "=P
2
" *
"_ 5 j
[ at
©

*

1 n

/ 5
E

: *

7 oy

x

4 RI
I
bw.
Vx
1
=
1
1
WW
|
a Iu
3
.
| >
- 0
y
2
=”
V.
=
LR
\ WF:
5
-
1
K. .v
>
C > We 4
zz
j 1
1
We ©
a3
" 24
9
hk
3
*
4


z

Ne,
7

* 1


140 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL


means of happineſs may appear ever ſo clearly
to be the only reaſonable foundation of political
ſociety, without ever having any chance of be-
ing reduced into practice? that oppreſſion and
miſery are draughts of ſo intoxicating a nature,
that, when once taſted, we can never afterwards
refule to partake of them ? that vice has ſo many
advantages over virtue, that the reaſonableneſs
and wiſdom of the latter, however powerfully
exhibited, can never obtain a hold upon our
affections? | |
While therefore we decry the allicacy of un-
aſſiſted laws, we are far from throwing any diſ-
couragement by that means upon the proſpect
of ſocial improvement. The true tendency of
this view of the ſubject is to ſuggeſt indeed a
different, but a more conſiſtent and promiſing
method by which this improvement is to be pro-
duced. The legitimate inſtrument of effecting
political reformation is truth. Let truth be in-
ceſſantly ſtudied, illuſtrated and propagated, and
the effect is inevitable. Let us not vainly en-
deavour by laws and regulations to anticipate
the future dictates of the general mind, but
calmly wait till the harveſt of opinion is.
ripe. Let no new practice in politics be intro-
duced, and no old one anxiouſly ſuperſeded,
till called for by the public voice. The taſk,
which for the preſent ſhould wholly occupy
the friend of man, is enquiry, inſtruction, diſ-
cuſſion. The time may come when his taſk
{hall be of another ſort. Error, being com-
pletely detected, may indeed fink into unnoticed
oblivion, without one partiſan to interrupt her


fall.


supERNENDENCE OF "OPINION. 147

fall. This would inevitably be the event, were
it not for the reſtleſſneſs and inconſiderate impe-
tuoſity of mankind. But the event may be
otherwiſe. Political change, by advancing too
rapidly to its criſis, may become attended with
commotion and hazard; and it will then be in-
cumbent on him actively to aſſiſt in unfolding
the cataſtrophe. The evils of anarchy have been
ſhown to be much leſs than they are ordinarily
ſuppoſed “; but, whatever be their amount, the
friend of Mun will not, when they ariſe, timidly
ſhrink from the poſt of danger. He will on the
contrary by ſocial emanations of wiſdom endea-
vour to guide the underſtandings of the people
at large to the perception of felicity.

In the fourth place the interference of an or-
ganiſed ſociety for the purpoſe of influencing
opinions and manners, is not only uſeleſs, but
pernicious, We have already found that ſuch
interference is in one view of the ſubject inef-
fectual. But here a diſtinction is to be made.
Conſidered with a view to the introduction of
any favourable changes in the ſtate of ſociety,
it is altogether impotent. But, though it be
inadequate to change, it is powerful to prolong.
This property in political regulation is ſo far
from being doubtful, that to it, alone we are to
aſcribe all the calamities that government has
inflicted on mankind. When regulation coin-
cides with the habits and propenſities of mankind
at the time it is introduced, it will be found ſuf-
ficiently capable of maintaining thoſe habits and

propenſities


Book V. Chap. XX. p. 100.


142 | GENERAL EFFECTS: OF THE POLITICAi.


propenfities i in the greater part unaltered for cen-
turies. In this view it is doubly pernicious..
To. underſtand this more accurately, let us
ts. it to the caſe of rewards, which has
always been a favourite topic with the advocates
of an improved legiſlation. How often have
we been told, that talents and virtues would
ſpring up ſpontaneouſly in a country, one of
the objects of whoſe conſtitution ſhould be to
ſecure to them an adequate reward? Now to
judge of the propriety of this aphoriſm we ſhould
begin with recollecting that the diſcerning of
merit is an individual, and not a ſocial capacity.
What can be more Teaſonable than that each
man for himſelf ſhould eſtimate the merits of
his neighbour ? To endeavour to inſtitute a ge-
neral judgment in the name of the whole, and
to melt down the different opinions of mankind
into one common opinion, appears at firſt ſight ſo
monſtrous an attempt, that it is impoſſible te
augur well of its conſequences. Wall this judg-
ment be wiſe, reaſonable or juſt ? Wherever
each man is accuſtomed to decide for himſelf,
and the appeal of merit is immediately to the
opinion of its contemporaries, there, were it not
for the falſe bias of ſome politive inftitation, we
might expect a genuine ardour in him who af-
pired to excellence, creating and receiving im-
preſſions in the judgment of an impartial au-
dience. We might expect the judgment of the
auditors to ripen by perpetual exerciſe, and
mind, ever curious and awake, continually to
approach nearer to the ſtandard of truth. What |
do we gain in compenſation for this, by ſetting
d


bo


SUPERINTENDENCE OF OPINION. 43


up authority as the general oracle, from which
the active mind is to ifiform itſelf what ſort of
excellence it ſhould . ſeek to acquire, and the
public at large what judgment they ſhould pro-
nounce upon the efforts of their contemporaries? -
What ſhould we think of an act of parliament
appointing ſome particular individual preſident
of the court of eritieiſm, and judge in the laſt
reſort of the literary merit of dramatic compoſi-
tions? Is there any ſolid reaſon why we fhould
expect better things, from authority uſurping the

examination of moral or political excellence?
Nothing can be more unreaſonable than the
attempt to retain men in one common Opinion
by the dictate of authority. The opinion thus
obtruded upon the minds of the public is not
their real opinion; it is only a project by which
they are rendered incapable of forming an opi-
nion. Whenever government aſſumes to 1
us from the trouble of thinking for ourſelves,
the only conſequences it produces are thoſe of
torpor and imbecility. Wherever truth ſtands
in the mind unaccompanied by the evidence
upon which it depends, it cannot properly be
ſaid to be apprehended at all. Mind is in this
caſe robbed of its eſſential character and genuine
employment, and along with them muſt be ex-
pected to loſe all that which is capable of render-
ing its operations ſalutary and admirable. Either
mankind will reſiſt the aſſumptions of authority
undertaken to ſuperintend their opinions, and
then theſe aſſumptions will produce no more than
an ineffectual ſtruggle; or they will ſubmit, and
then the effects wall be DOT He that in
any


144 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL


any degree conſigns to another the taſk of dic-
tating his opinions and his conduct, will ceaſe
to enquire for himſelf, or his enquiries will be
languid and inanimate.
| Regulations will originally be inſtituted in fa-
vour .cither of falſhood or truth. In the firſt
caſe no rational enquirer will pretend to alledge
any thing in their defence; but, even ſhould -
truth be their object, yet ſuch is their nature,
that they infallibly defeat the very purpoſe they
were intended to ſerve. Truth, when originally
preſented to the mind, is powerful and invi-
gorating ; but, when attempted to be perpetuated
T by political inſtitution, becomes flaccid and life-
eſs. Truth in its unpatroniſed ſtate ſtrengthens
and improves the underſtanding ; becauſe in that
ſtate it is embraced only ſo far as it is perceived
to be truth. But truth, when recommended by
authority, is weakly and irreſolutely embraced.
The opinions I entertain are no longer properly
my own; I repeat them as a leſſon appropriated
by rote, but I do not ſtrictly ſpeaking underſtand
them, and I am not able to aſſign the evidence
upon which they reſt. My mind is weakened,
while it is pretended to be improved. Inſtead
of the firmneſs of independence, I am taught
to bow to authority I know not why. Perſons
£thus trammelled, are not ſtrictly ſpeaking capa-
ble of a Aingle virtue. The firſt duty of man
is to take none of the principles of conduct upon
truſt, to do nothing without a clear and indivi-
dual conviction that it is right to be done. He
that reſigns his underſtanding upon one particu-
lar topic, will not exerciſe it vigorouſly upon
| others.


SUPERINTENDENCE OF OPINION. 145


others. If he be right in any inſtance, it will
be inadvertently and by chance. A conſciouſ-
neſs of the degradation to which he is ſubjected
will perpetually haunt him; or at leaſt he will
want the conſciouſnefs that accrues from inde-
pendent conſideration, and will therefore equally
want that intrepid perſeverance, that calm ſelf
approbation that grows out of independence.
Such beings are the mere dwarfs and mockery.
of men, their efforts comparatively puſillani-
mous, and the vigour with which they ſhould
execute their purpoſes, ſuperficial and hollow.
Strangers to conviction, they will never be
able to diſtinguiſh between prejudice and reaſon.
Nor is this the worſt, Even when the glimpſes
of enquiry ſuggeſt themſelves, they will not
dare to yield to the temptation. To what
purpoſe enquire, when the law has told me
what to believe and what muſt be the ter-
mination of my enquiries ? Even when opinion
properly ſo called ſuggeſts itſelf, I am com-
pelled, if it differ in any degree from the
eſtabliſhed ſyſtem, to ſhut my eyes, and loudly
profeſs my adherence where I doubt the moſt.
This compulſion may exift in many different
degrees. But, ſuppoſing it to amount to no
more than a very flight temptation to be in-
 lincere, what judgment muſt we form of ſuch
a regulation either in a moral or intellectual
view? of a regulation, inviting men to the
profeſſion of certain opinions by the proffer
of a reward, and deterring them from a ſe-
_ vere examination of their juſtice by penalties
and diſabilities? A ſyſtem like this does not
Vol. II. L f content


146 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL


content itſelf with habitually unnerving the
mind of the great maſs of mankind through
all its ranks, but provides for its own con-
tinuance by debauching or terrifying the few
individuals, who, in the midſt of the general
emaſculation, might retain their curioſity and
love of enterpriſe. We may judge how per-
nicious it is in its operation in this reſpect
by the long reign of papal uſurpation in the


dark ages, and the many attacks upon it that
were ſuppreſſed, previouſly to the ſucceſsful


one of Luther. Even yet, how few are there
that venture to examine 'into the foundation


of Mahometaniſm and Chriſtianity, or the


effects of monarchy and ariſtocratical inftitu -


tion, in countries where thoſe ſyſtems are eſta-
bliſhed by law? Suppoling men were free


from perſecution for their hoſtilities in this
e yet the inveſtigation could never be
impartial, while ſo many allurements are held
out, inviting men to a deeiſion in one par-
ticular way

To theſe 1 it t ſhould be added,


that what is right under certain cireumſtances


to-day, may by an alteration in thoſe circum-
ſtances become wrong to-morrow. Right and
wrong are the reſult. of certain relations, and
thofe relations are founded in the reſpective
28 of the beings to whom they belong.

nge thoſe qualities, and the relations be-
— 4 e different. The treatment that
I am bound to beſtow upon any one depends


upon my capacity and his cireumſtanees. In-


en firſt, * the ſecond, and I am


980 1


 SUPERINTENDENCE OF OPINION. 147


bound to a different treatment. I am bound
at preſent to ſubject an, individual to forcible
reſtraint, becauſe I am not wiſe enough by
reaſon alone to change his vicious propenſi-
ties. The moment I can render myſelf wiſe
enough, I ought to confine- myſelf to the lat-
ter mode. It is perhaps right to ſuffer the
negroes in the Weſt Indies to continue in
flavery, till they can be gradually prepared
for a ſtate of liberty. Univerſally it is a
fundamental principle in ſound political ſei-
ence, that a nation is beſt fitted for the amend=
ment of its civil government by being made
to underſtand and defire the advantage of
that amendment, and the moment it is ſo un-
derſtood and defired it ought to be introduced.
But, if there be any truth in theſe views,
nothing can be more adverſe to reaſon or
inconſiſtent with the nature of man, than
poſitive regulations tending to continue a certain
mode of proceeding when its utility is gone.

If we would be ſtill more completely aware
of the pernicious tendency of poſitive inſtitu-
tions, we ought in the laſt place explicitly
to contraſt the nature of mind and the nature
of government. It is one of the moſt unqueſ-
tionable properties of mind to be ſuſceptible
of perpetual improvement. It is the inalien-
able tendency of poſitive inſtitution, to retain
that with which it is converſant for ever in
the ſame ſtate. Is then the perfectibility of
underſtanding an attribute of trivial import-
ance? Can we recolle&t with coldneſs and
indifference the advantages with which this
KL -2 quality


jy

|

t

15

}

|

is

R

1

.

1

pr

+48

1

[
*

1

| li
3
1 9
|
1
it


143 GENERAL EFFECTS OF THE POLITICAL,


quality 18 pregnant to the lateſt poſterity?
And how are theſe advantages to Ti ſecured}


By inceſſant induftry, by a curioſity never to
be diſheartened or fatigued, by a ſpirit of en-
quiry to which a ſublime and philanthropic
mind will allow no pauſe. The circumſtance
of all others moſt neceſſary, is that we ſhould
never ſtand ſtill, that every thing moſt in-


tereſting to the general welfare, wholly deli-


vered from reſtraint, ſhould be in a ſtate of
change, moderate and as it were 1mpercepti-
ble, but continual. Is there any thing that can


look with a more malignant aſpect upon the ge-
neral welfare, than an inſtitution tending to give


permanence to certain ſyſtems and opinions?
Such inſtitutions are two ways pernicious ; -
firſt, which is moſt material, becauſe they ren-

der all the future advances of mind infinitely
tedious and operoſe ; ſecondly, becauſe, by
violently confining the ſtream of reflexion, and
holding it for a time in an unnatural ſtate, they
compel it at laſt to ruſh forward with impe-
tuofity, and thus occaſion calamities, which,
were it free from reſtraint, would be found ex-
tremely foreign to its nature. Is it to be believed
that, if the interference of poſitive inſtitution


were ont of the queſtion, the progreſs of mind


in paſt ages would have been ſo flow, as to have
ruck the majority of ingenuous obſervers with
deſpair ? The ſcience of Greece and Rome upon


the ſubjeQs of political juſtice was in many re-


ſpects extremely imperfect: yet could we have


been ſo long in appropriating their diſcoveries,
had not the allurements of reward and the


menace


SUPERINTENDENCE OF OPINION, 149


menace of perſecution united to induce us,
not to truſt to the firſt and fair verdict of
our own underſtandings ?

The juſt concluſion from the above reaſon-
ings is nothing more than a confirmation,
with ſome difference in the mode of application,
of the fundamental principle, that government
is little capable of affording benefit of the firſt
importance to mankind.. It is calculated to in-
duce us to lament, not the apathy and indiffer-
ence, but the inauſpicious activity of govern-
ment, It incites us to look for the moral im-
provement of the ſpecies, not in the multi-
plying of regulations, but in their repeal, It
teaches us that truth and virtue, like commerce,
will then flouriſh moſt, when leaſt ſubjected to
the miſtaken guardianſhip ot authority bee laws.
This maxim will rife upon us in its importance,
in proportion as we connect it with the numer-
ous departments of political juſtice to which it
will be found to have relation. As faſt as it
ſhall be adopted into the practical ſyſtem of
mankind, it will go on to deliver us from a
weight intolerable to mind, and in the higheſt
degree inimical to the progreſs of truth.


CHAP.


.. 80 J


OF RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS.


| Their general tendency. Ee. on the clergy:
They introduce, 1. Implicit faith —2. Hypocriſy:
Topics by which an adherence to them is vindi-


caled. Hffects on the laity. — Application.


ONE of the moſt ſtriking inſtances of the in-
jurious effects of the political patronage of opi-
nion, as it at preſent exiſts in the world, is to be
found in the ſyſtem of religious conformity.
Let us take our example from the church of
England, by the conſtitution of which ſubſcrip-
tion is required from its clergy to thirty-nine
articles of preciſe and dogmatical aſſertion upon
almoſt every ſubject of moral and metaphyſical
enquiry. Here then we have to conſider the
whole honours and revenues of the church, from
the archbiſhop who takes precedence next after
the princes of the blood royal to the meaneſt
curate in the nation, as employed in ſupport
of a ſyſtem of blind ſubmiſſion and abject hy-
pocriſy, Is there one man through this nume-
rous hierarchy that 1s at liberty to think for him-
ſelf? Is there one man among them that can lay
his hand upon his heart, and declare, upon his
| honour and conſcience, that his emoluments
have no effect in influencing his judgment?
The declaration is literally impoſſible. The moſt

that


OF RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS. 151


that an honeſt man under ſuch circumſtances
can ſay is, I hope not; I endeayour to be im-

o | -
Firſt, the ſyſtem of religious conformity is a
ſyſtem of blind fubmiſhon. In every country
poſſeſſing a religious eſtabliſhment, the ſtate, _

from a benevolent care it may be for the man-
ners and opinions of its ſubjects, publicly en-
courages a numerous claſs of men to the Rudy
of morality and virtue. What inſtitution, we
might naturally be led to enquire, can be more
favourable to public happineſs? Morality and
virtue are the moſt intereſting topics of human
ſpeculation; and the beſt effects might be ex-
pected to reſult from the circumſtance of many
perſons, perpetually receiving the moſt liberal
education, and ſetting themſelves apart, for the
expreſs cultivation of theſe topics. But unfortu-
nately theſe very men are fettered in the outſet by
having a code of propoſitions put into their
hands, in a conformity to which all their en-
quiries muſt terminate. The natural tendency cf
ſeience is to increaſe from age to age, and pro-
ceed from the humbleſt beginnings to the moſt
admirable concluſions. But care is taken in the
preſent caſe to anticipate theſe concluſions, and
to bind men by promiſes and penalties not to im-
prove upon the wiſdom of their anceſtors. The
plan is to guard againſt degeneracy and decline,
but never to advance. It is founded in the moſt
ſovereign ignorance of the nature of mind, Which

never fails to do either the one or the other.
Secondly, the tendency of a code of religious
conformity is to make men hypocrites. To un-
derſtand


— —
— — — — on =


:
i


152 OF RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS.


derſtand this it may be uſeful to recollect the
various ſubterfuges that have been invented by

ingenious men to apologiſe for the ſubſcription
of the. Engliſh clergy. It is obſervable by the
way that 1 articles of the church are founded
upon the creed of the Calviniſts, though for one
hundred and fifty years paſt it has been accounted
diſreputable among the clergy to be of any other
than the oppoſite, or Arminian tenets. Volumes
have been written to prove that, while theſe ar-
ticles expreſs predeſtinarian ſentiments, they are
capable of a different conſtruction, and that the
ſubſcriber has a right to take advantage of that
conſtruction. Divines of another claſs have reſted
their arguments upon the known good character
and benevolent intentions of the firſt reformers,
and have concluded that they could never intend

to tyranniſe over the conſciences of men, or pre-
clude the reſult of farther information. Laſtly,
there are many who have treated the articles as
articles of peace, and inferred that, though you
did not believe, you might allow yourſelf in the
diſingenuity of ſubſcribing them, provided you
added to it the farther guilt of conſtantly refrain-


ing to oppoſe what you conſidered as an adultera-


Lion of divine truth. |
It would perhaps be regarded as incredible, if


it reſted upon the evidence of hiſtory alone, that
a whole body of men, ſet apart as the inſtruct-
ors of mankind, weaned as they are expected
to be from temporal ambition, and maintained


from the ſuppoſition that the exiſtence of human
virtue and divine truth depends on their exer-
tions, ſhould with ope conſent employ themſelves


OF RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS. 253


in a caſuiſtry, the object of which is to prove
the propriety of a man's declaring his aſſent to
what he does not believe. Theſe men either
credit their own ſubterfuges, or they do not. If
they do not, what can be expected from men ſo
unprincipled and profligate ? With what front
can they exhort other men to virtue, with the
brand of vice upon their own foreheads? If they
do, what muſt be their portion of moral ſenſi-
bility and diſcernment ? Can we believe that men
ſhall enter upon their profeſſion with ſo notorious
a perverſion of reaſon and truth, and that no
conſequences will flow from it to infect their
general character? Rather, can we fail to com-
pare their unnatural and unfortunate ſtate, with
the profound wiſdom and determined virtue
which their induſtry and exertions would un-
queſtionably have produced, if they had been
leit to their genuine operation ? They are like

the victims of Circe, to whom human under-
ſtanding was preſerved entire, that they might
more exquiſitely feel their degraded condition.
They are incited to ſtudy and to a thirſt after
knowledge, at the ſame time that the fruits of
knowledge are conſtantly withheld from their
unſucceſsful attempts. They are held up to their
contemporaries as the profeſſors of truth, and
Political inſtitution tyrannically commands them,
in all the varieties of underſtanding and ſucceſſion
of ages, to model themſelves to one common
ſtandard.

Such are the effects that a code of religious
conformity produces upon the clergy themſelves;
let us conſider the effects that are produced upon
their countrymen. They are bid to look for in-


ſtruction


14 OF RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS. |


ſtruction and morality to a denomination of men,
formal, embarraſſed and hypocritical, in whom
the main ſpring of intelle& is unbent and inca-
pable of action. If the people be not blinded
with religious zeal, they will diicover and deſpiſe
the imperfections of their ſpiritual guides. If
they be ſo blinded, they will not the leis tranſ-
plant into their own characters the imbecil'and
unworthy ſpirit they are not able to detect. Is
virtue ſo deficient in attractions as to be inca-
pable of gaining adherents to her ſtandard ? Far
otherwiſe. Nothing can bring the wiſdom of a
juſt and pure conduct into queſtion, but the cir-
cumſtance of its being recommended to us from
an equivocal quarter. The moſt malicious enemy
of mankind could not have invented a ſcheme
more deſtructive of their true happineſs, than
that of hiring at the expence of the ſtate a body
of men, whoſe buſineſs it ſhould ſeem to be to
dupe their contemporaries into the Practice of
virtue. |
One of the leſſons that powered facts are per-
petually reading to the inhabitants of ſuch coun-
tries, is that of duplicity and prevarication in
an order of men, which, if it exiſt at all, ought
to exiſt only for reverence. Do you think that
this prevarication is not a ſubject of general no-
toriety? Do you think that the firſt idea that
riſes to the underſtanding of the multitude at
ſight of a clergyman, is not that of a man who
inculcates certain propoſitions, not ſo properly |
© becauſe he thinks them true or thinks them in-
tereſting, as becauſe he is hired to the employ-
ment? Whatever inſtruction a code of religious
uniformity may fail to convey, there is one that


OF RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS. 155


it always communicates, the Wisdom of eſtimat-
ing an unreſerved and diſintereſted ſincerity at
a very cheap rate. Such are the effects that are
produced by political inſtitution, at a time when
it moſt zealouſly intends with parental care to
guard its ſubjects from ſeduction and depravity.

Theſe arguments do not apply to any particu-
lar articles and creeds, but to the very notion of
eccleſiaſtical eſtabliſhments in general. Wherever
the ſtate ſets apart a certain revenue for the ſup-
port of religion, it will infallibly be given to the
adherents ,of ſome particular opinions, and will
operate in the manner of prizes to induce men at
all events to embrace and profeſs thole opinions.
Undoubtedly, if I think it right to have a ſpiritual
inſtructor to guide me in my reſearches and at
ſtated intervals to remind me of my duty, I
ought to be at liberty to take the proper ſteps to
ſupply myſelf in this reſpect. A prieſt, who
thus derives his miſhon from the anbiaſſed. judg-
ment of his pariſhioners, will ſtand a chance to
poſſeſs beforehand and independently of corrupt
influence the requiſites they demand. But why
ſhould I be compelled to contribute to the ſup-
port of an inſtitution, whether I approve of it or
no ? If public worſhip be conformable to reaſon,
reaſon without doubt will prove adequate-to its
vindication and ſupport. If it be from God, it
1s profanation to imagine that it ſtands in need
of the alliance of the ſtate. It muſt be in an
eminent degree artificial and exotic, if it be in-
capable of preſerving itſelf in exiſtence, other-
wiſe than by the inauſpicious interference of po-
litical inſtitution.


CHAP,


10 OF THE SUPPRESSION OF ERRONEQUS


rr


OF THE SUPPRESSION OF ERRONEOUS
| OPINION IN RELIGION AND
GOVERNMENT.


f Hereſy. — Arguments by which the F Sprefſion


e hereſy is recommended. — Anſwer, —lgnorance
vol neceſſary to make men virtuous. — Difference
| of opinion not ſubverſive of public fecurity.—
Reaſon, and not force, the proper corrective of
 fophifiry.— Abſurdity of the attempt to reſtrain
thought —to reſtrain the freedom of ſpeech. —
Conſequences that would reſult —ballibility of
the men by whom authority is exerciſed, —Of
erroneous opinions in government. —Iniquity of
the attempt to reſtrain them, — Tendency 4 un-


limited political diſcuſſion. .


Tux ſame views which have prevailed for
the introduction of religious eſtabliſhments, have
inevitably led to the idea of proviſions againſt
the riſe and progreſs of hereſy. No arguments
can be adduced in favour of the political patro-
nage of truth, that will not be equally cogent
in behalf of the political diſcouragement of error.
Nay, they will, of the two, be moſt cogent in
the latter caſe ; for error and miſrepreſentation
are the irreconcilable enemies of virtue, and if
* were the true means to diſarm them,
there


OPINIONS IN RELIGION AND GOVERN. 154
there would then at leaſt be no need of poſitive
proviſions to aſſiſt the triumph of truth. It has
however happened that this argument, though
more tenable, has had fewer adherents. Men
are more eaſily reconciled to abuſe in the diſtri-

bution of rewards, than in the infliction of
nalties. It will not therefore be requiſite labo-
riouſſy to infiſt upon the refutation of this prin-
ciple ; its diſcuſſion is principally neceſſary for

the ſake of method.

Various arguments have been alledged in de-
fence of this reſtraint. © The importance of
opinion as a general propoſition is notorious and
unqueſtionable. Ought not political inſtitution
to take under its inſpection that root from which
all our actions are ultimately derived? The opi-
nions of men muſt be expected to be as various
as their education and their temper: ought not
government to exert its foreſight to prevent this
diſcord from breaking out into anarchy and vio-
lence? There is no propoſition ſo abſurd or fo
hoſtile to morality and public good, as-not to
have found its votaries : will there be no danger
in ſuffering theſe eccentricities to proceed unmo-
leſted, and every perverter of truth and juſtice
to make as many converts as he is able? It has
been found indeed a hopeleſs taſk to endeavour -
to extirpate by violence errors already eſtabliſh-
ed; but is it not the duty of government to
prevent their aſcendancy, to check. the growth
of their adherents and the introduQion of here-
ſies hitherto unknown? Can thoſe perſons, to
whom the care of the general welfare is con-
lided, or who are fitted by their ſituation or
their


153 OF THE SUPPRESSION OF ERRONEOUS.


their talents to ſuggeſt proper regulations to the
adoption of the community, be juſtihed in con-
niving at the ſpread of ſuch extravagant and
. pernicious opinions as ſtrike at the root of order
and morality ? Simplicity of mind and an un-
-derſtanding undebauched with ſophiſtry have
ever been the characteriſtics of a people among
whom virtue has flouriſhed': ought not govern-
ment to exert itſelf to exclude the inroad of
qualities oppoſite to theſe? It is thus that the
friends of moral juſtice have ever contemplated
with horror the progreſs of infidelity and latitu-
dinarian principles. It was thus that the elder
Cato viewed with grief the importation into his
own country of that plauſible and loquacious
philoſophy by which Greece Hg already been
corrupted®.”

There are ſeveral trains of reflexion which
theſe reaſonings ſuggeſt. None of them can be
more important than that which may aflift us in
detecting the error of the elder Cato, and of
other perſons who have been the zealous but
miſtaken advocates of virtue. Ignorance is not
neceſſary to render men virtuous. If it were,
we might reaſonably conclude that virtue was
an. impoſture, and that it was our.duty to free
ourſelves from its ſhackles. The cultivation of
the underſtanding has no tendency to corrupt
the heart. A man who ſhould poſſeſs all the
ſeience of Newton and all the genius of Shake-


ſpeare,


The reader will conſider this as the language of the 8 :
The moſt eminent of the Greek philoſophers were in reality diſ-
tingurſhed from all other teachers, by the fortitude with which my
conformed to the precepts * taught.


OPINIONS IN RELIGION AND GOVERNT. 159


ſpeare, would not on that account be a bad man.
Want of great and comprehenſive views had as
conſiderable a ſhare as benevolence in the grief
of Cato. It is like the taking to pieces an im-
perfect machine in order by reconſtructing it to
enchance its value. An uninformed and timid
ſpectator would be frightened at the temerity of
the artiſt, at the confuſed heap of pins and
wheels that were laid aſide at random, and
would take it for granted that nothing but de-
ſtruction would be the conſequence. But he
would be diſappointed. It is thus that the ex-
travagant ſallies of mind are the prelude of the
higheſt wiſdom, and that the dreams of Ptolemy
were deſtined to precede the diſcoveries of
Newton.

The event cannot be other than favourable.
Mind would elſe ceaſe to be mind. It would
be more plauſible to ſay that the perpetual cul-
tivation of the underſtanding will terminate in
madneſs, than that it will terminate in vice. As
long as enquiry is ſuffered to proceed, and
ſcience to improve, our knowledge is perpetually
increaſed. Shall we know every thing elle, and
nothing of ourſelves? Shall we become clans
ſighted and penetrating in all other ſubjects,
without increafing our penetration upon the
ſubject of man? Is vice moſt truly allied to
wiſdom or to folly ? Can mankind perpetually
increaſe in wiſdom, without increaſing in the
knowledge of what it is wile for them to do?
Can a man have a clear diſcernment, uncloud-
ed with any remains of former miſtake, that

this is the action he ought to perform, moſt
1 conducive


1 *
r


e ” 2 — —


A
22
. "a — 2
— —
»


—_—_ —
*


—


i
-
\
:
.
#
*
1
4 =
* *
*
4
$59
#
1.
iS
0
} .
14
159
it
1
- 8
Y
i!
++
:
I
"4
:
1


5


5＋ꝙ⁊· ĩ2 2


— —


*
1 .
Cr SBI JAS.
- 8
e ef EEE —
*


= * ——


46 OF THE SUPPRESSION OF ERRON


conducive to his own intereſt and to the general


good, moſt delightful at the inſtant and ſatis-
factory i in the review, moſt agreeable to reaſon,
juſtice and the nature of things, and refrain from
performing it? Every ſyſtem which has been
conſtructed relative to 5 nature of ſuperior be-
ings and Gods, amidſt all its other errors has
reaſoned truly upon theſe topics, and taught
that the increaſe of wiſdom and knowledge led,
not to malignity and 3 but to benevo-
tence and Juſtice.

Secondly, it is a miſtake to ſuppoſe that ſpe-
culative differences of opinion threaten mate-
rially to diſturb the peace of ſociety. It is only
when they are enabled to arm themſelves with
the authority of government, to form parties in
the ſtate, and to ſtruggle for that political aſcen-
dancy which is too frequently exerted in ſupport
of or in oppoſition to. ſome particular creed,
that they become dangerous. Wherever govern-
ment is wile enough to maintain an inflexible
neutrality, theſe jarring ſects are always found
to live together with ſufficient harmony. The
very means that have been employed for the pre-
ſervation of order, have been the only means
that have led to its diſturbance. The moment


government reſolves to admit of no regulations


oppreſſive to either party, controverſy finds its
level, and appeals to argument and reaſon, in-
ſtead of appealing to the {word or the ſtake. The
moment government deſcends to wear the badge
of a ſect, religious war is commenced, the world
18 diſgraced with inexpiable broils and deluged
with 0s. 25

"Thirdly,


OPINIONS N RELIGION A!
Thirdly, the injuſtice of e men .


their opinions and arguments will be {till more


vilible, if we reflect a little on the nature of
puniſhment. Puniſhment is one of thoſe claſſes
of coercion, the multiplication of which is ſo
much to be deprecated, and which nothing but


the moſt urgent neceſſity can in any caſe juſtify;
That neceſlity is commonly admitted to exiſt,


where a man has proved by his unjuſt actions
the in juriouſneſs of his character, and where the
injury, the repetition of which is to be appre-
hended, is of ſuch a nature as to be committed
before we can have ſufficient notice to guard our-
ſelves againſt it. But no ſuch neceſſity can poſ-
ſibly exiſt in the caſe of falſe, opinions and per-


verſe arguments. Does any man aſſert falſhood?
Nothing farther can be deſired than that it ſhould
be confronted with truth. Does he bewilder us
with ſophiſtry ? Introduce the light of reaſon,
and his deceptions will vaniſh. There is in this
caſe a clear line of diſtinction. In the only ad-
miſſible province of puniſhment force it is true


is introduced, but it is only in return for force
previouſly exerted. Where argument therefore,


_ erroneous ſtatements and miſrepreſentation alone


are employed, it is by argument only that they
muſt be encountered. We ſhould not be crea-
tures of a rational and intellectual nature, if the
victory of truth over error were not ultimately
| certain. SITY, 1

To enable us to conceive properly of the va»
hay of laws for the puniſhment; of, hereſy, let us
ſuppoſe a country to be ſufficiently provided with
ſuch laws, and obſerve the n The *


VoL. . ; ty NM öl 5 N 15 :


165 OF THE SUPPRESSION OF ERRONEOUS'


is to prevent men "from. entertaining certain
opinions, or in other words from thinking in a
certain way. What can be more abſurd than
to undertake to put fetters upon the ſubtlety of
thought? How frequently does the individual
who deſires to reſtrain it in himſelf, fail in the
attempt? Add to this, that prohibition and me-
nace in this reſpect do but give new reſtleſſneſs
to the curioſity of the mind. I muſt not think
of the poſſibility, that there is no God; that
the ſtupendous miracles of Moſes and Chriſt
were never really performed; that the dogmas
of the Athanaſian ereed are erroneous. I muſt
ſhut my eyes, and run blindly into all the opi-
nions, religious and political, that my anceſtors


regarded as ſacred. Will this in all inſtanees be
e There is another confidatatith trite indeed,
but the triteneſs of which is an additional argu-
ment of its truth. Swift fays © Men ought to
be permitted to think as they pleaſe, but not to
propagate their pernicious opinions“. The
obvious anſwer to this is, We are Much ob-
liged to him: how would he be able to puniſh
our hereſy, even if he deſired it, ſo long as it
was concealed ?”* The attempt to puniſh opinion
is abſurd ; we may be ſilent reſpecting our con-
clufions, if we pleaſe ; the train of thinking by
which thoſe concluſions are generated cannot
fail to be ſilent.
de But, if men be not puniſhed for their
| thoughts, * may be N For nie thoſe
1 | e


at * See "ILY Chap. 1 I, p. 138.


OPINIONS IN RELIGION AND GOVERNT. 263
thoug hts.” No. This is not leſs impoſſible
than hs other. , By what arguments will you
perſuade every man in the nation ro exerciſe
the trade of an informer? By what arguments
will you perſuade my boſom friend, with whom
J repoſe all the thoughts of my heart, to repair
immediately from my company to a magiſtrate,
in order to procure my commitment for fo doing
to the priſons of the inquiſition ? In countries
where this is attempted, there will be a perpe-
tual ftruggle, the government endeavouring to
pry into our moſt ſecret tranſactions, and the
people buſy to countermine, to outwit and to
deteſt their ſuperintendents.

But the moſt valuable conſideration which
this part of the ſubject ſuggeſts, is, ſuppoſing
all this were done, what judgment muſt we
form of the people among whom it is done?
Though all this cannot, yet much may be per-
formed ; though the embryo cannot be annihi-
lated, it may be prevented from ever expanding
elf into the dimenſions of a man. The argu-
ments by which we were ſuppoſing a fyſtem
tor the reſtraint of opinion to be recommended,
were arguments derived from a benevolent anx-
iety for the virtue of mankind, and to prevent
their degeneracy. Will this end be accompliſh-
ed? Let us contraſt a nation of men, daring to

think, to ſpeak And to act what they believe to
be right, and fettered with no ſpurious motives
to diſſuade them from right, with a nation that
fears to ſpeak, and fears to think upon the moſt
intereſting ſubjects of human enquiry. Can
any ſpectacle be more degrading than this timi-
M 2 | dity?


164 Or THE SUPPRESSION OF ERRONEOUS


dity ? Can men in whom mind is thus annihilated
be capable of any good or valuable purpoſe?
Can this moſt abject of all ſlaveries be the ge-
nuine ſtate, the true perfection of the. ann
pecies? |
Another argument, though. i it has often been
ſtated to the world, deſerves to be mentioned in
this place. Governments, no more than indivi-
dual men, are infallible. The cabinets of princes
and the parliaments of kingdoms, if there be
any truth in conſiderations already ſtated*, are
often leſs likely to be right in their concluſions
than the theoriſt in his cloſet. But, diſmiſſing
the eſtimate of greater and leſs, it was to be
preſumed from the principles of human nature,
and is found true in fact, that cabinets and
parliaments are liable to vary from each other
in opinion. What ſyſtem. of religion or govern-
ment has not in its turn been patroniſed by
national authority? The conſequence therefore of
admitting this authority is, not merely attribut-
ing to government a right to impofe ſome, but
any or all opinions upon the community. Are
Paganiſm and Chriſtianity, the religions of Ma-
homet, Zoroaſter and Confucius, are monarchy
and ariſtocracy i in all their forms equally worthy
to be perpetuated among mankind? Is it quite
certain 'that the greateſt of all human calamities
is change ? Muſt we never hope for any advance,
any improvement? Have no revolution in go-
vernment, and no reformation in religion been
produ@tive of more benefit than diſadvantage ?
There


* Book V, Chap. XXIII, p. 122,


OPINIONS" IN RELIGION AND GOVERNT. 16;


There is no ſpecies of reaſoning in defence of
the ſuppreſſion of hereſy which may not be
brought back to this monſtrous principle, that
the knowlege of truth and the introduction of
right principles of policy, are circumſtances alto-
gether indifferent to the welfare of mankind.
The ſame reaſonings that are here employed
againſt the forcible ſuppreſſion of religious hereſy,
will be found equally valid with reſpect to poli-
tical. The firſt circumſtance that will not fail


to ſuggeſt itſelf to every reflecting mind, is,


What ſort of conſtitution muſt that be which
muſt never be examined? whoſe excellencies
muſt be the conſtant topic of eulogium, but reſ-
pecting which we muſt never permit ourſelves
to enquire in what they conſiſt ? Can it be the
intereſt of fociety to proſcribe all inveſtigation
reſpecting the wiſdom of its regulations? Or
muſt our debates be occupied with proviſions
of temporary convenience ; and are we forbid
to aſk, whether 'there may not be ſomething
fundamentally wrong in the delign of the ſtruc-
ture? Reaſon and good ſenſe will not fail to
augur ill of that ſyſtem of things Which is too
ſacred to be looked into; and to ſuſpect that
there muſt be ſomething effentially weak that
thus ſhrinks from the eye of curioſity. Add
to which, that, however we may doubt of the
importance of religious diſputes, nothing can
leſs reaſonably be expoſed to queſtion than that
the happineſs of mankind is eſſentially connected
with the improvement of political ſcience.

« But will not demagogues and declaimers
lead to the ſubverſion of all order, and introduce


the |


Py
" a |
. rar nronnt——————_— mt ow *
0
— —— 17 2 —— : $97 1 x * * — 2 — 3
*


N


= =
4 ** —
8983934 _— > on 3 |
, A — Y . 2 — cs 5 2 " * 8 1 Rr 2 * "I 4.x a a4 hk r
#4 * * i” ITY = r : N , i, 2 1
— 7 — — pn 3 I — 3 — p _ 2 . . _ _
6.2. 42 Mfr: 4-0 2 * PO as * ** . = 2 TE — a ONS ants 5 p
9 — * © =
v : > 1 * 0 * * — * 4 PM as. l - 7 43 5 —__ . um -
g : |


154 „„


166 OF THE SUPPRESSION, &c. _


the moſt dreadful calamities ?” What is the ſtate
they will introduce? Monarchy and ariſtocracy
are ſome of the moſt extenſive and laſting mal;
chiefs that have yet afflicted mankind. Will
theſe demagogues aer their hearers to in-
ſtitute a new dynaſty of hereditary deſpots to
oppreſs them? Will they perſuade them to
create out of their own body a ſet of feudal
chiefs to hold their brethren in the moſt barbar-
ous ſlavery? They would probably find the moſt
copious eloquence inadequate to theſe purpoſes.
The arguments of declaimers will not produce
an extenſive and ftriking alteration in political
opinions, except ſo far as they are built upon a
baſis of irreſiſtible truth. Even if the people
were in ſome degree intemperate in carrying the
concluſions of theſe reaſons into practice, the
miſchiefs they would inflict would be inexpreſ-
ſibly trivial, compared with thoſe which are
hourly perpetrated by the moſt cold blooded deſ-
potiſm. But in reality the duty of government
in theſe caſes is to be mild and equitable. Ar-
ments alone will not have the power, unaſ-
iſted by the ſenſe or the recollection of oppreſ-
ſion or treachery, to hurry the people into ex-
ceſſes. Exceſſes are never the offspring of reaſon,
are never the offspring of miſrepreſentation only,
but of power endeavouring to. ſtifle reaſon and
-traverſe the common tenſe of mankind.


8 A F;
OF. TESTS.


Their ſuppoſed advantages are attended with in-
juftice—are nugatory. — Nluftration. — Their
diſadvantages — they enſnare. — Example. —
Second example. —They are an uſurpation.—
Influence of teſts on the latitudinarian On the


puriſt, — Concluſion.


Tu E majority of the arguments above em-
ployed on the ſubject of penal laws in matters
of opinion are equally applicable to teſts, reli-
gious and political. The diſtinction between
Prizes and penalties, between greater and leſs, is
little worthy of our attention, if any diſcourage-
ment extended to the curiolity- of. intellect, and
any authoritative countenance afforded to one
ſet of opinions in preference to another, be in
its own nature * and een hoſtile to
the general good. e
Leaving out of the Sd enge religious
teſts, as being already ſuffieiently elucidated in
the preceding liſcuſfion *, let us attend for a
moment to an article which has had its ad vo-
cates among men of conſiderable liberality, the
ſuppoſed nnn of political teſts. 22 .
ſh


2 Chap. *


168 o TESTS.


ſhall we have no federal oaths, no oaths of bie
lity to the nation, the law and the republic?
How in that caſe ſhall we ever diſtinguiſh be-
tween the enemies and the friends of freedom ?”

Certainly there cannot be a method deviſed at
once more ineffectual and iniquitous than a fede-
ral oath. What is the language that in ſtrictneſs
of interpretation belongs to the act of the legiſ-
lature impoſing this oath ? To one party it ſays,
« We know very well that you are our friends;
the oath as it relates to you we acknowledge to
be altogether ſuperfluous ; nevertheleſs you muſt
take it, as a cover to our indirect purpoſes in
impoſing it upon perſons whoſe views are leſs
unequivocal than yours.” To the other p
it ſays, © It is vehemently ſuſpected that you
are inimical to the cauſe in which we are en-
gaged : this ſuſpicion is either true or falſe ; if
falſe, we ought not to ſuſpect you, and much
leſs ought we to put you to this invidious and
nugatory purgation ; if true, you will either
candidly confeſs your difference, or diſhoneſtly
prevaricate : be candid, and we will indignantly
baniſh you ; be diſhoneſt, and we will receive
you as boſom friends.”

Thoſe who ſay this however. promiſe too
much. Duty and common ſenſe oblige us to
watch the man we ſuſpect, even though he ſhould
ſwear he is innocent. Would not the ſame pre-
cautions which we are ſtill obliged to employ to
ſecure us againſt his duplicity, have ſufficiently
anſwered our purpoſe without putting him to
his purgation ? Are there no methods by which
ye can find out Me a man be the proper

ſubje et


OF TESTS. 169


ſubject in "hor to by an important truſt
without putting the queſtion to himſelf? Will
not he, who is ſo dangerous an enemy that we
cannot ſuffer him at large, diſcover his enmity
by his conduct, without reducing us to the
painful neceſſity of tempting him to an act of
prevarication ? If he be ſo ſubtle a hypocrite
that all our vigilance cannot detect him, will he
ſeruple to add to his other crimes the crime of


perjury ?


Whether the teſt we rrp be metely in-


tended to operate as an excluſion from office, or
to any more conſiderable diſadvantage, the diſ-
ability it introduces is {till in the nature of a
puniſhment. It treats the individual in queſtion
as an unſound member of ſociety, as diſtinguiſh-
ed in an unfavourable ſenſe from the multitude
of his countrymen, and poſſeſſing certain attri-
butes detrimental to the general good. In the
eye of reaſon human nature is capable of no
other guilt than this *. Society is authoriſed to


animadvert upon a certain individual, in the


caſe of murder for example, not becauſe he has
done an action that he might have avoided, not
becauſe he was ſufficiently informed of the better
and obſtinately choſe the worſe; for this is im-
poſſible, every man neceſſarily does that which
he at the time apprehends to be beſt : but becauſe
his habits and character render him dangerous
to ſociety, in the ſame ſenſe as a wolf or a
blight would be dangerous f. It muſt no doubt


be an emergency of no common magnitude, that


can


* Book IV, Chap. VI, + Ibid.


ES EE


2 — —


15

:

* *
=
2
5
1
13
138
*

Ba
1

- E «

8

1

=

1
1
2 L
S

., I

9
xx

Wo
=

_

__
' "

9 'D

4 'S

"x1 iS .
5 Mw

: 3

2-9
1

1

1

1 -

wo
1

'I : KK
=

_ + [£6

-
TS

. 9
JEM
. 4
, 9
x

*

1
4 ww
-

©
SH

WW
| *

>
+
ts =
& +)
4 "4
"W [4
82
=
=
* E
N
K+:
£5
A
is
1
I

1 7
"SS
_
"=
oY 1

8

. i

1
1

11

TM "2

1


„
1
© =
Kel *

1

*

"IP

.

2


ne OF TESTS.


can juſtify a people in putting a mark of diſplea-
ſure upon a man for the opinions he entertains,
be they what they may. But, taking for grant-
ed for the preſent the reaſonableneſs of this pro-
ceeding, it would certainly be juſt as equitable
for the government to adminiſter to the man ac-
cuſed for murder an oath of purgation, as to the
man accuſed of diſaffection to the eſtabliſhed
order of ſociety. There cannot be a principle
of juſtice clearer than this, that no man can be
called on in order to puniſhment to accule bim
ſelf.

Theſe reaſonings being particularly 1
to a people in a ſtate of revolution like the
French, it may perhaps be allowable to take from
their revolution an example of the injurious and
enſnaring effects with which teſts and oaths of
fidelity are uſually attended. It was required of
all men to ſwear © that they would be faithful
to the nation, the law and the king,” In what
ſenſe can they be ſaid to have adhered to their
oath, who, twelve months after their conſtitu-
tion had been eſtabliſhed on its new baſis, have
taken a ſecond oath, ner of their ever-
laſting abjuration of monarchy? What ſort of
effect, favourable or unfavourable? muſt this
pretarious mutability in their ſolemn appeals to
heaven have upon the minds of thoſe by whom
they are made ?

And this leads us from the conſideration of
the ſuppoſed advantages of. teſts religious and
2 to their real diſadvantages. The firſt
of theſe diſadvantages conſiſts in the impoſſibi-
lity of conſtructing a teſt in ſuch a manner, as

N to


OF TESTS. | 171


to ſuit the various opinions of thoſe upon whom
it is impoſed, and not to be liable to reaſonable
objection. When the law was repealed impoſin
upon the diffenting clergy of England a ſub-
2 with certain reſervations to the articles
of the eſtabliſhed church, an attempt was made
to invent an unexceptionable teſt that might be
ſubſtituted in its room. This teſt ſimply affirm-
ed, © that the books of the Old and New Teſta-
ment in the opinion of the perſon who took it
contained a revelation from God; and it was
ſuppoſed that no Chriſtan could ſcruple ſuch a
declaration. But à is impoſſible that I ſhould
be a Chriſtian, and yet doubt of the canonical
authority of the amatory eclogues of Solomon,
or of certain other books contained in a ſelection
that was originally made in a very arbitrary
manner? „Still however 1 may take the teſt,
with a perſuaſion that the books of the Old and
New Teſtament contain a revelation from God,
and ſomething more.” In the ſame ſenſe I mi
take it, even if the Alcoran, the Talmud and
the ſacred books of the Hindoos were added to
the liſt, What ſort of influence will be produced
upon the mind that is accuſtomed to this looſe-
neſs of conſtruction in its moſt ſolemn engage-
ments?

Let us examine with the Conn view the federal
oath of the French, proclaiming the determina-
tion of the {wearer © to be faithful to the nation,
the law and the king.” Fidelity to three ſeveral
intereſts which may in vanous caſes be placed in
oppoſition to each other will appear at firſt ſight
to benove ry reaſonable engagement. The pro-


priety


mind, that ſhall appear altogether faultleſs. But,


i ens


priety of vowing fidelity to the king has already
been brought to the trial and received its con-
demnation “. F idelity to the law 1 is an engage-
ment of ſo complicated a nature, as to ſtrike
terror into every mind of ſerious reflection. It
is impoſſible that a ſyſtem of law the compoſi-
tion of men ſhould ever be preſented to ſuch a
with reſpect to laws that appear to me to be un-
juſt, I am bound to every fort of hoſtility ſhort
of open violence, I am bound to exert myſelf
inceſſantly in proportion to the magnitude of
the injuſtice for their abolition. Fidelity to the
nation is an engagement ſcarcely leſs equivocal.
T have a paramount engagement to the cauſe of
Juſtice and the benefit of the human race. If
the nation undertake what is unjuſt, fidelity in
that undertaking is à crime. If it en
what is juſt, it is my duty to promote its ſucceſs,
not becauſe I am one of its citizens, but beenuſe
ſuch is the command of juſtice.

Add to this what has been already faid upon
the ſubject of obedienceſ, and it will be ſuffi-
ciently . that all teſts are the offspring of
uſurpation. Government has in no cafe a right
to iſſue its commands, and therefore cannot
command me to take a certain oath. Its only
legal functions are, to impoſe upon me a certain
degree of reſtraint whenever I manifeſt by my
actions a temper detrimental to the community,
and to invite me to a certain contribution for
purpoſes conducive to the general intereſt.

4 * O31 It


Bock V, Chap. II- VIII. + Book III, Chap. vl.


sr . 173


It may be alledged with reſpect to the French
federal oath, as well as with reſpect to the religi-


ous teſt before cited, that it may be taken with


a certain laxity of interpretation. When I {wear
fidelity to the law, I may mean only that there
are certain parts of it that I approve. When I
ſwear fidelity to the nation, the law and the king,
I may mean ſo far only as theſe three authorities
{hall agree with each other, and all of them agree
with the general welfare of mankind. In a
word the tinal reſult of this laxity of interpreta-
tion explains the oath to mean, I ſwear that I
believe it 1s my duty to do every thing that ap-
pears to me to be juſt.” Who can look without
indignation and regret at this proſtitution of
language ? Who can think without horror of
the conſequences of the public and perpetual
leſſon of duplicity which is thus read to man-
kind?

But, ſuppoſing there ſhould be certaim mem-
bers of the community ſimple and uninſtructed
enough to conceive that an oath contained ſome


real obligation, and did not leave the duty of


the perſon to whom it was adminiitered preciſely
where it found it, what is the leſſon that would


be read to ſuch members? They would liſten with


horror to the man who endeavoured to perſuade
them that they owed no fidelity to the nation,
the law and the king, as to one who was inſti-


gating them to facrilege. They would tell him


that it was too late, and that they muſt not allow
themſelves to hear his arguments. They would
perhaps have heard enough before their alarm
conmenced, to make them look with envy on

the


|
=


n


174 0 F TESTS.


the happy ſtate of this man, who was free to
liſten to the communications of others without
terror, who could give a looſe to his thoughts, |
and intrepidly follow the courſe of his enquiries
e hey led him. For themſelves they had
promiſed to think no more for the reſt of their
tives. Compliance indeed in this caſe is impoſſi-
ble; but will a vow of inviolable adherence to
a certain conſtitution have no effect in checking
the vigour of their ee and the elaſ-
ticity of their minds ?

We put a miſerable deception upon ourſelves,
when we promiſe ourſelves the moſt favourable
effects from the abolition of monarchy and ariſ-
tocracy, and retain this wretched ſyſtem of teſts,
overturning in the apprehenfions of mankind at
large the fundamental diſtinctions of juſtice and
injuſtice. Sincerity is not leſs eſſential than
equality to the well being of mankind. A go-
vernment, that is perpetually furniſhing motives
to jeſuitiſin and hypoeriſy, is not leſs abhorrent
to right reaſon, than a government of orders and
hereditary diſtinction. It is not eaſy to imagine
how ſoon men would become frank, explicit in
their declarations, and unreſerved in their man-
ners, were there no poſitive inſtitutions inculcat-
ing upon them the neceſſity of falſhood and diſ-
guiſe. Nor is it poſſible for any language to
deſcribe the inexhauſtible beneſits that would
ariſe from the univerſal practice of ſincerity.


r J "


*


C H AP. .


OF OATHS.


—


Oaths of office and duty tbeir abſurdity their
immoral conſequences.—Oaths of evidence lefs
_ atrocious. —Opinion of the liberal and reſolved
reſpeting them. — heir eſſential features : con-
tempt of veracity—falſe morality. —T heir par-
ticular flrufture—abſtraf principles aſſumed by
them to be true—their inconſiſtency with theſe
principles.


Th E fame arguments that prove the injuſtice
of teſts, may be applied univerſally to all oaths
of duty and office. If I entered upon the office
without an oath, what would be my duty ? Can
the oath that is impoſed upon me make any
alteration in my duty ? If not, does not the very
act of impoſing it, by implication aſſert a falſ-
hood? Will this falſhood, the aſſertion that a
direct engagement has a tendency to create a
duty, have no injurious effect upon a majority
of the perſons concerned ? What is the true
criterion that I ſhall faithfully diſcharge the of-
tice that is conferred upon me ? Surely my
paſt life, and not any proteſtations I may be
compelled to make. If my life have been
unimpeachable, this compulſion is an A

inſult;


x76 OF OATHS.


inſult; if it have been otherwiſe, it is ſomething
werle.

It is with no common diſapprobation that we
recollect the proſtitution of oaths which marks
the hiſtory of modern European countries, and
particularly of our own. This is one of the
means that goverament employs to diſcharge it-
felf of its proper functions, by making each man
ſecurity for himſelf. It is one of the means
that legiſlators have provided to cover the inefh-
ciency and abſurdity of their regulations, by
making individuals promiſe the execution of that
which the police is not able to execute. It holds
out in one hand the temptation to do wrong,
and in the other the obligation impoſed not to
be influenced by that temptation. It compels a
man to engage not only for his own conduct,
but for that of all his dependents. It obliges
certain officers (church-wardens in particular) to
promiſe an inſpection beyond the limits of hu-
man faculties, and to engage for a proceeding
on the part of thoſe under their juriſdiction,
which they neither intend nor are expected to
inforce. Will it be believed in after ages that
every conſiderable trader in exciſeable articles in
this country is induced by the conftitution of
its government to reconcile his mind to the guilt |
of perjury, as to the condition upon which he
is accuſtomed to exerciſe his profeſſion ? |

There remains only one ſpecies of oaths to
be conſidered, which have found their advocates
among perſons ſufficiently enlightened to reject
every other ſpecies of oath, I mean, oaths ad-


miniſtered to a witneſs in a court of juſtice.
c | That


OF OAT H 8. 177

Theſe are certainly free from many of the ob-
jections that apply to oaths of fidelity, duty or
office. They do not call upon a man to declare
his aſſent to a certain propoſition which the le-
giſlator has prepared for his acceptance; they
only require him ſolemnly to pledge himſelf to
the truth of aſſertions, dictated by his own ap-
prehenſion of things, and expreſſed in his own
words. They do not require him to e for
ſomething future, and of conſequence to ſhut
up his mind againſt farther information as to
what his conduct in that future ought to be;
but merely to pledge his veracity to the appre-
hended order of things paſt. -

Theſe conſiderations palliate the evil, but do
not convert it into good. Wherever men
, uncommon energy and dignity of mind have
exiſted, they have felt the degradation of bind-

ing their aſſertions with an oath. The Engliſh
conſtitution recogniſes in a partial and imperfect
manner the force of this principle, and therefore
provides that, while the common herd of man-
kind ſhall be obliged to ſwear to the truth, no-
thing more ſhall be required from the order of
nobles than a declaration upon honour. Will
reaſon juſtify this diſtinction? |

Can there be a practice more pregnant with
falſe morality than that of adminiſtering oaths
in a court of juſtice ? The language it expreſsly
holds is, You are not to be believed upon your
mere word ;” and there are few men firm enough
reſolutely to preſerve themſelves from contami-
nation, when they are accuſtomed upon the moſt


ſolemn occaſions to be treated with contempt.
Vor. II. N To


158 oO DAT HS.


To the unthinking it comes like a plenary in-
dulgence to the oceaſional tampering with vera-
city in affairs of daily occurrence, that they are
not upon their oath ; and we may affirm with-
out riſk of error, that there is no cauſe of inſin-
cerity, prevarication and falſhood more powerful,
than the practice of adminiſtering oaths in a
court of juſtice. It treats veracity in the affairs
of common life as a thing unworthy to be re-
garded. It takes for granted that no man, at
leaſt no man of plebeian rank, is to be credited
upon his bare affirmation ; and what it takes for”
granted it has an irreſiſtible tendency to produce.

Add to this a feature that runs through all the
abuſes of political inſtitution, it inverts the eter-
nal principles of morality. Why is it that I am
bound to be more eſpecially careful of what
affirm in a court of juſtice? Becauſe the ſubſiſt·
ence, the honeſt reputation or the life of a fel-
low man may be materially affected by it. All
theſe genuine motives are by the contrivance of
human inſtitution thrown into ſhade, and we are

expected to ſpeak the truth, only becauſe govern-
ment demands it of us upon oath, and at the |
times in which government has thought proper
or recollected to adminiſter this oath. All at-
tempts to ſtrengthen the obligations of morality
by fictitious and ſpurious motives, will in the
ſequel be found to have no tendency b but to relax
them.

Men will never act with that liberal Juctee
and conſcious integrity which is their higheſt
ornament, till they come to underſtand what
men are. He that contaminates his lips with


oA 179
an oath, muff have been thoroughly fortified
with previous moral inſtruction, if he be able
afterwards to underſtand the beauty of an eaſy
and ſimple integrity. If our political inſtitutors
had been but half ſo judicious in perceiving the
manner in which excellence and worth were to
be generated, as they have been ingenious and
indefatigable in the means of depraving man-
kind, the world, inſtead of a ſlaughter houſe,
would have been a paradiſe.
Let us leave for a moment the general conſi-
deration of the principle of oaths, to reflect
upon their particular ſtructure and the preciſe
meaning of the term. They take for granted
in the firſt place the exiſtence of an inviſible
governor of the world, and the propriety of
our addreſſing petitions to him, both which a
man may deny, and yet continue a good mem-
ber of ſociety. What is the ſituation in which
the inſtitution of which we treat places this man?
But we muſt not ſuffer ourſelyes to be ſtopped
by trivial conſiderations. —Oaths are alſo fo con-
ſtructed as to take for granted the religious ſyſ-
tem of the country: whatever it may SPE to
We |
Now what are the words with which we are
taught in this inſtance to addreſs the creator of
the univerſe ? © 80 help me God, and the con-
tents of his holy. word.” Tt is the language of
impregation. I pray him to pour down his ever-<
laſting wrath and curſe upon me, if I utter a le.
It were to be wiſhed that the name of that man
were recorded, 8 1 firſt invented this mode of
binding men to veracity. He had ſurely himſelf
N 2 but '


77 p


r Dp.


. —ͤũ— — — rr d . A RD —
by 2 * M 4 » . * ky
=
*


O nr


but very light and contemptuous notions of e
Supreme Being, who could thus tempt men ta
inſult him, by braving his juſtice. If it be our
duty to invoke his bleſſing, yet there muſt ſurely
be ſomething inſupportably profane in wantonly
and unneceſſarily putting all that he is able to
inflict upon us upon conditions.


en VS


OF LIBE LS.


Public libels. 3 of an attempt to preſcribe


the method in which public queſtions ſhall be


Ai ifeuſſed—its puſillanimity. - Invitations to tu-


mult.—Private libels— Reaſons in favour of


their being fubjected to reſtraint. —Anfwer.—
I. I ts neceſſary the truth ſhould be told. —Sa-
lutary effefts of the unreſtrained inveſtigation of


. charatter,——Objeftion : Freedom of ſpeech
mould be productive of calumny, not of Juflice.


—Anfwer.—Future hiſtory of libel.—2. It is


. neceſſary men ſhould be taught to be ſincere.—

Extent of the evil which ariſes from a command

. to be infincere—The mind ſpontaneouſly ſhrinks
from the proſecution of a libel. I.


IN the examination already beſtowed upon the
article of hereſy political and religious *, we


have
* Chap. III.


1 _—_ 8 —— 1 N


OF LIBELS. 181


have anticipated one of the two heads of the
law of libel; and, if the arguments there ad-
duced be admitted for valid, it will follow that
no puniſhment can juſtly be awarded againſt any
writing or words derogatory to religion or polt-
tical government.

It is impoſſible to eſtabliſh any ſolid ground of
diſtinction upon this ſubject, or to lay down rules
in conformity to which the argument muſt be
treated. It is impoſſible to tell me, when I am
penetrated with the magnitude of the ſubject,
that I muſt be logical and not eloquent; or when
[ feel the abſurdity of the theory I am combat
ing, that I muſt not expreſs it in terms that may
produce feelings of ridicule in my readers. It
were better to forbid me the diſcuſſion of the
ſubject altogether, than forbid me to deſcribe it
in the manner I conceive to be moſt ſuitable to
its merits. It would be a moſt tyrannical ſpecies
of candour to tell me, You may write againſt
the ſyſtem we patroniſe, provided you will write
in an imbecil and ineffectual manner; you may
enquire and inveſtigate as much as you pleaſe,
provided, when you undertake to communicate
the reſult, you carefully check your ardour, and
be upon your guard that you do not conyey any
of your own feelings to your readers.” Add to
this, that rules of diſtinction, as they are abſurd
in relation to the diſſidents, will prove a continual
inſtrumentof uſurpation and injuſticeto the ruling
party. No reaſonings will appear fair to them,
but ſuch as are futile. If I ſpeak with energy,
+ they will deem me inflammatory; and if I de-
{cribe cenſurable proceedings in plain and homely,

but


182 „ OF#LIBELS


but pointed language, they will cry out upon me
Wi as a buffoon.
[ It muſt be truly a lamentable caſe, if truth,
F favoured. by. the many and patroniſed by the
| great, ſhould prove too weak to enter the liſts
with falſhood. It is ſelf evident, that that which
will ſtand the teſt of examination, cannot need
the ſupport of penal ſtatutes. Aſter our adver-
ſiaries have exhauſted their eloquence and exert-
| ed themſelves to miſlead us, truth has a clear,
I nervous and {imple ſtory to tell, which, if force
be excluded on all ſides, will not fail ro put
down their arts. Miſrepreſentation will ſpeedily
vaniſh, if the friends of truth be but half as
alert as the advocates of falſhood, Surely then
it is a moſt ungracious plea to offer, We are
too idle to reaſon with you, weare therefore de-
termined to ſilence you by force.“ So long as
the adverſaries of juſtice confine themſelves to
expoſtulation, there can be no ground for ſerious
alarm. As ſoon as they begin to act with vio-
lence and riot, it will then be time «nough to
encounter them with force. |
here is however one particular day of libel
that ſeems to demand a ſeparate conſideration.
A libel may either not confine itſelf to any ſpe-
cies of illuſtration of religion or government,
or it may leave illuſtration entirely out of its
view. Its object may be to invite a multitude
of perſons to aſſemble, as the firſt ſtep towards
acts of violence. A public libel is any ſpecies of
writing in which the wiſdom of ſome eſtabliſh-
ed ſyſtem is controverted ; and it cannot be de-


nied that a diſpaſſionate and ſevere demonſtration
of


Or BIBEL S. 83


of its injuſtice tends, not leſs than the moſt
alarming tumult, to the deſtruction of ſuch in-
ſtitutions. But writing and ſpeecli are the pro-
per and becoming. methods of operating changes
in human ſociety, and tumult is an im
and equivocal method. In the caſe then of the
ſpecific preparations of riot, it ſhould ſeein that
the regular force of the ſociety, may lawfully in-
terfere. But this rant may be of two
kinds. It may conſiſt of precautions to counter-
act all tumultuous concourſe, or it may arraign
the individual for the oſſence he has committed
againſt the peace of the community. The firſt
wy theſe, * lufficiently commendable and
wife, and would, if vigilantly exerted, be in
almoſt all caſes adequate to the: purpoſe. The
ſecond.is attended with {ome difficulty. A libel
the avowed intention of which is to lead to im-
medlate violence, is altogether different from a
publication in which the general merits of any
inſtitution are treated with the utmoſt freedom,
and may well be ſuppoſed to fall under different
rules. The difficulty here ariſes only from the


conſideration of the general nature of puniſſi-


ment, which is abhorrent to the true Principles
of mind, and ought: to. be. reſtrained within as
narrow limits as poſſible; if not inſtantly aboliſſi-
ed *. A diſtinction to which obſervation and
experience in caſes of judicial proceeding have
uniformly led, is that between crimes that exiſt
only in intention, and overt. acts. So far as
prevention only is concerned, the former _—


* gee the following Book. )


— 9 — FELT EC TH 2


_ OF LIBELS.


ſeem in many caſes not leſs entitled to the ani-
madverſion of ſociety than the latter ; but the
i evidence of intention uſually reſts upon circum-
ances equivocal and minute, and the friend of
juſtice will tremble to erect any grave proceed-
ing upon ſo uncertain a baſis. It might be
| added, that he who ſays that every honeſt citi-
| zen of London ought to repair to St. George's
| Fields to-morrow in arms, only ſays what he
thinks is beſt to be done, and what the laws of
ſincerity oblige him to utter. But this argument
is of a general nature, and applies to every thing
that is denominated crime, not to the ſuppoſed
crime of inflammatory invitations in particular.
Hue that performs any action, does that which
xx he thinks is beſt to be done; and, if the peace
of ſociety make it neceſſary that he ſhould be
reſtrained from this by threats of violence, the
| neceffity is of a very painful nature. It ſhould
de remembered that the whole of theſe reaſon-
ings ſuppoſe that the tumult is an evil, and will
1 produce more diſadvantage than benefit, which
| is no doubt frequently, but may not be always,
| the caſe. It cannot be too often recollected, that
there is in no caſe a right of doing wrong, a
right to puniſh for a meritorious action. Every
1 government, as well as every individual, muſt
follow their own apprehenſions of juſtice, at
the peril of e miſtaken, unjuſt and conſe-


quently vicious *.—Theſe reaſonings on exhor-
tations to tumult, will alſo be found applicable


with ſlight variation to incendiary | letters addreſſed
fo private perſons.


[ 1 x
FAY Put


* Book IT, Chap! III.


OF-LIFBERELE © - 135


But the law of libel, as we have already ſaid,
diſtributes itſelf into two heads, libels againſt
public eſtabliſhments and meaſures, and libels
againſt private charater. Thoſe who have been
willing to admit that the firſt ought to paſs un-
puniſhed, have generally aſſerted the propriety
of counteracting the latter by cenſures and pe-
nalties. It ſhall be the buſineſs of the remain-
der of this chapter to ſhow that they were erro-
neous in their deciſion. |
The arguments upon which their deciſion is
built muſt be allowed to be both popular and
impreſſive. There is no external poſſeſſion

more ſolid or more valuable than an honeſt fame.
My property, in goods or eſtate, is appropriated
only by convention. Its value is for the moſt
part the creature of a debauched imagination;
and, if I were ſufficiently wiſe and philoſophical,
he that deprived me of it would do me very
little injury. He that inflicts a ſtab upon my
character is a much more formidable enemy.
It is a very ſerious inconvenience that my coun-
trymen ſhould regard me as deſtitute of princi-
ple and honeſty. If the miſchief were entirely
to myſelf, it is not poſſible to be regarded with
levity. I muſt be void of all ſenſe of juſtice,
if I were callous to the contempt and deteſta-
tion of the world. I muſt ceaſe to be a man,
if I were unaffected by the calumny that deprived
me of the friend I loved, and left me perhaps
without one boſom in which to repoſe my ſym-
pathies. But this is not all. The ſame ſtroke
that annihilates my character, extremely abridges,
if it do not annihilate, my uſefulneſs. It is in

vain


186 OF :L -B:EL$;
vain that I would exert my good intentions' and
my talents for the aſſiſtance of others, if my
motives. be perpetually miſinterpreted. Men
will not liſten to the arguments of him they
deſpiſe; he will be ſpurned during life, and
execrated as long as his memory endures. What
then are we to conclude but that to an injury,
greater than robbery, greater perhaps than mur-
der, we ought to award an blen mn
ment?“ |
The anſwer to this ſtatement may be given in
the form of an illuſtration of two propoſitions:
firſt, that it is neceſſary the truth ſhould be told;
ſecondly, that it is neceſſary men ſhould. de
taught to be ſincere. _
Firſt, it is neceſſary the truth ſhould be told.
How can this ever be done, if I be forbidden
to ſpeak upon more than one ſide of the queſ-
tion? The caſe is here exactly ſimilar to the
caſe of religion and political eltablichment. Af
we muſt always hear the praiſe of things as they
are, and allow no man to urge an objection, we
may be lulled into torpid Trace n we
can never be wiſe. bar vig
If a veil of partial favour is to be den over
the errors of mankind, it is eaſy to perceiye
whether virtue or vice will be the gainer. There
is no terror that comes home to the heart of vice,
like the terror of being exhibited to the public
eye. On the contrary there is no reward wor-
thy to be beſtowed upon eminent virtue but this
one, the plain, unvarniſhed eee of its
ee in *. ae, the Wars: 4 *


ON IL IBE I S. 187


If the unreſtrained diſcuſſion of abſtract en-
guiry be of the higheſt importance to mankind,
the unreſtrained inveſtigation of character is
ſcarcely leſs to be cultivated. If truth were
univer{ally told of men's diſpoſitions and actions,
gibbets and wheels might be diſmiſſed from the
face of the earth. The knave unmaſked would
be obliged to turn honeſt in his own defence.
Nay, no man would have time to grow a knave.
Truth would follow him in his firſt irreſolute
eſſays, and public diſapprobation arreſt him in
the commencement of his career.

There are many men at preſent who paſs for
virtuous, that tremble at the boldneſs of a -pro-
je& like this. They would be detected in their
effeminacy and imbecility. Their imbecility is
the growth of that inauſpicious ſecrecy, which
national manners and political inſtitutions ' at
preſent draw over the actions of individuals.
If truth were ſpoken without reſerve, there
would be no ſuch men in exiſtence. Men would
act with clearneſs and deciſion, if they had no
hopes in concealment, if they ſaw at every turn
that the eye of the world was upon them, How
great would be the magnanimity of the man
who was always ſure to be obſerved, ſure to be
judged with diſcernment, and to be treated with
juſtice? Feebleneſs of character would hourly
loſe its influence in the breaſt of thoſe. over
whom it now domineers. . They would feel
themſelves perpetually urged with an auſpicious
violence to aſſume manners more worthy of, the
form they bore.


To


188 or UTBSBELW


Jo theſe reaſonings it may perhaps be rejoin-
ed, This indeed is an intereſting picture. If
truth could be univerſally told, the effects would
no doubt be of the moſt excellent nature; but
the expectation is to be regarded as viſionary.”

Not ſo: the diſcovery of individual and per-
ſonal truth is to be effected in the ſame manner
as the diſcovery of general truth, by diſcuſſion.
From the colliſion of diſagreeing accounts juſtice
and reaſon will be produced. Mankind ſeldom
think much of any particular ſubje&, without
coming to think right at laſt.

„What, and is it to be ſuppoſed, that man-
kind will have the diſcernment and the juſtice of
their own accord to reject the libel ?”” Ves; libels
do not at preſent deceive mankind, from their
intrinſic power, but from the reſtraint under
which they labour. The man who from his
dungeon 1s brought to the light of day, cannot
accurately diſtinguiſh colours; but he that has
ſuffered no cement, feels no difficulty in
the operation. Such is the ſtate of mankind at
preſent: they are not exerciſed to employ their
judgment, and therefore they are deficient in
judgment. The moſt improbable tale now makes
a. deep impreſſion; but then men would be ac-
cuſtomed to ſpeculate upon the Poffibilities of
human acticel.

At Brft it may be, if all reſtraint upon the
freedom of writing and ſpeech were removed,
and men were encouraged to declare what chey
thought as publicly as poſſible, every preſs would
be burdened with an inundation of ſcandal. But
the ſtories by their very multiplicity would de-
8 2 "wn


OF -LI-B-E LS. 189


feat themſelves. No one man, if the lie were
ſucceſsful, would become the object of univerſal
erſecution. In a ſhort time the reader, accuſ-
tomed to the diſſection of character, would ac-
quire diſcrimination, He would either detect
the impoſition by its internal abſurdity, or at
leaſt would attribute to the ſtory no farther
weight, than that to which its evidence entitled
It.
Libel, like every Jy th human concern, 3
ſoon find its level, if it were delivered from the
injurious interference of political inſtitution.
The libeller, that is, he who utters an unfounded
calumny, either invents the ſtory he tells, or de-
livers it with a degree of aſſurance to which the
evidence that has offered itſelf to him is by no
means entitled. In each caſe he would meet
with his proper puniſhment in the judgment of
the world. The conſequences of his error would
fall back upon himſelf. He would either paſs
for a malignant accuſer, or for a raſh and head-
long cenfurer. Anonymous ſcandal would be
almoſt impoſſible in a ſtate where nothing was
concealed, But, if it were attempted; it would
be wholly pointleſs, ſince, where there could be
no honeſt and rational excufe for concealment,
the defire to be concealed would prove the baſe-
neſs of the motive.
| Secondly, force ought not to intervene for the
ſuppreſſion of private libels, becauſe men ought
to learn to be ſincere. There i is no branch of
virtue more eſſential than that which conſiſts in
giving language to our thoughts. He that is
accuſtomed to utter what he knows to be falſe
or


190 r
or to ſuppreſs what he knows to be true, is in a
perpetual ſtate of degradation. If I have had
particular opportunity to obſerve any man's vices,
- juſtice will not fail to ſuggeſt to me that I ought
to admoniſh him of his errors, and to warn
thoſe whom his errors might injure. There
may be very ſufficient ground for my reprefent-
ing him as a vicious man, though I may be to-
tally unable to eſtabliſh his vices ſo as to make
him a proper ſubje& of judicial punifhment,
Nay, it cannot be otherwiſe ; for I ought to de-
{cribe his character exactly fuch as It appears to
be, whether it be virtuous, or vicious, or of an
ambiguous nature. Ambiguity would preſently
ceaſe, if every man ayowed his ſentiments. -

is here as in the intercourſes of friendſhip :
timely explanation ſeldom fails to heal a broil;
miſunderſtandings would not grow conſiderable,
were we not in the habit of brooding over ima-
ginary wrongs.
Laws for the ſuppreſſion of private libels are
properly ſpeaking laws to reſtrain men from the
112560 of ſincerity. They create a warfare
etween the genuine dictates of unbiaſſed private
Judgment and the apparent ſenſe of the commu-
nity, throwing obſcurity upon the principles of
virtue, and infpiring an indifference to the prac-
tice. This is one of thoſe conſequences of po-
litical inſtitution that preſents itſelf at every mo-
ment: morality is rendered the victim of uncer-
tainty and doubt. Contradictory ſyſtems of
conduct contend with each other for the prefer-
ence, and I become indifferent to them all. How
is it poſſible —_ I ſhould imbibe the divine en-
thuſiaſm


OFT LIBE LS. 191
thuſiaſm of benevolence and juſtice, when I am
prevented from diſcerning what it is in which


they conſiſt? Other laws aſſume for the topic
of their animadverſion actions of unfrequent


occurrence. But the law of libels uſurps the-


office of directing me in my daily duties, and,
by perpetually menacing me with the ſcourge
of puniſhment, undertakes to render me habi-
tually a coward, continually governed by the
baſeſt and moſt unprincipled motives.

Courage conſiſts more in this circumſtance
than in any other, the daring to ſpeak every
thing, the uttering of which may conduce to
good. Actions, the performance of which re-
quires an inflexible reſolution, call upon us but
ſeldom; but the virtuous economy of ſpeech is


our perpetual affair. Every moraliſt can tell us
that morality eminently conſiſts in © the govern-


ment of the tongue.” But this branch of mo-


rality has long been inverted. | Inſtead of ſtudy-
ing what we ſhall tell, we are taught to conſider
what we ſhall conecal.. Inſtead of an active vir-
tue, going about doing good, we are inſtruct-
ed to believe that the chief end of man is to do
no miſchief. Inſtead of fortitude, we are care-
fully imbued with maxims of artifice and cun-
ning, miſnamed prudence. .


Let us contraſt the character of thoſe men


with whom we are accuſtomed to converſe, with
the character of men ſuch as they ought. to be,
and will be. On the one fide we perceive a per-
petual caution, that ſhrinks from the obſervin
eye, that conceals with a thouſand folds the ge-
nuine emotions of the heart, and that renders


us


RR 2 o
1 o
9 p + =] . rr - " 4 * R 7
* 29 — cles on hs OE 2 £4 A we Kel Na bi 5 \ 3 —
1771 ＋ꝗ—cƷ—eʒ — erg -


OLA EM nan rb t! 4 —_—_— — N e ob. £ "lu 5
2 a


"92. OF, LIBE LS:


us unwilling to approach the men that we ſup
Poſe accuſtomed to read it, and to tell what — ;
read. Such characters as ours are the mere
ſhadows of men, with a ſpecious outſide per-
haps, but deſtitute of ſubſtance and ſoul. Oh,
when ſhall we arrive at the land of realities,
when men ſhall be known for what they are, by
energy of thought and intrepidity of action
It is fortitude, that muſt render a man ſuperior
alike to careſſes and threats, enable him to derive
his happineſs from within, and accuſtom him to
be upon all occaſions prompt to aſſiſt and to in-
form. Every thing therefore favourable to for-
titude muſt be of ineſtimable value; every thing
that inculcates diſſimulation worthy of our per-
petual abhorrence.

There is one thing more that is of 1 importance
to be obſerved upon this ſubje& of libel, which
is, the good effects that would ſpring from every
man's being accuſtomed to encounter falſhood
with its only proper antidote, truth. After all
the arguments that have been induſtriouſſy accu-
mulated to juſtify proſecution for libel, eve
man that will retire into himſelf, will feel him-
ſelf convinced of their inſufficiency. The modes
in which an innocent and a guilty man would
repel an accuſation againſt them might be ex-
peed to be oppoſite ; but the law of libel con-
founds them. He that was conſcious of his
rectitude, and undebauched by ill ſyſtems of
government, would ſay to his adverſary, Pub-
Iſh what you pleaſe againſt me, I have truth on
my lide, and will confound your miſrepreſenta-
tions.” His ſenſe of fitneſs and Juſtneſs would
not


OF LIBE LS. 193


not permit him to ſay, « I will have recourſe to


the only means that- are congenial to guilt, I
will compel you to be ſilent.“ A man, urged
by indignation and impatience, may. commence
a proſecution againſt his accuſer ; but he may
be aſſured, the world, that is a diſintereſted
ſpectator, feels no cordiality for his proceedings.


The language of their ſentiments upon ſuch oc-


caſions is, What! he dares not even let us
hear what can be ſaid againſt him.”

The arguments in favour of juſtice, however
different may be the views under which it is
conſidered, perpetually run parallel to each
other. The recommendations under this head
are preciſely the ſame as thoſe under the pre-
ceding, the generation of activity and fortitude.
The tendency of all falſe ſyſtems of political in-
ſtitution 1s to render-the mind lethargic and tor-
pid. Were we accuſtomed not to recur either


to public or individual force but upon occaſions


that unequivocally juſtified their employment,
we ſhould then come to have ſome reſpect for
reaſon, for we ſhould know its power. How
great muſt be the difference between him who an-
ſwers me with a writ of ſummons or a challenge,
and him who employs the fword and the ſhield
of truth alone? He knows that force only is

to be encountered with force, and allegation
with allegation; and he ſcorns to change


places with the offender by being the firſt


to break the peace. He does that which,
were it not for the degenerate habits of ſo-
ciety, would ſcarcely deſerve the name of
courage, dares to meet * equal ground,


Vol. II. O | with


*
1 .
|
4]
©
4
8
£0
«J
3
nd
LS
*
. 4
4
3
,—
. =
1
1
"4
5
2*Y
:
"5
1
7
; +Y
;
* 1
- =—_
i
1h
boy
©


— t > #
0 - Wm. DR
7 2


—


194 O'F. LIBE L S.


with the ſacred armour of truth, an adv
who poſſeſſes only the periſhable weapons of
Eſhood. He calls up his underſtanding ; and
does not deſpair of baffling the ſhallow pre-
tences of calumny. He calls up his firmneſs;
and knows that a plain ſtory, every word of
which is marked with the emphaſis of fin-
cerity, will carry conviction to every hearer.
It were abſurd to expect that truth ſhould
be cultivated, ſo long as we are accuſtomed
to believe that it is an impotent, incumbrance.
It would be impoſſible to negle& it, if we
knew that it was as impenetrable as adamant,
d as laing as the world.


OF CONSTITUTIONS. |


Diflin@lion of regulations conſtituent and legiſſa-
tive, — Suppoſed character of permanence that
_ ought to be grven to the former — incon
with the nature of man. — Source of the error.
— Remark.” — Abſurdity of the ſyſtem of per=
manence. — Its futility. — Mode to be purſued
in framing a conſtitution. — Conſtituent laws
not more important than others. — In what
manner the of the diftrifts is to be de-
clared. — Tendency of the principle which re-

quires this conſent. — It would reduce the num-
ber of conſtitutional articles — parcel out the
legiſlative power — and produce the gradual
extinfion of law. — Objection.— — A


An article intimately Br” with the po-
litical conſideration of opinion is ſuggeſted to us
by a doctrine which has lately been taught rela-
tively to conſtitutions. It has been ſaid that the
laws of every regular ſtate naturally diſtribute
themſelves under two heads, fundamental and
adſcititious ; laws, the object of which is the.
diſtribution of political power and direCting the
permanent forms according to which public bu-
lineſs is to be conducted ; and laws, the refult
9 2 ;


196 OF CONSTITUTIONS.”
of the deliberations of powers already conſtituted,
This diſtinction being eſtabliſhed in the firſt in-
ſtance, it has been inferred, that theſe laws are
of very unequal importance, and that of conſe-
quence thoſe of the firſt claſs ought to be origi
nated with much greater ſolemnity, and to be
declared -much leſs ſuſceptible of variation than
thoſe of the ſecond. The French national afſem-
bly of 1789 puſhed this principle to the greateſt
extremity, and ſeemed deſirous of providing
every imaginable ſecurity for rendering the work
they had formed immortal. It conld not be
touched upon any account under the term of
ten years; every alteration it was to receive
muſt be recogniſed as neceſſary by two ſucceſſive
national aſſemblies of the ordinary kind; after
' theſe formalities an aſſembly of reviſion was to
be elected, and they to be forbidden to touch the
conſtitution | in any other points than thoſe which
had been previouſly marked out for their con-
ſideration.

It is ealy to perceive that theſe precautions
are in direct hoſtility with the principles eſtab-
liſhed in this work. © Man and for ever!” was
the motto of the labours of this afſembly. Juſt
broken looſe from the thick darkneſs of an abſo-
lute monarchy, they aſſumed to preſcribe leſſons
of wiſdom to all future ages. They ſeem not
ſo mach as to have dreamed of that purification
of intellect, that climax of improvement, which
may very probably be the deftiny of poſterity.
The true ſtate of man, as has been already de-
monſtrated, is, not to have his opinions hound
down 3 in the fetters of an eternal quietiſm, but

flexible


or CONSTITUTIONS. 197


flexible and unreftrained to yield with facility to
the impreſſions of increaſing truth. That form
of ſociety will appear moſt perfect to an en-
lightened mind, which is leaſt founded in a prin-
ciple of permanence. But, if this view of the
ſubject be juſt, the idea of giving permanence
to what is called the conſtitution of any govern-
ment, and rendering one claſs of laws, under
the appellation of fundamental, leſs ſuſceptible
of change than another, muſt be founded in
miſapprehenſion and error. | EE.
The error probably originally fprung out of
the forms of political monopoly which we ſee
eſtabliſhed over the whole civiliſed world. Go-
vernment could not juſtly derive in the firſt in-
| Rance but from the choice of the people; or,
to ſpeak more accurately (for the former prin-
ciple, however popular and ſpecious, is in reality
falſe), government ought to be adjuſted in its
proviſions to the prevailing cn ons of
juſtice and truth. But we ſee government at
. preſent adminiftered either in hints or in part
hy a king and a body of nobleſſe; and we
. ſay that the laws made by theſe
authorities are one thing, and the laws from
which they derived their exiſtence another. But
we do not conſider that theſe authorities, how-
ever originated, are in their own nature unjuſt.
If we had never ſeen arbitrary and capricious
forms of government, we ſhould probably never
have thought of cutting off certain laws from
the code under the name of conſtitutional.—
When we behold certain individuals or bodies of
men exerciſing an excluſive ſuperintendence
over


iss or CONSTITUTIONS.


over the affairs of a nation, we inevitably aſk
how they came by their authority, and the: an-
ſwer is, By the conſtitution. But, if we ſaw
no power exiſting in the ſtate but that of the
people, having a body of repreſentatives, and a
certain number of official 4 and clerks
acting in their behalf, ſubject to their reviſal,
and renewable at their pleaſure, the queſtion,
how the people came by this authority, would
Vever have ſuggeſted itſelf.

A celebrated objection that has been urged
againſt the governments of modern Europe is that
they have no conſtitutions . If by this objection
it be underſtood, that they have no written code
bearing this appellation, and that their conſtitu-
tions have been leſs an inſtantaneous than a
gradual production, the criticiſm ſeems to be
rather verbal, than of eſſential moment. In any
other ſenſe it is to be ſuſpected that the remark
would amount to an eulogium, but an eulogium
to which they are certainly by no means entitled.

But to return to the queſtion of permanence.
Whether we admit or reject the diſtinction be-
tween conſtitutional and ordinary legiſlation, it
is not leſs true that the power of a people to
change their conſtitution morally conſidered,
muſt be ſtrictly and univerſally bal with the
exiſtence of a conſtitution. The language of
permanence in this caſe is the greateſt of all ab-
ſurdities. It is to fay to a nation, Are
convinced that ſomething is right, perhaps i im-


mediately neceſſary, to be done? It ſhall be done
ten years hence.“


1


.


0 „ Rights of Man,


OF CONSTITUTIONS: 199


The folly of this ſyſtem may be farther eluci-
4 if farther elucidation be neceſſary, from
the following dilemma. Either a people muſt
be governed according to their own apprehen-
ſions of juſtice and truth, or they muſt not. The
laſt of theſe aſſertions cannot be avowed, but
upon the unequivocal principles of tyranny.
But, if the firſt be trye, then it 1s juſt as abſurd
to ay to a nation, This government, which you
choſe nine years ago, is the legitimate govern-
ment, and the government which your preſent
ſentiments approve the illegitimate; as to inſiſt
upon their being governed by the dic of their
remoteſt anceſtors, or even of the moſt inſolent
uſurper.

It is extremely * that a national aſſem-
bly choſen in the ordinary forms, is juſt as
much empowered to change the fundamental
laws, as to change any of the leaſt important
branches of legiſlation. This function would
never perhaps be dangerous but in a country
that ſtill preſerved a portion of monarchy or
ariſtocracy, and in ſuch a country a principle of
permanence would be found a very feeble anti-
dote againſt the danger. The true principle up-
on the ſubject is, that no aſſembly, though cho-
ſen with the moſt unexampled ſolemnity, has a
power to impoſe any regulations contrary ta the
public apprehenſion of right; and a very ordi-
nary authority, fairly originated, will be ſuffi-
cient to facilitate the harmonious adoption of a
change that is dictated by national opinion. The
diſtinction of conſtitutional and ordinary topics
* — appear in practice unintelligible and


vex ions.


200 OF CONSTITUTIONS.


vexatious. The aſſemblies of more frequent


recurrence will find themſelves arreſted in the


intention of conferring any eminent benefit on
their country,” by the apprehenſion that they
ſhall invade the conftitution. In a country
where the people are habituated to ſentiments of
equality, and where no political monopoly is to-
lerated, there is little danger that any national


aſſembly ſhould be diſpoſed tp inforce a pernici-


ous change, and there is ſtill leſs that the people
ſhould ſubmit to the injury, or not poſſeſs the
means eaſily and with ſmall interruption of pub-
lic tranquillity to avert it. The language of
reaſon on this ſubjeck is, Give us equality and
juſtice, but no conſtitution. Suffer us to follow
without reſtraint the dictates of our own judg-
ment, and to change our forms of ſocial order
as faſt as we improve in underſtanding and
knowledge,”

The opinion upon this head moſt popular i in
France at the time that the national convention


entered upon its functions, was that the buſineſs


of the conyention extended only to the preſent-
ing a draught of a conſtitution, to be ſubmitted
in the ſequel to the approbation of the diſtricts,
and then only to be conſidered as law. This
opinion is well deſerving of a ſerious examina-
tion. |

The firſt idea that ſuggeſts itſelf reſpectin


is, that, if conſtitutional laws ought to be Ab-
jected ta the reviſion of the diſtricts, then all


laws ought to undergo the ſame proceſs, under-
ſtanding by laws all declarations of a general
principle to be applied to particular caſes as they

my


OF CONSTITUTIONS. 202


may happen to occur, and even including all
proviſions for individual emergencies that will
admit of the delay incident to the revifion in
queſtion. It is an egregious miſtake to imagine
that the importance of theſe articles is in a de-
ſcending ratio from fundamental to ordinary,
and' from ordinary to particular. It is poſhble
for the moſt odious injuſtice to be perpetrated
by the beſt conſtituted aſſembly. A law render-
ing it capital to oppoſe the doctrine of tranſub-
ſtantiation, would be more 1njurious to the public
welfare, than a law changing the duration of the
national repreſentative, from two years, to one
year or to three. Taxation has been ſhown to
be an article rather of executive than legiſlative
adminiſtration * ; and yet a very oppreſſive and
unequal tax would be ſcarcely leſs ruinous than
any fingle meaſure that could poſſibly be deviſed.
It may farther be remarked that an approba-
tion demanded from the diſtricts to certain con-
ſtitutional articles, whether more or leſs numer-
ous, will be either real or deluſive according to
the mode adopted for that purpoſe. If the
diſtricts be required to decide upon theſe articles
by a ſimple affirmative or negative, it will then
be deluſive. It is impoſſible for any man or
body of men, in the due exerciſe of their under-
ſtanding, to decide upon any complicated ſyſtem
in that manner. It can ſcarcely happen but
that there will be ſome things that they will ap-
prove and ſome that they will diſapprove, On
the other hand, if the articles be unlimitedly
1 5 PO


Bock V, Chap. I.


* * —
- = > — 0 — - : _ GE R > = N 3
- py -4 ut -— - — 2 - - by 2 — - —_ —— m__—_. a Þ — 8 8 a — — *
_ - 2 == : ">= * ; þ ? , . 8 — * _ \ \ k -
2 5 * —— 4 _- = * 4 — — -_ ,. - 9. - — — 25 7 — * 4. - ö — £ NA j . 7 — — =_ _
— — — "37 — 1 " $_ — < — — — = = === — - — — A A——_— — — — =” — — — r E „ 2 — Rn * *
>, — . ˙ BRIT $4577 > TAS. — SEE —— —— — B — — — — ” or a KK Ls =) — 22 a hb = Fee * — Wa — — — 5 —
. or erithts Een parodies es — tf es * 2 5 - 2 = 2 ————= —— ——— — — — — . . — — x 3 — 8 Ty . — hs — —
. ere 2 2 =_ — — __ — — - ; — — — — r —— — Pg — —— = — >; - "IRONY — ＋ ID I, N — _ === Te =_—_y —_ * 2 CY." 4 "Gs. —
5 2 — — — — le Sho ach wagon 2 — . —— —— ei ada 2 a En So — — 8 2 ERS TO OS — 8 .
7 — - = 2 5 — — — :
| — - e . — —— — if, -
* * * hy 6 *
* 2 x *
1
"J


— — — —— ——
” — — — — ww
_ gr r — gr —


- — — wr. r o ET Eonar apa — _—
4 - . . n * 4
* 2 2 — 3 — =_— = e — 2


202 or CONSTITUTIONS.
propoſed for diſcuſſion in the diſtricts, a tranſ.


action will be begun to which it is not eaſy to
foreſee a termination. Some diſtricts will object
to certain articles; and, if theſe articles be mo-
delled to obtain their approbation, it is poſſible
that the very alteration introduced to pleaſe one
part of the community, may render the code
leſs acceptable to another. How are we to be


aſſured that the diflidents will not ſet up a ſepa-


rate government for themſelves? The reaſons
that might be offered to perſuade a minority of
diſtricts to yield to the ſenſe of a majority, are
by no means ſo perſpicuous and forcible, as thoſe
which ſometimes perſuade the minority of mem-
bers in a given aſſembly to that ſpecies of con-
ceſhon.

It is deſirable in all cafes of the practical


adoption of any given principle, that we ſhould
fully underſtand the meaning of the principle,


and perceive the concluſions to which it inevit-
ably leads. This principle of a conſent of
diſtricts has an immediate tendeney, by a ſalu-
tary gradation perhaps, to lead to the Jiflolution
all- government. What then can be more
abſurd, than to ſee it embraced by thoſe very
men, who are at the ſame time advocates for the
complete legiflative unity of a great empire? It
is founded upon the ſame baſis as the principle
of private judgment, which it is to be hoped
will ſpeedily ſuperſede the poſſibility of the
action of — in a collective capacity. It is
deſirable that the moſt important acts of the na-
tional repreſentatives ſhould be ſubje& to the
pp or PO of the diſtricts whoſe
| repreſentatives


or CONSTITUTIONS. 2


repreſentatives they are, for exactly the ſame
reaſon as it is defirable, that the acts of the
diſtricts themſelves ſhould, as ſpeedily as pra&ti-
cability will admit, be in force only ſo far as
relates to the individuals by whom thoſe acts are
approved.

The firſt conſequence that would refult, not
from the delufive, but the real eſtabliſhment of
this principle, would be the reduction of the
conſtitution to a very ſmall number of articles.
The impracticability of obtaining the deliberate
approbation of a great number of diſtricts to x
very complicated code, would ſpeedily manifeſt
itſelf. In reality the conſtitution of a ſtate go-
verned either in whole or in part by a political
monopoly, muſt neceſſarily be — But
what need of complexity in a country where
the people are deftined to govern themſelves ?
The whole conſtitution of ſuch a country ought
' ſcarcely to exceed two articles; firſt, a ſcheme
for the diviſion of the whole into parts equal in
their population, and, ſecondly, the fixing of
ſtated periods for the election of a — aſ-
ſembly; not to ſay that the latter of theſe ar-
ticles may very probably be diſpenſed with.

A ſecond conſequence that reſults from the
principle of which we are treating is as follows.
It has already appeared, that the reaſon is no
leſs cogent for ſubmitting important legiſlative
articles to the reviſal of the diſtricts, than for
ſubmitting the conſtitutional articles themſelves.
Bur after a few experiments of this fort, it can-
not fail to ſuggeſt itſelf, that the mode of ſending
laws to the diſtricts for their reviſion, unleſs in


caſes


24 OF CONSTITUTIONS.


caſes eſſential to the general ſafety, is a proceed -


ing unneceſſarily circuitous, and that it would be


better, in as many inſtances as poſſible, to ſuffer


the diſtricts to make laws for themſelves without
the intervention of the national aſſembly. The
Juſtneſs of this conſequence is implicitly aſſumed
in the preceding paragraph, while we ſtated the
very narrow bounds within which the conftitu-
tion of an empire, ſuch as that of France for
example, might be circumſcribed. In reality, _
provided the country were divided into conve-
nient diſtricts with a power of ſending repreſen-
tatives to the general aſſembly, it does not a

that any ill conſequences would enſue to the


common cauſe from theſe diſtricts being per-


mitted to regulate their internal affairs, in con-
formity to their own apprehenſions of juſtice.


Thus, that which was at firſt a great empire with


legiſlative unity, would ſpeedily be transformed
into a confederacy of lefſer republics, with a
general congreſs or Amphictyonic council, an-
ſwering the purpoſe of a point of co-operation
upon extraordinary occations. The ideas of a
great empire and legiſlative unity are plainly the
barbarous remains of the days of military he-
roiſm. In proportion as. political power is
brought home to the citizens, and ſimplified
into ſomething of the nature of pariſh regula-


tion, the danger of — and rival-


ſhip will be nearly annihilated. 2 proportion


as the ſcience of government is diveſted of its
preſent myſterious appearances, ſoclal truth will


become obvious, and the diſtricts pliant and
Hexible to the dictates of reaſon,


A third


OF CONSTITUTIONS. 205


A third conſequence ſufficiently memorable
from the fame principle is the gradual extinction
of law. A great aſſembly, collected from the
different provinces of an extenſive territory,
and conſtituted the ſole legiflator of thoſe by
whom the territory is inhabited, immediately
conjures up to itſelf an idea of the vaſt multi-
tude of laws that are neceſſary for regulating the
concerns of thoſe whom it repreſents. A large
city, impelled by the principles of commercial
jealouſy, is not flow to digeſt the volume of its
by-laws and excluſive privileges. But the inha-

bitants of a ſmall pariſh, living with ſome de-
gree of that ſimplicity which beſt correſponds
with the real nature and wants of a human being,
would ſoon be led to ſuſpect that general laws
were unneceſſary, and would adjudge the cauſes
that came before them, not according to certain
axioms previoully written, but according to the
circumſtances and demand of each particular
cauſe. — It was proper that this conſequence
ſhould be mentioned in this place. The bene-

fits that will ariſe from the abolition cf law will
come to be conſidered in detail in the following
book.

The principal objection that is uſually made
to the idea of confederacy confidered as the ſub-
ſtitute of legiſlative unity, is the poſſibility that
ariſes of the members of the confederacy detach-
ing themſelves from the ſupport of the public
cauſe. To give this objection every advantage,
let us ſuppoſe that the ſeat of the confederacy,
like France, is placed in the midſt of ſurround-
ing nations, and that the governments of theſe

nations


1 OOO —
— — * — . — -
> — 5 —
- — 1


i H
A ;
n + []
1
J. 4 ,
1 fit
46
„
7% }
I.
144
3
h .*
55 6
1 5
ny
1 1 o
"1,
* 4
1
WL
if
12:30
1 5
40
..
_
fp 0
ie
I..
.
1
14
. 41%
*
G
'q ed”:
7%,
„
. 1
11
U by .
U 15 '
1k, 0
3
1 T
} '
[
.
by Is
ih
1
4A
1
* .
„*
1
Wo”
.
i]
if 14 4
1-44
in
WY
7
.
93
.
14 BN
44 F
+4
i; ö
1 14
.. 1
; + .
b
„
1
*
E is
„
ET
ns -
' 3%
1 x
'
e
Ty
I i
1:
. 11 4
l
N N
x
1
*
.
[raj
*
. [2]
1
1.
fe
l
NP. 3
44,08
N .
„ |
1
"WF ;
Ms. |
.
.
3
1
A
is ::4
«3
1g
*
1
U *
. .
d ©
„
„ ;
mh
41 :
+,
17
14
7 =.
135
F
— +
7 *
[ *Z
C38
1k {
T7
4} '
1 at
4.44
*{
's
1
1 13 ö
141
4
. :
iy :
„
.
1 3+
on
# :
F f
:
e
I.
11
? N
"I
is
is "
15
1
Þ 76 .
65


AMATO =


206 OP. CONSTITUTIORS.,


nations are anxious by every means of artifice
and violence to ſuppreſs the inſolent ſpirit of


| liberty that has ſtarted up among this neighbour,


people. It is to be believed that even under


theſe circumſtances the danger is more imaginary
than real. The national aſſembly, being pre-


cluded by the ſuppoſition from the uſe of force


againſt the malcontent diſtricts, is obliged to


confine itſelf to expoſtulation ; and. it is ſuffi-
ciently obſervable that our powers of expoſtu-
tion are tenfold increaſed the moment our hopes:
are confined to expoſtulation alone. They have


*


to deſeribe with the utmoſt perſpicuity and ſim-


plicity the benefits of independence; to convince
the public at large, that all they intend is to en-
able every diſtrict, and as far as poſſible every
individual, to purſue unmoleſted their own ideas


of propriety; and that under their auſpices there
fhall be no tyranny, no arbitrary puniſhments,


ſuch as proceed from the jealouſy of councils
and courts, no exactions, almoſt no taxation.


Some ideas reſpecting this laſt ſubject will
ſpeedily occur. It is not poſſible, but that, in


2 country reſcued from the inveterate evils of
deſpotiſm, the love of liberty ſhould be conſi-
derably diffuſed. The adherents therefore of


the Pate cauſe will be many: the malcontents


few. If a ſmall number of diſtricts were ſo far


blinded as to be willing to ſurrender themſelves


to oppreſſion and ſlavery, it is probable they


would ſoon repent. Their deſertion would in-


ſpire the more enlightened and courageous with
additional energy. It would be a glorious ſpec-


wacle to ſee the champions of the cauſe of truth


declaring


or NATIONAL EDUCATION. 207


declaring that they deſired none but willing ſup-
porters. It is not poſſible that ſo magnanimous


a principle ſhould not contribute more to the ad-


vantage than the injury of their cauſe. .


H A F. VL
OF NATIONAL EDUCATION.


Arguments in its favour. — Anſwer. — 1. It
| produces permanence of opinion. — Nature of
| prejudice and judgment deſcribed. — 2. It re-
quires uniformity F operation. — 3. It 1s the
mirror and tool of national government. —T he
right of puniſhing not founded in the On”


Junction of mferufting.


A MODE in which government has been ac-
cuſtomed to interfere for the purpoſe of infſu-
encing opinion, is by the ſuperintendence it has
in a greater or leſs degree exerted in the article


of education. It is worthy of obſervation that


the idea of this ſuperintendence has obtained the
countenance of ſeveral of the moſt zealous ad-


vocates of political reform. The queſtion rela-


tive to its propriety or impropriety is entitled on


that account to the more deliberate examination.
„


*


208 OF NATIONAL EDUCATION.


%


The arguments in its favour have been alrea-


_ dy anticipated. Can it be juſtifiable in thoſe


perſons, who are appointed to the functions of
magiſtracy, and whoſe duty it is to conſult for
the public welfare, to neglect the cultivation of
the infant mind, and to ſuffer its future excel-
tence or depravity to be at the diſpoſal of for-
tune? is it poſſible for patriotiſm © the love of
the public to be made the characteriſtic of a
whole people in any other way fo fucceſsfully,
as by rendering the early communication of
theſe virtues a national concern? If the educa-
tion of our youth be entirely confided to the
prudence of their parents or the accidental be-
nevolence of private individuals, will it not be
a neceſſary conſequence, that ſome will be edu-


cated to virtue, others to vice, and others again


entirely n neglected ?” To theſe conſiderations it


has been added, That the maxim which has


prevailed in the majority of civilifed countries,
that ignorance of the law is no apology for the
breach of it, is in the higheſt degree iniquitous ;
and that government cannot juſtly puniſh us for
our crimes when committed, unleſs it have fore-
warned us againft their commiſſion, which can-
not be adequately done without ſomething of
the nature of public education.”

The propriety or impropriety of any project
for this purpoſe muſt be determined by the ge-
neral conſideration of its beneficial or injurious
fendency. If the exertions of the magiſtrate in
behalf of any ſyſtem of inſtruction will ſtand
the teſt as conducive to the public ſervice, un-
-+ nh he cannot be juſtified in neglecting

chem.


a


OF NATIONAL EDUCATION. a0


them. If on the contrary they conduce to in-
jury, it is wrong and unj juſtifiable that they:
ſhould be made.

The injuries that reſult from a ſyſtem of na-
cod education are, in the firſt place, that all
public eſtabliſhments include in them the idea of

ermanence. They endeavour it may be to ſe-
cure and to diffuſe whatever of advantageous to
ſociety 1s already known, but they forget that.
more remains to be known. If they realiſed
the moſt ſubſtantial benefits at the time of their
introduction, they muſt inevitably become leſs
and leſs uſeful as they increaſed in duration.
But to deſcribe them as uſeleſs is a very feeble
expreſſion of their demerits. They actively re-
ſtrain the flights of mind, and fix it in the be-
lief of exploded errors. It has commonly been
obſerved of univerſities and extenſive eſtabliſh-
ments for the purpoſe of education, that the
knowledge taught there, 1s a century behind the
knowledge which exiſts among the unſhackled
and unprejudiced members of the ſame political
community. The moment any ſcheme of pro-
ceeding gains a permanent eſtabliſhment, it be-
comes impreſſed as one of its characteriſtic fea-
tures with an averſion to change. Some violent
concuſſion may oblige its conductors to change
an old ſyſtem of philoſophy for a ſyſtem leſs
obſolete; and they are then as pertanaciouſly
attached to this ſecond doctrine as they were to
the firſt. Real intellectual improvement de-
mands that mind ſhould as ſpeedily as poſſible
be advanced to the height of knowledge already
exiſting among the enlightened members of the

Vor. IL P community,


210 OF NATIONAL EDUCATION.


community, and ſtart from thence in the pur.
ſuit of farther acquiſitions. But public educa-
tion has always expended its energies in the ſup.
port of prejudice ; it teaches its pupils, not the
fortitude that ſhall bring every propoſition to the
teſt of examination, but the art of vindicating


ſuch tenets as may chance to be previouſly eſta-
bliſhed. We ſtudy Ariſtotle or Thomas Aqui-


nas or Bellarmine or chief juftice Coke, not


that we may detect their errors, but that our
minds may be fully impregnated with their ab-
ſurdities. This feature runs through every ſpe-
cies of public eſtabliſhment ; and even in the
petty inſtitution of Sunday ſchools, the chief


leſſons that are taught, are a ſuperſtitious vene-


ration for the church of England, and to bow
to every man in a handſome coat. All this is
directly contrary to the true intereſt of mind.
All this muſt be unlearned, before we can begin
to be wile.

It is the characteriſtic of mind to be capable
of improvement. An individual ſurrenders the
beſt attribute of man, the moment he reſolves
to adhere to certain fixed principles, for reaſons
not now preſent to his mind, but which former-


ly were. The inſtant in which he ſhuts upon


himſelf the career of enquiry, is the inſtant of
his intellectual deceaſe. He is no longer a man;


he is the ghoſt of departed man. There can be


no ſcheme more egregiouſly ſtamped with folly,
than that of ſeparating a tenet from the evidence
upon which its validity depends. If I ceaſe
from the habit of being able to recal this evi-
125 w * is no longer a perception, but


a prejudice ; 1


OF NATIONAL EDUCATION. 211


z prejudice: it may influence me like a preju-
dice ; but cannot animate me like a real appre-
henfion of truth. The difference between the
man thus guided, and the man that keeps his
mind perpetually alive, is the difference between
cowardice and fortitude. The man who is in
the beſt ſenſe an intellectual being, delights to
recollect the reaſons that have convinced him,
to repeat them to others, that they may produce
conviction in them, and ſtand more diftin& and
explicit in his own mind; and he adds to this a
willingneſs to examine objections, becauſe he
takes no pride in conſiſtent error. The man.
who is not capable of this ſalutary exerciſe, to
what valuable purpoſe can he be employed?
Hence it appears that no vice can be more de-
ſtructive than that which teaches us to regard
any judgment as final, and not open to review.
The ſame principle chat applies to individuals
applies to communities. There is no propoſition,
at preſent apprehended to be true, ſo valuable
as to juſtify the introduction of an eſtabliſhment
for the purpoſe of inculcating it on mankind.
Refer them to reading, to converſation, to me-
ditation ; but teach them neither creeds nor ca-
techiſms, neither moral nor political.
Secondly, the idea of national education is
founded in an inattention to the nature of win.
Whatever each man does for himſelf is done
well; whatever his neighbours or his country
undertake to do for him is done ill. It is our
wiſdom to incite men to act for themſelves, nat
to retain them in a ſtate of perpetual pupillage.
He that learns becauſe he deſires to learn, will


P 2 liſten


212 OF NATIONAL EDUCATION.


liſten to the inſtructions he receives, and appre-
hend their meaning. He that teaches becauſe


he deſires to teach, will diſcharge his Occupation


with enthuſiaſm and energy. But the moment
Political inſtitution Wen to aſſign to ev

man his place, the functions of all will he dif-
charged with ſupineneſs and indifference. , Uni-
7 — 5 and expenſive eſtabliſhments; have long
been remarked for formal dulneſs. Civil 7 —
has given me the power to appropriate my eſtate
to certain theoretical purpoſes; but it is an idle
preſumption to think I can entail, my views, 2
1 can entail my fortune. Remove all thoſe ob-
ſtacles which PRAVETS, men from —— and re-


K 4 4


What 1 earn, — I acquire os borauſy 1 de
ſire to acquire it, I eſtimate at its true value;
but what is thruſt upon me may make me indo-
lent, but cannot make me reſpectable. It is
extreme folly to endeavour to Kare to others
independently of exertion on their part, the
means of being happy.— This whole propoſitian
of a national education, is founded upon a ſup-


poſition. which has been. repeatedly. refuted in


| this work, but which has recurred upon us in 4


thouſand forms, that unpatroniſed truth is inade-
quate to the purpoſe of enlightening mankind.
Thirdly, the project of a national education
ought Kuta to be diſcouraged, on account
of its obvious alliance with = government.
This is an alliance of a more formidable nature,
than the old and much conteſted alliance of


church


— hy — 1 1 — 5 _ _—_— — — — — 8 — 8 — „ 1 Minds a . 1


hs © —d


t
N


((


r d "a TE 'S


_


*


OF NATIONAL EDUCATION. 213:


church and ſtate. Before we put ſo 3
a machine under the direction of ſo ambiguous
an agent, it behoves us to conſider well what it
is that we do. Government will not fail to em
ploy it to ſtrengthen its hands, and pe

its inftitutions. If we could even ſuppoſe the
agents of government not to propole to them-
ſelves an object, which will be apt to appear in
their eyes, not merely innocent, but meritorious;
the evil would not the leſs happen. Their views
as inſtitutors of a ſyſtem of education, will not
fail to be analogous to their views in their politi-
cal capacity: the data upon which their conduct
as ſtateſmen is vindicated, will be the data upon
which their inſtructions are founded. It is not
true that our youth ought to be inſtructed to
venerate the conſtitution, however excellent;
they ſhould be inſtructed to venerate truth ; and
the conſtitution only ſo far as it correſponded
with their independent deductions of truth. Had
the ſcheme of a national education been adopted
when deſpotiſm was moſt triumphant, it is not
to be believed that it could have for ever ſtifled
the voice of truth. But it would have been the
moſt formidable and profound contrivance for
that purpoſe that imagination can ſuggeſt. Still,
in the countries where liberty chiefly prevails, it
is reaſonably to be aſſumed that there are impor-
tant errors, and a national education has the
moſt dire& tendency to perpetuate thoſe errors,
and to form all minds upon one model.

It is not eaſy to ſay whether the remark,
that government cannot juſtly puniſh offenders,
unleſs it have previouſly informed them what 8

virtue


, 1 of
.
wo;


214 OF NATIONAL EDUCATION.


virtue and what is offence,” be entitled to a fe
parate anſwer. It is to be hoped that mankind
will never have to learn ſo important a leſſon
PRs ſo corrupt a channel. Government may
and . preſume that men who
> in ſociety know that enormous crimes are
injurious to 1 public weal, without its being
neceſſary to announce them as ſuch, by laws to
be proclaimed by heralds, or expounded by cu-
rates. It has been alledged that © mere reaſon
may teach me not to ſtrike my neighbour ; but
will never forbid my ſending a ſack of woe!
from England, or printing the French conſtitu-
tion in Spain.” This objection leads to the true
diſtinction upon the ſubject. All real crimes are
capable of being diſcerned without the teaching
of law. All ſuppoſed crimes, not capable of
being ſo diſcerned, are truly and unalterably in-
nocent. It is true that my own underſtanding
would never have told me that the exportation
of wool was a vice: neither do I believe it is a
vice now that a law has been made affirming it.
It is a feeble and contemptible remedy for ini-
quitous puniſhments, to ſignify to mankind be-


forehand that you intend to inflit them, Nay,


the remedy is worſe than the evil r deſtroy me
if you pleaſe ; but do not endeavour by a na-
tional education to deſtroy in my underſtanding
the diſcernment of juftice and injuſtice. The
idea of fuch an education, or even perhaps of the
neceſſity of a written law, would never have oc-
curred, if government and juriſprudence had
never attempted the arbitrary converſion of in-


* into guilt.


7 CHAP


Se 7 Rad F F SS S8 F SOS S SA S MT


8 4
it.


C20


CHAP. NX.
OF PENSIONS AND SALARIES.


Reaſons by which they are vindicated Bali
in its uſual acceptation and labour for the pub-
lic compared. Immoral effefts of the inſtitution

, falaties. Source from which they are de-
rived —unneceſſary for the ſubſiflence of the
public funFionary—for dignity. —Salaries of
inferior officers may alſo be ſuperſeded. —T ax-


ation. —Nualifications.


An article which deſerves the matureſt con-
ſideration, and by means of which political
inftitution does not fail to produce the moſt
important influence upon opinion, is that of the
mode of rewarding public ſervices. The mode


which has obtained in all European countries is


that of pecuniary reward. He who is employed
to act in behalf of the public, is recompenſed
with a ſalary. He who retires from that em-
ployment, is recompenſed with a penſion. The
arguments in ſupport of this ſyſtem are well
known. It has been remarked, * that it may
indeed be creditable to individuals to be willing
to ſerve their country without a reward, but
that it is a becoming pride on the part of the
public, to refuſe to receive as an alms that for
which they are well able to pay. If one man,
animated by the moſt diſintereſted motives, be


permitted


216 OF PENSIONS AND SALARIES.


permitted to ſerve the public upon theſe terms,
another will aſſume the exterior of diſintereſted-
neſs, as a ſtep towards the gratification of a a
ſiniſter ambition. If men be not openly and
directly paid for the ſervices they perform, we
may reſt aſſured that they will pay themſelves
by ways ten thouſand times more injuri-
ous, He who devotes himſelf to the public,
ought to devote himſelf entire: he will there-
fore be injured in his perſonal fortune, and ought
to be replaced. Add to this, that the ſervants of
the public ought by their appearances and mode
of living to command reſpect both from their

own countrymen and from foreigners ; and that
this circumſtance will require. an expence for
which it is the ar of their country to pro-
vide“.

Before this nen can be ſufficiently eſti-
mated, it will be neceſſary for us to conſider the
analogy between labour in its moſt uſual accep-
tation and labour for the public ſervice, what
are the points in which they reſemble and in
which they differ. (If I cultivate a field the
produce of which is neceſſary for my ſubſiſtence,
this is an innocent and laudable action, the firſt
object it propoſes is my own emolument, and
it cannot be unreaſonable that that object ſhould
be much in my contemplation while the labour
is performing. If I cultivate a field the produce
of which is not neceſſary to my ſubſiſtence, but,
which If one to give in barter for a garment,

1 18K. the


* The ſubſtance of theſe arguments may be found in Mr.
Burke's Speech on Occonomical Reform.


—


OF PENSIONS AND SALARIES. 217


the caſe then becomes different. The action here
does not properly ſpeaking begin in myſelf.
Its immediate object is to provide food for
another; and it ſeems to be in ſome degree a
perverſion of intelle&, that cauſes me to place
in an inferior point of view the inherent quality
of the action, and to do that which is in the
firſt inſtance benevolent, from a partial retroſpect
to my own advantage. Still the perverſion here,
at leaſt to our habits of reflecting and judging,
does not appear violent. The action differs only
in form from that which is direct. I employ
that labour in cultivating a field, which muſt
otherwiſe be employed in manufacturing a gar-
ment. The garment I propoſe to myſelf as the
end of my labour. We are not apt to conceive
of this ſpecies of barter and trade as greatly in-
jurious to our moral diſcernment.

But then this is an action in the ſlighteſt de-
Tree indirect. It does not follow, becauſe we
are induced to do ſome actions immediately be-
neficial to others from a ſelfiſh motive, that we
can admit of this in all inſtances with impunity.
It does not follow, becauſe we are {ſometimes
inclined to be ſelfiſh, that we muſt never be ge-
nerous. The love of our neighbour is the great
ornament of a moral nature. The perception
of truth is the moſt ſolid improvement of an
intellectual nature. He that ſees nothing in the
univerſe deſerving of regard but himſelf, is a
conſummate ftranger to the dictates of immu-
table reaſon. He that is not influenced in his
conduct by the real and inherent natures of
things, is rational to no purpoſe. Admitting


46 5


214 OF PENSIONS AND SALARIES.


that it is venial ta do ſome actions immediately
beneficial to my neighbour from a partial retro-
ſpe& to myſelf, ſurely there muſt be other actions
in which I ought to forget, or endeavour to
forget myſelf. This duty is moſt obligatory in
actions moſt extenſive in their conſequences,
If a thouſand men be to be benefited, I ought
to recolle& that I am only an atom in the com-
pariſon, and to reaſon accordingly.

Theſe conſiderations may qualify us to decide
upon the article of penſions and ſalaries. Surely
it ought not to be the end of a good political
inſtitution to increaſe our ſelfiſhneſs, inſtead of
ſuffering it to dwindle and decay. It we pay
an ample ſalary to him who is employed in the
public ſervice, how are we ſure that he will not
have more regard to the ſalary than to the pub-
lic? If we pay a ſmall falary, yet the very exiſt-
ence of ſuch a payment will oblige men to
compare the work performed and the reward
beſtowed; and all the conſequence that will re-
ſult will be to drive the beſt men from the
ſervice of their country, a ſervice firſt degraded
by being paid, and then paid with an ill-timed
parſimony. Whether the ſalary be large or
ſmall, if a falary exiſt, many will deſire the
office for the ſake of its appendage. Functions
the moſt extenſive in their conſequences will be
converted into a trade. How humiliating will
it be to the functionary himſelf, amidſt the com-

plication and ſubtlety of motives, to doubt

- whether the ſalary were not one of his in-
ducements to the accepting the office? If he
A acquitted to himſelf, it is however ſtill to

be


OF PENSIONS AND SALARIES. 219


be regretted, that grounds ſhould be afforded to
his countrymen, which tempt them to miſinter-
pret his views.

Another conſideration of great weight in this
inſtance is that of the ſource from which ſalaries
are derived: from the public revenue, from
taxes impoſed upon the community. But there
is no practicable mode of collecting the ſuper-
fluities of the community. Taxation, to be
ſtrictly equal, if it demand from the man of
an hundred a year ten pounds, ought to demand
from the man of a thouſand a year nine hundred
and ten. Taxation will always be unequal and
oppreſſive, wreſting the hard earned morſel from
the gripe of the peaſant, and ſparing him moſt
whoſe ſuperfluities moſt defy the limits of juſ-
tice. I will not ſay that the man of clear diſcern-
ment and an independent mind would rather
ſtarve than be ſubſiſted at the public coſt: but
I will ſay, that it is ſcarcely poſſible to deviſe
any expedient for his — that he would
not rather accept.

Meanwhile the difficulty under this head is by
no means inſuperable. The majority of the per-
ſons choſen for public employment, under any
ſituation of mankind approaching to the preſent,
will poſſeſs a perſonal fortune adequate to their
ſupport. Thoſe ſelected from a different claſs,
will probably be ſelected for extraordinary talents,
which will naturally lead to extraordinary re-
ſources. It has been deemed diſhonourable to
ſubſiſt upon private liberality ; but this diſhonour
is produced only by the difficulty of reconciling
this mode of ſubſiſtence and intellectual inde-


pendence.


220 Of PENSIONS' AND SALARIES.


pendence. It is free from many of the objec-
tions that have been urged againſt a public ſti-
pend. I ought to receive your ſuperfluity as
my due, while I am employed in affairs more
important than that of earning a ſubliſtence ;
but at the ſame time to receive it with a total
indifference to perſonal advantage, taking only
preciſely what is neceſſary for the ſupply of my
wants. He that liſtens to the dictates of juſtice
and turns a deaf ear to the dictates of pride, will
wiſh that the conſtitution of his country ſhould
caſt him for ſupport on the virtue of individuals,
rather than provide for his ſupport at the public
expence. That virtue will, in this as in all other
inſtances, increaſe, the more it is called into ac-
tion. But what if he have a wife and chil-
dren?” Let many aid him, if the aid of one
be inſufficient. Let him do in his life-time what
Eudamidas did at his deceaſe, bequeath his daugh-
ter to be ſubſiſted by one friend, and his mother
by another. This is the only true taxation,
which he that is able, and thinks himſelf able,

aſſeſſes on himſelf, not which he endeavours to
diſcharge upon the ſhoulders of the poor. It is
a ſtriking example of the power of venal govern-
ments in generating prejudice, that this ſcheme of
ſerving the public functions without ſalaries, ſo
common among the ancient republicans, ſhould
by liberal minded men of the preſent day be deem-
ed impracticable. It is not to be believed that
thoſe readers who already pant for the abolition
of government and regulations in all their branch-
es, ſhould heſitate reſpeQing ſo eaſy an advance
tovegrds: this deſirable object. Nor let us ima-
gine


OF PENSIONS AND SALARIES. 221


gine that the ſafety of the community will de-
pend upon the ſervices of an individual. In the
country in which individuals fit for the public
ſervice are rare, the poſt of honour will be his,
not that fills an official ſituation, but that from
his cloſet endeavours to waken the ſleeping vir-
tues of mankind. In the country where they
are frequent, it will not be difficult by the ſhort
duration of the employment to compenſate for
the ſlenderneſs of the means of him that fills it.
It is not eaſy to deſcribe the advantages that
muſt reſult from this proceeding. The public
functionary would in every article of his charge
recollect the motives of public ſpirit and bene-
volence. He would hourly improve in the
energy and diſintereſtedneſs of his character.
The habits created by a frugal fare and a chear-
ful poverty, not hid as now in obſcure retreats,
but held forth to public view, and - honoured
with public eſteem, would ſpeedily pervade-the
community, and auſpiciouſly HEPES deut for
ſtill farther improvements.

The objection, © that it is noceſlity: for: bim
who acts on the part of the puhlid to make a
certain figure, and to live in a ſtyle calculated
to excite reſpect, does not ebe a ſeparate
anſwer. , The whole ſpirit of this treatiſe is in
direct hoſtility to this objection. If therefore
it have not been anſwered already, it would be
vain to attempt an anſwer in this place. It is
recorded of the burghers.of the Netherlands who
conſpired to throw off the; Auſtrian yoke, that
they came to the place of conſultation each man
with his knapſack of proviſions : who is there

chat feels inclined to deſpiſe this ſimplicity and
Fm | | honourable


222 OF PENSIONS AND SALARIES,

honourable poverty? The abolition of ſalaries

would doubtleſs render neceſſary the ſimplifica-

tion and abridgment of public buſineſs. This
would be a benefit and not a diſadvantage.

It will farther be objected that there are cer-
tain functionaries in the lower departments of
government, ſuch as clerks and tax-gatherers,
whoſe employment is perpetual, and whoſe ſab-
fiſtence onght for that reaſon to be made the re-
falt of their employment. If this objection
were admitted, 1 its conſequences would be of ſub-

| ordinate importance. The office of a clerk or
a tax-gatherer is conſiderably ſimilar to thoſe of
mere barter and trade; and therefore to degrade
it altogether to theit level, would have little re-
femblance to the fixing fuck a degradation upon
offices that demand the moſt elevated mind. 'The

- annexation of a ſtipend to ſuch employments,
If conſidered only as a matter of e ya ac-
commodation, might perhaps be endured.

But the exception, if admitted, ought to be
admitted with great caution. He that! is employ-
ed in an affair of public neceſſity, ought to feel,
while he diſcharges it, its true character. We
ſhould never allow ourſelves to undettake an of.
fice of a public nature, without feeling ourſelves
animated with a public zeal. We ſhall otherwiſe
diſcharge our truſt with comparative coldneſs
and neglect. Nor is this all. The abolition of
ſalaries would lead to the abolition of thoſe. 8277
ces to which ſalaries are thought neceſſary.
we had neither foreign wars nor domeſtic .
pends, taxation would be almoſt unknown; and,

if we had no taxes to collect, we ſhould want
no bers to keep an account of em. In the


=


n ”
* : N 4


-


/


OF PENSIONS AND, SALARIES. 223


{imple ſcheme of political inſtitution which rea-
ſon dictates, we could ſcarcely have any bur-
denſome offices to diſcharge ; and, if we had any
that were ſo in their abſtract nature, they might
be rendered hght by the perpetual rotation of
their hbkders,- 352008 1.1.
If we have no ſalaries, for a ſtill ſtronger rea-
ſon we ought to have no pecuniary qualificati-


ons, or in other words no regulation requiring


the poſſeſſion of a certain property, as a condi-
tion to the right of electing or the capacity of
being elected. It is an uncommon ſtrain of ty-
ranny to call upon men to appoint for them-
ſelves a delegate, and at the ſame time forbid
them to appoint exactly the man whom the

may judge fitteſt for the office. Qualification
in both kinds is the moſt flagrant injuſtice,” It
aſſerts the man to be of leſs value than his pro-
perty. It furniſhes to the candidate a new ſti-
mulus to the accumulation of wealth; and this
paſſion, when once ſet in motion, is not eafily
allayed. It tells him, „ Your intellectual and


moral qualifications may be of the higheſt order;


but you have not enough of the means of lux-
ury and vice.” To the non-elector it holds the
moſt deteſtable language. It ſays, © You are
poor; you are unfortunate ; the inſtitutions. of
ſociety oblige you to be the perpetual witneſs of
other men's ſuperfluity ; becauſe you are funk
thus low, we will trample you yet lower; youſhall
not even be reckoned in the lifts for a man, you
{hall be paſſed by as one of whom ſociety makes
no account, and whoſe welfare and moral exiſt-
ence ſhe diſdains to recollect.. > [is
941 F. CHAP.


*


V — XD — * * 1.
N r * C I A BS, 52
x neee
1 * — 0 IN Wold od HE re IP I. T5... -
oY OO EIT OE ion oe WONT al i OR ©, 3 :
Tn N n e : E N | I -


3


85 8 6 „ ä :
a n 8 d 2 *


IP
*


ra Bed


a — > 5 e 2 .
r 3 1 *


V- \ 14 I *
oe
- - 3 8 5
1 1 Ld Mr
Ga e


5 * 5 » n —— 2 —
4 hr Soap entre hs 2 _— 2
* — MR 5 Md I * * > wks - 2 -
- , 0 — - Sd 2 *
WS a Ar 1 — . * rh 2 r Cad =
% . 2 ws - a * „ 5 „ « - 3 9 vo 5 ©
-


„ - - * 5 -
7 —— — „ 7 * *
5 2 1 ve 4% J
4 ” 1 8 . 3 0
——— 4 xe b
w


K 2.


.


or THE MODES OF DECIDING 3 Q ES TION
ON THE PART OF THE COMMUNITY.


3 by lot, its origin—founded m the ſyſtem


of diſcretionary rights—implies the deſertion of
duty Deciſion by ballot—inculcates timidity—
and hypocriſy.—Decifton by vote, ts recommen-
dations. AS


E V V HAT has been here ſaid upon the ſubject


of qualifications, naturally leads to a few im-
portant obſervations upon the three principal
modes of conducting election, by ſortition, by


ballot or by vote.


The idea of ſortition was firſt introduced by
the dictates of ſuperſtition. It was ſuppoſed
that, when human reaſon piouſly acknowledged
its inſufficiency, the Gods, pleaſed with ſo un-
teigned a homage, interfered to guide the deci-
ſion. This imagination is now exploded. Ev
man who pretends to philoſophy will confeſs
that, wherever ſortition is introduced, the de-
cifion is excluſively guided by the laws of im-
pulſe and gravitation.— Strictly ſpeaking there is
no ſuch thing as contingence. But, ſo far as re-
lates to the exerciſe of apprehenſion and judg-
ment on the particular queſtion to be determined,


all on by lot is the deciſion of contingence.
5 The


MODES: OF DECIDING A QUESTION; Kc. 225


The operations of impulſe and gravitation either
proceed from a blind and unconſcious principle;
or, if they proceed from mind, it is mind exe-
cuting general laws, and not temporiſing with
every variation of human caprice. 0:99
All reference of public queſtions and elections
to lot includes in it two evils, moral miſappre-
henſion and cowardice. There is no ſituation
in which we can be placed that has not its cor-
reſpondent duties. There is no alternative that
can be offered to our choice, that does not in-
clude in it a better and a worſe. The idea of
ſortition derives from the ſame root as the idea
of diſcretionary rights. Men, undebauched by
the leſſons of ſuperſtition, would never have
recourſe to the deciſion by lot, were they not
impreſſed with the notion of indifſerence, that
they had a right to do any one of two or more
things offered to their choice; and that of con-
{equence, in order to rid themſelves of uncer-
tainty and doubt, it was ſufficiently allowable to
refer the deciſion of certain matters to accident.
It is of great importance that this idea ſhould
be extirpated. Mind will never arrive at the
true tone of energy, till we feel that moral li-
berty and diſcretion are mere creatures of the
imagination, that in all caſes our duty is preciſe,
and the path of juſtice ſingle and direct.
But, ſuppoſing us convinced of this principle,
if we afterwards deſert it, this is the moſt con-
temptible cowardice. Our deſertion either ariſes
from our want of energy to enquire, to compare
and to decide, or from our want of fortitude to
| defpiſe the inconveniences that might attend


Vor. II. 8 upon


226 MODES OF DECIDING A GUESTION
upon cur compliance with what our Jadgrhent
dictates.

Ballot is a mode of deciſion ſtill mòre cenſure
able than ſortition. It is ſcarcely poſſible to con-
ceive of a political inſtitution that inthides a more
direct and explicit patronage of viee. It has
been ſaid, © that ballot may in certain enſes be
neceſſary to enable a man of a feeble character
to act with eafe and independence, and to pre-
vent bribery, corrupt influence and faction.“
Vice is an ill remedy to apply to the diminution
of vice. A feeble and irreſolute character might
before be accidental; ballot is a contrivance to
render it permanent, and to ſcatter its ſeeds over
a wider ſurface. The true cure for a want of
conſtaney and public ſpirit is to inſpire firmneſs,
not to inſpire timidity. Truth, if communi-
cared to the mind with perfpicuity, is a ſufficient
baſis for virtue. To tell men that it is neceſſary
they ſhould form their deciſion. by ballot, is to
tell them that it is neceſſary they ſhould be
vicious.

If ſortition taught us to deſert our duty, bal-
fot teaches us to draw a veil of coneeabment over
our performance of it. It points ont to us n
method of acting unobferved. It incites us t6
make a myſtery of our ſentiments, If it did
this in the moſt trivial Article, it would not be
eaſy to bring 'the -miſchief it world produce
within the limits of calculation. But it dictates
this conduct in our moſt important concerns. It
calls upon us to diſcharge our duty to the public
with the moft virtuous conſtancy; but at the
ſame time directs us to hide our diſcharge of it.


One


ON THE PART OF THE COMMUNITY. 225
One of the moſt admirable principles 1n the
ſtructure of the material univerſe, is its tendency
to prevent us from withdrawing ourſelves from
the conſequenees of our own actions. Politi-
cal inſtitution that ſhould attempt to countera&
this principle, would be the only true impiety.
How can a man have the love of the public in
his heart, without the dictates of that love
flowing to his lips? When we dire& men to act
with ſecrecy, we direct them to act with frigidity.
Virtue will always be an unuſual ſpectacle among


men, till they ſhall have learned to be at all times


ready to avow their actions and aſſign the reaſons
upon which they are founded. .

If then ſortition and ballot be inſtitutions
pregnant with vice, it follows, that all ſocial de-
ciſions ſhould be made by open vote; that,
wherever we have a function to diſcharge, we
ſhould reflect on the mode in which it ought to
be diſcharged; and that, whatever conduct we
are perſuaded to adopt, eſpecially in affairs of ge-
neral concern, ſhould be adopted in the face of
the world. |


— —


.


— —


wn


8 1 TIS 7 Ns . Mo 2 ns UE the = #8
— 5 1 2 n By
- n 8 c
” 3 + 5 . n 2 LA ©;
1 bY = NR A 8 5 —


—— — q «
? n
unn, 3 agen Se 4
of - — * 4
— Aa An A» >
1 8


7 — 2
: -


© a


. 9 4 *
5 4
; — nl TA . i " 4 * 7 3 K 4 5
: 3 "I * Bf * © : * TE 5%. *%y 8 mn
, g , . a 3 io > be -
1 1 .
o * * -
. * - * *
* | s 6 %
{ * 8 8 5 ; ; — 0
„ a ng
, wes | ö
1 N © IH -4 ' * £ Fr
. : * AS * —


POLITICAL JUSTICE.


cc i
OF CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS.


\ 1


C H Aich A


LIMITATIONS OF THE DOCTRINE OF PUNISH-
MENT WHICH RESULT FROM THE |
PRINCIPLES OF MORALITY.


Definition of. puniſhment. — Nature of crime. —
ERetributive juſtice not independent and abſolute
— not to be vindicated from the ſyſtem of na-
ture. — Deſert à chimerical property. — Con-
clufion. 1 a


'Fh E ſubje& of puniſhment is perhaps the
moſt fundamental in the ſcience of politics.
Men affociated for the ſake of mutual protection
and benefit. It has already appeared, that the
internal affairs of ſuch aſſociations are of infi-
nitely greater importance than their external *;
It has appeared that the action of ſociety in con-
ferring

* Book V, Chap. XX.


230 LIMITATIONS OF THE


ferring rewards and ſuperintending opinion is of
pernicibus effect * Hence it follows that go-
vernment, or the action of the ſociety in its cor-
porate capacity, can ſcarcely be of any utility,
except ſo far as it is requiſite for the ſuppreſſion
of force by force z for the ptevehtibn of the
hoſtile attack of one member of the ſociety upon
the perſon or property of another, which pre-
vention is uſually called by the name of crimi-
nal juftice, or puniſhment. =
Before we can properly judge of the neceſſity
or urgeney of this action of government, it
will be of ſome importance to conſider the pre-
_ ciſe import of the word putiiſhment, I may
employ force to counteract the hoſtility that is
actually committing on me. I may employ
force to compel any member of the ſociety
to occupy the poſt that I conceive molt con-
dueive to the general advantage, either in the
mode of impreſſing ſoldiers and ſailors, or by
obliging a military officer or a miniſter of Rate
to accept or retain his appointment, I may put
an innocent man to death for the common good,
either becauſe he is infected with a peſtilential
diſeaſe, or becauſe ſome oracle has declared it
eſſential to the public ſafety. None of theſe,
trough they conſiſt in the exertion of force for
ſome moral purpoſe, comes within the import
of the word ꝓuniſhment, Puniſhment is gene-
rally \afed to fiamify the voluntary infliction of
evil upon a vicious being, not merely becaufe
the public advantage demands it, but becauſe
there is ap prehended to be a certain fitneſs and
r i propriety
* Book V, Chap. XII. BO VI, pafim.


DQGTRINE OF PUNISHMENT. 4334


ropriety in the nature of things, that render
[24 0g abſtractedly from the benehy to reſale,
the ſuitable concomitant of vice, 5
Ihe juſtice of puniſhment cherefgre, in the
ſtrict import of the werd, can only he a dedue-
tion from the hypotheſis of free-will, and muft
be falſe, if human actions be neceſſary, Mind,
as was ſufficiently apparent when we treated of
that ſubject &, js an agent, in ng. other {enfe
than matter is an agent. It operates and ji8'Dpes
rated upon, and the nature, the farce and line
of direction of the firſt, is exactly in propor-
tion to the nature, force and ling of direction of
the ſecond, Morality in a rational and deſign;
ing mind is not efſentially different from morality
in an jnanimate ſubſtance, A man of certain
intellectual habits is fitted to be na aſſaſſin, 3
dagger of a certain form it fitted to be his inftry-
ment. The one or the other excites a greater
degree of diſapprobation, in proportion as ity
fitneſs for miſchiovous purpoles appears to be
more inherent and direct. I view a dagger on
this account with more diſapprobation than a
knife, which is perhaps equally adapted for the
purpoſes of the aſſaſſin; becaule the dagger has
few or no beneficial uics to weigh againſt choſe
that are hurtful, and becauſe it has a tendency
by means of aſſociation to the exciting of evil
thoughts. I view the aſſaſſin with more diſap-
probation than the dagger, becauſe he is more
to be feared, and it is more diſſicult ta change
his vicious ſtructure or take from him ig capa-
city to injure. The man is propelled to act by


neceſſarß


* Book IV, Chap. VI,


232 LIMITATIONS OP THE


neceſſary cauſes and irreſiſtible motives, ie |
having once occurred, are likely to occur again.
The dagger has no quality adapted to the con-
traction of habits, and, though it have com-
mitted a thouſand murders, 1s not at all more
likely (unleſs ſo far as thoſe murders, being
known, may operate as a ſlight aſſociated motive
with the poſſeſſor) to commit murder again.
Except in the articles here ſpecified, the two
caſes are exactly parallel. The aſſaſſin cannot
help the murder he commits any more than the
dagger.

Theſe arguments are merely calculated to ſet
in a more perſpicuous light a principle, which
is admitted by many by whom the doctrine of
neceſſity has never been examined ; that the
only meaſure of equity is utility, and whatever
is not attended with any beneficial purpoſe, is
not juſt. This is ſo evident a propoſition that
few bade and reflecting minds will be found
inclined to reject it. Why do I inflict ſuffering
on another ? If neither for his own benefit nor
the benefit of others, can that be right? Will
reſentment, the mere indignation and horror !
have conceived againſt vice, juſtify me in putting
a being to uſeleſs torture? © But ſuppoſe I only
put an end to his exiſtence.” What, with no
proſpect of benefit either to himſelf or others?
The reaſon the mind eaſily reconciles itſelf to
this ſuppoſition is, that we conceive exiſtence to
be leſs a bleſſing than a curſe to a being incorri-
gibly vicious. But in that caſe the ſuppoſition
does not fall within the terms of the queſtion :
J am in reality conferring a benefit. It has been


aſked,


* 9 * 4


DOCTRINE OF PUNISHMENT. 233


aſked, © If we conceive to ourſelves two beings, 2


each of them ſolitary, but the firſt virtuous and


the ſecond vicious, the firſt inclined to the higheſt |


acts of benevolence, if his ſituation were changed
for the ſocial, the ſecond to malignity, tyranny
and injuſtice, do we not feel that the firſt is enti-


tled to felicity in preference to the ſecond? If


there be any difficulty in the queſtion, it is
wholly cauſed by the extravagance of the ſup-
poſition. No being can be either virtuous or
vicious who has no opportunity of influencing


the happineſs of others. He may indeed, though


now ſolitary, recollect or imagine a ſocial ſtate;
but this ſentiment and the propenſities it gene-
rates can ſcarcely be vigorous, unleſs he have
hopes of being at ſome future time reſtored to
that ſtate. The true ſolitaire cannot be conſi-
dered as a moral being, unleſs the morality we
contemplate be that which has relation to his
own permanent advantage. But, if that be our
meaning, puniſhment, unleſs for reform, is pe-
culiarly abſurd, His conduct is vicious, becauſe
it has a tendency to render him miſerable : ſhall
we inflict calamity upon him, for this reaſon
only becauſe he has already inflifted calamity
upon himſelf? It is difficult for us to 1magine to
ourſelves a ſolitary intellectual being, whom no
future accident ſhall ever render ſocial. It is
difficult for us to ſeparate even in idea virtue and
vice from happineſs and miſery ; and of conſe-


quence not to imagine that, when we beſtow a


benefit upon virtue, we beſtow it where it will
turn to account; and, when we beſtow a bene-
fit upon vice, we beſtow it where it will be un-


productive.


234 LIMITATIONS OF THE
productive. For theſe reaſons the queſtion of
a ſolitary being will always be extravagant and
unintelligible, but will never convince.
It has ſometimes been alledged that the very
courſe of nature has annexed ſuffering to vice,
and has thus led us to the idea of puniſhment,
Arguments of this ſort muſt be liſtened to with
great caution, It was by reaſonings of a ſimilar
nature that our anceſtars juſtified the practice of
religious perſecution ; © Heretics and unbelievers
are the objects of God's indignation ; it muſt
therefore be meritorious in us to mal-treat thoſe
whom God has curſed.” We know too little of
the ſyſtem of the univerſe, are too liable to error
reſpecting it, and ſee too ſmall a portion of the
whole, to entitle us to form our moral principles
upon an imitation of what we conceive to be the
courſe of nature, 5
It is an extreme error to ſuppoſe that the
courſe of nature is ſomething arbitrarily ad-
juſted by a deſigning mind. Let us once
conceive a ſyſtem of percipient beings to
exiſt, and a] that we know of the hiſtory
of man follows from that conception as ſo
many inevitable conſequences. Mind begin-
ning to exiſt muſt have begun from igno-
rance, muſt have received idea after idea,
muſt have been liable to erroneous concluſions
from imperfect conceptions. We ſay that the
ſyſtem of the univerſe bas annexed happineſs to
virtue and pain to vice. We ſhould ſpeak more
accurately if we faid, that virtue would not be
virtue nor vice be vice, if this connection could
cealg. Ihe office af the principle, whether
„ mind


DOCTRINE OF PUNISHMENT. 233


mind dr whatever eHe, to which the univerſe
owes its exiſtence, is leſs that of fabricating than


conducting; is not the creation of truth, and


the connecting ideas and propoſitions which had
no original relation to each other, but the ren-


deting truth, the nature of which is unalterable, |


an active and vivifying principle. It cannot
therefore be good reaſoning to ſay, the ſyſtem
of nature annexes unhappineſs to vice, or in
other words vice brings its oun puniſhment
along with it, therefore it would be unjuſt in
us not by a poſitive interference to render that
puniſhment double,
Thus it appears, whether we enter philoſo-
phically into the principle of human actions,
or merely analyſe the ideas of rectitude and
juſtice which have the univerſal conſent of
inankind, that, accurately f


fach thing as deſert, It cannot be juſt that we
ſhould inflict ſuffering on any man, except fo
far as it tends to good, Hence it follows that
the KriQt acceptation of the word puniſhment


no means accords with any Toand principles of
reaſoning. It is Tight that I ſhould inflict ſuf-


fering, in every caſe where it can be clearly
fhown that ſuch infliation will produce an over-
balance of good. But this infliction bears no
reference to the mere innocence or guilt of the
perſon upon whom it is made. An innocent
man js the proper ſubject of it, if it tend to
good. A guilty man is the proper ſubject of it
under no other point of view. To puniſh him
upon any hypotheſis for what is paſt and irreco-
verable and for the conſideration of that _
poo! 8


peaking, there is no


a
1


236 LIMITATIONS OF, &c.


muſt be ranked among the wildeſt conceptions
of untutored barbariſm. Every man upon whom
diſcipline is adminiſtered, is to be conſidered as
to the rationale of this diſcipline as innocent.
Xerxes was not more unreaſonable when he
laſned the waves of the ſea, than that man would
be who inflicted ſuffering on his fellow, from a
view to the paſt, and not from a view to the

future. "OY
It is of the utmoſt importance that we e ſhould
bear theſe ideas conſtantly in mind during our
whole examination of the theory of puniſhment.
This theory would in the paſt tranſactions of
mankind have been totally different, if they had
diveſted themſelves of all emotions of anger and
reſentment ; if they had conſidered the man who
torments another for whar he has done, as upon
par with the child who beats the table; if they
had figured to their imagination, and then pro-
perly eſtimated, the man, who ſhould ſhut up
in priſon ſome atrocious criminal, and afterwards
torture him at ſtated periods, merely in conſider-
ation of the abſtract congruity of crime and pu-
niſhment, without any poſſible benefit to others
or to himſelf; if they had regarded inflition
as that which was to be regulated ſolely by a
diſpaſſionate calculation of the future, without
ſuffering the paſt, in itſelf conſidered, for a mo-

| \ment to enter into the account.


ay ot 4 * —
4 » 3%


4 » 4
1 "TAP + 6 "3 425 er A
- * 6 - 75
a * >
* 1 1 * * 5 was « 4
p 1 7 . > KS}>
, » 0 — ,
ys *
. 1 4 8 , " . ? -
i * N 7 1 „ x +:% »


GENERAL: Fee OF COERCION. .

Conſcience in matters of relining confudered —in
the conduct of life. Beſi practicable criterion
ꝙ duty — not the deciſion of other men — but
of our o underflanding. ——T, endency of coer-
cion.— lis various e ule.


-


Havine « thus FEES al 14630 off puniſh-
ment or retribution ſtrictly ſo called, it Pelengs
to us in the farther diſcuſſion of this intereſting
ſubject, to think merely of that coercion, which
has uſually been employed againſt perſons CON-
victed of paſt injurious action, for the purpoſe
of preventing future miſchief... And here we


will firſt conſider what is the quantity of evil


which accrues from all ſuch COCrCION, and ſecond-
ly examine the cogency of the various reaſons
by which this coercion is recommended, It will
not be poſſible wholly to avoid the repetition of
ſome of the reaſons which occurred in the pre-
liminary diſcuſſion of the exerciſe of private
judgment *. But thoſe reaſonings will now be
extended, and derive ee advantage from
a fuller arrangement. 0

It is commonly ſaid that no man ought to be
compelled in matters of religion to act con-


trary


* Book IL Chap. VI.


= 8 CI * I.
ET


5 *
= *
X

oy


© 3x na
e


Ae
—


w


,


hs | *
£ *


4
2
*
k
f x
53
1


233, GENERAL DISADVANTAGES


trary to the dictates of his conſcience. Religion
is a principle which the practice of all ages has
deeply impreſſed upon the mind. He that diſ-
charges what his own apprehenſions preſcribe to
him on the ſubject, ſtands approved to the tri-
bunal of his own mind, and, conſcious of rec-
titude in his intercourſe with the author of na-
ture, cannot fail to obtain the greateſt of thoſe
advantages, whatever may be their amount,
which religion has to beſtow. It is in vain
that I endeavour by perſecuting ſtatutes to com-
pet him to reſign a falſe religion for a true. Ar-
guments may convince, but perſecution cannot.
The new religion, which I oblige him to profeſs
contrary to his conviction, howeyer pure and
holy it may be in its own nature, has no benefits
in flore for him. The ſublimeſt worſhip becomes
transformed into a ſource of corruption, when
it is not conſecrated by the teſtimony of a pure
conſcience. Truth is the ſecond object in this
reſpect, integrity of heart is the firſt: or rather
a propoſition, that in its abſtract nature is truth
uſelf, converts into rank falſhood and mortal
poiſon, if it be profeſſed with the lips only, ang
abjured by the underftanding. It is then the
foul garb of hypocriſy. Inſtead of elevating
the mind above ſordid temptations, it perpetually
reminds the worſhipper of the abje&t puſillani-
mity to which he has yielded. Inftead of filling
him with ſacred confidence, it overwhelms with
confuſton and remorſe, Hog

/ The inference that has been made from thefe
reaſonings is, that criminal law is eminently miſ-
applied in affairs of religion, and that its true
228 province


OF COERCION 239
province is civil miſdemeanours. But this in-
ference is falſe, It is only by an unaccount-
able perverſion of reaſon, that men have been
induced to affirm that religion is the ſacred pro-
vince of conſcience, and that moral duty may
be left undefined to the deciſion of the magiſ-
trate. What, is it of no conſequence whether
[ be the benefaRtor of my ſpecies, or their bit-
tereſt enemy ? whether I be an informer, or a
robber, or a marderer ? whether I be employed
as a foldier to extirpate my fellow beings, or be
called upon as a citizen to contribute my pro-
perty to their extirpation ? whether T tell the
truth with that firmneſs and unreſerve which
ardent philanthropy will rot fail to infpire, or
ſuppreſs ference leſt I be convicted of blaſphemy,
and fact leſt 1 be convicted of a libel? whether
I contribate my efforts for the furtherance of
Political juſtice, or quietly ſubmit to the exile
of a family of whole claims J am an advocate,
or to the ſubverſion of Hberty for which every
man ſhould be ready to die? Nothing can be
more clear, than that the value of religion, or
o& atty other ſpecies of abſtract -opimon, lies in
its moral tendency. If I fhould be ready to ſet
x frought che civil power for the ſake of that
which is the means, how much more when it,
riſes in contradiction to the end ? TIE


Of all human concerns morality is the moſt
mrereſfting. It is the perpetual affociate of our
tranſactions: there is no ſituation in which we
gan be placed, no alternative that can be pre-
ſenced to our choice, reſpecting which duty is
ent. „ What is the ftandard of —— *

5 uty


&


240 GENERAL DISADVANTAGES


duty?“ Juſtice. - Not the arbitrary decrces that
are in force in a particular climate; but thoſe
laws of eternal reaſon that are equally ob-
ligatory wherever man is to be found. © But
the rules of juſtice often appear to us obſcure,
doubtful and contradictory ; what criterion ſhall
be applied to deliver us from uncertainty ?”
There are but two criterions poſlible, the deciſi-
ons of other men's wiſdom, and the deciſions of
our own uaderſtanding. Which of theſe is
conformable to the nature of man? Can we ſur-
render our own underſtandings? However we
may ſtrain after implicit faith, will not conſcience
in ſpite of ourſelves whiſper us, This decrce
is equitable, and this decree is founded in miſ-
take? Will there not be in the minds of the
votaries of ſuperſtition, a perpetual diſſatisfac-
tion, a deſire to believe what is dictated to them,
accompanied with a want of that in which be-
hef conſiſts, evidence and conviction? If we
could ſurrender our underſtandings, what ſort
of beings ſhould we become? By the terms of
the propoſition we ſhould not be rational: the
nature of things would prevent us from being
moral, for morality is the judgment of reaſon,
employed in determining on the effects to reſult
from the different kinds of conduct we may ob-
erte.

Hence it follows that chere is no criterion of
War to any man but in the exerciſe of his pri-
vate judgment. Whatever attempts to preſcribe
to his conduct, and to deter him from any
courſe of action by penalties and threats, is an


exeecrable . There may be ſome men of
ſuch


OF COE R CIO N. 241
ſuch inflexible virtue as to ſet human ordinances
at defiance. It is generally believed that there
are others ſo depraved, that, were it not for pe-
nalties and threats, the whole order of ſociety
would be ſubverted by their exceſſes. But what
will become of the great maſs of mankind, who
are neither ſo virtuous as the firſt; nor fo dege-
nerate as the ſecond ? They are ſucceſsfully con-
verted by poſitive laws into latitudinarians and
cowards. They yield like wax to the impreſſion
that is made upon them. Dire&ed to infer the
precepts of duty from the dicta of the magiſtrate,
they are too timid to reſiſt, and too ſhort ſighted
to detect the impoſition. It is thus that the maſs
of mankind have been condemned to a tedious
imbecility. IM |
There is no criterion of duty to any man but
in the exerciſe of his private judgment. Has
coercion any tendency to enlighten the judg- |
ment? Certainly not. Judgment is the perceiv-
ed agreement or diſagreement of two ideas, the
perceived truth or falſhood of any propoſition.
Nothing can aid this perception, that does not
ſet the ideas in a clearer light, that does not
afford new evidence of the ſubſtantialneſs or un-
ſubſtantialneſs of the propoſition. The direct
tendency of coercion is to ſet our underſtanding
and our fears, our duty and our weakneſs at
variance with each other. And how poor ſpirited
a refuge does coercion afford? If what you re-
quire of me is duty, are there no reaſons that
will prove it to be ſuch? If you underſtand
more of eternal juſtice than I, and are thereby
fitted to inſtruct me, cannot you convey the ſu-
Vol. II. R perior


242 GENERAL DIS ADV ANT AGES


perior knowledge you poſſeſs from your under-
ſtanding into mine? Will you ſet your wit
againſt one who is intellectually a child, and be-
cauſe you are better informed than I, aſſume,
not to be my preceptor, but my ty rant? Am 1
not a rational being? Could I reſi your argu-
ments, if they were demonſtrative ? The odious
ſyſtem of coercion, firſt annihilates the under-
ſtanding of the ſubject, and then of him that
adopts it. Dreſſed in the ſupine prerogatives
of a maſter, he is excuſed from cultivating the
faculties of a man. What would not man have
been, long before this, if the proudeſt of us had
no hopes but in argument, if he knew of no
reſort beyond, and if he were obliged to ſharpen
his faculties, and collect his powers, as the only
means of effecting his purpoſes ?

Let us reflect for a moment upon the ſpecies
of argument, if argument it is to be called, that
coercion employs. It avers to its victim that he
muſt neceſlarily be in the wrong, becauſe I am
more vigorous and more cunning than he. Will
vigour and cunning be always on the ſide of
truth ? Every ſuch exertion implies in its nature

a ſpecies of conteſt. This conteſt may be de-
cided before it is brought to open trial by the
deſpair of one of the parties. But it is not al-
ways ſo. The thief that by main force ſurmounts
che ſtrength of his purſuers, or by ſtratagem
and ingenuity eſcapes from their toils, ſo far as
this argument is valid, proves the juſtice of his
cauſe. Who can refrain from indignation when
he ſees juſtice thus miſerably proftituted ? Who
does not feel, the moment the conteſt begins,
the full extent of the * dity that this appeal


includes?


includes? It is not eaſy to decide which of the
two is moſt deeply to be deplored, the magiſtracy,
the repreſentative of the ſocial ſyſtem, that de-
clares war againſt one of its members, in the
behalf of juſtice, or in the behalf of oppreſſion,
In the firſt we ſee truth throwing aſide her native
arms and her intrinſic advantage, and putting
herſelf upon a level with falſhood. In the ſe-
cond we ſee falſhood confident in the caſual ad-
vantage ſhe poſſeſſes, artfully extinguiſhing the
new borh light that would ſhame her in the
midſt of her uſurped authority. The exhibition
in both is that of an infant cruſhed in the merci-
leſs graſp of a giant. No ſophiſtry can be more
palpable than that which pretends to bring the
two parties to an impartial hearing. Obſerve
the confiſtency of this reaſoning.” We firſt vin-
dicate political coercion, becauſe the criminal
has committed an offence againſt the commu-
nity at large, and then pretend, while we bring
him to the bar of the community, the offended
party, that we bring him before an impartial
umpire: Thus in England, the king by his at-
torney is the proſecutor, and the king by his
repreſentative is the judge. How long ſhall fuch +
odious inconſiſtencies impoſe on mankind ? "The
purſuit commenced againft the ſuppoſed offender
is the poſſe comitatus, the armed force of the
whole, drawn out in ſuch portions as may be
judged neceffary ; and when ſeven millions of
men have got one poor, unaſſiſted individual in
their power, they are then at leiſure to torture
or to kill him, and to make his agonies a
ſpectacle to glut their ferocity. n

8 R 2 The


244 GENERAL DISADVANTAGES, &e.


The argument againſt political coercion is
equally good againſt the infliction of private
penalties between maſter and llave, and between
parent and child. There was in reality, not
only more of gallantry, but more of reaſon in
the Gothic ſyſtem of trial by duel, than in theſe.
The trial of force is over in theſe, as we have
already ſaid, before the exertion of force is be-
gun. All that remains is the leiſurely infliction
of torture, my power to inflict it being placed
in my joints and my ſinews. This whole ar-
gument may be ſubjected to an irreſiſtible di-
lemma. The right of the parent over his child
lies either in his ſuperior ſtrength or his ſuperior
reaſon. If in his ſtrength, we have. only to
apply this right univerſally, in order to drive
all morality out of the world. If in. his reaſon,
in that reaſon let him confide. It is a poor

argument of my ſuperior reaſon, that I am unable
to make juſtice be apprehended and felt in the
moſt neceſſary caſes, without the intervention .
blows.

Let us conſider the effect that coercion pro-
duces upon the mind of him againſt whom it is
employed. It cannot begin with convincing ;
it is no argument. It begins with producing
the ſenſation of pain, and the ſentiments of diſ-
taſte. It begins with violently alienating the
mind from the truth with which we wiſh it to
be impreſſed. It includes in it a tacit confeſſion
of imbecility. If he who employs coercion
againſt me could mould me to his purpoſes by ar-
gument, no doubt he would. He pretends to pu-
niſh me becauſe his argument is important, but he
really puniſhes me becauſe his argument is weak.

C H AP.


L 245 1


| a


HA NM ͤ˖ͤ
OF THE . OF COERCION. |


Nature of defence confidered. —Coerrion for re-
rain. for reformation. —Suppoſed uſes of ad-
 verſity—defefive—unneceſſary.—Coercion for
example—1. Nugatory.—The neceſſity of politi-
cal coercion ariſes from the defects of political
inſtitution, —2. Unjuſt,—Unfeeling character of
this ſpecies of coercion. +


11

Fe

\ ' — 1
> 7 p


Proc EED we to conſider three principal
ends that coercion propoſes to itſelf, reſtraint,
reformation and example. Under each of theſe
heads the arguments on the affirmative {ide muſt
be allowed to be cogent, not irreſiſtible. Under
each of them conſiderations will occur, that will
oblige us to doubt univerſally of the propriety
of coercion. In this examination I ſhall take it
for granted that the perſons with whom I am
reaſoning allow, that the ends of reſtraint and
example may be ſufficiently anſwered in con-
ſiſtency with the end of reformation, that is,
without the puniſhment of death. To thoſe by
whom this is not allowed in the firſt inſtance,
the ſubſequent reaſonings will only apply with
additional force. |
The firſt and moſt innocent of all the claſſes
of coercion is that which is employed in _
nz


wr


2246 OF THE PURPOSES


ling actual force. This has but little to do with
any ſpecies of political inſtitution, but may ne-

vertheleſs deſerve to be firſt conſidered. In this
caſe I am employed (ſuppoſe, for example, a
drawn ſword is pointed at my own breaſt or that
of another, with threats of inſtant deſtruction)


in preventing a miſchief that ſeems about inevita-
bly to enſue. In this caſe there appears to be


no time for experiments. And yet even here
meditation will not leave us without our diffi-
culties. The powers of reaſon and truth are
yet unfathomed. That truth which one man
cannot communicate in leſs than a year, another
can communicate in à fortnight. * The ſhorteſt
term may have an DW i commenſurate
to it. When Marius ſaid with a ſtern voice and
a commanding countenance to the ſoldier that
was ſent down into his dungeon to aſſaſſinate
him, Wretch, have you the temerity to kill
Marius! and with theſe few words drove him
to flight ; it was, that he had ſo energetic an idea
compreſled in his mind, as to make its way with
irreſiſtible force to the mind of his executioner.
If there were falſhood and prejudice mixed with
this idea, can we believe that truth is not more
powerful than they? It would be well for the
human ſpecies, if they were all in this reſpect
Ike Marius, all accuſtomed to place an intrepid
confidence in the ſingle energy of intellect.—
ere. ſhall ſay what there is that would be
poſſible to men with theſe habits? Who ſhall

ſay SDA far the whole ſpecies might be improved,
were they accuſtomed to deſpiſe force in others,


and did they refuſe to employ it for themſelves?
But


OF COERCION. 247

But the coercion we are here conſidering is
exceedingly different. It is employed againſt
an individual whoſe violence is over, He is at
preſent engaged in no hoſtility againſt the com-
munity or any of its members. He is quietly
purſuing thoſe occupations which are beneficial
to himſelf, and injurious to none. Upon what
pretence 1s this man to be the ſubject of violence ?
For reſtraint? Reſtraint from what? „From


ſome future injury which it is to be feared he


will commit.“ This is the very argument which
has been employed to juſtify the moſt execrable
of all tyrannies. By what reaſonings have the in-
quiſition, the employment of ſpies and the va-
rious kinds of public cenſure directed again
opinion been vindicated ? Becaufe there is an
intimate connexion between men's opinions and
their conduct : becauſe immoral ſentiments lead
by a very probable conſequence to immoral
actions. There is not more reaſon, in many
caſes at leaſt, to apprehend that the man who
has once committed robbery will commit it again,
than the man who diſſipates his property at the
gaming- table, or who is accuſtomed to profeſs
that upon any emergency he will not ſcruple to
have recourſe to this expedient. Nothing can
be more obvious than that, whatever precauti-
ons may be allowable with reſpect to the future,
juſtice will reluctantly claſz among theſe precau-
tions any violence to be committed on my neigh-
bour. Nor are they oftener unjuſt than they are
ſuperfluous. Why not arm myſelf with vigi-
lance and energy, inſtead of locking up every


% ; .


248 OF THE PURPOSES


man whom my imagination may bid me fear,


that I may ſpend my days in undiſturbed in-


activity? If communities, inſtead of afpiring,


—


as they have hitherto done, to embrace a vaſt
territory, and to glut their vanity with ideas of
empire, were contented with a {mall diſtrict with
a proviſo of confederation in caſes of neceſſity,


every individual would then live under the pub-


lic eye, and the diſapprobation of his nei *


Aa ſpecics of coercion, not derived d. the ca-
price of men, but from the ſyſtem of the uni-


verſe, would inevitably oblige him either to
reform or to emigrate.— The ſum of the argu-


ment under this head is, that all coercion for the


ſake of reſtraint is puniſhment upon ſuſpicion,
a ſpecies of puniſhment, the moſt abhorrent to


reaſon, and arbitrary in its application, that can
be deviſed.


The ſecond objection which coercion may be


imagined to propoſe to itſelf is reformation,


We have already ſeen various objections that


may be offered to it in this point of view. Co-


ercion cannot convince, cannot conciliate, but
on the contrary alienates the mind of him againſt
whom it is employed. Coercion has nothing
in common with reaſon, and therefore can have
no proper tendency to the generation of vir-
tue. Reaſon is omnipotent: if my conduct be
wrong, a very {imple ſtatement, flowing from
a clear and comprehenſive view, will make it
appear to be ſuch ; nor is there any perverſe-


neſs that can reſiſt the evidence of which truth
is capable.


But


OF COERCION. 249

But to this it may be anſwered, that this
view of the ſubje& may indeed be abſtractedly |
true, but that it is not true relative to the pre-
ſent imperfection of human faculties. The
grand requiſite for the reformation and improve-
ment of the human ſpecies, ſeems to conſiſt in
the rouſing of the mind. It is for this reaſon
that the ſchool of adverſity has ſo often been
conſidered as the ſchool of virtue. In an even
courſe of eaſy and proſperous circumſtances the
faculties ſleep. But, when great and urgent
occaſion is preſented, it ſhould ſeem that the
mind riſes to the level of the occaſion. Diffi-
culties awaken vigour and engender ſtrength ;
and it will frequently happen that the more you
check and oppreſs me, the more will my facul-
ties ſwell, till they burſt all the obſtacles of op-
preſſion,” |

The opinion of the excellence of adverſity is
built upon a very obvious miſtake. If we will
diveſt ourſelves of paradox and ſingularity, we
ſhall perceive that adverſity is a bad thing, but
that there is ſomerhing elſe that is worſe. Mind
can neither exiſt nor be improved without the
reception of ideas. It will improve more in a
calamitous, than a torpid ſtate. A man will
ſometimes be found wiſer at the end of his
career, who has been treated with ſeverity, than
with neglect. But becauſe ſeverity is one way
of generating thought, it does not follow that it
Sens =
It has already been ſhown that coercion abſo-
lutely conſidered is injuſtice. Can injuſtice be
the beſt mode of diſſeminating principles of


equity


259 OF THE: PURPOSES

equity and reaſon? Oppreſſion exerciſed to a
certain extent is the molt ruinous of all things.
What is it but this, that has habituated mankind
to ſo much ignorance and vice for ſo many
thouſand years ? Can that which in its genuine
and unlimited ſtate is the worſt, become by a
certain modification and diluting the beſt of all
things? All coercion ſours the mind. He that
ſuffers it, is practically perſuaded of the want
of a philanthropy ſufficiently enlarged in thoſe
with whom he is moſt intimately connected.
He feels that juſtice prevails only with great
limitations, and that he cannot depend upon be-
ing treated with juſtice. The leſſon which coer-
cion reads to him is, „Submit to force, and
abjure reaſon. Be not directed by the convic-
tions of your underſtanding, but by the baſeſt
part of your nature, the dread of preſent pain,
and the puſillanimous terror of the injuſtice of
others.” It was thus Elizabeth of England and
Frederic of Pruſſia were educated in - ſchool
of adverſity. * The way in which they profited
by this diſcipline was by finding reſources in their
own minds, enabling them to regard unmoved
the violence that was employed againſt them.
Can this be the beſt poſſible mode of forming
men to virtue ? If it be, perhaps it is farther re-
quiſite that the coercion we uſe ſhould be fla-
grantly unjuſt, ſince the improvement ſeems to.
lie not in ſubmiſſion, but reſiſtance.

But it is certain that truth is adequate to
awaken the mind without the aid of adverſity.
Truth does not conſiſt in a certain number of
unconnected propoſitions, but in evidence that

ſhows


or COERCION. *


ſhow 8 their reality and their value. If [ appre-
hend the value of any purſuit, ſhall I not en-
gage in it? If I apprehend it clearly, ſhall I not
engage in it zealouſly ? If you would awaken my
mind in the moſt effectual manner, tell me the
truth with energy. For that purpoſe, thoroughly
underſtand it yourſelf, impregnate your mind
with its evidence, and ſpeak from the clearneſs
of your view, and the fulneſs of conviction.
Mere we accuſtomed to an education, in which
truth was never neglected from indolence, or
told in a way treacherous to its excellence, in
which the preceptor ſubjected himſelf to the per-
petual diſcipline of finding the way to commu-
nicate it with brevity and force, but without
prejudice and acrimony, it cannot be doubted,
but ſuch an education would be much more
effectual for the improvement of the mind, than
all the modes of angry or benevolent coercion
that can be deviſed. — 5

The laſt object which coercion propoſes is
example. Had legiſlators confined their views
to reformation and reſtraint, their exertions of
power, though miſtaken, would {till have borne
the ſtamp of humanity. But, the moment ven-
geance preſented itſelf as a ſtimulus on the one
fide, or the exhibition of a terrible example on
the other, no barbarity was then thought too
great, Ingenious cruelty was buſied to find new
means of torturing the victim, or of rendering
the ſpectacle impreſſive and horrible.

It has long ſince been obſerved that this ſyſtem
of policy conſtantly fails of its purpoſe. Far-
ther refinements in barbarity produce a certain
impreſſion ſo long as they are new, but this im-

_. * | vreſſiol


\


2:2 OF THE PURPOSES
preſſion ſoon vaniſhes, and the whole ſcope of
a gloomy invention is exhauſted in vain *. The
reaſon of this phenomenon is that, whatever
may be the force with which novelty ſtrikes the
imagination, the unchangeable principles of
reaſon ſpeedily recur, and aſſert their indeſtructi-
ble empire. We feel the emergencies to which
we are expoſed, and we feel, or we think we
feel, the dictates of truth directing to their relief.
Whatever ideas we form in oppoſition to the
mandates of law, we draw, with ſincerity, though
it may be with ſome mixture of miſtake, from
the unalterable conditions of our exiſtence. We
compare them with the deſpotiſm which ſociety
exerciſes in its corporate capacity, and the more
frequent is our compariſon, the greater are our
murmurs and indignation againſt the injuſtice
to which we are expoſed. But indignation is
not a ſentiment that conciliates; barbarity poſ-
ſeſſes none of the attributes of perſuaſion. It
may terrify; but it cannot produce in us can-
dour and docility. Thus ulcerated with injuſ-
tice, our diſtreſſes, our temptations, and all the
eloquence of feeling preſent themſelves again
and again, is it any wonder they ſhould prove
Victorious? ?

With what repugnance ſhall we contemplate
the preſent forms of human ſociety, if we re-
collect that the evils which they thus mercileſsly
avenge, owe their exiſtence to the vices of thoſe
very forms? It is a well known principle of ſpe-
culative truth, that true ſelf love and ſocial
preſcribe to us exactly the ſame ſpecies of

conduct.


( | * Beccaria, Dei Delitti e delle Pene.


\ — — _ 07 3
—— 6 oo — - « l
. e 2 ee
wr. . = — Sabo. — 2 . + — —— 2
8 N 7 2 * a L- -
—


I yt;
— n


*

3

4
c
r


3
Fi
15
by
. *
* ö
*
o
a4 :
=
*
*.


\


OF. COER:CLON.


conduat*. Why is this acknowledged i in ſpecu-
lation and perpetually contradicted in ined
Is there any innate perverſeneſs in man that
continually hurries him to his own deſtruction?
This is impoſſible ; for man is thought, and,
till thought began, he had no propenſities either
to good or evil. My propenſities are the fruit

of the impreſſions that have been made upon
me, the good always preponderating, becauſe
the inherent nature of things is more powerful
than any human inſtitutions. The original ſin
of the worſt men, is in the perverſeneſs of theſe
inſtitutions, the oppolitions they produce be-
tween public and private good, the monopoly
they create of advantages which reaſon directs
to be left in common. What then can be more
ſhameleſs than for ſociety to make an example


of thoſe whom ſhe has goaded to the breach of


order, inſtead of amending her own inſtitutions,
which, by ſtraining order into tyranny, pro-
duced the miſchief? Who can tell how rapid
would be our progreſs towards the total annihi-
lation of civil delinquency, if we did but enter
upon the buſineſs of reform in the right manner?

Coercion for example, 1s liable to all the ſame


objections as coercion for reſtraint or reforma-


tion, and to certain other objections peculiar to
itſelf. It is employed againſt a perſon not now
in the commiſſion of offence, and of whom we
can only ſuſpect that he ever will oftend. It


ſuperſedes argument, reaſon and conviction, and


requires us to think ſuch a ſpecies of conduct
our


* Book IV, Chap. IX.


253


bo
I
1
4
.
DO.


— 1. =
* a=. _—_ = \ _— = 6-4 - 1 2
OY RS * A.: * es 7 r 9 Tr. r
„ 3 KS wr < = os Lag - —_ I” Ch 5
. 0 2 > EK ©, — © rr x — r 5 r —
5 : 4 then 3 —
— > PR
kom oh IN . —_—_ - . -


E — %
se —
— — _


r
2 Sy _ = 2 4
al >


254 OF THE PURPOSES OF COERCION.


our duty, becauſe ſuch is the good pleaſure of
our {upertors, and becauſe, as we are taught by
the example in queſtion, they will make us rae
our ſtubbornneſs if we think otherwiſe. In ad-
dition to this it is to be remembered that, when
J am made to ſuffer as an example to ochers, 1

am treated myſelf with ſupercilious neglect, as
if I were totally incapable of feeling and mo-
rality. If you inflict pain upon me, you are
either juſt or unjuſt. If you be juſt, it fhould
ſeem neceſſary that there mould be ſomething
in me that makes me the fit fubject of pain,
either deſert, which is abfurd, or miſchief I may
be expected to perpetrate, or laſtly a tendency
to reformation, If any of theſe be the reaſon
why the ſuffering J undergo is juſt, then exam-
ple is out of the queſtion : it may be an incidental
conſequence of the procedure, but it can form


no part of its principle. It muſt furely be a vety


inartificial and injudicious ſcheme for guiding
the ſentiments of mankind ; to fix upon an in-
dividual as a ſubject of torture or death, reſpect
ing whom this treatment has no direct fitneſs,
merely that we may bid others look on, and de.
rive inſtruction from his miſery. This argument
will derive additional force from the ee
of the following chapter.


C HA P.


288 1


CHN es &


%


OF THE APPLICATION OF COERCION.


Delinquency and coercion incommenſurable exter-
nal action no proper ſubject of criminal animad-
verſion—how far capable of proof. —Iniquity of
this flandard in a moral—and in a political
view. —Propriety of a retribution to be mea-

ſured by the intention of the offender conſidered,
Such a project would overturn criminal la
would ' aboliſh coercion. —Inſcrutability, 1. Of
motives=—doubtfulneſs of hiflory—declarations of
ſufferers.—2. Of the future conduct of the f
fenders—uncertainty of evidence—either of the
faftts—or the intention. Diſadvantages of the
defendant in a criminal ſuit. | *


_— . 1 a - — — - _ — — — — — -
1 * bs % : *
F. r ˙ ES oY
—_—_ - 4 4


a * +
TE
M


A FARTHER conſideration, calculated to
ſhow, not only the abſurdity of coercion for ex-
ample, but the iniquity of coercion in general, is,
that delinquency and coercion are in all caſes in-
commenſurable. No ſtandard of delinquency ever
has been or ever can be diſcovered. No two
crimes were ever alike; and therefore the re-
ducing them explicitly or implicitly to general
claſſes, which the very idea of example implies,
is abſurd. Nor is it leſs abſurd to attempt to pro-
portion the degree of ſuffering to the degree of
delinquency, when the latter can never be diſ-
covered. Let us endeavour to clear in the moſt ſa-
tisfactory manner the truth of theſe propoſitions.


Man,


*


256 OF THE APPLICATION


Man, like every other machine, the operations
of which can be made the object of our ſenſes,
may be ſaid, relatively, not abſolutely ſpeaking,
to conſiſt of two parts, the external and the
internal. The form which his actions aſſume
is one thing; the principle from which they
flow is another. With the former it 1s poſſibſ
we ſhould be acquainted ; reſpecting the latter
there is no ſpecies of evidence that can ade-
quately inform us. Shall we proportion the
degree of ſuffering to the former or the latter,
to the injury ſuſtained by the community, or
to the quantity of ill intention conceived by the
offender ? Some philoſophers, ſenſible of the
inſcrutability of intention, have declared in fa-
vour of our attending to nothing but the injury
ſuſtained. The humane and benevolent Bec-
caria has treated this as a truth of the utmoſt im-
portance, * unfortunately neglected by the ma-
jority of political inſtitutors, and preſerved only
in the diſpaſſionate ſpeculation of philoſo-
phers “.

It ĩs true that we may in many inſtances be
tolerably informed reſpecting external actions,
and that there will at firſt ſight appear to be no
great difficulty in reducing them to general
rules. Murder, according to this ſyſtem, will
be the exertion of any ſpecies of action affea-
ing my neighbour, ſo as that the conſequences
terminate in death. The difficulties of the ma-

giſtrate


* « Qugſta & una di quelle palpabili veritd, che per una maravig-
lioſa combinazione di ciregſtanxe non ſono con deciſa ficurezza conofci-
ule, che da alcuni _ penſatori nomini d ogni nazione, e d'ogni
ſecolo.. 2 Delitti æ delle Pene.


N . 7 5 *


OF OR C ION. .


giſtrate are much abridged upon this principle,
though they are by no means annihilated. It is
well known how many ſubtle diſquiſitions, "yp
dicrous or tragical according to the temper with
which we view them, have been introduced to
determine in each particular inſtance, whether
the action were or were not the real occaſion of
the death. It never can be demonſtratively aſ-
certained. 3 — OT

But, diſmiſſing this difficulty, how complica-
ted is the iniquity of treating all inſtances alike,
in which one man has occaſioned the death of
another? Shall we aboliſh the imperfect diſtincti-
ons, which the moſt odious tyrannies have hither-
to thought themſelves compelled to admit, be-
tween chance medley, manſlaughter and malice
prepenſe ? Shall we inflict on the man who, in
endeavouring to ſave the life of a drowning fel-
low creature, overſets a boat and occaſions the
death of a ſecond, the ſame ſuffering, as on him
who from gloomy and vicious habits is incited
to the murder of his benefactor? In reality the
injury ſuſtained by the community is by no means
the ſame in theſe two caſes ; the injury ſuſtained
by the community is to be meaſured by the an-
tiſocial diſpoſitions of the offender, and, if that
were the right view of the ſubject, by the en-
couragement afforded to ſimilar diſpoſitions from
his impunity. But this leads us at once from the
external action to the unlimited conſideration.
of the intention of the actor. The iniquity of the
written laws of ſociety is of preciſely the ſame na-
ture, though not of ſo atrocious a degree, in the
confuſion they actually introduce between varied

r 8 intentions,


> _— _ 9 4 LEG
— = Z . . . 2 . —[n— —
— A troy ihe; wr ted ' 69 8 - 7 = SEn#7 — — 18181 9 E ads —
3 2 4 ry 1 . "* 1 r o * 8 £47 © Aw a = . — -
. . a : Wa = ©. G t 2 N 9 * ao r 5 * **
: . . - , eden on - >” - I *
ay CY p N 2 , * SAD > am Lode” — - * = a Ds 1
5 - — — Mts i en l Z EPR 1
if * > ths Ve
. * . ns — — F
4 = o -
7 ; a 1 — . * — nnr


— — SA =


3. by m—
— TR
- vo. Cn. — =
n *


r


— TIT
— — — = —— —
N x « *
3 9
» > <.
NEE TEN —


258 OF THE APPLICATION
intentions, as if this confuſion were unlimited.


The delinquencies recited upon a former occaſion,
of „ one man that commits murder, to remove
a troubleſome obſerver of his depraved difpoſi-
tions, who will otherwiſe eounteract and expoſe


him to the world; a ſecond, becauſe he cannot


bear the 1 ingenuous fincerity with which he is told


of his vices; a third, from his intolerable envy


of ſuperior merit; 3 fourth, becauſe he knows
that his adverſary meditates an act pregnant with


extenſive miſchief, and perceives no other mode


by which its perpetration can be prevented; a
fifth, in defence of his father's life or his daugh-
ter's chaſtity; and any of theſe, either from


momentary impulſe, or any of the infinite fhades


of deliberation ; are delinquencies all of them
unequal, and entitled to a very different cenſure
in the court of reaſon. Can a ſyſtem that levels
theſe inequalities, and confounds theſe differences,


be productive of good? That we may render


men beneficent ride each other, ſhall we
ſubvert the very nature of right and wrong? Or


is not this ſyſtem, from whatever pretences in-
troduced, calculated in the moſt powerful manner
to produce general injury? Can there be a more


flagrant injury than to inſcribe as we do in effect
upon our courts of judgment, © This is the Hall
of Juſtice, in which the principles of right and


—weong are daily and ſyſtematically ſlighted, and


offences of a thouſand different magnitudes are


_ confounded together, by the inſolent ſupineneſs
| of the legiſlator, and the unfeeling ſelfiſhneſs of


thoſe


* Book II, Chap. VI, p. 122,


OF COERCION. 256


thoſe who have engroſſed the produce of the
general labour to their fole emolument !”


But ſuppoſe, ſecondly; thit we were to take


the intention of the offender; and the future
injury to be apprehended, as the ſtandard of in-
fliction. This would no doubt be a conſiderable

improvement. This would be the true mode of
reconciling coercion and juſtice, if for reaſons
already aſſigned they were not in their own na-
ture incompatible. It is earneſtly to be defired
that this mode of adminiſtering retribution ſhould
be ſeriouſly attempted. It is to be hoped that


men will one day attempt to eſtabliſh an accurate
criterion, and not go on for ever, as they have


hitherto done, with a ſovereign contempt of
equity and reaſon, This attempt would lead by


a very obvious proceſs. to the abolition of all
_ coercion.


It would meli lead to-the abglltzon of
all criminal law. An enlightened and reaſonable
judicature would have — in order to de-
cide upon the cauſe before them, to no code but

the code of reaſon, They would feel the abſur-
dity of other men's teaching them what they
ſhould think, and pretending to underſtand the
caſe before it e hte than they who had
all the circumſtances of the caſe under their in-
ſpection. They would feel the abſurdity of
bringing every erfor to be compared with a cer-
tain number of meaſures previoully invented,
and compelling it to agree with one of them.
But we ſhall ſhortly have occafton to return to


this topic *. __
S Te
A * Chap, VIII. + pages


rr Dn he ns


. 's n — "> IE — pes * 3 W 1 .. "of
2 oe a


5


200 OF THE APPLIC ATION


The greateſt advantage that would reſult from
men's determining to govern themſelves in the
ſuffering to be inflicted by the motives of. the
offender and the future injury to be apprehended,
would conſiſt in their being taught how vain and
iniquitous it is in them to attempt to wield the
rod of retribution. Who is it that in his ſober
reaſon will pretend to aſſign the motives that in-
fluenced me in any article of my conduct, and
upon them to found a grave, perhaps a capital,
penalty againſt me? The attempt would be pre-
ſumptuous and abſurd, even though the indi-
vidual who was to judge me, had made the
longeſt obſervation of my character, and been
moſt intimately acquainted with the ſeries of my
actions. How often does a man deceive himſelf
in the motives of his conduct, and aſſign it to
one principle when it in reality proceeds from
another? Can we expect that a mere ſpectator
ſhould form a judgment ſufficiently correct, when
he who has all the ſources of information in his
hands, is nevertheleſs miſtaken ? Is it not to this
hour a diſpute among philoſophers whether I be
capable of doing good to my neighbour for his
own ſake? © To aſcertain the intention of a
man it is neceſſary to be preciſely informed of
the actual impreſſion. of the objects upon his
ſenſes, and of the previous diſpoſition of his
mind, both of which vary in different perſons,
and even in the ſame perſon at different times,
with a rapidity commenſurate to the ſuceefſion
of ideas, paſſions and circumſtances k.“ Mean-
while


* (ce Oveſta [l- ee di gerd dalla impreſſione attuale degli og-
belli, el dalla precedente diſpoſizione della mente : «ſe variano in tutti


+


*


OFT COERCION: 261


while the individuals, whoſe office it is to judge
of this inſcrutable myſtery, are poſſeſſed of no
previous knowledge, utter ſtrangers to the per-
ſon accuſed, and collecting their only lights
from the information of two or three ignorant
and prejudiced witneſſes. 2 „I re oh
What a vaſt train of actual and poſſible mo-
tives enter into the hiſtory of a man, who has
been incited to deſtroy the life of another? Can
you tell how much in theſe there was of appre-
hended juſtice and how much of inordinate ſel-
fiſhneſs? how much of ſudden paſſion, and how
much of rooted depravity ? how much of in-
tolerable provocation, and how much of ſpon-
taneous wrong ? how much of that ſudden in-
ſanity which hurries the mind into a certain
action by a ſort of incontinence of nature al-
moſt without any aſſignable motive, and how
much of incurable habit? Conſider the uncer-
tainty of hiſtory. Do we not ſtill diſpute whether
Cicero were more a vain or a virtuous man,
whether the heroes of antient Rome were im-
pelled by vain glory or diſintereſted benevolence,
whether Voltaire were the ſtain of his ſpecies,
or their moſt generous and intrepid benefactor?
Upon theſe ſubjects moderate men perpetually
quote upon us the impenetrableneſs of the hu-
man heart. Will moderate men pretend that
we have not an hundred times more evidence
upon which to found our judgment in theſe
| Scott caſes,


gli uomini e in ciaſcun uomo col a velociſſima ſucceſſione delle idee, delle
palſioni, e delle circgſtanxe. He adds, . Sarebbe dungue nece//ario
formare non ſolo un codice particolare fer ciaſcun cittadino, ma una} \
nuova legge ad ogni delitto.”?


bo 2 4.


3
*
—


= — 1 ape PRI 9 23 8
n 2 —
_ wa we i ab at


IF


- Ss As p \ l —
my — 9 _ — - -, 2 = =. 9 =
ry r — - . — - we —> = = 2
ws : >: EN NN end ey + on. SY "ASS. ria — : —
1 _ - 1 _ - = —


Sion nn © „ area... LE -

- N 8 r
— .
5 r


—
—
N 722
_ — — —
— _


U


262 5 OF THE APPLIC ATION
caſes, than in that aabioenat who wes tried laſt


week at the Old Bailey? This part of the ſub-
| ject will be put in a ftriking light, if we reco
lect the narratives that have been written by
condemned criminals. In how different a light


do they place the tranſactions that proved fatal
to them, from the conſtruction that was put

upon them by their judges? And yet theſe nar- |

ratives were written under the moſt awful cir-


cumſtances, and many of them without the
leaſt hope of mitigating their fate, and with
marks of the deepeſt ſincerity. Who will ſay
that the judge with his lender pittance of infor.


mation was more competent to decide upon the
motives, than the priſoner after the ſevereſt ſeru-
tiny of his own mind? How few are the trials
which an humane and a juſt 'man can read,
terminating in a verdict of guilty, without feel
ing an uncontrolable repugnance againſt the ver-
diet? If there be any fight more humiliating
than all others, it is that of a miſerable victim
acknowledging the juſtice of a ſentence, againſt
which every enlightened reaſoner exclaims wath
horror.

But this is not all. The motive, when hs.
tained, is only a ſubordinate part of the queſ-
tion. The point upon which only ſociety can
equitably animadvert, if it had any juriſdiction in


the caſe, is a point, if poſſible, ſtil more inſcrut-


able hiker that of which we have been treating.
A legal inquiſition 1 into the minds of men, con-
ſidered by itſelf, all rational enquiries have
agreed to condemn. What we want to afcer-
Jai To: or WE intention of the offender, but


the


.
OF COERCION. 2


| the chance. of his offending again. E Puts

poſe we reaſonably enquire firſt into his. intention,
But, when, we have found this, our taſk is but
begun. This is one of our materials, to enable

us to calculate the probability of his repeating
his offence, or being imitated by others,. Wag
this an habitual ſtate of his mind, or was it a
criſis in his hiſtory likely to. remain, an, 5

What effect has experience produced on him, or
what likelihood is there that the uneaſineſs and
ſuffering that attend the perpetration of eminent
wrong may have worked a ſalutary change in his


mind ? Will he hereafter. be placed in circum i


ſtances that ſhall propel him to = ſame enormi-
ty? Precaution is in the nature of things a ſtep
in the higheſt degree precarious. Precaution
that conſiſts in minder injury on another, will
at all times be odious to an equitable mind.
Meanwhile be it obſerved, that all which. has
been laid upon the e of crime, tends
to aggravate the injuſtice of coercion for the
ſake. of example. Since the crime upon which
I animadvert in one man can geyer be t
ſame as the crime of another, it is as if L ſhould
award à grievous penalty againſt perſons with
one eye, to prevent any man in future from Ps
ting out his eyes by deſi 5 Iz
One more —— lan ag to prove. the k
abſurdity of the attempt to, proportion delin-
gener and ſuffering to each other may be de-
rived from the — of evidence. The
veracity of witneſſes will be to an impartial
{peQptor 3 nbject gf continual doubt. Their
competence,


265 OF THE APPLICATION


competence, ſo far as relates to juſt obſervation
and accuracy of underſtanding, will be ftill
more doubtful. + Abſolute impartiality it would
be abſurd to expect from them. How much
will every word and every action come diſtorted
by the medium through which it is tranſmitted ?
The guilt of a man, to ſpeak in the phraſeology
of law, may be proved either by direct or cir-
cumſtantial evidence. I am found near to the
| body of a man newly murdered. I come out
of his apartment with a bloody knife in my
hand or with blood upon my clothes. If, un-
der theſe circumſtances and unexpeCtedly charged
with murder, I falter in my ſpeech or betray
mips in my countenance, this is an addi-
tonal proof. Who does not know that there is
not a man in England, however blameleſs a life
he may lead, who is ſecure that he ſhall not end
it at the gallows ! ? This is one of the moſt ob-
* vious and univerſal bleſſings that civil govern-
ment has to beſtow. -- In what is called direct
evidence, it is neceſſary to identify the perſon
of the offender- ' How many inſtances are there
upon record of perſons condemned upon this
evidence, who after their death have been proved
entirely innocent? Sir Walter Raleigh, when a
riſoner in the Tower, heard ſome high words
accompanied with blows under his window. He
enquired of ſeveral eye witneſſes who entered
His: apartment in ſucceſſion, into the nature of
the tranſaction. But the ſtory they told varied
in ſuch material circumſtances, that he could form
4 no juſt idea of what had been done. He ap-
N : — this to prove the vanity of hiſtory. The
ö MEE. parallel


OF COERCION. 265


parallel would have been more det if he had
applied it to criminal ſuits, _

But ſuppoſing the external action, the firſ
part of the queſtion to be aſcertained, we have
next to diſcover through the ſame Sarhled and
confuſed medium the intention. How few men
ſhould I chooſe to entruſt with the drawing up
a narrative of ſome delicate and intereſting tran{-
action of my life? How few, though, corporally
ſpeaking, they were witneſſes of what was done,
would juſtly deſcribe my motives, and properly
report and interpret my words? And yet in an
affair, that involves my life, my fame and my
future uſefulneſs, I am obliged to truſt to _
vulgar and caſual obſerver. | |

A man properly confident in the force of truth,
would conſider a public libel upon his character
as a trivial misfortune. But a criminal trial in a
court of juſtice is inexpreſſibly different. Few
men, thus circumſtanced, can retain the neceſſary
preſence of mind and freedom from embarraſſ-
ment. But, if they do, it is with a cold and
unwilling ear that their tale is heard. If the
crime charged againſt them be atrocious, they
are half condemned in the paſſions of mankind,
before their cauſe is brought to a trial. All that
is intereſting to them is decided amidſt the firſt
burſt of indignation ; and it is well if their tory
be imparrially eſtimated, ten years after their body
has mouldered in the grave. Why, if a conſi-
derable time elapſe between the trial and the exe-
cution, do we find the ſeverity of the public
changed into compaſſion ? For the ſame reaſon


that a maſter, if he do not beat his ſlave in the
moment


266 ox THE APIEICATIOx, e.


moment of reſentment, often feels a repugnance
to the beating him at all. Not ſo much, as is
commonly ſuppoſed, from forgetfulneſs of the of-
fence, as that the ſentiments of reaſon have time
to recur, and he feels in a confuſed and indefi-
nite manner the injuſtice of coercion, Thus every
eonſideration tends to ſhaw, that a man tried
for a crime is a poor deſerted individual with the

whale force of the community conſpiring his
ruin. The culprit that eſcapes, however conſei-
ous of innocence, lifts up his hands with aſto-
niſhment, and can ſcarcely believe his ſenſes,
= \ having fuch mighty odds againſt him. It is
Hh ' ealy for a man who deſires to ſhake off an im-
putation under which he labours, to talk of be-
ing put on his trial; but no man ever ſerioufly
wiſhed for this ordeal, who knew what a trial


CHAP.


1 267 1 -


GO EEE


oF COERCION CONSIDERED AS A TEMPORARY
EXPEDIENT.


Arguments in its ſavour.— Anſiver.—it cannat fit
men for a better order of ſociety,—T he trne reme-
dy to private injuſtice dgſcribed —is adapted in
immediate practice. Duty of the community in

tbit reſbecti.— Duiy of indiuidualu.—Illuſtrati
from the caſe of ar individual defence,,—

A plication, —Diſadvantages of anarchy—-want

72 rity—of progreſſive enquiry.Correſpon-

dent diſadvantages dgſpotiſin.— Anarchy a-
wwakens, dgſpotiſm depreſſes the mind. Hina
reſult of anarchy——how determined,—-Snppoſed
. of coercion in a temporary vie. Re-
formation—example—reſtiraint.—Goncluſion.


. *
EH 5 72 i


8


PF * * 8
WY * 2 os
Lax 1


n n .
1 — FE PE, —— 99
. ˙ A


n
= 3

y 7 _ 7 1
1 "Fes n


* ”
nn e iemanes.;o C JI ANGT 5 £9
CAE 5 b F a
1 n u..


T H Us much for the general merits of coercion
conſidered as an inſtrument to be applied in t
government of men. It is time that we ſhould
enquire into the arguments by which it may be
apologiſed as a temporary expedient. No intro-
duction ſeemed more proper to this enquiry than
ſuch a review of the ſubject upon a comprehen-
five ſcale ; that the reader might be inſpired with
a ſuitable repugnance againſt ſo pernicious a
ſyſtem, and prepared firmly to reſiſt its admiſhon


in


268 OF COERCION CONSIDERED


in all caſes where its neceſſity cannot be clearly


demonſtrated.

The arguments in favour of coercion as a tem-
porary expedient are obvious. It may be alledged
that, however ſuitable an entire immunity in
this reſpect may be to the nature of mind abſo-
lutely conſidered, it is impracticable with regard
to men as we now find them. The human ſpecies
is at preſent infected with a thouſand vices, the
offspring of eſtabliſhed injuſtice. They are full
of factitious appetites and perverſe habits : head-
ſtrong in evil, inveterate in ſelfiſhneſs, without
ſympathy and forbearancefor thewelfareof others.
In time they may become accommodated to the
leſſons of reaſon; but at preſent they would be
found deaf to her mandates, and yr to com-
mit every ſpecies of injuſtice.”

One of the remarks that moſt irreſiſtibly ſug-
geſt themſelves upon this ſtarement is, that co-
ercion has no proper tendency to prepare men for
a ſtate in which coercion ſhall ceaſe. It is abſurd
to expect that force ſhould begin to do that which
it is the office of truth to finiſh, ſhould fit men


by ſeverity and violence to enter with more fa-


vourable auſpices into the ſchools of reaſon.
But, to-omit this groſs miſrepreſentation in be-
half of the ſuppoſed utility of coercion, it is of
importance in the firſt place to obſerve that there
is a complete and unanſwerable remedy to thoſe
evils the cure of which has hitherto been ſought
in coercion, that is within the reach of eve
community whenever they ſhall be perſuaded to
adopt it. There is a ſtate of ſociety, the out-


|


line


AS A TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT. 269


line of which has been already ſketched *, that
by the mere ſimplicity of its ſtructure would infal-
libly lead to the extermination of offence: a ſtate,
in which temptation. would be almoſt unknown,
truth brought down to the level of all apprehen-
ſions, and vice ſufficiently checked by the general
diſcountenance and ſober condemnation of eve
ſpectator. Such are the conſequences that would
neceſſarily ſpring from an abolition of craft and


myſtery of governing; while on the other hand


the innumerable murders that are daily com-
mitted under the ſanction of legal forms, are
ſolely to be aſcribed to the pernicious notion of
an extenſive territory ; to the dreams of glory,
empire and national greatneſs, which have hi-
therto proved the bane of the human ſpecies
without producing ſolid benefit and happineſs to
a ſingle individual. | 1
Another obſervation which this conſideration
immediately ſuggeſts, is, that it is not, as the
objection ſuppoſed, by any means neceſſary,
that mankind ſhould paſs through a ſtate of puri-
fication, and be freed. from the vicious propen-
ſities which ill conſtituted governments have
implanted, before they can be diſmiſſed from the
coercion to which they are at preſent ſubjected.
In that caſe their ſtate would indeed be hopeleſs, if
it were neceſſary that the cure ſhould be effected,
before we were at liberty to diſcard thoſe practices
to which the diſeaſe owes its moſt alarming ſymp-
toms. But it is the characteriſtic of a well formed
ſociety, not only to maintain in its members
thoſe virtues with which they are already 1
ut


* Book V, Chap. XXII, p. 115-


4


8 8 1 —_ rr
FFP NR EPI IP on; 39
Po Es > "LOST
—


7
Sd" 7 *
8 2


= os 4
_ —2 - 2 7 - —
8 > by > of of + bg L by * I o 2
ul — W — . — 1 8 bc.
Aa + - - 'V thi


- —
Pp \ a — 4 42
0 4 2 „ hd e AY 2 "4-0 255 2 Wy 8 F ” x - EAN
et 0 - 2 RS mY F — 4 33 ie 5 * ,
. GS; BD bs ˖ ˙—— OM, ARTS. LARS 5 y O macs BR
. 6 C * 2 2 24 e Us OR on — . - 4
* 4" tad gh 874 RI 3 . Sz, TL £ —— — —
x 5 ” * * 240 — | 1 * 0 — — * 5 -
IF 49.7 4 1 . 5 L 8 _ SIT * PEEL * Foul — —
W F "1 g r , bi. AY _ —_ r 2 * 4 = : 3 *
— — —
— w - - * - — — — a — —
** 1 N 3 6 _— Y


_ OS"


_ _ =_ » "TY, — E 2
3 * iS 2 o


»— #4 ——
32334 ton. Phe


r
2 - 1 —
TY . Yo va 4 "> 43 58
* 4 * ag in *
* 15 abs. Aro 3
e 3 .


XJ * _
£7 IS Ba . PE,
e So

=
2
. 2 PRES. **


7 » _ __ 9
— 2 I Te


3

K

irrer er
* 2 * 7


n
* * .
— IT e .

. 3 .

. tt 8 8

8 « £4 [Or

1 = 2 ER.
eo ce
DI a IO OI IF, «

F;* 2.297, ns

FI" ,


SJ
I:
"MW. R
5 8 TH —_—
* r 2 *
2 oo W 4 F o


e
or of 4 Bow


a
—
th
- =
2


2 . 1 a
.
r e
E


ay --
* *
N


b
. L
1. *


vie © 00%, adry >
ho ney EA


—
— Ar
* 1


SOT — OL
e
W „ Te)

* ny


20 OP COERCION CONSIDERED
but to extirpate their errors, and render them


benevolent and juft to each other. It frees us


from the influence of thoſe phantoms which
before mifled us, ſhows us our true advantage
as confiſting in independence and integrity, and
binds us by the general conſent of our fellow
citizens to the dictates of reaſon, more ſtrongly
than with fetters of iron. It is not to the ſound
of intelleQual health that the remedy ſo urgently
addreſſes itſelf, as to thoſe who are infected with
diſeaſes of the mind. The ill propenſities of
mankind no otherwiſe tend to poſtpone the abo-
tion of coercion, than as they prevent them from
perceiving the advantages of political ſimplicity,
The moment in which they can be perſuaded to a-
doptany rational plan for this abolition, is the mo-
ment in which the abolition ought to be effected,


/ A farther conſequence that may be deduced
from the principles that have here been delivered,


is that coercion of a municipal kind can in no cafe
be the duty of the community. The community
is always competent to change its inſtitutions, and
thas to extirpate offence in a way infinitely more

rational and juſt than that of coercion. If in this


Tenſe coercion has been deemed neceſſary as a
temporary expedient, the opinion admits of


fatisfactory refatation. Coercion can at no time,
either permanently or proviſionally, make part
of any political ſyſtem that is built upon the


principles of reaſon.


But, though in this ſenſe coercion cannot be
admitted ſo much as a temporary expedient,
there is another ſenſe in which it muſt be ſo
admitted, Coercion exerciſed in the name of


the


b


„ #


AS A TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT. 271


the ſtate upon its reſpective members cannot be
the duty of the community; but coercion may
be the duty of individuals within the commu-
nity. The duty of individuals is, in the firſt
place, to diſplay with all poſlible perſpicuity the
advantages of an improved ſtate of fociety, and
to be indefatigable in detecting the imperfecti-
ons of the conſtitution under which they live.
But, in the ſecond place, it behoves them to re-
collect, that their efforts cannot be expected to
meet with inſtant ſucceſs, that the progreſs of
knowledge has in all caſes been gradual, and
that their obligation to promote the welfare of
ſociety during the intermediate period is not
leſs real, than their obligation to promote its
future and permanent advantage. In reality
the future advantage cannot be effectually pro-
cured, if we be inattentive to the preſent ſe-
curity. But, as long as nations ſhall be ſo far
miſtaken as to endure a complex government
and an extenſive territory, coercion will be in-
diſpenſibly neceſſary to general ſecurity. It is
therefore the duty of individuals to take an
active ſhare upon ocraſion, in ſo much coer-
cion, and in ſuch parts of the exiſting ſyſtem,
as ſhall be ſufficient to prevent the inroad of
univerſal violence and tumult. It is unworthy
of a rational enquirer to ſay, theſe things are
neceſſary, but I am not obliged to take my ſhare
in them.“ If they be neceſſary, they are ne-
ceffary for the general good; of conſequence
are virtuous, and what no juſt man will refuſe
to perform. N |


The


}
|
|
|
4
:
F
:
1
ö
|
7
|
q
5


272 OF COERCION CONSIDERED
The duty of individuals is in this reſpe&


fimilar to the duty of independent communi-
ties upon the ſubject of war. It is well known
what has been the prevailing policy of princes
under this head. Princes, eſpecially the moſt


active and enterpriſing among them, are ſeized
with an inextinguiſhable rage for augmenting


their dominions. The moſt innocent and in-
offenſive conduct on the part of their neigh-


bours is an inſufficient ſecurity againſt their


ambition. They indeed ſeek to diſguiſe their
violence under plauſible pretences ; but it is
well known that, where no ſuch pretences oc-
cur, they are not on that account diſpoſed to
drop their purſuit. Let us ſuppoſe then a land
of freemen invaded by one of theſe deſpots.
What conduct does it behove them to adopt?
We are not yet wiſe enough to make the {word
drop out. of the hands of our oppreſlors by


the mere force of reaſon. Were we reſolved,


like quakers, neither to oppoſe nor obey them,
much bloodſhed might perhaps be avoided : but


a more laſting evil would reſult. They would


fix garriſons in our country, and torment us


with perpetual injuſtice. - Suppoſing even it
were granted that, if the invaded nation ſhould
conduct itſelf with unalterable conſtancy upon
the principles of reaſon, . the invaders would
become tired of their fruitleſs uſurpation, it


would prove but little. At preſent we have to


do, not with nations of philoſophers, but with
nations of men whoſe virtues are alloyed with
weakneis, fluctuation and inconſtancy. At


| Preſent it is our duty to conſult reſpecting the


procedure


A8 4 TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT. 253


procedure which to ſuch nations would be at-
tended with the moſt, favourable reſult. It is
therefore proper that we ſhould chooſe the leaſt
calamitous mode of obliging the enemy ſpeedily
to withdraw himſelf from our territories. C

The caſe of individual defence is of the ſame
nature. It does not appear that any advantage
can reſult from my forbearance, adequate to the
diſadvantages of my ſuffering my own life or
that of another, A peculiarly valuable member
of the community as it may happen, to become
a prey to the firſt ruffian who inclines to deſtro
it. Forbearance in this caſe will be the con-
duct of a ſingular individual, and its effect may
very probably be trifling. Hence it appears,
that I ought to arreſt the villain in the execu-
tion of his deſigns, though: at the hs of a
certain degree of coercion. /

The caſe of an offender, wh appears to be
hardened in guilt, and to trade in the violation
of ſocial ſecurity, is clearly parallel to theſe.
I ought to take up arms againſt the deſpot by
whom my country is invaded, becauſe my ca-
pacity does not enable me by arguments to
prevail on him to deſiſt, and becauſe my coun-
trymen will not preſerve their intellectual inde-
pendence in the midſt of oppreſſion. For the
ſame reaſon I ought to take up arms againſt the
domeſtic ſpoiler, becauſe J am unable either to
perſuade him to deſiſt, or the community to
adopt a juſt political inſtitution, by means of
which ſecurity might be maintained conſiſtently
with the abolition of coercion.


You. It. - 1 To


2:4 or COFRCION CONSIDERED


To underſtand the full exterit of this duty
it is incumbent upon us to remark that an-
archy as it is uſually underſtood, and a well
conceived form of ſociety without government,
are exceedingly different from each other. If
the government of Great Britain were diffolved
to-morrow, unleſs that diſſolution were the
reſult of conſiſtent and digeſted views of politi-
cal juſtice previouſly diſſeminated among the
inhabitants, it would be very far from leading
to the abolition of violence. Individuals, freed
from the terrors by which they had been ac-
cuſtomed to be reſtrained, and not yet placed
under the happier and more rational reſtraint
of public inſpection, or convinced of the wiſ-


dom of reciprocal forbearance, would break out


into acts of injuſtice, while other individuals,
who defired only that this irregularity ſhould
ceaſe, would find themſelves obliged to aſſociate
for its forcible ſuppreſſion. We ſhould have all
the evils attached to a regular government, at
the ſame time- that we were deprived of that
tranquillity and leifure which are its only advan-
tages. :
It may not be uſeleſs in this place to conſider
more. accurately than we have hitherto done the
evils of anarchy. Such a review will afford us
a criterion by which to diſcern, as well the com-
parative value of different inftitutions, as the
preciſe degree of coercion which muſt be em-
ployed for the excluſion of univerſal violence
and tumult.

Anarchy in its own nature is an evil of ſhort
duration. The moſt horrible are the miſchiefs
= it


AS A TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT. 4%


it inflicts, the more does it haſten to a cloſe;
But it is nevertheleſs neceſſary: that we ſhould
conſider both what is the quantity of miſchief


it produces in a given period, and what is the


ſcene in which it promiſes to cloſe.” The firſt
victim that is ſacrificed at its ſhrine is perſonal
ſecurity. Every man who has a ſecret foe;
ought to dread the dagger of that foe. There
is no doubt that in the worſt anarchy multitudes
of men will fleep in happy obſcurity. But woe
to him who by whatever means [excites the
envy, the jealouſy or the ſuſpicion of his neigh-
bour ! Unbridled ferocity inſtantly marks him
for its prey. This is indeed the principal evil
of ſuch a ſtate, that the wiſeſt, the brighteſt,
the moſt generous and bold will often be moft
expoſed to an immature fate. In ſuch a ftate
we muſt bid farewel to the patient lucubrations
of the philoſopher and the labour of the mid-
night oil, All is here, like the ſociety in which


it exiſts, impatient - and headlong. Mind will


frequently burſt forth, but its appearance will


be like the corruſcations of the meteor, not like


the mild illumination of the ſun. Men, who
ſtart forth into ſudden energy, will reſemble in
temper the ſtate that brought them to this un-
looked for greatneſs. They will be rigorous,
unfeeling and fierce; and their ungoverned
paſſions will often not ſtop at equality, but in-
cite them to graſp at power. OTIS:


With all theſe evils, we muſt not haſtily con-


clude, that the miſchiefs of anarchy are worſe
than thoſe which governinent is qualified tg
produce. With reſpect to perſonal ſecurity

T 2 anarchy


c
—— — — —¼⸗— * ä r
5 1 2 "= * 2 ** : * is
- 8 — 2 . - 7 "TL. 7
1 r I w 2 * * 7 2 my - +
f — — Me — 22 A 2 ee 7 — KANE U -
2 F e SS . 3 8 — . * * * ps 3 —
* IA. PRE CORE 4 hs b 4
Lab LR IRS Sus
> Fe - „


——— — 4


276 _ OF COERCION CONSIDERED


anarchy is certainly not worſe than deſpotiſm,


with this difference that deſpotiſm 1s as perennial


as anarchy is tranſitory. Deſpotiſm, as it exiſted
under the Roman emperors, marked out wealth
for its victim, and the guilt of being rich never
failed to convict the accuſed of every other crime.

This deſpotiſm continued for centuries. Deſpot-

iſm, as it has exiſted in modern Europe, has
been ever full of jealouſy and intrigue, a tool
to the rage of courtiers and the reſentment of
women. He that dared utter a word againſt
the tyrant, or endeavour to inſtruct his country-

men in their intereſts, was never ſecure that the
next moment would not conduct him to a dun-
geon. Here deſpotiſm wreaked her vengeance
at leiſure, and forty years of miſery and ſolitude
were ſometimes inſufficient to ſatiate her fury.
Nor was this all. An uſurpation that defied all
the rules of juſtice, was obliged to purchaſe its
own ſafety by aſſiſting tyranny through all its
ſubordinate ranks. Hence the rights of nobility,


of feudal vaſſalage, of primogeniture, of fines
and inheritance. When the philoſophy of law


mall be properly underſtood, the true key to its
ſpirit and its hiſtory will be found, not, as fome
men have fondly imagined, in a defire to ſecure
the. happineſs of - mankind, but in the venal


compact by which ſuperior tyrants have pur-


chaſed the countenance and alliance of the in-
ferior.

There is one point remaining in which
anarchy and deſpotiſm are ſtrongly cofitraſted
with each other. Anarchy awakens mind, dif-
fuſes energy and enterprize through the commu-

nity,


—


AS A TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT. 275


nity, though it does not effect this in the beſt
manner, as its fruits, forced into ripeneſs, muſt
not expect to have the vigorous ſtamina of true
excellence. But in deſpotiſm mind is trampled
into an equality of the moſt odious ſort. Eve


thing that promiſes greatneſs is deſtined to fall
under the exterminating hand of ſuſpicion and
envy. In deſpotiſm there is no encouragement


to excellence. Mind delights to expatiate in a
field where every ſpecies of eminence is within
its reach. A ſcheme of policy, under which all
men are fixed in claſles or levelled with the duſt,
affords it no encouragement to enter on its career,
The inhabitants of ſuch countries are but a more
vicious ſpecies of brutes. Oppreſſion ſtimulates
them to miſchief and piracy, and ſuperior force


of mind often diſplays itſelf only in cou


treachery or more daring injuſtice.
One of the moſt intereſting queſtions in rela-


tion to anarchy is that of the manner in which


it may be expected to terminate. The poſſi-
bilities as to this termination are as wide as the
various ſchemes of ſociety which the human
imagination can conceive. Anarchy may and
has terminated in deſpotiſm; and in that caſe


the introduction of anarchy will only ſerve to
afflict us with variety of evils. It may lead to


a modification of deſpotiſm, a milder and more
equitable government than that which has gone
before. And it does not ſeem impoſſible that it


ſhould lead to the beſt form of human ſociety,
that the moſt penetrating philoſopher is able to
conceive. Nay, it has ſomething in it that


ſuggeſts the „ a diftortes and tremendous
| likeneſs,


a 7 my — . — - ** q 1 d ** 's
= # "op - « * * — 7 2 SITE
s _ 5 3 «ws os N x w 2 94 2 2 r . A Go
eme 3 22 r A 8 r nnn =>
3 * 3 5 3 8 T's ISS CS if 8 PE 2 : XY ox 144 0.
— * * gy | — ; he 5 m3 I 15 -
F : 7 5 > p * - < La
3 2 , * » Ly — +ﬆ& 5 —
5 py . : 1 &c 4


** *
1


2e or COERCION CONSIDERED


| likeneſs, of true liberty. Anarchy has com-
monly been generated by the hatred of op-
preſſion. It is accompanied with a ſpirit of
independence. It diſengages men from preju-
dice and implicit faith, and in a certain degree
incites them to an impartial ſcrutiny into the
© reaſon of their actions.

, The ſcene in which anarchy ſhall terminate
principally depends upon the ftate of mind by
which it has been preceded. All mankind were

in a ſtate of anarchy, that is, without govern-
ment, previouſly to their being in a ſtate of
policy. It would not be difficult to find in the
hiſtory of almoſt every country a period of
anarchy. The people of England were in a
fate of anarchy immediately before the Reſtora-
tion. The Roman people were in a ſtate of
anarchy at the moment of their ſeceſſion to the
Sacred Mountain. Hence it follows that anarchy
is neither ſo good nor ſo ill a thing in relation
to its conſequences, as it has ſometimes been
repreſented.

It is not reaſonable to expect that a ſhort pe-
riod of anarchy ſhould do the work of a long
period of inveſtigation and philoſophy. When
we ſay, that it diſengages men from prejudice
and implicit faith, this muſt be underſtood with
much allowance. It tends to looſen the hold of
theſe vermin upon the mind, but it does not in-
ſtantly convert ordinary men into philoſophers.
Some prejudices, that were never fully incorpo-
rated with the intellectual habit, it deftroys ; but
other prejudices it arms with fury, and converts
into inſtruments of *


Little


AS A TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT, 279


Little good can be expected from any foeries.


*


of anarchy that ſhould ſubſiſt for inſtance among
American ſavages. In order to anarchy being


rendered a ſeed plot of future juſtice, reflexion


and enquiry mult have gone. before, the regions
of philoſophy muſt have been penetrated, and
political truth have opened her ſchool to man-
kind. It is for this reaſon that the revolutions
of the preſent age (for every. total revolution is
a ſpecies of anarchy) promiſe much ” happier
effects than the revolutions of any former period.
For the ſame reaſon the more anarchy can be
held at bay, the more fortunate will it be for
mankind. Falſhood may gain by precipitating
the criſis ; but a genuine and enlightened phi-
lanthropy will wait with unaltered patience for
the harveſt of inſtruction. The arrival of that
harveſt may be flow, but it is infallible. If
vigilance and wiſdom be ſucceſsful in their pre-
ſent oppoſition to anarchy, every benefit will be
ultimately obtained, untarniſhed with violence,
and unſtained with blood. | Nh
Theſe obſervations are calculated to lead us
to an accurate eſtimate of the miſchiefs of
anarchy, and prove that there are forms of
coercion and government more injurious in their
tendency than the abſence of organiſation itlelt.


government which deſerve in ordinary cales to
be preferred to anarchy. Now it is incontro-
vertibly clear that, where one of two evils, is
inevitable, the wiſe and juſt man will choote
the leaſt. Of conſequence the wiſe. and juſt
man, being unable as yet to introduce the ET.


They alſo prove that there are other forms of


1
1
8 *
4
K
4
F
»!
1
3
4


n
: — - wy 2 2 n 1 * * *,
* n — — — ———


Tx
—


230 OF COERCION CONSIDERED +


of ſociety which his . underſtanding approves,
will contribute to the ſupport of ſo much coer-
cion, as is neceſſary to exclude what is 08
anarchy. |

If then conflraint « as the antagoniſt of con-
ſtraint muſt in certain caſes and under tem-
porary circumſtances be admitted, it is an in-

tereſting enquiry to aſcertain which of the three
ends of coercion already enumerated muſt be
propoſed by the individuals by whom coercion
is employed. And here it will be ſufficient very
briefly to recollect the reaſonings that have been
ſtated under each of theſe heads,

It cannot be reformation, To reform a man
is to change the ſentiments of his mind. Sen-
timents may be changed either for the better or
the worſe. They can only be changed by the
operation. of falſhood or the operation of truth.
Puniſhment we have already found, at leaſt ſo

far as relates to the individual, is injuſtice. The
infliction of ftripes upon my body can throw
no new light upon the queſtion between us. I
can perceive in them nothing but your paſ-
ſion, your ignorance and your miſtake. If you
have any new light to offer, any cogent argu-
ments to introduce; they will not fail, if ade-
quately preſented, to produce their effect. If
you be e informed, ſtripes will not ſup-
ply the deficiency of your arguments. What-
ever be the extent or narrowneſs of your wif-
dom, it is the only inſtrument by which you
can hope to add to mine. You cannot give
that which you do not poſſeſs. When all is
done, I have nothing but the truths you told me


by


AS A TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT. 281


by which to derive light to my underſtand-
ing. The violence with which the commu-
nication of them was accompanied, may pre-
poſſeſs me againſt giving them an impartial
hearing, but cannot, and certainly ought not,
to make their evidence appear greater than
your ſtatement was able to make it.— Theſe
arguments are concluſive againſt coercion as an
inſtrument of private or individual education.
But conſidering the ſubject in a political view
it may be faid, that, however ſtrong may be
the ideas I am able to communicate to a man
in order to his reformation, he may be reſtleſs
and impatient of expoſtulation, and of con-
ſequence it may be neceſſary to retain him by
force, till I can properly have inſtilled theſe ideas
into his mind.” It muſt be remembered that the
idea here 1s not that of precaution to prevent
the miſchiefs he might perpetrate in the mean
time, for that belongs to another of the three
ends of coercion, that of reſtraint. But, ſepa-
rately from this idea, the argument is peculiarly
weak. If the truths I have to communicate be
of an energetic and impreſſive nature, if they
ſtand forward perſpicuous and diſtin& in my
own mind, it will be ſtrange if they do not at
the outſet excite curioſity and attention in him
to whom they are addreſſed. It is my duty to
chooſe a proper ſeaſon at which to communicate
them, and not to betray the cauſe of truth by an
ill timed impatience. This prudence I ſhould
infallibly exerciſe, if my object were to obtain
ſomething intereſting to myſelf ; why ſhould 1
be leſs quick ſighted when I plead the cauſe of
| | | juſtice


282 OF COERCION CONSIDERED


juſtice and eternal reaſon ? It is a miſerable way
of preparing a man for conviction, to compel
him by violence to hear an expoſtulation which
he is eager to avoid. Theſe arguments prove,
not that we ſhould loie light of reformation, if
coercion for any other reaſon appear to be ne-
ceſſary; but that reformation cannot reaſonably
be made the object of coercion.
Coercion for the ſake of example is a theory
that can never be juſtly maintained. The coer-
cion propoſed to be employed, confideged abſo-
tutely, is either right or wrong. If it be right,
it ſhould be employed for its own intrinſic re-
commendations, If it be wrong, what fort of
example does it diſplay? To do a thing for the
lake of example, is in other words to do a thing
to-day, in order to prove that I will do a ſimilar
thing to-morrow. This muſt always be a ſub-
crdinate conſideration. No argument has been
fo groſsly abuſed as this of example. We found
it under the ſubje& of war * employed to prove
the propriety of my doing a thing otherwiſe
wrong, in order to convince the oppoſite party
that I ſhauld, when occalion offered, do ſome-
thing elſe that was right. He will diſplay the
beſt example, who carefully ſtudies the princi-
ples of juſtice, and aſſiduouſſy practiſes them.
A better effect will be produced in human ſocicty
by my conſcientious adherence to them, than by
my anxiety to create a ſpecific expeQation re-
ſpecting my future conduct. This argument will
be ſtill farther inforced, if we recollect what has
already been ſaid reſpecting the ine chauſtible


0 5 _ differences
* Book V, Chap. XVI. p. 71.


As A TEMPORARY EXPEDIENT. 283
Hflerences of different caſes,” and the impoſſibi-


lity of reducing them to general rule.


The third object of coercion according to the
enumeration already made is reſtraint. If coer-
cion be in any caſe to be admitted, this is the
only object it can reaſonably propoſe to itſelf.
The ſerious objections to which even in this
point of view it is liable have been ſtated in
another ſtage of the enquiry *: the amount of
the neceſſity tending to ſuperſede theſe objections
has alſo been conlidered, 9

The ſubject of this chapter is of greater im-


portance, in proportion to the length of time


that may poſhbly elapſe, before any conſiderable
part of mankind ſhall be perſuaded to exchange
the preſent complexity of political inſtitution for
a mode which ſhall ſuperſede the neceſſity of


coercion. It is highly unworthy of the cauſe


of truth to ſuppoſe, that during this interval 1
have no active duties to perform, that I am not
obliged to co-operate for the preſent welfare of
the community, as well as for its future regene-
ration. The temporary obligation that ariſes
out of this circumſtance exactly correſponds


with what was formerly delivered on the ſubject


of duty. Duty is the beſt poſſible application
of a given power to the promotion of the general
good TJ. But my power depends upon the diſ-
poſition of the men by whom I am ſurrounded.
If I. were inliſted in an army of cowards, it
might be my duty to retreat, though abſolutely
conſidered it ſhould have been the duty of the

| army


—


* Chap. III. + Book IV, Chap. VI, p. 285, 6.


284 SCALE Or COERCION.


army to come to blows. Under every poſſible
circumſtance it is my duty to advance the general

good by the beſt means which the circumſtances
under which I am placed will admit.


„
SCALE OF COERCION.


Its ſphere de ſeribed- — 1. ſeveral claſſes.—Death
with torture.—Death abſolutely. —Origin of this
 policy—in the corruptneſs of political inflitu- |
tions—in the inbumanity of the inſtitutors.—
Corporal puniſhment, —lts abſurdity—tts atro-
ciouſneſs. — Privation of freedom. — Duty of
reforming our neighbour an inferior conſideration
in this caſe. —lts place defined. — Modes of re-
eee impriſonment. — Solitary
impriſonment.— Its ſeverity.— lis moral effefs.
Slavery. — Baniſbment.— 1. Simple baniſb-
ment. — 2. Tranſportation. — 3. Coloniſation.
— This proj eat has miſcarried from unkind-
 neſs—from officiouſneſs —Its permanent evils. —
Recapitulation.


| It is time to proceed to the conſideration of
certain inferences that may be deduced from
the theory of coercion which has now been
delivered; nor can any thing be of greater im-
portance


SCALE OF COERCION. 285


portance than theſe inferences will be found to
the virtue, the happineſs and improvement of
mankind.

And, firſt, it evidently follows that coercion
is an act of painful neceſſity, inconſiſtent with
the true character and genius of mind, the
practice of which is temporarily impoſed upon
us by the corruption and ignorance that reign
among mankind. Nothing can be more abſurd
than to look to it as a ſource of improvement.
It contributes to the generation of excellenee,
juſt as much as the keeper of the courſe contri-
butes to the fleetneſs of the race. Nothing can
be more unjuſt than to have recourſe to it, but
upon the moſt undeniable emergency. Inſtead
of multiplying occaſions of coercion, and apply-
ing it as the remedy of every moral evil, the
true politician will anxiouſly confine it within
the narroweſt limits, and perpetually ſeek to
diminiſh the occaſions of its employment. There
is but one reaſon by which it can in any caſe be
apologiſed, and that is, where the ſuffering the
offender to be at large ſhall be notoriouſly in-
jurious to the public ſecurity.

Secondly, the conſideration of reſtraint as the
only juſtifiable ground of coercion, will furniſh
us with a ſimple and ſatisfactory criterion by
which to meaſure the Juſtice of the ſuffering
inflicted.

The infliction of a lingering and tormenting
death cannot be vindicated upon this hypotheſis ;
for ſuch infliction can only be dictated by ſenti-
ments of reſentment on the one hand, or by the


deſire to exhibit a terrible example on the *
0


OT


5 r e
Wb was alik 4. 2X war 4= bes *
* r ſy Al 1 1


— —
er e 4
A


— ——


——
"7


* l
1
11 '
4 **
£
-
we
N 7
#
4; y
1
4
Y
F
2
*.
92


295 SCALE OF COERCION.


To deprive an offender of his life in any man-
ner will appear to be unjuſt, ſince it will always
be ſufficiently practicable without this to prevent
him from farther offence. Privation of life,
though by no means the greateſt injury that can
be inflicted, muſt always be conſidered as a very
ferious injury; ſince it puts a perpetual cloſe
upon the proſpects of the ſufferer, as to all the
enjoyments, the virtues and the excellence of a

human being. =
In the ſtory of thoſe whom the mercileſy
laws of Europe devote to deſtruction, we ſome-
times meet with perſons who ſubſequently to
their offence have ſuceeeded to a plentiful inherit-
ance, or who for ſome other reaſon ſeem to
have had the faireft proſpects of tranquillity and
happinefs opened upon them. Their ſtory with
a little accommodation may be conſidered as the
ſtory of every offender. If there be any man
whom it may be neceſſary for the ſafety of the
whole to put under reſtraint, this circumſtance
is a powerful plea to the humanity and juſtice of
the leading members of the community in his
behalf. This is the man who moſt ftands in need
of their aſſiſtance. If they treated him with
kindneſs inſtead of ſupercilious and unfeeling
neglect, if they made him underſtand with how
much relyQtance they had been induced to em-
ploy the force of the ſociety againſt him, if they
preſented truth to his mind with calmneſs, per-
ſpicuity and benevolence, if they employed thoſe
precautions which an humane diſpoſition would
not fail to ſuggeſt, to keep from him the motives of
corruption and obſtinacy, his reformation would

| be


SCALE OF COERCION. 287


be almoſt infallible. Theſe are the proſpects to
which his wants and his misfortunes powerfully
entitle him; and it is from theſe proſpects that
the hand of the executioner cuts him off for
ever. 11:4

It is a miſtake to ſuppoſe that this treatment of
criminals tends to multiply crimes. On the con-
trary few men would enter upon a courſe of
violence with the certaingy of being obliged by a
flow and patient proceſs to amputate their errors.
It is the uncertainty of puniſhment under the
exiſting forms that multiplies crimes. Remove
this uncertainty, and it would be as reaſonable
to expect that a man would wilfully break his
leg, for the ſake of being cured by a {kilful ſur-
geon. Whatever gentleneſs the intellectual phy-
ſician may diſplay, it is not to be believed that
men can part with rooted habits of injuſtice and
vice without the ſenſation of conſiderable pain.

The true reaſons in conſequence of which
theſe forlorn and deſerted members of the com-
munity are brought to an ignominious death, are,
firſt, the peculiar iniquity of the civil inſtitutions
of that community, and, ſecondly, the ſupineneſs
and apathy of their ſuperiors. In republican and
ſimple forms of government puniſhments are
rare, the puniſhment of death is almoſt unknown.
On the other hand the more there is in any
country of inequality and oppreſſion, the more
puniſhments are multiplied. The more the in-
ſtitutions of ſociety contradict the genuine ſenti-
ments of the human mind, the more ſeverely is it
neceſſary to avenge their violation. At the fame
time the rich and titled members of the commu-

nity,


28 SCALE OF COERCION.


nity, proud of their fancied eminence, behold
with total unconcern the deſtruction of the deſti-
tute and the wretched, diſdaining to recollect
that, if there be any e a difference between
them, it is the offspring of their different circum-
ſtances, and that the man whom they now ſo
much deſpiſe, would have been as accompliſhed
and ſuſceptible as they, if they had only changed
ſituations. When we. behold a ſtring of poor
wretches brought out for execution, juſtice "will
preſent to our affrighted fancy all the hopes and
poſſibilities which are thus brutally extinguiſhed,
the genius, the daring invention, the unſhrinking
firmneſs, the tender charities and ardent benevo-
tence, which have occaſionally under this ſyſtem
been ſacrificed at the ſhrine of torpid luxury and
unrelenting avarice.

The ſpecies of ſuffering commonly known by
the appellation of corporal puniſhment is alſo
proſcribed by the ſyſtem above eſtabliſhed. Cor-
poral puniſhment, unleſs ſo far as it is intended
for example, appears in one reſpect in a very
ludicrous point of view. It is an expeditious
mode of proceeding, which has been invented in
order to compreſs the effect of much reaſoning
and long confinement, that might otherwiſe have
been neceſſary, into a very ſhort compaſs. In
another view it is not poſſible to expreſs che abhor-
rence it ought to create. The genuine propenſity
of man is to venerate mind in his fellow man.
With what delight do we contemplate the pro-
greſs of intellect, its efforts for the diſcovery. of
truth, the harveſt of virtue that ſprings up under
the genial influence of inſtruction, the wiſdom
that


SCALE OF COERCION. 289
that is generated through the medium of unre-
ſtricted communication? How completely do
violence and corporal infliction reverſe the ſcene ?
From this moment all the wholeſome avennes
of mind are cloſed, and on every ſide we ſee
them guarded with a train of diſgraceful paſſions,
hatred, revenge, deſpotiſm, cruelty, hypocriſy,
conſpiracy and cowardice. Man becomes the
enemy of man; the ſtronger are ſeized with the
luſt of unbridled domination, and the weaker
ſhrink with hopeleſs diſguſt from the approach
of a fellow. With what feelings muſt an en-
lightened obſerver contemplate the furrow of a
laſh imprinted upon the body of a man? What
heart beats not in uniſon with the ſublime law
of antiquity, © "Thou ſhall not inflict ſtripes
upon the body of a Roman?“ There is but one
alternative in this caſe on the part of the ſufferer.
Either his mind muſt be ſubdued by the arbitrary
dictates of the ſuperior (for to him all is arbitrary
that does not ſtand approved to the judgment of
his own underſtanding) ; he will be governed by
ſomething that is nor reaſon, and aſhamed of
ſomething that is not diſgrace; or elſe every pang
he endures will excite the honeſt indignation of
his heart and fix the clear diſapprobation of* his
intelle&, will produce contempt and alienation,
againſt his puniſher. ; =

The juſtice of coercion is built upon this
ſimple principle: Every man is bound to employ
ſuch means as ſhall ſuggeſt themſelves for pre-
venting evils ſubverſive of general ſecurity, it
being firſt aſcertained, either by experience Or |
reaſoning, that all milder methods are inadequate

Vor. II. U 40


296 Sc OF COERCION.


to the exigence of the caſe. The condubidh
from this principle is, that we are bound under
certain urgent circumſtances to deprive the of-
fender of the liberty he has abuſed. Farther
than this no circumſtance can authoriſe us. He
whoſe perſon is impriſoned (if that be the right
kind of ſecluſion) cannot interrupt the peace of
his fellows; and the. infliction of farther evil,
when his power to injure 1s removed, 1s the wild
and unauthoriſed dictate of vengeance and rage,
the wanton ſport of unqueſtioned ſuperiority.
When indeed the perſon of the offender has
been firſt ſeized, there is a farther duty incumbent
on his puniſher, the duty of reforming him.
But this makes no part of the direct conſideration.
The duty of every man to contribute to the in-
tellectual health of his neighbour is of general
application. Beſides which it is proper to re-
colle& what has been already demonſtrated, tha:
coercion of no ſort is among the legitimate means
of reformation. Reſtrain the offender as long
as the ſafety of the community preſcribes it, for
this is juſt. Reſtrain him not an inſtant from a
imple view to his own improvement, for this is
contrary to reaſon and morality.
| Meanwhile there is one circumſtance by means
of which reſtraint and reformation are cloſely
connected. The perſon of the offender is to be
reſtrained as long as the public ſafety would be
endangered by his liberation. But the public
 fafety will ceaſe to be endangered as ſoon as his
propenſities and diſpoſitions have undergone a
change. The connection which thus reſults from


SCALE OF COERCION: 291
the nature of things, renders it neceſſary that,
in deciding upon the ſpecies of reſtraint to be
impoſed, theſe two circumſtances be conſidered
jointly, how the perſonal liberty of the offender
may be leaſt intrenched upon, and how his refor-
mation may be beſt promoted. _
The moſt common method purſued in de-
priving g the offender of the liberty he has abuſed
s to efect a public jail in which offenders of
every deleriptlon are thruſt together, and left to
form among themſelves what ſpecies of ſociety
they can. Various circumſtances contribute to
imbue them with habits of indolence and vice,
and to diſcourage induſtry; and no effort is made
to remove or ſoften theſe circumſtances. It ean-
not be neeeſſary to expatiate upon the atrocibuſ-
neſs of this ſyſtem. Jails are to a proverb ſemi-
naries of vice; and he muſt be au uncommon


proficient in the paſſion and the practice of in-


juſtice, or 4 man of ſublime virtue, who does
not come but of them a much worſe man than
he entered.
An active obſerver of mankind*, with- tha
pureſt intentions, and who had paid a very par-
ticular attention to this ſubject, was ſtruck with
the miſchievous tetidency of the reigning ſyſtem,
and called the attention of the public to a ſcheme
of ſolitary impriſonment, But this though tree
from the defects of the eſtabliſhed mode, i 18 lia-
ble to very weighty objeCtions. 18
It muſt ſtrike every feflecting mind as uncom-
most Nen and ſevere. It there-
You?! fore


+ Mr. Howl


—_ r 2


292 SCALE OF,COERCION.


fore be admitted into the ſyſtem of mild coercion
which forms the- topic of our enquiry. Man
is a ſocial animal. How far he is neceſlarily fo
will appear, if we conſider the ſum of advan-
tages reſulting from the ſocial, and of which he
would be deprived in the ſolitary ſtate. But in-
dependently of his original ſtructure, he is emi-
nently ſocial by his habits. Will you deprive
the man you impriſon, of paper and books, of
tools and amuſements? One of the arguments
in favour of ſolitary impriſonment is, that it is
neceſſary the offender ſhould be called off from
his wrong habits of thinking, and obliged
to enter into himſelf. This the advocates of
ſolitary impriſonment probably believe will be
moſt effectually done, the fewer be the avocations
of the priſoner. But let us ſuppoſe that he is
indulged in theſe particulars, and only deprived
of ſociety. How many men are there that can
denve:amuſement from books? We are in this
reſpect the creatures of habit, and it is ſcarcely
to be expected from ordinary men that they
ſhould mould themſelves to any ſpecies of em-
ployment, t& which in their youth they were
Wholly ſtrangers. But he that is moſt fond of


ſtudy as his moments when ſtudy pleaſes no


_— Ihe ſoul yearns with inexpreſſible long-
ings: for the ſociety of its like. Becauſe the
| public ſafety unwillingly commands the confine-
ment of an offender, muſt he for that reaſon never
light up his countenance. with a ſmile? Who
can tell the ſufferings of him who is condemned
to-uninterrupted ſolitude ? Who can tell that this
is not, to the maj r a mankind, the bittereſt


torment


SCALE OF COERCION. 293


torment that human ingenuity can inflict? No


doubt a mind truly ſublime would conquer this
inconvenience : but the powers of ſuch a mind
do not enter into the preſent queſtion.

From the examination of ſolitary impriſonment


in itſelf conſidered, we are naturally led to en-


quire into its real tendency as to the article of


reformation. To be virtuous it is requiſite that


we ſhould conſider men and their relation to each
other. As a preliminary to this ſtudy is it neceſ-
ſary that we ſhould be ſhut out from the ſociety
of men? Shall we be moſt effectually formed to
Juſtice, benevolence and prudence in our inter-
courſe with each other, in a ſtate of ſolitude ?
Will not our ſelfiſh and unſocial diſpoſitions be


perpetually increaſed ? What temptation has he


to think of benevolence or juſtice who has no


opportunity to exerciſe it? The true foil in which F


atrocious crimes are found to germinate, is a


gloomy and moroſe diſpoſition. Will his heart
become much either ſoftened or expanded, Who


breathes the atmoſphere of a dungeon ? Surely
it would be better in this reſpect to imitate the


ſyſtem of the univerſe, and, if we would teach
juſtice and humanity, tranſplant thoſe we would
teach into a natural and reaſonable ſtate of ſociety.
Solitude abſolutely confidered may inſtigate us
to ſerve ourſelves, but not to ferve our neigh-


bours. Solitude, impoſed under too few limita-
tions, may be a nurſery for madmen and idiots,
but not for uſeful members of ſociety. gr
Another idea which has ſuggeſted itſelf with
regard to the relegation of offenders from the
community they have injured, is that of *
h em


E
8
K
1
+
1
.
4


294 SCALE OF, COERCION.


them to a ſtate of 7 or hard labour. The
true refutation of this fyſtem is anticipated ir
what has been already Fad, To the ſafety of
the community it is unneceſſary, As a meang
to the reformation of the offender it 1s inexpreſ-
ſibly ill conceived. Man is an intellectual being.
There is no way to make him virtuous, but
in calling out his intellectual powers. Toy
is no way to make him dm but by mak-
ing him independent. He muſt ſtudy the "
of nature and the neceſſary ene
actions, not the arbitrary caprice of his ſu

rior. Do you deſire that I ſhould OP
not drive me to it with the whip; for, if before
1 thought it better to be idle, this will but in
creale my alienation. Perſuade my underſtand-
ing, and render it the ſubject of my choice. It
can only be by the moſt deplorable perverſion of
a, that we can be induced to believe any
ſpecies of ſlavery, from the ſlavery of the ſchool
boy to that of the moſt unfortunate negro in our
Welt India plantations, favourable to yirtue.

A ſcheme greatly preferable to any of theſe, |
and which has been tried under various forms,
is that of tranſportation, or baniſhment. This
ſcheme under the moſt judicious modifications
is liable to objection. It wauld be ſtran ge if
any ſcheme of cgercion or violence were not bi ;
But it has been made appear ſtill more 11
tionable than it will be found in its intrir
nature, by the crude and incoherent _ |
ſtances. with which i it has uſually been executed.

Baniſhment in its. ſimple form is evidently |
wyult. The citizen whoſe reſidence we deem


Inj ur 10us


SCALE OF COERCION. 295


injurious in our own country, we have no right
to impoſe upon another,
Baniſhment has ſometimes been joined with
ſlavery. Such was the practice of Great Britain
previouſly to the defection of her American
| colonies. This cannot ſtand in need of a fepa»
rate refutation.
The true ſpecies of baniſhment is removal to
a country yet unſettled. The labour by which
the untutored mind is beſt weaned fi the
vicious habits of a corrupt ſociety, is the labour,
not which is preſcribed by the mandate of a ſu-
perior, but which is impoſed by the neceſſity of
ſubſiſtence. The firſt ſettlement of Rome by
Romulus and his vagabonds is a happy image
of this, whether we conſider it as a real hiſtory,
or as the ingenious fiction of a man well ac-
quainted with the principles of mind. Men
who are freed from the injurious inftitutions of
European government, and obliged to begin the
world for themſelves, are in the dire& road to
be virtuous. ,
Two circumſtances have hitherto rendered
abortive this reaſonable project. Firit, that the
mother country purſues this ſpecies of colony
with her hatred. Our chief anxiety is in reality
to render its reſidence odious and uncomfort-
able, with the vain idea of deterring offenders.
Our chief anxiety ought to be to ſmooth their
difficulties, and contribute to their happineſs.
We ſhould recollect that the coloniſts are men
for whom we ought to feel no ſentiments but
thoſe of love and compaſſion. If we were rea-


fonable, we ſhould regret the cruel *
a


296 SCALE OF COERCION.


that obliges us to treat them in a manner unſuit-
able to the nature of mind; and having com-
plied with the demand of that exigence, we
ſhould next be anxious to confer upon them
every benefit in our power. But we are unrea-
ſonable. We harbour a thouſand ſavage feel-
ings of reſentment and vengeance. We thruſt
them out to the remoteſt corner of the world.
We ſubject them to perith by multitudes with
hardſhip and hunger. Perhaps to the reſult of
mature reflection baniſhment to the Hebrides,
would appear as eftectual as baniſhment to the
Alntipodes. |

Secondly, it is abſolutely neceſſary upon the

principles here explained that theſe coloniſts,

after having been ſufficiently provided in the
-outſet, ſhould be left to themſelves. We do
Worſe than nothing, if we purſue them into their
obſcure retreat with the inauſpicious influence of
our European inſtitutions. It is a mark of the
profoundeſt ignorance of the nature of man, to
ſuppoſe that, if left to themſelves, they would
| univerſally deftroy each other. On the contrary,
new ſituations make new minds. The worſt
_ criminals when turned adrift in a body, and re-
duced to feel the churliſh fang of neceſſity, con-
duct themſelves upon | reaſonable principles, and
often proceed with a ſagacity and public ſpirit that
might put the proudeſt monarchies to the bluſh.

Meanwhile let us not forget the inherent vices
of coercion, which preſent themſelves from what-
ever point the ſubje& is viewed. Colonization
feems to be the moſt eligible of thoſe expedients
which have been ſtated, but it is attended with
| confiderable


SCALE OF COERCION. 297


conſiderable difficulties. The community judges
of a certain individual that his reſidence cannot
be tolerated among them conſiſtently with the
general ſafety. In denying him his choice among


other communities do they not exceed their


commiſſion? What treatment ſhall be awarded
him, if he return from the baniſhment to which
he was ſentenced ?—Thelſe difficulties are calcu-
lated to bring back the mind to the abſolute in-
. juſtice of coercion, and to render us inexpreſſibly
anxious for the advent of that policy by which
it ſhall be aboliſhed. 1 $2 ee
To conclude. 'The obſervations of this chap-
ter are relative to a theory, which affirmed that
it might be the duty of individuals, but never of
communities, to exert a certain ſpecies of political
coercion ; and which founded. this duty upon a
conſideration of the benefits of public ſecurity.
Under theſe circumſtances then every individual
is bound to judge for himſelf, and to yield his


countenance to no other coercion than that which


is indiſpenſibly neceſſary. He will no doubt
endeavour to meliorate thoſe inſtitutions with
which he cannot perſuade his countrymen to part.
He will decline all concern in the execution of


ſuch, as abuſe the plea of public ſecurity to the


moſt atrocious purpoſes. Laws may eaſily be
found in almoſt every code, which, on account of
the iniquity of their proviſions, are ſuffered to fall
into diſuſe by general conſent, Every lover of juſ-
tice will uniformly in this way contribute to the
repeal of all laws, that wantonly uſurp upon the
independence of mankind, either by the multipli-
city of their reſtrictions, or ſeverity of their ſanc-
tions. r


3 og =" ” hs
—


—— —


? **
þ .
8 l \ N
* \ . \ # ö * — oe
ws pA On — —
4 4 — 7 — _—
. 2 Pk le I”
47565 2007 ws; — er . 3 CORN in. + _ * .
Fee * Are * * _— r 22 1 _


6 . — by * 41 * oy
A * 1
a OE 2 |

a LH "FOX 4 — e

=? GSC IEEE, — — —

P J ww r e
rr ̃ ˙ . 7—7˙¾‚ . .. 2247 2
8 3 ag 272 3». 2 FRF TS 1 v


£ 293 1


OF EVIDENCE.


| Difficulties to which this 5 i liable - exem-

pl fied in the diſtinftion between overt actions
and intentions. —Reaſons againſt this diſtinc-
tion. Principle i in which it 1s founded,


42


Havmo fuſſciently aſcertained the deciſion
in which queſtions of offence againſt the general
_ ought to terminate, it only remains under
this head of enquiry to conſider the principles
according to which the trial ſhould be conducted.
Theſe principles may for the moſt part be referred
to two points, the evidence that is t
and the method to be purſued by us in d
offences.

The Aificulties to which the ſub} of evi-
dence is liable, have been repeatedly ſeated 3 in the
earlier diviſions of this work*. It may be worth
while in this place to recollect the difficulties
which attend upon one particular claſs of evi-
dence, it being ſcarcely poſſible that the imagina-
tion of every reader ſhould not ſuffice him to
apply this text, and to perceive how eaſily the


ſame kind of enumeration might be extended to
any other claſs.


"4.4 . Book n. Chap. VI. Book VII. Chap. IV.


1


or bine,
It has been aſbed, Why intentions are at


ſubjected to the animadverſion of criminal
juſtice, in the ſame manner as direct acta of
% os ERS
The arguments in favour of their being thus.
ſubjected are obvious. The proper abje& of
political ſuperintendence is not the paſt, but the
future. Society cannot julily employ coercion; |
againſt any individual, however atrocious may
have been his miſdemeanours, from any ather
than a proſpective conſideration, that is, a con-
ſideration of the danger with which his habits.
may be pregnant to 5 e's ſafety. Paſt
conduct cannot properly fall under the animad-
verſion of government, except ſo far as it is an
indication of the future. But paſt conduct ap-
pears at firſt ſight to afford a ſlighter preſumption.
as to Nhat the delinquent will do hereafter, than
declared intention. The man who profeſſes his
deterwination to commit murder, ſeems ta be
ſcarcely a leſs dangerous member of ſociety, than
he who, baving already committed murder, has
no apparent intention to repeat his offence,” And
yet all governments have agreed either to pals
over the menace in ſilence, ar to ſuhject the of-
fender to a much leſs degree af coercion, than
they employ againſt him, by hom the crime.
has been. perpetrated. It may he right perhaps
to yield chem ſome attention when, they thus.
agree in forbearance, though little, undauhtedi
is due to their agreement in inhumanity.
This diſtinction, fo far as it is founded in rea-
ſon, has relation principally to the uncertainty of
evidence. Before the intention of any man 18


9 3
3 _—
n . . -


4s  _. OF” EVIDENCE:


be aſcertained in a court of juſtice from the con-

ſideration of the words he has employed, a va-
riety of circumſtances muſt be taken into the
account. The witneſs heard the words which
were employed: does he repeat them accurately,
or has not his want of memory cauſed him to
ſubſtitute in the room of ſome of them words of
his own ? Before it is poſſible to decide upon the
confident expectation I may entertain that theſe
words will be followed with correſpondent ac-


tions, it is neceſſary I ſhould know the exact
tone with which they were delivered, and geſ-
ture with which they were accompanied. It 1s


neceſſary I ſhould be acquainted with the con-
text, and the occaſion that produced them.
Their conſtruction will depend upon the quan-
tity of momentary heat or rooted malice with


which they were delivered; and words, which
appear at ſirſt ſight of tremendous import, will
ſometimes be found upon accurate inveſtigation


to have had a meaning purely ironical in the
mind of the ſpeaker. Theſe conſiderations, to-
gether with the odious nature of coercion in ge-
neral, and the extreme miſchief that may attend
our reſtraining the faculty of ſpeech in addition
to the reſtraint we conceive ourſelves obliged to
put on men's actions, will probably be found to
afford a ſufficient reaſon, why words ought ſel-
dom or never to be made a topic of political


animadverſion.


— . ; s a , 8
| ? *
- _— Ly FS — * f a 1
| X 4
.


CH AP. VIII.
gy e en,


Arguments b by which it is recommended — Anſwer,
—Law is, 1. endleſs — particularly in a free
fate. —Cauſes of this diJadvantage.—2. Uncer-
tain—inſianced in queſtions of property. — Mode
in which it muſt be ſtudied. —3. Pretends to
foretel future events. — Laws are a ſpecies of
promiſes —check the freedom ꝙ opinion —are
deſiruttive of the principles of reaſon.— Diſbo-

 neſiyof lawyers.-—An honeſt lawyer miſchievous.
——Abolitton of law vindicated: on the ſcore of

_ vifdom—of candour—jrom the nature of man.

D Future hiſtory of political juftice. — Errors
that might ariſe in the commencement.—1ts, gra-
dual progreſs. —lts Melis o on criminal lam on


property.


A FARTHER article of ME, importance in
the trial of offences, is that of the method to
be purſued by us in claſſing them, and the con-
ſequent apportioning the degree of animadver-
ſion to the caſes that may ariſe. This article
brings us to the direct conſideration of law,
which is without doubt one of the moſt impor-
tant topics upon which human intellect can be
employed. It is law which has hitherto been

05 regarded


ROY


thearhi


302 or LAW.


regarded in countries calling 1 themſelves e
28 he ſtandard, by which to meaſure all vlli-nces
and irregularities 3 fall under public animad-
verſion. Let us fairly inveſtigate the merits of


: {Rus choice.


The compariſon which has preſented itſelf to
thoſe by whom the topic has po inveſtigated,
has hitherto been between law on one fide, and
will of a deſpot on the other. But,
if we would fairly eſtimate the merits of law,
we 3 firſt conſider it as it Is in itſelf, and
then, if neceſſary, fearch for the moſt eligible


principle that may be fubſtitured in its Ant


It has been recommended as © affording in-


3 to the different members of che com-


munity reſpeQing the principles which will be
adopted in deciding upon their actions. It =


been repreſented as the higheſt degree of iniqu
ty, © to try men by an ex pot facto law, r n in-


deed in any other manner than by the letter of
a Ixæw, dy made, and ſufficiently Promul-
ted. 8
2 far it wil be fafe alto gether to atthihi-
late this principle we ſhall * a have occa-
ſion to enquire. It is obvious at firſt ſight to
temark, that it is of moſt importance in a coun-
try where the fyſtem of juriſprudence is moſt
capricious and abſurd. If it be deemed criminal
In any ſociety to wear clothes of a particular


Kdt, or buttons of a particular complicit,


it is natural to exclaim, that it is high time the


juriſprudence of that Tociety ſhould inform its


members what are the fantaſtic rules by which


they mean — But, if a fociety be con-


tented


4


OF I. A W. 303


tented with the rules of juſtice, and do not aſſume
to itſelf the right of diſtorting or adding to


thoſe rules, there law is evidently a leſs neceſſary


inſtitution. The rules of juſtice would be more
clearly and effectually taught by an actual inter-


courſe with human ſociety unreſtrained by the


fetters of prepoſſeſſion, than they can be by ca-
techiſms and codes *. „

One reſult of the. inſtitution of law is, that
the inſtitution once begun, can never be brought


to a cloſe. Edict is heaped upon edi; and


volume upon volume. This will be moſt the
caſe, where the government is moſt popular, and


its proceedings have moſt in them of the nature


of deliberation. Surely this is no flight indica-
tion that the principle is wrong, and that of
conſequence, the farther we proceed in the path
it marks out to us, the more ſhall we be bewil-
dered. No taſk can be more hopeleſs than that


of effecting a coalition between a right principle


and a wrong. He that ferioufly and fincerely
attempts it, will perhaps expoſe himſelf to more
palpable ridicule, than he who, inſtead of pro-
feſſing two oppolite fyſtems, ſhould adhere to
the worſt. |

There is no maxim more clear than this,
Every caſe is a rule to itſelf. No action of any
man was ever the ſame as any other action, had
ever the ſame degree of utility or injury. It
ſhould ſeem to be the bufinefs of juſtice, to
diſtinguiſh the qualities of men, and not, which
has hitherto been the practice, to confound *
1 | ; ut


* Book VI, Chap. VIII, p. 213-


- — 1
*
— 1 — Ap _
» — . — — — hoc pn e's * — — 2


— — —— — — —
— pay x 7
G8 ON & ie ENT eee 4 a 4 4
5 * — — 2 —— _—_ * * — 22h


2
*
4
if
.
9
15
*
*
0
7 OY


304 8 OF. A W.


But what has been the reſult of an attempt to
do this in relation to law? As new caſes occur,
the law is perpetually found deficient. How
mould it be otherwiſe? Lawgivers have not the
faculty of unlimited preſcience, and cannot de-
fine that which is infinite. The alternative that
remains, is either to wreſt the law to include a
caſe which was never in the contemplation of
the author, or to make a new law to provide
for this particular cate. Much has been done
in the firſt of theſe modes. The quibbles of
lawryers and the arts by which they refine and
diftort the ſenſe of the law, are proverbial. But,
though 1nuch is done, every thing cannot be thus
done. The abuſe would ſometimes be too pal-
pable. Not to ſay, that the very education that
enables the lawyer, when he is employed for
the proſecutor, to find out offences the lawgiver
never meant, enables him, when he is employed
for the defendant, to find out ſubterfuges that
reduce the law to a nullity. It is therefore per-
petually ee make new laws. Theſe
laws, in order to eſcape evaſion, are frequently
tedious, minute and circumlocutory. The vo-
lume in which juſtice records her preſcriptions
is for ever increaſing, and the world would not
contain the books that might be written. |
The conſequence of the infinitude of law is
its uncertainty, This ſtrikes directly at the
principle upon which law is founded. Laws
were made to put an end to ambiguity, and
that each man might know what he had to de-
pend upon. How well have they anſwered this
purpoie ? Let us inſtance in the article of pro-


Pexty.


Two men go to 18 for a certain eſtate.
They would not go to law; if they had not both
of them an opinion of their ſucceſs. But we
may ſuppoſe them partial in their own caſe.
They would not continue to go to law, if they
were not both promiſed ſucceſs by their lawyers.
Law was made 'that a plain man might know
what he had to depend upon, and yet the moſt
{kilful practitioners differ about the event of my
ſuit. It will ſometimes happen that the moſt
celebrated pleader in the kingdom, or the firſt
counſel in the ſervice of the crown, {hall aſſure
me of infallible ſucceſs, five minutes before
another law officer, ſtyled the keeper of the
king's' conſcience, by ſome unexpected juggle
— it againſt me. Would the iſſue have been
equally uncertain, if I had had nothing to truſt
to but the plain, unperverted ſenſe of a jury of
my neighbours, founded in the ideas they enter-
tained of peneral juſtice? Lawyers have abſurdly
maintained, that the expenſtveneſs of law is ne-
ceſſary to prevent the unbounded multiplication
of ſuits; but the true ſource of this multiplica-
tion is uncertainty. Men do not quarrel about
that which is evident, but that which is obſcure,
He that would ſtudy the laws of a country
accuſtomed to legal ſecurity, muſt begin with
the volumes of the ſtatutes, He muſt add a
ſtrict enquiry into the common or unwritten
law; and he ought to digreſs into the civil, the
eccleſiaſtical and canon law. To underſtand the
intention of the authors of a law, he muſt be
acquainted with their characters and views, and
with the various circumſtances, to which it owed
Vor. b - | | X | its


306 00 LAN. .


its riſe, and by which it was modified while
under deliberation. To underſtand the weight
and interpretation that will be allowed to it in a
court of juſtice, he muſt have ſtudied the whole
collection of records, deciſions and precedents.
Law was originally deviſed that ordinary men
might know what they had to depend upon,
and there is not at this day a lawyer exiſting in
Great Britain, preſumptuous and vain-glorious
enough to pretend that he has maſtered the code.
Nor muſt it be forgotten that time and induſtr
even were they infinite, would not ſuffice, k
is a labyrinth without end; it is a maſs of
contradictions that cannot be extricated. Study
will enable the lawyer to find in it plauſible,
perhaps unanſwerable, arguments for any {ide of
almoſt any queſtion ; but it would argue the
utmoſt folly to ſuppoſe that the ſtudy of law can
lead to knowledge and certainty,

A farther conſideration, that will Acker
the abſurdity of law in its moſt general accepta-
tion is, that it is of the nature of prophecy.
Its taſk is to deſcribe what will be the actions of
mankind, and to dictate deciſions reſpecting
them. Its merits in this reſpect have already
been decided under the head of promiſes.“ The
language of ſuch a procedure is, We are ſo
wile, that we can draw no additional knowledge
from circumſtances as they occur; and we pledge
ourſelves that, if it be otherwiſe, the additional
knowledge we acquire {hall produce no effect up-
ou our conduct. It is proper to obſerve, that this
ſubject of law may be conſidered in ſome reſpects
20 more properly belonging to the topic of the

: preceding
* Book Ul, Chap. III.


F


preceding book. Law tends no leſs than creeds,
catechiſms and teſts, to fix the human mind in
a ſtagnant condition, and to ſubſtitute a principle
of permanence, in the room of that unceaſin
perfectibility which is the only ſalubrious ele-
ment of mind. All the arguments therefore
which were employed upon that occaſion may
be applied to the ſubject now under conſideration.

The fable of Procruites preſents us with a

faint ſhadow of the perpetual effort of law. In
defiance of the great principle of natural philo-
ſophy, that there are not ſo much as two atoms
of matter of the ſame form through the whole
univerſe, it endeavours to reduce the actions of
men, which are compoſed of a thouſand evaneſ-

cent elements, to one ſtandard. We have already
| ſeen the tendency of this endeavour in the article
of murder *. It was in the contemplation of
this ſyſtem of juriſprudence, that the ſtrange
maxim was invented, that © ſtrict juſtice would
often prove the higheſt injuſtice f. There is
no more real juſtice in endeavouring to reduce
the actions of men into claſſes, than there was
in the ſcheme to which we have juſt alluded, of
reducing all men to the ſame ſtature. If on the
contrary juſtice be a reſult flowing from the con-
templation of all the circumſtances of each in-

dividual caſe, if the only criterion of juſtice be
general utility, the inevitable conſequence is that,
the more we have of juſtice, the more we ſhall
have of truth, virtue and happineſs.

X 2 From


* Book II, Chap. VI, p. 121. Book VII, Chap. IV, p 238.


Summum jus ſumma infuria.


308 OT' LAW:


From all theſe conſiderations we cannot heſi-
tate to conclude univerſally that law is an inſtitu-
tion of the moſt pernicious tendency.

The ſubject will receive ſome additional eluci-
dation, if we conſider the perniciouſneſs of law
in its immediate relation to thoſe who practiſe it.
If there ought to be no ſuch thing as law, the
profeſſion of a lawyer is no doubt entitled to
our diſapprobation. A lawyer can ſcarcely fail
to be a diſhoneſt man. This is leſs a ſubject for
cenſure than for regret. Men are the creatures

of the neceſſities under which they are placed,
He that is habitually goaded by the incentives of
vice, will not fail to be vicious. He that is per-
petually converſant in quibbles, falſe colours
and ſophiſtry, cannot equally cultivate the ge-
nerous emotions of the ſoul and the nice diſcern-
ment of rectitude. If a ſingle individual can
be found who is but ſuperficially tainted with
the contagion, how many men on the other hand,
in whom we ſaw the promiſe of the ſublimeſt
virtues, have by this trade been rendered indif-
ferent to conſiſtency or acceffible to a bribe ? Be
it obſerved, that theſe remarks apply principally
to men eminent or ſucceſsful in their profeſſion.
He that enters into an employment careleſsly
and by way. of amuſement, is much leſs under
its mfluence ' {though he will not eſcape), than
he that enters into it with ardour and devotion.
L et us however ſuppoſe, a circumſtance which
is perhaps altogether impoſſible, that a man ſhall.
be a perfectly honeſt lawyer. He is determined
to plead no cauſe that he does not believe to be
zuſt, and to employ no argument that he does
| | 6] not


O F LAW 309


not apprehend to be ſolid. He deſigns, as far
as his ſphere extends, to ſtrip law of its ambi-
guities, and to ſpeak the manly language of
reaſon, This man is no doubt highly reſpeCta-
ble ſo far as relates to himſelf, but it may be
_ queſtioned whether he be not a more pernicious
— of ſociety than the diſhoneſt lawyer.

The hopes of mankind in relation to their fu-
ture progreſs, depend upon their obſerving the
genuine effects of erroneous inſtitutions. But
this man is employed in ſoftening and maſk-
ing theſe effects. His conduct has a direct
tendency to poſtpone the reign of ſound policy,
and to render mankind tranquil in the midſt of
imperfection and ignorance. It may appear in-
deed a paradox to affirm that virtue can be more
pernicious than vice. But the true ſolution of
this difficulty lies in the remark, that virtue,
ſuch as is here deſcribed, is impoſſtble. We
may amuſe ourſelves with enquiring in ſuch
inſtances as this whether theory could not afford
us a better ſyſtem of intellectual progreſs than
the mixed ſyſtem which takes place in the world.
But the true anſwer probably is, that what we
call vice is mere error of the underſtanding, a
neceſſary part of the gradation that leads to —
and in a word that the courſe of nature and the
courſe of a perfect theory are in all caſes the
ſame.

The true principle which ought to be ſubſi⸗
tuted in the room of law, is that of reaſon ex-
ereiſing an uncontroled juriſdiction upon che cir-
cumſtances of the cafe, To this principle no ob-


jlection


310 OF LAW.


jection can ariſe on the ſcore of wiſdom. It is
not to be ſuppoſed that there are not men no-.
exiſting, whoſe intellectual accompliſhments
riſe to the level of law. Law we ſometimes
call the wiſdom of our anceſtors. But this is a
ſtrange impoſition. It was as frequently the
dictate of their paſſion, of timidity, jealouſy,
a monopoliſing ſpirit, and a luſt of power that
knew no bounds. Are we not obliged perpe-
tually to reviſe and remodel this miſnamed wiſ-
dom of our anceſtors? to correct it by a de-
tection of their ignorance and a condemnation
of their intolerance? But, if men can be found
among us whoſe wiſdom is equal to the wiſdom
of law, it will ſcarcely be maintained, that the
truths they have to communicate will be the
worſe for having no authority, but that which

they derive from the reaſons that ſupport them.
lt may however be alledged that, © if there
be little difficulty in ſecuring a current portion
of wiſdom, there may nevertheleſs be ſomething
to be feared from the paſſions of men. Law
may be ſuppoſed to have been conſtructed in the
tranquil ſerenity of the ſoul, a ſuitable monitor
to check the inflamed mind with which the re-
cent memory of ills might induce us to proceed
to the exerciſe of coercion.” This is the moſt
conſiderable argument that can be adduced in
fayour of the prevailing ſyſtem, and therefore
deſerves a mature examination.

The true anſwer to this objection is 4 no-
thing can be improved but in conformity to its
nature. If we conſult for the welfare of man,

we muſt bear perpetually in mind the ſtructure


of


OF L AW. Jil.
of man. It muſt be admitted that we are im-
perfect, ignorant, the ſlaves gf appearances.
Thele defects can be removed by no indirect
method, but only by the introduction of know-
ledge. A ſpecimen of the indirect method we
have in the doctrine of ſpiritual infallibility. It
was obſerved that men were liable to error, to
diſpute for ever without coming to a deciſion,
to miſtake in their moſt important intereſts.
What was wanting, was ſuppoſed to be a cri-
terion and a judge of controverſies. What was
attempted, was to endue truth with a viſible
form, and then repair to the oracle we had
erected,

The caſe reſpecting law is exactly parallel to
this. Men were aware of the deceitfulneſs of
appearances, and they ſought a taliſman to guard.
them from impoſition. Suppoſe I were to de-
termine at the commencement of every day upon
a certain code of principles to which I would con-
form the conduct of the day, and at the com-
mencement of every year the conduct of the year.
Suppoſe I were to determine that no circumitan-
ces ſhould be allowed by the light they afforded to
modify my conduct, left I ſhould become the
dupe of appearance and the flave of paſſion.
This is a juſt and accurate image of every
ſyſtem of permanence. Such ſyſtems are form-
I upon the idea of ſtopping the perpetual mo-
tion | of the machine, leſt it ſhould ſometimes
fall into diſorder.

This conſideration muſt ſufficiently perſuade
an impartial mind that, whatever inconveniences
may ariſe from the paſſions of men, the intro-
duction of fixed laws cannot be the genuine

| remedy.


342 - DF: LAW.


remedy. Let us eonſider what would be the
operation and progreffive ſtate. of theſe d _
provided men were wruſted to the guida

their own diſcretion, Such is the diſcip —
that a reaſonable ftate of ſociety employs with
reſpect to man in his individual capacity“:

"A ſhould it not be equally yalid with rafpedy
to men acting in a collective capacity? Inexpe-
rience and zeal would prompt me to reſtrain my
neighbour whenever he 1s acting Wrong, and,
by penalties and inconveniences deſignedly in-
terpoſed, to cure him of his errors. But rea-
ſon evinces the folly of this proceeding, and
teaches me that, if x be not accuſtomed to
depend upon the ener gies of intellect, he will
never riſe to the dignity of a rational being,
As long as a man is held in the trammels of
obedience, and habituated to look to ſome fo-
reign guidance for the direction of his conduct,
his underſtanding and the vigour of his mind will


fleep. Do I deſire to raiſe him to the energy of
which he is capable? I muſt teach him to feel


himſelf, to bow to no authority, to examine the


inciples he entertains, and render to his mind
the reaſon of his conduct.


The habits which are thus {alutary to the indi- |


vidual will be equally ſalutary in the tranſactions


of communities. Men are weak at preſent, be-
cauſe they have always been told they are weak,
and muſt not be truſted with themſelves. Take
them out of their ſhackles ; bid them enquire,
reaſon and Judge 5 and * will ſoon find them


very


Book V, Chap. XX, p. 100.


very different beings. Tell them that they have
paſſ ons, are occaſionally haſty, intemperate and
injurious, but they muſt be truſted with them-
ſelves. Tell them that the mountains of parch-
ment in which they have been hitherto in-
trenched, are fit only to impoſe upon ages of
ſuperſtition and ignorance 3 that henceforth we
will have no dependence but upon their ſpon-
taneous juſtice ; that, if their paſſions be gigan-
tic, they muſt riſe with gigantic energy to
fubdue them; that, if their decrees be iniquitous,
the iniquity ſhall be all their own, The effect
of this diſpoſition of things will ſoon be viſible;

mind will riſe to the level of its ſituation ; juries

and umpires will be penetrated with the mag-
nitude of the truſt repoſed in them. 15

It may be no uninſtructive ſpectacle to ſur-
vey the progreſſive eſtabliſhment of juſtice in
the ſtate of things which is here recommended.
At firſt it may be a few deciſions will be made
uncommonly abſurd or atroctous. But the
authors of theſe deciſions will be confounded
with the unpopularity and drfgrace in which
they have involved themſelves. In reality,
whatever were the original ſource of law, it ſoon
became cheriſhed as a cloak for oppreſſion. Its
obſcurity was of uſe to miflead the inquiſitive
eye of the ſufferer. Its antiquity ſerved to di-
vert a conſiderable part of the odium from the
erpetrator of rhe injuſtice to the author of the
law; and fill more to difarm that odium by
the influence of ſuperſtitious awe. It was well
known that unvarniſhed, barefaced oppreſhon
could not fail to be the victim of its own

operations.

To


314 . LAW.


To this Ratement it may indeed be objected,
that bodies of men have often been found
callous to cenſure, and that the diſgrace, being
amicably divided among them all, 1s intolerable

to none.” In this obſervation there'i is conſider-
able force, but it is inapplicable to the preſent
argument. To this ſpecies of abuſe one of
two things is. indiſpenſibly neceſſary, either
numbers or ſecrecy. To this abuſe therefore it
will be a ſufficient remedy, that each juriſdiction
be conſiderably limited, and all tranſactions
conducted in an open and en manner.—
To proceed.
I be juridical deciſions that were made imme-
diately after the abolition of law, would differ lit-
tle from thoſe during its empire. They would be
the deciſions of prejudice and habit. But habit,
having Joſt the centre about which it revolved,
would diminiſh in the regularity of its opera-
tions. Thoſe to whom the arbitration of any
queſtion was intruſted, would frequently re-
collect that the whole caſe was committed to
their deliberation, , and they could not fail occa-
ſionally to examine themſelves reſpeQing the
reaſon of thoſe principles which had hitherto
paſſed uncontroverted. Their underſtandings
would grow enlarged, in proportion as they
> felt the importance of their truſt, and the un-
bounded freedom of their inveſtigation. Here
then would commence an auſpicious order of
' things, of which no underſtanding: of man at
preſent in exiſtence can foretel the reſult, the
dethronement of implicit faith and the inaugu-
Gen of elde juſtice.


Some


OF LAW 315
Some of the concluſions of which this ſtate
of things would be the harbinger, have been
already. ſeen in the judgment that would be
made of offences againſt the community *.—
Offences arguing infinite variety in the depravity
from which they ſprung, would no longer be
confounded under ſome general name. Juries
would grow as perſpicacious in diſtinguiſhing,
as they are now indiſcriminate in confounding
the merit of actions and characters. |
Let us conſider the effects of the abolition of
law as it reſpects the article of property. As ſoon
as the minds of men became ſomewhat weaned
from the unfeeling uniformity of the preſent
ſyſtem, they would begin to enquire after equity.
In this ſituation let us ſuppoſe a htigated fuc-
ceſſion brought before them, to which there
were five heirs, and that the ſentence of their
old legiſlation had directed the diviſion of this
property into five equal ſhares. They would
begin to enquire into the wants and fituation
of the claimants. The firſt we will ſuppoſe to
have a fair character and be proſperous in the
world: he is a reſpectable member of ſociety,
but farther wealth would add little either to his
uſefulneſs or his enjoyment. The ſecond is a
miſerable object, periſhing with want, and over-
whelmed with calamity. The third, though
poor, is yet tranquil ; but there is a ſituation to
which his virtue leads him to aſpire, and in
which he may be of uncommon ſervice, but
which. he cannot with propriety accept, with-
5 Out


* Book II, Chap. VI, p. 121, Book VII, Chap. IV. p. 258.


316 OF LAW.


out a capital equal to two fifths of the whole
ſucceſſion. One of the claimants is an unmar-
ried woman paſt the age of childbearing. Ano-
ther is a widow, unprovided, and with a nu-
merous family depending on her ſuccour. The
firſt queſtion that would tuggeſt itfelf to un-
prejudiced perſons, having the allotment of
this ſucceſſion referred to their unhmited de-
eiſion, would be, what juſtice is there in the
indiſcriminate partition which has hitherto pre-
vailed ? This would be one of the early ſug-
geſtions that would produce a ſhock in the
_ prevailing fyſtem of property. To enquire
into the general itfue of theſe ſuggeſtions is
the principal object of the following book.

An obfervation which cannot have eſcaped
the reader in the peruſal of this chapter, is,
that law is merely relative to the exerciſe of
political force, and muſt periſh when the ne-
eeſſity for that force ceaſes, if the influence of
truth do nor ſtill ſooner extirpate it from the
practice of mankind. 5


CHAP.


L317 J


4


CHAP. IX.


OF PAR DON S.


Ther abſurdity, —Their origin, —T heir abuſes, —
Their arbitrary charafier. —Deftruftive of mo-


4


There is one other topic which belongs to
the ſubject of the preſent book, but which may
be diſmiſſed in a very few words, becauſe, though


it has unhappily been in almoſt all caſes neglected
in practice, it is a point that ſeems to admit of


uncommonly fimple and irreſiſtible evidence: I
mean, the ſabje& of pardons.

| The very word to a reflecting mind is fraught
with abſurdity. © What is the rule that ought in
all caſes to preſcribe to my conduct?“ Surely
juſtice; underſtanding by juſtice the greateſt uti-
lity of the whole maſs of beings that may be
indess by my conduct. What then is
clemency?“ It can be nothing but the pitiable
egotiſm of him who imagines he can do ſome-
thing better than juſtice. Is it Tight that 1
ſhould ſuffer conſtraint for a certain offence ?”*
The rectitude of my ſuffering mult be founded
in its tendency to promote' the general welfare.


He therefore that pardons me, iniquitouſly pre-


fers the imaginary intereſt of an individual, and
utterly neglects what he owes to the whole. He
| beſtovvs


.
318 OF FARDONS.


beſtows that which I ought not to receive, and
which he has no right to give. © Is it right on
the contrary that I ſhould not undergo the ſuffer-
ing in queſtion ? Will he by reſcuing me from
ſuffering, do a benefit to me and no injury to
= others? He will then be a notorious delinquent,
= if he allow me to ſuffer. There is indeed a con-
= fiderable defect in this laſt ſuppoſition. If, while
| he benefits me, he do no injury to others, he is
infallibly performing a public ſervice. If I ſuf-
fered in the arbitrary manner which the ſuppoſi-
tion includes, the whole would ſuſtain an un-
queſtionable injury in the injuſtice that was per-
petrated. And yet the man who prevents this
odious injuſtice, has been accuſtomed to arrogate
to himſelf the attribute of clement, and the appa-
rently ſublime, but in reality tyrannical, name cf
forgiveneſs. For, if he do more than has been
here deſcribed, inſtead of glory, he ought to
take ſhame to himſelf, as an enemy to the inte-
reſt of human kind. If every action, and
l eſpecially every action in which the happineſs of
ae rational being is concerned, be ſuſceptible of a
certain rule, then caprice muſt be in all caſes
excluded: there can be no action, which, if I
neglect, I ſhall have diſcharged my duty; and,
it I perform, I ſhall be entitled to applauſe.
l˙1 be pernicious effects of the ſyſtem of par-
dons is peculiarly glaring. It was firſt invented
as the miſerable ſupplement to a ſanguinary code,
the atrociouſneſs of which was ſo conſpicuous,
that its miniſters either dreaded. the reſiſtance of
the people if it were indiſcriminately executed,
or chemſelves ſhrunk with ſpontaneous repug-


j

|

| nance
|

|

|


OF PARDONS. 319


' nance from the devaſtation it commanded.” The
ſyſtem: of pardons naturally aſſociates with the
ſyſtem of law; for, though you may call eve
inſtance in which one man occaſions the death
of another by the name of murder, yet the in-
juſtice would be too great, to apply to all in-
ſtances the ſame treatment. Detine murder as
accurately as you pleaſe, the ſame conſequences,
the ſame diſparity of caſes will obtrude itfelf. It
is neceſſary therefore to have a court of reaſon,
to which the deciſions. of a court of law ſhall
be brought for reviſal. n &
But — is this court, incxpretitily nicks
important than the other, to be conſtituted ?
Here lies the eſſence of the matter; the reſt is
form. A jury is impanelled, to tell you the
generical name of the action; a judge preſides,
. to read out of the vocabulary of law the ſen-
tence annexed to that name; laſt of all, comes
the court of enquiry which is to decide whether
the remedy of the diſpenſatory be ſuitable to the
circumſtances of this particular caſe. This au-
thority has uſually been lodged 1 in the firſt in-
ſtance with the judge, and in the laſt reſort with
the king in council. Now, laying aſide the
propriety or impropriety of this particular fe-
lection, there is one grievous abuſe which ought
to ſtrike the moſt ſuperticial obſerver. Theſe
perſons, with whom the principal truſt is repoſed,
conſider their functions in this reſpect as a matter
purely incidental, exerciſe them with ſupineneſs,
and in many inſtances with the moſt ſcanty ma-
terials to guide their judgment. This grows in
a conſiderable degree out of the very name of


pardon,


E


OF, PARDONS.


pardon, which implies work of ſupercrogatory
benevolence.

From the manner in 1 which pardons are diſ-
peaſed inevitably Hows the uncertainty of puniſh-
ment. It is too evident that puniſhment is


329


| inflicted by no certain rules, and of conſequence


the lives of a thouſand victims are immolated in
vain. Not more than one half or one third of


the offenders whom the law condemns to death
in this metropolis, are made to ſuffer the ſen-


tence that is pronounced. ls it poſſible that each
offender ſhould not flatter himſelf that he ſhall
be, among the number that eſcapes? Such a ſyſ-


tem, to ſpeak it truly, is a lottery of death, in


which each man draws his ticket Alen reprieve or
execution, as undefinable accidents ſhall decide.


It may be aſked whether the abolition of law


would not produce equal uncertainty? By no
means. The principles of king and council in
ſuch caſes are very little underſtood, either by
themſelves or others. The principles of a jury
of his neighbours commiſſioned to . pronounce
upon the whole of the cafe, the criminal eaſily
gueſſes. He has only to appeal to his own ſenti-
ments and experience. Reaſon is a thoufand
times more explicit and intelligible than law; and
when we were accuſtomed to confult her, the
certainty of her deciſions would be ſuch as men
practiſed in our preſent courts are totally unable


to conceive.


Another very important be grows
out of the iyſtem of pardons. A ſyſtem of par-
dons-is a ſyſtem of — ſlavery. I am
l to expect a certain deſirable event, from

what ?


or PAR, Sa


what? From the clemency, the uncontroled,
unmerited kindneſs of a fellow mortal. Can any
leſſon be more degrading? The puſillanimous
ſervility of the man who devotes himſelf with
everlaſting obſequiouſneſs to another, becauſe
that other, having begun to be unjuſt, relents in
his career; the ardour with which he confeſſes
the rectitude of his ſentence and the enormity
of his deſerts, will conſtitute a tale that future <
ages will find it difficult to underftand.
What are the ſentiments in this reſpect that
are alone worthy of a rational being? Give me
that and that only, which without injuſtice you
cannot refuſe. More than juſtice it would be
diſgraceful for me to aſk, and for you to beſtow.
I ſtand upon the foundation of right. This is a
title, which brute force may refuſe to acknow-
ledge, but which all the force in the world can-
not annihilate. By reſiſting this plea you may
prove yourſelf unjuſt, but in yielding to it you
grant me but my due. If all things conſidered,
I be the fit ſubject of a benefit, the benefit is
merited: merit in any other ſenſe is contradictory
and abſurd. If you beſtow upon me unmerited
advantage, you are a recreant from the general
good. I may be baſe enough to thank you; but,
if I were virtuous, I ſhould condemn you.
Theſe ſentiments alone are confiſtent with
true independence of mind. He that is accuſ-
tomed to regard virtue as an affair of favour and
grace, cannot be eminently virtuous. If he oc-
caſionally perform an action of apparent kind-
neſs, he will applaud the generoſity of his ſenti-
ments; and, if he abſtain, he will acquit himſelf


Vol. II. Y with


\ .


— * OF PAR DON S.

with the queſtion, © May I not do what I will
with my own?” In the ſame manner, when he
is treated benevolently by another, he will in the
firſt place be unwilling to examine ſtrictly into
the reaſonableneſs of this treatment, becauſe
benevolence, as he imagines, is not ſubject to
any inflexibility of rule; and, in the ſecond place,
he will not regard his benefactor with that erect
and unembarraſſed mien, that complete ſenſe of


equality, which is the only immoveable baſis of
virtue and —


| AN .
ENQUIRY


POLITICAL JUSTICE.


B UV O K VIC
Gl F ROPERVTSE


8 A &


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY
DELINEATED.


Importance of this topic. —Abuſes to which it has
been expyſed.—Criterion of property: Fuſtice.—
Entitles each man to the ſupply of his aximal
wants as fargthe general flock will afford it—
to the means of well being. — Eſtimate of
luxury.—Its pernicious effefts on the individual
who partakes of it. —ldea of labour as the
foundation of property conſidered. Its unrea-
= fonableneſs.—Syſtem of popular morality on this

ſubject. — Defect of that ſyſtem.


\


*


TE ſubject of property is the key ſtone that
completes the fabric of political juſtice. According
as our ideas reſpecting it are crude or correct,
they will enlighten us as to the conſequences of a
* | Y 2 ſimple


324 GENUINE SYSTEM OF
ſimple form of ſociety without government, and


remove the prejudices that attach us to com-
plexity. There is nothing that more power-
fully tends to diſtort our judgment and opinions,
than erroneous notions concerning the goods of
fortune. Finally, the period that ſhall put an
end to the ſyſtem of coercion and puniſhment, 1s
intimately connected with the circumſtance of

property's being placed upon an equitable baſis.
Various abuſes of the moſt incontrovertible
nature have inſinuated themſelves into the admi-
niſtration of property. Each of theſe abuſes
might uſefully be made the ſubject of a ſeparate
inveſtigation. We might enquire into the vexati-
ons of this ſort that are produced by the dreams
of national greatneſs or magiſtratical vanity.
This would lead us to a juſt eſtimate of the dif-
ferent kinds of taxation, landed or mercantile,
having the neceſſaries or the luxuries of life for
their ſubject of operation. We might examine
into. the abuſes which have adhered to the com-
mercial ſyſtem ; monopohes, charters, patents,
protecting duties, prohibitions and bounties. We
might remark upon the conſequences that flow
from the feudal ſyſtem and the ſyſtem of ranks ;
ſeignorial duties, fines, conveyances, entails,
eſtates freehold, copyhold and manorial, vaſlalage
and primogeniture. We might conſider the rights
of the church; firſt fruits and tithes: and we
might enquire into the propriety of the regulation
by which a man, after having poſſeſſed as ſo-
vereign a conſiderable property during his life,
is permitted to diſpoſe of it at his pleaſure, at
the period which the laws of nature ſeem to have
fixed


PROPERTY DELINEATED. 32;


fixed as the termination of his authority, All
theſe enquiries would tend to ſhow the incalcula-
ble importance of this ſubject. But, excluding
them all from the preſent enquiry, it ſhall be the
buſineſs of what remains of this work to conſider,
not any particular abuſes which have incidentally
riſen out of the adminiſtration of property, but
thoſe general principles by which it has in almoſt
all caſes been directed, and which, if erroneous,
muſt not only be regarded as the ſource of the
abuſes above enumerated, but of others of innu-
merable kinds, too A and ſubtle to
enter into ſo brief a catalogue.
What is the criterion that muſt determine
whether this or that ſubſtance, capable of con-
tributing to the benefit of a human being, ought
to be conſidered as your property or mine? 'To
this queſtion there can be but one anſwer—Jut-
tice, Let us then recur to the principles of
juſtice“.

To whom does any article of property, ſup-
poſe a loaf of bread, juſtly belong? To him who
moſt wants it, or to whom the poſſeſſion of it
will be moſt beneficial. Here are fix men fa-
miſhed with hunger, and the loaf is, abſolutely
conſidered, capable of ſatisfying the cravings of
them all. Who is it that has a reaſonable claim
to benefit by the qualities with which this loaf is
endowed ? They are all brothers perhaps, and
the law of primogeniture beſtows its excluſtvely
on the eldeſt. But does juſtice confirm this
award? The laws of different countries diſpoſe

of , in a thouſand different ways Hon
| there


* Book II, Chap. II.


326 GENUINE SYSTEM OF


there can be but one way which is moſt conform-


able to reaſon.
It would have been eafy to put a caſe much


ſtronger than that which has juſt been ſtated. I
an- an hundred loaves in my poſſeſſion, and in


the next ſtreet there is a poor man expiring with


hunger, to whom one of theſe loaves would be


the means of preſerving his life. If I withhold


this loaf from him, am I not unjuſt ? If T impart
it, am I not complying with what juſtice de-
mands ? 'To whom does the loaf juſtly belong ?

I ſuppoſe myſelf in other reſpects to be in
eaſy circumſtances, and that I do not want this
bread as an object of barter or ſale, to procure
me any of the other neceſſaries of a human being.


Our animal wants have long - ſince been defined,


and are ſtated to conſiſt of food, clothing and
ſhelter. If juſtice have any meaning, nothing
can be more iniquitous, than for one man to
poſſeſs ſuperfluities, while there is a human
being in exiſtence that is not adequately ſupplied |
with theſe.
Juſtice does not top here. Every man is
entitled, ſo far as the general ſtock will ſuffice,
not only to the means of being, but of well
being. It is unjuſt, if one man labour to the
deſtruction of his health or his life, that another
man may abound in luxuries. It is unjuſt, if
one man be deprived of leiſure to cultivate his
rational powers, while another man contributes
not a ſingle effort to add to the common ftock.
The faculties of one man are like the faculties of
another man. Juſtice directs that each man un-
leſs * he be employed more beneficially to
the


PROPERTY DELINEAT ED. 327


the public, ſhould contribute to the cultivation
of the common harveſt, of which each man
conſumes a ſhare. This reciprocity indeed, as
was obſerved when that ſubje& was the matter
of ſeparate conſideration, is of the very eſſence
of juſtice. How the latter branch of it, the ne-
ceſſary labour, is to be ſecured, while each man
1s admitted to claim his ſhare of the produce, we
{hall preſently have occaſion to enquire. |
This ſubject will be placed in a ſtill more ſtrix-
ing light, if we reflect for a moment on the na-
ture of luxuries. The wealth of any ſtate may
intelligibly enough be conſidered as the aggregate
of all the incomes, which are annually conſumed
within that ſtate, without deſtroying the mate-
rials of an equal conſumption in the enſuing
year. Conſidering this income as being, what in
almoſt all caſes it will be found to be, the produce
of the induſtry of the inhabitants, it will follow
that in civiliſed countries the peaſant often does
not conſume more than the twentieth part of the

produce of his labour, while his rich neighbour
conſumes perhaps the produce of the labour of
twenty peaſants. The benefit that ariſes to this
favoured mortal ought ſurely to be very extraor-

dinary. JA |
But nothing is more evidend than that the con-
dition of this man is the reverſe of beneficial.
The man of an hundred pounds per annum, if
he underſtand his own happineſs, is a thouſand
times more favourably circumſtanced. What ſhall
the rich man do with his enormous wealth? Shall
he eat of innumerable diſhes.of the moſt expen-
five viands, or pour down hogſheads of the moſt
highly flavoured wines ? A frugal diet will con-
8 tribute


— — +


— — — — — — —


8 —


32 GENUINE SYSTEM OF


tribute infinitely more to health, to a clear un-
derſtanding, to chearful ſpirits, and even to the


gratification of the appetites. Almoſt every


other expence is an expence of oſtentation. No
man, but the moſt ſordid epicure, would long
continue to maintain even a plentiful table, if


he had no ſpectators, viſitors or ſervants, to be-


hold his efiabliſhment. For whom are our
ſumptuous palaces and coſtly furniture, our


-equipages, and even our very clothes? The


nobleman, who ſhould for the firſt time let his
imagination looſe to conceive the ſtyle in which


he would live, if he had nobody to obſerve,
and no eye to pleaſe but his own, would no


doubt be ſurpriſed to find that vanity had been
the firſt mover in all his actions.
The object of this vanity is to procure the


| admiration and applauſe of beholders. We need
not here enter into the intrinſic value of ap-


plauſe. Taking it for granted that it is as eſti-
mable an acquiſition as any man can ſuppoſe it,
how contemptible is the ſource of applauſe to
which the rich man has recourſe? * Applaud
me, becauſe my anceſtor has left me a great


eſtate. What merit is there in that? The firſt


effect then of riches is to deprive their poſſeſſor
of the genuine powers of underſtanding, and
render him incapable of diſcerning abſolute


truth. They lead him to fix his affections on


objects not accommodated to the wants and the
ſtructure of the human mind, and of conſe-
quence entail upon him diſappointment and un-
happineſs. The greateſt: of all perſonal advan-
tages are, independence of mind, which makes


us


PROPERTY DELINEATED. 329


us feel that our ſatisfactions are not at the mercy
either of men or of fortune; and activity of
mind, the chearfulneſs that ariſes from induſtry
perpetually employed about objects, of which
our judgment acknowledges the intrinſic value.
In this caſe we have compared the happineſs
of the man of extreme opulence with that of
the man of one hundred pounds per annum.
But the latter fide of this alternative was aſſumed


merely in compliance with exiſting as pc


Even in the preſent ſtate of human ſociety w

perceive, that a_man, who ſhould be 3
earning the neceſſary competence by a very mo-
derate induſtry, and with his purſuits uncroſſed
by the peeviſhneſs or caprice of his neighbours,
would not be leſs happy than if he were born
to that competence. In the ſtate of ſociety we
are here contemplating, where, as will preſently
appear, the requiſite induſtry will be of the
lighteſt kind, it will be the reverſe of a misfor-
tune to any man, to find himſelf neceſſarily
ſtimulated to a gentle activity, and in conſe-


quence to feel that no reverſe of fortune could


deprive him of the means of ſubliſtence and
contentment.

Butit has been alledged, © that we find among
different men very different degrees of labour
and induſtry, and that it is not juſt they ſhould
receive an equal reward.” It cannot indeed be
denied that the attainments of men in virtue
and uſefulncis ought by no means to be con-
founded. How far the preſent ſyſtem of pro-
perty contributes to their being equitably treated


it is very eaſy to determine. The preſent ſyſtem


or


4 - . n — 2 a 2 p 2 p 8 g
Q 8 — DO 6 2 . =, L 8 1


o
- =__ 9m Gennes —

o — RY Sa

— — _ x

gud iy" bs 8 *


0 K —
ES 4 8 we
— —


—ͤ— — — — —
n A
-


330  GENVINE SYSTEM OF


ol property confers on one man immenſe wealth


in conſideration of the accident of his birth.
He that from beggary aſcends to opulence, is


uſually known not to have effected this tranſition
by methods very creditable to his honeſty or his
uſefulneſs. The moſt induſtrious and active
member of fociety is frequently with great dif-


ficulty able to keep his family from ſtarving.


But, to paſs over theſe iniquitous effects of
the unequal diſtribution of property, let us con-


ſider the nature of the reward which is thus
propoſed to induſtry. If you be induſtrious,
vou ſhall have an hundred times more food than
vou can eat, and an hundred times more clothes


than you can wear. Where is the juſtice of


this? If I be the greateſt benefactor the human
ſpecies ever knew, is that a reaſon for beſtowing
oh me what I do not want, eſpecially when


there are thouſands to whom my ſuperfluity


would be of the greateſt advantage? With 5
ſuperfluity I can purchaſe nothing but ga

oſtentation and envy, nothing but the pit
pleaſure of returning to the poor under the name


of generoſity that to which reaſon gives them


an irreſiſtible claim, nothing but prejudice, error
and vice.


The doctrine of the injuſtice of accumulated
property has been the counting of all religious


morality, The object of this morality has been,


to excite men by individual virtue to repair this
injuſtice. The moſt energetic teachers of reli-
gion have been irreſiſtibly led to affert the pre-


eiſe truth upon this intereſting ſubject. They


have e. the rich, that they hold their wealth
| only


PROPERTY DELINEATED. 332


only as a truſt, that they are ſtrictly accountable
for every atom of their expenditure, that they
are merely adminiſtrators, and by no means
proprietors in chief *. The defect of this ſyſtem.
is, that they rather excite us to palliate our in-
juſtice than to forſake it.

No truth can be more {imple than that which
they inculcate. There is no action of any hu-
man being, and certainly no action that reſpects
the diſpolition of property, that is not capable
of better and worſe, and concerning which rea-
ſon and morality do not preſcribe a ſpecific
conduct. He that ſets out with acknowledging
that other men are of the ſame nature as him»
ſelf, and is capable of perceiving the preciſe
place he would hold in the eye of an impartial
ſpectator, mult be fully ſenſible, that the money
he employs in procuring an object of trifling or
no advantage to himſelf, and which might have
been employcd in purchaſing ſubſtantial and
indiſpenſible benefit to another, is unjuſtly em-
8 He that looks at his property with
the eye of truth, will find that every ſhilling
of it has received its deſtination from the dic»
tates of juſtice. He will at the ſame time how
ever be ad to conſiderable pain, in conſe-
quence of his own ignorance as to the preciſe
diſpoſition that juſtice and public utility require.
Does any man doubt of the truth of theſe

aſlertions ? Does any man doubt that, when I
employ a ſum of money {mall or great in the
purchaſe of an abſolute luxury for myſelf, I am


guilty


* See Swift's Sermon on Mutual Subjection, quoted Book II.
Chap. II.


332 GEN UINE SYSTEM OF
guilty of vice? It is high time that this ſubject


ſhould be adequately underſtood. It is high


time that we ſhould lay aſide the very names
of juſtice and virtue, or that we ſhould ac-
knowledge that they do not authoriſe us to accu-
mulate luxuries upon ourſelves, while we ſee


others in want of the indiſpenſible means of


improvement and happinels,


But, while religion inculcated on kind |


the impartial nature of juſtice, its teachers have
been too apt to treat the practice of juſtice,
not as a debt, which it ought to be con-
ſidered, but as an affair of ſpontaneous genero-
fity and bounty. They have called upon the


rich to. be clement and merciful to the poor.


The conſequence of this has been that the rich,
when they beſtowed the moſt ſlender pittance
of their enormous wealth in acts of charity, as
they were called, took merit to themſelves for
what they gave, inſtead of conſidering them-
ſelves as delinquents for what they withheld.

Religion is in reality in all its parts an ac-
commodation to the prejudices and weakneſſes
of mankind. Its authors communicated to the
world as much truth, as they calculated that the
world would be willing to receive. But it 1s
time that we ſhould lay aſide the inſtruction in-
tended only for children in underſtanding *, and
contemplate the nature and principles of things.
If religion had ſpoken out, and told us it was
juſt that all men ſhould receive the ſupply of
their wants, we ſhould preſently have been led


ta ;


* 1 Cor, Chap. III. Ver. 1, 2.


PROPERTY DELINEATED. 333


to ſuſpect that a gratuitous diſtribution to be


made by the rich, was a very indirect and in-


effectual way of arriving at this object. The
experience of all ages has taught us, that this


ſyſtem is productive only of a very precarious
ſupply. The principal object which it ſeems to
propoſe, is to place this ſupply in the diſpoſal
of a few, enabling them to make a ſhow of ge-
neroſity with what is not truly their own, and
to purchaſe the gratitude of the poor by the
payment of a debt. It is a ſyſtem of clemency
and charity, inſtead of a ſyſtem of juſtice. It
fills the rich with unreaſonable pride by the
ſpurious denominations with which it decorates
their acts, and the poor with ſervility, by lead-


ing them to regard the ſlender comforts they


obtain, not as their incontrovertible due, but as


the good pleaſure and the grace of their opulent


neighbours.


CHAP.


|
]
>
tl
*.
=
1
.
:
1
8
iv
ah
4
—
6
*
4
*
y
4
J
1
*
„
*.
Nt
k
*
4
4
9
K
TY.
1
g
27
1
i
zi
+
*
N


234 BENEFITS ARISING FROM THE


BENEFITS ARISING FROM THE GENUINE -
SYSTEM OF PROPERTY.


Conreſted with the miſchiefs of the FRE tem,
as conſiſting— 1. In a ſenſe of dependence. —
2. In the perpetual ſpeetacle of Gele, lead.

ung men aſtray in their dęſires and perverting

the integrity of their judgments.—The rich are

' the true penſioners.—3. In the diſcouragement

of intellectual altainments.—4. In the multi-
plication of vice—generating the crimes of the
poor—the paſſions of the rich—and the misfor-

tunes of war.—5. In depopulation.


Having ſeen the juſtice of an equal diftri-
bution of property, let us next conſider the
benefits with which it would be attended. And
here with grief it muſt be confeſſed, that,
however great and extenſive are the evils that
are produced by monarchies and courts, by the
impoſture of prieſts and the 1 iniquity of criminal
laws, all theſe are imbecil and impotent com-
pared with the evils that ariſe out of the eſtab-
liſhed ſyſtem of property.

Its firſt effect is that which we have already
mentioned, a ſenſe of dependence. It is true
that courts are mean ſpirited, intriguing and
fervile, and that this diſpoſition is transferred by

contagion


hourly corruption, and bred from father to ſon


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 333


contagion from them to all ranks of ſociety.


But property brings home a ſervile and truck-_


ling ſpirit by no circuitous method to every
houſe in the nation. Obſerve the pauper fawn-
ing with abject vileneſs upon his rich benefac-
tor, and ſpeechleſs with ſenſations of gratitude
for having received that, which he ought ro
have claimed with an ere& mien, and with a
conſciouſneſs that his claim was irreſiſtible,
Obſerve the ſervants that follow ia a rich man's
train, watchful of his looks, anticipating his
commands, not daring to reply to his inſolence,
all their time and their efforts under the di-
rection of his caprice. Obſerve the tradeſman,
how he ſtudies the paſſions of his cuſtomers,
not to correct, but to pamper them, the vileneſs
of his flattery and the ſyſtematical conſtancy
with which he exaggerates the merit of his
commodities. Obſerve the practices of a po-


pular election, where the great maſs are pur-
chaſed by obſequiouſneſs, by intemperance and.


bribery, or driven by unmanly threats of po-
verty and perſecution. Indeed © the age of
chivalry is not © gone*!” The feudal ſpirit
ſtill ſurvives, that reduced the great maſs of


mankind to the rank of flaves and cattle for the


ſervice of a few.

We have heard much of viſionary and theo-
retical improvements. It would indeed be i-
ſionary and theoretical to expect virtue from
mankind, while they are thus ſubjected to


ü


* Burke's Reflections.


44 — — — — — —


.
*
1 ]
j
i
1
| 2
Ei,
1
1 *D
| >
| ;
i 3
1
: 9
1 f
: ! g
f 1
!
A
j
i

4

1 ,

ff

{ -N

va

. **

*
©

I 1

L *
"7

i 1

: Ls
!
*

4 4

|

: 4
1 1
} 4

1
=

' 5

/ +

1

1

5

5
«2

: =

: |
*

; 4
*

4

15

1

©

6: A

&

*
rag
ö *

: 0
1
133
1
*
0 *
'
=
*
*


336 BENEFITS ARISING FROM THE


to ſell their independence and their conſcience
for the vile rewards that oppreſſion has to be-


ſtow. No man can be either uſeful to others


or happy to himſelf who-is a ſtranger to the
grace of firmneſs, and who is not habituated to
prefer the dictates of his own ſenſe of rectitude


to all the tyranny of command, and allure-


ments of temptation. Here again, as upon a
former occaſion, religion comes in to illuſtrate
our theſis. Religion was the generous ebullition
of men, who let their imagination looſe on the
grandeſt ſubjects, and wandered without reſtraint
in the unbounded field of enquiry. It is not to
be wondered at therefore if they brought home
imperfect ideas of the ſublimeſt views that in-
tellect can furniſh. In this inſtance religion
teaches that the true perfection of man is to di-
veft himſelf of the influence of paſſions ; that
he muſt have no artificial wants, no ſenſuality,
and no fear. But to diveſt the human


| fpecies under the preſent ſyſtem of the in-


fluence of paſſions is an extravagant ſpecu-


lation. The enquirer after truth and the


benefactor of mankind will be deſirous of re-
moving from them thoſe external impreſſions
by which their evil propenſities are cheriſhed.
The true object that ſhould be kept in view, is
to extirpate all ideas of condeſcenſion and ſu-
periority, to oblige every man to feel, that the


kindneſs he exerts is what he is bound to per-
form, and the aſſiſtance he aſks what he has, a


right to claim.
A ſecond evil that ariſes out of the eſtabliſhed
ſyſtem of 288 is the perpetual ſpectacle of


injuſtice


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 437


injuſtice it exhibits. This conſiſts partly in
luxury and partly in caprice. There is nothing
more pernicious to the human mind than luxury.
Mind, being in its own. nature effentially
active, neceſſarily fixes on ſome object public or
perſonal, and in the latter caſe on the attainment
of ſome excellence, or ſomething which ſhall
command the eſteem and deference of others.
No propenſity, abſolutely conſidered, can be
more valuable than this. But the eſtabliſhed
ſyſtem of property directs it into the channel of
the acquiſition of wealth. The oftentation of
the rich perpetually goads the ſpectator to the
deſire of opulence. Wealth, by the ſentiments
of ſervility and dependence it produces, makes
the rich man ſtand forward as the only object of
general eſteem and deference. In vain are ſo-
briety, integrity and induſtry, in vain the
ſublimeſt powers of mind and the moſt ardent
benevolence, if their poſſeſſor be narrowed in
his circumſtances, To acquire wealth and. to
diſplay it, is therefore the univerſal paſſion. The
whole ſtructure of human ſociety is made a
ſyſtem of the narroweſt ſelfiſnneſs. If ſelf love
and benevolence were apparently reconciled as
to their object, a man might ſet out with the
deſire of eminence, and yet every day become
more generous and philanthropical in his views.
But the paſſion we are here deſcribing is accuſ-
tomed to be gratified at every ſtep, by inhumanly
trampling upon the intereſt of others: Wealth
is acquired by overreaching our neighbours, and
is ſpent in inſulting them. | |

The ſpectacle of injuſtice which the eſtabliſhed
ſyſtem of property exhibits, conſifts partly in

Vor. II. Z. caprice.


at \


338 BENEFITS ARISING FROM THE


caprice. If you would cheriſh in any man the
love of rectitude, you muft take care that its
principles be impreſſed on- him, not only by


words, but actions. It ſometimes happens dur-


ing the period of education, that maxims of in-
tegrity — conſiſtency are repeatedly inforced,
and that the preceptor gives no quarter to the
baſe ſuggeſtions of ſelfiſhneſs and cunning.
But how is. the leſſon that has been read to the
pupil confounded and reverſed, when he enters
upon the ſcene of the world? If he aſk, * Why
is this man honoured ?” the ready 1 18,
* Becauſe he is rich. If he enquire farther,
„Why is he rich?“ the anſwer in moſt caſes is,
From the accident of birth, or from a minute
and fordid attention to the cares of gain.” The
ſyſtem of accumulated property is the offspring
of civil policy; and civil policy, as we are taught
to believe, is the production of accumulated
wiſdom. Thus the wiſdom of legiſlators and


ſenates has been employed, to. fecure a diftribu-


tion of property the moſt profligate and unprin-
cipled, that bids defiance to the maxims of juſ-
tice and the nature of man. Humanity weeps
over the diſtreſſes of the peaſantry of all civiliſed
nations; and, when ſhe turns from this ſpecta-
ele to behole the luxury of their lords, groſs,
imperious and prodigal, her ſenſations certainly
are not leſs acute. This ſpectacle is the ſchool
in which mankind have been educated. They
have been accuſtomed to the ſight of injuſtice,
oppreſſion and iniquity, till their feelings are
made callous, and their underſtandings incapa-


ble of apprehending the nature of true virtue.


F


/


mulated property, we compared the extent of
thoſe evils with the correſpondent evils of
monarchies and courts. No eireumſtances under
the latter have excited a more pointed diſappro-
bation than penſions and pecuniary corruption,
by means of which hundreds of individuals are


rewarded, not for ſerving, but betraying the


public, and the hard earnings of induſtry are
employed to fatten the ſervile adherents of deſ-
potiſm. But the rent roll of the lands of Eng-
land is a much more formidable penſion liſt,
than that which 1s fuppoſed to be employed in
the purchaſe of miniſterial majorities, All richgs,
and eſpecially all hereditary riches, are to be con-
ſidered as the ſalary of a ſinecure office, where
the labourer and the manufaQturer perform the
duties, and the principal fpends the income in
luxury and idleneſs . Hereditary wealth is in


Z 2 reality


* This idea is to be found in Ogilvie's Eſſay on the Right of
Property in Land, publiſhed about two years ago, Part I, Sect.
iii, par. 38, 39. The reaſonings of this author have ſometimes
conſiderable merit, though he has by no means gone to the ſource
of theevnb -:! -: 3 14 14 ey | |

It might be amuſing to ſome readers to recolle@ the authorities,
if the citation of authorities were a proper mode of reaſoning, by
which the ſyſtem of accumulated property is openly attacked.
The beſt known is Plato in his treatiſe of a Republic, His ſteps
have been followed by Sir Thomas More in his Utopia. Speci-
mens of very powerful reaſoning on the fame fide may be found in
Gulliver's Travels, particularly, Part IV. Chap. VI. Mably, in


his book De la Legiſlation, has diſplayed at large the advantages of


equality, and then quits the ſubject in deſpair from an opinion

the/ incorrigibleneſs of human depravity. Wallace, the contem-
porary and antagoniſt of Hume, in a treatiſe entitled, Various
Proſpects of Mankind, Nature and Providence, is copious in his
eulogium of the ſame ſyſtem, and deſerts it only from fear of —


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY: 330
In beginning to point out the evils of aceu-


*.
, bs ©
hb
4 4
1
i
+2
*
im
.
\ 4
: Þ
:
:
-


FFP A ̃] kA ˙ w


340 BENEFITS ARISING FROM THE


reality a premium paid to idleneſs, an immenſe
annuity expended to retain mankind ; in brutality
and ignorance. The poor are kept in ignorance
by the want of leifure. The rich are furniſhed
indeed with the means of cultivation and litera-
ture, but they are paid for being diſſipated and
indolent. The moſt powerful means that malig-
nity could have invented, are-employed to pre-
vent them from improving their talents, and
becoming uſeful to the public. 3

; Thie l. leads us to obſerve, chirdly, that the
eſtabliſhed ſyſtem of property, is the true level-
ling ſyſtem with reſpect to the human ſpecies,
by as much as the cultivation of intellect and
— is more valuable and more characteriſtic
of man, than the gratifications of vanity or ap-
petite. Accumulated property treads the powers
of thought in the duſt, extinguiſhes the ſparks
of genius, and reduces the great maſs of man-
kind to be immerſed in ſordid cares ; beſide de-
priving the rich, as we have already ſaid, of the
moſt ſalubrious and effectual motives to activity.
If ſuperfluity were baniſhed, the neceſſity for
the greater part of the manual induſtry of man-
kind would be e ; and the reſt, being


f „ amicably |


n decoding too {IR fee 1e Chap. VII. The great
practical authorities are Crete, Sparta, Peru, and Paraguay. It
would be eaſy to ſwell this liſt, if we added examples where an ap-
proach only to theſe principles was attempted, and authors who
have incidentally confirmed a do&rine, ſo intereſting and clear, as
never to have been wholly eradicated from any human underſtand-
in

| At would'be'trifling to object chat the ſyſtems of Plato and others
are full of imperfections. This indeed rather ſtrengthens their
authority; ſinee the evidence of the truth they maintained was fo
great, as ſtill to preſerve its hold on their underſtandings, though
they Knew not how to remove the difficulties that attended.it.


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY 341


amicably ſhared among all the active and vigorous
members of the community, would be burthen-
ſome to none. Every man would have a frugal,

yet wholeſome diet; every man would go forth to
that moderate exeiciſe of his corporal functions
that would give hilarity to the ſpirits; none would
be made torpid with fatigue, but all would have
leiſure to cultivate the kindly and philanthropical
affeQtions of the ſoul, and to let looſe his faculties _
in the ſearch of intellectual improvement. What
a contraſt does this ſcene preſent us with the pre-
ſent ſtate of human ſociety, where the peaſant
and the labourer work, till their underſtandings
are benumbed with toil, their ſinews contracted
and made callous by being for ever on the ſtretch,

and their bodies invaded with infirmities and fur.
rendered to an untimely grave? What is the fruit
of this diſproportioned and unceaſing toil ? At
evening they return to a family, famiſhed with
hunger, expoſed half naked to the inclemencies
of the ſky „hardly ſh ſheltered, and denied the
ſlendereſt ialtructien, unleſs in a few inſtances,
where it is diſpenſed by the hands of oſtentatious
charity, and the firſt leſſon communicated is un-
principled ſervility. All this while their rich
neighbour—but we viſited him before.

How rapid and ſublime would be the advances
of intellect, if all men were admitted into the
field of knowledge ? ? At preſent ninety-nine per-
ſons in an hundred are no more excited to any
regular exertions of general and curious thought,
than the brutes themſelves. What would be the
ſtate of public mind in a nation, where all were
wiſe, all had laid afide the ſhackles of prejudice


and


342 BENEFITS ARBING FROM THE


and implicit faith, all adopted with fearleſs con-
fidence the ſuggeſtions of truth, and the lethargy
of the ſoul was diſmiſſed for ever? it is to be
preſumed that the inequality of mind would in
2 certain degree be permanent; but it is reaſona-
ble to believe that the geniuſes of ſuch an age
would far furpals the grandeſt exertions of in-
tellect that are at preſent known. Genius would
not be depreſſed with falſe wants and niggardly
patronage. It would not exert itſelf with a ſenſe
of negle& and oppreſſion rankling in its boſom,
It would be freed from thoſe apprehenſions that
perpetually recal us to the thought of | car
emolument, and of conſequence would expa-
tiate freely among ſentiments of generoſity and
public good. 51 |


- From ideas of intellectual let us turn to moral
improvement. And here it is obvious that all
the occaſions. of crime would be cut off for ever.
All men love juftice. All men are conſcious that
man 1s a being of one common nature, and feel
the propriety of the treatment they receive from
one another being meaſured by a common ſtand-
ard. Every man is deſirous of aſſiſting another;
whether we ſhould chooſe to aſcribe this to an
inſtinct implanted in his nature which renders.
this conduct a ſoũrce of perſonal gratification,
or to his perception of the reaſonableneſs of ſuch
aſſiſtance. So neceſſary a part is this of the con-
ſtitution of mind, that no man perpetrates any
action however criminal, without having firſt
invented ſome ſophiſtry, ſome palliation, by
which he proves to himſelf that it is beſt to be
done“. Hence it appears, that offence, the in-
N ien
of Book II. Chap. III, p. 92. | 15 85


1


GENUINE, SYSTEM OF. PROPERTY. 343


vaſion of one man upon the ſecurity of another,
is a thought alien to mind, and which nothing
could have reconciled to us but the ſharp ſting
of neceſſity. * To conſider merely the preſent
order of human ſociety, it is evident that the
firſt offence muſt have been his who began a
monopoly, and took advantage of the weakneſs
of his neighbours to ſecure certain excluſive
privileges to himſelf. The. man on the other
hand who determined to put an end to this mo-
nopoly, and who peremptorily demanded what
was {upgrfiuous to the poſſeſſor and would be of
extreme benefit to himſelf, appeared to his own
mind to be merely avenging the violated laws of
juſtice. Were it not for the plauſibleneſs of this
apology, it is to be preſumed that there would

be no ſuch thing as crime in the world.
The fruitful ſource of crimes conſiſts in this
circumſtance, one man's poſſeſſing in abundance
that of which another man 1s deſtitute, We
muſt change the nature of mind, before we can
prevent it from being powerfully influenced by
this circumſtance, when brought ſtrongly home
to its perceptions by the nature of its ſituation.
Man muſt ceaſe to have ſenſes, the pleaſures. of
appetite and vanity muſt ceaſe to gratify, before
he can look on tamely at the monopoly of theſe
pleaſures. He muſt ceaſe to have a ſenſe of jul-
tice, before he can clearly and fully approve this
mixed ſcene of ſuperfluity and diſtreſs. It is
true that the proper method of curing this ine-
quality is by reaſon and not by violence. But
the immediate tendency of the eſtabliſhed ſyſtem
is to perſuade men that reaſon is impotent. The
lf Fas | injuſtice


* *


n 1


F


1 IS
— 7 26


7
f
(4
D
.
7
0 ö
od
+ vl
1's
54
4 4
[]
„4
EY.
i FT
L 4 of
.
438
* . 11 a
*
1
_
N
94
BT
8 8
.
1 .
i is N
14
"4
„
* hb x
.
_
1
+
> It
% 6 „ :
+6 308 7
.
1
9
19 .
* .
7
5
5 . *
'fs
. £
1-248
1
1
I N
2
l 1
k "a
0 1
þ {
nn
4
1
1
.
bY
9
& 1 ''
1
LNG
"15%
[ |
.


—
*


Rr rg => nanny, a nc
2 — . = — 2
a N 0


— PPP A . ta 34+
ner te teas poten — — r
* 0 : N


344 BENEFITS ARISING FROM THE


injuſtice of which they complain is upheld by
force, and they are too eaſily induced, by force
to attempt its correction. All they endeavour
is the partial correction of an injuſtice, which
education tells them is neceſſary, but more _


_ erful reaſon affirms to be tyrannical.


Force grew out of monopoly. It might acci-
dentally have occurred among ſavages whoſe ap-
petites exceeded their ſupply, or whoſe paſſions
were inflamed by the preſence of the object of
their deſire; but it would gradually have died


away, as reaſon and civiliſation advanced. Ac-


cumulated property has fixed its empire; and
henceforth all is an open contention of the
ſtrength and cunning of one party againſt the
ſtrength and cunning of the other. In this
caſe the violent and premature ſtruggles of the
neceſſitous are undoubtedly an evil, They tend
to defeat the very cauſe in the ſucceſs of which
they are moſt deeply intereſted ; they tend to


procraſtinate the triumph of truth. But the


true crime is in the malevolent and partial pro-
penſities of men, thinking only of themſelves,
and deſpiſing the emolument of others; and of
theſe the rich have their ſhare.

The ſpirit of oppreſſion, the ſpirit of ſervility,
and the ſpirit of fraud, theſe are the immediate
growth of the eſtabliſhed ſyſtem of property.
Theſe are 'alike hoſtile to intellectual and
moral improvement. The other vices of en-
vy, malice and revenge are their inſeparable
eompanions. In a ftate of ſociety where men
lived in the midſt of plenty, and where all
ſhared alike the bounties of nature, theſe
1 . 7 ſentiments


GENUINE SYSTEM Or PROPERTY. 335


| theſe ſentiments would inevitably expire. The
narrow principle. of ſelfiſhneſs would yaniſh.
No man being obliged to guard his little ſtore,


or provide with'anxiety and pain for his reſtleſs


wants, each would loſe his own individual ex-
iſtence in the thought of the general good.
No man would be an enemy to his neighbour,
for they would have nothing for which to con-
tend; and of conſequence philanthropy would
reſume the empire which reaſon aſſigns her.
Mind would be delivered from her perpetual -
anxiety about corporal ſupport, and free to ex-
patiate in the field of thought which is conge-
nial to her. Each man would nnn
of all.

Let us fix our attention for a moment upon |
the revolution of principles and habits that im-
mediately grow out of an unequal diſtribution
of property. Till it was thus diſtributed men
felt what their wants required, and ſought the
_ ſupply of thoſe wants. All that was more than
this, was regarded as indifferent. But no ſooner
is accumulation introduced, than they begin to
ſtudy a variety of methods, for diſpoſing of
their ſuperfluity with. leaſt emolument to their
neighbour, or in other words by which it ſhall
appear to be moſt their own. They do not
long continue to buy commodities, before they
begin to buy men. He that poſſeſſes or is the
ſpectator of ſuperfluity ſoon diſcovers the hold
which it affords us on the minds of others.
Hence the paſſions of vanity and oſtentation.
Hence the deſpotic manners of them who re-
collect with complacence the rank they *


/


346 BENEFITS ARISING FROM THE


and the reſtleſs ambition of thoſe whoſe atten-
tion is engroſſed by the poſhble future.
Ambition is of all the paſſions of the human
mind the moſt extenſive in its ravages. It adds
diſtrict to diſtrict, and kingdom to kingdom.
It ſpreads bloodſhed and calamity and conqueſt
over the face of the earth. But the paſſion it-
ſelf, as well as the means of gratifying it, is dhe
produce of the prevailing ſyſtem of property *.
It is only by means of accumulation that one
man obtains an unreſiſted fway over multitudes
of others. It is by means of a certain diſtribu-
tion of income that the preſent governments of
the world are retained in exiſtence. Nothing more
eaſy than to plunge nations ſo organiſed into war.
But, if Europe were at preſent covered with
inhabitants, all of them poſſeſſing competence,
and none of them ſuperfluity, what could in-
duce its different countries to engage in hoſtility ?
If you would lead men to war, you muſt ex-
| Hibit certain allurements. If you be not enabled
by a ſyſtem, already prevailing and which de-
rives force from preſcription, to hire them to
your purpoſes, you muſt bring over each indi-
vidual by dint of perfuation. How hopeleſs

a a taſk by ſuch means to excite mankind to mur-
der each other? It is clear then that war in every
horrid form is the growth of unequal property.
As long as this fource of jealouſy and corrup-
tion ſhall remain, it is vifionary to talk of uni-
verſal peace. As ſoon as the ſource ſhall be
n up, it will be menen to exclude the
| by quence.


. 3 V, Chap. XVI.


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 347
conſequence. It is property that forms men
into one common maſs, and makes them fit to
be played upon like a brute machine. Were
this ſtumbling block removed, each man would
be united to his neighbour in love and mutual
kindneſs a thouſand times more than now: but
each man would think and judge for himſelf.
Let then the advocates for the prevailing ſyſtem,
at leaſt conſider what it is for which they plead,
and be well aſſured that they have arguments in
its favour which will _ againſt theſe diſad-
vantages.

There is one other cir cunifhimeos which,
though inferior to thoſe above enumerated; de-
ſerves to be mentioned. This is population.
It has been calculated that the average cultiva-
tion of Europe might be improved, ſo as to
maintain five times her preſent number of in-
habitants . There is a principle in human

ſociety by which population is perpetually kept

down to the level of the means of ſubſiſtence.
Thus among the wandering tribes of America
and Aſia, we never find through the lapſe of
ages, that population has ſo increaſed, as to
render neceſſary the cultivation of the earth.
Thus, among the civiliſed nations of Europe,
by means of territorial monopoly the ſources of
ſubſiſtence are kept within a certain limit, and,
if the population became overſtocked, the lower
ranks of the inhabitants would be ſtill more in-
capable of procuring for themſelves the neceſſa-
ries of life, There are no doubt extraordinary
concurrences of er by means of


which


4 Ogilvie, Part 1. 8 Sect. iii, par. 25.


5 OF THE SUPPOSED ADVANTAGES


which changes are occaſionally introduced in this
reſpect; but in ordinary caſes the ſtandard of
population is held in a manner ſtationary for
centuries: Thus the eſtabliſhed ſyſtem of pro-
perty may be conſidered as angling. a conſi-
derable portion of our children in their cradle.
Whatever may be the value of the life of man,
or rather whatever would be his capability of
happineſs in a free and equal Rate of ſociety, the
ſyſtem we are here oppoling may be conſidered
as arreſting upon the threſhold of exiſtence four
fifths of that value and that happineſs.


, 2
4 l


CH" A'P. NK


OF THE OBJECTION' TO THIS SYSTEM FROM
" THE ADMIRABLE EFFECTS or LUXURY.


Nature of the objection. Luxury not neceſſary—
either to population—or to the ö of
db mind. Ie true character.


TRAESE ideas of juſtice and improvement are
as old as literature and reflection themſelves.
They have ſuggeſted themſelves in detached parts
to the inquiſitive in all ages, though they have

perhaps never been brought together fo as ſuffi-
ciently to ſtrike the mind with their conſiſtency:

j and 4 But, after — furniſhed an agree-

| | i able


O LULU. 4 2s
able him they have perpetually been laid aſide
as impracticable. We will proceed to examine
the objections upon which this ſuppoſed imprac-
ticability has been founded; and the anſwer to
theſe objections will gradually lead us to ſuch a
development of the propoſed ſyſtem, as by its

completeneſs and the regular adjuſtment of its
parts will be calculated to conviction to the
moſt prejudiced mind.

There is one objection chat has chiefly hn
cultivated on Engliſh ground, and to which we
will give the priority of examination. It has
been atirmed © that private vices are public be-
nefits.” But this principle, thus coarſely ſtated
by one of its original advocates*, was remodelled
by his more elegant ſucceſſors f. They obſerved,
that the true meaſure of virtue and vice was
utility, and conſequently that is was an unrea-
ſonable calumny to ſtate luxury as a vice. Luxu-
ry, they ſaid, © whatever might be the preju-
dices that cynics and aſcetics had excited againſt
it, was the rich and generous ſoil that brought to
perfection the true proſperity of mankind. With-
out luxury men muſt always have remained ſoli-

tary ſavages. It is luxury by which palaces are

built and cities peopled. How could there have
been high population in any country, without
the various arts in which the ſwarms of its in-
habitants are buſied? The true benefactor of
mankind 1s not the ſcrupulous devotee who by
his charities encourages inſenſibility and floth ;
4 1$ |

* Mandeville ; Fable of the Bees.


+ Coventry, in a treatiſe entitled, Philemon to Hydaſpes:
Hume; Eſſays, Part II, Effay II.


— —


.
— —


as


NS SN
— — — —
a — — en ZH


— FT % 828 „ oy
- 1 J
— —
* 7 2 *
*


r * 4 — 5 1 + = \ =
SEE - 404 2 a2 2 Py; WR . |
goth = 3 _ K . — 1
2 . , a _ - - — het x
- * —_— = —_— . y — — — — —
—


*
&5 - — — — 5 —
3 — — . ] ‚—‚——8«⁵«ðntu 3 "HZ — — ——
*
.
ww . * 7


350 OF THE SUPPOSED ADVANTAGES


is not the ſurly philoſopher who reads them
lectures of barren morality; but the elegant


voluptuary who employs thouſands i in ſober and
healthful induſtry to procure dainties for his table,
who unites diftant nations in commerce to ſupply
him with furniture, and who encourages the fine
arts and all the ſublimities of invention to fur-
nh decorations for his reſidence.”

I have brought forward this objection, rather
that nothing material might appear to be omitted,
than becauſe it requires a ſeparate anſwer. The
true anſwer has been anticipated. It has been
feen that the population of any country is
meaſured by its cultivation. If therefore ſufficient
motives can be furniſhed to excite men to agricul-
ture, there is no doubt, that population may be
carried on to any extent that the land can be
made to maintain. But agriculture, when once
begun, is never found to ſtop in its career, but
from poſitive diſcountenance. It is territorial


monopoly chat obliges men unwillingly to ſee


vaſt tracts of land lying waſte, or negligently and
imperfectly cultivated, while they are ſubjected
to the miſeries of want. If land were perpe-
tualty open to him who was willing to cultivate
it, it is not to be believed but that it would be
cultivated in proportion to the wants of the com-
munity, nor by the ſame reaſon would there be
any effectual check to the increaſe of population.
Undoubtedly the quantity of manual labour
would be greatly inferior to that which is now
performed by the inhabitants of any civiliſed
country, ſince at preſent perhaps one twentieth
part of the inhabitants performs the agriculture
which


*


OFF HRK UD Ur. ' It


which ſupports the whole, But it is by no means
to be admitted that this 8 would be found
a real calamity.

As to. what fort of a beneikficr the voluptuary
is to mankind, this was ſufficiently feen when we
treated of the effects of dependence and injuſtice.
To this ſpecies of benefit all the crimes and
moral evils of mankind are indebted for their
perpetuity. If mind be to be preferred to mere
amimal exiſtence, if it ought to be the with of
every reaſonable enquirer, not merely that man,
but that happineſs ſhould be propagated, then is
the Magee evi the bane of the human ſpecies.


C H A iP; Mk -


OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS SYSTEM FROM
THE ALLUREMENTS OF SLOTH.


The objection ſlated. Such a ſlate of fociety muſt
have been preceded by great intelletual improve-
ment. I he manual labour required in this ſlate
will be extremely ſmall. —Untverſality of” the
love of diftinftion.—Qperation of this motive

under the ſyſtem in queſtion—will finally be ſu-
perſeded by a better motive.


ANOTHER objection which has been urged
againſt the ſyſtem which counteracts the accumu-
lation of property, is, © that it would put an end

to induſtry. We behold in commercial countries


F the


2 2 ry
1 n


* — — ＋ 12 a= — -
be iS Tb + dd . ] EY Aw
Squat tr N


—— x —


— 2 — St -» ——


N /
i
A £
.
4 94
4
.
v! 4
=
1 \
"A
4%
Ss
N
Ly *
1
1
id
*
6
4.
}
f
2
*
1
x


— — — —ͤ— ä
-


— — 4 *


* — —— — — — — 7
4 - = go: —H — 1 © 8 — r 5
- = 44>. SOT 2 — 1 * * 39. 6 <5 E _ 4 » 38.4 = 2 —
n 6 . = — * - + — * — 8 — * *
, mh %
1 3 — — * — — mm . db
— —
— — — — = — ——_— yt - __
* —
1


352 OF THE PROPENSITY.


the miracles that are operated by the love of

ain. Their inhabitants cover the ſea with their
fleets, aſtoniſh mankind by the refinement of
their ingenuity, hold vaſt continents in ſubjection
in diſtant parts of the world by their arms, are


able to defy the moſt powerful confederacies,


and, oppreſſed with taxes and debts, ſeem to
acquire freſh proſperity under their accumulated
burthens. Shall we lightly part with a ſyſtem
that ſeems pregnant with ſuch inexhauſtible mo-
tives? Shall we believe that men will cultivate
aſſiduouſſy what they have no aſſurance they
ſhall be permitted to apply to their perſonal emo-
lument ? It will perhaps be found with agricul-
ture as it is with commerce, which then flouriſhes


| beſt when ſubjected to no control, but, when


placed under rigid reſtraints, languiſhes and ex-
Pires. Once eſtabliſh it as a principle in ſociety
that no man is to apply to his perſonal uſe more
than his neceſſities require, and you will find
every man become indifferent to thoſe exertions
which now call forth the energy of his faculties.
Man is the creature of ſenſations ;* and, when


we endeavour to ftrain his intelle&, and govern


him by reaſon alone, we do but ſhow our igno-
rance of his nature. Self love is the genuine
ſource of our actions *, and, if theſe ſhould


be found to bring vice and partiality along


with it, yet the ſyſtem that ſhould endeavour
to ſuperſede it, would be -at beſt no more
than a beautiful romance. If each man found
that, without being compelled to exert his own


induſtry,


v For an examination of this principle ſee Book IV, Chap. VIII.


TO SLOTHFULNESS. 353


induſtry, he might lay claim to the ſuperfluity of
his neighbour, indolence would perpetually uſurp
his faculties, and ſuch a ſociety muſt either ſtarve,
or be obliged in its own defence to return to that
ſyſtem of injuſtice and ſordid intereſt, which
theoretical reaſoners will for ever arraign to no
purpoſe.”
This is the principal objection that prevents

men from yielding without reſiſtance to the accu-
mulated evidence that has already been adduced.
In reply, it may be obſerved in the firſt place,
that the equality for which we are pleading is an
equality that would ſucceed to a ſtate of great in-
tellectual improvement. So bold a revolution
cannot take place in human affairs, till the gene-
ral mind has been highly cultivated. The pre-
ſent age of mankind is greatly enlightened; but
it is to be feared is not yet enlightened enough.
Haſty and undigeſted tumults may take place un-
der the idea * an equalifation of property; but
it is only a calm and clear conviction of juſtice,
of juſtice mutually to be rendered and received,
of happineſs to be produced by the deſertion of
our molt rooted habits, that can introduce an in-
variable ſyſtem of this fort. Attempts without
this preparation will be productive only of. con-
fuſion. Their effect will be momentary, and a a
new and more barbarous inequality will ſucceed. +
Each man with unaltered appetite will watch his
opportunity to gratify his love of power or his
love of diſtinction, by uſurping on his inattentive
neighbours.

Is it to be believed then that a ſtate of fo great
intellectual improvement can be the forerunner of

Vor. II. A'S barbariſin?


354 OF THE PROPENSITY
barbariſm ? Savages, it is true, are ſubject to the
weakneſs of indolence. But civiliſed and refined
ſtates are the ſcene of peculiar activity. It is
thought, acuteneſs of diſquiſition, and ardour of
urſuit, that ſet the corporeal faculties at work.
hought begs thought. Nothing can put a op
to the progreſſive advances of mind, but oppreſ-
fion. But here, ſo far from being oppreſſed,
every man is equal, every man independent and
at his eaſe. It has been obſerved that the eſta-
bliſhment of a republic is always attended with
public enthuſiaſm and irreſiſtible enterpriſe. Is
it to be believed that equality, the true republi-
caniſm, will be leſs effectual? It is true that in
republics this ſpirit ſooner or later is found to lan-
guiſh. Republicaniſm is not a remedy that ſtrikes
at the root of the evil. Injuſtice, oppreſſion and
miſery can find an abode in thoſe ſeeming happy
ſeats. But what ſhall ſtop the progreſs of ardour
and improvement, where the monopoly of pro-
perty 1s unknown ? = 42% 2
This argument will be ſtrengthened, if we re-
flect on the amount of labour that a ſtate of equal
property will require. What is this quantity of
exertion from which we are ſuppoſing many
members of the community to ſhrink ? It is ſo
light a burthen as rather to aſſume the appearance
of agreeable relaxation and gentle exerciſe, than
of labour. In this community ſcarcely any can
be expected in conſequence of their fituation or
avocations to conſider themſelves as exempted
from manual induſtry. There will be no rich
men to recline in indolence and fatten upon the
labour of their fellows. The mathematician, the
poet


— —


” =, ——_ —
2 * j -
mma 2 .
. * — 7 In, + — 2 22
= -— wart 3% 4 —
5


-. 4 <4

_—_
— —
EO TIER


—
3 »
g — N Ty = mM =
RX —_ * r * Nr = _ E OY : *
l — a : —— — 4 — — - — — r = _
enn — S . I —
—— L > . = S . N . *
— 5 N 3 — W * 4
= 1 - * I" * — . — —_ — « W
* = n


5 T r
3E 3 ö —> <6 : =
. — r 1
= — 2 — * be


o
9
1


2 — :
r


— — 2
— £:% : _—_—


þ

+ |
| þ
a
©
N


a D
_ — * N


— 2 — *


— — — | K
2 "i n Nr er LS ba ALL
92 A — pr

- c 3 =


—
—y— n 2 2:
— en + — — — = — —
.
-
-


wh — CM
— —


TO SLOTHFULNESS. 355


poet and the philoſopher will derive a new ſtock
of chearfulneſs and energy from the recurring la-
bour that makes them feel they are men. There
will be no perſons employed in the manufacture
of trinkets and luxuries ; and none in direCting the
Wheels of the complicated machine of govern-
ment, tax-gatherers, beadles, exciſemen, tide-
waiters, clerks and ſecretaries. There will be
neither fleets nor armies, neither courtiers nor
footmen. It is the unneceſſary employments that
at preſent occupy the great maſs of the inhabi-
tants of every civiliſed nation, while the peaſant
labours inceſſantly to maintain them in a ſtate
more pernicious than idleneſs. g |
It has been computed that not more than one
twentieth of the inhabitants of England are em-
ployed ſeriouſly and ſubſtantially in the labours of
agriculture. Add to this, that the nature of
agriculture is ſuch, as neceſſarily to give full oc-
cupation in ſome parts of the year, and to leave
others comparatively unemployed. We may
conſider theſe latter periods as equivalent to a la-
bour which, under the direction of ſufficient
(kill, might ſuffice in a ſimple ſtate of ſociety for
the fabrication of tools, for weaving, and the
occupation of taylors, bakers and butchers. The
object in the preſent ſtate of ſociety is to multiply
labour, in another ftate it will be to ſimplify it.
A vaſt diſproportion of the wealth of the commu-
nity has been thrown into the hands of a few,
and ingenuity has been continually upon the
ſtretch to find out ways in which it may be ex-
pended. In the feudal times the great lord in-
vited the poor to come and eat of the produce of


A121 his


—— — +2
4 P 3 " D = —
— — * Pry JE” — + * 7 2 FC J = —— =, —— a \ =
5 — — — — 2 2 4 eee E = — — — TS UB, — 6 — —U—U— — —
I N 3 1 5 — * — — $4 — Q IE: —— — 2 Fg wh $2E _ ks <4 — * — * - — =
— a — 2 - Ear ar SE te Es — _ — — — — — 2 — ů ů
—— —— . 4 —̃ — — — 3 — —_— — * = - _— —
— om = . — — — 5 g < NO Ce EE OS IEG
— — — * . - 8 -_ v - ITT —_ — —— — — * anal *
_ — —
—


g 5 Jo 2 42 — = =
Ee rn he oh r 3 S —
- Ep arm; ar Y 3 - —— — TOOL 2 4 —
7 * . J N 9 — — e
0 * 68 . Su. jp — „ ” — * 8 2 Sands
= G '


<2 — —_— — — —  —  —— EIS - 2 - *


—


356 OF THE PROPENSITY


his eſtate upon condition of their wearing his li-
very, and forming themſelves in rank and file to
do honour to his well born gueſts. Now that ex-
changes are more facilitated, we have quitted this
inartificial mode, and oblige the men we main-
tain out of our incomes to exert their ingenuity
and induſtry in return. Thus in the inſtance juſt
mentioned, we pay the taylor to cut our clothes
to pieces, that he may ſew them together again,
and to decorate them with ſtitching: and various
ornaments, without wiuch experience would
ſpeedily ſhow that they were in no reſpect leſs
uſeful. We are imagining in the preſent caſe a
ſtate of the moſt rigid ſimplicity.

From the ſketch which has been here given it


| ſeems by no means impoſſible, that the labour of


every twentieth man in the community would be
ſufficient to maintain the reſt in all the abſolute
neceſſaries of human life. If then this labour, in-


ſtead of being performed by ſo ſmall a number,


were amicably divided among them all, it would
occupy the twentieth part of every man's time.
Let us compute that the induſtry of a labouring
man engroſſes ten hours in every day, which,
when we have deducted his hours of reſt, recrea-
tion and meals, ſeems an ample allowance. It
follows that half an hour a day, ſeriouſly em-
ployed in manual labour by every member of the
community, would ſufficiently ſupply the whole


» with neceſſaries. Who is there that would


ſhrink from this degree of induſtry? Who is
there that ſees the inceſſant induſtry exerted in


this city and this iſland, and would believe that,
with


TO SLOTHFULNESS. 357


with half an hour's induſtry per diem, we ſhould
be every way happier and better than we are at
preſent ? Is it poſſible to contemplate this fair and
generous picture of independence and virtue,
where every man would have ample leiſure for the
nobleſt energies of mind, without feeling our very
ſouls refreſhed with admiration and hope?
When we talk of men's ſinking into idleneſs if
they be not excited by the ſtimulus of gain, we
have certainly very little conſidered the motives |
that at preſent govern the human mind. We
are deceived. by the apparent mercenarineſs of
mankind, and imagine that the accumulation of
wealth is their great object. But the caſe is far
otherwiſe. The preſent ruling paſſion of the hu-
man mind is the love of diſtinction. There is no
doubt a claſs in ſociety that are perpetually urged
by hunger and need, and have no leiſure for mo-
tives leſs groſs and material. But is the claſs next
above them leſs induſtrious than they? I exert a
certain ſpecies of induſtry to ſupply my immedi-
ate wants ; but theſe wants are ſoon ſupplied.
The reſt is exerted that I may wear a better coat,
that I may clothe my wife with gay attire, that I
may not merely have a ſhelter but a handſome þ.
habitation, not merely bread or fleſh to eat, but
that I may ſet it out with a ſuitable decorum.
How many of theſe things would engage my at-
tention, if I lived in a defart ifland, and had no
ſpectators of my economy? If I ſurvey the ap-
pendages of my perſon, 1s there one article that
is not an appeal to the reſpect of my neighbours,
or a refuge againſt their contempt ? It is for this
that the merchant braves the dangers of the m
| an


358 OF THE PROPENSITY,


and the mechanical inventor brings forth the trea-
ſures of his meditation. The ſoldier advances

even to the cannon's mouth, the ſtateſman ex-
| poſes himſelf to the rage of an indignant people,
becauſe they cannot bear to paſs through life with-
out diſtinction and eſteem. Excluſively of cer-
tain higher motives that will preſently be menti-
oned, this is the purpoſe of all the great exertions
of mankind. The man who has nothing to pro-
vide for but his animal wants, ſcarcely ever ſhakes
off the lethargy 'of his mind ; but the love of
praiſe hurries us on to the moſt incredible achieve-
ments. Nothing 1s more common than to find
perſons who ſurpaſs the reſt of their ſpecies in ac-
tivity, inexcuſably remiſs in the melioration of
their pecuniary affairs.

In reality thoſe by whom this reaſoning has been
urged, have miſtaken the nature of their own ob-
jection. They did not ſincerely believe that men
could be rouſed into action only by the love of
gain; but they imagined that in a ſtate of equal
property men would have nothing to occupy their
attention. What degree of truth there 1s in this
idea we thall preſently have occaſion to eſtimate.

Meanwhile it is ſufficiently obvious, that the
motives which ariſe from the love of diſtinction
are by no means cut off, by a ſtate of ſociety in-
compatible with the accumulation of property.
Men, no longer able to acquire the eſteem or
avoid the contempt of their neighbours by cir-
cumſtances of dreſs and furniture, will divert the
paſſion for diſtinction into another channel. They
will avoid the reproach of indolence, as carefully as
they now avoid the reproach of poverty. The only
perſons who at preſent negle& the effect which
their


TO SLOTHFULNESS. 359


their appearance and manners may produce, are
thoſe whoſe faces are Ks 2 with famine and
diſtreſs. But in a ſtate of equal ſociety no EA
will be oppreſſed, and of conſequence the more
delicate affections of the ſoul will have time to
expand themſclves. The general mind having,
as we have already ſhown, arrived at a high pitch
of improvement, the impulſe that carries it out
into action will be ſtronger than ever. The fer-
vour of public ſpirit will be great. Leiſure will
be multiplied, and the leiſure of a cultivated un-
derſtanding is the preciſe period in which great
deſigns, deſigns the tendency of which is to ſe-
cure applauſe and eſteem, are conceived. In
tranquil leiſure it is impoſſible for any but the
ſublimeſt mind to exiſt without the paſſion for
diſtinction. This paſſion, no longer permitted
to loſe itſelf in indirect channels and uſeleſs wan-
derings, will ſeek the nobleſt courſe, and perpe-
tually fructify the ſeeds of public good. Mind,
though it will perhaps at no time arrive at the ter-
mination of its poſſible difcoveries and improve-
ments, will nevertheleſs advance with a rapidity
and firmneſs of progreſſion of which we are at
preſent unable to conceive the idea.
The love of fame is no doubt a deluſion. This
like every other deluſion will take its turn to be
detected and abjured. It is an airy phantom,
which will indeed afford us an imperfect pleaſure
ſo long as we worſhip it, but will always in a
_ conſiderable degree diſappoint us, and will not
ſtand the teſt of examination. We ought to love
nothing but good, a pure and immutable felicity,
the good of the majority, the good of the .
ral.


360 OF THE PROPENSITY


ral. If there be any thing more ſubſtantial than
all the reſt, it is juſtice, a principle that reſts up-

On this ſingle poſtulatum, that man and man are
beings of the ſame nature, and ſuſceptible, un-
der certain limitations, of the ſame advantages.

Whether the benefit proceed from you or me,
ſo it be but conferred, is a pitiful diſtinction.
Juſtice has the farther advantage, which ſerves
us as a countercheck to prove the goodneſs of
this ſpecies of arithmetic, of producing the only
ſolid happineſs to the man by whom it is practiſed,
as well as the good of all. But fame cannot be-
nefit me, any more than ſerve the beſt purpoſes
to others. The man who acts from the love of
it, may produce public good ; but, if he do, it
is from indirect and ſpurious views. Fame is an
unſubſtantial and deluſive purſuit. If it ſignify
an opinion entertained of me greater than I de-
ſerve, to purſue it is vicious. If it be the pre-
ciſe mirror of my character, it is deſirable only
as a means, in as much as I may perhaps be able
to do moſt good to the perſons who beſt know
the extent of my capacity and the rectitude of my
intentions. |

The love of fame, when it periſhes in minds
formed under the preſent ſyſtem, often gives
place to a greater degeneracy. Selfiſhneſs 1s the
habit that grows out of monopoly. When therefore
this ſelfiſhneſs ceaſes to ſeek its gratification in
public exertion, it too often narrows itſelf into
ſome frigid conception of perſonal pleaſure, per-

_ haps ſenſual, perhaps intellectual. But this can-
not be the proceſs where monopoly is baniſhed.
Selfiſhneſs has there no kindly circumſtances to

foſter it. Truth, the overpowering truth of ge-

| neral


n N — FO = — — „ OY = — 5 5 A SS \
K " += a — — = T © Le A 2 » ms - a 7 22 = - 4 by — 0
— 2 RY Y FE : "TO i — — En 8 Teer 8 —— = C 2 * 5 — IE > YEW <A ”m_ — Foe, . = \ —_—
10 N fy 2855 IR Za * y ——— . = RI * . 3 — f — = — 4 —_— TICS. ern rr __
- . PIO: 5 n — 1 wad * 2 ul A 2 3 — 22 FI 2 — 5 . >> > AG 4 MG — \
= - , 6 6 4 _—— * . * d — * — — * . x CON of A a — — . on 4 :
TT —— 1 A; A 2 -
— — — n l 8 — - - — — — pr 1 — . —— — — - 2 — — — _ 5 — =" «> i TX. — — — — 2 — ”


a nee Wan = — 1
* 2 * n * 4 * ws - FE
\ . 2 . ——
8 os. — 2 - - & wo -


— *


— r —
- * 4 — "2 ==


TO SLOTHFULNESS. 361


neral good, then ſeizes us irreſiſtibly. It is im-
poſſible we ſhould want motives, ſo long as we
ſee clearly how multitudes and ages may be bene-
fited by our exertions, how cauſes and effects are
connected in an endleſs chain, ſo that no honeſt
effort can be loſt, but will operate to good, cen-
turies after its author is conſigned to the grave.


This will be the general paſſion, and all will be-
animated by the example of all. |


EN xp ©


OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS SYSTEM FROM
THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF ITS BEING
RENDERED PERMANENT.


Grounds of the objectian.—-Its ſerious import.
Anſwer. —T he introduction of ſuch a ſyſtem muſt
be owing, 1. Toa deep ſenſe of juſtice—2. To
a clear mjight into the nature of happineſs—as
being properly intellectual not conſiſting in ſen-

ual pleaſure or the pleaſures of deluſion. — In-
uence of the paſſions conſidered. — Men will not


accumulate either from individual forefight—or
from vanity.


LET us proceed to another objection. It has
ſometimes been ſaid by thoſe who oppoſe the
doctrine here maintained, that equality might


perhaps


A
Sx n 3 r 2 =
1 - „


—_——


r


„
——_—
— —.—


5 TL LINE
p 2 — —
E * — ——
, 3
W TW — — 2 —
8
©


« .
5
A - 2 2
=
__; l 3
— A *
. ” 4


DNN - F


> — „
. ———— h ͥ ——˖ꝙ«—
F


D


r — — 2
E
% = at - N = L


= —
2 EA | 5} .


— . —— —U — >


ae SI
r


”
— a t —— —
< .
— —
—


R


ö
* —————


— ——k— —— Pe

— 1 ee —

— . — —— - — rar *
” —


— — —ꝛů — == np **
— —
« 7 mn


— - - \ _— — —
_ 2 > by 2 Fs ad w i I a 7 = _—_
TE a9 0K, SS ⁵³˙¹¹ꝛ m ˙² .. Nd
: - : > 8 ITY A
3 — — — — * _ * * 1 7 "244
- * q
K . ry -. - ” =
— _ S.
« -
- h of


3 — *
s


362 OF THE PERMANENCE OF THE


perhaps contribute to the improvement and hap:
pineſs of mankind, if it were conſiſtent with


nature of man that ſuch a principle ſhould be


rendered permanent ; but that every expectation
of that kind muſt prove abortive. - Confuſion
would be introduced under the idea of equality
to-day, but the old vices and monopolies would
return to-morrow. All that the rich would
have purchaſed by the moſt generous facrifice,
would be a period of barbariſm, from which the
ideas andregulations ofcivil ſociety muſt commence
as from a new infancy. The nature of man can-
not be changed. There would at leaſt be ſome
vicious and deſigning members of ſociety, who
would endeavour to ſecure to themſelves indul-
gencies beyond the reſt. Mind would not be
reduced to that exact uniformity which a ſtate of
equal property demands; and the variety of ſen-
timents which muſt always in ſome degree pre-


vail, would inevitably ſubvert the refined ſyſtems


of ſpeculative perfection.”

No objection can be more eſſential than that
which is here adduced. It highly becomes us
in ſo momentous a ſubject to reſiſt all extrava-
gant ſpeculations: it would be truly to be la-
mented, if, while we parted with that ſtate of
ſociety through which mind has been thus far
advanced, we were replunged into barbariſm by
the purſuit of ſpecious appearances. But what
is worſt of all, is that, if this objection be true,
it is to be feared there is no remedy. Mind
muſt go forward. What it ſees and admires, it
will ſome time or other ſeek to attain. Such is


the inevitable law of our nature. But it is im-
| | poſſible


ka —
*. a


ts Fl Ved: bd


W I oO Mm I @ Mn ev


+


Q


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 363
poſſible not to ſee the beauty of equality, and to


be charmed with the benefits it ſeems to promiſe.


The conſequence is ſure. Man, according to
the ſyſtem of theſe reaſoners, is prompted to
advance for ſome time with ſucceſs ; but after
that time, in the very act of purſuing farther im-
provement, he neceſſarily plunges beyond the
compaſs of his powers, and has then his petty
career to begin afreſh. The objection repreſents
him as a foul abortion, with juſt underſtanding
enough to ſee what is good, but with too little
to retain him in the practice of it. Let us con-


ſider whether equality, once eſtabliſned, would


be ſo precarious as it is here repreſented.


In anſwer to this objection it muſt firſt be re-
membered, that the ſtate of equalization we are


here ſuppoling 1s not the reſult of accident, of
the authority of a chief magiſtrate, or the over


earneſt perſuaſion of a few enlightened thinkers,
but is produced by the ſerious and dehberate
conviction of the community at large. We will
ſuppoſe for the preſent that it is poſſible for ſuch
a conviction to take place among a given number
of perſons living in ſociety with each other: and,
if it be poſſible in a ſmall community, there


| ſeems to be no ſufficient reaſon to prove that it


is impoſſible in one of larger and larger dimen-
fions. The queſtion we have here to examine
18 concerning the probability, when the convic-
tion has once been introduced, of its becoming
permanent.

The conviction reſts upon two intellectual im-
preſſions, one of juſtice, and the other of hap-
pineſs. Equaliſation of property cannot begin

| to


364 OF THE PERMANENCE OF THE


to aſſume a fixed appearance in human ſociety”
till the ſentiment becomes deeply wrought into
the mind, that the genuine wants of any man
conſtitute his only juſt claim to the appropriating
any ſpecies of commodity. If the general ſenſe
of mankind were once fo far enlightened, as to
produce a perpetual impreſſion of this truth, of
ſo forcible a fort as to be exempt from all objec-
tions and doubt, we ſhould look with equal
horror and contempt at the idea of any man's
accumulating a property he did not want. All
the evils that a ſtate of monopoly never fails to
engender would ſtand forward in our minds,
together with all the exiſting happineſs that


attended upon a ſtate of freedom. We ſhould


feel as much alienation of thought from the


_ conſuming uſeleſsly upon ourſelves what would
be beneficial to another, or from the accu-
mulating property for the purpoſe of obtain-


ing ſome kind of aſcendancy over the mind of
our neighbours, as'we now feel from the com-
miſſion of murder. No man will diſpute, that a
ſtate of equal property once eſtabliſhed, would
greatly diminiſh the evil propenfities of man.
But the crime we are now ſuppoſing is more atro-
cious than any that is to be found in the pre-
ſent ſtate of ſociety. Man perhaps is incapable
under any circumſtance of perpetrating an action
of which he has a clear and undoubted perception
that 1s contrary to the general good. But be
this as it will, it is hardly to be believed that
any man for the fake of ſome imaginary gra-
tification to himſelf would wantonly injure the


whole, if his mind were not firſt ulcerated with
the


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 365
the impreſſion of the injury that ſociety by its


ordinances is committing againſt him. The
caſe we are here conſidering 1s that of a man,
who does not even imagine himſelf injured, and
yet wilfully ſubverts a ſtate of happineſs to
which no deſcription can do juſtice, to make
room for the return of all thoſe calamities and
vices with which mankind have been infeſted


from the earlieſt page of hiſtory.


The equalifation we are deſcribing is farther
indebted for its empire in the mind to the ideas


with which it is attended of perſonal happt-


| neſs. It grows out of a fimple, clear and un-


anſwerable theory of the human mind, that we
firſt ſtand. in need of a certain animal ſubſiſt-
ence and ſhelter, and after that, that our only
true felicity conſiſts in the expanſion of our
intellectual powers, the knowledge of truth,
and the practice of virtue. It might ſeem at


firſt fight as if this theory omitted a part of


the experimental hiſtory of mind, the pleaſures
of ſenſe and the pleaſures of deluſion. But this

omiſſion is apparent, not real. However many
are the kinds of pleaſure of which we are ſuſ-
ceptible, the truly prudent man will ſacrifice
the inferior to the more exquiſite. Now no
man who has ever produced or contemplated the
happineſs of others with a liberal mind, will de-
ny that this exerciſe is infinitely the moſt plea-
ſureable of all ſenſations. But he that is guilty
of the ſmalleſt exceſs of ſenſual pleaſures, by
ſo much diminiſhes his capacity of obtaining this
higheſt pleaſure. Not to add, if that be of


any importance, that rigid temperance is the rea-


ſonable


266 OF THE PERMANENCE OF THE


ſonable means of taſting ſenſual pleaſures with
the higheſt reliſh. This was the ſyſtem of Epi-
curus, and muſt be the ſyſtem of every man
who ever ſpeculated deeply on the nature of
human happineſs. For the pleaſures of deluſion,
they are abſolutely incompatible with our higheſt
pleaſure. If we would either promote or enjoy
the happineſs of others, we muſt ſeek to know
in what it conſiſts. But knowledge is the irre-
concileable foe of deluſion. In propertion as
mind riſes to its true element, and ſhakes off
thoſe prejudices which are the authors of our
miſery, it becomes incapable of deriving plea-
ſure from flattery, fame or power, or indeed
from any ſource that is not compatible with, or
in other words does not make a part of the com-
mon good. The moſt palpable of all claſſes of
knowledge is, that I am perſonally conſidered,
but an atom in the ocean of mind. The firſt ru-
diment therefore of that ſcience of perſonal hap-
pineſs which is inſeparable from a ſtate of equali-
fation, 1s, that I ſhall derive infinitely more plea-
ſure from ſimplicity, frugality and truth, than
from luxury, empire and fame. What tempta-
tion has a man, entertaining this opinion, and
living in a ſtate of equal property, to accu-

mulate ? 5 e
This queſtion has been perpetually darkened
by the doctrine, ſo familiar to writers of morality,
of the independent operations of reaſon and paſ-
ſion. Such diſtinctions muſt always darken. Of
how many parts does mind conſiſt? Of none. It
conſiſts merely of a ſeries of thought ſucceeding
thought from the firſt moment of our exiſtence to
| Its


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 367


2 its termination *. This word paſſion, which has
x produced ſuch extenfive miſchief in the philoſo-
: phy of mind, and has no real archetype, is per-


petually ſhifting its meaning. Sometimes it is
N applied univerſally to all thoſe thoughts, which,
. being peculiarly vivid, and attended with great
f force of argument real or imaginary, carry us
d out into action with uncommon energy. Thus
we ſpeak of the paſſion of benevolence, public
| ſpirit or courage. Sometimes it ſignifies thoſe
" BE vivid thoughts only, which upon accurate exa-
mination appear to be founded in error. In the
firſt ſenſe the word might have been unexceptio-
nable. . Vehement defire is the reſult of a certain
operation of the underſtanding, and muſt always
be in a joint ratio of the ſuppoſed clearneſs of the
propoſition and importance of the practical ef-
feats. In the ſecond ſenſe the doctrine of the paſ-
fions would have been exceedingly harmleſs, if
we had been accuſtomed to put the definition
inſtead of the thing defined. It would then
have been found that it merely affirmed that the
haman mind muſt always be liable to preciſely
the ſame miſtakes as we obſerve 1n it at preſent,
or in other words affirmed the neceſſary perma-
nence in oppoſition to the neceſſary perfectibility
of intellect. Who is there indeed that ſees not,
in the caſe above ſtated, the abſurdity of ſuppo-
ſing a man, ſo long as he has a clear view of juſ-
tice and intereſt lying on one fide of a given queſ-
tion, to be ſubject to errors that irreſiſtibly com-
pel him to the other? The mind is no doubt lia-
ble to fluctuation. But there 1s a degree of con-
| viction


* Book IV, Chap. VII, p. 310.


368 OF THE PERMANENCE OF THE


viction that would render it impoſſible for us any

longer to derive pleaſure from intemperance, do-
minion or fame, and this degree in the inceſſant
progreſs of thought muſt one day arrive.

This propoſition of the permanence of a ſyſtem
of equal property, after it has once been brought
into action by the energies of reaſon and convic-

tion, will be placed out of the reach of all equi-
table doubt, if we proceed to form to ourſelves
an accurate picture of the action of this ſyſtem.
Let us ſuppoſe that we are introduced to a com-
munity of men, who are accuſtomed to an induſ-
try proportioned to the wants of the whole, and
to communicate inſtantly and unconditionally,
each man to his neighbour, that for which the
former has not and the latter has immediate occa-
ſion. Here the firſt and ſimpleſt motive to per-
ſonal accumulation is inſtantly cut off. I need

not accumulate to protect myſelf againſt accidents,
fickneſs or infirmity, for theſe are claims the va-
lidity of which is not regarded as a ſubject of doubt,
and with which every man is accuſtomed to com-
bn V ply. I can accumulate in a conſiderable degree
by nothing but what is periſhable, for exchange be-
by. ing unknown, that which I cannot perſonally con-
= fume adds nothing to the Rain my wealth.—

4 Mieanwhile it ſhould be obſerved, that, though
accumulation for private purpoſes under ſuch a
fyſtem would be in the higheſt degree irrational
and abſurd, this by no means precludes ſuch ac-
cumulation, as may be neceſſary to provide againſt
public contingencies. If there be any truth in
43 the preceding reaſonings, this kind of accumula-
| tion will be unattended with danger. Add to *
| | that


7 :


—
— ge — — — vo vo = += <A


GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 369
tha


” perpetual tendency of wiſdom 1s to pre-
cludE contingency. It is well known that dearths
are principally owing to the falſe precautions and
falſe timidity of mankind ; and it is reaſonable to
ſuppoſe that a degree of ſkill will hereafter be
produced, which will gradually annihilate- the
failure of crops and other ſimilar accidents.

It has already appeared, that the principal and
unintermitting motive to private accumulation, is
the love of diſtinction and eſteem. This motive
1s alſo withdrawn. As accumulation can haveno
rational object, it would be viewed as a mark of
inſanity, not a title to admiration. - Men would
be accuſtomed to the ſimple principles of juſtice,
and know that nothing was entitled to eſteem
but talents and virtue. Habituated to employ |
their ſuperfluity to ſupply the wants of their neigh-
bour, and to dedicate the time which was not ne-
ceflary for manual labour to the cultivation of
intellect, with what ſentiments would they be-
hold the man, who was fooliſh enough to few a
bit of lace upon his coat, or affix any other orna-
ment to his perſon ? In ſuch a community proper-
ty would perpetually tend to find its level. It
would be intereſting to all to be informed of the
perſon in whoſe kane certain quantity of any
commodity was lodged, and every man would
apply with confidence to him for the ſupply of
his wants in that commodity. Putting therefore
out of the queſtion every kind of compulſion, the
feeling of depravity and abſurdity, that would be
excited with relation to the man who refuſed to
part with that for which he had no real need,
would operate in all caſes as a ſufficient diſcou-

Vor. II. . ragement


370 OF THE PERMANENCE, &e.


ragement to ſo odious an innovation. Every man
would conceive that he had a juſt and complete

title to make uſe of my ſuperfluity. If I refuſed

to liſten to reaſon and expoſtulation on this head,

he would not ſtay to adjuſt with me a thing fo

vicious as exchange, but would leave me in order

to ſeek the ſupply from ſome rational being. Ac-

cumulation, inſtead, as now, of calling forth

every mark of reſpect, would tend to cut off the

individual who attempted it from all the bonds of
ſociety, and fink him in Neglect and oblivion.
The influence of accumulation at preſent is deriv-

ed from the idea of eventual benefit in the mind
of the obſerver ; but the accumulator then would
be in a caſe ſtill worſe than that of the miſer now,

who, while he adds thoufands to his heap, can-

not be prevailed upon to part with a ſuperfluous
farthing, and is therefore the object of general
deſertion. |


_
x
by
[i
Ly
11
b
+
LE)
.
7
1
*
To
4
17
14 +.
i 1
1's
80 l
= N
4
1
N
5 14
IF fr
L —
K
*
14
8
X


2


—4


| X% -_ -
r —
* — — —
. ESE


—


e


5 „ Lo OY LE ENT EE IENG - — oF Dogs
=. AVD 4 at © ow — 3 r
2 2 1 1 —˙—. wc. GE ec _——

a 2


8 5
is =
n


| ST . CHAP.


?
17
4
Ly]
+
4:
is
*

*
8


£278]


e HA B. ih


OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS SYSTEM FROM
IHE INFLEXIBILITY OF ITS
RESTRICTIONS.


Nature of the objeclion.— Natural and moral a
pendence di Fs guiſhed—the firſt beneficial —-the

- ſecond injurious. —Tendency of reſtriction proper-
ly ſo called —The genuine ſyſtem of property not

a ſyſtem of reftrietions—Dves not require common
labour, meals or magazimes.—— Such reftri&tions
_abſurd—and unneceſſary. —Pvils of co-operation.
Is province may perpetually be diminiſhed. — Ma-
mud labour may be extinguiſhed. —Conſequent ac-
Tivity of intellect. Ideas of the future ſtate of
cooperation. Its limits.--Its legitimate province.
Evile of cohabitation—and marriage.—They
oppoſe the development of our e ar und ini-
_mical to our happineſs and deprave our under-
andin gs. Marriage a Fe of the prevailing
7 em of property. — Conſequences of its abolition.
GY need not in that ſtate of ſociety be a
ſabject of poſitive inſtitution. —-Theſe principles
do not lead to a fullen indroiduality.—Partial at-

... Fachments confidered, — Benefits accrumg from a
Jus affection—materially promoted by theſe prin-
cCiples. Vie genuine ſyſtem of property does not
prohibit accumulation—imphes a certain degree of


appropriation—and diviſian of labour.


Ax objection that has often been urged againſt
a ſyſtem of equal property, is, * that it is incon-
dx ſtent


*


372 OF THE ENJOYMENT.


fiſtent with perfonal independence. Every man

a according to this ſcheme is a paſſive inſtrument

| in the hands of the community. He' mult eat and
drink, and play and ſleep at the bidding of others.
He has no habitation, no period at which he can
retreat into himſelf, and not aſk another's leave.
He has nothing that he can call his own, not even
his time or his perſon. Under the appearance of
a perfect freedom from oppreſſion and tyranny,
he is in reality ſubjected to the moſt unlimited
ſlavery.”

To underſtand the force of this objection it 18
neceſſary that we ſhould diſtinguiſh two ſorts of
independence, one of which may be denomi-
nated natural, and the other moral. Natural in-
dependence, a freedom from all conſtraint except
that of reaſon and argument preſented to the un-
derſtanding, is of the utmoſt importance to the
welfare and improvement of mind. Moral in-
dependence on the contrary is always injurious.
The dependence which is eſſential in this reſpect
to the wholeſome temperament of ſociety, in-
cludes in it articles that are no doubt unpalatable
to a multitude of the preſent race of mankind,
but that owe their unpopularity only to weakneſs
and vice. It includes a cenſure to be exerciſed
by every individual over the actions of another,
a promptneſs to enquire into them, and to judge
them. Why ſhould I ſhrink from this? What
could be more beneficial than for each man to
derive every poſſible aſſiſtance for correcting and

moulding his conduct from the perſpigacity of his
neighbours? The reaſon why this ſpecies of cen-


ſure is at preſent exerciſed with illiberality, is
becauſe


PF av 7 — - +
— 2 1 = — 8 — Ge a A —
thro 0 -


—


— — 2 = = =
l — 2 © -- . > > 1 2 = = my =

< ATA in EG ar — r 7 * ˖— DF : — | =

2 — f 1 — A» Aa * 0626+ A - = 5 K —— 2 —

— — 5 5 8 e Fe = —̃ —— N = —

5 1 a * * 4 . * — = 2 — A Garg — — Fon Y \ At E Lada 4 1 „ a

* Y OP Ing 23.2 <>. WE AT I , Y

7 _ — — * —— — -
.
« ;


r WS
—


=
_ wh \ a =_ —_—
<4 > y__
FEY b r
— =
-


*h


OF LIBERT;Y. -- - 373


becauſe it is exerciſed clandeſtinely and we ſub-
mit to its operation with impatience and averſion.
Moral independence is always injurious: for, as
has abundantly appeared in the courſe of the pre-
ſent enquiry, there 1s no fituation-in which I can
be placed, where it is not incumbent upon me
to adopt a certain ſpecies of conduct in prefe-
rence to all others, and of conſequence where I
ſhall not prove an ill member of ſociety, if I act
in any other than a particular manner. The at-
tachment that is felt by the preſent race of man-
kind to independence in this reſpect, the deſire to
act as they pleaſe without being 2ccountable to
the principles of reaſon, is highly detrimental to
the general welfare.

But, if we ought never to act den |
of the principles of reaſon, and in no inſtance to
ſhrink from the candid examination of another,
it is nevertheleſs eſſential that we ſhould at all
times be free to cultivate the individuality and
follow the dictates of our own judgment. If there
be any thing in the ſcheme of equal property that
infringes this principle, the objection is conclu-
five. If the ſcheme be, as it has often been re-
preſented, a icheme of government, conſtraint
and regulation, it is no doubt in direct hoſtility
with the principles of this work.

But the truth is, that a ſyſtem of equal pro-
perty requires no reſtrictions or ſuperintendence
whatever. There is no need of common labour,
common meals or common magazines. Thele
are feeble and miſtaken inſtruments for reſtraining
the conduct without making conqueſt of the
judgment. It you. cannot bring over the hearts


of


— —
B *
— A — =
8 — _ = a 7
— 1. * — w — 2 tee
* 8 K =
— * :
* U — — —— — 2 —


_ >
—— 0% Mihoay Aon nr”
* — — * 2 — ſ—


=> E S


—
— oe...
* — .


$54 or THE ENJOYMENT


of the community to your party, expect no ſue-
ceſs from brute regulations. If you can, regu-
lation is unneceſſary. Such a ſyſtem was well
enough adapted to the military conſtitution of
Sparta ; ; but it is wholly unworthy of men who
are enliſted in no cauſe but that of reaſon and juſ-
tice. Beware of reducing men to the ſtate of
machines. Govern them through no medium
but that of inclination and conviction.

Why ſhould we have common meals? Am I
obliged to be hungry at the ſame time that you
are ? Ought I to come at a certain hour, from the
muſeum where I am working, the receſs where
I meditate, or the obſervatory where I remark
the phenomena of nature, to a certain hall appro-
priated to the office of eating; inſtead of eating,
as reaſon bids me, at the time and place moſt


ſuited to my avocations? Why have common


magazines ? For the purpoſe of carrying our pro-
viſions a certain diſtance, that we may afterwards
bring them back again? Or is this precaution
really neceſſary, after all that has been faid in
praiſe of equal ſociety and the omnipotence of
reaſon, to guard us againſt the knavery and co-
vetouſneſs of our aſſociates? If it be, for God's
ſake let us diſcard the parade of political juſtice,
and go over to the ſtandard of thoſe reaſoners who
fay, that man and the practice of juſtice are in-
compatible with each other.


Fo Once more let us be. upon our guard againſt reduc-


ing men to the condition of brute machines. The
objectors of the laſt chapter were partly in the
right when they ſpoke of the endleſs variety of
mind. It would be abſurd to ſay that we are not
capable


F LIBE ATV. 375
capable of truth, of evidence and agreement. In
theſe reſpects, ſo far as mind is in a ſtate of pro-
greſſive improvement, we are perpetually com-
ing nearer to each other. But there are ſubjects
about which we ſhall continually differ, and
ought to differ. The ideas, the aſſociations and
the circumſtances of each man are properly
his own; and it is a pernicious ſyſtem that would
lead us to require all men, however different their
circumſtances, to act in many of the common af-
fairs of life by a preciſe general rule, Add to
this, that, by the doctrine of progreſſive improve-
ment, we ſhall always be erroneous, though we
{hall every day become leſs erroneous. . The pro-
per method for haſtening the decay of error, is
not, by brute force, or by regulation which 1s
one of the claſſes of force, to endeavour to re-
duce men to intellectual uniformity; but on the
_y by teaching every man to think for him-
EI. |

From theſe principles it appears that every
thing that is uſually underſtood by the term co-
operation, is in ſome degree an evil. A man in
ſolitude, is obliged to ſacrifice or poſtpone the
execution of his beſt thoughts to his own conve-
nience. How many admirable deſigns have pe-
riſhed in the conception by means of this circum-
ſtance? The true remedy is for men to reduce
their wants to the feweſt poſſible, and as much
as poſſible to ſimplify the mode of ſupplying
them. It is {till worſe when a man is alſo oblig-
ed to conſult the convenience of others. If I be
expected to eat or to work in conjunction with
my neighbour, it muſt either be at a time moſt

| _ convenient,


i

9

6 |
J
13 38


ho —  *


” £1 Fa — r — 2 2 wo = — .
— 2 — — uw — — 5 — — — — —@ „ — — 2 aa _
N — : — 7 — — <Enag, * 2


—— 4


* 4 — o * —
— —_ . ” 5 —
— 33 — —
=


376 OF THE ENJOYMENT.


convenient to me, or to him, or to neither of us.
We cannot be reduced to a clock-work unifor-
mity.

Hence it follows that all ſupererogatory co-
operation is carefully to be avoided, common
labour and common meals. * But what ſhall
we ſay to co-operation that ſeems to be dictated
by the nature of the work to be performed! Fee -
ought to be diminithed. At preſent it is unrea-
ſonable to doubt, that the conſideration of the
evil of co-operation is in' certain urgent caſes to


be poſtponed to that urgency. Whether, by the,


nature of things co-operation of ſome ſort will al-


ways be neceſſary, is a queſtion that we are


{carcely competent to decide. At preſent, to
pull down a tree, to cut a canal, to navigate a
veſlel, requires the labour of many. Wall it al-
ways require. the labour of many? When we look
at the complicated machines ef human contri-
Vance, various forts of mills, of weaving engines,
of {team engines, are we not aſtoniſhed at the


compendiumi of labour they produce ? Who ſhall JP


fay where this ſpecies of improvement muſt ſtop?


by preſent ſuch inventions alarm the labouring


part of the community; and they may be pro-
ductive of temporary diſtreſs, though they con-
duce in the ſequel to the moſt important intereſts
of the multitude. But in a ſtate of equal labour
their utility will be liable to no diſpute. Here-


after it is by no means clear that the moſt exten-


five operations will not be within the reach of


one man; or, to make uſe of a familiar inſtance,


that a plough may not be turned into a field, and
perform it its $ plc without the need of ſuperin-
PTY tendence.


OF LIBERTY: 0 377


tendence, It was in this ſenſe that the celebrated
Franklin conjectured, that © mind would one
« day become omnipotent over matter.“

The concluſion of the progreſs which has here
been ſketched, isgomething like a final cloſe to
the neceſſity of manual — It is highly in
ſtructive in ſuch caſes to obſerve how the n
geniuſes of former times anticipated what ſeems
likely to be the future improvement of mankind.
It was one of the laws of Lycurgus, that no Spar-
tan ſhould be employed in manual labour. For
this purpoſe under his Yyſt mit was neceſſary that
they ſhould be plentiffapplicd with flaves
devoted to drudgery. or, to ſpeak more
accurately, the certain and unintermitting laws of
the univerſe, will be the Helots of the period we
are contemplating. We ſhall end in this reſpect,
oh immortal legiſlator ! at the point from which
you began.

To theſe proſpects ti the objection will
once again be repeated, that men, delivered
from the neceſſity of manual labour, will ſink in-
to {upineneſs.” What narrow views of the na-
ture and capacities of mind do ſuch objections im-
ply ?. The only thing neceſſary to put intellect
into action is motive. Are there no motives
equally cogent with the proſpe& of hunger?
Whole thoughts are moſt active, moſt rapid and
unwearied, thoſe of Newton or the ploughman ?
When the mind is ſtored with proſpects of intel-
lectual grgatneſs and "I can .it fink into
torpor? W Fo

To return to the |
may be a curious ſpec


abject of co-operation. It
tion to attend to the pro-
greſſive


— K
——— — —


* 3 *, =
— —
£ . N —
4 —
2 _ X
r — 22 >. 1 .
p a * _ * We. / pane Da. > — 2 bs - CE, 2 4 .


—— — 2 * *
3
— P
— — — — —— —a—ͤ—d
*


—_— Ang... 4 - PO IE . - va
— TENTS — 4 — —ů — — 9
1


38 Of THE ENJOYMENT
greſſive ſteps by which this feature of human


ſociety may be expected to decline. For exam-
le : ſhall we have concerts of muſic ? The mi-
ſerable ſtate of mechaniſm of the majority of
the performers is ſo conſpicuous, as to be even
at this day a topic of mortification and ridicule,
es it not be practicable hereafter for one man
to perform the whole ? Shall we have theatrical
exhibitions ? This ſeems to include an abſurd and
vicious Co-operation. It may be doubted whe-
ther men will hereafter come forward in any
mode gravely to repeat words and ideas not their
own ?. It may be doubted whether any muſical
performer will habituall / execute the compoſi-
tions of others? We yield ſupinely to the ſupe-
rior merit of our predeceſſors, becauſe we are


accuſtomed to indulge the inactivity of our own


faculties, All formal repetition of other men's
ideas ſeems to be a ſcheme for impriſoning for 1
long a time the operations of our own mind.
borders perhaps in this reſpect upon a bach bo
ſincerity, which requires that we ſhould give im-
mediate utterance to every uſeful and valuable
idea that occurs to our thoughts.

Having ventured to ſtate theſe hints and con-
jectures, let us endeavour to mark the limits of
individuality, Every man that receives an im-
preſſion from any external object, has the current


of his own thoughts modified by force; and yet


without external impreſſions we ſhould be no-
thing. We ought not, except under certain li-


mitations, to endeavour to free ourſelves from


their approach. Every man that reads the com-


poſition of another, ſuffers the ſucceſſion of his


ideas


O F LIBERTY. | 379


idcas to hi in a conſiderable degree under the di-
rection of his author. But it does not {eem as
if this would ever form a ſufficient objection a-
gainſt reading, One man will always have ſtored


up reflections and facts that another wants; and


mature and digeſted diſcourſe will perhaps al-
ways, in equal circumſtances, be ſuperior to that
which is extempore. Converſation is a ſpecies
of co-operation, one or the other party always
yielding to have his ideas guided by the other:
and yet converſation and the intercourſe of mind


with mind ſeem to be the moſt fertile ſources of
improvement. It is here as it is with puniſh-


ment. He that in the gentleſt manner under-
takes to reaſon another out of his vices, will
probably occaſion pain ; but this ſpecies of pu-
nithment ought upon no account to be ſuperſed-
d.

1 Another article which belongs to the ſubject
of co-operation is cohabitation. A very ſimple


— will lead us to a right deciſion in this in-


ſtance. Science is moſt effectually cultivated,

when the greateſt number of minds are employed
in the purſuit of it. If an hundred men ſpon-
taneouſly engage the whole energy of their facul-
ties upon the ſolution of a given queſtion, the
chance of ſucceſs will be greater, than if only
ten men were ſo employed. By the ſame reaſon
the chance will be alſo increaſed in proportion as
the intellectual operations of theſe men are in-
dividual, in proportion as their concluſions are
directed by the reaſon of the thing, uninfluenced
by the force either of compulſion or ſympathy.

All attachments to individuals, except in propor-


tion


*
f
:
:


- . ' LN — RR e L |
* p- = = "- Ln 1 Me, . wa E 7 = =
2 ETD rr OT


* is
Fw 4 .
„

9
"a
#9
*
8
80 7
5
bl


\ 1
* 4 —
: _
U - od Oo
„1 v
27
>;
4 .
J
:
„ 8
LY
g
* 5
U
!
g 1
by
i
7
F


380 or THE ENJOYMENT


tion to their merits, are plainly unjuſt. It is


therefore deſirable, that we ſhould be the friends


of man rather than of particular men, and that
we {ſhould purſue the chain of our own reflex1ons,
with no other interruption than information or
philanthropy requires.

This ſubject of cohabitation is particularly i in-
tereſting, as it includes in it the ſubject of mar-
riage. It will therefore be proper to extend our
enquiries ſomewhat further upon this head. Co-
habitation is not only an evil as it checks the in-
dependent progreſs of mind; it is alſo inconſiſtent
with the imperfections and propenſities of man.


It is abſurd to expect that the inclinations and


wiſhes of two human beings ſhould coincide


through any long period of time. To oblige


them to act and to live together, i is to ſubject them


to ſome inevitable portion of thwarting, bick-


ering and unhappineſs. This cannot be other-


wiſe, ſo long as man has failed to reach the ſtand-


ard of. abſolute perfection. The ſuppoſition that


I muſt have a companion for life, is the reſult of
a complication of vices. It is the dictates of
cowardice, and not of fortitude, It flows from
the defire of being loved and eſteemed tor ſome-


ting that is not deſert.


But the evil of marriage as it is practiſed in
European countries lies deeper than this. The
habit is, for a thoughtleſs and romantic youth of
each ſex to come together, to ſee each other for


a few times and under circumſtances full of de-


luſion, and then to vow to each other eternal at-
tachment. What is the conſequence of this? In
almpſt every inſtance they find themſelves de-


ceived,


F LIBERKTY.' 381
ceived. They are reduced to make the beſt of
an irretrievable miſtake. They are preſented
with the ſtrongeſt imaginable temptation to be-
come the dupes of falſhood. They are led to
conceive it their wiſeſt policy to ſhut their eyes
upon realities, happy if by any perverfion of in-
tellect they can perſuade themſelves that they
were right in their firſt crude opinion of their
companion. The inſtitution of marriage is a
ſyſtem of fraud; and men who carefully miſlead
their judgments in the daily affair of their life,
muſt always have a crippled judgment in every
other concern. We ought to diſmiſs our miſtake
as ſoon as it is detected; but we are-taught to
cheriſh it. We ought to be inceſſant in our
ſearch after virtue and worth ; but we are taught
to check our enquiry, and thut our eyes upon the
moſt attractive and admirable objects. Marriage
is law, and the worſt of all laws. Whatever
our underitandings may tell us of the perſon from
Whoſe connexion we ſhould derive the greateſt
improvement, of the worth of one woman and
the demerits of another, we are obliged to con-
ſider what is law, and not what is juſtice.

Add to this, that marriage is an affair of pro-
perty, and the worſt of all properties. So long
as two human beings are forbidden by poſitive in-
ſtitution to follow the dictates of their own mind,
prejudice is alive and vigorous. So long as I
ſeek to engroſs one woman to myſelf, and to pro-
hibit my neighbour from proving his ſuperior de-
ſert and reaping the fruits of it, I am guilty. of
the moſt odious of all monopolies. Over this
imaginary prize men watch with ning

ul,


| Ne
.


382 OF THE ENJOYMENT
louſy, and one man will find his deſires and his


capacity to circumvent as much excited, as tlie
other is excited to traverſe his projects and fruſ-
trate his hopes. As long as this ſtate of ſociety
continues, philanthropy will be croſſed and
checked in a thouſand ways, and the ſtill aug-
menting ſtream of abuſe will continue to flow.


The abolition of marriage will be attended


with no evils. We are apt to repreſent it to
ourſelves as the harbinger of brutal luſt and de-
pravity. But it really happens in this as in other
caſes, that the poſitive laws which are made to
reſtrain our vices, irritate and multiply them.
Not to fay, that the fame ſentiments of juſtice
and happineſs which in a ſtate of equal property
would deſtroy the reliſh for luxury, -would de-
creaſe our inordinate appetites of every kind, and
tead us univerſally to prefer the pleaſures of f ins
telle& to the pleaſures of ſenſe.

The intercourſe of the ſexes will in fach a
ftate fall under the ſame fyſtem as any other
ſpecies of friendſhip. Exclufively of all ground-
leſs and obſtinate attachments, it will be impoſ-
fible for me to live in the world without finding
one man. of worth ſuperior to that of any other
whom I have an opportunity of obſerving. To
this man I ſhall feel a kindneſs in exact propor-
tion to my apprehenſion - of his worth: The


caſe will be preciſely the ſame with reſpect to the


female ſex. I ſhall aſſiduouſly cultivate the in-
tercourſe of that woman whoſe accompliſhments
ſhall -ſtrike me in the moſt powerful manner.
But it may ** that other men will feel
; 7 | cc for


[


OF LIBERTY. 383


&« for her the ſame preference that I do.” This
will create no difficulty. We may all enjoy her
converſation ; and we ſhall all be wiſe enough to
conſider the ſenſual intercourſe as a very trivial
object. This, like every other affair in hich
two perſons are concerned, muſt be regulated in
each ſucceſſive inſtance by the unforced conſent
of either party. It is a mark of the extreme de-
pravity of our preſent habits, that we are inclined
to ſuppoſe the ſenſual intercourſe any wiſe mate-
rial to the advantages arifing from the pureſt af-
fection. Reaſonable men now eat and drink, not
from the love * pleaſure, but becauſe eating and
drinking are eſſential to our healthful exiſtence.
Reaſonable men then will propagate their ſpecies,
not becauſe a certain ſenſible pleaſure is annexed
to this action, but becauſe it is right the ſpecies
ſhould be propagated; and the manner in which
they exerciſe this function will be regulated by the
dictates of reaſon and duty. |
Such are ſome of the conſiderations that will
probably regulate the commerce of the ſexes. It
cannot be definitively affirmed whether it will be
known in ſuch a ſtate of ſociety who is the father
of each individual child. But it may be affirmed
that ſuch knowledge will be of no importance.
It is ariſtocracy, ſelf love and family pride that
teach us to ſet a value upon it at preſent. EF
ought to prefer no human being to another, be-
| cauſe that being is my father, my wife or my
fon, but becauſe, for reaſons which equally ap-
peal to all underſtandings, that being is entitled
to preference. One among the meaſures which
will ſucceſſively be dictated by the ſpirit of de-


mocracy,


3% OF THE ENJOYMENT


mocracy, and that probably at no _ diſtance, :
s the abolition of ſurnames.

Let us conſider the way in which this ſtate of
ſociety will modify education. It may be ima-
gined that the abolition of marriage would
make it in a certain ſenſe the affair of the pub-
lic; though, if there be any truth in the reaſon-
ings of this work, to provide for it by the poſi-
tive inſtitutions of a community, would be ex-
tremely inconſiſtent with the true principles of
the intellectual ſyſtem*. Education may be re-

garded as conſiſting of various branches. Firſt,
the perſonal cares which the helpleſs ſtate of an
infant requires. Theſe will probably devolve
upon the mother; unleſs, by frequent parturition 6
or by the very nature of theſe cares, that were
found toggender her ſhare of the burthen un-
equal; and then it would be amicably and wil-
lingly participated by others. Secondly, food
and other neceſſary ſupplies. Theſe; as we
have already ſeen, would eaſily find their true
level, and ſpontaneouſly flow from the quarter
in which they abounded to the quarter that
was deficient. Laſtly, the term education
may be uſed to ſignify inſtruction. The taſk of
inſtruction, under ſuch a form of ſociety as that
we are contemplating, will be greatly ſimplified
and altered from what it is at preſent. It will
then be thought no more legitimate to make
Yoys ſlaves, than to make men 10. The buſi-
neſs will not then be to bring forward ſo many
"_— in the e gg-ſhell, that the vanity. of pa-


1


* Book VI. Chap, VII. t Chap. V. p. 369.


„Or LIDE Nr


rents may be flattered by hearing their praiſes.
No man will then think of vexing with prema-
ture learning the feeble and inexperienced, for
fear that, when they came to years of diſcre-
tion, they ſhould refuſe to be learned. Mind
will be ſuffered to expand itſelf in proportion as
occaſion and impreſſion ſhall excite it, and not
tortured and enervated by being caſt in a parti-
cular mould. No creature in human form will
be expected to learn any thing, but becauſe he
deſires it and has ſome conception of its utility
and value; and every man, in proportion to his
capacity, will be ready to furniſh ſuch general
hints and comprehenfive views, as will ſuffice
for the guidance and encouragement of him who
ſtudies from a principle of deſire. bo

Before we quit this part of the ſubject it will
be neceflary to obviate an objection that will ſug-
| geſt itſelf to ſome readers. They will fay that
man was formed for ſociety and reciprocal kind-
neſs ; and therefore is by his nature little adapted
to the ſyſtem of individuality which is here de-
lineated. The true perfection of man is to blend
and unite his own exiſtence with that of ano-
ther, and therefore a ſyſtem which forbids him
all partialities and attachments, tends to degene-
racy and not to improvement.

No doubt man is formed for ſociety. But
there is a way in which for a man to loſe
his own exiſtence in that of others, that is emi-
nently vicious and detrimental. Every man
ought to reſt upon his own centre, and conſult
his own underſtanding. Every man ought to
feel his independence, that he can aſſert the
. I. 28 principles


386 OF THE ENJOYMENT


principles of juſtice and truth, without being
obliged treacherouſly to adapt them to the pe-
culiarities of his ſituation, and the errors of
others. 8 .

No doubt man is formed for ſociety. But he
is formed for, or in other words his faculties
enable him to ſerve, the whole and not a part.
Juſtice obliges us to ſympathiſe with a man of
merit more fully than with an inſignificant and
corrupt member of ſociety. But all partialities
ſtrictly ſo called, tend to the injury of him who
feels them, of mankind in general, and even of
him who is their object. The ſpirit of partia-
lity is well expreſſed in the memorable ſaying
of Themiſtocles, God forbid that I ſhould fit
upon a bench of juſtice, where my friends found
no more favour than ſtrangers !'” In fact, as has
been repeatedly ſeen in the courſe of this work,
we ſit in every action of our lives upon a bench
of juſtice ; and play in humble imitation the

art of the unjuſt judge, whenever we indulge
the ſmalleſt atom of partiality. | |

Such are the limitations of the ſocial princi-
ple. Theſe limitations in reality tend to im-
prove it and render its operations beneficial. It
would be a miſerable miſtake to ſuppoſe that the
principle is not of the utmoſt importance to
mankind. All that in which the human mind
differs from the intellectual principle in animals
is the growth of ſociety. All that is excellent
in man is the fruit of progreſſive improvement,
of the circumſtance of one age taking advantage
of the diſcoveries of a preceding age, and ſetting
out from the point at which they had arrived.

' Without


OF LIAs% EY: a


Without ſociety we ſhould be wretchedly de-
ficient in motives of improvement. But what is
moſt of all, without fociety our improvements
would be nearly uſeleſs. Mind without benevo-
lence is a barren and a cold exiſtence. It is in
ſeeking the good of others, in embracing a great
and expenſive ſphere of action, in forgetting our
own individual intereſts, that we find our true
element. The tendency of the whole ſyſtem
delineated in this Book is to lead us to that ele-
ment. The individuality it recommends tends
to the good of the whole, and is valuable only
as a means to that end. Can that be termed a
ſelfiſh ſyſtem, where no man deſires luxury, no
man dares to be guilty of injuſtice, and every one
devotes himſelf to ſupply the wants, animal or
intellectual, of others ?—To proceed.

As a genuine ſtate of ſociety 1s ne
with all laws and reſtrictions, ſoit cannot have
even this reſtriction, that no man ſhall amaſs pro-
pry. The ſecurity againſt accumulation, as

as already been faid, lies in the perceived ab-
ſurdity and inutility of accumulation. The prac-
_ tice, if it can be conceived. in a ſtate of ſociety


where the principles of juſtice were adequately
underſtood, would not even be dangerous. The


idea would not create alarm, as it is apt to do in


proſpect among the preſent advocates of political
juſtice. Men would feel nothing but their laugh-
ter or their pity excited at ſo ſtrange a perverſity
of human intellect.


What would denominate any thing my pro-


perty? The fact, that it was neceſſary to my wel-
fare. Les ya would be coeval with the exiſ-


Ce = tence


* „** n * *
Wd = nc — t
Pc


388 OF THE ENJOYMENT.


tence of that neceſſity. The word property would


probably remain; its ſignification only would be


modified. The miſtake does not ſo properly lie


in the idea itſelf, as in the ſource from which it


is traced. What I have, if it be neceſſary for
my uſe, is truly mine; what J have, though the
fruit of my own induſtry, if unneceſſary, it is an
uſurpation for me to retain.

Force in ſuch a ſtate of ſociety would be un-


known; I ſhould part with nothing without a


full conſent. Caprice would be unknown; no
man would covet that which I uſed, unleſs he


diſtinctly apprehended, that it would be more
_ beneficial in his poſſeſſion than it was in mine.
My apartment would be as facred to a certain
extent, as it is at preſent. No man would ob-


trude himſelf upon me to interrupt the courſe of
my ſtudies and meditations. No man would feel


the whim of occupying my apartment, while he


could provide himſelf another as good of his own.
That which was my apartment yeſterday would


probably be my apartment to-day. We have


few purſuits that do not require a certain degree


of apparatus; and it would be for the general


good that I ſhould find in ordinary caſes the ap-
paratus ready for my uſe to-day that I left yeſter-


day. But, though the idea of property thus mo-
dified would remain, the jealouſy and ſelfiſhneſs of


property would be gone. Bolts and locks would


be unknown. Every man would be welcome to


makeevery uſe of my accommodations, that did not
interfere with my own uſe of them. Novices as we


are, we may figure to ourſelves a thouſand diſputes,
where property was held by: ſo flight a tenure.
But diſputes would in reality be impoſſible. They


3 are


„ f ——x—x—x— -


6 1


OP IEE 389


are the offspring of a miſhapen and diſproporti-
oned love of ourſelves. Do you want my table?
Make one for yourſelf; or, if I be more ſkilful
in that reſpect than you, I will make one for you.
Do you want it immediately? Let us compare
the urgency of your wants and mine, and. let


juſtice decide.


Theſe obſervations lead us to the conſideration
of one additional difficulty, which relates to the
diviſion of labour. Shall each man make all his
tools, his furniture and accommodations? This
would perhaps be a tedious operation. Every
man performs the taſk to which he is accuſtom-
ed more ſkilfully and in a ſhorter time than ano-
ther. It is reaſonable that you ſhould make for
me, that which perhaps I ſhould be three or four
times as long making, and ſhould make imper-
fectly at laſt. Shall we then introduce barter and
exchange? By no means. The abſtract ſpirit of
exchange will perhaps govern; every man will
employ an equal portion of his time in manual la-
bour. But the individual application of exchange
is of all practices the moſt pernicious. The mo-
ment I require any other reaſon for ſupplying you
than the cogency of your claim, the moment, in
addition to the dictates of benevolence, I demand
a proſpect of advantage to myſelf, there is an end
of that political juſtice and pure ſociety of which
we treat. No man will have a trade. It cannot
be ſuppoſed that a man will conſtruct any ſpecies
of commodity, but in proportion as it is wanted.
The profeſſion paramount to all others and in
which every man will bear his part, will be that


of man, and in addition perhaps that of culti-


vator.


The


390 OF THE ENJOYMENT, &c.


The diviſion of labour, as it has been treated.
by commercial writers, is for the molt part the
offspring of avarice. It has been found that ten
perſons can make two hundred and forty times as
many pins in a day as one perſon *. This refine-
ment is the growth of luxury. The object is to
ſee into how vaſt a ſurface the induſtry of the low-
er claſſes may be beaten, the more completely to
gild over the indolent and the proud. The ingenu-
ity of the merchant is whetted, by new improve-
ments of this ſort to tranſport more of the wealth
of the powerful into his own coffers. The poſ-
ſibility of effecting a compendium of labour by
this means will be greatly diminiſhed, when men
ſhall learn to deny themſelves ſuperfluties, The
utility of ſuch a ſaving of labour, where labour
is ſo little, will ſcarcely balance againſt the evils
of ſo extenſive a co-operation. From What has
been ſaid under this head it appears, that there
will be a divifion of labour, if we compare the
ſociety in queſtion with the ſtate of the ſolitaire
and the ſavage. But it will produce an extenſive
compoſition of labour, if we compare it with
that to which we are at preſent accuſtomed i in Che


viliſed Europe.


* Smith's Wealth of Nations, Book I. Chap. I.


CHAP.


1 39 J


CHAP


OF THE OBJECTION TO THIS-SYSTEM FROM


THE PRINCIPLE OF POPULATION.


The objection ſtated. —-Remoteneſs of its operation.
—Conettural ideas reſpecting the antidote.
Omnipotence of mind. —Illuſtrations.—Caufes of
decrepitude.—-Youth is prolonged by chearfulneſs
—by clearneſs of apprelienſion and a benevolent
charafter.—T he powers we poſſeſs are eſſentially
progreſive.— Effects of attention. —The pheno-
menon of fleeþ explained — Preſent utility of theſe
reaſonings.—= Application to the future ſtate of


Society.


AN author who has ſpeculated widely upon
ſubjects of government“, has recommended equal,
or, which was rather his idea, common property,


as a complete remedy, to the uſurpation and diſ-


treſs which are at preſent the moſt powerful ene-
mies of human kind, to the vices which infect
education in ſome inſtances, and the neglect it
encounters in more, to all the turbulence of paſ-


ſion, and all the injuſtice of ſelfiſhneſs. But, af-


ter having exhibited this picture, not leſs true


than delightful, he finds an argument that de-
moliſhes


* Wallace: Various Proſpects of Mankind, Nature and
Providence, 1761.


a * Or POP U
moliſhes the whole, and reſtores him to indif-
ference and deſpair, in the exceſſive population
that would enſue.

One of the moſt obvious anſwers to this ob-
jection is, that to reaſon thus is to foreſee ditti-
culties at a great diſtance. Three fourths of the
habitable globe is now uncultivated. The parts
already cultivated are capable of immeaſurable
improvement. Myriads of centuries of {till in-
creaſing population may probably paſs away, and
the earth ſtill be found ſufficient for the ſubſiſt-
ence of its inhabitants. Who can fay how long
the earth itſelf will ſurvive the caſualties of the
planetary ſyſtem ? Who can fay what remedies
thall ſuggeſt themſelves for fo diſtant an inconve-
nience, tune enough for practical application, and
of which we may yet at this time have not the
ſmalleſt idea ? It would be truly abſurd for us to
ſhrink from a ſcheme of eſſential benefit to man-
Kind, leſt they ſhould be too happy, and by ne-

ceſſary eee at ſome diſtant period too po-
pulous.

But, though theſe remarks may be deemed a
ſufficient anſwer to the objection, it may not be
amis to indulge in ſome ſpeculations to which
ſuch an objection obviouſly leads. The earth
may, to ſpeak in the ſtyle of one of the writers
of the Chriſtian Scriptures, “ abide for cver*.”
It may be in danger of becoming too populous.
A By orw a may then be neceſſary. If it may,

Ki ſhould we fit down in ſupine indifference

conclude that we can diſcover no glimpſe of
it;


* Eceleſiaſtes, Chap. I. ver. 95


OF POPULATION. 393


it? The diſcovery, if made, would add to the
firmneſs and conſiſtency of our proſpects; nor is
it improbable to conjecture that that which
would form the regulating ſpring of our con-


duct then, might be the medium of a ſalutary


modification now. What follows muſt be con-


ſidered in ſome degree as a deviation into the


land of conjecture. If it be falſe, it leaves the
great ſyſtem to which it is appended in all ſound
reaſon as impregnable as ever. If this do not lead
us to the true remedy, it does not follow that there
is no remedy. The great object of enquiry will
ſtill remain open, however defective may be the
ſuggeſtions that are now to be offered.

Let us here return to the ſublime conjecture
of Franklin, that ** mind will one day become


omnipotent over matter*.” If over all other


matter, why not over the matter of our own bo-
dies ? If over matter at ever ſo great a diſtance,
why not over matter which, however ignorant
we may be of the tie that connects it with the
thinking principle, we always carry about with us,
and which is in all caſes the medium of com-
munication between that principle and the ex-


ternal univerſe? In a word, why may not man


be one day immortal. nay |

The different caſes in which thought modifies
the, external univerſe are obvious to all. It is
modified by our voluntary thoughts or deſign.
We deſire to ſtretch out our hand, and it is


ſtretched .


* I have no other authority to quote for this expreſſion than the
_ converſation of Dr. Price. Upon enquiry I ae bio to find it


confirmed to me by Mr. Willlam Morgan, the nephew of Dr.


Price, who recollects to have heard it repeatedly mentioned by his
uncle. |


— 0 8 RES RE
— =o * E


wo "POPULATION.


ſtretched out. We perform a thouſand opera-
tions of the ſame ſpecies every day, and 255
familiarity annihilates the wonder. They ar

not in themſelves leſs wonderful than any of thoſe
modifications which we are leaſt accuſtomed to
conceive. Mind modifies body involuntarily.
Emotion excited by ſome unexpected word, by a
letter that is delivered to us, occaſions the moſt
extraordinary revolutions in our frame, accele-
rates the circulation, cauſes the heart to palpi-
tate, the tongue to refuſe its office, and has been


known to occaſion death by extreme anguiſh or
extreme joy. Theſe ſymptoms we may either


encourage or check. By encoutaging them ha-
bits are produced of fainting or of rage. To
diſcourage them is one of the principal offices of
fortitude. The effort of mind in reſiſting pain
in the ſtories of Cranmer and Mucius Sczvola is
of the ſame kind. It is reaſonable to believe
that that effort with a different direction might
have cured certain diſeaſes of the ſyſtem. There


is nothing indeed of which phyſicians themſelves


are more frequently aware, than of the power of
the mind in aſſiſting or retarding convaleſcence.
Why is it that a mature man ſoon loſes that
elaſticity of limb, which characteriſes the heedleſs
gaiety of youth? Becauſe he deſiſts from youth-
ful habits. He aſſumes an air of dignity incom-
patible with the li htneſs of childiſh fallies. He
1s viſited and vexed with all the cares that riſe
out of our nuſtaken inſtitutions, and his heart
is no longer ſatisfied and gay. Hence his limbs
become ſtiff and unwieldly. This is the fore-
runner F of old age and death. 3
The


OF POPULATION. 295


The firſt habit favourable to corporeal vigour
is chearfulneſs. Every time that our mind be-
comes morbid, vacant and melancholy, a certain
period is cut off from the length of our lives,
Liſtleſſneſs of thou ght is the brother of death,
But chearfulneſs gives new life to our frame
and circulation to our juices. Nothing can long
be ſtagnant in the frame of him, whoſe heart is
tranquil, and his imagination active.

A ſecond requiſite inthe caſe of which we treat
is a clear and diſtin conception. If I know
- preciſely what I wiſh, it is eaſy for me to calm
the throbs of pain, and to aſſiſt the fluggiſh ope-
rations of the ſyſtem. It is not a knowledge of
anatomy, but a quiet and ſteady attention to my
ſymptoms, that will beſt enable me to correct
the diſtemper from which they ſpring. Faintmg
is nothing elſe but a confuſion of mind, in which
the ideas appear to mix in painful diſorder, and
nothing is diſtinguiſhed.

The true ſource of chearfulneſs is bene vo-
lence. To a youthful mind, while every thing
ſtrikes with 13 novelty, the individual ſituation
muſt be peculiarly unfortunate, if gaiety of
thaught be not produced, or, when interrupted,
do not ſpeedily return with its healing oblivion.
But novelty is a fading charm, and perpetually
decreaſes. Hence the approach of inanity and
liſtleflneſs. After we have made a certain round
life delights no more. A deathlike apathy in-
vades us. Thus the aged are generally cold and
indifferent ; nothing intereſts their attention, or
rouſes the ſluggiſhneſs of their ſoul. How ſhould
it be otherwiſe? The purſuits of mankind are


commonly frigid and contemptible, and the miſ-
take


3906 OF POPULATION.


take comes at laſt to be detected. But virtue is
a charm that never fades. The ſoul that perpe-
tually overflows with kindneſs and ſympathy, will
always be chearful. The man who is perpetu-
ally buſied in contemplations of public good, will
always be active.

The application of theſe reaſonings is 9
and irreſiſtible. If mind be now in a great degree
the ruler of the ſyſtem, why ſhould it be incapa-
ble of extending its empire ? If our involuntary
thoughts can derange or reſtore the animal eco-
nomy, why ſhould we not in proceſs of time, in
this as in other inſtances, ſubje& the thoughts
which are at preſent involuntary to the govern-
ment of deſign ? If volition can now do ſome-
thing, why ſhould it not go on to do ſtill more
and more? There is no principle of reaſon leſs
liable to queſtion than this, that, if we have in
any reſpect a little power now, and if mind be
eſſentially progreſſive, that power may, and, bar-

ring any extraordinary concuſſions of nature, in-
fallibly will, extend beyond any bounds we are
able to preſeribe to it.

Nothing can be more irrational aid hap:
tuous than to conclude, becauſe a certain ſpecies
of ſuppoſed power is entirely out of the line of
our preſent obſervations, that it is therefore al-
together beyond the limits of the human mind.
We talk familiarly indeed of the limits of our fa-
culties, but nothing is more difficult than to
point them out. Mind, in a progreſſive view at
leaſt, is infinite. If it could have been told to
the ſavage inhabitants of Europe in the times of
Thefeus: and — den man was capable of
| 0


' OF POPULATION. 397


predicting eclipſes and weighing the air, of ex-
plaining the phenomena of nature ſo that no pro-
digies ſhould remain, of meaſuring the diſtance
and the ſize of the heavenly bodies, this would
not have appeared to them leſs wonderful, than
if we had told them of the poſſible diſcovery of
the means of maintaining the human body in
perpetual youth and vigour. But we have not
only this analogy, ſhewing that the diſcovery in
queſtion forms as 1t were a regular branch of the
acquiſitions that belong to an intellectual nature;
but in addition to this we ſeem to have a glimpſe
of the ſpecific manner in which the acquiſition
will be ſecured. Let us remark a little more
diſtinctly the ſimplicity of the proceſs.

We have called the principle of immortality in
man chearfulneſs, clearneſs of conception and
benevolence. Perhaps we ſhall in ſome reſpects
have a more accurate view of it's potency, if we
conſider it as of the nature of attention. It is a
very old maxim of practical conduct, that what-
ever is done with attention, is done well. It is
becauſe this was a principal requiſite, that many
perſons endowed in an eminent degree with chear-
fulneſs, perſpicacity and benevolence, have per
haps not been longer lived than their neighbours.
We are not capable at preſent of attending to
every thing. A man who is engaged in the ſub-

limeſt and moſt delightful exertions of mind,
will perhaps be leſs attentive to his animal func-
tions than his moſt ordinary neighbour, though
he will frequently in a partial degree repair that
neglect, by a more chearful and animated obſer-
vation, when thoſe exertions are ſuſpended. But,


though


*
of
}
L
7
q
&.
3
9
1
1
| 5
- * j
1 4
1 f
3
i} 1
1
n ö
1. o
iS
I
=_
V3
11
1 7
=_
1 : _
1 1
1
ih A
Fa.
' A
* 1 I
100 of
1 *
1 1
1
/ b
137 "1
{i hot
| 5
» 7
1 2
.


38 OF POPULATION.


though the faculty of attention may at preſent have


a very ſmall ſhare of ductility, it is probable that
it may be improved in that reſpect to an incon-
cCeivable degree. The picture that was exhibited
of the ſubtlety of mind in an earlier ſtage of this
work *, gives to this ſuppoſition a certain degree
of moral evidence. If we can have three hun-
dred and twenty ſucceſſive ideas in a ſecond of
time, why ſhould it be ſuppoſed that we ſhall not

hereafter arrive at the ſkill of carrying on a great
number of contemporaneous proceſſes without


diſorder ?


Having thus given a view of what may be the


fature improvement of mind, it is proper that we
| ſhould qualify this picture to the ſanguine temper
of ſome readers and the incredulity of others, by
obſerving that this improvement, if capable of
being realiſed, is however at a great diſtance. A
very obvious remark will render this eminently
palpable. If an unintermitted attention to the
animal economy be neceſſary, then, before death
can be baniſhed, we muſt baniſh ſleep, death's
image. Sleep 1s one of the moſt conſpicuous in-
firmities of the human frame. It is not, as has
often been ſuppoſed, a ſuſpenſion of thought, but
an irregular and diſtempered ſtate of the faculty .
Our tired attention refigns the helm, ideas ſwim
before us in wild confuſion, and are attended with
leſs and leſs diſtinctneſs, till at length they leave


no traces in the memory. Whatever attention


and volition are then impoſed upon us, as it were


at unawares, are but faint reſemblances of our
operations


* Book IV, Chap. VII, p. 306.
+ Book IV, Chap. VII, p. 310.


R — — Afr — ah


;


OF' POPULATION. 399


operations in the ſame kind when awake: Ge-


nerally ſpeaking, we contemplate fights of horror


with little pain, and commit the moſt atrocious
crimes with little ſenſe of their true nature. The
horror we ſometimes attribute to our dreams, will
frequently be found upon accurate obſervation to
belong to our review of them when we wake.

One other remark may be proper in this place.
If the remedies here preſcribed tend to a total
extirpation of the infirmities of our nature, then,
though we cannot promiſe to them an early and
complete ſucceſs, we may probably find them of
ſome utility now. They may contribute to pro-
long our vigour, though not to immortaliſe it, and,
which is of more conſequence, to make us live
while we live. Every time the mind is invaded
with anguiſh and gloom, the frame beomes diſor-
dered. Every time that languor and indifference
creep upon us, our functions fall into decay. In
proportion as we cultivate fortitude and equani-
mity, our circulations will be chearful. In pro-
portion as we cultivate a kind and benevolent pro-
penſity, we may be ſecure of finding ſomething
for ever to intereſt and engage us.

Medicine may reaſonably be ſtated to conſiſt of
two branches, the animal and intellectual. The
latter of theſe has been infinitely too much ne-
glected. It cannot be employed to the purpoſes
of a profeſſion ; or, where it has been inciden-
tally ſo employed, it has been artificially and in-
directly, not in an open and avowed manner.


* Herein the patient muſt miniſter to himſelf*.”
LS How


* Macbeth, Act V.


\


650 OF POPULATION.
How often do we find a ſudden piece of good
news diſſipating a diſtemper? How common is
the remark, that thoſe accidents, which are to
the indolent a ſource of diſeaſe, are forgotten
and extirpated in the buſy and active? It would
no doubt be of extreme moment to us, to be
thoroughly acquainted with the power of motives,
habit, and what is called reſolution, in this reſ-
pect. I walk twenty miles in an indolent and
half determined temper, and am extremely fa-
tigued. I walk twenty miles full of ardour and
with a motive that engroſſes my ſou], and I come
in as freſh and alert as when I began my journey.
We are ſick and we die, generally ſpeaking, be-
cauſe we conſent to ſuffer theſe accidents. This
conſent in the preſent ſtate of mankind is in ſome
degree unavoidable. We mult have ſtronger mo-
tives and clearer views, before we can uniformly
refuſe it. But, though we cannot always, we
may frequently refuſe. This is a truth of which
all mankind are to a certain degree aware. No-
thing more common than for the moſt ignorant
man to call upon his fick neighbour, to rouſe
himſelf, not to ſuffer himſelf to be conquered ;
and this exhortation is always accompanied with
ſome conſciouſneſs of the efficacy of reſolution.
The wiſe and the good man therefore ſhould car-
ry with him the recollection of what chearfulneſs
and a determined ſpirit are able to do, of the ca-
pacity with which he 1s endowed of expelling the
* ſeeds and firſt light appearances of indiſpoſition.
The principal part of the preceding paragraph
is nothing more than a particular application of


what


OF POPULATION. 1


whit was elſewhere delivered reſpecting moral
and phyſical caufes*, It would have been eaſy
to have caſt the preſent chapter in a different form,
and to have made it a chapter upon health, ſhow-
ing that one of the advantages of a better ſtate of
ſociety would be a very high improvement of the
vigour and animal conſtitution of man. In that
caſe the conjecture of immortality would only
have come in as an incidental remark, and the
whole would have aſſumed lets the air of conjec-
ture than of cloſe and argumentative deduction.
But it was perhaps better to give the ſubject the
molt explicit form, at the riſk of exciting a cer-
tain degree of prejudice.

To apply theſe remarks to the ſubject of popu-
lation. The tendency of a cultivated and virtu-
ous mind is to render us indifferent to the gratifi-
cations of ſenſe. They pleaſe at preſent by their
novelty, that is, becauſe we know not how to
eſtimate them. They decay in the decline of life
indirectly becauſe the ſyſtem refuſes them, but
directly and principally becauſe they no longer ex-
cite the ardour and paſſion of mind. It is well
known that an inflamed imagination 1s capable of
doubling and tripling the ſeminal ſecretions. The
gratifications of ſenſe pleaſe at preſent by their
impoſture. We ſoon learn to deſpiſe the mere
animal function, which, apart from the deluſi-
ons of intellect, would be nearly the fame in all
caſes ; and to value it, only as it happens to be
relieved by perſonal charms or mental excellence.
We abſurdly imagine that no better road can be

Vol. II. De: found


Book I, Chap. VII, Part J.


„
bo
„


4 Or POPULATION.
found to the ſympathy and intercourſe of minds.


But a very ſlight degree of attention might con-


vince us that this is a falſe road, full of danger
and deception. Why fhould I eſteem another,


or by another be eſteemed ? For this reaſon


only, becauſe eſteem is due, and only ſo far as
The men therefore who exiſt when the earth

ſhall refuſe itſelf to a more extended population,

will ceaſe to propagate, for they will no longer


have any motive, either of error or duty, to in-


duce them. In addition to this they will perhaps
be immortal. The whole will be a people of
men, and not of children. Generation will not
fucceed generation, nor truth have in a certain
degree to recommence her career at the end- of
every thirty years. There will be no war, no
crimes, no adminiſtration of juſtice as it is called,
and no government. Theſe latter articles are at

no great diſtance ; and it is not impoſſible that
ſome of the preſent race of men may live to ſee
them in part accompliſhed. But beſide this,
there will be no diſeaſe, no anguiſh, no melan-
choly and no reſentment. Every man will ſeek
with ineffable ardour the good of all. Mind will


de active and eager, yet never diſappointed. Men


will ſee the progreſſive advancement of virtue
and good, and feel that, if things occaſionally
happen contrary to their hopes, the miſcarriage
itſelf was a neceflary part of that progreſs. They
will know, that they are members of the chain,
that each has his ſeveral utility, and they will not


feel indifferent to that utility. They will be ea-
ger to enquire into the good that already exiſts,


the


OF POPULATION: 403
the means by which it was produced, and the
greater good that is yet in ſtore. They will ne- N
ver want motives for exertion; for that benefit
which a man thoroughly underſtands and earneſt-
ly loves, he cannot refrain from ende arguring to
romote.
Before we diſmiſs this ſubject it is proper once
again to remind the reader, that the leading doc-
trine of this chapter is given only as matter of
probable conjecture, and that the grand argu-
ment of this diviſion of the work is altogether in-
pendent of its truth or falſhood.


404 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING


oe e I


OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING THE
GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY.


Apprehen/ions that are entertained on this ſubjett.
——dea of maſſacre.— Inference we ought to
make upon ſuppoſition of the reality of - theſe ap-
prehenfions.— Miſchief by no means the neceſſary
attendant on improvement. Duties under this
circumſtance, 1. of thoſe who are qualiſied for
public inſtruttors—temper—fmcerity.—Pernici-
ous effetts of diſſimulation in this caſe. —2. Of the
rich and great. — Many of them may be expected
to be advocates of equality. Conduct which
their intereſt as a body preſcribes. 3. Of the
friends of equality in general.—-Omnipotence of
truth. Importance of a mild and benevolent pro-
ceeding.— Connexion between liberty and equality.
Caufe of equality will perpetually advance.
Symptoms of its progreſs. —ldea of its future ſuc-


ceſs.— Concluſion.


H aving thus ſtated explicitly and without
reſerve the great branches of this illuſtrious pic-
ture, there is but one ſubject that remains. In
what manner ſhall this intereſting improvement
of human ſociety be carried into execution ? Are
there not certain ſteps that are deſirable for this
purpoſe? Are there not certain ſteps that are in-
evitable? Will not the period that muſt firſt

| elapſe,


ſion of evil?


THE GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 40g
elapſe, neceſſarily be ſtained with a certain infu-

No idea has excited greater horror in the minds
of a multitude of perſons, than that of the miſ-
chiefs that are to enſue from the diſſemination of
what they call levelling principles. They be-

Heve that theſe principles will inevitably fer-

ment in the minds of the vulgar, and that the
attempt to carry them into execution will be at-
tended with every ſpecies of calamity.” They
repreſent to themſelves * the uninformed and
unciviliſed part of mankind, as let looſe from all
reſtraint, and hurried into every kind of exceſs.
Knowledge and taſte, the improvements of in-
tellect, the diſcoveries of ſages, the beauties of
poetry and art, are trampled under foot and ex-
tinguiſhed by barbarians. It is another inunda-
tion of 'Goths and Vandals, with this bitter ag-
gravation, that the viper that ſtings us to death
was warmed in our own boſoms. |

They conceive of the ſcene as “ beginning in
maſſacre.” They ſuppoſe © all that is great,
pre-eminent and illuſtrious as ranking among the
firſt victims. Such as are diſtinguiſhed by pecu-
| liar elegance of manners or energy of diction and
compoſition, will be the inevitable objects of
envy and jealouſy. Such as intrepidly exert them-
ſelves to ſuccour the perſecuted, or to declare to
the public thoſe truths which they are leaſt in-
clined, but which are moſt neceſlary for them to
hear, will be marked out for aſſaſſination.”

Let us not, from any partiality to the ſyſtem of
equality delineated in this book, ſhrink from the
picture here exhibited. Maſſacre is the too =


1


456 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING


ſible attendant upon revolution, and maſſacre is
perhaps the moſt hateful ſcene, allowing, for its
momentary duration, that any imagination can
ſuggeſt. The fearful, hopeleſs expectation of
*- defeated, and the blood-hound fury of their
conquerors, is a complication of miſchief that all


which has been told of infernal regions cannot


ſurpaſs. The cold-blooded maſſacres that are per-


petrated under the name of criminal juſtice fall
ſhort of theſe in their moſt frightful aggravations.
The miniſters and inſtruments of law have by


cuſtom reconciled their minds to the dreadful taſk
they y perform, and bear their reſpective parts in the
901 ſhocking enormities, without being ſenſible


to the hg allied to thoſe enormities. But the
inſtruments of maſſacre are actuated with all the


ſentiments of fiends. Their eyes emit flaſhes of
cruelty and rage. They purſue their victims from
ſtreet to ſtreet and from houſe to houſe, They
tear them from the arms of their fathers and their
wives, They glut themſelves with barbarity and
inſult, and utter ſhouts of horrid j Joy at the =


tacle of their tortures.


We have now contemplated the tremendous
picture; what is the concluſion it behoves us to


draw ? Muſt \ we ſhrink from reaſon, from Juſtice,
from virtue and happineſs ? Suppoſe that the in-


evitable conſequence of communicating truth
were the temporary introduction of ſuch a ſcene
as has juſt been deſcribed, muſt we on that ac-
count refuſe to communicate it ? The crimes that
were perpetrated would in no juſt eſtimate appear
to be the reſult of truth, but of the error which
had previouſly been infuſed. The impartial en-


qu Irer


THE GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 207


quirer would behold them as the laſt ſtruggles
of expiring deſpotiſm, which, if it had ſurvived,
would have produced miſchiefs, ſcarcely leſs
atrocious in the hour of their commiſſion, and
infinitely more calamitous by the length of their
duration. If we would judge truly, even ad-
mitting the unfavourable ſuppolition above ſtated,
we muſt contraſt a moment of horror and diftreſs -
with ages of felicity. No imagination can ſuffi-
ciently conceive the mental improvement and the
tranquil virtue that would fucceed, were property
once permitted to reſt upon its genuine baſis.

And by what means ſuppreſs truth, and keep
alive the ſalutary intoxication, the tranquillifing
inſanity of mind which ſome men defire ? Such
has been too generally the policy of government
through every age of the world. Have we flaves !
We muſt aſhduouſly retain them in 1gnorance.
Have we colonies and dependencies ? The great
effort of our care is to keep them from being too
populous and proſperous. Have we ſubjects? It
is © by impotence and miſery that we endeavour
to render them ſupple : plenty is fit for nothing
but to make them unmanageable, diſobedient and
mutinous “.“ If this were the true philoſophy
of ſocial inftitutions, well might we ſhrink from
it with horror, How tremendous an abortion
would the human ſpecies be found, I all that
tended to make them wiſe, tended to make
them unprincipled and profligate ? But this it
is impoſſible for any one to believe, who will
lend the fubject a moment's impartial conſidera-
| | . . MON.


* Book V, Chap. III, p. 377.


-


408 OF THE MEANS OF. INTRODUCING


tion. Can truth, the perception of juſtice and a
deſire to execute it, be the ſource of irretrievable
ruin to mankind ? tt may be conceived that the
firſt opening and illumination of mind will be
attended with diſorder. But every juſt reaſoner
muſt confeſs that regularity and happineſs will
ſucceed to this confuſion. 'To refuſe the remedy,

were this picture of its operation ever ſo true,
would be as if a man who had diflocated a limb,

' ſhould refuſe to undergo the pain of having it
replaced. If mankind have hitherto loſt the road
of virtue and happineſs, that can be no juſt reaſon
why they ſhould be ſuffered to go wrong for
ever. We muſt not refuſe a conviction of error,
or even the treading over again ſome of the ſteps
that were the reſult of it.

Another queſtion ſuggeſts itſelf under this
head. Can we ſuppreſs truth ? Can we arreſt the
progreſs of the enquiring mind ? If we can, it will
only be done by the moſt unmitigated deſpotiſm.
Mind has a perpetual tendeney to riſe. It can-
not be held down but by a power that counteracts
its genuine tendency through every moment of
its exiſtence, Tyrannical and ſanguinary muſt
be the meaſures employed for this purpoſe. Mi-
ſerable and diſguſtful muſt be the ſcene they pro-
duce. Their reſult will be thick darkneſs of the
mind, timidity, ſervility, hypocriſy, This is the
alternative, ſo far as there is any alternative in
their power, between the oppoſite meaſures of

which the princes and governments of the earth
have now to chooſe: they muſt either ſuppreſs
enquiry by the moſt arbitrary ſtretches of power,
or preſerve a clear and tranquil held in which


every


4


THE GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 459


every man ſhall be at eur to diſcover and vin-
dicate his opinion.

No doubt it is the duty of governments to
maintain the moſt unalterable neutrality in this

rtant tranſaction. No doubt it is the duty of
— iduals to publiſh truth without diffidence or
reſerve, to publiſh it in its genuine form without
ſeeking aid from the meretricious arts of publi-
cation. The more it is told, the more it is known
in its true dimenſions, and not in parts, the leſs
is it poſſible that it ſhould coaleſce with or leave
room for the pernicious. effects of error. The
true philanthropiſt will be eager, inſtead of ſup--
preſſing diſcuſhon, to take an active ſhare in the
ſcene, to exert the full ſtrength of his faculties
in diſcovery, and to contribute by his exertions
to render the operations of thought at once per-
ſpicuous and profound.

It being then ſufficiently evident that truth
muſt be told at whatever expence, let us proceed
to conſider the preciſe amount of that expence,
to enquire how much of confuſion and violence
is inſeparable from the tranſit which mind has to
accompliſh, And here it plainly appears that
miſchief is by no means inſeparable from the
progreſs. In the mere circumſtances of our
acquiring knowledge and accumulating one truth
after another there is no direct tendency to
diſorder. Evil can only ſpring from the claſh
of mind with mind, from one body of men in
the community outſtripping another in their
1deas of improvement, and becoming impatient
of the oppoſition they have to encounter.

In this intereſting period, in which mind ſhall


arrive
pl


=


110 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING
arrive as it were at the true criſis of its ſtory,
there are high duties incumbent upon eve
branch of the community. Firſt, upon thoſe cul-
tivated and powerful minds, chat are fitted to be
precurſors to the reſt in the diſcovery of truth.
They are bound to be active, indefatigable and
diſintereſted. It is incumbent upon them to
abſtain from inflammatory language, from all
expreſſions of acrimony and reſentment. It is
abſurd in any government to erect itſelf into a
court of criticiſm in this reſpect, and to eſtabliſſi
a criterion of liberality and decorum; but for
that very reaſon it is doubly incumbent on thoſe
who communicate their thoughts to the public, to
exerciſe a rigid cenſure over themſelves. The
tidings of liberty and equality are tidings of good
will to all orders of men. They free the peaſant
from the iniquity that depreſſes his mind, and
the privileged from the luxury and deſpotifm by
which he is corrupted. Let thoſe who bear theſe
tidings not ftain their benignity, by ſhowing that
that benignity has not yet become the inmate of
their hearts.

Nor is it leſs necefſary that they ſhould be
urged to tell the whole truth won diſguiſe.
No maxim can be more pernicious than that
which would teach us to conſult the temper of
the times, and to tell only fo much as we ima-
gine our contemporaries will be able to bear.
This practice is at prefent almoft univerſal, and
it is the mark of a very painful degree of depra-
vity. We retail and mangle truth. We impart
it to our fellows, not with the liberal meaſure
with which | we have received nt, but with ſuch

parſimony


THE GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 411


parſimony as our own miſerable prudence may
chance to preſcribe. We pretend that truths fit to
be practiſed in one country, nay, truths which
we confeſs to be eternally right, are not fit to be
practiſed in another, That we may deceive others
with a tranquil conſcience, we begin with deceiv-
ing ourſelves. We put ſhackles upon our minds,
and dare na truſt ourſelves at large in the purſuit
of truth, This practice took its commencement
from the machinations of party, and the deſire of
one wife and adventurous leader to carry a troop
of weak, timid and ſelfiſh ſupporters in his train.
There is no reaſon why I ſhould not declare in
any aſſembly upon the face of the earth that I
am a republican. There is no more reaſon why,
being a republican under a monarchical govern-
ment, I ſhould enter into a deſperate faction to
invade the public tranquillity, than if I were mo-
narchical under a republic. Every community
of men, as well as every individual, muſt govern
itſelf according to its ideas of juſtice. What I
ſhould defire is, not by violence to change its
inſtitutions, but by reafon to change its ideas.
J have no buſineſs with factions or intrigue ; but
{imply to promulgate the truth, and to wait the
tranquil progreſs of conviction. If there be any
aſſembly that cannot bear this, of ſuch an aſſem-
| bly I ought to be no member. It happens much
oftener than we are willing to imagine, that
« the poſt of honour,” or, which is better, the
poſt of utility, © is a private ſtation“.“
The diſſimulation here cenſured, beſide its ili
effects upon him who praQiles it, and by degrad-
| | ing
* Addiſon's Caty, Act IV.


412 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING


ing and unnerving his character upon ſociety at
large, has a particular ill conſequence with reſpect
to the point we are conſidering. It lays a mine,
and prepares an exploſion. This is the tendency
of all unnatural reſtraint. Meanwhile the unfet-
= tered progreſs of truth is always ſalutary. Its
= advances are gradual, and each ſtep prepares
the general mind for that which is to follow.
hi They are ſudden and unprepared emanations of
| truth, that have the greateſt tendency to deprive
men of their lobriety and ſelf command. Re-
ſerve in this reſpect is calculated at once, to give
a rugged and angry tone to the multitude when-
ever they ſhall happen to diſcover what is thus
_ concealed, and to miſlead the depoſitaries of po-
litical power. It ſooths them into falſe ſecurity,
and prompts them to maintain an inauſpicious
obſtnacy.

Having conſidered what it is that belongs in
ſuch a criſis to the enlightened and wiſe, let us
next turn our attention to a very different claſs
of ſociety, the rich and great. And here in the
firſt place it may be remarked, that it is a very
falſe 1 that leads us univerſally to deſ-
pair of having theſe for the advocates of equality.
Mankind are not ſo miſerably ſelfiſh, as ſatiriſts
and courtiers have ſuppoſed. We never engage
in any action without enquiring what is the de-
ciſion of juſtice reſpecting it. We are at all
times anxious to ſatisfy ourſelves that what our
inclinations lead us to do, is innocent and right

| to be done.* Since therefore juſtice occupies
| ſo large a ſhare in the contemplations of the hu-
man D


* Book II, Chap. III, p. 92.


THE GENUINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 413
man mind, it cannot reaſonably be doubted that
a ſtrong and commanding view of juſtice would

prove a powerful motive to influence our choice.
But that virtue which for whatever reaſon we
have choſen, ſoon becomes recommended to us
by a thouſand other reaſons. We find in it re-
putation, eminence, felf complacence and the
divine pleafures of an approving mind.

The rich and great are far from callous to
views of general felicity, when ſuch views are
brought before them with that evidence and at-
traction of which they are ſuſceptible. From one
dreadful diſadvantage their minds are free. They
have not been ſoured with unrelenting tyranny,
or narrowed by the perpetual preſſure of diſtreſs.
They are peculiarly qualified to judge of the
emptineſs of that pomp and thoſe gratifications,
which are always moſt admired when they are
feen from a diſtance. They will frequently be
found conſiderably indifferent to theſe things,
unleſs confirmed by habit and rendered inveterate
by age. If you ſhew them the attractions of gal-
lantry and magnanimity in reſigning them, they
will often be reſigned without reluctance. Where-
ever accident of any ſort has introduced an active
mind, there enterpriſe is a neceſſary conſequence;
and there are few perfons ſo inactive, as to fit
down for ever in the ſupine enjoyment of the
indulgences to which they were born. The ſame
fpirit that has led forth the young nobility of
ſucceſſive ages to encounter the hardſhips of a
camp, might eaſily be employed to render them
champions of the cauſe of equality : nor is it to
be believed, that the circumſtance of ſuperior

virtue


OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING


414


virtue and truth in this latter exertion, will be
without its effect.

But let us ſuppoſe a conſiderable party of the
rich and great to be actuated by no view but to
their emolument and eaſe. It is not difficult
to ſhow them, that their intereſt in this ſenſe
will admit of no more than a temperate and
yielding reſiſtance. Much no doubt of the future
tranquillity. or confuſion of mankind depends
upon the conduct of this party. To them |

would fay : It is in vain "ag you to fight againſt
truth. It is like endeavouring with the human
hand to ſtop the inroad of the ocean. Retire
betimes. Seek your ſafety in conceſſion. If you
will not go over to the ſtandard of political juſ-
tice, temporiſe at leaſt with an enemy whom
you cannot overcome. Much, inexpreſſibly
much depends upon you. If you be wile, if
you be prudent, if you would ſecure at leaſt your
lives and your perional eaſe amidſt the general
ſhipwreck of monopoly and folly, you will be
unwilling to irritate and defy. Unleſs by your
raſhneis, there will be no confuſion, no murder,
not a drop of blood will be ſpilt, and you will
yourſelves be made happy. If you brave the
ſtorm and call down every ſpecies of odium
on your heads, ſtill it is poſſible, ſtill it is to be
| hoped that the general tranquillity may be main-
tained. But, ſhould it prove otherwiſe, you will
have principally to anſwer for all the conſe-
quences that ſhall enſue.

* Above all, do not be lulled into a raſh and
headlong ſecurity. We have already ſeen how
much che bypocriſy and inſtability of the wiſe


and


THE GENPINE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 413


and enlightened of. the preſent day, thoſe who
confeſs much, and have a confuſed view of ſtill
more, but dare not examine the whole with a
ſteady and unſhrinking eye, are calculated to
increaſe this ſecurity. But there is a danger ſtill
more palpable. Do not be miſled by the unthink-
ing and ſeeming general cry of thoſe who have

no fixed principles. Addreſſes have been found
in every age a very uncertain criterion of the
future conduct of a people. Do not count upon


the numerous train of your adherents, retainers


and ſervants. They afford a very feeble depen-
dence. They are men, and cannot be dead to
the intereſts and claims of mankind. Some of
them will adhere to you as long as a ſordid intereſt
ſeems to draw them in that direction. But the
moment yours ſhall appear to be the loſing cauſe,
the ſame intereſt will carry them over to the


enemy's ſtandard. They will diſappear like the


morning dew.


May I not hope that you are capable * re-


ceiving impreſſion from another argument? Will
you feel no compunction at the thought of reſiſt-
ing the greateſt of all benefits? Are you content
to be regarded by the moſt enlightened of your
contemporaries, and to be handed down to the
remoteſt poſterity, as the obſtinate adverſaries of
philanthropy and juſtice ? Can you reconcile it
to your own minds, that, for a ſordid intereſt,
for the cauſe of general corruption and abuſe,
you ſhall be found active in ſtifling truth, and
ſtrangling the new born happineſs of mankind?”
Would to God it were poſſible to carry home this
argument to the enlightened and accompliſhed
advocates of ariſtocracy | Would to God they


could


— -


2 — en 2 — , I
— WOO eq — ů ——— . — No
22 8 7
— . . — * —_— 33 *


r — . «—; a Oe


—— —


—— — —


—


2 * "Wc: — =.
2 — IRR Ot
2p EE Dn Cans =
— Ee —


4 * 0
— A -
—
. ——— —
— —


—
— — WE


—
—
—


3
ebf 4. 0%; a0 DIY — 1
. k rn EE IEEE — —


* = ht
et ;
—— ů ——ů ¶ů Q — —


— +” = ag
2 ie —— —


— 3
233
-


—
en
80 .


— —
n


—
4 _ 4 8 " * 3
—— PPP pm et meg wp then era ee = 5 — *


—


—— —
—


Fe
Fl ;

"t

|
1


416 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING
could be perſuaded to conſult neither paſſion, nor
prejudice, rior the flights of imagination, in de-
eiding upon ſo momentous a queſtion ! “ We
know that truth does not ſtand in need of your
alliance to ſecure her triumph. We do not fear
your enmity. But our hearts bleed to ſee ſuch
gallantry fuch talents and ſuch virtue enſlaved to
prejudice, and enliſted in error. It is for your
fakes that we expoſtulate, and for the honour
of human nature.”

To the general maſs of the adherents of the


cauſe of juſtice it may be proper to ſay a few


words. If there be any force in the arguments
of this work, thus much at leaſt we are authoriſed
to deduce from them, that truth is irreſiſtible. If
man be endowed with a rational nature, then
whatever is clearly demonſtrated to his under-
ſtanding to have the moſt powerful recommenda-
tions, ſo long as that clearneſs is preſent to his
mind, will inevitably engage his choice. It is
to no purpole to ſay that mind is fluctuating and
fickle ; for it is ſo only in proportion as evidence
is imperfect. Let the evidence be increaſed, and
the perſuaſion will be made firmer, and the choice
more uniform. It is the nature of individual
mind to be perpetually adding to the ſtock of its
tdeas and knowledge. Simitar to this is the na-
ture of general mind, excluſively of caſualties
which, ariſing from a more comprehenſive order
of things, appear to diſturb the order of limited
fyſtems. This is confirmed to us, if a truth of
this univertal nature can derive confirmation from
partial experiments, by the regular advances of
the human mind from century to century, ſince
the invention of printing.

* "20


THE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. Ai


« Let then this axiom of the omnipotence of truth
be the rudder of our undertakings. Let us not
precipitately endeavour to accompliſh that to-day,
which the diſſemination of truth will make wna-
voidable to-morrow. Let us not anxiouſly watch
for occaſions and events: the aſcendancy of truth
is independent of events. Let us anxiouſly refrain
from violence : force is not conviction, and is ex-
tremely unworthy of the cauſe of juſtice. Let
us admit into our boſoms neither contempt, ani-
moſity, reſentment nor revenge. The cauſe of
Juſtice is the cauſe of humanity. Its advocates
ſhould overflow with univerſal good will. We


ſhould love this cauſe, for it conduces to the ge-


neral happineſs of mankind. We ſhould love it,
for there 1s not a man that lives, who in the na-
tural and tranquil progreſs of things will not be
made happier by its approach. The moſt power-
ful cauſe by which it has been retarded, is the miſ-
take of its adherents, the air of ruggedneſs, bru-
tiſhneſs and inflexibility which they have given to
that which in itſelf is all benignity. Nothing leſs
than this could have prevented the great mak of
enquirers from beſtowing upon it a patient exami-
nation. Be it the care of the now increaſing ad-
vocates of equality to remove this obſtacle to the
ſucceſs of their cauſe. We have but two plain
duties, which, if we ſet out right, it is not eaſy
to miſtake. The firſt is an unwearied attention
to the great inſtrument of juſtice, reaſon. We
muſt divulge our fentiments with the utmoſt frank-
neſs. We muſt endeavour to impreſs them upon
the minds of others. In this attempt we muſt
give way to no diſcouragement. We mult ſharpen
our intellectual weapons; add to the ſtock of our

VYoL. II. E e knowledge;


4 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING


knowledge ; be pervaded with a ſenſe of the mag-
nitude of our cauſe; and perpetually increaſe that
calm preſence of mind and felf poſſeſſion which
mult enable us to do Juſtice to our Principles. Our
ſecond duty is tranquillity.”

It will not be right to paſs over a queſtion that
will inevitably ſuggeſt itſelf to the mind of the
reader. If an equaliſation of property be to
take place, not by law, regulation or public inſti-


tution, but only through the private conviction of
individuals, in what manner ſhall it begin? In


anſwering this queſtion it is not neceſſary to prove
ſo ſimple a propoſition, as that all republicaniſm,
all equaliſation of ranks and immunities, ſtrongly
tends towards an equaliſation of property. Thus,
in Sparta this laſt principle was completely admit-
ted. In Athens the public largeſſes were ſo great


as almoſt to exempt the citizens from manual la-


bour ; and the rich and eminent only purchaſed a
toleration for their advantages, by the liberal man-
ner in which they opened their ſtores to the pub-
hc. In Rome, agrarian laws, a wretched and il!


choſen ſubſtitute for equality, but which grew out


of the fame ſpirit, were perpetually agitated. If
men go on to increaſe in diſcernment, and this.
they certainly will with peculiar rapidity, when
the ill conſtructed governments which now retard
their progreſs are removed, the ſame arguments
which ſhowed them the injuſtice of ranks, will
ſhow them the injuſtice of one man's wanting that,
which while it is in the poſſeſſion of another, con-
duces in no reſpect to his well being.

It is a common error to imagine, that this in-


juſtice will be felt only by the lower orders who


ſuffer from it; and hence it would appear that it
cap


THE SYSTEM OP PROPERTY. 419


can only be corrected by violence. But in anſwer
to this it may in the firſt place be obſerved that all
ſuffer from it, the rich whoengroſs, as well as the
poor who want. Secondly, it has been clearly
ſhown in the courſe of the preſent work, that men
are not ſo entirely governed by ſelf intereſt as has
frequently been ſuppoſed. It has been ſhown, if
poſſible, ſtill more clearly, that the ſelfiſh are not
governed ſolely by ſenſual gratification or the love
of gain, but that the deſire of eminence and diſ-
tinction is in different degrees an univerſal paſſion.
Thirdly and principally, the progreſs of truth is
the moſt powerful of all cauſes. Nothing can be
more abſurd than to imagine that theory, inthe beſt
{enfe of the word, is not t eſſentially connected with
practice. That which we can be perſuaded clearly
and diſtinctly to approve, will inevitably modify
our conduct. Mind is not an aggregate of various
faculties contending with each other for the maſ-
tery, but on the contrary the will is in all caſes cor-
reſpondent to the laſt judgment of the underſtand-
ing. When men ſhall diſtinctly and habitually
perceive the folly of luxury, and when their neigh-
bours are impreſſed with a fimilar diſdain, 1t will
be impoſſible that they ſhould purſue the means
of it with the ſame avidity as before.

It will not be difficult perhaps to trace, in the
progreſs of modern Europe from barbariſm to re-
finement, a tendency towards the equaliſation of
property. In the feudal times, as now in India
and other parts of the world, men were born to
a certain ſtation, and it was nearly impoſſible
for a peaſant to riſe to the rank of a noble.


E e 2 Except


420 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING |


1


Except the nobles there were no men that were
rich; for commerce, either external or internal, had
ſcarcely an exiſtence. Commerce was one engine


for throwing down this ſeemingly impregnable


barrier, and ſhocking the prejudices of nobles,
who were ſufficiently willing to beheve that their
retainers were a different ſpecies of beings from


themſelves. Learning was another, and more


powerful engine. In all ages of the church we


| ſee men of the baſeſt origin riſing to the higheſt
eminence. Commerce proved that others could
riſe to wealth beſide thoſe who were caſed in


mail; but learning proved that the low-born
were capable of ſurpaſſing their lords. The pro-
greſſive effect of theſe ideas may eaſily be traced
by the attentive obſerver. Long after learning
began to unfold its powers, its votaries ſtill ſub-
mitted, to thoſe obſequious manners and ſervile
dedications, which no man reviews at the pre-
ſent day without aſtoniſhment. It is but lately
that men have known that intellectual excel-
lence can accompliſh its purpoſes without a pa-
tron. At preſent, among the civiliſed and well
informed a man of ſlender wealth, but of great
intellectual powers and a firm and virtuous mind,


is conſtantly received with attention and deference


and his purſe-proud neighbour who ſhould attempt

to treat him ſuperciliouſly, is ſure to be diſcounte-

nanced in his uſurpation. The inhabitants of diſ-

tant villages, where long eſtabliſhed prejudices

are ſlowly deſtroyed, would be aſtoniſhed to ſeo

how comparatively ſmall a ſhare wealth has in
| determining

\


THE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 421


determining che degree of attention with which
men are treated in enlightened circles.

Theſe no doubt are but ſlight indications. It
is with morality in this reſpect as it is with poli-
tics. The progreſs is at firſt ſo ſlow as for the
moſt part to elude the obſervation of mankind;
nor can it indeed be adequately perceived but by
the contemplation and compariſon of events dur-
ing a conſiderable portion of time. After a cer-
tain interval, the ſcene is more fully unfolded,
and the advances appear more rapid and deciſive.
While wealth was every thing, it was to be ex-
pected that men would acquire it, though at the
expence of character and integrity. Abſolute
and univerſal truth had not yet ſhown itſelf fo de-
cidedly, as to be able to enter the lifts with what
dazzled the eye or gratified the ſenſe. In propor-
tion as the monopohes of ranks and companies are
aboliſhed, the value of ſuperfluities will not fail

to decline. In proportion as republicaniſm gains
ground, men will come to be eſtimated for what
they are, not for what force has given, and force
may take away.

Let us refle& for a moment on the gradual con-
| ſequences of this revolution of opinion. Libera-
lity of dealing will be among its earlieſt reſults,
and of conſequence accumulation will become leſs
frequent and leſs enormous. Men will not be
diſpoſed, as now, to take advantage of each other's
diſtreſſes, and to demand a price for their aid,
not meaſured by a general ſtandard, but by the
wants of an individual. They will not conſider
how much they can extort, but how much it is
reaſonable to require. The maſter tradeſman who

RS Eos employs


2 N =


| — —
py *


.
— — ©. A . - OI
_— == c — N - * _
_y "» — * — — — 4-4
. . - - —— — n = = - -
—— wwe "Harv ay. — r _ = "Into; I” — N — —
— = CY — — ee ng d _— 4 . > a+ _ = _ _ \ -
I I — — —— — — — — — — — — — — *
= A —— — — S Fa *
al oe == —_— — bp. ai — — = _
— — — a — — — — — ==> — —— =
— — . — MN - * _
*
— - Wo
—


1
**
1
—
li

"1


— nes — —ä—ͤ——
<< Sd — 2


422 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING
employs labourers under him, will be diſpoſed


to give a more ample reward to their induſtry ;


which he is at preſent enabled to tax chiefly by the


neutral circumſtance of having provided a capital.


Liberality on the part of his employer will com-


plete in the mind of the artiſan, what ideas of po-
litical juſtice will probably have begun. He will
no longer ſpend the little ſurplus of his earnings
in that diſſipation, which is at preſent one of the


| pr incipal cauſes that ſubje& him to the arbitrary


leafure of a ſuperior. He will eſcape from the
irreſolution of ſlavery ard the fetters of deſpair,
and perceive that independence and eaſe are
ſcarcely leſs within his reach than that of any
other member of the community. This is a na-


tural ſtep towards the ſtill farther progrefſion, in 7


which the labourer will receive entire 3


the conſumer may be required to pay, without
having a middle man, an idle and uſeleſs mono-
poliſer, as he will then be found, to fatten upon
his ſpoils.

Ihe fame ſentiments that lead to liberality of
dealing, will alſo lead to liberality of diſtribution,
The trader, who is unwilling to grow rich by ex-
torting from his employer or his workmen, will
alſo refuſe to become rich by the not inferior in-
juſtice of withholding from his poor neighbour
the ſupply he wants. The habit which was creat-
ed in the former caſe of being contented with mo-
derate gains, is cloſely connected with the habit
of being contented with flender accumulation.


He that is not anxious to add to his heap, will not


be reluctant by a benevolent diſtribution to pre-
vent its increaſe. Wealth was once almoſt the


ſingle object of purſuit that preſented itſelf to the


grok


EY


THE SYSTEM OF PROPERTY. 423


proſs and uncultivated mind. Various objects
will hereafter divide men's attention, the love of
liberty, the love of equality, the purſuits of art
and the defire of knowledge. Theſe objects will
not, as now, be confined to a few, but will gra-
dually be laid open to all. The love of liberty
obviouſly leads to the love of man: the ſentiment
of benevolence will be increaſed, and the narrow-
neſs of the ſelfiſh affections will decline. The
general diffuſion of truth will be productive of
general improvement; and men will daily ap-
proximate towards thoſe views according to which
every object will be appreciated at its true value.
Add to which, that the improvement of which
we ſpeak is general, not individual. The pro-
greſs is the progreſs of all. Each man will find
his ſentiments of juſtice and rectitude echoed,
encouraged and ſtrengthened by the ſentiments of
his neighbours. Apoſtacy will be made emi-
nently improbable, becauſe the apoſtate will in-
cur, not only his own cenſure, but the cenſure of
every beholder. _ „
One remark will ſuggeſt itſelf upon theſe con-
ſiderations. If the inevitable progreſs of im-
provement inſenſibly lead towards an equaliſation
of property, what need was there of propoſing it
as a ſpecific object to men's conſideration?ꝰ The
anſwer to this objection is eaſy. The improve-
ment in queſtion conſiſts in a knowledge of truth.
But our knowledge will be very imperfect ſo long
as this great branch of univerſal juſtice fails to cons
ſtitute a part of it. All truth is uſeful; can this
truth, which is perhaps more fundamental than
any, be without its benefits? Whatever be the
object


424 OF THE MEANS OF INTRODUCING, e.


object towards which mind ſpontaneouſly advanc-
es, it is of no mean importance to us to have a
diſtinct view of that object. Our advances will thus
become accelerated. It is a well known princi-
ple of morality, that he who propoſes perfection
to himſelf, though he will inevitably fall ſhost of
what he purſues, will make a more rapid pro-
greſs, than he who is contented to aim only at
what is imperfect. The benefits to be derived
in the interval from a view of equalifation, as one
of the great objects towards which we are tend-
ing, are exceedingly conſpicuous. Such a view

will ſtrongly conduce to make us difintereited

now. It will teach us to look with contempt up-
on mercantile ſpeculations, commercial proſperi-
ty, and the cares of gain. It will impreſs us
with a juſt apprehenſion of what it is of which
man is capable and in which his perfection con-
fiſts ; and will fix our ambition and activity upon
the worthieſt objects. Mind cannot arrive at
any great and illuſtrious attainment, however
much the nature of mind may carry us towards
it, without feeling ſome preſages of its approach;
and it is reaſonable to believe that, the earlier
theſe preſages are introduced, and the niore diſ-
tinct they are made, the more auſpicious will be
the event,


T. 19H 4 $:


