An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, Vol. I
William Godwin (1793)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): William Godwin's 'An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, and its Influence on General Virtue and Happiness', Volume I (first edition; Dublin: Luke White, 1793). Scan via Internet Archive. Ends with the edition's 'END OF VOLUME THE FIRST'. This 1793 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

' POLITICAL JUSTICE,


ITS INFLUENCE
| ON
* GENERAL VIRTUE AND HAPPINESS,


%


WILLIAM GODWLIN.


4

IN TWO VOLUMES.
YOU 2 |
\

D311 Wy | |

PRINTED FOR LUKE WHITE. | 4
1793. |
|


— — —— ——— —ä— ͤ — — ¶ od Ro. - Bs — — — —


*


R


a


«


/ — — —


E. * ® Mi. . . *


4


1 EW weeks: of Heerarane: are held
in greater eſtimation, than thoſe which
treat in a methodical and elementary
way of the principles of ſcience. But
the human mind in every enlightened
age is progreſſive; and the beſt *
tary treatiſes after a certain time are re-
duced in their value by the operation
of ſubſequent diſcoveries. Hence it has
abways been deſired by candid enquir-
ers, that preceding works of this Kind
ſhould from time to time be ſuperſed-
ed, and that other 3 diond in-
cluding the larger views that have
ſince offered themſelves, mould be
ſubſtituted 1 in their place.

It would be ſtrange if ſomething.
of this kind were not gt a in po-
litics, after the great change that has
been produced in men's minds upon
this ſubject, and the light that has
been thrown upon it by the recent
diſcuſſions of America and France. A
Vor. I. 5 0 ſenſe


1 09;

ſenſe of the value of ſuch a work, 7: ol
properly executed, was the motive
which gave birth to theſe volumes.
Of their execution the reader muſt
judge. „ 1

Authors who hive formed che de-
ſign of ſuperſeding the works of their
predeceſſors, will be found, if *
were in any degree equal to the de-
ſign, not merely to have collected the
feathered information that had been
produced upon the ſubject, but to
have increaſed the ſcience with the
fruit of their own meditations. In
the following work principles will oc-
caſionally be found, which it will not
be juſt to reject without examination,
merely becauſe they are new. It was
impoſſible perſeveringly to reflect up-
on ſo prolific a ſcience, and a ſcience
which may be ſaid to be yet in its in-
fancy, without being led into ways of
thinking that were in ſome degree
uncommon. _ | 0

Another argument in favour of the
utility of ſuch a work was frequently
in the author's mind, and therefore
ought


KR NFA & >: iv
oug ht to be mentioned. He conceiv-
ed 1 — 5 1 to be the proper vehicle of
a liberal morality. That deſcription
of ethics deſerves to be held ih ſlight
eſtimation, which ſeeks only to regu-
late our conduct in articles of particu-
lar and perſonal concern, inſtead of
exciting our attention to the general
good of the ſpecies. It appeared ſuf-
ficiently practicable to make of ſuch a
treatiſe, excluſively of its direct poli-
tical uſe, an advantageous vehicle of
moral improvement. He was accord-
ingly defirous of producing a work,
from the peruſal of which no man
ſhould riſe without being ſtrengthen-
ed in habits of fincerity, fortitude and
juſtice. |
Having ſtated the conſideratiom in.
which the work originated, it is pro-
per to. mention a few circumſtances of
the outline of its hiſtory. The ſenti-
ments it contains are by no means the
ſuggeſtions of a ſudden efferveſcence
of fancy. Political enquiry had long
held a foremoſt place in the writer's at-
tention. + It is now twelve years ſince


b 2 he


nF Ae


he became ſatisfied, that monarchy
was a ſpecies of government unavoida-
bly corrupt. He owed this convicti-
on to the political writings of Swift
and to a peruſal of the Latm hiſtori-
ans. Nearly at the ſame time he de-
rived great additional inſtruction from
reading the moſt conſiderable French
writers upon the nature of man in the
following order, Sy/t#me de la Ne ature,
Rouſſeau and Helvetius. Long be-
fore he thought of the preſent 8
he had fniriſed to his mind the
arguments it contains on juſtice, gra-
titude, rights of man, promiſes, oaths
and the omnipotence of truth. Poli-
tical complexity is one of the errors
that take ſtrongeſt hold on the under-
ſtanding; and it was only by ideas
ſuggeſted by the French revolution,
that he Was reconciled to the deſira-
bleneſs of a government of the ſim-
pleſt conſtruction. To the fame event
he owes the determination of mid
which gave exiſtence to this work.
Such was the preparation which en-
couraged him to ho the pre-
Rat


N RE AGKH ix
ſent treatiſe. The direct execution
may be diſmiſſed in a few words. It
was projected in the month of May
1791: the compoſition was begun in
the following September, and has
therefore occupied a ſpace of ſixteen
months. This period was devoted to
the purpoſe with unremitted ardour.
It were to be wiſhed it had been lon-
ger; but it ſeemed as if no contemp-
tible part of the utility of the work de-
pended upon its early appearance.
The printing of the following trea-
tiſe, as well as the compoſition, was
influenced by the ſame principle, a de-
fire to reconcile a certain degree f
diſpatch with the neceſſary deliberati-
on. The printing was for that rea-
ſon commenced, long before the com-
poſition was finiſhed. Some diſadvan-
tages have ariſen from this circum-
ſtance. The ideas of the author be-
came more perſpicuous and digeſted,
as. his enquiries advanced, The longer
he conſidered the ſubject, the more
accurately he ſeemed to underſtand it.
This circumſtance has led him into a
few


* SY EE 4 CE


few contradictions. The principal of
theſe conſiſts in an occaſional inaccu-
racy of language, particularly in the
firſt book, reſpeQing the word go-
vernment. He did not enter upon
the work, without being aware that
government by its very nature coun-
teracts the improvement of individual
mind; but he underſtood the full
meaning of this propoſttion more com-
pletely as he proceeded, and ſaw more
diſtinctly into the nature of the reme-
dy. This, and a few other defects,
under a different mode of preparation
would have been avoided. The can-
did reader will make a ſuitable allow-
ance. The author judges upon a re-
view, that theſe defects are ſuch as
not materially to injure the object of
the work, and that more has been
gained than loſt by the conduct he has
purſued, =
The period in which the work
makes its appearance is ſingular. The
people of England have aſſiduouſſy
been excited to declare their loyalty,
and to mark every man as obnoxious
who


PT RR E Fi: A; CG: a.


who is not ready to ſign the Shibbo-
leth of the conſtitution. Money is
raiſed by voluntary ſubſcription to de-
fray the expence of proſecuting men
who ſhall dare to promulgate hereti-
cal opinions, and thus to oppreſs them
at once with the enmity of govern-
ment and of individuals. This was an
accident wholly unforeſeen when the
work was undertaken; and it will
ſcarcely be ſuppoſed that ſuch an acci-
dent could produce any alteration in
the writer's deſigns. Every man, if
we may believe the voice of rumour,
is to be proſecuted who ſhall appeal to
the people by the publication of any
unconſtitutional paper or pamphlet;
and it is added, that men are to be
proſecuted for any unguarded words
that may be dropped in the warmth of
converſation and debate. It is now to
be tried whether, in addition to theſe
alarming encroachments upon our li-
berty, a book is to fall under the arm
of the civil power, which, beſide the
advantage of having for one of its ex-
pPreſs objects the diſſuading from all
by tumult


”


—_—_ FE F 4. Cc E
tumult and violence, is by its very na-
ture an appeal to men of ſtudy and
reflection. It is to be tried whether
a project is formed for ſuppreſſing the
activity of mind, and putting an end
to the diſquiſitions of ſcience. Reſ-
pecting the event in a perſonal view
the author has formed his reſolution.
Whatever condu& his countrymen
may purſue, they will not be able to
ſhake his tranquillity. The duty he
is moſt bound to diſcharge is the aſſiſt-
ing the progreſs of Ks: ; and if he
. ſuffer in any reſpe& for ſuch a pro-
ceeding, there is certainly no viciſh-
tude that can befal him, that can ever
bring along with it a more —_—y
conſolation.
But, excluſively of this precarious
and unimportant. conſideration, it is
the fortune of the preſent work to
appear before a public that is panic
ſtruck, and impreſſed with the moſt
dreadful apprehenſions of ſuch doc-
trines as are here delivered. All the
prejudices of the human mind are-in
arms againft- it. This circumſtance
: may


C xili
may appear to be of greater advantage
than the other. But it is the proper-
ty of truth to be fearleſs, and to prove
victorious over every adverſary. It
requires no great degree of fortitude,
to look with indifference upon the
falſe fire of the moment, and to fore-
ſee the calm period of reaſon which
will ſucceed.


JANUARY 7, 1793.


þ —_— - — — ©
A —
— — — > . - - = _


a =» _ — — ——w Fs — 4 wy
x BÄ—4 7˙² I Or. LIT ¶ ⁰—n—m⁊ . —OSeTRIn. 7 15 5


C ON T B


E


FIRST BOOK.


OF THE IMPORTANCE OF POLITICAL
INSTITUTIONS.


0 AE


INTRODUCTION.


1 HE fubjed? propoſed. —Syſtem of indifference—
of paſſive 9337 liberty —Hlſtem of liber-
ty extended. Page £


S NAA mn
HISTORY OF POLITICAL SOCIETY.


Prequency of war—among the ancients—among the


moderns—the French—the Engliſh.—Cauſes of
war.—Penal laws, —Deſpoti W ——
Enumeration of arguments, RTE


CHAP.


Se” AN s Bn . _—— — 88
mers + ann. | — ——_— — —
mn — * > 7 * 3 — 2 C
WY. on — i K — -
: - ata
— tte — IS aro —l * r . us EDI. * —
p -


*


——


— <


—- — T — —
= of a ow —


— —— — -


y
4
[
4
4
1
1
i
i}
11
=
EI
4
"ot
1 7
Z


DO ONTENT 6


4A PP. 6


THE MORAL CHARACTERS OF MEN ORIGI-
NATE IN THEIR PERCEPTIONS.


No innate principles. —obecriun to this afſertion—


from the early actions of infants—from the defire


of ſelf-preſervation—from ſelf-love—from pity—
from the vices of children—tyranny—ſullenneſs.—
Concluſion. = Page 12


TS AP TY.


THREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF MORAL IM.
"" PROVEMENT CONSIDERED.


L LTT NMUN


Benefits of literature. — Examples. — Eſſential pro-
perties of literature. — Its defects.


II. EDUCATION.
B enefits of education — Cauſes of i ts arri.


— Ill. POLITICAL FUSTICE.


Benefits of political inſtitution — Univerſality of i ts


mfiuence—proved by the m * of ſociety.—
— Heul. 19


ar .


INFLUENCE OF POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS
— EXEMPLIFIED. © |


| Robbery 1 fraud, a0 great vices in n faciny—ori-


_ I. in extreme poverty—2. in the oftenta-
EASS 3 tion


4


CONTENTS


tion of the rich—3. in their yr annye—rendered
permanent—1 . by legiſiation— 2. by the admini-
Atration of ene 3. by the inequality 1 condi-
lions. | | | Page 3 I


N A


HUMAN INVENTIONS CAPABLE OF- PERPE-
* TUAL IMPROVEMENT.


 Perfodlibility of man—inflanced, fol , in language.
Its beginnings. — Abſtraction.— Complexity of
language. Second inſtance : alphabetical writ-


ing.—Hieroglyplics at firſt unverſal.—Progreſ-
ive deviations. — Application. 41


e A .


OF THE OBJECTION T O THESE PRINCIPLES
FROM THE INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE.


PART x
OF MORAL AND. PHYSICAL CAUSES.


The queſtion Rated — Provinces of ſenſation and
reflection, — Moral cauſes frequently miſtaken for
phyſical. —Supertority of the former evident from
the varieties of human charatter.—Operation of
phyfical cauſes rare. —Fertihity of reflection. —
Phyſical cauſes in the firſt inflance ſuperior, af=
terwards moral.—Objeftion from the effect of

; breed i in animals da. WOO”


PART


71


CONTENTS.


* -


| 2 ry R * big
© OF NATIONAL CHAR ACTERS.


1 Character of the prieſthood. — All nations Wn] of
liberty. —The aſſertion illuſtrated. — Experience


Favours theſe coating eans * introducing
Liberty. Page 57


*


char VII.


oF THE OBJECTION TO THESE PRINCIPLES.
FROM THE INFLUENCE OF LUXURY.


The 057 echion Late. Source of this objeckinn.—
Refated from mutability—from mortality—from
the nature of truth, — Thie — of .
rance *


5 0 0 K II. © |
| PRINCIPLES: or SOCIETY.


% H A P. I.
INTRODUCTION.


Nature of the enquiry, —Meode 0 47 purſuing 5.—
overnment.


— between ſociety a 72


C HA P.


CONTENTS


CHAP. I


OF JUSTICE.


Connexion of politice and morals. —Fxtent ys mean-
ing of quſtice.—Subjett of juſtice : mankind. —
Is d:ftribution meaſured by the capacity of its ſub-


 jeft—by his uſefulneſs. —Family affection confi-
_ © dered—Gratitude conſidered. —Objettions : from


ignorance.—frum utility. An exception ſtated.—
Degrees of juſtice — Application. — Idea f poli-
tical {1-45 | Page 75


po


}
2


or so 98
Motives of ſuicide + 1. eſcape from pain—2, benevo-
lence — Martyrdom conſidered. 86


AP PEN D I * No. U.


N DUELLING.


\ 5 *


Matives 279 duelling : 1. revenge —. Wa for
 courage.—Pallacy of this motive. —Objettion an-
i SRO NOT IRR, Wy + af 88


P <4 row
—


CHAP.


1 T E N 5.


GH, . P. W.


1
—


OF DP TX.


"of difficulty flated—0f abſolute ang practical vir-
tue. —Inpropriety of this diſtinction.— Univenſa-
lich of what 1s called practical e e

m robber y in religious Janaticiſm.—The
. fity of an actiam diſtinct from the diſpalition with
which: it is. performed. —Parther,  difficulty.—
Meaning waſh ack deere As NG 5:
N e ON wen x ach 10


8 by
x —
— 1 —


As —


C H A P. Iv.


CT 1/1 0


OF THE EQUALITY OF MANKIND.


Phyfical equality.——Ob; efHont, —Anfwers.— Moral
equalit 2—— —How 00 lonted —Province, 27 La |


' ,: 1 Fe - RES 25 5 > $6 ; * 1 V. * \ 97


S


0 %. \ %
Pl "109 1 e
«


0 „„


RIGHTS OF MAN.


The queſtion” lated. —PFoundation of fociety.—Op-
Halte , rights mpoſſible, —Conclufion from - theſe
premiſe . Diſcretion conſidered. Rights of

| Linge. —-Dmmoral conſequences of the doetrint of
rights.—Rights of communities Obere I.
the right of mutual aid. Explanation.— Ori-

Sin of, rhe term, right.—2. Rights of private

244; bs judgment


3


CSU YN TTEW TS


judgment and of the preſs. —Explanation—Rea-
ſons of this limitation upon a of the
community : 1. the inutility of attempting re-
firamt—2. its pernicious tendency.— Concluſion.
* * 157 RS 108


CAA. Po.


OF THE EXERCISE OF PRIVATE JUDG-


Foundation of virtue.— Human actions regulated:
1. by the nature of thing—2. by pofitroe inſti-

_ .Fution.—Tendency of . the latter : 1. to excite
virtue. Its equivocal character in this reſpett.
—2. 70 inform the judgment. — Its inaptitude for
that purpoſe. — Province of conſcience conſidered.
—Tendency of an interference with that province.
— Recapitulatton.—— Arguments in favour of
poſitive inſtitution: 1. the neceſſity of repelling
private injuſtice —Objettions + the uncertainty of
evidence—the druverfity of motives —the unſuita-
bleneſs of the means of correttion—either to im-
: preſs new ſentiments—or to ftrengthen old ones.
Puniſiment for the ſake of example conſidered.
- =—Urgency of the caſe.—2. rebellin—3. war.
_=ObjeFtwons—Reply, 112


. ——
.
„ 7 %


Vol. I. c BO OR


* 455 * *
Y


E | G TENTS


K m

d PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT.
CHAP. L,

SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL WRITERS.


The queſtion ſtated.—Pirſt kypotheſis : government
founded in ſuperior ſtrength, —Second hypotheſis :
government jure divino.—Third hypotheſis : the
 fectal contratt.——The firſt hypotheſts examined. —
The ſecond.—Criterion of drome right: 1. patri-
arclial deſcent——2. juſtice. Page 129


"a AF
OF THE SOCIAL CONTRACT.


Queries pPopoſed.——who are the contracting parties?
bat is the form of engagement ?—Over haw -

long a period does the contract extend ?-—To haw
great a variety of 1 Can it extend to
Jaws hereafter to be made ?— Addreſſes of adhe-
Jon conſidered — Power of a majority, 132


CHAP.


CD NT iE N31.


CHAP.
OF PROMISES.


The validity of promiſes examined — Shown to eds in-
. confiſtent with juſtice— to be foreign to the gene-
ral good. Of the expectation excited —T he Fal- |


filling expeftation does not imply the validity of a -
Wh e e e


op H A
OF POLITICAL AUTHORITY.


Common deliberation the true foundation of govern-
ment—proved from the equal claims of mankind
rom the nature of our faculties—from the ab-
fell of government—from the effetts of common
deliberation. — Delegation vindicated. —- Differ-
ence between the doctrine here maintained and that
of a ſocial contract apparent—from the merel
proſpective nature of the former —from the nullity
of promiſes —from the Ts 8 deliberation.

Conciufan. Wie” 145


M rl
* 1
% * * a :
wy, ng * — & * x . — o . y *
* o 4 1 *
| by. | H | | We 55


or LEGISLATION.


Sorry can e and interpret, but cannot nat. —
N „ er arecultve. 5 152


. IN.


N


c 2 a CHAP.


"HY


- thors.—Example.


COL Pa NT ENT. S8.


r.


OFT OBEDIENCE.


Obedience not the correlative of authority — No man
Sound to yield obedience to another. —Caſe of fub-


miſſion conſidered.— F oundation of obedience.—


- Uſefulneſs of ſocial communication. —Caſe of con-
fidence conſidered.— Its limitations. Miſchief of
unlimited confidence. Subjection explained.
; "0-4 r


”


APPENDIX.


Moral principles frequently elucidated by incidental
' reflection—by incidental paſſages in various au-


TCA PP: VE
Op FORMS OF GOVERNMENT.


Argument in favour of a variety of form. com-
pared with the argument in favour of a variety
of religious creeds.—That there is one beſt form
of government proved from the unity of truth—

 . from the nature of man.—Objettion from human

. » weakneſs and prejudice — Danger in eſtabliſhing

an imperfect code. Manners of nations produc-


ed


CONTENT S.


ed by tlieir forms of government. Gradual im-
provement neceſſary.— Simplicity chiefly to be de-
red. Publication f truth the grand inſtru-
ment—by individuals, not by government. — tlie
truth entire, and not by parcels.— Sort of pro-
 greſs to be dgſired. " Page 104.


B-Q ©: EK :, 9.
MISCELLANEOUS PRINCIPLES.
CIA FE 2
OF RESISTANCE.
Every individual the judge of his own reſiſtance. —
Objettion.— Anſwered from the nature of govern-


ment from the modes of refiſtance.---1. Force
rarely to be employed—either where there 1s ſmall


proſpect of ſucceſs r where the proſpect is
great, —Hiftory of Charles the firſt eſtimated.---
2. Reaſoning the legitimate mode. 175


CHAP.


7 2
: O13 TN TT iE Nes.
C3 — 7 1 f 4 . b 1 bd *
*
- .


San R430
+ OF REVOLUTIONS.
rien
DDUTIES OF A CITIZEN.
Obligation to ſupport the conſtitution of our country
. confidered---muſt ariſe either from the reaſon of
the caſe, or from a perſonal and local confiderati-


on. Jie firſt exammed.---The ſecond.
| Page 181


MODE OF EFFECTING REVOLUTIONS.


| Perſuaſion the\ proper inſtrument.— not violence
nor reſentment.--- Lateneſs f event deſirable.
11 1 .


arion
OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS.


Meaning of the term.— Aſſociations objected to---1 .
from the fort of perſons with whom a juſt revolu-
tion ſhould origmate—2. from the danger of tu-
mult.—Otjettions of afſoctation,—In what. caſes
aadmiſible.— Argued for from the neceſſity to give
 werght to opmion---from their tendency to afcer -
tam opmion.--- Unneceſſary for theſe purpoſes.---
General mutlity.---Conceſfions.--- Importance of
focial communication.—Propriety of teaching re


Jiftance cunſidered. 188


SECTION


eng


8 ECT ION Iv.
OF THE SPECIES OF REFORM TO BE DESIRED.


Ought it to be partial or entire? Trutſi may not be


partially taught.--- Partial reformation conifider-
ed.--- Objettion.— Anſwer.—Partial reform in-


diſpenfible— Nature Y a juſt revolution Hou
_ aiftant ? n


e H A F.
OF TYRANNICIDE.


Diverſity 0 5 of opinions on this ſubject. — Argument in


its vindication.---The deſtruction of a tyrant not
a caſe of exception . of tyrannicide.
--- Aſſaſſmation de de ſcribed. —— of fince-
© 2 | 2


6 M A

OF THE CULTIVATION OF TRUTH.
8K C TON 1

OF ABSTRACT OR GENERAL TRUTH.


Fr ts importance as conducin g—f0 our intellectual im-
provement— to our moral i mnprovement.——- Virtue
the beſt ſource of happmeſs.---Proved by compa-

_riſon---by its manner of adapting itſelf to all fitu-


_ "attons-=-by its undecaying excellence cannot be
* — oer ut by a cultivated mind.—
N Importance


PV S DENT S.


Importance of general truth to our political im-
provement. Page 212


SRC TIONMN. u
OF SINCERITY.


Nature of this virtue.---Its effects upon our own.
asclions upon our neighbours. —lts tendency to
produce fortitude.— Effects of inſincerity.---Cha-
rater which fincerity would acquire to fim
who practiſed it.----ObjeftHons.---- The fear of
giving unneceſſary pain. Anſwer .---The defire
of preſerving my hife.---This objection proves too
nuch. — Anſwer .—Secrecy confidered.—The ſe-
erets of others.—State ſecrets. —Secrets of phi-
" lanthropy, 11 219


APP END IX, No, I.


OF THE CONNEXION BETWEEN UNDER.
STANDING AND VIRTUE. |


Can eminent virtue exiſt unconnected with talents ?
Nature of virtue. It is the offspring of under -
ftanding.---It generates underſtanding.----Illuſ-

tration from other purſuits->=[0%Vt---ambition---
applied. _ | | £18 |
Can eminent talents exiſt unconnected with virtue?
 —eArgument in the affirmatrve from analogy—-in
the negative from the univerſality of moral  ſpecula-
tion from the nature q vice as founded in miſ-
take.---The argument balanced, — Importance of
e a ſenſe


%o NN T: BY FG
a ſenſe of juſtice. —ts connexion with talents.—


Uliberality with which men of talents are uſually
treated. | Page 233


APPENDIX, No. II.
OF THE MODE OF EXCLUDING VISITORS.


Its impropriety argued—from the  ftuation i in which
it places, I. the vifitor---2. the ſervant.—Ob-
jettions :—Pretended neceſſity of this practice, 1.
to preſerve us from mtruſion-—2.. to free us from
diſagrecable acquamtance.----Charatters of the


haneft and diſhoneſt man in Kg reſpect compared.
244


APPENDIX, No. III.


SUBJECT OF SINCERITY RESUMED.


A caſe propoſed. — Arguments in favour of conceal-
ment.--- Previous queſtion: Is truth in general to
be partially commumcated ?---C uſtomary effetts
of fincerity---of inſincerityupon him who prac-

 tifes it. 1. the ſuſpenſion of improvement—-2.
miſantſiropy 3. difingenuity---upon the ſpec-
 tators, —Simcerity delineated. —-Its general im-


portance.--- Application, Ds reſpecting the
choice LE a reſidence. 250


CHAP.


CONTENT 8


a eee e .
OF FREE WILL AND NECESSITY.


Importance of the queſtion —Definition of neceſſity.
—IWWhy ſuppoſed to exift in the operations of the
material untverſe.---The caſe of the operations of
® mind is parallel. —Indications of bw) es haſ-
3 tobi our judgments of character in our
1 ſeliemes of policy---m our ideas of moral diſci-
 Pline.--- Objection from the fallibility of our expec-
Fations in aeg conduct.---- Anſwer Origin
and univerſality of the ſentiment of free will.---
The ſentiment of neceſſity alſo untverſal.---The
truth of this ſentiment argued from the nature of
volition.--- Hypotheſis of free will exammed.--=
Selſfedetermination.— Indiſference. Jie will not
a diſtinct faculty.---Free will diſadvantageous to
zts 2 ofſe Nr no 1 to morality.
Page 2 6 I


C H AP. VL


INFERENCES FROM T HE DOCTRINE OF
NECESSITY.


Idea it agel to us of the univerſe, —— Influence
on our moral ideas action virtue exertion
penſugſion—fortatim.—ardoun —-complacence
and averfion—puniſhment—-repentance---praiſe'
and blame—intellectual franquility. Language
A neceſſity * 2


CHAP.


CON TEN T3.


C..H AP...
OF THE MECHANISM OF THE HUMAN MIND.


Nature of mechaniſm.---Its claſſes, material and in-
tellectual.— Material ſyſtem, or of vibrations.


—The intellectual ſyſtem moſt probable. from


the conſideration that thought would otherwiſe be


a ſuper fluity---from the efiabhſhed principles *


reaſoning from effects to cauſes.---Objections re-
futed, —Thoughts which produce animal mation
may be---1. Involuntary.— All animal motions
were firſt involuntary.— 2. Unattended with
conſeiouſneſs.---The mind cannot have more than
one thought at any one time.---Objeetion to this
affertion from the caſe of complex ideas----from


various mental operations —as compariſon-=-ap=


prehenfion—rapidity of the ſucceſſion of ideas. —
Application. Duration meaſured by conſcinuſ-
neſs.---3. A diſtinct thought to each motion m


be unneceſſary—apparent from the complexity of


ſenſible impręſſions.— Thie mind always thinks.


Concliſion.— Thie theory applied to the phe-


nomenon f walking-—to the circulation of the
blood. —Of motion in general.---Of dreams.


Page 294.


S. H A F.
OF THE PRINCIPLE OF VIRTUE,
Hypotheſis of benevolence and ſelf ue —ſuperiority
S the former. Action ts either voluntary or in-
os voluntary.


—


BROINCTIEN TESTS.


voluntary.---- Nature of the firſt of theſe claſſes.
Argument that reſults from it. Voluntary ac-
tion has a real exiſtence.---Conſequence of that
exiſtence.--- Experimental view of the ſubject.---
Suppoſitions ſuggeſted by the advocates of ſelf love
cat we calculate upon all occaſions the advan-
tage to accrue to us.---Falſeneſs of this ſuppoſi-
tion. Suppqſition of a contrary ſort.---We
not calculate what would be the uneafineſs to
reſult from our reframimg to act----either in
relieving diſtreſs---or in adding to the flock of ge-
neral good.--- Uneafineſs an accidental member 0 y
the proceſs.---T he ſuppoſitions inconſiſtently blen
ed. Scheme of ſelf-love recommended from the
propenſity of mind to abbreviate its proceſs---from
tie fumplicity that obtains in the natures of things.
--= Hypotheſis of ſelf-love incompatible with vir-
tue. Concluſion. Importance of the queſtion.
Application. | Page 316


© MAP; IX.
OF THE TENDENCY OF VIRTUE.


Tt is the road to happineſe---to the efleem and affec-
tion of others.---Objection from miſconſtruction
and calumny.--- Anfuer.---Virtue compared with
other modes of procuring efleem.-=-Vice and not
virtue ts the ſubject of obloguy---mſtanced in the
baſe alloy with which our virtues are mixed---in
arrogance and oftentation---in the vices in which
perſons of moral excellence allow themſelves.---
The virtuous man only has friends.---Virtue the
read to proſperity and ſucceſs in the world---ap-
plied to commercial tranſattions---to caſes that de-
fend * patronage.-- 4 * exceptions where
the


CO NTT Nr.
the dependent is employed as the inſtrument of vice.
---Virtue compared with other inodes of becoming
proſperous.---Source of the diſrepute of virtue in
this reſpett.--- Conceſhon.---Caſe where conveni-
ent vice bids fair for concealment.---Chance of
detection. I ndolence----appreh 156
n the offs privg 7 5 vice. — 336


B. O 01K:
OF- LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE POIVER.
e e e obs © 09 oh Aus -
INTRODUCTION.
Retroſpect of principles already eftabliſhed, —Diftri-


button of the remaining ſubjects. — Subject of the


preſent book. — Forms of government. — Method
of examination to be adopted. 352


CHA © II.


OF EDUCATION, THE EDUCATION OF
A PRINCE. |


Nature of monarchy delineated. — School of adver-


fity.—Tendency of ſuper fluity to inſpire effemi-
nacy—to deprive us of the benefit of experience
—lluſtrated in the caſe of princes. — Manner in


which they are addreſſed. —Tnefficacy of the in-
ae beſtowed 88 n. | 39


CHAP.


+ PONY ENT


@ H ls P. .
| PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE.


Principles by which" he is in tuenced—irreſponſibi-
' lity—mpatience of control—habits of diſſipation
 —4gnorance—diflike of truth—dijfiike of Juſtice
——pttiable ſituation 8 * Page 369


Ge


. IV.
OF A. VIRTUOUS DESPOTISM.


T uppoſed excellence of this form of government |
controverted. From the narrowneſs of human


powers. 0 aſe of a vicious adminiſtration— f a
uirtuous adminiſtration intended to be formed.


— Monarchy not —_— to the government of
| * fates. | 379 .


S H r ww
OF COURTS. AND MINISTERS.


$ ſtematical monopoly of confi fidence. Character of
N mmiſters—of of dependents. —Venalt


courts.—Unoer ality of this principle. 385


F
OF SUBJECTS.


Monarchy hind + in impoſture.— Kings not en-
titled to ſuperiority Inadequate to the func
| 3 tions


E


6 O0 * r r |
tions they poſſeſs — Means by which the impofture


is maintamed—1. Splendour. —2. Exaggeration.
This impoſture generates 1. Indifference, to
merit. —2. Indifference to truth—4J. Artificial
defires—4.. Puſillanimity.— Moral incredulity of
monarchical countries. —Tnjuſtice of luxury.—Of


the ordinate admiration of wealth. Page 394


E HA
OF ELECTIVE MONARCHY.


Diſorders attendant on ſuch an election. Election
is intended either to provide a man of great or
of moderate talents. —Conſequences of the firſi—


of the ſecond. —Can elective and hereditary mo-
narchy be combined ? 406


7 n * | |
* 7 * |
| -
| .
*
*
| ER
-
2
IS
*
CY
: .
*
*
=
>
”
:
* | ;
:
I
.
,
_ a
: —
I
=
*
L -
I ö :
N *
fu
0
=
- £
:
:
k
.
8 —


bo 1% 9 . *
55 n p is. N
„ |
4 ö 8
44 2
*
: .
”
: .
os
4% 1 2 5
*
8 **
/
7
I .
.. 48
+ *
: «
* 2 2
.
o
*
*
1
„
*
4 *
1 *


}


5 — Y
. 1 p
% 4
— %- + * * > 3 -
f 5 F * Þ>
* *
4 *. 3 0
1 KK * * 1 Peat 1 8
5 hs * 3 9
N. 4% 0
* 0


N , " c ; C
Ann a =: ; 4 i. 3 . | : * *
. _ 2 * = 7 in f p L Es 4-* b 200 4 --
F > 5 N 4 *
0 VCR :
: 8 — 0 ; : y 2 — 3 22 OS :
| CONCERNING/ e \
| | » ee a 5 2 | 85 *
; : .
POLITICAL US THEY,
CAL JUSTICE.
ö | ,


+


= *
*


185 eee * .


o THE IMPORTANCE OF POLITICAL.
* + 4» INSTITUTIONS.


INTRODUCTION:


The ſubject propoſed. —Syftem of indifference—of
paſſrue obedience—of liberty.—Syſtem of liberty


T HE queſtion which firſt preſents itſelf in an
enquiry concerning political inſtitution, relates to
the importance of the topic which is made the
ſubject of enquiry. All men will grant that the
happineſs of the human ſpecies is the moſt deſir-
able object for human ſcience to promote; and
that intellectual and moral happineſs or pleaſure is
extremely to be preferred to thoſe which are pre-

Vor. I. 8 cCarious


* _— The . 2280 i
N 8 WIG
x G
_
* .


*


2 INTRODUCTION


carious and tranſitory. The methods which may
be propoſed for the attainment of this object, are
various. If it could be proved that a found poli-
tical inſtitution was of all others the moſt power-


ful engine for promoting individual good, or on


the other hand that an erroneous and corrupt go-
vernment was the moſt formidable adverſary to
the improvement of the ſpecies, it would follow
that politics was the firſt and moſt important ſub-
ject of human inveſtigation.

The opinions of mankind in this reſpect have
been divided. By one ſet of men it is affirmed,
that the different degrees of excellence aſcribed
to different forms of government are rather ima-
ginary than real: that in the great objects of ſu-


perintendance no government will eminently fail;


and that it is neither the duty nor the wiſdom of
an honeſt and induſtrious individual to buſy him-


ſelf with concerns ſo foreign to the ſphere of


his induſtry. A ſecond claſs, in adopting the
ſame principles, have given to them a different
turn. Believing that all governments are nearly


equal in their merit, they have regarded anarchy


as the only political miſchief that deſerved to ex-


cite alarm, and have been the zealous and undiſ-


tinguiſhing adverſaries of all innovation. Neither


of theſe claſſes has of courſe been inclined to aſ-


cribe to the ſcience and practice of politics A pre- |


- eminence over every other.
But the advocates of what is termed political
| liberty have always been numerous. They have
placed this liberty principally in two articles ; the
' tecurity of our perſons, and the ſecurity of our
property. They have 9 that theſe .
; cou


|
1


 "IN-PRODVUGCTIAN, ', 20

could not be effected but by the impartial admini-

- ſtration of general laws, and the inveſting in the

people at large a certain power ſufficient to give
permanence to this adminiſtration. They have
pleaded, ſome for a leſs and ſome for a greater de-
gree of equality among the members of the com-
munity; and they have conſidered this equality as
infringed or endangered by enormous taxation, and
the prerogatives and privileges of monarchs and
ariftocratical Dodies. 5

Hut, while they have been thus extenſive in the
object of their demand, they ſeem to have agreed
with the two former claſſes in regarding politics as
an object of ſubordinate importance, and only in
a remote degree connected with moral improve-
ment. They have been prompted in their exer-
tions rather by a quick ſenſe of juſtice and diſdain
of oppreſſion, than by a conſciouſneſs of the inti-
mate connection of the different parts of the ſoci-
al ſyſtem, whether as it relates to the intercourſe
of individuals, or to the maxims and inſtitutes of
ſtates and nations *.

It may however be reaſonable to conſider whe-
ther the ſcience of politics be not of ſomewhat
greater value than any of theſe reaſoners have been
inclined to ſuſpect. It may fairly be queſtioned,
whether government be not ſtill more conſiderable
in its incidental effects, than in thoſe intended to
be produced. Vice, for example, depends for its

N B 2 exiſtence


Tpheſe remarks will apply to the Engliſh writers upon politics
in general, from Sydney and Locke to the author of the Rights
of Man. The more comprehenſive view has been perſpicuouſly
treated by Rouſſeau and Helvetius. 5


*


on —. — wm 3 Q ͤ˖» Ä— Ä ATA „„ —— . : J * . ass „ * 8 W 5
„ * : [ * 2 * " 2d 2 6 * N "oy 5 * 5 * 8 £ — . a * 5 5 .
9 x : 23 * * 3 9 , M N 9 * * * 8 ä * — * >. —ů— * * * p
* * 5 x y A. F > G — m 5 12 : „ * * N 4 - N
* ; . 2 , > 7 A *
* . *
* I 5 1
4 :


& Py


4 ANTRODUCTION.


exiſtence upon the exiſtence of temptation. May
not a good government ſtrongly tend to extirpate, +
and a bad one to increaſe the maſs of temptation ?


Again, vice depends for its exiſtence upon the


exiſtence of error. May not a good government


by taking away all reſtraints upon the enquiring


mind haſten, and a bad one by its patronage of er-


ror procraſtinate the diſcovery and eſtabliſhment
of truth? Let us conſider the ſubject in this point
of view. If it can be proved that the ſcience of
politics is thus unlimited in its importance, the ad-
vocates of liberty will have gained an additional
recommendation, and its admirers will be incited
with the greater eagerneſs to he inveſtigation of
its principles.


CHAP.


[ 513


-


HISTORY OF POLITICAL SOCIETY.


PF requency of War—among the Antients—among
the moderns—the French—the Engliſh.—Cauſes
of War._—Penal Laus. Deſpotiſm. — Deducki-


on. Enumeration F Arguments.


W HIL E we enquire whether government is
capable of improvement, we ſhall do well to con-
ſider its preſent effects. It is an old obſervation,
that the hiſtory of mankind is little elſe than the
hiſtory of crimes. War has hitherto been conſi-
dered as the inſeparable ally of political inſtituti-
on. The earlieſt records of time are the annals
of conquerors and heroes, a Bacchus, a Seſoſtris,
a Semiramis and a Cyrus. Theſe princes led mul-
lions of men under their ſtandard, and ravaged in-
numerable provinces. A ſmall number only of
their forces ever returned to their native homes,
the reſt having periſhed of diſeaſes, hardſhips and
miſery. The evils they inflicted, and the morta-
lity introduced in the countries againſt which their
expeditions were directed, were certainly not leſs .
ſevere than thoſe which their countrymen ſuffered.
No ſooner does hiſtory become more preciſe, than
we are preſented with the four great monarchies,
that is; with four ſucceſsful projects, by means of

| bloodſhed,


Ks 7 HISTORY OF


| bloodſhed, violence, and murder, of enſlavirg


mankind. The expeditions of Cambyſes againſt
Egypt, of Darius againſt the Scythians, and of
Xerxes againſt the Greeks, ſeem almoſt to ſet
> credibility at defiance by the fatal conſequences
with which they were attended. The conqueſts
of Alexander coſt innumerable lives, and the im-
mortality of Cæſar is computed to have been pur-
chaſed by the death of one million two hundred


thouſand men. Indeed the Romans, by the long


duration of their wars, and their inflexible ad-
herence to their purpoſe, are to be ranked among
the foremoſt deſtroyers of the human ſpecies,
Their wars in Italy endured for more than four
hundred years, and their conteſt for ſupremacy
with the Carthaginians two hundred. The: Mi-
thridatic war began with a maſſacre of one hun-
dred and fifty thouſand Romans, and in three ſin-
gle actions of the war five hundred thouſand men


were loſt by the eaſtern monarch. Sylla his fero-


cious conqueror, next turned his arms againſt his


country, and the ſtruggle between him and Marius


was attended with proſcriptions, butcheries, and


murders that knew no reſtraint from mercy
and humanity. The Romans, at length, ſuffered
the penalty of their iniquitous deeds; and the world


was vexed for three hundred years by the irrupti-


ons of Goths, Vandals, Oſtrogoths, Huns, and in-
numerable hordes of barbarians.


I forbear to detail the victorious progreſs of Ma-


homet and the pious expeditions of Charlemagne.


I will not enumerate the cruſades againſt the infi- l


dels, the exploits of Aurungzebe, Gengiſkan and
Tamerlane, or the extenſive murders of the Spa-
95 | | niards


by U


POLITICAL SOCIETY. © 94”


niards in the new world. Let us examine the ci-
vilized and favoured quarter of Europe, or even
thoſe countries of Europe which are thought moſt
enlightened. eee
France was waſted by ſucceſſive battles during
a whole century, for the queſtion of the Salic law,
and the claim of the Plantagenets. Scarcely Was
this conteſt terminated, before the religious wars
broke out, ſome idea of which we may form from
the ſiege of Rochelle, where of fifteen thouſand
perſons ſhut up eleven thouſand periſhed of hun-
ger and miſery: and from the maſſacre of Saint
Bartholomew, in which the numbers aſſaſſinated
were forty thouſand. This quarrel was appeaſed
by Henry the fourth, and ſucceeded by the thirty
years war in Germany for ſuperiority with the
houſe of Auſtria, and afterwards by the military
tranſactions of Louis the fourteenth. |
In England the war of Crefly and Agincourt
only gave place to the civil war of York and Lan-
caſter, and again after an interval to the war of
Charles the firſt and his parliament. No ſooner
was the conſtitution ſettled by the revolution, than
we were engaged in a wide field of continental
warfare by king William, the duke of Marlbo-
rough, Maria Thereſa and the king of Pruſſia.
And what are in moſt caſes the pretexts upon
which war is undertaken? What rational man
could poſſibly have given himſelf the leaſt diſtur-
bance for the ſake of chooſing whether Henry
the fixth or Edward the fourth ſhould have the
ſtyle of king of England? What Engliſhman
could reaſonably have drawn his ſword for the pur-
poſe of rendering his country an inferior depen-
dency


* HISTORY or


dency. of France, as it muſt neceſſarily have been

if the ambition of the Plantagenets had ſucceeded?
What can be more de plorable than to ſee us firſt.

engage eight years in war rather than ſuffer the

haughty Maria Thereſa to live with a diminiſhed

ſovereignty or in a private ſtation; and then eight

years more to ſupport the free-booter who had ta-
ken advantage of her helpleſs condition ?

The uſual cauſes of war are excellently deſcribed |
by Swift. Sometimes the quarrel between two
princes is to decide which of them ſhall diſpoſleſs
a third of his dominions, where neither of them

pretends to any right. Sometimes one prince
_ quarrels with another, for fear the other ſhould
_ quarrel with him. Sometimes a war is entered upon
becauſe the enemy is too ſtrong; and ſometimes.
becauſe he is too weak. Sometimes our neigh-
boars want the things which we have, or have
the things which we want; and we both fight,
till they take ours, or give us theirs. It is a very
juſtifable cauſe of war to invade a country after
the people have been waſted by famine, deſtroyed
by. peſtilence, or embroiled by factions among
themſelves. It is juſtifiable to enter into a war
againſt our neareſt ally, when one of his towns
lies convenient for us, or a territory of land that
would render our dominions round and compact.
If a prince ſends forces into a nation where the
people are poor and ignorant, he may lawfully put
the half of them to death, and make ſlaves of
the reſt, in order to civilize and reduce them from
their barbarous way of living. It is a very king-
ly, honourable and frequent practice, when one
ch deſires the aſſiſtance of another to ſecure


him


POLITICAL LOCLETY 12


him againſt an invaſion, that the aſſiſtant, when
he has driven out the invader, ſhould ſeize on
the dominions himſelf, and kill, impriſon or ba-
niſh the prince he came to relieve “-.

If we turn from the foreign tranſactions of ſtates
with each other, to the principles of their domeſ-
tic policy, we ſhall not find much greater reaſon
to be. ſatisfied. A numerous claſs of mankind are
held down in a ſtate of abject penury, and are con-
tinually prompted by diſappointment and diſtreſs
to commit violence upon their more fortunate


neighbours. The only mode which is employ-


ed to repreſs this violence, and to maintain the or-
der and peace of ſociety, is puniſhment. Whips,
axes and gibbets, dungeons, chains and racks are
the moſt approved and eſtabliſhed methods of per-
ſuading men to obedience, and impreſſing upon
their minds the leſſons of reaſon. Hundreds of


victims are annually facrificedat the ſhrine of poſi-


tive law and political inſtitution.
Add to this the ſpecies of government which
prevails over nine tenths of the globe, which is


deſpotiſm : a government, as Mr. Locke juſtly


obſerves, altogether © vile and miſerable,” and
more to be deprecated than Ago welt +.”


This


* Gulliver? 8 Travel, Part IV. Ch. v.

Locke on Government, Book I. Ch. i. F. 1; and Book II.
Ch. vii. 5. 91. The words in the laſt place are: Wherever any
two men are, who have no ſtanding rule and common judge to
appeal to on earth for the determination of controverſies of right


betwixt them, there they are till in the ate of nature, and under


all the inconveniencies of it, with ouly this wotful difference to
the — c.“


Moſt


—
2 2 * FAS
* — FI | 4s a * . 3

F, - wY *
5 * ——


OY CO ANTI") F
a T g 8 RY X * — —— a -
y — ———— —ů —ů — — _—
— _ ei — - cn 2A-- : -ajÞ- l .
W by 4
n * . d *
- 1 8 3 S .
1 a * * o
v
4 Ws.” . —


ardour and ſuch invincible perſeverance.


*


1


mis rox or


> This account of the hiſtory and ſtate of man is


not a declamation, but an appeal to facts. He


that conſiders it cannot poſſibly regard political


iſquiſition as a trifle, . and government as a neu-


tral and unimportant concern. I by no means call


upon the reader implicitly to admit that theſe evils


are capable of remedy, and that wars, executi-


ons and deſpotiſm can be -extirpated out of the
world. But I call upon him to conſider whether


they may be remedied. I would have him fee]


that civil policy is a topic upon which the fevereſt
inveſtigation may laudably be employed.
If government be a ſubject, which, like mathe-


matics, natural philoſophy and morals, admits of


argument and demonſtration, then may we rea-
ſonably hope that men ſhall ſome time or other
agree reſpecting it. If it comprehend every thing
that is moſt important and intereſting to man, it is
probable that, when the theory is greatly advanc-
ed, the practice will not be wholly neglected.
Men may one day feel that they are partakers of a
common nature, and that true freedom and per-

fect equity, like food and air, are pregnant with _.
benefit to every conſtitution. If there be the
fainteſt hope that this ſhall be the final reſult,
then certainly no, ſubject can inſpire to a ſound
mind ſuch generous enthuſiaſm, ſuch enlightened


The


%


Moft of the above arguments may be found much more at
large in Burke's Vindication of Natural Society ; a treatiſe in
which the evils of the exiſting political inſtitutions are diſplayed
with incomparable force of reaſoning and luſtre of eloquence,
while the intention of the author was to ſhew that theſe evils were
to be conſidered as trivial. ns |


POLITICAL SOCIETY. 1


The probability of this improvement will, be
_ fufficiently eſtabliſhed, if we conſider, FIRST,
that the moral characters of men are the reſult of
their perceptions : and, SECONDLY, that of all
the modes of operating upon mind government is
the moſt conſiderable. In addition to theſe argu-
ments it will be found, THIRDLY, that the good
and ill effects of political inſtitution are not leſs
_ conſpicuous in detail than in principle; and,
FOURTHLY, that perfectibility is one of the moſt
unequivocal characteriſtics of the human ſpecies,
ſo that the political, as well as the intellectual
ſtate of man, may be preſumed to be in a courſe
of progreſſive improvement.


CHAP.


—
——— — + — *


« — — —


- - - mn


00 wo Ie


N n A — 4444 en eb tat". Ate $
1 eee eo ot ns rr ox ey + > = — > - 1 — a AS
_ * * * kan * , p Ma F ” 5 ? |
b * 2 . — w


x2 THE MORAL CHARACTERS OF MEN


m 1


—


THE MORAL CHARACTERS OF MEN ORIG


NATE IN THEIR PERCEPTIONS.


8.


No innate principles. _LObjedtions to this aſſertion


rom the early actions of infants—from the
Aire of ſelf- preſervatim—from ſelf-Iove—from .
pity—from the vices of ch11 idren—tyranmy—ful-


Lenne eſs. — Concluſion.


a


\ y E bring into the world with us no innate


Principles: conſequently we are neither virtuous


nor vicious as we firſt come into exiſtence. No


truth can be more evident than this, to any man


who will yield the ſubject an impartial conſide-
ration. Every principle is a propoſition. Every
propoſition conſiſts in the connection of at leaſt
two diſtinct ideas, which are affirmed to agree or
difagree with each other. If therefore the prin-
ciples be innate, the ideas muſt be ſo too. But
nothing can be more incontrovertible, than that
we do not bring pre-eſtabliſhed ideas into the


world with us.


Let the innate principle be, that virtue is a
rule to which we are obliged to conform. Here
are three great and leading ideas, not to mention
ſubordinate ones, which it is neceſſary to form,
before we can fo much as underſtand the pro-
poſition.


What


c


ORIGINATE IN THEIR PERCEPTIONS. 23


What is virtue? Previouſly to our forming an
idea correſponding to this general term, it ſeems
neceſſary that we ſhould have obſerved the ſeveral
features by which virtue is diſtinguiſhed, and the
ſeveral ſubordinate articles of right conduct, that
taken together, conſtitute that maſs of practical
judgments to which we give the denomination of
virtue. Virtue may perhaps be defined, that
| ſpecies of operations of an intelligent being, which

conduces to the benefit of intelligent beings in ge-
neral, and is produced by a deſire of that benefit.
But taking for granted the univerſal admiſſion of
this definition, and this is no very defenſible aſ-
ſumption, how widely have people of different
ages and countries diſagreed in the application of
this general conception to particulars? a diſagree-
ment by no means compatible with the ſuppoſi-
tion that the ſentiment 1s itſelf innate. |

The next innate idea included in the above pro-
poſition, is that of a rule or ſtandard, a generical
meaſure with which individuals areto be compar-
ed, and their conformity or diſagreement with
which is to determine their value.

Laſtly, there is the idea of obligation, its na-
ture and ſource, the obliger and the ſanction, the
penalty and the reward. _ |
| Whois there in the preſent ſtate of ſcientifical
Improvement, that will believe that this vaſt chain
of perceptions and notions is ſomething that we
bring into the world with us, a myſtical maga-
zine, ſhut up in the human embryo, whoſe trea-
ſures are to be gradually unfolded as circumſtanc-
es ſhall require? Who does not perceive that they
are regularly generated in the mind by a ſeries of

| impreſſions,


: *14 "THE MORAL CHARACTERS OF MEN
impreſſions, and digeſted and arranged by aſſoci-
ation and reflection ?
Experience has by many been ſuppoſed adverſe

to theſe reaſonings: but it will upon examination
be found to be perfectly in harmony with them.
The child at the moment of his birth is totally
unprovided with ideas, except ſuch as his mode
of exiſtence in the womb may have ſupplied.
His firſt impreſſions are thoſe of pleaſure and
pain. But he has no foreſight of the tendency of
any action to obtain either the one or the other,
previouſly to experience.

A certain irritation of the palm of the hand will
produce that contraction of the fingers, which
accompanies the action of graſping. This con-
traction will at firſt be unaccompanied with de-
fign, the object will be graſped without any in-
__ tention to retain it, and let go again without
thought or obſervation. After a certain _—_
of repetitions, the nature of the action will be
ceived ; it will be performed with a confioutaeſs
of its tendency ; ; and even the hand ſtretched out
upon the approach of any object that is deſired.
Preſent to the child, thus far inſtructed, a light-
ed candle. The fight of it will produce a plea-
ſurable ſtate of the organs of perception. He
will ſtretch out his hand to the flame, and will
have no apprehenſion of the pain of burning till
he has felt the ſenſation.

At the age of maturity, the eyelids inſtantane-
ouſly cloſe, when any ſubſtance, from which
danger is apprehended, is advanced towards
them; and this action is ſo ſpontaneous, as to be
with great difficulty prevented by a grown perſon,
3 —


ORIGINATE IN THEIR PERCEPTIONS. * 15


though he ſhould explicitly defire-it. In infants -
there is no ſuch propenſity ; and an object may be
approached to their organs, however near and
however ſuddenly, without producing this effect.

Frowns will be totally indifferent to a child, who
has never found them aſſociated with the effects
of anger. Fear itſelf is a ſpecies of foreſight ,
and in no caſe exiſts till introduced by experi-


ence.


It has been ſaid, that the deſire of ſelf-preſer-
vation is innate. I demand what is meant by
this defire? Muſt we not underſtand by it, a
preference of exiſtence to non-exiſtence? Do we
prefer any thing but becauſe it is apprehended to
be good? It follows, that we cannot prefer exiſ-
tence, previouſly to our experience of the mo-
tives for preference it poſſeſſes. Indeed the ideas
of life and death are exceedingly complicated,
and very tardy in their formation. A child deſires
pleaſure and loathes pain, long before he can have
any imagination reſpecting the ceaſing to exiſt.
Again, it has been ſaid, that ſelf- love is in-
nate. But there cannot be an error more eaſy of
detection. By the love of ſelf we underſtand the
approbation of pleaſure, and diſlike of pain: but
this is only the faculty of perception under another
name. Who ever denied that man was a perci-
pient being? Who ever dreamed that there was
a particular inſtinct nocetiary to render him per-
cipient?

Pity has ſometimes been ſuppoſed an inſtance
of innate principle; particularly as it ſeems to
ariſe more inſtantaneouſly in young perſons, and
perſons of little refinement, than in others.
But


16, THE MORAL CHARACTERS OF MEN


But it was reaſonable to expect, that threats and
anger, circumſtances that have been aſſociated
with our own ſufferings, ſhould excite painful
feelings in us in the caſe of others, independently
of any laboured analyfis. The cries of diſtreſs,
the appearance of agony or corporal infliction, ir-
reſiſtibly revive the memory of the pains accom-
panied by thoſe ſymptoms in ourſelves. Longer
experience and obſervation enable us to ſeparate
the calamities of others and our own ſafety, the
exiſtence of pain in one ſubject and of pleaſure or
benefit in others, or in the fame at a future peri-
od, more accurately than we could be expected to
do previouſly to that experience.
- Such then is univerſally the ſubject of human
inſtitution and education. We bring neither vir-
tue nor vice with us at our entrance into the
world. Butthe ſeeds of error are ordinarily ſown
ſo early as to paſs with en obſervers for
mnate.

Our conſtitution prompts us to utter a cry at
the unexpected ſenſation of pain. Infants early
perceive the aſſiſtance they obtain from the voli-
tion of others; and they have at firſt no means of
- inviting that aſſiſtance but hy an inarticulate cry.
In this neutral and innocent circumſtance, com-
bined with the folly and imbecility of parents and
nurſes, we are preſented with the firſt occafion of
vice. Aſſiſtance is neceflary, conducive to the
exiſtence, the health and the mental ſanity of the
infant. Empire in the infant over thoſe who pro-
tect him is unneceſſary. If we do not withhold
our affiſtance preciſely at the moment when it
ceaſes to be requiſite, if our compliance or our


ot |


' ORIGINATE IN THEIR PERCEPTIONS. 17


Tefuſal be not in every caſe irrevocable, if we -
grant any thing to impatience, importunity or ob-
ſtinacy, from that moment we become parties in
the intellectual murder of our offspring.

In this caſe we inſtil into them the vices of a
tyrant; but we are in equal danger of teaching
them the vices of a ſlave. It is not till very late
that mankind acquire the ideas of juſtice, retribu-
tion and morality, and theſe notions are far from
exiſting in the minds of infants. Of conſequence,
when we ſtrike, or when we rebuke them, we
riſk at leaſt the exciting in them a ſenſe of injury,
and a feeling of reſentment. Above all, fenti-
ments of this ſort cannot fail to be. awakened, if
our action be accompanied with ſymptoms of an-
ger, cruelty, harſhneſs or caprice. The ſame
imbecility, that led us to inſpire them with a ſpi-
rit of tyranny by yielding to their importunities,
afterwards dictates to us an inconſiſtent and capri-
cious conduct, at one time denying them as ab-
ſurdly, as at another we gratified them unreaſona-
bly. Who, that has obſerved the conſequences
of this treatment, how generally theſe miſtakes
are committed, how inſeparable they are in ſome
degree from the wiſeſt and the beſt, will be ſur-
priſed at the early indications of depravity in chil-

dren *? 5

From theſe reaſonings it ſufficiently appears,
that the moral qualities of men are the produce of

Vor. I. C ae


* 'The arguments of this chapter are for the moſt part an ab-
ſtract, the direct ones from Locke on the Human Underſtanding,
thoſe which relate to experience from Hartley's Obſervations on


Man, and thoſe reſpecting education from the Emile of J. J.
Rouſſeau. | ©


18 - THE MORAL CHARACTERS, e.


the impreſſions made upon them, and that there

is no inſtance of an original propenſity to evil.

Our virtues and vices may be traced to the inci-
\ dents which make the hiſtory of our lives, and if
theſe incidents could be diveſted of every impro-

per tendency, vice would be extirpated from the
world. The taſk may be difficult, may be of
flow progreſs, and of * undefined and uncer-
tain, But hope will never deſert it; and the man
| who is anxious for the benefit of his ſpecies, will
. willingly devote a portion of his activity to an en-
quiry into the mode of effecting this extirpation in
whole or in part, an enquiry which promiſes
much, if it do not 12 e every thing,


CHAP.


15


CH AP. Iv.


T HREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF MORAL IM-
 PROVEMENT CONSIDERED.


I LITERATURE.


Benefits of literature. Examples —Efential pro-
herties of literature. —Its dgfecta.


IL. EDUCATION.
Benefits of Edycation, —Cauſes of its imbecility. |
ul. POLITICAL FUSTICE.


Benefits of political inſtitution. —Univerſality of
its influence——proved by the mi Nes of ſociety. :


Origin of evil.


I HERE are haves principal cauſes by which
the human mind is advanced towards a ſtate of
perfection; literature, or the diffuſion of know-
Jedge through the medium of diſcuſſion, whether
written or oral ; education, or a ſcheme for the
early impreſſion of right principles upon the hi-
therto unprejudiced mind; and political juſtice,
or OP : of any principle of morality and
SY


ou


*


*


20 * HREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF


truth into the practice of a community. Let us
take a momentary review of each of theſe.


3 apts Is URE.


Few engines can be more REES" and at the

ſame time more falutary in their tendency, than
literature. Without enquiring for the preſent
into the cauſe of this phenomenon, it is ſuffici-
_ ently evident in fact, that the human mind is
ſtrongly infected with prejudice and miſtake. The
various opinions prevailing in different countries
and among different claſſes of men upon the ſame
ſubject, are almoſt innumerable ; and yet of all
theſe opinions only one can be true. Now the
effectual way for extirpating theſe prejudices and
miſtakes ſeems to be literature.

Literature has reconciled the whole thinking
world reſpeCting the great principles of the ſyſtem
of the univerſe, and extirpated upon this ſubject
the dreams of romance and the dogmas of ſuperſti-
tion. Literature has unfolded the nature of the
human mind, and Locke and others have eſta-
bliſhed certain maxims reſpecting man, as New-
ton has done reſpecting matter, that are gene-
rally admitted for unqueſtionable. Diſcuſſion has
1 --] £0 with tolerable, perſpicuity the prefe-
rence of liberty over ſlavery ; and the Mainwar-
ings, the Sibthorpes, and the Filmers, the race of
ſpeculative reaſoners in favour of deſpotiſm, are
_ almoſt extinct. Local prejudice, had introduc-

ed innumerable privile ges and prohibitions up-
on a N of trade; ſpeculation has nearly aſ-


certained


A 4
Ap 44 ** *


MORAL IMPROVEMENT CONSIDERED. 21


certained that perfect freedom is moſt favourable
to her proſperity. If in many inſtances the colla-


tion of evidence have failed to produce univerſal


conviction, it muſt however be conſidered, that
it has not failed to produce irrefragable argument,
and that falſehood would have been much ſhorter
in duration, if it had not been protected and in-
forced by the authority of political government.
Indeed, if there be fuch a thing as truth, it

muſt infallibly be ſtruck out by the colliſion of
mind with mind. The reſtleſs activity of intellect
will for a time be fertile in paradox and error;
but theſe will be only diurnals, while the truths
that occaſionally ſpring up, like ſturdy plants,
will defy the rigour of ſeaſon and climate. In
proportion as one reaſoner compares his deductions
with thoſe of another, the weak places of his ar-
gument will be detected, the principles he too
_ haſtily adopted will be overthrown, and the judg-
ments, in which his-mind was expoſed to no finiſ-
ter influence, will be confirmed. All that is re-
quiſite in theſe diſcuſſions is unlimited ſpeculati-
on, and a ſufficient variety of ſyſtems and opini-
ons. While we only diſpute about the beſt way

of doing a thing in itſelf wrong, we ſhall indeed
make but a trifling progreſs ; but, when we are
once perſuaded that nothing is too facred to be
brought to the touchſtone of examin ation, ſcience
will advance with rapid ſtrides. Men, who turn
their attention to the boundleſs field of enquiry,
and ſtill more who recolle& the innumerable er-
rors and caprices of mind, are apt to imagine that
the labour is without benefit and. endleſs. But
this cannot be the caſe, if truth at laſt have any


real


22 THREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF


real exiſtence. Errors will, during the whole pe-
riod of their reign, combat each other; prejudi-
ces that have paſſed unſuſpected for ages, will have
their era of detection; but, if in any ſcience
we diſcover one ſolitary truth, it cannot be over-
o 3
Bauch are the arguments that may be adduced in
favour of literature. But, even ſhould we admit
them in their full force, and at the ſame time ſup-
poſe that truth is the omnipotent artificer by
which mind can infallibly be regulated, it would
yet by no means ſufficiently follow that literature
is alone adequate to all the purpoſes of human im-
provement. Literature, and particularly that li-
terature by which prejudice is ſuperſeded, and
the mind is ſtrung to a firmer tone, exiſts only as
the portion of a few. The multitude, at leaſt in
the preſent ſtate of human ſociety, cannot partake
of its illuminations. For that purpoſe it would
be neceſſary, that the general ſyſtem of policy
ſhould become favourable, that every individual
ſhould have leiſure for reaſoning and reflection,
and that there ſhould be no ſpecies of public in-
ſtitution, which, having falſhood for its baſis,
ſhould counteract their progreſs. 'This ſtate of
ſociety, if it did not precede the general diſſemi-
nation of truth, would at leaſt be the immediate
, 5
But in repreſenting this ſtate of ſociety as the


ultimate reſult, we ſhould incur an obvious fallacy,


The diſcovery of truth is a purſuit of ſuch vaſt ex-
tent, that it is ſcarcely poſſible to preſcribe
bounds to it. Thoſe great lines, which ſeem at
preſent to mark the limits of human underſtand-

OL. ing,


MORAL IMPROVEMENT CONSIDERED. 23


ing, will, like the miſts that riſe from a lake, re-
tire farther and farther the more cloſely we ap-
_ proach them. A certain quantity of truth will be
ſufficient for the ſubverſion of tyranny and uſur-
pation ; and this ſubverſion, by a reflected force,
will afliſt our underſtandings in the diſcovery of
truth. In the mean time, it is not eaſy to define
the exact portion of diſcovery that muſt neceſſa-
rily precede political melioration. The period of
partiality and injuſtice will be ſhortened, in pro-
portion as political rectitude occupies a principal
ſhare in our diſquiſition. When the moſt conſi-
derable part of a nation, either for numbers or in-
fluence, becomes convinced of the flagrant abſur-
dity of its inſtitutions, the whole will ſoon be pre-


pared tranquilly and by a fort of common conſent
to ſuperſede them. | |


H. EDUCATION.


Bur, if it appear that literature, unaided by
the regularity of inſtitution and diſcipline, is in-
dequate to the reformation of the ſpecies, it may
perhaps be imagined, that education, commonly
ſo called, is the beſt of all ſubſidiaries for making
up its defects. Education may have the advantage
of taking mind in its original ſtate, a ſoil prepared
for culture, and as yet uninfeſted with weeds;
and it is a common and a reaſonable opinion, that
the taſk is much eaſier to plant right and virtuous
diſpoſitions in an unprejudiced underſtanding, than
to root up the errors that have already become as
it were a part of ourſelves. If an erroneous and


vicious


(


26 THREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES Or


vicious 1 be, as it has been ſhewn do be,
the aurce of all our depravity, an education, de-
prived of theſe errors, ſeems to preſent itſelf as
the moſt natural exchange, and muſt negeſlarily:
render 1 its ſubject virtuous and pure.
Iwill imagine the pupil never to have been
made the victim of tyranny or the ſlave of caprice.
He has never been permitted to triumph in the
ſucceſs of importunity, and cannot therefore well
have become reſtleſs, inconſtant, A or
unjuſt. He has been inured to ideas of equality
and independence, and therefore is not paſſionatè,
haughty and overbearing. The perpetual wit
neſs of temperate conduct and reaſonable ſenti-
S ments, he is not blinded with prejudice, is not li-
able to make a falſe eſtimate of things, and of con-
ſequence has no immoderate defires after wealth,
and ſplendour, and the gratifications of luxury.
Virtue has always been preſented to him under
the moſt attractive form, as the ſureſt medium of
ſucceſs in every honourable purſuit, the never-
failing conſolation. of diſappointment, and infi-
nitely ſuperior in value to every other acquiſition.
It cannot be doubted that ſuch an education is
calculated to produce very conſiderable effects.
In the world indeed the pupil will become the
ſpectator of ſcenes very different from what his
preconceived ideas of virtue might have taught
him to expect. Let us however admit it to be
poſſible ſo to temper the mind, as to render it proof
againſt the influence of example and the allure-
ments of luxury. Still it may be reaſonable to doubt
of the ſufficiency of education. How many inſtanc-
es * we expect to find, in wg a pion has
been


MORAL IMPROVEMENT CONSIDERED. 25


been carried into execution, ſo enlightened, unre-
mitted-and ardent, as to produce theſe 'extraordi-
nary effects? Where muſt the preceptor himſelf
have. been educated, who ſhall thus elevate his
pupil above all the errors of mankind? If the
world teach an implicit deference to birth and*
riches and accidental diſtinctions, he will ſcarcely
be exempt from this deference. If the world be
fall of intrigue and rivalſhip and ſelfiſhneſs, he
will not be wholly diſintereſted. If falſhood be
with mankind at large reduced to a ſyſtem, re-
commended by the prudent, commanded by the
magiſtrate, inforced by the moraliſt *, and prac-
tiſed under a thouſand forms, the individual will

| 5 15 not
* The following paſſage is extracted from Lord Kaimes, late


one of the judges of the kingdom of Scotland.
„ Cuſtom-houſe oaths now a- days go for nothing. Not that the


world grows more wicked, but becauſe nobody lays any ſtreſs upon


them. The duty on French wine is the ſame in Scotland and in
England. But as we cannot afford to pay this high duty, the per-
miſſion underhand to pay Spaniſh duty for French wine, is found
more beneficial to the revenue than the rigour of the law. The
oath however muſt be taken that the wine we import 1s Spaniſh,
to entitle us to the eaſe of the Spaniſh duty. Such oaths at firſt
were highly criminal, becauſe directly a fraud againſt the public ;
but now that the oath is only exacted for form's ſake, without any
faith intended to be given or received, it becomes very little differ-
ent from ſaying in the way of civility, * I am, fir, your friend, or
your obedient ſervant.” —Loofe Hints upon Education, Appen-
dix, p. 362. Edinburgh, 1781. .

Archdeacon Paley in a work, the ſeventh edition of which lies
before me, and which is uſed as a text book in the univerſity of
Cambridge, ſpeaks thus: - 6 24:4" |

There are falſchoods which are not lies; that is, which are
not criminal ; as a ſervant's denying his maſter, a priſoner's plead-
ing not guilty, an advocate aſſerting the juſtice, or his belief of
the juſtice of his chent's cauſe. In ſuch inftances no confidence
is deftroyed, becauſe none was repoſed.“ Principles of Moral and
Political Philoſophy, Book III. Part I. Chap. xv. London,
LADS.) | a


*


26 THREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES Or


not always have the ſimplicity to be ſincere, r


the courage to be true. If prejudice have uſurped
the ſeat of knowledge, if law and religion and me-
taphyſics and government be furrounded with
myſtery and artifice, he will not know the truth,
and therefore cannot teach it; he will not poſſeſs
the criterion, and therefore cannot furniſh it to
another. Again; if a man thus mighty, thus
accompliſhed, thus ſuperior to rivalſhip and com-
pariſon, can be found, who will conſent to the
profanation of employing him in cultivating the
mind of a boy, when he ſhould be inſtructing
the world? „ N
Education, in the ſenſe in which it has com-
monly been underſtood, though in one view an
engine of unlimited power, is exceedingly in-
competent to the great buſineſs of reforming man-
kind. It performs its taſk weakly and in detail.
The grand principles that the inventor ſeeks in
his machines, and the philoſopher in inveſtigating
the ſyſtem of the univerſe, are ſuch, as from a
few ſimple data are ſufficient to the production of
a thouſand events. But the education I have been
deſcribing is the reverſe of this. It employs an
immenſe combination of powers, and an endleſs
chain of cauſes for the production of a ſingle ſpe-
cumen. No taſk, which is not in its own nature
impracticable, can eafily be fuppoſed more diffi-
cult, than that of counteracting univerſal error,
and arming the youthful mind againſt the conta-
gion of general example. The - ſtrongeſt mind
that propoſed this as its object, would ſcarcely
, undertake the forming more than one, or at moſt
a very ſmall number, of pupils. Where can a re-
| f ns medy


I


K


MORAL IMPROVEMENT CONSIDERED. 27
medy be found for this fundamental diſadvantage?
where but in political juſtice, that all comprehen-
ſive ſcheme, that immediately applies to the re-
moval of counter- action and contagion, that em-
braces millions in its graſp, and that educates in
one ſchool the preceptor and the pupil?


Ill. POLITICAL fUSTICE.


Tux benefits of political juſtice will beſt be
underſtood, if we conſider fociety in the moſt
comprehenſive view, taking into our eſtimate the
erroneous inſtitutions by which the human mind


haas been too often checked in its career, as well


as thoſe well founded opinions of public and in-
dividual intereſt, which perhaps need only to be
clearly explained, in order to their being general-
ly received. 3
Now in whatever light it be conſidered, we
cannot avoid perceiving, firſt, that political inſti-
tution is peculiarly ſtrong in that very point in
which the efficacy of education was deficient, the
extent of its operation. That it in ſome way in-
fluences our conduct will hardly be diſputed. It
is ſufficiently obvious that a deſpotic government
is calculated to render men pliant, and a free one
reſolute and independent. All the effects that
any principle adopted into the practice of a com-
munity may produce, it produces upon 2 com-
prehenſive ſcale. It creates a ſimilar bias in the
whole, or a conſiderable part of the ſociety. The
motive it exhibits, the ſtimulus it begets, are ope-
rative, becauſe they are fitted to produce effect
upon


23 THREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF |


upon mind. They will therefore inevitably in-
fluence all to whom they are equally addreſſed.
Virtue, where virtue is the reſult; will ceaſe to
be a taſk of perpetual watchfulneſs and conten-
tion. It will neither be, nor appear to be, a

ſacrifice of our perſonal advantage to diſinten-


eſted conſiderations. It will render thoſe the


confederates, ſupport and ſecurity of our recti-
| tude, who were before its moſt formidable ene-


Again, an additional argument in favour of the


efficacy of political inſtitutions, ariſes from the
extenſive influence which certain falſe principles,
engendered by an imperfect ſyſtem of ſociety,
have been found to exert. Superſtition, an im-
moderate fear of ſhame, a falſe calculation of in-
tereſt, are errors that have been always attended
with the moſt extenſive conſequences. How in-
credible at the preſent day do the effects of ſuper-
ſtition exhibited in the middle ages, the horrors
of excommunication and interdict, and the hu-


miliation of the greateſt monarchs at the feet of
the pope, appear? What can be more contrary to


European modes than that dread of diſgrace, which
induces the Bramin widows of Indoſtan to deſtroy


themſelves upon the funeral pile of their huſ-


bands? What more horribly immoral than the
- miſtaken idea which leads multitudes in commer-


cial countries to regard fraud, falſhood and cir-
cumvention as the trueſt policy ? But, however
powerful theſe errors may be, the empire of truth,
E once eſtabliſhed, would be incomparably great-


The man, who 1 18  enflaved by ſhame, ſuper-
ſtition


„*


MORAL IMPROVEMENT CONSIDERED. 29.


ſtition or deceit, will be perpetually expoſed to an
internal war of opinions, diſapproving by an invo-
luntary cenſure the conduct he has been molt per-
ſuaded to adopt. No mind can be ſo far alienated
from truth, as not in the midſt of its degeneracy
to have inceſſant returns of a better principle.
No ſyſtem of ſociety can be ſo thoroughly perva-
ded with miſtake, as not frequently to ſuggeſt to
us ſentiments of virtue, liberty, and juſtice. But
truth is in all its branches harmonious and confil-
tent.
The recolleQion of this circumſtance induces
me to add as a concluding obſervation, that it may.
_ reaſonably be doubted whether error could ever be
formidable or long-lived, if government did not
lend it ſupport. The nature, of mind is adapted
to the perception of ideas, their correſpondence
and difference. In the right diſcernment of theſe
is its true element and moſt congenial purſuit. Er-
ror would indeed for a time have been the reſult
of our partial perceptions; but, as our percepti-
ons are continually changing, and continually be-
coming more definite and correct, our errors would
have been momentary, and our judgments have
hourly approached nearer to the truth. The doc-
trine of tranſubſtantiation, the belief that men were
realy eating fleſh when they ſeemed to be eating
| bread, and drinking human blood when they ſeem-
ed to be drinking wine, could never . main-
tained its empire ſo long, if it had not been
reinforced by civil authority. Men would not
have ſo long perſuaded themſelves that an old
man elected by the intrigues of a conclaye of car-


dinals, |


30 THREE PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF |


dinals, from the moment of that election became
immaculate and infallible, if the perſuaſion had
not been maintained by revenues, endowments
and places, A ſyſtem of government, that ſhould
lend no ſanction to ideas of fanaticiſm and hypo-
criſy, would preſently accuſtom its ſubjects to
think juſtly upon topics of moral worth and im-
portance. A ſtate, that ſhould abſtain from im-
poſing contradictory and impracticable oaths, and
thus perpetually ſtimulating its members to con-
cealment and perjury, would ſoon become diſtin-
guiſhed for plain dealing and veracity. A coun-
try, in which places of dignity and confidence
ſhould ceaſe to be at the diſpoſal of faction, favour
and intereſt, would not long be the reſidence of
ſervility and deceit.

Theſe remarks ſuggeſt to us the true anſwer to
an obvious objection, that might otherwiſe pre-
ſent itſelf, to the concluſion to which theſe prin-
ciples appear to lead. It might be ſaid, that an
erroneous government can never afford an ade-
quate ſolution for the exiſtence of moral evil,
fince government was itſelf the production of hu-
man intelligence, and therefore, if ill, muſt have
been indebted for its ill qualities to ſome wrong
which had previous exiſtehce. 985 5
Ihe propoſition aſſerted in this objection is un-
doubtedly true. All vice is nothing more than
error and miſtake reduced into practice, and adopt-
ed as the principle of our conduct. But error is
perpetually haſtening to its own detection. Vici-
ous conduct is ſoon diſcovered to involve injuri-
ous conſequences. Injuſtice therefore by its own


nature is little fitted for a durable exiſtence. But
. govern-


MORAL IMPROVEMENT CONSIDERED. 31


government lays its hand upon the ſpring there
is in ſociety, and puts a ſtop to its motion &. It
gives ſubſtance and permanence to our errors. It
reverſes the genuine propenſities of mind, and,
inſtead of ſuffering us to look forward, teaches
us to look backward for perfection. It prompts
us to ſeek the public welfare, not in innovation
and improvement, but in a timid reverence for
the deciſions of our anceſtors, as if it were the
nature of mind always to degenerate, and neyer
to advance. IR


© 4 &- Ps


INFLUENCE OF POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS
__ EXEMPLIFIED. _

Robbery and fraud, two great vices In ſociety——ori-
ginate, I. in extreme poverty—2. in the oftenta-
fron of the rich —3. in their tyranny —rendered
permanent. —1. by legiſlation—2. by the admini-
ftration of lau- 3. By the inequality of conditton.


Th E efficacy of political inſtitutions will be
rendered ſtill more evident, if we enquire mto
the hiſtory of the moſt conſiderable vices at pre-
ſent exiſting in ſociety ; and if it can be ſhewn
that they derive their inveteracy from political in-

ſtitution. | "In f


\ * Logan, Philoſophy of Hiſtory, p. 69.


3 - INFLUENCE OF-POLITICAL


Two of the greateſt abuſes relative to the in-
terior policy of nations, which at this time pre-
vail in the world, will be allowed to conſiſt in the
regular transfer of property, either firſt by vio-
lence, or ſecondly by fraud. If among the inha-
-bitants of any country there exiſted no deſire
in one individual to poſſeſs himſelf of the ſub-
ſtance of another, or no defire ſo vehement and

reſtleſs, as to prompt him to acquire it by means
inconſiſtent, with order and juſtice ; undoubtedly
in that country guilt could hardly be known but
by report. If every man could with perfect fa-
. cility obtain the neceſſaries of life, and, obtain-
ing them, feel no uneaſy craving after its ſuper-
- fluities, temptation would loſe its power. Pri-
vate intereſt would viſibly accord with public
good ; and civil ſociety become all that poetry has
feigned of the golden age. Let us enquire into
the principles to which theſe evils owe their ex-
iſtence, and the treatment by which they may be
alleviated or remedied. |

Firſt then it is to be-obſerved, that, in the moſt
refined ſtates of Europe, the inequality of pro-
perty has ariſen to an alarming height. Vaſt .
numbers of their inhabitants are deprived of al-
moſt every accommodation that can render life
tolerable , or ſecure. Their utmoſt induſtry
{carcely ſuffices for their ſupport. The women
and children lean with an inſupportable weight
upon the efforts of the man, ſo that a large family
has in the lower order of life become a proverbial
expreſſion for an uncommon degree of poverty
and wretchedneſs. If ſickneſs or ſome of thoſe
caſualties which are perpetually incident to an ac-

| | ET OS + o tive


| INSTITUTIONS EXEMPLIFIED. 85


tive and lborious life, be ſuperadded | to theſe

burthens, the diſtreſs Is yet greater:
It ſeems to be agreed that in England there i is
leſs wretchedneſs and diſtreſs than in moſt of the.
kingdoms of the continent. In England the poors'
rates amount to the ſum of two millions ſterling
per annum. It has been calculated that one per-
ion in ſeven of the inhabitants of this country
derives at ſome period of his life aſſiſtance from
this fund. If to this we add the perſons, who,
from pride, a ſpirit of independence, or the want
of a legal ſettlement, though in equal diſtreſs,
receive no ſuch aſſiſtance, the proportion will be
conſiderably increaſed.

I lay no ſtreſs upon the accuracy of this calcu-
lation; the general fact is ſufficient to give us an
idea of the greatneſs of the abuſe. The conſe-
quences that reſult are placed beyond the reach.
of contradiction. A perpetual ſtruggle with the
evils of poverty, if frequently melfectual, muſt
neceſſarily render many of the ſufferers deſperate.
A painful feeling of their oppreſſed ſituation will
elf deprive them of the power of ſurmounting
it. The 1 of the rich, being thus un-
mercifully exerciſed, muſt inevitably expoſe them
to repriſals; and the poor man will be induced
to regard the ſtate of ſociety as a ſtate of war,
an unjuſt combination, not for protecting every
man in his rights and ſecuring to him the means
of exiſtence, but for engroſſing all its advanta-
ges to a few favoured individuals, and reſerving.
for the portion of the reſt want, dependence and
miſery.


pp / / / /c —@


34 INFLUENCE OF POLITICAL
A ſecond ſource of thoſe deſtructive paſſions by
which the peace of ſociety is interrupted, 1s to be
found in the luxury, the pageantry and magnifi-
cence with which enormous wealth is uſually ac-
companied. Human beings are capable of en-
countering with chearfulneſs conſiderable hard-
, ſhips, when thoſe hardſhips are impartially ſhared
with the reſt of the ſociety, and they are not in-
ſulted with the ſpectacle of indolence and eaſe in
others, no way deſerving of greater advantages
than themſelves. But it is a bitter aggravation of *
their own calamity, to have the privileges of
others forced on their obſervation, and, while they
are perpetually and vainly endeavouring to ſecure _
for themſelves and their families the pooreſt con-
veniences, to find others revelling in the fruits of
their labours. This aggravation is aſſiduouſly ad-
miniſtered to them under moſt of the political
eſtabliſhments at preſent in exiſtence. There is
a numerous claſs of individuals, who, though rich,
have neither brilliant talents nor ſublime virtues ;
and, however highly they may prize their educa-
tion, their affability, their ſuperior poliſh and the
elegance of their manners, have a ſecret conſci-
ouſneſs that they poſſeſs nothing by which they
can fo ſecurely aſſert their pre-eminence and keep
their inferiors at a diſtance, as the ſplendour of
their equipage, the magnificence of their retinue
and the ſumptuouſneſs of their entertainments.
The poor man is ſtruck with this exhibition; he
feels his own miſeries; he knows how unwearied'
are his efforts to obtain a ſlender pittance of this
prodigal waſte ; and he miſtakes opulence for fe-
licity. He cannot perſuade himſelf that an em-
2 broidered


-


INSTITUTIONS EXEMPLIFIED. - 35
broidered garment may quently cover an aching
heart. |
A third diſadvantage that is apt to como po-
verty with diſcontent conſiſts in the inſolence and
uſurpation of the rich. If the poor man would
in other reſpects compoſe himſelf in philoſophic
indifference, and, conſcious that he poſſeſſes every
thing that is truly honourable to man as fully as his
rich neighbour, would look upon the reſt as be-
neath his envy, his neighbour will not permit him
to do ſo. He ſeems as if he could never be ſatis-
fied with his poſſoſſions unleſs he can make the
ſpectacle of them grating to others; and that ho-
neſt ſelf- eſteem, by which his inferior might
otherwiſe arrive at apathy, is rendered the inſtru-
ment of galling him with oppreſſion and injuſ-
tice. In many countries juſtice is avowedly made
a ſubject of ſolicitation, and the man of the high-
_ eſt =. and moſt ſplendid connections almoſt in-
fallibly carries his cauſe againſt the unprotected
and friendleſs. In countries where this ſhameleſs
practice is not eſtabliſhed, juſtice is frequently a
matter of expenſive purchaſe, and the man with
the longeſt purſe is proverbially victorious: A
conſciouſneſs of theſe facts muſt be expected to
render the rich little cautious of offence in his deal-
ings with the poor, and to infpire him with a
temper overbearing, dictatorial and tyrannical.
Nor does this indirect oppreſſion ſatisfy his deſpo-
tiſm. The rich are in all ſuch countries directiy
or indirectly the legiſlators of the ſtate; and of _
conſequence. are perpetually reducing oppreſſion
into a ſyſtem, and depriving the poor of that little
— commonage


-


 commoniat ge of nature as it were, which might .
otherwiſe ſtill have remained to them.
The opinions of individuals, and of conſe- 1


7 But Lie manners eig in may coun-
tries are accurately calculated to impreſs a convic-
tion, that integrity, virtue, underſtanding and in-
duſtry are nothing, and that opulence is every
thing. Does a man, whoſe exterior denotes in-
digence, expect to be well received in ſociety,
and eſpecially by thoſe who. would be underſtood
to dictate to the reſt? Does he find or imagine
himſelf in want of their aſſiſtance and favour?
He is preſently taught that no merits can atone
for a mean appearance. The leſſon that is read to
him is, Go home, enrich yourſelf by whatever
means, obtain thoſe ſuperfluities which are alone
regarded as eſtimable, and you may then be ſe-
cure of an amicable reception. Accordingly
verty in ſuch countries 1s viewed as the e of
demerits. It is eſcaped from with an eagerneſs
that has no leiſure for the ſcruples of honeſty. It
is concealed as the moſt indelible diſgrace. While
one man chooſes the path of undiſtinguiſhing ac-
cumulation, another plunges into expences which
are to impoſe him upon the world as more opu-
lent than he is. He haſtens to the reality of that
penury, the appearance of which he dreads; and,
together with his property, ſacrifices the integri-
ty, veracity and character which might have con-
foled him in 1 his Ty.


Such


INSTITUTIONS EXEMPLIFIED. 37

Such are the cauſes, that, in different degrees
under the different governments of the world, :
prompt mankind openly or ſecretly. to encroach
upon the property of each other. Let us conſi-
der how far they admit either of remedy or aggra-
vation from political inſtitution. Whatever tends
to decreaſe the injuries attendant upon poverty,
decreaſes at the ſame time the inordinate deſire
and the enormous accumulation of wealth. Wealth
is not purſued for its own fake, and ſeldom for
the ſenſual gratifications it can purchaſe, but for
the ſame reaſons that ordinarily prompt men to
the acquiſition of learning, eloquence and ſkill,
for the love of diſtinction and fear of contempt.
How. few would prize the poſſeſſion of riches, if
they were condemned to enjoy their equipage,
their palaces and their entertainments in ſolitude,
with no eye to wonder at their magnificence, and
no ſordid obſerver ready to convert that wonder
into an adulation of the owner? If admiration
were not generally deemed the excluſive property
of the rich, and contempt the conſtant lacquey of
poverty, the love of gain would ceaſe to be an
univerſal paſſion. Let us conſider in what reſ-
pects political inſtitution 1 18 rendered ſubſervient
to this paſſion.

Firſt then, legiſlation is in almoſt every country
groſsly the favourer of the rich againſt the poor.
Such is the character of the game laws, by which
the induſtrious ruſtic is forbidden to deſtroy the
animal that preys upon the hopes of his future
fubſiſtence, or to ſupply himſeif with the food
that unſought thruſts itſelf in his path. Such was
the ſpirit of the late revenue laws of France,


which


38 INFLUENCE OF POLITICAL


which in ſeveral of their proviſions fell exclufively
upon the humble and induſtrious, and exempted
from their operation thoſe who were beſt able to
ſupport it. Thus in England the land tax at this
moment produces half a million leſs than it did a
century ago, while the taxes on conſumption have
experienced an addition of thirteen millions per
annum during the ſame period. This is an at-
tempt, whether effectual or no, to throw the
burthen from the rich upon the poor, and as ſuch
is an exhibition of the ſpirit of legiſlation. Upon
the ſame principle robbery and other offences,
which the wealthier part of the community have
no temptation to commit, are treated as capital
crimes, and attended with the moſt rigorous, of-
ten the moſt inhuman puniſhments. The rich
are encouraged to aſſociate for the execution of the
moſt partial and oppreſſive poſitive laws. Mono-
polies and patents are laviſhly diſpenſed to ſuch as
are able to purchaſe t them. While the moſt vigi-
lant policy is em ployed to prevent combinations
of the poor to fix the price of labour, and they
are deprived of the benefit of that prudence and
judgment which "Would {Eject the ſcene of their
induſtry. |
Secondly, the vie ation Ke Jaw is not Jen
iniquitous than the ſpirit in which it is framed.
Under the late government of France the office of
judge was a matter of purchaſe, partly by an open
price advanced to the crown, and partly by a ſe-
eret douceur paid to the miniſter. He, who
knew heſt how to manage his market in the retail
trade of juſtice, could afford to purchaſe the good
wal of its functions at the higheſt price. To the
| client


INSTITUTIONS EXEMPLIFIED. 39


client juſtice was avowedly made an object of per-
ſonal folicitation, and a powerful friend, a hand-
ſome woman, or a proper preſent, were articles
of much greater value than a good cauſe. In
England the criminal law is adminiſtered with to-
lerable impartiality fo far as regards the trial it-
felf; but the number of capital offences, and of
conſequence the frequency of pardons, open even
here a wide door to favour and abuſe. In cauſes
relating to property the practice of law 1s arrived
at ſuch a pitch as to render all juſtice ineffectual.
The length of our chancery ſuits, the multiplied
appeals from court to court, the enormous fees
of counſel, attornies, ſecretaries, clerks, the
drawing of briefs, bills, replications and rejoin-
ders, and* what has ſometimes been called the
glorious, uncertainty of the law, render it often
more adviſable to reſign a property than to con-
teſt it, and particularly exclude the impoveriſhed
claimant from the fainteſt hope of redreſs. No-
thing certainly is more practicable than to ſecure
to all queſtions of controverſy a cheap and ſpeedy
decifion, which, combined with the independence
of the judges and a few obvious improvements in
the conſtruction of juries, would infure the equi-
table application of general rules to all characters
and ſtations.

Thirdly, the inequality of conditions uſually
maintained by political inſtitution, is calculated
greatly to enhance the imagined excellence of
wealth. In the ancient monarchies of the eaſt,
and in Turkey at the preſent day, an eminent ſta-
tion could ſcarcely fail to excite implicit deference.
The timid inhabitant trembled before his ſuperior ;


and


FR * —_ +» =
— 1
772 —

— — — —

_ —— .

_ _ _ *
*


— =
T > xt
—


CY


A
— ———
2


— —
Is =o: \
— . o anos Coo SAC
— pits WA
* oF


-
n


— —ñä— — q


40 INFLUENCE OF POLITICAL, Kc.


and Wend have thought 3 it little leſs than blaſ-
phemy, to touch the veil drawn by the proud fa-
trap over his inglorious origin. The ſame 255
ciples were extenſively prevalent under the

ſyſtem. The vaſſal, who was regarded as a Tot
of live ſtock upon the eſtate, and knew of no ap-


peal from the arbitrary - fiat of his lord, would |


fearcely venture to ſuſpect that he was of the
fame ſpecies. This however conſtituted an un-
natural and violent ſituation. There is a propen-
ſity i in man to look farther than the outſide; and
to come with a writ of enquiry into the title of the
u ipſtar tand the ſucceſsful. In England at the pre-

ſent day there are few poor men who do not con-
ſole themſelves, by the freedom of their gd
verſions upon their ſuperiors. The nexy-fangl ed
| 8 1s 80 no means ſecure K hav-


i


Cary pur 92 Every m man mi AA as was the
caſe in certain countries upon record, be inſpired,
with the conſciouſneſs of citizenſhip, and be made
to feel himſelf an active and efficient member of
the great whole. The poor man would then per-
ceive, that, if eclipſed, he could not be tram pled
upon; and he would no longer be ſtung with —

Faries of envy, reſentment and def pair.


4


CH AF. VI


HUMAN INVENTIONS CAPABLE OF PERPE-
FT UAL IMPROVEMENT.


Perfeetibility of. man—inflanced, firſt, in language.
Alt beginnings. Abſtrattion.—Complexity of
language. Second inſtance: alphabetical writing.
Hieroglyplics at firfi univerſal. Progreſſive
devigtions.— BIR


Ir we would form to, Je a. lid ann .
of political, or indeed of am other r ſcience, we Wwe
ought not to confine our Ped to that narrow
=. = of things which paſſes under our own im-
medians nee and raſþly pronounce eVEry
t we have not ourſelves ſeen, to be im-
OH There 1S. no characteriſtic of man,
which ſeems at preſent at leaſt ſo eminently to diſ-
tinguiſh him, or to be of ſo. much importance in
every branch of moral ſcience, as his perfectibili-
ty. Let us carry back our minds to man in his
original ſtate, a being capable of impreſſions and
| knowledge to an unbounded extent, but not hav-
ing as yet received the one or cultivated the other ;
and let us contraſt this being with all that {ſcience
and genius have effected: and from hence we
may form ſome idea what it is of which human
nature is capable. It is to he remembered, that


' this


[i
y
+»
1
*
ir
by
1
t,


oy mT,


1 R m l _ — =_
— — = k
— nn Or — — *
5 = : . 2 ——
- — — — . —
- -


= ol
6.
— —— — —


42 - HUMAN INVENTIONS CAPABLE


this being did not as now derive aſſiſtance from the
communications of his fellows, nor had his feeble
and crude conceptions aſſiſted by the experience
of ſucceſſive centuries ; but that in the ſtate we
are figuring all men were equally ignorant. The

field of improvement was before them, but for


every ſtep in advance they were to be indebted to


their untutored efforts. Nor is it of any conſe-


quence whether ſuch was actually the progreſs of


mind, or whether, as others teach, the progreſs
was abridged, and man was immediately advanc-


ed half way to the end of his career by the inter-


ſition of the author of his nature. In any caſe
it is an allowable and no unimproving {peculation,
to conſider mind as it is in itſelf, and to enquire
what would have been its hiſtory, if immediately
upon its production, it had been left to be acted
upon by thoſe ordinary laws of the univerſe with
whoſe operation we are acquainted. _

One of the acquiſitions moſt evidently requi-


_ ftite as a preliminary to our preſent improvements


is that of language. But it is impoſſible to con-
ceive of an acquiſition, that muſt have been in its

origin more different from what at preſent it is
found, or that leſs promiſed that copiouſneſs and
refinement it has fince exhibited.

Its beginning was probably from thoſe involun-
tary cries, which infants for example are found to
utter in the earlieſt ſtages of their exiſtence, and
which, previouſly to the idea of exciting pity or
procuring aſſiſtance, ſpontaneouſly ariſe from the
operation of pain upon our animal frame. Theſe
cries, when actually uttered, become a ſubject of


| * to him by whom they are uttered;


and,


OF PERPETEAL IMPROVEMENT. 43


and, being obſerved to be conſtantly aſſociated
with certain preliminary impreſſions and to excite
the idea of thoſe impreſſions in the hearer, may
afterwards be repeated from reflection and the de-
fire of relief. Eager defire to communicate any
information to another, will alſo prompt us to ut-
ter ſome ſimple ſound for the purpoſe of exciting
attention : this ſound will probably frequently re-
cur to organs unpractiſed to variety, and will at
length ſtand as it were by convention for the in-
formation intended to be conveyed. But the diſ-
tance is extreme from theſe ſimple modes of com-
munication, which we poſſeſs in common with
ſome of the inferior animals, to all the analyſis
and abſtraction which languages require.

Abſtraction indeed, though as it is commonly
underſtood it be one of the fablimeſt operations of
mind, 1s in ſome ſort coeval with and inſeparable
from the exiſtence of mind. The next ſtep to
ſimple perception is that of compariſon, or the
coupling together of two ideas and the perception
of their reſemblances and differences. Without
compariſon there can be no preference, and with-
out preference no action: though it muſt be ac-
knowledged, that this compariſon 1s an operation
that may be performed by the mind without ad-
verting to its nature, and that neither the brute
nor the ſavage has any conſciouſneſs of the ſeveral
ſteps of the intellectual progreſs. Compariſon
immediately leads to imperfect abſtraction. The
ſenſation of to-day is claſſed, if ſimilar, with the
ſenſation of yeſterday, and an inference is made
reſpecting the conduct to be adopted. Without
this Gegrec of abſtraction the faint dawnings of lan-


guage


44 HUMAN INVENTIONS CAPABLE.


_ guage already deſcribed could never have exiſted.
Abſtraction, which was neceſſary to the firſt ex- |
iſtence of language, is again aſſiſted in its operati-
| ons by language. That generaliſation, which is
implied in the very notion of thought, being thus
| embodied and rendered palpable, makes the mind
acquainted with its own powers and createga reſt-
tek defire after farther progreſs.

But, though it be by no means impoſſible, to
trace the cauſes that congurred to the production
of language, and. to prove them adequate to their
effect, it does not the leſs appear that this is an ac-

quiſition of ſlow growth and ineſtimable value.
Phe very ſteps, were we to purſue them, would
appear like an endleſs labyrinth. The diſtance is
inmeaſurable between the three or four yague
and inarticulate ſounds uttered by animals, and
the copiouſneſs of lexicography or the regularity.
of: grammar. The general and ſpecial names by
which things are at firſt complicated and after-
Wards divided, the names by Which properties
are ſeparated from their ſubſtances and powers
from both, the comprehenſive diſtribution of
parts of 11 peech, verbs, adjectives and articles,
the inflexions of words by which the change of
their terminations chapges their meaning. through
a . of r ene concords and pox go-


96h w4 4%


the one hand did not ae that the boundlefs taſk
had been actually performed, or who on the other
was not intimately acquainted with the progreſ-
five nature of mind, would pronounce the accom-
pliſhment of thein impoſſible.

A Ko


OF PERPETUAL IMPROVEMENT. 35

A ſecond invention, well calculated to impreſs
us with a ſenſe of the progreſſive nature of man;
is that of alphabetical writing. Hieroglyphical
or picture writing appears at ſome time to have
been univerſal, and the difficulty of conceiving the
gradation from this to alphabetical is ſo great, as
to have induced Hartley, one of the moſt acute
of all philoſophical writers, to have recourſe to
miraculous interpoſition as the only adequate ſo-
lution. In reality no problem can be imagined
more operoſe, than that of decompoſing the ſounds
of words into four and twenty fimple elements or
letters, and again finding theſe elements in all
other words. When we have examined the ſub-
ject a little more cloſely, and perceived the ſteps
by which this labour was accompliſhed, perhaps
the immenſity of the labour will rather gain upon
us, as he that ſhall have counted a million of
units, will have a vaſter idea upon the ſubject,
than he that only conſiders them in the groſs.

In China hieroglyphical writing has never been
| ſuperſeded by alphabetical, and this from the very
nature of their language, which is conſiderably
monoſyllabic, the ſame ſound being made to ſig-
nify a great variety of objects, by means of certain
ſhadings of tone too delicate for any alphabet to be
able to repreſent. They have however two kinds
of writing, one for the learned, and another for
the vulgar. The learned adhere cloſely to their
hieroglyphical writing, repreſenting every word
by its correſponding picture; but the vulgar are
frequent in their deviations from it. |

Hieroglyphical writing and ſpeech may indeed
be conſidered in the firſt inſtance as two languages,
oY running


16 © HUMAN INVENTIONS CAPABLE |


running parallel to each other, but with no 8
connection. The picture and the word each of
them repreſent the idea, one as immediately as
the other. But, though independent, they will


5 become accidentally aſſociated; the picture at firſt


e. and afterwards more conſtantly ſug-
geſting the idea of its correſpondent ſound. It is
in this manner that the mercantile claſſes of China
began to corrupt, as it is ſtyled, their hierogly-
phical writing. They had a wor f two.
ſyllables to write. The character appropriate to
that word they were not acquainted with, or it
failed to ſuggeſt itſelf to their memory. Each of
the ſyllables however was a diſtinct word in the
„ and the characters belonging to them
perfectly familiar. The expedient that ſuggeſted
itſelf was to write theſe two characters with a mark
ſignifying their union, though in reality the cha-
racters had hitherto been appropriated to ideas of
a different ſort, wholly unconnected with that
now intended to be conveyed. Thus a ſort of re-
bus or chararde was produced. In other caſes the
word, though monoſyllabic, was capable of be-
ing divided into two ſounds, and the ſame proceſs
was employed. This is a firſt ſtep towards alpha-
betical analyſis. Some word, ſuch as the inter-
jection O / or the particle A is already found per-

fectly ſimple, and thus furniſhes a firſt ſtone to

the edifice. But, though theſe ideas may par
haps preſent us with a faint view of the manner in
which an alphabet was produced, yet the actual
production of a complete alphabet is perhaps of
all human diſcoveries, that which required the
molt perſevering reflection, the luckieſt concur-
rence


*


ö Or PERPETUAL IMPROVEMENT: 47


rence of circumſtances, and the moſt patient Fw |


gradual progreſs.


Let us however ſuppoſe man to have gained the
two firſt elements of knowledge, ſpeaking and


writing; let us trace him through all his ſubſe-
- quent improvements, through whatever conſti-
tutes the inequality between Newton and the
ploughman, and indeed much more than this,
ſince the moſt ignorant ploughman in civiliſed ſo-
ciety is infinitely different from what he would
have been, when ſtripped of all the benefits he
has derived from literature and the arts. Let us
ſurvey the earth covered with the labours of man,
houſes, incloſures, harveſts, manufactures, in-


ſtruments, machines, together with all the won-


ders of painting, poetry, eloquence and philo-
ſophy.

Such was man in his original ſtate, and ſuch is
man as we at preſent behold him. Is it poſſible
for us to contemplate what he has already done,
without being impreſſed with a ſtrong prefenti-
ment of the improvements he has yet to accom-
pliſh? There is no ſcience that is not capable of
additions ; there 1s no art that may not be carried
to a ſtill higher perfection. If this be true of all
other ſciences, why not of morals? If this be true
of all other arts, why not of ſocial inſtitution ?
The very conception of this as poſſible, is in the
higheſt degree encouraging. If we can ſtill far-
ther demonſtrate it to be a part of the natural and
regular progreſs of mind, our confidence and our
hopes will then be complete. This is the tem-


per with which we ought to engage in the ſtudy


of . truth. Let us look back, that we
may


.
RM
7
4
t
N
1.
10
*
70
q
4
h
_
©
$
4
j
1 i
"=
1
}


|
if
|


: 2
—


— . p


8 —
„„
—— —— —


1
tt — 2 ———
— — — ry Ta nn


WO


bY
—  -


——


—— — v2


48 HUMAN INVENTIONS CAPABLE, &c.

may profit by the experience of mankind; but
let us not look back, as if the wiſdom of our an-
eeſtors was ſuch as to leave no room for future


CHAP. VI.


OF THE OBJECTION TO THESE PRINCIPLES
FROM THE INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE.


EA. 8 .


)


OF MORAL AND PHYSICAL CAUSES:


The queſtion ſlated. — Provinces of ſenſation and re-
fleltin. Moral cauſes frequently miſtaken for
Phyfical —Superiority of the former evident from
the varieties of human charafer.,—Operation of

phyfical canſes rare. — Fertility of reflection.
Pfyfral cauſes in the firſt inſtance ſuperior, af-
ter ward moral —Objettion from the effeft of
breed in animals.—Colclufion. © 5


. "Fares are certain propoſitions which may be
- condidered indifferently, either as cordllaries low-
ing from the principles already eſtabliſhed, or as
„ 1 a ſource


; 1


PHYSICAL CAUSES. 4g


a ſource of new arguments againſt the validity of
thoſe principles. In the firſt view they are en-
titled to a clear and perſpicuous ſtatement, and in
the ſecond to a mature examination. For exam-
ple:

7 The cauſes which appear to operate upon the
human mind may be divided into two claſſes : per-
ceptions, which are rendered directly a ſubject of
reaſoning, and regarded by the intellect as induce-
ments to action; and perceptions, which act indi-
rectly upon the mind, by rendering the animal
frame gay, vigorous and elaſtic, or on the contra-
ry ſluggiſh, morbid and inactive. According to
the ſyſtem already eſtabliſhed, the former of theſe
are to be regarded as the whole, the latter being
ſo comparatively inefficient and ſubordinate as to
ſtand in the eſtimate as almoſt nothing. To ma-
ny reaſoners however they have by no means ap-
peared of ſo trivial importance, and it may not be
_ uſeleſs to examine for a moment the ideas the
have formed, and the reaſons which have induced
them to aſcribe ſo much to the meaneſt branch
of the human conſtitution.

Impreſſions upon our ſenſes may act either as
phyſical or moral cauſes. Indiſpoſition of the bo-
dy operates upon the mind principally in the firſt
of theſe ways, ſeeming without any formal deli-
beration of the underſtanding to incline us to diſ-
ſatisfaction and indolence. Corporal puniſhment
affects us principally in the latter mode, ſince,
though it directly introduces a painful ſtate of the
mind, it influences our conduct, only as it is re-
flected upon by the underſtanding, and converted
into a motive of action. |


Vor. I. E =


50. - OF MORAL AND


lt may be a curious ſpeculation to examine how
far theſe claſſes are diſtinct from each other. It
cannot be denied but that ſenſation is of ſome
moment in the affair. It poſſeſſes the initiative.
It is that from which all the intellects with which
we are acquainted date their operations. Its firſt
effect upon mind does in the majority of caſes
precede reflection and choice. In come caſes the
impreſſions upon our ſenſes are foreſeen by us,
and may conſequently be reſiſted in the outſet.
But it would be a contradiction to atfirm that they
can always be foreteen. F WO. 0 1s itſelf * _
privy of experience.
 - Meanwhile, though they can only in die- |
| lar inſtances be foreſcen, and of conſequence com-
pletely foreſtalled, yet much of their effect is in
all caſes to be aſcribed to deliberation and choice.
« I feel a painful ſenſation, and I perſuade my-
ſelf that it is wiſer to ſubmit, and thus cheriſh
and ſecond its influence, than to reſiſt. I con-
ceive myſelf unfortunate, oppreſſed by a combi-
nation of unfavourable accidents, and am ren-
dered by this conception gloomy, diſcontented
and wretched. I fatisfy 4 that my fituati--
on is ſuch as to render exertion unreaſonable, and
believe that the attempt would produce nothing
but abortive and fruitleſs torture. I remain liſt-
bats, fluggiſh and inactive.
How different would be the ſum 1 my ſituati-
on, if I were animated by ſentiments of chear-
fulneſs, induſtry and courage? It has been faid
« that a rainy day has been known to convert a
man of valour into a coward.” How eaſily would
this external diſadvantage have been ſurmouated,


if


 P HKY-SEC AL” CAUSES. wt


if his mind had been more full of the benefits to

ariſe from his valour, if the rainy day had been
put in the balance with his wife and children, the
moſt illuſtrious rewards to be beſtowed upon him-
ſelf, and freedom and felicity to be ſecured to his
country? © Indigeſtion, we are told, perhaps
a fit of the tooth- ach, renders a man incapable of
ſtrong thinking and ſpirited exertion. How long

wa theſe be able to hold out againſt a ſudden
and unexpected piece of intelligence of the moſt
dehghtful nature?

When operations of an injurious nature are in-
flicted on the body, and are encountered by the
mind with unalterable firmneſs, what is the 5 —
of pain which in ſuch inſtances is ſuffered? Was
the language of Anaxarchus merely a philoſophi-
cal rant, Beat. on, tyrant ! Thou mayeſt deſtroy
the ſhell of Anaxarchus, but thou canſt not touch
Anaxarchus himtelf?” How much pain was real-
ly endured by Mutius Scævola and archbiſhop
Cranmer, when each ſteadily held his hand to be
devoured by the flames? How much is endured
by the ſavage Indians, who fing in the midit of
*tortures, and ſarcaſtically provoke their tormen-
tors to more ingenious batbarity'?

The truth that ſeems to reſult from theſe con-
ſiderations is, that indiſpoſition only becomes for-
midable in proportion as it is ſeconded by the
conſent of the mind; that our communication with
the material univerſe isat the mercy of our choice ;
and that the inability of the underſtanding for in-
tellectual exertion is principally an affair of moral


confideration, exiſting only in the degree in which
It is Wa rately el.


E 2 | « The


1 OF MORAL AN P


The hero of to-day,” we are told, ſhal!
by an indigeſtion or a rainy atmoſphere be con-
verted into a coward to-morrow.” Waving the
conſideration of how far this fact where it exiſts
is in reality of a moral and intellectual nature, let
us examine to what degree a principle of this fort
is the true index of human actions. We have
already eſtabliſhed it as a fundamental, that there
are no innate ideas. Of conſequence, if men

were principally -governed by external circum-
ſtances ſuch as that of atmoſphere, their charac-
ters and actions would be much alike. The ſame
weather, that made you 4 coward, would make
me ſo too, and an army would be defeated by a
fog. Perhaps indeed this cataſtrophe would be
prevented by the impartiality of the moiſture, in
proportion-as the enemy advanced, which he ne-
ceſſarily muſt do, into the fame atmoſphere.
Every thing that checks the uniformity of this
effect, and permanently diſtinguiſhes the charac-
ter of one man from that of another, is to be
traced to the aſſociation of ideas. But aſſociation
is of the nature of reaſoning. The principal,
the moſt numerous and laſting of our aſſociations,
are intellectual, not accidental, built upon the re-
ſemblances and differences of things, not upon
the contingency of their occurring in any given
time or place. It is thus that one man appears
courageous and another cowardly, one man vigo-
rous and another dull, under the ſame or nearly
the ſame external circumſtances. .
In reality the atmoſphere, inſtead of conſider-
ably affecting the maſs of mankind, affects in an
eminent degree only a ſmall part of that maſs.
The


PHYSICAL CAUSES. 53


The majority are either above or below it; are ei-
ther too groſs to feel ſtrongly theſe minute varia-

tions, or too buſy to be at leiſure to attend to them.

It is only a few, whoſe treatment has been tender
enough to imbue them with extreme delicacy,

and whoſe faculties are not rouſed by ſtrong and

unintermitted incitements, who can be thus blind-

ly directed. If it ſhould be ſaid © that the wea-

ther indeed is too great a trifle to produce theſe

conſequences, but that there are pains and inter-

ruptions which ſcarcely any man can withſtand ;”

it may be anſwered, that theſe occur too ſeldom

to be miſtaken for the efficient principles of hu-

man character, that the ſyſtem which determines

our proceedings riſes from a different ſource, and

ordinarily returns when the pain or interruption
has ſubſided.

There can be no queſtion more intereſting than
that which we are now conſidering. Upon our
deciſion in this caſe it depends, whether thoſe per-
ſons act wiſely who preſcribe to themſelves a cer-
tain diſcipline and are anxious to enrich their
minds with ſcience,' or whether on the contrary it
be better to truſt every thing to the mercy of
events. Is it poſſible that we ſhould not perceive
from the very nature of the thing the advantages
which the wiſe man poſſeſſes over the fooliſh one,
and that the points in which they reſemble will be
as nothing compared to thoſe in which they dif-
fer? In thoſe particulars in which our conduct is
directed merely by external impreſſions we reſem-
ble the inferior animals; we differ from them in
the greater facility with which we arrange our
. ſenſations, and compare, prefer and judge.

2


ww - Or MORAL AND: - *

Out of a ſingle ſenſation a great variety of re-
flections may be generated. Let the thing perceiv-
ed be a material ſubſtance of certain regular dimen-
ſions. I perceive that it has an upper and a lower
ſurface, I can therefore conceive of it as divided.
can conceive of the parts into which it is form-
ed as moving towards and from each other, and
hence I acquire the ideas of diſtance and ſpace.
can conceive of them as ſtriking againſt each
other, and hence I derive the notion of impene-

trability, gravity and momentum, the flownelſs,
rapidity and direction of motion. Let the ſenſa-
tion be a pain in the head. I am led to reflect
upon its cauſes, its ſeat, the ſtructure of the parts
in which it reſides, the inconvenience it impoſes,
the conſequences with which it may be attended,
the remedies that may be applied and their effects,
whether external or internal, material or intellec-
tual. OTE: eo |
It is true that the infant and inexperienced
mind cannot thus analyſe and conjure up diſſerta-
tions of philoſophy out of its moſt trivial ſenſati-
ons. Such a capacity infers a long ſeries of pre-
ceding impreflions. Mind is in its infancy nearly
what theſe philoſophers deſcribe, the creature of
contingencies. But the farther it advances, the
more it individualiſes. Each man has habits and
prejudices that are properly his own. He lives
in a little univerſe of his own creating, or he
_ communicates with the omnipreſent and eternal

volume of truth. With theſe he compares the
ſuccefiive perceptions of his mind, and upon theſe
depend the concluſions he draws and the conduct


PHYSICAL CAUSES. 55


he obſerves. Hence it inevitably follows, that
phyſical cauſes, though of ſome conſequence in
the hiſtory of man, ſink into nothing, ha — com-
pared with the great and inexpteſſible operations
of reflection. They are the prejudices we con-
ceive or the judgments we form, our apprehenſi-
ons of truth and falſhood, that conſtitute the true
baſis of diſtinction between man and man. The
difference between ſavage and ſavage indeed, in
the firſt generation of the human ſpecies and in
perfect ſolitude, can only be aſcribed to the dif-
ferent impreſſions made upon their ſenſes. But
this difference would be almoſt imperceptible.
The ideas of wiſdom and folly would never have
entered the human mind, if men, like beaſts, de-
rived neither good nor evil from the reflections
and diſcoveries of their companions and anceſ-
tors. | | .
Hence we are furniſhed with an anſwer to the
analogical argument from the conſiderable effects
that phyſical cauſes appear to produce upon brutes.
* Breed for example appears to be of unqueſtio-
nable importance to the character and qualificati-
ons of horſes and dogs; why ſhould we not ſup-
pole. this or certain other brute and occult cauſes
to be equally efficacious in the caſe of men? How
comes it that the races of animals perhaps never
degenerate, if carefully cultivated; at the ſame
time that we have no ſecurity againſt the wiſeſt
philoſopher's begetting a dunce?
Janſwer, that the exiſtence of phyſical cauſes
cannot be controverted. In the caſe of man their
efficacy is ſwallowed up in the ſuperior importance
of reflection and ſcience. In. animals on the con-
trary they are left almoſt alone. If a race of ne-


groes


" Wh OF MORAL, &,


grow were taken, and maintained each man from
his infancy, except ſo far as was neceſſary for the
propagation of the ſpecies, in ſolitude; or even
if they were excluded from an acquaintance with
the improvements and imaginations of their anceſ-
tors, . gh permitted the ſociety of each other,
the operation of breed might perhaps be rendered
as conſpicuous among them, as in the different
claſſes of horſes and dogs. But the ideas they
would otherwiſe receive from their parents and
civiliſed or half-civiliſed neighbours would be in-
numerable : and, if the precautions above men-
tioned were unobſerved, all parallel between the
two caſes would ceaſe. 3
Such is the character of man conſidered as an in-
dividual. He is operated upon by exterior cauſes
immediately, producing certain effects upon him
independently of the exerciſe of reaſon; and he is
operated upon by exterior cauſes mediately, their
impreſſions furniſhing him with materials for re-
. flection, and aſſuming the form of motives to act
1 or to refrain from acting. But the latter of theſe,
1 at leaſt ſo far as relates to man in a civiliſed ſtate,
may ſtand for the whole. He that would change
4 the character of the individual, would miſerably
miſapply his efforts, if he principally ſought to

| effect this purpoſe by the operations of heat and
1 cold, dryneſs and moiſture upon the animal frame.
| The true inſtruments of moral influence, are de-
4 fire and averſion, puniſhment and reward, the ex-
hibition ef general truth, and the development of
thoſe puniſhments and rewards, which wiſdom
and error by the very nature of the thing conſtant-
ly bring along with them. 25

Ys PART


"4


6 15


1
OF NATIONAL CHARACTERS.


Character of the prieſthood — All nations capable
of liberty. —The aſſertion illuſtrated.— Experi-
ence favours theſe reaſonings.— Means of intro-

- ducing liberty. |


As is the character of the individual, ſo may
we expect to find it with nations and great bodies
of men. The operations of law and political in-
ſtitution will be important and intereſting, the
operations of climate trifling and unworthy of no-
tice. Thus there are particular profeſſions, ſuch
as that of the prieſthood, which muſt always ope-
rate to the production of a particular character.
Prieſts are upon all occaſions accuſtomed to
have their opinions liſtened to with implicit defe-
rence ; they will therefore be imperious, dogma-
tical and impatient of oppoſition. Their ſucceſs
with mankind depends upon the opinion of their
ſuperior innocence ; they will therefore be parti-
cularly anxious about appearances, their deport-
ment will be grave and their manners formal.
The frank and ingenuous fallies of mind they will
be obliged to ſuppreſs ; the errors and irregulari-
ties into which they may be drawn they will be
ſtudious to conceal. They are obliged at ſet in-


tervals


„ OF NATIONAL,


tervals to aſſume the exterior of an Fs FI: ;
but it is impoſſible that this ſhould at all times be
free from occaſional coldneſs and diſtraction.
Their importance is connected with their real or
ſuppoſed mental ſuperiority over the reſt of man-
kind; they muſt therefore be patrons of preju-
dice and nplicit faith. Their proſperity depends
upon the reception of particular opinions in the
World; they mult therefore be enemies to free-
dom of enquiry ; they mult have a bias.upon their
minds impreſſed by ſomething different from the
force of evidence. Particular moral cauſes may
in ſome inſtances limit, perhaps ſuperſede the in-
fluence of general ones, and render ſome men ſu-

rior to the character of their profeſſion ; but,
exclufively of ſuch exceptions, prieſts of all religi-
ons, of all climates and of all ages will have a
ſtriking ſimilarity of manners and diſpoſition. In
the ſame manner we may reſt aſſured that free
men in whatever country will be firm, vigorous
and ſpirited in proportion to their freedom, and
that vaſſals and ſlaves will be 1 Jy ſervile and
unprincipled.

The truth of this axiom has indeed been pretty
univerſally admitted; but it has been affirmed to
be < impoſſible to eſtabliſh a free government in
certain warm and effeminate climates.' To ena-

ble us to judge of the reaſonableneſs of this affir-
mation, let us confider what proceſs would be ne-
ceſſary in order to introduce a free government in-
to any country.

The anſwer to this queſtion is to be found in
the anſwer to that other, whether freedom have
any real and ſolid advantages over ſlavery! prog it

ave,


"CHARACTERS. 59


have, then our mode of proceeding reſpecting it
ought to be exactly parallel to that we ſhould em-
ploy in recommending any other benefit. If I
would perſuade a man to accept a great eſtate,
ſuppoſing that poffeſſion to be a real advantage;
if J would induce him to ſelect for his companion
a beautiful and accompliſhed woman, or for his
friend a wiſe, a brave and diſintereſted man; if I
would perſuade him to prefer caſe to pain, and gra-
tification to torture, what more is neceſſary, than
that I ſhould inform his underſtanding, and make
him ſee theſe things in their true and genuine co-
lours? Should I find it neceſſary to enquire firſt of
what chmate he was a native, and whether that
were favourable to the poſſeſſion of a great eſtate,
a fine woman, or a generous friend? _

The advantages of liberty over flavery are not
lefs real, though unfortunately they are leis pal-
pable, than in the caſes juſt enumerated. Every
man has a confuſed ſenſe of theſe advantages, but
he has been taught to beheve that men would tear
each other to pieces, if they had not prieſts to di-
rect their conſciences, and lords to conſult for their
ſubſiſtence, and kings to ſteer them in ſafetyx
through the inexplicable dangers of the political
ocean. But whether they be miſled by theſe or
other prejudices, whatever be the fancied terror
that induces them quietly to ſubmit to have their
hands bound. behind them, and the ſcourge vibrat-
ed over their heads, all theſe are queſtions of rea-
ſon. Truth may be preſented to them in ſuch ir-
reſiſtible evidence, perhaps by ſuch juſt degrees
familiariſed to their apprehenſion, as ultimately to
conquer the moſt: obſtinate prepoſſeſſions. _

81 ä Z the


* = — — N =_ .
= — r 1 — o - — — — — - — "1
n U bs = — — — — 2 - - - — * - p
i ä — — 1 === — = — r | p . — p E -
= * * 4 — — — ——_—_ _ —_ 2 I —_ — — > — 2 — ——— —— — — - Þ
\ « - ERS 7 —̃ — — cut ni — . GC tk ES —— ä — ene — —— —— . K * N * a
—— _ 4 OS . a
K 1 1 — — gy jr * wo » 7 — — — :
N — . "OT ——— 9 , 4 7 « * * Y We. * — * * . 2
F ” kh — 2 J > . 5
— PR = by * * I N * ty — * - * 7
8 Werse 1 8 1 * W 2 N 2 „* my Pe * 2 * *
"ſs * 7 Rey . , > ;
- a n carats St 6 _ N -
by 4 by .
© , -
- -
* *
— 8 c
=


6 OF NATIONAL 3


the preſs find its way into Perſia or Indoſtan, let


the political truths diſcovered by the beſt of the


European ſages be transfuſed into their language,
and it is impoſſible that a few ſolitary converts
ſhould not be made. It is the property of truth
to ſpread; and, excluſively of great national con-


vulſions, its advocates in each ſucceeding age will


be ſomewhat more numerous than in that which
went before. The cauſes, which ſuſpend its pro-
greſs, ariſe, not from climate, but from the
watchful and intolerant jealouſy of deſpotic ſove-
reigns.


Let us ſuppoſe then that the majority of a nati-


on by however flow a progreſs are convinced of


the defirableneſs, or, which amounts to the ſame,
the practicability of freedom. The ſuppoſition
would be parallel, if we were to imagine ten
thouſand men of ſound intellect, ſhut up in a mad-
houſe, and ſuperintended by a ſet of three or four
keepers. Hitherto they have been perſuaded, for
what abſurdity has been too great for human intel-
lect to entertain? that they were deſtitute of rea-
ſon, and that the ſuperintendence under which
they were placed was neceſſary for their preſerva-
tion. They have therefore ſubmitted to whips
and ſtraw and bread and water, and perhaps ima-
gined this tyranny to be a bleſſing. But a ſuſpi-
czon 1s at length by ſome means propagated
among them, that all they have hitherto endured
has been an impoſition. 'The ſuſpicion ſpreads,
they reflect, they reaſon, the idea is communicat-
ed from one to another through the chinks of their
cells, and at certain times when the vigilance of
their keepers has not precluded them from the
= HR pleaſures


CHARACTERS. 61


pleaſures of mutual ſociety. It becomes the clear
perception, the ſettled perſuaſion of the majority
of the perſons confined. |

What will be the conſequence of this opinion ?
Will the influence of climate prevent them from
embracing the obvious means of their happineſs?
Is there any human underſtanding that will not
perceive a truth like this, when forcibly and re-
peatedly preſented ? Is there a mind that will con-
ceive no indignation at ſo horrible a tyranny? In
reality the chains fall off of themſelves, when the
magic of opinion is diſſolved. When a great
majority of any ſociety are perſuaded to ſecure
any benefit to themſelves, there is no need of tu-
mult or violence to effect it. The effort would
be to reſiſt reaſon, not to obey it. The priſoners
are collected in their common hall, and the keep-
ers inform them that it is time to return to their
cells. They have no longer the power to obey.
They look at the impotence of their late maſtere,
and ſmile at their preſumption. They quietly
leave the manſion where they were hitherto im-
mured, and partake of the bleſſings of light and
air like other men.

Let us compare this theory with the hiſtory of
mankind. If the theory be true, we may expect
to find the inhabitants of neighbouring provinces
in different ſtates, widely diſcriminated by the in-
fluence of government, and little aflinilated by
reſemblance of climate. Thus the Gaſcons are


the gayeſt people in all France; but the moment


we paſs the Pyrenees, we find the ſerious and ſa-
turnine character of the Spaniard. Thus the Athe-
nians were lively, penetrating and ingenious, but


the


5-08 OF NATIONAL


the Thebans unpoliſhed, phlegmatic and dull.
It would be reaſonable to expect that different
races of men, intermixed ich each other, but
differently governed, would afford a ftrong and.
vifible contraſt. Thus the Turks are brave, open
and fincere, but the modern Greeks mean, cow-
ardly and deceitful. Wandering tribes cloſely
connected among themſelves, and having little

ſympathy with the people with whom they reſide,
may be expected to have great ſimilarity of man-
ners. Their ſituation cenders them conſpicuous,
the faults of individuals refle&t diſhonour upon
the whole, and their manners will be particular-
ly ſober and reputable, unleſs they ſhould happen
to labour under fo peculiar an odium as to render
all endeavour after reputation fruitleſs. Thus the
Armenians in the Eaſt are as univerſally diſt in-
guiſhed among the nations with whom they reſide,
as the Jews in Europe; but the Armenians are as
much noted for probity, as the Jews for extorti-
on.—W hat reſemblance is there between the an-
eient and the modern Greeks, between the old
Romans and the preſent inhabitants of Italy, be-
tween the Gauls and the French? Diodorus Sicu-
lus deſcribes the Gauls as particularly given to ta-
eiturnity, and Ariſtotle: affirms that they are the
only warlike nation who are negligent of women.
If on the contrary climate were principally con-
cerned in forming the characters of nations, we
might expect to find heat and cold producing an
extraordinary effect upon men, as they do upon
plants and inferior animals. But the reverſe of
this appears to be the fact. Is it ſuppoſed that
the neighbourhood of the ſun renders men gay,
fantaſtic


3


CHARACTERS. 63


fantaſtic and ingenious? While the French, the
Greeks and the Perſians have been remarkable for
their gaiety, the Spaniards, the Turks and the
Chinete are not leſs diftinguiſhed by the ſeriouſ-
neſs of their deportment. It was the opinion of
the ancients that the northern nations were inca-
pable of civiliſation and improvement; but the
moderns have found that the Engliſh are not in-
ferior in literary eminence to any nation in the
world. It is aſſerted, that the northern nations
are more hardy and courageaus, and that conqueſt
has uſually travelled from that to the oppoſite
quarter? It would have been truer to ſay that
conqueſt 1s uſually made by poverty upon 0
The Turks, who from the deſerts of Tartary in
vaded the fertile provinces of the Roman empire,
met the Saracens half way, who were advancin
with fimilar fiews from the no leſs dreary deſerts
of Arabia. In their extreme perhaps heat and cold
may determine the characters of nations, of the
negroes for example on one fide and the 1
ers on the other. Not but that in this very in
ſtance much may be aſcribed to the e eee
of a ſterile . on the one hand, and to the
indolence conſequent upon a ſpontaneous fertility
on the other. As to what is more than this, the
remedy has not yet been diſcovered. Phyſical
cauſes have already appeared to be powerful, till
moral ones can be brought into operation.

Has it been alledged that carniverous nations
are endowed with the greateſt courage? The
Swedes, whoſe nutriment 1s meagre and ſparing,
have ranked with the moſt diſtinguiſhed modern


nations in the operations of war.


It


.
A * *
15 5
+ So
*
% 2
: J


bh ©. QF NATIONAL


It is uſually ſaid, that northern nations are moſt
addicted to wine, and ſouthern to women. Ad-
mitting this obſervation in its full force, it would
only prove that climate may operate upon the
groſſer particles of our frame, not that it influences
- "thoſe finer organs upon which the operations of

intelle& depend. But the truth of the firſt of theſe.
_ remarks may well be doubted. The Greeks ap-
pear to have been ſufficiently addicted to the plea-
ſures of the bottle. Among the Perfians no cha-
racter was more coveted than that of a hard drink-
er. It 1s eaſy to obtain any thing of the negroes,
even their wives and children, in exchange for
liquor. -

As to women the circumſtance may be account-
ed for from moral cauſes. The heat of the cli-
mate obliges both ſexes to go half naked. The
animal arrives ſooner at maturity in hot countries.
And both theſe circumſtances produce vigilance
and jealouſy, cauſes which inevitably tend to in-
flame the paſſions &.

The reſult of theſe reaſonings is of the utmoſt
importance to him who ſpeculates upon prin-
ciples of government. It is of little conſequence
what diſcoveries may be made in moral and poli-
tical ſcience, if, when we have aſcertained moſt
accurately what are the intellectual requiſites that
lead to wiſdom and virtue, a blind and capricious
principle is to intrude itſelf, and taint all our con-
cluſions. Accordingly there have been writers on

: the


Ib majorky of inſtances in the three preceding pages are
taken from Hume's Eſſay on National Characters, where this ſub-
ject is treated with much ability. Eſſays, Vol. I, Part I, Eſſay xxi.


*<- a


CHARACTERS. 65
the ſubje& of government, who, admitting, and
even occaſionally declaiming with enthuſiaſm up-
on the advantages of liberty and the equal claims
of mankind to every ſocial benefit, have yet con-
cluded that the corruptions of deſpotiſm and the
uſurpations of ariſtocracy were congenial to cer-
tain ages and diviſions of the world, and under
proper limitations entitled to our approbation.

But this hypotheſis will be found incapable of
holding out againſt a moment's ſerious reflection.
Can there be any ſtate of mankind that renders
them incapable of the exerciſe of reaſon? Can
there be a period in which it is neceſſary to hold
the human ſpecies in a condition of pupillage ?
If there be, it ſeems but reaſonable that their ſu-
perintendents and guardians, as in the caſe of in-
fants of another ſort, ſhould provide for the means
of their ſubſiſtence without calling upon them for
the exertions of manual induſtry. Wherever men
are competent to look the firſt duties of humanity
in the face, and to provide for their defence agai
the invaſions of hunger and the inclemencies of
the ſky, there they will out of all doubt be found
equally capable of every other exertion that may
be neceſſary to their ſecurity and welfare. Preſent
to them-a conſtitution which ſhall put them into
a ſimple and intelligible method of directing their
own affairs, adjudging their conteſts among them-
ſelves, and cheriſhing in their boſoms a manly
ſenſe of dignity, equality and independence, and
you need not doubt that proſperity and virtue will
be the reſult.

The real enemies of liberty in any country are
not the people, but thoſe higher orders who pro-

-Vor. I. F fit


%


66 0 F NATIONAL, &c.


fit * a contrary ſyſtem, Infuſe juſt views of ſo-
cCiety into a certain number of the liberally educa-
ted and reflecting members; give to the people
guides and inſtructors ; and the buſineſs is done.
This however is not to be accompliſhed but in a
gradual manner, as will more fully appear in the
ſequel. The error hes, not in tolerating the worſt
forms of government for a time, but in ſuppoſing
a change impracticable, and not inceſſantly look -

ing end to its accompliſhment.


C H A p. vm


OF THE OBJECTION TO THESE PRINCIPLES
FROM THE INFLUENCE OF LUXURY.


The objection fated. — Source of this objectian.— Re-
fatd from mutability—from mortality—from
 ſympathy—from the nature of truth.—The pro-

2 of POT conſidered.


T HERE is another propoſition relative to the
ſubject, which is leſs to be conſidered as an aſſer-
tion diſtin& in itſelf, than as a particular branch
of that which has juſt been diſcuſſed ; I mean the
* which — « that nations like in-


dividuals


„


or LUX UR x. @


dividuals are ſubject to the phenomena of youth
and old age, and that, when a people by luxury
and depravation of manners have ſunk into decre-
pitude, it is notin the power of legiſlation to re-
ſtore them to vigour and innocence.”
This idea has partly been founded upon the ro-
mantic notions of paſtoral life and the golden age.
Innocence is not virtue. Virtue demands the ac-
tive employment of an ardent mind in the pro-
motion of the general good. No man can be
eminently virtuous, who is not accuſtomed to an
extenſive range of reflection. He muſt ſee all the
benefits to ariſe from a diſintereſted proceeding,
and muſt underſtand the proper method of pro-
ducing thoſe benefits. Ignorance, the flothful
habits and limited views of uncultivated life have
not in them more of true virtue, though they
may be more harmleſs, than luxury, vanity and
extravagance. Individuals of exquiſite feeling,
whoſe diſguſt has been excited by the hardened
ſelfiſhneſs or the unbluſhing corruption which
have prevailed in their own times, have recurred
in imagination to the foreſts of Norway or the
bleak and uncomfortable Highlands of Scotland in
ſearch of a purer race of mankind. This imagi-
nation has been the offspring of diſappointment,
not the dictate of reaſon and philoſophy.

It may be true, that ignorance is nearer than
prejudice to the reception of wiſdom, and that the

uabſence of virtue is a condition more hopeful than
the preſence'of its oppoſite. In this caſe it would
have been juſter to compare a nation ſunk in luxu-
ry, to an individual with confirmed habits of
wrong, than to an individual whom a debili-
% Fab tated


68- OF THE INFLUENCE


tated conflitation was bringing faſt to the grave.
But neither would that r e have been fair
and equitable,

The nen of nations is more fluctuatin g.
and will be found leſs obſtinate in its reſiſtance to
a conſiſtent endeavour for their improvement, than
that of individuals. In nations ſome of their
members will be leſs confirmed in error than
others. A certain number will be only in a very
ſmall degree indiſpoſed to liſten to the voice of
truth. This number will perpetually increaſe.
Every new 8 will be the means of convert-
ing others. roportion as the body of diſciples
is au arte e modes of attack upon the pre-
judices of others will be varied, and ſuited to the
variety of men's tempers and prepoſſefiions.

Add to this that generations of men are perpe-
tually going off the ſtage, while other generati-
ons ſucceed. The next generation will not have
ſo many prejudices to ſubdue. Suppoſe a deſpo-
tic nation by ſome revolution in its affairs to be-
come poſſeſſed of a free conſtitution. The chil-
dren of the preſent race will be bred in more firm
and independent habits of thinking ; the ſupple-
neſs, the timidity and the vicious dexterity of their
fathers will give place to an erect mien, and a
clear and decifive judgment. The partial and
imperfect change if character which was introdu-
ced at firſt, will in the ſucceeding age become
more unalloyed and complete.

Laſtly, the power of ſocial inſtitutions dine
the character of nations is very different from and
1 __ than any power which can ordi-

narily


QUE L:UKURY 4 69


narily be brought to bear upon a ſolitary individu-
al. Large bodies of men, when once they have
been enlightened and perſuaded, act with more
vigour than ſolitary individuals. They animate
the mutual exertions of each other, and the uni-
ted forces of example and ſhame urge them to
perſeverance. The caſe is not of that cuſtoma-
ry ſort where the power of reaſon only is tried in
curing any perſon of his errors; but is as if he
ſhould be placed in an entirely new ſituation.
His habits are broken through, and his motives
of action changed. Inſtead of being perpetually
recalled to vicious practices by the recurrence of
his former connections, the whole ſociety receives
an impulſe from the ſame cauſe that acts upon any
individual. New ideas are ſuggeſted, and the
ſurpriſe of novelty conſpires with the approbation
of truth to prevent men from falling back into
imbecility and langour. 200


The queſtion may in reality be reduced to an
enquiry, whether the human underſtanding can
be made the recipient of truth, whether it be
poſſible for an effort ſo ſtrenuous to exiſt as to
make men aware of their true intereſts. For let
this be granted, and the conſequence is inevitable.
It has already ſufficiently appeared, that whatever
is politically right or politically wrong, muſt be in
all caſes of no trivial conſequence to the welfare
of mankind. Monarchy for example will by all
men be acknowledged to be attended with many
diſadvantages. It acts upon inſufficient and par-
tial information, it generates intrigue, corruption,
adulation and ſervility. If it could be proved,
that it produced no advantages in equal proportion,


70 OF THE INFLUENCE


and that its abolition would not lead to miſchief,
anarchy and diſorder, is there a nation upon the
face of the earth to whom theſe propoſitions were
rendered palpable, that would endure to ſubmit
toit? Is there a nation upon the face of the earth,
that would ſubmit to the impoſitions of its admi-
niſtration, the wars it occafions, and the laviſh
revenues by which it is maintained, if they knew
it to be merely an excreſcence and a diſeaſe 1 in the
order of ſociety ?

But it has been farther alledged, that, even
ſhould a luxurious nation be prompted by into-
lerable grievances and notorious uſurpation to aſ-
ſert the juſt principles of human ' ſociety, they
would be unable to perpetuate them, and al
ſoon be led back by their evil habits to their for-
mer vices and corruption: that is, they would be
capable of the heroic energy that ſhould expel the
uſurper, but not of the moderate reſolution that
ſhould prevent his return. They would rouſe
themſelves ſo far from their lethargy as to aſſume
a new character and enter into different views;
but after having for ſome time acted upon their
convictions, they would ſuddenly become incapa-
ble of underſtanding the truth of their principles
and feeling their influence.

Men always act upon their apprehenſions of
preferableneſs. There are few errors of which
they are guilty, which may not be reſolved into
2 narrow and inadequate view of the alternative
preſented for their choice. Preſent pleaſure may
appear more certain and eligible than diſtant good.
But they never chooſe evil as apprehended to be
evil. Wherever a clear and unanſwerable notion


of


OF LUWNUNLY 717


of any ſubject is preſented to their view, a correſ—
pondent action or courſe of actions inevitably fol-
lows. Having thus gained one ſtep in the acqui-
fition of truth, it cannot eaſily be conceived of as
loſt. A body of men, having detected the inju-
rious conſequences of an evil under which they
have long laboured, and having ſhaken it off, will
ſcarcely voluntarily reſtore the miſchief they have
annihilated. Nothing can reconcile them to the
revival of falſnood, which does not obliterate their
preſent conviction of truth.


AN


\ = — r — ky —

J 1 3 — — — — n n
: — —— — — . — err Ang SETTER ES EIS: ut

— — —— — _ — — — 5 . - ' * 1 0 — "I. £ 8 7 * * ff 4 ; *
f l 2 g No, . — . N PPP ern n ASE XY "age ct. hs
223222 y Sa ES „
„
- by
, N -


-


1 eee e ee ee
EN Der
e CONCERNING | 79 955


POLITICAL |
; | * * 5 > - . p "$7 ; 4 J ih 5 Ss 3 * . 1


*


J


—


*


„


PRINCIPLES OF SOCIETY,


CHAP, I,


#4
4


INTRODUCTION.


AM


Nature of the enquiry—mode of | paar g it.—Dif.
Tinction between ſociety and government,


M R. Locke begins his celebrated Treatiſe of


Government with a refutation of the patriarchal
ſcheme of fir Robert Filmer; and, having thus
cleared his ground, proceeds to obſerve, that he,
that will not give juſt occaſion to think that all


government in the world is the product only of


7 1 5 | 1 force


\


5 * ;
3
. 3 ,
%


PRINCIPLES OF SOCIETY. 7


force and violence, and that men live together by

no other rules but that of beaſts, muſt of neceſ-

ſity find out another riſe of government, and ano-
ther original of political power *.” Accordingly
he proceeds through the greater part of his trea-
tiſe to reaſon abſtractedly upon the prohable hiſ-
tory of the early ages of mankind, and concludes
that no legitimate government could be built up-
on any other foundation than that -of an original
Con. | e
It is to be ſuſpected that this great man, friend
as he was to the liberty and the intereſts of man-
kind, intrepid and ſagacious in his ſearch after
truth, has been guilty of an overſight in the firſt


ſtep of the inveſtigation.
There are two modes, according to which we
may enquire into the origin of ſociety and govern-
ment. We may either examine them hiſtorically,
that is, conſider in what manner they have or
ought to have begun, as Mr. Locke has done; or
we may examine them philoſophically, that is,
conſider the moral principles upon which they
depend. The firſt of theſe ſubjects is not with-
out its uſe; but the ſecond is of a higher order
and more eſſential importance. The firſt is a
queſtion of form; the ſecond of ſubſtance. It
would be of trivial conſequence practically con-
ſidered, from what ſource any form of ſociety
flowed, and by what mode its principles were
ſanctioned, could we be always ſecure of their
conformity to the dictates of truth and juſtice.
It is farther neceſſary before we enter upon the


* Book II. Chap. i. F 1.


ſubject


: 74 PRINCIPLES OF SOCIETY.


ſubject carefully todiſtinguiſh between ſociety and
government. Men aſſociated at firſt for the ſake
of mutual affiſtance. They did not foreſee that
any reſtraint would be neceſſary, to regulate the
conduct of individual members of the ſociety, to-
wards each other, or towards the whole. The
neceſſity of reſtraint grew out of the errors and
perverſeneſs of a few. An acute writer has ex-
preſſed this idea with peculiar felicity. Society
and government,” ſays he, are different in them
ſelves, and have different origins. Society is pro-
duced by our wants, an government by our wick-
edneſs. Society is in èvery ſtate a bleſſing; go-
8 even in its beſt ſtate oy a neceſſary
Evil *.


* Common Senſe, p. 1.


—


CHAP.


c H A v. 1.
e


Fo onne&ion of politics and morals.—Extent and
meaning of juſtice. —Subjett of juſtice : mankind.
— ſts diſtribution meaſured by the capacity of its
© ſubjett—by his uſefulneſs —Family aſfection con-
- fidered. —Gratitude conſidered. —Objettions- from
ignorance—from utility. — An exception ſlated. —
Degrees of juſtice L of 980


tical Alice. :


F ROM what has been faid it a ppears, that the
ſubject of the preſent enquiry is ſtrictly ſpeaking
a department of the ſcience of morals. Morali-

is the ſource from which its fundamental axi-
oms muſt be drawn, and they will be made ſome-
what clearer in the preſent inſtance, if we aſſume
the term juſtice as a general appellation for all
moral duty.

That this appellation i is ſufficiently expreſſive of
the ſubject will appear, if we conſider for a mo-
ment mercy, gratitude, temperance, or any of thoſe
duties which in looſer ſpeaking are contradiſtin-
guiſhed from juſtice. Why ſhould I pardon this
criminal, remunerate this favour, abſtain from this
indulgence ? If it partake of the nature of mora-
lity, it muſt be either right or wrong, juſt or un-

juſt.


_ 3 OF JUSTICE.


Juſt. It muſt tend to the benefit of the Wai,
either without intrenching upon, or with actual
3 advantage to the maſs of individuals. Either way

it benefits the whole, becauſe individuals are parts

of the whole. Therefore to do it is juſt, and to


forbear it is unjuſt. If juſtice have any meaning,


it is juſt that I ſhould contribute every thing in my


power to the. benefit of the whole.

_ Conſiderable light will probably be thrown up-
on our inveſtigation, if, quitting for the preſent
the political view, we examine juſtice merely as
it exiſts among individuals, Juſtice is a rule of


conduct originating in the connection of one perci-


pient being with another. A comprehenſive
maxim which has been laid down upon the ſub-
ject is, „that we ſhould love our neighbour as
ourſelves.” But this maxim, though poſſeſſing
conſiderable merit as a' popular principle, is not


modelled with the ſtrictneſs of Philoſophical *


curacy.

In G looſe and general view I and my neighbour
are both of us men; and of conſequence entitled
to equal attention. But in reality it is probable
that one of us is a being of more worth and impor-
tance than the other. A man is of more worth


than a beaſt; becauſe, being poſſeſſed of higher


faculties, "ay is capable of a more refined and ge-
nuine happineſs. In the ſame manner the illuſtri-


ous, archbiſhop of Cambray was of more worth
than his chambermaid, and there are few of us


that would heſitate to pronounce, if his palace


were in flames, and the life of only one of them


could be e, ie of the two f to be
preferred. |


But


.
* 3
N


OF/JUSTICE. I
But there is another ground of preference, be-
ſide the private conſideration of one of them being
farther removed from the ſtate of a mere animal.
We are not connected with one or two percipient
beings, but with a ſociety, a nation, and in ſome
ſenſe with the whole family of mankind. Of
conſequence that life ought to be preferred which


will be moſt conducive to the general good. In
faving the life of Fenelon, ſuppoſe at the moment
when he was conceiving the project of his immor-
tal Telemachus, I ſhould be promoting the bene-
fit of thouſands, who have been cured by the pe-


ruſal of it of ſome error, vice and conſequent un-


happineſs. Nay, my benefit would extend far-.
ther than this, for every individual thus cured has
become a better member of ſociety, and has con-


tributed in his turn to the happineſs, the informa-
tion and improvement of others.
Suppoſing I had been myſelf the chambermaid,


I ought to have choſen to die, rather than that
Fenelon ſhould have died. The life of Fenelon
was really preferable to that of the chambermaid,


But underſtanding is the faculty that perceives the


truth of this and fimilar propoſitions ; and juſtice


is the principle that regulates my conduct accord-
ingly. It would have been fr © in the chamber-
maid to have preferred the archbiſhop to herſelf.


To have done otherwiſe would have been a breach


of juſtice.


Suppoſing the chambermaid had been my wife,
my mother or my benefactor. This would not


alter the truth of the propoſition. The life of
| Fenelon would ſtill be more valuable than that of


| the e 1 * pure, unadulke-


rated


b * oy the S#-< 4 - . „ . 8 ZW. * = . JG 31
— yr A gary oor 5 — — 4 A — o 2 — * — 4 1 * a th ro 1 mu ek *
T Bans * 9 of . 5 a 0p Lees "OR > * at - 1 4 — — —
5 — - Ls 0 * * * 5 # 29 „ — 4 ut 8 * 8 5 *
3 by Fs 1 4 7. - N . x 0 £ —_— : .


x,
>
„ >


jus TICK
rated juſtice, would ſtill have preferred that which
was moſt valuable. Juſtice would have taught


me to fave the life of Fenelon at the expence of


the other. What magic is there in the pronoun
«© my, to overturn the deciſions of everlaſting


truth ? My wife or my mother may be a fool or a


proſtitute, malicious, lying or diſhoneſt. If they


be, of what conſequence is it that they are mine?


But my mother endured for me the pains of
child bearing, and nouriſhed me in the helpleſſ-
neſs of infancy. When ſhe firſt ſubjected her-
ſelf to the neceſſity of theſe cares, ſhe was proba-
bly influenced by no particular motives of benevo-
lence to her future offspring. Every voluntary
benefit however entitles the beſtower to ſome
kindneſs and xetribution. But why ſo? Becauſe


a a voluntary benefit is an evidence of benevolent


intention, that is, of virtue. It is the diſpoſition


of the mind, not the external action, that enti-


tles to reſpect. But the merit of this diſpoſition
is equal, whether the benefit was conferred upon
me or upon another. L and another man cannot


both be right in preferring our own individual be-


nefactor, for no man can be at the ſame time both


5 better and worſe than his neighbour. My bene -
factor ought to be eſteemed, not becauſe he be-


ſtowed a benefit upon me, but becauſe he be-
ſtowed it upon a human being. His deſert will


be in exact proportion to the degree, in which


that human being was worthy of the diſtinction
conferred. Thus every view of the ſubject brings


us back to the conſideration of my neighbour's
moral worth and his importance to the general
Weal, as the only ſtandard to determine the treat-


went


's.


O00" F US CE 79
ment to which he is entitled. Gratitude there-
fore, a * which has ſo often been the
theme of the moraliſt and the poet, is no part ei-
ther of juſtice or virtue. By gratitude I under-
ſtand a ſentiment, which would lead me to pre-
fer one man to another, from ſome other conſi-
deration than that of his ſuperior uſefulneſs or
worth: that is, which would make ſomething
true to me (for example this preferableneſs),
which cannot be true to another n and is not
true in itſelf *.

It may be objected, ** that my relation, my
companion, or my benefactor will of courſe in
many inſtances obtain an uncommon portion of
my regard: for, not being univerſally capable of
diſcriminating the comparative worth of different
men, I ſhall inevitably judge moſt favourably of
him, of whoſe virtues I have received the moſt
unqueſtionable proofs ; and thus ſhall be compel-
led to prefer the man of moral worth whom I
know, to another who may poſſeſs, unknown to
me, an eſſential ſuperiority. _

This compulſion however is founded onde in the
preſent imperfection of human nature. It may
ſerve as an apology for my error, but can never
turn error into truth. It will always remain

contrary to the ſtrict and inflexible deciſions of
Juſtice. The difficulty of conceiving this is
owing merely to our confounding the diſpoſition
from which an action is choſen, with the action
itſelf. The diſpoſition, that would prefer virtue


\


* This argument reſpecting gratitude is Nated with great clear-
neſs in an Eſſay on the Nature of True Virtue, by the Rev. Jona-
than Edwards. 12mo. Dilly.


7 *

{

ny

it *

3
; 0

* oF

4

A
# 4 A

=

4

*
F.

1 7
„
E
ud f

U 7

.

—_— - *
| 1 Gs -£
| -

-

*
=

_ ve
[5
1.3 8
| *
1
[ 4
1 *
—_
1 75
"4
' [2 g
=.
U 1 .
1
_
_
4 . 94
N F
1 |
2
j 3
1 t
1
Y 4 L LS
'F k 5
| j : *
I N
= 8
i | ,
ko T
14 7
25
1 ?
..
1
! :
gf f
—_—_—
$1 S4f *
4 -
. :
_ 4
DES
1
A 1
. 5
my
$i 1 4 *
. 4
1 : ,
| =
ns |
\ 13
1 þ %
_
+. 2
F* 2
_  -
=_
iz” #
4 .
.
. bs
3} k
=_
TY ? :
15 ?
7 2
1 1
1 1
1 { |
» 4
Mo 4
14 \


—


to vice and a greater * of virtue to a leſs, is


- undoubtedly a ſubject of approbation; the erro-


neous exerciſe of this diſpoſition by which a wron =
object 1s ſelected, if unavoidable, is to be deplor-
50 but can by no colouring and under no :
mination be converted into right vx. 5
It may in the ſecond place be objected, 5 that


a mutual commerce of benefits tends to increaſe
the mals of benevolent action, and that to increaſe


the maſs of benevolent action is to contribute to
the general good.” Indeed! Is the general good
promoted by falſehood, by treating a man of one
degree of worth, as if he had ten times that worth ?
or. as if he were in any degree different from what
he really is? Would not the moſt beneficial con-
e reſult from a different plan; from my


cConſtantly and carefully enquiring into the deſerts


of all thoſe with whom I am connected, and from
their being ſure, after a certain allowance for the
fallibility of human judgment, of being treated by
me exactly as they deſerved? Who can tell what
would be the effects of ſuch. a plan 4 conduct
univerſally adopted?

There ſeems to be more truth in the 3
derived chiefly from the unequal diſtribution of
property, in favour of my providing in ordinary
caſes for my wife and children, my brothers and
relations, before I provide for ſtrangers. As long
as providing for individuals belongs to individuals,


it ſeems as if there muſt be a certain diſtribution
of the claſs as ſuperintendence and ſupply


ordang it, that each man may


amon 5 the *
9 5 have


. . Shis: this dane more copiouſly treated in che following
chapter.


"= "RP 7 USTICE, 8; 38
have his claim and reſource. But this argument, if
admitted at all, is to be admitted with great cau-
tion. It belongs only to ordinary caſes; and
caſes ofa higher order or a more urgent neceſſity
will perpetually occur, in competition with which
theſe will be altogether impotent. We muſt be
ſeverely ſcrupulous in meaſuring out the quantity
of ſupply ; and, with reſpe& to money in particu-
lar, muſt remember how little is yet underſtood
of the true mode of employing it for the public
benefit. 1 55 55 |
\ Having conſidered the perſons with whom juſ-
tice is converſant, let us next enquire into the de-
gree in which we are obliged to conſult the #
of others. And here I ſay, that it is juſt that 1
ſhould do all the good in my power. Does any
perſon in diſtreſs apply to me for relief? It is my
duty to grant it, and I commit a breach of duty
in refuſing. If this principle be not of univerſal
application, it is becauſe, in conferring a benefit
upon an individual, I may in ſome inſtances in-
flict an injury of ſuperior magnitude upon myſelf
or ſociety. Now the ſame juſtice, that binds me
to any individual of my fellow men, binds me to
the whole. If, while I confer a benefit upon
one man, it appear, in ſtriking an equitable ba-
lance, that I am injuring the whole, my action
ceaſes to be right and becomes abſolutely wrong.
But how much am T bound to do for the general
weal, that is, for the benefit of the individuals of
whom the. whole is compoſed ? Every thing in my
power. What to the negle& of the means of my
own exiſtence ? No; for I am myſelf a part. of
the whole. Beſide, it will rarely happen but that

Vorl. . R the


— ——— —— ̃ —-— ——
— — — — — — —


o
a — —ͤ—U UU ꝛ— —
7 £ — —


—_— r
— FSR —
= -


_—_—


—— "
3 od ou —__ —_ 2


bh * W — RO - — — — * — — 8
— ———— ̃ — — — —
— — yw—— — —


— —ũ—6—ſ —
.


—
— —
5


—


—


—— — —


- — — 7
wh pe — — * — — —
Pen A. We 49 49 — — Ix, * — — — — ——ç— — — * _ — „ - - — — — "Is
—_ ' - — ＋— . —
— q — * — ——•—3' 0 0 - por ny at © A bac _— 3 -
- TT LE EY 9 wing ay — VOM — —— — — 90 » — pr: __ - wt 4 —— 3 2 3 —— tnrerb 9 344 > 4 - —
; . . | - > - —— - % : I q N p . 8 N * a C " "I , of 1 *
— — 2 — — me - — Fj O — 9k _ * 5 * — jp * * n * 3 0 N . i RS ad RG r WIE << cad ma an tho * = a * 5 2 W
4 * = 4 8 * 4 - Pad b * 93 I N Os * 5 8 * * — K
; PL : * 5 n * * * - » : & 4 N 7 * 5
N 6 EY 8 ; c F . i * * 5 33 A
=” . . * 5 +=
- Y 4 N F 7 * 4 - 2
2 4 ; * | . . - 21
. MY £ ' * 4
; > I 8 . a \ ov '-
S ? ** n E
; J * *
4 ;
* 4 .


—


—

„„ W
mo

+ +


—
—
—
ä
<


*


„ OF JUSTAHCE..


the: a of doing for. others every thing i in my |


power, will demand for its execution the preſer-
vation of my own exiſtence ; Or in other words,


it will rarely happen but that I can. do more good


in twenty years than in one. If the extraordina-
ry. caſe ſhould occur in which I can promote the


general good by my death, more than by my life,


juſtice requires that I ſhould be content to die.
In all other Eaſes, it is juſt that I ſhould be care-
ful to maintain my body and my mind in the ut-


moſt vigour, and in the beſt condition for ſer-


yice®, |
I Will ſuppoſe for Ar that i it is is right for


one matt to poſſeſs. a greater portion of property


than another, either as the fruit of his induſtry,
or the inheritance of his anceſtors. - Juſtice oblig-
es him to regard this property as a truſt, and calls


upon him maturely to conſider in what manner it


may beſt be employed for the increaſe of liberty,
knowledge and virtue. He has no right to diſ-
poſe of a ſhilling of it at the will of his caprice.


So far from being entitled to well earned applauſe


for having employed ſome ſcanty pittance in the
ſervice of philanthropy, he is in the eye of juſtice
a delinquent if he withhold any portion from that


ſervice. N lothing can be more incontrovertible.


Could that portion have been better or more wor-


thily employed? That it could is implied in the


very terms of the propoſition. Then it was juſt


it ſhould have been ſo employed. — In the ſame


manner as my property, I hold my perſon as a
truſt in behalf of mankind. I am bound to em-


# 4 * 3 a 4 L *. n > Bs
\ -


r


or :JUSMIER ©. i


ploy my talents, my underſtanding, my ſtrength
and my time for the production of the greateſt
quantity of general good. Such are the declara-
tions of juſtice, ſo great is 208 extent of my
duty | | |
But juſtice is reciprocal. If it be juſt that I
ſhould confer a benefit, it is juſt that another man
ſhould receive it, and, if I withhold from: him
that to which he is entitled, he may juſtly.com-
plain. My neighbour is in want of ten pounds
that I can ſpare. There is no law of political in-
ſtitution that has been made to reach this caſe, and
to transfer this property from me to him. But in
the eye of ſimple juſtice, unleſs it can be ſhewn
that the money can be more beneficially employ-
ed, his claim is as complete, as if he had my bond
in his poſſeſſion, or had ſupplied me with goods
to the amount *.
I 0 this it has ſometimes been anſwered, © that
there is more than one perſon, that ſtands in need
of the money I have to ſpare, and of conſequence
I mult be at liberty to beſtow it as I pleaſe. I an-
ſwer, if only one perſon offer himſelf to my know-
ledge or ſearch, to me there is but one. Thoſe
others that I cannot find belong to other rich men
to aſſiſt (rich men, I fay, for every man is rich,
who has more money than his juſt occaſions de-
mand), and not to me. If more than one perſon
offer, I am obliged to balance their fitneſs, and

conduct myſelf accordingly. It is ſcarcely poſſi-
ble to Tops en that two men ſhall be of exactly
; 8 #3 ü 4 equal


* A irie nee of theſe orien is iS ſketched 3 in Swift's
| Sermon on Mutual Subjection.


Y _ *
— LT Er —
* rr
— — — — — — —
2 . 5
* — -
* o - —
. — A a


5
—_ K — — — —— — — —
—— — 2 "> A — 7 - — 3
— — * — pul 7 - wm A Ca = , o — — —— — — — =
- — — _—_ -— — = =
- 2 - l — s "2


9 - - - -
— —— — ——


— C__—_—  -——_—
—— —


Tu *
— — — —— — — — — — — — — —
— — — 2 - _ * . — — IS — - —
- m — — - ay; — —


—
- — * — ; * * a — — — oy > ip
_ . Uo — — — — —
: » — — © — -
— — — « _ . — an = * Py o — ” — - _— — — 7 » ® 2 — — "6 Y *
— — _ —— * — — - — - — * — ws — mM ——— — — — aw as — - Wn
d — — — — : . - — — — — - ; = 1
\ : * * Aer” A NO 4 . a — * „* _ 4
Mn + 9 " RF * *
i . : * t- 5


. d A OI opo—_ wm ce Cr
— . Wt — —
35 _
** 7 F , OD


— — = — a te
4 — .


84 öster.


equal fitneſs, or that I ſhall be equally certain of


the fitneſs of the one as of the other.

It is therefore impoſſible for me to confer upon
any man a favour, I can only do him a right.
Whatever deviates from the law of juſtice, even I 1


will fy ppoſe in the too much done in favour of


ſome individual or ſome part of the general whole,
is ſo much ſubtracted from the general ſtock, is


ſo much of abſolute injuſtice.


The inference moſt clearly afforded by the pre-
ceding reaſonings, is the competence of juſtice as
a principle of deduction in all cafes of moral
enquiry. 'The reaſonings themſelves are rather
of the nature of illuſtration and example, and any
error that may be imputed to them in particulars,
will not invalidate the general concluſion, the pro-
priety of applying moral juſtice as a criterion in
the inveſtigation of political truth.

Society is nothing more than an aggregation of
individuals. Its claims and its duties mult be the
aggregate of their claims and duties, the one no
more precarious and arbitrary than the other.
What has the ſociety a right to require from me ?
The {queſtion is already anſwered: every thing
that it is my duty to do. Any thing more? Certain-
ly not. "Gan they change eternal truth, or ſub-
vert the nature of men and their actions? Can they
make it my duty to commit intemperance, to
maltreat or aſſaſſinate my neighbour ?—A
What is it that the ſociety is bound to do for its
members? Every thing that can contribute to


their welfare. But the nature of their welfare is


defined by the nature of mind. That will möſt
contribute to it, which enlarges the underſtanding,
ſu pplies


OF JUSTICE. 85
ſupplies incitements to virtue, fills us with « a
nerous conſciouſneſs of our independence, ahd
carefully removes whatever can impede our exer-
tions.

Should it be affirmed, that it is not in the
power of any political ſyſtem to ſecure to us-theſe
advantages, the concluſion I am drawing will
{till be incontrovertible. It is bound to contribute
every thing it is able to theſe purpoſes, and no
man was ever yet found hardy enough to affirm
that it could do nothing. Suppoſe its influence
in the utmoſt degree limited, there muſt be one
method approaching nearer than any other to the
deſired object, and that method ought to be uni-
verſally adopted. There is one thing that politi-
cal inſtitutions can aſſuredly do, they can avoid
poſitively counteracting the true intereſts of their
ſubjects. But all capricious rules and arbi
diſtinctions do poſitively counteract them. There
is ſcarcely any modification of ſociety but has in
it ſome degree of moral tendency. So far as it
produces neither miſchief nor benefit, it is good
for nothing. So far as it tends to the improve-


ment of tho community, it ought to be univer-
ally *


APPENDIX,


*


—


TREE, V==="= — 2 — — <I* Re .
— — 93 . —
== —— —— ——— —
CC 5
- a


- 2-8 "= EDT IE Jr I =
= *
7 F
-
*


o


ESI \ \ 1
— - _ = — .
r es 3 — =
\ =
— . Lo _ — — wo -
N . . — 5 — , - - — ;
— ä — * — x —
. — 2.59 „r n 2 | TT * b
, , * e 4 =
4 ”F * g 4 1 a * « P - * 2
4 y 2. 5 9 = \ a "4% W
* 4 « 8 7 . A _ = 9 „
, * wo | 4 s * +
. * * 7 » - E 7 5 SE "=
2 2 r "=
0 0 0 tg 4
* * =
, * ?
4
*
wi bs
g 2
# * _—_ I
i A
0 — g


3 9


.


8 1
8 HS
* *
*
=
= " 4 N
F % oo £7 7
4 | | b „ .
2 , L
U
La »
* ou, * , x 600
> rr ; £449 F ö 1
4 5 1 p t * a
by * on * —
© A +, 4 ! * * _ , L . . =” 2 ＋ 114 ;
: - | * **
rn A, .
ba = 1 * 5 5
N p
*
— - .
,
BE 4 6 " C3 * + £ * x l
"I, 0 - * 1
1 a : > N 1 2 5 1
2 4 * #
- - 4 1 4
, a ( } 8 3 4
* N — '.
* — oF b — 12 Fay ” }. | 2 > „
* * © Py : n *
; } A. 5 l 6 8 | *


11


22 x of Kt 2 Lo Bleape EY pain—2: mY |
| Feralknte.— Martyrdom confudered. 7 NGA?


*


„ * 6 te - 2 : 5 0 4 n


nt


44H 18 erbitte will pad to us the Wer
diſputed caſe of ſuicide. Have I a Tight under
any circumſtances to deſtroy myſelf in order to


45. "eſcape from pain or. diſgrace ?** Probably not.


e


It is perhaps impoſſible to imagine a fituation,
- thatſhall exclude the poſſibility of future life,” vi-
gour and uſefulneſs. The motive aſſi gned for eſ-
cape is eminently trivial, to avoid pain, which
is a ſmall inconvenience ; or difgrace, which is
an imaginary evil. The example of fortitude in
Wutz them, if chere were no d conſidera-
continuing to live.

66 Ts there then no caſe i in what ſuicide : is 4
virtue? What ſhall we think of the reaſoning of
Lycurgus, who, when he determined upon a
voluntary death, remarked, * that all the facul-
ties a rational being poſſeſſed were capable of a
moral ufe, and that, after having ſpent his life


in the ſervice of his country, a man ought, if


poſſihle, to render his death a ſource of additional
benefit! ?” This was the motive of the ſuicide of


Codrus,


'OF $UTCID-E. 5

Codrus, Leonidas and Decius. If the ſame mo-

tive prevailed in the much admired ſuicide of

Cato, if he were inſtigated by reaſons purely

benevolent, it / 18 impotlible' not to applaud his

intention, even if he were miſtaken in the ap-
plication. = *

The difficulty is to 1 in any inſtance whe-
ther the recourſe to a voluntary death can over-
balance the uſefulneſs I may exert in twenty or
thirty years of addit onal life. But ſurely it would

be precipitate to decide that there is no ſuch in-
ſtance. There is a proverb which affirms, « that
the blood of the martyrs is the ſeed of the church.
It is commonly, ſuppoſed that Junius Brutus did
right in putting his ſons to death in; the firſt year
of the Roman' republic, and that this action con-
tributed more than any other cauſe; to generate
that energy and virtue for which his country was
afterwards ſo eminently diſtinguiſhed. The death
of Cato produced an effect enen ſimilar to
this. It was dwelt on with admiration by all the
lovers of virtue under the ſubſequent tyrants of
Rome. It ſeemed. to be the lamp from which
they caught the ſacred flame. Who can tell how
much it has contributed to revive that flame in
after ages, when it ſeemed to "Habs been ſo Jong
extinct ?

Loet it be n nt all martyrs e 4 are
ſuicides by the very ſignification of the term.
They die for a teſtimony [ «ve» ]; that is, they
have a motive for dying. But motives reſpect


only our own. voluntaty: acts, nat the violence 58
e us by another. | |


; APPENDIX,


4 5 8 $5 7


APPENDIX; No. II.
OF DUELLING.


Motroes if Duilling: 1 1 5 Reven ge.—2. | Reputation
for courage. —Pallacy of this motive e
on 1 aa, ;


II T may be proper in this place to beſtow a mo-
ment's conſideration upon the trite, but very im-
portant caſe of duelling. A very ſhort reflection
will ſuffice to ſet it inits true light.

This deteſtable practice was originally invented
by barbarians for the gratification of revenge, It
was probably at that time thought a very happy
project for reconciling the odiouſneſs of many

with the gallantry of courage. s

Blut in this light it is now generally given up.
Men of the beſt underſtanding who lend it their
ſanction, are unwillingly induced to do ſo, and
engage in ſingle combat merely that their __
tion may ſuſtain no ſlander.
Which of theſe two actions is the trueſt teſt of
. the engaging in a practice which our
2 diſapproves, becauſe we cannot ſubmit

e conſequences of following that judgement;

or the doing what we believe to be right, and
chearfully encountering all the conſequences
| Hut may be annexed to the practice of E

| 2 Wi


3 8 8


OF DUVELLING | #g


With what patience can a man of virtue think of
cutting off the lite of a fellow mortal, or of put-
ting an abrupt cloſe:to all the generous * 009
he may himſelf conceive for the benefit of others,
merely becauſe he has not firmneſs enough to awe
impertinence and falſhood into ſilence? 110
BgBut the refuſing a duel is an ambiguous ac ac-
tion. Cowards may pretend principle to ſhelter
themſelves from a danger they dare not meet.

This 1s partly true and partly falſe. There are
few actions indeed that are not ambiguous, or
that with the ſame general outline may not pro-
ceed from different motives. But the manner of
doing them will ſufficiently ſhew the principle
from which they ſpring. -

He, that would break. through an i
received cuſtom becauſe he believes it to be wrong,
muſt no doubt arm himſelf with fortitude. The
point in which we chiefly fail, is in not accurately
underſtanding our own intentions, and taking
care beforehand to free ourſelves from any alloy
of weakneſs and error. He, who comes forward
with no other idea in his mind but that of recti-
tude, and who expreſſes, with the ſimplicity and
firmneſs which full conviction never fails to in-
ſpire, the views with which he is impreſſed, is
in no danger of being miſtaken for a coward.
If he heſitate, it is becauſe he has not an idea
perfectly clear of the ſentiment he intends to con-
vey. If he be in any degree embarraſſed, it is
becauſe he has not not a feeling ſufficiently gene-
rous and intrepid of the guilt of the action in
which * is preſſed to engage


* ? OF. DUEL LING:


If there be any meaning in courage, its firſt
„ ;ngredient muſt be the daring to ſpeak the truth
at all times, to all perſons, and in every. poſſible
ſituation. What is it but the want of courage
| that ſhould prevent me from ſaying, -** Sir, I
| - _. ought to refuſe your challenge. What I ought
I to do, that I dare do. Have I injured you? I
will readily and without compulſion repair my
injuſtice to the uttermoſt mite. Have you miſ-
conſtrued me? State to me the particulars, and
doubt not that what is true I will make appear
to be true. Thus far I will go. But, though 1
ſhould be branded for a coward by all mankind,
I will not repair to the ſcene of deliberate mur-
der. I will not do an act that I know to be fla-
gitious. I will exerciſe my judgment upon
every propoſition that comes before me; the dic-
tates of that judgment I will tyenkis and upon
them I will form my conduct. He that holds
this language with a countenance in uniſon with
his words, will never be ee 0 or mo
15 e P fear, :


7 R -S £44 £%. AB .
44 . : —— aq .
3 1 . « - o " 4 5 - J .


hos


s RE ien
« 4 »
*
k
- 7
5
» is. 4
— * HH 3 4 £44
—
*
*
14 :


of 4 . = 4% 5 * 4 _ 9. 0 ” 5 - 4 % ©
; > ö g 47 17 1
4 « „ p o
y - *
F I wr i. 44 7 p — A. 4+ * Wo - * — —
' : ©. 1 ; : 1 ?
34 4 & \ , = * Tb - Sx *
*
* * w
_ *
ry
3 bs of *
* — F # 3 - v7 1 » = 0
"I'S . * „ 10 4 JF
F * * * — % . Y 225 F bs
— p4 * : ** Gy :
. - -


A di eur Ales =0 eue and a0 ir-
rue. —Impropriety of this diſtinction.— Uniuerſa-
| ty of what is called practical virtue——inflanced
in robbery in religious fanaticiſm.—The quality
f an action diſtinft from "the diſpoſition" ĩvitſi
which it is performed —far ther difficulty.—=Mean-
ing of the term, Mn W TR Ow”
\ N .
Man Gi f wt


A is a enen 25 n magni»
tude as to the ſubject of the preceding chapter,
founded upon the difference which may exiſt be-
tween abſtract juſtice and my apprehenſions of
juſtice. When I do an act, wrong in itſelf, but
which as to all the materials of judging extant to
my u nderſtanding appears to be right, 3 18 my con-
duct virtuous or vicious?

Certain moraliſts have introduced a diſtinction
upon this head between abſolute and Practical
virtue. There is one ſpecies of virtue, they
fay, ** which riſes out of the nature of things and
is immutable, and another which riſes out of the
views extant to my underſtanding. . Thus for ex-
ample ſuppoſe, I ou ght to worſhip Jeſus Chriſt ;

| put, 8 been bred in the religion of Mahomet,

| I ought


. yo 1 * — "© k.
(ESO Ln * * N 4 Fol
>. 3 il 4 na»; * — F aw


LEY "A
* 5 4 *
2 * - 4 P t
* \ * 1 .
:
4 7
of * *
* „
R . . * 4
ef 4 " * 8 2 - * 0
* q + , l " * 2
4 * + a * - *
* 2 5 2 1 4 8 ” " p ** * F — 8 . & 4h i 4 af -
2 w — — 3, # AAR * N A G 21 8 1 1
2 - — — — . ü ——— - — — 2 — 2 D Sar yg — er rs p yo 2 ——————— — — — C 2 — 1 * , - 1 oe: 4 * Naar P 4 24S
— — — 3 * a mos — 4 {IC 4 2 by a 2 — . — 4 A
_— — - rats Ha 7 eg. Le kt Lo _— I _—=_ ; — = ary; * nes ning 2 * my — — — ” FP" Ee — 2 — — . .
— x = 2 8 & - de gf r 2 —— - = - 2
* — 5 * 7 — > 2 — N 0 * — a — * — == a - A 2 — — — * — 2 — 6 . — — — — — — =O —— . = — * — * - -
' 2 2 r r K — — cs hy; ne . 2 2 — — — — —
he, 1 A 2 E Tr 2 r — — . n A *
SV” i. 2 " 7 D 57 _— 8 Y : 1 N 45 8 - — py 1 . - - — — 4 pn 4 . = - —— A — — .
7 — a y Ss 2 = ST 7s N mA 4 * TS SIE = - * 7 q ke - A 1 T5 5 6s ag 8 £ | as "a 8 . *


— — — —
— —


/
—
n
2 * 2 5


——
——
<<


be ed td a
4 »»
—
—y—U—ö—ñ [———. Fe
n
„ AT a
N 4


— —
n


4 6 tad 4
— — nh nary
- —— — —
> Sw
0 * +


92, * OF DUTY.


J ought to adhere to that religion, as long as its
evidences ſhall appear to me concluſive. I am
impannelled upon a jury to try a man arraigned
for murder, and who is really innocent. Ab-
ſtractedly conſidered, I ought to acquit him. But
I am unacquainted with his innocence, and evi-
_ dence is adduced ſuch as to form the ſtrongeſt
preſumption of his guilt. Demonſtratiqn in ſuch
caſes is not to be attained ; I am obliged in every
concern of human life to act upon preſumption ;
I ought therefore to convict him. 1
It may be doubted however whether any good
purpoſe is likely to be anſwered by employin
the terms of abſtract ſcience in this verſatile 0
uncertain manner. Morality is, if any thing can
be, fixed and immutable; and there muſt ſurely
be ſome ſtrange deception that ſhould induce us
to give to an action eternally and unchangeably
wrong, the epithets of rectitude, duty and virtue.
Nor have theſe moraliſts been thoroughly aware
to what extent this admiſſion would carry them.
The human mind is incredibly ſubtle in inventing
an apology for that to which its inclination leads.
Nothing is ſo rare as pure and unmingled hypocri-
ſy. There is no action of our lives which we
were not ready at the time of adopting it to juſti-
fy, unleſs ſo far as we were prevented by mere in-
dolence and unconcern. There is ſcarcely any
juſtification which we endeavour to paſs upon
others, which we do not with tolerable ſucceſs
paſs upon ourſelves. The diſtinction therefore
which is here ſet up would go near to prove that
every action of every human being is entitled to
the appellation of virtuous. 2 R
e There


or DV N


There is perhaps no man that cannot recplle&
the time when he ſecretly called in queſtion the
arbitrary diviſion of property eſtabliſhed in human
ſociety, and felt inclined to appropriate to his uſe
any thing the poſſeſſion of which appeared to him
defirable. It is probably in ſome ſuch way that
men are uſually influenced in the perpetration of
robbery. They perſuade themſelves of the com-
parative inutility of the property to its preſent
poſſeſſor, and the ineſtimable advantage that
would attend it in their hands. They believe that
the transfer ought to be made. It is of no conſe-
quence that they are not conſiſtent in theſe views,
that the impreſſions of education ſpeedily recur
to their minds, and that in a ſeaſon of adverſity
they readily confeſs the wickedneſs of their pro-
ceeding. It is not leſs true that they did what at
the moment they thought to be right.


But there is another conſideration that ſeem


ſtill more deciſive of the ſubject before us. The
worſt actions, the moſt contrary to abſtract juſtice
and utility, have frequently been done from the


moſt conſcientious motives. Clement, Ravaillac,


Damiens and Gerard had their minds deeply pe-
netrated with anxiety for the eternal welfare of
mankind. For theſe objects they ſacrificed their
eaſe, and chearfully expoſed themſelves to tor-
tures and death. It was benevolence probably
that contributed to light the fires of Smithfield,
and point the daggers of Saint Bartholomew. The
inventors of the Gun-powder Treaſon were in
general men remarkable for the ſanctity of their
lives and the ſeverity of their manners. It is
probable indeed, that ſome ambitious views, and
{ome ſentiments of hatred and abhorrence mixed
| | 2 with


——— —_ —
—


— —


4. „ 3 — — 2 0 - wad & <-.\huw aww —os - . =
3 — RR RY IE rr 2 y L — :
? — — — = 3 — — SS
- * 3 72 6 - — e 1 — * uh * '
2 * 1, 7 ; 1. : p 4 EE IE n= _ £ +,
v . 1 we EET ST] at ePrints


7 * * hats. * 1 1
— — — _ — — ck es — 2
.
5 its 2 —
9 — OF
73 — 17 * 1 Nr y \ 6


1
1
1
*
3
\f
*
' -
"
4
{HY
1
4


rr rr — — —
* * MI pan tas bh : 2 *
* F * 5 1 - **
x : 5 J
N =


34 : or DUTY.


with the bene e and! integrity of 16 per-
ſons! It is probable that no wrong action was


- ever: committed from views entirely pure. But
the deception they put upon 'themſelves might


nevertheleſs be complete: At all events their


opinions upon the ſubject could not alter the real


nature of the action.

The true ſolution of the queſtion lies 3 in "Fig
ing, that the diſpoſition with which an action is
adopted is one thing, and the action itſelf another.


A right action may be done from a wrong diſpo-


fition ; in that caſe we approve the action, but
condemn the actor. A wron g action may be
done from a right diſpoſition ; in that caſe we
condemn the action, but approve the actor. If


the diſpoſition by which a man is governed have


a ſyſtematical tendency to the benefit of his ſpe-


| cies, he cannot fail to obtain our eſteem, how-


ever miſtaken he may be in his conduct.
But what ſhall we fay to the duty of a man
under theſe circumſtances? Calvin, we will ſup-


poſe, was clearly and conſcientiouſly perſuaded
that he ought to burn Servetus. Ought he to


have burned him or not? If he burned him,
he did an action deteſtable in its own nature; if
he refrained, he acted in oppoſition to the beſt
judgment of his own underſtanding as to a point
of moral obligation.” It is abſurd however to


ſay, that it was in any ſenſe his duty to burn him.


The moſt that can be admitted is, that his diſpo-
fition was virtuous, and that in the circumſtan-
ces in which he was placed an action greatly to be


deplored flowed from that Vs ar Ke invinci-
| =_ neceſſity.


Shall


0 F vv. 7
Shall we  fay then that it was the duty of Cal-
vin, who did not underſtand the principles of to-


leration, to act upon a truth of which he was ig-
norant? Suppoſe that a perſon is to be tried at


Vork next week for murder, and that my evi-


dence would acquit him. Shall we ſay that it
was my duty to go to York, though I knew no-


thing of the matter ? upon the ſame principles


we might affirm that it is my duty to go from
London to York in half an hour, as the trial will
come on within that time; the impoſſibility not
being more real in one caſe than in the other.
Upon the ſame principles we might affirm, that it
is my duty to be impeccable, omniſcient and al-
mighty.

Duty is a term the uſe of which ſeems to be
to, deſcribe the mode in which any being may beſt
be employed for the general good. It is limit-
ed in its extent by the extent of the capacity of
that being. Now capacity varies in its idea in
proportion as we vary our view of the ſubject to
which it belongs. What I am capable of, if you
conſider me merely as a man, is one thing;
what J am capable of as a man of a deformed fi-


gure, of weak underſtanding, of ſuperſtitious pre-


judices, or as the caſe may happen, is another.
So much cannot be expected of me under theſe
diſadvantages, as if they were abſent. But, if
this be the true definition of duty, it is abſurd
to ſuppoſe in any caſe that an action injurious to
the general welfare can be claſſed in the rank of
duties.

To apply thoſe obſervations to the caſes that
have been ſtated. Ignorance, ſo far as it goes,


e y annihilates capacity. As I was unin-


formed :


I
*
K.
9 *
_- D
** I »s 1
—  — —
x rE— ——ů =
- * 2


1 *
. - a *
* * 7
—— FIC COPE —— — —k ——


_
—— — ——K— : 2—Ü—


k |

:

:
||
1
1
}


Ka . — .
—— — —— <i> eee


n


—
—
———————— I §— — —̃ —


F ˙! Gr -—— SE > Sa
” » fan > PAY ig A St. % fo


—
. 5 - 2 — — —j—34ꝙß œ — 4
8 —— — _ -
R —


© es ** . 8
rr


—


—— — m—
—


— —— — voy = — wm — Sn — — _
rere. do HEY Den 4 A WL ws rd ITS. on — * GO I Fs — — —
? 4 7 : SE" of + $ Bs, I, - — * fy -E- d _ -
* — N 4 2 * » — — , sf * 1 * * 8
— & * 4 *
9 5 —


. a 2 . n . enn FR
= * > ine n Fn 3 > {A == 6 ; ,
1 A


— as, a
pants tire re
wy - ns . 8 .


— a, . * — 4
r ee
* 7 * Wy { * of n 4 Y * as” + an

* 5 '. "ef 4 J * «
*%y ;


rr . . ergy ror ͤ—ͤ—ͤ—ʃ


— * 3 wy


—


So — ns


— ow


0437 > fe) Gent 4


- I —
Oo AG GAO rand es |
1 IS "OE * * J

— &


_ GI , _— j a me N @ "* * * 3s 2 1 "
n "+ 24 WR c * CE Leen aa DE Bade ee Ra yo NA *
» We P  CA 7" 1: 1 . n N ö 3
* * 5 i y - *
2 . e 8 *
A * + * 4 . - 4
* **
*
f ,
4 .
Is:
5 —


| el of the tial at You! 1 could not be i in-
fluenced by any conſideration reſpecting it. But
it is abſurd to ſay that it was my duty to neglect a
motive with which I was unacquainted. If you
alledge, that Calvin was ignorant of the prin-
ciples of toleration, and had no proper opportu-
nity to learn them, it follows that in burning
Servetus he did not violate his duty, but it does
not follow that it was his duty to burn him.
Upon the ſuppoſition here ſtated duty is filent.
Calvin was unacquainted with the principles of
juſtice, and therefore could not practiſe them.
The duty of no man can exceed his capacity ; but
then neither can in any caſe an act of injuſtice be
of the nature of duty. 5
There are certain inferences that flow from this
view of the ſubject, which it may be proper to
mention. Nothing is more common than for in-
dividuals and ſocieties of men to alledge that they
have acted to the beſt of their judgment, that
they have done their duty, and therefore that
their conduct, even ſhould it prove to be miſtaken,
is nevertheleſs virtuous. This appears to be an
error. An action, though done with the beſt in-
tention in the world, may have nothing in it of
the nature of virtue. In reality the moſt eſſen-
tial part of virtue conſiſts in the inceſſantly ſeek-
ing to inform ourſelves more accurately upon the
ſubject of utility and right. Whoever is greatly
miſinformed reſpeCting g them, 1s indebted for his
error to a defect in his philanthropy and zeal.
Secondly, ſince abſolute virtue may be out of
the power of a human being, it becomes us in.
the mean time to lay the greateſt ſtreſs upon a
virtuous diſpoſition, which is not attended with


the


*


the ſame cis guity. 55 virtuous i is of
the utmoſt conſequence , ſince it will in the ma-
Jority of inſtances be productive of virtuous ac- -
tions; ſince it tends, in exact proportion to the
quantity of virtue, to increaſe our diſcernment
and improve our underſtanding ; and ſince, if it
were univerſally propagated, it would immedi-
ately lead to the great end of virtuous actions, the
pureſt and moſt exquiſite happineſs of intelligent
beings. But a virtuous diſpoſition is principally
generated by the uncontrolled exerciſe of private
judgment, and the rigid conformity of every man,
to the eaten of his conſcience.


C0; AP.
OF THE OPT OF MANKIND.


Phyfica equality —Objeetin pang =—Afrad
equality.— How limited. Province of Fan |


juſlice.


TEE equality of mankind is either phyſical or
moral. Their phyſical Pry may be conſider-
ed either as it relates to the ſtrength of the body
or the faculties of the min FG
This part of the ſubject has been expoſed to
cavil and objection. It has been faid, that the
Vor. I. H reverſe


%


* *


9


BY


or THE EQUALITY


reverſe of this equality is the reſult of our expe-


_  rience. Among the individuals of our ſpecies

we actually find that there are not two ahke. One
man is ſtrong and another weak. One man is
wiſe and another fooliſh. All that exiſts in the


world of the inequality of conditions is to be
traced to this as their ſource. The ſtrong man


poſſeſſes power to ſubdue, and the weak ſtands
in need of an ally to protect. The conſequence
is inevitable: the equality of conditions is a chi-
merical aſſumption, neither poſſible to be reduced
into practice, nor deſirable if it could be ſo re-
duced.” eee 20


Upon this ſtatement two obſervations are to be


made. Firſt, this inequality was in its origin in-
finitely leſs than it is at preſent. In the unculti-


vated ſtate of man diſeaſes, effeminacy and luxu-
ry were little known, and of conſequence the


ſtrength of every one much more nearly * |
n


proached to- the ſtrength of his neighbour. Ir
the uncultivated ſtate of man the underſtandings


of all were limited, their wants, their ideas and
their views nearly upon a level. It was to be ex-
pected that in their firſt departure from this ſtate


great irregularities would introduce themſelves ;
and it is the object of ſubſequent wiſdom and im-
provement to mitigate theſe irregularities:
Secondly, notwithſtanding the incroachments
that have been made upon the equality of man-
kind, a great and ſubſtantial equality remains.
There is no ſuch difparity among the human race
nas to enable one man to hold ſeveral other men
in ſubjection, except ſo far as they are willing to
be ſubject. All government is founded in opi-


i
1 88 1 A. a


2 =
&


OF. MANKIND.
nion. Men at preſent live under any particular


form, becauſe they conceive it their intereſt to do


ſo. One part indeed of a community or empire
may be held in ſubjection by force; but this can-
not be the perſonal force of their deſpot; it muſt
be the force of another part of the community,
who are of opinion that it is their intereſt to ſup-
port his authority. Deſtroy this opinion, and the
fabric which is built upon it falls to the ground.
It follows therefore that all men are effentially in-
dependent.—So much for the phyſical equality.
The moral equality is ſtill leſs open to reaſona-
ble exception. By moral equality I underſtand
the propriety of applying one unalterable rule of
juſtice to every caſe that may ariſe. This can-
not be queſtioned but upon arguments that would
fubvert the very nature of virtue. Equality,
it has been affirmed, © will always be an unintel-
ligible fiction, fo long as the capacities of men
ſhall be unequal, and their pretended claims have
neither guarantee nor ſanction by which they can
be inforced x. But ſurely juſtice is ſufficiently
intelligible in its own nature, abſtracted from the
conſideration whether it be or be not reduced in-
to practice. Juſtice has relation to beings ehdow-
ed with perception, and capable of pleaſure and
pain. Now it immediately reſults from the na-
ture of ſuch beings, independently of any arbi-
trary conſtitution, that pleaſure is agreeable and
pain odious, pleaſure to be deſired and pain to be


| 5

* On a dit—que nous avions tous les mimei droits. Pig.
nore ce que ceft que les memes droits, ou il y a oy de talens
en de force, & nulle garrantie, nulle ſanction. Raynal, Revo-
lution a Amerique, p. 34. |


H 2 obviated.


2

E
CSS.
W *_—_


10 fr THE EQUALITY


obviated. It is therefore juſt and reaſonable that
ſuch beings ſhould contribute, ſo far as it lies in
their power, to the pleaſure and benefit of each


other. Among pleaſures ſome are more exqui-
fite, more unalloyed and leſs precarious than


others. It is juſt that theſe ſhould be preferred.
From hes ſimple principles we may deduce


the moral equality of mankind. We are par-
takers of a common nature, and the ſame cauſes


that contribute to the benefit of one contribute


to the benefit of another. Our ſenſes and facul-
ties are of the ſame denomination. - Our plea-


ſures and pains will therefore be the ſame. We


are all of us endowed with reaſon, able to com-


pare, to judge and to infer. The improvement


therefore which is to be defired for the one is to


be deſired for the other. We ſhall be provident
for ourſelves and uſeful to each other, in propor-


tion as we riſe above the atmoſphere of prejudice.


The ſame independence, the ſame freedom from
any ſuch reſtraint, as ſhould prevent us from giv-
ing the reins to our own underſtanding, or from


_ uttering upon all occaſions whatever we think to
be true, will conduce to the improvement of all.


There are certain opportunities and a certain fitu-
ation moſt advantageous to. every human being,
and it is juſt that theſe ſhould be communicated


to all, 5 meal at leaſt as the en en


will permit. |
There is indeed one ſo FEA of moral nin.


ty parallel to the phyſical inequality that has been
already deſcribed. The treatment to which men


are entitles 1 is to be meaſured by their merits and


their
Th


A FR” Ser n b >


OF MANEIND. 101
their virtues; That country would not be the
ſeat of wiſdom and reaſon, where the bene factor
of his ſpecies was conſidered in the ſame point
of view as their enemy. But in reality this diſ-
tinction, ſo far from being adverſe to equality in

any tenable ſenſe, is friendly to it, and is accord-
ingly known by the appellation of equity, a term
derived from the ſame origin. Though in ſome
ſenſe an exception, it tends to the ſame purpoſe
to which the principle itſelf is indebted for its
value. It is calculated to infuſe into every bo-
ſom an emulation of excellence. The thing
really to be defired is the removing as much as
poſſible arbitrary diſtinctions, and leaving to ta-
lents and virtue the field of exertion unimpaired.
We ſhould endeavour to afford to all the ſame
opportunities and the fame encouragement,. and


to render juſtice the common intereſt and
choice N


| 5 CHAP.


a


peculiarly unfortunate, if the advocates on. one


a


2 £4 WR)


* Ka 0 i
* 8 \ d


RIGHTS. OF MAN.


Nie queſtion flated. —F oundation of feciety aus |


pofite rights impoſſible —Concluſion from theſe
premiſes. — Diſcretion confidered. — Rights of
9 5 —Immoral conſequences of the dactrine of
rights. —Rights of communities. —Objetttons : 1.
The right of mutual aid. —Explanation.—Ori- |
gin of the term, right.—2. Rights of private
Judgment and of the preſs.- 3 Rea
fons of this limitation upon the functions of the
community : 1. The inutility of attempting re-
ftramt,—2. Its * * O. 8


fon.


TnERE is no ſubject that has been diſcuſſed
with more eagerneſs and pertinacity than the


rights of man. Has he any rights, or has he


none? Much may plauſibly be alledged on both


ſides of this queſtion; and in the concluſion thoſe


reaſoners appear to expreſs themſelves with the
greateſt accuracy who embrace the negative.
There is nothing that has been of greater diſſer-
vice to the cauſe of truth, than the haſty and un-
guarded manner in which its advocates have ſome-
times defended it: and it will be admitted to be


ſide


RIGHTS OF MAN 1003


tide of this queſtion ſhould be found to have the
oreateſt quantity of truth, while their adverſaries
{cy expreſſed themſelves in a manner more con-
ſonant to reaſon and the nature of things. Where
the queſtion has been ſo extremely darkened by
an ambiguous uſe of terms, it may at any rate be
deſirable to try, whether, by a patient and ſevere
inveſtigation of the firſt principles of political
ſociety, it may be placed i in a light conſiderably
different from the views of both parties
Political ſociety, as has already been obſerved,
is founded in the pr 18 wag of morality and juf-
tice. It is impoſſible tor intellectual A. to
be brought into coalition and intercourſe, with-
out a certain mode of conduct, adapted to their
nature and connection, a I becoming a
duty incumbent on the parties concerned. Men
would never have affociated, if they had not ima-
gined that in conſequence of that Aeta they
would mutually conduce to the advantage and
happineſs of each other. This is the A, pur-
poſe, the genuine baſis of their intercourſe ; and,
as far as this purpoſe is anſwered, ſo far does ſo-
ciety anſwer the end of its inſtitution.
There is only one poſtulate more, that is ne-
ceflary to bring us to a concluſive mode of rea-
ſoning upon this ſubject. Whatever is meant by
the term right, for it will preſently appear that
the ſenſe of the term itſelf has never been clear-
ly underſtood, there can neither be oppoſite rights,
nor rights and duties hoftile to 8 other. The
rights of one man cannot claſh with or be de-
ſtructive of the ri ghts of another ; for this, in-
a of e hn ſubject an important branch


of


A TE EE n= — A
25 - ; a RS — 2 8


—


* - - $9 4 —

— . A EET — ng

: _

D — — — 01909 P97 nr IE pneT r
8


— x — u,. — 5 —
— — _ — — — — — ——


;
f
j
1
1
4
to *
.
3
1
94 Pp
=o
4
1
1 1
ry 4
1
141
1.8%
17 1
1 :
3
1
10
1
4 | 4
18
if
l C > *
BY -.
1
1's
:
=.
1
"1
8


—


——— —̃ — -


——
— RELAY  "fþ
« tte *


e
. 2
9 *
wy


.
2˙


94 RIGHTS OF MAN.
of truth and morality, as the 8 of the


rights of man certainly underſtand it to be,
would be to reduce it to a heap of unintelligible


Jargon and inconſiſtency. If one man have a right


to be free, another man cannot have a right to
make him a ſlave; if one man have a right to
inflict chaſtiſement upon me, I cannot have a
right to withdraw myſelf from chaſtiſement ; if
my neighbour have a right to a ſum of money in
my poſſeſſion, I cannot have a right to retain it
in my pocket.—It cannot be leſs incontrover-
tible, 5 t Ihave no right to omit what my duty -
preſcribes.

From hence it inevitably follows that men have


no rights. By right, as the word is employed


in this ſubject, has always been underſtood diſ-
cretion, that is, a full and complete power of
either doing a thing or omitting it, without the
perſon's becoming liable to animadverſion or cen-
fure from another, that is, in other words, with-
out his incurring any degree of turpitude or guilt.
Now in this ſenſe I affirm that man has no rights,
no diſcretionary power whatever.
It is commonly faid, that a man has a right


to the diſpoſal of his fortune, a right to the em-


ployment of his time, a right to the uncontrolled
choice of his profeſſion or purſuits.” But this


can never be conſiſtently affirmed till it can be


ſhewn that he has no duties, preſcribing and li-
miting his mode of proceeding in all theſe reſ-
pects. My neighbour has juſt as much right to
put an end to my exiſtence with dagger or poiſon,
as to deny me that pecuniary aſſiſtance without


which I muſt ſtarve, or as to deny me that aſſiſ-
tance


RIGHTS OF MAN. ©. tos


tance without which my intellectual attainments


or my moral exertions will be materially injured.
He has juſt as much right to amuſe himſelf with
burning my houſe or torturing my children upon
the rack, as to ſhut himſelf up in a cell careleſs
about his fellow men, and to hide © his talent in
a napkin.” | ENTS
If men have any rights, any diſcretionary pow-
ers, they muſt be in things of total indifference,
as whether I fit on the right or on the left fide of
my fire, or dine on beef to-day or to-morrow.
Even theſe rights are much fewer than we are
apt to imagine, ſince before they can be com-
pletely eſtabliſhed, it muſt be proved that my
choice on one fide or the other can in no poſſible
way contribute to the benefit or injury of myſelf
or of any other perſon in the world. Thoſe muſt
indeed be rights well worth the contending for,
the very eſſence of which conſiſts in their abſo-
lute nugatorineſs and inutility.

In reality nothing can appear more wonderful
to a careful enquirer, than that two ideas ſo in-
compatible as man and rights ſhould ever have
been aſſociated together. Certain it is, that one
of them muſt be utterly excluſive and annihilato-
ry of the other. Before we aſcribe rights to man,
we muſt conceive of him as a being endowed
with intelle&, and capable of diſcerning the dif-
ferences and tendencies of things. But a being
endowed with intelle&, and capable of diſcern-
ing the differences and tendencies of things, in-
ſtantly becomes a moral being, and has duties
incumbent on him to diſcharge ; and duties and
; | 4 rights.


x
— 9 —
* 7 . 8 2
n ' —— ”
.. * 1 8 —— — —_—_— — hea -


, 9
x
U ** ———_—


. A ˙ AA IE SS


a 7?
—— ee .iu‚—
— nt


oh * *
» 2
.


16, RIGHTS OF MAN.


rights, as has already been ſhewn, are abſolutely
excluſive of each other.

It has been affirmed by the zealous advocates
* of liberty, that princes and magiſtrates have no
| | 55 rights; and no poſition can be more incontro-
1

.


vertible. There is no ſituation of their lives that
has not its correſpondent duties. There is no
power intruſted to them that they are not bound
; to exerciſe excluſively for the public good. It
3 is ſtrange that perſons adopting this principle
3 did not go a ſtep farther, and perceive that the
ſame reſtrictions were applicable to ſubjects and
citizens. = —
Nor is the fallacy of this language more con-
| ſpicuous than its immoral tendency. To this in-
S accurate and unjuſt uſe of the term right we owe
it, that the miſer, who accumulates to no end
that which diffuſed would have conduced to the
welfare of thouſands, that the luxurious man,
who wallows in indulgence and ſees numerous
families around him pining in beggary, never fail
to tell us of their rights, and to ſilenceanimadver-
ſion and quiet the cenſure of their own, mind by
reminding us, that they came fairly into poſſeſ-
ſion of their wealth, that they owe no debts, and
that of conſequence no man has authority to en-
Auire into their private manner of diſpoſing of that
Which is their own.” A great majority of man-
kind are conſcious that they ſtand in need of this
ſort of defence, and are therefore very ready to
combine againſt the inſolent intruder, who ven-
tures to enquire into things that do not concern
him.“ They forget, that the wiſe man and the
fy honeſt


EE EE TT
PS I» * *
*


+
— — — — = 5 = *
*


3 * — 77 2 "7 * * ** 8


— 5 —
cb —— —_y_y——

— ——— ——— ——

- —_ up q—_—__ *


— SS
— — TG ome > wer


—
—


5 —— er


— ʒʒ
—


— —
2


apt ET rs


— - — 9 ——— —— — ——
— "ney Wien. = - —


— — > _——_— — — r r
: 2 1 S a 4 . - 7 7
4 4 ;


—


ö
1
ö


RIGHTS OF MAN. 197


honeſt man, the friend of his country and his
kind, is concerned for every thing by which they
may be affected, and carries about with him a
diploma, conſtituting him inquiſitor general of

the moral conduct of his neighbours, with a du-
ty annexed to recal them to virtue, by every leſ-
ſon that truth can enable him to read, and every
puniſhment that plain ſpeaking is competent to
inflict.

It is ſcarcely neceſſary to add, that, if indivi-
duals have no rights, neither has ſociety, which
poſſeſſes nothing but what individuals have
brought into a common ſtock. The abſurdity of
the common opinion, as applied to this ſubject,
is ſtill more glaring, if poſſible, than in the view
in which we have already conſidered it. Accord-


ing to the uſual ſentiment every club aſſembling


for any civil purpoſe, every congregation of reli-
gioniſts aſſembling for the worſhip of God, has a

| rieht to eſtabliſh any proviſions or ceremonies,
no matter how ridiculous or deteſtable, provided
- they do not interfere with the freedom of others.
Reaſon lies proſtrate under their feet. They have
a right to trample upon and inſult her as they
pleaſe. It is in the ſame ſpirit we have been told
that every nation has a right to chooſe its form
of government. A moſt acute, original and in-
eſtimable author was probably miſled by the vul-
gar phraſeology on this ſubject, when he aſſerted,
— « at a time when neither the people of
France nor the national aſſembly were troubling
themſelves about the affairs of England or the
Engliſh. parlament Mr. Burke's conduct was
unpardonable


-
1
6
1


= RIGHTS OF MAN.


unpardonable 3 in commencing an | unprovoked at-
tack upon them *.”

There are various objections that ſuggeſt them-
ſelves to the theory which ſubverts the rights of
men ; and if the theory be true, they will proba-
bly appear in the reſult to be fo far from really
hoſtile to it, as to be found more fairly deducible
from and conſiſtent with its principles, than with
any of thoſe with which they have inadvertently


been connected.


In the firſt place it has ſometimes been alledged,
and ſeems to reſult from the reaſonings already ad-
duced under the head of juſtice, that . men have
a right to the aſſiſtance and co-operation of their
fellows in every honeſt purſuit.” But, when we
aſſert this propoſition, we mean ſomethin
the word right exceedingly different from rn ed Is
commonly underſtood by the term. We do not
underſtand ſomething diſcretionary, which, if a]
voluntarily fulfilled, cannot be conſidered as a


matter of claim. On the contrary every ching


adduced upon that occaſion was calculated to ſhew
that it was a matter of ſtrict claim; and perhaps
ſomething would be gained with reſpect to per-


1 e if we rather choſe to diſtinguiſh it by


at appellation, than by a name ſo much abuſed,
and ſo ambiguous, in its upphcation, ' as the term
right. |
The true origin af this latter term is relative to
the preſent ſtate of political ; government, in which
many of thoſe actions which moral duty moſt -
ſtrictly enjoins us are in no degree brought within


the ſphere of legiſlative ſanction. Men uninflu-


enced
* Rights of Man, page 1.


RIGHTS OF MAN. 109
enced by comprehenſive principles. of juſtice;
commit every ſpecies of intemperance, are ſelfiſh,
hard-hearted, licentious and cruel, and maintain
their right to all theſe caprices, becauſe the laws
of their country are ſilent with regard to them.
Philoſophers and political enquirers have too
frequently adopted the ſame principles with
a. certain degree of accommodation; though in
fact men have no more right to theſe erroneous
propenſities in their moſt qualified ſenſe, than
they had to them originally in all their extrava-
gance. It is true that, under the forms of ſocie-
ty now exiſting in the world, intemperance and
the caprices of perſonal intercourſe too frequently
eſcape without animadverſion. But in a, more
perfect form, though they may not fall under the

cogniſance of law, the offender will probably be
ſo unequivocally reminded by the ſincerity of his
neighbours of the error he has committed, as to
be in no danger of running away with the opinion
that he had a right to commit it.
A ſecond and more important objection to the
doctrine I am maintaining is derived from the
rights as they are called of private judgment, and
the liberty of the preſs. But it may eafily be
ſhewn, that theſe, no more than the articles al-
ready mentioned, are rights of diſcretion. If
they were, they would prove, that a man 'was
ſtrictly juſtifiable in publiſhing what he believed
to be pernicious or falſe, and that it was a matter
of perfect moral indifference whether he conform-
ed to the religious rites of Confucius, of Maho-
met, or of Chriſt. The political freedom of
conſcience and of the preſs, ſo far from being as
if


mo
. —
1 "> ge
*


0 rr r * * * — we


2 4 2 20 . F * * L 5
4 a RS.
:


33


td RIGHTS OF MAN.

it is commonly: ſuppoſed an extenſion, 1s a new
caſe of the limitation of tights and diſcretion.
Canſcience and the preſs ought to be unreſtrained,
not becauſe men have a right to deviate from the
exact line that duty preſcribes, but becauſe ſoci-
ety, the aggregate of individuals, has no right


to aſſume the prerogative of an infallible judge,


and to undertake authoritatively to preſcribe to its
members in matters of pure ſpeculation.”
One obvious reaſon againſt this aſſumption on
the part of the ſociety is the impoſſibility by any
compulfatory method of bringing men to uniformity

opinion. The judgment we form upon topics
of general truth, is or is imagined to be founded
upon evidence : and, however it may be ſoothed
by gentle applications to the betraying its impar-
tiality, it is apt to repel with no little pertinacity
whatever comes under the form of compulſion.
erſecution cannot perſuade the underſtanding,
even when it fabdues our reſolution. It may make
us hypocrites; but cannot make us converts.
The government therefore, which is anxious
above all things to imbue its ſubjects with inte-


| grity and virtue, will be the fartheſt in the world


om diſcouraging them in the explicit avowal of


their ſentiments. \


Bat there is another reaſon of a higher order.
Man 1s not, as has been already ſhewn, a perfect


being, but perfectible. No government, that has


yet exiſted, or is likely preſently to exiſt upon the
face of the earth, is faultleſs. No government
ought therefore pertinaciouſly to reſiſt the change
of its own inſtitutions ; and ſtill leſs ought it to
ſet up a ſtandard upon the various topics of hu-

man


— K p — *
7 .


RIGHTS OF. MAN. III


man ſpeculation, to reſtrain the excurſions of an
inventive mind. It is only by giving a free ſcope
to theſe excurſions, that ſcience, philoſophy and
morals have arrived at their preſent degree of
perfection, or are capable of going on to that ſtill
greater perfection, in compariſon of which all

that has been already done will perhaps appear
childiſh. Bnt a proceeding, abſolutely neceſſary
for the purpoſe of exciting the mind to theſe
falutary excurſions, and fill more neceſſary in or-
der to give them their proper operation, conſiſts
in the unreſtrained communication of men's
thoughts and diſcoveries to each other. If eve
man have to begin again at the point from which
his neighbour ſet out, the labour will be endleſs,
and the progreſs in an unvarying circle. There
is nothing that more eminently contributes to in-
tellectual energy, than for every man to be habi-
tuated to follow without alarm the train ofhis ſpe-
culations, and to utter without fear the concluſi-
ons that have ſuggeſted themſelves to him.—
But does all this imply that men have a right to
act any thing but virtue, and to utter any thing
but truth ? Certainly not. It implies indeed that
there are points with which ſociety has no right

Co interfere, not that diſcretion and caprice are

more free, or duty leſs ſtrict upon theſe points,
than upon any others with which human action
is converſant. 3


„
4
Ss.
i =.
y % — es wrt 2
q . — —— — —
FI" - — — ve —
2 CIS. n N — — — . 5 *
— un n N 4 an”. "0 2 :
wy on, omen 2 5 IT n - 2 1 3 .


CHAP.


112


r Vi.


IS E OF PRIVATE
ENT.


Foundation of virtue. — Human actions regulated:
I. By the nature of things.—2. By paſitive inſti-
futton.—Tendency of the latter: 1. To excite
virtue.—lts equivocal character in this reſpect.
—2. To inform the judgment. —Its inaptitude
for that purpoſe. — Province of conſcience conſider-
ed.—Tendency of an interference with that pro-
vince.— Recapitulation.— Arguments in favour
of poſitive inſtitution: 1. The neceſſity of repelling

private injuſtice.— Objections : The uncertainty
of evidence. —The diverſity of motives.— Jlie un-

ſurtableneſs of the means of correction either to

empreſs new ſentiments—or to ſtrengthen old
ones. —Puniſhment for the ſake of example conſi-
dered.— Urgency of the caſe.—2. Rebellion.—
3. War. —Objections.— Reply.


— — — K
— we 4 — —
Pr TTY Iz -


*
— —2—


P i _——— > — LR ws 4 > Fr " s eee ea * *
3 — - 3 — ä — — * _— - -
E —̃— — = x 2 — — — — . x —_— __ 5 —
LEGS - .. „ ————— — q . — - - — 4
— — S— , > 1 — a — — — — ———— ——— — — — . — — v4 *
* A »


\


i
N.
i.
1
17


To a rational being there can be but one rule
of conduct, juſtice, and one mode of aſcertain-
ing that rule, the exerciſe of his underſtanding.
If in any inſtance I be made the mechanical in-
ſtrument of abſolute violence, in that inſtance
fall under no deſcription of moral conduct either
good or bad. But, if, not being operated upon


by


Re


—


— — Ny _—_ — ——  - 3 TOI —_ =
n — - - — apes ———
— rr e ²˙ ·wꝛwDw p — p ̃²—¹ꝗn . . ¼ . pag
— — ry S * . * — 2 " r. pa r 4 =
* s _
”
-


OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 113


by abſolute compulſion, I be wholly prompted by
ſomething that is frequently called by that name,
and act from the hope of reward or the fear of pu-
niſhment, my conduct is poſitively wrong.

Here however a diſtinction is to be made.
Juſtice, as it was defined in a preceding chapter,
is coincident with utility. Iam myſelf a part of
the great whole, and my happineſs 1s a part of
that complex view of things by which juſtice is
regulated. The hope of reward therefore and
the fear of puniſhment, confined within certain
{tric limits, are motives that ought to have influ-
ence with my mind. |

There are two deſcriptions of tendency that
may belong to any action, the tendency which it
poſſeſſes by the neceſſary and univerſal laws of ex-
iſtence, and the tendency which reſults from the

ſitive interference of ſome intelligent being.

he nature of happinefs and miſery, pleaſure and
pain, is independent of all pofitive inſtitution :
that is, it is immutably true that whatever tends
to procure a balance of the former is to be deſir-
ed, and whatever tends to procure a balance of
the latter is to be rejected. In like manner the
promulgation of virtue, truth and political juſtice
muſt always be right. There is perhaps no acti-
on of a rational being that has not ſome tenden-
cy to promote theſe objects, and conſequently
that has not a moral character founded in the ab-
ſtract nature of things. 55

The tendency of poſitive inſtitution is of two
ſorts, to furniſh me with an additional motive
to the practice of virtue or right, and to inform

WE I my


174 OF THE EXERCISE |
my underſtanding as to what actions are right and
what actions are wrong. Much cannot be ſaid in
commendation of either of theſe tendencies.
Firſt, poſitive inſtitution may furniſh me with
an additional motive to the practice of virtue. I
have an opportunity of contributing very eſſenti-
ally to the advantage of twenty individuals ; they
will be benefited, and no other perſons will ſuſ-
tain a material injury. I ought to embrace this
opportunity. Here let us ſuppoſe poſitive inſti-
tution to interfere, and to annex ſome great per-
ſonal reward to myſelf to the performance of my
duty. This immediately changes the nature of
the action. Before I preferred it for its intrinſic
excellence. Now, ſo far as the poſitive inſtitu-
tion operates, I prefer it, becauſe ſome perſon
has arbitrarily annexed to it a great weight of
ſelf-intereſt. But virtue, conſidered as the qua-
lity of an intelligent being, depends upon the
diſpoſition with which the aCtion 1s accompanied.
Under a poſitive inſtitution then this very action,
which is intrinſically virtuous, may, ſo far as
relates to the agent, become vicious. The vici-
ous man would before have neglected the advan-
tage of theſe twenty individuals, becauſe he would
not bring a certain inconvenience or trouble upon
himſelf. The fame man with the ſame diſpoſi-
tion will now promote their advantage, becauſe
his own welfare is concerned in it. Twenty,
other things equal, is twenty times better than
one. He that is not governed by the moral
arithmetic of the caſe, or who acts from a diſpo-
ſition directly at war with that arithmetic, is un-
| juſt.


OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 115


juſt. In other words, morality requires that we
ſhould be attentive only to the tendency which
belongs to any action by the neceſſary and univer-
ſal laws of exiſtence. This is what is meant by


the principle, “that we ſhould do good, regard-


leſs of the conſequences; and by that other,
that we may not do evil, from the proſpect of
good to reſult from it.“ The caſe would have
been rendered ſtill more glaring, if, inſtead of
the welfare of twenty, we had ſuppoſed, the wel-
tare of millions to have been concerned. In rea-
lity, whether the diſparity be great or ſmall, the
inference ought to be the ſame.

Secondly, poſitive inſtitution may inform my
underſtanding as to what actions are right and
what actions are wrong. Here it is proper for us
to reflect upon the terms underſtanding and in-
formation. Underſtanding, particularly as it is
concerned with moral ſubjects, is the percipient
of truth. This is its proper ſphere. Information,
ſo far as it is genuine, is a portion detached from
the great body of truth. You inform me, that
Euchd aſſerts the three angles of a plane triangle
to be equal to two right angles. Still Iam un-
acquainted with the truth of this propoſition.


_ * But Euclid has demonſtrated it. His demon-


{tration has exiſted for two thoutand years, and
during that term has proved ſatisfactory to every
man by whom, it has been underitood.” Iam
nevertheleſs uninformed. The knowledge of
truth lies in the perceived agreement or diſagree-
ment of the terms of a propoſition. So long as
Lam unacquainted with the middle term by means
of which they may be compared, fo long as they

I 2 | axe


N
|
i
|
|


-
* 4
g ] ˙ÄdNu—.̃ꝗ7 “t ... .


* —— — —


a OF THE EXERCISE


are incommenſurate to my underſtanding, you
may have furniſhed me with a principle from
which I may reaſon truly to farther conſequences,
but as to the principle itſelf I may ſtrictly be ſaid
to know nothing about it. |
Every propoſition has an intrinſic evidence of
its own. Every conſequence has premiſes from
which it flows; and upon them, and not upon
any thing elſe, its validity depends. If you could
work a miracle to prove, * that the three angles
of a triangle were equal to two right angles, I
ſhould ſtill know, that the propoſition was either
true or falſe previouſly to the exhibition of that
miracle; and that there was no neceſſary connec-
tion between any one of its terms and the miracle
exhibited. The miracle would take off my at-
1 tention from the true queſtion to a queſtion alto-
1 gether different, that of authority. By the au-
1 thority adduced I might be prevailed on to yield
= an irregular aſſent to the propoſition ; but I could
1 not properly be ſaid to perceive its truth.
But this is not all. If it were, it might per-
1 haps be regarded as a refinement foreign to the
5 concerns of human life. Poſitive inſtitutions do
1 not content themſelves with requiring my aſſent
to certain propoſitions, in conſideration of the
reſpectable teſtimony by which they are inforced.
This would amount to no more, than advice flow-
ing from a reſpectable quarter, which after all I
might reject, if it did not accord with the mature
judgment of my own underſtanding. But in the
very nature of theſe inſtitutions there is included
a ſanction, a motive either of puniſhment or re-
ward to induce me to obedience. | |


It -


1 9 hes * 6 : "LEP 14
1 * A
»” 4


' OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 107


It is commonly ſaid, that poſitive inſtitutions
ought to leave me perfectly free in matters of con-
ſcience, but may properly interfere with my con-
duct in civil concerns. But this diſtinction
ſeems to have been very lightly taken up. What
ſort of moraliſt muſt he be, who makes no con-
ſcience of what paſles in his intercourſe with other
men? Such a diſtinction proceeds upon the ſup-
poſition, ** that it is of great conſequence whe-
ther I bow to the eaſt or the weſt ; whether I call
the object of my worſhip Jehovah or Alla; whe-
ther I pay a prieſt in a ſurplice or a black coat.
Theſe are points in which an honeſt man ought
to be rigid and inflexible. But as to thoſe other,
whether he ſhall be a tyrant, a ſlave or a free ci-
tizen ; whether he ſhall bind himſelf with mul-
tiplied oaths impoſſible to be performed, or be a
rigid obſerver of truth ; whether he ſhall ſwear
allegiance to a king de jure or a king de facto, to
the beſt or the worlt of all poſſible governments;
reſpecting theſe points he may ſafely commit his
conſcience to the keeping of the civil magiſtrate.”
In reality there are perhaps no concerns of a rati-
onal being, over which morality does not extend
its province, and reſpecting which he is not bound
to a conſcientious proceeding.

I am fatisfied at preſent, that a certain conduct,
ſuppoſe it be a rigid attention to the confidence of
private converſation, 1s incumbent upon me. You
tell me, there are certain caſes of ſuch pecu-
liar emergency as to ſuperſede this rule.” Per-
haps I think there are not. If I admit your pro-
poſition, a wide field of enquiry is opened, reſ-
pecting what caſes do or do not deſerve to be con-

| ſidered


118 GF THE EXERCISE
fidered as exceptions. It is little likely that we
ſhould agree reſpecting all theſe cafes. How
then does the law treat me; for my conſcientious
diſcharge of what I conceive to be my duty? Be-
cauſe 1 will not turn informer (which, it may be,
F think an infamous character) againſt my moſt
valued friend, the law accuſes me of miſpriſion
_ treaſon, felony” or murder, and perhaps hangs
I believe a certain individual to be a confirm-
& villa, and a moſt dangerous member of ſo-
ciety, and feel it to be my duty to warn others,
perhaps the public, againſt the effect of his vices.
Becauſe 1 pabliſh what I know to be true, the
law convicts me of libel, /candalum magnatum,
and crimes of I know not what complicated de-
nomination.
If the evil topped here, it would be well. If
I only ſuffered a certain calamity, ſuppoſe death,
I could endure it. Death has hitherto been the
common lot of men, and I expect at ſome time
or other to ſubmit to it. Human ſociety muſt
ſooner or later be deprived of its individual mem-
bers, whether they be valuable, or whether they
be inconſiderable. But the puniſhment acts not
only retroſpectively upon me, but proſpectively
upon my contemporaries and countrymen. 4
neighbour entertains the fame opinion ref]
the conduct he ought to hold as T did. But che
executioner of public juſtice interpoſes with a
powerful argument, to convince him that he has
miſtaken the path of abſtract rectitude.
What ſort of converts will be produced by this
unfeeling logic ? © I have deeply reflected, ſup-
poſe, upon the nature of virtue, and am con-
vinced


—


*


OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 119


vinced that a certain proceeding, is incumbent on
me. But the hangman, ſupported by an a& of
parliament, aſſures me I am miſtaken.” If 1
yield my opinion to his dickum, my action becomes
modified, and my character too. An influence
like this is inconſiſtent with all generous
nimity of ſpirit, all ardent impartiality in the diſ-
covery of truth, and all inflexible perſeverance
in its aſſertion. Countries, expoſed to the per-
petual interference of decrees inſtead of argu-
ments, exhibit within their boundaries the mere
phantoms of men. We can never judge from
an obſervation of their inhabitants what men
would be, if they knew of no appeal from the
tribunal of conſcience, and if, whatever they
thought, they dared to ſpeak, and dared to act.
At preſent there will perhaps occur to the ma-
jority of readers but few inſtances of laws, which
may be ſuppoſed to interfere with the conſcienti-
ous diſcharge of duty. A confiderable number
will occur in the courſe of the preſent enquiry.
More would readily offer themſelves to a patient
reſearch. Men are ſo ſucceſsfully reduced to a
common ſtandard by the operation of poſitive law,
that in moſt countries they are capable of little
more than like parrots repeating each other. This
uniformity is capable of being produced in two
ways, by energy of mind and indefatigableneſs of
enquiry, enabling a conſiderable number to pe-
netrate with equal ſucceſs into the receſſes of truth ; -
and by puſillanimity of temper and a frigid indit-
ference to right and wrong, produced by the pe-
nalties which are ſuſpended over ſuch as ſhall diſ-
intereſtedh enquire, and communicate and act


upon


- — o — 2 — — £
|
— — — — — <—pg—— <P — —_ — . — => : 1 < .
_ - — — = - — ———— — —
— ̃ ¹ͤò-—v-p. no Ie gy or IT — ns -
— » —— — —— ＋2ꝓ — —— 5 .
* = _ — > - 5
: 2 CEE Eg — I :
ͤ——ä——ꝓä— — — > — Oy — 88 A "
wt * * j n &
* | % þ
- * 44
s


—— — — ——


— .
* *
:


Or THE EXERCISE


120


upon the reſult of their enquiries. It is eaſy to


irony which of theſe is the cauſe of the uni-
ormity that prevails in the preſent inſtance.
If there be any truth more unqueſtionable than


the reſt, it is, that every man is bound to the ex-


ertion of his faculties in the diſcovery of right,
and to the carrying into effect all the right with
which he is acquainted. It may be granted that
an infallible ſtandard, if it could be diſcovered,
would be conſiderably beneficial. But this infal-


Able ſtandard itſelf would be of little uſe in hu-


man affairs, unleſs it had the property of reaſon-
ing as well as deciding, of enlightening the mind
as well as conſtraining the body. If a man be in
ſome caſes obliged to prefer his own judgment,


he is in all caſes obliged to conſult that judgment,


before he can determine whether the matter in
queſtion be of the fort provided for or no. So
that from this reaſoning it ultimately appears, that
no man is obliged to conform to any rule of con-
duct, farther than the rule is conſiſtent with juſ-

Such are the genuine principles of human ſo-


ciety. Such would be the unconſtrained concord


of its members, in a ſtate where every individu-
al within the ſociety, and every neighbour with-


out, was capable of liſtening with ſobriety to the
dictates of reaſon. We ſhall not fail to be im-


preſſed with conſiderable regret, if, when we de-
ſcend to the preſent mixed characters of mankind,
we find ourſelves obliged in any degree to depart
from ſo ſimple and grand a principle. The uni-
verſal exerciſe of private judgment is a doctrine
ſo unſpeakably beautiful, that the true politician
FE | will


OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. - 121


will certainly reſolve to interfere with it as ſparing-
ly and in as few inſtances as poſſible. Let us con-
ſider what are the emergencies that may be
thought to demand an exception. They can only
be briefly ſtated in this place, each of them re-
quiring to be minutely examined in the ſubſequent
ſtages of the enquiry.

In the firſt place then it ſeems neceſſary for
ſome powerful arbitrator to interfere, where the
proceedings of the individual threaten the moſt
injurious conſequences to his neighbours, and
where the inſtant nature of the cafe will not ac-
cord with the uncertain progreſs of argumentand
conviction addreſſed to the mind of the offender.
A man, ſuppoſe, has committed murder, or, to
make the caſe more aggravated, ſeveral murders ;
and, having thus far over-ſtepped all thoſe boun-
daries of innocence and guilt which reſtrain the
generality of men, it is to be preſumed from
analogy that he may be led to the commiſſion of
other murders. At firſt it may appear to be no
great infringement upon the exerciſe of private
judgment, to put it under ſome degree of reſtraint,
when it uach to the commiſſion of atrocious
crimes. There are however certain difficulties
in the caſe which are worthy to be conſidered.
Firſt, as ſoon as we admit the propriety of a
rule ſuch as that above ſtated, our next concern
will be with the evidence, which ſhall lead to
the acquittal or conviction of the perſon accuſed.
Now it is well known, that no principles of evi-
_ dence have yet been laid down that are infallible.
Human affairs univerſally proceed upon preſump-
tion and probability. An eye-witneſs mult l


—


8 ITY >
— 2 — — — — — — * — — -
— = Dy

— — * Þ


— —
—
—


*
od tc <q > rg =oet em
— - ww
— — Dn —


S © — a =
— —
e — — —


— ne
2 ——


— <> *


—
. ——
— — 3


—— — >


—— n


2 — >, \ : . —
— «. . . CCC C———_—_


cue


— ̃ q re A ̃7]⏑—, OI" A PEI OI r a
9 r * * ** n : 2
5 *
=-


"
j
|
|
|
1
j
|
|


© OC
*
{ 1


— ——on aig r=;
—_— —
7 F- 2 I - * :
*
-


= 1
c

-—  ** 2

*


3 EI
. —-„V-


C.. ⁰ 0 ⁵ͤ—yñ3
* — 5 * _


— —— —̃ — —
- I
*


E


” a7 *
9 oo 8


1


122 OF THE EXERCISE


tify the perſon of the offender, and in this he may
be — > We muſt neceſſarily be ET
with preſumptive proofs of his intention ; and
often are or imagine ourſelves to be 9 to ad-
mit preſumptive evidence of the fact itſelf. The
conſequence is inevitable. And ſurely it is no tri-


vial evil, to ſubje& an innocent man eventually,


to the public award and the eſtabliſhed puniſhment
annexed to the moſt atrocious crimes.

Secondly, the ſame external action will admit
of every poſſible ſhade. of virtue or vice. One
man ſhall commit murder, to remove a trouble-
ſome obſerver of his depraved diſpoſitions, who
will otherwiſe counteract and expoſe him to the
world. A ſecond, becauſe he cannot bear the in-
genuous fiacerity with which he is told of his
vices. A third, from his intolerable envy of ſu-
perior merit. A fourth, becauſe he at his
adverſary meditates an act pregnant with extenſive
miſchief, and he perceives no other mode by


which its perpetration can be prevented. A fifth,


in the actual defence of his father's life or his
daughter's chaſtity. Each of theſe men, except
perhaps the laſt, may act either from momentary
impulſe, or from any of the infinite ſhades and
degrees of deliberation. Would you award one
individual puniſhment to all theſe varieties of ac-
tion? Can you pretend in each inſtance: to aſcer-


tain the exact quantity of wrong, and to invent a


ſpecies of corporal puniſhment or reſtraint equiva-
lent to each? "Strictly ſpeaking no two men were
ever guilty of the ſame crime ; but here comes
in poſitive law, with its Procr uſtes's bed, and le-


vels |


*


-


OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 123
vels all characters, and tramples upon all diſtinc-
tions. | 2

Thirdly, puniſhment is not the appropriate
mode of correcting the errors of mankind. It
will probably be admitted, that the only true end
of puniſhment is correction. That queſtion will
be diſcuſſed in another part of the preſent enqui-
ry. * I have done ſomething, which thou
wrong in itſelf, I believe to be right ; or I have
done ſomething which I uſually admit to be
wrong; but my conviction upon the ſubject is not
ſo clear and forcible, as to prevent my yielding to
a powerful temptation.” There can be nodoubt,
that the proper way of conveying to my under-
ſtandirgg a truth of which I am ignorant, or of
impreſſing upon me a firmer perſuaſion of a truth -
with which I am acquainted, is by an appeal to
my reaſon. Even an angry expoſtulation with
me upon my conduct will but excite ſimilar paſ-
ſions in me, and cloud inſtead of illuminate my
underſtanding. There is certainly a way of ex-
preſſing truth, with ſuch benevolence as to com-
mand attention, and ſuch evidence as to inforce
conviction in all cafes whatever. *

Puniſhment inevitably excites. in the ſufferer,
and ought to excite, a ſenſe of injuſtice. Let its
_ purpoſe be to convince me of the truth of a pre
poſition, which I at preſent believe to be falſe.
It is not abſtractedly conſidered of the nature of
an argument, and therefore it cannot begin with
producing conviction. -Puniſhment is a ſpecious
name, but is in reality nothing more than force
put upon one being by another who happens to
be ſtronger. Now ftrength apparently does not

| conſtitute


*


*


Wr EXERCISE


conſtitute juſtice, nor ought might, accord-
ing to a trite proverb, to overcome right.“
The caſe of puniſhment, which we are now con-
ſidering, is the caſe of you and I differing in opi-
nion, and your telling me that you muſt be right,
ſince you have a more brawny arm, or have ap-
plied your mind more to the acquiring ſkill in
your weapons than I have.

But let us ſuppoſe, * that I am convinced of
my error, but that my conviction is ſuperficial
and fluctuating, and the object you propoſe is to
render it durable and profound. Ought it to be
thus durable and profound ? There are no doubt
arguments and reaſons calculated to render it ſo.
Is it in reality problematical, and do you wiſh by
the weight of your blows to make up for the de-
ficiency of your logic? This can never be defen-
ded. An appeal to force muſt appear to both
parties, in proportion to the ſoundneſs of their
underſtanding, to be a confeſſion of imbecility.
He that has recourſe to it, would have no occaſi-
on for this expedient, if he were ſufficiently ac-
quainted with the powers of that truth it is his
office to communicate. If there be any man, who,

in ſuffering puniſhment, is not conſcious of in-
| juſtice, he muſt have had his mind previouſly de-
baſed. by ſlavery, and his ſenſe of moral right and
e blunted by a ſeries of oppreſſion.

The caſe is not altered for the better, if I ſuf-
fer puniſhment, not for my own correction, but
for an example to others. Upon this ſuppoſiti-
on a new difficulty is introduced, reſpecting the
propriety of one man's being ſubjected to pain,
for the ſake of improving the character and era-

| dicating


OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 8 ns


dicating the vices of another. The ſuffering is
here alſo involuntary. Now, though will can-
not alter the nature of juſtice, it muſt be ad-
mitted that the voluntary ſufferer has at leaſt one
advantage over the involuntary, in the conſcious
lüberality of his purpoſe. He that ſuffers, not
for his own correction, but for the advantage of
others, ſtands, ſo far as relates to that ſuffering,
in the fituation of an innocent perſon. If the
ſuffering had relation to him perſonally as a vici-
ous or imperfect character, it muſt have relation
to him in reſpect either to the paſt or the future.
It cannot have relation to him as to the paſt, for
that is concluded and beyond the reach of altera-
tion or remedy. By the ſuppoſition it has not re-
lation to him but to others as to the future.

It ought to be obſerved in this place, that by
innocence I do not underſtand virtue. Innocence
is a ſort of neutral character, and ſtands in the
mid way between good'and harm. Undoubtedly
it were better, that a perſon uſeleſs to ſociety
ſhould be deſtroyed than a man of eminent worth,
and a perſon likely to prove injurious than either.
I fay likely to prove injurious: for the fault al-
ready committed, being irrevocable, ought not to
enter into the account, and we have nothing to
do but with the' probability of its repetition. It is
in this ſenſe that the ſufferer ſtands upon a level
with many of thoſe perſons, who are uſually de-
nominated innocent. Fe

It muſt alſo be allowed, that there are caſes in
which it is proper that innocent men ſhould ſuf-
fer for the public good. But this is a queſtion of
a very delicate nature, and the ſevere moraliſt will

be


|


+.
1
.
'4
.


gmt Im: = — — TINA 2
= — x — : ä
* . 3 5 2s — N 3 „
- n La
& : 7


Lo 7
4 3 — —
1 * „ A g 2333 — — r 3 — gs + — 4 __ _—_
„ „* —— Pc — — — — — — — as - I Fe A 2 L
2 — . EE - x . 5
hy moe ” 0
EE p Ee aa at ma <p> *
— - * * " : * — ;
x N pe * » - e
5


. — — pts = =
— — ———e— RE = = — EE CL
— ̃ Citrine, , , oi . "EE
* ty LA * ”
=
-


—— —— 1 — — Ae caes


—


—


OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.


126
be very reluctant to condemn that man to die for


the benefit of others, who is deſirous to hve.


As to every other circumſtance in the caſe of


him vho is puniſhed for an example to others, it


remains preciſely the ſame as . we ſuppoſed


him to be puniſhed for his own reformation. It


is ſtill an argument of the moſt exceptionable na-


ture employed to correct the opinions of mankind.


It is ſtill a menace of violence made uſe of to per-


ſuade them of the truth or falſhood of a propoſi-
tion. It has little chance of making them wile,
and can ſcarcely fail of making hom timid, diſ-
fembling and corrupt. ,
Notwithſtanding all theſe objections, it would
be difficult to find a country, reſpecting which


we could ſay, that the inhabitants might with


fatety be diſmiſſed from the operation of puniſh-
ment. 80 mixed is human character, ſo wild
are its excurſions, ſo calamitous and deteſtable
are the errors into which it occaſionally falls, that
ſomething more than argument ſeems neceſſary


for their ſuppreſſion. Human beings are ſuch ty-


ros in the art of reaſoning, that the wiſeſt of us


often prove impotent in our attempts, where an
inſtant effect was moſt powerfully wanted. While


J ſtand ſtill to reaſon with the thief, the aſſaſſin or
the oppreſſor, they haſten to new ſcenes of devaſ-
tation, and with unſparing violence confound all
the principles of human ſociety. I ſhould obtain
little ſucceſs by the abolition of puniſhment, un-


leſs I could at the ſame time aboliſh thoſe cauſes


that generate temptation and make puniſhment


neceſſary. Meanwhile the arguments already
adduced may be ſufficient to ſhew that puniſh-


ment


OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT. 127


ment is always an evil, and to perſuade us never


to recur to it but from the moſt evident ne-
a___ | |


The remaining caſes in which it may ſeem re-


Tay to have recourſe to the general will of the


ociety, and to ſuperſede the private judgment


of individuals, are, when we are called upon to
counteract the hoſtilities of an internal enemy, or
to repel the attacks of a foreign invader. Here as
in the former inſtance the evils that ariſe from an
uſurpation upon private judgment are many and
various. It is wrong that I ſhould contribute in
any mode to a proceeding, a war for example,
that I believe to be unjuſt. Ought I to draw my
ſword, when the adverſary appears to me to be
employed in repelling a wanton aggreffion ? The
caſe ſeems not to be at all different, if I contribute
my property, the produce it may be of my perſo-
nal labour; though cuſtom has reconciled us to
the one rather than the other.

The conſequences are a degradation of charac-


ter and a relaxation of principle, in the perſon -


who is thus made the inſtrument of a tranſaction,


which his judgment diſapproves. In this caſe,


as has been already ſtated generally, the human
mind is comprefled and unnerved, till it affords us
ſcarcely the ſemblance of what it might otherwiſe
have been. And, in addition to the general con-
ſiderations in fimilar caſes, it may be obſerved,
that the frequent and obſtinate wars which at pre-
ſent deſolate the human race would be nearly ex-
tirpated, if they were ſupported only by the vo-
luntary contributions of thoſe by whom their prin-
ciple was approved.


The


: HY
*


128 OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.


The objection, which has hitherto been per-
mitted practically to ſuperſede theſe reaſonings,
is the difficulty of conducting an affair, in the
ſucceſs of which millions may be intereſted, upon
ſo precarious a ſupport as that of private judg-
ment. The men, with whom we are uſually

concerned in human ſociety, are of ſo mixed a
character, and a ſelf- love of the narroweſt kind
is ſo deeply rooted in many of them, that it ſeems
nearly unavoidable upon the ſcheme of voluntary
contribution, that « 34 moſt generous would pay
a very ample proportion, while the mean and

| avaricious, though they contributed nothing,
would come in for their full ſhare of the benefit.
He that would reconcile a perfect freedom in this

reſpe& with the intereſt of the whole, ought to

ropoſe at the ſame time the means of extirpating
ſelfiſhneſs and vice. How far ſuch a propoſal is

(fcafible will come hereafter to be conſidered.


AN


f 229 J


AN


E NZ UI SB
CONCERNING
POLITICAL JUSTICE.


B O O K Il.


PRINCIPLES OE GOVERNMENT


SHA 1
SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL WRITERS.


The queſtion flated—Firft hypotheſis : Govern-
ment founded in ſuperior firength.—Second hypo-
theſis: Government jure divino.—Third po-
theſis : The ſocial contract. — Tie finſt bypothe=
At examined. The ſerond.— Criterion of divine
right + 1. Patriarchal deſcent—2. Fuſtice.


Tr has appeared in the courſe of our reaſoning:
upon hs Seas of ſociety, that there are _ |
ons in which it may be neceſſary, to ſuperſede pri-
vate judgment for the ſake of public good, and to
Vor. I. 1 / control


%


„ © . SYSTEMS or


We cControl the act of the individual by an act to TY,
| performed in the name of the whole. It is there-

1 fore an intereſting enquiry to aſcertain in what

i manner ſuch acts are to be originated, or in other
li words to aſcertain the foundation of political go-
vernment.
here are three hypotheſes that have been prin- |
cipally maintained upon this ſubject. Firſt, the
ſyſtem of force, according to which it is affirmed,
« that, inaſmuch as it is neceſfary that the great
maſs of mankind ſhould be held under the ſub-
jection of compulſory reſtraint, there can be no
other criterion of that reſtraint, than the power
of the individuals who lay claim to its exerciſe,
the foundation of which power exiſts in the une-
qual degrees, in which corporal ſtrength and in-
tellectual ſagacity are diſtributed among man-
kind.”

There is a nd cla of reaſoners, who deduce -
the origin of all government from divine right,
and athrm, * that, as men derived their exiſtence
from an infinite creator at firſt, ſo are they till
ſubject to his providential care, and of conſe-
quence owe allegiance to their civil governors, as
to a power which he has thou ght fit to ſet over

them.”

The third ſy "OE is chat which has been moſt
uſually Maps rey by the friends of equality and

_ Juſtice; the ſyſtem according to which the indivi-
duals of any ſociety are ſuppoſed to have entered

into a contract with their governors or with each
other, and. which founds the rights of govern-
ment in the conſent of the governed.


The


POLITICAL WRITERS. | 131


The two firſt of theſe hypotheſes may eaſily be
diſmiſſed. That of force appears to proceed up-
on the total negation of abſtract and immutable
juſtice, affirming every government to be right,


that is poſſeſſed of power ſufficient to inforce its


decrees. It puts a violent termination upon all
political ſcience ; and ſeems intended to perſuade
men, to fit down quietly under their preſent diſ-
advantages, whatever they may be, and not ex-
ert themſelves to diſcover a remedy for the evils
they ſuffer. The ſecond hypotheſis is of an equi-
vocal nature. It either coincides with the firſt,
and affirms all exiſting power to be alike of di-
vine derivation ; or it muſt remain totally uſeleſs
till a criterion can be found, to diftinguith thoſe
governments which are approved by God, from
thoſe which cannot lay claim to that ſanction.
The criterion of patriarchal deſcent will be of nd-
avail, till the true claimant and rightful heir can
be diſcovered. Ifwe make utility and juſtice the


teſt of God's approbation, this hypotheſis will be


liable to little objection; but then on the other
hand little will be gained by it, ſince thoſe who
have not introduced divine right into the argu-


ment, will yet readily grant, that a government


which can be ſhewn to be agreeable to urin and
juſtice, is a rightful government.


The third hypotheſis demands a more careful
examination. If any error have inſinuated itſelf
into the ſupport of truth, it becomes of particu-
lar conſequence to detect it. Nothing can be of
ſeparate prejudice and
miſtake on the one hand, from reaſon and de-
monſtration on the other. Wherever they have


more importance, than to


K 2 been


Tf *
1
' I


[4


132, SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL, &.


besen confaunded, the cauſe of truth muſt neceſ-
__ | farily be a ſufferer. That cauſe, fo far from he-
ing injured. by the diſſolution of the unnatural alli-

ance, may be expected to derive from that diſſo-
E migen ** of proſperiegant Was. *


of z 4 * 0 þ
* 5 k L
g | ; | C | H | | | P | II.
- - _— — as 99 a.
A P. *
” -
*. KzY x % * 0
* * ol * Lo „


| or THE- SOCIAL CONTRACT.


4 1


? Wir propyſ d —Wiog gre the contratling partiee?;
— het is the form of, engagement? 7 ow.

"= a r period daes the contract extend — Jo how. +
great a variety of proofs: Can it extend to.
laws hereafter to. be made *— Addreſſes. of adle-
Ae alk e gf 4 majority. ent! |


Lox N the. 10 e of. the ſyſtem * a
ſocial contract various difficulties, preſent them-..
ſelves. Who are the, parties to this. contract?
For whom did they, conſent, for themſelves only
or for others ?. For, how long a time is this con-
tract to be conſidered as binding? If the conſent.
of every individual be neceſſary, in what manner
is that conſent to be given? Is it to be tacit, or-
= gclaroel in expreſs terms Fe i 20044
_.. 8 Little


5


i


OF THE SOCIAL CONTRACT. 133
Little will be gained for the cauſe of equality
and juſtice, if our anceftors, at the firſt inſtita-
tion of government, had a right indeed of choot-
ing the ſyſtem of regulations under which they
thought proper to live, but at the fame time
could barter away the underſtandings and inde-
pendence of all that came after them to the lateſt
poſterity. But, if the contract muft be renew-
ed in each fucceſſive generation, what periods
muſt be fixed on for that purpoſe? And if I be
obliged to fubmit to the eſtabliſhed government
till my turn comes to affent to it, upon what
principle is that obligation founded? Surely not
upon the contract into which my father entered
before I was born? ;
| Secondly, what is the nature of the conſent,
in conſequence of which I am to be reckoned the
ſubje& of any particular government? It is uſu-
ally ſaid, that acquieſcence is ſufficient; and
that this acquieſcence is to be inferred from my
living quietly under the protection of the laws.”
But if this be true, an end is as effectually put ts
all political ſcience, all diſcrimination of better
and worſe, as by any ſyſtem invented by the moſt
{laviſh ſycophant that ever exiſted: Upon this
hypotheſis every government that is quietly ſub-
mitted to is a lawful government, whether it be
the uſurpation of Cromwel or the tyranny of Ca-
ligula. Acquieſcence is frequently nothing more
that a choice on the part of the individual of what
he deems the leaſt evil. In many caſes it is not
ſo much as this, ſince the peaſant and the artiſan,
who form the bulk of a nation, however diſſatis-
fied with the government of their country, ſel-


\


5 ——— —
. TE NN "
— 828 2. 3 — 4


— —


on


2
Y Fra r 5 ä W—_— 5
I . >=
= * i GOT, 4,4 E 2 3 a —.—
— IE" * —
ay * 2 * -
— - begs — 2 4 — >

— — = ———— . — 5 —


: 2
— — — —
*


———


Fu J N
Vi]
14
it, 1.
| Fi
| 418] .
1
t |
"hl
.
a
1
9
i


—
—
=


_— - ——
- — S
822 _ — —

* *

— —


g —
p


:
3 ——
rr *
— = — Groom ge — _
- — —
mes *
— —


—g—— —
— I — Com —
*


4


134 OF THE SOCIAL CONTRACT.


dom have i it in their power to tranſport themſelves
to another. It is alſo to be obſerved upon the
ſyſtem of acquieſcence, that it is in little agree-
ment with the eſtabliſhed opinions and practices
of mankind. Thus what has been called the law


of nations, lays leaſt ſtreſs upon the allegiance of


a foreigner ſettling among us, though his acquieſ-


cence is certainly moſt complete; while natives
removing into an uninhabited region are claimed


by the mother country, and removing into a
neighbouring territory are puniſhed by munici-
pal law, if they take arms againſt the country in


„which they were born. Now ſurely acquieſcence


can ſcarcely be conſtrued into conſent, while the
individuals concerned are wholly unappriſed of


\the authority intended to be reſted upon it.“


Mr. Locke, the great champion of the doc-
trine of an original contract, -has been aware of
this difficulty, and therefore abſerves, that * a
tacit conſent indeed obliges a man to obey the a
of any government, as long as he has any poſſeſ-
ſions, or enjoyment of any part of the dominions
of that government; but nothing can make a
man a member of the commonwealth, but his
actually entering into it by poſitive engagement,
and expreſs promiſe and compact. “ A fingu-
lar diſtinction; implying upon ** face of it, that
an acquieſcence, ſuch as has juſt been deſcribed,


is ſufficient to render a man amenable to the pe-


nal regu atzons'of ſociety ; but that his own con-


ſent is neceſſary to entitle him to its privileges.


* See Hume's Eſſays. Part II. Eſſay xii.
# Treatiſe of — Book II. "Ch. viii. $. 1 19, 122.


A third >


Or THE SOCIAL CONTRACT. 135


A third objection to the ſocial contract will ſug-


geſt itſelf, as ſoon as we attempt to aſcertain the


extent of the obligation, even ſuppoſing it to have


been entered into in the moſt ſolemn manner by
every member of the community. Allowing
that I am called upon, at the period of my com-
ing of age for example, to declare my aſſent or
diſſent to any ſyſtem of opinions, or any code of


practical inſtitutes; for how long a period does


this declaration bind me? Am I precluded from
better information for the whole courſe of my
life? And, if not for my whole life, why for a
year, a week or evenan hour ! If my deliberate
judgment or my real ſentiment be of no avail in
the caſe, in what ſenſe can it be affirmed that all
lawful government is founded in my conſent?
But the queſtion of time is not the only difficul-
ty. If you demand my aſſent to any propoſition,
it is neceſſary that the propoſition ſhould be ſtated
ſimply and clearly. So numerous are the varieties
of human underſtanding, in all caſes where its
independence and integrity are ſufficiently pre-
ſerved, that there is little chance. of any two men
coming to a preciſe agreement about ten ſucceſs
five propoſitions that are in their own nature open
to debate. What then can be more abſurd. than
to preſent to me the laws of England in fifty vo-
lumes folio, and call upon me to give an honeſt


and uninfluenced vote upon their whole contents


at once ? | |

But the ſocial contract, conſidered as the foun-
dation of civil government, requires more of me
than this. I am not only obliged to conſent to
All the laws that are actually upon record, but 3


i
!!
}
b
1
«
þ ml
[
:
1
'
i
5 1
+:
15.
17
{i
*
' "
| i
n.-
1
> +
1 *
OT
1 7
=o
nt
—
: «|
a [-
7 «
_ z
Mg
11
Wh
N *
11
2
.
: t
N.
| op
We
te
=
.
: 4.
*
i
1 }
1
. *
N
—
Wi
14
:
7
1
*
"i.
„
8
: =.
1
13
9
1
|
4 =
3 0
=
4
”
4
1 4
1
9
* bs
wn.
7 8
TY
wg
*
1 -
0
N by
TY
ml.
oa ».
Fo
9
: —
1
7 $4 4
1
„
? 2
1
ie
E 1.
4
"i
: x.
3
2
'BY
is
4 1
2 32
1
p ,
* :
1 i
4
4


. = *
8 12 3
3 4
VEE Ot NY nn nr prong wy?
l "SF" I n *


23 2 17 oy


4 Pe Rn
— —ͤ—a4᷑—— — ———— —


— : < — TR
2 , 4 5 pre : — = : k —
7 c s — =_ - —_ = = . = — p. . a — —
bog) Rr 4 r n r de 2 IE: 3 - _ LEES . —
2 f 4 = 3 g — „ F 8 . — — 4 AD — — i= 2 — — ne — —— — — — — 2
3 3 8 Re +: 8 _ . * — OT OP PE Bron fe CS Dn E — — — _ ——— — — - —— COLL ED ELECTED, — —
& . 1 ” M p V 22 2 7 as.” reel 4 * 2 — F e F wo LPT oe ng rep 8 = jus A * 3 * — 2 aaa a
4 Sth 4b 4 8 Gra . 2. — , £94 r 2 8 . ai 1 * wg wan on * . ag * 2 82 n * — — — — — TE =
—_ "_ 5 0 I \ — —— — = —


*
*


. —


n


=
T. n


8 4 x 2
* IC 7 x 2
*% WE a. We 7 Ms wt 1
— a, + P n
D <> = — * I'S ld


7


-
you = — . o — —y — —— — — — bo
l 9 INE? — _ = = : 4 —— - —— — — 2 — l => = \ l
= = \ \ 225 l — Com. = 7 2 7 TEE — * Fa => 5 28 75 2 2 „ Dl * * " = a >
2 = 2 = 2 D — — — 2 4 - * 3 LA DO 8 — 3 |
My — 1 < ih. 1 223 — - ” IE -- — w at = 1 ——— o 8 - * 4
2 2 >> — 7 2 2 » : —— S: - — — —— r — us — — r * - 4, > 4 2 —
= 2 —— >. Eg. 8 JT Yu og —— - - . — W r 8 - — $6 - - =o _ N
— — —— 0 - - - . * — — a — 4 — 2 = — E * 1 — = 2 > > — 2 8 — — — 2 2
bs * * . - — s. — <a nds = — — A x = - — v b
. — — — — « 8 og —_ —— — — — — * - > * 5225 2 —. —
— —-— — — p > A aa; Ah © —_ r * * F oh adi wo
y a X * ——_— 2 0 . 5 2 » 8
- A 2 — —


— —
= —
© pam — VE
a —
—


136 OF THE SOCIAL CONTRACT.


all the laws that ſhall hereafter be made. Ity WM
under this view of the ſubject, that Rouſſeau, in


* tracing the conſequences of the ſocial contract,


was led to aſſert, that / the great body of the
people, in whom the ſovereign authority refides,
can neither delegate nor reſign it. The eſſence


ol that authorit y, he adds, is the general will;


and will cannot t be repreſented. It muſt either


* be the ſame, or another ; there is no alternative.


The deputies of the people cannot be its repre-
ſentatives ; they are merely its attorneys. The
laws, that the community does not ratify in per-
ſon, are no laws, are nullities. x


The difficulty here ſtated has been Cured


to be provided againſt by ſome late advocates for
liberty, in the way of addreſſes of adheſion ; ad-
dreſſes, originating in the various diſtricts and
departments of a nation, and without which no


regulation of conſtitutional importance 1s to be


deemed valid. But this is a very inadequate and
ſuperficial remedy. The addreſſers of courſe have
ſeldom any other remedy than that above de-
ſcribed, of indiſcriminate admiſſion or rejection.
There is an infinite difference between the firſt

deliberation, and the ſubſequent exerciſe of a ne-


Bine. The former is a real power, the aer i is


* 4 4 ſeuverainete ne hon tire repreſentte, par la mime rai-
fon q welle ne peut ttre aliente ;, elle 275 le efſentiellement dans la
volonte gentrale, et la volonts ne ſe repreſente point : elle off la
meme, ou elle eſt autre; il n'y a point de milieu. Les deputes du


peuple ne ſont donc poiut ſes repreſentans, ils ne ſant que ſes com-


miſſaires ; ils ne peuvent ien conclure definitivement. Toute loi
que le peuple en W wa pas ratifiee, eft nulle; ce n'eſt point
une e oj.” ' Du CGontrat Social. Liv. III. Chap. xv.


feldom


OF THE SOCIAL CONTRACT. 137


ſeldom more than the ſhadow of a power. Not
to add, that addreſſes are a moſt precarious and
equivocal mode of colleCting the ſenſe of a nation.
They are uſually voted in a tumultuous and ſum-
mary manner ; they are carried along by the tide
of party ; and the ſignatures annexed to them
are obtained by indirect and accidental methods,
while multitudes of byſtanders, unleſs upon ſome
extraordinary occaſion, remain n of or in-
different to the tranſaction.

Laſtly, if government be founded in the con-
ſent of the people, it can have no power over
any individual by whom that conſent is refuſed.
If a tacit conſent be not ſufficient, ſtill leſs can I
be deemed to have conſented to a meaſure upon
which I put an expreſs negative. This imme-
17 follows from the obſervations, of Rouſſeau.
If the people, or the individuals of whom the
people 1 is conſtituted, cannot delegate their autho-
rity to a repreſentative; neither can any individu-
al delegate his authority to a majority, in an aſ-
ſembly of: which he- is himſelf a member. The


t 4+ 3»


rules by which. my actions ſhall, be directed are


matters of a conſidęration entirely perſonal; and
no man can transfer to another the keeping of his


conſcience and the judge of- his duties. But,
this brings us back to the point, from Which we
| ſet out. No conſent of QUrs, can diveſt us of; our
moral capacity. This is a ſpecies of property


which we can neither barter nor reſign; and of
conſequence it is impoſſible for any government


to derive its authority from an original contract. /


CHAP.


*
9
p -


\ i
4
I

7 #1 |

* l

* 1

Y ' *
j 11

— | 1

4
'y I
* Fl | +
i J
1 ti \
. 4)
$3
7 4
i f =
7 4
1 .
7
10 ik
HF 4
"8 1 8
fi 19
"RIS
in!

f ji His
! Til #
* 1
577
17

— * 14
/
: il i |
{1 18
. 1
I 4
I} i
2.9%
: 4

e
Fe, 7 LU
1
_

& FA
1
1
15 1
! (4
+ 4
os
i ;
"1
Ft .
[2.6
£ ©
{
2
: ay
72
1
: L
: Bo |
1
9
1 F
. I
1
1 ©
ER
1 =.
_—;
| \ 4
NY 4
$5 *
1 1,
_—
8
"7

: =
* 44
. \

: 6,
1 r
1
289
5h T%
. cv
1
1 þ
a”
"FF
| 4
_—— 3
1
ay
47S of
wa
*
wa
1 1 x
: *%
_—
. * o
4 Af 1
4:
1
=»
1 _—_
wy -
. #1
* 1
0 1
4 ” 7,
—_—
1 x
bo
18) :
-
3+
3
ö ' 4 1
L 8
3
- ==
A >» i N
1
91 ©.
_
n
V |
5 £
wo
4.5
1
2 I
2 q
=
2 4
13
* 4 *
' 2
x
a
TH * 2
| 2
7. %”
| —

! *
6 +
=

2

io —

i -
=
_

> -

< *

1 "0
be
SY
"_
=
*
*
Re.
oY
Ef
*
133
177
al
1
* N
i


E


.
OF PROMISES.


The validity of promiſes examimed.—Shewn to be in-
confiftent with juſtice. —To be foreign to the ge-
neral good. Of the expettation excited. —T he

fulfilling expectation does not imply the — *
a prom Wer C onclufron,


I H E whole principle of an i contra
proceeds upon the obligation under which we are


placed to obſerve our promiſes. The reaſoning


upon which it is founded is, “that we have pro-
miſed obedience to government, and therefore are
bound to obey.” It may conſequently be proper
to enquire into the nature of ow obligation to


obſerve our promiſes.


We have already eſtabliſhed justice as the ſum
of moral and political duty. Is juſtice then in its


- own nature precarious or immutable? Surely im-


mutable.—As long as men are men, the conduct
I am bound to obſerve reſpecting them muſt re-


main the ſame. A good man muſt always be the


proper object of my ſupport and co-operation;
vice of my cenſure ; and the vicious man of in-
ſtruction and reform.

What is it then to which the obligation of a


| promiſe applies? What I have promiſed is either


ri ight,


' OF PROMISES. 335


right, or wrong, or indifferent. There are few


articles of human conduct that fall under the lat-


ter claſs ; and the greater ſhall be our improve-


ments in moral ſcience the fewer ſtill will they
appear. Omitting theſe, let us then conſider
only the two preceding claſſes. * I have pro-
miſed to do ſomething juſt and right.. This cer-
tainly I ought to perform. Why? Not becauſe
I promiſed, but becauſe juſtice preſcribes it.
« I have promiſed to beſtow a ſum of money upon
ſome good and reſpectable purpoſe. In the inter-
val between the promiſe and my fulfilling it, a
greater and nobler purpoſe offers itſelf, and calls
with an imperious voice for my co-operation.
Which ought I to prefer? That which beſt de-
ſerves my preference. A promiſe can make no
alteration in the caſe. I ought to be guided by


the intrinſic merit of the objects, and not by any


external and foreign conſideration. No engage-
ments of mine can change their intrinſic claims.


All this muſt be exceedingly plain to the reader


who has followed me in my early reaſonings upon
the nature of juſtice. If every ſhilling of our
property, every hour of our time and every fa-
culty of our mind, have already received their
deſtination from the principles of immutable juſ-
tice, promiſes have no department left upon


which for them to decide. Juſtice it appears


therefore ought to be done, whether we have
promiſed it or not. If we diſcover any thing to
be unjuſt, we ought to abſtain from it, with


whatever ſolemnity we have engaged for its per-


petration. We were erroneous and vicious when


the


1 N
> — y —
— 8 — — — 2 2
4 .
= 4
_


- * 8 2 2
, 5 < . a F . FT
. — 1 N
7 « > - p20 HT CLF". - 0 1 da . by . 2 72 n
IP.” " — - — : — — AUK AS 7 — — —·˙·˙³ . — Pos % — 5 — — —— — —— — = — * 2 FS. Io jp
EVI TT * — * o * — TELE — — nay — —— — — — As . —_— — — — +; 8 — <2 5 - — —— —— — —— —— — - - -
OE” RS — he 2 . rr 2 * 8 * ard. . . Cd r . . 75 x EI T F > " .
2 * ? 5 by * A l << 5 — — 3
* l - * 4 by — * = — — 4 5 2 —_— = = . EE — — — — 2
— A Fi L th pf N 2 1 nf , . " — 2 _ A a — 18 ——_—_— 2 wn - 2 2 2 ma {oc 2 —
e nne io: 3. 8 e - PEP — * - 2 —
> e . UE 6 5 a Sa G 4 WA IO * x *. 1 * 8 i
8 tt ET — — ” pa — — by


_


1 e PE CF POPE PS n : — IR wh —


— —— — — a. ug


= - = l _ TIN = \ CIT NE? — — — 1 9 — — = =
— r ä 4 3 INS
= 2 = \ = — * = _ 7 * * : —__ —_ > Em 4
— — —— — — we — o 127 4 a, n 8 —
— FI = I —— mo Eyes TR" — 2 I
i = * 2 — oo v9 * * — —
— * — - 5 8 — -


= — = bay = — —
_— — 2 2 ——— —ꝛ— _ — 2
7 8 r e
_ — 2 Ra I —
- 2 ——ñ— . . — = _
>< gs _=_ 2 —


140 OF PROMISES.
the promiſe was made; but this. affords no ſuffi.


cient reaſon for its performance.


But it will be ſaid, if promiſes be not made,


or when made be not fulfilled, how can the affairs
of the world be carried on?“ By rational and in-
telligent beings acting as if they were rational
and intelligent. A promiſe would perhaps be


ſufficiently innocent, if it were underſtood mere-


ly as declaratory of intention, and not as preclud-


ing farther information. Even in this reſtrained


ſenſe. however it is far from being generally ne-


ceſſary. Why ſhould it be fuppoſed that the af-
fairs of the world would not go on fufficiently


well, though my neighbour could no farther de-
pend upon my aſſiſtance than it appeared rational
to grant it? Fhis would be a fufficient: depen

dence if I were honeſt, nor would: he if he were


honeſt defire any thing more. If I were diſho-
neſt, if F could not be bound: by the: reaſon and
juſtice of the caſe, it would afford him a ſlender


additional: dependence to call in the aid of a prin-


eiple founded in prejudice: and miſtake : not to
ſay; that, let it afford ever ſo great advantage in 5
any particular caſe, the evil of the immoral pre-
cedent would outweigh the individualiadvantage.
It may: be farther objected, © that this princi-


ple might be: ſufficiently: ſuited! to a better and
more — ſtate of ſociety, but that at preſent


there are diſhoneſt members of the community,
who will not perform their duty, if tliey be not


bound to it by ſome groſſer motive, than the mere


moral conſideration. Be it ſo. This is a queſ-


tion altogether different from that we have been


examining. * are now enquiring whether the


community


OF PROMISES ri
community ought to animadvert upon the errors


of its members. This animadverſion the upright |


man is not backward to encounter, and willingly
riſks: the penalty, which the ſociety (for the ſo-
ciety is more competent to aſcertain the uſt
amount: of the penalty than the preceding caprice
of the parties) has awarded in caſes: apparently
ſimilar, if he conceive. that his duty requires

But to return to the caſe of the promiſes. I


ſhall be told, that, in choofing between two
purpoſes about which.to employ my money, my


time or my talents, my promiſe may make an
eſſential difference, and therefore having once
been given ought to be fulfilled. The party to
whom it was made has had expectations excited
in him, which I ought not to diſappoint; the par-
ty to whom. I am under no engagement has no


ſuch diſappointment to encounter. What is this


tenderneſs to which I am bound, this expectati-


on I maſt nat dare to diſappoint ? An expectation
that Lſhould do wrong, that I ſhould prefer a leſs
good to a greater, that I ſhould commit abſo-
lute evil; for ſuch muſt be the reſult when the


balance has been ſtruck. *©* But his expectation


has altered the: nature of his fituation, has en-


gaged him in undertakings from which he would
otherwiſe: have abſtained.”” Be it fo. He and
all other men will be taught to depend more up-


on their ow-I uexertions, and leſs upon the aſſiſ-
tance of others, which caprice may refuſe, or
juſtice oblige me to withhold. He and all others


will be; taught to acquire ſuch: merit, and to en-


man


3


—


— —


— —


— —
5


*
1


oy
*
o
2 — — —


2 * .
— * + EW

— — —U—— —
2 >= — —


= -
— — ⁰⅛%d . ˙* . k⁵ . abate Ns
WW.


— —— ——

9 IRE. cr too mr

5 A *

4 3 —
ug


— —⅛
mY


—— — P — „
2 ** n 12 9 *


—_—


* ©, oF ro
1 1


e et Ne" 3
* 2 . * o „ *


. , *
0 c I
4 * \ 5 F
:
: *
” * 1
. : 2 N |
4 p
wa 2 — ramontegy — .
— = 2 — —— * . — — — 3 a - —
2 2 7 — — — Ä — he — 0 OO —— — 8 — — - — —— 7 -
—— — — Eh — — << — Indy — — —_— * — — — fe. pr
— — — - — —— 7 OED 7 . — 2 1 . ' 4
— 1 « TIES. . > . n =
hy 2 * 0 ft E. en 4 — 4 - — — — — — — —. 2 T =_
. = x * * * — — , — — N 2 —. — — 2 — me — — 22 — - 3
. " ” 8 4 8 A — - _ f Y N 2 1 0 — 8 — * -
0 A oa — 2 8 r my | TCD OG * 4 * 2 1 * — q 1 — 1 G4
= my on th N 5 „ — n 2 * 14 2 1 , ny ' ** i ww 1.9 — . N hb BE
A 9 * — 1 o 4 v * — 7 * * b . 0 q *
* 2 2 21. 2 q — * E 'F _ bm — = _ — — —— — — OO” — * =
— £2 . ea - wy? — — — — ee — 2


aw.


"
*
— * :
—ͤ— äG—— 2 — e
1229 * „ _ o =
- a oe PII ”


. 4 2 9 — — — .
* * . * A 3 by 2 :
N ©
. *


IE.
*
5


« — 5 —— -
— — _ wh
— — > nn — — > >. —
. — — — — — ͥ — A — — —
- ——U 0 — — or Ire — — —- — —— — —
4 \ 9 ”
A 4 -
-


N


8
—
o _—_ 4%
I — "Ix. 2 797 ů Od — — rr
* * i 2 5
at : - .
**


142 © -OF PROMISES.


man to come to their ſuccour, if they ſhould ſtand
in need of aſſiſtance. The reſolute execution of


juſtice, without liſtening to that falſe pity, which,


to do imaginary kindneſs to one, would lead us
to injure the whole, would in a thouſand ways
increaſe the independence, the energies and the
virtue of mankind. | | 1
Let us however ſuppoſe, that my conduct
ought to be influenced by this previous expecta-
tion of the individual.” Let us ſuppoſe, that,
in ſelecting an individual for a certain office, my
choice ought not to be governed merely by the ab-
ſtract fitneſs of the candidates, but that J ought
to take into the account the extreme value of the
appointment from certain circumſtances to one of
the candidates, and its comparative inutility to
the other.” Let us farther ſuppoſe, that the


_ expectation excited in one of them has led him


into ſtudies and purſuits to qualify himſelf for the
office, which will be uſeleſs if he do not fucceed
to it; and that this is one of the conſiderations
which ought to govern my determination.” —All
this does not come up to what we have been
taught reſpecting the obligation of a promiſe. * '
For, firſt, it may be obſerved, that it ſeems
to be of little conſequence in this ſtatement, |
whether the expectation were excited by a direct
promiſe or in ſome other manner, whether it
were excited by a declaration of mine or of a third


perſon, or laſtly, whether it aroſe ſingly out of
the reaſon of the caſe and the pure deductions
and reflections of the expecter's mind. Upon


every one of theſe ſuppoſitions his conduct, and
the injury he may ſuſtain from a diſappointment,
5 N "TM will


1


OF PROMISES. 143


will remain the ſame. Here then all that has


been commonly underſtood by the obligation of a
promiſe is excluded. The motive to be attended
to, flows from no ſolemn engagement of mine,
but from an incidental conſequence of my decla-


ration, and which might juſt as eaſily have been


the conſequence of many other circumſtances.
The conſideration by which it becomes me to be


influenced is, not a regard for veracity, or a par-


_ ticular defire to preſerve my integrity, both of


which are in reality wholly unconcerned in the


tranſaction, but an attention to the injury to be
ſuſtained by the loſing candidate, whatever might
be the original occaſion of the conduct out of
which the injury proceeded.. |

Let us take an example of a ſtill ſimpler nature.


« I hve in Weſtminſter; and I engage to meet
the captain of a ſhip from Blackwal at the Royal


Exchange. My engagement is of the nature of
information to him, that I ſhall be at the Exchange
at a certain hour. He accordingly lays afide his


other buſineſs, and comes thither to meet me.


This is a reaſon why I ſhould not fail him unleſs
for ſome very material cauſe. But it would ſeem
as if the reaſon why I ſhould not fail him would
be equally cogent, if I knew from any other
ſource that he would be there, and that a quanti-
iy of convenience equal to the quantity upon the
former ſuppoſition would accrue from my meet-
ing him. It may be ſaid, that it is eſſential to
various circumſtances of human intercourſe, that
| we ſhould be able to depend on each other for a
ſteady adherence to engagements of this ſort.”
The ſtatement however would be ſomewhat more


accurate


5
— — ——


-
Ht 4 of
22 ee EE CIs
——— ——— —— Wo


"x
p
em 2 a
d ——— —

00 —
:. ... EIS IIS
— rer—o— —— —— —
— 1


— —— ⁰¹wꝛm — — —
— 2; |


" -
5
—
* 4 ” 5 ” OR” = *
r —— r — — re 2 — — ——
ce - 3 — . — — D


4
—


*
” {lr —
1 — — —— 2 — e
22 * _ N


"0 G
$
n
— —


1

|

-
fl.

+ 14

% $
0


-
9
py r
1 Pr ==
1 2 ＋ rr


—


6 —


—


, ⁰ůͥꝙ;h̃! SS


— ES”
n


r


—


*
aq ” 4 *
„ po
—— — —  — — —— — — — — *
* n = Sas . — — he ph


——


: EF, 1 — . —
= * r 3 83 -- 2 I, 2 7 * * Dre a = _—_ Toe gd * 1 — - y 8 2 at Ty R 8
— r _ 1 , 222 ˙ 1 ˙ w : ;


2 Es „„


2 —


»

7 K
* oy

= — —. — ITE — — 2 —
— A — ˙ —ꝙĩũ . .. —⁵U.. . ̃7˙—·L.. ˙1¹⁰3Ä
# s . LO. . rx
—_— — J $ * * 8 4
S_— 2 > ED 8 1. Eo —


144 OF PROMISES.


accurate if we ſaid, that it was eſſential td va-
rious circumſtances of human intercourſe; that
we ſhould be known to beſtow a ſteady attention
upon the quantities of convenience or inconve-
nience, of good or evil, that might ariſe to others
from our conduct. ene
It is undoubtedly upon this hypotheſis a part
of our duty to make as few promiſes or declarati-

ons exciting appropriate expectations as poſſible.

He who lightly gives to another the idea that he
will govern himſelf in his future conduct, not by
the views that ſhall be preſent to his mind when
the conduct ſhall come to be determined on, but
by the view he ſhall be able to take of it at ſome
preceding period, is vicious in ſo doing. But


1 the obligation he is under reſpecting his future

| conduct is, to act juſtly, and not, becauſe he has

| committed one error, for that reaſon to become
Guilty of a ſecond. ©


5
— EY 3
—— — * —
a FY by A yz
— ; = — eee — —


——— — 3 2

= - — -
* 1 1

- —


HAF.


. 145 Þ


CH; A BOON


* PR 1 22 1 12 a "
— — — — — —
*
a 1— Fo > — nn” Tn Es —
. — — — - . — — S —— —— ene — — p—— — = —— — o —
— e = - == = 722 wo mg. — 2 IS = - _
: £ - . - bh * N 4 — - — * 7 = =
8 . „ 2 9 5 ER
2 224 2 = — n hy — —


| ; 2 |

OF POLITICAL AUTHORITY. [
Common deliberation the true foundation of govern- nt
ment—Proved from the equal claims of mankind | |
From the nature of our faculties — From the Kt
,. object of government. From the effects of com- [ i
mon deliberation, —— Delegation vindicated. 9
Difference between the doctrine here maintained 4
and that of a ſocial contract apparent—From K
the merely proſpectiue nature of the former — E
From the nullity of promiſes—From the fallibility H
of deliberation. ——Conclufion. : i


rr


H. AVING rejected the hypotheſes that have
moſt generally been adduced to account for the
origin of government conſiſtently with the prin-
ciples of moral juſtice, let us enquire whether
we may not arrive at the ſame object, by a ſim-
ple inveſtigation of the obvious reaſon of the caſe,
without having recourſe to any refinement of.


4
-

n e . Ms «„ 22% „„ ore —
- — — rr — PE NE - —
TRE «RE. 1 * 8 2 — 3 Rn Ay A
. o . 3 6.

"_ E &
bo ty


ſyſtem or fiction of proceſs. 4

Government then being introduced for the rea- 1
ſons already affigned, the firſt and moſt impor- [
tant principle that can be imagined relative to its Y


form and- ſtructure, ſeems to be this; that, as
government is a tranſaction in the name and 2
the benefit of the whole, every member of the
4... L community


r . CNN ꝗ¶ ] Nl WIG TI VE GO !
o E 1 1 „
— — — - . . 4 *
hom. "7 bw - * ar £0 We ove * A 4+ <


145 or POLITICAL AUTHORITY.


community ought to have ſome ſhare in its ad-
miniſtration. The arguments in ſupport of this
propoſition are various. 5 i
I. It has already appeared that there is no cri-
terion perſpicuouſly deſignating any one man or
ſet of men to preſide over the reſt. ä
2. All men are partakers of the common fa-
culty reaſon, and may be ſuppoſed to have ſome
communication with the common preceptor truth.
It would be wrong in an affair of ſuch momentous
concern, that any chance for additional. wiſdom
ſhould be rejected; nor can we tell in many caſes
till after the experiment how eminent any indivi-
dual may one day be found in the buſineſs of guid-
ing and deliberating for his fellows. |
3. Government is a contrivance inſtituted for
the ſecurity of individuals; and it ſeems both rea-
ſonable that each man ſhould have a ſhare in pro-
viding for his own ſecurity, and probable that
partiality and cabal ſhould by this means be moſt
w; 7
— 4. Laſtly, to give each man a voice in the
public concerns comes neareſt to that admirable
idea of which we ſhould never loſe ſight, the
uncontrolled exerciſe of private judgment. Each
man would thus be inſpired with a conſciouſneſs
of his own importance, and the laviſh feelings
that ſhrink up the foul in the preſence of an
imagined ſuperior would be unknown.
Admitting then the propriety of each man hav-
ing a ſhare in directing the affairs of the whole in
the firſt inſtance, it ſeems neceſſary that he ſhould
concur, in electing a houſe of repreſentatives, if
he be the member of a large ſtate; or, even in a
. ſmall


OF POLITICAL AUTHORITY. 147


ſmall one, that he ſhould aſſiſt in the appoint-
ment of officers and adminiſtrators ; which im-
plies, firſt, a delegation of authority to theſe of-
ficers, and, ſecondly, a tacit conſent, or rather
an admiſſion of the neceſſity, that the queſtions
to be debated ſhould abide the deciſion of a ma-
jority. by | ;

But to this ſyſtem of delegation the ſame ob-
jections may be urged, that were cited from
Rouſſeau in the chapter of the Social Contract.
It may be alleged that, if it be the buſineſs of
every man to exerciſe his own judgment, he can
in no inſtance ſurrender this function into the
hands of another. |


.


To this objection it may be anſwered, firſt,
that the parallel is by no means complete be-


tween an individual's exerciſe of his judgment in


a caſe that is truly his own, and his exerciſe of
his judgment in an article where the nee
and province of government are already admitted,


Wherever there is a government, there muſt be


a will ſuperſeding that of individuals. It is ab-


furd to expect that every member of a ſocietʒ


ſhould agree with every other member in the va-


rious meaſures it may be found neceſſary to


adopt. The ſame neceflity, that requires the
introduction of force to ſuppreſs injuſtice on the
part of a few, requires that the ſentiments of the
majority ſhould direct that force, and that the
minority ſhould either ſecede, or patiently wait
for the period when the truth on the ſubject
conteſted ſhall be generally underſtood. BOY


Secondly, delegation is not, as at firſt fight it


might appear to be, the act of one man commit-
POM: 1 ” 2.


-


i
TR
11
114
2 a1 4's
1 dl
g 1
4
1”
+ i
| 1
ny
1
* N 1
4
|
. 5
it
:
' *
U
*
1
1
118
Wit
b 4
*
4 H 1
7.
Bit
fr,
. a
þ 11
*
1
My
798
b. il
*
9
T5
bh


4
XJ

*

|
1
4

Tu
1


6 —L— n
— —— —


148 OF POLITICAL AUTHORITY.
ting to another a function, which ſtrictly ſpeak-
ing it became him to exerciſe for himſelf. De-


legation in every inſtance in which it can be re-


conciled with juſtice, is an a& which has for its
object the general good. The individuals to
whom the delegation is made, are either more
likely from talents or leiſure to perform the


function in the moſt eligible manner, or at leaſt


there is ſome public intereſt requiring that it
ſhould be performed by one or a few perſons,
rather than by every individual for himſelf. This
is the caſe, whether in that firſt and ſimpleſt bt: -
all delegations the prerogative of a majority, or
in the election of a houſe of repreſentatives, or
in the appointment of public officers. Now all
conteſt as to. the perſon who ſhall exerciſe a cer-


tain, function, and the propriety of reſigning it,
is frivolous, the moment it is decided how and


by whom it can moſt advantageouſly be exer-


ciſed. It is of no conſequence that I am the pa-


rent of a child, when it has once been aſcer-
tained that the child will receive greater be-


nefit by living under the ſuperintendence of a


ſtranger.
Laſtly, it is a miſtake to imagine that the


propriety of reſtraining. me when my conduct is
injurious, riſes out of any delegation of mine.


The juſtice of employing force when every other
means was inſufficient, is even prior to the ex-
iſtence of ſociety. Force ought never to be re-
ſorted to but in caſes of abſolute neceſſity; and,
when ſuch caſes occur, it is the duty of every


man to defend himſelf from violation. There is
therefore 0 delegation neceſſary on the part of


the


the offender ; but the community in the cenſure
it exerciſes over him ſtands in the place of the
injured party. wo FD 4 | 3

It may perhaps by ſome perſons be imagined,
that the doctrine here delivered of the juſtice of
proceeding in common concerns by a common
deliberation, is nearly coincident with that other
doctrine which teaches that all lawful govern-
ment derives its authority from a ſocial contract.
Let us conſider what is the true difference be-
tween them. Ws;

In the firſt place, the doctrine of common de-
liberation, is of a proſpective, and not a retro-
ſpective nature. Is the queſtion reſpecting ſome
future meaſure to be adopted in behalf of the
community? Here the obligation to deliberate


in common preſents itſelf, as eminently to be
preferred to every other mode of deciding upon


the intereſts of the whole. Is the queſtion whe-
ther I ſhall yield obedience to any meaſure al-
ready promulgated? Here I have nothing to do
with the conſideration of how the meaſure ori-
ginated ; unleſs perhaps in a country where com-


*


mon deliberation has in ſome ſort been admitted


as a ſtanding principle, and where the object
may be to reſiſt an innovation upon this princi-
ple. In the caſe of ſhip money under king
Charles the firſt, it was perhaps fair to reſiſt
the tax, even ſuppoſing it to be abſtractedly a
good one, upon account of the authority im-
poſing it; though that reaſon might be inſuffi-

cient, in a country unuſed to repreſentative tax-
ation. | |


Excluſively


OF POLITICAL AUTHORITY. 149


— — eons >> ag 2
— ß — - — =
*


EE r —


0
1 ay ar ̃ —— no ada I CLLR . i nan
—_ = — . —
hy 2 T On , .
"= * — . 3 ty
I —— 9" —


* - ESE SEAS Cab, AS ds 4 a Gd 2 —
—_ a =
EE CE I ee ce ie Notes


now Bag”


* — 2
2 F
Ld


2 2. $5.44
. "> WEL


f lj


——


—— —


— TSS
—


— — — —
eee;
—


e


2


or POLITICAL AUTHORITY.


Exclu fively of this conſideration, no meaſure
is to be reſiſted on account of the irregularity of
its derivation. If it be juſt, it is entitled both
to my chearful ſubmiſſion and my zealous ſup-
port. So far as it is deficient in jultice, I am bound


59


to reſiſt. My ſituation in this reſpect is in no


degree different from what it was previouſly to


all organiſed government. Juſtice was at that


time entitled to my aſſent, and injuſtice to my
diſapprobation. They can never ceaſe to have
the ſame claims upon me, till they ſhall ceaſe to
" Aten by the ſame 1 proper-
The meaſure of my reſiſtance will how-

27 vary with circumſtances, and therefore will
demand from us a ſeparate examination.
Secondly, the diſtinction between the doctrine
here Ln and that of a ſocial contract will
be better underſtood, if we recollect what has
been ſaid upon the nature and validity of promi-
ſes. If promiſe be in all caſes a fallacious mode
of binding a man to a ſpecific mode of action,
then muſt the argument be in all caſes imperti-


nent, that I conſented to ſuch a deciſion, and am
therefore bound to regtilate myſelf accordingly,

It is impoſſible to imagine a principle of more
injurious tendency, than that which ſhall teach
me to difarm my future wiſdom by my paſt


folly, and to conſult for my direction the errors
in which my 1gnorance has involved me, rather


than the code of eternal truth. So far as conſent
has any validity, abſtract juſtice becomes a mat-
ter of pure indifference : 10 far as juſtice deſerves
to be made the * of my life, it is in vain to


Fg . endeavour


PET
"


OF POLITICAL AUTHORITY. 151
endeavour to ſhare its authority with compacts
and promiſes. _ 5 by
Me have found the parallel to be in one re-
ſpect incomplete between the exerciſe of theſe
two functions, private judgment and common
deliberation. In another reſpe& the analogy is
exceedingly ſtriking, and conſiderable perſpi-
cuity will be given to our ideas of the latter by
an illuſtration borrowed from the former. In
the one caſe as in the other there 1s an obvious
principle of juſtice in favour of the general exer-


ciſe. No individual can arrive at any degree of


moral or intellectual improvement, unleſs in the
uſe of an independent; judgment. No ſtate can
be well or happily adminiſtered, unleſs in the
perpetual uſe 55 common deliberation reſpecting
the meaſures it may be requiſite to adopt. But,
though the general exerciſe of theſe faculties be
founded in immutable juſtice, juſtice will by no
means uniformly vindicate the particular applica-
tion of them. Private judgment and public de-
liberation are not themſelves the ſtandard of mo-


ral right and wrong; they are only the means of


diſcovering right and wrong, and of comparing
particular propoſitions with the ſtandard of eter-
nal truth. :

Too much ſtreſs has undoubtedly been laid
, upon the idea, as of a grand and magnificent
ſpectacle, of a nation deciding for itſelf upon
ſome great and public principle, and of the high-
eſt magiſtracy yielding its claims when the ge-
neral voice has pronounced. The value of the
Whole mult at laſt depend upon the quality of
their deciſion. Truth cannot be made more dus
ü 4 85 | M


*


N 1 —
7 ws ̃ —— —— > —
————ꝛ — — OT re tn — — — ä — — —


:
|
'
Þ
j
2
'
i
.
|
ö
1
4
.
|
ö
'
|
:

. =
7
| „

*
.
1
. 7
1 E


% a - I = — 4 — ——— — —
— = = WS — — — = — -
2 — — — — — = - -
+ X * - _ . K * * 4 1 — — — — — —
IJ . . Rt _— — — . — =I0
— pou


CI N
————ů— k ů


1
|


8


—
22 by 4 P
3
Eo WY ——


— — —


— I IR


re


ELL WS — : 085


* 2 —— 1
* n 4 2 p


152 or LEGISLATION.


by the number of its votaries. Nor is the ſpec-
tacle much leſs intereſting, of a ſolitary indivi-
dual bearing his undaunted teſtimony in favour
of juſtice, though oppoſed by miſguided mil-
lions. Within certain limits however the beauty
of the exhibition muſt be acknowledged. That
a nation ſhould dare to vindicate its function of
common deliberation, is a ſtep gained, and a
ſep that inevitably leads to an improvement of
the character of individuals. That men ſhould
unite in the aſſertion of truth, is no unpleaſing
evidence of their virtue. Laſtly, that an indi-
vidual, however great may be his imaginary ele-
vation, ſhould be obliged to yield his perſonal
pretenſions to the ſenſe of the community, at
leaſt bears the appearance of a practical confir-
mation of the great principle, that all private
| Sn muſt Veld to FE: x. grace * f


R
| „ „
i ; y % 4
\


9, OF LEGIS SL ATION.


5 Society can declare and interpret, but carnat enacl.
1 * only executive.


HA AVING ds far Mpeſtigisd E nature
of political functions, it ſeems neceſſary that ſome
l explanation


o LEGISLATION. 153
explanation ſhould be given in this place upon
the ſubject of legiſlation. Who is it that has
the authority to make laws? What are the cha-
racteriſtics by which that man or body of men is
to be known, in whom the faculty is veſted of
legiſlating for the reſt?

To theſe queſtions the anſwer is extegtinghy
ſimple : Legiſlation, as it has been uſually un-
derſtood, is not an affair of human competence.
Reaſon is the only legiſlator, and her decrees are
irrevocable and uniform. The functions of ſo-
ciety extend, not to the making, but the inter-
2 of law; it cannot decree, it can only de-
clare that, which the nature of things has al-
ready decreed, and the propriety of which irre-
ſiſtibly flows from the circumſtances of the caſe.
Monteſquieu ſays, that in a free ſtate every
man will be his own legiſlator *.” This is not
true, ſetting apart the F of the com-
munity, unleſs in the limited ſenſe already ex-
plained. It is the office of conſcience to deter-
mine, not like an Aſiatic cadi, aecording to
the ebbs and flows of his own paſſions, but like
a Britiſh judge; who makes no new law, but
faithfully declares that law which he finds al-
ready written T.“

The ſame diſtinction is to be mails u pon the
ſubject of authority. All political power is
ſtrictly ſpeaking executive. It has appeared to
be neceſſary, with reſpect to men as we at pre-


„ 2 E


*'« Dans un ẽtat libre, tout homme qu? et cenſt avoir une
- eme libre, doit etre gouverne 72 lui- meme.

| rit des Loix, Liv. 2 W vi.
+ ne 5 Sermons. — on a Good * |


,


. OBEDIENCE.


ſent find them, that force ſhould ſometimes be
employed in repreſſing injuſtice; and for the
ſame reaſons. it appears that this force ſhould as
far as poſſible be veſted in the community. To
the public ſupport of juſtice therefore the autho.
rity of the community extends. But no ſooner

does it wander in the ſmalleſt degree from the
great line of juſtice, than its authority is at an
end, it ſtands. upon a level with the obſcureſt in-
dividual, and every: an is bound to, reſiſt its de-


s.


FE. f c * - 2-4 - g FO
, ; < 6 * ; - : 1
a bv "_ . s | N
= ; L
* p a y 91 L a 4 — 8 4 f
. . Pd /
; ; | | ; — H P VI ;
* S 9 1 1 1 b 4 „ ö 1 *
s . * J 5
— *
z 4 *< "I" >
-
- FE .
«a. SL : „* N e* Y . 5 7
; 4 — „ + F » < 4 . A


Obedience not the correluative of authority.——No-
man bound to yield obedience to another.—Cafe
of ſubmiſion confidered.—Foundation of obedi-
ence. Uſefulneſs of focial communication.—Caſe
of © confidence confidered.—1ts limitations. Miſ-

chief unlimited canfidence——Subjettion. ex-


HAVvIN G enquired into the juſt and legiti-
mate ſource of authority, we will next turn our


attention to What has uſually been conſidered as its
correlative,


» i” "38. 3 f
* 4 F * 3 : 4 ;


-


1 OF OBEDIENCE. 155


correlative, obedience. This has always: been
found a ſubject of peculiar difficulty, as well in
relation to the meaſure and extent of obedience,
as to the ſource of our obligation to obey.

| The true ſolution will probably be found in the
obſervation that obedience is by no means the pro-
per correlative. The object of government, as
has been already demonſtrated, is the exertion of
force. Now force can never be regarded as'an
appeal to the underſtanding ; and therefore obe-
dience, which is an act of the underſtanding or
will, can have no legitimate connection with it.
I am bound to ſubmit to juſtice and truth, be-
cauſe they approve themſelves to my judgment.
Jam bound to co-operate with government, as
far as it appears to me to coincide with theſe prin-
ciples.. But 1 ſubmit to government when 1
think it erroneous, merely becauſe I have no
remedy.

No truth can be more fumple, at the ſame time
that no truth has been more darkened by the gloſ-
ſes of intereſted individuals, than that one man can
in no one caſe be bound to yield obedience to any
other man or ſet of men upon earth.

There is one rule to which we are univerſally
bound to conform ourſelves, juſtice, the treat-
ing every man preciſely. as his uſefulneſs. and
worth demand, the acting under every circum-
ſtance in the manner that ſhall procure the great-
eſt quantity of general good. When we have
done thus, what province is there left to the diſ-
poſal of obedience ? 7

I am ſummoned to appear before the magif⸗
trate to anſwer for a libel, an imaginary crime. f


156 OF OBEDIENCE.
an act which perhaps I am convinced ought in
no caſe to fall under the animadverſion of law.
I comply with this ſummons. My compliance
proceeds; perhaps from a conviction that the ar-
guments I ſhall exhibit in the court form the beſt
reſiſtance I can give to his injuſtice, or perhaps
from perceiving that my non-compliance would
frivolouſly and without real uſe R the
Jy tranquullity.

A quaker refuſes to pay tithes. He therefore
ſuffers a tithe proctor to diſtrain upon his goods.
"In this action morally ſpeaking he does wrong.
The diſtinction he makes is the argument of a
mind that delights in trifles. That which will
be taken from me by force, it is no breach of
morality to deliver with my own hand. The
money which the robber extorts from me, I do
not think it neceſſary to oblige him to take from
my perfon. If I walk quietly to the gallows,
this does not imply my conſent to be hanged.

In all theſe caſes there is a clear diſtinction be-
tween my compliance with juſtice and my com-
pliance with injuſtice. I conform to the princi- |
ples of juſtice, becauſe I perceive them to be in-
trinfically and unalterably right. I yield to in-
juſtice, though I perceive that to which I yield
to be abſtractedly wrong, and only chooſe the

leaſt among inevitable evils. |
I) he caſe of volition, as it is commonly termed,
ſeems parallel to that of intellect. You preſent a
certain propoſition to my mind, to which you
require my aſſent. If you accompany the pro-
poſition with evidence calculated to ſhew the
agreement between the terms of which it conſiſts,

you


OF OBEDIENCE . 157


you may obtain my aſſent. If you accompany
the propoſition with authority, telling me that
you have examined it and find it to be true, that
thouſands of wiſe and diſintereſted men have ad-
mitted it, that angels or Gods have affirmed it,
I may aſſent to your authority; but, with reſpect
to the propoſition itſelf, my underſtanding of its
reaſonableneſs, my perception of that in the pro-
poſition which ſtrictly ſpeaking conſtitutes its
truth or its falſhood, remain juſt as they did. I
believe ſomething elſe, but I do not believe the
propoſition. 15 bags 5

Juſt fo in morals. I may be perſuaded of the
propriety of yielding compliance to a requiſition
the juſtice of which-I cannot diſcern, as 1 may
be perſuaded to yield compliance to a requiſition
which I know to be unjuſt. But neither of theſe
requiſitions is ſtrictly ſpeaking a proper ſubject of
obedience. Obedience ſeems rather to imply the
unforced choice of the mind and aſſent of the
judgment. But the compliance I yield to go-
vernment, independently of my approbation of
its meaſures, is of the ſame ſpecies as my compli-
ance with a wild beaſt, that forces me to run
north, when my judgment and inclination prompt-
ed me to go ſouth.

But, though morality in its pureſt conſtructi-
on altogether excludes the idea of one man's
yielding obedience to another, yet the greateſt be-

nefits will reſult from mutual communication.
There is ſcarcely any man, whoſe communicati-
ons will not ſometimes enlighten my judgment
and rectify my conduct. But the perſons to whom
it becomes me to pay particular attention in this
: | _ reſpec,


158 OF OBEDIENCE.

reſpect, are not ſuch as may exerciſe any p: ticu-
lar magiſtracy, but ſuch, whatever may their
ſtation, as are wiſer or better informed 1 in any reſ-
pet than myſelf.

There are two ways in which a man wiſer than
myſelf may be of uſe to me ; by the communi-
cation of thoſe arguments by which he is convinc-
ed of the truth of the judgments he has formed ;
and by the communication of the judgments
Ares independent of argument. This laſt .
is of uſe only in reſpe& to the narrowneſs of our
own underſtandings, and the time that might be
requiſite for the acquiſition of a ſcience of which
we are at preſent ignorant. On this account I
am not to be blamed, if I employ a builder to
conſtruct me a houſe, or a mechanic to fink me a
well; nor ſhould I be liable to blame, if I work-
ed in perſon under their direction. In this cafe,
not having opportunity or ability to acquire the
ſcience myſelf, I truſt to the ſcience of another.

I chooſe from the deliberation of my own judg-
ment the end to be purſued ; I am convinced that
the end is good and commendable ; and, having
done this, I commit the ſelection of means to a

perſon whoſe qualifications are ſuperior to my

own. - The confidence repoſed in this inſtance 1s
preciſely of the nature of delegation in general.

No term ſurely can be more unapt than that of
obedience, to expreſs our duty towards the over-
ſeer we have appointed in our affairs.

Similar to the confidence I repoſe in a ſkilful
mechanic is the attention which ought to be paid
to the commander of an army. It is my in
the firſt place to be ſatisfied of the goodneſs 8

* Caule,


OF OBEDIENCE. 159
cauſe, of the propriety of the war, and of the
truth of as many general propoſitions concerning
the conduct of it, as can poſſibly be brought
within the ſphere of my underſtanding. It may
well be doubted whether ſecrecy be in any degree
neceſſary to the conduct of war. It may be
doubted whether treachery and ſurpriſe are to be
claſſed among the legitimate means of defeating
our adverſary. But after every deduction has
been made for conſiderations of this ſort, there
will ſtill remain caſes, where ſomething muſt be
confided, as to the plan of a campaign or the ar-
rangement of a battle, to the ſkill, fo far as that
{kill really exiſts, of the commander. When he
has explained both to the utmoſt of his ability,
there may remain parts, the propriety of which
I cannot fully comprehend, but which I have
ſufficient reaſon to confide to his judgment.

This doctrine however of limited obedience,
or, as it may more properly be termed, of confi-
dence and delegation, ought to be called into ac-
tion as ſeldom as poſſible. Every man ſhould
_ diſcharge to the utmoſt practicable extent the du-
ties which ariſe from his fituation. If he gain as
to the ability with which they may be diſcharged,
when he delegates them to another, he loſes with
reſpect to the fidelity; every one being conſci-
ous of the ſincerity of his own intention, and no
one having equal. proof of that of another. A
virtuous man will not fail to perceive the obliga-
tion under which he is placed to exert his own
underſtanding, and to judge for himſelf as wide-
ly as his circumſtances will permit,

"OM The


3


15 ' OF OBEDIENCE...


The abuſe of the doctrine of confidence has |
been the ſource of more calamities to mankind
than all the other errors of the human under.
ſtanding. Depravity would have gained little
ground in the world, if every man had been in
the exerciſe of his independent judgment. The
inſtrument by which extenſive miſchiefs have in
all ages been perpetrated has been, the principle
of many men being reduced to mere machines in
the hands of a few. Man, while he conſults his
own underſtanding, 1s the ornament of the uni-.
verſe. Man, when he ſurrenders his reaſon, and
becomes the partiſan of implicit faith and paſſive
obedience, is the moſt miſchievous of all animals.
Ceaſing to examine every propoſition that comes
before, him for the direction of his conduct, he is
no longer the capable ſubject of moral inſtruction.
He is, in the inſtant of ſubmiſſion, the blind in-
ſtrument of every nefarious purpoſe of his princi-
pal; and, when left to himſelf, is open to the
ſeduction of injuſtice, cruelty and profligacy. _

Theſe reaſonings lead to a proper explanation
of the word ſubject. If by the ſubject of any go-
vernment we mean a perſon whoſe duty it is to
obey, the true inference from the preceding prin-
ciples is, that no government has any ſubjects. .
If the contrary we mean a perſon, whom the go-
vernment is: bound to protect, or may juſtly re-
ſtrain, the word is ſufficiently admiſſible. This
remark. enables us to ſolve. the long-diſputed.
queſtion, what it 1s. that conſtitutes a man the
ſubject of any government. Every man is in this
ſenſe a ſubject, whom the government is compe-

tent


> 4a A,


OF OBEDIENCE., 161


tent to protect on the one hand, or who on the
other, by the violence of his proceedings, ren-
ders force requiſite to prevent him from diſturb-

ing that community, for the preſervation of
whoſe e the een is inſtituted,


"5 8


Moral es Mere elucidated by incidental


reflection By incidental paſſages in various aus
th IRS th


Ir; will generally be oe that, even 8 the
truth upon any ſubject has been moſt induſtriouſ-
ly obſcured, its occaſional irradiations have not
been wholly excluded. The mind has no ſooner
obtained evidence of any new truth, eſpecially in
the ſcience of morals, but it recolle&s numerous
intimations of that truth which have occaſionally
ſuggeſted themſelves, and is aſtoniſhed that a diſ-
covery which was perpetually upon the eve of
being made, ſhould have been kept at a diſtance
lo lon

This ! is eminently the ſs in the ſubject of
which we are raja g. Thoſe numerous paſſa-


ges in poets, divines * and e which
orf M po have


„ Be not afraid of them chat kill the hea and after that
haye no more that they can do“ Luke, Ch. XII. Ver. 4-


—


|

_—
31h
1 1
ki

S ++
1

4

if


14 *
1 1
a
* „
* 1
N
1
_— RO
1
$
Fo
% 8 *
11
x '4
-
.-
1
* „
„
. .
> of
=_
* os ©
In
©
i; *
i 5
N
N
1
1
„
114]
|
173
"i
_
„ \
+ . o
177 /
i
„
=
[0 :
on ©
I
[
1
7% =
is
1 1
WS 7
* # : «
p Ly:
£1718 ”
1 ö
*
4 TT
3
by 1
* 7
3 1
. .
9 *
9
1 "
9
* !
.
2
7
i b
ip
* }
.
al
( ,
x *
'-$4
'
$ 5
1
—
25%
4
f
1
N 1
15
j
£
1
1
i
*
t
4 ;
4 N {
is
1
[|
j \ :
6 8 1
L
| :
| |
7
1 *
In 1 *
I:
\ i


tes fouls au il ett vu de Ia morale.”


162 OF OBEDIENCE.

have placed our unalterable duty in the ſtrongeſt
contraſt with the precarious authority of a ſupe-
rior, and have taught us to diſclaim all ſubordina-
tion to the latter, . always been received by
the ingenuous mind with a tumult of applauſe.
There is indeed no ſpecies of compoſition, in
which the ſeeds of a morality too perfect for our


preſent improvements in ſcience, may more rea-


ſonably be expected to diſcover themſelves, than
in works of imagination, When the mind ſhakes
off the fetters of preſcription and prejudice, when
it boldly takes a flight into the world unknown,
and employs itſelf in ſearch of thoſe grand and in-
tereſting principles which thall tend to impart to
every reader the glow of enthuſiaſm, it is at ſuch

moments that the enquiring and philoſophical
reader may expect to be preſented with the ma-
terials and rude ſketches of intellectual improve-
ment“. 15 Ke . : 23 : N E |

Among the many paſſages from writers of every
denomination that wall readily ſuggeſt themſelves
This was the opinion of the gelebrated Mr. Turgot.
e He thought that the moral ſentiments of mankind might be
conſiderably ſtrengthened, and the perception of them rendered


4


more delicate and preciſe, either by frequent exerciſe, or the


perpetually ſubjecting them to the anatomy of a pure and en-
rer underſtanding. For this reaſon he conſidered ro-
mances as holding a place among treatiſes of morality, and even
as the only books in which he was aware of having ſeen moral


principles treated in an impartial manner.” MH. Turgot pen-


ſoit gu on peut parwenir ꝙ fortifier dans leg hommes leurs ſentimens
moraux, a les rendre plus delicats et plus juſtes, ſoit par I cer.
cice de ces ſentimens, ſoit en apprenant a les ſoumettre @ Panahye
d une raiſon ſaine et tclairte: '* Ceft par ce motif qu'il '#tgardoit
tes romans comme des livres de morale, et meme, diſoit.- il, comme


LY 1 4


Fie de M. Turgot, par M. de Cundorcet.


N


OF OBEDIENCE. — "


8 this head to a well informed mind, we may
naturally recollect the ſpirited reaſoning of young
Norval in the tragedy of Douglas, when he is cal-
led upon by lord Randolph to ſtate the particulars
of a conteſt in which he is engaged, that lord
Randolph may be able to decide between the


one putants.


% Nay, my good lord, though I revere you much,

My cauſe I plead not, nor demand: your judgment.

To the liege lord of my dear native land |

Lowe a ſubject's homage ; but even him

And his high arbitration I reject.

Within my boſom reigns another lord - |
Honour ; ſole e judge and umpire of itſelf.” Act IV.


Nothin 8 can be more accurate Wo a conſide-
rable part of the philoſophy of this paſſage. The
term * honour” indeed has been too much
abuſed, and preſents to the mind too. fantaſtical
an image, to be fairly deſcriptive of that principle
by which the actions of every intellectual being
ou ir to be regulated. The principle to which
it behoves us to attend, is the internal deciſion of
our own underſtanding ; and nothing can be more
evident than that the ſame reafoning, which led
Norval to reject the authority of his ſovereign in
the quarrels and diſputes in which he was engag-
ed, ought to have led him to reject it as the re-
gulator of any of his actions, and of confequence
to abjure that homage which he ſets out with re-

ſerving. Virtue cannot poſſibly. be meaſured b
the judgment and good 3 of N man with
whogs!v we are concerned. -/


- *
— = tf &. #4 * : : . . ; ; n
* *

2
o ! q < *

- 1 0 ö 2 x OY * 2 . | 4

M | = NES

2 T's


ay


x; | 110
* N 7


5


C H A P. VI.


5 1


OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT.


Argument in favour of a variety of forms com-
pared with the argument in favour of a variety
of religious creeds.—That there is one beſt form
of government proved—From the unity of truth
From the nature of man. —Objections from hu-

man weakneſs and prejudice —Danger in eſta-

_ . bliſhing an imperfect code. — Manners of nations

Produced by their forms of government. —Gradu-
al improvement neceſſary.—Simplicity chiefly to

Be deſired, — Publication of truth the grand in-
ſtrument.— By individuals, not by government—
The truth entire, and not by parcels, —Sort of


progreſs to be dgſired.


A PROPOSITION that by many political
reaſoners has been vehemently maintained, is that
of the propriety of inſtituting different political
governments ſuited to the characters, the habits
and prejudices of different nations. The Eng-
liſh conſtitution, fay theſe reaſoners, is adapt-
ed to the thoughtful, rough and unſubmitting
character of this iſland race; the ſlowneſs. and

- complication of Dutch formality to the phlegma-

2 tic Hollander; and the ſplendour of the grand
monarque to the vivacity of Frenchmen. 1 g
; OR the


7 < * &
N
1


OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT. 68


the ancients what could be better aſſorted than a
pure democracy to the intellectual acuteneſs and
impetuous energy of the Athenians ;, while the Yn.
hardy and unpoliſhed Spartan flouriſhed much  _.
more under the rugged and inflexible diſcipline of
Lycurgus? The great art of the legiſlator is to
penetrate into the true character of the nation

with whom he is concerned, and to diſcover the
exact ſtructure of government which is calculated

to render that nation flouriſhing and happy.”

Accordingly an Engliſhman who ſhould reaſon

upon theſe poſtulata might ſay, It is not neceſ- '

fary I ſhould aſſert the Engliſh conſtitution to be

the happieſt and ſublimeſt conception of the hu-
man mind; I do not enquire into the abſtract ex-
cellence of that. government under which France
made herſelf illuſtrious for centuries. I contem-
plate with enthuſiaſm the venerable republics of
Greece and Rome. But I am an enemy to the
removing ancient land-marks, and diſturbing
with our crude devices. the wiſdom of ages. I
regard with horror the Quixote plan, that would
reduce the wregular greatneſs of nations to the
frigid and impracticable ſtandard of metaphyſical

mens.” 2

This queſtion has been anticipated in various

parts of the preſent work; but the argument is
| 40, Popper and plauſible to a ſuperficial view, as
juſtly to entitle it to a ſeparate examination.
MS OY j W. „ „„

: * Theſe arguments bear ſome reſemblance to thoſe of Mr.
Burke. It was not neceſſary that they ſhould do ſo preciſely,
or that we ſhould take advantage of the argumentum ad hominem
built upon his fervent admiration of the Engliſh conſtitution. Not
to ſay that we ſhall feel ourſelves more at our eaſe in examining
the queſtion generally, than in a perſonal attack upon this illul-
trious and virtuous hero of the ancient model. |


*


— *
_= — —— wh N EIS — — o x \ a PTS G
— — - Ra * 2 — —— — - = 2 —
— we a n — — > _— 2 2 —* * by — © — — A - * £33
* - — - - 2 — e
= i a E — 2 — FOO a _ * — Scene ad 2 = *
2 — — — — 2 8 ——— 5 - — 2 III
- — — — — — — — — * - _ x — - = —— — ̃ X — — ws — ** — * —_ —— 4 * 7 —— Fo -
. — 2 — 2 — 2, — 2 2 = * — — = — —— — —— — — = ä r — 2 — 5 — wr P A — — — — — —
— . - - _ 2 — — — — — — — — — — ITT — — - Eo - — = 2 —* a — yet * 1 7 _
— 2 — — 4 to — — * — d = =< — 1 — — — — — — < — — —— — - * Y - * m 3 "= + +4
— 1 —_—_ . ., c ors add — OR - a 6 — * — — * — — — — - = wag — , hs — _ n A 8 — * 8 > IA 4 bor a 2
— 2 — an moe — — — * 7 Sig 7 Ry ” — + 2 — 5 2 . e — ; . — ali - a : * PR 22 — * 4 * * 2 « — * a CE REIN * *
2 " . * E 2 y bn -
of * * * * 4 ” - * =
N * - > 5 2 8 5 — — » 7 *
: iy : ö 4 „ . - I "We - © : N *
1 — —— ary — ng 4 * * ** 2 8 PW — CEO EIS. ** T * 3 pt 1 n * 2 . * 4 282 9 EY "ue
* — — — — d < — 4 is * * * n 1 588 8 N * = 4 —- 5 F „ v 7 4 * — * 2 1 * N bw 4 T =Y

= - — 2 — — 2 251 * 7 r * 2. » 8 7 Fas — 7 E 9 8 4 2 * " . 2. p 2

* 7 * * * 7 . - - * | as. * ” . -

j : * 7 . - 1 1 » — þ
, \ A - 1 : 6 I

4 * 1 a ._ 2 -

_- : Fr:
- "£


— m—__


— 2 rn


— 4 * 2


—


:
.
17


—
AG Ws


va
$7
|

j


4


166 OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT.


The idea bears ſome reſemblance to one which
was formerly inſiſted upon by certain latitudina-
rians in religion. It is impious, faid they,
* to endeavour to reduce all men to uniformity
of opinion upon this ſubject. Men's minds are
as variods as their faces. God has made them
* ſo; and it is to be preſumed that he is well
Pleaſed to be addreſſed in different languages, by
different names, and with the conſenting ardour
of difagreeing ſects. Thus did theſe reaſoners
confound the majeſty of truth with the deformity
of falſhood; and ſuppoſe that that being who was
all truth, took delight in the errors, the abſur-
dities, and the vices, for all falſhood in ſome
way or other engenders vice, of his creatures,
At the fame time they were employed in unnerv-
ing that activity of mind, which is the ſingle
ſource of human improvement. If truth and
falſhood be. in reality upon a leyel, I ſhall be very
weakly employed in a ſtrenuous endeavour either
to difcover truth for myſelf, or to impreſs it u pon
—_— -.

Truth is in reality ſingle and uniform. There
muſt in the nature of things be one beſt form of


government, which all intellects, ſufficiently


rouſed from the ſlumber of ſavage ignorance,
will be irreſiſtibly incited to approve. If an
equal participation of the benefits of nature be
good in itſelf, it muſt be good for you and me
and all mankind. Deſpotiſm may be of uſe to
keep human beings in ignorance, but can never
conduce to render them wiſe or virtuous or hap-
px. If the general tendency of deſpotiſm be in-
jurious every portion and l of it ye


OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT: 85 167


4


be a noxious ingredient. Truth cannot be ſo va-
riable, as to change its nature by crofling an arm
of the ſea, a petty brook or an ideal line, and
become falſhood. 'On the contrary it 1s at all
times and in all places the fame.
The ſubj ect 0 legiſlation i is every where the
fame, man. The ints in which human beings
reſemble are infinitely more conſiderable than
thoſe in which they differ. We have the ſame
ſenſes, the fame lets of pleaſure and pain, the
fame faculty to reaſon, to judge and to infet.
The fame cauſes that make me 75 will make
you ha appy. We ma J differ in our opinion upon
| this ſubje& at Hirſt, ut this difference is only
in prej jacke, and is by no means invincible.
An event may often conduce moſt to the benefit
of a hüman being, which his erroneous judg-
ment Per haps, regarded with leaſt complacency,
A wile ſuperintendent of affairs would preſs with
ſteady attention the real advantage of thoſe among
whom he reſided,” careleſs of the temporary diſ-
approbation he incurred, and which would laſt no
longer than the partial and mil] guided apprehen-
ſion from which it flowed.

Is there a country in which a prudent director
of education would propoſe ſome other object for
his labours than to make his pupil temperate and
Juſt and wiſe? Ts there a climate that requires
its inhabitants to be hard drinkers or horſe- joc-
kies or gameſters or bullies, rather than men?
Can there be a corner of the world, Where the
"lover of Juſtice and truth would find himſelf out
of his element and uſeleſs? If no; then libetty
muſt be every where better than flavery, and the


government.


—


* *
|


+. 7 5 ö 8 1
. q TSF: Ha. r os 3 ; a 1 a
7 . 4 A 8 ? - oF 4 * 5 Js 5 Eg # * — * ” * f ” . 3 1 8 4 * 2 7 .
168 OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT
. =
* > \ ”


*


.. ͤ ͤ 1.414059 tt ERR R40
government of rectitude and impartiality better
than the government of capricſe.


hut to this it may be objected that © men
may not be every where capable. of liberty. A


gift however valuable in itſelf, if it be intended
to be beneficial, muſt. be adapted to the capacity
of the receiver. In human affairs every thing
muſt be gradual ;- and it is contrary to every idea
that experience furniſhes of the nature of mind
to expect to advance men to a ſtate of perfection
at once. It was in a ſpirit ſomewhat ſimilar to
this, that Solon, the Athenian lawgiver, apolo-
giſed for the imperfection of his code, faying,
that he had not ſought to promulgate ſuch laws
as were good in themſelves, but ſuch as his coun-


„


try men were able to bear,” _. W area .
The experiment of Solon ſeems to be of a dan-
gerous nature. A code, ſuch as his, bid fair for
permanence, and does not appear to have con-
tained in it a principle of improvement. He did
not meditate that gradual progreſs which was
above deſcribed, nor contemplate in the Athe-
mans of his own time, the root from which were
to ſpring the poſſible Athenians of ſome future
period, who might realiſe all that he was able
to conceive of good ſenſe, fortitude and virtue.
His inſtitutions were rather calculated to hold
them down in perpetuity to one certain degree of

e
Ih his ſuggeſtion furniſhes us with the real clue
_ to that ſtriking coincidence between the manners
of a nation and the form of its government,
. which was mentioned in the beginning of the _
Chapter, and which has furniſhed ſo capital an
argument


OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT. 1569
argument to the advocates for the local propriety '
of different forms of government. It was in re-

ality ſomewhat illogical in theſe reaſoners to em-
ploy this as an argument upon the ſubject, with-
out previouſly aſcertaining which of the two
things was to be regarded as a cauſe and which
as an effect, whether the government aroſe out
of the manners of the nation, or the manners of
the nation out of the government. The laſt of
thefe ſtatements appears upon the whole to be
_ neareſt to the fact. The government may be
indebted for its exiſtence 'to accident or force.
Revolutions, as they have moſt frequently taken
place in the world, are epochas, in which the
temper -and wiſhes of a nation 'are leaſt con-
ſulted . When it is otherwiſe, ſtill the real
effect of the government which is inſtituted, is
to perpetuate propenſities and ſentiments, which
without its operation would ſpeedily have given
place to other propenfities. Upon every ſup-
poſition, the exiſting correſpondence between na-
tional character and national government will be
found in a juſt conſideration to ariſe out of the
latter. „„ "5
The principle of gradual improvement ad-
vanced in the laſt cited objection muſt be ad-
' mitted for true; but then it is neceſſary, while
we adopt it, that we ſhould not ſuffer. ourſelves
to act in direct oppoſition to it; and that we
ſhould chooſe the beſt and moſt powerful means
for forwarding that improvement.
Man is in a ſtate of perpetual progreſs. He
muſt grow either better or worſe, either cor-
2 he 4 ; =" IC.
See Hume's Eſſays, Part II. Eſſay xii.


153 OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT:


rect his habits or confirm them. The govern=
ment propoſed mult either increaſe our paſſions
and prejudices by fanning the flame, or by gra-
dually diſcouraging tend to extirpate them. In
reality, it is ſufficiently difficult to imagine a go-

vernment that ſhall have the latter tendency: By


its very nature political inſtitution has a tendency


>
fa *


to ſuſpend the elaſticity, and put an end to the


—


-advancement of mind. Every ſcheme for em-
bodying imperfection muſt be injurious. That
which is to-day a conſiderable melioration,; will
at ſome future period, if preſerved unaltered, ap-
pear a defect and diſeaſe in the body politic. It
were earneſtly to be defired that each man was
wiſe enough to govern himſelf without the in-
tervention of any compulſory reſtraint; and,
ſince government even in its beſt ſtate is an evil
the object principally to be aimed at is, that we


ſhould have as little of it as the general peace of


human ſociety will permit.


*


But the grand inſtrument for forwarding the


Improvement of mind is the publication of truth.
Not the publication on the part of government;
for it is infinitely difficult to diſcover infallibly
what the truth is, eſpecially upon controverted
points, and government is as liable as individuals
to be miſtaken in this reſpect. In reality it is


more liable; for the depoſitaries of government


have a very obvious temptation to deſire, by
means of ignorance and implicit faith, to 71
ub-


tuate the exiſting ſtate of things. The only


ſtantial method for the propagation of truth is
- diſcuſſion, ſo that the errors of one man may be
detected by the acuteneſs and ſevere diſquiſition


of


OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT. 171
of his neighbours. All we have to demand from


the officers of government, at leaſt in their pub-
lic character, is neutrality. - The intervention of


authority in a field proper to reaſoning and de-


monſtration is always injurious. If on the right
ſide, it can only diſcredit truth, and call off the
attention of men to a foreign conſideration. If
on the wrong, though it may not be able to ſup-


preſs the ſpirit of enquiry, it will have a ten-


dency to convert the calm purſuit of knowledge
Into paſſion and tumult. |

« But in what manner ſhall the principles of
truth be communicated ſo as beſt to lead to the
practice? By ſhewing to mankind truth in all
its evidence, or concealing one half of it? Shall
they be initiated by a partial diſcovery, and thus
ies on by regular degrees to concluſions that
would at firſt have NP alienated their
minds?

This queſtion will come to be more fully dis
cuſſed in a following chapter. In the mean time


let us only conſider for the preſe nt the quantity


of effect that may be expected from mae two
oppoſite plans.

An inhabitant of Turkey or Morocco may
perhaps be of opinion, that the veſting power
in the arbitrary will or caprice of an individual
has in it more advantages than diſadvantages. If
l be deſirous to change his opinion, ſhould I un-
dertake to recommend to him in animated lan-
guage ſome modification of this caprice? I ſhould
attack it in its principle. If I do otherwiſe, I
| ſhall betray the ſtrength of my cauſe. The prin-
_ oppoſite to his own, will not poſſeſs 7 5

the


.


"If
_


- =_ : \
— - -- -—— - * o 2 = = o — — 9 o — 1
= : — * 8 . =o 2 - © „ TT "= * — — 1 1 r
— — — — — — * . nc — — — cy — — = = _ =_
—_— — a - - — == —==Bp COU —— ——— — —— —propenſ == .. ͤ . — . . ——. . — — . — "=D — — — © CSI — — 2
ene - — — S = r =; — — = - = - 2 — 5 3 iy DL . 2 — — — — —_—_ m__ — Ng —— — » —— - — — — — - —_— * — — — — * _ — — —
— —— — - a; l -. - < * ” 2 E 1 — — — — — — r — — — — — — - — + 7 „ * * Pre th 3 —— -y . — — — ———_—— — —

* Wes 1 * g - ”Y 7 - . 1 ” , 8 1 ood F - A —_— » IT

4 * . 7 ® ? 7 4 . 2 7 3 3 was 4 * 705 * q by = ns ai * „ * ” a SY * __ 5 = — a * _ 2 *
3 PP — OE - wt \ * wk a fade 4 . 2 : : p I > N IRC” * f

;- oat * K ? * = - y 4 — —— bh bs thts - — — . i » . 2 — Pee "I wee} p —— —— ö FA 4 2 6 V 1 * * . 4 1 W 755 * 1

* cr © * E CEE * * * * 2 oo — ro 8 7 * * **. —_— 4 — . op 4 my
7 . 2 - : * 3 * - - 2 2 uf * : , * lb. 28 * * >
* s y * Y . . * * S
k Y . —_ a : g 4
* : - . *
1
" 6 *
3 a " ++
x *

_ : -


r F eee r
a I 6 *
- : *
5 C2


\


152 OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT.


the irreſiſtible force which I could have given to
it. His objections will aſſume vigour. The


7 am maintaining. being half truth and


If falſhood, he will in every ſtep of the conteſt
poſſeſs an advantage in the offenſive, of which,
if he be ſufficiently acute, I can never deprive


Now the principle I ſhould have to explain of
equal law and equal juſtice to the inhabitant of
Morocco, would be as new to him, as any prin-
ciple of the boldeſt political deſcription that!
could propagate in this country. Whatever ap-
parent difference may exiſt between the two
caſes, may fairly be ſuſpected. to owe its exiſt-
ence to the imagination of the obſerver. The
rule therefore which ſuggeſts itſelf in this caſe


s fitted for univerſal application.


As to the improvements which are to be in-
troduced into the political ſyſtem, their quantity


and their period muſt be determined by the de-


gree of knowledge exiſting in any country, and


the ſtate of preparation of the public mind for the
changes that are to be deſired. Political renova-


tion may ſtrictly be conſidered as one of the


ſtages in intellectual improvement. Literature
and diſquiſition cannot of themſelves be rendered


ſufficiently general; it will be only the cruder
and groſſer parts that can be expected to deſcend
in their genuine form to the multitude ; while
thoſe abſtract and bold ſpeculations, in which
the value of literature principally conſiſts, muſt


neceſſarily continue the portion of the favoured


few. It is here that ſocial inſtitution offers itſelf
in aid of the abſtruſer powers of argumentative
| communication.


8 11.


OF FORMS OF GOVERNMENT. 173


communication. As ſoon as any important truth
has become eſtabliſhed to a ſufficient extent in
the minds of the enterpriſing and the wile, it
may 5 and with eaſe be rendered a part
of the general ſyſtem; ſince the uninſtructed and

the poor are never the ſtrenuous ſupporters of
thoſe complicated ſyſtems by which oppreſſion is
maintained; and ſince they have an obvious in-
tereſt in the practical introduction of ſimplicity
and truth. One valuable principle being thus
realiſed, prepares the way for the realiſing of
more. It ſerves as a reſting- place to the human
mind in its great buſineſs of exploring the regi-
ons of truth, and gives it new alacrity and en-
couragement for farther exertions. |


. 175 q |


% _—
* nero . . AA ⅛⁵—.VNL L ——


AN
N
CONCERNING


POLITICAL JUSTICE,


4
4
:
Pp.
;


— * - W - —
*
— *


— 4


B O OR 1Y.


MISCELLANEOUS PRINCIPLES.


CHAP, 1


OF RESISTANCE,
Every individual the judge of his own refyftance.—
Objection.— Anſewered from the nature of go-
vernment From the modes of refiftance.—1 .
Force rarely to be employed — Either where there
is n all proſpect 72 fucceſs—Or where the proſpect 1
ir great, —Hiftory of Charles the firſt etimated. 1
— 2. Reaſoning the legitimate mode, | 1


. - . ,
HS — — — — —— F ]ĩͤ ̃ꝗ K ³˙ 17 FS Ina. 4


Ir ä has appeared in the courſe of our reaſonings
upon political authority, that every man is bound
to reſiſt every unjuſt proceeding on the part of

8 | the


Oo _ — - 0 - = * —
— — — = — - -+* Ro” = - \ „ © * — _ —m——— a N |
— — . gt - — m = — — = _ \ EY —_— C \
- : I = — ALF == _— =} — — = 2 — . INES — 2 CIs. : >
28 - 2 — ————— — — == — — . ‚˖§«—Üỹ9oͤ ns SEED Ion EEE R Ba - —
= YE Is - . Ci 3 — — 5 DEI. ———— FE — — az : = -
— ENNIO — —— — — — — — —— — — i —ñ— — — oy _
_ » —— _— "- w_ 2 — — = — on — A x p — — 2 . - — —
* — * 9 — Wakes X \
l : ;
* . ** _
i *
—
& — — 4
= ( —
—
.
.


- a on _
* . >


— i


Cn


_ _ o .
_— — — — — — = — —
— — —
— = , — — — 22 — — — — *
bo


—


— — —
— a en


r —
— — —L——ͤ“ —


—


—


T2


r Ä o_— w—_ "9 > gr
* — — — ws 2 he —


7756 or RESISTANCE.


the community. But who is the judge of this in-
juſtice ? The queſtion anſwers itſelf : the private
judgment of the individual. Were it not fo, the
appeal would be nugatory, for we have no infal-
lible judge to whom to refer our controverſies.
He is obliged to conſult his own private judgment
in this caſe, for the ſame reaſon that obliges him
to conſult it in every other article of his conduct.

« But is not this poſition neceſſarily ſubverſive
of all government ? Can there be a power to rule,
where no man is bound to obey; or at leaſt where
every man is to conſult his own underſtanding
firſt, and then to yield his concurrence no far-
ther than he ſhall conceive the regulation to be
juſt ? The very idea of government is that of an
authority ſuperſeding private judgment ; how
then can the exerciſe of private judgment be left


entire? What degree of order is to be expected
in a community, where every man is taught to
indulge his own ſpeculations, and even to reſiſt
the deciſion of the whole, whenever that deciſion
is oppoſed to the dictates of his own fancy?
The true anſwer to theſe queſtions lies in the
obſervation with which we began our diſquiſiti-
on on government, that this boaſted inſtitution is
nothing more than a ſcheme for enforcing by
brute violence the ſenſe of one man or ſet of men
upon another, neceſſary to be employed in certain
caſes of peculiar emergency. Suppoſing the queſ-
tion then to lie merely between the force of the
community on one part, and the force with which
any individual member ſhould think it incumbent
upon him to reſiſt their deciſions on the other, it
is ſufficiently evident that a certain kind of autho-


OF: RESISTANCE. m7


rity and ſupremacy would be the reſult.” But
this 1 is not the true ſtate of the queſtion: -


It is farther evident, that, though the duty of


every man to. exerciſe his private judgment be


unalterable, yet ſo far as relates to practice,


wherever government ſubſiſts, the exerciſe. of
private judgment is ſubſtantially intrenched upon.
The force put by the community upon thoſe who
_ exerciſe rapine and injuſtice, and the influence of
that force.as a moral motive upon its members
in general, are each of them exhibitions of an
argument, not founded in general reaſon, but in
the precarious interference of a fallible individu-
al. Nor is this all. Without anticipating the
queſtion of the different kinds of reſiſtance and the
election that it may be our duty to make of one
kind rather than another, it is certain in fact, that
my conduct will be materially altered by the fore-
fight that, if I act in a certain manner, I ſhall
have the combined force of a nùmber of indivi-
duals to oppoſe me. That government therefore
is the beſt, which in no one inſtance interferes
with the exerciſe of private judgment without ab-
ſolute neceſſity.

The modes according to which an individual
may oppoſe any meaſure which his judgment diſ-

1 — are of two ſorts, action and ſpeech.

Shall he upon every occaſion have recourſe to the
former? This it is abſurd ſo much as to ſuppoſe.
The object of every virtuous man is the general
good. But how can he be ſaid to promote the

eneral good, who is ready to waſte his active

| ron upon every trivial occaſion, and facrifice his
life without the chance of any public benefit?

— N mp *


4 A, —— Ae.


. lk
: : * N 1 — 3
* a. Jef FO Ck Wager 4
* 6 » 2 1 bo 7 -
Ko © WC 1 7


7 ² -A ⁵˙ !X-N IORS $5.5 OOO


—


—


£ Ron -
= — — > =o ä —


9 Jo


—
5


r
— I - e
—— r—— — —


— —
— —— —
- .


— —


——


— Wo Wo Cen III o_— —
2 — —


—


LD ONIONS


_ —.
— 2
_—


— — — 2 =
* — . —
2 . RT.


—
— —


—— — —
—— —— —


P New one —
— — — — —
8 a . > 1 — L a
; _
, a
T
a *
Ly —_
_ *


— -
— _ -


|
pt
N
\
7
i
U


— en eo rec ene>— ——— — — *
of


— urn og ene


— —


— 5 prone. — —


bf
f


7 — — —-—- — —⅜. ore — — — —
I © — — — a >


pe?


* * N
* ee


3


wy p 8 .


5 —
*
—


—
. Ces A A244
1 r

=


—


—
1 —


* ak Bt 5
— ona F- | .


= _ 6” RESISTANOE.


men, and to rouſe


. —
CT N


A _ m—
A „
I


Attn ond


FR TY
ball a 4 r


l


3
WS


— %


40 But he reſerves himſelf,” I Will ſuppoſe,


„ for ſome great occaſion; and then, careleſs as


to ſucceſs, which is a large object only to little
minds, generouſly embarkks in a cauſe where he
has no hope but to periſh. © He becomes the
martyr of truth. He believes that ſuch an exam-
ple will tend to impreſs the minds of his fellow
rip hw from their lethargy.”

The queſtion of martyrdom | is of a difficult na-
ture. I had rather convince men by my argu-
ments, than ſeduce them by my example. It is


| ſcarcely poſſible for me to tell what opportunities


for uſefulneſs may offer themſelves i in the future
years of my exiſtence. Nor is it im Ns ina
general conſideration that long and perſevering
ſervices may be more e geous than brilli-
ant and tranſitory ones. The caſe being thus


circumſtanced, a truly wiſe man cannot fail to


heſitate as to the idea of offering up* his life 2 vo-
luntary oblation.

Whenever martyrdom becomes an indifpenf -
ble duty, when nothing can preſerve him ſhort
of the cleareſt dereliction of principle and the
moſt palpable | deſertion of truth, 'he will then
meet it with perfect ſerenity. He did not avoid
it before from any weakneſs of perſonal feeling.
When it muſt be encountered, he knows that it


is indebted for that luſtre which has been ſo ge-
nerally acknowledged among mankind, to the in-
. of the ſufferer.
is ſo eſſential to true virtue, as an utter ow: 85


He knows that nothing


to individual advantage.
The objections that offer chethlbves: to an exer-
tion of actual force, where there are no hopes of
| ſucceſs,


OF RESISTANCE. 179
ſucceſs, are numerous. Such an exertion cannot
be made without 1 injury to the lives of more than
a ſingle individual. A certain number both of
enemies and friends muſt be expected to be the
victims of ſo wild an undertaking. It is regarded
by contemporaries, and regarded by hiſtory as an
intemperate ebullition of the paſſions ; and ſerves
rather as a beacon to deter others, than as a mo-
tive to animate them. It is not the frenzy of en-
thuſiaſm, but the calm, ſagacious and deliberate
effort of reaſon, to Which truth muſt be indebted
for its progreſs. |

But let us ſuppoſe, ** « that the proſpet of ſuc-
ceſs is conſiderable, and that there is reaſon to be-
lieve that reſolute violence may in no long time
accompliſh its purpoſe. Even here we may be
allowed to heſitate. Force has already appeared
to be an odious weapon; and, if the uſe of it be
to be regretted in the hands of government, it
does not change its nature though wielded by a
band of patriots. If the cauſe we plead be the
cauſe of nth, there is no doubt that by our rea-
ſonings, if ſufficiently zealous and conſtant, the
ſame purpoſe na be effected] in a milder and more
liberal ways.


In a word, it is proper to recalled here what |
has been eſtabliſhed as to the doctrine of force in
general, that it is in no caſe to be employed but
where every other means is ineffectual. In the
queſtion therefore of reſiſtance to government,
force ought never to be introduced without the
moſt imminent nee never but in circum-


Na 1154 RG


* Scc this caſe more fully diſcuſſed in the following chapter.


180 OF 2ESISTANCE __—_
ſtances ſimilar to thoſe of defending my life from
a ruffian, where time can by no means be gained,
and the conſequences inſtantly to enſue are un-
Queſtionably V n=
> 'The hiſtory of king Charles the firſt furniſhes
an inſtructive example in both kinds. The ori-
ginal deſign of his opponents was that of confin-
in Pie power within narrow and palpable limits.
This object, after a ſtruggle of many years, was
fully accompliſhed by the parliament of 1640,
without bloodſhed (except indeed in the ſingle
inſtance of lord Strafford) and without commotion.
They next conceived the project of overturning
the hierarchy and the monarchy of England, in
oppoſition to great numbers, and in the laſt point
no doubt to a majority of their countrymen. Ad-
mitting theſe objects to have been in the utmoſt
degree excellent, they ought not, for the pur-
pole of obtaining them, to have precipitated the
queition to the extremity of a civil war.
But, ſince force is ſcarcely under any cir-
cumſtances to be employed, of what nature is
that reſiſtance which ought conſtantly to be giv-
en to every inſtance of injuſtice? The reſiſtance
Jam bound to employ is that of uttering the
truth,” of cenfuring in the moſt explicit manner
every proceeding that I perceive to be adverſe to
the true intereſts of mankind. I am bound to
diſſeminate without reſerve all the principles with
which Iam acquainted, and which it may be of
importance to mankind to know ; and this duty
it behoves me to practiſe upon every occaſion and
with the meſt perſevering conſtancy. I muſt pe
LS h cloſe


OF REVOLUTIONS. 181
cloſe the whole ſyſtem of moral and political
truth, without ſuppreſſing any part under the idea
of its being too bold and paradoxical, and thus
depriving the whole of that complete and irreſiſti-
ble evidence, without which its effects muſt al-
ways be feeble, partial and uncertain.


S -
OF REVOLUTIONS.
8, ECT ION
' DUTIES OF A CITIZEN


Obligation to ſupport the conſtitution of our country
confidered— Muſt ariſe either from the reaſon of
the caſe, or from a perſonal and local conſidera-


 tiom.—The firſt examined.—The ſecond.


No queſtion can be more important than that
which reſpects the beſt mode of effecting revolu-
tions. Before we enter upon it however, it may
be proper to remove a difficulty which has ſug-
geſted itſelf to the minds of ſome men, how far
WR we


— V LES ao
*
—


— — = 252336 n * wy
. MA AT — — — TSS oo ITE 6 : —_—_


PI —
r
*


F
.
4

;
5

#


1


1
*


2 a ——— ——— oy. -
2 . * <<» ;
= I > ; n 4 = 6 ng 8
ns. ce tbh tc le... OG
*
-


. ©. ˙ꝛV
13


182 DUTIES OF A CITIZEN.
we ought generally ſpeaking to be the friends of
revolution; or, in other words, whether it be


juſtifiable in a man to be the en of the c con-
ſtitution of his count i |


„We live, it will be gd, cc nds hs pro-


tection of this conſtitution; and protection, be-


ing a benefit conferred, obiges us to a recipro-
cation of ſupport in return.

To this it may be anſwered, firſt, that this
protection is a very equivocal thing; and, till it
can be ſhown that the vices, from the effects of
which it protects us, are not for the moſt part


the produce of that conſtitution, We ſhall never


ſufficiently underſtand the quantity of benefit —
includes.

Secondly, gratitude, as has already "RD
proved *, is a vice and not a virtue. Every man
and every collection of men ought to be treated
by us in a manner founded upon their intrinſic
qualities and capacities, and not according to a
rule which has exiſtence only in relation to our-


| ſelves.


Add to this, thirdly, that no motive can be


more equivocal than the gratitude here recom-
mended. Gratitude to the conſtitution, an ab-


ſtract idea, an imaginary exiſtence, is altogether
unintelligible. Affection to my countrymen will
be much better proved, by my exertions to
procure them a ſubſtantial benefit, than by my
hs: pig; g a ſyſtem which I believe to be frau ht


injurious conſequences.
He who calls upon me to ſupport che colts


tution mult found _ Werne __ one of


| - two
n Book It chap. ii. p. 78.


DUTIES OF A CITIZEN. 183


two principles. It has a claim upon my ſup-
port either becauſe it is good, or becauſe it is
Againſt the requiſition in the firſt ſenſe there
is nothing to object. All that is neceſſary is to
prove the goodneſs which is aſcribed to it. But
erhaps it will be ſaid, that, though not abſo-
E good, more miſchief will reſult from an
attempt to overturn it, than from maintaining it
with its mixed character of partly right and partly
wrong.“ If this can be made evident, undoubt-
edly I ought to ſubmit. Of this miſchief how-
ever I can be no judge but in conſequence of.
enquiry. To ſome the evils attendant on a re-
volution will appear greater, and to others leſs.
Some will imagine that the vices with which the
Engliſh conſtitution is pregnant -are conſiderable,
and ſome that it is nearly innocent. Before I
can decide between theſe oppoſite -opinions and
balance the exiſting and the poſſible evils, I muſt
examine for myſelf. But examination in its na-
ture implies uncertainty of reſult. Were I to
determine before I fat down on which fide the
deciſion ſhould. be, I could not ſtrictly ſpeaking
be ſaid to examine at all. He that deſires a re-
volution for its own fake is to be regarded as-a
madman. He that defires it from a thorough
conviction of its uſefulneſs and neceſſity has a
claim upon us for candour and reſpece.
As to the demand upon me for ſupport to the
Engliſh conſtitution, becauſe it is Engliſh, there
is little plauſibility in this argument. It is of the
ſame nature as the demand upon me to be a
Chriſtian, becauſe I am a Briton, or a Maho-


„ N metan,


—


, — — - [ a

— - . * CIs 9

— — — * — — E _
— * — - __ —— os. 924 * — - xt _ * — — : — ne * *

— 2 — We, MT ks $547 D * FS „„ Anat 3 - rr Les — —
* . — — _ , N Y * e — . 42 at aid. ate Land ach 50
2 m = . * 21 n 2 dy N . ; W 2 4 * 22 i 4 3
* * 6 s * N Te > * N ” 9 2 : 0 : | *
IR * * * Nr y * 8 ” F by l * 21 2


— oe we ARR A, _— .
— ror 3 EPA ER. 4 IEA, » wor
of RY 2 * ”
we Met 3 l 7 9


rr
a - —
* 4 "7

a


= * — LG bin CAS AS Ac; — HOI 0 Or WE OE
—̃
* * IE *
- * *


_; DUTIES OF A CITIZEN.


metan, -becauſe I am a native of Turkey. In-
ſtead of being an expreſſion of reſpect, it argues
contempt of all. government, religion and virtue,
and every thing that is facred among men. If
there be ſuch a thing as. truth, it muſt be better
than error. If there be ſuch a faculty as reaſon,


it ought'to be exerted. But this demand makes.


truth a matter of abſolute indifference, and for-


| bids us the exerciſe of our reaſon. If men rea-
ſon and reflect, it muſt neceſſarily happen that


either the Engliſhman or the Turk will find his
government to be odious and his religion falſe.
For what purpoſe employ his reaſon, if he muſt
for ever conceal the concluſions. to which it leads
him? How would man have arrived at his pre-
ſent attainments, if he had always been contented
with the ſtate of ſociety in which he happened
to be born? In a word, either reaſon is the
curſe of our ſpecies, and human nature is to be
regarded with horror ; or it becomes us to em-
ploy our underſtanding and to a& upon it, and


to follow truth wherever it may lead us. It


cannot lead us to miſchief, ſince utility, as it re-


gards percipient beings, is the only baſis of mo-
ral and political uw.


\


a SECT.


—


1


SECTION IM
MODE OF EFFECTING REVOLUTIONS,


Perſuaſion the proper inſtrument—not vialence—
nor reſentment.—Lateneſs of event defirable.


P O return to the enquiry reſpecting the mode
of effecting revolutions. If no queſtion can be
more important, there is fortunately no queſtion
perhaps that admits of a more complete and ſa-
tisfactory general anſwer. The revolutions of
ſtates, which a philanthropiſt would deſire to
witneſs, or in which he would willingly co-ope-
rate, conſiſt principally in a change of ſentiments
and diſpoſitions in the members of thoſe ſtates.
The true inſtruments for changing the opinions
of men are argument and perſuaſion. The beſt
ſecurity for an advantageous iſſue is free and un-
reſtricted diſcuſſion. In that field truth muſt al-
ways prove the ſucceſsful champion. If then we
would improve the ſocial inſtitutions of mankind,
we muſt. write, we muſt argue, we mult con-
verſe. To this buſineſs there is no cloſe ; in this
purſuit there ſhould be no pauſe. Every me-
thod ſhould be employed, —not ſo much poſi-
tively. to allure the attention of mankind, or
perſuaſively to invite them to the adoption of our
Fun to remove every reſtraint upon
hought, and to throw open the temple of

”” ſcience


x86 MODE OF EFFECTING REVOLUTIONS.


| ſcience and the field of enquiry to all the
World. |
Thoſe inſtruments will always be regarded
by the diſcerning mind as ED. which may
be employed with equal proſpect of ſucceſs on
both ſides of every queſtion. This conſideration
ſhould make us look with averſion 1 upon all re-
fources of violence. When we deſcend into the
lifted field, we of courſe deſert the vantage
ground of truth, and commit the deciſion to un-


| Certainty and caprice. The phalanx of reaſon is


invulnerable ; it advances with deliberate and de-
termined pace ; and nothing is able to reſiſt it.
But when we lay down our arguments, and take
up our ſwords, the caſe is altered. Amidſt the
| barbarous pomp of war and the clamorous din of
civil brawls, who can tell whether the event ſhall
be proſperous or miſerable ?

We muſt therefore carefully Siftiriguith *
tween informing the people and inflaming them.
- indignation, reſentment and fury are to be de-
” precated ; and all we ſhould aſk is ſober thought,
clear diſcernment and intrepid diſcuſſion. Why
were the revolutions of America and France a
general concert of all orders and deſcriptions of
men, without ſo much (if we bear in mind the
multitudes concerned) as almoſt a diſſentient voice;
while the reſiſtance againſt our Charles the firſt
divided the nation into two equal parts? Be-
cauſe the latter was the affair of the ſeventeenth
century, and the former happened in the eloſe of
the eighteenth. Becauſe in the caſe of America
and France philoſophy had already developed


ſome of We Pr great * of A truth,
| and


2


MODE OF EFFECTING REVOLUTIONS. 187


and Sydney and Locke and Monteſquieu and
Rouſſeau had convinced a majority of reflecting
and powerful minds of the evils of uſurpation. If
theſe revolutions had happened {till later, not
one drop of the blood of one citizen would have
been ſhed by the hands of another, nor would
the event have been marked ſo much perhaps as
with one ſolitary inſtance of violence and con-
fiſcation. |
There are two principles therefore which the
man who deſires the regeneration of his ſpecies
ought ever to bear in mind, to regard the im-
provement of every hour as eſſential in the diſco-
very and diſſemination of truth, and willingly to
ſuffer the lapſe of years before he urges the re-
ducing his theory into actual execution. With
all his caution it is poſſible that the impetuous
multitude will run before the ſtill and quiet pro-
greſs of reaſon ; nor will he ſternly paſs ſentence
upon every revolution that ſhall by a. few years
have anticipated the term that wiſdom would
have preſcribed. But, if his caution be firmly
exerted, there is no doubt that he will ſuperſede
many abortive attempts, and conſiderably prolong
the general tranquillity. _ |


f 1383


SECTION III.


OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS.


Meaning of the term. — Aſſociations objected to—
I. From the fort of perſons with whom a juſt
revolution ſhould origmate—2. From the danger
tumult.— Objects of aſſociation. —In what
caſes admſſible.— Argued for from the neceſſity
10 give weight to opinion. —from their tendency
to aſcertam opinion. Unnecęſſary for theſe pur-
poſes. — General inutility.— Conceſſions. — Im-
portance of ſocial communication.—Propriety N


teaching reſiſtance 1


A0 QUESTION phe ſuggeſts itſelf in this
place reſpecting the propriety of affociations
among the people at large, for the purpoſe of
effecting a change in their political inſtitutions.
It ſhould be obſerved, that the affociations here
ſpoken of are voluntary confederacies of certain

members of the ſociety with each other, the ten-

dency of which is to give weight to the opinions
of the perſons ſo aſſociated, of which the opini-
ons of the unconfederated and inſulated part of
the community are deſtitute. This queſtion
therefore has nothing in common with that other,


whether 3 in a well organized ſtate every indivi-
| dual


0 n
: z; .* =.


OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS. 18g
dual would not find his place in a deliberative as
well as an elective capacity; the ſociety being
diſtributed into diſtricts and departments, and
each man poſſeſſing an importance, not meaſured
by the capricious ſtandard of ſome accidental
confederacy, but by a rule impartially applied to
every member of the community. ©

Relative then to political aſſociations, as thus
explained, there are two conſiderations, which,
if they do not afford reaſon for undiſtinguiſhing
condemnation, at leaſt tend to diminiſh our anx-
iety to their introduction. 3

In the firſt place revolutions leſs originate in
the energies of the people at large, than in the
conceptions of perſons of ſome degree of ſtudy
and reflection. I ſay, originate, for it muſt be
admitted, that they ought ultimately to be deter-
mined on by the choice of the whole nation. It
is the property of truth to diffuſe itſelf. The
difficulty is to diſtinguiſh it in the firſt inſtance,
and in the next to preſent it in that unequivocal
form which ſhall enable it to command univerſal
aſſent. This muſt neceſſarily be the taſk of a
few. Society, as it at preſent exiſts in the world,
will long be divided into two claſſes, thoſe who
have leiſure for ſtudy, and thoſe whoſe- impor-
tunate neceſſities perpetually urge them to tem-
porary induſtry. It is no doubt to be deſired,
that the latter claſs ſhould be made as much as
poſſible to partake of the privileges of the former.
But we ſhould be careful, while we liſten to the
undiſtinguiſhing demands of benevolence, that
we do not occaſion a greater miſchief than that
we undertake to cure. We ſhould be upon our

, 5 | guard


5 3 75 p 100 OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS.


guard againſt an event the conſequences of
Which are always to be feared, the propagat-
ing blind zeal, where we urn 0 5
realon. a
Ide ſtudious and refleting a can be ex-
| petted. to ſee deeply into future events. TO
conceive an order of ſociety totally different from
4} that which is now before our eyes, and to judge
olf the advantages that would-accrue from its in-
= ſtitution, are the prerogatives only of a few fa- |/
vgured minds. When theſe advantages have
b been unfolded by ſuperior penetration, they can-
got yet for ſome time be expected to be under-
flood by the multitude. Time, reading and con-
verſation are neceſſary to render them familiar.
They: muſt deſcend in regular gradation from the
moſt thoughtful to the — unobſervant. He,
that begins with an appeal to the people, may be
ſuſpected to underſtand little of the true charac-
ter of mind. A ſiniſter deſign may gain by pre-
eipitation; but true wiſdom is beſt adapted to a
ow, unvarying, inceſſant progreſs.
Human affairs, through every link of hs
great chain of neceſſity, are ai harmo-
niſed and adapted to each other. As the people
ſorm the laſt ſtep in the progreſs of truth, they
need leaſt preparation to induce them to aſſert it.
Their prejudices are few and upon the ſurface.
They are the higher orders of ſociety, that find,
or imagine they find, their advantage 1 in injuſtice,
and are eager to invent ar ts for its defence.
In ſophiſtry they firſt ſeek an excuſe for their
Conduct, and then became the redoubted cham-
Jo owe of thoſe errors which they have been aſſi-


bp” duous |


OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS. 1291


duous to cultivate. The vulgar have no ſuch
intereſt, and ſubmit to the reign of injuſtice
from habit only and the want of reflection. They
do not want preparation to receive the truth, ſo

much as examples to embody it. A very ſhort
catalogue of reaſons is ſufficient for them, When
they ſee the generous and the wiſe reſolved to
— 5 the cauſe of juſtice. A very ſhort period
is long enough for them to imbibe the ſentunents
of patriotiſm and libe

Secondly, e e muſt be formed with
great caution not to be allied to tumult. The
conviviality of a feaſt may lead to the depredati-
ons of a riot. While the ſympathy of opinion
catches from man to man, efpecially in numerous
meetings, and among perſons whoſe paſſions have
not been uſed to the curb of judgment, actions
may be determined on, which ſolitary reflection
would have rejected. There is nothing more
barbarous, cruel, and blood-thirſty, than the tri-
umph of a mob. Sober thought ſhould always
prepare the way to the public aſſertion of truth.
He, that would be the founder of a republic,
ſhould, like the firſt Brutus, be inſenſible to the
energies of the moſt impendam paſſions of our
nature.

Upon this ſubject of Miichatioud/ an obvious
diſtinction is to be made. Thoſe, who are diſ-
ſatisfied with the government of their country,
may aim either at the correction of old errors, or
the counteracting of new encroachments. Both
theſe objects are legitimate. The wiſe and the
virtuous man ought to ſee things preciſely as they
are, and judge of the actual conſtitution of his


country


4
=


192 OF/POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS.


country with the fame impartiality, as if he
8 ſunply read of it in the remoteſt Page of

iſto

Theſe two obj ects may be entitled to a differ-
ent treatment. The firſt ought undoubtedly to
proceed with a leiſurely ſtep and in all poſſible
tranquillity. The ſecond appears to require ſome-
thing more of activity. It is the characteriſtic of
truth, to truſt much to its own energy, and to
reſiſt invaſion rather by the force of conviction
than the force of arms. The individual oppreſ-
ied ſeems however particularly entitled to our
alſiſtance, and this can beſt be atforded by the
concurrence of many. The caſe may require an
carly and unequivecal diſplay of opinion, and
this perhaps. will afford an apology for ſome ſort
of aſſociation, provided it be conducted with all
poſſible attention to Fee and good
order.

Few. arguments can be of equal importance
with that which we are here diſcuſſing. Few
miſtakes can be more to be deplored than that
which ſhould induce us to employ immoral and
injurious methods for the ſupport of a good
_ cauſe. It may be alledged, „that aſſociation is
the only expedient. for arming the ſenſe of the
couatry againſt the arts of its oppreſſors. Why
arm? Why ſpread a reſtleſs commotion over the
face of a vation, which may lead to the moſt de-
ſtructive conſequences ? Why ſeek to beſtow
upon truth a weight that is not her own? a
weight that muſt always produce ſome obliquity,
4 ſome blind and unenlightened zeal ? In attempt-

| ing prematurely to anticipate | the conqueſt of

trut


OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS. 193


truth, we ſhall infallibly give birth to deformity
and abortion. If we have patience to wait her
natural progreſs, and to aſſiſt her cauſe by no
arguments that are not worthy of her, the event
will be both certain and illuſtrious.

A ſimilar anſwer will ſuggeſt itſelf to the ob-
jection, that aſſociations are neceſſary unequi- a
vocally to aſcertain the opinion of the people.
What ſort of opinion is that, which thus ſtands
in need of ſome ſudden violence to oblige it to
ſtart from it's hiding- place? The ſentiments of
mankind are then only equivocal in external ap-
pearance, when they are unformed and uncer-
tain in the conception. When once the indivi-
dual knows his own meaning, its ſymptoms will
be clear and unequivocal. Be not precipitate. If
the embryo ſentiment at preſent exiſting in my

mind be true, there is hope that it will gain
ſtrength by time. If you with to aſſiſt its growth,
let it be by inſtruction, not by attempting to
paſs that ſentiment for mine which you only with
to be ſo. If the opinion of. the people be not
known to-day, it will not fail to ſhew itſelf to-
morrow. If the opinion of the people be. not
known to-day, it is om ſe that which you would
have ſuppoſed to be their opinion is not ſuffici-
ently their opinion. You might as well think
of hiding the inhabitants of England, conceal-
ing their towns and their cultivation, and mak-
ing their country paſs for a deſert, as of con-
cealing their real and deliberate ſentiment.

Theſe are the expedients of men who do not
know that truth is omnipotent. It may appear
to die for a time, but it will not fail to revive

Vor. I. - | with


194 OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS.


with freſh vigour. If it have ever failed to pro-
duce gradual conviction, it is becauſe it has been
told in a meagre, an obſcure or a puſillanimous
manner. Ten pages that ſhould contain an ab-
ſolute demonſtration of the true intereſts of man-
kind in ſociety could no otherwiſe be prevented


from changing the face of the globe, than by


the literal deſtruction of the paper on which they
were written. It would become us to repeat
their contents as widely as we were able; but, if
we attempted any thing more than this, it would
be a practical proof that we did not know they
contained a demonſtration.

Such are the reaſonings that ſhould decide
upon our abſtract opinion of every caſe of aſſoci-
ation that comes before us. But, though from
hence it ſhould ſufficiently appear that aſſociation
is ſcarcely in any caſe to be deſired, there are
conſiderations that ſhould lead us ſometimes to
judge it with moderation and forbearance. There
is one mode, according to which the benefit of
mankind may beſt be promoted, and which
ought always to be employed. But mankind are
imperfect beings, and there are certain errors of
his ſpecies which a wiſe man will be inclined to
regard with indulgence. Aſſociations, as a mea-
ſure intrinſically wrong, he will endeavour at
leaſt to poſtpone as long as he can. But it muſt
not be diſſembled that in the criſis of a revolu-


tion they will ſometimes be unavoidable. While


opinion is advancing with filent ſte imagination
and zeal may be expected rae: to outrun
her progreſs. Wiſdom will be anxious to hold


them at bay; 3 and, if her votaries be many, ſhe


: will


OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS. 195


will be able to do this long enough to prevent
tragical conſequences. But, when the caſt is
thrown, when the declaration is made and irre-

vocable, ſhe will not fail, be the confuſion greater
or leſs, to take the fide of truth, and forward her
reign by the beſt means that the neceſſity of the


caſe will admit. 1

But, though aſſociation, in the received ſenſe
of that term, muſt be granted to be an inſtru-
ment of a very dangerous nature, it ſhould be
remembered that unreſerved communication in a
ſmaller circle, and eſpecially among perſons who
are already awakened to the purſuit of truth, is
of unqueſtionable advantage. There is at pre-
ſent in the world a cold reſerve that keeps man
at a diſtance from man. There is an art in the
practice of which individuals communicate for
ever, without any one telling his neighbour what
eſtimate he ſhould form of his attainments and
character, how they ought to be employed, and
how to be improved. There is a ſort of domeſ-
tic tactics, the object of which is to inſtruct us
to elude curioſity, and to keep up the tenour of
converſation, without the diſcloſure either of
our feelings or our opinions. The philanthro-
piſt has no object more deeply at heart than the
annihilation of this duplicity and reſerve. No
man can have' much kindneſs for his ſpecies, who
does not habituate himſelf to conſider upon each
ſucceſſive occaſion of ſocial intercourſe ow that
occaſion may be moſt beneficently improved.
Among' the topics to which he will be anxi-
ous to awaken attention, politics will occupy a

incipal ſhare.
22 * O 2 Books


196 OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS.


Books have by their very nature but a limited
- operation ; though, on account of their perma-
nence, their methodical diſquiſition, and their
eaſineſs of acceſs, they are entitled to the fore-
moſt place. But their efficacy ought not to en-
groſs our confidence. The number of thoſe by
whom reading is neglected is exceedingly great.
Books to thoſe by whom they are read have a
ſort of conſtitutional coldneſs. We review the
arguments of an * infolent innovator” with ſul-
lenneſs, and are unwilling to ſtretch our minds
to take in all their force. It is with difficulty
that we obtain the courage of ſtriking into un-
trodden paths, and queſtioning tenets that have
been generally received. But converſation ac-
cuſtoms us to hear a variety of ſentiments,
obliges us to exerciſe patience and attention,
and gives freedom and elaſticity to our mental
diſquiſitions. A thinking man, if he will recol-
lect his intellectual hiſtory, will find that he has
derived ineſtimable advantage from the ſtimulus
and ſurpriſe of colloquial ſuggeſtions ; and, if he
review the hiſtory of literature, will perceive
that minds of great acuteneſs and ability have
commonly exiſted in a cluſter. |
Ĩt follows that the promoting of the beſt inter
eſts of mankind eminently depends upon the free-
dom of focial communication. Let us imagine
to ourſelves a number of individuals, who, hav-
ing firſt ſtored their minds with reading and re-
flection, proceed afterwards in candid and un-
reſerved converſation to compare their ideas, to
ſuggeſt their doubts, to. remove their difficulties,
and to cultivate a collected and ſtriking _—
; ; | A O


OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS. 197


of delivering their ſentiments. | Let us ſuppoſe
theſe men, prepared by mutual intercourſe," to
go forth to the world, to explain with ſuccinct-
neſs and ſimplicity, and in a manner well calcu-
lated to arreſt attention, the true principles of ſo-
ciety. Let us ſuppoſe their hearers inſtigated in
their turn to repeat theſe truths to their compa-
nions. We ſhall then have an idea of know-
ledge as perpetually gaining ground, unaccom-
panied with peril in the means of its diffuſion.
Reaſon will ſpread itſelf, and not a brute and
unintelligent ſympathy. Diſcuſſion perhaps ne-
ver exiſts with ſo much vigour and utility as in
the converſation of two perſons. It may be car-
ried on with advantage in ſmall and friendly ſo-
cieties. Does the fewneſs of their numbers im-
ply the rarity of their exiſtence? Far otherwiſe:
the time perhaps will come when ſuch inſtituti-
ons will be univerſal. Shew to mankind by a
few examples the advantages of political diſcuſ-
ſion undebauched by political enmity and vehe-
mence, and the beauty of the ſpectacle will ſoon
render the example contagious. Every man will
commune with his neighbour. Every man will
be eager to tell and to hear what the intereſt of
all requires them to know. The bolts and forti-
fications of the temple of truth will be removed.
The craggy ſteep of ſcience, which it was before
difficult to aſcend, will be levelled with the

plain. Knowledge will be acceſſible to all.
Wiſdom will be the inheritance of man, from
which none will be excluded but by their own
heedleſſneſs and prodigality. If theſe ideas can-
not completely be realiſed, till the inequality of
> conditions


198 OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS.


conditions and the tyranny of government are
rendered ſomewhat leſs oppreſſive, this aftords
no reaſon againſt the ſetting afloat ſo generous a
ſyſtem. The improvement of individuals and
the melioration of political inſtitutions are deſ-
tined mutually to produce and reproduce each
other. Truth, and above all political truth, is
not hard of acquiſition, but from the ſupercili-
duſneſs of its profeſſors. It has been flow and
tedious of improvement, becauſe the ſtudy of it
has been relegated to doctors and civilians. It
has produced little effect upon the practice of
mankind, becauſe it has not been allowed a plain
and direct appeal to their underſtandings. Re-
move theſe obſtacles, render it the common pro-
perty, bring it into daily uſe, and you may rea-
ſonably promiſe yourſelf conſequences of the moſt
ineſtimable value. e 1 64
hut theſe conſequences are the property only
of independent and impartial diſcuſſion. If once
the unambitious and candid circles of enquiring
men be ſwallowed up in the inſatiate gulf of
noiſy aſſemblies, the opportunity of improve-
ment is inſtantly annihilated. The happy varie-
ties of ſentiment which fo eminently contribute
to intellectual acuteneſs are loſt. Activity of
thought is ſhackled by the fear that our aſſociates
Ahould diſclaim us. A fallacious uniformity of
opinion is produced, which no man eſpouſes from
conviction, but which carries all men along with
a xeſiſtleſs tide. Clubs, in the old Engliſh ſenſe,
that is, the periodical meeting of ſmall and inde-
pendent circles, may be admitted to fall within
the line of theſe principles. But they ceaſe to
"60s {6 HATH | | _ "BE


OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS. 199


be admiſſible, when united with the tremen-
dous apparatus of articles of confederacy and com-
mittees of correſpondence. Human beings ſhould
meet together, not to enforce, but to enquire.
Truth diſclaims the alliance of marſhalled num-
bers. .

It ſeems ſcarcely neceſſary to add, that the in-
dividuals who are engaged in the tranſactions
here cenſured, have frequently been inſtigated by
the beſt intentions, and informed with the moſt
liberal views. It would be in the higheſt degree
unjuſt, if their undertakings ſhould be found of
dangerous tendency, to involve the authors in in-
diſcriminate cenſure for conſequences which they
did not foreſee. But at the ſame time, in pro-
portion to the purity of their views and the ſound-
neſs. of their principles, it were earneſtly to be
defired that they would ſeriouſly reflect on the
means they employ. It would be deeply to be
lamented, if thoſe who were the trueſt friends to
the welfare of mankind, ſhould come, by the in-

judiciouſneſs of their conduct, to rank among its
enemies. | i
From what has been ſaid it is ſufficiently evi-
dent, that no alarm can be more groundleſs, than
that of violence and precipitation from the en-
lightened advocates of political juſtice. There is
however another objection which has been urged
againſt them, built upon the ſuppoſed inexpedi-
ency of inculcating upon the people at large the
propriety of occaſional reſiſtance to the author}
of government. Obedience,” ſay theſe objec-
tors “ is the rule; reſiſtance the exception.
Now what can be more prepoſterous, than per-


petually


—_—— -


_ —
— — — — —
—U 347 = —
— > 0
_ —
— ——
* — - —
2 2 .
—— — oe
oy


- — - > - —
— 2 = 2 - = — = b ” — > _ - — — —
: —_ —— WT, 2 . — ͤ——Uu— — 2
— . — — — r — — — — _
_— _— - _— - =_ —— 4 — 5 9 4 n "A" — 2
— — —jp — — — 8 3 - ts mY —
- — 1 * Þ ” OY G * — * —
— I we — 8. —— — 8 C bots - 5 — on . —
: — —— — — * — — i = —  —/. <- — > ve — — — — ad — — T
* — . * — * = — — — « J—_ - 2 — — — -
_ — > _— — * — — an. <<. — "> * 2 —— — * * Vang —— — —
- —— 2 > —— —— — — — — —— — — — — — — . 1 0 2 2 "
| — — 8 — — 1 — - n —_— ** * 4 © "62 c * * ” l 7
— — — — a . > — " 5 — — 2 . n 9 ry \ * 2 V . — — * 2
n 1 R * $4 4 ; o * * U 4 4 , T ">
6 > - 65 * K * R 4 :
* « * * — *. = *
* 5
*
” . - 5 4
* . Y
»
4 £
- 8 2
* 1
f
4
>


_ —


——
— — AO WO wo A =
— — — ao a> mW
% of — — — — _ —
— : — — — — — — — — —— — — Ws
— . - = — —— — — —
. x M6


— 2 2


200 OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS.
petually to inſiſt with all the pomp of eloquence


n an expedient, to which only an extreme
neceſſity can oblige us to have recourſeæ?ꝰ

It has already been ſhewn that obedience, that

is / a ſurrender of the underſtanding to the voice

of authority, is a rule to which it can never be

.creditable to human beings to conform. Tran-

quillity indeed, a ſtate in which a man ſhall leaſt


be diſturbed in the exerciſe of his private judg-


ment by the interpoſition of violence, is an ob-
ject we ſhould conſtantly endeavour to promote;
but this. tranquillity the principles here inculcated
have little tendency to diſturb. :


There is certainly no truth which it can be fo


the general intereſt to conceal. It muſt be con-


feſſed indeed, that a ſingle truth may be ſo de-
tached from the ſeries to which it belongs, as,


when ſeparately told, to have the nature of falſ-


hood. But this is by no means the caſe in the
preſent inſtance. To inform mankind of thoſe
general principles upon which all political inſti-
tutions ought to be built, is not to diffuſe partial
information. To diſcover to them their true in-
tereſts, and lead them to conceive of a ſtate of
ſociety more uncorrupt and more equitable than
that in which they live, is not to inculcate ſome
rare exception to a general rule. If there be any


government which muſt be indebted for its perpe-


tuity to ignorance, that government is the curſe
of mankind. In proportion as men are made to
„ underſtand


* This argument, nearly in the words here employed, may be


found in Hume's Eflay on Paſſive Obedience. Eſſays, Part IL
- Effay xiii. R PO |


ry


OF POLITICAL ASSOCIATIONS. - 201


underſtand their true intereſts, they will conduct
themſelves wiſely, both when they a& and-when
they forbear, and their conduct will therefore
promiſe the moſt advantageous iſſue. He, whoſe
mind has carefully been inured to the dictates of
reaſon, is of all men leaſt likely to convert into the
raſh and headſtrong invader of the general weal.


SECTION IV.


OP THE SPECIES OF REFORM TO BE
DESIRED. e


Ought it to be partial or entire? — Truth may not
be partially taught.—Partial reformation confy-
dered.—Objection.— Anfwer.—-Partial reform
indiſpenſible.— Nature of a juſt revolution
How diftant | $a


TurRgE is one more queſtion which cannot
fail occaſionally to ſuggeſt itſelf to the advocate of
ſocial reformation. Ought we to defire to fee
this reformation introduced gradually or at once?
Neither fide of this dilemma preſents us with the
proper expedient. |

| CE. No


202 OF THE SPECIES OF


No project can be more injurious to the cauſe
of truth, than that of preſenting it imperfectly
and by parcels to the attention of mankind. Seen
in its juſt light, the effect produced cannot fail to
be conſiderable; but, ſhewn in ſome partial and
imperfect way, it will afford a thouſand advanta-

ges to its adverſaries. Many objections will ſeem
| 1 which a full view of the ſubject would
ave diſſipated. Whatever limits truth is error;
and of conſequence ſuch a limited view cannot
fail to include a conſiderable mixture of error.
Many ideas may be excellent as parts of a great
whole, which, when violently torn from their
connection, will not only ceaſe to be excellent,
but may in ſome caſes become poſitively injuri-
ous. In this war of poſts and ſkirmiſhes vic-
tory will perpetually appear to be doubtful, and
men will either be perſuaded, that truth itſelf is
of little value, or that human intelle& is ſo nar-
row as to render the diſcovery of truth a hopeleſs
SS: ͤ ͤͤͤ Ä
It may be alledged, that one of the conſide-
rations of greateſt influence in human affairs is
that of the gradual decline of ill things to worſe,
till at length the miſchief, having proceeded to
its higheſt climax, can maintain itſelf no longer.
The argument in favour of ſocial improvement
would loſe much of its relative energy, if the op-
portunity of a ſecret compariſon of poſſible good
with actual evil were taken away. All partial
reforms are of the nature of palliatives. They
{kin over the diſeaſed part inſtead of extirpating
the diſeaſe. By giving a ſmall benefit, . a
benefit only in appearance, they cheat us of the


ſuperior


/


REFORM TO BE DESIRED. 203


ſuperior good we ought to have demanded. By
ſtripping error of a part of its enormities, they
give it freſh vigour and a longer duration.

We muſt be cautious however of puſhing this
argument too far. To ſuppoſe that truth ſtands
in abſolute need of a fil, or that ſhe cannot pro-
duce full conviction by her native light, is a con-
ception unworthy of her enlightened advocates.
The true ſolution will probably be found in the
accurately diſtinguiſhing the ſources of reform.
Whatever reform, general or partial, ſhall be

ſuggeſted to the community at large by an unmu-
tilated view of the ſubject, ought to be ſeen with
ſome degree of complacency. But a reform, that
{hall be offered us by thoſe whoſe intereſt is ſu
poſed to lie in the perpetuating of abuſe, and the
intention of which is rather to give permanence to
error by diveſting it of its moſt odious features, is
little entitled to our countenance. The true prin-
ciple of ſocial improvement lies in the correcting
public opinion. Whatever reform is ſtolen upon
the community unregarded, and does not ſponta-
neouſly flow from the energy of the general mind,
is unworthy of congratulation. It is in this reſ-
ſpect with nations as with individuals. He that
quits a vicious habit, not from reaſon and convic-
tion, but becauſe his appetites no longer ſolicit
him to its indulgence, does not deſerve the epi-
thet of virtuous. The obje& it becomes us to
purſue is, to give vigour to public opinion, not
to ſink it into liſtleſſneſs, and indifference.

When partial reformation proceeds from its le-
gitimate cauſe, the progreſs ſociety has made in

the acquiſition of truth, it may frequently: be en-


titled


20% ' OF THE SPECIES OF /


titled to our applauſe. Man is the creature of
habits. Gradual improvement is a moſt conſpi-
cuous law of his nature. When therefore ſome
contiderable advantage is {| ufficiently underſtood
by the community to induce them to defire its
1 that eſtabliſhment will afterwards
react to the enlightening of intellect and the gene-
rating of virtue. It is natural for us to take our
ſtand upon ſome leading truth, and from thence
explore the regions we have {till to traverſe.
There. js indeed a ſenſe in which gradual i im-
provement is the only alternative between refor-
mation and no reformation. All human intel-
lects are at ſea upon the great ocean of infinite
truth, and their voyage though attended with
hourly advantage will never be at an end. If
therefore we will ſtay till we ſhall have deviſed a
reformation ſo complete, as ſhall need no farther
reformation to render it more complete, we ſhall
eternally remain in inaction. Whatever is fairly
ek upon general principles by a conſide-
rable part of the community, and oppoſed by
none or by a very few, may be confidered as ſuf-
Seu ripe for execution.
Jo recapitulate the principal * ect of this
chapter, I would once again repeat, that violence
may ſuit the plan of any political partiſan, rather
than of him that pleads the cauſe of ſimple juſtice.
There is even a ſenſe in which the reform aimed
at by the true politician may be affirmed to be leſs
a gradual than an entire one, without contradict-
ing the former poſition. The complete refor-
mation that is wanted, is not inſtant but future
reformation. It can in reality ſcarcely be bee
dere


REFORM TO BE DESIRED. 205


dered as of the nature of action. It confiſts in an


univerſal illumination. Men feel their ſituation,
and the reſtraints, that ſhackled them before,
vaniſh like a mere deception. When the true
criſis ſhall come, not a ſword will need to be
drawn, not a finger to be lifted up. The ad-
verſaries will be too few and too feeble to dare
to make a ſtand againſt the univerſal ſenſe of
mankind. | |

Nor do theſe ideas imply, as at firſt ſight they
might ſeem to imply, that the revolution is at
an immeaſurable diſtance. It is of the nature of
human affairs that great changes ſhould appear to
be ſudden, and great diſcoveries to be made un-
expectedly, and as it were by accident. In form-
ing the mind of a young perſon, in endeavouring
to give a new bent to that of a perſon of maturer
years, I ſhall for a long time ſeem to have pro-
duced little effect, and the fruits will ſhew them-


ſelves when I leaſt expected them. The king-


dom of truth comes not with oſtentation. The
ſeeds of virtue may appear to periſh before they
germinate. i ONS


To recur once more to the example of France,


the works of her great political writers ſeemed
for a long time to produce little proſpect of any


practical effect. Helvetius, one of the lateſt, in


a work publiſhed after his death in 1771, la-
ments in pathetic ſtrains the hopeleſs condition of
his country. * In the hiſtory of every people,”
ſays he, there are moments, in which, uncer-


tain of the fide they ſhall chooſe, and balanced


between political good and evil, they feel a de-
fire to he inſtructed ; in which the ſoil, fo to ex-
preſs


*
.


206 OF THE SPECIES OF


preſs myſelf, is in ſome manner prepared, and
may eaſily be impregnated with the dew of truth.
At ſuch a moment the publication of a valuable
book may give birth to the moſt auſpicious re-
forms: but, when that moment is no more, the
nation, become inſenſible to the beſt motives, is
by the nature of its government plunged deeper
and deeper in ignorance and ſtupidity. The ſoil
of intelle& is then hard and impenetrable ; the
rains may fall, may ſpread their moiſture upon
the ſurface, but the proſpect of fertility 1s gone.
Such 1s the condition of France. Her people are
become the contempt of Europe. No ſalutary
criſis ſhall ever reſtore them to liberty*.””

But in ſpite of theſe melancholy predictions,
the work of renovation was in continual progreſs.
The American revolution gave the finiſhing ſtroke,
and only fix years elapſed between the completi-
on of American liberty and the commencement
of the French revolution. Will a term longer
than this be neceſſary, before France, the moſt
refined and conſiderable nation in the world, will
lead other nations to imitate and improve upon

1 her


A
3
A
9
”
7%
1
.
1
'3Þ
1
os |
i}
4+
CY |
ry .
1
1
5
me
| |
. 11
[1 1
—_
[ :
} 3,
8
BE -
TT
4
n
ws
gf
1
—
IT
1 \
: 1
4
FF 3
=
+
v4 1
'
1.20
[ .
ix
' Bis
14
1
1
| Hf
7703
1}
1
{FR
„
! F |
.
at
FEFY
q
.
1 by
„
TE
+118
J
1
i
A
*
wh: 0
144
ma.
„
11
[ | 4
| 1
muy
+4
nr
$
Wot)
* 1
1
e
4
433
„ 4%
LY
A 1
q .
| 1
4
1 |
} 41
”
is
14
þ
"4
Din
.
1
Ii
i .


wg


* „ Dans chaque nation il eft des momens on les citoyens, incer-
tains du parti qu ili daivent prendre, et ſuſpendus entre un bon et
un mau dais gouvernement, eprouvent la ſoif de Pinſtruttion, ot
tes efprits, ft je Poſe dire, prepares et ameublis peuvent ttre fa-
cilement pinttres de la roſee de.la verite. Qu en ce moment un bon
ouvrage paroiſſe, il peut op rer d heureuſes reformes : mais cet
inſtant paſſe, les citoyens, inſenſiblꝛs a la gloire, ſont par la forme
de leur gouuernemnet invinciblement entraines vers Pignorance et

Tabrutiſſament. Alors les eſprits font la terre endurcie: Peau de
la virite y tombe, y coule, mais ſans la feconder. Tel eft Pitat de
la France. Cette nation avilie eft aujourd'hui le möpris de

Europe. Nulle criſe ſalutaire ne lui rendra la liberté.

* De.P Homme, Preface.


3


REFORM TO BE DESIRED. 207


her plan? Let the true friend of man be inceſ-
fant in the propagation of truth, and vigilant to
counteract all the cauſes that might diſturb the
regularity of her progreſs, and he will have
every reaſon to hope an early and favourable
event.


S A E III.


OF TYRANNICIDE.


Diverſity of opinions on this ſubject. — Argument in
ils vindication.— Thie de ee Fa "= not
a caſe of exception. as # Jl” of tyran-.
nicide. — Aſſaſſination deſcribed. — Importance f
fmcerity.


A QUESTION, connected with the mode
of ee revolutions, and which has been ea-
gerly diſcuſſed ameng political reaſoners, is
that of tyrannicide. The moraliſts of antiquity
warmly contended for the lawfulneſs of this
practice ; by the moderns it has generally been
condemned.

The arguments in its | favour are built upon a
very obvious principle. Juſtice ought univer-
fally to be adminiſtered. Upon leffer criminals
it is * or pretended to be done, by the laws


of


}


208 OF TYRANNICIDE.


of the community. But criminals by whom law
is ſubverted, and who overturn the liberties of
mankind, are out of the reach of the ordinary ad-
miniſtration of juſtice. If juſtice be partially ad-
miniſtered in ſubordinate caſes, and the rich man
be able to oppreſs the poor with impunity, it muſt
be admitted that a few examples of this ſort are
inſufficient to authoriſe the laſt appeal of human


'beings. But no man will deny that the caſe of


the uſurper andthe deſpot is of the moſt atrocious
nature. In this inſtance, all the proviſions of
civil policy being ſuperſeded, and juſtice poiſon-
ed at the ſource, every man is left to execute for
himſelf the decrees of eternal equity.

It may however be doubted whether the de-
ſtruction of a tyrant be in any reſpect a caſe of ex-
ception- from the rules proper to be obſerved up-
on ordinary occaſions. The tyrant has certain-
ly no particular ſanctity annexed to his perſon,
and may be killed with as little ſcruple as any
other man, when the object is that of repelling
immediate violence. In all other caſes, the ex-
tirpation of the offender by a ſelf-appointed au-
thority, does not appear to be the proper mode
of counteracting injuſtice.

For, firſt, either the nation, whoſe tyrant you


' would deſtroy, is ripe for the aſſertion and main-
tenance of its liberty, or it is not. If it be, the
tyrant ought to be depoſed with every appearance


of publicity. Nothing can be more improper,
than for an affair, intereſting to the general weal,
to be conducted as if it were an act of darkneſs
and ſhame. It is an ill leſſon we read to man-
kind, when a proceeding, built upon the broad
1 5 | baſis


n "7 "a : as ab y
erer 5 * * * *
2 1 * 2 * 4
oy ** „ * s -
. 2 oy
if * 1


0 TYRANNICIDE. 269


baſis of general juſtice, is permitted to ſhrink
from public ſcrutiny. The piſtol and the dagger


may as eaſily be made the auxiliaries of vice as of
virtue. To proſcribe all violence, and neglect no
means of information and impartiality, is the moſt
effectual ſecurity we can have for an iſſue confor-
mable to the voice of reaſon and trutn.
If the nation be not ripe for a ſtate of freedom,
the man who aſſumes to himſelf the right of in-


terpoſing violence, may indeed ſhew the fervour


of his conception, and gain a certain degree of


notoriety. Fame he will not gain, for mankind
at preſent regard an act of this fort with merited
abhorrence ; and he will inflict new calamities on
his country. The conſequences of tyrannicide
are well known. If the attempt prove abortive,


it renders the tyrant ten times more bloody, fero-


cious, and cruel than before, If it ſucceed, and
the tyranny be reſtored, it produces the ſame ef-
fe& upon his ſucceſſors. In the climate of deſ-
potiſm ſome ſolitary virtues may ſpring up. But
in the midſt. of plots and conſpiracies there is nei-
ther truth, nor confidence, nor love, nor hu-
manity. doin on |


Secondly, the true merits of the queſtion will


be ſtill farther underſtood, if we reflect on the na-
ture of aſſaſſination. The miſtake, which has


been incurred upon this ſubject, is to be imputed


principally to the ſuperficial view that has been
taken of it. If its advocates had followed the
conſpirator through all his windings, and obſery-
ed his perpetual alarm leſt truth ſhould become
known, they would probably have been Jeſs in-
diſcriminate in their applauſe. No action can be


© You. I. P imagined


— rg — — ys 7
— — —
2 7 ” — —
. — . ——
2 — 4 a
— F 9 Dare —ů — — — — — je — — — ,
_—_ Eo ESTs DP —— — 2


11


— — -
— — — *
2 2
— -
* 2 3 _—
a . — —
— — —
- — — = -—— — ——


— _ & * 20 — 4& * a, N — 3
— — — 2 — — 2 1 yo 2 bf 2 * .
— w * — — a" > — _—_ - — —— »
* 4 4 = - * — - oy — 2 % of — 2 * 2 * . P
— — 1 — Rr ̃ vl... r am rms 5 5 8 7 2 — Eo 2 2 =
— — - - 2 — 1 — * W * 7 * 2 — 7 om — 3 „ 8 — 7 „ 9 8 7 Snort —
. ——-— — OBE CN ˖ — eas rn * © oy . Sr — — > — .
— « — * 1 = . 1 8 — — a a — *. * _ —
— —— * _— 2 — Sa — * Ae — — = ”» 0 <> mY - — — — 1 ” pn. > © = __ 3 2 5. wad 1
4 * wwe — = ——— — pr . Ys, 2 * ＋ 27 — . —
= —— — — > 2, m—_ 5 * 2 * N D —— L 2 * was. — —
— 8 E , — ; _
— — — 2282 2 ' : 1 7. A . n g
3 * *


270 OF TYRANNICIDE.


imagined more directly at war with a principle of |
ingenuouſneſs and candour. Like all that is moſt


%


odious in the catalogue of vices, it delights in


obſcurity. It ſhrinks from the penetrating eye
of wiſdom. It avoids all queſtion, and heſitates
and trembles before the queſtioner. It ſtruggles
for a tranquil gaiety, and is only complete where
there is the moſt perfect hypocriſy. It changes
the uſe of ſpeech, and compoſes every feature the
better to deceive. Imagine to yourſelf the con-
ſpirators, kneeling at the feet of Cæſar, as they
did the moment before they deſtroyed him. Not
all the virtue of Brutus can fave them from your
indignation. ; | Fc
There cannot be a better inſtance than that of
which we are treating, to prove the importance
of general ſincerity. We ſee in this example,
that an action, which has been undertaken from


the beſt motives, may by a defect in this particu-


lar tend to overturn the very foundations of juſ-
tice and happineſs. Wherever there is aſſaſſina-
tion, there 1s an end to all confidence among men.
Proteſts and aſſeverations go for nothing. No
man preſumes to know his neighbour's intention.
The boundaries, that have hitherto ſerved to di-
vide virtue and vice, are gone. The true inte-
reſts of mankind require, not their removal, but
their confirmation. All morality proceeds upon


the aſſumption of ſomething evident and true,
will grow and expand in proportion as theſe in-
dications are more clear and unequivocal, and


could not exiſt for a moment, if they were de-
ſtroyed. |


*


CHAP.


„


„


OF THE CULTIVATION OF TRUFH,


PERHAPS there cannot be a ſubje&t of
greater political importance, or better calculated
to lead us in ſafety through the mazes of contro-
verſy, than that of the value of truth. Truth
may be conſidered by us, either abſtractedly, as it
relates to certain general and unchangeable prin-
ciples, or practically, as it relates to the daily in-
cidents and ordinary commerce of human life.
In whichever of theſe views we conſider it, the
more deeply we meditate its nature and tenden-
cy, the more ſhall we be ſtruck with its unri-
valled importance.


T2” SECTION


212 OF THE CULTIVATION


DBECTIVN 1
OF ABSTRACT OR GENERAL TRUTH,
bt importance as conducin fm T 0 our intelleual
im rovement—T 0 our moral improvement — Vir.
tus the beſt ſource of happineſs. —Proved by com


_ pariſon—By its manner of adapting itſelf to all
ſituations —By, its undecaying excellence. —Can-


not be effettually propagated but by a culti-
vated mind. — Importance of general truth 76


. our political improvement.


7


1 conſidered, it conduces
to the perfection of our underſtandin gs, our vir-
tue and our political inſtitutions.

In the diſcovery and knowledge of truth is com-
priſed all that which an impartial and reflecting
mind is accuſtomed to admire. It is not poſſible
for us ſeriouſly to doubt concerning the prefe-
rence of a capacious and ardent intelligence over
the limited perceptions of a brute. All that we
can imagine of angels and Gods conſiſts in ſu
rior wiſdom. Do you fay in power alſo ? It al
preſently appear that wiſdom is power. The
truths of general nature, thoſe truths which pre-
ceded, either ſubſtantially or in the nature of
thin gs, the particular exiſtences that ſurround us,


and are independent of them all, are inexhauſti-
ble.


885


w


q
0


1 hows þF Os 2 eee WH ©


OFT. TRUT 213
a + m4 4 41


ble. Is it poſſible that a knowledge of theſe
truths, the truths of mathematics, of metaphy-
ſics and morals, the truths which, according to
Plato's conception *, taught the creator of the


world the nature of his materials, the reſult of
his operations, the conſequences of all poffible


ſyſtems in all their detail, ſhould not exalt and
elevate the mind ? The truths'of particular na-
ture, the hiſtory of man, the characters and pro-
penſities of human beings, the proceſs of our
own minds, the capacity of our natures, are
ſcarcely leſs valuable, The reaſon they are fo
will beſt appear if we conſider, ſecondly, the
tendency 1 truth in conducing to the perfection
of our virtue. eee en ee
Virtue cannot exiſt in an eminent degree, un-


accompanied by an extenſive ſurvey of cauſes and
their conſequences, ſo that, having ſtruck an ac-


curate balance between the mixed benefits and


injuries that for the preſent adhere to all human


affairs, we may adopt that conduct which leads


to the greateſt poſſible advantage. If there be
ſuch a thing as virtue, it muſt admit of degrees.


If it admit of degrees, he muſt be moſt virtuous,
who chooſes with the ſoundeſt judgment the
greateſt poſſible good of his ſpecies, But, in or-
der to hook the greateſt poſſible good, he muſt
be deeply acquainted with the nature of man, its
veneral features and its varieties. In order to ex-


ecute it, he muſt have conſidered all the inſtru-


ments for imprefling mind, and the different
modes of applying them, and muſt know exactly :
the proper moment for bringing them into action.
# 8 | *
* Sec the Parmenides.


J


— LY
— — 2 6 — x 2 2
= ou. — — — — _— — 2 wut — — — : > — - — — — — = *
— — 5 ———— — — — A Y - — nun — — ar — 2 —— py or 8 — p — — = a? —
— — — 8
_— : — — = — — — — — — — — — ED
- < . — — — — gar — dwg — — 8 — — 24 —
— ů— — — — f — — — — ny C — = "x — q Ju a a1 =_ oo * * 42 : — 1 4 * _ Pap **
ogy — 2 —— — —e— + + aw" — — — 228 — — Ui „3E Of taps Sq m— 9 — — 8 "x I 4 , — — = * —— —
- * * — - 1 — — © _ K — Do De — =
* YT . l 6 l > a : BI
oP d 5


* - as. — —
—
— 2
N . —— - ze, —
= ER = * ——
— —
— — —— rg
aw 19 < — —— — —•—U—J —
— CL, = = og .
* b 5 — ——
*
o KK


*


214 OF THE CULTIVATION


In whatever light we confider virtue, whether
we place it in the action or the diſpoſition, its


degree muſt be intimately connected with the


degree of knowledge. No man can love virtue


ſufficiently, who has not an acute and lively per-
ception of its beauty, and its tendency to pro-
duce the only ſolid and permanent happineſs,
What compariſon can be. made between the vir-
tue of Socrates and that of a Hottentot or a Sibe-


rian? A humorous example how univerſally


this truth has been perceived might be drawn

from Tertullian, who, as à father of the church,
was obliged to maintain the hollowneſs and in-
ſignificance of pagan virtues, and accordingly aſ-
ſures us, that the moſt- ignorant peaſant under


the Chriſtian diſpenſation poſſeſſed more real
knowledge than the wiſeſt of the ancient phi-


loſophers *. 85

We ſhall be ſtill more fully aware of the con-
nection between virtue and knowledge, if we
conſider that the higheſt employment of virtue
is to propagate itſelf. Virtue alone is happineſs.


The happineſs of a brute that ſpends the greater


part of his life in liſtleſſneſs and ſleep, is but one
remove from the happineſs of a plant that is full


of ſap, vigour and nutrition. The happineſs of
a man who purſues licentious pleaſure is mo-
mentary, and his intervals of wearineſs and diſ-
guſt perpetual. He ſpeedily wears himſelf out
in his ſpecious career; and, every time that he
employs the means of delight which his corporeal
exiſtence affords him, takes ſo much from his
Hrs * capacity
* Apologia, Cap. xlvi. See this ſubje& farther purſued in


Appendix, No. I.


F T-R-V=T WL 215
capacity of enjoyment. If he be wiſe enough
like Epicurus to perceive a part of theſe diſad-
vantages, and to find in freſh herbs and the water
of the ſpring the trueſt gratification of his appe-
tite, he will be obliged to ſeek ſome addition to
his ſtock of enjoyment, and like Epicurus to
become benevolent out of pure ſenſuality. But
the virtuous man has a perpetual ſource of en-
joyment. The only reaſon on account of which
the truth of this aſſertion was ever controverted,
is, that men have not underſtood what it was
that conſtituted virtue.

e is impoſſible that any ſituation can occur in
— whi h virtue cannot find room to expatiate. In
röC ſocietv there is continual opportunity for its ac-
I tive employment. I cannot have intercourſe with
- any human being who may not be the better for
that intercourſe. If he be already juſt and vir-
- tuous, theſe qualities are improved by commu-
- nication, It is from a ſimilar principle that it
.


ccc 0"


——
=


has been obſerved that great geniuſes have uſu-
ally exiſted in a cluſter, and have been awakened


r by the fire ſtruck into them by their neighbours.
"i If he be imperfect and erroneous, there muſt be
1 always ſome prejudice I may contribute to de-
f {troy, ſome motive to delineate, ſome error to
= remove. If I be prejudiced and imperfect my-


- ſelf, it cannot however happen that my preju-
t dices and imperfections ſhall be exactly coinci-
. dent with his. I may therefore inform him of
| the truths that I know, and even by the colliſion
8 of prejudices truth is elicited. It is impoſſible
/ that I ſhould ſtrenuouſly apply myſelf to his mind
: with ſincere motives of benevolence without


*


219 OF THE CULTIVATION


ſome. good being the reſult. Nor am I more
at a loſs in ſolitude. In ſolitude I may accumu-
late the materials of ſocial benefit. No ſitua-
tion can be ſo deſperate as to preclude theſe ef-
forts. Voltaire, when ſhut up in the Baſtile,
and for ought he knew for life, deprived of
books, of - pens and. of paper, arrranged and in
part executed the project of his Henriade *,

Another advantage of virtue in this perſonal
view, is that, while ſenſual pleaſure exhauſts the
frame, and paſſions often excited become frigid
and callous, virtue has exactly the oppoſite pro-

penſities. Paſſions, in the uſual acceptation of
that term, having no abſolute foundation in the
nature of things, delight only by their novelty.
But the more we are acquainted with virtue, the
more eſtimable will it appear ; and 1 its field is as
endleſs as the progreſs of mind. If an enlight-
ened love of it be once excited in the mind, it
is impoſſible that it ſhould not continually i in-
creaſe. By its variety, by its activity it perpe-
tually renovates itſelf, and renders the intellect in
which it reſides ever new. and ever young.

All theſe reaſonin gs are calculated to perſuade
us that the moſt precious boon we can beſtow
upon others is virtue, that the higheſt employ-
ment of virtue is to propagate itſelf. But, as
yirtue 1s inſeparably connected with knowledge
in my own mind, fo can it only by knowledge
be communicated to others. How can the vir-
e we have Juſt been > comernpiating be pet

ut


oy + Fie de "SER par Mens (faid to | be the marquis de
Villette). A Geneve, 1786. Chap. iv. This is probably the
beſt hiſtory of this great man which has yet appeared, |


$
.
*

00

1
+:
1 1
1 .
1
1
14
48

7 1
Li :
5 :
"

0

"= 4
SL.
£
13k


——


7
-


*
iy
n 1
*
[
.
bs
i 1
* 1 :
7
1
:
7
+.
* |
7 <4
1
63"
J >
* **
li
| js
4 N
ae
4
4
BY
"8325 3” x
11 .
By
7
4
\
l
$4 4+
1
A 5
TIF
BL
. f
1M
47
* }
_
4 4
f ö
1 + 1
*
14 1
: 8.41
ig:
q $14
Fi
*
j
i
.
by
TY!
=
8
4 4
4 :
8k
F 4
1
8 N.
1 is
*
;
1 3
'H |
1
4 :
SRL, _
1 3 i
1 *
4 4 1
n
31
17 /
A} 1
x if
"1923
. 775307
18 j
1
* |
ut
7
N
%
b LB 08
11
f
o .
48k
.
1
*
1
F
i
$f
4:
.
1
810887
4 &id
__
.
e
WT +
17
1 ; Þ#
1
=
1
bi b
th
—_ |
t
9
1! 5
1
1
12
110
f
9
t
9
U
1
!
o


* —
— — ü —˙— 2 Ae


: *


— —


— * _ —


— —
A ů


7
—
.


—— —


OF. TU 217


but by infuſing comprehenſive views and com-
municating energetic truths? Now that man
alone is qualified to give theſe views, and com-
municate theſe truths, who 1s himſelf pervaded
with them

Let us ſuppoſe for a moment virtuous diſpo-
ſitions as exiſting without knowledge or outrun-
ning knowledge, the lait of which 1s certainly
poffible, and we ſhall preſently find how little
ſuch virtue is worthy to be propagated. The
moſt generous views will in ſuch caſes fre-
quently lead to the moſt nefarious actions. A
Calvin will burn Servetus, and a Digby generate
the gun-powder treaſon. But, to leave theſe ex-
treme inſtances, in all cafes where miſtaken vir-
tue leads to cruel] and tyrannical actions, the
mind will be ſoured and made putreſcent by the
actions it perpetrates. Truth, immortal and ever
preſent truth, is ſo powerful, that, in fpite of
all his inveterate prejudices, the upright man
will ſuſpect himſelf, when he reſolves upon an
action - is at war with the plaineſt principles
of morality. He will become melancholy, diſ-
fatisfied and anxious. His firmneſs will degene-
rate into obſtinacy, and his juſtice into inexora-
ble ſeverity. The farther he purſues his ſyſtem,
the more erroneous will he become. The far-
ther he purſues it, the leſs will he be fatisfied
with it. As truth is an endleſs ſource of tran-
quillity and delight, error will be a prolific foun-
tain of new miſtakes and new diſcontent,

As to the third point, the tendency of truth
to the improvement of our political inſtitutions,
this is in reality the ſubject of the preſent vo-


lame,


238 OF THE CULTIVATION, &.


lume, and has been particularly argued in ſome
of the earlier diviſions of the work. If politics
be a ſcience, the inveſtigation of truth muſt be
the means of unfolding it, If men reſemble.
each other in more numerous and eſſential parti-
culars than thoſe in which they differ, if the
| beſt purpoſes that can be accompliſhed reſpect-
ing them be to make them free and virtuous and
wiſe, there muſt be one beſt method of adyanc-
ing theſe common purpoſes, one beſt mode of
ſocial exiſtence deducible from the principles of
their nature, If truth be one, there muſt be
one code of truths on the ſubject of our recipro-
cal duties. Nor is the inveſtigation of truth
only the beſt mode of arriving at the object of
all political inſtitutions, but it is alſo the beſt
mode of introducing and eſtabliſhing it, Diſ-
cufſion is the path that leads to diſcovery and
demonſtration. Motives ferment in the minds
of great bodies of men till all is ripe for action.
The more familiar the mind becomes with the
ideas of which they conſiſt and the propoſitions
that expreſs them, the more fully is it pervaded
with their urgency and importance,


\


SECT,


. 219 ]


SECTION I.


OF SINCERITY,


Nature of this virtue. —Its fes upon our own
attions—upon our neighbours, —lts tendency to
produce fortitude. —EffetFs of inſincerity.— Cha-
rafter which ſincerity would acquire to him who
prattiſed it.—Objeftions.—The fear of giving
unneceſſary pam,— Anſwer.—T he defire of pre-
ſerving my life. —T his objection proves too much.

 —Anſfwer.—Secrecy confidered.—The ſecrets
of others.—State ſecrets.— Secrets of philan-
thropy, * x


Ir 1s evident in the laſt place, that a ſtrict ad-
herence to truth will have the beſt effect upon
our minds in the ordinary commerce of life. This
is the virtue which has commonly been known
by the denomination of ſincerity ; and, whatever


certain accommodating moraliſts may teach. us,


the value of ſincerity will be in the higheſt de-
gree obſcured, when it is not complete. Real
ſincerity depoſes me from all authority over the
ſtatement of facts. Similar to the duty which
Tully impoſes upon the hiſtorian, it compels me
not to dare to utter what is falſe, or conceal
what is true.” It annihilates the baſtard pru-
dence, which would inſtruct me to give language
to no ſentiment that may be prejudicial to my

1 : | intereſts.


* —
ne
2


e


- — —
— - os, — 2 =_ = 2 oy - -


20 yh
4 Fs
: 4
1 „
i K
1
* 1. Ty
| :
13
1 y *
=
'
: 2
: *
81
_—_ . Mi
0 +38
i
1 1
WT. 2
4 : 1
Ws
'T 1
_ =
7
l C4 Lo
J F
x E
| \
1 *
1 1
s 1 by
=
o
WA
1 *
"ri
*
*


D e


—


We


1 R
N .
8 . — 1 8 . * a = :

- <> - —— — —— - — — — ——— — — = — Wh — — — - a- * - 8 —.—

£ . — P a CIT — 2 : :
Dr :
” 5 8 1 8 gp oO. * 1 8 > > X N
po Va Tel AST 4 WY 8 — 2 5 F ,

& 2 15 8 * 2 22 q 1 . =. * * n — a "a n

* Hs 7 r 4 — — — - _ _—_ 2 1 pb >
14. * wang £ fy . N e * * K n TS 0 3 ba =


1
n


.
3


LOO n 1
A


=_


4 - by
e
ee <

J 3
8


— 1
64.
1 1 «Y


3 * A A 2.0
Sa, 2 EE


— 6 — *
n


*
._-
2
IS


4
— - ”
wy 4 1-2 RS =. "


*


— —
= _ —— — —— Y 2 - .
ͤ— = - 4 SR ns as P— ⏑ — r —— — —
Fa, or ah a 75 — - A — — — 2 — — A
— — - 1 - = — : i 2 — — — — — *
— — — — — oy, — bo — * . 1 8 — 8 4
= — —— — — p * ” 1 RES. others a wt - 4 0
yo "oy — . ——— — - — * EY
wr — 0 — ©
* . -


he would-


cided upon the commiſſion of an. equivocal ac-


220 OF SINCERITY.


intereſts. It extirpates the low and ſelfiſh prin-
ciple, which would induce me to utter nothing
* to the diſadvantage of him from whom I have
received no injury.” It compels me to regard
the concerns of my ſpecies as my own Concerns.
What I know of truth, of morals, of religion,
of government, it compels me to communicate.
All the praiſe which a virtuous man and an ho-
neſt action can merit, I am obliged to pay to the
uttermoſt mite. I am obliged to give language
to all the blame to which profligacy, venality,
hypocriſy and circumvention are ſo juſtly enti-
tled. I am not empowered to conceal any thing
I know of myſelf, whether it tend to my ho-
nour or to my difgrace. I am obliged to treat
every other man with equal frankneſs, without
dreading the imputation of flattery on the one
hand, without dreading his reſentment and en-
mity on the other.

Did every man impoſe this law upon himſelf,
be obliged to conſider before he de-
tion, whether he choſe to be his own hiſtorian,
to be the future narrator of the ſcene in which
he was engaging. It has been juſtly obſerved
that the popiſh practice of auricular confeſſion
has been attended with ſome ſalutary effects.


How much better would it be, if, inſtead of a


practice thus ambiguous, and which may be con-


verted into ſo dangerous an engine of eccleſiaſti-


cal deſpotiſm, every man would make the world
his confeſſional, and the human ſpecies the keeper
of his conſcience ? hs 1 wy


How


OF SINCERITY 221
How extenſive an effect would be produced,
if every man were ſure of meeting in his neigh-
bour the ingenuous cenſor, who would tell to
himſelf, and publiſh to the world, his virtues,
his good deeds, his meanneſſes and his follies? I


have no right to reject any duty, becauſe it is


equally, incumbent upon my neighbours, and
they do not practiſe it. When I have diſcharged
the whole of my duty, it is weakneſs and vice
to make myſelf unhappy about the omiſſions of
others. Nor is it poſſible to fay how much
good one man ſufficiently rigid in his adherence
to truth would effect. One ſuch man, with ge-


nius, information and energy, might redeem a


nation from vice.

The conſequence to myſelf of telling every
man the truth, regardleſs of perſonal danger or
of injury to my intereſts in the world, would be
uncommonly favourable. I ſhould acquire a for- |
titude that would render me equal to the moſt
trying ſituations, that would maintain my pre-
ſence of mind entire in ſpite of unexpected oc-
currences, that would furniſh me with extempo-
rary arguments and wiſdom, and endue my
tongue with irreſiſtible eloquence. Animated
by the love of truth, my underſtanding would
always be vigorous and alert, not AS | betore fr oa
quently, ſubject to liſtleſſneſs, timidity and infi -
pidity. Animated by the love of truth, and by
a paſſion inſeparable from its nature, and which
is almoſt the ſame thing under another name, the
love of my ſpecies, I ſhould carefully ſeek for
ſuch topics as might moſt conduce to the benefit
of my neighbours, anxioufly watch the progreſs


of


— wo pos - * 2 —_ 2
- >. * * — 2 AER LADY Cres, * — *
i — V <6 -


— — — — A ——


33
nn J


ES


8 Ls .


WM — — — 97 =. 1 .
MI? OR 8
1 . . * 4 — - 2 — _- - =
: 4 _—_— —_— 3 „1
rr 2 1 =


1
— — = — — 2 22 5 . > IR 2 Oe" * x OS IEP a Ctr ESR RES oo I, End ih
w — — L N . . *
« 7 . — — g tg 70> 4 4 G - 3 2 5 + 4 * 4 . . 2
Ix 1 * a IS) RIPE AY pz 2 2 1 5 5,0 \ 4 MY. IF LT p f FE. AO |
= | teen icon f, ]¼—U— eg, BG
„ 4 > — — LS | = > -$- i a $4.4. Sf bs .


CEE ——_—


WP r
. r ET —


oo, SC FI ob
— En


r


—_— —— — —_ — *


— — —
T 2 —


_ — —
— a
— —
7


— — -
— bs — — 2 bt bs


— . = > * — — —
— ̃ ——eI—O—_—_—
— ——_—_ —
my


—


— — ä—ũ—— — 2 —


2167 1
— — 8 21 * n=
2


7 — — —
— 7 T
*& 6 — a > 22 — 2
— — nad — — 2 2 8 — — > -
b oF 7 _ N N -
N


222 OF SINCERITY.


of mind, and inceſſantly labour for the extirpa-
tion of prejudice. _ | |

What is it that at this day enables a thouſand |
errors to keep their ſtation in the world, prieſt-
craft, teſts, bribery, war, cabal, and whatever
elſe is the contempt and abhorrence of the en-


lightened and honeſt mind? Cowardice. Be-


cauſe, while vice walks ere& with an unabaſhed


countenance, men leſs vicious dare not paint her
with that truth of colouring, which ſhould at
once confirm the innocent and reform the guilty.
Becauſe the majority of thoſe who are not in-
volved in the buſy ſcene, and who, poſſeſſing
ſome diſcernment, ſee that things are not alto-
gether right, yet ſee in ſo frigid a way, and with
ſo imperfect a view. Many, who detect the
impoſture, are yet abſurd. enough to imagine
that impoſture is neceſſary to keep the world in
awe, and that truth being too weak to curb the
turbulent paſſions of mankind, it is exceedingly
proper to call in knavery and artifice as the abet-
tors of her power. If every man to-day would
tell all the truth he knows, three years hence


there would be ſcarcely a falſhood of any mag-
nitude remaining in the civilized world.


There is no fear that the character here de-
ſcribed ſhould degenerate into ruggedneſs and
brutality v. The motive by vie it is ani-
mated affords a ſufficient ſecurity againſt ſuch


conſequences. I tell an unpleaſant truth to


my neighbour from a conviction that it is my


[> See particular caſe of this incerity Clculled in Appendis;


o. II.


kindneſs in my heart. That man's mind muſt


duty. I am convinced it is my duty, becauſe I
perceive the communication is calculated for his
benefit.” His benefit therefore is the motive of
my proceeding, and with ſuch a motive it is im-
poſſible I ſhould not ſeek to communicate it in
the moſt efficacious form, not rouſing his re-
ſentment, but awakening his moral feelings and
his energy. Meanwhile the happieſt of all qua-
lifications in order to render truth palatable, is
that which riſes ſpontaneouſly in the fituation we
have been conſidering. Truth according to the
terms of the ſuppoſition is to be ſpoken from the
love of truth. But the face, the voice, the geſ-
ture are ſo many indexes to the mind. It is
ſcarcely poſſible therefore that the perſon with.
whom I am converſing ſhould not perceive, that
I am influenced by no malignity, acrimony and
envy. In proportion as my motive is pure, at
leaſt after a few experiments, my manner will
become unembarraſſed. There will be frank-
neſs in my voice, fervour in my geſture, and


—


= _—


—


1 2 2 » Pay 4 .
N N K _ bog 4 * 2 Ts #"&

** n 3
rr good 7


Fe" — *
*
« Im


be of a very perverſe texture, that can convert a
beneficent potion adminiſtered with no ungene=
rous retroſpect, no ſelfiſh triumph, into rancour
and averſion. There is an energy in the ſin-
cerity of a virtuous mind that nothing human
can refit. { |

I ſtop not to conſider the objections of the man
who is immerſed in worldly proſpects and pur-
ſuits. He that does not know that virtue is better
than riches or title muſt be convinced by argu-
ments foreign to this place. |


But


224 OF SINCERITY.


But it will be aſked, © What then, are pain-
fal truths to be diſcloſed to perſons who are al-
ready in the moſt pitiable circumſtances? Ought
a woman that is dying of a fever to be informed


of the fate of her huſband whoſe ſkull has been


fractured by a fall from his horſe.


The moſt that could poſſibly be conceded to a
caſe like this, is, that this perhaps 1s not the
moment to begin to treat like a rational being a
perſon who has through the courſe of a long life
been treated like an infant. But in reality there
is a mode in which under ſuch eircumftances
truth may ſafely be communicated; and, if it be
not thus done, there is perpetual danger that 1t


may be done in a blunter way by the heedleſs lo-


quaciouſneſs of a chambermaid, or the yet un-


1


debauched ſincerity of an infant. How many


arts of hypocriſy, ſtratagem and falſhood mult be
employed to cover this pitiful ſecret? Truth was
calculated in the nature of things to diſcipline the
mind to fortitude, humanity and virtue. Who
are we, that we ſhould ſubvert the nature of
things and the ſyſtem of the univerſe, that we
ſhould breed up a ſet of ſummer inſects, upon
which the breeze of ſincerity may never blow,


and the tempeſt of misfortune never beat ?


Rut truth may ſometimes be fatal to him


that ſpeaks it. A man, who fought for the Pre-


tender in the year 1745, when the event hap-
pened that diſperſed his companions, betook
imſelf to ſolitary flight. He fell in with a


of loyaliſts who were ſeeking to apprehend


Run 3 but not knowing his perſon, they en-
quired of him for intelligence to guide them


*
L


. 4 4


OF SIN CERITY. 225


in their purſuit. He returned an anſwer cal-
culated to cheriſh them in their miſtake, and
ſaved his life. 55 1 | -
This like the former is an extreme caſe ; but
the trye anſwer will probably be found to be the
fame. If any one ſhould queſtion this, let him
conſider how far his approbation of the conduct
of the perſon above cited would lead him. The
rebels, as they were called, were treated in the
period from which the example is drawn with
the moſt illiberal injuſtice. This man, guided
perhaps by the moſt magnanimous motives in
what he had done, would have been put to an
ignominious death. But, if he had a right to
extricate himſelf by falſhood, why not the wretch
who has been guilty of forgery, who has deſerved
puniſhment, but who may now be conſcious
that he has in him materials and inclination to
make a valuable member of ſociety ? Nor is the
inclination an eſſential part of the ſuppoſition.
Wherever the materials exiſt, it will perhaps be
found to be flagrantly unjuſt on the part of ſociety
to deſtroy them, inſtead of diſcovering the means
by which they might be rendered innocent and
uſeful. At this rate, a man has nothing to do
but to commit one crime, in order to give him a
right to commit a ſecond which ſhall ſecure im-
punity to the firſt. ee |
But why, when fo many hundred individuals
have been contented to become martyrs to the
unintelligible principles of a pitiful ſect, ſhould
not the one innocent man I have been deſcribing
be contented to offer himſelf up a victim at the
ſhrine of veracity? Why ſhould he purchaſe a a
. | | few


few. poor years of exile ad mile my the com-

miſſion of falſhood? Had he ſurrendered him-

{elf to his purſuers, had he declared in the pre-

ſence of his judges and his country, I, whom
you think too wicked and degenerate to deſerve
even to live, have choſen rather to encounter
your injuſtice than be guilty of an untruth: I
would have eſcaped from your iniquity and ty-
ranny if T had been able; but, hedged in on all
ſides, having no means of deliverance but in
falſhood, I chearfully ſubmit to all that your ma-
lice can inflict rather than violate the majeſty of
truth: would he not have done an honour to
himſelf, and afforded an example to the world,
that would have fully compenſated the calamity
of his untimely death? It is in all caſes incum-
bent upon us to diſcharge our own duty, with-
out being influenced by the enquiry whether
other men will diſcharge or neglect theirs.

It muſt be remembered however that this is

not the true jet of the argument. The ſtreſs


does not lie upon the good he would have done:


that is precarious. This heroic action, as it is
to be feared has been the caſe with many others,
might be conſigned to oblivion. The object of
true wiſdom under the circumſtances we are con-
ſidering, is to weigh, not ſo much what is to be
3 as what is to be avoided. We muſt not
guilty of infincerity. We muſt not ſeek to
08 a deſirable object by vile means. We
muſt prefer a general principle to the meretrici-
ous attractions of a particular deviation. We
muſt perceive in the preſervation of that general
—_— a * of univerſal — e


3 ing


OF SINCERITY. 227


ing the benefit to ariſe in any inſtance from ſu-
2 it. It is by general principles that the
buſineſs of the univerſe is carried on. If the
laws of gravity and impulſe did not make us
know the conſequences of our actions, we ſhould
be incapable of judgment and inference. Nor is
this leſs true in morals. He that, having laid
down to himſelf a plan of ſincerity, is guilty of
a ſingle deviation, infects the Whole, contami-
nates the frankneſs and magnanimity of his tem-
per (for fortitude in the intrepidity of lying is
baſeneſs), and is leſs virtuous than the foe againſt
whom he defends himſelf; for it is more virtu-
ous in my neighbour to confide in my apparent
honeſty, than in me to abuſe his confidence. In
the caſe of martyrdom there are two things to be
conſidered. It is an evil not wantonly to be in-
curred, for we know not what good yet remains
for us to do. It is an evil not to be avoided at
the expence of principle, for we ſhould be upon
our guard againſt ſetting an inordinate value upon
our own efforts, and imagining that truth would
die, if we were to be deſtroyed.

« But what becomes of the great duty of ſe-
crecy, which the incomparable Fenelon has
made a capital branch in the education of his
Telemachus? It is annihilated. It becomes
a truly virtuous man not to engage in any action
of which he would be aſhamed though all the
world were ſpectators. Indeed Fenelon with all
his ability has fallen into the moſt palpable in-
conſiſtency upon this ſubject. In Ithaca a con-
ſiderable part of the merit of Telemachus conſiſts


22 „ in


%.


* r n * a F 7
"4. + Wb. x 5 ” 1
enn * *
9 4
* u 48 * 7 *
3 0 A A. * * *
* * Fl


iure,


in keeping his mother's ſecrets k. When he ar-
rives in Tyre, he will not be perſuaded to com-
mit or ſuffer a deception, though his life was ap-
parently at ſtake . 47 PR
What is it of which an honeſt man is com-
monly aſhamed ? Of virtuous poverty, of doing
menial offices for himſelf, of having raiſed him-
ſelf by merit from a humble ſituation, and of a
thouſand particulars which in reality conſtitute
his glory. With reſpect to actions of benefi-
cence we cannot be too much upon our guard
againſt a ſpirit of oſtentation and the character
that imperiouſly exacts the gratitude of its bene-
ficiaries ; but it is certainly an extreme weakneſs
©_ . to deſire to hide our deſerts. So far from deſir-
ing to withhold from the world the knowledge
of our good deeds, we ought to be forward' to
exhibit an attractive and illuſtrious example.
We cannot determine to keep any thing ſecret
without riſking at the ſame time to commit a
hundred artifices, quibbles, equivocations and
falſhoods. 1100 8
But the ſecrets of others, have I a power
over them?” Probably not: but you have a
duty reſpecting them. The facts with which
you are acquainted are a part of your poſſeſſi-
ons, and you are as much obliged reſpecting
them as in any other caſe, to employ them for
the public good. Have I no right to indulge in
myſelf the caprice of concealing any of my af-
fairs, and can another man have a right by his
caprice to hedge up and reſtrain the path of my
Moto. F duty?


* Telemaque. Liv. NI. + Liv. III.


\


0 'SINCERITY. 229


duty ! But tate ſecrets?” This perhaps is a
ſubje& that ought not to be anticipated. We
ſhall have occaſion to enquire how miniſters of
the concerns of a nation came by their right to
equivocate, to juggle and over-reach, while pri-
vate men are obliged to be ingenuous, direct and
ſincere. 5 | 2

There is one caſe of a ſingular nature that ſeems
to deſerve a ſeparate examination; the caſe of
ſecrets that are to be kept for the ſake of mankind.
Full juſtice is done to the affirmative ſide of this
argument by Mr. Condorcet in his life of Vol-
taire, where he is juſtifying this illuſtrious friend
of mankind, for his gentleneſs and forbearance in
aſſerting the liberties of the ſpecies. He firſt
enumerates the inceſſant attacks of Voltaire upon
ſuperſtition, hypocritical auſterities and war; and
then proceeds: It is true, the more men are en-
lightened, the more they will be free; but let
us not put deſpots on their guard, and incite them
to form a league againſt the progreſs of reaſon.
Let us conceal from them the ſtrict and eternal
union that ſubſiſts between knowledge and liber-
ty. Voltaire thought proper to paint ſuperſtition
as the enemy of 9 to put kings and
princes upon their guard againſt the gloomy fe-
rocity and ambition of the prieſthood, and to de-
monſtrate that, were it not for the freedom of
thought and inveſtigation, there would be no ſe-
curity againſt the return of papal inſolence, of
proſcriptions, aſſaſſinations and religious war.
Had he taken the other ſide of the queſtion, had
he maintained, which is equally true, that ſuper-
ſtition and ignorance are the ſupport of .

ä J


|
iy


L
7


l n —
r - em Se. TOO 5 4 —_— =
4 A 8 2 ISS "+, 2 A * — RO 2 * rn
* A — — — * *
2 + * 2 2 — n 72 . fig * 2
> ot * on — :
* - » — . - - - 4 2 * a
Io - , . 1 © x e * 1 L I — 4 8 — 4 2 we * Sh —

. R * . "fs — 1 my ' e « N ** * . 9 : * " 3 . 3 9 — 9 k

* 8 CEE - — 46; % N N N 5
"RE" ' | | SY N 8 88 . * PLS * 1 :

* : . - | * 9
* * £ o h 9 4 "of -
* F . oy


Cielle. plus durable et plus 2 72


239 _ OF. SINCERITY.


he would only have anticipated truths for which
the public were not ripe, and have ſeen a ſpeedy
end to his career. Truth taught by moderate de-
grees gradually enlarges the intellectual capacity,
and inſenſibly prepares the equality and happi-
neſs of mankind ; but taught without prudential
reſtraint wouldeither be nipped in the bud, or occa-
ſion national concuſſions in the world, that would
eb found premature and therefore abortive *.”
What a cowardly diſtruſt do reaſonings like
theſe exhibit of the omnipotence of truth! With
reſpect to perſonal ſafety, it will be found upon
an accurate examination that Voltaire with all his
ingenuity and ſtratagem was for ſixty years: toge-
ther the object of perpetual, almoſt daily perſe-


cution from courts and miniſters. He was


* Plus les hommes ſeront eclaires, plus ils ſeront libres.—
Mais e ee les oppreſſeurs de former une ligue contre
la raiſon, cachons leur. l'etroite et neceſſaire union des lumieres et
de la liberté. Quel fera donc le devoir d'un pbilgſophe? — Il


*tclairera les gouvernemens ſur tout ce qu' ils ont & craindre des


pritres.— l fera voir que fans la jane and le meme eſprit


Hans te clerge ramenerait.les mimes aſſaſſinats, les memes ſupplices,
les memes proſcriptions, les memes _puerres: civiles.— Au lieu de
montrer que la ſuperſtition eff Pappur du deſpotiſme, avant que
la raiſon ait raſſembls aſſez de force, il prouvera qu'elle eft len-
_ 2m des rois.— Tel gſt Leſprit de tous les anvrages de Voltaire
Que des hommes, infericurs d lui, ne voyent pas que fi Voltaire
elt fait autrement, ni Monteſquieu ni Rouſſeau n duraient pu
tcrire leurs ouvrages, que J Europe ſerait encore ſuperſtitieuſe, et
reſterait long-tems eſclave.— En attaquant les appreſſeurs avant
d'avoir tclarre les citoyens, on e perare la liberti et d'eto-
ufer la raiſon. L hHiſtoire offre la preuve de cette verite. Com-
- bien de fois, malgre les generenx efforts des amis de la liberte,
une ſeule bataille n'a-t-elle pas riduit des nations d une ſervitude
die pluſieurs ſibcles Pourquoi ne pas profiter de cette experience
fungſte, et ſavoir attendre des progres des lumitres une libertt plus


1 Vie de Voltaire, par


*


* * K, throughout.


3


OF: SINCERITY, _ 237


obliged to retire from country to country, and at
laſt to take advantage of a reſidence upon the bor-
ders of two ſtates with a habitation in each. His
attempts to ſecure the patronage of princes led
only to viciſſitude and diſgrace. If his plan had
been more. firm and direct, he would mw have
been leſs ſafe. IT imidity, and an anxious endea-
vour to ſecure to ourſelves a protector, invite
perſecution. With the advantages of, Voltaire,
with his talents and independence, he 1 have
held the tyrants of the world 1 1n. awe... | |
As to the progreſs of truth, it is. not fo preca-

rious as its fearful friends may imagine. Mr. Con-
dorcet has juſtly infinuated 1 in the courſe of his ar-
gument, that in the invention of printing is
contained the embryo, which in its maturity and
vigour is deſtined to annihilate the ſlavery of the
human race *,”” Books, if proper precautions
be employed, cannot be deſtroyed. Knowledge
cannot be extirpated. Its progreſs is ſilent, but
infallible; and pu the moſt uſeful ſoldier in this
war, who accumulates in an un periſhable form
the g greateſt maſs of truth,

As 3 has nothing to fear Ft, her enemies,
ſhe needs not have any thing to, fear. from her
friends. The man, who publiſhes the ſublimeſt
diſcoveries, is not of all others the moſt likely to
inflame the vulgar, 'and hurry the great queſtion
of human happineſs to a premature criſis. The
object to be purſued undoubtedly is, the gradual |
improvement of mind. But this end will be bet-
ter anſwered * cxlubiting a as much truth as poſ-


ble,


* et Peut-ttre avant P' invention de Pi imprimerie etait-1l 1mpoſ- J
b. a ſe ſouſtraire au joug.


— See — "a ©
. IE
*


wy rer 3
— ng ˖˙•— ͤ—— - ——
* 3 © 2


— £
vader SIR. i;


— * * 5
a nes Foto
—_— HB 2
3 : EL weak
TOE)


Lag *
* 1


N. .
. AR ON
—


E —
— 2 n vs 2
— — 1
—


4 rf
F
we


232 OF SINCERITY.


ſible, enlightening a few, ah ſuffering | know-


ledge to expand in the proportion which the laws


of nature and neceſſity preſcribe, than by any


artificial plan of piecemeal communication that


we can invent, There is in the nature of things


a gradation in diſcovery and a progreſs in im-
provement, which do not need to be aſſiſted by
the ſtratagems of their yotaries. In a word,
there cannot be a more unworthy idea, than that
truth and virtue ſhould be under the neceſſity of
ſeeking alliance with concealment. The man,
who would artfully draw me into a little, that by ß
ſo doing he may unawares ſurpriſe me into much,

J infallibly regard as an impoſtor. Will truth,
contracted into ſome petty ſphere and ſhorn of its
beams, acquire additional evidence? Rather let
me truſt to its omnipotence, to its congeniality
with the nature of intellect, to its direct and irre-
fiſtible tendency to produce liberty, and happi-
neſs, and virtue. Let me fear that I have not
enough of it, that my views are too narrow to
produce impreſſion, and anxiouſly endeavour” to


add to my ſtock ; not apprehend that, exhibited
In its noon-day brightneſs, its luſtre and genial
nature ſhould not be univerſally confeſſed,


See this ſubje farther purſued in Appendix, No, III.


= | *


APPENDIX,


APPENDIX, No. I.


OF THE CONNEXION BETWEEN UNDER-
STANDING AND. VIRTUE.


Can eminent virtue exiſt unconnected with talents ?
Mature of virtue. It is the offspring of
underſtanding. —It generates underſlanding.—
Lluſtration from other A OO
tion — Apphed. ©
Can eminent talents exit unconnetted with virtur?
 —eArgument in the affirmative from analogy —
In the negative from the untverſality of moral
hpeculation— From the nature of vice as founded
in miſtake, —The argument balanced —Impor-
tance of a ſenſe of juſtice. —Its connexion with
. Talents. Alliberality with which men n of talent.
are iſually treated.


A PROPOSITION which, however evident
in itſelf, ſeems never to have been conſidered
with the attention it deſerves, is that which af-
firms the connexion between underſtanding and
virtue. Can an honeſt ploughman be as virtuous
as Cato ? Is a man of weak intelle&s and narrow
education as capable of moral excellence as the
ſublimeſt genius or the mind moſt ſtored with in-
formation and ſcience? "4


To


234 CONNEXION BETWEEN


To determine theſe queſtions it is neceſſary
we ſhould recollect the nature of virtue. Conſi-
dered as a perſonal quality it conſiſts in the diſ-
poſition of the mind, and may be defined a deſire

to promote the benefit of intelligent beings in ge-
neral, the quantity of virtue being as the quanti-
ty of defire: Now deſire is another name for
preference, or a perception of the excellence real
or ſuppoſed of any object. I ſay real or ſuppoſed,.
for an object totally deſtitute of real and intrinſic
excellence, may become an object of deſire by
means of the imaginary excellence that is aſcribed
to it. Nor is this the only miſtake to which hu-
man intelligences are liable. We may deſire an
object of abſolute excellence, not for its real an
genuine recommendations, but for ſome fictitious
attractions we may impute to it. This is always
in ſome degree the caſe, when a beneficial action
is performed from an ill motive.
How far is this miſtake compatible with 3
virtue ? If I defire the benefit of intelligent be-
ings, not from a clear and diſtin& perception of
what it is in which their benefit conſiſts, but
from the unexamined leſſons of education, from
the phyſical effect of ſympathy, or from any ſpe-
| cies of zeal unallied to and incommenſurate with |
_ __ knowledge, can this deſire be admitted for vir-
tuous? Nothing ſeems more inconſiſtent with
our ideas of virtue. A virtuous preference is the
preference of an object for the ſake of certain be-
neficial qualities which really belong to that ob-
ject. To attribute virtue to any other ſpecies of
eee


.UNDERSTANDING* AND VIRTUE.


preference would be the ſame as to ſuppoſe that
an accidental effect of my conduct, which was


altogether out of my view at the time of *


2


it, might e me to abe W
tuous. |


Hence it appears, firſt, e virtue confilts in
a defire of the benefit of the ſpecies: and, ſe-


condly, that that defire only can be denominated
virtuous, which flows from a diſtinct perception
of the value, and conſequently of the nature, of
the thing deſired. But how extenſive muſt be
the capacity that comprehends the full value of
that benefit which is the object of virtue 1 It muſt
begin with a collective idea of the human ſpecies.

It muſt diſcriminate, among all the different

cauſes that produce a pleaſurable ſtate of mind,

that which produces the moſt exquiſite and
durable pleaſure. Eminent virtue requires that

I ſhould have a grand view of the tendency of

knowledge to produce happineſs, and of juſt po-

- litical inſtitution to favour the progreſs of know
ledge. Itdemands that I ſhould perceive in what
manner ſocial intercourſe may be made conducive

to virtue and felicity, and imagine the unſpeaka-

ble advantages that may ariſe from a coincidence
and ſucceſſion of generous efforts. Theſe things
are neceſſary, not merely for the purpoſe of ena-
bling me to employ my virtuous diſpoſition in the
beſt manner, but alſo for the purpoſe of giving

to that diſpoſition a juſt animation and vigour.

God, according to the ideas uſually conceived of

that being, is more benevolent than man, be-

cauſe he has a conſtant and clear perception of


the


TRE —


4%


5 *
My HET — -
- — — — * 2 * — A bo -
— r 2
2 £ IVY 7 — — 3 — .
— r — — V— gn — 1 7 *


; — a i= I” _ 4 E 5 - —
1 r . agrw. canal: cate Wes; <-
SE — — . Lib —— — cl Iu Ex ICIS 1 A 3 2
— r — E — — — __ EY — K — = — = l . th _— . — — » * *
— re — - 0 28 8 "= — 2 9 — oe 2 pt _ — k 7
——
—


—


—
, — 5 * „ * rn St 8 2 . * 2 EE IF 22 — * — r —
> . — uy * — o * 2 * — ud * — — a> woe — —
4 — ry 8 E * * vs if <e "» Y — 22 - N
—  — yy * — * * 8 = "_ — a <a, — x = — — — 2 2 p - $2 K a oy OE A _ 4 p
—— INIT 0 es N N 5 8 * - 2 e
8 = 2 * N * - * * Aa * * * N 3 * © — P
- -z / _ . 4 ” - 7 " k .
% « p
- 4 *
* " —
. 7 o 8
. i


r
— 3 OA. *
*


fails to generate capacity.


CoNNExION BETWEEN
. nature of that end which his provide nee


| Panfu.


A farther proof that a powerful underſtanding


is inſeparable from eminent virtue will ſuggeſt


itſelf, if we recollect that earneſt deſire never
\


This propoſition has been beautifully illuſtrated


by the poets, when they have repreſented the paſ-


ſion of love as immediately leading in the breaſt
of the lover to the attainment of many arduous


accompliſhments. It unlocks his tongue, and


enables him to plead the cauſe of his paſſion with
inſinuating eloquence. It renders his converſati-


on pleaſing and his manners graceful. Does he
deſire to expreſs his feelings in the language of


verſe? It dictates to him the moſt natural and pa-
thetic ſtrains, and ſupplies him with a juſt and in-
tereſting language which the man of mere reflec-
tion and ſcience has often ſonght for in vain.

No picture can be more truly founded in a


knowledge of human nature than this. The hiſ-


tory of all eminent talents is of a ſimilar kind.
Did Themiſtocles deſire to eclipſe the trophies of


the battle of Marathon? The uneaſineſs of this de-


fire would not let him ſleep, and all his thoughts
were occupied with the invention of means to


accompliſh the purpoſe he had choſen. It is a
well known maxim in the forming of juvenile


minds, that the inſtruction, which is communi-
cated by mere conſtraint, makes a ſlow and feeble


impreſſion ; but that, when once you have in-


ſpired the mind with a love for its object, the
—— and the progreſs are entirely altered. The


uneaſineſs of mind which earneſt deſire produces,


doubles


UNDERSTANDING AND VIRTUE. 237


doubles our intelle&us activity; and as ſurely
carries us forward with increaſed velocity towards
our goal, as the expectation of a reward. of ten
thouſand pounds would prompt me to walk from
London to York with firmer reſolution and in a
| ſhorter time.

Let the object be for a perſon uninſtrufted 3 in
the rudiments of drawing to make a copy of ſome
celebrated ſtatue. At firſt, we will ſuppoſe,
his attempt ſhall be mean and unſucceſsful. If
his defire be, feeble, he will be deterred by
the miſcarriage of this eſſay. If his defire be
ardent and ee he will return to the at-
tack. He will derive inſtruction from his fai-
lure. He will examine where and why he miſ-
carried. He will ſtudy his model with a more
curious eye. He will perceive that he failed
principally from the looſe and undigeſted idea he
had formed of the object before him. It will no
longer ſtand in his wad as one general maſs, but
he will analyſe it, beſtowing upon each part in
ſucceſſion a ſeparate conſideration.

The caſe is ſimilar in virtue as in ſcience. If
I have conceived an earneſt deſire of being a be-
nefactor of my ſpecies, I ſhall no doubt find out
a channel in which for my deſire to operate, and
thall be quick-ſighted in diſcovering the defects
or comparative littleneſs of the plan I have cho-
ſen. But the choice of an excellent plan for the
accompliſhment of an important purpoſe, and
the exertion of a mind perpetually watchful to
remove its defects, imply conſiderable under-
ſtanding. The farther I am engaged in the pur-
fuit of this plan the more will my capacity in-
creaſe. If — mind flag and be diſcouraged in the
purſuit,


*
4
_


— "I CLIT
0 * ” EF 2 * 2
* *
* *
2
: X


D


— — — 9
g * * I
- =
* po
, .


r
enn
{ N


n : 07 :
„ 7 .
f |


2 TIVES — 3 2 _ = - = l g —
CI 2 wie.” = Fs deve; _ * — — — =» [4 m5 8 r
— — UREA : — 222 — ons INES 1 —— - cart —
- bay 2 — 2 * * „
— 5 — — — — — 2 — - W — kg =
. 2 8 Earls "ELIT 2 * * — ho >, —— : * 3 = Moyo 2 BY " — 1 1
< — IE r — 22 ——. — 71 bs * ö = wed. in
K ode nn r Eg — — a *. * 4 a — Ee \ — s 7
1 — i 1 — — 2 * n 8 22 1 IM EE RI ns
— 0 Dees „ "os N O_o ve. 0 — 22 b * A 1 —
e A a g — 12 e 1 1 8 * * n
* ; 4 : * Fn d 4 * * : 5 wp 2 2 5 *
N ww A 2 hes * 4 1 Yo O .
o * » 4
- a — -
- . 1 * —
RE 8
* » £
Lo ve


career.


Thus far we have only been conſidering how


238 O õ,jũ BETWEEN


| a. it will not be. merely want of anderitaind .
ing, but want of deſire. My defire and my vi-
tue will be leſs, than thoſe of the man, who
goes on with unremitted conſtancy 1 in the ſame


impoſſible it is that eminent virtue ſhould exiſt in
a weak underſtanding, and it is ſurpriſing that


ſuch a propoſition ſhould ever have been conteſted.


It is a curious queſtion to examine, how far the
converſe of this propoſition is true, and in what


degree eminent talents are TS os mt .


abſence of virtue.


From the arguments already adduced it ap-


pears that virtuous defire is another name for a


clear and diſtinct perception of the nature and va-
lue of the object of virtue. Hence it ſeems moſt
natural to conclude, that, though underſtanding,
or ſtrong percipient power is the indiſpenſible pre-
requiſite of virtue, yet it is neceſſary that this
power ſhould be fixed upon this object, in order
to its producing the deſired effect. This it is in
art. Without genius no man ever was a poet;
but it is neceſſary that general capacity ſhould
have been directed to this particular channel, for


e e excellence to be the reſult.


There is however ſome difference between the


—


To eve


two caſes. Poetry is the buſineſs of a few, virtue
and vice are the affairs of all men.
tellect that exiſts one or other of theſe qualities
muſt properl;- belong. 85 N be granted that,


ry in-


where


*


 vxpERSTANDING An VIRTUE. 239


where every other | circumſtance is equal, .
man will be moſt virtuous, whoſe underſtanding
has been moſt actively employed in the ſtudy of *
virtue. But morality has been in a certain degree 2
an object of attention to all men. No perſon
ever failed more or leſs to apply the ſtandard of
Juſt and unjuſt to his on actions and thoſe of
others; and this has of courſe been generally
done with moſt 1 ingenuity by men of the A
capacity.”

N Mun Ader be remembered that à Vicious
conduct is always the reſult of narrow views. A
man of powerful capacity and extenſive obſerva-
tion is leaſt likely to commit the miſtake, either
of ſeeing himſelf as the only object of importance
in the univerſe, or of conceiving that his own ad-
vantage may beſt be promoted by trampling on
that of others. Liberal accompliſhments are
ſurely in ſome degree connected with liberal prin-
ciples. He, who takes into his view a whole
nation as the ſubjects of his operation or the in-
ſtruments of his greatneſs, may naturally be ex-
pected to entertain ſome kindneſs for the whole.
He, whoſe mind is habitually elevated to magni-
ficent conceptions, is not likely to ſink without
ſtrong reluctance into thoſe ſordid purſuits, which
engroſs ſo large a portion of mankind.

But, though theſe general maxims muſt be ad-
mitted for true, and would incline us to hope for

a conſtant union between eminent talents and
| gteat virtues, there are other conſiderations which
preſent a ſtrong drawback upon ſo agreeable an

expectation. It is ſufficiently evident that mo-
ee in ſome degree enters into the reflections of
| - _


1


240 CoNNExION BETWEEN


all mankind. But it is equally evident, that it
may enter for more or for leſs; and that there
will be men of the higheſt talents, who have
their attention diverted to other objects, and by
"Whom it will be meditated upon with leſs earneſt-
neſs, than it may ſometimes be by other men
who are in a general view their inferiors. The
human mind is in ſome caſes fo tenacious of its
errors, and ſo ingenious in the invention of a ſo-
phiſtry by which they may be vindicated, as to
fruſtrate expectations of virtue in other reſpects
the beſt founded. e |
From the whole of the ſubject it ſeems to ap-
pear, that men of talents, even when they are
erroneous, are not deſtitute of virtue, and that
there is a degree of guilt of which they are in-
capable. There is no ingredient that ſo eſſential-
ly contributes to a virtuous character as a ſenſe
of juſtice. Philanthropy, as contradiſtingurſhed
to juſtice, is rather an unreflecting feeling, than
a rational principle. It leads to an abſurd indul-
_ gence, which is frequently more injurious than
beneficial even to the individual i: propoſes to
favour. It leads to a blind partiality, inflicting
calamity without remorſe upon many perhaps, in
order to promote the imagined intereſt of a few.
But juſtice meaſures by one inflexible ſtandard
the claims of all, weighs their oppoſite pretenſi-
ons, and ſeeks to diffuſe, happineſs, becauſe hap-
pineſs is the fit and reaſonable adjunct of a conſci-
ous being. Wherever therefore a ſtrong ſenſe
of juſtice exiſts, it is common and reaſonable to
fay, that in that mind exiſts conſiderable virtue,
though the individual from an unfortunate con-
currence


UNDERSTANDING AND VIRTUE. 241


currence of circumſtances may with all his great
qualities be the inſtrument of a very ſmall porti-
on of benefit. Can great intellectual energy exiſt
without a ſtrong ſenſe of juſtice ?

It has no doubt reſulted from a train of ſpecu-
lation fimilar to this, that poetical readers have
commonly remarked Milton's devil to be a being
of conſiderable virtue. It muſt be admitted that
his energies centered too much in perſonal regards.
But why did he rebel againſt his maker ? It was,
as he himſelf informs us, becauſe he ſaw no ſuffi-
cient reaſon for that extreme inequality of rank
and power which the creator aſſumed. It was
becauſe preſcription and precedent form an ade-
quate ground for implicit faith. After his fall,
why did he ſtill cheriſh the ſpirit of oppoſition : ?
From a perſuaſion that he was hardly and injuri-
ouſly treated. He was not diſcouraged by the
apparent inequality of the conteſt : becauſe a
ſenſe of reaſon and juſtice was ftrongerin his mind,
than a ſenſe of brute force : becauſe he had much
of the feelings of an Epictetus or a Cato, and
little of thoſe of a ſlave. He bore his torments
with fortitude, becauſe he diſdained to be ſubdu-
ed by deſpotic power. He ſought revenge, be-
cauſe he could not think with tameneſs of the
unexpoſtulating authority that aſſumed to diſpoſe
of him. How beneficial and illuſtrious might
the temper from which theſe qualities lowed have
proved with a ſmall diverſity of ſituation |

Let us deſcend from theſe imaginary exiſtences
to real hiſtory. We ſhall find that even Cæſar
and Alexander had their virtues. There 1s great

VOL. I. | R reaſon


* = —— — . TIT] 8
— — * — : — —
22 woF.+ S 2 2 : —_— .
2 * * ph K <> 254 —— —— .
p — ION — > \ * bg — — — *
RES — — 8 —
K by ” - F 3 3 « 2 ——_ — 4 -
2 5 bk »» OA = I. A — 2 ie *
— 4 iy 2 > —
— — — .


5 3 ©. — —  S —
— <= . — SOC hor —_
—
o - 5 — 8 0
7 . — 1 1
2 — — — DP
— — 1-4 » * 20 oo
_— bes RES. yn Roa Ie ar 4 yy , .
- oe —_ — — —
* * A


/


* CONNEXION BETWEEN
| reaſon to believe, that, however miſtaken was


their ſyſtem of conduct, they imagined it recon-
cileable and even conducive to the general good,
If they had deſired the general good more ear-


neſtly, they would have underſtood better how to


promote it. | |

Upon the whole it appears, that great talents
are great energies, and that great energies cannot
flow but from a bees ſenſe of fitneſs and juſ-
tice. A man of uncommon genius is a man of
high paſſions and lofty deſign; and our paſſions
will be found in the laſt analyſis to have their ſur-
eſt foundation in a ſentiment of juſtice. If a man
be of an aſpiring and ambitious temper, it is be-


cauſe at preſent he finds himſelf out of his place,


and withes to be in it. Even the lover imagines
that his qualities or his paſſion give him a title ſupe-
rior to that of other men. If I accumulate wealth, it
is becauſe I think that the moſt rational planof life
cannot be ſecured without it; and, if I dedicate
my energies to ſenſual pleaſures, it is that I re-


gard other purſuits as irrational and viſionary. All


our paſſions would die in the moment they were


py . . » .
' conceived, were it not for this reinforcement. A


man of quick reſentment, of ſtrong feelings, and
who pertinaciouſly reſiſts every thing that he re-
gards as an unjuſt aſſumption, may be confidered
as having in him the ſeeds of eminence. Nor is it
eaſily to be conceived that ſuch a man ſhould not


proceed from a ſenſe of juſtice to ſome degree of


benevolence ; as Milton's hero felt real compaſſion


and fympathy for his partners in misfortune.


If theſe reaſonings are to be admitted, what
judgment ſhall we form of the deciſion of doctor


Johnſon, who, ſpeaking of a certain obſcure tran-


ſlator


' UNDERSTANDING AND VIRTUE. 243
ſlator of the odes of Pindar, ſays, that he was
% one of the few poets to whom death needed
not to be terrible* ?” Let it be remembered that
the error is by no means peculiar to doctor John
ſon, though there arè few inſtances in which it is
carried to a more violent extreme, than in the
general tenour of the work from which this quo-
tation is taken. It was natural to expect that
there would be a combination among the multi-
tude to pull down intellectual eminence. Ambi-
tion is common to all men ; and thoſe, who are
unable to riſe to diſtinction, are at leaſt willing to
reduce others to their own ſtandard. No man can
completely underſtand the character of him with
whom he has no ſympathy of views, and we may
be allowed to revile what we do not underſtand.
But it is deeply to be regretted that men of talents
ſhould fo often have entered into this combination.
Who does not recolle& with pain the vulgar abuſe
that Swift has thrown upon Dryden, and the mu-
tual jealouſies and animoſities of Rouſſeau and
Voltaire, men who ought to have co-operated for
the ſalvation of the world? :


* Lives of the Poets: Life of Weſt.


R2 APPENDIX,


244  - OF THE MODE OF


4 | APP ENDIX, No. II.


OF THE MODE OF EXCLUDING VISITORS.


*


Its impropriety argued— From the ſituation in
which it places, 1. The viſitor 2. The ſervant.
- Objeftions :—Pretended neceſſity of this prac-

tice, 1. To preſerve us from mtrufion—2. To

free us from diſagreeable acquaintance.—Cha-
 radters of the honeſt and diſhoneſt man in this
reſpect, compared. |


T HIS principle reſpecting the obſervation of
truth in the common intercourſes of life cannot
erhaps be better illuſtrated, than from the fami-
bi and trivial caſe, as it is commonly ſuppoſed
to be, of a maſter directing his ſervant to fay he
is not at home, as a means of freeing him from
the intruſion of impertinent gueſts. No queſtion |
of morality can be foreign to the ſcience of poli-
tics; nor will thoſe few pages of the preſent
work be found perhaps the leaſt valuable, which
here and in other places “ are dedicated to the re-
futation of errors, that by their extenſive influ-
ence have perverted the foundation of moral and
political juſtice. |
Let us firſt, according to the well known axi-
om of morality, put ourſelves in the place of the
| perſon
* Vide Appendixes to Book II, Chap. II.
3


EXCLUDING VISITORS. 245


erſon whom this anſwer excludes. It ſeldom
1 but that he is able, if he be in peſſeſſion
of any diſcernment, to diſcover with tolerable ac-
curacy whether the anſwer he receives be true or
falſe. There are a thouſand petty circumſtances
by which falſhood continually detects itſelf. The
countenance and the voice of the ſervant, unleſs
long practiſed indeed in this leflon of deceit, his
cold and reſerved manner in the one caſe, and his
free, ingenuous and unembarraſſed air in the
other, will almoſt always ſpeak a language leſs
ambiguous than his lips. But let us ſuppoſe only
that we vehemently ſuſpect the truth. It is not
intended to keep us in ignorance of the exiſtence
of ſuch a practice. He that adopts it, is willing
to avow in general terms that ſuch is his ſyſtem,
or he makes out a caſe for himſelf much leſs
favourable than I was making out for him.
The viſitor then who receives this anſwer, feels
in ſpite of himſelf a contempt for the prevarication
of the perſon he viſits. I appeal to the feelings of
every man in the ſituation deſcribed, and I have
no doubt that he will find this to be their true
ſtate in the firſt inſtance, however he may have a
ſet of ſophiſtical reaſonings at hand by which he
may in a few minutes reaſon down the firſt move-
ments of indignation. He feels that the trouble
he has taken and the civility he intended intitled
him at leaſt to truth in return.

Having put ourſelves in the place of the viſitor,
let us next put ourſelves in the place of the poor
deſpiſed ſervant. Let us ſuppoſe that we are our-
ſelves deſtined as ſons or hutbands to give this an-
fwer that our father or our wife is not at home,


when


246 Cx THE MODE Or
when he or ſhe is really in the houſe. Should


we not feel our tongues contaminated with the


baſe plebeian lie? Would it be a ſufficient opiate
to our eonſciences to ſay that ſuch is the prac-
tice, and it is well underſtood ?”” It never can be
underſtood : its very intention 1s, not to be un-
derſtood. We fay that ©. we have certain argu-
ments that prove the practice to be innocent.
Are ſervants only competent to underſtand theſe
arguments ? Surely we ought beſt to be able to
underſtand our own arguments, and yet we
rink with abhorrence from the idea of on
ſonally acting upon them.

Whatever ſophiſtry we may have to excuſe our
error, nothing is more certain than that our ſer-
vants underſtand the leſſon we teach them to be
a lie. It is accompanied by all the retinue of
falſhood. Before it can be gracefully practiſed,
the ſervant muſt be no mean proficient in the
myſteries of hypocriſy. By the eaſy impudence
with which it is uttered, he beſt anſwers the
purpoſe of his maſter, or in other words the pur-
poſe of deceit. By the eaſy impudence with
Which it is uttered, he beſt ſtifles the u pbraid-
ings of his own mind, and conceals from others
the ſhame impoſed on him by his deſpotic taſk-
maſter. Before this can be ſufficiently done, he
muſt have diſcarded the ingenuous frankneſs b
means of which the thoughts find eaſy commerce
with the tongue, and the clear and undiſguiſed
countenance which ought to be the faithful
mirror of the mind. Do you think, when he
has learned this degenerate leſſon in one inſtance,


nt it will produce no unfavourable effects upon
his


EXCLUDING VISITORS. - 247
his general conduct? Surely, if we will practiſe
vice, we ought at leaſt to have the magnanimity
to practiſe it in perſon, not cowardlike corrupt
the principles of another, and oblige him to do

that which we have not the honeſty to dare to
do for ourſelves. .
But it is ſaid, that this lie is neceſſary, and
that the intercourſe of human ſociety cannot be
carried on without it.” What, is it not as eaſy
to fay, J am engaged, or © indiſpoſed,” or
as the caſe may happen, as I am not at home?
Are theſe anſwers more inſulting, than the uni-
verſally ſuſpected anſwer, the notorious hypo-
criſy of I am not at home ?”” -
he purpoſe indeed for which this anſwer is
uſually employed is a deceit of another kind.
Every man has in the catalogue of his acquaint-
ance ſome that he particularly loves, and others
to whom he is indifferent, or perhaps worſe
than indifferent. This anſwer leaves the latter
to ſuppoſe, if they pleaſe, that they are in the
claſs of the former. And what is the benefit to
reſult from this indiſcriminate, undiſtinguiſhing
manner of treating our neighbours? Whatever
benefit it be, it no doubt exiſts in conſiderable
vigour in the preſent ſtate of poliſhed ſociety,
where forms perpetually intrude to cut off all
intercourſe ' between the feelings of mankind ;
and I can ſcarcely tell a man on the one hand
t that I eſteem his character and honour his vir-
tues, or on the other that he is fallen into
an error which will be of prejudicial conſequen-
ces to him,” without trampling upon all the
barriers of politeneſs. But is all this right? Is
not


n E 1
„
+ -
y . of} b * *
1H
34 „
= LF
_ **
ob % K . ,
6K} 1
an *
SS -
5 75
in
o «$
D
{ot [
*' 1 |
N 1
54 IC
„ L
5 :
*
BM
v 1.8
41 F 7
4 8
5
tu? is :
10 a
7 * .
181
7
N
4
7
the [
. p
.
7
!
;
.
|
'
1


3
2 *


KD
es
*
-


o _ — — =
= __- l — ä—ä
: > — — —
* & * —— — — —— — —ͤ—ũ—ä— à— C—_ — — — ——— — ty
— — ] — — VF ² 1 orc ors, — — ———— — —_— - — I =


_ = = __


— - POS A. — en <2 on —— —


———
— -


$a 4 Pr


— —
—


——— 2 ——ͤ—4 —
— I _ *


3


0
248 | OF THE MODE OF


not the eſteem or the diſapprobation of others
among the moſt powerful incentives to virtue or
puniſhments of vice? Can we even underſtand
virtue and vice half ſo well as we otherwiſe
ſhould, if we be unacquainted with the feelings of
our neighbours reſpecting them? If there be in the
liſt of our acquaintance any perſon whom we par-
ticularly diſlike, it uſually happens that it 1s for
ſome moral fault that we perceive or think we per-
ceive in him. Why ſhould he be kept in ignorance
of our opinion reſpecting him, and prevented from
the opportunity either of amendment or vindica-
tion? If he be too wile or too fooliſh, too virtu-
ous or too vicious for us, why ſhould he not be
ingenuouſly told of his miſtake in his intended
kindneſs to us, rather than be ſuffered to find it
out by fix months enquiry from our ſervants?
This leads us to yet one more argument in fa-
vour of this diſingenuous practice. We are told,
there is no other by which we can rid our-
felves of diſagreeable acquaintance.” How long
hall this be one of the effects of poliſhed ſociety,
to perſuade us that we are incapable of doing
the moſt trivial offices for ourſelves? You may
as well tell me, that it is a matter of indiſ-
penſible neceſſity to have a valet to put on my
ſtockings.” In reality the exiſtence of theſe
troubleſome viſitors is owing to the hypocriſy of
politeneſs. It is that we wear the ſame indiſcri-
minate ſmile, the ſame appearance of cordiality
and complacence to all our acquaintance. Ought
we to do thus? Are virtue and excellence en-
| titled to no diſtinctions? For the trouble of


theſe impertinent viſits we may thank ourſelves.
lk


EXCLUDING VISITORS. 249


If we practifed no deceit, if we aſſumed no atom
of cordiality and eſteem we did not feel, we


ſhould be little peſtered with theſe buzzing in-


truders. But one ſpecies of falſhood involves us
in another; and he, that pleads for theſe lying
anſwers to our viſitors, in reality pleads the cauſe
of a cowardice, that dares not deny to vice the
diſtinction and kindneſs that are excluſively due
to virtue. |

The man who acted upon this ſyſtem would
be very far removed from a Cynic. The con-


duct of men formed upon the faſhionable ſyſtem


is a perpetual contradiction. At one moment
they fawn upon us with a ſervility that diſho-
nours the dignity of man, and at another treat us
with a neglect, a ſarcaſtic inſolence, and a ſu-
percilious diſdain, that are felt as the ſevereſt
_ cruelty, by him who has not the firmneſs to re-
gard them with neglect. The conduct of the
genuine moraliſt is equable and uniform. He
loves all mankind, he deſires the benefit of all,
and this love and this deſire are legible in his


conduct. Does he remind us of our faults? It


is with no mixture of aſperity, of ſelfiſh diſdain
and inſolent ſupertrity. Of conſequence it is
ſcarcely poſſible he ſhould wound. Few indeed


are thoſe effeminate valetudinarians, who recoil


from the advice, when they diſtinguiſh the mo-
tive. But, were it otherwiſe, the injury is no-


thing. Thoſe who feel themſelves incapable of


ſuffering the moſt benevolent plain dealing,
would derive leaſt benefit from the preſcription,
and they avoid the phyſician. Thus is he deli-
vered, without harſhneſs, hypocriſy and deceit,

£ from


a AS IS


250 SUBJECT OF


from thoſe whoſe intercourſe he had leaſt reaſon
to deſire ; and the more his character is under-
ſtood, che more his acquaintance will be ſelect,
his company being chiefly ſought by the inge-
nuous, the well diſpoſed, and thoſe who are de-
ſirous of improvement.


\


APPENDIX, No. III.


' SUBJECT OF SINCERITY RESUMED.


A caſe propoſed. — Arguments in favour of con-
cealment.— Previous queſiton : Is truth in gene-
ral to be partially communicated? Cuſtomary
effects of fincerity—of infincerity—upon him who

4 N es it—1. The ſuſpenfion of improvement—

228. Myſanthropy — 3. Diſingenuity — upon the

ſpectators.—Sincerity delincated—its general im-

Portance.— Application. — Duty reſpecting the
choice of a refidence.


= =
: =+ — Fay = -
— r => 2 — 2 — by 3 -
: ” — mY 2. — - p
7 2 22 „ 2 — 3 - Ss.” a = od ” — EPR — ay - on SV) Der - 9 —
= * 1 8 — 25 7 pl nth: * — * 833 — — — Ba — — » 6, %
— — 5 - — —— 4 n a _ Lo
* — tu : Y —
< . .
N - - * —
— r— net. ——— — DT — —— "_ —— _ _ —— . — — w — — 5 — "wy he" 545 4 — * - = = — T x 7 — es, > Þ p * = >
f 0 4 N g * , 9 a CAE $685 2 4 . DT . - FIT : K 2. T hy e 4 7
7 FR * " 7 2 a 12 | L * F 4 . * * : 5 * 9 — 1
.
* *
oO
: N „ 1
* .
* .
? *
1 J
. 7
F .


+ O enable us more e to. judge of the


Ap


Af extent of the obligation to be ſincere, let us
1 ſuppoſe, that I am reſident, as a native or
[ = otherwiſe, in the kingdom of Portugal, and that
| I am of opinion that the eſtabliſhment, civil and
3 — of that country is in a high degree in-
1 jurious


— — —
TY — — = = r r
_ .X 5 — 2 _ * by
= 4 * * _ — lt — — —
— — ey OO ̃— ry oo es + We — — — — —— — — — — — DL DD x K — — 7 — — — ——ů— — — - — — — — =
— . — - 5


—— —


SINCERITY RESUMED. 281
jurious to the welfare and improvement of the
inhabitants. Ought I explicitly to declare the
ſentiments I entertain? To this queſtion I an-
ſwer, that my immediate duty is to ſeek for
myſelf a different reſidence.” 4%

The arguments in favour of concealment in
this caſe are obvious. That country is ſubje&
to a high degree of deſpotiſm, and, if I deli-
vered my ſentiments in this frank, manner, eſpe-
_ cially if along with this I were ardent and inde-

fatigable in endeavouring to proſelyte the inha-
bitants, my ſincerity would not be endured. In
that country the inſtitution of the holy inquiſi-
tion ſtill flouriſhes, and the fathers of this vene-
rable court would find means effectually to f1-
lence me, before I had well opened my commiſ-
ſion. The inhabitants, wholly unaccuſtomed to
ſuch bold aſſertions as thoſe I uttered, would feel
their pious ears inexpreſſibly ſhocked, and the
| martyrdom I endured, inſtead of producing the
good effects with which martyrdom is ſometimes
attended, would ſoon be forgotten, and, as long
as it was remembered, would be remembered
only with execrations of my memory. If on
the contrary I concealed my ſentiments, I might
ſpend a long life in acts of ſubſtantial benevo-
lence. If I concealed them in part, I might
perhaps by a prudent and gradual diſcloſure ef-
fect that revolution in the opinions of the inha-
bitants, which by my precipitation in the other
caſe I defeated in the outſet. Theſe arguments
in favour of concealment are not built upon cow-
ardice and ſelfiſhneſs, or upon a recolle&ion of
the horrible tortures to which I ſhould be ſub-
42 g . je Re d.


252 SUBJECT OF


jected. They flow from conſiderations of phi-
lanthropy, and an endeavour fairly to eſtimate in
what mode my exertions may be rendered moſt
conducive to the general good.” CERT
Before we enter upon their direct examination,
it may be proper to premiſe ſome general ob-
ſervations. In the firſt place, let us calmly en-
quire whether the inſtance here ſtated be of the
nature of an exception or a rule. Ought 1
univerſally to tell only a ſmall part of the truth
at a time, careful not to ſhock the prejudices of
my hearers, and thus lead them imperceptibly
to concluſions which would have revolted them
at firſt; or am I to practiſe this method only,
where the riſk is great, and my life may be the
forfeit ?** It would ſeem as if truth were a ſa-
cred depoſit, which I had no right to deal out in-
ſhreds to my fellow men, juſt as my temper or
my prudence ſhould diftate. It would ſeem as
if it were an, unworthy artifice, by an ingenious
arrangement of my materials to trick men into a
concluſion, to which frankneſs, ingenuity and
ſincerity would never have conducted them. It
would ſeem as if the ſhock I am fo careful to
avoid were favourable to the health and robuſt
conſtitution of mind ; and that, though I might
in this way produce leaſt temporary effect, the
ultimate reſult would afford a balance greatly ie
favour of undiſguiſed fincerity. _
A ſecond preliminary proper to be introduced
in this place conſiſts in a recollection of the ge-
neral effects of ſincerity and inſincerity, the rea-
ſons for which the one is commonly laudable
and the other to be blamed, independently of the


ſubjects


SINCERITY RESUMED. 253


ſubjects about which they may employed.
Sincerity is laudable, on account of the firmneſs
and energy of character it never fails to produce.
« An upright man, it has ſometimes been ſaid,
« ought to carry his heart in his hand.” He
_ ought to have an ingenuouſneſs which ſhrinks
from no examination. The commerce between
his tongue and his heart is uniform. What-
ever he ſpeaks you can depend upon to be the
truth and the whole truth. The defigns he has
formed he employs no artifice to conceal. He
tells you in the firſt inſtance : This is the pro-
poſition I mean to demonſtrate. I put you upon
your guard. I will not take you by ſurpriſe. If
what I affirm be the truth, it will bear your ſcru-
tiny. If it were error, I could have recourſe to
no means more equivocal, than that of concealing
in every ſtep of the proceſs the object in which
my exertions were intended to terminate.”
Infincerity is to be blamed, becauſe it has an
immediate tendency to vitiate. the integrity of
character. * I muſt conceal the opinions I enter-
tain,” ſuppoſe, ** from the holy father inquiſi-
tor.” What method ſhall I employ for this pur-
poſe ? Shall I hide them as an impenetrable ſe-
cret from all the world ? If this be the ſyſtem I
adopt, the conſequence is an inſtant. and imme-
diate end to the improvement of my mind, It is
by the efforts of a daring temper that improve-
ments and diſcoveries are made. The ſeeds of
diſcovery are ſcattered in every thinking mind,
but they are too frequently ftarved by the unge-
nial ſoil upon which they fall. Every man ſuſ-
pects the abſurdity of kings and lords, and the
injuſtice of that glaring and oppreſſive *
vrhic


254 SUBJECT OF


which ſubſiſts in moſt civiliſed countries. But
he dares not let his mind looſe in ſo adventurous
a ſubject. If I tell my thoughts, I derive from
the act of communication encouragement to pro-
ceed. I perceive in what manner they are re-
ceived by others, and this perception acts by re-
bound upon my own progreſs. If they be re-
ceived cordially, - I derive new encouragement
from the approbation of others. If they be re-
ceived with oppoſition and diſtruſt, I am induc.
ed to reviſe them. I dete& their errors, or I
{ſtrengthen my arguments, and add new truths to
thoſe which I had previouſly accumulated. What
can excite me to the purſuit of diſcovery, if I know
that I am never to communicate my difcoveries ?
It is in the nature of things impoſſible, that the
man, who has determined with himſelf never to
utter the truths he knows, fhould be an intrepid
and indefatigable thinker. The link which: bmds
together the inward and the outward man is in-
diſſoluble; and he, that is not bold in ſpeech,
will never be ardent and unprejudiced in enquiry.
Add to this, that conſcious diſguiſe has the worſt
effect upon the temper, and converts virtue,
which ought to be frank, ſocial and ingenuous,
into a ſolitary, moroſe and miſanthropical prin-
Ciple. FT.
Bur let us conceive that the method J employ
to protect myſelf from proſecution is different
from that above ſtated. Let us ſuppoſe that I
communicate my ſentiments, but with caution
and reſerve. This ſyſtem involves with it an
endleſs train of falſhood, duplicity and tergiverſa-


SINCERITY RESUMED. 255


tion. When I communicate my ſentiments, it
is under the inviolable ſeal of ſecrecy. If my
zeal carry me any great lengths, and my love of
truth be ardent, I ſhall with to communicate it
as far as the bounds of prudence will poflibly ad-
mit, and it will be ſtrange if in a courſe of years
do not commit one miſtake in my calculation.
My grand ſecret is betrayed, and ſuſpicion is ex-
cited in the breaſt of the father inquiſitor. What
ſhall I do now? I muſt, I ſuppoſe, ſtoutly deny
the fact. I muſt compoſe my features into a con-
ſiſtent expreſſion of the moſt natural ignorance


and ſurpriſe, happy if I have made ſuch progreſs


in the arts of hypocriſy and falſhood, as to put
the change upon the wild beaſt who is ready to
devour me. The moſt conſummate impoſtor
is upon this hypotheſis the man of moſt perfe&
_ virtue.

hut this is not all. My character for benevo-


lence being well known, I am likely to be ſur-
rounded by perſons of good humoured indiſcre-


tion rather than by inveterate enemies. Of every
man who queſtions me about my real ſentiments
I muſt determine firſt, whether he ſimply wiſfi to
be informed, or whether his deſign be to betray
me. The character of virtue ſeems in its own
nature to be that of firm and unalterable reſoluti-
on, confident in its own integrity. But the cha-
racter that reſults from this ſyſtem begins in heſi-
tation, and ends in diſgrace. I am queſtioned
whether ſuch be my real ſentiments. I deny it.
My queſtioner returns to the charge with an,
« Oh, but I heard it from ſuch a one, and he


WAS


hy
7

. 1

© L

: 2


*
4
*
1 o
* y
2 o
by
8 1


„r
1 r


4 2 n F 5 >
= 3 = 2 bs — 2 * 2
—— 3 5 8 8 ä = =
Er EY - + wa Et N FIC F 4 ** 2 1 2
f „ £ *s \ 4 = a Pos
"Oe $ O mt. 1 Wen 8
Tl ad \ ___


— 7 * * EE -
- rr
* *

U


*** a
LF
SS
Fl k

2d 8


255 SUBJECT OF


was preſent when you delivered them.” What am
I to do now? Am I to aſperſe the character of
the honeſt reporter of my words? Am] to make
an impotent effort to get rid of the charge; and,
inſtead of eſtabliſhing my character for orthodoxy,
aſtoniſn my i informer with my cool and intrepid
effronte

Inſincerity has the worſt effect both upon him
who practiſes, and upon them who behold it. It
deprives virtue of that conſcious magnanimity and
eaſe, which ought ever to be ranked among its
nobleſt effects. It requires the perpetual exerciſe
of preſence of mind, not for the purpoſe of tel-
ling the moſt uſeful truths in the beſt manner,
but in order to invent a conſiſtent catalogue of
lies, and to utter them with a countenance at
war with every thing that is paſſing in my heart.
It deſtroys that confidence on the = of my
hearers, which ought to be inſeparable from vir-
tue. They cannot all of them be expected to
| underſtand the deep plan of benevolence and the
total neglect of all ſelfiſh and timid conſiderations
by which I am ſuppoſing my conduct to be regu-
lad. But they can all ſee my duplicity and
tergiverſation. They all know that I excel the
moſt conſummate impoſtor in the coolneſs with
which I can utter falſhood, and the craft with
which I can ſupport it.

Sincerity has ſometimes been brou ght into diſ.
repute by the abſurd ſyſtem according to which
it has been purſued, and {till oftener by the whim-
ſical picture which the adverſaries of undiſtin-
guiſhing ſincerity have made of it. It is not ne-


ceſſary


SINCERITY RESUMED. 257


ceſſary that I ſhould ſtop every perſon that I meet
in the ſtreet to inform him of my ſentiments. It -
is not neceſſary that I ſhould perpetually talk to
the vulgar and illiterate of the deepeſt and ſub-
limeſt truths. All that is neceſſary is, that I
ſhould practiſe no concealment, that I ſhould
preſerve my diſpoſition and character untainted.
Whoever queſtions nie, it is neceſſary that I
ſhould have no ſecrets or reſerves, but be al-
ways ready to return a frank and explicit an-
ſwer. When I undertake by argument to eſta-
bliſh any principle, it is neceſſary that I ſhould
employ no circuitous methods, but clearly ſtate
in the firſt inſtance the object I have in view.
Having ſatisfied this original duty, I may _—_
call upon my hearer for the exerciſe of his
ence. It is true,” I may fay, that the *
nion I deliver will appear ſhocking to your pre-
judices, but I will now deliberately and minutely
aſſign the reaſons upon which it is founded. If
they appear fatisfactory, receive; if they be in-
concluſive, reject it. This is the ground work
of ſincerity. The ſuperſtructure is the propaga-
tion of every important truth, becauſe it conduc-
es.to the improvement of man whether individu-
ally or collectively ; and the telling all I know of
| myſelf and of my neighbour, becauſe ſtrict juſ-
tice and unequivocal publicity are the beſt ſecuri-
ty for every virtue.

Sincerity then, in ordinary caſes at leaſt, ſeems
to be of ſo much importance, that it 1s my duty
firſt to conſider how to preſerve my ſincerity un-
tainted, and afterwards to ſelect the beſt means

Vor. E 8 in


:
4
*
: -
. 1
1
* F
59
©
_
n
— +438
4 n
44 C3
1 1 al
if *
ir.
: * *
| EF:
g 1 *
1 9
FM

q ' 13
<->
:

1
.
Be: .
| .
: "AY
FA.
FR
fo
WE”
£2
3
et
Ws
EX
*
4 a
2 Y
N 9
| |
q "=
: 4
-

\ | *
1
248

*
| =
* +
] ._
.
*
þ i


256 re OF


in my power in each particular ſituation, of be-
nefiting mankind. Sincerity is one of thoſe para-
mount and general rules, which is never to give
way to the affair of the day. I may imagine per-
haps that falſehood and deceit may be moſt bene-
ficial in ſome particular inſtances, as I might ima-
gine upon the ſubject of a preceding chapter, that
it would be virtuous to plant my dagger in the
heart of a tyrant. But we ſhould be cautious of
indulging our imaginations in theſe inſtances.
The great law of always employin g ingenuous
and honourable means ſeems to be of more im-
| Portance than the exterminating any local and

temporary evils. I well know in the preſent caſe
what good will reſult from a frank and undiſguiſ-
ed principle of action, and what evil from deceit,
duplicity and falſhood. But I am much leſs
certain of the good that will ariſe under parti-
cular circumſtances from a neglect of theſe prin-
ciples.

Having thus unfolded the true ground of rea-
ſoning upon this ſubject, we will return to the
queſtion reſpecting the conduct to be obſerved by
the reformer in Portugal.

And here the true anſwer will m be found
to be that which has been above delivered, that

a perſon ſo far enlightened upon theſe ſubjects,
ought by no conſideration to be prevailed upon to
ſettle in Portugal; and, if he were there already,
ought to quit the country with all convenient
ſpeed. His efforts in Portugal would probably
be vain; but there is ſome other country in


which they will be attended with the happieſt
9 |
"8


SINCERITY RESUMED. 259
It may be objected, * that ſome perſons muſt


begin the work of reformation in Portugal, and


why ſhould it not be the individual of whom we
are treating?” But the anſwer is, that, in the
ſenſe ſuppoſed in this objection, it is not neceſſa-
ry that any body ſhould begin. Theſe great and
daring truths ought to be publiſhed in England,
France and other countries; and the diſſeminati-
on that will attend them here, will produce a re-
port and afford an example, which after ſome
time may- prepare them a favourable reception


there.


The great chain of cauſes from which every


event in the univerſe takes its riſe, has ſuffici-


ently provided for the gradual inſtruction of man-


kind, without its being neceſſary that individuals


ſhould violate their principles, and facrifice their
integrity to accompliſh it. Perhaps there never
was a mind that ſo far outran the reſt of the
' ſpecies, but that there was ſome country in which
the man that poſſeſſed it might ſafely tell all he
knew. The ſame cauſes that ripen the mind of
the individual are acting generally, ripening ſimi-
lar minds, and giving a certain degree of ſimilar
impreſſion to whole ages and countries. There
exiſt perhaps at this very moment in Portugal,
or ſoon will exiſt, minds, which, though mere
children in ſcience compared with their gigantic


neighbours in a more favoured ſoil, are yet accu-


rately adapted to the improvement of their coun-
trymen. If by any ſport of nature an exotic
ſhould ſpring up, let him be tranſplanted to a
climate that will prove more favourable to his vi-
gour and utility. Add to this, that, when we

| S 2 are


—— — —


2 IF r
r
N 2 „ <A * :


2 + — —
7


* 1
= *


; 0
"4


r 3 8 —— NS
id i , * - — .
—
— ” N
* Ea _ r = — _ 2 cm - _
8 — x — — = * * . —
— 5 — 1 — - — -
a — r r 8 — N — —
TEE r r og pe” _ " — 5 » DET.
f p ́5! ep erent, mo rr 15 rm egg — —


|
Y [ : +»
#4
. 1
7
1
5 : .
|
.
| |
|
4 . bl
= -
$34


rr — = = * — *
; * * -
- be, * F * Y * * ”
TY. 7 = ” * *
1 # «


260 SUBJECT OF SINCERITY RESUMED.


are inclined to ſet an inordinate value upon our
own importance, it may be reaſonable to ſuſpect
that we are influenced by ſome lurking principle
of timidity or vanity. It is by no means certain
that the individual ever yet exiſted, whoſe life
was of ſo much value to the community, as to be
worth preſerving at ſo great an expence, as that
of his ſincerity.


( *


Cu an WM


1


„


* F
bo =


OF FREE WILL AND NECESSITY. _


IC 4.  =n7*


„es


0 * — 2 |» Tay =7 r — ©  —
— ]
1. N : * * 8 Nr
2 8 % ER" . | wa \
FF


Importance of the queſtion. — Definition of neceſſity.
M ſuppoſed to exiſt in the operations of the
material univerſe. —The caſe of the operations of
mind is parallel. —Indications of neceſſity—m

 tuſtory—m our judgments of charatter—m our

ſchemes of policy—in our ideas of moral diſci-


pline.—Objection from the fallibility of our ex-


—


2
1


bectations in human conduct. — Anfwer.——Origin a
and univerſality of the ſentiment of free will. — p
The ſentiment of neceſſity alſo univerſal.— The 43
truth of this ſentiment argued from the nature KM
F volition. — Hypotheſis of free will examined.  - Mi
Self-determination.—Tndifference.—The will not =
 @ diſtin faculty, —Free will diſadvantageous .=
To its poſſeſſor.—Of no ſervice to morality. 3
Hav G now finiſhed the theoretical part of i
our enquiry, ſo far as appeared to be neceſſary to i
afford a foundation for our reaſoning reſpecting |
the different proviſions of political inſtitution, i
we might dire&ly proceed to the conſideration Wi:
of thoſe proviſions. It will not however be uſe- 7
leſs to pauſe in this place, in order to conſider =:
e ee 2 15 en thoſe F 3
1
1


a ets
—
D


1
"SE oY
1
"= *
Y "i
4
D 4


_— Pl


RY


262 OF FREE WILL


thoſe general principles of the human mind,
which are moſt intimately connected with the to-
pics of political reaſoning *.


None of theſe principles ſeems to be of greater
importance than that which affirms that all ac-
tions are neceflary. TT oo

Moſt of the reaſonings upon which we have
hitherto been employed, though perhaps con-
ſtantly built upon this doctrine as a poſtulate,
will yet by their intrinſic evidence, however in-
conſiſtently with his opinion upon this primary
topic, be admitted by the advocate. of free will.


But it ought not to be the preſent deſign of poli-


tical enquirers to treat the queſtions that may
preſent themſelves ſuperficially, It will be found


upon maturer reflection that this. doctrine of mo-


ral neceſſity includes in it conſequences of the
higheſt moment, and leads to a bold and com-
prehenſive view of man in ſociety, which can-
not poſſibly be entertained by him who has em-
braced the oppoſite opinion. Severe method
would have required that this propoſition ſhould
have been eſtabliſned in the firſt inſtance, as an
indiſpenſible foundation of moral reaſoning of
every ſort. But there are well diſpoſed perſons,


Who notwithſtandin g the evidence with which it


js attended, have been alarmed at its conſequen-
*The reader, who is indiſpoſed to abſtruſe ſpeculations, will
find the other members of the enquiry ſufficiently connected,


without an expreſs reference to the remaining part of the preſent


book,


$


AND NECESSITY, On


ces; and it was perhaps proper, in compliance


with their miſtake, 'to ſhew that the moral rea-


ſonings of this work did not ſtand in need of this
ſupport, in any other ſenſe than moral reaſonings
do upon every other ſubject. |

Io the right underſtanding of any arguments
that may be adduced under this head, it is re-
quiſite that we ſhould have a clear idea of the
meaning of the term neceflity. He who affirms
that all actions are neceſſary, means, that, if we
form a juſt and complete view of all the circum-
ſtances in which a living or intelligent being is
placed, we ſhall find that he could not in any
moment of his exiſtence have acted ' otherwiſe
than he has acted. According to this aſſertion
there is in the tranſactions of mind nothing looſe,
precarious and uncertain. Upon this queſtion
the advocate of liberty in the philoſophical ſenſe
muſt join iſſue. He muſt, if he mean any thing,
deny this certainty of conjunction between moral
antecedents and conſequents. Where all is con-
ſtant and invariable, and the events that ariſe
uniformly flow from the circumſtances in which
they originate, there can be no liberty.

It is acknowledged that in the events of the
material univerſe every thing is ſubjected to this
neceſſity. The tendency of inveſtigation and en-
quiry relatively to this topic of human know-
ledge has been, more effectually to exclude
chance, as our improvements extended. Let us
conſider what is the ſpecies of evidence that has
ſatisfied philoſophers upon this point. Their
only ſolid ground of reaſoning has been from ex-
perience, The argument which has induced
: mankind


= o —_—_ £ a Ot; a — x >
- - * *
— — — : — — tus rr — 1c 4 2 — * - 8 * *
| = 5 - © —
a —
1 — — A by .
<—_— — — = pms Ps + — 5 . * 1 * N 2 " — * * ys Lake af ry © _
a4 Yo Y- N . © 4 : - o * 8 * * SY
* — : N 7 ”
— 8 1


mT
= —
CET ELD - .
= —_— i 1 = - : NG 2 bY —
— — —— — 1 — — 1 —
6 a G _ 2 Che . 5 >
- mT "FAT * r * *
hw FE. * . .
. 4 .
5 1 * 8
9
,
*


\


WH:  _"OF-FREE WILL

mankind to conceive of the univerſe as governed
by certain laws, and to entertain the idea of ne-
ceſſary connection between ſucceſſive events, has
been an obſerved fimilarity-in the order of ſuc-
ceſſion. If, when we had once remarked two
events ſucceeding each other, we had never had
occaſion to ſee that individual ſucceſſion re-
peated; if we ſaw innumerable events in perpe-
tual progreſſion without any apparent order, ſo
that all our obſervation would not enable us,
when we beheld one, to pronounce that another


of ſuch a particular claſs might be expected to


follow; we ſhould never have conceived of the
exiſtence of neceſſary connection, or have had an
es correſponding to the term cauſe.

Hence it follows that all that ſtrictly ſpeaking
we know of the material univerſe is this ſucceſ-
fon of events. Uniform ſucceſſion irreſiſtibly
forces upon the mind the idea of abſtract con-
nection. When we ſee the ſun conſtantly riſe
in the morning and ſet at night, and have had


_ occaſion to obſerve this phenomenon invariably .


taking place through the whole period of our ex-


iſtence, we cannot avoid believing that there is


ſome cauſe producing this uniformity of event.
But the principle or virtue by which one event
is conjoined to another we never ſee. |

Let us take ſome familiar illuſtrations of this
truth. Can it be imagined that any man by the
inſpection and analyſis of gunpowder would have
been enabled, previouſly to experience, to pre-
dict its exploſion? Would he previouſly to ex-
perience have been enabled to predict, that one
Piece of marble having a flat and poliſhed ſur-


face


AND NECESSITY. 265
face might with facility be protruded along ano-
ther in a horizontal, but would with conſiderable
pertinacity reſiſt ſeparation in a perpendicular di-
rection? The fimpleſt phenomena of the moſt.
hourly occurrence were originally placed at an
equal diſtance from human ſagacity. :

There is a certain degree of obſcurity incident
to this ſubject ariſing from the following circum-
ſtance. All human knowledge is the reſult of
perception. We know nothing of any ſubſtance
but by. experience. If it produced no effects, it
would be no ſubject of human intelligence. We
collect a conſiderable number of theſe effects,
and, by their perceived uniformity having re-
_ duced them into general claſſes, form a general
idea annexed to the ſubje& that produces them.
It muſt be admitted, that a definition of any ſub-
ſtance, that is, any thing that deſerves to be
called knowledge reſpecting it, will enable us to
predict ſome of its future poſſible effects, and
that for this plain reaſon, that definition is pre-
diction under another name. But, though, when
we have gained the idea of impenetrability as a
general phenomenon of matter, we can predict
ſome of its effects, there are others which we
cannot predict : or in other words, we know
none of its effects but ſuch as we have actually
_ remarked, added to an expectation that fimilar
events will ariſe under ſimilar circumſtances, pro-
portioned to the conſtancy with which they fade
been obſerved to take place in our paſt experi-
ence. Finding as we do by repeated experiments,”
that material ſubſtances have the property of re-
ſiſtance, and that one ſubſtance in a ſtate of —
| 'when


Dn * —
een


:
:
4
0 .
_ .
4 8
13
_
1
i
by F
4. .
_—
*
„
- +
” :
on, *
A 9
24
.
.
'
* 7
* 4
f
44
by
|
< 41
140
i
oY
879 1
.
' +
*
= }
+ þ N
= N
44 +
r 3}
} :
1
| .
1
To
_ '
v4
„
hs *
4
1
4 > i}
11:69
'F I
=:
17 N
H. |
\ 4
Rl |
*
1
1
ov fk
1 i 10
b
4 +
* *
: "1
#3: 0 '
}
.
N $
\ [


_ — — — —
S —_ ä
4 "oY 7


266 Or FREE WILL
when impelled by another, paſſes into a ſtate of


motion, we are {till in want of more particular
obſervation to enable us to predict the ſpecific
effects that will follow from this impulſe in each
of the bodies. Enquire of a man who knows
nothing more of matter than its general property
of impenetrability, what will be the reſult of one
ball of matter impinging upon another, and you
will ſoon find how little this general property
can inform him of the particular laws of motion.
We ſuppoſe him to know that it will communi-
cate motion to the ſecond ball. But what quan-

tity of motion will it communicate ? What ef-
fects will the impulſe produce upon the impelling
ball? Will it continue to move in the ſame di-


rection? will it recoil in the oppoſite direction ?


will it fly off obliquely, or will it ſubſide into a
ſtate of reſt? All theſe events will appear
equally probable to him whom a ſeries of obſer-
vations upon the paſt has not inſtructed as to what
he is to expect from the future.

From theſe remarks we may ſufficiently colle&


what is the ſpecies of knowledge we poſſeſs re-


ſpecting the laws of the material univerſe. No
experiments we are able to make, no reaſonings
we are able to deduce, can ever inſtru& us in


the principle of cauſation, or ſhew us for what


reaſon it is that one event has, in every inſtance
in which it has been known to occur, been the
precurſor of another event of a certain given de-


ſcription. Vet we reaſonably believe that theſe


events are bound together by a perfect neceſlity,
and exclude from our ideas of matter and motion
the ſuppoſition of chance or an uncauſed event.

Aſſociation


AND NECESSITY... 267


Aſſociation of ideas obliges us, after having ſeen
two events perpetually conjoined, to paſs, as
ſoon as one of them occurs, to the recollection
of the other: and, in caſes where this tranſition
never deceives us, but the ideal ſucceſſion is al-
ways found to be an exact copy of the future
event, it is impoſſible that this ſpecies of fore-
fight ſhould not convert into a general foundation
of reaſoning. We cannot take a fingle ſtep upon
this ſubject, which does not partake of the ſpe-
cies of operation we denominate abſtraction.
Till we have been led to. conſider the rifing of
the ſun to-morrow as an incident of the ſame
ſpecies as its rifing to-day, we cannot deduce
from it ſimilar conſequences. It is the bufineſs
of ſcience to carry this taſk of generaliſation to
its fartheſt extent, and to reduce the diverſified
events of the univerſe to a ſmall number of ori-
ginal principles. "32>" E NI |
Let us proceed to apply theſe reaſonings con-
cerning matter to the illuſtration of the theory of
mind. Is it poſſible in this latter theory, as in
the former ſubject, to diſcover any general prin-
ciples? Can intelle& be made a topic of ſcience?
Are we able to reduce the multiplied phenomena
of mind to any certain ſtandard of reafoning ? If
the affirmative of theſe queſtions be conceded,
the inevitable conſequence appears to be, that
mind, as well as matter, exhibits a conſtant con-
junction of events, and affords a reaſonable pre-
ſumption to the neceſſary connexion of thoſe
events. It is of no importance that we cannot
ſee the ground of that connexion, or imagine
how propoſitions and reaſoning, when preſented
| | 95 ä to


o FREE WIEL

to the ind of a percipient being, are able by
neceflary conſequence to generate volition and
animal motion ; for, if there be any truth in the
above reaſonings, we are equally incapable of
perceiving the ground of connexion between any
two events in the material univerſe, the common
and received opinion that we do perceive ſuch
ground of connexion being in reality nothing
more than a vulgar prejudice.

That mind is a topic of ſcience may be argued
from all thoſe branches of literature and enquiry
which have mind for their ſubject. What ſpe-
cies of amuſement or inſtruction would hiſtory
afford us, if there were no ground of inference
from moral cauſes to effects, if certain tempta-
tions and inducements did not in all ages and cli.
mates produce a certain ſeries of actions, if we
were unable to trace connexion and a principle of
unity in men's tempers, propenſities and tranſac-
tions. The amuſement would be inferior to that
which we derive from the peruſal of a chronolo-
gical table, where events have no order but that
of time; ſince, however the chronologiſt may
neglect to mark the internal connexion between
ſucceſſive tranſactions, the mind of the reader
is buſied in ſupplying that connexion from me-
mory or imagination: but the very idea of ſuch
connexion would never have ſuggeſted itſelf, if
We had never found the ſource of that idea in ex-
perience. The inſtruction ariſing from the pe-
ruſal of hiſtory would be abſolutely none; ſince
inſtruction implies in its very nature the claſſing
and generaliſing of objects. But, upon the ſup-
1 on which we are arguing, all 2
wou


CORO *
*


AND NECESSITY. ** 239
would be unconnected and disjunct, without the


poſſibility of affording any grounds of reaſoning


or principles of ſcience.


The idea correſ pondent to the term character


inevitably includes in it the aſſumption of neceſ-
ſary connexion. The character of any man is the


reſult of a long ſeries of impreſſions communi-


cated to his mind, and modifying it in a certain
manner, ſo as to enable us, 41 a number of
theſe modifications and impreſſions being given,
to predict his conduct. Hence ariſe his temper
and habits, reſpecting which we reaſonably con-
clude, that they will not be abruptly ſuperſeded
and reverſed ; and that, if they ever be reverſed,
it will not be accidentally, 7 in conſequence
of ſome ſtrong reaſon perſuading, or ſome ex-
traordinary event modifying his mind. If there
were not this original and eſſential connexion· be-
tween motives and actions, and, which forms
one particular branch of this principle, between
men's paſt and future actions, there could be no
ſuch thing as character, or as a ground of infer-
ence enabling us to predict what men would be
from what they have been.

From the ſame idea of neceſſary connexion
ariſe all the ſchemes of policy, in conſequence
of which men propoſe to themſelves by a certain
plan of conduct to prevail upon others to become
the tools and inſtruments of their purpoſes. All
the arts of courtſhip and flattery, of playing upon
men's hopes and fears, proceed upon the ſuppo-
fition that mind is ſubje& to certain laws, and
that, provided we be ſkilful and aſſiduous enough


In


l.


- >
*
N ”
q
* 8 8
1 * n Wo
: oy 5 * 4 * 1 4 1 - 1 — -
ee mwah og — —
7 r ee


n


9
P


1 . n
33 N _ e
bag 0 7
has
Se 4 1 — *


— » =
—


3 1 1 P =
- = _— — 24" wh = q wa n — —
— > — — > > 4 l * J = 4
9 | wo oY —_— > T8 ea EZ TP —— : -
A l l 7 — - > — - 7 \ = > \
2 ; , — — r 3 * n Oy E - \ .
— —— — — — 2 — oe e 3 * =; 6 — = — _ "PONY * — —
* — Md — p — ws 8 n 142 . _ 2 * -
n * _ > meas * "Ss K
5 — _ — W y n _ - a
— 2 - a A bY =
7 1 1 * * c * 9 * a
8 * 2 1 * 4
-


. MOVED K


— —=
L


7 - - e - ie en,
— — bY =,
E r
9 4 > Jr
— * 2 jo
ba *
*


_ _
1 = = ww. _- >, - 2
— . Wy — —


0


— n
1 F
— . ů ů ů*— ð¹» RA — 5 2
o 1
— ——— VP . woe 1 —


270 OF FREE WILL


in applying the cauſe, the effect wall inevitably


follow. 45 | of
Laſtly, the idea of moral diſcipline proceeds:
entirely upon this principle. If I carefully per-'
fuade, _— and exhibit motives to another,
it is becauſe I believe that motives have a ten-
dency to influence his conduct. If I reward or


- puniſh him, either with a view to his own im-


ef or as an example to others, it is
cauſe I have been led to believe that rewards
and puniſhments are calculated in their own na-


ture to affect the ſentiments and practices of


mankind. |
There is but one conceivable objection againſt


the inference from theſe premiſes to the neceſ-
. fity of human actions. It may be alledged, that


though there is a real connection between mo-


tives and actions, yet that this connection may


not amount to a certainty, and that of conſe-
quence the mind ſtill retains an inherent activity
by which it can at pleaſure diſſolve this connex-
jon. Thus for example, when I addreſs argu-
ment and perſuaſion to my neighbour to induce
him to adopt a certain ſpecies of conduct, I do

it not with a certain expectation of ſucceſs, and
am not utterly diſappointed if all my efforts fail
of their effect. I make a reſerve for a certain
faculty of liberty he is ſuppoſed to poſſeſs, which
may at laſt counteract the beſt, digeſted pro-


jects.


But in this objection there is nothing peculiar


to the caſe of mind. It is juſt ſo in matter. I


ſee a part only of the premiſes, and therefore


can pronounce only with uncertainty upon the
| concluſion.


S--4


\


AND NECESSITY. 271
concluſion. A philoſophical experiment, which
has ſucceeded a hundred times, may altogether
fail upon the next trial. But what does the phi-
loſopher conclude from this? Not that there. is
a liberty of choice in his retort and his materials,
by which they baffle the beſt formed expectati-
ons. Not that the connexion between effects
and cauſes is imperfect, and that part of the ef-
fect happens from no cauſe at all. But that there
was ſome other cauſe concerned whole operation
he did not perceive, but which a freſh inveſti-
gation will probably lay open to him. When
the ſcience of the material univerſe was in its in-
fancy, men were ſufficiently prompt to refer
events to accident and chance; but the farther
they have extended their enquiries and obſerva-
tion, the more reaſon they have found to con-
clude that every thing takes place according to
neceſſary and univerſal laws. |

The caſe is exactly parallel with reſpe& to
mind. The politician and the philoſopher, how-
ever they may ſpeculatively entertain the opinion
of free will, never think of introducing it into
their ſcheme of accounting for events. If an in-
cident turn out otherwiſe than they expected,
they take it for granted, that there was ſome un-
obſerved bias, ſome habit of thinking, ſome pre-
judice of education, ſome ſingular aſſociation of
ideas, that diſappointed their prediction; and,
if they be of an active and enterpriſing temper,
they return, like the natural philoſopher, to
ſearch out the ſecret ſpring of this unlooked for


event.
The


we
#4
A'S


— =
- —— = l —_— — — Cx. \ TER _ : -
= — — = 22 1 on, oe =; =_ — . R = =
8 l — : — — a4 5 polite Moat _— — nn — — * 3 5 EE A 1 4 12 -_ 8
= n = > a wr oh = n - - CIT iN * „5 - = — a - a * 4 — 2 ot pu > — — 0 5 = \ l
— . q _— \ Do © 41 * . >
FCC rr 8 5 = = p< — 2 A _— 23 = _ l CER, — oo — — 1 * * ä Mas PE
* —4 og 4 — = « * a Jn £ nr —— — 245 . bo - .
- , - 7 * 5 Re ” ; * 4 * 2 n — - v3 "mT . . .
— 2 £ - - — — - — 8 —— - Þ * *
— — — ” " -: . — « _ — — — 1 = _— — * . 2 W = — 4 — * * —— *
* = - 8 C A it 25 * th 1 4 - 1 - =
= 7 * A ED -


\ = ——
— — - —
— ® 4
*


_—


l re enter a -


272 OF FREE WILL


The reflections into which we have entered
upon the doctrine of cauſes, not only afford us a
fimple and impreſſive argument in favour of the
doctrine of neceſſity, but ſuggeſt a very obvious
reaſon why the doctrine oppoſite to this has been
in a certain degree the general opinion of man-
kind. It has appeared that the idea of neceſſary
connexion between events of any ſort is the leſ-


fon of experience, and the vulgar never arrive at


the univerſal application of this principle even to


the phenomena of the material univerſe. In the
eaſieſt and moſt familiar inſtances, ſuch as the


impinging of one ball of matter upon another
and its conſequences, they willingly admit the
interference of chance, or an event uncauſed. In
this inſtance however, as both the impulſe and
its effects are ſubjects of obſervation to the ſenſes, -
they readily imagine that they perceive the abſo-
late principle which cauſes motion to be commu-
nicated from the firſt ball to the ſecond. Now
the very ſame prejudice and precipitate conclu-
fion, which induce them to believe that they
diſcover the principle of motion in objects of
tenſe, act in an oppoſite direction with reſpect
to ſuch objects as cannot be ſubjected to the ex-
amination of ſenſe. The manner in which an
idea or propoſition ſuggeſted to the mind of a
percipient being produces animal motion they


never ſee; and therefore readily conclude that


there is no neceſſary connexion between theſe


Events. TY S , ; \
But, if the vulgar will univerſally be found to
be the advocates of free -will, they are not leſs
ſtrongly, however inconſiſtently, impreſſed with


the


AND NECESSITY. 273


the belief of the doctrine of neceſſity. It is a
well known and a juſt obſervation, that, were it
not for the exiſtence of general laws to which the
events of the material univerſe always conform,
man could never have been either a reaſoning or
a moral being. The moſt conſiderable actions of
our lives are directed by foreſight. It is becauſe
he foreſees the regular ſucceſſion of the ſeaſons,
that the farmer ſows his field, and after the ex-
piration of a certain term expects a crop. There
would be no kindneſs in my adminiſtering food to
the hungry, and no injuſtice in my thruſting a
drawn ſword againſt the boſom of my friend, if
it were not the eſtabliſhed quality of food to nou-
riſh, and of a ſword to wound.

But the regularity of events in the material
_ univerſe will not of itſelf afford a ſufficient foun-
dation of morality and prudence. The volunta-
ry conduct of our neighbours enters for a ſhare
into almoſt all thoſe calculations upon which our
own plans and determinations are founded. If
voluntary conduct, as well as material impulſe,
were not ſubjected to general laws, included in
the ſyſtem of cauſe and effect, and a legitimate
topic of prediction and foreſight, the certainty
of events in the material univerſe would be pro-
ductive of little benefit. But in reality the mind
paſſes from one of theſe topics of ſpeculation to
the other, without accurately diſtributing them
into claſſes, or imagining that there 1s any differ-
ence in the certainty with which they are at-
tended. Hence it appears that the moſt unin-
ſtructed peaſant or artifan 1s practically a neceſſa-


rian. The farmer calculates as ſecurely upon
| Vor. I. 2 85 the


274 OF FREE WILL


the inclination of mankind to buy his corn when
it is brought into the market, as upon the tenden-
cy of the ſeaſons to ripen it. The labourer no
more ſuſpects that his employer will alter. his
mind and not pay him his daily wages, than he
ſuſpects that his tools will refuſe to perform thoſe
functions to-day, in which they were \ yeſletday
employed with ſucceſs &. .

Another argument in favour of Fi. doctrine of
neceſſity, not leſs clear and irreſiſtible than that
from the conſideration of cauſe and effect, will
ariſe from any conſiſtent explication that can be
given of the nature of voluntary motion. The
motions of the animal ſyſtem diſtribute themſelves ;
into two great claſſes, voluntary and involuntary.
Involuntary motion, whether it be conceived to
take place independently of the mind, or to be the
reſult of thought and perception, is ſo called, be-
cauſe the conſequences of that motion, either in
whole or in part, did not enter into the view of
the mind when the motion commenced. Thus
the cries of a new-born infant are not leſs involun-
tary than the circulation of the blood ; it being
impoſſible that the ſounds firſt reſulting from a
certain agitation of the animal frame ſhould be
foreſeen, ſince forefight is the fruit of expe-
rience.

From theſe obſervations we may deduce a rati-
onal and conſiſtent account of the nature of voll-
tion. Voluntary motion is that which is accom-
panied with foreſight, and lows from intention
and deſign. Volition is that ſtate of an intellec-


tual


The reader will find the ſubſtance of the above arguments in
a more diffuſive form in Hume's Enquiry concerning Human Un-


gerflanding, being the third part of his Eſſays.


AND NECESSITY. 275


tual being, in which, the mind being affected in
a certain manner by the apprehenſion of an end
to be accompliſhed, a certain motion of the or-
gans and members of the animal frame is found to
be produced. þþþ

Here then the advocates of intellectual liberty
have a clear dilemma propoſed to their choice.
They muſt aſcribe this freedom, this imperfect
connexion of effects and cauſes, either to our vo-
luntary or our involuntary motions. They have
already made their determination. They are
aware that to aſcribe freedom to that which is in-
voluntary, even if the aſſumption could be main-
tained, would be altogether foreign to the great
fubjects of moral, theological or political enquiry.
Man would not be in any degree more of an
agent or an accountable being, though it could
be proved that all his involuntary motions ſprung
up in a fortuitous and capricious manner.

But on the other hand to aſcribe freedom to
our voluntary actions is an expreſs contradiction
in terms. No motion is voluntary any farther
than it is accompanied with intention and deſign,
and flows from the apprehenſion of an end to be
accompliſhed. So far as it flows in any degree
from another ſource, ſo far it is involuntary.
The new-born infant foreſees nothing, therefore
all his motions are involuntary. A perſon arriv-
ed at maturity takes an extenſive ſurvey of the
conſequences of his actions, therefore he is emi-
nently a voluntary and rational being. If any part
of my conduct be deſtitute of all foreſight of the
effects to reſult, who is there that aſcribes to it
depravity and vice? Xerxes acted juſt as ſoberly

0 | T2 | 25


« o


276 OF FREE WILL


as ſuch a reaſoner, when he cauſed his attendants
to inflict a thouſand laſhes on the waves of the
Helleſpont.

The truth of the doctrine of neceſſity will be
ſtill more evident, if we conſider the abſurdity of
the oppoſite hypotheſis. One of its principal in-
gredients is ſelf determination. Liberty in an im
perfect and popular ſenſe is aſcribed to the moti-
ons of the animal ſyſtem, when they reſult from
the foreſight and deliberation of the intellect, and
not from external compulſion. It is in this ſenſe
that the word is commonly uſed in moral and po-
litical reaſoning. Philoſophical reaſoners there-
fore, who have deſired to vindicate the property
of freedom, not only to our external motions,
but to the acts of the mind, have been oblig-
ed to repeat this proceſs. Our external actions
are then ſaid to be free, when they truly reſult
from the determination of the mind. If our
volitions, or internal acts be alſo free, they
muſt in like manner reſult from the determi-
nation of the mind, or in other words, „the
mind in adopting them“ mult be ſelf deter-
mined. Now nothing can be more evident than
that that in which the mind exerciſes its freedom,
muſt be an act of the mind. Liberty therefore
according to this hypotheſis conſiſts in this, that
every choice we make has been choſen by us,

and every act of the mind been preceded and pro-
= _.” duced by an act of the mind. This is ſo true,
= that in reality the ultimate act is not ſtyled free
from any quality of its own, but becauſe the
mind in adopting it was ſelf- determined, that is,
becauſe it was preceded by another act. The ul-
timate act reſulted completely from the determi-
nation


*


AND NECESSITY. 277


nation that was its precurſor. It was itſelf ne-
ceſſary; and, if we would look for freedom, it
muſt be in the preceding act. But in that pre-
ceding act alſo, if the mind were free, it was
ſelf determined, that is, this volition was choſen
by a preceding volition, and by the ſame reaſon-
ing this alſo by another antecedent to itſelf. All
the acts except the firſt were neceſſary, and fol-
lowed each other as inevitably as the links af a
chain do, when the firſt link is drawn forward.
But then neither was this firſt act free, unleſs the
mind in adopting it were ſelf determined, that is,
unleſs this act were choſen by a preceding act.
Trace back the chain as far as you pleaſe, every
act at which you arrive is neceſſary. That act,
which gives the character of freedom to the whale,
can never be diſcovered; and, if it could, in its
own nature includes a contradiction.

Another idea which belongs to the hypotheſis
of ſelf determination, is, that the mind is not ne-
ceſſarily inclined this way or that by the motives
which are preſented to it, by the clearneſs or ob-
ſcurity with which they are apprehended, or by
the temper and character which preceding habits
may have generated; but that by its inherent ac-
tivity it is equally capable of proceeding either
way, and paſſes to its determination from a pre-
vious ſtate of abſolute indifference. Now what
ſort of activity is that which is equally inclined to
all kinds of actions? Let us ſuppoſe a particle of
matter endowed with an inherent propenſity to
motion. This propenſity muſt either be to move
in one particular direction, and then it muſt far
ever move in that direction unleſs counteracted by
ſome external impreſſion; or it muſt have an

equal


278 OF FREE WILL.


equal tendency to all directions, and then the re-
ſult mult be a ſtate of perpetual reſt.


4


The abſurdity of this conſequence is ſo evi-
dent, that the advocates of intellectual liberty have
endeavoured to deſtroy its force by means of a
diſtinction. Motive,” it has been ſaid, is
indeed the occaſion, the /ine qua non of volition,
but it has no inherent power to compel volition.
Its influence depends upon the free and uncon-
ſtrained ſurrender of the mind. Between oppo-
ſite motivesand conſiderations the mind can chooſe
as it pleaſes, and by its determination can con-
vert the motive which is weak and inſufficient
in the compariſon into the ſtrongeſt.” But this
; hypotheſis will be found exceedingly inadequate
to the purpoſe for which it is produced. Motives
mult either have a neceſſary and irreſiſtible influ-
ence, or they can have no influence at all.

For, firſt, it muſt be remembered, that. the
ground or reaſon of any event, of whatever na-
ture it be, muſt be contained among the circum-
ſtances which precede that event. The mind is
ſuppoſed to be in a ſtate of previous indifference,
and therefore cannot be, in itſelf confidered, the
ſource of the particular choice that is made.
There is a motive on one fide and a motive on
the other: and between theſe he the true ground
and reaton of preference. But, wherever there

is tendency to preference, there may be degrees
of tendency. If the degrees be equal, preference
cannot follow: it is equivalent to the putting
equal weights into the oppoſite ſcales of a balance.
If one of them have a greater tendency to prefe-
58 N rencèe


\


AND NECESSITY.


eſt tendency muſt ultimately prevail. When
two things are balanced againſt each other, fo
much amount may be conceived to be ſtruck off
from each fide as exiſts in the ſmaller ſum, and
the overplus that belongs to the greater is all that
we enters into the confideration.

Add to this, ſecondly, that, if motive hav:
not a neceſſary influence, it is altogether ſuper-
fluous. The mind cannot firſt chooſe to be in-
fluenced' by a motive, and afterwards ſubmit to
its operation: for in that cafe the preference
would belong wholly to this preyious volition.
The determination would in reality be complete
in the firſt inſtance ; and the motive, which came
in afterwards, might be the pretext, but could
not be the true ſource of the proceeding -x.
5 Laſtly, it may be obſerved upon the hypothe-
ſis of free will, that the whole ſyſtem is built
upon a diſtinction where there is no difference,
to wit, a diſtinction between the intellectual and
active powers of the mind. A myſterious philo-
ſophy taught men to ſuppoſe, that, when the
underſtanding had perceived any object to be ==
_— there was need of ſome diſtinct powe


to put the body in motion. But reaſon finds no


ground for this ſuppoſition ; nor is it poſſible to
conceive, that, in the cafe of an intellectual fa-
culty placed in an aptly organiſed body, prefe-
rence can exiſt, together with a conſciouſneſs,


gained


* The argument from the impoſſibility of free will is treated


with great force of reaſoning in Jonathan Edwards's Enquiry into
the Freedom of the Will.


_


279
rence than the other, that which has the great-


2 4
— 4 :
;
* — 4 # 4 * - # -
* A — — „n mY *. as» TW of - — *, i.
F Fr |
rar . og r 7 = |
1 i be 9 ah


—_—


\
0 1 ; 1 % Ll 4.
* — * todo
— oa i A =


*


*
5 * REST n 2 l - 2
1 2 8 * 1
5 — . — ; — =
% ow C j . 0 LY * . p p = * 8 E
- — 1 F #\ - — = * _ — L * 2 * i, wt | P * A = ; _—
: N ' W y L " 7 TH 1 As - Y dad ?
+ SL dd 2 i * fe. nd "ed © CAE, PANTS ILSS r Wy x - IN - 8 * 8 ; 3 e **
„ R wo _— . n 5 oe > © 5 edu IG
2 wy — y 9 l yo q CDS ſx > - Bo, Ly 4 * 2 * 2 |
"Ru D . DEAE TOI. AD "268; EY ITY
wow” þ " 4 N * * a we I K 3 — Toll. _ 2
3 r r ;


. — 1 27 => _— =
= = = _— ü- SA. = i Ju: Feb 3m: _
n — — — — — — 2 5 — - : =y - ww =* — 2 —
= of A b — — — 22 — — "ILY . 2 * * —— — -
\ — — — — * _ - —— 4 2+ tai. 3 y *


- —
3 pry


i
145
4 *
.
*


— —

x * — E Ab. SY = > 20. — — —

; . — - - . 5 * : —
— —— — — — - p - Co — R *
— SE CBE ü —— I - - — —
— 2 K mn * - ns Q * 2 = - — — — o — —
— FPS " 2 — * ö — we » * — — — — 8 2 » 5 2
r 7 { ” * 1 — >
_ = * - £


= a wy
8 ——


= 7 OB — 3 „ Gor
oy — . -
— — = (6200 oa 2 CO ren i — a—B — — -
, * >a — w- GS) = —
"OLA — < 84 gigs 2 5
— Ir. 0 n


— — — — —
* r er
1 *
- — F —


.


280 RR WILL .


gained from experience, of our power to obtain
the object preferred, without a certain motion of
the animal frame being the neceſlary reſult. We
need only attend to the obvious meaning of the
terms in order to perceive that the will is merely,


as it has been happily termed, the laſt act of the


underſtanding, one of the different caſes of the


affociation of ideas. What indeed is preference,


but a perception of ſomething that really inheres
or is ſuppoſed to inhere in the objects themſelves?
It is the judgment, true or erroneous, which the
mind makes reſpecting ſuch things as are brought
into compariſon with, each other. If this had
been ſufficiently attended to, the freedom of the
will would. never have been gravely maintained


by philoſophical writers, fince no man ever ima-
gined that we were free to feel or not to feel an
impreſſion made upon our organs, and to believe


C


or not to believe a propoſition demonſtrated to our
It muſt be unneceſſary to add any thing farther


on this head, unleſs it be a momentary recollec-


tion of the ſort of benefit that freedom of the will
would confer Upon us, ſuppoſing at to be poſſible.
Man being, as we have now found him to be, a

imple ſybſtance, governed by the apprehenſions
of his underſtanding, nothing farther is requiſite
but the improvement of his reaſoning faculty, to


make him virtuous and happy. But, did he poſ-


ſeſs a faculty independent of the underſtanding,
and capable of reſiſting from mere caprice the
molt powerful arguments, the beſt education and
the moſt ſedulous inſtruction might be of no uſe to


him.


AND NECESSITY. 281


him. This freedom we ſhall eaſily perceive to
be his bane and his curſe ; and the only hope of
laſting benefit to the ſpecies would be, by draw-
ing cloſer the connexion between the external
motions and the underſtanding, wholly to extir-
pate it. The virtuous man, in proportion. to his
improvement, will be under the conſtant infſu-


ence of fixed and invariable principles; and ſuch


a being as we conceive God to be, can never in
any one inſtance have exerciſed this liberty, that
is, can never have acted in a fooliſh and tyranni-
cal manner. Freedom of the will is abſurdly
repreſented. as neceſſary to render the mind ſuſ-
ceptible of moral principles; but in reality, ſo
far as we act with liberty, far as we are inde-
penderit of motives, our conduct is as inde-
pendent of morality as it is of reaſon, nor is it


poſſible that we ſhould deſerve either praiſe or


ciphnable.


*
= l -
G6 wc ve N N 4 * 1 .
* an 7 . 7
* ; * ä ” wry
f e Tr 0
N hs — 4 \
etl (DIGI n


£ | *
* FE 4 1
LY R . TE a 0 _ 4
1 r r of * 8 LIE 1
__ = — C F = ns 3 = = .


blame for a proceeding thus capricious and indiſ-


\ * 0
rr


r


” - 1 33 n i. LAY
» 03 rere N


282 INPERENCES FROM THE


EH AP.


INFERENCES FROM THE ; DOCTRINE
OF NEGESSTLL. e


* S
7


lie it Kere fo us wart the ries, ace on
our moral ideas — action — virtue — exertion —
1 perſuaſion — exhortation— ardour — complacence
and averfion— puniſhment — repentance — praiſe
and blame—intelleftual nn Len guage
N of neceſſity Arne


l
* +» &/ 6 wt 4 „


3 chen the doctrine of FO:
neceſſity as ſufficiently eſtabliſhed, let us proceed
to the conſequences that are to be deduced from
it. This view of things preſents us with an idea
of the univerſe as connected and cemented in all
its parts, nothing in the boundleſs progreſs of
things being capable of happening otherwiſe
than it has actually happened. In the life of
every human being there is a chain of cauſes,
generated in that eternity which preceded his
birth, and going on in regular proceſſion through
the whole period of his exiſtence, in conſe-
quence of which it was impoſſible for him to
act in any inſtance otherwiſe than he has
acted.

5 The contrary of this having been the conce
tion of the maſs of mankind in all ages, and


Prom


DOCTRINE OF NECESSITY, 283


ideas of contingency and accident having perpe-
tually obtruded themſelves, the eſtabliſned lan-


guage of morality has been univerſally tinctured
with this error. It will therefore be of no tri-
vial importance to enquire how much- of this
language 1s founded in the truth of things, and
how much of what is expreſſed by it is purely
imaginary. Accuracy of language is the indiſ-
penſible prerequiſite of ſound knowledge, and
without attention to that ſubje& we can never
aſcertain the extent and importance of the conſe-
quences of neceſſity. |

Firſt then it appears, that, in the emphatical
and refined ſenſe in which the word has ſome-
times been uſed, there is no ſuch thing as action.
Man is in no caſe ſtrictly ſpeaking the begin-
ner of any event or ſeries of events that takes
place in the univerſe, but only the vehicle thro'


which certain cauſes operate, which cauſes, if


he were ſuppoſed not to exiſt, would ceaſe to
operate. Action however, in its more ſimple
and obvious ſenſe, is ſufficiently real, and exiſts
equally both in mind and in matter. When a
ball upon a billiard board is ſtruck by a perſon
playing, and afterwards impinges upon a ſecond
ball, the ball which was firſt in motion is ſaid
to act upon the ſecond, though it operate in the
ſtricteſt conformity to the impreſſion it received,
and the motion it communicates be preciſely de-
termined by the circumſtances of the caſe. Ex-
actly ſimilar to this, upon the principles already


explained, are the actions of the human mind.


Mind is a real cauſe, an indiſpenſible link in the
great chain of the univerſe ; but not, as has ſome»


times


—


1 * * - _ - by youu :
* * 2 3 2 3 2 „ Jy ** - we d
8 r eee a n
. ͤ ——— SS Lees = 5
LES I 8 » © _ _—_— * dry * = 72 8 pd


LIES
—


Ld


Ts 1 — 2


— * *
3


—— I ON ee Fe ea


EE


r
3
ng ——


> N *
Tag 1 2 OT ba 2 Ky
* —
rule 5


— —
Ts - - 4” CL a
. 1 E 9 8 = = l - = = 2 — =
= \ = Fa... * — > Wm \ * me Ent - l — = a —
F . l : - IS \ I
= — » as \ N - - _ = => = © I 7 - -
4 > — no & 8 _ N = - — 91 n 5 [2
K — — — — wg 7
r — - =p 4 hte ROE — PLS l on _ = — as = - vo — 2 -
r we I, WM. Fa — = — nn Ny en 2 .
- — . — — 222 *
5 by IE. — a —
. x "SIE 5 * —— * *
La * & 5
wo *


—
— —
—


nou _—__—— — —


= Sy — 1 | —— — = — =” ©


8 —_— 5 „
1 2
—-—


wo *
—— —— ——
12 — — = i -
4 - — L W 4
.
"— - 1
" < 5


— — .
2. 2 —
— — —


c
F rm nugongee Rae wen ne en .
* RI — 5

*


284 © INFERENCES FROM THE


times been ſuppoſed, a cauſe of that paramount
deſcription, as to ſuperſede all e and be
itſelf ſubject to no laws and methods of opera-
tion. Upon the hypatheſis of a God, it as not


the choice, apprehenſion or judgment of that be-


ing, ſo properly as the truth which was the foun-
dation of that judgment, that has been the ſource
of all contingent and particular exiſtences. His
exiſtence, if neceſſary, was neceſſary only as the
ſenſorium of truth and the medium of its ope-
ration.

Is this view of things indess with We


exiſtence of virtue?
If by virtue we underſtand the operation of an


intelligent being in the exerciſe of an optional
power, ſo that under the ſame preciſe circum-


ſtances it might or might not have taken my
undoubtedly it will annihilate it. | |


But the doctrine of neceſſity does not over-


turm the nature of things. Happineſs and mi-


ſery, wiſdom and error will ſtill be diſtinct from
each other, and there will ſtill be a connexion


between them. Wherever there is diſtinction


there is ground for preference and deſire, or on
the contrary for neglect and averſion. Happineſs
and wiſdom will be objects worthy to be deſired,
miſery and error worthy to be diſhked. If there-
fore by virtue we mean that principle which aſ-
ſerts the preference of the former over the lat-


ter, its reality will remain undiminiſhed by the


doctrine. of neceſſity.


Virtue, if we would ſpeak accurately, ought
to be confidered by us in the firſt inſtance objec-


tively, rather than as modifying any particular
beings.


twwwss cakh cnc


DOCTRINE OF NECESSITY. 285


beings. It is a ſyſtem of general advantage, in
their aptitude or inaptitude to which lies the va-
lue or worthleſſneſs of all particular exiſtences.


This aptitude is in intelligent beings uſually _


termed capacity or power. Now power in the
ſenſe of the hypotheſis of liberty 1s altogether
chimerical. But power in the ſenſe in which it
is ſometimes affirmed of inanimate ſubſtances, is


equally true of thoſe which are animate. A can-


dleſtick has the power or capacity of retaining a
candle in a perpendicular direction. A knife has
a capacity of cutting. In the fame manner a hu-
man being has a capacity of walking: though it
may be no more true of him, than of the inani-
mate ſubſtance, that he has the power of exer-
citing or not exerciſing that capacity. Again,
there are different degrees as well as different
claſſes of capacity. One knife is better adapted
for the purpoſes of cutting than another.

Now there are two conſiderations relative to
amy particular being, that excite our approba-
tion, and this whether the being be poſſeſſed of


conſciouſneſs or no. Theſe conſiderations are


capacity and the application of that capacity. We


approve of a ſharp knife rather than a blunt one,
becauſe its capacity is greater. We approve of
its being employed in carving food, rather than
in maiming men or other animals, becauſe that
application of its capacity is preferable. But all
approbation or preference 1s relative to utility or
general good. A knife is as capable as a man of
being employed in the purpoſes of virtue, and
the one is no more free than the other as to its
employment. The mode in which a knife N

made


n


B 8
1 woe PR A. ROTOR YI WR


LG N =


286 INFERENCES FROM THE


made ſubſervient to theſe purpoſes is by mate-
rial impulſe. The mode in which a man 1s
*made ſubſervient is by inducement and perſua-
ſion. But both are equally the affair of neceſ-
ſity. The man differs from the knife, juſt as
the iron candleſtick differs from the braſs one;
he has one more way of being acted upon. This
additional way in man is motive, in the candle-
ſtick is magnetiſm.


But virtue has another ſenſe, in which it is


analogous to duty. The virtue of a human be-
ing is the application of his capacity to the gene-
ral good; his duty is the beſt poſſible applica-
tion of that capacity. The words thus explained
are to be conſidered as rather ſimilar to gramma-
tical diſtinction, than to real and philoſophical
difference. Thus in Latin bonus is good as af-
firmed of a man, bona is good as affirmed of a
woman. In the ſame manner we can as eaſily
conceive of the capacity of an inanimate as of an
animate ſubſtance being applied to the general
good, and as accurately deſcribe the beſt poſſible
application of the one as of the other. There is
no eſſential difference between the two caſes. .
But we call the latter virtue and duty, and not
the former. Theſe words may in a popular ſenſe
be conſidered as either maſculine or feminine,

but never neuter. var |
But, if the doctrine of neceſſity do not annihi-
late virtue, it tends to introduce a great change
into our ideas reſpecting it. According to this
doctrine it will be abſurd for a man to fay, I
will exert myſelf,” © I will take care to remem-
ber, or even “ will do this.” All theſe ex-
"BO Preſſions


DOCTRINE OF NECESSITY. 287


preſhons imply as if man was or could be ſome-


thing elſe than what motives make him. Man


is in reality a paſſive, and not an active being.
In another ſenſe however he is ſufficiently capa-
ble of exertion. The operations of his mind
may be laborious, like thoſe of the wheel of a
heavy machine in aſcending a hill, may even
tend to wear out the ſubſtance of the ſhell in
which it acts, without in the ſmalleſt degree
impeaching its paſſive character. If we were
conſtantly aware of this, our minds would not


glow leſs ardently with the love of truth, juſtice,


happineſs and mankind. We ſhould have a firm-
neſs and ſimplicity in our conduct, not waſting
itſelf in fruitleſs ſtruggles and regrets, not hur-
ried along with infantine impatience, but ſeein
events with their conſequences, and calmly and
unreſervedly given up to the influence of thoſe
comprehenſive views which this doctrine in-
ſpires. 8

As to our conduct towards others in inſtances
where we were concerned to improve and meli-
orate their minds, we ſhould addreſs our repre-
ſentations and remonſtrances to them with dou-
ble confidence. The believer in free will can
expoſtulate with or correct his pupil with faint
and uncertain hopes, conſcious that the cleareſt
exhibition of truth is impotent, when brought
into conteſt with the unhearing and indiſciplina-
ble faculty of will ; or in reality, if he were con-
ſiſtent, ſecure that it could produce no effect at
all. The neceſſarian on the contrary employs
real antecedents, and has a right to expect real
effects. |


But,


——— 1 * Z
* *% E


y p
Th
4
” 4
FER
.
= "+
=
_ y
_
F
1 j
5
_
U 1
4
« j :
Li LL
_ U
_
} I
"4
af
.
1
—
# *
1
1 0
n
u
} :
\
4
þ F
34
Mc
- I
2% :
„ j
\ RY .|
*
*
p .
1 in
1
7 *
0 1
11/4
14
.
ly
119 7
U
-
4 17
wn 1
r.
w
l Y
Ih .
"734 F
4
: ;
: I |
-Þ}
7 ++ i
f U
1
Mid
= [2
LT [1
bs 4 :
r
„
7 N .
: PB
1
*
1 H
1
10 .
3 4 0
U nl
*
mk
i 5 i
bs j ;
vo
= 1
= +4 1h
| . | ihe
_ $
_--
1
.»”
os
1
1. %
—_— My
3
s
Sl A
-
1
*
.
If |
.v -v
; .
_
os y N .
_
4 þ
— 5
LO +65
uw.” 2
1
Wk 5
3
75 ;
[hed
fe *
fa


2


7 =
a 3 Þ Þ
— — — —


8 .
. e


*
. - —»— -
——
- = Iz. —
—


288 INFERENCES FROM THE


But, though he would repreſent, he would
not exhort, for this is a term without a mean-
ing. He would: ſuggeſt motives to the mind,
but he would not call upon it to comply, as if it
had a power to comply or not to comply. His


office would conſiſt of two parts, the exhibition


of motives to the purſuit of a certain end, and


the delineation of the eaſieſt and moſt effeCtual


way of attaining that end.


There is no better ſcheme for exablaic us to
perceive how far any idea that has been connected
with the hypotheſis of liberty has a real founda-
tion, than to tranſlate the uſual mode of expreſ-
ſing it into the language of neceſſity. Suppoſe
the idea of exhortation ſo tranſlated to ſtand thus:
To enable any arguments I may ſuggeſt to you
to make a ſuitable impreſſion it is neceſſary that
they ſhould be fairly conſidered. I proceed there-
fore to evince to you the importance of attention,
knowing, that, if I can make this importance'


_ ſufficiently manifeſt attention will inevitably fol-


low.” I ſhould however be far better employed
in enforcing directly the truth Jam deſirous to
impreſs, than in having recourſe. to this circui-


tous mode of treating attention as if it were a ſe-


parate faculty. Attention will in reality always
be proportionate to our apprehenſion” of the im-


portance of the ſubject before us. |
At firſt ſight it may appear as if, the moment
J was fatisfied that exertion on my part was no
better than a fiction, and that I was the paſſive
inſtrument of cauſes exterior to myſelf, I ſhould»
become indifferent to the objects which had hi-
therto intereſted me the moſt deeply, and loſe:
all


DOCTRINE OF NECESSITY. 289
all that inflexible perſeverance, which ſeems in-
ſeparable from great undertakings. But this
cannot be the true ſtate of the caſe. The more
[ reſign myſelf to the influence of truth, the
clearer will be my perception of it. The leſs I
am interrupted by queſtions of liberty and ca-
price, of attention and indolence, the more uni-
form will be my conſtancy. Nothing could be
more unreaſonable than that the ſentiment of ne-
ceſſity ſhould produce in me a ſpirit of neutrality
and indifference. 'The more certain is the con-
nexion between effects and cauſes, the more
chearfulneſs ſhould I feel in yielding to painful
and laborious employments. 1 IRON? >
It is common for men impreſſed with the opi-
nion of free will to entertain reſentment, indig-
nation and anger againſt thoſe who fall into the
commiſſion of vice. How much of theſe feel-
ings 1s juſt, and how much erroneous? The
difference between virtue and vice will equally
remain upon the oppoſite hypotheſis. Vice there-
fore muſt be an object of rejection and virtue of
preference ; the one muſt be approved and the
other diſapproved. But our diſapprobation of
vice will be of the ſame nature as our diſ-
approbation of an infectious diſtemper.

One of the reaſons why we are accuſtomed to
regard the murderer with more acute feelings of
diſpleaſure than the knife he employs, is that we
find a more dangerous property, and greater cauſe
for apprehenſion, in the one than in the other.
The knife is only accidentally an object of terror,
but againſt the murderer we can never be enough
upon our guard. In the ſame manner we regard


St. . © U the


20 INFERENCES FROM THE


the middle of a buſy ſtreet with leſs complacency
as a place for walking than the fide, and the
ridge of a houſe with more averſion than either.
Independently therefore of the idea of freedom,
mankind in general find in the enormouſly vici-
ous a ſufficient motive of antipathy and diſguſt.
With the addition of that idea, it 1s. no wonder
that they ſhould be prompted to expreſſions of
the moſt intemperate abhorrence. | we

Theſe feelings obviouſly lead to the prevailing
conceptions on the ſubject of puniſhment. The
doctrine of neceſſity would teach us to claſs pu-
niſhment in the liſt of the means we poſſeſs of
reforming error. The more the human mind
can be ſhewn to be under the influence of mo-
tive, the more certain it is that puniſhment will
produce a great and unequivocal effect. But the
doctrine of neceſſity will teach us to look upon
puniſhment with no complacence, and at all
times to prefer the moſt direct means of encoun-
_ tering error, which is the development of truth.
Whenever puniſhment is employed under this
ſyſtem, it will be employed, not for any intrin-
fic recommendation it poſſeſſes, but juſt ſo far
as it ſhall appear to conduce to general uti-
—_ _— 3
On the contrary it is uſually imagined, that,
independently of the utility of puniſhment, there
is proper deſert in the criminal, a certain fitneſs
in the nature of things that renders pain the ſuit-
able concomitant of vice. It is — * fre-
quently ſaid, that it is not enough that a mur-
derer ſhould be tranſported to a deſart iſland,
where there ſhould be no danger that his malig-


nant


hs. VET 4


DOCTRINE OF NECESSITY. 297


nant propenſities ſhould ever again have opnor-
| — 92 but that it is allo right the Mig
nation of mankind againſt him ſhould expreſs it-
ſelf in the infliction of ſome actual ignominy and
pain. On the contrary, under the ſyſtem of ne-
ceſſity the ideas of guilt, crime, deſert and ac-
countableneſs have no place.

Correlative to the feelings of reſentment, in-
dignation and anger againſt the offences of others,
are thoſe of repentance, contrition and ſorrow for
our own. As long as we admit of an eſſential
difference between virtue and vice, no doubt all
erroneous conduct whether of ourſelves or others
will be regarded with diſapprobation. But it
will in both caſes be conſidered, under the ſyſ-
tem of neceſſity, as a link in the great chain of
events which could not have been otherwiſe than
it is. We ſhall therefore no more be diſpoſed
to repent of our own faults than of the faults of
others. It will be proper to view them both as
actions, injurious to the public good, and the
repetition of which is to be deprecated. Amidſt
our preſent imperfections it will perhaps be uſe-
ful to recollect what is the error by Which we
are moſt eaſily ſeduced. But in proportion as
our views extend, we ſhall find motives enough
to the practice of virtue, without any partial re-
troſpect to ourſelves, or recollection of our own

propenſities and habits. | |
In the ideas annexed to the words reſentment
and repentance there is ſome mixture of true
judgment and a ſound conception of the nature
of things. There is perhaps ſtill more juſtice in
the notions conveyed by praiſe and blame, —
2 eſe


" Ay 4 1 7
*


292 INFERENCES FROM THE


theſe alſo are for the moſt part founded in the hy-
potheſis of liberty. When I ſpeak of a beauti-
ful landſcape or an agreeable ſenſation, I employ
the language of panegyric. I employ it till
more emphatically, when I ſpeak of a good ac-
-tion ; becauſe I am conſcious that panegyric has
a tendency to procure a repetition of ſuch ac-
tions. So far as praiſe implies nothing more than
this, it perfectly accords with the ſevereſt philo-
ſophy. So far as it implies that the man could
have abſtained from the virtuous action I ap-
. it belongs only to the deluſive ſyſtem of
liberty. he eg +, 408
A farther conſequence of the doctrine of ne-
ceſſity is its tendency to make us ſurvey all
events with a tranquil and placid temper, and
approve and diſapprove without impeachment to
our ſelf poſſeſſion. It is true, that events may
be contingent as to any knowledge we poſſeſs re-
ſpecting them, however certain they are in
themſelves. Thus the advocate of liberty knows
that his relation was either loſt or ſaved in the
great ſtorm that happened two months ago ; he
regards this event as paſt and certain, and yet he
does not fail to be anxious about it. But it is
not leſs true, that all anxiety and perturbation
imply an imperfect ſenſe of contingency, and a
feeling as if our efforts could make ſome altera-
tion in the event. When the perſon recollects
with clearneſs that the event is over, his mind
grows compoſed ; but preſently he feels as if it
were in the power of God or man to alter it,
and his diſtreſs 1s renewed. All that is more
than-this is the impatience of curiofity ; but phi-
; loſophy


A


DOCTRINE OF NECESSITY. 293


loſophy and reaſon have an evident tendency to
prevent an uſeleſs curioſity from diſturbing our
peace. He therefore who regards all things paſt,
preſent and to come as links of an indiſſoluble
chain, will, as often as he recollects this com-
prehenſive view, be ſuperior to the tumult of
paſſion; and will reflect upon the moral concerns
of mankind with the ſame clearneſs of percep-
tion, the ſame unalterable firmneſs of judgment,
and the ſame tranquillity as we are accuſtomed
to do upon the truths of geometry.

It would be of infinite importance to the cauſe
of ſcience and virtue to expreſs ourſelves upon all
occaſions in the language of neceſſity. The con-
trary language is perpetually intruding, and it is
difficult to ſpeak two ſentences upon any topic
connected with human action without it. The
expreſſions of both hypotheſes are mixed in inex-
tricable confuſion, juſt as the belief of both hypo-
theſes, however incompatible, will be found to
exiſt in all uninſtructed minds. The reformati-
on of which I ſpeak would probably be found ex-
ceedingly practicable in itſelf; though, ſuch is
the ſubtlety of error, that we ſhould at firſt find
ſeveral reviſals and much laborious ſtudy neceſ-
ſary before it could be perfectly weeded out.
This muſt be the author's apology for not having
attempted in the preſent work what he recom-
mends to others. Objects of more immediate
importance demanded his attention, and engroſ-
_ ſed his faculties.


CHAP.


**


20 © OF THE MECHANISM


C H A P. VII.


or THE MECHANISM OF THE HUMAN
MIND.


Nature of mechaniſin—Its alas material and in-
tellectual.— Material ſyſtem, or of vibrations. —
The intellectual ſyſtem moſt probable—From the
conſideration that thought would otherwiſe be a

ſuperfluity.—From the eſtabliſhed principles of
reaſoning from effects to cauſes.—Objections re-
- futed. —T houghts which produce animal motion
may be—1. Involuntary. All animal motions
were firſt involuntary.—2. Unattended with con-
 ferouſneſs.—T he mind cannot have more than one
thought at any one time. Obection to this er-
tion from the caſe of complex ideas. — From vari-
ous mental operation. —As compariſon— Appre-
 henfion—Rapidity of the ſucceſſion of 1deas.— Ap-
plication. — Duration meaſured by conſciouſneſs.
— 93. A aiftin# thought to each motion may be
unneceſſary.— Apparent from the complexity of
ſenſible impreſſions. —The mind always thinks, —
 Conclufion.—The theory applied to the phenome-
non of walking—To h circulation of the blood.
0 motion in general, —Of Dreams.


Tn E doctrine of neceſſity 3 . it
follows that the theory of the human mind is pro-
perly, like the _ of every other {cries of


events


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 293
events with which we are acquainted, a ſyſtem of
mechaniſm ; underſtanding by mechaniſm no-


thing more than a regular connexion of pheno-


mena without any uncertainty of event, ſo that
every incident requires a ſpecific cauſe, and could
be no otherwiſe in any reſpect than as the cauſe
determined it to be. |

But-there are two ſorts of mechaniſm capable
of being applied to the ſolution of this caſe, one
which has for its medium only matter and moti-
on, the other which has for its medium thought.
Which of theſe is to be regarded as moſt pro-
bable ?

According to the firſt we may conceive the
human body to be ſo conſtituted as to be ſuſce
tible of vibrations, in the ſame manner as : 1


ſtrings of a muſical inſtrument are ſuſceptible of


vibrations. Theſe vibrations, having begun up-
on the ſurface of the body, are conveyed to the

brain; and, in a manner that is equally the re-
| ſult of conſtruction, produce a ſecond ſet of vi-
brations beginning in the brain, and conveyed to


the different organs or members of the body.


Thus it may be ſuppoſed, that a piece of iron


conſiderably heated is applied to the body of an


infant, and that the report of this uneafineſs, or
irritation and ſeparation of parts being conveyed to
the brain, vents itſelf again in a ſhrill and pierc-
ing cry. It is in this manner that we are & to
ecti-


—


imagine certain convulſive and ſpaſmodic


ons to take place in the body. The caſe, as here


deſcribed, is ſimilar to that of the bag of a pair
of bagpipes, which, being preſſed in a certain


manner, utters a groan, without any thing more


being


=.
=
= o * 1 9
— *
1 12 EYE OE HE at Tg
1 2 n =


. n
8 3 —


296 OF THE MECHANISM


being neceſſary to account for this phenomenon,
than the known laws of matter and motion. Let
us add to theſe vibrations a ſyſtem of aſſociations
to be carried on by traces to be made upon the
medullary ſubſtance of the brain, by means of
which paſt and preſent impreſſions are connected
according to certain laws, as the traces happen to
approach or run into each other; and we have
then a complete ſcheme for accounting in a cer-
tain way for all the phenomena of human action.
It is to be obſerved, that, according to this ſyſ-
tem, mind or perception is altogether unneceſſa-
ry to explain the appearances. It might for other
reaſons be defirable or wiſe, in the author of the
univerſe for example, to introduce a thinking
ſubſtance or a power of perception as a ſpectator
of the proceſs. But this percipient power is al-
together neutral, having no concern either as a
medium or otherwiſe in producing the events*.
The ſecond ſyſtem, which repreſents thought
as the medium of operation, 1s not leſs a ſyſtem
of mechaniſm, according to the doctrine of ne-
ceſſity, than the other, but it is a mechaniſm of
a totally different kind. es |


There


The above will be found to be a tolerably accurate deſcripti-
on of the hypotheſis of the celebrated Hartley. It was unneceſſa-
ry to quote his words, as it would be foreign to the plan of the
preſent work to enter into a refutation of any individual writer.
The ſagacity of Hartley, in having pointed out the neceſſary con-
nex1on of the phenomena of mind, and ſhewn the practicability of
reducing its different operations to a ſimple principle, cannot be
too highly applauded. The reaſonings of the preſent chapter,

if true, may be conſidered as giving farther ſtability to his princi-
pal doctrine by freeing it from the fcheme of material automatiſm
with which it was unneceffarily clogged. -


,


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 297 +


There are various reaſons calculated to perſuade


us that this laſt hypotheſis is the moſt probable.


No conſiderable argument may be derived from
the ſingular and important nature of that property
of human beings, which we term thought ; which
it is ſurely ſomewhat violent to ſtrike out of our
ſyſtem as a mere ſuperfluity.

A ſecond reaſon {till more deciſive than the for-
mer, ariſes from the conſtancy with which


thought in innumerable inſtances accompanies the


functions of this mechaniſm. Now this conſtan-
cy of conjunction has been ſhewn to be the only
ground we have in any imaginable ſubject for in-
ferring neceſſary connexion, or that ſpecies of
relation which exiſts between cauſe and effect.


We cannot therefore reject the principle which
{ſuppoſes thought to have an efficient ſhare in the


mechaniſm of man, but upon grounds that would
vitiate all our reaſonings from effects to cauſes.

It may be objected, *< that, though this conti-
guity of event argues neceſſary connexion, yet
the connexion may be exactly the reverſe of what
is here ſtated, motion being in all inſtances the
cauſe, and thought never any thing more than an
effect. But this is contrary to every thing we
know of the ſyſtem of the univerſe, in which
each event appears to be alternately both the one


and the other, nothing terminating in itſelf, but


every thing leading on to an endleſs chain of con-
ſequences. ;

It would be equally vain to object, that we
are unable to conceive how thought can have
any tendency to produce motion in the animal
ſyſtem ;” ſince it has juſt appeared that this igno-

rance


2 8 g — e „14% „%ͤé%%


298 OF THE MECHANISM


rance is by no means peculiar to the ſubject be-
fore us. We are univerſally unable to perceive
the ground of neceflary connexion.

It being then ſufficiently clear that there are
cogent reaſons to perſuade us that thought is the
medium through which the motions of the ani-
ma] ſyſtem are generally carried on, let us pro-
ceed to conſider what is the nature of thoſe
thoughts by which the limbs and organs of our
body are ſet in motion. It will then probably be
found, that the difficulties which have clogged
the intellectual hypotheſis, are principally found-
ed in erroneous notions derived from the ſyſtem
of liberty; as if there were any eſſential difference
between thoſe thoughts which are the medium
of generating motion, and thoughts in general.

Firſt, thought may be the ſource of animal
motion, without partaking in any degree of voli-
tion, or deſign. It is certain that there is a great
variety of motions in the animal ſyſtem, which
are in every view of the ſubject involuntary.
Such, for example, are the cries of an infant,
when it 1s firſt impreſſed with the ſenſation of
pain. Such muſt be all thoſe motions which
flowed from ſenſation previouſly to experience.
Volition implies that ſomething which is the ſub-
ject of volition, is regarded as deſirable ; but we
cannot defire any thing, till we have an idea cor-
reſponding to the term futurity. Volition im-
phes intention, or deſign ; but we cannot deſign
any thing, till we have the expectation that the
exiſtence of that thing is in ſome way connected
with the means employed to produce it. An in-


fant, when he has obſerved that a voice exciting
| compaſſion


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 299


compaſſion is the reſult of certain previous emo-


tions, may have the idea of that voice predomi+


nant in his mind during the train of emotions that


produce it. But this could not have been. the


caſe the firſt time it was uttered. In the firſt.


motions of the animal ſyſtem, nothing of any ſort


could poflibly be foreſeen, and therefore nothing


of any ſort could be intended. Yet in the very


inſtances here produced the motions have ſenſati-


on or thought for their conſtant concomitant ;
and therefore all the arguments, which have been
alread 3 remain in full force to prove
that thought is the medium of their production.
Nor will this appear very extraordinary, if we
conſider the nature of volition itſelf. In volition,


if the doctrine of neceſſity be true, the mind is


altogether paſſive. Two ideas preſent them-
ſelves in ſome way connected with each other;
and a perception of preferableneſs neceffarily fol-
lows. An object having certain deſirable quali-
ties, is perceived to be within my reach; and
my hand is neceſſarily ſtretched out with an inten-


tion to obtain it. If a perception of preferableneſs


and a perception of deſirableneſs irreſiſtibly lead
to animal motion, why may not the mere percep-
tion of pain? All that the adverſary of automa-
tiſm is concerned to maintain is, that thought is
an eſſential link in the chain; and that, the mo-
ment it is taken away, the links that were before
it have no longer any tendency to produce mo-
tion in the links that were after it. It is poffible,
that, as a numerous claſs of motions have their
conſtant origin in thought, ſo there may be no
thoughts altogether unattended with W

| ere


1 — — 5a hn dane a — IS


o
o
1

1

bj

al

|

4
"=
5
1

1

*

ul

N 1%
£

*
7

7

0

We .
f
F
1


300 OF THE MECHANISM


Here it may be proper to obſerve, that, from
the principles already delivered, it follows that
all the original motions of the animal ſyſtem are
involuntary. In proportion however as we ob-
tain experience, they are ſucceſſively made the
ſubjects of reflection and foreſight ; and of con-
ſequence become many of them the themes of
intention and deſign, that is, become voluntary.
We ſhall preſently have occaſion to ſuſpect that
motions, which were at firſt involuntary, and af-
terwards by experience and aſſociation are made
voluntary, may in the proceſs of intellectual
operation be made involuntary again.ä— But to
proceed. s 1 TER H

Secondly, thought may be the ſource of ani-
mal motion, and yet be unattended with con-
ſciouſneſs. This is undoubtedly a diſtinction of
conſiderable refinement, depending upon the pre-
ciſe meaning of words; and, if any perſon
ſhould chooſe to expreſs himſelf differently on
the ſubject, it would be uſeleſs obyſtinately to
diſpute that difference with him. By the con-
ſciouſneſs which accompanies any thought there
ſeems to.be ſomething implied diſtin& from the
thought itſelf. Conſciouſneſs is a ſort of ſupple-
mentary reflection, by which the mind not only
has the thought, but adverts to its own ſituation
and obſerves that it has it. Conſciouſneſs there-
fore, however nice the diſtinction, ſeems to be a
ſecond thought.

In order to aſcertain whether every thought
be attended with conſciouſneſs, it may be proper
to conſider whether the mind can ever have more
than one thought at any one time. Now this

7 ſeems


2


ox THE HUMAN MIND. 307
ſeems altogether contrary to the very nature of
mind. My preſent thought is that to which my
preſent attention is yielded; but I cannot attend
to ſeveral things at once. This aſſertion appears
to be of the nature of an intuitive axiom; and
experience is perpetually reminding us of its
truth. In comparing two objects we frequently
endeavour as it were to draw them together in
the mind, but we ſeem to be obliged to paſs ſuc-
ceſſively from the one to the other.

But this principle, though apparently ſup-
ported both by reaſon and experience, is not un-
attended with difficulties. The firſt is that
which ariſes from the caſe of complex ideas.
This will beſt be apprehended if we examine it
as relates to viſible objects. Let us ſuppoſe
that I am at preſent employed in the act of read-
ing. I appear to take in whole words and in-
deed cluſters of words by a fingle act of the
mind. But let it be granted for a moment that
I fee each letter ſucceſſively. Yet each letter is
made up of parts : the letter D for example of a
right line and a curve, and each of theſe lines of
the ſucceſſive addition or fluxion of points. If I
conſider the line as a whole, yet its extenſion is
one thing, and its terminations another. I could
not ſee the letter if the black line that deſcribes
it and the white ſurface that bounds it were not
each of them in the view of my organ. There
muſt therefore, as it ſhould ſeem, upon the hy-


potheſis above ſtated, be an infinite ſucceſſion of


ideas in the mind, before it could apprehend the
ſimpleſt objects with which we are converſant.
But we have no feeling of any ſuch thing, but


rather


4
Re as.
i „ vo Tuwew


— —


3


— *
* 8 —


—
i


* * $ 2
; F nn IR ππ¹ Den Way
= N 8 "> + r r E63 rr


,
0


; — 3


en


N
bd


302 CF THE MECHANISM


rather of the preciſe contrary. Thouſands of
human beings go out of the world without ever
apprehending hat lines are compoſed of the ade
dition or fluxion of phints. An hypotheſis there-
fore, that is in direct oppoſition to ſa many ap-
parent facts, muſt have a very uncommon por-
tion of evidence to ſuſtain it, if indeed it can be
ſuſtained at all.”
The true anſwer to this objection ſeems to be
the following. The mind can apprehend only a
ſingle 1dea at once, but that idea needs not. be in
every ſenſe of the word a ſimple idea. The
mind can apprehend two or more objects at a
ſingle effort, but it cannot apprehend them as
two. There ſeems no ſufficient reaſon to deny
that all thoſe objets which are painted at once
upon the retina of the eye, produce a joint and
ſimultaneous impreſſion upon the mind. But
they are not immediately conceived by the mind
as many, but as one: fo ſoon as the idea ſuggeſts
itſelf that they are made up of parts,. theſe parts
cannot be conſidered by us otherwiſe than ſuc-
ceſſively. The reſolution of objects into their
ſimple elements, is an operation of ſcience and
improvement; but it is altogether foreign to our
firſt and original conceptions. In all caſes the
operation is rather analytical than ſynthetical,
rather that of reſolution than compoſition. We
do not begin with the ſucceſſive perception of
elementary parts till Wwe have obtained an idea
of a whole; but, beginning with a whole,
are capable of reducing it into its elements.

The ſecond difficulty is of a much ſubtler na-
ture. It conſiſts in the ſeeming ann

©


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 303
of performing any mental operation, ſuch as com-
pariſon for example, which has relation to two or
more ideas, if we have not both ideas before us
at once, if one of them be completely vaniſhed
and gone, before the other begins to exiſt.”
The cauſe of this difficulty ſeems to he in the
miſtake of ſuppoſing that there is a real interval
between the two ideas. It will perhaps be
found upon an accurate examination, that,
though we cannot have two ideas at once, yet
it is not juſt to ſay, that the firſt has periſhed
before the ſecond begins to exiſt. The inſtant
that connects them, is of no real magnitude,
and produces no real diviſion. The mind is al-
ways full. It is this inſtant therefore that is the
true point of compariſon.

It may be objected, ** that this cannot be a
juſt repreſentation, ſince compariſon is rather a
matter of retroſpe& deciding between two ideas
that have been completely apprehended, than a
perception which occurs in the middle, before
the ſecond has been yet obſerved.” To this ob-
jection experience will perhaps be found to fur-
niſh the true anſwer. We find in fact that we
cannot compare two objects till we have paſſed
and repaſſed them in the mind.

“ Suppoſing this account of the operation of
the mind in compariſon to be admitted, yet
what ſhall we fay to a complex ſentence con-
taining twenty ideas, the ſenſe of which J fully
apprehend at a ſingle hearing, nay, even in ſome
caſes by that time one half of it has been ut-
tered?” - Bi |
5 The


"a OF THE MECHANISM


The mere taſk of underſtanding what is af.
firmed to us is of a very different nature from
that of compariſon, or any other ſpecies of judg-
ment that is to be formed concerning this af-
firmation. When a number of ideas are pre-
ſented in a train, though in one ſenſe there be


variety, yet in another there is unity. Firſt,


there is the unity of uninterrupted ſucceſſion, the
erennial flow as of a ſtream, where the drop
indeed that ſucceeds is numerically diſtinct from


that which went before, but there is no ceſlation.


Secondly, there is the unity of method. The
mind apprehends, as the diſcourſe proceeds, a
ſtrict aſſociation, from ſimilarity or ſome other


' ſource, between each idea as it follows 1 in the


roceſs, and that which went before it.

The faculty of underſtanding the different
parts of a diſcourſe in their connexion with each
other, ſimple as it appears, is in reality of gra-
dual and flow acquiſition. We are by various
cauſes excluded from a minute obſervation of the
progreſs of the infant mind, and therefore do
not readily conceive by how imperceptible ad-
vances it arrives at a quickneſs of apprehenſion
relative to the ſimpleſt ſentences. But we more
eaſily remark its ſubſequent improvement, and
perceive how long it is before it can apprehend a
diſcourſe of any length or a ſentence of any ab-
ſtraction.

Nothing is more certain than the poſſibility of
my perceiving the ſort of relation that exiſts be-
tween the different parts of a methodical diſ-
courſe, for example, Mr. Burke's Speech - upon
Oeconomical Reform, though it be impoflible

for


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 305


for me aſter the ſevereſt attention to conſider the
ſeveral parts otherwiſe than ſucceſſively. I have
a latent feeling of this relation as the diſcourſe
proceeds, but I cannot give a firm judgment re-
ſpecting it otherwiſe thay by retroſpect. It may
however be ſuſpected that, even in the caſe of
{imple apprehenſion, an accurate attention to the
operations of mind would ſhow, that we ſcarcely


in any inſtance hear a ſingle ſentence, without


returning again and again upon the ſteps of the
ſpeaker, and drawing more cloſely in our minds
the preceding members of his period, before he
arrives at its conclufion ; though even this exer-
tion of mind, ſubtle as it is, be not of itſelf
thought ſufficient to authoriſe us to give a judg-
ment upon the whole. There may perhaps be
caſes where the apprehenſion is more inſtantane-
ous. A ſimilar exception appears to take place


even in ſome caſes of judgment or compariſon. -


A new aſſociation, or a connecting of two ideas
by means of a middle term, which were never
brought into this relation before, is a taſk of ſuch
a nature, that the ſtrongeſt mind feels ſome ſenſe
of effort in the operation. But, where the
judgment accurately ſpeaking is already made,
the operation is in a manner inſtantaneous. If
you ſay, that a melon is a larger fruit than a
cherry, I immediately aſſent. The judgment,
though perhaps never applied to this individual
ſubject, may be ſaid to have been made by me


long before. If again you tell me that Cæſar


was a worſe man than ——_— I inſtantly ap-
prehend your meaning ; but, unleſs I have upon
ſome former occaſion conſidered the queſtion, I

Vor. I. X can


7


2
| 1


a 0 cer W. wat - 4 * Th ry
* 2 2 os EET. "Is hn 3 R - — „ A ET, ? # r 4 * * | * 5 Rd
ns» ies. od, at SITES. Wa tad = . e Sun reren 0 rr had =
| — * — gn he. p —_—_— — — ns . LS = o 4


OD a N 2 ag
K Be a ons NE et i


2
— — — — — — — 2
_— mon rot D 1 2 5 * 3 EY" ** wee *
k — <= a” any I 9 1 * 7
0 _— - -


—


» a.” .
GET, AS was AT at. 3 ' =


* LY ;
*


; * . IS
Wo
3


206 Cp THE MECHANISM


can neither aſſent nor diſſent till after ſome re-
flegtion. f

But, if the principle here ſtated be true, how

infinitely rapid muſt be the ſucceſſion of ideas?

While I am ſpeaking no two ideas are in my

mind at the ſame time, and yet with what faci-

lity do I paſs from one to another? If my dil-

1 courſe be argumentative, how often do I pals
= the topics of which it conſiſts in review before I
I utter them, and even while I am ſpeaking con-
tinue the review at intervals without producing
any pauſe in my diſcourſe? How many other
ſenſations are perceived by me during this pe-
riod, without ſo much as interrupting, that is,
without materially diverting the train of my
ideas? My eye ſucceſſively remarks a thouſand
objects that preſent themſelves. My mind wan-
ders to the different parts of my body, and re-
ceives a ſenſation from the chair upon which I
fit, from the table upon which I lean; from the
pinching of a ſhoe, from a ſinging in my ear, a
pain in my head, or an irritation of the breaſt.,
When theſe moſt perceptibly occur, my mind
paſſes from one to another, without feeling the
minuteſt obſtacle, or being in any degree diſ-
tracted by their multiplicity. From this curſory
view of the ſubject it appears that we have a
multitude of different ſucceſſive perceptions in
every moment of our exiſtence *. |


— * = "4.3
—— — gn ts ny — *
N
+


Conſciouſneſs,


* An attempt has been made to calculate. theſe, but there is
uo reaſon to believe that the calculation deſerves to be conſidered
as a ſtandard of truth. Senſations leave their images behind
them, ſome for a longer and ſome for a ſhorter time; ſo that, in
4wo different inſtances, the calculation is in one caſe eight, and in
another three hundred and twenty to a ſecond. -* |
* See Watſon on Time, Ch. II.


Py 4 2
* ORE PP
* IIS
3
wi.
— > *
*


OF THE HUMAN Mp. 307


Conſciouſneſs, as it has been above defined,
appears to be one of the departments of memory.
Now the nature of memory, ſo far as it relates
to the ſubject of which we are treating, is ex-
ceedingly obvious. An infinite number of
thoughts paſſed through my mind in the laſt
five minutes of my exiſtence. How many of
them am I now able to recollect? How many of
them ſhall I recolle& to-morrow ? One impreſ-
ſion after another is perpetually effacing from
this intellectual regiſter. Some of them may
with great attention and effort be revived; others
obtrude themſelves uncalled for; and a third ſort
are perhaps out of the reach of any power of
thought to reproduce, as having never left their
traces behind them for a moment. If the me-
mory be capable of ſo many variations and de-
grees of intenſity, may there not be ſome caſes
with which it never connects itſelf? If the ſuc-
ceſſion of thoughts be ſo inexpreſſibly rapid,
may they not paſs over ſome topics with ſo de-
licate a touch, as to elude the ſupplement of con-
ſciouſneſs? | |

It ſeems to be conſciouſneſs, rather than the
ſucceſſion of ideas, that meaſures time to the
mind. The ſucceſſion of ideas is in all caſes
exceedingly rapid, and it is by no means clear
that it can be accelerated. We find it impracti-
cable in the experiment to retain any idea in our
minds unvaried for any perceptible duration.
Continual flux appears to take place in every
part of the univerſe. It is perhaps a law of our
nature, that thoughts ſhall at all times ſucceed
to each other with equa] rapidity. Yet time

985 A 2 {ſeems


E


n : *
— >" by „


- WW ” *»
* 77
DR


= **


1
1
days n WY on my . or Ig , — Bs
rr 2E. ͥͤ ³Übw ——1. ˙ A . ] m Cd ent


Ln ob


*
;
a
. *
** * 3 5 1
r


308 OF THE MECHANISM
ſeems to our apprehenſion to flow now with a
precipitated and now with a tardy courſe. The
indolent man reclines for hours in the ſhade ;
and, though his mind be perpetually at work,
the filent lapſe of duration is unobſerved. But,
when acute pain or uneaſy expectation obliges
conſciouſneſs to recur with unuſual force, the
time then appears inſupportably long. Indeed it
is a contradiction in terms to ſuppoſe that the
ſucceſſion of thoughts, where there is nothing
that perceptibly links them together, where they
totally. elude or inſtantly vaniſh from the memo-
ry, can be a meaſure of time to the mind. That
there is ſuch a ſtate of mind in ſome caſes aſſum-
ing a permanent form, has been ſo much the ge-
neral opinion of mankind, that it has obtained a
name, and is called reverie. It is probable from
what has been ſaid that thoughts of reverie, un-
derſtanding by that appellation thoughts untranſ-
mitted to the memory, perpetually take their
turn with our more expreſs and digeſted thoughts,

even in the moſt active ſcenes of our life.

Laſtly, thought may be the ſource of animal

motion, and yet there may be no need of a diſ-
tinct thought producing each individual motion.
This is a very important point in the ſubject be-
fore us. In uttering a cry for example, the
number of muſcles and articulations of the body
concerned in this operation 1s very' great ; ſhall
we ſay that the infant has a diſtin& thought for
each motion of theſe articulations? _ |
The anſwer to this queſtion will be conſidera-
bly facilitated, if we recolle& the manner in
2 he . which


a


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 309


which the impreſſions are blended, which we re-
ceive from external objects. The ſenſe of feeling
is diffuſed over every part of my body, I feel the
different ſubſtances that ſupport me, the pen I
guide, various affections and petty irregularities
in different parts of my frame, nay, the very air
that environs me. But all theſe impreſſions are
abſolutely. ſimultaneous, and I can have only
one perception at once. Out of theſe; various
impreſſions, the moſt powerful, or that which
has the greateſt advantage to ſolicit my attention,
overcomes and drives out the reſt; or, Which
not leſs frequently happens, ſome idea of aſſoci-
ation ſuggeſted by the laſt preceding idea wholly
withdraws my attention from every external ob-
ject. It is probable however that this percepti-
on is imperceptibly modified by. the miniature
impreſſions that accompany it, juſt as we actually
find that the very ſame ideas preſented to a fick
man, take a peculiar tinge, that renders them ex-
ceedingly different from what they are in the
mind of a man in health, It has been already
ſhown, that, though there is nothing lets fre-
quent than the apprehending of a ſimple idea,
yet every idea, however complex, offers itfelf to
the mind under the conception of unity. The
blending of numerous impreſſions into one per-

ception is a law of our nature, and the cuſtoma-

ry train of our perceptions is entirely of this de-
nomination. Mean while it deſerves to be re-
marked by the way, that, at the very time that
the moſt methodical ſeries of perceptions is going
on in the mind, there is another ſet of percepti-
ons,


310 Or THE MECHANISM


ons, or rather many ſets playing an under or in-
| termediate part; and, though theſe perpetu-
ally modify each other, yet the manner in which
it is done is in an eminent degree minute and
unobſerveds ldd |
Theſe remarks furniſh us with an anſwer to the
long diſputed queſtion, whether the mind al-
ways thinks? It appears that innumerable im-
preſſions are perpetually made upon our body,
and the only way, in which the ſlighteſt of theſe
is prevented from conveying a diſtin& report
to the mind, is in conſequence of its being over-
powered by ſome more conſiderable impreſſion.
It cannot therefore be alledged, that, as one
impreſſion is found to be overpowered by ano-
ther while we wake, the ſtrongeſt only of the
ſimultaneous impreſſions furmſhing an idea to
the mind; ſo the whole ſet of ſimultaneous im-
preſſions during ſleep may be overpowered by
ſome indiſpoſition of the ſenſorium, and entirely
fail of its effect. For, firſt, the caſes are al-
together different. From the explication above
given it appeared, that not one of the impreſ-
ions was really loſt, but tended, though in a
very limited degree, to modify the predominant
- impreſhon. Secondly, nothing can be more un-
- intelligible than this indiſpoſition. Were it of
the nature which the objection requires, ſleep
- ought to ceaſe of its own accord after the expi-
ration of a certain term, but to be incapable of
: hm Br cn from any experiment I might make
upon the ſleeper. To what purpoſe call or ſhake
him? Shall we fay, that it requires an impreſ-
rs RE | 6 ſion


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 311


ſion of a certain magnitude to excite the ſenſo-
rium? But a clock ſhall ſtrike in the room
and not wake him, when a voice of a much
lower key produces that effect. What is the
preciſe degree of magnitude neceſſary? We ac-
tually find the ineffectual calls that are addreſſed
to us, as well as various other ſounds, occaſio-
nally mixing with our dreams, without our
being aware from whence this new perception
aroſe. *

To apply theſe obſervations. If a number
of impreſſions may come blended to the mind,
fo as to make up one thought or perception, why
may not one thought, in caſes where the mind
acts as a cauſe, produce a variety of motions ?
It has already been ſhown that there is no eſſen-
tial difference between the two cafes. The
mind is completely paſſive in both. Is there any
ſufficient reaſon to ſnow, that, though it be poſ-
ſible for one ſubſtance conſidered as the recipient
of effects to be the ſubject of a variety of ſimul-
taneous impreſſions, yet it is impoſſible for one
ſubſtance conſidered as a cauſe to produce a va-
riety of ſimultaneous motions ? If it be granted
that there is not, if the mere modification of a
thought deſigning a motion in chief, may pro-
duce a ſecondary motion, then it muſt perhaps
farther be confeſſed poſſible for that modification


which my firſt thought produced in my ſecond,


to carry on the motion, even though the ſecond
thought be upon a ſubject altogether different.
The conſequences, which ſeem deducible from
this theory of mind, are ſufficiently memorable.
By ſhowing the extreme ſubtlety and oY |
0


312 OF THE MECHANISM


of thought, it removes many of the difficulties
that might otherwiſe reſt 15 its finer and more
evVaneſcent operations. If thought, in order to
be the cauſe of animal motion, need not have
either the nature of volition, or the concomitant
of conſciouſneſs, and if a ſingle thought may be-
come a complex cauſe and produce a variety of
motions, it will then become exceedingly diffi-
cult to trace its operations, or to diſcover any cir-
cumſtances in a particular inſtance of animal mo-
tion, which can ſufficiently indicate that thought
was not the principle of its production, and by
that means ſuperſede the force of the general
arguments adduced in the beginning of this chap-
ter. Hence therefore it appears that all thoſe
motions which are obſerved to exiſt in ſubſtances
having perception, and which are not to be diſ-
covered in ſubſtances of any other ſpecies, may
reaſonably be ſuſpected to have thought, the diſ-
tinguiſhing peculiarity of ſuch ſubſtances, for
their cauſe. 1 1
There are various claſſes of motion which will
fall under this definition, beſide thoſe already
enumerated. An example of one of theſe claſſes
ſuggeſts itſelf in the phenomenon of walking. An
attentive obſerver will perceive various ſymptoms
calculated to perſuade him, that every ſtep he
takes during the longeſt journey is the production
of thought. Walking is in all caſes originally a
voluntary motion. In a child when he learns to
walk, in a rope dancer when he begins to prac-
tiſe that particular exerciſe, the diſtinct determi-
nation of mind preceding each ſtep is ſufficiently
perceptible. It may be akſurd to ſay, that a
| 8 1 lon g


—
\


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 313


long ſeries of motions can be the reſult of ſo many
expreſs volitions, when theſe ſuppoſed volitions
leave no trace in the memory. But it is not un-
reaſonable to believe that a ſpecies of motion
which began in expreſs deſign, may, though it
ceaſes to be the ſubject of conſcious attention, owe
its continuance to a continued ſeries of thoughts
flowing in that direction, and that, if life were
taken away, material impulſe would not carry on
the exerciſe for a moment. We actually find,
that, when our thoughts in a train are more than
commonly earneſt, our pace ſlackens, and ſome-
times our going forward is wholly ſuſpended, par-
ticularly in any leſs common ſpecies of walking,
ſuch as that of deſcending a flight of ſtairs. In
aſcending the caſe is ſtill more difficult, and ac-
cordingly we are accuſtomed wholly to ſuſpend
the regular progreſs of reflection during that ope-.
ration. |
Another claſs of motions of a ſtill ſubtler nature,
are the regular motions of the animal economy,
ſuch as the circulation of the blood, and the pul-
ſation of the heart. Are thought and perception
the medium of theſe motions ? We have the ſame
argument here as in the former inſtances, con-
junction of event. When thought begins, theſe
motions alſo begin; and, when it ceaſes, they
are at an end. They are therefore either the
cauſe or effect of percipiency, or mind; but we
ſhall be inclined to embrace the latter ſide of this
dilemma, when we recollect that we are probably
acquainted with many inſtances in which thought
is the immediate cauſe of motions, which ſcarcely
yield in ſubtlety to theſe; but that, as to the ori-


gin


314 OF THE MECHANISM


gin of thought, we are wholly uninformed. Add |
to this, that there are probably no motions of the
animal economy, which we do not find it in the
power of volition, and ſtill more of our nn
ſenſations, to haſten or retard. 1

It is far from certain that the phenomenon of
motion can any where exiſt where there is not
thought. Motion may be diſtributed into four
claſſes; the ſimpler motions which reſult from
what are called the eſſential properties of matter
and the laws of impulſe ; the more complex ones
which cannot be accounted for by the aſſumption
of theſe laws, ſuch as gravitation, elaſticity,
electricity and magnetiſm; and the motions of
the vegetable and animal ſyſtems. Each of theſe
ſeems farther than that which preceded it from
being able to be accounted for by any thing we
underſtand of the nature of matter.

Some light may be derived from what has been
here advanced upon the phenomenon of dreams.
« In ſleep we ſometimes imagine” for example
that we read long paſſages from books, or hear a
long oration from a ſpeaker. In all caſes ſcenes
and incidents paſs before us that in various ways
_ our paſſions and intereſt our feelings. Is

it poſſible that theſe ſhould be the unconſcious

oduction of our minds ?” _

It has already appeared, that volition is the ac-
cidental, and by no means the neceſſary conco-
mitant, even of thoſe thoughts which are moſt
active and efficient in the producing of motion. It
is therefore no more to be wondered at that the
mind ſhould be buſied in the compoſition of books

which it appears to read, than that a train of
thoughts


OF THE HUMAN MIND. 15
thoughts of any other kind ſhould paſs through it


without a conſciouſneſs of its being the author.
In fact we perpetually annex wrong and errone-
ous ideas to this phraſe, that we are the authors.
Though mind be a real and efficient cauſe, it is in
no caſe a firſt cauſe. It is the medium through
which operations are produced. Ideas ſucceed
each other in our ſenſorium according to certain
neceſſary laws. The moſt powerful impreſſion,
either from without or from within, conſtantly gets
the better of all its competitors, and forcibly
drives out the preceding thought, till it is in the
ſame irreſiſtible manner driven out by its ſuc-
ceſſor.


CHAP.


316 OF THE PRINCIPLE


n A; Pi. OE


OF TRE PRINCIPLE OF VIRTUE,


Hypethcs of benevolence and ſe ' fe 1 1
of the former. — Action is either voluntary or
muluntary.— Nature of the firſt of theſe claſ-
fes.— Argument that reſults from it.—Volun-
tary action has a real exiſtence.—Conſequence z
that exiſtence. —Fxperimental view of the fu
Jeet. —Suppoſitions ſuggeſted by the advocates of
felf love—that we calculate upon all occaſions the
advantage to accrue to us. —Palſeneſs of this
Juppo/ition —Suppoſution of a contrary ſort.—
We do not calculate what would be the uneaſi-

refs to reſult from our reframing to att—eitther
in relieving aiſtreſs—or in adding to the ſtock of
general good. — Uneafineſs an accidental member
F the proceſs. —The ſuppoſitions inconſitently
blended. —Scheme of ſelf love recommended from
the propenſity of mind to abbreviate its proceſs —
from the ſimplicity that obtains in the natures of
things. Hypotieſis of ſelf love compatible with
virtue.—Conclufion — Importance of the queſ-
tion.


"2. .m: E ſubj ect of intellectual mechaniſm ſug-
geſted itſelf as the moſt ſuitable introduction to
an


*


an enquiry into the moral principles of human
conduct. Having firſt aſcertained that thought is.
the real and efficient ſource of animal motion, it
remains to be confidered what is the nature of
thoſe particular thoughts in which the moral
conduct of man originates. 1
Upon this queſtion there are two opinions. By
ſome it is ſuppoſed that the human mind is of a
temper conſiderably ductile, ſo that, as we in
certain inſtances evidently propoſe our own ad-
vantage for the object of our purſuit, ſo we are
capable no leſs ſincerely and directly in other in-
ſtances of deſiring the benefit of our neighbour.
By others it is affirmed, that we are incapable of
acting but from the proſpect or ſtimulant of per-
ſonal advantage, and that, when our conduct ap-
pears moſt retrograde from this object, the prin-
ciple from which it flows is ſecretly the ſame.
Tt ſhall be the bufineſs of this chapter to prove
that the former hypotheſis is conformable to
truth. |

It is to be preſumed from the arguments of
the preceding chapter, that there exiſt in the
theory of the human mind two claſſes of action,
voluntary and involuntary. The laſt of theſe we
have minutely inveſtigated. It has ſufficiently
appeared that there are certain motions of the
animal ſyſtem, which have ſenſation or thought
for their medium of production, and at the fame.
time ariſe, to have recourſe to a uſual mode of
expreſſion, ſpontaneouſly, without forefight of
or a direct reflecting on the reſult which is to
follow. But, if we admit the exiſtence of this
phenomenon, there does not ſeem leſs _ to

_ wi dmit


318 OF THE PRINCIPLE We
admit the exiſtence of the other claſs of ad F


above enumerated, which is accompanied in its
operation with a foreſight of its reſult, and to
which. that foreſight ſerves as the reaſon. and
cauſe of exiſtence. 5
| Voluntary action cannot proceed from all per-
ceptions indiſcriminately, but only from percep-
tions of a peculiar claſs, viz. ſuch perceptions
as are accompanied with the idea 3

as true reſpecting them, ſomething which may
be affirmed or denied. One of the firſt in-
ferences therefore from the doctrine of vo-
luntary action, is the exiſtence of the under-
ſtanding as a faculty diſtinct from ſenſation, or,
to ſpeak more accurately, the poſſibility of em-
ploying the general capacity of perception, not
merely as the vehicle of diſtinct ideas, but as the
medium of connecting two or more ideas toge-
ther. This particular habit, when it has once
been created, gradually extends itſelf to every
province of the mind, till at length it is impoſ-
ſible for any thing to make a clear and diſtinct
impreſſion upon ak ſenſori um, without its be-
ing followed with ſome judgment of the mind
concerning it.

It is thus that man becomes a moral being.
He is no farther ſo than he is capable of con-
necting and comparing ideas, of making propo-
ſitions concerning them, and of foreſeeing cer-
tain conſequences as the reſult of certain moti-
ons of the animal ſyſtem.

But, if the foreſight of certain conſequences to
reſult may be the ſufficient reaſon of action, that
is, if there be ſuch a thing as volition, then
every foreſight of that kind has a tendency to

| | 3 1 action.


*


r u-,


action. If the perception of ſomething as true,
joined with the conſciouſneſs of my capacity to
act upon this truth, be of itſelf ſufficient to pro-


duce motion in the animal ſyſtem, then every


perception ſo accompanied has a tendency to


motion. To apply this to the ſubje& before
us. ws


I perceive a certain agreeable food, I perceive


in myſelf an appetite which this food is adapted


to gratify, and theſe perceptions are accompa-
nied with a conſciouſneſs of my power to appro-
priate this food. If no other conſideration exiſt


in my mind beyond thoſe which have juſt been


ſtated, a certain motion of the animal ſyſtem ir-


reſiſtibly follows. |
Suppoſe now that the perſon about whoſe ap-


*


petites theſe propoſitions are converſant, is not
myſelf but another. This variation cannot ma-


terially alter the caſe. Still there remain all the
circumſtances neceſſary to generate motion. I
perceive the food, I am acquainted with the
wants of the perſon in queſtion, and I am con-


ſcious of my power of adminiſtering to them.


Nothing more is neceſſary in order to produce a
certain movement of my body. Therefore, if,
as in the former caſe, no other conſideration ex-
iſt in my mind, a certain motion of the animal
ſyſtem irreſiſtibly follows. Therefore, if ten
thouſand other conſiderations exiſt, yet there
was in this, ſeparately conſidered, a tendency to
motion. That which, when alone, muſt inevi-


tably produce motion, muſt, however accompa
nied, retain its internal character.


Let


vo N
4 A #


320 OF THE PRINCIPLE


Let us however ſuppoſe, which ſeems the
only conſiſtent mode of ſupporting the doctrine
of ſelf love, that there is no ſuch thing prac-
tically conſidered as volition, that man never acts
from a foreſight of conſequences, but always
continues to act, as we have proved him to act
at firſt, from the mere impulſe of pain, and pre-
Ciſely in the manner to which that impulſe
prompts him, without the rational faculty hav-
ing any tendency to prolong, to check or to re-
gulate his actions. What an incredible picture
does this exhibit to us of the human mind? We
form to ourſelves, for this cannot be diſputed,
opinions, we meaſure the tendency of means to

the promotion of ends, we compare the value
of different objects, and we imagine our conduct
to be influenced by the judgments we are in-
duced to make. Wie perceive the preferableneſs
of one thing to another, we deſire, we chuſe;


all this cannot be denied. But all this is a vain


apparatus; and the whole ſyſtem of our conduct
proceeds, uninfluenced by our apprehenſion of
the relative value of objects, * our foreſight
of conſequences favourable or adverſe. .
There is no other alternative. Once admit
the underſtanding to an efficient ſhare in the bu-
fineſs, and there is no reaſon that can poſſibly.
be aſſigned, why every topic, which is the ob-
ject of human underſtanding, ſhould not have its
portion of efficiency. Once admit that we act
upon the apprehenſion of ſomething that may
be affirmed or denied reſpecting an idea, and we
ſhall be compelled to acknowledge that every
propoſition including in it the notion of prefer-
1 ableneſs


ON 'VAiR TUE: 321
ableneſs or the contrary, of better or went will,
ſo far as it falls within the compaſs of our power
real or ſuppoſed to effect, afford a motive in-
ducing, though with different degrees of energy,
to animal motion. But this 1s directly contrary
to the theory of ſelf love. They who maintain
that ſelf love is the only ſpring of action, fay in
effect, not only that no action is diſintereſted,
but that no diſintereſted conſideration contributes
in any degree as an inducement to action. If I
relieve the virtuous diſtreſs of the beſt of men, I
am influenced according to them by no particle
of love for the individual or compaſſion for his
diftreſs, but excluſively by the defire of e
ing gratification to myſelf.

Let us conſider this caſe a little more cles:
If I perceive either that my proſperity or exiſt-
ence mult be ſacrificed to thoſe of twenty men
as good as myſelf, or theirs to mine, ſurely this
affords ſome ſmall inducement to adopt the
former part of the alternative. It may not be
ſucceſsful, but does it excite no with however
fleeting, no regret, however ineffectual? The
deciſion of the queſtion is in reality an affair of
arithmetic ; is there no human being that was
ever competent to underſtand it? The value of
a man is his uſefulneſs ; has no man ever be-
lieved that another's capacity for uſefulneſs was
equal to his own? I am as 40, conſequently
the others are as 800; if the 40 were not
myſelf, I ſhould perceive that it was leſs than.
800 ; is it poſſible I ſhould not perceive it, wade,
the caſe 8 — ny own ? |


a I. N * But


322 OF THE PRINCIPLE


But the advocates for. the ſyſtem of ſelf love
generally admit, ( that it is poffible for a man to
facrifice his own exiſtence in order to preſerve
that of twenty others; but they affirm, < that
in ſo doing he acts from wr intereſt. He
perceives that it is better for him'to die with the
conſciouſneſs of an heroic action, than live with
the remorſe of having declined it.” That is,
here is an action attended with various recom-
mendations, the advantage to. ariſe 'to twenty
men, their tranquillity and happineſs through a
long period of remaining exiſtence, the benefits
they will not fail to confer on thouſands of their
contemporaries, and throu gh them on millions
of 1 and laſtly his own eſcape from re-
morſe and momentary exultation in the perform-
ance of an act of virtue. From all theſe motives
he ſelects the laſt, the former he wholly diſre-
gards, and adopts a conduct of the higheſt ge-
neroſity from no view but to his own advantage.
Abſtractedly and impartially conſidered, and put-
ting ſelf as ſuch out of the queſtion, this is its
leaſt recommendation, and he. is abſolutely and
unlimitedhy callous to all the reſt.

Conſidering then the ſyſtem of difnteroſted-
neſs as ſufficiently eſtabliſhed in theory, let us
compare it with the leſſons of experience. Thero

are two different hypotheſes by which this theory-
is oppoſed; the one affirming * that in every.
thing we do, we employ, previouſly to the
choice of the mind, a calculation by which W
determine how far the thing to be done will con-
duce to our own advantage ;” the other aſcribing-
our actions * to * ſame blind and unintelligent


— i


QF VIRTUE. 23


principle, by which, when a child cries, he fre-
quently utters a ſound unexpected by himſelf,
but which inevitably. reſults from a certain con-


nexion of an organized body with an irritated.
0 Sp | | ; ME


How far does experience agree with the firſt
of theſe hypotheſes? Surely nothing can be
more contrary to any thing we are able to ob-
ſerve of ourſelves, than to imagine, that in every
act, of pity ſuppoſe, we eſtimate the quantity
of benefit to ariſe to ourſelves, before we yield
to the emotion. It might be ſaid indeed, that
the mind is very ſubtle in its operations, and
that, a certain train of reaſoning having been
rendered familiar to us, we paſs it over in our
reflections with a rapidity that leaves no trace in
the memory. But this, though true, will con-
tribute little to relieve the ſyſtem we are conſider-
ing, ſince it unfortunately happens that our firſt
emotions of pity are leaſt capable of being ac-
counted for in this way. Tos Tx |
To underſtand this let us begin with the caſe
of an infant, Before he can feel ſympathy, he
muſt have been led by a ſeries of obſervations to
perceive that his nurſe for example, is a being
Wg of conſciouſneſs, and ſuſceptible like
imſelf of the impreſſions of pleaſure and pain.
Having ſupplied him with this previous know -
ledge, let us ſuppoſe his nurſe to fall from a
flight of ſtairs and break her leg. He will pro-
bably feel ſome concern for che accident; he will
underſtand the meaning of her cries, ſimilar to
thoſe he has been accuſtomed to utter in diſtreſs;
and he will diſcover ſome wiſh to relieve her.
TOES X* 2 = Pity


+ OF THE PRINCIPLE


Pity is perhaps firſt introduced by a mechanical
impreſſion upon the organs, in conſequence of
which the cries uttered by another prompts the
child without direct deſign to utter cries of his
own. Theſe are at firſt unaccompanied with com-
paſſion, but they naturally induce the mind of
the infant to yield attention to the —
which thus impreſſed him.

In the relief he wiſhes to communicate is he ö
prompted by reflecting on the pleaſures of gene-
roſity? This is by the ſuppoſition the firſt be-
nevolent emotion he has experienced, and previ-
ouſly to experience it is impoſſible he ſhould.
foreſee the pleaſures of benevolence. Shall We
ſuppoſe that he is influenced by other ſelfiſh con-
ſiderations? He conſiders, that, if his nurſe
die, he will be in danger of periſhing; and that,
if ſhe be lame, he will be deprived of his airings.
Is it poſſible that any man ſhould believe, that,
in the inſtantaneous impulſe of ſympathy, the
child is guided by theſe remote conſiderations?
Indeed it was unneceſſary to have inſtanced in an
action apparently benevolent, fince it is equally.
clear that our moſt familiar actions are inconſiſt-
ent with this explanation. We do not ſo much
as eat and drink, from the recollection that theſe
functions are neceſſary to our ſupport.

The ſecond of the two hypotheſes enumerated, N
is diametrically the reverſe of the firſt. As the
former repreſented all human actions as proceed-
ing from a very remote deduction of to intel-
lect, the latter conſiders the whole as merely


Phyſical. In its literal ſenſe, as has already been


— nothing can be more incompatible with
| experience.


_


| a GR // — 223


experience. Its advocates therefore are obliged
to modify their original aſſumption, and to ſay,
not that we act merely from ſenſation, but that
ſenſation affords the baſis for reflection; and
that, though we be capable: of conducting our-
ſelves by ſyſtem and foreſight, yet the only topic
to which we can apply that foreſight is the- re-
moval of pain. In reality all that which is regu-
larly adapted to the accompliſhment of a certain
purpoſe, muſt be admitted to flow from the dic-
tates of reflection. The tear ſtarts, the cry is
uttered at the prompting of ſenſation only, but
we cannot lift a finger to relieve except as we

are commanded by the underſtanding.

Here then we are preſented with the com-
mencement of a new ſeries. If uneaſineſs be
{till the ſource of the phenomena, at leaſt it is
now under a different form. Before, a certain
emotion was produced, reſpecting which no in-
tention was extant in the mind. Now an ac-
tion or a ſeries of actions 1s adopted with a cer-
tain view and leading to a certain end. This
end is ſaid to be the removal of uneaſineſs. Whe-
ther it be or no is a queſtion which recollection
in many caſes is competent to enable us to de-
cide. If we frequently deceive ourſelves as to
the motive by which we are prompted to act,
this is chiefly owing to vanity, a defire of imput-
ing to ourſelves, or being underſtood by the
world to a& from, a principle more elevated
than that which truly belongs to us. But this
idea is leaſt prevalent with children and ſavages,
and of conſequence they ought to be moſt com-
pletely aware that the project they have __

ceive


326 OF THE PRINCIPLE

ceived is that of removing uneaſineſs. It ſeems
to be an uncommon refinement in abſurdity to
ſay, that the end we really purſue is one to
which we are in no inſtance conſcious ; that our


action is wholly derived from an unperceived in-


| Huence, and the view extant in the underſtanding
altogether impotent and unconcerned.
In the caſe we have juſt examined uneaſineſs is
the firſt ſtep in the proceſs; in others which
might be ſtated uneaſineſs is not the firſt ſtep.
In the purſuit” ſuppoſe of a chemical pro-
peſs I accidentally difcover a circumſtance, which
may be of great benefit to mankind. I inſtantly
quit the obje& I was originally purſuing, proſe.
cute this diſcovery, and communicate it to the
world.” In the former proceeding a ſenſation
of pain was the initiative, and put my intellec-
_ tual powers into action. In the preſent caſe the
perception of truth is the original mover. What-
ever uneaſineſs may be ſuppoſed to exiſt, render-
ing me anxious for the publication of this bene-
fit, is the conſequence of the 1 6 1 The
uneaſineſs would never have exiſted if the per-
ception had not gone before it.
But it has been ſaid, that, though the per-
ception of truth in this caſe goes firſt, the pain
was not leſs indiſpenſible in the proceſs, ſince,
without that, action would never have followed.
Action is the child of defire, and a cold and un-
intereſting deciſion of the underſtanding would
for ever have laid dormant in the mind. Grant-
ing that pain in a certain modified degree is a
| conſtant ſtep in the proceſs, it may nevertheleſs
be denied that it is in the ſtricteſt ſenſe of ay
wor


OF VIRTUE. 327
word indiſpenſible. To perceive that I ought to
publiſh a certain diſcovery, is to perceive that
publiſhing is preferable to not publiſhing it. But
to perceive a preference is to prefer, and to pre-
fer is to chooſe. The proceſs is in this caſe com-
plete, and pain, in the ſenſe in which it comes
in at all, is merely an accident. Why do I feel
pain iti the negle& of an a& of benevolence, but
becauſe benevolence is judged by me to be a con-
duct which it becomes me to adopt? Does the
underſtanding wait to enquire what advantage
will reſult from the propolitions, that two and
two make four, or that ſuch and ſuch cauſes
will contributè to the happineſs of my neighbour,
before it is capable of perceiving them to be
true? | |

The ſame principle which is applied here, is
not leſs applicable to fame, wealth and power,
in a word to all thoſe purſuits Which engage the
reflecting and ſpeculative part of the civiliſed
world. None of theſe obje&s would ever have
been purſued, if the deciſions of the intelle& had
not gone firſt; and informed us that they were
Wotthy to be purſued. 8
Neither of the two hypotheſes we have been
examining would perhaps have been reckoned ſo
much as plauſible in themſelves, if they had not
been blended together by the inadvertence of
their ſupporters. The advocates of ſelf love have
been awate; that the mere ſenſitive impulſe of
pain would account for a very ſmall part of the
hiſtory of man; and they have therefore inſenſi-
bly ſlided from the conſideration of uneaſineſs to
be removed, to that of ihtereſt to be promoted.

Fa They


328 OF THE PRINCIPLE


They have confounded the two caſes of ſenſation
and reflection; and, taking it for granted in the
latter that private gratification was the object


univerſally purſued, have concluded that they


were accounting for all human actions from one
principle. In reality no two. principles can be
more diſtin, than the impulſe of uneaſineſs,
which has very improperly been denominated
the love of ourſelves, and that deliberate ſelf love,
by which of ſet deſign we purſue our own advan-
tage. One circumſtance only they have in com-
mon, that of repreſenting us as incapable of un-
derſtanding any propoſition, till we have in ſome
way or other connected it with perſonal intereſt.
This is certainly a juſt repreſentation of their
conſequences ; ſince, if I were capable of under-
ſtanding the naked ' propoſition, that my neigh-
bour ſtood in need, of a candle for inſtance to be
removed from one end of a room to the other,
this would be a reaſon of action, a motive, either
{ſtrong or weak, either predominant or the con-
trary. But, if this conſideration entered for


any thing into the ground of my proceeding,


5 whole would not be reſolvable into ſelf
ove.

An hypotheſis, which has been thought to
have ſome tendency to relieve the difficulties of
the ſyſtem of ſelf love, is that * of the mind's
reaſoning out for itſelf certain general principles,
which are a ſort of reſting-places in he proceſs,


to which it afterwards recurs, and upon which
it acts, without being at the trouble in each in-
ſtance of application, of repeating the reaſons
upon which the general principle was W

nus


„„ . . „„ e e ans „„ to fo os an e oc _


„ hed of. SS hw R_P9Þﬀ[ko£X fu. fd © gs AY A,


OF RN 329


Thus in geometry, as we proceed to the higher
branches, we perpetually refer to the earlier pro-
poſitions as eſtabliſhed and certain, without hav-
ing at the time in our minds perhaps the ſmalleſt
recollection of the way in which thoſe early pro-
poſitions were demonſtrated.” But this repre-
| ſentation, though true, has very little tendency
to decide in the ſubject before us. It is {till true,
that, if I be capable of underſtanding a propoſi-
tion as it relates to the intereſt of my neighbour,
any reaſoning about the propoſition by which it
is indirectly connected with my own intereſt, is
unneceſſary to put me into a ſtate of action. It
is ſtill true, that my action has a direct and an in-
direct tendency; and, till it can be ſhown that
there is ſomething in the nature of mind that un-
fits it for entertaining the direct purpoſe, an un-
prejudiced enquirer will be very little diſpoſed
univerſally to have recourſe to that which is in-
direct. |

The hypotheſis of ſelf love ſeems to have been
originally invented from a love of “that ſimpli-
city, which appears to be the ultimate term in
all grand diſcoveries relative to the ſyſtem of the


univerſe.” But ſimplicity, though well deſerv-


ing our approbation, can fcarcely of itſelf be a
ſafficient ſupport for any opinion. The fimpli-
city however in this caſe 1s more apparent than


real. Not to repeat what has been faid relative


to the coalition of two hypotheſes very incon-


gruous in their own nature, there is little genu-
ine ſimplicity in a ſcheme, that repreſents us as


perpetually acting from a motive which ve leaſt
ſuſpected, and ſeeks by a circuitous and intri-
cate


|
4 4.
9


o
.
— . % *
4 of 2
” * 3
— he » 2 bo * 1 y
u - >. at F , 4 A
—— I — 1 — — — — — — - __
— * SO * — 1 þ . 4 N * — N e 4 p * — — — 4 k 0 $, ry congnr f . d TE — 21
. 2 S TSE 5” - NM o ene Ja. > —— XA a ox Ih er er ER SC INT TE ISS
— —— — Ws — ETC of Tag r nz . „ na I 2 ä — > 4 hag 1 17 RN S >
3 n es Ws ; — — I and 11 8 FE 7 ot, I wad” ' 2 2 — 8 PEARS = T
2 r r : Re SG TY * 1 =O SEES Rs} - =_ wh =
o Tx pe = ARIES = AL a 4. = q — ** CS — CO Ch — 6 No - — | 2 A —
V4 4s 2 Soy — 1 4 - — — — — 2 — — — 2 — _ 2
= l : 8 70 & * u 2 * m_ Lane r 4
, l "We = b * Wat: COT * #= NG rt l
hs Po _ =. : 2 = a -
I . *
i, «< 72 I \ 8 = TI :


— — 1 — * uh
Ly 2 > *
OO OW 9 + «nt


.
2


* 4 *
rr
— — poem
# =
—


339 OF THE PRINCIPLE


cate method for a recommendation of little in-
trinſic value, rejecting in all caſes the great and
obvious reaſon Which the firſt view of the ſubject


ſuggeſted. True ſimplicity is altogether on the


ſide of the oppoſite ſyſtem, which repreſents man
as capable of being governed by the nature of
the thing, and of acting from the motive which
he ſuppoſes to influence him; which requires
nothing but perception to account for all the phe-
nomena of mind, and, when a reaſon exciting
to action is apprehended, does not ſeek for an
additional principle to open a communication be-
tween the judgment and the choice.

There 1s 'one obſervation more, which, though
it be not fo concluſive as ſome of thoſe which
have been mentioned, ought not to be omitted,
It {elf love be the only principle of action, there
can be no ſuch thing as virtue. Virtue is a prin-


ciple in the mind, by which we are enabled to


form a true eſtimate of the pretenſions of differ-
ent reaſons inviting us to preference. - He, that
makes a falſe eſtimate, and prefers a trivial and
partial good to an important and comprehenſive
one, is vicious. It is in the diſpoſition and view
of the mind, and not in the good which may ac-
cidentally and unintentionally reſult, that virtue
conſiſts. Judas's act in betraying Chriſt, ac-

cording to the Chriſtian fyſtem, may be regarded
as a real and effential cauſe conducting to the
ſalvation of mankind. Yet Judas's act was not


- virtuous, but vicious. He thought only of the
forty pieces of filver, the price of his treachery,
and neglected every conſideration of public utility
and Juſtice. Juſt fo in the caſe ſtated early 1 -

tne


a I Rwy — 2 tt» =#+ F 0


the preſent chapter, the public vagina , abſo-
lutely and ſtrictly ſpeaking, prefers forty to eight
hundred or eight hundred millions. So far as re-
lates to the real merits of the caſe, his own ad-
vantage or pleaſure is a 5 conſide-
ration, and the benefit to be produced, ſuppoſe
to a world, is ineſtimable. Vet he falſely and
unjuſtly prefers the firſt, and regards the latter,
abſtractedly conſidered, as nothing. If there be
ſuch a thing as juſtice, if J have a real and abſolute
value, upon which truth can decide, and which
can be compared with what is greater or leſs,
then, according to this ſyſtem, the beſt action
that ever was performed, may, for any thing we
know, have been the action in the whats world
of the moſt exquiſite and deliberate myuſtice.
Nay, it could not have been otherwiſe, ſince it
produced the greateſt good, and therefore was
the individual inſtance in which the greateſt good
Was moſt Aectly poſtponed to perſonal gratifi-
cation.
" Norwill chi objection be much relieved by
the ſyſtem already alluded to of reſting- -placks,
enabling a man in a certain degree to forget the
narrow and ſelfiſn principles in which his conduct
originated. It can ſcarcely be queſtioned, that
the motives which über a man to adopt his
ſyſtem of conduct, and without which he never
would have adopted it, are of more importance,
than the thoughtleſſneſs and inattention by which
they are forgotten, in deciding upon the mora-
lity of his Araber
From this train of reaſoning the reſult is, that
men are capable of underſtanding the beauty of


virtue,


332 OF THE PRINCIPLE


virtue, * the claims of other men upon their


benevolence; and, underſtanding them, that theſe


views, as well as every other perception of the
intellect, are of the nature of motives, ſometimes
overpowered by other conſiderations, and ſome-
times overpowering them, but always in their
own nature capable of exciting to action, when
not counteracted by pleas of a different ſort.
Men are capable no doubt of preferring an inferi-
or intereſt of their own to a ſuperior intereſt of
other people; but to this preference it is per-
haps neceſſary, that they ſhould imagine the be-
nefit to themſelves to be great and the injury. to
others comparatively ſmall, or elſe that they
ſhould have embraced the pernicious opinion that
the general good is beſt ſerved by each man's ap-
plying himſelf excluſively to his . ad-


Vantage.


There is no doctrine in which the generous


and elevated mind reſts with more ſatisfaction,


than in that of which we are treating. If it be


falſe, it is no doubt incumbent” pon us to make
the beſt of the ſmall remnant of good that re-


mains. But it is a heartleſs proſpect for the mo-


raliſt, who; when he has done all, has no hope


to perſuade mankind to one atom of real affection
towards any one individual of their ſpecies. We
may be made indeed the inſtruments of good,
but in a way leſs honourable, than that in which.


a frame of wood or a ſheet of paper may be made


the inſtrument of good. The wood or the paper
are at leaſt neutral. But we are drawn into the


ſervice with affections of a diametrically oppo-
| fite direction. When we do the moſt benevolent


action,


OD ORE: 333
action, it is with a view only to our own advan-
tage, and with the molt ſovereign and unreſerved
neglect of that of others. - We are inſtruments of.
good, juſt in the fame manner as bad men are faid
to be the inſtruments of providence, even when
their inclinations are moſt refractory to its decrees.
In this ſenſe we may admire the ſyſtem of the
univerſe, where public utility reſults from each
man's contempt of that utility, and where the
moſt beneficial actions of thoſe, whom we have
been accuſtomed to term the beſt men, are only
inſtances in which juſtice and the real merits of
the caſe are moſt flagrantly violated. But we
can think with little complacence of the indivi-
duals of whom this univerſe is compoſed. It is
no wonder that philoſophers, whoſe ſyſtem has
taught them to look upon their fellow men as
thus perverſe and unjuſt, have been frequently
cold, phlegmatic and unanimated. It is no won-
der that Rouſſeau, the moſt benevolent of all
theſe philoſophers, and who moſt eſcaped the
general contagion, has been driven to place the
perfection of all virtue in doing no injury“. Nei-
ther philoſophy nor morality nor politics will ever
ſhow like themſelves, till man ſhall be acknow-
ledged for what he really is, a being capable of
juſtice, virtue and benevolence, and who needs
not always to be led to a philanthropical conduct
by foreign and frivolous conſiderations.

The ſyſtem of diſintereſted benevolence proves,
to us, that it is poſſible to be virtuous, and not
merely to talk of virtue; that all which has been
ſaid ” „ and moraliſts reſpecting 1 im

partial


by EL, * ſublime vertu ft nigative; elle nous inſtruit .
ne jamais faire du mal d perſonne.” E MILE, Liv. II.


* | OF THE PRINCIPLE


- juſtice is not an unmeaning rant; and
ow when we call upon mankind to diveſt them.
ſelves of -felfiſh and perſonal conſiderations, we
call upon them for ſomething which they are able


to practiſe. An idea like this reconciles us to our


ſpecies ; teaches us to regard with enlightened
admiration the men who have appeared to loſe
the feeling of their perſonal exiſtence in the pur-
ſuit of general advantage ; and gives us reaſon to
expect, that, as men collectively advance in
Fe and uſeful inflitution, they will proceed
more and more to conſolidate — private judg-

ment and their individual will with abſtract juſ-
tice and the unmixed approbation of genoral hap-

ſs.

Pha are the mai that qught: to be made
from this doctrine with reſpect to political inſtitu-
tion? Certainly not that the intereſt of the indi-
vidual ought to be made incompatible with the
part he is expected to take in the intereſt of the
whole. This is neither defirable, nor even poſ-
ſible. But that ſocial inſtitution needs not de-
ſpair of feeing men influenced by other and bet-
ter motives. The legiſlator is — to recollect
that the true benen of mind conſiſts in diſinte -
reſtednefs. He ſhould regard it as the ultimate
object of his exertions, to induce men to eſtimate


themſelves at their true value, and neither ta
grant to themſelves nor claim from others a high-


er confideration than they juſtly deſerve. Above


all he ſhould be a cl not to add to the vigour
of the ſelfiſh paſſions. He ſhould gradually wean


men from contemplating their own benefit in all
that they do, and induce them to view with


complacency


FFT G 1 was @% F IJY wands © ani


or VIRTUE. ::> -


complacency the advantage that is to reſult to
others.

The laſt perfection of this feeling .
that ſtate of mind which bids us rejoice as fully
in the good that is done by others, as if it were
done by ourſelves. The truly wiſe man will be
actuated neither by intereſt nor ambition, the
love of honour nor the love of fame. He has

no emulation. He is not made uneaſy by a com-
pariſon of his own attainments with thoſe of others,
but by a compariſon with the ſtandard of right.
He — a duty indeed obliging him to ſeek the
good of the — but that good is his only ob-
ject. If that good be effected by another hand,
he feels no —— All men are his fel-
low labourers, but he is the rival of no man.
Like Pedaretus in ancient ſtory, he exclaims:
J alfo have endeavoured to e but there
are three hundred citizens in Sparta better than 1
myſelf, and I rejoice.” |


3
.
' k

}

l
Inv
174
i gg 54

F
r
: *
| *
REM
1.
| ,
SLEW
dd
35
| *
*

N '
=
: :
| q
|
'
,
. q h


CHAP.


335 OF THE TENDENCY


OO:


OF THE TENDENCY OF VIRTUE.
IE is the road to happineſs—To the efteem and affec-
tion of others. —Objettion from miſconſtruction
and calumny.— Anfwer.—Virtue compared with
other modes of procuring efteem.—Vice and not


virtue is the ſubject of obloguy — Inſtanced in the


_ baſe alloy with which our virtues are mixed—In
arrogance and oſtentation— In the vices in which
perſons f moral excellence allow themſeFves.—
The virtuous man only has friends. —Virtue the
road to proſperity and ſucceſs in the world— Ap-
plied to commercial trunſactions— Jo caſes that de-


pend upon patronage. — Apparent exception where |


the dependent is employed as the inſirument of
wice.—Virtue compared with other modes of be-
coming proſperous. —Source of the diſrepute of
virtue in this reſpec}. —Conceſſion.—Caſe where
convenient vice bids fair for concealment.—Chance
of deteftion.—Indolence— Apprehenſrveneſs
And depravity the offspring of vice.


Havme endeavoured to eſtabliſh the theory
of virtue upon its true principle, and to ſhew that
ſelf-intereſt is neither its baſis in juſtice and truth,
nor by any means neceſſary to incite us to the
practice, it may not be improper to conſider in
what degree public intereſt is coincident with
private,


y =” oe ” RY RY WS


* F


private, and by that means at once to remove one
of the enticements and apologies of yice, and af-
ford an additional encouragement and direction to
the true politician. . .
In the firſt place then, there appears to be ſuf
ficient reaſon to believe, that the practice of vir-
tue is the true road to individual happineſs. Many
of the reaſons which might be adduced in this
place have been anticipated in the chapter of the
Cultivation of Truth. Virtue is a ſource of hap-
pineſs that does not pall in the enjoyment, and of
which no man can deprive us k. The eſſence of
virtue conſiſts in the ſeeing every thing in its true
light, and eſtimating every thing at its intrinſic
value. No man therefore, ſo far as he is virtu-
ous, can be in danger to become a prey to ſorrow
and diſcontent. He will habituate himſelf, reſ-
pecting every ſpecies of conduct and temper, to
look at its abſolute utility, and to tolerate none
from which benefit cannot ariſe either to himſelf
or others. Nor will this be ſo difficult a taſk as
it 1s commonly imagined. The man, who is ac-
cuſtomed upon every occaſion to conſult his rea-
ſon, will ſpeedily find a habit of this nature grow-
ing upon him, till the juſt and diſpaſſionate value


of every incident that befals him will come at
length ſpontaneouſly to ſuggeſt itſelf. Thoſe
evils which prejudice bas taught ſo great a part of
mankind toregard with horror, will appear to his
underftanding diſarmed of their terrors. Poverty,


obloquy and diſgrace will he judged by him to
be very trivial misfortunes. Few conditions can
eie. „ i t e Hanna


* Ch. IV. p. 214.


333 © OF. THE TENDENCY.


be ſo deſtitute as to deprive us of the means of
obtaining for ourſelves a ſubſiſtence. The rea-
ſonable mind perceives at once the poſſibility of
this and the beſt method of executing it; and it
needs no great ſtretch of underſtanding to decide,
that real happineſs does not conſiſt in luxurious
accommodations. With reſpect to obloquy and
diſgrace, the wiſe man may lament the tendency
they poſſeſs to narrow the ſphere of his uſeful-
neſs; but he will readily perceive, that, ſepa-
rately from this conſideration, they are no evils.


My real value depends upon the qualities that are


properly my own, and cannot be diminiſhed by
the ſlander and contempt of the whole world.


Even bodily pain loſes much of its ſting, when it
js encountered by a chearful, a compoſed, and a


determined ſpirit. To all theſe negative advan-
tages of virtue, we may add the poſitive ſatisfac-
tion of a mind conſcious of rectitude, rejoicing in
the good of the whole, and perpetually exerted
for the promotion of that good. |


There are indeed ſome extreme caſes of the


election of virtuous conduct, reſpecting which it
is difficult to pronounce. Was it Regulus's inte-
Teſt to return to Carthage to a tormenting death,
rather than fave his life by perſuading the Roman
_ ſenate to an exchange of priſoners? Probably it
was. Probably, with the exquiſite feeling of duty
with which Regulus was animated, a life that
was to be perpetually haunted with the recollec-
tion of his having omitted the nobleſt opportunity
of public ſervice, was not worth his purchaſe.
His reaſoning, ſo far as related to perſonal inte-
reft, might be like that of Cato in the play :


= A day


OF VIRTUE. 339


* A day, an hour, of virtuous liberty


Is worth a whole eternity in bondage 51 |

| Secondly, virtue not only leads t6 the happi-
neſs of him who practiſes it, but to the eſteem
and affection of others. Nothing can be more
indiſputable, than that the direct road to the
eſteem of mankind, is by doing things worthy
of their eſteem. The moſt artful ſcheme for
paſſing things upon others for ſomewhat differ-
ent from what they really are, is in momen
danger of detection; and it would be an egregi-<
ous miſtake to ſuppoſe, that men eſteem any
thing but what comes to them under the a

nce of virtue. No man ever exiſted of a
taſte ſo depraved as to feel real approbation of
another, for the artfulneſs of his flattery, or the
_— with which he over-reached his neigh-

urs.

There is indeed one diſadvantage that occurs
under this head, conſiſting in this circumſtance,
e that no man truly admires what he does not
underſtand. Now, in order thoroughly to com-
prehend the value of = mental effort, —_—

8 A | IO


*The firſt of the three heads diſcuſſed in this chapter is in-
ſerted chiefly for the ſake of method, few perſons having really
doubted that virtue is the moſt genuine fource of individual tran-
quillity and happineſs. It is therefore diſmiſſed with all practica-
ble brevity. The two remaining heads had a ſtronger claim to
_ diſcuſſion. It unfortunately happens to be the generally received

opinion, that rigid virtue is neither the ſureſt road to other men's

approbation and eſteem, nor the moſt probable means of — |
our external proſperity. If the author had known of any wor
at preſent exiſting, that had appeared to him to place this ſubject
in any degree in its true light, he would have omitted the reaſfon-
ings of this chapter.


. * , "> 8 8 1th. abt;
* 0 WS *
; * oh,
/ "IM
* 2


240 OF THE TENDENCY


of a purely intellectual or moral nature, jt is per-
haps neceſigry that the genius or virtue of the
ſpectator ſhpuld be equal to that of him by whom
it is made. It is an inevitable law of our nature,
that we ſhould in a great meaſure judge of others
by ourſelves, and form our ſtandard of human
nature by an inveſtigation of our own minds.
That, reſpecting which we feel a clear and dif-
tint conviction that we are ourſelves inca
ble, we are prone to ſuſpect to be mere ſhow and
deception in others. We are the more inclined
to this, becauſe we feel their virtues to be a re-
proach to our indolence, and therefore are lit-
tle diſpoſed to make a liberal eſtimate of
But, though there be ſome truth in theſe ob-
ſervations, they have frequently been made much
too indiſcriminate, by the miſanthropy and im-
patience of thoſe, who have conceived their eſti-
mation with their neighbours or the world to fall
greatly ſhort of their merit. It muſt be admit-
ted that mankind are reluctant to acknowledge a
wiſdom 'or a virtue ſuperior to their own ; but
this reluctance is by no means invincible. It is
abſurd to ſuppoſe that no man believes himſelf
the inferior of his neighbour, or that, when he
reads the plays of Shakeſpeare, the philoſophy. of
Rouſſeau, or the actions of Cato, * ſays, 1
am as ſkilful, as wiſe, or as virtuous as this
man. It would be ſtill more abſurd to ſuppoſe
that men may not in a conſiderable degree per-
ceive the beauty of paſſages they could never


have written, and actions they would never have
performed, | 1 A


It


OF- VIRTUE.” ip


It is true that men of high moral excellence
are ſeldom eſtimated at their true value, eſpeci-
ally by their contemporaries. But the queſtion
does not relate to this point, but to that other,
whether they be not eſteemed more than perſons
of an other deſcription, and of confequence”
whether virtue be not the beſt road to eſteem?
Now, let a ſpeeious nce be maintained
with ever fo much uniformity of ſucceſs, it is
perpetually in danger of detection. It will ak

ways want ſomething of animation, of conſiſt-
ency and fitmneſs that true virtue would produce.
The imitation will never come up to the life.
That temporiſing and compliance, which are
careful not to eoritradict too much the prejudices
of mankind, and in which the principal advan-
tage of a merely exterior virtue conſiſts, will al-
ways bear ſomething fufpicious about them.
Men do not love him who is ally court-
ing their applauſe. They do not
beral ſpirit what is ſought with too unwearied an
aſſiduity. But their praiſe is ifwoluntarihy ex-
torted, by him who is not ſo anxious to obtain
ſucceſs, as to deſerve it.

H men of virtue be frequently miſinterpreted
or miſunderſtood, this is in a great degree to be


aſcribed to the imperfection of their virtue and


the ertors of their conduct. True virtue ſhould
hold no commerce with art. We ought not to
be ſo defirous to exhibit our virtue to advantage,
as to give it free ſcope and fuffer it to — it-
ſelf, Art is nearly allied to ſelfiſfmeſs;

virtue has — been ſhown to 5
diſintereſted. The mind ſhould be fix only 0 on


give with a li-


ol
| ———— + EESS.= — = ä
— — 8 * ** 1 N k k . - my 3
WEIR >; r — rn — —
Ts db; INST p, - — — — — — F —
- _ — = i - — 7 m—_— TY .
%%% ͤ LE SEIKO ©
. 5 — e


RET. Fans -
_ = "= 1
= =


3% OF THE TENDENCY


the object purſued, and not upon the graceful-
neſs or gallantry of the purſuit. We ſhould be
upon all occaſions perfectly ingenuous, expreſ--
ſing with ſimplicity the ſentiments of our heart,
and ſpeaking of ourſelves, when that may be ne-
ceflary, neither with oſtentation and arrogance
on the one hand, nor with the frequently ap-
plauded lies of a cowardlike humility on- the
other. There is a charm in fincerity that no-
thing can reſiſt. If once a man could be per-
fectly frank, open and firm in all his words and
actions, it would be impoſſible for that man to
be miſinterpreted. . 271 i
Another fruitful ſource of miſrepreſentation
has appeared to be envy. But, if we be regarded
with envy, it may be ſuſpected to be in a great
meaſure our own fault. He will always be en-
vied moſt, who is moſt arrogant, and whoſe
mind moſt frequently recurs to his on attain-
ments and the inferiority of others. Our virtues
would ſeldom be contemplated with an uneaſy
ſenſe of reproach, if they were perfectly unaſ-
ſuming. Any degree of oftentation in their leſs
corrupted neighbour, as it humbles the vanity of

' mankind,” muſt be expected to excite in them a
defire of retaliation. But he whoſe virtues flow
from philanthropy alone, whoſe heart expands
with benevolence and good will, and who has no
deſire to make his ſuperiority felt, will at all
times have many friends and few enemies.

_ * Virtue has alſo frequently been ſubje& to miſ-
repreſentation from a farther circumſtance which
is moſt properly chargeable upon the ſufferers,
and that is, the inequality of their actions. It is

no


DP VYLEME: 343
no wonder, if we firſt rouſe the angry paſſions of
mankind by our arrogance, and then render our
motives ſuſpected by a certain mixture of art in
the exhibition of our characters, - that the follies
and vices we commit, if they be of a glaring
kind, ſhould too often furnith a triumphant ar-
gument to ſupport againſt us the accuſation of
hypocriſy and deceit. It unfortunately happens,
that, when men of an ardent ſpirit fall into error,
their errors are inevitably conſpicuous. It — |
pens, that men, who have dedicated the flowe
af their ſtrength to laudable rpoſes, too =

think they _ a right to dul ulge in relaxations
unworthy of the energy of their characters. They
would Kendy avoid this fatal miſtake, if wy
duly reflected, that it is not their individual
character only that is at ſtake, but that they are
injuring the cauſe of juſtice and general good.
Prudential and timid virtues, unalloyed with im-
prudent and thoughtleſs vices, are beſt under-
ſtood by the vulgar. Their reign indeed is
ſhort ; they triumph only for a day: but that
they are tranſitory is of little avail, while thoſe
who are moſt worthy of laſting eſteem, wan-

tonly barter it for gratifications, contemptible
2 emſelves, and fatally important in their ef-
ects.

But to return to the compariſon between che
eſteem and affection that acerue from virtue, and
from any other plan of conduct. The produce
in the latter caſe muſt always be in a —
degree barren, and of very ſhort duration. Whe-
ther the good name acquired by virtue be more or
leſs, virtue will appear in the end to be the only


mode


—


244 OF THE TENDENCY


mode for its acquiſition. He who merits the
eſteem of his neighbours and fellow citizens, will


at leaſt be underſtood by a few. Inſtances might


be adduced in which perſons inſtigated by the

pureſt motives have been eminently' unpopular.
But there is perhaps no inſtance in which ſuch
men have not had a few friends of tried and
zealous attachment. There is no friendſhip but


this. No man was ever attached to an indivi-


dual but for the good qualities he aſcribed to
him ; and the degree of attachment will always
bear ſome proportion to the eminence. of th
qualities. Who would ever have redeemed the
life of a knave at the expence of his own? And
how many inſtances do there occur of ſuch he-
role friendſhip where the character was truly il-


luſtrious:


In the third place, virtue will probably be
found the ſecureſt road to out ward proſperity and
ſuceeſs in the world, according to the old max-
im, that honeſty is the beſt policy. It is in-
deed natural to ſuppoſe that a good name ſhould |


eminently contribute to our ſucceſs. This is


evident even in the humbleſt walks of life. That


tradeſman, other things equal, will always be
moſt proſperous; who is molt fair and equitable


in his dealings. Which is moſt likely to ſucceed,
he who never gives expectations that he cannot
fulfil, or who is perpetually a lis
cuſtomers? he who is conterited with a reaſona-


ble profit, or who is ever upon the watch to outs
wit thoſe with whom he deals? he who puts
one conſtant price upon his commodities, or whe
takes whatever he can get, favouritig a ſuſpici>
1 8 | e


—


"OF VIRTUE | as


ous * unreaſonably, and extofting with
mercileſs avarice from an eaſy one? in # word,
he who withes to keep the perſons with whorn
he is concerned in ptefent good Bumour, or
who would give them permanent fatisfac-
tion? |

There is no doubt, that, though the former
may obtain by his artifices a momentary ſuceets,
the latter will in the fequel be genetally prefer-
red. Men are not ſo blind to thei own intereſt
as they have ſometimes been reprefented; and
they well ſoon feel the advantage of dealing with
the perſon upon wliom they can depend. We
do not love to be perpetually pak. our guard
againſt an enemy, and for ever prying into
the tricks and ſubterfu ges of a depraved
heart. ::..-;.

But what ſhall we. fay to thoſe caſes in which
advancement depends upon patronage ? There
are two circumſtarices under this head which
ſeem to form an exceptiori to the rule above de-
hvered. The firſt is that of a. pattohy Wlidſe
vicious and imperfect character renders the Co-
operation of vicious men neceſſary to his purſuits,
whom therefore he will be contented to reward;
even while he deſpifes. The ſecond is that of
an office, and it is to be feared ſuch offices
exiſt, which may require a compliant and cor-
_ rupt character in the perſon who is to fill it; and
for the obtaining of which vice of a certain ſort
is a neceſſary recommendation.

It muſt no doubt be admitted as to this ſub-
ect i in general, that, ſo far as relates to ſucceſs
in le 2 vicious men will often prove for-

tunate.


0 F
9
0 1 22 8
— — — — #


”
. m
=
. 4 8 2 N
— —̃ cont
2 — — —
—_— PTY — ä — —— R — — .
. 4 +> . ＋
——— TEN — — * a F * ＋ U
— — — — — — —
EE x 8 LAT ro | 1 _ . \ af — $ =
_ * bt _ & — =
I cab _ on RT
= _


—— —
— .


——
—


346 or THE TENDENCY

tunate. But it may. reaſonably be e
whether vice be in the firſt inſtance the moſt
likely road to fortune. The candidates for this
equivocal ſpecies of preferment may be nume-
rous. An individual cannot diſtinguiſh himſelf
in the crowd but by a portion of ability, which
it may well be ſuppoſed would not have been un-
ſucceſsful in the career of virtue. After all, not
every candidate, not even every ſkilful candidate,
will be victorious. There is always a ſtruggle
in the breaſt of the patron between contempt and
a corrupt motive; and, where there is ſtruggle,


the deciſion will Ometines be on the fide which


the client leaſt defires. Even when fortune
ſeems to have overtaken him, his ſituation is {till
precarious. His ſucceſs is dunded upon a local
and mutable baſis; his patron may deſert him,
may be deprived of his power or his life; and
the client, who, after | g ſacrificed every
Principle to his hopes of advantage, miſſes his
aim, or is cut ſhort in his career, is in all caſes a
ſubject of deriſion. A bad eminence is always
unſtable ; and, if we could ſum up the numbers
of thoſe who have facrificed their virtue to their
ambition, we ſhould probably find that a great
majority of them — egregiouſly miſcarried in
their calculation.

In the mean time, if we turn to the iber fide
of the eſtimate, we ſhall in the firſt place inevi-
tably ſuſpe& that eſteem muſt lead to ſome of
the fruits of eſteem. But, excluſively of this
conſideration, if there be offices for which vice of
a certain ſort is a neceſſary qualification, there
are Ub ea, 2 multitude of offices which

cannot


OF VIX 347
cannot be well diſcharged but by a man of inte-
grity. The patron, though he would perhaps
' willingly provide for his pander or his paraſite at
the expence of his country, will not be inclined
to truſt a man of accommodating principles with
the ſuperintendence of his fortune or the educa-

tion of his child. SSR
With the exception of the two caſes that have
been ſtated, integrity, as it is the firſt qualifica-
tion for diſcharging a function with propriety,
will always occupy a foremoſt place in the re-
commendation of the client. 'The employer,
whoſe object is the real intereſt of himſelf, his
friends or his country, will have a powerful mo-
tive inducing him to prefer the honeſt candidate.
Ability may be almoſt equally requiſite ; hut abi-
lity and virtue, if we ſhould chooſe to ſuppoſe
that there is no neceſſary alliance between them,
will at leaſt by no perſon be thought exclufive of
each other. If a knave may in ſome caſes ob-
tain an employment of truſt and real importance,
it is vehemently to be ſuſpected that this would
not have happened, if an honeit man of equal
ability had been at hand. Add to this that vir-
tue is perpetually gaining ground upon us. The
more it 1s tried, and the more it 1s known, the
more will it be refpe&ted. It is to the man of
real virtue, whoſe character is not brought into
ſuſpicion by the equivocal nature of tome of his
eee ch whoſe virtue conſiſts in benevo-
nce, equanimity and juſtice, that all will
have recourſe, when they have the ſucceſs of
the affair in which they are concerned deeply at
heart, N
= Nothing


— r n 3 TE au
oY * 4 * f 1 - - - — . - ——— * —— :
0 - * K — dag. — TIL * 4 Son "= * 3 6 3 * 2
A 2 g WF 4 8" . — . $ n — * a * —
4 Io 0 2 = rs N —


348 OF THE TENDENCY

4 Nothing has tended more to bring honeſty as
an inſtrument of ſucceſs into general diſrepute,
than the ſort of complaint that is frequently heard


from ſuch as are unſucceſsful. Theſe men will


naturally have recourſe to the moſt ſpecious to-
pic of ſelfeonſolation, and there is none that more
obviouſly ſuggeſts itſelf than the ſuppoſition that


they failed through their too much virtue. Thus
the man of rugged temper who is per tually in-
ſulting the foibles of others, the timid man who
is incapable of embracing at once a perilous alter-


native, the ſcrupulous man who knows not what
to admit or reject and is always undetermined upon


his courſe of action, and a thouſand others, are
forward to impute their miſcarriage to their inte-
grity, though ſtrictly ſpeaking it was in every one


of theſe caſes to be aſcribed to their vices. _


There is another conſideration which deſerves


to be taken into account in this eſtimate. There
is a degree of virtue which would probably render
me diſinclined to fill many eminent ſtations, to be
a great lawyer, a great ſenator, or a great miniſ-
ter. The functions of theſe ſituations in the pre-
ſent ſtate of mankind are of ſo equivocal a nature,
that a man, whoſe moral views are in the higheſt


degree ſublime, will perhaps find in himſelf little


forwardneſs to exerciſe them. He will perhaps
conceive that in a private ſtation, unincumbered
with engagements, unwarped by the ſiniſter mo-


tives that high office will not fail to preſent, he


may render more laſting ſervices to mankind:


But ſurely it is no very formidable objection to


fay, that honeſty will prevent a man from acquir-
ing what he has no wiſh to acquire. Phe.
"2 A caſe


QT” VIRTUE 349
A caſe of ſomewhat a different nature has
* ſuggeſted, and it has been afked, «< Whe⸗
ther honeſty be the beſt road to ſucceſs, where
the violation of it bids fair for perpetual conceal-
ment ? Fortune has led me to the military pro-
feſſion, I lack advancement, but promotions in
the army are cuſtomarily made by purchaſe.
Thus circumſtanced, I find by accident a ſum of
money, in ſecreting which I am in little danger
of detection, and I apply this ſum to purchaſe me
a commiſſion. Should I have more effectually
promoted my worldly ſucceſs by a more ſerupu-
lous conduct?“


The anſwer to this queſtion ought probably to
be affirmati ve. In the firſt place we are to con-


ſider the chance of detection. The direct ten-
dency of the laws of the material univerſe is ſuch,
as to force the more conſiderable and intereſting
actions of human beings into publicity. No man
can render himſelf inviſible. The moſt artful
conſpirator cannot ſufficiently provide againſt a
thouſand petty circumſtances, that will lead, if
not to conviction, at leaſt to preſumption againſt
him. Who is there that would wiſh to have faſ-
tened upon him the ſuſpicion of a baſe and difin-
genuous procedure? This feature in human af-
fairs is ſo remarkable, as to have furniſhed topics
to the literary induſtry of former centuries, and to
have been interpreted God's revenge againft the
unjuſt. Suppoſe that in this caſe I found the
money dropped in a field. Will the owner have
no ſuſpicion where he loſt it? Will no human
being have obſerved that I was near the ſpot at the
queſtionable period? The chances are certainly


againſt


30 OF. THE TENDENCY


againſt me, and a mere balance of chance would
probably have been ſufficient to prove that honeſ-
ty 1s the beſt policy. The bare circumſtance of
my ſuddenly poſſeſſing a ſum of money without
vitible means of acquiring it, a circumſtance to
which the attention of my neighbours is always
ſufficiently alive, would caſt an unpleaſant ſtain
upon my character. How often has the well con-
trived train of the politician, triumphing in the
inſcrutability of his wiſdom, been baffled by the
moſt trivial accidents? Since therefore, the
race is not to the ſwift, nor the battle to the
ſtrong, the trueſt wiſdom is to act ſo as to fear
no detection. |

There are other circumſtances which tend to
eſtabliſh the ſame propoſition. The man, who
depends upon his courage, his ability, or his ami-
able character for recommendation, will perpetu-
ally cultivate theſe. His conſtancy will be un-

wearied ; and, conſcious of the integrity of his
means, his ſpirit will be intrepid and erect. The
progreſs of this man, if his ardour be ſufficiently
great to inſpire him with ability, and to render
him quick ſighted to the detection of his miſtakes,
will be inceffant. But the man who has employ-
ed foul means, will depend partly upon them,
and cannot be ſo fervent in the cultivation of the
true. If he always eſcape detection, he will al-
ways fear it, and this will ſully the clearneſs of
his ſpirit. Vice cannot compare with virtue in


its tendency to individual happineſs. This is not


the ſubjeck we are conſidering in this place; but
this will apply to our ſubject. Remorſe, uneaſi-
neſs and confuſion of mind are calculated to pre-

| | vent


|


OF WIR TU 351
vent me from perceiving the true point of projec-
tion in my affairs, and detract much from the
probability of my riſing to eminence in any pro-
feſſion. | Fd

Laſtly, the man who. has once yielded to a
_ diſhoneſt temptation, will yield to it again. He
has loſt the conſiſtency of character and diſdain of
vice, which were his firmeſt ſecurities. He that
ſays, © I will be diſhoneſt now, and diſhoneſt no
more, forgets ſome of the moſt obvious and cha-
racteriſtic features of the human mind. If he eſ-
cape ſuſpicion in the firſt inſtance, he will only
diſgrace himſelf more foully in the ſecond: if the
remorſe and degradation of ſpirit ariſing from one
baſe action could periſn, they would be fixed and
— bai all GENE
ie firſt, | 1


\
4


-


BOOK


#
*


352 OF LEGISLATIVE AND


0
or LEGISLATIVE AND EXEQUTIFE POIWER.


ON


99 - 907 Ol
INTRODUCTION.


Retroſpelt of principles already eſtabliſhed. —Diſ-
tribution of the remaining ſubjects.— Subject of
the preſent book.—Forms of government.—Me- -
thad of exammation to be adopted.


| IN the preceding diviſions of this work the
ground has been ſufficiently cleared to enable us
to proceed with conſiderable explicitneſs and ſa-
tisfaction to the practical detail of political inſti-
tution. It has appeared that an enquiry concern-
ing the principles and conduct of ſocial inter-
courſe is the moſt important topic upon which
the mind of man can be exerciſed * ; that upon
thoſe principles well or ill conceived, and the
manner in which they are executed, the vices
and virtues of individuals depend* ; that political
inſtitution to be good muſt have its ſole foundati-
"9818 the rules of immutable juſtice + ; and that
thoſe
* Book I, + Book IT, Chap. II.


EXECUTIVE POWER. 353


thoſe rules, uniform in their nature, are equally
applicable to the whole human race T. |
The different topics of political inſtitution can-
not perhaps be more perſpicuouſly diſtributed
than under the four following heads: proviſions
for general adminiſtration; proviſions for the in-
tellectual and moral improvement of indrviduals ;
proviſions for the adminiſtration of criminal juſ-
tice; and proviſions for the regulation of pro-
perty. Under each of theſe heads it will be our
buſineſs, in proportion as we adhere to the great
and comprehenſive principles already eſtabliſhed,
rather to clear away abuſes than to recommend
farther and more preciſe regulations, rather to
ſimplify than to complicate. Above all we
ſhould not forget, that government is an evil, an
uſurpation upon the private judgment and indi-
vidual conſcience of mankind; and that, however
we may be obliged to admit it as a neceſſary evil
for the preſent, it behoves us, as the friends of
reaſon and the human ſpecies, to admit as little
of it as poſſible, and carefully to obſerve whe-
ther, in conſequence of the gradual illumination
of the human mind, that little may not hereafter
be diminiſhed. |
And firſt we are to conſider the different pro-
viſions that may be made for general adminiſtra-
tion ; including under the phraſe general admi-
niſtration all that ſhall be found neceſſary of what
has uſually been denominated legiſlative and ex-
ecutive power. Legiſlation has already appeared
to be a term not applicable to human ſociety *.
Vor. I. AR 1 Men


+ Book I, Chap. VII. VIII. Boo III. Chap. VII.
* Book III. Chap. V. |


354 OF LEGISLATIVE AND


Men cannot do more than declare and interpret
law; nor can there be an authority ſo para-


mount, as to have the prerogative of making


that to be law, which abſtract and immutable.


juſtice had not made to be law previouſly to that
interpoſition. But it might notwithſtanding this


be found neceſſary, that there ſhould be an au-


thority empowered to declare thoſe general prin-
ciples, by which the equity of the community
will be regulated, in particular caſes upon which
it may be compelled to decide. The queſtion
concerning the reality and extent of this neceſ-
ſity it 1s proper to reſerve for after conſideration.


Executive power conſiſts of two very diſtinct.


parts : general deliberations relative to particular
emergencies, which, ſo far as practicability is
concerned, may be exerciſed either by one indi-
vidual or a body of individuals, ſuch as peace
and war, taxation 4, and the ſelection of proper
periods for convoking deliberative aſſemblies:
and particular functions, ſuch as thoſe of financial
detail, or minute ſuperintendence, which cannot
be exerciſed unleſs by one or at moſt by a ſmall

number of perſons. |
In reviewing theſe ſeveral branches of autho-
rity, and confidering the perſons to whom they
may be moſt properly confided, we cannot do
better than adopt the ordinary diſtribution of
forms of government into monarchy, ariſtocracy
and democracy. Under each of theſe heads we
may


+ I ſlate the article of taxation as a branch of executive
government, fince it is not, like law or the declaration of
law, a promulgating of ſome general principle, but is a tem-
porary regulation for ſome particular emergence, |


EXECUTIVE POWER. 355


may enquire into the merits of their reſpective
principles, firſt abſolutely, and upon the hypo-
theſis of their ſtanding fingly for the whole ad-
miniſtration ; and ſecondly, in a limited view,
upon the ſuppoſition of their conſtituting one
branch only of the ſyſtem of government. It is
uſually alike incident to them all to confide the
minuter branches of executive detail to inferior
agents.

One thing more it is neceſſary to premiſe.
The merits of each of the three heads I have
enumerated are to be conſidered negatively. The
corporate duties of mankind are the reſult of
their irregularities and follies in their individual
capacity. If they had no imperfection, or if
men were ſo conſtituted as to be ſufficiently and
ſufficiently early corrected by perſuaſion alone,
ſociety would ceaſe from its functions. Of con-
ſequence, of the three forms of government and
their compoſitions that is the beſt, which ſhall
leaſt impede the activity and application of our
intellectual powers. It was in the recollection
of this truth that I have preferred the term po-
litical inſtitution to that of government, the
former appearing to be ſufficiently expreſſive of
that relative form, whatever it be, into which
individuals would fall, when there was no need


of force to direct them into their proper chan-


nel, and were no refractory members to cor-
rect.


Aa2 CHAP.


*
* —
1 *
. [4 T2
'” 2 * l — — — —— — 9 — — — -
% . - — —
— — — - — = — —— — —
S — — — — — — 1 - = 4 vs TE TH 4
bs — — 2 0 ; : IN = . — R *. r W 2 — 8 —
— > . — F \ 1 1 — Þ Con. mM - — 1 = | nk. —
— — eres Y — — ; 8 re A y ws we bs co p
2 = — 6-g—nt = 0» — ems 8 —_ - cap 98 8 e . — r A * I” + a 1 & - — =_ — — 3 = 1 = *
2 - _ : . 2 . < 0 2 — 2 n 1 —— Fn IF gs Seed © 7 r 9 * 2 L * TE. Ll = =
— ——_———_ — — a a — . — 4 n 9 < hs OP C : Fi 2 0 — Pay. = * wk d - - -
By N 0 7 4 F 33 K e! — r 4 r — — —— Sn
35 8 2 A = { it = = = — ”
n 5 — AY ? _ , , ”
a „


—
— td
SSA, om. — "Za. Ha
* RAG


—


n


— — amore


bd
1 5
1

e.


1 © OF EDUCATION.
11
1 0
M ;
| 0
.
or EDUCATION, THE EDUCATION or ir
: £ A PRINCE, | Ve
| t
Pl


Nature of monarchy delineated. School of adver- fr.
 fity.—Tendency of ſuperfluity to inſpire effemi- ¶ i
nacy—to deprive us of the benefit of experience | th
—illuſtrated in the caſe of princes.— Manner in ſh
which they are addreſſed. —Inefficacy of the in- tic
ftruttion beſtowed upon them. bo


F IRS T then of monarchy ; and we will firſt MW mi
ſuppoſe the ſucceſſion to the monarchy to be he- ¶ the
reditary. In this caſe we have the additional ad- to
vantage of conſidering this diſtinguiſhed mortal, W oth
who is thus ſet over the heads of the reſt of his ſup
ſpecies, from the period of his birtn. | haf
The abſtract idea of a king is of an extremely Il fic
momentous and extraordinary nature; and, tho I pea
the idea has by the accident of education been I ple
rendered familiar to us from our infancy, yet fror
4 perhaps the majority of readers can recollect the I der
L, period, when it ſtruck them with aſtoniſhment ma)
; and confounded their powers of apprehenſion. I wel
It being ſufficiently evident that ſome ſpecies of I fice
government was neceſſary, and that individuals I


mult concede a part of that ſacred and important I {che
. Privilege


THE EDUCATION OF A PRINCE. 357


privilege by which each man is conſtituted judge
of his own words and actions, for the fake of
general good, it was next requiſite to canfider
what expedients might be ſubſtituted in the room
of this original claim. One of theſe expedients
has been monarchy. It was the intereſt of each
individual that his individuality ſhould be in-
vaded as rarely as poſſible; that no invaſion
ſhould be permitted to flow from wanton ca-
price, from ſiniſter and difingenuous views, or
from the inſtigation of anger, partiality and paſ-
fion ; and that this bank, ſeverely levied upon
the peculium of each member of the ſociety,
ſhould be adminiſtered with frugality and diſcre-
tion. It was therefore without doubt a very
bold adventure to commit this precious depoſit
to the cuſtody of a ſingle man. If we contem-
plate the human powers whether of body or
mind, we ſhall find them much better ſuited to
the ſuperintendence of our private concerns and
to the adminiſtering occaſional aſſiſtance to
others, than to the accepting the formal truſt of
ſuperintending the affairs and watching for the
happineſs of millions. If we recolle& the phy-
ſical and moral equality of mankind, it will ap-
pear a very violent uſurpation upon this princi-
ple to place one individual at ſo vaſt an interval
from the reſt of his ſpecies. Let us then conſi-
der how ſuch perſons are uſually educated, or
may be expected to be educated, and how
nel they are prepared for this illuſtrious of-
To -
It is a common opinion that adverſity is the
ſchool in which all extraordinary virtue muſt be
N formed.


* a


358 OF EDUCATION,


formed. Henry the fourth of France and Eli-
. Zabeth of England experienced a long ſeries of
calamities before they were elevated to a throne.
Alfred, of whom the obſcure chronicles of a bar-
barous age record ſuch ſuperior virtues, paſſed
through the viciſſitudes of a vagabond and a fu.
gitive. Even the mixed, and upon the whole
the vicious, yet accompliſhed, characters of Fre-
deric and Alexander, were not formed without
the interference of injuſtice and perſecution.

This hypotheſis however ſeems to have been
puſhed too far. It is no more reaſonable to ſup-
poſe that virtue cannot be matured without in-


Jjuſtice, than to believe, which has been ano-


ther prevailing opinion, that human happineſs
cannot be ſecured without impoſture and deceit.
Both theſe errors have a common ſource, a diſ-
truſt of the omnipotence of truth. If their ad-
vocates had reflected more deeply upon the na-
ture of the human mind, they would have per-
ceived that all our voluntary actions are judg-
ments of the underſtanding, and that actions of
the moſt judicious and uſeful nature muſt infal-
libly flow from a real and genuine conviction of
1 wh

But, though the exaggerated opinion here
ſtated of the uſefulneſs of adverſity be erroneous,
it is, like many other of our errors, allied to
important truth. If adverſity be not neceſſary,
it muſt be allowed that proſperity is pernicious.
Not a genuine and philoſophical proſperity,
which requires no more than ſound health with
a ſound intellect, the capacity of procuring. for
ourſelves by a moderate and well regulated in-


 duſtry |


- A


%S


"3


THE EDUCATION OF A PRINCE. 359


duſtry the means of ſubſiſtence, virtue and wiſ-
dom: but proſperity as it is uſually underſtood,
that 1s, a competence, provided for us by the
caprice of human inſtitution, inviting our bodies


to indolence, and our minds to, lethargy ; and
ſtill more proſperity, as it is underſtood in the


caſe of noblemen and princes, that is, a ſuper-
fluity of wealth, which deprives us of all inter-
courſe with our fellow men upon equal terms,
and makes us priſoners of ſtate, gratified indeed
with baubles and ſplendour, but ſhut out from
the real benefits of ſociety and the perception of
truth. If truth be ſo intrinſically powerful as to
make adverſity unneceſſary to excite our atten-
tion to it, it 1s nevertheleſs certain that luxury
and wealth have the moſt fatal effects in diſtort-
ing it. If it require no foreign aid to aſſiſt its
energies, we ought however to be upon our
guard againſt principles and ſituations the ten-
dency of which may be perpetually to counter-
act it.

Nor is this all. One of the moſt eſſential in-
gredients of virtue is fortitude. It was the plan
of many of the Grecian philoſophers, and moſt
of all of Diogenes, to fa to mankind how


very limited was the ſupply that our neceſſities


required, and how little dependent our real wel-
fare and proſperity were upon the caprice of


others. Among innumerable incidents upon re-


cord that illuſtrate this principle, a fingle one
may ſuffice to ſuggeſt to our minds its general
ſpirit. Diogenes had a ſlave whoſe name was
Menas, and Menas thought proper upon ſome
occaſion to elope. Ha !” ſaid the philoſopher,


.


=
P \ S
r 72 "6, Rs hy cou
e


N
=
ry
=
15
af
'
©]
vs
1
04
RE
_ mY
$?
1
EK
:
: Ly
1
: *
1
L
*
F
:
|
©}
: ll]


_—


360 OF EDUCATION,


* can Menas live without Diogenes, and cannot

Diogenes live without Menas? There can be
no leſſon more important than that which is thus
conveyed. The man that does not know him
ſelf not to be at the mercy of other men, that
does not feel that he is invulnerable to all the vi-
ciſſitudes of fortune, is incapable of a conſtant
and inflexible virtue. He, to whom the reſt of
his ſpecies can reaſonably look up with confi-
dence, muſt be firm, becauſe his mind 1s filled
with the excellence of the object he purſues;
and chearful, becauſe he knows that it 1s out of
the power of events to injure him. If any one
ſhould chooſe to imagine that this idea of virtue
is ſtrained too high, yet all muſt allow that no
man can be entitled to our confidence, who
trembles at every wind, who can endure no ad-

verſity, and whoſe very exiſtence is linked to the

artificial character he ſuſtains. Nothing can
more reaſonably excite our contempt, than a

man who, if he were once reduced to the genu-

ine and fimple condition of man, would be re-

duced to deſpair, and find himſelf incapable of
conſulting and providing for his own ſubſiſtence.

Fortitude is a habit of mind that grows out of a

ſenſe of our own independence. If there be a

man, who dares not even truſt his own imagina-

tion with the fancied change of his circum-

ſtances, he muſt neceſſarily be effeminate, ir-

_ reſolute and temporiſing. He that loves ſen-
ſuality or oſtentation better than virtue, may be

entitled to our pity, but a madman only would
entruſt to his diſpoſal any thing that was dear to

him. e

| Again,


THE EDUCATION OF A PRINCE. 3561


Again, the only means by which truth, how-
ever immutable in its own nature, can be com-
municated to the human mind is through the in-


let of the ſenſes. It is perhaps impoſſible that a


man ſhut up in a cabinet can ever be wife. If
we would acquire knowledge, we muſt open our
eyes, and contemplate the univerſe. Till we
are acquainted with the meaning of terms and
the nature of the objects around us, we cannot
underſtand the propoſitions that may be formed
concerning them. Till we are acquainted with
the nature of the objects around us, we cannot
compare them with the principles we have
formed, and underſtand the modes of employing
them. There are other ways of attaining wit-
dom and ability befide the ſchool of adverſity,
but there is no way of attaining them but thro'
the medium of experience. That is, experience
brings in the materials with which intellect
works; for it muſt be granted that a man of li-
mited experience will often be more capable
than he who has gone through the greateſt va-
riety of ſcenes ; or rather perhaps, that one man
may collect more experience in a ſphere of a
few miles ſquare, than another who has failed
round the world.

To conceive truly the value of experience we
muſt recollect the infinite improvements the hu-


man mind has received in a long ſeries of ages,


and how an enlightened European differs from a


ſolitary ſavage. However multifarious are theſe


improvements, there are but two ways in which
they can be appropriated by any individual; ei-
He at ſecond hand by books and converſation,


f . With 2
* no jo
{5 4 ; my
| 4 4 . . m 3 F 7 — -
: : . —_ _ — _— — — — —— — — — — —— — =

: : - — —— — — — r

= — = - | |
— —— — — — — — —— 5 ; — 2 x 8

a ; 3 > * 1 — . ">= .caae- — — — . * —. -
3 : Seer IT” OE Ie? — 2 7
F = Mets ups as i ES —— FH I —— 7 :


*
Pa
*


Or


— oe


„ enn . OE


— — = 2 Zo — —
7 > —
> he — Bs A <2 — —


362 OF EDUCATION,


or at firſt hand by our own obſervations of men
and things. The improvement we receive in the

firſt of theſe modes is unlimited; but it will not

doalone. We cannot underſtand books, till we

have ſeen the ſubjects of which they treat.

He that knows the mind of man, muſt have
obſerved it for himſelf; he that knows it moſt
intimately, muſt have obſerved it in its greateſt
variety of ſituations. He muſt have ſeen it
without diſguiſe, when no exterior ſituation puts
a curb upon its paſſions, and induces the indivi-
dual to exhibit a ſtudied, not a ſpontaneous cha-
racter. He muſt have ſeen men in their unguard-
ed moments, when the eagerneſs of temporary
reſentment tips their tongue with fire, when they
are animated and dilated by hope, when they are
tortured and anatomiſed by deſpair, when the ſoul
pours out its innioſt {ſelf into the boſom of an
equal and a friend. Laſtly, he muſt himſelf
have been an actor in the ſcene, have had his
own paſſions brought into play, have known the
anxiety of expectation and the tranſport of ſuc-
ceſs, or he will feel and underſtand about as much
of what he ſees, as mankind in general would of
the tranſactions of the vitrioliſed inhabitants of
the planet Mercury, or the ſalamanders that live
in the ſun.—Such is the education of the true
philoſopher, the genuine politician, the friend
and benefactor of human kind. |

What is the education of a prince? Its firſt
quality 1s extreme tenderneſs. The winds of
heaven are not permitted to blow upon him. He
is dreſſed and undreſſed by his lacqueys and valets.
His wants are carefully anticipated; his deſires

without


THE EDUCATION OP A PRINCE. 363
without any effort of his profuſely ſupplied. His


health is of too much importance to the commu-

nity to permit him to exert any conſiderable ef-
fort either of body or mind. He muſt not hear
the voice of reprimand or blame. In all thin
it is firſt of all to be remembered that he is a
prince, that is, ſome rare and promany creature,
but not of human kind.

As he is the heir to a throne, it is never for-
gotten by thoſe about him, that conſiderable im-
portance is to be annexed to his favour or his diſ-
pleaſure. Accordingly they never expreſs them-
ſelves in his preſence frankly and naturally, either
reſpecting him or themſelves. They are ſupport-
ing a part, They play under a maſk. Their
own fortune and emolument is always uppermoſt
in their minds, at the ſame time that they are
anxious to appear generous, diſintereſted and ſin-
cere. All his caprices are to be complied with.
All his gratifications are to be ſtudied. They
find him a depraved and ſordid mortal; they
judge of his appetites and capacities by their own; ;
and the gratifications they recommend ſerve to


ſink him deeper in folly and vice.


What i is the reſult of ſuch an education? Hav- |


ing never experienced contradiction, the young
prince is arrogant and preſumptuous. Having
always been accuſtomed to the ſlaves of neceſſity
or the ſlaves of choice, he does not underſtand
even the meaning of the word freedom. His
temper is inſolent, and impatient of parley and


expoſtulation. Knowing nothing, he believes


himſelf ſovereignly informed, and runs hcadlong
into danger, not from firmneſs and courage, but
72 | from


wt —
a — -B en ee »
, 4


364 OF EDUCATION,


from the moſt egregious wilfulneſs and vanity.
Like Pyrrho among the ancient philoſophers, if


his attendants were at a diſtance, and he truſted
himſelf. alone in the open air, he would perhaps
be run over by the next coach, or fall down the
firſt precipice. His violence and preſumption
are ſtrikingly contraſted with the extreme timidity
of his diſpoſition. The firſt oppoſition terrifies
him, the firſt difficulty ſeen and underſtood ap-
pears inſuperable. He trembles at a ſhadow, and
at the very ſemblance of adverſity is diſſolved into
tears. It has accordingly been obſerved that
princes are commonly ſuperſtitious beyond the
rate of common mortals. |

Above all, ſimple, unqualified truth is a ſtran-
ger to his ear. It either never approaches ; or if
fo unexpected a gueſt ſhould once appear, it
meets with ſo cold a reception, as to afford little
encouragement to a ſecond viſit. The longer he
has been accuſtomed to falſehood and flattery,
the more grating will it ſound. The longer he
has been accuſtomed to falſhood and flattery, the
more terrible will the taſk appear to him, to
change his taſtes, and diſcard his favourites. He


will either place a blind confidence in all men, or,


having detected the inſincerity of thoſe who were
moſt agreeable to him, will conclude that all
men are knaviſn and deſigning. As a conſequence
of this laſt opinion, he will become indifferent to
mankind, callous to their ſufferings, and will be-
lieve that even the virtuous are knaves under a
craftier maſk. Such is the education of an indi-
vidual, who is deſtined to ſuperintend the affairs

and watch for the happineſs of millions. =


In this picture are indeed contained all thoſe


features which naturally conſtitute the education
of


THE EDUCATION OF A PRINCE. 3565


of a prince, into the conducting of which no per-
ſon of energy and virtue has by accident been in-
troduced. In real life it will be variouſly modi-
fied, but the majority*of the features, unleſs in
very rare inſtances, will remain the ſame. In no
caſe can the education of a friend and benefactor of
human kind, as ſketched in a preceding page, by

any ſpeculative contrivance be communicated.
Nor is there any difficulty in accounting for
this univerſal miſcarriage. The wiſeſt preceptor
thus circumſtanced mult labour under inſuperable
diſadvantages. No fituation can be fo unnatural
as that of a prince, ſo difficult to be underſtood
by him who occupies it, fo irrefiſtibly propelling
the mind to miſtake. The firſt ideas it ſuggeſts
are of a tranquilliſing and ſoperific nature. It
fills him with the opinion of his ſecretly poſletiing
ſome inherent advantage over the reſt of his ſpe-
cies, by which he is formed to command and
they to obey. If you aſſure him of the contrary,
you can expect only an imperfect and temporary
credit; for facts, which in this caſe depoſe againſt
you, ſpeak a language more emphatic and intel-
ligible than words. If it were not as he ſuppoſes,
why ſhould every one that approaches be eager
to ſerve him? The ſordid and ſelfiſh motives by
which they are really animated he is very late in
detecting. It may even be doubted whether the
individual, who was never led to put the profeſ-
ſions of others to the teſt by his real wants, has
in any inſtance been completely aware of the little
credit that is often due to them. A prince finds
himſelf courted and adored long before he can
have acquired a merit entitling him to ſuch diſtinc-
tions. By what arguments can you perſuade him
{ES | laboriouſly


366 OF EDUCATION,


laboriouſly to purſue what appears ſo completely
fuperfluous?' How can you induce him to be diſſa-
tisfied with his preſent acquiſitions, while every
other perſon aſſures him that his accompliſhments
are admirable and his mind a mirror of ſagacity?
How will you perſuade him who finds all his wiſhes
anticipated, to engage in any arduous undertaking,
or propoſe any diſtant object for his ambition ?

But, even ſhould you ſucceed in this, his pur-
fuits may be expected to be either miſchievous or
uſeleſs. His underſtanding is diſtorted ; and the
baſis of all morality, the recollection that other
men are beings of the ſame order with himſelf,
is extirpated. It would be unreaſonable to ex-
pect from him any thing generous and humane.
Unfortunate as he is, his fituation is continually
propelling him to vice, and deſtroying the germs
of integrity and virtue before they are unfolded.
If ſenſibility begin to diſcover itſelf, it is immedi-
ately poiſoned by the blighting winds of flattery.
Amuſement and ſenſuality call with an imperious
voice, and will not allow him time to feel. Ar-
tificial as is the character he fills, even ſhould he
afpire to fame, it will be by the artificial methods
of falſe refinement, or the barbarous inventions
of uſurpations and conqueſt, not by the plain and
unornamented road of benevolence.

Some idea of the methods uſually purfued, and
the effects produced in the education of a prince,
may be collected from a late publication of the
celebrated madame de Genlis, in which ſhe gives
an account of her own proceedings in relation to
the children of the duke d' Orleans. She thus de-
icribes the features of their diſpoſition and habits
at the time they were committed to her care.


« The


THE EDUCATION OF A PRINCE. 367
« 'The duke de Valois (the eldeſt) is frequently


coarſe in his manners and ignoble in his expreſſi-
ons. He finds a great deal of humour in de-
ſcribing mean and common objects by vulgar ex-
preſſions; and all this ſeaſoned with the pro-
verbial fertility of Sancho Panza himſelf, and ſet
off with a loud forced laugh. His prate is eter-
nal, nor does he ſuſpe& but that it muſt be an
exquiſite gratification to any one to be enter-
tained with it ; and he frequently heightens the
jeſt by a falſhood uttered in the graveſt manner
| imaginable. Neither he nor his brother has the
leaſt regard for any body but himſelf ; they are
ſelfiſh and graſping to an extreme, conſidering
every thing that is done for them as their due,
and imagining that they are in no reſpect obliged
to conſult the happineſs of others. The flight-
eſt, reproof is beyond meaſure ſhocking to them,
and the indignation they conceive at it immedi-
ately vents itſelf in ſullenneſs or tears. They
are in an uncommon degree effeminate, afraid of
the wind or the cold, unable to run or to leap,
or even ſo much as to walk at a round pace, or
for more than half an hour together. The duke
de Valois has an extreme terror of dogs, to ſuch
a degree as to turn pale and ſhriek out at the
fight of one.” «© When the children of the
duke d'Orleans were committed to my care,
they had been accuſtomed in winter to wear
under-waiſtcoats, two pair of ſtockings, gloves,
muffs, &c. The eldeſt, who was eight years
of age, never came down ſtairs without being
ſupported by the arm of one or two perſons ; the
domeſtics were obliged to render them the


| meaneſt
2


WS Raga dAikRae ww

wy © * *
7 E. — 7 NE TE 4
Fn g - 2


OY
WW


+= \
1


WW 8 5 * hy
* oo
_ 4
> *


724
*


OE SRO 2 9
— — —
—


* * 2 * wy 2 9 Sa e "
cf e 5 2
-


Pd
. > Hoe OO i a def 75 21 tT ok icerren own oe
pay ö * N N 25 15 * = &
- * P . 3 2 2 5 L OY
"Pp * oP 7 :
8 „
a 7
| BODY *


Pre *


\


— ; — , er ESI in. —
NB ates _— — — : — — FR *
fy P F — 2 * 8 — 4 = 7 * "4M
N.
©


„% OF EDUCATION.


meaneſt ſervices, and, for a cold or any flight
indiſpoſition, ſat up with them for nights to-


gether *.” |


Madame de Genlis, a woman of uncommon


talents and comprehenſive views, though herſelf


infected with a conſiderable number of errors,
corrected theſe defects in the young princes.


Bat few princes have the good fortune to be


_ educated by a mind ſo powerful and wile as that


of madame de Genlis, and we may fafely take
our ſtandard for the average calculation rather


from


* « M. de Valois à encore des manieres bien diſagreables, des


expreſſions ignobles, & de tems en tems le plus mauvais ton. 4


preſent qu il eft a ſon aiſe avec moi, il me debite avec confiance
toutes les gentilleſſes qu'on lui a appriſes. Tout cela aſſaiſonnt de


| tous les proveroes de Sancho, et un gros rire force, qui weſt


fas le moindre de ſes deſagremens. En outre, il eft tres bavard,
grand conteur, & il ment ſouvent pour ſe divertir ; avec cela la
plus grande indifference pour M. & Mae. de Chartres, n'y pen-


fant jamais, les voyant froidement, ne defirant point les voir. —


Ils etoient Pun & Pautre de la plus grande impolitęſſe, oui


non tout court, ou un ſigne de tete, peu reconnoiſſant, parce qu' ils
croient qu'il weſt point de ſoins, d' attentions, ni d igards qu'on ne
tes dorve. Il i"ttoit pas poſſible de les reprendre ſans les mettre au
deſeſpoir; dans ce cas, toujours des pleurs ou de Fhumeur, [ls
etoent tres douillets, craignant le vent, le froid, ne pouvant,


be * . . « * f 4 .
non ſeulement ni courir ni ſauter, mais meme ni marcher


d'un bon pas, & plus d'une demi-heure. Et M. le duc de Va-


bois ayant une peur affreuſe des chiens au point de pälir & de crier


guand il en voyoit un.“ 2

Quand on ma remis ceux que j'ai tleves, ils avaient Pha-
bitude de porter en hiver des gillets, des doubles paires de bas,
des grands manchons, &c. L'aint, qui avoit huit ans, ne


| deſeendoit jamais un eſealier ſans © appuyer fur le bras d'une ou


deux perſonnes. On obligeoit des domeſtiques de ces enfans d leur


rendre les ſervices les plus vils : pour un rhume, pour une ligire


encommodite, ces domgſtiques paſſoient ſans ceſſe les nuits, &c.“


Legons d'une Gouvernante d ſes Eleues, par Mde. de Sillery


Brulart (ci-devant comteſſe de Genlis), Tome II.


*


„ eo oe c HH Oo A,”


PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE. 369
from her predeceſſors than herſelf. She forms


the exception; they the rule. Even were it
otherwiſe, we have already ſeen what it is that
a preceptor can do in the education of a prince.
Nor ſhould it be forgotten that theſe were
not of the claſs of Princes deſlined to a


throne.


* 1
z


CH A P. Wt
PRIVATE LIFE OF A MAINT:


Princip les by ich Je . EOS» e. 1/161
li in patience of control—habits of of drſſepation


—ignorance—dijlike of truth. di ile of juſtice
TRY Situation of. *


8 UCH is the cure; the fut that it pro-
duces may eatily be conjectured. The faſhion
which is given to the mind in youth, it ordina-
rily retains in age; and it is with ordinary caſes
only that the preſent argument is concerned. If
there have been kings, as there have been other
men, in the forming of whom particular have
outweighed general cauſes, the recollection of

Vor. „ 1 | ſuch


* 12 * 5
4 -
Ft, Gy :
N
£ *
4. #
4


e PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE.


_  fuch exceptions has little to do with the queſ-
tion, Whether monarchy be generally ſpeaking a
benefit or an evil. Nature has no particular
mould of which ſhe forms the intellects of prin-
ces; monarchy is certainly not jure divino; and
df conſequence, whatever ſyſtem we may adopt
upon the ſubject of natural talents, the ordinary
. rate of kings will poſſeſs at beſt but the ordi-
nary rate of human underſtanding. In what has
been faid, and in what remains to ſay, we
are not to fix our minds upon prodigies, but
to think of the ſpecies as it is uſually found.
But, though education for the moſt part de-
1 termines the character of the future man, it may
| not be uſeleſs to follow the diſquifition a little
farther. Education in one ſenſe is the affair of
youth, but in a ſtricter and more accurate ſenſe.
the education of an intellectual being can termi-
nate only with his life. Every incident that be-
fals us is the parent of a ſentiment, and either
confirms or counteracts the preconceptions of
Now the cauſes that acted upon kings in their
minority, continue to act upon them in their
maturer years. Every thing is carefully kept
out of ſight that may remind them they are men.
Every means is employed that can perſuade them
that they are of a different ſpecies of beings, and
ſubject to different laws of exiſtence. © A
king,” fuch at leaſt is the maxim of abſolute
.  monarchies, though obliged by a rigid ſyſtem
of duties, is accountable for his diſcharge of
thoſe duties only to God.” That is, expoſed to
- 4 hundred fold more ſeductions t


than ordinary


men,


A. ade + 4 6 i p W
, pb} het - 5 2 *
oi 2 48 - *
*
-


PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE. 371
men, he has not like them the checks of a viſt» .
ble conſtitution of things, perpetually through
the medium of the ſenſes making their way to
the mind. He is taught to believe himſelf ſu-
perior to the reſtraints that- bind ordinary men,
and ſubject to a rule peculiarly his own. Every
thing is truſted to the motives: of an inviſible
world; which, whatever may be the eſtimate to
which they are entitled in the view of philoſo-
phy, mankind are not now to learn are weakly
felt by thoſe who are immerged in ſplendour or
affairs, and have little chance of ſucceſs: in con-
tending with the impteſſions of ſenſe and the al-
lurements of viſible objects.
It is a maxim generally received in the world
© that every king is a deſpot in his heart,” and
the maxim can ſeldom fail to be verified in the
experiment. A hmited monarch and an abſo-
lute monarch, though in many reſpects different,
approach in more points than they ſeparate. A
monarch, ſtrictly without limitation, is perhaps
a phenomenon that never yet exiſted. All coun-
tries have poſſeſſed ſome .check upon deſpotiſm,
which to their deluded imaginations appeared a
ſufficient ſecurity for their independence. All
kings have poſſeſſed ſuch a portion of luxury and
eaſe, have been ſo far ſurrounded with ſervility
and falſhood, and to ſuch a degree exempt from
perſonal reſponſibility, as to deſtroy the natural
and wholeſome complexion of the human mind.
Being placed ſo high, they find but one ſtep be-


tween them and the ſummit of ſocial authority,
and they cannot but eagerly deſire to gain that

ſtep. Having ſo frequent oecaſions of ſeeing
WE. —_ 2 their


372 PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE.


their beheſts implicitly obeyed, being trained in
ſo long a ſcene” of adulation and ſervility, it is
impoſſible they ſhould not feel ſome indignation
at the honeſt firmneſs that ſets limits to their
omnipotence. But to ſay, that every king is
a deſpot in his heart, will preſently be ſhown
to be the ſame thing as to ſay, that every king
is by unavoidable neceſſity the enemy of the hu-
een n ne e wo doit
The principal ſource of virtuous conduct is to
recollect the abſent. He that takes into his eſti-
mate preſent things alone, will be the perpetual
ſlave of ſenſuality and ſelfiſhneſs. He will have
no principle by which to reſtrain appetite, or to
employ himſelf in juſt and benevolent purſuits.
The cauſe of virtue and innocence, however ur-
gent, will no ſooner ceaſe to be heard, than it
will be forgotten. - Accordingly nothing is found
more favourable to the attainment of moral ex-
cellence than meditation: nothing more inimical
than an uninterrupted ſucceſſion of amuſements.
It would be abſurd to expect from kings the re-
collection of virtue in exile or diſgrace. It has
generally been obſerved, that even for the loſs
of a flatterer or a favourite they ſpeedily conſole
themſelves. Image after image {> ſpeedily ſuc-
ceed in their ſenſorium, that no one of them
leaves a durable impreſſion. A circumſtance
which contributes to this moral inſenſibility, is
the effeminacy and cowardice which grow out
of perpetual indulgence. Their minds ſponta-
neouſly ſhrink from painful ideas, from motives
that would awaken them to effort, and reflec-
FFF


3


©
.
"oP


PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE. 373
tions that would demand ſeverity of diſquiſi-
tion. . + $69
What ſituation can be more unfortunate than
that of a ſtrangers who cannot ſpeak” our lan-
guage, knows nothing of our manners and cuſ-
toms, and enters into the buſy ſcene of our af-
fairs, without one friend to adviſe with or aſſiſt
him? If any thing is to be got by ſuch a man,
we may depend upon ſeeing him inſtantly ſur-
rounded with a group of thieves, ſharpers and
extortioners. They will make him ſwallow the
moſt incredible ſtories, will impoſe upon him
in every article of his neceſſities or bis com-
merce, and he will leave the country at laſt, as
unfriended and in as abſolute ignorance as he
entered it. Such a ſtranger is a king; but with
this difference, that the foreigner, if he be a
man of ſagacity and penetration, may make his
way through this crowd of intruders, and diſco-
ver a ſet of perſons worthy of his confidence,
which can ſcarcely in any caſe happen to a king.
He is placed in a vortex peculiarly his own. He
is ſurrounded with an atmoſphere through which
it is impoſſile for him to diſcover the true co-
lours and figure of things. The perſons that are
near him are in a cabal and conſpiracy of their
own, and there is nothing about which they are
more anxious than to os truth from approachs
ing him. The man, who.is not acceſſible to


every comer, who delivers up his perſon into the
cuſtody of another, and may, for any thing that
he can tell, be precluded from that very inter-
courſe and knowledge it is moſt important for


214 PRIVATE LIFE, OF A PRINCE.
him to poſſeſs, whatever name he may bear, is


in reality a priſoner. 2
Whatever the arbitrary inſtitutions of men may
pretend, the more powerful 4nſtitutions of na-
ture forbid one man to tranſact the affairs and

provide for the welfare of millions. A king
fon finds the neceſſity of entruſting his functi⸗-
ons to the adminiſtration of his ſervants. He


acquires the habit of ſeeing with their eyes and


acting with their hands. He finds the neceſſity
of confiding implicitly in their fidelity. Like a

man long ſhut up in a dungeon, his organs are
not ſtrong enough to bear the irradiation of
truth. Aceuſtomed to receive information of
the feelings and ſentiments of mankind through
the medium of another perſon, he cannot bear
directly to converſe with buſineſs and affairs.


Whoever would detach his confidente from his


preſent favourites, and induce him to paſs over
again in ſerutiny the principles and data upon
Which he has * determined, requires of
him too painful a taſk. He haſtens from his in-
foriner to communicate the aecuſation to his fa-
vourite, and the tongue that has been accuſtomed
to credit, cafily varniſhes over this new
Sway He flies from uncertainty, anxiety
and be to his routine of amuſements ; or
amuſement pre ſents itſelf, is importunate to be
received, — 5 preſently obliterates the tale that
overfpread the — with melancholy and ſuſpi-
eion. Mah has been ſaid of intrigue and du-
plicity. They have been alledged to intrude
_ ar the walks of commerce, to haunt.
the intercourſe of men of letters, and to rend the


petty


PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE, 35 |


petty concerns of a village with faction. But,

wherever elſe they may be ſtrangers, in courts

they undoubtedly find a congenial climate. The

intruſive tale-bearer, who carries knowledge to

the ear of kings, is within that circle an object of

general abhorrence. The favourite 'marks him

for his victim; and the inactive and unimpaſſi-

oned temper of the monarch ſoon refigns him to

the vindictive importunity of his adverſary. It

is in the contemplation of theſe circumſtances tat

Fenelon has remarked that kings are the moſt 4

unfortunate and the moſt miſled of all human |

beings *®. Wnt” ret

But in reality were they in poſſeſſion of purer

ſources of information, it would be to little pur- | q
poſe. Royalty inevitably allies itſelf to vice. I

Virtue, in proportion as it has taken poſſeſſion of -

any character, is juſt, conſiſtent and ſincere. But

kings, debauched by their education, ruined by

their fituation, cannot endure an intercourſe witl

theſe attributes. Sincerity, that would tell them

of their errors and remind them of their cowar-

dice; juſtice, that, uninfluenced by the trap-

pings of majeſty, would eſtimate the man at his

true deſert; conſiſtency, that no temptation

would induce to part with its principles; are odi- |

ous and intolerable in their eyes. From ſuch in-

truders they haſten to men of a pliant character, 4

who will flatter their miſtakes, put a falſe varniſh


ON


%


* « Les plus malheureux & les 122 aveugles de tous les hom
mes.” Telemaque, Liv. XI1I, More forcible and impreſſive
deſcription is ſcarcely any where to be found, than that of the-
evils inſeparable from monarchical government, contained in
this and the following book of Fenelon's work. De”


376 PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE.
on their actions, and be viſited by no impertinent
ſeruples in afliſting the indulgence of their appe-
tites. There is ſcarcely in human nature an in-
flexibility that can reſiſt perpetual flattery and
compliance. The virtues that grow up among us
are cultured in the open ſoil of equality, not in
the artificial climate of greatneſs. We need the
winds to harden, as much as the heat to cheriſh.
us. Many a mind, that promiſed well in its
outſet, has been found incapable to ſtand the teſt
of perpetual indulgence and eaſe, without one
ſhock to waken, and one calamity to =p it in its
ſmooth career. 85
Monarchy is in reality ſo unnatural an inſtituti-
on, that mankind have at all times ſtrongly ſuſ-
pected it was unfriendly to their happineſs. The
power of truth upon important topics is ſuch,
that it may rather be ſaid to be obſcured than ob-
literated; and falſhood has ſcarcely ever been ſo
ſucceſsful, as not to have had a reſtleſs and pow
erful antagoniſt in the heart of its votaries. The
man who with difficulty earns his ſcanty ſub-
ſiſtence, cannot behold the oſtentatious ſplendour
ofa king, without being viſited by ſome ſenſe of
injuſtice.” He inevitably queſtions in his mind
the utility of an officer whoſe ſervices are hired at
ſo enormous a price. If he conſider the ſubject
with any degree of accuracy, he is led to perceive,
and that with ſufficient ſurpriſe, that a king is
nothing more than a common mortal, exceeded
by many and equalled by more in every requilite
of ſtrength, capacity and virtue. He feels % "TIN
1 fore that nothing can be more groundleſs and un-


| 800 e e


PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE. 377


Juſt than the ſuppoſing that one ſuch man as this
is the fitteſt and moſt competent inſtrument for
regulating the affairs of nations. |

Theſe reflections are ſo unavoidable that kings
themſelves have often been aware of the danger to
their imaginary happineſs with which they are
pregnant. They have ſometimes been alarmed
with the progreſs of thinking, and oftener regard-
ed the eaſe and proſperity of their ſubjects as a
ſource of terror and apprehenſion. They juſtly
conſider their functions as a ſort of public exhibi-
tion, the ſucceſs of which depends upon the cre-
dulity of the ſpectators, and which good ſenſe


and courage would ſpeedily bring to a termination.


Hence the well known maxims of -monarchical
government, that eaſe is the parent of rebellion,


and that it is neceſſary to keep the people in a


ſtate of poverty and endurance in order to render


them ſubmiſſive. Hence it has been the perpetual


complaint of deſpotiſm, that the reſtive knaves
are overrun with eaſe, and plenty ever is the
nurſe of faction .. Hence it has been the leſſon
perpetually read to monarchs : © Render your
ſubjects proſperous, and they will ſpeedily refuſe
to labour; they will become ſtubborn, proud,
unſubmiſſive to the yoke, and ripe for revolt.
Tt is impotence and miſery that alone will render
them ſupple,” and prevent them from rebelling
againſt the dictates of authority f..
* Tragedy of Jane Shore, Act III.
+ * Si wous mettes les peuples dans Pabondance, ils ne tra-
vailleront plus, ils deviendront fers, indociles, et ſeront toujours
prets a ſe revoiter : ily a que la foibleſſe et la miſere qui les ren-
dent ſouples, et qui les empichent de reſiſter a Pautorite.” =
| | | Telimaque, Liv. XIII.


PS 2


38 PRIVATE LIFE OF A PRINCE.


It is a common and vulgar obſer vation that the
ſtate of a king is greatly to be pitied. All his
actions are hemmed in with anxiety and doubt.
le cannot, like other men, indulge the gay and
© Careleſs hilarity of his mind; but is obliged, if he


be of an honeſt and conſcientious diſpoſition, to


5 conſider how neceſſary the time, which he is


thoughtleſsly giving to amuſement, may be to
the relief of a worthy and oppreſſed individual ;
how many benefits might in a thouſand inſtances
reſult from his interference; how many a guile-
leſs and undeſigning heart might be cheared by his
Juſtice. The conduct of kings is the ſubje of
the ſevereſt criticiſm, which the yery nature of
their ſituation diſables them to encounter. A
thouſand things are done in their name in which
they have no participation ; a thouſand ſtories are
ſo diſguiſed to their ear as to render the truth ab-
ſolutely undiſcoverable; and the king is the ge-
neral ſcape-goat, loaded with the offences of all
his dependents. .
No picture can be more juſt, judicious and hu-
mane than that which is thus exhibited. Why
then ſhould the advocates of antimonarchical prin-
eiples be conſidered as the enemies of kings?
They would relieve them from a load would
fink a navy, too much honour*.” They would


-  _ exalt them to the happy and enviable condition of


private individuals. In reality nothing can be
more iniquitous and cruel than to impoſe upon a
man the unnatural office of a king. It is not leſs
inequitable towards him that exerciſes it, than to-


* Shakeſpeare; Henry the Eighth, Act III.


or A VIRTUOUS DESPOTISM. 37/0


* them who are ſubjected to it. Kinki,
if they underſtood their own intereſts, would
be the firſt to eſpouſe theſe principles, the moſt
cager to liſten to them, the moſt fervent in ex
— their eſteem of the men who under-
erg impreſs upon their ſpecies this K |
me |


CHAP. IV.
o A VIRTUOUS DESPOTISM.


Suppoſed excellence of this form of government
controverted. From the narrowneſs of human
gowers.—Caſe of a vicious adminiſtration— 4
_ wirtwous adminiſtration intended to be formed.
 — Monarchy not adapted to rhe IE of


* Jeates.


TukRE! is a principle frequently maintained
upon this ſubject, which is well entitled to our
impartial conſideration. It is granted by thoſe
who eſpouſe it, that hes ae monarchy, from
the imperfection of thoſe by whom it is adminiſ-
tered, is moſt frequently —— with evil;
bt they _ e that it is the beſt and moſt de-


firable


ä———U—U2—D—ͤ— ——ʒ—— 2 —— — os + % * LS —— = A oY n . * 1 * —— PR 3 —
1 2 1 _ 2 N * r A IE , OT NY ye
* * * pe * A * A T 2 o . * 0. a 5 S 8 if by
5 . 2 . Y


3% OF A VIRTUOUS DESPOTISM.


ſirable of all forms under a good and virtuous
prince. It is expoſed,” ſay they, © to the fate


2 of all excellent natures, wa from the beſt thing


frequently, if corrupted, becomes the worſt.”
This remark is certainly not very decifive of


the general queſtion, fo long as any weight ſhall


be attributed to the arguments which have been
adduced to evince what ſort of character and dif-
poſition may be ordinarily expected in princes. It
may however be allowed, if true, to create in the
mind a ſort of partial retroſpect to this happy and
perfect deſpotiſm ; and, if it can be ſhown to be


falſe, it will render the argument for the abolition |


of monarchy, ſo far as it is concerned, more en-
tire and complete.

Now, whatever diſpoſitions any man may poſ-
ſeſs in favour of the welfare of others, two things
are neceſſary to give them validity; diſcernment


and power. I can promote the welfare of a few
perſons, becauſe I can be ſufficiently informed of
their circumſtances. I can promote the welfare
of many in certain general articles, becauſe for


this purpoſe it is only neceſſary that I ſhould be
informed of the nature of the human mind as ſuch,
not of the perſonal ſituation of the individuals con-
cerned. But for one man to undertake to admi-


niſter the affairs of millions, to ſupply, not gene-


ral principles and perſpicuous reaſoning, but par-
ticular application, and meaſures adapted to the
neceſſities of the moment, is of all n
the moſt extravagant and abſurd.

The moſt natural and obvious of all proceedin 95


is for each man to be the ſovereign arbiter of his


own concerns. If the imperfection, the narrow
| views


OF A VIRTUOUS DESPOTISM. _ 381


views and the miſtakes of human beings render
this in certain caſes inexpedient and impracticable,
the next reſource is to call in the opinion of his
peers, perſons who from their vicinity may be
preſumed to have ſome general knowledge of the
caſe, and who have leiſure and means minutely
to inveſtigate the merits of the queſtion. It can-
not reaſonably be doubted, that the ſame expedi-
ent which men employed in their civil and crimi-
nal concerns, would by uninſtructed mortals be
adopted in the aſſeſſment of taxes, in the delibe-
rations of commerce, and in every other article
in which their common intereſts were involved,

only generaliſing the deliberative aſſembly or pan-
nel in proportion to the generality of the queſtion
to be decided.

Monarchy, inſtead of referrin g every queſtion
to the perſons concerned or their neighbours, re-
fers it to a ſingle individual placed at the greateſt
diſtance poffible from the ordinary members of
the ſociety. Inſtead of diſtributing the cauſes to
be judged into as many parcels as they would con-
veniently admit for the ſake of providing leiſure
and opportunities of examination, it draws them
to a ſingle centre, and renders enquiry and exa-
mination impoſſible. A deſpot, however virtu-
_ ouſly diſpoſed, is obliged to act in the dark, to
derive his knowledge from other men's informa-
tion, and to execute his beheſts by other men's
inſtrumentality. Monarchy ſeems to be a {ſpecies
of government proſcribed by the nature of man;
and thoſe perſons, who furniſned their deſpot
with RF) and virtue, forgot t to add omniſci-
"212% IONCS


382 OF A VIRTUOUS DESPOTISM.


ence and omnipotence, qualities not leſs neceſſa- |
ry to fit him for the office they had provided.
Let us ſuppoſe this honeſt and —
deſpot to be ſerved by miniſters, avaricious, hy-
pocritical and intereſted. What will the pe le
in by the good intentions of their monarch ?
2 will mean them the greateſt benefits, but he
will be altogether unacquainted with their ſitua-
tion, their character and their wants. The infor-
mation he receives will frequently be found the
very reverſe of the truth. He will be taught
that one individual is highly meritorious and a
proper ſubje& of reward, whoſe only merit is
the profligate cruelty with which he has ſerved
the purpoſes of his adminiſtration. He will be
5 taught that another is the peſt of the community,
who is indebted for this report to the ſteady vir-
tue with which he has traverſed and defeated the
wickedneſs of government. He will mean the
greateſt benefits to his people ; but when he pre-
ſeribes ſomething calculated for their advantage,
his ſervants under pretence of complying ſhall in
reality perpetrate diametrically the — No-
thing will be more dangerous than to endeavour
to remove the obſcurity with which his miniſters
ſurround him. The man, who attempts ſo har-
dy a talk, will become the inceſſant object of
| x its hatred. Though the ſovereign ſhould be
ever ſo ſeverely juſt, the time will come when
his obſervation will be laid aſleep, while malice
and revenge are ever vigilant. Could he unfold
the ſecrets of his priſon houſes of ſtate, he would
find men committed in his name whoſe crimes he


never knew, whoſe names he never heard of,


_


OF A VIRTUOUS DESPOTISM. 383

perhaps men whom he honoured and eſteemed.
Such 1s the hiſtory of the benevolent and philan-
thropic deſpots whom memory has recorded; and
the concluſion from the whole is, that, wherever
deſpotiſm exiſts, there it will always be attended
with the evils of deſpotiſm, capricious meaſures
and arbitrary infliction. IH 5
But will not a wiſe king take care to pro-
vide himſelf with good and virtuous ſervants ?”
Undoubtedly he will effect a part of this, but he
cannot ſuperſede the effential natures of things.
He that executes any office as a deputy will ne-
ver diſcharge it in the ſame perfection as if he
were the principal. Either the miniſter muſt be
the author of the plans which he carries into ef-
fect, and then it is of little conſequence, except
ſo far as relates to his integrity in the choice of his
ſeryants, what ſort of mortal the ſovereign ſhall
be found; or he muſt play a ſubordinate part,
and then it is impoſſible to transfuſe into his mind
the perſpicacity and energy of his maſter. Where-
ever deſpotiſm exiſts, it cannot remain in a ſin-
gle hand, but muſt be tranſmitted whole and en-
tire through all the progreſſive links of authori-
ty. To render deſpotiſm auſpicious and benign
it is neceſſary, not only that the ſovereign ſhould
poſſeſs every human excellence, but that all his
officers ſhould be men of penetrating genius and
unſpotted virtue. If they fall ſhort of this, they
will, like the miniſters of Elizabeth, be ſome-
times ſpecious profligates *, and ſometimes men,
who, however admirably adapted for buſineſs,
conſult on many occaſions excluſively their pri-
8 vate

un Dudley Earl of Leiceſter.


at *


384 Of A VIRTUOUS DESPOTISM.


vate advantage, worſnip the riſing ſun, enter into
vindictive cabals, and cuff down new fledged
merit *#. Wherever the continuity is. broken,


the flood of vice will bear down all before it.


One weak or diſingenuous man will be the ſource
of unbounded miſchief. It is the nature of mo-
narchy under all its forms to confide greatly in
the diſcretion of individuals. It provides no re-
ſource for maintaining and diffuſing the ſpirit of
Juſtice. Every thing reſts upon the permanence
and extent of influence of perſonal virtue.
Another poſition, not leſs generally aſſerted
than that of the defirableneſs of a virtuous deſpo-
tiſm, is, „that republicaniſm is 3 ſpecies of go-
vernment practicable only in a ſmall ſtate, while
monarchy is beſt fitted to embrace the concerns
of a vaſt and flouriſhing empire.” The reverſe
of this, ſo far at leaſt as relates to monarchy,
appears at firſt ſight to be the truth. The com-
petence of any government cannot be meaſured
by a purer ſtandard, than the extent and accu-
racy of its information. In this reſpect monarchy
appears in all cafes to be wretchedly deficient ;
but, if it can ever be admitted, it muſt ſurely
be in thoſe narrow and limited inſtances where
an individual can with leaſt abſurdity be ſuppoſed
to be acquainted with the affairs and intereſts of |
the whole. |


*


* Cecil earl of Saliſbury, lord treaſurer; Howard earl of
en lord admiral, &c. |


CHAP.


OF COURTS AND MINISTERS.”


S y/tematical monopoly of abe ian _


 miniſters—of their dependents. —Venality | of
 courts,—Unt WD of this: Ye


4 of


: * 2


y V E ſhall be better able to zue of "2
diſpoſitions with which information is communi-
cated and meaſures are executed in monarchical
countries, if we refle& upon another of the evil
conſequences attendant upon this ſpecies of go-


vernment, the exiſtence and corru zption | of


courts.
The At of this, as well as of every,


other human inſtitution, ariſes out of the cir-


cumſtances with which it is ſurrounded. Mi-
niſters and favourites are a ſort of people who
have a ſtate priſoner 1 in their cuſtody, the whole
management of whoſe ' underſtanding and actions
they can eaſily engroſs. This they completely
effect with a weak and credulous maſter, not
can the moſt cautious and penetrating entirely


Vor. I. c Cc pt _


.


386 OF COURTS AND MINISTERS.


. elude their machinations. They unavoidably
_ defire to continue in the adminiſtration of his
functions, whether it be emolument, or the love
of homage, or any more generous motive by _
which they are attached to it. But the more
they are confided in by the ſovereign, the greater
will be the permanence of their fituation ; and
the more excluſive is their poſſeſſion of his ear,
the more implicit will be his confidence. The
wiſeſt of mortals are liable to error; the moſt
ö judicious projects are open to ſpecious and ſuper-
1 ficial objections; and it can rarely happen but a


miniſter will find his eaſe and ſecurity in exclul-
ing as much as poſſible other and oppoſite ad-
. viſers, whoſe acuteneſs and ingenuity are per-
= haps additionally whetted by a deſire to ſucceed
2 | to his office. 1 5
Mliniſters become a fort of miniature kings in
their turn. Though they have the greateſt op-
portunity of obſerving, the impotence and un-
meaningneſs. of the character, they yet envy it.
It is their trade perpetually to extol the dignity
and importance of the maſter. they ſerve ; and
men cannot long anxiouſly endeavour to convince


others of the truth of any propoſition without


failing parent of eee . They aff


milate themſelves therefore of choice to a man
to whoſe circumſtances their own are conſidera-
bly ſimila. Hes tit yh THF 44 Ts

. | „ n In


OF COURTS AND MINISTERS. 387
In reality the requiſites, without which mo-


narchical government cannot be preſerved in ex-


iſtence, are by no means ſufficiently ſupplied by
the mere intervention of miniſters. There muſt
be the miniſters of miniſters, and a long bead
roll of ſubordination deſcending by —— and
complicated ſteps. Each of theſe lives on the


ſmile of the miniſter, as he lives on the ſmile of


the ſovereign. Each of theſe has his petty in-


tereſts to manage, and his empire to employ un-


der the guiſe of ſervility. Each imitates the vices
of his ſuperior, and exacts from others the adu-
lation he is obliged to pay.

It has already appeared chat a king is neceſſa-


= and — unayoidably a deſpot in his heart.


He has been uſed to hear thoſe things only which
were adapted to give him pleaſure ; and it is
with a grating and uneaſy ſenſation that he liſtens
to communications of a different ſort. He has
been uſed to unheſitating compliance; and it is
with difficulty he can digeſt expoſtulation and op-


poſition. Of conſequence the honeſt and virtu-


ous character, whoſe principles are clear and un-
ſhaken, is leaſt qualified for his ſeryice ; he muſt


either explain away the ſeverity of his principles,


poriſing _ The temporiſing politician
expects fame pliability i in others that he ex-
hibits in himſelf; and the fault which he can
leaſt forgive is an ill timed and inauſpicious ſcru-
þ pulobity, |

: Expecting chis oomplinate from all the coad-
Jutors and inftruments of his deſigns, he ſoon


Cc 2 | comes


or he muſt give place to a more.crafty and tem-


j

. o
18

179
ef. 4
11
1 Li
:
4:
Eh '+
2 * i
bo»
13
1
:
1 1
15
i
N
11
1
1
" 4
.
.
i

,

*
1

.

J

7

fi :

I [
71 5
8: 83
a5.

*

Yo

$4:

Tf] 1

; l
f

i

: *
$f
11

Ft

:

0 (
1
2
15H

1 „
„„
1 71

Ll
; 1
4
[
:
1
4
7
+>
T
is

$7 U

ai.
. 1
14
£ TH
*
1
1
, -
f
i
HEY
e
Nine
„ .
108
1
4Y
*
e
1
wy
1
7
11
$ 1
by
ms
1
44 if
6
+18,
nt
5 0 'T. 7
or 1»
1
9
N 1
1
9
EX
e
* *
"7
U
5 U
: 12
; 15
: Þ
'$ -
13
4
.
+8
1
WHY,
a
1
N 14
: boy
1 5
" q
. KI
«0
. 7
! "14
o
R
: ; E
| ty
. {
' 1
1
} ,
BY
1
; n
"2
1
MIN]
| 2
3
1 :
1H

9

10

ol.
H &

1

44

33

| *.
}

| 5
| \


*


338 OF COURTS AND MINISTERS.


comes to ſet it up as a ſtandard by which to
judge of the merit of all other men. He is deaf
to every recommendation but that of a fitneſs for
the ſecret ſervice of government, or a tendency
to promote his intereſt and extend the ſphere of
his influence. The worſt man, with this argu-—
ment in his favour will ſeem worthy of encou-
ragement; the beſt man who has no advocate
but virtue to plead for him will be treated with
ſuperciliouſneſs and neglect. -Tt is true the ge-
nuine criterion of human deſert can never be ſu-
perſeded and reverſed. But it will appear to be
reverſed, and appearance will produce many of
the effects of reality. To obtain honour it will
be thought neceſſary to pay a ſervile court to ad-
miniſtration, to bear with unaltered patience
their contumely and ſcorn, to flatter their vices,
and render ourſelves uſeful to their private grati-
fication. To obtain honour it will be thought
neceſſary by aſſiduity and intrigue to make to
-ourſelves a party, to procure the recommenda-
tion of lords and the good word of women of
33 and clerks in office. To obtain honour
it will be thought neceſſary to merit diſgrace.
The whole ſcene conſiſts in hollowneſs, dupli-
City and falſhood. The miniſter ſpeaks fair to
the man he deſpiſes, and the ſlave pretends a ge-
-nerous attachment, while he thinks of nothing
but his perſonal intereſt. That theſe principles
are interſperſed under the worſt governments
with occafional deviations into better it would
be folly to deny; that they do not form the
great prevailing features wherever a court and a
22 s 3 - = loch!


 OF-COURTS AND MINISTERS. 389
monarch are to be found 3 it would be madneſs to
aſſert. 8

The fundamental diſadvantage of ſuch a form.
of government is, that it renders things of the.
moſt eſſential 1 importance ſubject throug ſucceſ-
ſive gradations to the caprice of individuals.
The ſuffrage of a body of electors will alwa
bear a reſemblance more or leſs remote to x 5
public ſentiment. The ſuffrage of an individual
will depend upon caprice, perſonal convenience
or pecuniary corruption. If the king be himſelf
inacceſſible to injuſtice, if the miniſter diſdain a
bribe, yet the fundamental evil remains, that
kings and miniſters, fallible themſelves, muſt
upon a thouſand occaſions depend upon the re-
commendation of others. Who will anſwer for
theſe through all their claſſes, officers of ſtate
and deputies of department, humble friends and
officious valets, wives and daughters, concubines
and confeſſors?

It is ſuppoſed by many, that the cls BE -
permanent hereditary diſtinction is neceſſary to
the maintenance of order among beings ſo im-
perfect as the human ſpecies. But it is 4 6
by all, that permanent hereditary diſtinction is
£9ion of policy, not an ordinance of age Fs
truth. Wherever it exiſts, the human mind,
ſo far as relates to political ſociety, is prevented
from ſettling upon its true foundation. There is
a perpetual ſtruggle between the genuine ſenti-
ments of underſtanding, which tell us that all
this is an impoſition, and the imperious voice of

government, which bids us, Reverence and


obey.


3  OFCOURTS AND MINISTERS. |


. obey.” In this unequal conteſt, alarm and ap-
_  prehenſion will perpetually haunt the minds of
thoſe who exerciſe uſurped power. In this ar-
tificial ſtate of man powerful engines muſt be
employed to prevent hin from riſing to his true
level. It is "the buſineſs of the goverfiors to
perſuade the governed, that it is their intereſt to
be ſlaves.” They have no other means by which
do create this fictitious intereſt, but thoſe which
they derive from the perverted underſtandings
and Þurdened property of the public, to be re-
turned in titles, ribbands and bribes. Hence
that ſyſtem of univerſal corruption without which
monarchy could not exiſt.
It has' ſometimes been ſuppoſed that corrup-
tion is particularly incident to a mixed govern-
ment. In ſuch a government the people
; Poſſeſs a certain portion of freedom; privilege
finds its place as well as prerogative ; a certain
ſturdineſs of manner and conſciouſneſs of inde-
pendence are the natives of theſe countries.
The country gentleman will not abjure the dic-.
tates of his judgment without a valuable conſi-
deration. . There is here more than one road
to ſucceſs ; popular favour is as ſure a means of
advancement as courtly patronage. In deſpotic
countries the people may be driven like ſheep ;
however unfortunate is their condition, they
know of no other, and they fubmit to it as an
Inevitable calamity. Their characteriſtic fea-
ture is a torpid dullneſs in which all the ener-
gies of man are forgotten. But in a country
Calling itſelf free the minds of the inhabitants
| are


_


OF COURTS AND MINISTERS. 291


are in a perturbed and reſtleſs. ſtate, and ex-
traordinary means muſt. be employed to calm
their vehemence. It has ſometimes. happened
to men whole | hearts have been pervaded with
he loye of virtue, of which 3 proſtitu-
tion is the moſt odious Corruption, to prefer,
while they have contemplated. this picture, an
acknowled ed. deſpotiſm. 0 2 * of eee
ind imperfect liberty. d
But this picture is not accurate. "x much af
it as relates to a mixed government muſt be ac-
deport to be true. But the features of
tiſm are much too fayourably. touched.
ether privilege be conceded. by the forms
Ade conſtitution or no, a whole nation can-
not be kept ignorant of its force. No people
were ever yet ſo ſunk in ſtupidity as to imagine
one man, becauſe he bore the appellation of a
king, literally equal to a million. In a Whole
nation, as monarchical nations at leaſt muſt be
7 re to be fh a there ml bo N
ity and yeomapry, PROF. ere WII
be perſons who by their, tuation, or their
om Ith, or their talents, form à middle rank


etween. the monarch and the vulgar, and who
their confederacies and their intrigues can
old the. PIP Meer "Theſe | men muſt be


Ti eye. 25 Hy, > e is never cloſed. & How
numerous


* .


1 go" 8 - it | 2 ; : F * % j 1 910, 5 *
432 OF COURTS AND MINISTERS. |
numerous are the precautions and jealouſies


that theſe terrors dictate? No man can go
out or come into the country but he is
watched. The preſs muſt iſſue no productions
that have not the imprimatur of government.
All coffee houſes and places of public reſort are
objects of attention. Twenty people cannot be
collected together, unleſs for the purpoſes of ſu-
perſtition, but it is immediately ſuſpected that
they may be conferring about their rights.
Is it to be ſuppoſed, that, where the means of
jealouſy are employed, the means of corruption
will be forgotten? Were it ſo indeed, the caſe
would not be much improved. No picture can
be more diſguſtful, no ſtate of mankind more
depreſſing, than that in which a whole nation 1s
held in obedience by the mere operation of fear,
in which all that is moſt eminent among them,
and that ſhould give example to the reſt, is pre-


vented under the ſevereſt penalties from expreſ-
ſing its real ſentiments; and by neceſſary conſe-
quence from forming any ſentiments that are
worthy to be expteſſed. But in reality fear was
never employed for theſe purpoſes Se” No
tyrant was ever fo unſocial as to have no confe-
derates in his guilt, This monſtrous edifice will
always be found ſupported by all the various in-
ſtruments for perverting the human character, ſe-
verity, menaces, blandiſhments, profeſſions and
bribes. To this it is in a great degree owing that
monatchy is ſo very coſtly an eſtabliſhment. It
is the buſineſs of the deſpot to diſtribute his lot-
tery of ſeduction into as many prizes as poſſible,
ca) RE | | ong _


OF COURTS AND MINISTERS. 393


Among the conſequences of a pecuniary polity
theſe are to be reckoned the foremoſt, that every
man is ſuppoſed to have his price, and that, the
corruption being managed in an underhand man-
ner, many a man, who appears a patriot, may be
really a hireling ; by which means virtue itſelf is
brought into diſcredit, is either regarded as mere


folly and romance, or obſerved with doubt and
ſuſpicion, as the cloke of vices which are only the


more humiliating the more they are concealed..


|
'


b %


2 0 «> 1 | 4 . . , 4 4
D * 8 1 .
, * . »
wh Fu 2 * 0 * | . |
. a 1 &. = - "
5 LS. 7

* wn » 1

*

4 , hs. A s "4 * 2 1 1 v » 4
: 1 2 7 + > iis *


13


1 * 4 % KY * g
* - * *
\ = 6 * *
* * , $ * *
1 ; * > \ 3 0 * K Ny N 0 1
. , N * ; * * 8 0 h 5 F * ae fl F * « *% * 5
: * N * 4 3 4 N io 7 - + ”


*
f


Monarchy founded in impoſture. Kings not en-
titled to ſuperiority— Inadequate to the func-
tions they poſſeſs. — Means by which the impoſture

maintained — 1. Splendour—2. Exaggeration.
—This impoſture generates — 1. Indifference to
merit—2. Indifference to truth 3. Artificial
agſires 4. Puſillanimity.— Moral incredulity of
monarchical countries. — Injuſtice of luxury.—Of
the inordinate admiration of wealth.


L ET us proceed to conſider the moral effects
which the inſtitution of monarchical govern-
ment is calculated to produce upon the inhabitants
of the countries in which it flouriſhes. And here
it muſt be laid down as a firſt principle that mo-
narchy is founded in impoſture. It is falſe that
kings are entitled to the eminence they obtain.
They poſſeſs no intrinſic ſuperiority over their
ſubjects. The line of diſtinction that is drawn
is the offspring of pretence, an indirect means
employed for effecting certain purpoſes, and not
the offspring of truth. It tramples upon the
genuine nature of things, and depends for its
ſupport upon this argument, * that, were it

_— not


Fr. SVYBFEECTHS. 28
not for impoſitions of a ſimilar nature, man-
kind would-be miſerable.? |

Secondly, it is falſe that kings can diſcharge the
functions of royalty. They pretend to ſuperin-
tend the affairs of millions, and they are neceſſa-
rily unacquainted with theſe affairs. The ſenſes
of kings are conſtructed like thoſe of other men,
they can neither ſee nor hear what is tranſacted in
their abſence. They pretend to adminiſter the
affairs of millions, and they poſſeſs no ſuch ſuper-
natural powers as ſhould enable them to act at a
diſtance. They are nothing of what they would
perſuade us to believe them. The king is often
ignorant of that of which half the inhabitants of
his dominions are informed. His prerogatives
are adminiſtered by others, and the loweſt clerk
in office is frequently to this and that individual
more effectually the ſovereign than the king him-
ſelf. He knows nothing of what is ſolemnly tranſ-
* acted in his name. 12 3 2 |

To conduct this impoſture with ſucceſs it is
neceſſary to bring over to its party our eyes and
our ears. Accordingly kings are always exhibit-
ed with all the ſplendour of ornament, attendance
and equipage. They live amidſt a ſumptuouſneſs
of expence ; and this not merely to gratify their
appetites, but as a neceſſary inſtrument of policy.
The moſt fatal opinion that could lay hold upon
the minds of their ſubjects is that kings are but
men. Accordingly they are carefully withdrawn
from the profaneneſs of vulgar inſpection; and,
when they are exhibited, .it is with every arti-
fice that may dazzle our ſenſe and maflead our
judgment. L


396 rer.


The impoſture does not ſtop with our eyes,
but addreſſes itſelf to our ears. Hence the in-
flated ſtyle of regal formality. The name of the
king every where obtrudes itſelf upon us. It
would ſeem as if every thing in the country, the
lands, the houſes, the furniture and the inhabi-
tants were his property. Our eſtates are the
king's dominions. Our bodies and minds are his
ſubjects. Our repreſentatives are his parliament, _
Our courts of law are his deputies. All magif-
trates throughout the realm are the king's officers.
His name occupies the foremoſt place in all ſta-
tutes and decrees. He is the proſecutor of every

criminal. He is Our Sovereign Lord the King.”
Were it poſſible that he ſhould die, the fountain
of our blood, the means by which we live,”
would be gone: every political function would
be ſuſpended. It is therefore one of the funda-
mental principles of monarchical government that
* the king cannot die. Our moral principles
accommodate themſelves to our veracity: and
- accordingly the ſum of our political duties (the
moſt important of all duties) is loyalty ; to be
true and faithful to the king ; to honour a man,
whom it may be we ought to deſpiſe ; and to.
obey ; that is, to acknowledge no immutable cri-
terion of juſtice and injuſtice. _
-  _- What muſt be the effects of this machine upon
the moral principles of mankind ? Undoubtedly
ö we cannot trifle with the principles of morality
3 and truth with impunity. However gravely the
impoſture may be carried on, it is impoſſible but
that the real ſtate of the caſe ſhould be ſtrongly
ſuſpected. Man in a ſtate of ſociety, if unde-
_ bauched


| OF SUTFJECFTS. 397
bauched by falſhoods like theſe, which confound
the nature of right and wrong, is not ignorant of
what it is in which merit conſiſts. He knows
that one man is not ſuperior to another except ſo
far as he is wiſer or better. Accordingly theſe are
the diſtinctions to which he aſpires for himſelf.
Theſe are the qualities he honours and applauds
in another, and which therefore the feelings of
each man inſtigate his neighbour to acquire.
But what a revolution is introduced among theſe

original and undebauched ſentiments by the arbi-
trary diſtinctions which monarchy engenders?
We ſtill retain in our minds the ſtandard of merit,
but it daily grows more feeble and powerleſs,
we are perſuaded to think that it is of no real uſe
in the tranſactions of the world, and preſently
lay it aſide as Utopian and viſionary.

Conſequences equally injurious are produced
by the hyperbolical pretenſions of monarchy.
There is a ſimplicity in truth that refuſes alliance
with this impudent myſticiſm. No man is en-
tirely ignorant of the nature of man. He will
not indeed be incredulous to a degree of energy
and rectitude that may exceed the ſtandard of his
preconceived ideas. But for one man to pretend
to think and act for a nation of his fellows is fo
| ans hem as to ſet credibility at defiance. Is
e perſuaded that the impoſition is ſalutary? He
willingly aſſumes the right of introducing fimilar
falſhoods into his private affairs. He becomes
convinced that veneration for truth is to be claſſed
among our errors and prejudices, and that, fo
far from being, as it pretends to be, in all caſes
ſalutary,


398 OF SUBJECTS. |
falutary, it would lead, if ingenuouſly pratiſed,
to the deſtruction of mankind. - 0D
Again, if kings were exhibited ſr as car
are in themſelves to the inſpection of mankind,
the falutary prejudice, as it has been called,
which teaches us to venerate them, would ſpeedi-
ly be extinct: it has therefore been found neceſ-
ſary to ſurround them with luxury and expence.
Thus are luxury and expence made the ſtandard
of honour, and of conſequence the topics of anx-
iety and envy. However fatal this ſentiment
may be to the morality and happineſs of mankind,
it is one of thoſe illuſions which monarchical go-
vernment 1s eagàr to cheriſh. In reality, the
firſt principle of virtuous feeling, as has been
elſewhere ſaid, is the love of independence. He -
that would be juſt muſt before all things eſtimate
the objects about him at their true value. But
the principle in regal ſtates has been to think
your father the wiſeſt of men becauſe he is your
father *, and your king the foremoſt of his ſpecies
becauſe he is a king. The ſtandard of intellec-
tual merit is no longer the man but his title. To
be drawn in a coach of ſtate by eight milk- white
\ Fa) _,_» horſes


* « The perſons whom you ought to love infinitely more
than me, are thoſe to whom you are indebted for your exiſtence.“
Their conduct ought to regulate yours and be the ſtandard of
your ſentiments,” “ The reſpect we owe to our father and

mother is a ſort of worſhip, as the phraſe filial piety implies.”
EE que vous devez aimer avant moi ſans aucune comparaiſon, ce
font ceux d qui vous devez la vie.” © Leur conduite doit regler
la votre et fixer votre opinion.” © Le reſpect que nous devons d
notre pere et d notre mere eſt un culte, comme Pexprime le mot


r


Piẽte filiale. Leons dune Gouvernante, Tome J.


OF SWEETIE C BEL 299
horſes is the higheſt of all human claims to our
veneration. 'The fame principle inevitably runs
through every order of the ſtate, and men defire
wealth under a monarchical government, for the
fame reaſon that under other circumſtances they
would have deſired virtue. " 5

Let us ſuppoſe an individual who by ſevere la-
bour earns a ſcanty ſubſiſtence, to become by ac-
cident or curioſity a ſpectator of the pomp of a
royal progreſs. Is it poſſible that he ſhould not
mentally apoſtrophiſe this elevated mortal, and
aſk, * What has made thee to differ from
me ?” If no ſuch ſentiment paſs through his
mind, it isa proof that the corrupt inſtitutions of
ſociety have already diveſted him of all ſenſe of
juſtice. The more ſimple and direct is his cha-
racter, the more certainly will theſe ſentiments
occur. What anſwer ſhall we return to his en-
quiry? That the well being of ſociety requires
men to be treated otherwiſe than according to
their intrinſic merit? Whether he be ſatisfied
with this anſwer or no, will he not aſpire to poſ-
ſeſs that (which in this inſtance is wealth) to
which the policy of mankind has annexed fuch
high diſtinction? Is it not indiſpenſible, that,
before he believes in the rectitude of this inſtitu-
tion, his original feelings of right and wrong
ſhould be wholly reverſed ? If it be indiſpenſible,
then let the advocate of the monarchical ſyſtem
ingenuoufly declare, that, according to that ſyſ-
tem, the intereſt of ſociety in the firſt inſtance
requires the total ſubverſion of all principles of


moral truth and juſtice.


With


409 OF SUBJECTS.


With this view let us again recolle& the max-


im adopted in monarchical countries, * that the
king never dies.” Thus with true oriental extra-
vagance we ſalute this imbecil mortal, O king,
live for ever!” Why do we this? Becauſe upon
his exiſtence the exiſtence of the ſtate depends.
In his.name the courts of law are opened. If his
political capacity be ſuſpended for a moment, the
centre to which all public buſineſs is linked, is


deſtroyed. In ſuch countries every thing is uni-


form: the ceremony is all, and the ſubſtance no-


thing. In'the riots in the year 1780 the mace of


the houſe of lords was propoſed to be ſent into
the paſſages by the terror of its appearance to
quiet the confuſion ; but it was obſerved- that, if
the mace ſhould be rudely detained by the rioters,
the whole would be thrown into anarchy. Buſi-


neſs would be at a ſtand, their infignia, and with
their infignia their legiſlative and deliberative


functions be gone. Who can expect firmneſs
and energy. in a country, where every thing is
made to depend not upon juſtice, public intereſt
and reaſon, but upon a piece of gilded wood?
What conſcious dignity and- virtue can there be
among a people, who, if deprived of the imagi-
nary guidance of one vulgar mortal, are taught to
believe that their faculties are benumbed, and all
their joints unſtrung ? e
_ Laſtly, one of the moſt eſſential ingredients in
a virtuous character is undaunted firmneſs; and
nothing can more powerfully tend to deſtroy this
principle than the ſpirit of a monarchical govern-
ment. The firſt leiten of virtue is, Fear no man;


1


=


OF',SUBJECTS. Jer


the firſt leſſon of fuch a conſtitution is, Fear the
king. The firſt leſſon of virtue is, Obey no man*;
the firſt leſſon of monarchy is, Obey the king.

Fhe true intereſt of mind demands the annihilation


inſeparable from monarchy to ſupport and render
them more palpable than ever. He that cannot
ſpeak to the proudeſt deſpot with a conſciouſneſs
that he is a man ſpeaking to a man, and a deter-
mination to yield him no ſuperiority to which his
inherent qualifications do not entitle him, is
wholly incapable of ſublime virtue. How many
ſuch men are bred within the pale of monarchy ?
How long would monarchy maintain its ground
in a nation of ſuch men? Surely it would
be the wiſdom of ſociety, inſtead of conjuring up
a thouſand phantoms to induce us into error, in-
ſtead of furrounding us with a thoufand fears to
deprive us of true energy, to remove every ob-
ſtacle and ſmooth the path of improvement.
Virtue was never yet held in much honour and
eſteem in a monarchical country. It is the incli-
nation and the intereſt of courtiers and kings to
bring it into difrepute ; and they are but too ſuo-
ceſsful in the attempt. Virtue is in their conce
tion arrogant, intruſive, err Ar and ſtub


of all factitious and imaginary diſtinctions; it N.


born. It is an aſſumed outſide, by which thoſe


who pretend to it intend to gratify their rude
tempers or their ſecret views. Within the circle
of monarchy virtue is always regarded with diſ-
honourable incredulity. The ape ſyſtem

MOB _— TT” which


* * Book III, Chap. VI. 0


* .
F F * 1
— — we —
— —— — o — ee AT —
* — © _ — * — —_ — P -
o — — _ — — 5 — — * 22 — my
o — 22 — — —
—— — — — —
3 — — A ——— 8
— . w oo


3 ——*⁵ð¹


%
: «> 8 *
— — — — - WV —
— — — — — — 2
ju ry — . — — ——
= — — — al — —
n — — — — . ⁵ wAA Ä —— —
- —— —


42 OF. SUBJEC T'S. f


which affirms ſelf love to be the firſt mover of all
our actions and the falſity of human virtues, is the
growth of theſe countries. Why is it that the
language of integrity and public ſpirit is conſtant-
ly regarded among us as hypocriſy ? It was not
always thus. It was not till the uſurpation of
Cæſar, that books were written by the tyrant and
his partiſans to prove that Cato was no better than
a ſnarling pretenderF.

There is a farther e 0 has ſel
dom been adverted to upon this ſubject, but which
ſeems to be of no inconſiderable importance. In
our definition of juſtice it appeared that our debt
to our fellow men cl to all the efforts we
could make for their welfare, and all the relief
we could ſupply to their neceſſities. Not a talent
do we poſſeſs, not a moment of time, not a ſhil-
ling of property, for which we are not reſponſi-
ble at the tribunal of the public, Which we are
not obliged to pay into the general bank of com-
mon advantage. Of every one of theſe things
there is an employment which is beſt, and that
beſt juſtice obliges us to ſelect. But how exten-
five 1 is the conſequence of this principle with reſ-

to the luxuries and oſtentation of human life?

Are there many of theſe luxuries that will ſtand
the teſt, and approve themſelves upon examina-
tion to be the beſt objects upon which our property
can be employed ? Will it often come'out to be
| | true,


*


Maximes, par M. le Duc de la 8 De la Fai.
fete des Vertus Humaines, par M. Eſprit.

| + Sce Plutarch's Lives; Lives of Cæſar and Cicero: Cice-
ranis Epiſtolæ ad Atticum, Lib. AII. Epiſt. XL, XLI


OF SUBJECTS: - as
true, that hundreds of individuals ought to be
ſubjected to the ſevereſt and moſt inceſſant la-

| bour, that one man may ſpend in idleneſs what
would afford to the general maſs eaſe, leiſure,
and conſequently wiſdom ?
Whoever frequents the habitation of the lux-
urious will ſpeedily be infected with the vices of
luxury. The miniſters and attendants of a ſove-
reign, accuſtomed to the trappings of magnifi-
cence, will turn with diſdain from the merit that
is obſcured with the clouds of adverfity. In vain
may virtue plead, in vain may talents ſolicit diſ-
tinction, if poverty ſeem to the faſtidious ſenſe of
the man in place to envelop them as it were with
its noifome effluvia. The very lacquey knows
how to repel unfortunate merit from the great
man's door. f
Here then we are preſented with the leſſon
which is loudly and perpetually read through all
the haunts of monarchy. Money is the great
requiſite for the want of which nothing can
atone. Diſtinction, the homage and eſteem of <
mankind, are to be bought, not earned. The
rich man need not trouble himſelf to-invite them,
they come unbidden to his ſurly door. Rarely
indeed does it happen, that there is any crime that
gold. cannot expiate, any baſeneſs and meanneſs
of character that wealth cannot cover with obli-
vion. Money therefore is the only object worthy
of your purſuit, and it is of little importance
by what finiſter and unmanly means, fo it be but
obtained.


= —


404 OF SUBJECTS


lt is true that virtue and talents do not ſtand in
need of the great man's aſſiſtance, and might, if
they did but know their worth, repay his ſcorn
with a juſt andenlightened pity. But unfortunately
they are too often ignorant of their ſtrength, and
adopt the errors they ſee univerſally eſpouſed in
the world. Were it otherwiſe, they would in-
deed be happier, but the general manners. would
probably remain the ſame. The general man-
ners are faſhioned by the form and ſpirit of the
national — .. and, if in extraordina-
ry caſes they become diſcordant, they ſpeedily
Jubrert it.

The evils indeed that ariſe out of avarice, an
inordinate admiration of wealth and an intempe-
rate purſuit of.it, are ſo obvious, that they have
conſtituted a perpetual topic of lamentation and
complaint. The object in this place is to conſi-
der how far they are extended and aggravated by
a monarchical government, that is, by a conſti-
tution the very eſſence of which is to accumu-
late enormous wealth upon a. ſingle head, and to
render the oſtentation of ſplendour the choſen in-
ſtrument for ſecuring honour and veneration.
The object is to conſider in what degree the lux-

ury of courts, the effeminate ſoftneſs of favou-
| rites, the ſyſtem, never to be ſeparated from the
monarchical form, of putting men's approbation
and good word at a price, of individuals buying
the favour of government, and government buy-
ing the favour of individuals, is injurious to the
moral 1 improvement of mankind. As long as the
unvarying practice of courts is cabal, and as long as
the an tendency of cabal is to bear down


tale nts,


| OF SUBJECTS. 405
talents, and diſcourage virtue, to recommend
cunning in the room of ſincerity, a ſervile and
ſupple diſpoſition in preference to firmneſs and
inflexibility, a convenient morality as better than
a ſtrict one, and the ſtudy of the red boak of pro-
motion rather than the ſtudy of general welfare,
ſo long will monarchy be the bittereſt and moſt
potent of all the adverſaries of the true intereſts

of mankind. „


CHAP.


L 406]


V


0 OF ELECTIVE MONARCHY.


5 orders aer on ſuch an election —Elettion
is intended either to provide a man of great or
of moderate talents. —Conſequences. of the firft—
of the ſecond. —Can elective and hereditary mo-

 narchy be combined * |


Have G conſidered the nature of monarchy
in general, it is incumbent on us to examine how
far its miſchiefs may be qualified by rendering
the monarchy elective.
One of the moſt obvious objections to this re-
medy is the difficulty that attends upon the con-
duct of ſuch an election. There are machines
that are too mighty for the human hand to con-
duct; there are proceedings that are too gigantic
and unwieldy for human inſtitutions to regulate.
The diſtance between the maſs of mankind and
a ſovereign is ſo immenſe, the truſt to be con-
fided fo ineſtimably great, the temptations of the
object to be decided on fo alluring, as to ſet
every paſſion that can vex the mind in tumultu-
ous conflict, Election will therefore either dwin-


Idle into an empty form, a conge d'tlire with the


ſucceſsful candidate's name at full length in the
_ concluſion, an election perpetually continued in
the ſame family, perhaps in the ſame lineal or-

der


| OF ELECTIVE" MONARCHY. 407


der of deſcent ; or will become the f gnal of a
thouſand calamities, foreign cabal and domeſtic
war. Theſe evils have been fo generally under-
ſtood, that elective menarchy in the ſtrict ſenſe
of that appellation has very few advocates. -
ERouſſeau, who in his advice to the Poliſh na-
tion appears to be one of thoſe few, that is, one
of thoſe who without loving monarchy conceive
an elective ſovereignty greatly preferable to an
hereditary one, endeavours to provide againſt the
 diforders of an election by introducing into it a
ſpecies of ſortition *. In another part of the
preſent enquiry it will be our buſineſs to exa-
mine how far chance and the deciſion by lot are
compatible with the principles either of ſound
' morality or ſober reaſon. For the preſent it will
be ſufficent to ſay, that the project of Rouſſeau
will probably fall under one part of the follow-
ing dilemma, and of conſequence will be refuted
by the fame arguments that bear upon the mode
of election in its moſt obvious idea.

The deſign with which election can be intro-
| duced into the conſtitution of a monarchy muſt _
either be that of raiſing to the kingly office a man
of ſuperlative talents and uncommon genius, or
of providing a moderate portion of wiſdom and
good intention for the diſcharge of theſe functi-
ons, and preventing them from falling to the
lot of perſons of notorious imbecility. To the
firſt of theſe deſigns i it will be objected by many,
E that genius is frequently nothing more in the
Hands of its poſſeſſor than an inſtrument for AC-
n the moſt pernicious intentions.“

| And,


* Comſiderations ſur le 1 de Pologne, Chap. V. 7 It.


408 ox ELECTIVE MONARCHY. :
And, though in this aſſertion there is much par-


tial and miſtaken exaggeration, it cannot haw-


ever be denied that genius, ſuch as we find it
amidſt the preſent imperfections of mankind, is
compatible with very ſerious and eſſential errors.
If then genius can by temptations of various ſorts
be led into practical miſtake, may we not rea-
ſonably entertain a fear reſpecting the effect of
that ſituation which of all others is moſt preg-


nant with temptation? If conſiderations of in-


ferior note be apt to miſlead the mind, What
hall we think of this moſt intoxicating draught,


of a condition ſuperior to.. reſtraint, ſtripped of + 5g
all thoſe accidents and viciſſitudes from which


the morality of human beings has flowed, with _

no falutary check, with no intellectual warfare _
where mind meets mind on equal terms, but
perpetually ſurrounded with ſycophants, ſervants _
and dependents? To ſuppoſe a mind in which


genius and virtue are united and permanent, is


alſo undoubtedly to ſuppoſe ſomething which no
calculation will teach us to expect ſhould offer


upon every vacancy. And, if the man could be
Found, we muſt imagine to ourſelves electors al-


moſt as virtuous as the elected, or elſe error and
- "prejudice, faction and intrigue will render his
.  eleQtion at leaſt precarious, perhaps improbable.
Add to this that it is ſufficiently evident from
the unalterable evils of monarchy already enume-
rated, and which I ſhall preſently have occaſion
to recapitulate, that the firſt act of ſovereignty
in a virtuous monarch, whoſe diſcernment was.
cgqual to his virtue, would be to annihilate the
cConſtitution, which had raiſed him to a throne.
Ie | RO But


or ELECTIVE MONARCHY. 409


But we will ſuppoſe the purpoſe of inſtituting an
F Ae monarchy not to be that of conſtantly fill-


ing the throne: with a man of ſublime genius,
but merely to prevent the ſovereignty from falling
to the lot of perſons of notorious mental imbecility.
Such is the ſtrange and pernicious nature of mo-
narchy, that it may be doubted whether this be
a benefit. Wherever monarchy exiſts, courts
and adminiſtrations muſt, as long as men can
ſce only with their eyes and a& only with their
hands, be its conſtant attendants. But theſe
have already appeared to be inſtitutions ſo miſ-
chie vous, that er one of the greateſt 1 in-
juries that can be done to mankind is to per-
ſuade them of their innocence. Under the
moſt virtuous deſpot favour and intrigue, the
unjuſt exaltation of one man and depreſſion of
another will not fail to exiſt. Under the moſt
virtuous deſpot the true ſpring there is in mind,
the deſire to poſſeſs merit, and the conſciouſheſs |
that merit will not fail to make itſelf perceived
by thoſe around it, and through their eſteem to 1
riſe to its proper ſphere, will be cut off; ang }
mean and Saltbus motives be ſubſtituted in its 7
room. Of what conſequence is it that my me-
rit is perceived by mortals who have no power
to advance it? The monarch, ſhut up in his
ſanctuary and ſurrounded with formalities, will
never hear of it. How ſhould he? Can he
know what is paſſing in the remote corners of
his kingdom? Can he trace the firſt timid bloſ-
ſoms of genius and virtue? The people them-
ſelves will loſe their diſcernment ok theſe things,
becauſe they will perceive their diſcernment to


be


*
oY
# . „ ＋ S —
I. 1 8
* _ — 4 — — ADs 2 — = — . 1
— — -
r — -


*
—
_
F
— — > A
„ i a


— —


410 OF ELECTIVE MONARCHY.


be powerleſs in effects. The offspring of min
As daily ſacrificed by hecatombs to the genius of
monarchy. The ſeeds of reaſon and truth be-
come barren and unproductive in this unwhole-
ſome climate. And the example p ee ex
hibited of the preference of wealth and craft
over integrity and talents, produces the moſt
powerful effects upon that maſs of mankind,
wo at firſt ſight may appear leaſt concerned in
the objects of generous ambition. This miſchief,
to whatever it amounts, becomes more ſtrongly
faſtened upon us under a good monarch than
under a bad one. In the latter caſe it only re-
ſtrains our efforts by violence, in the former it
ſeduces our underſtandings. To palliate the de-
fects and ſkin over the deformity of what is fun-


| _ damentally wrong, is certainly very perilous, per-
\ haps very fatal to the beſt intereſts of mankind.


A queſtion has been ſtarted, whether it be poſ- 3


ſible to blend elective and hereditary monarchy,
and the conſtitution of England has been cited as
an example of this poſſibility. What was it that

the parliament effected at the revolution, and
when they ſettled the ſucceſſion upon the - houſe
of Hanover? They elected not an individual,
but a new race of men to fill the throne of theſe
kingdoms. They gave a practical inſtance of


their power upon extraordinary emergencies to


change the ſucceſſion. At the ſame time how-
ever that they effected this inaction, they denied
it in words. They employed the eee ex-
preſſions that language could furniſh to bind them-
ſelves, their heirs and poſterity for ever to adhere
to this ſettlement. They conſidered the preſent
| ä


Of ELECTIVE MONARCHY, aq __
as an emergence, which, taking into the account
the precautions and reſtrictions they had provided,
could never occur again. 5 885
In reality what ſort of ſovereignty is that which

is partly hereditary and partly elective? That the

acceſſion of a family or race of men ſhould origi-
nally be a matter of election has nothing particu-

lar in it. All government is founded in opinion;
and undoubtedly ſome ſort of election, made by
a body of electors more or leſs extenſive, origi-

nated every new eſtabliſnment. To whom in
this amphibious government does the ſovereignty
belong upon the death of the firſt poſſeſſor? To
his heirs and deſcendants. What ſort of choice
ſhall that be conſidered, which is made of a man
half a century before he begins to exiſt? By What
deſignation does he ſucceed? Undoubtedly by that
of hereditary deſcent. A king of England there-

fore holds his crown independently; or, as it has
been energetically expreſſed, © in contempt” of
the choice of the people“. 7


This argument is ſtated with great copiouſneſs and irreſiſti-
ble force of reaſoning by Mr. Burke towards the beginning of his
Reflections on the Revolution in France.


END OF VOLUME THE FIRST.


