Faust: A Dramatic Poem (J. W. von Goethe (Abraham Hayward, trans.), 1833)
==========================================================
Hayward's 1833 first complete English Faust in prose — the translation that introduced Faust to English readers. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 


I 


i""^ sU~^ iVUwo'^^^- f^^^ 


COJ ( 


--l-i- 


x^ 


=->'^< 


i lacKcr X ';Xt.-S 


FAUST: 


^ fitamattc H^otm, 


BY 


GOETHE. 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PROSE, WITH REMARKS ON 
FORMER TRANSLATIONS, AND NOTES, 


BY 


The translator of SAVIGNY'S 

" H^t tl)e l^oratton of H^nv 2lge (or Eegwiatioit anir 

Jfurwimil^ence." 


LONDON:- MDCCCXXXIII. 


• 6 MAR 1975 

OF OXFORD 


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. 


The outline of Faust's story is already familiar 
enough, and I have given all that I think neces- 
sary in the way of illustration or commentary in 
my Notes. In this place, therefore, I have prin- 
cipally to explain the motives which led to the 
following hazardous and, some may think, pre- 
sumptuous undertaking. 

It was first suggested to me by a remark made 
by Mr. Charles Lamb to an honoured friend of 
mine: that he had derived more pleasure from the 
meagre Latin versions of the Greek tragedians, 
than from any other versions of them he was ac- 
quainted with. The following remarks by Goethe 
himself confirmed me in it:— 

" We Germans had the advantage that several 
significant works of foreign nations were first 
translated in an easy and clear manner. Shakes- 
peare translated into prose, first by Wieland, then 
by Eschenburg, being a reading generally intelli- 
gible and adapted to every reader, was enabled 
to spread rapidly, and produce a great effect. 

b 


( vi ) 

I honour both rhythm and rhyme, by which poetry 
first becomes poetry, but the properly deep and 
radically operative, — the truly developing and 
quickening, is that which remains of the poet, 
when he is translated into prose. The inward 
substance then remains in its purity and fiillness ; 
which, when it is absent, a dazzling exterior often 
deludes us with the semblance of, and, when it id 
present, conceals."* 

These will be admitted to be very high authori- 
ties in favour of occasional prose translations of 
poetry ; and I think no one who knows " Faust" 
will deny, that it is the poem of all others of which 
a prose translation ia most imperatively required,- 
for the simple reason, that it teems with thought^ 
and has long exercised a widely-spread influence 
by qualities wholly independent of metre and 
rhyme. I am not aware that I can illustrate my 
meaning better than by the following extract from 
a German Review. It forms part of a critical no- 
tice of a work by M. Rosenkranz, and may be 
taken as a fair sample of the light in which Faust 
is constantly considered in Germany: — 

^^ The various attempts to continue the infinite 

* Aus meinem Leben: Dichtung und WahrheiU — Tli, 3, B, 11. 
Hardly a single sentence of the English version, published under the 
title of Memoirs of Goethe, is to be depended' upon. In the Wei(* 
minsler Review for April, 1824, decisive proofs were given that it 
was a bad translation from a bad French translation, hy a person 
who did not understand a word of the original. It is really terrific 
to see the manner in which Goethe's reflections on religious subjects 
hare been perverted by him. 


( vii ) 

matter of Faust where Goethe drops it> although 
in themselves fruitless and unsuccessful^ at least 
show in what manifold ways this great poem may 
be conceived, and how it presents a different side 
to every individuality. ' As the sunbeam breaks 
itself differently in every eye, and the starred hea* 
ven and nature are difierent for every soul*mirror, 
so is it with this immeasurable and exhaustless 
poem. We have seen illustrators and continuera 
of Faust, who, captivated by the practical wisdom 
which pervades it, considered the whole poem. as 
one great collection of maxims of life: we have 
met with others who saw nothing else in it but a 
paotheistical solution of the enigma of existence: 
others again, more alive to the genius of poetry, ad- 
mired only the poetical clothing of the ideas, which 
otherwise seemed to them to have little significance ^ 
and others, again, saw nothing peculiar but the 
felicitous exposition of a philosophical theory, and 
the spedfication of certain errors of practical life. 
All the^e are right; for from all these points of 
view Faust is great and significant; but whilst it 
appears to follow these several directions as radia- 
tions firom a focus, at the same time it contains 
(but for the most part concealed) its peculiar, truly 
great, and principal direction; and this is the recon- 
cilement of the great contradiction of the world, 
the establishment of peace between the Real and 
the Ideal. No one who loses sight of this, the 
great foundation of Faust, will find himself in a 
condition —we do not say to explain or continue, 

b^ 


( viii ) 

but even to read and comprehend the poem. Thk 
principal basis underlies all its particular tenden- 
cies — the religious, the philosophical, the scientifici 
the practical ; and for this very reason is it, that the 
theologian, the scholar, the soldier, the man of the 
world, and the student of philosophy, to whatever 
school he may belong, are all sure of finding some- 
thing to interest them in this all-embracing pro- 
duction."* 

Now I cannot help thinking that a work of 
which this, or any thing like it, can be said with- 
out appearing preposterous, deserves to be trans- 
lated as literally as the genius of our language wilt 
admit, with an almost exclusive reference to the 
strict meaning of the words, and a comparative 
disregard of the beauties which are commonly 
thought peculiar to poetry, should they prove irre- 
concilable with the sense. I am not saying that 
they will prove so, for the noblest conceptions and 
most beautiful descriptions in Faust would be noble 
and beautiful in any language capable of containing 
them, be it as unmusical and harsh as it would — 

As sunshine broken on a rill, 

Though turned aside, is sunshine still. f 

* I translated this very hastily from a German Journal several 
months ago. I unfortunately forgot to note down the name, but I 
think it was the Blatter fur Literai-ische Unterhaltungf published 
by Brockhaus of Leipzig. 

t " It would be a most easy task to prove, that not only the lan- 
guage of a large portion of every good poem, even of the most ele- 
vated chiracter, must necessarily, except with reference to the metre, 
in no respect differ from that of good prose, but likewise that some 


( i» ) 

Still less am I saying, that such a translation would 
be the best or should be the only one. But I 
venture to think that it may possess some interest 
and utility now; when, at the distance of more than 
half a century from the first appearance of the 
work, nothing at all approximating to an accurate 
version of it exists. With one or two exceptions, 
all attempts by foreigners (foreigners as regards 
Germany, I mean,) to translate even solitary scenes 
or detached passages fi"om Faust, are crowded with 
the most extraordinary mistakes, not of words 
merely, but of spirit and tone ; and the author*s 
fame has suffered accordingly. For no warnings 
on the part of those who know and would fain 
manifest the truth, can entirely obviate the dete- 
riorating influence of the sort of versions I am 
alluding to on the mind. " I dare say," the reader 
replies, " that what you tell me about this transla- 
tion may be right, but the author's meaning can 
hardly be so obscured or perverted as to prevent 
my forming some notion of his powers." 

Now I print this translation with the view of 
proving to a certain number of my literary firiends, 
and through them perhaps to the public at large, 
that they have hitherto had nothing fi-om which 
they can form any estimate of Faust; and with 
this view, and this view only, I shall prefix a few 

of the most interesting parts of the best poems will be found to be 
strictly the language of prose, when prose is well written.'' — Words^ 
worth* s Preface to the Lyriccd Ballads, 


( * ) 

remarks on the English and French translators 
who have preceded me. 

I begin with Lord F. L. Gower, whom I shall 
be obliged to criticise with greater freedom and at 
more length than I could wish; but a combination 
of circumstances has enabled him to cast a blot on 
the fame of his original, which nothing but the 
most unsparing exposure can efiace. A man of 
rank, of acknowledged taste and talent, and a pro- 
fessed student of German literature for years,* it 
was a matter of certainty that his translation would 
be read, and that many influential critics. Would 
be favourable to him. Accordingly, his translation 
has kept the field from the hour of its publication . 
to this, to the entire suppression of many would- 
be competitors, and has been eulogised in the 
warmest terms by men whose authority stands un- 
deniably high. Thus, in the review of the second 
edition in the Quarterly Review, it was said: — 
" The translator brought to his task a thorough 
knowledge of the language of his original ; he has 
had the courage to cope with all the per]^xities 
of rhyme ; and the warmth of his poetical feeling 
is as apparent in the passages we have quoted, as 
the study which he has bestowed on English lan- 
guage and versification." In Blackwood, too, the 
writer of the celebrated review of Wallenstein, 
after calling on men of talent to make further ex- 
periments on the fruitful field of genuine German 

* I collect this from tbt Pnface to his Firtt Edition. 


( xi ) 

tragedy, remarks: *' Mr. R. P. Gillies and Lord 
Francis Gower, in particular, have already shown 
themselves to be in possession of every accom- 
plishment this labour requires/' Judgments of a 
widely difierent tendency have been subsequently 
pronounced, it is true; but they came from party 
journals and were not supported by proo&, and 
the present state of opinion as regards his lordship 
must still be very flattering, when a writer, like Mr. 
Allan Cunningham, can risk such a paragraph as 
the following: '* The German literature, with 
many brilliant things from nature, is too startling 
and grotesque, though sobered down by the taste 
of such excellent translators as Cariyle, Lord 
Francis Gower, and Coleridge."* The first of 
living critics also, A. W. von Schlegel, has awarded 
his lordship the praise of having displayed a distin- 
guished talent in a very difficult undertaking ;f a 
praise which, taken literally, I have no intention 
to dispute, for the translation certainly does contain 
individiud passages of great beauty, to ^hkh a 
I)artial critic may confidentiy point. But it is as 
unfair to found a general conclusion on particular 
beauties as on particular defects; and I stand pre- 
pared to prove that, considered as a whole, Lord 

• Life of Sir Walter Soott in the Atfaeneum of October «, 1832. 

t " Von verschiedenen unsrer dichterischea original-wexie sind 
geistreicbe Uebersetzungen erachieneo, unter denen die des Faust 
von Lord Gower ein aasgezeichnetes talent bei einem lebr schwieri- 
gen Untemehmen bewiihrt." — Kritisehe Sehriften, p. 14. Berlin, 
1824. 


( xii ) 

F. Gower's translation is about as unfaithful as a 
translation can be; and that, far from bringing to 
his task a thorough knowledge of the language of 
his original, he has hardly construed any two con- 
secutive pages aright. I proceed at once to esta- 
blish these assertions by proof. 

Lord F. Gower's faults are twofold — of omission 
and commission. To begin with those of the first 
kind — he has omitted the Prologue in Heaven, 
with the exception of the Angel's Song at the 
commencement; the Shepherds' Song, post, p. 29; 
the beautiful little Song of the Invisible Spirits, 
which follows the curse, post, p. 55; a large part 
of the scene in Auerbach's cellar; the Flower 
Scene, post, p. 130;* the Summer-house Scene, 
post, p. 133 ; and the whole of the Interlude 
supposed to be played upon the Blocksberg. 
The inevitable effect of these omissions was forci- 
bly stated in the Quarterly Review: — " In one 
page (of the original) we have Raphael and 
Gabriel uttering strains of Miltonic harmony and 
grandeur, in the hearing of all the host of Heaven. 
In another, the jabber of fiends and sorcerers in 
their witch-sabbath presents an unearthly mixture, 
in which it is impossible to draw any definite line 
between the grotesque and the ghastly, the sadness 
of immortal degradation, and the buffoonery of 
diabolical despair. In the midst of all this, human 

* Lord F. G. simply says, They make love. As I once heard a 
young lady remark — if it was'nt very naughty, one would like to 
know how they made it. 


( xiii ) 

passions — love, hatred, revenge, repentance, re- 
morse — clothe themselves alternately in the severest 
simplicity of idiomatic dialogue, and the softest or 
noblest strains of lyric poetry. Even mere satire 
— the satire of literature, of manners, of politics, 
above all, of philosophy, finds its place. The 
efiect of so strange a medley of elements must have 
been abundantly considered by so learned an artist 
as Goethe; and no translator can have any right 
to interfere with him by diminishing their number 
or variety." 

But besides omissions of the kind above-men- 
tioned, omissions of two, four, six, or eight lines 
at a time, are constantly occurring, to the irrepara- 
ble injury of those fine links of association in 
which all works of genius^ abound, and which are 
not the less to be regarded, because (as in the 
case of the finer fibres of the human body) we are 
often unconscious of their existence till they are 
snapped, and the work becomes loose and lifeless 
for want of them.* What renders these omis- 

* Id Mr. Coleridge's magnificent Translation — I had almost said. 
Poem— of Wallenstein, many lines are wanting; but the fact is, 
Mr. Coleridge translated from a MS. copy before the work was 
printed, and the lines in question were added subsequently. As 
there is little hope of his undertaking Faust, I must be pardoned 
for expressing a hope that he may yet be induced to supply these 
deficiencies, the only deficiencies, in his work. How beautifully, 
for instance, such lines as the following would read in his rich 
musical numbers, which often, it has been truly said, affect the heart 
and ear like a spell : 

Der Dienst, die Waffen sind mir eitler Tand. 
So miisste' es einem sePgen Geiste seyn 
Der aus den Wohnungen der ew'gen Freude 


( xiv ) 

sions still more censurable is, that in the Second 
and last Eklition no notice whatever is given that any 
omission of any sort has been made; and in the 
First Edition we are only cursorily informed that his 
lordship '^ had left sundry passages unattempted, 
from a conviction of his own inability to transfer 
their spirit to a translation, and that considerations 
of decency, also, in a few instances, prevented him 
from proceeding." * Where these omitted passages 
occur, and what may be their length and character, 
the reader must find out for himself; except in the 
single instance of the Prologue, which, from what 
I can collect from his note, is one of the instances 
in which he was checked by decency. Again, I 
shall borrow some just and striking remarks from 

Zu seinen Kinderspielen and Geschafcen, 
Zu seinea Neigangen uod Briidenchaften, 
Zar ganzen armen Menscheit wiederkehrte. 

The Piecolomini, Act 3, &. 5 

Wo aber bleibt sie denn ! ! goldne Zeit 
Der Reise, wo aDs jede neue Sonne 
Vereinigte, die spate Nacht nnr trennte! 
Da rann kein Sand und keine Glocke schlug. 
£s schien die Zeit dem Ueberseligen 
In ihrem ew'gen Laufe stillzustehen. 
O ! der ist aiis dem Himmel schon gefallen, 
Der an der Stunden Wechsel denken muss ! 
Die Ubr schlagt keinem Glucklicben. 

The Piecolomini, Act 3, Sc, 3. 

Several beautiful lines are also omitted in Max's last speech but 
one. Act 1, Sc. 4. 

* As the Second Edition contains much (as in the May-Day Night 
Scene) that was not in the First, the omission of this Preface in the 
Second Edition would naturally lead every one to conclude that 
there was no longer any occasion for it. 


( XV ) 

Quarterly : — " It is no great wonder that persons 
who have considered only an analysis such as 
Madame de Stael's, or a version thus incomplete, 
should 9 in spite of occasional passages, mistake 
the general purpose of the poet — and accuse him 
of ridiculing curiosity, knowledge, and virtue, 
while, in fact, he had himself taken especial pre- 
cautions (whatever may be thought of the taste 
with which he had selected some of these) to make 
it clear to every capacity, that the only objects of 
his attack were the extravagance, restlessness, and 
misery of curiosity when directed to subjects be- 
yond the legitimate range of human intellect, the 
uselessness of mere knowledge divorced from wis- 
dom by the intervention of vanity, and the feeble- 
ness of that virtue which presumes to rely solely 
on itself." 

According, therefore, to the opinion of a very 
partial critic, his Lordship has not merely aided 
in giving an immoral tendency to the poem he 
professes to purify, but has been, no doubt un- 
wittingly, the means of fixing a stigma on the 
moral and religious character of Goethe. 

I now come to faults of commission. These are 
very, very numerous, and I shall be obliged to 
quote a great many, in order to counterbalance the 
weight of authority which Lord F. Gower has 
contrived to enlist upon his side. Most of the 
examples, however, are so irresistibly ludicrous, 
that I do not think the commentary will be found 
dull. All but one are taken from the Second 
£dition, published at an interval of two years from 


( xvi ) 

the first; ample time having been thus afforded 
for the correction of mistakes. That one is the 
following. 

In allusion to the spirits invoked by Faust^ 
Wagner is made to say: — 

** They feign their native home the sky, 
Assume a false gentility, 
And lisp in English when they lie." 

Patriotism compels me to say that engUsch means 
like angels^ and conveys no national reflection. 
The line therefore stands thus: 

" And lisp like angels when they lie." 

It is strange that Gregory's pun, embalmed in 
Wordsworth's poetry,* did not give his Lordship a 
suspicion of the truth. 

All future references are to the second edition. 

In the first six lines of the Archangels' Song, 
generally considered one of the best executed parts 
of the translation, there are two slight errors and 
one glaring one : 

** The sun his ancient hymn of wonder 
Is pouring out to kindred spheres, 
And still pursues, with march of thunder, 

His pre-appointed course of years. 
Thy visage gives thy angels power, 
Though none its dazzling rays withstand." — 

Vol. i. p. 17. 

^ ** AngU by name ; and not an angel waves 

His wing, who seemeth lovelier in Heaven's eye 

Than they appear to holy Gregory.*' — EccUtiasUcal Sktieha* 


( xvii ) 

The Sun is pouring out his hymn of wonder (as 
his lordship is pleased to term it) witb, not to, 
kindred spheres, and course of years is a very in- 
correct mode of rendering reise (journey); but the 
Thy of the fifth line is the great blunder of the 
passage, as it proves Lord F. Gower to have sup- 
posed the thr and sie of the original to refer to the 
Deity. I do most earnestly assure him that they 
refer to the Sun, and that a German would no 
more think of addressing the Deity in the third 
person plural, than an Englishman of affixing Mr. 
to the name. Indeed, nothing can show more 
strongly Lord F. Gower's unacquaintance with the 
German language and literature than his repeated 
mistakes as to sie; which word is never used as a 
mode of address in elevated composition, except 
now and then ironically.* At the present moment, 
I do not recollect a single instance in the whole of 
" Faust." I subjoin two other passages, in which 
this sort of blunder occurs, to the obvious sacrifice 
of the sense. In the second scene with Mephis- 
topheles, Faust is made to speak to him thus : 

** My breast, that swells no more with learning's 
throes, 
I give to pain, and bare it to the storm ; 
And all that man enjoys, or undergoes, 
I wish concentered in this single form : 

* In speaking to equals or superiors, the Germans use the third 
person plural, as ** Wollten i\e wohl die giite haben,— would iht^ 
have the goodness." The same word, %\t, stands for both t/iri/ and 
%}it. The Sun in German is feminiDe. 


( xviii ) 

High aa yourself to mount, to dive as low ; 
Upon myself to heap your weal and woe ; 
Wide as your range my circle to extend, 
And, like yourself^ be blasted at the end" — ^p. 99. 

The full extent of this error may be seen at a 
glance on turning to the passage (post, p. 60). It 
has arisen from the translator's supposing ihr and 
ihremy which really refer to menscheit {humanity 
or the human race)^ to be the ceremonial mode of 
address. The wonder to me is, that he did not 
pause and inquire before writing down so palpable 
an absurdity as making Faust wish for the lot of 
the Devil. Again, in the dialogue between the 
Student and Mephistopheles, the latter tells the 
Student that he will daily feel a greater longing for 
the breasts of Wisdom ; to which the Student re- 
plies, that he shall joyfully hang upon her (Wis- 
dom's) neck. His lordship, misled by ihrem again, 
makes him reply: 

" Sir, from your neck I shall with joy depend :" 

as if he wanted to hug Mephistopheles ! 

To bring these mistakes together I have been 
obliged to anticipate a little. Going back to the 
conclusion of the first paragraph of Faust's first 
soliloquy, (post, p. 8,) I find the following cou- 
plets : — 

<< That I may need dispense no more 
The solemn nothings of my store, 
But dealing less in words than cteedSf 
Explore the world*s primaeval seeds." 


( xix ) 

Any one would suppose from this that Faust was 
anxious for action instead of knowledge, and had 
thoughts of going forth to battle by way of getting 
better acquainted with the world. Lord F. Gower 
would say, no doubt, that he could not complete 
the couplet with a word (as things or realities) 
conveying the right meaning. In such cases he 
ought to annex a Nota Bene like that to the fol- 
lowing epitaph : — 

" Here lies the body of Nicholas New City, 

He died t*other day, the more's the pity ! 
N,B. — The man's name was Oldtown, but it woulcfnt 
rhyme" 

In the next page but one (p. 24), we find the 
simple expressions den wurme nagen — which 
worms gnaw, expanded thus : — 

" Where revelling worms peruse the store 
Of wisdom's antiquated lore." 

Can anything be more inconsistent with the spirit 
of the scene than this conceit? There are a few 
good lines in page 25, but all the rest of the invo- 
cation scene is given in the weakest and most 
wishy-washy style. For example : — 

Faust. 
Yes, I am Faust, a powerful name, 
Thy more than equal, child of flame. 

Spirit. 
I wander and range 
Through existence's change, 
Above and below, 


( XX ) 

Through the tide and the flow, 
I shoot and I sparkle, and never am still. 

Faust. 
. Say, thou ever roving spirit. 
What relation can I bear to thee ? 

Spirit. 
To some other form, in another state, 
Thou mayest bear relation. 
Not to me." * 

I know not why Faust is made to declare him- 
self " a powerful name," except to justify his call- 
ing himself " more than equal," which he does not 
pretend to in the original. The six lines chaunted 
by the Spirit remind me strongly of the country- 
man, who managed to spell a word (usage) in such 
a manner {yowsitcK) that not a single letter be- 
longing to it was left. But for the position of the 
lines, I could not have discovered what they were 
intended for. The words which Lord F. Gower 
translates as a question — " What relation can I 
bear to thee ?" are an exclamation, " How near I 
feel to thee !" which the Spirit answers: " Thou art 
mate for (or thou resemblest) the spirit whom thou 
conceivest, not for me." To make the Spirit deny 
any relation to Faust, is in direct contradiction to 
a preceding passage, in which the relation of every 
thing to every thing is dwelt upon. But perhaps 
Lord F. Gower meant relationship; i. e. that the 
Spirit was not uncle, aunt, grandfather, or grand- 
mother, to Faust. 

* p. 28, and post, p. 12. 


( xxi ) 

Two pages after, in the course of Faust's re- 
marks on elocution, we find:— 

" And must we, when we learn to speak, 
Consider how 'twould sound in Greek V* 

I doubt whether any man ever asked such a 
question before. I am sure Goethe never did. 
But this is a favourite mode of eking out a line 
with his lordship. Thus: — 

*^ The chemist calls it Nature's encheiresis, 
And scarce knows why, although the name from 
Greece is." — p. 108. 

" To gain the love, and learn my Greek of 
A man whom all with honour speak of.'* — p. 104. 

When Greece won't serve his turn, he manages to 
make shift with Rome : — 

" Confirm a story I have made, 
jis how* her husband's limbs are laid 
At Padua, in a decent tomb. 

Faust, 

". Fine 1 I must travel then almost to Rome." — 

4 

p. 180. 

I need hardly say that there is nothing about 
Rome, Greece, or Greek in the original. At page 
32 are the lines following : — 

Wagner. 
And yet 'tis surely neither shame nor sin. 
To learn the world and those that dwell therein, 

* When Tremaine came out, he was voted vulgar in the exclu- 
sive circles for constantly saying. As how. Behold an unimpeachable 
authority ! 

C 


( xxii ) 

Faust. 
Yes, call it learnings if you will. 
Thus may you give each dog you meet a name, 
'Tis hard to make him answer to the same" 

The literal translation (post, p. 15,) will show 
the incorrectness of this passage. Erkennen is 
not learning, and the two last lines, about the dog, 
are doggrel with a vengeance. I can hardly un- 
derstand how a man of Lord F. Gower's accom- 
plishments could bring himself to write such a 
couplet, or finish it off with the same, were it not 
evident from other passages, that he has a fancy 
for the phrase. Thus: — 

** Excuse me, Sir, I heard your voice declaim, 
And thought you read some Grecian tragedy ; 
I wished to hear and profit by the same." — ^p. 29. 

" I should turn godfather, and give the name 
Of Mr. Microcosm to the same" — p. 100. 

" And puts his arm around their waist, 
To see how tight the same is laced." — ^p. 113. 

" True, as she could, she earned the same, 
And paid her gallant with her shame." — ii. p. 12. 

A lawyer might urge the excuse of habit; nor do 
I see any thing censurable in the Irish attorney's 
challenge, " to meet him in The Fifteen Acres (a 
sort of Irish Chalk Farm) be the same more or 
less;" but the prodigal use of it by Lord F. Gower 
is a riddle to me. 

The beginning of Faust's soliloquy ^p. 34,) is 
mistaken, and almost all of it will be found on 


( xxiii ) 

comparison exceedingly weak. I would particu- 
larly instance the last six lines, spoken just before 
he sets the goblet to his lips : 

** In thee I ne'er shall pledge my friend again, 
Or for such rhyme the quick invention strain^ 
This juice of fatal strength and browner hue, 
Would make the unfinished verses feet too few : 
In thee the troubles of my soul I cast, 
Hail the blest drops, and drain them to the last."* 

There is nothing about unfinished verses, or 
casting troubles into the cup, in the original. 

Passing by many minor departures from the 
sense, and some singular verbal mistakes, such as 
translating irauskopf (a person who has frizzled 
or curled hair) the Old OnCy-f and Freyer (lover 
or sweetheart) fHar% — I pass on to the best of all 
conceivable tests. I will take one of the most 
splendid passages in the poem — a passage perhaps 
never equalled, and certainly never excelled, in 
its kind; one, in short, where every translator of 
taste must feel all his energies called up; and I 
shall prove that Lord F. Gower hardly understood 

* p. 40, and post, p. 20. 

t p. 48, and post, p. 25. On seeing the context, I think most 
readers will agree with me, that " the Young One," would have 
been the better emendation, had it been necessary to make one. 
The line as it stands — 

" The Old One at his elbow walks to-day, ** — 
might give rise to an unpleasant supposition. 

X " There was a lion red, a friar bold. 

Who married lilies in their bath of gold." — p. 58. 

c2 


( xxiv ) 

a line of it. It is the passage occupying from p. 
33, 1. 2 from the bottom, to p. 34, 1. 8, from the 
bottom, in my translation. Lord F. Gower has 
translated it thus : — 

" Happy in error's sea who finds the land, 
2. Or o*er delusion's waves his limbs can buoy; 

We use the arts we cannot understand — 
4. And what we know, we know not to employ. 

But let us not, in fancy's moody play, 
6. The moment's present raptures waste away. 

See how, from tufted trees, in evening's glow, 
8. Ere daylight sets, the cottage casements glow: 

It sinks, the sun has lived another day, 
10. And yields to death hut to recruit his fires : 

Alas ! no wing may bear me on my way, 
1 2. To track the monarch as his orb retires. 

/ matched him, as he sought the west : 
14. Beneath his feet creation slept, 

Each summit blood- red bright, each vale at rest, 
1 6 . The waveless streams like golden serpents crept. 

In vain yon mountain's arrowy pinnacle 
18. To the mind's flight opposed its precipice. 

Ocean himself retired, his billows fell, 
^0. And for my path disclosed his huge abyss. 

The vision ceased, the sun's glad reign was o'er, 
22. Yet the wish died not with returning night. 

Darkness behind me, and the day before, 
24f. On rush*d my soul to drink the eternal light. 

Seas roll'd beneath, and skies above me rose. 
26. Blest dream ! It vanish'd in its loveliest prime. 

Alas ! no mortal wings may succour those, 
28. Which lifl the mind upon its flight sublime." — 

pp. 59—61. 


( XXV ) 

I have added the numbers for the convenience 
of reference. The leading, all-pervading and 
all-destroying blunders of this passage will be 
found in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth lines^ 
where Faust is made simply to regret that he has 
no wing, instead of expressing that regret as a 
wish, and to say, " / watched Aiwi," instead of / 
should see him; in other words, his lordship has 
mistaken Ich s'dh\ the imperfect of the subjunc- 
tive, for Ich sahy the imperfect of the indicative, 
and changed the tenses of all the subsequent verbs 
to accord. We have thus a vision supposed to be 
passing through the mind of the speaker as he 
speaks, translated as a description of something 
that was past. I ask any candid Englishman what 
he would think of a German who should treat 
one of Shakespeare's finest effusions in this man- 
ner. For example, Edgar's speech in Lear:— ^ 

" Come on, Sir; here's the place: — stand still. — How 
fearful 
And dizzy frvas, to cast one's eyes so low ! 
The crows and dhoughs that winged the midway air, 
Showed scarce so gross as beetles : Half way down 
Hung one who gathered samphire'' — 

But I have not half nor a quarter done with this 
passage yet; for his lordship, not content with 
killing it, has ruthlessly mutilated its parts. What 
are limbs (1. 2.) brought in for? or where does his 
lordship get — 

'* We use the arts we cannot understand." 


( xxvi ) 

In the tenth line — 

" And yields to death but to recruit his fires/' 

it is evident that he has mistaken fordem^ to pro- 
mote^ ioxfordern^ to demand. The idea presented 
is not Goethe's but Gray's — 

" To-morrow he renews his golden flood, 
And warms the nations with redoubled ray." 

And I am far from thinking that Goethe gains by 
the exchange ; for it is surely much more compli- 
mentary to the Sun^ to suppose him rolling on in 
unfading splendour eternally, and diffusing light 
and heat as he goes, than to send him home every 
night, like a lamplighter, to fetch a fresh bottle of 
oil. The 16th line is no translation at all. The 
line it stands for is — 

'' The silver brook flowing into golden streams." 

His lordship doubtless saw no meaning in it, but 
it is, notwithstanding, capable of two. It may 
allude to the gradual gilding of the waters, as the 
sun-beams come to play upon them ; or to another 
natural phenomenon, which I will explain by an 
anecdote. In the summer of 1831, it was my good 
fortune to pass through the beautiful valley of 
Ahrenberg, a valley which wants but a Moore to 
make an Ovoca of it.* Whilst we were changing 
horses, I walked with a German student to a rising 
ground to get a better view of the scenery. The 

* It lies on the road between Elberfeldt and CaHel. 


( xxvii ) 

setting sun was shining in such a manner^ that the 
beams massed themselves on a broad part of the 
stream^ and fell transversely over a tributary brook, 
thus giving a rich golden glow to the river and the 
appearance of a white silvery line to the rivulet. 
We had hardly gained the height, when my fellow 
traveller exclaimed : — 

"Den Silberbach ingoldne Stroma fliessen." 

In the 19th and ^th lines, all the tenses, as I 
have already intimated, are wrong, and his lord- 
ship has actually translated aufthun, which here 
means to open on the sight,* as if it meant to 
open in the sense of unclosing. Thus, instead of 
a sun-lit ocean — one of Nature's Claudes, we have 
a great black ugly gulph with whales and por- 
poises splashing about at the bottom of it, which the 
very Israelites would be afraid to go through with- 
out Pharaoh and his host at their heels. The 
// in line 26, is another unfortunate perversion of 
sie, and in the present instance, there is not the 
semblance of an excuse ; for Traum {dreani) being 
masculine, sie necessarily refers to the Sun, which 
is represented as disappearing whilst the vision is 
passing. The word succour (instead of keep pace 
with) in the 27th line, is so glaringly wrong, that 
it is hardly necessary to point attention to it. I 
cannot resist quoting the first four lines of Wag- 
ner's next speech: — 

" I have had fancies, but for such as these, 
They never troubled me, as I remember ; 

* In nautical phrase, to loom. 


( xxviii ) 

I soon have gazed my fill at fields and trees, 
Envying no bird his wings, or any member.** 

The words in italics are pure expletives, inserted 
with the sole object of making member rhyme to 
remember; unless, indeed, it was intended to 
make Wagner speak in the language of English 
pleading, and deny that he envied, not merely 
the wings, but the head, breast, neck, thighs, 
legs, or feet of the bird. 

The first scene with Mephistopheles aflTords two 
striking illustrations of Lord F. Gower's want of 
familiarity with the commonest German words. He 
translates 

" Keines der Viere 
Steckt in dem Thiere." 

" None of the Four 
Stand in the door.*' 

And— 

" Ich habe jetzt dich kennen lemen." 

" I have just learnt to study you.*' 

The German scholar who cannot distinguish 
Thier (beast) jfrom Thilr (door), and does not 
know that kennen lernen means *' to become ac- 
quainted with," can hardly be complimented on 
his proficiency. 

From this scene also, I shall take an example 
of the noble translator's mode of dealing with phi- 
losophical passages, where the utmost caution is 
obviously required : 

'* I am a part of part, which once was at the head^ 
Part of the darkness yVom rvhich light was bred; 


( xxix ) 

Proud element, which now disputes the right 
His mother has to govern space in night ; 
And yet succeeds not. Struggle as he will, 
Corporeal fetters must enchain him still ; 
And, if corporeal forms he chance to meet. 
They make a shadow of him in the street. 
So, for light's sake, in duty bound I pray, 
Bodies may perish at an early day." — p. 60. 

The literal meaning may be seen, post, p. 44 — 
45, and two illustrative quotations are given in 
a note. It will there be found that by the change 
of all into at the head, Lord F. Gower has de- 
stroyed the analogy which gives the passage its 
force. If darkness was at the head, light must 
have been cotemporary with it, and the " Let 
there be light, and there was light," is nonsense. 
The second line is couched in the language of 
Tattersall's, and would lead one to suppose that 
darkness was a brood-mare. Again, if light was bred 
out of darkness, it could not be an element ; and 
to make the author of the Farbenlehre repre- 
sent light as being made a shadow of, is going a 
little too far. The two last lines, also, are glaringly 
wrong. Mephistopheles hopes, not that bodies 
may perish for light's sake, but that light and body 
may perish together ; the phrase — " in duty bound 
I pray" — is a mere expletive, and a very ill chosen 
one, for it is not the devil's duty nor inclination 
to pray for the destruction of matter for light's 
sake^ and he is not very likely to pray at all. 

The next scene, in Faust's study, is crowded 


( XXX ) 

with errors. I shall mendon the most glaring^ 
Faust's wish for death is thus given : 

" Thrice happy he, for whom, in victory's light 
Round the pale brow the gory wreath he twines, 
Whom, after dancing's mad delight, 

Lock'd in affection's arms he finds. 
Oh ! that, by such a road my soul might pass, 
And quit this wretched shivering frame." 

On turning to the original (or post, p. 53), it 
will be seen that Faust wished he had died when 
the spirit appeared to him, and that, without this 
allusion, what follows loses a considerable portion 
of its point. The curse is well translated, but it 
begins with a palpable mistake : 

" What, though remember 'd music's powers 
One instant o'er my senses stole. 
And, with the forms of earlier hours. 

From frenzy's grasp recall'd my soul ! 
Still shall my curse invoke confusion," &c. 

Faust curses because remembered music's powers, 
&c. (see post, p. 54.) 

The chorus of spirits, (post, p. 55,) is left out; 
and the immediately following speech of Mephis- 
topheles is singularly misconstrued : 

'* Cease to indulge the moody pain. 

Which, vulture-like, consumes the mind : 

Bad as man is, you must remain 
A human being amid mankind. 

And yet I boast no great man's right, 
To bid you bear, without relief. 
Your mental tax of silent grief." 


( xxxi ) 

It is sufficient to refer to the literal translation 
(post, p. 56.) There is no mention of taxes; 
and I have always understood that those im- 
posed by great men refer rather to matter than 
to mind. 

The end of Faust's speech (post, p. 57,) where 
he professes his indifference as to whether there 
be an Above or Below in the other spheres, is thus 
given : — 

" And whether, of those other spheres, 
Some are below and some above." 

And where (post, p. 59,) Faust says that there 
is no fear of his breaking the contract, as what he 
promises is precisely what all his energies are 
striving for, he is made to say : 

" Only no fear that I my word evade. 
To strain each nerve, to keep my faith aright. 
Is the plain substance of the vow I m^de." 

The notion of the substance of a vow being to 
keep the same vow, strikes me to be about as irre- 
concileable with common sense, as it certainly is 
with the sense of the original. The passage in 
which Mephistopheles tells Faust to associate him- 
self with a poet, is one mass of error: 

** I thought the burthen of the song. 
That time is short, and art is long. 
Had urged you to pursue instruction. 
By reasoning, logic, and induction. 


( xxxii ) 

/ deemed some poet yawr ally, 

With genius ever on its mettle, 
Each more resplendent quality 

Upon your honoured head to settle : 
The stag's swifl foot, the lion's boldness, 
Italian fire, and German coldness. 
/ thought tlie hard had told us how your mind 
Cunning and magnanimity combined : 
And how, when youth's warm impulse drove. 
On system you could fall in love. 
If in my travels I should chance to see 
A man like this, the world's epitome, 
I should turn godfather, and give the name 
Of Mr. Microcosm to the sameJ* — pp. 99 — 100. 

Compare this with the original or with the passage 
(post^ p. 61.) In the same scene we have : 

*•* Euch ist kein Mass und Ziel gesetzt," 
translated by 

" Your wishes are not well defined." 
And ellenhohe Socken by 

'< Boot-Jieels longer than your legs and thighs." 
These lines, also, are mistranslations : 

<< The happiest he, who by the word abides, 
That leads him straight where certainty resides, 
And everlasting truth is found." — 

p. Ill, and post, p. 68. 

" Yet ere we mix in life refined, 
1 would this beard were lefl behind." — 

p. 115, and post, p. 71. 


( xxxiii ) 

Lord F. Gower did wisely, so far as his own 
reputation is concerned, to omit the larger part of 
the scene in Auerbach's cellar, for with his unac- 
quaintance with German idioms, and evident dis- 
like to what is low, he would certainly have made 
sad work of it. Indeed, this is no matter of spe- 
culation, for much of the little he has attempted is 
wrong. For example: 

" What has that game-legg'd varlet here to do ?" — 
" You seem a very easy gentleman." — p. 120. 

ALTMAYER. 

" I think I felt him gently brush my side.* 

SlEBEL. 

What ! will he, then, again among us glide, 
Our beards to bum — our threats to brave ?" — 

p. 127. 

The lines with which the three last are meant to 
correspond are the two first lines of p. 85, post 

But the most extraordinary mistake is in the 
passage where one of the revellers calls on the 
rest to attack Mephistopheles, with the exclama- 
tion, er ist vogelfrei; literally, he is outlawed. 
This his lordship gives : 

** Thrust home cold iron — he is bullet-proof!^* 

This exclamation was natural enough for the Whigs 
at Lowdon Hill, when they saw (as they said) 
the bullets recoiling from Claverhouse's buff coat 

• The original of this line is — 

" Ich dacht, wir hiesse ihn sachte seitw'drts gehn." 


( xxxiv ) 

and jack boots like hailstones,* but it was not very 
likely to escape from boon companions in a cellar 
in the fifteenth century, who are immediately af- 
terwards represented as attacking Mephistopheles 
with their knives. 

I have occupied so much room already with my 
criticisms, that I must confine myself, if possible, 
to a few brief additional examples from the re- 
maining scenes. In the Witch scene, I shall only 
call attention to two. At p. 138, Lord F. Gower 
makes Mephistopheles say, 

<< By incidents like this, at least we learn, 
That poets are not quite the fools they seem.*' 

The observation thus perverted alludes to the 
monkeys, not to poets in general, and to some 
verses sung by the monkeys, (post, p. 94,) which 
his lordship has left out. The end of the witch's 
incantation: 

" This is the witch's one-times-one ;" 

he translates, 

'* That is the witch's once go one." 

From this it is clear that he did not know that 
Einmal-Eins means Multiplication-table, for the 
literal translation would have suited equally well 
with the rhyme. The speech of Mephistopheles 


• " Try him with the cold steeP' — was the cry at every renewed 
charge — " powder is wasted on him." — (Old Mortality.) 


( XXXV ) 

next following is badly given. In Faust's first 
speech after seeing Margaret (post, p. lOl), there 
is a most ridiculous mistake : 

" As with her gown held up, she fled, 
That well-turn'd ankle well might turn one's head !" 

The expression which he supposes himself 
translating is^ kurz angebunden. On looking out 
each individual word in his dictionary, Lord F. 
Gower would possibly find kurz^ shorty angebun- 
den, tied or fastened; but idioms won't bear ana- 
lysing, and I do most respectfully assure him, that 
the two words in combination are a very common 
mode of speech to express tartness, sharpness, or 
irritability. I must say, I think it extremely hard 
on Faust, to represent him as excited by the view 
of Margaret's legs, and a little hard on Margaret 
herself, to represent her as wearing her petticoats 
so short. 

When left alone in Margaret's chamber, Faust 
gradually works himself into a passion of repent- 
ance, and resolves on giving up his enterprize; 
when, therefore, Mephistopheles appears with the 
casket, he exclaims : 

" Away, away, I return no more" — 

meaning, that he will never come there again. 
Lord F. Gower translates it: 

" Begone yourself! for I go hence no more" — 

And the Quarterly Reviewer cites the passage with 
commendation. 


( xxxvi ) 

The scene in Martha*8 house teems with ridi-* 
culous mistakes. Martha is introduced by Goethe 
as wishing for a certificate of her husband's death, 
to give plausibility to Mephistopheles's design of 
introducing Faust as a witness. His lordship, 
however, translates : 

" Vielleicht ist er gar todt ! Oh Fein ! 

Hatt'ich nur einen TodUnsckein!*^ 
'* Perhaps he is dead: oh sad condition ; 

Could I but see his apparition !** 

Again, at the end of the same scene, two wit- 
nesses being necessary, Mephistopheles says he 
has a companion who will go with him before the 
judge, and proposes to introduce him to the ladies. 
It is subsequently agreed, that the introduction 
shall take place in Martha's garden the same 
evening. His lordship leaves out all mention of 
the judge, and concludes the scene thus : 

Martha. 

" Here in the garden he shall make his oath : 
This very evening we expect you both." 

There are two other passages in this scene which 
I am tempted to quote: 


« 


He, as in Naples once he promenaded, 

By a fair gentlewoman was regarded; 

And so much truth and love she show'd my friend, 

He bore their tokens to his latter end.'' — 

p. 175, and post, p. 119. 


( xxxvii ) 

Again^ Mephistoph'eles is made to say to Mar- 
tha: 

" Were you and he to change to-day, 
He well might find the task as great, 
Your vacuum to reinstate." — 

p. 176, and post, p. 119. 

What his lordship means by reinstating a widow's 
vacuum, I cannot pretend to explain. 

In the short scene of four pages, in which Me- 
phistopheles tries to persuade Faust to bear testi- 
mony to the death of Martha's husband, three 
palpable mistranslations occur : 

" Wenn er nichtsbesser hat, so ist der Plan zerrissen." 
" I never heard a plan so void of sense." — ^p. 180, 

" Ja wenn man nichts ein wenig besser wiisste." 
" True, were I like yourself, and just as clever." 

p. 181. 

" Wer Recht behalten will und l|it nur eine Zunge, 
Behalt's gewiss. 

" Those who support the truth with simple tongues. 
The truth the best support." — p. 182. 

The words from which his lordship has deduced 
this axiom in favour of simplicity, really mean no 
more than that if a man be resolved on having the 
last word, and have but a tongue in his head^ 
there is no preventing him ; but it is his lordship's 
practice throughout, to translate idioms word for 
word by his dictionary, following, in this respect, 
the example of the Frenchman, who translated 
" I have other fish to fry," literally. 

d 


( xxxviii ) 

The love-scenes, as I have said already, are 
miserably curtailed ; but enough remains to furnish 
the ordinary complement of mistakes. What can he 
mean by fixing such twaddle as this upon Goethe? 

Margaret. 
" Yes, you are courteous, kind, and good, 
But then you come of gentle blood, 
Have many a friend of many a nation, 
And more than all this, education. 

Faust. 
Dulness, not knowledge, wrinkles oft the brow ; 
Folly will often dress at wisdom. 

Maroaret. 

How?"— 
p. IS5, and post, p. 126. 

She may well say, How ? and Tm sure I can't 
tell her ; but I think it would be better for both 
parties if Folly would leave Wisdom alone. The 
reader will find that there is nothing about gentle 
blood, education, dulness, wrinkles, or brows, in 
the original. His lordship has drawn exclusively 
upon his own resources for all these ; unless the 
line about education was borrowed from — 

" When land and money, all are spent. 
Then learning is most excellent." 

Which, by the by, was paraphrased by Porson, 


( xxxix ) 

after swallowing the contents of the last jug upon 
the table : 

" When wine and brandy all are spent, 
Then table beer*s most excellent." 

To the following passage I request the particu- 
lar attention of those who have had the patience 
to accompany me thus far. Upon it I would wil- 
lingly rest the whole question as to Lord F. 
Gower's capacity for feeling or translating the 
work. It is taken from the scene in which Mar- 
garet describes the care and anxiety her little sister 
occasioned her : 

" Before its birth my father was no more, 
My mother almost gave it o*er : 
It pined, and then recovered hy degrees ; 
'Twas I must feed it, hold it on my knees ; 
And thus I watch*d and nurs'd it, all alone. 
And grew to look upon it as my own. 

Faust. 
How sweet your task to rear the drooping flower ! 

Margaret. 
And yet it cost me many a weary hour : 
And then, besides, to tend the house affairs — 
'T would weary you to tell you all my cares." 

p. 187, and post, p. 127, 128. 

A passage, occupying twenty-three lines in the 
original, is here compressed into ten — a passage 
deriving its beauty exclusively from the number of 
minute particulars and the succession of delicate 
touches, by which the picture is worked up ; even 

d2 


( xl ) 

these ten lines, too, are defaced by an unpardon* 
able mistake. Goethe, to suggest a natural reason 
for devolving the cares of a mother upon Margaret, 
makes her say that her mother was given up for 
lost and only recovered by degrees. His lordship 
transfers the lingering illness to the child. I can 
add nothing which will not suggest itself to every 
one on barely reading the literal translation, but I 
trust the Quarterly Reviewers will not commend 
his lordship for poetical feeling again. On this 
occasion, however, I cannot help thinking that 
he was repelled, as it were, from accuracy, by the 
same sort of feeling which sent Sir Robert Hazle- 
wood of Hazlewood from the bar.* He could no 
more bring himself to write of wash-tubs than the 
worthy baronet to speak of tallow-candles. 

The passage in which Faust prays that, as it is 
his doom to be the ruin of Margaret, they may 
perish together and perish quickly, — is given with 
singular weakness (p. 198, and post, p. 140) ; and 
the reply of Mephistopheles — 

" Geh* ein imd troste sie, du Thor !" 
literally 

" Get in and comfort her, thou fool," — 

* *' The first ca^, indeed, which was laid on my table, quite sick- 
ened me ; it respected a bargain, Sir, of tallow, between a butcher 
and a candle- maker ; and I found it was expected that I should 
grease my mouth, not only with their vulgar names, but with all the 
technical terms and phrases, and peculiar language, of their dirty 
arts. Upon my honour, my good Sir, I have never been able to 
bear the smell of a tallow-candle since'*'— Gu^ Mannering. 


^ 


( xli ) 

is thus translated: 

" Console her — tell her things may mend.** 

I am pretty nearly tired of my task, though I 
feel it a duty to go through with it. I am there- 
fore happy that I can pass' over the celebrated 
answer of Faust when questioned about his reli- 
gion. It will form the subject of a note to a forth- 
coming work by a friend of mine. At the end of 
the scene, however, there is a new reading of 
Freyer, which deserves notice. His lordship now 
translates it magister artium. In the scene pre- 
ceding the death of Valentine, I find a very ludi- 
crous mistake. There is a German superstition, 
not unknown in other countries, that a blue light 
hovers over places where treasure lies hid. In 
allusion to this, Faust says: 

" Riickt wohl der Schatz indessen in die Hoh* ? 
Den ich dorthinten fiimmern seh'. 

His lordship translates this question and the reply 

as follows: 

Faust. 
" Say, does yon taper's light reveal 
The secret store we came to steal ?" 

Mephistofheles. 

" It does : and shortly you shall share, 
The treasures which are hoarded there. 
Dollars they are, all fresh and new, 
Undipped by Christian, Turk, or Jew."* 

* Po&t, p. 1 55, and see the note. 


( xlii ) 

In allusion to this treasure, Faust says that he 
dislikes going empty-handed to Margaret, upon 
which Mephistopheles remarks : 

" £s sollt* euch eben nicht verdriessen, 
Umsonst auch etwas su geniessen." 

Lord F. Gower puts in the place of this, — for I 
cannot accuse him of translating it, though I have 
no doubt from internal evidence that he thought 
he was doing so, — the following couplet: 

** To please you both, I shall provide 
A trifle of my own beside." 

» 

In the dying speech of Valentine to his sister 
there is a beautiful little allegory, beginning: 

" When first Shame is 6om," &c. — (See post, p. 159.) 
Lord F. Gower begins it : 

" When crime is newly brought to hed^*-^ 

and completely spoils the allegory by changing the 
acting person or personification three times in the 
course of it. He has first, "crime," then "the novice," 
then " vice ;" from all which it seems clear that, by 
some unaccountable mental process, his lordship's 
notions of the allegorical Shame were mixed up 
with the gross physical image of a young lady in 
bed — a nurse, a cradle, caudle, and pap. 

In the cathedral scene (vol. ii. p. 39, post, p. 
161,) there are two unconscious mistakes, and one 


( xliii ) 

wilful one. Vergriffnen is not snatched in haste, 
— and by translating 

" In deinem Herzen, 
Welche Missethat?" 

" Is it not in thy heart, 
The blackening spot?'* 

the whole force of the question is lost. The 
meaning is, which of your many crimes is more 
immediately present to you ? The wilful fault is 
well-known. The scene concludes by Margaret's 
exclaiming: 

" Neighbour,* your smelling bottle !" — 

and fainting away. Lord F. Gower finishes the 

scene thus : 

" Help me, I faint !" 

On this subject the Quarterly Reviewer observes: 
" The last exclamation is, in the original, * Nach- 
barin, euer flUschen.' The translator probably 
thought the contrast of the awful Latin chorus, 
the whispers of a demon, and the poor Margaret 
asking the girl that kneels next to her for her 
phial, too violent— too German. But the poet 
knew what he was doing; — the effect of his three 
bare common words is terrible. It is among the 
highest triumphs of genius to blend, without pro- 
ducing the effect of incongruity, the dream and the 
reality ; and this simple girl's agonies, whether of 

* Nadiharin is female neighbour. 


( xliv ) 

lovei sorrow, or despair, would have been compara- 
tively powerless, had she not been taught to utter 
them in the vivid poetry of such prose as this." 

Does not the Reviewer think it more likely for 
a fainting girl to call for a smelling-bottle than a 
phial? As to his lordship's emendation, I should 
hardly think two opinions can exist. 

In the Walpurgis-Night Scene, his lordship was 
enabled to profit by Shelley's Translation as well 
as by the criticisms which it called forth, but he 
has not profited so largely as he might have done. 
To make up for the want of familiar modes of 
speech in other parts of the poem requiring them, 
his lordship has introduced a large allowance of 
them here. For instance, Mephistopheles says: 

" By this way we are still far from our destination.*' 

Lord F. Gower has it: 
" Could we but post it, then the way were short." 

The notion of posting it over the Hartz moun- 
tains by night in the 16th century, is certainly 
original. The will-o'the-wisp, too, is told to " turn 
link,'* and made to exclaim: 


« 


Rays, by the centre, dress! quick march, my light! 


as if he had been reviewing a battalion of the 
Guards. There is no warrant for any of these 


( »lv ) 

lively efiusions in the text. On referring again to 
the lines which he translates: 

" Lead us right that we may enter 
Strange enchantment's dreamy spheres." — 

Lord F. Gower will see that they had already en- 
tered. And in translating 

" Aher sag mir ob wir stehen ? 

Oder ob wir weiter gehen ?" 
" Tell rae, tell me, sfiall we stay, 

Or pursue our mystic way ?" 

he has copied one of Shelley's worst mistakes.* 
He has spoilt the beautiful passage beginning : 

** Hier leuchtet Ghtt aus Dunst und Flor — 

in the same manner in which he has spoilt the 
allegory of Shame before-mentioned. Instead of 
keeping Glut (translate it as he would) as the 
nominative throughout, he has it, first as mine- 
damp, then as mist, and then as metal. It is 
neither, f 

In the description of the effects of the storm, 
his lordship must fain introduce a prettiness: 

" Those that stand, they groan and creak, 
Their triumph o*er the storm to speak." 

His lordship's single mistakes, like the Irishman's 
single misfortunes, never come alone. Groaning 

* See poBt, p. 166. t Vol. ii. p. 40, and post, p. 167. 


( xlvi ) 

and creaking would be an odd mode of ex- 
pressing triumph, were there any triumph to 
express; but there is none. All goes down before 
the hurricane — 

" Im furchterlich verworrenen Falle 
Ueber einander krachen sie aUe** — 

or, to borrow Shelley's magnificent lines, equally 
true to the required effect and to the text : 

** The trunks are crushed and shattered 
By the fierce blast's unconquerable stress. 
Over each other crack and crash they all. 
In terrible and intertangled £alV* 

The music of these lines really comes upon the ear 
like the full crash of an oratorio orchestra. 

The song of the Half-Chorus of Wizards is 
mistranslated in a manner that is really inconceiv* 
able : 

*' We slink like snails upon the floor, 
The women always go before. 
When all on evil ways depart 
JVe have a thousand paces start.*' 

The plain meaning is, that in going to the devil, 
women are a thousand paces in advance. * Was his 
lordship ignorant that Herenmeister (the persons 
speaking) are males. The last seven lines of 
this scene are left out, and it finishes thus : 

" What's here — a playhouse ? On the moral stage 
*Tis good to see the vices of the age. 
How now ? a hill, 

* Post, p. 169. 


( xlvii ) 

SCEIBILIS. 

This instant will be given 

A bran new piece, the last and best of seven." 

For the line^i ia italics there is no warrant what- 
ever in the text ; and it strikes me as preposterous 
in the extreme to make Mephistopheles talk maud- 
lin morality on the Blocksberg. 

If anything, Lord F. Gower has taken still greater 
liberties with the single prose scene in Faust than 
with any part, of the same length, of the poetry. 

e.g.— 

Faust. 
" Dog! bestial wretch! Change, thou Eternal Spirit, 
change his shape once more to its canine form! make 
him become the attendant who courted and won my 
notice on my nightly path ; become the fawning thing 
who crouched before the wanderer's feet, in guise as 
harmless as that wanderer waSf when first he met him. 
Yes! assume the form of his companion, his favourite, 
crawl in the sand, that with his foot he may crush thee 
into its bosom! S)ie not the first! Oh! misery, mi- 
sery ! That the woe of woman was ever such as hers ! 
that the first should not have atoned for her children in 
the eyes of all-forgiving Heaven !" 

The sentence in italics is inserted instead of the 
allusion to the superstition explained in the note to 
my translation of the scene.* The words which his 
lordship translates by " the form of his (Faust's) 
companion, his favourite," are seine Lieblings^ 
bildung) I. e. " his (Mephistopheles') favourite 
form.'* The confusion of persons, the perversion of 

* Post, p. 190, 191, and note. 


( xlviii ) 

sense occasioned by this blunder, and the incor- 
rectness of the rest of the paragraph, are suffi- 
ciently obvious. The following speech, placed 
in the mouth of Mephistopheles, is still more ob- 
jectionable. 

** MEPHISTOPHELES. 

" I cannot loosen the bonds of the Avenger. I may 
not draw his bolts. — Save her ! — who was it placed her 

beyond salvation ^ — I or thou? [Faust looks wildly 

roundJ] Dost thou grasp at the thunder ? Well that 

it was not given to the hand of wretched mortality to 
smite the guiltless object that crosses us. It is the true 
resource of the tyrant in distress.** 

The words translated : " Who was it placed her 
beyond salvation," are "Wer war's, der sie ins 
verderben stiirzte ?" " Who was it that hurled her 
into ruin ?" She was not placed beyond salvation^ 
as the conclusion of the drama shows ; and to put 
such a falsehood in the mouth of Mephistopheles 
manifests, in my opinion, a radical misunder- 
standing of the character. The passage as to the 
thunder runs : *' Well that it was not given to 
you, wretched mortals !'* Lord F. Gower makes the 
immortal demon identify himself with that very mor- 
tality which he contemns. In the same scene, Bluts- 
chuld is translated curse of blood; lanem, lour; and 
" Mord und Tod einer welt iiber dich, ungeheuer,^ 
'^ The curse of murdered worlds upon thee, assassin 
of creation .'" It is literally " Murder and death of a 
world upon thee, monster ;" alluding, of course, to 
the temptation and fall of man. I defy his Lord- 
ship's warmest admirers to suggest the shadow of 


( xlix ) 

an excuse for garbling the plain prose of one of 
the greatest writers of the age in this manner. 

The scene in which Faust and Mephistopheles 
sweep by the Ravenstone, contains six short lines. 
Lord F. Gower has mistranslated two of these. He 
translates *' Eine Heienzunfr — " a witch pastime^* 
and " Sie streuen und weihen,*^ — " they flocU and 
disperse themselves. ''^^ 

The Quarterly Reviewer says, " The terrible 
prison scene, with which the volume closes, is ren- 
dered with fidelity, elegance, and strength." To 
the proof! — 
The first line is-r 

'' Mich fasst ein langst entwohnter Schauer ;*' 

it is translated, 

'* Strength to my limbs my fainting soul denies.'' 

The fourth is, 

" Und ihr verbrechen war ein guter Wahn ;" 
rendered, 
" Frenzy the crime for which her blood must flow." 

Margaret's song is represented by these four 

lines : 

" Now shame on my mother 
Who brought me to light, 
And foul fall my father, 
Who nursed me in spite. **f 

The exquisitely simple expressions, " Schon 
war ich auch, und das war mein Verderben," 

* Seepoft, 194. 

t See the literal translation, post, p. 195, and the note. 


( 1 ) 

" I was fair, too, and that was my undoing/' are 
rendered, 

" And yet so soon to perish by your laws, 
Once I was fair too — that was just the cause/* 

Examples of this sort of weakness abound: 
" Ich herze dich mit tausendfacher Glut," 
" With twice its former heat my love shall glow." 

Vol. ii. p. 71- 

" Stumm liegt die Welt wie das Grab."* 

" And all are dumb, with speechless pain 

As if they never would speak again." 

Vol. ii. p. 76. 

See also vol. ii. p. 69, from 1. 11, a passage spoilt 
by the change of person and the omission of the 
exclamation " I am saved !" — and see p. 70, from 1. 7, 
to the second line of the next page. At page 74 
his lordship gives another version of lauem. He 
translates " Sie lauern doch mir auf," '* They 
glare upon me still :" and in p. 75 he shows a total 
insensibility to one of the most exquisite touches 
of nature in the scene. The literal translation is : 

" Faust. 
The day is dawning ! my love ! my love ! 

Margaret. 
Day ! yes, it is becoming day ! the last day is pressing 
in. It was to be my wedding day ! Tell no one that 
thou wert with Margaret before^f Woe to my garland !" 

* Literally, ** Dumb lies the world as the grave." 
t The allavion is still more strongly marked by the German hey 
than by the English with. 


( H ) 
His lordship gives it thus : 

" Faust. 
Day ! Margaret, day ! your term will soon be past. 

Margaret. 

True, 'tis the day ; the last, the last ! 
My bridal day ! — 'twill soon appear ; 
Tell it to none thou hast been /tere," — 

1. e. in the prison. His lordship takes no notice 
whatever of the garland, which, at any rate, ought 
to have suggested the real meaning. 

Margaret's frenzied call to save her child (post, 
p. 201), is rendered thus : 

" Quick ! fly ! 
Save it, or the child will die I 
Through the wild wood. 
To the pond ! 
It lifls its head I 
The bubbles rise ! 
It breathes ! 
Oh save it, save it !" 

The beauty of this passage depends on the minute- 
ness of the particulars which crowd upon the poor 
girl's mind* His lordship leaves out two thirds of 
them, and gives us, byway of recompense, his own 
logical conclusion that the child will die if it be 
not saved. But his lordship, God knows why, has 
evidently taken a strong dislike to this unhappy 
child, and resolved that it should neither be born. 


( lii ) 

nursedi drowned, or buried^ as the mother and the 
author wished and intended : 

" On my right breast my boy shall be, 
Let no one else lie there but he, 
'Twere bliss, with Aim in death to lie, 
Which, on this earth, my foes deny/* 

The passage (post, p. 200) runs, " No one else mU lie 
by me," not " Let no one," &c. ; and Margaret, not 
having so much as an ahndung or presentiment of 
his lordship's attempt, expresses no anxiety whatever 
as to her boy, to whom he has applied the appre- 
hension she expresses about Faust. The him in 
the third line should therefore be altered into 
ihee. 
The translator finishes his undertaking in character: 

" Mephistopheles. 
She is condemned ! 

Voices from above. 
Is pardon'd! 

Mephistopheles (to FaustJ. 

Hence and flee ! 
(Vanishes with Faust^. 

Margaret (from within). 
Henry! Henry!" 

There being no attempt at metre or rhyme in this 
place, his lordship has no excuse for inaccuracy ; yet 
every word of this conclusion, except the proper 
names and one of the stage directions, is wi'ong, 
" Sie is gerichtef is not " She is condemned;' " Sie 


( liii ) 

isgereitef is not " She is pardoned;"* "Her zu mir^ 
is not " Hence and flee ;" and " Stimme von Innen 
verhallend is not " Margaret from mthinJ"' Of 
such passages we certainly may say — 

** Eroendare liturae 
Multae non possunt, una litura potest." 

The next attempt to bring the English public ac- 
quainted with Faust on which I think it necessary 
to comment, is a publication entitled: " Faustus, 
from the German of Goethe. Embellished with 
Retsch's Series of Twenty-seven Outlines, illus- 
trative of the Tragedy, engraved by Henry Moses." 
This title is a deceptive one. It ought to stand 
" Retsch's Series &c. explained by Extracts, &c." 
for the illustrations are the principal, and the text 
the accessary. The anonymous author, however, 
to judge from the preface, would be very far from 
consenting to any transposition of the kind: 

" It is not pretended that the following pages 
contain a full translation of this celebrated drama. 
The slight analysis drawn up as an accompaniment 
to Retsch's Outlines being out of print, the pub- 
lishers felt desirous to supply its place with a more 
careful abstract of " Faust," which, while it served 
as a book of reference and explanation for the use 
of the purchasers of the plates, might also possess 
some claims to interest the general reader as an 
independant publication. With this view the most 
striking passages and scenes of the original ha 
been translated into blank verse, and connected by 

e 


( Hv ) 

a detailed description in prose, in which the writer 
has aimed at nothing more than to render the pro- 
gress of the plot clearly understood. Some parts 
are omitted which, it was thought, would be of- 
fensive to English readers, from the free and occa- 
sionally immoral tendency of the allusions which 
they contain ; other parts of the scene have been 
thrown into narrative, where the difference of taste 
subsisting between the two nations would have 
rendered a clear translation of that which in Ger- 
many is considered sublime, in our language ludi- 
crous: the general features of the whole have, 
nevertheless, been endeavoured to be preserved. 
The original is written in a great variety of metres, 
but in confining himself to blank verse in all parts 
of the play, except those which are strictly lyrical, 
the translator believes that he has adopted the only 
measure that would enable him to imitate the tone 
without sacrificing the sense of his text. 

" Faust is preceded by a prelude between the 
manager, author, and a kind of merry fellow or 
clown. This is nothing more than an introductory 
dialogue, like that to Gay*s Beggar's Opera, and 
as it bears no relation to the plot of the piece, has 
not been translated. For a different reason the 
prologue has also been passed over : it carries the 
scene to heaven, whither Mephistopheles ascends 
for the purpose of obtaining permission to tempt 
Faustus ; and, both in conception and execution, is 
repugnant to notions of propriety, such as are enter- 
tained in this country." 


( Iv ) 

The statement marked by italics is not true ; he 
has not so much as attempted the most striking 
passages and scenes, nor a third of them ; though, 
for aught I know, he may fancy that he has, for 
his taste seems a very peculiar one. I must be 
excused, however, for not entering into a detailed 
disproof of his statements; nor can I spare room for 
a recapitulation of his mistakes. But as the work 
certainly shows talent enough to acquire it some 
portion of authority, I shall give brief examples 
of the mode in which it is this gentleman's pleasure 
to translate, connect, describe, and purify Faust. 

In the first garden scene, after translating down 
to that part of Margaret's description of her do- 
mestic anxieties where Faust interrupts her by an 
exclamation (post, p. 127), the writer continues in 
this manner : 

** Faustus. 
If she resembled you, she was an angel. 

Margaret. 
One moment stay. — (She gathers afiomer and plticks 
the leaves off one by one,/' 

There is nothing, not so much as an asterisk, to 
mark that any thing intervenes between these lines, 
though, in fact, the words given to Faust belong to 
the middle of one scene, and those given to Mar- 
garet to the middle of another, whilst a whole 
dialogue between Martha and Mephistopheles in- 
tervenes between the two. Here is one of his 
descriptions : 

" Faustus replies to this interrogatory (as to his 

e2 


' 


( Ivi ) 

religion^ post^ p. 144) by one of those mystical 
definitions of belief in God which characterize the 
professors of natural religion. Margaret, however, 
notwithstanding her girlish simplicity, has too much 
good sense to be imposed upon by general pro- 
fessions of faith calculated to cover any kind of 
religious creed. She tells him he has no Christi- 
anity, and, desirous apparently to turn from so 
unpleasant a subject, she then changes the conver- 
sation, and then expresses her dislike to her lover's 
constant companion, Mephistopheles." 

I could give instances of mistranslation by scores. 
I shall content myself with one : 

" Der Erde Mark mit Ahnungsdrang durchwiihlen.'* 

" Rooting from out thee every trace of earth." 

Perhaps it is not possible to translate Ahnungs- 
drang literally, but the writer who is not familiar 
enough with the difficulty to avoid such a blunder 
as this, can know next to nothing of Faust. The 
conclusion of the cathedral scene, in which the 
writer coincides with Lord F. Gower, is a fair ex- 
ample of his mode of erasing the ludicrous: 

" Margaret (to a bystander.) 
Help, neighbour ! oh ! support me." 

Germany and England may not always agree in 
their estimate of sublimity, but Lord F. Gower and 
this gentleman will find upon inquiry, that this 
notable emendation of their's is pretty generally 
regarded as a fair specimen of the ludicrous in 
both countries. 


( Ivii ) 

With regard to the accusation of indecency, I 
have only to say, that, when Mrs. Austin's Selec- 
tions shall have superseded the Old Testament — 
vrhich, if any selections could produce such a catas- 
trophe, they would — and Mr. Bowdler's Shakspeare 
shall be the only Shakspeare on our shelves,* I shall 
be quite ready to admit that Faust deserves to be 
excluded from general perusal for indecency. But 
not till then ; for the whole poem does not contain 
a fifth part of the condemned expressions or allu- 
sions to be found in any two books of the Penta- 
teuch, or any two acts of Othello, Hamlet, or 
Lear; and (confining this observation to Shak- 
speare) I am sure the purpose is equally pure. 
I say so much in reply to the objection urged, as 
I have now and then heard it, by men of feeling 
and taste, who understood what they were talking 
about. As for this writer, the indecency he com- 
plains of is his own : for example, he thus alludes 
to the song sung by Margaret at the commence- 
ment of the prison scene : " A voice is heard 
within, singing a rude ballad, so gross as to in- 
dicate insanity." The song, like Ophelia's, was 
intended to indicate insanity, and would not be 
grosser than that, did it mean what this gentleman 
thinks it does, which it does not. I appeal to the 

* I beg Mrs. A.'s pardon for coopling her with Mr. B. I rather 
think the best soi-disant purified edition would be like woodcock 
without the trail ; but Shakspeare purified by Mr. Bowdler is what 
neither gods nor men endure. 


( Iviii ) 

literal translation (post, p. 195) and the note. One 
instance more and I have done with him : 

" Faustus. 
Cursed villain! 

Begone : name not that lovely creature : — do not 

Invite my half infuriated senses 

To wish her mine again. 

Mephistopheles. 

What then must he 
The sad result ? She thinks you have forsaken her ; 
And so you have almost. 

Faustus. 

Nay, I am near her ; 
And were the winds and waves a barrier *twixt us, 
I never can forget her, ne'er forsake her. 

Mephistopheles. 
Well, my friend, often have I envied you 
Beneath the roses, like two twins embracing, 

Faustus. 
Away, base pander! 

Mephistopheles. 
Ah ! you abuse me : I must laugh ; 
Now *tis great pity — you shall once more enter 
Her chamber, not to death. 

Faustus. 

What joy 
What heavenly joy is in her arms!" 

This the reader will have the goodness to ob- 
serve is a castigated passage, five or six lines 
liaving been omitted.* But it is, notwithstanding, 

• Post, p. lia. /./ ^ 


( lix ) 

indubitably true that all the coarseness disco- 
verable in it, as given above, is attributable to a 
most ridiculous mistake. He actually supposes, 
and would lead those of his readers who do not 
know better to suppose, that the ruin of Margaret 
had been already consummated! What, then, did 
he suppose to be Mephistopheles' object in in- 
flaming the passions of Faust? I once heard of an 
attorney, who sent a young lady to get another 
act of seduction performed that the action might 
be more surely maintainable; and perhaps the 
translator thought that Margaret's mother had 
employed the devil to procure evidence against 
Faust. 

Of the power manifested in the unfinished frag- 
ments left by Shelley, few think or speak more 
highly than myself; and I quite agree that nothing 
but a few months' study of German was wanting 
to make him fully equal to an adequate translation 
of Faust; but yet — 

(But yet is as a gaoler, to bring forth 
Some monstrous malefactor,) 

it must not be forgotten that they are unfinished 
fragments, and that Shelley was far from perfect in 
the language he was translating from ; and no ad- 
miration of his genius, no respect for his memory, 
ought to prevent our saying that he has not done 
justice to Faust, if it can be clearly made to appear 
that he has not. I shall, therefore, point out the 
principal errors by which the general effect of his 


( Ix ) 

translation is impaired. They will be found to be 
something more than specks in the sun ; but if not, 
it is surely a feet worth noticing, that the sun has 
specks. 

The fragments in question consist of the pro- 
logue in Heaven, and the May-day Night scene. 
The first has no great merit, and few considerable 
mistakes, though quite enough to show the trans- 
lator's want of femiliarity with German. He has 
furnished us with the means of bringing this to an 
indisputable test by appending a literal translation 
of the Archangels' song to the poetical one. Now, 
in the first stanza he translates Reise — circle^ and 
" herrlich — excellent; and in the second there are 
two palpable mistakes : 

" And swifl, and inconceivably swift 

The adornment of earth winds itself round, 
And exchanges paradise-clearness with deep, dread- 
ful night. 
The sea foams in broad waves 
From its deep bottom^ up to the rocks, 
And rocks and sea are torn on together 
In the eternal swift course of the spheres." 

The words in italics are wrong, and I see no 
reason for translating Pracht — adornment. There 
are three errors in the following : 

'* Mephistopheles. 

Well and good. 
I am not much in doubt about my bet; 
And if I lose, then 'tis your turn to crow^ 
Enjoy your triumph then with a full breast. 


( 1« ) 

Ay ! dust shall he devour, and that with pleasurci 
Like my old paramour^ the famous snake. 

The Lord. 
Pray come here wlien it suits you.^* 

To make The Lord give this general invitation to 
Mephistopheles^ is a &iilt which it is impossible 
to palliate, and the two others are sufficiently 
gross. — (See post, p. 4, 5.) 

He also translates '* mit dauernden Gedanken,' 
with sweet and melancholy thoughts, which is not 
merely at variance with the letter but with the 
spirit of the text. The following mistranslations 
occur in the May-day Night scene. 

Mephistopheles says to the will-o'th'-wisp, 

'* £i ! £i ! er denkt den menschen nachzuahmen/' 

Shelley translates it : 

Ha! ha ! your worship thinks you have to deal 
With men." 

The following passage contains two mistakes, 
which greatly injure the efiect of the scene : 

" Tell me, sIuUl we go or stay ? 
Shall rve onward ? Come along : 
Every thing around is swept 
Forward, onward, far away ! 
Trees and masses intercept 
The sight:' 

As I have remarked already in my commentary 
on Lord F. Gower, it is not shall we, but do we. 
The words translated — which intercept the sight, 


( Ixii ) 

are — die Gesichier schneiden, literally, which cut 
(in the sense of make) faces. As well might a 
foreigner translate the English idiom to cut capers , 
literally. There are two mistakes in this pas- 
sage: 

" The way is wide, the way is long, 

But what is that for a bedlam throng ? 

Stick with the prong, and scratch with the broom, 

The child in the cradle lies strangled at home, 

And the mother is clapping her hands* 

The words marked in the second line are a trans- 
lation of *•' Was ist das fur ein" &c. Instead of 
clapping her hands, the mother bursts (platzt). 
The semi-chorusses of wizards are mis-translated : 

" Semi-chorus of Wizards 1. 

We glide in 
Like snails when the women are all away ; 
And from a house once given over to sin, 
Woman has a thousand steps to stray. 

Semi-chorus 2. 
A thousand steps must a woman take 
Where a man but a single spring will make."* 

He translates : 

" Und wenn wir um den Gipfel ziehn 

So streichet an dem Boden hin" — 
" We cling to the shirty and we strike on the ground." 

* See post, p. 169. 


( Ix'rii ) 

Gipfel, which he translates sJcirty is peak or pin- 
nacle. I need hardly add that the whole line is 
wide of the mark. 

The stage direction— »« einigeny die um ver- 
glimmende Kohlen sitzen, is translated^ " to some 
old women" &c., and Mephistopheles is made to 
say: 

*' Old gentlewomen, what do you do out here ? 
You ought to he with the youug rioters. 
Right in the thickest of the revelry — 
But every one is best content at home" 

It begins " Ihr alten Herrn/' so that I suppose 
some joke is intended by the change of sex, though, 
if so, it is but a poor one. The last line is pal- 
pably wrong : so also are the replies of the Parvenu 
and the Author, which succeed.* The most ex- 
traordinary blunder, however, is in the speech of 
the Pedlar-witch as he terms her : 

Pedlar-witch. 

" Look here, 
Gentlemen ; do not hurry on so fast 
And lose the chance of a good pennyworth. 
I have a pack full of the choicest wares 
Of every sort, and yet in all my bundle 
Is nothing like what may be found on earth ; 
Nothing that in a moment will make rich 
Men and the world with fine malicious mischief — 
There is no dagger drunk with blood ; no bowl 
From which consuming poison may be drained 

• Post. p. 173. 


( Ixiv ) 

By innocent and healthy lips ; no jewel 
The price of an ahandon*d maiden's shame ; 
No sword which cuts the bonds it cannot loose, 
Or stabs the wearer's enemy in the back ; 
No—."* 

It is difficult to account for a man of Shelley's 
fine taste making so extraordinary a blunder as 
this.f Faust's description of Procktophantasmist 
is misp'anslated, and there is an omission in the last 
speech of M ephistopheles, which were alone suf- 
ficient to show in how unfinished a state this firag- 
ment must have been left. The line — 

" Hier ist's so lustig wie im Prater," 

literally 

" It is as merry here as in the Prater ;" 
is given thus : 

" It is as airy here as in a ( )" 

Had the manuscript been any thing more than 
a rough copy^ such a blank as this would surely 
have been filled up.;]: 

• Post, p. 173. 

t 1 rather think that the line 

" Dem htmBT auf der Erde gleicht/' 
put him on the wrong scent Lord F. Gower has mistaken it too. 

X Mr. Leigh Hunt will perhaps excuse my printing the following 
extract from a note of his to myself ; interesting both on account of 
the writer and the subject of it : — " I was away from my friend, in 
another country, when he began to read German ; and my impres- 
sion is, that he did not make any very long or extensive acquaint- 
ance with the literature : only what he did read, he would read ex- 
quisitely, and with a thorough knowledge of the meaning, making it 


( Ixy ) 

I cannot conclude this commentary on preceding 
translators of Faust without paying my humhle 
tribute of admiration to the striking merit of some 
passages which appeared in the thirty-ninth number 
of Blackwood's Magazine. A good half of these 
were loosely and carelessly executed, as if the 
writer felt that he was writing anonymously and 
for a magazine;* but I should assign him the 
next place to Shelley, did his precedence depend 
upon me. ^ 

It is generally supposed in this country that 
German literature is little cultivated in France. 
It would not be easy to reconcile this with the fact, 
that, besides the abstract given in Madame de 
Stael's Germany, there are no less than three 
French prose translations of Faust, all apparently 
by men of learning and ability. But no learning or 

a point to have a perfect understanding of the letter, in order that he 
might leave nothing unperceived of the spirit. Of the particular 
state in which the manuscript was left, I have no recollection, ex- 
cept that a few passages were not filled up." Motives which will 
be readily appreciated, prevented my applying to the gifted autho- 
ress of Frankenstein, though mutual friends offered their services. 
It is much to be regretted that we have no regular life of Shelley. 
The notices in the New Monthly are excellent, but Shelley's calum- 
niated memory demands an avowed biographer. Another book in 
pari materid much wanted, is a full Essay on the Life and Writings 
of Hazlitt* An accomplished friend of mine — the writer of the ac- 
count of Hazlitt which lately appeared in the Examiner — is the 
man for it. 

* In the passage quoted ante, p. xxiv, he makes the same mistake 
as Lord F. Gower : 

" Erst have I teen by evening's heavenly light," &c. 


( Ixvi ) 

ability can overcome the difficulties which the pe- 
culiar character of the French language presents ; 
and they have all shown themselves hopelessly in- 
capable of conveying anything like a correct notion 
of the work. 

The translations in question are by M. Le Comte 
de Sainte-Aulaire, M. Albert S*** (Stapfer), and 
M. Gerard.* I cannot introduce the little I have 
to say about them better than by an extract from 
M. Sainte-Aulaire's Preface. His remarks will 
well repay the trouble of perusal, independently 
of their bearing upon Faust: 

" Independamment de la nature de ces conceptions, 
le caractere de la langue allemande ajoute encore au 
vague pour lequel ces auteurs sont vantes ou critiques. 

'* La richesse de la langue, la liberte des inversions, 
la liberte plus grande de composer des mots nouveaux, 
et dont le sens n'est consequemment pas encore defini, 
toutes des facilites, dont le genie sait tirer un si grand 
parti, sont quelquefois aussi pour lui-m^me une seduc- 
tion dangereuse. 

** La phrase allemande, d'une longueur demesuree, 
est, pour ainsi dire, elastique ; elle re9oit tout ce qu'on 
veut y faire entrer. A force de I'enrichir d'epithetes, 
de multiplier les nuances, de la charger de parentheses, 
il arrive quelquefois que Tordre et la clarte sont com- 
promis. L'exuberance des mots alt^re la precision 
du sens ; le traducteur, dans un veritable embarras de 
richesses, trouve plus qu'il ne lui faut pour une seule 
pensee; il en aper^oit plusieurs la ou^Tauteur n'a 

* A feigned name, and I am told that the writer wishes to pre- 
serve his incognito. 


( Ixvii ) 

voulu en exprimer qu'une seule, et i\ lui est difficile 
de faire un choix, parce que toutes sont implicitement 
comprises dans paroles qu'il doit traduire. 

*' La langue fran9aise repousse cette surabondance 
avec du modeste dedain. EUe considire comme son 
premier devoir, ou plutdt comme son plus beau privi- 
lege, une precision parfaite. Un liomme d'etat disait, 
en parlant de documens diplomatiques : * Tout ce qui 
est clair est fran^ais, tout ce qui est obscur est alle- 
mand.' C'est qu'en effet il est exact de dire, gramma* 
ticalement parlant, tout ce qui n'est pas clair n*est pas 
fran9ais. Cet avantage de noire langue^ immense dans 
son application aux affaires, est peut-etre mains apridabk 
dans la poesie. Sans pretendre decider cette question, 
je dirai seulement que I'attention necessaire pour saisir 
la pensee du poete a travers le vague des expressions, 
la difiiculte de reconnaitre les formes surchargees de 
magnifiques draperies, cette difficulte, dis-je, maintient 
I'esprit du lecteur dans une activite favorable aux 
beautes poetiques. EUes sont peut-etre plus vivement 
senties lorsqu^elles nous apparaissent couvertes d'un voile, 
etfaihlement eclairees, que si des Vahord nous avions tout vu, 
tout compris. 

*^ Mais encore faut-il que la pensee sorte en fin des 
ten^bres, que Tintelligence puisse la reconnaitre et la 
saisir. S*il est possible de soutenir que le vague des ex- 
pressions est quelquefois un moyen d'effet pour le poete 
habile, il serait absurde d'attribuer un avantage quel- 
conque au vague de la pensee. Cette locution meme, 
pensee vague, est une logomachie. Tout assemblage de 
mots doit repondre a une perception parfaitement claire 
de Fesprit: une pensee n'est pas plus ou moins claire ; 
si elle ne Test pas parfaitement, ou ne peut le devenir 
au moyen d'une exacte analyse, elle n'est plus une 


( Ixviii ) 

pensee, et les paroles dont elle s'enveloppe ne sont que 
du galimatias. 

*' Ainsi Tobligation de penser clairement tient a la 
nature des choses; elle est egalement imposee aux 
poetes de tous les temps, de tous les pays. L*obliga- 
tion de parler clmrement est surtout imposee aux ecri- 
vains fran^ais: aucune excuse ne pent les en dis- 
penser ; aucune beaute ne racheterait le reproche d'ob« 
scurit6. Le genie de la langue fran^aise se refuse 
invinciblement a ces constructions embarrassees, a ces 
expressions indeterminees, aux moyens desquelles plu- 
gieurs sens se laissent presser sous une m^me enveloppe. 
Enfin, si ce qui ne pr^sente aucun sens n'est pas du 
langage, ce qui presente plusieurs sens n' est pas du 
fran^ais. 

" C'est d'apres ces deux idees que j*ai travaille a 
la traduction de cet ouvrage ; j*ai dd renoncer a tra- 
duire plusieurs passages, et notamment deux scenes 
assez etendues, parce qu*il m'a ete impossible de les 
comprendre. Un grand nombre de phrases ne me 
presentaient aucun sens, et I'intention g6n6rale de Izt 
scene ne pouvait me mettre sur la voie ; car il m'etait 
Egalement impossible de la d^couvrir. On trouvera 
ces deux scenes dans les notes : je les emprunte a la 
traduction d'un jeune litterateur plein de merite, qiii 
n'a pas et6 rebute par des difficultes eontre lesquelles 
je n*ai pas eu le courage de lutter. J'ajouterai m^me 

que Tessai de M. Albert S a ete pour moi un 

nouveau motif de decouragement : j*ai reconnu dans sa 
traduction une parfaite connaissance de la langue alle- 
mande. Tout ce qui a un sens a ete saisi et traduit; 
cependant I'ensemble ne me parait pas beaucoup plus 
clair en fran9ais qu'en allemand. 


'^ 


( Ixix ) 

" Dans le reste de Touvrage, j'ai sou vent rencontre 
des passages qui me laissaient incertain sur leur send 
veritable, parce que la construction de la phrase, et la 
signification indeterminee des mots rendaient plusieurs 
interpretations possibles. En ce cas^faicrUy axant touty 
devoir parlerjran^ais ; je me ^uis attache d ne laisser sub- 
sister dans la traduction aucune des incertitudes queje trou- 
vais dans foriginal, et jai tout subordonne d Vexprcssion 
claire et precise du sens quejavais choisi.** 

As well might a painter say: — "The moon 
looks best when struggling through clouds, and it 
was my duty to paint her surrounded by them. 
But I had no paint fit for clouds in my box; 
therefore, I have painted her without any, and, 
therefore, my duty is performed." 

The only wonder to me is, that M. Sainte- 
Aulaire was not led to the almost inevitable con- 
clusion, that it is impossible to translate Faust into 
French. I can forgive him all his other fallacies for 
the sake of the language he has clothed them in, 
and the truth of some of the individual remarks. 
Acting on the above theory, he has given a clever 
and spirited, but vague and loose, paraphrase of 
the poem, instead of a translation of it ; invariably 
shunning the difficulties which various meanings 
present, by boldly deciding upon one, instead of 
trying to shadow out all of them — which I regard 
as one of the highest triumphs a translator can 
achieve — and avoiding the charge of incorrectness 
by making it almost impossible to say whether the 
best construction has suggested itself or not. I 

f 


( •« ) 

)¥ill give two or three examples of the mode in 
which he plays with the text. He thus translates 
the lines towards the end of the Prologue in 
Heaven, beginning " Doch ihr die achten Got- 
tersohne," &c.* 

" Vous veritables enfans de Dieu, vivez heureux ; 
conteinplez la beaute celeste ; dans votre activity crea- 
trice, aimez la regie et les limites, et soumettez a 
Tepreuve de la sagesse les fantomes que de vagues 
desirs vous presentent.** 

In a note to this passage I have stated the diffi- 
culties presented by it, but I have no difficulty in 
saying that M. Sainte-Aulaire's reading is gla- 
ringly wrong. 

Again— the passage, post, p. 15, which I have 
also made the subject of a note, is thus given : — ' 

" Au premier coup d*oeil le Uvre tombe des mains ; 
on dirait une friperie, un magasin de vieux meubles : 
tout au plus, vous croyez voir des marrionnettes en 
action qui debitent avec emphase des maximes solen- 
nelles." 

One more and I have done. It is the para- 
phrase of the passage in which Faust describes 
his Father*s alchemical pursuits and the composi- 
tion of his physic: — 

** Entoure de quelques adeptes, il s*epuisait sur ses 
fourneaux ; il croyait ses remedes infallibles : les ma- 
lades avalaient et mouraient, sans que personne mit 
aon savoir en doute/* 

♦ Post, p. 6, 1. 9. 


*, 


( Ixxi ) 

The whole description of the physic-making 
process is left out. 

Not content with substituting his own meaning 
for the author's, whenever there is the least shadow 
of a doubt, he frequently follows a most extraordi- 
nary method of rendering it where there is none. 
For example: — 

" Le texte porta : * Les espnts qui nient,* J'ai tra- 
duit: * Les esprits des tenehres; parceque nier la verite, 
qui est la lumiere, c*est affirmer le mensonge, c'est entrer 
dans les tenebres."* — (Note (2) to p. 45.) 

At this rate it is a translator's duty to give the 
conclusion to be deduced from a proposition instead 
of the proposition itself. At the same time we 
must not condemn M. Sainte-Aulaire too hastily, 
for the other French translators, who profess to 
be literal, have not been more successful than him- 
self, except in making their occasional mistakes 
more palpable. The following examples will ex- 
emplify the mode in which MM. Stapfer and 
Gerard express what they understand, and replace 
what they do not. The passage beginning — 

*• Mit segenduftenden Schwingen — "* 

Is given by M. Stapfer thus: — 

'* Quelle rosee delicieuse elles repandent sur la terre 
aride, et quelle ravissante harmonie le battement de 
leurs ailes imprime aux espaces du monde, qu'elles 
parcourent incessamment." — (p. 30.) 

• Post, p. 10, 1. 9. 

f2 


( Ixxii ) 

The air das All durchklingeti is here totally 
sunk. The specimens next following are also 
from M. Stapfer: — 

" Schon gliih* Ich wie von neuem Wein." 

*' On dirait qu'une liqueur spiritueuse coule dans 
mes veines et me brule.** 

" Such* Er den redlichen Gewinn, 
Sey Er kein schellenlauter Thor ! 

** Laisse-la ces folies, et cherche a gagner ton pain 
honnetement." — (See post, p. 14.) 

" Nur was der Augenblick erschafll das kann er niitzen." 
*' Rien n*est utile que ce que Tesprit feconde." 

*' Drum frisch ! Lass alles Sinnen seyn, 
Und g*rad' mit in die Welt hinein !" 

" Allons done, laisse en paix tons tes sens, et en 
route avec eux dans ce monde !" 

In the scene at the well Margaret says : — 

<* Und segnet' mich und that so gross, 
Und bin nun selbst der Siinde bloss. 
Doch-alles was dazu mich trieb. 
Ach war so gut! ach war so lieb!*' 

It is given — 

" Et je me signals, et je faisais le signe aussi grand 
que possible . . . £t maintenant je suis le peche meme. 
Helas, tout m*y a entraine. Dieu ! 11 etait si bon ! il 
etait si amiable !* 

* Compare post, p. 151. 


( Ixxiii ) 

The following are from M. G6rard — 

" Verfluchtes, dumpfes Mauerloch." 
" Miserable trou de souris." — (see post, p. 8.) 

" Schon gliih* Ich wie von neuem Wein — '* 
" Deja je p^tille comme une liqueur nouvelle." 

'* Ja, kehre nur der holden Erdensonne, 
Entscblossen deinen Riicken zu!" 

" C'est en cessant d'exposer ton corps au doux 
soleil de la terre." 

This line occurs, post, p. 19,1. 21. No one after 
reading the passage will require any additional 
examples. 

In the literary portions of her Germany, Madame 
de Stael is generally understood to have received 
a sort of aid which ought to have rendered her 
pretty nearly infallible. Her chapter on Faust, 
however, is remarkably inaccurate, and proves 
most conclusively, that she had only a very super- 
ficial acquaintance with the work. "It is lucky 
for Goethe," says Jean Paul, ** that important 
omissions prevent frivolous translations in her 
book. This devilish tragedy, resembling the 
Divine Comedy of Dante, in which whole worlds 
of spirits play and fall, — has she, what with drawing 
out and drawing in, actually turned into an ama- 
tory romance."* I am not prepared to prove her 
guilty to this extent, but I shall quote some pas- 

• Heidelberger Jahrbiicher der Lilteratur, 1815. 


/ ? 


( Ixxiv ) 

sages to show that what Jean Paul intiniates as to 
the firivolity of her style of translating is true : — 

" Ach! unsere Thaten selbst, so gut als unsre Leiden, 
Sie bemmen unsres Lebens Gang." 

'* Nos actions, comme nos soufFrances, arr^tent la 
marcbe de la pensie,'' 

" Dem Wurme gleicb' ich, der den Staub durchwuhlt- 
Den, wie er sich im Staube nahrend lebt, 
Des Wandrers Tritt vernichtet und begrabt." 

" C'est a rinsecte que je ressemble. II s*agite dans 
la poussiere, il se nourrit d'elle, et le voyageur, en 
passant, 1 ecrase et le detruit." 

She describes Mephistopheles' soliloquy when 
left alone to receive the student^ (post, p.'^OS;) in ^t) 
this manner: — 

** II revSt la robe de docteur, et, pendant qu'il 
attend Tecolier, il exprime seul son dedain pour Faust. 
Get homme, dit il, ne sera jamais qu'a demi pervers, 
et c'.est en vain qu'il se flatte de parvenir h T^tre 
entierement." 

This is the passage which calls down the well- 
merited indignation of Jean Paul. Her description 
of the conclusion of the dialogue with the student 
(post, p. 71,) is equally infelicitous: — " Mephis- 
topheles ^crit ce que Satan a dit k Eve pour 
Tengager d manger le fruit de I'arbre de vie: Vous 
serez comme Dieu, connoissant le bien et le mal'. 
Jepeux bien, se dit il a lui-mfeme, emprunter cette 
ancienne sentence ^ mon cousin le serpent; il y a 
long-temps qu'on sen sert dans ma families 


( Ixxv ) 

Faust's exposition of his creed is completely spoilt? 
and where (post, p. 136,) Faust complains that 
Mephistopheles is ever kindling a wild fire in his 
heart for that lovely image (meaning Margaret); 
Madame makes him say — " II allume dans mon 
sein un feu d6sordonne qui m'attire vers la beauiiJ" 
But the remark with which she introduces this 
scene — " Faust se lasse de Tamour de Marguerite 
&c." — and her treatment of the concluding part 
of it, (post, p. 139,) were alone enough to demon- 
strate her utter incompetency to pronounce an opi- 
nion upon Faust. She actually describes this con- 
cluding part as occurring after the seduction of 
Margaret and after the murder of Valentine, and 
then gives the following translation of it: — 

*' Mephistopheles oblige Faust a quitter la ville, et 
le desespoir que lui fait eprouver le sort de Marguerite 
interesse a lui de nouveau. 

" * Helas ! s'ecrie Faust, elle e^t ete si facilement 
heureuse, une simple cabane dans una vallce des Alpes, 
quelques occupations domestiques, auroient suffi pour 
satisfaire ses desirs bomes, et remplir sa douce vie ; 
mais moi, Tennemi de Dieu, je n'ai pas eu de repos que 
je n'aie bris6 son coeur, que je n'aie fait tomber en 
mines sa pauvre destinee. Ainsi done la paix doit lui 
etre ravie pour toujours. II faut qu'elle soit la vie time 
de I'enfer. He bien! demon, abrege mon angoisse, 
fais arriver ce qui doit arriver. Que le sort de cette 
infortunee s'accomplisse, et precipite-moi du moins 
avec elle dans Tabime.' 

** L'amertume et le sang-froid de la reponse de Me- 
phistopheles sont vraiment diaboliques. 

" < Comme tu t'enflammes, lui dit-il, comme tu bouil- 


( Ixxvi ) 

lonnes! Je ne sais comment te consoler f et sur mon hon^ 
new je me donnerois au diahle^ si je ne ViUns pas moi- 
miime : mais penses-tu done, insens^, que parce que ta 
pauvre tete ne voit plus d'issue, il n*y en ait plus 
veri tablemen t? Vive celui qui sait tout supporter avec 
courage ! Je t'ai deja rendu pas mal semblable a moi, 
et songe, je t'en prie, qu'il n'y a rien de phis fastidxeux 
dans ce monde qu'un diable qui se desespere/ '* 

Such blundering as this is wholly unaccountable. 
She first wrenches a fine passage fi*om its place, 
thereby making nonsense of it, and then mixes 
it up with matter which has no possible connec- 
tion with it. Mephistopheles uses words some- 
thing like those in italics, in the scene where he 
complains of the jewels having been carried off 
by the priest, (post, p. 110,) but what Madame 
means by introducing them here, it is for her 
admiring countrymen, or her literary advisers in 
Germany, to explain. She has contrived to miss 
most of the delicate touches in the prison scene, 
and made several gross blunders in it to boot; 
as — 

'* £s fasst mich kalt beym Scbopfe.*' 
** L'air est si froid pres de la fontaine." 

" Sag Niemand dass du schon bey Gretchen warst." 

" Ne dis a personne que tu as vu Marguerite cetle 
nuit»** 

She concludes as follows: — 

" Mephistopheles (d Faust J. 

" Suis-moi. 

" CMephistopheUs disparoit avec Faust; on entend 


( Ixxvii ) 

encwe dans le fond du cachot la voix de Marguerite qui 
rappelle vainement son ami: J 

" Faust ! Faust !" 

*' La piece est interrompue apres ces mots. L'in- 

tention de Tauteur est sans doute que Marguerite 

perisse, et que Dieu lui pardonnc ; que la vie de Faust 

soit sauvee, mais que son dme soit perdue,*^ 

* 
As a continuation is on the eve of appearing, it 

would be dangerous to speculate on the author's 
intentions ; but, so far as they can be collected, I 
should say that here again she is decidedly wrong. 
I cannot quit the subject of translation from 
the German by the French, without alluding to 
one peculiarity which is clearly traceable in all 
their attempts of the sort. To whatever cause the 
curious in national character may attribute it, cer- 
tain it is that the French have comparatively little 
notion of what we call bathos in composition, and 
are constantly spoiling the effect of highly-wrought 
passages by light or ludicrous associations. Half 
the examples of vagueness and incorrectness given 
above are also examples of this, and I could treble 
the number with ease. Thus, in translating Faust's 
appeal to the moon, (post, p. 8,) both M. Stapfer 
and M. Gerard make him express a wish to dance 
in the meadows by her light; and M. Sainte- 
Aulaire makes him exclaim, when he is about to 
take the poison: " Partons avec gaiie pour ce 
voyage" — without, in either case, the slightest war- 
rant from the text. I fear I shall call down a 
storm of indignation on my head, but I do really 
think there is no other country in the world, in 


( Ixxviii ) 

which Faust would have been pictured as wishing 
to dance, or as setting out for — the place we never 
name to ears polite — with gaiety.* 

I am not aware of any other translation of Faust 
in any language, though I have been at some pains 
to inquire, — particularly in Italy, where German 
literature has attracted considerable attention of 
late, and where Faust might be expected to inspire 
a peculiar interest from its being constantly asso- 
ciated by critics with the Divine Comedy of Dante.f 

* Some curious evamples of bathos iu the greatest French 
writers may be seen in Schlegel's Lectures on the Drama, Lect. 11. ; 
where we are also made to remark their excessive apprehension of 
ridicule. I lately witnessed a singular illustration of Frencb in- 
sensibility to the art of sinking. I had the good fortune to be pre* 
sent at the sitting of the French Academy held for the reception 
of M. Dupin Ain6. In replying to the Inaugural Oration, the acting 
President (M. Jouy) having occasion to speak of M. Dupio's works, 
ushered in what he had to say of one of them thus : — " En parlant 
de votre grand ouvrage en deua volumei* ^c. To the best of my 
observation, there was not a Frenchman present who smiled, and 
not an Englishman who did not. By way of testing my theory, I 
told the story the day after to a mixed party, and the efiect was 
precisely the same. I once heard it asked how any thing else could 
be expected from a language which has but one word to express 
liking and loving, a mistress or a leg of mutton— JVtme Julie — 
Taime un gigot. Yet it is the language in which, to say nothing of 
past ages, Beranger, Lamartine, Victor Hugo, Sainte Beuve, &c. 
&c. &c. have immortalised themselves in our own. 

t The following anecdote, related to me by an eye-witness, is a 
singular illustration of the sort of devotional feeling with which 
Italians regard every thing connected with Dante. One morning 
during Mr. Gary's residence at Chiswick (in the house formerly 
occupied by Hogarth), two strangers were observed inquiring 
anxiously for the house. They were supposed to mean the Duke of 
Devonshire's, and directed accordingly ; but this was soon discovered 


( Ixxix ) 

My main object in these criticisms is to shake, 
if not remove, the very disadvantageous impressions 
that have hitherto been prevalent of Faust, and 
keep public opinion suspended concerning Goethe 
till some poet of congenial spirit shall arise, capable 
of doing justice to this — the most splendid and 
interesting of his works. By my translation, also, 
I shall be able to show what he is not, though it 
will be quite impossible for me to show what he is, 
" II me reste, (says M. Stapfer) k protester centre 
ceux qui, apr^s la lecture de cette traduction, s'ima- 
gineraient avoir acquis une id6e complete de Torigi- 
nal. Port6 sur tel ouvrage traduit que ce soit, 
le jugement serait erron6 ; il le serait surtout k 
r%ard de celui-^i, at cause de la perfection continue 
du style. Qu'on se figure tout le charme de 'Amphi- 
phitryon de Moli^re joint -A ce que les poesies de 
Pamy offirent de plus gracieux, alors seulement 
on pourra se croire dispens6 de le lire." If I do 
not say something of the sort, it is only because I 
cannot decide with what English names Moliere 

to be a mistake. The house they meant was that of the translator 
of Dante — a greater man in their eyes than any duke upon earth — 
and without even a letter of introduction to the proprietor, they had 
walked all the way from town for the pleasure of seeing the house in 
which be lived, and the chance of catching a glimpse of himself. 
Another translation of Dante (by Mr. Wright), which the best 
judges declare to be also of first rate excellence, is in the very act of 
publication as I write, but the difference of plan removes all the in^ 
vidiousness of rivaliy. The best Italian translations from the Ger- 
man are Maffei's from Schiller. Nicolini presented Maffei's trans- 
lation of Maria Stuart to an English lady with the remark, that it 
was worth all his own productions put together. 


( Ixxx ) 

and Parny would be most aptly replaced. The 
merely English reader, however, will perhaps take 
my simple assurance, that, from the admitted beauty 
of Goethe*s versification, no writer loses more by 
being submitted to the crucible of prose ; though, 
at the same time, very few writers can afford to lose 
so much.* The bloom-like beauty of the songs, in 
particular, vanishes at the bare touch of a translator; 
as regards these, therefore, I may as well own at 
once that I am inviting my friends to a sort of 
Barmecide entertainment, where fancy must supply 
all the materials for banquetting. I have one com- 
fort, however : the poets have hitherto tried their 
hands at them in vain, and I am backed by very 
high authority in declaring the most beautiful — 
Meine RuK ist hin — to be utterly untranslatable. 
Indeed, it is only by a lucky chance that a succes- 
sion of simple heartfelt expressions or idiomatic 
felicities in one language, is ever capable of exact 
representation in another. Two passages already 
quoted appear well adapted to exemplify what I 
mean. When Margaret exclaims : — 
" Sag Niemand dass du schon bey Gretchen warst," 

it is quite impossible to render in English the finely 
shaded meaning of bey. Here, therefore, Germany 
has the best of it, but when we translate — 
.*" Schon war ich auch, und das war mein verderben" 
" I was fair too, and that was my undoing'' — we 

* I had serious thoughts at one time of calling this book " Aids 
to the understanding of Faust" — a sort of title not unusual in 
Germany, and indicating the exact light in which I wish my labours, 
to be viewed. 1 gave it up for fear of being accused of affectation. 


( Ixxxi ) 

greatly improve upon the original^ and add a deli- 
cacy which I defy any German to imitate : for the 
applicability of verderben in so many other places 
completely spoils its peculiar fitness for this.* 

My only object in giving a sort of rhythmical ar- 
rangement to the lyrical parts, was to convey some 
notion of the variety of versification which forms one 
great charm of the poem . The idea was first suggested 
to me by Milton's translation of the Ode to Pyrrha, 
entitled : " Quis multa gracilis te puer in rosi, ren- 
dered almost word for word without rime, according 
to the Latin measure, as near as the language will 
admit." But I have seldom, if ever, made any 
sacrifice of sense for the purpose of rounding a line 
in the lyrics or a period in the regular prose, pro- 
ceeding throughout on the rooted conviction, that, 
if a translation such as mine be not literal, it is 
valueless. By literal, however, must be understood 
only that I have endeavoured to convey the precise 
meaning of Goethe : an object often best attainable 
by preserving the exact form of expression em- 
ployed by him, unless, indeed, it be an exclusively 
national one. Even then I have not always re- 
jected it : for, in my opinion, one great advantage 
to be anticipated from such translations is the 
naturalization of some of those pregnant modes of 
expression in which the German language is so 
remarkably rich. Idioms, of course, belong to a 
wholly different category. My remarks apply only 

* Many striking examples of the above theory will be found on 
comparing Vincent Bourne's translations with the originals, ft was 
in performing this veiy pleasing task some years ago that I was first 
led to generalise upon the subject. 


( Ixxxii ) 

to th<»se phrases and compounds where nothing is 
wanting to make an Englishman perfectly cm faH 
o{ them^ but to think out the full meaning of the 
words* In all such cases I translate literally, in 
direct defiance of those sagacious critics, who ex- 
pect to catch the spirit of a work of genius as dogs 
lap water from the Nile, and vote a German author 
unreadable unless all his own and his country's 
peculiarities are planed away. 

In Faust the same word sometimes occurs oftener 
than English taste may approve. I have, notwith- 
standing, repeated it. It was not my business to 
attempt polishing the style ; and I think, moreover, 
that we are far too fastidious in this respect. In 
short, my theory is, that, if the English reader, 
not knowing German, be made to stand in pre- 
cisely the same relation to Faust as the En^ish 
reader, thoroughly acquainted with German, stands 
in towards it — f. e. if the same impressions be 
conveyed through the same sort of medium, whe- 
ther bright or dusky, coarse or fine — the very 
extreme point of a translator's duty has been 
attained. 

But though I feel pretty confident of the cor- 
rectness of this theory, I am far from certain that 
my practice uniformly accords with it — 

" Video meliora proboque, 
Deteriora sequor" — 

I cannot deny that I have often been driven to a 
paraphrase by necessity, and sometimes seduced 
into one by indolence. A little must be allowed 


( Ixxxiii ) 

also for the difficuhy of reducing verse into read- 
able prose. As the translation, however, has 
been executed at leisure moments, was finished 
many months ago, and has undergone the carefiil 
revisal of friends, I think I can answer for its 
general accuracy ; but in a work so crowded with 
elliptical and idiomatic, nay even provincial, 
modes of expression, and containing so many 
doubtful allusions, as Faust, it is morally impos- 
sible to guard against individual errors ; or what, 
at any rate, may be represented as such by those 
who will not give the translator credit for having 
weighed and rejected the constructions they may 
chance to prefer. In the course of my inquiries, 
I have not unfrequently had three or four different 
interpretations suggested to me by as many accom- 
plished German scholars, each ready to do battle 
for his own against the world. There are also 
some few meanings which all reasonable people 
confess themselves unable to un-earth, — or rather, 
un-heaven; for it is by rising, not sinking, that 
Goethe leaves his readers behind, and in nearly 
all such instances, we respect, despite of our em- 
barrassment, the aspirations of a master-mind, soar- 
ing proudly up into the infinite unknown, and 
though failing possibly in the full extent of its aim, 
yet bringing back rich tokens of its flight. 

Faust has never yet been published with notes, 
with the exception of a very few added to the 
French translations, in which none of the real 
difficulties are removed. I have endeavoured to 


( Ixxxiv ) 

supply this deficiency by bringing together all the 
information I could collect amongst a pretty ex- 
tensive circle of German acquaintance. I have 
also ransacked all the commentaries I could get, 
though nothing can be more unsatisfactory than 
the result. They are almost exclusively filled with 
trashy amplifications of the text, not unfirequently 
dilating into chapters what Goethe had condensed 
in a line. I have named the whole of them below.* 
That of Dr. Schubarth is said to be the only one 
which ever received any token of approbation from 
Goethet. A few parallel passages from English 
poets will also be found in the notes. They are 
merely such as incidentally suggested themselves ; 

* Ueber Goethe's Faust : Vorlesungen von Dr. Schubarth, Ber- 
lin, 1830. Ueber Goethe's Faust and dessen Fortsetzung, Nebst 
einem Anhange von dem ewigen Juden, Leipzig, 1824. Aesthetische 
Vorlesungen Ueber Goethe's Faust, &c. von Dr. Hinrichs, Halle, 
1825. Ueber Calderon's Tragoedie vom Wunderthatigen Magus ; 
Ein Beitrag zum Verstandniss der Faustischen Fabel, von Karl 
Rosenkrantz, Halle und Leipzig, 1829. Herold's Stimme zu 

Goethe's Faust, von C. F. G 1, Leipzig 1831. Zur Beur- 

theilung Goethe's, mit Beziehung auf verwandte Litteratur und 
Kunst von Dr. Schubarth, 1820 ; a work in two volumes, of which 
a large part is occupied with Faust. Goethe aus personlichem Um- 
gange dargestellt, by Falk ; the last 110 pages of which consist of a 
Commentary on Faust Vorlesungen iiber Goethe's Faust, by Dr. 
Ranch, 1830. And see Schlegel's Lectures on Dramatic Literature, 
Lect. 15 ; and the Briefwechsel zwuchen Schiller und Goethe, vol. iii. 
pp. 129 — 141, and passim. In 1829, also, the production of Faust 
as an acting play called forth a good deal of ingenious criticism in 
the German journals, as to its fitness for scenical representation. 
Schlegel appears to me to have set this question at rest. 


( Ixxxv ) 

except, indeed, that I re-read the greater part of 
Wordsworth, Coleridge and Shelley, during the 
progress of the undertaking; a course of study 
which I earnestly recommend my fellow labourers 
in this walk to pursue. I mention it as a sin- 
gular fact, that I gained no addition to my stock of 
expressions from Byron, though at one period of 
my life I knew him pretty nearly by heart.* 

I fear it will be quite impossible for me to ac- 
knowledge all the assistance I have received, but 
there are a few kind co-operators whom I think 
it a duty to name, though without their know- 
ledge and perhaps contrary to their wish. 

I certainly owe most to my old master and 

* ByroD, however, is the most popular of modem English poets 
in Germany. I have also recently met with a sin^lar mark of 
German partiality for Moore — a translation, line for line, of the 
Loves of the Angels. The commencement may be taken as a fair 
sample of the attempt : — 

" £s trug die Welt ihr erstes Kleid, 
Und Sterne hatten kaum begonnen 
In Glanz zu kreisen, und die Zeit 
War tageweise nur verronnen ; 
Als in der Dammrung der Natur 
Sich Engel froh mit Menschen griissten — " 

Thonuu Moore*s Liebe der EngeL Gedicht S^c. 
iihersetzt von Paul Graf v. Haugwitz, BresslaUf 
hei Gosohorsky. 

But the most flattering testimony of admiration for an English 
writer appeared in a late number of a German journal of consider- 
able repute. It was a review of a new translation of Eugene Aram, 
The Disowned, and Devereux, lavishing the highest commendation 
on them, and surmounted by a wreath or coronet of flowers with 
BuLWER inscribed in the centre of it. 

g 


( Ixxxvi ) 

friend Mr. Heilner, whose consummate critical 
knowledge of both languages enabled him to 
afford me the most effective aid in disentangling 
the perplexities of the work; and to my friend Mr. 
Hills (of the Home Circuit), one of the best Ger- 
man scholars I know, in whose richly-stored mind 
and fine taste I found a perfect treasure-house of 
all that is most beautiful in the most beautiful 
creations of genius, and an almost infallible crite- 
rion of propriety. 

But it is also with pride and pleasure that I offer 
my best acknowledgments for very valuable aid to 
— Mrs. John Austin, the elegant translator of The 
German Prince's Tour : Dr. Bernays, Professor of 
the German Language and Literature at King's 
College, and one of those who have reflected most 
honour on that Institution by their works: my 
clever and warm-hearted friend, Mr. Heller, At- 
tach6 to the Prussian Embassy: Mr. A. Trop- 
paneger, a German gentleman of learning and 
taste now residing in London : Dr. Jacob Grimm, 
the first philologist of this or perhaps of any age, 
and an eminently successful cultivator of the most 
interesting department of German literature be- 
sides: and, last not least, A. W. von Schlegel — 
the world has long ceased to prefix titles to the 
name — whose enduring claims to general admira- 
tion are at once too various to be easily enume- 
rated and too well known to need enumerating. 
There is yet another highly distinguished friend 
whose name I should have been enabled to add, 


( Ixxxvii ) 

had not his regretted absence in a foreign country 
deprived me of it. When I reflect how much I 
owed to him on a former occasion of the kind^ I 
cannot contemplate the omission without a pang. 

In conclusion I have only to say, that, as I fol- 
lowed no one implicitly, my friends are not an- 
swerable for my mistakes; and that I shall be 
much obliged to any one who will suggest any 
amendment in the translation or any addition to 
the notes, as at some future time I may reprint or 
publish the work. 

A. H. 

Pump Court, Temple, 
January, 1833. 

P. S. My first intention was not to include the 
Dedication and Prologue on the Theatre, which 
were added long after the first appearance of the 
poem, and have no necessary connection with it. 
But I was advised to make the book complete by 
adding them, and they will be found in an Ap- 
pendix. 


g^ 


FAUST. 


PROLOGUE IN HEAVEN. 

The Lord, the Heavenly Hosts. Afterwards 

Mephistopheles. 

Tiit Archangels comefonoard. 


Raphael. 
The Sun chimes in, as ever, with the emulous music of 
his brother spheres, and performs his prescribed jour- 
ney with the roll of the thunder. His aspect gives 
strength to the angels, though none can fathom him; 
and the inconceivably sublime works of creation are 
glorious as on the first day. 

Gabriel. 
And rapid, inconceivably rapid, the pomp of the earth 
revolves; the brightness of paradise alternates with 
deep fearful night. The sea foams up in broad waves 
at the deep base of the rocks; and rock and sea are 
whirled on in the ever rapid course of the spheres. 

B 


iv^\ '. 


,> i * 


Ci 


U V 


( 2 ) 

Michael. 
And storms are roaring as if in rivalry, from sea to 
land, from land to sea, and forming all around a chain 
of the deepest elemental ferment in their rage. There, 
' *" flashing desolation flares before the path of the thunder- 
/y clap. But thy angels. Lord, respect the mild going of 

thy day. 

. The Three. 
^lYt* ' u Thy aspect gives strength to the angels, though 
none can fathom thee, and all thy sublime works are 
glorious as on the first day. 

Mephistopheles. 
Since, Lord, you approach once again, and inquire 
how we are getting on, and on other occasions were 
not displeased to see me-^therefbre is it that you 
see me also amongst the pack. Excuse me, I cannot 
talk fine, not though the whole circle should cry scorn 
on me. My pathos would certainly make you laogh, 
had you not left off laughing. I have nothing to say 
about suns and worlds; 1 only mark how men are 
plaguing themselves. The little god of the world con- 
tinues ever of the same stamp, and is as odd as on the 
first day. He would lead a somewhat better life of it, 
had you not given him a glimmering of heaven's light« 
He caSs it reason^ and uses it only to be more brutal 
than all other brutes. He seems to me, with your 
Grace's leave, like one of the long-legged grasshoppers. 


( 8 ) 

which is ever flying, and bounding as it flies, and then 
sings its old song in the grass; — and would that he lay 
for ever in the grass ! He thrusts his nose into every 
.dirty mess. 

The Lord. 
Have you nothii^ else to say to me? Are you 
always coming for no other purpose than to complain? 
Is nothing ever to your liking upon earth? 

Mephistopheles. 
No, Lord ! I find things there, as ever, miserably 
bad. Men, in their days of wretchedness, move my 
pity ; I really have not the heart to torment the poor 
things. 

The Lord, 
Do you know Faust ? 

Mephistofheles, 
The Doctor ? 

The Lord. 
My servant? 

Mbphistopheles. 
Verily ! he serves you afler a fashion of his own. 
The fool's meat and drink are not of earth. The 
ferment of his spirit impels him towards the far away. 
He himself is half conscious of his madness. Of hea- 
Ven — he demands its brightest stars, and of earth — its 
every highest enjoyment; and nothing, neither the far 
nor the near, contents his deeply agitated breast. 

B 9, 


•\^ 


( 4 ) 

The Lord. 
If he does but serve me in dimness and perplexity 
now, I shall soon lead him into light. When the tree 
buds, the gardener knows that blossom and fruit will 
deck the coming years. 

Mephistopheles. 
What wiU you wager? you shall lose him yet! If 
you give me leave to guide him quietly my own way. 

The Lord. 
So long as he lives upon the earth, so long be no- 
thing forbidden to thee. Man is prone to error, whibt 
his struggle lasts. 

Mephistopheles. 
I am much obliged to you for that; for I have never 
had any fancy for the dead. I like plump fresh cheeks 
the best. I am not at home to a corpse. I am like 
the cat with the mouse. 

The Lord. 
Enough, it is permitted thee. Divert this spirit from 
his original source, and bear him, if thou canst seize 
him, down on thy own path with thee. And stand 
abashed, when thou art compelled to own — a good 
man, in his dark perplexity, may stDl be conscious of 
the right way. 

Mephistopheles. 
Well, well, — only it will not last* long. 1 am not at 
all in pain for my wager. Should I succeed, excuse 


( 5 ) 

my triumphing with my whole soul. Dust shall he eat, 
and with a relish, like my cousin, the renowned snake. 

The Lord. 
There also you are free to act as you like. I have 
never hated the like of you. Of all the spirits that 
deny, the scoffer is the least offensive to me. Man's 
activity is all too prone to slumher : he soon gets fond 
of unconditional repose ; I therefore wiUingly allow him 
a companion, who stirs and works, and must, as devil, 
produce. But ye, the true children of heaven, rejoice 
in the living profusion of heauty. The creative es- 
sence, which works and lives through all time, em- 
brace you within the happy bounds of love ; and what 
hovers in changeful seeming, do ye fix firm with ever- 
lasting thoughts. 

(Heaven closes, the Archangels disperse,) 
Mephistopheles alone, 
I like to see the Ancient One occasionally, and take 
care not to break with him. It is reaUy fine of so great 
a Lord, to speak so kindly with the Devil himself. 


FAUST. 


NIGHT. 

Faust in a high-vaulted narrow Gothic chamber^ seated 

restless at his desk. 

FAUST. 

I HAVE QoWj alas, by zealous exertion, thoroughly 
studied philosophy, jurisprudence and medicine, — and, 
to my sorrow, theology too. Here I stand, poor fool 
that I am* just as wise as before. I am called Master, 
aye, and Doctor, and have now for ten years been 
leading my pupils about — up and down, crossways and 
crooked ways — by the nose ; and see that we can know 
nothing! This it is that cuts me to the heart. True, I 
am cleverer than all the solemn triflers— doctors, mas- 
ters, writers and priests. No doubts nor scruples of any 
sort trouble me; I fear neither hell nor the Devil. 
But for this very reason is all joy torn from me. I no 
longer &ncy I know any thing worth knowing ; I no 
longer &ncy I could teach anything to better and con* 
vert roaokind. Then I have neither land nor money, 
nor lionour nor woiidly rank. A dog would spurn 


( 8 ) 

such a life. I have therefore devoted myself to magic, 
to try whether, through the power and voice of the 
Spirit, many a mystery might not hecome known to 
me; that I may no longer, with hitter sweat, pant to 
utter what I do not know ; that 1 may learn what it is 
that holds the world together in its inmost core ; see 
all the springs and seeds of production at work, and 
drive no longer a paltry traffic in words. 

Oh! would that thou, radiant moonlight, wert shining 
for the last time upon my misery ; thou, whom I have 
sat watching so many a midnight at this desk ; then, 
over hooks and papers, melancholy friend, didst thoU 
appear to me ! Oh ! that I might wander on the moun- 
tain-tops in thy loved light, hover with spirits round 
the mountain caves, flit over the fields in thy glimmer, 
and escaped from all the fumes of knowledge, hathe, 
re-invigorated, in thy dew f 

Woe is me ! am I still penned up in this dungeon — 
this accursed, musty walled-hole — where the precious 
light of heaven itself glimmers mournfully through 
painted panes, hroken and stinted hy this heap of 
hooks, — worm-eaten, dust-hegrimed, and encompassed 
hy a smoke-smeared paper reaching up to the very 
top of the vault ; with glasses and hoxes ranged round» 
instruments piled tip on all sides, ancestral lumber 


( 9 ) 

stuffed in with the rest? This is thy world, and a pre- 
cious world it is ! 

And dost thou still ask, why thy heart flutters so 
confinedly in thy bosom ? Why a vague aching deadens 
within thee every stirring principle of life? — Instead of 
the animated nature, for which God made man, thou 
hast nought around thee but beasts* skeletons and dead 
mens' bones, in smoke and mould. 

Up ! away ! out into the wide world ! And this mys- 
terious book, ^ from Nostradamus' own hand, is it not 
company enough for thee ? Thou wilt then know the 
course of the stars, and, with nature for thy instructress, 
the soul's essence will rise before thee, as one spirit 
speaks to another. Vain! that the holy signs are 
here expounded to thee by dull poring. Spirits, ye are 
hovering near ; answer me, if you hear ! 

(He opens the book and contemplates the sign of the 
Macrocosm,) 

Ah ! what rapture thrills through all my senses at 
the sight. I feel a fresh hallowed enjo3nnent of life 
glowing anew through nerve and vein. Was it a god 
that traced these signs ? — which still the storm within, 
fill my poor heart with gladness, and, by a mystical in- 
spiration, unveil the powers of nature to my view. Am 
I a god ? All seems so bright. I see, in these pure 
features, nature herself working in my soul's presencel. 


( 10 ) 

Now for the &wt lame do I eonoeive what the eage 
saith, — " The world of spirits is not dosed* Thy 
•ense is Aut, thy heart is dead! Up, acolyte, bathe, 
undned, thy earthly breast in the red beams of mom«- 
lag/' (Ht amlempUUe* the ugn.) 

How all weaves itself into a whok ; the one work^ 
and lives in the other \ How tbe heaveidy inflnenees 
ascend and descend, and readi each other the goldai 
buckets, — on bliss-exhaling pinions, press from heaven 
thnvugh earlih, all ringing faannooioiisly throi^h the 
Ail. What a show! but (di! a show onlyl Where 
diali i seize thee, infinite nature? Ye breasts, where ?^ 
ye sources of all life* on which hang heaven and earth, 
towards which the blighted breast presses — ye guah, ye 
auckle, and am I thus languishing io vaja? 

(He twm» mer the booh indigtumtlfft toad aee$ the Mga 
of the Spirit of the Earth.) 

How difioreatly this sign a&cts me ! Thou* Spirit 
of the Earth, art nearer to me. Already do I fi^l my 
energies exalted, dready ^ow as with new wine; I feel 
courage to east myself into the world ; to endure eartUy 
weal andearthly woe ; to wrestle with storms, and stand 
unahakenmid die shipwreck's crash. — Clouds diicken 
over me ; the moon pales ber Ught ; the lamp dies away ; 
exhalations arise $ red beaaas eneirde my bead^ a oold 
shuddering flickers down from the vaulted roof and 
£wteD0 on mtl I feel it^<*thou ant jSittiug round me, 


( n ) 

prayer-ocMBpelled Spirit* Unveil tb^flelfl Ah J what 
a tearii^ in my heart — ^all my Benses are stirring up to 
new sensations! I feel ray whole soul surrendered to 
thee. Thou must — thou must ! — ^shonld it cost me my 
life. 

(He seizes the hook and pronounces mystically the 
sign of the Spirit. A red Jkme fiashee up; the 
Spirit appears in the flame.) 

Spirit. 
Who calls for me ? 

Faust, (averting his face.) 
Horrible vision! 

Spirit. 
Thou hast potently attracted me, after long sucking 
at my sphere. And now^^ 

Fau8t« 
Torture ! I endure thee not. 

Spirit. 
You pray, panting, to see me, to hear ray voice, to 
gaze upon my face. Your potent invocation works 
«pon me. I am here ! What a miserable terror seizes 
thee, the demigod! Where is the soul's calliiig? 
Where the breast, dnt created a world to itself, and 
upbore and contained it? which, with a thrill of ex- 
Stacy, swelled to lift itself to a level with us spirits. 
Where art thdu, Faust ?-•— whose voice rang to me, who 
pressed «pon nae with all his enei^ies? Art thou he ? 


( 12 ) 

thou, Who, blighted by my breath, art shivering through 
all the depths of life, a trembling writhing worm ? 

Faxjst. 
Shall I yield to thee, thou child of fire? I am he, 
am Faust, thy equal. 

Spieit. 
In the stream of life, 
In the storm of action, 
I move up and down, 
I flit hither and thither. 
Birth knd grave, 
An eternal sea, 
A changeful weaving, 
A glowing life — 

Thus I work at the whizzing loom of time, 
And weave the visible clothing of the Deity. 

Faust. 
Busy spirit, thou who sweepest round the wide 
world, how near I feel to thee! 

Spirit. . 
Thou art mate for the spirit whom thou conceivest, 
not for me. (The Spirit vanifhes.J 

Faust — collapsing. 
Not for thee ! For whom then? I, the Image of the 
, Deity, and not mate for even thee! 

(A knocking at the door,) 
' Oh, Death! I know it: that is tny amanuensis. My 


( 13 ) 

fairest fortune is turned to nought. That the unidea'd 
groveller must disturb these full revealings ! 

(^Wagnek enters in his dressing-gonm and night" 
cap, with a lamp in his hand, Faust turns 
round in displeasure. J 

Wagner. 
Excuse me — I heard you declaiming; you were no 
doubt reading a Greek tragedy. I should like to im- 
prove myself in this art, for now-a-days it may be 
turned to account. I have often heard say that a 
player might instruct a priest. 

Faust. 
Yes, if the priest be himself a player, as may likely 
enough come to pass occasionally. 

Wagner. 
Ah! when a man is so condemned to his study, 
and hardly sees the world of a holiday — hardly through 
a telescope, only from afar ; how is he to lead it by per- 
suasion? 

Faust. 
If you do not feel it, you will not get it by hunting 
for it, — if it does not gush from the soul, and subdue 
the hearts of all hearers with original delight. Sit 
at it for ever — glue together— cook up a hash from 
another's feast, and blow your own little heap of ashes 
into a paltry flame ! You may gain the admiration of 
children and apes, if you have a taste for it ; but you 


( H ) 

win never totieb the hearto of others, if it does not flow 
fresh from your own. 

Wagner. 

Bat it is elocution that makes the oratorV success. I 
feel it well, but am still far behind hand. 

Faust. 

Keep the true object steadily in view — Be no tinkling 
fool ! — Reason and good sense are expressed with littfe 
art. And when yan are seriously intent on saying 
something, is it necessary to hunt for Wtfrds? Your 
speeches, I say, which are so highly polished, in which 
ye crisp the shavings of humanity, are unrefreshing 
as the mist'wind which whistles through the withered 
leaves in autumn. 

Wagner. 

Oh, heaven f art is long, and life is short. Often, 
during my critical studies, do I suffer both in head and 
heart. How hard it is to compass the means by whi<5h 
one mounts to the fountain head ; and before he has 
got half way, a poor devil must probably die ! 

Faust. 

Is parchment the holy well, a drink from which 
allays the thirst for ever ? Thou hast not gained the 
cordial, if it gushes not from thy own soul. 

Wagner. 

Excuse me ! it is a great pleasure to transport one- 
self into the spirit of the times ; to see how a wise 


( 15 ) 

man has thought before us, and to what a glorioiia 
height we hare smce canied it. 

FAtrsr. 

Oh, yes, up to the very stars. My friend, past ages 
are to us a book with seven seals. What people term 
the spirit of the times, is at bottom only their own 
spirit, in which the times are reflected. A miserable 
exhibition it frequently is ! A single glance is enough 
to make one run from it ! A dirt-tub and a himber- 
room ! — and, at best, a grand political show, with fme 
pragmatical saws, such as sound well in the months of 
the puppets ? 

Wagner. 

But the world! the heart and mind of mani every 
one would like to know something about that. 

Faust. 

Aye, what is called knowing. Who dares give the 
child its true name ? The few who have ever known 
anything about it, and who sillily enough did not keep a 
guard over their full hearts, but published what they 
had felt and seen to the multitude, — these, time imme- 
morial, have been crucified and burnt. I beg, friend — 
the night is far advanced — for the present we must 
break off. 

Wagner. 

I could fain have kept waking to converse with 
you so learnedly. To-morrow, however, the first 


( 16 ) 

day of Easter, you must permit me a question or 
two more. Heart and soul have I devoted myself to 
study. True, I know much ; but I would fain know 
all. (Exit.) 

Faust. 

How hope only quits not the brain, which clings 
perseveringly to trash, — gropes with greedy hand for 
treasures, and exults at finding earth- worths ! 

Dare such a mere human voice sound here, where 
all around me teemed with spirits ? Yet ah, this once 
I thank thee, thou poorest of all the sons of earth. 
Thou hast snatched me from despair, which had well- 
nigh got the better of sense. Alas ! the vision was 
so gigantically great, that I felt quite shrunk into a 
dwarf. 

I, formed in God's own image, who already thought 
myself . near to the mirror of eternal truth; who 
reveUed, in the lustre and clearness of heaven, with the 
earthly part of me stripped off; I, more than cherub, 
whose emancipated spirit already, in its imagina- 
tive soarings, aspired to glide through nature's veins, 
and, in creative might, enjoy the life of a god — ^how 
must I atone for it ! One thunder-word has swept me 
wide away. 

I dare not presume to mate myself with thee. If 
I have possessed the power to draw thee to me, I 
had no power to hold thee. In that blest moment, 


( 17 ) 

ifelt so little, so great; you fiercely thrust me back upon 
the uncertain lot of humanity. Who will teach me? 
What am I to shun? Must I obey that impulse? Alas ! 
our actions, equaUy with our sufferings, clog the course 
of our lives. 

Something foreign to it is ever clinging to the noblest 
conception the mind of man can form. When we have 
acquired the good of this world, what is better is 
termed falsehood and vanity. The glorious feelings 
which gave us life, become torpid in the worldly 
throng. 

Although phantasy, at one time, on daring wing and 
full of hope, dilates to infinity, — ^a little space satisfies 
her, when venture afber venture has been wrecked in 
the whirlpool of time. Care straightway builds her 
nest in the depths of the heart, hatches vague tortures 
there, rocks herself restlessly, and frightens joy and 
peace away. She is ever masquing in some new dress : 
it may be as house and land, as wife and child, as 
fire, water, dagger, poison. You tremble before aU 
that never happens, and must be always wailing what 
you never lose. 

I am not like the heavenly essences ; I feel it but too 
deeply. I am like the worm, which drags itself pain- 
fully through the dust, — which, as it seeks its living in 
the dust, is crushed and buried by the step of the 
passenger. 


( 18 ) 

Is it not dutt, all that in a hundred shelves con- 
tracts this lofty wall— the frippery, which, with its 
thousand forms of emptiness, cramps me up in this 
world of moths? Is this the place for finding what I 
want? Must I go on reading in a thousand hooks, 
that men have made themselves miserable in all ages, 
that now and then there has been a happy one ? 

Thou, fleshkss scull, what art thou grinning at? but 
th|it thy brain, like mine, was once bewildered, — 
sought the bright day, and, with an ardent longing afler 
truth, went miserably astray in the twilight? 

Ye instruments, too, forsooth, are mocking me, with 
your wheels and cogs, cylinders and collars, I stood 
at the gate, ye were to be the key ; true, your wards 
are curiously twisted, but you raise not the bolt. In-> 
scrutable at broad day, nature does not suffer her veil 
to be torn from her ; and what she does not choose to 
reveal to thy mind, thou wilt not wrest from her by 
levers and screws. 

You, antiquated lumber, which I have never used, 
you are only here because my father had occasion for 
you. Thou, old roll, hast been smoke-besmeared sincQ 
the dim lamp first smouldered at this desk. Far 
better would it be for me to have squandered away 
the little I possess, than to be sweating here under the 
burthen of that little. To possess what thou hast 
inherited from thy sires, enjoy it. What one does not 


( 19 ) 

profit by, is an oppressive burthen ; what the moment 
brings forth, in that only can it profit us. 

But why are my looks fastened on that spot : is that 
phial there a magnet to my eyes ? Why, of a sudden, 
is all so exquisitely bright, as when the moonlight 
breathes around* a benighted wanderer in the woods? 
I hail thee, thou precious phial, which I now take down 
with reverence: in thee I honour the wit and art of 
man. Thou abstraction of kind soporific juices, thou 
concentration of all refined deadly essences, vouchsafe 
thy master a token of thy grace ! I see thee, and the 
pang is mitigated ; I grasp thee, and the struggle abates ; 
the spirit's flood-tide ebbs by degrees. I am beckoned 
out into the wide sea; the glassy wave glitters at my 
feet ; another day invites to other shores. A chariot 
of fire waves, on light pinions, down to me. I feel 
prepared to permeate the realms of space, by a new 
track, to new coheres of pure activity. This sub- 
lime existence, this god-like beatitude! And thou, 
worm as thou wert, dost thou merit it? Aye, only 
resolutely turn thy back on the bright sun of the 
earth ! Dare to tear up the gates which all willingly 
slink by ! Now is the tune to show by deeds that man's 
dignity yields not to God's sublimity, — to quail not 
in presence of that dark abyss, in which phantasy 
damns itself to its own torments, — to struggle onwards 

c2 


/ 


( 20 ) 

to that pass, around whose narrow mouth all Hell is 
flaming ; calmly resolve upon the step, even at the risk 
of dropping into nothingness. 

Now come down, pure crystal gohlet, on whom I 
have not thought for many a year, — forth from your 
old receptacle ! You glittered at my father's festivi- 
ties, gladdening the grave guests, as one pledged you 
to the other. The gorgeousness of the many artfully- 
wrought images, — the drinker's duty, to explain them 
in rhyme, and empty the contents at a draught, — 
remind me of many a night of my youth. I shall not 
now pass you to a neighbour, I shall not now display 
my wit on your devices. Here is a juice which soon 
intoxicates. It fills your cavity with liquid brown. 
Be this last draught — which I brewed, which I choose 
— quaffed, with my whole soul, as a solemn festal 
greeting, to the morn. 

(He places the goblet to his mouth.) 
(The ringing of bells and singing ofchorusses,) 

Chorus of Anoels. 

Christ is arisen ! 

Joy to the mortal. 

Whom the perishable, 

Sneaking, hereditary 

Imperfections enveloped. 
Faust. 
What deep humming, what clear strain, draws irre- 


( 21 ) 

sistibiy the goblet from my mouth? Are ye hollow- 
sounding bells already proclaiming the first festal hour 
of Easter ? Are ye chorusses already singing the com- 
forting hymn, which once, on the night of the sepulchre, 
pealed forth, from angel lips, the assurance of a new 
covenant? 

Chorus of Women. 
With spices 

Had we embalmed him, 
We, his faithful ones, 
Had laid him out. 
Clothes and bands 
Cleanlily swathed we round, -- 
Ah ! and we find 
Christ no longer here ! 
Chorus of Angels. 
Christ is arisen ! 
Happy the loving one. 
Who the afflicting, 
Wholesoine and chastening 
Trial has stood ! 
Faust. 
Why, ye heavenly tones, with your subduing soft- 
ness, do you seek me out in the dust? Peal out, where 
sofl men are to be found ! I hear the message, but 
want faith. Miracle is the pet child of faith. I dare 
not struggle , towards those spheres from whence the 


( 22 ) 

glad tidings sound ; and yet, accustomed to the sound 
from infancy, it still calls me back to life. In other 
days, the kiss of heavenly love descended upon me 
in the solemn stillness of the Sabbath ; the fuU-toned 
bell sounded so fraught with mystic meaning, and a 
prayer was vivid enjoyment. A longing, inconceiva- 
bly sweet, drove me forth to wander over wood and 
plain, and amidst a thousand burning tears, I felt a 
world rise up to me. This anthem harbingered the 
gay sports of youth, the unchecked happiness of spring 
festivity. Recollection now holds me back, with child- 
like feeling, from the last decisive step. Oh ! sound 
on, ye sweet heavenly strains! The tear is flowing, 
earth has me again. 

Chorus of Young People. 

The Buried One, 

Already on high, 

Living, sublime. 

Has gloriously raised himself! 

He is in growing bliss, ^ 

Near to creating joy. 

Ah ! on earth's bosom 

Are we for suffering here ! 

He lefi us, his own. 

Languishing here below ! 

Alas! we weep for, 

Master, thy lot! 


( 28 ) 

Chorus of Angels. 
Christ is arisen 
Out of corruption's lap. 
Joyfully tear yourselves 
Loose from your bonds ! 
Ye, in deeds giving praise to him, 
Love manifesting. 
Living brethren-like. 
Travelling and preaching him, 
Bliss promising — 
You is the Master nigh, 
For you is he here ! 


( 2* ) 


BEFORE THE GATE. 


Pramenaders of all kinds pass out. 


Some Mechanics. 
Why that way? 

Others. 
We are going up to the Jagerhaus. 

The former. 
But we are going to the mill. 

A Mechanic. 
I advise you to go to the Wasserhof. 

A SECOND. 

- The road is not pleasant. 

The others. 
What shall you do? 

A THIRD. 

I am going with the others. 

A FOURTH. 

Come up to Burgdorf, you are there sure of finding 
the prettiest girls and the best beer, and rows of the 
first order. 

A FIFTH. 

You wild fellow, is your skin itching for the third 
time? I cannot go, I have a horror of the place. 


( 25 ) 

Servant Girl. 
No, no, I shall return to the town. 

Another. 
We shall find him to a certainty by those poplars. 

The First. 
That is no great gain for me. He will walk by 
your side. With you alone does he dance upon the 
green. What have I to do with your pleasures. 

The Second. 
He is sure not to be alone to day. The curly-head, 
he said, would be with him. 

Student. 
The devil ! how the stout damsels step out ; come 
along, brother, we must go with them. Strong beer, 
stinging tobacco, and a girl in full trim, — that now is 
my taste. 

Citizens' Daughters. 
There are pretty lads for you ! ' It is really a shame. 
They might have the best of company, and are running 
after these girls. 

Second Student to the First. 
Not so fast ! there are two coming up behind ; they 
are trimly dressed, out One of them is my neighbour ; 
I have a great liking for the girl. They are walking 
in their quiet way, and yet will suffer us to join them 
in the end. 


( 26 ) 

Ths First. 
No, brother. I do not like to be under restraint. 
Quick, lest we lose the game. The hand that twirls the 
mop on a Saturday, will fondle you best on Sundays. 

Townsman. 

No, the new Burgomaster is not to my taste ; now 
that he has become so, he is daily getting bolder; and 
what is he doing for the town? Is it not growing 
worse every day ? One is obliged to submit to more 
restraints than ever, and pay more than in any time 
before. 

Beggar sings. 

Ye good gentlemen, ye lovely ladies, so trimly 
dressed and rosy cheeked, be pleased to look upon 
me, to regard and relieve my wants. Do not suffer 
me to sing here in vain. The free-handed only is 
light-hearted. Be the day, which is a holiday to all, a 
harvest-day to me. 

Another Townsman. 

I know nothing better on Sundays and hcdidays than 
a chat of war and war's alarms, when people are 
fightmg far away in Turkey. A man stands at the 
window, takes off his glass, and sees the painted ves- 
sels glide down the river ; theii returns home glad at 
heart at eve, and blesses peace and times of peace. 

Third Townsman. 

Aye, neighbour, I have no objection to that; they 


( 27 ) 

may break one another's heads, and turn every thing 
topsy turvy, for aught I care ; only let things at home 
remain as they are. 

An Old Woman to the Citizens' Daughters. 
Hey day : how smart ! the pretty young creatures. 
Who would not fall in love with you? Only not so 
proud! it is all very well; and what you wish, I should 
know how to put you in the way of getting. 

Citizen's Daughter. 
Come along, Agatha. I take care not to be seen 
with such witches in public ; true, on Saint Andrew's 
eve she showed me my future lover in flesh and blood. 

The other. 
She showed me mine in the glass, soldier-like, with 
other bold fellows ; I look around, I seek him every 
where, but I can never meet with him. 

Soldiers. 
Towns with lofty 
Walls and battlements, 
Maidens with proud 
Scornful thoughts, 
I fain would win. 
Bold the adventure, 
Noble the reward. 

And the trumpets 
Are our summoners 


i 

* 


( 28 ) 

As to joy 
So to death. 
That is a storming, 
That is a life for you ! 

V 

Maidens and towns 
Must surrender. 
* Bold the adventure, 

Noble the reward — 
And the soldiers 
Are off. 

Faust and Wagner. 

Faust. 

River and rivulet are freed from ice by the gay 

quickening glance of the spring. The joys of hope are 

budding in the dale. Old winter, in his weakness, 

has retreated to the bleak mountains ; from thence he 

sends, in his flight, nothing but impotent showers of 

hail, in flakes, over the green-growing meadows. But 

« / the sun endures no white. Production and growth are 

every where stirring; he is about to enliven every 

thing with hues. The landscape wants flowers ; their 

places are supplied by men and women in^|^ attire. 

ft 

Tun^'*^!^ look back from this rising ground upon the 

town. Forth from the gloomy portal presses a motley 

■« * ^ ^ crowd. Every one suns himself delightedly to-day. 


( 29 ) 

They celebrate the rising of the Lord, for they 
themselves have arisen ; — from the dull rooms of mean 
houses, from the bondage of mechanical drudgery, 
from the confinement of gables and roofs, from the 
stifling narrowness of streets, from the venerable gloom 
of churches, are they raised up to the open light of day. 
But look, look, how quickly the mass is scattering 
itself through the gardens and fields ; how the river, 
broad and long, tosses many a merry bark upon its 
surface, and how this last wherry, overladen almost to 
sinking, moves off. Even from the farthest paths of 
the mountain, gay coloured dresses glance upon us. 
I hear already the bustle of the village ; this is the true 
heaven of the multitude ; big and little are huzzaing 
joyously. Here, I am a man — ^here, I may venture to 
be one. 

Wagner. 


enemy to coarseness of every sort. FiNling, shouting, 
skittle-playing, are sounds thoroughly detestable t<f me. 
People run riot as if the devil was drivi|^ them^and 

call it merriment, call it singing. ^ ^ 

■ 

> 
Rustics under the Lime Tree. « 


% 


♦. 


To walk with you. Sir DoctOT, is honour and profit 
But I would not venture hither alone, because I am an \ 


% 


Dance and Sono. 
The swain dressed himself out for the dance. 
With party-coloured jacket, ribbon and garland. ^ 


* 


i 


/ 


/ 


( 30 ) 

Smartly was he dressed! 

The ring round the lime-tree was already full, 

And all were dancing like mad. 

Huzza ! Huzza ! 

Tira-lira-hara-ola ! 
Merrily went the fiddle*stick. * 

He pressed eagerly in, 
Gave a maiden a push 
With his elbow ; 
The buxom girl turned round 
And said — *' Now that I call stupid." 

Huzza! Huzza! 

Tira-lira^hara-la ! 
** Dont be so rude." 

Yet nimbly sped it in the ring ; 
They turaea right, they turned left, 
And aU the petticoats were flying. 
They gre^^ed, they grew warm, 
^And rested panting arm-in-arm, 
^ I^^za! Huzza! 
^^^ira-lira-hara-la ! 
^d hip on elbow. 

" Have done now! don't be so impudent! 
How many a man has cajoled and 


( SI ) 

Deceived his betrothed." 
But he coaxed her aside, 
And far and wide echoed from the lime-tree 

Huzza! Huzza! 

Tira-lira-hara-la ! 
The screams and the fiddle-stick. 

Old Peasant. 

Doctor, this is really good of you, not to scorn us 
to-day, and, deep-learned as you are, to mingle in this 
crowd. Take then the fairest jug, which we have 
filled with firesh liquor: I pledge you in it, and pray 
aloud that it may do more than quench your thirst — 
may the number of drops which it holds be added to 
your days. 

Faust. 

I accept the refreshing draught, and wish you all 
health and happiness in return. (The people come 
round him,) 

Old Peasant. 

Of a surety it is well done of you, to appear on this 
glad day. You have been our friend in ^il days, 
too, before now. Many a one stands here alive whom 
your father tore from the hot fever's rage, when he 
stayed the pestilence. You too, at that time a young 
man, visited all the houses of the sick : many a dead 
body was bom forth, but you came out safe. You en- 


( 32 ) 

dured many a sore trial. The Helper above helped 
the helper. 

All. 

Health to the tried friend — may he long have the 
power to help. 

Faust. 

Bend before Him on high, who teaches how to help, 
and sends help. (He proceeds with Wagner.) 

Wagner. 

What a feeling, great man, must you experience at 
the honours paid yeu by this multitude. Happy he 
who can turn his gifls to so good an account. The 
father, points thee out to his boy ; all ask, and press, 
and hurry round. The fiddle stops, the dancer pauses. 
As you go by, they range themselves in rows, caps 
fly into the air, and they all but bend the knee as if 
the Host were passing. 

Faust. 

Only a few steps further, up to that stone yonder. 
Here we will rest from our walk. Here many a time 
have I sat, thoughtful and solitary, and mortified my- 
self witl^ prayer and fasting. Rich in hope, firm in 
faith, I thought to extort the stoppage of that pesti- 
lence from the Lord of Heaven, with tears, and sighs, 
and wringing of hands. The applause of the multitude 
now sounds like derision in my. ears. Oh! couldst 
thou read in my inmost soul^ how little father and son 


( 33 ) 

merit such honour ! My father was a worthy somhre 
man, who, honestly hut in his own way, tried phiu]ta»- 
dcal experiments on nature and her haUowed cir- 
cles ; who, in the company of adepts, shut himself up 
in the dark laboratory, and fused contraries together 
after numberless recipes. There was a red lion, a hold 
lover, married to the lily in the tepid bath, and then 
both, with open flame, tortured from one bridal cham- 
ber to another. If the young queen, with varied hues, 
then appeared in the glass — this was the physic ; the 
patients died, and no one inquired, who recovered. 
Thus did we, with our hellish electuary, rage in these 
vales and mountains far worse than the pestilence. I 
myself have given the poison to thousands : they pined 
away, and I must survive to hear the reckless mur- 
derers praised. 

Wagner. 

How can you trouble yourself on that account ? Is 
it not enough for a good man to practise conscientiously 
and scrupulously the art that has been entrusted to 
him. If, in youth, you honour your father, you will 
willingly learn from him : if, in manhood, you extend 
the bounds of knowledge, your son may mount still 
higher than you. 

Faust. 

Ohj happy he, who can still hope to emerge from this 
sea of error ! Man desires what he knows not, and can- 


( 34 ) 

not employ what he knows. But let us not embitter the 
•blessing of this hour by such melancholy reflections. 
See, how the green-girt cottages shimmer in the setting 
Sun ! He bends and sinks, the day is overlived. Yon- 
der he hurries off, and quickens other life. Oh! that I 
have no wing to lift me from the ground, to struggle 
after, for ever after, him ! I should see, in everlasting 
evening beams, the stilly world at my feet, — every height 
on fire, — every vale in repose, — the silver brooks flow- 
ing into golden streams. The rugged mountain, with 
all its dark defiles, would not then break my godlike 

course. Already the sea, with its heated coves, opens 

on my enraptured sight. The god seems at last to sink 
away. But the new impulse wakes. I hurry on to 
drink his everlasting light, — the day before me and the 
night behind, — the heavens above, and under me the 
waves. — A beauteous dream! as it is passing, he is 
gone. Alas, no bodily wing can keep pace with the 
wings of the mind. Yet it is the inborn tendency of 
our being for feeling to strive upwards and onwards ; 
when, over us, lost in the blue expanse, the lark sings 
its trilling lay : when, over rugged pine-covered heights, 
the outspread eagle soars ; and, over plain and sea, the 
crane struggles onwards to her home. 

Wagner. 
I myself have often had strange fancies, but I never 
yet experienced an impulse of the kind. One soon 


( 36 ) 

lo<^8 one's fill of woods «id fields. I shall never envy 
the wing« of the hird. How difierently the pleasnroe 
of the mind bear us, from book to book, from page to 
page* With them, winter nights become cheerful and 
bright, a happy life warms every limb, and, ah ! when 
you unroll a precious manuscript, all heaven comes 
down to you. 

Faust. 
Thou art only conscious of one impulse. Oh, never 
become acquainted with the other ! Two souk, alas, 
dwell in my breast: the one struggles to separate 
itself from the other. The one clings with obstinate 
fondness to the world, with organs like cramps of steel: 
the other lifb itself majesticaDy from the mist to the 
realms of an exalted ancestry. Oh ! if there be spirits 
'hovering in the air, ruling 'twixt earth and heaven, de- 
scend, ye, from your golden atmosphere, and lead me 
off to a new variegated life. Aye, were but a magic 
mantle mine, and could it bear me into foreign lands, I 
would not part with it for the costliest garments, not 
for a king's mantle. 

Wagher. 

Invoke not the well-known troop, which diffuses 

itself, streaming, through the atmosphere, and threatens 

danger in a thousand forms, from every quarter, to 

man. The sharp-fanged spirits, with arrowy tongues, 


( 86 ) 

press upon you from the north ; from the east, they 
come parching, and feed upon your lungs. If the 
south sends from the desart those which heap fire 
after fire upon thy hrain ; the west hrings the swarm 
which only refreshes, to drown fields, meadows, and 
yourself. They are fond of listening, ever alive for 
mischief: they obey with pleasure, because they take 
pleasure to delude : they feign to be sent from heaven, 
and lisp like angels, when they lie. But let us be 
moving, the earth is already grown gray, the air is chill, 
and the mist is falling; it is only in the evening that 
we set a proper value on our home. Why do you 
stand still, and gaze with astonishment thus ? What 
can thus attract your attention in the gloaming ? 

Faust. 

Seest thou the black dog ranging through the com 
and stubble ? 

Wagner. 

I saw him long ago, he did not strike me as anything 
particular. 

Faust. 

Mark him well ! for what do you take the brute ? 

Wagner. 

For a poodle, who in poodle-fashion is puzzling out 
the track of his master. 

Faust. 

Dost thou mark how, in wide spiral curves, he quests 


( 37 ) 

round and ever nearer us ; and, if I err not, a line of 
fire follows upon his track. 

Wagner. 
- I see nothing but a black poodle ; you may be de- 
ceived by some optical illusion. 

Faust. 
It appears to me, that he is drawing light magical 
nooses, to form a toil, around our feet. 

Wagner. 
I see him bounding hesitatingly and shyly round us, 
because^ instead of his master, he sees two strangers. 

Faust. 
The circle grows narrow, he is already close. 

Wagner. 
You see it is a dog, and no spirit. He growls and 
hesitates, crouches on his belly and wags with his tail — 
all as dogs are wont to do. 

Faust. 
Join our company ! — Hither ! 

Wagner. 
It is a poor fool of a poodle. Stand still, and he 
will sit on his hind legs; speak to him, and he will 
jump up on you ; lose aught, and he will fetch it to 
you, and jump into the water for your stick. 

Faust. 
You are right ; I find no trace of a spirit, and aU is 
the result of training. 


« \ 


( 38 ) 

Waoker. 

Even a wise man may become attached to a dog 
when he is well brought up. And he richly deserves 
all the favour you can bestow upon him, — ^he, the ac- 
complished pupil of students* as he is. 

{They enter the gate of the town,) 


( 39 ) 


STUDY. 

Fau8T| entering with the poodle. 

I have left field and meadow veiled in deep night, 
which wakes the better soul within us with a 
holy feeling of foreboding awe. Wild desires, with 
deeds of violence, are now sunk in sleep : the love of 
man is stirring — the love of God is stirring now. 

Be quiet, poodle, run not hither and thither. What 
are you snuffling at on the threshold? Lie down be- 
hind the stove ; there is my best cushion for you. As 
without, upon the mountain path, you amused us by 
running and gambolling, so now receive my kindness as 
a welcome quiet guest. 

Ah ! when the lamp is again burning friendlily in our 
narrow cell, all becomes clear in our bosom, — in the 
heart which knows itself. Reason begins to speak, and 
hope to bloom, again ; we yearn for the springs of life 
— oh yes, for the fountains of life, far away. 

Growl not, poodle ; the brutish sound ill harmonises 
with the hallowed tones which now possess my whole 
soul. It is common for men to deride what they do 
not understand — to snarl at the good and beautiful, 


( 40 ) 

which is often uncongenial to them. Is the dog dis- 
posed to snarl at it like them ? But ah ! I feel already 
that, in the best of moods, contentment wells no longer 
from my breast. Yet why must the stream be so soon 
dried up, and we again lie thirsting ? I have had so 
much experience of that! This want, however, admits 
of being compensated. We learn to prize that which is 
not of this earth; we long for revelation, which no- 
where burns more purely and brightly than in the New 
Testament. I feel inlpelled to open the original text — 
to translate, with upright feeling, a little of the sacred 
original into my darling German. 

(He opens a volume^ and disposes hxmselff&r the task,) 
It is written : ''In the beginning was the Word.'* 
Here I am already at fault — who will help, me on? 
I cannot possibly value the Word so highly; I must 
translate it differently, if I am truly inspired by the 
spirit. It is written : '* In the beginning was the 
Sense.'' Consider well the first line, that your pen 
be not over hasty. Is it the Sense that influences and 
produces everything? It should stand thus: *' In the 
beginning was the Power." Yet, in the very act of 
writing it down, something warns me not to keep to it. 
The spirit comes to my aid ! At once I see my way, 
and write confidently : "In the beginning was the 
Deed." 


( 41 ) 

If I am to share the chamber with you, poodle, cease 
your howling — cease your barking. I cannot endure 
so troublesome a companion near to me. One of us 
two must quit the cell. It is with reluctance that I 
withdraw the rights of hospitality ; the door is open— 
the way is clear for you. But what do I see ! Can 
that come to pass by natural means? Is it shadow — is 
it reality ? How long and broad my poodle grows ! He 
raises himself powerfully ; that is not the form of a 
dog! What a phantom I brought into the house ! — ^he 
looks already like a hippopotamus, with fiery eyes, ter- 
rific teeth. Ah ! now I am sure of thee ! Solomon's 
key is good for such a half-hellish brood. 

Spirits in the passage. 

One is caught within! 

Stay without, follow none ! 

As in the gin the fox. 

Quakes an old lynx of hell. 
But take heed ! 

Hover thither, hover back, 
Up and down, 

And be is loose f 

If ye can aid him. 

Leave him not in the lurch ! 

For he has already done 

Much to serve us. 


( 4« ) 

Faust. 
Pint, to confront the beast, 
Use I the spell of the four : 

Salamander shall glow, 

Undine twine, 

Sylph vanish, 

Kobold stir himselfl 
Who did not know 

The elements. 
Their power and force. 

Were no master 

Over the spirits. 

Vanish in flame, 

Salamander ! 
Rushingly flow together. 

Undine! 
Shine in meteor beauty, 

Sylph ! 
Bring homely help. 
Incubus ! Incubus ! 
Step forth and finish the spell. 
None of the four stick in the beast. He lies undis- 
turbed and grins at me. I have not yet made him feel. 
Thou shalt hear me conjure stronger. 
Art thou, fellow, 
A scapeling from hell ? 


( « ) 

Then see this sign ! 
To which bend the dark troop. 
He is already swelling, and bristling his hair. 
Reprobate ! 

Can'st thou read him ? — 
The unoriginated, 
Unpronounceable, 
Through all lieaven diffused, 
Vilely transpierced ? 
Driven behind the stove, it is swelling like an ele- 
phant ; it fills the whole space, it is about to vanish into 
mist. Rise not to the ceiling ! Down at thy master *s 
feet ! Thou see'st I do not threaten in vain. I will 
scorch thee with holy fire. Wait not for the thrice 
glowing light. Wait not for the strongest of my spells. 

Mephistopheles 
(Crnnet forward as the mitt sinks, in the dress of a 

tnweUing scholar, from behind the state.) 
Wherefore such a fuss ? What may be your pleasure ? 

Faust. 
This then was the kernel of the poodle ! A travelling 
scholar ? The casus makes me laugh. 

Mephistopheles. 
I salute your learned worship. You have made me 
sweat with a vengeance* 

Faust. 
What b thy name 1 


( 44 ) 

Mephistofheles. 
The question strikes me as trifling for one who rates 
the Word so low; who, far estranged from all mere 
outward seeming, deals only with the essences of things. 

Faust. 
With such gentlemen as you, one may generally 
learn the essence from the name ; since this appears 
hut too plainly if your name he fly-god, destroyer, 
liar. So, once again, who art thou ? 

Mephistofheles. 
A part of that power, which is ever willing evil and 
ever producing good. 

Faust. 
What am I to understand hy this riddle. 

Mephistofheles. 
I am the spirit which constantly denies, and that 
rightly ; for every thing that arises deserves to be an- 
nihilated. Therefore better were it that nothing should 
arise. Thus, all that you call sin, destruction, in a 
word. Evil, is my proper element. 

Faust. 
You call yourself a part, and yet stand whole before 

me. 

Mephistofheles. 
I tell thee the modest truth. Although man, that 
microcosm of folly, commonly esteems himself a whole. 
I am a part of the part, which in the beginning was all ; 


( *5 ) 

a part of the darkness which brought forth light, — the 
proud light, which now contests her ancient rank and 
space with mother night. But he succeeds not ; since, 
strive as he will, he cleaves, as if wedded, to bodies, he 
streams from bodies, he gives beauty to bodies, he is 
broken by a body in his course, and so, I hope, will 
perish with bodies before long. 

Faust. 

Now I know thy dignified calling. Thou art not 
able to destroy on a great scale, and so art beginning 
on a small one. 

Mefhistopheles. 

And, to say truth, I have made little progress in it. 
That which is opposed to nothing — the something, this 
clumsy world, much as I have tried already, I have not 
yet learnt how to come at it, — with waves, storms, 
earthquakes, fire. Sea and land remain precisely as 
they were after all ! And the damned stuff, the brood of 
brutes and men, there is no such thing as getting the 
better of them neither. How many I have already 
buried ! And new fresh blood is constantly circulat- 
ing ! Things go on so — it is enough to make one mad ! 
From air, water, earth — in dry, wet, hot, cold — germs 
by thousands evolve themselves. Had I not reserved 
fire, I should have nothing apart for myself. 

Faust. 

So thou opposest thy cold deviFs-fist, clenched in 


( 46 ) 

impotent malice, to the ever*8tirring» the beneficent 
creating power. Try tby hand at something else, 
strange child of Chaos. 

Mbphistopheles. 

We will certainly think about it — ^more of that anon! 
Might I be permitted this time to depart? 

Faust. 
I see not why you ask. I have now become ac- 
quainted with you ; call on me in future as yon feel 
inclined. Here is the window, here the door; there 
is also a chimney for you. 

Mephistopheles. 
To confess the truth, a small obstacle prevents me 
from walking out — the wizard-foot upon your threshold. 

Faust. 
The Pentagram embarrasses you? Tell me then, 
thou child of hell, if that repels thee, how cam'st thou 
in. How was such a spirit entrapped ? 

Mephistopheles. 
Mark it well ; it is not wefi drawn ; one angle, the 
outward one, is, as thou seest, a little open. 

Faust. 
It is a lucky accident. Thou shouldst be my pri- 
soner then? This is a chance hit. 

Mephistopheles. 
The poodle observed nothing when he jumped in. 
The thing looks differently now ; the devil cannot get 
out. 


( 47 ) 

Faust. 
But why do you not go through the window ? 

Mephistopheles. 
It is a law binding on devils and phantoms that they 
must go out the same way that they stole in. The first 
is free to us ; we are slaves as regards the second. 

Faust. 
Hell itself has its laws? I am glad of it; in that 
case a compact, a binding one, may be made with you 
gentlemen ? 

Mephistopheles. 
What is promised, that shalt thou enjoy to the letter ; 
not the smallest deduction shall be made from it. But 
this is not to be comprehended in a moment, and we 
will speak of it the next time. But I most earnestly 
beg of you to let me go this once. 

Faust. 
Wait yet another moment, and tell me something 
worth telling. 

Mephistopheles. 
Let me go now ! I will soon come back ; you may 
then question me as you like. 

Faust. 
I have laid no snare for thee ; thou hast run into the 
net of thy own free will. Who has got hold of the 
devil, keep hold of him ; he will not catch him a second 
time in a hurry. 


( 48 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
If you like, I am ready to stay and keep you company 
here, but upon condition that I may exert my arts to 
beguile the time for you. 

Faust. 
I shall like it ; you may do so, provided only that 
the art be an agreeable one. 

Mephistopheles. 
My friend, you will gain more for your senses in this 
one hour, than in the whole monotonous year besides. 
What the delicate spirits sing to you, the beauteous 
images which they call up, are not an unsubstantial 
play of enchantment. Your smell will be gratified, your 
palate delighted, and your feelings entranced. No 
preparation is necessary ; we are all assembled — strike 
up! 

Spirits. 
Vanish, ye dark 
Arched ceilings above ! 
More charmingly look in 
The friendly blue sky! 
Were the dark clouds 
Melted into thin air ! 
Little stars sparkle. 
Softer suns smile in. 
^therial beauty 
Of the children of heaven, 


1 


( ^ ) 

Tremulous bending, 

Hover across ; 
Longing desire, 

Follow afler. 
And the fluttering 
Ribbons of drapery 
Cover the plains, 
Cover the bower. 
Where lovers, 
I>eep in thought. 
Give themselves for life. 
Bower on bower ! 
Sprouting tendrils ! 
Down-weighing grapes 
Gush into the vat 
Of the hard-squeezing press. 
The foaming wines 
Gush in brooks. 
Rustle through 
Pure precious stones. 
Leave the heights 
Behind them lying. 
Broaden to seas. 
To form the charm of 
Green-growing hills. 
And the winged throng 


( 50 ) 

Sips happmess, 

Flies to meet the sun, 

Flies to meet the bright 

Isles, which dancingly 

Moye on the waves ; 

Where we listen to 

Shouting in chorusses, 

Where we see 

Dancers on meads ; 

Who wander unchecked in 

The free air about. 

Some are clambering 

Over the heights, 

Some are swimming 

Over the seas, 

Others are hovering 

In the mid air. 

AU towards the life. 

All towards the fiur away 
Sweet loving stars of 

Favour and bliss. 
Mephistopheles. 
He slumbers ! Well done, my airy delicate young- 
sters, ye have fairly sung him to sleep. I am your 
debtor for this concert. Thou art not yet the man to 
hold fast the devil! Play around him with sweet 
dreamy visions; plunge him in a sea of illusion. 


( 61 ) 

But to break the spell of this threshold I need a rat's 
tooth. I have not to conjure long; one is already 
rustling hither, and will hear me in a moment. The 
lord of rats and mice, of flies, frogs, bugs, and lice, 
commands thee to venture forth and gnaw this thresh- 
hold where he has smeared it with oil. Thou com'st 
hopping forth already ! Instantly to the work ! The 
point which repelled me is towards the front on the 
ledge; one bite more, and it is done. — Now Faust, 
dream on, till we meet again. 

Faust, waking. 
Am I then once again deceived. Does the throng 
of spirits vanish thus ? Was- it in a lying dream that 
the devil appeared to me, and Was it a poodle that 
darted away ? 


E 2 


( 58 ) 


STUDY. 

Faust. — Mefhistopheles, 
Faust. 
Does any one knock? Come in! Who wants to 
disturb me again ? 

Mephistopheles. 


It is I. 


Come in ! 


Faust. 


Mephistopheles. 
You must say so three times. 

Faust. 
Come in, then ! 

Mephistopheles. 
So far, so good. We shall agree, I hope; for, to 
chase away your fancies, I am here, like a youth of 
condition, in a coat of scarlet laced with gold, a mantle 
of stiff silk, a cock's feather in my hat, and a long 
pointed sword at my side. And to make no more words 
about it, my advice to you is to array yourself in the 
same manner immediately, that unrestrained, emanci- 
pated, you may try what life is. 

Faust. 
In every dress I dare say I shall feel the torture of 


( 53 ) 

the contracted life of this earth. I am too old for 
mere play, too young to be without a wish. What 
can the world afford me? — " Thou shalt do without!" 
^* Thou shalt do without!" That is the eternal song 
which is rung in every one's ears, which, our whole 
life long, every hour is hoarsely singing to us. In 
the morning I wake only to horror. I could fain weep 
bitter tears to see the day, which in its course will 
not accomplish a wish for me, no, not one; which, 
with wayward captiousness, weakens even the pre- 
sentiment of every joy, and disturbs the creation of 
my busy breast by a thousand ugly realities. Then 
again, at the approach of night, I must stretch myself 
in anguish on my couch ; here, too, no rest is vouch- 
safed to me ; wild dreams are sure to harrow me up. 
The God that dwells in my bosom, that can stir my 
inmost soul, that sways all my energies — he is power- 
less as regards things without ; and thus existence is a 
load to me, death an object of earnest prayer, and life 
detestable. 

Mephistopheles. 

And yet death is never an entirely welcome guest. 

Faust. 

Oh! happy the man, around whose brows he wreathes 
the bloody laurel in the glitter of victory — whom, after 
the maddening dance, he finds in a maiden's arms. Oh 


/ 


( 5* ) 

that I had sunk away, enrapt, exanimate^ before the 
great spirit's power ! 

Mephistopheles. 
And yet ^ certain person did not drink a certain 
brown juice on that night. 

Faust. 
Playing the spy, it seems, is thy amusement. 

MePHISTOPHEIiES. 

I am not omniscient ; but I know inuch, 

Faust. 

Since a sweet familiar tone drew me from thosis 
thronging horrors, and played on what of childlike feel- 
ing remained in me with the concording note of happier 
times,^-'my curse on every thing which entwines the 
soul with its jugglery, and chains it to this den of 
wretchedness with blinding and flattering influences. 
Accursed, flrst, be the lofty opinion in which the mind 
wraps itself! Accursed* the blinding of appearanceSi 
by which our senses are enslaved! Accursed, what 
play the pretender to us in dreams, — the cheat of 
glory, of the lasting of a name! Accursed, what 
flatters us as property, as wife and child, as slave 
and plough! Accursed be Mammon when he stirs- 
us to bold deeds with treasures, when he smoothes 
our couch for indolent delight! Accursed, the balsam-r 
juice of the grape! Accursed, that liighest joy of 


- 1 


( 56 ) 

love! Accursed be Hope, accursed be Faith, and 
accursed, above all, be Patience ! 

Chorus of Invisible Spirits. 

Woe, woe, 

Thou hast destroyed it. 

The beautiful world. 

With thy strong fist ; 

It tumbles, it falls abroad. 

A demigod has shattered it to pieces I 

We bear away 

The wrecks into nothingness, 

And wail over 

The beauty that is lost. 

Mighty 

Among the sons of earth. 

Proud one, 

Build it again. 

Build it up in thy bosom! 

A new career of life, ! 

With unstained sense begin ; 

And new lays 

Shall peal out thereupon. 
Mephistopheles. 
These are the little ones of my train. Listen, how, 
with wisdom beyond their years, they counsel you to 
pleasure and action. Out into the world, away from 


( 56 ) 

solitariness, where the senses and the juices of life 
stagnate — would they fain lure thee. 

Cease to trifle with thy misery — which, like a vul- 
ture, feeds upon thy vitals. The worst company will 
make you feel that you are a man amongst men. Yet 
I do not mean to thrust you amongst the common herd. 
I am none of your great men ; but if, united with me, 
you will wend your way through life, I will readily 
accommodate myself to be your's upon the spot. I am 
your companion ; or, if it suits you, your servant, your 
slave! 

Faust. 

And what am I to do for you in return ? 

Mephistopheles. 

For that you have still a long day of grace. 

Faust. . 

No, no ; the devil is a selfish one, and does not do 
indifferently, for God's sake, what may advantage ano- 
ther. Speak the condition plainly out; such a servant 
is a dangerous inmate. 

Mephistopheles. 

I will bind myself to your service Aere, and never 
sleep nor slumber at your call. When we meet on the 
other sidcy you shall do as much for me. 

Faust. 
. I care little about the other side: if you first knock 
this world to pieces, the other may arise afterwards 


( 57 ) 

if it will. My joys flow from this earth, and this sun 
shines upon my sufferings : if I can only separate my- 
self from them, what will and can, may come to pass. 
I will hear no more about it — whether there be hating 
and loving in the world to come, and whether there be 
an Above or Below in those spheres, like our own. 

Mephistofheles. 

In this mood you may venture. Bind yourself; and 
during these days you shall be delighted by my arts ; 
I will give thee what no human being has ever seen as 
yet. 

Faust. 

What, poor devil, wilt thou give ? Was the mind of 
man, in its high aspiring, ever comprehended by the like 
of thee? But if thou hast food which never satisfies; 
ruddy gold, which, volatile, like quicksilver, melts 
away in the hand; a game, at which one never wins; 
a maiden, who, on my breast, is already ogling my 
neighbour; the bright god-like joy of honour, which 
vanishes like a meteor ! — Show me the fruit which rots 
before it is plucked, and trees which every day grow 
green anew. 

Mephistofheles. 

Such a task affiights me not. I have such treasures 
at my disposal. But, my good friend, the time will 
come in its turn when we may feast on what is really 
: good in peace. 


( 58 ) 

Faust. 
If ever I lie down, calm and composed, upon a 
couch, be there at once an end of me. If thou canst 
ever flatteringly delude me into self-complacency — if 
thou canst cheat me with enjoyment, be that day my 
last. I offer the wager. 

Mephistopheles. 
Done! 

Faust. 
And my hand upon it ! If I ever say to the pass- 
ing moment — " Stay, thou art so fair !** then mayst thou 
cast me into chains ; then will I readily perish ; then 
may the death-bell toll ; then art thou free from thy 
service. The clock may stand, the index hand may 
fall : be time a thing no more for me ! 

Mephistopheles. 
Think well of it ; we shall bear it in mind. 

Faust. 
You have a perfect right so to do. I have formed no 
rash estimate of myself. As I am, I am a slave; what 
care I, whether thine or another's. 

Mephistopheles. 
This very day, at your feast, I shall enter upon my 
duty as servant. Only one thing — to guard against 
accidents, I must trouble you for a line or two. 

Faust. 
Pedant, dost thou, too, require writing? Hast thou 


( 59 ) 

never known man nor man's word ? Is it not enough 
that my word of mouth disposes of my days for all 
eternity ? Does not the world rave on in its currents, 
and am I to he hound hy a promise ? Yet this prejudice 
is implanted in our hearts : who would willingly free 
himself from it ? Happy the man who hears truth pure 
in his hreast ; he will never have cause to repent any 
sacrifice ! But a parchment, written and stamped, is 
a spectre which all shrink from. The word dies 
away in the pen ; in wax and leather is the mastery. 
What, evil spirit, wouldst thou of me? Brass, marhle, 
parchment, paper? Shall I write with style, graver, 
pen ? I leave the choice to thee. 

Mephistopheles. 

How can you put yourself in a passion and over- 
work your oratory in this manner ? Any scrap will do : 
you will suhscrihe your name with a drop of blood. 

Faust. 

Jf this will fully satisfy you, the whim shall be com- 
pUed with. 

Mephistopheles. 

Blood is quite a peculiar sort of juice. 

Faust. 

But fear pot that I shall break this compact ? What 
I promise, is precisely what all my energies are striving 
for, I have aspired too high : I belong only to thy class. 
Th^ greftt spirit has spurned me ; Nature shuts herself 
against me. The thread of thought is snapped ; I have 


( 60 ) 

long loathed every sort of knowledge. Let us quench the 
glow of passion in the depths of sensuality ; let every 
wonder be forthwith prepared beneath the hitherto im- 
pervious veil of sorcery. Let us cast ourselves into the 
rushing of time, into the rolling of accident. There 
pain and pleasure, success and disappointment, may 
succeed each other as they will — man's proper element 
is restless activity. 

Mephistopheles, 

Nor end nor limit is prescribed to you. If it is your 
pleasure to sip tlie sweets of every thing, to snatch at 
all as you fly by, much good may it do you — only fall 
to, and don't be coy. 

Faust. 

I tell thee again, pleasure is not the question ; I de- 
vote myself to the intoxicating whirl; — to the most 
agonizing enjoyment — to enamoured hate — to animat- 
ing vexation. My breast, cured of the thirst of know- 
ledge, shall henceforth bare itself to every pang. I will 
enjoy in my own heart's core all that is parcelled out 
amongst mankind ; grapple in spirit with the highest 
and deepest ; heap the weal and woe of the whole race 
upon my breast, and thus dilate my own individuality 
to theirs, and perish, in the end, like them. 

Mephistopheles. 

Oh, believe me, who many thousand years have 
chewed the cud on this hard food, that from the cradle 


( 61 ) 

to the bier, no human being digests the old leaven. 
Believe a being like me, this Whole is only made for a 
god. He exists in an und3ring blaze of brightness ; us 
he has brought into darkness ; and for you^ — only day 
and night are proper for you. 

Faust. 

But I will. 

Mephistopheles. 

That is well enough to say ! But I am only troubled 
about one thing ; time is short, art is long. I should 
suppose you would sufifer yourself to be persuaded. 
Take a poet to counsel, make the gentleman set his 
imagination at work, and heap all noble qualities on 
your honoured head, — the lion's courage, the stag's 
swiflness, the fiery blood of the Italian, the enduring 
firmness of the North. Make him find out the secret 
of combining magnanimity with cunning, and of being 
systematically in love with the burning desires of 
youth. I myself should like to know such a gentle- 
man — I would call him Mr. Microcosm. 

Faust. 

What, then, am I, if it be not possible to attain the 
crown of humanity, which every sense is striving for? 

Mephistopheles. 

Thou art in the end — what thou art. Put on wigs 
with millions of curls ; place thy foot upon socks an ell 
high, — thou abidest ever what thou art. 


( 62 ) 

Faust. 

I feel it ; in vain have I scraped together and acca- 
mulated all the treasures of the human mind upon 
myself; and when I sit down at the end, stifl no new 
power wells up within : I am not a hair's breadth higher, 
not a whit nearer the Infinite. 

Mephistopheles. 

My good Sir, you see things precisely as they are 
ordinarily seen ; we must manage matters better, be- 
fore the joys of life pass away from us. What the 
deuce ! you have surely hands and feet and head and 

. And what I enjoy with spirit, is it the less my 

own on that account? If I can pay for six horses, 
are not their powers mine ? I drive along and am a 
proper man, as if I had four-and-twenty legs. Quick, 
then, have done with poring, and straight away into 
the world with me. I tell you, a fellow that speculates 
is like a brute driven in a circle on a barren heath by 
an evil spirit, whilst fair green meadow lies every 
where around. 

Faust. 

How shall we set about it? 

Mephistopheles. 

We have only to start. What a place of martyrdom, 
what a precious life to lead! — wearying one's self and a 
set of youngsters to death. Leave that to your neigh- 
bour, Mr. Paunch. Why will you plague yourself to 


( 63 ) 

thresh straw ? The best that you can know you dare 
not tell the lads. Even now I hear one in the pas- 
sage. 

Faust. 
I cannot possibly see him. 

Mephistopheles. 
The poor boy has waited long ; he must not be sent 

away disconsolate. Come, give me your cap and gown : 
the masking dress will become me to admiration. 

(He changes his dress.) 
Now trust to my wit. I require but a quarter of an 
hour. In the mean time prepare for our pleasant trip. 

(Exit Faust. ^ 
Mephistopheles in Faust's gown. 
Only despise reason and knowledge, the highest 
strength of humanity ; only permit thyself to be con- 
firmed in delusion and sorcery-work by the spirit of 
lies, — and I have thee unconditionally. Fate has given 
him a spirit which is ever pressing onwards uncurbed, — 
whose overstrained striving o'erleaps the joys of earth. 
Him will I dr^ through the wastes of life, through 
vapid unmeaningness. He shall sprawl, stand amazed, 
stick fast, — and meat and drink shall hang, a bait to 
his insatiableness, before his craving lips: he shall 
pray for refreshment in vain ; and had he not already 
given himself up to the Devil, he would, notwithstand- 
ing, infallibly be lost. 


( 64 ) 

(A Student enters.) 
Student. 
I am but just arrived, and come, full of devotion, to 
address and become acquainted with a man whom all 
name with honour. 

Mephistopheles. 
I am flattered by your attention. You see a man, 
like many others. Have you yet made any inquiry 
elsewhere ? 

Student. 
Interest yourself for me, I pray you. I come with 
every good disposition, a little money, and youthful 
spirits; my mother could hardly be brought to part 
with me, but I would fain learn something worth learn- 
ing in the world. 

Mephistopheles. 
You are at the very place for it. 

Student. 
Honestly speaking, I should be glad to be out again. 
These walls, these halls, are by no means to my taste. 
The space is exceedingly confined ; there is not a tree, 
nothing green, to. be seen ; and in the halls, on the 
benches, — hearing, sight, and thinking fail me. 

Mephistopheles. 
It all depends on habit. Thus, at first, the child 
does not take kindly to the mother's breast, but soon 


( 65 ) 

finds a pleasure in nourishing itself. Just so will you 
daily experience a greater pleasure at the breasts of 
wisdom. 

Student. 
I shall hang delightedly upon her neck : do but tell 
me how I am to attain it. 

Mephistopheles. 
Tell me, before you go further, what faculty you fix 
upon? 

Student. 
I should wish to be profoundly learned, and should 
fike to comprehend what is upon earth or in heaven, 
science and nature. 

Mephistopheles. 
You are here upon the right scent ; but you must not 
suffer your attention to be distracted. 

Student. 
I am heart and soul in the cause. A little relaxation 
and pastime, to be sure, would not come amiss on 
bright summer holidays. 

Mephistopheles. 
Make the most of time, it glides away so fast. But 
method teaches you to gain time. For this reason, my 
good friend, I advise you to begin with a course of 
logic. In this study, the mind is well broken in, — ^laced 
up m Spanish boots, so that it creeps circumspectly 
along the path of thought, and runs no risk of flicker- 


( 66 ) 

ing, ignis-fatuus-like, in all directions but the right. 
Then many a day will be spent in teaching you that 
one, two, three,— is necessary for that which formerly 
you hit off at a blow, as easily as eating and drinking. 
It is with the fabric of thought as with a weaver's 
master-piece, where one treadle moves a thousand 
threads, the shuttles shoot backwards and forwards, the 
threads flow unseen, ties, by thousands, are struck off 
at a blow. Your philosopher, — he steps in and proves 
to you, it must have been so : the first would be so, the 
second so, and therefore the third and fourth so ; and 
if the first and second were not, the third and fourth 
would never be. The students of all countries put a 
high value on this, but none have turned weavers. 
He who wishes to know and describe any thing living, 
seeks first to drive the spirit out of it ; he has then 
the parts in his hand; only, unluckily, the spiritual 
bond is wanting. Chemistry terms it encheiresis natura^ 
and mocks herself without knowing it. 

Student. 

I cannot quite comprehend you. 

Mephistopheles. 

You will soon improve in that respect, if you learn 
to reduce and classify all things properly. 

Student. 

I am so confounded by all this ; I feel as if a mill- 
wheel was turning round in my head. 


( 67 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
In the next place, before every thing else, you must 
set to at metaphysics. There see that you conceive 
profoundly what is not made for human brains. A fine 
word will stand you in stead for what enters and what 
does not enter there. . And be sure, for the first half 
year, to adopt the strictest regularity. You will have 
five lectures every day. Be in as the clock strikes. 
Be well prepared beforehand with the paragraphs care- 
fully conned, that you may see the better that he says 
nothing but what is in the book ; yet write away as 
zealously as if the Holy Ghost were dictating to you. 

Student. 
You need not tell me that a second time. I can 
imagine how useful it is. For what one has in black 
and white one can carry home in comfort. 

Mephistopheles. 
But choose a faculty. 

Student. 
I cannot reconcile myself to jurisprudence. 

Mephistopheles. 
I cannot much blame you, I know the nature of this 
science. Laws descend, like an inveterate hereditary 
disease ; they trail from generation to generation, and 
glide imperceptibly from place to place. Reason be- 
comes nonsense ; beneficence, a plague. Woe to thee 

f2 


( 68 ) 

that thou art a grandson! Of the laiy that is bom 
with us — of that, unfortunately, there is never a ques- 
tion. 

Student. 
You increase my repugnance. Oh, happy he, whom 
you instruct. I should abnost like to study theology^ 

Mephistopheles. 
I do not wish to mislead you. As for this science, 
it is so difficult to avoid the wrong way ; there is so 
much hidden poison in it, which is hardly to be distin- 
guished from the medicine. Here, again, it is best 
to attend but one master, and swear by his words. 
Generally speaking, stick to words ; you will then pass 
by the safe gate into the temple of certainty. 

Student. 

But there must be some meaning connected with the 
word. 

Mephistopheles. 

Right ! Only we must not be too anxious about that; 
for it is precisely where meaning fails that a word 
comes in most opportunely. Disputes may be admira- 
bly carried on with words ; a system may be built with 
words ; words form a capital subject for belief; a word 
admits not of an iota being taken from it. 


( 69 ) 

Student. 

Your pardon, I detain you by my many questions, 
but I must still trouble you. Would you be so kind 
as to add an instructive word or two on medicine. 
Three years is a short time, and the field, God knows, 
is far too wide. If one has but a hint, one can feel 
one's way along further. 

Mephistopheles, aside. 

I begin to be tired of the prosing style. I must 
play the devil properly again. (aloud.) 

The spirit of medicine is easy to be caught ; you 
study through the great and little world, to let things 
go on in the end — as it pleases God. It is vain that 
you wander scientifically about; no man wiU learn 
more than he can ; he who avails himself of the passing 
moment — that is the proper man. You are tolerably 
well built, nor will you be wanting in boldness, and if 
you do but confide in yourself, other souls will confide 
in you. In particular, learn how to treat the women ; 
their eternal ohs! and ahs!, so thousandfold, are to 
be cured from a single point, and if you only assume a 
moderately demure air, you will have them all under 
your thumb. You must have a title, to convince 
them that your art is superior to most others, and 
then you are admitted firom the first to all those little 
privileges which another spends years in coaxing for. 


( 70 ) 

Learn how to feel the pulse adroitly, and boldly clasp 
them, with hot wanton looks, around the tapering hip, 
to see how tightly it is laced. 

Student. 
There is some sense in that; one sees at any rate 
the where and the how. 

Mephistopheles. 
Grey, my dear firiend, is all theory, and green the 
golden tree of life. 

Student. 
I vow to you, all is as a dream to me. Might I 
trouble you another time to hear your wisdom speak 
upon the grounds. 

Mephistopheles. 
I am at your service, to the extent of my poor 
abilities. 

Student. 
I cannot possibly go away without placing my com- 
mon-place book in your hands. Do not grudge me 
this token of your favour. 

Mephistopheles. 
With all my heart. (He writes and gives it back.) 

Student retzds, 
Eritis sicut Deus, scientes bonum et malum. 

(He closes the book reverentially^ and takes his 
leave.) 


( 71 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
Only follow the old saying and my cousin the snake, 
and some time or other you, with your likeness to God, 
will be sorry enough. 

Faust enters. 
Whither now ? 

Mephistopheles. 
Where you please ; to see the little, then the great 
world. With what joy, what pleasure, will you revel 
through the course. 

Faust. 
But with my long beard, I want the easy manners of 
life. I shall fail in the attempt. I never knew how 
to accommodate myself to the world ; I feel so little 
in the presence of others. I shall be in a constant state 
of embarrassment. 

Mephistopheles. 
My dear friend, all that will come of its own accord ; 
so soon as you feel confidence in yourself, you know 
the art of life. 

Faust. 
How, then, are we to start ? Where are your car- 
riages, horses, and servants? 

Mephistopheles. 
We have only to spread out the mantle ; that shall 
bear us through the air. Only you will take no heavy 


( 72 ) 

baggage on this bold trip. A little inflammable air, 
which I will prepare, will lifl us quickly from this 
earth ; and if we are light, we shall mount rapidly. I 
wish you joy of your new course of life. 


( 73 ) 


AUERBACH'S WINE VAULTS IN LEIPZIG. 

(Drinking bout of merry Fellows,) 

Froscii. 
Will no one drink ? no one laugh ? I will teach you 
to grin. Why you are like wet straw to-day, yet at 
other times you blaze brightly enough. 

Brander. 
That is your fault ; you contribute nothing towards 
it : no nonsense, no beastliness — 

Froscii. 
(Throws a glass of wine over his head,) 
There are both for you ! 

Brander. 
You double hog ! 

Frosch. 
Why you wanted me to be so ! 

SlEBEL. 

Out with him who quarrels ! With open heart sing 
Runda ! swill and shout ! holla, holla, ho ! 

Altmayer. 

Woe is me, I am lost. Cotton, here! the knave 
splits my ears. 


( 74 ) 

SlEBEL. 

It is only when the arch echoes again, that one feels 
the true power of the bass. 

Frosch. 
Right; out with him who takes any thing amiss. 
A ! taralara da ! 

Altmayer. 
A! taralara! 

Frosch. 
Our throats are tuned. 

(He sings,) 
The dear, holy Romish empire, how holds it still 
together ? 

Brander. 
A nasty song! psha, a political song! an offensive 
song. Thank God every morning of your life, that 
you have not the Romish empire to care for. I, at 
least, esteem it no slight gain that I am not emperor 
nor chancellor. But we cannot do without a head. We 
will choose a pope. You know what sort of qualifica- 
tion thrns the scale, and elevates the man. 

(^Frosch sings,) 
Soar up. Madam Nightingale, give my sweetheart ten 
thousand greetings for me. 

SlEBEL. 

No greeting to the sweetheart; I will not hear 
of it. 


( 75 ) 

Frosch. 
Greeting to the sweetheart and a kiss too ! Thou 
shalt not hinder me. 

(He sings,) 
Open bolts ! in stilly night. 
Open bolts ! the lover wakes. 
Shut bolts ! at morning's dawn. 

^ SlEBEL. 

Aye, sing, sing on, and praise and celebrate her, 
my turn for laughing will come. She has taken me in ; 
she will do the same for you. May she have a hobgoblin 
for a lover. He may toy with her on a cross way. An 
old he-goat, on his return from Bloksberg, may wicker 
good night to her on the gallop. A hearty fellow of 
genuine flesh and blood is far too good for the wench. 
I will hear of no greeting, unless it be to smash her 
windows. 

Brander, striking on the table. 

Attend, attend ; listen to me ! You gentlemen must 
allow me to know something of life. Love-sick folks sit 
here, and I must give them something suitable to their 
condition by way of good night. Attend! a song of 
the newest cut ! and strike boldly in with the chorus. 

(He sings.) 

There was a rat in the cellar, who lived on nothing 
but fat and butter, and had raised himself up a paunch 
fit for Doctor Luther himself. The cook had laid 


( 76 ) 

poison for him ; then the world became too hot for him, 
as if he had love in his body. 

Chorus. — As if he had love in his body. 

He ran round, he ran out, he drank of every puddle, 
he gnawed and scratched the whole house, but his fury 
availed nothing ; he gave many a bound of agony ; the 
poor beast was soon done for, as if he had love in his 
body. 

Chorus. — As if &c. 

He came running into the kitchen for sheer pain, in 
open daylight, fell on the hearth and lay convulsed, 
and panted pitiably. Then the poisoner exclaimed, 
with a laugh — Ha! he is at his last gasp, as if he had 
love in his body. 

Chorus. — As if &c. 

SlEBEL. 

How the flats chuckle ! It is a fine thing, to be sure, 
to lay poison for the poor rats. 

Brander. 
They stand high in your favour, I dare say. 

Altmayer. 
The bald-pated paunch ! The misadventure makes 
him humble and mild. He sees in the swollen rat his 
own image drawn to the Ufe. 

Faust and Mephistopheles. 
Mephistopheles. 
Before all things else, I must bring you into merry 


( 77 ) 

company, that you may see how lightly life may be 
passed. These people make every day a feast. With 
little wit and much pleasure, each turns round in the 
narrow circle-dance, like kittens playing with their 
tails. So long as they have no headache to complain 
of, and so long as they can get credit from their host, 
they are merry and free from care. 

Brander. 

They are just off their journey ; one may see as 
much firom their strange manner. They have not been 
here an hour. 

Frosch. 

Thou art right ; Leipsic is the place for me : it is a 
little Paris, and gives the finishing air. 

SlEBEL. 

What do you take the strangers to be ? 

Frosch. 
Let me alone ; in the drinking of a bumper I will 
worm it out of them as easily as draw a child's tooth. 
They appear to me to be noble ; they have a prgud 
and discontented look. 

Brander. 
Mountebanks to a certainty, I wager. 

Altmayer. 
Likely enough. 

Frosch. 
Now mark ; I will smoke them. 


( 78. ) 

Mephistopheles to Faubt. 
These p^ple would never scent the devil, if he had 
them by the throat. 

Faust. 
Grood morrow, gentlemen. 

SlEBEL. 

Thanks, and good morrow to you. 

(Aside, looking at Mephistopheles askance.) 
What ! does the fellow halt on the foot ? 

Mephistopheles. 
Will you permit us to sit down with you. We shall 
have company to cheer us instead of good liquor, which 
is not to be had. 

Altmayeb. 
You seem a very dainty gentleman. 

Frosch. 
I dare say, you are lately from Rippach ? Did you 
sup with Mr. Hans before you left ? 

Mephistopheles. 
We passed him without stopping to-day. The last 
time we spoke to him, he had much to say of his cou- 
sins ; he charged us with compliments to each. 

(With an inclination towards Frosch. 
Altmayer (aside). 
Thou hast it there I he knows a thing or two. 

Siebel. 
A knowing fellow ! 


( 79 ) 

Frosch. 
Only wait, I shall have him presently. 

Mephistopheles. 
If I am not mistaken, we heard some practised voices 
singing in chorus? No doubt, singing must echo ad- 
mirably from this vaulted roof. 

Frosch. 
I dare say you are a virtuoso ? 

Mephistopheles. 
Oh, no! The power is weak, but the desire is 
strong. 

Altmater. 
Give us a song. 

Mephistopheles. 
As many as you like. 

SlEBEL. 

Only let it be bran new. 

Mephistopheles. 
We are just returned from Spain, the fair land of 

wine and song. 

{He sings.) 

There was once upon a time a king who had a great 

flea— 

FaoscH. 

Hark ! A flea ! Did you catch that ? A flea is a 

fine sort of chap. 


( 80 ) 

Mephistopheles sings. 

There was once upon a tiine a king ; he had a great 
flea, and was as fond of it as if it had been his own 
son. Then he called his tailor; the tailor came. 
** There, measure the youngster for coat, waistcoat and 
breeches, and measure him for hose." 

Brander. 

Only don't forget to tell the tailor to measure with 
the greatest nicety, and, as he loves his head, to make 
the hose sit smoothly. 

Mephistopheles sings. 

He was now attired in velvet and silk, had ribbons 
on his coat, had a cross besides, and was forthwith 
made minister, and had a great star. Then his brothers 
and sisters also became great folks. And the ladies and 
gentlemen at court were dreadfully tormented ; from 
the queen to the nurse they were pricked and bitten, 
yet dared not crack nor scratch them away. But we 
crack and stifle fast enough when one pricks. 

Chorus. — But we crack, &c. 

Frosch. 

Bravo! bravo ! That was capital. 

SlEBEL. 

Such be the lot of every flea. 

Brander. 
Point your fingers, and nick them cleverly. 

Altii^ayer. 
Liberty for ever ! Wine for ever ! 


( 81 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
I would willingly drink a glass in honour of liberty, 
were your wine a thought better. 

SlEBEL. 

You had better not let us hear that again ! 

Mephistopheles. 

I am afraid of giving offence to the landlord, or I 
would treat these worthy gentlemen out of our own 
stock. 

SlEBEL. 

O, bring it in ; I take the blame upon myself. 

Frosch. 
Give us a good glass, and we shall not be sparing of 
our praise ; only don't let your samples be too small ; 
for if I am to give an opinion, I require a regular 
mouthful. 

Altmayer (aside), 
. They are from the Rhine, I guess. 

Mephistopheles. 
Bring a gimblet. 

Brandkr. 
What for? You surely have not the casks at the 
door? 

Altmayer. 
Behind, there is a tool chest of the landlord's. 

Mephistopheles (taking the gimlet) to Frosch. 
Now say, what wine would you wish to taste ? 

G 


( 82 ) 

Frosch. 
What do you mean? Have you so many sorts? 

M EPHISTOPHELES. 

I give every man his choice. 

Altmayer, to Frosch. 
Ah ! you begin to lick your lips already. 

Frosch. 
Well ! if I am to choose, I will take Rhine wine. Our 
father-land afibrds the best of gifts. 
M EPHISTOPHELES, (borifig a hole in tJie edge of the table 

where Frosch is sitting). 
Get a little wax to make stoppers immediately. 

Altmayer. 
Ah ! these are juggler's tricks. 

Mephistopheles, to Brander. 
And you ? 

Brander. 
I choose Champaigne, and right sparkling it must be. 
^Mephistophetes bores again; one of tJie others 
has in the mean time prepared the wax-stoppers 
and stopped the holes.) 
One cannot always avoid what is foreign; what is 
good often lies so far off. A true German does not 
like a Frenchman, but has no objection to his wine. 
Siebel fas Mephistopheles approaclies him). 
I must own I do not like acid wine ; give me a glass 
of genuine sweet. 


( 83 ) 

Mephistopheles bores. 
You shall have Tokay in a twinkling. 

Altmayer. 
No, gentlemen, look me in the face. I see plainly 
you are only making fun of us. 

Mephisotopheles. 
Ha! ha! that would be taking too great a liberty 
with such distinguished guests. Quick I only speak out 
at once. What wine can I have the pleasure of serving 
you with? 

Altmayer. 
With any \ there is no need of much questioning. 

(After all the holes are bored and stopped.) 
Mephistopheles (with strange gestures). 
The vine bears grapes. 
The he-goat bears horns. 
Wine is juicy, 
Vines are wood ; 

The wooden table can also give wine. 
A deep insight into nature ! 
Behold a miracle, only have faith ! 
Now draw the stoppers and drink. 

All. 
(As they draw the stoppers^ and the wine he chose 

runs into each man^s glass,) 
Oh ! beautiful spring that flows for us ! 

g2 


( 84 ) 

MePHISTOPH ELES. 

Only take care not to spill any of it. 

(They drink repeatedly). 
All sing. 
We are as happy as cannibals — as five hundred swine. 

Mephistopheles. 
These people are now in their glory ; mark, how merry 
they are. 

Faust. 
I should like to depart now. 

Mephistopheles. 
But stop and see, their brutishness will show itself 
bravely. 

Siebel. 
(Drinks carelessly, the wine is spilt upon the ground, 

and turns to flame,) 
Help, fire, help ! hell is on fire. 

Mephistopheles (conjuring the flame). 
Be quiet, friendly element. 

(To SlEBEt J. 

This time it was only a drop of the fire of purgatory. 

Siebel. 
What may that be? Hold! you shall pay dearly for 
it. It seems that you do not know us. ^ 

Frosch. 
He had better not try that a second time. 


( 85 ) 

Altmayer. 
I think we had better send him packing quietly. 

SlEBEL. 

What, Sir, dare you play off your hocus pocus here? 

Mephistopheles. 
Silence, old wine-butt. 

SlEBEL. 

Broomstick ! will you be rude to us too ? 

Brander. 
But hold ! or blows shall rain. 

Altmayer. 
(Draws a stopper from the table; fireflies out against 

him.J 
I am on fire! I am on fire! 

SlEBEL. 

Sorcery ! thrust home ! the knave is fair game. 
(They draw their knives and attack Mephistopheles.) 

Mephistopheles (with solemn gestures). 
False form and word, 
Change sense and place, 
Be here, be there ! 
( They stand amazed and gaze on each other.) 
Altmayer. 
Where am I ? What a beautiful country ! 

Frosch. 
Vineyards! Can I believe my eyes? 


( 86 ) 

SlEBEL. 

And grapes close at hand ! 

Brander. 

Here, under these green leaves, see, what a stem ! 

see, what a grape ! 

(He seizes Siebel hy the nose. The others do the same 

one with the other ^ and brandish their knives.) 

Mephistopheles (as before). 

Error, loose the bandage from their eyes ! And do 

ye remember the devil's mode of jesting! 

(He disappears with Faust. The feUows start back 

from one another,) 

Siebel. 

What's the matter ? 

Altmayer. 

How? 

Fbosch. 

Was that your nose ? 

Brander, to Siebel. 

And I have your's in my hand ! 

Altmayer. 

It was a shock which thrilled through every limb 1 

Give me a chair, I am sinking. 

Frosch. 

No, do but tell me, what has happened ? 

Siebel. 

Where is the fellow? If I meet with him, it shall be 

as much as his life is worth. 


( 87 ) 

Altmayer. 
I saw him with my own eyes riding out of the cellar 
door upon a cask. My feet feel as heavy as lead. 

( Turning towards the tahle^). 
My ! I wonder whether the wine is flowing still ? 

SlEBEL. 

It was all a cheat, a lie, and a make-helieve. 

Frosch. 
Yet it seemed to me as if I was drinking wine. 

BftANDER. 

But how was it with the grapes? 

Altmayer. 
Let any one tell me after that, that one is not to he- 
lieve in miracles ! 


( 88 ) 


WITCHES' KITCHEN. 

A large cauldron is hanging over the fire on a low 
hearth. Different figures are seat in the fumes which 
rise from it. A Female Monkey is sitting by the 
cauldron and skimming it, and taking care that it does 
not run over. The Male Monkey is seated near, Tvith 
the young ones, and warming himself. The walls and 
ceiling are hung with the strangest articles of Witch 
furniture. 

Faust. 
I loath this mad concern of witchcraft. Do you 
promise me that I shall recover in this chaos of in- 
sanity? Do I need an old hag's advice? And will 
this mess of cookery really take thirty years from my 
body ? Woe is me, if you know of nothing better ! 
Hope is already gone. Has nature and has a noble 
spirit discovered no sort of balsam ? 

Mephistopheles. 
My friend, now again you speak wisely ! There is 
one natural mode of renewing youth. But it is in 
another book, and is a. strange chapter. 

Faust. 
I will know it. 


( 89 ) 

Mephistofiieles. 

Well ! to have a mean without money, physician, or 
sorcery : betake thyself straightway to the field, begin 
to hack and dig, confine thyself and thy sense within a 
narrow circle ; support thyself on simple food ; live 
with beasts as a beast, and think it no robbery to ma- 
nure the land you crop. That is the best way, believe 
me, to keep a man young to eighty. 

Faust. 

I am not used to it. I cannot bring myself to take 
the spade in hand. The confined life does not suit me 
at all. 

Mephistopheles. 

Then you must have recourse to the witch afber all. 

Faust, 

But why the old woman in particular ? Cannot you 
brew the drink yourself? 

Mephistopheles. 

That were a pretty amusement! I could build a 
thousand bridges in the time. Not art and science 
only, but patience is required for the job. A quiet 
spirit is busy for years; time only makes this fine 
liquor strong. And the ingredients are exceedingly 
rare. The Devil, it is true, has taught it her, but 
the Devil cannot make it. (Perceiving the Monkeys.J 
See what a pretty breed ! That is the maid— that the 


1 


( 90 ) 

man — (to the MonkeysJ It seems your mistress is not 
at home ? 

The Monkeys. 
At the feast, 
Out of the house, 

Out and away by the chimney-stone ! 
Mkphistopheles. 
How long does she usually rake ? 

The Monkeys. 
Whilst we are warming our paws. 

Mephistopheles (to Faust.^ 
What do you think of the pretty creatures ? 

Faust. 
The most disgusting I ever set eyes on. 

Mephistopheles. 
Nay, a discourse like this is precisely what I take 
the greatest pleasure in. 

(To the Monkeys. J 
Tell me, accursed whelps, what are ye stirring up 
with the porridge ? 

Monkeys. 
• We are cooking coarse beggars' broth. 

Mephistopheles. 
You will have plenty of customers. 

The He Monkey, 
(approaches and fawns on Mephistopheles. J 
Oh, quick throw the dice, 


( 91 ) 

And make me rich. 
And let me win. 
My fate is a sorry one, 
And had I money, 
I should not want for sense. 
Mephistopheles. 
How lucky the monkey would think himself, if he 
could only put into the lottery. 

( The Young Monkeys hate, in the mean time, been 
playing nfith a large globe j and roll it forwards.) 
The He Monkey. 
That is the world ; 
It rises and falls, 
And rolls unceasingly. 
It rings like glass : 
How soon breaks that ? 
It is hollow within ; 
It glitters much here, 
And stiU more here, 
I am alive ! 
My dear son. 
Keep thee aloof; 
Thou must die I 
It is of clay, 
There are potshards. 

Mephistopheles. 

What is the sieve for? 


( 92 ) 

The He Monkey takes it down, 
Wert thou a thief, I should know thee at once. 

( He runs to the female and makes her look through,) 
Look through the sieve ! Dost thou recognize the 
thief? and darest not name him ? 

Mephistopheles approaching the fire. 
And this pot ? 

The Monkeys. 
The stupid ninny. He does not know the pot ! he 
does not know the cauldron ! 

Mephistopheles. 
Uncivil brute I 

The He Monkey. 
Take the tail here, and sit down on the settle. 

(He makes Mephistopheles sit down,) 
Faust, 
( Who all this time has been standing before a looking- 
glass , now approaching and now standing off from it,) 

What do I see? What a heavenly image shows 
itself in this magic mirror. O Love, lend me the 
swiftest of thy wings, and bear me to her region. Ah ! 
when I move from this spot, when I venture to go 
near, I can only see her as in a mist. The loveliest 
image of a woman ! Is it possible, is -the woman so 
lovely? Must I see in these recumbent limbs the in- 
nermost essence of all Heavens ? Is there any thing 
like it upon earth ? 


( 93 ) 

Mephistopheles 
When a God first works hard for six days, and him- 
self says bravo at the end, it is but natural that some- 
thing clever should come of it. For this time look 
your fill. I know where to find out such a love for you, 
and happy he whose fortune it is to bear her home as a 
bridegroom. 

f Faust, continues looking into the mirror. Mephis- 
topheles stretching himself on the settle and play- 
ing with the tail continues speaking,) 
Here I sit, like the king upon his throne ; here is my 
sceptre^ I only want the crown. 

The Monkeys, 
fwho have hitherto been playing all sorts of strange antics 
in confusion^ bring Mephistopheles a cronm, with loud 
acclamations.) 

Oh, be so good as to glue the crown with sweat and 
blood. 

(They handle the crown awkwardly, and break it 
into two pieces, with which they jump about.) 
Now it is done. 
We speak and see ; 
We hear and rhyme — 
Faust, before the mirror. 
Woe is me. I am becoming almost mad. 

Mephistopheles. 
My own head begins to totter now. 


( 94. ) 

The Monkeys. 
— And if we are lucky, 
And if things fit, 
Then there are thoughts. 
Faust, as before. 
My heart is beginning to bum. Do but let us be- 
gone immediately. 

Mephistopheles, m the same position. 
Well, no one can deny, at any rate, that they are 
sincere poets. 

(The cauldron^ which the She Monkey has neglected, 
begins to boil over ; a great flame arises, and streams 
up the chimney. The Witch comes shooting down 
through the flame with horrible cries,) 

The Witch. 
Ough, ough, ough, ough ! 

Damned beast! Accursed sow! 

Neglecting the cauldron, scorching your dame — 

Cursed beast ! 

(Espying Faust and Mephistopheles.) 

What now ? 

Who are ye? 

What would ye here ? 

Who hath come slinking in I 

The red plague of fire 

Into your bones ! 

(She dips the skimming ladle into tlie cauldron, and 
sprinkles flames at Faust, Mephistopheles, and 
the Monkeys. The Monkeys wimper,) 


( 93 ) 

M EPHISTOPHELES, 

( Who whisks round the tail which he holds in his hand^ 
and strikes ammigst the glasses and pots,) 
To pieces ! 
To pieces ! 

There lies the porridge ! 
There lies the glass ! 
It is only carrying on the jest — beating time, thou 
carrion, to thy melody. 

(As the Witch steps hack in rage and amazement.) 
Dost thou recognize me, thou atomy, thou scarecrow ? 
Dost thou recognize thy lord and master? What is 
there to hinder me from striking in good earnest, from 
dashing thee and thy monkey-spirits to pieces? Hast 
thou no more any respect for the red doublet? Can*st 
thou not distinguish the cock's feather ? Have I con- 
cealed this face? Must I then name myself? 

The Witch. 
O master, pardon this rough reception. But I see 
no cloven foot. Where then are your two ravens? 

Mephistopheles. 
This once, the apology may serve. For, to be 
sure, it is long since last we met. The march of 
intellect too, which licks all the world into shape, has 
even reached the devil. The northern phantom is no 
more to be seen. Where do you now see horns, tail, and 
claws ? And as for the foot, which I cannot do without. 


( 96 ) 

it would prejudice me in society ; thei efore, like many a 
young man, I have worn false calves the^e many years. 

The Witch, dancing. 
I am almost beside myself, to see the gallant Satan 
here again. 

MfPHlSTOPHELES. 

The name, woman, I beg to be spared. 

The Witch. 
W^herefore? What has it done to you? 

Mephistopheles. 
It has been long written in story books ; but men are 
not the better for that; they are rid of the wicked one, 
the wicked have remained. You may call me Baron, 
that will do very well. I am a cavalier, like other 
cavaliers. You doubt not of my gentle blood; see 
here, these are the arms I bear ! 

(He makes an unseemly gesture,) 
The Witch laughs %mmx>derately. 
Ha, ha! That is in your way. You are the same 
mad wag as ever. 

Mephistopheles (to Faust). 
My friend, attend to this. This is the way to deal 
with witches. 

The Witch. 
Now, Sirs, say what you are for. 

Mephistopheles. 
A good glass of the juice you wot of. I must beg 
you to let it be of the oldest. Years double its power. 


( 97 ) _ 

The Witch. 
Most willingly. Here is a bottle out of which I 
sometimes sip a little myself; which, besides, no longer 
stinks in the least. I will give you a glass with plea- 
sure. (Aside,) But if this man drinks it unprepared, 
you well know he cannot live an hour. 

Mephistopheles. 
He is a worthy friend of mine, on whom it will have 
a good effect. I grudge him not the best of thy kit- 
chen. Draw thy circle, spell thy spells, and give 
him a cup full. 

( The Vf ITCH, with strange gestures^ draws a circle and 
places strange things in it; in the mean time the 
glasses begin to ring, and the cauldron to sound and 
make music. Lastly, she brings a great book, and 
places the Monkeys in the circle, who are made to 
serve her for a reading desk and hold the torches. 
She signs to Faust to approach,) 

Faust, to Mephistopheles. 
But teU me what is to come of all this ? The absurd 
stuff, the frantic gestures, this most disgusting jug- 
glery — I know them of old and abominate them. 

Mephistopheles. 
Pooh! that is only fit to laugh at. Don't be so 
fastidious. In her capacity of mediciner she is obliged 
to play off some hocus-pocus, that the dose may ope- 
rate well on you. (He makes Faust enter the circle,) 

H 


( 98 ) 

The Witch, with a strong emphasis, begins to declaim 

from the hook. 
You must understand. 
Of one make ten, 
And let two go. 
And three make even ; 
Then art thou rich. 
Lose the four. 
Out of five and 'six, 
So says the Witch, 
Make seven and eight, 
Then is it done. 
And nine is one, 
Alud ten is none. 

That is the witdies one-time's-one. 
Faust. 
It seems to me that the hag is raving. 

Mephistopheles. 
There is a good deal more of it yet— I know it well; 
the whole hook is to the same tune. I have wasted 
many an hour upon it, for a downright conttadic- 
tion remains equally mysterious to wise fo&s and fools. 
My friend, the art is old and new. It has ever been 
the fashion to spread error instead of truth by three 
and one, and one and three. It is tatight and prattled 
uninterruptedly. Who will concern themselves about 


( 99 ) 

dolts ? Men are wont to believe, when they hear only 
words, that there must be something in it. 

The Witch continues. 
The high power 
Of knowledge, 

Hidden from the whole world ! 
And he who thinks not, 
On him is it bestowed ; 
He has it without trouble. 
Faust. 
What sort of nonsense is she reciting to us? My 
head is splitting! I seem to hear a hundred idiots de- 
claiming in full chorus. 

Mephistopheles. 
Enough, enough, incomparable Sybil ! Hand us thy 
drink, and fill the cup to the brim without more ado ; 
for this draught will do my friend no harm. He is a 
man of many grades, who has taken many a good gulp 
already. 

( The Witch with many ceremonies pours the liquor into 
a cup : as Faust lifts it to his mouth, a light fiame 
arises,) 

Mephistopheles. 
Down with it at once. Do not stand hesitating. It 
will soon waim your heart. Are you hail-^fellow well- 
met with the devil, and afraid of fire? 

(The Witch dissolves the circle — Faust steps out. J 

H 2 


( 100 ) 

MfiPHISTOPHELES. 

Now forth at once ! You must not rest. 

The Witch. 
Much good may the draught do you. 

Mephistopheles, to the Witch. 
And if I can do any thing to pleasure you, you need 
only mention it to me at Walpurgis. 

The Witch. 
Here is a song! if you sing it occasionally, it will 
have a particular effect on you. 

Mephistopheles, to Faust. 
Come, quick, and be guided by me, you must abso* 
lutely perspire to make the spirit work through blood 
and bone. I will afterwards teach you to enjoy the 
nobility of idleness, and you will feel ere long, with 
heartfelt delight, how Cupid bestirs himself and bounds 
hither and thither. 

Faust. 
Let me only look another moment in the glass. That 
female form was too, too lovely. 

Mephistopheles. 
Nay, nay ; you shall soon see the model of all wo- 
mankind in flesh and blood. 

(aside.) 
With this draught in your body, you will soon see a 
Helen in every woman you meet. 


( 101 ) 


THE STREET. 

Faust. (^Margaret passing by.) 
My pretty lady, may I take the liberty of offering 
you my arm and escort? 

Margaret. 
I am neither lady, nor pretty, and can go home by 
myself. (Sfte disengages herself and exit.) 

Faust. 
By heaven, this girl is lovely! I have never seen 
the like of her. She is so well-behaved and virtuous, 
and something snappish withal. The redness of her lip, 
the light of her cheek — I shall never forget them all the 
days of my life. The manner in which she cast down 
her eyes is deeply stamped upon my heart ; and how 
sharp she was-^it was absolutely ravishing ! 

Mephistopheles enters. 
Faust. 
Hark, you must get me the girl. 

Mephistophele s. 
Which? 

Faust. 
She passed but now. 


( 102 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
What she ? She came from her confessor, who ab- 
solved her from all her sins. I stole up close to the 
chair. It is an innocent little thing, that went for next 
to nothing to the confessional. Over her I have no 
power. 

Faust. 
Yet — she is past fourteen. 

Mephistopheles. 
You positively speak like Jack Rake, who covets 
every sweet flower for himself, and fancies that there 
is neither honour nor favour which is not to be had for 
the plucking. But this will not always do. 

Faust. 
My good Mr. Sermoniser, don't plague me with 
your law. And, in a word, I teD you this : if the sweet 
young creature does not lie this very night in my 
arms, at midnight our league is at an end. 

Mephistopheles. 
Consider what is possible. I need a fortnight, at 
least, only to find an opportunity. 

Faust. 
Had I but seven hours clear, I should not want the 
Devil's assistance to seduce such a child. 

Mephistopheles. 
You talk now almost like a Frenchman ; but don't 
fret about it, I beg. What boots it to go straight to 


( lOS ) 

enjoyment ? The delight is not so great by far as when 
you have kneaded and moulded the doll on all sides 
with all sorts of nonsense, as many an Italian story 
teaches. 

Faust. 
But I have appetite without all that. 

Mephistopueles. 
Now, seriously and without ofience, I. tell you once 
for all, that the lovely girl is not to be had in such a 
hurry ; nothing here is to be taken by storm ; we must 
have recourse to stratagem. 

Faust. 
Get me something belonging to the angel. Carry 
me to her place of repose ; get me a kerchief from her 
bosom, a garter of my love. 

Mephistopheles. 
That you may see my anxiety to minister to your 
passion, — ^we will not lose a moment ; this very day I 
will conduct you to her chamber. 

Faust. 
And shaU I see her ? have her ? 

Mephistopheles. 
No. She will be at a neighbour's. In the mean 
time you, all alone, and in her atmosphere, may feast 
to satiety on anticipated joy. 

Faust. 
Can we go now ? 


( 104 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
Tt fs too early. 

Faust. 
Get me a present for her. (Exit,) 

Mephistopheles. 
Presents directly ! Now that's capital ! That is the 
way to succeed. I know many a fine place and many 
a long-buried treasure. I must look them over a bit. 

(ExiiJ 


( 105 ) 


EVENING. 

A neat little Room. 

Margaret, braiding and binding up her hair, 

I would give something to know who that gentleman 

was to-day ! He had a gallant bearing, and is noble 

I am sure. I could read that on his brow ; besides, he 

would not else have been so bold. (Exit.) 

Mephistophbles. — Faust. 
Mephistopheles. 
Come in — as softly as possible — only come in ! 

Faust, a/ter a pause. 
Leave me alone, I beg of you. 

Mephistopheles, looking round. 
It is not every maiden that is so neat. (Exit.) 

Faust, looking round. 
Welcome, sweet twilight, that pervades this sanc- 
tuary. Possess my heart, delicious pangs of love, 
you who live languishing on the dew of hope. What 
a feeling' of peace, order, and contentment breathes 
round! What abundance in this poverty! What bliss 
in this cell * 

(He throws himself upon the leathern easy chair by the 
side of the bed,) 


n 


( 106 ) 

Oh ! receive me, thou, who hast welcomed, with open 
arms, in joy and sorrow, the generations that are past. 
Ah, how often has a swarm of children clustered ahout 
this patriarchal throne. Here, perhaps, in gratitude 
for her Christmas-hox, with the warm round cheek of 
childhood — ^has my beloved piously kissed the withered 
hand of her grandsire. Maiden^ I feel thy spirit of 
abundance and order rustle round me — that spirit 
which dafly instructs thee like a mother — ^which bids 
thee spread the neat doth upon the table and strew 
the sand upon the floor. Dear Maid ! so godlike ! you 
make the hut a heaven ; and here — 

(He t^s up a hedrcurtain,) 
what blissful tremor seizes me ! Here could I linger 
for hours! Nature! here, in light dreams, you ma- 
tured the born angel. Here lay the child ! its gentle 
bosom filled with warm life ; and here, with weavings 
of hallowed purity, the divine image developed it- 
self. 

And thou, what has brought thee hither? How 
deeply moved I feel ! What would'st thou here ? Why 
grows thy heart so heavy ? Poor Faust, I no longa: 
know diee. 

Am I breathing an enchanted air? I panted so for 
instant enjoyment, and I feel myself dissolving into a 
dream of love. Are we the sport of every pressure of 
the air ? 


(. 107 ) 

And if she entered this very moment, how would'st 

thou atone for thy guilt ! The hig boaster, alas, how 

shrunk ! would lie, dissolved away, at her feet. 

Mephistopheles. 

Quick ! I see her coming below. 

Faust. 

Away, away, I return no more. 

Mephistofheles. 

Here is a casket tolerably heavy. I took it from 
somewhere else. Place it, without hesitation, in the 
press. I promise you she will be beside herself. I 
put the trifles in it to gain another ; but children are 
children, and play is play, all the world over. 

Faust. 

I know not — shall I ? 

Mepuistopheles. 

Is that a thing to ask about? Perchance you mean 
to keep the treasure for yourself? In that case I advise 
you to spare the precious hours for your lusts and 
further trouble to me. I hope you are not avaricious. 
I scratch my head, rub my hands — 

(He 'places the casket in the press and closes the lock*) 

But quick, away ! — to bend the sweet young creature 
to your heart's desire ; and now you look as if you were 
going to the lecture-room, as if Physic and Meta- 
^ysic were standing bodily before you there. But 
away! \_Exeunt, 


( 108 ) 

Margaret, with a lamp. 

It feels so close, so sultry here, (she opens the window). 
And yet it is not so very warm without. I begin to 
feel I know not how. I wish my mother would come 
home. I tremble all over; but I am a silly timid 
woman. (She begins to sing ets she undresses herself,) 
*^ Song. 

There was a king in Thule, faithful even to the 
grave, to whom his dying mistress gave a golden goblet. 

He prized nothing above it ; he emptied it at every 
feast; his eyes overflowed as oflen as he drank out 
of it. 

And when he came to die, he reckoned up the cities 
in his kingdom ; he grudged none of them to his heir, 
but not so with the goblet. 

He sat at the royal banquet, with his knights around 
him, in his proud ancestral hall, there in his castle on 
the sea. 

There stood the old toper, took a parting draft of 
life's glow, and threw the hallowed goblet down into 
the waves. 

He saw it splash, fill, and sink deep into the sea; 
his eyes sank, he never drank a drop more. 

(Sfie opens the press to put away her clothes, and 
perceives the casket.) 

How came this beautiful casket here ? I am sure I 
locked the press. It is very strange ! What is in it, 


( 109 ) 

I wonder ? Perhaps some one brought it as a pledge, 
and my mother lent money upon it. A little key hangs 
by the ribbon ; I have a good mind to open it. What 
is here ? Good heavens ! look ! I have never seen any 
thing like it in all my bom days ! A set of trinkets, 
a countess might wear on the highest festival. How 
wotdd the chain become me? To whom can such 
finery belong ? (She puis them on and walks before the 
looking-glass j. If the earrings were but mine ! one 
cuts quite a different figure in them. What avails 
your beauty, poor maiden ? That is all very pretty and 
good, and that is all. You are praised, half in pity ; 
but all presses after gold, — hangs on gold. — Alas, we 
poor ones ! 


(. no ) 


PROMENADE. 

Faust walking up and damn thoughtfully. To him 

Mephistopheles. 
By an despised love! By the elements of hell! 
Would that I knew something worse to curse by ! 

Faust. 
What is the matter ? What is it that pinc^s you 
60 sharply ? I never saw such a face in piy life ! 

Mephistopheles. 
I could give myself to the devil directly, were I not 
the devil myself. 

Faust. 
Is your hrain disordered ? It hecomes you truly, to 
rave like a madman. 

Mephistopheles. 
Only think. A priest has carried off the jewels 
provided for Margaret. The mother gets sight of the 
thing, and begins at once to have a secret horror of it. 
Truly the woman hath a fine nose, is ever snuffling in 
her prayer-book, and smells at every piece of furniture 
to try whether the thing be holy or profane ; and she 
plainly smells out in the jewels, that there was not 
much blessing connected with them. My child, said she, 
ill-gotten wealth ensnares the soul, consumes the blood. 


i 


( 111 ) 

We will consecrate it to the Mother of God ; she will 
gladden ns with heavenly manna. Margaret pouted 
her lips : it is after all, thought she, a gift horse ; and 
truly, he cannot be godless, who brought it here so 
handflomdy. The mother sent for a priest. Scarcely 
had he heard the jest, but he seemed well pleased with 
the sight. He spoke : '* this shows a good disposition ; 
he who conquers, — he is the gainer. The church has a 
good stomach, she has eaten up whole countries, and 
has never yet over-eaten herself The church alone, 
my good women, can digest ill-gotten wealth." 

Faust. 
That is a general custom ; a Jew and a King can do 
it too. 

Mephistopheles. 
So saying he swept off clasp, chain and ring, as if 
they were so many mushrooms ; thanked them neither 
more nor less than if it had been a basket of nuts ; 
promised them all heavenly reward, and very much 
edified they were. 

Faust. 
And Margaret — 

Mephistopheles. 
Is now sitting full of restlessness ; wishing she knows 
not what ; thinks day and night on the trinkets, and 
still more on him who brought them. 


( 112 ) 

Faust. 
My love*8 grief distresses me. Get her another set 
immediately. The first were no great things. 

Mephistopheles. 
Oh ! to be sure, all is child's play to the gentleman ! 

Faust. 
Do it, and order it as I wish. Stick close to her 
neighbour. Don't be a milk-and-water devil; and 
fetch a fresh set of jewels. 

Mephistopheles. 
With all my heart, honoured Sir. 

Faust exU, 
A love-sick fool like this puffs away sun and moon 
and stars indifferently, by way of pastime for his 
mistress. 


1 


( 113 ) 


THE NEIGHBOUR'S HOUSE. 

Martha alone, 
God forgive my dear husband ; he has not acted well 
towards me. He goes straight away into the world, 
and leaves me widowed and lonely. Yet truly I never 
did anything to vex him ; God knows I loved him to 
my heart. (She weeps.) 

Very probably he is dead. Oh, torture ! Had I but 
a certificate of his death ! 

Margaret enters, 
Margaret. 
• Martha ! 

Martha. 
What is the matter, Margaret? 

Margaret. 
My knees almost sink under me ! I have found just 
such another ebony casket in my press, and things quite 
magnificent, a deal costlier than the first were. 

Martha. 
You must say nothing about it to your mother. She 
would carry it to the confessional again. 

Margaret. 
•Now, only see; only look at them. 

I 


( U4 ) 

Martha dresses her up in them. 
Oh! you lucky creature. 

Margaret. 
Unfortunately, I must not be seen in them in the 
street nor in the church. 

Martha. 
Do but come over frequently to me, and put on the 
trinkets here in private. Walk a litde hour up and 
down before the looking-glass; we shall find our en- 
joyment in that. And then an occasion offers, a festival 
occurs, where little by little one lets folks see them. 
First a chain, then the pearl ear-rings. Your mother, 
perhaps, will not observe it, or one may make some 
pretence to her. 

Margaret. 
But who could have brought the two caskets ? There 
is something not right about it. 

(Some one knocks J 
Margaret. 
Good God ! can that be my mother? 

Martha, looking through the blinds. 
It is a stranger — come in ! 

Mephistopheles enters. 
I have made free to come in at once ; I have to beg 
pardon of the ladies. 

(He steps back respectfully before Margaret.) 
I came to inquire after Mrs. Martha Schwerdtlein. 


( 115 ) 

Martha. 
I am she ; what is your pleasure, Sir ? 

Mephistopheles (cLside to IierJ. 
I know you now, that is enough. You have a visitor 
of distinction there. Excuse the liberty I have taken. 
I will call again in the aflemoon. 

Martha (aloud). 
Only think, child — of all things in the world ! this 
gentleman takes you for a lady. 

Margaret. 
I am a poor young creature. Oh! Heavens, the 
gentleman is too obliging. The jewels and ornaments 
are none of mine. 

Mephistopheles. 
Ah ! it is not the jewels alone. She has a mien, a 
look, so striking. How glad I am that I may stay. 

Martha. 
What do you bring then? I am very curious — 

Mephistopheles. 
I wish I had better news. I hope you will not make 
me suffer for it. Your husband is dead, and sends you 
his compliments. 

Martha. 
Is dead! the good soul! Oh, woe is me! My 
husband is dead! Ah, I shall die! 

Margaret. 
Dear, good Martha, don't despair. 

i2 


( 116 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
Listen to the melancholy tale. 

Margaret. 
For this reason I should wish never to be in love for 
all the days of my life. The loss would grieve me to 
death. 

Mephistopheles. 
Joy must have sorrow — sorrow, joy. 

Martha. 
Relate to me the close of his life. 

Mephistopheles. 
He lies buried in Padua at St. Antony's, in a spot 
well consecrated for a bed of rest, — eternally cool. 

Martha. 
Have you nothing else for me ? 

Mephistopheles. 
Yes, a request, big and heavy! be sure to have 
three hundred masses sung for him. For the rest, my 
pockets are empty. , 

Martha. 
What ! not a coin by way of token ? Not a trinket ? 
what every journeyman mechanic husbands at the bot- 
tom of his pouch, saved as a keepsake, and rather 
starves, rather begs — 

Mephistopheles. 
Madam, I am very sorry. But he really has not 
squandered away his money. He, too, bitterly re- 


( 117 ) 

pented of his sins ; aye, and bewailed his ill-luck still 
more. 

Margaret. 
Ah ! that mortals should be so unlucky. Assuredly 
I will sing many a requiem for him. 

Mephistopheles. 
You deserve to be married directly. You are an 
amiable child. 

Margaret. 
Oh, no, there is time enough for that. 

Mephistopheles. 
If not a husband, then a gallant in the meantime. It 
were one of the best gifts of heaven to have so sweet a 
thing in one's arms. 

Margaret. 
That is not the custom in this country. 

Mephistopheles. 
Custom or not! such things do happen though. 

Martha. 
But relate to me — 

Mephistopheles. 
I stood by his death-bed. It was somewhat better 
than dung, — of half-rotten straw ; but he died like a 
Christian, and found that he had still much more upon 
his score. " How thoroughly," he cried, " must I 
detest myself— to run away from my business and my 


.( 118 ) 

wife in such a manner. Oh ! the recollection is death 
to me. If she could but forgive me in this life!" — 

Martha (weeping). 
The good man ! I have long since forgiven him. 

Mephistopheles. 
*' But, God knows, she was more in fault than I." 

Martha. 
It is a lie! What, tell lies on the brink of the 
grave! 

Mephistopheles. 
He certainly fabled with his last breath, if I am but 
half a connoisseur. <' I," said he, " had no occasion to 
gape for pastime — first to get children, and then bread 
for them — and bread in the widest sense, — and could 
not even eat my share in peace." 

Martha. 
Did he thus forget all my faith, all my love — ^my 
drudgery by day and night ? 

Mephistopheles. 
Not so, he affectionately reflected on it. He said : 
" When I left Malta, I prayed fervently for my wife 
and children; and heaven was so far favourable, that 
our ship took a Turkish vessel, which carried a trea- 
sure of the great sultan. Bravery had its reward, 
and, as was no more than right, I got my fair share 
of it." 


( 119 ) 

Martha. 
How ! Where ! Can he have buried it ? 

Mephistopheles. 
Who knows where it is now scattered to the four 
^vinds of heavto t A fidr damsel took an interest in 
him as he was strolling about, a stranger in Naples. 
She manifested great fondness and fidelity towards 
him ; so much so, that he felt it even unto his blessed 
end. 

Martha. 
The villain! the robber of his children ! And all the 
wretchedness, all the poverty, could not check his scan- 
dalous life. 

Mephistopheles. 
But consider, he has paid for it with his life. Now, 
were I in your place, I would mourn him for one chaste 
year, and have an eye towards a new sweetheart in the 
meantime. 

Martha. 
Oh God! but I shall not easily in this world find 
anothet like my first. There could hardly be a kinder- 
hearted fool : he only loved being away from home too 
much, and stranger women, and stranger wine, and the 
cursed dicing. 

Mbphistophblbs. 
Weill well, things might have gone on very well, if 
he, on his part, only winked at an equal number of 


( 120 ) 

peccadilloes in you. I protest^ upon this condition, I 
would change rings with you myself! 

Martha. 
Oh, the gentleman is pleased to jest. 
Mephistopheles (aside.) 
Now, it is full time to be off. I dare say she would 
take the Devil himself at his word. 

fto Margaret.^ 
What is the state of your heart? 

Margaret. 
What do you mean ? 

Mephistopheles (aside.) 
Good, innocent child. 

(aloud.) 
Farewell, ladies. 

Margaret. 
Farewell. 

Martha. 
Oh, but teU me quickly ! I should like to have a 
certificate where, how, and when my love died and was 
buried. I was always a friend to regularity, and should 
like to read his death in the weekly papers. 

Mephistopheles. 
Aye, my good Madam, the truth is manifested by 
the testimony of two witnesses all the world over; 
* and I have a gallant companion, whom I will bring 
' before the judge for you. I will fetch him here« 


( 121 ) 

Martha. 
Oh, pray do ! 

Mephistopheles. 
And the young lady will be here too ? — a fine lad ! 
has travelled much, and shows all possible pohteness 
to the ladies. 

Maboaret. 
I should be covered with confusion in the presence 
of the gentleman. 

Mephistopheles. 
In the presence of no king on earth. 

Martha. 
Behind the house there, in my garden, we shall 
expect you both this evening. 


( 122 ) 


THE STREET. 
Faust. — Mephistopheles. 

Faust. 
How have you nul&Bged ? Is it in train ? WDl it 
soon do? 

Mephistopheles. 
Bravo ! Do I find you all on fire ? Margaret will very 
shortly be your's. This evening you will, see her at 
her neighbour Martha's. That is a woman especially 
chosen, as it were^ for the procuress and gypsey call- 
ing. 

Faust. 
So far so good. 

Mephistopheles. 
Something, however, is required of us. 

Faust. 
One good turn deserves another. 

Mephistopheles. 
We have only to make a formal deposition, that the 
extended limbs of her lord repose in holy ground in 
Padua. 

Faust. 
Wisely done ! We shall first be obliged to take the 
journey there, I suppose. 


( 1«3 ) 

M£PHI61X>rHSl.SS. 

Sancta simpllcitas ! , There is ao necessity for that. 
Only bear witness without knowing much about the 
matter. 

Faust. 
If you have nothing better to propose, the scheme is 
Man end* 

Mephistopheles. 
Oh, holy man ! There's for you now ! Is it the first 
time in your life that you have borne false testimony ? 
Have you not confidently given definitions of God, of 
the world, and of whatever moves in it — of man, and 
of the workings of his head and heart? — with una- 
bashed front, dauntless breast? And, looking fiiirly at 
the real nature of things, have you — you must confess 
you have not — ^have you known as much of these mat- 
ters as of Mr. Swerdtlein*s death ? 

Faust, 
Thou art and ever wilt be a liar, a sophist. 

Mephistopheles. 
Aye, if one did not look a little deeper. To-morrow, 
too, will you not, in all honour, make a fool of poor 
Margaret, and swear to love her with all your soul ? 

Faust. 
And truly from my heart. 

Mephistopheles. 
Fine talking ! Then you will speak of eternal truth 


( 124 ) 

and love, of one exclusive all absorbing passion — ^will 
that also come from the heart ? 

Faust. 

Peace — it will ! — ^when I feel, and seek a name for 
the passion, the phrensy, but find none ; then range 
with all my senses through the world, grasp at all the 
most sublime expressions, and call this flame, which is 
consuming me, endless, eternal, eternal ! — is that a de- 
vilish play of lies? 

Mephistopheles. 

I am right for all that. 

Faust. 

Hear I mark this, I beg of you, and spare my lungs. 
He who is determined to be right and has but a tongue, 
will be right undoubtedly. But come, I am tired of 
gossiping. For you are right, particularly because I 
cannot help myself. 


( 125 ) 


GARDEN. 

Maroabet on Faust's arm, Martha with Mephisto- 
PHELEs, walking up and down. 

Margaret. 
I am sure that you are only trifling with me — letting 
yourself down to Bhame me. Travellers are wont to 
put up with things out of complacency. I know too 
well that my poor prattle cannot entertain a man of 
your experience. 

Faust. 
A glance, a word from thee, gives greater pleasure 
than all the wisdom of this world. (He kisses her hand. J 

Margaret. 

Don't inconvenience yourself! How can you kiss 

it? It is so coarse, so hard. I have been obliged to 

do — heaven knows what not ; my mother is indeed too 

exact. (They pass on.) 

Martha. 
And you. Sir, are always travelling in' this manner ? 

Mephistopheles. 
Alas, that business and duty should force us to it ! 


( im ) 

How many a place one quits with regret, and yet may 
not tarry in it ! 

Martha. 
It does very well in the wild years of youth to rove 
about freely through the world. But the evil day 
ccmies at last, and to sneak a solitary old bachelor to 
the grave — ^that was never well for any one yet. 

Mephistofheles. 
I shudder at the distant view of it. 

Martha. 
Then, worthy Sir, think better of it in time. 

(TheypcLSSon,) 
Margaret. 
Aye ! out of sight out of mind! Politeness sits easily 
on you. But you have friends in abundance : they are 
more sensible than I am. 

Faust. 
O, thou excellent creature ; believe me, what is called 
sensible, often better deserves the name of vanity and 
narrow-mindedness. 

Margaret. 
How? 

Faust. 
Alas, that simplicity, that innocence, never appreci- 
ates itself and its own hallowed worth ? That humility, 
lowliness — the highest gifts of love-fraught bounteous 
nature — 


( 127 ) 

Maboaret. 

Only think of me one little minute; I shaU have 
time enough to think of you. 

Faust. 

You are much alone, I dare say ? 

Margaeet. 

Yes, our household is but small, and yet it must be 
looked after. We keep no maid ; I am obliged to cooky 
sweep^ knit and sew, and run early and late. And my 
mother is so precise in every thing ! Not that she has 
such pressing occasion to restrict herself. We might 
do more than many others. My father left a nice little 
property, a small house and garden near the town. 
However, my days at present are tolerably quiet. My 
brother is a soldier ; my little sister is dead. I had my 
full share of trouble with her, but I would gladly take 
all the anxiety upon myself again, so dear was the child 
to me. 

Faust. 

An angel, if it resembled thee ! 

Margaret. 

I brought it up, and it loved me dearly. It was 
born after my father's death. We gave up my mother 
for lost, so sad was the condition she then lay in ; and 
she recovered very slowly, by degrees. Thus she 
could not think of suckling the poor little worm, and so 
I brought it up, all by myself, with milk and water. It 


( 128 ) 

thus became my own. On my arm, in my bosom, it 
smiled, and sprawled, and grew. 

Faust. 
You have felt, no doubt, the purest joy. 

Maboaret. 
And many anxious hours, too. The little one's 
bradle stood at night by my bed-side : it could scarcely 
move but I was awake; now obliged to give it suck; 
now to take it to bed to me ; now, when it would not 
be quiet, to rise from bed, and walk up and down 
in the room dandling it; and early in the morning, 
stand already at the wash-tub : then go to market and 
see to the house ; and so on, day after day. Under 
such circumstances. Sir, the spirits are not uniformly 
good ; but food and rest relish the better for it. 

(They pass on,) 
Martha. 
The poor women have the worst of it. An old 
bachelor is hard to convert.. 

Mephistopheles. 
It only depends on one like you to teach me better. 

Martha. 
Tell me plainly. Sir, have you never met with any 
one ? Has your heart never attached itself any where ? 

Mephistopheles. 
The proverb says — a hearth of one's own, and a 
good wife, are as good as pearls and gold. 


I 


( 129 ) 

Maktiia. 
I mean, have you never liad an inclination ? 

Mephistopheles. 
I have been in general very politely received. 

Martha. 
I wished to say — was your heart never ser'wualy 
affected ? 

Mephistopheles. 
One should never venture to joke with women. 

Martha. 
Ah, you do not understand me. 

Mephistopheles. 
I am heartily sorry for it. But I understand — that 
you are very kind. ( They pass on. J 

Faust. 
You knew me again, you little angel, the moment I 
entered the garden ? 

Margaret. 
Did you not see it ? I cast down my eyes. 

Faust. 
And you forgive the liberty I took — my boldness 
as you were leaving the cathedral. 

Margaret. 
1 was struck all of a heap. Such a thing had never 
happened to me before ; no one could say any thing 
bad of me. Alas, thought I, has he seen anything bold. 


( 130 ) 

unmaidenly, in my behaviour ? It seemed as if the 
thought suddenly struck him, " I need stand on no ce- 
remony with this girl.** I must own I knew not what 
began to stir in your favour here ; but certainly I was 
right angry with myself for not being more angry with 
you. 

Faust. 
Sweet love ! 

Margaret. 
Wait a moment ! 

(She 'plucks a star-jUmer, and picks off the leaves 
one after the other,) 

Faust. 
What is that for — a nosegay ? 

Margaret. 
No, only for a game. 

Faust. 
How? 

Margaret. 
Go ! You will laugh at me. 

(She plveks off the leaves and murmurs to herself.) 

Faust. 
What are you murmuring? 

Margaret, half aloud. 
He loves me — he loves me not ! 

Faust. 
Thou angelic being ! 


J 


( 131 ) 

Margaret contituief. 
Loves me — not — Cloves me^-oot — 

(Plucking off the last leaf wUh fond deligkt.) 
He loves me ! 

Faust. 
Yes, my child. Let this flower-prophecy be to thee 
as a judgment from heaven. He loves thee ! dost thou 
understand what that means ? He loves thee ! 

(He takes both her hands.) 
Margaret. 
I tremble all over ! 

Faust. 
Oh, tremble not. Let this look, let this pressure of 
the hand, say to thee what is unutterable: — to give 
ourselves up wholly, and feel a bliss which must be 
eternal! Eternal! — it's end would be despair! No, 
no end ! no end ! 

(^Margaret presses his hands, extricates herself 
from his embrace, and runs away. He stands a 
moment in thought, and then follows her. J 
Martha, approaching. 
The night is coming on. 

Mephistopheles. 
Aye, and we will away. 

Martha. 
I would ask you to stay here longer, but it is a 

r2 


L 


( 132 ) 

wicked place. One would suppose no one had any 
other object or occupation than to gape after their neigh- 
bour's incomings and outgoings. And one comes to 
be talked about, appear as one will. And our little 
couple ? — 

Mephistopheles. 
Have flown up the walk yonder. Wanton butter- 
flies ! 

Martha. 
He seems fond of her. 

Mephistopheles. 
And she of him. That is the way o£ the world. 


( 133 ) 


A SUMMER HOUSE. 

(^Margaret runs in, gets behind the door, holds the 
tip of her finger to her Ups, and peeps through the 
crevices. J 

Margaret. 
He comes ! 

Faust enters. 
Ah, rogue, is it thus you provoke me. I have 
caught you at last. (He kisses her,) 

Margaret. 
(evnbrctcmg him and returning the kiss,) 
Dearest man, I love thee from my heart ! 

(^Mephistopheles knocks,) 
Faust, stamping. 
Who is there ? 

Mephistopheles. 
A friend. 

Faust. 
A brute. 

Mephistopheles. 
It is time to part, I believe. 

Martha com£s up, 
> Yes, it is late, Sir. 


( iw ) 

Faust. 
May I not accompany you? 

Margaret. 
My mother would — farewell. 

Faust. 
Must I then go? FarewelL 

Martha. 
Adieu! 

Margaret. 
Till our next speedy meeting ! 

(Faust and Mxphistopheles exeunt) 

Margaret. 

Gracioui God ! How many things auch a man can 

think ahout ! How abashed I stand in his presence, 

and say yea to every thing ! I am bat a poor silly 

child, I cannot conceive what he sees in me. 


J 


( 135 ) 


FOREST AND CAVERN. 

Faust, alone. 

Sublime spirit, thou gavest ine, gavest me every 
thing I prayed for. Not in vain didst thou turn thy 
face in fire to me. Thou gavest me glorious nature 
for a kingdom, with power to feel and to enjoy her. It 
is not merely a cold wondering visit that thou permit- 
test me ; thou grudgest me not to look into her deep 
bosom, as into the bosom of a friend. Thou passest in 
review before me the whole series of animated things, 
and teachest me to know my brothers in the still wood, 
in the air and water. And wh^n the storm roars and 
creaks in the forest, and the giant pine, precipitating its 
neighbour-boughs and neighbour-stems, sweeps, crush- 
ing, down, — and the mountain thunders with a dead 
hollow muttering to the fall, — thou bearest me off to the 
sheltered cave ; then thou showest me to myself, and 
deep mysterious wonders of my own breast reveal 
themselves. And when the clear moon, with its soften- 
ing influences, rises to my view, — from the wall-like 
rocks, from the damp underwood, the silvery forms of 
past ages hover up to me, and sofVen down the austere 
pleasure of contemplation. 

Oh, now I feel that nothing perfect falls to tlie lot of 


( 136 ) 

man! With this beatitude, which brings me nearer and 
nearer to t];e gods, thou gavest me the companion, 
whom already I cannot do without ; although, cold and 
insolent, he degrades me in my own eyes, and turns 
thy gifts to nothing with a breath. He is ever kindling 
a wild fire in my heart for that lovely image. Thus 
do I reel from desire to enjoyment, and in enjoyment 
languish for desire. 

Mephistopheles enters. 

Have you not had enough of this kind of life ? How 
can you delight in it so long ? It is aU well enough to 
try once, but then on again to something new. 

Faust. 

I would you had something else to do than to plague 
me in my happier hour., 

Mephistopheles. 

Well, well! I will let you alone if you wish. You 
need not say so in earnest. Truly, it is little to lose 
an ungracious, peevish, and crazy companion in you. 
The livelong day one has one's hands full ! One cannot 
read in your worship's face what pleases you, and what 
to let alone. 

Faust. 

That is just the right tone! He would fain be 
thanked for wearying me to death. 

Mephistopheles. 

Poor son of earth ! what sort of life would you have 


(137 ) 

led without me ? I have cured you for sometime to 
come of the crotchets of imagination, and but for me, 
you would already have taken your departure from 
this globe. Why mope in caverns and fissures of rocks 
like an owl? Why sip in nourishment from sodden 
moss and dripping stone, like a toad? A fair, sweet, 
pastime ! The doctor still sticks to you. 

Faust. 

Dost thou understand what new life-power this wan- 
dering in the desert procures for me ? Aye, couldst 
thou have but a dim presentiment of it, thou wouldst be 
devil enough to grudge me my enjoyment. 

Mephistopheles. 

A super-earthly pleasure ! To lie on the mountains 
in darkness and dew — clasp earth and heaven exstati- 
cally — swell yourself up to a godhead — rake through 
the earth's marrow with your thronging presentiments 
— feel the whole six days' work in your bosom — in 
haughty might enjoy I know not what— now overflow, 
in love's raptures, into all, with your earthly nature 
cast aside — and then the lofty intuition (with a gesture) 

— I must not say how — to end! 

Faust, 
Fye upon you ! 

Mephistopheles. 
That is not to your mind. You are entitled to cry 
fye, so morally! We must not name to chaste ears 


( 138 ) 

what chaste hearts cannot renounce. And, in a word, 
I do not grudge you the pleasure of giving yourself 
lying pretexts occasionally. But you will not keep it 
up long. You are already driven back into your old 
course, and, if this holds much longer, will be fretted 
into madness or torture and horror. Enough of this ! 
your little love sits yonder at home, and all to her is 
poor and melancholy. You are never absent from her 
thoughts. She loves you all-subduingly. At first, your 
passion came overflowing, like a rivulet swollen by the 
melting of the snow; you have poured it into her 
heart, and lo, your rivulet is dry again! Methinks, 
instead of reigning in the woods, your worship would 
do well to reward the poor young monkey for her love. 
The time seems lamentably long to her ; she stands at 
the window and watches the clouds roll away over the 
old walls of the town. " Were I a bird !" so runs her 
song, during all the day and half the night. One while 
she is cheerful, mostly sad,-— one while only ceasing to 
cry because she can cry no longer. Then, again, com- 
posed, to all appearance, — and ever lovesick ! 

Faust. 

Serpent! serpent! 

Mephistopheles, aside. 

It will do. I shall catch you ! 

Faust. 

Reprobate! take thyself away, and name not the 


( 139 ) 

lovely woman. Bring not the desire for her sweet body 
before my half distracted senses again ! 

Mephistopheles. 
What is to be done then ? She thinks that you 
are off, and in some manner you are. 

Faust. 
I am near her, and were I ever so far off, I can never 
forget, never lose, her. Nay, I already envy the very 
body of the Lord when her lips are touching it. 

Mephistopheles. 
Very well, my friend. I have often envied you the 
twin-pair, which feed among roses. 

Faust. 
Pander, begone. 

Mephistopheles. 
Good again ! You rail, and I cannot help laughing. 
The God who created lad and lass, well understood the 
noble caDing of making opportunity too. But away, 
it is a miserable mess of it ! Your road lies to your 
mistress's chamber, not, I think, to death. 

Faust. 
What are the joys of heaven in her arms ? Let me 
kindle on her breast ! Do I not feel her wretchedness 
unceasingly? Am I not the outcast? — the houseless 
one? — the monster without aim or rest? — who, like a 
torrent, dashed from rock to rock, in devouring fury 


( 140 ) 

towards the precipice ? And she, upon the side, with 
childlike simplicity, in the little cot upon the little 
Alpine field, and all her homely cares embraced within 
that little world ! And I, the hated of God — it was not 
enough to grasp the rocks and smite them to shatters ! 
Her, her peace, must I undermine ! — HeU, thou couldst 
not rest without this sacrifice! Devil, help me to 
shorten the pang ! Let what must be, be quickly ! Let 
her fate fall crushing upon me, and both of us perish 
together ! 

Mephistopheles. 
How it seethes and glows again ! Get in and com- 
fort her, you fool ! — When such a noddle sees no outlet, 
it immediately represents to itself the end. Life to him 
who bears himself bravely ! And yet on other occasions 
you have a fair spice of the devil in you. I know 
nothing in the world more insipid than a devil that 
despairs. 


( 141 ) 


MARGARET'S ROOM. 


Margaret, alon€f at the sptnning-tvheeL 

My peace is gone ; 
My heart is heavy; 
I shaD find it never, 
And never more. 

Where I have him not, 
Is the grave to me. 
The whole world 
Is embittered to me. 

My poor head 
Is wandering. 
My poor sense 
Is distraught. 

My peace is gone ; 
My heart is heavy ; 
I shall find it never, 
And never more. 


( 1*2 ) 

For him alone look I 
Out at the window ! 
For him alone go I 
Out of the house ! 

His lofly step, 
His noble form ; 
The smile of his mouth, 
The power of his eyes. 

And of his speech 
The witching flow, 
The pressure of his hand. 
And ah ! his kiss ! 

My peace is gone ; 
My heart is heavy; 
I shaD find it never, 
And never more. 

My bosom struggles 

After him. 

Ah! could I enfold him 

And hold him 1 and kiss him 

So as I would ! 

On his kisses 

I should die away ! 


( 1*3 ) 


MARTHA'S GARDEN. 

Margaret. 
Promise me, Henry! 

Faust. 
What I can ! 

Margaret. 
Now tell me, how do you feel as to religion ? You 
are a dear good man, but I believe you don't think 
much of it. 

Faust. 
No more of that, my child ! you feel I love you : I 
would lay down my life for those I love, nor would I 
deprive any of their feeling and their church. 

Margaret. 
That is not right ; we must believe in it. 

Faust. 
Must we ? 

Margaret. 
Ah ! if I had any influence over you ! Besides, you 
do not honour the holy sacraments. 

Faust. 
I honour them. 


( 144 ) 

Margaret. 

But without desiring them. It is long since you 
went to mass or confession. Do you believe in God? 

Faust. 

My love, who dares say I believe in God ? You may 
ask priests or philosophers, and their answer will ap- 
pear but a mockery of the questioner. 

Margaret. 

You don't believe, then ? 

Faust. 

Mistake me not, thou lovely one ! Who dare name 
him? and who avow : " I believe in him." Who feel? 
and dare to say : " 1 believe in him not." The All- 
embracer, the AU-sustainer, does he not embrace and 
sustain thee, me, himself? Does not the heaven arch 
itself there above? — Lies not the earth firm here below? 
— And do not eternal stars rise, friendlily twinkling, 
on high ? — Are we not looking into each other's eyes, 
and is not all thronging to thy head and heart, and 
weaving in eternal mystery, invisibly — visibly, about 
thee ? — Fill thy heart with it, big as it is, and when 
thou art wholly blest in the feeling, then call it what 
thou wilt ! Call it Happiness ! Heart ! Love ! God ! 
I have no name for it ! Feeling is all in all. Name 
is sound and smoke, clouding heaven's glow. 

Margaret. 

That is all very fine and good. The priest says 


( 145 ) 

nearly the same, with only a slight difference in the 
words. 

Faust. 
All hearts in all places under the blessed light of 
day say it, each in its own language — why not in 
mine? 

Margaret. 
Thus taken, it may pass ; but, for all that, there is 
something wrong about it, for thou hast no Chris- 
tianity. 

Faust. 
Dear child! 

Margaret. 
I have long been grieved at the company I see you 
in. 

Faust. 
How so? 

Margaret. 
The man you have with you is hateful to me in 
my inmost soul. Nothing in the whole course of my 
life has so stabbed me to the heart, as the repulsive 
visage of that man. 

Faust. 
Fear him not, you silly little thing. 

Margaret. 
His presence makes my blood creep. With this 
exception, I have kind feelings towards every body. 


( 146 ) 

But, much as I long to see you, I have an unaccount- 
ahle horror of that man, and hold him for a rogue be» 
-sides. God forgive me, if I do him wrong. 

Faust. 
There must he such oddities, notwithstandingv 

Margaret. 
I would not live with the like of him. Whenever 
he comes to the door, he looks in so mockingly, and 
with fury but half-suppressed ; one sees that he sym- 
pathises with nothing. It is written on his forehead, 
that he can love no living soul. I feel so happy in thy 
arms— so unrestrained— in such glowing abandonment; 
and his presence closes up my heart. 

Faust. 
You misgiving angel, you! 

Margaret. 
It overcomes me to such a degree, that when he but 
chances to join us, I feel as if I loved you no longer ; 
and in his presence, I should never be able to pray ; 
and ^is eats into my heart. You, too, Henry, must 
feel the same. 

Faust. 
You have an antipathy. 

Margaret. 
I must go now. 

Faust. 
Ah, can I never recline one little hour undisturbed 


( 147 ) 

upon thy bosom, and press heart to heart and soul to 
soul? 

Margaret. 
Ah, did I but sleep alone ! I would gladly leave the 
door unbolted for you this very night. But my mother 
does not sleep sound, and were she to catch us, I should 
die upon the spot. 

Faust. 
Thou angel, there is no necessity for that. You see 
this phial ! Only three drops in her drink will gently 
envelope nature in deep sleep. 

Margaret. 
What would I not do for thy sake ? It will do her 
no harm, I hope. 

Faust. 
Would I recommend it to you, my love, if it could? 

Margaret. 
If, best of men, I do but look on you, I know not 
what drives me to comply with your will. I have 
already done so much for you, that next to nothing 
now remains for me to do. 

(Mephistopheles enters,) 
Mephistopheles. 
The silly monkey ! is she gone. 

Faust. 
Hast thou been playing the spy again? 

l2 


( 1*8 ) 

MiCPniSTOPHELES. 

1 heard what passed plainly enough. You were 
catechised, Doctor. Much good may it do you. The 
girls are certainly deeply interested in knowing whe- 
ther a man be pious and simple after the old fashion. 
They say to themselves : " if he is conformable in that 
matter, he will also be conformable to us," 

Faust. 
Thou, monster as thou art, canst not conceive how 
this fond, faithful soul, full of her faith, which is all 
sufficient for her happiness, feels a holy horror to think 
that she must hold the man who is dearest to her for 
lost? 

Mephistopheles. 
Thou super-sensual, sensual lover, a chit of a girl 
leads thee by the nose. 

Faust. 
Thou abortion of dirt and fire ! 

Mephistopheles. 
And she is knowing in physiognomy too. In my pre- 
sence she feels she knows not how. This little mask 
betokens some hidden sense. She feels that I am most 
assuredly a genius — perhaps the devil himself. To 
night, then — ? 

Faust. 
What is that to you? 

Mephistopheles. 
I have my pleasure in it, though. 


( 149 ) 


AT THE WELL. 


Margaret and Bessy with pitchers. 


Bessy. 
Have you heard nothing of Barbara ? 

Margaret. 
Not a word. I go very little abroad. 

Bessy. 
Certainly, Sybella told it me to day. She has even 
made a fool of herself at last. That comes of playing 
the fine lady. 

Margaret. 
How so ? 

Bessy. 
It is a bad business. She feeds two now, when she 
eats and drinks. 

Margaret. 
Ah! 

Bessy. 

She is rightly served at last. What a time she has 

hung upon the fellow ! There was a promenading and 

a gallanting to village junkettings and dancing booths 

— she forsooth must be the first in every thing — he 


( 150 ) 

was ever treating her to tarts and wine. She thought 
great things of her beauty, and was so lost to honour 
as not to be ashamed to receive presents from him. 
There was then a hugging and kissing — and lo, the 
flower is gone ! 

Margaret. 
Poor thing ! 

Bessy. 
You really pity her ! When the like of us were at 
the spinning, our mothers never let us go down at 
night. She stood sweet with her lover ; on the bench 
before the door, and in the dark walk, the time was 
never too long for them. But now she may humble 
herself, and do penance, in a white sheet, in the church. 

Margaret. 
He will surely make her his wife. 

Bessy. 
He would be a fool if he did. A brisk young fellow 
has the world before him. Besides, he's off. 

Margaret. 
That is not handsome ! 

Bessy. 
If she gets him, it will go ill with her. The boys will 
tear her garland for her, and we will strew cut straw 
before her door. (Exit.) 

Margaret (going home J. 
How stoutly I could formerly revile, if a poor maiden 


( 151 ) 

chanced to make a slip ; how I could never find words 
enough to speak of another's shame ! How black it 
seemed to me ! and, blacken it as I would, it was never 
black enough for me — and blessed myself and felt so 
grand, and am now myself a prey to sin ! Yet— all that 
drove me to it, was, God knows, so sweet, so dear ! 


( 152 ) 


PLACE DEVOTED TO RELIGIOUS EXER- 
CISES. 

(In the niche of the wall a devotional image of the Mater 
Dolorosa, with pots of flowers before it,) 

Margaret (places fresh fUmers in the pots.) 

Ah, incline, 

Thou full of pain, 

Thy countenance graciously to my distress. 

The sword in thy heart. 

With thousand pangs 

Up-lookest thou to thy Son's death. 

To the Father look*st thou 

And sendest sighs 

Alofl for his and thy distress. 


I 

Who feels 


How rages 

My torment to the quick? 

How my poor heart in me throbbeth, 

How it trembleth, how it yearneth, 

Knowest thou and thou alone ! 


( 153 ) 

Whithersoe'er I go, 

What woe, what woe, what woe. 

Grows within ray bosom here ! 

Hardly, alas, am I alone, 

I weep, I weep, I weep. 

My heart is bursting within me ! 

The flower-pots on my window-sill 
Bedewed I with my tears, alas ! 
When I at morning's dawn 
Plucked these flowers for thee. 

When brightly in my chamber 
The rising sun*s rays shone, 
Already, in all wretchedness. 
Was I sitting up in my bed. 

Help ! rescue me from shame and death ! 

Ah, incline. 

Thou full of pain, 

Thy countenance graciously to my distress ! 


( 154. ) 


NIGHT.— STREET BEFORE MARGARET'S 

DOOR. 

Valentine, (a Soldier, Margaret's brother.) 

When I made one of a company, where many a one 
likes to show off, and the fellows were loud in their 
praises of the flower of maidens, and drowned their 
commendation in bumpers, — with my elbows leaning 
on the board, I sat in quiet confidence, and listened 
to all their swaggering ; and stroke my beard with a 
smile, and take the bumper in my hand, and say: 
** All in its way ! but is there one in the whole 
country to compare with my dear Margaret, — who is 
fit to hold a candle to my sister V* Hob and nob, 
kling ! klang ! so it went round ! Some shouted, 
*' he is right ; she is the pearl of the whole sex ;" 
and Till those praisers were dumb. And now — it is 
enough to make one tear out one's hair by the roots, 
and run up the walls — I shall be twitted by the sneers 
and taunts of every knave, shall sit like a bankrupt 
debtor, and sweat at every chance word. And though I 
might crush diem at a blow, yet I could not call them 
liars. Who comes there ? Who is slinking this way ? 
If I mistake not, there are two of them. If it is he, I 
will have at him at once ; he shall not leave this spot 
alive. 


( 155 ) 

Faust. 
How from the window of tlie Sacristy there, the light 
of the eternal lamp flickers upwards, and gliminers 
weaker and weaker at the sides, and darkness thickens 
round ! Just so is all night-like in my breast. 

Mephistopheles. 
And I feel languishing like the tom-cat that cmeaks 
up the fire-ladders and then creeps stealthily round the 
walls. I feel quite virtuously, — with a spice of thievish 
pleasure, a spice of wantonness. In such a manner 
does the glorious Walpurgis night already thrill me 
through every limb. The day after to-morrow it comes 
round to us again ; there one knows what one wakes 
for. 

Faust. 
In the mean time, can that be the treasure rising, — 
that which I see glimmering yonder ? 

Mephistopheles. 
You will soon enjoy the lifting up of the casket. I 
lately took a squint at it. There are capital lion- 
doUars within. 

Faust. 
Not a trinket ? not a ring?— to adorn my lovely mis- 
tress with. 

Mephistophei.es. 
I think I saw some such thing there as a sort of pearl 
necklace. 


( 156 ) 

Faust. 
That is weU. I feel sorry when I go to her without 
a present. 

Mepuistopheles. 
You ought not to regret having some enjoyment 
gratis. Now that the heavens are studded thick with 
stars, you shall hear a true piece of art. I will sing 
her a moral song, to make a fool of her the more 
certainly. 

(He sings to the guitar,) 
What are you doing here, Catherine, hefore your 
lover's door at morning dawn ? Stay, and beware, he 
lets thee in a maid, not to come out a maid. 

Beware. If it be done, then good night to you, you 
poor, poor things. If you love yourselves, do no- 
thing to pleasure any spoiler, except with the ring on 
the finger. 

Valentine comes forward. 
Who art thou luring here? by God! thou cursed 
ratcatcher! First, to the devil with the instrument, 
then to the devil with the singer. 

Mephistopheles. 
The guitar is broken to pieces ! It is all up with it ! 

Valentine. 
Now then for a scull-cracking. 

Mephistopheles to Faust. 
Don*t give way. Doctor! Courage. Stick close, 


( 157 ) 

and do as I tell you. Out with your toasting-iron! 
Thrust away, and I will parry. 

Valentine. 


Parry that ! 


Why not? 


That too ! 


To be sure. 


Mephistopheles. 


Valentine. 


Mephistopheles. 


Valentine. 
I believe the devil is fighting. What is that ? My 

hand is already getting powerless. 

Mephistopheles to Faust. 
Thrust home. 

Valentine falls. 
Oh, torture. 

Mephistopheles. 
The clown is tamed now. But away ! We must 
vanish in a twinkling, for a horrible outcry is already 
raised. I am perfectly at home with the police, but 
should find it hard to clear scores with the criminal 
courts. 

Martha (at the window,) 
Out! out! 

Maroaret (at the window.) 
Bring a light ! 


( 158 ) 

Maktha (as before.) 
They are railing and scuffling, screaming hhd fight- 
ing. 

People. 
Here lies one dead already. 

Martha (conung out,) 
Have the murderers escaped ? 

Margaret (coming out.) 
Who lies here ? 

People. 
Xhy mother's son. 

Margaret. 
Almighty God ! what misery ! 

Valentine. 
I am dying ! that is soon said, and sooner still done. 
What are you women howling and wailing about? Ap- 
proach and listen to me. (All come round kim.) 
Look ye, Margaret ! you are still young ! you are 
not yet adroit enough, and manage your matters ill. 
I tell it you in confidence ; since you are, once for all, 
a whore, be one in good earnest. 

Margaret. 
Brother ! God ! What do you mean ? • 

Valentine. 
Leave God out of the game. What is done, alas! 
cannot be undone, and things will take their course. 
You begin privately with one ; more of them soon 


( 1S9 ) 

follow; and when a dozen have had you, the whole 
town will have you too. 

When first Shame is bom, she is brought into the 
world clandestinely, and the veil of night is drawn over 
her head and ears. Aye, people would fain stifle her. 
But when she grows and waxes big, she walks flaunt- 
ingly in open day, and yet is not a whit the fairer. 
The uglier her face becomes, the more she courts the 
light of day. 

I already see the time when all honest citizens will 
turn aside from you, you whore, as from an infected 
corpse. Your heart will sink within you when they 
look you in the face. You will wear no golden chain 
again! No more will you stand at the altar in the 
church, nor take pride in a fair lace collar at the 
dance. You will hide yourself in some dark misera- 
ble corner, amongst beggars and cripples, and, even 
should God forgive you, be cursed upon earth ! 

Martha. 

Commend your soul to God's mercy. Will you yet 
heap the sin of slander upon your soul. 

Valentine. 

Could I but get at thy withered body, thou shame- 
less bawd, I should hope to find a full measure of par- 
don for all my sins ? 

Margaret. 

My brother ! Oh, this agonising pang ! 


( m ) 

Valentine. 
Have done with tears, I tell you. When you re- 
nounced honour, you gave roe the deepest heart-stab of 
all. I go through death's sleep unto God, a soldier and 
a brave one. (He dies,) 


( 161 ) 


CATHEDRAL. 
SERVICE, ORGAN, and ANTHEM. 

Margaret amongst a number of People, Evil Spirit 

behind Margaret. 

Evil Spirit. 
How different was it with thee, Margaret, 
When still full of innocence, 
Thou earnest to the altar here — 
Out of the well-worn little book 
"^ Lispedst prayers. 
Half child-sport, 
Half God in the heart ! 
Margaret ! 
Where is thy head ? 
In thy heart 
What crime ? 

Prayest thou for thy mother's soul? who 
Slept over into long, long pain through thee ? 
Whose blood is that on thy threshold ? 

And under thy heart 

Stirs it not quickening even now. 
Torturing itself and thee 
With its foreboding presence ? 


( 162 

Margaret. 
Woe! woe! 

Would that I were free from the thoughts 
That come over me and across me 
Despite of me ! 

Chorus. 
Dies irse, dies ilia, 
Solvet sseclum in fayill4. (Organ plays.) 

Evil Spirit. 
Horror seizes, thee ! 
The Trump sounds ! 
The graves tremble ! 
And thy heart, 
From the repose of its ashes 
For fiery torment 
Brought to life again, 
Trembles up! 

Margaret. 
Would that I were hence ! 
I feel as if the organ 
Stifled my breath, 
As if the anthem 
Dissolved my heart's core! 

Chorus. 
Judex ergo cum sedebit 
Quidquid latet adparebit 
Nil inultum remanebit. 


( 163 ) 

Margaret. 
I feel so thronged ! 

The wall-pillars 

Close on me ! 

The vaulted roof 

Presses on me! — Air! 

Evil Spirit. 
Hide thyself! Sin and shame 
Do not remain hidden. 
Air? Light? 
Woe to thee! 

Chorus. 
Quid sum miser tunc dicturus ? 
Quem patronum rogaturus ? 
Cum vix Justus sit securus. 

Evil Spirit. 
The glorified from thee 
Avert their faces. 
The pure shudder 
To reach thee their hands. 
Woe! Woe! 

Chorus. 
Quid sum miser tunc dicturus ? 

Maroarst. 
Neighbour ! Your smellii^-bottle ! 


(She srvoons awdy,) 


ut 


( 16* ) 


MAY-DAY NIGHT. 

THE HARTZ MOUNTAINS. 

Dittrict ofSchtrke and Elend. 

Faust. — Mefhistopheles. 

Mephistopheles. 

Do you not long for a broomstick ? For my part, 
I should be glad of the roughest he-goat. By this road 
we are still far from our destination. 

Faust. 

So long as I feel fresh upon my legs, this knotted 
stick suffices me. What is the use of shortening the 
way ? To creep along the labyrinth of the vales, and 
then ascend these rocks, from which the ever-bubbling 
spring precipitates itself, — this is the pleasure which 
gives zest to such a path. The spring is already 
weaving in the birch trees, and even the pine is be- 
ginning to feel it, — ought it not to have some effect 
upon our limbs ? 

Mefhistopheles. 

Verily^ I feel nothing of it. All is wintry in my 
body, and I should prefer frost and snow upon my 
path. How melancholy the unfinished disk of the red 


( 165 ) 

moon rises with belated glare ! and gives so bad a li^^t, 
that, at every step, one runs against a tree or a rock. 
With your leave, I will caU a will-o'the-wisp. I see 
one yonder, burning right merrily. Holloa, there, my 
friend! may I intreat your company? Why wilt thou 
blaze away so uselessly ? Be so good as to light us up 
along here. 

WlLL-0*THE-WlSP. 

Out of reverence, I hope, I shall succeed in subduing 
my unsteady nature. Our course is ordinarily but a 
zigzag one. 

Mephistopheles. 

Ha ! ha ! you think to imitate men. But go straight, 
in the devil's name, or I will blow your flickering life 
out. 

Will-o'the-Wisp. 

I see well that you are master here, and will wil- 
lingly accommodate myself to you. But consider ! the 
mountain is magic-mad to-night, and if a will-o'the- 
wisp is to show you the way, you must not be too par- 
ticular. 

Faust, Mephistopheles, Will-o*the-Wi8p, in aUer- 

noting song. 

Into the sphere of dreams and enchantment, it seems, 
have we entered. Lead us right, and do yourself ere* 
dit ! — that we may advance betimes in the wide deso- 
late regions. 


( 166 ) 

Sfee trees after trees, how rapidly they move by ; and 
the diffs, that bow, and the long-snouted rocks, how 
they snort, how they blow ! 

Through the stones, through the turf, brook and 
brookling hurry down. Do I hear rustling ? do I hear 
songs? do I hear the sweet plaint of love? — voiees 
of those blest days ? — ^what we hope, what we love t 
And Echo, like the tale of old times, sends back the 
sound. 

Too-whoo, too-whoo — it sounds nearer; the owl, the 
pewet, and the jay, — ^have they all remained awake? Are 
those salamanders through the brake, with their long 
legs, thick paunches ? And the roots, like snakes, wind 
from out of rock and sand, and stretch forth strange 
filaments to terrify, to seize us ; from coarse speckles, 
instinct with life, they set polypus-fibres for the tra- 
veller. And the mice, thousand-coloured, in whole 
tribes, through the moss and through the heath! And 
the glow-worms fly, in crowded swarms, a confounding 
escort. 

But tell me whether we stand still, or whether we 
are moving on ? Every thing seems to turn round, — 
rocks and trees, which make grimaces, and the will- 
o'the-wisps, which multiply, which swell thonselves 
out* 

MXPHISTOFHELSS. 

Keep a stout hold of my skirt! Here is a oentnl 


( 167 ) 

peaky from which one sees with wonder how Mammon 
is glowing in the mountain. 

Faust. 
- How strangely a melancholy light, of morning red, 
glimmers through the mountain gorges, and penetrates 
even to the deepest recesses of the precipice. Here 
rises a mist, there float exhalations. Here the glow 
sparkles out of gauze-like yapour, then steals along 
like a fine thread, and then again bursts forth like a 
fountain. Here it winds, a whole track, with a hundred 
veins through the valley ; and here, in the compressed 
comer, it masses itself at once. There sparks are 
scattering, like golden sand upsprinkled in the air. 
But see ! the wall-like rock is on fire in all its height. 

Mephistopheles. 

Does not Sir Mammon illuminate his palace magni- 
ficently for this festival ? It is lucky that you have 
seen it. I already scent the boisterous guests. 

Faust. 

How the storm-blast is raging through the air! With 
what thumps it strikes against my neck ! 

Mephistopheles. 

You must lay hold of the old ribs of the rock, or it 
will hurl you down into this abyss. A mist thickens 
the night. Hark ! what a crashing through the forest I 
The owls fly scared away. Hark to the splintering of 
the ever-green palaces! the crackling and snapping 


( 168 ) 

of the boughs; the mighty groaning of the trunks; 
die creaking and yawning of the roots — all come 
crashing down, one over the other, in fearfully confused 
fall ; and the winds hiss and howl through the wreck- 
covered cliffit! Dost thou hear voices aloft? — in the 
distance? — close at hand? — Aye, a raving witch-song 
streams along the whole mountain. 

The Witches, tn chorus. 
To the Brocken the witches repair! The stubble is 
yellow, the com is green. There the huge multitude is 
assembled. Sir Urian sits at the top. On they go over 

stcme and stock ; the witch s, the he-goat s. 

Voices. 
Old Baubo comes alone ; she rides upon a farrow- 
sow. 

Chorus. 
Then honour to whom honour is due! Mother 
Baubo to the front, and lead the way! A proper sow 
and mother upon her, — then follows the whole swarm 
of witches. 

Voice. 
Which way did you come ? 

Voice. 
By Ilsenstein. I there peeped into the owl's nest. 
She gave me such a look. 

Voice. 
Oh, drive to hell! What a rate you are riding at! 


( 169 ) 

Voice. 
She has grazed me in passing: only look at the 
wound. 

Chorus of Witches. 
The way is broad, the way is long. What mad 
throng is this ? The fork sticks, the besom scratches ; 
the child is suffocated, the mother bursts. 

Wiz ARDs. — H alf-Chorus, 
We steal along like snails in their house ; the women 
are all before ; for in going to the house of the wicked 
one, the woman is a thousand steps in advance. 

The other Half. 
We do not take that so precisely. The woman does 
it with a thousand steps. But, let her make as much 
haste as she can, the man does it at a single bound. 

Voices (above.) 
Come with us, come with us, from Felsensee ! 

Voices (from below, J 
We should like to mount with you. We wash and 
are thoroughly clean, but we are ever barren. 

Both Choruses. 
The wind is still, the stars fly, the melancholy moon 
is glad to hide herself. The magic-choir sputters forth 
sparks by thousands in its whizzing. 

Voice (from below, J 
Hold! hold! 


( 170 ) 

Voice (from above,) 
Who calls there from the deft in the rock ? 

Voice ffiom below,) 
Take me with you ! take me with you ! I haye been 
mounting for three hundred years already, and cannot 
reach the top. I would fain be with my fellows. 

Both Choruses. 
The besom carries, the stick carries, the fork carries, 
the he-goat carries. Who cannot raise himself to- 
night, is lost for ever. 

Demi-Witch (below,) 
I have been tottering after such a length of time, — 
how far the others are a-head already! I have no rest 
at horoe,^and don't get it here neither. 

Chorus of Witches. 

» 

The salve gives courage to the witches ; a rag is good 
for a sail ; every trough makes a good ship ; he will 
never fly, who flew not to-night. 

Both Choruses. 
And when we round the peak, let yourselves down 
upon the ground, and cover the heath &r and wide 
with your swarm of witch-hood. 

(They let themsehes down,) 
Mephistopheles. 
There's crowding and pushing, rustling and clatter- 
ing! There's whizzing and twirling, bustling and bab- 
bling ! There's glittering, sparkling, stinking, bum- 


( 171 ) 

ing! A true witch-element! But stick dose to me, 
or we shall be separated in a moment. Where art 
thou? 

Faust (in the iKstance^J 

Here! 

Mephistophsles. 

What ! already torn away so far ? I must exert my 
authority as master. Room ! Squire Voland comes. Make 
room, sweet people, make room ! Here, Doctor, take 
hold of me ! and now, at one bound, let us get dear of 
the crowd. It is too mad, even for the like of me. 
Hard by there, shmes something with a peculiar light. 
Something attracts me towards those bushes. Come 
along, we will slip in there. 

• Faust. 

Thou spirit of contradiction ! But go on! thou may*st 
lead me. It was wisely done, to be sure. We repair to 
the Brocken on Walpurgis* night, to isolate ourselves 
when we get here. 

Mephistopheles. 

Only see what variegated flames! A merry club is 
met together^ One is not alone in a small company. 

Faust. 

I should prefer being above,, though! I already 
see flame and eddying smokci • Yonder the multitude 
is streaming to the Evil One« Many a riddle must 
there beiuhtied." 


( 178 ) 

Mephistopubleb. 

And many a riddle is also tied anew. Let the great 
world bluster as it will, we will here house ourselves 
in peace. It is an old saying, that in the great world 
one makes little worlds. Yonder I see young witches, 
naked and bare, and old ones, who prudently cover 
themselves. Be compliant, if only for my sake ; the 
trouble is small, the sport is great. I hear the tuning 
of instruments ! Confounded jangle! One must ac- 
custom oneself to it. Come along, come along! it 
cannot be otherwise. I will go forward and introduce 
you, and I shall lay you under a firesh obligation. 
What sayest thou, friend? this is no trifling space. 
Only look! you can hardly see the end. A hundred 
fires are burning in a row. People are dancing, talking 
cooking, drinking, love-makmg. Now tell me where 
anything better is to be found ! 

Faust. 

To introduce us here, do you intend to present 
yourself as wizard or devil ? 

MXPHISTOPHELES. 

In truth, I am much used to go incognito. But one 
shows one's orders on gala days. I have no garter to 
distinguish me, but the cloven foot is held in high 
honour here. Do you see the snail there ? she comes 
creeping up, an4 with her feelers has already found out 
something in me. Even if I would, I could not deny 


( 178 ) 

myself here. But come! we will go from fire to fire; 
I'll be the pander, and you shall be the gallant. 

(To some who are sitting round some expiring embers, J 
Old gentlemen, what are you doing here at the extre- 
mity ? I should commend you, did I find you nicely 
in the middle, in the thick of the riot and youthful 
revelry. Every one is surely enough alone at home. 

General. 
Who can put his trust in nations, though he has done 
ever so much for them ? For with the people, as with 
the women, youth has always the upper hand. 

Minister. 
At present people are wide astray from the right 
path — the good old ones for me ! For, verily, when 
we were all in all, that was the true golden age. 

Parvenu. 
We, too, were certainly no fools, and often did what 
we ought not. But now every thing is turned topsy- 
turvy, and just when we wished to keep it firm. 

Author. 
Who now-a-days, speaking generally, likes to read 

a work of even moderate sense ? And as for the rising 
generation, they were never so malapert. 
Mephistopheles (who all at once appears very old, J 
I feel the people ripe for doomsday, now that I 
ascend the witch-mountain for the last time; and be- 


( 174 ) 

cause my own cask runs thick, the world also is come 
to the dregs. 

A Witch who sells old cloaths and frippery. 

Do not pass by in this manner, gentlemen ! Now is 
your time. Look at my wares attentively; I have 
them of all sorts. And yet there is nothing in my shop 
— «which has not its fellow upon earth — that has not^ 
some time or othae, wnmght proper mischief to man- 
kind and to the world. There is no dagger here, from 
which blood has not flowed ; no chalice, from which hot 
consuming poison has not been poured into a healthy 
body ; no trinket, which has not seduced some amiable 
woman ; no sword, which has not cut some tie asunder, 
which has not perchance stabbed an adversary from 
behind. 

Mephistopheles. 

Cousin ! you understand but ill the temper of the 
times. Done, happened! Happened, done! Take to 
dealing in novelties ; novelties only have any attraction 
for us. 

Faust. 

If I can but keep my senses ! This is a fair with a 
vengeance ! 

Mephistopheles. 

The whole throng struggles upwards. You think 
to shove, and you yourself are shoved. 

Faust. 

Who, then, is that ? 


i 


( »75 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
Mark her well ! That is Lilith. 

Faust. 
Who? 

Mephistopheles. 
Adam's first wife: Beware of her fair hair, of that 
ornament in which she shines pre-eminent. When she 
ensnares a young man with it, she does not let him off 
again so easily. 

Faust. 
There sit two, the old one with the young one. They 
have already capered a good hit ! 

Mephistopheles. 
That has neither stop nor stay to-night. A new dance 
is heginning; come, we will set to. 

Faust (dancing with the young one.j 
I had once upon a time a fair dream. In it, I saw an 
apple-tree; two lovely apples glittered on it: they en- 
ticed me, I climhed up. 

The Fair Oke. 
You are very fond of apples, and have been so fi-om 
Paradise downwards. I ^1 moved with joy, that my 
garden also bears such. 

.Mephistopheles (with the old one, J 
I had once upon a time a wild dream. In it, I saw a 

cleft tree. It had a ; as it was, 

it pleased me notwithstanding. 


( 176 ) 

The Old One. 

I present my best respects to the knight of the cloven 

foot. Let him have a ready, if he does not 

fear ■ — . 

Procktophantasmist. 

Confounded mob ! how dare you ? Was it not long 
since demonstrated to you ? A spirit never stands upon 
ordinary feet ; and you are actually dancing away, like 
us other mortals ! 

The Fair One« 

What does he come to our hall for then? 

Faust, dancing. 

Ha! He is absolutely everywhere. He must appraise 
what others dance ! If he cannot talk about every 
step, the step is as good as never made at all. He is 
most vexed, when we go forwards. If you would but 
turn round in a circle, as he does in his old mill, he 
would term that good, I dare say; particularly were 
you to consult him about it. 

Procktophantasmist. 

You are still here, then ! No, that is unheard oft 
But vanish! We have enlightened the world, you 
know ! That devil's crew, they pay no attention to rule. 
We are so wise, — and Tegel is haunted, notwithstand- 
ing! How long I have been sweeping away at the 
delusion ; and it never becomes clean ! It is unheard 
of! 


( 177 ) 

The Fair One. 
Have done boring us here, at any rate, then! 

Procktophantasmist. 
I tell you Spirits, to your faces, I endure not the 
despotism of the spirit. My spirit cannot exercise it. 

(The dancing goes on.) 
To-night, I see, I shall succeed in nothing ; but I am 
always ready for a journey ; and still hope, before 
my last step, to get the better of the devils and the 
poets. 

Mephistopheles. 
He will, forthwith, seat himself in a puddle ; that is 
his mode of solacing himself; and when leeches have 
feasted on his rump, he is cured of spirits and spirit. 

(To Faust, who has left the dance,) 
Why do you leave the pretty girl, who sung so sweetly 
to you in the dance ? 

Faust. 
Ah! in the middle of the song, a red mouse jumped 
out of her mouth. 

Mephistopheles. 
There is nothing out of the way in that. One must 
not be too nice about such matters. Enough that the 
mouse was not grey. Who cares for such things in a 
moment of enjoyment. 

Faust. 
Then I saw — 

N 


( 178 ) 
Mephistopheles. 


What? 


Faust. 
Mephisto, do you see yonder a pale fair girl stand- 
ing alone and far off? She drags herself but slowly 
from the place; she seems to move with fettered feet. 
I must own, she seems to me to resemble poor Mar- 
garet. 

Mephistopheles. 
Do but let that alone ! no good can come of it. It 
is a creation of enchantment, is lifeless, — an idol. It 
is not well to meet it; the blood of man thickens at 
its chill look, and he is well nigh turned to stone. 
You have heard, no doubt, of Medusa. 

Faust. 
In truth, they are the eyes of a corpse, which there 
was no fond hand to close. That is the breast, which 
Margaret yielded to me ; that is the sweet body, which 
I enjoyed. 

Mephistopheles. 
That is sorcery, thou easily deluded fool; for she 
wears to every one the semblance of his beloved. 

Faust. 
What bliss! what suffering! I cannot tear myself 
from that look. How strangely does a single red line, 
no thicker than the back of a knife, adorn that lovely 
neck. 


( 179 ) 

Mephistopheles. 

Right ! I see it too. She can also carry her head 
under her arm, for Perseus has cut it off for her. But 
ever this fondness for delusion! Come up the hill, 
however; here all is as merry as in the Prater; and, 
if I am not hewitched, I actually see a theatre. What 
is going on here, then ? 

Servibilis. 

They will recommence immediately. A new piece, 
the last of seven; — it is the custom here to give so 
many. A dilettante has written it, and dilettanti play 
it. Excuse me, Gentlemen, hut I must be off. It is 
my dilettante office to draw up the curtain. 

Mephistopheles. 

When I find you upon the Blocksberg, — that is just 
what I approve ; for this is the proper place for you. 


n2 


WALPURGIS-NIGHT'S DREAM. 


OR 


OBERON AND TITANIA'S 


GOLDEN WEDDING FEAST. 


Intermezzo. 


Theatre-Manager. 
To-day we rest for once; we, the brave sons of 
Mieding. Old mountain and damp dale, — that is the 
whole scenery ! 

Herald. 
That the wedding-feast may be golden, fifty years 
are to be past ; but if the quarrel is over, I shall like 
the golden the better. 

Oberon. 
If ye spirits are with me, this is the time to show it : 
the king and the queen, they are united anew. 

Puck. 
When Puck comes and twists himself round, and his 
foot trails in the dance, — hundreds come after to re- 
joice along with him. 

Ariel. 
Ariel awakes the song, in tones of heavenly purity : 
his music lures many trifles, but it also lures the fair. 

Oberon. 
Wedded ones, who would agree, — let them take a 
lesson from us two. To make a couple love each other, 
it is only necessary to separate them. 


( 184. ) 

TiTANIA. 

If the husband lodes gruff, and the wife be whim- 
sical, take hold of both of them immediately. Con- 
duct me her to the South, and him to the extremity of 
the North. 

Orchestra Turn. 
Fortissimo. 
Flies' snouts, and gnats' noses, with their kindred ! 
Frog in the leaves and cricket in the grass : they are 
the musicians ! 

Solo. 
See, here comes the bagpipe ! It is the soap-bubble. 
Hark to the Schnecke-schnicke-schnack through its 
dull nose. 

Spirit which is just formed. 
Spider's foot and toad's belly, and little wings for 
the little wight ! There is not an animalcula, it is true, 
but there is a little poem. 

A Pair ot Lovers. 
Little step and high bound, through honey-dew, and 
exhalations. Truly, you trip it me enough, but you do 
not mount into the air. 

Inquisitive Traveller. 
Is not this masquerading-mockery ? Can I believe 
my eyes? To see the beauteous god, Oberon, here 
to-night, too! 


( 185 ) 

Orthodox. 
No claws, no tail ! Yet it stands beyond a doubt that, 
even as <* The Gods of Greece/' so is he too a devil. 

Northern Artist. 
What I catch, is at present only sketch-ways as it 
were ; but I prepare myself betimes for the Italian 
journey. 

Purist. 
Ah ! my ill-fortune brings me hither ; what a con- 
stant scene of rioting! and of the whole host of 
witches, only two are powdered. 

Young Witch. 
Powder as well as petticoats are for little old and 
grey women. Therefore I sit naked upon my he-goat, 
and show a stout body. 

Matron. 

«. 

We have too much good-breeding to squabble with 
you here. But I hope you will rot, young and delicate 

as you are. 

Leader of the Band. 
Flies* snouts and gnats' noses, don't swarm so about 
the naked. Frog in leaves and cricket in the grass I 
Continue, however, to keep time, I beg of you. 
Weathercock towards one side. 
Company to one's heart's content ! Truly, nothing 
but brides! and young bachelors, man for man! the 
hopefulliQst people ! 


s 


( 186 ) 

Weathercock, towards the other side. 
And if the gpround does not open, to swallow up all 
of them — with a quick run, I will immediately jump 
into hell. 

Xenien. 
We are here as insects, with little sharp holders, to 
honour Satan, our worshipful papa, according to his 
dignity. 

HENNINas. 

See ! how naively they joke together in a crowded 
troop. They will e'en say in the end, that they had 
good hearts. 

MUSAOET. 

I like full well to lose myself in this host of witches ; 
for, truly, I should know how to manage these better 
than Muses. 

Ci-devant Gekius of the Age. 

With proper people, one becomes somebody. Come, 
take hold of my skirt! The Blocksberg, like the 
German Parnassus, has a very broad top. 

Inquisitive Traveller. 

Tell me what is the name of that sti£P maD f He 

walks with stiff steps. He anuffies at every thing he 

can snuffle at. ** He is scenting out Jesuits." 

The Crane. 
I like to fish in clear and even in troubled, waters. 

On the same principle you see the pious gentleman 

associate even with devils. 


( 187 ) 

Worldling. 
Aye, for the pious, believe me, every thing is a ve- 
hicle. They actually form many a conventicle, here 
upon the Blocksberg. 

Dancer. 
Here is surely a new choir coming! I hear dis- 
tant drums. But don't disturb yourselves ! there are 
single-toned bullfinches in the reeds. 

Dogmatist. 
I wiU not be put out of my opinion, not by either 
critics or doubts. The Devil, though, must be some- 
thing ; for how else could there be a devil? 

Idealist. 
Phantasy, this once, is really too masterful in my 
mind. Truly, if I be AU, I must be silly to-day. 

Realist. 
Entity is a regular plague to me, and cannot but 
vex me much. I stand here for the first time not 
firm upon my feet. 

Supernaturalist. 
I am greatly pleased at being here, and am delighted 
with these ; for, from devils, I can certainly draw con- 
clusions as to good spirits. 

Sceptic 
They follow the track of the flame, and believe 
themselves near the treasure. Only doubt (zweifel) 
rhymes to devil (teufel). Here I am quite at home. 


( 188 ) 

Leader of the Band. 
Frog in the leaves and cricket in the grass ! Con- 
founded dilettanti! Flies' snouts and gnats* noses; 
you are fine musicians ! 

The Knowing Ones. 
Sanscoucif that is the name of the host of merry 
creatures. There is no longer any walking upon' feet, 
wherefore we walk upon our heads. 

The Maladroit Ones. 
In times past we have spunged many a tit-hit; but 
now, good bye to all that! Our shoes are danced 
through ; we run on hare soles. 

Will-o'the- Wisps. 
We come from the bog, from which we are just 
sprung ; but we are the glittering gallants here in the 
dance directly. 

Star-Shoot. 
From on high, in star-and-fire-light, I shot hither. 
1 am now lying crooked-ways in the grass ; who will 
help me upon my legs ? 

The Massive Ones. 
Room! room! and round about! so down go the 
grass-stalks. Spirits are coming, but spirits as they are, 
they have plump limbs. 

Puck. 
Don't tread so heavily, like elephant's cubs; and 
the plumpest on this day, be the stout Puck himself. : 


( 189 ) 

Ariel. 
If kind nature gave — if the spirit gave you wings, 
follow my light track, up to the hill of roses. 

Orchester, pianissimo. 
Drifting clouds, and wreathed mists, brighten from 
on high ! Breeze in the leaves, and wind in the rushes, 
and all is dissipated ! 


( 190 ) 


A GLOOMY DAY.— A PLAIN. 

Faust. — Mephistopheles. 

Faust. 

In misery! Despairing! Long a wretched wanderer 
upon the earth and now a prisoner! The dear unhappy 
being, cooped up in the dungeon as a malefactor for 
horrid tortures ! Even to that ! to that ! Treacherous 
worthless Spirit, and this hast thou concealed from me ! 
Stand, only stand 1 roll thy devilish eyes infuriated in 
thy head ! Stand and brave me with thy unbearable 
presence ! A prisoner ! In irremediable misery ! Given 
over to evil spirits, and to sentence-passing, unfeeling 
humanity ! And me, in the mean time, hast thou been 
lulling with tasteless dissipations, concealing her grow 
ing wretchedness from me, and leaving her to perish 
without help. 

Mephistopheles. 

She is not the first. 

Faust. 

Dog! horrible monster! — Turn him, thou Infinite 
Spirit! turn the reptile back again into his dog's shape, 


( 191 ) 

in which he was often pleased to trot before me by 
night, to roll before the feet of the harmless wanderer, 
and fasten on his shoulders when he tumbles down. 
Turn him again into his, favourite shape, that he may 
crouch on his belly before me in the sand, whilst I 
spurn him with my foot, the reprobate ! Not the first ! 
Misery! misery! It is inconceivable by any human soul, 
that more than one creature can have sunk into such a 
depth of misery, — that the first, in its writhing death- 
agony, was not sufficient to atone for the guilt of all 
the rest in the sight of the Ever-Pardoning. The mi- 
sery of this one grinds me to the quick ; thou art grin- 
ning calmly at the fate of thousands. 

Mephistopheles. 

Now are we already at our wits ends again! just 
where the sense of you mortals snaps with overstrain- 
ing. Why dost thou enter into fellowship with us, if 
thou canst not go through with it ? WilFst fly, and art 
not safe from dizziness ? Did we force ourselves on 
thee, or thou thyself on us? 

Faust. 

Gnash not thy greedy teeth thus defyingly at me ! I 
loathe thee ! Great, glorious Spirit, thou who deignedst 
to appear to me, thou who knowest my heart and my 
soul, why yoke me to this shame-fellow, who feeds on 
mischief, and battens on destruction ! 


( 192 ) 

Mephistopheles. 
Hast done ? 

Faust. 
Save her ! or woe to tfaee ! •The most horrible curse 
on thee for thousands of years ! 

Mephistopheles. 
I cannot loosen the shackles of the avenger, nor 
undo his bolts. — Save her! — Who was it that plunged 
her into ruin ? I or thou ? 

fTAUST hohs wildly around.) 
Art thou grasping after the thunder? Well, that is 
not given to you wretched mortals ! To dash to pieces 
one who meets you in all innocence — that is just the 
tyrant's way of venting himself in perplexities. 

Faust. 
Bring me thither ! She shall be free ! 

Mephistopheles. 
And the danger to which you expose yourself? 
Know, blood-guiltiness by your hand still lies upon the 
town. Avenging spirits hover over the place of the 
slain, and lie in wait for the returning murderer. 

Faust. 
That, too, from thee ? Murder and death of a world 
upon thee, monster ! Conduct me hence, I say, and 
free her ! 

Mephistopheles. 
I will conduct thee, and what I can, hear! Have I 


( 193 ) 

all power in heaven and upon earth ? I will cloud the 
gaoler's senses ; do you possess yourself of the keys, 
and bear her off with human hand. I will watch! The 
magic horses will be r^dy, I will bear you ofT. This 
much I can do. 

Faust. 
Up and away ! 


( 19* ) 


NIGHT.— OPEN PLAIN. 

Faust and Mephistofueles rushing along upon black 

horses, 

Faust. 
What are they working — those about the Raven- 
stone yonder ? 

Mephistopheles. 
— Can't tell what they're cooking and making. 

Faust. 
— Are waving upwards — waving downwards — bend- 
ing-stooping. 

Mephistopheles. 
A witch-company. 

Faust. 
They are sprinkling and charming. 

Mephistopheles. 
On! on! 


( 195 ) 


DUNGEON. 


Faust, 
(with a bunch of keys and a lamp, before an iron wicket,) 

A tremor, long unfelt, seizes me; the concentrated 
misery of mankind fastens on me. Here, behind these 
damp walls, is her dwelling-place, and her crime was 
a good delusion ! Thou tremblest to go to her ! Thou 
fearest to see her again ! On ! thy irresolution lingers 
death hither wards. 

(He takes hold of the lock, — Singing within. J 

My mother, the whore, 

She was the death of me ! 

My father, the rogue, 

He ate me up ! 

My little sister 

Picked up the bones 

At a cool place ! 

There I became a beautiful little wood-bird. 

Fly away ! fly away ! 


o2 


( 196 ) 

• 

Faust {"opening the lock,) 
She has no presentiment that her lover is listening, 
hears the chains clank, the straw rustle. 

(He enters.) 
Maroaret (hiding jher face in the bed of straw,) 
Woe ! woe ! They come. Bitter death ! 

Faust (softly.) 
Hush ! hush ! I come to free thee. 

Margaret (throwing herself before him. J 
If thou art human, feel for my wretchedness. 

Faust. 
You will wake the guard by your cries ! 

(He takes hold of the chains to unlock them,) 
Margaret (on Iter knees.) 
Who has given thee, executioner, this power over 
me? You come for me whilst it is yet midnight. 
Be merciful and let me live. Is not to-morrow morn- 
ing time enough? 

(She stands up.) 

I am yet so young, so young ! and am to die already ! 
I was fair, too, and that was my undoing ! My true- 
love was near, he is now far away. Tom lies the gar- 
land, scattered the flowers. Don't take hold of me so 
roughly! Spare me! What have I done to you? Let 
me not implore in vain. I never saw you before in all 
my life, you know! 


( 197 ) 

Faust. 
Shall I survive this misery? 

Margaret. 
I am now entirely in thy power. Only let me first 
give suck to the child. I pressed it this whole night 
to my heart. They .took it away to vex me, and 
say now, I killed it. And I shall never be happy 
again. They sing songs upon me ! It is wicked of the 
people. An old tale ends so,— who bids them apply 
it? 

Faust throws himself donm. 
A lover lies at thy feet, to unloose the bonds of 
wretchedness. 

Margaret throws herself by his side. 
Aye, let us kneel to invoke the saints. See, under 
these steps, under the threshold, hell is seething. The 
Evil One, with fearful fury, is making a din ! 

Faust exclaiming, 
Margaret ! Margaret ! 

Margaret listening. 
That was my true-love's voice. 

(She springs up. The chains fall off.) 
Where is he ? I heard him call. I am free ! Nobody 
shall hinder me. I will fly to his neck! lie on his 
bosom! He called Margaret! He stood upon the 
threshold. In the midst, through the howling and 
clattering of hell, through the grim devilish scof&ng, I 
recognised the sweet, the loving tone. 


( 198 ) 

Faust. 
Tifi I. 

Ma.rga.set. 
'Tis thou! Ah, say so once again! 

(clagping him,) 
Tis he ! 'Tis he ! Whither is all my wretchedness ? 
Whither the agony of the dungeon ?— the chains ? 'Tis 
thou ! Thou com'st to save me. I am saved ! — ^There 
again already is the street, where I saw you for the first 
time ; and the cheerful garden, where I and Martha 
waited for you. 

Faust, striving to take her away. 
Come along ! come along ! 

Margaret. 
Oh tarry ! I like to tarry where thou tarriest. 

(caressing him.) 
Faust. 
Haste ! If you do not make haste, we shall pay 
dearly for it. 

Margaret. 
What! you can no longer kiss? So short a time 
away from me, my love, and already forgotten how to 
kiss ? Why do I feel so sad upon your neck ? when, in 
other times, a whole heaven came over me from your 
words, your looks ; and you kissed me as if you were 
going to smodier me ! Kiss me ! or I will kiss you ! 

(She embraces him,) 


( 199 ) 

woe ! your lips are cold, — are dumb. Where have 
you left your love? who has robbed me of it? 

(She turns from hxm,) 

Faust, 

Come ! follow me ! take courage, my love. I will 

press thee to my heart with thousandfold warmth — 

only follow me ! I ask thee but this. 

Margaret, (turning to him,) 

And is it thou, then ? And is it thou, indeed ? 

Faust. 
Tis I. Come along ! 

Margaret. 

You undo the fetters, you take me to your bosom 
again ! How comes it that yO\x are not aftaid of me ? 
And do you then know, my love, n^hom you are free- 
ing? 

Faust. 

Come, come, the depth of night is already passing 
away. 

Margaret. 

I have killed my mother, I have drowned my child. 
Was it not bestowed on thee and me?--* on the^ too? 
'Tis thou ! I scarcely believe it. Give me thy handi 
It is no dream, thy dear hand! — but oh, *tis damp! 
wipe it off. As it seems to me, there is blood on it. 
Oh, Grod, what hast thou done ? Put up thy sword ! 

1 pray thee, do ! 


( SOO ) 

Faust. 

Let by-gones be by-gones. Thou wilt kill me. 

Margaret. 

No, you must remain behind. I will describe the 
graves to you ; you must see to them the first thing 
to-morrow. Give my mother the best place; — ^my 
brother close by ; — ^me, a little on one side, only not 
too fiir off! And the little one on my right breast ; no 
one else will lie by me. To nestle to thy side, — that 
were a sweet, a dear delight ! But nothing will ever go 
right with me again. I feel as if I were irresistibly 
drawn to you, and you were thrusting me off. And 
yet 'tis you ; and you look so good, so kind. 

Faust. 
If you feel that 'tis I, come along. 

Margaret. 
Out there ? 

Faust. 
Into the free air ! 

Margaret. 
If the grave is without, if death lies in wait, — then 
come ! Hence into the eternal resting place, and not a 
step farther. — Thou art now going away ? O Henry, 
could I but go too ! 

Faust. 
Thou canst ! Only consent ! The door stands open. 


( 201 ) 

Margaret. 

I dare not go out ; there is no hope for me. What 

avails it flying ? They are lying in wait for me. It 

is so miserable to be obliged to beg, — and, what is 

worse, with an evil conscience, too. It is so miserable 

to wander in a strange land, — and they will catch me, 

do as I wiU» 

Faust. 

I will stay with thee. 

Margarkt. 

Quick, quick ? Save thy poor child. Away ! Keep 

the path up by the brook — over the bridge — into the 

wood — to the left where the plank is — in the pond. 

Only quick and catch hold of it! it tries to rise! it 

is still struggling ! Help! help! 

Faust. 

Collect thyself, I beg. Only one step, and thou art 

free. 

Margaret. 

Were we but past the hill ! There sits my mother 
on a stone — my brain grows chill ! — there sits my mo- 
ther on a stone, and waves her head to and fro. She 
signs not, she nods not, her head is heavy ; she slept 
so long, she'll wake no more. She slept that we might 
enjoy ourselves. Those were pleasant times ! 

Faust. 

As no prayer, no persuasion, is here of any avail, I 
will risk the bearing thee away. 


1 

4 


( 902 ) 

Mabgaret. 

Let me alone ! No, I endure no violence ! Lay not 
hold of me so murderously ! Time was, you know, 
when I did all to pleasure you. 

Faust. 

The day is dawning ! My love ! my love ! 

Margaret. 

Day ! Yes, it is growing day ! The last day is 

pressing in ! It was to he my wedding-day ! Tell no 

one that thou hadst heen with Margaret already. Woe 

to my garland ! It is all over now ! We shall meet 

again, but not at the dance. The crowd thickens ; it is 

not heard. The square, the streets, cannot hold them. 

The bell tolls ! — the staff breaks ! How they bind and 

seize me! Already am I hurried off to the blood-seat! 

Already quivering for every neck is the sharp steel 

which quivers for mine. Dumb lies the world as the 

grave ! 

Faust. 
Oh that I had never been bom ! 

Mephistofheles appears within. 
Up! or you are lost. Profitless hesitation! Lin- 
gering and prattling! My horses shudder; the mom* 

ing is gloaming up. 

Margaret. 

What rises up from the bottom ? He ! He ! Send 

him away ! What would he at the holy place ? He 

would me ! 


( 203 ) 

Faust. 


Thou art to live ! 


Margaret. 

Judgment of God! I have given myself up to thee. 

Mephistopheles to Faust. 

Come! come! I will leave you in the lurch with 

her. 

Margaret. 

Thine am I, Father ! Save me ! Ye Angels ! Ye 

Holy Hosts, range yourselves round ahout, to guard 

me! Henry! I am horror-struck for thee. 

Mephistopheles. 

She is judged! 

\oicE from above. 

Is saved ! 

Mephistopheles to Faust. 

Hither to me ! 

(disappears with Faust.^ 

Voice from within, dying away. 
Henry! Henry! 


NOTES. 

[If the reader does not require explanation, there seems no 
necessity for intruding it on him or breaking any interest 
he may happen to feel in the work. In the text, there- 
fore, I have omitted all reference to the notes. — A. H.] 


NOTES. 


Prologue in Heaven, 

Page 1. Prologue in Heaven,"] — The idea of this 
prologue is taken from the Book of Job, chapters 1st 
and 2nd. " It is worthy of remark/* says Dr. Schu- 
bart, " that in the guise in which the poet introduces 
his Mephistopheles, a great difference is to be seen 
between his mode of treating the principle of evil and 
that followed by Klopstock, Milton, and Lord Byron 
in Cain. It has also been a matter of course, to 
hold to one side only of the biblical tradition, which 
represents Satan as an angel of light fallen through 
pride and haughtiness, endeavouring to disturb the 
glorious creation of the Supreme Being. Goethe, on 
the contrary, has adhered rather to the other side of 
tradition, of which the Book of Job is the groundwork, 
according to which Satan or the Devil forms one of 
the Lord's Host, not as a rebel against his will, but 
as a powerful tempter, authorised and appointed as 
such &c." (Vorlesungen), We are also called upon 
to admire the propriety of the parts assigned to the 
Archangels in the Introductory Song. Dr. Hinrichs 
shows some anxiety to establish that The Lord depicted 


( 208 ) 

by Goethe, is The Lord of Christianity. On this sub- 
ject he has the following note, which, Retsch's Out- 
lines being well known in this country, seems worth 
copying : — " That The Lord in this poem is the Chris- 
tian God, and therefore the Divine Spirit, Cornelius 
also signifies in the . title-page of his Illustrations of 
Faust, where the Lord, in the middle of an unequal 
square, begirt by a half circle of angels, bears the triple 
crown upon his head and the terrestrial globe in his 
left hand ; whilst in Retsch's Illustrations of Faust, the 
Lord without the triple crown and the cross, does not 
express the Christian God, and for that reason the 
conception is not embraced by it." — (Fori, p. 36.) 

p. 2, But thy angels. Lord, respect the mild going of 
thy day.'] — Boten is literally, messengers ; but angels, 
ayyekoi, are the messengers of God. The use of the 
word going, in the above sense, is a plagiarism : — 

" The day is placid in its going, 
So a lingering s'ireetness bound 
Like a river in its flowing" — Wordsuwrth. 

p. 4. A good man in his dark perplexity, ^c.] — The 
same exalted confidence in human nature is expressed 
in another passage of Goethe's works: — 

" Wenn einen Menscben die Natur erhoben 
1st es kein Wunder, wenn ihm viel gelingt; 
Mann muss in ihm die ^{acht des Schopfers loben 
Der schwachen Thon zu Alcher Ehre-bringt: 
Doch wenn ein Mann von alien Lebensproben 
Die sauerste besteht, sich selbst bezwingt; 
Dann kann man ihn mit Freuden Andem zeigen, 
Und sagen : Das ist er, das ist sein eigen.'*— 

Geheimni$iie. 


( 209 ) 

p. 5. The Scoffer is the least offensive to wie.] — Shelley 
translates Schalk, rogue y but this certainly does not 
convey the character of Mephistopheles, nor am I aware 
of any English word that would. The meaning must 
be : I prefer a roguish devil who sneers or scoffs at my 
works to one who openly defies. 

p. 5, The creative essence ^c.'] — It is quite impossi- 
ble to translate this passage, and I have never seen a 
satisfactory explanation of it. Das JVerdende is lite- 
rally The Becoming, but rverden is rather the Greek 
ytvofiai than the English to become. The following 
extract from Coleridge's Aids to Reflections, may help 
the reader to a better understanding of the word. 
After saying : " The scheme of grace and truth that 
became through Jesus Christ" &c. he adds by way of 
note to the word became: " the Greek word lytvtro 
unites in itself the two senses of began to exist and was 
made to exist. It exemplifies the force of the middle 
voice, in distinction from the verb reflex. In answer 
to a aote on John, i. 2., in the Unitarian version of the 
New Testament, I think it worth noticing that the 
same word is used in the very same sense by Aristo- 
phanes in that famous parody on the cosmogonies of 
of the mystic poets, or the creation of the finite, as 
delivered or supposed to' be delivered in the Cabiric or 
Samothracian Mysteries, in the Comedy of the Birds : 

yivir "Olpavoc, HVcavdc re 
Kai r^. 

Aids <^c. 9.d Edit, p. 18. 

A friend, whom I consulted about this passage, sent 
me the following note: — "Creation's energy — ever 

p 


( 210 ) 

active and aKve — encircle you with the joyous bounds 
of love — and that which flits before you, a fluent 
and changeful phantom, do ye flx by the power of 
enduring thought!" I back this translation against 
yours ; but then I have picked up a dropped feather 
from the spicy nest of the phoenix, Coleridge : " The 
particles that constitute the size, the visibility of an 
organic structure, are in perpetual flux. They are to the 
combining and constitutive power, as the pulses of air 
to the voice of a discourser, or of one who sings a 
roundelay. The same words may be repeated ; but in 
each second of time the articulated air hath passed 
away, and each act of articulation appropriates and 
gives momentary form to a new and other portion. 
As the column of blue smoke from a cottage chimney 
in the breathless summer noon — or the steadfast-seem- 
ing doud on the edge-point of a hill in the driving 
air current, which momently condensed and recom- 
posed is the common phantom of a thousand successors 
{schwankende Erscheinung,) such is the flesh (and every 
organised body) which our hod\ly eyes transmit to us, 
which our Palates taste, which our Hands touch." — 
Aids ^c, p. 392. 

p. 5. / like to see the Ancient One occasionalty.']-^ 
Shelley translates den Alten^ the Old Fellow. But the 
term may allude merely to " The Ancient of Days," 
and is not necessarily a disrespectful one. In allusion 
to Mephistopheles* liking to see The Lord occasionally, 
Dr. Hinrichs observes : *' A fallen angel, as Shake- 
speare himself says, is still an angel, who likes to see 
the Lord occasionally, and avoids breaking with him, 
wherefore we find Mephistopheles in heaven amongst 
the host." — ^p. 37. 


( 211 ) 

The following passage occurs in Falk : *' Yet even 
the clever Madame de Stael was greatly scandalised 
that I (Goethe) kept the devil in such good humour. 
In the presence of God the Father, she insisted upon it, 
he ought to be more grim and spiteful. What will she 
say if she sees him promoted a step higher — ^nay, per- 
haps, meets him in heaven ?*' 

First Scene in Fausfs Study. 
p. 7. The opening scene in the Study is the only 
part in which the Faustus of Marlow hears any simi- 
larity to the Faust of Goethe. I give it, with the 
Chorus, in which an outline of the traditional story is 
sketched : 

ENTER CHORUS. 

Not marching in the fields of Tharsimen, 
Where Mars did mate the warlike Carthagen ; 
Nor sporting in the dalliance of love,' 
In courts of kings, where state is overturned ; 
Nor in the pomp of proud audacious deeds. 
Intends our muse to vaunt his heavenly verse ; 
Only this, gentles, we must now perform, 
The form of Faustus' fortunes, good or bad : 
And now to patient judgments we appeal. 
And speak for Faustus in his infancy, 
Now is he born of parents base of stock. 
In Germany, within a town call'd Rhodes : 
At riper years to Wittenburg he went, 
So much he profits in divinity. 
That shortly he was grac'd with Doctor's name. 
Excelling all, and sweetly can dispute 
In th' heavenly matters of theology : 
Till, swoln with cunning and a self-conceit, 

p2 


( 212 ) 

His waxen wings did mount above his reach ; 
And melting heavens conspired his overthrow : 
For falling to a devilish exercise, 
And glutted now with learning's golden gifts, 
He surfeits on the cursed necromancy. 
Nothing so sweet as magic is to him, 
Which he prefers before his chiefest bliss, 
Whereas his kinsman chiefly brought him up. 
And this the man that in his study sits. 

ACT THE FIRST. — SCENE I. 

Faustus in his Study, 

Faust. Settle thy studies, Faustus, and begin, 
To sound the depth of that thou wilt profess ; 
Having commenced, be a divine in show, 
Yet level at the end of every art, 
And live and die in Aristotle's works. 
Sweet analytics, 'tis thou hast ravish'd me. 
Bene disserere est fines logicis. 
Is, to dispute well, logic's chiefest end ? 
Affords this art no greater miracle ? 
Then read no more ; thou hast attain'd that end, 
A greater subject fitteth Faustus' wit : 
Bid economy farewell : and Galen come. 
Be a physician, Faustus ; heap up gold, 
And be eterniz'd for some wond'rous cure ; 
Summum bonum medicinae sanitas ; 
The end of physic is our bodies' health. 
Why, Faustus, hast thou not attain'd that end ? 
Are not thy bills hung up as monuments. 
Whereby whole cities have escap'd the plague, 
And thousand desperate maladies been cur'd ? 


( 218 ) 

Yet art thou still but Faustus and a man. 
Could'st thou make men to live eternally, 
Or, being dead, raise them to life again, 
Then this profession were to be esteem'd. 
Physic farewell. Where is Justinian ? 
Si una eademque res legatur duobus, 
Alter rem, alter valorem rei, &c. 
A petty case of paltry legacies. 
Exhereditari filium non potest pater, nisi, &c. 
Such is the subject of the institute. 
And universal body of the law. 
This study fits a mercenary drudge, 
Who aims at nothing but external trash, 
Too servile and illiberal for me. 
When all is done, divinity is best. 

Jerome's bible, Faustus : view it well. 
Stipendium peccati mors est : ha! stipendium, &c. 
The reward of sin is death : that's hard. 
Si peccdsse negamus, fallimur, et nulla est in nobis 

Veritas, 
If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and 

there is no truth in us. 
Why then belike we must sin, 
And so consequently die. 
Aye, we must die an everlasting death. 
What doctrine call you this ? Che, sera, sera : 
What will be, shall be ; divinity adieu. 
These metaphysics of magicians. 
And necromantic books are heavenly ! 
Lines, circles, letters, characters : 
Aye, these are those that Faustus most desires. 
Oh ! what a world of profit and delight, 
Of power, of honour, and omnipotence. 
Is promised to the studious artisan ! 


( 214 ) 

All things that move between the quiet pole. 
Shall be at my command. Emperors and kings 
Are but obey*d in their several provinces ; 
But his dominion that exceeds in this, 
Stretches as far as doth the mind of man : 
A sound magician is a demigod. 
Here tire my brains to get a deity. Center Weigner,) 

(Marlow's fVorks, vol. ii. J 

Lord Byron did not understand German, and has 
asserted that all he knew of Faust was from a viva 
voce translation of parts of it by Monk Lewis. Goethe, 
however, as is well known, always considered Manfred 
to be founded upon Faust. (See ByrofCs Works, last 
edit. vol. xi. p. 71.) All three works, however, are 
so essentially distinct, that I see not the slightest 
ground for impugning either Goethe's or Byron's ori- 
ginality. Byron also terms the Deformed Transformed 
a Faustish kind of drama; and in some sense almost 
every thing he wrote might be called Faustish. 

p. 8. / have therefore devoted myself to magic,'] — 
Goethe tells us in his Memoirs, that, whilst confined by 
ill-health, he and a Miss von Klettenberg, with whom he 
appears to have had a sort of liaison at the time, read 
through several books on alchemy : e. g. Welling's 
Opus Mago-Cabalisticum, Theophrastus Paracelsus, 
Basilius Valentinus, Helmont, Starkey, and the Aurea 
Catena Homeri.* The study of these writers subse- 
quently induced Goethe to put up a small chemical 
apparatus, of which he says : " now were certain in- 

* Doring (p. 72) mentions the circumstance and connects it with 
Faust. 


( 315 ) 

gredients of the Macrocosmus and Microcosmus dealt 
with after a strange fashion." In his Farbenlehre, 
also, he enters upon an animated defence of natural 
magic. It is clear from many passages in his Memoirs, 
that the reflections on the insufficiency of knowledge 
which he has here put into the mouth of Faust, were 
his own at one period of his life, though he subse- 
quently attained to a better estimate of it. For in- 
stance : " The remarkable puppet-show fable of Faust, 
found many an answering echo in my breast. I too 
had ranged through the whole round of knowledge, 
and was early enough led to see its vanity." 

p. 9. Nostradamus J] — The following account of 
this worthy is given in the Conversations-Lexicon : — 
" Nostradamus, properly Michel Notre Dame, born 
in 1503, at St, Remy in Provence, of a family of 
Jewish origin, studied medicine, applied himself some- 
what to quackery, and fell at last into the favourite 
malady of his age, astrology. The prophecies which 
from his seclusion at Salon he made known in rhymed 
quatrains under the title of " Centuries of the World," 
excited great notice by their style and their obscurity. 
Henry the Second, King of France, sent for the author, 
and rewarded him royally. When, subsequently, this 
monarch was wounded in a tournament, and lost his 
life, men believed that the prophecy of this event was 
to be found in the 35th quatrain of the First Century : 

" Le lion jeune le vieux surmontera, 
£n camps bellique par singuUer duel, 
Dans cage d'or les yeux lui crevera, 
Deux plaies une, puis mourir niort cruelle." 


( 216 ) 

The most distinguished persons of his time visited 
him at Salon. Charles the Ninth appointed him his 
physician. There were not wanting people, however, 
who made light of his prophecies. So late as 1781 
they were prohibited by the Papal Court, because the 
downfall of Papacy was announcad in them. He died 
at Salon in 1565." — fConversatians^Lexicon, Tit, Nos- 
tradamus,) 

p. 9 and 10. Macrocosm, and Spirit of the Earth or 
Microcosm,'] — Dr. Hinrichs says : — " The Macrocosm 
signifies Nature, as such, and is opposed to Micro- 
cosm, as man.*' — p. 59. But I incline to think that 
Macrocosm means the Universe, and the Spirit of 
Earth the Earth generally. Thus Falk, in accounting 
for Faust's weakness in the presence of the latter, says» 
" The mighty and maniform universality of the earth 
itself — that focus of all phenomena, which at the same 
time contains within itself sea, mountain, storm, earth- 
quake, tiger, lion, lamb. Homer, Phidias, Raphael, 
Newton, Mozart, and Apelles — whom, appear when 
and where it might, would it not strike with trembling, 
fear, and awe?" — p. 247. The Ganzen (I am here 
adopting the gloss of a friend) is the Omneity of the 
metaphysicians, and Eins in dem Andem wirJct und lebty 
is The Immanence of All in each of Plato. 

But the best commentary on the whole of the passage 
in which these words occur is to be found in the first 
chapter of Herder's Ideen, who (according to Falk) re- 
ceived many of his notions from Goethe. The analogy of 
the following passage is sufficiently marked : " When, 
therefore, I open the great book of Heaven and see 
before me this measureless palace, which alone, and 


( ^17 ) 

everywhere, the Godhead only has power to fill, I con- 
clude, as undistractedly as I can, from the whole to the 
particular, from the particular to the whole." — (/rfeen, 
B, 1. C. 1.) The Spirits* chaunt probably suggested 
Shelley's 

" Nature's vast plan — the web of human things, 
Birth and the grave /" 

In Dodsley's Collection of Old Play's (Vol. V.) is 
" A Moral Mask," entitled " Microcosm," by Thomas 
Nabbs, in which Nature, Earth, Fire, Water, &c. &c. 
figure as dramatis personae. 

p. 10. A cold shuddering <^c.] — 

" Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my 
bones to shake. 

" Then a spirit passed before my face : the hair of my flesh 
stood up." — ( The Book of Job, ch. iv.) 

p. 13. Enter Wagner/] — The traditional Faust had a 
disciple or pupil named Wagner or Wagenar ; who is 
thus described in Cayet's Translation of Widman : ** Le 
Docteur Faust avoit un jeune serviteur qu*il avoit eleve 
quand il etudioit a Wittenberg que vit toutes les illu- 
sions de son maitre Faust, toutes ses magies et tout 
son art diabolique. II etoit un mauvais gar9on, cou- 
reur et debauche du commencement qu'il vint de- 
meurer a Wittenberg: il mendoit, et personne ne le 
vouloit prendre a cause de sa mauvaise nature; le 
gar9on se nommoit Christofle Wagner, et fut des lors 
serviteur du Dr. Fauste ; il se tint tres bien avec lui, 
ensorte que le Dr. Fauste Tappeloit son fils : il alloit 
ou il vouloit, quoiqu'il allat tout boitant et de travers." 


( 218 ) 

— Dr. Hinrichs has a strange theory about this cha- 
racter. In bis opinion, Faust represents Philosophy, 
and Wagner, Empiricism ; Philosophy being Germany, 
and Empiricism all the rest of the world. In weighing 
this compliment to foreigners, it will be bom in mind 
that EmpirikeTf in German philosophy, means some- 
thing very different from quack. Tenneman uses it as 
a synonime for experimentalist. 

p. 14. In which ye crisp the shavings of humanity, "] — 
The phrase knitzel kraiiseln is one about which the 
greatest variety of opinion exists, but the two highest 
authorities substantially agree ; — 

« Vos discours qui brillent d'un si faux eclat, dans 
lequel vous etalez les ornements les plus factices de 
Tesprit humain, &c. Krduscln, rendre crepu, ffiser, 
Schnitxelf ce sont des decoupures de papier. En les 
tordant en differens sens on pent en feire des ornements, 
meme des fleurs, mais ces fleurs n'ont aucune fraicheur. 
Le poete les compare done avec les omemens d'une 
rhetorique afiectee. Une des beautes de ce passage 
c*est la singularity de la rime krduseln et saiiseln, laquelle 
a son tour aura amene les expressions un peu bizarre 
du second Vers." — (M. de ScMegel ^private letter.) 

*^ Your fine speeches in which you ruffle up man's 
poorest shreds (in which you repeat the most miserable 
trifles in candy ed language,) are comfortless,*' &c. — 
CDr, Jacob Grimm — private letter). The analogy be- 
tween this passage and the si vis mejlere <^c. of Horace, 
will suggest itself to every one. 

p. 15. My friend, past ages are to us a hook with 
seven seals, ^c] — This speech also is one of consider- 
able dilflculty. Good critics are not wanting who 


( 219 ) 

contend that der Herren eigntr Geist means the spirit 
of certain great persons or lords of the earth exercising 
a wide-spread influence on their times, and that eine 
Haupl-iind StcuUs^Action means a grand political in- 
trigue. But I have it on indisputable authority, that 
Haupt-und Staats-action was the name given to a de* 
scription of drama formerly well-known in Germany. 
Dr. Grimm's note upon this passage is : " Ein Kehricht- 
JasSf &c. a dust-vat (dirt-basket) and a lumber-room, 
and at best a historico-pragmatical play, with excellent 
moral maxims, as they are fit for a puppet-show.*' M. 
de Schlegel says : " Haupt-und Stoats- Action : C'est 
le titre qu'on afHchait pour les drames destines aux 
marionettes, lorsqu' ils traitaient des sujets heroiques et 
historiques." 

p. 17. Something foreign to it is ever clinging to the 
noblest conception, ^c] — 

" But must needs confess 


That 'tis a thing impossible to frame 
Conceptions equal to the soul's desires ; 
And the most difficult of tasks to keep 
Heights which the soul is competent to gain. 
— Man is of dust ; ethereal hopes are his, 
Which, when they should sustain themselves aloft, 
Want due consistence; like a pillar of smoke. 
That with majestic energy from earth 
Rises; but, having reached the thinner air, 
Melts, and dissolves, and is no longer seen." — 

Excursion, 

p. 17. The glorious feelings which gave us life, Spc,'] — 
No one who has ever indulged in day-dreaming or felt 
the beau ideal of fancy crumble away before the ugly 
real of life — no one, in short, who is not a mere trockne 


( 220 ) 

Schleicher J like Wagner, will require any illustration of 
this paragraph. But I may venture to mention, as asso- 
ciated in my own mind with it, Schiller's Poem on Life 
and Ideality, and Shelley's Ode on Intellectual Beauty. 
Goethe, also, expressing the same sentiment, observes 
in his Memoirs : " Ordinarily, when our soul-concert 
is most spiritually attuned, the harsh grating tones of 
the world strike in, in the most overpowering and 
boisterous manner, and the contrast which is ever se- 
cretly going on, suddenly coming forth, only influences 
the more sensibly on that account." 

p. 19. As when the moonlight breathes,'] — 

" How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon that bank." 

Merchant of Venice. 

This line, and Lear's — 

" Pray you, undo this button— thank you, Sir;" 

have been cited as alone sufficient to place Shakespeare 
in the first rank of poetry— I think, by Leigh Hunt. 
The line is also alluded to in what he terms the gos- 
sipping Preface to the late edition of his works ; and a 
very charming bit of gossipping it is. 

p. 19. Another day ^c] — 

" Another day is gone, and other palms are won." 

Wordsworth, 

This mode of iteration seems preferable to the repeti- 
tion of new, 

p. 20. The gorgeousness of the many artfully-wrought 
images, ^c.]— " I remember seeing a beautiful silver 
goblet of the kind— i. e. one contrived for the trial of 
a guest's powers of breath and drinking— at Berne in 
Switzerland, for sale, alas, second-hand, in an old shop. 


( 221 ) 

It was so contrived, that the wine flowed down a chan- 
nel into the main reservoir, and in its course turned a 
mill, on the sweeps of which the drinker's eyes would 
be directed, if in their natural position, during the pull 
(zug). — (A^ote by a friend.) I need do no more than 
name the Blessed Bear of Bradwardine. The phrase 
with liquid brown is imitated from Ford's : — 

" The cup with liquid purple overflowing." 

But perhaps with its brown flood would be best. 

p. 22. A longing inconceivably sweet, ^c] — Compare 
the splendid passage in Tintern Abbey, beginning — 

" Though changed no doubt from what I was when first 
I came amongst these hills," &c. 

p. 26. The painted vessels»'\ — 

" The painted vessels glide." 

Dryden — I believe, but I cannot find the place. The 
allusion to the war in Turkey, and the other townman's 
reply, are supposed by one of the commentators to be 
a sneer at the indifference manifested as to the war of 
Grecian independence. I am afraid this ingenious 
writer forgot that the first part of the poem was written 
half a century ago. 

p. 28. Hail in flakes. "] — I am SLfrsiid flakes is not the 
proper term here — in Streifen means in belts or sec- 
tions ; and it may be as well to mention, that what I have 
translated hail (komiges Eises^) is literally granulous ice. 
To understand Faust's position in this speech, the 
reader must fancy a town on a river, like most of those 
upon the Rhine, with a sort of suburban village on the 
opposite bank. Falk makes this scene the groundwork 


( ^22 ) 

of a eommentary on the advantages of the Sabbath ; a 
fair specimen of the mode in which most of the com- 
mentaries on Faust are eked out. 

p. S3. There was a red lion, ^c] — Mr. T. Griffiths, 
of Kensington, who some short time since delivered an 
extremely interesting lecture on Alchymical Signs at 
the Royal Institution, enables me to furnish an expla- 
nation of this passage, which has generally been passed 
over as (what M. Sainte-Aulaire is pleased to term it) 
galimatias. The fact is, Goethe was too finished an 
artist to leave any incorrectness of any sort that he 
could avoid ; and I believe no m^ had a greater con- 
tempt for that school of poetasters, who are eternally 
appealing to what they call poetical license in justifica- 
tion of nonsense. Whether the technical terms of an 
exploded art should be used at all, is another question. 
I only say that, if used, they should be used properly. 

There was a red lion. — This expression implies the 
red stone, red mercury, or cinnabar, f 

A bold lover. — This expression alludes to the pro- 
perty the above compound possessed (according to 
the adepts) of devouring, swallowing, or ravishing 
every pure metallic nature or body. 

married. — This simply implies the conjoining or 
union of two bodies of opposite natures ; red and white 
were supposed male and female. 

to the lily. — This term denotes a preparation of 
antimony, called lilium minerale, or lilium paracelsi ; 
the white stone, or perhaps albified mercury, some- 
times called the " white fume," or the " most milk- 
white swanne.'* 

— in the tepid hath. — This denotes a vessel filled with 
heated water, or a " balneum mariae,* used as a very 


( 323 ) 

conv^ent means of elevating the body of an ahidel 
or alembic slowly to a gentle heat. 

— and then with open fiame. — This means the direct 
and fierce application of fire to the aludel upon its re- 
moval from the water bath, af^er the marriage had 
taken place betwixt the " red and the white." 

— tortured, — The adepts deemed their compounds 
sensible of pleasure and pain ; the heat of the open fire 
tortured the newly united bodies ; these therefore en- 
deavoured to escape, or sublime, which is the sense in 
which the word tortured is to be taken. 

— -from one bridal chamber, — This means the body 
of the aludel, in which they were first placed, and 
which had been heated to such a degree as to cause 
their sublimation. 

— to another, — This signifies the glass head or ca- 
pital placed on the body of the aludel, which received 
the sublimed vapours. Many heads were put on in 
succession, into which the vapours successively passed. 

If the young queen. — This implies the supposed royal 
offspring of the red lion and the lily, or its alliance to 
the noble metals — the sublimer products. 

— with varied hues then appeared, — During the pro- 
cess, various hues appeared on the sublimed compound, 
according to the order of their appearance the per- 
fection or completion of the great work was judged of. 
Purple or ruby were most esteemed, for being royal 
colours they were good omens. 

In the glass, — This means the glass head or capital 
of the aludel, as before noticed. 

This was the medicine^ — The term medicine was used 
to express, both the elixir to heal and cure human 
bodies, and that to transmute the bodies of metals into 
the most pure and fine gold and silver. 


( 224 ) 

. The passage divested of alchymical obscurity would 
read thus : — 

" There was red mercury, a powerfully acting body, 
united with the tincture of antimony, at a gentle heat 
of the water-bath. Then being exposed to the heat of 
the open fire in an aludel, a sublimate filled its heads in 
succession, which, if it appeared with varied hues, was 
the desired medicine." 

In a note to me, Mr. Griffiths adds : — " All the 
terms it contains may be found in alchymical works ; 
it is a very good specimen of mystical writing." 

p. 34. See how the green-girt cottages shimmer,'] — 
Those who don't like or don't understand shimmer may 
put glisten in the place of it ; but I am satisfied that I 
am true to my text {shimmern\ and John Philip Kemble 
himself was not more ready to go to the stake for his 
aches than I for my shimmer. But I shall hardly be 
called upon to do this, for the word is recognized by 
Tod and Jameson, and must be familiar to all readers of 
old Scotch or English poetry : 

" No shimmering sun here ever shone, 
No wholesome breeze here ever blew." 

I have to thank my friend Mr. Allan Cunningham for 
this example. He also tells me that it is sometimes 
written skimmer, 

p. 34. Every height on fire J] — 

^' Cover a hundred leagues and seem 
To set the hills on fire." — Wordsworth. 

'' The western wave was all a-llame, 
The day was well nigh done ! 
Almost upon the western wave. 

Rested the broad bright sun."— Coleridge. 


( 225 ) 

I believe most of my friends will thank me for enabling 
them to compare the emotions produced by sunrise in 
Wordsworth, with those produced by sunset in Faust. 

** What soul was his, when irom the naked top 
Of some bold headland, he beheld the sun 
Rise up and bathe the world in light ! He look'd — 
Ocean and earth, the solid frame of earth 
And ocean's liquid mass beneath him lay 
In gladness and deep joy. The clouds were touch'd 
And in their silent faces did he read 
Unutterable love. Sound needed none, 
Nor any voice of Joy ; his spirit drank 
The spectacle : sensation, soul, and form 
AU melted into him ; they swallowed up 
His animal being; in them did he live 
And by them did he live ; they were his life. 
In such access of mind ; in such high hour 
Of visitation from the livmg God 
Thought was not ; in enjoyment it expired. 
No thanks he breathed — he preferred no request ; 
Rapt into stiU communion that transcends 
The imperfect offices of prayer and praise 
His mind was a thanksgiving to the power 
That made him ; it was blessedness and love ! '* 

Reunion, B. i. 

p. 35. The realms of an exalted ancestry »'] —This al- 
ludes to a supposed divine origin of the soul or spirit 
of man, or to — " For I am in a strait betwixt two, 
having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which 
is better." — Phil. i. It was the suggestion of an able 
critic, though, that Ahnen might be the verb substan- 
tived, in which case it would mean of high aspirings or 
presejUiments, An anonymous commentator quotes the 


( 226 ) 

fi>HQy(ring lines apropos of the main sentiment in tbis 
speech : — 

** Und was die Menschen meinen, 
Das ist mir einerlei) 
Miichte mich mir selbst vereinen 
AUein wir sind 2U zwei ; 

" Und im lebend'gen Treiben 
Sind wir ein Hier und Dort, 
Das eine liebt zu bleiben 
Das andre mocbte fort." 

1 do not know whose they are. 

p. 37. — A line of ^re follows upon his track.'} — In his 
work on Colours already alluded to, Goethe gives the 
following explanation o£ this phenomenon: — " A dark 
object, the moment it withdraws itself, imposes on the 
eye the necessity of seeing the same form bright. In 
jest and earnest, I shall quote a passage from Faust 
which is applicable here. (Then follows the passage.) 
This had been written sometime, — from poetical in- 
tuition and in half consciousness, when, as it was 
growing twilight, a black poodle ran by my window 
in the street, and drew a clear shining appearance 
after him, — the undefined image of his passing form 
remaining in the eye. Such phenomena occasion the 
more pleasing surprise, as they present themselves 
most vividly and beautifully, precisely when we suffer 
our eyes to wander unconsciously. There is no one to 
whom such counterfeit images have not oflen appeared, 
but they are allowed to pass unnoticed ; yet I have 
known persons who teased themselves on this account, 
and believed it to be a symptom of the diseased state 


( 227 ) 

of their eyes, whereupon the explanation which I had it 
in my power to give inspired them with the highest 
satisfaction. He who is instructed as to the real nature 
of it, remarks the phenomenon more frequently, be- 
cause the reflexion immediately suggests itself. Schiller 
wished many a time that this theory had never been 
communicated to him, because he was every where 
catching glimpses of that the necessity for which was 
known to him." The phenomenon is now, at any rate, 
a recognised and familiar one. See Sir David Brewster^s 
Letters on Natural Magic ^ p, 20. 

In a note to the following lines in the Lay of the Last 
Minstrel, there is a strange story of a fiend appearing in 
the shape of a black dog : — 

^' For he was speechless, ghastly, wan, 
Like him of whom the story ran, 
He spoke the spectre-hound in Man." — Canto 6. 

p. 38. Even a wise man may become attached to a dog 
Tvhen he is well brought wp.] — " A bonny terrier that, 
sir ; and a fell chield at the vermin, I warrant him — 
that is, if he*s been weel entered, for it a* lies in that." 
*' Really, sir," said Brown, " his education has been 
somewhat neglected, and his chief property is being a 
pleasant companion." 

" Ay, sir ? that's a pity, begging your pardon, it*s a 
great pity that — beast or body, education should aye be 
mindedr— Guy Mannering. 

p. 39. It is common for men to deride^ ^c] — " It has 
oflen and with truth been said, that unbelief is an in- 
verted superstition, and our age suffers greatly by it. 

a 2 


( SS8 ) 

A noble deed is attributed to selfishness, an heroic 
action to vanity, an undeniable poetic production to a 
state of delirium; nay, what is still stranger, every 
thing of the highest excellence that conies forth, every 
thing most worthy of remark that occurs, is, so long as 
it is barely possible, denied/* — Goethe^ Farbenlehre. 

p. 40. We long for revelation which no where bums, 4*^-] 
— It is clear from Goethe's Memoirs and many other 
parts of his works, that he is here describing the work- 
ings of his own mind in youth ; that, when his spirit was 
tormented by doubts, he constantly referred to the Bible 
for consolation and found it there. It also appears that 
he occasionally struggled to penetrate below the surface 
in somewhat the same manner as Faust. ** So far as the 
main sense was concerned, I held by Luther's edition ; in 
particulars, I referred occasionally to Schmidt's verbal 
translations, and sought to make my little Hebrew as 
useful as I could." It is a singular fact that, next to 
the Bible, the book which Goethe was fondest of, and 
which confessedly exercised the greatest influence on 
his mind, was Spinosa. So constantly, indeed, was he 
studying this writer, that Herder on one occasion is 
said to have exclaimed to him, " Why you literally 
never read any Latin book but Spinosa!" 

In allusion to Faust's attempt to translate the Xoyoc, 
the German commentators are filled to overflowing 
with controversional divinity ; whilst the French trans- 
lator, M. Sainte-Aulaire, omits the whole passage as 
an unmeaning play of words. 

p. 42. KoholdJ] — Is a goblin or spirit supposed to 


( 229 ) 

inhabit the earth ; the same, I believe, as the gnome. 
Undine has been made familiar enough by La Motte- 
Fouque's tale so called. I cannot let slip this oppor- 
tunity of entering my protest against the French trans- 
lation by which this tale is principally known out of 
Germany. It is a mere paraphrase in a style the very 
opposite of the original. In the course of the voyage 
down the Danube, Madame De Montolieu has actually 
given a description of the persons of Bertha and Un- 
dine, which are not described at all in the text. But 
the mistranslations of which I most complain, are such 
as inbriinstig kussend by serrant sur son cceur, A lady 
might be supposed to know the difference without any 
reflection on her modesty. 

p. 43. Mepkistopkeles comes forward in the dress of a 
travelling scholar.~\ — " That Mephistopheles comes forth 
as a travelling scholar (scholasticus), and therefore as 
a philosopher, is not without significance. For on 
seeing him, Faust knows that he is approached as a 
friend, he himself being devoted to philosophy ; and 
even the expression fahrender scholast expresses the 
unquiet with which Faust is filled. The wandering 
about through the world — for example, of Jordanus, 
Bruno, &c. — is to be viewed with reference to internal 
restlessness, impelled by which these philosophers wan- 
dered unceasingly from place to place." — (Dr, Hin- 
ricKs Msth. Vorl p. 98.) 

p. 44. Flygod,'] — Meaning Beelzebub. The following 
note was given me by a friend. 

" y\^] ^y2, Baal Zebub, Fly-Baal, i. e. the God B^al 
as deus avtrruncus muscarum, 2 K. i. 2, 3, 16, — an 


( 2S0 ) 

oracular Deity of the Ekronited, similar to the Zcfi^c 
&ir6fivioc of the Greeks (Pausan. Eliac. c 14); or to the 
Deus Myiagros (Solin, c. 1). — Gesenius in voce, yQt 
He adds, it has been wcorrectly regarded as a name of 
reproach, and refers to Carpzov. Apparat. Antiq. Heb. 
497. However, it is sufficient for your purpose, that 
it has generally been so regarded. And never, since 
I was aware of this, have I seen a big booming blue- 
bottle fly without thinking of Satan." 

p. 44. A part of the part toldch in the beginning xoas 
ally ^c] — " And the earth was without form and void ; 
and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the 
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. 

*< And God said, Let there be light : and there was 
light. 

" And God saw the light, that it was good : and 
God divided the light from the darkness." — (Gen, c. 1.) 

** Granted, that day, proceeding from the original 
source of light, deserves all honour, because it invigo- 
rates, quickens, gladdow— still it does not follow, 
that darkness must be addressed and shunned as the 
evil principle, because it makes us uneasy, and lulls us 
to sleep : we rather see in such an effect the character- 
istics of sensuous beings controlled by phenomena." — 
(Goethe.) 

p. 45. That which is opposed to nothing,'] — Dr. Schu- 
bart cautions us against supposing that under the term 
nichts a complete void is intended, as it means merely 
the original state of things under the reign of Chaos. 

p. 45. From air^ water, earth, 4'C.] — " In the air, in 


. • 


( 281 ) 

the water, in the marshes, in the sand, — genera and spe* 
cies multiplied themselves, and I believe that they will 
continue to multiply in the same proportion with the 
course of discovery," — (Herder, Ideen zur Phiiosophie 
4'C. B. 2, c. 4.) 

p. 46. The Peniagram,'\ — The Pentagram, Pentalpha, 
or Drudenfuss, was a pentagonal figure like the fol- 
lowing : 


supposed to possess the same sort of power which used 
popularly to be attributed to the horseshoe amongst us. 
I owe the following quotation, in which the term oc- 
curs, to a friend : 

UXdrtav fxivroi iv a.^^ riay iwiorroXdv to " 'Eu Trpdr- 
Ttiv* vpov^riKEV. 01 de Tlv^ayopetoi " to 'YyiaivtLy'** kcll 
TO ye TpiwXovy TpiytavoVy to Zi dW^Xb^v to Yleyrdypafifiov^ 
f mffxPoXto wpoQ TOVQ OfM^o^ov^ k')^iavTO, vyeia trpoi 
avTUfv dfyofmiETO.** — {SchoL in Aristoph, Nub, 599.) 

p. 54. Since a stveet familiar tone, ^c] 

** My eyes are dim with childish tears, 
My heart is idly stirred, 
For the same sound is in my ears 
Which in those days I heard." — Wordsworth. 

p. 56. And what am J to do for you in return.^ — 
The actual or traditional compact was to the following 
effect : 

** Puis le D. Fauste re^oit son sang sur une tuile, et 
y met des charbons tout chauds, et ecrit comme s'ensuit 
ci-apres : 


( 33S ) 

*^ *' Jean Fauste, Docteur, reconnois de mk propre main 

manifestement pour une chose ratifiee, et ce en vertu 

de cet ecrit : qu'apre» que je me suis mis a ^p^culei* lea 

elemens, et apr^ lea dons qui m*ont ete distribuez et 

departis de la-haut : lesquels n'ont point trouve d'ha- 

bitude dans mon entendement. Et de ce que je n'ai 

peu ^tre enseigne autrement des hommes, lors je me 

suis pi'esentement adonne a un Esprit, qui s*appelle 

MephostophiUSf qui est valet du prince infernal en 

Orient, par paction entre lui et moi, qu'il m*addresse- 

roit et m'apprendroit, comme il m'etoit predestine, qui 

aussi reciproquement m'a promis de m*etre sujet en 

toutes choses. Partant et a Toj^iosite, je lui ai promis 

et lui certifie, que d'ici a vingt-quatre ans, de la date 

de ces pr^sentes, vivant jusques-1^ compl^tement^ 

comme il m'enseignera en son art et science, et en ses 

inventions me maintiendra, gouvernera, conduira, et 

me fera tout bien, avec toutes choses necessaires a mon 

corps, a mon ame, a ma chair, a mon sang et a ma 

sante: queje suis et serai sien a jamais. Partant, je 

renonce a tout ce qui est pour la vie du maitre celeste 

et de tons les hommes, et que je sois en tout sien. Pour 

plus grande certitude, et plus grande confirmation, j'ai 

ecrit la presente promesse de ma propre main^ et I'ai 

sous-ecrit de mon propre sang que je me suis tire ex- 

pressement pour ce faire, de mon sens et de mon juge- 

ment, de ma pensee et volonte, et Fai arr^te, scelle et 

testifie, etc/ — {Cayet's Widman, part i.) 

In Marlow's Faustus the instrument is formally set 
out. 

p. 57. But if thou hast food, ^c] — This passage has 
caused a good deal of puzzHng, though neither Falk 
nor Schubart seems to be aware of any difficulty : 


( 9S3 ) 

" I know thy rotten gifts» ^ays Faust. Which of 
thy fine goods of the earth wilFst thou offer me ? How 
could the like of thee ever he capable of measuring the 
unquiet of man's breast. Ha^ thou food to serve up 
which never satisfies? Or canst thou only show trees 
which daily bloom anew and bud again ? I loathe this 
foliage of yesterday, this tale, which, ever the same, 
is told in the morning, and in the evening die& away 
again — 

" Zeig mir die Frucfat die fauH eh' man sie hricht 
Und Baume die sich taglich neu begriinen." — 

Falk, p. 283. 

** This (Mephistopheles' promise) appears to Faust 
but mockery. What can a devil give a man to satisfy 
him, when he is not capable of giving it to himself? 
The gifts of a devil, he says, are but delusion, and melt 
away in the same manner as his quicksilver-like gold : 
thus he can only bestow fmits which woidd not rot 
before the plucking, but no ever-budding tree sprouts 
forth beneath his skill and fostering." — {Schubart, 
198.) 

None of the editions that I have ever seen make the 
hast du an interrogatory, as Falk seems to understand 
it. There are authorities, however, for construing it — 
Though thou hast, &c. It is also contended that : 

'^ Doch hast du Speise die nicht s'attigt, hast 
Du rothes Geld, &c. " 

is to be construed affirmatively : " However, thou hast 
food which never satisfies," &e. ;«— and that the zeig mir, 
&c. is ironical and tantamount to saying : ** This is all 
thou canst show me." But on this construction, I do 
not see how the inversion of the second hast da is to be 
justified, whilst the ansWer of Mephistopheks clearly 


( 234 ) 

implies that the zeig mir &c. was a demand on the 
part of Faust. The most probable supposition is, that 
Faust's meaning was pretty nearly the same as in the 
subsequent speech in which he expresses a wish to 
enjoy all that is parcelled out amongst mankind — ^pain 
and pleasure, success and disappointment, indifferently. 
Taking this wish into consideration, we may well sup- 
pose him saying: — " You can give nothing of any 
real value in the eyes of a man like me ; but if you 
have the common perishable enjoyments of humanity 
to bestow, let me have them." 

p. 58. Ai your feasU'] — I am told that this is the 
proper interpretation of beym Doctorsckmausy in allusion 
to the inauguration feast given on the taking of a de- 
gree. 

p. 62. I am not a hairs breadth higher, <^c.] — 
" Which of you by taking thought, can add one cubit 
to his stature." — Matth, vi. 27. 

p. 62. 1. 10. As all the French translators have mis- 
taken the word intended, I shall follow Gibbon's ex- 
ample, and give it in a learned language. The German 

H is Opx««c> and not, as the French translators 

suppose, Ilvyiy. 

p. 62. And am a proper manJ] — 
'' As proper a man as any in Venice." — Shakspeare. 

p. 63, Whose- overstrained striving o'erleaps, 4*^.] — 

" I have no spur 
To prick the sides of my intent, but only 
Vaulting Ambition, which overleaps itself 
And faXHa on the other side." — Macbeth. 


( 2S5 ) 

p. 64. A Student enters, 1 — This scene is a satire on 
the modes of instruction pursued in German Univer- 
sities, and is much admired. But the effect is in a 
great measure produced by the happy application of 
pedantic phrases and college slang, which are no more 
capable of being relished in England than such terms 
as wooden-spoony little-go, crammings or plucking^ in Ger- 
many. It is evident from many passages in his Me- 
moirs, that Goethe's early impressions of University 
pursuits were pretty nearly what he has put into the 
mouth of Mephistopheles ; nor, if we are to believe 
Falk, did his opinions change materially in afler-life : 

'* Our scientific men are rather too fond of details. 
They count out to us the whole consistency of the 
earth in separate lots, and are so happy as to have a 
different name for every lot. That is argil (fhonerde) ; 
that is quartz (keiselerde) ; that is this, and this is that. 
But what am I the better if I am ever so perfect in all 
these names ? When I hear them I always think of the 
old lines in Faust — 

* Encheiresin natura nennt's die Chemie 
Bohrt sich selber Esel und weiss nicht wie!' 

" What am I the better for these lots ? what for their 
names ? I want to know what it is that impels every 
several portion of the universe to seek out some other 
portion, — either to rule or to obey it, — ^and qualifies 
some for the one part and some for the other, accord- 
ing to a law innate in them all, and operating like a 
voluntary choice. But this is precisely the point upon 
which the most perfect and universal silence prevails." 

** Every thing in science," said he at another time, 
with the same turn of thought, <* is become too much 


( S36 ) 

divided into coinpartments. In our professors* chairs 
the several provinces (Fdcher) are violendy and arbi-> 
trarily severed, and allotted into half-yearly courses of 
lectures, according to fixed plans. The number of real 
discoveries is small, especially when one views them 
consecutively through a few centuries. Most of what 
these people are so busy about is mere repetition of 
what has been said by this or that celebrated prede- 
cessor. Such a thing as independent original know- 
ledge is hardly thought of. Young men are driven in 
flocks into lecture-rooms, and are crammed, for want of 
any real nutriment, with quotations and words. The 
insight which is wanting to the teacher, the learner is 
to get for himself as he may. No great wisdom or 
acuteness is necessary to perceive that this is an entirely 
mistaken path," 

I copy this from Mrs. Austin's forthcoming transla- 
tion, tlie sheets of which were kindly lent to me by her. 
One of the very last books in GoeUie's hands was this 
lady's translation of the German Prince's Tour, and 
I have heard that he spoke with high hope of the pro- 
gress that might be made by such talents as her's in 
bringing England better acquainted with Germany. 
He little thought how soon they were to be employed 
in constructing a monument to himself! Mrs. Austin's 
Falk will be enriched by ample notes, biographical, 
anecdotical, and explanatory ; but she omits the com- 
mentary on Faust, which indeed has little merit of any 
kind. 

p. 65. Spanish booUJ]^^l have been told by literary 
men in Germany that the Spanish boot was an instru- 
ment of torture, like the Scottish boot mentioned in 
Old Mortality (vol. ii. p. 406) ; but on subsequent 


( ^7 ) 

inquiry I find that the name used to be given to a 
common sort of boot fitting tight to the leg. 

p. 65, Then many a day will be spent in teaching 
you, Sfc.'] — " In logic it struck me as strange that I was 
so to pull to pieces, dismember, and, as it were, destroy 
those very operations of the mind which I had gone 
through with the greatest ease from my youth, in order 
to perceive the proper use of them." — (Goethe's Me- 
moirs.) 

** And all a rhetorician's rules, 
Teach nothing but to name hia tools." — Hudibras. 

p. 65. He who wishes to know and describe any thing 
living <^c.] — 

*^ Like following life in creatures we dissect, 
We lose it in the moment we detect." — Fope, 

p. 67. Five lectures every day."] — Five is the number 
of Courses of Lectures a young and eager student 
ordinarily attends at the outset. 

p. 67. As if the Holy Ghost were dictating to you,~\ — 
It is the custom in Germany for the professors to read 
slowly enough for their pupils to follow them with the 
pen. This is called dictating, and few professors can 
venture to depart from it. I am acquainted with a 
very eminent one who lost the greater part of his class 
by his contumacy. I have generally found that stu- 
dents who took down the lecture verbatim, knew very 
little of the substance of what had been said. 

p. 67. / cannot reconcile myself to jurisprudence,'] — 
Here again Goethe is repeating his own sentiments. 


( 288 ) 

He was originally destined by his father for the law, 
but it was only with the greatest reluctance that he 
could be brought to qualify himself for the necessary 
examination at Strasburg, where such examinations 
were comparatively light. He says, that he had no 
turn for any thing positive. — {Memoirs^ book ix.) I 
presume it is hardly necessary to add that the excla- 
mation, " Woe to thee that thou art a grandson,*' 
alludes to the artificial and complicated systems which 
people coming late into the world are pretty sure to 
find entailed upon them — as a lawyer, fond of my pro- 
fession, I must be excused for adding — unavoidably. 
The law that is born with us, means, I suppose, what 
in common parlance is called the law of nature. It 
may assist future translators, not versed in German 
jurisprudence, to be told, that Gesetz, in strictness, 
means enactment, and Recht, law or a rule of law, 
generally. Gesetz' und Rechte, therefore are both in- 
cluded under the term laws, 

p. 69. The spirit of medicine^ — It appears that Goethe 
associated a good deal with medical students at Stras- 
burg, and took considerable interest in the studies 
usually followed in connection with medicine. 

p. 73. AuerhojcKs wine-vaults in Leipzig, This 
place is still shown, and tradition says that the poet 
as well as the hero, Goethe as well as Faust, have 
caroused in it. Be this as it may, the scene in the 
poem appears to have been imitated from two or three 
distinct adventures recorded in the old histories of 
Faust, neither of which happened at Leipzig : 


( 239 ) 

" At the city of Prague is a publican's house, known 
by the sign of the Anchor, where the Doctor one day 
called as he was upon a tour. Seating himself among 
the travellers, in a short time he thus accosted them — 
' Gentlemen, would you like to partake of all kinds of 
foreign wines in the world?' The whole party, with 
one accord, cried out, * Yes, yes !' * Then will you 
first like to taste the French, Spanish, Rhenish, Ma- 
laga, or any other kind V continued he, ' whichever 
you most approve V 

" Upon this one of the guests exclaimed — * Doctor 
Faustus ! whatever wine you please to furnish. Doctor, 
we shall find some means of disposing of it.' Where- 
upon he begged them to provide him with plenty of 
bottles and glasses, and he would supply the rest. 
This being done^ he bored several holes in the table, 
and placing a funnel in each, he held the bottles under 
it, and decantered as much wine as they would contain. 
As he laid them down one after another, the delighted 
guests began to laugh heartily, and heartily did they 
regale themselves." — (Roscoes German Novelists, vol. i. 
p. 377.) The other adventure, in which the guests of 
Faust seize each other's noses mistaking them for 
grapes, is also told by Mr. Roscoe, but I prefer the 
quaintness of the old French version : 

<* Le Docteur Fauste avoit, en un certain lieu, invite 
des hommes principaux pour les traiter, sans qu'il eut 
apprete aucune chose. Quand done ils furent venus, 
ils virent bien la table couverte, mais la cuisine etoit 
encore froide. II se faisoit aussi des noces, le m^me 
soir, d'un riche et honn^te bourgeois, et avoient ete 
tons les domestiques de la maison empechez, pour bien 
et honorablement traiter les gens qui y etoient invitez. 


( «4« ) 

Ce que le Docteur Fauste aiant appris, coimnanda a 
son Esprit que de ces noces il lui i^port4t un service 
de vivres tout appretez, soit poissons ou aotres, qu'in- 
continent il les enlevit de la pour traiter ses botes. 
Soudain il y eut en la maision, ou Ton faisoit les noces, 
un grand vent par les cheminees, fen^tres et portes, qui 
eteignit toutes les chandelles. Apr^s que le vent fut 
cesse, et les chandelles derechef allumez, et qu'ils 
eurent vii d'ou le tumulte avoit ete, ils trouverent qu'il 
manquoit a un mets une pidce de roti, a un autre une 
poule, a un autre une oye, et que dans la chaudiere il 
manquoit aussi de grands poissons. Lors fiirent Fauste 
et ses invitez pourviis de vivres, mais le vin manquoit; 
toutefois non pas long-temps, car Mephaatophilh fut fort 
bien au voiage de Florence dans les caves de Fougres, 
dont il en apporta quantite ; mais apres qu'ils eurent 
mange, ils desiroient (qui est ce pour quoi ils etoient 
principalement venus,) qu'il leur fit pour plaisir quelque 
tour d*enchantemens. Lors il leur fit venir sur la table 
une vigne avec ses grappes de saison, dont un ehacun 
en prit sa part. II commanda puis apr^s de prendre 
un coiiteau, et le mettre a la racine, comme 8*ils 
Teussent voulu couper. Neanmoins, ils n'en pikrent 
pas venir a bout: puis apr^s, il s'en alia hors des 
etuves, et ne tarda gueres sans revenir ; lors ils s'arr^- 
terent tous et se tindrent Tun Tautre par le nez, et un 
coiiteau dessus. Quand done puis apr^s ils voulurent, 
ils piirent couper les grappes. Cela leur fut ainsi mis 
aucunement, mais ils eurent bien voulu qu*il les e^t fait 
venir toutes meures." — (Part iii. ch. 33.) 

It appears also from another passage of this veritable 
history, that Faust did, on one occasion, perform the 
feat which Altmayer (p. 87) speaks about; namely, 
ride out of a cellar on a cask. 


( 241 ) 

p. 75. Soar up. Madam Nightingale, give my sweet- 
heart ten thousand greetings for me,'] — The following is 
the song which Goethe must have had in his mind: — 

FRAU NACHTIGALL. 

" Nachtigal, ich hbr dich singen 
Das Herz mucht mir im Leib zerspringen, 
Komme docb und sag mir bald, 
Wie ich mich verhalten soil. 

** Nachtigal, ich seh dich laufen 
An dem Bachlein thust du saufen, 
Da tunkst dein klein Schn'ableiti ein 
Meinst es war der beste Wein. 

" Nachtigal, wo ist gut wohnen, 
Auf den Linden, in den Kronen, 
Bei der schon Frau Nachtigal, 
Grass mein ScKdlzchen tatisendmal." 

I take this song from the collection of Alte Deutsche 
UedeTy entitled Des Knaben Wunderhom^ compiled by 
MM. von Amim and Brentano. The plan was pro- 
bably suggested by Dr. Percy's Relics ; a book, by the 
by, which (translated and imitated by Burger and others) 
has exercised at least as great an influence on German 
literature as on our own. (See some interesting re- 
marks on this subject in the last edition of Words- 
worth's Works, vol. i. p. 329.) 

p. 77, Leipzig is the place, 4-c.] — This has been a 
standing joke against Leipzig ever since. It appears 
from his Memoirs, that when Goethe commenced his 
college studies at Leipzig, a great affectation of polite- 
ness prevailed amongst the towns-people. 

p. 78. Mr, Hans,'] — The devil, I believe. 

R 


( 24^ ) 

p. 8vS. IVitcKs Kitchen.'] — The best commentary on 
this scene is to be found in Retsch's Outlines. He 
represents the monkeys as something between the 
monkey and the baboon. I am not precisely aware 
what species of monkey the meerkatze really is. The 
term is thus used in a German translation of Lear. 
" Eine unvergleichliche Ausflucht fiir einen Huren- 
jager, seinen Meerkatzen-trieb den Sternen zur Last 
zu legen." — (Act i. sc. 2, in Edmund's Speech on 
Planetary Influences.) 

p. 90. At the feast, 4*c.] — Falk observes, in allusion 
to the text of these three lines, that Faust and Mephis- 
topheles are greeted in a tone which, through the 
diphthong au, bears a strong affinity to the language of 
monkeys. 

p. 90. Coarse beggars broth,] — " The breiten Bettel 
suppen have an ironical reference to the coarse supersti- 
tions which extend with a thick palpable shade amongst 
all nations throughout the whole history of the 
world."— (i^fl/it.) 

p. 92. Take the tail (wedelj here, <^c.] — Retsch re- 
presents Mephistopheles as holding a light sort of 
skreen or fan in his hand. 

p. 93, Oh! be so good as to glue the crawn^ ^c] — " A 
wish which, profoundly considered, sounds so politically, 
that one would swear the monkey-spirits had read the 
history of both the old Romish and the new empire, 
chapter by chapter, with all its dethronings and assassi- 
nations, from the beginning of the first to the end of the 
last war." — (Falk.) 


( 243 ) 

p. 95. Thmi atomy, ^ 

" Thou atomy, thou!" — Hen. V. Act v. sc. 4. 

p. 98. For a downright contradiction^ 4*^-] — Dr. Hin- 
rich's note on this passage is : "A system of philosophy 
which, like that of Hegel, begins with such a contra- 
diction, — for instance, Das Set/n ist Nichts, has the ad- 
vantage that it frightens away those who have no call 
for it, both wise men and fools.'* If this be an ad- 
vantage, I bear my willing testimony that Hegel pos- 
sesses it ; and I never yet met with any man whose 
call was strong enough to drag or propel him through 
the Enct/clopadie der Pkilosophiscen Wissenschaften, I 
once heard a singular illustration of Hegel's obscurity. 
He had proposed a toast at a public dinner, which it 
was the duty of the toast-master to give out. This 
functionary made several efforts and had more than 
one consultation with the philosopher, but was at 
length obliged to give up the undertaking in despair, 
and declared aloud that be did not understand a word 
of it. I heard this story told at a supper party in Ger- 
many by a very eminent Professor. 

p. 101. Margaret, '^ — Goethe's first love was called 
Margaret. I almost wish she had been called Elizabeth, 
that I might use the sweet English diminutive, Bessy. 
I cannot make up my mind to call her Peggy, which 
is the correct translation of Gretchen, As Margaret is 
supposed to belong to about the same rank in life as 
Jeannie Deans, it is also to be wished that she could be 
made to speak the same dialect, for even the most 
fastidious in such matters never seem to associate low 
Scotch with vulgarity. But here I should want the 

k2 


( 2U ) 

pen of my friend, the translator of Wilhelm Meister ; 
which, indeed, I have wanted often enough as it is. 
After all, the only real vulgarity is aifectation ; and I 
have therefore tried to make Margaret talk exactly as 
I think a girl of her condition would do. 

p. 102. All sorts of nonsense,'] — The word hrvrnhorium 
in the text is certainly not German, nor did I ever 
meet with it before. It is probably taken from the 
French word brimborion as used in the following pas- 
sage, which I hit upon by accident : " Ces pendardes-la, 
avec leur pommade, ont, je pense, envie de me ruiner. 
Je ne vois partout que blancs d'oeufs, lait virginal, et 
mille autres brimbortons que je ne connois point." — (JLes 
Precieuses Ridicules, Act i. sc. 4.) 

p. 108. There was a king in Tkule,'] — Many of the 
songs in Faust, this amongst others, were not originally 
written for it. Goethe mentions in his Memoirs that 
he sung this song with considerable applause in a 
social meeting. 

p. 120. / would change rings with you myself J] — ^In 
some countries of Germany the bridegroom, instead of 
placing the ring on the finger of the bride, gives one to 
her and receives one in return. 

p. 120. Two witnessesJ] — Alluding to the rule of the 
civil law, which forms the basis of all the German 
systems. — Unius responsio testis omnino non audiatur^ 
{Cod. 4, 20, 9.) 

p. 131. I tremble all ofoer*'] — The best translation of 


( 24A ) 

Mich uberldtiJVs would be by an expression which I once 
heard a very pretty little friend of mine employ, though 
I am not aware that there is classical authority for it : 
" I felt a sort of all-overishness," 

p. 135. From the wall-like rocks, from the damp under- 
wood,^ — 

" How divine, 
The liberty for firail, for mortal man, 
To roam at large among unpeopled glens 
And mountainous retirements, only trod 
By devious footsteps ; regions consecrate 
To oldest time ! and, reckless of the storm 
That keeps the raven quiet in her nest, 
Be as a presence or a motion — one 
Among the many there ; and, while the mists 
Flying, and rainy vapours, call out shapes 
And phantoms from the craigs and solid earth, 
As fast as a musician scatters sounds 
Out of an instrument; and while the streams" — 

Excursion^ 

" And he, with many feelings, many thoughts, 
Made up a meditative joy, and found 
Religious meanings in the forms of nature." 

Coleridge, SyhyUine Leaves, p. 65. 

p. 138. Were I a bird, S^c,'\ — The song alluded to is 
the following : — 

" Wenn ich ein Voglein war, 
Und auch zwei Fliiglein h'att. 
Flog ich zu dir; 
Weils aber nicht kann seyn 
Bleib ich all hier. 


( 246 ) 

" Bin ich gleich weit von dir. 
Bin ich doch im Schlaf bei dir, 
Und red mit dir; 
Wenn ich erwachen thu, 
Bin ich allein. 

*' Es veigeht keine stund in der nacfat. 

Da mein Herze nicht erwacht, 

Und an dich gedenkt, 

Dass du mir viel tausendmal 

Dein Herze geschenkt.'* 

(Herder's Volkslieder, B. 1, p. 67. — 
Wunderhonij Part 1, p. 231.) 

p. 139. The twin pair, which feed among roses.'] — 
•* Thy two breasts are like two young ro;tfes that are 
twins, which feed among the lilies." — {Song of Solomon, 
ch. iv. V. 5.) " Je ne vous conseille pas de traduire 
cela litteralement. On jeterait les hauts cris. C*est 
a la responsabilite du poete. L*esprit malin semble 
vouloir insinuer que les saints meme, et les sages, tels 
que Solomon, n'etaient pas insensibles aux attraits de 
la volupte." (M. de SchkgeL) This really kind warn- 
ing came too late. Besides, I wish to give as exact a 
transcript of the mind of Goethe as exhibited in Faust 
as I can. 

p. 144. Are we not looking into each othe/s eyes,] 

— ^— — " when Ml of blissful sighs, 

They sat and looked into each other's eyes." 

Lalla Rookh. 

" They looked up to the sky, whose floating glow 
Spread like a rosy ocean, vast and bright; 
They gazed upon the glittering sea below. 
Whence the broad moon rose circling into sight; 
They heard the wave's splash, and the wind so low, 
And saw each other's dark eyes darting light 
Into each other." Don Juan. 


J 


( 247 ) 

Clarchen. ^* Lass mich schweigen ! lass mich dich 
halten. Lass mich dir in die Augen sehen ; alles drin 
finden, Trost und Hofihung und Freude und Kummer.'* 
(Egmont, Act iii.) 

p. 145. The man you have with you is hateful to nie, Src^ 
— Margaret's intuitive apprehension of Mephistopheles 
is copied from an incident in one of Goethe's own love- 
makings: " I could scarcely rest till I had introduced 
my friend Merk at Lotta's, but his presence in this 
circle did me no good; for, like Mephistopheles, go 
where he will, he will hardly bring a blessing with 
him." Goethe always called this friend " Mephisto- 
pheles Merk," and gives a strange account of the 
mingled goodness and devilishness of his disposition. 
The same feeling is beautifully described in the fol- 
lowing lines by Coleridge : — 

" And yet Sarolta, simple, inexperienced, 
Could see him as he was, and often warn'd me ! 
Whence learn 'd she this? O she was innocent! 
And to be innocent is nature's wisdom ! 
The hedge dove knows the prowlers of the air, 
Feared soon as seen, and flutters back to shelter. 
And the young steed recoils upon his haunches. 
The never-yet-seen adder's hiss first heard. 
O surer than suspicion's hundred eyes 
Is that fine sense, which to the pure in heart 
By mere oppugnancy of their own goodness 
Reveals th' approach of evil." Zapolya. 

p. 150. We will strew cut straw before her door,^ — 
This alludes to a German custom something analogous 
to Skimmerton -riding in this country. It consisted in 
strewing cut or chopped straw before the door of a 
bride whose virtue is suspected, the day before^ the 


1 1 J 


( 348 ) 

wedding. The garland is (like the snood) a token of 
virginity, and a ruined maiden is said to have lost her 
garland. 

p. 152. Place devoted to reUgionu observances/] — There 
seems to be some doubt as to the meaning of the term 
Zwinger. An accomplished German friend tells me 
that the niches in which the figures of saints &c. are 
placed, are so called from the railing or Iattice*work 
before them. In Retsch's Outline of this scene, Mar- 
garet is represented kneeling in an open space before 
an image of the Virgin placed in such a niche close to 
a church. The space between the walls of a town and 
the houses is also called Zxvinger. 

^ 155. Can that be ike treasure rismgy SfC.'] — ^This 
alludes to a superstitious belief that the presence of a 
treasure is indicated by a blue light or flame, though 
only, I beUeve, to the initiated. The same allusion 
occurs in the Intermezzo, post, p. 187 ; and also in a 
little poem by Goethe, called Der Schatzgrdber — 

*^ Und ich sah ein Licht von weitem, 
Und est kam gleich einem Sterne." — 

In the Antiquary, too, in the scene between Sir 
Arthur Wardour and Dousterswivel in the ruins of 
St. Ruth, it is said, *^ No supernatural light burst forth 
from below to indicate the subterranean treasury." — 
(Vol. i. p. 317.) 

p. 155. Lionthalers.'] — The Loxventhaler is a coin first 
struck by the Bohemian Count Schlick, from the mines 
^ Joachims-Thai in Bohemia; the finest in the years 


( 249 ) 

1518—1529, under Ludovick the first king of Hun- 
gary and Bohemia. The one side represents the fork- 
tailed lion, with the inscription— Lud wig I. D. G. Rex 
Bohm. The reverse, the full-length image of St. John 
with the arms of Schlick.— (JfoWer* Mmtz-Belusti- 
gmgen.) 

p. 156. What are you doings here, Catherine? 
This song is obviously imitated from Ophelia's. — 
(Hamlet, Act 4, Scene 5.) 

p. 156. Rat-catcher.'] — This term is Mercutio's : — 

" Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk ?" 

Romeo and Juliet, Act 3} Scene 1. 

p. 157. Out with your toasting-iron.'] — * 

" Put up thy sword betime 
Or 111 so maul you and your toasting-iron, 
That you shall think the devil is come from hell !" 

King John, Act 4, Scene 3. 

The German word Flederwisch, literally gooKxoing, 
is a cant term for a sword. 

p. 159. When first Shame, Spc] — 

" The while some one did chaunt this lovely li^ : 

Ah see, whose fair thing dost &in to see 
The springing flower the image of thy day, 

Ah see the virgin rose, how sweetly she 
Dost first peep forth with bashfiil modesty, 

The fairer seems, the less ye see her may ; 
Lo, see soon after, how more bold and free 

Her bared bosom she doth broad display ; 

Lo, see soon afler, how she fad^s and falls away." 

Spenser. 


( 250 ) 

p. 161. Evil spirit behind Margaret, ~\ — 

** I looked to heaven and tried to pray, 
But or ever a prayer had gusht, 
A wicked whisper came, and made 
My heart as dry as dust." 

Rime of the Ancient Mariner. 

p. 161. And under thy heart stirs it not quickening now? 

" She held within 
A second principle of life, which might 
Have dawned a fair and sinless child of sin." 

Don Juan, Canto 4. 

It is common in Germany to say, Sie trdgt das P/and 
der lAebe unter ihrem Herzen — " She bears the pledge of 
love under her heart." 

p. 162. I feel as if the organ^ <^c.] — There is a pas- 
sage somewhere ' in Goethe's works, in which he de- 
scribes the Dies tree as having a somewhat similar effect 
upon himself. I should feel much obliged to any one 
who would refer me to it. 

p. 1 64. May 'Day Night, — The Harz Mountains, Dis- 
trict of Schirke and Elend,'] — Walpurgis is the name of 
the female saint who converted the Saxons to Chris- 
tianity. May-Day Night is dedicated to her. " The 
solitudes of the Harz forest in Germany, but es- 
pecially the mountains called Blockberg, or rather 
Brockenburg, are the chosen scenes for the tales of 
witches, demons, and apparitions. The occupation of 
the inhabitants, who are either miners or foresters, is 
of a kind that renders them peculiarly prone to super- 
stition, and the natural phenomena which they witness 


«l 
I 


( 251 ) 

in pursuit of their solitary or subterraneous profession 
are often set down by them to the interference of 
goblins or the power of magic. Among the various 
legends current in that wild country, there is a fa- 
vourite one, which ^supposes the Harz to be haunted 
with a kind of tutelar demon, in the shape of a wild 
man, of huge stature, his head wreathed with oak- 
leaves, and his middle cinctured with the same, bearing 
in his hand a pine torn up by the roots. It is certain 
that many profess to have seen such a form traversing, 
with huge strides, in a line parallel to their own course, 
the opposite ridge of a mountain, when divided from it 
by a narrow glen ; and indeed the fact of the appari- 
tion is so generally admitted, that modern scepticism 
has only found refuge by ascribing it to optical decep- 
tion." (The Antiquaryy vol. i. p. 249.) 

This optical deception, however, admits of a very 
simple explanation : — When the rising sun (and accord- 
ing to analogy, the case will be the same at the setting) 
throws his rays over the Brocken upon the body of a 
man standing opposite to fine light clouds floating 
around or hovering past him, he needs only fix his eye 
steadily upon them, and in all probability he will see 
the singular spectacle of his own shadow extending to 
the length of five or six hundred feet, at the distance 
of about two miles before him. {Hihbert on Appari- 
tions, p. 450, note. Brewster^s Letters on Natural Magic, 
Lett, 6.) In Mr. Gillies' tasteful collection of German 
stories, there is a very interesting one called The First 
of May ; or Walhurga^s Night. 

The Harz Mountains border on Hanover and Sax- 
ony, and run to a great extent. Schirke and Elend are 
two villages on or near the Blocksberg. The situation 


( 252 ) 

is gloomy and desolate, as indeed the name Elend suffi- 
ciently implies. 

p. 167. And here, in the compressed corner^ it masses 
itself at once,'} — I follow Shelley in translating vereinzeU 
skk thus ; because this is the only construction which 
gives the passage its full e£fect. But vereinzeU sick is 
literally separates itself. One friend suggests isolates 
itself as the best mode of rendering it ; and another, 
that vereiazielt may be a misprint for vereinigt, 

p. 168. The witch — *, the he-goat *.] — ^In 

Aristophanic language — the witch ireph-iai, the he- 
goat Kiva(ipa, 

p. 171. How the Storm-blast, ^c,} — 

*' And now the Storm-Blast came, and he 
Was tyrannous and strong; 
He struck with his overtaking wings, 
And chased us south along." 

The Rime of the Ancient Mariner. 

Wind'braut (literally, wind'bride) is only to be found 
in Adelung, according to whom it is whirlwind, 

p. 168. Sir C^nan.]— This is a coramwi name for 
the devil in Germany. Voland (post p. 171) is, I 
believe^ one of the names of Beeleebub. 

p. 171. Many a riddle must be there untied,} — Some of 
the German critics express considerable disappoint- 
ment that Goethe did not give these riddles with the 
Devil's solution of them ; a very reasonable expecta- 
tion, it must be owned. 


( 25S ) 

p. 174. There is no dagger here, ^c.']-^! am inclined 
to think that Goethe must have read Burn's Tam- 
O'Shanter before writing this : — 

*' Coffins stood round like open presses, 
That shaw'd the dead in their last dresses; 
And hy some devilish cantrip slight, 
£ach in its cauld hand held a light, — 
By which, heroic Tarn was ahle 
To note upon the haly tahle, 
A murderer's hanes in gihhit aims ; 
Twa span-lang, wee, unchristen'd haims ; 
A thief, new cutted frae a rape, 
Wi' his last gasp his gah did gape ; 
Five tomahawks vn! hluid red^rusted; 
Five scymitars, wi' murder crusted; 
A garter, which a babe had strangled; 
A knife, a father's throat had mangled. 
Whom his ain son o' life bereft. • 
The gray hairs yet stack to the heft;." 

p. 175. Lilith,'] — A name given to Eve by the profane 
poets of the East. 

p. 1 76. Procktophantasmist,'] — The person intended is 
now generally understood to be Nicolai, formerly a 
bookseller at Berlin, and a writer of considerable repu- 
tation in Germany. He had given offence to Goethe, 
by repeated attacks in the various critical journals in 
which he was from time to time engaged, and also by 
publishing a parody on The Sorrows of Werther, enti- 
tied " The Joys of Werter,'* in which Werther is made 
to shoot himself with a pistol loaded with chicken's 
blood, and recovers and lives happily. Goethe judi- 
ciously carried on the joke by writing a continuation, 
in which Werther, though alive, is represented as 
blinded by the blood, and bewailing his ill fortune in 


( 254 ) 

• 

not being able to see the beauties of Charlotte. Goethe 
sayd that his reply, though only circulated in manu- 
script, deprived Nicolai of all literary consideration. 
He speaks of him as a man of talent, but incapable of 
allowing merit in any thing which went the least be- 
yond his own contracted notions of excellence.* Nicolai 
was the author of a novel which attracted sufficient at- 
tention to be translated into English and French, and 
of a Book of Travels in Germany and Switzerland. It 
seems that in his critical writings he had particularly 
opposed himself to the use of supernatural machinery, 
when, by a singular fatality, he himself became afflicted 
with a malady, during which he was haunted by appa- 
ritions of the most extraordinary sort. Bleeding by 
leeches was one of the principal remedies resorted to. 
An account of his case, drawn up by himself, may be 
seen in Nicholson's Philosophical Journal, vol. vi. p. 161. 
It is quoted by Dr. Hibbert, in his Work on Apparitions. 
Nicolai, I am told, lived for some time at a village near 
Berlin, called Tegel.-t* This a£fbrds a satisfactory ex- 
planation of the sentence es spukt in Tegel — which 
has sadly puzzled both translators and commentators. 
Shelley translates Tegel^ pond, putting it in italics ; and 

* " Was schiert mich der Berliner Bann 
Geschmackler^Pfaffenwesen ! 
Und wer mich nicht verstehen kann 
Der lerne besser ]esen." — Goethe. 

t Tegel has acquired considerable celebrity from having become 
the residence of W. von Humboldt, (the statesman and translator of 
the Agamemnon of ^schylus) who has built a magnificent villa there. 
I have not his correspondence with Schiller before me, but to the 
best of my recollection many of his letters are dated from Tegel. I 
have also heaid that it was to a ghost residing in this villa that the 
passage above-mentioned alludes. 


( 255 ) 

Dr. Schubart says that is is compounded of Egel (a 
leech) and the diabolical T., which is the initial letter of 
Devil (Teufel) in German. Mr. Stapfer calls Prock- 
tophantasmist (which, afler terming it untranslateable, 
he translates L Ordonnateur du Brocken) " le represen- 
tant de la philosophie materialiste du siecle dernier," 
and translates es spukt in Tegel — le creuset n*est pas vide 
encore ; and Mr. Gerard adopts the same reading sub- 
stantially : et cependant le creuset est toujours aussi plein. 
Lord F. Gower and M. Le Comte Sainte Aulaire, skip 
it altogether. Shelley and M. Stapfer say Brockto- 
phantasmist. This alteration destroys the etymology, 
which must be ITpwicro^, the part which (as is evident 
from the allusion to the leeches) is supposed to have a 
connection with his phantasies. 

p. 177. A red mouse jumped out of her mouth,^ — This 
is said to typify death, but I never heard why; nor do 
I know what the grey mouse means. 

p« 178. The blood of man thickens at its chill look.^ 

" Her lips were red, her looks were free, 
Her locks were yeDow as gold, 
Her skin was as white as leprosy, 
The Night-Mair Life-in-Death was she 
Who thicks man's blood with cold." 

Bime of the Ancient Mariner, 

The term Idol must be understood in the sense of 
Eidolon, 

p. 179. When I Jind you upon the Blocksherg,'] — To 
wish a man upon the Blocksherg — Ich wunsche den Kerl 
auf dem Blocksherg — is like wishing him at the devil, 


( 256 ) 

in English. This speech, therefcire, has in Gennan the 
effect of a pun. 

p. 183. The Intermezzo. '\ — It is quite impossible to 
convey to the English reader more than a very faint 
notion of this scene. The effect is produced almost 
exclusively by satirical allusions, quaintly rhymed, 
to things and persons which are not generally known 
even in Germany itself; though no one, who has ever 
witnessed the delight with which Germans belonging to 
the inner circle of educated society dwell upon it, can 
doubt that it possesses merit of a high order in its way. 
It is impossible to explain all the allusions without 
rambling far beyond the limits of a note. I must there- 
fore confine myself to such particulars as admit of com- 
pression. 

The Midsummer Night* s Dream and Wieland*s Obe- 
ron have furnished the basis of the first seven or eight 
stanzas and some of the last. 

Mieding, mentioned in the first couplet, was scene 
painter to the Weimar Theatre. Goethe has immor- 
talised him by a litttle poem on his death : 

" Wie ! Mieding todt? erschallt bis unter's Dach 
Das hohle Haus, von Echo kehrt ein Ach ! 
Die Arbeit stockt, die Hand wird jedem schwer, 
Der Leim wird halt, die Farbejliesst vkht mehr — ** 

There are other lines in the poem, however, which 
would rather lead me to suppose him stage-manager. 
He is mentioned by Doring (p. 198). 

The Inquisitive Traveller is Nicolai ; and the allu- 
sion to the stiff man smelling after Jesuits is to him. 
He had written Travels in which all whom he sus- 
pected of being connected with the Jesuits were de- 


( 251 ) 

nounced. I state this on M. Stapfer*s authority, for I 
never saw the book in question myself. 

The words put into the mouth of the northern artist 
are intended as a quiz on the style of expression 
afiected by the German artists of the day. 

The Gods of Greece — Die Goiter Griechenlands — ^is 
the title of a well known poem of Schiller's, which 
somewhat scandalised the pious people of his day« 
Some useful notes upon it are contained in Klattowsky's 
Manual. 

The Purist is said to typify a school of critics who 
affected great zeal for purity of expression and strict 
attention to costume upon the stage. 

The Xenien, as is well known, is the name given by 
Goethe and Schiller to verses, mostly satirical or epi* 
grammatical, which they published from time to time 
in co-partnership. 

Hennings is a German writer still living. Amongst 
other things, he is the author of a Commentary on 
Faust. M. Stapfer calls him '* Une des victimes im* 
moires dans les Xenies. Henning en Allemand signifie 
coq, ce qui jusqu'k un certain point sauve la person* 
nalit^.'' 

Musaget is supposed to mean the conductor of a 
literary journal called '* The Muses and the Graces." 

The Genius of the Age was also, according to M. 
Stapfer, the name of a literary journal — edited, he adds, 
by Hennings. 

The extent of the German Parnassus is an old joke% 
A few years since it was computed that there were no 
less than fourteen thousand living authors in Germany. 

To the best of my information, Irrlichter means 
parvenus : and Stemscknuppe a sort of poetical Icarus, 

s 


( 358 ) 

who momitt like a rocket and eociies down like tkr 
stick. Most of the odier afiusioiiB refer to wdll*. 
known classes in society or to certain sects or schools 
in metaphysical philosophy. For information as to the 
latter, I must refer the reader to Temieman's Grunirisi, 
or Mr. Johnson's Translation of it. True, the Edin- 
burgh Review has said, " Instead of being of the smallest 
assistance to the student of philosophy, the work (as 
translated) is only calculated to impede his progpess, if 
not at once to turn him from the pursuit; from be^ 
ginning to end all is vague or confused, unintelligible or 
erroneous.*' But the Edinburgh Review is not in&l- 
lible, and it would take a much worse trandator than 
Mr. Johnson to destroy the utility of a work, which 
marks out all the leading epochs in philosophy and 
gives mimrte chronological information concerning them, 
with biographical notices of their founders smd fol-. 
lowers and ample lists of their works. In a word, &r 
from agreeing with the Reviewer tlmt iAke Manual will 
not be of the smallest assistance to the student of phi- 
losophy, I know no work in English likely to prove half 
so useful to him. 

M. de Schlegel told me that the allusions in the Inter-^ 
mezzo were not present to his memory, and finding 
that it would cost him some trouble to recover the 
train, I did not press my request for an explanation of 
them, though his very interesting letter on Goethe's 
Triumph der Empjindsamkeit, addressed to M. de Re- 
mnsat and published in the third volume of the Tkedtre 
Ailemand, was a powerful temptation to me. The 
ftrst paragraph of this letter may help to explain why it 
is so very difficult to write notes upon Goethe : " J'ai 
veicu quelques annees pres de Goeth& (says M. de 


( 259 ) 

Schlegel) lorsqu'il etait dans la force de Tage et dans la 
matuf ite de son genie ; j'ai souvent passe des journ^es 
entieres avec lui, et nous avons beaucoup cause sur ses 
outrages ; mais il n'aimait guere a donner des explica- 
tions, comme aussi il n'a jamais voulu faire des prefaces." 

p. 191. To roll before the feet, ^-c.]— This alludes 
to a prevalent superstition, that evil spirits will some- 
times place themselves in the path of a foot passenger 
in the shape of a dog or other animal, with the view of 
tripping him up and spruaging upon him when down. 

p. 194. Wh(d are they working — about the Ravenstone 
yonder f] — Retsch's oudine represents a raised stone- 
mound or platform, with a gallows at one end and a 
gibbet £br hanging in chains at the other. Witches and 
skeletons are about, upon and over it, apparently en- 
gaged in some unhallowed rite. Faust is pointing it out 
to Mephistopheles with a look of interrogation, which 
Mephistopheles answers by a grim sneer. The Raben^ 
stein, I believe, is generally made of black stone. I 
need hardly add that this vision, as well as that of 
Margaret with fettered feet at the end of the scene 
upon the Brocken, are intended as forebodings of her 
fate. 

p. 195. My mother, the whore, S^cJ] — This song is 
founded on a popular German story, to be found in the 
Kinder-und Haus-Miircheti of the distinguished brothers 
Grimm under the title of Fan den Machandel-Boom, 
and in the English selection from that work under the 
title of The Juniper Tree, — The wife of a rich man, 
whilst standing under a juniper tree, wishes for a little 

s % 


( 260 ) 

child as white as snow and as red as blood ; and on 
another occasion expresses a wish to be buried under 
the juniper when dead. Soon after, a little boy as 
white as snow and as red as blood is bom ; the mother 
dies of joy at beholding it, and is buried according 
to her wish. The husband marries again, and has a 
daughter. The second wife becoming jealous of the 
boy, murders him and serves him up at table for the 
unconscious father to eat. The father finishes the 
whole dish, and throws the bones under the table. 
The little girl, who is made the innocent assistant in her 
mother's villainy, picks them up, ties them in a silk 
handkerchief, and buries them under the juniper tree. 
-The tree begins to move its branches mysteriously, and 
then a kind of cloud rises from it, a fire appears in 
the cloud, and out of the fire comes a beautiful bird, 
which flies about singing the following song : 

** Min Moder de mi slacht't, 
Min Vader de mi att, 
Min Sweater de Marleeniken 
Socht alle mine Beeniken, 
Un bindt sie in een syden Dook 
Legts unner den Machandelboom ; 
Ry witt, Kywitt ! ach watt en schun Vagel bin ich ! ' 

The literal translation would be — 

" My mother who slew me. 
My father who ate me, 
My sister Margery 
Gathers all my bones 
And binds them up in a silk handkerchief, 
Lays them under the Juniper tree. 
Kywitt ! Kywitt ! ah what a beautiful bird am I ! 


( 261 ) 

The whole story is written in the same dialect as the 
song. There is an interesting note upon this story, and 
on the analogy it bears to certain classical traditions, 
in the English selection above mentioned. Leyden 
mentions a story strongly resembling it. See also Mr. 
Taylor's tract upon the Bacchic Mysteries, Pamphleteer, 
No. 15. It is to be observed, that the story does not 
bear out the terms applied to the father and mother in 
Margaret's song. The author of Herold 's Stimtne sug- 
gests, that Margaret, like David, feels in her guilt the 
guilt of father and mother. 

I am sure I shall be doing an acceptable service 
to those who love to trace poetical analogies, by re- 
minding them of Wordsworth's exquisite little poem of 
Ruth : — 

" God help thee, Ruth ! Such pains she had 
That she in half a year was mad, 
And in a prison housed ; 
And there she sang tumultuous songs, 
By recollection of her wrongs, 
To fearful passion roused." 

p. 202. The wand breaks,'] — The signal for the exe- 
cutioner to do his duty, is given by the breaking of a 
wand or staff. 

p. 203. She is judged,] — This is the literal translation ; 
for richten does not necessarily imply to condemn t any 
more than Gericht (immediately above) necessarily im- 
plies condemnation; and I adopted it in preference to 
she is condemned, because I thought it inconsistent with 
the character of Mephistopheles to put a direct and 
useless falsehood in his mouth. But since the passage 


( 968 ) 

was printed off, I have received the following note 
upon tbe point from M. de Sdilegel, who is certainly 
the highest living authority on such matters: " Sie 
at gerichtei, we rapporte k la sentence de mort pro- 
noncee par les juges ; les mots suivants : Sie itt gerettetj 
au salut de son ame.*' This reading, I own, is ettdrely 
new to me. 


J 


APPENDIX. 


( 265 ) 


APPENDIX. 


DEDICATION. 


Ye approach again, ye shadowy shapes, which once, in 
the morning of life, presented yourselves to my trou- 
bled view. Shall I try, this time, to hold you fast? 
Do I feel my heart stiU inclined towards that delu- 
sion ? Ye press forwards ! well then, ye may reign, 
as ye rise around me out of vapour and mist. My 
bosom feels youthfully agitated by the magic breath 
which atmospheres your train. 

Ye bring with you the images of happy days, and 
many loved shades arise ; like to an old half-expired 
Tradition, rises First-love witlT* Friendship in their 
company. The pang is renewed; the plaint repeats 
the labyrinthine mazy course of life, and names the 
dear ones^ who, cheated of fair hours by fortune, have 
vanished away before me. 

They hear not the following lays— the souls to 
whom I sang the first. Dispersed is the friendly throng 
— the first echo, alas, has died away ! My sorrow voices 


( 3«6 ) 

itself to the stranger many: their very applause 
makes my heart sick ; and all that in other days re- 
joiced in my song — if still living, strays scattered 
through the world. 

And a long mrwonted yearning for that quiet pensive 
Spirit-realm seizes me. 'Tis hovering even now, in 
half-formed tones, — my lisping lay, like the ^olian 
harp. A tremor seizes me ; tear follows tear ; the 
austere heart feels itself growing mild and soft. What 
I have, I see as in tlie distaBce ; and what » gone, be 
coBies a reality to me. 


( 267 ) 


PROLOGUE ON THE THEATRE. 


Manager, Theatre-Poet, Merrtman. 

Manager. 
Ye two, who have so often stood by me in need and 
tribulation, say, what hopes do you happen to entertain 
for our undertaking upon German ground. I wish very 
much to please the multitude, particularly because it 
lives and lets live. The posts, the boards are put up, 
and every one looks forward to a feast. There they 
sit already, calm, with elevated brows, and would fain 
be set a wondering. I know how the spirit of the 
people is conciliated ; yet I have never been in such a 
dilemma as now. True, they are not accustomed to 
the best, but they have read a terrible deal. How 
shall we manage it ? — that all be fresh and new, and 
pleasing together with significance. For assuredly I 
like to see the multitude, when, like a stream, they 
press on towards our booth, and with powerfully re- 
peated undulations, force themselves through the narrow 
portal of grace — in broad day»light, already before 
four, elbow their way to the paying place, and -risk 


"•a- 


( 268 ) 

breaking their necks for a ticket, as in a famine at 
bakers' doors for bread. It is the poet only that works 
this miracle on people so various — oh! do it, my 
friend, to-day ! 

Poet. 

Oh ! speak not to me of that motley multitude, at 
whose very aspect the spirit takes flight. Veil from 
me that undulating throng, which sucks us, against 
our will, into the whirlpool. No ! conduct me to the 
quiet, heavenly nook, where only enjoyment blooms for 
the poet — where love and friendship, with godlike 
hand, create and cherish the blessings of the heart. 
Ah ! what there hath gushed from us in the depths of 
the breast, what the lip stammered tremblingly to itself 
•—now failing, and now perhaps succeeding — the wild 
moment's sway swallows up. Oflen only when it has 
endured through years, does it appear in perfected 
form. What glitters, is born for the moment. What 
is genuine, remains unlost to posterity. 

Merryman. 

If I could but hear nothing of posterity ! Suppose 
I chose to talk about posterity, who then would make 
fun for cotemporaries ? That they will have — ^and 
ought to have it. The presence of a gallant lad, too, is 
always something, I should think. He who knows how 


( 269 ) 

to impart himself agreeably — ^he will never be soured 
by popular caprice. He desires a large circle, to agitate 
it the more certainly. Therefore do but pluck up 
courage, and show yourself a model to the world. 
Let Fancy, with all her chorusses, — Reason, Under- 
standing, Feeling, Passion, but — mark me well — not 
without Folly, be heard. 

Manager. 
. But, most particularly, let there be incident enough. 
People come to look ; they like best to see. If much 
is spun off before their eyes, so that the many can 
gape with astonishment, you have then gained in 
breadth immediately ; you are a great favourite. You 
can only subdue the mass by mass. Each eventually 
picks out something for himself. Who brings much, 
will bring something to many a one, and all leave the 
house content. If you give a piece, give it at once in 
pieces ! With such a hash you cannot but succeed. 
It is easily served out, as easily as invented. What 
avails it to present a whole ? the public will pull it to 
pieces for you notwithstanding. 

Poet. 
You feel not the baseness of such a handicraft! 
How little that becomes the true artist ! The daubing 
of these fine gentlemen, I see, is already a maxim with 
you. 


( «T« ) 

Manager. 

Such a reproof leaves me unhurt. A msoi who in- 
tends to work properly, must set a value on the best 
toed. Consider, you have soli wood to split; mad 
only look whom you are writing for ! Whilst one is 
driven by ennui, the other comes satiated fir<»n an 
overloaded table ; and, what is worst of all, very many 
a one comes from reading the journals. People hurry 
dissipated to us, as to masquerades ; and curiosity only 
wings every step. The ladies gives themselves and 
their finery as a treat, and play with us without pay. 
What are you dreaming about on your poetical height? 
What is it that makes a full house merry? Look 
closely at your patrons! Half are cold, half raw. 
The one looks forward to a game of cards afler the 
play ; the other, to a wild night on the bosom of a 
lass. Why, poor fools that ye are, do ye plague the 
sweet Muses for such an end? I tell you, only give 
more, and more, and more again ; thus can you never 
be wide of your mark. Try only to mystify the people ; 
to satisfy them is hard — What is come to you ? De- 
light or pain ? 

Poet. 

Begone and seek thyself another servant ! The poet, 
forsooth, is wantonly to sport away £3r thy sake the 
highest right, the right of man, which Nature bestows 


( «71 ) 

upcHi him ! By what stirs he every heart ? By. whfU 
suhdues he every element? Is it not the harmony? 
which hursts from out his hreast, and sucks the world 
bai^ again into his heart. When Nature, carelessly 
twisting it, forces the thread's interminahle length 
upon the spindle ; when the confused multitude of all 
Beings jangles out of tune and harsh, — who, life-infiu* 
ing, so disposes the ever equahly flowing series, that it 
moves rhythmically? Who calls the Individual to the 
general consecration? — ^whereinto it strikes with har- 
mony sublime ? Who bids the tempest rage to passions ? 
the evening-red glow in the pensive spirit ? Who sheds 
along the loved one's path all lovely blossomings of 
spring ? Who wreathes the unmeaning green leaves 
into a garland of honour lor deserts of all kinds ? Who 
ensures Olympus ?' — Associates Gods ? Man's Power 
revealed in the Poet. 

Merrym/vn. 
Employ these fine powers then, and carry on your 
poetical affairs as one carries on a love-adventure. — 
Accidentally one approaclies, one feels, one stays, and 
little by little one gets entangled. The happiness in* 
creases, — then it is disturbed ; one is delighted, — then 
comes distress ; and before one is aware of it, it is even 
a romance. Let us also give a play in this manner. 
Only plunge into -the thick of human life ! Every 
one lives it,— to not many is it known ; and seize it 


( 272 ) 

where you will, it is interesting. Little clearness in 
motley images ! much error and a spark of truth ! — this 
is the way to brew the best liquor, which refreshes and 
edifies all the world. Then assembles youth's fairest 
flower to see your play, and listens to the revelation. 
Then every gentle mind sucks melancholy nourish- 
ment for itself from out your work; then one while this, 
and one while that, is stirred up; each one sees what 
he carries in his heart. They are as yet equally ready 
to weep and to laugh ; they still honour tlie soaring, 
are pleased with the splendour. One who is formed, 
there is no such thing as pleasing ; one who is forming, 
will always be grateful. 

Poet. 

Then give me also back again the times, when I my- 
self was still forming; when a fountain of crowded 
lays sprang freshly and unbrokenly forth ; when mists 
veiled my world, — the bud still promised miracles; 
when I gathered the thousand flowers which profusely 
filled the dales. I had nothing, and yet enough, — the 
intuitive longing after truth, and the pleasure in decep- 
tion ! Give me back those impulses untamed, — the deep 
pain-fraught happiness, the energy of hatred, the might 
of love! — Give me back my youth! 

Mer&yman. 

Youth, my good friend, you need undoubtedly, when 
foes press you hard in the fight, — when the loveliest of 


( 273 ) 

lasses cHng with ardour round your neck, — when, from 
afar, the garland of the swifl course beckons from the 
hard-won goal, — when, after the dance's maddening 
whirl, one drinks away the night carousing. But to 
strike the familiar lyre with spirit and grace, to sweep 
along, with happy wanderings, towards a self-appointed 
aim ; — that, old gentlemen, is your duty, and we honour 
you not the less on that account. Old age does not 
make childish, as men say; it only finds us still as 
true children. 

Manager. 

Words enough have been interchanged ; let me now 
see deeds also. Whilst you are turning compliments, 
something useful may be done. What boots it to stand 
talking about being in tune ? The hesitating never is 
so. If ye once give yourselves out for poets, — command 
poesy. You well know what we want ; we would sip 
strong drink — now brew away immediately ! What ia 
not doing to-day, is not done to-morrow. No day 
should be wasted in dallying. Resolution should boldly 
seize the possible by the forelock at once. She will 
then not let it go, and works on, because she cannot 
help it. 

You know, upon our German stage every one 
tries what he likes. Therefore spare me neither sce- 
nery nor machinery upon this day. Use the greater and 


( 274 ) 

the lesser light of heaven; you are free to squander 
the stars ; there is no want of water, fire, rocks, beasts 
and birds. So spread out, in this narrow booth, the 
whole circle of creation ; and travel, with considerate 
speed, from Heaven, through the World, to Hell. 


NOTES. 

p. 265. They hear not the following lays — the souh to 
whom I sang my first, ~\ — 

To understand the Dedication, it is necessary to refer 
to the history of the book. The plan of Faust appears 
to have been in Goethe's mind very early in life,* and 
parts were communicated to the circle of which his 
first-love, Margaret, formed one. It was first published 
in 1790, and forms the commencement of the seventh 
volume of Goethe* s Schrifien : JVien und Leipzig bey 
J. Stahel und G. J, Goschen, 1790. It is entitled, 
Faust : Ein Fragment (not Doktor Fausty Ein Trauer^ 
spielf as Doring says), and contains no prologue or 
dedication of any sort. It commences with the scene 
in Faust's study, ante, p. 7, and is continued as now 

• * He puts it down amongst the works written between 1769 and 
1775, in the list appended to the Stuttgart and Tubingen octavo 
edition of 1819. 


( 275 ) 

down to the passage ending ante, p. 16, line 7 from 
the top. In the original, the line — 

" Und froh ist, wenn er Regenwurmer findet." 

ends the scene. The next scene is between Faust and 
Mephistopheles, and begins thus : — 

Faust. 

• •••«• 

Und was der ganzen Menschheit zugetheilt ist" — 

i. e. with the passage (ante, p. 60,) beginning : " I will 
enjoy in my own heart's core all that is parcelled out 
amongst mankind,'* &c. All that intervenes in later 
editions, is wanting. It is thenceforth continued as 
now to the end of the Cathedral scene (ante, p. 163); 
except that the whole scene in which Valentine is 
killed is wanting. Thus Margaret's prayer to the 
Virgin, and the Cathedral scene, come together and 
form the conclusion of the work. According to Do- 
ring's Verzeichniss there was no new edition of Faust 
until 1807. I do not possess this edition, nor have I 
been able to satisfy myself as to the precise period 
when the work first appeared in its present form. My 
impression is, that about twenty years intervened be- 
tween the first edition and the first completed one. 

As I have intimated in my Preface, it would be 
rather hazardous at the present time to speculate on 
what Paust was or is to be ; but I shall be adding, I 
think, a gem to my work by quoting a passage from a 
letter which arrived too late for me to make use of the 
anecdote before: — " Ce poeme, d^s son origine, etoit 
condamne a ne rester qu'un fragment. Mais quoi- 
qu'on juge de I'ensemble, les details sont admirables. 

T 2 


( 276 ) 

Ceci me rappelle une anecdote que je tiens da oe- 
l^bre medecin Zimmemian, fort lie avec Goethe daas 
sa jeunesse : Faust avait ete annonce de bonne heure, 
et Ton s*attendait alors a le voir paraitre prochaine- 
ment. Zimmerman, se trouvant a Weimar, demanda 
a son ami des nouvelles de cette composition. Goethe 
apporta un sac rempli de petits chiffons de papier. 
II le vuida sur la table et dit : * Voila mon Faust' ** 
— (AT. de Schlegel — private Letter,) This sack or bag 
bears some analogy to the Walpurgis sack mentioned 
by Falk. 

An interesting correspondence took place in 1797 
between Schiller and Goethe as to Faust, {Brief- 
wechsel, vol. iii. p. 136 et seq.) It contains two pas- 
sages which I feel tempted to extract : 

'* I will take care that the parts be pleasant and 
entertaining, and set people thinking ; in respect of the 
whole, which vill ever remain a fragment, the new theory 
of the Epic may be useful to me." So says Goethe, 
directly confirming M. de SchlegeVs remark. 

My next extract, from Schiller, is equally interest- 
ing: 

" What troubles me is, that Faust, according to the 
plan, seems to me to demand even a totality of matter, 
if the idea is to appear fully developed in the end ; and 
for so high-springing a mass^ I find no poetical band 
to hold it together. But you will know already how 
to extricate yourself. For example : it would be right, 
in my opinion, to introduce Faust into trading life ; 
and whatever piece you select from this mass, it seems 
to me, by its very nature, always to require a too great 
circumstantiality and breadth." 


( 277 ) 

p. 267. Prologue on the Theatre.']'-' 

ft must be borne in mind diat the theatre is one of 
the temporary theatres or booths which are common 
at i&irs, and that the company is supposed to be an 
itinerant one. 

p. 269. People come to look:'] — 

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, 

Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, et quse 

Ipse sibi tradit spectator. 

De Arte PoeticL 

■ 

p. Z7S. That, old gentleman, is your duty.] — 

It was a favourite theory of Goethe, that the power 
of calling up the most vivid emotions was in no respect 
impaired by age, whilst the power of pourtraying them 
was greatly improved by experience. 

p. 27S. Use the greater and the lesser Ught of hea- 
ven:] — 

" And God made two great lights; the greater light to 
mle the day, and the lesser light to rule the night : he 
made the stars also." — Gen. i. 17. 


Addendum to note beginning p. 209, I. 7. 

Since this note was written, I have received the 
following explanation from one of our most eminent 
German scholars : '* There is clearly no translating 
of tliese lines, especially on the spiu- of the moment ; 
yet it seems to me the meaning of them is pretty dis- 


( 278 ) 

tinct. The Lord has just remarked, that man (poor 
fellow) needs a devil, as traTelling companion, to spur 
him on by means of Denial ; whereupon, turning round- 
(to the angels and other perfect characters) he adds, 

* But ye, the genuine sons of Heaven, joy ye in the 
living fulness of the beautiful' (not of the logical, 
practical, contradictory, wherein man toils imprisoned); 

* let Being (or Existence), which is everywhere, a glo- 
rious birth into higher Being, as it for ever works and 
lives, encircle you with the soft ties of Love; and 
whatsoever wavers in the doubtful empire of appear- 
ance* (as all earthly things do) ; < that do ye by endur- 
ing thought make firm.' Thus would Das Werdende 
(The thing that is a — ^being) mean no less than the 
universe (the visible universe) itself; and I here phrase 
it by " Existence," which is everywhere a birth into 
higher Existence (or in some such way) and make a 
comfortable enough kind of sense out of that qua- 
train."* I do not add my distinguished friend's name, 
but the mingled force and quaintness of his style would 
betray him anywhere. 

I am tempted to add one interpretation more, by 
way of making the collection complete : " The Lord, 
addressing the heavenly host, commands them, as the 
' genuine sons of God,' to rejoice in the eternal growth 
of beauty ! there being in the divine creation, a cease- 
less flow of beautiful phenomena, which the divine 
intellect fixes, as it were, by contemplation and 
thought. This is our interpretation of a passage which 
Mr. Shelley has not rendered intelligible, nor have we 
been able to translate it literally." — (The Monthly Re- 

* The passage in the original consists of four lines. 


( 279 ) 

pos. No. 71.) The writer was the intimate friend of 
Goethe and of abnost all Goethe's most distinguished 
cotemporaries. He has consequently been enabled to 
enrich the series of articles from which I quote with 
many rare and characteristic anecdotes, which future 
historians of literature will find invaluable. 

Addendum to Preface^ p. Ivii, note. 

As one example amongst many, compare Faust's 
amotions in Margaret's chamber with those of St. Preux 
in Julie's. (La Nouvelle Heloise, vol. i. lett. 54.) 


Corrigenda. 

Preface, p. xz. 1. 11, insert ^ve instead of six. 

p. 8, 1. 10, insert for before whom, 

p. 17, insert she can appear instead of it may be. 

p. 54. 1. 16, insert plays instead ofpUty. 

p. 59, 1. 20, dele the note of interrogation. 

p. 64, 1. 13, insert here after are, 

p. 92, 1. 14, dele the, 

p. 102, L 12, insert morality instead of law, 

p. 142, last line, insert Should I instead of I should. 

p. 208, ]. 19, insert To instead of So, 

p. 217, 1. 6, insert/ram^ instead of plan. 


LoBiion: printed by C. Roworth and SoD«, Bell-yard, Tenple>bar. 


74752100 


•( 


RJU4i4uX 


§ 


* 


L / 


■ • J
