The Inspector General (Nikolai Gogol, 1836)
==========================================================
The greatest Russian comedy — the mistaken-identity satire that made the Tsar laugh and wince. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (inspectorgeneral00gogoiala).

IVELLJS- 


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 


%  FOR  FULL  LIST  OF  THE  VOLUMES  IN  THIS  SERIES, 
SEE  CATALOGUE  AT  END  OF  BOOK. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL  (OR 
"REVIZOR.")  A  RUSSIAN  COMEDY: 
BY  NIKOLAI  V.  GOGOL. 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL, 
WITH  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES, 
BY  ARTHUR  A.  SYKES. 


LONDON:   WALTER  SCOTT,   LTD. 
24  WARWICK  LANE. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

INTRODUCTION      ...  .       vii 

THE   INSPECTOR-GENERAL  ....  5 

NOTES. 

I.   ON   THE  TRANSCRIPTION   OF   RUSSIAN  .  175 

II.    ON  THE  CHIN  AND  ORDERS  OF  KNIGHTHOOD  178 

III.    ON   A   RUSSIAN   POPULAR   SONG    .  ,  l8l 

iv.  ON  ST.  GEORGE'S  DAY        .        .        .        .185 


INTRODUCTION. 


"  DON'T  blame  the  looking-glass  when  your  own  face 
is  at  fault."  This  Russian  proverb  was  appropri- 
ately chosen  by  Gogol  as  a  motto  for  his  famous 
comedy.  The  Inspector-General  is  a  faithful  reflex 
of  the  seamy  side  of  provincial  life  in  Russia,  and 
a  typical  set  of  droll  but  dubious  characters  live 
again  in  its  pages.  The  play  is  indeed  a  mirror,  and 
a  not  too  flattering  one,  to  the  more  shady  section  of 
Muscovite  society.  Apart,  however,  from  the  general 
tone  of  satire,  which  would  be  more  keenly  appreciated 
by  its  victims,  there  is  in  the  Revizbr  so  much 
rough-and-ready  wit,  and  such  a  series  of  humorous 
situations,  that  the  comedy  appeals  also  to  non- 
Russian  readers.  As  to  plot,  there  is  scarcely  any. 
The  central  incident  of  the  piece  is  the  arrival  of  a 
supposed  "  revizdr  "  in  a  country  town  somewhere  in 
the  south  of  Russia.  This  functionary  has  no  exact 
English  analogue,  but  he  may  be  defined  as  an 
inspector  commissioned  by  the  Government,  with 
unlimited  powers  to  inquire  into  the  abuses  of  pro- 


viii  INTR  OD  UCTION. 

vincial  administration.  It  is  needless  to  say  that 
such  a  petty  autocrat  would  be  about  the  last  person 
desired  as  a  visitor  by  the  local  chinovniks  whom 
Gogol  depicts.  They  are  certainly  a  collection  of 
black  sheep,  and  the  approach  of  this  much-dreaded 
official  does  not  add  to  their  peace  of  mind.  After 
years  of  undisturbed  jobbery  and  plunder,  they  are 
rudely  confronted  with  the  prospect  of  administrative 
exile  to  Siberia.  It  appears  that  the  Town-Governor 
has  regularly  blackmailed  the  merchants,  who  in  their 
turn  have  recouped  themselves  out  of  Government 
contracts.  The  Judge  is  more  distinguished  as  a 
Nimrod  than  as  a  Solomon ;  he  has  turned  the 
court-house  into  a  kennel,  and  done  a  roaring  traffic 
in  bribes.  Artemi  Philippovich,  the  Warden  of  the 
Hospital,  has  left  the  patients  to  be  cured  by  "  nature  " 
and  the  ministrations  of  an  inarticulate  foreigner,  who 
is  innocent  of  any  knowledge  of  Russian.  Of  the 
others,  Luka  Lukich,  Director  of  Educational  Estab- 
lishments, to  give  him  his  full  style  and  title,  is,  if 
possible,  more  incapable  than  his  subordinates.  The 
Postmaster  Shpydkin's  weak  point  is  his  taste  for 
opening  and  reading  other  people's  letters ;  while  the 
Police-Officers  are  generally  too  drunk  to  be  employed 
on  duty.  Such  is  the  model  community,  for  which 
the  imaginary  inspector's  escapades  have  a  tragi-comic 
result 


INTRODUCTION.  ix 

The  comedy  was  first  produced  at  St.  Petersburg 
in  April  1836,  during  the  reign  of  the  Tsar  Nicholas. 
Russian  literature  at  that  date  showed  signs  of  a  revival. 
Derzhavin,  the  court  poet,  and  Karamzin,  as  a  romance- 
writer,  were  now  going  out  of  fashion.  It  was  felt 
that  the  mania  for  adaptation  from  the  French  had 
been  rather  overdone.  Even  as  early  as  1823  Gri- 
boyedov  had  raised  a  protest.  He  satirised  the  in- 
ordinate and  slavish  Francophilism  of  the  age  in  a 
powerful  play,  Gbre  ot  Umd  (Wit  comes  to  Grief). 
Krilov,  the  fabulist,  also  contributed  to  this  reaction 
by  producing  some  genuine  Russian  work,  though  on 
different  lines.  Sixty-eight  years  old  in  1836,  he  was 
at  the  height  of  his  popularity,  and  had  not  ceased 
issuing  his  immortal  series  of  Fables.1  Another 
prominent  litterateur  was  Zhuk6vski,  then  aged  fifty- 
three.  He  is  best  known  to  the  outside  world  as 
the  author  of  the  national  anthem,  "Bbzhe  Tsaryd 
Khrani"  (God  save  the  Tsar).  Of  Gogol's  more 

1  His  last  fable,  The  VelmSzha  (Grandee),  was  published  in 
1843.  It  described  a  fainlant  magnate  as  being  sent  to 
Paradise  on  the  ground  that  he  would  only  have  done  mischief 
if  he  had  concerned  himself  with  the  duties  of  government. 
This  satire  on  the  authorities  was  accordingly  pigeon-holed  by 
the  censors.  Krilov,  however,  found  means  of  reading  it  to  the 
Tsar  Nicholas,  who  was  greatly  amused,  and  embraced  him, 
with  the  words,  "  Write  away,  old  man,  write  away  !  "  He 
died,  however,  the  following  year. 


x  INTRODUCTION. 

immediate  contemporaries,  some  half-dozen  have 
achieved  European  fame.  Pushkin,  the  poet,  and 
Le*rmontov,  the  novelist,  were  thirty-seven  and  twenty- 
two  years  old  respectively  when  the  Revizbr  first  came 
out.  They  were  both  destined  for  the  same  fate — 
to  be  killed  in  duels  by  Frenchmen,  the  former  in 
1837,  and  Le'rmontov  four  years  later.  Other  well- 
known  names  are  those  of  Turgeniev  (1818-1883) 
and  Dostoyevski  (1821-1881),  the  famous  pair  of 
novelists.  More  celebrated  than  all  is,  perhaps, 
Count  Lyof  Tolstdy  (born  in  1828),  but  he  belongs 
rather  to  a  subsequent  generation.  Gogol's  own  age 
at  the  date  of  the  Inspector-General  was  twenty-seven, 
as  he  was  born  in  the  same  year  as  Tennyson  and 
Gladstone. 

Nikoldi  Vasilyevich  G6gol  ^Yanovski  came  into 
the  world  at  Sorochintsi,  his  father's  estate,  near 
Poltava,  the  scene  of  the  famous  battle,  exactly  a 
century  before,  between  Charles  XII.  of  Sweden  and 
Peter  the  Great.  The  date  of  his  birth  is  variously 
given  as  March  the  2ist,  or  3ist,  1809.  The  poetic 
and  historical  surroundings  of  his  birthplace  in  the 
Ukraine  must  have  largely  influenced  his  childhood 
and  determined  the  bent  of  his  future  career  He 

1  The  word  gogol  is  the  Russian  name  for  the  "  golden-eye," 
a  kind  of  wild  duck  (fuligula  clangula),  called  in  German  die 
Schette  Ente,  from  the  bell-like  sound  of  its  flight. 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

was  educated  at  the  "Gymnasium,"  or  High  School  of 
Nye'zhin,  a  town  of  about  40,000  inhabitants  in  the 
Chernfgov  Government,  near  the  sacred  city  of  Kiev. 
Here  he  was  a  somewhat  erratic  and  irregular  pupil, 
but  he  distinguished  himself  by  starting  a  manuscript 
magazine  called  the  Star,  to  which  he  was  the  chief 
contributor.  He  also  composed  a  tragedy,  The 
Brigands.  After  leaving  the  academy  of  Nye'zhin  he 
proceeded,  in  1829,  to  St.  Petersburg  full  of  high 
hopes,  but  with  slender  funds.  His  literary  stock-in- 
trade  consisted  of  one  or  two  fugitive  pieces,  such  as 
"  Italy :  a  poem,"  and  an  idyl,  "  Hans  Kuchel 
Garten,"  which  he  published  under  the  pseudonym  of 
V.  Alof.  These  productions  were  so  unmercifully 
ridiculed  by  the  critics,  that  he  hired  a  room  in  an 
inn  and  burnt  all  the  copies  obtainable.  Discouraged 
by  this  failure,  he  thought  of  trying  the  stage,  but 
found  that  his  voice  was  too  weak.  Supporting 
himself  in  the  meanwhile  with  a  desultory  clerkship, 
he  scored  his  first  success  in  1830  with  some  delinea- 
tions of  Little  Russian  peasant  life,  entitled  "  Even- 
ings at  a  Farm  near  Dikanka,"  by  Riidy  Pank6. 
Shortly  after  this  he  was  appointed  Professor  of 
History  at  the  University  of  St.  Petersburg.  His  first 
few  lectures  were  brilliant,  but  he  soon  wearied 
of  the  work,  and  finally  threw  it  up  in  1835.  During 
this  period  his  pen  was  by  no  means  idle.  He  wrote 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

a  number  of  stories  and  sketches,  chiefly  descriptive 
of  Malo-Russian  life,  such  as  "  The  Quarrel  of  the 
two  Ivans"  and  "Old-fashioned  Landowners."  His 
success  was  assured  by  the  production  of  a  romance 
called  Taras  Bulba,  relating  the  career  of  a  Zapo- 
rozhian1  Cossack  chieftain.  He  broke  fresh  ground  in 
1836  with  the  Revizbr.  This  uncompromising  satire 
on  Russian  bureaucracy  procured  him  a  host  of 
enemies,  who  took  care  to  retaliate  upon  him.  The 
generosity  of  the  Emperor  Nicholas,  however,  provided 
him  with  the  means  of  escaping  from  their  attacks, 
and  enabled  him  to  dispel  his  melancholy  tendencies 
by  an  extended  tour  on  the  Continent.  During  his 
stay  in  Italy  he  wrote  the  first  part  of  his  most 
celebrated  work,  Mybrivuiya  Dushi  (Dead  Souls). 
This  singular  title  was  applied  to  serfs  who  had  died 
between  the  "  revisions  "  or  censuses,  held  at  irregular 
intervals  before  the  Emancipation  of  1861.  The 
book  describes  the  adventures  of  the  speculator 

1  Literally,  beyond  tint  pordgi,  the  granite  ledges  or  rapids  of 
the  Dnie"pr.  The  Zapor6zhtst  were  so  called  to  distinguish  them 
from  the  Cossacks  of  the  Don,  and  of  the  Yaik,  or  Ural.  They 
formed  originally  a  military  republic,  with  their  Syfah  (head- 
quarters), on  an  island  at  the  confluence  of  the  Dniepr  and  the 
Samara,  below  Yekaterinoslav.  Disbanded  in  1777,  they  emi- 
grated to  Turkey  and  the  Caucasus.  Gogol's  father  at  one 
time  held  the  honorary  post  of  Military  Secretary  to  the  Zapo- 
rozhian  Cossacks. 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

Chichikov,  who  travels  about  Russia,  engaged  in 
a  traffic  in  dead  serfs  in  order  to  pawn  them  to  the 
State.  Dead  Souls  appeared  in  1842,  and  soon 
achieved  a  marked  popularity.  By  ridiculing  the 
proprietors  and  depicting  the  wretchedness  of  the 
muzhiks,  Gogol  may  be  said  to  have  helped  in  prepar- 
ing Russia  for  the  great  Liberation  which  was  accom- 
plished twenty  years  after. 

In  his  later  years  Gogol  became  a  confirmed 
hypochondriac.  He  entertained  mystical  views  on 
religious  and  social  subjects,  and  abjured  his  former 
productions.  A  fit  of  depression  impelled  him  to 
burn  the  manuscript  of  the  second  part  of  Dead 
Souls.  As  a  result,  the  book  only  exists  in  an 
incomplete  form,  with  considerable  gaps  filled  up 
from  a  rough  draft  found  after  his  death.  In 
1846  Gogol  went  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  Holy 
Sepulchre  at  Jerusalem,  the  Mecca  of  the  Orthodox. 
Eventually  he  returned  to  Moscow,  and  lived  on  the 
hospitality  of  his  friends.  He  passed  from  house  to 
house,  with  a  bag  full  of  newspaper  extracts  and 
criticisms  in  which  his  works  were  unfavourably 
reviewed.  Outliving  his  literary  productiveness  by 
some  years,  he  died  at  the  early  age  of  forty-three 
on  March  3rd,  1852. 

Those  who  personally  knew  Gogol  in  the  forties 
describe  him  as  an  awkward  and  badly-dressed  little 


xiv  INTRODUCTION. 

man,  with  a  sidelong  gait,  extremely  shy  and  uncom- 
municative, except  in  the  society  of  children  and 
his  intimate  friends.  A  large  nose  and  a  huge  lock 
of  hair  falling  over  his  right  eyebrow  gave  him  a 
somewhat  eccentric  appearance.  It  is  not  recorded 
that  he  was  ever  in  love,  and  he  died  unmarried. 

The  Inspector-General,  like  Dead  Souls,  is  now 
firmly  established  as  a  Russian  classic.  An  enthu- 
siastic critic,  Dudishkin,  has  gone  so  far  as  to  lay 
down  his  opinion  that  "Russia  possesses  only  one 
comedy — The  Revizbr — which  quite  fulfils  the  require- 
ments of  dramatic  art."  Representations  of  the  play 
are  given  from  time  to  time,  especially  at  the  Alexan- 
drovski  Theatre  at  St.  Petersburg.  Jubilee  celebrations 
were  held  in  1886  in  the  two  capitals.  Matters  were 
different,  however,  fifty  years  earlier.  Difficulties  were 
thrown  in  the  way  of  its  original  production  on  the 
stage,  as  the  chinovniks  of  the  day  considered  it  not 
sufficiently  "  well-intentioned  "  in  tone.  They  would 
have  succeeded  in  suppressing  such  an  outspoken 
satire  had  not  the  Tsar  Nicholas,  as  in  the  case  of 
Krildv,  personally  applauded  the  comedy,  laughing 
heartily  over  the  Town-Governor's  embarrassments. 

There  have  been  several  editions  of  Gogol's  works, 
including  a  complete  collection  published  at  Moscow 
in  1856-57.  Some  of  his  novels  have  been  translated, 
but  I  have  not  seen  an  English  rendering  of  the 


INTR  OD  UCTION.  xv 

Revizbr.  I  do  not  think  any  translation  has  as  yet 
been  published  in  England  or  America.  Sosnitski's 
edition,  dated  1886,  which  introduces  some  slight 
changes  in  the  text  and  punctuation,  is  followed  in 
the  present  version.  The  original  manuscript  is  in 
the  possession  of  Professor  TikhonraVof,  of  Moscow 
University. 

Gogol  has  embodied  some  criticisms  on  his  play, 
and  views  on  comedy  in  general,  in  his  Teatrdlni 
Razyezd)  or  Departure  from  the  Theatre.  In  this 
piece  the  author,  after  being  concealed  in  the  foyer, 
soliloquises  on  the  different  and  not  always  compli- 
mentary opinions  passed  on  his  play  by  the  audience 
at  the  close  of  the  performance.  "  I  overheard  more 
than  I  expected,"  he  says.  "  So  they  complain  that 
there  is  not  a  single  honest  character  in  the  piece. 
Well,  at  any  rate,  honest  ridicule  is  present  through- 
out." The  state  of  his  feelings  may  also  be  gathered 
from  some  extracts  which  I  translate  freely  from  a 
letter  of  his  to  Pushkin,  written  shortly  after  the  first 
representation — • 

"...  The  Revizdr  has  been  played,  but  I  am  perplexed 
and  distressed  about  it.  ...  My  creation  seemed  strange 
and  foreign  to  me.  The  principal  part  was  a  failure,  as 
I  expected.  Diirr  (the  actor)  had  not  the  faintest  con- 
ception of  Khlestakdv's  personality.  He  gave  us  a 
farcical  scapegrace  borrowed  from  the  Paris  theatres — 


xvi  INTRODUCTION. 

he  was  the  hackneyed  liar  who  has  appeared  on  our 
stage  in  exactly  the  same  costume  for  the  last  two 
centuries.  Cannot  the  character  of  Khlestak6v  be  divined 
from  his  part  ?  Have  I  in  my  self-conceit  so  lament- 
ably failed  to  give  indications  for  the  actor's  guidance  ? 
Yet  I  thought  it  was  clear  enough.  Khlestak6v  is  not  an 
intentional  impostor,  or  a  liar  by  profession ;  he  forgets 
that  he  is  telling  falsehoods,  and  almost  believes  what  he 
is  saying.  His  spirits  rise,  as  he  finds  he  is  a  success — 
he  becomes  expansive,  poetic,  inspired.  How  much  of 
that,  pray,  was  expressed  ?  Why,  not  a  bit  of  recognis- 
able individuality  did  poor  Khlestak6v  exhibit.  .  .  . 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  is  one  of  a  set  of  not  very 
distinguished  young  people,  who  sometimes  behave  well 
and  talk  sensibly.  It  is  only  in  exceptional  circumstances 
that  his  mean  and  insignificant  nature  is  revealed.  .  .  . 
In  a  word,  he  is  a  combination  of  many  different  Russian 
types.  We  all  are,  or  have  been,  Khlestakovs — only  we 
don't  care  to  admit  it.  We  prefer  to  laugh  at  the  failing 
in  other  people.  The  smart  cavalry  officer,  the  man  of 
state,  even  the  literary  sinner,  have  all,  for  once  in  their 
lives  at  least,  played  the  part.  .  .  . 

"  On  the  opening  night  I  felt  uncomfortable  from  the 
very  first  as  I  sat  in  the  theatre.  Anxiety  for  the  approval 
of  the  audience  did  not  trouble  me.  There  was  only 
one  critic  in  the  house— myself— that  I  feared.  I  heard 
clamorous  objections  within  me  which  drowned  all  else. 
However,  the  public,  as  a  whole,  was  satisfied.  Half  of 
the  audience  praised  the  play,  the  olher  half  condemned 
it,  but  not  on  artistic  grounds.  What  they  said  I  will 


INTRODUCTION.  xvii 

tell  you  on  our  next  meeting.  Their  criticisms  were 
partly  instructive  and  partly  absurd.  .  .  . 

"When  played,  I  noticed  that  the  beginning  of  the 
fourth  act  was  tame.  It  seemed  that  the  action  dragged, 
after  developing  with  sufficient  rapidity.  So,  on  my 
return  home,  I  at  once  reconstructed  this  act.1  As  it 
now  stands,  I  think  it  has  gained  in  force — or  at  any  rate, 
in  truth  to  nature. 

"One  word  more, about  the  last  scene.  It  was  a  hopeless 
failure.  The  curtain  hung  for  an  awful  minute,  and  the 
play  did  not  seem  properly  ended.  It  was  not  my  fault. 
The  final  scene  will  never  be  a  success  until  it  is  rendered 
simply  as  a  tableau  vivant.  .  .  .  But  I  was  told  that  to 
do  so  would  be  to  limit  the  actors'  powers,  that  a  ballet- 
master  would  be  wanted,  that  their  dignity  would  suffer, 
etc,  etc.  What  these  etceteras  were  I  gathered  from 
their  looks,  which  were  more  unpleasantly  expressive 
than  their  language.  All  the  same,  I  stick  to  my  opinion, 
and  repeat  it  a  hundred  times  over.  The  restrictions  of 
a  tableau  vivant  do  not  bar  the  exercise  of  histrionic 
talent  any  more  than  banks  impede  a  river,  which,  on 
the  contrary,  gains  in  rapidity  and  volume  by  flowing 
between  them.  .  .  .  There  is  a  great  variety  of  ways  in 
which  to  express  speechless  amazement.  The  alarm  of 
the  different  characters  varies  with  their  degree  of  guilt 
and  the  elasticity  of  their  consciences.  Each  should 
carry  out  his  rdle  to  a  consistent  end.  They  can  remain 

1  Gogol  excised  two  scenes  from  Act  IV.,  one  a  dialogue 
between  Anna  and  Marya,  the  other  between  Khlestak6v  and 
Rastakovski. 


xviii  INTRODUCTION. 

great  actors,  though  they  may  have  to  submit  to  the 
directions  of  a  ballet-master. 

"But  I  have  not  strength  enough  to  fuss  and  wrangle 
further.  I  am  tired  out  in  body  and  mind.  I  swear, 
no  one  knows  or  can  believe  the  sufferings  I  have 
undergone.  I  am  sick  of  my  play,  and  long  to  hurry 
off— God  knows  where !  Only  a  steamer-voyage  and  a 
change  of  scene  can  cure  me.  Heaven  only  knows  how 
I  thirst  for  them  !  For  God's  sake,  come  and  see  me 
soon.  I  will  not  start  without  bidding  you  good-bye. 
There  are  still  many  things  to  discuss  which  I  cannot 
tell  you  in  a  dull  and  tiresome  letter.  .  .  . 

"St.  Petersburg,  May  25th,  1836." 

With  regard  to  the  translation  of  the  play,  it 
remains  to  add  that  the  contracted  forms  of  rapid 
conversational  English  are  employed  throughout,  in 
accordance  with  stage  usage.  Ungrammatical  and 
slang  renderings  are  occasionally  given,  to  correspond 
with  the  uneducated  style  of  some  of  the  characters. 
A  free  use  of  italics  was  also  necessary,  to  indicate 
the  proper  emphasis,  and  to  give  the  force  of  some  of 
the  untranslatable  Russian  particles.  To  avoid  stiff* 
ness,  the  second  person  singular  (ft)  is  replaced  by 
the  English  you.  Certain  Russian  phrases  and  terms 
are  perhaps  more  effective  than  their  English 
equivalents,  and  I  have  accordingly  retained  them, 
with  due  explanation.  It  is  hoped  that  the  present 
version,  without  being  slavishly  literal,  has  kept  as 


INTRODUCTION.  xix 

close  to  the  original  as  the  difference  of  the  two 
spoken  idioms  will  permit.  The  notes  at  the  end 
are  on  points  in  connection  with  the  play  which  seem 
to  call  for  extended  comment.  I  have  occasionally 
referred  to  well-known  authorities,  such  as  Kovalevski, 
Reiff,  and  Leroy-Beaulieu,  and  wish  especially  to 
acknowledge  the  assistance  and  information  afforded 
me  by  Mr.  A.  F.  Litvinoff.  In  conclusion,  the  frontis- 
piece is  a  line-drawing  taken  from  two  sources — the 
1841  portrait  by  R  Moller,  and  a  rather  more  flatter- 
ing likeness  published  by  Wesenberg  &  Co.,  St. 
Petersburg. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 


CHARACTERS. 

ANT6N  ANT6NOVICH,  Governor  of  a  Russian  provincial  town. 

ANNA  ANDREYEVNA,  his  wife. 

MARYA  ANxdNOVNA,  his  daughter. 

LuicA  LuKfCH,  Director  of  Schools. 

His  wife. 

AMMOS  FY6DORCWCH,  a  Judge. 

ARXEMI  PHILIPPOVICH,  Charity  Commissioner  and  Warden  of 

the  Hospital. 

IvAN  KuziufcH,  a  Postmaster. 
IvAN     ALEXANDROVICH1    KHLESTAK6v,    a    St.    Petersburg 

chindvnik  (official). 
OsiP,  his  servant. 
DOBCHfNSKi,  \  independent 
BOBCHfNSKi,  ]   gentlemen. 
HUBNER,  a  District  Doctor. 
LvtfLYUKOV,    1 
RASXAKOVSKI,  [-ex-officials. 

KAR6BKIN,         J 

UKHAVY6RTOV,  a  Police   Superintendent.     (Chdstni  Prhlav, 
or  Police- Commissary.) 

\Police-Officers.      (Kvartdlniye,  or  Ward- 

J  InsPectors)' 

a  merchant. 
Lock-smith's  Wife. 
Sergeant's  Wife. 

MISHKA,  servant  of  the  Governor. 
Waiter  at  the  inn. 
Gentlemen  and  ladies,  guests,  merchants,  citizens,  and  petitioners. 

1  The  second  of  the  three  names  which  Russians  possess  is  the 
Stchestvo,  or  patronymic.  It  is  formed  by  adding  to  the  father's 
Christian  name  ovich  or  evich  (sometimes  contracted  into  ich)  for 
men,  and  ovna  or  evna  for  women. 

In  order  to  simplify  for  English  readers  the  somewhat  formid- 
able cast,  the  surnames  of  the  first  eight  characters  are  omitted, 
as  they  would  not  be  used  in  familiar  intercourse.  Khlestakov's 
name  is,  however,  retained  in  full.  The  surnames  only  of  the 
rest,  who  are  of  lower  social  standing,  are  given.  (Osip  and 
Mishka  are  nicknames.)  The  full  names  of  nearly  all  the 
characters  occur  either  in  the  text  or  the  notes. 


NOTES1  ON  THE  CHARACTERS  AND  COSTUMES. 

THE  GOVERNOR. — A  man  who  has  grown  old  in  the  State 
service — in  his  own  opinion,  a  smart  official.  He  wears  an  air 
of  dignified  respectability,  but  is  by  no  means  incorruptible. 
He  speaks  to  the  point,  generally  avoiding  extremes,  but 
sometimes  launching  into  an  argument.  His  features  are 
harsh  and  stern,  like  those  of  a  chinovnik  who  has  worked  his 
way  up  from  the  lowest  rank.  His  coarse  and  ill-educated 
nature  causes  him  to  pass  with  rapidity  from  fear  to  joy,  and 
from  servility  to  arrogance.  He  is  dressed  in  uniform  with 
loops  and  facings,  and  wears  Hessian  boots  with  spurs. 

ANNA  ANDREYEVNA. — His  wife,  still  tolerably  young,  and 
a  provincial  coquette,  brought  up  on  novels  and  albums  and 
household  trivialities.  She  is  very  inquisitive,  and  displays  now 
and  then  a  vain  disposition.  Henpecks  and  ridicules  her 
husband  to  a  certain  extent  on  minor  points,  when  she  can 
get  the  best  of  him  in  argument.  Changes  her  dress  four  times 
in  the  course  of  the  piece. 

KHLESTAK6v. — A  young  man,  about  twenty-three  years 
old,  mean  and  insignificant  to  look  at.  Not  overburdened  with 
common-sense,  being,  as  they  say,  "  without  a  tsar  in  his  head." 
He  would  be  designated  as  "very  frivolous"  in  the  Govern- 
ment offices.  Speaks  and  acts  without  reflection,  and  lacks 
concentration.  His  style  of  address  is  abrupt,  and  his  remarks 
are  totally  unexpected.  (The  actor  should  sustain  this  rSle 
with  the  greatest  possible  naivete. )  Dresses  in  the  latest  fashion. 

OsiP,2  his  servant,  resembles  other  middle-aged  persons 
of  his  class.  Talks  seriously,  looks  downwards,  and  is  fond  of 

1  By  Gogol. 

2  Colloquial  form  of  Ydsiph—  "  Joe. " 


4  NOTES. 

arguing  and  lecturing  his  master.  He  scarcely  varies  the  tone 
of  his  voice,  addressing  Khlestak6v  bluntly  and  even  rudely. 
He  is  the  cleverer  of  the  two,  and  sees  through  things  quicker  ; 
is  silent  and  uncommunicative,  and  a  rogue.  Wears  a  rather 
worn-out  overcoat  of  a  grey  or  blue  colour. 

BoBcnfNSKi  and  DOBcafNSKl  are  short,  fat,  inquisitive, 
and  remarkably  like  each  other.  They  both  wear  short  waist- 
coats, and  speak  rapidly,  with  an  excessive  amount  of  gesticula- 
tion. Dobchinski  is  the  taller  and  steadier,  Bobchfnski  the 
more  free-and-easy,  of  the  pair. 

LYAPKIN-TYAPKIN,  the  Judge. — Has  read  five  or  six  books, 
and  so  is  somewhat  of  a  freethinker.  He  is  very  fond  of 
philosophic  speculation,  carefully  weighing  each  word.  (The 
player  should  be  careful  to  preserve  a  judicial  and  consequential 
style.)  Speaks  with  a  bass  voice  and  a  prolonged  drawl, 
clearing  his  throat  beforehand,  like  an  old-fashioned  clock, 
which  buzzes  before  it  strikes. 

ZKMLYAN{KA,  the  Charity  Commissioner,  is  very  fat,  slow, 
and  awkward ;  nevertheless  an  intriguing  rascal,  most  obliging 
and  officious. 

The  POSTMASTER  is  an  artless  simpleton. 

The  other  characters  require  no  special  explanation,  as  their 
prototypes  can  be  met  almost  anywhere. 

The  company  should  pay  especial  attention  to  the  final  scene. 
The  last  word  uttered  must  strike  them  like  an  electric  shock, 
suddenly  and  simultaneously,  and  the  whole  group  should  fall 
into  position  at  the  same  instant.  The  ladies  must  all  ejaculate 
the  cry  of  astonishment,  as  if  it  proceeded  from  a  single  throat. 
The  neglect  of  these  directions  will  ruin  the  whole  effect. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

FIRST  ACT. 

SCENE — A  room  in  the  Governors  house. 
SCENE  I. 

(The  GOVERNOR,  the  CHARITY  COMMISSIONER,  the 
DIRECTOR  OF  SCHOOLS,  the  JUDGE,  the  POLICE 
SUPERINTENDENT,  the  DOCTOR,  and  two  Police 
Officers.} 

GOVERNOR.  I  have  called  you  together, 
gentlemen,  to  receive  a  very  unpleasant 
piece  of  news :  there's  an  Inspector-General 
coming. 

JUDGE  and  CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  What, 
a  Reviz6r  ? 

GOVERNOR.  Yes,  an  Inspector  from  Peters- 
burg, incognito.  With  secret  instructions,  too. 

JUDGE.     Well,  I  declare! 


6  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  We've  escaped 
hitherto,  so  now  it's  our  turn  ! 

LUKA  LUKfCH  (the  School  Director).  Good 
Lord  !  with  secret  instructions  ! 

GOVERNOR.  I  had  a  sort  of  presentiment  of 
it :  all  last  night  I  dreamt  about  a  pair  of  mon- 
strous rats.  Upon  my  word,  I  never  saw  the 
like  of  'em — so  black  and  enormous.  They  came 
and  snuffed  about — and  vanished.  .  .  .  Here's 
a  letter  which  I  will  read  you  from  Andrei 
Ivanovich  Chmikov.  You  know  him,  Artemi 
Philippovich  (to  the  CHARITY  COMMISSIONER). 
This  is  what  he  says  :  "  My  dear  friend,  my 
comrade  and  benefactor  .  .  .  (He  mutters  over 
quickly  the  first  few  sentences?)  .  .  .  and  to  let 
you  know" — Ah  !  that's  it — "  I  hasten  to  let  you 
know,  amongst  other  things,  that  an  official  has 
been  sent  with  instructions  to  inspect  the  whole 
province,  and  your  district  especially.  (Lifts  his 
finger  significantly?)  That  he  is  coming  I  know 
from  very  reliable  sources,  but  he  pretends  to 
be  a  private  person.  So,  as  you  have  your  little 
faults,  you  know,  like  everybody  else  (you're  a 
sensible  man,  and  don't  let  your  little  perquisites 
slip  through  your  fingers)  .  .  ."  (Stopping?) 
H'm,  that's  after  a  manner  of  speaking.  ..."  I 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.  ^ 

advise  you  to  take  precautions,  for  he  may  come 
any  hour — if  he  has  not  already  done  so,  and 
is  staying  somewhere  incognito.  .  .  .  Yesterday 
.  .  ."  Oh,  then  come  family  matters.  "  My 
cousin,1  Anna  Kirfllovna,  paid  us  a  visit,  with 
her  husband  ;  Ivan  Kirfllovich  has  got  very  fat, 
and  is  always  playing  the  fiddle  .  .  ."  etcetera, 
etcetera  Now,  here's  a  pretty  business ! 

JUDGE.  Yes,  extraordinary,  simply  extra- 
ordinary. There  must  be  some  reason  for  it. 

LUKA.  But  why,  Ant6n  Ant6novich,2  why  is 
it ?  Why  should  we  have  an  Inspector? 

GOVERNOR  (sighing}.  Oh,  it's  fate,  I  suppose  ! 
(Sighs  again.}  Till  now,  thank  goodness,  they've 
pried  into  other  towns;  but  now  our  time  has  come. 

JUDGE.  It's  my  opinion,  Ant6n  Antonovich, 
that  it's  a  deep  political  move,  and  it  means — 
let  me  see — that  Russia  .  .  .  yes,  that's  it  ... 
Russia  wants  to  make  war,  and  the  Government 
has  surreptitiously  sent  an  official  to  see  if  there's 
any  disaffection  anywhere. 

1  In  the  original  it  is  sesird  (sister),  for  dvoyurddnaya  sestrd 
(first  cousin).    The  sister  of  the  writer,  who  is  Andrei  Ivdnovich, 
would,  according    to    Russian    custom,  have    the    patronymic 
Ivdnovna,  not  Kirlllovna. 

2  It  is  polite  in  Russian  to  address  every  one  by  his  or  her 
paternal,  as  well  as  Christian,  name. 


8  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

GOVERNOR.  Ah, you've  got  it!  you  know  a 
thing  or  two  !  The  idea  of  treason  in  an  inland 
town  !  As  if  it  lay  on  the  frontier !  Why,  from 
here  you  may  gallop  for  three  years  before  you 
reach  a  foreign  country. 

JUDGE.  No,  I'll  tell  you  how  it  is — you  don't 
understand — the  Government  looks  very  closely 
into  matters  ;  it  way  be  far  away,  yet  it  observes 
everything 

GOVERNOR  (cutting  him  short}.  It  may  or  it 
may  not — anyhow,  gentlemen,  I  have  warned 
you.  I  have  made  some  arrangements  on  my 
own  behalf,  and  I  advise  you  to  do  the  same. 
You  especially,  Arte"mi  PhiHppovich !  (to  the 
CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.)  Without  doubt,  this 
chinovnik  will  want  first  of  all  to  inspect  your 
hospital ;  and  so  you  had  better  see  that  every- 
thing is  in  order ;  that  the  night-caps  are  clean, 
and  that  the  sick  persons  don't  go  about  as 
they  usually  do — looking  like  blacksmiths. 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Oh,  that's  all 
right.  They  shall  have  clean  night-caps,  if 
you  like. 

GOVERNOR.  And  you  might  write  up  over 
each  bed,  in  Latin  or  some  other  lingo — that's 
your  business,  Christian  Ivanovich  (to  the 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.  g 

DOCTOR)^ — the  name  of  each  complaint,  when  the 
patient  got  ill,  the  day  of  the  week  and  month 
.  .  .  and  I  don't  like  your  invalids  smoking  such 
strong  tobacco ;  it  makes  you  choke  when  you 
come  in.  It  would  be  better  too  if  there  weren't 
so  many  of  them  ;  otherwise  it  will  be  at  once 
ascribed  to  bad  supervision  or  unskilful  doctoring. 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Oh,  Christian 
Ivanovich  and  I  have  settled  all  about  the 
doctoring ;  the  nearer  we  get  to  nature  the 
better :  we  don't  go  in  for  costly  medicines. 
A  man  is  a  simple  affair — if  he  dies,  he  dies  ; 
if  he  gets  well,  why,  then  he  gets  well.  And  it 
wouldn't  be  easy  for  the  sick  people  and  Christian 
to  understand  one  another ;  he  doesn't  know  a 
word  of  Russian.  (The  DOCTOR  grunts  unin- 
telligibly.} 

GOVERNOR.  Also  I  would  recommend  you, 
Ammos  Fy6dorovich — (to  the  JUDGE) — to  turn 
your  attention  to  the  court-house  buildings. 
There's  the  ante-chamber,  where  the  petitioners 
usually  wait ;  you've  let  the  attendants  breed 
geese  there,  and  the  goslings  go  poking  their 
beaks  amongst  people's  legs.  Of  course,  rearing 
geese  is  a  laudable  object,  and  there's  no  reason 
why  an  usher  should  not  do  so;  only,  you  see,  the 


io          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

County  Court  is  not  exactly  the  place  for  it.  ... 
I  intended  to  mention  it  before,  but  it  somehow 
quite  escaped  my  memory. 

JUDGE.  Well,  I'll  tell  them  to  take  'em  all 
into  the  kitchen  to-day.  Will  you  come  to 
dinner? 

GOVERNOR  (not  noticing}.  Besides  that,  it 
doesn't  do  for  the  court  chamber  to  get  so  full 
of  rubbish  of  all  sorts  :  why,  there  was  a  sporting 
whip  lying  among  the  papers  on  your  very  desk. 
I  know  you're  fond  of  sport,  but  there  is  a  proper 
time  and  place  for  everything — when  the  In- 
spector is  gone  you  can  put  it  back  again.  Then 
your  assessor  .  .  .  he's  certainly  a  learned  man, 
but  he  reeks  of  spirits,  as  if  he  had  just  come  out 
of  a  distillery;  that  also  is  undesirable.  I  meant 
to  tell  you  of  this  some  while  ago,  but  something 
or  other  put  it  out  of  my  head.  There  are  ways 
of  remedying  it,  if  it  is  really,  as  he  says,  a 
natural  failing  :  you  can  recommend  him  to  eat 
onions  or  garlic,  or  something  of  the  sort. 
Christian  Ivanovich  can  help  him  there  with 
some  of  his  nostrums.  (The  DOCTOR  grunts  as 
before.) 

JUDGE.  No,  it's  quite  impossible  to  get  rid  of 
it ;  he  says  his  nurse  knocked  him  down  when 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL,  n 

he  was  a  child,  and  ever  since  he  has  smelt  of 
vodka. 

GOVERNOR.  Well,  I  just  reminded  you  of  it. 
As  regards  the  local  administration,  and  what 
Andre"i  Ivdnovich  is  pleased  to  call  one's  "  little 
faults "  in  his  letter,  I  don't  understand  what 
he  means.  Why,  of  course,  there  isn't  a  man 
living  who  has  not  some  peccadilloes  to  account 
for  :  Heaven  made  him  so — let  freethinkers  say 
what  they  like. 

JUDGE.  What  do  you  mean  by  peccadilloes, 
Anton  Ant6novich  ?  There  are  peccadilloes  and 
peccadilloes.  I  tell  every  one  plainly  that  I 
take  bribes,  but  what  kind  of  bribes?  Why, 
greyhound  puppies.  That's  a  totally  different 
matter. 

GOVERNOR.  H'm,  whether  they're  puppies  or 
anything  else,  they're  all  bribes  alike. 

JUDGE.  No,  indeed,  Ant6n  Ant6novich.  But 
suppose,  for  example,  one  receives  a  cloak  worth 
five  hundred  roubles,1  or  your  good  lady  receives 
a  shawl  .  .  . 

1  The  par  value  of  the  "metallic"  rouble  of  TOO  kopeks  is 
35.  2d.  The  paper  or  credit  rouble,  which  has  a  forced  currency, 
varies  considerably  according  to  the  rate  of  exchange.  It 
has  been  as  low  as  is.  gd.  in  value. 


12  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

GOVERNOR  (testily).  Yes  ;  but  what  has  that 
got  to  do  with  your  being  bribed  with  puppy 
greyhounds?  Besides,  you're  an  atheist;  you 
never  go  to  church ;  while  I,  at  least,  am  a  firm 
believer,  and  attend  service  every  Sunday. 
Whereas  you — oh,  I  know  you ;  when  I  hear 
you  talking  about  the  Creation  my  hair  simply 
stands  on  end. 

JUDGE.  What  of  that?  I  have  reasoned  it 
all  out  with  my  own  unaided  intellect. 

GOVERNOR.  Anyhow,  too  much  knowledge 
is  worse  than  none  at  all.  .  .  ,  However,  I  only 
made  a  remark  about  the  County  Court,  and  I 
daresay  nobody  will  ever  look  at  it ;  there's  an 
odour  of  sanctity  about  the  place.  But  you,  Lukd 
Lukfch,  as  Director  of  Educational  Establish- 
ments, ought  to  have  an  eye  on  the  teachers. 
They're  very  clever  people,  no  doubt,  and  are 
blessed  with  a  college  education ;  but  they  have 
very  funny  habits — inseparable  from  their  pro- 
fession, I  suppose.  One  of  them,  for  instance, 
the  fat-faced  man — I  forget  his  name — can't 
get  along  without  screwing  up  his  phiz  like 
this — (imitates  him} — when  he's  got  into  his 
chair  ;  and  then  he  sets  to  work  clawing  his 
neck-tie  and  scratching  his  chin.  It  doesn't 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          13 

matter,  of  course,  if  he  makes  a  face  at  a  pupil — 
perhaps  it's  even  necessary — I'm  no  judge  of 
that ;  but  you  yourselves  will  admit,  that  if  he 
grimaces  at  a  visitor,  it  may  leave  a  very  bad 
impression.  The  honourable  Inspector,  or  any 
one  else,  might  take  it  as  meant  for  himself — 
and  then  the  deuce  knows  what  might  come 
of  it 

LUKA.  What  can  I  do  with  him,  I  ask  ?  I 
have  told  him  of  it  time  after  time.  Only  the 
other  day,  when  our  head-master  came  into  class, 
your  friend  made  such  a  face  at  him  as  I  had 
never  seen  before.  I  daresay  it  was  with  the 
best  intentions,  but  people  come  complaining  to 
me  about  radical  notions  being  instilled  into  the 
juvenile  mind. 

GOVERNOR.  And  then  you  should  look  to 
the  master  of  the  history  class.  He  has  a  learned 
head,  that  is  evident,  and  has  picked  up  any 
amount  of  knowledge  ;  but  he  lectures  with  such 
ardour  that  he  quite  forgets  himself.  I  once 
listened  to  him.  As  long  as  he  was  holding  forth 
about  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians,  it  was  all 
right ;  but  when  he  got  on  Alexander  of  Mace- 
don,  I  can't  describe  his  behaviour.  Good 
heavens,  I  thought,  there's  a  fire  !  He  jumped 

2 


14          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

out  of  his  chair,  and  smashed  a  stool  on  the 
ground  with  all  his  might !  Alexander  of 
Macedon  was  a  hero,  we  all  know,  but  that's  no 
reason  for  breaking  the  furniture  ;  besides,  the 
State  has  to  pay  for  the  damages. 

LUKA.  Yes,  he  is  fiery  !  I  have  spoken  to 
him  about  it  several  times.  He  only  says  :  "  As 
you  please,  but  in  the  cause  of  learning  I  will 
even  sacrifice  my  life  !  " 

GOVERNOR.  Yes,  it's  a  mysterious  law  of 
fate  ;  your  clever  man  is  either  a  drunkard,  or  he 
makes  such  frightful  grimaces  that  you  have  to 
carry  out  the  saints.1 

LUKA.  Ah,  Heaven  save  us  from  being 
schoolmasters  !  You're  afraid  of  everything  ; 
everybody  meddles  with  you,  and  wants  to  show 
you  that  he's  as  learned  as  you  are. 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  all  that's  nothing  ;  it's  this 
cursed  incognito  !  All  of  a  sudden  he'll  look  in  : 
"  Ah,  so  you're  here,  my  friends  !  And  who's  the 
judge  here?"  he'll  say.  " Lyapkin-Tyapkin." 2 
"  Well,  bring  Lyapkin-Tyapkin  here,  then  !  " 
"  And  who  is  the  Charity  Commissioner  ? " 

1  To  avoid  shocking  them.  An  ikbn  or  picture  of  the  patron 
saint  is  placed  in  the  krdsni  tigol  (beautiful,  or  sacred  corner)  of 
rooms  or  shops  in  Russia.  2  His  surname. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL,  15 

"Zemlyanfka."1  "Call  Zemlyanfka, too!"  There'll 
be  a  pretty  kettle  of  fish  ! 


SCENE  II. 
(Enter  the  POSTMASTER.) 

POSTMASTER.  Tell  me,  gentlemen,  who's 
coming  ?  What  sort  of  chinovnik  ? 

GOVERNOR.    What,  haven't  you  heard  ? 

POSTMASTER.  I  heard  something  from  Bob- 
chfnski ;  he  was  just  now  with  me  at  the  post- 
office. 

GOVERNOR.    Well,  what  do  you  think  about  it? 

POSTMASTER.  What  do  /  think  about  it? 
Why,  there'll  be  a  war  with  the  Turks. 

JUDGE.     Exactly;  that's  just  what  I  thought! 

GOVERNOR.  Well,  you're  both  wide  of  the 
mark.2 

POSTMASTER.  It'll  be  with  the  Turks,  I'm 
sure.  It's  all  the  Frenchman's  doing.3 

GOVERNOR.  Pooh  !  War  with  the  Turks, 
indeed !  It's  we  who  are  going  to  get  into 

1  His  surname.  2  Literally,  you  both  hit  the  sky. 

3  At  the  period  of  the  play  the  Russians  and  French  were 
bitter  enemies. 


1 6  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

trouble,  not  the  Turks.  That's  quite  certain. 
I've  a  letter  to  say  so. 

POSTMASTER.  Oh,  then  we  shan't  go  to  war 
with  the  Turks. 

GOVERNOR.  Well,  how  do  you  feel,  Ivan 
Kuzmich?  (To  the  POSTMASTER.) 

POSTMASTER.  How  do  /  feel  ?  How  do  you, 
Ant6n  Ant6novich  ? 

GOVERNOR.  I  ?  Well,  I'm  no  coward,  but 
I  am  just  a  little  uncomfortable.  The  shop- 
keepers and  townspeople  bother  me.  It  seems 
I'm  unpopular  with  them ;  but,  the  Lord  knows, 
if  I've  blackmailed  anybody,  I've  done  it  without 
a  trace  of  ill-feeling.  I  even  think — (button-holes 
him%  and  takes  him  aside) — I  even  think  there 
will  be  some  sort  of  complaint  drawn  up  against 
me.  .  .  .  Why  should  we  have  a  reviz6r  at  all  ? 
.  .  .  Look  here,  Ivan  Kuzmich,  don't  you  think 
you  could  just  slightly  open  every  letter  which 
comes  in  and  goes  out  of  your  office,  and  read  it 
(for  the  public  benefit,  you  know),  to  see  if  it 
contains  any  kind  of  information  against  me, 
or  only  ordinary  correspondence?  If  it  is  all 
right,  you  can  seal  it  up  again  ;  or  simply 
deliver  the  letter  opened. 

POSTMASTER.     Oh,  I  know  that  game.  .  .  . 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          17 

Don't  teach  me  that!  I  do  it  from  pure 
curiosity,  not  as  a  precaution  ;  I'm  death  on 
knowing  what's  going  on  in  the  world.  And 
they're  very  interesting  to  read,  I  can  tell  you  ! 
Now  and  then  you  come  across  a  love-letter, 
with  bits  of  beautiful  language,  and  so  edifying 
.  .  .  much  better  than  the  Moscow  News  ! 

GOVERNOR.  Tell  me,  then,  have  you  read 
anything  about  any  chinovnik  from  Petersburg  ? 

POSTMASTER.  No,  nothing  about  any  one 
from  Petersburg,  but  plenty  about  the  Kostroma 
and  Saratov1  people.  It's  a  pity  you  don't  read 
the  letters.  There's  some  very  fine  passages  in 
them.  For  instance,  not  long  ago  a  lieutenant 
writes  to  a  friend,  describing  a  ball  in  first-rate 
style — splendid  !  "  Dear  friend,"  he  says,  "  I  live 
in  Elysium  ;  heaps  of  girls,  music  playing,  flags 
flying,"  .  .  .  quite  a  glowing  description,  quite  ! 
I've  kept  it  by  me,  on  purpose.  Would  you  like 
to  read  it  ? 

GOVERNOR.  Thanks ;  there's  no  time  now. 
But  oblige  me,  Ivan  Kuzmi'ch — if  ever  you 
chance  upon  a  complaint  or  a  denouncement, 

1  Kostromd  is  a  town  and  "government"  in  Great  Russia, 
N.E.  of  Moscow.  Saratov  is  in  S.E.  Russia.  Both  towns  are 
on  the  Volga. 


1 8  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

keep  it  back,  without  the  slightest  compunc- 
tion. 

POSTMASTER.  I  will,  with  the  greatest 
pleasure. 

JUDGE  (who  has  overheard  a  little}.  You  had 
better  mind;  you'll  get  into  trouble  over  that 
some  time  or  other. 

POSTMASTER  (innocently}.  Eh  ?  The  saints1 
forbid  ! 

GOVERNOR.  It  was  nothing  —  nothing.  It 
would  be  different  if  it  concerned  you  or  the 
public — but  it  was  a  private  affair,  I  assure 
you ! 

JUDGE.  H'm,  some  mischief  was  brewing,  / 
know !  .  .  .  But  I  was  going  to  say,  Ant6n  Ant6- 
novich,  that  I  had  got  a  puppy  to  make  you  a 
present  of — own  sister  to  the  dog  you  know 
about.  I  daresay  you've  heard  that  Che"ptovich 
and  Varkhovmski  have  gone  to  law  with  one 
another;  so  now  I  live  in  clover — I  hunt  hares 
first  on  one's  estate,  and  then  on  the  other's. 

GOVERNOR.  I  don't  care  about  your  hares 
now,  my  good  friend;  I've  got  that  cursed 
incognito  on  the  brain  !  I  expect  the  door  to 
be  opened,  and  all  of  a  sudden.  .  .  . 

1  Bdtyushki,  little  fathers. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          19 
SCENE  III. 

(Enter  BOBCHfNSKl  and  DOBCHfNSKl,  out  of  breath.") 

BOBCHfNSKi.  What  an  extraordinary  occur- 
rence ! 

DOBCHINSKL     An  unexpected  piece  of  news  ! 

ALL.     What  is  it — what  is  it  ? 

DOBCHiNSKl.  Something  quite  unforeseen ; 
we  go  into  the  inn 

BOBCHINSKI  (interrupting}.  Yes,  Pyotr1 
Ivanovich.  and  I  go  into  the  inn 

DoBCHfNSKl  (takes  him  up\  All  right,  Peter 
Ivanovich,  let  me  tell  it ! 

BOBCHINSKI.  No,  no,  allow  me — allow  me. 
.  .  .  You  haven't  got  the  knack 

DOBCHfNSKl.  Oh,  but  you'll  get  mixed  up 
and  forget  it  all. 

BOBCHINSKI.  Oh,  no,  I  shan't— good  heavens, 
no  !  There,  don't  interrupt  me — do  let  me  tell 
the  news — don't  interrupt !  Pray  oblige  me, 
gentlemen,  and  tell  Dobchmski  not  to  interrupt 

GOVERNOR.     Well,  say  on,  for   God's  sake, 

1  They  both  have  the  same  imya  and  dtchestvo  (Christian  and 
paternal  names),  but  I  have  given  one  the  Russian  and  the  other 
the  English  form,  for  the  sake  of  distinction. 


20          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

what  is  it?  My  heart  is  in  my  mouth!  Sit 
down,  sirs ;  take  seats  !  Py6tr  Ivanovich,  here's 
a  chair  for  you!  (They  all  sit  round  BOB- 
CHf  NSKI  and  DOBCHf  NSKI.)  Well  now,  what  is 
it,  what  is  it  ? 

BOBCHf  NSKI.  Permit  me — permit  me ;  /  can 
relate  it  properly.  .  .  .  H'm,  as  soon  as  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  taking  my  leave  after  you  were  good 
enough  to  be  bothered  with  the  letter  which  you 
had  received,  sir — yes,  then  I  ran  out — now 
please  don't  keep  on  taking  me  up,  Dobchfnski ; 
I  know  all  about  it,  all,  I  tell  you,  sir. — So,  as 
you'll  kindly  take  notice,  I  ran  out  to  see 
Kar6bkin.  But  not  finding  Kar6bkin  at  home, 
I  went  off  to  Rastakovski,  and  not  seeing  him, 
I  went,  you  see,  to  Ivdn  Kuzmi'ch,1  to  tell  him  of 
the  news  you'd  got;  yes,  and  going  on  from 
there  I  met  Dobchfnski 

DOBCHiNSKI  (breaking  in).  By  the  stall, 
where  they  sell  tartlets 

BOBCHiNSKI.  by  the  stall,  where  they 

sell  tartlets.  Well,  I  meet  Dobchfnski  and  say  to 
him,  "Have  you  heard  the  news  that  Ant<5n 
Ant6novich  has  got  ?  —  the  letter  may  be 
depended  on ! "  But  Peter  Ivanovich  had 

1  Shpy6kin,  the  Postmaster. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.  21 

already  heard  of  it  from  your  housekeeper, 
Avdotya,1  who,  I  don't  know  why,  had  been 
sent  to  Philip  Ant6novich  Pachechuyev • 

DOBCHINSKI  (interrupting).  With  a  bottle 
for  some  French  brandy. 

BOBCHf  NSKI.  yes,  with  a  bottle  for  some 

French  brandy.  Then  I  went  with  Dobchmski 
to  Pachechuyev's — will  you  stop,  Peter  Ivano- 
vich — there,  do  have  done  with  your  inter- 
fering!— So  off  we  go  to  Pachechuyev's,  and 
on  our  way  •  Dobchmski  says,  "Let's  go,"  says 
he,  "  to  the  inn.  I've  eaten  nothing  since 
morning  .  .  .  there's  such  a  rumbling  in  my 
inner  man"  .  .  .  Yes,  sir,  in  Peter  Ivanovich's 
internals.  "  But  they've  got  some  fresh  salmon 
in  the  inn,"  he  says ;  "  so  we  can  have  a  snack." 
We  hadn't  been  in  the  public-house  a  moment, 
when  in  comes  a  young  man— 

DOBCHINSKI  (as  before}.  Rather  good- 
looking  and  well-dressed.2 

BOBCHINSKI.  yes,  rather  good-looking 

and  well-dressed — and  walks  into  the  room, 
with  such  an  expression  on  his  face — such  a 

1  Popular  form  of  "  Eudoxia." 

2  v  partiktilydrnom  pZdty$,   in    town   or   morning   dress,   as 
opposed  to  mundir,  uniform. 

2* 


22  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

physiognomy  —  and  style — so  distinguished  a 
head-piece  (moves  his  hand  round  his  forehead}. 
I  had  a  kind  of  presentiment,  and  I  say  to 
Dobchmski,  "  There's  something  up  here,  sir  ! " 
Yes — and  Dobchinski  beckoned,  and  called  up 
the  landlord,  Vlas,1  the  inn-keeper,  you  know — 
three  weeks  ago  his  wife  presented  him  with  a 
baby — such  a  fine,  forward  boy — he'll  grow  up 
just  like  his  father,  and  keep  a  public-house. 
Well,  we  called  up  Vlas,  and  Dobchinski  asks 
him  quite  privately,  "Who,"  says  he,  "is  that 
young  man  ?  "  And  Vlas  replies,  "  That,"  says 
he — oh,  don't  interrupt  me  so,  Peter  Ivanovich, 
please;  good  Lord !  you  can't  tell  the  story,  you 
can't  tell  it — you  don't  speak  plainly,  with  only 
one  tooth  in  your  head,  and  a  lisp. — "That 
young  man,"  says  he,  "  is  a  chinovnik," — yes,  sir 
— "  who  is  on  his  way  from  Petersburg,  and  his 
name,"  says  he,  "  is  Ivan  Alexandrovich  Khles- 
takov,  sir,  and  he's  off,"  says  he,  "to  the 
government  of  Saratov,"  says  he,  "and  his 
goings-on  are  very  peculiar — he's  stayed  here 
over  a  fortnight,  he  doesn't  leave  the  house,  he 
takes  everything  on  account,  and  doesn't  pay  a 
kopeV  When  he  told  me  that,  I  felt  illumin- 

1  Elaise. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          23 

ated  from  above,  and  I  said  to  Peter  Ivanovich, 
«  Hey ! " 

DOBCHfNSKi.  No,  Py6tr  Ivanovich,  /  said 
"  Hey ! " 

BOBCHfNSKI.  Well,  first  you  said  it,  and  then 
/  did.  "  Hey !  "  said  both  of  us,  "  and  why  does 
he  stay  here,  when  he's  bound  for  Saratov  ? " 
Yes,  sir,  that  chinovnik  is  HE  ! 

GOVERNOR.     Who— what  chinovnik  ? 

BOBCHINSKI.  Why,  the  chinovnik  of  whom 
you  were  pleased  to  get  the  notification — the 
Reviz6r. 

GOVERNOR  (in  a  panic}.  Great  God !  what 
do  you  say  ?  It  carit  be  he ! 

DOBCHINSKI.  It  is,  though !  Why,  he  pays  no 
money,  and  he  doesn't  go.  Who  else  could  it  be  ? 
And  his padarSzknqya1  is  made  out  for  Saratov. 

BOBCHINSKI.     It's  he,  it's  he,  good  God,2  it's 

1  The  posting  system   was  well   organised  in   the    Russian 
Empire  before  the  introduction  of  railways.     A  padardzhnaya, 
or  order  for  relays   of  post-horses,   could  be  obtained   before 
starting  at  an  average  inclusive  cost  for  a  trdika  (team  of  three 
horses)  of  about  2d.   per  mile.     The  traveller  could  then  post 
at  his  leisure  and  convenience  between  any  two  stations  in  the 
empire,  from  Poland  to  the  Pacific. 

2  Yet  £6hu,  an  asseveration  which  is  much  more  used  than 
its  equivalent  is  in  English. 


24  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

he !  ...  Why,  he's  so  observant ;  he  noticed 
everything.  He  saw  that  Dobchfnski  and  I  were 
eating  salmon — all  on  account  of  Dobchinski's 
inside  .  .  .  and  he  looked  at  our  plates  like 
this  (imitates}.  I  was  in  an  awful  fright 

GOVERNOR.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  sinners 
like  us !  Where  is  he  staying  now,  then  ? 

DOBCHfNSKl.     In  room  No.  5,  first  floor. 

BOBCHINSKI.  In  the  same  room  where  the 
officers  quarrelled  last  year  on  their  way  through. 

GOVERNOR.     How  long  has  he  been  here  ? 

DOBCHINSKI.  A  fortnight  or  more.  He 
came  on  St.  Vasfli's  Day.1 

GOVERNOR.  A  fortnight!  (Aside.}  Holy 
Fathers  and  Saints,  preserve  me!  In  that 
fortnight  the  sergeant's  wife  was  flogged !  No 
provisions  given  to  the  prisoners !  Dram-shops 
and  dirt  in  the  streets  !  Shameful — scandalous ! 
(  Tears  his  hair.) 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  What  do  you 
think,  Anton  Ant6novich — had  we  better  go 
to  the  inn  in  gala  uniform  ? 

1  St.  Vasfli  of  Egypt,  whose  day  is  kept  on  February  28th, 
Old  Style  (March  I2th,  New  Style),  by  the  Orthodox  Church. 
The  Russian  lower  classes  generally  reckon  by  saints'  days 
instead  of  by  the  date  of  the  month. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          25 

JUDGE.  No,  no  !  First  send  the  Mayor,  then 
the  clergy  and  the  tradespeople ;  it's  all  in  the 
book,  The  Acts  of  John  the  Freemason)-  .  ,  . 

GOVERNOR.  No — no !  Leave  it  to  me ! 
I've  had  ticklish  jobs  before  now,  and  I've 
managed  'em  all  right,  and  even  been  thankful 
for  them.  Maybe,  the  Lord  will  help  us  out 
this  time  as  well.  (Turns  to  BoBCHfNSKl.) 
You  say  he's  a  young  man  ? 

BOBCHINSKL  Yes,  about  twenty-three  or 
four  at  the  outside. 

GOVERNOR.  So  much  the  better — it's  easier 
to  ferret  anything  out.  It's  the  devil,  if  you've 
got  an  old  bird  to  deal  with  ;  but  a  young  man's 
all  on  the  surface.  You,  gentlemen,  had  better 
get  your  departments  in  order,  while  I'll  go  by 
myself,  or  with  Dobchfnski  here,  and  have  a 
private  stroll  round,  to  see  that  travellers  are 
treated  with  due  consideration.  Here,  Svistunov! 
(to  one  of  the  Police- Officers?) 

SVISTUNOV.    Sir? 

GOVERNOR.  Go  at  once  to  the  Police  Super- 
intendent ;  or  no — I  shall  want  you.  Tell  some- 

1  The  Freemasons  are  considered  to  be  a  dangerous  society, 
and,  as  such,  are  suppressed  in  Russia.  The  freethinking  Judge 
alludes  to  a  forbidden  book. 


26  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL, 

body  to  send  him  as  quick  as  possible  to  me, 

and  then  come  back   here.     (SviSTUN6v  runs 

out  at  full  speed^} 
CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.    Let  us  go,  let  us 

go,  Ammos  Fyodorovich.     Some  mischief  may 

happen,  I  do  believe. 

JUDGE.     What's  there  for  you  to  be  afraid  of? 

Give  the  sick  clean  nightcaps,  and  the  thing's  done! 
CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.    Nightcaps — bosh! 

The  sick  were  ordered  to  have  oatmeal  porridge. 

Instead  of  that,  there's  such  a  smell  of  cabbages 

in  all  my  corridors  that  you're  obliged  to  hold 

your  nose. 

JUDGE.     Well,   my   mind's   at   ease  on    that 

score.    As  to  the  County  Court,  who'll  visit  that  ? 

Supposing  he  does  look  at  any  of  the  papers, 

he'll  wish  he'd  left  it  alone.     Why,  I've  been 

sitting   fifteen   years  on  the  bench — and  do  I 

ever  look  at  a  charge-sheet  ?     No,  thank  you ! 

Solomon   himself  couldn't   make  head  or  tail 

of  'em! 

(The  JUDGE,  CHARITY  COMMISSIONER, 
SCHOOL  INSPECTOR,  and  POSTMASTER 
go  out,  and  bump  violently  up  against  the 
POLICE-OFFICER  in  the  doorway  as  the 
latter  returns^) 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          27 


SCENE  IV. 

(The  GOVERNOR,   BoBCHfNSKi,  DoBCHfNSKi,  and  the 
POLICE-OFFICER,  SviSTUNdv.) 

GOVERNOR.     Well,  is  the  droshky  ready  ? 

SviSTUNOV.     Yes. 

GOVERNOR.  Go  into  the  street  ...  or  no, 
stop  !  ...  go  and  bring  .  .  .  Why,  where  are 
the  others  ?  How  is  it  you  are  alone  ?  Didn't 
I  give  orders  for  Pr6khorov  to  be  here  ?  Where's 
Pr6khorov  ? 

SviSTUNOV.  Pr6khorov's  in  the  police-office, 
and  can't  be  employed  on  duty  just  now. 

GOVERNOR.    How's  that  ? 

SviSTUNOV.  Well — they  brought  him  back 
this  morning  dead  drunk.  They've  soused  his 
head  in  water,  but  he's  not  got  sober  yet. 

GOVERNOR  (tearing  his  hair).  Akh,  Bozhe 
moiy  B6zhe  moil'1  .  .  .  Go  out  into  the  street, 
quick  ! — or  no !  run  to  my  room,  sharp,  d'ye 
hear  ?  and  fetch  my  new  hat  and  sword.  Now, 
Peter  Ivanovich  (to  DOJBCHINSKI),  let  us  be 
off! 

1  Oh,  my  God  1 


28          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

BOBCHINSKL  And  me — me  too!  ...  Let 
me  come  too,  Ant6n  Ant6novich ! 

GOVERNOR.  No,  no,  Bobchinski,  it's  im- 
possible! Three's  no  company,  you  know, 
and  we  couldn't  find  room  in  the  droshky 
either. 

BOBCHfNSKI.  Oh,  that  doesn't  matter;  I'll 
manage  it — I'll  trot  behind  the  droshky  on  foot 
— on  foot — on  foot!  I  only  just  want  to  peep 
through  a  chink,  so,  to  see  what  his  ways  are 
like.  .  .  . 

GOVERNOR  (turning'  to  the  POLICE-OFFICER 
and  taking  the  sword}.  Run  directly  and  get  the 
constables  together — let  'em  each  take  a  ... 
there,  see  how  this  sword  has  got  rusted  !  It's 
that  dog  of  a  trader,  Abdulin — he  sees  the 
Governor's  sword's  worn  out,  and  he  doesn't 
provide  me  with  a  new  one  !  Oh,  the  scurvy 
set  of  tricksters!  And  I'll  bet  the  scoundrels 
have  got  their  petitions  against  me  ready  under 
their  coat-tails  !  .  .  .  Let  each  of  'em  take  hold 
of  a  street  .  .  .  d — n  !  I  don't  mean  a  street — 
a  broom  .  .  .  and  sweep  the  whole  of  the  street 
that  leads  to  the  inn,  and  sweep  it  clean, 
mind  !  .  .  .  Do  you  hear  ?  And  just  look  here 
— I  know  you,  my  friend  ;  I  know  your  little 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.  29 

ways  :  you  worm  your  way  in1  there,  and  walk 
off  with  silver  spoons  in  your  boots — just  you, 
look  out,  I  have  a  quick  ear.  .  .  .  What  have 
you  been  up  to  with  the  merchant  Ch6rnyaiev, 
eh?  He  gave  you  two  yards2  of  cloth  for  your 
uniform,  and  you  stole  the  whole  piece.  Take 
care  !  Don't  you  rob  more  than  your  station 
warrants  !  Be  off! 


SCENE  V. 
(Enter  the  POLICE  SUPERINTENDENT.) 

GOVERNOR.  Hullo,  Stepan  Ilyich,  where  to 
goodness  have  you  been  hiding  yourself?  What 
kind  of  behaviour  do  you  call  that  ? 

SUPERINTENDENT.  I  was  only  beyond  the 
door  for  a  moment. 

GOVERNOR.  Well,  listen,  Stepan  Ilyich ! 
There's  a  chinovnik  come  from  Petersburg. 
What  arrangements  have  you  made  ? 

SUPERINTENDENT.     Exactly  as  you  ordered. 

1  Literally,   you  become  a  kutn   or  sponsor — i.e.,  you   get 
intimate. 

2  Two  arshlns.     An  arshin  is  28  inches. 


3o           THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

I  have  sent  the  Kvartdlni,1  Pugovitsin,  with  the 
constables  to  clean  up  the  streets. 

GOVERNOR.     But  where's  Derzhimorda  ? 

SUPERINTENDENT.  He's  gone  off  with  the 
fire-engine. 

GOVERNOR.     And  Pr6khorov's  drunk  ? 

SUPERINTENDENT.    Yes. 

GOVERNOR.     How  is  it  you  allowed  that  ? 

SUPERINTENDENT.  The  Lord  only  knows ! 
Yesterday  there  was  a  row  outside  the  town — 
he  went  there  to  stop  it,  and  was  brought  back 
drunk. 

GOVERNOR.  Well,  hear  me,  then — this  is  what 
you  are  to  do  :  the  police-lieutenant — he  is  tall, 
so  he's  to  stand  on  the  bridge — that  will  give  a 
good  effect.  Then  the  old  fence,  near  the  boot- 
maker's, must  be  pulled  down  at  once  and 
scattered  about,  and  a  post  stuck  up  with  a 
wisp  of  straw,  so  as  to  look  like  building  opera- 
tions. The  more  litter  there  is  the  more  it  will 
show  the  Governor's  zeal  and  activity.  .  .  . 
Good  God !  though,  I  forgot  that  about  forty 
cart-loads  of  rubbish  have  been  shot  behind  that 
fence.  What  a  dirty  town  this  is !  No  matter 

1  Inspector  of  a  ward. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          31 

where  you  put  a  monument,  or  even  a  paling, 
they  collect  all  kinds  of  rubbish  from  the  devil 
knows  where,  and  upset  it  there !  .  .  .  And  if 
the  newly-come  chinovnik  asks  any  of  the 
officials  if  they  are  contented,  they're  to  say : 
"  Perfectly,  your  Honour ; "  and  if  anybody  is 
not  contented,  I'll  give  him  something  afterwards 
to  be  discontented  about.  ,  .  .  {Heaves  a  sigh.} 
Ah-h-h!  I'm  a  sinner — a  terrible  sinner! 
(Takes  the  hat-box  instead  of  his  hat.}  Heaven 
only  grant  that  I  may  soon  get  quit  of  the 
matter,  and  then  I'll  give  such  a  taper  for  a 
thank-offering  as  has  never  been  given  before ! 
-I'll  levy  three  puds1  of  wax  from  every  merchant 
for  it!  Akh  B6zhe  moi,  Bdzhe  moil  Let's  be 
going,  Peter  Ivanovich  !  (Tries  to  put  the  hat- 
box  on  his  head  instead  of  the  hat.} 

SUPERINTENDENT.    Ant6n  A ntonovich, that's 
the  hat-box,  not  your  hat ! 

GOVERNOR  (throwing  the  box  down}.  D — n  it ! 
so  it  is !  ...  And  if  he  asks  why  the  hospital 
chapel  has  not  been  built,  for  which  the  money 
was  voted  five  years  ago,  they  must  mind  and 
say  that  it  began  to  be  built,  but  got  burnt 
down.  Why,  Idrew  up  a  report  about  it.  But 
1  A  piid  =  40  Russian  Ibs.  =  36  Ibs.  Avoirdupois. 


32          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

of  course  some  idiot  is  sure  to  forget,  and  let 
out  that  the  building  was  never  even  begun.  .  .  . 
And  tell  Derzhimorda  that  he's  not  to  give  such 
free  play  to  his  fists  ;  guilty  or  innocent,  he 
makes  them  all  see  stars,  in  the  cause  of  public 
order.  .  .  .  Come  on,  come  on,  Dobchfnski. 
(Goes  out  and  returns?)  And  the  soldiers  are 
not  to  be  allowed  in  the  streets  with  next  to 
nothing  on  :  that  scoundrelly  garrison  only  put 
their  tunics  on  over  their  shirts,  with  nothing  at 
all  below.  (All go  out.} 


SCENE  VI. 

(ANNA  ANDR&YEVNA  and  MARYA  ANT6NOVNA  rush  on 
the  scene.") 

ANNA.  Where  are  they,  where  are  they? 
Akh  Bdzhe  moi!  .  .  (Opening  the  door?) 
Husband !  Ant6sha  !  Ant6n  !  (Hurriedly,  to 
MARYA.)  And  it's  all  your  fault !— dawdling, 
and  saying,  "  I  want  a  pin — I  want  a  handker- 
chief." (Runs  up  to  the  window  and  shouts?) 
Ant6n,  where  are  you,  where  are  you  ?  Has 
he  come — eh?  the  Inspector?  Has  he  got  a 
moustache  ?  What's  it  like  ? 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          33 

VOICE  OF  THE  GOVERNOR.  Wait  a  bit, 
ma'am,1  wait  a  little  ! 

ANNA.  Wait?  What  an  idea!  Wait,  for- 
sooth !  .  .  .  Not  a  bit  of  it !  I  only  want  one 
word — is  he  a  colonel,  or  what  is  he,  eh  ?  ( With 
disgust?)  There !  he's  gone !  I  won't  forgive 
him  for  that !  .  .  .  And  you  kept  saying, 
"  Mamma  dear,  do  stop  a  moment  while  I  pin 
back  my  scarf;  I'll  come  directly."  Directly, 
indeed,  drat  you !  It's  all  through  you  we've 
missed  the  news !  It's  all  your  abominable 
vanity.  You  heard  the  Postmaster  was  here,  and 
so  you  must  needs  mince  before  the  looking- 
glass  and  strike  all  sorts  of  attitudes.  You 
fancy  he's  smitten  with  you;  but  I  can  tell  you, 
miss,  he  simply  makes  a  face  at  you  as  soon  as 
your  back  is  turned. 

MARYA.  But  what's  to  be  done  then,  mamma? 
It's  all  right ;  we  shall  know  all  about  him  in  an 
hour  or  two. 

ANNA.  An  hour  or  two,  forsooth !  Much 
obliged  to  you,  I'm  sure  !  A  pretty  answer  to 
give  me  !  Why  didn't  you  say — we  shall  know 
more  in  a  month  /  .  .  .  (She  leans  out  of  the 
window?)  Here,  Avd6tya!  I  say!  .  .  .  Have 

1  Mdtushka — literally,  little  mother  or  good  wife. 

3 


34  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

you  heard  whether  anybody's  come,  Avdotya  ? 
.  .  .  No?  you  booby — no?  Well,  you  should 
have  asked!  Oh,  you  can't  find  out  anything 
with  your  head  full  of  lovers  and  flim-flams!  .  .  . 
Eh,  what?  They  went  off  in  a  hurry?  Well, 
you  should  have  run  after  the  droshky  !  Be  off 
at  once,  d'you  hear?  run  and  ask  everybody 
where  they  are — ask  nicely,  and  find  out  what 
he's  like — do  you  hear  me  ?  Peep  through  the 
key-hole  and  find  out  all  about  it — what  sort  of 
eyes  he's  got — see  if  they're  black  or  not,  and  be 
back  here  at  once  this  minute,  d'you  understand  ? 
Quick,  quick,  quick !  (She  keeps  on  shouting, 
and  they  both  stand  at  the  window  until  the 
curtain  drops.} 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          35 


SECOND  ACT. 

SCENE — A  small  room  in  the  inn.  Bed,  table, 
portmanteau,  empty  bottle,  books,  clothes' 
brush,  etc. 

SCENE  I. 

OsiP  (lying  on  his  master's  bed}.  Devil  take 
it !  I'm  so  hungry;  there's  a  noise  in  my  inside 
like  a  whole  troop  of  trumpeters.  We  shall 
never  get  home  at  this  rate  !  What  are  we  to 
do,  I'd  like  to  know  ?  There's  two  months  gone 
since  we  left  "  Peter  " ! x  He's  chucked  away  all 
his  cash  on  the  journey,  the  gay  young  dog,  so 
now  he's  got  to  stick  here,  with  his  tail  between 
his  legs  !  We  should  have  had  plenty  to  pay 
for  the  fare,  but  no,  he  must  needs  cut  a  dash  in 
every  town  in  this  style !  {Imitates  him.'}  "Heah, 
Osip,  go  and  engage  me  the  best  room  they've 
got,  and  order  the  very  best  dinner  they  can  cook ; 

1  Slang  for  St.  Petersburg.     Gogol  elsewhere  uses  the  short 
form  "Petersburg." 


36  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

I  can't  stand  anything  cheap  and  nasty;  I  must 
have  the  best !  "  Anything  reasonable  wouldn't 
have  mattered,  but  for  an  ordinary  copyin'-clerk1 
to  go  on  like  that !  Then  he  goes  and  makes 
friends  on  the  road ;  plays  cards,  and  gets  rooked, 
of  course  !  Oh,  I'm  sick  of  this  sort  o'  life  ! 
Reelly,  it's  better  in  our  village  ;  there's  not  so 
much  going  on,  but  there's  less  to  worrit  you  ; 
you  lie  the  whole  while  over  the  stove2  and  eat 
tartlets.  .  .  .  Still,  there's  nothing  like  life  in 
"  Peter,"  that's  a  fack,  and  there's  no  denyin'  of 
it  All  you  want  is  money,  and  then  you  live 
like  a  lord — theayters,  dancing  dogs,  everythink. 
And  everybody  talks  so  perlite — it's  reelly  almost 
like  bein'  at  Court ;  if  you  go  to  the  Shchukin 
Bazaar,3  the  shop-keepers  call  you  "  my  lord  "  ; 
you  sit  with  the  chinovniks  in  the  ferry-boat  ; 
if  you  want  company,  you  can  go  into  a  shop,  a 

1  Yelistrdtishka,   corruption    of   (Kolllzhki)  Registr&tor,    an 
official  of  the  fourteenth  and  lowest  rank  in  the  Civil  Service. 
(See  Note  II.  at  the  end. ) 

2  No.  palatyakh,  on  the  shelves  which  are  placed  over  the 
large  square  oven  or  stove  in  Russian  cottages,  at  a  height  of 
about  six  or  seven  feet  from  the  ground. 

3  The  Shchukin  Dvor  is  a  bazaar  in  the  Bolshaya  Sad6vaya 
(Great  Garden  Street),  behind  the  Gostfnni  Dvor  or  Great  Bazaar 
of  the  Nevski  Prospekt,  St.  Petersburg. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          37 

gent  will  tell  you  there  what's  going  on  in 
the  army,  and  all  about  the  stars  in  the  sky, 
just  as  if  you  had  'em  all  in  your  'and.  Then  an 
old  officer's  wife  will  try  and  flirt  with  you,  or  a 
pretty  chambermaid  will  give  you  such  a  look. 
Aha,  you  dog  !  {Smirks  and  wags  his  head.} 
What  doosid  fine  manners  they  have  too ;  you 
never  hear  any  disrespeckful  langwidge ;  they 
always  say  you1  to  you  !  If  you're  tired  of 
walking,  why  you  take  a  droshky,  and  sit  there 
like  a  nob ;  and  if  you  don't  want  to  pay,  why 
you  needn't ;  every  house  has  got  a  door  open, 
and  you  can  pop  in,  and  the  devil  himself  couldn't 
catch  you.  There's  one  objection  though :  some- 
times you  get  a  fust-class  feed,  and  sometimes 
you're  starved — as  we  are  now.  It's  all  his  fault ! 
What's  to  be  done  with  him  ?  The  old  man 
sends  him  money — enough  to  rub  along  with — 
and  what  for  ?  ...  Why,  he  goes  on  the  bust 
with  it;  hires  droshkies,  says  every  day  "Go  and 
get  a  theay ter-ticket ; "  and  then  look  at  him  in  a 
week — he  has  to  pop  his  new  tail-coat !  Another 
time  he  parts  with  everything  to  his  last  shirt, 
except  p'raps  an  old  coat  or  a  worn-out  cape, 

1   Vui  instead  of  the  more  familiar  Tf,  thou.      The  usage  of 
these  pronouns  is  the  same  as  in  other  continental  countries. 


38  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

s'help  me,  it's  the  truth !  Selling  such  beautiful 
English  cloth  !  Every  dress-suit  costs  him  a 
hundred  and  fifty  roubles,  and  he  lets  his  uncle 
have  it  for  twenty.  I  won't  speak  of  his  breeches ; 
they  can't  get  a  buyer.  And  what's  it  all  for  ? 
Why,  because  he's  never  at  his  business  ;  instead 
of  attending  to  his  dooties,  he  gallivants  along 
the  Proshpect,1  and  goes  off  card-playing.  Ah, 
if  the  governor  only  knew  it !  he  wouldn't  stop 
to  think  that  you're  a  chinovnik,  but  he'd  lift  up 
your  little  shirt-tail,  and  whip  you  so  that  you 
would  feel  sore  for  a  week.2  If  you  have 
dooties,  you  ought  to  attend  to  'em.  Here's 
the  landlord  now,  says  he  won't  let  you  have 
anything  to  eat  unless  you  pay  beforehand, 
and  if  we  don't  pay  ?  (Sighs.}  Oh,  good  Lord  ! 
for  a  little  shchi\z  I'll  bet  every  one  else  has 
had  a  square  meal.  Hullo  !  there's  a  knock  ; 
he's  coming  !  (Gets  off  the  bed  hastily?) 

1  The  Nevski  Prospekt  in  St.  Petersburg. 

2  Literally,  you  would  rub  yourself  for  four  days  or  so. 

3  Cabbage-soup. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL,          39 
SCENE  II. 

{Enter  KHLESTAKOV.) 

KHLESTAK6V.  Here,  take  these.  {Hands  him 
his  cap  and  walking-stick^}  What,  you've  been 
rolling  on  the  bed  again  ? 

OSIP.  Me  rolling  on  the  bed !  I  haven't 
seen  any  bed ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  That's  a  lie  ;  you  have  been. 
Look  here,  it's  all  tumbled  about ! 

OsiR  Why  blame  me  for  it?  /  don't  know 
what  a  bed  feels  like.  I've  got  legs,  and  I 
stand.  What  do  I  want  with  your  bed  ? 

KHLESTAKOV  (walks  about  the  room}.  Just 
see  if  there's  any  tobacco  left  in  the  pouch  there. 

OsiP.  Tobacco,  indeed  !  Why,  you  smoked 
the  last  of  it  four  days  ago. 

KHLESTAK6V  (paces  up  and  down,  biting  his 
lips;  then,  loudly  and  peremptorily).  Here,  Osip, 
d'you  hear  ? 

OsiP.     What  do  you  want  ? 

KHLESTAKOV  (less  firmly}.     Go  down  there. 

OsiP.     Where  ? 

KHLESTAKOV  (in  an  almost  supplicating  tone). 


40          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

Downstairs  to  the  buffet  .  .  .  and  tell  'em  there 
...  to  give  me  something  to  eat. 

OsiP.     No  indeed,  that  I  will  not ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  What,  you  dare  to  refuse,  you 
blockhead ! 

OSIP.  Yes,  it's  all  the  same,  if  I  do  go — you 
won't  get  anything  from  there.  The  landlord 
said  he'll  let  you  have  nothing  more. 

KHLESTAKOV.  How  does  he  dare  to  say  so? 
Bosh,  I  say ! 

OsiP.  He  even  says,  though:  "I'll  go  to  the 
Governor — it's  the  third  week  your  master  has 
not  paid  his  bill.  You  and  your  master,"  he 
says,  "  are  a  pair  of  sharpers,  and  your  master's 
a  scoundrel  as  well.  We've  had  to  do  with 
rogues  and  hangers-on  like  you  before,"  says  he. 

KHLESTAKOV.  And  you,  you  beast,  repeat  it 
all  to  me,  and  enjoy  it. 

OSIP.  "  Yes,"  says  he ;  "  all  that  sort  come 
here,  and  make  theirselves  at  home,  run  up  a 
bi-11,  and  then  you  can't  get  rid  of  them.  I'm 
not  joking,"  he  said  ;  "  I'll  go  straight  and  make 
a  complaint,  and  have  him  taken  to  the  police- 
office,  and  then  clapped  into  gaol." 

KHLESTAK6V.  Now,  now,  stop  it,  you  fool.  Do 
go  and  speak  to  him  !  The  ill-mannered  brute  ! 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          41 

OsiP.  I'd  better  call  the  landlord  here  him- 
self. 

KHLESTAKOV.  What  do  /  want  him  for? 
You  go  and  talk  to  him  yourself. 

OSIP.     But  reelly,  sir 

KHLESTAKOV.  Well,  go  to  the  devil,  and  call 
the  landlord  here.  (Q SIP  goes  out.} 


SCENE  III. 

KHLESTAKOV  (alone).  How  infernally  hungry 
I  am!  I  took  a  little  walk,  thinking  my  appetite 
would  go, — d — n  it,  not  a  bit  of  it !  I'm  as 
ravenous  as  ever.  Yes,  if  I  hadn't  had  that 
spree  in  Penza,1  I'd  have  had  enough  money  to 
get  home  with.  That  infantry  captain  cheated 
me  finely — the  way  the  villain  cut  the  cards 
was  astounding.  He  wasn't  at  it  more  than  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  and  he  cleaned  me  out 
entirely.  But,  all  the  same,  I'd  give  anything  to 
have  another  turn  with  him,  only  I  shan't  have 
the  chance  !  .  .  . 

What  a  beastly  little  town  !     They'll  give  you 

1  A  town  and  government  S.  E.  of  Moscow,  on  the  way  to 
Saratov. 


42  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

nothing  on  tick  at  the  grocers'  shops.  It's 
simply  disgusting!  (Whistles  an  air  from 
"Robert  the  Devil";  then  "Nye  shei  tt  mnye, 
mdtushka"  ;^  then  variations  of  his  own."}  .  .  . 
H'm,  nobody  seems  likely  to  come. 


SCENE  IV. 
(Enter  OSIP  and  the  WAITER.) 

WAITER.  The  landlord  wants  to  know  what 
you  want. 

KiiLESTAK6v.  Ah,  good  day,  my  friend ! 
And  how  are  you  ? 

WAITER.     Pretty  well,  thank  you.2 

1  A  Russian  popular  song,  generally  known  under  the  name 
"  Krdsni  Sarafan"   (the   Red   Gown).      The   first   four  lines 
commence  thus  :  "Ny</  shei  tt  mny$,  mdtushka,  krdsni  sarafan  ; 
Nyt vkhodli  rodlmushka, p6-pustu  v izydn! " — i.e.,  "Do  not  sew 
the  red  gown  for  me,  mother ;  spend  not  useless  money,  my  ow  n 
mother  ! "     These  words  are  supposed  to  be  sung  by  a  young 
girl,  who  does  not  wish  to  marry ;  she  is,  however,  persuaded 
by  her  mother.     The  air  in  question  is  a  simple  but  tuneful  one. 
(See  Note  III.  at  the  end.) 

2  Sldva  B6hu— literally,  "Glory  to  God,"  "  Thank  the  Lord  " 
— the   usual   reply  to  the  question,  " Kak  vui  pazhivdyetc?" 
(How  are  you?),  the  words   "  Ya  zdarfo"  (I  am  well)  being 
understood. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          43 

KHLESTAK^V.  And  how  are  you  getting  on 
in  the  inn  ?  Business  going  on  nicely  ? 

WAITER.     Yes — sldva  B6hu — very  nicely. 

KHLESTAK6V.     Plenty  of  visitors  ? 

WAITER.     Yes,  we've  got  enough. 

KHLESTAKOV.  Look  here,  my  friend,  I 
haven't  had  my  dinner  brought  up  yet — just 
hurry  up  with  it,  please,  as  soon  as  possible. 
.  .  .  You  see,  I've  got  something  particular  to 
do  directly  after  dinner. 

WAITER.  But  the  landlord  said  they're  not 
to  send  anything  more.  He  was  all  but  going 
to  the  Governor  to-day  to  complain  of  you. 

KHLESTAKOV.  Complain  of  me!  Why, 
consider  for  yourself,  my  good  fellow — I  must 
eat.  If  this  goes  on  I  shall  become  a  skeleton. 
I  really  am  very  hungry,  joking  apart. 

WAITER.  Quite  so,  sir.  He  said,  "  I'll  give 
him  no  dinner  till  he  pays  for  what  he's  had 
already."  That  was  his  answer. 

KHLESTAKOV.  But  you  reason  with  him — 
talk  him  over  ! 

WAITER.     Yes,  but  what  am  I  to  say  ? 

KHLESTAK.6V.  You  speak  to  him  seriously, 
and  say  I  must  have  something  to  eat.  As  for 
the  money  .  .  .  why,  he  seems  to  think  that, 


44  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

because  a  muzhik  such  as  he  is  can  go  the  whole 
day  without  food,  any  one  else  can  also.  What 
an  idea  !  (Exeunt  OsiP  and  WAITER.) 


SCENE  V. 

KHLESTAKOV  (alone}.  It  will  be  too  disgusting, 
though,  if  he  flatly  refuses  to  let  me  have  any- 
thing. I  never  felt  so  ravenous  as  I  do  now.  .  .  . 
Shall  I  try  to  raise  anything  on  my  clothes  ? 
Shall  I  pop  my  trousers  ?  .  .  .  No,  better  starve 
than  not  go  home  in  Petersburg  dress !  .  .  . 
What  a  shame  that  Yokhi'm1  wouldn't  let  me 
have  a  carriage  on  hire  ;  it  would  have  been 
d — d  fine  to  go  home  in  a  proper  turn-out, 
and  drive  up  in  style  under  some  squire  or  other's 
porch,  with  carriage-lamps  alight,  and  Osip 
behind  in  livery.  How  they'd  all  flutter  with 
excitement,  I  guess  !  "  Who's  that  ?  What's 
that  ? "  Then  my  footman  goes  up  in  a  gold 
livery  (draws  himself  up  and  imitates  him},  and 
announces  "  Ivan  Alexdndrovich  Khlestak6v, 
of  Petersburg  ;  are  they  receiving  ? "  Those 

1  Joachim,  a  celebrated  horse  and  carriage  dealer  of  St 
Petersburg. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          45 

bumpkins,  though,  don't  know  what  that  phrase 
means.  If  any  boor  of  a  farmer  pays  them  a 
visit,  he  waddles  in  like  a  bear,  straight  into  the 
drawing-room.  .  .  .  And  then  you  walk  up  to 
a  pretty  girl,  and  say,  "  How  charmed  I  am, 
Suddrinya.1  .  .  ."  (Rubs  his  hands  and  makes  a 
bow.}  .  .  .  Tfu  !  (Spits.}  I  feel  quite  sick, I'm  so 
hungry. 

SCENE  VI. 

(Enter  OSIP,  and  afterwards  the  WAITER.) 

KHLESTAK6V.     Well,  what  is  it  ? 

OSIP.     They're  bringing  dinner. 

KHLESTAK6V  (claps  his  hands,  and  jumps 
briskly  to  a  chair}.  Aha  !  Dinner  !  dinner ! 
dinner!2 

WAITER  (with  plates  and  a  napkin}.  This  is 
the  last  time  the  landlord  will  send  you  dinner. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Well,  the  landlord  ...  the 
landlord  is  a  ...  I  spit  on  your  landlord  !  What 
have  you  got  there  ? 

WAITER.     Soup  and  roast-beef. 

1  The  term  suddrtnya  (madam)  is  applied  to  married  and 
unmarried  ladies  alike.     It  is  a  short  form  of  gosuddrtnya. 
8  Nyesiit — literally,  they  are  bringing  it. 


46           THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KHLESTAK6v.     What,  only  two  dishes  ? 

WAITER.     That's  all,  sir. 

KHLESTAK6V.  What  nonsense  !  I  won't  have 
it !  Ask  him  what  he  means  by  it !  ...  That's 
too  little ! 

WAITER.  No,  the  landlord  says  it's  a  good 
deal  too  much  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.     But  isn't  there  any  sauce  ? 

WAITER.     No,  there  isn't  any. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Pray,  why  not?  I  saw  'em 
myself  getting  a  lot  ready,  as  I  went  past  the 
kitchen.  And  at  the  ordinary  this  morning  two 
undersized  little  men  were  eating  salmon  and  all 
sorts  of  good  things. 

WAITER.  Well,  if  you  please,  sir,  there  is 
some,  and  there  isn't. 

KHLESTAK6V.     How  not  ? 

WAITER.    There  isn't  any,  then. 

KHLESTAK6V.  What,  no  salmon — no  fish — 
no  cutlets  ? 

WAITER.  Only  for  the  gentlemen  as  pays, 
sir! 

KHLESTAK6v.     What  a  fool  you  arc  ! 

WAITER.    Yessir. 

KHLESTAK^V.  You  beastly  pig!  ...  Why 
are  they  eating,  while  7  mayn't  ?  Why  mayn't  I 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          47 

too,  confound  it  ?  Ain't  I  a  bond-fide  traveller 
too,  as  good  as  they  ? 

WAITER.     No,  sir,  not  exactly,  that's  certain. 

KHLESTAK6V.     How's  that,  pray  ? 

WAITER.  Well,  the  difference  is  pretty  plain : 
they  settles  up  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Oh,  I  won't  argue  with  you, 
you  booby  !  (Pours  out  the  soup  and  tastes  it.} 
What !  do  you  call  that  soup  ?  Why,  you've 
simply  poured  hot  water  into  a  cup;  it's  got  no 
taste,  it  only  stinks  !  None  of  that  for  me,  thank 
you.  Bring  me  some  other  soup  ! 

WAITER.  Very  well,  sir,  I'll  take  it  away. 
The  governor  said  if  you  didn't  like  it,  you 
could  leave  it. 

KHLESTAK6V  (holding  on  to  his  plate}.  Well, 
well  .  .  .  leave  it  alone,  I  say,  you  fool !  You 
may  be  very  familiar  with  others,  but  I'm  not 
that  sort,  my  man  !  I  advise  you  not  to  try  it 
on  with  me.  .  .  .  ( Tastes  it  again.}  My  God ! 
what  soup  !  (Goes  on  eating  it.}  I  should  think 
no  one  in  the  world  ever  ate  such  soup.  Here's 
some  feathers  floating  about  instead  of  butter ! 
(Comes  across  a  piece  of  chicken.}  Well,  I  declare! 
Ai,  ail  what  a  fowl!  .  .  .  Give  me  the  roast 
beef !  There's  a  little  soup  left,  Osip ;  take  it 


48           THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

yourself.     (Cuts  the  meat.}     What,  is  that  what 
you  call  roast  meat?     That's  not  roast  beef! 

WAITER.    What  is  it,  then  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  Devil  knows  what  it  is — only 
it's  not  roast  beef.  It's  more  like  roast  iron1 
than  meat !  (Eats  it.}  Rogues  and  scoundrels ! 
The  stuff  they  give  one !  Why,  my  jaws  ache 
with  eating  a  single  mouthful !  (Picks  his  teeth 
with  his  finger.}  Villains !  it's  as  tough  as  the 
bark  of  a  tree;  I  can't  get  it  out,  anyhow.  Such 
messes  are  enough  to  ruin  one's  teeth,  curse  the 
blackguards  !  ( Wipes  his  mouth  ivith  the  napkin?) 
Is  there  nothing  more? 

WAITER.    No. 

KHLESTAK^V.     Scoundrels,    blacklegs,    that 
they  are  !     There  might  have  been  some  pastry! 
Rascals  !     It's  only  travellers  that  they  fleece  ! 
(WAITER  removes  and  carries  the  dishes  out, 
accompanied  by  OsiP.) 


SCENE  VII. 

KHLESTAKOV  (alone}.     I  swear  it's  just  as  if 
I'd  eaten  nothing  at  all :  it  has  only  whetted  my 

1  Tafdr— literally,  a  hatchet. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          49 

appetite.     If  I  only  had  a  trifle  to  send  to  the 
market  and  buy  a  bun  with  ! 

OsiP  (re-entering].  The  Town-Governor  has 
come  for  some  reason  or  other;  he  has  announced 
himself,  and  is  asking  for  you. 

KHLESTAK6V  (in  great  alarni}.  What  do 
you  say  ?  .  .  .  There,  that  brute  of  an  innkeeper 
has  gone  and  reported  me  !  .  .  .  Suppose  he 
really  hauls  me  off  to  gaol !  How  would  it  be 
if  I  went  in  aristocratic  style  .  .  .  no,  no,  I 
won't !  There  are  the  officers  and  people 
strolling  about  the  town,  and  I  have  regularly 
set  the  fashion,  and  ogled  a  merchant's  daughter. 
.  .  .  No,  I  carit  .  .  .  and  pray,  who  is  he,  that 
he  has  the  audacity  ?  Treating  me  as  if  I  was 
actually  a  shop-keeper  or  a  day-labourer !  (Puts 
on  a  courageous  air  and  draws  himself  up^)  I'll 
just  say  straight  out  to  him  :  "  How  dare  you 

to " 

(The  door-handle  is  turned ;  KHLESTAK(5v 
turns  pale  and  collapses?) 


50          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 


SCENE  VIII. 

(Enter  the  GOVERNOR  and  DoBCHfNSKi.  The  former 
advances  a  few  steps  and  halts.  They  stare  at  each 
other  in  great  trepidation  for  some  moments?) 

GOVERNOR  {plucking  up  courage  a  little,  and 
saluting  deferentially1}.  I  hope  you  are  well,  sir  ! 

KHLESTAK6V  (bows}.  My  respects  to  you, 
sir! 

GOVERNOR.     Excuse  my  intruding.  .  .  . 

KHLESTAK6V.     Pray  don't  mention  it.  ... 

GOVERNOR.  It  is  my  duty,  as  chief  magis- 
trate of  this  town,  to  take  all  due  measures  to 
prevent  travellers  and  persons  of  rank  from 
suffering  any  inconvenience.  .  .  . 

KHLESTAK^V  (hesitates  a  little  at  first,  but 
towards  the  end  adopts  a  loud  and  confident  tone}. 
We-ell,  what  was  to  be  done?  It's  no-ot  my 
fault.  ...  I  really  am  ...  going  to  pay  .  .  . 
they'll  send  me  money  from  home.  (BOBCHINSKI 
peeps  in  at  the  door.}  He's  to  blame  most :  he 
sends  me  up  beef  as  hard  as  a  board  ;  and  the 
soup  !  the  devil  only  knows  what  he'd  mixed  up 

1  Rukiposhvam — literally,  with  arms  down  the  seams  (of  one's 
uniform). 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          51 

with  it :  I  was  obliged  to  pitch  it  out  of  the 
window.  He  starves  me  the  whole  day  .  .  . 
and  the  tea's  so  peculiar — it  smells  of  fish  and 
nothing  else !  Why  then  should  I  ...  A  fine 
idea,  indeed"! 

GOVERNOR  (nervously),  I  assure  you,  it's  not 
my  fault,  really.  I  always  get  very  good  beef 
from  the  market.  The  Kholmog6ri1  drovers 
bring  it,  and  they  are  sober  and  well-principled 
people.  I'm  sure  I  don't  know  where  he  gets  it 
from.  But  if  anything's  wrong  .  .  .  allow  me 
to  suggest  that  you  come  with  me  and  get  other 
quarters. 

KHLESTAKOV.  No,  that  I  will  not !  I  know 
tvhat  " other  quarters"  means  ;  it's  another  word 
for  gaol  /  And  pray,  what  right  have  you — how 
dare  you  .  .  .  ?  Why,  I  ...  I'm  a  Government 
official  at  Petersburg  .  .  .  (Defiantly.}  Yes  I  ... 
I  ...  I  ... 

GOVERNOR  (aside).  Oh,  my  God  !  how  angry 
he  is  !  He  knows  all !  Those  cursed  merchants 
have  told  him  all ! 

1  Kholmogdrt,  a  town  on  the  estuary  of  the  Northern  Dvina, 
70  versts  (46  miles)  from  Archangel,  celebrated  for  its  fine  breed 
of  cattle.  Lomon6sov,  the  founder  of  modern  Russian  literature, 
was  born  near  here. 


52           THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KHLESTAKOV  (aggressively).  That  for  you 
and  your  governorship  together!  I'll  not  go 
with  you  !  I'll  go  straight  to  the  Minister. 
(Bangs  his  fist  on  the  table?)  Who  are  you,  pray, 
who  are  you  ? 

GOVERNOR  (starting  and  shaking  all  over). 
Have  pity  on  me !  don't  ruin  me !  I  have  a 
wife  and  small  children!  Don't  make  me  a 
miserable  man ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  No,  I'll  not  go  with  you ! 
What's  that  got  to  do  with  me?  why  am  / 
to  go  to  gaol  because  you've  got  a  wife  and 
small  children  ?  I  like  that — that's  beautiful ! 
(BOBCHiNSKi  looks  in  through  the  door  and 
disappears  in  terror?)  No,  much  obliged  to  you, 
sir,  but  I'll  not  leave  here  ! 

GOVERNOR  (quaking).  It  was  only  my  inex- 
perience, I  swear,  only  my  inexperience !  and 
insufficient  means!  Judge  for  yourself — the 
salary  I  get  is  not  enough  for  tea  and  sugar. 
And  if  I  have  taken  any  bribes,  they  were  very 
little  ones — something  for  the  table,  or  a  coat  or 
two.  ...  As  for  the  sergeant's  widow,  who  took 
to  shop-keeping — whom  they  say  I  flogged1 — 
it's  a  slander,  I  swear,  it's  a  slander.  My  enemies 
1  For  engaging  in  trade  without  a  licence. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          53 

invented  it — they're  the  kind  of  people  who  are 
ready  to  murder  me  in  cold  blood ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Yes,  yes,  but  I've  nothing 
to  do  with  tJiem.  .  .  .  (Reflects?)  I  don't  see, 
though,  why  you  should  dilate  about  your 
enemies  to  me,  or  talk  about  sergeants'  widows. 
...  A  sergeant's  wife  would  have  been  quite  a 
different  matter  .  .  .  Don't  you  try  to  flog  me, 
though — your  arm's  not  long  enough  for  that ! 
.  .  .  Enough !  Look  you  here !  .  .  ,  I'll  pay, 
I'll  pay  the  bill  all  right,  but  at  present  I'm  out 
of  cash.  That's  just  why  I  stay  here,  because  I 
haven't  a  kope"k  left. 

GOVERNOR  (aside,  recovering}.  Oh,  the  cun- 
ning rascal !  That's  a  nice  yarn  !  a  pretty  piece 
of  mystification!  You  may  believe  as  much  of 
that  as  you  please!  .  .  .  One  doesn't  know  how 
to  begin  with  him.  Still  I've  got  to  try — come 
of  it  what  will,  I  must  have  a  try  somehow ! 
(Aloud?)  H'm,  if  you  really  are  in  want  of  funds, 
or  anything  else,  I  am  ready  to  oblige  you  at  once. 
It  is — ahem  ! — my  duty  to  assist  travellers. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Lend  me  then — lend  me  a 
trifle !  and  then  I'll  settle  up  immediately  with 
the  landlord.  I  only  want  two  hundred  roubles, 
or  even  less. 


54  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

GOVERNOR  {getting  out  his .  pocket-book}. 
There's  exactly  two  hundred  roubks — don't 
trouble  to  count  them  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  I'm  very  much  obliged  to 
you  !  I'll  return  it  you  directly  I  get  home  .  .  . 
it  was  a  sudden  case  of  impecuniosity.  ...  I  see 
you  are  a  gentleman.  Now  the  state  of  things  is 
altered. 

GOVERNOR  (aside].  Well,  thank  the  Lord ! 
he's  taken  my  money.  Now  I  guess  we  shall 
hit  it  off.  I  shoved  four  hundred  instead  of  two 
into  his  hand. 

KHLESTAKOV.  Hi,  Osip!  (OsiP  enters} 
Call  the  waiter  here !  ( To  the  GOVERNOR  and 
DOBCHfNSKi.)  But  why  are  you  standing  all 
this  while?  Pray  oblige  me,  take  a  seat!  (To 
DOBCHINSKI.)  Please  take  a  seat,  I  beg  of  you! 

GOVERNOR.    Oh  no !    We  can  very  well  stand. 

KHLESTAKOV.     But  please,  please,  be  seated  ! 
I  see  now  completely  the  generosity  and  sincerity 
of  your  character :  at  first  I  confess  I  thought 
you  had  come  with  the  object  of  putting  me 
in—         (To  DOBCHINSKI.)     Do  take  a  chair! 
(The  GOVERNOR  and  DOBCHfNSKi  at  last 
sit  down.      BoBCHiNSKI  looks  in  at  the 
door  and  listens} 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          55 

GOVERNOR  (aside}.  Now  I  must  be  a  little 
bolder.  He  wants  his  incognito  kept  up.  Good, 
we'll  talk  a  little  nonsense  too — we'll  pretend  we 
don't  know  in  the  least  what  he  really  is. 
(Aloud.}  I  was  going  my  rounds  in  the  per- 
formance of  my  duty  with  Peter  Ivanovich 
Dobchfnski  here — he's  a  landed  proprietor  of 
this  place — and  we  came  into  the  inn  to  ascertain 
whether  travellers  are  being/  well  entertained — 
because  I  am  not  like  other  governors,  who 
never  attend  to  their  business  ;  no,  out  of  pure 
Christian  philanthropy,  apart  from  my  duty,  I 
wish  every  mortal  to  be  treated  well — and  lo! 
as  a  reward  for  my  pains,  the  occasion  has 
presented  itself  of  making  so  agreeable  an 
acquaintance. 

KHLESTAK6V.  I  too  am  delighted.  Without 
your  kind  assistance  I  confess  I  should  have  had 
to  stay  here  for  a  pretty  long  while — I  hadn't  the 
least  idea  how  to  pay  my  bill. 

GOVERNOR  (aside}.  Oh  yes,  fib  away.  Didnt 
know  how  to  pay  his  bill !  (Aloud.}  May  I 
venture  to  inquire  into  what  locality  you  are 
pleased  to  be  going  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  I  am  going  to  my  own  estate 
in  the  Saratov  government. 


56          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

GOVERNOR  (aside,  with  an  ironical  expression 
on  his  face].  To  the  Saratov  government !  Oh 
indeed !  And  he  doesn't  even  blush !  One 
must  keep  a  sharp  look-out  with  this  gentleman  ! 
(Aloud.}  You  have  deigned,  indeed,  to  engage 
on  a  pleasant  enterprise !  It  is  quite  true  that 
journeys  are  disagreeable,  as  they  say,  on  account 
of  the  delays  in  posting;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
they  furnish  an  agreeable  diversion  for  the  mind. 
You  are  travelling  for  your  own  amusement,  I 
suppose  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  No,  my  father  wants  me.  The 
old  man's  angry  because  up  till  now  I've  made 
no  advance  in  the  service  in  Petersburg.  He 
thinks  that  the  moment  you  get  there  they  stick 
the  Vladfmir1  in  your  button-hole.  No,  indeed, 
and  I'd  like  to  send  him  to  knock  about  a  chan- 
cellor's office  for  a  while  ! 

GOVERNOR  (aside).  Just  observe,  I  ask  you, 
how  he  romances !  and  drags  in  his  old  father 
too  !  (Aloud.}  And,  may  I  ask,  are  you  going 
there  for  a  long  time  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.  Really  I  don't  know.  You 
see,  my  father  is  stupid  and  obstinate,  like  a 

1  The  St.  Vladfmir  of  the  Fourth  Class  (the  sixth  Russian 
order  in  point  of  seniority). 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          57 

block  of  wood — the  old  duffer!  I  shall  tell  him 
straight  out :  "  Do  as  you  please,  but  I  can't  live 
away  from  Petersburg."  Why  should  I  be 
condemned  to  rot  away  among  rustics  ?  That's 
not  my  ideal — my  soul  craves  for  civilisa- 
tion! 

GOVERNOR  (aside).  Well,  he  is  a  fine  hand  at 
spinning  yarns,  and  no  mistake !  He  lies,  and 
lies,  but  doesn't  trip  anywhere !  Why,  the  ugly,, 
insignificant  little  whipper-snapper,  I  could  crush 
him  with  my  finger-nail !  But  stop,  he'll  soon 
betray  himself  under  my  management !  I'll  let 
him  fib  a  little  longer!  (To  KHLESTAKOV.) 
You  condescended  to  observe,  quite  rightly — 
what  can  one  do  in  a  dead-alive  place  ?  Why, 
see  what  it's  like  here :  you  lie  awake  at  night, 
you  toil  for  your  country's  good,  you  spare  no 
effort  or  exertion — and  I  should  like  to  know 
how  much  reward  you  get  for  your  pains !  .  .  . 
(He  looks  round  tJie  room.}  Rather  damp,  this 
room,  isn't  it  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  Yes,  it's  a  dirty  hole,  and  the 
insects — well,  I've  never  seen  the  like  of  'em  ; 
they  bite  like  dogs  ! 

GOVERNOR.  You  don't  say  so  !  An  illustrious 
visitor  like  you  to  be  incommoded  with — with 


58  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

disgusting  insects,  that  have  no  business  to  exist! 
And  I  daresay  it's  dark  in  this  room  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  Dark  ?  I  should  think  so  ! 
The  landlord  has  started  the  custom  of  not 
allowing  me  any  candles.  Now  and  then  I  want 
to  do  something,  to  read  a  bit,  or  the  fancy 
strikes  me  to  compose  a  little — not  a  bit  of  it, 
it's  as  dark  as  pitch  ! 

GOVERNOR.  May  I  venture  to  ask  you  .  ,  , 
but  no,  I  am  unworthy  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.     What  do  you  mean  ? 

GOVERNOR.  No,  no  ;  I  am  unworthy,  un- 
worthy of  the  honour ! 

KllLESTAK6v.     But  what  do  you  mean  ? 

GOVERNOR.  If  I  might  be  so  bold  ...  I 
have  a  charming  little  room  for  you  at  home, 
light  and  comfortable.  .  .  .  But  no  !  I  feel  it  is 
too  great  an  honour.  .  .  .  Don't  be  offended, 
yti  Bdhu  ;  I  only  meant  well  by  the  offer  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  On  the  contrary,  I  accept  it 
with  pleasure.  I  should  be  much  more  comfort- 
able in  a  private  residence  than  in  this  pot-house. 

GOVERNOR.  I  am  only  too  delighted  !  How 
glad  my  wife  will  be  !  It's  a  little  habit  I  have; 
I  always  was  hospitable  from  childhood, especially 
when  my  guest  is  distinguished  and  enlightened. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          59 

Don't  think  I  say  this  by  way  of  flattery;  no,  I 
have  not  that  vice.  I  only  speak  from  the  ful- 
ness of  my  heart 

KHLESTAKOV.  I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you. 
I  myself  hate  two-faced  people.  I'm  very  much 
struck  with  your  open-heartedness  and  generosity; 
and,  I  assure  you,  I  expect  nothing  more  than 
that  people  should  treat  me  with  consideration 
and  esteem,  ahem  !  esteem  and  consideration ! 


SCENE  IX. 

(Enter   the    WAITER,  escorted  by  OSIP.     BOBCHfNSKi 
peeps  in  again.} 

WAITER.     You  were  pleased  to  require ? 

KHLESTAK6V.     Yes,  bring  me  the  bill. 

WAITER.  I  gave  you  the  second  account  not 
long  ago. 

KHLESTAKOV.  Oh,  I  can't  remember  your 
stupid  accounts  !  Tell  me  what  it  comes  to ! 

WAITER.  You  were  pleased  to  order  dinner 
the  first  day,  and  the  second  day  you  only  took 
salmon,  and  after  that  everything  was  put  down 
on  credit 


60  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Durdk  !l  you've  begun  to  add 
it  all  up  again  !  How  much  is  it  altogether  ? 

GOVERNOR.  Please  don't  let  it  bother  you  ; 
he  can  very  well  wait.  ( To  the  WAITER.)  Get 
out  of  this  ;  the  money  will  be  sent  you. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Yes,  of  course ;  that  will  be 
the  best. 

(Pockets  the  notes.  Tlie  WAITER  goes  out. 
BOBCHINSKI  looks  in  again  through  the 
doorway?) 


SCENE  X. 
(The  GOVERNOR,  KHLESTAK^V,  a«^DoBCHiNSKi.) 

GOVERNOR.  Wouldn't  you  like  now  to  in- 
spect a  few  of  the  institutions  in  our  town — say, 
the  hospital  and  so  on  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.     But  what  is  there  to  see  ? 

GOVERNOR.  Well,  you  will  see  how  we 
manage  matters — what  excellent  order  there 
is.  ... 

KHLESTAKOV.  Oh,  with  the  greatest  pleasure ; 
I  am  ready.  (BOBCHINSKI  puts  his  head  in  at 
tJie  door.} 

1  Fool,  booby. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          61 

GOVERNOR.  And  then,  if  you  wish,  we  can 
go  on  from  there  and  inspect  the  district  High 
School,  and  see  the  good  discipline  with  which 
our  instruction  is  administered. 

KHLESTAKC-V.     Oh,  by  all  means ! 

GOVERNOR.  Afterwards,  if  you  like  to  visit 
the  prison  and  the  town  gaol,  you  will  be  able  to 
notice  how  carefully  our  criminals  are  kept. 

KHLESTAK(5v.  Yes,  yes  ;  but  why  go  to  the 
gaol?  We  had  very  much  better  look  at  the 
hospital. 

GOVERNOR.  As  you  please.  Do  you  propose 
to  ride  in  your  own  carriage,  or  go  with  me  in  a 
droshky  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.  Well,  I  prefer  to  go  with  you 
in  a  droshky. 

GOVERNOR  (to  DOBCHINSKI).  Now,  Dob- 
chmski,  there  will  be  no  room  for  you. 

DOBCHINSKI.  Oh,  it  doesn't  matter,  I'll 
manage ! 

GOVERNOR  (aside>  to  DOBCHINSKI).  Listen : 
will  you  run,  as  fast  as  you  can,  and  take  a 
couple  of  notes — one  to  Zemlyanfka  at  the 
hospital,  the  other  to  my  wife.  (To  KHLES- 
TAKOV.) May  I  take  the  liberty  of  asking  you 
to  permit  me  to  write  a  line  to  my  wife  in  your 


62  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

presence,  to  tell  her  to  get  ready  to  receive  her 
honoured  guest? 

KHLESTAK6V.  But  why  all  this  .  .  .  ?  How- 
ever, there's  the  ink  ...  I  don't  know  about 
paper,  though  .  .  .  Would  that  bill  do  ? 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  yes !  I'll  write  on  that ! 
(Writes,  talking  to  himself  at  the  same  time.'} 
We'll  see  how  business  goes  after  lunch?-  and 
a  pot-bellied  bottle  or  two !  We  have  some 
Russian  "  Madeira,"2  not  much  to  look  at,  but  it 
will  roll  an  elephant  under  the  table.  If  I  only 
knew  what  he  really  is,  and  how  far  I've  got  to 
be  on  my  guard. 

(Finishes  writing,   and  gives    the  note    to 
DoBCHiNSKl,  who  is  just  going  out,  when 
the  door  suddenly  flies  off  its  hinges,  and 
BOBCHfNSKI,   who  was  listening  on  the 
other  side,  tumbles  forward  with  it  on  the 
floor.     All  utter  exclamations  of  surprise. 
BOBCHINSKI  gradually  picks  himself 'up '.) 
KHLESTAK6V.     What,  have  you   hurt  your- 
self anywhere  ? 

1  Friihstuck.     Khlestak6v  has  already  had  an  early  Russian 
abytd,  or  dinner. 

2  Gubfrnskaya  madylra,   grown  in  the    "government"  or 
province. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          63 

BOBCHINSKI.  Oh,  nothing,  nothing,  sir, 
nothing  to  bother  about,  sir,  only  a  little  knock 
on  the  nose  !  I'll  run  over  to  Doctor  Hiibner's — 
he  has  some  splendid  plaster — it'll  soon  get  right. 

GOVERNOR  {making  an  angry  gesture  at  BOB- 
CHINSKI,  to  KHLESTAK6v).  Oh,  that  doesn't 
matter,  sir  !  With  your  kind  permission  we  will 
go ;  but  I'll  tell  your  servant  to  take  your 
portmanteau  across.  (Calls  OsiP.)  Here,  my 
good  fellow,  take  everything  over  to  my  house, 
the  Governor's — any  one  will  show  it  you.  .  .  . 
By  your  leave,  sir !  (Makes  way  for  KHLES- 
TAK(3v,  and  follows  him;  then  turns,  and 
severely  addresses  BOBCHINSKI.)  You  again! 
Couldn't  you  find  some  other  place  to  tumble  in  ! 
and  sprawling  there,  like  the  devil  knows  what ! 
(Goes  out;  after  him  BOBCHINSKI.  Curtain 
falls.} 


64  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 


THIRD  ACT. 
SCENE — The  same  apartment  as  in  the  First  Act. 

SCENE  I. 

(ANNA  ANDR£YEVNA  and  MARYA  ANI^NOVNA  standing 
at  the  window,  in  the  same  positions  as  at  the  end  of  the 
First  Act.") 

ANNA.  There  now,  we've  been  waiting  a 
whole  hour,  and  it's  all  through  your  stupid 
vanity ;  you  were  quite  ready  dressed,  but  no ! 
you  must  still  be  dawdling !  .  .  .  Oh,  dear  !  not 
a  sound  to  be  heard  of  her.1  .  .  .  How  vexatious 
it  is  !  ...  There's  not  a  soul  to  be  seen,  of  course ; 
it's  just  as  if  the  whole  place  were  dead. 

MARYA.  There,  mamma,  really  we  shall  know 
all  about  it  in  a  minute  or  two.  Avd6tya  must 
come  back  soon.  {Looks  out  of  the  window  and 
screams?)  Oh,  mdmenka,  mamma  dear !  some 
one  ts  coming — away  there  at  the  end  of  the 
street ! 

1  The  servant  Avd6tya. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          65 

ANNA.  Who's  coming?  Where?  You've 
always  got  some  fancy  or  other !  .  .  .  Ah,  so 
there  is  I  Who  is  it,  now  ?  He's  short — in  a 
dress  coat !  Who  can  it  be  ?  Eh  ?  How  tire- 
some not  to  know !  Who  ever  can  it  be  ? 

MARYA.     It's  Dobchfnski,  mamma. 

ANNA.  Dobchfnski,  indeed !  One  of  your 
random  guesses,  miss !  It's  certainly  not  Dob- 
chinski.  (  Waves  her  handkerchief?)  Hi !  you  ! 
come  here  !  quick  ! 

MARYA.     It's  really  Dobchfnski,  mdmenka  ! 

ANNA.  There  now,  you  only  want  to  con- 
tradict, of  course.  You're  told  it's  not  Dob- 
chfnski. 

MARYA.  But  look,  mamma,  look  !  You  see 
it  is  Dobchfnski. 

ANNA.  Well,  so  it  is.  ...  I  see  now.  Why 
do  you  want  to  argue  about  it  ?  (Shouts  at  the 
window?)  Hurry  up,  quick  !  How  slow  you 
walk  !  .  .  .  Well,  where  are  they — eh  ?  Tell  me 
from  where  you  are;  it'll  do  just  as  well !  What, 
is  he  very  severe  ?  Eh  ?  How  about  my  hus- 
band— my  husband?  (Moves  away  from  the 
window  a  little,  disgusted.}  How  stupid  he  is ! 
Not  a  single  word  will  he  utter  till  he's  got  into 
the  room  ! 

5 


66  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

SCENE  II. 

(Enter  DoBCufNSKi.) 

ANNA.  Now,  if  you  please,  tell  me — aren't 
you  ashamed  of  yourself?  I  used  to  think  you 
were  the  only  one  of  them  who  was  a  gentleman. 
They  all  bolted  off,  and  you  after  them!  and  here 
have  /  been  all  this  while  without  a  soul  to  tell 
me  about  it  all.  Isn't  it  disgraceful  of  you  ?  I 
stood  godmother  to  your  little  Ivan  and  Liza, 
and  this  is  the  way  you  treat  me  ! 

DOBCHINSKI.  I  vow,  my  dear  lady,1  I  ran  so 
fast  to  pay  my  respects  to  you,  that  I'm  quite  out 
of  breath.  ...  I  have  the  honour  to  salute  you, 
Marya  Antonovna  ! 

MARYA.     Good  afternoon,  Peter  Ivdnovich ! 

ANNA.  Well,  tell  us  now,  what's  going  on 
there  ? 

DOBCHfNSKi.  Ant6n  Ant6novich  has  sent 
you  this  note. 

ANNA.     Yes,  but  what  is  he — a  general  ? 

DOBCHINSKI.     No,  not   a   general,   but  he's 

i  Ktimushka,  a  familiar  term  of  address.  Like  the  English 
word  "gossip,"  it  strictly  means  "fellow-sponsor,"  "god- 
mother. " 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          67 

quite  as  big  a  swell.  Such  manners — such 
dignified  ways  ! 

ANNA.  Ah,  it's  the  very  same  that  was 
mentioned  in  the  letter  to  my  husband  ! 

DOBCHfNSKI.  Precisely.  Bobchfnski  and  I 
were  the  first  to  discover  him. 

ANNA.     Good  !     Now  tell  me  all  about  it ! 

DOBCHINSKL  I  will.  Thank  the  Lord,  every- 
thing's all  right  now.  At  first  he  received  Ant6n 
Ant6novich  rather  roughly ;  I  assure  you, 
ma'am,  he  got  angry,  and  said  that  the  inn 
was  most  uncomfortable,  that  he  wouldn't  come 
to  the  Governor's  house,  nor  go  to  gaol  for 
him  ;  but  afterwards,  when  he  found  out  Ant6n 
Ant6novich's  innocence,  and  had  had  a  short 
conversation  with  him,  he  changed  his  opinion 
directly,  and  then,  thank  Heaven,  all  went  well. 
They  have  now  gone  to  inspect  the  hospital. 
...  I  confess,  though,  that  Antdn  Ant6novich 
quite  thought  that  a  secret  information  would 
be  lodged  against  him.  I  myself  also  was  a 
little  alarmed. 

ANNA.  Why  should  you  be  afraid?  you're 
not  an  official,  you  know. 

DOBCH!  NSKI.  Yes,  but  you  see,  when  a  bigwig 
speaks  you  can't  help  feeling  a  bit  frightened. 


68  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

ANNA.  Well,  well  ...  all  this  is  trifling, 
though  ;  describe  what  he's  like  personally — 
is  he  young  or  old  ? 

DOBCHINSKI.  Young,  quite  young — about 
twenty-three  years  old  ;  but  he  talks  quite  like 
an  old  man.  "Permit  me,"  he  says,  "I  will 
go  there,  and  there" — (gesticulates)—-^  in  very 
distinguished  style.  "  I  am  fond,"  says  he,  "  of 
writing  and  reading  ;  it's  a  bore,  though,"  he 
says,  "  that  it's  rather  dark  in  my  room." 

ANNA.  But  what's  he  like  to  look  at,  dark 
or  fair  ? 

DoBCHfNSKl.  No,  auburn1  rather,  and  his 
eyes  flash  like  a  wild  beast's — they  quite  un- 
nerve you. 

ANNA.  H'm — let's  see  what's  written  in 
this  note.  (Reads.}  "  I  hasten  to  let  you 
know,  my  dear,  that  I  was  in  a  very  critical 
predicament ;  but,  relying  on  the  mercy  of 
God,  two  pickled  gherkins  a  part  and  a  half- 
portion  of  caviare — I  rouble  25  kopeks  .  .  ." 
(Stops.}  What  ever  does  he  mean  by  pickled 
gherkins  and  caviare,  there  ? 

DoBCHfNSKl.  Oh,  Ant6n  Ant6novich  wrote 
on  a  piece  of  paper  that  had  been  used  before, 

1  Shdntret,  a  corruption  of  the  French  ch&tain. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          69 

to  save  time  ;  there's  some  bill  or  other  made 
out  on  it. 

ANNA.  Oh,  I  see,  exactly.  (Goes  on  reading?) 
"  But,  relying  on  the  mercy  of  God,  I  think  all 
will  come  to  a  happy  conclusion.  Get  a  room 
ready  quickly — the  one  with  the  gold  wall- 
paper— for  our  distinguished  guest ;  don't  have 
anything  extra  for  dinner,  because  we  shall 
lunch  at  the  hospital  with  Arte'mi  Philfppovich, 
but  order  in  some  more  wine  ;  tell  Abdiilin  to 
send  some  of  his  very  best — otherwise  I  will 
wreck  his  whole  cellar.  I  kiss  your  hand,  my 
dear,  and  remain,  thine,  Ant6n  Skvaznfk-Dmuk- 
hanovski.  .  .  ."  Akh,  Bozhe  moil  there's  not  a 
moment  to  lose  !  Hi,  who's  there  ?  Mishka  I1 

DOBCHfNSKI  (runs  to  the  door  and  shouts?) 
Mishka !  Mishka  !  Mishka  !  (MlSHKA  enters?) 

ANNA.  Attend :  run  over  to  Abdiilin  the 
merchant.  .  .  .  Stop,  I  will  give  you  a  note. 
(Sits  at  the  table  and  writes,  talking  at  the  same 
time?)  Give  that  note  to  the  coachman  Sidor ; 
he's  to  run  to  Abdulin's  with  it,  and  bring  back 
the  wine.  Then  return  here  directly,  and  get 
a  room  ready  for  a  visitor.  Put  a  bed,  wash- 
stand,  etcetera,  there. 

1  Diminutive  of  Mikhail. 


70  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

DOBCHINSKI.  Well,  I'll  hurry  off  now, 
Anna  Andre"yevna,  and  see  how  he  does  the 
inspecting ! 

ANNA.     Go  then,  go,  I'll  not  detain  you. 


SCENE  III. 

ANNA.  Now,  Mashenka,1  we  must  think 
about  our  toilet.  He's  a  young  dandy  from 
town — the  Lord  forbid  that  he  should  laugh  at 
us  !  You  had  better  put  on  your  blue  dress 
with  the  little  flounces. 

MARY  A.  Lor',  mamma,  the  blue  dress !  I 
don't  like  it  at  all !  The  Lyapkin-Tyapkin 
goes  about  in  blue,  and  Zemlyanfka's  daughter 
in  blue  too.  No,  I'd  much  better  put  on  my 
light  pink2  gown. 

ANNA.  Your  light  pink  gown !  .  .  .  really, 
you  only  say  that  for  the  sake  of  contradiction  ! 
You  will  look  much  better  in  blue,  because  I 
wish  to  wear  my  favourite  shade — straw  colour. 

MARYA.  Oh,  mamma,  that  doesn't  suit  you 
at  all ! 

ANNA.    What !  straw-colour  doesn't  suit  me  ? 

1  Diminutive  of  Mdsha,  the  familiar  form  for  Mdrya. 
a  TsvySlnoye — literally,  any  bright  colour. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          71 

MARYA.  No.  I'll  bet  anything  you  won't 
look  well :  your  eyes  ought  to  be  quite  dark 
to  go  with  pale  yellow. 

ANNA.  Oh,  I  like  that !  As  if  my  eyes 
weren't  dark  !  They're  as  dark  as  they  can  be  ! 
What  rubbish  you  talk  !  How  can  they  help 
being  dark,  when  I  always  draw  the  queen  of 
clubs,  if  I  tell  my  fortune  by  the  cards  ? 

MARYA.  Oh,  mdmenka,  the  queen  of  hearts 
is  much  more  your  style ! 

ANNA.     Fiddlesticks !     Nonsense !     I  never 

was   a   queen   of   hearts !      (Exit  hastily  with 

MARYA,  and  speaks  behind  the  scenes?)     What 

an  idea — queen  of  hearts!     Goodness  gracious ! 

(On  their  departure  a  door  is  opened,  and 

MISHKA  sweeps    dust  out.     OSIP  enters 

from  another  door,  with  a  portmanteau 

on  his  head?} 


SCENE  IV. 

OSIP.     Where's  this  to  go  ? 

MlSHKA.     Here,  mister,1  this  way  ! 

OSIP.     Stop  !    I  must  take  breath  first.     Oh, 

1  Dyddyushka,  diminutive  of  dyddya,  uncle. 


72          THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

what  a  miserable  time  I'm  having!  On  an 
empty  stomach  any  load  seems  heavy. 

MISHKA.  Eh,  uncle,  will  the  general  be  here 
soon? 

OSIP.     The  general  ? — who  ? 

MlSHKA.     Why,  your  bdrin  !l 

OsiP.     My  bdrin  ?    Him  a  general  ? 

MlSHKA.     Ain't  he  then  a  general  ? 

OSIP.    Oh  yes,  but  in  a  different  kind  o'  way. 

MlSHKA.  What  is  he  then  ? — higher  or  lower 
than  a  real  general  in  rank  ? 

OSIP.     Oh,  higher  I 

MISHKA.  There  now !  that's  why  there's  all 
this  to-do  here. 

OsiP.  Look  here,  young  'un  !  I  see  you're  a 
smart  chap — just  get  us  somethin'  to  eat ! 

MISHKA.  But  for  the  likes  of  you,  uncle, 
there's  nothing  good  enough  ready.  You  won't 
eat  plain  stuff — but  they'll  send  you  something, 
when  your  master  sits  down  to  table. 

OSIP.  Well,  but  what  "  plain  stuff"  have  you 
got? 

MISHKA.  Cabbage-soup,  and  porridge,  and 
pastry. 

OSIP.  Let's  have  the  cabbage-soup,  porridge, 
1  Master ;  strictly  speaking,  a  nobleman. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          73 

and  pastry — it  doesn't  matter — I'll  eat  it  all. 
Now  let's  take  the  portmanteau !  What,  is 
there  another  door  ? 

MISHKA.     Yes.     (They  both  carry  the  port- 
manteau into  the  side-chamber^} 


SCENE  V. 

(The  POLICE  OFFICERS  throw  both  folding-doors  open. 
KHLESTAKOV  enters;  after  him  the  GOVERNOR,  then 
the  CHARITY  COMMISSIONER,  the  DIRECTOR  OF 
SCHOOLS,  and  BOBCHINSKI  with  plaster  on  his  nose. 
The  GOVERNOR  points  out  a  piece  of  paper  lying  on 
the  floor  to  the  POLICE  OFFICERS,  who  rush  breathlessly 
to  pick  it  up%  and  butt  against  each  other.") 

KHLESTAKOV.  Splendid  institutions !  I'm 
charmed  with  the  way  you  have  of  showing 
strangers  all  that's  to  be  seen  in  your  town  ! 
In  other  places  they  showed  me  nothing. 

GOVERNOR.  In  other  towns,  I  venture  to 
suggest,  the  authorities  and  officials  care  most 
for  their  own  advancement ;  but  here,  one  may 
say,  there  is  no  other  thought  than  how  to 
win  the  recognition  of  the  Government  by  good 
order  and  vigilance. 

KHLESTAK6V.     That    lunch   was   excellent ; 


74  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

I've  quite  over-eaten  myself.  D'you  then  have 
a  spread  like  that  every  day  ? 

GOVERNOR.  No ;  it  was  in  honour  of  such 
an  acceptable  guest ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  I'm  fond  of  my  dinner ! 
What  does  one  live  for  but  to  pluck  the  flowers 
of  pleasure  ?  What  was  that  fish  called  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (stepping  forward). 
Labardcin?  sir  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  It  was  exquisite  !  Where 
was  it  we  lunched  ?  In  the  infirmary,  wasn't  it  ? 

CPIARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Precisely  so,  sir; 
in  the  hospital. 

KHLESTAKOV.  I  remember,  I  remember — 
there  were  beds  there.  But  have  the  sick  got 
well  ?  There  were  not  many  of  them,  it 
seemed. 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Ten  or  so  re- 
main, not  more;  the  rest  have  all  recovered. 
The  place  is  so  well  organised — there's  such 
good  discipline.  It  may  seem  incredible  to 
you,  perhaps,  but  ever  since  I've  undertaken 
the  management  they  all  get  well  like  flies.2 

1  Salted  or  dried  codfish. 

2  In  allusion  to  the  Russian  popular  saying,   "  Umrtit  kak 
miikhi  muzhiki"    (The  muzhiks  die  like  flies.) 


THE  /A  SPECTOR-GENERAL.          75 

The  patient  no  sooner  gets  into  the  sick-ward 
than  he's  well  again.  It's  not  so  much  done  by 
the  doctoring  as  by  honesty  and  regularity. 

GOVERNOR.  And  I  venture  to  point  out 
what  a  head-splitting  business  is  the  office  of 
a  Town  Governor !  How  many  multifarious 
matters  are  referred  to  him,  concerning  the  clean- 
ness of  the  town  and  repairs  and  alterations 
alone !  ...  in  a  word,  the  most  competent  of 
men  might  get  into  hopeless  difficulties.  God 
be  thanked  though,  everything  progresses  favour- 
ably here !  Any  other  governor,  to  be  sure, 
would  look  after  his  own  profit ;  but,  believe  me, 
that  when  I  lie  down  to  rest,  my  sole  prayer  is  : 
"  O  Lord  my  God,  grant  that  Government  may 
see  my  zeal  and  be  satisfied !"  .  .  .  They  may, 
or  may  not,  reward  me — that  is  as  they 
please,  of  course — but,  at  any  rate,  my  con- 
science is  clear.  When  there  is  order  through- 
out the  town,  when  the  streets  are  swept 
clean,  and  the  prisoners  are  well  kept  and 
locked  up,  when  the  number  of  drunkards 
is  small — what  more  do  I  want  ?  Ah,  I  long 
for  no  honours !  They  are,  without  doubt, 
alluring,  but  to  the  upright  all  dust  and  vanity ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (aside}.    Ah,   the 


76  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL, 

villain,  how  he  can  spout !  It's  a  gift  of 
Heaven  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Quite  true.  I  don't  mind 
saying  I  also  like  to  declaim  now  and  then  ; 
sometimes  it's  in  prose,  and  sometimes  I  throw 
off  verses. 

BOBCHINSKI  (to  DOBCHlNSKl).  How  well, 
how  very  well  that  was  put,  Pyotr  Ivanovich ! 
Such  an  observation  .  ,  .  shows  he's  studied 
the  liberal  arts ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  By  the  way,  could  you  tell 
me  if  you  have  any  amusements  here,  any 
places  where  you  could  get  a  game  of  cards, 
for  instance  ? 

GOVERNOR  (aside).  Oho,  my  young  friend,1 
/  know  who  you  mean  that  for!2  (Aloud.} 
God  forbid  !  We've  never  even  heard  of  such 
a  thing  as  a  card-club  here !  I've  not  dealt 
a  card  in  my  life ;  I  don't  even  know  how  cards 
are  played.  I  can't  bear  to  look  at  'em — if 
ever  I  happen  to  see  a  king  of  diamonds  or  such 
like,  I'm  so  overcome  with  disgust  that  I  just 
have  to  spit  to  relieve  myself.  It  did  once 

1  Goltibchik,  my  little  pigeon. 

2  Literally,  in  whose  garden  you  throw  stones — a  proverbial 
expression. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          77 

happen  that,  to  please  the  children,  I  built  a 
house  of  cards,  but  I  had  a  nightmare  of  the 
cursed  things  the  night  after !  Lord  forgive 
'em — how  can  people  waste  precious  time  over 
card-playing?  .  .  . 

LUKA  (aside}.  But,  the  rascal,  he  rooked 
me  to  the  tune  of  a  hundred  roubles  at  faro 
yesterday ! 

GOVERNOR.  .  .  .  No,  I  think  it  better  to 
employ  my  time  for  the  Empire's  benefit ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Well,  I  don't  quite  agree 
with  you,  though  ...  It  all  depends  how  you 
look  at  it  As  long  as  you  stop,  say,  after 
losing  three-quarters  of  your  cash,1  it's  all 
right.  .  .  .  No,  don't  say  that  cards  are  not  good 
fun,  now  and  then  ! 


SCENE  VI. 
(Enter  ANNA  ANDREYEVNA  and  MARYA  ANT6NOVNA.) 

GOVERNOR.     May    I    take    the    liberty    of 

introducing  my  family  :  my  wife  and  daughter  ! 

KHLESTAK^V  (bowing  to  each}.    How  fortu- 

1  Literally,  after  bending  down  three  corners  of  your  scoring- 
card. 


78  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

nate  I  am,  madam,  in  being  permitted  the 
pleasure  of  meeting  you  ! 

ANNA.  It  is  far  more  agreeable  to  us  to 
make  the  acquaintance  of  so  distinguished  a 
personage ! 

KHLESTAK6V  (with  an  air  of  gallantry). 
Pardon  me,  Suddrinya,  it  is  quite  the  contrary; 
the  pleasure  is  on  my  side  ! 

ANNA.  Impossible,  sir — you  allow  yourself 
to  say  that  by  way  of  compliment !  I  beg  of 
you  to  take  a  seat. 

KHLESTAK6V.  To  stand  near  you  is  happi- 
ness enough ;  still,  if  you  insist  on  it,  I  will  sit. 
How  favoured  I  am,  to  sit  at  length  by  your 
side ! 

ANNA.  Pardon  me,  but  I  cannot  dare  to 
take  that  as  meant  sincerely.  .  .  .  You  have 
found  the  journey  very  disagreeable,  I  should 
think,  after  life  in  the  capital  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.  Excessively  so  !  After  being 
used,  comprenez-vous,  to  living  in  society — to  find 
myself  all  at  once  on  my  travels — with  dirty 
inns,  in  the  depths  of  uncivilisation  !  .  .  .  If  it 
were  not,  I  must  say,  for  circumstances  which 
.  .  .  (Looks  meaningly  at  ANNA,  showing  off.) 
which  recompense  me  for  all  the 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          79 

ANNA.  Really,  how  unpleasant  it  must  have 
been  for  you ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  I  find  it  quite  the  reverse, 
though,  madam,  at  the  present  moment ! 

ANNA.  Oh,  how  can  you  say  so,  sir !  You 
do  me  much  honour.  I  do  not  deserve  it ! 

KHLESTAK^V.  Why  not,  indeed?  Sudd- 
rinya>  you  do  deserve  it ! 

ANNA.     Oh,  I  live  only  in  the  country.  .  .  . 

KHLESTAK6V.  Ah,  but  the  country,  all  the 
same,  has  its  charming  hills  and  rivulets.  .  .  . 
To  be  sure,  who  could  compare  it  to  St.  Peters- 
burg ?  Ah,  Petersburg — what  a  life  it  is,  indeed ! 
I  dare  say  you  think  I  am  only  a  copying-clerk ; 
on  the  contrary,  I'm  on  most  friendly  terms 
with  the  chief  of  our  department.  He  slaps  me 
on  the  back  and  says,  "Come  and  dine,  my 
boy  ! "  I  only  look  in  at  my  office  for  a  couple 
of  minutes  or  so,  just  to  say,  "This  is  to  be 
done  so,  and  that  so"  There's  a  rat  of  a  clerk 
there,  who  scribbles  away — tr — tr.  .  .  .  !  for 
dear  life.  They  wanted  even  to  make  me  a 
"College  Assessor."1  I  can  guess  pretty  well 

1  Kolllzhki  Assessor,  the  eighth  grade  or  chin  in  the  Civil 
Service,  with  the  title  of  Vuis6kob!aghar6dye  (Nobility).  See 
Note  II.  at  the  end. 


8o  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

why.  And  the  porter  flies  after  me  on  the 
stairs  with  the  blacking-brush  :  "  Allow  me, 
Ivan  Alexandrovich,"  says  he,  "to  clean  your 
boots  for  you !  "  (To  the  GOVERNOR.)  But  why 
do  you  stand,  gentlemen  ?  Pray  be  seated ! 

GOVERNOR.      Our     rank    is    not    high 
enough  ;  we  must  stand  ! 

CHIEF    COMMISSIONER.     Oh,  we  had 
rather  remain  standing  ! 

LUKA.     Don't  allow  yourself  to  bother 
Labout  us  I 

KHLESTAK6V.  No  ceremony  !  I  entreat 
you  to  take  seats!  (The  GOVERNOR,  and  the 
rest  sit  down.)  I  do  not  care  to  stand  on  my 
dignity ;  on  the  contrary,  I  always  try  to  slip 
away  unobserved  !  But  it's  impossible  to  hide 
one's  self.  Quite  impossible !  No  matter 
where  I  go,  they  cry  at  once  :  "  There  goes  Ivan 
Alexandrovich  !  "  Once  they  even  took  me  for 
the  Commander-in-chief;  the  soldiers  rushed 
out  of  the  guard-house  and  saluted.  An  officer, 
whom  I  knew  very  well,  said  to  me  afterwards  : 
"  Hullo,  my  boy,  we  completely  mistook  you 
for  the  Commander-in-chief!" 
ANNA.  You  don't  say  so  ! 
KHLESTAKtfv.  I  know  nearly  all  the  pretty 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          81 

actresses,  and  compose  all  sorts  of  vaudevilles. 
I  frequently  see  literary  men  ;  I'm  on  a  very 
friendly  footing  with  Pushkin — often  say  to 
him:  "Well,  how  de  do,  Pushkin,  my  boy!"1 
"So-so,  old  man,"1  he'd  reply.  "Things  might 
be  better.  ..."  A  regular  original,  is  Push- 
kin !"2 

ANNA.  So  you  write  too  ?  How  delightful 
it  must  be  to  be  an  author  !  And  do  you  really 
write  for  the  papers  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.  Yes,  I  write  for  the  papers 
too.  Besides  that,  there  are  a  good  many  of 
my  productions,  such  as  "Figaro's  Wedding," 
"Robert  the  Devil,"  "Norma"3—  I  really  for- 
get some  of  their  names.  It  all  happened  by 
chance.  I  didn't  intend  to  write,  but  a  theatre- 
manager  said,  "Do  turn  me  off  something,  old 
man."  I  consider  a  bit :  "  You  may  as  well, 
brother ! "  And  so  I  knocked  it  off  in  one 

1  Brat)    literally    "  brother,"   the    most    common    form    of 
address  to  an  equal  or  inferior,  b&tyushka  (little  father)  being 
applied  to  superiors. 

2  Pushkin,  the  greatest  of  Russian  poets,  was  a  friend  of 
Gogol's,  and  was  alive  (aged  37)  at  the  date  of  the  production 
of  this  play.     See  Introduction. 

3  The  well-known  operas  by  Mozart,  Meyerbeer,  and  Bellini 
respectively. 

6 


82  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

evening,  I  daresay.  I  have  a  marvellous  flow  of 
ideas,  you  know.  All  that  came  out  under  the 
name  of  "Baron  Brambeus,"1  and  "The  Frigate 
of  Hope,"2  and  the  Moscow  Telegraph* — all 
that  was  my  composition  ! 

ANNA.  Is  it  possible ;  and  so  you  were 
really  "  Brambeus  "  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  Of  course,  and  I  correct  all 
their  verses.  Smirdin4  gives  me  forty  thousand 
for  that. 

ANNA.  And,  I  daresay,  "Yuri  Miloslavski  "5 
was  composed  by  you. 

KHLESTAK6V.     Yes,  that's  by  me. 

ANNA.     I  thought  so  at  once. 

MARYA.  But,  mamma  dear,  it  says  on  the 
title-page  that  Zagoskin  was  the  author. 

1  The  pseudonym  of  Josef  I.  Sienkowski,  a  popular  journalist, 
critic,  orientalist,   and  encyclopaedic  writer  of  the   time,  and 
editor  of  the  BibUottka  dlya  chtlniya  ("  Library  for  Reading"). 

2  A  novel  by  A.  Bestuzhev,  written  under  the  pseudonym  of 
"  Marlmski." 

8  A  newspaper,  edited  by  N.  Polevoi. 

4  A  celebrated  publisher  of  St.  Petersburg. 

6  A  story  of  the  Smiltnoye  Vrlmya,  or  "  time  of  troubles," 
between  the  death  of  Theodore  I.,  the  last  of  Rurik's  dynasty 
(1598),  and  the  accession  of  Michael,  the  first  of  the  Romanovs 
(1613). 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          83 

ANNA.  There  !  of  course  :  I  kneiv  you  would 
want  to  argue  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Ah,  so  it  was;  that's  true, 
that  particular  work  was  by  Zagoskin ;  but 
there's  another  "  Yuri  Miloslavski,"  and  that 
was  written  by  me. 

ANNA.  Ah,  to  be  sure  !  I  read  yours.  How 
beautifully  it  is  written  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  I  must  admit,  I  live  by  my 
pen.  My  house  is  the  first  in  Petersburg ;  it's 
well  known  there  as  "  Ivan  Alexdndrovich's." 
(Addresses  the  company  generally^  Do  me  the 
favour,  if  any  of  you  are  ever  in  Petersburg,  to 
pay  me  a  visit — I  beg,  I  beg  of  you  !  I  give 
balls  too,  you  know. 

ANNA.  I  can  fancy  with  what  good  taste 
and  magnificence  the  balls  are  given  ! 

KHLESTAK6v.  It's  a  simple  affair,  not  worth 
talking  about !  On  the  table,  for  instance,  is  a 
water-melon  that  costs  seven  hundred  roubles. 
The  soup  comes  straight  from  Paris  by  steamer 
in  the  tureen  :  there's  nothing  in  the  world  to 
be  compared  with  its  flavour!  I  go  to  a  ball 
every  day.  We  have  our  whist-club  there  too  : 
the  Foreign  Minister,  the  French  Ambassador, 
the  German  Ambassador,  and  myself.  We 


84  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

regularly  kill  ourselves  over  cards  ;  there's 
nothing  to  be  seen  like  it !  How  I  rush 
home,  and  clamber  up  four  flights  of  stairs,  and 
just  have  strength  to  say  to  the  cook,  "  Here, 
Mavrusha,  take  my  great  coat ! "  .  .  .  What  do 
I  say?  I  was  forgetting  that  J  live  on  the  first- 
floor Why,  the  staircase  alone  cost  me  I  don't 

know  how  much.  .  .  .  And  it's  a  curious  sight  to 
see  my  ante-chamber :  counts  and  princes  jostling 
and  humming  there  like  bees  ;  all  you  can  hear 
is  buzz,  buzz,  buzz  !  Once  there  was  a  Minister 
.  .  .  (the  GOVERNOR  and  the  rest  start  from 
their  chairs  in  alarm).  They  even  write  "  Your 
Excellency  "  on  their  letters  to  me.  .  .  .  On  one 
occasion  I  took  charge  of  a  Department.  It  was 
a  funny  story :  the  Director  went  off  somewhere 
— nobody  knew  where.  So,  naturally,  people 
began  to  ask  how  was  his  place  to  be  taken  ? 
who  was  to  fill  it?  Any  number  of  generals 
coveted  the  post  and  tried  it,  but  they  soon  gave 
the  thing  up — too  difficult  for  'em !  It  looked 
easy  enough,  but,  on  closer  inspection,  it  proved 
a  devil  of  a  business  !  There  was  nothing  to 
be  done,  but  come  to  me.  In  a  twinkling 
the  streets  were  choke-full  of  couriers,  couriers 
after  couriers.  Just  picture  to  yourselves  thirty- 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          85 

five  thousand  couriers !  How's  that  for  a 
situation,  I  ask  you  ?  "  Ivan  Alexandrovich, 
come  and  direct  the  Department !  "  I  own  I 
was  a  little  taken  aback.  I  went  out  in  my 
dressing-gown  and  wanted  to  refuse,  but,  thinks 
I,  it'll  get  to  the  Emperor's  ears,  and  it  wouldn't 
look  well  on  my  record  of  service1  either  .  .  . 
so,  "All  right,"  I  say,  "  I'll  undertake  the  job, 
I'll  undertake  it !  So  be  it ! "  I  say,  "  I'll  take 
it ;  only  remember,  sharp's  the  word  with  me — 
sharp's  the  word,  mind  !  "  And  so  it  was;  I  go 
through  the  Department  like  an  earthquake ; 
they  all  shake  and  tremble  like  an  aspen-leaf. 
(The  GOVERNOR  and  otliers  quake  with  terror ; 
KHLESTAK6v/ra:££</.y  with  redoubled  vehemence?) 
Oh,  it's  no  joke,  I  can  tell  you.  I  gave  them  all 
a  jobation  !  Even  the  Council  of  the  Empire  is 
in  awe  of  me.  And  why  not,  indeed  ?  I'm  such 
a  ...  I  don't  spot  any  one  in  particular.  I 
address  them  all  generally,  and  say,  "/know 
my  power ;  /  know  my  business  !  "  I'm  every- 
where— everywhere !  I  go  to  Court  every  day. 
Why,  to-morrow,  they're  going  to  make  me  a 
Field-marsh — 

i  He  refers  to  his  official  record  kept  by  the  clerk  of  his  special 
department,  with  a  duplicate  at  the  office  of  the  corresponding 
ministry. 


86  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

(Slips  off  his  chair,  and  spraivls  on  the 
floor,  but  is  respectfully  helped  up  by  the 
chinovniks.} 

GOVERNOR  (approaches,  trembling  all  over, 
and  struggles  to  speak}.  But,  your  E — e — ex 
•  •  •  (gasps]. 

KHLESTAK^V  (sharply}.     What's  the  matter  ? 
GOVERNOR.    Your  E — e — ex  .  .  . 
KHLESTAK6V  (as  before).     I  can't  make  out 
a  word  you  say;  it's  all  nonsense. 

GOVERNOR.  Yo — ur  E — e — xlncy,1  excel- 
lency, won't  you  be  pleased  to  rest  a  little,  .  .  . 
here  is  a  room,  and  all  you  require. 

KHLESTAKOV.    Bosh !    Rest   a  little  ?!  ... 
Stay,  I  think  I  will  !  .  .  .  Your  lunch,   gentle- 
men,   was     excellent.  .  .  .   I'm    delighted,    de- 
lighted !    (Theatrically^}  Labardan  !  Labardan  ! ! 
(Exit  into   the  side-room,  followed  by  the 
GOVERNOR.) 


SCENE  VII. 

(The  same,  without  KHLESTAKOV  and  the  GOVERNOR.) 

BOBCHINSKI.     There,  Py6tr  Ivdnovich,  there's 

a   man   for  you !     That's  what  I  call  a  man ! 

1  Va — va — vdshestvo,  for  Vdshe  prevoskhodilehlvo. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          87 

Never  have  I  been  before  in  the  presence  of 
such  a  swell — I  nearly  died  of  fright !  What's 
his  rank,  do  you  think,  Dobchfnski  ? 

DOBCHINSKI.  I  should  think  he's  almost  a 
general. 

BOBCHINSKI.  Well,  /  think  that  a  general 
wouldn't  do  for  the  sole  of  his  boots  !  Or  if 
he  is  a  general,  then  he  must  be  the  very 
Generalissimo  himself !  Did  you  hear  how  he 
bullies  the  Council  of  State?  Let's  go  quick, 
and  tell  Ammos  Fyodorovich  and  Kardbkin. 
Good  afternoon,  Anna  Andre"yevna  ! 

DOBCHiNSKl.     Good  afternoon,  Ktimushka  ! 
(Both  go  out.} 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (to  LUKA  LUKICH). 
It's  a  terrible  anxiety,  and  one  doesn't  know 
who's  the  culprit.  We're  not  in  uniform  either ! 
As  soon  as  he  wakes  he'll  send  a  report  about 
us  to  Petersburg!  (Exit  dejectedly  with  the 
SCHOOL  INSPECTOR;  both  saying  to  ANNA:) 
Good-bye,  Suddrinya  ! 

SCENE  VIII. 
(ANNA  and  MARY  A.) 

ANNA.     Oh,  what  a  charming  young  man  ! 
MARY  A.     Akh,  how  delightful  he  is  ! 


88  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

ANNA.  But  what  refinement  of  manners! 
You  can  see  at  once  he's  in  society.  His 
deportment  and  all  ...  akh,  how  fine !  I'm 
passionately  fond  of  young  men  like  that — I'm 
simply  beside  myself!  However,  I'm  sure  I 
charmed  him  exceedingly :  I  noticed — he  kept 
looking  at  me  all  the  time. 

MARYA.     Oh,  mamma  dear,  he  looked  at  me! 

ANNA.  Get  along  with  your  rubbish;  your 
remarks  are  quite  out  of  place  ! 

MARYA.     But,  mamma,  he  did,  really  ! 

ANNA.  There  you  are,  arguing  again ! 
You're  not  to ;  that's  flat !  When  did  he 
look  at  you,  pray  ?  and  why  should  he  look 
at  you  ? 

MARYA,  Really,  mamma  dear,  he  gazed  at 
me  the  whole  time.  When  he  began  to  talk 
about  literature  he  looked  at  me,  and  when 
he  described  how  he  played  whist  with  the 
ambassadors  he  kept  his  eyes  on  me. 

ANNA.  Well,  perhaps  he  did  once  or  twice, 
and  that  was  only  for  the  sake  of  appearances. 
He  thought,  "  Oh,  I  suppose  I  had  better  give 
her  a  glance  or  two  !  " 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          89 

SCENE  IX. 

GOVERNOR  (entering  on  tiptoe}.     Sh — sh — 

ANNA.    What  ? 

GOVERNOR.  I'm  vexed  that  he  has  drank  so 
much.  .  .  .  Now,  supposing  half  of  what  he  said 
was  true  !  (Reflects^)  And  why  shouldn't  it  be 
so?  When  a  man's  tipsy  he  lets  everything 
out :  what's  in  his  heart  flies  to  his  tongue.  Of 
course  he  invented  a  little ;  but  then  no  story  is 
ever  told  without  a  little  ornamentation.  .  .  . 
So  he  plays  whist  with  Ministers,  and  goes  to 
Court  .  .  .  Upon  my  word,  the  more  one  thinks 
about  it — the  devil  knows  what  to  make  of  it — 
I  feel  as  giddy  as  if  I  stood  on  the  top  of  a 
steeple,  or  they  were  going  to  hang  me. 

ANNA.  /  don't  feel  the  slightest  nervous- 
ness; I  merely  saw  in  him  an  educated, 
polished,  well-bred  young  man ;  but  I  don't 
bother  myself  about  his  rank. 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  that's  just  like  you  women! 
That  one  word  woman  explains  everything ! 
You  women  only  care  about  fiddle-faddle,1  and 

1  Or,  it  is  a  trifle  to  you  (but  it  is  a  serious  matter  to  me). 
The  Russian  is  ambiguous. 


90  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

fire  off  remarks  without  rhyme  or  reason.  You 
may  be  let  off  with  a  flogging,  but  your  husband 
will  never  more  be  heard  of.  You  treat  this 
gentleman,  my  dear,  as  familiarly  as  if  he  was 
another  Dobchfnski. 

ANNA.  I  recommend  you  not  to  trouble 
about  that.  We  shall  see  what  we  shall  see 
.  .  .  (Glances  significantly  at  her  daughter^] 

GOVERNOR  (soliloquising).  Oh,  it's  no  good 
talking  to  you !  What  a  state  of  things  this 
is !  I  haven't  yet  been  able  to  recover  from 
my  fright.  (Opens  the  door,  and  calls  off.} 
Mishka,  call  the  police  officers  Svistundv  and 
Derzhimdrda  ;  they  are  somewhere  about  near 
the  gate.  (After  a  short  silence.}  It's  a  very 
queer  world  now.  One  ought  to  be  able  to 
recognise  such  people  by  their  distinguished 
appearance ;  but  this  miserable  stripling — how 
is  one  to  know  who  he  is?  A  military  man 
reveals  himself  at  once.  When  he  puts  on 
civilian  dress  he  looks  like  a  fly  with  its  wings 
clipped.  ...  But  then  he  obstinately  remained 
at  the  inn,  and  just  now  gave  vent  to  such 
allegories  and  ambiguities,  that  it  would  take 
you  an  age  to  make  head  or  tail  of  'em.  How- 
ever, he  has  surrendered  at  last.  Yes,  and  said  a 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.  91 

good  deal  more  than  he'd  need  to.     It's  pretty 
plain  he's  quite  young  ! 


SCENE  X. 

{Enter  OSIP.     All  rush  to  him,  beckoning?) 

ANNA.     Come  here,  my  friend  ! 

GOVERNOR.     Hush!  .  .  .  Is  he — is  he  asleep? 

OsiP.     No,  he's  still  stretching  himself. 

ANNA.     Tell  me — what's  your  name? 

OSIP.     Osip,  ma'am. 

GOVERNOR  (to  his  wife  and  daughter}.  There, 
that's  enough,  that'll  do  for  you.  (To  OsiP.) 
Well,  my  friend,  have  you  been  well  looked 
after  ? 

OSIP.  Fustrate,  sir,  fustrate  ;  and  thank  you 
kindly. 

ANNA.  Tell  me  now — a  good  many  counts 
and  princes  visit  your  master,  don't  they  ? 

OsiP  (aside).  What  shall  I  say  now  ?  I  dessay, 
if  I  tell  'em  yes,  they'll  feed  me  even  better  still. 
(Aloud.}  Oh  yes,  a  lot  of  counts  come  and  see 
him. 

MARYA.  Ah,  my  dear  Osip,  how  handsome 
your  bdrin  is  ! 


92  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

ANNA.  But  tell  me,  please,  Osip,  how  does 
he ? 

GOVERNOR.  Now  stop  it,  please  !  You  only 
hinder  me  with  such  foolish  remarks.  Well 
now,  my  friend 

ANNA.     But  what  is  your  master's  rank  ? 

OsiP.     Oh — the  2isual  rank  ! 

GOVERNOR  (to  ANNA).  Akh>  B6zhe  mot,  how 
you  keep  on  with  your  senseless  questions ! 
You  don't  say  a  single  word  to  the  point ! 
Now,  my  man,  what  is  your  master  like — 
eh?  strict?  Is  he  given  to  scolding  you  or 
not? 

OsiP.  Yes,  he  likes  orderliness.  He  must 
have  everything  exact 

GOVERNOR.  Well,  I  like  your  face,  my 
friend.  I'm  sure  you're  one  of  the  right  sort 
Now  what 

ANNA.  Listen,  Osip,  what  does  your  master 
wear  in  town ;  does  he  go  about  in  uniform 
or 

GOVERNOR.  Now  that'll  do  ;  really,  what  a 
magpie  you  are  !  This  is  a  serious  business — a 
matter  of  life  and  death.  .  .  .  (To  OsiP.)  Yes, 
I'm  very  pleased  with  you,  my  man ;  an  extra 
cup  of  tea  on  a  journey  is  always  acceptable ; 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          93 

it's  a  trifle  cold  now,  so  there's  a  couple  of  silver 
roubles  for  tea. 

OSIP  (takes  the  money'}.  Oh,  thank  you  kindly, 
sir !  The  Lord  give  you  very  good  health ! 
It's  a  great  help  to  a  poor  man. 

GOVERNOR.  Certainly,  certainly ;  and  I'm 
very  glad  to  help  you.  Now,  my  friend, 
what 

ANNA.  Listen  to  me,  Osip.  What  coloured 
eyes  does  your  master  like  best ? 

MARYA.  Osip,  my  life!  what  a  charming 
little  nose  your  master  has  ! 

GOVERNOR.  Have  done !  Let  me  speak. 
.  .  .  (To  OSIP.)  Just  tell  me,  please,  my  good 
fellow,  what  does  your  bdrin  pay  most  attention 
to — I  mean,  what  pleases  him  most  on  his 
journeys  ? 

OSIP.  Oh,  he's  fond  of  finding  out  all  about 
everything.  Most  of  all,  he  likes  being  well 
received,  being  well  entertained. 

GOVERNOR.     Well  entertained  ? 

OSIP.  Yes.  As  for  me,  I'm  only  a  serf;  but 
he  sees  that  I'm  well  treated  too.  Lor'  bless 
us !  One  day  we  set  off  somewhere.  He  says, 
"  Well,  Osip,  have  they  treated  you  well  ? " 
"  Shabbily,  your  nobility,"  says  I.  "  Oho,"  says 


94  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

he,  "  then  he's  no  good  as  a  host,  Osip.  You 
remind  me  of  him  when  I  come  along  again  ! " 
"  Ah  !  "  thinks  I  to  myself—  (gesticulates) — "  God 
help  him  ! — and  I'm  only  a  nobody." 

GOVERNOR.  Very  good  ;  you  speak  to  the 
point.  What  I  gave  you  was  for  tea — here's 
something  extra  for  biscuits ! 

OSIP.  Oh,  you're  too  liberal,  your  high 
nobility  !  (Pockets  the  money.}  I'll  make  sure 
to  spend  it  all  in  drinking  your  honour's  health  ! 

ANNA.  Come  to  me,  Osip,  and  you'll  get 
something  more. 

MARYA.  Osip,  my  life,  kiss  your  master  for 
me! 

(KHLESTAK6V  is  heard  to   cough   slightly 
in  the  next  room.} 

GOVERNOR.  Sh!  (Walks  on  tiptoe;  the 
rest  of  the  scene  is  conducted  in  an  undertone?) 
Good  God  !  don't  make  a  noise !  Get .  out  of 
the  room!  (To  ANNA.)  We've  had  quite 
enough  of  you ! 

ANNA.  Let  us  go,  Mdshenka ;  I'll  tell  you 
something  I  noticed  about  our  guest  that  can 
only  be  said  in  private. 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  they're  at  it  again!  Just 
go  and  listen  to  them — you'll  have  to  stop  up 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          95 

your    ears    pretty    quick !      ( Turns    to    OSIP.) 
Now,  my  friend 


SCENE  XI. 

(Enter  DERZHIM6RDA  and  SviSTUN6v.) 

GOVERNOR.  Sh  !  Those  bandy-legged  bears 
— how  they  stump  with  their  boots !  They 
blunder  about  as  if  some  one's  throwing  forty 
puds1  out  of  a  waggon.  Where's  the  devil 
taking  you  to  ? 

DERZHIM6RDA  (loudly).     My  orders  were 

GOVERNOR.  Sh!  (Stops  his  mouth.'}  You 
bark  like  a  raven  !  (Shakes  htm.}  Your  orders 
were — were  they  indeed !  Bellowing  like  a 
bull  in  a  barrel !  (To  OSIP.)  Now,  my  man, 
you  go  and  get  ready  there — order  anything 
that  there  is  in  the  house!  (OsiP  goes  out} 
But  you  .  .  .  stand  on  the  landing,  and  don't 
stir  from  the  spot !  And  let  no  stranger  into 
the  house,  and  above  all,  no  merchants  !  If  you 
let  one  even  slip  past  you,  then  I'll  .  .  .  !  And 
just  mind,  if  any  one  comes  with  a  petition,  or 

1  A  piid  is  36  Ibs.  Avoirdupois. 


96  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

even  without  one,  if  he  looks  like  a  person  who 
would  present  a  petition  against  me — then  you 
kick  him  out  head-foremost — straight !  So ! 
(Business.'}  Do  you  understand  ?  Sh !  now, 
sh  !  (Exit  on  tiptoe  with  the  Police- Officers?) 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          97 


FOURTH   ACT. 

SCENE — The  same  apartment  in  the  Governor's 
house. 

SCENE  I. 

(Enter  cautiously,  almost  on  tiptoe,  AMMOS  Fv6DORO- 
VICH  (the  Judge),  ART£MI  PHILIPPOVICH  (the  Charity 
Commissioner),  the  POSTMASTER,  LUKA  LuKfcH, 
DOBCHfNSKl,  and  BOBCHfNSKl,  all  in  full  gala  uni- 
form. The  whole  scene  is  played  in  an  undertone?) 

JUDGE  (arranging  them  all  in  a  semicircle). 
For  God's  sake,  gentlemen,  form  your  circle 
quicker;  let's  have  better  order  !  Good  heavens 
— he  goes  to  Court,  you  know,  and  bullies  the 
Council  of  State !  Draw  up  in  military  order, 
absolutely  in  military  order !  Peter  Ivanovich, 
you  must  stand  there  !  (Both  BOBCHINSKI  and 
DOBCHiNSKl  run  on  tiptoe  to  the  place  assigned.} 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  It's  as  you  please, 
Ammos  Fy6dorovich  ;  but  we  certainly  ought  to 
make  the  attempt. 

7 


98  THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

JUDGE.     What  attempt? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  You  know  what  I 
mean. 

JUDGE.    Palm-oil? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Yes,  try  a  little 
palm-oil. 

JUDGE.  It's  risky — he'll  storm  at  us ;  he's  a 
State  functionary,  you  know.  Perhaps  it  had 
better  take  the  form  of  a  testimonial  from  the 
nobility  and  gentry — some  sort  of  souvenir. 

POSTMASTER.  Or  perhaps,  say — there's  some 
money  been  sent  by  post,  and  we  don't  know  who 
it's  for. 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Mind  he  doesn't 
send  you  by  post  somewhere  further  than  you 
care  for.  I  tell  you,  these  little  matters  are  not 
so  managed  in  a  well-ordered  State.  Why  is 
there  a  whole  squadron  of  us  here  ?  We  ought 
to  approach  him  one  by  one,  and  do  ...  what 
is  needful  in  a  private  interview,  so  that  nobody 
knows  anything  about  it.  That's  how  things 
are  done  in  a  well-managed  community.  So, 
Ammos  Fy6dorovich,  you  ought  to  begin  first. 

JUDGE.  Much  better  you;  the  illustrious 
visitor  broke  bread  in  your  hospital. 

CHARITY    COMMISSIONER.     No,    no!    then 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.          99 

Luka  Lukfch  had  better,  as  the  enlightener 
of  youth. 

LUKA.  I  can't,  I  can't,  really,  gentlemen  ! 
I  confess  I've  been  so  brought  up  that,  if  any  one 
a  single  degree  above  me  in  rank  addresses  me, 
I  just  lose  my  head,  and  my  tongue's  as  if  stuck 
in  the  mud.  No,  sirs,  excuse  me  ;  really  I  must 
beg  to  be  let  off! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Then  there's  no 
one  but  you,  Ammos  Fy6dorovich  !  Why,  every 
word  you  utter  sounds  like  another  Cicero 
talking  ! 

JUDGE.  What  nonsense  !  Cicero,  indeed  ! 
what  an  idea  !  Just  because  one  now  and  then 
spouts  a  little  about  house-dogs  or  blood- 
hounds ! 

ALL  (surrounding  hini).  No,  not  only  about 
dogs — about  the  building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel'1 
too.  .  .  .  No,  Ammos  Fy6dorovich,  don't  desert 
us — be  our  father!  .  .  .  Don't  desert  us,  Ammos 
Fy6dorovich  ! 

JUDGE.  Release  me,  gentlemen  !  (At  this 
moment  footsteps  and  expectorations  are  heard  in 

1  A  discussion  where  all  are  talking  at  the  same  time,  and 
nobody  is  listening  to  any  one  else,  is  called  stolpotvorenie,  or 
"building  the  Tower  of  Babel."  But  here  the  allusion  is  to  the 
Judge's  scepticism. 


ioo         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KHLESTAK6v's  room.  All  rush  headlong  to  the 
door,  jostling  and  struggling  to  get  out.  They 
squeeze  and  crush  one  another  a  good  deal,  and 
half-suppressed  exclamations  are  heard:) 

BOBCHfNSKl's  VOICE.  Ugh!  Py6tr  Ivanovich, 
you've  trod  on  my  toe  ! 

ZEMLYANIKA'S  VOICE.  I'm  stifling,  stifling  ; 
give  me  room — only  give  me  time  to  repent ! — 
you're  squeezing  the  life  out  of  me  ! 

(Other  ejaculations  of  "Ahh !  "  "  Oohh  ! "  etc. 
At  last  they  all  get  through,  and  the  room 
is  left  empty.') 


SCENE  II. 

KHLESTAK6V  (coming  out  alone,  with  the  look 
of  a  man  who  has  overslept  himself).  I've  had  a 
proper  snooze,  it  seems.  Where  did  they  get 
such  mattresses  and  feather-beds  from?  I 
regularly  perspired.  .  .  .  They  must  have  plied 
me  fairly  well  after  lunch  :  my  head  aches  yet. 
...  As  far  as  I  can  see,  I  can  pass  the  time 
here  very  comfortably.  I  like  generosity  and 
hospitality — all  the  more  if  I  think  they've  not 
got  a  deep  game  to  play.  .  .  .  And  the  Governor's 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         101 

daughter's  not  at  all  bad;  while  her  mother, 
well  .  .  .  No,  I  don't  know,  but  this  sort  of  life 
just  suits  me  to  a  T. 


SCENE  III. 

JUDGE  (enters  and  stops  still,  soliloquising). 
Oh  Lord  !  oh  Lord !  grant  me  success !  How 
my  knees  knock  together !  (Aloud,  drawing 
himself  up  and  steadying  himself  with  his  sword.} 
I  have  the  honour  to  present  myself:  County 
Court  Judge  of  this  district  and  College  Assessor 
Lyapkin-Tyapkin  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Pray  take  a  seat!  So  you 
are  the  judge  here  ? 

JUDGE.  I  was  elected  judge  for  three  years 
by  the  nobility  and  gentry  in  the  year  1816,  and 
have  continued  in  the  office  ever  since. 

KHLESTAK6V.  You  find  it  profitable,  I  dare 
say,  being  a  judge  ? 

JUDGE.  After  three  periods  of  the  three 
years  I  was  decorated  with  the  Vladfmir  of  the 
Fourth  Class,1  with  commendation  from  the 
Government  (Aside.}  This  money  is  regularly 
burning  a  hole  through  my  hand  ! 

1  For  the  Russian  orders,  see  Note  II.  at  the  end. 


102        THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KHLESTAKOV.  Well,  I  like  the  Vladfmir; 
it's  better  than  the  Anna  of  the  Third  Class, 
at  any  rate. 

JUDGE  (thrusting  his  clenched  fist  somewJiat 
forward,  aside}.  Oh,  Lord  God  !  I  don't  know 
where  I'm  sitting!  I  feel  as  if  I  was  on  hot 
burning  coals  ! 

KllLESTAK6v.  What  have  you  got  in  your 
hand  there  ? 

JUDGE  (loses  his  head,  and  drops  tlte  bank-notes 
on  the  floor}.  No — othing,  sir  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Nothing  ?  How's  that  ? 
Why,  I  see  there's  some  money  dropped ! 

JUDGE  (shaking  all  over}.  I — impos-sible,  sir  ! 
(Aside.}  Oh  Lord,  now  I'm  before  the 
judge  !  They've  brought  the  cart  to  take  me 
to  Siberia ! 

KHLESTAKOV  (picks  the  notes  up}.  Yes,  so 
it  is  ;  it's  money  ! 

JUDGE.  Now,  all  is  over!  I'm  lost!  I'm 
lost ! 

KHLESTAKOV.    I  say,  lend  me  this  ! 

JUDGE  (eagerly}.  If  you  wish,  sir,  if  you 
wish — with  the  greatest  of  pleasure !  (Aside.} 
Now,  courage — courage !  Aid  me,  Most  Holy 
Mother ! 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         103 

KHLESTAKOV.  I  spent  all  my  money  on  the 
road,  you  know,  over  one  thing  and  another. 
.  .  .  However,  as  soon  as  I  get  home  I'll  return 
it  you. 

JUDGE.  Don't  mention  it ;  it's  quite  un- 
necessary !  The  honour  of  lending  it  you  is 
enough.  .  .  .  Indeed,  with  my  feeble  powers,  but 
with  all  zeal  and  loyalty  to  the  Government 
...  I  shall  endeavour  to  deserve  .  .  .  (Rises 
and  stands  erect,  hands  down  his  sides.}  I  will 
not  venture  to  disturb  you  further  with  my 
presence.1  .  .  .  Will  there  be  any  injunction  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.     Injunction — what  injunction  ? 

JUDGE.  I  mean,  will  you  not  give  any  in- 
junction to  the  judge  of  this  district? 

KHLESTAKOV.  Why  should  I  ?  I've  no 
need  for  him  at  present  ;  no,  thank  you — thanks 
very  much ! 

JUDGE  (bowing  and  going  out,  aside).  Now 
the  town  is  ours  ! 

KHLESTAKOV  (alone}.  H'm,  the  Judge  is  an 
excellent  fellow ! 

1  Readers  of  the  play  in  the  original  will  notice  that  the 
identical  formula,  nye  smyeyu  b6tiye  bezpakfit  svayim  prisrilst- 
viemt  is  used  in  this  and  the  three  following  scenes ;  I  there- 
fore employ  the  same  set  of  words  in  the  translation. 


io4         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 
SCENE  IV. 

(Enter  the  POSTMASTER  in  uniform^  sword  in  hand.) 

POSTMASTER.  I  have  the  honour  to  present 
myself:  Postmaster  and  Court  Councillor 
Shpy6kin  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Ah,  welcome !  I'm  very  fond 
of  agreeable  company !  Take  a  seat !  And  so 
you  live  here  always  ? 

POSTMASTER.    Yes,  sir,  just  so. 

KHLESTAKOV.  Well,  I  like  this  little  town 
of  yours.  Cert'nly,  there  are  not  many  people  in 
it,  but  what  of  that  ?  it's  not  the  capital.  That's 
true,  isn't  it — it's  not  the  capital  ? 

POSTMASTER.     That's  quite  true,  sir. 

KHLESTAK6V.  You  see,  it  is  only  in  the 
capital  you  get  bon-ton>  and  no  country  bump- 
kins. That's  your  opinion,  isn't  it  ? 

POSTMASTER.  Exactly  so,  sir !  (Aside.} 
Well,  he's  not  at  all  haughty — he  talks  about 
anything  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Still  you  admit  you  can  live 
happily  in  a  small  town  ? 

POSTMASTER.     Precisely  so,  sir ! 

KHLESTAKOV.     What  does  one  want?     In 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         105 

my  opinion,  all  you  want  is  that  people  should 
respect  you,  and  sincerely  like  you— isn't  that 
so? 

POSTMASTER.     Absolutely  correct 

KHLESTAKd)V.  I  must  say  I'm  glad  we  are 
of  the  same  mind.  I  dare  say  I'm  called  eccentric, 
but  it's  my  nature.  (Catches  the  others  eye,  and 
speaks  sotto  voce.}  I  may  as  well  borrow  a 
trifle  of  this  Postmaster  too.  (Aloud.}  A  very 
odd  thing  has  happened  to  me  :  I've  spent  my 
last  coin  on  the  way.  Can  you  lend  me  three 
hundred  roubles  ? 

POSTMASTER.  Of  course  !  I  shall  count  it  a 
very  great  happiness.  Here  it  is — take  it,  sir, 
please — delighted  to  oblige  you  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Thanks,  very  much.  You  see, 
I've  a  mortal  hatred  of  stinting  myself  when 
I'm  travelling — why  should  I  ?  Ain't  I  right  ? 

POSTMASTER.  Quite  right,  sir !  (Rises  and 
draws  himself  up,  with  his  hand  on  his  sword.} 
I  will  not  venture  to  disturb  you  further  with 
my  presence.  .  .  .  Have  you  any  observation  to 
make  with  reference  to  the  postal  administra- 
tion ? 

KHLESTAK6V.     No,  nothing ! 
(The  POSTMASTER  bows  and  exit '.) 


io6         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KHLESTAKOV  (lighting  a  cigar}.  The  Post- 
master, it  seems  to  me,  is  also  a  very  good 
fellow — at  least,  he's  ready  to  oblige  ;  that's  the 
sort  of  people  I  like. 

SCENE  V. 

(Enter  LUK.A  LUKicH,  unceremoniously  propelled  from 
behind.  A  voice  in  his  rear  is  heard  saying^  almost 
aloud,  "  Go  on,  what  are  you  afraid  of  ? ") 

LUKA  (saluting  nervously,  with  his  hand  on 
his  sword].  I  have  the  honour  to  present 
myself:  Director  of  Schools  and  Honorary 
Councillor  Khl6pov  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Ah,  how  d'ye  do !  Take  a 
seat !  take  a  seat !  Won't  you  have  a  weed  ? 
(Offers  him  one.} 

LUKA  (aside,  irresolutely).  Good  gracious 
now !  I  never  thought  of  that !  Shall  I  take 
it  or  not  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.  Take  it,  take  it ;  it's  of  an 
excellent  brand.  To  be  sure,  it's  not  a  Peters- 
burg one.  I  used  to  smoke  cigars  there,  my  good 
sir,  that  cost  twenty-five  roubles  the  hundred. 
Ah  !  you'd  lick  your  fingers  after  smoking  them! 
Here's  a  match — light  up  !  (Gives  him  a  match. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         107 

LUKA  tries  to  smoke,  shaking  all  over.}     There, 
don't  put  that  end  in  your  mouth  ! 

LUKA  (throws  the  cigar  down,  spits,  and  gesti- 
culates. Aside}.  Devil  take  it  all  ;  my  cursed 
nervousness  spoils  everything! 

KHLESTAKOV.  I  see  you're  not  very  fond  of 
cigars,  but  I  own  they're  one  of  my  weaknesses. 
Not  the  only  one,  though — I'm  rather  susceptible 
to  the  charms  of  the  fair  sex  too.  What's  your 
taste  ?  Do  you  prefer  brunettes,  or  blondes  ? 
(LUKA  is  completely  dumfoundered.} 

KHLESTAK6V.  No,  out  with  it! — brunettes, 
or  blondes  ! 

LUKA.     I  daren't  give  an  opinion. 

KHLESTAKOV.  No,  no ;  don't  get  out  of  it 
that  way.  I  particularly  want  to  know  your 
taste. 

LUKA.  I  will  venture  to  say  then  .  .  . 
(Aside.}  I  don't  know  what  I'm  saying — my 
head's  in  a  whirl ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Aha!  Aha!  So  you  won't 
commit  yourself!  I'm  sure  you're  smitten  with 
some  little  brunette  or  other  !  Confess  it  now — 
you  are!  (LUKA  is  speechless.}  Oho,  you're 
blushing.  Look,  look  !  Why  won't  you 
speak  ? 


io8         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

LUKA.  I'm  too  shy,  your  nob — excell — 
enity !  (Aside.}  Confound  my  tongue,  it's 
done  for  me,  done  for  me ! 

KHLESTAKtfv.  Too  shy — eh  ?  Well,  there's 
a  certain  something  in  my  look  which  inspires 
that  feeling ;  at  least  I  know  that  not  a  woman 
can  resist  it — can  they  ? 

LUKA.     Certainly  not,  sir  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Now,  there's  a  very  funny 
thing  happened  to  me  :  I've  spent  all  I  possess 
in  coming  here.  You  couldn't  lend  me  three 
hundred  roubles,  could  you  ? 

LUKA  (aside,  grabbing  at  his  purse).  What 
a  case,  if  I  haven't  got  them !  .  .  .  Ah,  I  have, 
I  have !  (Takes  some  notes  out,  and  hands  them, 
trembling,  to  KHLESTAK6v.) 

KHLESTAKbv.     I'm  deeply  indebted  to  you ! 

LUKA.  I  will  not  venture  to  disturb  you 
further  with  my  presence  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.     Good-bye,  then  ! 

LUKA  (disappears  hastily,  remarking,  aside:} 
There !  thank  Heaven !  perhaps  he  won't  visit 
the  schools  now  I 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         109 

SCENE  VI. 

(Enter  the  CHARITY  COMMISSIONER,  ART£MI  PniLfp- 
POVICH.  He  draws  himself  up,  like  the  others,  in  a 
military  attitude  of  respectful  attention,  with  his  hand 
on  his  sword.) 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  I  have  the  honour 
to  present  myself:  Charity  Commissioner  and 
Court-Councillor  Zemlyanfka. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Zdrdvstvuity^  won't  you 
take  a  seat  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  I  had  the  honour 
of  receiving  and  personally  conducting  you 
through  the  charitable  institutions  committed 
to  my  charge. 

KHLESTAKOV.  Ah,  so  you  did,  I  remember- 
You  gave  me  an  excellent  luncheon. 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  I  am  glad  to 
labour  in  the  service  of  my  Fatherland. 

KHLESTAK6V.  It's  my  weakness — I  confess 
it — I'm  fend  of  good  cookery.  .  .  .  But  it  seems 
as  if  you  weren't  so  tall  and  erect  yesterday, 
were  you  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.     It's  very  possible. 

i  "How  do  you  do ? "—literally,  "Be in  good  health,"  the 
usual  Russian  salutation. 


no         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

(After  a  short  silence.}  I  can  only  say  that  I 
spare  no  effort  to  perform  my  duty  zealously. 
(Draws  his  chair  a  little  closer^  and  speaks  in 
a  lower  tone.}  There's  this  Postmaster  here 
does  absolutely  nothing.  Everything  is  in  the 
greatest  state  of  neglect  :  letters  and  pack- 
ages are  kept  back  .  .  .  pray  investigate  the 
matter  yourself.  The  Judge  too,  who  was  here 
just  before  me,  does  nothing  but  hunt  hares, 
and  keeps  his  dogs  in  the  County  Court  build- 
ings ;  while  his  general  conduct,  if  I  must  un- 
burden my  mind  to  you — certainly  it's  for  my 
country's  good  that  I  have  to  do  it,  though  he's 
my  friend  and  connection — well,  his  conduct  is 
most  deplorable.  There's  a  certain  proprietor 
here,  Dobchfnski  by  name — you  have  deigned 
to  meet  him — and  as  soon  as  ever  Dobchfnski 
goes  away  anywhere,  his  wife  and  the  Judge  are 
having  a  tete-a-tete.  I  am  ready  to  swear  to 
it  ...  and  the  children,  down  to  the  youngest 
little  girl,  have  a  very  strong  likeness  to  the 
Judge 

KHLESTAKOV.  Well,  I  declare !  I  never 
should  have  thought  it ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Then  there's  the 
Director  of  Schools.  I  can't  think  how  the 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         1 1 1 

Government  could  have  appointed  him.  He's 
worse  than  a  Jacobin,1  and  he  poisons  the  minds 
of  the  young  generation  with  revolutionary 
doctrines  that  simply  baffle  description.  Hadn't 
I  better  put  all  this  down  on  paper  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  Do,  by  all  means ;  I  shall  be 
very  glad  to  have  it !  I  like  to  read  something 
amusing  when  I'm  bored.  .  .  .  By  the  way, 
what  is  your  name  ?2  I  keep  forgetting  ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.    Zemlyamka. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Ah,  of  course — Zemlyanfka. 
And  tell  me,  please,  have  you  any  children  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  To  be  sure  I  have, 
sir,  five  of  'em  ;  two  are  now  grown  up. 

KHLESTAK6V.  You  don't  say  so ;  grown 
up  !  And,  now  .  .  .  what  are  their ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  I  understand,  you 
are  pleased  to  ask  what  their  names  are  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.     Yes,  what  are  their  names  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Nikolaf,  Ivan, 
Yelizave"ta,  Mdrya,  and  Perepetuya.3 

1  Referring  to  the  Jacobins  of  the  French  Revolution. 

2  Kak  vdsha  familya — literally,  what  is  your  family,    i.e., 
surname.     Further  on,  he  asks  for  his  {mya  and  6tchestvo,  his 
Christian  name  and  his  patronymic. 

3  Slavonic  form  of  Perpetua. 


ii2         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KHLESTAK6V.     Good,  good ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  As  I  will  not 
venture  to  disturb  you  further  v/ith  my  presence, 
or  take  up  the  time  which  you  consecrate  to  the 
performance  of  your  duties  .  .  .  (Bows  and  pre- 
pares to  leave.} 

KHLESTAK6V  (accompanying  him  ouf).  Oh, 
don't  mention  it!  All  you've  told  me  is  very 
amusing.  ...  It's  a  great  treat  to  me.  .  .  . 
(Turns  back,  and  reopens  the  door,  calling  after 
him.}  Hi,  there  !  what  are  your  ...  I  quite 
forget  your  Christian  and  paternal  names  ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Arte"mi  Philfp- 
povich. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Oh,  I  beg  your  pardon, 
Arte"mi  Philippovich,  but  an  odd  thing  has 
happened  to  me — I've  cleaned  myself  out 
coming  here.  You  haven't  got  four  hundred 
roubles  to  lend  me  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Yes,  I  have. 
(Gives  it.} 

KHLESTAK6V.  Well,  that  is  lucky!  I  thank 
you  most  sincerely ! 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         113 
SCENE  VII. 

(Enter  BOBCHfNSKi  and  DoBCHfNSKi.) 

BOBCHINSKI.  I  have  the  honour  to  present 
myself:  Peter,  son  of  Ivan  Bobchmski,  citizen 
of  this  town.1 

DOBCHINSKI.  And  I  am  Py6tr,  son  of  Ivan 
Dobchfnski,  landed  proprietor. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Ah,  but  I've  met  you  before  ! 
I  think  you  had  a  fall  then  ?  How  is  your  nose 
now? 

BOBCHiNSKI.  Sldva  Bdhu  !  quite  well,  thank 
you  !  Please  don't  trouble  about  it — it's  healed 
now,  quite  healed  up  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  That's  all  right— I'm  glad 
to  hear  it.  ...  (Suddenly.'}  You  haven't  got 
any  money  about  you  ? 

DOBCHINSKI.     Money  !     What  for  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.     Lend  me  a  thousand  ! 

BOBCH! NSKI.  Good  God  !  I  haven't  got  such 
a  sum !  Haven't  you,  though,  Py6tr  Ivanovich  ? 

DOBCHINSKI.     No  more  have  I,  sir  ;  because, 

1  They  use  the  antiquated  and  provincial  form,  Ivandv  stn, 
instead  of  Ivanovich. 

8 


ii4         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL, 

if  you  care  to  know,  all  my  money  is  deposited 
with  the  Board  of  Guardians.1 

KHLESTAKOV.  Well,  then,  if  you  haven't  a 
thousand,  say  a  hundred  roubles. 

BOBCHINSKI  (rummaging  in  his  pockets). 
Haven't  you  got  a  hundred,  Dobchfnski?  I 
have  only  got  forty  in  paper,  altogether. 

DOBCHfNSKl.  I've  no  more  than  twenty-five 
roubles. 

BOBCHiNSKl.  Have  another  good  look,  then, 
Py6tr  Ivanovich  !  You've  a  hole  in  your  right 
pocket,  I  know — I  dare  say  there's  some  dropped 
through. 

DoBCHiNSKi.  No,  there's  nothing  in  the 
hole,  I'm  positive. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Never  mind,  then— I'll  do 
with  that.  Very  well,  let  it  be  sixty-five  roubles. 
.  .  .  That's  all  right.  (Takes  the  notes.} 

DOBCHfNSKl.  I  was  going  to  presume  to  ask 
you  a  favour  with  reference  to  a  very  delicate 
question 

KHLESTAK6V.     Well,  what  is  it  ? 

DOBCHfNSKl.  It  is  a  matter  of  a  very 
delicate  nature,  sir :  my  eldest  son,  will  you 

1  Local  bodies,  which  used  to  act  as  Savings  Banks,  with 
State  security,  before  the  re-organisation  of  the  Imperial  Bank. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         115 

condescend  to  observe,  was  born  a  little  before 
my  marriage 

KHLESTAKOV.    Hullo? 

DOBCHINSKI.  And  so,  if  you  please,  I  wish 
him  to  be  quite  my — well,  legitimate  son  now, 
sir,  and  to  be  called  Dobchfnski,  like  me, 
sir. 

KHLESTAK6V.  All  right,  that's  quite  possible ; 
let  him  be  called  so. 

DOBCHfNSKl.  I  wouldn't  trouble  you,  sir, 
only  it  was  a  pity,  with  all  his  capabilities.  The 
boy  really  gives  me  the  greatest  hopes :  he 
repeats  whole  poems  by  heart ;  and  if  he  finds  a 
knife  anywhere,  he'll  at  once  make  a  little  toy 
droshky  as  neatly  as  a  conjurer,  sir.  Here's 
Bobchmski  will  testify  to  that. 

BOBCHINSKI.     Yes,  he  has  wonderful  talents ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Very  good,  very  good  !  I'll 
do  my  best  for  him.  .  .  .  I'll  speak  about  it.  ... 
I  hope  to  ...  that  shall  all  be  arranged — yes, 
yes!  ...  (TwrartoBOBCHfNSKl.)  Haven't  you 
something  to  ask  me  for  ? 

BOBCHfNSKl.  Yes,  I  have  a  very  humble 
request  to  make. 

KHLESTAK6v.     Well  then,  what  about? 

BOBCHlNSKl.      I    most    respectfully    beg    of 


n6         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

you,  when  you  return  to  Petersburg,  to  tell  all 
the  different  grandees  there — the  senators  and 
admirals — that  Jiere,  your  Serenity — I  mean, 
your  Excellency — in  this  very  town  lives  Peter 
Ivanovich  Bobchfnski — merely  to  say  that : 
Peter  Ivdnovich  Bobchfnski  lives  here. 

KHLESTAK6V.     Very  good  ! 

BOBCHINSKI.  And  if  the  Emperor  should  get 
to  hear  of  it,  then  will  you  say  to  the  Emperor 
too  :  May  it  please  your  Imperial  Majesty,  that 
is  the  town  where  Peter  Ivdnovich  Bobchfnski 
lives. 

KHLESTAK6V.     Certainly ! 

(together}.       Pardon      us      for 
DOBCHINSKI 

,  -  troubling     you    so    with    our 

BOBCHfNSKI 

presence. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Don't  mention  it,  don't 
mention  it !  It's  a  great  pleasure  to  me.  (Con- 
ducts them  out.) 


SCENE  VIII. 

KHLESTAKOV  (solus).  There's  a  good  many 
chinovniks  here !  It  seems  to  me,  though,  they 
take  me  for  a  Government  official !  I  certainly 
drew  the  long  bow  yesterday.  .  .  .  What  a  set 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.        1 1 7 

of  flats  they  are  !  I  must  send  an  account  of  it 
all  to  Tryapi'chkin  at  Petersburg  :  he  writes 
articles — he'll  scribble  off  a  fine  description  of 
them.  Hi,  Osip!  bring  me  some  ink  and  paper! 
(OsiP  looks  in  at  the  door  and  says,  "  Directly, 
sir  ! ")  But  I  must  be  careful  with  Tryapfchkin 
— this  may  strike  him  as  a  good  joke — he'll  sell 
his  own  father  for  a  jest,1  and  he  won't  refuse 
a  chance  of  making  money.  Besides,  these 
officials  are  a  good  sort  of  people  :  their  lending 
me  money  is  a  decided  point  in  their  favour. 
I'll  just  see  how  much  I've  got.  .  .  .  There's 
three  hundred  from  the  Judge,  and  three  hundred 
from  the  Postmaster.  .  .  .  Six,  seven,  eight 
hundred — what  a  greasy  bit  of  paper — eight 
hundred,  nine  hundred.  .  .  .  Oho  !  it  tots  up  to 
more  than  a  thousand.  .  .  .  Now  then,  my  friend 
the  captain,  just  let  me  catch  you  now — we'll  see 
who'll  be  the  winner  ! 

SCENE  IX. 

(Enter  OSIP,  with  inkstand  and  paper?) 

KHLESTAKOV.      Now,  booby,  you  see  how 
well  they  entertain  me !     (Begins  to  write.'} 

1  Russian  proverb. 


n8         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

OsiP.  Yes,  thank  the  Lord !  Only,  do  you 
know,  Ivan  Alexandrovich ? 

KHLESTAK6v.     Know  what  ? 

OSIP.  You  ought  to  be  starting  !  Y/i  B6hu 
it's  high  time ! 

KHLESTAK6V  (writing).  What  nonsense ! 
Why? 

OsiP.  I  mean  it.  The  Lord  be  with  'em  all! 
You've  been  a-going  it  here  for  two  days — reelly, 
it's  quite  enough  !  Why  hob-nob  with  'em  any 
longer  ?  Spit  on  'em !  You  don't  know  what 
may  happen  next1 — somebody  else  may  turn 
up.  ...  F//  B6hut  Ivan  Alexandrovich  !  And 
there's  splendid  'orses  here — they'd  go  like 
lightning ! 

KHLESTAK6V  (writes).  No,  I'd  like  to  stay 
on  here  a  little  longer.  To-morrow  will  do. 

OSIP.  To-morrow !  Lord  love  us  !  we  must 
go,  Ivan  Alexandrovich !  If  they  make  a  lot  of 
you  just  now,  it's  all  the  better  reason  for 
starting  at  once.  You  see,  they've  been  and 
mistook  you  for  somebody  else  ;  and  the  guv'nor 
will  be  angry  at  your  loitering  here.  .  .  .  Those 
'orses  would  go  famous,  Fll  undertake — they'd 
give  you  real  good  'uns  here. 

1  Nye  rbven  chat — literally,  one  hour  is  unlike  (another). 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.  119 

KiiLESTAK6v  (still  writing}.  Very  well  then. 
Only  take  this  letter  first,  please,  and  then  get 
an  order  for  post-horses — and  mind  you  see  that 
they're  good  ones.  Tell  the  postboys  I'll  give 
them  each  a  rouble  for  drink,  if  they  drive  like 
feldjdgers}  and  sing  their  loudest.  .  .  .  (Con- 
tinues writing?)  There,  I  fancy  Tryapichkin 
will  die  of  laughing — 

•  OSIP.  I'll  send  it  off,  sir,  by  the  man 
here.  I'd  better  be  packing  up,  so's  not  to 
lose  time. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Very  good — bring  me  a  light, 
though  ! 

OSIP  (goes  out,  and  speaks  behind  the  scene]. 
Hi  there,  mate  !  You  take  a  letter  to  the  post, 
and  tell  the  postmaster  he's  to  frank  it — and 
order  them  to  bring  round  their  very  best 
courier's  troika  for  my  master  at  once ;  and  say 
that  the  bdrin  don't  pay  any  fare — he  travels  at 
the  Government's  expense,  tell  'em.  They're  to 
look  alive,  or  the  bdrin  will  be  furious.  Stop, 
the  letter  ain't  ready  yet. 

KHLESTAK6V   (goes  on    with  his   letter}.     I 
should  like  to  know  where  he's   living  now — 
whether  it's  the  Pochtamtskaya  or  the  Gardkha- 
1  Imperial  couriers,  who  have  precedence  at  the  post-stations. 


120         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

vaya.1  He  likes  to  change  his  quarters  pretty 
often — saves  paying  the  rent.  I'll  make  a  shot 
at  it,  and  address  to  the  Pochtdmtskaya.  (Folds 
the  letter  up  and  addresses  it?) 

(OSIP  brings  the  light.  KHLESTAKOV  seals 
the  letter.  At  the  same  time  DERZHI- 
MORDA'S  voice  is  heard  exclaiming: 
"  Where  are  you  coming  to,  old  stick-in- 
the-mud?2  You've  been  told  no  one's 
to  be  let  in.") 

KHLESTAK6V  (gives  OSIP  the  letter).  There, 
take  it  out ! 

MERCHANTS'  VOICES.  Let  us  in,  bdtyushka 
—  you  can't  prevent  us :  we've  come  on 
business  ! 

DERZHIMORDA'S  VOICE.  Be  off!  Be  off! 
He's  not  receiving  any  one  !  He's  asleep.  (The 
noise  increases?) 

KHLESTAK6V.  What's  up  there,  Osip  ?  See 
what  the  row's  about ! 

OSIP  (looks  through  the  window).  Some 
tradesmen  want  to  come  in,  and  the  police- 

1  Two  of  the  great  thoroughfares  of  St.  Petersburg.     The 
word  tilitsa  (street)  is  understood  after  their  names,  which  mean 
Post  Office  and  Peas  Street  respectively. 

2  Baradd — literally,  "beard." 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         121 

officer  won't  let  'em.  They're  waving  papers 
about — they  want  to  see  you,  I'm  sure. 

KHLESTAK6V  (going  to  the  window).  Well, 
what  do  you  want,  my  friends  ? 

MERCHANTS'  VOICES.  We  throw  ourselves 
on  your  favour !  Give  orders  that  your  lordship 
will  receive  our  petition. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Let  them  in,  let  them  in ! 
Let  them  come !  Osip,  tell  them  they're  to 
come  in.  (Exit  OSIP.  KHLESTAKOV  takes 
some  petitions  in  through  the  window,  turns  them 
over,  and  reads .-)  "  To  his  High  Well-born 
Illustrious  Financial  Lordship  from  the  Merchant 
Abdulin  "...  the  devil  knows  what  it's  about ; 
and  what  a  title,  too ! 

SCENE  X. 

(Enter  the  MERCHANTS,  with  sugar-loaves  and  a  basket 
of  wine.) 

KHLESTAKOV.     Now,  my  friends,  what  is  it  ? 
MERCHANTS.     We  implore  your  favour  ! 
KHLESTAKOV.     Well,  say  what  you  want ! 
MERCHANTS.     Do  not  ruin  us,  your  lordship ! 
we  are  grievously  and  unjustly  oppressed  ! 
KHLESTAKOV.    By  whom  ? 


122         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

ONE  OF  THE  MERCHANTS.  It's  all  by  the 
Governor  of  this  town.  There  never  was  such 
a  governor,  sir !  It  is  impossible  to  describe 
the  outrages  he  commits.  We're  so  ruined  by 
constant  billeting  that  we  may  as  well  hang  our- 
selves !  He  catches  us  by  the  beard,  and  says, 
"  Ah,  you  dog  of  a  Tartar !  "  My  God  !  if  we 
don't  pay  him  due  respect  .  .  .  !  but  we've 
always  done  our  duty  peaceably :  we've  never 
refused  anything  that  his  lady  or  his  daughter 
might  want  for  dress.  But  no,  you  see,  that 
is  not  enough  for  him  ;  why,  he  comes  into  a 
shop,  and  anything  he  lights  upon — he  collars 
the  lot :  he'll  see  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  say,  "  Ah, 
my  friend,  that's  a  nice  little  piece  of  stuff;  just 
carry  it  to  my  house  ! "  So  we  have  to  take 
it,  and  the  piece  will  be  fifty  arshins1  or  so  in 
length. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Is  it  possible  ?  Akk,  what  a 
blackguard  he  is ! 

MERCHANTS.  Yes,  by  God  !  No  one  ever 
remembers  such  a  governor.  So  we  cover  up 
everything  in  the  shop  when  we  see  him 
coming  along.  And,  let  alone  choice  articles, 
he'll  take  any  sort  of  rubbish :  some  prunes  had 

1  Nearly  39  yards. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         123 

been  lying  in  the  barrel  for  seven  years,  too 
bad  for  my  shop-boy  to  eat — he  stuffs  a  whole 
handful  of  them  into  his  pocket.  He  says  his 
name-day1  is  the  feast  of  St.  Anthony,  and  then 
you  have  to  bring  him  all  kinds  of  things  he 
doesn't  even  want — that's  no  matter,  you've  got 
to  keep  on  bringing  them  ;  and  more,  he  says 
St  Onufri's2  Day  is  another  name-day  of  his, 
so  there's  nothing  to  be  done  but  come  with 
your  contributions  on  that  day  too. 

KHLESTAK6V.  Why,  he's  nothing  more  nor 
less  than  a  brigand  ! 

MERCHANT.  That's  true  !  But  try  to  thwart 
him,  and  he'll  quarter  a  whole  regiment  of 
soldiers  in  your  house.  And  if  we  have  the 
doors  barred  in  his  face,  he  says,  "  I  will  not 
submit  you  to  corporal  punishment  or  torture, 
as  that  is  forbidden  by  the  law;  but,  my  dear,  I 
will  make  you  swallow  red  herrings."8 

1  A  Russian  does  not  celebrate  his  birthday,  but  his  imyenM, 
or  the  feast  of  his  patron  saint,  on  whose  day,  and  after  whom,  he 
was  christened.     Hence  an  orthodox  Russian  can  only  be  called 
after  one  of  the  saints  of  the  Greek  Calendar. 

2  In  English,  Humphrey. 

3  To  produce  excessive  thirst.     This  indirect  form  of  torture 
was  employed,  to  extort  confession,  by  the  secret  police  of  the 
notorious  "Third  Section"  of  the  Imperial  Chancellery. 


I24         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KHLESTAK6  V.  What  a  thorough-paced  villain ! 
He  ought  to  be  sent  straight  to  Siberia  for  that! 

MERCHANT.  Yes,  if  you  by  your  favour  will 
only  remove  him,  all  will  be  well,  provided  only 
he  does  not  stay  in  our  neighbourhood.  Do  not, 
our  father,  despise  our  bread-and-salt  j1  we  pay 
our  respects  to  you  with  this  sugar-loaf  and  this 
basket  of  wine  ! 

KHLESTAK6v.  No,  don't  you  imagine  that; 
I  never  accept  bribes.  But  if  you  offered  me  a 
loan  of,  say,  three  hundred  roubles,  that  would 
be  quite  another  matter.  I  could  take  that. 

MERCHANTS.  Take  it  then,  our  father.  ( They 
produce  the  money.}  But  what  is  three  hundred — 
better  have  five  hundred ;  only  help  us  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  If  you  wish  it — it's  a  loan — 
I'll  not  say  a  word  !  .  .  .  I'll  take  it ! 

MERCHANTS  (offering  the  money  on  a  silver 
tray).  Please  accept  the  tray  also  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Well,  I  may  perhaps  take  the 
tray. 

MERCHANTS  (bowing).  Then  take  the  sugar- 
loaf  as  well ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Oh,  no !  I  never  accept  any 
kind  of  bribes 

1  The  khly£b-sol  is  a  token  of  hospitality  and  good-will. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         125 

OSIP.  Your  High  Nobility!  why  won't  you 
have  it !  Take  it — it  will  come  in  very  useful 
on  the  journey  !  .  .  .  Give  me  the  sugar-loaves 
and  the  packing-case — it'll  all  do.  What's  that? 
Cord  ?  Let's  have  the  cord  as  well — the  cord 
will  be  handy  on  the  road  :  the  carriage  '11  get 
damaged,  or  something  or  other — it'll  do  to  tie 
it  up  with  ! 

MERCHANTS.  Show  us  this  favour  then, 
your  Excellency.  If  you  refuse  to  aid  us  in  our 
prayer,  we  don't  know  what  will  happen — we 
may  as  well  go  and  hang  ourselves  ! 

KHLESTAKC-V.  Most  undoubtedly  I  will, 
undoubtedly  !  I'll  do  my  best ! 

(TJie    MERCHANTS    take    their  leave.    A 
woman's  voice  is  heard  without:  "  No,  you 
daren't  stop  me !     I'll  complain  to  him  of 
you  !     Don't  you  push  me  so  roughly  ! ") 
KHLESTAK6V.     Who's  there?     (Goes  to  the 
window?)     Well,  what's  the  matter,  mdtushka  ? 

VOICES  OF  TWO  WOMEN.    Take  pity  on  us, 
father !     Say  that  your  worship  will  listen  to  us ! 
KHLESTAK6V  (at  the  window).     Let  them 
come  in. 


126        THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 


SCENE  XI. 

(Enter  the  LOCKSMITH'S  WIFE   and  the  SERGEANT'S 
WIFE.) 

LOCKSMITH'S  WIFE  (bowing  to  the  ground}. 
Have  pity  on  me  ! 

SERGEANT'S  WIFE.     Have  pity  on  me  too  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.     Who  are  you,  women  ? 

SERGEANT'S  WIFE.  I  am  the  sergeant 
Ivdnov's  wife. 

LOCKSMITH'S  WIFE.  I  live  here,  my  father ; 
I'm  the  locksmith's  wife,  Fevr6nya  Pyetr6va 
Pashly6pkina 

KHLESTAK6v.  Stop,  one  of  you  speak  at  a 
time — what  do  you  want? 

LOCKSMITH'S  WIFE.  Have  mercy  on  me — I 
beg  for  vengeance  on  the  Governor  !  May  the 
Lord  curse  him  with  every  kind  of  curse,  so  that 
neither  the  villain  himself,  nor  his  children,  nor 
his  uncles,  nor  his  aunts,  may  ever  prosper  in 
anything  they  undertake ! 

KHLESTAK6V.     But  why  ? 

LOCKSMITH'S  WIFE.  Why,  wretch  that  he 
is !  he's  ordered  my  husband  to  shave  his 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         127 

forehead1  as  a  recruit,   and   the  lot  didn't  fall 
on  us,  and  it's  against  the  law,  for  he's  married ! 
KHLESTAKdv.     How  then  could  he  do  it  ? 
LOCKSMITH'S  WIFE.    He  has  done  it,  though, 
the  villain  ;  he's  done  it !     May  God  blast  him  in 
this  world  and  the  next !     And  his  aunt,  if  he 
has  an  aunt— may  every  sort  of  evil  blight  her— 
may  his  father,  if  he's  alive,  may  he  rot  to  death, 
the  scoundrel,  and  may  he  choke  for  ever  for  his 
villainy !     They  ought  to  have  taken  the  tailor's 
drunken  son,  but  the  parents  gave  him  a  big 
present;  so  he  sneaked  off  for  the  son  of  Pante- 
teyeva  the  merchant's  wife,  but  Panteleyeva  pri- 
vately sent  her  ladyship  three  pieces  of  linen,  so 
he  pitches  on  me.    "  What  do  you  want  a  husband 
for?  "  he  says;  "  he's  no  use  to  you."     Well,  I'm 
the  person  to  know  whether  he's  any  use  or  not! 
"Then,"  he  says,  "your  husband  is  a  thief— if  he 
hasn't  stolen  already,  he  will  do  so ;  it's  all  the 
same,  and  so  they  shall  take  him  next  year  for 
a  soldier."     And   how  shall   I  do  without  my 
husband?      Blackguard!    may    none    of   your 
family  ever  come  to  see  the  blessed   light   of 

1  The  shaving  of  the  forehead  was  formerly  practised  in 
order  to  prevent  desertion.  The  phrase  now  means  merely  "to 
enlist." 


128         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

God  !  may  your  mother-in-law,  if  you  have  a 
mother-in-law 

KHLESTAK6V.  There,  there  !  that  will  do  ! 
{Motions  the  old  woman  out.')  Now  what  have 
you  to  say  ?  (  To  the  other.} 

LOCKSMITH'S  WIFE  (going  out).  Don't  forget 
me,  my  father ! 

SERGEANT'S  WIFE.  I  have  come  to  beg  for 
justice  against  the  Governor! 

KHLESTAK^V.  Well,  well,  what  is  it?  Cut  it 
short ! 

SERGEANT'S  WIFE.  He  has  flogged  me,  little 
father ! 

KHLESTAKOV.    How? 

SERGEANT'S  WIFE.  By  mistake,  my  father ! 
Our  old  women  were  quarrelling  in  the  market, 
and  the  police  came  up  and  took  and  caught 
and  reported  me — and  I  couldn't  sit  down  for 
two  days  after  it ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  What's  to  be  done  now, 
then  ? 

SERGEANT'S  WIFE.  To  be  sure,  that  can't  be 
altered.  But  command  him  to  pay  compensation 
for  the  mistake.  I  must  bear  my  lot  without 
complaining — but  a  little  money  would  be  very 
acceptable  now ! 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         129 

KHLESTAKOV.  Kharasho,  kharaslio  ! 1  You 
can  go  now — be  off — I'll  see  to  it.  (Hands  with 
petitions  are  thrust  in  through  the  window?) 
What!  any  more  of  'em  there?  (Goes  to  the 
window?}  No,  no,  I  can't  attend  to  you — it's 
impossible,  impossible!  (Going  out?}  What  a 
nuisance  they  are,  devil  take  'em  !  Don't  let 
'em  in,  Osip ! 

OsiP  (calls  out  of  the  window}.     Go  away,  go 
away,  there's  no  time  now — come  to-morrow ! 
( TJie  door  opens,  and  a  figure  appears  in  a 
frieze    great-coat    ^vith    unkempt    beard, 
swollen  lips,  and  head  bound  up ;  others 
are  seen  behind  him  in  the  background?) 
OsiP.     Be  off  with  you,  be  off!     Where  are 
you  a-coming  to? 

(He  puslies  his  fists  into  the  first  man's 
stomach,  shoves  him  into  the  passage,  and 
goes  out  himself,  shutting  tJie  door?} 

SCENE  XII. 

(Enter  MARYA  ANT6NOVNA.) 
MARY  A.    A — kh  ! 
KHLESTAK6V.      Why  are  you  so  frightened, 

mademoiselle? 

1  Good  1 


1 3o         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

MARY  A.     Oh  no  !  I  was  not  frightened. 

KHLESTAKOV  (showing  off).  Pardon  me, 
sudarinya,  if  I  say  that  it  is  very  agreeable  to 
me  to  think  you  have  taken  me  for  one  who  .  .  . 
May  I  venture  to  inquire  where  you  thought  of 
going? 

MARYA.     Really,  I  was  going  nowhere. 

KHLESTAKtfv.  Might  I  ask,  then,  why  you 
were  going  nowhere  ? 

MARYA.  I  wondered  if  mamma  were  here 

KHLESTAK6V.  No ;  but  I  should  really  like 
to  know  why  you  were  going  nowhere  ? 

MARYA.  Oh,  I'm  disturbing  you.  You  were 
engaged  on  important  business ! 

KHLESTAK6V  (with  a  lady-killing  air}.  But 
a  glance  from  your  eyes  is  better  than  any 
important  business  !  .  .  .  You  could  never 
disturb  me — that's  quite  impossible ;  on  the 
contrary,  you  afford  me  the  very  greatest 
pleasure  ! 

MARYA.  Ah,  you  compliment  as  they  do  in 
the  capital ! 

KHLESTAK6v.  A  charming  lady  like  you 
should  only  be  so  addressed  !  May  I  dare  to  be 
so  happy  as  to  offer  you  a  chair  ?  But  no !  you 
should  have  a  throne^  not  a  chair ! 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         131 

MARYA.  Indeed,  I  do  not  know.  ...  I  ought 
to  be  going.  ( Takes  a  seat.) 

KHLESTAKOV.  What  a  beautiful  scarf  you 
have ! 

MARYA.  You  are  making  fun  of  me — you're 
only  laughing  at  countrified  people  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  How  I  should  long,  mademoi- 
selle, to  be  that  scarf,  so  as  to  clasp  your  lily 
neck ! 

MARYA.  I  don't  in  the  least  understand  what 
you  mean.  .  .  .  What  singular  weather  we  are 
having  to-day ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Your  little  lips,  though, 
sitddrtnyO)  are  worth  all  the  weather  in  the 
world  ! 

MARYA.  You  only  say  that  because  you  .  .  . 
I  was  going  to  ask  you  to  write  some  verses  in 
my  album  as  a  souvenir.  You  know  a  good 
many,  of  course. 

KHLESTAKOV.  For  you,  mademoiselle,  I  will 
do  anything  you  wish.  Say  the  word,  what 
verses  will  you  have  ? 

MARYA.  Oh,  anything — so  long  as  they're 
good  and  new ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Let  me  see — verses !  I  know 
a  lot  of  them  ! 


132         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

MARYA.  Well,  will  you  tell  me  what  you 
are  going  to  write  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.  Why  should  I  repeat  them  ? 
I  know  them  without  that ! 

MARYA.     I'm  so  fond  of  poetry.  .  .  . 

KHLESTAK6V.  Yes,  and  I  know  a  quantity 
of  all  sorts.  Would  you  like  this,  say,  "  O  thou, 
mortal  man,  who  vainly  in  thine  anguish  mur- 
murest  against  God."1  .  .  .  Or  there's  others  ,  .  . 
I  can't  just  remember  'em  now — they're  all 
of  no  account  Instead,  I  offer  you  my  love^ 
which  ever  since  your  first  glance  .  .  .  {Moves 
his  chair  closer?) 

MARYA.  Love  ?  I  don't  understand  what 
love  is !  ...  I've  never  known  what  love  is 
like  .  .  .  {Moves  her  chair  aivay^} 

KHLESTAKOV.  But  why  do  you  move  your 
chair  away  ?  We  had  much  better  sit  close  to 
each  other ! 

MARYA  (moves  it  still  further}.  Why  close  ? 
We're  just  as  well  apart ! 

KHLESTAKOV  {moves  his  chair  up}.  Why 
apart  ?  We're  just  as  well  close  together ! 

1  0  tt,  shto  v  gdresti  napr&sno  no.  B6gha  rdpshchesh,  chelavy$kt 
a  hackneyed  quotation  from  an  Ode  on  the  Book  of  Job,  by 
Lomon6sov,  the  earliest  Russian  poet  (1711-1765). 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         133 

MARYA.     But  why  do  you  do  that  ? 

KHLESTAK6V  (edging  nearer}.  I  only  seem 
near  you — -fancy  that  I'm  far  away ! 

MARYA  (looks  out  of  the  window}.  Ah  !  what 
was  that,  seemed  to  fly  past  ?  Was  it  a  magpie, 
or  what  ? 

KHLESTAKOV  (kisses  her  on  the  shoulder, 
and  looks  at  the  window}.  Yes,  that  was  a 
magpie ! 

MARYA  (rises  indignantly}.  No,  that's  too 
much.  .  .  .  What  rudeness  I 

KHLESTAKOV  (holding-  her  back}.  Forgive 
me,  mademoiselle — I  did  it  for  love,  only  for 
love  of  you  ! 

MARYA.  And  so  you  think  I'm  a  country 
hoyden.  .  .  .  (Struggles  to  free  herself?} 

KHLESTAKOV  (still  holding  her}.  It  was  for 
love,  really,  for  love!  ...  I  was  only  joking, 
Marya  Antonovna,  don't  be  angry  !  I'm  ready 
to  beg  your  pardon  on  my  knees  !  (Falls  on  his 
knees?}  Do  forgive  me,  forgive  me  !  You  see, 
you  see,  I'm  on  my  knees  ! 


i34        THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

SCENE  XIII. 
(Enter  ANNA  ANDR£YEVNA.) 

ANNA  (sees  KllLESTAK6v  kneeling).  Akh, 
what  a  situation  ! ! 

KHLESTAK6V  (rising}.    Oh,  con-found  it ! 

ANNA  (to  her  daughter).  Well,  miss,  what's 
the  meaning  of  this  behaviour  ? 

MARYA.    Mamma  dear,  I— 

ANNA.  Be  off  from  here  :  d'you  hear  me,  be 
off,  I  say !  and  don't  dare  to  show  your  face  to 
me  again  !  (MARYA  goes  out  in  tears.}  Excuse 
me,  sir,  but,  I  confess,  I  was  so  astonished  at 
these  proceedings  .  .  . 

KHLESTAKOV  (aside).  But  she  isn't  bad- 
looking,  either.  (Throws  himself  at  her  feet.} 
Suddrinya,  you  see,  I  burn  with  love ! 

ANNA  What's  this,  you  on  your  knees  ?  Oh, 
get  up,  sir,  get  up  !  The  floor  is  quite  dirty 
here ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  No,  on  my  knees — indeed, 
on  my  knees,  I  wish  to  know  my  fate — life  or 
death ! 

ANNA.  But  allow  me,  sir  ;  I  don't  quite  com- 
prehend the  meaning  of  your  words.  If  I  am 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.        135 

not  mistaken,  you  were  making  a  proposal  to 
my  daughter  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  No,  I'm  in  love  with  you  I 
My  life  hangs  on  a  thread  !  If  you  will  not 
crown  my  constant  love,  then  I  am  unfit  for 
earthly  existence !  With  a  flame  at  my  heart, 
I  ask  for  your  hand ! 

ANNA.  But  permit  me  to  mention  that  I  am, 
so  to  speak  .  .  .  well,  I  am  married ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  What  matter?  Love  knows 
no  difference  !  Has  not  Karamzm  said  :  "  The 
laws  may  condemn.  .  .  ." 1  We  will  fly  under 
the  canopy  of  heaven !  Your  hand — I  crave 
your  hand 

SCENE  XIV. 

(MARYA  ANT6NOVNA  suddenly  runs  in.) 

MARYA.  Mamma  dear,  papa  says,  will 
you  .  .  .  (Sees  KHLESTAK6V  on  his  knees,  and 
shrieks .-)  Akh,  what  a  situation  ! ! 

ANNA.  What  is  it,  then?  What  do  you 
want?  What  have  you  come  for?  What  do 
you  mean  by  this  flightiness  ?  Bursting  in  all  of 

1  Quoted  from  some  verses  in  the  romance,  Bornholm  Islandt 
by  Karamzfn,  the  great  Russian  historian  (1766-1826). 


136        THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

a  sudden,  like  a  cat  in  a  fit  I1  ...  Well,  what 
have  you  seen  that's  so  surprising  ?  What's  got 
into  your  head,  then  ?  Why,  really,  you  act  like 
a  three-year-old  child — not  like,  not  in  the  least 
like,  what  one  would  expect  from  a  girl  of 
eighteen  !  I  wonder  when  you  will  get  more 
sensible,  and  behave  as  a  well-brought-up 
young  lady  should,  and  learn  good  manners 
and  steadiness  of  conduct ! 

MARYA  (through  her  tears}.  Really,  mamma 
dear,  I  didn't  know 

ANNA.  Oh,  your  head's  always  empty2 — you 
copy  Lyapkin-Tyapkin's  daughters.  What  do 
you  want  to  follow  them  for — you've  no  business 
to  take  them  as  your  pattern.  You  have  other 
examples,  miss,  before  you — your  own  mother ! 
That's  the  model  you  ought  to  imitate ! 

KHLESTAK6V  (seizing  MARYA's  hand}.  Anna 
Andr^yevna,  do  not  oppose  our  happiness,  but 
give  your  blessing  to  a  constant  love ! 

ANNA  (astounded}.     So  it's  her  you're 

KHLESTAKOV.  Decide  my  fate !  is  it  life  or 
death  ?  ! 

1  Ugoryttaya — literally,  suffocated. 

2  SkvaznSi  vy$ter  razgiilivayet — literally,   a  draught  blows 
through  (your  head). 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         137 

ANNA  (recovering,  to  MARYA).  There,  now 
you  see,  minx,  now  you  see — it  was  all  on  your 
account,  you  baggage,  that  our  guest  was  pleased 
to  fall  on  his  knees;  and  then  you  suddenly 
blunder  in,  as  if  you  had  taken  leave  of  your 
senses.  It  would  have  served  you  quite  right  if 
I  had  refused — you're  not  worthy  of  such  good 
fortune. 

MARYA.  I  won't  do  it  any  more,  mamma ; 
I'll  never  do  so  again 


SCENE  XV. 

(Enter  the  GOVERNOR,  breathlessly.') 

GOVERNOR.  I  will  never  do  so  again,  your 
Excellency  !  Don't  ruin  me — don't  ruin  me  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.     Why,  what's  the  matter  ? 

GOVERNOR.  The  merchants  have  been  here, 
complaining  to  your  Excellency.  ...  I  swear, 
on  my  honour,  not  half  of  what  they  say  is  true. 
They  cheat  and  rob  the  people  themselves.  The 
sergeant's  wife  lied  when  she  told  you  I  flogged 
her — it's  false,  yti  Bohu,  it's  false.  Why,  she 
flogged  herself ' ! 

KHLESTAKOV.     The  sergeant's  wife  may  go 


138         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

to  the  devil — I'm  not  going  to  bother  about 
her! 

GOVERNOR.  Don't  believe  'em — don't  believe 
em  !  they're  such  liars  .  .  .  not  a  child will  trust 
'em  even  !  The  whole  town  knows  they're  liars, 
and  as  for  cheating,  I'll  go  so  far  as  to  say  the 
world  has  never  bred  such  a  gang ! 

ANNA.  But  do  you  know  the  honour  Ivan 
Alexandrovich  has  conferred  on  us?  He  has 
asked  for  our  daughter's  hand  ! 

GOVERNOR.  What?  what?  .  .  .  You're  mad, 
mdtushka.  .  .  .  Don't  be  offended,  your  Excel- 
lency ;  but  she's  a  little  wrong  in  the  head 
sometimes — she  takes  after  her  mother. 

KHLESTAK6V.  But  I  do  really  ask  for  her 
hand !  I'm  deeply  in  love  ! 

GOVERNOR.  I  can't  believe  it,  your  Excel- 
lency  ! 

ANNA.     Not  when  he  tells  you  so  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.  I'm  not  joking  .  .  .  I'm 
madly  in  love  with  her ! 

GOVERNOR.  I  daren't  believe  it ;  I'm  not 
worthy  of  such  an  honour ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  If  you  refuse  me  Marya 
Ant6novna's  hand,  the  devil  knows  what  I'm 
not  ready  for  1 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         139 

GOVERNOR.  I  can't  believe  you — you  are 
pleased  to  be  jesting,  Excellency ! 

ANNA.  Oh,  what  a  blockhead  you  are,  to  be 
sure !  How  many  times  are  you  to  be  told  ? 

GOVERNOR.     No,  no — it's  incredible ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Give  me  your  consent,  give 
me  your  consent !  I'm  a  desperate  man — 
capable  of  anything !  If  I  blow  my  brains  out, 
you  will  be  held  responsible. 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  my  God !  I  am  innocent, 
body  and  soul !  Don't  take  offence,  I  beg ! 
Please  do  what  your  honour  thinks  fit!  My 
head's  in  such  a  whirl  now  ...  I  can't  realise 
what's  going  on.  .  .  .  I've  become  a  regular  tom- 
fool— such  as  I  never  was  before ! 

ANNA.  There  now,  give  them  your  blessing ! 
(KHLESTAKOV  and  MARYA  approach  him.} 

GOVERNOR.  May  the  Lord  bless  you — but  I 
am  innocent  of  it !  (KHLESTAKOV  kisses  MARYA. 
The  GOVERNOR  stares  at  them,  and  at  last  realises 
that  it  is  not  all  a  plot.)  What?  what  the  devil ! 
They're  really  .  .  . !  (Rubs  his  eyes.}  So  they 
are,  they're  kissing  each  other ;  they,  actually 
are — just  as  if  they  were  engaged  !  Aha ! 
Oho!  What  a  stroke  of  luck!  Well,  I'm 
blest !  1 


I4o         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 
SCENE  XVI. 

(Enter  OSIP.) 

OsiP.     The  horses  are  ready ! 

KHLESTAKOV.    All  right— I'll  come  directly ! 

GOVERNOR.     Are  you  then  going  away  ? 

KHLESTAKOV.     Yes,  I'm  starting. 

GOVERNOR.  But  just  when — that  is  to  say 
.  .  .  you  condescended  to  hint  at  a  marriage,  I 
thought ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  I  have  to  leave,  though,  at  a 
minute's  notice;  but  I'm  only  going  for  a  day  to 
see  my  uncle — he's  a  wealthy  old  boy — and  I'll 
be  back  again  to-morrow ! 

GOVERNOR.  We  won't  venture  to  detain  you 
then — we'll  only  hope  for  your  safe  return  ! 

KHLESTAK6V.  Thanks,  thanks ;  I'll  come 
back  directly!  (To  MARYA.)  Good-bye,  my 
love!  .  .  .  No,  I  can't  bear  to  say  it!  Fare- 
well, darling.  {Kisses  her  hand.} 

GOVERNOR.  Will  you  want  anything  for 
your  journey  ?  You  were  good  enough,  I  think, 
to  say  you  were  short  of  funds  ? 

KHLESTAK^V.    Oh  no,  it  doesn't  matter.  .  .  . 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         141 

(Reflects  a  little}    Well  ...  all  the  same  .  .  . 
since  you  are  so  kind 

GOVERNOR.     How  much  do  you  want  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  Well,  you  know,  you  have 
lent  me  two  hundred — that's  to  say,  it  wasn't 
two  hundred,  but  four — I  don't  want  to  profit 
by  your  mistake — so,  if  you  like  to  lend  me  as 
much  again,  that  will  make  it  a  round  su-m,  just 
eight  hundred. 

GOVERNOR.  You  shall  have  it  at  once! 
(Takes  the  notes  out  of  his  purse?)  There,  as  if 
on  purpose,  there's  some  brand  new  notes  ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Ah,  so  they  are !  (Takes  the 
notes  and  examines  them?}  That's  fine !  They 
say  new  bank-notes  mean  good  luck,  don't 
they  ? 

GOVERNOR.     So  they  do,  sir  ;  exactly  so ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Well,  good-bye,  Ant6n 
Ant6novich  !  I'm  deeply  grateful  to  you  for 
your  hospitality — I've  never  been  so  well  treated 
as  here.  Good-bye,  Anna  Andre"yevna  !  Fare- 
well, Marya  Ant6novna,  my  darling  ! 

(  They  go  off>  and  their  voices  are  heard  behind 
the  scenes.} 

KHLESTAKOV.  Farewell,  Marya  Ant6novna, 
angel  of  my  soul ! 


i42         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  how's  this  ?  you're  going  to 
ride  in  a  post-carriage  P1 

KHLESTAK6V.  Yes,  it's  a  way  I  have. 
Springs  give  me  a  headache. 

DRIVER.     Tprr.  .  .  .  Whoa  then  ! 

GOVERNOR.  Have  something  then  laid  there ; 
a  rug,  say.  Won't  you  let  me  tell  them  to  get 
you  one  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  Oh  no,  why?  it's  needless — 
still,  if  you  like,  let's  have  the  rug ! 

GOVERNOR.  Here,  Avd6tya,  run  to  the 
cupboard  and  get  out  the  very  best  rug,  the 
Persian  one  with  the  blue  ground — make  haste ! 

DRIVER.    Tprrr 

GOVERNOR.  How  long  are  we  to  wait  for 
your  return  ? 

KHLESTAK6V.  Oh,  to-morrow,  or  the  day 
after ! 

OsiP.  Ah,  is  that  the  rug?  let's  have  it 
here — lay  it  so!  And  now  put  some  hay  this 
side  ! 

DRIVER.     Whoa  then,  whoa 

OsiP.  Here,  on  this  side  !  this  way  !  more — 
that's  right !  that'll  do  famous  !  (Pats  the  rug 

1  Na  pereklddnoi — literally,  "  with  relays  of  horses,"  and  a 
hired  sledge  or  springless  tarantds. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.        143 

with  his  hand.}  Now  you  can  take  your  seat, 
your  honour ! 

KHLESTAKOV.  Good-bye,  Ant6n  Ant6no- 
vich ! 

GOVERNOR.     Good-bye,  your  Excellency  ! 

WOMEN'S  VOICES.  Good-bye,  Ivan  Alexdn- 
drovich ! 

KHLESTAKOV.     Good-bye,  mdmenka  ! 

DRIVER.  Gee-up,  my  beauties!  (Bell tinkles ; 
the  curtain  falls.) 


i44         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 


FIFTH  ACT. 
SCENE— As  before. 

SCENE  I. 


GOVERNOR.  Well,  Anna  Andreyevna — eh  ? 
Had  you  any  idea  of  that,  now  ?  There's  a 
prize,  if  you  like  !  Now,  confess  it  candidly — 
you  never  dreamt  of  such  a  thing !  You  were  a 
simple  town-governor's  wife,  and  now  see  who 
you've  hooked  for  a  son-in-law — a  devil  of  a 
swell,  confound  you ! 

ANNA.  Not  at  all — I  knew  it  ages  ago.  It's 
you  that's  taken  by  surprise  ;  you're  only  a  com- 
monplace person,  and  have  never  met  people 
of  quality ! 

GOVERNOR.  Why,  madam,  I'm  one  of  the 
quality  myself!  .  .  .  Just  think,  though,  Anna 
Andr^yevna,  what  a  fine  pair  of  birds  we've 
become — eh  ?  Anna  Andre*yevna !  We  can  fly 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         145 

pretty  high  now  —  devilish  high!  .  .  .  Stop, 
won't  I  pepper  up  all  the  gentlemen  who  were 
so  free  with  their  petitions  and  complaints !  Hi, 
who's  there  ?  (A  POLICE-OFFICER  enters.}  Oh, 
that's  you,  Ivan  Karpovich !  Just  summon  the 
merchants  here,  brother.  Won't  I  let  the  black- 
guards have  it !  Informing  about  me,  indeed ! 
Wait  a  little,  you  cursed  pack  of  Jews,  you  little 
turtle-doves  !  I  chastised  you  before  with  whips, 
now  I'll  try  the  scorpions  !  Take  note  of  all 
who  came  to  protest  against  me,  and  especially 
the  scribblers  who  concocted  their  petitions. 
And  be  sure  to  let  'em  all  know,  from  me,  what 
an  honour  Heaven  has  sent  the  Governor ; 
he's  going  to  marry  his  daughter,  not  to  a 
nobody,  but  to  a  man  whose  equal  the  world's 
never  seen,  who  can  accomplish  everything — 
everything — everything !  Make  them  all  under- 
stand that !  Shout  it  in  every  one's  ears,  ring 
the  bells — devil  take  it !  Now's  my  triumph,  and 
triumph  I  will !  (  The  POLICE-OFFICER ^wj  out.} 
Now,  Anna  Andreyevna,  what  d'you  think — 
ch  ?  Things  being  as  they  are,  where  shall  we 
take  up  our  abode — here,  or  in  "  Peter  "  ? 

ANNA.     Oh,  in  Petersburg,  of  course.     How 
could  we  remain  here  ? 

10 


i46         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

GOVERNOR.  Very  well,  Petersburg  be  it 
then ! — only  it's  not  bad  here  even.  I  fancy, 
though,  the  governorship  can  go  to  the  devil — 
eh,  Anna  Andrdyevna  ? 

ANNA.  Of  course,  what's  a  governorship, 
indeed  ! 

GOVERNOR,  Now,  don't  you  think,  Anna 
Andre"yevna,  we  shall  really  get  to  the  top  of 
the  tree,  as  he's  hail-fellow-well-met  with  all  the 
ministers,  and  goes  to  Court  ;  so  he'll  get  me 
promoted,  until  in  time  I  shall  find  myself 
among  the  generals.  What  do  you  think,  Anna 
Andre"yevna,  shall  I  do  as  a  general  ? 

ANNA.     I  should  say  so — beautifully! 

GOVERNOR.  Ah,  confound  it!  it's  splendid 
to  be  a  general !  They'll  hang  a  ribbon  across 
my  shoulder!  Which  do  you  say's  the  best 
order  to  have — the  red  one  or  the  blue?1 

ANNA.     Oh,  decidedly  the  blue  is  the  best 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  that's  what  you  aim  at! 
The  red  one's  pretty  good,  too.  Why  does  one 
want  to  be  a  general  ?  Why,  because,  when 
you  travel  anywhere  you  have  couriers  and 
orderlies  always  galloping  in  front,  shouting 

1  The  red  ribbon  is  for  the  Order  of  St.  Anne,  1st  class ; 
the  blue,  for  the  White  Eagle.  (See  Note  at  the  end.) 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL,         147 

"  horses ! "  and  no  one  else  can  have  'em  at  the 
stations  —  every  one  waits  for  you  —  all  the 
councillors,  captains,  and  town-governors — and 
you  don't  turn  a  hair!1  You  dine  with  the 
lord-lieutenant,2  wherever  it  may  be,  and  snub 
the  town-governor  ! 3  Ha,  ha,  ha !  {Laughs  till 
the  tears  roll  down  his  cheeks?)  Thafs  what  I 
call  tempting,  d it ! 

ANNA.  Anything  rude  like  that  just  pleases 
you.  But  you  really  must  remember  that  we 
shall  have  to  live  a  quite  different  kind  of  life — it 
won't  do  for  you  to  know  any  of  your  dog-fancier 
judges,  whom  you  go  hare-hunting  with,  or  people 
like  Zemlyanika;  on  the  contrary,  your  acquaint- 
ances will  be  persons  of  distinction — counts  and 
fashionables,  all  of  them  .  .  .  only  I'm  anxious 
about  you :  you  will  go  and  let  out  some 
expression  or  other,  which  is  never  heard  in 
polite  society. 

GOVERNOR.  Well,  what  of  that — a  word 
doesn't  hurt ! 

1  Literally,  your  breath  does  not  even  turn  your  moustache — 
i.e.,  you  don't  concern  yourself. 

2  Guberndtor,  chief  of  a  gubtrniya  or  province. 

3  Gorodnichi,  like  the  speaker,  governor  or  burgomaster  of  a 
town.    The  phrase  here  is,  St6i  gorodnichi  ! — literally,  the  town- 
governor  can  stand  or  wait. 


148         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

ANNA.  No,  perhaps  not,  when  you're  only  a 
town-governor;  but  there,  you  know,  our  circum- 
stances will  be  totally  altered. 

GOVERNOR.  Yes,  indeed  !  You  can  get  two 
good  sorts  of  fish,  they  say,  there — the  sea- eel 
and  the  smelt,  and  they  make  your  mouth 
water  when  you  begin  to  eat  'em. 

ANNA.  That's  all  he  thinks  about— -fish  !  I 
shall  wish  our  house  to  be  the  very  first  in  the 
capital,  and  my  boudoir  to  be  full  of  such  amber 
and  perfume  that  you  can't  go  in  without 
shutting  your  eyes — sol  (Screivs  up  her  eyes 
and  sniffs.}  A — h !  how  exquisite ! 


SCENE  II. 
(Enfer  the  MERCHANTS.) 

GOVERNOR.     Oh,  good-day,  little  falcons.1 
MERCHANTS  (bowing).     We  wish  you  health, 

little  father ! 

GOVERNOR.     Well,   my   little   pigeons,2  and 

how  are  you  getting  on?  and  how's  business? 

(Changes  his  tone.)     And  so  you  would  report 

1  Sok6liki.     2  GoVibchiki,    terms    of   endearment ;  here,    of 
course,  used  ironically. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         149 

me,  you  tea-swillers,  you  peddling  hucksters ! 
You  would,  would  you,  you  utter  ruffians,  you 
ringleaders  of  blackguardism,  you  sharks,  you 
pirates  you !  Eh?  Complaining  of  black- 
mail? Oh,  you  thought,  here's  a  chance  to  clap 
him  in  prison !  .  .  .  May  the  seven  fiends  and  a 
she-devil  catch  you  !  do  you  know  that ? 

ANNA.  Akh}  Bozlie  mdil  what  language  you 
use,  Ant6sha ! 

GOVERNOR  (impatiently}.  Oh,  I  can't  be 
picking  and  choosing  my  words  now  !  ( To  the 
MERCHANTS.)  Are  you  aware  that  the  very 
same  chinovnik  to  whom  you  complained  is  now 
engaged  to  my  daughter?  I'll  pay  you  out!  .  .  . 
Why,  you  fleece  the  whole  nation  !  .  .  .  You 
make  a  contract  with  the  Government,  and 
cheat  it  out  of  a  hundred  thousand  with  the 
rotten  cloth  you  supply;  and  then,  if  you're  asked 
to  give  one  a  present  of  fifteen  or  twenty  yards, 
you  expect  a  consideration  for  it !  Ay,  if  they 
only  knew,  they'd  come  down  upon  you  !  And 
the  side  you  put  on  I1  He's  a  merchant — don't 
you  touch  him  !  "  We  don't  rank  after  gentle 
folks,"  say  you — but  gentlemen  have  had  an 
education,  you  ape  !  I  daresay  they  are  flogged 
1  Literally,  your  belly  wags  in  front. 


150         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

at  school — otherwise  they'd  learn  nothing.  But 
what  do  you  learn  ?  Why,  the  A  B  C  of  swind- 
ling, for  your  master  beats  you  if  you  don't 
manage  to  rob  properly.  While  you're  still  a 
small  boy  you  don't  know  the  Lord's  Prayer,  but 
you  can  do  anybody;  and  then,  don't  you  give 
yourself  airs  when  you  get  bigger,  and  your  purse 
gets  fuller  !  My  !  what  a  sight  for  sore  eyes ! 
Just  because  you  blow  out  sixteen  samovars1  a 
day  you  put  a  swagger  on !  I  spit  on  your  head 
and  your  bumptiousness  ! 

MERCHANTS  (bowing  low).  We  are  guilty, 
Ant6n  Ant6novich  1 

GOVERNOR.  You  complained  of  me?  But 
who  was  it  that  winked  at  your  jobbery  when 
you  built  the  bridge  and  charged  twenty  thou- 
sand for  less  than  a  hundred  roubles'  worth  of 
wood  ?  It  was  I,  you  goat's-beard  ! 2  Have  you 
forgotten  tJiat?  If  I  had  rounded  on  you,  I 
could  have  sent  you  to  Siberia !  What  say  you 
to  that — eh  ? 

ONE  OF  THE  MERCHANTS.     God  knows,  we 

1  Alluding  to  the  immoderate  consumption  of  weak  tea  by 
Russian  traders  over  their  bargains. 

2  At  the  date  of  the  play,  only  the  lower  classes  wore  beards  ; 
hence  the  expression,  Kozlinaya  baradA,  is  a  term  of  abuse. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         151 

are  guilty,  Ant6n  Antdnovich — the  devil  tempted 
us !  We  will  never  inform  against  you  again  ! 
Tell  us  what  compensation  you  wish  .  .  .  only 
don't  be  angry ! 

GOVERNOR.  Don't  be  angry  !  Oh,  now  you 
wallow  at  my  feet — because  I've  got  the  upper 
hand !  but  if  I  was  in  your  position  for  a 
moment,  you  would  roll  me  in  the  mud,  you 
rabble,  and  club  me  on  the  head  into  the 
bargain ! 

MERCHANTS  {prostrating  themselves}.  Spare 
us,  Anton  Ant6novich ! 

GOVERNOR.  Spare  you,  indeed  !  It's  "spare 
us!"  now,  but  what  was  it  before — eh ?  I  have  a 
good  mind  to  ...  but  no  !  ( Waves  his  hand's 
condescendingly.}  There,  may  the  Lord  forgive 
you !  Enough — I  bear  no  malice  ;  only  beware, 
and  mind  your  P's  and  Q's  !  for  I'm  not  giving 
my  daughter  to  any  ordinary  gentleman  ;  so  see 
that  the  wedding  presents  are  .  .  .  you  under- 
stand? And  don't  flatter  yourselves  you  can 
put  me  off  with  your  dried  fish  or  sugar-loaves. 
.  .  .  There,  now,  you  can  go,  and  the  Lord  be 
with  you !  (Exeunt  MERCHANTS.) 


i52         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 


SCENE  III. 

(Enter  the  JUDGE,  the  CHARITY  COMMISSIONER,  and 
afterwards  RASxAKOVSKl.) 

JUDGE  (almost  before  he  has  entered  the  raw/). 
Are  we  to  believe  the  report,  Ant6n  Ant6novich  ? 
Has  an  extraordinary  piece  of  good  fortune 
befallen  you  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  I  have  the  honour 
to  congratulate  you *  on  your  extraordinary  good 
fortune  !  I  was  heartily  pleased  when  I  heard 
of  it!  (Kisses  ANNA'S  hand.}  Anna  Andreyevna! 
(Kisses  MARYA's.)  Marya  Antdnovna  ! 

RASxAKOVSKl  (entering}.  I  congratulate 
Ant6n  Ant6novich !  May  the  Lord  grant  long 
life  to  you  and  the  bridal  pair,  and  bless 
you  with  grandchildren  and  great-grand- 
children, and  many  descendants  to  succeed 
you !  Anna  Andre"yevna  !  (Kisses  her  hand} 
Marya  Ant6novna  !  (Kisses  MARYA's  hand.} 

1  All  the  characters  in  this  and  the  following  scenes  use  the 
same  form  of  congratulation  ;  I  therefore  keep  the  similarity  in 
the  translation. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.        153 
SCENE  IV. 

(Enter  KAR6BKIN  and  his  wife,  and  LYULYUKOV.) 

KAROBKIN.  I  have  the  honour  to  congratu- 
late Ant6n  Ant6novich !  Anna  Andreyevna  ! 
Mdrya  Ant6novna !  (Kissing  their  hands.} 

KAROBKIN'S  WIFE.  I  sincerely  congratulate 
you,  Ant6n  Ant6novich,  on  your  good  fortune ! 

LvtiLYUKOV.  I  have  the  honour  to  congratu- 
late you,  Anna  Andreyevna !  (Kisses  her  hand 
and  turns  to  the  audience,  smacking  his  lips  with 
an  air  of  bravado?)  Marya  Antonovna !  I  have 
the  honour  !  (Goes  through  the  same  performance.} 

SCENE  V. 

(Enter  a  number  of  "visitors  with  overcoats  and  in  full 
dress j  they  first  shake  ANNA'S  hand,  and  then 
MARYAis,  saying,  "  Anna  Andreyevna  !  "  "  Marya 
Antonovna ! "  Enter  also  BoBCHfNSKi  and  DOB- 
CHfNSKi,  eagerly  jostling  each  other.) 

BOBCHINSKI.  I  have  the  honour  to  con- 
gratulate you  .  .  . 

DOBCHf NSKI.  Ant6n  Ant6novich,  I  have  the 
honour  to  congratulate  you  ! 

BOBCHINSKI.    ...  On  the  happy  occurrence  ! 


154         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

DOBCHfNSKl.     Anna  Andre"yevna! 

BOBCHiNSKi.    Anna  Andre"yevna ! 

(  They  both  approach  at  the  same  moment,  and 
knock  their  foreheads  together). 

DOBCHINSKI.  Marya  Ant6novna !  (Kisses 
Jier  hand.}  I  have  the  honour  of  congratulating 
you !  May  you  enjoy  the  greatest,  greatest 
happiness,  and  walk  about  in  cloth  of  gold,  and 
eat  all  sorts  of  choicely-flavoured  soups,  and 
always  pass  your  time  very  agreeably  ... 

BOBCHiNSKi  (interrupting  him}.  Marya 
Ant6novna,  I  have  the  honour  to  congratulate 
you!  May  God  grant  you  wealth  of  every 
kind  and  ducats  and  a  baby  boy,  as  tiny,  yes,  as 
tiny  as  this  ! — (Measures  ^vith  his  hand] — small 
enough  to  sit  on  the  palm  of  your  hand !  yes, 
and  may  the  little  darling  cry  all  the  time  :  wall 
— wah — wall  ! 

SCENE  VI. 

(Enter  more  Visitors,  who  kiss  hands;  then  the  SCHOOL 
DIRECTOR  (LuitA  LuKfcH)  and  his  wife.} 

LUKA.     I  have  the  honour 

LUKA's  WIFE  (running  forward}.  I  con- 
gratulate you,  Anna  Andr^yevna!  (T/iey  kiss 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         155 

each  other.}  But  really  I  am  so  delighted  ! 
They  tell  me  Anna  Andreyevna  has  betrothed 
her  daughter.  "Akh  B6zhe  moi!"  thinks  I  to 
myself,  and  I  was  so  delighted  that  I  say  to  my 
husband,  "  Just  listen,  Lukdnchik :  What  a 
stroke  of  good  luck  for  Anna  Andreyevna ! " 
"  Yes,  sldva  Bohu ! "  I  say  to  myself,  and  I  tell 
him  I'm  so  enchanted  that  I'm  burning  with 
impatience  to  go  and  say  so  to  Anna  Andre'- 
yevna  myself  .  .  .  "Akk,  Bozhe  mdil"  I  think, 
"that's  exactly  what  Anna  Andreyevna  has 
been  looking  out  for — a  match  for  her  daughter, 
and  now  there's  a  piece  of  good  fortune — just 
what  she  wanted  has  happened  !  "  And  I  assure 
you  I  was  so  delighted  that  I  couldn't  speak— -I 
could  only  cry  and  cry  ;  yes,  I  regularly  sobbed! 
Then  Lukanchik  says  :  "  What  are  you  sobbing 
for,  Nastenka  ?  "*  "  Lukanchik,"  I  say,  "  I  don't 
know  myself,  but  see,  the  tears  are  streaming 
down  in  a  torrent !  " 

GOVERNOR.  Kindly  sit  down,  gentlemen ! 
Here,  Mfshka,  bring  some  more  chairs!  (The 
Visitors  take  seats.} 

1  Diminutive  of  Anastasia. 


156        THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

SCENE  VII. 

(Enter  the  POLICE-SUPERINTENDENT  and  the  POLICE- 
OFFICERS.) 

SUPERINTENDENT.  I  have  the  honour  to 
congratulate  you,  your  high  Nobility,1  and  to 
wish  you  happiness  for  many  years ! 

GOVERNOR.  Thanks — thanks  !  Please  be 
seated,  gentlemen !  (TJiey  sit  down.} 

JUDGE.  Now  tell  us,  please,  Anton  Ant6no- 
vich,  how  it  all  came  about — give  us  the  whole 
history  of  it ! 

GOVERNOR.  It's  an  extraordinary  story — he 
condescended  to  make  the  proposal  himself  in 
person ! 

ANNA.  In  a  most  respectful  and  delicate 
way.  He  said  quite  too  nicely :  "  Anna 
Andre'yevna,  you  have  simply  made  a  con- 
quest of  me !  "  Such  a  handsome,  well-bred 
young  man ;  such  distinguished  manners ! 
"  Believe  me,  Anna  Andre'yevna,"  he  said,  "  I 
don't  value  my  life  at  a  kopek — it  is  only  on 
account  of  your  rare  and  charming  qualities 
that  I  ..." 

1  Vuis6koblaghor6dyet  the  form  ef  address  applied  to 
cbinovoiks  of  the  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  degrees. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         157 

MARYA.  Oh,  mamma,  really  that's  what  he 
said  to  me  I 

ANNA.  Be  quiet !  You  know  nothing  about 
it !  Don't  you  meddle  with  what  doesn't  con- 
cern you  !  "  I  love  to  distraction,  Anna  Andre*  - 
yevna ! "  Such  were  his  flattering  words  .  .  . 
and  when  I  began  to  say,  "  We  dare  not  hope 
for  so  high  an  honour ! "  down  he  went  on  his 
knees  in  the  most  aristocratic  manner.  "  Anna 
Andr^yevna,"  he  exclaimed,  "don't  make  me 
the  most  miserable  of  men  !  Consent  to  respond 
to  my  passion,  or  with  death  I  will  cut  short 
my  existence ! " 

MARYA.  But  of  course,  mamma,  he  meant 
that  for  me. 

ANNA.  Oh,  no  doubt,  no  doubt  ,  ,  .  he 
meant  it  for  you  ;  I'm  not  denying  that  at  all. 

GOVERNOR.  And  how  he  frightened  us  too  : 
he  said  he  would  blow  his  brains  out.  "  I'll 
shoot  myself ;  I'll  shoot  myself !  "  he  cried. 

SEVERAL  OF  THE  VISITORS.  Good  gracious, 
you  don't  say  so ! 

JUDGE.     What  a  character ! 

LUKA.     In  truth,  this  is  the  work  of  fate ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Don't  say  it's 
fate,  batyushka;  fate's  an  old  turkey-hen !  The 


158         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

Governor's  public  services  have  earned  him  this 
honour !  (Aside.}  They  always  cast  pearls 
before  swine,  like  that ! 

JUDGE.  If  you  like,  Anton  Ant6novich,  I'll 
make  you  a  present  of  the  dog  we  were  bargain- 
ing about 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  no !  I  can't  bother  about 
dogs  now ! 

JUDGE.  Oh,  if  you  don't  like  that  one,  we'll 
arrange  about  another ! 

KARtfBKlN's  WIFE.  Ah,  Anna  Andre"yevna, 
how  glad  I  am  at  your  good  fortune ! — you  can't 
imagine ! 

KAR6BKIN.  May  I  ask  where  your  distin- 
guished guest  is  now  ?  I  heard  he  had  left  for 
some  reason  or  other. 

GOVERNOR.  Yes,  he  has  gone  away  for  a 
day  on  very  important  business • 

ANNA.  ...  to  see  his  uncle,  and  to  ask  for 
his  blessing. 

GOVERNOR.  Yes,  to  ask  for  his  blessing ; 
but  to-morrow  .  .  .  (Sneezes ;  the  rest  simul- 
taneously ejaculate  "  Bless  you ! ")  Many  thanks  ! 

he'll  be  back  again,  I  say,  to-m (Sneezes 

again  ;  the  ejaculations  are  repeated,  and  several 
of  the  company  speak  at  tJte  same  time:) 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         159 

SUPERINTENDENT.  I  wish  you  good  health, 
your  high  Nobility ! 

BOBCHINSKI.  A  sack  of  ducats  and  a  hundred 
years ! 

DOBCHINSKI.  May  the  Lord  prolong  them 
to  a  thousand  ! l 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (aside).  May  you 
go  to  perdition ! 

KARtfBKlN's  WIFE  (aside).  May  the  devil 
fly  away  with  you  ! 

GOVERNOR.  I  thank  you  sincerely,  and  wish 
you  the  same ! 

ANNA.  We  intend  to  live  in  Petersburg  now. 
Here,  there's  such  an  air,  I  must  say  .  .  .  it's 
really  too  rustic !  .  .  .  /  find  it  excessively  dis- 
agreeable .  .  .  my  husband  too  ...  he  will  get 
general's  rank  there ! 

GOVERNOR.  Yes,  I  own,  gentlemen,  I've  a 
consumed  ambition  to  be  a  general ! 

LUKA.     And  may  God  grant  it ! 

RASTAKOVSKI.  With  man  it  is  impossible, 
but  with  God  all  things  are  possible ! 

JUDGE.  A  great  voyage  befits  a  great 
ship.2 

1  Na  s6rok-sarak6v — literally,  to  forty  times  forty. 
9  Russian  proverb. 


160         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Your  public  ser- 
vices deserve  the  honour ! 

JUDGE  (aside}.  And  a  nice  blunder  he'll 
make  when  he  gets  it!  Why,  a  generalship 
will  suit  him  as  well  as  a  saddle  does  a  cow ! 
No,  my  friend,  it's  a  far  cry  to  that.  There's 
plenty  of  people  cleverer  than  you  who  are  not 
yet  generals ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (aside).  General, 
indeed  !  Confound  him  !  It's  not  impossible, 
after  all.  He  may  get  made  one.  With  his 
bumptiousness,  the  devil  wouldn't  have  him 
at  any  price!  (Turns  to  him.)  When  you 
are  a  general,  Ant6n  Ant6novich,  don't  forget 
us  I 

JUDGE.  And  if  any  little  business  difficulty 
crops  up,  don't  fail  to  help  us  out ! 

KAROBKIN.  Next  year  I  am  going  to  take 
my  son  to  the  capital  to  serve  his  country ;  please 
be  so  kind  as  to  take  him  under  your  protection 
— be  a  father  to  the  little  orphan ! 

GOVERNOR.  I'm  quite  ready,  on  my  part — 
quite  ready  to  help  him  ! 

ANNA.  You're  always  free  with  your  pro- 
mises, Ant6sha  !  But,  in  the  first  place,  you'll 
not  have  time  to  think  about  that  How 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         161 

can  you  possibly  burden  yourself  with  such 
engagements  ? 

GOVERNOR.  Why  not,  my  love  ?  One  can 
sometimes 

ANNA.  Of  course  !  But  you  really  cannot 
bother  to  be  a  friend  and  protector  of  all  sorts 
of  nobodies ! 

KAR6BKlN's  WIFE  (aside}.  Do  you  hear  how 
she  treats  us  ? 

A  VISITOR.  Oh,  she  was  always  like  that — 
/  know  her  ;  seat  her  at  table,  and  she'll  put 
her  feet  on  it * 

SCENE  VIII. 

(Enter  the  POSTMASTER,  out  of  breath,  with  an  opened 
letter  in  his  hand.} 

POSTMASTER.  Here's  an  astounding  thing 
happened,  sirs  !  The  chinovnik  we  took  to  be 
the  Revizdr  is  not  a  revizdr  ! 

ALL.     What  ?  not  a  revizdr  ? 

POSTMASTER.  Not  a  revizdr  at  all— I've 
found  that  out  from  the  letter. 

GOVERNOR.  What  do  you  mean — what  do 
you  mean — from  what  letter  ? 

1  Russian  proverb. 

II 


1 62         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

POSTMASTER.  Why,  from  the  letter  he  wrote 
himself.  They  bring  me  a  letter  to  post.  I  look 
at  the  address,  and  see  "Post-office  Street" — 
I  was  regularly  stunned.  Well,  I  say  to  myself, 
he's  without  doubt  found  something  wrong  in 
the  postal  department,  and  he's  reporting  it  to 
the  authorities.  So  I  took  the  letter  and — 
opened  it. 

GOVERNOR.    How  could  you ? 

POSTMASTER,  7  don't  know — a  supernatural 
force  impelled  me.  I  had  already  ordered  a 
courier  to  take  it  by  express,  but  such  a  feeling 
of  curiosity  overpowered  me  as  I  had  never 
known  before.  "  I  can't  do  it,  I  can't — I  can't!" 
I  hear  myself  saying;  but  I  feel  drawn,  drawn  to 
it !  "  Oh,  don't  open  it,  or  you'll  be  utterly 
ruined  !  "  that's  what  sounds  in  one  ear ;  and  in 
the  other,  like  a  devil  whispering,  "  Open  it,  open 
it,  open  it!"  And  so  I  broke  the  sealing-wax — 
my  veins  were  on  fire;  but  after  I  had  done  it 
they  froze,  by  God,  they  froze.  My  hands 
shook,  and  everything  whirled. 

GOVERNOR.  And  so  you  dared  to  open  the 
letter  of  so  powerful  a  personage  ? 

POSTMASTER.  That's  where  the  joke  is — 
he's  neither  a  personage  nor  powerful ! 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL,         163 

GOVERNOR.  What  is  he  then,  according  to 
you  ? 

POSTMASTER.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other; 
the  devil  knows  what  he  is ! 

GOVERNOR  {furiously).  What  do  you  mean  ? 
How  do  you  dare  to  call  him  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other,  nor  the  devil  knows  what?  I'll  put 
you  under  arrest ! 

POSTMASTER.    Who  ?    You  ? 

GOVERNOR.    Yes — /  will ! 

POSTMASTER.  Pooh !  That's  beyond  your 
power ! 

GOVERNOR.  Are  you  aware  that  he  is  going 
to  marry  my  daughter  ?  that  I  shall  become  a 
grandee?  that  I  shall  have  power  to  send  to 
Siberia  ? 

POSTMASTER.  Eh,  Anton  Ant6novich — Si-. 
beria  ?  that's  a  long  way  off.  .  .  .  But  I  had 
better  read  you  the  letter.  Gentlemen,  let  me 
read  it  you ! 

ALL.     Yes,  read  it,  read  it ! 

POSTMASTER  (reads}.  "  I  hasten  to  let  you 
know,  my  dear  Tryapfchkin,  all  about  my 
adventures.  On  the  way  an  infantry  captain 
cleared  me  out  completely,  so  that  the  innkeeper 
wanted  to  send  me  to  gaol ;  when  all  of  a 


1 64         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

sudden,  owing  to  my  Petersburg  get-up  and 
appearance,  the  whole  town  took  me  for  the 
Governor-General.  So  now  I  am  living  at  the 
Governor's  ;  I  do  just  as  I  please  ;  I  flirt  madly 
with  his  wife  and  daughter — but  I  can't  settle 
which  to  begin  with.  Do  you  remember  how 
hard-up  we  were,  how  we  dined  at  other  folk's  ex- 
pense, and  how  the  pastry-cook  once  pitched  me 
out  neck-and-crop,  because  I  had  put  some  tarts 
I  had  eaten  down  to  the  account  of  the  King  of 
England  ?  It  is  quite  a  different  state  of  things 
now !  They  all  lend  me  as  much  money  as  ever 
I  please.  They  are  an  awful  set  of  originals — 
you  would  die  of  laughing  if  you  saw  them  ! 
You  write  articles,  I  know:  bring  these  people 
in.  First  and  foremost,  there's  the  Governor — 
he's  as  stupid  as  a  mule  .  .  ."* 

GOVERNOR.     Impossible!  it  can't  be  there ! 

POSTMASTER  (showing  him  tJie  letter}.    Read 
it  yourself ! 

GOVERNOR  (reads).    "  Stupid  as  a  mule."    It 
can't  be  so — you've  written  it  yourself! 

POSTMASTER.     How  could  I  have  written  it  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.    Read! 
Read  on ! 

1  Literally,  a  grey  gelding. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         165 

POSTMASTER  (resuming).  "  The  Governor — 
he's  as  stupid  as  a  mule  ..." 

GOVERNOR.  Oh,  devil  take  it !  Is  it  neces- 
sary to  repeat  that?  As  if  it  wasn't  there 
without  that ! 

POSTMASTER  (continues}.  Hm  .  .  .  hm  .  .  . 
hm  ..."  as  a  mule.  The  Postmaster  too  is  a 
good  fellow  .  .  ."  {Stops.}  Well,  he  says  some- 
thing uncomplimentary  about  me  too. 

GOVERNOR.     No — read  it  out ! 

POSTMASTER.    But  what's  the  good  ? 

GOVERNOR.  No,  no — confound  it,  if  you  read 
any  of  it,  read  it  all !  Read  it  through  ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Allow  me;  I'll 
have  a  try  !  (Puts  on  his  spectacles,  and  reads.} 
"  The  Postmaster  is  exactly  like  our  office- 
beadle  Mikhe"yev,  and  a  rascal  into  the  bargain 
— he  drinks  like  a  fish." 

POSTMASTER  (to  the  company].  Well,  the 
young  blackguard  ought  to  be  flogged — that's 
all! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (continuing).  "  The 
Charity  Com  ...  er  ...  er  ..."  (Hesitates.} 

KAROBKIN.     But  what  are  you  stopping  for  ? 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  It's  badly  written 
.  .  .  however,  it's  clearly  something  insulting. 


1 66         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

KAR6BKIN.  Give  it  to  me!  my  eyes  are 
better,  I  fancy.  ( Tries  to  take  the  letter?) 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (holding  it  back}. 
No,  we  can  leave  that  part  out — further  on  it's 
plain  enough. 

KAROBKIN.     But  allow  me — I  can  read  ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Why,  so  can  /— 
further  on,  I  tell  you,  it's  quite  easy  to  make 
out. 

POSTMASTER.  No,  read  it  all !  It  was  all 
read  before ! 

ALL.  Give  it  up,  Art6mi  Philippovich ; 
give  the  letter  up!  (To  KAR6BKIN.)  You 
read  it ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Certainly!  (Hands 
the  letter}  There,  if  you  please  .  .  .  (Covers  the 
passage  with  his  finger}  That's  where  you 
begin.  (All  crowd  round} 

POSTMASTER.  Read  it,  read  it  through ;  what 
nonsense  !  read  it  all! 

KAR6BKIN  (reading).  "  The  Charity  Com- 
missioner, Zemlyanfka,  is  a  regular  pig  in  a 
skull-cap." 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (to  the  rest}.  That's 
supposed  to  be  witty  I  Pig  in  a  skull-cap!  Who 
ever  saw  a  pig  in  a  skull-cap  ? 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         167 

KAROBKIN  (continues}.  "The  School  Director 
reeks  of  onions " 

LUKA  (to  the  rest).  Good  God  !  and  an  onion 
has  never  crossed  my  lips  ! 

JUDGE  (aside).  Thank  goodness,  there's 
nothing,  at  any  rate,  about  me  ! 

KAR6BKIN  (reading).     "  The  Judge " 

JUDGE  (aside).  Now  for  it !  .  .  (Aloud.}  I 
think  this  letter  is  tedious.  What  the  devil's  the 
good  of  reading  all  that  rubbish  ? 

LUKA.     No ! 

POSTMASTER.    No,  go  on  with  it ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  No,  read  it 
through ! 

KAROBKIN  (resumes').  "The  Judge,  Lyapkin- 
Ty£pkin,  is  in  the  utmost  degree  moveton1  .  .  ." 
(Stops.}  That  must  be  a  French  word  ! 

JUDGE.  But  the  devil  knows  what's  the 
meaning  of  it !  It's  bad  enough  if  it's  only — 
swindler,  but  it  may  be  a  good  deal  worse. 

KAROBKIN  (goes  on).  "  But,  after  all,  the 
people  are  hospitable  and  well-meaning.  Fare- 
well, my  dear  Tryapichkin.  I  myself  should 
like  to  follow  your  example  and  take  up 

1  They  are  puzzled  by  the  phonetic  rendering  of  the  French 
phrase,  inauvais  ton. 


1 68        THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

literature.  It's  a  bore,  my  friend,  to  live  as  I 
do — one  certainly  wants  food  for  the  mind ;  one 
must,  I  see,  have  some  elevated  pursuit.  Write 
to  me  at  the  village  of  Podkalitovka,  Sardtov 
government"  (He  turns  the  letter  over  and 
reads  the  address?}  "  To  the  Well-born  and 
Gracious  Mister  Ivan  Vasiliyevich  Tryapichkin, 
Saint  Petersburg,  Post-office  Street,  Number 
Ninety-seven,  within  the  Court-yard,  Third  Floor, 
on  the  right." 

ONE  OF  THE  LADIES.  What  an  unexpected 
rebuff! 

GOVERNOR.  He  has  as  good  as  cut  my  throat ! 
I'm  crushed,  crushed — regularly  crushed  !  I  can 
see  nothing — only  pigs'  snouts  instead  of  faces, 
nothing  else.  .  .  .  Catch  him,  catch  him ! 
(Gesticulates  wildly?) 

POSTMASTER.  How  can  we  catch  him  ? 
Why,  as  if  on  purpose,  I  told  the  manager  to 
give  him  his  very  best  tr6ika* — and  the  devil 
persuaded  me  to  give  him  an  order  for  horses 
in  advance. 

KAROBKIN'S  WIFE.  Well,  here's  a  pretty 
mess  !  the  like  of  it  has  never  happened  ! 

1  A  sledge  or  carriage  with  three  horses.     The  centre  horse  is 
trained  to  trot,  while  the  two  outsiders  gallop. 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.         169 

JUDGE.  Besides,  sirs,  confound  it !  he  has 
borrowed  three  hundred  roubles  of  me  ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  And  three  hundred 
of  me  too ! 

POSTMASTER  (groans}.  Ah!  and  three  hun- 
dred of  me  as  well ! 

BOBCHiNSKI.  Yes,  and  Dobchmski  and  I, 
sirs,  gave  him  sixty-five,  sirs,  in  bank-notes ! 

JUDGE  (with  a  gesture  of  perplexity}.  How 
was  it,  gentlemen,  that  we  came  to  make  such  a 
mistake  ? 

GOVERNOR  (beats  himself  on  the  sJwulders). 
How  could  I  ?  There's  not  such  another  old 
blockhead  as  I  am !  I  must  be  in  my  dotage, 
idiot  of  a  mutton-head  that  I  am.  .  .  .  Thirty 
years  have  I  been  in  the  service;  not  a  trades- 
man or  contractor  could  cheat  me ;  rogues  after 
rogues  have  I  overreached,  sharpers  and  rascals 
I  have  hooked,  that  were  ready  to  rob  the 
whole  universe !  three  governors-general  I've 
duped  !  .  .  .  Pooh  !  what  are  governors-general  ? 
( With  a  contemptuous  wave  of  the  hand.}  They're 
not  worth  talking  about !  .  .  . 

ANNA.  But  this  can't  be  so,  Antdsha ;  he's 
engaged  to  Mashenka !  .  .  . 

GOVERNOR    (furiously).      Engaged!     Bosh! 


170        THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

A  fig  for  your  "engaged"!  Confound  your 
engagement !  (In  desperation?]  Look  at  me, 
look — all  the  world,  all  Christendom,  all  of  you 
see  how  the  Governor's  fooled  !  Ass !  booby ! 
dotard  that  I  am  !  (Shakes  his  fists  at  himself?} 
Ah,  you  fat-nose !  Taking  an  icicle,  a  rag,  for  a 
man  of  rank  !  And  now  he's  rattling  along  the 
road  with  his  bells,  and  telling  the  whole  world 
the  story  !  Not  only  do  you  get  made  a  laugh- 
ing-stock of,  but  some  quill-driver,  some  paper- 
stainer  will  go  and  put  you  in  a  play !  It's 
maddening !  He'll  spare  neither  your  rank  nor 
your  calling,  and  all  will  grin  and  clap  their 
hands.  .  .  .  Who  are  you  laughing  at?  laugh 
at  yourselves  /  .  .  .  Ah !  you  .  .  .  (Stamps  on 
the  ground  ferociously?}  I  would  do  for  all  the 
pack  of  scribblers  !  Ugh  !  the  quill-splitters  ! 
damned  liberals !  devil's  brood !  I  would  scrag 
you  all,  I'd  grind  you  to  powder !  You'd  be  a 
dish  for  the  foul  fiend,  and  the  devil's  cap  your 
resting-place !  (Shakes  his  fist  and  grinds  his 
Jieel  on  the  ground.  Then,  after  a  short  silence :) 
I  can't  collect  myself  yet.  It's  true,  that  if  God 
will  punish  a  man,  he  first  drives  him  mad.  To 
be  sure,  what  was  there  like  a  Reviz6r  in  that 
crack-brained  trifler  ?  Nothing  at  all !  Not 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.        171 

the  resemblance  of  half  a  little  finger — and 
all  of  them  shout  at  once  :  the  Reviz<5r,  the 
Reviz6r !  Who  was  it  then  who  first  gave  out 
he  was  the  Reviz6r  ?  Answer  me  ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER  (shrugging  his 
shoulders).  It  all  happened  in  such  a  way  that  I 
wouldn't  tell  you,  if  you  were  to  kill  me.  Our 
wits  were  befogged — it  was  the  devil's  doing  ! 

JUDGE.  Who  started  the  idea  ?  Why,  there 
they  are  —  those  enterprising  young  bucks  ! 
(Points  to  DOBCHf  NSKI  and  BOBCHINSKI.) 

BOBCIIINSKI.  I  swear  it  wasn't  me  !  I  never 
thought 

DOBCHINSKI.     I  hadn't  the  least  idea 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  Undoubtedly  it 
was  you  ! 

LUKA.  Why,  certainly  it  was  ;  they  ran  like 
mad  from  the  inn  with  the  news — "  He's  here, 
he's  come,  he  pays  no  money!  ..."  A  fine 
bird  you  discovered  ! 

GOVERNOR.  Of  course,  it  was  you  —  you 
gossiping  busy-bodies,  you  damnable  liars ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  I  wish  you  had 
gone  to  the  devil  with  your  revizdr  and  your 
stories ! 

GOVERNOR.     All  you  do  is  to  run  about  the 


172         THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL. 

town  and  meddle  with  everybody,  you  con- 
founded chatterboxes,  you  tittle-tattling  scandal- 
mongers, you  short-tailed  jackdaws  ! 

JUDGE.     You  confounded  bunglers  ! 

LUK^     You  dirty  night-caps ! 

CHARITY  COMMISSIONER.  You  pot-bellied 
drivellers ! 

(All  crowd  up  to  them  threateningly?) 

BOBCHINSKI.  F//  Bohu,  it  wasn't  me,  it  was 
Dobchfnski ! 

DOBCHfNSKI.  No,  Peter  Ivanovich,  you  cer- 
tainly were  the  first  to 

BOBCHINSKI.    No,  I  did  not— you  began  it. 

LAST  SCENE. 

(Enter  a  Gendarme.) 

GENDARME.  The  Inspector-General  sent  by 
Imperial  command  has  arrived,  and  requests 
your  attendance  at  once.  He  awaits  you  in  the 
inn. 

(Tfiey  are  thunderstruck  at  this  announce- 
ment. The  ladies  utter  simultaneous  ejacu- 
lations of  amazement ;  the  whole  group 
suddenly  shift  their  positions  and  remain 
as  if  petrified?) 


THE  INSPECTOR-GENERAL.        173 


SCENE  WITHOUT  WORDS. 

( The  GOVERNOR  is  seen  standing  in  the  centre,  stiff  as  a 
Post,  with  outstretched  arms  and  head  bent  back.  At 
his  right  are  his  wife  and  daughter,  turning  to  him; 
beyond  them  the  POSTMASTER,  turning  to  the  audience 
with  a  look  of  interrogation;  behind  him  LUKA 
LUKfCH,  with  an  innocent  expression;  and  farther, 
at  the  extreme  edge  of  the  scene,  three  ladies  (visitors), 
who  exchange  satirical  glances,  sneering  at  the 
GOVERNOR  and  his  family.  To  the  GOVERNOR'S 
left  is  ZEMLYANfKA,  with  his  head  slightly  on  one 
side,  as  if  listening;  behind  him  the  JUDGE,  shrugging 
his  shoulders,  bending  low,  and  moving  his  lips,  as  if 
he  were  going  to  whistle  or  say,  "  Here's  a  Saint 
George's  Day  for  you,  old  woman  /" x  Next  to  him  is 
KAR6BKIN,  winking  at  the  audience  and  making  a 
contemptuous  gesture  at  the  GOVERNOR  ;  and  at  the 
outside  of  the  scene  BOBCHfNSKi  and  DOBCHfNSKi, 
staring  at  each  other  open-mouthed.  The  others  stay 
motionless  as  statues.  The  whole  group  retain  the 
same  positions  for  a  minute  or  so,  as  if  changed  to 
stone;  then  the  curtain  falls.} 


CURTAIN. 


1  I.e.,  Now  we're  in  for  it !     See  Note  IV.  at  the  end. 


NOTES. 

I.— NOTE  ON  THE  TRANSCRIPTION  OF  RUSSIAN. 

THERE  is  a  lack  of  uniformity  in  the  transliteration  of 
Russian  words  and  names,  which  is  to  be  regretted.  To 
remedy  the  irregularity,  in  the  case  of  foreign  names  in 
general,  a  scheme  was  introduced  in  1885  by  the  Royal 
Geographical  Society.  I  have,  with  one  or  two  trifling 
exceptions,  followed  the  main  rules  of  this  system,  which 
are  as  follows : — 

I.  Vowels  are  pronounced  as  in  Italian,  and  consonants 
as  in  English. 

II.  The  acute  accent  is  only  used  to  denote  the  syllable 
on  which  stress  is  laid. 

III.  Every  letter  is  pronounced.     When  two  vowels 
come  together,  each  one  is  sounded,  though  the  result, 
when  spoken  quickly,  is  scarcely  to  be  distinguished  from 
a  single  sound. 

Thus,  for  example — 

a  has  the  sound  of  a  in  Papa, 
e         „  „        e  in  Rent, 

i         „  „        i  in  Fiji, 

o        „  „        o  in  Soho. 

u        „  „        u  in  Zulu. 

g  is  always  hard,  as  in  get. 


1 76  NOTES. 

ch  is  always  soft,  as  in  church. 

kh,  gh  are  guttural,  like  the  German  ac/it,  Tag. 

zh  is  like  z  in  azure  (the  French/). 

y  is  consonantal,  as  in  yet. 

In  the  case  of  Russian,  with  its  phonetic  wealth  of 
twenty-one  consonants  and  fifteen  vowels  and  semi-vowels, 
it  is  the  latter  group  which  presents  most  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  a  satisfactory  rendering.  In  accordance  with  the 
above  scheme,  the  so-called  "  preiotised  "  vowels  appear 
as ya, yet y$, yi, yo, yu.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  students 
of  Russian  will  recognise  them  in  this  somewhat  uncouth 
form.  The  "  hard  sign  "  or  semi-vowel  has  practically  no 
sound,  and  therefore  saves  the  trouble  of  transcription. 
The  "  soft  sign "  is  rendered  by  Ralston  and  others  by 
the  apostrophe  ('),  but  as  it  does  not  improve  the  look  of 
the  word,  I  have  left  it  out.  (Like  the  tilde  over  the  «  in 
senor,  it  softens  the  preceding  consonant.)  Variations 
occur  in  rendering  the  short  i  (i s kratkoi).  As  this  semi- 
vowel is  only  used  to  form  the  diphthongs  a/,  et,  oi,  etc.,  it 
should  not  have  the  diaeresis.  A  well-known  family  name 
is  sometimes  written  Tolstoi',  according  to  the  French 
system,  to  avoid  confusion  with  the  sound  of  oi  in  that 
language.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  Russian 
author  himself  signs  his  name  in  Western  orthography 
as  Lyof  or  Leo  Tolstoy}-  Of  the  remaining  vowels,  the 
unaccented  Russian  o  is  pronounced  like  a,  and  I  have 
generally  so  transcribed  it.  The  "  thick  "  or  guttural  i 
(Polish  y)  is  a  difficult  sound,  confined  to  the  Slavonic 

1  The  word  tolstti  is  a  common  Russian  adjective,  meaning 
fat,  stout. 


NOTES.  177 

languages.  The  English  y  is  often  used  as  its  equivalent, 
but  none  of  the  three  values  of  our  y  exactly  resembles 
those  of  the  Russian  letter.  I  therefore  employ  the 
symbols  i  and  (after  labials)  ui.  With  regard  to  the 
consonants,  the  Russians  are  to  be  congratulated  on 
possessing  a  complicated  sibilant  (shtcha\  which  requires 
no  less  than  seven  German  letters  to  represent  it — viz., 
schtsch.  It  may,  however,  be  reduced  in  English  to  shch, 
sounding  like  the  italicised  letters  in  Briti^  Channel, 
or  digej//bn.  After  this  specimen,  it  is  perhaps  unad- 
visable  here  to  enter  further  into  the  subtleties  of  the 
Russian  alphabet. 

I  have  ventured  on  this  disquisition,  which  I  trust  the 
lay  reader  will  pardon,  in  the  hope  that  it  will  enable 
persons  who  are  unacquainted  with  Russian  to  approxi- 
mate to  the  true  pronunciation,  while  those  who  are 
familiar  with  the  language  may  the  more  readily  recog- 
nise the  Slavonic  words  in  their  Latin  spelling.  A 
common  cause  of  mispronunciation  is  that  the  names 
have  been  written  after  a  French  or  German  system,  and 
then  sounded  in  English  fashion.  If  the  Geographical 
Society's,  or  any  other  scientific  standard,  had  been 
adopted  earlier,  we  should  not  have  had  "  Suwarro.w " 
rhyming  with  to-morrow,  and  "  Nijni "  with  bridge  nigh. 
They  would  have  been  spelt  Suvdrov  and  Nizhni,  and 
pronounced  with  the  open  vowel-sounds.  "Good  King 
Wenceslaus  "  of  the  Christmas  carols  would  have  called 
himself  by  his  real  name  Vyentsesldv  (Crown  of  Glory), 
and  the  proud  title  Vladimir  (Lord  of  the  World)  would 
not  have  been  corrupted  into  "  Woldemar."  The  familiar 
"  Potemkin,"  "  Kamskatka,"  and  "  Sebastopol"  ought  to 

12 


178  NOTES. 

be  replaced  by  the  more  correct  Patydmkin^  KamcMtka, 
and  Syevastdpol.  But  I  am  afraid  that  these  and  other 
phonetic  renderings,  such  as  Tsarevich^  Lake  Lddaga, 
and  Ndvaya  Zemfyd,  will  be  condemned  as  pedantic 
eccentricities,  and  contrary  to  the  good  old  British 
custom  of  writing  one  thing  and  saying  another.  Such 
innovations  will  perhaps  find  more  acceptance  in  the 
distant  future,  when  every  schoolboy  learns  Russian  in 
order  to  read  Gogol  in  the  original. 

II. — NOTE  ON  THE  CHIN  AND   ORDERS  OF 
KNIGHTHOOD. 

As  the  terms  chin  and  chindvnik  are  of  frequent  occur- 
rence in  the  Re-vizor^  and  play  a  large  part  in  Russian 
official  and  social  life,  I  give  a  few  particulars  on  this 
subject,  compiled  from  official  sources.  Like  so  many 
other  institutions,  the  CMn,  or  Official  Precedence,  owes 
its  origin  to  the  reforming  zeal  of  Peter  the  Great 
(1672-1725).  Four  years  before  his  death  he  completed 
his  task  of  classifying  the  great  part  of  the  nation,  with 
the  exception  of  the  serfs,  into  a  vast  civil  and  military 
hierarchy  of  fourteen  chint,  or  classes,  members  of  which 
were  then  called  chinfaniks.  The  grades  and  titles 
which  he  introduced  have,  with  trifling  exceptions, 
remained  to  this  day.  They  are  given  in  the  subjoined 
Tdbel  o  Rangdkh,  or  Scheme  of  Official  Precedence.  It 
will  be  noticed  that  most  of  the  designations  are  German ; 
and  it  should  be  remarked  that,  in  the  civil  service 
especially,  they  are  merely  arbitrary  titles,  and  do  not 
give  any  idea  of  the  duties  or  privileges  attached  to  the 
rank. 


i8o  NOTES. 

Mention  is  made,  in  the  course  of  the  play,  of  various 
Russian  orders.  It  will  perhaps  render  these  allusions 
clearer  if  I  subjoin  a  few  details,  from  the  Almanack  de 
Gotha  and  the  Almanack  de  la  Cour  de  Russie. 

The  highest  order  in  point  of  rank  and  seniority  is  that 
of  St.  Andrew  " Pyervozvdnni,"  or  the  "First-called," 
founded  by  Peter  the  Great  in  1698.  The  initials  of  its 
legend  are  S.A.P.R.  (Sanctus  Andreas  Patronus  Russiae). 
Its  ribbon  is  blue,  and  the  motto  is,  Za  Vyeru  i  Vyernosf 
(For  Faith  and  Fidelity).  Members  of  this  order  are 
ex  officio  knights  of  the  orders  of  St.  Alexander,  the 
White  Eagle,  and  St  Anne. 

The  three  next  are  the  St.  Catherine  (for  ladies),  the 
St.  Alexander  Nevski,  instituted  by  Peter  I.  in  1714  and 
1722  respectively,  and  the  St.  Anne,  founded  in  1735  by 
Karl  Friedrich  Ulrich,  Duke  of  Holstein-Gottorp,  in 
honour  of  his  wife  Anne,  daughter  of  Peter  the  Great. 

Two  orders  borrowed  from  Poland  are  the  White 
Eagle,  dating  from  the  reign  of  Wladyslaw  Lokietek  in 
the  fourteenth  century,  reconstituted  by  Augustus  II.  in 
1705,  and  finally  adopted  as  an  order  of  the  Russian 
empire  by  Nicholas  I.  in  1832 ;  and  the  St.  Stanislas, 
founded  by  Catherine  II.  in  1765,  and  named  after  her 
favourite  StanislaV  Poniatdwski. 

Besides  these  there  are  the  military  order  of  St. 
George,  and  the  St.  Vladfmir  (founded  by  Catherine  II.  in 
1769  and  1782  respectively).  The  former  corresponds  to 
the  British  Victoria  Cross,  and  is  only  given  for  valour  on 
the  field  of  battle.  It  may  be  recognised  by  its  "bant" 
or  cocarde,  an  orange  and  black  ribbon.  It  is  divided 
into  four  classes,  the  second  class  being  conferred  on 


181 

generals,  while  the  first  class  is  reserved  for  victorious 
commanders-in-chief.  Thus  the  sole  possessor  of  the  St. 
George  of  the  first  class  is  the  Grand  Duke  Mikhdil 
Nikolclyevich,  for  his  successful  conduct  of  the  Asiatic 
campaign  of  1877-78,  while  his  nephew,  the  present  Tsar, 
only  wears  the  second  class  for  the  taking  of  Rustchuk, 
under  his  command  as  general  of  division  in  the  Russo- 
Turkish  war  of  1877-78. 


III.— NOTE  ON  A  RUSSIAN  POPULAR  SONG. 

An  old  and  popular  Russian  folk-song  is  alluded  to  in 
Act  II.,  Sc.  3.  As  it  is  not  given  in  Ralston's  Songs  of 
the  Russian  People,  I  quote  it  here.  The  following  is 
the  first  half  of  the  poem,  written  in  trochaic  metre  by 
I.  Vanenko: — 

Nye  shei  tt  mnye,  matushkn, 

Krasni  sarafan  : 
Nye  vkhodi,  rodimushka, 

Popustu  v  izyan ! 
Rano  m6yu  kdslnku 

Na  dvye  raspletat' ! 
Prikazhi  mnye  rusuyu 

V  lentu  ubirat' ! 
Puskai,  nye  pokritaya 

Sholkovoi  fatoi, 
Ochi  molodetskiya 

Vyeselit  soboi  ! 
T6  li  zhitye  dyevichye, 

Shtob  yevo  myenyat', 


1 82  NOTES. 

T6ropit'sa  zamuzhem 

Okhat'  da  vzdikhat'  ? 
Z61otaya  v6lyushka 

Mnye  mily^i  vsev6 ! 
Nye*  khochu  ya  s  volyushkoi 

V  svye"tye  nichev6 ! 

I  have  endeavoured  to  retain  the  original  metre, 
which  is  a  favourite  Russian  form,  in  the  following 
version.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  rustic  Beatrice  has, 
or  pretends  to  have,  a  decided  opinion  that  marriage  is  a 
failure. 

Weave  not,  mother,  for  my  sake, 

Robe  of  damask  red : 
Bride's  attire  'twere  vain  to  make  1 

Vain  for  me  to  wed  ! 
All  too  soon  'tis  to  unbind 1 

Plaited  flaxen  tress ! 
Let  the  garland,  gaily  twin'd, 

Still  my  locks  caress  ! 
Take  the  silken  veil  away  ! 

Let  me  still  be  free, 
Eyes  to  charm  and  hearts  to  sway — 

None  more  fair  to  see  ! 
Am  I  sham'd  of  maiden  years? 

Scorn  I  so  my  life  ? 
Wed,  I  barter  mirth  for  tears, 

Joy  for  sighs  and  strife  ! 

1  The  unmarried  Russian  girl  wears  her  hair  in  a  long  kosd, 
or  single  plait,  which  is  undone  just  before  her  marriage. 
Married  women  tie  their  hair  up,  or  cut  it  short. 


NOTES.  183 

Nay,  my  golden  freedom's  worth 

More  than  all  beside. 
Nought  long  I  for  on  the  earth, 

Free,  and  no  man's  bride  ! 

The  following  tune,  to  which  these  words  are  sung, 
is  one  well  known  throughout  Russia,  and  is  given 
in  Stellovski's  Album  of  Folk-Songs.  It  also  occurs  in 
the  first  part  of  Wieniawski's  violin  solo,  Souvenir 
de  Moscou.  I  reproduce  a  simple  arrangement,  by  the 
kindness  of  Messrs.  Enoch  &  Sons,  from  the  Russkiya 
Narbdniya  Pyhni  (Russian  National  Songs),  vol.  565  of 
the  Litolff  collection.  There  is  an  immense  quantity  of 
these  ballads  and  builini.  Those  who  are  curious  in  such 
matters  may  consult  the  voluminous  editions  of  Afandsiev, 
Sakharov,  Ribnikov,  and  Shein.  Though  not  quite  so 
irregular  as  Hungarian  music,  with  its  occasional  five 
beats  to  the  bar,  the  songs  of  the  Steppes  have  a  character 
of  their  own.  Like  most  volkslieder,  they  are  usually  in  a 
minor  key,  with  the  bass  of  the  accompaniment  now  and 
then  unexpectedly  ending  on  the  mediant  or  sub- 
dominant. 

For  the  benefit  of  readers  who  are  not  acquainted  with 
Russian,  I  may  mention  that  the  two  words,  which  form 
the  title  of  the  song,  are  pronounced  as  Kr&sni  Sarafdn, 
meaning,  the  Red  Sarafdn,  or  Gown. 


KPACHBIH    CAPAOAH'L 


Allegretto  moderate. 


r 


^rrfc: 


f 


fSStf=£ 


£E^^^fe«.Si 

^T?  tT  r 


"T 


n f-S-S-r-r^-"?--  r 


I 


NOTES.  185 

IV.— NOTE  ON  ST.  GEORGE'S  DAY. 

"  Vot  teby$,  bdbushka,  i  Yiiriev  dyenl"  a  very  common 
popular  expression,  referring  ironically  to  an  unpleasant  sur- 
prise. The  first  Sudyfbnik,  or  Code  of  Ivan  III.,  promulgated 
in  1497,  recognised  one  of  the  eleven  or  twelve  days  dedicated 
to  St  George— viz.,  November  26 — as  the  date  of  the  annual 
migration  of  such  peasants  as  wished  to  change  their  domicile. 
In  course  of  time  this  right  of  removal  was  gradually  restricted. 
In  1597  Boris  Godun6v  issued  an  edict  authorising  landowners 
to  enforce,  if  they  so  desired,  the  return  of  any  peasant  who  had 
not  been  absent  more  than  five  years ;  the  muzhik  was  still 
allowed,  however,  to  change  his  abode  on  St.  George's  Day. 
In  1648  the  Ulozhenie,  or  Decree,  of  Alexis  abrogated  even  this 
privilege,  and  thenceforward  the  peasants  became  kry$p6stniye 
lyiidi,  or  serfs  bound  to  the  soil.  Their  enslavement  increased 
in  extent  and  severity  under  successive  Tsars  and  Tsaritsas  until 
the  end  of  the  last  century,  when  enfranchisement  began  to  be 
discussed,  and  in  scattered  instances  effected  ;  though,  as  is  well 
known,  the  final  Act  of  Liberation,  by  Alexander  II.,  was  not 
accomplished  until  the  famous  igth  of  February  1861.  Mean- 
while the  annual  recurrence  of  St.  George's  Day  reminded  the 
serfs  of  their  lost  right  of  migration,  and  gave  bitter  point  to  the 
expression  which  is  quoted  on  page  173. 


THB  WALTER  SCOTT  PRESS,   NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE. 


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY. 


Cloth,  uncut  edges,  gilt  top.     Price  1/6  per  volume. 


ALREADY  ISSUED. 


Romance  of  King  Arthur, 

Tboreau's  Walden. 
Thoroau's  Week. 
Thorcau's  Essays. 

Confessions  of  an  English 
Opium-Eater. 

Lander's  Conversations. 
Plutarch's  Lives. 
Browne's  Religio  Medici. 

Essays    and    Letters   of 
P.  B.  Shelley. 

Prose  Writings  of  Swift. 
My  Study  Windows. 

Lowell's    Essays   on   the 
English  Poets. 

The  Blglow  Papers. 
Great  English  Painters. 
Lord  Byron's  Letters. 
Essays  by  Leigh  Hunt. 
Longfellow's  Prose. 


Great  Musical  Composers 
Marcus  Aurelius. 
Epictctus. 
Seneca's  Morals. 

Whitman's  Specimen 
Days  In  America. 

Whitman's  Democratic 
Vistas. 

White's  Natural  History, 
Captain  Singleton. 
Essays  by  Mazz*n*i 
Prose  Writings  of  Heine. 
Reynolds'  Discourses. 

The   Lover:    Papers    of 
Steele  and  Addlson. 

Burus's  Letters. 
Volsnnga  Saga. 
Sartor  Resartns. 
Writings  of  Emerson. 
Life  of  Lord  Herbert. 


THE  SCOTT  LIBRARY— continued. 


English  Prose. 
The  Pillars  of  Society. 
Fairy  and  Folk  Tales. 
Essays  of  Dr.  Johnson. 
Essays  of  Wm.  Hazlitt. 
Lander's  Pentameron,  &c. 
Poe's  Tales  and  Essays. 
Vicar  of  Wakefield. 
Political  Orations. 
Holmes's  Autocrat. 
Holmcs's  Poet. 
Holmes's  Professor. 
Chesterfield's  Letters. 
Stories  from  Carlcton. 
Jane  Eyre. 

Elizabethan  England. 
Davis's  Writings. 
Spence's  Anecdotes. 
More's  Utopia. 
Sadi's  Gulistan. 
English  Folk  Tales. 
Northern  Studies. 
Famous  Reviews. 
Aristotle's  Ethics. 
Landor's  Aspasla. 
Tacitus. 
Essays  of  Ella. 


Balzac. 

De  Musset's  Comedlos. 
Darwin's  Coral-Reefs. 
Sheridan's  Plays. 
Our  Village. 
Humphrey's  Clock,  &c. 
Tales  from  Wonderland. 
Douglas  Jerrold. 
Rights  of  Woman. 
Athenian  Oracle. 
Essays  of  Sainte-Ecuvc. 
Selections  from  Plato. 
Heine's  Travel  Sketches. 
Maid  of  Orleans. 
Sydney  Smith. 
The  New  Spirit. 
Marvellous  Adventures 
(From  the  Morte  d' Arthur.) 
Helps's  Essays. 
Montaigne  s  Essays. 
Luck  of  Barry  Lyndon. 
William  TclL 
Carlyle's  German  Essays 
Lamb's  Essays. 
Wordsworth's  Prose. 
Leopardi's  Dialogues. 
Inspector-General  (Gogol) 


AUTHORISED    VERSION. 

Crown  8vo,   Cloth,  Price  6s. 

PEER  GYNT:  A  Dramatic  Poem. 

BY  HENRIK  IBSEN. 

TRANSLATED   BY 

WILLIAM   AND   CHARLES   ARCHER. 


This  Translation^  though  unrhymed,  preserves  throughout  the 
various  rhythms  of  the  original. 


"  In  Brand  the  hero  is  an  embodied  protest  against  the  poverty  of 
spirit  and  half-heartedness  that  Ibsen  rebelled  against  in  his  country- 
men. In  Peer  Gynt  the  hero  is  himself  the  embodiment  of  that  spirit. 
In  Brand  the  fundamental  antithesis,  upon  which,  as  its  central  theme, 
the  drama  is  constructed,  is  the  contrast  between  the  spirit  of  com- 
promise on  the  one  hand,  and  the  motto  '  everything  or  nothing '  on 
the  other.  And  Peer  Gynt  is  the  very  incarnation  of  a  compromising 
dread  of  decisive  committal  to  any  one  course.  In  Brand  the  problem 
of  self-realisation  and  the  relation  of  the  individual  to  his  surroundings 
is  obscurely  struggling  for  recognition,  and  in  Peer  Gynt  it  becomes  the 
formal  theme  upon  which  all  the  fantastic  variations  of  the  drama  are 
built  up.  In  both  plays  alike  the  problems  of  heredity  and  the  influence 
of  early  surroundings  are  more  than  touched  upon;  and  both  alike 
culminate  in  the  doctrine  that  the  only  redeeming  power  on  earth  or  in 
heaven  is  the  power  of  love." — Mr.  P.  H.  WICKSTEED. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane. 


IBSEN'S   FAMOUS   PROSE   DRAMAS. 

EDITED  BY  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 

Complete  in  Five  Vols.     Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  Price  3/6  each. 
Set  of  Five  Vols.,  in  Case,  17/6;  in  Half  Morocco,  in  Case,  32/6. 

"  We  seem  at  last  to  be  shown  men  and  women  as  they  are  ;  and  at  first  it 
is  more  than  we  can  endure.  ,  .  .  All  Ibsen's  characters  speak  and  act  as  if 
they  were  hypnotised,  and  under  their  creator's  imperious  demand  to  reveal 
themselves.  There  never  was  such  a  mirror  held  up  to  nature  before :  it  is 
too  terrible.  .  .  .  Yet  -we  must  return  to  Ibsen,  with  his  remorseless  surgery, 
his  remorseless  electric-light,  until  we,  too,  have  grown  strong  and  learned  to 
face  the  naked — if  necessary,  the  flayed  and  bleeding— reality" — SPEAKER 
(London). 

VOL.  I.  "A  DOLL'S  HOUSE,"  "THE  LEAGUE  OF 
YOUTH,"  and  "THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY."  With 
Portrait  of  the  Author,  and  Biographical  Introduction  by 

WlLLIAMARCHER. 

VOL.  II.  "  GHOSTS,"  "  AN  ENEMY  OF  THE  PEOPLE," 
and  "THE  WILD  DUCK."  With  an  Introductory  Note. 

VOL.  III.  " LADY  INGER  OF  OSTRAT,"  "THE  VIKINGS 
AT  HELGELAND,"  "THE  PRETENDERS."  With  an 
Introductory  Note  and  Portrait  of  Ibsen. 

VOL.  IV.  "EMPEROR  AND  GALILEAN."  With  an 
Introductory  Note  by  WILLIAM  ARCHER. 

VOL.  V.  " ROSMERSHOLM,"  "THE  LADY  FROM  THE 
SEA,"  "HEDDA  GABLER."  Translated  by  WILLIAM 
ARCHER.  With  an  Introductory  Note. 

The  sequence  of  the  plays  in  each  volume  is  chronological ;  the  complete 
set  of  volumes  comprising  the  dramas  thus  presents  them  in  chronological 
order. 

"  The  art  of  prose  translation  does  not  perhaps  enjoy  a  very  high  literary 
status  in  England,  but  we  have  no  hesitation  in  numbering  the  present 
version  of  Ibsen,  so  far  as  it  has  gone  (Vols.  I.  and  II.),  among  the  very 
best  achievements,  in  that  kind,  of  our  generation." — Academy. 

"  We  have  seldom,  if  ever,  met  with  a  translation  so  absolutely 
idiomatic." — Glasgow  Herald. 

LONDON:  WALTER  SOOTT,  LIMITED,  24  WARWICK  LANK. 


Crown  8vo,  about  350  pp.  each,  Cloth  Cover,  2s.  6d.  per  vol. 
Half-polished  Morocco,  gilt  top,  55. 

COUNT  TOLSTOI'S  WORKS. 

The  following  Volumes  are  already  issued — 
A  RUSSIAN  PROPRIETOR. 

THE  COSSACKS. 

IVAN  ILYITCH,  AND  OTHER  STORIES. 
MY  RELIGION. 

LIFE. 

MY  CONFESSION. 

CHILDHOOD,  BOYHOOD,  YOUTH. 

THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  WAR. 

ANNA  KAR£NINA  33.  6d. 

WHAT  TO  DO? 

WAR  AND  PEACE.     (4  VOLS.) 

THE  LONG  EXILE,  AND  OTHER  STORIES  FOR  CHILDREN. 

SEVASTOPOL. 
THE  KREUTZER  SONATA,  AND  FAMILY 

HAPPINESS. 

Uniform  with  the  above. 

IMPRESSIONS  OF  RUSSIA. 

BY  DR.  GEORQ  BRANDKS. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane. 


The  Contemporary  Science  Series, 

EDITED   BY   HAVELOCK  ELLIS. 


Crown  Svo,  Cloth,  33.  6d.  per  vol. ;  Half  Morocco,  6s.  6d. 

I.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  SEX.      By  Professor  PATRICK  GEDDES  and 

J.  ARTHUR  THOMSON.    With  90  Illustrations.    Second  Edition. 
"  The  authors  have  brought  to  the  task— as  indeed  their  names  guarantee 
— a  wealth  of  knowledge,  a  lucid  and  attractive  method  of  treatment,  and  a 
rich  vein  of  picturesque  language." — Nature. 

II.  ELECTRICITY  IN  MODERN  LIFE.     By  G.  W.  DB  TUNZELMANN. 

With  88  Illustrations. 

"  A  clearly-written  and  connected  sketch  of  what  is  known  about  electricity 
and  magnetism,  the  more  prominent  modern  applications,  and  the  principles 
on  which  they  are  based."— Saturday  Review. 

III.  THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  ARYANS.    By  Dr.  ISAAC  TAYLOR.    Illus- 

trated.   Second  Edition. 

"  Canon  Taylor  is  probably  the  most  encyclopaedic  all-round  scholar  now 
living.  His  new  volume  on  the  Origin  of  the  Aryans  is  a  first-rate  example  of 
the  excellent  account  to  which  he  can  turn  his  exceptionally  wide  and  varied 
information  .  .  .  Masterly  and  exhaustive." — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

IV.  PHYSIOGNOMY    AND    EXPRESSION.      By    P.     MANTEGAZZA. 

Illustrated. 

"Professor  Mantegazza  is  a  writer  full  of  life  and  spirit,  and  the  natural 
attractiveness  of  his  subject  is  not  destroyed  by  his  scientific  handling  of  it." 
— Literary  World  (Boston). 

V.  EVOLUTION  AND  DISEASE.    By  J.  B.  SUTTON,  F.R.C.S.    With 

135  Illustrations. 

"  The  work  is  of  special  value  to  professional  men,  yet  educated  persons 
generally  will  find  much  in  it  which  it  is  both  interesting  and  important  to 
know."— The  Scottish  Weekly. 

VI.  THE  VILLAGE  COMMUNITY.    By  G.  L.  GOMME.     Illustrated. 

"  His  book  will  probably  remain  for  some  time  the  best  work  of  reference 
for  facts  bearing  on  those  traces  of  the  village  community  which  hare  not 
been  effaced  by  conquest,  encroachment,  and  the  heavy  hand  of  Roman  law." 
— Scottish  Leader. 

VII.  THE  CRIMINAL.    By  HAVELOCK  ELLIS.     Illustrated. 

"An  ably  written,  an  instructive,  and  a  most  entertaining  book." — Law 
Quarterly  Review, 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane. 


The  Contemporary  Science  Series— continued. 

VIII.  SANITY  AND  INSANITY.    By  Dr.  CHARLES  MEBCIER.    Illus- 
trated. 

"  Taken  as  a  whole,  it  is  the  brightest  book  on  the  physical  side  of  mental 
science  published  hi  our  time." — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

IX.  HYPNOTISM.    By  Dr.  ALBERT  MOLL.    Second  Edition. 

"  Marks  a  step  of  some  importance  in  the  study  of  some  difficult  physio- 
logical and  psychological  problems  which  have  not  yet  received  much  atten- 
tion in  the  scientific  world  of  England." — Nature. 

X.  MANUAL  TRAINING.    By  Dr.  C.  M.  WOODWARD,  Director  of  the 

Manual  Training  School,  St  Louis.    Illustrated. 

"  There  is  no  greater  authority  on  the  subject  than  Professor  Woodward."— 
Manchester  Guardian. 

XI.  THE  SCIENCE  OF  FAIRY  TALES.    By  E.  SIDNEY  HARTLAND. 

"  Mr.  Hart  land's  book  will  win  the  sympathy  of  all  earnest  students,  both 
by  the  knowledge  it  displays,  and  by  a  thorough  love  and  appreciation  of  his 
subject,  which  is  evident  throughout." — Spectator. 

XII.  PRIMITIVE  FOLK.    By  ELIK  RECLUS. 

"  For  an  introduction  to  the  study  of  the  questions  of  property,  marriage, 
government,  religion, — in  a  word,  to  the  evolution  of  society, — this  little 
volume  will  be  found  most  convenient." — Scottish  Leader. 

XIII.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  MARRIAGE.   By  Professor  LETOURNBAU. 
"  Among  the  distinguished  French  students  of  sociology,  Professor  Letour- 

neau  has  long  stood  in  the  first  rank.  He  approaches  the  great  study  of  man 
free  from  bias  and  shy  of  generalisations.  To  collect,  scrutinise,  and  appraise 
facts  is  his  chief  business." — Science. 

XIV.  BACTERIA  AND  THEIR  PRODUCTS.    By  Dr.  G.  SIMS  WOOD- 
HEAD.    Illustrated. 

"  An  excellent  summary  of  the  present  state  of  knowledge  of  the  subject." — 
Lancet. 

XV.  EDUCATION  AND  HEREDITY.    By  J.  M.  GUYAU. 

"  It  is  a  sign  of  the  value  of  this  book  that  the  natural  impulse  on  arriving 
at  its  last  page  is  to  turn  again  to  the  first,  and  try  to  gather  up  and  co- 
ordinate some  of  the  many  admirable  truths  it  presents." — Anti-Jacobin. 

XVI.  THE  MAN  OF  GENIUS.     By  Professor  LOMBROSO.    Illustrated. 
"By  far  the  most  comprehensive  and  fascinating  collection  of  facts  and 

generalisations  concerning  genius  which  has  yet  been  brought  together." — 
Journal  of  Mental  Science. 

XVII.  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  SCIENCE.    By  Professor  KARL  PEARSON. 
Illustrated. 

XVIII.  PROPERTY:  ITS  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT.     By  CH. 
LETOURNEAU,  General  Secretary  to  the  Anthropological  Society,  Paris, 
and  Professor  in  the  School  of  Anthropology,  Paris. 

An  ethnological  account  of  the  beginnings  of  property  among  animals,  of  its 
communistic  stages  among  primitive  races,  and  of  its  later  individualistic  de- 
velopments, together  with  a  brief  sketch  of  its  probable  evolution  in  the  future. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lane. 


The  Contemporary  Science  Series— continued. 

XIX.  VOLCANOES,  PAST  AND  PRESENT.     By  Professor  EDWARD 
HULL,  LL.D.,  F.R.S. 

This  volume  will  treat  of  the  form  and  structure  of  volcanic  mountains,  the 
materials  of  which  they  are  composed  ;  of  volcanic  islands ;  of  tertiary  volcanic 
rocks  of  the  British  Isles,  Europe,  and  America ;  recently  extinct  or  dormant 
volcanic  areas ;  Etna,  Vesuvius ;  causes  of  volcanic  action  and  connection  with 
earthquakes,  etc.  Besides  maps  and  plans,  the  volume  will  contain  a  large 
number  of  illustrations  showing  structure  of  volcanic  mountains,  etc.,  etc. 

XX.  PUBLIC    HEALTH.     By  Dr.  J.  F.  J.  SYKES.     With  numerous 
Illustrations.  (In  Preparation.) 

The  increased  knowledge  of  the  internal  and  external  influences  upon  health 
obtained  within  recent  years,  and  the  practical  applications  of  which  it  is 
capable  in  the  prevention  of  disease,  gives  rise  to  many  interesting  problems, 
some  of  which  are  being  solved,  some  are  only  partially  touched,  and  others 
remain  unelucidated.  In  this  volume  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  summarise 
and  bring  to  a  focus  the  essential  points  in  evolution,  environment,  parasitism, 
prophylaxis,  and  sanitation  bearing  upon  the  preservation  of  the  public  health. 


The  following  Writers  are  preparing  Volumes  for  this  Series : — 
Prof.  E.  D.  Cope,  Prof.  G.  F.  Fitzgerald,  Prof.  J.  Geikie,  Prof.  A.  C. 
Iladdon,  Prof.  C.  II.  Herford,  Prof.  J.  Jastrow  (Wisconsin),  Dr.  J.  B. 
Longstaff,  Prof.  James  Mavor,  Prof.  Aug.  Weismann,  etc. 


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  LIMITED,  24  Warwick  Lana. 


SNTRAL  UNIVERSITY  LIBR'f 
rsity  of  California,  Sa  i  3f  . 

DATE  DUE 


T 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


A     000  833  878     2
