Dead Souls (Nikolai Gogol, 1842)
==========================================================
The great Russian comic epic — Chichikov's scheme to buy dead serfs is the national satire. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (deadsouls00gogo).

y,iih


'^^ymmlmm


OF   THE
U  N  IVLR.S  ITY
or    ILLINOIS

891.73
Q55
0-m  E^r


y-  -.J


^r^i*'-\*


|?i.  Return  this  book  on  or  before  the
ns,f-  --i   below.    A


tViis  material  is  re
The  person  charging  ^"  ^  ,     library  from

Tories,  Oo;est.mpedbelo..^^ „„.


for    disciplinary

the  University.  r^«tpr    333-8400


jflftylo-J  2001

ml  01


Ll61-O-l0"6


0^  Ea^"^


NIKOLAI  Y.   GOGOL.


XoxE  of  the  many  provinces  of  Eussia  possess  more  interest  for
"Western  nations  than  the  Ukraina,  the  land  where  North  and
South  meet,  a  region  of  boundless  plains,  of  melancholy  aspect
and  complex  character.  The  Turk  and  the  Pole  once  ruled
there,  and  have  left  many  traces  of  their  dominion  behind  them,
while  the  old  Cossack  leagues  imparted,  as  it  were,  a  republican
spirit  to  the  province.  All  students  of  Eussian  history  are
familiar  with  those  warriors  of  the  Don,  the  Zaporozhtsui —
recruited  among  brigands  and  fugitive  serfs — whose  hands  were
raised  against  every  man,  and  who  knew  no  law  save  that  of
the  sword.  It  was  from  one  of  these  Zaporog  families,  which
have  transmitted  to  their  descendants  such  a  keen  appreciation
of  the  adventurous  and  the  marvellous,  that  sprang  the  true
founder  of  the  Russian  school  of  fiction,  Nikolai  Vasilyevitch
Gogol*-Yanovsky,  the  author  of  "  Dead  Souls."  It  was  in  the
heart  of  the  Ukraina,  too,  on  his  father's  farm  at  Scrotchintsui,
not  far  from  the  historical  city  of  Poltava,  that  he  first  saw  the
light,  on  the  31st  of  March,  1809.

Eeared  near  the  famous  battlefield  which  w^itnessed  the
giant  contest  between  Charles  XII  of  Sweden  and  the  great
Czar  of  Muscovy,  instructed  in  the  old-time  songs  and  legends
of  the  Malo-Eussians,  his  mind  became  imbued  at  an  early  age
with  warlike  and  poetic  folk-lore,  whence  he  afterwards  derived
materials  for  his  first  noticeable  work.  Educated  first  at  Pol-
tava and  subsequently  at  Xiezhin,  he  proved  but  an  indifferent
scholar,  preferentially  exercising  his  satirical  powers  at  the
expense  of   his  schoolfellows.     However,  if  he  did  not  quite

*  The  gogol  i 3  a  species  of  duck  called  the^olden-eye.

167990


Va  KIKOLAI    V.    GOGOL.

satisfy  his  teachers,  he  evinced  at  an  early  age  a  marked  taste
for  literature,  for  whilst  at  Niezhin  he  started  a  manuscript
journal,  in  which  he  inserted  stories,  tragedies,  ballads,  and
satirical  sketches  from  his  own  pen.  Having  with  some  diffi-
culty graduated,  he  repaired  in  1829  to  St.  Petersburg,  fired
with  enthusiasm  and  dreaming  of  speedy  glory.  Like  a  genuine
Zaporog,  indeed,  he  entered  the  capital  as  though  it  were  a
conquered  city,  feeling  convinced  that  he  had  merely  to  stretch
out  his  hands  to  secure  possession  of  every  possible  felicity.
But  in  (peSMhereof  he  found  the  stern  realities  of  life,  and
met  with  many  discouraging  failures.  An  idyllic  story ,>  entitled
Hans  Kiichel-Garten,  which  he  published  anonymously,  was  so
mercilessly  ridiculed  by  the  reviewers,  that  he  immediately
withdrew  it  from  circulation  and  burnt  all  the  copies  that  he
could  lay  his  hands  upon.  He  was,  in  fact,  so  disheartened
that  he  resolved  to  turn  his  attention  to  the  stage,  and  actually
applied  to  the  director-general  of  the  Imperial  theatres  for  an
engagement ;  but  it  was  found  that  he  did  not  possess  a  suf-
ficiently powerful  voice  to  shine  in  the  profession,  and  he  had
to  look  for  an  opening  elsewhere.

Early  in  1830,  one  of  his  stories,  known  in  England  as  "  St.
John's  Eve,"  appeared  anonymously  in  a  Russian  periodical,
and  shortly  afterwards  he  secured  a  very  insignificant  appoint-
ment at  the  Ministry  of  Appanages.  Here  his  official  duties
were  paltry  in  the  extreme,  but  he  exercised  his  mind  to
advantage  by  studying  the  clerks  and  functionaries  around  him,
portraits  of  many  of  whom  are  to  be  found  in  his  works.

Soon  afterwards,  having  shaken  off"  the  yoke  of  bureaucratic
slavery,  he  again  began  to  write,  and  sought  the  advice  of  the
celebrated  poet  Pushkin.  The  latter  advised  him  to  appeal  for
inspiration  to  national  history  and  the  popular  lore  of  his  native
province.  He  did  so,  the  outcome  of  his  efforts  being  the
"Evenings  in  a  Hamlet  near  Dikanka,"  which  teemed  with
recollections  of  the  Ukraina,  his  personal  remembrance  of  his
birth-place  being  interspersed  with  weird  and  grotesque  excerpts
of  legendary  lore.  The  "Evenings  "  met  with  considerable  suc-
cess, and  apart  from  any  other  merit,  they  possessed  that  of
depicting  life  in  a  part  of  Russia  then  but  little  known.     This


NIKOLAI    V.    GOGOL.  VH

being  duly  appreciated,  Gogol  felt  encouraged,  and  published,
in  1834,  a  second  series  of  stories,  entitled  "  Tales  of  Mirgorod."'
These  included  his  famous  epic  poem  in  prose,  "  Taras  Bulba,"
a'^ti'rriiig  narrative  of  Cossack  life  in  former  times,  which
en'sured  "Eis  reputation. "  He  was  at  once  placed  in  the  front
rank  of  the  authors  of  the  day,  and  a  brilliant  career  was  pre-
dicted for  him.

He  had  in  the  meanwhile  become  a  teacher  of  Russian  at  the
Patriotic  Institute  ;  and  the  success  of  "  Taras  Bulba  "  proved
so  great,  and  such  a  decided  opinion  was  expressed  in  high
quarters  that  a  man  who  thus  revivified  the  past  must  be
skilled  in  teaching  it,  that  he  was  appointed  professor  of
media3val  history  at  the  university  of  the  capital.  His  opening
lecture  there  was  a  brilliant  success,  completely  confirming  all
these  favourable  anticipations,  and  once  or  twice,  upon  subse-
quent occasions,  he  fairly  electrified  his  audience.  But  on  the
whole  his  course  was  very  unsatisfactory.  "  His  lectures,"
says  the  Russian  writer  Ivanitsky,  who  was  a  pupil  at  the  time,
"  soon  became  very  dry  and  tedious.  He  looked  upon  the  dead
nations  of  the  past  with  dreary  eyes,  as  it  were  ;  the  work  was
wearisome  to  him,  and  he  himself  saw  that  his  audience  was
bored."

In  fact,  he  was  dreaming  of  other  things.  Already  in  the
"Tales  of  Mirgorod"  he  had  inserted  a  short  story,  which
marked  a  change  both  in  his  style  and  ideas.  Previously  he
had  belonged  to  the  romantic  school,  but  in  this  little  narrative,
called  "  Old-Fashioned  Folks,"  he  evinced  a  sudden  partiality  for
realismj.jdiidL^£K.iipoii-luia. apace.  In  1835  he  resigned  his
functions  as  a  professor  to  devote  himself  exclusively  to  litera-
ture, penning  comedies,  stories,  and  sketches  with  feverish
activity.  Among  his  productions  at  this  period  one  may  mention
the  story  of  "  Akakiy_Akakievitch^s_.Kew  _Cloak,"  which  was
based  upon  his  experiences  whilst  he  acted  as  a  clerk  at  the
Ministry  of  Appanages.  It  was  the  first  blow  which  he  dealt  at
the  Russian  system  of  govermaont,  the  second  being  his  famous
comedy,  "  TLo  luhpoctor-GcDcral,"  which  was  written  in  1836,
and  in  which  he  exposed  the  venality,  hypocrisy,  and  underhand
intrifruing  of  the  Russian  functionaries.  With  the  erroneous  ideas


/


Vlll  NIKOLAI    Y.    GOGOL.

that  prevail  as  to  the  narrow-minded  tyranny  of  the  Emperor
Nicholas,  it  seems  strange  that  such  a  scathing  satire  upon  his
government  should  ever  have  been  publicly  performed  at  St.
Petersburg.  However,  it  was  the  Emperor  himself  who,  after
reading  the  manuscript  and  laughing  at  it,  ordered  his  comedians
to  perform  the  play  ;  and  on  the  first  night  he  personally  gave
the  signal  for  applause.  The  result  of  "  The  Inspector-General,"
as  regards  Gogol,  was  precisely  the  same  as  the  result  of  "  Tar-
tuffe  "  with  Moliere  :  he  gained  many  admirers  and  a  still  greater
number  of  enemies ;  and  so  sensitive  was  his  mind  that,  upon
being  traduced  and  reviled  by  those  whom  he  had  so  com-
mendably  denounced,  he  lost  all  his  buoyant  spirits,  and  hypo-
chondria set  in.  Thanks  to  the  munificence  of  the  Emperor
Nicholas,  he  was  at  this  period  able  to  leave  Eussia  for  a  time
and  travel  through  the  Continent ;  but  the  gloom  which  had
settled  upon  his  mind  was  not  to  be  dispelled,  and  in  writing  to
his  friends  he  frequently  remarked  that  he  felt  utterly  weary  in
both  body  and  mind.

He  had  taken  away  with  him  on  his  travels  the  idea  of  penning
a  masterpiece,  in  which  he  would  say  everything  that  ought  to
be  said  for  the  enlightenment  of  iiis  countrymen.  This  was  the
story  2Icrtvui((  Dushi  ("  Dead  Souls  "),  a  translation  of  which  is
now  offered  to  the  English  reader.  Pushkin,  so  Gogol  himself
declares,  had  given  him  the  foundation  of  his  plot ;  but  to  many
it  would  seem  to  have  been  borrowed  from  Cervantes.  Indeed,
in  numerous  respects,  "  Dead  Souls  "  recalls  the  immortal  story
of  "  Don  Quixote."  It  was  to  have  comprised  three  parts,  but
only  the  first  one  was  ever  completed.  The  second,  when
nearly  finished,  was  partially  burnt  by  Gogol,  the  portion  of  it
which  escaped  destruction  being  published  after  his  death.
When  the  first  part  was  issued  at  Moscow,  in  1842,  cries  of
mingled"  stupefaction  and  indignation  were  raised  throughout
empire.  "What!  was  that  Russia?"  people  asked.  "A
band  of  rascals  and  idiots,  without  exception  ! "  And  thereupon
the  author  was  denounced  on  all  sides  as  a  renegade  and  a
defamer.  /'.He  was  told  that,  desj)ite  serfdom  and  official
venality,  there  were  still  some  brave  hearts  and  honest  folks
in  the  empire.     He  then  realised  that  he  had  struck  too  hard


y  \  the


NIKOLAI   V.    GOGOL.  IX

a  blow,  and  he  -wrote  numerous  explanatory  letters,  begging  his
readers  to  wait  for  the  second  part  of  his  book,  for  the  coming
contrast  of  light  with  darkness.  But  time  passed  by,  and.  this
second  part  did  not  appear.  Gogol's  pen,  so  ready  in  de-
nouncing hypocrisy  and  exposing  venality,  seemed  unwilling,
as  it  were,  to  trace  a  brighter  picture  of  humanity.

At  last,  in  1846,  he  returned  to  Russia,  broken  down  in  health
and  scarcely  able  to  work.  While  he  desperately  endeavoured
to  complete  "Dead  Souls,"  some  crisis  of  hypochondria  mastered
him  every  now  and  then, and  upon  one  such  occasion  he  destroyed
all  his  books  and  a  portion  of  his  manuscript.  Then  he  turned
his  mind  to  religion.  He  wished  to  go  upon  a  pilgrimage  to  the
Holy  Land,  he  said;  and,  to  procure  the  necessary  funds
and  obtain  the  prayers  of  his  readers,  he  issued  a  series  of
"  Letters  to  Friends,"  which  caused  a  perfect  scandal  on  account
of  the  religious  and  social  views  which  he  expressed  in  them.
It  was  declared  that  he  had  lapsed  into  mysticism,  but  in  point
of  fact  his  views  were  rather  those  of  a^ansenis^t.  '  However,
he  made  his  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  and  upon  his-4-eturn  onco
more  to  Russia,  as  he  was  without  any  home  or  means,  he  received
the  hospitality  of  various  friends.  Like  a  true  Cossack,  he  could
never  linger  for  long  in  one  spot,  but  went  about  from  house  to
house,  carrying  with  him  a  little  bag  full  of  newspapers,  reviews,
and  pamphlets,  in  which  he  had  been  harshly  dealt  with.

A  person  who  saw  him  at  this  period  of  his  life  described
him  to  the  Viscount  de  Yogiie  as  a  little  man  with  short  legs,
walking  sideways,  awkward  and  ill-dressed,  with  a  lock  of  hair
falling  over  his  forehead,  and  a  large  prominent  nose.  He  was
then  very  uncommunicative,  though  he  would  brighten  up  occa-
sionally in  the  company  of  children,  of  whom  he  Avas  always
very  fond.  "With  an  unprepossessing  exterior  he  combined  great
timidity,  and  his  biographers  assert  that  he  was  never  in  love.
The  readers  of  his  works  will  note,  moreover,  that  his  feminine
characters  are  invariably  insignificant  and  weakly  drawn.  He
evidently  had  but  a  very  slight  knowledge  of  women.

At  thirty  years  of  age,  after  the  publication  of  the  first  part
of  "Dead  Souls,"  Gogol's  productive  faculties  were  blasted;
after  that  he  merely  lingered  on,  as  it  were,  and  at  forty-three.


X  NIKOLAI    V.    GOGOL.

on  February  21st,  1852,  he  expired.  His  death  caused  but  Uttle
stir.  Imperial  favour  no  longer  upheld  him;  indeed,  the  governor
of  Moscow  was  formally  blamed  for  having  followed  his  coffin  to
the  cemetery,  and  Ivan  Turgenieff,  the  novelist,  was  exiled  to
his  estates  for  having  published  an  article  in  which  he  called
him  a  great  man.  Posterity,  however,  has  ratified  that  title,
though' it  is,  perhaps,  difficult  to  assign  to  Gogol  any  precise  place
in  the  literary  Pantheon.  M.  Merimee  places  him  there  beside
Dean  Swift,  but  the  Viscount  de  Vogue  would  prefer  to  find  him
a  niche  of  honour  between  Cervantes  and  Le  Sage.  Be  this  as
it  may,  it  is  at  least  certain  that  "  Dead  Souls,"  his  unfinished
masterpiece,  has  for  forty  years  remained  the  greatest  work  of
fiction  in  the  Russian  language.  The  incidents  of  the  story  are
ever  fresh  in  people's  minds,  and  are  constantly  alluded  to  in
the  course  of  everyday  conversation  throughout  the  length  and
breadth  of  the  Russian  empire.  Many  of  GogoVs  sallies,  too,
have  become  proverbial  expressions,  and  the  names  of  the
personages  whom  he  introduced  to  his  compatriots  in  "Dead
Souls  "  have  grown  as  familiar  in  their  mouths  as  household
words.

In  concluding  these  prefatory  remarks,  it  should  be  stated
that  Gogol  having  left  his  work  unfinished,  the  present  trans-
lator has,  for  the  sake  of  continuity,  borrowed  various  con-
necting passages  from  M.  Charriere's  French  version  of  the
story,  and  has  also  added  the  sequel  to  it,  written  by  Dr.
Zahartchenko,  of  Kief.  ^


DEAD   SOULS.


CHAPTER  I.

THE    CAriTAli   OF    THE    GOVERNMENT.

A  S5IALL  and  quite  a  pretty  britcbka  on  springs  entered  the  gates
of  the  hostehy  in  the  provincial  city  of  N.  N. ;  it  was  of  the
sort  used  by  retired  colonels,  staff-captains,  landed  gentry  who
own  some  two  hundred  souls  of  peasants,  and,  in  a  word,  by
fill  who  are  called  gentlemen  of  the  middle  class.  In  the
britcbka  sat  a  gentleman  who  was  neither  handsome  nor  yet
very  plain  in  his  personal  appearance,  neither  too  stout  nor  too
ihin  ;  it  was  impossible  to  say  that  he  was  old,  nor  could  he
be  called  very  young.  His  arrival  i^roduced  no  commotion
whatever  in  the  town,  and  was  not  signalised  by  anything  in
particular;  though  two  moujiks  who  were  standing  at  the  door  of
ti  pot-house  opposite  the  inn,  made  some  remarks,  which  had,
however,  more  reference  to  the  equipage  than  to  the  person
jseated  in  it.  "  Just  look,"  said  one  of  them  to  the  other,
"  what  a  wheel  that  is  !  What  do  you  think  ?  Will  that  wheel
last  as  far  as  Moscow,  or  not  ?  " — "  Oh  !  it  will  hold  out,"  replied
the  other.  "  But  it  won't  hold  out  as  far  as  Kazan,  I  fancy  ?  "
— "It  will  not,"  returned  the  other.  And  here  the  conversa-
tion ended.  However,  as  the  britcbka  drove  into  the  inn-yard,  it
was  met  by  a  young  man  in  white  duck  trousers  very  narrow
and  very  short,  and  a  swallow-tailed  coat  with  claims  to  fashion,
beneath  which  was  visible  a  shirt-front  fastened  with  a  Tula
jDin,  in  the  shape  of  a  bronze  pistok  The  young  man  turned
round,  surveyed  the  equipage,  caught  hold  of  his  cap,  which
the  wind  was  on  the  point  of  blowing  off,  and  then  went  his
way.

When  the  carriage  had  entered  the  courtyard,  the  gentleman
was  received  by  one  of  the  servants  of  the  inn — a  2>olovoi  as  they


12  DEAD    SOULS.

ars  called  in  Russian  hostelries — who  was  so  lively  and  restless
that  it  was  even  impossible  to  see  what  sort  of  a  face  he  had.
He  ran  out  briskly,  napkin  in  hand,  his  lanky  figure  clad  in  a
long  cotton  surtout,  with  its  waist  almost  at  the  nape  of  his
neck,  tossed  back  his  hair,  and  quickly  led  the  gentleman  up-
stairs along  the  whole  length  of  a  wooden  gallery,  to  show  him
the  chamber  sent  him  by  God.  The  chamber  was  of  the  well-
known  sort,  for  the  inn  was  also  of  the  familiar  species — that
is  to  say,  exactly  like  all  taverns  in  provincial  towns,  where  for
two  roubles  a  day,  travellers  obtain  a  sleeping-room  full  of  beetles
which  peep  out  of  every  corner  like  plums,  and  having  a  door
leading  into  an  adjoining  apartment,  which  door  is  always  blocked
up  with  a  chest  of  drawers.  In  that  room  too  a  neighbour  is
always  lodged,  some  silent  and  quiet,  but  very  curious  man,
who  takes  an  interest  in  finding  out  every  particular  relating  to
the  stranger.  The  frontage  of  the  hostelry  corresponded  with
its  interior  :  it  was  very  long,  and  two  storeys  high  ;  the  lower
one  was  not  stuccoed,  but  preserved  the  hue  of  its  dark-red
bricks,  which  Avere  already  of  a  muddy  tint  by  nature,  and
had  grown  still  darker  through  the  severe  weather  of  many
years  ;  the  upper  storey  was  painted  the  inevitable  yellow.  On
the  lower  floor  there  were  shops  with  horse-collars,  ropes,  and
cracknels,  &c.,  and  in  the  corner  shop,  or  rather  at  its  window,
sat  a  shiten  -•'■  seller,  with  a  samovar  of  red  copper,  and  a  face  as
red  as  his  samovar.  At  a  distance  it  might  have  even  been
supposed  that  two  samovars  were  standing  in  the  window,  had
not  the  man  had  a  beard  as  black  as  pitch.
'^  ^Vhile  the  newly-arrived  gentleman  was  inspecting  his  room,
his  luggage  was  brought  in ;  first  of  all  came  a  trunk  of  white
leather,  somewhat  the  worse  for  wear,  and  showing  signs  that
this  was  not  the  first  time  it  had  travelled.  The  ti'unk  was
brought  in  by  the  coachman  Selifan,  an  undersized  man  in  a
short  tiihq),-\  and  the  footman  Petrushka,  a  young  fellow  of
thirty,  with  a  rather  surly  face,  a  very  thick  nose  and  lips,  and
wearing  a  plain,  somewhat  worn  surtout,  which  had  evidently
come  from  his  master's  shoulders.  After  the  trunk  came  a
dressing-case  of  mahogany  with  inlaid  decorations  of  veined
birChwood,  a  boot-jack,  and  a  roast  chicken  wrapped  up  in  blue
paper.  When  all  this  had  been  brought  in,  the  coachman  Seli-
fan betook  himself  to  the  stable  to  see  to  the  horses,  and  the

*  Shiten  is  a  beverage  made  of  water,  honey,  and  laurel-leaves,  or
Falvia,  and'often  drunk  in  Eussia  instead  of  tea,  especially  by  the  poorer
classes.

t  A  sheepskin  coat.


THE    CAPITAL    OF    THE    GOVERNMENT.  13

footman  Petrushka  began  to  settle  himself  in  the  small  ante-
room, an  extremely  dark  little  hole,  whither  he  had  already-
contrived  to  transport  his  cloak,  and  with  it  some  of  his  own
peculiar  odour,  which  had  been  communicated  to,  and  was
wafted  after,  the  bag  containing  the  articles  pertaining  to  his
toilet.  In  this  tiny  den  he  placed  against  the  wall  a  narrow,
three-legged  bedstead,  covered  it  with  a  small  semblance  of  a
mattress  as  flat  as  a  pancake,  and  perhaps  as  greasy,  which  he
had  succeeded  in  procuring  from  the  landlord  of  the  inn.

While  his  servants  were  installing  themselves  and  getting
things  to  rights,  the  gentleman  had  betaken  himself  to  the
general  parlour.  Every  traveller  knows  what  these  common
parlours  are  like :  the  same  walls  painted  in  oil  colours,
darkened  above  by  pipe -smoke,  and  covered  below  with  the
marks  made  by  the  backs  of  travellers  and  tradespeople,  for
merchants  come  here  on  market-days  in  sixes  and  sevens  to
drink  their  customarj'  two  glasses  of  tea.  There  was  the  usual
smoke-begrimed  ceiling,  the  same  smoky  chandelier  with  its
multitude  of  pendant  glass  drops,  which  leaped  and  jingled
every  time  the  waiter  ran  across  the  Avorn  oil-cloth,  boldly
flourishing  his  tray,  upon  which  stood  well-nigh  as  many  tea-
cups as  there  are  birds  on  the  seashore.  Moreover,  there  were
the  usual  oil  paintings  on  the  walls  ;  in  a  word,  everything  was
exactly  the  same  as  what  is  found  everywhere,  the  only  differ-
ence being  that  one  of  the  pictures  represented  a  nj^mph  with
such  an  enormous  bosom  as  the  reader  has,  in  all  probability,
never  beheld.  Such  freaks  of  nature,  however,  occur  in  various
historical  pictures,  whence,  at  what  time,  and  by  whom  brought
to  us  in  Russia,  is  unknown,  but  sometimes  by  our  grandees
and  art-lovers,  who  have  purchased  them  in  Italy  on  the  advice
of  the  couriers  who  conducted  them.

The  gentleman  threw  off  his  cap  and  unwound  from  his  neck
a  raiubow-hued  woollen  scarf,  such  as  a  wife  prepares  for  her
husband  with  her  own  hands,  giving  it  to  him  with  suitable
instructions  how  to  wrap  himself  up.  Who  makes  these  things
for  bachelors  no  one  can  tell.  God  knows !  For  myself,
although  a  celibatarian,  I  have  never  worn  such  a  scarf.  Hav-
ing unwound  his  scarf,  the  gentleman  ordered  dinner.  While
they  served  him  with  the  various  dishes  usual  at  an  inn,  such
as  ca'bbage  soup  with  tarts,  purposely  kept  for  several  weeks,
calf's  brains  with  peas,  small  sausages  with  cabbage,  roast
capon,  pickled  cucumbers,  and  the  eternal  sweet  puff-paste  tarts
which  are  always  ready  at  one's  service — while  he  A'^as  being
served  with  all  these  either  warm  or  cold,  he  made  the  waiter


It  DEAD    SOULS.

tell  him  all  sorts  of  nonsense  about  -who  had  formerly  kept  the
inn,  and  who  kept  it  now,  whether  there  was  much  profit
derived  from  it,  and  whether  the  landlord  was  a  great  rogue,
to  which  the  waiter  answered  according  to  custom,  "  Oh,  a  very-
great  one,  sir  !  a  perfect  rascal !  "  For  there  are  a  great  many
people  nowadays  in  civilized  Russia  Avho  cannot  eat  a  mouthful
in  a  tavern  without  talking  to  the  servant,  and  even  sometimes
jesting  in  an  amusing  way  at  his  expense.

However,  the  new  arrival's  questions  were  not  all  foolish
ones.  He  inquired  with  great  minuteness  who  was  the  gover-
nor of  the  town,  who  was  president  of  the  court,  who  was  pro-
curator ;  in  short,  .he  did  not  omit  a  single  individual  of  impor-
tance ;  but  he  interrogated  him  with  still  greater  minuteness
concerning  all  the  prominent  landowners  :  how  many^^souls^_
(a^rfe)  such  a  one  had,  how  far  he  lived  from  town,  what  his
character  was,  even,  and  how  often  he  came  into  the  city ;  he
inquired,  too,  attentively  concerning  the  condition  of  that
region — were  there  no  diseases  in  the  government,  epidemic
complaints,  deadly  fevers,  small-pox,  and  the  like ;  and  he  put
other  questions  of  the  same  sort,  and  in  a  manner  which  gave
proof  of  something  more  than  mere  curiosity.  There  was
something  respectable  about  the  gentleman's  manners,  and  he
blew  his  nose  very  loudly.  It  is  impossible  to  say  how  he
managed  it,  but  his  nose  resounded  like  a  trumpet.  This  won  him
much  respect  from  the  servant,  who  every  time  he  heard  the
noise  shook  back  his  hair,  straightened  himself  up  into  a  more
respectful  attitude,  and  then  bending  down  his  head  from  his  full
height,  inquired,  "Is  there  anything  you  would  like,  sir?"
After  dinner  the  gentleman  sipped  a  small  cup  of  coffee,  and
seated  himself  on  the  sofa,  placing  behind  his  back  the  cushion,
which  in  Russian  taverns  is  stuffed  with  something  very  much
resembling  bricks  and  pebbles  instead  of  wool.

Then  he  began  to  yawn,  and  ordered  them  to  show  him  to
his  room,  where  he  lay  down  and  slept  for  two  hours.  Having
rested  himself,  he  wrote  upon  a  scrap  of  paper,  at  the  request
of  the  servant,  his  title.  Christian  name,  and  surname,  so  that  they
might  be  communicated  to  the  police,  according  to  regulation.
The  waiter,  as  he  descended  the  stairs,  spelt  out  on  the  bit  of
paper  the  following  words:  "Collegiate  Councillor^ Pavel
Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoff,  landed  proprietor,  travelling  on~his
own  private  business."

While  the  waiter  was  still  engaged  in  deciphering  this,  letter
by  letter,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoff  set  out  to  take  a  look
at  the  town,  which  seemed  to  be  satisfactory,  for  he  found  that


THE    CAPITAL    OF    THE    GOVERNMENT.  15

it  was  not  a  whit  behind  other  provincial  cities  ;  the  yellow
paint  on  the  stone  buildings  struck  the  eye  forcibly,  and  the
wooden  structures  were  of  a  modest  dark  grey.  The  houses
were  one  and  two  storeys  high,  or  a  storey  and  a  half,  includ-
ing the  inevitable  "  entresol,"  which  is  so  very  beautiful,  in  the
opinion  of  provincial  architects.  In  some  places,  these  houses
seemed  lost  in  the  middle  of  a  street  which  was  as  broad  as  a
field,  with  interminable  wooden  fences ;  in  other  places  they
were  collected  in  a  cluster  ;  and  here  more  activity  on  the  part
of  the  people  and  more  life  were  perceptible.  Signboards  met
the  eye,  with  representations  of  cracknels  and  boots,  nearly
obliterated  by  the  rain;  and  here  and  there  was  a  painting  of
a  pair  of  blue  breeches,  and  the  name  of  some  Warsaw  tailor.
Here,  moreover,  was  a  shop  full  of  caps — leather  caps  with
peaks,  and  military  ones  ;  over  there  a  billiard-table  was
depicted  with  two  players  wearing  swallow-tailed  coats,  such  as
visitors  to  the  theatres  put  on  when  they  intend  to  go  behind
the  scenes  after  the  last  act.  The  players  were  painted  with
their  cues  in  position,  with  their  arms  somewhat  drawn  back,
and  with  crooked  legs  which  had  just  executed  a  flourish  in  the
air.  Beneath  all  this  was  written,  "  Here's  the  Establishment."
Here  and  there  tables  stood  in  the  street,  bearing  nuts,  and
soap,  and  gingerbread  which  looked  like  soap  ;  in  other  places
there  were  eating-houses,  with  pictures  of  a  fat  fish,  and  a  fork
thrust  into  it.  Most  frequently  of  all,  one  noticed  darkened
figures  of  the  imperial  two-headed  eagle,  nowadays  replaced  by
the  laconic  inscription,  "Drinking-house."'''-  The  pavement  was
everywhere  in  a  bad  condition.

The  traveller  glanced  at  the  city-garden,  which  was  planted
with  sickly  trees,  and  after  catechising  the  sentry  there  as  to
the  nearest  way  of  reaching  the  cathedral,  the  courts,  and  the
governor's  house,  in  case  of  need,  he  went  to  survey  the  river,
which  flowed  through  the  middle  of  the  city.  On  the  way  he
tore  down  a  theatrical  poster  from  the  pillar  to  which  it  was
attached,  in  order  that  he  might  read  it  thoroughly  on  his  return
home  ;  stared  intently  at  a  rather  pretty  woman  who  passed  along
the  sidewalk,  followed  by  a  little  boy  in  military  livery,  with  a
package  in  his  hand ;  and  then  he  went  home  and  to  his  room,
being  assisted  upstairs  by  the  servant  of  the  inn.  After  drinking
his  tea,  he  seated  himself  at  the  table ,  ordered  a  light  to  be  brought,
pulled  the  poster  out  of  his  pocket,  held  it  near  the  candle,  and
began  to  read  it,  half  shutting  his  right  eye  as  he  did  so.     The

*  Until  recent  times,  the  crown  received  the  revenues  of  the  drinking-
houscs,  or  kahaki ;  hence  the  two-headed  eagles.


16  DEAD   SOULS.

poster  contained  but  little  of  interest :  a  drama  of  Kotzebue's  was
to  be  performed  at  the  local  theatre,  Mr.  Poplevin  playing  the
part  of  Rolla,  and  Miss  Zyablova  that  of  Cora.  The  rest  of  the
characters  were  of  no  consequence,  nevertheless  he  read  all  the
names,  and  even  got  as  far  as  the  prices  for  the  pit,  and  learnt
that  the  poster  was  printed  at  the  Government  printing-office.
He  then,  it  appears,  wound  up  the  day  with  a  plateful  of  cold
veal,  some  sour  cabbage-soup,  and  a  sound  sleep — a  regular
hear  sleep,  as  people  say  in  some  localities  of  the  vast  Russian
empire.

The  whole  of  the  following  day  was  devoted  to  visits.  The
new-comer  set  out  to  call  upon  all  the  official  hierarchy  of  the  town.
He  paid  his  respects  to  the  governor,  who,  like  himself,  was
neither  fat  nor  lean  in  person.  The  governor  wore  the  order  of
St.  Anna '^  dangling  from  his  neck,  and  was  said  to  be  down  on  the
list  for  a  star  ;  he  was  a  very  good-natured  man,  moreover,  and
sometimes  embroidered  on  tulle.  Then  the  traveller  called  upon
the  vice-governor,  the  jbrocurator,  the  president  of  the  court,
the  chief  of  police,  the  farmer  of  the  brandy  revenues,  the
director  of  the  imperial  factories — indeed,  suffice  it  to  say  that
he  displayed  unusual  activity  in  the  matter  of  calls.

In  his  conversations  with  the  ruling  personages,  he  contrived
to  flatter  each  in  a  very  artful  way.  He  hinted  to  the  governor,
as  though  cursorily,  that  to  visit  his  government  was  like  enter-
ing Paradise.  The  roads  were  everywhere  like  velvet,  he  said  ;
and  he  added  that  the  rulers  who  appointed  wise  officers  were
worthy  of  the  greatest  praise.  To  the  chief  of  police  he  said
something  extremely  flattering  about  the  watchmen  of  the  town ;
and  in  -the  course  of  conversation  with  the  vice-governor  and
the  president  of  the  court,  who  were  as  3'et  only  state. council-
lors, he  twice  addressed  them  as  "  Your  Excellency"  f  by  mis-
take, which  pleased  them  greatly.  The  result  of  this  was  that
the  governor  asked  him  to  honour  him  that  same  evening  with
his  company  at  a  family  party ;  the  other  officials  did  the  same
on  their  part,  one  asking  him  to  dinner,  another  to  a  game
of  Boston,;]:  and  a  thii'd  to  drink  a  cup  of  tea.

The  stranger  appeared  to  avoid  saying  much  about  himself ;

*  The  fifth,  in  rank  of  the  Russian  orders;  was  founded  Felj.  14,  1735,
by  Charles  Frederic  of  Schleswig-Holstein.

t  Tashe  prcvoskhoditclstvo.  This  title  is  due  only  to  the  memhers  of  the
third  and  fourth  classes  of  the  Eussian  hierarchj'^.  As  memhers  of  the
fifth  class,  the  vice-governor  and  the  judge  only  had  a  right  to  the  title
of  Vuisokopoduii,  "wellborn."

j  "Boston,"  a  card  game  vrhich  was  very  popular  on  the  Continent
during  the  first  half  of  the  present  century.


THE   CAPITAL    OF    THE    GOVERNMENT.  17

but  when  he  did  say  anything,  it  consisted  of  commonplace
remarks,  uttered  with  evident  discretion.  He  had  gone  through
a  great  deal  in  his  time,  he  said.  He  had  suffered  for  the  sake
of  Right ;  he  had  many  enemies,  who  even  sought  his  life  ;  and
now,  feeling  desirous  of  settling  down  in  peace,  he  was  seeking
a  place  of  residence.  Having  reached  that  town,  he  added,  he
had  regarded  it  as  his  positive  duty  to  pay  his  respects  to  the
principal  officials.  Such  was  all  that  people  learned  regarding
this  new  arrival,  who  did  not  fail  to  make  his  appearance
promptly  at  the  governor's  assembly.  His  preparations  for
this  party  occupied  him  more  than  two  hours,  for  he  paid  un-
wonted attention  to  his  toilet.

After  a  brief  after-dinner  nap,  he  had  an  elaborate  wash,
changed  his  linen,  and  finally  donned  a  cranberry -coloured,
swallow-tailed  coat.  Having  dressed  in  this  fashion,  he  drove
in  his  own  carriage  along  the  wide,  interminable  streets,  illumin-
ated by  the  feeble  light  gleaming  here  and  there  from  the
windows.  However,  the  governor's  house  was  illuminated  as
though  for  a  ball :  there  were  calashes  with  lanterns,  two  sentries
at  the  entrance,  and  postilions'  shouts  in  the  distance  ;  in  short,
all  that  was  requisite.  Tchitchikoff  was  almost  forced  to  close
his  eyes  on  his  entrance  into  the  drawing-room,  for  the  glare  of
the  candles,  the  lamps,  and  the  ladies'  dresses  was  terrible.
Everything  was  flooded  with  light.  Black  dress-coats,  moreover,
fluttered  hither  and  thither,  and  Tchitchikoff  had  not  succeeded
in  looking  about  him  when  his  arm  was  seized  by  the  governor,
who  at  once  presented  him  to  his  wife.  The  newly-arrived
guest  thereupon  favoured  the  lady  with  a  compliment — a  very
polite  one  for  a  middle-aged  man  whose  official  rank  was  neither
very  high  nor  very  low.  When  the  couples  of  dancers  drove
everyone  against  the  walls  as  they  came  to  a  stand-still,  he  put
his  hands  behind  his  back  and  looked  at  them  very  attentively
for  a  couple  of  minutes.  Many  ladies  were  dressed  fashionably
and  well ;  others  were  clothed  with  whatever  God  had  sent  to
that  provincial  town.  The  men  here,  as  everywhere  else,  were
of  two  sorts.  Some  were  slender,  and  hovered  incessantly
about  the  ladies  ;  a  few  of  them — who  were  only  with  difficulty
distinguishable  from  Petersbui'gians — wore  tastefully  arranged
whiskers,  or  had  fine-looking,  smoothly  shaven  faces.

These  seated  themselves  beside  the  ladies,  talked  to  them
in  French,  and  threw  them  into  confusion  exactly  as  if  they
were  in  the  capital.  The  other  men  consisted  of  the  stout  ones,
or  those  who  were  like  the  stranger,  Tchitchikoff;  that  is,  not
go  very  fat,  and  yet  not  thin.     These  latter  looked  askance  at


18  DEAD   SOULS.

the  ladies,  and  retreated  from  them,  casting  sidelong  glances
about  them  to  discover  whether  the  governor's  servants  had  set
out  the  green  tables  for  whist  anywhere.  Their  faces  were  full
and  round,  some  of  them  had  beards,  here  and  there  one  of
them  was  pock-marked.  These  were  the  prominent  officials  of
the  town.

Alas !  fat  men  know  better  how  to  manage  their  affairs  in
this  world  than  thin  ones  do.  The  thin  ones  only  serve  on
special  commissions,  or  are  merely  in  the  ranks,  and  change
about  here  and  there  ;  their  existence  is  too  light  in  some  way,
too  airy,  and  not  to  be  depended  upon.  But  the  stout  ones
never  fill  minor  positions,  they  always  hold  responsible  ones ;
and  if  they  do  settle  down  anywhere,  they  do  so  forcibly  and
reliably,  so  that  the  place  itself  trembles  and  threatens  to  give
way  beneath  them.  They  are  not  fond  of  external  glitter;
their  coats  are  not  so  skilfully  cut  as  the  thin  men's  coats  ;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  they  have  plenty  of  cash  in  their  coffers.

Tchitchikoflf  thought  of  all  this  as  he  surveyed  the  company,
and  the  result  was  that  he  finally  joined  the  stout  men,  among
whom  he  found  nearly  all  his  acquaintances.  The  procurator,
who  had  very  black,  thick  brows,  and  a  left  eye  which  was
rather  given  to  mnking,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Come  into  the
other  room,  my  boy,  and  I'll  tell  you  something!  "  He  was  a
serious  and  reticent  man,  however.  Then  there  was  the  post-
master, a  man  of  low  stature,  but  a  wit  and  a  philosopher ;  and
the  president  of  the  court,  a  very  sensible  and  amiable  man.
All  these  greeted  Tchitchikoff  as  an  old  friend,  whereupon  he
bowed,  somewhat  on  one  side,  but  not  without  courtesy.  He
next  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  very  polite  and  friendly  land-
owner, Maniloff,  and  of  a  rather  awkward  one,  Sobakevitch,
who  trod  on  his  foot  the  very  first  thing,  and  said,  "  I  beg  your
pardon !  "

They  all  immediately  asked  him  to  join  them  at  whist,
and  he  agreed  to  do  so  with  a  very  good  grace.  They  seated
themselves  at  a  small  table  and  did  not  rise  until  supper-time.
All  conversation  entirely  ceased,  as  is  proper  when  people  give
themselves  up  to  active  business.  Although  the  postmaster  was
very  talkative,  even  he,  as  soon  as  he  had  taken  his  cards  in
his  hand,  thought  fit  to  assume  a  thoughtful  expression  and
puckered  up  his  lips.  He  remained  thus  all  the  time  that  the
game  lasted.  Whenever  he  played  a  court-card,  however,  he
smote  the  table  heavily  with  his  hand,  saying,  if  it  were  the
queen,  "  Go  along,  old  popess  !  "  and  if  the  king,  "  Away  with
you,  you  Tamboff  moujik  !  "     And  the   president   constantly


THE   CAPITAL   OF   THE   GOVERNMENT.  19

exclaimed,  "  I've  got  him  by  the  moustache  !  "  or  "I've  got  her
by  the  moustache  !  "  Sometimes  as  the  cards  fell  on  the  table,
exclamations  resounded  such  as,  "Ah  !  to  be,  or  not  to  be  ;  "
"  There's  nothing  to  be  done;  "  "  So  there's  a  diamond  !  "  and
60  on.  At  the  end  of  the  game  the  players  disputed  loudly,
and  the  traveller  joined  in  the  discussions,  but  in  a  pleasant
manner.  He  never  shouted  "  Go  on!  "  but  politely  remarked,
"  Will  you  have  the  kindness  to  play  ?  I  have  had  the  honour
to  cover  your  ace,"  and  so  on.

Then,  in  order  to  propitiate  his  antagonists,  he  frequently
offered  them  his  silver  and  enamel  snuff-box,  at  the  bottom  of
which  they  perceived  two  violets  which  had  been  placed  there
to  scent  it.  His  attention  was  especially  directed  to  Maniloff
and  Sobakevitch,  the  landowners  already  referred  to.  He  im-
mediately made  inquiries  about  them,  calling  the  president  and
V  the  postmaster  on  one  side  for  the  purpose.  Some  of  the  ques-
'  tions  he  put  to  them  evinced  not  only  his  curiosity,  but  also  his
solicitude  ;  for  the  first  thing  of  all  that  he  asked  was,  how  many
serfs  each  of  them  had,  and  in  what  condition  their  estates  were;
and  after  that  he  informed  himself  as  to  their  names  and  sur-
names. In  a  short  time  he  had  succeeded  in  charming  them
completely.

Landowner  Maniloff,  a  middle-aged  man  who  had  eyes  as
sweet  as  sugar,  and  screwed  them  up  every  time  he  laughed,  was
in  ecstasies  with  the  traveller.  He  pressed  his  hand  for  a  long
time,  and  begged  him  in  the  most  earnest  manner  to  honour
him  with  a  trip  to  his  estate,  which,  according  to  his  assertions,
was  only  fifteen  versts  from  the  city  barriers.  To  this  Tchitchi-
koff  replied,  with  an  extremely  courteous  inclination  of  the
head,  and  a  hearty  squeeze  of  the  hand,  that  he  was  not  only
ready  to  accept  the  invitation  with  great  pleasure,  but  that  he
should  consider  it  a  sacred  duty  to  call  upon  Maniloff.

Sobakevitch,  too,  said  rather  laconically,  "  I  invite  you  to  my
house  also,"  at  the  same  time  giving  a  backward  scrape  with
his  left  foot,  which  was  shod  with  a  shoe  of  gigantic  size.

On  the  following  day  Tchitchikoff  went  to  dine  and  spend  the
evening  with  the  chief  of  police.  They  sat  down  to  play  at
whist  at  three  in  the  afternoon,  and  played  until  two  o'clock  in
the  morning.  Here  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  landowner
named  Nozdreff,  a  man  of  thirty,  a  wide-awake  young  fellow,
who  began  to  address  hini  as  thou  after  the  first  three  or  four
words.  Nozdreff  also  called  the  chief  of  police  and  the  pro-
curator zAow,  and  behaved  in  a  friendly  way ;  but  when  they
began  to  play  for  high  stakes,  the  chief  of  police  and  the  pro-


20  DEAD   SOULS-

curator  watched,  every  trick  he  took  with  great  attention,  and
followed  up  almost  every  card  he  laid  down.  Tchitchikoff
passed  the  next  evening  with  the  president  of  the  court,  who
received  his  guests  in  a  rather  greasy  dressing-gown  ;  then  he
spent  an  evening  with  the  vice-governor,  dined  with  the  farmer
of  the  brandy  revenues,  attended  a  small  but  expensive  dinner
at  the  procurator's,  and  a  lunch  which  was  given  by  the  mayor  of
the  town,  and  which  was  equivalent  to  a  dinner.  In  a  word,
Tchitchikoff  was  not  able  to  spend  a  single  hour  at  home,  and  he
only  entered  the  inn  to  sleep.

The  new-comer  understood  how  to  adapt  himself  to  every
circumstance,  and  showed  that  he  was  an  accomplished  man  of
the  world.  On  whatever  subject  the  converation  turned  he
could  always  keep  it  up  ;  if  it  was  a  question  of  breeding  horses,
he  spoke  about  breeding  horses  ;  if  his  companions  talked  of  fine
dogs,  he  made  some  very  practical  observations  on  that  subject;
if  they  discussed  the  investigations  undertaken  by  the  imperial
courts  of  justice,  he  showed  that  he  was  not  unacquainted  with
legal  affairs ;  if  a  dispute  arose  over  a  game  at  billiards,  he  was
not  found  wanting  in  the  necessary  knowledge  ;  if  philanthropy
was  the  subject  under  discussion,  he  entered  into  it  very  fully,
and  tears  even  came  into  his  eyes  ;  moreover,  he  was  well
posted  as  to  the  distillation  of  brandy  when  that  was  mentioned ;
and  when  they  talked  of  the  local  officials,  he  passed  judgment
on  them  as  though  he  himself  were  an  official.

It  was  worthy  of  note,  moreover,  that  our  friend  Tchitchikoff
knew  how  to  impart  his  views  with  a  fitting  gravity  of  mien,
and  bore  himself  admirably.  He  spoke  neither  loudly  nor
softly,  but  exactly  in  the  proper  key.  In  short,  turn  him  which
ever  way  you  would,  he  was  an  estimable  man.  All  the  officials
were  delighted  with  him.  The  governor  expressed  himself  to
the  effect  that  he  was  a  well-meaning  man  ;  the  procurator  said
that  he  was  a  practical  man  ;  the  commander  of  the  garrison  that
he  was  a  learned  man  ;  the  chief  of  police  that  he  was  a  respect-
able and  amiable  man  ;  the  chiet's  wife  that  he  was  a  most  agree-
able and  well-bred  man.  Even  Sobakevitch  himself,  who  rarely
expressed  a  favourable  opinion  of  anyone,  when  he  returned  at
H  tolerably  late  hour  from  town,  and,  having  undressed  him-
self, lay  down  in  bed  beside  his  gaunt  wife,  he  said  to  her,  "  My
love,  I  spent  the  evening  at  the  governor's,  and  dined  with  the.
chief  of  police,  and  I  have  made  the  acquaintance  of  Collegiate
Councillor  Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoff — a  very  agreeable  man
he  is  to."  Whereupon  his  spouse  replied  "  H'm !  "  and  gave  him
a  push  with  her  foot.


THE   MANILOFF   FAMILY.  21

Such  was  the  very  flattering  opinion  •which  was  formed  of
Tchitchikoff  in  the  town  ;  and  it  was  maintained  until  he
adopted  a  very  singular  course  of  conduct  which  threw  the
entire  locality  into  a  state  of  amazement.


CHAPTER  II.

THE    MANILOFF   FAMILY.


The  strange  gentleman  had  been  living  in  the  town  for  more
than  a  week,  going  about  to  evening  parties,  dinners,  and  hav-
ing a  very  good  time  of  it  as  people  say,  when  he  decided  to
pay  certain  visits  out  of  town ;  for  instance,  to  go  and  see  the
landowners  Manilofi"  and  Sobakevitch,  as  he  had  promised.
Selifan,  his  coachman,  was  ordered  to  harness  the  horses  to  the
well-known  britchka  early  in  the  morning,  while  Petrushka  was
ordered  to  stay  at  home,  and  look  after  the  room  and  the  trunk.
The  reader  already  knows  that  Petrushka  wore  a  rather  loose,
light-brown  surtout,  which  had  belonged  to  his  master,  and
that,  according  to  the  custom  with  people  of  his  class,  he  had  a
very  thick  nose  and  thick  lips.  In  character  he  was  reserved,  not
talkative,  and  he  was  even  possessed  of  a  noble  desire  for  cul-
ture— that  is  to  say,  he  delighted  in  reading  books.  The  cha-
racter of  these  books  was  a  secondary  matter ;  it  was  all  the
same  to  him  whether  the  work  recounted  the  adventures  of  a
love-enslaved  hero,  whether  it  was  an  A  B  C  book,  or  a  breviary ;
he  read  everything  with  equal  attention.  If  any  one  had  oflfered
him  a  volume  of  chemistry  he  would  not  have  refused  it.  It
was  not  so  much  what  he  read,  as  the  process  of  reading,  that
pleased  him.  He  enjoyed  the  surprise  of  finding  that  the  letters
continually  formed  some  word  or  other,  which  at  times  meant
the  deuce  only  knows  what.  His  reading  was  chiefly  accom-
plished in  a  recumbent  attitude  in  the  ante-room,  where  he  was
for  ever  lying,  upon  the  bedstead  and  mattress,  which  became
in  consequence  as  flat  and  as  thin  as  a  pancake.  In  addition  to
his  passion  for  reading  he  had  two  other  characteristic  traits —
he  slept  without  undressing,  just  as  he  was,  in  the  same  sur-
tout ;  and  he  always  carried  about  with  him  a  special  atmo-
sphere of  his  own,  a  peculiar  smell,  which  corresponded,  to
some  extent,  with  that  of  a  dwelling-room ;  so  that  it  sufficed
for  him  merely  to  install  himself  somewhere,  to  take  his  cloak


22  DEAD   SOULS.

and  belongings  there,  for  people  to  think  that  the  apartment
had  been  inhabited  for  fully  ten  years.

Tchitchikoflf,  who  was  very  dainty,  and  even  in  some  respects
capricious,  frowned  when  this  atmosphere  saluted  his  sensitive
nose  in  the  morning,  and  shook  his  head,  remarking,  "  The  deuce
take  it,  my  good  fellow,  you  are  sweating.  You  ought  to  have
a  bath."  To  this  Petrushka  made  no  reply,  but  immediately
busied  himself  about  something,  brushed  his  master's  coat,  or
simply  carried  some  article  away.  What  did  he  think  while  he
thus  remained  silent  ?  Perhaps  he  said  to  himself,  "  You're
nice  !  Aren't  you  tired  of  repeating  the  same  thing  forty  times
in  succession  ?"  God  alone  knows  the  truth  ;  it  is  difficult  to
find  out  what  a  house-serf  does  think  when  his  master  is  reading
him  a  lesson.  So  this  is  what  may  be  said  of  Petrushka  in  the  .
first  place.

Tchitchikoff,  having  given  the  necessary  orders  for  departure
one  evening,  awoke  very  early  the  next  morning,  washed,
wiped  himself  from  head  to  foot  with  a  damp  sponge — which  he
only  did  on  Sundays,  and,  indeed  that  day  chanced  to  be  a  Sun-
day— shaved  himself  in  such  a  way  that  his  cheeks  seemed  to
be  real  satin  in  point  of  smoothness  and  polish,  donned  first  his
cranberry-coloured  swallow-tailed  coat,  and  then  his  cloak  lined
with  long-haired  bearskin,  and  went  down-stairs,  supported
under  the  arm  by  the  inn-servant.  He  seated  himself  in  his
britchka,  which  rolled  through  the  gates  of  the  tavern  into  the
street  with  a  great  noise.  A  pope  (priest),  who  was  passing,
j  removed  his  hat ;  some  small  boys  in  dirty  blouses  extended
I  their  hands,  saying,  "  Give  alms  to  the  orphans,  master !  "  and
( the  coachman,  perceiving  that  one  of  them  was  hanging  on
behind  the  carriage,  cracked  his  whip  at  him  ;  whereupon  the
britchka  went  jolting  over  the  stones.  It  was  with  delight  that
Tchichikofl*  beheld  in  the  distance  the  striped  turnpike-bar,
which  announced  that  there  would  soon  be  an  end  to  the  pave-
ment as  to  all  other  torture  ;  and  indeed  after  striking  his  head
a  few  times  with  considerable  force  against  the  carriage  frame
he  was  at  length  borne  out  upon  the  soft  soil.  No  sooner  was
the  town  left  behind  than  upon  both  sides  of  the  road  appeared
hillocks,  fir-woods,  plantations  of  young  pines,  the  charred
trunks  of  old  ones,  some  wild  heather,  and  so  on.  Our  traveller
passed  villages  stretched  out  in  a  line,  in  architecture  resembling
piles  of  firewood,  the  houses  being  covered  with  grey  roofs,
Avith  carved  wooden  ornaments  beneath  them.  Some  moujiks
in  their  sheepskin  jackets,  and  yawning  as  usual,  were  seated  on
benches  outside  the  gates.     Women  with  fat  faces  and  closely


THE    MANTLOFF    FAMILY.  23

bound  bosoms  gazed  from  the  upper  -windows  ;  from  the  lower
ones  a  calf  peeped,  or  else  a  pig  thrust  out  his  snout.  In
short,  the  views  were  the  customary  ones.  Having  covered
fifteen  versts,  Tchitchikoff  recollected  that,  according  to  Mani-
loff's  account,  his  estate  must  be  situated  somewhere  about
there;  however,  the  sixteenth-verst  stone  flew  past,  and  still
no  village  was  visible.  In  fact,  had  it  not  been  for  two  moujiks
Avho  chanced  to  come  along,  our  hero  would  hardly  have  suc-
ceeded in  reaching  his  destination.  At  the  query,  "Is  it  far  to
Zamanilovka  village  ?  "  the  moujiks  removed  their  caps,  and
one  of  them,  who  was  the  more  sensible  of  the  two,  and  who
wore  along  beard,  replied,  "Manilovka,  possibly,  but  not  Za-
manilovka."

"  Well,  then,  Manilovka."

"Manilovka!  You  must  go  on  a  verst  farther,  and  then
turn  to  the  right."

"  To  the  right  ?  "  repeated  the  coachman.

"  To  the  right,"  said  the  moujik.  "  That  is  the  road  to
Manilovka,  but  there  is  no  Zamanilovka.  It  is  called  so,-; — that
is,  its  name  is  Manilovka ;  and  there's  no  Zamanilovka  at  all.
There,  right  on  the  hill,  you  will  see  a  two-floor  house  built  of
stone  ;  that's  the  owner's  house  ;  that  is,  the  gentleman  himself
lives  there.  That's  Manilovka  for  you  ;  but  there's  no  Zamani-
lovka whatever- here,  and  never  has  been."

They  drove  on  in  search  of  Manilovka.  After  going  two  versts
farther,  they  came  to  a  turning  into  a  cross-country  road  ;  but
they  covered  two,  three,  and  even  four  versts  apparently,
and  still  no  two-floor  stone  house  was  visible.  Then  Tchitchi-
koff" recollected,  that  if  a  friend  invites  you  to  visit  him  at  a  vil-
lage fifteen  versts  off,  it  means  that  it  is  certainly  situated  about
thirty  versts  away.  This  proved  to  be  the  case  as  regards
Manilovka.  The  seigneurial  house  stood  alone  on  a  height,
exposed  to  every  wind  which  blew :  the  slope  of  the  hill  upon
which  it  was  perched  was  covered  with  short  turf.  Upon  it,  in
the  English  fashion,  were  scattered  two  or  three  clumps  of
shrubbery — lilac-bushes,  and  acacias,  with  five  or  six  birch-trees
rearing  their  fine-leaved,  slender  crests.  Beneath  two  of  them
a  summer  house  was  visible,  with  a  green  cupola,  blue  wooden
columns,  and  the  inscription, "  The  Temple  of  Solitary  Meditation."
Lower  down  there  was  a  pond,  covered  with  green  scum,  which
is  no  novelty  in  the  English  gardens  belonging  to  the  Russian
landed  gentry.  At  the  foot  of  the  hill  and  also  partly  on  the
declivity  itself,  some  wooden  cottages  stood  out,  and  our  hero
for  some  unknown  reason  began  to  count  them  on  the  spot,  and


24  DEAD   SOULS.

reckoned  up  over  two  hundred.  Nowhere  among  them  was
there  a  tree  or  any  particle  of  green  stuff :  nothing  whatever
but  smooth  boards.

The  view  was  enlivened  by  two  women,  who  with  their
dresses  picturesquely  tucked  up,  were  wading  up  to  their  knees
in  the  pond,  dragging  a  torn  net,  in  which  one  could  espy  two
entangled  crabs  and  a  glistening  flatfish.  These  women  seemed
to  be  quarrelling,  and  upbraiding  each  other  about  something.
Far  off  on  one  side  a  pine-forest  stretched  monotonously  blue.
The  sky  was  neither  clear  nor  cloudy,  but  of  a  light-gray  tint ;
and  to  complete  the  picture,  there  was  a  cock,  that  prophet  of
a  change  of  weather,  who,  although  he  had  been  sorely  treated
by  other  cocks,  on  account  of  certain  matters  connected  with
courtship,  crowed  very  loudly,  and  even  flapped  his  wings,
which  were  as  frowsy  as  old  rugs.

As  Tchitchikoff  drove  into  the  courtyard,  he  perceived  Mani-
loff  himself  standing  under  the  verandah,  in  a  green  shalloon
coat,  and  with  his  hand  pressed  to  his  brow,  so  as  to  form  a
screen  for  his  eyes,  with  which  he  was  surveying  the  approaching
equipage.  As  the  britchka  came  near  to  the  verandah,  his  eyes
grew  merrier,  and  his  smile  became  broader  and  broader.

"  Pavel  Ivanovitch!  "  he  exclaimed  at  length,  as  Tchitchikoff
descended  from  the  britchka.  "  So  you  have  remembered  us
at  last !  "

The  two  friends  kissed  each  other  heartily,  and  Maniloff  led
his  guest  indoors.  This  landowner  was  a  well-favoured  man
in  personal  appearance  :  his  features  were  agreeable,  but  they  in-
dicated that  he  was  rather  too  much  permeated  with  sugar.  There
was  something  about  his  manners  and  ways  indicating  that  he
sought  favour  and  acquaintanceship.  He  smiled  seductively,
was  of  a  fair  complexion,  and  had  blue  eyes.  You  could  not
help  saying,  the  first  moment  you  spoke  with  him,  "  What  a
nice  agreeable  man?"  The  next  moment  you  would  say
nothing;  but  at  the  third  you  would  remark,  "The  deuce
knows  what  this  fellow  is  like  !  "  and  you  would  go  off  as  far
away  from  him  as  possible  ;  in  fact  if  you  did  not  retreat,  you
would  feel  bored  to  death.  You  expected  no  quick  or  arrogant
word  from  him,  such  as  you  may  hear  from  almost  any  person  if
you  touch  upon  a  subject  he  dislikes.  Maniloff  never  displayed
a  bad  temper ;  nor  had  he  any  hobbies  or  peculiarities.  At
home  he  said  very  little,  and  was  mostly  occupied  in  thought
and  meditation  :  but  the  subject  of  his  thoughts  was  probably
known  to  God  alone.  It  is  impossible  to  say  that  he  busied
himself  with  the  management  of  his  estate,  for  he  never  even


'     THE   MANILOFF   FAMILY.  26

went  into  the  fields,  and  affairs  seemed  to  manage  themselves.
When  the  steward  said,  "  It  would  be  as  well,  sir,  to  do  so  and
80," — "  Yes :  it  would  not  be  bad,"  was  his  customary  reply,
as  he  puffed  away  at  his  pipe,  which  had  become  a  habit  with
him  when  he  served  in  the  army,  where  he  had  been  considered
the  most  discreet,  most  delicate,  and  the  most  accomplished,  of
officers.     "  Yes,  it  really  would  not  be  bad,"  he  repeated.

When  a  moujik  came  to  him,  and  said,  as  he  scratched  the
back  of  his  head,  "  Master,  pray  let  me  leave  my  work,  allow
me  to  earn  something," — "  Go,"  he  replied  as  he  smoked  his
pipe  ;  and  it  never  even  entered  his  head  that  the  moujik  had
gone  off  on  a  drunken  carouse.  Sometimes,  as  he  gazed  from
the  verandah  at  the  yard  and  the  pond,  he  said  that  it  would  be
as  well  if  an  underground  passage  could  be  made  from  the
house,  or  if  a  stone  bridge  were  built  across  the  pond  with
booths  on  each  side,  where  dealers  might  sit  and  sell  the  various
small  wares  required  by  the  peasants.  At  such  times,  his  eyes
became  particularly  sweet,  and  his  face  assumed  a  most  satisfied
expression.

However,  all  these  projects  were  confined  to  words  alone.
Some  book  or  other  was  always  lying  in  his  study,  with  a  mark
at  the  fourteenth  page  ;  a  book  which  he  had  been  reading  con-
stantly for  the  last  two  years.  There  was  forever  something
lacking  in  the  house  :  in  the  drawing-room,  there  was  some
very  handsome  furniture,  covered  with  an  elegant  silken
material,  which  certainly  must  have  cost  a  high  price  ;  but  on
two  of  the  arm-chairs  it  was  missing,  and  they  were  simply
covered  with  rugs.  For  several  years,  Maniloff  had  said  to  his
visitors,  "  Don't  sit  down  on  those  chairs,  they  are  not  ready
yet."  In  one  room  of  the  house,  too,  there  was  no  furniture
at  all ;  though  directly  after  his  marriage  he  had  remarked,
"My  love,  we  must  see  about  putting  some  furniture  into  that
room  to-morrow,  if  only  for  a  time."  In  the  evening  a  very  hand-
some candlestick  of  dark  bronze,  representing  the  three  Graces,
and  with  an  elegant  mother-of-pearl  shade,  was  placed  upon  the
table,  and  beside  it  was  set  a  plain  brass  candlestick,  which  was
lame,  twisted  on  one  side,  and  all  covered  with  tallow,  although
neither  master,  mistress,  nor  servants  perceived  it.

Maniloff  and  his  wife  were  perfectly  satisfied  with  each  other.
In  spite  of  the  fact  that  they  had  been  married  for  more  than
eight  years,  each  was  constantly  ofiering  the  other  a  bit  of  apple,
or  a  sugar-plum,  or  a  nut,  and  saying  in  a  touchingly  tender
voice,  expressive  of  the  most  perfect  affection,  "  Open  your
little  mouth,  my  soul,  and  I  will  put  this  tidbit  in."     Of  course


26  DEAD   SOULS.

the  little  mouth  opened  very  gracefully  on  such  occasions.
Surprises  were  prepared  for  4)irth days,  such  as  a  mother-of-
pearl  case  for  a  toothbrush.  And  very  frequently,  as  the  ]
husband  and  the  wife  sat  on  the  sofa,  the  former  would  suddenly  ;
abandon  his  pipe,  for  some  utterly  inscrutable  cause,  and  the
other  her  work,  if  she  chanced  to  have  any  in  her  hand  at  the
time,  and  they  would  imprint  upon  each  other's  Hps  such  a
long  and  languishing  kiss,  that  a  cigarette  might  have  been
smoked  during  the  time  it  lasted.  In  a  word,  they  were  what
is  called  happy.  But  it  may  be  observed  that  there  are  many
other  occupations  in  a  house  besides  indulging  in  prolonged
kisses  and  surprises ;  and  many  different  questions  might  have
been  put  to  the  Maniloff  couple.  Why,  for  instance,  did
matters  go  on  so  stupidly  and  senselessly  in  the  kitchen  ?  Why
was  the  storeroom  so  empty?  Why  have  a  thief  for  house-
keeper ?  Why  were  the  servants  dirty  and  intoxicated  ?  Why
did  they  all  sleep  so  unmercifully,  or  spend  their  time  in  playing
pranks  ?  But  all  these  are  trivial  subjects,  for  Madame  Manilova
had  been  to  a  boarding  school ;  and  a  good  education  is  received
in  boarding-schools,  as  is  well  known.  Three  principal  subjects
there  constitute  the  foundation  of  human  virtue, — the  French
language,  which  is  indispensable  to  family  happiness  ;  the  piano-
forte, necessary  to  afford  pleasant  moments  to  a  husband  ;  and
lastly,  come  matters  of  domestic  management, — such  as  knitting
purses,  and  other  sui-prises.

But  let  us  return  to  our  heroes,  who  have  been  standing  for
several  minutes  before  the  drawing-room  door,  entreating  each
other  to  enter  first.

"  Pray  do  not  put  yourself  out  so  much  for  me  ;  I  will  follow
you,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  No,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  no  ;  you  are  a  guest,"  said  Maniloff,
pointing  to  the  door.

"Pray  do  not  object;  I  beg  that  you  will  enter,"  rejoined
Tchitchikoff.

"No,  excuse  me.  I  will  not  permit  such  a  pleasant  and
accomphshed  guest  to  walk  behind  me."

"  Why  accomplished  ?     Please  go  in."

"  Well,  then,  please  pass  in  yourself."

"But  why?"

"  Well,  because,"  said  Maniloff,  with  a  pleasant  smile.

Finally  the  two  friends  passed  through  the  doorway  side  by
side,  crowding  each  other  a  little  in  the  process.

"  Allow  me  to  present  my  wife  to  you,"  said  Maniloff.  "  My
love,  Pavel  Ivanovitch."


THE   MANILOFF    FAMILY.  27

Then  Tcliitchikoff  saw  a  lady,  whom  he  had  not  yet  even
noticed,  saluting  him  and  Maniloff.  She  was  pretty,  and  be-
comingly dressed.  Her  loose  gown  of  pale  silk  suited  her  well.
With  one  of  her  small,  delicate  hands  she  hastily  flung  something
on  the  table,  and  then,  clasping  a  cambric  handkerchief  with
embroidered  corners,  she  rose  from  the  divan  on  which  she  was
seated.  Tchitchikoft' approached  to  kiss  her  hand.  Mrs.  Mani-
lova,  with  rather  a  strong  roll  on  her  r's,  declared  that  he  had
greatly  delighted  them  by  his  arrival,  and  that  her  husband
never  let  a  day  pass  by  without  mentioning  him.
■  "  Yes,"  added  Maniloff,  "  she  has  got  into  the  habit  of  asking
me,  '  Why  does  not  your  friend  come  ?  '  '  Wait,  my  love,'  I
say,  '  he  will  come.'  And  now  he  has  at  length  favoured  us
with  a  visit.  Truly,  he  has  afforded  us  the  same  pleasure  as
one  feels  in  May,  on  the  anniversary  of  the  heart."

Tchitchikoff"  became  a  little  embarrassed  when  he  heard  that
affairs  had  already  got  as  far  as  the  anniversary  of  the  heart,
and  he  modestly  replied  that  he  possessed  neither  a  great  name
nor  any  distinguished  rank.

"  You  have  everything,"  broke  in  Maniloff  with  the  same
pleasant  smile  ;  "  you  have  all  that,  and  even  more."

"How  did  our  town  strike  you?"    added   Mrs.  Manilova.
"  Did  you  pass  the  time  pleasantly  there  ?  "
'    "  It  is  a  very  fine  town,   a  very  beautiful  town,"   replied
Tchitchikoff",  "  and  I  spent  the  time  most  agreeably;  the  society
there  is  very  friendly."

"  And  how  did  you  like  onr  governor  ?  "  asked  Mrs.  Manilova.

"He  is  a  very  dignified  and  amiable  person,  is  he  not?"
added  Maniloff.

"  Quite  true,"  said  Tchitchikoff';  "  a  most  worthy  man.
And  how  he  enters  into  his  duties  I  how  well  he  understands
them  !     It  would  be  well  if  there  were  a  few  more  such  men."

"  Yes,  how  well  he  understands  the  way  to  receive  people,
and  behave  discreetly  and  courteously !  "  chimed  in  Maniloff,
with  a  smile,  and  almost  closing  his  eyes  with  pleasure,  like  a
cat  whom  one  is  tickling  gently  behind  the  ears  with  one's
finger.

"  He  is  a  very  sociable  and  agreeable  man,"  continued  Tchit-
chikoff; "  and  what  an  artist !  I  should  never  even  have  imagined
such  a  thing !  How  well  he  embroiders  !  He  gave  me  a  purse
of  his  workmanship  ;  even  a  lady  who  can  embroider  so  taste-
fully is  seldom  seen."

"  And  the  vice-governor — what  a  nice  man  he  is,  is  he  not?"
said  Maniloff,  again  drawing  his  eyelids  down  a  little.


23  DEAD   SOULS.

"  A  very,  very  worthy  man,"  replied  Tcbitchikoff.

"  Well,  and  pray  how  did  the  chief  of  police  impress  you  ?
He  is  a  very  agreeable  man,  is  he  not  ?"

"  Extremely  agreeable  ;  and  what  a  sensible,  well-read  man  !
We  played  whist  with  him,  and  the  procurator,  and  the  presi-
dent of  the  court,  until  the  cocks  crowed.  A  very,  very  worthy
man."

"Well,  and  what  is  your  opinion  of  the  chief- of-police's
wife?"  added  Mrs.  Manilova.  "She  is  a  very  charming
woman,  is  she  not?"

"  Oh,  she  is  one  of  the  most  estimable  women  I  know,'-
replied  Tchitchikoflf.

After  this  they  dealt  with  the  president  of  the  court  and  the
postmaster;  and  in  this  way  they  spoke  of  nearly  all  the
officials  in  the  town,  who  all  seemed  to  be  most  estimable
persons.

"  Do  you  always  live  in  the  country  ?"  asked  Tcbitchikoff,  at
length  putting  a  question  in  his  turn.

"Principally  in  the  country,"  answered  Maniloff.  "  Some-
times, however,  we  go  to  town  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  cul-
tivated people.  One  gets  rusty,  you  know,  if  one  lives  all  the
time  shut  up."

"  True,  true,"  said  Tcbitchikoff.

"Of  course,"  continued  Maniloff,  "it  would  be  a  different
thing  if  the  neighbourhood  were  good — if,  for  instance,  there
were  a  man  with  whom  one  could  in  any  way  discuss  amiability,
good  breeding,  or  follow  up  any  science  which  would  stir  the

soul,  and  impart  a  lofty  flight,  so  to  speak,  to "     Here  he

wished  to  express  something  or  other,  and,  perceiving  that  he
had  already  conveyed  some  idea  of  his  meaning,  he  simply
waved  his  hand  in  the  air,  and  went  on.  "  Then,  of  course,
the  country  and  solitude  would  possess  many  charms.  But
there  is  absolutely  no  one  hereabouts.  Why,  one  merely  reads
the  '  Son  of  the  Fatherland'  now  and  then."

Tcbitchikoff  perfectly  agreed  with  his  entertainer,  adding  that,
in  his  mind,  nothing  could  be  more  delightful  than  to  live  in
solitude,  and  enjoy  the  spectacle  of  nature,  and  sometimes  read
some  book  or  other.

"  But  then,  you  know,"  said  Maniloff,  "  if  you  have  no  friend
with  whom  you  can  share "

"  Oh,  that  is  true,  quite  true,"  interrupted  Tcbitchikoff,
"  What  are  all  the  treasures  in  the  world  under  such  circum-
stances ?  *  Possess  not  money,  possess  good  people  for  asso-
ciates,' said  a  certain  wise  man."


THE   MANTLOFF   FAMILY.  29

"  And  do  you  know,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  said  Maniloff,  with  a
look  of  mingled  sweetness  and  hypocrisy,  "with  a  true  friend
one  experiences  something  in  the  nature  of  spiritual  enjoyment  ?
For  instance,  when  chance  afforded  me  the  happiness,  the  signal
happiness,  I  may  say,  of  talking  to  you,  and  of  enjoying  your
charming  conversation "

"  Oh,  really,  now,  what  charming  conversation  do  you
mean  1  I  am  an  insignificant  man,  and  nothing  more,"  replied
Tchitchikoflf.

"  0  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  allow  me  to  be  frank.  I  would  gladly
give  the  half  of  all  my  possessions  to  acquire  even  a  portion  of
your  merits."

"  On  the  contrary,  I,  for  my  part,  should  regard  it  as  the
greatest — "

No  one  knows  what  this  mutual  outpouring  of  sentiment
would  have  led  to,  if  a  servant  had  not  announced  at  that
moment  that  dinner  was  ready.

"  I  beg  of  you  humbly,"  said  Maniloff,  "  to  remain  and  dine
with  us.  You  will  excuse  us  if  our  dinner  is  not  like  what
people  serve  in  capital  cities  ;  we  simply  have  cabbage  soup,
after  the  Russian  fashion,  but  we  ofi"er  it  with  a  pure  heart.  I
most  respectfully  beg  of  you  to  join  us."

Then  they  disputed  for  a  while  as  to  who  should  go  first ;  and
finally  Tchitchikofi"  entered  the  dining-room  side  by  side  with
them.

In  the  dining-room  stood  two  boys,  Manilofi"s  sons,  who  were
of  that  age  when  children  are  seated  at  table  in  high  chairs.
Beside  them  stood  their  tutor,  who  bowed  and  smiled  politely.
Tho  hostess  seated  herself  behind  the  soup  tureen ;  the  guest
was  placed  between  the  host  and  hostess,  and  a  servant  fastened
napkins  round  the  children's  necks.

"What  charming  children!"  said  Tchitchikofi",  gazing  at
them.    "  How  old  are  they  ?  "

"  The  elder  is  eight ;  the  other  was  six  only  yesterday,"  said
Mrs.  Manilova.

"  Themistoclus,"  said  Maniloff",  turning  to  the  elder  boy,  who
was  trying  to  free  his  chin  from  the  napkin  which  the  lackey  had
tied  about  it.  Tchitchikofi"  elevated  his  eyebrows  on  hearing
this  Grecian  name,  to  which  Maniloff",  for  some  unknown  reason,
had  given  the  termination  us ;  but  he  immediately  tried  to
restore  his  countenance  to  its  wonted  expression.

"  Tell  me,  Themistoclus,  which  is  the  finest  city  in
France?"

Here  the  tutor  directed  his  whole  attention   upon  Themis-


30  DEAD    SOULS.

toclus,  and  seemed  to  want  to  fly  at  him  ;  but  he  became  quite
composed  again,  and  nodded  his  head  approvingly,  when
Themistoclus  said  "  Paris."

"  And  what  is  our  finest  city,"  asked  Maniloff.

Again  the  tutor  turned  his  attention  upon  the  boy.

"  Petersburg,"  replied  Themistoclus.  )

"  And  still  another  ?  "

"  Moscow,"  replied  Themistoclus.

"You  clever  darling,"  said  Tchitchikoff.  "But  do  you
know,"  he  continued,  instantly  turning  to  Maniloff  with  a  look
of  some  surprise.  "But  do  you  know  this  child  possesses  great
capacity."

"Oh,  you  don't  know  him  yet!"  replied  Maniloff;  "he  is
very  clever  indeed.  Here's  the  younger  one,  Alcides,  he  is  not
so  quick ;  but  the  elder  one,  if  he  comes  across  a  beetle,  his
little  eyes  begin  to  dance  all  at  once,  and  he  runs  after  it  and
directs  his  attention  to  it  immediately.  I  shall  put  him  into  the
diplomatic  service.  Themistoclus,"  he  again  began,  turning  to
the  youngster,  "  do  you  want  to  be  an  ambassador  ?  "

"  Yes,"  replied  Themistoclus,  chewing  away  at  his  bread,  and
wagging  his  head  from  right  to  left.

Just  at  that  moment  the  footman,  who  stood  behind  the
embryo  ambassador,  wiped  his  nose,  and  it  was  as  well  that  he
did  so,  for  otherwise  something  unpleasant  would  have  fallen
into  the  soup.

During  dinner  the  conversation  turned  upon  the  pleasures  of  a
quiet  life,  interspersed  with  remarks  from  the  hostess  about  the
theatres  and  the  actors  in  the  town.  The  tutor  looked  very
attentively  at  the  speakers,  and  as  soon  as  he  perceived  that
they  were  about  to  smile,  he  invariably  opened  his  mouth  and
laughed  heartily.  He  was  probably  a  grateful  person,  and
wished  in  this  manner  to  repay  the  host  for  his  good  treatment.
Once,  however,  his  countenance  assumed  a  gloomy  expression,
and  he  struck  the  table  sternly,  fixing  his  eyes  upon  the  children,
who  sat  opposite  him.  This  happened  when  Themistoclus  bit
Alcides's  ear,  and  when  Alcides,  with  his  eyes  puckered  up,  and
mouth  wide  open,  seemed  about  to  sob  in  the  most  pitiful
manner.  However,  realising  that  he  might  be  deprived  of  some
dish  by  way  of  punishment,  he  brought  his  mouth  back  to  its
former  position,  and  with  tears  in  his  eyes  began  to  gnaw  a
mutton  bone,  which  caused  both  his  cheeks  to  shine  with  grease.

The  hostess  turned  to  Tchitchikoff  very  frequently,  saying,
"  You  are  not  eating  anything ;  you  have  taken  very  little."

To  which  Tchitchikoff  each   time  replied,   "I  am   greatly


THE   MANILOFF   FAMILY.  31

obliged ;  I  am  full.     Agreeable  conversation  is  better  than  any
dish  whatever."

Finally,  they  all  rose  from  the  table.  Maniloff  was  extremely
well-pleased ;  and  supporting  his  friend's  back  with  his  hand,
be  was  on  the  point  of  conducting  him  to  the  drawing-room,
when  suddenly  Tchitchikoff  announced,  with  a  very  important
look,  that  he  desired  to  speak  with  him  on  a  momentous  subject.

"  In  that  case,  permit  me  to  invite  you  into  my  study,"  said
Maniloff ;  and  he  led  him  into  a  small  room  where  the  windows
looked  out  upon  the  blue  forest.  "  This  is  my  little  nook,"  he
added.

"  A  pleasant  httle  room,"  remarked  Tchitchikoff,  casting  his
eyes  about  it.  The  room  was  really  not  unpleasant ;  the  walls
were  painted  a  greyish-blue  colour.  There  were  four  chairs,
one  arm-chair,  a  table  upon  which  lay  the  little  book  with  the
marker  of  which  of  which  we  have  already  had  occasion  to
speak,  and  some  papers  covered  with  writing.  However,  there
was  more  tobacco  than  anything  else.  It  was  in  various  forms
— in  paper  packages,  in  boxes,  and  even  piled  in  a  heap  on  the
table.  On  the  sills  of  both  windows,  various  piles  of  ashes,
shaken  out  of  pipes,  w^ere  arranged  with  some  attempt  at  an
ornamental  disposition.  It  was  evident  that  this  occasionally
afforded  Maniloff  a  means  of  whihng  his  time  away.

"  Permit  me  to  request  you  to  place  yourself  in  this  arm-
chair," said  he.     "  You  will  be  more  comfortable  here."

"  No  ;  allow  me  to  sit  upon  an  ordinary  chair."

"That  cannot  be  allowed,  if  you  please,"  resumed  Maniloff
with  a  smUe.  "  My  armchau-  is  expressly  assigned  to  guests;
whether  j'ou  like  it  or  not,  you  must  sit  in  it."

Tchitchikoff'  sat  down.

"  Permit  me  to  offer  you  a  pipe,"  said  his  host.

"  No ;  I  do  not  smoke,"  replied  Tchitchikoff'  pohtely,  and
with  a  certain  air  of  regret.

"Why?"  asked  Maniloff  also  politely,  and  with  an  air  of
regret.

"I  have  never  acquired  the  habit  of  smoking;  a  pipe  is  said
to  dry  one  up."

"  Pennit  me  to  remark  that  that  is  prejudice.     I  even  hold

that  smoking  a  pipe  is  much  more  healthy  than  taking  snuff'.

i  There  was  a  lieutenant  in  our  regiment,  a  very  handsome  and

!  cultivated  man,  who  never  took  his  pipe  out  of  his  mouth,  not

I  even  when  he  was  at  table  or  anywhere  else,  if  I  may  say  so.

And  now  he  is  over  forty ;  and,  thank  God,  up  to  the  present

time  he  is  so  well  that  he  could  not  possibly  be  better."


32  DEAD   SOULS.  ^

Tchitchikoff  remarked  that  that  really  did  happen  at  times,
and  that  there  were  many  things  in  nature  which  could  not  be
explained  by  even  the  most  far-seeing  minds.

"  But  permit  me  now  to  ask  one  question,"  he  began  in  a
tone  in  which  there  was  a  strange,  or  almost  a  strange,  expres-
sion, and  then  he  glanced  behind  him,  it  is  impossible  to  say
why.  Maniloff  also  glanced  behind  him  for  some  inexplicable
reason.  "  How  long  is  it,"  resumed  Tchitchikoff,  "  since  you
condescended  to  hand  in  your  census  list  ?  "

"  Why,  a  long  while,  or  rather,  I  don't  recollect."

"  So  that  many  of  your  serfs  have  died  since  ?  "

"I  cannot  say.  I  suppose  it  will  be  necessary  to  ask  the
overseer  about  that.  Hey,  there,  you  fellow !  Call  the  over-
seer ;  he  should  be  here  to-day."

The  overseer  made  his  appearance.  He  was  a  man  of  about
forty,  who  shaved  his  beard,  wore  a  surtout,  and  apparently
led  a  very  tranquil  life,  for  there  was  a  certain  look  of  puffy
fulness  in  his  face  and  a  yellowish  hue  about  his  skin  ;  more-
over, his  small,  sleepy  eyes  showed  that  he  knew  very  well
indeed  what  down-pillows  and  feather-beds  were.

"Listen,  my  good  fellow,"  said  Maniloff.  "How  many  of
our  serfs  have  died  since  the  census  was  taken  ?  "

"Yes,  well — how  many?  Why,  many  have  died  since
then,"  said  the  overseer ;  and  thereupon  he  gave  a  yawn,  cover-
ing his  mouth  slightly  with  his  hand  as  with  a  shield.

"Yes;  I  will  confess  that  I  thought  so  myself,"  interposed
Maniloff;  "  that's  it,  a  good  many  have  died."  Here  he  turned
to  Tchitchikoff  and  added,  "  Exactly  so,  a  great  many."

"  And  what  might  the  number  be,  for  instance  ?  "  asked
Tchitchikoff.

"  Yes,  what  number  ?  "  interposed  Maniloff.

"  Well,  I  might  say,  what  is  the  number  ?  "  rejoined  the
overseer.  "Why,  really  I  don't  know  how  many  have  died;
nobody  has  counted  them."

"  Yes,  exactly,"  said  Maniloff,  turning  to  Tchitchikoff.  "  I
also  supposed  that  the  mortality  had  been  large  ;  but  I  don't
know  in  the  least  how  many  have  died."

"Please  to  count  them,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  "and  make  a
minute  register  of  them  by  name."

"Yes,  all  byname,"  said  Maniloff,  whereupon  the  overseer
rejoined,  "Yes,  sir,"  and  departed.

"  And  why  do  you  want  this  done  ?  "  inquired  Maniloff  when
the  overseer  was  gone.

This   question  seemed   to  embarrass  his   guest ;    a  certain


THE   MANILOFF    FAMILY.  33

strained  look  appeared  on  his  face  and  even  caused  it  to  redden
as  he  made  an  effort  to  express  himself.  Then  Maniloff  heard
such  strange  and  remarkable  things  as  human  ear  had  never
before  listened  to.

"  You  ask  the  reason  ?  Well,  this  is  the  reason ;  I  should
like  to  purchase  some  serfs,"  began  Tchitchikoff,  but  then  he
stammered  and  did  not  finish  his  sentence.

"  But  allow  me  to  ask  you,"  said  Maniloff,  "  how  you  desire
to  purchase  these  serfs — with  the  land,  or  simply  for  removal
elsewhere;  that  is  to  say,  without  land  ?  "

"Well,  I  don't  exactly  mean  serfs,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  "I
want  dead  ones."

"What?  Excuse  me,  I  am  a  little  hard  of  hearing ;  I
thought  I  heard  a  very  singular  word."

"  My  desire  is  to  obtain  dead  serfs,  who  are,  however,  indi-
cated as  alive  in  the  census  list,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

Maniloff  instantly  dropped  his  tchibouk  on  the  floor,  and,
opening  his  mouth,  remained  gaping  for  several  minutes.  These
two  friends  who  had  discoursed  so  sweetly  on  the  charms  of  a
life  of  friendship,  remained  motionless,  with  their  eyes  fixed  on
each  other  like  those  portraits  which  were  hung  in  olden  times
opposite  one  another.  At  length  Maniloff"  picked  up  his  tchi-
bouk and  gazed  into  Tchitchikoff 's  face,  endeavouring  to  see
whether  there  was  any  sign  of  a  smile  upon  his  lips,  in  fact,
whether  he  was  jesting ;  but  nothing  of  the  sort  was  perceptible  ;
on  the  contrary,  his  face  seemed  even  graver  than  usual.  Then
Maniloft'  wondered  whether  his  guest  had  not  unconsciously
lost  his  mind,  and  he  gazed  intently  at  him  in  terror:  but  our
hero's  eyes  were  perfectly  clear ;  there  was  no  wild,  restless
fire  in  them,  such  as  leaps  from  the  eyes  of  a  madman  ;  all  was
quiet  in  his  demeanour  and  as  it  should  be.  Think  as  he  would
as  to  what  he  ought  to  do  or  say,  Maniloff'  could  not  devise
any  other  course  than  to  emit  the  smoke  which  had  remained
in  his  mouth.

"  Yes,  I  should  like  to  know,"  resumed  Tchitchikoff,
"  whether  you  can  let  me  have  any  such  persons,  not  alive  in
reality,  but  alive  so  far  as  legal  forms  are  concerned.  Make
them  over  to  me,  or  manage  it  in  any  way  you  think  best."

However,  Maniloff  became  so  confused  and  troubled  that  al
he  could  do  was  to  stare  at  him.

"It  seems  to  me  that  you  see  some  difficulties  ?  "  observed
Tchitchikoff'.

"  I  ?  no,  not  that,"  said  Maniloff,  "  but  I  cannot  conceive —
excuse  me — in  fact,  I  was  not  able  to  obtain  so  brilliant  an

C


34  DEAD   SOULS.

education  as  is  visible,  so  to  speak,  in  your  every  movement.  I
do  not  possess  the  lofty  art  of  expressing  myself,  and  possibly,
iu  the  statement  w^hich  you  have  just  made,  something  else
is  concealed — possibly  you  were  pleased  to  express  yourself  in
that  way  for  the  sake  of  beauty  of  style  ?"

"  No,"  responded  Tchitchikoff, "  no  :  I  meant  just  what  I  said ;
that  is  to  say,  souls  (serfs)  which  are  actually  already  dead."

ManilofF  was  completely  bewildered.  He  felt  that  he  must  do
something,  ask  some  question,  but  what  question — the  deuce
only  knew.  He  at  last  ended  by  emitting  some  more  smoke,
not  from  his  mouth,  however,  but  through  his  nostrils.

"  So,  if  there  is  no  obstacle,  you  might  set  about  preparing  a
deed  of  sale,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  What !  a  deed  of  the  sale  of  some  dead  souls  ?  "

"Well,  no!"  said  Tchitchikoff.  "We  will  write  that  they
are  alive,  just  as  it  stands  recorded  on  the  census  list.  I
am  not  accustomed  to  depart  in  any  way  from  the  laws ;  I
suffered  for  that  reason  in  the  service — but  excuse  me  :  duty  is
a  sacred  thing  for  me ;  the  law — well,  I  am  dumb  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  law."

These  last  words  pleased  Maniloff.  Still  he  had  not  penetrated
his  guest's  real  meaning  ;  and,  instead  of  replying,  he  began  to
suck  away  so  powerfully  at  his  tchibouk,  that  it  soon  groaned
like  a  bassoon.  It  seemed  as  though  he  were  trying  to  extract
from  it  some  opinion  with  regard  to  so  strange  a  matter  ;  how-
ever, the  tchibouk  groaned,  and  that  was  all.

"  Perhaps  you  entertain  some  doubts  ?  "  urged  Tchitchikoff.

"  Oh,  excuse  me,  none  whatever!  But  permit  me  to  ask,
will  not  this  enterprise,  or  to  express  the  matter  more  plainly,
as  it  were,  this  negotiation, — will  not  this  negotiation  be  incom-
patible with  the  official  regulations  ?  "

Here  Maniloff  made  several  motions  with  his  head,  and  looked
very  significantly  in  Tchitchikoff''s  face  ;  his  countenance  having
an  expression  of  such  deep  meaning  as  was,  possibly,  never
seen  upon  a  human  face,  except,  perhaps,  on  that  of  some  very
wise  minister,  at  the  moment  of  a  most  head-splitting  trans-
action.

However,  Tchitchikoff  simply  said  that  such  an  enterprise,  or
negotiation,  would  in  no  way  be  inconsistent  with  the  laws  ;
and  he  added  a  moment  later,  that  the  treasury  would  even
obtain  some  profit  from  it,  for  it  would  receive  the  legal  taxes. .

"  You  think  so  ?  "

"  Yes,  I  think  that  it  will  be  a  good  thing."

**  Ah  !  if  it  is  a  good  thing,  that  is  another  matter  :  I  have  no


THE    MANILOFF    FAMILY.  35

objection  to  it  then,"  said  Maniloff,  and  he  became  perfectly  re-
assured.

"  It  now  remains  for  us  to  agree  about  a  price."

"  What  price  ?  "  said  Maniloft'  again  ;  and  he  paused.  "  Do
you  suppose  that  I  am  going  to  take  your  money  for  souls  who
have,  in  a  certain  way,  terminated  their  existence  ?  If  such  a
fantastic  idea  has  occurred  to  you,  you  are  mistaken.  I  will  give
you  these  souls  gratuitously,  and  take  the  deed  of  sale  upon
myself."

We  must  not  omit  to  say  that  Tchitchikoff  expressed  great
satisfaction  upon  hearing  these  words  spoken  by  Maniloff,
Albeit  usually  grave  and  judicious,  he  came  near  executing  a
leap  like  a  goat,  which,  as  it  is  well  known,  men  only  execute  in
the  most  powerful  outbursts  of  joy.  He  turned  so  vigorously  in
his  chair,  that  he  split  the  material  with  which  it  was  covered.
Maniloff  stared  at  him  in  some  amazement.  Moved  by  grati-
tude, our  hero  expressed  so  much  recognition,  that  his  host
became  confused,  turned  red  all  over,  made  a  negative  gesture
with  his  head,  and  finally  expressed  himself  to  the  effect  that  it
was  really  "nothing";  that  he  merely  wanted  to  show  his
heartfelt  affection  in  some  way,  for  he  was  a  believer  in  the
affinity  of  souls  ;  however  to  his  mind  the  dead  ones  were  in
some  respects  perfect  rubbish.

"  They  are  not  rubbish  at  all,"  replied  Tchitchikoff,  pressing
his  companion's  hand  and  heaving  a  deep  sigh.  He  seemed  to
be  ready  for  a  sentimental  outburst,  and  it  was  not  without
feeling  and  expression  that  he  at  length  uttered  the  following
words  :  "If  you  only  knew  what  a  service  you  have  rendered
me  by  this,  which  seems  to  you  mere  rubbish  ;  and  yet  I  am  a
man  without  kindred  or  connections  1  Yes  ;  and,  in  fact,  what
have  I  not  endured  '?  I  am  like  a  bark  amid  fierce  billows.
Ah  !  what  oppression,  what  persecution,  have  I  not  undergone,
what  bitterness  have  I  not  tasted,  and  for  what  ?  Because  I
held  to  the  Right,  because  I  had  a  pure  conscience,  because
I  lent  a  helping  hand  to  a  helpless  widow  and  wretched
orphans — "

At  this  point  Tchitchikoff  oven  wiped  away  his  tears  with  his
handkerchief.  Maniloff  was  thoroughly  moved.  The  two
friends  pressed  each  other's  hands  for  a  long  time,  and  gazed
long  and  silently  into  each  other's  eyes,  in  which  the  tears
were  visible.  Maniloft"  would,  on  no  account,  release  the  hand
of  our  hero,  but  continued  to  press  it  so  warmly  that  his  com-
panion did  not  know  how  to  free  it.  At  last,  drawing  it  gently
away,  he  said  that  it  would  not  be  a  bad  thing  to  complete  the


36  DEAD   SOULS*

deed  of  sale  as  promptly  as  possible,  and  that  it  would  be  as  Well
if  Maniloff  would  visit  him  in  town ;  finally  he  grasped  his  hat,
and  began  to  take  leave.

"  What !  are  you  going  ?  "  asked  Maniloff,  suddenly  recover-
ing himself,  and  almost  in  affright.

At  that  moment  Mrs.  Manilova  entered  the  study.

"  Lisanka,"  said  Maniloff,  with  a  rather  sorry  countenance,
•'  Pavel  Ivanovitch  is  leaving  us."

"  Then,  we  have  bored  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  replied  Mrs.
Manilova.

"  Madam  !  here,"  exclaimed  Tchitchlkoff,  "  here,  just  here,"
— and  he  laid  his  hand  upon  his  heart, — "  yes,  here,  will  ever
linger  the  charming  hours  spent  with  you;  and  believe  me,
there  could  not  be  for  me  any  greater  bliss  than  to  live  with
you,  if  not  in  the  same  house,  at  least  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood."

"  But,  do  you  know,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  said  Maniloff,  who
was  greatly  pleased  by  such  an  idea,  "  it  would  in  fact  be  grand
for  us  to  live  here  together  under  one  roof,  or  beneath  the  shade
of  some  elm-tree,  to  philosophise  over  something,  to  penetrate
the  depths — "

"  Oh,  that  would  be  a  heavenly  life  !  "  interrupted  Tchitchi-
koff,  with  a  sigh.  "  Farewell,  madame  !  "  he  continued,  kiss-
ing Mrs.  Manilova's  hand.  "Farewell,  my  most  respected
friend  !     Do  not  forget  my  request !  "

"  Oh  !  you  may  be  easy  on  that  score,"  replied  Maniloff".  "  I
shall  see  you  in  town  in  a  couple  of  days  at  the  latest."

They  all  then  went  into  the  dining-room.

"  Good-by,  my  dear  little  boys  !  "  said  Tchitchlkoff,  catching
sight  of  Alcides  and  Themistoclus,  who  were  busying  themselves
over  a  wooden  hussar  who  had  neither  any  arms  nor  any  nose.
*' good-by,  my  dear  little  ones.  You  will  excuse  me  for  not
having  brought  you  a  present,  but  I  must  confess  that  I  did  not
even  know  of  your  existence  ;  however,  when  I  come  again,  I
shall  certainly  bring  one.  I  will  bring  you  a  sword :  would  you
like  a  sword  ?  "

"Yes,"  answered  Themistoclus.

"  And  a  drum  for  you.  It  shall  be  a  drum,  shall  it  not  ?  "  he
proceeded,  bending  down  to  Alcides.

"  Yes,  a  dwum,"  whispered  Alcides,  and  he  dropped  his  head.

"  Very  well,  I  will  bring  you  a  drum,  such  a  fine  drum  !
it  will  be  all  turrr-ru-tra,  ta  ta,  ta  ta  ta.  Good-by,  you
darling,  good-by  !  "  Here  he  kissed  Alcides  on  the  head,  and
turned  to  Maniloff  and  his  wife  vdth  the  little  laugh  with  which


THE    MANILOFF    FAMILY.  37

one  generally  does  turn  to  parents,  giving  them  to  understand
what  dear  little  things  their  children  arc.

*'  Really,  you  had  better  stay,  Pavel  Ivanoviteh,"  said  Mani-
lofl',  when  they  were  all  gathered  on  the  verandah.  "  Look  at
the  clouds."

"  They  are  very  small,  replied  Tchitchikoff."

"  Do  you  know  the  road  to  Sobakevitch's  '?  "

"  Oh  !  I  wanted  to  ask  you  about  that."

"  Well,  if  you  will  allow  me,  I  will  tell  your  coachman  at
once."  Here  Maniloff,  with  the  same  afi'ability,  gave  the  coach-
man his  instructions,  even  addressing  him  once  by  the  pronoun
"  you  ''—in  lieu  of  the  "  thou  "  usual  in  speaking  to  inferiors.

The  coachman,  on  hearing  that  he  must  pass  by  two  turnings,
and  take  the  third  one,  said,  "  We  shall  hit  it,  your  excellency  ;  "
and  Tchitchikoff  drove  off,  accompanied  by  the  bows  and  waving
kerchiefs  of  his  hosts,  who  stood  Avatching  him  on  tiptoe.

Maniloff,  indeed,  stood  for  a  long  time  on  the  veranda,  follow-
ing the  retreating  britchka  with  his  eyes  ;  and  even  when  it  had
become  invisible,  he  still  stood  there,  smoking  his  pipe.  At  last
he  entered  the  room,  seated  himself  on  a  chair,  and  gave  himself
up  to  meditation,  heartily  rejoicing  that  he  had  done  his  visitor
a  trifling  service.  Then  his  thoughts  turned  imperceptibly  to
other  subjects,  and  finally  they  wandered  away,  God  knows
where.  He  thought  of  the  bliss  of  a  life  of  friendship  ;  of  how
delightful  it  would  be  to  dwell  with  his  friend  on  the  banks  of
some  river  ;  and  so  on ;  but  suddenly  Tchitchikoff's  strange  re-
quest disturbed  all  his  dreams.  The  thought  of  it  seemed  to
seethe  strangely  in  his  brain  ;  turn  it  over  as  he  would,  he  could
not  explain  it  to  himself;  and  thus  he  sat  smoking  his  pipe,  and
pondering  all  through  the  afternoon  and  evening  until  supper-
time.


CHAPTER  III.

MADAME    KOROBOTCHKINA.


Meanwhile  Tchitchikoff,  in  a  very  well-satisfied  frame  of  mind,
sat  in  his  britchka,  which  had  long  been  rolling  along  the  high-
way. From  the  preceding  chapter,  one  can  gather  what  consti-
tuted the  chief  subject  of  his  thoughts  ;  and  therefore  it  is  no
wonder  that  he  was  speedily  absorbed  in  it,  body  and  soul.  That


38  DEAD   SOULS.

the  conjectures,  calculations,  and  fancies  which  strayed  through
his  mind  were  extremely  agreeable,  was  evident  from  his  face  ;
for  at  each  moment  it  expanded  into  a  contented  smile.  He  was
so  engrossed  with  his  thoughts  that  it  required  a  loud  clap  of
thunder  to  bring  him  to  himself,  and  induce  him  to  look  about
him :  the  whole  sky  was  now  completely  covered  with  clouds,  and
the  dusty  post-road  was  sprinkled  with  drops  of  rain.  At  length
a  second  clap  of  thunder  resounded,  both  louder  and  nearer  than
the  first  one,  and  the  rain  suddenly  poured  down  as  though  from
a  pail.  At  first  it  came  in  a  slanting  direction,  and  beat  upon  one
side  of  the  britchka,  then  on  the  other ;  next  altering  its  course,
and  becoming  almost  perpendicular,  it  drummed  right  upon
the  top  of  the  carriage,  and  began  to  fall  on  our  hero's  head.
This  made  him  pull  down  some  leathern  curtains,  which  had  two
small  round  windows,  adapted  for  the  contemplation  of  views
upon  the  road,  and  at  the  same  time  he  ordered  Selifan  to  drive
faster.

The  coachman  drew  from  beneath  his  box  some  trumpery
garment  of  gray  cloth,  put  it  on,  grasped  the  reins  firmly,  and
shouted  at  his  troika,'^-  which  were  hardly  moving  their  legs.
However,  Selifan  could  not  at  first  remember  whether  he  had
passed  two  or  three  turnings.  He  decided,  after  due  reflec-
tion, that  there  had  been  a  great  many,  all  of  which  he  had
passed.  As  a  Russian  soon  discovers  what  to  do  in  critical
moments,  he  turned  into  the  first  cross-road  he  next  came  to,  on
the  right,  shouted,  *'  Hey,  there,  my  respected  friends  !  "  to  the
horses,  and  set  off  at  a  gallop,  without  much  concern  as  to  where
the  cross-road  would  lead  him.

The  rain,  however,  seemed  likely  to  last  for  a  longtime.  The
dust  of  the  road  was  quickly  converted  into  mud,  and  every
moment  it  became  more  diflftcult  for  the  horses  to  drag  the
britchka  along.  Tchitchikoff  had  already  begun  to  grow  seriously
disquieted  at  not  seeing  Sobakevitch's  village.  According  to  his
calculations,  they  ought  to  have  reached  it  long  ago.  He  peered
out  on  all  sides,  but  it  was  now  pitch  dark.

"  Selifan !  "  he  said  at  last,  leaning  out  of  the  britchka.

"  What  is  it,  master  ?  "  replied  Selifan.

"  Look  and  see  if  there  is  a  village  visible."

"  No,  master,  there  isn't  one  visible  anywhere."  And  there-
upon Selifan,  with  a  flourish  of  his  whip,  began,  not  exactly  a
song,  but  something  which  had  no  end.  Everything  entered  into
it, — all  the  cries  of  approbation  and  encouragement  to  which

*  A  team  of  three  horses.


MADAME   KOROBOTCHKINA.  39

horses  are  treated  throughout  Russia,  from  one  end  of  the  land
to  the  other  ;  adjectives  of  every  description  without  discrimina-
tion— in  fact,  the  first  that  came  to  his  tongue.  And  so  it  went
on  until,  at  last,  he  began  to  call  the  poor  animals  secretaries.

Meanwhile  Tchitchikoff  noticed  that  the  britchka  was  swaying
about  in  all  directions,  and  that  he  was  being  badly  jolted.  This
warned  him  that  they  had  got  out  of  the  road,  and  Avere
probably  careering  through  a  ploughed  field.  Selifan  seemed
to  have  perceived  it  himself,  but  he  said  not  a  word.

"Here,  you  rascal,  what  road  are  you  driving  on?"  cried
Tchitchikoff.

"  But  what's  to  be  done,  master,  in  such  weather  ?  you  can't
see  your  whip  before  you,  it's  so  dark!  "  Thus  speaking  the
coachman  tipped  the  britchka,  so  that  Tchitchikoff  was  obliged
to  hold  on  with  both  hands.  It  was  only  then  that  he  per-
ceived that  Selifan  had  been  drinking.

'•  Hold  on,  hold  on  !  you'll  upset  us  !  "  he  shouted  to  him.

"No,  master;  how  could  I  upset  you?"  said  Selifan.  "It
isn't  good  to  upset, — I  know  that  myself  already  :  I  sha'n't  upset
at  all."  Thereupon  he  began  to  turn  the  britchka  slightly,  tip,
tip,  until  finally  he  rolled  it  over  on  one  side.  Tchitchikoft'  fell
full  length  into  the  mud.  However,  Selifan  stopped  the  horses,
who  would,  indeed,  have  stopped  of  themselves,  for  they
were  greatly  fatigued.  This  unforeseen  catastrophe  completely
amazed  the  driver.  Extricating  himself  from  his  box,  he
planted  himself  in  front  of  the  britchka,  set  both  arms  akimbo
on  his  hips,  and  while  his  master  was  floundering  about  in  the
mud,  and  endeavouring  to  crawl  out  of  it,  he  said  after  some
reflection,  "  Well ;  so  it  has  tipped  over !  ''

"You're  as  drunk  as  a  cobbler,"  retorted  Tchitchikoff.

"  No,  master,  no.  Besides,  how  is  it  possible  for  me  to  be
drunk  ?  I  know  that  it  is  not  a  good  thing  to  drink.  I  had
a  chat  with  a  friend  ;  for  one  may  chat  with  a  good  fellow,  and
there's  nothing  wrong  in  that ;  and  we  also  had  something  to
eat  together.  A  snack  (zaMska)  is  not  a  disgraceful  thing  :  a
fellow  may  fairly  take  a  bite  Avith  a  nice  companion."

"  What  did  I  tell  you  the  last  time  that  you  were  intoxicated,
eh?  have  you  forgotten  ?  "  asked  Tchitchikoft'.

"  No,  your  blcuiorddiue*  how  could  I  have  forgotten  ?  I  know
my  business.  I  know  that  it  is  not  right  to  get  drunk.  But  I
had  a  chat  with  a  fine  man,  for "

*  AVellbom,  equivalent  to  the  German  "  wohlgetoren."  There  is  no
exact  equivalent  in  English,


40  DEAD    SOULS.

"  I'll  thrash  you  !  I'll  teach  you  to  chat  with  a  fine  man !  "
^,J^~As  your  clemency  pleases,"  replied  Selifan,  in  complete
(^acquiescence:  "if  you  must  thrash  me,  then  thrash  away.  I
have  no  objection  to  that.  And  why  not  beat  me,  if  there  is
cause  for  it  ?  That  is  according  to  the  master's  will.  It  is
necessary  for  him  to  beat,  for  the  moujik  often  becomes  un-
governable :  he  must  be  well  looked  after.  If  there  is  cause
for  it,  then  beat  away:  why  not?  "

To  this  reasoning  the  master  found  no  answer  whatever.  But
at  that  moment  it  seemed  as  though  fate  had  resolved  to  be
merciful  to  them.  The  barking  of  a  dog  resounded  in  the  dis-
tance, and  Tchitchikoff,  in  delight,  ordered  the  horses  to  be
whipped  up.  The  Russian  driver  possesses  a  fine  sense  of  hearing
in  lieu  of  eyes  ;  hence  it  happens  that  although  he  sometimes
drives  along  at  full  speed,  with  his  eyes  screwed  up,  he  always
comes  out  somewhere.  Selifan,  without  being  able  to  see  his
hand  before  him,  drove  so  directly  to  the  village  that  he  only
drew  up  when  the  britchka  stopped  short  with  its  shaft  against
a  fence,  and  when  it  could  actually  go  no  farther.  Through  the
thick  veil  of  pouring  rain,  Tchitchikofi"  could  merely  perceive
something  resembling  a  roof.  He  despatched  Selifan  to  find  a
gate  ;  and  this  would  have  required  a  long  time,  no  doubt,  if  in
Russia  people  did  not  keep  ill-tempered  dogs  in  lieu  of  door-
keepers ;  and  a  dog,  indeed,  now  loudly  announced  the  britchka's
arrival.  A  light  twinkled  through  one  small  window,  and
reached  the  fence,  revealing  the  gate  to  our  travellers.  Selifan
began  to  knock :  and  soon  a  person  draped  in  an  arniyak''
opened  the  wicket,  whereupon  the  master  and  man  heard  a
hoarse,  feminine  voice  asking,  "  Who  knocks  ?  what  has
happened  ?  "

"  We  are  travellers,  my  good  woman :  let  us  in  to  pass  the
night,"  said  Tchitchikoff

"  You're  lively  travellers  !  "  rejoined  the  old  woman  :  "nice
weather  you  have  come  in  !  This  isn't  a  post-house  :  a  land-
owner lives  here."

"  But  what  is  to  be  done,  my  good  woman  ?  We  have  lost
our  way.  We  cannot  pass  the  night  on  the  steppe,  in  such
weather  as  this."

"  Yes :  it  is  dark,  and  the  weather  is  bad,"  added  SeKfai.

"  Hold  your  tongue,  you  blockhead  !  "  said  Tchitchikoflf.

"  Who  are  you  ?  "  asked  the  old  woman.

*'  A  nobleman,  mj'^  good  woman."

*  A  long,  full  garment,  worn  by  peasants.


MADAME   KOROBOTCHKINA.  41

The  word  "  nobleman  "  seemed  to  give  the  old  woman  matter
for  thought.     "  Wait !  I'll  tell  the  mistress,"  she  ejaculated.

In  a  couple  of  minutes  she  returned  with  a  lantern  in  her
hand.  The  gate  opened.  A  faint  light  flashed  from  another
window.  The  britchka  entered  the  yard,  and  came  to  a  stand-
still in  front  of  a  small  house,  of  which  it  was  difficult  to  get  a
good  view  through  the  darkness.  Only  one  half  of  it  was  illu-
minated by  the  light  which  shone  through  the  window  falling
upon  a  puddle  just  in  front  of  the  building.  The  rain  resounded
noisily  as  it  poured  on  to  the  wooden  roof,  whence  it  ran  in  a  mur-
muring stream  into  the  water-butt.  Meanwhile  the  dogs  had
burst  out  barking  in  every  possible  key  and  style  ;  one,  throwing
back  his  head, gave  a  prolonged  howl,  with  as  much  care  as  though
he  had  received  wages  for  it ;  another  followed  suit  post-haste.
Then  there  rang  out,  like  a  post-bell,  an  inharmonious  soprano,  no
doubt  belonging  to  a  young  dog ;  and,  finally,  all  ended  with  the
growls  of  an  old  animal,  whose  notes  reminded  one  of  a  contra-
basso  in  a  church  choir,  when  the  concerto  is  in  full  swing.

However,  our  drenched  and  shivering  hero  thought  only  of
bed.  The  britchka  had  not  come  to  a  full  stop,  when  he  leapt
out  upon  the  threshold,  tottered,  and  came  near  falling.  A  woman,
younger  than  the  first  one,  but  strongly  resembling  her,  then
emerged  from  under  the  porch  and  conducted  him  into  a  room.
Tchitchikoff  cast  a  couple  of  fleeting  glances  about  him :  the
room  was  hung  with  antique,  striped  paper  ;  the  pictures  repre-
sented various  birds  ;  between  the  windows  hung  some  little  old
mirrors,  with  dim  frames  in  the  form  of  twisted  leaves,  and
behind  each  mirror  was  tucked  either  a  letter  or  a  pack  of  cards,
or  else  a  stocking.  There  was  also  a  wall-clock,  with  flowers
painted  on  the  dial-plate ;  but  nothing  else  could  be  discerned.
Tchitchikofi"  felt  that  his  eyes  were  sticking  together,  as  though
some  one  had  smeared  them  over  with  honey.  However,  a
moment  later  the  mistress  of  the  house  entered,  a  woman  ad-
vanced in  years,  in  some  sort  of  a  nightcap  hastily  donned,  and
with  a  flannel  Avrapper  round  her  neck.  Evidently  one  of  those
women  who  own  a  small  landed  property,  and  cry  over  bad
crops  and  losses,  who  hold  their  heads  on  one  side,  and  accumu-
late money  in  motley  little  bags,  stowed  away  in  their  chests  of
drawers.  In  one  bag  they  Avill  put  all  their  silver  roubles  ;  in
another,  their  half-roubles ;  in  a  third,  their  twenty-five  copeck
pieces, — although,  to  all  appearance,  there  is  nothing  in  the
drawers  but  linen,  night-dresses,  skeins  of  thread,  and  a  cloak
which  has  been  ripped  up  with  the  intention  of  converting  it
into  a  gown  ;  or,  if  it  be  old,  it  has  been  burnt  in  cooking  holiday


42  DEAD    SOULS.

pancakes,  or  has  simply  worn  out  of  its  own  accord.  However,
the  old  woman  is  economical,  and  this  cloak  is  destined  to  lie
there  for  many  years,  and  will  descend  by  will  to  her  grand-
niece,  together  with  all  sorts  of  other  ancient  fripperies.

Tchitchikoff  presented  his  apologies  for  having  disturbed  the
inmates  of  the  house  by  his  unexpected  arrival.  "No  matter,
no  matter,"  said  his  hostess.  "  In  such  weather,  it  was  God
who  brought  you  here.  Such  a  tumult  and  storm  !  You  ought
to  have  something  to  eat  after  your  journey  ;  but  it  is  very  late
at  night,  and  it  is  impossible  to  prepare  anything."

The  lady's  words  were  interrupted  by  a  dreadful  hissing,  which
alarmed  our  friend  ;  the  noise  was  such,  indeed,  that  the  whole
room  seemed  to  be  full  of  snakes  :  but  on  glancing  up,  he  felt
re-assured,  for  he  perceived  that  the  wall-clock  had  taken  a  fancy
to  strike.  The  hissing  was  immediately  followed  by  a  hoarse
rattle  ;  and  finally,  collecting  all  its  powers,  the  clock  struck
two  with  a  sound  as  though  some  one  were  drumming  on  a  broken
crock  with  a  stick,  after  which  the  pendulum  went  on  ticking
quietly  from  right  to  left.

Tchitchikoff  thanked  his  hostess,  saying  that  he  needed  nothing,
that  she  must  not  trouble  herself  about  anything,  that  he  only
desired  a  bed,  though  he  would  like  to  know  where  he  Avas,
and  whether  the  house  was  far  from  Sobakevitch's  estate.  To
which  the  old  woman  replied  that  she  had  never  even  heard  of
such  a  name,  and  believed  that  there  was  no  such  gentleman
at  all.

"  But  at  least,  you  know  Maniloff  ?  "  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  And  who  is  Maniloff?  "

"  A  landowner,  my  good  woman."

"  No,  I  have  never  heard  of  him  :  there  is  no  such  landowner
hereabouts.

"  What  landowners  are  there  then  ?  "

"Bobroff,  Svinin,  Kanapatieff,  Kharpakin,  Trepakin,  Plye-
shakoff."

"  Are  they  rich  men  ?  "

"  No,  father,  not  very  rich.  One  of  them  owns  twenty  souls
(serfs),  another  thirty ;  but  there  isn't  one  who  owns  a  hun-
dred."

Tchitchikoff  perceived  that  he  had  arrived  in  a  regular  wilder-
ness.    "  Tell  me,  at  least,  is  it  far  to  the  town  ?  "

"  About  sixty  versts.  How  sorry  I  am  that  I  have  nothing  to
offer  you  to  eat !     But  will  you  drink  some  tea,  friend  ?  "

"  Thank  you,  my  good  woman.     I  only  want  a  bed."

"In  truth,  rest  is  necessary  after  such  a  journey.     Place


MADAME   KOROBOTCHKITS^A.  43

yourself  here,  my  friend,  on  this  divan.     Hey,  there,  Fetinya,
fetch  a  feather-bed,  some  pillows,  and  a  coverlet.    What  weather
God  has  sent  us  !  such  thunder  !     My  light  has  been  burning
all  night  before  the  holy  pictures.     Why!  my  father,  your  back        ^^
and  your  side  are  all  muddy,  like  a  boar's  !     Where  did  you  get  q

60  dirty?  "  H

"  Glory  be  to  God,  that  I  only  soiled  my  clothes  !     I  must  ^

return  thanks  for  not  having  broken  my  ribs."  U

"  Ye  saints,  how  dreadful !     Don't  you  want  something  to       ~

wipe  your  coat  ?  "  '5^*^  b

*'  Thank  you,  thank  you.  Don't  trouble  yourself,  but  please
give  your  maid  orders  to  dry  my  clothes."

"  Do  you  hear,  Fetinya  ?  "  said  the  lady,  turning  to  the
same  woman,  who  had  come  out  to  the  porch  with  a  light.  She
had  already  succeeded  in  dragging  in  a  feather-bed,  and,  after
beating  it  up  on  both  sides  with  her  hands,  she  had  sent  a  flood
of  feathers  flying  about  the  room.  "  Take  the  gentleman's  caf-
tan and  his  other  clothes,"  resumed  the  lady,  "first  dry  them
before  the  fire,  as  you  used  to  do  for  your  dead  master,  and
then  brush  and  beat  them  thoroughly."

"  I  hear,  sudariiuja  I  "  *  said  Fetinya,  as  she  spread  a  sheet
over  the  feather-bed  and  placed  the  pillows.

"Well,  now  your  bed  is  ready,"  said  the  lady.  "Farewell,
my  friend  :  I  wish  you  a  good-night.  Do  you  need  anything
more  ?  Perhaps,  father,  you  are  accustomed  to  have  someone
to  tickle  your  heels  at  night.  My  late  husband  could  never  get
to  sleep  without  it."

But  the  guest  declined  to  have  his  heels' tickled.  The  lady
took  her  departure ;  and  Tchitchikofi'  immediately  undressed,
giving  every  thing  to  Fetinya,  who,  after  wishing  him  good-
night in  her  turn,  carried  all  the  wet  garments  awa5\  When  he
was  left  alone  he  glanced,  not  without  satisfaction,  at  his  couch,
which  reached  almost  to  the  ceiling.  Fetinya  was  evidently
an  adept  in  the  art  of  beating  up  a  feather-bed.  Then  with  the
aid  of  a  chair,  he  climbed  into  the  bed,  which  so  gave  way
beneath  him  that  he  sank  almost  to  the  floor,  while  the  feathers
which  he  pressed  out  at  the  seams  flew  all  over  the  room.  He
blew  out  the  candle,  drew  the  calico  coverlet  over  him,  and  at
once  fell  asleep.

It  was  already  quite  late  in  the  morning  when  he  awoke  on
the  following  day.  The  sun  was  shining  through  the  shutters
straight  into  his  eyes,  and  the  flies  were  buzzing  about.    Cast-

♦  Madam.     The  ordinary  answer,  corresponding  to  "  Yes,  madam."


44  DEAD    SOULS.

ing  a  glance  round  the  room  he  perceived  that  birds  did  not
form  the  subjects  of  all  the  pictures  :  among  them  hung  a  por-
trait of  Kutusoff,  and  an  oil-painting  of  an  old  man  in  a  uniform
such  as  was  worn  under  Pavel  Petrovitch.  The  clock  again  hissed,
and  then  struck  ten  :  a  feminine  face  peeped  in  at  the  door,  and
immediately  disappeared  again ;  for  TchitchikofF,  during  his
sleep,  had  thrown  off  all  the  bedclothes.  The  face  which  had
peeped  in  seemed  familiar  to  him  in  some  way.  He  endea-
voured to  recall  who  it  belonged  to,  and  finally  remembered  that
it  was  the  countenance  of  his  hostess.  He  put  on  his  shirt :
his  garments,  all  dried  and  brushed,  lay  beside  him.  When  he
was  dressed  he  approached  the  window,  and  began  to  survey
the  view  before  him.  The  window  overlooked  a  narrow  yard
which  was  filled  with  domestic  fowl  of  every  kind.  The  turkeys .
and  hens  were  innumerable ;  among  them  stalked  a  cock  with
measured  steps,  shaking  his  comb,  and  turning  his  head  on  one
side,  as  though  he  were  listening  to  something.  A  sow  and  her
litter  were  also  there,  poking  their  snouts  into  a  heap  of  rub-
bish. The  sow  devoured  a  little  chicken  by  the  waj^  and  then
quietly  continued  to  eat  some  water-melon  rind.  This  small
court,  or  chicken-yard,  was  surrounded  by  a  fence,  beyond  which
spread  some  broad  vegetable  gardens  filled  with  onions,  cab-
bages, potatoes,  beet-roots,  and  other  vegetables.  There  was
also  an  orchard  with  apple  and  other  fruit-trees,  covered  with
nets,  so  as  to  protect  them  from  magpies  and  sparrows  :  the
latter  were  flitting  in  large  parties  from  place  to  place.  Several
scarecrows  with  arms  outstretched  were  elevated  on  long  poles,
and  one  of  them  wore  the  lady's  own  cap.  Beyond  the  vege-
table garden  came  some  peasants'  huts,  which,  although  they
were  built  at  irregular  intervals,  and  not  arranged  in  street
fashion,  indicated  that  there  were  a  number  of  inhabitants  in  the
place.  Tchitchikoff  noted  that  they  were  all  kept  in  repair  as
they  should  be :  the  worn-out  boarding  on  the  roofs  had  been
replaced  by  new  planks  ;  none  of  the  gates  hung  awry ;  more-
over, in  certain  sheds  turned  towards  him  he  observed  some
carts  which  were  almost  new.  "Yes,  her  village  is  of  a  fair
size,"  he  said  to  himself,  and  he  immediately  resolved  to  become
more  closely  acquainted  with  the  lady.  He  glanced  at  the  door-
way through  which  she  had  popped  her  head,  and,  catching
sight  of  her  seated  behind  the  tea-table,  he  went  up  to  her  with
a  cheerful  engaging  mien.

"  Good-morning,  my  friend.  How  did  you  sleep  ?  "  said  his
hostess,  rising  from  her  place.  She  was  better  dressed  than  on
the  preceding  evening,  wearing  a  dark  gown,  and  no  longer


MADAME   KOROBOTCHKINA.  45

Sporting  a  nightcap  ;  however,  a  wrapper  was  still  wound  about
her  throat.

"  Well,  very  well,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  seating  himself  in  an
arm-chair.     "  And  how  did  you  sleep,  my  friend  ?  "

"  Badly,  my  friend."

"How  so?"

•'  Sleeplessness.  My  hips  ache,  and  my  legs  seem  as  if  they
would  break  just  above  my  ankles."

"It  will  pass  oft',  it  will  pass  off,  my  dear  woman.  You
mustn't  pay  any  attention  to  it."

"  God  grant  that  it  will  pass  oft'!  I  have  rubbed  myself  with
lard,  and  with  turpentine  also.  But  what  will  you  take  with
your  tea  ?     There  is  some  fruit-brandy  in  that  flask."

"  That's  not  bad,  my  dear  woman — not  bad  at  all.  I  will
take  some  fruit-brandy."

Tchitchikofi'  had  made  up  his  mind  not  to  stand  on  ceremony
with  this  person,  so  taking  his  cup  of  tea  in  one  hand,  and
pouring  some  fruit-brandy  into  it  with  the  other,  he  resumed  as
follows : —

"You  have  a  nice  little  village,  my  dear  woman.  How  many
souls  are  there  ?"

"Nearly  eighty,  my  friend,"  said  his  hostess:  "but  un-
fortunately the  times  are  bad ;  last  year  the  crops  were
frightful !  May  the  Lord  preserve  us  from  anything  of  the  kind
again."

"  But  there  are  some  stout-looking  moujiks  here,  and  the
izbas  are  sound.  Permit  me  to  ask  your  family  name.  1  was
BO  upset — I  arrived  so  late  at  night  that "

"  My  name  is  Korobotchka.  I  am  the  widow  of  a  collegiate
secretary."

"  I  thank  you  humbly.     And  your  other  name  ?  "

"  Nastasya  Petrovna."

"  Nastasya  Petrovna  ?  That's  a  fine  name,  Nastasya  Petrovna.
I  have  an  aunt,  my  mother's  sister,  who  is  named  Nastasya
Petrovna."

"And  what  is  your  name  ?"  inquired  the  lady.  "  I  think
you  must  certainly  be  an  assessor."

"  No,  my  dear  woman,"  replied  Tchitchikoff",  laughing,  "  I
certainly  am  not  an  assessor :  I  am  travelling  on  my  own
business."

"  Ah  !  so  you  are  a  wholesale  merchant.  It  really  is  a  pity
that  I  sold  my  honey  to  the  dealers  so  cheap !  You  would
probably  have  bought  it  of  me,  father."

"  No,  I  should  not  have  bought  honey."


46  DEAD   SOULS.

"  What  then  ?  Hemp,  perhaps  ?  But  very  little  hemp  is
spun  in  my  house  now, — half  a  pood*  at  most."

**  No,  Tuy  dear  woman,  I  am  thinking  of  a  different  sort  of
goods  :  tell  me,  have  any  of  your  peasants  died  ?  "

"  Ah,  yes,  my  friend,  eighteen  of  them  !  "  said  the  old  woman
with  a  sigh.  "And  they  were  such  splendid  fellows,  all  work-
men. Some  have  been  born  since,  it  is  true  ;  but  what  of  that  ?
They  are  all  small  fry.  And  then  the  assessor  comes  :  '  Pay  for
your  souls,'  says  he.  The  people  are  dead,  but  until  the  next
census  you  must  still  pay  taxes  on  them  as  though  they  were
living.  And  last  week  my  smith  was  burnt  to  death, — such  a
clever  smith  he  was  !  and  he  knew  the  locksmith's  business  too."

"  Have  you  had  a  fire  here  ?  "

"  Oh,  no  !  God  preserve  us  from  such  a  misfortune  !  he  burnt
himself  up,  my  father.  His  inside  got  on  fire  in  some  way  or  other
— through  drinking  too  much.  Blue  flames  came  out  of  him,
and  he  rotted  and  rotted  away  until  he  turned  as  black  as  coal.
And  he  was  such  a  skilful  smith  !  At  present  I  cannot  drive
out :  there  is  no  one  to  shoe  the  horses."

"All  is  according  to  the  will  of  God,  my  dear  woman,"  said
Tchitchikoff,  sighing.  "  Nothing  can  be  said  against  the  wisdom
of  God,     Will  you  give  them  to  me,  Nastasya  Petrovna  ?  "

"  Give  you  what,  my  friend  ?  "

"  Why,  all  the  souls  that  have  died."

"  But  how  can  I  give  them  away  ?  "

"  It  is  simple  enough.  Or,  if  you  prefer  it,  you  can  sell  them.
I  will  give  you  money  for  them."

"  But  how  ?  I  really  don't  catch  your  idea.  You  don't  want
to  dig  them  up  out  of  the  ground,  do  you  ?  "

Tchitchikofi'  perceived  that  the  old  woman  was  far  from  appre-
hending his  meaning,  and  that  it  was  indispensable  for  him  to
speak  to  her  more  plainly.  So  he  explained  to  her  in  a  few
words  that  the  transfer,  or  purchase,  would  have  no  significance
except  on  paper,  and  that  the  dead  souls  would  be  inscribed  as
though  they  were  living.

"  But  of  what  use  can  they  be  to  you  ?  "  said  the  old  woman,
staring  at  him.

"  That  is  my  affair."

"  But  they  are  dead."

"  Who  says  they  are  alive  ?  My  buying  them  is  an  advan-
tage to  you,  since  they  are  dead.  You  still  have  to  pay  for
them,  but  I  will  release  you  from  that  trouble  and  taxation.   Do

*  Twenty  pounds*  weight.


MADAME   K.OROBOTCHKINA.  47

you  understand  ?  And  I  will  not  only  free  you  from  that,  but  I
will  give  you  fifteen  roubles  to  boot.     Now  is  it  clear  ?  "

"  Really,  I  don't  know,"  exclaimed  the  lady,  pausing.  "  I
have  never  sold  any  dead  people  before."

"  The  idea  !  It  would  be  far  more  wonderful  if  you  ever  had
sold  any  to  any  one.  Or  is  it  that  you  think  they  could  be
turned  to  profit  ?  "

"  No,  I  do  not  think  that.  What  profit  could  be  derived  from
them  ?   The  only  thing  that  troubles  me  is,  that  they  are  dead."

"Well,  she's  a  hard-headed  person,"  said  Tchitchikoff  to
himself.  "  Listen,  my  good  woman  !  Just  think  it  over  well :
liere  you  are  raining  yourself  with  paying  taxes  on  them  as  if
they  were  living."

"  Oh,  my  friend,  don't  speak  of  it!"  interrupted  the  lady.
"  Only  two  weeks  ago  I  paid  a  hundred  and  fifty  roubles,  be-
sides making  a  present,  to  the  assessor."

"  Well,  you  see  how  it  is,  my  dear  woman  ?  Now,  only  take
into  consideration  the  fact  that  you  won't  have  to  give  any  more
presents,  for  now  I  shall  pay  for  the  dead  serfs, — I,  and  not
you :  I  assume  all  responsibilities.  I  will  even  have  the  deed
prepared  at  my  expense, — do  yeu  understand  me  ?"

The  old  woman  became  thoughtful.  She  saw  that  the  transac-
tion really  seemed  to  be  a  profitable  one  for  herself,  but  it  was
too  novel  and  untried;  and  so  she  began  to  feel  very  much
afraid  lest  our  friend  should  cheat  her  in  this  sale.  He  was  a
suspicious  character,  for  he  had  arrived,  God  knows  whence,
and  at  night  time  too.

"  Well,  my  dear  woman,  shall  we  strike  the  bargain  ?  "  asked
Tchitchikofi".

"  Really,  my  friend,  I  never  sold  any  dead  people  before.  I
sold  some  live  ones  two  years  ago, — two  girls  to  the  protopopo
for  a  hundred  roubles  each ;  and  he  was  very  glad  and  grate-
ful :  they  turned  out  splendid  workers :  they  even  weave
napkins."

"  Well,  but  the  question  isn't  one  of  living  serfs, — God  be
with  them  ! — I  ask  for  dead  ones."

"  Really,  I  am  afraid  lest  it  should  occasion  me  a  loss  in  some
way.  Perhaps  you  are  deceiving  me,  my  father ;  perhaps  they
— they  are  worth  more."

"Listen,  my  good  woman — what  a  woman  you  are!  How
can  they  be  worth  anything  ?  They  are  dust.  Do  you  under-
stand ?  Simply  dust.  Take  any  useless,  trivial  thing,  for
example,  even  a  simple  rag, — and  the  rag  has  a  value ;  it
can  at  least  be  sold  for  a  paper-mill :  but  those  dead  serfs  are


48  DEAD   SOULS.

good  for  nothing.  Now,  tell  me  yourself,  what  are  they  good
for?"

"  That  is  quite  true.  They  are  good  for  nothing  at  all,  and
only  one  thing  deters  me,  that  they  are  dead."

"Eh!  what  a  blockhead  she  is  ! "  said  Tchitchikoff  to  him-
self, beginning  to  lose  his  patience.  "  Come,  I  must  settle  it
with  her!  She  has  thrown  me  into  a  perspiration,  the  con-
founded old  fool!"  Here  he  drew  a  handkerchief  from  his
pocket,  wiped  away  the  perspiration  which  had  started  out  on
his  brow,  and  resolved  to  attack  the  old  lady  in  a  different  style.
"  My  dear  woman,"  said  he,  "  you  either  do  not  wish  to  under-
stand my  words,  or  else  you  say  all  that  for  the  mere  sake  of
saying  something.  I  will  give  you  money — fifteen  roubles  in
bank-notes — do  you  understand  ?  Money.  You  cannot  pick
money  up  in  the  street.  Now,  tell  me  how  much  did  you  sell
your  honey  for?"

"For  twelve  roubles  a  pood."

"  You  are  surely  exaggerating  a  little,  my  good  woman.  You
did  not  sell  it  for  twelve  ?  "

"  By  Heavens,  I  did."

"  Now,  come.  So  much  as  that — for  honey  ?  You  had  been
collecting  it  for  a  year,  perhaps,  with  a  deal  of  care  and  labour  ;
you  worried  about  your  bees  and  their  comfort,  and  kept  them
all  winter  in  the  cellar ;  but  the  dead  souls  I  speak  of  are  not  a
matter  of  this  world.  In  their  case  you  have  not  been  put  to
trouble  and  toil.  It  was  God's  will  that  they  should  quit  this
world,  thereby  diminishing  your  property.  As  regards  the
honey,  you  received  twelve  roubles  for  your  labour  and  exer-
tions ;  but  as  regards  the  souls  you  will  obtain  fifteen  roubles
gratuitously,  so  to  say ;  and  not  in  silver,  but  in  blue  bank-
notes." After  these  powerful  arguments,  Tchitchikoff"  hardly
entertained  a  doubt  but  what  the  old  woman  would  surrender.

"Indeed!"  she  replied.  "I  am  a  widow,  and  so  inex-
perienced in  business  !  It  will  be  better  for  me  to  wait  a  little
while  :  perhaps  some  merchants  may  come,  and  I  can  find  out
about  the  prices."

"  It's  a  shame  to  talk  like  that,  my  dear  woman  !  it's  simply  a
shame  !  Now,  just  consider  what  you  are  saying  !  Who  will  buy
those  dead  serfs  ?     Come,  what  use  can  be  made  of  them  ?  "

"Perhaps  they  may  be  needed  some  day  on  the  estate,"
rejoined  the  old  woman;  and  without  concluding  her  speech,
she  opened  her  mouth,  and  stared  at  Tchitchikoff"  almost  in
terror,  desirous  of  knowing  what  he  would  reply.

"  Dead  men,  indeed,  about  the  estate  ! "  he  exclaimed.  "  Eh  I


MADAME   KOROBOTCHKINA.  49

where  did  you  get  that  idea  ?  They  might  be  used  as  scare-
crows in  your  kitchen-garden  to  frighten  away  the  sparrows.
That's  what  you  mean,  I  suppose,  eh  ?"

"May  the  powers  of  the  cross  be  with  us!  what  terrible
things  you  say  !"   began  the  old  woman,  crossing  herself.

"  What  else  would  you  set  them  doing  ?  And,  moreover,  the
bones  and  the  graves  will  all  remain  with  you  :  the  transfer  will
only  be  on  paper.  Now,  what  do  you  say  to  that  ?  How  is  it
to  be  '?     Give  me  an  answer,  at  any  rate  !  "

The  old  woman  began  to  reflect  again.

"  What  are  you  thinking  of,  Nastasya  Petrovna  ?"

"In  truth,  I  cannot  decide  what  to  do  :  it  will  be  better  for
me  to  sell  you  my  hemp."

"  But  what  should  I  do  with  your  hemp  ?  I  am  talking  to  you
of  something  entirely  different,  if  you  please  ;  and  yet  you  thrust
your  hemp  on  me  !  Hemp  is  hemp,  and  when  I  come  again,  I
may  take  it.  But  not  now.  So,  how  is  it  to  be,  Nastasya
Petrovna  ? ' '

"  By  Heavens  !  dead  souls  are  such  strange  wares, — I  never
heard  the  like  before."

Here  Tchitchikoff  exceeded  all  the  bounds  of  patience,  dashed
a  chair  on  to  the  floor,  and  consigned  the  lady  to  the  fiend.

She  was  extremely  frightened.  "Ah!  don't  mention  him.
God  be  with  him  !  "  she  exclaimed,  turning  very  pale.  "  Only
two  days  ago,  I  dreamed  of  the  Evil  One  all  night.  I  had  a
fancy  to  tell  my  fortune  with  cards,  after  saying  my  prayers,
and  God  evidently  sent  him  as  a  punishment.  I  saw  him  in
such  terrible  guise ;  his  horns  were  longer  than  a  bull's."

"I  am  surprised  that  you  don't  dream  of  fiends  by  the
dozen,"  said  our  friend.  "I  made  my  proposition  from  motives
of  Christian  philanthropy  alone  :  I  see  a  poor  widow  struggling
along,  suffering  from  want. — Well,  go  to  destruction  then,  and
perish  with  your  whole  village  ! "

"  Ah  !  dear  me — why  do  you  try  to  quan-el  ?  "  said  the  old
woman,  looking  at  him  in  terror.

"  There's  no  use  in  saying  a  word  to  you.  Truly,  now,  you
are  exactly  like  the  house-dog,  who  lies  in  the  hay,  and  neither
eats  the  hay  himself  nor  permits  anyone  else  to  eat  it.  I  should
have  liked  to  purchase  various  domestic  products  from  you,
for  I  sometimes  take  government  contracts  also."

Here  he  lied,  merely  in  passing,  and  without  any  ultimate  ob-
ject, but  with  most  unexpected  success.  The  government  con-
tracts acted  powerfully  on  Nastasya  Petrovna:  at  all  events,
she  said  in  an  almost  beseeching  voice,  "  Why  has  your  anger

D


60  DEAD    SOULS.

become  so  hot  ?   If  I  had  known,  to  begin  with,  that  you  were
such  a  testy  man,  I  should  not  have  contradicted  you  at  all."

'*  As  if  there  were  no  cause  for  anger!  The  matter  may  not
be  worth  an  egg,  and  yet  I  am  angry  about  it !  "

"  Well,  as  you  please  :  I  am  ready  to  sell  the  souls  for  fifteen
roubles  in  bank-notes.  Only  look  here,  my  father,  concerning
those  contracts  :  if  any  rye  or  buckwheat  flour  is  required,  or
groats,  or  meat,  please  don't  forget  me."

"  No,  my  dear  woman,  I  will  not,"  he  said  ;  and  at  the  same
time  he  wiped  away  the  perspiration,  which  was  pouring  down
his  face  in  three  streams.  He  then  questioned  her  as  to  whether
she  had  not  some  confidential  friends  in  the  town,  or  some
acquaintance,  whom  she  could  authorise  to  complete  the  deed  of
sale,  and  all  that  was  necessary.

"  Why,  the  son  of  the  protopope,  Father  Kirill,  serves  in  the
courts,"  replied  Mrs.  Korobotchka,  whereupon  Tchitchikoff
asked  her  to  write  the  protopope's  son  a  confidential  letter ;  and,
in  order  to  prevent  any  unnecessary  obstacles  from  arising,  he
even  undertook  to  compose  it  himself.

"  It  would  be  a  good  thing,"  thought  Mrs.  Korobotchka  to
herself  in  the  meanwhile,  "if  he  would  take  my  flour  and
cattle  for  the  government.  I  must  make  him  a  present.  There
was  some  batter  left  over  last  night :  I  will  go  and  tell  Fetinya
to  bake  some  griddle-cakes  (hlini).  It  would  be  as  well,  too,  to
make  him  a  sweet  tart  with  eggs  :  I  have  some  very  fine  eggs,
and  it  will  only  require  a  short itime."

The  hostess  thenleft  the  room,  in  order  to  put  her  idea  into
execution  with  regard  to  the  tart,  and  probably  intending  to
amplify  it  with  other  productions  of  domestic  cooking  and
baking ;  while  Tchitchikoff  proceeded  to  the  drawing-room,
where  he  had  passed  the  night,  in  order  to  get  the  necessary
papers  from  his  dressing-case.  Here  everything  had  long  since
been  put  in  order  :  the  luxurious  feather-bed  had  been  carried
away  and  a  dressing  table  stood  before  the  divan.  Placing  his
case  upon  it,  he  rested  awhile  ;  for  he  felt  that  he  was  as
drenched  with  perspiration  as  though  he  had  been  in  a  river.
Everything  he  had  on,  from  his  shirt  to  his  stockings,  was  moist.
"  Ah,  that  confounded  old  woman  has  worn  me  out  I  "  he  said,
after  resting  a  while  ;  and  then  he  opened  his  dressing-case.  He
immediately  set  to  work,  drew  out  some  paper,  and  mending  a
pen,  began  to  write.     At  that  moment  his  hostess  entered.

"  You  have  a  pretty  case  there,  my  friend,"  said  she,  seating
herself  beside  him.     "  You  purchased  it  at  Moscow,  surely  ?  "
"  Yes,"  replied  Tchitchikoff,  continuing  to  write.


MADAME   KOROBOTCHKINA.  51

"  I  knew  it :  everything  there  is  of  good  workmanship.  Two
years  ago  my  sister  brought  me  some  warm  shoes  for  the  chil-
dren from  Moscow,  and  they  are  of  such  good  material  that  the
children  are  still  wearing  them  to  this  hour.  Ah,  what  a  lot  of
stamped  paper  you  have  there  !  "  she  went  on,  peeping  into  the
dressing-case.  In  fact,  there  was  a  good  deal  of  stamped  paper
there.  "  If  you  would  only  give  me  a  sheet  of  it,"  she  added.
"  I  need  it  so  much  :  if  a  petition  has  to  be  sent  to  the  court,  I
have  nothing  to  write  it  on."

Tchitchikofl'  explained  to  her  that  the  paper  was  not  suited  for
the~pufpose  she  indicated  :  that  it  was  intended  for  bills  of  sale
and  not  for  petitions.  However,  at  last,  in  order  to  quiet  her,
he  gave  her  several  sheets  valued  at  a  rouble  each.  Then  having
written  the  letter  to  the  protopope's  son,  he  gave  it  to  her  to
sign,  and  asked  for  a  brief  list  of  the  dead  moujiks.  It  appeared
that  she  kept  no  list,  but  she  knew  almost  all  of  their  names  by
heart.  He  made  her  dictate  them  to  him  on  the  spot.  The  family-
names  of  some  of  the  peasants,  and  still  more  their  nicknames,
surprised  him  ;  and  each  time  he  heard  a  strange  one,  he
paused  and  looked  up.  A  certain  Petr  Savelieff  Neuvazhai-
Koruito'''  struck  him  especially,  and  he  could  not  refrain  from
saying,  "  That  is  very  long."  Another  had  the  term  korovuii
Jcirpitch\  coupled  with  his  name,  and  one  was  simply  called
Y\'^heel  Ivan.  When  Tchitchikoff  had  finished  writing,  he
sniffed  the  air  a  little,  and  inhaled  the  smell  of  something  hot
and  buttery.

"I  humbly  beg  of  you  to  taste,"  said  his  hostess,  whereupon
he  glanced  round,  and  saw  on  the  table  some  mushrooms,  pat-
ties, butter-cakes,  pancakes,  griddle-cakes,  and  all  sorts  of  tarts
— tarts  containing  garlic,  poppy-seeds,  curds,  fish,  and  what  not.

"  Here  is  a  sweet  pasty  with  eggs,"  said  the  hostess.

Tchitchikoff'  attacked  the  sweet  pasty  with  eggs,  and  after
eating  nearly  half  of  it,  he  praised  it.  In  fact,  the  pasty
was  savoury  in  itself;  and  besides,  after  all  his  trouble  and  bar-
tering with  the  old  woman,  he  needed  some  substantial  refresh-
ment.

"  Will  you  have  some  griddle-cakes  ?  "  asked  his  hostess.

In  reply,  Tchitchikoff"  rolled  three  cakes  together,  dipped
them  in  some  melted  butter,  put  them  into  his  mouth,  and  then
wiped  his  lips  and  rubbed  his  hands  on  his  napkin.

After  repeating  this  three  times,  he  requested  his  hostess  to
order  his  britchka  to  be  prepared.     Nastasya  Petrovna  imme-

*  Despise-the-Trough.  t  Cow-brick.

UNIVERSITY  OF  H.LINOIS
LIBRARY


62  DEAD   SOULS.

diately  sent  Fetinya  with  instructions  to  attend  to  this,  and  also
to  fetch  some  more  hot  griddle-cakes  at  the  same  time.

*'  Your  griddle-cakes  are  very  good,  my  dear  woman,"  said
Tchitchikoff,  accepting  the  hot  ones  when  they  arrived.

"  Yes,  we  do  them  fairly  well  here,"  said  the  hostess  ;  "  but
it's  a  pity  the  crops  are  bad  ;  the  flour  is  not  so  good. — But  why
are  you  in  such  a  hurry,  my  friend  ?  "  she  added,  perceiving
that  Tchitchikoff  had  his  cap  in  his  band.  "  The  britchka  is
not  harnessed  yet."

"It  must  be  ready,  my  good  woman,  it  must  be  ready.  My
man  harnesses  the  horses  quickly."

"  Well,  please  don't  forget  about  the  contracts."

"  I  won't  forget,  I  won't  forget,"  said  Tchitchikoflf,  as  ho
went  into  the  vestibule.

"  And  you  won't  buy  any  lard  ?  "  said  his  hostess,  following
him.

"  Why  not  ?     I'll  buy  some,  but  later  on."

"  I  shall  have  some  at  Christmas."

"  I  will  buy  it,  I  will  buy  it :  I  will  buy  everything  you  have,
even  your  lard."

'•Perhaps  you  would  also  like  some  chicken's  feathers.  I
shall  have  some  also  at  St.  Philip's  feast."

"  Very  good,  very  good,"  said  Tchitchitkoff.

"  You  see,  my  father,  that  your  britchka  is  not  yet  ready,"
added  his  hostess,  when  they  emerged  from  the  porch.

"It  will  be  ready  sure  enough.  But  tell  me,  how  I  am  to
get  back  to  the  high  road  ?  "

"  How  are  you  to  get  to  it  ?  "  said  his  hostess.  "  Well  it  is
hard  to  tell  you  ;  there  are  a  number  of  turns,  but  I  can  send
a  little  girl  with  you  to  guide  you.  You  probably  have  room
for  her  to  sit  on  the  box  ?  "

"  Of  course."

"  Then,  I  will  send  a  little  girl  with  you ;  she  knows  the
road ;  only  mind  you  do  not  carry  her  ofl' !  The  traders  have
already  carried  off  one  of  my  girls."

Tchitchikoff  assured  her  that  he  would  not  do  so,  and  Mrs.
Korobotchka,  regaining  her  composure,  then  began  to  inspect
everything  in  her  yard  ;  she  glanced  at  the  housekeeper,  who
was  bringing  some  honey  from  the  storehouse  ;  at  a  moujik,
who  made  his  appearance  at  the  gate ;  and  gradually  her  mind,
.  sorely  confused  by  her  chat  with  our  hero,  reverted  to  house-
.  hold  matters.

"  Ah  !  here  is  the  britchka,  here  is  the  britchka  !  "  exclaimed
Tchitchikoff  ^at  last,  catching  sight  of  his  approaching  vehicle.


MADAME   KOROBOTCHKINA.  53

"  What  have  you  been  doing  so  long,  you  blockhead  ?  "  he
added  to  Selifan.  "  It  is  evident  you  haven't  entirely  got  rid
of  the  fumes  of  your  intoxication."

To  this  Selifan  made  no  reply.

"Farewell,  my  dear  woman!"  added  our  hero.  "Now,
where  is  your  girl  ?  "

"  Hey,  Pelageya,"  said  the  hostess  to  a  little  girl  of  eleven,
who  was  standing  near  the  porch,  in  a  gown  of  home-made
linen  stufi",  with  bare  feet,  which  might  have  been  taken  at  a
distance  for  boots,  so  bedaubed  they  were  with  fresh  mud.
"Show this  gentleman  the  road."

Selifan  helped  the  child  to  climb  on  to  the  box,  Tchitchikoff
placed  his  foot  on  the  step  after  her ;  and  making  the  britchka
tilt  on  one  side,  for  he  was  rather  heavy,  he  finally  took  his
seat,  saying,  "Ah,  now,  that's  well!  Farewell,  my  good
woman  !  "     Then  the  horses  started  off.

Selifan  growled  all  the  way,  but,  at  the  same  time,  he  was
very  attentive  to  his  business,  as  was  generally  the  case  with
him  when  he  had  been  in  fault,  or  intoxicated.  The  horses
were  wonderfully  spruced  up.  The  collar  of  one  of  them,  which
had  hitherto  been  almost  in  a  tattered  state,  was  now  skilfully
mended.  They  went  on  till  they  reached  a  cross  road,  and
here  the  coachman  turned  to  the  little  girl  seated  on  the  box
beside  him.  Pointing  with  his  whip  to  the  cross  road,  which
was  black  with  the  rain,  and  which  ran  between  fresh,  bright,
green  fields,  he  asked,  "  To  the  right,  eh?  "

"  No,  no  :  I  will  show  you,"  rephed  the  girl.

"Where  now?"  asked  Selifan,  when  they  had  gone  some
distance  farther,  and  had  come  to  a  fresh  cross  road.

"  It's  here,"  replied  the  little  maid,  pointing  with  her  hand.

"  Why,  you  child  !  "  said  Selifan.  "  That  is  to  the  right,  as
I  said.     She  doesn't  know  the  right  from  the  left !  "  he  added.

Although  the  day  was  very  fine,  the  road  was  so  miry  that
the  wheels  of  the  britchka  caught  up  the  mud,  and  soon  became
covered  with  it  as  with  a  coating  of  felt,  which  rendered  the
equipage  considerably  heavier.  Moreover,  the  soil  was  clayey,
and  unusually  adhesive.  For  these  reasons  they  did  not  emerge
from  the  bye  ways  until  mid- day.  Without  the  aid  of  the  little
girl,  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  accomplish  even  this  ;  for
the  roads  sprawled  out  in  all  directions,  and  Selifan  would  have
covered  a  vast  expanse  of  unnecessary  ground,  without  any
fault  of  his  own.  However,  the  little  girl  at  last  pointed  to  a
black-looking  building  in  the  distance,  and  said,  "  There  is  the
highway."


54  DEAD    SOULS.

"And  that  building?"  inquired  Selifan.

"  That's  the  tavern,"  said  the  child.

"All  right,  now  we  can  get  along  by  ourselves,"  rejoined
Selifan:  "run  home."

He  drew  up,  and  helped  her  to  descend,  muttering  between
his  teeth,  "  What  a  black-legged  creature  you  are  !  "

TchitchikofF  gave  her  a  copper  groschen  ;  and  then  she  ran
away  home,  quite  content  with  her  present  and  especially  with
having  ridden  on  the  carriage-box.


CHAPTER  IV.


NOZDEEFF.


On  reaching  the  inn  Tchitchikoff  commanded  a  halt  for  two
reasons :  on  the  one  hand,  to  give  the  horses  an  opportunity  to
rest,  and,  on  the  other,  to  get  something  to  eat  for  himself.

The  wooden  inn,  darkened  with  age,  received  TchitchikofF
beneath  its  narrow  but  hospitable  verandah,  supported  on  turned
wooden  columns,  which  resembled  ancient  ecclesiastical  candle-
sticks. The  inn  was  somewhat  like  an  izbd  (cabin),  but  of
rather  larger  dimensions.  The  carving  on  the  cornice  round
the  windows  and  door  gave  it  a  tolerably  artistic  appearance,
which  was  heightened  by  some  jugs  and  flowers  painted  on
the  shutters.

Ascending  the  narrow  wooden  staircase  which  led  up-stairs
into  a  spacious  vestibule,  Tchitchikoff  encountered  a  door  which
opened  with  a  squeak,  and  beheld  a  fat  old  woman  in  a  motley
chintz  gown,  who  addressed  him  with,  "  This  way,  if  you
please."

"  Do  you  happen  to  have  a  roast  sucking-pig  ?"  Tchitchikofi
asked  in  reply  to  her  greeting.
,,      "  Yes."

"  With  horse-radish  and  sour  cream  ?  "

"  Yes,  with  both."

"  Fetch  it  here,  then."

The  old  woman  went  to  get  it,  and  brought  a'  plate,  and  a
napkin  which  was  starched  to  such  a  point  that  it  stood  on  one
end  like  a  dry  crust ;  then  she  brought  a  knife  with  a  yellow
bone  handle  and  a  blade  as  thin  as  a  penknife,  a  two-pronged
fork,  and  a  salt-cellar  which  could  not  be  induced  to  stand
straight  on  the  table.


NOZDREFF.  55

Our  hero,  according  to  his  custom,  immediately  entered  into
conversation  with  the  landlady,  and  inquired  whether  she  kept
the  inn  herself,  or  whether  there  was  a  landlord,  and  how  much
money  the  inn  brought  in  each  year,  and  whether  her  sons  lived
with  her,  and  whether  the  eldest  one  was  married  or  unmarried,
what  sort  of  a  wife  he  had,  whether  she  had  brought  him  a
large  dowry  or  not,  and  whether  the  bride's  father  was  satisfied,
or  whether  he  had  been  angry  at  only  receiving  only  a  few  presents
at  the  wedding ;  in  short,  he  omitted  nothing.  Of  course  it  is
understood  that  he  inquired  what  landowners  there  were  in  the
vicinity  /  and  he  found  out  that  there  were  several,  named
Blokhin,  Potchitaefi",  Muilnoi,  Tcheprakoff,  and  Sobakevitch.
"  Ah  !  do  you  know  Sobakevitch  ?  "  he  asked,  and  he  imme-
diately learnt  that  the  old  woman  knew  not  only  Sobakevitch,
but  Maniloflf  also.  She  declared,  too,  that  Manilofi"  was  more
exacthifj  than  Sobakevitch  :  "He  immediately  orders  a  chicken
to  be  boiled,  asks  for  some  veal,"  she  said  ;  "  and  if  there  is  any
roast  mutton,  he  asks  for  that  also — indeed  he  tries  everything  ;
but  Sobakevitch  only  asks  for  one  thing,  eats  it  all  up,  and  then
wantsa  second  help  without  extra  charge."

While  Tchitchikoff  was  thus  conversing  and  eating  the  roast
sucking-pig,  the  rumble  of  an  approaching  carriage  became  audi-
ble. Peeping  through  the  window  he  perceived  a  light  britchka,
attached  to  a  troika  of  three  fine  horses,  halting  before  the  door
of  the  inn.  Two  men  descended  from  the  britchka.  One  of  them
was  fair-haired  and  of  lofty  stature;  the  other  somewhat  shorter
and  of  dark  complexion.  The  fair  man  wore  a  dark-blue  Hun-
garian coat,  the  dark  one  a  simple  striped  summer  JRcket.  In
the  distance  an  empty  calash  was  coming  along,  drawn  by  four
long-maned  horses  with  frayed  collars  and  some  rope  harness.
The  fair-haired  man  immediately  walked  up-stairs,  while  the
dark  one  remained  fumbling  for  something  in  the  britchka,
talking  to  the  servant  and  pointing  to  the  advancing  calash.
His  voice  struck  Tchitchikoft"  as  familiar  to  him  in  some  way  or
other.  While  he  was  still  gazing  out  of  the  window  the  fair-
haired  man  had  succeeded  in  opening  the  door  of  the  room.  He
was  of  lofty  stature,  with  a  thin,  or  what  is  called  a  worn  face,
and  a  reddish  moustache.  It  might  be  surmised  from  his
brown  cheeks  that  he  knew  what  smoke  was,  if  not  the  smoke
of  powder,  at  least  that  from  tobacco.  He  bowed  courteously
to  Tchitchikoflf,  and  the  latter  responded  in  the  same  way.
Then  the  dark-complexioned  man  entered,  flinging  his  cap  from
his  head  upon  the  table,  and  jauntily  passing  his  fingers  through
his  thick  black  hair.    He  was  a  well-built  young  man  of  medium


56  DEAD    SOULS.

height,  with  full  red  cheeks,  teeth  as  white  as  snow,  and  whiskers
as  Slack  as  pitch.  He  looked  as  fresh  as  blood  and  milk  ;  his
face  was  radiant  with  health.

"Bah,  bah,  bah  !  "  he  exclaimed  all  at  once,  flinging  both
arms  about  as  he  caught  sight  of  Tchitchikoflf.  "  How  did  you
come  here  ?  "

Tchitchikoff  now  recognised  Nozdreff,  the  same  person  in-
whose  company  he  had  dined  at  the  procurator's,  and  who,  in
the  course  of  a  very  few  minutes,  had  got  upon  a  very  intimate
footing  with  him.

"Where  have  you  been?"  resumed  Nozdreff;  and  without
awaiting  a  reply,  he  went  on.  "  For  myself  I  have  been  to  the
fair,  my  dear  fellow.  And  now  congratulate  me  !  I'm  totally
ruined  !  Would  you  believe  it  ?  I  was  never  so  completely
plucked  in  all  my  life  !  Why,  I  am  travelling  with  peasants'
horses  !  Just  look  out  of  the  window  !  "  Hereupon  he  bent
Tchitchikoff's  head  so  that  it  almost  came  in  violent  contact
with  the  window  sash.  "  Do  you  see  what  wretched  beasts
they  are?"  he  continued.  "It  was  with  difficulty  that  they
dragged  me  along,  the  cursed  animals  !  I  had  to  get  into  his
britchka."  So  saying,  Nozdreff  pointed  to  his  comrade.  "By
the  way,  j'ou  are  not  already  acquainted  ?  This  is  my  brother-
in-law,  Mizhueff.  We  were  talking  about  you  this  morning.
'  See,  now,'  said  I,  '  we  must  fi.nd  Tchitchikoff! '  But  oh  !  my
friend,  if  you  only  knew  how  completely  ruined  I  am!  Will
you  believe  it  ?  I  not  only  lost  four  trotters,  but  everything
else  besides  !  Why,  I  haven't  either  a  watch  or  a  chain  about
me  !  "

Tchitchikoff  now  looked  at  Nozdreff,  and  perceived  that  he
had  neither  watch  nor  chain.  It  even  struck  him  that  one  of
his  whiskers  was  smaller  and  thinner  than  the  other.

"  If  I  only  had  had  twenty  roubles  in  my  pocket,"  continued
Nozdreff,  "  only  just  twenty,  I  could  have  won  everything
back ;  that  is  to  say,  I  could  have  won  that  and  thirty  thou-
sand roubles  besides,  and  have  immediately  put  them  into  this
pocket-book,  like  an  honourable  man."

"  But  that  was  what  you  said  at  the  time,"  replied  the  fair-
haired  man ;  "  and  when  I  gave  you  fifty  roubles,  you  lost
them  too."

"I  did  not  mean  to  lose  them;  by  heavens,  I  didn't  mean
to !  If  I  had  not  committed  a  mistake  I  should  not  have  lost
them.  If  I  hadn't  staked  three  to  two  on  that  cursed  seven
after  the  king,  I  might  have  broken  the  bank."

"  But  you  didn't  break  it,"  said  the  fair-haired  man.


NOZDREFF.  67

"  I  did  not  break  it  because  I  plaj-ed  too  soon.  But  do  you
think  that  your  major  plays  well  ?  "

"  "Whether  he  plays  well  or  not,  he  outplayed  you."

"  Much  that  amounts  to  !  "  said  Nozdreii".  "  I'll  win  some
cash  from  him  in  the  same  way.  Yes,  just  let  him  play  with
me  again,  then  we'll  see,  we'll  see  what  sort  of  a  player  he  is.
Ah!  how  jolly  we  were  in  town,  friend  Tchitchikoflf !  Really,
the  fair  was  capital.  The  merchants  themselves  declared  that
there  never  was  such  a  concourse  of  people.  Everything  which
I  had  brought  up  from  the  country  sold  at  the  most  favourable
prices.  Ah,  my  friend,  what  a  carouse  we  had  !  Even  now
when  I  think  of  it — deuce  take  it — that  is,  it  is  such  a  pity  you
were  not  there.  Just  imagine,  a  regiment  of  dragoons  Avas
stationed  at  three  versts  from  the  town.  Every  one  of  the
officers — and  there  were  forty  of  them — came  to  town ;  and
then  we  began  to  drink,  brother,  with  the  staff  cavalry  captain,
Potzyelueflf,  such  a  splendid  fellow  he  is  !  such  a  moustache  he
has,  brother  !  He  calls  Bordeaux  '  burdashki.'  '  Bring  some
burdashki,  my  good  fellow,'  says  he.  Then  Lieutenant  Kuv-
shinnikoff — ah,  my  friend,  what  a  charming  man  he  is  !  And
I  may  say  that  the  carouse  was  managed  according  to  rule.
We  were  all  together,  and  what  wine  Ponomareff  gave  us  !  He
is  a  rascal  though,  and  you  mustn't  purchase  anything  in  his
shop  :  he  mixes  all  sorts  of  rubbish  in  his  wine — sandal-wood,
burnt  cork,  and  he  even  colours  it  with  elderberry,  the  villain ;
but  after  all  if  he  brings  a  little  bottle  from  the  cellar  which  he
calls  his  own  sanctum,  then  truly,  my  friend,  you  find  yourself
in  the  empyrean.  Our  champagne  was  so  good  that  the
governor's  is  nothing  to  it,  simply  kvas.*'  Fancy,  not  only
real  Cliquot,  but  a  special  sort  of  Cliquot — double-distilled
Cliquot.  And  then  I  got  one  little  bottle  of  a  French  wine
called  '  Bonbon,'  with  a  perfume.  Ah  !  roses  and  everything
you  like.  But  what  a  carouse  we  did  have  !  After  us  came
some  prince  or  other,  and  he  sent  to  the  shop  for  champagne ;
but  no,  there  wasn't  a  single  bottle  left  in  the  whole  city,  the
officers  had  drunk  it  all  up.  Just  think,  I  alone  drank  seven-
teen bottles  in  the  course  of  the  dinner."

"  Come,  now,  you  can't  drink  seventeen  bottles,"  remarked
the  fair-haired  man.

"  On  the  word  of  an  honest  man,  I  say  that  I  did  drink
them,"  replied  Nozdrefl".

"You  can  say  what  you  like,  but  I  assert  that  you  cannot
drink  ten."

*  A  Bourish.  liquor  made  from  rye-meal  and  malt.


58  DEAD  SOULS.

"  Come,  will  you  bet  that  I  can't  drink  them  ?  "

"  "What's  the  use  of  betting  ?  "

"Come,    now,    wager    that    gun    which     you    bought    in
town."

"No,  I  won't."

"  Come,  wager  it,  try  it."

"  I  don't  want  to  try  it."

"  Yes,  you  would  be  left  without  a  gun  as  you  are  left  with-
out a  hat.  Ah,  friend  Tchitchikoflf,  how  sorry  I  am  that  you
were  not  there.  I  know  that  you  could  not  have  parted  from
Kuvshinnikofi".  How  well  you  would  have  agreed  with  each
other !  He's  not  at  all  like  the  procurator  and  all  those
government  misers  who  tremble  over  every  copeck.  He  can
play  at  galbik,  faro,  or  anything  you  wish.  Ah,  Tchitchikoff  !
Now,  what  would  it  have  cost  you  to  come  ?  Truly,  you
are  a  dirty  pig  for  not  coming,  a  thorough  lout.  Kiss  me,  my
soul ;  death,  but  I  love  you  !  Look,  Mizhueff !  fate  has  brought
us  together.  Now,  what  is  he  to  me,  or  what  am  I  to  him?
He  has  come  here,  God  knows  whence,  and  we  also  have  come
here.  But,  I  say,  how  many  carriages  there  were,  my  friend,
at  the  fair,  and  all  on  such  a  grand  scale  !  I  tried  my  luck  at
the  wheel  of  fortune,  and  won  two  boxes  of  pomatum,  a  porce-
lain cup,  and  a  guitar  :  then  I  staked  once  more,  and  gave  the
thing  a  twist,  and  lost  more  than  six  roubles,  dash  it !  But  I
say,  if  you  only  knew  what  a  wild  fellow  Kuvshinnikofi"  is  !  We
went  to  nearly  all  the  balls  together.  There  was  such  a  woman
at  one  of  them,  with  hardly  anything  on  her  back.  She  was
nearly  naked,  and  I  thought  to  myself,  '  Devil  take  it ! '  But
Kuvshinnikofi" — he's  such  a  brute  ! — he  just  seated  himself
beside  her,  and  paid  her  such  compliments  in  French.  I  assure
you,  he  didn't  miss  flirting  with  any  of  the  women.  That's
what  he  calls  '  making  the  most  of  the  strawberries.'  By  the
way  one  dealer  at  the  fair  sold  such  wonderful  fish  and  slices
of  dried  sturgeon.  I  have  brought  some  with  me — lucky  I
thought  of  buying  them  while  I  still  had  some  money  left.
But,  I  say,  where  are  you  going  now  ?  "

"  To  see  a  man  I  have  to  deal  with,"  said  Tchitchikofi".
"  Oh,  dash  the  man  !  let  him  alone  ;  come  to  my  house."
"  Impossible,  impossible  !     I  have  some  business  to  transact
with  him."

"  Well,  that's  a  nice  story  to  invent.     Ah,  you  Opodeldok
Ivanovitch,  you're  deceiving  us  !  "

"  Eeally,  I  have  some  business  to  attend  to,  and  very  impor-
tant business  too."


J


NOZDREFF.  69

"  I'll  bet  that  you  are  lying  !  Come,  tell  me  to  whose  house
you  are  going."

"  Well,  then,  to  Sobakevitch's."

On  hearing  this  Nozdreff  burst  into  such  a  resounding  laugh
as  only  a  fresh,  healthy  man  can  give  vent  to,  displaying  all
his  sugar-white  teeth,  and  his  cheeks  quivering  and  leaping.
A  traveller  in  an  adjoining  room  who  was  abruptly  aroused  from
his  slumbers,  stared  round,  wondering  what  was  happening,
and  finally  ejaculated,

"Eh,  what !  has  the  house  tumbled  down?  "

"  What  is  there  ridiculous  in  what  I  said  ?"  said  Tchitchikoff,
somewhat  offended  by  Nozdreff 's  laugh.

But  Nozdreff  continued  laughing  at  the  top  of  his  voice,  and
even  shouted  at  intervals,  "  Oh,  mercy  !  I  shall  burst."

"  But  there's  nothing  to  laugh  at.  I  promised  Sobakevitch
to  go  and  see  him,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  You'll  be  sorry  whenj'ou  reach  his  house,  he's  a  downright
niggard  !  Ah  !  I  know  your  character  ;  you'll  be  mightily  dis-
appointed if  you  think  you'll  find  a  faro  bank  and  a  good  bottle
of  '  bonbon '  there.  Listen,  my  dear  fellow;  let  Sobakevitch
go  to  the  devil,  and  come  with  me.  What  dried  sturgeon  I'll
treat  you  to  !  Ponomareff  bowed  to  me  when  I  bought  it  and
said,  '  It's  only  for  you ;  you  may  search  through  the  whole
fair,  and  you  won't  find  any  such  dried  sturgeon.'  But  he's  a
frightful  scamp,  and  I  said  so  to  his  face.  '  You,'  said  I,  '  and
our  brandy  farmers  are  the  biggest  rascals  we  have.'  The  beast
laughed,  and  stroked  his  beard.  Kuvshinnikoff  and  I  break-
fasted at  his  place  every  day.  Ah,  my  dear  fellow,  I  forgot  to
tell  you.  But  I've  got  something  which  I  wouldn't  sell  for
ten  thousand  roubles.  Hey,  there,  Porfiriy  !  "  he  shouted  to
his  man,  who  was  holding  in  one  hand  a  knife,  and  in  the  other
a  crust  of  bread  with  a  bit  of  sturgeon,  which  he  had  succeeded
in  slicing  off"  on  the  sly.  "Hey,  there,  Porfiriy!"  shouted
Nozdrefi",  "  bring  that  puppy  here.  Such  a  dog  !  "  he  continued,
turning  to  Tchitchikoff.  "  I  didn't  buy  it,  I  stole  it ;  the  owner
wouldn't  give  it  up  of  his  own  free  will.  I  offered  him  a
chestnut  horse  :  you  remember  it — the  one  I  won  from  Khvos-
tuireff?  "

As  it  happened,  Tchitchikoff  had  never  seen  either  the  chest-
nut horse  nor  I^vostuireft'  in  his  life.

"  Won't  you  have  something  to  eat,  master,  now  ?  "  said
the  old  woman,  approaching  Nozdreff.

"No,   nothing.     Ah,    my    dear    Tchitchikoff",    how   we    did


60  DEAD    SOULS.

carouse  !    However,  woman,  give  me  a  glass  of  vodka  [spirits].
What  kind  have  you  got  ?"  .  ■

"  Aniseed,"  replied  the  old  woman.

"  Well,  fetch  your  aniseed,"  said  Nozdreff.

"  Give  me  a  glass  too,"  said  the  fair-haired  man.

"  There  was  an  actress  at  the  theatre  who  sang  like  a  canary,"
now  resumed  Nozdreff.  "  Kuvshinnikoff,  who  sat  beside  me,
said,  '  There,  my  dear  fellow,  we  must  make  the  most  of  the
strawberries  with  her.'  I  think  there  were  at  least  fifty  booths
at  the  fair.  A  fellow  named  Fenardi  turned  somersets  for  four
hours."  Here  he  took  a  glass  of  aniseed  from  the  old  woman,
who  made  a  low  reverence  to  him.  "  Bring  it  here!  "  he  next
cried,  catching  sight  of  Porfiriy  entering  with  the  puppy.

Porfiriy  was  dressed  like  his  master,  in  a  dirty  wadded  ark-
haluk.*  He  set  the  puppy  on  the  floor  ;  the  animal  stretched
itself  out,  and  then  began  to  sniff  and  smell.

"  There's  a  pup,"  said  Nozdreff,  grasping  it  by  the  back,  and
lifting  it  up,  whereupon  it  emitted  a  very  pitiful  howl.  "But
you  haven't  done  as  I  told  you,"  resumed  Nozdreff,  turning  to
Porfiriy,  and  examining  the  dog's  belly  attentively.  "  You  have
not  combed  him."

"  Yes,  I  did  comb  him."

"  Then  where  have  all  those  fleas  come  from  ?  "

"  I  can't  tell.  Perhaps  they  crawled  on  to  him  from  the
britchka."

"You  lie  !  you  lie  !  and  you  never  meant  to  comb  him.  I
believe,  you  fool,  that  you  have  given  him  some  of  your  own
fleas.  Look  here,  Tchitchikoff,  look  what  ears  he  has  !  just
feel  them  with  your  hand."

"  Oh,  I  can  see  them;  he's  of  a  good  breed,"  replied  Tchit-
chikofi".

"  No,  but  take  hold  of  him  ;  feel  his  earg."

Tchitchikoff,  to  please  Nozdreff,  felt  the  animal's  ears,  and
then  remarked,  "Yes,  he  will  be  a  good  dog."

"  And  do  you  feel  how  cold  his  nose  is  ?  Take  it  in  your
hand."

Not  wishing  to  offend  him,  Tchitchikoff  touched  the  dog's
snout  also,  saying,  "  Good  scent."

"  A  genuine  bull-dog,"  went  on  Nozdreff.  "  I  confess  that  I
had  for  a  long  time  been  whetting  my  teeth  for  a  bull-dog.
Here,  Porfiriy,  take  him  away."

Porfiriy  took  hold  of  the  dog,  and  carried  him  off  to  the
britchka.

*  A  loog,  straight  coat  reaching  to  the  knees.


NOZDREFF.  61

"Listen,  Tchitchikoflf,"  continued  Nozdreff,  "you  certainly-
must  come  to  my  house  ;  it's  only  five  versts  away  ;  wo  shall
be  there  in  no  time,  and  then  you  can  go  to  Sobakevitch's,  if
you  like."

""Why  not?"  said  Tchitcbikoff  to  himself.  "I  will  go  to
Nozdrefi"s,  after  all.  He  isn't  any  worse  than  the  others.  He's
like  everybody  else  ;  and,  besides,  he's  just  been  losing  money.
He  has  plenty  of  everything,  evidently ;  and  I  might  ask  him
to  give  me  something  without  payment."  "  I'll  go,  if  you  like,"
be  now  added  aloud  ;  "  but  don't  detain  me  long ;  time  is  of
value  to  me  just  now."

"  Ah  !  that's  right !  that's  good  !  Wait,  I'll  kiss  you  for
that."  Here  Nozdreff  and  Tchitchikofi'  embraced  each  other.
"That's  glorious!"  added  the  former;  "we'll  all  three  ride
together."

"  No,  you  must  let  me  leave  you,"  said  the  fair-haired  man.
"  I  must  go  home."

"  Nonsense,  nonsense,  my  dear  fellow  !    I  won't  let  you  go."

"But  really,  my  wife  will  be  angry  ;  you  can  get  into  the
other  britchka  now."

"  Ni,  ni,  ni,  don't  think  of  it."

The  fair-haired  man  was  one  of  those  individuals  who,  at  first
sight,  seem  to  have  a  stubborn  character.  Before  you  have
succeeded  in  opening  your  mouth  they  are  ready  to  dispute,  and
it  seems  as  if  they  would  never  agree  with  anyone.  However,
it  always  ends  by  their  betraying  some  weakness,  and  consent-
.  ing  to  the  very  thing  they  had  opposed.

"  Nonsense  !  "  said  Nozdreft",  in  answer  to  some  objection
made  by  his  brother-in-law.  Then  he  set  the  latter' s  cap  on  his
head,  and  the  fair-haired  fellow  followed  his  companions.

"  You  haven't  paid  for  your  aniseed,  master,"  now  said  the
landlady.

"  Oh,  very  well,  very  well,  my  good  woman !  I  say,  brother-
in-law,  pay,  if  you  please.  I  haven't  a  copeck  left  in  my
pocket.

"  How  much  do  you  want  ?  "  asked  his  brother-in-law.

"  Why,  twenty  copecks  in  all,"  said  the  old  woman.

"  She's  mad  !     Give  her  ten  ;  that's  more  than  enough."

"It's  but  little,  master,"  said  the  old  woman.  However,  she
took  the  money  gratefully,  and  hastily  went  to  open  the  door
for  them.  She  had  lost  nothing,  as  she  had  asked  four  times
the  worth  of  the  vodka.

The  travellers  took  their  seats.  Tchitchikoff's  britchka  drove
■  idongside  the  one  in  which  Nozdrefi'  and  his  brother-in-law  sat,


62  DEAD   SOULS.

1

and  thus  they  could  all  three  of  them  converse  freely  on  the
way.  Behind  them  followed  Nozdreff's  little  calash,  which  was
always  dropping  in  the  rear,  with  its  bony  peasants'  horses.  In
this  vehicle  rode  Porfiriy  and  the  puppy.

While  the  travellers  are  journeying  on,  suppose  we  say  some-
thing about  Nozdreff,  who  may,  perhaps,  play  a  not  unimpor-
tant part  in  our  drama.

Nozdreff's  person  is  probably  already  somewhat  known  to
the  reader.  It  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  everyone  to  meet  a  few
men  like  him.  They  are  called  lively  young  fellows,  even  in
childhood,  and  at  school  they  have  the  reputation  of  being  good
comrades.  A  certain  amount  of  frankness,  straightforwardness,
and  boldness  are  visible  on  their  countenances.  They  make
acquaintances  quickly,  and  before  you  have  time  to  look  about
you  they  call  you  "  thou."  They  apparently  strike  up  a  friend-
ship for  ever  ;  but  it  almost  always  happens  that  the  person  whose
friendship  they  wish  to  cultivate  quarrels  with  them  that  same
evening  over  a  friendly  drinking-bout.  Nozdreff,  at  thirty-five,
was  precisely  the  same  as  he  had  been  at  eighteen  and  twenty
years  of  age — a  great  lover  of  carousing.  Marriage  had  effected
no  change  in  him,  especially  as  his  wife  had  soon  departed  to  the
other  world,  leaving  him  two  small  children  who  were  decidedly
in  his  way,  although  a  very  pretty  nurse  looked  after  them.  He
never  could  stay  at  home  more  than  a  day  at  a  time.  His  sen-
sitive nose  scented  out  a  fair  with  all  sorts  of  assemblies  and  balls
at  a  distance  of  ten  versts  away.  In  the  twinkling  of  an  eye
he  was  there,  disputing  and  raising  a  tumult  at  the  card  tables,
for,  like  all  men  of  his  description,  he  bad  a  passion  for  cards.
He  did  not  play  in  quite  an  irreproachable  style  or  quite
honestly,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  first  chapter,  for  he  knew
several  ways  of  turning  up  false  cards,  and  other  things  besides,
so  that  the  game  very  frequently  ended  by  his  coming  to  grief ;
he  was  either  kicked  out,  or  else  he  returned  home  with  only
one  whisker  left  him,  and  that  rather  scanty.  However,  his
full,  healthy  cheeks  were  so  well  provided  with  vegetative
force  that  his  whiskers  soon  grew  afresh,  and  even  stronger
than  before.  And  what  was  strangest  of  all — the  thing  can
only  happen  in  Russia — was  that  after  a  time  he  again  met  the
friends  who  had  pummelled  him,  and  met  them  ^as  though
nothing  had  taken  place.  And  he  was  not  the  worse  for  it,  as
the  saying  goes,  nor  they  either.

When  Nozdreff  was  in  society  he  would  either  drink  himself
full  in  such  a  manner  that  he  could  only  laugh,  or  else  he  would
lie  and  lie  in  the  most  terrible  way.  Indeed  he  lied  absolutely


NOZDREFF.  ^3

without  any  need  to  do  so  ;  all  of  a  sudden  he  would  tell  a
stoiy  about  some  horse  he  had  owned  w^ith  a  blue  or  pink  mane,
and  such-like  nonsense,  so  that  his  hearers  finally  walked  off
in  mingled  amazement  and  disgust.

While  we  have  been  describing  Nozdreff  the  three  equipages
have  driven  up  to  the  porch  of  his  house.  In  the  house  no
preparations  had  been  made  for  their  reception.  In  the  middle
of  the  dining-room  stood  two  wooden  trestles,  and  mounted
upon  them  were  two  moujiks  whitening  the  walls,  and  droning
out  an  interminable  song,  while  the  floor  was  all  bespattered
with  whitewash.  Nozdreff  at  once  ordered  the  moujiks  and  the
trestles  off,  and  ran  out  info  an  adjoining  room  to  give  his  orders.
His  guests  heard  him  giving  the  cook  directions  about  dinner,
and  on  reflection,  Tchitchikoff",  who  already  began  to  feel  some
appetite,  realised  that  they  would  not  sit  down  to  |table  before
five  o'clock.  When  Nozdreff  returned  he  took  his  guests  to
inspect  his  village  ;  and  in  a  little  over  two  hours  he  had  shown
them  absolutely  everything  worthy  of  exhibition.  First  of  all
they  went  to  inspect  the  stables,  where  they  saw  two  mares —
one  a  dapple-grey  and  the  other  a  chestnut — and  then  a  brown
stalHon,  not  very  handsome  to  look  at,  but  for  which  Nozdreff
swore  that  he  had  paid  ten  thousand  roubles.

"  Oh !  no,  you  did  not  give  ten  thousand  for  him  surely,"
remarked  his  brother-in-law.     "  He  isn't  worth  even  one."

"  By  heavens,  I  did  give  ten  thousand  !  "  said  Nozdreff.

"  You  may  swear  as  much  as  you  like,"  replied  his  brother-
in-law.

"  Well,  if  you  like,  we  will  have  a  bet  about  it,"  said  Nozdreff.

But  his  brother-in-law  would  not  bet.  Then  Nozdreff  showed
them  an  empty  stall,  where  some  valuable  horses  had  formerly
stood  ;  and  in  this  same  stable  they  also  saw  a  goat,  an  animal
which,  according  to  an  ancient  superstition,  is  considered  an  in-
dispensable adjunct  in  any  place  where  horses  are  kept.  This
one  seemed  to  be  on  good  terms  with  the  steeds,  and  walked
about  beneath  their  bellies  as  if  quite  at  home.  Then  Nozdreff
led  his  friends  to  view  a  young  wolf,  which  was  tied  up.

"Here's  a  little  wolf,"  said  he.  "I  have  him  fed  on  raw
meat,  expressly.     I  want  him  to  be  a  perfect  wild  beast."

Next  they  went  to  look  at  the  pond,  which  according  to  Noz-
dreff's  statements,  contained  fish  of  such  a  size  that  two  men
could  vfiih  difiiculty  draw  one  of  them  to  the  shore — a  statement
which  his  relative  did  not  fail  to  cast  a  doubt  upon.

"Now  I'll  show  you  the  most  splendid  pair  of  dogs  in  the
world,  Tchitchikoff,"  said  Nozdrefi".  "  The  firmness  of  their  flesh


64  DEAD   SOULS.

will  arouse  your  admiration,  and  their  scent— it's  wonderfully
keen."  Thereupon  he  led  them  to  a  very  prettily  built  little  house,
surrounded  by  a  large  yard,  enclosed  on  all  sides.  As  they  entered
the  yard  they  saw  all  kinds  of  dogs,  both  long  and  short-haired,
and  of  every  possible  hue  and  colour — dark  brown,  black  with
brown  streaks,  brown-spotted,  red-spotted,  black-eared,  grey-
eared,  &c.  NozdrefF  was  perfectly  at  home  among  all  these
animals,  like  a  father  in  the  midst  of  his  family.  They  all  in-
stantly elevated  their  tails,  wagged  them  according  to  canine  laws,
flew  straight  to  meet  the  visitors,  and  began  to  greet  them.  About
ten  of  them  placed  their  paws  on  Nozdreff's  shoulders,  another
one  manifested  the  same  friendship  for  Tchitchikoff,  and,  rising
on  his  hind  legs  licked  his  lips,  so  that  our  hero  immediately
began  to  spit.  The  three  men  duly  examined  the  two  dogs,  which
inspired  admiration  by  the  firmness  of  their  flesh — indeed  they
were  fine  animals — and  then  they  went  to  see  a  Crimean  bitch,
who  was  already  blind  and  would  die  soon,  so  Nozdreff"  declared,
though  she  had  been  a  splendid  creature  only  two  years  before.
They  looked  at  the  bitch  and  found  that  she  really  was  blind.
Then  they  went  to  see  the  mill,  overlooking  a  little  stream.
"  And  now  we  must  visit  the  blacksmith,"  said  Nozdrefl'.  And
after  walking  a  little  farther  they  came  upon  the  smithy.

"  Here,  in  this  field,"  said  Nozdrefi",  pointing  to  a  meadow  near
the  blacksmith's  shop,  "  there's  such  a  pest  of  hares,  that  you
can't  see  the  ground  for  them  at  times.  The  other  day  I  caught
one  of  them  by  the  hind-legs  with  my  own  hand."

"Come  now,  you  can't  catch  a  hare  with  your  hand,"  re^
marked  his  brother-in-law.

"But  I  did,  I  actually  did  catch  one!"  replied  Nozdreff'.
"Now  I  will  take  you  to  show  you  where  my  land  ends,"
he  resumed,  turning  to  Tchitchikoff'.

Nozdreff  led  his  guests  through  a  field  full  of  briars  and  stones
and  little  mounds.  The  guests  were  obliged  to  make  their  way
over  the  clods  recently  turned  by  the  plough.  Tchitchikoff
began  to  feel  tifed.  lu  many  places  water  burst  forth  beneath
their  feet,  the  district  lay  so  low.  At  first  they  took  pains  in
-walking  and  set  their  feet  cautiously ;  but  perceiving  at  last  that
this  was  of  no  avail,  they  went  straight  on,  without  trying  to
.escape  the  mud.  After  proceeding  a  considerable  distance,  they
at  last  beheld  the  boundary,  which  consisted  of  a  wooden  post
and  a  narrow  ditch.  "  Here's  the  boundary-line,"  said  Nozdreff;
"  all  that  you  behold  on  this  side  is  mine,  including  all  the
^forest  which  looks  so  blue  in  that  direction,  and  everything  that
is  behind  the  forest — yes,  all  that  is  mine  !  "


NOZDREFF.  65

"  "When  did  the  forest  come  into  your  possession  ?  "  inquired
his  brother-in-law.  "  Have  you  purchased  it  recently  ?  It
never  used  to  belong  to  you."

"  Yes,  I  bought  it  a  little  while  ago,"  replied  Nozdreff.

"  How  did  you  manage  to  buy  it  so  quickly  ?  "

"  How  ?  Why,  I  bought  it  on  the  day  before  yesterday,  and
I  paid  a  high  price  for  it :   devil  take  it !  "

"  But  you  were  at  the  fair  then  !  "

"  What  a  fellow  you  are,  Sofron  !  Can't  a  man  be  at  a  fair
and  buy  some  land  as  well  ?  Well,  yes,  I  was  at  the  fair,  but
my  steward  bought  it  in  my  absence."

*'  Yes,  the  steward  might  have  done  it,"  said  his  brother-in-
law  ;  but  he  still  had  his  doubts  and  shook  his  head.

The  visitors  returned  to  the  house  by  the  same  abominable
route.  Nozdreff  conducted  them  to  his  study,  in  which,  how-
ever, no  trace  of  those  things  which  are  usually  to  be  seen  in  a
study,  namely,  books  and  papers,  were  perceptible  ;  the  only
noteworthy  articles  there  were  a  sword  and  two  guns,  which
were  hanging  on  the  wall,  one  of  the  firearms,  according  to  their
owner,  being  worth  three  hundred,  and  the  other  eight  hundred,
roubles.  His  brother-in-law,  after  surveying  the  apartment,
merely  shook  his  head.  Then  they  were  shown  some  Turkish
daggers,  on  one  of  which  was  engraved  the  name  "  Savclli  Sibi-
ri/aliojf,  niaker."  And  then  a  hand-organ  was  produced,  and
Nozdreff  immediately  ground  out  something.  This  hand-organ
played  not  unpleasantly  ;  but  in  the  middle  of  the  tunes  some
catastrophe  seemed  to  take  place,  for  a  mazurka  suddenly
ended  in  the  song,  "Malbrook's  going  to  the  war ;  "  and  the
latter,  in  its  turn,  unexpectedly  developed  into  a  well-known
waltz  of  ancient  date.  Long  after  the  player  had  ceased  to  turn
the  crank,  one  pipe  in  the  organ,  a  very  audacious  one,  would
not  quiet  down,  but  went  on  whistling.  Then  Nozdreff'  exhi-
bited his  pipes  of  wood,  clay,  and  meerschaum,  coloured  and
uncoloured,  some  of  them  enveloped  in  chamois-s^in  ;  also  a  tchi-
bouk  with  an  amber  mouthpiece,  which  he  had  won  at  play  not
long  before ;  and  a  tobacco-pouch,  embroidered  by  some  countess
or  other,  who  had  fallen  head  over  heels  in  love  with  him  at
some  posting  station,  and  whose  little  hands,  as  he  expressed  it,
were  the  most  subtle  superfluities  in  the  world.  By  this  word
superfluities,  he  probably  intended  to  designate  the  highest
pitch  of  perfection.

After  nibbling  a  little  smoked  sturgeon,  they  seated  them-
selves at  table  at  about  five  o'clock.  It  was  evident  that  with
Nozdreff  dinner  did  not  constitute  the  principal  feature  in  life  ;

E


66  DEAD   SOULS

the  dishes  did  not  play  a  very  great  part  in  it :  some  of  the
food  was  burned  to  cinders  and  part  of  it  was  not  cooked  at  all.
It  was  plain,  too,  that  the  cook  was  chiefly  guided  by  inspiration,
and  dashed  in  the  first  thing  which  came  to  hand  :  if  the  pepper
stood  near  him,  he  sprinkled  in  pepper  ;  if  cabbage  came  in  his
way,  he  used  cabbage  ;  and  added  milk,  ham,  peas — in  short,
everything,  slap-dash  fashion.  So  long  as  it  was  hot,  some
flavour  would  surely  be  the  result.  At  dinner,  Nozdreff  directed
attention  to  the  wine  ;  even  before  the  soup  was  served  he
poured  out  a  large  glass  of  port  for  each  of  his  guests,  and
another  of  Haut  Sauterne  ;  for  in  the  Russian  provinces  there  is
no  such  thing  as  plain  Sauterne.

Then  Nozdi-eff  ordered  a  bottle  of  Madeira  to  be  brought ;
"  and  better,''  said  he,  "  no  field-marshal  ever  drank."  The
Madeira  actually  scorched  their  mouths  ;  for  the  dealers  being
well  acquainted  with  the  tastes  of  the  provincial  landed  gentry,
had  touched  it  up  with  rum,  and  added  nitro-muriatic  acid,  in
the  hope  that  the  drinker's  stomach  would  bear  it  all.  Then
Nozdrefi"  ordered  a  bottle  of  sparkling  Burgundy  to  be  brought,
and  filled  the  glasses  with  great  diligence,  right  and  left — Tchi-
tchikoflf's  and  his  brother-in-law's  ;  but  Tchitchikofi"  observed,
by  the  way,  that  he  did  not  pour  much  into  his  own.  This
made  him  cautious  ;  and  as  soon  as  Nozdrefi"  began  to  talk  or
to  pour  out  some  more  liquor  for  his  brother-in-law,  he  promptly
emptied  his  own  glass  on  his  plate.  Before  long  some  cherry-
brandy  was  brought  on,  which  had,  so  Nozdrefi'  declared,  ex-
actly the  same  flavour  as  cream,  but  in  which,  to  Tchitchikoft"s
amazement,  common  raw  brandy  was  quite  perceptible.  Next
they  drank  some  sort  of  balsam,  which  bore  a  name  difiicult  to
recall ;  indeed  the  host  himself  gave  it  a  difierent  title  when  he
mentioned  it  for  the  second  time.

The  dinner  had  long  been  finished,  and  all  the  wines  had
been  tried,  but  the  guests  still  lingered  at  the  table.  Tchitchi-
kofi" was  unwilling  to  approach  Nozdrefi"  on  the  matter  of  most
importance  to  himself  in  the  presence  of  the  brother-in-law.
The  subject  was  one  that  demanded  solitude  and  a  friendly
discussion.  However,  after  all  the  brother-in-law  could  hardly
be  a  dangerous  person,  for  he  appeared  to  be  pretty  thoroughly  1
intoxicated,  and  as  he  sat  there  he  kept  pecking  at  the  table
with  his  nose.  Becoming  conscious  all  at  once  that  he  was  not
in  a  very  nice  condition,  he  made  a  suggestion  that  he  had
better  start  for  home,  but  he  did  so  in  as  languid  and  feeble  a
voice  as  if,  to  use  the  Russian  expression,  he  were  bridling  a
horse  with  pincers.


NOZDREFF.  67

"  No,  no,  ni,  ni !  I  won't  let  you  go  !  "  said  Nozdreff.

*'  Oh,  don't  detain  me,  my  friend  ;  I  really  must  go,"  said
the  brother-in-law.     "  You  ought  not  to  detain  me."

"Nonsense,  nonsense  !  we'll  set  up  a  bank  in  a  minute."

"No  ;  set  it  up  yourself,  brother,  but  I  can't.  My  wife  will
be  in  a  great  rage,  she  will  indeed.  I  shall  have  to  tell  her  all
about  the  fair.  I  must,  brother — I  really  must  go  at  once.  No,
don't  detain  me,"

"  Well !  let  your  wife  go  to .  A  mighty  important  matter

you  have  to  discuss  with  her  !  "

"  No,  brother  ;  but  she  is  so  worthy  of  esteem,  and  so  true  !
She  renders  me  such  services  that,  will  yoif  beHeve  it  ?  the
tears  come  into  my  eyes  at  thought  of  her.  No,  don't  keep  me
here  ;  as  I  am  an  honest  man  I  must  leave."

"  Let  him  go  ;  of  what  use  is  he  ?  "  said  Tchitchikoff  softly  to
Nozdreff.

"Well,  that's  true,"  said  Nozdreff.  "I  hate  such  people
like  death  itself!  "  and  he  added  aloud,  "  Well,  the  Devil  be
with  you  !  go  and  dally  with  your  vfife,fetiuk."  *

"No,  brother,  don't  call  me  fetiuk,"  retorted  his  brother-in-
law.  "I  am  indebted  to  her  for  my  life.  She  really  is  so
good  and  sweet,  and  she  caresses  me  so — it  moves  me  to  tears.
If  she  asks  me  what  I  have  seen  at  the  fair,  I  shall  have  to  tell
her  all  about  it — she  really  is  so  charming."

"  Well,  go  and  tell  her  a  pack  of  lies  !     There's  your  cap."

"  No,  brother,  it  is  not  at  all  proper  for  you  to  express  your-
self about  her  in  that  manner  ;  it  is  the  same  thing  as  insulting
me,  I  may  say — she  is  so  lovely."

"  Well,  then,  take  yourself  off  to  her  as  quickly  as  possible."

"  Yes,  brother,  I  am  going.  Excuse  me  for  not  staying;  I
should  Ibe  heartily  glad  to  do  so,  but  I  cannot."  And  the
brother-in-law  continued  to  repeat  his  apologies  for  a  long  while
without  perceiving  that  he  had  already  been  seated  for  some
time  in  his  britchka,  that  he  had  passed  through  the  gates,  and
that  the  open  fields  alone  were  spread  around  him.  We  may
safely  conclude  from  his  condition  that  his  wife  did  not  learn
many  particulars  with  regard  to  the  fair.

"What  a  fool!"  said  Nozdreff,  as  he  stood  at  the  window
and  watched  the  retreating  carriage.  "  How  he  goes  along  !
That  little  side-horse  isn't  a  bad  one,  though ;  I  have  long
wanted  to  get  my  hands  on  him.  But  there's  nothing  to  be  done
with  my  brother-in-law ;  he's  o,  fetiuk,  just  simply  a  fetiuk  !  "

After   this   they  went   back   to   the  sitting-room.     Porfiriy
*  An  insulting  name.


68  DEAD    SOULS.

brought  in  lights,  and  Tchitchikoff  observed  that  bis  host  held
a  pack  of  cards  which  had  most  mysteriously  made  their  way
into  his  hands.

"  "Well,  my  dear  fellow  !  "  said  Nozdreff,  pressing  the  cards
with  his  fingers,  "  come,  just  to  while  away  the  time,  I'll  hold
a  three-hundred-rouble  bank,"

But  Tchitchikoff  pretended  not  to  have  heard  this  remark,  for
as  though  an  important  matter  had  suddenly  occured  to  his
memory,  he  said,  "  Ah  !  lest  I  should  forget  it,  I  have  a  favour
to  ask  of  you."

"What  is  it?"

"  First,  give  me  your  word  that  you  will  grant  it."

"  But  what  is  the  favour  ?  "

"  Come,  give  me  your  word."

"  Very  well."

"  Your  word  of  honour  ?  "  .

.    "  My  word  of  honour."

"  Then  here  is  my  request :  You  surely  have  several  dead
serfs  whose  names  are  not  yet  struck  out  of  the  census
returns  ? "

"Well,  yes.     What  of  that?"

"  Well,  make  them  over  to  me,  in  my  name."

"  What  do  you  want  with  them?  "

''  Well,  I  need  them."

"  But  what  for  ?  "

"  Well  they  are — but  that's  my  business  ;  in  short,  I  want
them."

"Come,  you  certainly  have  invented  some  scheme  or  other.
What  is  it?     Tell  me  ?  "

"Invented  what  scheme?  What  do  j^ou  mean?  It's  im-
possible to  make  anything  out  of  such  nonsense."

"  But  what  can  you  want  with  them  ?  "

"  Oh,  what  a  curious  fellow  you  are  ;  you  want  to  feel  every-
thing with  your  hand,  and  even  to  smell  it !  "

"  But  why  won't  you  say  what  they  are  for  ?  Look  here  ;  as
long  as  you  won't  tell  me,  I  won't  do  what  you  want."

"  But  what  good  will  it  do  you  to  know  ?  Well,  it's  simply
this — the  fancy  struck  me.  But,  look  here,  it  is  not  honour-
able on  your  part ;  you  gave  me  your  word,  you  know,  and  now
you  take  it  back."

"  Well,  as  you  like ;  but  I  won't  make  the  dead  serfs  over  to
you  until  you  tell  me  what  you  want  them  for  "

"  What  can  I  say  to  him  ?  "  wondered  Tchitchikoff;  and,  after
a  moment's  reflection,  he  declared  that  he  needed  the  dead


NOZDREFF.  69

souls  in  order  to  obtain  weight  in  society ;  that  his  landed
property  was  not  large,  so  that,  until  it  became  more  extensive,
he  should  like  to  have  a  few  dead  souls.

"  You  lie  !  you  lie  !  "  said  Nozdreff",  without  permitting  him
to  finish.     "  You  are  lying,  my  good  fellow!  "

Tchitchikoff  himself  perceived  that  his  story  was  not  a  very
skilful  one,  and  that  his  excuse  was  lame.

"  Well,  then,  I  will  tell  you  plainly,"  he  said,  recovering
himself,  "  only  please  do  not  tell  any  one.  I  am  thinking  of
marrying ;  but  you  must  know  that  the  bride's  father  and
mother  are  very  ambitious  people.  It's  a  nice  affair,  truly ;
I'm  sorry  I  entered  into  it.  They  imperatively  require  the  bride-
groom to  o^vn  not  less  than  three  hundred  souls,  and  as  I  have
only  a  hundred  and  fifty  peasants,  that's  not  enough "

"  Come,  you're  lying,  lying  !  "  shouted  Nozdrefi"  again.

"  No,  no  !  "  said  Tchitchikoff,  "  I  haven't  lied  even  so  much
as  that;  "  and,  with  his  thumb,  he  pointed  out  the  smallest
joint  on  his  little  finger.

"  I'll  stake  my  head  that  you  are  lying,"  retorted  Nozdrefi".

"  But  this  is  an  insult !  Why  do  you  declare  like  that  that
I  am  lying  ?  "

"  Come,  now,  I  certainly  know  you  ;  you  are  a'^reat  rascal — >/
allow  me  to  tell  you   so  in  a  friendly  way.     If  I  were  your
superior  ofiicer,  I  would  have  you  hanged  on  the  first  tree."

Tchitchikoft"  took  ofi"ence  at  this  remark.  Any  expression
that  was  in  any  wise  coarse  or  contrary  to  decorum  proved  dis-
tasteful to  him.  In  fact  he  did  not  even  like  to  be  treated
with  familiarity  under  any  circumstances,  unless  it  were  by
a  very  exalted  personage  indeed.  So  he  was  now  thoroughly
ofi'ended.

"I'd  hang  you,  by  heavens  I  would!"  repeated  Nozdrefi".
"  I  say  this  to  you  frankly,  not  for  the  purpose  of  insulting  you,
but  simply  as  a  friend."

"  There  are  limits  to  everything,"  said  Tchitchikoff"  with  a
show  of  dignity.  "  If  you  wish  to  make  such  speeches  as
those,  take  yourself  off"  to  some  barracks."  And  then  he  added,
*'  If  you  will  not  give  me  your  dead  serfs,  then  sell  them  to
me."

"  Sell  them  !  Come,  I  know  you;  you  are  a  scamp,  and  you
won't  give  much  for  them !  "

"Eh!  but  you  are  a  strange  fellow  too!  Look  here;  do
you  prize  those  dead  serfs  very  highly  ?  Do  you  value  them
like  diamonds  ?  "

"AVell,  yes,  I  do."


70  DEAD   SOULS.

"  As  you  please.  What  Jewish  instincts  you  have,  my  dear
fellow  !     You  simply  ought  to  give  them  to  me."

"  Come,  now,  just  to  prove  that  I  am  not  a  niggard,  I  won't
take  anything  for  them.  But  buy  my  stallion,  and  I  will  give
them  to  you  as  a  bonus."

"But,  pray,  what  do  I  want  with  your  stallion?"  said
Tchitchikofl",  who  was  really  astounded  by  this  proposition.

"  What  ?  Why,  I  paid  ten  thousand  roubles  for  him,  and  I
will  sell  him  to  you  for  four."

"  But  of  what  use  is  a  stallion  to  me  ?  I  don't  keep  a
stud."

"But,  listen;  you  don't  understand  me.  I  will  only  take
three  thousand  roubles  from  you  now,  and  the  other  thousand
you  can  pay  later  on."

"  But  I  have  no  use  for  the  stallion,  God  be  with  him !  "

"  Come,  then,  buy  my  chestnut  mare."

"  I  don't  need  the  mare  either."

"  I  will  only  ask  you  two  thousand  roubles  for  the  mare  and
the  grey  horse  which  you  saw  in  my  stable."

"  But  I  don't  want  the  horses."

"  You  can  sell  them  ;  you  will  get  twice  as  much  for  them  at
the  nearest  fair."

"All  the  more  reason  why  you  should  sell  them  youi'self,  if
you  are  sure  you  could  make  twice  as  much."

"  I  know  I  should  ;  but  I  want  you  to  have  some  profit."

Tchitchikofl"  returned  thanks  for  Nozdreft's  friendly  inten-
tions, and  flatly  declined  to  purchase  either  the  grey  horse  or
the  chestnut  mare.

"  Well,  then,  buy  a  dog.  I'll  sell  you  such  a  couple  that  on
seeing  them  cold  chills  will  run  over  your  skin  !  Bnidastayas  *
with  whiskers ;  their  hair  stands  up  like  bristles  ;  the  curves  of
their  loins  are  something  inconceivable,  and  their  paws  are
round  like  balls."

"  And  what  have  I  to  do  with  dogs ;  I  am  not  a  sportsman."

"  But  I  want  you  to  have  some  dogs.  Listen  :  if  you  won't
take  a  dog,  buy  my  hand-organ.  It's  a  wonderful  hand-organ  !
As  I  am  an  honest  man,  it  cost  me  fifteen  hundred  roubles.  I
will  let  you  have  it  for  nine  hundred."

"  And  why  should  I  buy  a  hand-organ  ?  I  am  not  a  German,
to  drag  it  along  the  road  and  beg  for  money."

"  But  this  is  not  the  sort  of  hand-organ  that  the  Germans  use.
It's  a  valuble  instrument ;  examine  it  closely ;  it's  all  of  maho-
gany. Here,  I'll  show  it  to  you  once  more."  Here  Nozdrefi",
*  A  very  ugly  sort  of  hunting-dog.


NOZDREFF.  71

seizing  Tchitchikoff  by  the  hand,  began  to  drag  him  into  another
room ;  and  although  our  hero  stamped  his  feet  and  protested
that  he  akeady  knew  all  about  the  hand-organ,  he  was  forced
to  listen  once  more  to  the  tune  describing  the  manner  in  which
"Malbrook  "  (Marlborough)  went  to  the  war.

"  If  you  won't  give  me  any  money,  then,  this  is  what  I  will
do.  Listen !  I  will  let  you  have  the  hand-organ  and  all  the
dead  souls  I  have,  and  you  shall  give  me  your  britchka  and
three  hundred  roubles  bonus."

"  Come,  that's  an  idea  !     And  what  am  I  to  travel  in  ?"

"  I  will  give  you  another  britchka.  Come,  let's  go  to  the
carriage-house,  and  I  will  show  it  to  you.  You  need  only  have
it  painted  over,  and  it  will  be  a  wonder  of  a  britchka.'.'

"  Why,  some  devil  has  deprived  this  fellow  of  his  senses  !"
said  Tchitchikoff  to  himself ;  and  he  resolved,  at  any  cost,  to
get  rid  of  all  britchkas,  hand-organs,  and  dogs  with  inconceiv-
able cask-shaped  ribs  and  ball-shaped  paws.

"  Then  it's  to  be  the  britchka,  the  hand-organ,  and  the  dead
souls  all  together."

"  No  ;  I  won't  have  them  !  "  said  Tchitchikoff  once  more.

"  Why  won't  you  ?  "

"  Simply  because  I  won't ;  and  that's  enough."

"  Well,  what  a  fellow  you  are,  to  be  sure  !  I  see  that  it  is
impossible  to  get  on  with  you  like  a  good  friend  and  comrade
— that's  a  fact !  It  is  evident  that  you  are  a  double-faced
man."

"  So  I'm  a  knave,  am  I  ?  Well,  judge  for  yourself :  why  should
I  acquire  a  thing  which  is  absolutely  useless  to  me  ?  "

"  Well,  please  don't  mention  it.  I  know  you  very  well,  now.
A  thorough  knave,  truly  !  Now,  listen  ;  if  you  like,  we'll  have
a  faro  bank.  I  will  slake  all  the  dead  souls  on  one  card,  and
the  hand-organ  to  boot."

"  Well,  settling  it  by  gambling  means  subjecting  one's  self  to
uncertainty,"  said  Tchitchikoff;  and  meantime  he  cast  a  glance
at  the  cards  in  Nozdreft''s  hands.  By  the  appearance  of  the
pack  it  struck  him  that  these  must  be  prepared  cards — oven
the  gilding  on  the  edges  seemed  suspicious  to  him.

Why  to  uncertainty?  "  said  Nozdreff".  "  There  is  no  uncer-
tainty about  it ;  if  luck  is  only  on  your  side,  you  can  win  a
devil  of  a  lot !  There  it  is  !  Eh,  what  luck !  "  he  said,  be-
ginning to  deal  for  the  sake  of  arousing  his  guest's  appetite  ;
"  what  luck,  what  luck  !  Look  here,  and  here  !  Here's  that
confounded  card  upon  which  I  staked  everything  !  I  felt  that
it  would  give  me  over  to  the  Evil  One  ;  and  I  shut  my  eyes,


72  DEAD   SOULS.

and  said  to  myself,  '  Devil  take  you  ;  you  will  betray  me,  you
cursed  thing!  "

While  Nozdreff  was  saying  this,  Porfiriy  brought  in  a  bottle
of  wine.  But  Tchitchikoflf  positively  declined  either  to  play  or
to  drink.

"  Why  won't  you  play  ?  "  asked  Nozdreff.

"  Well,  because  I  am  not  so  disposed.  To  tell  the  truth,  I
am  not  at  all  fond  of  gambling,"

"Why  not?"

Tchitchikoff  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  retorted,  "Because
I'm  not."

"  You're  a  fool,  then  !  "

"  I  can't  help  it.     God  made  me  so."

"  You're  simply  &,fetiuk  !  I  used  to  think  you  a  decent  sort
of  a  man  ;  but  you  don't  understand  good  manners  at  all.  It's
impossible  to  talk  with  you  as  with  a  friend  :  there's  no  up-
rightness or  sincerity  about  you  !  You're  a  perfect  Sobake-
vitch — ^.just  such  another  rascal !  "

"  Why  are  you  insulting  me  ?  Am  I  to  blame  because  I
don't  gamble  ?  Sell  me  your  dead  souls  and  let  us  have  an  end
of  all  this  nonsense."

"  May  the  bald  devil  get  you  !  I  did  mean  to  give  them  to
you  for  nothing,  but  now  you  won't  get  them  at  all !  I  wouldn't
sell  them  even  if  you  were  to  give  me  three  empires.  Such  a
deceiver,  such  a  detestable  miser  you  are  !  I  will  have  nothing
to  do  with  you  from  this  time  forth.  Go,  Porfiriy,  tell  the
ostler  not  to  give  any  oats  to  this  man's  horses  ;  let  them  eat
hay  instead."

Tchitchikofi"  was  not  in  in  the  least  prepared  for  this  last
decree.

"  It  would  have  been  better  if  you  had  never  presented  your-
self before  my  eyes  at  all !  "  exclaimed  Nozdreff.

Despite  this  quarrel,  the  host  and  his  guest  supped  together ;
but  on  this  occasion  no  wines  with  seductive  names  appeared
upon  the  table,  A  single  bottle  of  Cyprus  reared  its  head :  it
was  of  the  sort  known  as  sour  {kislyatina)  in  every  respect.
After  supper  Nozdreff  told  Tchitchikoff,  as  he  conducted  him
to  an  adjoining  chamber,  where  sleeping  accommodation  was
prepared  for  him,  "  Here's  your  bed ;  but  I  don't  mean  to  wish
you  good  night."

Tchitchikoff  remained  in  the  most  unpleasant  frame  of  mind
after  Nozdreff's  departure.  He  was  inwardly  vexed  with  him-
self, and  reproached  himself  with  having  come  to  this  house,
and  thus  wasted  his  time.     He  reproached  himself  still  more


NOZDREFF.  73

for  his  indiscretion  in  discussing  a  business  matter  with  Nozdrefl',
which  was  acting  indiscreetly,  like  a  child,  like  a  fool  in  fact,
for  the  matter  was  not  at  all  of  a  kind  which  could  be  intrusted
to  Nozdreff.

"Nozdreff  is  a  worthless  fellow,  who  lies,  embellishes  his
facts,  and  is  capable  of  setting  afloat  the  deuce  knows  what.
Some  scandal  will  surely  arise.  It  was  not  prudent  to  tell  him
that — not  prudent  at  all !  I  am  a  perfect  fool !  "  added  our
friend  to  himself.

He  slept  very  badly  that  night.  Certain  small  but  very
dauntless  insects  bit  him  in  an  intolerably  painful  manner,  so
that  when  he  had  scratched  a  whole  handful  ofi'  himself  he
exclaimed,  "  I  wish  the  devil  had  taken  you,  and  Nozdreff
also !  "

He  woke  early  in  the  morning.  His  first  act,  after  putting  on
his  dressing-gown  and  boots,  was  to  cross  the  yard  to  the
stable,  and  order  Selifan  to  harness  the  britchka  at  once.  As
he  was  returning  through  the  yard  he  met  Nozdretf,  who  was
also  in  his  dressing-gown,  and  had  a  pipe  between  his  lips.

Nozdreff  greeted  him  in  a  friendly  way,  and  inquired  how  he
had  slept.

"  So-so,"  replied  Tchitchikoff  very  drily.

"As  for  myself,  my  dear  fellow,"  said  Nozdreff,  "I  had  the
horrors  all  night, — it's  terrible  to  speak  of  it ;  it  seems  as
if  a  squadron  had  bivouacked  in  my  mouth.  I  yelled  so  ;  for,
just  fancy,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  being  flogged,  ha,  ha !  And
by  whom  do  you  suppose  ?  You'll  never  guess  it.  Why,  by
Stafi'-Captain  Potzyelueft' and  my  friend  Kuvshinnikoff."

"Yes,"  thought  Tchitchikoff  to  himself,  "it  would  be  a
good  thing  if  they  would  really  give  you  a  sound  drubbing  in
real  life."

"  By  Heavens  !  it  was  extremely  painful,"  resumed  Nozdreff.
"  I  woke  up,  and,  devil  take  it !  there  actually  was  something
scratching  me  ;  in  fact,  it  was  the  fleas.  Now,  go  and  dress
yourself;  I  will  join  you  immediately.  I  have  only  to  give
that  rascally  steward  of  mine  a  good  cursing."

Tchitchikoff  went  to  his  room  to  wash  and  dress.  When  he
emerged  into  the  dining-room  after  performing  his  ablutions,
the  tea-things  and  a  bottle  of  rum  were  already  standing  on  the
table.  Traces  of  the  dinner  and  supper  of  the  preceding  day
were  still  about  the  room.  The  broom  did  not  appear  to  have
been  applied  at  all,  for  the  floor  was  strewn  with  bits  of  crust,
and  some  tobacco-ash  still  lay  on  the  tablecloth.  Nozdreff
himself,  who  entered  immediately  afterwards,  had  nothing  on


U  DEAD   SOtJtS.

besides  his  dressing-gown,  which,  being  partially  open,  disclosed
his  bare  hairy  chest.  As  he  held  his  tchibouk  in  his  hand  and
sipped  his  tea,  he  was  a  very  fine  sight  indeed  for  one  of  those
painters  who  object  to  gentlemen  whose  hair  is  too  well-brushed
and  curled,  or  who  are  too  sprucely  attired.

"  Well,  what  do  you  think  about  it  ?  "  said  Nozdreff  after  a
brief  silence  ;   "  won't  you  play  for  the  souls  ?  "

"  I  have  already  told  you,  my  dear  fellow,  that  I  don't  play  ;
I  will  purchase  them,  if  you  like,"

"  Then  I  won't  sell ;  that  wouldn't  be  behaving  in  a  friendly
manner.  I  Avon't  take  money  for  the  deuce  knows  what.  But
play  is  another  matter.     Let's  cut  the  cards  at  least."

"  I  have  already  said  no,"

"  And  you  won't  change  your  mind  '?  "

"  No  ;  I  will  not,"

"Then  listen;  let  us  play  at  draughts:  if  you  win,  all  the
dead  souls  will  be  yours.  For  I  have  a  great  many  who  must  be
crossed  out  of  the  next  census  list.  Hey,  there,  Porfiriy,  fetch
the  draught-board  here  !  "

"It  is  useless  trouble  ;  I  shall  not  play,"  said  Tchitchikoff,

"  But  this  is  not  gambling.  There  can  be  no  luck  or  falsify-
ing in  this  ;  it's  all  skill.  I  even  warn  you  in  advance  that  I
hardly  know  how  to  play  at  all ;  so  perhaps  you  will  allow  me
something  to  start  with."

"  Well,  I'll  try  it,"  said  Tchitchikoff  to  himself.  "  I'll  play
at  draughts  with  him.  I  used  to  play  the  game  rather  well,
and  it  will  be  difficult  for  him  to  indulge  in  any  of  his  tricks
in  it."

"  So  be  it,"  he  then  observed  aloud.  "  If  you  like,  I  will
play  at  draughts."

"  The  souls  shall  stand  for  one  hundred  roubles."

"  Why  so  ?    It  will  be  enough  if  they  are  reckoned  at  fifty."

"  No,  no  !  what  sort  of  a  stake  is  fifty  roubles  ?  But  it  "will
be  better  for  me  to  include  in  the  hundred  roubles  some  medium-
class  dog,  ar  a  gold  watch-seal."

"  Well,  as  you  like,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  How  many  kings  will  you  give  me  ?  "  said  Nozdreff.

"  Eh  ?     Why,  none,  of  course."

"Let  me  at  least  have  two  moves."

"  No,  I  won't ;  I  am  a  bad  player  myself."

"  We  know  what  a  bad  player  you  are,"  replied  Nozdreff,
making  the  first  move,

"  It  is  a  very  long  time  since  I  have  had  any  draughts  in  my
hands,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  also  making  a  move.


I


NoZdReff.  '75

*'  We  know  you,  and  we  know  just  how  badly  you  play,"
retorted  Nozdreti",  moving  forward  another  draught,  and  at  the
same  time  a  third  one  with  the  edge  of  hig  sleeve.

"It  is  a  very  long  time  since  I  had  any  draughts  in  my
hand,"  again  repeated  Tchitchikofl'.  "But  eh,  eh!  what's
that,  my  good  fellow  ?     Put  that  back  !  "

"What?"

"  That  draught,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  and  at  the  same  instant
he  caught  sight  of  another  almost  under  his  very  nose,  which
seemed  to  have  become  a  king  spontaneously.  Where  it  had
come  from,  God  only  knew.  "No,"  said  Tchitchikofi",  rising
from  the  table,  "  there  is  absolutely  no  possibility  of  playing
with  you  !  Things  are  not  managed  like  that — three  pieces
moved  at  a  time."

"  What  do  you  mean  by  three  ?  It  was  a  mistake.  One
moved  without  my  knowing  it ;  I'll  take  it  back,  if  you  like."

"  And  the  other — where  did  it  come  from  ?  "

"  Which  other  ?  "

"  This  one,  which  has  become  a  king."

"  The  idea  !    As  if  you  didn't  recollect !  "

"  No,  my  good  fellow;  I  counted  all  the  moves,  and  I  re-
member everything.  You  put  it  there  just  now.  That's  where
it  belongs."

"  What — where's  the  place  ?  "  said  NozdrefF,  reddening.  "  I
see,  my  dear  fellow,  that  you  are  a  romancer."

"  No,  my  good  fellow  ;  it  seems  that  you  are  the  romancer,
but  an  unsuccessful  one."

"  For  whom  do  you  take  me  ?  "  asked  NozdrefF.  "  Do  you
mean  to  say  that  I  am  cheating  ?  "

"  I  do  not  take  you  for  anything,  but  I  will  never  play  with
you  again  from  this  time  forth."

"  No  ;  you  can't  give  it  up,"  said  NozdrefF,  becoming  angry,
"  the  game  has  begun  !  "

"  I  have  a  right  to  leave  off,  since  you  don't  play  in  a  man-
ner becoming  to  an  honest  man."

"  What !  you  lie  !     You  cannot  say  that !  "

"  No,  my  good  fellow,  you  yourself  are  lying."

"  I  did  not  cheat,  and  you  cannot  refuse  to  play.  You  must
finish  the  game."

"  You  cannot  make  me  do  so,"  rejoined  Tchitchikoff  coolly;
and,  stepping  up  to  the  board,  he  mixed  all  the  draughts  to-
gether.

Nozdreff  fired  up  at  once,  and  came  so  near  to  Tchitchikoff
that  the  latter  retreated  a  couple  of  paces.


76  DEAD    SOULS.

"I  will  force  you  to  play!  It  doesn't  matter  if  you  liave
mixed  up  the  draughts.  I  remember  all  the  moves.  We  will
put  them  back  just  as  they  were."

"  No,  my  dear  fellow;  that  matter  is  ended.  I  won't  play
with  you."

"  You  won't  play  ?  "

"  You  see  yourself  that  it  is  impossible  to  play  with  you."

"  No  ;  say  plainly  that  you  won't  play,"  said  Nozdreff,  step-
ping up  closer  to  him.

"I  won't!"  replied  Tchitchikoff,  as  he  raised  both  hands
nearer  to  his  face  in  case  of  an  emergency,  for  matters  were
really  coming  to  a  crisis.  This  precaution  of  his  was  very  well
timed,  for  Nozdreff  gave  a  sweep  of  his  arm,  and  one  of  our
hero's  fat  and  pleasant-looking  cheeks  would  have  been  marked
with  indelible  dishonour  if,  fortunately,  he  had  not  parried  the
blow,  seized  Nozdreff  with  both  hands,  and  squeezed  him  powex'-
fully.

"  Porfiriy  !  Pavlushka  !  "  shouted  Nozdreff  in  a  rage,  and
striving  to  free  himself.

On  hearing  these  words,  Tchitchikoff,  so  as  not  to  let  the
servants  be  witnesses  of  any  disgraceful  scene,  and  conscious
at  the  same  time  that  it  was  useless  to  hold  Nozdreff,  released
his  grasp.  At  the  same  moment  Porfiriy  and  Pavlushka,  the
latter  a  robust  young  fellow,  whom  it  would  have  been  hard
to  contend  against,  came  in.

"So  you  won't  finish  the  game?"  asked  Nozdreff.  "An-
swer me  plainly."

"  It  is  impossible  to  finish  the  game,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  and
he  glanced  out  of  the  window.  He  saw  his  britchka  standing
quite  ready,  and  Selifan  seemed  to  be  merely  awaiting  a  sign
to  drive  up  to  the  porch.  However,  there  was  no  possibility
of  getting  out  of  the  room  ;  the  two  stout  peasants  stood  at  the
door.

"  So  you  won't  finish  the  game  ?  "  repeated  Nozdreff,  with
his  face  burning  as  if  it  were  on  fire.

"If  you  had  played  as  befits  an  honest  man,  I  would  have
gone  on  ;  but  now  I  cannot."

"  Ah  !  so  you  cannot,  you  rascal !  When  you  saw  that  you
couldn't  have  it  all  your  own  way,  you  threw  it  up.  Thrash
him !  "  shrieked  Nozdreff,  quite  beside  himself,  and  turning  to
Porfiriy  and  Pavlushka,  while  he  himself  firmly  grasped  his
cherry-wood  tchibouk.  Tchitchikoff  turned  as  pale  as  a  sheet.
He  tried  to  say  something,  but  felt  that  his  lips  moved  without
producing  a  sound.     "  Thrash  him  !  "  screamed  Nozdreff,  rush-


NOZDREFF.  77

ing  forward  with  his  pipe-stem,  and  covered  with  perspiration,
as  though  he  had  attacked  an  impregnable  fortress.  *'  Thrash
him  !  "  he  yelled,  in  the  same  voice  with  which  some  despairing
lieutenant,  at  the  moment  of  a  great  assault,  shouts  "  Forward,
children  !  "  to  his  men.  However,  if  NozdretF  imagined  himself
to  be  some  desperately  enthusiastic  officer  attacking  a  fortress,
the  stronghold  upon  which  he  was  marching  did  not  in  the  least
resemble  an  impregnable  one.  On  the  contrary,  Tchitchikoff
experienced  such  terror  that  his  heart  seemed  to  sink  to  his
heels.  The  chair  with  which  he  had  contemplated  defending
himself  had  already  been  torn  from  his  hands  by  the  serfs ;
already,  with  his  eyes  half  shut,  and  feeling  more  dead  than
alive,  he  prepared  to  take  a  taste  of  his  host's  Circassian  tchibouk,
and  no  one  knows  what  would  have  become  of  him,  had  not
fate  been  graciously  pleased  to  save  his  ribs,  his  shoulders,  and
his  hind- quarters.  All  of  a  sudden,  and  in  the  most  unexpected
manner,  as  though  coming  from  the  clouds,  the  quivering  jingle
of  bells  became  audible,  and  then  the  rumbling  of  the  wheels
of  a  telyega  driving  up  to  the  porch  resounded,  the  heavy  snort-
ing and  oppressed  breathing  of  the  heated  horses  reverberating
in  the  very  room.  They  all  involuntarily  glanced  out  of  the
window.  Someone  with  a  moustache,  in  a  military-looking
surtout,  descended  from  the  telyega.  After  inquiring  in  the
ante-room,  he  entered  while  Tchitchikoff  was  still  quaking  with
alarm,  being,  indeed,  in  the  most  pitiable  situation  in  which
mortal  ever  found  himself.

"  Allow  me  to  inquire  which  of  you  gentlemen  is  Mr.  Noz-
dreff,"  said  the  stranger,  looking  with  some  surprise  both  at
Nozdreff  himself,  who  was  standing,  tchibouk  in  hand,  and  at
Tchitchikoff,  who  seemed  dismayed.

"  Allow  me  to  inquire,  first  of  all,  to  whom  I  have  the
honour  of  speaking,"  said  Nozdreff,  stepping  up  closer  to  the
stranger.

"  The  captain-ispravnik."  '■'•'■

"  And  what  do  you  want,  pray  ?  "

"  I  -have  come  to  acquaint  you  with  the  fact  that  you  will
remain  under  arrest  until  your  case  is  decided."

"  What  nonsense  !     What  case  ?  "  asked  Nozdreff.

"You  have  been  mixed  up  in  a  scandalous  affair — as  you
know  very  well.  While  in  a  state  of  intoxication  you  and  some
companions  grossly  insulted  landowner  Maximoff  and  beat
him."

"  You  he  !     I  never  yet  set  eyes  on  landowner  Maximoff'."
*  The  head  of  the  rural  police.


78  DEAD    SOULS.

"  My  dear  sir,  permit  me  to  inform  you  that  I  am  an  officer ;
you  can  reply  like  that  to  your  servants,  but  not  to  me."

Hereupon  Tchitchikotf,  without  waiting  to  hear  what  retort
Nozdreff  would  make,  hastily  snatched  up  his  cap  and  slipped
past  the  captain-ispravnik  on  to  the  steps,  seated  himself  in  his
britchka,  and  ordered  Selifan  to  drive  off,  urging  his  horses  to
the  top  of  their  speed.


CHAPTER  V.

SOBAKEVITCn.


OuK  hero  was  thoroughly  frightened.  Although  his  Britchka
was  rolling  along  at  full  speed,  and  Nozdreff's  village  had  long
since  disappeared  from  sight  behind  the  meadows,  the  declivi-
ties, and  hillocks,  he  still  kept  looking  behind  him  in  terror,  as
though  he  expected  that  a  pursuing  party  would  suddenly  make
its  appearance.  He  breathed  with  difficulty,  and  when  he  laid
his  hand  upon  his  heart,  he  found  that  it  was  going  thump,
thump,  like  a  woodcock  in  a  cage.  "  Ah,  what  a  fright  he  gave
me!  Only  think  of  it!"  Then  all  sorts  of  forcible  and  un-
pleasant wishes  were  heaped  upon  Nozdreff :  some  ugly  words
even  occurred  in  the  course  of  all  this.  Tchitchikoff  was  a
Russian,  and  in  a  rage.  Moreover,  it  was  by  no  means  a  matter
for  jest.  "  Say  what  you  like,"  he  said  to  himself,  "if  that
captain-ispravnik  had  not  come  in,  I  might  never  have  looked
upon  the  light  of  God  again.  I  should  have  disappeared  like  a
bubble  in  the  water,  without  leaving  a  trace,  without  any  pos-
terity, without  having  acquired  for  my  future  children  any  pro-
perty or  position  or  even  an  honourable  name."  Our  hero,  it
will  be  observed,  was  very  solicitous  about  his  descendants.

"  He's  a  brute,  that  Nozdreff,"  thought  Selifan  to  himself.
"  I  never  saw  such  a  fellow  before.  I'd  like  to  spit  on  him  !
It's  all  well  enough  not  to  give  a  man  anything  to  eat,  but  you
ought  to  feed  a  horse  properly ;  a  horse  loves  oats  ;  that's  his
fodder ;  what  bread  and  meat  are  for  us,  so  oats  are  for  him ;
his  provisions."

The  horses,  also,  apparently,  entertained  an  unfavourable
opinion  of  Nozdreff;  the  piebald  one  especially.  Although  the
worst  oats  always  fell  to  his  share,  and  although  Selifan  never


SOBAKEVITCH.  79

poured  auy  into  his  manger  without  saying,  "  0  you  rascal !  "
still  he  usually  did  have  some  oats,  and  not  plain  hay  ;  but  at
Nozdrefif 's  he  had  been  given  hay  alone,  and  that  was  not  proper.
So,  like  everyone  else,  he  was  far  from  being  content.

The  cogitations  of  man  and  beast  alike  were  suddenly  inter-
rupted in  a  most  unexpected  manner.  The  horses,  Tchitchikofl",
and  Selifan  abruptly  came  to  themselves  when  a  calash  drawn
by  six  horses  bore  down  upon  them.  Almost  directly  afterwards
there  rang  out  the  frightened  cries  of  two  ladies  seated  in  the
calash,  and  the  curses  and  threats  of  their  coachman,  who  bawled
out  "0,  you  rascal  !  I  shouted  to  you  at  the  top  of  my  voice,
*  Turn  to  the  right,  you  jack-a-napes  !  '  Are  you  drunk  ?  "

Selifan  was  conscious  of  his  neglect  of  duty  ;  but,  as  a  Russian
never  likes  to  acknowledge  himself  in  the  Avrong  before  another,
he  immediately  drew  himself  up,  and  retorted,  "  And  what  were
you  dashing  along  in  that  way  for  ?  Did  you  leave  your  eyes
in  pawn  in  some  wine-shop  ?  "  Then  he  began  to  back  the
britchka,  trying  by  this  means  to  free  it  from  the  other  equi-
page, but  all  in  vain  ;  everything  was  entangled.  The  ladies  in
the  calash  looked  on  at  all  this  with  alarm  depicted  on  their
countenances.  One  of  them  was  old,  and  the  other  quite
young, — she  was  a  girl  of  sixteen,  with  her  golden  hair  neatly
and  prettily  wound  about  her  small  head.  The  lovely  oval  of
her  face  was  like  that  of  a  fresh  egg,  and  it  shone  with  a  certain
transparent  whiteness,  also  like  an  egg  when  it  is  held  against
the  light  in  the  sun-browned  hands  of  the  housekeeper  examin-
ing it.  The  gui's  delicate  ears  also  transmitted  a  warm,  rosy
light ;  and,  in  addition  to  all  this,  the  terror  expressed  by  her
parted  lips  and  the  tears  in  her  eyes — in  fact,  everything  made
her  so  charming  that  our  hero  gazed  at  her  for  several  minutes
without  paying  the  slightest  heed  to  the  confusion  which  had
arisen  between  the  horses  and  the  coachmen.

"  Get  out  of  the  way,  you  Nizhegorod  crow  !  "  shouted  the
strange  driver.  Selifan  drew  back  his  reins,  the  strange  coach-
man did  the  same,  the  horses  retreated  a  little,  and  then  again
came  into  collision,  and  kicked  over  the  traces.  Hereupon  the
piebald  horse  was  so  delighted  at  the  idea  of  making  some  new
acquaintances,  that  ho  absolutely  refused  to  back,  but  laying
his  nose  upon  the  neck  of  a  new-found  friend,  seemed  to  be
whispering  something  into  his  ear — some  horrible  nonsense,
probably,  for  the  horse  of  the  calash  kept  shaking  his  ears
incessantly.

However,  some  moujiks  from  the  village,  which,  happily,  was
near  by,  finally  assembled  on  the  scene  of  disorder.     Such  a,


80  DEAD   SOULS.

spectacle  is  a  boon  to  the  moujik,  just  as  a  newspaper  or  a  club
is  to  a  German,  so  a  throng  of  peasants  soon  collected  about
the  equipages,  only  the  old  women  and  little  children  being  left
in  the  village.  The  traces  were  unhitched  ;  a  few  blows  dealt
upon  the  piebald's  nose  made  him  spring  back  ;  in  a  word,  the
teams  were  disentangled  and  led  apart.  But  whether  they
were  vexed  at  being  separated  from  their  newly-found  friends,
or  were  simply  obstinate,  at  all  events,  whip  them  as  the  coach-
men would,  they  refused  to  stir,  standing  stockstill  as  though
rooted  to  the  spot.

The  sympathy  of  the  peasants  became  acute.  They  vied  with
one  another  in  oifering  advice.  "  Go,  Andriushka,"  said  one  of
them,  "  lead  that  side-horse  on  the  right,  and  let  uncle  Mityai
mount  the  shaft-horse.  Get  on,  uncle  Mityai."  Long,  gaunt
Mityai,  a  fellow  with  a  red  beard,  climbed  upon  the  shaft-horse,
where  he  looked  like  the  village  bell-tower,  or,  rather,  like  a
well-pole,  with  which  water  is  drawn  from  a  well.  The  coach-
man lashed  his  horses,  but  nothing  came  of  it :  uncle  Mityai
rendered  no  assistance.  "  Stop,  stop  !  "  then  shouted  the  pea-
sants. "  Get  on  the  side-horse,  uncle  Mityai,  and  let  uncle
Minj'ai  mount  the  shaft-horse."  Uncle  Minyai,  a  broad-shoul-
dered moujik,  with  a  beard  as  black  as  pitch,  and  a  belly  like
the  gigantic  samovar  in  which  sbiten  is  prepared  for  a  large
party  of  frozen  market  folks,  willingly  mounted  the  shaft-horse,
which  almost  fell  to  the  earth  beneath  his  weight.  "  Now
matters  will  go  better,"  cried  the  peasants.  "  Warm  him  up,
warm  him  up  !  Give  a  taste  of  the  whip  to  that  dun  horse,
who  has  planted  his  legs  obstinately  apart,  like  a  koramora."  *

But  perceiving  that  matters  did  not  improve,  and  that  the
warming  up  did  no  good,  uncle  Mityai  and  uncle  Minj-ai  both
mounted  the  shaft-horse,  and  Andriushka  got  upon  the  side  one.
Finally  the  coachman,  losing  patience,  made  both  uncle  Mityai
and  uncle  Minyai  dismount ;  and  he  did  right,  for  the  horses
were  steaming  as  though  they  had  journeyed  a  whole  stage  at
full  speed  without  drawing  breath.  He  allowed  them  to  rest
for  a  moment,  after  which  they  started  off  of  their  own  accord.
While  this  was  going  on  Tchitchikoff  stared  with  great  attention
at  the  young  stranger  in  the  calash.  He  made  several  attempts
to  address  her,  but  for  some  reason  or  other  he  was  unsuccess-
ful. At  last  the  ladies  departed  ;  the  girl's  pretty  head,  delicate
features,  and  slender  form  disappeared,  somewhat  like  a  vision ;

*  A  large,  long  gnat,  which  when  it  alights  on  a  waU  may  be  ap-
proached and  easily  seized  by  the  legs.


!


"t:^


SOBAKEVITCH.  81

and  there  only  remained — the  road,  the  britchka,  the  troika  of
horses  so  well  known  to  the  reader,  SeUfan,  Tchitchikoff,  and
the  low-lying,  blank-looking  fields  around.

As  Selifan  drove  off  again,  Tchitchikoff  began  to  think  about
the  young  girl  in  the  calash.  "  She  was  a  pretty  little  thing,"
said  he,  opening  his  snuffbox,  and  taking  a  pinch  of  snuff.
"  She  was  nicely  dressed  too,"  he  added.  "  So  I  suppose  that
she  is  well  off,  I  wonder  what  sort  of  a  man  her  father  is.  Is
he  a  wealthy  landowner  of  respectable  morals,  or  simply  a  man
with  money  acquired  in  the  public  service  ?  This  girl  might
have  a  dowry  of  two  hundred  thousand  roubles  or  so,  and  she
would  be  a  very,  very  appetizing  little  morsel.  Such  a  dowry
would  be  quite  a  fortune  to  many  a  respectable  man."

The  snug  little  sum  of  two  hundred  thousand  roubles  appeared
to  his  mind  in  such  fascinating  colours,  that  he  even  began  to
feel  vexed  with  himself  for  not  having  inquired  who  the  travellers
were  during  the  stoppage  which  had  followed  upon  the  accident.
However,  the  appearance  of  Sobakevitch's  village  speedily
changed  his  thoughts,  and  caused  them  to  turn  to  the  matter
he  had  in  hand.

The  village  struck  him  as  a  tolerably  large  one  ;  to  right  and
left  of  it,  like  two  wings,  one  dark,  the  other  light,  stretched
two  woods,  one  of  birch  trees  and  the  other  of  pines ;  in  the
centre  rose  up  a  wooden  house,  with  a  mezzanine  storey,  a  red
roof,  and  walls  painted  a  dull  gray — it  was  a  house  of  the  sort
usually  erected  among  us  on  military  settlements  and  by  Ger-
man colonists.  It  was  apparent  also  that,  during  its  construc-
tion, the  architect  had  had  to  carry  on  a  constant  struggle  with
the  owner's  tastes.  This  architect  had  been  a  pedant,  and  had
desired  symmetry,  but  the  owner  had  wanted  comfort,  and  had
sacrificed  all  the  Avindows  on  one  side  of  the  house  so  as  to  avoid
draughts.  And,  moreover,  the  verandah  was  by  no  means  in
the  middle  of  the  frontage,  for  the  owner  had  given  orders  to
omit  one  column  on  one  side,  so  that  there  were  only  three
columns  instead  of  four,  as  had  been  originally  provided  for.
The  yard  was  surrounded  by  palings  of  unusual  strength  and
thickness,  and  the  owner  evidently  paid  great  attention  to
the  question  of  durability.  Huge,  untrimmed  beams,  calculated
to  last  for  centuries,  had  been  employed  in  building  the  stables,
the  carriage-house,  and  the  kitchen.  The  moujiks'  huts  in  the
village  were  also  wonderfully  well  put  together ;  there  were  no
brick  walls,  no  carvings  or  other  adornments,  but  everything
was  solid  and  in  proper  condition.     In  short,  everything  at


82  DEAD   SOULS.

which  Tchitchikoff  gazed  was  substantial,  and  firm,  but  had  an
unprepossessing  look.

As  he  drove  up  to  the  porch,  he  caught  sight  of  two  people,
who  looked  out  of  one  of  the  windows  at  almost  the  same
moment, — a  woman  with  a  cap  on  her  head,  and  with  a  face  as
long  and  narrow  as  a  cucumber  ;  and  a  man  whose  countenance
was  as  round  as  the  Moldavian  pumpkins  called  calabashes,
with  which,  in  Russia,  balalaikas  ■'-  are  made, — those  light,  two-
stringed  instruments,  the  ornament  and  solace  of  the  susceptible
youth  of  twenty,  who  walks  along  in  his  dandified  way,  winking
at  the  white-bosomed,  white-necked  maidens  who  have  assem-
bled to  listen  to  his  soft  music.  After  taking  a  peep  out  of  the
window,  both  faces  disappeared  at  the  same  moment.  A  lackey
in  a  gray  jacket,  with  a  tall  blue  collar,  made  his  appearance
upon  the  steps,  and  led  Tchitchikoff  into  the  vestibule,  where
Sobakevitch  himself  came  to  meet  him.  On  catching  sight  of
his  visitor,  he  said  abruptly,  "  Pray  enter,"  and  led  him  inside
the  house.

When  they  had  entered  the  drawing-room,  Sobakevitch  pointed
to  an  arm-chair,  and  said,  "  Pray  be  seated."  Then  Tchitchikofi",
as  he  seated  himself,  glanced  at  the  walls,  and  at  the  pictures
which  were  hanging  on  them.  These  pictures  were  portraits  of
young  men,  Greek  military  leaders,  portrayed  at  full  length.
At  the  window  hung  a  cage,  out  of  which  peeped  a  dark-brown
thrush  with  white  spots,  which,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  bore  a
striking  resemblance  to  its  master.  The  host  and  his  guest  had
not  been  together  two  minutes,  when  the  door  of  the  drawing-
room  opened,  and  the  hostess  came  in, — a  tall  lady  in  a  cap
with  ribbons,  which  had  been  dyed  with  some  home-made  dye.
She  entered  in  stately  fashion,  holding  her  head  as  erect  as  a
palm-tree  holds  its  crest.

"  This  is  my  Feodulia  Ivanovna,"  said  Sobakevitch.  Tchit-
chikofi" approached,  and  kissed  the  hand  which  she  almost  shoved
against  his  lips,  and  this  afi'orded  him  an  opportunity  of  observing
that  her  hand  had  been  washed  in  salt  water  in  which  some
cucumbers  had  been  kept.  This  is  said  to  be  very  good  for  the
skin.  "  Let  me  present  this  gentleman  to  you,  my  love,"  con-
tinued Sobakevitch:  "Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikofi'!  I  had
the  honour  of  making  his  acquaintance  at  the  houses  of  the
governor  and  the  chief  of  police."

Feodulia  Ivanovna  invited  our  hero  to  seat  himself,  making  a
movement  with  her  head  similar  to  those  made  by  actresses

*  A  primitive  kind  of  guitar.


SOBAKEVITCH.  83

when  they  are  impersonating  queens.  Then  she  seated  herself
on  the  sofa,  covered  her  shoulders  with  her  merino  kerchief,  and
did  not  move  so  much  as  an  eye  or  an  eyebrow.

Tchitchikoff  again  raised  his  eyes  to  the  walls,  and  again
beheld  the  Greek  heroes  and  the  thrush  in  the  cage.  "  We
were  speaking  of  you  at  the  presiding  judge's — Ivan  Grigore-
vitch's — on  Friday  evening  last,"  he  said  at  last,  perceiving
that  Sobakevitch  and  his  wife  were  not  disposed  to  begin
the  conversation.  "  We  passed  the  time  very  pleasantly
there.  '

"  Yes  :  I  was  not  at  the  president's  on  that  occasion,"  replied
Sobakevitch.

"  He  is  a  very  fine  man."

"  Who  ? "  asked  Sobakevitch,  looking  at  the  stove  in  the
corner.

"  The  president  of  the  court."

"Well,  perhaps  he  strikes  you  that  way;  but  in  reality  the
world  has  never  produced  such  another  fool."

Tchitchikofi"  was  rather  taken  aback  by  this  sharp  remark ;
but  recovering  himself,  he  went  on,  "Of  course,  no  man  is
exempt  from  failings  ;  but  the  governor  now — what  a  fine  man
he  is  !  "

"  The  governor  a  fine  man  ?  "

"Yes  :  is  he  not  ?  "

"  Why,  he's  the  greatest  robber  in  the  world  !  "

"  What !  the^governor  a  robber  ?  "  said  Tchitchikofi*,  and  he
could  not  in  the  least  understand  how  the  governor  came  to  be
numbered  among  robbers.  "  I  must  confess  that  I  never  should
have  thought  such  a  thing,"  he  continued.  "  Permit  me  to
remark,  however,  that  his  behaviour  does  not  correspond  with
anything  of  the  sort :  on  the  contrary,  there  is  even  a  kindli-
ness about  him."  Here  our  hero  drew  out,  as  a  proof,  a  purse
which  the  governor  had  embroidered  with  his  own  hands  and
given  him,  and  then  he  spoke  in  terms  of  praise  mth  regard  to
the  suave  expression  of  his  excellency's  countenance.

"  But  his  face  is  that  of  a  highwayman,"  said  Sobakevitch.
"  Only  give  him  a  knife,  and  let  him  loose  on  the  highway,  and
he'll  cut  your  throat  for  a  copeck,  that  he  will !  He  and  the
vice-governor — why  they're  Gog  and  Magog  !  "

"  Sobakevitch  is  evidently  not  on  good  terms  with  them,"
thought  Tchitchikofi".  "  Shall  I  talk  to  him  about  the  chief  of
police  ?  He  seemed  to  be  a  friend  of  his — However,  that's
nothing  to  me,"  he  added  aloud.  "  I  must  acknowledge  that
the  chief  of  police  pleases  me  most  of  all.     What  a  fine,  open


84  DEAD    SOULS.

upright  character  he  has  !    The  simplicity  of  his  heart  is  visible
on  his  face."

"He's  a  rascal!"  said  Sobakevitch  with  the  greatest  cool-
ness. "  He  betrays  and  deceives  us,  and  yet  he  dines  with  us !
I  know  them  all,  and  they  are  all  rascals ;  the  whole  town  is
just  the  same  :  scoundrel  sits  by  scoundrel,  and  rails  against
othev  scoundrels.  They  are  all  betrayers  of  Christ.  There's
only  one  honest  man  there — the  procurator ;  and  he's  a  pig,  if
the  truth  must  be  told  !  "

After  these  laudatory  remarks,  Tchitchikoff  perceived  that
there  was  no  use  in  mentioning  the  other  officials ;  and  he  now
recalled  the  fact  that  Sobakevitch  was  not  fond  of  speaking  well
of  any  one.

"  Well,  my  love,  shall  we  have  some  dinner  ?  "  said  Sobake-
vitch's  wife  to  her  husband.

"Pray  let  us  have  it!"  replied  Sobakevitch.  Thereupon,
approaching  the  table,  the  host  and  his  guest  drank  a  glass  of
vodka  apiece,  as  was  fitting,  tasted  some  zakuska,  as  all  people
do  through  all  the  length  and  breadth  of  Russia,  including
various  salted  viands  and  other  appetizing  dishes,  and  then
repaired  to  the  dining-room:  before  them,  like  a  swimming
goose,  went  the  hostess.

The  small  table  was  set  for  four.  At  the  fourth  place  there
speedily  appeared — it  is  difiicult  to  say  precisely  what ;  whether
a  lady  or  a  girl,  a  relative,  a  housekeeper,  or  simply  someone
who  was  living  in  the  house, — at  all  events,  a  somebody  without
a  cap,  about  thirty  years  old,  in  a  gown  of  motley  hues.

"  The  cabbage  soup  is  very  good  to-day,  my  soul,"  said
Sobakevitch,  after  sipping  his  soup,  and  taking  on  his  plate  a
huge  supply  of  nyani,  a  dish  which  consists  of  breast  of  mutton
stuffed  with  buckwheat  groats,  brains,  and  trotters.  "  Such
nyani  as  this,"  he  added,  turning  to  Tchitchikoff",  "cannot  be
got  in  town  :  the  Devil  knows  what  they  give  you  there  !  "

"  But  the  governor's  table  wasn't  bad,"  said  Tchitchikoff".

"But  do  you  know  what  all  his  stuff  is  made  of?  You
wouldn't  eat  it  if  you  did  know."

"  I  do  not  know  how  it  is  prepared,  and  I  am  no  judge  of
that ;  but  the  pork  cutlets  and  the  boiled  fish  were  excellent."

"  So  it  seemed  to  you.  But  I  know  what  they  buy  at  the
market.  That  rascal  of  a  cook,  who  has  taken  lessons  of  a
Frenchman,  buys  a  cat,  skins  it,  and  serves  it  up  on  the  table
instead  of  a  hare."

"Faugh!  what  unpleasant  things  you  say!"  said  Sobake-
vitch's  wife.


SOBAKEVITCH.  85

"  What  of  it,  my  love?  That's  the  way  they  manage  things.
I  am  not  to  blame  if  they  do  so.  Every  superfluous  thing,
which  our  Akulka  throws — if  I  may  be  allowed  to  mention  it
— into  the  swill-tub,  they  put  in  their  soup — yes,  in  their  soup  !
And  there  you  have  the  truth  !  "

"  You  are  always  telling  that  sort  of  thing  at  table,"  returned
Sobakevitch's  wife  again.

"  What  of  it,  my  soul?"  said  Sobakevitch:  "if  I  did  that
myself — but  I  tell  you  to  your  face,  that  I  wouldn't  eat  filth.
If  you  were  even  to  smother  a  frog  in  sugar,  I  wouldn't  put  him
in  my  mouth,  and  I  won't  touch  oysters  either  :  I  know  what
an  oyster  is  like.  Take  some  mutton,"  he  continued,  turning  to
Tchitchikoff ;  "this  is  breast  of  mutton  with  stuffing.  It's
none  of  those  fricassees,  such  as  are  made  in  gentlemen's  kit-
chens from  meat  which  has  been  flung  round  in  the  market  for
four  days  !  It  is  the  German  and  French  doctors  who  invented
all  that.  I'd  like  to  hang  them  all  for  it !  They  have  invented
dieting,  too — which  is  curing  people  by  hunger.  Because  they
have  weak  natures  themselves  they  fancy  that  they  know
how  to  doctor  Russian  stomachs!     No,  all  that  isn't  the  right

thing  by  any  means  ;    it's  all  humbug  ;    it's  all "     Here

Sobakevitch  nodded  his  head  very  angrily.  "Ah!  they  are
always  talking  about  civilization,  civilization  ;  and  their  civiliza-
tion is — faugh  !  I  wanted  to  use  another  word,  but  it  would
have  been  indecent  at  table.  I  don't  have  anything  of  that  sort
in  my  house.  When  I  have  pork,  I  send  the  whole  pig  to
table  ;  when  I  have  mutton,  I  bring  on  the  whole  sheep  ;  or
goose,  and  then  we  have  the  whole  goose  !  I'd  rather  have
only  two  dishes,  and  eat  as  my  fancy  dictates."  Sobakevitch
confirmed  his  words  by  action  :  he  piled  half  the  breast  of  mut-
ton upon  his  plate,  ate  all  the  meat,  gnawed  the  bones,  and
sucked  them  to  the  very  last  one.

"Yes,"  thought  Tchitchikofl',  "that  man's  thick  lips  do  not
belie  him."

"  I  don't  have  things,"  now  said  Sobakevitch,  wiping  his
hands  on  his  napkin,  "  I  don't  manage  things  here,  as  a  certain
Pliushkin  manages  them  at  his  house  :  he  owns  eight  hundred
souls,  and  yet  he  lives  and  dines  worse  than  my  shepherd."

"  W^ho  is  this  Pliushkin  ?  "  asked  Tchitchikofl'.

"  A  scoundrel ! "  replied  Sobakevitch.  "He's  such  a  miser
as  you  can  hardly  conceive  of.  Prisoners  live  better  in  jail
than  he  does:  all  his  serfs  have  died,  one  after  another,  of
hunger."

"  lieally,"  interposed  Tchitchikofl',  with  interest.     "  And  do


86  DEAD   SOULS.

you  mean  to    say  that  his   people   actually  die  off  in  great
numbers '?  "

"  They  die  like  flies."

"  Like  flies  !  Is  it  possible  ?  But  allow  me  to  ask  you,  how
far  away  from  you  does  he  live  ?  "

"  Five  versts."

"Five  versts!"  exclaimed  Tchitchikoff:  and  he  was  even
conscious  of  a  slightly  accelerated  action  of  the  heart.  "  And
when  you  emerge  from  your  gates,  is  it  towards  the  right,  or
the  left  ?  "

"I  should  advise  you  not  to  think  of  going  to  that  dog's  !  "
said  Sobakevitch."'  "  It  is  more  excusable  for  a  man  to  go  to
some  improper  place  than  to  his  house."

"  Oh  !  I  was  not  inquiring  with  any  special  object,  but  merely
because  I  take  an  interest  in  knowing  about  all  sorts  of  places,"
replied  Tchitchikofi".

After  the  breast  of  mutton  came  some  votrus1ika,\  each  of
which  was  bigger  than  a  plate  ;  then  a  turkey,  as  large  as  a  calf,
stuffed  with  all  sorts  of  good  things — eggs,  rice,  liver,  and
heaven  knows  what  all ;  all  placed  in  a  ball  inside  the  bird.
This  ended  the  dinner  :  but  when  they  rose  from  the  table,
Tchitchikoff  felt  that  he  weighed  a  whole  pood|  more  than  usual.
They  went  into  the  drawing-room,  where  a  dish  of  preserves
was  already  awaiting  them — neither  pears  nor  plums,  however,
nor  indeed  any  special  sort  of  fruit — and  which,  by  the  way,
neither  the  host  nor  the  guest  touched.  The  hostess  went  out
in  order  to  procure  some  other  little  dainties,  and  taking  advan-
tage of  her  absence,  Tchitchikoff  turned  to  Sobakevitch,  who
was  leaning  back  in  an  arm-chair,  feeling  barely  capable  of
grunting  after  such  a  heavy  meal,  and  merely  emitting  certain
unintelligible  sounds,  while  he  crossed  himself  and  covered  his
face  every  now  and  then  with  his  hands.  Tchitchikoff  turned  to
him  with  these  words  :  "I  should  like  to  speak  with  you  on  a
matter  of  business."

"  Here  are  some  more  preserves,"  at  this  moment  said  the
hostess,  returning  with  a  small  plate  ;  "  they  are  a  good  sort,
sweetened  with  honey."

"  We'll  attend  to  that  later  on,"  said  Sobakevitch.  "  Go  to
your  room  now  :  Pavel  Ivanovitch  and  I  are  going  to  take  off
our  coats,  and  have  a  little  rest."

The  hostess  expressed  her  desire  to  send  for  some  feather-

*  Sobakevitch' s  own  name  is  a  derivative  of  sobaka,  a  dog.
t  Pancakes  with  curds.
X  Forty  pounds.


SOBAKEVITCH.  87

beds  and  pillows  ;  but  her  husband  said,  "  We  want  nothing  of
that;  we  will  rest  in  the  arm-chairs."  So  Mrs.  Sobakevitch
withdrew.

Sobakevitch  then  bent  his  head  slightly,  preparatory  to  hear-
ing what  the  business  might  be.  Tchitchikoff  began  in  a  very
distant  way,  touched  upon  the  Russian  Empire  in  general,  and
expressed  himself  in  very  laudatory  terms  with  regard  to  its
extent,  saying  that  even  the  ancient  Roman  Empire  had  not  been
so  great,  and  that  strangers  rightly  admired  Muscovy.  Sobake-
vitch listened  to  all  this,  and  nodded,  whereupon  our  hero  added
that  according  to  the  existing  laws  of  the  empire,  souls  (serfs)
set  down  in  the  census  lists,  although  they  might  have  completed
their  earthly  career,  were,  nevertheless,  still  taxed  just  like  the
living  ones,  pending  the  preparation  of  a  new  census  list,
although,  as  an  offset  to  that,  the  newly  born  were  not
entered  on  the  registers.  Sobakevitch  still  listened  and  nodded,
and  then  Tchitchikoff  added  that  despite  all  the  justice  of  these
regulations,  they  were  burdensome  for  some  proprietors,  since
they  entailed  upon  them  the  necessity  of  paying  taxes  for  dead
as  well  as  for  live  serfs.  He,  Tchitchikoff,  feeling  great  personal
regard  for  his  friend  Sobakevitch,  was,  however,  prepared  to
assume  a  portion  of  such  really  heavy  obligations.  With  regard
to  this  principal  point,  our  hero  expressed  himself  very  cau-
tiously :  he  made  no  dii'ect  mention  of  dead  souls,  but  merely
alluded  to  them  as  non-existent  individuals.

Sobakevitch  listened  to  all  the  talk  as  before,  with  his  head
bent  and  hardly  any  expression  whatever  upon  his  countenance.
It  seemed  as  though  there  were  no  soul  at  all  in  his  body,  or
that  if  there  were  one  belonging  to  it,  it  was  not  in  the  place
where  it  should  have  been.  As  in  the  case  of  Koshtchei  the
Deathless,*  it  was  no  doubt  somewhere  beyond  the  mountains.

"  Well  ?  "  said  Tchitchikoff,  pausing  at  last  and  awaiting  a
reply,  not  without  some  emotion.

"  You  want  some  dead  souls,  eh  ?  "  simply  inquired  Sobake-
vitch, without  showing  the  slightest  surprise,  and  as  if  the  ques-
tion were  one  of  selling  grain  or  faggots.

"  Yes,"  replied  Tchitchikoff,  and  he  again  softened  the  ex-
pression by  adding,  "  non-existent  persons."

"  They  can  be  found :  why  not  ?  "  said  Sobakevitch.

"  And  if  there  are  any  in  your  village,  then,  no  doubt  you —
would  be  glad  to  get  rid  of  them  ?  "

"  I  am  ready  to  sell  them,  if  you  like,"  said  Sobakevitch,

•  A  character  in  Eussian  folk-lore.


88  DEAD   SOULS.

raising  his  head  a  little,  and  recognising  the  fact  that  this  would-
be  purchaser  must  in  all  probability  find  some  profit  in  them —
though  what  it  was  he  could  hardly  tell.

"Deuce  take  it !  "  said  Tchitchikofi"  to  himself;  "  this  fellow
talks  of  selling  before  I  have  barely  given  a  hint."  And  then  he
remarked  aloud,  "  And,  at  what  price,  for  instance  ?  though,  to
be  sure,  for  such  things  as  that,  any  discussion  of  price  is  rather
strange."

"  Well,  I  will  not  demand  too  much  of  you :  let  us  say  a
hundred  roubles  a  head,"  replied  Sobakevitch.

"A  hundred  !  "  exclaimed  Tchitchikoflf,  dropping  his  jaw,  and
staring  at  his  friend  with  all  his  eyes,  not  knowing  whether  he
had  heard  him  correctly,  or  whether  his  tongue,  which  was
heavy  by  nature,  had  not  turned  the  wrong  way,  and  let  slip
one  word  instead  of  another.

"  What,  is  that  too  high  for  you  ?  "  ejaculated  Sobakevitch  ;
and  he  added,  "Well,  what  would  be  your  price  ?  "

"  My  price !  We  have  probably  made  some  mistake,  or  else
we  don't  understand  each  other,  and  have  forgotten  the  main
point  of  this  business.  For  my  part,  I  place  my  hand  on  my
heart,  and  suggest  that  eighty  copecks  apiece  would  be  a  very
handsome  sum."

"  The  idea !  eighty  copecks  !  "

"  Well,  in  my  judgment,  it  is  impossible  to  offer  more."

"But I  am  not  selling  shoes."

"  Well,  you  must  acknowledge  yourself  that  you  are  not  sell-
ing men  either,"

'  "And  so  you  think  that  you  have  found  a  fool,  who  will  sell
you  a  duly  registered  soul  for  eighty  copecks  ?  "

"  But  permit  me.  Surely  those  serfs  died  long  ago,  and  all
that  remains  of  them  is  merely  a  name,  barely  perceptible  to  the
senses.  However,  not  to  enter  into  further  discussion  on  this
point,  I  will  give  you  a  rouble  and  a  half,  if  you  like,  but  I
cannot  give  more."

"  You  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  mention  such  a  sum  !  You
are  haggling:  state  a  real  price."

"  I  cannot  go  beyond  that,  Mikhail  Semenovitch,  believe  me;
on  my  conscience,  I  cannot:  what  cannot  be  done  cannot  be,"
said  TchitchikoflT,     However,  he  added  another  half-rouble.

"Now,  why  are  you  so  niggardly?"  said  Sobakevitch:
"  really  that  isn't  dear !  Some  other  scoundrel  will  deceive
you  and  sell  you  rubbish,  and  not  real  dead  souls  ;  but  mine  are
as  sound  as  nuts,  picked  articles  :  there's  no  better  artisan  than  a
healthy  moujik.     Just  consider  the  matter :  here's  Mikhyeeff,


SOBAKEVITCH.  89

the  carriage-builder  !  Why,  no  better  equipages  are  made  than
those  he  builds.  And  his  work's  not  like  Moscow  work,  made
merely  to  last  an  hour  ;  such  durability !  And  he  pads  his
carriages,  and  varnishes  them  so  beautifully  too  !  "

Tchitchikoff  opened  his  mouth  to  remarK  that  Mikhyeeff  had
left  the  world  a  long  while  ago  :  but  Sobakevitch  had  warmed
up  to  his  subject,  as  the  saying  runs,  and  he  went  on  speaking
as  follows  : —

"And  Probka  Stepan,  the  carpenter!  I'll  wager  my  head
that  you  won't  find  another  such  moujik  anywhere.  What  a
stout  fellow  he  was,  to  be  sure  !  God  knows  what  the  autho-
rities would  have  given  to  have  him  serve  in  the  Guards  :  he
was  three  arshins  and  a  vershok  in  height."*

Again  Tchitchikofi'  felt  inclined  to  remark  that  Probka  had  not
been  in  the  world  for  a  long  time ;  but  Sobakevitch  had  evi-
dently got  well  started,  and  such  a  flood  of  speech  poured  forth
from  his  mouth  that  our  friend  was  constrained  to  listen.

"  Milushkin,  the  brickmaker,  too  ;  he  could  set  up  an  oven  in
any  house  whatever.  Maksim  Telyatnikofi",  the  cobbler  :  what
ever  he  pricked  mth  his  awl  became  a  boot  at  once  ;  and  as  for
his  boots,  they  were  wonderful.  Besides  which  he  was  always
as  sober  as  a  judge.  And  Yeremei  Sorokoplekhin  !  Now  that
moujik  was  worth  a  fortune  ;  he  traded  at  Moscow,  and  he
alone  paid  obrok  f  to  the  amount  of  five  hundred  roubles  a
year.  What  a  set  of  people  to  be  sure  !  Mine  are  not  at  all-
the  sort  of  dead  souls  that  some  Pliushkin  or  other  would  sell
you."

"  But  permit  me,"  said  Tchitchikoff  at  last,  astounded  by  such
a  copious  flood  of  words,  to  which  there  was  apparently  no  end  ;
"  why  do  you  enumerate  all  these  men's  qualities  ?  Surely,  that
does  not  concern  us  now,  since  they  are  all  dead.  A  dead  body
is  only  good  to  prop  up  a  fence  with,  says  the  proverb."

"Yes,  certainly,  they  are  dead,"  said  Sobakevitch,  as  though
considering  the  subject,  and  recalling  the  fact  that  they  really
were  defunct;  and  then  he  added,  "Well,  what's  the  use  of
talking  about  these  men,  although  they  are  still  reckoned  as
alive  ?  What  sort  of  men  are  those  who  are  still  alive  ?  Flies,
and  not  men  at  all !  "

"  But  they  do  still  exist,  whereas  the  dead  ones  are  merely
visionary."

*  An  arshin  is  28  inches;  a  rershok  is  If  inch:  consequently  Probka
[cork)  Stepan  was  7  feet  1|  inch  high.

t  Obrok,  a  tax  which  was  paid  in  lieu  of  personal  labour  on  the  estate,
by  serfs  who  were  allowed  to  exercise  their  callings  in  the  towns.


90  Dead  souls.

"  Well,  no,  they  are  not  visionary.  I  tell  you  that  you  won't
even  find  any  such  men  as  Mikhyeeff :  such  a  machinist  as  he
was  will  never  set  foot  in  this  room  again.  No,  that's  no  vision.
And  there  was  more  strength  in  his  big  shoulders  than  in  any
horse.  Where,  I  should  like  to  know,  could  you  find  such  a
vision  ?  "

"  Well,  I  cannot  give  more  than  two  roubles  apiece,"  said
Tchitchikoff".

"No,  no  ;  but  in  order  that  you  may  not  pretend  that  I  am
asking  a  high  price,  and  won't  make  you  any  concessions,  I  will
say  seventy-five  roubles  a  soul :  only  it  must  be  in  bank-notes
— and  that's  really  only  for  acquaintance'  sake."

"Well,  what  can  he  think?  "  said  Tchitchikoff  to  himself:
"does  he  take  me  for  a  fool?"  and  then  he  added  aloud,
"  Keally,  you  surprise  me ;  there  seems  to  be  some  theatrical
performance  or  comedy  going  on  between  us  :  otherwise  I  can-
not understand  it.  You  seem  to  be  a  sensible  man.  You  have
all  the  marks  of  possessing  a  cultivated  mind.  Surely  these  are
paltry  goods — fu  !  fu !  What  are  they  worth  ?  What  are  they
good  for  ?  "

"  Well,  but  you  are  buying  them  :  they  must  be  of  some  use
to  you."

Here  Tchitchikoff  bit  his  lips,  and  felt  at  a  loss  for  an  answer.
He  began  to  talk  about  some  family  affairs,  but  Sobakevitch
simply  replied : —

"  I  do  not  require  to  know  what  your  connections  are  :  I  do
not  meddle  in  family  matters,  that  is  your  own  affair.  You
need  the  souls,  and  I  will  sell  them  to  you,  and  perhaps  you
will  regret  not  having  bought  them.

"  Two  roubles,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  So  you  are  like  Yakov's  magpie,  who  repeated  the  same
thing  on  every  occasion,  as  the  proverb  says.  Give  something
like  what  they  are  worth."

"  Well,  may  the  deuce  take  him  !  "  said  Tchitchikoff  to  him-
self. "  I'll  add  half  a  rouble,  as  a  sop  ! — I  will  add  half  a  rouble,
if  you  like."

"  Well,  and  if  you  like,  I'll  say  my  last  word  to  you  :  fifty
roubles.  Truly,  it's  a  loss  to  me,  and  you  can't  purchase  such
fine  people  anywhere  so  cheap  !  "

"  What  a  hard-headed  beast !  "  said  Tchitchikoff  to  himself;
and  then  he  continued  aloud  with  some  vexation,  "  Yes  :  what's
the  use  of  discussing  it  after  all,  just  as  though  it  were  a
serious  affair,  when  I  can  get  them  elsewhere,  for  nothing,  too.
So  far  every  one  has  gladly  handed  them  over  to  me,  simply  for


SOBAKEVITCH.  91

the  sake  of  getting  rid  of  them  as  speedily  as  possible.  The  man
who  holds  on  to  them  and  pays  taxes  on  them  is  a  fool !  "

"But  do  you  know,"  replied  Sobakevitch,  "  that  this  sort  of
purchase — I  say  this  strictly  between  ourselves,  and  out  of
friendship — is  not  always  legal,  and  if  I  were  to  report  it,  or  if
any  one  else  were  to  do  so,  the  party  concerned  would  never
have  any  credit  in  the  matter  of  contracts,  or  if  he  wished  to
enter  into  any  profitable  connections  ?  "

"So  that's  what  you  are  aiming  at,  you  sly  scoundrel!"
thought  Tchitchikoflf,  and  he  immediately  remarked  with  the
most  nonchalant  air,  "As  you  please.  I  am  buying  them,  not
from  any  necessity,  as  you  imagine,  but  because  my  own  views
incline  me  to  do  so.  If  you  won't  take  two  roubles  and  a  half,
then  good-day  to  you."

"  I  can't  put  him  out :  he  won't  give  way,"  thought  Sobake-
vitch. "  Well,  God  be  with  you !  give  me  thirty,  and  take
them."

"No;  I  see  that  you  do  not  wish  to  sell  them,  so  farewell."

"  Permit  me  !  permit  me  !  "  said  Sobakevitch,  holding  Tchit-
chikoffs  hand,  and  treading  on  his  foot,  for  our  hero  had  for-
gotten to  guard  himself;  realising  this,  the  host  gave  a  hiss,
and  then  jumped  upon  our  friend's  other  foot.

"I  beg  your  pardon!"  he  said,  "I  seem  to  have  incon-
venienced you.  Please  to  sit  down  here  :  pray  do  !  "  Then
he  seated  Tchitchikofi"  in  the  chair,  rather  skilfully  than  other-
wise, like  a  bear  who  has  been  tamed,  and  who  knows  how  to
twirl  himself  about,  and  to  perform  tricks  when  asked,  "  Show
us  how  women  bathe,  Misha  !  "  or,  "  How  do  little  children
steal  peas,  Misha  ?  "

"  Really,  I  am  wasting  time  :  I  must  make  haste,"  replied  our
hero."

"  Sit  still  a  little  minute,  and  I  will  say  something  presently
which  will  please  you."  Here  Sobakevitch  moved  nearer  to
him,  and  said  softly  in  his  ear,  as  though  it  were  a  secret,  "  Will
you  give — a  corner  ?  "'■'

"  That  is  to  say,  twenty-five  roubles  ?  Ni,  ni,  ni !  I  won't
give  even  the  quarter  of  a  corner :  I  won't  add  a  copeck  more  I "

Sobakevitch  now  said  nothing :  Tchitchikoflf  also  held  his
peace.  The  Greek  heroes,  with  their  aquiline  noses,  gazed  down
from  the  wall  upon  this  barter,  with  great  attention.

"  What  is  your  final  price  ?  "  asked  Sobakevitch  at  last.

"  Two  and  a  half."

*  In  card-playing,  one-fourth  of  the  stake,  which  is  indicated  by  turn-
ing down  the  corner  of  the  card.


92  DEAD    SOULS.

"  Keally,  a  human  soul  is  the  same  to  you  as  boiled  beet-
root.    Won't  you  give  three  roubles  ?  "

"  I  cannot."

"  Well,  there's  nothing  to  be  done  with  you  :  have  it  as  you
like.  It's  a  loss  to  me,  but  I  have  a  dog's  nature  :  I  cannot
refrain  from  doing  my  neighbour  a  kindness.  I  suppose  I  shall
have  to  prepare  a  deed  of  sale,  so  that  all  may  be  in  proper
form  ?  "

"  Of  course."

"  Well,  then,  here's  another  point :  I  shall  have  to  go  to
town."

Thus  the  transaction  was  completed.  They  both  decided  to
visit  the  town  on  the  following  day  and  draw  up  the  deed  of  sale.
Tchitchikoflf  then  asked  for  a  list  of  the  peasants.  Sobakevitch
readily  agreed  to  give  one,  and  immediately  stepped  up  to  his
desk  and  began  to  write  down  the  list,  not  only  giving  the
serfs'  names,  but  duly  indicating  their  admirable  qualities.

"  The  list  is  ready  at  last,"  he  eventually  said,  turning  round.

"Ready?  Please  bring  it  here."  Tchitchikoff  ran  it  over,
and  was  amazed  by  its  accuracy  and  punctiliousness.  Not  only
were  the  professions  circumstantially  described,  the  names,  ages,
and  conditions  of  the  various  serfs,  but  on  the  margins  there
were  notes  respecting  their  behaviour  and  sobriety  ;  in  a  word,
it  was  a  pleasure  to  look  at  the  list.

"  Now,  please  to  give  me  the  earnest-money,"  said  Sobake-
vitch.

"Why  should  you  receive  earneat-money  ?  You  will  receive
all  the  money  at  once,  in  town."

"  Well,  you  know  that  earnest-money  is  customary,"  rejoined
Sobakevitch.

"  I  do  not  know  how  I  can  give  you  any,  for  I  have  brought
no  money  with  me.     Yes,  here  are  ten  roubles."

"  Ten  roubles,  indeed  !     Give  me  fifty  at  least !  "

Tchitchikoff  again  denied  that  he  had  any  money  with  him  ;
but  Sobakevitch  asserted  so  positively  that  he  must  have  some,
that  he  drew  out  another  bank-note,  saying,  "  Here  are  fifteen
more,  if  you  like,  and  that  will  make  twenty-five.  Only  please
to  hand  me  a  receipt."

"  What  do  you  want  with  a  receipt?  "

"  It  is  always  better  to  have  a  receipt,  you  know.  Circum-
stances may  change — all  sorts  of  things  may  happen."

"  Very  good  :  give  me  the  money,  then."

"  But  why  give  you  the  money  ?  Here  it  is  in  my  hand  :  as
soon  as  you  have  written  the  receipt,  you  shall  have  it."


SOBAKEVITCH.  93

"  But,  pray,  how  am  I  to  write  out  a  receipt  ?  I  must  see  the
money  first."

Tchitchijiofi'  relinquished  the  notes  he  held  to  Sobakevitch,
who,  approaching  the  table,  and  covering  them  with  his  left
band,  wrote  upon  a  scrap  of  paper  that  he  had  received  twenty-
five  roubles  in  imperial  bank-notes,  as  earnest-money  for  various
serfs  he  had  sold.  After  writing  the  receipt  he  looked  over  the
notes  again.

"  The  notes  are  rather  old,"  he  remarked,  examining  one  of
them  at  the  light,  "  and  somewhat  torn,  but,  between  friends,
such  things  must  not  be  considered."

"Close-fisted,  close-fisted!"  said  Tchitchikoflf  to  himself,
"  and  a  beast  into  the  bargain  !  "

"  You  don't  want  any  female  serfs,  eh  ?  "  asked  Sobakevitch.

"  No,  thank  you."

"I  could  sell  some  cheap.  At  a  rouble  apiece,  for  old
acquaintance'  sake."

"  No  :  I  have  no  use  for  women."

"  Well,  if  you  have  no  use  for  them,  it  is  useless  to  talk  about
them.  Taste  knows  no  law.  '  One  man  loves  the  pope,  and
another  the  pope's  wife,'  says  the  proverb."

"I  should  also  like  to  request  that  this  transaction  may
remain  a  secret  between  us,"  said  Tchitchikofi",  as  he  took
leave.

"  That  is  a  matter  of  course.  A  third  person  has  no  business
to  interfere.  What  takes  place  between  two  intimate  friends
should  be  confided  to  their  mutual  friendship  alone.  Farewell !
I  thank  you  for  having  visited  me.  I  trust  that  you  will  not
forget  me  in  the  future :  if  you  have  a  little  leisure  time,  come
and  dine  with  me  ;  spend  a  day  here.  Perhaps  we  may  be  able
to  render  each  other  some  further  service."

"  That's  hardly  likely  !  "  said  Tchitchikofi"  to  himself,  as  he
seated  himself  in  his  britcbka.  "  That  close-fisted  devil  has
squeezed  two  roubles  and  a  half  out  of  me  for  each  dead  soul !"

He  was  dissatisfied  with  Sobakevitch's  conduct.  Although
they  had  met  at  the  governor's  and  the  chief  of  police's,  he  had
behaved  like  a  perfect  stranger, — he  had  exacted  money  for
rubbish.  When  the  britchka  drove  out  of  the  yard,  Tchitchikofi"
glanced  back,  and  perceived  that  Sobakevitch  was  still  standing
upon  the  threshold,  apparently  watching  his  visitor  to  see  where
he  was  going.

"  The  sly  villain,  he's  still  standing  there !  "  he  muttered
between  his  teeth ;  and,  after  turning  towards  the  peasant's
huts,  he  ordered  Selifan  to  drive  ofi"  in  such  a  manner  that  the


94  DEAD    SOULS.

equipage  could  not  be  seen  from  the  house.  He  wanted  to
visit  Pliushkin,  whose  people,  according  to  Sobakevitch's
account,  died  like  flies,  but  he  did  not  wish  Sobakevitch  to
know  it.  When  the  britchka  reached  the  farther  end  of  the
village,  he  called  to  the  first  moujik  he  met,  a  fellow  who  had
picked  up  a  thick  beam  somewhere  on  the  road,  and  who  was
dragging  it  home  to  his  hut  on  his  shoulder,  like  an  indefatigable
ant.

"  Hey,  there,  beard !  How  do  you  get  to  Pliushkin's  from
here,  without  having  to  pass  your  master's  house  ?  "

This  question  seemed  to  perplex  the  moujik.

"  Don't  you  know  ?  "  ,

"  No,  master,  I  don't  know."

"  0  you  fool  !  and  you've  got  gray  hair,  too  !  Don't  you  know
that  miser  Pliushkin,  the  man  who  feeds  his  people  so  badly  ?"

"  Ah  !  the  ragged  man  with  patched  clothes  !"  exclaimed  the
moujik.  "  Take  that  path  there,  and  turn  to  the  right  a  hundred
paces  off.     Then  you  will  only  have  to  drive  straight  on."

Thereupon  the  britchka  rolled  rapidly  away.


CHAPTER  VI.

PLIUSHKIN.

While  Tchitchikoff  was  still  meditating  over  the  nickname  of
'*  ragged  man  "  bestowed  by  the  moujik  upon  Pliushkin,  he  did
not  observe  that  he  had  arrived  in  the  middle  of  an  extensive
village,  with  a  multitude  of  izbas  and  streets.  But  he  was
soon  forced  to  take  notice  of  the  fact  by  a  tolerably  severe
jolting  over  the  timber-laid  road,  beside  which  the  stone-
paved  street  of  a  city  is  nothing.  These  planks  moved,  now
up,  now  down,  like  the  keys  of  a  pianoforte  ;  and  an  incautious
rider  received  either  a  slap  on  the  nape  of  the  neck,  or  a  blow
on  his  brow,  or  was  even  made  to  bite  the  tip  of  his  tongue
with  his  own  teeth  in  a  very  painful  manner.  Tchitchikoff
observed  a  certain  peculiar  antiquity  in  all  the  village  structures.
The  timber  walls  of  the  izbas  were  dark  and  old  :  many  of  the
roofs  were  so  full  of  holes  that  they  looked  like  gratings ;  on
some  merely  the  ridge-pole  and  the  side-rafters  remained,  in  the
form  of  ribs.  It  seemed  as  though  the  owners  themselves  had
torn  off  the  shingles  and  boards,  arguing,  and  with  justice,  that


PLIUSHKIN.  95

badly  built  izbas  are  not  good  shelter-places  during  rain,  and
that  in  fine  weather  the  water  does  not  come  through ;  besides
it  is  no  use  making  a  fuss  about  it,  as  there  is  all  out-doors  and
the  drinking- shops  at  one's  disposal,  and  one  can  go  where  one
likes  on  the  highway.  There  was  no  glass  in  the  windows  of
the  little  cabins  ;  some  were  stufi'ed  with  rags,  or  women's  petti-
coats ;  the  little  railed  balconies,  which  for  an  unknown  reason
are  built  just  under  the  roof  on  some  Russian  izbas,  were  all
awry,  and  blackened  even  to  an  unpicturesque  degree.  Behind
the  izbas,  in  many  places,  stretched  huge  stacks  of  grain  in  rows,
and  behind  the  stacks  and  the  ancient  izba  roofs  two  village
churches  rose  up  into  the  clear  air,  peeping  forth,  now  on  the
right  hand,  now  on  the  left,  as  the  britchka  took  different  turns  ;
they  stood  beside  each  other,  one  built  of  wood,  and  in  ruins ;
and  the  other  of  stone,  with  yellow  walls,  all  spotted  and  cracked.
Pliushkin's  house  began  to  appear  at  intervals,  and  at  last  it
came  fully  into  sight  just  as  the  last  izbas  were  passed,  and
when  there  appeared  a  desolate  vegetable  garden  or  cabbage
plantation,  surrounded  by  a  low,  and  in  some  places  dilapidated
fence.  This  strange  dwelling-place,  which  was  very  long,  had  a
decrepit  look.  In  some  places  it  was  one  storey  high,  in  others
two  ;  upon  its  dark  roof,  which  did  not,  in  many  parts,  afford
adequate  protection  from  the  weather,  on  account  of  its  age,
there  towered  two  belvederes,  one  facing  the  other,  both  already
tottering,  and  destitute  of  any  trace  of  paint.  The  walls  of  the
house  presented  naked  lattice-work  in  lieu  of  plaster  to  view  in
various  spots,  and  they  had  evidently  been  subjected  to  all  sorts
of  inclement  weather — rain,  whirlwinds,  and  autumnal  changes.
Only  two  of  the  windows  were  open :  the  rest  were  closed  with
shutters,  or  simply  barricaded  with  boards.  And  even  these
two  windows  were  damaged :  one  of  them  being  darkened  by  a
triangular  piece  of  blue  sugar-paper  pasted  over  it.

The  old  and  spacious  garden,  which  stretched  away  behind
the  house,  running  towards  the  village,  and  then  merging  into
a  meadow,  seemed  to  be  the  only  fresh  spot  about  the  place,  and
formed  the  only  picturesque  feature  in  the  desolate  landscape.
The  crests  of  the  trees,  which  had  grown  at  then*  own  will,  rose
up  against  the  horizon  in  verdant  clumps  and  quivering  domes
of  foliage.  The  colossal  white  bole  of  a  beech  tree,  deprived  of
its  leafy  head,  which  had  been  broken  off  by  a  gale  of  wind  or
a  thunderstorm,  rose  from  the  midst  of  this  green  thicket,  look-
ing like  a  symmetrical  column  of  gleaming  white  marble  against
the  sky :  the  slanting,  sharply-pointed  fracture  with  which  it
ended  above,  instead  of  there  being  a  capital,  appeared  dark


96  DEAD   SOULS.

above  the  snowy  whiteness  of  the  trunk.  The  hop-plants,  which
had  stifled  the  lilacs,  mountain-ashes,  and  hazel-bushes  climb-
ing to  the  top  of  the  fence,  also  threatened  to  envelop  the  shat-
tered beech-tree.  They  had  grown  half-way  up  the  trunk  and
then  descended,  catching  in  other  trees,  and  in  places  hanging  in
the  air,  knotting  their  slender  clinging  tendrils  into  rings,  which
swayed  gently  in  the  breeze.  The  green  grove,  illumined  by
the  sun,  parted  here  and  there,  disclosing  unlighted  depths
within  it,  looking  like  the  dark  throats  of  wild  beasts.  It  was  all
enveloped  in  gloom,  and  in  its  dark  recesses  there  stood  forth
here  and  there,  beside  a  narrow  winding  path,  some  rickety
arbour  surrounded  by  a  railing,  with  the  decayed  and  hollow
trunk  of  a  willow  tree,  a  gray  Siberian  acacia,  and  some  brush-
wood, which  was  all  tangled  and  interlaced.  A  young  maple-bough
too,  had  stretched  forth  its  green  leaves,  beneath  one  of  which
a  sun-ray  had  crept,  God  alone  knows  how,  suddenly  rendering
it  fiery,  transparent,  and  wondrously  gleaming  amid  that  thick
darkness.  On  one  side,  at  the  very  edge  of  the  garden,  some
lofty  ash-trees  bore  the  huge  nests  of  crows  aloft  on  their
quivering  crests.  On  some  of  them,  boughs  which  had  been
half  torn  away  drooped  downward,  laden  with  dry  leaves.  In
a  word,  the  scene  was  beautiful  as  neither  art  nor  nature  alone
can  invent,  but  as  is  only  possible  when  they  are  both  combined,
when  nature  gives  the  finishing  touch  with  her  chisel  to  the
often  senseless  work  of  man,  lightening  the  heavy  masses,  de-
molishing all  the  coarsely  conceived  regularity  and  poverty  of
outline,  and  casting  a  wondrous  warmth  over  all  which  has
been  planned  in  cold,  measured  purity  and  faultlessness.

After  making  one  or  two  turns,  our  hero  at  length  found  him-
self in  front  of  the  house,  which  now  appeared  even  more
gloomy  than  before.  The  ancient  wood  fence  and  gates  were
already  covered  with  green  slime.  A  cluster  of  buildings —
servants'  apartments,  storehouses,  cellars,  evidently  falling  into
decay — stretched  on  one  side  of  the  yard;  beside  them,  to  right
and  left,  the  gates  of  other  courtyards  were  visible.  Every-
thing here  announced  that  things  had  been  conducted  on  a
grand  scale  in  former  times.

Nothing  was  visible  which  could  enliven  the  picture — no  doors
flying  open,  no  crowd  of  people  going  in  or  out,  no  bustle  of  the
living  nor  solicitude  for  the  house.  The  great  gates  alone  were
open,  and  that  because  a  moujik  had  entered  with  a  laden  telyega
covered  with  a  mat.  However,  Tchitchikofi"  soon  perceived  a
person  who  began  to  quarrel  with  the  moujik  who  had  brought


PLItJSHKIN.  97

this  tely^ga.  For  a  long  time  he  could  not  make  out  to  what
sex  this  person  belonged — whether  it  was  a  man  or  a  woman.
The  garb  this  person  wore  greatly  resembled  a  woman's  cloak,
but  the  voice  seemed  rather  hoarse  for  a  woman's.  "It  must,
however,  be  a  woman,"  said  Tchitchikotf  to  himself,  but  imme-
diately afterwards  he  added,  "  Oh,  no  !  "  "  But  of  course  it  is
a  woman  !  "  he  said  at  last,  after  a  more  searching  gaze.  The
person,  meanwhile,  stared  fixedly  at  him,  as  if  a  visitor  was  a
rarity  there.  Seeing  the  keys  which  hung  from  this  person's
belt,  and  hearing  the  very  abusive  words  which  were  being
addressed  to  the  moujik,  Tchitchikoff  inferred  that  the  wearer
of  the  cloak  was  probably  the  housekeeper.

"  Listen,  my  good  woman,"  he  said,  descending  from  his
britchka  ;  "  does  your  master — ■  ?  "

"  Not  at  home,"  interrupted  the  housekeeper,  without  wait-
ing for  him  to  finish  his  query ;  and  then,  after  a  momentary
pause,  she  added,  "  What  do  you  want?  "

"  I  have  some  business  to  transact  with  him."

"  Go  into  the  room,  there,  then,"  said  the  housekeeper,  open-
ing the  door,  and  showing  him  her  back  all  spotted  over  with
floui",  and  a  large  rent  in  her  cloak.  Our  hero  then  entered  a
dark  but  spacious  vestibule,  whence  the  cold  air  poured  out  as
though  from  a  cellar.  From  the  vestibule  he  reached  a  room
which  was  also  dark,  being  only  Ughted  by  a  gleam  which  came
through  a  wide  crack  under  the  door.  On  opening  this  door  he
found  himself  at  last  iu  the  light,  and  was  very  much  astonished
at  the  disorder  which  he  beheld  before  him.  It  seemed  as  if
the  floors  were  being  washed,  and  as  if  all  the  house  furniture
had  been  temporarily  piled  up  here.  A  broken  chair  was  even
standing  on  one  table,  and,  beside  it  was  a  clock  of  which  the
pendulum  had  stopped,  and  to  this  a  spider  had  attached  its
web.  There  also  stood  a  sideboard  filled  with  ancient  silver,
decanters,  and  Chinese  porcelain.  Upon  a  desk,  inlaid  with
mother-of-pearl,  which  had  already  fallen  out  in  pieces,  leaving
behind  it  empty  yellowish  holes  filled  with  glue,  lay  all  sorts  of
things :  a  pile  of  documents,  covered  with  a  marble  paper-
weight which  had  turned  green ;  an  ancient  book  in  a  leather
binding,  with  red  edges ;  a  lemon,  completely  dried  up,  and  no
larger  than  a  broken  walnut-wood  knob  from  an  arm-chair  ;
a  wineglass  covered  with  a  letter,  and  containing  some  sort  of
liquid  and  three  flies  ;  a  bit  of  sealing-wax ;  a  scrap  of  rag,
which  had  been  picked  up  somewhere ;  two  ink-stained  pens,
dried  up  and  looking  as  though  they  were  in  a  consumption ;
together  with  a  toothpick,  which  was  quite  yellow,  and  with

Q


98  DEAB   SOULS.

•wHch  the  owner  had  probably  cleansed  his  teeth  prior  to  the
arrival  of  the  French  in  Moscow.

Upon  the  walls  several  pictures  were  suspended  close  to-
gether, and  without  any  attempt  at  arrangement ;  there  was  a
long,  yellow  engraving  of  some  battle,  with  huge  drums,  shout-
ing soldiers,  three-cornered  hats,  and  prancing  horses.  This
lacked  a  glass,  and  was  mounted  in  a  dilapidated  mahogany
frame.  On  a  line  with  this  a  huge  oil  painting,  which  repre-
sented some  flowers  and  fruits,  with  a  boar's  head,  and  a  duck
hanging  head  downwards,  monopolised  half  the  wall.  From  the
middle  of  the  ceiling  hung  a  chandelier  enveloped  in  a  linen  bag,
to  which  the  accumulated  dust  gave  the  aspect  of  a  silk-
worm's cocoon  with  the  worm  in  it;  and  in  one  corner  of  the  room
various  things  not  worthy  to  lie  upon  the  table  were  piled
up  in  a  heap.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to  affirm  that  a
living  being  inhabited  this  apartment,  had  not  an  ancient,
threadbare  nightcap,  which  lay  upon  the  table,  borne  witness  to
the  fact.  While  Tchitchikoft'  was  still  engaged  in  surveying
the  place,  a  side-door  opened,  and  the  same  housekeeper  whom
he  had  encountered  in  the  yard  entered  the  room.  But  he  now
became  aware  that  this  person  was  rather  a  steward  than  a  house-
keeper ;  a  housekeeper,  at  all  events,  does  not  shave,  whereas
this  person,  on  the  contrary,  shaved  every  now  and  then,  for
his  chin  and  all  the  lower  portion  of  his  cheeks  resembled  one
of  those  currycombs  made  of  iron  wire,  with  which  horses  are
cleaned  down  in  the  stable.  Tchitchikoff,  imparting  an  inquir-
ing expression  to  his  countenance,  waited  impatiently  to  hear
what  the  steward  would  say  to  him.  The  steward,  on  his  side,
waited  for  Tchitchikofl"  to  speak.  At  length,  our  hero,  surprised
by  such  strange  indecision,  made  up  his  mind  to  inquire, —

"  "Where  is  your  master  ?     Is  he  at  home  ?  "

"Yes,  he  is  here,"  said  the  steward.

"  Where  ?  "  repeated  Tchitchikoff.

"  What,  my  good  fellow,  are  you  blind  ?  "  said  the  steward.
"  At  home,  indeed  !     I  am  the  master  !  "

Here  our  hero  involuntarily  stepped  back,  and  looked  more
attentively  at  this  person.  It  had  been  his  lot  to  see  many  sorts
of  people — even  people  such  as  the  author  and  the  reader  have
never  beheld — but  such  an  individual  as  this  one  he  had  never
yet  looked  upon.  His  face  was  like  that  of  many  gaunt  old
men,  only  his  chin  projected  so  much  that  every  time  he  wanted
to  spit  he  had  to  cover  it  with  his  handkerchief,  in  order  not  to
spit  upon  it ;  his  small  eyes  were  still  bright,  and  they  darted
about   beneath  his   lofty,  bushy  brows  like   mice  when  they


PLIUSHKIN.  99

thrust  their  pointed  noses  out  of  their  dark  holes,  prick  up  their
ears,  and  peer  about  to  see  whether  a  cat,  or  some  scamp  of  a
boy,  is  not  hidden  somewhere.  His  attire  was  even  more
worthy  of  remark.  It  was  difficult  to  tell  of  what  material  his
dressing-gown  was  made  ;  the  sleeves  and  the  upper  portions  of
the  sku'ts  were  greasy  and  shiny  to  such  a  degree  that  they
resembled  the  Russia  leather  of  which  boots  are  made  ;  behind
there  were  four  tails  instead  of  two,  from  between  which  pro-
truded some  checked  cotton.  Something,  also  impossible  to
distinguish,  either  a  stocking  or  a  belt,  but  certainly  not  a
neckerchief,  was  knotted  about  his  neck.  In  short,  if  Tchitchi-
koft"  had  encountered  this  landowner,  thus  arrayed,  at  the  door
of  a  church,  he  would  probably  have  bestowed  a  copper
groschen  upon  him  ;  for  it  must  be  stated,  to  our  hero's  credit,
that  he  had  a  compassionate  heart,  and  could  not  refrain  from
giving  a  copper  groschen  to  a  poor  man.

However,  it  was  not  a  beggar,  but  a  landowner,  who  stood
before  him.  This  proprietor  possessed  over  a  thousand  souls  :
and  one  might  have  searched  a  long  while  for  a  person  having
so  much  wheat,  flour,  and  so  forth,  in  his  storehouse,  or  pos-
sessing so  many  storerooms,  barns,  and  drying-houses,  filled
with  sheepskins,  both  dressed  and  tanned ;  and  having  such
quantities  of  linen,  cloth,  dried  fish,  and  dried  vegetables  at  his
disposal.  If  any  one  had  peeped  in  upon  him  in  his  yard,  where
stores  of  wood  and  utensils  were  accumulated,  it  would  have
seemed  to  him  that  he  had,  by  some  means,  come  upon  the
"  shavings  market "  at  Moscow,  where  wooden  vessels  are  sold,
and  where  clever  mothers-in-law  betake  themselves  daily,  fol-
lowed by  their  cooks,  to  purchase  household  requisites.  At
Pliushkin's  one  found  every  sort  of  article  in  wood,  turned,
fitted  together,  and  plaited, — casks,  half-casks,  buckets  with
handles  and  without  handles,  tar-barrels,  the  tubs  in  which
women  soak  flax  and  dirty  clothes  ;  baskets,  made  of  thin  strips
of  ash ;  oval  boxes  of  plaited  birch-bark,  with  wooden  bottoms
and  covers ;  and  many  other  things  of  various  sorts  which  are
of  service  to  the  Russians  both  rich  and  poor.

But  what  was  the  use  of  all  these  things  to  Pliushkin  ?  Two
such  estates  as  his  could  not  have  used  them  up  in  a  lifetime,
though  that  seemed  to  make  no  difference  to  him.  Not  content
with  what  he  had,  he  rambled  about  the  streets  of  his  village,
peering  beneath  the  bridges  and  the  planks  thrown  across
the  gutters,  and  everything  he  came  across,  whether  it  was  the
old  solo  of  a  shoe,  a  woman's  discarded  rag,  an  iron  nail,  or  a
piece  of  a  broken  earthenware  pot,  he  carried  it  all  home  with


100  DEA.T)   SOULS.

him,  and  threw  it  upon  the  heap  which  Tchltchikoff  had  observed
in  the  corner  of  the  room.  "  There's  the  old  fisherman  out  on
his  ramble,"  the  moujiks  would  say,  when  they  spied  him  search-
ing after  his  booty.  And,  in  fact,  there  was  no  need  of  sweeping
the  streets  after  he  had  gone  on  his  rounds  ;  if  a  passing  officer
chanced  to  lose  a  spur,  the  spur  was  forthwith  transferred  to
the  familiar  heap ;  if  a  woman  gaped  over  the  well,  and  forgot
her  pail,  Pliushkin  carried  off"  the  pail.  However,  whenever  a
moujik  caught  him  in  the  act,  he  never  disputed,  but  immediately
surrendered  the  stolen  article ;  though  if  it  once  fell  upon  his
heap,  that  was  the  end  of  it :  he  swore  that  it  was  his  own,
that  he  had  bought  it  at  such  and  such  a  time,  of  such  or  such
a  person,  or  that  he  had  inherited  it  from  his  grandfather.  In
his  own  room  he  picked  up  everything  he  saw — a  bit  of  sealing-
wax,  a  scrap  of  paper,  or  a  tiny  feather — and  stuffed  everything
away  in  his  desk,  or  on  the  window-ledge.

Of  course,  there  had  been  a  time  when  he  had  simply  been  a
careful  manager,  when  he  had  been  a  married  family  man,  and
when  his  neighbours  had  been  in  the  habit  of  coming  to  dine
with  him,  and  listening  to  him,  and  taking  lessons  from  him  in
wise  economy.  Everything  then  went  on  briskly :  grain-mills
and  fulling-mills  were  in  operation,  cloth-mills  were  running,  car-
penters' shops  and  spinning-rooms  were  at  work ;  the  searching
glance  of  the  master  penetrated  everywhere  and  into  everything ;
and  carefully,  but  assiduously,  like  an  industrious  spider,  did
he  run  about  attending  to  domestic  matters.  In  those  times
his  courteous  and  talkative  wife  was  renowned  for  her  hospi-
tality ;  two  charming  daughters,  both  fan-  and  as  fresh  as  roses,
came  to  greet  the  guests :  the  son,  a  fine,  vivacious  little  boy,
ran  out  and  kissed  everybody.  All  the  windows  in  the  house
were  open  then :  there  was  a  French  tutor,  who  was  a  great
sportsman,  and  who  was  always  bringing  home  partridges  or
ducks  for  dinner.  And  there  was  also  a  governess  for  the  little
girls.  But  the  good  housewife  died.  Pliushkin  became  restless,
and,  like  all  widowers,  suspicious  and  saving.  He  did  not  place
full  confidence  in  his  eldest  daughter,  Alexandra  Stepanovna,
and  he  was  right ;  for  Alexandra  Stepanovna  soon  eloped  with  a
staff-captain,  belonging  to  God  knows  what  regiment  of  cavalry,
and  she  married  him  in  haste  in  some  village  church,  although
she  knew  that  her  father  did  not  like  ofiicers,  on  account  of  a
strange,  prejudiced  belief  of  long  standing,  that  they  were  all
gamblers  and  spendthrifts.  Her  father  sent  his  curse  after  her,
and  then  the  house  grew  more  desolate,  its  owner  became  more
and  more  miserly.     The  French  tutor  was  dismissed,  because


PLIUSHKIN.  101

the  time  had  arrived  for  the  son  to  enter  the  civil  service ;  the
governess  was  sent  about  her  business,  because  it  appeared  that
she  was  not  free  from  guilt  in  the  matter  of  Alexandra  Stepan-
ovna's  elopement ;  the  son,  on  being  despatched  to  the  chief
town  of  the  government,  in  order  to  learn  official  routine,  accord-
ing to  his  father's  wish,  enlisted  in  a  regiment  instead,  and  wrote
to  his  father  immediately  afterwards,  asking  for  some  money.
Very  naturally,  he  received  in  reply  what  the  common  people
call  a  shish.*  Finally,  the  last  daughter,  who  had  remained  at
home  with  the  father,  died,  and  the  old  man  found  himself  the
sole  guardian,  protector,  and  owner  of  his  wealth.

His  lonely  life  then  made  him  yet  more  miserly,  and  as
though  for  the  express  purpose  of  confirming  him  in  his  opinion
of  military  men,  his  son  ruined  himself  at  cards  :  he  sent  him  a
hearty  paternal  curse,  and  never  troubled  himself  afterwards  to
inquire  whether  he  still  existed  in  the  world  or  not.  More
windows  were  shut  up  every  year  in  the  house,  until  at  last
only  two  remained  to  admit  any  light,  one  of  which,  as  the
reader  has  already  seen,  was  pasted  up  with  blue  paper.  As
time  went  on  he  paid  less  and  less  attention  to  domestic  manage-
ment, busying  himself  more  about  the  scraps  of  paper  and  feathers
which  he  collected  in  his  room ;  he  became  more  and  more  crusty
"with  the  people  who  came  to  buy  the  products  of  his  estate  ;  the
dealers  grew  disgusted  with  him,  and  finally  abandoned  him
altogether,  saying  that  he  was  a  devil,  and  not  a  man ;  his  hay
and  grain  rotted ;  his  ricks  and  stores  of  all  sorts  turned  into
manure,  pure  and  simple,  so  that  cabbages  might  have  been
grown  upon  them  ;  the  flour  in  his  vaults  turned  to  stone,  and
had  to  be  chopped  up  :  it  was  terrible  to  touch  the  linen,  the
cloth,  and  other  materials  of  domestic  manufacture  ;  they  turned
to  dust  under  the  hand.  He  himself  had  already  forgotten  what
he  possessed  of  any  given  article.  He  only  remembered  the
sideboard  which  contained  his  decanters  of  brandy,  upon  which
he  had  made  a  mark,  in  order  that  no  one  might  thievishly  drink
the  liquor.  Meanwhile,  however,  the  revenues  of  the  estate  were
collected  as  before  :  the  moujiks  had  to  bring  as  much  obrok  as
usual,  the  same  tribute  of  nuts  was  imposed  upon  every  housewife,
and  the  weaving  women  were  obliged  to  furnish  the  same  number
of  webs  of  linen.  Everything  finally  was  piled  away  in  the
storerooms  and  rotted,  and  he  himself  became  at  last  scarcely
human.  His  daughter,  Alexandra  Stepanovna,  came  a  couple  of
times  with  her  little  son,  to  try  whether  she  could  not  obtain

*  Literally,  an  insulting  sign,  made  with  the  fingers,  and  what  English
children  call  a  long  nose.


102  DEAD    SOULS.

something :  it  was  evident  that  a  wandering  life  with  a  cavalry-
captain  was  not  so  attractive  as  it  had  appeared  before  marriage.
However,  Pliushkin  forgave  her,  and  allowed  the  little  boy  to
play  with  a  button  which  was  lying  on  the  table,  but  he  gave
her  no  money.  On  another  occasion,  Alexandra  Stepanovna
came  with  two  children,  and  brought  her  father  an  Easter-cake
to  eat  with  his  tea,  and  also  a  new  dressing-gown ;  for  the  one
which  he  was  wearing  was  in  such  a  state  that  it  made  her
both  confused  and  ashamed  to  look  at  it.  Pliushkin  caressed
both  of  his  grandchildren,  and  placing  them,  one  on  his  right
knee  and  the  other  on  his  left,  he  trotted  them  exactly  as  though
they  had  been  riding  on  horses ;  he  also  accepted  the  Easter-
cake  and  the  dressing-gown,  but  he  gave  his  daughter  absolutely
nothing,  whereupon  Alexandra  Stepanovna  took  her  departure.

But  we  must  return  to  our  hero.  Pliushkin  had  been  stand-
ing in  front  of  him  for  several  minutes  without  uttering  a  word  ;
and  Tchitchikoflf  was  still  utterly  incapable  of  beginning  the  con-
versation, distracted  as  he  was  by  the  sight  of  the  master  him-
self, as  well  as  by  all  that  was  in  the  room.  For  a  long  time  he
could  not  think  how  to  explain  the  reason  of  his  visit.  He  was
on  the  point  of  expressing  himself  to  the  effect  that,  having
heard  of  Pliushkin  as  a  public  benefactor,  he  had  considered  it
his  duty  to  pay  him  a  personal  tribute  of  respect ;  but  he  felt
that  that  would  be  too  much.  On  casting  one  more  stealthy
glance  on  all  that  was  in  the  room,  he  became  conscious  that  the
expression  public  benefactor  might  be  successfully  replaced  by
the  words  economy  and  order :  so,  having  reconstructed  his  sen-
tence on  that  pattern,  he  said  that,  having  heard  of  his  economy
and  rare  skill  in  managing  his  estate,  he  had  regarded  it  as  his
duty  to  make  his  acquaintance  and  offer  his  respects  in  person.
He  certainly  might  have  alleged  some  other  and  better  reason,
but  none  occurred  to  him.

To  this,  Pliushkin  mumbled  some  reply  between  his  lips,  for
he  had  no  teeth.  What  it  was  exactly  is  not  known,  but  in  all
probability,  the  sense  was  as  follows  :  "  May  the  deuce  take  you
and  your  respects  !  "  However,  since  hospitality  is  in  such
repute  all  over  Russia  that  even  a  miser  cannot  ignore  its  laws,
he  added  a  little  more  distinctly,  "  I  beg  you  most  humbly  to
take  a  seat,  I  have  not  been  in  the  habit  of  receiving  guests  for
a  long  time,  and  I  must  confess  that  I  perceive  but  very  little
use  in  them.  A  strange  custom  has  sprung  up,  of  going  about
to  visit  people's  estates  to  the  neglect  of  domestic  affairs.  How-
ever, I  can't  offer  you  anything,  for  I  dined  long  ago  :  and  my
kitchen  is  very  mean  and  poor,  and  the  chimneys  are  in  a  state


PLIUSHKIN.  103

of  utter  ruin  ;  if  you  try  to  heat  the  stove,  you  will  certainly  set
the  house  on  fire."

♦'  So  that's  the  kind  of  man  he  is  !  '"  said  Tchitchikoff  to  him-
self. "  It's  lucky  that  I  dined  at  Sobakevitch's,  and  tucked
into  that  breast  of  mutton."

"And  it  is  a  most  unfortunate  circumstance  but  there  is
hardly  a  wisp  of  hay  for  your  horses  in  the  whole  establish-
ment," proceeded  Pliushkin.  "  Yes,  and  where  is  there  any  to
be  had  ?  The  farm  is  small  and  barren  :  the  peasants  are  lazy  ;
they  are  not  fond  of  working ;  they  only  think  of  getting  away
to  the  pot-house.  As  you  know,  people  are  thrown  on  the
world  in  their  old  age."

"  But  I  was  told,"  said  Tchitchikoff  modestly,  "  that  you  had
over  a  thousand  souls."

"  Why  !  who  said  that  ?  My  good  fellow,  you  should  have
spit  in  the  eye  of  the  person  who  told  you  that !  He  was  a
jester:  he  evidently  wanted  to  make  fun  of  you.  That  is  the
way  people  talk ;  but  for  the  last  three  years  a  cursed  fever  has
been  killing  off  my  serfs  in  swarms."

"  You  don't  say  so!  And  have  many  really  died  ?  "  exclaimed
Tchitchikoff  sympathetically.

''  Yes  ;  a  great  many  have  been  carried  off."

"  Will  you  permit  me  to  inquire  the  number  ?  "

"  Fully  eighty  souls."

"No,  really  ?  "

"  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  lying,  my  good  fellow.''

"  Permit  me  to  ask  another  question  :  I  assume  that  you
are  reckoning  these  souls  from  the  time  when  the  last  census
was  taken  ?  "

"  Glory  to  God  if  it  were  only  that !  "  said  Pliushkin  ;  "  but
since  the  last  census  I  must  have  lost  fully  one  hundred  and
twenty  souls."

"  Really  ?  fully  one  hundred  and  twenty  ?  "  exclaimed  Tchit-
chikoff, and  he  even  dropped  his  jaw  somewhat  with  amazement.

"  I  am  rather  old  to  lie,  my  good  fellow  :  I  have  lived  seventy
years,"  said  Pliushkin,  who  seemed  to  have  taken  offence  at  our
hero's  almost  joyous  exclamation.

Tchitchikoff  perceived  that  such  a  want  of  sympathy  in
another's  woe  had  I'eally  been  extremely  impolite  ;  so  he  imme-
diately sighed,  and  said  that  he  felt  very  sorry.

"  Yes,  but  your  sorrow  won't  put  anything  in  my  pocket,"
said  Pliushkin.  "  There's  a  captain  who  lives  here  near  me —
the  deuce  knows  where  he  came  from,  but  he  says  that  he's  a  rela-
tive.    '  Dear  uncle,  dear  uncle  !  '  he  cries,  and  he  begins  to  kiss


104  DEAD   SOULS.

my  hand,  and  to  express  his  sorrow,  and  raises  such  a  howl  that
you  have  to  hold  your  ears.  He's  very  red  iu  the  face,  and  he's
actually  drinking  himself  to  death  on  brandy.  He  probably  lost
all  his  money  while  serving  as  an  officer,  or  some  actress
coaxed  it  out  of  him ;  so  now  he  comes  here,  and  tries  to
wheedle  himself  into  my  good  graces  !  "

Tchitchikoflf  endeavoured  to  explain  that  his  sympathy  was  of
a  very  different  sort  to  that  of  the  captain,  and  that  he  was
ready  to  prove  it,  not  by  empty  words,  but  by  deeds ;  in  fact,
without  deferring  the  matter  any  further,  he  immediately  ex-
pressed his  willingness  to  take  upon  himself  the  responsibility  of
paying  the  taxes  for  all  the  serfs  who  had  died  in  such  an  unfor-
tunate manner.  The  proposition  seemed  to  amaze  Pliushkin.
He  stared  at  TchitchikofF  for  a  long  time  with  his  eyes  wide-
open,  and  he  finally  inquired,  "  Haven't  you  been  in  the  army,
my  good  fellow?  "

"  No,"  replied  Tchitchikoff,  with  a  good  deal  of  artfulness:  "  I
was  in  the  civil  service."

"  In  the  civil  service  ?  "  repeated  Pliushkin,  and  he  began  to
work  his  lips  about,  as  though  he  were  chewing  something.
"  But  what  do  you  mean  by  this  ?     It  is  surely  a  loss  to  you."

"  For  your  sake,  I  am  even  prepared  to  suffer  loss."

"  Ah,  my  dear  fellow  !  Ah,  my  benefactor  !  "  shrieked
Pliushkin,  not  perceiving,  in  his  joy,  that  the  snuff  was  drop-
ping from  his  nose  in  a  very  unpicturesque  fashion,  and  that  the
skirts  of  his  dressing-gown,  in  flying  apart,  had  displayed  a  very
impolite  garment  to  view.  "  You  have  comforted  an  old  man  !
Ah,  my  Lord!  Ah,  my  Saviour!"  Pliushkin  could  say  no
more.  But  a  minute  had  not  elapsed,  when  the  joy  which  had
momentarily  shown  itself  on  his  countenance  disappeared  as
though  it  had  not  existed,  and  his  face  once  more  assumed  a
careworn  expression.  He  even  wiped  it  with  his  handkerchief ;
and,  rolling  this  into  a  ball,  he  began  to  draw  it  along  his  upper

*'  With  your  permission,  may  I  ask  if  you  mean  to  undertake
paying  the  taxes  for  them  every  year  ?  and  will  you  give  the
money  to  me,  or  to  the  imperial  treasury  ?  "

"  This  is  the  way  we  will  manage  :  we  will  make  out  a  deed
of  sale  for  them,  as  though  they  were  alive,  and  as  though  you
had  sold  them  to  me."

"  Yes,  a  deed  of  sale,"  said  Pliushkin,  falling  into  thought,
and  he  again  began  to  move  his  lips  as  before.  "  But  a  deed  of
sale — it's  nothing  but  an  expense.  -  Those  officials  have  no  con-
sciences.    In  former  days  one   used  to  pay  half  a  rouble  in


PLIUSHKIN.  105

copper  as  tax  for  a  sack  of  flour  ;  but  now  you  have  to  send  a
whole  waggon-load  of  groats,  and  add  a  red  bank-note  into  the
bargain — so  gi-asping  have  they  grown.  I  do  not  know  why  no
one  else  has  called  attention  to  that  matter."

However,  Tchitchikoff  immediately  remarked  that  he  was
even  prepared  to  bear  the  expenses  of  the  deed  of  sale.

On  hearing  that  he  would  pay  that,  Pliushkin  concluded  that
his  visitor  must  be  a  thorough  fool,  and  merely  pretended  that  he
had  been  in  the  civil  service,  but  had  probably  been  an  officer  in-
stead, and  had  dallied  with  actresses.  However,  with  all  this,  he
could  not  conceal  his  joy,  but  wished  all  sorts  of  happiness  to
our  hero,  and  to  his  children  even,  without  waiting  to  in-
quire whether  he  had  any  or  not.  He  went  to  the  window,
drummed  with  his  fingers  on  the  glass,  and  cried,  "Hey,
there,  Proshka !  "

A  moment  later,  someone  could  be  heard  running  on  tiptoe  in
the  vestibule,  and  rummaging  about  there  for  a  long  time.  Finally
the  door  opened,  and  Proshka  entered,  a  boy  of  thirteen,  shod
in  such  huge  boots  that,  as  he  stumbled  along,  he  nearly  drew
his  feet  out  of  them.  It  may  be  asked  why  Proshka  had  such
large  boots.  Well,  for  all  his  domestic  servants,  no  matter  how
many  of  them  there  were  in  the  house,  Pliushkin  had  but  a
single  pair  of  boots,  which  was  always  to  be  found  in  the  vesti-
bule. Anyone  who  was  summoned  into  the  master's  presence
generally  ran  across  the  yard  barefooted  ;  but  on  entering  the
vestibule  he  pulled  on  the  boots,  and,  thus  arrayed,  made  his
appearance  in  the  room.  On  quitting  the  master's  apartment,
he  left  the  boots  in  the  vestibule,  and  went  his  way  again  bare-
footed. If  anyone  had  glanced  out  of  the  window  in  the
autumn,  and  especially  when  the  first  morning  frosts  were  set-
ting in,  he  could  have  seen  all  the  house-serfs  taking  such  leaps
as  are  hardly  made  on  the  stage  by  the  most  accomplished
dancers.

"  Look  there,  my  good  fellow,  what  a  face  !  "  said  Pliushkin
to  Tchitchikoff,  pointing  at  Proshka's  countenance.  "  Stupid,
truly,  like  a  block  of  wood ;  but  only  try  to  lay  anything  down
for  a  minute,  and  he  will  steal  it !  Well,  what  have  you  come
for,  you  fool — tell  me,  eh  ?  "     Here  a  brief  silence  ensued.

"  Bring  the  samovar,  do  you  hear  ?  "  added  Pliushkin  at  last.
"And  here,  take  this  key,  and  give  it  to  Mavra,  so  that  she
may  go  to  the  storeroom.  There,  on  the  shelf,  is  the  sugar  oflf
the  Easter-cake  which  Alexandra  Stepanovna  brought  me — let
her  bring  it  here  for  our  tea.  Stop  !  where  are  you  going,  you
fool  ? — yes,  you  utter  fool !     Is  the  Fiend  in  your  legs,  busy


106  DEAD   SOULS.

scratching  you  ?  Listen  first.  The  upper  part  of  the  sugar  is
probably  spoilt,  so  let  it  be  scraped  off  with  a  knife.  And  don't
you  throw  any  of  it  away,  but  carry  it  to  the  fowl-house.  And
see  to  it  that  you  don't  go  into  the  storehouse,  my  boy.  If
you  do,  do  you  know  what  will  happen  ?  You  will  get  a  taste
of  a  birch  rod,  so  that,  if  you  have  a  capital  appetite  now,  you'll
have  a  better  one  then.  Just  try  to  go  into  the  storehouse!
I  shall  look  out  of  the  window  in  the  meanwhile.  He  cannot
be  trusted  in  anything,"  continued  Pliushkin,  turning  to  Tchit-
chikoff,  after  Proshka  had  taken  himself  off,  in  company  with  his
boots.

Then  he  began  to  gaze  suspiciously  at  our  friend.  Such
remarkable  magnanimity  began  to  appear  incredible  to  him ;  and
he  said  to  himself,  "  After  all,  the  devil  only  knows,  he  may  be
simply  a  braggart,  like  most  spendthrifts  !  He  will  lie  and  lie,
just  for  the  sake  of  talking,  and  then  he  will  go  off!  "  As  a
measure  of  precaution,  therefore,  and  desirous  of  putting  our
hero  to  a  further  test,  he  said  that  it  would  not  be  a  bad  idea  to
draw  up  the  deed  of  sale  as  speedily  as  possible  :  for  one  cannot
depend  upon  man,  you  know  ;  to-day  he  is  alive,  and  to-morrow
God  knows  where.

Tchitchikoff  expressed  his  readiness  to  do  so  on  the  instant,
and  merely  required  the  list  of  serfs.  This  reassured  Pliushkin.
It  was  evident  that  he  had  made  up  his  mind  to  something  ;  and
in  fact,  taking  his  keys,  he  approached  the  sideboard,  and  having
opened  the  door,  he  fumbled  for  a  long  time  among  the  cups
and  glasses,  and  finally  exclaimed,  "Well,  I  can't  find  it.  But
I  had  some  splendid  liquor,  if  it  has  not  all  been  drunk ;  but
my  people  are  such  thieves.  However,  perhaps  this  is  it."
Tchitchikoff  now  saw  that  he  held  a  decanter  covered  with  dust.
"My  deceased  wife  made  this,"  continued  Pliushkin.  "That
rascally  housekeeper  meant  to  spoil  it  completely,  and  she  did
not  even  cork  it  up,  the  beast !  Beetles  and  all  sorts  of  rubbish
made  their  way  into  it ;  but  I  took  all  the  filth  out,  and  now  it
is  perfectly  clean,  and  I  will  pour  yoii  out  a  glass."

However,  Tchitchikoff  made  an  effort  to  refuse  the  liquor,
saying  that  he  had  already  eaten  and  drunk.

"  You  have  already  eaten  and  drunk?  "  said  Pliushkin.  "  Yes,
of  course ;  one  recognises  a  man  who  belongs  to  good  society
wherever  one  meets  him.  He  does  not  go  about  asking  for
things,  but  is  satisfied  with  Avhat  he  takes  at  home.  But  when
some  good-for-nothing  thief  comes  along,  you  may  feed  him  as
much  as  you  like,  he'll  never  refuse.  Why,  there's  the  captain :
he  comes  here.     '  Dear  uncle,'  says  he,  '  give  me  something  to


PTJIISHKIN.  107

eat ! '  And  I'm  his  uncle  about  as  much  as  he  is  my  grand-
father. Probably  he  has  nothing  to  eat  at  home,  and  so  he
prowls  about  the  country.  Yes,  surely  you  will  need  the  list
of  all  those  lazy  dogs.  Certainly.  As  soon  as  I  knew  about
their  death,  I  wrote  their  names  down  on  a  special  piece  of
paper,  in  order  that  I  might  have  them  struck  out  at  the  first
revision."

Pliushkin  now  put  on  his  spectacles,  and  began  to  rummage
among  his  papers.  As  he  untied  each  bundle,  he  treated  his
guest  to  such  a  cloud  of  dust  that  the  latter  sneezed.  At  last
he  drew  out  a  paper  which  was  covered  with  writing.  The
names  of  the  serfs  were  sprinkled  all  over  it  as  thickly  as  flies.
They  were  of  all  sorts :  ParamanoflFs  and  Pimenoffs,  and  Pan-
taleimonoffs,  and  even  a  certain  Grigoriy  Go-but-you-won't-get-
there.  In  all,  there  were  over  one  hundred  and  twenty.
Tchitchikoff  smiled  at  the  sight  of  so  many  names.  Having
placed  the  list  in  his  pocket,  he  remarked  to  Pliushkin  that  he
should  be  obliged  to  go  to  town  in  order  to  complete  the  bill  of
sale.

"  To  town  ?  But  why  ?  And  how  can  I  leave  my  house  ?
Why,  all  my  people  are  either  thieves  or  rogues !  They  would
plunder  me  so  thoroughly  in  one  day  that  I  should  not  even
have  a  nail  left  to  hang  my  caftan  on."

"  Then,  you  haven't  any  acquaintance  in  town  ?  "

"  What  acquaintances  ?  All  my  acquaintances  have  died,  or
have  dropped  me.  Ah,  my  dear  fellow!  as  for  an  acquaintance — •
But  stop,  I  have  one,"  he  exclaimed.  "Why,  the  president  of
the  court  himself  is  a  friend  of  mine  !  He  has  never  been  here
to  visit  me  in  my  old  age  !  Still,  how  could  I  help  knowing
him  ?  We  were  brought  up  together,  and  used  to  play  together.
Know  him,  indeed  !  He's  an  old  friend  !  Would  it  not  do  to
write  to  him  ?  "

*'  Write  to  him  by  all  means."

"Why  not?  Such  an  old  friend!  We  w^ere  friends  at  school."

And  across  the  old  fellow's  wooden  face  there  suddenly  flashed
a  ray  of  light,  which  expressed,  not  feeling,  but  the  pale  reflec-
tion of  a  feeling  :  an  apparition,  similar  to  the  sudden  appear-
ance of  a  drowning  man,  which  appearance  elicits  a  joyous  shout
from  the  crowd  assembled  on  the  shore.  But  in  vain  do  the
rejoicing  brothers  and  sisters  cast  a  rope  from  the  bank,  and
wait  to  see  whether  he  will  not  rise  once  more ;  whether  his
hands  are  exhausted  with  his  struggles  or  not,  this  apparition
is  the  last.  He  is  not  seen  again,  and  the  calm  surface  of  the  un-
responsive fluid  seems  still  more  terrible  and  more  desolate  than


108  DEAD    SOULS.

before.  Thus  Pliushkin's  face,  after  the  momentary  feeling
which  had  flashed  across  it,  became  more  unfeeling  and  expres-
sionless than  ever.

"  There  was  a  quarter  of  a  sheet  of  clean  paper  lying  on  the
table,"  said  he,  "  but  I  don't  know  what  has  become  of  it :  my
people  are  such  worthless  creatures."  Hereupon  he  began  to
peer  about  under  the  table,  poked  about  everywhere,  and  finally
screamed,  "  Mavra  !  hey,  Mavra!  "  At  his  call  a  woman  made
her  appearance  carrying  a  plate,- upon  which  lay  the  sugar  with
which  the  reader  is  already  acquainted ;  and  a  long  discussion
took  place  between  them.

"  What  have  you  done  with  the  paper,  you  thief?  "

"  By  Heavens,  master,  I  have  seen  nothing,  except  the  scrap
with  which  you  covered  the  wineglass  !  "

"Why,  I  can  see  by  your  eyes  that  you  have  made  away
with  it."

"  But  why  should  I  have  made  away  with  it  ?  It's  of  no  use
to  me  :  I  don't  know  how  to  read  or  write."

"You  lie!  you  have  carried  it  to  the  sacristan:  he  has  a
smattering  of  knowledge,  as  I  know,  and  you  have  carried  it  off
to  him."

"  The  sacristan  can  get  paper  for  himself  if  he  wants  it.  He
has  never  laid  eyes  on  your  scrap."

"  Just  wait ;  the  fiends  will  toast  you  on  a  gridiron  for  this,
on  the  day  of  judgment !     You'll  see  how  they  will  roast  you."

"  But  what  will  they  roast  me  for,  when  I  have  not  even  taken
your  paper  in  my  hands  ?  I  may  have  other  weaknesses,  but  no
one  ever  accused  me  of  thieving  before."

"  Oh,  won't  the  devils  roast  you,  though !  They  will  say,
'  Take  that,  you  wretched  creature,  for  deceiving  your  master  !'
Yes,  they  will  toast  you  on  red-hot  bars  !"

"And  I  shall  say,  'There's  no  reason  for  it!  by  Heaven,
there's  none  !  I  did  not  take  it.  Why,  there  it  lies  on  the
table.     You  are  always  accusing  us  wrongfully!"

Indeed,  Pliushkin  now  perceived  the  bit  of  paper,  and  paused
for  an  instant,  chewing,  as  it  were,  till  he  finally  ejaculated,
"Well,  what  did  you  flare  up  so  for?  Hey,  what  a  touchy
creature  she  is  !  Say  but  one  word  to  her,  and  she'll  answer
you  back  with  ten.  Go  and  fetch  a  taper  to  seal  a  letter.
But  hold  !  don't  bring  a  tallow  candle :  tallow  melts  easily ;
it  burns  out,  and  is  a  dead  loss  :  fetch  me  a  pine-knot !"

Mavra  went  out :  and  Pliushkin,  seating  himself  in  an  arm-
chair, and  taking  a  pen,  turned  the  paper  about  for  a  long  time
in  every  direction,  to  see  whether  he  could  not  contrive  to  cut


PLItJSHKIN.  109

it  in  two,  but  at  length  be  convinced  himself  that  this  was  im-
possible, so  he  dipped  his  pen  into  the  ink-bottle,  containing
some  mouldy  liquid,  together  with  a  multitude  of  dead  flies,
and  began  to  write,  each  word  being  finely  penned  and  each  line
following  close  upon  the  other.  He  was  already  regretfully
reflecting  that  there  would  still  remain  a  large  expanse  of
unused  paper.

To  such  meanness,  pettiness,  baseness,  could  this  man  de-
scend, to  such  an  extent  could  he  change  !  Does  this  resemble'
the  truth,  the  reader  may  ask  ?  Well,  it  is  very  likely  the!
truth:  it  may  very  well  happen  with  a  man.  The  fiery  youth!
of  to-day  would  start  back  in  horror  if  he  were  shown  the  por-j
trait  of  himself  in  his  old  age.  So  take  with  you  on  your  road, '
as  you  leave  behind  you  the  soft  years  of  youth  and  emerge
into  manhood,  which  renders  one  hard  and  surly — take  with
you  all  your  human  impulses,  don't  leave  them  on  the  way  :  you'
can  never  find  them  again  later  on  if  they  are  once  relinquished.,'
Stern  and  terrible  old  age,  as  it  advances,  will  return  you  nothing^
give  you  nothing  back  !

"  And  do  you  know  of  any  of  your  friends  who  would  like  to
buy  some  absconding  serfs  ?"  said  Pliushkin,  folding  his  letter.

"  Have  you  any  serfs  who  have  absconded  ?  "  asked  Tchit-
chikofi"  quickly.

"  That's  the  very  point :  I  have.  My  son-in-law  made  some
inquiries,  and  it  appeared  that  no  trace  of  them  could  be  found  :
but  he's  a  military  man  ;  he's  a  master  hand  at  stamping  about
in  his  spurs,  but  when  it  comes  to  troubling  himself  about  legal
matters ."

"  How  many  of  them  were  there  ?  "  *

"  They  would  amount  to  seventy  in  all."

"No!"

"By  Heaven,  it  is  true  !  Why,  there  isn't  a  year  but  what
they  run  away  from  me.  The  common  people  are  great  gluttons,
and  have  acquired  a  habit,  out  of  sheer  idleness,  of  stufiing
themselves  on  festival  days ;  and  I  myself  have  nothing  to  eat.
Well,  I  would  take  anything  that  I  might  be  oftered  for  the  ones
■who  have  run  away.  So  you  had  better  advise  your  friend  :  if
he  only  found  ten  of  them,  he  would  make  a  deal  of  money.  A
Boul  on  the  census  list  is  worth  fifty  roubles,  you  know."

"No,  we  won't  let  my  friend  have  so  much  as  a  smell  of
them,"  said  Tchitchikoff  to  himself,  and  then  he  proceeded  to
explain  that  no  such  friend  was  to  be  found,  that  the  expenses
of  such  an  undertaking  would  amount  to  so  much  that  one  would
have  to  cut  the  skirts  ofl;  one's  own  caftan  to  satisfy  the  judges


110  DEAD    SOULS.

and  the  lawyers ;  however,  out  of  sympathy,  he  was  ready  to
give, — well,  it  was  such  a  trifle,  that  it  was  not  worth  men-
tioning."

"  But  how  much  would  you  give  ?  "  asked  Pliushkin,  at  once
turning  into  a  Jew  :  his  hands  trembled  like  quicksilver.

"I  would  give  twenty-five  copecks  for  each  soul."

**  And  how  would  you  pay — in  ready  money  ?"

"Yes,  cash  on  the  spot."

"But,  my  good  fellow,  in  consideration  of  my  poverty,  you
might  at  least  give  me  forty  copecks  apiece."

"  My  most  respected  sir,"  replied  Tchitchikoff,  "  I  would  pay
not  only  forty  copecks,  but  five  hundred  roubles,  apiece.  I
would  pay  that  amount  gladly,  because  I  see  that  a  highly  re-
spected, good  old  man  is  suffering  on  account  of  his  generosity."

"By  Heaven,  it  is  so!  By  Heaven,  you  are  right!"  said
Pliushkin,  hanging  his  head,  and  then  swaying  it  compassionately
from  side  to  side.     "  It's  all  out  of  generosity."

"  Well,  do  you  see  ?  I  understood  your  character  in  an  instant.
So,  why  should  not  I  give  five  hundred  roubles  a  soul  for  them  ?
But  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  do  it,  unfortunately.  I  am  willing
to  add  five  copecks  if  you  like,  so  that  each  soul  w^ould  thus  be
reckoned  at  thirty  copecks."

"Well,  my  good  fellow,  as  you  please ;  but  add  at  least  a
couple  of  copecks."

"  I  will  say  two  copecks  more,  then.  How  many  have  you  ?
I  think  you  said — seventy?"

"  No,  they  will  mount  up  to  seventy-eight  in  all."

"Seventy-eight,  seventy-eight,  at  thirty-two  copecks  a  soul, —
that  will  be — "  Here  our  hero  reflected  for  an  instant,  no  longer,
and  then  said,  "  That  will  be  twenty-four  roubles  and  ninety-
six  copecks."  He  was  strong  in  arithmetic.  He  immediately
made  Pliushkin  write  out  a  list  of  the  serfs  who  had  absconded,
and  gave  him  the  money,  which  the  latter  took  in  both  hands,
and  carried  to  his  desk,  with  as  much  caution  as  though  it  had
been  some  sort  of  liquid,  and  as  if  he  feared  each  moment  that  he
might  spill  it.  On  arriving  at  the  desk,  he  placed  the  money
with  extreme  care  in  one  of  the  small  compartments,  where  it
was  probably  destined  to  remain  interred  until  Father  Karp
and  lather  Polykarp,  the  two  popes  of  his  village,  were  called
upon  to  bury  him, — to  the  indescribable  joy  of  his  son-in-law  and
daughter,  and  possibly  also  of  the  captain  who  counted  himself
as  a  relative.  Having  put  the  money  away,  Pliushkin  seated
himself  in  his  arm-chair,  and  seemed  incapable  of  finding  any
other  subject  of  conversation.


PLItJSHKlN.  Ill

"  What !  are  you  preparing  to  go  already?  "  said  he,  per-
ceiving a  slight  movement  which  Tchitchikoff'  made,  simply  with
the  object  of  getting  his  handkerchief  out  of  his  pocket.

This  question  reminded  our  hero  that  there  was  really  no
occasion  for  further  delay.  "  Yes  :  it  is  time  for  me  to  go  !  "
he  exclaimed,  taking  up  his  cap.

"  Won't  you  drink  a  cup  of  tea  ?  "

"  No :  it  will  be  better  to  let  the  tea  wait  until  another
time."

*'  How  is  that  ?  I  have  ordered  the  samovar.  However,  to
tell  the  truth,  I  am  not  very  fond  of  tea  myself.  It's  an
expensive  beverage ;  and,  besides,  the  price  of  sugar  has  risen
most  terribly.  Proshka,  we  don't  need  the  samovar.  Carry
the  sugar  back  to  Mavra,  do  you  hear  ?  Let  it  be  put  back  in
the  same  place, — or  no,  give  it  here  :  I  will  take  it  back  myself.
Farewell,  my  dear  fellow," — this  to  Tchitchikoff,  "  and  may  God
bless  you  !  And  you  will  hand  my  letter  to  the  president  of  the
court.  Yes,  let  him  read  it :  he  is  an  old  acquaintance  of  mine.
Why,  we  were  brought  up  together!  "

Thereupon,  this  extraordinary  apparition,  this  little,  withered-
up  old  man,  conducted  our  hero  into  the  yard,  after  which  he
ordered  the  gates  to  be  instantly  locked.  Then  he  went  the
round  of  his  storehouses,  in  order  to  see  whether  the  night
watchmen  were  at  their  posts,  ready  to  beat  with  their  wooden
shovels  on  empty  casks  in  lieu  of  sheet- iron.  Then  he  peeped
into  the  kitchen,  where,  under  the  pretext  of  seeing  whether
the  servant's  food  was  good,  he  partook  heartily  of  some  cab-
bage soup  and  groats;  and,  finally,  having  upbraided  everyone
of  them  for  thieving  and  evil  conduct,  he  returned  to  his  own
room.  When  he  was  alone,  he  even  began  to  meditate  how  he
might  requite  his  visitor  for  his,  in  fact,  unbounded  magnani-
mity. "I  will  give  him,"  said  he,  "  my  watch.  It  is  a  very
good  silver  watch,  none  of  your  brass  or  pinchbeck  affixirs.  It's
somewhat  out  of  order,  but  he  can  have  it  set  to  rights  for  him-
self. He  is  still  a  young  man,  and  will  need  a  watch  in  order
to  please  his  bride.  Or  no,"  he  added,  after  some  thought,  "  it
will  be  better  to  bequeath  it  to  him  after  my  death,  in  my  will,
as  a  remembrance."

But  our  hero  was  in  the  most  cheerful  possible  frame  of  mind,
even  without  the  watch.  Such  an  unexpected  acquisition  as  he
had  made  was  a  perfect  godsend,  say  what  you  like  ;  it  was  not
only  dead  souls,  but  fugitive  ones  into  the  bargain,  and  to  the
number  of  over  two  hundred  !  He  had  certainly  felt,  as  ho
drove  up  to  Pliushkin's  village,  that  he  should  reap  some  sort  of


L


112  DEAB   SOULS.

a  harvest ;  but  he  had  by  no  means  expected  so  bountiful  a  one.
So  all  along  the  road  he  was  extremely  merry.  It  was  already
perfectly  dark  when  they  arrived  at  the  mn  in  the  town.  There
Tchitchikoif  was  met  by  his  servant  Petrushka,  who  held  up  the
skirt  of  his  surtout  with  one  hand, — for  he  did  not  like  to  have
his  coat-tails  flying, — while  with  the  other  he  assisted  his
master  to  alight  from  the  britchka.  The  waiter  also  ran  out,
with  a  candle  in  his  hand,  and  a  napkin  over  his  arm.  Whether
Petrushka  was  rejoiced  at  the  arrival  of  his  master  is  not
known.  At  all  events,  he  exchanged  a  wink  with  Selifan  ;  and
his  ordinarily  surly  countenance  seemed  on  this  occasion  to
brighten  up  a  little.

"  You  have  been  pleased  to  stay  away  a  long  time,"  said  the
waiter,  as  he  lighted  our  hero  up  the  staircase.

"Yes,"  answered  Tchitchikofl',  as  he  set  foot  on  the  stairs.
"  Well,  and  how  are  you  ?  "

"Very  well,  thanks  be  to  God,"  replied  the  waiter,  bowing.
"  Some  lieutenant  or  other  arrived  yesterday,  and  engaged
number  sixteen,  next  to  your  room."

"  A  lieutenant  ?  "

"  I  don't  know  v/ho  he  is ;  but  he  comes  from  Eyazan,  and
has  some  brown  horses."

"  Good,  good  !  Well,  behave  yourself  as  well  in  future,"  said
Tchitchikoif,  and  he  then  went  to  his  room.  On  entering  the
ante-chamber  he  sniffed,  and  remarked  to  Petrushka,  "You
might  at  least  have  opened  the  windows  while  I  was  away  !  "

"  I  did  open  them,"  said  Petrushka  ;  but  he  was  lying.

His  master  was  perfectly  well  aware  of  that,  but  he  did  not
care  to  retort.  He  felt  very  much  fatigued  after  the  journey
which  he  had  taken.  After  partaking  of  the  lightest  kind  of  a
supper — merely  a  sucking-pig — he  immediately  undressed,  and,
stowing  himself  away  beneath  the  covei'let,  he  fell  into  a  deep,
sound  sleep.  Indeed,  he  slept  in  a  wonderful  way,  as  only  those
happy  beings  sleep  who  know  nothing  of  either  nightmares  or
fleas,  and  who  are  not  given  to  cudgelling  their  brains.


THK   TRIBUNALS   AND   THE    POLICE.  113

CHAPTER  VII.

THE    TEIBUNALS   AND   THE    POLICE.

On  the  next  morning  when  our  hero  awoke  he  stretched  out
his  arms  and  legs,  and  felt  that  he  had  had  a  good  rest.  After
lying  for  a  couple  of  minutes  on  his  back,  he  snapped  his  fingers,
and  recalled  with  a  smile  that  he  now  owned  nearly  four  hundred
souls.  Thereupon  he  leapt  from  his  bed,  and  began  to  dress,
without  even  looking  at  his  face,  of  which  he  was  sincerely  fond,
and  in  which  he  seemed  to  find  the  chin  the  most  attractive
feature,  for  he  frequently  praised  it  in  the  presence  of  his  friends,
especially  if  they  chanced  to  be  present  while  he  was  shaving.
"Look  here,"  he  generally  said,  "  see  what  a  chin  I  have  :  it
is  perfectly  round."

However,  now  he  glanced  neither  at  his  chin  nor  at  his  nose,
but  straightway  put  on  his  morocco  leather  boots  with  orna-
ments of  many  colours,  such  as  the  town  of  Torzhok  skilfully
supplies,  and  then  in  Scottish  fashion,  clad  only  in  his  shirt,  and
forgetful  of  his  dignity  and  his  respectable  middle  age,  he
executed  a  couple  of  leaps  about  the  room,  cracking  his  heels
very  cleverly.  Finally  he  set  to  work  :  he  rubbed  his  hands
before  his  dressing-case  with  as  much  satisfaction  as  an  incor-
ruptible district  judge  feels  when  he  has  successfully  completed
a  judicial  investigation.  He  was  anxious  to  settle  matters  at
once,  and  would  not  allow  of  any  delay.  He  decided  to  draw
up  the  bills  of  sale  himself,  in  order  that  he  might  not  be
obliged  to  pay  any  lawyer.  He  was  perfectly  well  acquainted
with  the  legal  formulas,  so  he  boldly  began  writing  in  large
letters,  "Year  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  so-and-so;"
and  then,  in  smaller  letters  he  added"  Landowner  so-and-so,"
and  all  the  rest  that  was  necessary,  so  that  in  a  couple  of
hours  everything  was  ready.

When  he  glanced  after  this  at  the  various  lists  of  moujiks
who  had  actually  been  alive  once  upon  a  time — who  had  toiled,
and  got  drunk,  and  acted  as  izvoshtchiks,  had  cheated  their
masters,  or  possibly  had  simply  been  good  moujiks  in  their
way,  a  certain  feeling  overpowered  him,  which  was  strange  and
incomprehensible,  even  to  himself.  Each  one  of  the  lists  seemed
to  possess  a  special  character  ;  and,  more  than  that,  the  moujiks
themselves  seemed  to  have  acquired  a  special  character.     Nearly


114  DEAD    SOULS.

all  the  moujiks  which  had  belonged  to  Madame  Korobotchka
seemed  to  have  supplementary  names  and  nicknames.  Pliush-
kin's  list  was  distinguished  by  brevity  of  style  ;  often  only  the
first  syllables  of  the  men's  names  and  surnames  were  given,  and
these  were  followed  by  a  couple  of  dots.  On  the  other  hand,
Sobakevitch's  list  was  remarkable  for  its  fulness  and  minuteness
of  detail ;  not  a  single  one  of  any  of  the  moujiks'  qualities  was  I
omitted.  Of  one  it  was  said,  "A  good  cabinet-maker;"  to  the
name  of  another  was  appended  the  remark,  "  He  is  intelligent,
and  does  not  get  drunk,"  Such  facts  were  also  indicated  as
who  were  the  men's  mothers  and  fathers,  and  what  the  con-
duct of  the  parents  had  been.  Against  the  name  of  one,  a  certain
Fedotoflf,  there  was  written,  *'His  father  is  not  known,  but  his
mother  was  the  housemaid  Kapitolina  ;  however,  he  is  of  a  good
disposition,  and  not  a  thief."  All  these  details  contributed  a
peculiar  freshness  to  the  list ;  it  seemed  as  though  these  moujiks
had  been  alive  only  the  day  before.  After  indulging  in  a  long
look  at  their  names,  Tchitchikoflf  ejaculated  with  a  sigh,  "  My
good  fellows  !  how  many  there  are  of  you  packed  in  here  !
What  did  you  do  when  you  were  alive  ?  Answer  me,  beloved  of
my  heart  !  How  did  you  get  along  ?  "  This  led  him  to  many
reflections  as  to  the  lives  led  by  the  departed  moujiks,  and  the
time  rapidly  slipped  away.  "  Heigho  !  twelve  o'clock  I  "  he  said
at  last,  glancing  at  his  watch.  "  Why  have  I  been  dawdling
here  all  this  time  ?  I  might  have  finished  my  business,  and
instead  of  that  I  first  wasted  time  in  foolish  thoughts.  Well,
I  am  a  fool.

Having  made  this  remark  he  exchanged  his  Scottish  cos-
tume for  one  patronised  by  civilised  Europeans,  drew  the
buckle  of  his  waistcoat  as  tightly  as  possible,  sprinkled  himself
with  eau-de-Colopie,  took  his  cap  in  his  hand  and  his  papers
under  his  arm,  and  set  out  for  the  city  court-house  to  com-
plete the  sales.

He  walked  along  at  a  rapid  pace,  for  he  felt  that  he  should
feel  awkward  and  uneasy  until  everything  was  finished.  He
had  not  been  long  in  the  street,  and  he  was  still  thinking  of  all
these  matters,  and  at  the  same  time  drawing  his  bearskin  cloak,
covered  with  light-brown  cloth,  over  his  shoulders,  when  at  a
turn  in  the  lane  he  came  in  contact  with  a  gentleman,  also
clad  in  a  bearskin  cloak,  covered  with  light-brown  cloth,  and
having  a  warm  cap  with  ear-pieces  on  his  head.  The  gentleman
uttered  an  exclamation ;  it  was  Maniloff.  They  immediately
clasped  each  other  in  a  close  embrace,  and  stood  in  the  street  in
that  attitude  for  fully  five  minutes.     Their  kisses  were  so  vigorous


THE   TRIBUNALS   ANB   THE   POLICE.  115

that  their  front  teeth  ached  for  the  whole  day  afterwards,  and
Maniloff's  joy,  especially,  was  so  great,  that  nothing  seemed
left  of  his  face  but  his  nose  and  lips  ;  his  eyes  disappeared  com-
pletely. He  held  Tchitchikoff's  hand  in  both  of  his  own  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  and  made  it  frightfully  warm.  Then  he
related  in  the  most  delicate  and  agreeable  terms  how  he  had
come  to  town  on  purpose  to  embrace  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  and  his
speech  concluded  with  a  compliment  such  as  is  only  addressed
as  a  rule  to  a  young  girl,  with  whom  one  is  on  the  point  of
dancing.  Tchitchikoff  had  already  opened  his  mouth  without
knowing  how  to  thank  Maniloli';  but  all  at  once  the  latter  pulled
a  roll  of  paper,  tied  with  a  narrow  pink  ribbon,  from  beneath
his  cloak.

"  What  is  this  ?  "  asked  our  hero,  taking  the  paper.

"  A  list  of  the  moujiks."

"  Ah  !  "  Then  Tchitchikoff  unrolled  it,  ran  his  eyes  over  it,
and  was  amazed  at  the  clearness  and  elegance  of  the  writing.
"  This  is  splendidly  done,"  said  he  ;  "  it  will  not  be  necessary
to  copy  it.  There  is  even  a  border  all  round  it.  Who  did
this  border  so  tastefully  ?  "

"  Well,  you  ought  not  to  ask  me.     It  was  my  wife."

"Ah,  good  Heavens  !  I  am  really  ashamed  that  she  should
have  taken  so  much  trouble."

"  There  is  no  such  thing  as  trouble,  when  Pavel  Ivanovitch
is  in  question."

Tchitchikoff  made  a  bow  of  gratitude.  On  learning  that  he
was  on  his  way  to  the  court-house,  to  complete  the  deed  of  sale,
Maniloff  expressed  his  readiness  to  accompany  him.

The  friends  locked  arms  and  set  off  together.  At  every
elevation,  however  light,  at  every  little  rise  of  ground  or  step,
Maniloff"  supported  Tchitchikoff,  and  almost  lifted  him  up  by
his  arm,  accompanying  the  action  with  an  agreeable  smile  and
the  remark  that  he  would  by  no  means  suffer  Pavel  Ivanovitch
to  hurt  his  little  feet.  Tchitchikoff'  felt  conscience-stricken,
since  he  did  not  know  how  to  return  his  thanks,  though  he  was
well  aware  that  he  was  rather  heavy.  By  dint  of  mutual  assist-
ance, they  finally  reached  the  market-place,  where  the  court-
house was  situated,  a  large  three-storey  stone  building,  as  white
as  chalk,  in  allusion,  probably,  to  the  purity  of  soul  prevaihng
in  the  pubUc  offices  installed  within  it.

The  friends  did  not  walk,  but  ran,  up  the  staircase.  Tchi-
tchikoff, not  caring  to  let  Maniloff  have  the  trouble  of  helping
him,  quickened  his  pace  ;  and  Maniloff,  on  his  side,  flew  on
in  advance,  in  order  not  to  allow  Tchitchikoff  to  get  the  advan-


116  DEAD    SOL'LS.

tage  of  him,  so  that  they  hoth  were  very  much  out  of  breath  when
they  finally  arrived  in  a  dark  corridor.  Neither  in  this  place  nor
in  the  rooms  around  was  any  cleanliness  at  all  conspicuous.
Our  heroes  espied  a  great  many  documents,  both  rough  drafts
and  clean  copies,  clerks  with  bent  heads,  broad  necks,  swallow-
tailed  coats,  surtouts  of  provincial  cut,  and  even  one  in  a
pimple  light  gray  round  jacket,  which  stood  out  sharply  among
the  rest,  and  whose  owner,  with  his  head  on  one  side,  and
almost  resting  on  the  paper,  was  writing  out  either  a  protocol
about  the  seizure  of  some  land,  or  else  the  description  of  an
estate  which  had  been  suddenly  seized  by  some  land-grabber.
Then  they  heard  exclamations  and  orders  given  in  a  hoarse
voice  :  "  Matter  No.  368,  if  you  please,  Fedosiy  Fedosievitch  !  "
Next  a  scolding  remark:  "You  are  always  carrying  off  the
stopper  of  the  court  ink-bottle  !  "  While  at  times  a  more  com-
manding voice,  belonging  probably  to  one  of  the  superior  offi-
cials, rang  out  imperiously,  "  There,  copy  that,  and  look  sharp  ;
if  you  don't,  your  boots  shall  be  taken  off  your  feet,  and  you
bhall  sit  in  my  office  without  food  for  six  days  !"

The  noise  made  by  the  pens  as  they  went  scratch,  scratch,
was  very  great,  and  resembled  that  of  several  telyegas  loaded
with  brushwood  passing  through  a  forest,  where  the  dry  leaves
lay  fully  a  quarter  of  an  arshin  '■'  high.

Tchitchikoff  and  Maniloff  entered  the  first  department,  where
there  sat  two  officials,  of  whom  our  hero  inquired, — "Will  you
be  kind  enough  to  tell  us  where  is  the  proper  office  for  recording
the  sales  of  serfs  ?"

"What  do  you  want?"  said  both  functionaries,  turning
round.

"  I  want  to  have  a  deed  of  sale  registered."

"  What  have  you  been  buying  ?  "

"  I  wish  to  know  first  of  all  where  the  serf  department  is—
here,  or  where  ?  "

"  Tell  us  first  what  you  have  bought,  and  what  price  you
have  paid,  and  then  we  will  tell  you  where  to  go  ;  but  it's  im-
possible for  us  to  do  so  otherwise."

Tchitchikoff  immediately  perceived  that  these  officials  were
simply  inquisitive  young  fellows  who  unduly  assumed  an  air  of
importance.

"Listen,"  said  he;  "  I  know  perfectly  well  that  all  affairs
connected  with  serfs,  no  matter  what  the  price  paid  for  them
may  be,  are  transacted  in  one  place,  and  I  therefore  beg  of  you

*  Seven  inclies.


THE    TRIBUNALS    AND   THE    POLICE.  117

to  show  US  the  department ;  if  you  do  not  know  what  goes  on
here  about  you,  we  will  inquire  of  someone  else."

To  this  the  functionaries  made  no  reply :  one  of  them  merely
pointed  with  his  finger  to  a  corner  of  the  room,  where  there  sat
an  old  man  docketing  some  papers.  Tchitchikoff  made  his  way
straight  up  to  him.  The  old  man  was  greatly  absorbed  in  his
work.

"  Permit  me  to  inquire,"  said  Tchitchikoff  with  a  bow,
*'  whether  this  is  the  place  for  matters  connected  with  sale  of
serfs  ?  "

The  old  man  raised  his  eyes  and  replied,  "  No,  this  is  not
the  place  for  serf-sales."

"  Where  is  it,  then  ?  "

"  In  the  serf  department."

"  And  where  is  the  serf  department  ?  "

"  Ivan  Antouovitch  has  charge  of  it."

"And  where  is  Ivan  Antonovitch  ?  ''

The  old  man  pointed  with  his  finger  to  another  corner  of  the
room,  and  Tchitchikoff  and  Maniloff  betook  themselves  to  Ivan
Antonovitch.  Ivan  Antonovitch  had  already  cast  a  glance  behind
him  and  taken  a  stealthy  survey  of  them  ;  but  he  now  busied
himself  more  intently  than  ever  with  his  writing.

"  Permit  me  to  inquire,"  said  Tchitchikoff  with  a  bow,  "  whe-
ther this  is  the  place  for  the  transaction  of  business  connected
Avith  the  sale  of  serfs  ?  "

Ivan  Antonovitch  pretended  not  to  hear  him,  and,  without
vouchsafing  any  reply,  became  absorbed  in  his  papers.  It
at  once  became  apparent  that  he  had  attained  to  years  of  dis-
cretion— in  fact  he  seemed  to  be  well  past  forty.  His  hair  was
black  and  thick,  and  he  had  one  of  those  faces  which  is  desig-
nated in  common  life  as  a  "jug  phiz."

"  Allow  me  to  inquire  whether  this  is  the  serf  department  ?"
repeated  Tchitchikoff.

"Yes,"  said  Ivan  Antonovitch,  who  just  turned  his  jug  face
round,  and  then  went  on  with  his  writing.

"  Well,  this  is  my  business.  I  have  purchased  some  peasants
for  exportation  from  various  proprietors  in  this  district.  I  havo
the  deeds  of  sale  ;  all  that  remains  is  to  register  them."

"  Ai'e  the  vendors  present  ?  "

"  Some  are  here,  and  from  the  others  I  have  written  autho-
rity."

"  Have  you  brought  your  drafts  of  the  bills  of  sale  ?  "

"  Yes,  I  have.  I  should  like  to  know — I  am  in  somewhat  of
f\,  hurry^f  the  business  could  not  be  fiuished  to-day  ?  "


118  DEAD    SOULS.

"  Oh,  to-day !  that's  impossible,"  said'Ivan  Antonovitch.  "  In-
quiries must  first  be  instituted  as  to  whether  there  is  anything
illegal  about  these  matters."

"  As  far  as  that  is  concerned,  and  in  order  that  the  affair  may
be  expedited,  I  may  mention  that  Ivan  Grigorievitch,  the  Presi-
dent of  the  Court,  is  a  great  friend  of  mine."

"  Yes  ;  but  Ivan  Grigorievitch  is  not  the  only  person  in  the
world  to  be  considered  ;  there  are  others,"  said  Ivan  Antono-
vitch grimly.

Tchitchikoff  understood  the  hint  conveyed  by  Ivan  Antono-
vitch, and  so  he  said,  "  The  others  will  not  be  left  dissatisfied.
I  have  been  in  the  service  myself;  I  know  how  the  business  is
managed."

"  Go  to  Ivan  Grigorievitch,"  said  Ivan  Antonovitch,  in  a
somewhat  mollified  voice.  "  Let  him  give  orders  to  the  proper
persons  ;  but  the  matter  does  not  depend  on  us."

Tchitchikoff",  pulling  a  bank-note  from  his  pocket,  laid  it  before
Ivan  Antonovitch,  who  did  not  notice  it  in  the  least,  though  he
immediately  covered  it  with  a  book.  Tchitchikoff  was  about
to  point  it  out  to  him ;  but  Ivan  Antonovitch  let  it  be  under-
stood, by  a  motion  of  his  head,  that  it  was  not  necessary  for
him  to  do  so.

"There,  that  fellow  will  conduct  you  to  the  court-room,"
the  official  next  said,  nodding  his  head.  A  clerk  with  frayed
sleeves  and  patched  trousers  guided  our  friends,  as  Virgil  guided
Dante  in  the  olden  days,  taking  them  straight  to  the  court-room,
where  in  an  ample  arm-chair,  and  behind  two  ponderous  books
and  a  mirror  of  the  laws,  sat  the  president  in  state,  like  the
sun.  He  was  not  alone,  for  beside  him  sat  Sobakevitch,  en-
tirely concealed  by  the  zertzalo.*  The  entrance  of  the  visitors
elicited  an  exclamation,  and  the  presidential  chair  was  shoved
back.  Sobakevitch  also  rose  from  his  seat.  The  president
received  Tchitchikoff"  into  his  embrace,  and  the  audience-
chamber  resounded  with  kisses,  after  which  the  two  friends
inquired  about  each  other's  health.  It  then  appeared  that  they
both  had  the  back-ache,  which  was  immediately  attributed  to
their  sedentary  life.  The  president,  it  seemed,  had  already
been  informed  of  the  purchases  by  Sobakevitch,  for  he  imme-
diately began  to  congratulate  our  hero,  which  threw  him  into
some  confusion  at  first,  especially  when  he  perceived  that
Sobakevitch  and  Maniloff",  two  of  the  persons  with  whom  the

*  Zertzah.  A  small,  triangular  glass  case,  containing  the  three  ukases
of  Peter  the  Great,  with  the  imperial  eagle.  This  stands  on  the  tahle  of
every  court-room  in  Russia,


THE   TRIBUNALS   AND   THE    POLICE.  119

business  had  been  privately  transacted,  now  stood  face  to  face.
However,  he  thanked  the  president,  and  then  turning  to  Sobake-
vitch,  he  inquired,  "  And  how  is  your  health  ?  "

"  Glory  to  God,  I  do  not  complain,"  said  Sobakevitch.  And,
in  fact,  he  had  nothing  to  complain  of.  Iron  would  sooner  have
taken  cold  or  caught  a  cough  than  this  marvellously  well  consti-
tuted landowner.

"  Yes,  you  have  always  gloried  in  your  health,"  said  the
president ;  "  and  your  late  father  also  was  a  strong  man."

"  Yes,  he  went  bear-hunting  alone,"  replied  Sobakevitch.

"But  it  seems  to  me,"  said  the  president,  "  that  you  also
could  overthrow  a  bear  if  you  chose  to  go  out  and  encounter
him."

"  No,  I  could  not  throw  him,"  answered  Sobakevitch.  "  My
father  was  much  stronger  than  I  am."  And  he  continued,  with
a  sigh,  "No,  there  are  no  such  people  left  now.  Here's  my
life,  for  example.  What  sort  of  a  life  is  it  ?  It  is  nothing
but "

"  In  what  respect  is  not  your  life  agreeable  ?  "  said  the
president.

"  It's  not  good,  not  good  !  "  said  Sobakevitch,  shaking  his
head.  "  Judge  for  yourself,  Ivan  Grigorievitch.  I  have  lived
for  fifty  years  and  I  have  never  once  been  ill ;  I  have  never  had
so  much  as  a  headache  or  an  ulcer  or  a  boil.  Now  that  is
not  a  good  omen.  Some  time  or  other  I  shall  have  to  pay  for
all  this  !  "  and  hereupon  Sobakevitch  became  plunggd  into  pro-
found melancholy.  /

".  Eh,  what  a  man  !  "  thought  Tchitcliikoflf  and  the  president
simultaneously.  "  What  a  thing  he  has  hit  upon  to  fret
about ! "

"  I  have  a  little  note  for  you,"  said  Tchitchikofi",  pulling
Pliushkin's  letter  out  of  his  pocket.

"  From  whom  ?  "  said  the  president.  And  breaking  the  seal,
he  exclaimed,  "  Ah  !  fromPliushkin.  Is  he  still  vegetating  on  in
this  world  ?  That's  a  case  of  fate.  He  used  to  be  the  most
sensible,  the  wealthiest  of  men.     But  now "

"  He's  a  dog  !  "  said  Sobakevitch  ;  "  a  scoundrel !  He  has
starved  nearly  all  his  people  to  death."

"  Certainly,  certainly,"  said  the  president,  when  he  had
finished  reading  the  letter.  "  I  am  ready  to  be  his  agent.  When
do  you  wish  to  complete  the  sale — now,  or  later  on  ?"

"Now,"  said  Tchitchikoff;  "I  should  like  it  to  be  to-day,  if
possible,  for  I  wish  to  go  out  of  town  to-morrow.  I  have
brought  the  draft  bills  of  sale  with  me."


120  DEAD    SOULS.

"  That  is  all  right,  only,  -whatever  may  be  your  wishes  in  the
matter,  we  shall  not  let  you  leave  us  so  soon.  The  deeds  of
sale  will  be  completed  to-day,  but  you  must  remain  with  us.
I  will  give  the  necessary  orders  immediately,"  added  the  presi-
dent; and  he  opened  the  door  to  the  offices,  which  were
filled  with  functionaries,  who  resembled  industrious  bees,
scattered  over  their  comb — if,  indeed,  a  honeycomb  can  be
compared  to  government  offices.  "  Is  Ivan  Antonovitch  here  ?  "
he  asked.

"  Yes,"  replied  a  voice  within.

"  Send  him  here."

Ivan  Antonovitch,  the  man  with  the  jug-like  face,  presented
himself  in  the  audience-chamber,  and  bowed  respectfully.

"  Here,"  said  Ivan  Grigorievitch,  "  take  all  these  bills  of  the
sale  of  serfs,  and  have  them "

"  And  don't  forget,  Ivan  Grigorievitch,"  broke  in  Sobakevitch,
"that  at  least  two  witnesses  will  be  required  on  both  sides.
Send  to  the  procurator  at  once ;  he  is  a  man  of  leisure,  and  is
probably  at  home.  Lawyer  Zalotukha,  the  greatest  robber  on
earth,  does  all  his  work  for  him.  The  inspector  of  the  Medical
Institute — he's  a  gentleman  of  leisure  too,  and  is  probably  at
home,  if  he  has  not  gone  off  somewhere  to  play  at  cards.  But
there  are  plenty  who  are  nearer  at  hand :  Trukhatchevsky,
Byegushkin — they  are  all  useless  encumberers  of  the  earth  ! "

"  Exactly,  exactly  !  "  said  the  president ;  and  he  immediately
despatched  a  clerk  in  search  of  all  of  them.

"  I  must  also  request  you,"  said  Tchitchikofi",  "  to  send  for
the  representative  of  a  lady  landowner,  with  whom  I  have  con-
cluded a  purchase — th6  son  of  the  protopope  Father  Kirill ;  he
serves  under  you."

"  Certainly  ;  we'll  send  for  him,"  said  the  president.  "Every-
thing shall  be  done,  and  you  need  not  give  anything  to  the
officials;  that  I  must  beg  of  you.  My  friends  must  not  pay."
So  saying,  he  immediately  gave  some  orders  to  Ivan  Antono-
vitch, which  were  evidently  displeasing  to  the  latter.  The  deeds
seemed  to  produce  a  favourable  impression  on  the  president,
especially  when  he  perceived  that  the  purchases  were  for  a  large
number  of  serfs,  who  must  be  worth  fully  a  hundred  thousand
roubles.  He  looked  Tchitchikoff  in  the  eye  for  several  minutes,
with  an  expression  of  the  greatest  satisfaction,  and  at  length
remarked,  "  Well,  really!  This  is  the  way  to  do  things,  Pavel
Ivanovitch.     So  you  have  acquired  all  these  ?"

"Yes,"  replied  Tchitchikoff.


THE    TRIBUNALS   AND   THE    POLICE.  121

"  It's  a  fine  transaction  ;  truly,  a  fine  piece  of  business."

"Yes;  I  myself  know  that  a  finer  piece  of  business  could
not  be  undertaken.  At  all  events,  a  man's  object  in  living
remains  undefined  if  he  does  not  set  his  feet  firmly  on  a  durable
foundation,  in  place  of  following  the  chimera  of  youth."  Here
our  friend  very  opportunely  introduced  some  strictures  upon
young  men  for  indulging  in  Liberalism,  and  so  on.  But  it  was
worthy  of  note  that  there  was  a  certain  lack  of  firmness  in  his
own  words,  as  though  he  were  saying  to  himself  all  the  while,
"  Eh,  my  good  fellow  ?  you  are  lying,  and  stoutly  lying,  too  !  "
He  did  not  even  glance  at  Sobakevitch  and  Maniloft',  for  fear  of
detecting  something  or  other  on  their  faces.  But  his  fears  were
groundless  :  Sobakevitch's  face  never  moved  ;  and  Manilofl",  de-
lighted with  this  discourse,  only  nodded  his  head  approvingly
as  he  fell  into  that  attitude  which  an  admirer  of  music  assumes
when  a  songstress  has  outdone  a  fiddle,  piping  such  a  shrill
note  that  even  a  bird  could  not  sing  it.

"  Why  don't  you  tell  Ivan  Grigorievitch,"  noAv  called  out
Sobakevitch,  "just  what  you  have  bought?  And  you,  Ivan
Grigorievitch,  why  don't  you  ask  him  what  sort  of  an
acquisition  he  has  made  ?  Such  people  !  Simply  worth  their
weight  in  gold !  Why,  I  have  sold  him  my  carriage-maker,
Mikhyeft'!  "

"No;  you  haven't  sold  Mikhyefi*,  though  ?  "  said  the  presi-
dent. "  I  knew  that  carriage-maker,  Mikhyefi";  he  was  a  capital
workman;  he  repaired  a  drozhky  for  me  once.  Only,  excuse
me,  how  is  it  ?     You  certainly  told  me  that  he  was  dead."

"  What !  Mikhyeff  dead  ?"  said  Sobakevitch,  not  in  the  least
disconcerted.  "It  was  his  brother  who  died;  but  he's  very
much  alive,  and  in  better  health  than  ever.  Only  a  few  days
ago  he  began  to  make  me  a  britchka,  such  as  you  can't  get  made,
even  in  Moscow."

"  Yes,  Mikhyefi"  is  a  capital  workman,"  said  the  president,
"  and  I  am  even  surprised  that  5'ou  could  part  with  him."

"Yes,  and  not  Mikhyefi' only,  but  Cork  Stepan,  the  carpenter ;
Milushkin,  the  brickmaker ;  Maksim  Telyatnikofl",  the  shoe-
maker— they  are  all  gone  ;  I've  sold  them  all."  And  when  the
president  inquired  why  he  had  sold  them,  since  they  were  all
men  who  were  indispensable  about  a  house,  being  capital
artisans,  Sobakevitch  replied,  with  a  wave  of  his  hand,  "Ah!
well,  the  fancy  struck  me.  'Come,'  I  said  to  myself,  '  I'll  sell
them  ;'  and  so  I  did,  in  a  freak."  Thereupon  he  hung  his  head,
as  though  he  repented  of  his  deed,  and  added,  "  Here  I  am,  a


122  DEAD   SOULS.

grey-haired  man,  and  I  haven't  acquired  any  common  sense  to
this  day."

"But  excuse  me,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  said  the  president,
"  how  does  it  come  that  you  are  purchasing  serfs  without  land  ?
Are  they  for  colonisation  ?  "

"Yes,  for  colonisation."

"  Oh,  well!  if  they  are  for  colonising  purposes,  it's  quite  a
different  matter  ;  and  in  what  locality?  "

"  The  locality.     Oh  !  in  the  Khersonese  Government."

"  Oh,  the  land  is  excellent  there  !  "  said  the  president,  and
he  expressed  himself  in  very  laudatory,  terms  with  regard  to  the
growth  of  the  grass  there.

"  And  have  you  a  sufficient  amount  of  land  ?  "

**I  have  as  much  as  is  necessary  for  the  serfs  which  I  have
bought."

*'  Is  there  a  river  or  a  pond  ?  "

**  A  river.  And  there  is  a  pond  besides."  After  saying  this,
Tchitchikoff  glanced,  unintentionally,  at  Sobakevitch ;  and,
although  Sobakevitch  was  as  stolid  as  ever,  it  seemed  to  him  as
though  there  were  written  on  his  face,  "  Oh,  you're  lying !
You  haven't  any  river,  or  pond,  or  land,  at  all !  "

During  this  conversation,  the  witnesses  began  to  make  their
appearance, — the  blinking  procurator,  who  is  already  known
to  the  reader  ;  the  inspector  of  the  Medical  Institute,  Trukhat-
chevsky,  Byegushkin,  and  the  other  "  encumberers  of  the  earth,"
as  Sobakevitch  expressed  it.  Many  of  them  were  entirely
unknown  to  Tchitchikoff.  Not  only  was  the  son  of  the  proto-
pope,  Father  Ivirill,  fetched,  but  even  the  protopope  himself.
Each  of  the  witnesses  signed  with  all  his  names  and  titles :  some
in  a  reversed  handwriting  ;  some  in  a  slanting  hand ;  some  simply
upside  down, — introducing  such  letters  as  were  surely  never
yet  beheld  in  the  Russian  alphabet.  Our  well-known  Ivan
Antonovitch  did  his  work  very  briskly.  The  deeds  of  sale  were
recorded,  the  dates  were  entered,  everything  was  copied  in  the
books,  and,  when  it  was  all  done,  there  was  a  chai-ge  of  one
half-rouble  per  cent.,  for  the  registration,  to  be  paid.  However
Tchitchikoff  disbursed  even  less,  for  the  president  ordered  that
only  one-half  of  the  tax  should  be  demanded  of  him ;  and  the
other  half  was,  in  some  manner,  transferred  to  the  account  of
another  purchase.

"  So  now,"  said  the  president,  when  all  was  over,  "it  only
remains  for  us  to  seal  the  contracts  with  a  convivial  glass."

"  I  am  ready,"  said  Tchitchikoff.  "  It  only  depends  on  you
to  name  a  time.     It  would  be  a  sin  on  my  part  if  I  did  not


THE    TRIBUNALS    ANT)   THE    POLICE.  123

uncork  two  or  three  bottles  of  foaming  wine  for  such  an  agree-
able company."

"  No  ;  you  have  not  taken  the  matter  aright.  We  are  going
to  provide  the  foaming  material  ourselves,"  said  the  president.
"  It  is  an  obligation:  it  is  our  duty.  You  are  our  guest:  we
must  entertain  you.  Do  you  know  what,  gentlemen  ?  This  is
what  we  will  do  :  we  will  all  of  us,  as  many  as  there  are  here
present,  go  to  the  chief  of  poHce's ;  he's  a  wonderful  fellow  !
It  will  only  take  him  a  minute  to  pass  along  through  the  fish-
market  and  look  at  the  wine  merchants,  and  you  know  how  we
shall  fare  then  !  And  v^eW  also  have  a  little  whist-party  to
celebrate  this  occasion."

No  one  could  refuse  such  a  proposition.  The  witnesses  felt
an  appetite  at  the  very  mention  of  the  fish-market :  they  all
instantly  took  up  their  caps  and  hats,  and  the  sitting  of  the
court  was  at  an  end.  When  they  passed  through  the  offices,
Ivan  Antonovitch — he  of  the  jug  face — said  softly  to  Tchitchi-
kofi",  as  he  made  his  bow,  "  You  have  bought  a  hundred  thou-
sand roubles'  worth  of  peasants,  and  yet  you  have  only  given
me  one  white  bank-note  for  my  labour."

"Yes;    and   what   are    peasants,    after    all?"    Tchitchikofi"  /
answered  him  in  a  corresponding  whisper ;  "a  very  worthless  j
and  most  insignificant  class  of  people,  and  not  worth  half  that."  i
Ivan   Antonovitch  then  understood  that  his  visitor  was   of  an
uncompromising  character,  and  would  not  give  him  any  more.

The  visitors  finally  arrived  at  the  chief  of  police's  house  in  a
body.  This  chief  of  police  really  was  a  wonderful  man.  As
soon  as  he  learned  the  state  of  alfairs,  he  called  to  the  captain
of  the  district,  a  bold  young  fellow  in  lacquered  cavalry-boots,
and  whispered  a  couple  of  words  in  his  ear,  adding,  "Do  you
understand?"  And  then  while  the  guests  were  playing  whist
with  ardour  in  one  room,  there  appeared  on  the  table  in  another
some  sturgeon,  sterlet,  salmon,  sveriuga,*  pressed  caviar,
salted  caviar,  herrings,  patties,  cheese,  smoked  tongues,  and  so
on  ;  all  of  which  came  from  the  market.  Next  appeared  a  con-
tribution from  the  oflicials'  own  quarters — a  boar's  head,  a  patty
made  out  of  a  nine-pood  sturgeon,  another  pasty  of  mushrooms,
some  gingei'bread,  butter-cakes,  and  rzvarenitza. '■'■'■

The  chief  of  police  was  a  sort  of  father  and  benefactor  to  the
town.  He  was  as  much  at  home  among  the  citizens  as  in  his
own  family,  and  he  visited  the  shops  and  bazaars  and  disposed
of  their  contents  as  if  they  were  his  own  private  storerooms.

*  A  fish  of  the  sturgeon  species.

•f  A  spiced  driftk  made  of  beqr,  brandy,  and  mead.


124  DEAD    SOULS.

On  perceiving  that  the  luncheon  was  ready,  this  wonderful
official  proposed  to  his  guests  that  they  should  finish  their  game
of  whist  after  the  meal ;  and  they  all  hetook  themselves  to  the
adjoining  room,  whence  an  odour  which  tickled  their  nostrils
agreeably  had  long  since  been  issuing.  Sobakevitch  had  peeped
through  the  doorway  a  long  while  before,  and  had  caught  sight
of  the  sturgeon  reposing  on  a  huge  platter  in  the  distance.  "When
each  of  the  guests  had  drunk  a  glass  of  vodka  of  the  olive-green
hue  of  those  Siberian  stones  from  which  seals  are  cut  in  Russia,
they  approached  the  table  with  their  forks,  and  began  to  ex-
hibit their  characters  and  their  predilections,  as  the  saying  is  ;
some  attacking  the  caviar,  others  the  salmon,  and  others  the
cheese.

Sobakevitch,  paying  no  heed  to  any  of  these  trifles,  attached
himself  to  the  sturgeon,  and  in  a  little  more  than  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  while  the  rest  were  eating,  drinking,  and  conversing,  he
completely  made  away  with  it,  so  that  when  the  chief  of  police
happened  to  remember  it,  and  said  to  his  guests,  "  And  what  do
you  think  of  that  product  of  nature,  gentlemen  ?  "  and  turned
towards  it  with  his  fork  upraised,  he  saw  that  nothing  was  left
of  his  product  of  nature  except  its  tail.  But  Sobakevitch  kept
quiet,  as  though  it  were  not  his  doing  ;  and,  marching  up  to  the
dish  which  was  farthest  off,  he  thrust  his  fork  into  a  small  dried
fish.  After  that  he  seated  himself  in  an  arm-chair,  and  neither
eat  nor  drank  any  more,  but  merely  screwed  up  his  eyes  and
blinked.

The  chief  of  police  was  in  no  wise  sparing  of  his  wine,  and
there  was  no  end  to  the  toasts.  The  first  one  was  drunk,  as  the
reader  may  have  divined,  to  the  health  of  the  new  landowner  in
the  Khersonese,  and  then  to  the  welfare  of  his  serfs  and  to  their
successful  removal ;  then  to  the  health  of  his  future  beautiful
wife,  which  evoked  a  pleasant  smile  on  the  lips  of  our  hero.
They  surrounded  him  on  all  sides,  and  began  to  entreat  him  to
remain  at  least  two  weeks  longer  in  the  town.  "  No,  Pavel
Ivanovitch  !  You  may  say  what  you  like,  you  shall  stay  awhile
with  us!  We'll  marry  you  off"! — We  will  marry  him,  won't
Ave,  Ivan  Grigorievitch  ?  "

"  We'll  marry  him  !  we'll  marry  him  !  "  The  president  of
the  court  caught  up  the  refrain.  "You  may  defend  your-
self with  hands  and  feet,  but  we'll  marry  you  all  the  same,"
he  said.  "  Now,  my  dear  fellow,  you  have  come  here,  and
you  won't  have  any  reason  to  complain.  We  are  not  fond  of
jesting."

*'  What !     Why  should  I  resist  with  hands  and  f^et  ?  "  said


THE  TRIBUNALS  AND  THE   POLICE.  125

Tchitchikoflf,  laughing.     "  Marriage  is  not  such  a  thing  that
one However  there  would  have  to  be  a  bride."

"A  bride  will  be  provided.  "Why  not?  You  shall  have
everything, — everything  that  you  wish  !  "

"  And  if "

"  Bravo  !  he  will  stay  !  "  they  all  exclaimed.  "  Viva,  hurrah!
Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  Hurrah  !  "  And  they  all  crowded  round
him  to  touch  his  glass  with  those  which  they  held  in  their
hands.  Tchitchikotf  clinked  glasses  with  all.  "  Ah  !  Ah  !  once
more  ! "  exclaimed  the  more  enthusiastic ;  and  again  they
clinked.  Then  they  came  up  to  touch  glasses  a  third  time,
and  for  the  third  time  they  clinked.  All  had  become  extremely
merry  in  a  very  short  space  of  time.  The  president,  who  was
a  very  charming  man  when  he  got  excited,  embraced  Tchitchi-
kofl'  several  times,  exclaiming,  in  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  "  My
Boul !  my  mamma  !  "  and  then  cracking  his  fingers,  he  even
began  to  dance  round  our  hero,  humming  the  well-known  song,
"  Ah!  thou  art  so  nice,  so  nice,  thou  Komarinsk  moujik  !  "

After  the  champagne,  they  opened  some  Hungarian  wine,
which  raised  their  spirits  to  a  still  higher  level,  and  rendered
them  extremely  lively.  They  had  forgotten  all  about  their
whist.  They  asked  questions,  laughed  and  talked  about  every-
thing,—  about  politics,  and  even  about  military  matters;  freely
expressing  sentiments  for  which  they  would  have  whipped  their
children  at  another  time.  They  settled  a  multitude  of  the  most
difiicult  questions.  Tchitchikofi"  had  never  found  himself  in
such  a  merry  mood.  He  fancied  that  he  was  actually  a  land-
owner in  the  Khersonese,  and  he  talked  about  various  improve-
ments,— about  farming  ;  about  the  happiness  and  bliss  of  two
souls  living  in  mutual  affinity ;  and  he  began  to  recite  to  Sobake-
vitch,  Werther's  message  to  Charlotte,  in  verse ;  his  friend
blinking  as  he  sat  in  his  arm-chair,  for  after  eating  all  that
sturgeon  he  felt  strongly  inclined  to  sleep.  However,  Tchitchi-
kofi" finally  became  conscious  that  he  was  growing  too  commu-
nicative ;  he  asked  for  a  carriage,  and  obtained  the  loan  of  the
procurator's  drozhky.  The  coachman  of  this  vehicle  w^as  an
experienced  young  fellow,  as  soon  became  apparent  on  the  road  ;
for  he  drove  with  one  hand,  and,  thrusting  the  other  behind  him,
supported  our  hero  with  it.  In  this  manner  was  Tchitchikofi"
conveyed  in  the  procurator's  drozhky  to  his  inn,  where  he  still
continued  to  talk  all  sorts  of  nonsense  for  a  long  while,  chatting
about  a  golden-haired  bride  with  rosy  cheeks,  and  a  dimple
on  the  right  one  ;  about  estates  in  the  Ivhersonese,  and  capital.
Selifan  even  received  instructions  to  collect  all  the  newly  pur-


126  DEAD   SOULS.

chased  serfs,  in  order  that  a  roll  of  them  might  be  called.  He
listened  for  a  long  time  in  silence,  and  then  he  left  the  room,
remarking  to  Petrushka,  "Go  and  undress  the  master!"

Petrushka  set  about  removing  his  master's  boots,  f  and  almost
dragged  him  on  to  the  floor  with  them.  But  at  last  the  boots
were  removed,  the  master  properly  undressed,  and  after  tossing
about  for  a  while  on  the  bed,  which  creaked  unmercifully,  he
fell  asleep,  fully  convinced  that  he  was  a  landowner  in  the
Khersonese.  But  in  the  meanwhile  Petrushka  had  carried  his
trousers  and  his  cranberry-coloured  coat  into  the  corridor,  and,
hanging  them  up,  he  began  to  beat  and  brush  them  so  that  the
dust  flew  all  over  the  place.  As  he  was  preparing  to  take
them  down  again  he  glanced  outside  and  perceived  Selifan  just
coming  from  the  stable.  Their  glances  met,  and  they  under-
stood each  other  by  instinct :  the  master  had  fallen  asleep,  so
that  they  could  take  a  little  run  on  their  own  account.  Carrying
the  coat  and  trousers  into  the  room,  Petrushka  immediately
went  down-stairs  ;  and  they  both  set  off  without  uttering  a
single  word  to  each  other  as  to  the  object  of  their  expedition,
but  chatting  on  the  way  of  a  totally  different  subject.  Their
walk  was  not  a  long  one,  however ;  they  only  went  just  across
the  street  to  a  building  which  stood  opposite  the  inn.  Here
they  entered  a  cellar-like  room,  where  people  of  all  sorts  were
seated  at  wooden  tables — men  with  shaven  and  unshaven
chins  ;  men  in  sheepskin  coats,  and  men  in  nothing  but  shirts  ;
with  one  fellow  who  wore  a  frieze  cloak.  What  Selifan  and
Petrushka  did  there,  God  only  knows  ;  but  they  came  out  an
hour  later,  arm-in-arm,  in  utter  silence,  showing  each  other
great  attention,  and  mutually  preventing  each  other  from  falling.
Hand  in  hand,  and  without  ever  releasing  their  hold  on  each
other,  they  fumbled  about  on  the  staircase  for  a  quarter  of
an  hour,  then  mounted,  and  reached  their  master's  rooms.
Petrushka  halted  for  a  moment  before  his  lowly  bed,  meditating
how  he  could  lie  down  upon  it  in  the  most  genteel  manner,  and
then  he  stretched  himself  directly  across  it,  so  that  his  feet
rested  on  the  floor.  Selifan  lay  down  on  the  same  bed,  placing
his  head  on  Petrushka's  stomach,  forgetting  that  he  ought  not
to  have  slept  there  at  all,  but  in  the  servants'  quarters,  or  in
the  stable  near  the  horses.  Both  fell  asleep  at  the  same  instant,
raising  a  snore  of  incredible  loudness,  to  which  their  master
replied  from  the  other  room  with  a  thin,  nasal  whistle.  Soon
after  this  all  sank  into  silence,  and  the  inn  was  wrapt  in
impenetrable  slumber.  In  one  small  wmdow  alone  was  there
still  a  light  visible ;   it  was  the  window  of  a  room  occupied  by


THE  TRIBUNALS   AND   THE   POLICE.  l27

some  cornet  or  other,  who  had  come  from  Ryazan,  and  who  was
evidently  very  fond  of  boots,  for  since  his  arrival  he  had  already
ordered  four  pairs,  and  was  now  trying  on  a  fifth  one.  Several
times  he  approached  his  bed  with  the  intention  of  throwing
them  off  and  lying  down,  but  he  could  by  no  means  bring  him-
self to  do  so.  The  boots  were  really  very  well  made  ;  and  for
a  long  time  he  still  kept  lifting  up  his  feet  and  gazing  with
admii'ation  at  the  high  and  wonderfully  formed  heels.


CHAPTER  VIII.

THE     GOVEENOR's    BALL.


Tchitchikoff's  purchases  became  the  subject  of  conversation
throughout  the  town.  Discussions  went  on,  and  opinions  were
expressed  as  to  whether  the  purchase  of  serfs  for  colonisation
was  profitable.  In  the  course  of  the  debate  many  people
showed  themselves  to  be  thoroughly  conversant  with  the  sub-
ject. "  Of  course,"  said  some,  "  it  is  profitable.  There  is  no
question  as  to  that  ;  the  soil  in  the  southern  provinces  is  very
fine  and  fertile ;  but  what  will  Tchitchikoff  do  with  his  serfs  if
he  has  no  water  ?  For  there  certainly  are  no  rivers  thereabouts."

"  The  lack  of  water  would  be  nothing,  nothing  at  all,  Btepan
Dimitrievitch,"  replied  another  wiseacre  ;  "but  this  colonisa-
tion of  serfs  is  a  hopeless  matter.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that
on  new  land,  where  the  work  is  confined  to  agriculture — where
there  is  nothing,  neither  izba  nor  manor-house — the  moujik
will  run  away,  as  sure  as  twice  two  make  four,  and  will,  indeed,
take  himself  ofi'  in  such  a  manner  that  you  will  never  dis-
cover the  slightest  trace  of  him."

"  No,  Alexei  Ivanovitch  ;  excuse  me,  excuse  me :  I  do  not
agree  with  you  at  all  when  you  say  that  Tchitchikofi''s  moujiks
will  run  away.  A  Russian  man  is  capable  of  anything,  and  can
adapt  himself  to  all  climates.  Send  him  to  Kamchatka  if  you
like,  only  give  him  some  warm  gloves,  and,  axe  in  hand,  he  will
set  to  work  and  build  himself  a  new  izba."

"  But,  Ivan  Grigorievitch,  you  have  lost  sight  of  one  very
important  fact :  you  have  not  yet  inquired  what  sort  of  moujiks
Tchitchikoff  has  bought  ?  You  have  forgotten  that  a  landowner
does  not  part  with  good  serfs.  I  am  ready  to  forfeit  my  head  if
Tchitchikoft"s  serfs  are  not  thieves,  drunkards  to  the  last  degree,
and  of  idle  and  dissolute  behaviour."


12S  DEAD   SOULS.

"  Yes,  yes,  I  agree  to  that ;  that  is  true  :  nobody  sells  good
moujiks,  and  Tchitchikoff's  men  are  drunkards ;  but  you  must
take  into  consideration  that  there  is  a  moral  here — that  a  moral
point  is  involved  :  they  are  worthless  now,  but,  when  settled  on
new  land,  they  may  all  at  once  turn  into  good  subjects.  There
have  been  plenty  of  examples  of  that  sort,  not  only  in  the  world
itself,  but  also  in  history."

"  Never,  never  !  "  said  the  director  of  the  imperial  factories  ;
"and  believe  me,  it  never  can  be:  for  Tchitchikoff's  serfs  will
now  have  two  powerful  enemies.  The  first  enemy  will  be  their
proximity  to  the  Little  Russian  provinces,  where  the  sale  of
wine  is  freely  allowed.  I  assure  you,  that  in  two  weeks'  time
they  will  have  drunk  themselves  to  death.  The  other  enemy
will  be  the  habit  of  a  vagabond  life,  which  they  must  infallibly
acquire  during  the  process  of  removal.  It  will  be  necessary  for
Tchitchikoff  to  keep  them  constantly  before  his  eyes,  and  to
govern  them  with  all  due  strictness ;  punish  them  for  each
shortcoming,  and  not  depute  this  to  any  other  person,  but  slap
their  faces  and  whip  them  himself,  whenever  it  is  required."

"  Why  must  Tchitchikoff  administer  castigation  in  person  ?
He  might  find  an  overseer."

"  Yes,  find  an  overseer  who  can !    Overseers  are  all  rascals  !  "

"Rascals,  because  the  master  does  not  occupy  himself  with
his  affairs."

"That  is  true,"  broke  in  several.  "An  owner  ought  to
know  something,  at  least,  about  the  management  of  his  estate,
and  be  able  to  discriminate  between  people  :  then  he  would
always  have  a  good  steward."

But  the  director  of  the  imperial  factories  declared  that  a  good
steward  was  not  to  be  found  for  less  than  five  thousand  roubles.
And  then  the  president  of  the  court  said  that  one  might  be  had
for  three  thousand.  But  the  director  retorted,  "  Where  will
you  find  him  ?  In  your  own  nose  ?  "  Whereupon  the  president
said,  "  No,  not  in  my  nose,  but  in  this  very  district — namely,
Piotr  Piotrovitch  Samoiloff :  that's  the  overseer  whom  Tchitchi-
koff needs  for  his  moujiks."

Many  of  the  townspeople  entered  heartily  into  Tchitchikoff's
position,  and  the  difficulties  of  removing  so  large  a  number  of
serfs  greatly  alarmed  them  ;  they  even  began  to  feel  much
afraid  that  a  revolt  should  break  out  among  such  uneasy  sub-
jects as  Tchitchikoff's  serfs.  Thereupon  the  chief  of  police
remarked  that  there  was  no  mutiny  to  be  apprehended  ;  that
the  captain-ispravnik  existed  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  any
rising ;  that,  if  the  captain-ispravnik  could  not  go  himself,  he


THE   GOVERNOR  S   BALL.  129

need  only  send  his  cap,  and  that  this  cap  alone  would  drive  the
serfs  to  the  very  localit)^  fixed  upon  for  colonisation.  Many
staked  their  estates  that  this  would  exterminate  the  spirit  of
rebellion  in  Tchitchikoff's  unruly  peasants.  Opinions  varied
greatly  :  some  there  were  who  pronounced  in  favour  of  military
sternness  and  severity,  even  if  it  were  a  little  excessive  ;  others
counselled  mildness.  The  chief  of  police  remarked  that  a  sacred
responsibility  now  rested  on  TchitchikofF ;  that  the  latter  might
become,  in  a  certain  sense,  a  father  to  his  serfs,  as  he  expressed
it ;  he  might  even  lead  them  to  a  beneficent  state  of  culture,  and
in  this  connection  he  spoke  in  laudatory  terms  of  the  Lancas-
trian method  of  mutual  instruction.

In  this  manner  did  the  townspeople  discuss  and  talk  the
matter  over,  and  many,  moved  by  sympathy,  even  communi-
cated their  advice  to  TchitchikofF,  and  actually  went  so  far  as  to
offer  a  convoy  for  the  safe  transport  of  the  peasants.  Tchitchi-
kofF thanked  them  for  their  advice,  saying  that  he  would  not
fail  to  adopt  it  in  case  of  need,  but  he  declined  the  escort  in  a
decided  manner,  saying  that  it  was  not  in  the  least  necessary  ;
that  the  serfs  whom  he  had  purchased  were  of  an  exceedingly
peaceable  disposition ;  that  they  were  themselves  very  well
disposed  towards  the  idea  of  removal,  and  that  no  revolt  could
possibly  arise  among  them  under  any  circumstances  whatever.
All  these  discussions  and  expressions  of  opinion  produced,  how-
ever, the  very  happiest  results  that  TchitchikofF  could  possibly
desire.  They  gave  rise,  in  fact,  to  reports  that  he  was  neither
more  nor  less  than  a  great  millionaire.  The  inhabitants  of  the
town  had  already  fallen  heartily  in  love  with  Tchitchikoff,  even
without  this,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  first  chapter ;  but  now,
after  all  these  rumours,  they  became  still  more  deeply  attached
to  him.  Moreover,  they  were  good-natured  people,  if  the  truth
must  be  told,  and  lived  together  in  harmony,  treating  each
other  in  a  friendly  fashion  vnth  kind-hearted  simplicity  and
gentleness.  They  were  also  much  given  to  hospitality,  and  the
man  who  had  tasted  their  bread  and  salt,  or  who  had  sat  out  an
evening  at  whist  with  them,  became,  in  a  certain  way,  their
relative ;  and  this  was  especially  the  case  with  Tchitchikofi\
with  his  engaging  manners  and  qualities,  for  he  was  really  pos-
sessed of  the  great  power  of  pleasing.  They  took  such  a  fancy  to
him  that  he  actually  could  not  devise  a  means  of  tearing  himself
from  the  city  ;  all  that  he  heard  was,  "  Come,  one  little  week  ;
live  with  us  just  one  little  week  longer,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  "  In
a  word,  he  was  petted  to  death,  as  the  expression  runs.

And  yet  more  worthy  of  note  (indeed,  a  complete  subject  of

I


130  DEAD    SOULS.

surprise)  was  the  impression  whicli  TcliitcbikofF  produced  on
the  ladies.  Previously  they  had  had  very  little  to  say  about
him,  although  they  had  done  him  full  justice,  so  far  as  his
agreeable  manners  in  society  were  concerned ;  however,  from
the  instant  when  reports  as  to  his  being  a  millionaire  became
current,  they  discovered  other  qualities  in  him.  The  ladies
were  not  in  the  least  interested  parties,  however :  the  word
"millionaire"  was  to  blame  for  it  all.  Not  the  millionaire
himself,  but  simply  the  word ;  for  there  is  something  about
the  very  sound  of  this  word,  more  than  about  any  money-bag,
which  produces  an  effect  equally  on  rascally  people,  on  people
who  are  neither  one  thing  nor  the  other,  and  upon  good
people — in  short,  it  takes  effect  upon  everybody.  The  million-
aire has  this  advantage — that  he  can  see  baseness — pure,
utterly  disinterested  baseness — founded  upon  no  calculations
whatever.  Many  know  very  well  that  they  will  receive  nothing
from  him,  and  that  thay  have  no  right  to  receive  anything ;  but
they  will  infallibly  anticipate  his  desires,  laugh,  pull  off  their
hats,  and  force  an  invitation  for  themselves  to  the  dinner  where
they  know  that  the  millionaire  is  asked.  It  is  impossible  to  assert
that  this  tender  leaning  towards  baseness  was  experienced  by
the  ladies:  still,  there  were  many  drawing-rooms  where  they
began  to  say,  that,  of  course,  Tchitchikoflf  was  not  such  a  very
handsome  man,  but  that  he  possessed  the  exact  amount  of  good
looks  which  are  requisite  in  a  man  ;  that  if  he  had  been  a  little
thicker  or  fatter,  it  would  have  been  unbecoming.  In  this  con-
nection something  was  said  about  a  thin  man  which  was  of  a
rather  offensive  character, — that  he  was  in  the  nature  of  a  tooth-
pick, and  indeed  not  a  man  at  all.  Additions  of  various  sorts
were  made  to  the  attire  of  the  ladies.  There  was  a  throng  and
almost  a  crush  in  the  bazaar;  and  a  procession  was  even  formed,
to  such  a  degree  had  equipages  flocked  there.  The  merchants
were  amazed  to  find  that  some  pieces  of  goods  which  they  had
brought  from  the  yearly  fair,  and  which  they  had  not  been  able
to  get  rid  of  on  account  of  their  rather  high  price,  had  now  come
into  fashion  all  at  once,  and  that  customers  fairly  tore  them
from  each  other's  hands.  One  dame  was  observed  during  mass
to  have  such  a  train  to  her  dress,  that  it  monopolised  half  the
church,  so  that  the  chief  of  police  of  the  district,  who  chanced
to  be  present,  gave  orders  that  the  common  people  were  to  move
farther  off — that  is  to  say,  nearer  to  the  vestibule — in  order  that .
her  excellency's  robes  might  not  be  damaged.

Even  Tchitchikoff  himself  could  not  but  observe  this  unusual
attention  to  some  extent.     Once,  on  returning  home,  he  found


THE    GOVERNOR  S    BALL.  131

a  letter  on  his  table.  Whence  it  had  come,  and  "who  had
brought  it,  it  was  impossible  to  discover.  The  inn  servant
simply  declared  that  it  had  been  brought  there,  and  that  ho  had
been  told  not  to  mention  by  whom.  This  letter  began  in  very
decided  terms,  as  follows  :  "  Yes,  I  must  write  to  you  !  "  Then
something  was  said  about  the  existence  of  a  secret  sympathy
between  souls.  This  truth  was  enforced  by  some  points  of
exclamation  which  took  up  nearly  half  a  line.  Then  followed
some  remarks  which  were  so  very  striking,  that  we  consider  it
indispensable  to  quote  them  :  "  What  is  our  life  ?  A  vale  in
■which  sorrows  have  taken  up  their  abode."  "  What  is  the
world  ■?  A  throng  of  people  without  feeling."  The  writer  then
informed  him  that  she  was  bedewing  with  her  tears  some  lines
traced  by  her  tender  mother,  who  had  been  dead  for  twenty-five
years.  Next  she  invited  Tchitchikoff  to  go  with  her  to  the
wilderness  ;  to  abandon  for  ever  the  city,  where  people  could  not
benefit  by  the  air  in  their  stifling  quarters.  The  end  of  the
letter  expressed  absolute  despair,  and  it  concluded  with  these
words : —

"  Two  turtle-doves  will  show  thee
My  ashes  cold  and  dried ;
With  yearning  coos  will  tell  thee,
That  'twas,  alas  !  in  tears  I  died."

The  last  line  would  not  scan,  but  that  mattered  nothing :  the
letter  was  composed  in  the  taste  of  the  period.  There  was  no
signature :  neither  was  there  name  or  sui'name,  nor  even  the
month  or  date.  The  writer  merely  added  in  the  postscript  that
Tchitchikofl*'s  own  heart  must  divine  who  had  penned  it,  and
that  the  original  would  be  present  at  the  governor's  ball,  which
was  to  take  place  on  the  morrow.

This  interested  him  greatly.  There  was  something  so  attrac-
tive about  this  Anonyma,  something  which  appealed  so  strongly
.to  his  curiosity,  that  he  read  her  epistle  for  a  second,  and  even
for  a  third  time,  and  finally  said,  "  Well,  I  am  curious  to  know
who  wrote  such  a  thing  !  "  In  a  word,  the  matter  had  evidently
become  serious  :  he  pondered  and  thought  it  over  for  more  than
an  hour  ;  at  last,  flinging  open  his  arms,  and  dropping  his  head,
he  said,  "  That  letter  is  very,  very  fancifully  written  !  "  Then,
of  course,  the  letter  was  folded  up,  and  laid  away  in  his  dressing
case,  in  company  with  some  theatre-bills  and  a  wedding  invita-
tion, which  he  had  preserved  for  seven  years  in  the  same
position  and  the  same  place.  A  little  later,  indeed,  an  invi-
tation to  a  ball  at  the  governor's  was  brought  to  him — a  matter
of  very  common   occurrence   in'  provincial   towns.     Wherever


132  DEAD   SOULS.

there  is  a  governor,  balls  are  given ;  otherwise  the  proper  alle-
giance and  respect  of  the  nobility  could  not  be  maintained.

Our  hero's  appearance  at  the  ball  produced  a  remarkable
effect.  Every  one  who  was  present  turned  to  greet  him, — one
with  his  hand  full  of  cards ;  another  at  the  most  interesting
point  in  a  conversation,  just  as  he  was  saying,  "  But  the  lower
district  judge  replied  to  that  " —  But  whatever  the  district  judge
did  reply,  it  was  flung  on  one  side,  and  the  speaker  hastened
forward  with  a  welcome  for  our  hero :  "  Pavel  Ivanovitch !
Ah,  my  Heavens  !  Dear  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  Most  respected
Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  My  soul,  Pavel  Ivanovitch!  Here  you  are,
Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  Here  he  is,  our  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  Permit
me  to  press  your  hand,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  Give  him  here :  I
will  kiss  him  as  fervently  as  possible,  my  precious  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch !  "  Tchitchikoff  found  himself  in  the  embrace  of  several
persons  at  once.  He  had  not  succeeded  in  wholly  freeing  him-
self from  the  embrace  of  the  president  of  the  court,  when  he
found  himself  in  that  of  the  chief  of  police ;  then  the  chief  of
police  handed  him  over  to  the  inspector  of  the  medical  insti-
tution;  the  inspector  of  the  medical  institution  to  the.  brandy
farmer ;  the  brandy  farmer  to  the  architect.  The  governor,  who
was  at  that  moment  standing  beside  a  lady,  and  holding  in  |one
hand  a  bonbon  motto  and  a  Bolognese  spaniel,  flung  both  motto
and  spaniel  on  the  floor  as  soon  as  he  caught  sight  of  him,
whereupon  the  dog  set  up  a  howl.  In  a  word,  our  hero  shed
abroad  great  joy  and  mirth.  Upon  every  countenance  there
beamed  either  satisfaction  or  at  least  the  reflection  of  the
universal  satisfaction.  Thus  it  is  with  the  faces  of  oflicials
during  their  superior's  visits  of  inspection,  after  their  first  fear
has  passed  off,  when  they  perceive  that  the  state  of  things
satisfies  him,  and  when  he  has  at  last  been  graciously  pleased
to  jest ;  that  is,  to  say  a  few  words  with  an  amiable  smirk.
The  officials  who  find  themselves  close  to  him  laugh  in  double
measure  at  this  ;  even  those  who  have  but  barely  heard  the
words  which  he  has  uttered,  laugh;  and,  last  of  all,  a  man
who  stands  afar  off,  near  the  door,  at  the  very  entrance,  per-
haps,— some  police-officer,  who  has  never  laughed  all  his  life
since  his  birth,  and  who,  hitherto,  has  only  shown  his  fist  to
the  people, — even  he,  by  the  irresistible  law  of  reflection  ex-
hibits some  sort  of  a  smile,  although  this  smile  may  resemble
the  expression  on  the  face  of  a  man  who  is  on  the  point  of
sneezing  after  a  pinch  of  strong  snuff'.

\^  Our  hero  replied  to  each  and  all,  and  was  conscious  of  his
unusual  skill ;  he  bowed  to  right  and  to  left,  somewhat  on  ope


\  "^  jOfi^'^^


THE    GOVERNOR  S    15ALL.  133

side,  according  to  his  custom,  but  with  perfect  ease,  so  that  he
enchanted  everyone.  The  ladies  immediately  surrounded  him
in  a  glittering  garland,  and  brought  with  them  a  perfect  cloud
of  every  sort  of  perfume :  one  breathed  forth  roses,  another
smelt  of  spring  and  violets,  a  third  was  thoroughly  permeated
with  mignonette.  Tchitchikofl'  simply  raised  his  nose  in  the
air,  and  snified.  There  was  a  great  variety  of  taste  exhibited  in
the  ladies'  costumes  :  their  muslins  and  satins  were  of  such  pale,
fashionable  colours,  that  it  is  impossible  to  put  names  to  them  ;
bands  of  ribbon,  and  bouque^  of  llowers,  fluttered  here  and
there  on  the  dresses,  in  the  most  picturesque  disorder,  although
many  a  very  orderly  head  had  laboured  over  this  disorder  ;
the  airy  head-dresses  only  clung  on  by  one  ear,  so  to  speak,  and
seemed  to  say,  "  Ei,  I  shall  fly  away !  'tis  a  pity  that  I  cannot
bear  my  beauty  away  with  me  !  "  The  ladies'  bodices,  more-
over, fitted  them  tightly,  and  presented  the  most  vigorous  and
pleasing  forms  to  the  eye.

It  is  necessary  to  state,  that  all  the  ladies  of  N were

rather  plump  ;  but  they  laced  themselves  so  artfully,  and  had
such  agreeable  ways,  that  their  rotundity  was  not  noticed  at  all.
Everything  about  their  appearance  had  been  the  subject  of
great  thought,  attention,  and  care :  their  necks  and  shoulders
were  uncovered  just  as  much  as  was  necessary,  and  not  a  bit
more  ;  each  one  exhibited  her  possessions  up  to  that  point
where,  according  to  her  own  convictions,  she  felt  persuaded
that  they  were  fitted  to  enslave  the  men :  all  the  rest  was
concealed  with  remarkable  taste ;  either  some  adornment  of
ribbon,  and  lighter  than  the  little  puffs  which  are  called
"kisses,"  encircled  the  neck  in  an  ethereal  way,  or  else  little
vandyked  layers  of  thin  cambric,  known  under  the  name  of
"modesties,"  emerged  from  the  dress  behind  the  shoulders.
These  "  modesties  "  covered  certain  things  both  behind  and
before  which  were  not  calculated  to  make  a  man  feel  unhappy,
while,  at  the  same  time,  they  made  him  suspect  the  existence  of
the  destroying  objects.  Long  gloves  were  drawn  up  almost  to
the  sleeves,  but  deliberately  left  bare  the  attractive  portions  of
the  arms  above  the  elbows,  many  of  which  were  of  an  enviable
plumpness  :  in  some  cases  the  kid  gloves  had  burst,  while  being
encouraged  to  ascend  higher.  In  short,  it  seemed  as  though  on
all  of  them  was  written,  "  This  is  not  the  provinces;  this  is
the  capital;  this  is  Paris  itself!"  Only  here  and  there  did
some  head-dress,  hitherto  unseen  upon  earth,  thrust  itself
forward,  or  even  some  feather,  possibly  a  peacock's,  arranged
quite  in  opposition  to  the  fashion,  and  in  accordance  with  indi-


134  DEAD    SOULS.

vidual  taste.  But  this  is  not  to  be  avoided ;  such  is  the  nature
of  a  provincial  town ;  it  will  infallibly  break  out  in  some  spot  or
other.

However,  as  Tchitchikoff  stood  before  the  ladies  he  wondered,
"  But  which  one  of  them  is  the  wi'iter  of  that  letter?  "  And
then  he  thrust  his  nose  forward  to  look  more  attentively ;
directly  before  it  there  was  an  array  of  elbows,  trimmings,
sleeves,  ends  of  ribbons,  perfumed  tuckers  and  gowns.  The
gallopade  was  being  danced  at  a  furious  rate  :  the  wife  of  the
postmaster,  the  captaifi-ispravnik,  a  lady  with  a  blue  feather,  a
lady  with  a  white  feather,  the  Georgian  Prince  Tchipkhaikhilid-
zefi",  an  official  from  Petersburg,  an  official  from  Moscow,  a
Frenchman,— Coucou,  —  Perkhunovsky,  Berebendovsky,  they
all  had  risen  and  joined  in.

Tchitchikoff  soon  became  utterly  bewildered  in  his  efforts  to
decide  which  of  the  ladies  was  the  writer  of  the  letter.  On  en-
deavouring to  fix  a  penetrating  glance  on  the  women,  he  became
aware,  that,  on  their  part,  something  was  being  expressed  which
sent  both  hope  and  sweet  pain  deep  down  into  the  heart  of  a
poor  mortal,  so  that  he  said  at  last,  "No,  it  is  utterly  impos-
sible to  guess."  This  did  not,  however,  in  any  way  diminish  the
cheerful  frame  of  mind  in  which  he  found  himself.  He  ex-
changed a  few  agreeable  words  with  the  ladies,  in  an  easy  and
skilful  manner ;  approached  one  and  another  with  a  tripping,
mincing  gait,  as  is  generally  done  by  little  old  dandies  on  their
high  heels,  which  are  called  "mice's  horses,"  as  they  trip
briskly  among  the  ladies.  After  tripping  to  right  and  left  with
skilful  turns,  he  gave  a  scrape  of  the  foot  in  the  shape  of  a  short
tail,  or  a  comma.  The  ladies  were  greatly  pleased,  and  not  only
discovered  in  him  a  large  number  of  amiable  and  agreeable
qualities,  but  began  to  perceive  a  noble  expression  on  his  counte-
nance— something  martial  and  warlike — which,  as  it  is  well
known,  is  extremely  pleasing  to  women.  They  even  began  to
quarrel  a  little  over  him.  On  perceiving  that  he  tarried  near  the
door,  some  of  them  made  haste  to  occupy  seats  as  close  to  the
door  as  possible  ;  and  when  one  of  them  succeeded  in  effecting
this  before  the  others,  there  all  but  ensued  an  exceedingly
unpleasant  scene  ;  and  many  who  would  have  liked  to  do
the  same  thing  themselves,  found  such  boldness  extremely
shocking.

Tchitchikoff"  was  so  occupied  by  his  conversation  with  the
ladies,  or,  rather,  the  ladies  so  occupied  and  surrounded  him
with  their  conversation,  indulging  in  a  vast  number  of  the  best-
planned  and  refined  allegories,  which  all  were  bound  to  guess,


THE   GOVERNOR  S   BALL.  135

and  which  made  the  perspiration  start  out  upon  his  brow,  that  he
forgot  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  politeness,  and  ad-
dress his  hostess  first  of  all.  He  only  recalled  it  when  he  heard
the  voice  of  the  governor's  wife,  who  had  been  standing  before
him  for  some  moments  already.  This  lady  said  to  him,  in  a
rather  flattering  and  roguish  voice,  with  an  amiable  shake  of  the
head,  "  Ah,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  so  you  are  here  !  "

It  is  impossible  to  reproduce  the  next  words  of  the  governor's
wife  with  accuracy,  but  something  amiable  was  said  by  her  in  the
spirit  in  which  the  ladies  and  cavaUers  express  themselves  in
the  novels  of  our  society  writers — those  gentlemen  who  are  so
fond  of  describing  drawing-rooms,  and  who  plume  themselves  on
their  knowledge  of  the  highest  "  tone  " — something  in  the  strain
of,  "  Have  the  others  taken  such  possession  of  your  heart  that
there  is  no  longer  any  room  in  it,  not  even  the  smallest  corner,
for  those  whom  you  have  so  pitilessly  forgotten  ?  "  Our  hero
instantly  turned  to  the  governor's  wife,  and  was  on  the  point  of
making  her  a  reply  which  would  probably  have  proved  in  no  wise
inferior  to  those  which  are  perpetrated  in  fashionable  novels  by
the  Zvouskys,  Linskys,  Lidins,  Gremins,  and  all  the  other
clever  military  men,  when,  chancing  to  raise  his  eyes  unexpec-
tedly, he  suddenly  paused,  as  though  benumbed.

The  governor's  wife  was  not  standing  alone  before  him  :  she
held  by  the  hand  a  young  girl  of  sixteen — a  fresh  blonde,  with
delicate  and  well-formed  features :  a  little  pointed  chin,  a  be-
witchingly  rounded,  oval  face,  such  as  an  artist  would  have
chosen  as  a  model  for  the  Madonna,  and  such  as  is  rarely  en-
countered in  Russia,  where  everything  is  fond  of  appearing  in
broad  forms — mowiitains  and  forests  and  steppes,  and  faces  and
lips  and  feet — the  v%yy  little  blonde  whom  he  had  met  on  the
highway  as  he  was*  leaving  Nozdreft"s,  when,  through  the
stupidity  of  their  coachmen,  or  of  their  horses,  their  equipages
had  come  so  strangely  into  collision,  so  entangling  the  harness
that  uncle  Mityai  and  uncle  Minyai  had  had  to  straighten  mat-
ters. Tchitchikoff  now  became  so  confused  that  he  could  not
utter  a  single  suitable  word  ;  indeed  he  muttered — the  deuce
knows  what,  but  something  which  neither  a  Gremin,  nor  a
Zvonsky,  nor  a  Lidin  Avould  have  said.

"  You  do  not  know  my  daughter  yet,"  said  the  gover-
nor's wife ;  "  she  is  a  school-girl,  and  has  only  just  returned
home."

But  our  hero  replied  that  he  had  already  had  the  unexpected
pleasure  of  making  her  acquaintance.  Then  he  tried  to  add
something  more,  but  failed.    The  governor's  wife  said  two   or


136  DEAD   SOUI.S.

three  words,  and  then  went  off  with  her  daughter  to  the  other
end  of  the  apartment  to  her  other  guests  :  while  Tchitchikoff
continued  to  stand  motionless  in  the  same  place,  like  a  man  who
has  gone  cheerfully  out  into  the  street  in  order  to  take  a  walk,
with  eyes  disposed  to  look  at  everything,  and  who  has  suddenly
stopped  stockstill,  as  though  he  had  forgotten  something.  More
stupid  than  that  man  no  one  can  possibly  be.  In  an  instant
his  agreeable  expression  has  vanished  from  his  face  :  he  strives
to  recollect  what  it  is  that  he  has  forgotten.  Is  it  his  handker-
chief ?  No,  his  handkerchief  is  in  his  pocket.  Is  it  his  money  ?
But  no,  his  money  is  also  in  his  pocket.  He  seems  to  have  every-
thing about  him  ;  and  yet  some  unknown  spirit  whispers  to  him,
in  his  ear,  that  he  has  forgotten  something.  And  so  he  gazes
abstractedly  and  gloomily  at  the  moving  throng  before  him — at
the  flying  equipages;  at  the  caps  and  guns  of  a  passing  regi-
ment ;  at  a  sign-board ;  and  withal  he  sees  nothing  distinctly.
Thus  also  did  Tchitchikoff  become  a  stranger  to  all  that  was
going  on  around  him.  At  this  same  moment,  a  multitude  of
hints  and  questions,  all  full  of  refinement  and  amiability,  were
being  addressed  to  him  by  the  perfumed  mouths  of  the  ladies  :
"Is  it  permitted  to  us  poor  dwellers  on  the  earth  to  be  so  bold
as  to  ask  you  what  you  are  thinking  about  ?  "  "  Where  lie  those
blissful  regions  in  which  your  thoughts  are  hovering  ?  "  "  May
we  know  the  name  of  her  who  has  plunged  you  into  this  sweet
valley  of  meditation  ?  "

However,  our  hero  replied  carelessly,  their  agreeable  phrases
being  as  much  wasted  as  though  they  had  been  cast  into  the
water.  He  was  even  so  impolite  that  he  speedily  deserted
them,  and  went  away  to  another  part  of  the  room,  being
desirous  of  seeing  where  the  governor's  wife  had  gone  with  her
daughter.  But  the  ladies,  it  appeared,  were  not  willing  to  re-
lease him  so  quickly.  Each  one  of  them  inwardly  resolved  to
employ  all  those  feminine  weapons  which  are  so  dangerous  to
our  hearts,  and  to  set  all  their  best  devices  in  motion.  Each
of  them  took  an  inward  vow  that  she  would  be  as  fascinating  as
possible  in  the  dance,  and  show  off  her  best  points  in  all  their
brilliancy.  The  postmaster's  wife,  as  she  waltzed,  drooped  her
head  on  one  side  in  a  very  languishing  way,  as  though  she  really
were  listening  to  something  supernatural.  One  extremely  charm-
ing woman,  who  had  not  come  with  any  intention  of  dancing —
being  precluded,  as  she  herself  expressed  it,  by  a  little  incom-
modity  in  the  shape  of  a  small  corn  on  her  right  foot,  in  conse-
quence of  which  she  had  even  been  forced  to  don  soft  shoes —
could  not  resist,  however,  but  took  a  few  turns  in  her  cloth


THE    GOVERNOR  S    BALL.  137

foot-geai-,  simply  to  prevent  the  postmaster's  wife  from  getting
too  many  conceited  ideas  into  her  head.

However  all  this  by  no  means  produced  upon  Tchitchikoff  the
effect  which  the  women  had  relied  upon.  He  did  not  even
glance  at  the  circle  thus  formed  ;  but,  rising  incessantly  on  tip-
toe, he  gazed  over  their  heads,  in  endeavour  to  see  where  the
fascinating  blonde  had  gone.  He  also  bent  down,  and  stared
between  their  backs  and  shoulders ;  and  at  length  he  caught
sight  of  his  charmer,  sitting  beside  her  mother,  over  whom
something  in  the  nature  of  an  Oriental  turban  with  a  feather
was  waving  very  grandly.  Then  it  seemed  as  though  our  hero
wanted  to  take  his  beauty  by  storm.  Either  the  spring  weather
■was  taking  effect  upon  him,  or  someone  pushed  him  from  be-
hind ;  at  all  events,  he  made  his  way  forward  with  great  deci-
■  sion,  and  paying  no  heed  to  anyone.  The  farmer  of  the  brandy
revenues  received  such  a  thrust  from  him  that  he  tottered,  and
barely  held  his  own  on  one  foot ;  indeed,  had  it  not  been  for
this,  he  would  most  assuredly  have  knocked  down  a  whole  row
of  people.  The  postmaster  also  stepped  back,  and  stared  at  our
friend  in  amazement,  mingled  with  delicate  irony  ;  but  Tchitchi-
koff never  glanced  at  him  :  he  only  saw  the  little  blonde,  pull-
ing on  a  long  glove,  in  the  distance,  and  doubtless  burning
with  a  wish  to  launch  her  flight  over  the  waxed  floor.  Four
couples  had  already  begun  the  mazurka  in  one  corner  :  their
heels  tapped  the  floor ;  and  a  staff-captain  was  toilmg  with
mind  and  body,  with  arms  and  legs,  executing  such  steps
as  no  one  else  ever  executed,  even  in  a  dream.  Tchitchikoff
slipped  past  the  mazurka,  almost  on  the  dancers'*very  heels,
and  made  straight  for  the  spot  where  sat  the  governor's  wife
and  her  daughter.  Still  he  finally  approached  them  very
timidly,  and  became  confused,  exhibiting  a  certain  awkwardness
in  all  his  movements.

It  is  impossible  to  say  with  certainty  whether  the  sentiment
of  love  had  been  awakened  in  our  hero :  it  is  even  a  matter  of
doubt  whether  gentlemen  of  that  description — that  is  to  say,
gentlemen  who  are  neither  fat  nor  thin — are  capable  of  loving.
Nevertheless,  there  was  something  strange  about  this, — some-
thing which  he  could  not  very  well  explain  to  himself  :  it  seemed
to  him,  as  he  afterwards  confessed  to  himself,  that  the  whole
ball,  with  all  its  chatter  and  noise,  had,  for  several  minutes,
retreated  far  into  the  distance ;  the  fiddles  and  horns  had
sounded  from  somewhere  beyond  the  mountains  ;  and  all  was
covered  with  a  misty  veil,  like  a  carelessly  painted  field  in  a
picture  ;  and  from  out  of  this  misty  and  negligently  sketched


133  DEAD    SOULS.

background  there  stood  out,  clear  and  Avell  defined,  the  delicate
features  of  the  charming  blonde :  her  little  oval  face  ;  her  slender,
very  slender  form, —  such  as  girls  retain  for  the  first  few  months
after  they  are  released  from  school ;  her  white  and  almost  plain
gown,  which  clothed  her  slight,  shapely  young  limbs  so  lightly
and  gracefully,  defining  them  in  pure  outlines.  She  seemed  to
him  like  some  admirable  toy  cleverly  turned  from  ivory :
she  alone  stood  out  white,  transparent,  and  bright  from  amid
the  troublous  opaque  throng.

Evidently,  this  is  the  way  things  go  on  in  the  world ;  evi-
dently, even  Tchitchikofi's  are  converted  into  poets  for  a  few
minutes  in  the  course  of  their  lives.  Perhaps,  though,  the  word
poet  is  too  strong.  At  all  events,  he  felt  himself  like  something
in  the  nature  of  a  young  man — almost  a  hussar.  Perceiving
an  empty  chair  beside  the  young  beauty,  he  desired  to  take
possession  of  it.  The  conversation  did  not  make  much  progress
at  first,  but  afterwards  it  went  very  well ;  and  he  even  began  to
produce  an  efi"ect.  In  fact,  the  little  blonde  actually  began  to
yawn  while  our  hero  was  telling  his  tales.  He  did  not  notice  it
in  the  least,  however ;  but  he  related  a  number  of  agreeable
things,  which  he  had  already  told  on  similar  occasions,  in
various  places.

All  the  ladies  were  now  thoroughly  displeased  with  Tchitchi-
koff's  behaviour.  One  of  them  walked  past  him,  expressly  for
the  purpose  of  letting  him  see  how  she  felt,  and  even  brushed
the  little  blonde,  in  a  very  impertinent  manner,  with  the  heavy
rouleau  of  her  dress,  and  so  arranged  the  scarf  which  was  flutter-
ing about  her  shoulders,  that  the  end  of  it  flourished  into  the
girl's  face  ;  at  the  same  moment,  there  proceeded  from  the  mouth
of  some  ladies  in  the  rear  a  very  biting  and  vicious  remark,  in
company  with  an  odour  of  violets.  But  he  either  did  not  hear
it,  or  pretended  that  he  did  not ;  and  this  was  not  right,  for  the
opinions  of  ladies  should  be  prized.  He  repented  of  this,  but
later  on,  and  consequently,  too  late.

Indignation,  which  was  perfectly  just  in  every  respect,  now
took  possession  of  the  ladies,  and  was  depicted  on  their  faces.
However  great  may  have  been  Tchitchikoff's  weight  in  society,
although  he  was  a  millionaire,  and  nobility  was  expressed — and
even  something  martial  and  military — on  his  countenance,  yet
there  are  things  which  ladies  will  not  forgive  any  man  for,  be  he
who  he  may;  and  when  that  is  the  case — why,  there's  the
end  of  him.  There  are  cases  when  a  woman,  however  weak
and  insipid  her  character  may  be,  in  comparison  with  that  of  a
man,  suddenly  becomes  firmer  not  only  than  a  man,  but  firmer


THE   governor's   BALL.  ]29

than  anything  in  the  whole  world.  The  scorn  expressed,  almost
unintentionally,  by  Tchitchikoff,  restored  among  the  ladies  that
spirit  of  concord  which  had  almost  vanished,  in  consequence  of
their  mutual  jealousy.  The  few  dry  and  commonplace  words
which  they  involuntarily  uttered  contained  sharp  insinuations.
To  complete  the  disaster,  one  of  the  young  men  composed  on
the  spot  some  of  those  satirical  verses  about  the  dancers,  without
which,  as  is  well  known,  hardly  any  provincial  ball  passes  off.
These  verses  were  instantly  attributed  to  Tchitchikoff.  The
indignation  waxed  fiercer,  and  the  ladies  began  to  talk  about
him  in  the  various  corners,  in  the  most  unpleasant  manner ;  as
for  the  poor  schoolgirl,  she  was  utterly  annihilated,  and  sen-
tence was  pronounced  upon  her  at  once.

But  in  the  meantime,  a  surprise  of  the  most  disagreeable  sort
was  in  preparation  for  our  hero.  At  the  very  moment  when
the  pretty  blonde  was  yawning,  and  he  was  relating  to  her  various
incidents  which  had  happened  to  him  at  divers  times,  and  even
touching  lightly  on  the  Greek  philosopher  Diogenes,  Nozdreff"
made  his  appearance  from  the  last  room  in  the  suite.  He  was
in  a  joyous,  merry  mood,  and  came  arm  in  arm  with  the  pro-
curator, whom  he  had  probably  been  dragging  about  for  some
time  already ;  for  the  poor  procurator  was  bending  his  heavy
brows  in  every  direction,  as  though  endeavouring  to  devise
some  means  of  ridding  himself  of  this  friendly  promenade.  In
fact,  it  was  intolerable.  NozdreH'  had  sipped  courage  with  two
cups  of  tea,  with  rum,  of  course,  and  had  been  lying  unmerci-
fully. On  catching  sight  of  him  at  a  distance,  Tchitchikofi'  even
made  up  his  mind  to  a  sacrifice — that  is,  to  abandon  his  enviable
position,  and  to  effect  as  speedy  a  retreat  as  possible  ;  for  this
encounter  boded  no  good  to  him.  But  as  ill-luck  would  have  it,
the  governor  came  up  at  that  moment,  expressed  extraordinary,
delight  at  having  found  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  and  detained  him,
begging  him  to  act  as  judge  in  a  dispute  of  his  with  two  ladies
on  the  question,  "  Whether  woman's  love  were  lasting,  or  not  ?"
However,  in  the  meantime,  Nozdreff"  had  caught  sight  of  our
hero,  and  made  straight  for  him.

"Ah,  ah!  the  Ivhersonese  landowner !  the  Khersonese  land-
owner! "  he  shouted,  marching  up,  and  bursting  into  a  laugh,
which  made  his  cheeks,  fresh  and  glowing  as  a  rose  in  spring,
quiver:  "  How  now  '?  have  you  bought  any  more  dead  souls  ?
Surely,  you  do  not  know,  your  excellency,"  he  screamed,  turn-
ing to  the  governor:  "this  man  deals  in  dead  souls!  By
Heavens  !  Listen,  Tchitchikoff  :  you  know  that  I  am  speaking
out  of  friendship,  for  you  and  I  are  friends,  and  his  excellency


140  DEAD   SOULS.

here  also.     I  would  like  to  liang  you,  by  Heavens,  I'd  like  to
hang  you  !  "

Tcbitchikoff  did  not  know  where  he  was.

"Will  you  believe  it,  your  excellency?"  went  on  Nozdreff:
"  he  said  to  me, '  Sell  me  your  dead  souls  ; '  and  I  fairly  burst  vnth
laughter !  I  come  here,  and  I  am  told  that  he  has  purchased
three  million  roubles'  worth  of  serfs  for  colonisation.  Colonisa-
tion, indeed  !  he  tried  to  buy  dead  souls  of  me.  Listen,  Tcbit-
chikoff:  you're  a  fraud,  by  Heavens,  a  fraud  !  Here's  his  ex-
cellency here. — It's  true,  isn't  it,  procurator?"

But  the  procurator,  Tcbitcbikoft",  and  even  the  governor  him-
self, were  in  such  confusion,  that  they  found  absolutely  nothing
whatever  to  say  ;  and  in  the  meantime,  Nozdreff,  paying  not  the
least  heed  to  them,  continued  his  half-drunken  speech  :  "  Wait,
my  good  fellow,  you,  you^ — I  shall  not  leave  you  until  I  find
out  why  you  were  buying  dead  souls.  Listen,  Tcbitchikoff,  you
really  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  yourself !  You  know  yourself
that  you  have  no  better  friend  than  I.  And  here's  his  excel-
lency. It's  true,  isn't  it,  procurator?  You  cannot  conceive,
your  excellency,  how  we  are  bound  up  in  each  other  ;  that  is,  it
is  simply  as  though  you  were  to  say,  here, — I  stand  here,  and
you  ask,  '  Nozdreff,  tell  me  on  your  conscience,  which  is  dearer
to  you,  your  own  father,  or  Tcbitchikoff?"  Well,  I  should
answer,  '  Tcbitchikoff,  by  Heavens  !  '  Permit  me,  my  soul,
I  will  give  you  one  kiss. — Pardon  me,  your  excellency;  but  I
must  kiss  bim. — Yes,  Tcbitchikoff ;.  now  don't  resist ;  allow  me
to  imprint  just  one  little  kiss  vipon  thy  snow-white  cheek  !"

Nozdreff  was  so  vigorously  repulsed,  however,  as  he  at-
tempted to  bestow  his  kiss,  that  he  came  near  flying  full-
length  on  the  floor.  Everyone  bad  retreated  from  him,  and
listened  no  more.  But  his  remarks  about  dead  souls  had  been
uttered  at  the  top  of  his  voice,  and  had  been  accompanied  by
such  boisterous  laughter,  that  they  had  attracted  the  attention,
even  of  those  who  were  in  the  most  remote  corners  of  the  room.
This  news  seemed  so  terrible,  that  all  paused  with  a  sort  of
wooden,  stupidly  interrogative  expression  on  their  faces.  Tcbit-
chikoff observed  that  several  of  the  ladies  winked  at  each  other,
with  a  malicious,  biting  smile ;  and  there  was  an  equivocal
expression  oh  some  of  their  faces  which  still  further  increased
his  confusion.

That  Nozdreff  was  a  notorious  liar  was  known  to  all ;  and
the  most  utter  nonsense  from  him  would  not  have  been  the
slightest  novelty  :  but  mortal  man — truly,  it  is  hard  to  under-
stand how  a  mortal  is  constructed  :  no  matter  wbat  a  saying


THE    governor's    BALL.  141

may  be,  so  long  as  it  is  a  novelty,  he  instantly  communicates  it  to
another  mortal,  if  only  for  the  sake  of  saying,  "  Just  see  what
lies  are  disseminated!  "  and  the  other  mortal  inclines  his  ear
with  pleasure,  although  he  himself  afterwards  says,  "  Why,  that
is  a  stupid  lie,  which  is  not  worth  noticing !  "  and  then  he  in-
stantly sets  out  to  seek  a  third  mortal,  tells  him  all  about  it,  and
then  they  both  exclaim,  with  noble  indignation,  "  What  a  stupid
lie  !  "  And  all  this  will  infallibly  go  the  rounds  of  the  whole
town  ;  and  all  the  mortals  therein,  no  matter  what  their  number
may  be,  will  inevitably  talk  their  fill,  and  then  confess  that  it
deserves  no  attention  and  is  not  worth  talking  about.

This  apparently  trivial  incident  visibly  disturbed  our  hero.
No  matter  how  stupid  a  fool's  words  may  be,  they  are  oflen
sulficient  to  perturb  a  sensible  man.  Tchitchikoflf  began  to  feel
awkward  and  out  of  place  ;  it  was  exactly  as  though  a  beauti-
fully cleaned  boot  had  been  suddenly  plunged  into  a  muddy,
evil-smelling  puddle  ;  in  short,  it  was  unpleasant,  very  unpleasant
indeed.  He  tried  not  to  think  of  it ;  he  endeavoured  to  divert
his  thoughts,  to  enjoy  himself:  he  sat  down  to  the  whist-table,
but  everything  went  crooked.  Twice  he  made  a  mistake  in  the
suit,  and,  forgetting  that  one  does  not  deal  to  one's  self  third,
he  gave  a  flourish  with  his  hands,  and  proceeded.  The  president
of  the  court  could  not  in  the  least  comprehend  how  it  was  that
Pavel  Ivanovitch,  who  knew  how  to  play  so  well,  and,  one
might  even  say,  delicately,  could  make  such  mistakes,  and  had
even  sacrificed  his  king  of  spades,  upon  which,  to  use  his  own
expression,  he,  the  president,  had  relied  as  upon  a  stone  wall.
Finally,  the  postmaster  and  the  president,  and  even  the  chief  of
police,  as  was  proper,  began  to  jest  over  our  hero,  to  say  that
he  was  in  love,  that  "  We  know  all  about  it :  Pavel  Ivanovitch's
heart  is  bad,  and  we  know  by  whom  it  has  been  wounded."
However,  all  this  did  not  console  him  in  the  least,  try  as  he
would  to  laugh  and  to  jest  in  return.  He  was  not  even  in  a  state
to  unbend  at  supper,  although  the  company  at  table  was  very
agreeable,  and  Nozdrefi'had  been  led  away  long  before  ;  for  even
the  ladies  had  at  length  perceived  that  his  conduct  had  been
quite  too  scandalous.  In  the  middle  of  the  cotillion,  he  had
seated  himself  on  the  floor,  and  began  to  catch  at  the  skirts  of
the  feminine  dancers,  which,  to  use  the  ladies'  expression,  was
unlike  anything  else  that  had  ever  been  heard  of.

The  supper  was  very  gay  :  but  Tchitchikoflf  did  not  even
await  the  end  of  it ;  he  went  home  much  earlier  than  it  was  his
custom  to  go.  There,  in  his  little  chamber,  which  is  so  familiar  to
the  reader,  with  some  drawers  half  blocking  up  the  door,  and  some


142  DEAD   SOULS.

•beetles  peeping  out  of  the  corners  now  and  then,  his  thoughts
and  spirits  became  as  uncomfortable  as  the  uncomfortable  arm-
chair in  which  he  sat.  There  was  a  troubled,  disagreeable
sensation  at  his  heart :  a  sort  of  heavy  void.  "  May  the  deuce
take  all  those  who  originated  balls  !  "  he  said  angrily.  "  Now,
what  the  Fiend  is  there  to  make  merry  about  ?  There  are  bad
crops  and  high  prices  all  over  the  government,  and  yet  they
must  needs  have  a  ball.     Eh,  a  pretty  affair,  truly  !  "

While  our  friend  was  sitting  in  his  uncomfortable  arm-chair
busied  with  his  thoughts,  the  tallow  candle  burned  on  before
him,  its  light  long  since  obscured  by  its  long  black  wick  and
threatening  to  go  out  every  instant ;  while  through  the  window,
the  dull,  dark  night  peeped  in  at  him  on  the  point  of  turning
blue  with  the  approaching  dawn  ;  for  the  cocks  already  crowed
afar.  At  this  very  hour,  too,  in  another  quarter  of  the  town,  an
incident  was  taking  place  which  was  destined  to  increase  the
unpleasantness  of  our  hero's  position.

Along  the  distant  streets  and  alleys  there  rattled  a  very
singular  equipage,  which  aroused  doubt  within  one's  mind  as  to
its  proper  nomenclature.  It  did  not  resemble  a  tarantas,  nor  a
calash,  nor  a  britchka :  it  was  more  like  a  swollen,  fat-cheeked
watermelon  set  upon  wheels.  The  sides  of  the  watermelon —
that  is  to  say,  the  doors,  which  bore  traces  of  yellow  paint —
closed  very  badly,  on  account  of  the  dilapidated  condition  of  the
handles  and  locks  ;  so  they  were  secured  with  strings.  The
watermelon  was  filled  with  chintz  pillows,  sacks  of  grain,
kalatchi,'^'  hokwrld,  skorodumJd,  and  cracknels  of  raised  dough.
A  chicken-pie  and  a  pasty  filled  with  pickled  cucumbers  even
peeped  out  on  the  top  ;  while  the  foot-board  was  occupied  by  an
individual  of  the  lackey  species,  clad  in  a  short  round  jacket  of
variegated  home-made  stuff,  and  an  unkempt  pepper  and  salt
beard,  an  individual  of  the  sort  known  by  the  appellation  of
vialui.f

The  rattle  and  squeak  of  the  iron  clamps  and  the  rusty  screws
as  the  vehicle  passed  along,  awakened  a  watchman  quite  at  the
other  end  of  the  town,  and  this  fellow,  raising  his  halberd,
shouted  at  the  top  of  his  voice  through  his  sleep,  "  Who  goes
there?"  but  perceiving  at  last  that  no  one  was  going  past  him,
and  that  there  was  only  a  rattling  in  the  distance,  he  shook  him-
self by  his  collar,  made  of  some  sort  of  wild  beast's  skin,  and,
stepping  up  to  his  lantern,  he  chastised  it  thoroughly.     Then,

*  Meat  patties.

t  "  Boy,"  in  the  sense  of  servant,  regardless  of  age,  just  as  a  negro
was  formerly  called  a  "boy  "  in  the  South  of  the  United  States,


THE    EMOTIOIS'S   OF    A    SMALL    TOAVX.  143

quitting  bis  halberd  once  more,  be  went  to  sleep  again,  accord-
to  tbe  laws  of  bis  order  of  cbivalry.  Meanwbile  tbe  borses  of
tbe  watermelon  coacb  bad  fallen  down  more  tban  once,  for
tbey  were  not  sbod  ;  and,  besides  it  was  evident  tbat  tbe  ancient
pavement  of  tbe  town  was  not  familiar  to  tbem.  Tbe  kuhiiinaiia,''-
after  making  several  turns  from  street  to  street,  finally  drove
into  an  obscure  lane  leading  past  tbe  little  parish  church  of
St.  Nikolai,  and  baited  before  the  gate  of  tbe  protopope's  house.
From  the  vehicle  then  descended  a  maidservant  wearing  a  ker-
chief and  a  tyeJofjryel(a.\  She  knocked  at  tbe  gate  with  both
fists  as  vigorously  as  though  she  bad  been  a  man.  Then  the
dogs  began  to  bark  ;  and  finally  the  gates,  opening,  ingulfed,
although  with  great  difiiculty,  this  clumsy  travelling  convey-
ance.

Tbe  equipage  entered  a  small  courtyard,  which  was  full  of
wood,  chicken-coops,  and  cages  ;  from  tbe  equipage  then
emerged  a  lady,  who  was  none  other  than  our  friend  the  widow
of  tbe  collegiate  secretary  Korobotcbok.  Shortly  after  our
hero's  departure,  she  had  become  so  uneasy  with  regard  to
any  possible  trickery  on  bis  part,  tbat,  after  losing  her  sleep  for
three  nights  in  succession,  she  bad  made  up  her  mind  to  go  to
town  herself,  and  this  despite  the  fact  tbat  her  horses  were  not
sbod.  She  meant  to  find  out  definitely  what  dead  souls  were
good  for,  and  whether  she  bad  not  committed  a  blunder,  which
God  forbid,  in  selling  them,  perchance,  too  cheaply.  The
eventual  result  of  her  arrival  in  town  will  be  learnt  by  the
reader  from  a  conversation  which  took  place  soon  afterwards
between  two  ladies.  We  will  give  this  conversation  in  the  next
chapter.


CHAPTER  IX.

THE  EMOTIONS  OF  A  SMALL  TOWN.

Ix  the  morning,  even  at  an  earlier  hour  than  was  suitable  for
visits,  a  lady  in  an  elegant  plaid  cloak  emerged  from  tbe  door  of
an  orange-coloured  wooden  mansion  with  blue  columns,  accom-
panied by  a  lackey  in  a  coat  with  numerous  capes,  and  a  gold
band  on  his  glossy  round  hat.
[  *  An  ugly,  heavy,  old-fashioned  coach.  f  A  short,  wann  jacket.


144  DEAD    SOULS.

The  lady,  "with  remarkable  haste,  entered  a  calash  which
stood  at  the  entrance.  The  lackey  immediately  slammed  the
door  after  her,  put  up  the  steps,  and,  seizing  the  strap  behind,
called  out  to  the  coachman,  "Drive  on  !  "  The  lady  had  just
learned  some  news,  and  she  felt  an  unconquerable  desire  to
impart  it  to  her  friends.  She  looked  out  of  the  window  every
instant,  and  saw,  to  her  indescribable  vexation,  that  she  was
still  only  half  way  to  her  destination.  Every  house  seemed
longer  to  her  than  usual :  the  white  stone  hospital,  with  its
narrow  windows,  dragged  out  to  an  interminable  length,  so  that
at  last  she  could  not  restrain  her  impatience,  but  said,  "  There's
no  end  to  that  cursed  building !  "  Twice  did  the  coachman
receive  the  order,  "Faster,  faster,  Andriushka  !  You  drive
intolerably  slow  to-day  !  "  Finally,  however,  the  lady  reached
her  destination.  The  calash  halted  before  a  one-story  wooden
house  of  a  dark  gray  hue,  with  white  bas-reliefs  over  the
windows,  a  lofty  wooden  grating  before  the  windows,  and  a
narrow  palisade  in  front,  behind  which  some  slender  trees
gleamed  white  with  the  city  dust  which  never  left  them.  In  the
windows  of  the  house  some  pots  of  flowers  were  to  be  seen,
together  with  a  parrot  swinging  in  a  cage,  and  clinging  to
his  ring  with  his  beak,  and  there  were  also  two  poodles  lying
asleep  in  the  sunshine.  In  this  house  dwelt  a  feminine  friend
of  the  lady  who  had  just  driven  up.  For  various  reasons  we
prefer  to  call  this  friend  by  the  nickname  which  Avas  almost

universally  accorded  to  her  in  the  town  of  N ;  namely,

"  The  charming  lady."  She  had  acquired  this  cognomen  in  a
legitimate  manner ;  for  indeed  she  spared  no  pains  to  make
herself  extremely  agreeable.

Still,  amid  all  her  amiability  there  certainly  did  peep  out  some
disagreeable  traits,  and  at  times  her  gracious  words  pricked  one
most  unmercifully.  However  everything  was  dispensed  with
a  refined  art  such  as  is  only  met  with  in  provincial  towns.
Each  of  her  movements  was  tasteful ;  she  was  very  fond  of
poetry;  she  even  knew  how  to  hold  her  head  in  a  dreamy  way  ;
and  everyone  agreed  that  she  was  really  charming  in  every
respect.

But  the  other  lady — that  is  to  say,  the  visitor — was  not  so
many-sided  in  character,  so  we  will  simply  call  her  "  the  nice
lady."  The  arrival  of  this  visitor  awakened  the  poodles,  who  were
slumbering  in  the  sun — shaggy  Adele  and  the  thin-legged  male
puppy,  Potpourri.  Both  carried  their  curled  tails  into  the  ante-
room, where  the  visitor  had  freed  herself  of  her  cloak,  and
stood  in  a  gown  of  fashionable  pattern  and  coloui'.     There  was


THE    EMOTIONS   OF    A   SMALL   TOWN.  145

a  long  scarf  about  her  neck,  and  an  odour  of  jasmine  was  wafted
through  the  room.  No  sooner  had  the  charming  lady  heard  of
the  arrival  of  her  friend,  the  nice  lady,  than  she  ran  out  into  the
ante-room.  The  ladies  seized  each  other  by  the  hand,  kissed
each  other,  and  screamed  as  schoolgirls  scream  when  they
meet  shortly  after  their  release  from  their  studies,  and  before
their  mammas  have  succeeded  in  explaining  to  them  that  the
father  of  one  suitor  is  poorer  and  of  lower  rank  than  the  other.
The  kisses  were  very  loud,  so  that  the  poodles  began  to  bark
again,  for  doing  which  they  were  switched  with  a  handkerchief.
Then  both  ladies  betook  themselves  to  the  drawing-room,  which
was  blue,  of  course,  with  a  divan,  an  oval  table,  and  even  a  plush-
covered  screen  ;  after  them  ran  shaggy  Adele  and  Potpourri  on
his  slender  legs.  "  Here,  here,  in  this  nice  little  corner  !  "  said
the  hostess,  seating  her  guest  in  one  corner  of  the  sofa.  "  That's
it,  that's  it !  Now,  here's  a  cushion  for  you."  So  saying,  she
thrust  behind  the  other's  back  a  cushion,  which  had  a  knight
worked  upon  it  in  wool,  in  the  fashion  in  which  such  things
are  always  worked  on  canvas  :  his  nose  projected  like  a  stair-
case, and  his  lips  were  square.  "  How  glad  I  am  that  you
have  called,"  now  resumed  the  charming  lady.  "  I  heai'd
some  one  arrive,  and  I  thought  to  myself,  '  Who  can  it  be
so  early  ?  '  Parasha  suggested  the  wife  of  the  vice-governor  ;
but  I  said  to  myself,  '  "What !  has  that  fool  come  here  to  bore
us  again  ?  '  and  I  was  on  the  point  of  saying  that  I  was  not  at
home."

The  visitor  was  certainly  anxious  to  communicate  her  news
at  once  ;  but  an  exclamation  which  the  charming  lady  uttered
at  that  moment  gave  another  turn  to  the  conversation.

"  What  a  gay,  pretty  chintz  !  "  exclaimed  the  charming  lady,
gazing  at  the  gown  of  the  nice  lady.

"  Yes,  it  is  very  gay.  But  Praskovya  Feodorovna  thinks  that
it  would  be  better  if  the  pattern  were  smaller,  and  if  the  dots
were  blue  instead  of  light  brown.  I  sent  some  other  material  to
my  sister  :  it's  so  lovely  that  it  is  simply  impossible  to  describe
it  in  words.  Just  imagine :  some  little  stripes  as  fine  as  the
human  mind  can  conceive,  a  blue  ground,  and  across  the  stripes,
all  over  them  in  fact,  a  lot  of  dots  and  splashes,  dots  and  splashes,
dots  and  splashes, — in  short,  it  is  incomparable.  I  positively
declare  that  there  was  never  anything  like  it."

"  But  my  dear,  that's  motley."

"  Oh,  no  !  it's  not."

"  Yes,  it's  motley."

It  must  be  stated  that  the  charming  lady  was  somewhat  of  a

K


146  DEAD    SOULS.

materialist,  inclined  to  denial  and  doubt,  and  that  she  despised
many  things  in  life.  However  the  nice  lady  again  asserted  that
her  material  was  not  in  the  least  degree  motley,  and  exclaimed,
"Dear  me !  you  are  wearing  gimp.  Why,  gimp  is  no  longer  worn."

"  "What !  it  is  not  worn  ?  "

"  No  :  scallops  are  worn  instead."

"  Scallops — ah,  that's  not  nice  at  all!  "

"Scallops;  everything  is  scallops;  a  pelerine  scalloped  at
the  edges,  scalloped  sleeves,  scalloped  epaulets,  scallops  below,
scallops  above,  scallops,  scallops  everywhere."

"That's  not  at  all  pretty,  Sophia  Ivanovna,  if  everything  is
scalloped."

"  Oh  dear  me,  yes  ;  it  is  incredibly  pretty,  Anna  Grigorievna.
But  how  greatly  surprised  you  will  be  to  learn  that  bodices
have  grown  still  longer,  and  that  the  front  is  cut  in  a  point.
The  skirts  are  quite  round,  like  the  old-fashioned  farthingales  ;
and  a  little  padding  is  even  added  behind,  in  order  that  one  may
look  a  fine  woman."

"  "Well,  that  is  nice,  I  must  confess  !  "  said  the  charming  lady,
making  a  gesture  of  the  head  which  was  full  of  dignity.

"  Exactly  :  I  confess  that  I  like  it,''  replied  the  nice  lady.

"Well,  for  myself,  I  shall  not  follow  that  fashion,  on  any
account."

"  I  also  think — well  really,  when  you  consider  what  fashion
does  come  to  sometimes.  I  asked  my  sister  for  some  patterns,
just  for  the  fun  of  the  thing.  My  Melanie  has  already  made
herself  a  dress  in  the  new  style."

"  So  you  have  some  patterns  !  "  exclaimed  the  charming  lady,
not  without  a  perceptible  movement  of  anger.

"  Certainly :  my  sister  sent  them  to  me."

"  Give  them  to  me,  my  soul,  for  the  sake  of  all  that's  holy  !  "

"  Alas  !  I  have  already  promised  them  to  Prascovya  Feodor-
ovna.     Perhaps  you  can  have  them  after  her."

"Who  will  care  to  wear  anything  after  Prascovya  Feodor-
ovna  !  It's  very  strange  that  you  should  give  the  preference  to
strangers  over  your  own  friends."

"  But  she  is  my  aunt."

"  God  knows  what  sort  of  an  aunt  she  is  to  you — merely
on  the  husband's  side.  No,  Sophia  Ivanovna,  don't  deny  it ;  I
won't  hear  anything  more ;  you  evidently  meant  to  inflict  this
insult  on  me.  It  is  plain  that  you  wish  to  break  off  all  acquaint-
ance with  me."

Poor  Sophia  Ivanovna  did  not  know  what  to  do.  She  felt
that  she  had  placed  herself  between  two  vigorous  tires.     So


THE    EMOTIONS   OF   A   SMALL    TOWN.  117

much  for  boastiug.  She  was  ready  to  pull  out  her  tongue  to
punish  herself  for  her  stupidity.

"  Well,  and  what  about  our  delightful  friend  ?  "  asked  the
charming  lady.

"  Ah,  my  Heavens  !  Where  is  my  poor  head  ?  This  is  too
good  !  Of  course  you  know,  Anna  Grigorievna,  why  I  have
come  to  see  you  this  morning?  "  Here  the  visitor's  breathing
became  oppressed ;  and  her  companion  retorted:  "  Praise  and
laud  him  as  you  like,  but  I  say  frankly,  and  I  will  say  it  to  his
face,  that  he  is  a  Avorthless  man  — worthless,  worthless,
worthless  !  "

"  But  only  listen  while  I  disclose  to  you."

"  Rumours  have  been  in  circulation  that  he  is  handsome ;
but  he  is  not  handsome  at  all :  and  his  nose — why,  it's  a  most
disagreeable  nose."

"Permit  me,  only  permit  me  to  tell  you, — my  dearest  Anna
Grigorievna,  permit  me  to  tell  you.  This  is  really  a  story,  a
story  I  have  to  relate."

"  What  sort  of  a  story,  pray  ?  "

"  Ah,  Anna  Grigorievna,  my  life  !  if  you  could  only  conceive
the  situation  in  which  I  find  myself  Just  imagine  :  this  morn-
ing the  protopopess — the  wife  of  Father  Kirill — comes  to  me,
and  what  do  you  think  ?  What  sort  of  a  fellow  do  you  suppose
our  meek  friend,  our  stranger,  is,  hey  ?  "

"  What !     Has  he  been  paying  court  to  the  jjrotopopess  ?  "

"  Ah,  Anna  Grigorievna,  if  he  only  had  been  paying  court  to
her,  that  would  be  nothing  !  but  listen  to  what  the  protopope's
wife  told  me.  She  says  that  Mrs.  Korobotchka,  the  land-
owner, has  come  to  her  house,  dreadfully  frightened  and  as  pale
as  death,  and  has  told  her — what  has  she  not  told  her  !  Only
listen!  it's  a  perfect  romance:  all  of  a  sudden,  in  the  dead  of
the  night,  when  everybody  was  fast  asleep  in  the  house,  there
came  a  knock  at  the  gate, — the  most  terrible  knock  that  you
can  imagine  ;  there  was  a  cry  of,  '  Open,  open  !  if  you  don't.
I'll  break  down  your  gates  ! '  How  does  that  strike  you  ?  What
sort  of  a  charmer  is  he  after  that  ?  "

"But  what  is  Mrs.  Korobotchka  like?  Is  she  young  and
pretty  ?  "

"  Not  in  the  least :  she  is  an  old  woman."

"  Ah,  delightful !  So  he  is  crazy  after  an  old  woman  ?  Well,
the  taste  of  our  ladies  seems  to  be  very  nice  :  they  have  pitched
upon  a  funny  person  to  fall  in  love  with."

"  Why,  no,  Anna  Grigorievna,  it's  not  at  all  as  you  think.
But  fancy,  he  presents  himself  armed  from  head  to  foot,  like


148  DEAD    SOULS.

Rinaldo  Rinaldino,  and  makes  this  demand :  '  Sell  me  all  your
souls  that  have  died.'  Then  Mrs.  Korobotchka  replies  very
sensibly,  and  says,  'I  cannot  sell  them,  as  they  are  dead.' —
'  No,'  says  he,  '  they  are  not  dead.  It's  my  business  to  know,'
says  he,  '  whether  they  are  dead,  or  not ;  and  they're  not  dead,
they're  not  dead ! '  he  shouts,  '  they're  not  dead  !  '  In  short,
he  behaves  in  a  scandalous  manner :  the  whole  village  runs  up,
the  children  cry,  everybody  shouts,  no  one  can  understand.
Well,  it  was  simply  horrible  !  horrible  !  horrible  !  But  you  can-
not conceive,  Anna  Grigorievna,  how  upset  I  was  when  I  heard
all  this.  '  My  dearest  lady,'  says  the  protopopess  to  me,  *  look
in  the  glass,  and  see  how  pale  you  are.' — '  I  don't  want  to  look
in  the  glass,'  I  said.  '  I  must  go  and  tell  Anna  Grigorievna.'
I  ordered  the  calash  that  very  instant.  Andriushka,  the  coach-
man, asked  me  where  I  was  going ;  but  I  could  not  utter  a
word,  and  I  only  stared  in  his  face  like  a  fool.  I  suppose  he
must  have  thought  that  I  was  crazy.  Ah,  Anna  Grigorievna,  if
you  only  knew  how  it  troubled  me  !  "

"But  this  is  very  strange,"  said  the  charming  lady;  "  what
can  those  dead  souls  mean  ?  I  must  admit  that  I  understand
nothing  whatever  about  it.  This  is  the  second  time  that  I  have
heard  something  about  dead  souls ;  and  although  my  hus-
band says  that  Nozdreflf  lies,  there  is  certainly  something  in  it
all."

"  But,  Anna  Grigorievna,  imagine  my  position  when  I  heard
this.  *  And  now,'  says  Mrs.  Korobotchka,  '  I  do  not  know,'
says  she,  '  what  I  am  to  do.  He  made  me  sign  my  name  to
some  counterfeit  document,  and  he  flung  a  fifteen-rouble  bank-
note at  me.  I,'  she  says,  '  I  am  an  inexperienced,  helpless
widow.  I  know  nothing.'  Fine  doings,  indeed  !  But  if  you
could  gain  any  conception  of  how  completely  I  was  upset !  "

"  But  it  can't  be  any  question  of  dead  souls  :  something  else
must  be  concealed  behind.

"  I  agree  with  you,"  said  the  nice  lady,  somewhat  taken  with
this  idea,  and  conscious  of  a  strong  desire  to  know  what  could
possibly  be  concealed  behind  it  all.  She  even  slowly  said,"  And
what  do  you  think  is  concealed  in  this  case  ?  Come,  what  do
you  think  ?  "

"  But  what  do  you  yourself  think  ?  "

"What  do  I  think?  I  confess  that  I  am  completely  be-
wildered," replied  the  nice  lady.

"  Still,  I  should  like  to  know  your  opinion  on  the  subject."
However   the  nice   lady  found    nothing   to  say.     She   was
capable  of  experiencing  emotion,  but  she  was  not  capable  of


THE    EMOTIONS   OF    A    SMALL   TOWN.  149

forming  an  accurate  theory  ;  and  for  that  reason  she  required,
more  than  any  other,  tender  friendly  advice.

"  Well,  listen  to  what  these  dead  souls  are,"  said  the  charm-
ing lady  ;  and  at  these  words  her  guest  concentrated  all  her
faculties  on  listening.  Her  little  ears  stretched  forward  of
themselves ;  she  partly  rose,  so  that  she  hardly  rested  on  the
sofa  ;  and,  although  she  was  rather  heavy,  she  suddenly  be-
came thinner,  and  almost  ethereal,  like  the  down  which  floats
in  the  air.

"  The  dead  souls — "  began  the  charming  lady.

"  Well,  what  are  they  ?  what  are  they  ?  "  broke  in  her  visitor,
in  great  excitement.

"  The  dead  souls — "

"  Ah,  speak,  for  Heaven's  sake  !  "

•'  Were  simply  invented  as  a  blind  ;  but  this  is  the  real  mat-
ter— he  wants  to  carry  off  the  governor's  daughter."

This  conclusion  was  by  no  means  expected  by  the  visitor,  and
it  was  certainly  remarkable  in  every  respect.  The  nice  lady,  on
heaving  it,  became  transfigured  on  the  spot,  grew  paler,  pale  as
death,  and  felt  actually  alarmed.

"  0  Heavens  !  "  she  exclaimed,  clasping  her  hand=.  "  That  is
something  which  I  should  never  have  suspected  !  "

"  Well,  for  myself,  I  guessed  what  the  matter  was  as  soon  as
you  opened  your  mouth,"  replied  the  charming  lady.

"But  what  are  we  to  think  of  the  way  young  girls  are
trained  at  the  Institute  after  this,  Anna  Grigorievna  ?  There's
innocence  for  you  !  "

"  Innocence  indeed !  I  have  heard  that  she  says  such
things  as  I  should  never  have  the  courage  to  utter."

"  Do  you  know,  Anna  Grigorievna,  it  simply  breaks  one's
heart  to  see  to  what  a  pitch  immorality  has  already  attained  !  "

"  But  all  the  men  are  wild  about  her,  though  I  must  confess
that,  to  my  mind,  there  is  nothing  in  her."

"  She  is  intolerably  affected."

"  Ah,  my  life,  Anna  Grigorievna  ;  she  is  a  statue,  and  there
is  not  a  particle  of  expression  in  her  face."

"  Yes,  how  affected,  how  affected  she  is  !  Heavens,  how  affec-
ted !  I  do  not  know  who  taught  her,  but  never  in  my  life  have
I  seen  a  woman  put  on  so  many  airs  !  "

"  She's  a  perfect  statue,  my  love,  and  as  pallid  as  death."

"  Oh,  don't  say  that,  Sophia  Ivanovna !  She  rouges  outra-
geously."

"  Why,  what  are  you  saying,  Anna  Grigorievna  ?  She's  chalk,
chalk,  the  purest  chalk."


150  DEAD    SOULS.

**  My  dear,  I  sat  beside  her :  the  rouge  on  her  cheeks  is  a
finger  thick,  and  falls  off  in  cakes  like  stucco.  Her  mother
taught  her  to  use  it :  she  was  a  coquette  herself,  and  the
daughter  will  surpass  the  mother."

"Well,  now,  excuse  me,  but  I  am  ready  to  sacrifice  my  chil-
dren, my  husband,  my  whole  fortune,  this  very  instant,  if  she
uses  a  single  drop,  or  an  atom,  or  even  a  shadow,  of  rouge."

"  Ah  !  good  heavens,  what  are  you  saying,  Sophia  Ivanovna  ?  "
said  the  charming  lady,  clasping  her  hands.

"Why,  really,  Anna  Grigorievna,  you  say  such  things  that  I
can  only  stare  at  you  in  amazement,"  said  the  nice  lady,  clasp-
ing her  hands  in  her  turn.

It  may  seem  strange  to  the  reader  that  these  two  ladies
should  be  unable  to  agree  as  to  what  they  had  seen  at  almost
one  and  the  same  time.  But  this  kind  of  thing  happens  very
frequently.  If  one  lady  looks  at  an  object,  it  turns  out  per-
fectly white  ;  but  let  another  lady  look  at  it,  and  it  will  appear
red — red  as  a  cranberry.

"  Now,  this', will  prove  to  you  that  she  is  pale,"  went  on  the
charming  lady  :  "  I  remember  now  that  I  was  sitting  beside
Maniloff ;  and  I  said  to  him,  '  See  how  pale  she  is  ! '  Truly,
one  needs  to  be  as  foolish  as  our  gentlemen  are  to  laud  her.  But
that  charmer  of  ours.  Ah,  how  repulsive  he  seemed  to  me  !  You
cannot  conceive,  Anna  Grigorievna,  to  what  a  degree  he  seemed
repulsive  to  me  !  "

"  All  the  same,  there  were  some  ladies  who  were  not  entirely
indifferent  to  him."

"  Do  you  mean  me,  Anna  Grigorievna  ?  Why,  you  can  never
say  that,  never,  never  !  "

"  No,  I  was  not  speaking  of  you  :  just  as  though  there  were
no  one  else  but  you  !  "

"  Never,  never,  Anna  Grigorievna  !  Permit  me  to  remark  to
you,  that  I  know  myself  very  well  ;  but  perhaps  what  you  say
might  be  applied  to  certain  ladies  who  affect  to  be  unap-
proachable."

"  You  must  excuse  me,  Sophia  Ivanovna,  and  allow  me  to  in-
form you  that  such  scandalous  statements  have  never  been
connected  with  my  name.  With  some  other,  possibly,  but  not
with  mine  ;  and  you  must  allow  me  to  tell  you  so."

"  Why  have  you  taken  offence  ?  There  were  other  women
there  :  there  were  even  some  who  seated  themselves  near  the
door,  in  order  to  be  nearer  to  him."

Now,  after  these  words,  spoken  by  the  nice  lady,  a  tempest
ought  inevitably  to  have  followed ;    but,  to  the  intense  amaze-


THE    EMOTIONS   OF    A   SMALL   TOWN.  151

ment  of  both  ladies,  they  each  suddenly  calmed  down,  and
nothing  whatever  came  of  it.  The  charming  lady  recollected
that  the  dress  pattern  was  not  yet  in  her  possession,  and  the
nice  lady  realised  that  she  had  not  succeeded  in  learning  all  the
particulars  with  regard  to  the  discovery  made  by  her  friend.
Thus  peace  speedily  ensued.  Moreover,  it  cannot  be  said  of
either  of  the  ladies  that  they  experienced  any  real  ill-will  to-
wards one  another.  On  the  whole,  there  was  nothing  malicious
about  their  characters  :  there  had  merely  arisen  in  the  course  of
conversation  a  petty  desire  to  prick  each  other  ;  one  simply
indulged  in  some  little  pointed  word  aimed  at  the  other,  for  en-
joyment's sake  :  "  That's  for  you  !  now  take  it  and  digest  it."
The  impulses  of  the  heart  difler  in  the  female  as  well  as  in  the
male  sex.

"  But  still  I  cannot  comprehend,"  now  said  the  nice  lady,
"  how  Tchitchikofi",  a  new-comer,  could  make  up  his  mind  to
such  an  audacious  enterprise.  It  cannot  be  that  he  was  without
confederates."

•'  And  you  think  that  there  are  none  ?  "

"  But  who  do  you  suppose  would  help  him  ?  "

"  Well,  Nozdrefl',  for  instance."

"  Bo  you  think  Nozdreif  would  ?  "

"And  why  not?  It  would  be  just  like  him.  You  know
that  he  tried  to  sell  his  own  father,  or,  rather,  to  gamble  him
away  at  cards."

"  Ah,  good  Heavens  !  what  interesting  news  you  tell  me  !  I
should  never  have  imagined  that  Nozdreff  was  mixed  up  in  this
affair."

"  I  have  always  supposed  so."

"When  one  thinks  of  it,  really  what  strange  things  do  hap-
pen in  the  world  !  Now,  could  anyone  have  imagined,  when
Tchitchikoff  first  came  to  our  town,  you  recollect,  that  he  would
create  such  a  strange  commotion  ?  Ah,  Anna  Grigorievna,  if
you  only  knew  how  thoroughly  upset  I  am  !  If  it  were  not  for
your  good-will  and  friendship.  And  here  we  are,  on  the
brink  of  destruction.  Ah  !  what  is  to  become  of  us  ?  My  maid
Masha  saw  me  as  pale  as  death  just  now:  '  Dearest  mistress,'
she  says  to  me,  '  you  are  pale  as  death.' — '  Never  mind,  Masha,*
I  answered.  But,  so  that's  the  state  of  things.  So  Nozdreff  is
concerned  in  it !     I  am  glad  to  hear  that !  "

The  nice  lady  was  extremely  anxious  to  learn  some  further
particulars  with  regard  to  the  elopement ;  that  is  to  say,  about
the  hour  at  which  it  was  to  take  place,  and  so  forth.  But  the
charming  lady  asserted  her  ignorance  in  plain  terms.     She  did


152  DEAD   SOULS.

not  know  how  to  lie  :  to  suppose  anything  is  another  matter,
especially  when  the  supposition  is  founded  on  inward  conviction.
Now,  when  she  felt  an  inward  conviction,  she  knew  how  to  stand
up  for  herself:  and  if  any  learned  advocate,  renowned  for  his
gift  of  overcoming  other  people's  opinions,  had  attempted  to
wage  battle  with  her,  he  would  have  speedily  found  out  what  an
inward  conviction  signifies.

It  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  the  two  ladies  should  at  last
have  firmly  convinced  themselves  of  what  they  had  at  first
taken  merely  as  an  assumption.  We,  the  wise  men,  as  we  call
ourselves,  proceed  almost  in  the  same  fashion  ;  and  our  learned
judgments  serve  as  a  proof  of  the  fact.  At  first  the  learned  man
approaches  a  problem  in  a  remarkably  crafty  manner  ;  he  begins
timidly,  with  the  most  modest  of  questions  :  "  Whence  comes
it  ?  Did  not  this  land  receive  its  name  from  such  and  such  a
place  or  person?"  or,  "Does  not  this  document  belong  to
another  and  a  later  period  ?  "  or,  "  Is  it  not  necessary  to  take
this  people  as  meaning  that  other  people  ?  "  He  immediately
quotes  various  ancient  authors,  and  as  soon  as  he  sees,  or
merely  thinks  he  sees,  a  hint,  he  sets  off"  at  a  trot,  takes  courage,
converses  with  the  ancient  writers,  puts  questions  to  them,  and
even  answers  for  them  himself,  wholly  forgetting  the  fact  that
he  began  with  a  timid  assumption.  It  already  seems  to  him  that
he  sees  it  all,  that  everything  is  clear,  and  his  judgment  is
summed  up  in  the  words,  "  So  this  is  how  it  was  !  So  that  is
the  nation  we  are  to  understand !  So  that  is  the  point  from
which  the  subject  must  be  considered  !  "  Then  comes  publica-
tion from  the  pulpit  or  professor's  chair ;  and  the  newly  dis-
covered truth  is  despatched  on  its  travels  through  the  world,
gathering  to  itself  followers  and  disciples.

At  the  very  moment  when  the  two  ladies  had  so  successfully
and  cleverly  unravelled  this  whole  complicated  matter,  the  pro-
curator, with  his  ever  immovable  physiognomy,  his  thick
brows  and  winking  ej'es,  entered  the  drawing-room.  The  ladies
vied  with  each  other  in  communicating  all  the  circumstances  to
him  ;  they  told  him  about  the  purchase  of  the  dead  souls,  of
Tchitchikoff's  intention  to  carry  off  the  governor's  daughter,  and
they  contrived  to  thoroughly  confuse  him ;  so  that,  in  spite  of
standing  for  a  long  time  in  one  and  the  same  place,  winking  with
his  left  eye,  and  slapping  his  chin  with  his  handkerchief,  he
could  make  absolutely  nothing  of  it.

The  ladies  left  him  in  that  condition,  and  set  ofl',  each  in  her
own  direction,  to  stir  up  the  town.  This  enterprise  they  suc-
ceeded in  carrying  out  in  little  more  than  half  an  hour.     The


THE   EMOTIONS   OF    A    SMALL   TOWN.  153

town  was  decidedly  stirred  up  :  everything  was  in  a  ferment,
and  no  one  could  understand  anything  about  the  matter.  The
ladies  had  managed  to  cast  such  a  mist  before  everyone's  eyes,
that  all  the  people,  and  the  officials  in  particular,  remained  for
some  time  completely  bewildered,  standing  stock-still,  with  pro-
truding eyes,  like  sheep.  The  dead  souls,  the  governor's  daughter,
and  Tchitchikoff  were  merged  and  mingled  in  their  brains  in  a
wondrously  queer  fashion.  Then,  after  their  first  stupefaction,
they  tried  to  separate  them  one  from  the  other.  They  endeavoured
to  understand  what  they  had  heard,  and  became  enraged  on  per-
ceiving that  the  atfair  would  in  no  wise  explain  itself  What
sort  of  a  parable  was  this  story  about  dead  souls  ?  There  was
no  logic  whatever  in  dead  souls  ; — how  could  dead  souls  be  pur-
chased ?  Where  could  a  fool  be  found  to  buy  them  ?  And
with  what  sort  of  contraband  money  would  he  efiect  the  pur-
chase ?  And  with  what  object,  and  to  what  use  could  dead  souls
be  applied  ?  And  why  mix  up  the  governor's  daughter  in  all
this  matter.  Tchitchikoff  might  want  to  run  off"  with  her,  but
why  should  he  buy  dead  souls  in  order  to  accomplish  this  ?  And
if  he  bought  dead  souls,  then  why  elope  with  the  governor's
daughter  ?  Did  he  mean  to  dower  her  with  the  dead  souls  ?
In  short,  what  nonsense  was  this  story  which  had  been  dis-
seminated throughout  the  town '?  And  what  sort  of  a  state  of
things  was  it,  when,  before  one  could  even  turn  round,  scandals
were  set  afloat  and  travelled  throughout  the  place.  If  there  had
only  been  some  sense  in  them.     But  no.

However,  they  had  been  put  in  circulation,  so,  of  course,
there  was  some  foundation  for  them.  What  !  foundation  for
dead  souls  ?  No,  none  at  all !  It  was  all  stuff  and  nonsense  !
Yes,  deuce  take  it,  that,  that  was  all.  Meanwhile  rumour  was  fol-
lowed by  rumour  ;  and  the  whole  town  began  talking  about  dead
souls  and  the  governor's  daughter,  about  Tchitchikoft"  and  dead
souls,  and  about  the  governor's  daughter  and  Tchitchikoff.  The
town,  which  had  hitherto  seemed  to  be  asleep,  was  lashed  as  by
a  whirlwind.  It  woke  up,  too,  all  the  more  readily  as  it  was  a
long  time  since  there  had  been  any  news  of  any  description  what-
ever. For  the  space  of  three  whole  months,  nothing  had  arisen,
even  of  the  sort  which  is  designated  in  capital  cities  as  gossip,
and  which,  as  is  well  known,  is  equivalent,  so  far  as  town  life
is  concerned,  to  a  timely  supply  of  edible  provisions.  Now  that
these  stories  anent  our  hero  became  current,  two  opposing  par-
ties were  instantly  formed — the  masculine  party  and  the  femi-
nine party.  The  masculine  party,  which  was  perfectly  ridiculous,
directed  its  attention  to  the  dead  souls,  while  the  feminine  occu-


154  DEAD   SOULS.

pied  itself  exclusively  with  the  abduction  of  the  governor's
daughter.  In  this  party — to  the  honour  of  the  ladies,  it  must
be  remarked — there  was  incomparably  more  order  and  caution.
Their  vocation  was,  evidently,  to  be  good  and  orderly  house-
wives. With  them  everything  speedily  assumed  a  vivid  and  de-
finite aspect,  was  clothed  in  clear  and  visible  form,  explained,
and  sifted  :  in  short,  a  finished  picture  was  presented.  It  ap-
peared that  Tchitchikofi'  had  been  enamoured  of  the  governor's
daughter  for  a  long  time,  and  that  they  had  met  by  moonlight
in  the  garden  ;  that  the  governor  would  even  have  given  our
friend  his  daughter,  for  Tchitchikofi"  was  as  rich  as  a  Jew,  if  it
had  not  been  for  his  wife,  whom  he  had  abandoned — though
where  and  how  they  had  learned  that  Tchitchikofi"  was  married,
was  more  than  anyone  could  say.  However,  it  appeared  that
his  wife,  who  was  sufiering  from  hopeless  love,  had  written  the
most  touching  letters  to  the  governor  ;  and  that  Tchitchikofi,
on  seeing  that  the  girl's  father  and  mother  would  not  give  their
consent  on  any  terms,  had  resolved  on  abduction.  In  other
houses  this  was  narrated  somewhat  difierently  :  That  Tchitchi-
kofi" had  no  wife  at  all ;  but  that,  like  a  clever  man,  acting  on  a
certainty,  he  had,  in  order  to  obtain  the  daughter's  hand,  begun
matters  with  the  mother  ;  that  he  had  carried  on  an  intrigue
with  her,  and  that  aftei'wards  he  had  made  his  proposal  for  the
daughter's  hand,  whereupon  the  mother,  becoming  alarmed  lest
a  crime  against  religion  should  be  committed,  and  feeling  the
gnawings  of  conscience  within  her  soul,  had  flatly  refused  ;  so
that  was  why  Tchitchikofi  had  decided  upon  an  elopement.

To  all  this,  many  explanations  and  corrections  were  added,
in  proportion  as  the  rumours  at  length  penetrated  to  the
most  remote  parts  of  the  town.  In  Kussia,  the  lower  classes
are  very  fond  of  discussing  the  scandals  which  take  place  in  the
highest  society  ;  so  people  began  to  talk  this  over  in  miserable
little  cabins,  where  no  one  knew  Tchitchikofi,  nor  had  even
set  eyes  upon  him  ;  and  fresh  additions,  and  very  extensive
explanations,  were  made.  The  subject  grew  more  and  more
absorbing,  and  assumed  a  more  definite  form  each  day;  finally,
it  was  brought  to  the  ears  of  the  governor's  wife  herself,  in  all
its  perfection.

This  lady,  as  the  mother  of  a  family,  and  the  first  lady  in
the  town,  felt  thoroughly  insulted  by  such  stories,  and  flew  into  a
rage,  which  was  in  every  respect  justifiable.  The  poor  little
blonde  had  to  undergo  the  most  unpleasant  tete-a-tete  that  ever
it  fell  to  the  lot  of  a  sixteen-year-old  maiden  to  endure.  Whole
floods  of  questions,  cross-questions,  declarations,   threats,  re-


THE   EMOTIONS   OE   A   SMALL   ToWN.  155

preaches,  exhortations  ensued,  so  that  the  girl  burst  into  tears
and  sobbed,  and  could  not  understand  a  single  word.  Mean-
while the  house  porter  received  strict  orders  not  to  admit
Tchitchikofi"  at  any  time,  or  under  any  circumstances.

Having  accomplished  their  business  so  far  as  the  governor's
wife  was  concerned,  the  ladies  made  an  attack  on  the  masculine
party,  endeavouring  to  bring  the  latter  over  to  their  side,  and
asserting  that  the  dead  souls  were  all  a  fabrication,  and  only
made  use  of  in  order  to  avert  all  suspicion,  so  that  the  abduction
might  the  more  successfully  be  carried  out.  Many  of  the  men
were  actually  converted,  and  went  over  to  the  women's  side,
despite  the  fact  that  they  were  vigorously  upbraided  by  their
companions,  who  heaped  upon  them  the  opprobrious  names  of
"women"  and  "petticoats,"  which  terms,  as  is  well  known,
are  extremely  insulting  to  the  male  sex.  __

But  arm  themselves  and  resist  as  they  would,  there  was  no
such  order  in  the  masculine  party  as  there  was  in  the  feminine
one.  Everything  with  the  males  was,  after  a  fashion,  rude,
unpolished,  unfitting,  awkward,  inharmonious,  ugly  :  there  was
a  confusion  in  their  heads,  a  turmoil,  a  lack  of  clearness,  a
slovenliness  about  their  thoughts  ;  in  short,  bare,  coarse,  heavy
nature  was  therein  disclosed,  quite  unfitted  for  household  man-
agement, or  for  convictions  of  the  heart,  incredulous,  lazy,
filled  with  incessant  doubts  and  eternal  fears.  These  men  said
that  it  was  all  nonsense ;  that  the  abduction  of  the  governor's
daughter  was  rather  the  sort  of  thing  a  hussar  would  efl'ect ;  that
Tchitchikofi",  a  mere  civilian,  would  not  attempt  it ;  that  the
women  were  lying;  that  the  chief  point  to  which  attention
should  be  directed  was  the  dead  souls,  for,  after  all,  the  deuce
only  knew  what  they  meant,  though  something  very  low  and
rascally  must  be  concealed  behind  them.  Why  the  men  thought
that  something  low  and  rascally  was  concealed  behind  them  we
shall  presently  learn.

A  new  governor-general  had  been  appointed  for  the  province  ;
and  his  arrival,  as  was  well  known,  was  bound  to  create  a  state
of  excitement  among  the  officials.  There  would  be  a  lot  of
investigations,  reprimands,  a  thorough  setting  to  rights,  and  all
sorts  of  commotion  with  which  the  chief  would  treat  his  subor-
dinates. "  Now,  what  will  happen,"  thought  the  functionaries,
"  if  he  finds  out  that  these  stupid  rumours  are  afloat  in  the  town  ?
He  may  on  that  score  alone  make  our  life  too  hot  for  us !  "
The  inspector  of  the  medical  institute  suddenly  turned  pale.
God  knows  what  fancy  assailed  him:  did  not  the  dead  souls
signify  the  patients  who  hud  died  in  considerable  numbers  in  the


156  DEAD   SOULS.

hospitals  and  in  other  places,  of  an  epidemic,  against  which
proper  measures  had  not  been  taken  ?  Was  not  Tchitchikoff
some  official  despatched  from  the  office  of  the  governor-general
to  institute  a  secret  investigation  ?  He  communicated  this  idea
to  the  president  of  the  court.  The  president  retorted  that  that
was  nonsense,  and  then  immediately  turned  pale  himself,  on
putting  to  himself  the  query.  What  were  the  dead  souls  pur-
chased by  Tchitchikoff,  as  a  matter  of  fact  ?  And  he,  the  presi-
dent, had  allowed  the  deeds  of  sale  to  be  registered,  and  had
even  played  the  part  of  Pliushkin's  confidential  agent  in  the
matter.  That  would  come  to  the  governor's  ears,  and  what
then  ?  He  had  no  sooner  mentioned  this  to  his  friends  than  they
all  turned  pale  :  a  terror  more  infectious  than  the  pest  was
instantly  communicated  to  all  the  townsfolk.  All  instantly
upbraided  themselves  for  sins  which  they  had  never  even  com-
mitted. The  words  dead  soids  sounded  so  indefinite,  that  they
even  began  to  suspect  that  they  contained  a  hint  referring  to  the
over-hasty  interment  of  two  dead  bodies,  a  matter  of  recent
occurrence.

Some  Solvuitchegod  merchants,  who  had  come  to  town  for
the  fair,  had  afterwards  joined  in  a  carouse  with  some  friends,
merchants  from  Ustsuisolsko, — a  carouse  on  the  Russian  plan
with  orgeat,  punch,  cordials,  and  so  on.  This  carouse  had  ended
in  a  fight,  as  usual.  The  Solvuitchegod  merchants  killed  the
Ustsuisolsko  merchants,  although  they  themselves  received  a
stout  drubbing  on  their  ribs,  their  flanks,  and  other  portions  of
their  bodies,  which  bore  witness  to  the  immeasurably  huge  fists
with  which  the  deceased  had  been  endowed.  One  of  the  victors
even  had  his  nose  split — that  is  to  say,  it  was  completely  crushed,
so  that  only  aboxit  half  a  finger's  length  of  it  remained  on
his  face.  The  traders  had  acknowledged  their  guilt,  alleging  in
excuse  that  they  had  been  in  a  kind  of  frenzy.  Rumours  then
spread  abroad  that  they  had  redeemed  their  guilty  heads  by  the
oftering  of  four  imperial  bank-notes  apiece  :  however,  the  affair
had  been  wrapped  in  mystery.  It  appeared,  though,  from  the
inquest  subsequently  held,  that  the  Ustsuisolsko  men  had  died
of  sufi'ocation  by  stove-gas,  and  so  they  were  buried  as  persons
who  had  been  sufi"ocated.  The  second  instance  of  recent
occurrence  was  the  following  :  the  crown-serfs  of  the  hamlet
of  Vshivoi-Spyes,  uniting  with  some  serfs  of  the  same  class
belonging  to  the  hamlets  of  Borovka  and  Zadirailoff,  had  anni-
hilated the  rural  police,  sweeping  them,  as  it  were,  from  oft'  the
face  of  the  earth.  The  alleged  reason  for  this  was,  that  the
rural  policemen  sufiered  from  weakness  in   the  region  of  the


THE    EMOTIONS    OF    A    SMALL   TOWN.  137

heart,  and  gazed  too  attentively  at  the  moujiks'  wives  and
daughters.  However,  nothing  was  known  for  a  certainty  ;  but
it  resulted  that  one  of  the  rural  policemen  was  eventually  found
dead  on  the  highway  ;  his  uniform,  or  surtout,  was  torn  in
rags,  and  it  was  impossible  to  recognise  his  face.  The  aflair
dragged  through  the  court,  and  finally  reached  the  upper
tribunal,  where  it  was  at  first  decided  in  secret  council  to  this
efi'ect :  As  it  was  not  known  which  of  the  serfs  had  taken  part
in  the  aflair,  and  as  they  were  tolerably  numerous  ;  and  since
the  policeman  was  dead,  and  the  serfs  were  still  alive,  so  that  a
decision  in  their  favour  was  of  very  great  importance  to  them,
the  matter  was  resolved  thus :  It  was  declared  that  the
policeman  himself  had  been  to  blame,  inasmuch  as  he  had  un-
justly oppressed  the  peasants  of  Vshivoi-Spyes  and  Zadirailofi";
and  it  was  reported  that  he  had  died  of  an  apoplectic  stroke
while  returning  home  in  his  sleigh.

The  matter  had  been  thoroughly  disposed  of,  apparently  ;
but,  for  some  reason  or  other,  the  ofiicials  began  to  think  that
probably  the  question  Avas  now  of  these  dead  souls.  Now,  it
happened  as  if  expressly,  that  at  the  very  time  when  the
ofiicials  found  themselves  in  such  embarrassing  circumstances,
two  documents  reached  the  governor.  The  contents  of  one  of
them  was  to  the  efl'ect  that,  according  to  reports  and  informa-
tion previously  received,  there  was  at  that  time  in  the  neigh-
bourhood a  forger  of  bank-notes,  who  was  hiding  himself  under
various  names,  and  that  a  strict  investigation  was  to  be  imme-
diately instituted.  The  other  document  contained  a  communi-
cation from  the  governor  of  a  neighbouring  province  respecting
some  legal  proceedings  against  a  highway  robber,  and  it  stated
that  if  any  suspicious  individual  should  make  his  appearance  in
that  region  without  references  or  passport,  he  was  to  be
instantly  arrested.  These  two  documents  fairly  stunned  the
ofiicials.  Their  first  conclusions  and  conjectures  were  entirely
wrong.  Of  course  it  was  quite  impossible  to  suppose  that  this
had  any  reference  to  Tchitchikofl":  nevertheless,  when  they  all
came  to  think  the  mattfer  over,  each  one  from  his  own  point  of
view,  and  when  they  recollected  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they
did  not  in  the  least  know  who  Tchitchikoff  was,  that  he  had
expressed  himself  in  a  very  obscure  way  with  regard  to  his  own
person, — had  said,  in  truth,  that  he  had  sufiered  for  the  right  in
the  service,  though  that  was  far  from  being  explicit, — and  when,
in  addition  to  all  this,  they  recollected  that  he  had  even  spoken
of  having  many  enemies,  who  went  so  far  as  to  even  seek  his
life,  then  they  became  yet   more  thoughtful.    His  life  was  iu


158  DEAD    SOULS.

danger,  lie  was  persecuted,  consequently  he  had  done  some-
thing, eh  ?  And  ^Yho  was  he,  after  all  ?  Of  course  it  was  im-
possible to  think  that  he  made  counterfeit  bank-notes,  muchless
that  he  could  be  a  highwayman ;  his  personal  appearance  was
in  his  favour ;  but  with  all  that,  who  could  he  in  fact  be  ?

Thus  the  officials  now  began  to  put  to  themselves  the  query
which  they  should  have  put  in  the  first  instance, — that  is  to  say,
in  the  first  chapter  of  our  work.  It  was  decided  to  make  some
inquiries  of  those  persons  from  whom  the  souls  had  been  pur-
chased, in  order  that  one  might  at  least  learn  what  manner  of
sale  it  had  been,  and  what  was  to  be  understood  by  these  dead
souls,  and  whether  our  hero  had  not  revealed  to  someone,  unin-
tentionally it  might  be,  or  in  passing,  his  real  intentions,  and
whether  he  had  not  told  someone  who  he  really  was.  First  of
all,  then,  the  officials  addressed  themselves  to  Mrs.  Korobotchka,
but  from  her  they  learned  little  :  he  had  bought  some  serfs  of  her
for  fifteen  roubles,  she  said,  and  he  had  said  that  he  dealt  in
chickens'  feathers,  too,  and  he  had  promised  to  purchase  all
sorts  of  things  ;  and  he  had  said  he  furnished  tallow  to  the
treasury,  and  therefore  must  be  a  rascal,  for  there  had  been  one
man  already  who  bought  chickens'  feathers,  and  supplied  the
treasury  with  tallow,  and  he  had  deceived  everybody,  and  had
cheated  the  protopopess  out  of  more  than  a  hundred  roubles.
All  that  she  said  further  was  nearly  a  repetition  of  the  same
thing,  and  all  that  the  officials  perceived  was  that  Mrs.
Korobotchka  was  simply  a  stupid  old  woman.  Manilofl"  replied
to  them  that  he  was  always  ready  to  answer  for  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch  as  for  himself;  that  he  would  willingly  sacrifice  the  whole
of  his  property  if  he  could  thereby  acquire  the  hundredth  part
of  Pavel  Ivanovitch's  qualities.  Altogether  he  expressed  him-
self in  the  most  flattering  terms  with  regard  to  the  latter,
adding  some  reflections  on  friendship,  which  he  uttered  with
half-closed  eyes.  These  thoughts  sufficiently  exhibited,  of
course,  the  tender  impulses  of  his  heart,  but  they  did  not  ex-
plain the  matter  in  hand  to  the  officials.

Sobakevitch,  on  his  side,  answered  that,  in  his  opinion,
Tchitchikoflf  was  a  fine  man ;  that  he  had  sold  the  latter  serfs
for  export,  and  that  the  people  were  alive  in  every  sense,  but
that  he  would  not  answer  for  what  might  happen  in  the  future ;
that  if  they  were  to  die  on  the  road,  in  consequence  of  the
hardships  of  transportation,  that  would  be  no  fault  of  his,  and
that  God  alone  is  powerful  in  that  matter  ;  but  there  are  many
fevers  and  other  deadly  diseases  in  the  world,  and  cases  had
been  heard  of  where  whole  villages  had  died  off.     The  officials


THE    RESULT    IS   OUR   HERO  S    FLIGHT.  163

bad  recourse  to  yet  another  device,  which  is  not  quite  honour-
able, but  which  is  occasionally  resorted  to — that  is  to  say,  they
undertook  to  interrogate  Tchitchikoff's  servants  through  their
own  lackeys,  to  find  out  whether  the  former  knew  any  particulars
with  regard  to  the  life  and  circumstances  of  their  master;  however
on  this  side  they  learned  nothing.  All  they  elicited  from  Pet-
rushka  was  a  bad  smell,  and  from  Selifan  that  his  master  had
"  been  in  the  service  of  the  state  in  the  excise  department,"  and
nothing  more.  A  very  strange  custom  obtains  with  the  lower  class!
of  people  in  Russia  :  if  they  are  questioned  directly  about  any-  \
thing,  they  never  'remember,  they  retain  nothing  whatever  in
their  minds,  and  answer  simply  that  they  do  not  knoiy ;  but  if
they  are  interrogated  about  something  else,  they  drag  this  in,
and  narrate  it  with  a  multitude  of  details  which  one  does  not
care  to  listen  to.  All  the  researches  carried  out  by  the  officials
merely  disclosed  to  them  the  fact  that  they  knew  nothing  with
certainty  as  to  what  Tchitchikofl'  was,  but  that  nevertheless
Tchitchikofi"  must  surely  be  something.  They  eventually  con-
cluded to  talk  the  matter  over  thoroughly,  and  to  arrive  at  a
decision  as  to  what  was  to  be  done  about  it :  what  measures
were  to  be  taken,  what  our  hero  really  was — whether  he  was  a
man  whom  it  was  necessary  to  detain  and  lay  hands  upon  as
being  an  evil-disposed  person,  or  whether  he  was  a  man  who
could  detain  and  lay  hands  upon  them  all  as  persons  of  evil
intent.  With  this  object,  it  was  proposed  that  they  should  all
assemble  at  the  house  of  the  chief  of  police,  who  is  already
known  to  the  reader  as  the  father  and  benefactor  of  the  town.


CHAPTER  X.

THE    EESULT    IS    DUE    HEEo's    FLIGHT.

On  assembling  at  the  residence  of  the  chief  of  police,  the
officials  had  occasion  to  remark  from  each  other's  appearance
that  they  had  all  become  greatly  emaciated  by  such  an  amount
of  care  and  anxiety.  In  fact,  the  appointment  of  a  new
governor-general,  the  arrival  of  these  documents  of  secret
import,  and  all  these  rumours,  signifying  God  knows  what, —
everything  had  left  visible  traces  of  worry  upon  their  coun-
tenances, and  the  swallow-tailed  coats  of  many  of  them  had


180  DEAD    SOULS.

grown  perceptibly  loose.  All  had  yielded  to  the  effects :  the
president  of  the  court  had  grown  thin,  and  the  inspector  of  the
Medical  Institute  had  grown  thin  too  ;  and  a  certain  Semen
Ivanovitch,  who  was  never  called  by  his  family  name,  and  who
wore  upon  his  index-finger  a  ring,  which  he  allowed  the  ladies
to  look  at,  even  he  had  grown  thin.  Of  course,  as  is  always
the  case,  there  were  some  of  a  bold  cast  of  character,  who  had
not  lost  their  presence  of  mind  ;  but  of  such  there  were  very  few
indeed.  The  postmaster  alone  did  not  modify  his  usual  evenness
of  character ;  and  he  was  always  accustomed  to  say,  in  such
cases,  "  We  know  you,  you  governor-generals  !  There  may,
possibly,  be  three  or  four  changes  in  your  ranks,  but  I  have
been  sitting  in  my  place  for  the  last  thirty  years,  ray  dear
sirs."

The  council  which  had  assembled  on  the  present  occasion
speedily  set  to  work,  but  a  most  incomprehensible  lack  of
decision  was  evinced  in  the  views  of  those  who  had  assembled
at  it.  One  person  said  that  Tchitchikoff  forged  imperial  bank-
notes, and  then  he  added  himself,  "  But  perhaps,  no — perhaps  he
is  not  a  counterfeiter."  Another  asserted  that  our  hero  was  an
official  belonging  to  the  govern  or- general's  chancellery,  and
immediately  added,  "  However,  the  deuce  only  knows  what
he  is  :  you  certainly  can't  read  it  on  his  forehead."  All  pro-
tested against  the  surmise  that  he  might  be  a  bandit  in  disguise  :
they  considered  that,  in  addition  to  his  personal  appearance,
which  was  respectable  in  itself,  there  was  nothing  in  his  conver-
sation to  indicate  a  man  given  to  deeds  of  violence.  Ail  at
once  the  postmaster,  after  having  remained  buried  in  some  sort
of  reflection  for  the  space  of  several  minutes, — either  in  conse-
quence of  a  sudden  inspiration  which  had  illumined  his  mind,  or
from  some  other  cause, — unexpectedly  exclaimed,  "  Do  j'ou
know,  gentlemen,  who  he  is  ?  "  The  voice  in  which  he  uttered
this  had  something  about  it  which  caused  all  to  exclaim
simultaneously,  "Who?" — "This  man,  gentlemen,  is  no  other
than  Captain  Kopyeikin  !  "  And  when  all,  with  one  voice,  there-
upon inquired  "Who  is  Captain  Kopyeikin?"  the  postmaster
said,  "  What !  you  don't  know  who  Captain  Kopyeikin  is  ?  "

They  all  replied  that  they  had  not  the  least  idea  who  Captain
Kopyeikin  was.

The  postmaster  thereupon  began  to  relate  a  long  story  of  a
half-pay  Eussian  officer,  who,  although  he  had  lost  an  arm  and
a  leg,  had  some  years  previously  placed  himself  at  the  head  of
a  band  of  robbers  in  the  forests  of  Ryazan.

"But  excuse  me,  Ivan  Andreitch,"  said  the  chief  of  police,


THE   RESULT  IS   OUH  HERo's  FLIGHT.  161

you  tell  us  that  Captain  Kopyeikin  had  lost  au  arm  and  a  leg,
whereas  Tchitchikofi" — "

Here  the  postmaster  uttered  an  exclamation,  and  dealt  him-
self a  blow  on  the  forehead  with  the  full  sweep  of  his  arm,  and
called  himself  a  calf  publicly,  in  the  presence  of  them  all.  He
could  not  comprehend  how  such  a  circumstance  had  not
occurred  to  his  mind  before,  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  tale  ;
and  he  confessed  that  the  adage  was  perfectly  just,  *•  The  Russian
is  strong  in  second  thoughts."  Nevertheless,  a  moment  later,  he
began  to  employ  craft,  and  tried  to  extricate  himself  by  saying
that  mechanism  had  reacheda  high  degree  of  perfection  in  England  ;
that  it  was  evident,  from  the  newspapers,  that  a  man  had  invented
a  wooden  leg  of  such  a  description  that,  by  the  pressure  of  an
imperceptible  spring,  such  legs  would  bear  a  person  God  knows
to  what  regions,  so  that  he  could  never  be  found  afterwards.

However,  they  all  entertained  strong  doubts  as  to  whether
Tchitchikoti'  was  Captain  Kopyeikin,  and  they  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  postmaster's  theory  was  too  far-fetched.  Still
they  had  not  hit  the  mark ;  and,  led  on  by  the  postmaster's
acute  guesses,  they  wandered  still  farther  from  the  truth.
From  among  a  number  of  hypotheses,  some  of  which  were  very
clever  in  their  way,  one  was  finally  settled  upon ;  and  this,
strange  to  say,  was  that  Tchitchikoff  was  Napoleon  in  disguise.
Now  Englishmen  had  long  been  envious,  because,  forsooth,
Russia  was  so  great  and  extensive ;  and  some  caricatures  had
even  appeai'ed  in  which  a  Russian  was  depicted  engaged  in
conversation  with  an  Englishman.  The  Englishman  was  stand-
ing and  holding  a  dog  behind  him  with  a  cord,  and,  of  course,
the  dog  was  understood  to  be  Napoleon  :  "  Look  out,"  says  the
Briton,  "  if  you  don't  do  so-and-so,  I'll  set  the  dog  on  you."
And  here  they  had  possibly  let  him  loose  from  the  island  of  St.
Helena  ;  and  now  he  had  made  his  way  back  to  Russia  in  the
shape  of  Tchitchikofi'.

Of  course  the  officials  did  not  believe  all  this,  but  still  they
reflected  upon  it ;  and,  on  scrutinizing  the  matter,  they  were  of
opinion  that  Tchitchikoli"s  face,  when  he  turned  and  presented
his  profile  to  one's  gaze,  was  very  much  like  the  portraits
of  Napoleon.  The  chief  of  police  likewise,  who  had  served  in
the  campaign  of  1812,  and  had  seen  Napoleon  in  the  flesh,  could
not  help  confessing  that  the  latter  was  not  in  the  least  taller
than  Tchitchikofi",  and  that  the  cast  of  Napoleon's  countenance
Avas  neither  too  fat  nor  too  thin.  Perhaps  some  readers
will  call  all  this  incredible,  and  the  author  is  also  prepared  to
declare  it  incredible  to  please  them ;    but  unfortunately,  it  all


162  DEAD    SOULS.

took  place  exactly  as  narrated.  Moreover,  it  behoves  us  to
remember  that  all  this  occurred  shortly  after  the  glorious
expulsion  of  the  French.

At  that  period,  all  our  landed  gentry,  officials,  merchants,
shopmen,  every  man  who  could  read  and  write,  and  even  un-
educated people,  had  been  sworn  politicians  for  at  least  eight
years.  "The  Moscow  News  "  and  "The  Son  of  the  Father-
land "  were  mercilessly  perused,  and  reached  the  last  reader  in
tatters,  which  were  unfit  for  any  use  whatever.  Instead  of  the
questions,  "  How  much  have  you  sold  your  oats  for  per  measure,
my  dear  fellow  ?  "  or,  "  Did  you  derive  some  slight  benefit  from
last  night's  light  snow  ?  "  they  said,  "  What  do  the  newspapers
state  ?  Has  Napoleon  been  released  from  the  island  again  ?  "
The  merchants  greatly  dreaded  this  contingency,  for  they  put
full  faith  in  the  prediction  of  a  certain  prophet  who  had  been  in
jail  for  the  last  three  years.  This  prophet  had  come  from  no
one  knows  whence,  in  bast  shoes  and  a  sheepskin  coat,  which
smelt  horribly  of  stale  fish,  and  had  announced  that  Napoleon
was  "Antichrist,"  and  was  held  fast  by  a  strong  chain  behind
six  walls  and  seven  seas,  but  that  hereafter  he  would  break  the
chain  and  obtain  possession  of  the  whole  world.  This  prophet
had  been  lodged  in  jail  for  his  prophecy,  as  he  deserved  to  be  ;
but  nevertheless,  the  prophecy  had  done  its  work,  and  the
merchants  were  thoroughly  alarmed.

Fora  longtime  afterwards,  during  a  period  of  the  most  profitable
transactions  even,  the  merchants  discussed  "  Antichrist"  when
they  betook  themselves  to  the  taverns  to  drink  their  tea.  Many
of  the  officials  and  of  the  genuine  nobility  also  involuntarily
meditated  upon  the  subject,  and  being  inoculated  with  mysticism,
which,  as  is  well  known,  was  then  in  high  fashion,  they  per-
ceived a  special  meaning  in  every  letter  which  composed  the
name  of  Napoleon  ;  many  even  discovered  in  it  the  numbers  of
the  Apocalypse.

Thus,  there  was  nothing  surprising  in  the  fact  that  the  offi-
cials involuntarily  meditated  upon  this  point.  However,  they
promptly  recovered  themselves,  on  perceiving  that  their  fancies
were  carrying  them  along  too  rapidly,  and  that  this  was  no  solu-
tion as  regards  our  hero.  They  thought  and  they  talked,  and
finally  they  decided  that  it  would  not  be  a  bad  idea  to  ques-
tion Nozdrefl"  thoroughly,  as  he  had  been  the  first  to  start  the
story  of  the  dead  souls,  and  stood,  as  they  said,  in  intimate  rela-
tions to  TchitchikofF ;  consequently,  he  must  know  something  of
the  circumstances  of  our  friend's  life,  and  an  eflbrt  must  be  made
to  see  what  he  had  to  say.


THE    RESULT    IS    OUR    HERO  S    FLIGHT.  163

So  the  chief  of  police  wrote  Nozdreff  a  note  on  the  instant,
inviting  him  for  the  evening ;  and  a  policeman  in  cavalry-boots,
with  an  attractive  bloom  upon  his  cheeks,  proceeded  immedi-
ately, with  hasty  steps,  and  holding  up  his  sword,  to  Nozdreff's
lodgings.  Nozdreff  was  engaged  with  a  matter  of  importance  ;
for  four  whole  days  he  had  neither  emerged  from  his  apartments
nor  admitted  anyone  to  them,  but  had  received  his  food  through
the  window,  and  had  even  grown  pale  and  green.  His  business
demanded  the  greatest  attention  ;  it  consisted  in  selecting  from
several  gross  of  cards  a  single  pack,  the  most  suitable  one  upon
which  one  might  rely  as  upon  a  faithful  friend.  There  was  work
enough  still  to  last  two  weeks,  and  during  the  whole  of  this
period  Porfiriy  was  to  clean  the  bull-pup  Avith  a  certain  small
brush,  and  to  wash  him  three  times  a  day  in  soap  and  water.
Nozdreff  was  greatly  incensed  at  having  his  solitude  intruded
upon  ;  first  he  consigned  the  policeman  to  the  Devil,  but  when  he
had  read  in  the  chief  of  police's  note  that  a  harvest  might  be
expected,  since  some  novice  or  other  was  to  be  at  the  even-
ing gathering,  he  instantly  calmed  down,  hastily  locked  up  his
room,  dressed  himself  in  the  first  clothes  that  came  to  hand,  and
set  out.

Nozdrefl''s  disposition,  testimony,  and  surmises  presented
such  a  sharp  contrast  with  those  of  the  officials  that  the  guesses
of  the  latter  were  upset.  This  fellow  was  decidedly  a  man  for
whom  there  existed  no  doubts  whatever,  and  in  exact  propor-
tion as  they  exhibited  hesitation  and  timidity,  did  he  display
firmness  and  confidence.  He  replied  to  all  points  without  even
hesitating,  declared  that  Tchitchikoff  had  purchased  dead  souls
to  the  number  of  several  thousands,  and  that  he  himself  had  sold
some  to  him,  because  he  did  not  see  any  reason  why  he  should
not  sell  them.  To  the  question,  Was  not  Tchitchikoff'  a  spy,  and
was  he  not  attempting  to  find  out  something  ?  Nozdreff  replied
that  ho  had  already  been  a  spy  in  their  school-days,  that  he  had
been  called  the  "attorney-general,"  and  that  his  comrades  (in-
cluding himself )  had  hustled  him  about  so  much  that  it  had  been
necessarj'  to  apply  two  hundred  and  forty  leeches  to  one  of  his
temples — that  is,  he  had  meant  to  say  forty  ;  the  mention  of  the
two  hundred  had  popped  out  of  its  own  accord.  To  the  ques-
tion. Was  Tchitchikoff  a  counterfeiter  ?  he  replied  that  he  was  ;
and,  in  that  connection,  he  related  an  anecdote  to  illustrate  Tchi-
tchikoff's  remarkable  cleverness — how  the  authorities,  on  learn-
ing that  he  had  two  million  roubles'  worth  of  counterfeit
bank-notes  in  his  house,  had  sealed  up  the  building,  and  set  a
guard  of  two  soldiers  at  every  door,  and  how  Tchitchikoff  had


164  BEAD   SOULS.

changed  the  notes  in  the  course  of  one  night,  so  that,  when  the
seals  were  removed  on  the  following  day,  it  was  seen  that  they
were  all  genuine.  To  the  question,  Did  Tchitchikoff  really
intend  to  kidnap  the  governor's  daughter,  and  was  it  true  that
he  himself  had  undertaken  to  assist  and  take  part  in  the  enter-
prise ?  Nozdreff  replied  that  he  had  assisted,  and  that,  if  it  had
not  been  for  him,  nothing  would  have  come  of  it.  Here  he  tried
to  catch  himself  up,  perceiving  that  he  had  lied  quite  unneces-
sarily, and  that  he  might  by  this  mistake  call  down  misfortune
on  his  head  ;  however  he  could  not  possibly  restrain  his  tongue.

Moreover,  it  was  difficult  to  do  so,  as  such  interesting  details
presented  themselves  that  he  could  by  no  means  keep  silent :  he
even  mentioned  the  name  of  the  village  where  was  situated  the
parish  church  in  which  the  marriage  was  arranged  to  take  place  ;
namely,  the  village  of  Trukhmatchevka :  the  pope's  name,  he
said,  was  Father  Sidor  ;  seventy-five  roubles  was  the  price  to  be
paid  for  the  service  ;  and  the  pope  would  not  have  consented
had  he  not  frightened  him  by  threatening  to  denounce  him  for
having  married  Mikhail,  the  flour-dealer,  to  his  fellow-god-
parent;"' that  he  had  even  surrendered  his  own  calash,  and  had
prepared  relays  of  horses  at  all  the  stations.  These  lying  par-
ticulars extended  even  to  the  point  of  mentioning  the  names  of
the  postboys.  An  attempt  was  made  to  drop  a  word  about
Kapoleon,  but  the  officials  repented  of  their  effort ;  for  Nozdreff
furnished  them  with  such  a  pack  of  nonsense,  destitute  of  even
the  slightest  semblance  of  truth,  that  they  all  departed,  sighing  ;
the  postmaster  alone  continued  to  listen  for  a  long  while,  think-
ing that  there  might,  at  least,  be  something  more  ;  but  finally
even  he  waved  his  hand  and  said,  "  The  deuce  knows  what
it's  all  about!  "  And  they  all  of  them  agreed  that,  struggle
with  a  bull  as  much  as  you  like,  you  will  never  get  any  milk
from  him.

So  the  officials  were  left  in  a  worse  position  than  before,  and
they  could  not  settle  in  the  least  who  Tchitchikoff  was.

Tchitchikoff  knew  nothing  whatever  of  all  this.  It  seemed
to  happen  expressly,  that  he  took  a  slight  cold  at  that  very  time,
— one  of  those  colds  in  the  head  with  a  slight  swelling  in  the
throat,  in  the  distribution  of  which  the  climate  of  many  of  our
provincial  towns  is  extremely  lavish.  In  order  that  his  life
might  not  be  cut  short,  without  posterity,  which  God  forbid,  he
decided  that  it  would  be  better  to  keep  to  his  room  for  two  or
three  days.     During  these  few  days  he  gargled  his  throat  with

*  Godparents  are  not  allowed  to  marty  in  the  Greek  Church.


THE    RESULT    IS   OUR   HERO  S   FLIGHT.  165

a  decoction  of  milk  and  figs,  which  he  afterwards  ate ;  and  he
wore  a  little  poultice  of  camomile  and  camphor  bound  upon  his
cheek.  As  he  was  desirous  of  occupying  his  time  in  some  way,
he  prepared  new  and  detailed  lists  of  the  peasants  whom  he  had
recently  purchased  ;  and  he  even  read  a  volume  of  the  "Duchess
de  La  Valliere,"  which  he  had  rummaged  out  of  his  trunk;
looked  over  divers  notes,  and  other  objects  in  his  dressing-case,
read  his  papers  over  a  second  time,  in  a  perfunctory  way,  and
felt  greatly  bored  by  everything.

He  could  not  in  the  least  understand  what  it  meant,  that  not
one  of  the  city  officials  had  come  even  once  to  inquire  after  his
health,  whereas,  only  a  short  time  before,  drozhkies  had  stood
constantly  in  front  of  the  inn, — now  the  postmaster's,  now  the
procurator's,  and,  again,  that  belonging  to  the  president  of  the
court.  He  merely  shrugged  his  shoulders  as  he  walked  about
the  room.  At  length  he  felt  better,  and  God  knows  how  he
rejoiced  when  he  perceived  the  possibility  of  going  out  into  the
fresh  air  once  more.  He  set  about  his  toilet  without  delay,
opened  his  dressing-case,  poured  some  hot  water  into  a  glass,  took
out  his  brush  and  soap,  and  prepared  to  shave  himself ;  and,  by
the  way,  it  was  high  time  that  he  did  so,  for,  on  feeling  his
chin  with  his  hand,  and  looking  in  the  glass,  he  ejaculated,
"  Eh  !  what  a  forest  has  sprung  up  !  "  And  in  fact,  it  was  not
a  forest,  but  all  over  his  cheeks  and  chin  a  tolerably  thick  stubble
had  planted  itself.  After  shaving  himself,  he  set  so  briskly  to
work  with  his  toilet,  that  he  nearly  leaped  out  of  his  trousers.
At  last  he  was  dressed  ;  and  sprinkled  with  eau-de-Cologne,  and
warmly  wrapped  up,  he  emerged  into  the  street,  after  having
muffled  up  his  face  as  a  measure  of  precaution.

His  re-appearance  on  the  scene  was  really  a  festive  occasion,
as  it  is  with  every  convalescent.  Everything  which  he
encountered  assumed  a  smiling  aspect, — the  houses,  the  passing
moujiks,  who  were  really  quite  gloomy,  however,  and  one  of
whom  had  just  succeeded  in  dealing  a  comrade  a  blow  on
the  ear.  He  intended  that  his  first  call  should  be  for  the
governor.  All  sorts  of  thoughts  occurred  to  him  on  the  way  :
the  pretty  little  blonde  was  whirling  in  his  brain  ;  his  fancy
even  began  to  grow  somewhat  uncontrollable,  and  he  had
already  begun  to  jest  and  to  laugh  at  himself  a  little.  It  was  in
this  frame ,  of  mind  that  he  found  himself  in  front  of  the
entrance  to  the  governor's  house.  He  M'as  already  in  the  act
of  hastily  throwing  oft'  his  cloak  in  the  vestibule,  when  the
porter  astounded  him  with  the  utterly  unexpected  words,  "Not
receiving  !  "


166  DEAD    SOULS.

*'  How  ?  What  do  you  mean?  You  evidently  do  not  recog-
nise me.     Take  a  good  look  at  my  face  !  "  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  Not  know  you,  indeed  !  Why,  this  is  not  the  first  time  I
ever  saw  you,"  retorted  the  porter.  "It  is  precisely  you  out
of  all  the  rest  whom  I  have  received  orders  not  to  admit :  every-
one else  can  enter."

"  You  don't  say  so  !     Why,  what's  the  reason  ?  "

"  Those  are  my  orders,  and  it's  as  it  should  be,  evidently,"
said  the  porter,  and  he  added  the  words  "  so  there."  After  which
he  stood  before  Tchitchikoff  in  a  negligent  attitude,  and  without
preserving  that  courteous  mien  with  which  he  had  always
hitherto  removed  our  hero's  cloak.  It  seemed  as  though  he  were
thinking,  as  he  gazed  at  him,  "Oho  !  Since  the  master  drives
you  from  his  door,  you  must  be  some  sort  of  a  scamp  !  "

"Incomprehensible,"  thought  Tchitchikoff  to  himself,  and
he  went  straight  to  the  president  of  the  court ;  but  the  president
of  the  court  was  thrown  into  such  confusion  at  the  sight  of  him
that  he  could  not  put  two  words  together,  and  uttered  such
nonsense  that  they  both  felt  ashamed.  Try  as  he  would,  on
leaving,  to  explain  the  matter,  and  to  discover  what  the  presi-
dent meant,  and  to  what  his  words  referred,  Tchitchikoff  could
not  understand  anything.

Then  he  called  on  the  others — the  chief  of  police,  the  vice-
governor,  and  the  postmaster  ;  but  they  either  did  not  receive
him  at  all,  or  received  him  so  strangely,  conducted  the  conver-
sation in  such  a  constrained  and  incomprehensible  way,  were  so
abstracted,  and  everything  turned  out  so  ridiculously,  that  he
began  to  doubt  whether  their  brains  were  in  a  normal  condition.
He  made  an  attempt  to  approach  someone,  in  order  at  least  to
discover  the  cause  of  all  this  ;  but  he  did  not  discover  if.  He
wandered  aimlessly  through  the  town,  like  a  man  only  half
awake,  and  quite  incapable  of  deciding  whether  his  wits  had
forsaken  him,  whether  the  officials  had  lost  their  heads,  whether
all  this  was  happening  in  a  dream,  or  what.  It  was  late,  almost
twilight,  in  fact,  when  he  returned  to  his  inn,  whence  he  had
emerged  in  such  an  agreeable  frame  of  mind,  and  ordered  tea  to
be  brought,  out  of  sheer  dulness.  He  had  begun  thoughtfully
pouring  out  his  tea,  absorbed  in  a  sort  of  meditation  as  to  the
peculiarity  of  his  position,  when  the  door  of  his  chamber
suddenly  opened,  and  Nozdreff  stood  before  him  in  a  wholly
unexpected  manner.

"What  says  the  proverb?  Seven  versts  is  the  immediate
neighbourhood  to  friends  !  "  remarked  Nozdreff,  doffing  his  cap  :
"  As  I  was  passing  by,  I  espy  a  light  in  your  window.    '  Come ! '


THE    RESULT   IS    OUR   HERO  S   FLIGHT.  167

I  think  to  myself,  '  I'll  go  in  !  he  certainly  can't  be  asleep.'
And  it's  a  good  thing  that  you  have  some  tea  on  the  table  :  I'll
drink  a  cup  with  pleasure.  I  had  all  sorts  of  vile  stuff  for
dinner  to-day,  and  I  feel  a  row  beginning  in  my  stomach.
Order  a  pipe  to  be  filled  for  me.     Where's  your  pipe  ?  "

"  I  don't  smoke  a  pipe,"  said  Tchitchikotf.

"  Stuff !  As  if  I  didn't  know  that  you  were  a  smoker.  Hey,
there  !  What's  his  name  ?  what  do  you  call  your  man  ?  Hey,
there,  Vakhramei,  listen  !  "

"His  name  is  not  Vakhramei,  but  Petrushka."

"  What  ?     Well,  you  used  to  have  a  Vakhramei  ?  "

"  I  never  had  a  Vakhramei."

"  Yes,  exactly  :  it  was  Derebiu  who  had  a  Vakhramei.  Fancy
what  luck  Derebin  has  :  his  aunt  has  quarrelled  with  her  son
because  he  has  married  a  serf-girl,  and  now  she  has  bequeathed
all  her  property  to  Derebin.  Thinks  I  to  myself,  'If  I  only
had  an  aunt  like  that,  even  a  distant  one  !  '  But  what's  the
matter  with  you,  my  dear  fellow,  that  you  have  been  keeping
aloof  from  everybody,  and  have  not  been  anywhere  ?  Of  course
I  know  that  5'ou  are  occasionally  engaged  in  learned  pursuits,
that  you  are  fond  of  reading."  (From  what  premises  Nozdreff
drew  his  conclusions  that  Tchitchikoff  occupied  himself  with
learned  subjects,  and  that  he  was  fond  of  reading,  we  cannot  in
the  least  divine,  and  Tchitchikoff'  still  less.)  "  Ah,  brother
Tchitchikoff!  if  you  only  knew,  it  really  would  furnish  food
for  your  satirical  humour."  (Why  Tchitchikoff  had  a  satirical
mind  is  also  unknown.)  "  Fancy,  my  dear  fellow,  they  were
playing  at  gorka  at  the  house  of  Likhatcheft',  the  merchant :
that's  where  the  laugh  comes  in!  Perependeft" was  with  me.
'  Look  here,'  says  he,  '  if  Tchitchikoff'  were  here  now,  this  would
just  suit  him  ! '  "  (Tchitchikoff,  by  the  way,  had  never  known
any  Perependeff  in  his  life.)  "And  confess,  my  dear  fellow,
that  you  behaved  very  meanly,  you  know,  when — when  you
played  that  game  of  draughts  with  me.  For  I  won.  Yes,  my
dear  fellow,  you  simply  diddled  me.  But  the  deuce  knows,  I
can't  cherish  ill-will.  The  other  day,  at  the  president  of  the
court's — but  stop  !  I  must  tell  j-ou,  that  the  whole  town  is
arrayed  against  you.  They  think  that  you  make  counterfeit
money,  and  have  appealed  to  me  ;  but  I  defended  you  with  all
my  might.  I  told  them  that  I  had  been  to  school  with  you,
and  knew  your  father :  well,  there's  no  use  in  particularizing,
but  I  told  a  lot  of  lies."

"  I  make  counterfeit  money  !  "  shrieked  Tchitchikoff",  spring-
ing from  his  chair.


168  DEAD    SOULS.

"  But  why  did  you  frighten  them  so  ?  "  went  on  Nozdreff.
"The  deuce  knows,  they  nearly  went  out  of  their  nainds  with
terror  :  they  made  you  out  to  be  a  spy  and  a  highwayman.  And
the  procurator  has  died  of  fright :  his  funeral  will  take  place  to-
morrow. You  won't  attend  it,  eh  ?  To  tell  the  truth,  they  are
afraid  of  a  new  governor- general.  But  you  have  certainly  under-
taken a  very  risky  business,  Tchitchikoff."

"  What  risky  business  ?  "  inquired  Tchitchikoff  uneasily.

"  Why,  the  abduction  of  the  governor's  daughter.  I  must
confess  that  I  expected  it :  by  heavens,  I  expected  it !  The
very  first  time  when  I  saw  you  together  at  the  ball, '  Well,  now,'
I  thought  tom5'self,  '  Tchitchikoff  is  not  doing  that  fornothing  !  '
But  it's  useless  for  you  to  make  such  a  choice  :  I  can't  see  any-
thing pretty  about  her.  Still,  there  is  one  girl  worth  having,  a
relative  of  Bikusoff's,  his  sister's  daughter  ;  and  such  a  girl,  too!
One  may  really  call  her  a  wonderful  piece  of  calico  !  "

"  But  what  are  you  saying  ?  What  crack-brained  affair  is  this  ?
What  do  you  mean  by  abducting  the  governor's  daughter  ?  "
said  Tchitchikoff,  staring  with  all  his  eyes.

*'  Come,  enough  of  that,  my  dear  fellow  !  What  a  reserved
man  you  are  !  I  admit  that  I  came  to  you  about  this  very  matter :
I  am  ready  to  assist  you  if  you  like.  So  be  it :  I  will  hold  the
crown  over  you,*  the  calash  and  relays  of  horses  shall  be  my
care,  but  on  one  condition — that  you  will  lend  me  three  thou-
sand roubles.  I  must  have  them,  my  dear  fellow,  or  cut  my
throat."

While  Nozdreff  was  rattling  on  in  this  strain,  Tchitchikoff
wiped  his  eyes  several  times,  with  a  desire  to  convince  himself
whether  he  was  listening  to  all  this  in  a  dream.  The  manufac-
ture of  counterfeit  bank-notes  ;  the  abduction  of  the  governor's
daughter  ;  the  death  of  the  procurator,  of  which  he  was  said  to
be  the  cause  ;  the  arrival  of  a  governor-general — all  this  pro-
duced a  tolerably  violent  alarm  in  his  breast.  "  Well,  if  it  has
come  to  this,"  he  thought  to  himself,  "  there's  no  time  to  waste  ;
I  must  get  away  from  here  as  speedily  as  possible."

He  then  got  rid  of  Nozdreff  as  promptly  as  he  could,  sum-
moned Selifan  at  once,  and  ordered  him  to  be  ready  at  day-
break, so  that  they  might  leave  town  at  six  o'clock  on  the
next  morning,  without  fail ;  everything  was  to  be  thoroughly  in-
spected, the  britchka  greased,  and  so  forth,  and  so  forth.  Seli-
fan ejaculated,  "  I  obey  you,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  "  but  all  the
same  he  halted  for  some  time  motionless  at  the  door.    Our  hero

*  Crowns  are  held  above  the  heads  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom  during
the  marriage  ceremony  in  the  Greek  Church,


DEPARTURE    ON    FRESH    ENTERPRISES.  169

then  immediately  commanded  Petrushka  to  pull  out  his  trunk
from  under  the  bed — where  it  was  covered  with  dust — and
together  they  immediately  set  to  work  packing  it  with  socks,
shirts,  linen,  both  clean  and  soiled,  boot-jacks,  and  calendars,
all  of  which  were  thrown  in  as  they  came  to  hand,  without  much
attempt  at  arrangement.  Our  hero  wanted  to  be  ready  that
evening  without  fail,  in  order  that  no  delay  might  occur  on  the
following  morning.  After  standing  for  a  couple  of  minutes  at
the  door,  Selifan  had  slowly  left  the  room.  Slowly,  as  slowly
as  it  is  possible  to  conceive  of,  he  descended  the  staircase,  im-
printing traces  of  his  wet  boots  on  the  well-worn  steps,  and  in
his  surprise  he  scratched  the  back  of  his  head  with  his  hand  for
a  long  time  thereafter.


CHAPTER  XI.

DEPARTURE  ON  FRESH  ENTERPRISES.

Everything  was  to  have  been  ready  at  daybreak,  and  at  6  a.m.
Tchitchikoflf  was  to  have  passed  through  the  city  gates.  Nothing,
however,  happened  as  he  had  anticipated.  In  the  first  place,  he
woke  up  later  than  he  had  intended  :  this  was  the  first  unplea-
santness. On  rising,  he  immediately  sent  to  learn  whether  his
britchka  was  harnessed,  and  whether  all  was  in  readiness ;  but
it  was  reported  to  him  that  the  britchka  was  not  yet  harnessed,
and  that  nothing  was  ready  :  this  was  the  second  unpleasant-
ness. He  then  flew  into  a  rage,  and  even  made  preparations  to
administer  a  sound  thrashing  to  our  friend  Selifan,  merely
waiting,  in  impatience,  until  the  latter  should  allege  some
excuse  in  his  own  defence.  Selifan  soon  made  his  appearance
at  the  door,  and  his  master  had  the  pleasure  of  listening  to  the
discourses  which  masters  generally  hear  from  their  servants
whenever  it  is  necessary  for  one  to  set  out  in  haste.

"It  will  be  necessary  to  have  the  horses  shod,  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch."

"  Ah,  you  young  pig  !  0  you  blockhead  !  Why  didn't  you  say
so  before  ?     Wasn't  there  time  ?  "

"  Yes,  there  was  plenty  of  time.  And  there's  the  wheel,  too,
Pavel  Ivanovitch  :  the  tire  will  have  to  be  replaced,  for  the  roads
are  full  of  ruts  now,  and  there  will  he  a  great  strain  on  it  every-
where. And  I  wanted  to  report  that  the  dashboard  is  all
rickety,  so  that  it  will  probably  not  last  for  two  stages,"


170  DEAD    SOULS.

"  You  villain  !  "  shouted  TchitcMkoff,  wringing  his  hands,  and
approaching  the  servant  sq  closely  that  Selifan  retreated,  for
fear  that  he  might  receive  a  blow  from  his  master.

"  Have  you  sworn  to  murder  me  ?  hey  ?  "  shouted  our  hero.
"  Do  you  wish  to  cut  my  throat  ?  Yes,  have  you  made  up  your
mind  to  cut  my  throat  on  the  highway,  you  bandit,  you  hog,
you  marine  scarecrow  ?  hey  ?  hey  ?  We  have  been  settled  here
three  weeks,  haven't  we,  hey  ?  And  you  never  gave  a  hint,  you
good-for-nothing,  of  all  this,  and  now  you  bring  it  out  at  the  last
moment,  when  we're  almost  on  the  very  point  of  starting  !  You
meant  to  mount  and  set  out,  did  you,  hey  ?  And  you  concealed
it,  hey,  hey  ?  Of  course  you  knew  it  all  before  ?  You  knew  it,
hey  ?  hey  ?     Answer  me  !     You  knew  it,  hey  ?  "

"  I  knew  it,"  replied  Selifan,  dropping  his  head.

"  Then  why  didn't  you  say  so,  hey  ?  "  g

To  this  question  Selifan  made  no  reply,  but  he  seemed  to  be
saying  to  himself,  as  he  stood  with  drooping  head,  "  Just  see
how  nasty  it  has  all  turned  out ;  I  knew  it,  and  like  a  stupid  I
did  not  tell  it."

"  Now  go  and  fetch  the  blacksmith,"  retorted  our  hero,  "  and
let  everything  be  finished  in  two  hours.-  Do  you  hear  ?  in  two
hours  without  fail ;  and  if  it  is  not,  I'll  give  you,  I'll — I'll  twist
you  into  a  horn — I'll  tie  you  up  in  a  knot !  "  As  will  be  seen
by  this  language  our  hero  was  deeply  incensed.

Selifan  turned  to  the  door,  with  the  intention  of  carrying  out
his  instructions  ;  but  suddenly  he  halted,  and  said,  "  One  thing
more.  That  piebald  horse  ought  to  be  sold,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,
for  he's  a  regular  villain :  he's  such  fi  horse,  that  if  you  keep
him — may  God  protect  us  from  mishap,  that's  all  I  say !  "

"  Yes  !  Of  course  I'll  go — I'll  run  to  the  market,  and  sell
him !  "

"By  Heavens,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  he's  only  fine  in  appear-
ance. In  reality,  he's  the  most  vicious  horse  I  know ;  such  a
horse  is  worth  nothing."

"  You  idiot !  When  I  want  to  sell  him,  I'll  sell  him.  You
have  set  to  arguing  again,  I  see  !  I'll  attend  to  that.  If  you
don't  fetch  the  blacksmith  instantly,  and  if  everything  is  not
ready  in  two  hours,  I'll  give  you  such  a  thrashing  that  you  won't
be  able  to  look  yourself  in  the  face  afterwards  !  Gro  !  march  1  "
Thereupon  Selifan  left  the  room.

Tchitchikofi"  broke  into  a  violent  rage,  and  flung  down  the
sword  which  he  carried  about  with  him  on  his  journeys,  for  the
purpose  of  inspiring  fear  whenever  necessary.  He  excited  him-
self with  the  blacksmith  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  he


DEPARTURE    ON   FRESH   ENTERPRISES.  171

came  to  terms ;  for  all  blacksmiths  are  barefaced  rogues,  and
this  one,  on  perceiving  that  despatch  was  required,  demanded
six  times  the  worth  of  the  job.  Kage  as  our  hero  would ;  call
him  villain,  thief,  a  robber  of  travellers  ;  hint  as  he  would  of  the
Day  of  Judgment — the  blacksmith  would  not  yield  in  the  least  :
he  thoroughly  maintained  his  character,  and  not  only  refused  to
abate  the  price,  but  even  loitered  over  the  work  for  five  hours
and  a  half  instead  of  two.

During  this  interval  our  friend  had  the  satisfaction  of  passing
through  those  agreeable  moments,  familiar  to  every  traveller,
when  everything  is  packed  up  in  his  trunks,  and  when  only  some
bits  of  cord  and  paper,  and  a  variety  of  rubbish  is  strewn  about
his  room — when  he  neither  belongs  to  the  road  nor  to  home,
but  gazes  from  his  window  upon  the  passers-by  threading  their
w5,y  along,  discussing  or  thinking  over  their  money  affairs,  and
raising  their  eyes  in  stupid  curiosity  at  him,  and  then,  after  one
glance,  pursuing  their  road.  Everything  in  existence — every-
thing that  he  beholds — the  little  shop  opposite  his  Avindow,  and
the  old  woman  who  lives  in  the  house  over  the  way,  and  who
approaches  her  short-curtained  window  to  look  at  him  —  every-
thing is  hateful  to  him  ;  still  he  does  not  retreat  from  his  own
window.  There  he  stands,  now  shivering,  again  directing  his
troubled  attention  upon  everything  before  him ;  and  in  his  vexa-
tion at  having  to  wait,  he  crushes  perchance  a  fly  which  has
been  buzzing  and  beating  against  the  pane,  just  beneath  his
finger.

But  there  is  an  end  to  all  things,  and  with  our  hero  the
longed-for  moment  at  last  arrived  ;  all  was  ready ;  the  dash-
board of  the  britchka  had  been  properly  repaired,  the  wheel  was
provided  with  a  new  tire,  the  horses  were  led  back  from  the
watering-trough,  and  the  rascally  blacksmiths  had  taken  their
departure,  counting  their  sUver  roubles,  and  wishing  our  friend
a  good  journey  as  they  went.  At  length  the  britchka  was
packed;  two  hot  kalatchi, '■'  jnst  purchased,  were  put  in;  and
Selifan  had  already  thrust  something  for  himself  into  his  pocket,
as  he  sat  on  the  box.  Finally  our  hero  seated  himself  in  his
equipage  ;  while  the  waiter  of  the  inn,  clad  in  his  stout  cotton
surtout,  waved  his  cap  ;  and  the  lackeys,  coachmen,  and  others
who  had  assembled  gazed  at  the  departure  of  the  strange
gentleman.  Then,  amid  all  the  other  incidents  which  accom-
pany an  exit,  the  britchka,  which  had  remained  for  so  long  a
time  in  the  town,  and  which  has  possibly  so  greatly  wearied
the  reader,  emerged  from  the  gate  of  the  inn.
*  Meat  patties,


172  DEAD   SOULS,

"  Glory  to  God  !  "  thought  TchitchikofF,  and  he  crossed  him-
self. Selifan  cracked  his  whip  ;  Petrushka  mounted  beside  him,
after  first  hanging  on  the  step  for  awhile ;  and  our  hero,  in-
stalling himself  as  comfortably  as  possible,  and  wrapping  him-
self in  his  Georgian  rug,  placed  a  leather  pillow  behind  his  back,
and  closely  hugged  the  hot  meat-pies.  The  equipage  began
dancing  and  jolting  about,  owing  to  the  pavement,  which,  seem-
ingly, possessed  a  power  of  projection.  Our  hero  gazed  with  un-
defined feelings  at  the  houses,  the  garden-walls,  and  the  streets,
which,  on  their  side,  seemed  to  leap  as  they  retreated  slowly
behind  him,  and  which,  perchance,  he  would  never  behold  again
during  the  whole  course  of  his  existence.

As  they  turned  into  a  fresh  street,  the  britchka  was  forced  to
come  to  a  halt,  -for  an  interminable  funeral  procession  was
passing  along.  Tchitchikoflf  thrust  out  his  head,  and  ordered
Petrushka  to  inquire  who  was  being  buried,  and  he  learned  that
it  was  the  procurator.  Full  of  unpleasant  feelings  he  promptly
hid  himself  in  a  corner,  covered  himself  with  his  rug,  and
drew  the  curtain.  When  the  equipage  was  thus  brought  to  a
standstill,  Selifan  and  Petrushka,  reverently  removing  their  hats,
took  observations  as  to  who  were  there.,  in  and  on  what  they
rode,  and  how  many  of  them  there  were  in  all,  including  both
foot-mourners  and  persons  in  carriages.  Their  master,  after
giving  them  strict  orders  not  to  recognise  anyone,  or  to  salute
any  of  their  lackey  friends,  also  began  peeping  through  the
small  pane  of  glass  which  was  set  in  his  leather  curtain.

Behind  the  coffin  marched  all  the  officials,  with  their  heads
bare.  He  began  to  fear  that  they  might  recognise  his  equipage,
but  they  were  not  thinking  of  that.  They  did  not  even  engage
in  those  various  worldly  discussions,  such  as  the  people  who
accompany  a  corpse  generally  indulge  in.  Their  minds  were
centred  upon  themselves  at  that  juncture  of  affairs  :  they  were
wondering  what  sort  of  a  person  the  new  governor-general
would  be,  how  he  would  take  hold  of  matters,  and  how  he  would
treat  them.  After  the  officials,  who  were  on  foot,  followed
some  coaches,  from  which  gazed  ladies  in  mourning  caps.  It
was  obvious,  from  the  movements  of  their  lips  and  hands,  that
they  were  engaged  in  a  brisk  conversation :  possibly  they  also
were  discussing  the  coming  of  the  new  governor-general,  enun-
ciating hypotheses  with  regard  to  the  balls  which  he  would  give,
and  also  worrying  about  their  everlasting  scallops  and  gimp.

After  the  coaches  followed  several  empty  drozhkies  in  single
file,  till  finally  no  more  remained,  and  our  hero  could  proceed.
He  heaved  a  sigh  of  relief  as  he  parted  the  leather  curtains,  and


DEPARTURE   ON   FRESH   ENTERPRISES.  173

heartily  ejaculated,  "  So  that's  the  procurator  !  He  has  lived,
and  now  he  has  died  ;  and  now  they  will  print  in  the  neAvs-
papers  that  he  died  regretted  hy  his  subordinates  and  by  all
mankind,  a  respected  citizen,  a  wonderful  father,  a  model
husband ;  and  soon  they  will  no  doubt  add  that  he  was  accom-
panied to  his  grave  by  the  tears  of  widows  and  orphans  ;  but,  in
sooth,  when  one  comes  to  examine  the  matter  thoroughly,  all
one  will  find  in  confirmation  of  these  statements  is  that  he  had
wonderfully  thick  eyebrows  !  "  At  this  juncture  our  friend
ordered  Selifan  to  drive  on  as  rapidly  as  possible  ;  and  then  he
said  to  himself,  "  It's  as  well,  on  the  whole,  that  we  met  the
funeral  procession  :  they  say  that  it  presages  good  luck  to  meet
a  corpse."

Meanwhile  the  britchka  had  turned  into  some  more  deserted
streets  :  soon  only  some  long  dark  wooden  fences  stretched  out  on
both  sides,  heralding  the  city  limits.  And  then  the  pavement
came  to  an  end,  and  the  barriers  and  the  town  were  left  behind.
Now,  there  is  nothing  more  before  them,  and  they  are  again  on
the  high  road.  And  again,  on  either  side,  huge  stones  mark  the
versts  ;  there' are  the  supervisors  of  post-stations  to  be  seen,  to-
gether with  wells,  peasants'  carts,  gray  hamlets,  brisk  women,  and
bearded  men  running  from  the  post-houses  with  bags  of  oats  in
their  hands.  A  pedestrian  in  bast  shoes,  worn  into  holes,  who
has  wandered  eight  hundred  versts,  is  met ;  then  come  little
towns,  nicely  built,  with  tiny  Avooden  shops  containing  barrels
of  flour,  bast  shoes,  meat-pies,  and  other  trifles ;  then  there  are
bridges  and  fields  stretching  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach.  The
antique  equipages  of  the  landed  gentry  come  along  ;  next
appears  a  soldier  mounted  on  a  horse,  and  carrying  a  green
cotter  with  a  leaden  plate,  which  bears  the  inscription,  "  Such-
and-such  a  battery  of  artillery  ;  "  strips  of  land,  green,  yelloAV,
and  black,  are  visible  here  and  there  on  the  steppe  ;  songs  re-
sound afar  ;  crests  of  pine-trees  peer  forth  amid  the  mist ;  the
tolling  of  a  bell  dies  away  in  the  distance  ;  crows  fly  across  the
sky  as  plentiful  as  flies,  and  beyond  these  stretches  an  illimitable
horizon.

As  our  friend  Tchitchikofi"  drove  along  he  indulged  in  sundr)^
day-dreams.  At  the  outset  he  felt  nothing,  and  only  gazed
behind  him,  desirous  of  assuring  himself  that  he  had  really
emerged  from  the  town  ;  but  when  he  saw  that  the  town  had
long  since  disappeared  from  view,  that  neither  a  smithy,  a  mill,
nor  any  of  those  things  which  are  found  in  the  vicinity  of  towns
was  visible,  that  even  the  Avhite  steeples  of  the  stone  churches
had,  as  it  were,  long  since  sunk  into  the  earth,  he  devoted  his


174  DEAD   SOULS.

attention  to  the  road  alone,  glancing  to  right  and  left.     The

town  of  N became  in  his  memory  as  though  it  had  never

existed, — ^"as  though  he  had  merely  passed  through  it  long,  long
ago,  in  the  days  of  his  childhood.  At  length,  even  the  road
ceased  to  occupy  him  ;  and  he  began  to  close  his  eyes,  and  to
recline  upon  his  pillow.  The  author  is  glad  that  such  was  the
case,  since  it  affords  him  an  opportunity  to  speak  of  his  hero ;
for  so  far,  as  the  reader  has  seen,  he  has  been  constantly
hindered  in  this  design, — now  by  Nozdreff,  now  by  balls,  then
by  the  ladies,  then  by  the  town  gossip, — in  short,  by  a  thousand
of  those  matters  which  seem  mere  trifles  when  transferred  to  a
book,  but  which  are  regarded  as  extremely  important  affairs
when  they  actually  take  place.  But  we  will  now  lay  them  com-
pletely on  one  side,  and  occupy  ourselves  with  our  hero's
antecedents.

His  origin  was  obscure  and  modest.  His  parents  belonged  to
the  nobility,  but  whether  to  the  ancient  aristocracy  or  to  the
nobility  by  right  of  office,  God  only  knows.  He  did  not  re-
semble them  in  features  :  at  all  events,  a  female  relative  who
was  present  at  his  birth  exclaimed,  as  she  took  him  in  her
arms,  "  He  has  not  turned  out  at  all  as  I  expected  !  He  ought
to  look  like  his  grandmother  on  his  mother's  side,  and  it  would
have  been  better  so  ;  but  he  has  been  born  just  as  the  proverb
says,  neither  like  mother  nor  like  father,  but  like  some  passing
youth."

Life  gazed  rather  sourly  and  unpleasantly  on  him  at  first,
through  a  dim  little  window  with  the  snow  piled  against  it  :  he
had  neither  friend  nor  comrade  in  his  childhood.  A  tiny  room,
with  little  windows  which  were  opened  neither  in  winter  nor
in  summer ;  his  invalid  father  in  a  long  surtout  lined  with  lamb-
skin, and  knitted  slippers,  who  sighed  incessantly  as  he  paced
up  and  down  and  spat  in  the  sand-box  in  the  corner ;  intermin-
able sittings  on  a  form  with  a  pen  in  his  hand,  and  ink  on  both
his  fingers  and  his  lips  ;  the  constantly  repeated  precept,  "Never
lie,  but  obey  your  elders,  and  bear  your  benefactor  in  your
heart ;  "  a  never-ceasing  scraping  and  scuffling  about  the  room  ;
a  familiar  but  always  surly  voice,  "You  have  been  at  your
pranks  again!  "  which  echoed  through  the  apartment  whenever,
weary  of  the  monotony  of  work,  he  added  some  flourish  or
tail  to  a  letter  ;  and  an  equally  familiar  and  always  unpleasant
sensation,  when  these  words  were  followed  by  the  twisting  of
his  ears, — behold  here  the  dismal  picture  of  his  childhood  and
early  youth,  of  which  his  memory  barely  retained  a  faint
image.


DEPARTURE   ON   FRESH  ENTERPRISES.  175

But  everything  in  life  is  subject  to  sudden  and  lively  changes  :
and  one  day,  with  the  first  spring  sunshine  and  shower,  the
father  took  his  son,  and  set  out  with  him  in  a  telyega,  drawn
by  a  gaunt  piebald  horse.  The  coachman  who  drove  this
animal  was  a  little  humpback,  the  head  of  the  only  family  of
serfs  owned  by  Tchitchikoft's  father,  and  who  occupied  himself
with  nearly  all  the  duties  of  the  household.  They  drove  along
with  the  piebald  for  more  than  a  day  and  a  half;  they  passed
the  night  on  the  road,  crossed  a  river,  lunched  on  some  cold
meat-pie  and  roast  mutton,  and  only  reached  the  city  on  the
morning  of  the  third  day.

Before  the  boy's  eyes  shone  the  streets  of  the  city  in  un-
expected splendour,  making  him  keep  his  mouth  open  for
several  minutes.  The  piebald,  in  company  with  the  telyega,
tumbled  into  a  hole  near  a  narrow  alley,  which  inclined  down-
wards, and  was  blocked  up  with  mud  ;  then  for  a  long  time  the
animal  laboured  there  with  all  its  might,  splashed  about  with
its  legs,  aided  by  the  hunchback,  and  even  by  the  master  him-
self, and  finally  they  reached  a  small  courtyard,  with  two  dilapi-
dated apple-trees  in  front  of  a  little  old  house  with  a  narrow
back  garden,  planted  only  with  wild  cherry-trees  and  lilacs,
and  concealing  in  its  depths  a  wooden  sentry-box  v/hich  was
full  of  rubbish,  and  had  a  dim,  narrow  window.

In  this  house  dwelt  a  relative  of  theirs,  a  little  witherod-up
old  woman,  who  still  went  to  market  every  morning,  and  after-
wards dried  her  stockings  on  her  samovar.  She  tapped  the
little  lad  on  the  cheek,  and  admired  his  plumpness.  With  her
he  was  to  remain,  whilst  attending  the  classes  every  day  at  the
college  of  the  town.  His  father  passed  the  night  there,  and
set  out  homewards  on  the  following  day.  No  tears  were  shed
by  his  parent  when  they  parted  :  the  boy  was  given  half  a
rouble  in  copper  as  pocket-money,  and,  what  is  much  more
important,  some  very  wise  advice  :  "  Look  here,  Pavlusha,
study  well,  don't  be  stupid,  and  don't  play  tricks,"  said  his
father.  "  Most  of  all,  please  your  teachers  and  your  superiors.
If  you  please  your  teachers,  you  will  get  into  the  right  road
and  distance  all  the  others,  even  if  you  do  not  succeed  in  the
sciences,  and  even  if  God  has  not  endowed  you  with  any  talent.
Don't  associate  with  your  comrades,  they  will  teach  you  no
good ;  but  if  it  must  be  so,  then  associate  with  those  who  are
the  wealthiest,  and  who  can  be  of  the  most  service  to  you  in  case
of  need.  Do  not  make  any  presents,  nor  treat  any  one,  but
rather  behave  so  that  others  may  give  you  presents.  Save  all
you  can  :  that  is  the  surest  recipe  in  the  world.     Your  friends


176  DEAD   SOULS.

or  comrades  Would  cheat  you,  and  in  adversity  tliey  would  be
the  first  to  betray  you  ;  but  money  will  never  betray  you,  no
matter  in  what  straits  you  may  be.  You  can  do  everything,
you  can  accomplish  anything  in  the  world,  with  money."  After
bestowing  this  advice  upon  our  hero,  his  father  took  leave  of
him,  and  dragged  himself  home  again,  behind  his  piebald.
From  that  day  forth  Tchitchikoff'  never  beheld  his  parent  again  ;
but  his  words  and  exhortations  had  sunk  deep  into  his  soul.

Pavlusha  began  to  attend  the  classes  on  the  very  next  day.  Ho
did  not  appear  to  have  any  especial  capacity  for  any  particular
branch  of  learning ;  he  merely  distinguished  himself  by  his
diligence  and  cleanliness  ;  but,  in  compensation,  he  exhibited
great  talents  in  another  direction — that  of  practical  life.  He
divined  or  comprehended  a  matter  on  the  instant,  and  con-
ducted himself  in  such  a  manner  that  his  comrades  actually  did
give  him  presents  ;  and  he  not  only  never  gave  them  any,  but
sometimes  he  even  hoarded  up  their  gifts,  and  afterwards  sold
them  back  to  them.

While  still  a  child,  he  learned  how  to  deny  himself  every-
thing. He  did  not  spend  a  copeck  of  the  half-rouble  which  his
father  had  given  him :  on  the  contrary,  he  made  an  addition  to
it  that  same  year,  which  displayed  uncommon  skill.  He
moulded  a  bullfinch  out  of  some  wax,  coloured  it,  and  sold  it  at
a  good  profit.  Then,  in  the  course  of  time,  he  entered  into
other  speculations,  and  this  is  what  they  consisted  in  :  he
purchased  some  eatables  in  the  market,  seated  himself  in  the
class  near  those  who  had  the  most  money,  and  as  soon  as  he
observed  one  of  his  companions  growing  weary — which  was  a
sign  of  approaching  hunger — he  thrust  some  gingerbread  or  a
roll  into  his  hand,  under  the  form,  as  though  by  accident ;
having  thus  incited  his  schoolfellow,  he  demanded  payment  in
proportion  to  his  appetite.  For  two  months  also  he  toiled  in  his
own  quarters  in  training  a  mouse,  which  he  had  shut  up  in  a
little  wooden  cage  ;  and  at  length  he  succeeded  to  such  a  degree,
that  the  mouse  stood  on  its  hind-legs,  lay  down,  and  rose  up  at
the  word  of  command ;  and  then  he  sold  it  in  an  advantageous
manner.  When  he  had  amassed  money  to  the  amount  of  five
roubles  or  so,  he  made  a  little  bag  for  it,  and  began  to  hoard  up
his  cash.

He  behaved  with  even  more  sagacity  in  the  case  of  his
superiors.  No  one  knew  how  to  sit  upon  a  form  more  quietly
than  he.  It  must  here  be  remarked  that  his  teacher  was  a  great
lover  of  quietness  and  good  conduct,  and  that  he  could  not
endure  the  clever  and  witty  boys ;  it  seemed  to  him  as  though


DEPARTURE   ON   FRESH   ENTERPRISES.  177

they  must  infallibly  be  laughing  at  him.  It  sufficed  for  any
youngster,  who  had  caused  himself  to  be  remarked  for  clever-
ness, to  make  the  slightest  movement,  or  unintentionally  con-
tract his  eyebrows,  for  the  teacher  to  fall  suddenly  upon  him.
He  would  persecute  and  punish  the  youngster  unmercifully.
"  I'll  drive  the  conceit  and  disobedience  out  of  you,  my  lad!"
he  said :  "I  know  you  through  and  through,  better  than  you
know  yourself.  Here,  go  down  on  your  knees  to  me  !  You
shall  go  hungry  !  "  And  the  poor  boy  would  have  to  rub  his
knees,  and  fast  for  twenty-four  hours,  without  knowing  why.
"  Capacity  and  talent !  that's  all  nonsense  !  "  the  master  was
wont  to  say  :  "  I  only  look  at  conduct.  I  will  give  full  marks  in
all  the  branches  to  the  boy  who  does  not  even  know  the  first  letter
of  the  alphabet,  provided  he  behaves  himself  in  a  praiseworthy
way ;  and  I'll  give  bad  marks  to  the  boy  in  whom  I  perceive
an  inclination  to  ridicule  or  an  evil  disposition,  even  although
he  could  grasp  Solon  by  the  belt  and  throw  him."

Thus  spoke  this  teacher,  who  to  the  day  of  his  death  never
loved  Kruilofi/''  because  the  latter  had  said,  "  Drink  if  you  be  so
inclined,  but  attend  to  study  and  business."  This  teacher  was
always  relating  with  glee  that  in  the  academy  where  he  had
ruled  before  he  came  to  that  school,  such  silence  reigned  that
you  could  hear  the  flies  fly  about ;  and,  he  added,  that  not  one
of  the  pupils,  the  whole  year  round,  ever  coughed  or  blew  his
nose  in  school-time ;  in  fact,  it  was  impossible  to  tell  whether
there  was  anyone  in  the  room  or  not.

Tchitchikoft'  quickly  caught  the  teacher's  spirit,  and  his  idea
as  to  what  constituted  good  behaviour.  He  never  moved  an
eye  or  an  eyebrow  all  the  time  that  the  class  lasted,  no  matter
how  much  the  others  might  pinch  him  behind.  As  soon  as  the
bell  rang,  he  rushed  headlong  so  as  to  be  the  first  to  hand  the
teacher  his  three-cornered  hat,  for  the  teacher  wore  one  of  that
description,  And  then  our  hero  was  the  first  to  leave  the  class-
room, and  contriving  to  encounter  the  master  three  times  on
the  way,  he  pulled  ofi"  his  cap  repeatedly.  These  manoeuvres
were  completely  successful.  During  the  whole  of  his  stay  at
that  school,  he  received  excellent  marks  ;  and  on  leaving  it,
he  obtained  a  certificate  of  thorough  acquirements  in  all  branches
of  knowledge,  and  a  book,  with  an  inscription  in  gilt  letters,
"  for  exemplary  diligence  and  admirable  conduct."

On  emerging  from  the  academy,  he  found  himself  a  youth  of
sufficiently   attractive  personal  appearance,    and    with    a  chin
which  required  shaving.     At  this  juncture  his  father  died.     His
*  A  famous  llussian  writer  of  fables.


178  DEAD    SOULS.

inheritance  proved  to  consist  of  four  badly-worn  waistcoats,  two
ancient  surtouts  lined  with  lambskin,  and  an  insignificant  sum
of  money.  Evidently  his  father  had  not  been  expert  in  accu-
mulating copecks.  Tchitchikofi"  sold  the  venerable  little  house
and  the  insignificant  bit  of  land  attached  to  it  for  a  thousand
roubles,  and  transported  his  seven  serfs  to  town,  with  the  inten-
tion of  settling  there  and  entering  the  official  service.

At  this  juncture  the  poor  teacher — the  lover  of  silence  and
laudable  conduct — was  turned  out  of  the  academy  for  stupidity,
or  for  some  other  fault.  Then  in  grief  he  began  to  drink,
and  at  length  he  had  no  money  to  purchase  any  liquor  with  :
ill,  without  a  mouthful  of  bread,  or  any  assistance,  he  descended
very  low,  to  some  God-forsaken,  unwarmed  kennel.  His  former
pupils,  the  clever  and  bHlliant  ones,  in  whom  he  had  continually
detected  disobedience  and  conceited  behaviour,  on  learning  of
his  pitiable  condition,  immediately  collected  some  money  for  him,
selling  several  things  of  their  6Wn  for  that  purpose,  Pavlusha
Tchitchikofi"  alone  declined  to  give  anything,  on  the  score  of
poverty,  though  at  last  he  ofi'ered  a  five-copeck  silver  piece,
which  his  comrades  instantly  flung  away,  saying,  "  Oh  you
miser  !  "  The  poor  teacher  covered  his  face  with  his  hands
when  he  heard  of  such  an  act  on  the  part  of  his  former  pupils ;
tears  poured  from  his  dim  eyes  in  a  torrent,  as  though  he  had
been  a  weak  child.  "  God  has  brought  me  to  tears  on  my  death-
bed !  "  he  exclaimed,  in  a  feeble  voice  ;  and  he  sighed  heavily
on  hearing  about  Tchitchikofi",  and  immediately  added,  "Ah,
Pavlusha !  How  a  man  changes !  Surely  he  was  very  well
behaved !  There  was  nothing  boisterous  about  him — he  was
like  silk.     Ah  !  he  deceived  me,  deceived  me  !  "

It  is  impossible  to  assert,  however,  that  our  hero's  nature  was
so  grim  and  harsh,  that  his  feelings  were  dulled  to  such  a  degree,
that  he  tnew  neither  pity  nor  sympathy ;  he  felt  both  the  one
and  the  other :  he  was  even  desirous  of  assisting  the  teacher,
only  not  to  the  extent  of  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  lest  he
might  have  to  encroach  upon  the  hoard  which  he  had  made  up
his  mind  not  to  touch.  In  short,  his  father's  exhortation,  "  Save
and  amass  money,"  had  been  of  some  avail.  He  had  no  actual
love  for  money  for  the  sake  of  money  itself :  he  was  not  actuated
by  miserliness  and  greed.  No,  but  life  gleamed  before  his  eyes,
with  all  its  pleasures,  with  all  its  possibilities  :  equipages,  a
handsomely  mounted  establishment,  savoury  dinners  —  it  was
all  that  which  was  constantly  passing  through  his  brain.  So  as
to  secure  in  the  course  of  time  all  these  things  without  fail,  he
saved  up  his  money,  denying  it  to  himself  and  to  others  for  a  space.


DEPARTURE    ON   FRESH   ENTERPRISES.  179

When  a  wealthy  man  drove  past  him  in  an  elegant  drozhky,
■with  trotters  in  rich  harness,  he  halted  as  though  rooted  to  the
spot ;  and  when  he  came  to  himself,  as  though  after  a  long
dream,  he  said,  "  And  that  man  was  formerly  a  shop-clerk,  and
wore  his  hair  cut  in  a  ring!  "'•'  Everything  which  smacked  of
wealth  or  ease  produced  upon  our  hero  an  impression  which  was
inexplicable,  even  to  himself.

On  leaving  the  academy,  he  did  not  even  care  to  take  a
holiday,  so  sti'ong  within  him  was  his  desire  to  set  to  work  and
enter  the  service.  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  his  laudatory
credentials,  he  had  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  a  situation  in
the  department  of  justice.  Even  in  the  most  remote  corners  of
the  land,  influence  is  required.  At  last  he  obtained  an  insig-
nificant little  place  :  the  salary  was  only  thirty  or  forty  roubles
a  year.  But  he  resolved  to  apply  himself  ardently  to  his  duties,
to  conquer  and  to  overcome  everything.  And  in  fact,  he  dis-
played great  self-sacrifice  and  patience,  and  incredible  economy
even  as  regards  the  necessaries  of  life.  From  early  morning
until  late  at  night  he  wrote,  straining  every  power  of  mind  and
body,  and  wholly  absorbed  in  the  duties  of  his  post.  He  did  not
go  home,  he  slept  on  the  tables  in  the  office  ;  he  sometimes  took
his  meals  with  the  watchmen  ;  and  withal,  he  managed  to  re-
main clean,  to  dress  respectably,  to  communicate  a  pleasant  ex-
pression to  his  face,  and  something  even  noble  to  his  movements.

It  must  be  stated  that  the  officials  in  the  department  of
justice  were  especially  distinguished  for  their  lack  of  comeliness
and  for  their  deficiency  of  understanding.  Some  of  them  had
faces  looking  exactly  like  badly  baked  bread  :  one  fellow's
cheeks  were  swollen,  another's  chin  was  twisted  up,  the  upper  lip
of  a  third  had  swollen  like  a  bladder,  and  burst ;  in  short,  such
faces  were  not  handsome  at  all.  Tbey  all  spoke,  too,  in  a  surly
way,  in  voices  which  seemed  to  indicate  that  they  were  on  the
point  of  beating  someone  ;  and  they  frequently  sacrificed  to
Bacchus,  thus  demonstrating  that  a  large  remnant  of  heathendom
still  lingers  in  the  nature  of  the  Slav.  At  times  they  even
entered  the  offices  in  a  drunken  condition,  which  rendered  the
offices  unpleasant,  and  the  air  anything  but  aromatic.

Among  such  officials  Tchitchikoft"  could  not  fail  to  attract
attention  and  to  be  distinguished  from  the  rest,  presenting,  as
he  did,  a  complete  contrast,  both  as  to  his  comely  countenance,
the  courtesy  of  his  voice,  and  his  entire  abstinence  from  all
strong  liquors.  Yet,  despite  all  this,  his  path  was  a  thorny  one.

*  Referring  to  the  circular  mode  of  cutting  the  hair  among  low-clasa
Russians.


180  DEAD   SOULS.

He  had  fallen  upon  a  superior  who  was  very  antiquated  in  his
customs,  who  prided  hiraself  on  his  stony  insensibility  ;  and  who
was  eternally  the  same,  always  unapproachable.  Never  in  his  life
had  a  smile  dawned  on  his  face,  never  had  he  once  greeted  any-
one with  an  inquiry  as  to  his  health.  No  one  had  ever  beheld
him  otherwise,  whether  in  the  street  or  at  his  own  house  ;
never  once  had  he  shown  any  interest  in  anything.  Ah  !  if  he
had  only  drunk  himself  drunk  for  once,  and  in  his  intoxication
have  indulged  in  a  laugh  !  if  he  had  but  yielded  to  a  little  wild
mirth,  such  as  a  brigand  indulges  in,  in  a  moment  of  intoxication  !
But  there  was  no  prospect  of  anything  of  that  kind  happening,
there  was  neither  vice  nor  goodness  in  him,  and  this  utter
absence  of  failings  and  qualities  produced  an  odd  impression.
His  marble-like  countenance,  which  lacked  any  striking  irre-
gularity, hinted  at  no  resemblance  to  anyone  or  anything  else  ;
his  features  were  harshly  symmetrical  and  covered  with
numerous  pock-marks,  so  that  it  was  said  that  the  Devil  came
by  night  to  grind  his  peas  on  his  countenance.

It  seemed  as  though  it  were  not  in  the  power  of  mortal  man
to  insinuate  himself  into  the  good  graces  of  such  a  person,  but
Tchitchikoff  made  the  experiment.  At  first  he  began  by
pleasing  him  in  all  sorts  of  insignificant  trifles :  he  looked  care-
fully after  the  mending  of  his  pens,  and  laid  them  close  to  his
hand  ;  he  blew  and  swept  all  the  spilt  sand  and  tobacco  from  his
superior's  table,  he  brought  him  a  fresh  rag  for  his  ink-bottle ;
he  hunted  up  his  hat  for  him, — the  shabbiest  hat  that  ever
existed  in  this  world, — and  on  each  occasion  laid  it  at  his  elbow
at  the  very  moment  when  the  ofiice  closed  ;  he  brushed  his  back
if  it  had  become  dirty  through  contact  with  the  whitening  on
the  walls.  But  all  this  passed  by  absolutely  unnoticed,  as
though  nothing  of  the  sort  had  been  done.  At  length  Tchitchikoff
got  wind  of  his  superior's  home  and  family  life  :  he  learned  that
he  had  a  marriageable  daughter,  who  also  possessed  one  of
those  faces  which  look  as  though  peas  had  been  ground  upon  it,
and  he  meditated  making  an  attack  in  that  quarter.

Having  found  out  what  church  she  attended  on  Sundays,  he
placed  himself  right  opposite  her  every  week,  cleanly  dressed,
with  a  well-starched  shirt-front ;  and  the  manoeuvre  was  a
success  :  the  grim  chief  wavered,  and  invited  him  to  tea.  Then
before  they  had  time  to  look  about  them  in  the  office,  Tchitchikoff
had  transferred  himself  to  the  chiefs  house,  had  become
necessary,  indispensable  to  him.  He  purchased  his  flour  and
sugar ;  he  behaved  to  the  daughter  as  though  she  were  his  be-
trothed ;  called  the  chief  "papa,"  and  kissed  his  hand.    Every-


DEPARTURE    OX    FRESH    ENTERPRISES.  181

one  in  the  chancellery  canae  to  the  conclusion  that  the  wedding
would  take  place  at  the  end  of  February,  before  the  beginning
of  the  long  fast.  The  stern  head  of  the  department  even  began
to  interest  himself  on  Tchitchikofi's  behalf  with  the  authorities,
and  in  a  short  time  our  hero  was  given  a  vacant  appointment
which  had  been  discovered.  This,  to  all  appearances,  was  the
principal  object  of  his  connection  with  his  supei"ior ;  for  his
trunk  was  immediately  and  clandestinely  removed  from  the
latter's  house,  and  on  the  following  day  he  was  settled  in  new
quarters.  He  ceased  to  call  the  chief  "  papa,"  and  no  longer
kissed  his  hand  ;  the  subject  of  the  marriage,  too,  was  dropped,
as  though  there  had  never  existed  any  idea  of  such  a  thing.
However,  he  once  met  the  old  gentleman,  and,  pressing  his  hand
in  a  flattering  way,  he  invited  him  to  tea  ;  so  that  the  old  chief,
in  spite  of  his  eternal  immobility  and  hard  indifference,  shook
his  head  every  time  that  he  thought  of  it,  and  muttered  to  him-
self, "  He  cheated  me,  he  deceived  me,  that  son  of  the  Devil !  "
This  was  the  most  difficult  threshold  which  our  hero  stepped
across.  From  that  time  on,  he  progressed  more  easily  and  with
more  success.  He  became  a  man  of  note.  He  appeared  to  have
every  quality  which  is  adapted  to  this  world — an  agreeable  way
of  dealing  with  people,  and  suitable  boldness  in  handling  matters
of  business.  By  these  means,  he  shortly  gained  what  is  called  a
lucrative  position,  and  availed  himself  of  it  in  the  most
superior  manner.  The  reader  must  be  informed  that,  at  that
time,  the  strictest  prosecution  was  instituted  for  every  descrip-
tion of  bribe-taking.  This  did  not  alarm  our  hero,  however ;
he  immediately  proceeded  to  turn  it  to  his  own  account,  dis-
playing thereby  genuine  Kussian  ingenuity,  which  only  shews
itself  in  cases  of  emergency.  This  is  how  he  arranged  matters.
As  soon  as  a  petitioner  made  his  appearance,  and  thrust  his
hand  into  his  pocket,  in  order  to  draw  therefrom  the  familiar
letter  of  recommendation,  with  the  signature  of  Prince  Kho-
vansky,  as  we  used  to  express  ourselves  in  Russia  at  that
period,"  Tchitchikoff  would  stay  his  hand,  saying  with  a  smile,
"No,  no,  you  think  that  I — no,  no!  this  is  our  duty;  we  are
under  obligations  to  do  it ;  we  must  do  it  without  any  re-
muneration. You  may  rest  easy  on  that  point :  everything
will  be  completed  to-morrow.  Allow  me  to  inquire  where  you
are  lodging  ?  It  is  not  necessary  that  you  should  put  yourself
to  any  personal  trouble  :  everything  will  be  brought  to  you  at
your  own  house."

*  For  about  half  a  century,  Prince  Khovansky  signed  all  the  imperial
bank-notes,


182  DEAD    SOULS.

The  delighted  applicant  returned  home  almost  in  a  state  of
ecstasy,  thinking,  "  Here,  at  last,  is  a  man  of  a  kind  which  we
ought  to  have  more  of:  he  is  simply  a  precious  diamond  !  "

But  the  petitioner  waits  one  day,  two  days — and  the  matter
is  not  brought  to  his  house  ;  the  third  day  it  is  the  same.  He
betakes  himself  to  the  office:  the  afiair  has  not  even  been
touched.  Then  he  applies  to  the  precious  diamond  :  "Ah,  excuse
me  !  "  says  Tchitchikoff  very  courteously,  seizing  him  by  both
hands.  "We  are  so  worried  with  business!  but  to-morrow
everything  will  be  finished — to-morrow,  without  fail.  Reallj^,
I  am  mortified."  And  all  this  accompanied  by  the  most
fascinating  manners.

But  neither  on  the  morrow,  nor  on  the  day  after,  nor  on  the
day  after  that,  are  the  papers  brought  to  the  petitioner  at  his
house.  The  petitioner  falls  to  thinking,  "  Doesn't  this  signify
something  ?  "  He  makes  inquiries ;  he  is  told  "The  copyists  must
be  given  something." — "  Why  not  ?  I  am  willing  to  give  them
twenty-five  copecks  !  "  he  exclaims.  "  Why  do  you  get  so
heated  over  it  ?  "  comes  the  reply.  "  This  is  the  way  it  must  be
arranged  :  give  a  white-note  to  the  copyist ;  he  himself  will  get  a
quarter  of  a  rouble  out  of  it,  and  the  rest  will  go  to  the  head,  of
the  department."

The  slow-witted  petitioner  deals  himself  a  blow  on  the  fore-
head, and  curses  the  way  in  which  the  world  is  arranged  now-
adays, as  well  as  the  new  customs,  and  the  loftily  courteous  man-
ners of  the  officials.  "  In  former  times,  you  used  at  least  to  know
what  you  were  about,"  he  reflects.  "If  j^ou  presented  the  head
of  the  department  with  a  red  bank-note,*  your  business  was  as
good  as  done,  but  now  you  have  to  spend  a  white-note, f  and
waste  a  week  into  the  bargain,  before  you  can  guess  what
they  are  up  to.  May  the  Devil  fly  away  with  their  disinterested-
ness and  official  generosity  !  "

The  petitioner  was  in  the  right,  of  course  ;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  there  were  no  longer  any  direct  bribe-takers  among
the  heads  of  departments,  they  were  the  most  honest  and  the
noblest  of  men  :  only  the  secretaries  and  the  petty  clerks  were
rascals.  A  much  more  extensive  field  soon  presented  itself  to
Tchitchikoff".  A  commission  was  appointed  for  the  erection  of
some  extremely  important  government  building.  He  got  him-
self appointed  on  this  commission,  and  appeared  to  be  one  of
the  most  active  of  its  members.  The  commission  set  to  work
at  once.     The  process  of  erection  dragged  on  for  six  years  ;

*  Ten  roubles.  ^  f  Twenty -five  roubles.


DEPARTURE    ON    FRESH    ENTERPRISES.  183

but  the  climate  in  some  way  interfered,  or  the  buildinw  materials
were  not  what  they  should  have  been ;  at  all  events,  that
government  edifice  never  got  any  further  than  the  foundations.
But  in  the  meantime,  at  the  other  extremity  of  the  town,  a
handsome  house,  in  the  urban  style  of  architecture,  rose  up  for
each  member  of  the  commission  :  obviously  the  soil  was  more
propitious  there.  The  members  began  to  gather  courage,  too,
and  commenced  to  marry.

It  was  only  then  that  Tchitchikoft  gradually  began  to  relax
in  his  strict  rules  of  conduct  and  his  pitiless  self-sacrifice.  It
was  only  then  that  his  long-continued  fast  was  lightened  ;  and
it  appeared  that  he  had  never  been  averse  to  the  various  forms
of  enjoyment,  from  which  he  had  known  how  to  refrain  during
the  fiery  years  of  his  youth,  when  no  other  man  is  able  to
control  himself  entirely.  Some  luxuries  made  their  appear-
ance at  his  place ;  he  indulged  in  a  tolerably  good  cook,  and  in
fine  cambric  shirts.  He  had  already  begun  to  purchase  some
cloth  for  his  own  use,  such  as  no  one  else  in  the  whole  province
wore  ;  and  from  that  time  forth  he  began  to  wear  it — it  was
light  brown  or  reddish  in  shade,  and  his  coats  were  very  much
cut  away  in  front.  Then  he  had  already  set  up  an  excellent
pair  of  horses,  and  drove  the  team  himself;  he  had  also
already  contracted  a  habit  of  rubbing  himself  down  with  a
sponge  dipped  in  water  mixed  with  eau-de-Cologne;  he  had
already  purchased  some  expensive  soap  for  the  purpose  of  im-
parting smoothness  to  his  skin ;  he  had  already

But  all  at  once  there  was  despatched,  in  the  place  of  the  easy-
going chief,  a  new  head  of  the  department,  who  was  a  military
man,  a  fierce  general,  a  sworn  foe  of  bribery,  and  of  everything
which  is  reckoned  unjust.  He  frightened  all  the  under-officials,
down  to  the  very  last  one  ;  on  the  second  day  he  demanded  their
accounts,  detected  various  deficits,  found  money  missing  at
every  step ;  then  he  took  note  of  his  subordinates'  handsome
houses  of  urban  architecture,  and  instituted  an  investigation.
The  ofiicials  were  dismissed  from  the  service  ;  the  houses  of  an
ux-ban  style  of  architecture  were  turned  over  to  the  treasury,
and  converted  into  various  benevolent  institutions  and  district
schools ;  everybody  was  blown  into  atoms,  and  Tchitchikoff'
worse  than  all  the  rest.

All  of  a  sudden,  his  face,  in  spite  of  its  agreeable  expression,
ceased  to  please  the  chief,  just  why  God  only  knows — some-
times there  is  no  cause  whatever  for  such  a  thing.  At  all  events,
the  chief  conceived  a  deadly  hatred  for  Tchitchikoff  and  sacked
him.     But  as  this  chief  was  a  military  man,  it  stood  to  reason


184  DEAD    SOULS.

that  he  did  not  understand  all  the  refinements  in  the  methods  of
transacting  ofiicial  affairs  ;  indeed,  after  a  brief  interval,  the
new  men  he  selected  insinuated  themselves  into  his  good  graces
by  feigning  an  upright  appearance,  and  skillfully  adapting
themselves  to  circumstances  ;  and  the  honest  chief  speedily
found  himself  in  the  hands  of  greater  rascals  than  ever,  although
he  had  not  taken  them  for  such ;  he  even  congratulated  himself
on  having  finally  selected  suitable  men,  and  seriously  flattered
himself  that  he  possessed  high  competence  in  the  matter  of  dis-
cerning character.  The  officials  understood  his  mind  and  dis-
position at  once.  Everything  beneath  his  rule  was  carried  on
with  a  great  show  of  honesty;  and  with  such  success  that,
within  a  short  space  of  time,  each  one  of  his  subordinates
possessed  a  capital  amounting  to  several  thousand  roubles.

At  this  juncture  many  of  the  ex-oflScials  were  converted  to
the  path  of  righteousness,  and  were  re-admitted  to  the  service.
But  Tchitchikoff  could  not  manage  to  make  his  way  back  on  any
terms ;  even  the  chief  secretary,  who  had  been  induced  to
espouse  his  cause  in  consideration  of  some  of  Prince  Khovansky's
notes,  and  who  led  the  general  by  the  nose  in  all  matters  of
business,  could  effect  absolutely  nothing  in  the  present  case.
The  chief  belonged  to  that  class  of  men  who  are  led  by  the  nose
(without  their  knowledge,  of  course),  but,  if  once  an  idea  makes
its  way  into  their  head,  there  it  remains  fast,  exactly  as  though
it  were  an  iron  nail :  it  is  impossible  to  extract  it  in  any  manner
whatever.  All  that  the  clever  secretary  could  effect  was  the
erasure  of  the  beclouded  record  in  the  service  register ;  and  this
he  only  managed  by  an  appeal  to  the  chief's  compassion  by  de-
picting to  him,  in  vivid  colours,  the  miserable  fate  of  Tchitchi-
kofi"s  unhappy  family,  which  family,  fortunately,  our  hero  did
not  possess.

"  Well,  this  is  a  pretty  situation  !  "  said  Tchitchikofi".  "My
hook  caught,  it  dragged  me  up,  but  it  has  broken  loose — and
that  settles  it.  Crying  won't  assuage  my  grief:  I  must  set  to
work  again."  So  he  resolved  to  begin  his  career  afresh,  to  in-
dulge in  patience  again,  to  deny  himself  everything,  without
regard  to  the  free  and  luxurious  style  in  which  he  had  lately
spent  his  money.

It  was  necessary  to  remove  to  another  town,  and  to  acquire
fame  there.  But  for  some  reason  he  was  not  successful  in  his
new  ventures.  He  was  obliged  to  make  two  or  three  changes
in  his  employment  in  a  very  brief  space  of  time  ;  the  positions
given  him  were  dirty,  and  humiliating  in  a  way.  It  must  be
stated  that  Tchitchikofl'  was  the  most  decorous  man  that  ever


DEPARTURE    ON    FRESH    ENTERPRISES.  185

existed  in  this  world.  Although  he  was  forced,  at  first,  to  make
his  way  in  vile  company,  he  always  preserved  his  cleanliness  of
mind  :  he  liked  to  have  an  office  table  of  varnished  wood,  in
fact,  to  have  everything  handsome  about  him.  He  never
allowed  himself  to  employ  ungentlemanly  language,  and  he
always  took  oflence  if  he  detected  in  the  words  of  others  any
absence  of  the  I'espect  due  to  rank  and  office.  I  think  that  the
reader  will  be  gratified  to  learn  that  he  changed  his  linen  every
two  days  in  the  winter,  and  every  day  in  summer,  when  the
weather  was  warm  ;  any  smell  M'hich  was  in  the  least  degree
unpleasant  oflended  him.  For  this  reason,  he  always  thrust  a
clove  up  his  nose  when  Petrushka  came  to  undress  him  and
pull  ofi'  his  boots ;  and  in  many  ways  his  nerves  were  as  sensi-
tive as  those  of  a  young  girl.  Hence,  it  was  very  hard  for  him
to  find  himself  again  among  the  petty  officials  who  were  distin-
guished by  an  odour  of  spirits,  and  by  real  indelicacy  of  habits.

But  brace  his  courage  as  he  would,  he  all  the  same  grew  thin
and  even  green,  during  this  period  of  adversit3\  Previously  he
had  already  begun  to  grow  plump,  and  to  acquire  those  rounded,
respectable  outlines  which,  as  the  reader  has  seen,  he  possessed
when  we  became  acquainted  with  him  ;  and  many  a  time  he  had
gazed  in  the  glass,  and  meditated  on  much  that  was  agreeable
— such  as  a  pretty  little  wife  and  children — and  a  smile  had
followed  his  thoughts  ;  but  now,  when  he  glanced,  accidentally
as  it  were,  at  himself  in  the  mirror,  he  could  not  refrain  from
exclaiming,  "  Holy  Mother  of  God,  how  hideous  I  have  grown  !  "
And  for  a  long  time  thereafter  he  did  not  care  to  look  at
himself.

However,  our  hero  endured  all,  he  endured  it,  endured  it
bravely  and  patiently,  and — at  length  he  passed  into  the  custom-
house service.  It  must  be  stated  that  this  branch  of  the  service
had  long  formed  the  secret  goal  of  his  desires.  He  had  observed
Avhat  dainty  foreign  articles  the  custom-house  officials  possessed
at  home,  what  porcelain  and  muslin  they  presented  to  their
lady  cronies,  their  sisters,  and  their  aunts.  Long  previously
he  had  many  a  time  said,  with  a  sigh,  "  That's  the  place  to  be
in  :  the  frontier  is  close  at  hand,  the  people  are  cultivated,  and
what  fine  cambric  shirts  one  could  indulge  in !  "

It  must  be  added,  that  in  this  connection  he  also  thought  of  a
certain  special. sort  of  French  soap,  which  imparted  a  remark-
able whiteness  to  the  skin  and  freshness  to  the  cheeks.  What
its  name  was,  God  only  knew :  but  he  assumed  that  it  must  in-
fallibly be  found  abroad.  Thus,  he  had  long  pined  to  enter  the
custom-house  service,  but  he  had  been  withheld  from  doing  so


186  DEAD    SOULS.

for  a  long  time  by  the  profits  wliick  flowed  to  him  from  the
building  commission ;  and  he  had  judged  wisely,  that  the  cus-
tom-house service,  however  desirable  it  might  be,  was  nothing
more  than  a  crane  afar  in  the  heavens,  while  the  building  com-
mission was  certainly  a  titmouse  in  the  hand.

Now,  however,  he  Avas  resolved  to  make  his  way  into  the  cus-
tom-house service  at  any  cost,  and  he  accomplished  it.  He  en-
tered upon  his  duties  with  extraordinaryzeal.  It  seemed  as  though
fate  itself  had  destined  him  to  be  a  custom-house  official.  Such
skill,  penetration,  and  acumen  had  never  been  seen,  or  even
heard  of  before.  In  three  or  four  weeks  he  had  attained  to
such  dexterity  in  custom-house  matters,  that  he  positively  knew
all  that  there  was  to  be  known  :  he  no  longer  weighed  or
measured,  but  he  could  judge  from  the  wrapper  how  many
arshins  there  were  in  any  piece  of  cloth,  or  any  other  material.
On  taking  a  package  in  his  hand,  he  could  instantly  tell  how
many  pounds  it  weighed.  In  searching  for  hidden  goods,  his
own  comrades  declared  that  he  possessed  a  regular  dog's  scent ;
indeed,  it  was  impossible  not  to  experience  some  surprise  at  wit-
nessing how  patient  he  was  in  feeling  every  button  ;  and  this  he
did  with  deadly  equanimity  and  incredible  courtesy.

When  the  people  whom  he  was  searching  lost  their  tempers,
flew  into  a  rage,  and  experienced  a  malicious  desire  to  spoil  his
agreeable  face  with  their  fists,  he  merely  remarked,  without  any
change  in  the  expression  of  his  countenance,  or  the  suavity  of
his  manners,  "  Will  you  not  be  so  good  as  to  stand  up  ?  "  or,
"  Will  you  not  be  so  kind,  madam,  as  to  step  into  the  other
room  ?  the  wife  of  one  of  our  officials  will  come  to  an  explana-
tion with  you  there  ;  "  or,  "  Permit  me  to  open  the  lining  of
your  cloak  a  trifle  with  my  penknife  ;  "  and  so  saying  he  would
draw  forth  a  shawl  or  a  kerchief,  with  as  much  nonchalance  as
though  it  had  been  from  his  own  trunk.  His  superiors  ad-
mitted that  he  was  the  Devil  himself,  and  not  a  man  :  he  dis-
covered goods  in  wheels,  in  shafts,  in  a  horse's  ears,  and  in  no-
body knows  what  other  places  besides,  where  it  would  never
enter  the  author's  head  to  hide  them,  and  where  no  one  but  a
custom-house  official  could  find  them.  Thus  the  poor  traveller
who  crossed  the  frontier  lost  his  wits  for  several  minutes,  and
could  only  cross  himself,  and  say,  as  he  wiped  away  the  perspi-
ration which  had  broken  out  all  over  his  body,  "  Well,  well !  "
The  traveller's  position  very  much  resembled  that  of  the  scholar
who  has  just  emerged  from  the  private  apartment  where  his
master  has  summoned  him  to  receive  an  exhortation,  but  where
he  has  quite  unexpectedly  treated  him  to  a  flogging.


DEPARTURE    ON    FRESH   ENTERPRISES.  187

In  a  very  short  time  the  smugglers  found  that  there  was  no
tricking  our  hero.  Woe  and  despair  reigned  throughout  all
Polish  Jewry.  His  honesty  and  incorruptibility  were  invincible,
almost  superhuman.  He  did  not  even  collect  a  little  capital  for
himself  out  of  the  various  confiscated  wares,  and  other  articles
which  were  seized  in  divers  manners,  and  which  did  not  reach
the  treasury,  because  they  would  necessitate  superfluous  cor
respondence.  Such  zealously  disinterested  service  could  not
fail  to  become  the  subject  of  general  admiration,  and  at  length
it  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  chiefs.  Our  hero  received  a
promotion  of  one  rank  (tchin) ;  and  then  he  presented  a  scheme
for  trapping  all  the  smugglers,  merely  requesting  that  he  might
be  furnished  with  the  means  of  conducting  the  afiair  himself.
He  was  immediatel}'  intrusted  with  the  command,  and  with  un-
limited power  to  conduct  any  and  all  sorts  of  searches.  That
was  all  he  wanted.

At  that  time  a  large  band  of  smugglers  had  been  organised
on  a  regular  and  well-conceived  plan.  The  profits  of  this  bold
enterprise  were  reckoned  by  the  million.  Our  friend  had  long
known  of  its  existence,  and  had  even  refused  to  wink  at  its
doings,  when  an  envoy  had  been  despatched  to  buy  him,  saying
dryly,  "  The  proper  time  has  not  yet  arrived."  But  at  the  very
moment  when  he  had  got  the  entire  disposition  of  aflairs  into  his
own  hands,  he  informed  the  band  that  the  time  had  arrived.
His  calculations  were  well  founded.  In  one  year  he  might
obtain  more  money  than  he  could  earn  in  twenty.  He  had  not
cared  to  enter  into  relations  with  these  people  before,  because
then  he  had  only  been  an  insignificant  individual,  and,  conse-
quently, he  would  have  received  but  little ;  but  now,  now  it
was  quite  another  matter,  he  could  make  what  terms  he  pleased.
In  order  that  the  business  might  progress  without  loss  or  hin-
drance, he  confided  in  another  ofiicial,  a  comrade  of  his,  who  was
unable  to  resist  the  seduction  despite  the  fact  that  his  hair  was
white.  The  terms  were  agreed  upon,  and  the  company  began
operations.

Business  opened  in  a  brilliant  manner.  The  reader  has
doubtless  heard  the  ancient  and  oft-repeated  anecdote  about
the  clever  journeys  of  the  Spanish  sheep,  who  used  to  cross
the  frontier-line  of  Kussia  in  a  double  fleece,  carrying  a  million's
worth  of  Brabant  lace  beneath  their  outer  fleece.  This  occurred
at  the  very  time  that  Tchitchikofl'  was  in  the  customs'  service.
Had  he  not  participated  in  the  smuggling  undertaking,  no  Jew
in  existence  could  have  carried  such  a  thing  to  a  successful  ter-
mination.    After  three  or  four  journeys  of  the  sheep  across  the


188  DEAD    SOULS.

frontier,  Tchitchikoff  and  his  brother  official  each  found  them-
selves in  possession  of  a  capital  of  four  hundred  thousand
roubles.  It  was  even  said  that  Tchitchikofl",  being  the  more
daring,  secured  over  five  hundred  thousand.

God  alone  knows  to  what  vast  amount  these  delightful  sums
would  have  increased,  had  not  the  cursed  fiend  ruined  the  whole
business.  The  Evil  One  threw  the  two  officials  into  a  tifi";
the  functionaries,  to  speak  plainly,  quarrelled  about  the  veriest
trifle.  It  came  about  in  the  heat  of  conversation,  and  possibly
they  may  have  been  drinking  a  little.  Tchitchikoff  called  the
other  official  a  "  pope's  son  "  ;  and  the  latter,  although  he  was
in  reality  the  son  of  a  priest,  took  violent  ofi'ence — no  one
knew  why — and  instantly  retorted  in  a  vigorous  and  remark-
ably cutting  manner,  as  follows,  "  No,  you  lie  !  I  am  the  son  of
a  councillor  of  state,  not  a  pope's  sou  ;  and  as  for  you — why
you  are  a  pope's  son  yourself!"  And  in  his  pique,  he  added,
for  the  further  exasperation  of  his  adversary,  "  Yes,  that's  it
precisely !  "

Although  he  had  thoroughly  quenched  Tchitchikoff"  by  thus
bestowing  upon  him  the  epithet  which  had  been  applied  to  him-
self, and  although  the  expression,  "  That's  precisely  it !  "  was  a
trifle  strong,  yet,  not  satisfied  with  all  this,  he  sent  a  private
denunciation  of  our  friend  to  the  authorities.  Moreover,
it  was  said  that  there  had  also  been  a  quarrel  between  them
over  a  pretty  little  woman,  who,  according  to  the  expression  of
the  custom-house  functionai'ies,  was  as  stout  and  as  rosy  as  a
fresh  beet ;  and  it  was  added  that  men  had  been  hired  by  our
hero's  rival  to  give  him  a  sound  drubbing  at  night  in  a  dark
alley.  However,  both  officials  were  being  deceived,  as  the
pretty  little  woman  really  favoured  a  certain  Staff'-Captain  Sham-
shareff".  God  only  knows  how  the  matter  actually  stood :  let
the  reader  who  likes  doing  so  invent  a  case  to  suit  himself.
The  chief  point  is,  that  the  secret  relations  with  the  smugglers
were  made  public.  Although  the  councillor  of  state's  son
ruined  himself,  he  succeeded  in  thoroughly  revenging  hiruself
on  his  comrade.  Tchitchikoff"  was  brought  before  the  court,
everything  which  he  possessed  was  confiscated  and  catalogued,
and  the  whole  aff"air  burst  over  his  head  with  the  suddenness  of
a  clap  of  thunder.  Both  the  confederates  recovered  themselves
as  from  a  stupor,  and  then  they  realised  what  they  had  done.
The  councillor  of  state's  son  would  not  stand  trial,  but  perished
in  some  obscure  retreat ;  while  our  hero,  already  a  collegiate
councillor,  stood  his  trial.  He  had  managed  to  conceal  a  portion
of  his  money,  fine  as  was  the  scent  of  the  investigating  com-


BfiPARTtJRE   ON   FRESH   ENTERPRISES.  189

mittee  appointed  by  his  chiefs.  In  defending  himself,  too,  he
employed  all  the  most  subtle  subterfuges  of  a  mind  which  was
already  well  experienced  and  versed  in  the  ways  of  men ;  in  one
case  he  employed  fascinations  of  manner ;  in  another  aflecting
speeches;  in  yet  another  he  threw  dust  in  his  superior's  eyes  by
means  of  flattery,  which  never  harms  any  case  whatever ;  and
in  a  fourth  instance  he  slipped  a  little  money  into  the  proper  hand.
In  short,  he  adjusted  the  matter  in  such  a  fashion  that  he  Avas
not  left  in  the  dishonoured  position  of  his  companion,  but
escaped  punishment.  However,  there  no  longer  remained  to  him
either  his  five  hundred  thousand  roubles  or  his  various  foreign
trifles,  or  anything  else  ;  other  amateurs  had  laid  hands  on  all
of  them.  Still  he  retained  a  little  hoard  of  ten  thousand
roubles,  which  he  had  concealed  in  provision  for  a  dark  day ;
together  with  a  couple  of  dozen  cambric  shirts,  a  little  britchka,
such  as  is  used  by  bachelors,  and  two  serfs — the  coachman
Selifan  and  the  valet  Petrushka ;  moreover,  the  custom-house
officials,  moved  by  compassion,  left  him  five  or  six  pieces  of
soap  for  the  preservation  of  his  ros}^  complexion — and  that
was  all.  So  behold  the  situation  in  which  our  hero  again  found
himself!  Behold  what  a  mass  of  misfortune  had  descended
upon  his  head!  This  was  what  he  designated  as  "  suflering
for  the  right  in  the  service."

It  might  now  be  surmised  that  after  such  storms,  experiences,
after  such  fickleness  of  fate,  and  human  woe,  he  would  depart
to  some  distant  and  tranquil  solitude,  to  some  little  pi'ovincial
town,  with  his  ten  thousand  roubles  whicji  had  cost  him  so  dear,
and  wither  away  in  a  chintz  dressing-gown,  at  the  window  of  a
tiny  house  ;  or  else,  by  way  of  recreation,  stroll  out  into  the
chicken-yard,  and  feel  each  pullet  which  was  destined  for  the
table — indeed,  in  this  manner,  lead  a  noiseless  but  in  its  own
way,  not  entirely  useless  life.

However,  this  was  not  the  way  that  things  turned  out.
Justice  must  be  rendered  to  our  hero's  invincible  strength  of
character.  After  all  this,  which  would  have  sufiiced,  if  not  to
annihilate,  at  least  to  cool  and  calm  another  man  for  ever,  his
unconquerable  passion  was  not  at  all  dulled  within  him.  He
was  grieved,  he  was  vexed,  he  grumbled  against  all  the  world,
he  was  indignant  at  the  injustice  of  fate,  he  was  enraged  by  the
injustice  of  men  ;  and  yet  he  could  not  refrain  from  fresh
attempts.  In  a  word,  he  displayed  a  patience  in  comparison
with  which  that  of  a  plodding  German  is  nothing,  since  the
latter  is  solely  due  to  the  slow,  languid  circulation  of  his  blood.
Tchitchikofi''s  blood,  on  the  contrary,  flowed  briskly ;  but  the


190  Dead  souls.

exercise  of  much  thoughtful  volition  was  required  to  enable  him
to  cast  out  his  hook  at  anything  now  likely  to  yield  him
profit.

He  reflected,  and  his  thoughts  obviously  took  this  point  of
view :  "  Why  do  I  exist  ?  Why  has  misfortune  overwhelmed
me  ?  Who  cares  about  one's  duties  nowadays  ?  Everybody
wins  his  way.  I  have  not  rendered  anyone  unhappy  ;  I  have
not  plundered  the  widow ;  I  have  not  turned  anyone  adrift
penniless  on  the  world  ;  I  have  merely  availed  myself  of  super-
fluous cash.  I  accepted  it  in  cases  where  any  one  would  have
taken  it ;  if  I  had  not  taken  advantage  of  the  chance,  other
people  would  have  done  so.  Why  do  others  thrive  while  I
become  food  for  the  worm  ?  And  what  am  I  now  ?  What  am
I  good  for  ?  With  what  eyes  must  I  now  gaze  into  those  of
any  respectable  father  of  a  family  ?  How  can  I  avoid  feeling
the  gnawing  of  conscience,  knowing,  as  I  do,  that  I  am  a  useless
burden  on  the  earth  ?  And  what  will  my  children  say  here-
after ?  '  There,'  they  will  say,  '  is  our  beast  of  a  father  :  he
will  leave  us  no  property  at  all ! '  "

It  has  already  been  seen  that  Tchitchikofi"  worried  a  great
deal  over  his  posterity.  Such  a  tender  subject  it  is  !  Perhaps
even  some  other  man  would  not  have  purloined  so  much  if  it
had  not  been  for  the  question  which,  for  some  unknown  reason,
springs  up  of  itself,  "  What  will  the  children  say  ?  "  So
behold  the  future  founder  of  a  race,  like  a  cautious  cat,  which,
with  a  sidelong  glance,  observes  whether  the  master  be  not
looking,  and  then  hastily  seizes  everything  which  is  within  its
reach,  whether  it  be  soap  or  candles  or  tallow,  or  a  canary  bird,
which  in  short,  lets  nothing  whatever  escape  it.

Thus,  our  hero  wept  and  complained  :  but,  in  the  meantime,
he  never  ceased  exercising  his  wits.  Again  he  retired  within
himself;  again  he  stinted  himself  in  everyway;  again  he  under-
took to  lead  a  hard  life  ;  again  he  descended  from  a  clean  and
respectable  existence  to  dirt  and  the  life  of  the  lowly.  And
while  awaiting  something  better,  he  was  fain  to  engage  in  the
calling  of  a  steward  —  a  calling  which  has  not  hitherto  been
largely  adopted  by  our  citizen  classes,  for  a  steward  receives
buffets  from  all  quarters,  is  but  little  respected  by  the  petty-clerk
tribe,  or  even  by  confidential  agents,  is  condemned  to  dance
attendance  in  ante-rooms,  and  to  put  up  with  impertinence  and
so  on ;  however,  necessity  obliged  our  hero  to  make  up  his
mind  to  everything.

Among  the  commissions  which  fell  to  him  in  this  new  capacity
was  the  mortgaging  of  several  hundred  peasants  to  the  Council


DEPARTtJRE   OK   FRESH   ENTERPRISES.  191

of  Guardians.*  His  employer's  estate  was  ruined  to  the  last
degree.  It  had  suffered  from  murrain  among  the  cattle  ;  from
the  depredations  of  rascally  overseers  ;  from  bad  harvests  ;
from  epidemic  diseases  ;  from  the  death  of  the  best  workmen  ;
and,  most  of  all,  from  the  senseless  behaviour  of  the  owner,
who  had  decorated  a  gorgeous  house  in  Moscow  in  the  latest
taste,  and  had  thus  spent  his  very  last  copeck,  so  that  he  had
nothing  left  to  purchase  food  for  himself.  For  this  reason,  he
was  finally  compelled  to  mortgage  his  last  remaining  serfs.
This  pawning  was  a  new  thing  in  those  days,  and  it  was  not
decided  upon  without  fear  and  trembling.  Tchitchikoff,  in  his
capacity  of  agent,  after  having  first  rendered  all  the  oflicials
fevourable  (it  is  well  known  that,  without  conciliating  them  not
an  application  is  ever  entertained,  not  an  inquiry  answered),
having  thus  acquired  the  favour  of  all  of  them,  he  explained  to
the  secretary  that  one-half  of  the  peasants  having  died,  there
might  be  a  lot  of  trouble  as  regards  the  security.

"  But  they  are  still  reckoned  on  the  census-list  ?  "  said  the
secretary.

"Yes,  they  are  so  reckoned,"  replied  Tchitchikoff.

"Well,  what  are  you  afraid  of  ?  "  said  the  secretary:  "one
has  died,  another  has  been  born,  so  the  people  remain  available
all  the  same."

The  secretary  evidently  understood  how  to  talk  to  the  point.
But  in  the  meantime,  the  most  inspired  thought  that  ever
entered  a  human  brain  had  flashed  upon  that  of  our  hero.

"Ah,  I  am  a  regular  Akim  the  Simpleton!  "  he  said  to
himself:  "I  have  been  hunting  for  my  mittens,  and  they  are
both  in  my  belt !  Now,  suppose  that  I  buy  all  the  souls  which
have  died  since  the  last  census  was  taken ;  and  suppose  that  I
obtain  a  thousand  of  them,  say,  and  that  the  Council  of  Guar-
dians will  lend,  say,  two  hundred  roubles  a  soul ;  there  I  shall
~Tiave  a  capital  of  two  hundred  thousand  roubles  !  And  the  times
are  propitious  just  now :  there  was  an  epidemic  not  long  ago,
and  not  a  few  people  died,  glory  be  to  God !  The  landed  gentry
have  also  been  losing  at  cards,  and  carousing  and  squandering
in  proper  fashion  ;  everybody  has  crawled  ofl"  to  Petersburg,  to

*  The  Council  of  Guardians  is  a  grand  banking  establishment,  directed
by  a  council  -which  governs  various  institutes  for  orphans  and  deaf-mutes,
placed  under  the  patronage  of  the  reigning  empress.  Money  can  be  de-
posited there  at  an  interest  of  four  per  cent.,  and  both  real  and  personal
property  can  be  mortgaged  there.  Serfs  to  the  number  of  ten  thousand
could  be  pawned  there  in  former  times,  when  one  of  this  Council's  most
considerable  sources  of  income  was  the  monopoly  of  plajong- cards,  which
in  Kussia,  as  elsewhere,  insures  a  safe  and  lucrative  revenue.  ^


192  DEAD   SOULS.

enter  the  service  ;  their  estates  are  abandoned,  or  managed  at
hap-hazard  ;  they  find  it  harder  every  year  to  pay  their  taxes  ;
so  it  may  chance  that  I  shall  be  able  to  earn  a  copeck  once  more.
Of  course,  it  is  difficult  and  troublesome,  and  it  would  be
the  finishing  touch  if  any  scandal  arose  from  this.  But  vphat  is
a  man's  mind  given  to  him  for  !  To  contend  with  difficulties  of
course.  And  the  best  thing  about  it  is,  that  the  afi'air  will
appear  incredible  to  everybody,  and  no  one  will  believe  it.  It
is  true  that  without  land  it  is  impossible  either  to  purchase  or
to  pawn  serfs.  But  I  will  buy  them  for  colonisation — for
colonisation  !  The  land  in  the  provinces  of  Tauris  and  Kherson  is
now  given  away  gratuitously  to  anyone  who  will  settle  upon  it.
I  will  take  them  all  there !  To  the  Khersonese  with  them  !
There  let  them  live  !  And  the  colonisation  can  be  efiiected  in
legal  form,  according  to  the  decrees  of  the  courts.  If  the
officials  want  to  review  the  serfs,  I  won't  object.  I  will  present
a  certificate,  with  the  signature  of  the  captain-ispravnik  himself.
The  village  can  be  styled  the  '  TchitchikofF  Sloboda,'*  or  else
called  after  my  baptismal  name,  the  '  Hamlet  of  Pavlovskoe.'  "

So  this  is  the  way  in  which  that  strange  project  was  formed
in  the  brain  of  our  hero  ;  and  I  am  not  sure  whether  the  reader
will  feel  grateful  or  not  to  him  for  conceiving  it ;  but  it  is
difiicult  to  express  how  grateful  the  author  is  to  him,  for  say
what  you  like,  had  this  scheme  never  entered  the  head  of
our  friend  Tchitchikofi",  this  book  would  never  have  made  its
appearance  on  the  earth.

Our  hero  crossed  himself  in  Russian  fashion,  and  set  to
work.  Under  pretence  of  selecting  a  place  of  residence,  and
other  suitable  pretexts,  he  undertook  to  obtain  a  peep  at  various
corners  of  our  empire,  and  especially  at  those  which  had  suffered
more  than  the  others  from  mishaps — bad  crops,  mortality,  and
so  forth  :  in  short,  all  the  spots  where  he  could  most  comfortably
and  cheaply  purchase  the  people  whom  he  required.  He  did
not  address  himself  at  random  to  any  landowner,  but  selected
the  men  who  were  most  to  his  taste,  or  those  with  whom  the
transaction  of  such  business  would  present  the  fewest  difficulties,
after  first  making  their  acquaintance,  and  disposing  them  in  his
favour,  so  that,  as  far  as  possible,  he  might  acquire  the  dead
serfs  out  of  friendship,  instead  of  by  purchase.

This,  then,  is  the  complete  portrait  of  our  hero.  But  a  final
explanation  of  one  characteristic  may  be  required  :  What  is  he

*  A  sloboda  in  ancient  times  was  a  village  in  the  suburbs  of  a  town,
peopled  by  feudal  retainers.


DEPARTURE    ON    FRESH    ENTERPRISES.  193

as  regards  moral  qualities  ?  That  he  is  not  a  hero  composed
of  perfection  and  virtue  is  obvious.  Who  is  he  ?  A  knave,  of
course.  Why  a  knave  ?  Why  be  so  stern  towards  another  ?
There  are  no  knaves  among  us  now  :  there  are  only  well-
intentioned  people,  agreeable  people  abroad ;  and  they  are  all
talking  of  virtue.

No  doubt  the  public  will  be  dissatisfied  with  our  hero  ;  but
this  is  not  so  hard  to  bear  as  is  the  fact  that  there  lives  in  tho
author's  mind  the  invincible  conviction  that,  under  different
circumstances,  his  readers  might  have  been  pleased  with  this
same  hero,  with  this  very  Tchitchikoff.  If  the  author  had  not
looked  deeper  than  others  into  his  hero's  soul,  if  he  had  not
beheld  in  its  depths  things  which  escape  most  people  ;  if  he  had
not  revealed  the  secret  thoughts  for  which  no  man  gives  another
credit,  but  had  depicted  him  in  the  light  in  which  he  appeared
to  the  whole  town,  to  Maniloff  and  other  persons,  then  every-
one would  have  been  delighted,  and  would  have  considered  him
a  very  interesting  man.  Perhaps  neither  his  face  nor  his  per-
sonality, as  a  whole,  would  have  struck  the  eye  so  forcibly  ;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  on  finishing  the  perusal  of  this  story,  the
reader's  soul  would  not  have  been  in  the  least  moved,  and  ho
might  have  turned  once  more  to  the  card-table,  which  is  the
universal  comforter  in  Russia.  Yes,  my  good  readers,  you
would  have  preferred  not  to  see  the  man's  meanness  laid  bare.
"  Why,"  you  say,  "  to  what  purpose  is  this  ?     Do  we  not  our-     j

.gelyes  know  that  there  is  much  which  is  stupid  and  despicable
in  life?~"  And  moreover  it  frequently  happens  that  we  behold
things  which  are  not  at  all  cheerful.     Show  us  rather  some-      i
thing  very  beautiful,  very  attractive  :  it  is  better  to  forget  our-      »
selves."     "  Why,  my  friend,  do  you  inform  me  that  domestic

^matters  are  going  so  badly?  "  says  the  master  to  his  steward.
"I  know  all  that  without  your  telling  me,  my  good  fellow;
haven't  you  anything  else  to  talk  about  ?  I  don't  want  to
know  about  it :  let  me  forget  it,  and  then  I  shall  be  happy."  /  1/
And  then  the  money  which  would  have  gone  so  far  towards
righting  matters  is  employed  in  various  ways  in  lulling  the
master  to  forgetfulness.  The  mind  which  might,  perhaps,  have
invented  a  means  of  acquiring  vast  wealth,  slumbers  ;  and  so
at  last  the  estates  go  bang  !  to  the  auction — and  the  master  goes
forth  into  the  wide  world  to  forget  himself  with  a  soul  prepai-ed
in  its  dire  need  to  accomplish  vile  deeds  which  would  have  terri-
fied it  before.

Why  hide  all  this  ?  Why  hesitate  over  words  ?  Why  be
chary  of  calling  things  by  their  right  names  ?     Who,  if  not  an

N


194  DEAD    SOULS.

author,  is  to  speak  the  truth  ?  You  are  afraid  of  a  deep,
scrutinizing  glance  ;  you  shrink  from  fixing  a  deep  gaze  upon
anything  yourselves  ;  yoa  are  fond  of  slipping  past  everything,
•with,  eyes  which  see  nothing.  You  even  laugh  heartily  at  Tchi-
tchikoff;  perhaps  you  even  praise  the  author;  you  say,  "At
any  rate,  he  has  sketched  him  cleverly.  He  must  be  a  jolly
sort  of  a  man  !  "  And  after  these  words,  you  turn  with
redoubled  arrogance  to  yourselves,  a  self-satisfied  smile  makes
its  appearance  on  your  countenances,  and  you  add,  "Well  it
must  be  admitted  that  people  are  dreadfully  queer  in  some  of
our  provinces,  and  there  must  be  a  few  rascals  among  them  !  "
However,  which  of  you,  filled  with  Christian  humility,  will  dive
into  the  depths  of  his  own  soul,  and  not  aloud,  but  in  silence
and  solitude,  in  moments  of  isolated  self-communion,  will  put  to
himself  the  weighty  question,  "And  is  there  not  some  taint  of
Tchitchikofi"  in  me  also  ?  "  ,;  Why  not,  indeed  ?  Still  you  never
say  that  of  yourself;  but  if  some  acquaintance  of  neither  very
lofty  nor  very  low  rank  passes  by,  you  instantly  nudge  your
neighbour,  and  say  to  him,  almost  bursting  with  laughter  the
while,  "Look,  look!  there  is  Tchitchikoff!  Tchitchikoflf  has
passed  by  !  "  and  then,  like  a  child,  oblivious  of  all  the  respect
which  is  due  to  rank  and  years,  you  will  run  after  him,  imitate
him  behind  his  back,  and  say,  "Tchitchikoff"!  Tchitchikoff"!
Tchitchikoff!"

But  we  have  been  talking  in  rather  a  loud  tone  of  voice,
forgetful  of  the  fact  that  our  hero,  who  has  slumbered  while  we
have  recounted  his  life,  is  awake  now,  and  might  easily  over-
hear his  name,  thus  often  repeated.  He  is  a  man  who  takes
off"ence  readily,  and  who  does  not  like  to  have  people  express
themselves  disrespectfully  with  regard  to  him.  No  doubt  it
matters  little  to  the  reader  whether  Tchitchikoff  be  incensed
with  him  or  not,  but  the  author  must  on  no  account  quarrel
with  his  hero ;  there  still  remains  a  considerable  space  over
which  they  must  travel  hand  in  hand.

The  britchka,  with  Tchitchikoff,  Selifan,  and  Petrushka  was
still  proceeding  at  a  jog-trot,  when  our  hero  woke  up.

"Oho!  What  are  you  about  ?  "  he  said  to  his  coachman.
"  Answer,  I'm  speaking  to  you!"

"  What  ?  "  asked  Selifan  in  a  leisurely  tone.

"  What,  indeed  !  You  goose  !  Where  are  you  going  ?  Come
now,  make  haste  ! "

And  in  fact,  Selifan  had  been  driving  along  for  a  good  while
■with  his  eyes  half  shut,  just  touching  the  horses — who  also
were  dreaming —  with  the  reins  from  time  to  time ;  and
Petrushka's  cap  had  long  since  fallen  off  in  some  unknown  spot,


DEPARTURE    OX    FRESH    ENTERPRISES.  195

while  he  himself  had  fallen  backwards  until  his  head  struck
against  Tchitchikoff's  knees,  so  that  the  latter  was  obliged  to
give  him  a  push.  But  Selifan  now  roused  himself  up,  and
after  administering  a  few  lashes  to  the  piebald,  and  flourishing
his  knout  in  the  air,  he  ejaculated,  in  a  sing-song  tone,  "  Never
fear  !  "  The  horses  then  started  up,  and  drew  the  light  britchka
along  as  if  it  had  been  merely  a  tuft  of  down.  Selifan  still
flourished  away,  and  shouted,  "  Eh,  eh,  eh  !  "  as  he  jerked  up
and  down  on  the  box,  while  the  troika  flew,  now  up  the  ascents
and  then  down  the  declivities  of  the  highway.

Tchitchikoff  smiled  as  he  lightly  swung  on  his  leather
cushions,  for  he  liked  to  drive  rapidh'.  And  what  Russian  does
not  love  fast  driving  ?  How  could  it  fail  to  suit  the  taste  of  a
man  who  is  always  striving  for  excitement,  who  delights  to
roam  ?  How  could  his  soul  help  loving  this  ?  Should  he  not
love  it,  this  speed  which  seems  so  triumphant,  so  marvellous  ?
It  is  as  though  an  unknown  power  had  taken  you  upon  its
wings ;  that  you  were  flying  on  and  on  while  everything  else
was  flying  back.  The  verst-stones  fly  back  ;  the  merchants,  on
the  boxes  of  their  britchkas,  fly  to  meet  you  ;  the  forest  flies  ofi"
on  both  sides  of  the  road,  with  its  dark  bands  of  pines  and  firs,
and  with  the  blows  of  axes  and  the  cawing  of  crows  resounding
in  its  depths ;  the  whole  road  flits  away  into  the  dim  distance.
And  there  is  something  terrible  bound  up  with  this  swift  flashing,
amid  which  one  can  only  distinguish  the  sky  overhead,  flecked
with  light  clouds  ;  and  where  the  moon,  as  it  pierces  them,
seems  to  be  the  only  thing  which  is  immovable.

Ah,  the  troika — the  bird-troika  !  Who  invented  thee  ?  Of
course,  thou  couldst  only  have  had  thy  birth  among  a  dashing
race — in  that  land  which  has  extended  smoothly,  glidingly,  over
half  the  earth,  and  where  one  may  count  the  verst-pillars  until
one's  eyes  swim.  Thou  art  not  a  complicated  vehicle,  friend
troika.  Thou  art  not  put  together  with  iron  spikes  ;  a  clever
moujik  of  Yaroslavl,  with  axe  and  chisel  only,  has  made  thee  with
despatch.  Thy  driver  wears  no  German  cavalry-boots  :  he  has
a  beard  and  mittens,  they  are  all  he  needs.  The  deuce  only
knows  what  he  sits  upon;  but  see,  he  has  risen,  and  he  waves
his  arms  and  strikes  up  a  song.  The  horses  dash  on  like  a
whirlw^ind ;  the  spokes  of  the  wheels  have  become  merged  into
one  smooth  circle;  the  road  quakes,  and  the  foot-traveller  halts
and  cries  aloud  in  alarm — while  yet  the  troika  flies  on,  on,  on  !
And,  behold,  it  is  already  visible  afar,  raising  a  cloud  of  dust,
and  piercing  the  air,  till  at  last  it  vanishes  from  view.

Ip  it  not  thus,  like  the  bold  troika  which  cannot  be  overtaken,
that  thou  art  dashing  along,  0  Russia,  my  country  ?     Tbe  v^nA^


196  DEAD    SOULS.

smoke  beneath  thee,  the  bridges  thunder  ;  all  is  left,  all  will  be
left,  behind  thee.  The  spectator  stops  short  astounded,  as  at  a
marvel  of  God.  Is  this  the  lightning  which  has  descended
from  heaven  ?  he  asks.  What  does  this  awe-inspiring  move-
ment betoken  ?  and  what  uncanny  power  is  possessed  by  these
horses,  so  strange  to  the  world  ?  Ah  !  horses,  horses,  Eussiau
horses  !  what  horses  you  are  !  Doth  the  whirlwind  sit  upon
your  manes  ?  Doth  your  sensitive  ear  prick  with  every  tingle
in  your  veins  ?  But  lo  !  you  have  heard  a  familiar  song  from
on  high  ;  simultaneously,  in  friendly  wise  you  have  bent  your
brazen  breasts  to  the  task  ;  and,  hardly  letting  your  hoofs
touch  the  earth,  you  advance  in  one  tightly- stretched  line,
flying  through  the  air.  Yes,  on  the  troika  flies,  inspired  by
God  !  0  Eussia,  whither  art  thou  dashing  ?  Eeply  !  But  she
replies  not ;  the  horses'  bells  break  into  a  wondrous  sound  ;  the
shattered  air  becomes  a  tempest,  and  the  thunder  growls;
Eussia  flies  past  everything  else  upon  earth  ;  and  other  peoples,
kingdoms,  and  empires  gaze  askance  as  they  stand  aside  to
make  way  for  her  !


CHAPTER  XII.

TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE    SOEEOWS    OF    LOVE.

Why,  it  may  be  asked,  why  depict  misery  upon  misery,  and  the
imperfection  of  our  lives,  by  unearthing  people  from  the  Avil-
derness,  from  the  remote  nooks  and  corners  of  our  empire  ?  But
what  is  to  be  done  if  the  character  of  the  author  is  such  that,
conscious  of  his  own  imperfection,  he  is  unable  to  depict  any-
thing except  miseryupon  misery,  and  the  imperfections  of  our  life,
unearthing  people  from  the  wilderness,  from  remote  nooks  and
corners  of  the  empire  ?  And  here  we  have  again  arrived  in  the
wilds,  again  we  have  hit  upon  a  distant  nook.  But,  on  the
whole,  what  a  nook,  what  wilds  !

Like  the  gigantic  escarpment  of  some  interminable  fortress,
with  angles  and  batteries,  the  mountainous  elevation  extends
for  more  than  a  thousand  versts.  Grandly  does  it  pursue  its
course  across  the  boundless  expanse  of  the  plain,  now  breaking
off"  in  the  shape  of  a  perpendicular  wall,  of  a  clayey  or  limestone
formation,  hollowed  out  into  gullies  and  watercourses,  and
rounding  over  in  a  swelling  which  pleases  the  eye,  covered,  as


TEJCTYOTNIKOFF  :    OR,    THE    SORROWS    OF    LOVE.         197

with  a  lambskin  coat,  with  young  bushes,  which  have  sprouted
forth  amid  the  trees  which  had  been  felled  ;  and,  last  of  all,  with
dark  clumps  of  forest,  which  have  escaped  the  axe  by  some
miracle.  The  river,  now  faithful  to  its  bed,  displays  sharp  angles
and  round  curves,  and  now  stretches  to  a  distance  into  the  mea-
dows, where,  after  several  windings,  it  glitters  like  fire  beneath
the  sun.  Then  it  hides  itself  in  a  grove  of  beeches,  ash-trees,
and  alders,  and  thence  emerges  in  triumph  in  company  with
bridges,  mills,  and  dams,  which  seem  to  pursue  it  at  every
step.

Here  had  met  examples  of  the  whole  vegetable  kingdom.  The
oak,  the  fir,  the  wild-pear,  the  maple,  the  cherry,  the  thorn  or
nettle-tree,  with  wild  wreathing  ivy  and  hops,  climbed  all  over
the  mountain  side  from  summit  to  base,  now  aiding  now  stifling
each  other  in  their  growth.  And  aloft,  mingled  with  their  ver-
dant crests,  appeared  the  red  roofs  of  a  manorial  building,  the
peaks  and  frets  of  the  peasants'  cabins  being  concealed  in  the
rear,  behind  the  carved  balcony  and  large  half-rounded  windows
of  the  mansion.  And  over  all  these  roofs  and  trees  the  ancient
church  reared  its  five  glittering  golden  crests.  Oh  all  its  cupolas
there  were  open-work  gilt  crosses,  and,  at  a  distance,  it  seemed
as  though  the  gold,  sparkling  like  burning  ducats,  hung  sus-
pended in  the  air  without  support.  And  all  this — roofs,  tree-
tops,  and  crosses — was  charmingly  reflected,  but  in  a  reversed
position,  in  the  river,  where  the  hollow,  deformed  willows,  stand-
ing, some  in  the  water  and  others  on  the  margin,  with  their
branches  and  their  leaves  drooping  thence,  all  enveloped  in  the
green  slime  which  floated  on  the  stream  with  the  yellow  water-
lilies,  appeared  to  be  gazing  upon  their  wondrous  reflection.

Who  was  the  owner  of  this  picturesque  village,  approached
from  a  long  avenue  of  oaks,  which  received  the  visitor  cour-
teously, stretching  out  their  drooping  boughs  as  though  for  a
friendly  embrace,  and  accompanying  him  to  the  very  front  of
the  house,  of  which  we  have  already  seen  the  upper  storey  from
afar,  and  which  now  stands  face  to  lace  with  one,  having  on  one
side  a  row  of  peasants'  cabins  displaying  peaks  and  carved
gables,  and  on  the  other  hand  a  church  glittering  with  golden
crosses  ?  To  what  fortunate  individual  did  this  labyrinth  be-
long?

To  a  landowner  of  the  Tremalakhansky  district,  Andrei  Ivano-
vitch  Tentyotnikofl*  by  name,  a  lucky  young  fellow  of  thirty,
who  was  still  unmarried.

Who  was  he  ?  what  was  iie  ?  what  qualities,  what  capacities,
did  ne  possess  ?  We  must  inquire  of  his  neighbours — of  his
neighbours,  dear  readers.     One  neighbour  expressed  his  opinion


198  DEAD   SOtJLS.

of  him  by  the  laconic  phrase,  "  A  perfect  beast !  *'  A  general,
who  lived  at  a  distance  of  ten  versts  oflf,  said,  "He  is  by  no
means  a  stupid  young  man,  but  he  has  got  a  great  many  queer
notions  into  his  head.     I  might  be  of  service  to  him,  for  I  am

not  without  influence  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  even  with "

However,  the  general  did  not  finish  his  speech.  As  for  the
captain-ispravnik,  he  gave  this  answer:  "There's  something
low  about  him — he's  a  worthless  fellow ;  and  I  must  go  after
him  to-morrow  for  his  arrears  !  "  The  moujiks  of  the  village,
when  questioned  as  to  what  sort  of  a  man  their  master  was,
made  no  reply  at  all.  So,  of  course,  their  opinion  of  him  was
unfavourable.

But,  to  speak  dispassionately,  he  was  not  a  bad  fellow  :  he
simply  encumbered  the  earth.  Since  there  are  a  great  many
people  in  the  wide  world  who  are  utterly  useless,  why  should
not  Tentyotnikoff  be  one  of  them  too  ?,'

As  a  rule  he  awoke  very  late  in  the  morning  ;  and  on  rising,  he
sat  for  a  long  time  in  his  bed,  rubbing  his  eyes.  And,  although
his  eyes  were  unfortunately  small,  this  operation  lasted  a  re-
markably long  time.  In  the  meanwhile  his  man,  Mikhailo,  stood
at  the  door,  with  a  hand-basin  and  a  towel.  This  poor  Mik-
hailo stood  an  hour  there,  then  another  hour  ;  then  he  went  to
the  kitchen  and  came  back  again,  but  his  master  was  still  rub-
bing his  eyes  and  sitting  up  in  bed.  Finally  he  rose  from  his
bed,  washed  himself,  put  on  his  dressing-gown,  and  came  out
into  the  drawing-room  to  drink  some  tea,  coffee,  cocoa,  and  even
some  boiled  milk,  sipping  a  little  of  all  of  them,  mercilessly
crumbling  his  bread,  and  heedlessly  scattering  the  ashes  from
his  pipe  all  over- the  place.  He  sat  for  two  hours  over  his  tea,
and  that  was  not  all :  he  took  a  cold  cupful  of  it,  and  walked  to
the  window  which  overlooked  the  court-yard  ;  and  at  the  win-
dow the  following  scene  took  place  every  day : —

First  of  all,  Grigoriy,  a  house-serf,  who  acted  as  butler,
roared  at  Perfilievna,  the  housekeeper,  in  some  such  terms  as
these:  "You  clumsy,  big,  rebellious  darling!  you  worthless
hussy  !  You  might,  at  least,  hold  your  noise,  you  disgusting
woman !  "

"  And  don't  you  want  that  ?  "  shrieked  the  worthless  woman,
making  an  insulting  sign  with  her  hand.  Perfilievna  was  a
coarse  woman  in  her  actions,  despite  of  the  fact  that  she  was
fond  of  raisins,  fruit-tarts,  and  all  sorts  of  sweets,  which  she  kept
under  lock  and  key.

"  You  have  entered  into  a  compact  with  the  steward,  you
storehouse  good-for-nothing  !  "  shouted  Grigoriy.


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE    SORROWS    OF    LOVE.         199

"  Yes,  and  the  steward  is  just  such  another  thief  as  you  are.
Do  you  think  that  the  master  doesn't  know  you  ?  Why,  he's
there,  he  is  listening,"

"  Where's  the  master  '?  "

"  There  he  is,  sitting  by  the  window  ;  he  sees  everything."

And  the  master  really  was  sitting  at  the  window,  and  he  saw
everything.

To  complete  the  uproar,  a  child  belonging  to  a  house-serf
which  had  received  a  hearty  slap  from  its  mother,  screamed  at
the  top  of  its  voice  ;  then  a  greyhound  howled  on  account  of  the
hot  water  with  which  the  cook  had  splashed  it  as  she  chased
it  from  the  kitchen.  In  short,  everything  was  screaming  and
wailing  intolerably.  The  master  saw  and  heard  it  all.  And  it
was  only  when  it  became  so  unendurable  that  it  prevented  his
doing  anything  whatever  that  he  sent  out  word  to  say  that
they  must  make  less  noise.

Two  hours  before  dinner  he  retired  to  his  study  to  engage  In
a  serious  literary  composition,  which  was  designed  to  embrace
all  Russia,  from  all  points  of  view — the  political,  social,  re-
ligious, and  philosophical — he  meant  to  solve  all  the  difficult
questions  attaching  to  her  history,  ^d  to  clearly  define  her
great  future  ;  everything  in  short  was  to  be  done  in  that  form
and  fashion  in  which  the  man  of  the  day  delights.  This
colossal  undertaking  was  limited,  however,  to  thought:  our
writer  nibbled  his  pen,  sundry  drawings  made  their  appearance
upon  his  paper,  and  then  everything  was  thrown  aside  and  a  book
was  taken  in  hand,  and  not  dropped  again  until  dinner-time.
This  book  was  perused  with  the  soup,  the  roast,  the  salad,  and
even  with  the  pastry,  so  that  some  dishes  grew  cold  and  some
were  even  removed  untasted.  After  this  came  a  pipe  and  some
coftee,  and  a  game  of  chess  with  himself.  What  he  did  after-
wards until  supper-time  it  would  be  hard  to  say.  It  appeared
that  he  simply  did  nothing  whatever.

And  thus  did  one  utterly  solitary  young  man  of  thirty  pass
his  time,  constantly  sitting  about  in  his  dressing-gown,  without
any  neckcloth.  He  did  not  walk  out,  he  did  not  even  care  to
go  upstairs  to  look  at  the  view  ;  he  did  not  care  to  open  the
■windows  to  admit  fresh  air  into  the  room  ;  and  it  was  as  though
the  sight  of  the  beautiful  village,  which  no  visitor  could  help  ad-
miring, did  not  exist  for  its  owner.  From  this  the  reader  will
see  that  Andrei  Ivanovitch  Tentyotnikoff  belonged  to  that  class
of  people  who  are  not  extinct  in  Russia,  and  who  were
formerly  called  sluggards  and  lazybones,  and  who  are  now
called  I  know  not  what.     Are  such  characteristics  born  with  a


DEAD   SOULS.

man,  or  aw  they  developed  later  in  life,  begotten  by  the
gloomy  circumstances  with  which  the  man  is  hemmed  in  ?  In
reply  to  this  question  it  will  be  better  to  relate  the  history  of
this  young  fellow's  childhood  and  training.

It  seemed  as  though  everything  had  conspired  to  make  some-
thing odd  out  of  him.  As  a  sharp-witted  lad  of  twelve,  of  a
thoughtful  mood  and  somewhat  sickly  constitution,  he  entered
a  school  managed  at  that  time  by  a  very  remarkable  man.  The
idol  of  youth,  the  wonderful  teacher,  the  incomparable  Alexan-
der Petrovitch,  was  endowed  with  the  gift  of  divining  a  man's
nature.  How  he  did  understand  the  character  of  the  Eussian
man  !  How  he  understood  children  !  How  well  he  knew  how
to  move  them  !  There  was  not  a  mischief-maker  who  did  not
come  to  him,  after  playing  a  prank,  and  confess  it  of  his  own
accord.  But  this  was  not  all ;  the  player  of  pranks  did  not
leave  the  master's  presence  with  drooping  head,  but  held  it  well
in  the  air,  with  a  hearty  desire  to  atone  for  his  fault.  There
was  something  encouraging  in  Alexander  Petrovitch's  very  re-
proof, something  which  said,  "  Forward  !  Else  as  quickly  as
possible  to  your  feet,  without  heeding  your  fall !  "  He  called
ambition  the  force  which  stimulates  a  man  onward,  and  he  en-
deavoured to  arouse  it.  With  him  there  was  no  question  of
good  behaviour.  He  generally  said,  "  I  require  brains  and
nothing  else.  He  who  directs  his  attention  to  acquiring  know-
ledge will  have  no  time  for  pranks,  mischief  will  disappear  of
itself."

This  schoolmaster  did  not  have  many  pupils,  and  he  mostly
taught  in  person.  He  understood  how  to  give  the  very
marrow  of  the  subject,  without  pedantic  accessories  or  pom-
pous views  or  speculations,  and  so  that  it  seemed  plain  to
the  youngest  that  the  knowledge  was  necessary  to  them.  Only
those  branches  of  learning  were  chosen  by  him  which  were
adapted  to  make  a  man  a  good  citizen.  The  greater  part  of
the  lessons  consisted  in  stories  about  what  awaited  a  young  man
in  the  future,  and  he  understood  so  well  how  to  sketch  out  a
career,  that  the  youth  lived  mind  and  soul  in  the  service  while
still  on  his  school  form.  The  master,  hiding  nothing,  set  before
the  boy  in  all  their  nakedness  the  bitterness  and  the  hindrances
which  arise  in  a  man's  path,  and  all  the  trials  and  temptations
which  await  him.  He  knew  everything,  just  as  though  he
himself  had  passed  through  every  rank  and  calling.

Whether  it  was  from  this  cause  that  ambition  was  so
strongly  aroused  in  his  pupils,  or  because  there  was  something
in  the  very  eyes  of  this  extraordinary  teacher,  which  said  to  the


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OB,   THE   SORROWS   OF   LOVE.         201

youth,  "  Forward  !  " — that  word  so  well  known  to  the  Russian,
and  which  works  wonders  on  his  sensitive  organization — at  all
events,  the  youths  from  the  very  outset  sought  out  difficulties
and  longed  to  he  in  action,  contending  with  the  greatest  hard-
ships under  circumstances  in  which  it  was  necessary  to  display
the  utmost  firmness  of  soul.  Few  graduated  after  this  course
of  study,  but  those  few  proved  men  of  might.  They  remained
firm  in  the  most  insecure  places  ;  while  many  who  were  much
more  clever  than  they  were,  could  not  endure  their  position,
but  abandoned  everything  on  account  of  petty  personal  vexa-
tions ;  or  else  having  become  dull  and  lazy,  they  found  them-
selves in  the  hands  of  bribe-takers  and  rogues.  But  the  others
wavered  not ;  and  knowing  both  life  and  men,  and  possessing
true  wisdom,  they  exercised  a  powerful  influence  on  the  evil-
disposed.

How  this  wonderful  teacher  startled  Andrei  Ivanovitch  in  his
boyhood  !  The  fiery  heart  of  the  ambitious  lad  for  a  long  time
leaped  at  the  very  thought  of  entering  upon  the  higher  course  of
study  ;  and  indeed,  when  sixteen  years  old,Tentyotnikofl',  having
distanced  all  the  lads  of  his  own  age,  was  counted  worthy  of
being  transferred  to  the  highest  class  as  one  of  the  best,  though
he  did  not  believe  it  himself.  What  to  all  appearances  could  be
better  for  our  Tentyotnikoft"  than  such  an  instructor  ?  But  fate
would  have  it  so,  that  at  the  very  time  when  the  lad  was  trans-
ferred to  this  class  of  the  elect- — a  thing  which  he  had  so
ardently  desired — the  remarkable  teacher,  whose  words  of  en-
couragement alone  threw  him  into  a  sweet  confusion,  fell  ill,
and  died  shortly  afterwards.  Oh,  what  a  blow  was  this  for  the
young  fellow !  How  terrible  was  this  his  first  loss.  It
seemed  to  him  as  though  everything  in  the  academy  were
altered.

In  the  place  of  Alexander  Petrovitch  there  then  came  a
certain  Feodor  Ivanovitch,  a  good  painstaking  man,  but  one
who  held  very  ditierent  views  of  things.  In  the  easy  uncon-
straint  of  the  boys  of  the  first  class  he  thought  that  he  detected
intractability.  He  began  by  instituting  among  them  certain
outward  forms  of  order ;  for  instance  he  required  the  young
fellows  to  preserve  unbroken  silence,  under  no  circumstances
were  they  to  walk  out  except  in  pairs;  and  he  even  began  to
measure  the  distance  from  couple  to  couple  with  his  arshiu-
-tick.  At  table  he  arranged  them  according  to  size  for  appear-
ance' sake,  and  not  according  to  capacity  ;  so  that  the  stupid
boys  got  the  best  bits  and  the  clever  boys  the  remnants.  All
this  provoked  grumbling,  especially  when  the  new   master,  in


202  DEAD   SOULS.

direct  opposition  to  the  practices  of  his  predecessor,  announced
that  brains  and  fine  progress  signified  nothing  to  him  ;  that  he
only  looked  at  conduct ;  that  if  a  boy  studied  badly  but  behaved
well,  he  should  show  him  a  preference  over  the  clever  but
playful  boy.  However,  Feodor  Ivanovitch  did  not  attain  his
object.  Playfulness  being  objected  to,  secret  pranks  .began.
Everything  went  like  clockwork  in  the  daytime,  but  at  night
there  was  rioting.

Our  young  friend  Andrei  Ivanovitch  was  of  a  quiet  disposi-
tion. He  could  not  be  led  astray  by  the  nightly  orgies  of  his
schoolmates,  who  played  their  pranks  in  full  view  of  the
windows  of  the  principal's  quarters,  nor  by  their  mockery  of
holy  things,  which  arose  because  the  pope  did  not  chance  to  be
a  clever  man.  No,  even  in  his  dreams  his  mind  recognised  its
heavenly  origin.  Still  he  hung  his  head  :  his  ambition  was
aroused,  but  there  was  no  career  of  active  occupation  open  to
him.  It  would  have  been  better  perhaps  had  this  ambition  not
been  aroused  at  all.  He  listened  to  the  enthusiastic  professors
at  their  lectures,  and  recalled  his  former  instructor,  who  had
known  how  to  talk  in  intelligible  terms  without  becoming
excited.  What  courses  did  he  not  attend  !  What  subjects  did  he
not  hear  treated !  Medicine  and  chemistry,  philosophy,  law,
and  the  universal  history  of  mankind,  all  on  such  a  vast  scale,
that  in  three  years  the  professors  merely  succeeded  in  reading
the  introduction.  However,  all  this  lingered  in  Andrei's  brain
in  formless  masses.  Thanks  to  his  native  common-sense,  he
was  conscious  that  he  ought  not  to  be  taught  in  that  manner ;
but  the  proper  way  he  did  not  know.  And  he  often  recalled
Alexander  Petrovitch,  and  grew  so  sad  at  times  that  he  did  not
know  what  to  do  with  himself  for  grief.

But  youth  is  happy  in  this,  that  it  has  a  future.  In  propor-
tion as  the  time  of  his  departure  from  school  drew  nigh,  his
heart  began  to  beat  more  violently.  He  said  to  himself,  "  Surely,
this  is  not  life  ;  this  is  only  the  preparation  for  life :  real  life
lies  on  the  surface  ;  that  is  the  place  for  action."  And  without
even  glancing  at  the  marvellously  beautiful  little  nook  which
made  such  an  impression  on  every  visitor,  without  even  paying
obeisance  to  the  dust  of  his  parents,  he  betook  himself,  after  the
custom  of  all  ambitious  men,  to  Petersburg,  where,  as  it  is  well
known,  all  our  spirited  young  fellows  hasten,  from  every  quarter
of  Russia,  to  enter  the  service,  to  shine  or  to  work,  or  simply  to
skim  the  surface  of  colourless,  deceptive  society,  which  is  as
cold  as  ice.

Andrei  Ivanovitch's    ambitious    aspirations    were   promptly


tEJftYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE   SORROWS   OF   I.OVE.         203

quelled,  however,  at  the  very  outset  by  his  uncle,  Ouufriy  Ivauo-
vitch,  an  actual  councillor  of  state.  The  latter  declared  that
the  chief  point  in  a  man  was  a  good  handwriting  ;  that,  with-
out this,  no  one  could  obtain  admission  to  a  ministry  or
to  any  imperial  office.  At  last,  however,  with  great  difficulty,
and  with  the  assistance  of  his  uncle's  influence,  Tentyotnikoff
secured  an  appointment  in  some  department  or  other.  When
he  was  conducted  for  the  first  time  into  the  light  and  magnifi-
cent hall,  with  its  inlaid  floor  and  varnished  writing-desks,  which
looked  as  though  the  greatest  grandees  of  the  empire  sat  at
them,  and  dealt  with  the  fate  of  the  whole  country ;  when  he
beheld  the  legions  of  handsome  gentlemen  who  were  writing
there,  noisily  moving  their  pens,  and  inclining  their  heads  on
one  side ;  and  when  they  placed  him  at  a  table,  and  at  once
gave  him  a  document — intentionally  of  little  importance — to
copy  (it  was  a  correspondence  about  three  roubles,  which  had
been  going  on  for  half  a  year),  an  extraordinarily  odd  sensa-
tion took  possession  of  him.

It  seemed  to  him  as  though  he  were  in  some  primary  school,
and  had  to  go  through  his  education  all  over  again.  It  was  as
though  he  had  been  degraded  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  class
for  some  prank  or  other  ;  the  gentlemen  who  were  seated  around
him  were  very  much  like  scholars.  His  former  occupations
then  seemed  better  to  him  than  those  of  the  present  moment,
and  his  preparation  for  the  service  superior  to  the  service  itself.
He  began  to  regret  his  school-life.  And  all  at  once  the  defunct
Alexander  Petrovitch  stood  so  vividly  before  him  that  he  came
near  bursting  into  tears.  The  room  spun  round,  the  officials
and  the  tables  became  all  mixed  up  together,  and  he  with  diffi-
culty conquered  this  momentar)'-  obscuration  of  his  faculties.
"  No,"  he  said  on  recovering  himself,  "I  will  set  to  work,  no
matter  how  petty  the  work  may  seem  in  the  beginning !  "
Then  summoning  strength  to  his  heart  and  spirit,  he  resolved  to
acquit  himself  of  his  duties  in  imitation  of  the  rest.

After  a  short  time  Tentyotnikoff  became  used  to  the  service,
only  it  did  not  prove  to  be  his  chief  aim  and  object,  as  he  had
at  first  supposed  that  it  would  be,  but  something  of  secondary
importance.  It  served  as  a  means  of  occupying  his  time,
causing  him  to  set  a  higher  value  on  the  moments  which
remained  to  him.  His  uncle,  the  actual  councillor  of  state,  had
begun  to  think  that  his  nephew  was  going  to  do  him  credit,
when  all  of  a  sudden  this  nephew  disappointed  him.

Among  Andrei  Ivanovitch's  friends — and  these  were  numerous
— there  chanced  to  be  two  who  were  what  is  called  "  embittered


204  DEAD   SOULS.

men."  They  possessed  those  uneasy  and  peculiar  characters
which  not  only  manifest  displeasure  at  real  injustice,  but  even
at  whatever  seems  in  their  eyes  to  be  unjust.  Good  men  at  the
outset  but  disorderly  in  their  own  conduct,  demanding  conside-
ration for  themselves,  and  at  the  same  time  most  intolerant
towards  others,  they  acted  powerfully  on  Andrei  Ivanovitch  by
means  of  their  fiery  language  and  the  manner  in  which  they
evinced  their  noble  indignation  against  society.  After  making
him  irritable,  they  called  his  attention  to  all  sorts  of  trifles  to
which  he  would  not  before  have  thought  of  paying  any  heed.
Then  Feodor  Feodorovitch  Lyenitzuin,  the  chief  of  one  of  the
departments,  suddenly  incurred  the  young  fellow's  displeasure.
Andrei  began  to  seek  out  a  multitude  of  shortcomings  in  the  chief.
It  seemed  to  him  that  in  conversation  with  his  superiors  he
turned  entirely  into  artificial  sugar,  and  that  when  he  addressed
himself  to  a  subordinate,  into  vinegar  ;  that,  after  the  manner  of
all  petty-minded  individuals,  he  took  note  of  those  who  pre-
sented themselves  with  congratulations  for  him  on  festive  occa-
sions, and  revenged  himself  on  those  whose  names  did  not  appear
on  his  porter's  list.

In  consequence  of  this,  Andrei  Ivanovitch  felt  a  positive  dis-
gust with  him,  and  at  last  one  day  he  addressed  Feodor  Feodoro-
vitch with  so  much  impertinence  that  he  received  an  intimation
from  the  authorities  that  he  must  either  apologise  or  send  in  his
resignation.  He  then  sent  in  his  resignation.  His  uncle,  the
actual  councillor  of  state,  came  to  him  in  alarm,  with  entreaties :
"  For  Christ's  sake,  Andrei  Ivanovitch,  consider  !  What  are  you
doing  ?  Abandoning  a  career  so  auspiciously  begun  simply
because  you  happened  not  to  like  the  chief?  Reflect!  Who
are  you  ?  What  is  this  to  you  ?  Why,  if  such  things  were  to
be  noticed,  no  one  would  remain  in  the  service.  Reconsider
the  matter,  mortify  your  pride,  go  and  explain  matters  to  him  !  "

"  That  is  not  the  point,  uncle,"  said  the  nephew.  "  It  isn't
hard  for  me  to  ask  his  pardon.  I  am  in  the  wrong :  he  is  the
chief,  and  it  wasn't  proper  for  me  to  speak  to  him  in  that  man-
ner. But  the  question  is  this :  I  have  another  duty — three
hundred  souls  of  peasants,  an  estate  in  disorder,  and  a  fool  as  a
steward.  The  empire  will  suff'er  very  little  loss  if  another  man
is  set  to  copying  documents  in  the  ofiice  in  my  stead,  but  there
will  be  a  vast  loss  if  three  hundred  men  do  not  pay  their  taxes.
What  do  you  think  about  it  ?  I  am  a  landowner  ;  if  I  busy
myself  with  improving  and  caring  for  those  who  are  intrusted
to  me,  and  if  I  present  the  empire  with  three  hundred  upright,
sober,  and  industrious  subjects,  will  my  service  be  in  any  way


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE    SORROWS   OF    LOVE.  205

inferior  to  that  of  any  head  of  department — Lyenitzuin,  for
instance  ?  "

The  actual  councillor  of  state  stood  with  his  mouth  wide  open
in  amazement.  He  had  not  expected  such  a  reply.  After
reflecting  for  a  short  time,  he  began  again  in  this  fashion  :  "  But
still,  my  friend,  how  can  you  bury  yourself  in  the  country  ?
What  sort  of  society  can  there  be  among  the  moujiks  ?  Here,
at  all  events,  you  may  encounter  a  general  or  a  prince  in  the
street.  You  will  pass  someone  there  ;  well,  and  there's  the
gaslights,  and  busy  Europe  hard  by,  whereas,  in  the  country,
cver}'one  you  meet  is  either  a  peasant  or  a  woman.  And  why
condemn  yourself  to  barbarity  for  your  whole  life  ?  "

However,  the  convincing  arguments  of  the  uncle  had  no  eflfect
upon  the  nephew.  The  latter  felt  weary  of  the  service  and  of  the
capital.  The  country  had  begun  to  present  itself  to  him  in  the
light  of  a  comfortable  retreat,  calculated  to  refresh  his  mind,
and  he  might  there  lead  a  life  of  useful  activity.  He  had
already  unearthed  the  newest  books  on  the  subject  of  village
economy.

Within  two  weeks  after  this  conversation,  Tentyotnikoff  was
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  scenes  amid  which  his  childhood
had  been  passed,  not  far  from  the  very  beautiful  nook  which  no
visitor  or  tourist  was  ever  able  to  admire  sufficiently.  He  had
already  quite  forgotten  certain  spots,  and  he  gazed  with  curiosity
upon  the  magnificent  views,  like  a  perfect  new-comer.  And,  lo  !
for  some  unknown  reason,  his  heart  began  to  beat  on  a  sudden.
When, in  answer  to  the  query,  "  Whose  forest  is  this?  "  he  was
told,  "  Tentyotnikoff 's ;  "  when,  emerging  from  the  forest,  the
road  ran  through  meadows,  past  groves  of  quivering  aspens,  old
willows,  and  young  vines,  in  sight  of  the  heights  which  stretched
afar ;  when  it  flew  over  the  bridges,  leaving  the  river  now  on
the  right,  and  now  on  the  left ;  and  when,  in  answer  to  the
query,  "Whose  are  these  fields  and  water-meadows?"  the
answer  came,  "  Tentyotnikoff 's  ;  "  when  the  road  again  ascended
the  heights,  and  ran  on  the  one  hand  along  a  level  plateau,  past
crops  of  wheat,  rye,  and  barley,  and  on  the  other  past  all  the
places  through  which  he  had  previously  journeyed,  and  which
presented  themselves,  all  of  a  sudden,  foreshortened  by  the
distance  ;  and  when,  as  the  darkness  gradually  descended,  the
road  again  stretched  beneath  the  shadow  of  luxuriant  trees,
scattered  over  the  greensward  up  to  the  very  entrance  of  the
village,  and  the  peasants'  cabins  made  their  appearance  here
and  there,  together  with  the  red-roofed  manor-house  and  its
dependent  buildings,  and  the  gleaming  golden  cupolas    of  the


206  DEAD    SOULS.

church ;  when,  by  his  hotly  beating  heart  and  without  putting
any  question,  he  became  conscious  what  the  place  was  where
he  had  arrived — then  it  was  that  the  sensations  and  thoughts
which  had  been  incessantly  accumulating  within  him  burst
into  expression  in  the  following  words  : —

"  Well,  and  have  not  I  been  a  fool  hitherto  ?  Fate  destined
me  to  be  the  owner  of  an  earthly  paradise,  and  I  bound  myself
into  servitude  as  a  scribbler  of  dead  documents  !  The  idea  of
intrusting  this  place  of  mine  to  a  steward — of  preferring  the
conduct  of  affairs  at  a  distance  among  strangers — of  preferring  to
the  actual  management  of  my  own  property,  the  fantastic  paper
management  of  provinces  situated  a  thousand  versts  away,
where  I  have  never  set  foot,  and  in  attending  to  which  I  can
only  commit  a  heap  of  contradictions  and  absurdities  !  "

But  another  spectacle  was  awaiting  him.  Having  heard  of  the
impending  arrival  of  their  master,  the  moujiks  and  women  had
assembled  on  the  verandah ;  soroki,"^^  kitchi,f  kerchiefs,  peasant-
kirtles,  beards,  with  all  the  picturesque  accessories  of  a  hand-
some population,  surrounded  him,  while  the  words,  "  0  thou
our  provider  !  "  rang  out,  and  the  old  men  and  women  burst
into  involuntary  tears  as  they  recalled  his  grandfather  and  great-
grandfather. He  also  could  not  refrain  from  tears,  and  said  to
himself,  "How  much  love!  And  why?  I  had  never  seen
them,  never  troubled  myself  about  them!  "  Then  he  made  a
vow  to  share  their  labours  with  them,  to  attend  to  their  wants,
in  order  that  their  love  might  not  be  in  vain,  and  so  that  he
might  really  be  their  "  provider."

Accordingly,  he  began  to  take  charge  of  the  management,  and
to  make  various  arrangements.  He  diminished  the  compulsory
service  to  the  lord  of  the  manor,  leaving  certain  days  of  labour
due  to  the  master  to  the  time  allowed  to  the  peasant.  He
dismissed  the  fool  of  an  overseer.  He  began  to  examine  into
everything  himself ;  showed  himself  in  the  fields,  at  the
threshing-floor,  near  the  grain-ricks,  at  the  mills,  the  landing-
stages,  watching  the  lading  and  launching  of  rafts  and  flat-boats.

"There  he  is;  see  the  brisk-legged  fellow!"  the  peasants
began  to  say,  while  they  themselves  began  to  grow  indolent,
and  to  scratch  the  backs  of  their  heads.

But  all  this  did  not  last  long.  The  moujiks  quickly  learn  the  lay
of  the  land.  In  this  case  they  speedily  understood  that  although
the  master  was  very  alert,  he  had  no  idea  so  far  as  to  the

*  Linen  head-dresses,  stitched  with  coloured  wool  or  yam,  worn  by
peasant-women  in  the  Ural,
t  Also  head-dresses.


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OK,    THE    SORllOWS    OF    LOVE.         207

proper  way  of  treating  them.  And  although  he  spoke  in  a
scholarly  manner,  it  was  not  to  the  purpose.  The  result  was,
that  the  master  and  the  peasant  not  only  failed  to  understand
each  other  and  act  in  harmony,  but  were  incapable  of  singing
the  same  notes.

Tentyotnikoff  soon  observed  that  everything  on  the  land
belonging  to  himself  did  not  thrive  so  well  as  it  did  on  the
peasants'  land.  The  seed  was  sown  earlier  but  came  up  later ;
and  yet  to  all  appearance  the  men  worked  well.  He  even  pre-
sided over  the  work  in  person,  and  ordered  a  measure  of  brandy
to  be  given  to  each  man  who  worked  assiduousl3\  The  peasants'
rye  had  eared,  their  oats  had  yielded  bountifully,  their  millet
had  developed  stalks  long  before  his  grain  had  shown  a  stem.  In  a
word,  he  began  to  perceive  that  the  peasants  were  simply  cheat-
ing him,  in  spite  of  all  the  privileges  which  he  had  conferred
upon  them.

He  tried  reproof,  but  merely  received  some  such  answer  as
the  following  :  "  How  is  it  possible,  master,  that  we  should
not  rejoice  in  our  lord's  profit '?  You  yourself  graciously
observed  how  hard  we  worked  when  we  were  ploughing  and
sowing.  You  ordered  a  measure  of  vodka  apiece  for  us  because
we  did  so."     What  reply  could  be  made  to  that  ?

"But  why  has  it  all  turned  out  badly  now?"  the  master
asked.

"  "WTio  knows  ?  Evidently  some  worms  devoured  the  seed
from  below.  And  just  remeinber  what  a  summer  we  have
had :  there's  been  no  rain  at  all."

But  the  master  saw  that  no  worms  had  devoured  the  peasants'
crops  from  below,  and  that  the  rain  had  fallen  in  a  peculiar  way  :
it  had  favoured  the  peasants,  but  not  one  drop  of  it  had  watered
the  owner's  fields.

It  was  still  more  difficult  for  him  to  manage  the  women.
They  were  continually  begging  olf  from  their  work,  and  com-
plaining of  the  master's  impositions.  It  was  strange  !  He  had
utterly  abolished  all  tributes  of  linen,  berries,  mushrooms,  and  nuts;
he  had  released  them  from  fully  half  of  their  other  labours,  think-
ing that  the  women  would  devote  this  time  to  domestic  affairs;  that
they  would  mend  and  make  theii-  husbands'  clothes,  and  cultivate
their  vegetable  gardens.    However,  nothing  of  the  sort  took  place.

Idleness,  quarrelling,  gossiping,  and  all  sorts  of  dissension
arose  among  the  fair  sex,  so  that  the  husbands  were  continu-
ally coming  to  him  with  such  words  as  these  :  "  Master,  take
away  that  devil  of  a  woman,  my  wife  !  she's  a  perfect  fiend ;
there's  no  living  with  her  !  "


208  DEAD    SOULS,

He  hardened  his  heart,  and  tried  to  resort  to  sternness.  But
how  could  he  be  stern  ?  A  woman  would  come  to  him  in  the
regular  feminine  fashion,  weak  and  ill  and  whining,  with  the
most  horrible  and  disgusting  rags  heaped  upon  her — where  she
had  got  them,  God  only  knows!  "Go  away,  go  home  !  take
yourself  out  of  my  sight!  God  be  with  you!"  said  poor
Tentyotnikoff ;  and  then  he  saw  the  sick  woman,  as  soon  as
she  had  emerged  from  his  doors,  fight  with  a  neighbour  over  a
beet-root  and  belabour  the  neighbour's  sides  in  a  way  of  which  a
healthy  man  would  have  been  incapable.

It  occurred  to  him  to  try  the  experiment  of  establishing  a
school  among  them,  but  this  resulted  in  such  folly  that  he  hung
his  head  in  shame  :  it  would  have  been  better  if  he  had  not
thought  of  it.  Finally,  in  his  discouragement  his  zeal  faded
away.

He  superintended  the  work  in  an  inattentive  manner.  If  he
stood  near-by  while  the  scythes  were  rustling  softly  through  the
grass,  or  the  men  were  piling  the  hay  in  stacks,  or  loading  it  on
waggons,  his  eyes  gazed  into  the  distance  ;  if  the  work  was  pro-
ceeding afar,  they  sought  objects  near  at  hand,  or  glanced  aside
at  some  bend  of  the  river,  along  the  banks  of  which  walked  a
red-billed,  red-legged  marten.  He  gazed  at  it  with  curiosity,  as
it  held  a  fish,  which  it  had  canght  crosswise  in  its  bill,  as
though  meditating  whether  it  should  swallow  it  or  not  ;  and
then  gazing  intently  across  the  river  at  another  marten,  gleaming
white  in  the  distance,  he  saw  that  it  had  not  caught  a  fish,  but
was  staring  fixedly  at  the  marten  who  had.  Or  else  deserting
both  the  martens  and  the  bend  of  the  river,  screwing  his  eyes
tight  together,  and  throwing  up  his  head  towards  the  airy
expanse,  he  inhaled  the  perfume  of  the  fields,  and  listened  to  the
voices  of  the  melodious  tenants  of  the  air  as  they  united  in  one
harmonious  chorus.  He  heard  the  woodcock  piping  in  the  rye,
the  landrail  croaking  in  the  grass,  the  linnets  grumbling  and
twittering  as  they  flitted  past,  the  marsh-snipe  shrieking  as  he
rose  in  the  air,  the  trills  of  the  lark  rolling  down  an  invisible
ladder  of  air,  and  the  notes  of  the  stork  ringing  out  like  the
blasts  of  a  trumpet  as  it  outlined  a  triangle  in  the  sky.  The
whole  neighbourhood,  full  of  sound,  gave  back  a  delightful  echo.
But  even  all  this  began  to  bore  him.  He  soon  ceased  to  visit
the  fields  altogether  and  sat  in  his  own  room,  refusing  even  to
receive  the  reports  of  the  steward.

At  first  some  people  from  the  neighbourhood  came  to  visit
him — a  retired  lieutenant  of  hussars,  redolent  of  tobacco  ;  a
student  who  had  not  completed  his  course  but  who  held  very


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE    SORROWS   OF    LOVE.  209

decided  opinions,  and  had  gathered  his  ■wisdom  from  current
pamphlets  and  newspapers.  However,  these  visitors  also  began
to  bore  Andrei.  Their  conversation  seemed  to  him  somewhat
superficial  :  their  European  style  and  their  familiarities  were
quite  too  frank  and  straightforward  for  his  taste.  He  decided
to  cut  short  his  acquaintance  with  everyone,  and  he  eflFected
this  in  a  rather  abrupt  manner.

One  day,  when  a  retired  colonel,  a  most  agreeable  super-
ficial converser  on  all  sorts  of  topics,  called  with  the  herald  of
the  new  order  of  thought,  the  student  Varvar  Nikolaitch  Vish-
nepokromofi",  in  order  to  indulge  in  a  long  talk  on  politics,
philosophy,  literature,  morals,  and  even  the  state  of  English
finances — he  sent  word  to  say  that  he  was  not  at  home,  and,
at  the  same  time,  was  so  indiscreet  as  to  show  himself  at  the
window.  His  eyes  met  those  of  one  of  his  visitors.  One,  of
course,  muttered  between  his  teeth,  "  The  beast !  "  The  other,
in  his  vexation,  sent  some  word  like  "  pig  "  after  the  first.
The  acquaintanceship  ended  there.  From  that  time  forth,  no
one  called  at  Tentyotnikofi"s  house.

He  was  glad  of  it,  and  devoted  himself  to  planning  a  great
work  on  Russia.  The  reader  already  knows  in  what  manner  he
pursued  this  task.  Still,  now  and  then,  there  was  a  minute
when  he  was  thoroughly  aroused  from  sleep.  When  the  post
brought  him  the  newspapers  and  reviews,  and  he  saw  in  print
the  familiar  name  of  some  former  comrade,  who  had  already
succeeded  in  winning  a  conspicuous  position  in  the  imperial
service,  or  had  contributed  something  important  to  science  or
to  universal  progress,  a  secret  and  quiet  sorrow  penetrated  his
heart,  and  a  pained,  speechlessly  sad,  gentle  complaint  at  his
own  inaction  involuntarily  burst  forth.  Then  his  life  appeared
to  him  to  be  hateful  and  repulsive.  Then  the  vanished  years  of
his  life  at  school  rose  up  before  him  with  extraordinary  vivid-
ness, and  Alexander  Petrovitch  suddenly  stood  before  him  as
though  he  were  alive.  Finally  the  tears  poured  from  his  eyes
in  streams.

What  did  these  tears  signify  ?  Did  his  pining  soul  reveal  in
them  the  depressing  secret  of  its  disease — that  the  exalted  inner
man  which  had  begun  to  take  form  within  him  had  not  suc-
ceeded in  filling  to  its  outlines,  and  fixing  itself  firmly  ?  That,
inexperienced  from  his  very  youth,  he  had  not  attained  to  that
lofty  state  of  mind  to  which  he  had  hoped  to  rise  and  grow
strong  on  obstacles  and  limitations  ?  That  his  remarkable  teacher
had  died  too  soon,  and  that  there  was  no  one  now  in  all  the
world  who  could  arouse  the  powers  kept  down  by  perpetual

o


210  DEAD    SOULS.

indecision,  who  could  say  to  him  in  a  voice  of  encouragenaent
that  word,  "Forward!"  which  the  Kussian  thirsts  for  every-
where, no  matter  what  class  of  society,  trade,  or  calling  he  may
belong  to  ?

Who  is  he  who  has  understood  how  to  say  to  us,  in  our
native  tongue,  that  all-powerful  \^oy^,  forward  ?  Who,  knowing
all  the  powers  and  qualities  and  all  the  depths  of  our  natures,
could,  with  one  enchanting  gesture  of  the  hand,  have  directed
us  to  higher  life  ?  With  what  tears,  with  what  love,  would  the
grateful  Eussian  have  requited  him  !  But  century  after  century
has  passed  by  in  shameful  indolence,  Russia  remains  the  same,
in  immature  youth,  God  vouchsafing  no  man  who  knows  how
to  pronounce  that  all-powerful  word  !

One  circumstance  came  near  rousing  Tentyotnikoff,  and  nearly
brought  about  some  change  in  his  character.  Something  in  the
nature  of  a  love-affair  took  place.  In  the  neighbourhood,  at
about  ten  versts  from  Tentyotnikoff 's  village,  there  dwelt  a
general,  who  lived  as  a  general  should — exercised  hospitality,
was  fond  of  having  his  neighbours  come  to  pay  him  their
respects,  talked  in  a  hoarse  voice,  read  books,  and  had  a
daughter — a  being  such  as  had  never  been  seen  before.  It
sometimes  is  vouchsafed  to  a  man  to  behold  something  of  the
sort  in  his  dreams ;  and  from  that  time  forth,  throughout  his
life,  he  reflects  upon  that  vision ;  reality  has  for  ever  disap-
peared for  him,  and  he  is  absolutely  good  for  nothing.

Her  name  was  Ulinka.  She  had  been  rather  strangely  brought
up.  An  Englishwoman,  who  did  not  know  a  word  of  Russian,
had  educated  her.  She  had  lost  her  mother  in  infancy,  and
her  father  had  no  time  to  attend  to  her.  Moreover,  as  he  loved
her  to  ma,dness,  he  might  have  merely  spoiled  her.  She  was
self-willed  in  everything,  like  a  child  which  has  grown  up  in
freedom.  If  anyone  had  seen  how  a  sudden  outburst  of  wrath
brought  a  collection  of  deep  wrinkles  to  her  lovely  brow,  and
how  warmly  she  disputed  with  her  father,  he  would  have  thought
that  she  was  a  very  capricious  creature.  But  her  wrath  only
flashed  up  when  she  heard  of  some  injustice,  or  of  some
ill-treatment.  She  never  disputed  on  her  own  account,  and
she  never  defended  herself ;  and  her  anger  disappeared  on  the
instant  if  she  saw  the  person  against  whom  it  was  directed  in
trouble.  At  the  first  request  for  alms,  no  matter  from  whom  it
proceeded,  she  gave  all  that  she  had,  before  she  even  had  time
to  reflect  on  the  impropriety  of  flinging  away  her  purse  with
everything  which  it  contained.

There  was  something  impetuous  about  her.  When  she  spoke,


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE    SORROWS   OF    LOVE.         211

it  seemed  as  though  everythmg  followed  her  thoughts :  the
expression  of  her  countenance,  the  tone  of  her  voice,  the  move-
ments of  her  hands,  the  very  folds  of  her  garments,  all  seemed
to  incline  in  the  same  direction,  and  it  was  as  though  she  were
on  the  point  of  flying  after  her  own  words.  There  was  no
reserve  about  her.  She  never  feared  to  reveal  her  thoughts  to
anyone,  and  no  power  on  earth  could  reduce  her  to  silence  when
she  wished  to  speak.  Moreover,  her  peculiar  and  bewitching
walk  was  so  free  and  unconstrained  that  anyone  would  involun-
tarily make  way  for  her.  In  her  presence  a  wicked  man  grew
confused  and  silent ;  the  most  audacious  and  unrestrained  in
his  language  found  not  a  word  to  say  to  her,  but  lost  his  wits  :
though  the  shy  man  was  able  to  converse  with  her  as  he  had
never  done  with  anyone  else  in  all  his  life,  and  felt  from  the
first  moment  of  the  conversation  as  if  he  had  known  her
somewhere  before,  and  had  already  beheld  her  features ;  it
seemed  to  him  that  this  had  happened  in  the  depths  of  his  boy-
hood, in  some  familiar  house,  on  a  merry  evening,  amid  the
joyous  games  of  a  throng  of  children  ;  and  for  a  long  time  after-
wards the  man's  age  of  discretion  seemed  wearisome  to  him.

The  very  same  thing  happened  in  the  case  of  Tentyotnikoff.
It  seemed  to  him,  from  the  first  day  of  their  acquaintance,  that
he  had  alwaj-s  known  her.  A  new,  inexplicable  sensation  pene-
trated his  soul;  for  an  instant  a  gleam  of  light  illumined  his
wearisome  life.  At  first  the  general  received  the  young  fellow
well  and  gladly,  but  they  could  not  get  on  together.  Their
conversations  ended  in  disputes,  and  left  a  certain  unpleasant
feeling  on  both  sides :  for  the  general  was  not  fond  of  contra-
diction or  retorts  ;  and  Tentyotnikofl',  on  his  side,  was  quick  to
take  ofience.  Of  course  he  forgave  the  father  a  great  deal  for
the  daughter's  sake ;  and  peace  was  preserved  between  them,
until  some  relatives  came  to  visit  the  general — Countess  Bodui-
reva  and  Princess  Yuzyakina,  who  had  been  maids  of  honour  at
court  during  the  preceding  reign,  and  who  now  kept  up  some
connections  with  Petersburg,  in  consequence  of  which  the
general  paid  them  great  deference.  From  the  very  day  of  their
arrival,  it  seemed  to  Tentyotnikoff"  that  he  was  treated  more
coldly — that  he  was  overlooked,  or  regarded  as  a  person  of  no
importance :  he  was  addressed  in  a  somewhat  unduly  familiar
fashion  as  "  My  dearest  fellow  !  "  "  Listen,  my  friend  !  "  and
indeed  once  the  general  even  said  "  thou  "  to  him.

This  last  enraged  him.  Nevertheless,  hardening  his  heart
and  setting  his  teeth,  he  had  the  presence  of  mind  to  say,  in  an
unusually  soft  and  courteous  tone,  while  a  spot  of  crimson  made


212  DEAD    SOULS.

its  appearance  on  his  face,  and  everything  within  him  was  boil-
ing, "  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  your  kindly  sentiments,  general.
By  employing  the  word  thou,  you  display  an  amount  of  friend-
ship which  almost  induces  me  to  address  you  as  thou  also.  But
the  difference  in  our  ages  precludes  such  familiarity  between  us."

The  general  was  thrown  into  confusion.  Collecting  his  words
and  ideas,  he  began  to  say,  though  in  rather  an  incoherent
manner,  that  the  word  thou  had  not  been  uttered  by  him  in  that
sense  ;  that  it  was  permissible  for  an  old  man  to  say  thuu  to  a
young  one,  and  so  on.  It  may  be  noted  that  he  did  not  utter
a  syllable  about  his  rank.

Of  course,  their  acquaintance  ceased  from  that  moment,  and
the  love  affair  came  to  an  end  at  its  very  outset.  The  light
which  had  shone  for  an  instant  before  Tentyotnikoff  was  extin-
guished, and  the  shadows  which  followed  upon  it  seemed  all  the
blacker.  His  life,  indeed,  became  what  the  reader  has  seen  at
the  beginning  of  this  chapter — it  was  all  converted  into  lying  in
bed  and  inactivity.  Dirt  and  disorder  took  possession  of  his
house.  The  broom  stood  for  half  a  day  in  the  middle  of  the
floor,  in  company  with  the  dirt.  His  old  trousers  even  strayed
into  the  drawing-room.  On  the  elegant  little  table  which  stood
in  front  of  the  divan  there  lay  a  pair  of  braces,  just  as  though  they
had  been  refreshment  for  a  visitor.  Our  young  friend's  existence
had  become  trivial  and  slothful  to  such  a  degree  that  not  only
did  his  servants  cease  to  respect  him,  but  the  very  cocks  and
hens  pecked  at  him.

Upon  taking  his  pen  in  hand,  he  would  pass  hours  in  sketching
crooked  trees,  little  houses,  peasants'  huts,  telyegas,  and  troikas,
in  a  vacant-minded  way.  However,  sometimes,  when  he  had  for-
gotten everything,  the  pen,  of  its  own  will  and  without  its  master's
knowledge,  drew  a  little  head  with  delicate  features,  with  an
alert,  penetrating  glance,  and  a  lock  of  hair  turned  back  ;  and  the
master  then,  to  his  amazement,  saw  that  this  was  the  portrait  of
one  whose  portrait  no  artist  even  could  have  sketched.  And
then  he  became  still  more  melancholy  ;  and,  believing  that  there
is  no  such  thing  as  happiness  upon  earth,  he  grew  more  bored
and  silent  than  before.

Such  was  the  condition  of  Andrei  Ivanovitch  Tentyotnikoff's
soul.  All  at  once,  while  he  was  one  day  Avalking  to  the  window,
pipe  and  cup  in  hand,  after  the  usual  order  of  things,  he  was
stupefied  not  to  hear  either  Grigoriy  or  Perfilievna,  but  he  did
perceive  a  bustle  and  some  hurrying  to  and  fro  in  the  yard.
The  scullion  and  the  floor-washer  were  hastening  to  open  the
gates,   at   which,    indeed,    some  horses   were    visible,    exactly


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE    SORROWS    OF    LOVE.         213

like  the  horses  which  are  carved  or  drawn  on  triumphal  arches
— a  muzzle  to  the  right,  a  muzzle  to  the  left,  and  a  muzzle  in
the  middle.  Above  them,  on  the  box,  sat  a  coachman^  and  a
footman  in  voluminous  surtouts.  Behind  them  sat  a  gentleman
in  a  leather-peaked  cap  and  a  cloak,  with  a  scarf  of  rainbow  hues
around  his  neck.  AVhen  the  equipage  drew  up  before  the  porch
with  a  sweep,  it  became  apparent  that  it  was  nothing  less  than
a  light  britchka  on  springs.  The  gentleman,  who  possessed  an
extremely  pleasing  exterior,  sprang  out  of  it,  with  almost  the
alertness  and  agility  of  a  military  man.

Andrei  Ivanovitch  was  struck  with  terror.  He  took  the  visi-
tor for  an  otficial  from  the  courts  of  justice.  It  must  be  stated
that,  in  his  youth,  he  had  become  entangled  in  a  piece  of  folly.
Two  philosophers  belonging  to  the  hussars,  who  instead  of  com-
pleting their  course  in  aesthetics,  had  ruined  themselves  as
gamblers,  had  got  up  some  philanthropical  cociety  or  other,
under  the  chief  superintendence  of  an  old  mason,  a  rascal  who
was  also  a  gambler,  but  at  the  same  time  a  very  eloquent  man.
This  society  Avas  organised  with  extensive  views — to  procure
lasting  happiness  for  everyone,  from  the  banks  of  the  Thames
to  Kamtchatka.  A  vast  amount  of  money  was  required,  and  con-
tributions were  collected  among  the  generous  members.  Where
all  this  money  went  to,  no  one  knew,  excepting  the  manager-in-
chief.  He  had  inveigled  into  the  company  two  friends,  embit-
tered men  who  had  originally  been  decent  fellows,  but  who  had
been  transformed  into  regular  drunkards  by  dint  of  drinking
toasts  in  the  honour  of  science,  culture,  and  the  coming  respon-
sibilities of  maukind.  Tentyotnikoff  soon  recovered  his  senses
and  freed  himself  from  this  circle.  But  the  society  had  already
succeeded  in  entangling  him  in  some  operations  of  a  character
not  exactl)^  suited  to  a  nobleman,  so  that  an  aflair  with  the  police
ensued.  Thus,  it  is  not  surprising  that,  although  he  had  left  the
capital,  and  broken  off  all  connection  with  the  society,  he  did
not  feel  quite  at  ease.  His  conscience  was  not  quite  clear,  and
indeed  it  was  with  some  alarm  that  he  now  gazed  at  the  door
as  it  opened.

However,  his  terror  vanished  at  once  when  his  visitor,  after
bowing  with  incredible  skill,  somewhat  on  one  side,  but  keeping
his  head  in  a  respectful  position,  explained,  in  soft  but  decisive
words,  that  he  had  recently  been  traversing  Russia,  impelled  by
both  business  and  curiosity ;  that  the  empire  abounded  in
noteworthy  objects,  not  to  mention  the  abundance  of  trades  and
the  variety  of  soils  to  be  found  ;  that  he  had  been  attracted  by
the  picturesque  situation  of  the  village,  but  that  he  should  not


214  DEAD   SOULS.

have  ventured  to  intrude,  if,  in  consequence  of  tlie  spring  floods
and  the  bad  roads,  his  equipage  had  not  sustained  an  unexpected
fracture,  which  required  the  intervention  of  a  blacksmith  and
some  artisans.  However,  he  added  that,  even  if  no  accident
had  happened  to  his  britchka,  he  could  not  have  denied  himself
the  pleasure  of  personally  presenting  his  respects.

On  finishing  this  speech,  the  guest,  with  bewitching  suavity,
gave  a  scrape  of  his  foot,  which  was  shod  in  an  elegant  varnished
shoe,  fastened  with  mother-of-pearl  buttons,  and,  notwithstand-
ing his  corpulence,  he  sprang  backwards  with  the  lightness  of  an
india-rubber  ball.

Andrei  Ivanovitch  felt  re-assured,  and  concluded  that  this
must  be  some  inquisitive  professor,  who  was  travelling  through
Russia  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  some  plants  or  other,  or
possibly  fossils.  He  immediately  expressed  his  readiness  to
render  every  assistance  in  his  power  ;  he  offered  the  services  of
his  artisans,  his  wheelwrights  and  blacksmiths  ;  he  requested
the  stranger  to  dispose  of  everything  as  though  he  were  in  his
own  house  ;  he  even  seated  him  in  his  own  large  reclining-
chair,  and  then  prepared  to  listen  to  his  remarks  upon  the  natural
sciences.

But  the  guest  touched  rather  upon  philosophical  matters.  He
likened  his  life  to  a  vessel  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  driven  hither
and  thither  by  treacherous  winds  ;  he  mentioned  that  he  had
been  obhged  to  make  numerous  changes  in  his  place  of  residence
and  his  occupation ;  that  he  had  suffered  much  for  the  truth's
sake  ;  that  his  life  had  even  been  more  than  once  in  danger  from
his  enemies  ;  and  he  related  many  things  of  a  sort  which  showed
him  to  be  a  practical  man.  At  the  conclusion  of  his  speech,  he
blew  his  nose  in  a  white  cambric  handkerchief,  with  such  vio-
lence that  it  gave  a  report  the  like  of  which  Andrei  Ivanovitch  had
never  heard  before.  There  is  at  times  in  an  orchestra  a  horn  which
seems  to  blare  in  your  ear,  instead  of  in  the  orchestra.  Exactly
such  a  sound  echoed  through  the  startled  apartments  of  the
slumbering  house ;  and  immediately  after  it  came  the  smell  of
eav -de-Cologne,  which  was  invisibly  disseminated  by  a  skilful
flourish  of  the  cambric  pocket-handkerchief

The  reader  has  probably  already  divined  that  the  visitor  was
none  other  than  our  respected  and  long-neglected  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch Tchitchikoff.  He  had  grown  a  little  older  evidently ;
time  had  not  passed  by  without  tempests  and  anxieties.  It
seemed  as  though  the  very  swallow-tailed  coat  on  his  back  had
grown  antique,  and  the  britchka,  and  the  coachman  and  the
valet,  the  horses  and  the  harness,  had  all   become  worn  and


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE   SORROWS   OF    LOVE,         215

threadbare.  From  this  it  appeared  that  his  finances  were  not
in  an  enviable  condition.  However,  the  expression  of  his  face,
his  courtesy,  and  his  manners  remained  the  same.  He  had  be-
come even  more  agreeable  in  his  movements  and  conduct,
and  he  twisted  one  leg  under  the  other  in  a  more  skilful
fashion  than  ever  when  he  seated  himself  in  his  arm-chair.
There  was  more  suavity  in  his  turns  of  speech,  more  caution
and  moderation  in  his  words  and  expressions,  more  dexterity  in
his  bearing,  more  tact  about  him  in  every  way.  His  collar  and
shu't-bosom  wei'e  cleaner  and  whiter  than  snow,  and  despite
the  fact  that  he  was  on  a  journey,  there  was  not  even  a  speck
of  dust  upon  his  coat — it  was  exactly  as  though  he  had  just  come
from  a  birthday  dinner.  His  cheeks  and  chin  were  so  beauti-
fully shaven  that  even  a  blind  man  might  have  admired  their
agreeably  rounded  contours.

A  tran'sformation  at  once  took  place  in  the  house.  That
half  of  it  which  had  hitherto  remained  dark,  with  the  shutters
closed,  suddenly  blossomed  out  and  received  light.  Every-
thing began  to  move  about  in  the  newly  illuminated  rooms,  and
matters  soon  assumed  a  different  aspect.  All  the  ai'ticles  indis-
pensable for  a  toilet  for  the  night  were  placed  in  the  chamber
which,  was  assigned  to  the  visitor  as  a  bedroom.  As  for  the
apartment  which  was  intended  for  his  study,  there  were  here
three  tables :  one,  a  writing-table,  stood  before  the  sofa  ;  the
second,  a  card-table,  was  placed  between  the  two  windows  and
in  front  of  the  mirror  ;  the  third,  a  corner-table,  stood  in  the
angle  between  the  door  leading  to  the  bedroom  and  the  door
opening  into  an  unoccupied  hall,  filled  with  decrepit  furniture,
and  now  used  as  an  ante-room,  in  which  no  one  had  set  foot
for  a  year  previously.  On  this  corner-table  some  clothes  which
had  been  taken  out  of  our  hero's  trunk  were  placed,  namely,
a  coat,  beneath  it  a  pair  of  trousers,  a  second  pair  ditto  quite
new,  and  grey  in  colour,  also  two  velvet  and  two  satin
waistcoats,  and  a  surtout.  All  these  things  were  arranged  one
on  the  top  of  the  other  in  pyramid  fashion,  and  were  covered
over  with  a  silk  handkerchief.  In  the  other  corner  between  the
door  and  the  window  was  ranged  a  row  of  boots :  some  were
not  quite  new,  others  were  entirely  new ;  there  were  patent-
leather  boots,  low  shoes,  and  chamber  slippers.  They  also
were  modestly  veiled  with  a  silk  handkerchief,  so  that  it  was
just  the  same  as  if  they  were  not  there.

On  the  writing-table  were  speedily  arranged  with  great
regularity  a  dressing-case,  a  bottle  of  eau-de-CoJoijne,  some
toothpicks,  a  calendar,  and  two  novels — the  second  volume  of


216  DEAD   SOULS.

each  only.  The  clean  linen  was  placed  in  the  chest  of  drawers
which  stood  in  the  bedroom,  and  the  linen  which  required
washing  was  tied  up  in  a  bundle  and  thrust  under  the  bed ;  the
trunk,  when  it  had  been  emptied,  was  also  shoved  under  the  bed.
As  for  the  sword  which  our  hero  carried  with  him  on  the  road  in
order  to  inspire  robbers  with  salutary  fear,  that  also  Avas  placed
in  the  bedroom,  and  suspended  from  a  nail  not  far  from  the  bed.
Everything  assumed  an  aspect  of  neatness  and  order.  Nowhere
was  there  a  scrap  of  paper,  a  pen,  or  a  speck  of  dust.  The  very
air  seemed  to  have  become  ennobled.  The  odour  of  a  fresh  and
healthy  man  who  does  not  wear  his  linen  too  long,  but  takes  a
bath  and  rubs  himself  down  with  a  damp  sponge  every  Sun-
day, began  to  fill  the  apartment.  The  odour  of  the  valet  Pe-
trushka  attempted  for  a  time  to  establish  itself  in  the  ante-room ;
however,  Petrushka  was  speedily  transferred  to  the  kitchen,  as
was  fitting.

At  first  Andrei  Ivanovitch  feared  for  his  independence ;  he  was
alarmed  lest  any  visitor  should  embarrass  him  with  any  changes
in  his  mode  of  life,  which  was  so  cleverly  arranged.     But  his
fears  were  unfounded.     Our  hero,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  displayed  a
remarkable  capacity  for  adapting  himself  to  all  circumstances.
He   expressed   his   approval   of   his   host's   philosophical   and
methodical  disposition,  saying  that  it  promised  to  prolong  his
life  for  a  century.     With  regard  to  solitude,  he  expressed  him-
self very  happily  to  the  effect  that  it  promoted  grand  thoughts
in  a  man.     Then  after  glancing  into  the  library  and  praising
books  in  general,  he  remarked  that  they  rescued  a  man  from  idle-
ness.    He  let  fall  but  few  words,  but  those  few  were  weighty.
In  his  behaviour  he  displayed  even  more  tact.     He  made  his
appearance  just  at  the  proper  time,   and  he   vanished  at  the
very  moment  which  was  fitting  ;  he  did  not  worry  his  host  with
questions  during  the  latter's  taciturn  moods  ;  he  took  pleasure  in
playing   at  chess  with  him,  and  he   enjoyed   keeping   silent.
While  one  of  them  was  emitting  curling  wreaths  of  smoke  fi'om
his  pipe,  the  other,  who  did  not  smoke,  devised  an  occupation
which  corresponded  with  it :  for  example,  he  pulled  a  snufi'box
of  oxidized   silver   from   his   pocket,    and   grasping   it   firmly
between  two  fingers  of  his  left  hand,  he  twirled  it  briskly  with
his  right  fore-finger — so  that  it  looked  like  the  earth  whirling
on  its  axis — or  else  he  drummed  on  the  cover  with  his  finger,
and  whistled  all  the  while.     In  short,  he  did  not  incommode  his
entertainer  in  the  least.

"I  now  behold  for  the  first  time  a  man  with  whom  it   is
possible  to  live,"  said  Tentyotnikofi"  to  himself.    "On  the  whole,


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OK,    THE    SORROWS   OF    LOVE.         217

this  is  rare  among  us.  There  are  plenty  of  people  who  are
learned  and  cultivated  and  good,  but  as  for  people  of  a  perfectly
equable  temperament,  people  with  whom  one  could  pass  one's
life  without  quarrelling,  I  really  do  not  know  whether  many
such  persons  are  to  be  found  anywhere.  At  all  events,  this  is
the  first  man  of  the  sort  whom  I  have  seen."  Thus  did  Tentyot-
nikofi"  express  himself  with  regard  to  his  visitor.

Tchitchikofl",  on  his  side,  felt  very  glad  that  he  had  quartered
himself  for  a  time  at  the  house  of  this  quiet  and  peaceable  young
man.  He  had  grown  tired  of  his  gipsy  life.  Even  from  a
sanitary  point  of  view,  it  would  prove  advantageous  to  rest  for
/a  month  in  this  lovely  village,  in  sight  of  the  meadows  and  the
budding  spring.

It  would  have  been  difiicult  to  find  a  nook  better  suited  for
repose.  The  spring,  long  retarded,  was  suddenly  bursting  forth
in  all  its  beauty,  and  life  was  beginning  to  display  itself  in  every
direction.  The  fresh  and  early  emerald  verdure  was  dotted
with  yellow  dandelions,  while  the  purple  anemone  nodded  its
graceful  head.  Swarms  of  gnats  and  other  insects  made  their
appearance  in  the  swamps :  the  water-spider  was  already
hastening  in  pursuit  of  them,  and  birds  of  every  species  as-
sembled among  the  dry  reeds.  Ducks  and  all  other  kinds  of
water-fowl  fluttered  down  upon  the  flooded  lakes  and  rivers.
The  earth  all  at  once  became  populous  ;  the  forests  awoke  from
their  sleep  ;  the  meadows  became  vocal.  How  brilliant  was  the
verdure  !  how  fresh  the  air  !  What  bird-calls  rang  through  the
gardens  !  what  echoes,  what  cries  of  joy  from  everything  !  The
village  was  full  of  harmony  and  song,  as  though  a  wedding  were
going  on.  Walks  were  taken  in  every  direction,  and  Tchitchi-
kofl' himself  walked  a  great  deal.

At  one  time  he  du'ected  his  course  to  the  summit  of  the  hill,
which  aflbrded  a  view  of  the  spreading  valleys  below,  where
there  still  lingered  some  wide  lakes  formed  by  the  inundations,
with  islands  of  still  leafless  forest  lying  darkly  in  their  midst ;  or
else  he  strolled  through  the  wooded  ravines,  where  the  thickly
clustering  trees,  weighed  down  with  the  nests  of  cawing  rooks,
which  obscured  the  heavens  with  their  fitful  flittings,  were
beginning  to  deck  themselves  with  leaves.  Again  he  betook
himself  over  to  the  wharf,  whence  the  first  boats  were  setting
out,  laden  with  peas  and  barley  and  wheat,  while  the  water
dashed  noisily  against  the  wheel  of  the  mill,  which  was  just
beginning  to  work.  He  went  to  inspect  the  first  spring  hus-
bandry— he  watched  the  plough  turn  up  black  strips  of  earth
amid  the  green  ;  or  saw  how  the  dexterous  sower,  tapping  the


218  Dead  souls.

sieve  which  hung  from  his  breast,  scattered  the  seed  evenly  and
in  the  right  spot,  so  that  not  a  grain  fell  on  either  one  side  or
the  other.

Indeed  Tchitchikoff  went  everywhere.  He  talked  and  dis-
cussed things  with  the  overseer,  with  the  peasants,  and  with
the  miller.  He  knew  everybody  and  all  about  everything,  the
how  and  the  Avhy  ;  in  what  fashion  the  affairs  of  the  estate  were
progressing,  and  how  much  the  grain  sold  for,  how  much  of  it
was  sent  to  be  ground  in  the  autumn,  and  how  much  in  the
spring,  together  with  the  names  of  all  the  moujiks,  and  where
this  one  had  purchased  his  cow,  and  what  that  one  fed  his  pigs
on — in  short,  everything.  He  also  learned  how  many  peasants
had  died,  and  it  appeared  that  they  were  not  numerous.  Being
a  man  of  discernment,  he  perceived  that,  so  far  as  his  pet  scheme
went,  matters  would  not  progress  well  with  Andrei  Ivanovitch.
On  the  other  hand,  ignorance,  neglect,  thieving,  and  intoxication
prevailed  everywhere.  And  he  said  to  himself,  in  his  own  mind,
*'  What  a  fool  that  Tentyotnikoff  is  !  Such  an  estate,  and  to
neglect  it  so  !  He  might  have  an  income  of  fifty  thousand
roubles  a  year  !  "

More  than  once  it  occurred  to  him,  in  the  course  of  his  walks,
that  he  would  some  time — that  is  to  say,  not  now,  but  later  on,
when  his  principal  business  had  been  settled,  and  he  had
the  means  on  hand — become  the  peaceful  owner  of  some
such  estate  as  this  one.  Then,  naturally,  there  presented  itself
to  his  imagination  the  figure  of  a  rosy,  fair-haired  young  girl,
from  the  merchant  or  some  other  wealthy  social  class,  and  who
would  even  understand  music.  A  younger  generation,  destined
to  perpetuate  the  name  of  Tchitchikoff,  also  presented  itself  to
him — a  frolicsome  little  boy  and  a  beautiful  daughter,  or  two
small  urchins  and  two,  or  even  three,  little  maidens,  so  that  it
might  be  known  to  all  men  that  he  had  actually  lived  and
existed,  and  had  not  merely  passed  over  the  earth  like  a  shadow
or  a  ghost.

Then  he  began  to  fancy  that  it  would  not  be  a  bad  idea  to
make  some  additions  to  his  rank:  "councillor  of  state,"  for
instance,  is  an  honourable  title,  and  one  deserving  of  respect.
How  many  things  enter  a  man's  mind  in  the  course  of  his  walks  !
They  frequently  divert  him  from  the  wearisome  present,  mock
him,  torment  him,  excite  his  imagination,  and  remain  dear  to
him  even  when  he  himself  feels  convinced  that  they  will  never
be  realised  !

The  village  also  pleased  Pavel  Ivanovitch's  servants.  They,
like  himself,  had  become  accustomed  to  it.     Petrushka  speedily


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,   THE   SOUROWS   OF    LOVE.         219

struck  up  a  friendship  with  the  butler,  Grigoriy,  although  at
first  both  of  them  assumed  a  great  deal  of  dignity,  and  put  on
some  intolerable  airs  in  speaking  to  each  other.  Petrushka
tried  to  lord  it  over  Grigoriy  on  the  strength  of  having  seen  so
many  places  ;  but  GrigOriy  promptly  quenched  him  with  Peters-
burg, where  Petrushka  had  never  been.  The  latter  then
attempted  to  recover  his  position,  and  launched  into  details  as  to
the  distance  of  the  places  which  he  had  visited ;  but  Grigoriy
mentioned  a  place  which  is  not  to  be  found  on  any  map,  and
reckoned  up  over  thirty  thousand  versts,  so  that  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch's  servitor  remained  dumbfounded,  dropped  his  jaw,  and
was  then  and  there  held  up  to  the  ridicule  of  all  the  domestics.
The  matter  ended,  however,  in  a  close  friendship  springing  up
between  the  valet  and  the  butler.  Bald  Pimen,  a  peasant,  kept
a  drinking-shop  at  the  end  of  the  village,  and  here  the  two
cronies  were  to  be  seen  at  all  hours  of  the  day.  They  became
perfectly  at  home  there,  or,  as  the  peasants  expressed  it,
"  fixtures."

Selifan,  on  his  side,  found  a  difierent  sort  of  attraction.  As
soon  as  evening  came,  the  village  maids  sang  songs,  and  wove
and  broke  the  chain  of  the  spring  khorovods.'''  The  girls,  finely
formed  creatures  of  good  race,  such  as  are  not  now  to  be  found
in  the  large  villages,  kept  him  playing  at  "raven"  for  hours
together.  It  was  hard  to  tell  which  of  them  was  the  prettiest :
they  all  had  white  necks,  white  bosoms,  and  bright,  rolling
eyes  ;  they  walked  like  peacocks,  and  wore  plaits  of  hair  hang-
ing to  their  waists.  When,  taking  their  white  hands  in  both  of
his,  he  moved  sloAvly  with  them  in  the  choral  dance,  or  left  them
and  stationed  himself  with  the  other  lads  in  a  line  opposite
them,  all  the  gallants  stepping  forward, in  rank  to  meet  the
maidens,  while  the  latter,  laughing  loudly,  sang,  "  Lords,  show
the  bridegroom!" — then,  while  the  fading  light  of  evening
vanished,  and  the  shades  descended  all  around,  the  mournful
echo  of  their  song  ringing  back  from  far  beyond  the  river,  he
himself  did  not  know  Avhat  was  going  on  within  him.  Morning
and  evening,  sleeping  or  waking,  thereafter,  all  things  danced
before  his  eyes,  and  he  seemed  to  hold  white  hands  in  his  own,
and  to  be  ever  moving  through  the  choral  dance.

Tchitchikoff"s  horses  also  were  content  with  their  new  abode.
The  oats  were  excellent,  and  the  arrangements  of  the  stable
were  remarkably  comfortable.  From  each  stall,  although  it
was  divided  ofi",  it  was  possible  to  see  the  other  horses  over  the

*  Dances  accompanied  by  songs  and  games.


220  DEAD   SOULS.

partitions  ;  and  if  any  one  of  them,  even  the  most  distant  of
the  lot,  took  a  foolish  fancy  to  neigh,  it  was  possible  to  hear
him  at  once.

In  short,  they  all  felt  quite  at  home.  As  far  as  the  business
upon  which  Pavel  Ivanovitch  was  traversing  far-reaching  Russia
— the  dead  souls — was  concerned,  he  had  become  extremely
cautious  and  delicate,  even  when  he  had  to  deal  with  downright
fools.  And  he  had  to  be  all  the  more  cautious  with  Teutyotni-
koff,  for  the  latter  was  certainly  not  a  fool ;  he  read  books,  and
philosophised,  and  tried  to  explain  to  himself  the  cause  of  every-
thing. "  No ;  it  will  be  better  to  see  whether  he  cannot  be  ap-
proached more  successfully  in  another  manner,"  thought  Tchit-
chikoff,  who,  during  his  chats  with  the  house-serfs,  had  found
out  that  their  master  had  formerly  been  in  the  habit  of  going
to  see  his  neighbour,  the  general,  very  frequently.  He  had
learnt,  too,  that  the  general  had  a  daughter  ;  that  their  master
had  evidently  been  made  for  the  young  lady,  and  the  young
lady  for  their  master.  However,  they  had  fallen  out  all  of  a
sudden,  and  had  parted.  Moreover,  our  hero  himself  had  ob-
served that  Andrei  Ivanovitch  was  always  sketching  heads  with
his  pen  and  pencil,  and  that  these  heads  all  resembled  one  another.

Once,  after  dinner,  while  twirling  his  silver  snuif-box  round
as  usual,  our  hero  began  as  follows  :  "  You  have  everything  in
the  world,  Andrei  Ivanovitch  ;  yes,  everything  save  one."

"  What  is  that  ?  "  inquired  the  host,  emitting  a  wreath  of
smoke.

"  A  companion  for  your  life,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

But  Andrei  Ivanovitch  said  nothing,  and  there  the  conversa-
tion rested.

Tchitchikoff  was  not  disconcerted,  however  ;  in  fact,  he  chose
another  opportunity,  just  before  supper.  While  they  were  dis-
cussing one  thing  and  another,  he  suddenly  remarked,  "  Why,
really,  Andrei  Ivanovitch,  it  wouldn't  be  a  bad  thing  for  you  if
you  married."

Not  a  word  did  Tentyotnikoft  respond  to  this,  exactly  as
though  the  subject  were  displeasing  to  him.

Still  Tchitchikoff  was  not  discouraged.  He  selected  a  third
occasion,  after  supper,  and  then  spoke  thus :  "  However  much  I
turn  your  circumstances  over  in  my  mind,  it  seems  to  me  quite
necessary  for  you  to  marry  :  you  are  falling  into  hypochondria."

On  this  occasion,  Tchitchikoff' s  words  were  very  decisive,  or
else  Tentyotnikoff's  frame  of  mind  was  favourable  to  frank-
ness— at  all  events,  the  young  fellow  sighed,  and  said,  "  In
love,    as    in    everything  else,  one  needs  to    be    born    lucky.


TENTYOTNIKOFF  ;    OR,    THE    SORHOWS    OF    LOVE.         221

Pavel  Ivanovitch."  And  then  he  related  to  him  the  -whole
history  of  his  acquaintance  with  the  general,  and  of  the  quar-
rel, just  as  it  had  taken  place.

When  Tcbitchikofi'  had  heard  the  whole  story,  word  by  word,
and  learnt  that  the  entire  matter  had  arisen  from  the  word
thou,  he  was  taken  aback.  For  a  moment  he  looked  Tenty-
otnikoff  fixedly  in  the  eyes,  and  could  not  decide  whether  he
was  simply  a  fool  or  a  thorough  lunatic.

"  Pray,  Andrei  Ivanovitch,"  he  said  at  length,  taking  him
by  both  hands,  "  what  insult  was  there  in  that  ?  AVhat  is  there
offensive  about  the  word  thou  /  "

"  There's  nothing  offensive  about  the  word  itself,"  answered
Tentyotnikoff ;  "  but  there  may  be  in  its  application,  in  the  way
in  which  it  is  uttered  ;  that's  where  the  insult  lies.  Thou —
that  signifies,  *  Recollect  that  you  are  a  good-for-nothing  fel-
low. I  only  receive  you  here  because  there  is  no  one  better
than  you  in  the  neighbourhood  ;  but  now  a  certain  Princess
Yuzyakina  has  come,  so  learn  to  know  3^our  place,  and  remain
on  the  threshold.'  That's  what  it  means  !  "  So  saying,  the
ej'es  of  the  gentle  and  peaceable  Andrei  Ivanovitch  flashed  :  and
the  irritation  of  his  w^ounded  feelings  was  audible  in  his  voice.

"But  even  in  that  sense,  what  harm  does  it  do?"  asked
Tchitchikoff.

"  What !  Do  you  think  that  I  should  continue  to  visit  him
after  such  misconduct  ?  "

"  But  what  misconduct  ?  That  is  not  misconduct,"  said
Tchitchikoff.

"  "WThy  is  it  not  misconduct?"  inquired  Tentyotnikoff  in
amazement.

"  Oh  !  it  is  merely  a  habit  with  generals,  and  not  misconduct ;
they  say  thou  to  everybody.  And,  moreover,  why  should  it
not  be  allowable  in  a  worthy  man  who  has  served  his  time
honourably  ?"

"  That's  a  different  thing,"  said  Tentyotnikoff.  "If  he  had
been  an  old  man,  or  a  poor  man,  neither  proud inor  boastful,
nor  a  general,  I  would  willingly  permit  him  to  address  me  as
thou."

"  This  fellow's  an  utter  fool !  "  said  Tchitchikoff  to  himself.
"  The  idea  of  permitting  a  thing  to  a  ragamuffin,  and  not  to  a
general  ! — Very  well,"  he  said  aloud,  "  let  us  assume  that  he  did
insult  you  ;  well,  you  have  had  your  revenge  on  him  :  he  said
'  thou  '  to  you,  and  you  said  it  to  him.  But  to  quarrel,  to  part
for  ever  on  account  of  a  trifle,  that  is — you  must  excuse  me —
absurd.   When  a  man  has  chosen  his  goal,  he  must  bid  defiance


222  DEAD    SOULS.

to  all  obstacles.  Why  consider  the  fact  that  a  man  spits  at  you  ?
Man  is  always  spitting  :  that's  the  way  he  is  made.  And  you
may  search  the  whole  world  through  now  for  a  man  who  has
not  at  some  time  spat  at  another  man,  and  you  won't  find  one."

"A  strange  man  this  Tchitchikoff !  "  said  Tentyotnikoff  to
himself  in  surprise,  quite  disconcerted  by  these  words.

"  But  what  an  eccentric  fellow  this  Tentyotnikofl' is  !  "  Tchi-
tchikoff Avas  thinking  at  the  same  moment.  "  Andrei  Ivanovitch,
I  will  talk  with  you  like  a  brother  to  a  brother.  You  are  an  in-
experienced man.  Allow  me  to  manage  this  aifair.  I  will  go  to
his  excellency,  and  explain  to  him  that  it  happened  through  a
misunderstanding  on  your  side — through  your  youth  and  lack  of
acquaintance  with  men  and  with  the  world."

"I  have  no  intention  of  humbling  myself  to  him,"  said  Tenty-
otnikoff, taking  offence  ;  "  and  I  cannot  authorise  you  to  do  so
on  my  behalf."

"  I  am  incapable  of  acting  improperly,"  retorted  Tchitchikoff,
also  offended.  "  Of  other  errors  I  may  have  been  guilty,  in
common  with  the  rest  of  mankind,  but  of  baseness,  never  !  Ex-
cuse me,  Andrei  Ivanovitch,  but  I  did  not  expect  that  you  would
take  my  words  in  such  an  insulting  sense."  All  this  was  spoken
with  an  air  of  dignity.

"  I  am  in  the  wrong ;  forgive  me,"  said  Tentyotnikoff  hastily,
and  with  emotion,  seizing  hold  of  both  his  hands.  "I  did  not
think  of  wounding  you.  I  swear  to  you  that  your  kindly
sympathy  is  dear  to  me.  But  let  us  drop  this  discussion.  We
will  never  mention  it  again."

"  In  that  easel  shall  go  to  the  general."

"  Why  ?  "  asked  Tentyotnikoff",  looking  our  hero  straight  in
the  eyes  in  his  amazement.  j

"  To  present  my  respects."  /

"  A  strange  fellow  this  Tchitchikoff!  "  thought  Tentyotnikoff.

"  A  strange  fellow  this  Tentyotnikoff!  "  thought  Tchitchikoff.

"  I  shall  go  to  him  at  about  ten  o'clock  to-morrow  morning,
Andrei  Ivanovitch.  In  my  opinion,  the  sooner  one  pays  one's
respects  to  a  man  the  better.  As  my  britchka  is  not  yet  in  a
suitable  condition,  allow  me  to  use  your  calash.  In  that  way,
I  shall  be  able  to  reach  his  house  at  about  ten  o'clock  to-morrow
morning."

"Certainly;  what  a  request!  You  are  completely  master
here,  and  the  equipage  and  everything  else  are  entirely  at  your
disposal."

After  this  conversation  they  separated  and  went  off  to  bed,
not  without  meditating  on  each  other's  peculiarities,


AN    ANCIENT   RELIC   OF    1812.  223

The  afiair  was  really  very  singular.  The  next  morning,
when  the  horses  were  brought  round  for  Tchitchikoff,  and  he
sprang  into  the  calash,  with  almost  as  much  agility  as  a  military
man,  in  a  new  coat,  a  white  neckcloth  and  waistcoat,  and  drove
off  to  pay  his  respects  to  the  general,  Tentyotnikoff  was  assailed
by  feelings  such  as  he  had  not  experienced  for  a  long  time.
His  rusty,  dreamy  thoughtfulness  was  converted  into  active
disquietude.  A  nervous  emotion  suddenly  overpowered  all  the
other  feelings  of  this  idler,  who  had  hitherto  been  wholly  en-
grossed in  heedless  indolence.  He  now  seated  himself  on  the
sofa  ;  then  he  strayed  to  the  window,  then  picked  up  a  book,
then  tried  to  think,  but  his  endeavours  were  fruitless  !  Not  a
thought  entered  his  brain.  Then  he  tried  to  avoid  thinking  of
anything — vain  effort !  Fragments  of  something  resembling
thought,  odds  and  ends,  crept  in  from  everywhere,  and  clung  to
his  brain.  "  What  a  strange  state  of  mind  !"  he  said,  and  he
approached  the  window,  to  gaze  at  the  road  which  cut  through
the  gloomy  forest,  at  the  extremity  of  which  the  dust  raised
by  the  departing  calash  was  still  revolving  like  smoke.  But  let
us  abandon  Tentyotnikoff,  and  follow  our  hero  to  the  general's.


CHAPTER    XIII.

AN    ANCIENT   EELIC    OF    1812.


In  a  little  more  than  half  an  hour,  the  good  horses  carried
Tchitchikoff  a  distance  of  ten  versts,*  first  through  the  dense
forest,  then  between  the  fields  of  grain,  which  were  already
beginning  to  show  green  through  the  freshly  ploughed  soil ;  then
along  a  rocky  ridge,  whence  views  of  the  distant  landscape  were
at  each  moment  disclosed  ;  then  up  a  broad  avenue  of  lime-trees,
which  had  as  yet  hardly  put  forth  their  leaves.  He  thus  pro-
ceeded to  the  very  centre  of  the  village.  Here  the  avenue
of  lime-trees  made  a  turn  to  the  right  and  changed  into  a  street
of  poplars,  hemmed  in  below  by  a  fence,  which  terminated  in
some  open-work  iron  gates,  through  which  peeped  the  facade  of
the  general's  house,  resting  on  eight  Corinthian  columns,  and
richly  ornamented  with  florid  carving.  Paint  had  been  applied
everywhere ;  everything  was  kept  in  due  repair,  and  nothing
was  allowed  to  fall  into  decay.  The  courtyard  resembled  a
*  A  verst  is  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile.


224  DEAD   SOULS,

polished  wooden  floor  in  cleanliness.  Driving  up  to  the  entrance,
Tchitchikoff  sprang  out,  asked  to  be  announced  to  the  general,
and  was  forthwith  conducted  to  the  latter's  study.

The  general  surprised  him  by  his  magnificent  personal  appear-
ance. He  was  clad  in  a  wadded  satin  dressing-gown,  of  a  superb
purple  hue.  His  glance  was  frank,  his  face  manly;  his  moustache
and  bushy  whiskers  were  streaked  with  grey  ;  his  hair  was
clipped  close  behind  his  head,  allowing  a  full  view  of  his  thick
neck,  which  was  of  the  sort  known  as  "three-storey,"  having
three  folds,  with  a  transverse  crease.  In  a  word,  he  was  one
of  those  picturesque  generals  in  whom  the  famous  year  '12
abounded.

General  Betrishtcheff  was  indeed  possessed  of  a  multitude  of
good  qualities  and  of  a  multitude  of  defects.  As  is  usual  with
Russians,  both  were  mingled  within  him  in  a  sort  of  picturesque
disorder.  In  decisive  moments  he  displayed  magnanimity,
valour,  wisdom,  an  unbounded  generosity  in  everything,  and,
mingled  with  this,  caprices  of  ambition,  and  that  petty  personal
touchiness  which  no  single  Russian  can  ever  dispense  with  when
he  is  sitting  in  idleness,  and  when  no  demands  are  made  upon
his  decision.  He  did  not  like  those  who  had  outstripped  him
in  the  service,  but  expressed  himself  in  biting  terms  and  pointed
epigrams  with  regard  to  them.  The  one  who  sufi'ered  most  of
all  was  a  former  comrade,  whom  he  regarded  as  an  inferior  to
himself  in  brains  and  capacity,  but  who  had,  nevertheless,
risen  above  him,  being  already  governor-general  of  two  provinces,
and,  as  though  on  purpose  to  spite  him,  of  the  very  two  in
which  his  own  estates  were  situated,  so  that  he  found  himself
dependent  upon  his  rival,  as  it  were.  In  revenge.  General
Betrishtcheff'  slandered  his  ex-comrade  on  every  possible  occa-
sion, blamed  every  regulation  which  he  made,  and  regarded
every  measure  he  took  as  the  height  of  folly.

There  was  something  strange  about  our  general.  He  loved
incense ;  he  loved  brilliancy ;  he  was  fond  of  boasting  of
his  brains  ;  he  was  also  fond  of  knowing  things  which  other
people  did  not  know,  and  he  did  not  like  the  people  who  knew
anything  of  which  he  was  ignorant.  Although  he  had  received
a  semi-foreign  education,  he  was  desirous  of  playing  the  part
of  a  Russian  gentleman  in  perfection.  And  it  is  not  to  be
wondered  at  that  with  such  unevenness,  with  such  strong  and
salient  contradictions  of  character,  he  should  have  experienced
in  the  service  a  multitude  of  vexations,  in  consequence  of
which  he  had  handed  in  his  resignation,  laying  the  blame  of
his  worry  on  some  inimical  party,  since  he  lacked  the  mag-


AN   ANCIENT   RELIC   OF    1812.  225

nanimlty  to  assume  any  portion  of  the  blame  himself.  He  pre-
served, in  his  retirement,  the  picturesquely  grand  demeanour  of
his  profession.  He  was  always  the  same,  whether  clad  in
a  dress-coat,  a  surtout,  or  a  dressing-gown.  From  the  tone  of
his  voice  to  the  slightest  movement  of  his  body,  everything
about  him  was  masterly  and  commanding  ;  and  inspired,  if  not
respect,  at  least  fear,  in  the  lower  ranks.

Tchitchikoflf  experienced  mingled  fear  and  respect.  Bending
his  head  reverentially  on  one  side,  and  making  a  fleeting  out-
ward movement  with  his  hands,  as  though  preparing  to  lift  a
tray  full  of  cups,  he  inclined  his  body  with  wonderful  agility,
and  said,  "  I  have  regarded  it  as  my  duty  to  present  myself  to
your  excellency.  Cherishing  as  I  do  a  reverence  for  the  valour
of  the  men  who  saved  then-  country  upon  the  field  of  battle,
I  have  regarded  it  as  my  duty  to  present  myself  in  person  to
your  excellency."

This  proceeding  was  evidently  not  displeasing  to  the  general.
With  an  exceedingly  condescending  movement  of  the  head,  he
said,  "  I  am  very  glad  to  make  your  acquaintance.  I  beg  you
to  do  me  the  favour  to  take  a  seat.    Where  have  you  served  ?  "

"My  career  in  the  service,"  replied  Tchitchikofl:',  seating
himself  in  the  arm-chair,  not  in  the  middle,  but  sideways,  and
grasping  the  arms  with  his  hands,  "  began  in  the  department  of
justice,  your  excellency.  Its  latter  course  was  completed  in
discharging  various  duties — in  the  superior  courts,  on  a  building
commission,  and  in  the  custom-house  service.  My  life  may  be
likened  to  a  vessel  amid  the  billows,  your  excellency.  In
patience,  as  I  may  say,  I  was  born  and  swaddled  ;  and  I  am,
so  to  speak,  patience  itself  personified.  But  as  for  the  enemies
who  have  sought  my  life,  no  words,  no  colours,  so  to  speak,
can  possibly  portray  them  in  a  proper  manner.  Hence,  in  the
decline  of  life,  I  am  merely  seeking  a  nook  where  I  may  pass
the  remnant  of  my  days.  I  have  been  stopping  for  a  while  with
a  near  neighbour  of  your  excellency."

"Who  is  that?"

"  Tentyotnikoflf,  your  excellency."

The  general  frowned.     *

"He  greatly  regrets,  your  excellency,  that  he  did  not  show
proper  respect."

"To  what?"

"  To  your  excellency's  merits.  He  finds  no  words —  He
says,  '  If  I  could  in  any  way  atone — for  truly  I  have  not  known
how  to  value  the  men  who  saved  our  fatherland.*  "

"  Pray,  what  is  he  thinking  of?     I'm  not  angry  with  him,"

p


226  DEAD   SOULS.

said  the  mollified  general.  "From  my  soul  I  sincerely  like
him,  and  I  am  convinced  that  he  will  become  a  very  useful  man
in  the  course  of  time."

"  You  have  been  pleased  to  express  yourself  admirably,  your
excellency.  Really,  a  most  useful  man :  perhaps  he  will  con-
quer the  world  with  his  gift  of  language  ;  he  is  a  master  with
his  pen."

"  I  suppose  he  writes  some  sort  of  nonsense — verses,  eh  ?  "

"  No,  your  excellency,  not  nonsense.  He  is  writing  some-
thing practical — history,  your  excellency."

"  History  ?     The  history  of  what  ?  "

"The  history" — here  Tchitchikoflf  paused;  and  whether  it
was  because  the  general  was  sitting  opposite  him,  or  else  because
he  wished  to  impart  more  weight  to  the  subject,  he  added,
"  The  history  of  generals,  your  excellency."

"  Of  generals  ?     Of  what  generals  ?  "

"  Of  generals  in  general,  your  excellency;  of  generals  as  a
body.  That  is,  to  speak  accurately,  of  the  generals  of  our  coun-
try." Tchitchikoff  had  become  completely  entangled  and  had
lost  his  head;  he  could  not  help  saying  to  himself,  "  Heavens,
what  nonsense  I  am  talking  !  "

"  Excuse  me,  I  do  not  understand  you  very  clearly.  What  is
it  about  ?  Is  it  to  be  the  history  of  some  particular  period,  or  a
series  of  separate  biographies  ?  and  of  all  our  generals  or  only
of  those  who  were  engaged  in  the  war  of  1812  ?  "

"  Exactly  so,  your  excellency  ;  of  those  who  took  part  in  the
war  of  1812."  Having  thus  spoken,  our  hero  said  to  himself,
"  May  I  be  hanged  if  I  understand  it !  "

"  Then  why  doesn't  he  come  to  see  me  ?  I  could  furnish  him
with  a  very  great  quantity  of  curious  materials."

"He  is  afraid,  your  excellency."

"  "What  nonsense  !  On  account  of  a  few  idle  words  !  But
I'm  not  that  kind  of  a  man  at  all.  I  am  willing  to  go  to  see
him,  if  you  like."

"  He  will  not  permit  that :  he  will  come  to  you,"  said  Tchi-
tchikoff recovering  himself.  As  he  regained  his  courage  he  thought
"What  a  chance  !  I  came  to  the  general's  just  at  the  right  time !
But  my  tongue  has  been  rattling  away  like  a  fool's.''

At  this  moment  a  rustling  sound  became  audible  in  the  study.
A  walnut-wood  door  opened,  and  a  living  form  appeared,  hold-
ing the  bronze  knob  in  its  hand.  If  a  transparent  picture,  bril-
liantly illuminated  by  lights  from  behind,  had  suddenly  made  its
appearance  in  the  dark  room,  it  would  not  have  produced  a  more
startling  effect.     The  girl  who  thus  presented  herself  had  evi-


AN    ANCIENT   RELIC   OF    1812.  227

dently  entered  for  the  purpose  of  saying  something  to  the  gene-
ral, but  had  stopped  short  on  catching  sight  of  the  stranger.  It
seemed  as  though  a  ray  of  sunshine  had  flitted  in  with  her,  and
as  though  the  general's  frowning  study  had  burst  into  a  laugh.
Straight  and  light  as  an  arrow,  she  seemed  taller  than  most  of
her  sex.  But  this  was  an  illusion,  for  she  was  not  of  such  lofty
stature.  It  was  the  result  of  the  remarkably  harmonious  com-
bination of  all  the  proportions  of  her  body.  Her  gown  fitted
her  as  though  the  very  best  dressmakers  had  taken  counsel
together  as  to  how  they  might  best  adorn  her.  But  this  also
was  an  illusion.  She  dressed  herself :  she  pricked  her  needle
into  some  material  or  other,  and  it  at  once  draped  and  arranged
itself  around  her  in  such  loops  and  folds  that,  if  she  had  been
transferred  to  canvas  with  all  these  bcAvitching  draperies,  she
would  have  been  pronounced  the  copy  of  a  work  of  genius.  All
fashionably  dressed  young  ladies  would  have  appeared  like  the
motley  products  of  the  rag-market,  in  her  presence.  However,
despite  all  her  comeliness,  she  was  somewhat  too  thin  and  slender.
*'  Let  me  introduce  my  spoiled  pet  to  you,"  said  the  general,
turning  to  Tchitchikoflf.  "  But  I  do  not  yet  know  your  names."
"  Is  the  name  of  a  man  who  has  never  distinguished  himself
by  his  merits  of  any  consequence  ?  "  asked  Tchitchikoflf,  modestly
dropping  his  head.

"Still,  it  is  necessary  to  know."

"Pavel  Ivanovitch,  your  excellency,"  replied  Tchitchikoff,
bowing  with  almost  the  skill  of  a  military  man,  and  skipping
backwards  with  the  lightness  of  an  india-rubber  ball.

"  Ulinka,"  said  the  general,  turning  to  his  daughter,  "Pavel
Ivanovitch  has  just  imparted  some  interesting  news  to  me.
Our  neighbour,  Tentyotnikoflf,  is  not  at  all  so  stupid  a  fellow  as
we  supposed.  He  is  occupied  with  a  rather  important  work —
the  history  of  the  generals  of  1812."

"  But  who  thought  that  he  was  a  stupid  man  '?  "  hastily  re-
marked the  girl.  "No one, probably,  excepting VishnepokromojQf,
whom  you  put  faith  in,  and  who  is  a  base  and  empty-headed
fellow."

"  AVhy  is  he  base  ?  He  is  rather  empty-headed ;  that's  true,"
said  the  general.

"  He  is  not  only  empty-headed,  but  mean  and  crafty.     A
man  who  has  insulted  his  brothers  and  driven  his  sister  out  of
the  paternal  house,  must  be  a  mean  fellow."
"  But  that  is  only  what  people  say."

"  Such  things  are  not  said  without  cause.  I  do  not  under-
stand, father,  how  anyone  with  your  kind  soul,  and  with  such


228  DEAD   SOtJLS.

a  rare  heart  as  you  have,  can  receive  a  man  who  is  as  far  re-
moved from  you  as  heaven  is  from  earth,  and  whom  you  your-
self know  to  be  bad."

"  There,  you  see,"  said  the  general,  smiling  at  Tchitchikoff,
**  that's  the  way  she  and  I  always  quarrel  with  each  other;  "
and  turning  to  his  daughter,  he  continued,  "  But,  my  love,  I  can-
not drive  him  away."

"  Why  should  you  drive  him  away  ?  But  why  show  him  so
much  attention  ?     Why  pet  him  ?  "

Here  Tchitchikoff  thought  it  incumbent  on  him  to  interpose
a  word.  "  Everyone  asks  for  love,  sudaruinya,'^'  said  Tchitchi-
koff. "  What  is  to  be  done  ?  Even  animals  like  to  be  stroked.
Bears  will  thrust  their  muzzles  through  the  bars  of  their  cages,
as  much  as  to  say, '  Come,  pat  me  !  '  "

The  general  broke  into  a  laugh  "They  really  do  thrust
their  muzzles  through  :  *  Come,  pat  me  ! '  Ha,  ha,  ha  !  And
there  are  some  who  are  not  content  with  all  that,  but  want
you  to  come  into  their  dens,  and  demand  encouragement,  as  it
were.  Ha,  ha,  ha !  "  and  the  general's  sides  began  to  quiver
with  laughter.  His  shoulders,  which  had  formerly  supported
his  heavy  epaulets,  shook  too,  exactly  as  though  they  still  upheld
those  ornamental  appendages.

Tchitchikoff  also  gave  a  laugh,  but  out  of  respect  for  the
general,  he  emitted  it  in  the  letter  e, — "He,  he  !  he,  he,  he  !  "
And  his  body  also  began  to  quiver  with  laughter,  but  his
shoulders  did  not  shake,  because  they  had  never  worn  heavy
epaulets.

"A  man  will  steal,  he  will  rob  the  treasury,  and  yet  demand
a  reward  for  it,  the  beast  I  '  It's  impossible,'  says  he  '  to  labour
without  encouragement.'     Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha  !  "

"Has  your  excellency  ever  heard  that  story,  'Love  us  while
We  are  dirty,  everyone  will  love  us  when  we're  clean,'  "  said
Tchitchikoff,  turning  to  the  general  with  rather  a  roguish  smile.

"  No,  I  have  never  heard  it."

"  It  is  a  most  curious  anecdote,  your  excellency.  On  the
estate  of  Prince  Gukzovsky,  whom  your  excellency  probably
knows — "

"  No,  I  do  not  know  him."

"  Well,  there  was  a  German  overseer  there,  your  excellency,
^=-a  young  man.  He  had  occasion  to  go  to  the  city  in  connec-
tion with  recruiting  and  other  matters,  and  had  some  dealings
with  the  judicial  authorities ;    now  do  you  know,  he  greased

*  Sudcruhiya,  miss  or  madam,


AN   ANCIENT   RELIC   OF    1812.  229

theu'  hands "  (Tchitchikoff  here  screwed  up  one  eye,  and
indicated  by  his  countenance  how  one  "  greases  "  the  hands  of
public  officials).  "  Well,  they  entertained  him  on  one  occasion,
and  while  he  was  dining  with  them,  he  says,  '  Gentlemen,  you
must  come  and  visit  me  one  of  these  days  on  the  prince's
estate.'  They  reply,  'We  will.'  It  chanced,  your  excellency,
that  a  short  time  afterwards  the  judges  had  to  make  some  in-
vestigations concerning  an  affair  which  had  occurred  on  the
estate  of  Count  Trekhmetiefi',  whom  your  excellency  is  no  doubt

pleased  to "

"  No,  I  do  not  know  him."

"  Well,  they  did  not  make  the  investigation,  but  they  turned
their  telyega  into  the  farm-yard,  went  to  the  house-steward's
apartments,  and  played  cards  for  three  days  and  nights  without
stopping  to  draw  breath.  The  samover  and  the  punch,  your
excellency,  never  left  the  table.  They  fairly  stuck  in  the
throat  of  the  count's  steward,  so  to  speak."  (Here  Tchitchi-
kofi'  pointed  at  his  own  throat.)  "  In  order  to  get  rid  of  them,
he  says,  *  You  should  go  to  see  the  prince's  overseer,  gentlemen,
the  German;  he  is  not  far  ofl',  and  he  is  expecting  you.' —
'Ah,  surely! '  say  they,  '  he  invited  us.'  So  all  of  them,  all
sleepy  and  unshaven  as  they  were,  with  dirty  hands  and  faces, — ■
got  into  their  telyega,  and  drove  off  to  the  German's.  But  the
German,  your  excellency,  had  just  been  married.  He  had
married  a  schoolgirl,  a  pretty  and  subtle  young  woman."
(Tchitchikoff  here  expressed  her  subtlety  in  his  countenance.)
"  Being,  so  to  speak,  in  the  midst  of  their  honeymoon,  they
were  sitting  over  their  tea  like  two  dear  little  angels,  when  all  of
a  sudden  the  door  opened,  and  the  assemblage  burst  in  upon
them."

"  I  can  imagine  it ;  very  good,"  said  the  general,  laughing.
"This  so  surprised  the  German,  your  excellency,   that  he
quite  lost  his  head.     He  steps  up  to  the  officials,  and  says,
'  What  do  you  want,  you  dirty  louts  ?  ' — '  Well,  you're  a  pretty
fellow !  '   they  reply :   '  a  different  turn  of  matters   demands  a
different  turn  of  speech.     We've  come  on  business,'  they  add.
*  How  much  brandy  is  distilled  on  this  estate  ?     Show  your
books  ! '     He  stammered  this  and  that.     'Ei,  off  with  him  !  '
they  shouted,  and  then  they  seized  him,  bound  him,  carried  him
to  town,  and  there  he  remained  in  prison  for  a  year  and  a  half."
"Well,  I  declare  !  "  said  the  general.
Ulinka  clasped  her  hands.

"  His  wife,  your  excellency,  began  to   make  a  fuss.     But
what  can  a  woman  do  when  she  is  young,  and  hasn't  been  tried


230  DEAD    SOULS.

in  the  furnace  of  experience,  so  to  speak  ?  Fortunately,  there
were  some  kind  people  on  hand  who  advised  her  to  go  to  see
the  justice  of  the  peace.  The  German  recovered  his  freedom,
your  excellency,  on  condition  that  he  spent  two  thousand
roubles  on  a  complimentary  banquet.  And  after  the  dinner,
when  they  all  were  pretty  thoroughly  drunk,  they  said  to  him,
'  Here,  you  see  !  You  scorned  us  !  You  wanted  to  see  us  all
properly  shaved  and  washed.  No,  yoii  must  love  tis  xvhile  ive
are  dirty,  for  everyone  will  like  us  ivhen  we  are  clean.'  "

The  general  burst  into  a  roar  of  laughter,  but  a  pained  expres-
sion appeared  on  the  girl's  noble  face.

"Ah,  papa  !  I  do  not  understand  how  you  can  laugh,"  said
she.  "These  dishonourable  deeds  cause  me  sorrow  and  no-
thing else.  When  I  see  deception  openly  practised  in  the  sight
of  all,  when  I  see  that  the  perpetrators  are  not  punished  by
universal  scorn,  I  do  not  know  what  takes  place  within  me,  but
I  become  angry,  and  I  think  and  think —  "  And  here  she
suddenly  burst  into  tears.

"Only  please  don't  be  angry  with  us,"  said  the  general;
"  we  are  not  to  blame  in  this  matter,  eh  ?  "  he  went  on,  turning
to  Tchitchikoflf,  "Kiss  me,  my  dear,  and  go  to  your  room.  I
am  about  to  dress  for  dinner.  I  hope,"  he  added,  looking
Tchitchikoff  in  the  face,  "  that  you  will  stay  to  dine  with
me."

"  If  your  excellency  will  only  " —

"  Stay  without  ceremony.  I  have  plenty  to  offer  you,  thank
God.     There  is  some  cabbage-soup."

With  a  deprecatory  motion  of  the  hands  Tchitchikoff  bent
his  head  with  respect  and  gratitude,  so  that  all  the  objects  in
the  room  were  hidden  from  his  view  for  a  moment,  merely  the
tips  of  his  boots  remaining  visible  to  him.  When  he  raised  his
head  once  more,  after  remaining  in  this  reverent  attitude  for  a
ew  moments,  Ulinka  was  no  longer  visible.  She  had  vanished.
In  her  stead  there  stood  before  him  a  gigantic  valet,  with  thick
moustaches  and  whiskers,  who  was  holding  a  silver  washbasin
and  a  towel  in  his  hands.

"  You  will  permit  me  to  dress  in  your  presence  ?"  asked  the
general.

"  Not  only  to  dress  in  my  presence,  but  to  do  anything  which
your  excellency  sees  fit."

Pulling  off  his  dressing-gown  with  one  hand,  and  pulling  up
the  sleeves  of  his  shirt,  the  general  began  his  ablutions,  splash-
ing and  snorting  like  a  duck.  The  soapy  water  flew  about  in
all  directions.


AN    ANCIENT   RELIC    OF    1812.  231

"  How  does  it  go  '?  "  said  he,  as  he  wiped  his  neck  on  all
sides.     "  '  You  must  love  us  while  we  are  clean '  " —

"  Dirty,  your  excellency."

"  Yes,  '  while  we  are  dirty,  for  everyone  will  love  us  when  we
are  clean.'  Very,  very  good !  They  love,  they  love,  they
actually  love  encouragement.  Stroke,  stroke  them  !  Without
encouragement,  they  won't  steal,  eh?     Ha,  ha,  ha  !  "

Tchitchikoft*  was  in  indescribable  spirits,  and  a  fresh  inspira-
tion suddenly  came  to  him.  "  The  general  is  a  jolly  fellow,  and
a  good-natured  one.  I'll  try  my  dodge,"  thought  he  ;  and  then
perceiving  that  the  valet  had  retired  with  the  washbasin,  he  ex-
claimed, "  Your  excellency,  since  you  are  so  kind  and  attentive
to  everyone,  I  have  a  great  favour  to  ask  of  you."

"  What  is  it  ?  "

"I  have  an  aged,  invalid  uncle,  your  excellency,"  said  Tchi-
tchikoff,  glancing  about  him.  "  He  has  three  hundred  souls,
and  no  heir  except  myself.  He  is  not  able  to  manage  his
estate  himself,  on  account  of  his  infirmities ;  and  he  will  not
allow  me  to  manage  it  either.  And  he  alleges  a  queer  reason
for  this.  '  I  do  not  know  my  nephew,'  says  he.  '  Perhaps  he
is  a  spendthrift.  Let  him  prove  to  me  that  he  is  a  trustworthy
man  :  let  him  acquire  three  hundred  souls  for  himself,  and  then
I  will  give  him  my  three  hundred.'  "

"  Why,  what  does  he  mean  ?  He's  certainly  a  perfect  fool,"
said  the  general.

"If  he  were  only  a  fool,  one  might  get  along.  But  think  of
my  position,  your  excellency.  The  old  man  has  taken  a  house-
keeper, and  she  has  some  children  of  her  own.  Before  I  know
it,  they  will  get  hold  of  everything."

"  The  old  fellow  must  have  lost  his  senses,"  said  the  general.
"Only  I  do  not  see  how  I  can  help  you,"  he  added,  looking  at
Tchitchikofi"  in  surprise.

"Well,  this  is  what  I  have  thought  of.  If  your  excellency
would  make  over  to  me  all  the  dead  souls  in  your  village,  just
as  though  they  were  alive,  with  a  regular  bill  of  sale,  then  I
could  show  the  bill  of  sale  to  the  old  man,  and  he  would  leave
me  his  fortune."

Here  the  general  burst  into  such  a  laugh  as  man  can  never
have  given  vent  to  before.  He  flung  himself  into  an  arm-chair,
threw  his  head  back,  and  almost  choked.  The  whole  house  was
alarmed.  The  valet  hurried  in,  and  then  came  the  daughter  in
affright.

"Father,  what  has  happened  to  you?"  she  asked,  in  terror
and  amazement.


232  DEAD   SOULS.

But  it  was  a  long  while  before  the  general  uttered  a  sound.
"  It's  nothing,  my  dear.  Go  to  your  own  room.  We  will  come
to  dinner  directly.  Be  at  ease.  Ha,  ha,  ha  !  "
*  Then,  after  giving  vent  to  several  fresh  sighs,  the  general's
laughter  burst  forth  with  fresh  violence,  and  re-echoed  from  the
vestibule  to  the  most  remote  room  in  the  house,

Tchitchikoff  felt  disturbed.

"  Uncle,  uncle  !  how  finely  fooled  you  will  be  !  "  said  the
general.  "Ha,  ha,  ha  !  To  receive  dead  souls  instead  of  live
ones  !     Ha,  ha,  ha  !  "

"  Dear  me,  how  ticklish  his  nerves  are  !  "  thought  Tchitchi-
koff to  himself.

"Ha,  ha,  ha  !"  went  on  the  general.  "  What  an  ass  !  The
idea  of  demanding  such  a  thing  !  Let  him  make  three  hundred
souls  out  of  nothing  in  my  presence,  and  then  I'll  give  him  three
hundred  souls  of  mine  !     He's  an  ass,  of  course  !  "

"  Yes,  your  excellency,  he's  an  ass."

"  Well,  that's  a  good  trick  of  yours,  to  treat  the  old  fellow
to  dead  souls.  Ha,  ha,  ha  !  I'd  give,  God  knows  what,  to  see
him  when  you  present  that  bill  of  sale  to  him.  But  what  is
he  ?     What's  he  like  ?     Is  he  very  old  ?  "

"Eighty  years."

"But  he  moves  about?  He's  alert?  He  must  be  pretty
strong  if  that  housekeeper  lives  with  him."

"  Strong,  indeed  !  He's  wasting  away,  grain  by  grain,  your
excellency."

"  What  a  fool !     Surely  he  is  a  fool !  "

"  He  is,  your  excellency."

"  But  he  goes  out  in  society  ?  Does  he  look  alert  ?  Can  he
support  himself  on  his  legs  ?  "

"  He  can  stand,  but  with  difficulty."

"  What  a  fool !     But  he  is  strong  ?    Has  he  still  his  teeth  ?  "

"  Only  two,  your  excellency."

"  What  an  ass  !  Don't  get  angry,  my  friend.  He's  an  ass,
even  if  he  is  your  uncle."

"  He  is  an  ass,  your  excellency,  though  he  is  my  rela-
tive, and  it  is  hard  to  acknowledge  it.  Still,  what  is  to  be
done?"

TchitchikoiF  lied  :  it  was  not  hard  to  acknowledge,  for  the
probabilities  are  that  he  had  never  had  an  uncle  whatsoever.

"  As  matters  stand,"  he  added,  *' if  your  excellency  will  be
so  kind  as  to  grant  me — "

"  The  dead  souls  ?  Oh  !  for  such  a  trick  I'd  give  them  to  you
with  land  and  houses  too.     Take  the  whole  cemetery  !     Ha,


TWO    VERY    ECCE>'TRIC   PERSONS.  233

ha,  ha,  ha !     That  old  man  !    that  old  man  !     Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha  !

How  j'our  uncle  will  be  fooled  !     Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha !  "

And  again  the  general's  roars  of  laughter  rang  through  the
apartments.*


CHAPTEE  XIV.

WHICH    DESCRIBES   TWO    YEEY   ECCENTEIC    PERSONS.

"  If  Colonel  Koshkareff  reall)''  is  a  monomaniac,  it  would  not
be  a  bad  thing  to  try  my  little  dodge  on  him,"  said  Tchitchikoff,
on  finding  himself  once  more  amid  the  open  fields  and  the  vast
expanse,  when  everything  had  disappeared,  and  all  that  re-
mained was  the  vault  of  heaven  above  and  two  clouds  on  one
side.

"  Selifon,  did  you  make  thorough  inquiries  as  to  the  road  to
Cefeffel  Kdslik:arefi''s  ?  "  he  asked.

"  If  you  will  please  to  consider,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  I  had  no
time  to  do  so,  for  I  was  working  at  the  calash  ;  but  Petrushka
inquired  of  the  coachman."

"  What  a  fool !  You  have  been  told  that  no  reliance  is  to  be
placed  in  Petrushka.  Petrushka  is  a  blockhead,  Petrushka  is
a  stupid,  and  Petrushka  is  certainly  drunk  now,  to  boot."

"  There's  surely  no  such  difliculty  about  it,"  said  Petrushka,
turning  half  round,  and  looking  out  of  the  corner  of  his  eye.
"  There's  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  take  to  the  fields  after
descending  the  hill."

"  And  you  have  taken  nothing  in  your  mouth  excepting  com-
mon brandy  '?  Good,  very  good  !  One  may  say,  he  marvelled
at  the  beauty  of  Europe."  After  this  remark,  Tchitchikoft'
stroked  his  chin,  and  asked  himself,  "  What  a  difference  there

*  The  author  appears  to  have  left  this  portion  of  his  story  unfinished.
From  some  rough  notes  which  were  found,  however,  after  his  death,  it
would  seem  that  he  here  intended  to  describe  how  Tentyotnikoff  wiis
reconciled  to  his  friend  the  general,  to  whom  he  soon  paid  a  ceremonious
visit  at  Tchitchikott's  suggestion.  They  had  a  conversation  together
respecting  the  generals  of  1812,  and  eventually  Tentyotnikoff  asked  for
Ulinka's  hand.  Her  father  finally  consented  to  a  betrothal,  and  then
determined  to  entrust  our  friend,  Tchitchikoff  with  the  task  of  communi-
cating this  important  news  to  the  various  members  of  the  family.  When
the  story  is  resumed  in  chapter  xiv.,  the  hero  is  seen  on  his  way  to  the
residence  of  one  of  the  relatives,  a  certain  Colonel  Koshkareff,  who  ig
suffering  from  a  peculiar  form  of  monomania.


234  DEAD   SOULS.

is,  after  all,  between  the  physiognomy  of  a  cultivated  nobleman
and  that  of  a  coarse  lackey."

Meanwhile,  the  calash  had  begun  to  go  down-hill.  The  fields,
and  the  wide  expanse  dotted  with  maple-groves,  opened  out
again.  The  comfortable  equipage,  rocking  gently  on  its  elastic
springs,  continued  to  descend  the  declivity,  and  at  length,
traversing  the  fields,  it  passed  by  a  mill ;  then,  over  a  bridge,
with  a  light  rumble  ;  and  finally  with  a  little  bound,  over
the  soft,  yielding  surface  of  the  lowlands.  And  not  even  a
mound  or  a  hillock  was  to  be  seen  on  either  hand.  Silence
prevailed,  not  even  a  calash  was  in  view.

The  clumps  of  vines,  the  slender  alders,  and  silvery  poplars
flew  by,  brushing  Selifan  and  Petrushka,  on  the  box,  with
their  branches.  They  swept  the  latter's  cap  ofi"  every  moment.
The  surly  servitor  leapt  from  the  box,  cursed  the  stupid  trees,
and  his  master  who  had  perched  him  up  there,  but  he  would
neither  fasten  his  cap  nor  even  hold  on  to  it  with  his  hand,
hoping  that  each  time  would  be  the  last,  and  that  the  mishap
would  not  occur  again.  Maples,  birches,  and  pines  were  soon
added  to  the  list  of  trees.  The  forest  grew  darker,  and  seemed
to  be  preparing  to  turn  to  the  blackness  of  night.  But  all  at
once,  from  every  quarter,  gleams  of  light  shone  between  the
branches  and  tree-boles,  like  flashes  from  a  mirror.  The  trees
became  more  sparsely  scattered,  the  gleams  of  light  grew  larger,
and  then,  all  at  once,  a  lake  lay  before  them — a  watery  expanse
four  versts  in  diameter.

High  above  the  lake,  on  the  opposite  shore,  lay  scattered  the
gray  timber  cabins  of  a  village.  Shouts  rang  from  the  water.
Twenty  men,  standing  up  to  their  waists,  their  shoulders,  and
their  necks  in  the  lake,  were  dragging  a  net  to  the  opposite
shore.  An  accident  had  happened.  Along  "vvith  the  fish  a  man
had  become  entangled — a  man  who,  in  height  as  in  girth,  was
the  exact  counterpart  of  a  water-melon,  or  a  small  cask.  He
was  in  a  desperate  condition,  and  was  yelling  at  the  top  of  his
lungs,  "  Blockhead  Denis,  give  it  over  to  Kuzma  !  Kuzma,
take  the  end  from  Denis  !  Don't  bear  on  so.  Big  Foma  !  Go
yonder,  where  little  Foma  is.  You  devils  !  you'll  break  the  net,
I  tell  you  !  "

This  water-melon  evidently  had  no  fears  for  himself:  he
could  not  drown,  owing  to  his  corpulence  ;  and  tumble  about  as
he  would,  with  the  object  of  diving,  the  water  kept  bringing
him  to  the  surface  ;  even  if  two  men  had  seated  themselves  on
his  back,  he  would  have  remained  on  the  surface  of  the  water
with  them  like  an  obstinate  bladder,  merely  grunting  a  little


TWO   VERY   ECCENTRIC   PERSONS.  235

beneath  their  weight,  and  emitting  bubbles  through  his  nose.
But  he  was  very  much  afraid  that  his  net  would  break  and  the
fish  he  had  caught  escape  him  ;  and,  therefore,  several  men,
stationed  on  the  bank  with  ropes,  were  dragging  him  in  as  well
as  the  fish.

"  This  must  be  a  gentleman ;  this  must  be  Colonel  Kosh-
karefi',"  said  Selifan.

"  Why  ?  "  asked  our  hero.

"Because  his  body,  as  you  will  be  pleased  to  observe,  is
whiter  than  other  people's,  and  he  is  respectably  corpulent,  like
a  gentleman."

Meanwhile,  the  gentleman  who  was  entangled  in  the  net  had
been  dragged  considerably  nearer  to  the  shore.  On  feeling  that
he  could  touch  the  bottom  with  his  feet,  he  did  so,  and  at  the
same  time  he  became  aware  of  the  calash  descending  to  the  dam,
and  of  Tchitchikofi"  seated  in  it.

"  Have  you  dined  ?  "  shouted  the  gentleman,  stepping  on  to
the  bank,  with  the  captured  fish  enveloped  in  the  net,  like  a
lady's  hand  incased  in  a  transparent  glove  in  summer-time.
Then,  as  he  held  one  hand  before  his  eyes  like  a  visor,  to  shield
them  from  the  sun,  and  let  the  other  one  hang  down — looking
for  all  the  world  like  the  Venus  de  Medici  emerging  from  the
bath — he  repeated  his  question  in  a  loud  voice.

"  No,  I  haven't  dined,"  answered  Tchitchikofi",  raising  his  cap,
and  continuing  to  bow  from  the  calash.

"  Well,  thank  God  for  that !  "

"  Why  ?  "  inquired  Tchitchikofi",  with  curiosity,  holding  his
cap  above  his  head.

"  Because  ! — fling  that  sturgeon  also  into  the  washtub,  Little
Foma!  Go  and  help  him,  Kuzma."  Two  of  the  fishermen
now  lifted  the  head  of  some  monster  out  of  the  tub.  "  See
what  a  prince  !  he  came  in  from  the  river  !  "  added  the  stout
gentleman.  "  Go  to  the  manor-house.  Coachman,  take  the
road  below,  through  the  vegetable  garden.  Run,  you  stupid
Big  Foma,  knock  down  the  palings.  He  will  guide  you,  and
ril  be  there  directly."

Long-legged,  barefooted  Big  Foma  ran,  just  as  he  was,  in  his
shirt  alone,  through  the  whole  village,  where  drag-nets,  fishing-
baskets,  and  similar  things  hung  over  every  cabin,  for  all  the
peasants  were  fishermen ;  then  he  took  down  the  palings
of  some  vegetable  garden,  and  through  this  garden  the  calash
entered  a  square  close  to  a  wooden  church.  Farther  on,
behind  the  church,  the  roofs  of  the  manorial  buildings  were
visible.


236  DEAD   SOULS.

"  This  Koshkareff  is  rather  eccentric,"  said  Tchitchikoff  to
himself.

"Here  I  am!"  cried  a  voice  on  one  side,  whereupon  our
hero  glanced  round.  The  gentleman  had  already  arrived  beside
him,  clad  in  a  grass-green  nankeen  surtout  and  yellow  breeches  ;
but  his  neck  was  devoid  of  a  neckcloth,  after  the  manner  of
Cupid's.  He  was  seated  sideways  in  a  drozhky,  the  whole  of
which  he  took  up  by  himself.  Tchitchikoff  tried  to  say  some-
thing to  him,  but,  behold,  he  had  already  disappeared.  The
drozhky  again  made  its  appearance  at  the  spot  where  the  fish
had  been  drawn  out,  and  again  the  fat  man  s  voice  rang  out,
"  Big  Foma  and  Little  Foma  !     Kuzma  and  Denis  !  "

When  Tchitchikoff  arrived  at  the  porch  of  the  house,  he  was
amazed  to  find  the  fat  gentleman  already  there  to  receive  him  in
his  embrace.  How  he  had  managed  to  fly  there  was  incompre-
hensible. They  kissed  each  other,  however,  making  a  triple
cross,  after  the  ancient  Eussian  custom.  The  gentleman  be-
longed to  the  old  school.

"  I  have  brought  you  a  greeting  from  his  excellency,"  began
Tchitchikoff.

"  From  what  excellency  ?  "

"  From  your  relative.  General  Alexander  Dmitrievitch."

'•  AVho  is  this  Alexander  Dmitrievitch  ?  "

"  General  Betrishtcheff,"  replied  Tchitchiko'ff  in  some  surprise.

"  Don't  know  him."

Tchitchikoff  was  still  more  amazed.

"  How  is  this  ?  I  hope,  at  least,  that  I  have  the  pleasure  of
addressing  Colonel  Koshkareff?  "

"  No,  don't  hope  it.  Thank  God  that  you  have  come  not  to
him  but  to  me,  Piotr  Petrovitch  Pyetukh,  Pyetukh  Piotr  Petro-
vitch,"  repeated  the  host.

Tchitchikoff  was  petrified.  "  How's  this  ?  "  said  he,  turning
to  Selifan  and  Petrushka,  both  of  whom  dropped  their  jaws  and
stared  with  all  theu'  eyes,  as  one  sat  on  the  box  and  the  other
stood  at  the  door  of  the  calash.  "How's  this,  you  fools?
You  were  told  to  go  to  Colonel  Koshkareff 's,  and  this  is  Piotr
Petrovitch  Pyetukh's  ?  "

"You  have  behaved  capitally,  my  children!  Go  to  the
kitchen  :  they  will  give  each  of  you  a  measure  of  vodka  there,"
said  Piotr  Petrovitch  Pyetukh.  "  Unharness  the  horses,  and  go
to  the  servants'  quarters  this  instant !  "

"I  am  meditating  what  I  ought  to  do:  such  an  unforeseen
Hiistake,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

"It's  no  mistake.     First  see  what  sort  of  a  dinner  we  have,


TWO   VERY  ECCENTRIC  fERSOKS.  237

atid  then  say  whether  it  is  a  mistake.  I  most  humbly  beg  of  you
to  enter,"  added  Pyetukh,  taking  Tchitchikoff  by  the  arm,  and
leading  him  into  the  house.  From  the  rooms  there  emerged  to
meet  them  two  young  fellows  dressed  in  summer  surtouts,  and
as  slender  as  willow  wands  :  they  exceeded  their  father  in  height
by  a  full  arshin.

"  My  sons,  students  at  the  gymnasium,  who  have  come  home
for  the  holidays.  You  can  remain  with  our  guest,  Nikolasha ;
and  you,  Alexasha,  come  with  me."  So  saying,  the  host  dis-
appeared.

Tchitchikoff  devoted  his  attention  to  Nikolasha.  The  latter,
it  appeared,  bade  fair  to  be  a  good-for-nothing  in  the  future.
He  told  Tchitchikoff,  the  very  tirst  thing,  that  there  was  no
advantage  to  be  derived  from  studying  at  the  provincial  gym-
nasium ;  that  he  and  his  brother  wanted  to  go  to  Petersburg,
because  the  provinces  were  not  fit  to  live  in.

"  I  understand,"  thought  Tchitchikoff:  "  the  matter  will  end
with  the  confectioners'  shops  and  the  boulevards.  But  how
are  matters '? "  he  asked  aloud :  "in  what  condition  is  your
papa's  property  ?  "

*'  Mortgaged,"  replied  the  papa  himself,  who  was  again  in  the
drawing-room.    "  Mortgaged."

"  That's  bad,"  thought  Tchitchikoff.  "  At  this  rate  there
will  soon  be  no  <?state  at  all.  I  must  make  haste — but  that
was  surely  unnecessary,"  he  said,  with  an  air  of  regret.  "You
have  been  over-hasty  in  mortgaging  it."

"  No,  not  at  all,"  said  Pyetukh.  "  People  say  that  it  is  profit-
able. Everybody  mortgages  his  property  now  :  how  can  one  help
following  the  example  of  others  '?  Besides,  I  have  always  lived
here :  I  am  going  to  try  to  live  in  Moscow.  Here  are  my
sons  persuading  me  to  do  so  ;  they  long  for  the  culture  of  the
capital."

"What  a  fool  this  man  is,"  thought  Tchitchikoff":  "he  is
squandering  everything,  and  making  spendthrifts  of  his  sons.
It's  a  snug  little  property.  "When  you  come  to  look  at  it,  the
peasants  are  well  oft",  and  he's  not  badly  situated  either.  But
when  they  become  cultured  yonder,  in  the  restaurants  and
theatres,  everything  will  go  to  the  devil.  This  fisherman  ought
to  live  on  his  own  property  in  the  country."

"I  am  sure  that  I  know  what  you  are  thinking  of,"  said
Pyetukh.

"  What?  "  inquired  Tchitchikoff,  in  some  confusion.

"  You  are  thinking,  '  Fool,  fool  that  this  Pyetukh  is  !  he  has
invited  me  to  dinner,  and  as  yet  there's  no  dinner  provided.


238  DEAD   SOULS.

Well,  it  will  soon  be  ready,  most  respected  sir.    It  will  be  ready
before  a  girl  with  a  shaved  head  has  time  to  braid  her  hair."

"  Daddy,  here's  Platon  Mikhailovitch  coming,"  said  Alexasha,
looking  out  of  the  window.

**  Mounted  on  his  brown  horse,"  added  Nikolasha,  leaning
over  the  sill.

"  Where,  where  ?"  cried  Pyetukh,  approaching  the  window.

"Who  is  this  Platon  Mikhailovitch  ?"  inquired  Tchitchikoff
of  Alexasha.

"  Our  neighbour,  Platon  Mikhailovitch  Platonoff,  a  very  hand-
some man,"  answered  Alexasha

In  the  meantime,  Platonoff  himself  had  entered  the  room :
he  was  a  handsome  fellow,  with  a  fine  figure  and  glossy  light
hair,  which  curled  naturally.  A  heavy-jawed  terror  of  a  dog,  by
the  name  of  Yarb,,  followed  him,  rattling  his  brass  collar.

"  Have  you  dined  ?  "  inquired  the  host.

"Yes."

"What  have  you  come  for  then — to  laugh  at  me?  What
can  I  do  with  you  when  you  have  dined  ?  "

The  visitor  laughed,  and  replied,  "I  will  console  you  by  ad-
mitting that  I  ate  nothing  at  dinner :  I  had  no  appetite  at  all."

"  And  we  have  had  such  a  catch  !  If  you  could  only  have  seen
it !     Such  sturgeons  !     Such  carp  and  karasishtcJd  /"  '■'■

"  It's  vexatious  enough  to  hear  you  tell  me  about  it.  Why
are  you  always  so  cheerful  ?  "

"And  why  should  one  be  bored,  if  you  please  ?  "  asked  the
master  of  the  house.

"  Why  be  bored  ?     Because  things  are  tiresome."

"  You  eat  too  little  ;  that's  all.  Try  to  make  a  good  dinner.
It's  only  lately  that  boredom  was  invented.  Nobody  used  to  get
bored  in  former  times."

"  Well,  enough  of  your  boasting !  Just  as  if  you  were  never
bored ! "

"  I  never  am.  And  upon  my  word  there's  no  time  to  be  bored.
One  wakes  up  in  the  morning,  and  there's  the  cook  on  the  spot,
and  dinner  must  be  ordered  :  then  comes  tea,  and  then  the  over-
seer, and  then  the  fishing,  and  then  dinner.  After  dinner,  and
before  one  has  a  chance  to  snore,  there's  the  cook  again,  and
supper  must  be  ordered.  How  has  one  any  time  to  feel  bored  ?  "

During  the  whole  of  this  conversation,  Tchitchikofi"  had  been
observing  the  new-comer,  who  had  amazed  him  by  his  remark-
ably good  looks,  his  slender,  picturesque  figure,  the  freshness,

*  A  fish  reBembling  carp.    ]


TWO   VERY  ECCENTRIC   PERSOlsrs.  239

indeed,  the  feminine  clearness  of  his  complexion,  which  was  not
defaced  by  a  single  blemish.  Neither  passion  nor  grief,  nor
anything  in  the  nature  of  emotion,  had  dared  to  lay  a  finger  on
his  face,  which  was  as  pure  as  a  young  girl's,  nor  to  imprint
even  a  wrinkle  upon  it,  although  that  might  have  given  it  a  look
of  life,  for  it  was  a  rather  sleepy  face  in  spite  of  the  ironical
smile  which  lighted  it  up  at  times.

"  And  I,  permit  me  to  remark,"  said  Tchitchikofi',  "am  unable
to  understand  how  a  man  can  mope  when  he  has  such  a  per-
sonal appearance  as  yours.  Of  course,  if  he  lacks  money,  or
has  enemies — and  there  are  people  who  are  always  ready  to
make  attempts  even  on  the  life  of  a  man."

"Believe  me,"  interrupted  the  handsome  man,  "I  should
sometimes  like  a  little  anxiety,  for  the  sake  of  variety.  If  some
one  would  only  put  me  in  a  passion  !  But  there's  no  one  to  do
so.     It's  a  bore,  and  that's  all  there  is  about  it."

"  Then,  you  have  not  a  sufficient  amount  of  land  in  your
estate,  or  the  number  of  your  serfs  is  small  ?  "

"  Not  in  the  least.  My  brother  and  I  have  ten  thousand
desijatins'-'-  of  land  between  us,  and  over  a  thousand  men  peasants
on  them."

"  Strange  !  I  cannot  understand  it !  But  perhaps  you  have
had  some  bad  harvests,  or  epidemics,  or  some  of  your  male  serfs
have  died  ?  "

"  On  the  contrary,  everything  is  in  the  best  of  order,  and  my
brother  is  a  capital  manager."

"And  to  mope  with  all  that!  I  don't  understand  it,"  said
Tchitchikofl',  shrugging  his  shoulders.

"We'll  drive  away  his  moping  mood  immediately,"  said  the
host.  "  Run,  Alexasha,  quick,  to  the  kitchen,  and  tell  the  cook
to  send  us  some  fish-patties  as  speedUy  as  possible.  And  where's
that  jackanapes  Yemelyan,  and  that  thief  Antoshka  ?  Why  don't
they  serve  the  zakuska  /  "  f

But  at  this  moment  the  door  opened.  The  jackanapes  Ye-
melyan and  the  thief  Antoshka  made  their  appearance  with  nap-
'EinfT'spread  the  table,  and  set  on  it  a  tray  with  six  decanters,
containing  liquors  of  various  colours.  A  necklace  of  plates,  with
all  sorts  of  viands  fit  to  arouse  the  appetite,  soon  surrounded
the  tray  and  decanters.  The  servants  flitted  hastily  hither  and
thither,  incessantly  fetching  something  in  covered  dishes,  inside
of  which  butter  could  be  heard  bubbling.  The  jackanapes  Ye-
melyan and  the  thief  Antoshka  arranged  things  in  excellent

*  Twenty-seven  thousand  acres,
t  Appetizers.


240  DEAD    SOULS.

style.  Their  nicknames  had  merely  been  bestowed  on  them  by
way  of  encouragement.  Their  master  was  not  at  all  fond  of
scolding,  being  a  good-natured  fellow ;  but  the  Eussian  man
cannot  get  along  without  a  spicy  word  now  and  then.  It  is  as
necessary  to  him  as  a  glass  of  vodka  is  to  his  stomach,  to  aid
digestion.  How  can  it  be  helped  ?  Such  is  his  nature :  be
likes  nothing  that  is  sweet.

The  zakuska  was  followed  by  the  dinner.  Now  the  kind-
hearted  host  became  a  thorough  brigand.  No  sooner  did  he  spy
a  bit  of  food  on  anyone's  fork  than  he  immediately  added
another,  saying,  "  Without  a  mate,  neither  man  nor  bird  can
live  in  this  world."  If  anyone  had  two  morsels,  he  heaped  a
third  on  to  the  top  of  them,  declaring,  "  What  sort  of  a  number
is  two  ?  God  loves  a  trinity."  If  his  guest  had  three,  he  said,
"Where  was  there  ever  a  telyega  seen  with  three  wheels?  Who
builds  a  cabin  with  three  corners  ?  "  As  regards  the  fourth  bit
he  was  prepared  with  a  proverb  also,  and  likewise  as  regards
the  fifth.  Tchitchikoff  devoured  nearly  a  dozen  slices,  and
thought,  "Well,  the  host  won't  pile  up  anything  more."  But
in  vain :  without  saying  a  word,  his  host  laid  on  his  plate  some
ribs  of  veal,  with  kidneys,  from  a  most  gigantic  calf.

"  I  fed  the  animal  for  two  years  on  milk,"  said  the  host :  "  I
cared  for  him  as  though  he  had  been  my  own  son  !  "

"I  cannot  eat  it,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  Try,  and  say  I  cannot  afterwards."

"  It  won't  go  down.     I  have  no  room  left."

"  Well,  there  was  no  room  in  the  church,  as  the  story  goes ;
but  the  chief  of  police  arrived — and  a  place  was  found  for  him.
There  was  such  a  throng  that  there  was  not  room  for  an  apple
to  fall.     Only  try  :  this  morsel  is  the  chief  of  police."

Tchitchikoff  did  try,  and  the  morsel  actually  was  something
in  the  nature  of  a  chief  of  police.  A  place  was  found  for  it,  but
it  seemed  as  though  nothing  more  could  be  put  in.

"  Now,  how  is  such  a  man  to  go  to  Petersburg  or  Moscow !
In  three  years,  with  such  hospitality  as  this,  he  would  utterly
ruin  himself,"  thought  Tchitchikoff.  Of  course  he  was  not  aware
that  this  had  already  been  thoroughly  accomplished,  and  that,
even  without  being  hospitable,  a  man  may  get  rid  of  everything,
not  in  three  years,  but  even  in  three  months.

It  was  the  same  with  the  wines.  On  receiving  his  money  from
the  mortgage-bank,  Piotr  Petrovitch  had  provided  himself  with
a  store  of  wines  for  ten  years  to  come.  Consequently,  he  poured
and  poured.  What  the  guests  did  not  drink,  he  gave  to  Alexasha
and  Nikolasha,  who  clinked  their  glasses  together  like  the  rest.


TWO    VERY   ECCENTRIC   PERSONS.  241

It  was  plain  in  advance  to  what  branch  of  human  learning  they
would  direct  their  attention  upon  their  arrival  in  the  capital.  The
guests  could  hardly  move.  With  great  difficulty  they  dragged
themselves  on  to  the  balcony,  and  with  greater  difficulty  disposed
themselves  in  some  arm-chairs.  The  host  had  no  sooner  seated
himself  in  his,  of  a  special  square  shape,  than  he  fell  asleep.
His  corpulent  person  becoming  converted  into  a  blacksmith's
bellows,  as  it  were,  began,  through  his  open  mouth  and  nostrils,
to  emit  such  sounds  as  even  a  realistic  writer  could  not  describe.
It  was  like  a  drum  and  a  fife  at  play,  combined  with  yet  another
sound  resembling  the  bark  of  a  dog.

"  Eh,  how  he  whistles  !  "  said  Platonoflf.

Tchitchikolf  began  to  laugh.

"  Of  course,  if  you  dine  like  that,  there's  no  chance  of  getting
bored.     Sleep  follows,  does  it  not  ?  "

"  Yes.  But,  nevertheless,  I — you  must  excuse  me — I  cannot
understand  how  it  is  possible  for  you  to  be  bored.  There  are
so  many  means  to  prevent  oneself  being  bored."

"What  are  they?"

"Are  there  not  plenty  for  a  young  man  ?  Dancing,  playing
on  some  instrument,  not  to  mention  getting  married."

"To  whom?"

"  Are  there  no  rich,  pretty  girls  in  the  neighbourhood,  then  ?"

"  Well,  no."

"  Well,  then  you  can  look  elsewhere  :  you  can  travel."  And
a  brilliant  idea  flashed  through  Tchitchikoff's  brain.  "Yes,
that's  a  capital  suggestion!  "  he  said,  looking  Platonoff  full  in
the  eye.

"What?"

"Travelling."

"  Where  is  one  to  go  ?  "

"  Why,  if  you  are  at  liberty,  come  with  me,"  said  Tchitchikoff ;
and  he  thought,  as  he  gazed  at  Platonofl",  "  That  would  be  a  tine
thing.  Then  we  might  share  the  expenses,  and  the  whole  cost
of  repairing  the  trap  might  be  carried  to  his  account."

"  But  were  are  you  going  ?"

"  Just  at  present  I  am  not  travelling  on  my  own  aflfairs  so
much  as  on  those  of  someone  else.  General  BetrishtchefF,  an
intimate  friend,  and,  I  may  say,  a  benefactor,  has  requested  me
to  inform  his  relatives — in  short,  it's  a  family  matter ;  but  it  is
my  own  afiair  too,  so  to  speak  ;  and,  say  what  you  will,  to  see
the  world,  to  observe  the  manners  of  its  people,  is  like  a  living
book,  a  second  education."  While  he  spoke  thus,  Tchitchikoff
was  thinking  to  himself,  "  It  really  would  be  capital !     I  might

Q


242  DEAD   SOULS.

charge  all  the  expenses  to  him,  and  even  travel  with  his  horses,
while  mine  are  being  fed  in  his  village."

"  Why  shouldn't  I  travel  ?  "  Platonoff  was  thinking  on  his
side  in  the  meanwhile,  "  I  have  nothing  to  do  at  home  ;  and
the  management  of  my  affairs  is  in  my  brother's  hands,  so  there
would  be  no  dissipation  about  it.  Why  not  travel,  in  fact  ?  Will
you  consent,"  he  asked  aloud,  "to  pass  two  days  with  my
brother  ?     Otherwise,  he  would  not  let  me  go."

"  With  the  greatest  pleasure  ;  three  even."

"  Come,  shake  hands  on  it.  We'll  go,"  said  Platonoff,  brighten-
ing up.

He  clapped  his  hands.     "  Let's  be  off!  "  he  added.

"  Where  ?  where  ?  "  cried  the  host,  waking  up  and  staring  at
them.  "  No,  my  dear  fellows.  I  have  ordered  a  wheel  to  be
removed  from  the  calash  ;  and  your  horse,  Platon  Mikhail ovitch,
has  been  driven  fifteen  versts  away.  No  :  you  are  going  to  pass
the  night  here  ;  and  to-morrow,  after  an  early  dinner,  you  may
go  your  way."

What  was  to  be  done  with  Pyetukh  ?  They  were  forced  to
remain,  and  were  rewarded  with  a  beautiful  spring  evening.
The  host  arranged  a  trip  on  the  river.  Twelve  rowers  and
twenty-four  oars,  accompanied  by  songs,  bore  them  over  the  sur-
face of  the  mirror-like  lake.  From  the  lake  they  entered  the
river,  which  was  immeasurably  broad,  with  sloping  banks  on
either  side  ;  and  they  passed,  ever  and  anon,  beneath  ropes
stretched  from  shore  to  shore,  to  assist  in  the  fisheries.  The
waters  were  barely  disturbed  by  the  current ;  the  changing
views,  as  they  succeeded  one  another,  presented  themselves  in
silence  to  the  eyesight;  and  grove  after  grove  refreshed  one
with  an  ever-varying  commingling  of  trees.

The  rowers,  grasping  their  twenty-four  oars  simultaneously,
suddenly  elevated  them  in  the  air,  and  the  boat  floated  along
over  the  motionless,  glassy  surface,  as  lightly  as  a  bird.  The
leader  of  the  singers,  a  broad-shouldered  youth,  who  sat  third
from  the  rudder,  struck  up  the  opening  lines  of  a  song  in  a  clear,
ringing  voice,  which  seemed  to  issue  from  the  throat  of  a
nightingale.  Five  more  caught  up  the  refrain  ;  the  other  six
carried  it  on,  and  it  poured  forth  in  a  melody  as  boundless  as
Russia  herself.  Even  Pyetukh  roused  up,  and  began  to  hum,
supporting  the  singers  whenever  the  chorus  lacked  strength ;
and  even  Tchitchikoff  felt  sensible  that  he  was  a  Russian.  Pla-
tonoff alone  thought,  "  What  is  there  fine  about  that  melancholy
tune  ?     It  only  makes  one's  soul  still  more  depressed."

The  shades  of  night  had  already  fallen  when  they  returned.


TWO   VERY   ECCENTRIC    PERSONS.  243

The  oars  beat  upon  the  water,  which  no  longer  reflected  the
heavens.  In  darkness  they  landed  on  the  shore,  where  fires  had
been  lighted,  and  here,  on  tripods,  some  fish-soup,  made  of
freshly  caught  quivering  chubs,  was  cooking.  The  village  cattle
and  poultry  had  long  since  been  driven  home  ;  the  dust  they  had
raised  had  settled  again,  and  the  herdsmen  who  had  driven
them  stood  at  the  gates  waiting  for  their  usual  pot  of  milk  and
an  invitation  to  partake  of  some  of  the  fish-soup.  Amid  the
darkness  the  subdued  hum  of  men's  voices  and  the  yelping  of
dogs,  resounding  from  some  distant  village,  were  audible.  The
moon  rose,  bent  upon  lighting  up  the  darkened  landscape,  and
finally  everything  was  illuminated.  Wondrous  was  the  picture !
But  there  was  no  one  to  admire  it.  Nikolasha  and  Alexasha
were  dreaming  of  Moscow,  of  the  restaurants  and  the  theatres,
about  which  a  cadet  who  came  from  the  capital  had  told  them ;
their  father  was  meditating  how  he  might  feed  his  guests ;  Pla-
tonoff"  was  yawning.  Tchitchikoff"  seemed  to  be  the  most  ani-
mated of  them  all.

"  Truly,"  thought  he,  "  I  will  set  up  a  little  hamlet  of  my
own  someday.  How  can  a  man  live  anywhere  except  in  the
country  ?  "  And  visions  of  a  pretty  wife  and  some  small  Tchit-
chikofi's  began  to  present  themselves  to  his  fancy.

And  at  supper  they  again  over-fed  themselves.  "When  Pavel
Ivanovitch  entered  the  apartment  which  had  been  prepared  for
him,  and,  throwing  himself  on  the  bed,  felt  his  stomach,  he  said,
"  It's  full,  choke-full !  No  chief  of  police  living  could  get  into
it!  "  As  it  happened,  the  study  of  the  master  of  the  house
must  needs  be  situated  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall  of  our  hero's
room.  The  partition  was  thin,  and  every  word  which  was  spoken
in  the  study  was  audible  to  Tchitchikoft",  who  now  heard  his  host
giving  orders  to  the  cook  for  an  early  breakfast  on  the  morrow ;
and  what  orders  they  were  !  They  would  have  given  a  corpse  an
appetite.  First  came  a  roar,  "  Now,  roast  it  brown,  and  see  that
it  is  well  basted  !  "  And  then  the  cook  responded  in  a  shrill
falsetto,  "  I  obey,  sir !     It  shall  be  done,  sir  !  "

"And  you  are  to  make  a  four-cornered  fish-pasty,"  resumed
the  master,  drawing  in  his  breath  with  a  sucking  noise.  "In
one  corner  you  must  put  the  cheeks  and  the  cartilage  of  the
sturgeon,  in  another  some  buckwheat  stufiing  with  onions  and
mushrooms,  some  garlic,  sweet  milk,  brains,  cocks'  crests  and
crawfish,  and — you  know ;  arrange  it  so  that  it  may  be  appe-
tising."

"  Yes,  sir.     I  will  do  as  you  tell  me."

*'  And  let  it  be  browned  on  one  side,  and  lighter  on  the  other.


244  DEAD   SOULS.

And  bake  it  so  that  the  crust  may  be  all  soaked  with  the  con-
tents, so  that  it  may  be — you  know  how,  not  crumbly,  but  likely
to  melt  in  your  mouth."  Thereupon  Pyetukh  smacked  his  lips,
and  wiped  them.

"  The  deuce  take  it !  He  won't  let  me  go  to  sleep,"  thought
Tchitchikoff,  as  he  wrapped  the  coverlet  round  his  head,  in  order
not  to  hear.  However,  through  the  coverlet  now  came  the
words —

"  And  round  the  sturgeon  place  some  little  stars  of  beetroot
and  mushrooms — you  know,  with  horseradish  and  turnips,  car-
rots and  beans,  and  some  of  that — what  do  you  call  it  ? — so  that
there  may  be  as  much  garnishing  as  possible.  And  then  let  us
have  a  pig's  breast,  well  stuffed  and  with  some  nice  crackling,
and  the  sauce  served  apart.

And  many  other  dishes  besides  did  Pyetukh  order,  continually
repeating,  "  And  brown  it,  and  roast  it  crisp,  and  see  that  it  is
well  basted  !  "  Tchitchikoli'  at  last  fell  asleep  while  his  host  was
giving  some  orders  about  a  turkey.

The  next  day  the  guests  overfed  themselves  to  such  an  extent
that  Platonofi'  could  not  ride.  His  stallion  was  sent  back  in
charge  of  one  of  Pyetukh's  grooms,  and  then  he  and  Tchitchi-
koff seated  themselves  in  the  calash,  whilst  the  thick-nosed  dog,
Yarb,  followed  them  languidly.     He,  too,  had  overfed  himself.

"  This  is  too  much.  It  does  not  do  to  over-feed  one's  self
like  this,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  when  they  had  left  the  house  be-
hind them.

"  And  our  friend  thinks  such  a  life  the  correct  thing  :  that's
the  vexatious  part  of  it,"  said  Platonofl'.

"  Well,  if  I  had  an  income  of  seventy  thousand  roubles  a  year
like  you,"  thought  Tchitchikoff',  "  I  wouldn't  let  myself  be
bored."

"  Would  you  object  to  going  to  a  village  about  ten  versts
from  here  ?  "  inquired  Platonofl'.  "  I  should  like  to  take  leave  of
my  sister  and  my  brother-in-law."

"  With  the  greatest  pleasure,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

"  If  you  are  fond  of  learning  any  particulars  about  the  man-
agement of  an  estate,"  said  Platonoff',  "  you  will  take  an  interest
in  making  my  brother-in-law's  acquaintance.  You  cannot  find
a  better  manager  than  he  is.  In  the  space  of  ten  years,  he  has
brought  his  property  into  such  a  fine  state  that  he  now  receives
an  income  of  two  hundred  thousand  roubles  from  it,  instead  of
thirty  thousand,  as  he  did  at  first."

"  Ah,  he  must  evidently  be  a  most  estimable  man  !   It  will  be


TWO    VERY   ECCENTRIC   PERSONS.  245

extremely  interesting  to  make  his  acquaintance.  But  bow  is
this  ?     That  is  to  say,  what  is  his  family  name  ?  "

"  Kostanzhoglo."

"  And  his  baptismal  name  and  patronymic  ?  "

"  Konstantin  Feodorovitch."

"  Konstantin  Feodorovitch  Kostanzhoglo!  Indeed,  it  will  be
very  interesting  to  make  his  acquaintance.  It  must  be  instruc-
tive to  know  such  a  man."

Platonoff  took  upon  himself  to  guide  Selifan,  as  was  requi-
site, for  the  coachman  could  hardly  hold  himself  on  his  box.  As
for  Petrushka,  he  twice  tumbled  from  the  calash  like  a  log,  so
that  it  became  necessary  to  bind  him  to  the  seat  Avith  a  rope.
"  What  a  brute  !  "  was  all  that  Tchitchikoff  said.

"Look!  Kostanhoglo's  land  begins  here,"  said  Platonoft\
"  It  has  quite  another  aspect."  And  in  fact,  all  over  the  fields
planted  with  forest-trees,  the  young  saplings  were  as  even  and
as  straight  as  arrows  ;  behind  them  came  another  plantation  of
young  trees,  but  a  little  taller;  behind  this  rose  a  wood  of  older
growth,  and  so  on,  the  trees  of  each  patch  being  taller  than  the
preceding  ones.  Then  came  another  strip  of  land,  covered  with
a  heavy  growth  of  grain  ;  and  again,  in  the  same  manner,  a  young
growth  of  forest,  succeeded  by  an  older  one.  As  they  passed
under  the  arched  branches,  Platonofi' exclaimed,  "All  these  have
grown  up  in  eight  or  ten  years ;  with  anybody  else  they  would
not  have  grown  in  twelve."

"  How  does  he  manage  it  ?  "  asked  our  hero.

"  Oh,  you  must  ask  him.  He's  quite  learned  in  all  matters
connected  with  the  soil.  He  does  nothing  in  vain.  He  not  only
understands  the  soil,  but  he  knows  what  locality  is  required  for
each  thing,  and  which  tree  should  go  with  each  grain.  He  makes
everything  answer  three  or  four  purposes  at  once.  If  he  has  a
patch  of  forest,  it  is  because,  in  addition  to  the  forest  as  a  forest,
just  so  much  exti'a  moisture  must  be  provided  for  the  fields,  with
so  much  fertilising  mould  from  the  falling  leaves,  and  so  much
shade.  When  there  is  a  drought  everywhere  else,  there  is  no
drought  with  him  :  when  the  crops  all  round  about  him  fail,  they
don't  fail  with  him.  It's  a  pity  that  I  know  so  little  about  these
things,  that  I  cannot  explain  them  fully  to  you;  however,  my
brother-in-law  resorts  to  such  strange  devices,  he  is  called  a
sorcerer.  You  will  see  some  very  curious  things  on  his  estate.
But  it's  a  bore,  all  the  same."

"  He  really  must  be  a  remarkable  man,"  thought  Tchitchikofi".
"  It  is  most  lamentable  that  this  young  man  cannot  give  me  an
idea  of  what  he  does.     I  feel  very  anxious  to  see  him."


246  DEAD    SOULS.

At  length  the  village  made  its  appearance.  It  resembled  a
town  :  a  multitude  of  cahins  were  scattered  about  on  three
hillocks,  crowned  with  churches,  and  everywhere  hemmed  in
with  ricks  of  hay,  and  stacks  of  grain.  "  Yes,"  thought
Tchitchikoff,  "  it  is  evident  that  a  man  of  importance  lives  here."

The  cabins  were  all  well  built ;  the  streets  were  level ;  when-
ever a  telyega  appeared,  it  was  stout  and  quite  new ;  the
moujiks  whom  one  encountered  had  an  intelligent  expression ;
the  horned  cattle  were  of  choice  kinds ;  even  the  serfs'  pigs
looked  like  noblemen.  It  was  evident  that  here  dwelt  peasants,
who,  as  the  song  says,  dug  with  silver  spades.  Here  there
were  no  English  parks  or  lawns,  arbours  and  bridges,  with  all
sorts  of  devices  :  but,  after  the  ancient  fashion,  an  avenue  lined
with  granaries  and  labourers'  cottages  ran  almost  up  to  the  very
manor-house,  so  that  all  that  was  going  on  round  about  might
be  under  the  master's  eye.  To  complete  the  arrangement,  a
lofty  tower  of  observation,  which  commanded  a  view  for  fifteen
versts  in  every  direction,  rose  upon  the  roof,  not  for  the  sake
of  ornament,  but  for  the  express  purpose  of  overlooking  the
labourers  in  the  distant  fields.  Under  the  porch  they  were  met
by  some  well-trained  servants,  very  different  indeed  from  the
drunken  Petrushka,  and  far  more  prepossessing,  although  they
did  not  wear  swallow-tailed  coats,  but  simple  cossack  tunics  of
blue  homespun.

The  mistress  of  the  house  also  ran  out  to  the  porch.  She
was  as  fresh  as  blood  and  milk,  as  beautiful  as  God's  day,  and
as  like  Platonofl'  as  one  drop  of  water  is  like  another ;  with  this
difference,  however,  that  she  was  not  at  all  languid,  like  he  was,
but  merry  and  talkative.

"  "Welcome,  brother  !  How  glad|I  am  that  you  have  come  !  "
she  said.    "  Konstantin  is  not  at  home,  but  he  will  soon  be  here."

"Where  is  he  ?  "

"  He  has  business  in  the  village  with  some  traders,"  she  re-
plied, conducting  the  visitors  into  the  house.

Tchitchikoff  gazed  with  curiosity  at  the  abode  of  this  re-
markable man,  who  possessed  an  income  of  two  hundred
thousand  roubles,  and  he  hoped  that  the  aspect  of  the  place
would  give  him  some  inkling  as  to  the  owner's  qualities.  But
it  was  impossible  to  draw  any  inferences.  The  rooms  were
simple,  even  bare  :  there  were  no  frescoes,  whatnots,  or  costly
porcelain,  or  even  books.  In  short,  everything  indicated  that
the  owner  did  not  spend  much  of  his  time  within  four  walls ;
he  plainly  preferred  being  in  his  fields,  and  did  not  scheme  in
sybaritic  fashion,  before  the  fire,  and  in  a  comfortable  arm-chair


TWO    VERY   ECCENTRIC   PERSONS.  247

facing  the  chimney  ;  his  plans  indeed  entered  his  brain  on  the
field  of  action  ;  and  upon  being  formed  within  him,  were  at  once
put  into  practice.  The  only  signs  of  work  which  Tchitchikoff
could  perceive  in  the  rooms  were  connected  with  housewifery.
Upon  the  tables  and  chairs  there  lay  some  clean  linden-wood
planks,  with  the  petals  of  flowers  strewed  upon  them,  drying.

"What  rubbish  have  you  spread  out  here,  sister?"  asked
Platonoff.

"Rubbish  indeed!"  exclaimed  the  hostess.  "This  is  the
very  best  remedy  for  fever.  We  cured  all  the  peasants  with  it
last  year.  And  that  is  for  cordials,  and  that  for  preserves.
You  always  laugh  at  my  preserves  and  pickles,  but  when  you
taste  them,  you  praise  them  highly."

Platonoff  approached  the  piano,  and  began  to  turn  over  the
music.  "  Heavens  !  how  old-fashioned  !  "  said  he.  "  Come,
now,  are  not  you  ashamed  of  yourself,  sister  ?  "

"  Really,  you  must  forgive  me,  brother.  I  have  had  no  time
to  devote  to  music  for  a  long  while  past.  I  have  a  little
daughter,  eight  years  old,  whom  I  must  educate.  Must  I  con-
sign her  to  the  hands  of  a  foreign  governess  simply  for  the  sake
of  obtaining  time  to  devote  myself  to  music  ?  No  :  you  must
excuse  me,  brother  ;  that  is  something  which  I  shall  not  do."

"  How  tiresome  you  have  grown,  sister,"  said  the  brother,  as
he  walked  to  the  Avindow.  "  Ah  !  here  he  is  !  He's  coming  !
he's  coming  !  "  exclaimed  Platonoff.

Tchitchikofl'  also  hastened  to  the  window.  A  man  of  forty,
sunburnt  and  alert,  was  approaching  the  porch.  He  wore  a
knitted  cap  and  a  camel's-hair  surtout.  Evidently  he  paid  no
heed  to  his  attire.  Two  men  of  the  lower  classes  were  walking
beside  him,  cap  in  hand,  engaged  in  discussing  something  with
him.  One  of  them  was  a  simple  peasant,  the  other  some  sort
of  itinerant  wholesale  trader  and  adventurer,  wearing  a  blue
sibirka  *  As  they  all  came  to  a  halt  near  the  porch,  their  con-
versation became  audible  inside  the  house.

"This  is  what  you  had  better  do,"  said  Kostanzhoglo, —
"  purchase  your  liberty  from  your  master.  I  will  lend  you  the
money  to  do  so  if  you  like.  You  can  work  it  out  with  me  after-
wards."

"  No  :  why  purchase  our  freedom  ?  You  take  us  rather.
Everyone  learns  sense  from  you.  The  difficulty  now  is,  that
we  can't  take  care  of  ourselves.  The  distillers  supply  such
liquors  that  one  glass  makes  a  fellow's  stomach  ache  as  though

*  A  long  coat  without  any  opening  behind.


248  DEAD   SOULS.

he  had  drunk  a  pailful.  Before  one  succeeds  in  recovering
one's  senses,  one  has  squandered  everything.  There  are  so
many  snares  set  for  poor  people  nowadays.  The  Evil  One,
who  rules  the  world — by  Heavens  ! — has  so  arranged  matters
that  everything  throws  a  man  off  the  track.  People  have
begun  to  make  tobacco,  and  all  sorts  of  things.  But  what  is  to
be  done,  Konstantin  Feodorovitch  ?  A  man  is  a  man  in  the
sight  of  God:  you  can't  deny  that."

"Listen:  the  point  lies  in  this.  You  will  not  have  full
freedom,  even  with  me.  It  is  true  that  you  will  receive  every-
thing at  the  start,  including  a  cow  and  a  horse  ;  but  the  point
of  the  matter  is,  that  my  demands  on  the  peasant  are  greater
than  they  are  anywhere  else.  With  me,  work  is  the  first  con-
sideration. I  do  not  allow  idleness  either  in  myself  or  in  anyone
else.  I  work  like  an  ox,  and  I  make  my  peasants  work.  All
sorts  of  rubbish  get  into  a  man's  head  through  lack  of  work.
So  just  you  fellows  consider  this  at  the  war,*  and  discuss  it
among  yourselves."

"  We  have  already  discussed  it,  Konstantin  Feodorovitch.
The  elders  have  already  expressed  their  minds.  '  Ah  ! '  they
say,  *  every  one  of  Konstantin's  peasants  is  rich.  And  your
priests  are  so  compassionate,  whereas  ours  don't  attend  to  their
duties  ;  indeed  no  one  can  be  buried  properly.'  "

"All  the  same,  go  and  talk  it  over."

"  I  obey  you,  Konstantin  Feodorovitch."

"Do  me  the  favour  to  reduce  your  price,  Konstantin
Feodorovitch,"  now  said  the  itinerant  dealer  in  the  blue  sibirka,
who  was  walking  on  the  landowner's  other  side.

"  I  have  already  given  you  my  answer.  I  am  not  fond  of
chaffering.  I  am  not  like  the  other  landowners,  whom  you
can  beggar  because  of  the  pressure  of  their  debts.  I  know  you
all,  you  see.  You  keep  lists  of  all  those  who  are  in  debt.
What  is  there  to  be  surprised  at  in  that  ?  A  man  who  is  re-
duced to  extremities  sells  you  goods  at  half-price.  But  what  is
your  money  to  me  ?  My  things  can  wait  three  years  if  necessary.
I  have  no  payments  to  make  to  the  Advance  Bank."

"  That's  true,  Konstantin  Feodorovitch.  And  it  is  simply
because  I  wish  to  have  some  dealings  with  you,  and  not  from
any  motives  of  greed,  that  I  ask  you  this.  But  please  accept
three  thousand  roubles  as  earnest-money."  The  sharper  there-
upon  pulled  a   bundle    of  dirty   bank-notes  from  his   bosom,

*  The  communal  council  of  village  elders.


TWO    VERY    ECCENTRIC    PERSONS.  249

Kostanzboglo  took  them  with  the  greatest  coolness,  and  thrust
them  into  the  rear  pocket  of  his  surtout.

"  Hm  !  "  thought  Tchitchikoff :  "just  as  though  the  packet
were  a  pocket-handkerchief  !  "

Kostanzhoglo  now  made  his  appearance  at  the  door  of  the
drawing-room.  Tchitchikofi'  was  struck  by  the  bronzed  hue  of
his  face,  the  stiflness  of  his  dark  hair,  which  here  and  there  was
turning  grey  prematurely,  by  the  alert  expression  of  his  eyes,
and  by  a  certain  bilious  stamp  of  fiery  Southern  origin.  Kos-
tanzhoglo himself  did  not  know  whence  his  forefathers  had
come.  He  did  not  trouble  himself  about  his  genealogy,  how-
ever, deeming  it  a  matter  of  no  importance,  superfluous  as
regards  domestic  management.  He  was  not  of  pure  Kussian
origin,  that  is  certain,  as  his  features  proved  the  contrary  ;
however,  he  was  thoroughly  convinced  that  he  was  a  Muscovite,
and  he  was  acquainted  with  no  other  tongue  than  Eussian.

Platonofl'  introduced  Tchitchikoft"  to  him,  and  they  kissed
each  other,  according  to  custom.

"To  cure  myself  of  hypochondria,  Konstantin,  I  have  hit
upon  the  plan  of  travelling  through  the  different  provinces,"
said  Platonoff ;  "  and  Pavel  Ivanovitch  here,  has  proposed  that
I  should  accompany  him,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  my  low
spirits."

"  Very  good,"  said  Kostanzhoglo.  "  What  localities  do  you
propose  to  visit  ?  "  he  added,  turning  to  Tchitchikoff.

"  I  must  confess,"  answered  Tchitchikoff,  inclining  his  head
courteously  on  one  side,  and  at  the  same  time  caressing  the  arm
of  his  chair,  "I  must  confess  that  just  at  present  I  am  travel-
ling not  so  much  on  my  own  account  as  on  the  business  of  some-
one else.  General  Betrishtchefl",  my  intimate  friend,  and  I  may
say,  my  benefactor,  has  asked  me  to  communicate  with  his
relatives.  There  are  several  of  them  to  be  seen ;  but  on  the
other  hand,  I  am  also  travelling  on  my  own  account,  so  to
speak  :  for,  not  to  mention  the  advantage  which  is  to  be  derived
from  travelling  as  regards  health,  I  like  to  view  the  world,  and
study  the  habits  of  the  people.  Travel  forms  a  living  book,  a
science  in  itself,  so  to  speak."

"  Yes,  it  does  not  do  anyone  harm  to  take  a  peep  at  various
quarters."

"  That  remark  is  capitally  put :  yes,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it
does  no  harm.  You  see  things  which  you  would  not  have
otherwise  seen  :  you  meet  people  whom  you  would  not  have
met.  Conversation  with  some  of  them  is  worth  its  weight  in
gold.     Here  now,  for  example,  a  case  presents  itself.     I  appeal


250  DEAD   SOULS.

to  you,  most  respected  Konstantin  Feodorovitch!  teach  me,
instruct  me,  slake  my  thirst  for  knowledge  of  the  truth  !  I
await  your  sweet  words,  as  I  might  await  manna !  "

"  But  with  what  object  ?  In  what  should  I  instruct  you  ?  "
asked  Kostanzhoglo  in  confusion.  "  I  got  my  own  poor  educa-
tion at  very  small  cost."

•  "Your  wisdom,  wisdom,  most  respected  sir, — the  wisdom
needful  to  manage  a  country  estate  ;  the  wisdom  to  extract  an
assured  income  from  it ;  to  acquire  not  imaginary  but  real
property,  thus  fulfilling  all  the  duties  of  a  citizen,  and  winning
the  reverence  of  one's  fellow-countrymen."

"  Well,  do  you  know  what  ?  "  said  Kostanzhoglo,  gazing
thoughtfully  at  our  hero.  "  Eemain  a  day  with  me.  I  will  show
you  all  the  arrangements,  and  tell  you  all  about  everything.
You  will  see  that  there  is  no  wisdom  about  it."

"Yes,  do  stay,"  said  Mrs.  Kostanzhoglo;  and  turning  to  her
brother,  she  added,  "  Stay,  brother  :  what  need  is  there  for  you
to  hurry  away  ?  "

"It's  all  the  same  to  me.  How  shall  it  be,  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch  ?  "

"  I  accept,  with  the  greatest  pleasure.  But  here  is  the  diffi-
culty :  I  must  call  upon  a  relative  of  Greneral  Betrishtcheff'Sj  a
certain  Colonel  Koshkareff."

"  Why,  he's  a  lunatic  !  "

"  Yes,  he  is  demented.  I  know  that.  And  of  my  own  accord
I  would  not  go  to  see  him,  but  General  Betrishtcheff,  my  intimate
friend  and  benefactor,  so  to  speak,  wants  me  to  do  so."

"  In  that  case,  do  you  know  what  you  had  better  do  ?  "  said
Kostanzhoglo.  It's  not  ten  versts  to  his  place.  My  carriage  is
standing  harnessed.  Go  and  see  him  immediately.  You  will
be  able  to  get  back  here  in  time  for  tea."

"An  excellent  idea!"  exclaimed  Tchitchikoff,  seizing  his
hat.

The  host's  j)roIi/otJia-''-  was  brought  to  the  door,  and  in  half  an
hour  it  had  borne  him  to  the  colonel's  village.  The  whole
place  was  in  disorder :  buildings  in  process  of  construction  and
of  reconstruction,  heaps  of  refuse,  bricks  and  lumber,  encumbered
all  the  streets.  The  houses  looked  like  courts  of  justice.  On
one  was  the  inscription.  Depot  of  Agricultural  Implements,  in
gilt  letters  ;  on  another,  Chief  Ofiice  for  Accounts  ;  farther  on,
Committee  of  Rural  Affairs  ;  and  again.  School  for  the  Higher
Education  of  the  Peasantry.  In  short,  the  deuce  only  knows
what  was  not  there.

*  A  variety  of  drozhky,  of  circular  shape.


TWO    VERY   ECCENTRIC   PERSONS.  251

Our  hero  fouud  the  colonel  at  a  desk  in  the  office  for  accounts,
with  a  pen  between  his  teeth.  Koshkarefi'  received  him  with
special  aflability.  Judging  from  appearances,  he  was  an  ex-
tremely amiable  and  very  approachable  man  ;  he  began  to
tell  our  hero  of  the  great  labour  it  had  cost  him  to  bring  his
estate  to  its  present  flourishing  condition.  He  complained
bitterly  of  the  difficulty  of  making  the  moujik  understand  that
there  are  such  things  as  luxury,  art,  and  skill ;  that  up  to  that
time  he  had  not  been  able  to  make  the  women  wear  corsets,
whereas  in  Germany,  where  he  had  spent  some  time  with  his
regiment  in  the  year  '14,  even  a  miller's  daughter  he
knew  had  been  able  to  play  upon  the  piano.  However,
in  spite  of  all  the  opposition  of  the  party  of  ignorance,  he
still  hoped  to  attain  his  object,  and  so  enlighten  the  peasan-
try of  his  village,  that  they  would  be  seen  reading  a  book  on
lightning  conductors,  or  the  "  Georgics  "  of  Virgil,  or  making  a
chemical  analysis  of  the  soil,  as  they  followed  the  plough.

"  Dear  me,  did  anyone  ever  hear  of  such  a  thing  !  "  thought
Tchitchikofl".  Why  to  this  day,  I  have  not  even  read  '  The
Duchess  of  La  Valliere  '  through  !  I  never  have  any  time."

The  colonel  had  a  great  deal  more  to  say  about  promoting  the
welfare  of  the  people.  Costume  possessed  great  significance
with  him.  He  offered  to  wager  his  own  head  that  if  only  one-
half  of  the  Russian  peasantry  could  be  induced  to  don  German
trousers,  the  sciences  would  progress,  trade  would  flourish,  and
gold  remain  permanently  in  Russia.

Tchitchikoff  listened  and  listened,  looking  the  colonel
steadily  in  the  eye  the  while,  and  he  finally  said  to  himself,
"  Evidently  enough,  there's  no  need  to  stand  on  ceremony  with
this  man."  Thereupon,  he  immediately  stated  that  he  wished
to  buy  some  serfs,  obtain  the  necessary  deeds  of  sale,  and  fulfil
all  the  formalities.

"  So  far  as  I  can  judge  by  your  words,"  said  the  colonel,  in
a  good  deal  of  confusion,  "  this  is  a  request  you  present,  is  it
not?"

"  Exactly  so."

"In  that  case,  put  it  in  writing.  It  will  go  to  the  commis-
sion for  the  reception  of  reports,  which  after  having  passed
opinion  upon  it,  will  send  it  to  me.  From  me  it  will  go  to  the
committee  of  rural  aflairs.  Thence,  after  sundry  amendments,
it  will  pass  to  the  superintendent.  The  superintendent  will
then  communicate  with  my  secretary."

"  Good  gracious ! "  exclaimed  Tchitchikofl".    "  God  knows  how


252  DEAD   SOULS.

long  it  will  take  to  transact  the  business  in  writing !     You  see,
the  souls  I  want  are — after  a  fashion — dead."

"  Very  good.  Then  write  that  the  souls  are,  after  a  fashion,
dead."

"  But  how  can  dead  souls  be  written  down  ?  It  is  impossible
to  inscribe  them  like  that,  for  although  they  are  dead,  it  must
appear  as  though  they  were  alive."

"  Good.  Then  write,  'but  it  is  necessary,  or  it  is  requisite,
it  is  desirable,  it  is  demanded,'  in  fact,  anything  you  like,  'that
they  shall  appear  as  though  alive.'  This  cannot  be  transacted
in  any  other  way  than  by  writing.  England,  and  even  Napo-
leon has  set  the  example.  I  will  detail  a  commissioner,  who
will  conduct  you  to  all  the  departments."

He  touched  a  bell.    A  man,  the  secretary,  made  his  appearance.

"Send  me  a  commissioner!"  The  commissioner,  something
between  a  peasant  and  an  official,  also  appeared.  "  This  man
here  will  conduct  you  to  all  these  indispensable  places."  So
said  the  colonel.

Tchitchikoif  decided  to  accompany  the  commissioner  and
inspect  the  indispensable  departments  out  of  curiosity.  The
department  for  the  reception  of  reports  existed  as  yet  only
upon  the  sign-board,  and  the  doors  were  locked.  The  head  of
affairs  here  had  been  transferred  to  the  newly  instituted  com-
mittee of  rural  building.  His  place  had  at  first  been  supplied
by  the  colonel's  valet,  named  Berezovsky  ;  who  also  had  since
been  ordered  off  to  the  committee  on  construction.  They
knocked  at  the  department  of  rural  aflairs — and  there  things
were  undergoing  re-arrangement ;  however,  finally  they  routed
out  a  drunken  man,  but  got  no  satisfaction  from  him.  "Every-
thing is  in  a  nonsensical  state  here,"  remarked  the  commissioner
to  Tchitchikofi",  at  last.  "The  master  is  being  led  by  the  nose.
The  building  commission  rules  everything  ;  it  tears  everybody
from  his  business,  and  sends  him  wherever  it  sees  fit.  And
the  only  profit  in  the  whole  aftair  is  derived  by  the  commission."
This  fellow  Avas  evidently  displeased  with  the  commission.

When  Tchitchikofi"  glanced  around  him,  he  saw  building  going
on  everywhere.  He  did  not  care  to  push  his  inspection  farther.
On  his  return,  he  told  the  colonel  that  things  were  in  a  bad
way,  that  there  was  nothing  but  confusion  in  the  place,  that  it
was  impossible  to  make  head  or  tail  of  it,  and  that  there  was  no
commission  for  the  reception  of  reports  at  all,  simply  a  desperate
set  of  thieves.

The  colonel  boiled  over  with  righteous  indignation,  pressing
Tchitchikoft's  hand  warmly  in  token  of  his  gratitude.  Then,
immediately  snatching  up  pen  and  paper,  he  wrote  down  eight


TWO   VERY   ECCENTRIC   PERSONS.  253

questions  of  the  most  searching  nature  :  On  what  ground  had
the  building  commission  disposed,  in  this  high-handed  manner,
of  ofBcials  who  were  not  subject  to  its  authority  '?  How  could
the  director-in-chief  permit  the  superintendent  of  works  to  set
out  on  an  investigation  without  having  first  resigned  his  post  ?
And  how  could  the  committee  of  rural  affairs  view  with  indiffer-
ence the  fact  that  the  commission  for  the  reception  of  reports
and  petitions  was  not  in  existence  at  all  ?

"Now  there's  going  to  be  a  storm  !  "  thought  Tchitchikoff,
and  he  tried  to  take  his  leave.

"  No,  I  will  not  let  you  go,"  said  the  colonel.  "  My  personal
pride  is  touched.  I  will  show  you  what  a  regular,  organised
course  of  management  is  like.  I  will  intrust  your  business  to  a
man  who  is  worth  all  the  rest  put  together.  He  has  completed
a  university  education.  That's  the  sort  of  serfs  that  I  have  !
So  as  not  to  waste  any  valuable  time,  I  beg  that  you  will  take  a
seat  in  my  library,"  added  the  colonel,  opening  a  side  door.
"  You  will  find  books,  paper,  pens,  pencils,  and  everything  you
may  require  there.  Make  use  of  them,  make  use  of  them  all;
you  are  the  master  here.     Culture  should  be  free  to  all."

Thus  spoke  Koshkarefi',  as  he  conducted  Tchitchikoff'  into  the
library.  This  was  a  vast  hall,  lined  from  top  to  bottom  with
books.  There  were  even  some  stufied  animals.  The  books
pertained  to  all  branches  of  learning  :  to  forestry,  the  rearing  of
cattle  and  swine,  horticulture,  and  so  on  ;  and  there  were  special
journals  on  every  subject,  such  as  are  disseminated  among  sub-
scribers, but  which  no  one  ever  reads.  Perceiving  that
none  of  these  books  were  adapted  for  passing  the  time,  Tchi-
tchikoff' turned  to  another  case.  This  was  jumping  from  the
frying-pan  into  the  fire.  All  these  were  philosophical  works.
Six  huge  tomes  presented  themselves  to  his  eyes,  with  the  title,
"  Preliminary  Introduction  to  the  Domain  of  Thought ;  or,  The
Theory  of  Universality,  Correlation,  and  Essentiality,  in  its
Application  to  the  Conception  of  the  Organic  Origin  of  the
Keciprocal  Partition  of  Universal  Productiveness."  Turn  the
book  over  as  Tchitchikoff  would,  on  every  page  there  occurred
such  words  as  "phenomenon,"  "development,"  "abstract,"
"  isolation,"  and  "  conjunction,"  and  the  deuce  knows  Avhat
besides.

"This  is  beyond  me  !  "  said  our  hero,  and  he  turned  to  a
third  book-case,  where  all  the  volumes  belonged  to  the  depart-
ment of  art.  Thence  he  drew  out  a  bulky  tome,  with  some
immodest  mythological  pictures,  and  began  to  look  them  over.
That  style  of  picture  pleases  bachelors  of  middle  age,  and  some-


254  DEAD   SOtJLS.

times  even  laoary  old  men,  "wlio  run  after  ballet-dancers  and
other  like  spices.  Having  finished  the  inspection  of  this  book,
Tchitchikoif  was  on  the  point  of  pulling  down  another  of  the
same  description,  when  Colonel  KoshkarefF  made  his  appearance
with  a  beaming  countenance  and  a  document  in  his  hand.

"  It's  all  done,  and  capitally  done  !  The  man  of  whom  I  spoke
to  you  is  a  positive  genius.  For  this  I  shall  place  him  over
them  all,  and  I  shall  establish  an  entire  department  for  him
alone.  See  what  a  clear  head  he  has,  and  how  he  has  settled
everything  in  a  few  minutes."

"  Now,  glory  to  thee,  0  Lord  !  "  thought  Tchitchikoif,  and  he
prepared  to  listen.

The  colonel  on  his  side  began  to  read  : —

"  '  Entering  upon  the  consideration  of  the  commission  in-
trusted to  me  by  your  worship,  I  have  the  honour  to  report  on
it,  as  follows : —

"  '  1st.  The  petition  itself  of  the  collegiate  councillor  and
cavalier,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoif,  contains  a  misconcep-
tion ;  for  the  souls  he  speaks  of  are  styled  dead  through  an
oversight.  By  this  designation  he  has  probably  been  graciously
pleased  to  indicate  those  who  are  near  to  death,  but  not  dead.
And  this  very  designation  bears  witness  to  an  empirical  educa-
tion, obtained,  in  all  probability,  in  a  parish  school ;  for  the
human  soul  is  deathless.'

"'He's  a  sharp  fellow,  said  Colonel  Koshkarefi",  with  satis-
faction. "  He  has  pricked  you  a  little  there.  But  confess,  he
wields  a  clever  pen  !  "

"  '  In  the  second  place,  there  are  no  unmortgaged  souls,
either  among  those  on  the  verge  of  death,  or  of  any  other  sort,
on  the  estate  ;  for  they  all  are  not  only  mortgaged  a  first  time,
without  exception,  but  re-mortgaged,  to  the  amount  of  one
hundred  and  fifty  roubles  a  soul.  Moreover,  as  regards  the
small  hamlet  of  Gurmailovka,  the  situation  there  is  by  no  means
clear,  on  account  of  a  lawsuit  now  being  carried  on  with  the
landowner,  Predishtchefl',  notice  of  which  was  duly  published  in
'  The  Moscow  Gazette,'  of  the  present  year.  No.  42.'  "

"  Then  why  did  not  you  tell  me  so  in  the  first  place  ?  Why
have  you  detained  me  with  your  nonsense  ?  "  inquired  Tchitchi-
koff  angrily.

"  Really,  now  !  Why,  it  was  necessary  that  you  should  be
made  aware  of  all  this  in  writing.  A  fool  can  perceive  a  thing
unintelligently,  but  it  must  be  seen  intelligently."

Tchitchikoff  snatched  up  his  cap  in  a  rage,  and  ran  out  of  the
house,  against  all  decorum.     His  coachman  was  standing  with


TWO   VERY   ECCENTRIC   PERSONS.  255

the  carriage  in  readiness,  for  he  knew  that  he  must  not  un-
harness the  horses,  as  a  written  petition  would  have  had  to  be
presented  for  fodder,  and  an  order  to  serve  out  the  oats  would
only  have  been  issued  on  the  following  day.  Nevertheless,  the
colonel  ran  out  to  accompany  our  hero  to  his  carriage.  He  even
shook  his  hand  warmly,  pressed  it  to  his  heart,  and  thanked
him  for  having  afibrded  him  an  opportunity  of  seeing  how  his
oi'ganisation  operated.  He  said  that  matters  must  be  spurred
up  and  kept  in  motion,  for  everything  was  apt  to  become
drowsy,  and  the  springs  of  an  administration  might  grow  rusty
and  weak.  In  fact,  owing  to  this  incident,. a  happy  thought
had  occurred  to  him :  to  institute  a  commission  which  should
be  entitled  the  commission  of  scrutiny,  with  power  over  the
building  commission,  so  that  then  no  one  would  dare  to  steal
anything  in  future.

Tchitchikoff  went  away  feeling  angry  and  dissatisfied,  and  he
reached  Kostanzhoglo's  house  at  a  late  hour,  when  the  candles
had  already  been  lighted.

"  What  has  detained  you  so  late  ?  "  asked  the  host  when  he
made  his  appearance  at  the  doorway.

"Yes,  what  have  you  been  discussing  at  such  length  with
the  colonel"?  "  inquired  Platonoff.

"  I  have  never  beheld  such  a  fool  since  I  was  born !  "  said
Tchitchikoff.

"  That's  nothing,"  remarked  Kostanzhoglo.  "Koshkareffis
a  consoling  phenomenon.  He  is  useful,  because  in  him  one
sees  reflected,  in  a  grotesque  and  very  striking  manner,  the
follies  of  those  wiseacres,  who,  without  knowing  anything
themselves,  pretend  to  direct  the  world.  He  has  set  up  offices
and  factories  and  schools ;  and  the  deuce  knows  what  he  hasn't
established  !  Xo  sooner  have  he  and  his  fellows  recovered  from
the  effects  of  the  French  invasion  of  the  year  '12,  than  they
must  needs  completely  ruin  themselves  again.  In  fact,  they
have  ruined  themselves  worse  than  the  French  ever  ruined
them  ;  and  thus  it  happens  that  a  certain  Piotr  Petrovitch  Pye-
tukh  is  regarded  as  a  tine  example  of  a  landed  proprietor,"

"  Well,  his  property  is  now  pledged  to  the  Advance  Bank,"
said  Tchitchikoff.

"Just  so!  Everything  is  mortgaged,  everything  will  go  to
the  bank."  Having  spoken  thus,  Kostanzhoglo  began  to  rage
a  little.  "There's  Shlyapkin,  too,  who  has  setup  a  candle-
factory;  he  has  imported  workmen  from  London,  and  has  be-
come a  dealer  in  candles  !  A  respectable  business,  truly,  for  a
landowner  !     He  also  visits  manufacturers  and  factory  owners,


256  DEAD   SOULS.

and  lie  sets  up  spinning  machines,  and  makes  calico  for  tlie
liussies  and  the  women  of  the  town."

"But  you  have  factories  yourself,"  remarked Tchitchikoff.

"  And  who  established  them  ?  They  established  themselves.
The  wool  accumulated  :  there  was  no  way  of  getting  it  off  my
bands,  and  I  began  to  weave  cloth,  coarse  cloth,  merely  suited
to  moujiks,  my  moujiks.  However,  some  of  it  is  purchased
from  me  at  the  fairs  because  of  its  cheapness.  For  six  years  in
succession,  too,  the  fishermen  piled  up  fish-scales  on  my  shores.
And  what  was  to  be  done  with  them  ?  So  I  began  to  boil  them
down  into  glue,  and  I  have  made  forty  thousand  roubles  out  of
them.     And  that's  the  way  everything  goes  with  me."

"  What  a  devil  of  a  fellow  !  "  thought  Tchitchikoff,  staring  at
his  host  with  all  his  eyes.  "  What  claws  he  has  for  raking  in
money !  "

"And  then,  I  have  undertaken  these  things  from  another
motive.  I  have  drawn  together  a  number  of  labourers,  who
Avould  otherwise  have  died  of  hunger.  It  is  a  famine  year,  and
all  through  the  fault  of  the  manufacturers,  who  neglected  to  sow
crops.  Many  factories  have  accumulated  on  my  hands,  my
friend.  A  new  one  springs  up  every  year,  simply  because  scraps
and  refuse  of  some  kind  or  other  have  accumulated.  Only  con-
sider domestic  economy  attentively.  Every  sort  of  rubbish  will
yield  a  revenue."

"  This  is  astounding !  So,  rubbish  jjields  a  revenue,"  said
Tchitchikoff

However,  Kostanzhoglo  now  broke  into  a  bitter  speech  about
what  he  called  the  Don  Quixotism  of  the  Russian  character,
and  Tchitchikoff,  who  wanted  to  catechise  his  host  in  detail  as
to  the  manner  in  which  every  sort  of  rubbish  could  be  made  to
produce, a  revenue,  had  no  chance  to  interpolate  a  word.

"  People  imagine,"  said  the  host,  "  that  they  are  enlightening
the  peasant.  Just  make  him  rich  first,  and  a  good  manager,
and  the  rest  will  be  his  business.  But  nowadays  everybody  is
more  stupid  than  it  is  possible  for  one  to  conceive.  Just  see
what  these  scribblers  write  now  !  They  put  forth  some  little
book,  and  all  men  dart  upon  it.  And  this  is  what  they  say :
'  The  peasant  leads  a  very  simple,  a  too  simple,  drowsy  life.  He
must  be  made  acquainted  with  articles  of  luxury  :  he  must  be
made  to  feel  the  need  of  a  higher  civilisation.'  They  them-
selves, thanks  to  this  luxury,  have  become  rags,  and  not  men,
contracting  the  deuce  knows  what  diseases.  There  is  no  longer
a  little  boy  of  eighteen  who  has  not  already  tried  everything ;
he  has  no  teeth  left  him,  and  he's  as  bald  as  a  bladder.     So  now


TWO    VERY   ECCENTRIC    PERSONS.  257

they  want  to  infect  the  peasants  also.  But,  thank  God  !  there  is
one  healthy  class  stillleft  among  us  which  has  not  been  initiated
into  all  the  vices.  For  this  we  simply  owe  thanks  to  God.  The
agriculturist  is  the  most  honourable  man  among  us.  "Why  do
we  meddle  with  him  ?  Would  to  God  that  all  men  were  like
the  husbandman."

"  So  you  assume  that  agriculture  is  the  most  profitable  call-
ing to  which  a  man  can  devote  himself?  "  inquired  Tchitchikoflf.

"  It  is  the  most  legitimate,  but  not  the  most  profitable.  '  Thou
shalt  till  the  earth  in  the  sweat  of  thy  brow,'  it  has  been  said.
There's  nothing  surprising  about  that.  It  has  already  been
proved,  by  the  experience  of  ages,  that  man  is  more  moral,
purer,  nobler,  more  lofty,  when  engaged  in  the  profession  of
agriculture.  I  do  not  say,  refrain  from  engaging  in  anything
else,  but  let  agriculture  lie  at  the  foundation — that's  all.  Fac-
tories will  arise  of  themselves,  and  factories  of  a  legitimate  sort,
just  what  is  needed  here,  under  the  hand  of  a  man  who  is  him-
self on  the  spot.  Not  the  sort  of  factories  where  all  manner  of
vile  means  are  resorted  to,  and  the  wretched  populace  is  demo-
ralised and  depraved.  Say  what  you  like  about  luxuries,  I  shall
not  establish  on  my  estate  any  of  those  things  which  create  a
demand  for  tobacco  or  sugar,  for  instance.  If  vice  must  enter
the  world,  it  shan't  be  through  my  instrumentality.  I  will  be
righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.  I  have  been  living  among  the
people  for  twelve  years,  and  I  know  what's  what."

"  The  most  wonderful  thing  to  me  is  your  statement,  that  by
judicious  management  profit  may  be  derived  from  scraps  and
remnants,  and  that  every  sort  of  refuse  will  give  an  income,"  said
Tchitchikofi".  "  For  instance,  if  I  became  a  landed  proprietor,
and  wanted  to  enrich  myself  in  a  brief  space  of  time,  so  that  I
might  fulfil  the  highest  duties  of  a  citizen,  in  what  manner
should  I  set  about  it  ?  "

*'  How  ought  you  to  proceed,  in  order  to  become  wealthy  ?  "
replied  Kostanzhoglo.    **  Ah,  that's  the  point !  "

"  Come,  let  us  go  to  supper !  "  said  the  hostess,  rising  from
the  sofa,  and  stepping  into  the  middle  of  the  room,  where  she
wrapped  her  shivering  limbs  in  a  shawl.

Tchitchikoflf  sprang  from  his  chair  with  almost  the  same  agility
that  a  military  man  would  have  shown,  flew  to  the  hostess  with
the  suave  expression  of  a  delicate  statesman  on  his  countenance,
oflTered  her  his  arm  with  a  flourish,  and  escorted  her  through
two  apartments  to  the  dining-room,  where  the  soup-tureen  was
already  standing  on  the  table,  with  its  cover  off",  and  exhaling
an  agreeable  odour  of  fresh  herbs  and  spring  vegetables.     They

B


258  DEAD   SOULS.

all  seated  themselves  at  table.  The  servants  quickly  placed  all  the
courses  on  the  table,  in  covered  dishes,  together  M'ith  every-
thing that  -was  necessary,  and  then  quitted  the  room.  Kostanz-
hoglo  did  not  like  to  have  the  servants  listen  to  the  conversa-
tion of  their  superiors,  and  still  less  to  have  them  stare  at  him
while  he  was  engaged  in  eating.

*'  You  were  speaking  of  becoming  a  landowner,"  he  said  at
last,  addressing  our  hero. ,  "  Well,  there  is  the  estate  of  my  neigh-
bour, Khlobuyoff,  for  sale.  Why  don't  you  buy  it  ?  It  is  a
splendid  chance  ;  and  I  would  pay  him  forty  thousand  roubles
for  it  on  the  spot,  if  he  demanded^ that  sum."

"H'm!"  said  Tchitchitoff,  and  he  fell  into  thought.  "But
why,"  he  at  last  inquired,  with  some  hesitation,  "  why  do  you
not  purchase  it  yourself?  "

"  One  must  know  how  to  draw  the  line  somewhere.  I  have
a  great  many  worries  connected  with  my  present  estate,  with-
out assuming  any  more  responsibilities.  Moreover,  the  noble-
men of  the  district  are  crying  out  against  me,  asserting  that
I  have  taken  advantage  of  their  need  and  bankrupt  condition —
indeed,  that  I  am  buying  up  all  the  land  for  a  song,  and  so  I
have  grown  tired  of  it  all."

"  How  inclined  people  are  to  evil  speaking  !  "  said  Tchitchi-
koff.

"  Particularly  in  our  province :  it  is  something  you  can't
conceive.  They  never  mention  me  otherwise  than  as  a  niggard
and  a  miser  of  the  first  water.  They  make  excuses  for  them-
selves on  every  point.  '  I  certainly  have  been  a  spendthrift,'
one  of  them  will  say  ;  '  but  that  was  because  I  lived  in
accordance  with  the  higher  requirements  of  life,  and  encouraged
tradesmen,  that  is  to  say,  rascals.  Of  course,  I  might  have
lived  like  a  hog,  as  that  Kostanzhoglo  does.'  "

"  I  should  like  to  be  such  a  hog  !  "  said  Tchitchikojff.

"  And  all  that  is  so  much  falsehood  and  nonsense.  The
higher  requirements,  forsooth  !  Why  are  they  so  lauded  ?
These  fellows  buy  books,  indeed,  but  then  they  don't  read
them.  The  matter  ends  in  cards  and  champagne.  And  all  this
comes  of  my  not  giving  them  dinners,  and  lending  them  money.
I  don't  give  them  dinners,  simply  because  it  would  bore  me  to
entertain  them :  I  am  not  accustomed  to  parties.  But  if  any
one  will  come  and  eat  what  I  eat  myself — take  pot-luck  with  me,
as  the  saying  goes — I  am  very  glad  to  have  him.  I  don't  lend
money !  What  nonsense.  Come  to  me  in  a  case  of  absolute
need,  and  tell  me  the  circumstances,  and  how  you  propose  to
use  my  money  ;  if  I  see  from  your  words,  that  you  will  employ


TAVO  VERY  ECCENTRIC  PERSONS.  259

it  sensibly,  and  that  the  money  will  clearly  be  of  advantage  to
you,  I  won't  refuse  ;  I  won't  even  ask  you  for  interest."

"  This  must  be  taken  into  consideration,"  thought  Tchitchi-
koff.

"  And  I  seldom,  if  ever,  refuse,"  proceeded  Kostanzhoglo.
"  But  fling  my  money  to  the  winds,  I  won't.  You  must
excuse  my  not  doing  that.  Deuce  take  the  man  who  does  it !
He  will  spend  his  cash  on  dinners  for  his  mistress,  or  he  will
furnish  his  house  in  a  mad  style,  or  he  will  get  up  some  sort  of
a  jubilee  in  memory  of  the  fact  that  he  has  lived  his  life  in  vain.
There's  no  use  in  lending  such  a  man  money  !  "

Here  Kostanzhoglo  spat,  and  came  near  uttering  some  violent
and  indelicate  words  in  the  presence  of  his  wife.  The  gloomy
tint  of  hypochondria  darkened  his  countenance.  Vertical  and
horizontal  wrinkles,  the  witnesses  of  the  wrathful  movement
of  his  spleen  which  had  been  so  excited,  collected  on  his  brow.
"  Permit  me,  honoured  sir,  to  again  recall  you  to  the  subject
of  our  interrupted  conversation,"  said  Tchitchikoflf,  drinking
another  glass  of  wine.  "  Suppose,  for  instance,  that  I  were  to
acquire  the  property  which  you  were  so  good  as  to  mention  ;
then  how  much  time  would  be  required  for  me  to  become
sufficiently  wealthy  to — "

"  If  you  wish,"  interrupted  Kostanzhoglo  gruffly  and  abruptly,
being  still  in  an  irritated  frame  of  mind,  "  If  you  wish  to  grow
rich  in  a  short  space  of  time,  you  will  never  become  wealthy  at
all  ;  but  if  you  wish  to  enrich  yourself,  without  concerning
yourself  as  to  the  time  required,  you  can  speedily  become  rich.
Yes,"  went  on  Kostanzhoglo,  still  abruptly,  as  though  he  were
personally  incensed  with  TchitchikofF,  "it  is  necessary  to  feel
a  love  for  work  :  without  that,  nothing  can  be  accomplished.
You  must  love  the  management  of  your  estate.  And,  believe
me,  it  is  not  at  all  wearisome.  People  have  invented  a  fiction
to  the  eftect  that  it  is  dull  in  the  country.  I  should  die  of
dulness  if  I  were  to  pass  a  single  day  in  the  city,  as  people  do
pass  their  days  there,  in  those  stupid  clubs  and  inns  and
theatres.  Fools  !  idiots  !  asses  they  are  !  The  manager  of  an
estate  has  no  time  to  be  dull.  Look  at  the  yearly  round  of
work.  See  how,  even  before  the  advent  of  spring,  ever3'thing
is  already  on  the  watch ;  there  is  the  preparation  of  the  seeds,
the  sorting,  the  measuring  of  the  grain  in  the  barns,  and
the  drying.  Everything  is  scanned  beforehand,  and  everything
reckoned  up.  And  when  the  ice  breaks  up,  and  the  streams
pour  down,  and  the  earth  warms  up,  then  the  spade  does  its
work  in  vegetable  garden  and  orchard,   and  the  plough  and


260  DEAD    SOULS.

harrow  perform  theirs  in  the  fields  ;  and  then  come  planting  and
sowing.  Well,  the  future  harvest  is  sown,  the  blessing  of  the
world  is  sown,  the  food  of  millions  is  sown  !  And  then  follows
the  haymaking.  And  then  summer  has  arrived.  All  at  once
the  reaping  is  in  full  swing  :  the  wheat  has  come  up  after  the
rye,  and  next  the  barley  and  the  oats.  Everything  is  seething  ;
it  is  impossible  to  lose  a  minute.  If  you  had  twenty  eyes,  there
would  be  work  for  all  of  them.  And  when  everything  is  done — •
the  grain  carried  to  the  threshing-floor,  and  stored  in  the
granaries — then  begins  the  autumn  ploughing  of  the  stubble,  the
preparing  of  the  storehouses  for  the  winter,  the  ricks  and  the
cattle-pens  to  see  to,  and,  at  the  same  time,  all  the  women's
work.  And  then  in  the  winter,  the  threshing  and  the  removal  of
the  grain  to  the  granaries ;  the  felling  and  sawing  of  the  trees
in  the  forest ;  the  conveyance  of  bricks  and  timber  for  building
operations  in  the  spring.  You  go  to  the  mill,  you  go  to  the
factory,  you  go  to  inspect  the  workmen's  quarters,  you  go  to  the
peasants'  cabins  to  see  how  they  are  getting  on  there.  Yes,  for
my  part,  if  a  carpenter  handles  his  axe  well,  I  am  ready  to
stand  and  watch  him  for  two  hours,  such  a  cheering  eflect  does
work  produce  upon  me.  But  if  you  can  also  see  with  what
object  all  this  is  being  done,  how  everything  about  you  is  mul-
tiplying and  increasLQg,  bearing  increase  and  income — 'Well,  I
cannot  express  what  takes  place  in  your  spirit  then.  And  it  is
not  because  your  money  is  uicreasing — money  is  nothing  in
itself — but  because  all  this  is  the  work  of  your  own  hands,
because  j^ou  see  that  you  are  the  source  of  it  all  ;  that  you  are
the  creator,  and  that  from  you,  as  from  some  magician,  good
and  abundance  are  showered  upon  all.  Now,  where  else  will  you
find  me  such  another  enjoyment  ?  "  said  Kostanzhoglo  ;  and,
as  he  raised  his  face,  the  wrinkles  disappeared  from  it.  He  was
radiant,  like  an  emperor  on  the  day  of  his  solemn  coronation,
and  flashes  of  light  seemed  to  radiate  from  his  countenance.
'*  Yes,  in  the  whole  world,  you  will  not  find  any  other  such
pleasure.  Just  in  this  does  man  imitate  God.  God  prescribed
to  himself  the  task  of  creation  as  the  loftiest  of  all  enjoyments.
And  he  demands  the  same  thing  from  man,  in  order  that  man,
like  his  Creator,  may  distribute  happiness  around  him.  And  yet
this  is  called  a  tiresome  task  !  "

Tchitchikoflf  listened  to  his  host's  melodious  speech  as  to  the
song  of  heavenly  birds.  His  mouth  watered.  His  very  eyes
grew  moist,  and  expressed  beatitude.

'*  Konstantin,  it  is  time  to  go,"  said  the  mistress  of  the  house,
rising  from  the  table.     They  all  rose  up.     Tchitchikoff  ofiered


TWO    VERY   ECCENTRIC   PERSONS.  261

his  arm  with  a  flourish,  and  conducted  his  hostess  back  to  the
drawing-room  ;  but  his  movements  now  lacked  their  former
agility,  for  his  thoughts  were  now  all  bent  on  practical  matters.

"You  may  say  what  you  like,  a  country  life  is  tiresome  all
the  same,"  said  Platonoff,  as  he  walked  behind  them.

"  My  guest  isn't  a  stupid  man,"  meanwhile  thought  the  host.
"  He  is  attentive,  and  cautious  of  speech."

When  they  had  all  settled  themselves  in  a  comfortable  little
room  opposite  a  balcony,  with  a  glass  door  leading  into  the
garden,  and  had  gazed  dreamily  at  the  stars  shining  above  the
crests  of  the  trees  in  the  sleeping  garden,  Tchitchikoff  expe-
rienced an  agreeable  sensation,  such  as  he  had  not  felt  for  a
long  time,  exactly  as  though  his  native  roof  had  at  length,  after
his  prolonged  wanderings,  received  him  once  more,  and  as  if,  to
crown  all,  he  had  accomplished  everything  which  he  had  desired,
and  had  cast  aside  his  pilgrim's  staff,  saying.  Enough !  Such
wonderful  eflect  had  his  host's  discourse  produced  upon  him.

That  night  when  he  went  to  bed  he  did  not  sleep.  His
thoughts  kept  him  awake.  He  was  meditating  how  he  might
become  the  owner,  not  of  a  fanciful,  but  of  a  real,  estate.  If  he
could  only  mortgage  those  dead  souls,  and  acquire  some  pro-
perty which  was  not  in  cloudland  !  He  already  beheld  himself
actively  engaged  in  directing  things,  just  as  Kostanzhoglo  had
instructed  him — swiftly,  and  yet  cautiously,  watching  every-
thing with  his  own  eyes,  making  himself  personally  acquainted
with  all  the  peasants,  devoting  himself  solely  to  labour  and
to  the  management  of  affairs.  He  tasted,  in  anticipation,  the
pleasure  which  he  would  experience  when  he  had  instituted
strict  order,  and  when  all  the  springs  of  the  domestic  machine
were  acting  vigorously,  propelling  one  another.  Work  pressed ;
and  just  as  flour  is  rapidly  ground  from  the  grain  in  a  mill,  so
cash,  hard  cash,  was  being  continually  extracted  from  all  sorts
of  scraps  and  refuse.  His  host  was  the  first  man  in  all  Russia
for  whom  he  had  experienced  a  personal  respect.  So  far,  he
had  respected  a  man  either  for  his  high  official  rank  or  for  his
possessions.  Never  yet  had  he  respected  any  man  for  his  mind
alone.  Kostanzhoglo  was  the  first,  and  our  hero  understood  that
he  could  not  play  any  tricks  on  him.  Another  project,  moreover,
engrossed  his  thoughts — that  of  purchasing  Khlobuyoff's  estate.
He  had  ten  thousand  roubles  of  his  own,  and  he  thought  of  trying
to  borrow  fifteen  thousand  from  Kostanzhoglo,  since  the  latter
had  already  declared  that  he  was  ready  to  assist  any  man  who
was  desirous  of  becoming  wealthy.  The  rest  he  might  require
must  be  obtained  in  some  other  way,  either  by  mortgage  or


262  DEAD    SOULS.

simply  by  making  KUobuyoff  wait.  That  was  possible,  too,
surely.  And  be  pondered  upon  the  subject  for  a  long  time.  At
length  Morpheus,  who  had  held  all  the  household  in  his  em-
brace for  fully  four  hours  already,  clasped  Tchitchikoff  also  to
his  bosom.     He  fell  into  a  sound  sleep  and  began  to  snore.


V  CHAPTER  XV.


U        i^      J  LUXURY    AND    INDIGENCE.

\t^  1  "On  the  following  day  everything  was  arranged  in  the  best  pos-
^  r^J~  sible  manner.  Kostanzhoglo  gladly  lent  our  hero  ten  thousand
roubles,  without  interest  or  security — on  his  simple  note  of
hand:  so  ready,  indeed,  was  he  to  assist  anyone  on  the  road
to  wealth.  He  showed  Tchitchikoff  all  over  his  establishment.
With  him,  not  a  single  moment  was  lost ;  noting  ran  to  waste ;
not  the  slightest  irregularity  took  place  among  his  villagers.
There  was  not  a  sluggard  anywhere.  Intelligence  and  content-
ment beamed  upon  the  faces  of  his  peasants.  Everything  was
so  simply  and  sensibly  arranged  that  it  worked  itself.  The  alter-
nations of  forest  and  tilled  land  could  not  fail  to  astonish  Tchi-
tchikoff. How  much  this  man  had  accomplished,  without  making
any  noise  in  the  world,  without  composing  projects  or  treatises
about  the  manner  of  insuring  the  well-being  of  all  mankind !
And  how  useless  is  the  life  of  the  man  who  dwells  in  towns,
who  frequents  taverns  and  dances  over  polished  floors  !  At  this
thought  Tchitchikoff"s  desire  to  become  a  landowner  grew
stronger  than  ever.

Kostanzhoglo  himself  offered  to  accompany  our  hero  to
Khlobuyoff's  in  order  to  inspect  the  estate  with  him.  Tchi-
tchikoff" was  in  fine  spirits.  After  a  hearty  breakfast,  they  set
out,  all  three,  including  Platonoff,  riding  in  Pavel  Ivanovitch's
calash ;  the  host's  empty  prolyotka  ''•'  followed  them.  The
dog,  Yarb,  ran  on  in  front,  chasing  the  birds  from  the  road.
Kostanzhoglo's  forests  and  tilled  fields  stretched  for  fifteen
versts  on  both  sides  of  the  highway.  As  soon  as  their  limit
was  reached,  everything  assumed  a  very  different  aspect :  the
grain  was  sickly,  and  stumps  took  the  place  of  trees.  Khlo-
buyoff''s  little  village  seemed  deserted,  in  spite  of  its  fine  situa-
*  A  circular  drozliky.


LUXURY   AND    INDIGENCE.  263

tion.  The  new  stone  mansion,  which  had  remained  in  an
unfinished  state  and  uninhabited  for  several  years,  stood  out
most  prominently  of  all ;  and  behind  it  was  the  little  old  manor-
house,  which  was  still  used  as  a  residence.  They  found  the
master  of  the  place  unkempt  and  yawning,  having  but  just
awoke.  He  was  forty  years  of  age  ;  his  neckerchief  was  knotted
on  one  side ;  there  was  a  patch  on  his  surtout,  and  there  were
holes  in  his  shoes.

•  God  knows  what  his  delight  at  seeing  his  visitors  was  :  it
was  as  though  he  had  beheld  some  brothers,  from  whom  he  had
been  separated  for  a  very  long  time.

"  Konstantin  Feodorovitch  !  Platon  Mikhailovitch  !  You  have
honoured  me  with  a  visit!  "  he  exclaimed.  "Let  me  rub  my
eyes.  I  really  thought  that  no  one  was  ever  coming  to  see  me
again.  Everybody  Hies  from  me,  as  from  the  plague  :  they
think  that  I  want  to  try  to  borrow  money  from  them.  Oh,  it's
hard,  hard,  Konstantin  Feodorovitch !  I  see  that  I  alone  am
to  blame.  But  what  am  I  to  do  ?  The  pig  has  earned  his
pig's  fate.  Excuse  me,  gentlemen,  for  receiving  you  in  such  a
costume  :  my  boots,  as  you  see,  are  full  of  holes.  What  refresh-
ment will  you  take  ?  "

"  Do  not  stand  on  ceremony.  We  have  come  on  business.
Here  is  a  purchaser  for  your  estate,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchi-
tchikoff,''  said  Kostanzhoglo.

"I  am  heartily  glad  to  make  your  acquaintance.  Allow  me
to  shake  hands  with  you."

Tchitchikolf  gave  him  both  his  hands.

"  I  should  very  much  like  to  show  you  the  estate,  which  is
worthy  of  your  attention,  Pavel  Ivanovitch.  But  permit  me  to
inquire,  gentlemen,  whether  you  have  dined  ?  "

"  Yes,  yes,"  said  Kostanzhoglo,  desirous  of  dismissing  the
subject.  "  We  will  not  trespass  on  your  hospitality,  and  we  are
going  back  directly."

"In  that  case,  let  us  start,"  said  Khlobuyoff,  taking  up  his
cap.     "  Let  us  go  and  inspect  my  disorder  and  thriftlessness."

The  guests  put  on  their  caps,  and  all  set  out  on  foot  to  survey
the  village.  Almost  every  street  was  lined  on  both  sides  with
wretched  huts,  the  tiny,  shattered  windows  of  which  were  filled
up  with  foot-cloths.*

"  Yes,  let  us  go  and  inspect  my  disorder  and  thriftlessness,"
repeated  Khlobuyoff.  "  Of  course,  it  is  as  well  for  you  that  you
have   dined.     Will  you  believe  it,    Konstantin  Feodorovitch?

*  The  long  strips  of  cloth  which  peasants  wind  about  thcii-  feet  in  place
of  stockings.


264  BEAD   SOULS.

there  is  not  a  single  chicken  in  the  house,  to  such  straits  have
I  come  !  "

He  sighed  ;  and,  as  though  sensible  that  he  would  meet  with
but  little  sympathy  from  Konstantin  Feodorovitch,  he  took  Pia-
tonoff's  arm,  and  pressing  it  close  to  his  breast,  he  walked  on  in
advance  with  him.  Kostanzhoglo  and  Tchitchikoff  remained
behind,  and,  linking  arms,  followed  the  other  pair  at  a  dis-
tance.

"  It's  hard,  Platon  Mikhailovitch,  it's  hard  !  "  said  Khlobuyoflf
to  Platonoflf.  "  You  cannot  conceive  how  hard  it  is.  No  money,
no  food,  no  shoes  !  These  are  surely  words  in  an  unknown
tongue  to  you.  All  this  would  be  but  a  trifle  were  I  but  young
and  alone.  But  when  all  these  misfortunes  attack  you  in  your
old  age,  when  you  have  a  wife  and  five  children  by  your  side,
then  you  grow  sad  involuntarily,  you  grow  sad."

"  Well,  and  if  you  were  to  sell  your  estate,  wouldn't  that  set
3'ou  right  ?  "

"  Set  me  right  indeed  !  "  exclaimed  Khlobuyoff,  with  a  wave
of  the  hand.  "  Everything  must  go  to  pay  my  debts,  and  there
won't  be  a  thousand  roubles  left  for  me."

"  Then  what  are  you  going  to  do  ?  "

"  God  knows  !  "

"  Why  do  you  not  undertake  something  to  extricate  yourself
from  such  a  position  ?  "

"  What  should  I  undertake  ?  "

"  Get  some  employment."

**  I  was  a  governmental  secretary.  But  what  sort  of  a  place
would  they  give  me  now  ?  How  am  I  to  accept  some  paltry
remuneration  of  five  hundred  roubles  or  so  ?  I  have  a  wife  and
five  children,  remember."

"  Get  a  situation  as  overseer."

"  And  who  would  intrust  his  property  to  me  ?  I  have  ruined
my  own."

"  Well,  but  if  hunger  and  death  threaten,  something  must  be
done.  I  will  ask  my  brother  whether  he  cannot  get  you  some
employment  through  someone  in  the  city."

''  No,  Platon  Mikhailovitch,"  replied  Khlobuyofi",  sighing,  and
pressing  his  hand  warmly.  "  I  am  good  for  nothing  now.  I  have
become  decrepit  before  my  time,  and  my  loins  ache  from  my  old
sins,  and  I  have  rheumatism  in  my  shoulders.  Of  what  use  am
I '?  And  besides,  a  great  many  lucrative  places  have  already
been  established  for  the  benefit  of  useless  people.  God  forbid
that  the  taxes  of  the  poorer  classes  should  be  increased  on  my
account !  "


LUXURY   AND    INDIGENCE.  265

"  Behold  the  fruits  of  dissipation  !  "  thought  Platonoff,  "  This
is  worse  than  my  heedlessness."

In  the  meantime,  while  they  had  been  thus  conversing,  Kos-
tanzhoglo,  as  he  walked  behind  them  with  Tchitchikoff",  was
quite  beside  himself  with  rage.

"  Just  see,"  said  Kostanzhoglo,  pointing  with  his  finger,  *'  to
what  a  state  of  misery  he  has  reduced  his  peasants  !  Why,
there  are  neither  carts  nor  horses  here.  If  murrain  breaks  out
a  man  ought  not  to  consider  his  own  property.  He  ought  to  sell
all  his  own  belongings  at  once,  and  provide  the  peasant  with
cattle,  in  order  that  he  may  not  be  left  for  a  single  day  without
the  means  of  pursuing  his  work.  However,  things  cannot  be
remedied  for  years  here.  The  peasants  have  become  lazy,  dis-
sipated drunkards.  If  you  ever  allow  them  to  remain  without
work  for  even  one  year,  you  ruin  them  for  ever  ;  they  grow  used
to  rags  and  a  vagabond  life.  And  what  land  !  Look  at  the  land  !  "
he  said,  pointing  to  the  fields,  which  soon  made  their  appear-
ance behind  the  cabins.  "  They  are  all  water-meadows.  I
could  raise  flax,  and  make  five  thousand  roubles  out  of  that
alone.  I  could  plant  beets,  and  get  four  thousand  out  of  them.
And  look  yonder  ;  on  the  slope  a  forest  formerly  arose  :  there  is
nothing  now.  He  has  planted  no  grain — -I  know  that.  And
look  at  those  valleys.  I  would  raise  such  a  forest  there  that
the  crows  could  not  fly  to  the  top  of  it.  The  idea  of  flinging
away  such  treasures  of  land  !  And  if  there  was  nothing  to
plough  with,  he  might  have  cultivated  the  vegetable  garden  with
a  spade  :  he  might  have  undertaken  that  garden  himself.  Take
the  spade  in  your  own  hand  ;  make  your  wife,  your  children,
your  servants  do  it  too ;  if  you  must  die  beasts,  at  all  events
die  over  your  work.  You  will  then  at  least  die  in  the  fulfilment
of  your  duty  ;  and  if  not,  you  can  eat  yourself  for  dinner  like  a
pig  !  "  So  saying,  Kostanzhoglo  spat,  and  his  splenetic  temper
darkened  his  brow  with  a  gloomy  cloud.

When  they  advanced  farther,  and  stood  upon  the  crest  of  a
declivity  overgrown  with  cytisus,  and  looked  down  upon  the
gleaming  bends  of  the  river,  first  at  the  distant  valley,  where  a
portion  of  General  Betrishtchefi"s  house  peeped  forth  from  the
encircling  forest,  and  then  at  the  wooded  hill  beyond,  veiled  in
the  blue  mist  of  distance,  Tchitchikoft'  suddenly  said,  "  If  some
nice  groves  were  planted  here,  the  village  would  transcend  every-
thing in  the  world  in  beauty."

"  So  you  are  a  lover  of  tine  prospects  !  "  said  Kostanzhoglo,
with  a  quick,  stern  glance  at  him.  "  Look  here  !  if  you  take  to
running  after  views,  you  will  be  left  with  no  bread.     Look  out


266  DEAD   SOULS.

for  your  fields,  and  not  for  beauty.  Beauty  will  come  of  itself.
Let  it  serve  you  for  an  example,  that  the  best  and  handsomest
cities  are  those  where  each  man  has  built  according  to  his  own
convenience  and  taste.  Those  which  have  been  built  by  rule
are  nothing  but  a  collection  of  barracks.  Away  with  beauty  !
Look  to  practical  results  !  "

"It's  a  pity  that  it  is  necessary  to  wait  so  long  ;  I  should  so
like  to  see  everything  in  the  proper  condition."

"Patience  !  Work  for  a  few  years  :  plant,  sow,  till  the  soil,
without  a  moment's  rest.  It  is  hard,  very  hard  ;  but  later  on,
when  the  earth  has  been  well  turned  over^  it  will  begin  to  assist
you  of  itself,  just  as  though  it  were  a  machine.  Yes,  my  dear
felloAv,  over  and  above  your  seventy  hands  or  so,  seven  hundred
invisible  ones  will  begin  to  toil.  Everything  will  be  increased
tenfold.  I  never  move  a  finger  now— everything  runs  by  itself.
Yes,  Nature  loves  patience ;  that  is  the  law  which  God  himself
has  prescribed  to  her."

"  When  I  listen  to  you,  I  am  conscious  of  a  great  access  of
force.     My  courage  rises,"  said  Tchitchikoff".

"  That's  a  nice  way  to  plough  land !  "  exclaimed  Kostanz-
hoglo,  with  a  keen  feeling  of  indignation,  pointing  to  the  slope.
"  I  can't  stay  here  any  longer  ;  it's  death  to  me  to  gaze  upon
such  disorder  and  desolation  !  You  can  come  to  an  understand-
ing with  him  now,  without  my  assistance.  Get  this  treasure  out
of  that  fool's  hands  as  speedily  as  possible.  He  is  only  dis-
honouring the  gifts  of  God."  So  saying,  Kostanzhoglo,  who  was
already  clouded  by  the  bilious  disposition  of  his  perturbed  spirit,
took  leave  of  Tchitchikoff,  and,  having  overtaken  their  host,
began  to  say  farewell  to  him.

"  I  beseech  you,  Konstantin  Feodorovitch,"  said  the  astonished
host ;  "  you  have  only  just  arrived,  and  yet  you  are  going  al-
ready! "

"  I  can't  stay.  I  have  an  imperative  engagement  at  home,"
replied  Kostanzhoglo.  Whereupon  he  hastily  took  leave,  seated
himself  in  his  carriage,  and  drove  off".

It  seemed  as  though  Khlobuyoff  understood  the  cause  of  his
departure.

"Konstantin  Feodorovitch  cannot  stand  it,"  said  he;  "it  is
not  pleasant  for  such  a  manager  as  he  is  to  look  at  this  dis-
order. Believe  me,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  I  did  not  even  plant  grain
this  year.  As  sure  as  I  am  an  honest  man,  I  had  no  seed,  not
to  mention  the  fact  that  there  were  no  means  of  ploughing.  They
say  that  your  brother  is  a  capital  manager,  Platon  Mikhailo-
vitcli ;  but  Konstantin  Feodorovitch — well,  he's  a  Napoleon  in


LUXURY    AND    INDIGENCE.  26?

his  own  liDe.  In  truth,  I  often  think,  why  are  so  much  brains
put  into  one  head  ?  Why  couldn't  I  at  least  have  one  little  bit
in  my  own  stupid  noddle  '?  Look  to  yourselves,  gentlemen  ;
walk  cautiously  over  the  bridge  lest  you  tumble  into  the  pool.
I  ordered  the  planks  to  be  repaired  last  spring.  What  I  feel
most  compunction  about  is  my  poor  peasants  ;  I  perceive  the
need  of  an  example  for  them,  but  what  sort  of  an  example  am  I
for  anyone  ?  And  what  am  I  to  do  '?  I  cannot  be  exacting  and
strict.  How  am  I  to  inculcate  order  in  them,  when  I  am  so  dis-
orderly myself '?  Take  them  under  your  charge,  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch.  I  should  have  given  them  their  liberty  long  ago,  but  that
it  would  have  been  of  disadvantage  to  anyone.  I  see  that  it  is
necessaiy  first  of  all  td'  bring  them  to  such  a  state  that  they
shall  know  how  to  order  their  own  lives.  It  is  requisite  that  a
man  should  be  stern  and  just,  and  live  among  them,  in  order  to
produce  an  efi'ect  on  them  by  his  own  example  and  his  unweary-
ing activity.  I  perceive,  from  my  own  case,  that  the  Kussian
man  cannot  get  along  without  someone  to  urge  him  forwards  :
without  that  he  falls  dozing,  and  decays."

"  It  is  strange,"  said  Platonoti',  "  that  a  Russian  should  be
capable  of  thus  falling  into  drowsiness  and  decay  ;  that,  unless
you  watch  the  man  of  the  lower  classes  with  all  your  eyes,  he
turns  out  a  drunkard  and  good-for-nothing  !  "

"  That  arises  from  the  lack  of  civilisation,"  remarked  Tchit-
chikotf.

"  God  knows  what  is  the  cause  of  it !  "  went  on  Khlobuyoff,
"  Surely,  we  are  civilised.  I  have  attended  lectures  at  the  uni-
versity, and  what  have  I  to  show  for  being  at  the  university  ?
Come,  now,  what  have  I  learned  ?  They  not  only  did  not  teach
me  to  live  an  orderly  life,  but  they  even  tried  their  best  to  teach
me  the  art  of  spending  as  much  money  as  possible  on  every
new  refinement  or  comfort,  and  they  made  me  acquainted  with
.IS  many  matters  as  possible  which  require  the  expenditure  of
money.  Why  was  I  educated  in  so  senseless  a  way  ?  Yes,  and
look  at  my  comrades.  Two  or  three  of  them  derived  some  real
advantage  from  it,  and  possibly  because  they  would  have  been
sensible  in  any  case  ;  but  the  rest  only  endeavoured  to  learn
things  which  ruin  the  health  and  entice  money  from  one's
pocket.  Ting,  we  always  select  in  civilisation  the  things  which
are  the  worst  of  all ;  we  grasp  the  surface,  but  not  the  substance. ,
Ko,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  we  do  hot  understand  how  to  live,  but  for
what  cause,  by  Heaven  !  I  cannot  say."

"  There  must  be  some  cause,"  remarked  Tchitchikoff.

Poor  Khlobuyoft'  sighed  deeply  several  times,  and  proceeded


268  DEAD    SOtJLS.

as  follows :  "  It  sometimes  seems  to  me  that  the  Eussian  is  a
lost  being.  He  wants  to  do  everything,  and  can  do  nothing.
He  keeps  thinking  that  he  will  begin  a  new  life  on  the  morrow,
but  nothing  comes  of  it.  On  that  very  same  evening  he  over-
feeds himself,  so  that  he  can  do  nothing  but  wink,  and  cannot
manage  his  tongue.  He  sits  and  stares  at  everyone  like  an  owl.
Truly,  we  are  all  just  like  that."

"Yes,"  said  TchitchikolF,  laughing:  "such  things  do
happen."

"  Let  us  take  still  another  turn  in  this  direction,"  said  Khlo-
buyoff.     "Let  us  now  inspect  the  pey^ants'  fields."

The  views  on  their  way  back  were  ^fe  same.  Slatternly  dis-
order appeared  everywhere.  EverytHmg  was  neglected  and
abandoned.  An  angry  woman  in  a  dirty  gown  was  beating  a
poor  little  girl  to  death,  and  swearing  by  all  the  devils  in  every
direction.  Farther  on,  two  peasant  men  were  observing  the
wrath  of  the  drunken  woman  with  stoical  indifference.  One  of
them  was  scratching  his  back  while  the  other  was  yawning.
Yawns  were  even  visible  on  the  buildings,  whose  roofs  were
gaping.  Platonoff,  too,  on  his  side,  yawned  as  he  gazed  at
them.  "  My  future  property,  these  peasants,"  thought  Tchitchi-
koff.  "Hole  on  hole,  and  patch  on  patch."  And,  in  fact,  on
the  top  of  one  cabin  lay  a  gate  instead  of  a  roof;  the  decaying
walls  were  propped  up  with  poles,  which  had  been  removed
from  the  master's  barns.  It  was  evident  that  Trishkin's  method  of
dealing  with  his  coat  prevailed  in  the  domestic  management.  The
people  here  cut  off  the  cuffs  and  the  tails  to  patch  the  elbows.*

"  Your  estate  is  not  in  an  enviable  condition,"  remarked
Tchitchikoff,  as  they  entered  the  owner's  house.

There  they  were  struck  by  the  commingling  of  poverty  with
glittering  trifles,  mementoes  of  past  luxury.  A  figure  of  Shak-
speare  sat  on  the  inkstand  ;  on  the  table  there  lay  a  dainty  ivory
scratchback.  The  visitors  were  received  by  the  mistress  of  the
house,  dressed  tastefully  and  in  the  latest  fashion,  who  talked
about  the  city,  and  the  theatre  which  had  been  started  there.
The  four  children  also  were  prettily  dressed  and  in  good  taste,
and  they  even  had  a  governess.  However,  this  made  them  all
the  more  sad  to  contemplate,  for  they  were  thin  and  sickly.  It
would  have  been  better  had  they  been  clothed  in  striped  petti-
coats and  simple  blouses,  and  had  they  been  allowed  to  run
about  the  yard  by  themselves,  and  had  in  no  wise  differed  from
the  robust  village  children.     The  hostess  was  soon  joined  by  a

*  An  allusion  to  a  popular  fable  by  Kruiloff,  in  -which  he  describes  a
man's  method  of  repairing  his  coat.


LUXURY    AND    INDIGENCE.  269

lady  guest — some  empty-headed  chatterer — and,  finally,  the
ladies  retired  to  their  own  apartments,  whereupon,  the  children
running  after  them,  the  men  were  left  alone.

"  What  is  your  price  for  the  estate  now  ?  "  inquired  Tchitchi-
koff.  "I  ask  this,  I  tell  you  frankly,  in  order  to  learn  your
ultimate,  your  lowest  price;  for  the  property  is  in  a  worse  con-
dition than  I  had  anticipated,"

"  In  the  very  worst,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  answered  Khlobuyofi".
"And  that  is  not  all.  I  will  not  conceal  from  you  the  additional
fact  that,  out  of  the  hundred  souls  which  are  set  down  on  the
census  list,  only  fifty  are  among  the  living.  That  is  the  result
of  the  cholera  among  us.  Some  others  have  taken  their  leave
without  passports ;  so  that  they,  too,  may  be  reckoned  among
the  dead.  If  they  were  to  be  demanded  by  the  mortgagees,
the  whole  estate  would  pass  into  the  courts.  Therefore  I  will
only  ask  j-ou  thirty  thousand  roubles."

Tchitchikofi"  began  to  meditate  and  to  bargain.

"Mercy  on  us!  Thirty  thousand!  For  such  an  estate —
thirty  thousand  roubles  !     Come,  take  twenty-five  thousand."

Platonoft'  felt  ashamed  for  his  /riend.  "  Conclude  the  sale,
Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  he  said.  "  You  can  get  that  much  for  the
property  at  any  time.  If  you  will  not  give  him  thirty  thousand,
my  brother  and  I  will  join  together  and  purchase  it."

"Veiygood,  I  agree,"  said  Tchitchikofi'  in  alarm.  "Very
good  ;  but  only  on  condition  that  half  of  the  money  shall  not  be
paid  for  a  year."

"  No,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  I  cannot  consider  that  for  a  moment.
Give  me  half  on  the  spot,  and  the  remainder  in  a  fortnight.
The  bank  would  lend  me  that  amount,  if  that  were  only  enough
tc  satisfy  the  leeches."

"Really?  Well,  well,"  said  Tchitchikofi".  "I  have  only
ten  thousand  upon  me  at  present."  In  point  of  fact,  he  was
lying :  he  had  twenty  thousand  in  all,  not  counting  the  money
which  Kostanzhoglo  had  lent  him.  But  it  pained  him  to  part
with  so  much  at  one  time.

"  No,  thank  you,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  I  tell  you  that  it  is
absolutely  necessary  that  I  should  have  fifteen  thousand."

"  Well,  only  five  thousand  will  be  lacking.  I  do  not  know
where  to  get  them  on  the  spur  of  the  moment."

"  I  will  lend  you  five  thousand  to-morrow,"  said  Platonofi".

"  Will  you  really  ?  "  exclaimed  Tchitchikofi,  thinking  to  him-
self, "  Well,  this  is  very  opportune  that  he  should  lend  me  that
money."  They  then  struck  hands  on  the  bargain.  Tchitchikofi"s
dressing-case  was  brought  from  the  calash,  and  ten  thousand


270  DEAD   SOULS.

roubles  were  taken  from  it,  which  amount  Tchitchikoff  handed
to  Khlobuyoif  as  earnest  money.  He  promised  to  bring  him  the
remaining  five  thousand  roubles  on  the  morrow  ;  that  is  to  say,
he  promised.  But  he  meant  to  bring  only  three  thousand  or  so,
after  a  lapse  of  two  or  three  days,  and,  in  fact,  to  put  it  off  still
longer  if  possible.  Pavel  Ivanovitch  particularly  disliked  to  let
any  money  pass  out  of  his  hands.  Even  in  a  case  of  extreme
necessity,  it  always  seemed  to  him  better  to  surrender  the
money  to-morrow  than  to-day.  That  is  to  say,  he  proceeded  as
we  all  do.  We  all  find  it  agreeable  to  put  off  a  creditor.  Let
him  polish  his  spine  in  the  anteroom  for  a  while.  Just  as
though  he  could  not  wait !  A"Vhat  business  is  it  of  ours  that
every  hour  may  be  precious  to  him,  and  that  his  affairs  may
suffer  from  it  ?  Come  to-morrow,  my  good  fellow ;  I.  have  no
time  to  attend  to  you  to-day.

**  Where  shall  you  live  in  future  ?  "  Platonofi"  now  inquired
of  Khlobuyoff.     "  Have  you  any  other  village  ?"

"  None  at  all ;  I  shall  go  to  town.  I  have  a  little  house
there.  It  makes  no  difference.  It  would  have  been  necessary
to  do  so  in  any  case,  for  the  sake  of  the  children.  They  must
have  masters  in  the  law  of  God,  in  music  and  dancing.  It  is
impossible  to  procure  them  in  the  village,  of  course."

"  Not  a  morsel  of  bread,  and  yet  his  children  must  learn  to
dance  !  "  thought  Tchitchikoff.

"  This  is  queer,"  thought  Platonoff.

"  But  we  must  wet  down  the  contract  in  some  way,"  said
Khlobuyoff".  "  Hey,  there,  Kiriushka  !  fetch  a  bottle  of  cham-
pagne, my  good  fellow."

"  There's  not  a  bit  of  bread,  but  there  is  champagne,"  thought
Tchitchikoff'.

Platonoff  did  not  know  what  to  think.

Khlobuyoff"  had  provided  himself  with  champagne,  in  case  of
an  emergency.  He  had  sent  to  town — what  was  to  be  done  ?
Kvas  is  not  sold  in  the  shops  on  credit,  and  yet  a  man  must
drink.  However,  a  Frenchman  who  had  recently  come  from  St.
Petersburg  with  some  wines  allowed  everyone  to  take  them  on
credit.  There  was  nothing  else  for  Khlobuyoff  to  do  but  to  buy
some  champagne  from  him  mthout  paying  for  it.

This  champagne  was  now  brought.  They  drank  three  glasses
of  it,  and  grew  meriy.  Khlobuyoff  unbent ;  he  became  charming
and  sociable,  and  overflowed  with  anecdotes  and  wit.  He  dis-
played in  his  conversation  so  much  knowledge  of  men  and
the  world,  he  had  observed  many  things  so  well  and  faithfully,
he  depicted  his  fellow-landowners  so  aptly  and  skilfully  in  a


LUXURY   AND   INDIGENCE.  271

few  words,  he  so  clearly  perceived  the  errors  and  failings  of
them  all,  he  knew  so  thoroughly  the  history  of  the  ruined  ones
• — the  why  and  the  how  of  their  decay — he  knew  how  to
describe  their  habits  with  so  much  originality  and  ability,  that
both  of  his  hearers  were  enchanted  with  his  discourse,  and  felt
inclined  to  pronounce  him  an  extremely  clever  man.

"  I  am  astonished,"  said  Tchitchikoif,  "  that  you,  with  such
ability,  can  hit  upon  no  plans  or  resources."

"  I  have  some  plans,"  replied  Ivhlobuyoff,  and  immediately  he
overwhelmed  them  with  a  whole  mountain  of  projects.  Everyone
of  these  was  so  senseless,  so  extraordinary,  so  little  derived  from
any  acquaintance  with  men  and  with  the  Avorld,  that  all  hishearers
could  do  was  to  shrug  their  shoulders  and  say,  "  Good  heavens!
what  an  immeasurable  gulf  exists  between  the  knowledge  of
men  and  the  world  and  the  art  of  making  use  of  that  know-
ledge !  "  Everything  was  founded  on  the  immediate  procuring
from  some  quart-er  or  another  of  a  sum  of  one  or  two  hundred
thousand  roubles.  Then,  it  seemed  to  Khlobuyoff,  everything
would  come  right,  and  his  estate  would  be  managed  as  it
should  be  ;  his  income  might  be  quadrupled,  all  damage  might  be
repaired,  and  he  would  be  placed  in  a  position  to  pay  his  debts;
and  he  concluded  his  speech  thus  :  "  But  what  do  you  advise
me  to  do  ?  There  is  not,  no,  there  is  not  in  existence,  a  philan-
thropist who  could  make  up  his  mind  to  advance  me  two  hun-
dred, or  even  one  hundred,  thousand  roubles  as  a  loan.  Plainly,
God  wills  it  not."

"The  idea,"  thought  Tchitchikoff,  "that  God  should  send
that  fool  two  hundred  thousand  roubles  !  "

"  1  have  an  aunt,  though,  who  is  worth  three  millions,"  pur-
sued Khlobuyoff.  "She  is  a  pious  old  woman,  and  gives  money
to  churches  and  monasteries  ;  but  she  is  slow  in  assisting  her
nearest  relatives.  She's  an  aunt  of  the  ancient  pattern,  well
worth  inspection.  She  has  four  hundred  canaries,  and  her
poodle-dogs,  parasites,  and  servants  are  such  as  are  not  to  be
seen  elsewhere  nowadays.  The  youngest  of  her  servants  must
be  sixty  years  old,  though  she  always  addresses  him  as  '  Hey,
there,  boy !  '  If  a  guest  does  not  behave  to  suit  her,  she
orders  the  viands  to  be  carried  past  him  at  dinner.  And  it  is
done  :  that's  what  she  is  like  !  "
Platonoflf  burst  into  a  laugh.

"  What  is  her  name,  and  where  does  she  live?"  inquired
Tchitchikoff.

"  She  lives  in  our  town.  Her  name  is  Alexandra  Ivanovna
Khajiasarova."  " '


272  DEAD    SOULS.

"  Why  do  not  you  appeal  to  her  ? "  asked  Platonoff,  with
sympathy.  "It  seems  to  me  that,  if  she  could  realise  the
condition  of  your  family,  she  would  not  refuse  you  help."

"Well,  no;  she  would.  She  is  rather  strong-minded  ;  indeed,
she's  a  flinty  old  lady,  Platon  Mikhailovitch !  And  she  has
plenty  of  other  courtiers  to  hang  about  her  without  me.
There's  one  man  who  aspires  to  the  governorship.  He  has
claimed  relationship  with  her,  and  is  trying  to  get  hold  of  her
fortune.     God  be  with  him  !  perhaps  he  may  succeed."

"  The  fool !  "  thought  Tchitchikoff.  "  I  myself  would  wait
upon  such  an  aunt  as  that,  just  as  a  nurse  waits  upon  a
child  !  "

"  What  dry  work  talking  is  !  "  said  Khlobuyoff.  '  Hey,
there,  Kiriushka  !   fetch  another  bottle  of  champagne."

"  No,  no  ;  I  shall  not  drink  any  more,"  said  Platonoff.

"Nor I,"  added  Tchitchikoff;  and  they  both  declined  in  a
very  decided  manner.

"  Well,  then,  at  least  promise  to  visit  me  in  town.  I  give
a  dinner  to  our  city  ofl&cials  on  the  8th  of  July."

"  Good  gracious  !  "  exclaimed  Platonoff.  "A  dinner  in  this
state  of  affairs,  when  you  are  utterly  ruined !  "

"  What  am  I  to  do  ?  I  can't  help  it.  It  is  my  duty,"
answered  Khlobuyoff.     "  They  have  entertained  me."

Platonoff"  opened  his  eyes  to  their  fullest  extent.  Up  to  that
moment  he  had  not  been  aware  that  there  exist  in  the  cities
and  towns  of  Russia  certain  wise  individuals  whose  lives  are  an
absolutely  unsolvable  problem.  It  seems  as  though  an  individual
of  this  class  were  ruined ;  he  is  head  over  ears  in  debt ;  he  has
no  property  whatever,  and  yet  he  gives  a  dinner,  and  all  his
guests  say  that  it  is  the  last,  that  their  host  will  be  carried  off
to  prison  on  the  morrow.  Ten  years  elapse,  and  the  wise  man
is  still  in  existence,  he  is  still  more  deeply  in  debt  than  before,
and  is  still  giving  a  dinner ;  and  the  guests,  as  usual,  think  it
will  be  the  last,  and  again  feel  convinced  that  the  morrow
will  see  their  host  in  prison.

Khlobuyoff's  house  in  town  presented  a  remarkable  spectacle.
One  day  the  pope,  clad  in  his  vestments,  would  be  celebrating
a  prayer  service  ;  and  on  the  morrow  some  French  actors  would
be  holding  a  rehearsal  there.  On  one  day  not  a  crumb  of
bread  was  to  be  found  in  the  place  ;  on  the  following,  there  was
a  hospitable  reception  of  artists  and  painters,  and  magnificent
presents  for  everybody.  Sometimes  such  very  embarrassing
intervals  occurred,  that  anyone  in  Khlobuyoff's  place  would  have
hung  or  shot  himself     but  he  was  saved  from  such  a  course  by


LUXURY    AND    INDIGENCE.  273

a  religious  turn  of  mind,  which  in  him  was  blended  in  some
queer  fashion  with  a  dissipated  life.

At  these  bitter  and  difficult  moments  he  perused  the  lives  of
the  saints  and  penitents,  who  had  schooled  their  minds  to  soar
above  misfortune.  His  soul  became  very  tender  at  such  times:
he  grew  gentle  of  spirit,  and  his  eyes  filled  with  tears.  He
prayed;  and  strange  to  say,  some  unexpected  succour  nearly
always  arrived  from  some  quarter  or  other :  either  some  one  of
his  old  friends  remembered  him,  and  sent  him  money,  or  some
passing  stranger  lady  having  heard  his  history  by  accident,  with
the  impulsive  generosity  characteristic  of  the  feminine  heart,
sent  him  a  handsome  present,  or  rendered  him  a  service  in
some  quarter  of  which  he  never  heard.  Then  he  piously  ac-
knowledged the  boundless  mercy  of  providence,  had  a  service
of  prayer  celebrated  out  of  gratitude,  and  began  his  life  of
dissipation  afresh.

"I'm  sorry  for  him,  I  really  am,"  said  Platonoflf  to  Tchitchi-
koft",  as  they  were  driving  away,  after  having  taken  leave  of  him.
"  He's  the  Prodigal  Son  !  "  replied  Tchitchikoff.  "  Such  people
deserve  no  pity."

And  they  both  soon  ceased  to  think  of  him — Platonofi",  because
he  was  accustomed  to  gaze  on  all  things  and  people  languidly
and  sleepily.  His  heart  suffered  at  the  sight  of  suffering,  but
the  impression  which  was  left  on  his  soul  was  never  a  profound
one.  Besides,  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  minutes  he  no  more
thought  of  Khlobuyoff,  as  he  no  longer  thought  of  himself.
Tchitcjiikoff  did  not  think  of  Khlobuyoff,  because  all  his  thoughts
were  seriously  pre-occupied  with  his  purchase.  Consider  it  as
he  might,  turn  it  on  whatever  side  he  would,  he  perceived  that
the  pui'chase  was  an  advantageous  one  in  any  case.  He  might
be  able  to  mortgage  it.  He  might  contrive  so  as  to  mortgage
merely  the  dead  and  fugitive  serfs.  He  might  arrange  so  that
all  the, best  land  could  be  first  sold  piecemeal,  and  the  estate
mortgaged  all  the  same  afterwards.  He  might  also  make
arrangements  to  cultivate  the  property  himself,  and  become  a
proprietor  after  the  pattern  of  Kostanzhoglo,  availing  himself
of  the  latter's  advice,  as  his  neighbour  and  benefactor.  He  might
moreover  proceed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  sell  the  estate  to  pri-
vate persons — that  is  of  course  in  case  he  did  not  wish  to  under-
take the  care  of  it  himself — thus  merely  retaining  for  himself  the
deceased  and  fugitive  serfs.  Then  another  means  of  profit  pre-
sented itself  to  his  mind :  he  might  abandon  this  region  entirely,
and  not  pay  Kostanzhoglo  the  money  which  he  had  borrowed
from  him.    Strange  thought !    Not  that  Tchitchikoff  entertained


274  DEAD    SOULS.

it,  but  it  suddenly  presented  itself  to  his  mind  mocking  and
laughing  and  winking  at  him.  A  shameless  hussy  of  a  thought !
An  unruly  creature,  forsooth!

•  Our  hero  felt  content — content  because  he  was  now  a  landed
proprietor,  not  in  fancy,  but  in  reality  :  a  proprietor  who  had
land  and  appurtenances  and  peasants — peasants  who  were  not
fictions,  not  creatures  of  the  imagination,  but  actual  persons.
And  by  degrees  he  began  to  sway  about,  and  to  rub  his  hands,
and  to  wink  at  himself,  and  to  blow  some  march  through  his
fist,  placed  to  his  lips  as  though  it  had  been  a  trumpet ;  and  he
even  uttered  a  few  encouraging  words  aloud,  as  well  as  some
nicknames  addressed  to  himself,  such  as  "  My  little  bull-dog,"
and  "  My  plump  little  chicken."  But  recalling  the  fact  that  he
was  not  alone,  he  suddenly  ceased,  and  endeavoured  by  some
means  to  check  the  ill-timed  outburst  of  his  rapture  ;  and  when
Platonoff,  taking  some  of  our  hero's  noise  for  fragments  of  a
remark  addressed  to  him,  inquired,  "  What  is  it  ? "  he  re-
plied, "  Nothing."

"  !■  :cp  !  "  at  last  shouted  Platonoff  to  the  coachman.

Tchitchikoff  glanced  about  him,  and  perceived  that  they  had,
for  a  lon^^  time,  been  driving  through  a  magnificent  grove.  The
trunks  of  the  beech-trees  and  the  aspens,  gleaming  like  a  snowy
palisade,  rose  in  light  and  graceful  outlines  against  the  back-
ground formed  by  the  tender  green  of  the  newly  unfolded  foli-
age. The  nightingales  were  trilling  loudly  in  rivalry.  The
wood-tulips  gleamed  yellow  amid  the  grass.  Our  hero  could
not  account  to  himself  for  being  in  this  beautiful  place,  when  he
had  so  recently  been  in  the  midst  of  naked  fields.  Out  from
among  the  trees  peeped  a  church  of  white  stone.  At  the  end  of
the  road,  too,  a  gentleman  made  his  appearance,  and  advanced
to  meet  them :  he  wore  a  leather  cap  with  a  peak,  and  carried
a  long  dry  stick  in  his  hand.  A  hound  of  English  breed,  with
long,  slender  legs,  ran  on  before  him.

"Ah!  here's  my  brother,"  said  Platonofi".  "Stop,  coach-
man!" and  then  he  descended  from  the  calash:  Tchitchikoft'
did  the  same.  The  dogs  had  already  succeeded  in  licking  each
other  over.  Lively,  slender-legged  Azor  licked  Yarb  on  the
nose,  then  he  licked  Platonofi''s  hand,  then  leaped  on  Tcbitchi-
koflf  and  licked  him  on  the  ear.

The  brothers  embraced.

''Ah!  pray,  Platon,  how  have  you  been  treating  me  ?  "  said
the  second  brother,  whose  name  was  Vasiliy.

"  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  answered  Platon  indifierently.

"  AVhat,  indeed  !     Not  a  sound  or  a  syllable  from   you  for


LUXURY   AND    INDIGENCE.  275

three  days  !  Pyetukh's  groom  brought  your  horse  home.  *  He
has  gone  off  with  some  gentleman,'  he  reported.  Now,  if  you
had  only  said  one  word  as  to  where  and  why,  and  for  how  long
a  time  you  were  going !  But  no  !  Pray,  brother,  how  can  you
behave  so  ?  And  God  knows  what  things  I  have  been  fancying
all  these  days  !  "

"  Well,  what  is  to  be  done  about  it  ?  I  forgot,"  answered
Platon.  "  We  Avent  to  Konstantin  Feodorovitch's.  He  salutes
you,  and  our  sister  also  greets  you.  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  let  me
introduce  you  :  my  brother.  Vasiliy ;  brother  Vasiliy,  this  is
Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoft'."  The  men  thus  invited  to  mutual
acquaintance  shook  hands  and  took  off  their  caps.

"  Who  can  this  Tchitchikoff  be?"  thought  brother  Vasiliy.
"Brother  Platon  is  not  very  choice  in  his  acquaintances."  He
scrutinized  Tchitchikoff  as  closely  as  politeness  would  permit,
and  perceived  that  our  hero  was  a  very  respectable-looking
person.

Tchitchikoff  also  stared,  as  much  as  propriety  allowed,  at
brother  Vasiliy,  and  perceived  that  the  latter  was  shorter  of
stature  than  Platon,  that  his  hair  was  darker,  and  that  his  face
was  far  from  being  as  handsome,  but  that  thei'e  was  much  more
life  and  animation,  more  heartfelt  kindness  in  his  features.  It
was  evident  that  he  was  less  given  to  dreaming.  However,  to
this  Pavel  Ivanovitch  paid  little  heed.

"  I  have  made  up  my  mind,  Vasya,  to  travel  through  Holy
Russia  with  Pavel  Ivanovitch.  Perhaps  that  will  cure  me  of
my  hypochondria."

"  How  could  you  make  up  your  mind  so  quickly  ?  "  said
brother  Vasiliy,  taken  aback  ;  and  he  came  near  adding,  "  and
go  off  with  a  man  whom  you  see  for  the  first  time,  and  who  may
be  a  worthless  fellow,  and  the  Devil  knows  who  '?  "  Quite  in-
credulous, he  glanced  askance  at  Tchitchikoff,  and  observed  his
remarkable  respectability.

They  turned  into  a  gateway  on  the  right.  The  courtyard  was
old-fashioned  :  the  house  also  was  old-fashioned,  of  a  sort  which
is  not  built  now,  with  sheds  beneath  the  lofty  roof.  Two  gigantic
lime-trees  grew  in  the  middle  of  the  yard,  and  covered  nearly
half  of  it  with  shade.  Beneath  them  stood  several  wooden
benches.  Syringas  and  wild  cherry-trees  in  blossom  surrounded
the  place,  covering  the  walls  completely  with  their  flowers  and
leaves.  The  manor-house  was  almost  wholly  concealed  :  only
the  doors  and  windows  peered  prettily  out  beneath  and  between
the  boughs.  Through  the  forest-trees,  straight  as  arrows,  the
kitchen,  the  storerooms,  and  the  cellars  were  visible.


276  DEAD    SOULS.

Moreover,  one  could  hear  the  nightingales  gaily  warbling,  and
the  whole  grove  gave  hack  a  loud  echo.  A  feeling  of  peace  and
pleasantness  stole  into  the  soul.  Everything  smacked  of  those
untroubled  times  when  men  lived  in  amity,  and  when  all  was
simple  and  plain.  Brother  Vasiliy  invited  TchitchikoiF  to  take
a  seat.  They  all  sat  down  on  the  benches  under  the  lime-
trees.

A  lad  of  seventeen,  in  a  handsome  blouse  of  pink  cotton,
brought  some  decanters  filled  with  all  sorts  of  fruit  kvas,  of
various  colours,  some  thick  like  butter,  others  foaming  like
carbonated  lemonade,  and  placed  them  before  the  gentlemen.
After  setting  the  decanters  on  the  table,  he  picked  up  a  spade
which  was  leaning  against  a  tree,  and  went  ofi"  to  the  garden.
All  the  servants  of  the  Platonoff  brothers,  like  those  of  their
brother-in-law,  Kostanzhoglo,  were  gardeners ;  or,  to  speak
more  accurately,  all  the  house-servants  took  turns  at  garden
duties.

Brother  Vasiliy  insisted  that  servants  were  not  a  separate
class;  thati  if  needed,  one  could  entirely  dispense  with  them;
that  everybody  was  capable  of  handing  things,  and  that  it  was  not
necessary  to  appoint  certain  people  to  do  so  ;  that  the  Eussian
is  a  fine,  alert  felloAV,  and  no  sluggard,  so  long  as  he  goes  about
in  blouse  and  peasant  coat ;  but  that  as  soon  as  he  dons  a
foreign  surtout  he  instantly  becomes  awkward,  dull,  lazy ;
no  longer  changes  bis  shirt ;  entirely  ceases  to  take  baths  ;
sleeps  in  his  coat,  and  beneath  it  raises  a  crop  of  foreign  fleas,
and  an  innumerable  multitude  of  other  insects.  And  on  this
point,  he  may  have  been  right.  In  Platonoff"  village  the  people
were  dressed  in  a  particularly  dainty  manner  :  the  head-dresses
of  the  women  were  covered  with  gold,  and  the  sleeves  of  their
blouses  were  made  of  the  borders  of  genuine  Turkish  shawls.

''Won't  you  take  some  refreshment  ?  "  said  brother  Vasiliy
to  Tchitchikoff",  pointing  to  the  decanters.  "  These  are  various
kinds  of  kvas,  for  which  our  house  has  long  been  celebrated."

Tchitchikoff"  poured  out  a  glass  from  the  first  decanter ;  it
was  mead,  such  as  he  had  drunk  in  Poland  in  days  gone  by  ;  it
sparkled  like  champagne,  and  there  was  so  much  gas  in  it  that
it  leapt  from  his  mouth  into  his  nose.  "Nectar!"  said  he.
Then  he  drank  a  glassful  from  a  second  decanter.  Its  contents
were  even  better  than  those  of  the  first.

"That's  a  liquor,  that's  a  liquor  worth  drinking!"  said
Tchitchikoff".  "I  may  say  that  I  have  drunk  the  very  best
fruit  wine  at  your  brother-in-law,  Konstantin  Feodorovitch's,
nd  the  very  best  of  kvas  at  your  house."


LUXURY   AND   INDIGENCE.  277

"  But  we  have  fruit  wine  also  :  my  sister  made  this.  In  what
direction  do  you  propose  traveUing  ?  "  asked  brother  Vasihy.

"I  am  travelling,"  answered  Tchitchikofl*,  swaying  lightly  on
the  bench,  and  stroking  his  knee,  "  not  so  much  on  my  own
account  as  on  the  business  of  others.  General  Betrishtcheff,
my  intimate  friend,  and  I  may  even  say  my  benefactor,  has
requested  me  to  notify  his  relatives  of  his  daughter's  marriage.
Relatives  are  relatives,  of  course  :  but  I  am  also  travelling  on
my  own  account,  so  to  speak  ;  for,  not  to  mention  the  bene-
fitting of  health,  travelling  is,  so  to  speak,  a  book  in  itself,  and
it  is  a  second  education  to  see  the  world  and  the  difierent  sorts
of  people."

Brother  Vasiliy  fell  into  thought.  "  This  man  speaks  rather
rhetorically,  yet  there  is  some  truth  in  what  he  says,"  thought
he.  After  a  brief  silence  he  turned  to  Platon  :  "I  begin  to  think,
Platon,  that  travelling  may  really  enliven  you.  There  is  no-
thing the  matter  with  j-ou  but  spiritual  lethargy.  You  have
simply  fallen  asleep,  and  that  not  out  of  satiety  or  weariness,
but  from  the  lack  of  vivid  impressions  and  sensations.  I  am  in
precisely  the  contrary  condition.  I  should  be  very  glad  not  to
feel  things  so  acutely,  and  not  to  take  everything  which  happens
so  much  to  heart."

"  You  seemingly  like  to  take  things  to  heart,"  replied  Platon.
"  You  search  out  disquiet,  and  manufacture  troubles  for
yourself."

*'  Why  should  I  manufacture  them,  when  something  disagree-
able is  lying  in  wait  at  every  step  ?"  said  Vasiliy.  "Have  you
heard  of  the  trick  that  Lyeuitzuin  has  played  us  during  your
absence  '?  He  has  seized  the  bit  of  wild  land  where  we  celebrate
the  red  hill.  In  the  first  place,  I  will  not  surrender  that  land
for  any  money  whatever.  My  peasants  celebrate  the  Krasnaya
Gorka*  there  every  spring,  and  all  the  memories  of  the  village

*  With  the  first  week  after  Easter  commences  the  festival  of  the
Krasnaya  Gorka,  "  the  red  or  little  bright  hill,"  the  term  referring  to  the
red  colour  of  the  Easter  eggs,  to  the  brightness  of  the  spring,  and  the
name  "  little  hill"  being  given  to  it  because  it  was  originally  held  or  in-
augurated on  some  high  place.  It  lasts  from  Low  Sunday  till  the  end  of
June,  and  its  chief  feature  is  the  khororocl — the  circling  dance  attended  by
choral  song.  The  chief  singer  on  these  occasions  is  a  woman,  who  holds
in  her  hands  a  round  loaf  and  a  red  egg,  each  an  emblem  of  the  sun.
Turning  her  face  and  hands  towards  the  east,  she  begins  one  of  these
choral  songs,  which  is  then  taken  up  by  the  chorus  ;  and  in  many  places
this  is  attended  or  followed  by  the  destruction  of  the  figure  of  death  or
winter.  Many  of  the  songs  are  addressed  to  the  goddess  of  love,  the
presiding  genius  of  the  season,  or  at  least  bear  reference  to  her  influence  ;


278  DEAD   SOULS.

are  bound  up  with  it :  in  my  eyes,  a  custom  is  a  sacred  thing,
and  I  am  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice  for  its  sake,"

"  He  does  not  know  that,  and  that  is  the  reason  why  he  has
seized  the  land,"  said  Platon.  *'  He  is  a  new-comer  ;  he  has
only  just  arrived  from  Petersburg ;  things  must  be  explained
and  made  clear  to  him."

"  He  knows,  he  knows  perfectly  well.  I  sent  him  woi'd,  but
he  replied  impertinently."

"  You  will  have  to  go  to  him  yourself,  and  explain  matters.
Talk  it  over  with  him  yourself."

"  No,  indeed  !  He  puts  on  too  many  airs  altogether.  I  will
not  go  near  him.     Go  yourself,  if  you  like."

"  I  would  go  were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  I  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  management  of  affairs.  He  might  mislead  and  cheat
me."

"  I  will  go,  if  you  think  proper,"  said  Tchitchikoff.

Vasiliy  glanced  at  our  hero  and  thought,  **  This  man  must
be  very  fond  of  travelling  !  "

"  Only  tell  me  what  sort  of  a  person  this  Lyenitzuin  is,"
pursued  Tchitchikoff,  "  and  the  scope  of  the  matter.""""

"  I  am  ashamed  to  impose  so  unpleasant  a  commission  on
you.  In  my  opinion,  the  man  is  a  worthless  fellow  ;  he  belongs
to  the  petty  landed  nobility  of  our  government ;  he  has  served
his  time  in  Petersburg,  having  there  married  some  one's  ille-
gitimate daughter,  and  acquired  a  great  opinion  of  himself.  He
sets  the  fashion.  But  people  do  not  live  in  an  utterly  stupid
way  with  us.  The  fashion  is  no  ukaz  to  our  minds,  and  Peters-
burg is  not  the  church."

"  Exactly,"  said  Tchitchikoff;  "  and  what  is  the  point  of  the
business  ?  "

"  He  needs  some  land,  you  see.  And  I  would  have  let  him
take  some  other  plot  for  nothing,  but  not  this  wild  strip.  How-
ever, he's  a  quarrelsome  fellow,  and  he  thinks  that  I  am
frightened."

"  In  my  opinion,  it  would  be  better  to  talk  the  matter  over.
Perhaps  you  will  not  repent  of  it  if  you  intrust  the  matter  to  me.
General  Betrishtcheff  also — "

"  But  I  am  ashamed  that  you  should  be  obliged  to  talk  with
such  a  man."

"  Never  mind  that ;  to-morrow  morning  I  will  call  upon  him,
and  everything  will  be  settled  to  your  satisfaction.  1  am  sure
of  it."

and  ia  some  places  it  is  customary  to  sing  tbem  under  the  windows  of
newly  married  couples.  {W.  E.  y.  Ralston's  Sonffs  of  the  Russian  People,
p.  221.)


LUXURY   AND    INDIGENCE.  279

On  the  next  day  Tchitchikoff  called  upon  Lyenitzuin  in  a
neighbourly  way,  and  informed  him  that  he  had  purchased
KhlobuyofF's  estate.  Lyenitzuin  and  Khlobuyoff  were  relatives,
and  our  hero  speedily  guessed  that  chance  had  brought  him  to
the  residence  of  the  man  who  was  desirous  of  securing  the  civil-
governorship  of  the  town,  so  as  to  be  near  the  aunt  with  the
three  millions  of  roubles.  He  had  always  known  how  to  ingra-
tiate himself  Avith  her.  He  was  offered  a  much  higher  post,  he
said,  but  he  preferred  to  remain  near  the  dear  relative  who  had
treated  him  so  kindly  since  his  infancy.

"  That  is  a  noble  sentiment,"  said  Pavel  Ivanovitch.

Our  hero  greatly  pleased  Lyenitzuin,  who  considered  that  he
had  a  very  intelligent  look.  Moreover,  Tchitchikoff  showed
himself  very  respectful  and  indulgent  as  regards  the  persons  they
talked  about,  excepting  perhaps  Khlobuyoff;  he  also  knew  a
large  number  of  noblemen  of  that  district  and  the  neighbouring
ones,  and  he  seemed  to  be  both  a  skilful  business  man  and
gave  himself  out  wealthy,  with  large  connections  in  society.  At
last  he  remarked  to  Lyenitzuin  :

"It  is  you,  no  doubt,  who  will  some  day  inherit  the  fortune
of  Alexandra  Ivanovna  Khanassaroff,  or  at  least  the  greater  part
of  it."

"  Those  who  assert  that  are  in  the  wrong,"  replied  Lyenit-
zuin. "  I  hear  that  she  has  made  a  will  leaving  the  bulk  of  her
fortune  to  the  convents."

"  How  shameful !  The  convents  are  rich  enough  already.  But
why  not  prevail  upon  her  to  make  a  fresh  will  ?  I  can't  calmly
see  you  disinherited  like  that.  I  shall  stay  some  time  in  the
town  and  obtain  an  introduction  to  the  venerable  Alexandra
Ivanovna,  and  if  you  like — to  oblige  you — I  will  insinuate  to  her
that  the  convents  are  rich  enough  already.  Why  not  draw  up
a  fresh  will,  nicely  put  together,  which  she  would  only  have  to
sign  ?  "

"  Oh,"  said  Lyenitzuin ;  "  I'm  afraid  she  wouldn't  sign."

"  Old  people  are  obstinate,  I  know,"  rejoined  our  hero.  "  But
no  matter  ;  since  she  is  going  to  die,  why  shouldn't  she  be  made
to  leave  her  property  to  you.  Besides,  it's  only  a  name  to  sign ;
and  in  my  opinion,  as  she  is  so  obstinate,  why,  I  should  get
somebody  to  sign  for  her."

"  Hush  !  hush  !  One  moment !  "

Thereupon,  as  if  a  breeze  had  sprung  up  and  as  if  Lyenitzuin
feared  a  draught,  he  rose,  drew  down  the  blinds,  pulled  the  cur-
tains forward,  and  cast  a  glance  into  the  adjoining  rooms.  Then
as  he  closed  the  doors  again,  he  contrived  to  lock  them,  no  doubt


2S0  DEAD   SOULS.

by  mistake.  Next  he  and  Tchitchikoff  indulged  in  some  inti-
mate conversation,  carried  on  in  so  low  a  tone  that  not  a  word
of  it  reached  us  until  Lyenitzuin  drew  back  the  curtains  and
unlocked  the  doors,  then  seating  himself  again  on  the  sofa
and  offering  his  hand  to  our  hero,  who  pressed  it  affection-
ately.

Said  Tchitchikoff:  "  Only  all  this  must  remain  secret.  It  is
not  so  much  the  crime  itself,  as  the  scandal  it  often  creates
that  proves  injurious."

"  That's  so,  that's  so,"  returned  Lyenitzuin,  drooping  his  head
completely  on  one  side.

"  How  delightful  to  encounter  a  similarity  of  opinion !  "  ex-
claimed Tchitchikoff.  "  I  am  engaged  in  an  affah*  which  is  both
legal  and  illegal :  in  appearance  it  is  illegal,  in  reality  it  is  legal.
As  I  need  some  chattels  to  mortgage,  I  do  not  wish  to  induce
anyone  to  sell  me  anything  which  I  might  not  pay  for.  If  a
catastrophe  should  occur  to  me,  which  God  forbid  !  it  would  not
be  pleasant  for  others  ;  so  I  have  decided  only  to  acquire  sundry
fugitive  and  dead  souls,  which  have  not  yet  been  struck  off  the
register,  in  order,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  to  benefit  myself
and  to  perform  a  deed  of  Christian  charity  by  freeing  the  unfor-
tunate proprietors  from  the  necessity  of  paying  the  taxes  for
them.  So  we  merely  execute  a  formal  deed  of  sale  between  us,
as  though  living  serfs  were  in  question."

*'  But  all  the  same,  this  is  a  very  strange  proceeding,"  thought
Lyenitzuin;  and  he  drew  his  chair  back  a  little.     "Yes,  the

transaction  is,  of  a  character "  he  resumed  aloud,  but  he

could  not  make  up  his  mind  to  say  anything  further.

"  There  will  be  no  risk,  for  it  will  be  kept  private,"  repUed
Tchitchikoff,  "  and,  moi-eover,  between  honourable  men "

"  But  still,  on  the  whole "

"It  is  a  perfectly  clear  transaction,  and  there  is  no  trickery
about  it,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  with  great  frankness  and  directness.
"  What  the  nature  of  the  business  is,  we  have  just  decided  ;  it
lies  between  honourable  men,  who  have  reached  years  of  discre-
tion and  who  are  of  good  understanding  apparently.  It  takes
place  in  private  between  them."  So  saying,  he  looked  the  other
in  the  eye  with  a  frank  and  ingenuous  expression.

Clever  as  Lyenitzuin  was,  accomplished  as  he  was  in  all
methods  of  transacting  business,  he  was  on  this  occasion  thrown
quite  out  of  his  calculations  ;  the  more  so  as  he  had  contrived,
in  some  remarkable  manner,  to  entangle  himself  in  his  own  net.
In  reality,  he  was  not  at  all  fitted  for  dishonesty.

"  This  is  an  extraordinary  afiair  !  "  he  said  to  himself.  "Just


LTJXURY  AND   INDIGENCE.  281

try  to  enter  into  an  intimate  friendship  with  the  best  of  men,
without  repenting  of  it !     There's  a  puzzle  for  you.''

However,  fate  and  circumstances  seemed  to  favour  Tchitchi-
koflf  in  a  special  manner.  Exactly  as  though  with  the  object  of
rendering  assistance  in  this  difficult  question,  the  young  mistress
of  the  house,  Lyenitzuin's  wife,  entered  the  room  at  that  mo-
ment ;  she  was  thin,  pale,  and  short,  but  dressed  in  Petersburg
fashion,  and  was  extremely  fond  of  people  who  were  comme  ilfaut.
Behind  her  came  a  nurse,  bearing  in  her  arms  her  first  infant,  a
pledge  of  the  tender  love  of  the  recently  wedded  couple.  Tchit-
chikotF  completely  fascinated  the  Petersburg  lady  with  his  little
skip,  his  agile  walk,  and  his  trick  of  inclining  his  head  on  one
side  ;  and  he  captivated  the  baby  also.

At  first  the  latter  set  up  a  yell,  but  Tchitchikoflf — by  dint
of  the  words  "Agu,  agu,  darling!"  by  tickling  it  with  his
finger,  and  by  the  beauty  of  the  carnelian  seal  on  his  watch —
succeeded  in  enticing  the  child  into  his  own  arms.  Then  he
began  to  toss  it  up  to  the  very  ceiling,  thereby  eliciting  a  pleased
laugh,  which  greatly  delighted  its  parents.  But  whether  from
mutual  satisfaction,  or  from  some  other  cause,  the  infant  sud-
denly misbehaved  himself.

"  Oh  heavens  !  "  exclaimed  Lyenitzuin's  wife  :  "  he  has  com-
pletely ruined  your  coat."

Tchitchikoft'  looked.  The  sleeve  of  his  coat,  which  was  quite
new,  was  utterly  spoiled.  "  I'd  like  to  shoot  you,  you  little
devil !  "  he  said  to  himself  in  his  wrath.

The  host,  the  hostess,  and  the  nurse  all  ran  for  some  eau-de-
Cologne,  and  began  to  scrub  the  sleeve  in  all  directions.

"  It's  nothing,  it's  nothing,  it's  of  no  consequence  whatever,"
said  Tchitchikofi",  endeavouring  to  communicate  as  cheerful  an
expression  as  possible  to  his  countenance.  "Is  it  possible  for
a  child  to  spoil  anything  at  this  golden  period  of  his  existence  ?  "
he  repeated  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  he  said  to  himself,  "You
little  brute  !  I  wish  the  wolves  had  eaten  you  :  that  would
suit  me  to  a  hair,  you  cursed  little  rascal  ! ' '

This  apparently  trifling  circumstance  made  the  host  take  a
favourable  view  of  Tchitchikofl''s  business.  How  could  he  refuse
anything  to  a  guest  who  had  bestowed  so  many  innocent  ca-
resses on  the  baby,  and  who  had  so  magnanimously  paid  for
them  at  the  cost  of  his  own  coat !

"  Permit  me,  then,  to  repay  your  service,"  said  our  hero,
"with  another  one.  I  wish  to  act  as  mediator  in  your  aflair
with  the  Platonoft'  brothers.  You  want  some  land,  do  you  not?  "

Then  Tchitchikoff  entered  into  a  long  explanation  as  regards


282  DEAD   SOULS.

the  strip  of  soil  which  Lyenitzuin  had  appropriated,  and  he
prevailed  upon  him  to  restore  it  to  the  Platonoffs  in  exchange
for  some  other  land.  This  matter  being  settled,  Tchitchikoff
took  leave  of  Lyenitzuin  and  returned  to  make  his  report  to
Vasiliy.  With  his  usual  tactics,  moreover,  he  prevailed  upon
the  latter  to  sell  him  some  dead  souls  ;  and  then,  PlatonofF
having  fallen  ill,  so  that  he  could  not  resume  his  travels,  our
hero  set  off  alone,  his  friend  Tentyotnikoff  having  in  the  mean-
while sent  hrm  his  britschka,  which  had  been  left  with  General
Betrishtcheflf.

Upon  reaching  the  town  he  made  various  arrangements
respecting  the  purchase  of  Khlobuyoff 's  estate.  However,  in  lieu
of  giving  another  fifteen  thousand  roubles  in  cash,  he  displayed
a  variety  of  deeds  which  seemed  to  indicate  that  he  possessed
large  means.  He  wished  to  realise,  he  said,  and  accordingly
ofi'ered  his  bill  at  four  months'  date  to  Khlobuyoff,  who  at  first
demurred  to  the  proposal,  declaring  that  he  required  ready
money.  However,  as  all  the  persons  summoned  to  serve  as
witnesses  to  the  deed  of  sale,  and  the  officials  also,  spoke  in
Pavel  Ivanovitch's  favour,  Khlobuyoff"  feared  lest  he  might
appear  unreasonable,  and  finally  he  accepted  the  promissory
note  and  signed  the  deed  of  sale  as  if  he  had  received  full
payment.

Meanwhile  Tchitchikoff"  had  secured,  through  Lyenitzuin,  an
introduction  to  Alexandra  Ivanovna,  the  wealthy  aunt,  and  he
so  ingratiated  himself  in  her  favour  that  at  last  she  could  do
nothing  without  consulting  him.  Still  he  failed  in  his  eff"orts  to
persuade  her  to  make  a  new  will.  Three  months,  moreover,
went  by  without  Khlobuyoff"  being  paid  and  without  Tchitchikoff"
showing  any  disposition  to  raise  a  loan  in  view  of  meeting  his
promissory  note.  Then  suddenly  a  report  was  circulated  that
Pavel  Ivanovitch  was  negotiating  the  secret  sale  of  the  estate,
and  people  were  puzzled  as  to  what  game  he  could  be  playing.
A  traveller  who,  on  passing  through  the  city,  dined  one  day
with  the  colonel  of  police,  remarked  to  him  in  the  course  of
conversation,  "  I  hear  that  the  famous  Tchitchikoff"  is  staying
here.  You  are  aware,  I  suppose,  that  he  is  journeying  through
Eussia,  buying  up  all  the  landowners'  dead  serfs,  with  an  object
one  can  readily  guess."  This  remark  was  repeated  on  all  sides,
and  it  finally  reached  the  ears  of  the  military  governor,  just  at
the  time,  too,  when  the  latter  heard  that  Alexandra  Ivanovna,
the  wealthy  lady,  had  died,  and  that  seals  had  been  affixed  in
her  house  to  all  the  articles  of  furniture  in  which  she  might
have  secreted  either  any  valuables  or  a  will.     People  pretended


LUXURY    AND    INDIGENCE.  283

that  tlie  old  lady's  demise  had  only  been  reported  forty-eight
hours  after  its  occurrence  ;  and,  moreover,  it  was  insinuated
that  our  hero  alone  could  tell  in  Avhat  manner  she  had  died,  as
he  had  been  hovering  around  her  till  the  very  last,  ordering  the
servants  about  as  if  they  had  been  his  own.

Similar  remarks  are  very  often  made  when  wealthy  people
die  ;  still,  the  military  governor,  without  believing  in  a  crime,
considered  that  the  reports  which  had  reached  his  ears  warranted
his  summoning  Tchitchikofi'  before  him.  He  suspected  him,  at
least,  of  culpable  intriguing,  and,  wishing  to  try  him,  he  ordered
him,  in  genuine  Russian  fashion,  to  leave  the  town  within
forty-eight  hours.  Tchitchikoff,  who  had  feared  something
worse,  at  once  felt  relieved  ;  he  spoke,  and  spoke  so  well,  that
everything,  even  those  atx'ocious  reports,  seemed  to  militate  in
his  favour.  He  modestly  called  his  excellency's  attention  to
the  fact  that  such  an  abrupt  departure  would  not  only  throw
his  own  affairs  into  confusion,  but  would  prove  extremely  pre-
judicial to  the  honourable  people  with  whom  he  had  business
connections.  Finally  he  was  authorised  to  remain  in  the  city
as  long  as  he  pleased,  but  on  conditions  that  he  conducted
himself  properly,  and  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  give  rise  to  any
more  scandalous  reports.

"Prince  !  "  retorted  our  hero,  "I  have  heard  it  said,  and  I
believe  it  true,  that  it  would  be  easier  to  stay  the  waters  of  the
Dnieper  or  the  Volga  than  the  tongues  of  chatterers  in  a  little
town."

He  then  came  forth  from  this  audience  possessed  of  more
assurance  than  formerly ;  and  he  did  not  hide  his  contempt  for
the  scandal-mongers  who  for  a  few  hours  had  believed  that  he
was  seriously  compromised.

Soon  afterwards  Khlobuyoff  received  the  fifteen  thousand
roubles  remaining  due  to  him  for  his  estate  ;  and  he  was  seen
walking  beside  Tchitchikoff  at  the  pompous  funeral  of  the
wealthy  aunt,  whose  obsequies  were  defrayed  by  Lyenitzuin.
On  the  day  when  the  seals  were  removed  from  the  residence  of
the  deceased  a  will  was  found,  and  all  interested  parties  were
summoned  by  the  authorities  to  hear  it  read.  Lyenitzuin,  de-
tained no  doubt  by  the  cares  of  office,  did  not  come  until  late  ;
and  when  the  perusal  of  the  will  was  over  he  received  with  cold
dignity  the  congratulations  of  the  people  present.  He  was
appointed  universal  legatee,  various  small  legacies  being  be-
queathed to  Khlobuyoff,  to  two  lady  companions,  a  couple
of  poor  cousins,  and  a  shrine  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  poor
relations  called  Lyenitzuin's  attention  to  the  fact  that  five  or  six


284  DEAD    SOULS.

coffers,  a  jewel  case,  and  some  sixty  pieces  of  gold  and  silver
plate  were  missing  ;  but  Lyefiitzuin,  upon  hearing  this,  merely
smiled  and  shrugged  his  shoulders.  He  was  no  doubt  fully
aware  as  to  where  the  missing  articles  had  gone.


CHAPTEE   XVI.


TWO    WILLS,    A    FAIR,    A    LAWYER,    AND    A    HOLY   MAN.

Everything  in  the  world  has  a  use  of  its  own.  "  Whoever  de-
sires a  thing  makes  an  effort  to  obtain  it,"  says  the  proverb.  The
expedition  through  the  old  lady's  trunks  had  been  successfully
achieved ;  and  as  a  result,  some  things  had  found  their  way  into
Tchitchikoff's  dressing-case.  In  short,  it  had  been  wisely
planned.  Tchitchikoff  had  not  exactly  been  guilty  of  theft,  but
he  had  taken  advantage  of  circumstances.  All  of  us  have  taken
advantage  at  times,  in  one  manner  or  another — one,  of  the
forests  belonging  to  the  crown  ;  another,  of  someone's  savings  ;
one  man  will  steal  from  his  children  for  the  sake  of  some
itinerant  actress  ;  another,  from  his  peasants,  for  the  sake  of
buying  furniture  or  equipages.  What  can  one  do,  when  so
many  enticements  exist  in  the  world — expensive  restaurants
with  mad  prices,  and  masquerades,  and  drives  and  dances  with
the  gipsies  ?  Surely,  one  cannot  always  restrain  one's  self  :
man  is  not  God.  Thus  Tchitchikoff,  like  a  very  great  many
people  who  are  fond  of  every  comfort,  turned  matters  to  his  own
advantage.

Tchitchikoff  ought  now  to  have  left  the  town,  but  the  roads
had  become  bad.  In  the  meantime,  another  fair  had  begun  in
the  town,  a  genuine  aristocratic  fair.  The  first  one  had  been
more  for  horses,  cattle,  and  raw  products,  and  divers  peasant
manufactures,  purchased  by  drovers  and  by  wholesale  dealers.
But  now,  everything  which  had  been  purchased  at  the  Nizhego-
rod  fair,  high-class  wares  of  every  description,  had  been  brought
here.  Those  raiders  on  the  Russian  purse,  the  French,  had
brought  pomades,  while  French  women  had  brought  bonnets —
those  women  who  are  Egyptian  locusts,  as  Kostauzhoglo
expressed  it,  and  who,  not  content  with  devouring  everything,
leave  their  eggs  behind  them,  buried  in  the  earth.

The  bad  state  of  the  crops  had  detained  some  landowners  in  the


TWO   WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND   A   LAWYER.  285

country.  On  the  other  hand,  the  officials  who  had  not  suffered
from  the  bad  crops  turned  out  in  force  ;  so  did  their  wives,  to
their  misfortune.  Having  read  many  of  those  books  which  have
been  disseminated  of  late  with  the  object  of  inoculating  man-
kind with  all  sorts  of  novel  requirements,  they  had  conceived
a  most  extraordinary  thirst  for  all  manner  of  new  enjoy-
ments. A  Frenchman  had  opened  a  novel  establishment,  of  a
sort  hitherto  unheard  of  in  that  government  —  a  pleasure-
garden,*  with  a  supper  at  what  purported  to  be  a  remarkably
low  price,  the  half  of  it  being  allowed  to  remain  on  credit,  to
boot.  This  was  sufficient  to  induce  not  only  all  the  heads
of  departments,  but  all  the  clerks,  to  visit  it,  in  the  expec-
tation of  future  bribes  from  petitioners.  A  desire  to  show  off  in
each  other's  presence  in  the  matter  of  horses  and  equipages
sprang  up.  There  was  a  great  elbowing  of  different  classes  for
the  sake  of  diversion.  In  spite  of  the  wretched  weather,  with
mingled  snow  and  rain,  elegant  calashes  flew  up  and  down.
Where  they  all  came  from,  God  only  knows,  but  they  would  not
have  done  discredit  to  Petersburg  itself.  Merchants  and  clerks
raised  their  hats  adroitly,  and  invited  the  ladies  to  enter.
Bearded  traders  in  fur  caps  were  rarely  to  be  seen.  Every-
thing wore  a  European  look.

Tchitchikoff,  in  a  new  Persian  dressing-gown  of  gold  brocade,
was  lolling  on  a  divan,  and  chaffering  with  an  itinerant  smuggler-
pedlar  of  Jewish  extraction  and  German  accent :  and  before
him  lay  a  piece  of  the  finest  cambric,  which  he  had  purchased
for  shirts,  and  two  cardboard  boxes  of  the  finest  soap,  possessed
of  the  most  desirable  qualities.  This  was  the  very  same  sort  of
soap  which  he  had  formerly  been  in  the  habit  of  obtaining  when
employed  in  the  custom-house  at  Eadziwill.  It  really  did
possess  the  property  of  imparting  a  wonderful  softness  and
whiteness  to  the  cheeks.  At  the  very  moment  when  he,  in  the
character  of  a  connoisseur,  was  making  his  purchases  of  these
articles,  which  are  indispensable  to  a  well-bred  man,  the  rumble
of  an  approaching  carriage  became  audible,  together  with  the
slight  answering  rattle  of  the  walls  and  windows  of  the  apart-
ment, and  his  excellency  Alexei  Ivanovitch  Lyenitzuin  entered.

"I  submit  to  your  excellency's  judgment  this  cambric,
this  soap,  and  this  cap,  which  I  purchased  yesterday,"  said
Tchitchikoff,  while  he  placed  on  his  head  a  cap  embroidered
with  gold  and  pearl  beads,  and  felt  full  of  dignity  and  grandeur
in  his  character  of  a  Persian  shah.

*  A  Vauxhall,  literally.


286  DEAD   SOULS.

But  his  excellency,  without  vouchsafing  any  reply  to  our
hero,  said  with  a  troubled  look,  "  I  must  have  a  talk  with  you
on  business  matters."  Anxiety  and  uneasiness  were  depicted
on  his  countenance.  The  worthy  merchant  with  a  German
accent  was  instantly  dismissed,  and  they  were  left  alone.

"Do  you  know  what  disagreeable  thing  has  happened  ?
Another  will  by  that  old  woman,  executed  five  years  ago,  has
been  found.  She  bequeaths  half  of  her  property  to  a  monastery,
and  the  other  half,  in  equal  shares,  to  her  two  companions."

TchitchikoflF  was  taken  aback.

"  But  that  will  is — nonsense  !  It  signifies  nothing.  It  is
set  aside  by  the  second  one,"  said  he.

"  But  it  is  not  stated  in  the  second  will  that  the  former  one
is  thereby  annulled."

"That  is  taken  for  granted.  The  first  is  annulled  by  the
last.  This  is  folly.  The  first  will  is  utterly  void.  I  am  well
acquainted  with  the  wishes  of  the  deceased.  I  was  with  her.
Who  signed  this  other  will  ?     Who  were  the  witnesses  ?  "

"  It  was  duly  witnessed  in  court.  The  witnesses  were  the
ex-judge  Burmiloff,  and  Khavanoff"."

"  That's  bad,"  thought  Tchitchikofi'.  "  Khavanoflf  is  said  to
be  an  honest  man.  As  for  Burmiloflf  he  is  a  venerable  hypocrite,
who  reads  the  Apostles  in  church  on  festival  days.  But
nonsense  !  nonsense  !  "  he  said  aloud,  and  he  immediately  felt
sufficient  firmness  to  face  anything.  "  I  know  better  than  that.
I  was  present  at  the  last  moments  of  the  dead  woman's  life.  I
know  all  about  it  better  than  anybody  else.  I  am  ready  to  take
my  personal  oath."

These  words  and  his  air  of  decision  for  the  moment  reassured
Lyenitzuin.  The  latter  was  very  much  excited,  and  had  begun
to  suspect  that  there  might  have  been  some  sort  of  fraud  on
Tchitchikofi''s  part  in  connection  with  the  will.  He  now  re-
proached himself  for  his  suspicions.  Tchitchikotf's  readiness  to
take  his  oath  was  a  plain  indication  of  the  reverse.  We  do  not
know  whether  Pavel  Ivanovitch  would  actually  have  had  the
audacity  to  take  his  oath  on  the  Gospel ;  but,  at  all  events,  he
was  audacious  enough  to  say  that  he  would.

"  Make  yourself  easy  on  that  score,"  he  added.  "  I  will  con-
sult a  lawyer  on  this  matter.  Nothing  must  be  attributed  to
you.  You  must  keep  entirely  clear  of  this  affair.  But  I  can
stay  in  the  town  as  long  as  it  suits  me."

Tchitchikoflf  immediately  ordered  his  carriage  to  be  brought
to  the  door,  and  betook  himself  to  a  lawyer's.  This  lawyer  was
^  man  of  extraordinary  experience.      He  had  fallen  under  the


TWO    WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND    A    LAAVYER.  287

jurisdiction  of  the  court  fifteen  years  previously,  but  be  had  so
managed  that  it  bad  been  utterly  impossible  to  prevent  bim
practising  his  profession.  Everybody  was  perfectly  well  aware
of  the  fact  that  he  had  deserved  transportation  half  a  dozen
times.  He  was  suspected  to  the  last  degree  in  every  quarter,
but  it  was  impossible  to  produce  plain  and  convincing  proofs.
There  really  was  something  uncanny  about  him,  and  he  might
have  been  boldly  proclaimed  as  a  wizard  if  the  history  which  we
are  transcribing  referred  to  an  uncivilised  epoch.

The  lawyer  amazed  Tchitchikoft"  by  the  coolness  of  his  de-
meanour and  the  filthiness  of  his  dressing-gown,  which  presented
a  complete  contrast  to  the  handsome  mahogany  furniture,
the  gilt  clock  under  a  glass  shade,  the  chandelier  which  peeped
forth  from  the  chintz  cover  protecting  it,  and  all  the  other
objects  which  surrounded  him,  and  which  bore  the  stamp  of
European  civilisation.

Nothing  daunted,  however,  by  the  dubious  appearance  of  the
lawyer,  Tchitchikoff  explained  the  perplexing  points  of  the
matter  in  hand,  and  sketched  a  seductive  perspective  of  the
gratitude  which  would  infallibly  follow  sound  counsel  and
assistance.

The  jurisconsult  replied  to  this  with  allusions  to  the  transitory
character  of  all  earthly  things,  and  Avith  much  art  he  allowed  it
to  be  understood  that  a  stork  in  the  heavens  signified  nothing
with  him  providing  he  had  a  tomtit  in  the  hand.

There  was  help  for  it :  the  tomtit  for  the  hand  had  to
be  provided.  Then  the  dubious  coolness  of  the  philosopher
suddenly  vanished.  He  turned  out  to  be  the  most  good-natured
of  men,  extremely  communicative  and  agreeable  in  conversation,
and  not  a  whit  inferior  in  cleverness  to  Tchitchikofl'  himself.

"  Permit  me  to  say  to  you,  instead  of  entering  into  a  long-
winded  talk,  that  you  certainly  cannot  have  examined  the  last
will  thoroughly.  It  assuredly  contains  some  codicil.  Get  it  into
your  possession  as  speedily  as  possible.  Although,  of  course,  it
is  forbidden  to  take  such  things  home  with  one,  still,  if  certain

officials  are  appealed  to  in  the  proper  way I  will  render

assistance  on  my  part."

"  I  understand,"  thought  Tchitcbikofi";  and  he  said,  "  I  really
cannot  distinctly  recall  whether  there  was  a  codicil  or  not  " —
just  as  though  he  had  not  written  the  will  himself.

"  The  very  best  thing  that  you  can  do  will  be  to  look  it  over.
Besides,  in  any  case,"  the  lawyer  continued  in  an  amiable  way,
"you  must  feel  quite  at  your  ease  ;  and  you  must  not  take  alarm
at  anything,  even  if  matters  seem  to  be  going  very  badly.    Never


288  DEAD   SOULS.

despair  of  anything  under  any  circumstances  whatever.  There
is  nothing  which  cannot  be  remedied.  Look  at  me.  I  am  always
tranquil.  No  matter  what  critical  accusations  are  brought
against  me,  my  composure  remains  immovable."  The  face  of
the  lawyer-philosopher  did,  in  point  of  fact,  retain  a  remarkably
tranquil  look,  which  was  very  re-assuring  to  Tchitchikoff.

"That  is,  of  course,  a  matter  of  the  greatest  moment;  but
3'ou  must  acknowledge,  nevertheless,  that  occasions  may  arise
of  such  a  nature,  that  an  attack  on  the  part  of  one's  enemies  may
be  of  such  a  description,  and  that  there  may  occur  difficult
situations  of  such  a  sort  that  all  composure  is  put  to  flight."

"  That  is  cowardice,  believe  me,"  rejoined  the  philosophical
lawyer  with  great  composure  and  amiability.  "  Only  try  to  have
all  transactions  set  down  on  paper,  and  have  nothing  left  to
talk  alone.  And  as  soon  as  you  perceive  that  the  aflair  is
approaching  a  solution,  and  that  it  is  ripe  for  settlement,  do  not
endeavour  to  justify  and  defend  yourself,  but  simply  try  to  intro-
duce some  fresh  issues  which  have  no  connection  with  the  case."

"  That  is  with  the  object  of  doing  what  ?  "

"  Producing  confusion,  producing  confusion,  nothing  more :
you  must  introduce  side  issues,  extraneous  circumstances,  into
this  case,  so  that  other  people  may  become  involved  in  it ;  the
object  is  to  render  the  matter  complicated,  neither  more  nor
less.  And  then  let  some  freshly  arrived  oflicial  from  Petersburg
unravel  it,  let  him  unravel  it  if  he  can  !  "  the  sagacious  lawyer
repeated,  looking  Tchitchikoff  straight  in  the  eye  with  extra-
ordinary satisfaction,  just  as  a  teacher  contemplates  a  pupil
when  he  is  explaining  to  him  some  treacherous  passage  in  the
Piussian  grammar.

"  And  it  will  be  as  well  for  you  to  collect  such  items  as  are
calculated  to  throw  dust  in  people's  eyes,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  also
gazing  with  satisfaction  into  the  eyes  of  the  philosopher,  like  a
pupil  who  has  understood  his  teacher's  exposition  of  a  deceptive
passage.

"  Such  items  will  be  provided,  they  will  be  provided.  Believe
me,  the  brain  grows  inventive  by  dint  of  frequent  practice.  You
will  gain  a  great  deal  by  complicating  matters ;  and  we  must
have  as  many  officials  mixed  up  in  it  as  possible,  and  their  fees
must  be  handsome.  In  short,  as  many  persons  as  possible  must
be  drawn  into  the  business.  There  is  no  necessity  of  sacrificing
other  people  for  nothing,  but  we  must  justify  ourselves  by  means
of  them,  and  they  must  be  responsible  on  paper.  They  must
buy  themselves  off.  There's  a  harvest  for  you  !  In  this  manner
you  can  complicate  and  entangle  matters,  so  that  no  one  can


TWO   WILLS,   A  FAIR,    AKD   A   LAWYER.  289

understand  anything  about  them.  Why  am  I  so  calm  ?  Because
I  know  this  :  when  my  aftairs  are  going  very  badly  I  get  every-
one implicated  in  them — the  governor  and  the  vice-govei'nor,
and  the  chief  of  police  and  the  treasurer — I  get  every  one  of
them  involved.  I  know  all  their  circumstances — just  who  has  a
quarrel  with  whom,  and  who  is  otiended  with  whom,  and  who
wants  to  revenge  himself  on  whom.  Then  let  them  extricate
themselves  if  they  can  :  others  can  be  found  to  replace  them.
It  is  only  in  troubled  waters  that  fish  are  caught."

Here  the  philosopher-lawyer  stared  at  Tchitchikoff  with  all
his  eyes,  and  again  it  was  with  satisfaction  similar  to  that
"with  which  a  teacher  expounds  a  treacherous  passage  in  the
Russian  grammar  to  his  pupil.

"Yes,  this  man  is  truly  wise,"  said  Tchitchikoff  to  himself;
and  he  took  leave  of  the  jurisconsult  in  the  most  amiable  and
agreeable  frame  of  mind.

Perfectly  reassured,  he  flung  himself  with  careless  grace  on
the  elastic  cushions  of  his  calash.  Then  he  ordered  Selifan  to
throw  the  hood  back  (he  had  gone  to  the  lawyer  with  the  hood
raised,  and  even  with  the  apron  buttoned  up),  and  assumed  the
exact  attitude  of  a  retired  colonel  of  hussars,  or  of  Vishnepo-
kromoff  himself,  throwing  one  leg  gracefully  over  the  other,  and
pleasantly  presenting  to  all  who  met  him  a  face  which  fairly
beamed  from  beneath  a  new  silk  hat,  tilted  somewhat  on  one
side.  Selifan  was  ordered  to  drive  in  the  direction  of  the  bazaar.
The  merchants,  both  those  belonging  to  the  town  and  the
strangers,  took  off  their  hats  respectfully  as  they  stood  at  the
doors  of  their  shops ;  and  Tchitchikoff,  not  without  dignity,
raised  his  hat  in  return.

Many  of  them  were  already  acquainted  with  him ;  others,
although  strangers,  were  captivated  with  the  attractive  appear-
ance of  a  gentleman  who  so  well  understood  how  to  bear  himself,
and  they  greeted  him  as  though  they  knew  him.  The  fair  in  the
city  of  Tfuslavl  had  not  yet  come  to  an  end  :  the  horse  and  agri-
cultural fair  had  closed,  and  that  which  embraced  fine  wares  for
gentlemen  of  the  highest  breeding  had  opened.  The  merchants
who  had  arrived  on  wheels  had  made  up  their  minds  not  to
return  except  on  runners.

"  Pray  enter,  sir,  pray  enter,  sir !  "  said  the  man  at  the  cloth-
shop,  striking  a  politely  affected  attitude  as  he  stood  with  his
head  bare,  in  a  German  surtout  of  Moscow  make,  and  holding
his  hat  in  one  hand  while  with  two  fingers  of  the  other  ho
stroked  his  round,  cleanly  shaven  chin  ;  at  the  same  time  dis-
playing an  expression  of  dainty  refinement  on  his  face.

T


290  DEAD    SOULS.

TcMtcliikoff  entered  the  shop.  "  Show  me  some  cloth,  my
good  fellow,"  said  he.

The  amiable  merchant  immediately  lifted  a  loose  board  in  the
counter ;  and  having  thus  made  an  entrance  for  himself,  he
found  himself  inside  his  shop,  with  his  back  to  his  goods  and
his  face  to  his  customer.  Then,  with  uncovered  head  and
flourishing  his  hat,  he  saluted  Tchitchikofl'  once  more.  Then
he  put  on  his  hat,  and,  bending  gracefully  forwards  with  both
hands  resting  on  the  counter,  he  spoke  thus  :  "  "What  sort  of
cloth,  sir  ?  Do  you  prefer  it  of  English  make,  or  of  domestic
manufacture  ?  "

"Of  domestic  manufacture,"  replied  Tchitchikoflf;  "but  it
must  be  of  the  best  quality,  of  the  sort  called  English."

"What  colours  would  you  like  to  look  at?"  inquired  the
shopman,  still  swaying  too  and  fro,  with  his  hands  still  resting
on  the  counter.

"  Of  an  olive  or  bottle-green  tint,  or  else  cranberry  colour,"
said  Tchitchikoff.

"  I  may  assert  that  you  shall  have  the  very  best  sort,  than
which  no  better  is  to  be  found  except  in  enlightened  capitals.
Boy,  fetch  the  cloth  with  number  34  upstairs.  That's  not  it,
my  friend.  No ,  fetch  the  other !  Why  do  you  always  feel
yourself  above  your  station,  you  penniless  scamp  ?  Throw
that  here.  Yes,  here  is  the  very  cloth."  And  unfolding  it  from
the  other  end,  the  shopman  lifted  it  almost  to  Tchitchikofi''s
very  nose,  so  that  our  hero  could  not  only  feel  its  silky  gloss
with  his  hand,  but  even  smell  it.

"Very  good,  but  that  is  not  what  I  want,"  said  Tchitchikoff.
"  I  have  served  in  the  custom-house  service,  you  see,  so  I  must
have  the  very  finest  quality  ;  and  it  must  also  be  of  a  reddish
tint,  with  rather  a  cranberry  tinge."

"  I  understand,  sir :  what  you  really  want  is  the  shade  which
is  now  coming  into  fashion.  I  have  some  other  cloths  of  the  very
best  quality.  I  warn  you  that  the  price  is  high,  but  they  are
of  the  very  finest  quality."

Then  he  climbed  up  to  reach  some  cloth  from  a  shelf.  The
piece  fell  down.  He  unrolled  it  with  the  art  of  a  bygone  age,
and  even  forgot  for  the  moment  that  he  belonged  to  a  later
generation  as  he  held  it  to  the  light,  even  emerging  from  his  shop
to  do  so,  screwing  up  his  eyes  as  he  faced  the  light,  and  saying,
"  'Tis  the  most  exquisite  shade  of  cloth,  Navarino  smoke-tint
and  flame-colour."

The  cloth  was  satisfactory;  the  price  was  agreed  to,  although
it  was  with  "  a  prefix,"  as  the  dealer  declared.     Then  a  clever


i


TWO    WILLS,    A    FAIll,    AND    A   LAWYER.  291

tearing  movement  was  executed  with  both  hands.  Finally  it  was
enveloped  in  paper  in  the  Russian  fashion,  with  incredible  swift-
ness. The  bundle  was  then  encircled  with  a  slender  cord,
which  clasped  it  with  a  knot  which  palpitated  with  life.  Next
the  cord  was  snipped  off  with  some  shears,  and  the  whole  placed
in  the  calash.

"  Show  me  some  black  cloth,"  now  rang  out  a  voice  in  the
shop,

"  Here's  Khlobuyoff,  deuce  take  him  !  "  said  Tchitchikoff  to
himself,  and  he  turned  his  back  that  he  might  not  see  the  other;
for  ho  considered  it  ill-bred  on  the  latter's  part  to  enter  into  any
explanation  with  him  in  regard  to  the  inheritance.  But  Khlo-
buyoff had  already  espied  him.

"How  is  this,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  ?  Are  you  avoiding  me  in-
tentionally ?  I  am  never  able  to  find  you,  although  there  are
some  matters  which  we  must  discuss  seriously."

"  My  most  respected  sir,  my  most  respected  sir,"  said  Tchi-
tchikoff, squeezing  his  hand,  "  believe  me,  I  am  extremely
desirous  of  having  a  talk  with  you;  but  I  really  have  no  time."
And  he  said  to  himself,  "  May  the  Devil  fly  away  with  you  !  "
when  all  at  once,  he  saw  Murazoff,  the  wealthy  farmer  of  the
brandy  revenues,  entering  the  shop.  "Ah,  my  heavens,  Afanaisy
Vasilievitch!  "  said  Tchitchikoff;  "this  is  a  fortunate  encounter!"

Then  Vishnepokromoff,  who  entered  after  him,  repeated,
"  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch  !  "  And  the  well-bred  shopman,  holding
his  hat  as  far  from  his  head  as  his  arm  would  allow,  and  bend-
ing his  whole  body  forward,  exclaimed,  "Your  most  humble
servant,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch!"  All  their  faces  exhibited  that
dog-like  servility  which  sinful  man  shows  to  a  millionaire.

Old  Muzaroff  bowed  to  all  of  them,  and  turned  directly  to
Khlobuyoff.  "  Excuse  me  :  having  seen  you  from  a  distance
entering  this  shop,  I  decided  to  trouble  you.  If  you  are  at
liberty,  and  if  your  way  lies  past  my  house,  do  me  the  favour
to  come  in  for  a  short  time.    I  must  speak  with  you."

Khlobuyoff  replied  "Very  well,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch."

"  What  very  beautiful  weather  we  are  having,  Afanasiy  Vasi-
lievitch," said  Tchitchikoff."

"Yes,  are  we  not,"  interposed  Vishnepokromoff.  "It  is
quite  unusual,  surely."

"  Yes,  sir,  thank  God,  it  is  not  bad.  But  a  little  rain  is  re
quired  to  allow  of  sowing."

"It  is  very,  very  much  needed,"  responded  Vishnepokro-
moff.  "  And  it  would  be  well  for  the  hunting  season  also."

"Yes,  a  shower  would  do  no  harm, "^chimed  in  Tchitchikoff,


292  DEAD    SOULS.

who  did  not  need  any  rain  at  all ;  but  for  some  reason  or  otlier  it
is  always  pleasant  to  agree  with  a  man  who  possesses
millions.

"My  head  simply  grows  dizzy,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  when
Murazoflf  went  out,  "at  the  thought  that  that  man  owns  ten
millions.     It  is  simply  incredible."

"  The  thing  is  monstrous,"  s^id  Yishnepokromqff.  "  Capital
ought  not  to  be  in  the  hands  of  a  few."""  This  fs  no~w  the  subject
of  treatises  in  every  country  of  Europe.  If  you  have  any
money,  share  it  with  your  neighbour  ;  entertain,  give  balls,  in-
dulge in  beneficent  luxury,  which  furnishes  food  to  artisans
and  handicraftsmen."

"  I  cannot  understand  it,"  said  Tchitchikofi'.  "  Ten  millions,
and  he  lives  like  a  simple  moujik  !  The  deuce  only  knows
what  might  be  done  with  those  ten  millions !  It  might  be  so
employed  that  you  would  have  no  society  lower  than  that  of
generals  and  princes."

"Yes,  sir,"  added  the  shopman.  "  With  all  Afanasiy  Vasilie-
^vitch's  fine  qualities,  there  is  much  that  is  uncnltivarteTi~a"bout
himT"  If  a  merchant  acquires  honours  he  is  no  longer  a  mer-
chant :  he  is  already  after  a  fashion  a  wholesale  dealer.  In
those  circumstances  I  should  feel  bound  to  take  a  box  at  the
theatre,  and  I  would  not  marry  my  daughter  to  a  simple
colonel:  no,  sir,  I  would  wed  her  to  a  general.  What's  a
colonel  to  me  ?  And  my  dinner  would  be  prepared  by  the  con-
fectioner, and  not  by  the  cook  any  longer."

"Well,  what's  the  use  of  talking?  Pray  cease  all  this,"
said  Vishnepokromofi".  "  What  couldn't  one  do  with  ten
millions  ?  Only  give  me  ten  millions,  and  you  would  see  what
I  would  do  !  "

"  No,  no,"  thought  Tchitchikoff :  "  much  good  you  would  do
with  ten  millions.  But  if  I  only  had  ten  millions,  I  would
really  accomplish  something  proper  with  them."

"Ah!  if  I  had  ten  millions,  after  all  these  terrible  experi-
ences," said  Khlobuyofif  to  himself.  "  Experience  teaches  one  the
value  of  every  copeck.  Eh  !  I  am  not  now  as  I  was."  And
after  a  moment's  thought,  he  asked  himself,  ''Would  you  really
know  how  to  manage  your  affairs  now  ?"  Then,  with  a  wave
of  his  hand  he  added,  "  What  the  deuce  !  I  believe  that  I  should
squander  it  now  exactly  as  I  did  before  !  "  And  he  quitted  the
shop,  burning  with  curiosity  to  know  what  Murazoflf  had  to  say
to  him.

"I  am  waiting  for  you,  Semyon  Semyonovitch,"  said  Mura-
^ofi"  to  Khlobuyoflf,  as  he  entered  the  house.     "  Please  come  to


TWO    AVIIXS,  FAIR,    AND    A    LAWYER.  233

my  room."  And  be  then  led  Khlobuyoff  into  bis  private  room,
and  wbicb  M'cas  no  more  comfortable  tban  that  of  an  oliicial  wbo
received  a  paltr}'  salary  of  some  six  or  seven  bnndred  roubles  a
year.

"Pray  tell  me  :  I  suppose  3'ou  are  in  a  little  better  circum-
stances now  ?  You  have  surely  received  something,  nov/  that
your  aunt  is  dead  ?  "

"What  am  I  to  say  to  you,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch  ?  I  do
not  know  whether  my  circumstances  are  improved  or  not.  I
have  received  thirty  thousand  roubles,  with  which  I  must  pay
off  a  portion  of  my  debts  ;  and  beyond  that  I  have  nothing
whatever.  But  the  principal  point  is  that  things  are  not  just
as  they  should  be  in  connection  with  that  will.  There  has
been  some  rascality  about  it,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch.  I  will  tell
you  about  it  directly,  and  you  Avill  be  amazed  that  such  a  trans-
action could  take  place.     That  Tchitchikoff —  "

"Excuse  me,  Semyon  Semyonovitch;  before  talking  of
Tchitchikoff,  permit  me  to  speak  about  yourself.  Tell  me  how
much,  according  to  your  calculations,  would  be  sufficient  to  set
your  affairs  entirely  to  rights  ?  "

"  My  affairs  are  in  a  very  perplexing  state,"  answered  Khlo-
buyoff. "  In  order  to  straighten  them  out,  pay  off  my  debts,
and  be  in  a  condition  to  live  in  the  most  modest  manner,  I
should  need  one  hundred  thousand  roubles,  if  not  more."

"  And  if  you  had  that,  how  would  you  order  your  life  ?  "

"  Well,  I  should  take  some  inexpensive  lodgings,  and  occupy
myself  with  the  education  of  my  children.  There  is  no  use  in
thinking  of  myself;  my  career  is  ended,  I  am  no  longer  good
for  anything."

"  But  your  life  will  in  that  case  remain  an  idle  one  ;  and  in
an  idle  life  temptations  arise  which  a  man  would  never  dream
of  when  busy  with  work."

"I  cannot;  I  am  good  for  nothing;  I  have  grown  stupid
and  my  loins  pain  me."

"  But  how  can  one  live  without  work  '?  How  can  one  exist
in  the  world  without  duties,  without  a  place  of  one's  own,
praj''  ?  Look  at  every  one  of  God's  creatures i  Every  one  of
them  has  some  service  to  perform,  is  of  some  use.  Even  a
stone  is  created  for  use ;  and  man,  the  most  intelligent  being
of  them  all — is  it  possible  that  he  should  remain  useless  ?  "

"  But  I  shall  not  be  without  occupation,  I  can  attend  to
the  education  of  my  children."

"  No,  Semyon  Semyonovitch,  that  is  the  hardest  thing  of  all.
How  can  you  educate  your  children  when  you  are  not  educated


294  DEAD    SOULS.

yourself?  You  can  educate  your  children  by  the  example  of
your  own  life.  But  is  your  life  a  fitting  example  for  them  ?  Is
it  well  to  teach  them,  for  instance,  to  pass  their  time  in  idle-
ness and  in  card-playing  ?  No,  Semyon  Semyonovitch,  give
your  children  to  me  to  take  care  of:  you  will  spoil  them.
Think  seriously  of  this  matter :  idleness  has  been  your  ruin
— you  must  flee  from  it.  How  can  you  live  in  the  world  with-
out attaching  yourself  to  anything  ?  Some  duty  must  be  ful-
filled. Even  a  day-labourer  serves  a  use.  He  eats  coarse
bread,  but  he  earns  it;  and  he  takes  an  interest  in  his
occupation,"

"  By  heavens,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch,  I  have  tried,  I  have
really  made  an  efi'ort  to  conquer  myself !  What  am  I  to  do  ?
I  have  grown  old,  I  have  become  unfitted  for  anything.  Now,
what  can  I  do  ?  Shall  I  enter  the  service  ?  But  how  am  I,  at
my  age,  to  sit  at  one  desk  with  the  ofiice-clerks  who
have  just  begun  theu-  career  ?  Besides,  I  am  incapable  of
accepting  bribes  ;  and  hence  I  hinder  my  own  advancement,
and  injure  others.  And  they  have  their  castes  already  formed,
No,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch,  I  have  reflected,  and  I  have  tried,
and  I  have  meditated  on  all  sorts  of  situations — and  I  am
unfitted  for  any  one  of  them.     In  the  almshouse,  perhaps,"

"  The  almshouse  is  for  those  who  have  toiled  ;  but  to  those
who  have  passed  their  youth  in  merriment,  one  gives  the  answer
which  the  ant  gave  to  the  grasshopper,  *  Go,  dance  !  '  And  those
who  live  in  the  almshouse  work  also,  and  toil,  and  do  not  play
at  whist.  Semyon  Semyonovitch,  you  are  deceiving  both  your-
self and  family."

So  saying,  Murazoff"  gazed  intently  into  the  other  man's  face  ;
but  poor  Khlobuyoff  could  make  no  reply.  Murazoff"  felt  sorry
for  him,

"  Listen,  Semyon  Semyonovitch,"  he  resumed.  "  Surely  you
pray  when  you  enter  a  church  ;  you  miss  neither  mass  nor  ves-
pers, that  I  know.  Although  you  do  not  like  to  rise  early,  still
you  do  it,  and  you  go — yes,  you  go  to  church  at  four  o'clock  in
the  morning,  when  no  one  else  is  up."

"  That's  another  thing,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch.  I  know  that  I
am  not  doing  that  for  man,  but  for  Him  who  has  commanded  us
all  to  exist  on  earth.  But  what  of  that  ?  I  believe  that  He  is
merciful  to  me  ;  that,  no  matter  how  wretched  and  vile  I  may
be.  He  will  pardon  and  receive  me  when  men  repulse  me  with
their  feet,  and  when  my  best  friend  betrays  me,  and  pretends
that  he  betrayed  me  with  a  beneficent  aim."

A  look  of  bitterness  came  over  Khlobuyoflf's  countenance ;  and


TWO   WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND   A    LAWYER.  295

Murazoflf  held  his  peace  for  a  moment,  as  though  to  allow  him
to  recover  himself.  Then  he  said,  "  Why  do  not  you  accept
some  duties,  but  not  for  the  sake  of  man  or  for  the  gratifica-
tion of  society  "?  Serve  Him  who  is  so  merciful.  Work  is  well-
pleasing  in  His  sight,  as  well  as  prayer.  Engage  in  some  occu-
pation, but  undertake  it  as  though  you  were  doing  it  for  His
sake,  and  not  for  that  of  man.  Come,  now,  if  you  do  but  draw
water  in  a  sieve,  just  think  that  you  are  doing  it  for  His  sake.
You  will  derive  at  least  this  profit  from  it — that  you  will  have
no  time  left  to  lose  money  at  cards,  to  feast  with  parasites,
and  lounge  your  life  away.  Eh,  Semyon  Semyonovitch  !  Do
you  know  Ivan  Potapuich  ?  "

"  I  know  him,  and  respect  him  very  deeply."

"  Well,  he  was  formerly  a  prosperous  merchant.  He  had  half
a  million.  Everything  which  he  looked  at  turned  to  profit,  and
he  launched  into  large  expenditure.  He  began  to  have  his  son
taught  French,  and  he  married  his  daughter  to  a  general.  And
wherever  he  encountered  a  friend,  whether  in  a  shop  or  in  the
street  of  the  exchange,  he  would  drag  him  into  a  tavern ;  he
feasted  thus  for  days  at  a  time,  and  finally  became  bankrupt.
And  then  God  sent  a  calamity  upon  him  :  his  son  died.  And
now,  do  you  see '?  he  is  a  clerk  in  my  employ.  He  has  made  a
fresh  start.  His  afi"airs  have  righted  themselves.  He  might
again  enter  trade  on  a  basis  of  five  hundred  thousand  roubles.
'  I  have  been  a  clerk,  and  as  a  clerk  I  wish  to  die.  Now,'  he
says,  *  I  have  become  healthy  and  fresh  ;  but  formerly  I  had  the
bellyache,  and  dropsy  was  beginning  to  attack  me.  No  more
of  it ! '  says  he.  And  he  never  tastes  tea  now  ;  all  he  eats  is
cabbage  soup  and  oatmeal  porridge — yes,  sir.  And  he  prays  as
not  one  of  the  rest  of  us  does,  and  he  helps  the  poor  as  none  of
the  rest  of  us  do.  And  I  should  be  glad  to  assist  another  man
who  has  squandered  his  money."

Poor  Klilobuyofi"  became  thoughtful.

The  other  man  took  him  by  both  hands.  "  Semyon  Semyono-
vitch," said  he,  "  if  you  only  knew  how  sorry  I  am  for  you  !  I
think  of  you  constantly.  Now  listen  to  me.  You  are  aware
that,  in  the  monastery,  there  is  a  hermit  whom  no  one  sees.
This  man  is  possessed  of  great  wisdom — of  more  wisdom,  sir,
than  anyone  whom  I  know.  Now,  he  can  give  proper  advice.
I  once  began  to  tell  him  that  I  had  a  certain  friend — but  I  will
not  mention  his  name — and  that  he  was  sufi"ering  from  such  and
such  a  cause.  He  began  by  listening  to  my  talk ;  but  all  at
once  he  interrupted  me  with  the  words,  *  God's  business  takes
the  precedence  of  your  own.     There  are  churches  to  be  built.


296  DEAD    SOULS.

and  there  is  no  money  to  do  it ;  money  must  be  collected  for
the  churches  ! '  And  then  he  clapped  to  the  door.  *  What  does
that  mean  ?  '  I  thought  to  myself.  Evidently  he  did  not  mean
to  impart  any  advice,'  so  I  went  to  our  archimandrite.  No  sooner
had  I  entered  the  door,  than  the  first  words  he  addressed  to  me
were  in  the  form  of  an  inquiry  :  did  not  I  know  of  some  man  to
whom  could  be  intrusted  the  task  of  making  a  collection  for  the
churches  ?  He  must  belong  to  the  gentry  or  merchant  class,
must  be  better  educated  than  the  average,  and  must  regard  the
work  as  his  salvation.  I  instantly  paused.  '  Ah,  good  heavens  !
why,  the  hermit  meant  to  designate  Semyon  Semyonovitch  for
this  task !  The  remedy  is  adapted  to  his  disease.  By  dint  of
going  about  with  a  book  under  his  arm,  from  landed  proprietor
to  peasant,  from  peasant  to  petty  tradesman,  he  will  learn  how
each  class  lives,  and  who  stands  in  need  of  what — so  that  when
he  returns,  after  having  made  the  tour  of  several  governments,
he  will  understand  the  ground  and  the  country  far  better  than
all  the  people  who  dwell  in  towns.'  And  such  men  are  needed
now.  Here  a  certain  prince  informs  me  that  he  would  give  a
great  deal  to  get  hold  of  a  man  who  really  knows  affairs,  not
from  papers,  but  as  they  really  are ;  for,  as  he  says,  nothing
can  be  gathered  from  papers,  everything  is  so  involved."

"  You  have  utterly  confused  and  overcome  me,  Afanasiy
Vasilievitch,"  said  Khlobuyoff,  as  he  gazed  in  amazement  at  Mur-
azoff.  "  I  actually  cannot  believe  that  you  are  saying  this  to
me.  For  your  purpose  you  require  an  active  man,  of  un-
wearied energy ;  and  moreover,  how  can  I  desert  my  wife  and
children  ?  "

"  You  must  feel  no  anxiety  with  regard  to  your  wife  and  chil-
dren. I  take  them  under  my  own  protection,  and  teachers  shall
be  provided  for  the  childi'en.  If  you  are  willing  to  go  about
with  double  pouches,  begging  alms  for  yourself,  it  is  much
more  noble  to  do  so  for  God.  I  will  give  you  a  simple  kibitka  :
do  not  be  afraid  of  being  jolted;-  it  will  be  of  benefit  to  your
health.  I  will  furnish  you  with  money  for  the  journey,  so  that,
as  you  go  along,  you  may  give  to  those  who  stand  most  in  need
of  it.  In  this  way  you  can  do  a  great  deal  of  good.  You  must
make  no  mistake ;  those  to  whom  you  give  must  be  worthy
persons.  By  travelling  about  in  this  manner,  you  will  make  the
acquaintance  of  every  sort  of  individual,  and  you  will  learn  how
each  one  lives.  This  is  not  the  same  thing  as  being  an  official
whom  everyone  fears,  but  in  your  case,  knowing  that  you  are
collecting  for  the  Church,  they  will  talk  freely."

**  I  perceive  that  it  is  a  very  beautiful  scheme,  and  I  should  bo


TWO    WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND    A    LAWYER.  297

very  glad  to  have  a  share  in  it ;  hut  it  really  seems  to  me  as
though  it  were  heyoud  my  powers."

"  Well,  what  is  within  your  powers  ?  "  said  Murazoff.  "  There
is  nothing  within  our  powers  ;  everything  is  beyond  our  powers.
Nothing  is  possible  without  aid  from  on  high.  Prayer  concen-
trates the  faculties.  A  man  crosses  himself,  and  says,  '  Lord,
have  mercy  ! '  then  he  rows  on,  and  reaches  the  shore.  One
must  not  pause  long  to  think  of  this  ;  it  is  merely  necessary
to  cling  blindly  to  God.  The  kibitka  will  be  ready  for  you
immediately  ;  and  you  must  run  to  the  father  archimandrite
for  the  book  and  his  blessing,  and  then  set  out  on  your
journey."

"  I  will  obey  you,  and  I  will  accept  this  as  the  command  of
God  ;  and  may  the  Lord  give  me  his  blessing !  "  thought  Khlo-
buyoff,  as  he  felt  strength  and  alertness  beginning  to  permeate
his  soul.  His  very  brain  seemed  to  be  stimulated  with  the
hope  of  escape  from  his  sad  and  inextricable  predicament.
Light  began  to  glimmer  in  the  distance.

"  And  now,  permit  me  to  ask  you,"  said  Murazoff,  "  what  sort
of  a  man  is  that  Tchitchikoff  ?  "

"I  can  tell  you  incredible  things  about  Tchitchikoff.  Ho  is
engaged  in  such  transactions — well,  do  you  know,  Afanasiy
Vasilievitch,  that  will  was  certainly  forged  ?  The  real  one  has
been  found — one  in  which  my  aunt  bequeaths  all  the  property
to  her  lady  companions,  whom  she  brought  up."

"  You  don't  say  so  !  Then,  who  fabricated  the  forged
will  ?  "

"  That  is  the  very  point,  and  a  most  revolting  business  it  is.
They  say  that  Tchitchikoff  did  it,  and  that  the  will  was  signed
after  the  testator's  death.  They  dressed  up  some  woman  to
represent  the  dead  woman,  and  that  person  signed  it.  In  short,
the  affair  is  of  the  most  rascally  description.  A  thousand  appeals
have  poured  in  from  all  quarters ;  wooers  are  now  flocking  to
Marya  Yeremyevna,  who  personated  the  deceased.  Lideedtwo
official  personages  are  now  quarrelling  over  her.  That's  the  sort
of  a  business  it  is,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch."

"  I  have  heard  nothing  about  this,  but  there  really  is  some-
thing wrong  about  the  matter.  I  will  admit  that  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch  Tchitchikoff  is  to  me  an  extremely  repulsive  man,"  said
Murazoff.

"  I  have  also  filed  an  appeal,  in  order  to  remind  the  officials
that  an  immediate  heir  is  in  existence.  They  may  all  fight  it
out  among  themselves,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,"  thought
Khlobuyotf,   as  he  left  the  house.     "Afanasiy  Vasilievitch  is


298  DEAD    SOULS.

no  fool.  He  probably  thought  the  matter  over  before  he  in-
trusted this  commission  to  me.  All  I  have  to  do  is  to  fulfil
it."

He  had  already  begun  to  meditate  on  his  journey,  while
Murazoflf  was  still  repeating,  "  Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoff  is
to  me  an  extremely  repulsive  man.  If  he  would  only  dis-
play the  same  perseverance  and  force  of  will  in  a  good  cause  !  "

In  the  meantime,  appeal  after  appeal  had  been  presented  to
the  court.  Relatives  who  had  never  been  heard  of  before  made
their  appearance.  As  birds  of  prey  swoop  down  upon  a  corpse,
so  every  one  swooped  down  upon  the  immense  heritage  left
by  the  old  woman.  Denunciations  against  Tchitchikoff,  against
the  fraudulent  will ;  complaints  as  to  the  fraudulent  character
of  the  first  will  as  well ;  charges  of  theft,  and  of  the  concealment
of  various  sums  ;  charges  against  Tchitchikoff  in  connection  with
his  purchase  of  dead  souls,  and  of  his  introduction  of  snauggled
goods  during  his  service  in  the  custom-house — had  already  been
brought  forward.

Everything  had  been  ferreted  out,  and  his  former  history  was
generally  known.  God  alone  knows  how  people  had  got  scent
of  his  history,  and  had  unearthed  the  whole  of  it !  But  there
were  proofs,  even  with  regard  to  such  matters  as  Tchitchikoff
supposed  to  be  known  to  himself  and  to  the  four  walls  only.
AH  this  was  a  judicial  secret  for  the  present,  and  had  not  yet
reached  his  ears  ;  although  a  confidential  note  from  his  lawyer,
which  he  received  before  long,  gave  him  to  understand  that
there  was  trouble  brewing.  This  note  Avas  couched  in  brief
terms  :  "  I  hasten  to  inform  you  that  your  business  will  create  a
stir,  but  remember  that  you  are  not  to  feel  anxious.  The  chief
thing  is — composure.  We  will  settle  it  all."  This  note  en-
tirely reassured  him.  "That  man  is  a  real  genius!"  said
Tchitchikoff.

To  complete  his  pleasant  frame  of  mind,  the  tailor  brought
home  his  new  suit  just  at  this  time.  He  conceived  a  strong
desire  to  have  a  look  at  himself  in  his  new  coat  of  Navarino
smoke  and  flame ;  he  tightly  buckled  his  trousers,  which  fitted
him  wonderfully  well  in  every  respect,  so  that  he  was  a  perfect
picture.  The  cloth  moulded  itself  to  his  hips  and  calves  ;  it  set
snugly  to  his  whole  form,  thereby  communicating  still  greater
elasticity  to  it.  When  he  drew  the  strap  close  behind,  his
stomach  seemed  just  like  a  drum.  He  immediately  smote  it  with
a  brush,  and  said,  "  What  a  fool !  but,  on  the  whole,  it  forms  a
picture."  It  appeared  that  the  coat  was  even  better  made  than
the  trousers :  there  was  not  a  single  wrinkle ;    all  the  parts


TWO   WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND    A    LAWYER.  299

stretched  smoothly,  curving  outward  over  the  rounding  portions
of  his  body,  and  defining  the  hollows.

The  tailor  merely  smiled  at  Tchitchikoff's  remark,  that  it
pinched  him  a  little  under  his  left  arm :  it  set  all  the  better
round  the  waist  for  that,  said  he.  "Be  at  your  ease,  be  at  your
ease,  as  regards  the  work,"  he  kept  repeating  with  unconcealed
triumph.  "  Things  are  made  so  nowhere  else  outside  of  Peters-
burg." The  tailor  was  from  Petersburg  himself;  and  on  his
sign  he  had  inscribed,  From  London  and  Paris.  He  was  not
fond  of  jesting,  and  his  object  in  employing  the  names  of  these
two  cities  was  to  close  the  throats  of  all  other  tailors  on  the  spot,
so  that,  in  the  future,  no  one  should  present  himself  as  coming
from  those  cities,  but  might  set  himself  down  as  from  some
Carlsruhe  or  Copenhagen.

Tchitchikoti'  settled  his  debt  to  the  tailor  in  handsome  style  ;
and  when  he  was  alone  once  more,  he  began  to  survey  himself
at  his  leisure  in  the  mirror,  like  an  artist  possessed  of  an
aesthetic  sense,  and  con  amore.  Everything  seemed  more  satis-
factory than  befoi-e :  his  cheeks  were  more  interesting,  his  chin
was  more  captivating,  his  white  collar  imparted  tone  to  his
cheeks,  his  blue  satin  neckcloth  imparted  tone  to  his  collar,  the
new-fangled  plaits  of  his  shirt-front  gave  tone  to  his  neckcloth,
his  rich  velvet  waistcoat  gave  value  to  his  shirt-front,  and  his
swallow-tailed  coat  of  Navarino  smoke  and  flame,  which  was  as
glossy  as  silk,  heightened  the  effect  of  all  the  rest.

He  turned  to  the  right — good  !  He  turned  to  the  left — better
still!  He  bent  forward  as  though  in  the  house  of  a  court-
chamberlain,  or  of  a  gentleman  who  even  scratches  himself  in
the  French  style,  and  who,  even  when  angry,  never  disgraces
himself  by  an  unclean  word  in  the  Russsian  language,  but
curses  in  the  French  dialect.     Such  delicacy  !

Inclining  his  head  a  little  on  one  side,  he  tried  to  strike  an
attitude  as  though  in  the  act  of  addressing  a  lady  of  middle  age,
and  of  the  highest  cultivation.  The  attitude  turned  out  a  perfect
picture.  Artist,  take  your  brush,  and  limn  it !  In  his  satis-
faction he  executed  a  little  skip  in  the  nature  of  a  capez*.  The
table  trembled  ;  and  a  glass  bottle  containing  e  an- de-Colo  fine
fell  to  the  floor  ;    but  this  occasioned  him  no  dismay.

He  simply  called  the  stupid  bottle  a  "fool,"  and  was  think-
ing, "  To  whom  shall  I  show  myself  first  ?  The  best  thing  of
all  will  be  " —  when  suddenly  there  became  audible  in  the  ante-
room a  clanking  resembling  that  produced  by  boots  and  spurs,
and  a  gendarme  entered  in  full  uniform,  and  with  a  look  on  his
face  as  though  he  were  a  whole  army  in  himself.     "  You  are


300  DEAD    SOULS.

ordered  to  present  yourself  instantly  to  the  governor-general,"
said  he.  Tchitchikoff  was  stunned.  Before  him  towered  a
bearded  scarecrow,  with  a  horse-tail  on  his  head,  a  cross-belt
over  one  shoulder,  another  cross-belt  over  the  other,  and  a
huge  sword  suspended  at  his  side.  It  seemed  to  Tchitchikoff
that  a  gun  and  the  deuce  knows  what  besides  was  suspended
from  his  other  side.  There  Avas  indeed  a  whole  army  contained
in  this  one  individual,  and  what  an  army !  He  attempted  to
make  some  reply ;  but  the  scarecrow  interrupted  him  roughl}^
"You  are  to  come  with  me  immediately."

On  glancing  through  the  doorway  into  the  ante-room,  Tchi-
tchikoff caught  a  glimpse  of  another  scarecrow  ;  then  he  cast
a  glance  through  the  window :  there  was  a  carriage  in  the
courtyard.  What  was  to  be  done  ?  He  was  forced  to  seat
himself  just  as  he  was,  coat  of  Navarino  smoke  and  flame  and
all,  in  the  equipage  ;  and,  trembling  in  every  limb,  he  was
driven  to  the  governor-general's,  and  the  gendarme  with  him.
They  did  not  even  allow  him  time  to  recover  himself  in  the  ante-
room. "  Step  up  !  The  prince  is  waiting  for  you,"  said  the
official  who  was  on  duty.  The  ante-room,  filled  with  couriers
who  had  received  their  packets,  flashed  past  him  as  in  a  mist:
then  came  a  hall,  through  which  he  passed  with  but  one
thought,  "  This  is  the  way  one  is  seized,  without  a  hearing  or
any  formality,  and  sent  to  Siberia  !  "  His  heart  beat  with  such
^violence  as  even  that  of  the  most  sincere  lover  is  incapable  of.
At  length  a  door  opened,  a  study  filled  with  portfolios,  book-
cases, and  books  presented  itself  before  him,  and  the  prince
stood  there,  as  angry  as  wrath  personified.

"  My  destroyer,  my  destroyer  !  "  said  Tchitchikoff  to  himself.
"  He  will  cut  my  throat  as  the  wolf  tears  that  of  the  lamb."

*'  I  have  spared  you,  I  have  permitted  you  to  remain  free  in
the  city  when  you  should  have  been  in  prison  ;  but  you  have
again  sullied  yourself  with  the  most  dishonourable  villainy  with
which  a  man  ever  disgraced  himself!  "

The  prince's  lips  quivered  with  anger.

"  With  what  dishonourable  deed  and  villainy  does  your  excel-
lency charge  me  ?  "  inquired  Tchitchikoff,  trembling  in  every
limb.

"  The  woman,"  said  the  prince,  stepping  a  little  closer,  and
looking  Tchitchikoff  straight  in  the  eye,  "the  woman  who
signed  that  will,  at  your  dictation,  has  been  apprehended  ;  and
you  will  be  confronted  with  her."

The  world  grew  dark  before  the  eyes  of  Tchitchikoff,  who
turned  as  pale  as  a  sheet.


TWO    WILLS,    A   FAIR,    AXD    A    LA^^^:EIl.  SOI

"  Yoiir  excellency,  I  will  tell  you  the  real  truth  of  that  matter.
1  am  guilty,  yes,  guilty,  but  not  so  guilty.  My  enemies  have
betrayed  me."

"  No  one  can  betray  you,  for  the  rascality  within  you  is
many  times  greater  than  the  most  abandoned  liar  could  even
conceive  of.  I  don't  believe  that  you  ever  have  done  a  thing  in
your  life  which  was  not  dishonourable.  Every  copeck  that
you  have  acquired  has  been  acquired  by  the  most  dishonourable
means,  and  by  robbery,  and  the  most  disgraceful  sort  of  trans-
actions, which  deserve  the  knout  and  Siberia.  No,  there  has
been  enough  of  this.  You  will  be  conveyed  this  instant  to
prison ;  and  there,  on  a  level  with  the  vilest  of  men  and  with
thieves,  you  will  avt^ait  the  judgment  on  your  case.  And  this  is
but  a  slight  punishment,  for  you  are  far  worse  than  those  who
are  clad  in  armyaks'"  and  sheepskin  coats  ;  for  you — "  Here  he
glanced  at  the  coat  of  Navarino  smoke  and  flame,  and,  seizing
the  bell-cord,  he  rang  vigorously.

"  Your  excellency,"  cried  Tchitchikoff,  "  have  mercy  !  You
ai"e  the  father  of  a  family  :  pparc  me,  for  the  sake  of  my  aged
mother !  "

"  You  lie  !  "  exclaimed  the  prince  angrily.  "  You  besought
me  once  in  the  name  of  your  children  and  of  the  wife  which  you
never  had,  and  now  it  is  for  the  sake  of  your  mother."

"  Your  excellency,  I  am  a  wretch,  and  the  vilest  of  good-for-
nothings,"  said  Tchitchikoff".  "I  really  have  lied;  I  really
had  no  wife  and  children ;  but  God  is  my  witness  that  I  have
always  wanted  to  have  a  wife,  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  a  man  and
a  citizen,  in  order  hereafter  to  actually  merit  the  respect  of
my  fellow-citizens  and  of  the  authorities.  But  how  inauspicious
has  been  the  course  of  circumstances  !  Your  highness,  I  have
been  forced  to  win  an  existence  at  the  cost  of  my  blood.
At  every  step  I  have  encountered  deceit  and  temptation  —
enemies,  corrupters,  and  robbers.  My  whole  life  has  been  like
a  stormy  tempest,  or  like  a  vessel  amid  the  billows,  at  the
mercy  of  the  gale.     I  am  a  man,  your  excellency — "

Tears  suddenly  streamed  in  torrents  from  his  eyes.  He  flung
liimself  at  the  prince's  feet,  just  as  he  was,  in  his  coat  of
Navarino  smoke  and  flame,  his  velvet  waistcoat,  his  blue  satin
neckcloth,  his  wonderfully  well-made  trousers,  and  pressed  his
brow  to  the  floor,  while  his  finely  arranged  hair  exhaled  a  sweet
scent  of  eau-dc-Coloyne  of  the  first  quality.

"  Get  away  from  me!     Call  a  soldier  to  take  him  away!  "
said  the  prince  to  the  man  who  entered.
*  Long  peasant-cloaks.


302  BEAD   SOULS.

"  Your  excellency !  "  shrieked  Tchitchikoff,  clasping  tlie
prince's  boot  with  both  arms.

"  Go  away,  I  tell  you  !  "  said  the  prince,  striving  to  extricate
his  leg  from  Tchitchikoff's  embrace.

"  Your  excellency,  I  will  not  stir  from  this  spot  until  you
grant  me  mercy,"  said  Tchitchikoff,  not  releasing  the  prince's
boot,  but  pressing  it  close  to  his  breast,  and  making  his  way
across  the  floor,  coat  of  Navarino  smoke  and  flame  included,  in
company  with  the  boot.

"  Leave,  I  tell  you  !  "  repeated  the  prince,  with  the  same
inexplicable  sensation  of  disgust  which  a  man  experiences  at  the
sight  of  some  repulsive  insect  which  he  cannot  bring  himself
to  crush  under  foot.  He  shook  himself  so  violently,  that
Tchitchikofi'  felt  the  shock  of  the  prince's  foot  upon  his  nose,  his
lips,  and  his  rounded  chin.  But  he  did  not  relax  his  hold  upon
the  boot,  he  even  clasped  the  leg  in  his  embrace  with  renewed
energy.  Two  stalwart  gendarmes  dragged  him  away  by  main
force,  bound  his  arms,  and  then  led  him  through  all  the  apart-
ments. He  was  pale  and  worn,  and  in  that  condition  of  nervous
terror  in  which  a  man  finds  himself  when  he  sees  before  him
black,  inevitable  death,  that  bugbear  which  is  so  repellent  to  our
natures.

At  the  very  door  opening  upon  the  staircase  Murazoff  met
him.  A  ray  of  hope  suddenly  flashed  through  his  mind.  In  an
instant,  by  the  exercise  of  supernatural  strength,  he  had  torn
himself  from  the  hands  of  the  two  gendarmes,  and  had  flung
himself  at  the  feet  of  the  astounded  old  man.

"  My  friend,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  what  is  the  matter  with  you  ?' '
exclaimed  Murazofi".

"  Save  me  !  They  are  leading  me  to  prison — to  my  death."
However,  the  gendarmes  seized  him  and  carried  him  ofi',  with-
out allowing  him  to  complete  his  sentence.

A  damp  and  musty  attic  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  boots
and  foot-bandages  of  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison,  an  unpainted
table,  two  miserable  chairs,  a  window  with  an  iron  grating,
a  worthless  stove,  through  whose  cracks  the  smoke  emerged,
but  which  gave  out  no  heat,  such  were  the  quarters  where
Tchitchikofi",  in  his  fine  new  coat  of  Navarino  smoke  and  flame,
was  lodged,  before  he  had  begun  to  taste  the  sweets  of  life  and
to  attract  the  attention  of  his  contemporaries.  He  had  not  been
allowed  to  make  any  preparations,  or  even  to  take  the  most
indispensable  articles  with  him.  His  dressing-case,  where  his
money  was  kept,  his  papers,  his  deeds  of  sale  respecting  the
dead  souls — everything  now  was  in  the  hands  of  the  authorities.


TWO   WILLS,    A   FAIR,    AND   A    LAWYER.  303

He  flung  himself  on  the  floor :  hopeless  sorrow,  like  a  .carni-
vorous worm,  coiled  itself  about  his  heart.  With  eve^-increasing
swiftness  did  it  begin  to  devour  this  heart,  which  was  wholly
unprotected.  One  day  more,  only  one  day  more  of  such
anguish,  and  Tchitchikofi"  would  have  utterly  ceased  to  exist  on
this  earth  !  But  some  one's  all-saving  hand  had  not  been  idle
in  Tchitchikofl's  aftairs.  An  hour  later  the  door  of  his  prison
was  flung  open.     Old  Murazofi"  entered.

If  some  person  had  poured  fresh  water  from  a  spring  into  the
parched  throat  of  a  weary  and  fainting  traveller  tortured  with
thirst,  and  covered  with  the  dust  and  dirt  of  the  road,  he  would
not  have  strengthened  and  refreshed  the  wayfarer  to  such  an
extent  as  this  visit  revivified  our  hero.

"  My  saviour!  "  he  exclaimed,  suddenly  springing  from  the
floor,  upon  which  he  had  thrown  himself  in  his  outburst  of  grief  ;
and  grasping  Murazofi"s  hand,  he  kissed  it  quickly,  and  pressed
it  to  his  bosom.  "  May  God  reward  you  for  having  thus  visited
an  unhappy  wretch !"

He  burst  into  tears.

The  old  man  gazed  at  him  with  a  look  of  pain  and  compassion,
and  said,  "Ah,  Pavel,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  Pavel  Ivanovitch,
what  have  you  done  ?  "

"  What  was  there  for  me  to  do  ?  That  accursed  lack  of
judgment  as  to  measure  overtook  me,  and  I  had  not  sense  enough
to  pause  in  time.  Satan,  the  accursed,  beguiled  me.  led  me
beyond  the  bounds  of  reason  and  of  human  calculations.  I
have  sinned,  I  have  sinned  !  But  how  could  they  behave  in
that  manner  ?  To  throw  a  nobleman,  a  nobleman,  into  prison
without  a  hearing,  without  even  an  investigation  !  A  nobleman,
Afanasiy  Vasilievitch  !  And  why  did  not  they  allow  me  time  to
go  to  my  quarters,  to  arrange  my  affairs?  Now  everything
that  belongs  to  me  is  left  without  anyone  to  take  care  of  it.
My  dressing-case,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch  !  my  dressing-case  !  It
contains  my  entire  property.  I  won  it  by  the  sweat  of  my
brow,  by  my  blood,  by  years  of  toil,  by  privation.  My  dressing-
case,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch  !  Everything  will  be  stolen — carried
ofl"!     OGod!"

And,  powerless  to  control  the  anguish  which  attacked  his  very
heart,  he  sobbed  aloud  in  a  voice  which  pierced  the  thick  walls
of  his  prison,  and  resounded  dully  in  the  distance  :  he  snatched
off  his  satin  neckcloth,  and,  seizing  his  coat  of  Navarino  flame
and  smoke  by  the  collar,  he  tore  it  off",

"Ah,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  how  these  riches  have  blinded  you  !
They  prevent  your  realising  your  terrible  situation."


304  DEAD   SOULS,

"  My  benefactor,  my  saviour,  save  mo!"  cried  poor  Pavel
Ivanovitcb,  throwing  himself  at  Murazoff's  feet.  "  The  prince
loves  you  :  he  will  do  anything  for  you."

"  No,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  I  cannot,  much  as  I  should  wish  and
like  to  do  it.  You  have  fallen  under  an  inexorable  law,  and
not  under  the  power  of  any  man."

"  That  rascal  of  a  Satan,  that  outcast  of  the  human  race,  has
ruined  me  !  "  So  saying,  Tchitchikoff  dashed  his  head  against
the  wall,  and  struck  the  table  with  his  fist,  so  that  he  wounded
it  till  it  bled  ;  but  he  felt  neither  the  pain  in  his  head  nor  the
violence  of  the  blow.

"  Calm  yourself,  Pavel  Ivanovitch ;  reflect  how  you  may
make  your  peace  with  God,  and  not  with  men  ;  think  of  your
miserable  soul."

"  But  what  a  fate,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch  !  Did  such  a  fate
ever  overtake  any  other  man  ?  I  amassed  my  copecks  pa-
tiently— with  bloody  patience,  I  may  say,  with  toil,  with  toil ;
and  I  have  never  cheated  men,  nor  robbed  the  treasury,  as
many  do.  "Why  did  I  amass  copecks  ?  In  order  to  be  able  to
pass  the  remnant  of  my  days  in  comfort,  to  leave  them  to  the
wife  and  children  whom  I  intended  to  acquire  for  my  salvation,
for  the  service  of  my  country.  That  is  why  I  wanted  to  amass
money.  I  have  gone  astray  ;  I  do  not  deny  it,  I  have  gone
astray ;  but  what  could  I  do  ?  I  only  went  astray  when  I
saw  that  nothing  was  to  be  won  by  following  the  straight  road,
and  that  the  crooked  ways  were  more  profitable.  But  I  have
ever  toiled  and  stinted  myself.  If  I  have  taken  anything  it  has
been  from  the  wealthy.  But  see  those  scoundrels  in  the  de-
partments of  justice  who  steal  thousands  from  the  treasury,
who  rob  the  poor,  who  squeeze  the  last  copeck  from  those  who
have  nothing.  What  a  misfortune  this  is  !  Tell  me  why  it  is,
that  every  time  that  you  begin  to  reap  the  fruits  of  your  labour,
and  to  touch  them  with  your  hand,  so  to  speak,  there  suddenly
arises  a  tempest,  or  you  run  aground  on  a  reef  beneath  the
water,  and  the  whole  ship  is  dashed  into  splinters  ?  Here  I
had  a  capital  of  thirty  thousand  roubles  ;  I  also  had  a  three-
storey  house ;  on  two  occasions  I  purchased  a  village.  Ah,
Afanasiy  Vasilievitch,  why  are  these  blows  dealt  to  me  ?  Was
not  my  life  already  like  a  bark  among  the  billows  ?  Where  is
the  justice  of  Heaven  ?  Where  is  the  reward  for  patience,  for
unexampled  perseverance  ?  Three  times  have  I  begun  afresh,
after  having  lost  everything.  I  began  again  with  a  copeck,
when  any  other  man  would  long  before  have  taken  to  drink-  in
despair,  and  have  ruined  himself  in  the  dram-shop.  Consider  how


TWO    WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND    A    LAWYER.  305

much  I  have  had  to  contend  with,  how  much  to  endure  !  Why,
every  copeck  has  hcen  wrung  out  of  me,  so  to  speak,  with  all
the  powers  of  my  soul.  Some  other  man  might  have  acquired
a  fortune  with  ease,  but  with  me  it  has  only  been  by  dint  of
great  exertion."

He  sobbed  loudly  with  insufferable  torture  of  heart,  fell  upon
a  chair,  completely  tore  off  the  skirt  of  his  coat,  which  was
hanging  in  slareds,  flung  it  away  from  him,  and  thrusting  both
hands  into  his  hair,  over  the  improvement  of  which  he  had
formerly  taken  so  much  pains,  he  tore  it  out  remorselessly,  en-
joying the  pain  by  which  he  strove  to  deaden  the  unquenchable
torture  of  his  heart.

For  a  long  time  Murazoft'  sat  silent  before  him,  gazing  at  this
remarkable  exhibition  of  madness,  which  was  something  that
he  had  never  hitherto  witnessed.  This  fellow,  who  had  not
long  ago  been  fluttering  about  with  the  easy  agility  of  a  man  of
the  world  or  an  officer,  was  now  flinging  himself  wildly  about  in
a  soiled,  torn,  and  rumpled  waistcoat  and  unbuttoned  trousers,
with  a  hand  bleeding  from  the  blow  which  he  had  dealt  it,  and
pouriug  out  invectives  on  the  hostile  powers  which  attend  upon
mankind.

"Ah,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  Pavel  Ivanovitch !  "  said  Muraz  off.
"  What  a  man  you  might  have  been  if  you  had  but  exerted
yourself  with  this  same  force  and  perseverance  in  the  proper
direction,  with  a  better  aim  in  view !  Great  heavens  !  how
much  good  you  might  have  accomplished  !  If  one  of  the  people
who  love  good  had  only  expended  as  much  power  in  its  behalf
as  you  have  expended  in  acquiring  copecks,  and  had  under-
stood how  to  sacrifice  his  own  self-love  and  ambition  for  good
without  sparing  himself,  as  you  have  not  spared  yourself  for
the  sake  of  amassing  money,  my  God,  how  this  earth  of  ours
would  have  blossomed  out !  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  Pavel  Ivano-
nitch  !  the  pity  of  it  is  not  that  you  have  been  guilty  towards
others,  but  that  you  have  been  false  to  yourself,  to  the  rich
powers  and  talents  with  which  you  were  endowed.  You  were
intended  to  be  a  great  man,  but  you  have  been  the  cause  of
your  own  loss  and  ruin."

No  matter  how  far  the  incorrigible  criminal  may  have  strayed
from  the  path  in  his  wanderings,  no  matter  how  hardened  his
feelings  may  have  become,  no  matter  how  he  may  have  per-
sisted in  and  clung  to  his  life  of  corruption,  yet  if  you  approach
him  with  the  very  qualities  which  he  has  discredited,  his  soul
involuntarily  awakens,  and  quivers  in  every  fibre.

"  Afanasiy   Vasilievitch,"    said  Tchitchikoff,   and  he  seized

u


306  DEAD   SOULS.

Murazoff's  hand  in  both  of  his,  "  oh,  if  you  could  only  con-
trive to  set  me  free,  to  restore  my  property  to  me,  I  swear  to
you  that  I  would  henceforth  lead  a  wholly  different  life.  Save
me,  my  benefactor,  save  me  !  "

"  What  can  I  do  ?  I  must  in  that  case  war  against  the  laws.
Suppose  that  I  were  to  bring  myself  to  that ;  however,  the
prince  is  a  just  man ;  he  would  not  release  you."

"My  benefactor,  you  can  do  anything  !  The  law  does  not
terrify  me.  I  could  find  means  of  coping  with  the  law  :  what
troubles  me  is,  that  I  have  been  cast  into  prison,  that  I  shall
perish  here  like  a  dog,  and  that  my  property,  my  papers,  my
dressing-case —     Ah !     Save  me  !  "

He  embraced  the  old  man's  feet,  and  burst  into  tears.

"  Ah,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  Pavel  Ivanovitch ! "  said  old  Murazoff,
shaking  his  head,  "  how  this  property  has  blinded  you  !  For
its  sake  you  refuse  to  listen  to  your  poor  soul."

"  I  will  think  of  my  soul ;  only  save  me  !  "

"Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  said  old  Murazoff",  impressively,  "  it  is
not  within  my  power  to  save  you.  You  see  that  yourself.  But
I  will  exert  myself  so  far  as  I  can  to  lighten  your  fate  and  to
have  you  set  at  liberty.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  succeed
in  effecting  this,  but  I  will  try.  But  in  case  I  should  succeed
beyond  my  expectations,  I  shall  claim  a  reward  for  my  labour,
Pavel  Ivanovitch.  Cast  aside  all  these  efforts  to  acquire  wealth.
i  say  to  you  in  serious  earnest,  that  if  I  were  to  lose  all  my
money — and  I  have  more  than  you — I  should  not  weep  over  it.
No,  no  ;  the  point  does  not  lie  in  the  property  of  which  others
may  deprive  me,  but  in  that  which  no  one  can  confiscate  or
steal  away  from  me.  You  have  already  lived  a  tolerably  long
time  in  the  world.  You  yourself  style  your  life  a  bark  amid
the  billows.  You^already  have  enough  to  live  upon  for  the  re-
mainder of  your  days.  Settle  down  in  some  retired  spot,  near
a  church  and  among  good  simple  people  ;  or,  if  you  are  anxious
to  leave  descendants  behind  you,  marry  some  good  young  girl
who  is  not  rich,  but  who  is  accustomed  to  a  modest  way  of
living  ;  forget  this  noisy  world  and  all  its  seductive  caprices,
and  let  it  forget  you.  There  is  no  rest  to  be  had  in  it.  You
see  how  it  is :  everyone  in  it  is  an  enemy,  a  tempter,  or  a
traitor."

"  Certainly,  certainly.  I  had  already  formally  intended
to  order  my  life  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  my
soul,  to  occupy  myself  with  the  management  of  my  estate,  to
live  a  quiet  life,  in  fact.  The  tempter  Satan,^yes,  the  Devil  and
his  crew,  turned  me  from  the  path  and  beguiled  me."


TWO   WII,LS,    A   FAIR,    AND    A    LAWYER.  307

Some  hidden  and  hitherto  unknown  feelings  now  revealed
themselves  within  our  hero,  as  though  something  remote,  some-
thing which  had  been  dropped  into  his  mind  long  before,  which
had  been  stifled  since  his  childhood  by  stern  and  deadly  pre-
cepts, by  the  unpropitious  conditions  of  his  wearisome  boyhood,
by  the  dreariness  of  his  paternal  home,  by  the  changeless
isolation,  poverty,  and  misery  of  his  earliest  impressions,  by  the
gloomy  views  of  fate  which  peered  sadly  at  him  through  a  dim
window-pane,  obscured  by  the  snowstorms  of  winter,  was
desirous  of  awaking.

A  groan  burst  from  his  lips,  and,  covering  his  face  with  both
hands,  he  exclaimed  in  a  sorrowful  voice,  "It  is  true,  it  is
true  !  "

"  Neither  your  knowledge  of  mankind  nor  your  experience
availed,  since  the  foundation  of  your  fortune  was  unlawful.
But  if  there  had  been  a  lawful  foundation.  Ah,  Pavel  Ivano-
vitch !  why  have  you  ruined  yourself?  Awake!  it  is  not  too
late ;  perhaps  there  may  still  be  time."

"  No,  it  is  too  late,  too  late  !  "  groaned  Tchitchikoff  in  a  voice
which  nearly  broke  MurazofF's  heart.  "I  begin  to  feel,  I  am
conscious,  that  it  is  not  thus,  not  thus,  that  I  shall  go — that
I  have  wandered  very  far  from  the  right  road ;  but  I  can  do  jf/
nothing  now.  No,  not  thus  was  I  brought  up.  My  father  incul-  ^  ^
cated  righteousness,  he  beat  it  into  me  :  he  made  me  copy  moral
precepts,  while  he  himself  stole  a  forest  from  a  neighbour  in  my
presence,  and  forced  me  to  assist  him  in  the  deed.  He  entered
into  an  unjust  lawsuit,  and  I  knew  it ;  he  corrupted  a  young
girl  who  was  an  orphan  and  his  ward.  Example  is  stronger
than  precept.  I  see,  I  feel,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch,  that  I  am
not  leading  the  right  sort  of  life,  but  no  one  could  have  a  greater
repugnance  for  vice.  My  nature  has  grown  coarse  ;  I  have  not
that  love  for  good,  those  fine  impulses  for  deeds  of  benevolence,
which  are  formed  by  habit ;  I  have  not  as  great  a  desire  to  do
battle  for  the  good  as  for  the  acquisition  of  wealth.  I  am  telling
you  the  truth.     Ah  !  what  am  I  to  do  ?  "

The  old  man  sighed.

"  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  you  possess  as  much  strength  of  will  as
patience,"  said  he.  "  Medicine  is  bitter  ;  but  the  sick  man
takes  it,  knowing  that  otherwise  he  will  not  recover.  You  have
no  love  for  the  good  :  do  good  by  main  force,  without  any  love
for  it.  This  will  be  accounted  a  greater  merit  in  your  case  than
in  the  case  of  a  man  who  does  good  for  the  love  of  it.  Only
force  yourself  to  do  it  a  few  times  and  you  will  acquire  a  lov^
for  it.     Believe  me,  everything  proceeds  in  this  manner.     Wj


308'  DEAD   SOULS.

have  been  told  that  the  '  kingdom  of  heaven  is  taken  by  force.'
Only  by  force  can  we  come  near  to  it,  and  by  force  it  is  neces-
■  sary  to  lay  hold  of  it.  Eh,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  !  surely  you
possess  that  strength,  that  iron  patience  which  is  not  possessed
by  others,  and  can  you  not  conquer  '?  Yes,  it  seems  to  me  that
you  could  prove  a  bof/atuir.'^'  For  all  men  are  now  lacking  in
will,  all  are  weak,"

It  was  evident  that  these  words  penetrated  into  Tchitchikoff 's
inmost  soul,  and  touched  something  egotistical  at  the  bottom  of
it.  Decision,  or  some  powerful  emotion  which  resembled  it,
gleamed  in  his  ej'es.

"  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch,"  said  he  firmly,  "  if  you  will  only
procure  my  release,  and  the  means  of  departing  hence  with  some
property,  I  will  give  you  my  word  that  I  will  begin  a  different
life.  I  will  purchase  a  village,  I  will  become  a  good  manager  ;
I  will  amass  money,  not  for  myself,  but  for  the  purpose  of
assisting  others  ;  I  will  do  good,  so  far  as  lies  within  my  power  ;
1  will  forget  myself,  and  all  the  dainties  and  feasts  of  the  city ;
I  will  lead  a  simple  and  sober  life."

"  May  God  strengthen  you  in  that  determination  !  "  said  the
delighted  old  man.  "  I  shall  exert  my  utmost  powers  to  beg  your
freedom  from  the  prince.  Whether  I  shall  succeed  or  not,  God
alone  knows.  In  any  case,  your  fate  will  certainly  be  amelio-
rated. Ah,  good  heavens,  embrace  me !  Permit  me  to  embrace
you  !  How  truly  you  have  rejoiced  my  heart !  Now  God  be
with  you  !     I  shall  go  straight  to  the  prince."

Then  Tchitchikoff  was  left  alone.  His  whole  nature  had  been
shaken  to  its  depths,  and  thoroughly  softened.  Even  platinum,
the  hardest  of  metals,  and  the  one  which  resists  the  fire  longer
than  all  the  rest,  melts  at  last ;  when  the  fire  is  increased  in  the
furnace,  and  the  bellows  blow  upon  it,  and  the  heat  of  the
llames  attains  to  an  intolerable  pitch,  then  the  most  stubborn  of
metal  blanches,  and  is  converted  into  a  liquid ;  and  so  the
strongest  miseries  of  mental  torture  yield,  when  intolerable
fires  consume  a  natui'e  A\hich  has  grown  for  a  season  hardened.

"I  have  no  feelings  myself,"  soliloquised  our  hero.  "I
feel  nothing,  but  I  will  exert  all  my  powers  to  cause  others  to
feel :  I  am  evil  and  worthless  myself,  but  I  will  use  all  my
strength  to  convert  others  to  goodness ;  I  am  but  a  poor  Chris-
tian myself,  but  I  will  strain  every  nerve  in  order  that  I  may
give  no  cause  for  offence.  1  will  work,  I  will  toil  in  the  sweat
of  my  brow.     In  the  village  I  will  conduct  myself  honestly,  in

*  A  hero  of  the  ancient  epic  songs  of  Russia.


TWO    WILLS,    A   FAIR,    AND    A    LAAVYER.  309

order  that  I  may  have  a  good  influence  on  others.  Why,  after
all,  should  I  regard  myself  as  an  utter  castaway  '?  I  have  capa-
city for  the  management  of  an  estate  ;  I  posse:!:s  the  qualities  of
economy  and  skill,  and  good  sense,  and  even  of  perseverance.
All  that  is  necessary  is  to  make  up  my  mind  to  it."

After  this  fashion  did  Tchitchikoff  meditate,  and  he  seemed
to  be  testing  the  half-awakened  powers  of  his  soul.  It  seemed
as  though  his  nature  were  becoming  aware  in  a  dim  groping
Avay  that  there  is  some  duty  which  must  be  fulfilled  in  every
situation,  in  every  nook,  however  remote,  despite  all  the  per-
plexities and  disturbances  which  hover  round  a  man  in  every
position  in  which  he  may  be  placed.  And  a  laborious  life,  far
removed  from  the  uproar  of  cities,  and  from  those  seductions
which  man  has  devised  in  his  idleness,  unmindful  of  toil,  began
to  outline  itself  so  distinctly  before  him,  that  he  almost  forgot
the  unpleasantness  of  his  predicament,  and  was  even  prepared
to  return  thanks  to  providence  for  that  heavy  blow  if  he  might

regain  his  libei'ty  and  a  portion  of  his However,  at  this

moment  the  door  of  his  noisome  prison  opened,  and  an  official
personage  entered — Samosvistoff,  an  epicui'ean,  a  clever  fellow,-
with  shoulders  an  arshin*  broad,  and  huge  feet,  a  capital  com-
panion, a  roisterer,  and  a  thorough  brute,  as  even  his  comrades
expressed  themselves  in  regard  to  him.  In  times  of  war  this
man  would  have  wrought  wonders  had  he  been  despatched  to
make  his  way  through  some  impenetrable,  perilous  place,  to
crawl  in  under  the  very  mouths  of  the  enemy's  cannon  :  it  would
have  been  the  very  work  for  him.  After  having  missed  a
military  career,  which  might  have  made  an  honest  man  of  him,
he  had  set  all  his  powers  to  the  task  of  rendering  himself  as  vile
as  possible.  And,  incredible  to  state,  he  possessed  extraordi-
nary convictions  and  principles ;  he  behaved  well  with  his
comrades,  never  betrayed  any  of  them,  and  having  given  his
word,  he  kept  it ;  but  as  for  the  official  personages  of  a  higher
rank  than  his  own,  he  regarded  them  in  the  light  of  a  hostile
battery,  through  which  it  behoved  him  to  make  his  way,  taking
advantage  of  every  weak  spot,  of  every  breach,  of  all  lack  of
watchfulness.

"  I  know  all  about  your  situation  :  I  have  heard  every-
thing," he  said,  when  he  saw  that  the  door  was  closed  behind
him.  *'  Have  no  fears,  none  ;  all  will  be  set  right.  Everybody
has  set  to  work  on  your  behalf,  and  Ave  are  all  at  your  service.
Thirty  thousand  Avill  suffice  for  all,  not  a  rouble  more,"

*  Twenty-eight  inches.


310  DEAD    SOULS.

"  Done  !"  exclaimed Tchitchikoff.  "And  shall  I  be  set  com-
pletely at  liberty  ?  "

*'  Completely.  You  will  even  receive  compensation  for  your
losses."

"  And  for  the  trouble  ?  "

"  Thirty  thousand  roubles.  That  is  for  all  of  us — our  people,
the  governor-general,  and  his  secretary."

"  But  excuse  me,  how  can  I  ?  All  my  effects,  my  dressing-
case,  and  the  rest,  are  now  under  seal,  under  supervision."

"  You  will  receive  everything  an  hour  hence.  Shall  we
strike  hands  on  the  bargain  ?  "

Tchitchikoff  gave  his  hand.  His  heart  beat  fast  and  he
could  not  believe  that  this  was  possible.

"  Farewell  for  the  present.  I  was  commissioned  by  our
mutual  friend  to  tell  you  that  the  principal  thing  is — composure,
and  presence  of  mind."

"  H'm  !  "  thought  Tchitchikoff:  "lunderstand;  the  lawyer."

Thereupon  Samosvistoff  disappeared.  Tchitchikoff,  left
alone  once  more,  had  not  yet  succeeded  in  believing  his  words,
when  an  hour  later,  his  dressing-case  and  papers  were  brought
to  him,  and  what  is  more,  in  the  very  best  of  order.  Samos-
vistoff played  the  part  of  director  ;  he  scolded  the  sentinels
posted  at  our  hero's  house  for  their  heedlessness ;  he  inspected
them,  and  ordered  application  to  be  made  for  extra  soldiers,  so
that  the  guard  might  be  strengthened.  Then  he  seized  not  only
the  dressing-case,  but  all  the  documents  which  could  in  any
way  compromise  Tchitchikoff.  Having  made  them  all  up  into  a
package  together,  he  sealed  it  and  ordered  a  soldier  to  take  it
to  Tchitchikoff,  under  the  pretence  that  it  consisted  of  indis-
pensable articles  for  his  toilet.  Indeed,  Tchitchikoff  received
together  with  his  papers,  all  the  warm  clothing  which  was
necessary  for  covering  his  delicate  body.  This  change  of
matters  rejoiced  him  unspeakably.  He  conceived  strong  hopes,
and  he  again  began  to  dream  of  luxuries,  of  evenings  spent  at
the  theatre,  and  of  a  ballet-girl  whom  he  was  courting.  The
country  and  a  quiet  life  began  to  lose  all  charms  for  him  ;  the
city  and  its  tumult  were  more  brilliant  and  seductive.  Oh,
life !

However,  in  the  meantime,  the  matter  had  assumed  unheard
of  proportions  in  the  court  and  council-chamber.  The  pens  of
the  scribes  laboured  away,  while  the  scribes  themselves  took
snuff  and  admired  their  flourishing  cahgraphy.  The  lawyer,
like  a  hidden  magician,  guided  the  entire  mechanism :  he
thoroughly  confused  them  all  before  any  of  them  had  succeeded


TWO    WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AXD    A    LAWYER.  311

in  looking  into  the  matter.  The  imbroglios  augmented.  Samos-
vistoff  also  excelled  himself  in  audacity  and  in  incredible  daring.
On  learning  where  the  woman  who  had  been  captured  was
kept  under  guard,  he  straightway  presented  himself  there  with
such  a  dashing  and  authoritative  air,  that  the  sentry  saluted
him,  and  dropped  his  hand  to  the  seam  of  his  trousers.

"  Have  you  been  standing  here  long  ?  "  asked  Samosvistoff.

"  Ever  since  the  morning,  your  honour ;  it  will  be  three
hours  before  I  shall  be  relieved,  your  honour."

' '  I  require  your  services.  I  shall  tell  the  officer  to  despatch
another  man  in  your  place."

"  I  obey  you,  your  honour  !  "

Then  proceeding  home,  in  order  not  to  initiate  anyone  else
into  the  affair,  Samosvistoff  dressed  himself  up  like  a  gendarme,
completing  his  disguise  with  moustache  and  side-whiskers.
The  Devil  himself  would  not  have  recognised  him.  He  then
started  off  for  the  house  where  Tchitchikoff  was  confined,
and  seizing  the  first  woman  whom  he  encountered,  he  gave  her
in  charge  to  two  official  youngsters,  who  were  also  sharp  prac-
titioners. Then  he  presented  himself  with  his  moustaches  and
a  gun,  as  the  case  required,  to  the  sentinel.  "  Go !  "  said  he,
"  the  commander  has  sent  me  to  take  your  duty."

While  the  exchange  was  effected  Samosvistoff  took  up  his
stand  with  his  gun.  This  was  all  that  was  required.  Mean-
while the  woman  who  had  personated  the  dead  aunt  had  been
replaced  by  another,  who  neither  knew  nor  remembered  any-
thing. The  former  was  then  concealed  in  such  a  manner  that
indeed  it  was  never  known  what  had  become  of  her.

At  the  vejry  time  when  Samosvistoff  was  transforming  him-
self into  the  semblance  of  a  warrior,  the  lawyer  was  working
wonders  in  civil  circles.  The  governor  was  given  to  understand
indirectly  that  the  procurator  was  preparing  a  complaint  about
him ;  the  commandant  of  the  gendarmes  was  informed  that  an
official  who  had  been  living  privately  in  town  was  writing  a
denunciation  of  him ;  the  official  who  had  been  living  privately
was  told  that  there  was  another  and  still  more  mysterious
official  personage,  who  was  lodging  information  against  him  ;
and  all  of  them  were  placed  in  such  a  position,  that  they  were
forced  to  resort  to  the  lawyer  for  advice.  This  was  the  utter
nonsense  which  resulted  :  denunciation  followed  upon  denun-
ciation, and  such  things  were  on  the  point  of  being  divulged
as  no  one  had  ever  heard  of  before,  and  which,  in  point  of  fact,
had  never  had  any  existence  at  all.  Every  sort  of  device  was
employed  in  the  work,  and  brought  to  bear  on  the  matter :  one


312  DEAD    SOULS.

man  was  stated  to  be  an  illegitimate  son,  and  his  birth  and
name  were  revealed  ;  another  was  declared  to  have  a  mistress  ;
while  the  name  of  a  man  whom  the  wife  of  another  was  pur-
suing was  also  made  known.

Scandal,  oflfence,  and  every  sort  of  element  were  so  intermin-
gled and  intertwined  with  Tchitchikoff's  aflair,  and  his  dead
souls,  that  it  was  utterly  impossible  to  decide  in  any  manner
whatever  which  of  these  matters  was  the  most  nonsensical.
"When  the  papers  at  length  began  to  attack  the  governor-
general,  the  poor  prince  could  make  nothing  of  them.  An  ex-
ceedingly clever  and  sensible  oflficial  to  whom  the  preparation
of  the  abstract  report  was  entrusted  came  near  losing  his  mind.
It  was  absolutely  impossible  by  any  means  whatever  to  grasp
the  thread  of  the  imbroglio.  The  prince  moreover  was  at  that
time  troubled  about  a  multitude  of  other  matters,  each  more
annoying  than  the  other.  Famine  had  made  its  appearance  in
one  quarter  of  the  government.  The  officials  who  had  been
sent  there  to  distribute  bread  had  not  taken  the  proper
measures.  In  another  quarter  of  the  government,  the
BaslwJniki-''  had  been  making  a  stir.  Someone  had  circulated
among  them  a  report  that  Antichrist  had  been  born,  and  that  he
gave  the  dead  no  peace,  for  he  had  been  collecting  their  souls.
The  Raskolniki  then  hov/led  and  made  accusations ;  and  under
the  pretext  of  catching  Antichrist,  they  slew  peaceable  folks.

In  another  locality,  the  peasants  had  revolted  against  the
proprietors  and  the  members  of  the  rural  police.  Some  vaga-
bonds had  circulated  a  rumour  among  them  to  the  effect  that
the  time  was  approaching  when  the  peasants  were  to  become
landowners  themselves,  and  array  themselves  in  swallow-
tailed  coats,  while  the  gentry  would  be  clothed  in  blouses  and
become  peasants ;  and  without  reflecting  on  the  fact  that  in
that  case  there  would  be  far  too  many  landowners,  the  entire
district  refused  to  pay  any  taxes  whatever  to  the  rural  police.
It  became  necessary  to  resort  to  forcible  measures.  The  poor
prince  was  in  the  most  distracted  state  of  mind  conceivable.  It
was  at  such  a  time  as  this  that  he  was  visited  by  Murazoff,
the  farmer  of  the  brandy  revenues.  "  Let  him  enter,"  said  the
prince.     Thereupon  the  old  man  made  his  appearance.

"  See  what  your  Tchitchikoff  has  come  to,"  said  the  prince.

*  "When  tlie  Patriarcli  Nikon,  about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth
centuiy,  had  the  sacred  -writings  revised,  and  the  numerous  errors  -which
had  crept  in  through  the  carelessness  of  scribes  (and  otherwise)  corrected,
some  people  still  clung  to  the  old  and  faulty  versions  ;  and  thus  the  sect  of
the  Maakolniki,  or  "  Old  Believers,"  came  into  existence.


TWO    WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND    A    LAWTTER.  313

You  stood  up  for  him,  and  defended  him.  Now  he  has  involved
himself  in  a  transaction  such  as  the  vilest  of  thieves  would  not
have  dabbled  in."

"Permit  me  to  observe  to  your  excellency  that  I  do  not
understand  this  matter  very  well."

"  He  has  forged  a  will,  and  has  done  other  things  besides.
He  deserves  public  chastisement  with  the  whip  for  such  mis-
deeds."

"Your  excellency — I  do  not  say  this  with  the  object  of  de-
fending Tchitchikoff — but  surely  all  this  has  not  been  proved
as  yet.     Ko  investigation  has  yet  been  made."

"  There  are  proofs.  The  woman  who  was  dressed  up  to  re-
present the  dead  woman  has  been  arrested.  I  intend  to
interrogate  her  expressly  in  your  presence."

The  prince  then  rang,  and  gave  orders  that  the  woman  in
question  should  be  summoned.     Murazoff  held  his  peace.

"  It  is  a  most  disgraceful  afiair,"  resumed  his  excellency,
"  and  to  their  shame  be  it  said,  the  most  prominent  officials  in
the  city  are  mixed  up  in  it,  even  the  civil  governor  himself.
He  ought  not  to  be  where  thieves  and  rascals  congregate,"
said  the  prince  wrathfully.

"  Why,  the  civil  governor  is  the  heir"^'  to  the  deceased's
property  ;  he  has  a  right  to  be  connected  with  the  matter  ;  but
it  is  only  natural,  your  excellency,  that  others  should  have  inter-
fered on  all  sides.  A  rich  woman  has  died  ;  she  has  not  made
a  just  and  reasonable  disposition  of  her  property;  persons
desirous  of  enriching  themselves  have  flown  here  from  all
quarters — that  is  all  human  nature."

"  But  why  commit  villainies?  The  scamps  !  "  said  the  prince
with  a  feeling  of  indignation.  "I  have  not  a  single  honourable
official  about  me  :  they  are  all  rogues  !  "

"  Well,  your  excellency,  which  of  us  is  as  good  as  he  ought
to  be  ?  All  the  officials  of  our  city  are — men  ;  but  they  have
their  merits,  and  many  of  them  are  extremely  well  informed  as
to  their  business.  On  the  other  hand,  everyone  is  liable  to
sin."

"  Listen,  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch  ;  tell  me — you  are  the  only
honest  man  whom  I  know — why  have  you  such  a  passion  for
defending  every  sort  of  rascal  ?  "

"Your  excellency,"  answered  Murazofi',  "whoever  the  man
may  be  whom  you  designate  as  a  rascal,  he  is  still  a  man.  How
can  I  help  defending  a  person  when  I  know  that  half  the   evil

*  Lyenitzuin  had  now  become  the  civil  governor.


314  DEAD   SOULS.

•which  he  does  proceeds  from  coarseness  and  ignorance  ?
Surely  we  commit  injustice  at  every  step,  and  are  at  every
instant  the  cause  of  the  misery  of  a  fellow-creature,  even  when
we  have  no  evil  intentions.  You  also  have  certainly  been
guilty  of  great  injustice."

"What!"  exclaimed  the  prince  in  amazement,  thoroughly
astounded  by  the  unexpected  turn  which  the  conversation  had
taken.

"  Murazoff  remained  silent  for  a  moment,  as  though  ponder-
ing, but  he  finally  said,  "  Well,  in  the  case  of  DerpennikofF,
for  instance."

"  Afanasiy  Vasilievitch,  that  was  a  crime  against  the  funda-
mental laws  of  the  empire :  it  was  tantamount  to  a  betrayal  of
one's  native  land."

"  I  do  not  seek  to  justify  him.  But  is  it  just  to  condemn  a
young  fellow  who  has  been  betrayed  and  led  astray  by  others,
by  reason  of  his  youth  ?  is  it  just  to  condemn  him  exactly  as
though  he  had  been  one  of  the  ringleaders  ?  The  same  fate
overtook  DerpennikofF  and  a  certain  Voronnoi-Dryannoi,  but
their  crimes  were  certainly  not  identical."

"  For  heaven's  sake,"  rejoined  the  prince,  with  perceptible
emotion,  "do  you  know  anything  about  that  matter  ?  Tell  me  ;
it  was  only  recently  that  I  wrote  direct  to  Petersburg  in
reference  to  a  mitigation  of  Derpennikofi"s  punishment."

"  No,  your  excellency,  I  did  not  refer  to  that.  I  know
nothing  more  about  the  matter  than  you  do.  Although  there
certainly  does  exist  one  circumstance  which  might  be  used  to
Dei-pennikoft's  advantage,  only  he  himself  will  not  consent  to
utilise  it,  because  another  would  be  made  to  suffer  thereby.  I
was  merely  thinking  whether  you  had  not  been  over-hasty  on
that  occasion.  But  pardon  me,  your  excellency  ;  I  only  judge
according  to  my  weak  understanding.  You  have  several  times
enjoined  upon  me  the  duty  of  expressing  myself  frankly.  When
I  was  a  master  over  men,  I  had  a  great  many  labourers  of  all
sorts,  both  good  and  bad  ;  now,  when  a  peasant  has  misbehaved
himself,  if  you  do  not  take  special  circumstances  and  the  man's
former  life  into  consideration,  if  you  do  not  inquire  coolly  into
every  particular,  you  never  attain  to  any  real  comprehension  of
the  matter ;  whereas,  if  you  question  him  as  a  brother  might
question  a  brother,  he  will  at  once  tell  you  everything  of  his
own  accord.  He  will  not  even  ask  for  mercy,  nor  will  he
cherish  any  hard  feelings  towards  anyone,  for  he  will  perceive
clearly  that  it  is  not  you,  but  the  law,  which  is  punishing  him."

The  prince  then  fell  into  thought ;  but  soon  numerous  voices


TWO   WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND    A   LAWYER.  315

were  heard  in  the  large  office  near  the  audience  chamber.  The
prince  was  awaiting  the  woman  accused  of  having  forged
Alexandra  Ivanovna's  signature  to  the  spurious  will.  Hearing
the  noise  and  feeling  impatient,  he  went  and  opened  the  door,
whereupon  in  the  office  he  saw  a  number  of  clerks  gathered
round  a  man  who  was  stuttering  and  stammering  in  answer  to
their  questions.  Near  by  there  stood  the  accused  woman,
guarded  by  three  soldiers.  While  the  man  stammered  and
gesticulated,  she  wept  and  wrung  her  hands,  and  at  this  sight
some  townsfolks  who  were  also  present  asked  permission  to  ex-
plain matters  to  his  excellency.  The  confusion  was  so  great  that
it  seemed  as  if  a  riot  were  going  on.  The  prince,  in  consterna-
tion, glanced  at  Murazoff,  who  took  upon  himself  to  call  six  of
the  oldest  of  the  townsfolk  into  the  governor's  private  room.  It
then  appeared  that  the  stammering  man  was  the  husband  of  the
woman,  that  the  latter  had  been  arrested  by  surprise  during  the
morning,  and  had  never  had  anything  to  do  with  any  will,  being
quite  incapable  of  acting  a  part  or  of  signing  even  her  own  name,
much  less  that  of  Alexandra  Ivanovna.  The  prince,  though  at
first  much  astonished  to  find,  as  he  thought,  that  the  wrong
woman  had  been  an-ested  (for  he  was  ignorant  of  the  ruse
resorted  to  by  Samosvistoff  in  favour  of  Tchitchikoff),  finally
gave  orders  for  the  alarmed  couple  to  be  sent  home  in  one  of  his
own  carriages,  and  he  expressed  his  regret  to  them  that  such  a
mistake  had  been  made.

At  that  moment  a  young  official  entered  the  private  room  and
remained  standing  in  a  respectful  attitude  with  his  portfolio.  He
was  one  of  the  few  who  engage  con  amore  in  the  administration
of  afi'airs,  instigated  neither  by  ambition,  nor  by  a  desire  for
gain.  In  fact,  he  occupied  himself  with  public  aflairs  because
be  was  convinced  that  his  life  had  been  given  him  for  that
purpose.  His  business  consisted  in  sifting  a  matter  and  in
picking  it  to  pieces,  and  explaining  it  when  he  had  grasped  all
its  tangled  threads.  He  felt  that  his  toil,  his  efi"orts,  and  his
sleepless  nights  were  abundantly  rewarded  if  the  matter  at
length  became  intelligible  to  him,  and  when  he  saw  that  ho
could  report  upon  it  in  a  few  clear  and  definite  words,  so  that  it
would  be  patent  and  comprehensible  to  ever3'one.

The  prince,  seeing  his  young  assistant,  greeted  him  kindly  ;
and  then,  as  he  wished  to  profit  by  a  journey  which  Murazoff
was  about  to  make,  so  as  to  have  various  instructions  carried
out  in  different  parts  of  the  province,  he  began  to  speak  to  him
on  the  subject.  Murazoff  readily  consented  to  do  whatever  the
prince  required,  and  the  latter  then  resumed  :  "Those  faithless


316  DEAD    SOULS.

subordinates  of  mine  who  by  their  orgies  and  their  avidity  have
stirred  up  the  famine-stricken  districts,  have  now  returned  here,
and  I  shall  give  them  their  dues.  I  have  just  seen  a  most  com-
promising letter,  sent  by  one  of  them  to  a  certain  lawyer  here,
a  thorough  intriguer,  whom  I  intend  to  turn  out  of  the  city.  I
must  now  also  send  some  troops  into  the  disaffected  districts,
especially  to  the  one  where  the  Raskolniki  (Old  Believers)  are
becoming  turbulent ;  that  is,  unless  you  really  think  that  your
presence  and  sagacity  would  suffice  to  bring  those  unfortunate
people  to  reason."

"  Yes,  I  think  so,  prince  ;  and  to  make  all  the  surer  of  suc-
cess, I  shall  myself  supply  the  impoverished  districts  with
barley  and  rye.  That  is  a  business  which  I  know  better  than
your  officials  do  ;  I  will  make  personal  observation  as  to  what
is  needful.  And,  if  your  excellency  will  permit  it,  I  will  talk
with  the  Easkolniki.  They  will  converse  more  freely  with  a
civilian  like  myself.  Thus,  God  knows,  I  may  perhaps  be  able
to  arrange  matters  peaceably  with  them.  The  officials  would
arrange  nothing.  A  correspondence  en  the  subject  would  en-
sue, and  they  so  complicate  matters  on  paper  that  the  affair
would  become  even  more  confused  than  it  now  is.  I  shall  ac-
cept no  money  from  you,  for  it  would  be  a  shame,  at  such  a
time,  to  think  of  one's  own  purse  when  people  are  perishing
of  hunger.  I  have  abundant  stores  of  grain  ;  I  have  already
exported  some  to  Siberia,  and  I  shall  send  some  more  next
summer."

"God  alone  can  requite  you  for  such  a  service,  Afanasiy
Vasilievitch.  I  shall  not  say  another  word  to  you  ;  you  can
realise  the  situation  yourself ;  words  are  inadequate  and  useless.
But  with  regard  to  the  petition  I  have  received  from  eighty-two
officials  of  the  town  in  favour  of  eleven  of  their  colleagues  con-
victed of  deceit  and  prevarication,  I  don't  think  I  have  a  right
to  let  this  matter  pass  without  notice.  Whatever  the  peti-
tioners may  say,  it  would  not  be  just  or  honourable  on  my  part
to  pardon  knaves."

"  By  heavens  !  your  excellency,  it  is  impossible  to  call  them
that,  the  more  so  as  many  of  them  are  very  worthy  people.  The
situations  in  which  a  man  sometimes  tinds  himself  are  difficult —
very,  very  difficult.  There  are  cases  when  a  man  seems  to  be
undoubtedly  guilty,  but  when  you  inquire  into  the  matter,  it  is
not  he  at  all  who  is  to  blame."

"  But  what  will  they  themselves  say  if  I  let  them  off'  ?  There
are  certainly  some  among  them  who  will  raise  their  noses
higher   than   ever   after   this,   and   even   say   that   they   had


TWO   WILLS,    A   FAIR,    AND    A    LA"\VYER.  317

frightened  me.      They  will  be  the  first  to  show  me  disrespect,
and  my  authority  will  be  compromised.''

"  Permit  me,  your  excellency,  to  communicate  to  you  my  ad-
vice on  this  subject.  Call  all  the  officials  together,  give  them  to
understand  that  j'ou  know  everything,  represent  to  them  your
own  position  in  the  very  terms  in  which  you  have  just  been
pleased  to  present  it  to  me,  and  ask  their  advice  as  to  what  each
one  of  them  would  do  in  your  place."

"  Yes ;  you  think  they  will  be  accessible  to  nobler  senti-
ments than  those  connected  with  intriguing  and  enriching
themselves  !     Pooh  !  they  will  only  laugh  at  me."

"  I  do  not  think  so,  your  excellency.  There  is  some  sense  of
justice  left,  even  in  a  person  who  is  worse  than  the  common
run  of  men.  Some  Jew  might  behave  in  that  way,  but  not  a
Russian.  No,  your  excellency,  there  is  no  necessity  for  your
concealing  your  meaning.  Speak  to  them  exactly  as  you  have
been  graciously  pleased  to  speak  to  me.  They  accuse  you  of
being  a  proud  and  ambitious  man,  who  will  listen  to  nothing,
and  who  trusts  in  himself  alone  ;  so  let  them  see  everything  as
it  really  is.  How  can  it  affect  you '?  You  are  in  the  right.
Speak  to  them  as  though  it  were  not  in  their  presence,  but  in
the  presence  of  God  himself,  that  you  were  making  your  con-
fession."

"  Afanasiy  Yasilievitch,"  said  the  prince  thoughtfully,  "  I  will
think  this  over;  and  in  the  meanwhile,  I  thank  you  sincerely
for  your  advice."

"  And  will  your  excellency  order  Tchitchikoff's  release  ?"

"  Well,  yes,  I  will.  Tell  Tchitchikoff  that  he  is  to  take  him-
self off  as  speedily  as  possible,  within  twenty-four  hours  ;  and
the  farther  he  goes,  the  better.  I  should  never  forgive  him  if
he  fell  under  my  hand  again."

Murazoff  went  straight  from  the  prince  to  Tchitchikoff.  Ho
found  our  hero  already  in  fine  spirits,  calmly  occupied  with  the
very  excellent  dinner  which  had  been  brought  to  him  from  a
very  good  restaurant.  From  the  very  first  phrases  of  the  con-
versation, the  old  man  perceived  that  Tchitchikofi' had  somehow
contrived  to  win  over  some  of  the  cunning  officials.  He  even
realised  that  the  invisible  influence  of  the  crafty  lawyer  had
been  exercised  in  the  case.

"  Listen  to  me,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  said  he  ;  "I  have  brought
you  your  freedom,  on  conditions  that  you  quit  the  city  in-
stantly. Collect  your  eflects,  and  God  be  with  j'ou  !  Don't  de-
lay your  departure  for  a  moment,  for  matters  may  grow  worse.
I  am  aware  that  a  certain  person  is  instigating  you  to  your  pre-


318  DEAD   SOULS.

sent  course  ;  but  I  can  inform  you  in  confidence  that  certain
affairs  are  now  on  the  point  of  disclosure  which  are  of  such  a
nature  that  no  earthly  powers  will  be  able  to  save  him.  Of
course,  he  will  wish  to  ruin  others  in  his  fall ;  but,  no  matter,
the  day  of  reckoning  is  at  hand.  When  I  left  you  just  now  you
were  in  a  favourable  state  of  mind,  much  more  favourable
than  you  are  now.  My  advice  to  you  was  not  lightly  given.
Don't  be  so  eager  for  that  wealth  for  which  men  quarrel  and
cut  each  other's  throats.  Believe  me,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  until
men  cast  aside  all  the  things  for  the  sake  of  which  they  gnaw
and  devour  each  other  upon  this  earth,  until  they  direct  their
attention  to  the  rational  acquisition  of  spiritual  wealth,  true
opulence  and  order  will  never  be  established  upon  earth.  Days
of  famine  are  approaching  for  the  whole  nation,  and  for  each
one  separately.  That  is  clear.  Say  what  you  like,  the  body
does  depend  upon  the  soul.  If  you  wish  it  to  progress  as  it
should,  don't  think  any  more  of  dead  souls,  but  of  your  own
living  soul,  and,  with  God's  aid,  adopt  a  different  course  of  life.
I  also  shall  take  my  departure  to-morrow.  Make  haste  to
leave,  for  if  you  don't  a  misfortune  will  happen  to  you  in  my
absence."

So  saying,  the  old  man  quitted  the  room.  Tchitchikoff  grew
thoughtful,  and  he  concentrated  his  mind  upon  the  significance
of  life.  "  Murazoft'  is  right,"  said  he.  "  It  is  time  to  enter  on
a  different  path  !  "

So  saying,  he  left  his  prison,  one  of  the  guards  carrying  his
dressing-case  to  the  outer  gate.  God  alone  knows  how  delighted
Selifan  and  Petrushka  were  over  their  master's  release.

"Well,  my  good  fellows,"  said  Tchitchikoff",  turning  to  them
in  an  amiable  way,  "  you  must  harness  up  and  start."

"  All  right,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  said  Selifan.  "  The  road  must
be  laid  by  this  time,  for  a  good  deal  of  snow  has  fallen,  and  it
will  be  fine  for  sledging.  It  really  is  time  to  get  out  of  this  ac-
cursed city.  We  ourselves  are  so  tired  of  it  that  we  don't  want
to  stay  in  it  a  day  longer."

"  Go  to  the  carriage-maker,  and  tell  him  to  fit  some  runners
to  the  calash,"  said  Tchitchikoff.  He  did  not  care  to  pay  any
farewell  calls  on  anyone.  He  felt  awkward  after  all  that  had
passed — the  more  so,  as  many  scandals  of  the  most  unpleasant
description  were  in  circulation  about  him  in  the  city.  He
avoided  all  encounters,  and  quietly  went  to  the  merchant  from
whom  he  had  previously  purchased  the  Navarino  smoke-and-
flame  coloured  cloth  ;  of  this,  he  bought  four  arshins  more  to
serve  for  a  coat  and  trousers,  and  then  he  directed  his  course


TWO   WILLS,    A    FAIR,    AND    A   LAWYER,  319

to  the  same  tailor  as  before.  In  consideration  of  double  pay,
the  fellow  agreed  to  expedite  matters  ;  and  the  tailor  colony  sat
down  to  work  all  night,  with  needle,  goose,  and  teeth,  so  that
the  coat  was  ready  on  the  morrow,  although  a  little  late.  It  was
excellent,  exactly  like  the  first  one.  But,  alas  !  Tchitchikofl'  ob-
served that  there  was  now  a  smooth  white  spot  on  his  head ;
and  he  wailed  mournfully.  "  And  why  need  I  have  indulged  in
such  violent  grief  ?  I  ought  not  to  have  torn  my  hair  for  a  long
time  to  come,"

After  settling  with  the  tailor,  he  at  length  left  the  town.  He
was  no  longer  the  Tchitchikoft"  of  former  days  ;  he  was  merely
the  ruin  of  the  old  Tchitchikofl".  His  soul,  by  its  internal  condi-
tion, might  have  been  compared  to  a  building  which  has  been
pulled  to  pieces,  in  order  that  a  new  one  may  be  constructed
from  it,  which  new  one  has  not  yet  been  begun,  as  the  final
plans  have  not  yet  arrived  from  the  architect,  so  that  the  work-
men are  left  in  a  state  of  indecision.

Old  Murazoff"  took  his  departure  an  hour  before  Tchitchikoft",
in  a  kibitka  in  company  with  his  clerk,  Potapuitch ;  and  one
hour  after  Tchitchikoft"s  departure,  an  order  was  circulated
through  the  town  to  the  efiect  that  the  prince  wished  to  see
everyone  of  the  oificials  on  the  occasion  of  his  approaching
trip  to  Petersburg.

The  entire  official  force  of  the  city,  beginning  with  the  civil
governor  and  ending  with  a  titular  councillor,  assembled  in  the
grand  hall  of  the  governor-general's  residence.  There  were  all
the  heads  of  offices  and  departments,  councillors,  assessors,
Sourbiters,  Rednoses,  Blowhards  ;"^"  those  who  had  taken  bribes,
those  who  had  not ;  those  whose  souls  were  crooked,  those
whose  souls  were  getting  crooked,  and  those  whose  souls  were
not  crooked  at  all.  All  awaited  the  entrance  of  the  governor-
general  in  considerable  excitement  and  trepidation.  The  prince
made  his  appearance  with  a  face  which  was  neither  gloomy  nor
pleasant ;  his  glance  was  firm,  so  was  his  step.  The  entire
official  assemblage  bowed,  some  of  them  to  their  very  girdles.
The  prince  responded  with  a  slight  inclination  of  the  head,  and
then  began  as  follows  : —

"  As  I  am  on  the  point  of  starting  for  Petersburg,  I  have
thought  it  proper  to  have  an  interview  with  you,  and  I  will  ex-
plain to  you  in  some  degree  the  cause  of  my  adopting  this
course.  A  very  disgraceful  aff'air  has  occurred  here  in  our
very  midst.     I  presume  that  many  of  those  now  present  know

*  Translations  of  epithets  employed  as  proper  names.


320  DEAD   SOULS.

to  what  matter  I  refer.  This  affair  has  led  to  the  detection  of
other  matters  not  less  disgraceful,  in  which  men  whom  I  had
hitherto  regarded  as  honest  have  become  involved.  I  am  even
acquainted  with  their  secret  purposes  to  confuse  and  muddle
everything  in  such  a  manner  that  it  will  be  absolutely  im-
possible to  arrive  at  a  clear  knowledge  of  the  situation.  I
know  who  is  the  leader  in  all  this,  and  all  about  his  secret
action,  although  he  has  very  cleverly  kept  in  the  background
all  through.  But  the  point  lies  here — that  I  intend  to  investi-
gate this  matter,  not  by  a  formal  investigation  of  the  papers,
but  by  swift  trial,  as  in  time  of  war  ;  and  I  hope  that  the
emperor  will  grant  me  the  right  to  do  so,  when  I  have  laid  the
whole  business  before  him.  In  this  case,  as  there  exists  no
possibility  of  carrying  out  the  proceedings  in  the  usual  form,
since  cabinets  full  of  documents  have  been  burned,  and  since
eflbrts  are  being  made  by  means  of  forged  denunciations  and
other  false  extraneous  testimony  to  confuse  this  matter,  which
is  dark  enough  already,  I  consider  a  court-martial  to  be  the  sole
resource,  and  I  should  like  to  gather  your  opinion  on  the
subject."

The  prince  paused,  as  though  awaiting  a  reply.  All  stood
with  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  floor.  Many  of  them  were
pallid.

"  I  am  also  acquainted  with  another  transaction,"  resumed
his  excellency,  "  although  those  engaged  in  it  feel  perfectly
sure  that  it  cannot  be  possibly  known  to  anyone.  The  prose-
cution will  in  this  instance  be  vigorously  pressed  ;  for  I  shall
myself  be  the  informant  and  the  plaintiff,  and  I  shall  present
convincing  proofs."

One  of  the  official  assemblage  now  shuddered,  and  some  of
the  more  timid  fairly  took  alarm.

"As  a  matter  of  course,"  continued  the  prince,  "the  chief
ringleader  will  be  punished  by  the  loss  of  his  rank  and  pro-
perty, and  the  rest  by  removal  from  office.  Possibly  many
innocent  men  will  suffer.  But  what  is  to  be  done  ?  The  affair
is  a  very  dishonourable  one,  and  people  cry  aloud  for  justice.
Although  I  am  aware  that  this  will  not  even  serve  as  a  lesson
to  others — for  in  the  place  of  those  who  are  discharged,  others
will  make  their  appearance,  and  the  very  men  who  have  hitherto
been  honest  will  become  dishonest,  and  the  very  men  who
are  honoured  with  my  confidence  will  deceive  and  betray  me —
still,  in  spite  of  all  this,  I  am  forced  to  act  rigorously,  for  the
case  is  one  in  which  punishment  is  requisite.  I  know  that  I
shall  be  accused  of  harshness  and  cruelty,  but  I  also  know


TWO    WILLS,    A   FAIR,    AND    A    LAAVYER.  321

that  I  shall  be  less  blamed  by  those  for  whom  I  must  now
become  simply  an  instrument  of  justice,  destined  to  fall  upon
their  heads."

An  involuntary  shudder  passed  over  the  faces  of  all  who
were  present.  The  prince  was  calm.  Neither  wrath  nor
mental  emotion  of  any  kind  was  reflected  upon  his  counten-
ance.

"Well,"  he  continued,  "  the  man  in  whose  hands  the  fate  of
many  lies,  and  whom  no  appeals  could  hitherto  move,  now
appeals  to  you  all.  All  shall  be  forgotten,  wiped  out,  forgiven ;
I  will  myself  intercede  for  all,  if  you  will  comply  with  my
request.  This  is  what  I  ask.  I  know  that  dishonesty  cannot
be  GX,tirpated  by  any  means  whatever,  neither  by  terror  nor  by
chastisement.  It  has  become  too  deeply  rooted.  The  dis-
honourable practice  of  taking  bribes  has  come  to  be  a  necessity,
and  indispensable  even  for  those  who  were  not  born  with
dishonest  instincts.  I  know  that  it  is  impossible  for  many  men
to  resist  the  general  current.  But  I  am  now  obliged — at  a
sacred  and  decisive  moment,  when  the  salvation  of  the  country
is  in  question,  when  every  citizen  contributes  all  he  has,  and
sacrifices  everything  to  relieve  his  starving  countrymen — I  am
obliged  to  make  a  proclamation  to  all  those  who  still  have  a
Russian  heart  in  their  bosoms,  and  who  have  any  comprehen-
sion of  the  significance  of  the  word  nobility.  Why  discuss
which  of  us  is  the  most  to  blame  ?  I  am  perhaps  more  to
blame  than  all  the  others ;  I  may  have  been  too  stern  with  you
in  the  beginning  ;  I  may  through  my  superfluous  suspicion
have  repulsed  such  of  you  as  honestly  desired  to  be  of  service
to  me.  But  if  those  I  refer  to  really  loved  justice  and  the
welfare  of  their  country,  they  should  not  have  taken  oftence  at
the  haughtiness  of  my  demeanour  ;  they  should  have  stifled
their  own  self-pride,  and  sacrificed  their  own  personalities.  I
should  have  noted  their  self-sacrifice  and  their  lofty  sentiments,
and  have  finally  accepted  wise  and  useful  advice  from  them.
Nevertheless,  the  subordinate  ought  rather  to  mould  himself  to
the  temper  of  his  chief,  than  the  chief  to  the  temper  of  his
subordinates.  This  is,  at  all  events,  more  lawful  and  easier,
since  many  subordinates  have  but  one  chief,  whereas  each  chief
has  a  hundred  subordinates.  But  we  will  now  lay  aside  the
question  as  to  who  is  the  most  to  blame.  The  point  lies  here —
that  we  are  called  upon  to  save  our  country  ;  that  our  father-
land is  being  ruined,  not  by  the  incursions  of  twenty  foreign
nations,  but  by  ourselves  ;  that  beside  the  lawful  government,
another  government  has  been  established  which  is  much  more


S22  DEAD   SOULS.

powerful  than  any  lawful  one.  We  have  fixed  our  own  condi-
tions ;  everything  has  had  a  price  set  upon  it,  and  these  prices  have
even  become  universally  known.  And  no  ruler,  were  he  even
wiser  than  all  the  rulers  and  lawgivers  in  the  world,  can  remedy
this  evil,  no  matter  how  greatly  he  limits  the  action  of  dis-
honest officials  by  appointing  other  officials  to  overlook  them.
All  means  indeed  will  prove  unavailing  until  each  one  of  us
feels  that  he  must  prepare  to  repel  dishonesty,  in  the  same
manner  in  which  he  armed  himself  at  the  epoch  of  the  great
national  rising.  I  now  appeal  to  you  as  a  Russian,  as  a  man  of
one  blood  with  yourselves.  I  turn  to  those  among  you  who
have  the  least  comprehension  of  what  nobility  of  thought  con-
sists in.  I  invite  them  to  remember  their  duty — duty,  which
presents  itself  to  man  wherever  and  whatever  he  maybe.  I  in-
vite them  to  examine  their  duties  more  closely,  and  the  obliga-
tions of  the  service  they  belong  to."

"And  now,  gentlemen,"  added  the  prince,  "will  you  now  be
kind  enough  to  follow  me  into  the  adjoining  apartment  ?  "*

As  the  prince  uttered  these  words,  he  made  a  sign  to  the
lackej'S  who  were  standing  on  each  side  of  one  of  the  doors  of
the  audience-room,  and  this  door  was  instantly  fiung  open.
The  governor-general  then  passed  into  the  largest  apartment  of
his  official  quarters ;  the  entire  assembly  folloAved  him  there
and  the  door  was  closed  again.  This  apartment,  which  was
surrounded  by  writing-tables,  was  lighted  from  above,  and  had
in  all  five  doors,  all  of  which  were  closed ;  in  front  of  each,
inside  the  room,  stood  two  gendarmes,  armed  and  motionless.
This  circumstance  seemed  to  add  to  the  gravity  of  the  language
which  they  had  just  listened  to.  Still  another  peculiarity
attracted  general  attention  :  only  a  few^  chairs  usually  stood
near  each  of  the  writing-tables;  but  on  this  occasion,  the  chairs
were  considerably  more  numerous  than  usual,  and  on  the
tables  in  front  of  the  chairs  there  lay  sheets  of  white  paper,
and  on  the  paper  freshly  cut  pens.

The  prince  now  addressed  the  company  in  these  words : —

*  Here  Gogol's  text  comes  to  an  end,  as  stated  in  our  preface.  How-
ever, in  1857  a  book  was  published  at  Kieft' under  the  title  of  "  Continuation
and  Conclusion  of  Bend  Souls, "  by  Yastchenko  Zakhartchenko.  What  fol-
lows is  taken  from  that  work,  in  the  belief  that]  it  will  please  those  who
like  to  have  their  stories  complete,  and  serve  as  a  curiosity  to  others.
The  MS.  destroyed  by  Gogol  was  no  doubt  very  different ;  and  the  follow-
ing matter  must  be  regarded  as  a  mere  experiment,  such  as  has  been
made  at  various  times  in  England  by  second  and  third-rate  writers  in  at-
tempting to  complete  the  unfinished  work  of  some  great  novelist — as
witness  Thackeray's  "  Denis  Duval,"  and  Dickens's  "Mystery  of  Edwia
Drood."


TWO   WILLS,    A   FAIR,    AND    A    LAWYER.  323

"  Gentlemen,  the  request  which  I  am  about  to  make  to  you
is  this  :  please  to  seat  yourselves,  take  your  pens,  and  write
down  freely  on  those  sheets  of  paper  j-our  opinion  of  the  com-
munication which  I  have  just  made  to  you,  and  of  which  I  feel
sure  you  have  not  missed  a  word.  You  will  not  require  more
than  twenty  minutes  to  enunciate  your  sentiments  as  to  the
state  of  things  which  I  have  described  to  you,  and  as  to  the
measures  which  I  ought  to  take.  At  all  events,  I  wish  to  have
the  one  hundred  and  sixty-two  sheets  of  paper  written,  signed,
and  dated  by  your  own  hands  within  half  an  hour's  time."

After  speaking  these  last  words,  he  withdrew  into  his  study.
Half  an  hour  later  he  re-entered  the  room,  had  all  the  sheets  of
paper  collected  and  then  courteously  dismissed  the  assemblage.
All  the  officials  retired,  either  thoughtful  or  depressed,  and
returned  home,  without  dreaming  even  of  questioning  one
another.

After  the  scrutiny,  which  was  conducted  under  the  prince's
own  eyes,  twenty-seven  humble  resignations  were  laid  on  one
side.  The  twenty-eighth,  however,  was  written  with  a  noble
and  profound  sentiment  of  wounded  pride.  It  came  from  an
exalted  personage,  who,  moreover,  called  in  person,  and  who
was  immediately  admitted.  The  explanation  and  the  conduct
of  this  official,  who  had  resigned,  indicated  reviving  loyalty  and
a  general  return  to  better  sentiments.  The  prince  promised
to  add  a  marginal  note  to  the  petition  which  this  person  had
addressed  to  the  sovereign,  in  order  to  obtain  his  discharge  ;
he  then  undertook  to  preside  in  person  over  a  tribunal  of  arbi-
tration, which  Lyenitzuin  besought  him  to  establish  im-
mediately, and  in  the  presence  of  which  he  was  desirous  of
terminating,  in  an  honourable  manner,  the  scandalous  suit,
which  had  arisen  between  himself  and  the  other  interested
parties  with  regard  to  the  testamentary  dispositions  of  his  late
relative,  Khlobuyoff's  aunt.

This  matter  having  been  arranged,  the  prince  wrote  a  cir-
cular, copies  of  which  were  despatched  that  same  evening  to
the  twenty-seven  scamps  of  divers  ranks  who  had  been  led  to
acknowledge  themselves  guilty  on  the  spot.  Each  one  was
invited  to  consider  whether  it  would  not  be  appropriate,  whilst
sending  in  a  petition  for  permission  to  resign,  which  really
amounted  to  an  appeal  to  the  sovereign  for  mercy,  whether  it
would  not  be  appropriate  to  support  this  petition  by  an  apology
to  his  fellow-men,  in  the  shape  of  some  good  deed — for  example,
the  gift  of  some  money  to  the  poor  of  the  district  who  were  suf-
fering from  famine.    Then  they  all  were  to  name  to  which  of  the


324  DEAD   SOULS.

Eastern  governments  theywisted  to  retire  with  the  simple  rank
of  citizen.  The  prince's  circular  procured  for  the  poor  inha-
bitants of  the  distrijCt,  now  sorely  afflicted  with  famine,  a  sum
of  nearly  one  hundred  thousand  roubles,  which  was  distributed
among  them.

At  the  expiration  of  three  months  not  a  single  one  of  these
twenty-seven  rascals  remained  in  the  town.  We  do  not  know
whether  any  others  afterwards  arrived  in  their  stead,  but  these
were  all  forced  to  quit  the  government,  never  to  appear  there
more.  As  for  the  lawyer,  we  do  not  know  whether  it  was  of
his  own  free  will  or  in  consequence  of  certain  orders  he  received,
that  he  decided  to  make  a  prolonged  sojourn  in  the  vicinity  of
Lake  Baikal ;  however,  fifty  days  after  the  departure  of  our
hero  the  ex-advocate  was  installed  in  a  small  house  in  the
western  suburb  of  Irkutsk.  There,  in  the  midst  of  gardens,
like  Diocletian  after  he  had  abdicated  the  imperial  throne,  our
fallen  lawyer,  in  the  lack  of  employment  for  his  legal  talents,
innocently  occupied  himself  in  cultivating  vegetables  and  pre-
paring all  sorts  of  preserves.

His  excellency  the  civil  governor,  Lyenitzuin,  in  company
with  his  wife  and  their  charming  infant,  set  out  on  their  side
for  Nice,  where  they  intended  to  spend  the  winter.  As  for
Khlobuyoff",  in  the  course  of  his  tour  of  penitence  he  had  raised
his  humble  mission  almost  to  the  level  of  a  sort  of  apostleship.
Treasures  of  really  even  angelic  eloquence  had  been  discovered
in  this  man,  for  so  long  a  time  both  a  dissipated  and  frivolous
fellow,  and  the  efiects  of  his  words  on  the  people  far  surpassed
those  which  Murazoft'  had  hoped  for.  The  repentant  Lyenitzuin,
it  should  be  mentioned,  bought  back  the  hereditary  domain  of
Khlobuyofi',  who,  on  his  mission  being  accomphshed,  learnt  that
his  land  has  been  restored  to  him  tree  from  all  encumbrances,
abundantly  provided  with  agricultural  implements,  with  grain,
horses,  oxen,  and  flocks,  and  managed  for  a  year,  free  of  cost,  by
an  upright  agriculturist  known  to  Murazofi'  and  Kostanzhoglo.
Moreover,  Lyenitzuin  decided  to  pay  Khlobuyoff  an  annuity  of
twenty  thousand  roubles,  with  reversion,  after  his  death,  to  his
wife,  and,  in  default  of  him  and  his  wife,  to  their  eldest  child.

But  let  us  return  to  our  hero,  and  let  us  see  what  thoughts
occupy  his  mind  after  his  rescue  from  a  most  perilous  situation,
by  precisely  the  very  matters  which  seemed  destined  to  pre-
cipitate his  ruin ;  that  is  to  say,  by  the  deluge  of  accusations
brought  against  him,  by  the  unexampled  complications  which
had  arisen,  and  by  his  arbitrary  imprisonment,  which  at  first
seemed  merely  a  preliminary  to  Siberia  or  the  scafi'old.


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR    OF   TCHITCHIKOFF.


CHAPTER   XVII.

MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR    OF    TCHITCHIKOFF. HIS    OPINIONS    IN    THE

LAP   OF    FORTUNE.

More  than  a  month  had  elapsed  since  Tchitchikoff  had  enjoyed
the  seven  hours  of  sleep  per  day  which  are  considered  indis-
pensable to  the  health  of  man  ;  and  of  late,  repose  seemed  to
have  totally  abandoned  him  at  night.  Thus  the  gentle,  easy
motion  of  the  sleigh  now  proved  conducive  to  repose,  and,
stretched  out  comfortably  in  his  calash,  he  slept  for  fourteen
hours.  He  woke  himself  at  last  by  a  powerful  snore  resembling
the  detonation  of  a  blunderbuss,  followed  by  a  sneeze  of  the
most  sonorous  description ;  and  the  commotion  which  accom-
panied this  double  explosion  was  a  double  test,  to  boot,  for  the
admirable  springs  of  the  ancient  calash.  A  dog  broke  his  chain,
a  cock  set  his  numerous  family  the  example  of  a  headlong  flight ;
two  peasants  ran  out  into  their  yards  to  see  who  could  be  thus
firing  close  to  their  dwellings;  a  woman,  trembling  like  a  leaf
and  standing  with  her  mouth  open,  let  fall  a  large  jar  of  clotted
milk  on  the  threshold  of  a  barn.  However,  Selifan  and  Petrushka,
who  were  not  deceived  as  to  the  nature  of  the  phenomenon,
rushed  straight  to  their  master's  couch.  Tchitchikoff,  as  soon
as  he  could  understand  things  about  him,  learned  that  the
horses  had  been  obliged  to  halt  in  order  to  regain  their  breath
and  strength,  and  that  his  people,  after  having  kept  their  seats
on  the  box  for  nearly  fifteen  hours  by  the  clock,  had  taken
advantage  of  this  enforced  halt  to  refresh  themselves  a  little  on
some  cabbage,  milk,  and  hot  bread.

Our  hero  entered  the  public  room  of  the  rustic  hostelry  where
his  servants  had  fed,  and  there  devoured  by  himself  the  third  of
a  fine  kitlei.i/aka,*  weighing  between  six  and  eight  pounds,  which
the  landlord  had  prepared  for  a  wedding  in  the  village  ;  then,
the  horses  having  been  once  more  harnessed  to  the  carriage,  he
paid  his  reckoning,  resumed  his  seat,  and  set  out  again  on  his
journey,  after  having  fully  informed  himself  as  to  the  situation
of  the  estates  of  a  certain  Dobryakoff,  who,  five  days  prior  to
the  imprisonment  of  Tchitchikoft",  had  received  from  the  latter  a
deposit  of  three  very  heavy  coffers.

Our  hero  found  Dobryakoff's  house  well  enough,  and  also  the
coffers  which  were  awaiting  him,  but  not  Dobryakoff"  himself,

*  A  fish-pasty,  the  contents  of  which  have  been  previously  described.


326  DEAD    SOULS.

for  he  was  absent.  The  uncle  of  that  gentleman,  an  old  man
over  eighty  years  of  age,  gave  TchitchikofF  and  his  servants  a
perfect  dinner,  delivered  the  coffers  up  to  his  visitor,  and  only
allowed  him  to  depart  after  a  formal  promise  to  return  shortly
and  visit  his  nephew.

Our  hero  soon  cruelly  repented  of  the  precipitation  with  which
he  abandoned  that  hospitable  roof,  where  he  had  not  considered
it  prudent  to  remain  on  account  of  the  burden  which  he  was
carrying  away.  He  had  hardly  resumed  his  journey  when  the
sky  clouded  over,  the  wind  rose,  and  terrible  squalls  of  snow
whirled  around  him ;  every  trace  of  the  road  disappeared,  and
the  tempest  was  all  the  more  alarming  since  it  was  united  with
sharp  cold.

The  travellers,  who  had  lost  their  way  completely,  wandered
about  at  random,  still  advancing  until  after  midnight  with  infinite
difficulty,  and  not  without  great  danger,  when  at  length  the
despair  which  had  seized  hold  of  them  was  followed  by  a  feeble
ray  of  hope  ;  the  hurricane  diminished  in  violence,  the  darkness
became  less  impenetrable,  and  they  fancied  they  could  see  a
clearing,  surrounded  by  thick  underwood,  stretching  before  them.
Fortunately  they  kept  the  wind  behind  them,  and  they  skilfully
tacked  and  tacked  whilst  in  the  valleys  formed  by  the  thousands
of  snow  heaps,  which  were  alternately  raised  and  carried  off  by
the  tempest.  During  an  interval  of  enforced  halt  made  by  the
horses,  who  were  overcome  with  fatigue,  they  heard  the  barking
of  dogs.  This  auspicious  sound  restored  a  little  courage,  even  to
the  steeds,  and  five  minutes  later  they  could  distinguish  some
lights  in  the  distance.

They  were  those  of  the  hunting-box  of  a  wealthy  nobleman,
who  was  staying  there  with  a  considerable  number  of  friends
and  neighbours.  His  whole  pack  of  hounds  was  assembled
there,  with  all  his  huntsmen — a  truly  royal  establishment;  while
the  company  was  gathered  in  the  principal  apartment,  having
just  concluded  a  copious  and  splendid  supper,  which  had  been
wound  up  with  lavish  libations.  It  was  at  this  moment  that
Pavel  Ivanovitch  was  announced  to  the  nobleman,  Prince
Kutinin,  as  a  traveller  who  had  lost  his  way,  and  who  requested
his  excellency's  hospitality  for  the  night.  The  prince,  who  was
busy  having  several  card-tables  prepared,  ordered  that  the
stranger  should,  first  of  all,  be  supplied  with  a  good  supper  and
a  fire,  and  that  he  should  afterwards  be  presented  to  him,  unless
indeed  he  preferred  to  go  to  bed.

At  the  expiration  of  an  hour,  Tchitchikofi"  was  in  the  drawing-
room,  seated  beside  the  prince,  who  had  just  won  from  a  young


MISERY    AND    GRANDEUR    OF    TCHITCHIKOFE.  327

gentleman,  at  cards,  first  his  ready  money,  then  two  estates  he
owned,  next  his  stud,  and  finally  his  equipages,  weapons  and
dogs.

The  prince  was  desirous  of  learning  who  was  the  guest  whom
the  storm  had  sent  him.  Tchitchikoff  posed  as  a  man  who,
wearied  of  the  benumbing  influence  of  towns,  was  in  search  of
an  estate  and  a  wife,  as  he  henceforth  wished  to  live  a  family
life,  and  to  indulge  in  his  tastes  for  agriculture.  Upon  hearing
this,  the  prince  informed  him  of  a  magnificent  estate  at  a  dis-
tance of  thirty  versts  or  so,  which  belonged  to  a  young  lady
who  knew  how  to  manage  her  property  extremely  well,  and  who
would  no  doubt  be  charmed  to  make  our  hero's  acquaintance,
and,  better  still,  to  bestow  herself  and  all  her  possessions  upon
him.  Then  he  invited  Tcbitchikoft'  to  join  in  a  game  of  faro,
that  was,  if  he  felt  inclined  to  tempt  fortune.  But  our  hero
at  the  moment  had  to  give  some  orders  to  his  servants.  He
had  himself  shown  to  the  small  chamber  which  had  been
assigned  to  him,  and  an  apology  was  made  to  him,  as,  in  order
to  reach  it,  he  was  forced  to  pass  through  the  kitchen.  On
entering  his  apartment,  followed  by  Petrushka,  he  beheld  the
three  coffers  ranged  against  the  wall ;  and  he  gazed  at  them
intently  with  a  contraction  of  his  brows,  for  they  constituted  a
very  heavy  burden  for  him  to  carry  about  with  him  in  all  his
peregi-inations.  Suddenly  the  idea  occurred  to  him  to  ask
Petrushka  if  he  knew  who  the  man  was  with  a  piercing  glance,
whom  he  had  seen  sitting  on  a  stool  near  the  kitchen  fire.

"  He  is  a  Jew,"  answered  Petrushka,  "and  is  said  to  be  worth
millions.  Chance  always  leads  men  of  his  class  to  places  where
fortunes  fly  about."

"  Beg  him  to  come  here,  then,  and  leave  me  alone  with  him  ;
but  try  to  borrow  a  scale  and  some  weights,  and  remain  in  the
kitchen  near  at  hand."

The  Jew  was  brought  in,  the  scales  were  procured,  and,  at
the  expiration  of  half  an  hour,  the  three  embarrassing  coffers*
had  disappeared  from  the  room,  and  perhaps  even  from  the
house.  Tchitchikoff  returned  to  the  drawing-room  without
having  opened  his  cash-box,  but  with  seventy-five  thousand
good  roubles  in  his  pocket-book,  a  portion  of  which  he  decided
to  risk  at  play.  He  had  the  best  of  luck  ;  and  the  finest  piece
of  all  was,  undoubtedly,  that,  having  won  thirty  thousand
roubles  without  anyone  paying  any  heed  to  it,  lie  had  the
pleasure    of   seeing   the  whole    company,   overwhelmed   with

*  These  coffers  contained  the  gold  and  silver  plalc  ■vv-hich  was  missing
afcer  the  death  of  Khlobuyoff'a  aunt.


328  DEAD   SOULS.

fatigue,  break  up  into  groups,  and,  preceded  by  lackeys  armed
with  torches,  retire  to  their  rooms.  It  was  now  five  o'clock  in
the  morning.

Tchitchikoff  did  not  sleep.  The  weather  was  now  perfectly
ealm,  and  the  moonlight  superb.  He  pushed  his  bed  towards
the  door,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  barricade  it,  and  opened  his
cash-box  on  a  large  stool,  quite  close  to  him.  Then,  sitting  up
in  bed,  with  the  white  coverlet  thrown  picturesquely  round  his
shoulders,  he  set  to  work  to  count  up  his  capital.  As  he  was
completing  this  intoxicating  operation,  he  beheld  a  man,  who
seemed  to  be  observing  him,  rise  up  beneath  his  window.  He
instantly  darted  to  the  casement,  armed  with  a  slipper,  held  as
though  it  were  a  pistol ;  and  his  gesture  imparted  a  comical
fright  to  the  prowler,  in  whom  Tchitchikoif  suddenly  recognised
his  coachman,  Selifan.  He  called  him,  and  gave  him  formal
orders  to  harness  the  horses  and  be  ready  to  set  out  at  day-
break.

Tchitchikoif' s  double  team  was  not  in  a  state  to  travel  even
ten  versts,  dragging  the  calash  and  towing  the  britchka  behind  ;
but,  as  luck  would  have  it,  there  chanced  to  be  fifteen  stout
post-horses  stalled  in  a  coach-house  there,  and  they  were  to
start  at  daybreak  for  a  posting  station  situated  nineteen  versts
away,  and  in  the  very  direction  of  the  estate  of  the  wealthy
spinster  whom  Prince  Kutinin  had  alluded  to  on  the  evening
before.  Tchitchikofi''s  own  horses  were  accordingly  attached
behind  his  carriage,  so  that  the  trip  proved  only  a  promenade
for  the  poor  beasts.  After  three  hours'  repose  at  an  inn,  which
was  situated  on  the  boundary-line  between  two  provinces,  they
were  harnessed  in  earnest,  and,  going  at  a  gentle  trot,  they
were  able  to  reach  the  house  where  happiness  was  possibly
awaiting  Tchitchikofi".

Our  hero  had  thought  it  necessary,  before  covering  this  short
distance  of  fifteen  versts,  to  take  minute  pains  with  his  toilet.
In  vain  was  he  informed  that  Appolina  Mercurievna  had  had
twenty  suitors,  all  of  whom  she  haJ  successively  ill-used  and
dismissed;  that  she  was  proud,  fantastic,  choleric,  and  often
cruel ;  that  she  made  her  twenty -five  hundred  souls  sutler  more
than  they  would  sufi"er  in  hell,  and  that  she  was  abetted  in  this
task  by  a  woman,  who,  like  herself,  had  remained  unmarried,
and  who,  by  her  redoubtable  activity,  appeared  a  hundred  times
more  ferocious  than  her  noble  mistress.  However,  our  friend
wished  to  see  and  to  judge  for  himself,  and  so  he  presented
himself,  was  duly  received,  paid  his  court,  pleased  the  lady,
became  enamoured  of  her  somewhat  vigorous  charms,  made  his


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR    OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  329

offer,  and  was  accepted.  Then  a  day  was  fixed  for  the  wed-
ding.

There  was  great  joy  among  the  gentlewoman's  serfs,  on
hearing  that  a  man  would  soon  become  their  master,  and  they
imagined  that  this  master  was  an  angel  from  heaven,  a  saviour,
who  had  been  sent  to  them  by  Providence.  0  hope !  what  gulfs
of  misery  and  sorrow  dost  thou  now  and  again  embellish  with
a  fleeting  ray!  Meanwhile  the  lady's  relatives,  who  had  been
invited  to  the  wedding,  arrived  from  all  directions.  One  of  them,
alas  !  came  from  the  very  town  whence  Tchitchikoff  had  come,
and  this  man  privately  told  his  cousin  of  all  that  he  knew,  or
thought  he  knew,  respecting  our  hero  ;  and  this  occurred  on  the
very  eve  of  the  day  appointed  for  the  nuptials.  Appolina  having
heard  that  Tchitchikoff  had  begged  mercy  from  the  governor-
general  for  his  crimes,  in  the  name  of  his  wife  and  children,
knew  all  she  cared  to  know  of  the  monster.  She  awaited  him,
surrounded  by  all  her  guests,  who,  not  having  been  forewarned,
had  assumed  looks  of  delight  and  pleasure  ;  and  at  the  moment
when  Tchitchikoff"  entered  the  room,  and  hastened  forward  to
kiss  her  hand,  that  same  hand  suddenly  showered  down  upon
his  rosy  cheeks  a  perfect  hailstorm  of  blows.  And  in  the
meanwhile  this  infuriated  spinster  poured  forth  a  torrent  of
frightful  language,  and  ordered  her  lackeys  to  hound  this  fine
gentleman  to  his  calash,  which  was  all  harnessed  and  packed
ready  for  the  road.

Our  hero,  who  had  fancied  that  he  had  finally  reached  the  goal
of  his  laboux-s,  the  innocent  and  laudable  object  of  his  expe-
ditions, who  had  seemed  to  be  upon  the  point  of  marrying,  of
acquiring  some  fine  domains,  of  enriching  his  vassals,  of  devoting
himself  to  a  country  life,  in  the  bosom  of  an  amiable  family,  and
of  conquering,  by  dint  of  sagacity,  order,  and  prudence,  the
respect  and  esteem  of  the  whole  world,  then  once  more  had  to
pass  through  the  hands  of  perverse  men.  The  first  of  these
was  a  petty  squire,  the  personal  enemy  of  General  Betrishtchefl',
to  whom  he  was  so  unfortunate  as  to  mention  that  general.
This  mad  and  fantastic  gentleman,  who,  as  the  result  of  nume-
rous excesses,  had  reached  the  highest  pitch  of  lunacy,  dragged
our  hero  oft'  to  his  house,  and  constrained  him  to  take  part  in
one  of  those  excessive  orgies  which  seem  likely  to  be  followed
either  by  madness  or  death.  This  man  indeed  compelled  Tchi-
tchikoff, under  penalty  of  death,  to  drink  more  spirituous  liquors
in  the  space  of  two  hours  than  he  had  drunk  in  the  whole  pre-
ceding thirty  years  ;  and  then  he  had  him  kissed  by  fifty  men,


330  DEAD    SOULS.

and  immediately  afterwards  by  fifty  women,  wbo  obeyed  bis
commands.

After  tbis  trial,  tbe  most  terrible  wbicb  be  bad  so  far  endured,
our  bero  escaped  from  tbe  dangerous  freaks  of  tbis  tyrant  of  tbe
steppes  ;  and  a  few  days  later  be  fell  in  witb  a  great  nobleman,
an  Anglomaniac  prince,  wbo  was  perfectly  infatuated  witb  bis
stud  and  witb  sport,  and  who  made  him  play  a  ridiculous  part,  by
forcing  bim  to  adopt  a  borsey  mania,  wbicb  was  quite  out  of  con-
sonance witb  bis  personal  appearance.  Nevertheless,  on  tbe
advice  of  tbis  nobleman,  be  betook  himself  to  a  neighbouring
locality  to  inspect  an  estate  wbicb  was  for  sale  there.

In  tbe  bouse  there,  a  young  fellow  who  was  in  the  diplomatic
service,  bad  just  arrived  from  Petersburg,  for  the  purpose  of
dividing  tbe  inheritance  of  a  deceased  uncle  with  bis  sister.
Tbis  rustic  damsel — a  young  girl  of  nineteen — like  a  genuine,
pure-blooded  inhabitant  of  the  steppes,  was  still  more  terrible
and  ferocious  than  the  Appolina  of  whom  we  have  spoken.  So
our  bero  fled  from  tbe  bouse,  where  tbe  most  violent  scenes
■were  of  constant  occurrence  between  this  Amazon,  who  always
had  her  whip  in  her  hand,  and  her  brother,  whom  she  drove  to
extremities.  It  seemed  as  if  it  would  all  result  in  some  unfor-
tunate affair,  of  wbicb  Tcbitchikoff  did  not  care  to  be  a  witness.
With  regard  to  the  dispute,  he  had  recognised  tbe  fact  that  both
tbe  diplomat  and  bis  sister  bad  set  their  minds  on  the  same
thing :  the  former  was  resolved  to  obtain,  by  ruse  or  knavery,
tbe  larger  part  of  the  property ;  and  she,  on  her  side,  was  no
less  determined  to  obtain  fully  two-thirds  of  the  inheritance,  but
by  means  of  strife,  ill-usage,  scandal,  and  transports  of  rage.

At  length,  after  having  sold  one  hundred  dead  souls  at  a
wretched  price,  to  a  man  named  Bosnyakoff,  and  to  some  of  the
petty  officials  of  a  town  of  tbe  tenth  rank,  he  was  led  twenty
days  later  by  business  to  tbe  city  of  Krasuoi,  situated  in  the
district  of  tbe  same  name,  and  in  the  government  of  Bubni.
There  be  installed  himself  at  an  inn,  ordered  his  dinner,  and
while  waiting  to  have  it  served  him  in  bis  own  room,  be  began
to  peruse  "The  Moscow  Gazette,"  which  the  waiter  had
just  brought  in.  Therein  be  read  bis  full  name  and  a  descrip-
tion of  bis  person,  with  an  order  which  had  been  sent  to  all
tbe  towns  to  arrest  bim  and  deliver  him  up  to  justice,  for
having  bought,  mortgaged,  and  sold  a  considerable  number  of
dead  souls,  and  for  having  committed  in  various  governments
divers  deeds  prohibited  by  the  laws.  Ten  minutes  later,  and
before  Selifan  bad  had  time  to  harness  tbe  horses  and  to  fetch
the  luggage,  the  police  appeared,  headed  by  the  gorodnitchii/,


MISERY   AND   GRANDEtJR  OF   TCHITCHlKOfP.  331

or  mayor  of  the  town,  a  man  about  fifty  years  of  age,  who  was
very  expert  in  all  sorts  of  disputes.  He  first  surveyed  Tchi-
tchikoft",  his  fine  linen,  and  his  general  appearance  of  prosperity;
he  reflected  upon  his  title  of  collegiate  councillor,  and  took  an
interest  in  him  ;  and  then  he  cast  a  significant  glance  at  his  subor-
dinates, who  were  attached  to  him.  These  subordinates  retired
into  the  corridor  and  discreetly  closed  the  door.

"  Listen,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  said  the  municipal  ofiicer.
"You  have  been  arrested  on  the  complaint  of  a  person
named  BosnyakoS',  who  is  a  very  malicious  fellow,  and  wants
to  blacken  you.  I  can  send  someone  to  him,  and  for  five  hundred
roubles  my  messenger  will  contract  with  him  to  withdraw  his
complaint.  I  must  tell  you  that  he  has  accused  you  of  having
traflicked  in  dead  souls  of  both  sexes,  and  of  having  mortgaged
a  large  number  to  the  State  Bank."

"  In  any  case  I  have  not  done  violence  to  anyone  in  either
buying,  selling,  or  mortgaging."

•'  No,  you  have  not ;  but,  now,  if  you  have  any  money,  say
so,  and  I  am  on  your  side.  For  how  much  have  you  mortgaged
your  dead  souls  to  the  State  Bank  ?  "

'•  For  eighty  thousand  roubles."

"  You  must  pay  that  back  promptly  ;  in  fact,  you  must  de-
posit the  sum  to-morrow.    You  understand  me  '?  "

*'  I  will  do  so.  But  I  have  still  a  thousand  souls,  from  whom
I  shall  never  derive  any  profit,  since  I  am  under  arrest."

"  Never  mind  ;  I  will  find  a  way  for  you  to  mortgage  them
very  profitably."

"  Pray  do  me  that  favour."

The  dialogue  then  proceeded  as  follows  :

The  mayor  (aside)  :  "  Tell  me  aloud  that  youonly  have  five
thousand  roubles  with  you,  and  nothing  else  in  the  whole
world.     (Aloud.)     State,  sir,  what  sum  you  possess."

Tchitchihof  {((loud):  "I  possess  five  thousand  roubles  in
silver,  which  constitute  my  entire  property."

The  mayor  (aloud) :  "  Hand  me  those  five  thousand  roubles,
sir."

Tchitchikojf  (aloud) :   "  Here  they  are."

The  mayor,  after  opening  the  door  :  "  That  is  all  right,  sir ;
don't  be  alarmed  about  a  wretched  intrigue.  [Me  counts  the  Jive
thousand  roubles,  and  divides  it  into  two  unequal  jjfl?-^A'.]  Five
thousand.  Good  !  I  will  take  these  four  thousand  five  hundred
and  fifty  roubles,  which  will  suffice  to  pay  your  personal  ex-
penses and  the  current  cost  of  the  ati'air  ;  the  police  will  render
you  an  account  of  your  money  at  any  time  you  may  ask  for  it.


332  DEAD   SOULS.

The  four  hundred  and  fifty  which  you  see  in  this  pocket-book,  I
shall  place  in  your  valise  ;  they  will  constitute  the  sum  which
was  found  when  an  inventory  was  taken.  You  understand  me,
I  hope  ?  His  excellency  the  military  governor  orders  that
you  shall  be  kept  under  guard  until  he  has  been  more  fully  in-
formed by  the  police  ;  and  as  the  police  quarters  are  in  my
house,  you  will  live  at  my  house,  if  you  please,  with  me,  and
just  as  I  do."

This  mayor  had  hardly  any  fortune,  but  ho  had  kept  on  good
terms  with  all  classes  of  society.  When  a  man  impressed  him
as  being  rather  good  than  evil,  and  when  he  could  render  him
a  service,  he  entered  into  the  business  with  a  great  deal  of  zeal
and  goodwill.  He  had,  above  all  things,  a  passion  for  a  respect-
able air.  On  the  present  occasion  he  had  the  happiness  of
arranging,  for  less  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  roubles,  all  his
prisoner's  aff"airs,  and  in  addition  he  enabled  him  to  derive  a
very  good  profit  from  the  thousand  souls  which  were  left  on  his
hands.  Then  he  was  pleased  to  alloAV  Tchitchikoflf  to  marry
his  daughter  Marya,  who  was  young,  docile,  fresh,  and  ignorant,
it  is  true — indeed,  utterly  insignificant ;  but  she  was  very  good
and  very  afi'ectionate  all  the  same,  the  best  sort  of  wife  that
could  be  desired  for  oifcr  hero,  and  whom  we  could  wish  for  the
majority  of  our  friends  and  acquaintances.

A  good  third  of  the  gentry  of  the  government  took  part  in
the  wedding,  which  lasted  for  three  days  without  a  break ;  and
the  newly-married  couple  retired  to  a  very  fine  estate  which
Tchitchikoff"  had  purchased,  at  a  convenient  distance  from
the  city  of  Krasnoi,  and  where,  in  the  space  of  ten  years,  amid
satisfactions  of  all  sorts,  repose,  and  true  happiness,  he  saw  his
first  nine  children  born  and  grow  up.  Our  hero  occupied  his
leisure  with  agriculture,  kitchen-gardening,  and  even  with  ar-
boriculture ;  he  regulated  his  expenses  in  perfect  accordance
with  his  revenues  ;  and  in  order  not  to  lose  a  certain  talent  of
the  pen  which  he  possessed,  he  thought  proper  to  gather
together  his  memoirs,  and  commit  them  to  paper  in  the  form
of  notes,  whence,  from  all  appearance,  and  thanks  to  our
author,  has  proceeded  most  of  the  present  work.

In  the  eleventh  year  of  this  unclouded  happiness,  such  as
but  very  few  honest  men  taste  of,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  felt
troubled ;  he  felt  weary  of  so  much  repose,  so  much  health,
so  much  luck,  monotony,  uniformity,  and  calm  felicity.  His
notes  were  abandoned,  he  received  the  caresses  of  his  young
family  in  an  absent-minded  way,  and  he  no  longer  went  beyond
his  grounds.     As  he  wandered  about   his  yard,  he   reminded


MISERY    AND    GRANDEUR   OF   TCHITCHIKOFF.  333

Selifan  and  Petrushka  of  the  days  of  their  former  peregrina-
tions ;  he  endeavoured  to  awaken  in  these  burly  men  some
desire  for  an  excursion  in  the  fashion  of  the  olden  days ;  but
they  had  become  fond  of  a  sedentary  life  as  they  grew  old,
and  they  did  not  understand  his  meaning.  He  gazed  upon
them  with  scorn,  and  felt  enraged  with  himself  for  having
addressed  the  brutes  except  in  the  way  of  giving  orders.

One  day,  when  the  spring  had  arrived,  however,  he  informed
these  ancient  relics,  and  without  tolerating  a  single  word  of
objection,  that  on  the  morrow,  the  fifth  of  May,  at  daybreak,
the  calash  was  to  stand  ready  harnessed  at  the  door,  and
that  they  were  to  hold  themselves  prepared  for  an  excursion
of  several  months'  duration.  He  proposed  to  go  and  visit
Tentyotnikoft'  and  the  fair  Ulinka,  whose  happiness  he
regarded  as  his  own  work.  He  should  thus  learn  whether
General  Betrishtcheff  was  still  of  this  world.  He  flattered
himself  that  in  any  case  he  would  be  welcome,  at  least  among
a  portion  of  his  extensive  circle  of  relations ;  and  circum-
stances alone  had  prevented  his  revisiting  the  Tentyotnikofl'
family,  as  it  was  his  duty  to  do,  having  made  a  promise  to  that
efiect.

They  set  out ;  but  at  the  fourteenth  verst,  and  five  versts
away  from  any  wheelwright  or  blacksmith,  two  spokes  and  the
rim  of  one  of  the  wheels  of  the  ancient  calash  broke.  Tchi-
tchikofl'  passed  the  night  in  a  miserable  village  inn.  On  the
following  day,  his  constant  presence  in  the  artisan's  shop  having
produced  no  result  except  that  of  retarding  the  work,  through
afl'ording  the  rustic  so  many  opportunities  to  chatter,  he  was
forced  to  make  up  his  mind  to  pass  a  second  night  in  the  so-
called  inn,  which  was  a  hut.  And  when  at  length,  on  the  second
day,  the  wheels  were  all  in  good  condition,  the  master  felt  ill.
Selifan  and  Petrushka  exchanged  a  glance,  and,  without  having
received  any  orders  or  instructions,  the  animals  took  the  road
for  home  of  their  own  free  will.  Marya  learnt  all,  but  she  care-
fully refrained  from  interrogating  her  husband  as  to  the  cause  of
his  prompt  return,  and  from  laughing  at  his  lamentable  tale — a
piece  of  discretion  which  induced  Tchitchikoff,  after  he  had  re-
lated what  had  taken  place,  to  ridicule  his  project  and  his  dis-
comfiture.

He  then  subscribed  to  seven  Russian  papers  and  to  three
periodical  foreign  publications — two  French  and  one  German —
although  he  did  not  know  a  hundred  words  of  French,  and  not
six  of  German,

Reading  did  not  long  suit  his  taste,  however.     On  the  other


334  DEAD    SOULS.

hand,  lie  took  some  pleasure  in  caressing  his  children,  though
he  never  thought  of  teaching  or  reproving  theua.  He  considered
that  the  education  of  .children  was  woman's  work  ;  and,  with
this  view,  he  had  provided  his  wife  with  an  old  Swiss  gover-
ness, to  whom  he  rarely  spoke,  not  knowing  very  well  what  to
say  to  her.

At  last  Tchitchikoff  reverted,  in  spite  of  himself,  to  the  idea
of  a  journey,  of  some  excursion  or  other,  but  without  any  defi-
nite plan.  Whilst  he  was  yet  in  a  state  of  indecision,  the  end
of  the  autumn  and  the  whole  of  the  winter  passed  by.  How-
ever, the  triennial  election  of  magistrates  was  soon  to  take  place
in  the  chief  town  of  the  government — a  town  which  was  ordi-
narily quite  deserted  and  sleepy,  and  which  he  had  only  visited
at  the  time  of  his  marriage,  and  on  the  occasion  of  purchasing
his  property.  He  had  only  spent  six  days  there,  and  those  in-
cessantly in  the  courts.  Several  gentlemen,  however,  now  came
to  sound  his  intentions,  and  to  seek  his  vote  ;  many  of  the  out-
going magistrates,  who  wished  to  retain  their  positions,  or  even
to  obtain  more  important  ones,  hastened  to  pay  court  to  him.
Time  sped  on.  It  was  a  magnificent  opportunity  for  escaping,
at  least  for  three  weeks,  from  the  uniformity  and  monotony  of  a
prolonged  sojourn  in  the  country.

Our  hero  took  the  greatest  delight  in  the  preparations  for  his
trip.  He  carefully  inspected  the  condition  of  his  fresh  vehicle,
recommended  Selifan  and  Petrushka  not  to  get  drunk  during
his  absence,  for  in  lieu  of  these  old  retainers  he  preferred  to
take  with  him  his  new  valet  and  his  wife's  coachman,  a  man  of
very  fine  appearance,  who  spoke  little  and  drank  a  great  deal,
though  he  had  never  been  seen  intoxicated.

On  reaching  the  city,  our  hero  alighted  at  the  best  hotel,  sent
in  haste  for  a  tailor,  and  ordered  a  nobleman's  uniform  ;  then
he  dined,  and  went  to  take  a  walk  in  the  pubhc  garden.  On
returning  to  his  hostelry  in  the  evening,  he  passed  by  the  house
occupied  by  the  marshal  of  the  nobility  of  the  district  and  saw
that  it  was  brilliantly  lighted  up.  The  marshal,  whose  name
was  Stepan  Stepanovitch  Podgruzdyoff",  had  nearly  half  of  the
local  nobility  in  his  rooms.  The  servants  Avere  handing  round
tea,  and  the  whole  apartment  was  pervaded  with  an  odour  of
lemon,  rum,  and  Turkish  tobacco.  But  what  predominated  over
everything  else  was  the  discussion  of  the  elections  which  were
about  to  take  place.  Nearly  all  of  Podgruzdyoff's  guests  were
in  a  joyous  frame  of  mind.  He  himself  sat  in  a  large  magiste-
rial chair,  in  front  of  the  Avriting-table  in  his  study  ;  and  the
elective  police  judge,  whose  name  was  Prokop  Petrovitch  Zazh-


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR    OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  335

.^urin,  sat  as  near  to  him  as  possible  on  a  light,  fanciful  chair,
contrasting  Avith  the  other  one.

"  I  should  be  glad  to  hear  from  your  own  mouth  an  answer
to  this  question,"  said  the  judge.  "  "Will  you  comply  with  the
desire  of  the  entire  nobility,  who  want  you  to  remain  marshal
for  another  three  years  ?  It  is  very  flattering  to  serve  under
you ;  and,  infirm  as  I  am,  I  might,  in  that  case,  consider  the
subject  of  continuing  my  functions  as  judge  for  another  term  of
three  years,  and  even  for  two  terms.  But  if  they  want  me,  it
must  be  with  you."

"  No,  Prokop  Petrovitch,"  replied  the  marshal.  "  I  have  told
you,  and  I  hold  to  it,  that  I  have  done  my  duty  and  discharged
my  tribute.  If  thenobility  re-elect  me,  all  that  I  shall  do  will  be
to  thank  them  very  cordially  ;  but  at  the  same  time  I  shall
refuse."

"In  that  case,  I  shall  adhere  to  my  own  determination  not
to  be  re-elected.  Who  would  be  a  worthy  representative  of  our
district  after  you  ?  Farewell,  Stepan  Stepanovitch  !  I  regret
that  I  have  not  been  able  to  alter  your  decision.  It  is  very  bad
of  you  to  reject  our  supplications  like  this."

Judge  Zazhmurin  thereupon  pressed  the  marshal's  hand,  and
gained  the  street  by  descending  the  private  staircase.

No  sooner  had  he  taken  his  departure,  than  captain-ispravnik
-Bttrdyakin  entered  the  marshal's  study.  "Prokop  Petrovitch
has  just  gone,"  said  he.  "  He  surely  must  have  told  you  that
he  has  had  more  than  enough  of  the  service."

"  That  is  really  what  he  did  say.  What  do  you  think  of
it,  eh  ■?  "

"  I  think  that  he  is  humbugging  us."

"  Oh  !  indeed  !  "

"That  is  putting  it  mildly,  for  in  reality  he  has  his  eye  on
the  marshal's  oflice.  He  marshal !  Imagine  anyone  with  that
pig's  snout  as  marshal !  "

"  He  is  ambitious,  is  he  not  ?  "  asked  Podgruzdyofi'.

"  A  man  may  have  a  weakness  ;  but  the  idea  of  Zazhmurin,
with  that  phiz  of  his,  thinking  of  representing  the  nobility  !  And
even  as  a  judge,  what  is  he'?  To  speak  the  plain  truth,  the
nobility  made  a  mistake  in  choosing  him  ;  for,  after  all,  what  is
there  more  noble  and  sacred  than  to  decide  the  fate  of  others  '?
By  the  way,  this  oflice  has  been  proposed  to  me,  but  I  really  daro
not  accept  it.  I  have  so  much  aflection  for  our  aristocracy,  that
I  feel  sure  that  every  nobleman  would  always  be  in  the  right  in
my  eyes,  and  the  common  people  always  in  the  wrong.  With
such  a  method,  I  should  soon  be  involved  in  a  criminal  suit.


336  DEAD   SOULS.

But  what  is  to  be  done  ?  I  ara  of  opinion  that  one  should  always
comply  with  the  petition  of  a  nobleman.  Yes  ;  I  will  do  every-
thing for  the  nobility."

"  You  icill  do.     So  you  have  come  to  a  decision  ?  "

'*  Oh,  yes.  I  offer  myself  as  a  candidate,  for  the  mere  sake
of  overthrowing  that  Zazhmurin.  I  know,  that  if  he  sees  that  he
has  but  few  chances  of  being  elected  marshal,  he  will  cling  to
his  place  of  judge.     He  is  a  very  crafty  fellow."

"  You  are  very  intimate  together,  yet  just  see  how  you  talk
about  him !  "

"  Intimate — intimate  as  one  can  be  with  him.  He  would  like
me  to  be  a  grain  of  salt,  and  hold  out  a  spoonful  of  cool  water
to  me  ;  but  no,  I  shan't  wait  for  a  bath."

"Ah!"

The  marshal  and  the  captain-ispravnik  now  passed  into  the
drawing-room,  where  the  conversation  had  turned  from  the  elec-
tions to  very  different  and  rather  risky  subjects.  As  for  the  elec-
tions, each  person  kept  his  thoughts  to  himself.  Equipages  could
be  seen  driving  up  outside,  and  for  the  most  part  entering  the
courtyard.  The  sound  of  the  laughter  and  chatting  of  the  new
arrivals  became  audible,  first  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  and  tiien
in  the  ante-chamber.  Several  members  of  the  local  nobility  en-
tered. Their  names  were  Hamyazoff,  Morkatinoff,  Shtchavarin,
Sosikoff,  and  Kornikin.  They  saluted  the  assembly,  and  went
to  shake  hands  with  Podgruzdyoff,  who  was  quietly  sitting  on  a
sofa,  with  a  cigar  in  his  mouth.  Hamyazoff  and  the  brothers
Morkatinoff  had  just  come  from  a  dinner  at  the  house  of  the  civil
governor.

"If  I  had  only  known,"  said  Hamyazoff,  puffing  out  his
cheeks,  "  I  shouldn't  have  brought  any  wines,  any  cook,  or  any
cooking  utensils  up  from  the  country.  This  is  an  extremely
hospitable  town.  I  have  only  been  here  three  days,  and  yet  I
have  already  taken  part  in  seven  dinners  ;  I  feel  horribly  afraid
of  acquiring  a  big  belly.  So,  pardon  and  mercy,  Stepan  Stepano-
vitch  !  to-morrow  I  dine  in  two  houses,  and  I  am  invited  to
breakfast  in  five  others.  I  really  do  not  know  if  I  can  come  to
you.     My  entertainers  will  end  by  making  me  burst."

"  Here  is  a  gentleman  who  has  come  to  the  elections  in  order
to  overfeed  himself,  and  drink  from  morning  till  night ;  he  can
talk  of  nothing  save  his  great  digestive  capacity,"  remarked  a
short,  thin  gentleman,  with  a  complexion  the  colour  of  saffron.
"  All  that  one  hears  him  talk  about  is,  what  he  eat  here,  and
what  he  will  eat  there  ;  what  he  has  drunk  here,  and  how  he
became  intoxicated  there.  Then  he  savs  that  he  is  invited  to  five


MISERY    AND    GRANDEUR   OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  337

houses  farther  on  ;  that  he  is  now  on  his  way  to  sup  with  some
importunate  count ;  that  to-morrow  morning  at  ten  o'clock  he
will  favour  that  monster  of  a  prince  with  his  company  to  break-
fast. And  so  on  ;  but  how  does  he  manage  to  lodge  so  much
food  in  his  body  ?  "

These  remarks  were  addressed  to  the  "  plenipotentiary  "  of  an  '
absent  elector,  a  man  whose  countenance  recalled  that  of  a  hare.
He  noisily  repressed  an  inclination  to  laugh,  and,  in  his  fear  of
offending  Hamyazoff  or  anyone  else,  he  assumed  the  most  seri-
ous possible  mien.  Then  he  passed  a  dirty  silk  handkerchief
over  his  face  and  executed  two  or  three  dexterous  skips,  in
order  to  reach  a  corner  of  the  room.  Here  he  made  two  or  three
pirouettes,  still  continuing  to  wipe  his  face  ;  and,  finally,  he  b?-
took  himself  to  a  large  table  covered  with  a  green  cloth,  bor-
dered with  gold  fringe,  from  which  he  i^icked  up  the  Piegulationa
of  the  Elections,  and  began  perusing  them  for  the  hundredth
time,  in  a  low  voice,  at  the  same  time  lending  an  ear  to  a  noisy
conversation  which  was  going  on  in  the  next  room.  Podgruz-
dyoff  now  went  out :  he  was  going  to  the  governor's  for  a  few
minutes,  and  meanwhile  a  number  of  his  guests  remained,
thinking  it  seemly  to  await  his  return.  Hamyazoff  accompanied
Podgruzdyoff  to  the  door  of  his  carriage,  and  then  returned  to
the  drawing-room.  At  first  he  surveyed  all  the  faces  present,  and
whispered  a  few  words  in  the  ear  of  his  neighbours,  whereupon
one  of  the  electors  said,  "  If  Stepan  Stepanovitch  would  only
consent,  we  should  be  very  glad  to  vote  for  him,  so  that  he
could  remain  in  ofiice."

"  Well,  gentlemen,  you  are  not  hard  to  suit,  if  you  can  put
up  with  such  a  marshal  as  he  is  !  "  exclaimed  Hamyazoff.

"  What  do  you  mean  by  that  ?  Podgruzdyoff  is  an  active
man  :  see  how  he  performs  his  duties  as  guardian,  see  how  he
protects  the  orphan,  how  he  defends  the  widow !  "

"Eh!  That's  his  first  duty;  anyone  of  us  would  do  the
same ;  but  you  pay  no  heed  to  another  and  equally  important
duty.  What  sort  of  a  cook  has  he  got  ?  It's  shameful !  He
pretends  that  that  kitchen-man  of  his  served  his  apprenticeship
at  the  English  club  at  Moscow  :  I  don't  believe  a  word  of  it,  for
my  own  part.  He's  but  a  sorry  cook.  One  eats  and  eats  of
his  cooking,  and  is  never  satisfied  :  it  only  fatigues  one's  jaws.
You  all  know  what  to  think  of  his  stuffed  dishes,  which  adhere
to  the  teeth  and  the  palate,  they  glue  the  coatings  of  my  oeso-
phagus together  in  a  way  which  enforces  silence  upon  me  during
the  whole  of  the  repast."

"  And,  God  be  thanked  !  that  suits  your  neighbours  capitally,"

Y


338  DEAD   SOULS.

gaid  tlie  little  gentleman  with  the  saffron  complexion,  raising  a
burst  of  laughter  by  this  witticism.

"  Jokes  are  somejvhat  misplaced  to-day,"  retorted  Hamya-
zoff ;  *'  we  have  come  here  to  elect  our  magistrates.  Listen  !  I
know  that  Melekitchenzoff,  who  has  just  returned  from  abroad,
wants  to  be  elected  marshal,  and  he's  the  very  man  whom  we
ought  to  elect ;  he  has  a  cook,  a  genuine  French  artist,  gentle-
men. He  will  never  regale  you  with  any  hotel-cookery.  As
far  as  the  rest  is  concerned,  why,  I  am  ready  to  vote  in  favour
of  Podgruzdyoff,  but  on  conditions  that  he  changes  his  cook  and
engages  a  proper  one."

"  Send  away  his  cook,  indeed,  for  the  sake  of  being  elected
marshal !     Come,  now !  "

''What  ?  He  won't  change  his  cook  when  the  nobility  desire
it !  If  I  were  marshal,  I  would  do  everything  in  the  world  for
the  sake  of  pleasing  the  nobihty.  And  stay  !  as  a  proof  of  my
devotion,  I  declare  to  you  that  I  will  sacrifice  my  own  cook  to
him,  placing  him  at  his  disposal  for  the  whole  period  of  his
office  without  payment.  You  will  agree,  I  hope,  that  that  is  a
real  sacrifice.  My  cook  is  the  soul  of  my  house  ;  and  so  as  not
to  die  of  hunger,  I  shall  have  to  desert  wife,  children,  and
home,  to  come  to  live  with  Podgruzdyoff.  Never  mind.  I  am
prepared  to  do  so,  simply  for  the  happiness  of  proving  to  all  of
you  how  devoted  I  am  to  the  interests  of  the  aristocracy."

Having  concluded  this  speech,  Hamyazofi'  remained  with  arms
outstretched,  and  his  body  bent  forwards,  awaiting  a  response,
which  did  not  come.

"  We  intend  to  ask  Stepan  Stepanovitch  to  remain  with  us
for  another  three  years,"  at  last  said  one  of  the  gentlemen.

"  Even  without  cook  or  kitchen  ?  "  asked  the  glutton.

"  Oh  !  to  the  devil  with  the  cook  !  I  have  my  dinner  ready
in  my  own  house,"  replied  the  gentleman.

"Well,"  said  Hamyazoff,  "all  the  same,  I  think  that  we
ought  to  elect  Melekitchentzoff."

"No!  No!"

"  Why  not  ?  Think  of  what  awful  stuff  Podgruzdyoff  makes
us  eat."

"  We  will  make  matters  right  for  Podgruzdyoft'  when  the
balloting  begins  ! "  cried  three  or  four  persons  at  once.  "  He  is
worthy  of  his  position,  and  does  honour  to  our  district."

"Who?  Podgruzdyoff?"  said  Burdyakiu,  the  captain-
ispravnikj  at  this  moment  entering  the  room.  "  Oh  !  a  marshal
is  always  good  and  worthy,  of  course.  But  listen :  I  will  make
no  secret  of  the  fact  that  several  people  wish  to  elect  me  judge.


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR    OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  339

Yes,  me.  You  understand — judge.  That  is  what  can  be  deno-
minated an  important  and  sacred  office.  But  I  fear  lest  I  might
have  to  condemn  a  noble.  I  should  acquit  him :  on  my  word
of  honour,  I  should  acquit  him.  That  would  be  equivalent  to
placing  a  cord  about  my  own  neck.  But  every  nobleman  will
be  acquitted.  So  in  the  name  of  heaven,  do  not  vote  for  either
me  or  Zazhmurin.  Besides,  although  Zazhmurin  cannot  recon-
cile himself  to  the  idea  of  not  being  elected,  remember  that  it
will  be  rendering  him  a  service  to  vote  against  him.  His  wife
has  spoken  to  me.     It  is  said  that  work  has  quite  deranged  his

nerves ;  and  for  his  wife,  as  you  can  imagine Well,  as  for

myself,  I  will,  in  the  first  place,  tell  you  sincerely,  that  if  it
pleases  the  nobility  to  elect  me  judge,  all  well  and  good  :  I  shall
not  dare  to  refuse.  I  shall  submit.  In  short,  you  may  dispose
of  me  as  you  think  proper."

Thereupon  this  candidate  saluted  the  company  and  withdrew
with  a  brisk  step.

There  had  also  been  a  gathering  at  Zazhmurin's,  but  of  per-
sons of  a  lower  quality.  Some  of  them  drank  brandy,  and
nibbled  bread  and  butter  and  sandwiches.  Barantzofi",  the
auditor,  was  playing  a  game  of  cards,  each  point  being  valued
at  a  quarter  of  a  copeck,  with  three  men  who  held  powers  of
attorney  from  ditierent  absent  nobles.  Zazhmurin,  Burdyakin,
and  he  had  hired  this  lodging  in  company.  In  an  extremely
ruinous  carriage-house  which  stood  in  the  yard  of  the  place,  an
ex-cornet  of  hussars,  the  prodigal  Prince  Smuirsky,  was  lodged,
Barantzoft'  having  procured  him  a  commission  as  an  elector's
deputy,  and  brought  him  there  for  nothing.  The  prince  was
continually  entering  the  rooms,  in  order  to  get  an  opportunity  to
refresh  himself.  He  was  also  continually  quarrelling  with  Barant-
zofi',  his  temporary  patron  ;  and  after  each  quarrel,  he  retreated  to
his  carriage-shed,  where  he  remained  grumbling  and  fuming  until
dinner  or  supper  time,  when  his  heart  experienced  the  necessity
of  effecting  a  reconciliation  with  the  auditor.

"  Tikhon  Semyonovitch,"  said  the  prince  enthusiastically
to  Barantzoff,  "it  is  for  your  sake  that  I  came  to  town."
And  as  he  said  this  he  pulled  his  moustache.

"  Yes,  indeed,  I  had  the  glory  of  bringing  you  with  me,
prince,"  retorted  Barantzoff,  dealing  the  cards  with  a  serious
air.

**  As  a  friend  you  will  have  my  vote,"  continued  the  prince.
"  I  have  come  here  for  your  sake,  and  shall  vote  for  you."

"  Pass,"  now  said  Barantzoff,  to  his  partners  at  cards,  and
rising  up  he  left  the  room.


340  BEAD    SOULS.

"  That  dear  friend  of  mine  can  count  on  some  black  balls,"
said  the  prince,  as  soon  as  he  had  gone.  "I  will  collect  a
hapdful  of  them,  and  stuff  them  in  for  my  neighbours  and
myself.     He  can  reckon  on  that."

At  this  moment  Barantzoflf  returned,  whereupon  the  prince
continued,  "  I  wish  it  to  be  thoroughly  understood  that  Barant-
zoflf and  I  are  a  genuine  pair  of  friends."

He  then  drank  a  glass  of  punch,  smacked  his  lips,  stamped
his  feet,  and  set  his  glass  on  the  window-sill ;  then  he  seated
himself  on  a  wretched  chair,  which  he  tormented  in  an  un-
worthy manner,  while  he  complacently  picked  his  nose,  and
whistled  an  air  which  he  seemed  to  be  intentionally  rendering
unintelligible.

"  We  must  be  careful  with  the  prince  until  the  voting  is
over,"  said  Zazhmurin  to  his  friends,  "  for  he  can  talk  rather
disagreeably  when  he  likes."

"  Yes  ;  but  he  can  be  prevented  from  doing  anything  foolish,
can't  he  '?    A  man  of  that  kind — "

"  Where  the  deuce  did  he  get  that  coat?  "  asked  another  of
the  card-players."  "  It  does  not  belong  to  him.  Look  at  the
two  big  creases  down  the  back."

"  Oh.  Barantzoff  lent  him  that  coat  for  the  elections."

"  Speak  lower,"  rejoined  another  person.  "Someone  said  a
word  to  the  prince  yesterday  about  that  very  coat.  *  It's  my
coat ! '  he  cried.  '  No  one  will  wear  it  after  me.  I  never  take
it  off.  When  I  went  to  bed  last  night  I  would  not  permit
my  servants  to  take  it  off.  I  had  a  fancy  for  sleeping  in  my
coat.  Has  anyone  any  remarks  to  make  on  it  ?  '  That  is
just  what  he  said,  speaking  too  with  great  violence."

"  What  are  you  muttering  among  yourselves  ?"  at  this  mo-
ment asked  the  prince.  "  It  strikes  me  that  you  are  reviling  me.
Order  me  some  punch  and  tobacco,  or  beware  of  my  black-
balling you  all."  Forward,  march!  Left  wheel !  Make  haste
with  the  liquor."

"  Stop  that,  prince  ;  your  jokes  are  not  quite  the  thing."

"Bitter,  eh?  Well,  in  the  company  of  clever  people,  my
wit  is  light  and  sweet.  It  varies  according  to  my  surround-
ings, you  see.  You  will  all  be  served  with  black  balls,
remember ;  for,  being  a  prince,  I  detest  demagogues.  To-
morrow comes  the  oath.  There  will  be  no  drawing  back.  I
must  do  as  my  conscience  dictates.  You  want  oflfice ;  you  set
yourselves  up  as  candidates  for  the  magistracy,  and  you
belong  to  a  party ;  you  put  yourself  at  the  head  of  a  band.
And  why  do  you  covet  these  positions  ?  In  order  to  coin  money


MISERY    AND    GRANDEUR   OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  341

out  of  them.     Ah  !  we  know  all  about  it,  and  I'll  settle  your
business,  that  I  will !  "

"  What  an  odd  idea  of  yours  to  irritate  him,  gentlemen,"  re-
marked someone  in  a  corner  of  the  room.

"  Ah  !  very  true.  So  you  are  there,  my  little  hare,"  said  the
prince,  addressing  the  person  who  had  just  spoken.  "  Well,
let  us  see  what  you  want.  You  have  just  been  married,  hey  ?
And  to  whom,  you  fool  ?  And  now  you  want  to  be  an
auditor,  eh  ?  "  The  prince  then  went  and  whispered  in  the  ear  of
his  little  hare,  and  finally  resumed  in  a  louder  key,  "  Now,
speak  out !  You  know  that  I  am  pretty  well  oil'  as  regards
connections — that  I  am  an  aristocrat,  an  ultra-aristocrat,  poor
though  I  am  ;  I  have  free  entrance  to  the  governor's  house  and
the  marshal's,  so  I  have  plenty  of  means  of  procuring  people
protectors.  Let  us  suppose  that  Barantzotf  or  someone  clso
makes  me  a  present  of  a  nobility  uniform  with  some  embroidery
of  pure  gold,  such  as  befits  my  rank.  Where  is  the  general
who  would  have  a  grander  air  than  I  ?  Barantzoflf  has  a  high
opinion  of  me,  as  you  know,  and  for  the  time  being,  we  lodge
here  together.  But  that  is  not  always  the  case.  I  have  an
apartment  of  my  own  all  to  myself.  Faith,  I  pay  seven  roubles
for  the  sake  of  occupying  it  during  the  elections.  Barantzotf
feeds  me  as  a  matter  of  course.  But  that's  only  right.
Neither  on  the  journey  nor  here  have  I  fasted  for  a  single
hour."  Then  in  a  very  low  voice  the  prince  added,  "  Barant-
zoff  wants  to  be  a  councillor  ;   only  think  of  it !  "

"  Another  candidate  !  But  he  has  been  holding  office  for
eighteen  years  already.     Surely  that's  long  enough."

"  Let  him  hold  his  pockets  well  open,  and  I  will  provide  him
with  plenty  of  black  balls.  Only  don't  you  say  anything  about  it
— you  understand — ts,  ts.  But,  wait  a  bit,  I  must  embrace  you.
Do  you  know,  your  wife  is  very  pretty  !  Ugh,  ugh  !  I've  got
the  stomach-aclae.  I  don't  know  what  that  animal  Barantzotf
gives  us  to  eat,  but  I  feel  quite  upset."

Thereupon  the  prince  quitted  the  room,  and  crossed  the  yard  to
reach  his  coach-house.  It  really  was  time  he  did  so,  out  of  regard
for  the  peace  of  mind  of  the  other  gentlemen.  However,  they
also  withdrew  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later.

Zazhmurin  retired,  but  left  a  candle  burning  near  the  bed
which  was  prepared  for  Burdyakin,  his  friend  the  captain-
ispravnik,  with  whom  ono  is  already  acquainted,  and  who,  to
the  great  astonishment  of  the  judge,  had  not  returned.  How-
ever, at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  there  came  a  violent
knocking  at  the  gate  in  the  courtyard.     Zazhmurin  awoke  and


342  DEAD   SOULS.

sat  up  in  bed.  The  three  servants  whom  he  had  brought  with
him  from  the  countrj'-  were  sleeping,  fully  dressed,  on  the  floor
of  the  ante-room.  'Zazhmurin  roused  them  and  despatched
them  to  the  gate,  and  a  moment  later  Burdyakin  entered  like  a
bomb,  pale,  disordered,  his  hair  unkempt,  and  a  cloak  for  his
only  garment.

"  Where  have  you  been  ?  "  asked  Zazhmurin,  with  mingled
interest  and  anxiety.

"  Oh,  don't  speak  of  it !  I  have  jttst  come  from  a  place
where  they  will  never  catch  me  again.  It  is  the  first  time  in  my
life  that  I  have  been  there,  and  it  will  be  the  last.  Hey,  there,
some  cold  water  !     I  cannot  recover  from  my  fright."

"Tell  me  what  is  the  matter  with  you."

"  Don't  ask  me."

"  But  your  boots,  your  breeches,  your  cap  ?  "

"  Heaven  be  praised  !  I  am  safe  and  sound  myself ;  the  deuce
take  my  effects !  Hey,  there,  boy  !  Some  ice,  some  ice,  quick,
and  rub  my  back,  the  whole  of  my  back!  "

"  There's  something  amiss,  I  see;  so  I  shall  get  up,  and
make  a  declaration  to  the  police."

"No,  pray  do  nothing  of  the  sort !  In  the  name  of  heaven,
do  not  stir  !  Another  investigation — that  would  be  a  pretty
mess.  I  have  only  been  to  a  dancing-school ;  but  if  my  wife
knew  that  I  had  set  foot  in  such  an  establishment,  she  would
never  let  me  come  to  the  elections  again.  And  then  farewell  to
all  my  fine  hopes  !  "

"  What  the  deuce  were  you  doing  at  a  dancing- school  ?  "

"  Eh  !    There  was  a  reason  for  my  going  there."

"What  reason  ?  Come  tell  me  all, "  anxiously  said  the  judge,
putting  on  his  dressing-gown  and  his  velvet  cap.

"  I  was  at  the  marshal's  house,"  replied  Burdyakin,  "and
they  were  urging  me  to  present  myself  as  a  candidate  for  one
of  the  judgeships.  I  did  not  wish  to  do  so.  I  repulsed  their
ofiers,  but  they  continued  to  promise  me  their  votes,  and  I  felt
on  the  point  of  yielding.  '  Bah  !  '  I  said  to  myself,  '  I  shall  go
to  Khramikin's  and  talk  about  something  else.'  I  arrive.  I
find  him  at  home,  and  he  says  to  me  at  once,  '  Bravo !  let's  go
to  the  dancing-school.'  "

"So  you  went?"

"  So  we  went.  As  he  disposes  of  two  votes,  there  is  not
much  that  one  can  refuse  him  in  election  time.  The  deuce
knows  to  what  school  he  took  me  !  There  was  a  great  illumina-
tion and  a  lot  of  music,  I  know.  It  reminded  me  of  my
wedding ;   but  my   heart   began   beating   in   a   very    diflerent


MISERY    AND    GRANDEUR   OF   TCHITCHIKOFF.  343

manner,  even  in  the  ante-room.  Ah !  what  a  surprise ;  I  be-
held two  lovely  black  eyes,  and  I  was  pressing  my  suit,  when  a
big  fellow  with  a  stick  came  in  ;  but —  Oh,  dear  !  oh,  dear  !  oh,
dear  !   Ahi,  ahi,  ahi !  Softly  there  !  lah,  lah  !  "

The  servants  were  rubbing  away  with  some  ice  at  the  ill-
used  back- of  the  poor  captain-ispravnik.  After  the  ice,  he  had
some  hot  napkins  applied  to  his  bruised  loins  ;  then  they  drew
on  him  a  clean  white  shirt,  and  he  fell  asleep.  Zazhmurin,
having  accurately  divined  what  school  his  colleague  had  come
from,  allowed  him  to  fall  into  a  profound  slumber,  which,  bene-
ficial as  it  was,  frustrated  all  his  hopes  of  election,  for  he  was
obliged  to  keep  his  room  for  several  days.

Our  friend  Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoff",  unlike  the  others,
did  not  become  agitated  or  discomposed  by  the  elections.  He
went  to  bed  like  a  genuine  rustic,  long  before  eleven  o'clock.
On  the  following  morning,  the  15th  of  September,  he  pulled  on
his  trousers,  washed  himself  in  plenty  of  vvater,  carefully  rub-
bing down  his  face,  his  neck,  his  chest,  and  his  arms.  He  had
just  donned  his  Tartar  dressing-gown,  when  through  the  door-
way, which  his  valet  had  left  half  open,  he  beheld  the  visage  of  his
tailor's  assistant,  who  was  carefully  carrying  a  hght  package
enveloped  in  a  large  silk  handkerchief.

"Is  it  ready  ?  "  inquired  Tchitchikoff.

"  Quite  ready,  sir,"  responded  the  tailor,  putting  down  his
bundle  and  extracting  the  pins.

"  And  it  will  become  me  ?  "

"  It  ought  to,"  replied  the  artist.

Tchitchikolf  now  took  off  his  dressing-gown  and  donned
the  uniform  which  the  tailor  had  brought  him.  Placing  him-
self in  front  of  a  mirror,  he  executed  divers  movements,  after
which  he  remarked  that  the  coat  was  perhaps  a  trifle  tight  under
the  arms.

The  tailor  asserted,  however,  that  it  left  nothing  to  be
desired.

"Very  well,"  said  Tchitchikoff;  "  but  look  here,  if  I  move
like  this  and  this,  it  impedes  the  action  of  my  arms."

"  The  electors'  assembly  isn't  a  lake,  sir,  and  you  won't  have
to  swim  through  it  as  if  for  your  life  in  order  to  reach  the
shore  ;  you  will  sit  still  there,  like  all  the  other  nobles  of  your
age."

"No  doubt,  no  doubt,"  replied  Tchitchikoff",  somewhat  morti-
fied to  think  that  he  had  assumed  the  airs  of  a  shipwrecked
mariner  in  the  presence  of  his  tailor.  However,  he  could  not
refrain  from  trying  on  his  three-cornered  hat,  and  from  saying,


Za  DEAD    SOULS.

as  he  inspected  it,  "  Faith,  I  look  like  a  general  in  this  uniform  :
don't  you  think  so,  my  friend  ?  "

"  Dressed  like  this,  you  are  a  real  general."

"  Do  you  think  so  ?     And  my  face  ?     Hey  ?  "  j

"  Exactly  the  face  which  suits  a  general,  and  not  an  ordinary  '
general  either."

"  What  ?  An  ordinary  general  ?  Are  there  several  sorts  of
generals,  then  ?  "

"  Well,  there  is  the  American  sort,  sir."

"What  nonsense  !  Where  did  you  get  the  idea  that  we  ha^^e
American  generals  in  Russia  ?  "

"  They  are  called  so."

"  Who  is  called  so  ?  "

"  Why,  the  grandees,  the  high  nobility,  the  noble  lords  who
are  the  owners  of  great  estates."

"You  lie!  Come,  now;  I  can  see  that  you  are  a  great
humbug."

"  I  say  what  I  know,  that  is  all,  sir."

"  Well,  here  is  the  price  of  your  work.  Did  you  cut  and
make  it  yourself  ?  "  he  added,  as  he  gazed  at  his  figure  in  the
glass.

"I  did,  sir."

"  This  money  is  for  yourself  ?  "

"  No  ;  it  is  for  my  master :  if  you  will  give  me  something  for
myself  you  will  afford  me  great  pleasure,  sir."

"  Here,  then,  take  this,  and  go  and  have  a  drink  of  tea  to  my
health."     Thereupon  our  hero  gave  the  fellow  a  silver  rouble.

Once  alone  he  assumed  different  poses  in  front  of  the  mirror,  ,
saluted  forwards,  backwards,  and  obliquely,  girded  on  his  sword
of  state,  drew  on  his  gloves,  and,  as  the  weather  was  very
fine,    betook   himself  on   foot   to   the   assembly-house  of  the
nobility.

The  bell  had  been  ringing  for  half  an  hour  already,  to  sound
the  call  to  the  elections ;  the  nobles  arrived  in  increasing  num-
bers as  the  time  passed  by,  and  before  the  door  stood  some
soldiers,  who  had  been  placed  there  as  reinforcements  for  the
city  police,  which  was  represented  by  five  or  six  agents.

The  house  where  the  nobility  assembled  was  full  of  noise.
People  were  hurrying  in  and  out.  Acquaintances  met  and  in-
dulged in  the  national  practice  of  hugging  and  kissing,  which  did
not,  however,  exclude  hand-shaking  in  the  English  fashion.  In
the  great  hall  Tchitchikoff  perceived,  not  without  some  surprise,
a.  throng  of  men  who  were  saluting  not  only  their  acquaintances,
but  even  the  strangers  whofii  they  now  saw  for  the  first  time.


MISERY   AND   GRANDEUR   OF   TCHITCHIKOFF.  315

Their  air  "was  quiet  and  respectful,  not  to  say  obsequious  :  their
hair  was  smooth,  and  their  chins  freshly  shaven.  These  gen-
tlemen were  the  candidates  for  the  higher  magisterial  olHces
in  that  province.

The  marshal  of  the  nobility  of  the  province,  dressed  in  the
uniform  of  a  gentleman  of  the  bed-chamber  to  His  Imperial
Majesty,  made  his  entrance,  bowing  courteously  on  all  sides.  He
halted  in  the  midst  of  the  crowd,  and  conversed  in  a  friendly
way  with  the  nobles  of  his  acquaintance.  The  district  marshals
took  it  upon  themselves  to  present  to  him  the  nobles  of  their
districts.  Meanwhile  the  chief  marshal  did  not  cease  to  bow,
and  he  even  gave  his  hand  to  some  of  the  nobles  as  they
passed  him.

Tchitchikoff  had  not  counted  upon  so  signal  an  honour,  so
that  he  felt  discomposed  and  surprised  when  the  marshal  oU'ered
him  his  hand  with  a  good  deal  of  warmth.  His  flattered  self-
esteem  immediately  became  apparent  in  his  walk,  in  the  manner
in  which  he  carried  his  head,  and  in  the  air  of  his  entire  person.
He  fully  understood  how  much  he  had  gained  in  the  eyes  of  all
his  coimtry  neighbours  ;  indeed,  all  the  nobles  of  his  district  stared
at  him  for  several  minutes,  and  some  of  them  discovered  that  he
possessed  the  physiognomy  of  a  diplomat.

"  Tell  me,"  said  one  noble  to  another,  "  why  did  the  marshal
shake  hands  like  that  wdth  Tchitchikoff?  "

"  It  happened  through  absence  of  mind  :  it  was  chance,  that
is  all."

"  No,  no  !  After  giving  him  his  hand,  he  raised  his  thick  eye-
brows ;  and  I  observed,  that  in  looking  at  Tchitchikofi",  as  at  a
person  whom  one  is  glad  to  find  at  his  post,  he  uttered  a  sig-
nificant ah — ah — ah."

"  Bah  !  it  was  accident,  or  chance."

"  Accident  doesn't  explain  anything."

"  Well,  how  am  I  to  know  Avhat  you  are  asking  about  ?  I
was  looking  up  above,  in  the  galleries."

"You,  perhaps,  have  some  acquaintances,  relatives,  here,
looking  for  you  '?  "

"Yes;  but  look  at  those  ladies  there.  New  arrivals  surely,
new  arrivals.  We  never  have  anything  like  them  here,  even  at
fair-time.     Look,  look  !  "

"  Fine  objects  for  enthusiasm,  I  must  say  !  Are  we  here  to
ogle  the  women  ?  And  to  think  that  you  have  such  a  beauty
of  a  wife  !  "

"  What  has  that  to  do  with  the  matter?  A  beauty,  if  you
like,  yes.    But  the  canons  don't  fol'bid  one  admiring  the  unicorn


346  DEAD   SOULS.

and  the  adder  also,  and  therefore  I  wish  to  admire  those  two
ladies  at  closer  range."

"  Well,  there  he  gpes  !  What  an  idea  !  But  I  shall  not  en-
dure this,  and  I  shall  go  up-stairs  to  bring  him  back  here."

While  these  two  were  chatting,  the  great  majority  of  the
nobility  had  gathered  round  the  large  table  at  which  the  gover-
nor was  seated.  He  was  a  fine,  handsome  man :  he  saluted
the  assembly,  and  then,  standing  up,  he  delivered,  as  presiding
ofiicer,  a  speech  brief  and  to  the  point,  in  which  he  announced
the  opening  of  the  elections.  He  begged  those  present,  first  of
all,  to  accompany  him  to  church,  in  order  to  take  the  oath  to
preserve  impartiality  in  the  voting,  and  not  to  elect  as  magis-
trates any  men  who  were  not  roall}'  worthy  of  exercising  the
functions.

The  church  was  situated  in  the  principal  street,  which  pre-
sented a  very  animated  aspect  that  day.  Uniforms  of  all  the
branches  of  the  service  were  visible,  with  carriages  of  all  periods,
filled  with  electors  and  candidates  on  their  way  to  church  be-
tween the  thick  motley  ranks  formed  by  the  populace,  some
of  whom  gathered  at  the  windows  of  the  houses,  even  to  the
very  dormer-windows  in  the  attics.

The  church,  usually  rather  large  for  its  purposes,  seemed
extremely  small  on  this  occasion.

After  the  ceremony  of  the  oathj  those  who  had  taken  part  in
it  dispersed  throughout  the  city,  some  of  them  to  return  home,
others  to  hasten  about  and  pay  visits,  and  the  majority  to  assure
themselves  of  a  place  at  a  good  table,  ready  to  take  it  by  assault
if  it  did  not  present  itself  voluntarily.  This  was  a  day  of  fine
hopes  for  many.  Many  who  had  not  breakfasted  at  all,  and  who
had  dined  very  badly,  suddenly  made  a  copious  supper,  and  felt
assured  of  an  excellent  dinner  for  several  days  to  come.

On  the  following  day,  electoral  business  began  by  the  reading
of  a  list,  arranged  in  alphabetical  order,  of  all  such  nobles  in
the  province  who  were,  or  who  had  been,  in  the  hands'of  the  law.
After  the  proclamation  of  each  name  it  was  to  be  decided,  by
vote,  whether  the  bearer  might,  or  might  not,  have  a  right  to
take  part  in  the  election.

Tchitchikofi"  was  present  when  this  afi'ecting  perusal  began,
and  he  could  no  longer  keep  his  seat.  His  impatience  was  so
great,  that  several  times  he  crept  close  to  the  secretary  and
looked  over  his  shoulder  at  the  list  he  was  reading.  Then,
taking  advantage  of  a  momentary  interruption,  he  asked  the
secretary,  in  a  low  voice,  if  he  would  reach  the  letter  T  before
very  long.     The  secretary  courteously  replied  that  he  was  just


MISERY    AND    GRANDEUR   OF   TCHITCHIKOFF.  347

about  to  begin  the  reading  of  the  names  having  T  as  their  ini-
tial letter.  On  obtaining  this  information,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  re-
turned with  anxiety  to  his  seat,  and  said  to  his  neighbours  that
a  decayed  tooth  was  causing  him  horrible  suftcring  ;  that  he  had
in  vain  hoped  that  the  pain  would  cease  ;  that  he  realised  the
necessity  of  having  it  extracted  ;  and  that,  in  any  case,  he  could
not  remain  amid  so  many  draughts.  Accordingly  he  left  the
hall,  and  on  arriving  at  his  inn  he  threw  himself  on  to  his  bed,
pending  the  serving  of  some  pickled  sturgeon,  which  he  had
ordered  that  morning  to  be  ready  at  four  o'clock.

Half  an  hour  at  least  had  elapsed  after  Tchitchikoff's  depar-
ture before  the  letter  T  was  reached.  The  first  name  called  was
that  of  a  sub-lieutenant,  A.  P.  Tchuvirin,  who  had  been  tried  for
appropriating  citizen  Krovopatkin's  cow  by  violence.  The  court
had  acquitted  Tchuvirin.

*'  Let  him  vote  !  "  cried  a  number  of  voices.

G.  P.  Tchernofi",  collegiate  secretary,  had  been  accused  of  de-
frauding the  brandy  revenues,  and  of  having  cruelly  beaten  the
collector.  Acquitted  on  the  first  charge,  he  had  been  condemned
on  the  second  to  damages,  as /reparation  for  the  man  who  had
been  beaten,  and  also  to  three  days'  arrest.

"  Let  him  vote  !  "  was  the  cry,  as  in  the  preceding  case.

Ivan  Borisovitch  Tchirnazoft",  titular  councillor,  had  been  ac-
cused of  cutting  wood  on  crown  land.

"Crown  land!  Exclude  him!  exclude  him!"  cried  a  hun-
dred voices  at  once,  with  an  accent  of  wrath.

"  Ivan  Stepanitch  Tzelikoft",  collegiate  assessor,"  now  read
the  secretary,  "  has  been  tried  in  court  for  having  discharged  a
loaded  firearm  in  the  middle  of  the  public  square."

"  What !  Tzelikoft'  discharged  a  loaded  gun  ?  "  said  a  gentle-
man M'ith  curled  hair,  in  a  vivacious  manner,  "  Positively
loaded  '?  "

"There  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  gun  was  loaded,"  said
another  person.

"  Well,  if  the  gun  was  not  loaded,  it  was  not  possible  to  fire
it,"  remarked  a  third.

"  Li-i-i-tle  bo-o-o-y-s  so-o-o-meti-i-i-mes  b-b-burn  pri-i-i-
ming  for  fun,"  said  a  gentleman  who  stammered  in  a  very
painful  manner.

"  Why  did  not  the  secretary  finish  his  sentence  ?  "  now  asked
a  noble  with  leaden  eyes  and  closely  cropped  hair.  "  Did
Tzelikoff  kill  anyone  with  his  loaded  gun  ?  "  he  added  in  a  tone
of  alarm.

"  You  are  requested  to  be  silent."


348  DEAD    SOULS.

"  Pray,  wlio  regulates  the  discussion  here  ?  I  ask  whether
Tzelikoff  killed  or  wounded  anyone  ?  "

The  uproar  was  increasing  every  moment.

"  Gentlemen,  gentlemen  !  Silence,  I  beseech  you,"  said  the
marshal  of  the  province,  gently.

"  I  know  all  about  it  myself.  I  was  present.  Yes,  indeed  !
he  wounded  my  dog,"  began  a  portly  gentleman,  who  had  a  re-
markable tuft  of  hair  on  his  right  cheek.

"  By  this  discharge — "  read  the  secretary,  making  an  effort
to  continue  his  perusal.

"  Listen,  Piotr  Feodorovitch,  listen  !  That  shot  of  Tzelikoff's
is  being  explained."

"  What  ?     How  ?     One  can't  hear  anything."

"  Yes,  the  hubbub  is  going  to  begin  now  ;  the  whole  orchestra
is  tuning  its  instruments."  ,

"  Speak  louder,  secretary,  and  proceed.  Ahi !  ahi !  there's
somebody  treading  on  my  cursed  corn  again !  Who  goes
there  ?  Ahi !  ahi !  What  a  rude  lout  !  He  does  not  even
apologise."

"By  this  shot,"  now  resumed  the  secretary,  pitching  his
voice  an  octave  higher,  "he  inflicted  mortal  terror  upon  a  lady
who  was  passing  by.  This  lady  was  the  wife  of  Mr.  Shukin,
the  inspector  of  police  of  that  district ;  and  in  consequence
of  her  fright,  this  lady,  on  reaching  her  home "

•'Ah  !  If  she  died,  that  settles  about  the  shot,"  interrupted
one  of  the  nobles.

"  In  the  name  of  heaven,  gentlemen,  listen,  and  donotinter-
rupt !  "  exclaimed  another.

"  On  reaching  home,"  continued  the  secretary,  "  she  took  to
her  bed,  and  gave  birth  to  two  children,  who  proved  to  be  of  the
male  sex."

Great  laughter  now  burst  forth.  "  Very  good.  But  how  about
the  mother  '?  ' '

"  The  mother  and  her  children  are  in  the  best  possible  health.
As  a  result  of  the  investigation  which  followed,  Tzelikoff  was
.exonerated  from  all  responsibility."

"  Let  him  vote,  then !  "  was  the  cry  on  all  sides.

*'  It  would  be  too  severe  to  deprive  this  man  of  his  rights  as
an  elector.  He  has  suggested  a  new  means  of  assisting
nature."

"  What  you  say  is  quite  true.  And,  by  the  way,  how  is
your  mare  ?     Has  she  foaled  ?  ' '

"  Oh  !  I  have  sold  her  to  a  horse-dealer.  But  you  have  not
heard  of  the  adventure  ?  "


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR    OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  349

"  Silence,  silence  there  !  "  shouted  an  usher.

"  Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoff,  councillor  of  state,"  now
read  the  secretary,  "accused  of  forgery  in  connection  with  a
will."

"  Ah  !  for  a  nobleman  that  is  rather  bad.  Exclude  him  !  ex-
clude him  !  "

"  Hey  ?  W-w-w-hat  ?  H-h-how  ?  "  said  the  noble  with  the
painful  stammer.  "  F-f-f-f-f-for-gery  in  precious  stones  and  di-
di-di-di-a-monds  '?  "

"  Are  you  deaf?  "  retorted  a  neighbour,  "  You  Avere  told,
for  forgery  in  connection  with  a  will."

"  Ha,  ha  !  I  un-understand  it.  Vari-ous  messes.  In  the  e-e-
e-lec-tions  ?  But  how  did  it  con-con-cern  the  tri-tri-bu-nals?"
resumed  the  stammering  gentleman,  who  was  a  bit  of  a  fool.

"  Hush-sh-sh-sh  !  Silence,  I  beg  of  you!"  now  said  the
marshal  of  the  province.

"  Accused  of  forgery,  in  connection  with  a  will,  and  of  having
purchased  from  divers  noble  owners  of  inhabited  estates  a  num-
ber of  deceased  peasant-serfs,  dead  souls,  with  and  without  the
land  they  occupied.  After  due  investigation,  however,  Pavel
Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoff  was  released  as  not  guilty."

"What?     What?     Dead  souls  ?  "

"  Yes,  he  was  accused  of  having  jnirchased  dead  souls — some-
thing absurd,  eh  ?  "

"  Wh-wh-a-at  ?  He  pur-pur-chased  the-e-e  will  of  a  de-de-ad
wo-wo-man  ?  "  said  the  deaf  gentleman  who  stammered.

"Ah,  my  dear  sir,  how  tiresome  you  are  !  Why,  open  your
cars  !  I  answer  you  for  the  last  time  :  he  purchased  some  thou-
sands of  dead  souls."

"  Did  you  say  dead  souls  ?  Ah,  good  heavens  !  it  is  impos-
sible to  hear  ;  it  is  a  perfect  Babel  here."

"  How  scandalous  !  I  shall  take  my  departure  ;  the  secre-
trry  reads  one  thing,  and  then  the  people  talk  of  another."

"  Not  at  all.  This  is  the  exact  fact :  he  appropriated  a  large
inheritance,  and  purchased  several  ancient  cemeteries  with  the
money."

"Impossible  ;  "

"  Read  the  passage  again  !  Read  it  again  !  "  cried  a  large
portion  of  the  noble  assemblage.  "  And  come  nearer  to  us.
Here,  here  ;  this  is  a  good  place  ;  it  is  the  exact  centre  of  the
hall."

"  No,  no,"  shouted  the  others  ;  "  more  to  the  right,  to  the
right;  that's  the  real  centre  ;  here,  nearer  us."

The  secretary  placed  himself  in  the  very  centre  of  the  hall ;


350  DKAD    SOULS.

then  he  coughed,  and  began  to  read  anew.  "  Pavel  Ivanovitch
Tchitchikofl',  councillor  of  state,  accused  of  forgery  in  connection
with  a  will,  and  accused  of  having  purchased  from  divers  noble
owners  a  number  of 'deceased  peasant-serfs — dead  souls."

At  these  words  frightful  uproar  and  confusion  ensued.  Most
of  the  electors  rose  to  their  feet.

"  This  is  strange  news  !  "  cried  one.

"  Crime  upon  crime  !  "  exclaimed  another.

"  What  an  abomination  !  "

' '  This  man  is  an  adventurer,  a  speculator — that's  what
he  is! "

"Oh,  but  what  an  idea  that  is  of  disinterring  the  dead  !  "

"  Did  he  mean  to  make  bone-black  out  of  them  ?  "

"  Was  it  ever  discovered  what  he  intended  to  do  with  those
bones  and  corpses  ?  "

* '  I  think  that  saltpetre  can  be  made  from  tombs  ;  and  the
bones  would  yield  ashes  which  might  certainly  be  utilised  in
commerce  :  for  my  part "

' '  What  horrors  that  man  is  uttering !  It  is  a  case,  a  case,
such  a  case,  you  see,  as  no  one  ever  imagined.  When  I  tell  my
Avife  about  this  she  will  say  that  I  am  lying."

"  Why  tell  her  about  it  then  ?  Why  incur  a  scolding  ?  What
is  the  use  of  seeking  quarrels  ?  Don't  little  spars  arise  of  them-
selves without  that  ?  I  shall  not  say  a  word  to  my  wife  about
this  abominable  affair."

"  Well,  I  shall  tell  it  all  to  mine ;  otherwise  she  will  hear  of  it
from  someone  else,  and  that  will  furnish  her  with  a  good  pre-
text for  a  quarrel."

"  But  why  did  he  purchase  the  dead  souls  ?  "

The  chief  marshal  had  preserved  his  patience  up  to  this  point;
but  realising  that  this  case  must  be  disposed  of,  he  armed  him-
self with  his  bell,  and  rang  it  until  the  most  complete  silence  was
established  ;  then  he  said  to  the  assembly  :  "  Gentlemen,  there
appears  to  be  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  whether  this  gentle-
man shall  be  admitted  into  the  assembly.  Will  you  resort  to
the  ballot  ?

"  Yes,  yes  ;  very  good."

"  Now  is  the  time,  or  never."

"The  ballot,  the  ballot!"

The  balls  were  brought,  and  they  proceeded  to  the  ballot.

"Ah,  how  I  should  like  to  see  that  fellow  Tchitchikoff  and
judge  his  face,  his  personal  appearance,  his  manners  !  "

"He  certainly  must  look  like  a  sharper  and  rascal — like  an
undertaker's  man  at  the  least."


MISERY    AND    GRANDEUR   OF    TCHITCHIKOFF;  351

"jNot  at  all:  everyone  was  sayiug  yesterday  that  lie  is  still
a  young  man,  rather  plump,  with  a  rosy  complexion,  fine  bear-
ing, and  of  good  style."

"It  is  said  that  he  has  served  in  the  Imperial  Guards."

"  Tchitchikoff  ?  Really?  Come,  tell  us,  Trofim  Petrovitch  ;
since  he  belongs  to  your  district  you  must  know  him."

"  No,  I  don't;  he's  not  known  in  our  district;  there  is  no
person  of  that  name  there."

"  He  was  an  agent  for  the  settlement  of  disputed  claims  in
Siberia."

"  Well,  we  must  find  out  from  what  district  he  comes  :  but  of
whom  can  we  inquire  ?  "

"Oh!  he  came  here  straight  from  Kamtchatka,  riding  on  a
reindeer."

"Ha!  ha!  ha!"

"I  tell  you  that  it  is  a  very  grave  case."

"  Tchetchelkoff,  Tchetchelkoff !  "  soliloquised  one  gentleman.
"What  funny  names  one  encounters  in  the  world  nowadays!
And  so  trading  in  dead  souls  leads  to  nobility  !  Bravissimo  !
How  great  is  our  good  mother  Russia  !  She  contains  all  sorts
of  people  naturally,  and  all  kinds  of  industries  and  trades  arc
plied  within  her.     And  now  we  have  this  fellow  Tchetchclkofi'."

"  What  do  you  mean  by  your  Tchetchelkoff?  "  interrupted  a
neighbour.  "Who  and  what  is  Tchetchelkofi'?  The  name  has  been
read  to  you  a  score  of  times  plainly  enough  ;  it  is  Tchetchanin,
and  not  Tchetchelkoff  at  all :  it  enrages  me  to  hear  proper  names
mutilated."

"  Pooh  !  pooh  !  "  burst  in  another  person.  "  The  real  name
is  Tchitchikoff.  Mr.  Tchitchikoff"  is  here,  here  in  this  very  hall.
He  has  a  fine  appearance  ;  and  the  general  expression  of  his
face  is  of  a  kind  to  inspire,  or  at  least  it  has  the  reputation  of
inspiring "

"  Very  good,  very  good,  Vasiliy  Lukitch !  "  shouted  jet  a
fourth  noble.  "Oh  heavens!  when  that  fellow  undertakes  to
talk,  and,  above  all,  to  analyse,  there  is  never  any  end  to  it."

An  uncle  and  a  nephew,  v.ho  were  seated  side  by  side,  now
joined  in  the  chatter.

"  Admit  him,  admit  him  !  "  said  the  nephcAV.  "Mr.  Tchit-
chikoff must  be  admitted !  He  imrchased,  and  since  he  pur-
chased, that  signifies  that  he  paid  for,  his  souls.  If,  instead  of
buying  them,  he  had  robbed,  carried  off,  stolen — then  it  would
be  necessary  to  exclude  him  and  to  prosecute  him."

"No  doubt,"  rejoined  the  uncle.  "And  we  should  demand
that  he  be  stripped  of  his  title  of  noble."


352  DEAD   SOTTLS.

At  this  moment  a  third  person  stepped  up  to  the  uncle  and
the  nephew.  He  was  a  short,  wrinkled  old  man  in  an  ancient,
naval  uniform,  with  a^worn  embroidered  collar.  His  whole  face
was  covered  with  perspiration,  and  his  grey  hair  was  plastered
down  on  his  temples.  This  old  sea-dog  seemed  very  agitated.
He  had  already  searched  every  corner  of  the  room  ;  he  had  now
reached  the  centre  of  it,  and  his  eyes  roved  in  every  direction.
On  approaching  the  people  of  whom  we  have  spoken  he  said,
with  a  preoccupied,  serious  air  :  "  Gentlemen,  will  you  have
the  great  kindness  to  tell  me  what  price  TchitchikofF  paid  for  a
dead  soul — I  mean  his  average  price  ?  "

"  Seven  roubles  and  seventy-five  copecks,  paper  money,"
gravely  replied  a  stout  gentleman,  as  he  held  a  huge  silver
snuflf-box  under  his  nose,  and  regaled  himself  methodically  and
delightedly  with  pinches  of  the  aromatic  powder.

"  Of  the  male  sex,  or  the  other  ?  "

"  Both — male  and  female."

The  mariner's  face  lighted  up;  then  he  assumed  an  air  of
mystery,  and  added —

"  Did  he  merely  purchase  grown-up  persons,  or  did  he  take
children  as  well  ?  "

"  I  have  told  j'^ou  what  he  did  :  he  bought  souls.  You  ought
to  know  what  souls  are."  '■'

"Yes — but  just  one  word.  Will  you  have  the  kindness  to
point  out  this  Tchitchikofi"  to  me,  or  to  tell  me  where  he  is  to
be  found  at  the  present  moment — in  what  part  of  the  hall  ?  "

"  Stay,  look  yonder,  there — there  against  the  pillar  at  the
corner  of  the  gallery.  You  see  that  tall,  thin,  ugly  man,  with
long,  whitish,  untidy  hair,  and  tortoise-shell  spectacles  ?  He
has  a  face  easily  noticed,  and  he's  Tchitchikofi"."

The  naval  ofiicer  gave  a  leap  like  a  kid,  and  then  he  went
off  at  so  violent  and  ungovernable  a  pace  that  he  flung  two
heavy  gentlemen  flat  on  the  floor,  overturned  three  arm-chairs,
upset  numerous  benches,  and  at  length  reached  the  unkempt

*  The  ex-officer's  question  was  a  very  natural  one.  In  Russia,  only
male  serls  were  counted  as  souls,  but  this  did  not  prevent  the  landowners
from  deriving  a  very  good  revenue  also  from  the  female  serfs  on  their
estates,  to  whom  they  gave  permission  to  go  to  the  towns  and  support
themselves  there  by  their  work,  in  consideration  of  their  paying  a  stipu-
lated sum  [oeroZ:].  These  women  have  been  known  to  pay  more  than
their  fathers,  brothers,  or  husbands,  rather  than  return  to  the  village.
The  children  were  not  required  to  pay  any  obrok  until  they  grew  up,
but  they  were  employed  in  a  great  many  little  services  which  grown  men
could  not  perform .  It  was  only  the  children,  without  regard  to  their
sex,  who  were  of  no  account  in  the  eyes  of  the  tax-collectors.


MISERY  AND   GRANDEUR   OF  TCHITCHIKOFF.  353

man  with  the  tortoise-shell  spectacles.  Having  seized  him  con-
vulsively by  the  arms  and  dragged  him  to  a  deserted  corner,
the  naval  officer  addressed  him  with  a  great  many  bows,  accom-
panying each  of  his  words  with  abrupt  movements  of  his  arms,
eyelids,  and  head.  However,  the  unkempt  man  smiled  with  a
scornful  air,  surve5'ed  the  eloquent  ancient  mariner  from  head  to
foot,  thrust  out  his  under  lip,  and  shrugged  his  thin  shoulders.

"  Seriously,  then,  you  are  not  Tchitchikoff  ?"  urged  the  retired
officer.

"  Pray,  do  me  the  honour  to  tell  me  what  you  want  of  me.
I  have  not  the  honour  of  knowing  you.  Excuse  me."  And  then
the  fellow  with  the  tumbled  hair  made  a  movement  as  if  about
to  depart.

"  Xo,  no,  you  shall  not  thus  escape  me,  noble  and  generous
Tchitchikofi" !  "  exclaimed  the  ancient  mariner.  "You  must
purchase  my  one  hundred  and  forty  souls,  of  both  sexes,  who
died  of  cholera :  you  must  indemnify  me,  at  least  in  part,  for
that  cruel  loss.  Give  an  old  mariner,  his  sons,  and  grand-
children due  cause  to  bless  your  name  for  ever."

""Will  you  please  to  leave  me  alone!"  said  the  unkempt
man.  "  What  the  deuce  do  you  mean  by  all  the  ridiculous
things  that  you  are  saying  to  me  ?  "

"  Everyone  seeks  his  own  advantage :  that  is  quite  natural.
I  have  so  much  respect  for  the  traffic  which  you  have  engaged
in,  and  I  regard  it  as  so  perfectly  legitimate,  that  I  am  willing
to  deduct  twenty-five  copecks  from  the  price  which  you  usually
give  for  each  dead  soul,  simply  so  as  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  of
assisting  in  the  success  of  your  operations  in  the  measure  of
my  means."

"Once  more,"  retorted  the  unkempt  gentleman,  "I  beg  of
you  to  cease  your  raillery.  Do  not  force  me  to  say  harsh  things
to  you."

"I  certainly  have  no  occasion  to  expect  the  least  coarse
■word  from  so  wise  a  man  as  yourself.  Let  us  strike  the  bargain
here  between  ourselves ;  as  for  the  contract  and  the  money,  I
will  go  to  your  house  with  3'ou."

"  Oh  !  you  will,  will  you  ?  "

"  Yes;  don't  feel  at  all  uneasy  about  that.  I  shall  have  no
difficulty  in  finding  your  house ;  I  should  even  find  it  were  it
situated  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  And  so  my  honourable  friend
Pavel "

This  private  colloquy  was  at  this  moment  interrupted  by  the
silence  which  suddenly  prevailed  throughout  the  hall.  The
secretary  proclaimed  the  result  of  the  voting.

z


354  DEAD    SOULS.

"  The  ballot  wliicli  has  just  taken  place  with  reference  to
Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikoff,  councillor  of  state,  has  resulted
in  the  maintenance  of  his  right,  by  499  ayes  against  87  noes.
Mr.  Tchitchikoff  is  admitted  as  a  member  of  the  assembly  by  a
majority  of  412  votes."

"  I  congratulate  you !  "  said  the  naval  officer,  turning  to  the
unkempt  gentleman.

"  May  the  devil  confound  you  !  "  replied  the  latter,  and  he
hurriedly  made  off  through  the  different  groups  of  bystanders.

The  reading  of  the  list  was  then  resumed,  and  concluded  in
half  an  hour's  time.  Several  propositions  were  then  submitted
to  the  assembly.  Some  of  these  proposals  offered  an  occasion
for  a  great  deal  of  uproar,  and  the  voices  raised  within  the  hall
became  audible  outside.  All  the  members  who  had  contrived  to
appease  their  stomachs  with  a  breakfast,  without  their  absence
having  been  noticed,  held  out.  At  each  proposition,  many  still
shouted  and  declaimed  jwo  and  contra  at  random.  Some,  aproiMS
of  nothing,  demanded  a  ballot.  However,  all  ended  by  feeling
the  prick  of  hunger,  and  were  charmed  to  hear  the  governor
adjourn  the  deliberations  upon  the  seven  or  eight  propositions
which  still  remained  to  be  discussed  until  the  close  of  the  elec-
tions. In  fact,  the  actual,  final  resolution  was,  that  the  secre-
tary was  to  be  allowed  full  liberty  in  all  these  matters.

There  is  one  good  thing  about  these  days  of  electoral  assem-
blies— a  man  is  able,  if  not  always  to  obtain  certain  satisfaction
for  his  self-love,  at  least  to  feast,  and  find  relaxation  from  his
ordinary  cares.  Very  few  gentlemen  are  to  be  met  with  who
do  not  end  by  unreservedly  signing  everything  that  the  secre-
tary of  the  nobility  presents  to  them,  everything  which  he  pre-
pares, or  means  to  prepare,  upon  numerous  sheets  of  paper,
without  caring  to  hamper  his  agile  pen,  or  even  to  spoil  his
appetite  by  annoying  subtilties.

That  evening  our  hero  felt  infinitely  better  than  he  had  felt
at  the  assembly.  It  is  to  be  supposed  that  three  helps  of  the
pickled  sturgeon  and  a  bottle  of  old  CluUeau  Larose,  which  he
absorbed  in  order  to  get  rid  Jof  the  boredom  consequent  upon
several  hours  of  solitude,  had  a  salutary  effect  upon  his  maxillary
nerve  ;  at  all  events,  he  had  no  occasion  to  place  himself  in  the
hands  of  any  dentist.  He  took  his  round  hat  and  a  long,  wadded
surtout,  and  set  out  lounging  about  the  streets,  with  a  handsome
Indian  cane  in  his  hand.  All  the  houses  in  the  town,  all  the
lodgings,  good  or  bad,  the  smallest  chambers,  the  pettiest  garden-
pavilions,  were  filled  to  overflowing ;  the  hostelries  and  restau-
rants were  glittering  with  lights ;  their  doors  were  fairly  besieged


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR    OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  355

with  carriages,  both  public  and  private,  of  all  sizes,  shapes,  and
names.  The  so-called  harmony  of  itinerant  orchestras,  com-
j)osed  of  foreign  artists,  mostly  Bohemians,  rang  out  intrepidly
and  with  impunity  from  several  halls.  The  nobility  were  spend-
ing their  gold  in  costly  breakfasts  and  dinners.  Excepting  one
or  two  highly  renowned  vintages,  the  only  Avine  absorbed  was
champagne  ;  whilst  the  only  water  partaken  of  was  the  famous
natural  seltzer  water.  Whilst  they  ate  and  drank  to  excess,
proposing  toasts  of  great  originality,  a  vast  quantity  of  promises
to  treat  So-and-so  with  black  balls,  and  the  host  of  the  day  with
white  ones,  burst  forth  as  though  bubbling  from  the  heart.
Vain  words,  forgotten  as  soon  as  uttered  !  On  the  following
day  the  balls  were  dropped  according  to  the  impulse  or  the
caprice  of  the  moment,  according  to  the  influence  of  connec-
tions or  the  strength  of  parties,  which  became  more  sharply
outlined  at  the  decisive  moment.

"  At  the  last  elections,"  said  Burdyakin  to  a  friend  at  the
street-corner,  "  the  late  So-and-so  gave  a  third  person  the  sup-
port which  he  had  promised  to  mo  that  very  morning.  He  did
not  like  to  see  me  elected  to  that  modest  office.  However,  God
punished  him  for  his  rascality  :  he  died  five  months  after  his
treachery."

"  One  thing  is  certain,"  replied  the  other,  "  that  not  one  hair
of  our  heads  falls  without  the  will  of  God.  But  to-day  you  want
to  become  a  judge  ;  well,  what  shall  you  do  in  that  office  ?  "

"  I  ?  The  first  thing  I  shall  do  will  bo  to  attend  to  the
things  which  my  predecessor  wrongfully  neglected.  As  a
preliminary  step,  I  shall  purify  the  audience  chamber ;  and  it  is
only  after  having  had  all  parts  of  the  place  properly  blessed,
that  I  shall  show  myself.  And  you  may  be  sure  that  I  shan't
listen  to  anyone,  but  act  entirely  on  my  own  judgment."

"  According  to  your  own  judgment — h'm  !  Yes,  if  Ivan  Feo-
dorovitch  will  allow  it."

"  Ivan  Feodorovitch  has  no  chance  whatever  of  being  chosen
marshal."

"  May  heaven  hear  you !  But  let  us  go  into  that  cafu  there
— the  evening  dew  is  falling  ;  I  am  shivering."

"You  call  that  a  cafe  !  AVhy  it  is  a  tavern,  not  to  say  a
cavern.  There  are  twenty  brawlers  in  there,  gorging  themselves
with  champagne,  while  three  merry  girls,  in  very  low  dresses,
play  on  the  harp  and  sing  to  them,  God  only  knows  what
sprightly  songs.  To  think  that  those  wretched  fellows  are  all
married  men,  and  yet  they  sit  there  devouring  those  women


356  DEAD   SOtTLS.

with  their  eyes  !  And  fancy,  they  were  not  ashamed  to  invite
me  ! "

"  And  you  ?  "

"  Well,  I  looked  in  just  to  see  what  was  going  on  there,  and
then  I  speedily  stole  away.  Would  j^ou  believe  it,  that  many
persons,  in  consequence  of  this  permanent  orgy,  will  be  forced
to  set  out  for  their  villages  after  this  evening  ?  They  had
brought  with  them  enough  money  to  live  on  for  a  month  or
more,  but  in  three  days  they  are  drained  dry,  and  now  they  say
that  unforeseen  circumstances  recall  them  home  as  speedily  as
possible."

"Ah,  good  evening,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,"  said  Burdyakin  at
this  moment  to  Tchitchikofi",  who  happened  to  come  along.
"You  were  at  the  assembly  to-day?"  he  continued,  looking
intently  at  our  hero.

"  Yes,  I  spent  two  hours  there.  I  had  taken  a  toothache
there  with  me,  and  the  draughts  increased  it  to  such  a  degree
that  I  was  obliged  to  return  to  my  inn."

"  I  also  went  to  the  assembly,  in  spite  of  a  very  bad  cold,  but
I  went  later  on,  so" that  I  did  not  meet  you.  Just  imagine,  they
mentioned  your  affairs,  your  trial — a  lot  of  nonsense,  in  fact."

"Indeed!  what  was  it?"  said  Tchitchikoff,  ignoring  the
fact  that  anything  could  have  been  said  to  his  disadvantage.

"  Why,  some  trial  which  you  underwent  was  mentioned  ;  and,
although  it  was  said  that  you  had  been  released,  they  laughed
and  talked  and  railed  at  you.  After  all,  the  nobility  doesn't
wish  you  ill.  So  as  to  uphold  you,  I  went  from  one  person  to
another  through  the  hall,  talking,  insisting,  flattering,  beseech-
ing, and  promising  ;  and,  by  my  faith,  I  succeeded  ;  your  elec-
toral rights  were  recognised  by  a  large  majority  of  votes."

"  Well,  I  never  suspected  anything  of  the  sort,"  said  our  hero.

"  Listen  :  let  me  advise  you,  between  ourselves,  to  come  for-
ward boldly  as  a  candidate  for  the  marshalship.  Believe  me,
your  district  is  very  well  disposed  towards  you  at  the  present
moment,  and  you  will  be  elected."

"  I  don't  aspire  to  that  office  ;  it  makes  one  lead  a  bustling,
restless  life,"  said  Tchitchikoff  aloud,  but  all  the  while  he
thought  to  himself,  "  That  would  be  very  flattering."

"  Yes,  indeed  !  Well,  Pavel  Ivanovitch,  that  is  a  very  wise
course  of  yours  ;  don't  put  yourself  forward ;  you  are,  and
will  remain,  a  remarkably  sensible  man,  not  only  in  your  own
■district  but  throughout  the  province.  Look  at  Zazhmurin  :
"what  does  he  lack  ?  A  good  fever,  perhaps  ;  at  all  events,  he
is  rich  and  intelligent,' and  expert  in  rural  management.  But,  no


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR   OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  357

matter ;  here  he  is  burning  to  become  marshal.  He  has  been
warned  that  he  will  be  black-balled,  but  he  won't  listen  to  any-
thing. He  hopes  on,  and  do  you  know  why  ?  This  is  the  way  he
calculates.  Oh,  he's  a  cunning  fellow !  To-morrow  and  the
day  after  are  to  be  devoted  to  the  solution  of  a  multitude  of
questions  ;  the  third  day  is  Sunday ;  then  the  arrival  of  several
gentlemen  from  all  the  districts  is  expected.  In  these  three
days  many  of  the  people  already  here  will  have  expended  all
the  money  they  had  brought  with  them  on  cards,  drinks,  feasts,
and  orgies,  and  then  they  will  recollect  that  Zazhmurin  has  a
pocket  well  padded  with  bills  of  credit.*  He  will  lend  them
money  at  six  per  cent,  on  good  notes  guaranteed  by  the  most
solvent  among  them ;  and,  more  than  that,  he  will  make  the
borrowers  swear  on  their  honour  to  vote  for  him.  And  yet,  I
ask  you,  how  can  a  pig's  snout  like  that  man  aspire  to  be  mar-
shal of  the  nobility  ?  "

"  He  impresses  me  as  an  honest  man,  and  I  don't  see  why  he
should  be  driven  to  purchase  votes,"  remarked  our  hero.

"  Well,  pray  do  me  the  pleasure  of  dropping  in  a  black  ball
for  him,  and  in  m)''  opinion  j^ou  ought  to  do  the  same  for  every-
one except  Melekitchentzoii'.  As  for  myself,  the  general  desire
has  obliged  me  to  come  forward  as  a  candidate  for  a  judgeship;
these  are  grave  functions.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  judge  one's
fellow-men  when  one  knows  that  at  the  last  judgment  one  will
have  to  render  an  account  of  one's  decisions,  and  j-et  I  have
made  up  my  mind  to  it ;  and  I  shall  be  an  exemplary  magistrate,
you  may  depend  upon  that."

"  It  will  be  very  meritorious  on  your  part,"  said  our  hero.
"  But  what  sort  of  a  man  is  this  Melekitchentzofl'  of  yours  ?  "

"  A  millionaire  !  That  is  the  man  who  ought  to  be  elected.
That  is  the  man  who  will  make  an  accomplished  marshal.  Do
you  know,  he  has  promised  to  give  a  great  dinner,  where  he
will  regale  everyone  with  Dutch  milk  ?  I  am  acquainted  with
Dutch  cheese,  and  I  am  very  fond  of  it.  So,  for  that  reason
alone,  I  have  decided  to  assist  him  in  becoming  marshal  of
the  district.  My  wife  is  very  fond  of  Dutch  cheese,  and  my
eldest  daughter  also  ;  but  milk,  the  real  Dutch  milk,  that's  a
thing  that  neither  I  nor  my  wife  nor  my  children  have  ever
tasted.  Well,  MelekitchentzotF  has  brought  some  from  the  Low
Countries — a  hogshead,  a  largo  hogshead  of  it — and,  just
imagine  it,  ho  has  brought  it  in  his  carriage  !  "

*  At  that  period  certain  Lills  of  credit  oirculiited  throughout  Russia
just  like  hank-notes.


358  DEAD   SOULS.

"  It  is  of  Viktor  ApoUonovitch  ^  that  you  are  speaking,
surely?"  said  a  gentleman  with  a  shrill  voice,  who  had  just
halted  behind  Burdyakin.

"Yes,  of  Melekitchentzoff,  certainly."

"  But  what  is  this  milk  of  which  you  were  just  speaking  ?  "

"  Milk,  what  ?     Why,  milk,  Dutch  milk."

"  That  isn't  milk  at  all ;  you  have  been  misled.  It  isn't  milk,
but  whey ;  and  not  common  Dutch  whey,  but  what  is  called
Amsterdam  whey.     I  have  tasted  it."

"  Don't  believe  him,  Pavel  Ivanovitch  ;  he's  lying.  Well,  let
us  see  if  you  have  tasted  it,"  resumed  the  captain-ispravnik ;
"tell  us  what  it  tastes  like,  and  what  effect  it  has  on  the
stomach."

"That's  a  fine  question  to  ask!  The  whey  which  Viktor
ApoUonovitch  has  brought  is  acid  and  bitter,  salt  and  sweetish,
at  one  and  the  same  time."

"I  suspected  as  much  ;  ah,  ah,  ah!  the  jokers  !  they  have
made  him  swallow  some  sea-water.  Water,  water,  I  tell  you  ;
it  was  salt  water — that's  what  it  was.  I  must  tell  you  that
Melekitchentzoff  has  brought  with  him  from  the  west  a  number
of  men,  birds,  fish,  and  divers  objects  ;  among  other  things,  he
brought  some  very  small  shell-fish,  which  are  called  mussels,  I
believe,  to  treat  the  poor  pupils  at  a  school  in  which  he  takes  an
interest.  Oh,  what  a  fine  thing  it  is  to  be  rich  !  Well,  in  order
to  keep  these  shell-fish  fresh,  they  had  to  be  preserved  in  salt
water  ;  and  it  is  probably  that  water,  which  the  prince's  ser-
vants, at  his  request,  made  this  gentleman  drink.  He  has  swal-
lowed a  jarful  of  salt  water,  spoonful  by  spoonful.  That's  what
he  knows  about  Dutch  milk.     Come,  now,  my  dear  fellow."

"  Come,  yourself !  The  custom-house  wouldn't  allow  salt
water  to  pass  ?  "

"  And  why  not  ?  it  is  for  use  ;  the  doctor  has  prescribed  sea-
water  for  me  to  drink.  I  can  drink  nothing  else,  so  the  custom-
house allows  it  to  pass ;  it  must  allow  it."

"  It  may  be  as  you  say ;  so  be  it.  But  let  us  discuss  serious
matters.  Did  you  know  that  in  the  assembly  they  wanted  to
elect  me  as  assessor  of  the  court  of  this  district  ?  The  proposal
is  very  disagreeable  to  me — oh,  very  disagreeable  indeed  !  I
begged  of  them,  and  prayed  of  them,  not  to  think  of  it ;  but  no,
they  wouldn't  listen  to  me.  They  will  force  my  nomination
upon  me,  the  wretches!"  At  this  point  the  drinker  of  sea-
water  suddenly  drew  the  captain-ispravnik  on  one  side,  to
ask  him,  "Pray,  who  is  this  gentleman  whom  you  have  with
you  ?  "


MISERY   AXD   GRANDEUR   OF   TCHITCHIKOFF.  359

"That  is  Pavel  Ivanovitch  Tchitchikofi' ;  he  can  dispose  of
two  votes,  and  holds  two  more  in  reserve."

"  Permit  me,  sir,"  now  said  the  candidate  for  the  office  of
assessor,  in  a  honeyed  voice,  "  permit  me  to  introduce  myself
to  you :  I  am  the  governmental  secretary,  Tchyerin  ;  my  lands
lie  in  your  district ;  I  am  a  neighbour  of  Mr.  Burdyakin  ;  "  and
here  he  walked  towards  Tchitchikoft'.

"I  am  much  flattered,  sir,"  responded  Tchitchikofl',  while
he  walked  on  in  front  of  him.

"Until  to-day  I  have  not  been  bold  enough  to  introduce  my-
self to  you  ;  excuse  my  thus  accosting  you  with  a  request.
When  they  vote  for  me — my  name  is  Tchyerin — when  they
vote  for  me,  black-ball  me.  Yes,  I  beg  of  you,  black-ball  me.
No  doubt  I  should  be,  on  every  occasion  and  wholly,  at  the
command  of  the  nobility  if  I  were  elected.  I  should  cherish
no  other  ambition  than  that  of  trying  to  please  every  gentle-
man belonging  to  our  set ;  but,  nevertheless,  you  will  oblige
me,  and  that  greatly,  if  you  will  kindly  vote  against  me."

"  If  the  other  persons  who  know  you  esteem  you  worthy  of
the  post  of  'assessor,  I  shall  not  vote  differently  to  the  nobility
of  the  district ;  indeed,  I  shall  vote  in  your  favour  if  the  other
people  do  so."

"Asj'ou  please;  at  all  events,  receive  the  homage  of  my
respectful  devotion."

After  speaking  these  words,  this  solicitor  ran  off  to  pay  his
court  elsewhere.  Tchitchikoff  glanced  to  right  and  to  left,  and
no  longer  saw  him  anywhere.

"  What  sort  of  a  fellow  is  this  Tchyerin,  your  neighbour  in
the  country  ?  "  he  asked  Burdyakin.

"  A  passed-master  in  card-playing.  Oh,  he  never  fears
sharpers,  whoever  they  may  be."

*'  Then  he  himself  is  a  little  bit  in  that  line  ?  "

"  Yes,  he  is  ;  so  put  in  a  black  ball  for  him,  and  another
black  one  for  Kostlyakin  also."

"  Who  is  Kostlyakin?"

"A  landowner,  nothing  more.  I  wanted  to  marry  his
daughter  with  a  brother  of  my  wife's,  a  fine  fellow,  who  had
just  been  promoted  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  and  had  already
been  promised  a  troop.  Well,  Kostlyakin  had  the  effrontery  to
reply  to  the  young  man's  request,  '  Begin  by  getting  the  troop,
and  then  come  and  make  your  proposal  to  me.'  Can  anyone
conceive  it — such  an  animal  refusing  to  ally  his  family  with
mine  ?  Black-ball  Vuirkin  also.  As  for  Yerebnikoff,  take  care  !
He  is  a  ferret ;  distrust  him,  and  black-ball  him,  too.    Knaplin,


360  DEAD    SOULS.

too,  ought  to  have  a  good  black  ball ;  however,  do  as  you  think
fit  about  him.  Stay,  I  have  two  other  friends — Ivan  Telkin
and  Piotr  Telkin,  two  cousins,  against  one  of  whom  I  strongly
recommend  you  to  cast  black  balls."

"  Well,  I  shall  have  a  hard  time  of  it ;  you  have  mentioned
seven  or  eight  people  to  me,  and  I  really  fear  that  I  shall  make
some  mistake."

"  Do  you  wish  to  render  me  a  service  ?  "

"I  desire  it  greatly."

"  Well,  listen  !  Each  time  that  you  receive  your  balls  from  the
hand  of  the  marshal,  hand  them  to  me,  and  I  will  deposit  them
according  to  your  desires,  as  one's  oath,  honour,  and  conscience
require."

"  Well,  we  will  see  about  it."

*'  Good  evening,  Pavel  Ivanovitch."

"Adieu."

"  What  is  the  matter  with  them  all  ?  "  said  Tchitchikoff  to
himself,  as  he  re-entered  his  chamber  at  the  inn ;  "  why  are
they  thus  excited  ?  One  finds  nothing  but  lying,  fraud,  and
hypocrisy  at  every  step.  The  elections  are  useful  in  many
respects,  as  a  privilege  conferred  on  the  nobility  ;  but  in  the
practice,  in  the  exercise  of  the  right,  there  is  a  little  too  much
perfidy  and  malignity.  I  am  not  ambitious  of  any  office,  cer-
tainly ;  I  only  came  here  to  divert  my  mind  from  my  occupa-
tions as  a  landowner,  and  I  find  nothing  but  worry.  Instead  of
remaining  here  any  longer,  I  should  do  better  to  go  and  busy
myself  about  the  v/elfare  of  my  peasants,  the  education  of  my
young  family,  and  many  other  things  which  would  prove  bene-
ficial either  to  me,  or  my  family,  when  I  am  gone.  I  must  be
honest ;  that  accursed  ambition,  or  rather  that  petty  vanity,  al-
ways oppresses  my  heart,  after  creeping  in  to  it  like  a  serpent.
It  is  only  too  true,  that  I  should  like  to  be  elected  marshal  of
the  nobility  of  our  district.  It  seems  that  that  is  the  goal  of  a
noble's  desires,  and  all  these  parties  and  intrigues  are  due  to  it.
Whatever  I  do  or  say,  it  seems  as  though  someone  were  every
moment  urging  me  on,  and  shouting  in  my  ears,  '  Announce
yourself  as  a  candidate  ;  try,  try  !  perhaps  you  will  succeed  !  *
One  unhappy  man  has  undermined  his  whole  fortune  for  the
sake  of  collecting  the  nobility  at  his  house  ;  he  is  ruining  him-
self, and  all  his  family,  by  his  extravagant  expenditure.  Still
he  never  gets  discouraged,  but  hopes  to  be  elected  marshal
in  spite  of  all  the  afi"ronts  and  discomfitures  he  meets  with.
There  are  also  a  great  many  aspirants  this  year,  and  very  few
offices  to  be  filled  up.    Ought  not  I  to  postpone  my  candidature


MISERY    AND    GRANDEUR   OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  361

until  the  next  election  ?  But  no  :  three  years  arc  three  centuries  !
Shall  I  be  alive  and  in  health  three  years  hence  ?  I  should  like
to  serve  as  marshal  for  eight  or  nine  mouths,  or  a  year  at  the
most ;  then  I  would  hand  in  a  peremptory  resignation  ;  that
would  be  the  thing.  Oh  !  if  I  could  only  have  the  pleasure  of
signing  my  name,  in  my  clear,  firm  handwriting,  on  patents
of  nobility,  or  on  a  circular  addressed  to  all  my  noble  elec-
tors!  "

Tchitchikoff  was  so  engrossed  with  this  last  idea  that,  with-
out thinking,  he  placed  a  sheet  of  paper  before  him,  seized  a
pen,  and  Avrote  with  one  sweep  of  the  hand  in  magisterial,
flowing  calligraphy,  "  Tchitchikofi',  Marshal  of  the  Nobihty."
Then  he  glanced  about  him,  twisted  the  paper  up,  burned  it  in
the  flame  of  his  candle,  and  thought,  as  he  took  off  his  clothes,
"  What  a  miserable  creature  is  man  !  After  many  tempests,  I
have  entered  a  haven  of  safety,  but  my  heart  and  my  imagina-
tion have  followed  me  into  it ;  and  in  the  absence  of  real
troubles  coming  from  without,  I  create  for  myself,  by  my  own
fanc)',  subjects  of  irritation  and  false  hopes,  which  do  not
allow  me  to  taste  the  sweets  of  repose."

Three  days  elapsed,  and  the  noisy  elections  for  the  district
began.  The  streets  were  crowded  from  sunrise  by  equipages
coming  and  going,  filled,  most  of  them,  too,  to  excess,  with
members  of  the  country  nobility,  in  their  grand  uniforms.
Some  even  went  modestly  on  foot  to  each  other's  houses  ;  and
when  men  who  were  tolerably  sure  of  each  other  met,  they
alighted  from  their  carriages  or  halted  and  exchanged  embraces.
They  could  be  seen  saluting  each  other  at  fabulous  distances,
and  the  most  flattering  hopes  were  depicted  on  their  faces.

The  turmoil  aroused  Tchitchikofl'  long  before  his  ordinary
hour  of  rising  ;  he  hastened  to  his  window,  and  amused  himself
with  watching  an  enormous  britchka,  drawn  by  two  horses  with
long,  badly-groomed  coats,  and  containing  five  portly  gentle-
men in  full  dress.

"  Generals,  upon  my  word !  all  generals  to-day !  It's  a
regular  invasion  of  generals,"  said  he ;  then,  having  donned
his  own  gala  attire,  he  studied  two  or  three  noble  attitudes
before  his  mirror,  and  with  his  arms  crossed  on  his  breast
and  his  head  borne  loftily,  though  shghtly  upon  one  side,  he  said
with  much  assurance  and  in  a  loud  tone  of  voice,  "  I  know
nothing  about  the  others  ;  let  people  look  at  us  all,  and  de-
cide for  themselves.  There  arc  no  doubt  some  wealthy  men
in  this  motley  throng,  men  who  are  cultivated  in  mind,  and
handsome  in  person  ;    but  I — I  alone,  probably,    realise    the


362  DEAD   SOULS.

ideal  of  a  general — an  American  gmej-al."  And.  tears,  due  to
egotistical  tenderness  and  of  a  vague  uneasiness,  bathed  the
rosy  cheeks  of  our  hero  ;  while  he  said  to  himself,  "  Lord  Grod,
what  is  it  that  is  taking  place  withia  me  ?  Why  these  tears  ?
It  is  my  accursed  ambition  which  weeps,  knowing  that  it  can-
not be  gratified.  This  ambition  is  a  worm,  gnawing  at  my
heart,  surfeiting  itself  upon  my  blood,  living  on  me  and  in  me,
and  which  will  only  die  when  I  die ;  to  curse  it  is  equivalent  to
cursing  myself."

Tchitchikoff  then  entered  his  carriage,  and  drove  to  the
assembly.  On  the  way  he  was  stared  at,  for  he  was  not  one
of  those  men  who  never  have  a  thought  depicted  on  their  brows.
He  was  especially  noticed  by  the  populace,  because  he  distanced
not  only  the  pedestrians,  but  all  the  other  carriages.  Half  of
the  street  and  three-quarters  of  the  grand  square  were  encum-
bered with  vehicles.

The  soldiers  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  calming  the  excite-
ment of  the  drivers,  Tartars  or  Mongolians,  who  from  the
elevation  of  their  boxes,  still  lead,  at  least  as  coachmen,  that
proud  Eussian  aristocracy  in  which  so  many  of  their  ancient
princes  figure.  Perched  on  their  high  seats,  they  rise  above
all  the  general  populace — the  common  herd,  the  promiscuous
throng  of  nobles,  the  artisans,  the  clerks,  the  citizens,  and  the
rustics  alike.

"  Hey,  there,  you  big  beard  !  To  the  left,  to  the  left !  and
don't  leave  the  line.  Well,  don't  you  hear  me  ?  "  shouted
one  of  those  quellers  of  disorder  known  as  the  blue  dragoons.

"  We  know  what  we  are  about,"  retorted  the  son  of  Mamai,*
who  was  thus  addressed.  "  We  have  driven  through  Moscow
and  Petersburg,  and  you  can't  frighten  us,  comrade."

"  Come,  come  !  no  arguing,  unless  you  want  to  feel  the  flat
of  my  sword."

"  Just  try  it  on  !  My  master,  there  within,  is  already  three-
quarters  elected  marshal.  And  yet,  you  spurred  lout,  you  lay
down  the  law  like  a  commander-in-chief !  What  sort  of  a  bird
are  you,  I  should  like  to  know  ?  We  have  our  plate  laid  at
the  governor's  table.  My  master  will  tell  him.  Hallo  !  what
are  you  hitting  me  for  ?  Stop  !  listen  !  Leave  me  alone  !  Will
you  let  me  be,  you  madman  ?  I'll  leave  the  box,  and  the  horses,
and   the    carriage  !     How  dare  you  strike  me  ? ' '     Then    the

*  The  expression  "son  of  Mamai,''  means  a  Tartar.  Mama'i  was  the
leader  of  one  of  the  Tartar  incursions  in  the  Middle  Ages  (1380),  and  his
name  is  preserved  in  history.  His  exploits  are  also  celebrated  in  the
Eussian  epic  songs.


MISERY   AND   GRANDEUR   OF   TCHITCHIKOFF.  363

coachman  called,  turning  towards  his  master,  "  Sir  !  Hey,  sir  !  "
And  again  coufrontiug  the  dragoon:  "There,  that's  enough.
Where  would  you  like  me  to  re-enter  the  line  ?  ^Yill  you  cease
pestering  me  ?  Just  see  how  you  have  treated  my  tchchnen,'^
which  belongs  to  my  master.  Hum  !  It' s  disgusting  how  you
beat  and  ill-treat  people."

Several  soldiers  and  drivers  had  little  asides  of  this  nature
on  various  points.  Meanwhile,  inside  the  hall  the  balloting
began.  Podgruzdyoff  having  announced  his  definite  resignation
of  the  office  of  marshal,  votes  were  given  in  turn  for  three
candidates  who  had  brought  themselves  forward,  and  who  were
summarily  rejected  by  black-balling.  A  compact  party  then
advanced  to  vote  for  Melekitchentzoff,  in  Podgruzdj^oft^'s  place,
and  the  immense  majority  feeling  discontented,  observed  that
there  was  nobody  to  oppose  him  likely  to  have  anylchance  what-
ever.

Tchitchikofi"  remained  modestly  leaning  against  a  pillar,  the
devouring  worm  of  ambition  gnawing  painfully  at  his  heart.
Everything  was  left  in  suspense  for  several  minutes  in  default
of  a  competitor  to  oppose  this  wealthy  candidate,  Melekitchent-
zoff, who  was  already  casting  patronising  and  triumphant
glances  upon  his  supporters,  and  leering  tenderly  at  the
curule  chair  of  the  marshalate.  Our  hero  meanwhile  said  to
himself,  "Oh,  it  would  have  been  a  thousand  times  better
if  I  had  gone  on  a  round  of  visits  to  Betrishtchetf's  relatives,
rather  than  have  come  here  and  subjected  myself  to  all  this
torture.  I  have  suffered  a  great  deal  in  my  life ;  still,  I
have  enjoyed  some  happy  days.  This  is  my  harshest  trial.
Would  it  not  be  best  for  me  to  go  and  announce  myself
openly  as  a  candidate  ?  Good  God  !  What,  won't  anyone
come  and  say  to  me,  '  Will  you  be  pleased  to  accept  nomina-
tion ?  '  Let  them  talk  to  me  about  my  likeness  to  an  American
general  after  this !  I  have  allowed  myself  to  be  caught  with
the  raillery  of  a  tailor  !  I'll  just  see  if  a  single  person  will
come.  0  dead  souls  !  dead  souls  !  you  have  enriched  me  with-
out elevating  me,  and  it  is  you  who  are  now  about  to  com-
pete my  abasement  and  my  ruin  !  "

Tchitchikofi"  was  raving.  He  really  was  in  despair,  when
all  at  once,  three  gentlemen  belonging  to  his  district  approached
him,  and  proposed  to  him  that  he  should  present  himself  as  a
candidate.  Oui-  hero  could  not  reply  at  first,  so  overwhelmed
did  he  feel ;  then  he  hesitated,  and  it  was  only  at  the  expira-

*  Cossack  coat.


364  DEAD  SOULS.

tion  of  several  minutes  that  he  was  able  to  pronounce  with
some  decision  the  folloAving  honest  and  pathetic  words  :

"Divine  providen,ce,  in  sending  me  through  you  such  an  un-
expected honour,  seems  desirous  of  wiping  out  all  trace  of  the
injustice  which  I  have  experienced  in  the  pilgrimage  of  life.
Gentlemen,  you  cannot  be  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  ray  exist-
ence long  resembled  the  condition  of  a  vessel  buffeted  by
storms.  You  propose  trusting  to  me  the  helm  of  the  vessel  of
your  interests.  You  place  too  much  value  possibly  on  the  little
wisdom  with  which  experience  may  have  endowed  me.  How-
ever, I  perceive  in  this  an  opportunity  for  self-sacrifice,  and  I
will  not  hesitate.     Dispose  of  me."

Thereupon  he  shed  a  few  tears,  and  crumpled  his  three-
cornered  hat  with  both  hands  ;  then,  obviously  much  agitated,
he  passed  into  an  apartment  adjoining  the  grand  hall.

The  voting  for  the  candidates  was  immediately  proceeded
with,  and  this  operation  did  not  last  long.

As  soon  as  the  voting  was  finished,  there  arose  from  all
quarters  of  the  hall  a  loud  and  general  shout,  amid  which  one
plainly  heard  the  words,  "  We  congratulate  you  !  "

"It's  all  over,"  thought  Tchitchikoff,  wiping  his  brow,  which
was  quite  moist  from  emotion.  "The  honours  have  fallen  to
me,  and  my  heart  is  relieved  of  an  immense  weight."  And  his
bearing  as  he  re-entei'ed  the  hall  evinced  what  a  lively  sentiment
of  personal  dignity  he  felt  at  that  moment.

"  Gentlemen,"  he  said  to  the  throng  which  watched  him  as
he  passed  along,  "  I  thank  you  cordially  for  an  election  which
cannot  be  otherwise  than  flattering  to  me  from  every  point  of
view.  But  I  have  many  reasons  for  begging  you,  for  adjuring
you,  to  exempt  me  from  this  noble  office  at  least  for  three  years,
in  order  that  I  may  become  more  firmly  settled  in  this  part  of
the  country,  where  approbation  will  always  be  so  precious  to
me."

Pavel  Ivanovitch,  having  delivered  himself  to  this  effect,  bent
his  head  slightly  towards  his  left  shoulder,  brought  both  hands
together  on  his  breast,  and  awaited  a  reply.

Prince  Tchigirin,  a  man  of  lofty  stature,  renowned  for  his
overwhelming  blows,  who  chanced  to  stand  at  about  ten  paces
from  Tchitchikoff,  then  exclaimed  in  a  very  fine  baritone  voice : —

"  Mr.  Tchitchikoff"  is  wrong  in  thus  alarming  himself.  Gen-
tlemen, pray  have  the  charity  to  explain  to  him  that  he  came
out  third  or  fourth  in  the  list,  and  that  he  is  excused  from
discharging  the  functions  in  question,  not  for  three  years  only,
but  for  fifteen  or  perhaps  eighteen.",


MISERY  AND   GRANDEUR   OF   TCHITCHIKOFF.  365

Prince  Tchigirin  was  not  a  competitor ;  lie  himself  did  not
wish  to  be  marshal ;  but  on  the  other  hand  he  could  not  endure
the  thought  that  anyone  else  should  aspire  to  the  office,  unless  he
were  a  prince,  or  at  least  a  triple  millionaire.

Soon  afterwards  Melekitchentzoft"  sought  out  Tchitchikoff,
for  he  wished  to  invite  him  to  dinner,  and  to  regale  him  with
a  dish  of  herring-roe  such  as  could  only  be  found  at  his  table.
However,  our  hero  had  disappeared  from  the  hall,  and  three  hours
later  he  was  taking  tea  in  a  posting-house  situated  twenty-one
versts  from  town,  and  listening  to  the  overture  of  "  Lodoiska,"
executed  by  a  musical  snuff-box,  which  had  constituted  the  de-
light of  the  superintendent  of  this  station  for  the  last  twenty-five
years.  Our  hero  greatly  envied  the  contentment  of  this  worthy
simple  man,  who,  in  order  to  render  himself  happy,  had  only  to
rummage  in  his  pocket  and  press  a  small  leather  button.

"  And  I,"  thought  he,  "  what  do  I  lack  to  be  happy  ?  Nothing
that  a  man  can  reasonably  desire.  Accursed  vanity,  what  wilt
thou  of  me  ?  However,  the  lesson  which  I  have  just  received
ought  at  last  to  teach  me  to  restrain  the  impetuosity  of  my
ambitious  aspirations."

Such  was  the  style  of  his  thoughts  when  he  resumed  his
journey  to  return  to  the  bosom  of  his  numerous  family.  He
had  been  married  for  twelve  years,  and  he  had  eleven  children,
who  had  always  been  the  freest  and  the  happiest  children  in  the
world.*  We  will  not  say  the  same  for  the  fourteen  hundred
families  of  serfs  of  which  our  hero  was  the  lord  and  master,  and
for  whom  it  cannot  be  asserted  that  he  always  entertained  the
feelings  of  a  father.  The  only  persons  with  regard  to  whom  he
was  always  inclined  to  passive  indulgence  were  Selifan  and
Petrushka.  They  died  shortly  after  their  master's  great  dis-
comfiture at  the  elections,  possibly  in  consequence  of  the  pro-
found chagrin  caused  by  the  preference,  more  apparent  than
real,  which  Tchitchikoff"  accorded  to  the  valet  and  coachman
who  had  accompanied  him  to  town  on  that  occasion.  He  had,
in  his  character  of  master,  some  principles  from  which  he  never
departed.  As  he  despised  tale-bearers,  he  never  punished  any
faults  of  which  he  had  not  himself  been  a  witness,  or  by  which  he
had  not  personally  suffered  ;  but  then  he  punished  severely,  with-
out pausing  to  consider  the  degree  of  gravity  of  the  ofience.
An  impostor,  a  thief,  a  drunkard,  a  libertine,  had  only  to  avoid
ever  coming  in  Tchitchikoft"'s  way,  to  appear  perfectly  innocent
in  his  eyes,  however  detestable  his  reputation  might  be ;  but  if
one  of  his  peasants  told  him  a  lie  in  person,  or  if  one  of  them
passed  him  on  his  way  from  the  forest  with  a  load  of  purloined


366  DEAD   SOULS.

brushwood  on  his  back ;  if  a  third,  in  replying  to  him,  gave
vent  to  an  alcohoHc  hiccough,  or  if  he  caught  sight  of  a  fourth
courting  a  village  m,aid  in  unseemly  fashion,  even  were  she  his
betrothed,  then  it  made  no  diflerence — all  four  were  mercilessly
condemned  to  be  flogged.

Very  few  of  his  peasants  were  allowed  the  means  of  attaining
to  a  state  of  comfort.  Still,  some  of  them,  in  spite  of  the  thou-
sand obstacles  inherent  to  their  condition  of  serfage,  became
fairly  well  oif,  and  besought  him  to  give  them  their  freedom  on
condition  of  payment.  He  invariably  refused,  without  alleging
any  reason  for  this  course ;  and  he  never  even  consented  to
allow  their  daughters  to  marry  freemen.  To  have  subjects,  to
keep  them  firmly  under  his  control,  to  augment  as  much  as
possible  the  revenue  of  his  own  private  government,  such  was
henceforth  his  sole  ambition.

Any  considerations  of  equity,  of  social  amelioration,  or  uni-
versal morality,  the  dissemination  of  knowledge,  and  intellectual
emancipation,  afiected  him  but  little.  They  merely  served  to
sadden  him,  for  he  considered  that,  if  these  nonsensical  notions
won  favour  with  the  public,  they  would  be  a  very  bad  omen  as
regards  the  prosperity  of  his  oflspring,  whom  he  believed  he  had
created  in  his  own  image  and  likeness.

He  subscribed  to  several  newspapers,  reviews,  and  illustrated
publications,  simply  because  these  sheets  were  all  to  be  met
with  in  the  reception-rooms  of  his  neighbours ;  but  he  never
endeavoured  to  discover  by  perusing  them  what  were  the  needs,
the  general  feeling,  the  current  of  ideas,  and  the  aspirations
of  the  new  era  now  dawning.  Of  the  ordinary  contents  of  the
Journal  des  Debuts,  for  instance,  he  never  allowed  any  men-
tion in  his  presence,  save  that  it  were  what  came  under  the
heading  Assize  Court ;  and  then  all  at  once  he  would  exclaim,
"  What  is  the  use  of  tribunals  which  are  open  to  the  public  ?
Why  confer  this  name  of  '  public  '  on  the  populace  ?  And  what
is  the  use  of  publishing  all  these  horrors,  which  one  hears  in  the
court-room,  over  and  over  again  in  the  newspapers  ?  "  And
more  frequently  still  he  was  accustomed  to  say,  "  You  see,  you
see  what  abominations  daily  take  place  in  the  West !  And  yet
there  are  fools  who  want  to  Europeanise  Eussia,  when,  on  the
contrary,  it  is  for  Europe  to  Eussianise  herself,  as  she  ought  to
do  for  her  own  safety ;  otherwise  I  predict  that  she  will  shortly
perishan  final  impenitence."

The  most  important  duty  which  he  fulfilled  with  regard  to
his  six  eldest  sons,  was  to  accompany  them  in  succession  to
Petersburg  and  Moscow  in  order  to  install  them  respectively  in


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR   OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  367

the  public  [service — the  army,  the  navy,  the  departments  of
finances,  justice,  foreign  and  home  affairs.  The  other  lads,
who  were  younger,  were  placed  in  various  educational  institu-
tions. That  done,  he  received  and  opened  their  letters,  glanced
over  them,  beginning  at  the  end,  and  .then  threw  them  on  the
table,  and  left  the  task  of  answering  them  to  his  wife.  He  took
some  pleasure  in  seeing  his  sons  again  when  they  came  home
on  leave,  and  he  sent  them  back  at  the  expiration  of  their  fur-
loughs much  better  provided  with  money  than  Avith  sentimental
blessings.  They,  on  their  part,  returned  without  regret,  the
one  to  the  general  whose  aide-de-camp  he  was,  the  second  to
his  ship,  the  third,  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  to  their  offices,  and  the
others  to  their  schools.  As  for  his  daughters,  he  did  not  under-
stand how  they  could  want  anything  but  ribbons  and  dancing-
lessons  in  the  first  place,  or  dowries  and  trousseaux  in  the  next.

The  district  was  unfortunate  in  its  marshals  ;  in  less  than
two  years  it  lost  three  of  them.  Melekitchentzoff"  died  of
indigestion ;  Count  Nulin,  who  followed  him,  of  a  fall  from
his  horse ;  and  Kostlyakin,  the  third  one,  of  the  measles,
though  some  people  said  that  it  was  the  cholera.  At  all  events,
Tchitchikoff  was  destined  to  arrive  at  the  goal  of  his  desires.
He  was  called  upon  to  discharge  the  functions  of  the  mar-
shalate,  pending  the  next  elections,  and  was  regarded  as  a
worthy  representative  of  the  local  nobility,  except  by  certain
country  squires,  who  were  impatient  of  all  superiority,  and  who,
like  Princo  TchigiYih,  theii'  leader,  had  never  been  known  to  be
6 atisfied  witli  anyone .

An  interim  appointment  was  all  that  our  hero  wanted ;  some
months  later,  he  was  confirmed  in  his  post  for  three  years,  and
he  resigned  himself  to  his  duties.  We  will  not  designate  those
who  were  the  most  assiduous  at  his  table  and  his  entertainments
— they  can  be  divined.  The  malcontents  ?  Of  course,  with
Tchigirin  always  at  their  head.

The  millionaire  Melekitchentzoff",  in  dying,  had  appointed
Tchitchikoff"  to  be  one  of  his  executors  and  co-guardian  of  his
two  minor  sons.  All  this  weighed  heavily  in  his  favour,  and  was
of  great  advantage  to  him,  thanks  to  the  manner  in  which  he
discharged  his  duties.  There  was  very  little  of  the  citizen  about
him,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  much  of  the  self-made  grand
seigneur — the  provincial  grand  seigneur  of  the  antique  pattern.  ;;J

Thus,  despite  success,  our  hero,  having  a  heart  far  above  his
fortunes,  was  not  in  the  least  satisfied.  With  his  hair  of  ala-
baster whiteness,  his  calm  and  upright  bearing,  his  florid
cheeks,  his  aristocratically  fine  and  transparent  nose,  his  mag-


368  BEAD   SOULS.

netic  glance,  the  noble  and  generous  manner  in  wHcli  Le  did
the  honours  of  his  house,  his  gala-days  and  his  great  festivals,
he  thought  that  the  nobility  of  the  country  did  not  render  him
justice  in  proportion'  to  his  merits  ;  and  indeed  he  was  of  opinion  ■
that,  at  the  elections  which  took  place  eleven  months  after  his
exaltation,  he  ought  to  have  been  elected  marshal  of  the  pro-
vince, instead  of  being  confirmed  as  marshal  of  his  district  for,
the  succeeding  three  years.  This  well-deserved  promotion  would
have  had  the  efiect,  not  only  of  taking  him  in  triumph  to  the  capi-
tal of  the  province,  but  would  have  opened  to  him  the  doors
of  the  palace  of  the  Czars  at  Petersburg,  and  possibly  have
attached  to  his  marshal's  uniform  the  golden  key  of  court
chamberlain,  which  renders  the  offices  of  master  and  grand
master  of  ceremonies  accessible.

However,  Tchitchikoff  kept  his  thoughts  to  himself,  and,  too
proud  to  sulk  like  a  fool,  he  retreated  into  himself  like  a  sage.
But  his  eyes  constantly  turned  to  the  walls,  the  floors,  and  the
ceilings  of  the  principal  rooms  of  his  house,  and  he  thought
them  all  very  bare,  very  mean,  and  very  poor,  compared  to  the
marvels  which  he  had  seen  in  the  Kremlin  at  Moscow,  and  in
the  great  "Winter  Palace  of  the  new  capital.

As  he  had  so  many  great  qualities,  our  hero  will  surely  par-
don us  for  not  concealing  anything.  He  had  a  lofty  soul,
and  a  quick,  just,  and  penetrating  mind  ;  but  his  heart,  which
was  often  so  strong,  was  not  exempt  from  momentary  weak-
nesses. He  feared  all  contact  with  foreigners,  on  account,  in
the  first  place,  of  their  habit  of  immediately  judging  a  country
which  baffles  their  research ;  in  the  second  place  of  their
detestable  love  of  novelties,  styled  progress ;  and  in  the  third
place,  of  their  stupid  principles  in  favour  of  the  equality  of  all
citizens  before  the  law.

The  very  word  citizen,  as  applied  to  plebeians,  to  peasants,
and  even  to  the  merchant  and  artisan  classes,  seemed  to  him  a
revolting  absurdity.  The  law,  in  his  opinion,  was  a  machine
set  up  and  worked  by  noblemen,  and  which  performed  its  func-
tions for  the  benefit  of  noblemen,  who  had  at  their  head  the
Czar,  who,  to  his  honour  be  it  said,  was  the  first  gentle-
man in  the  empire  ;  equality  was  to  his  mind  only  an  antique
phantom  evoked  by  the  evil-intentioned  from  the  depths  of  the
ruins  of  the  fabulous  republics  of  Pskoff"  and  Novgorod,  at
the  instigation  of  the  philosophers  of  Germany,  who  had  already
suffocated  Poland  with  the  fumes  of  their  political  wisdom.

Thus  Tchitchikoff  entertained  sentiments  with  regard  to  the
inhabitants  of  Europe  which  were  thoroughly  Chinese.  He  con-


MISERY   AND    GRANDEUR   OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  369

scientiously  failed  to  fulfil  any  engagements  with  Englishmen,
Frenchmen,  Germans,  Swiss,  and  Italians,  simply  with  the  ob-
ject of  making  them  feel  that  a  formal  treaty  or  engagement
entered  into  with  them  was  not  a  contract  which  could  bind
the  Russian.  If  he  yielded  in  the  end,  it  was  only  at  the
entreaty  of  his  peers  in  the  nobility ;  and  he  still  acquitted
himself  after  his  own  fashion,  obliging  them  to  feel  that  he
acted  out  of  respect  to  himself,  and  not  in  virtue  of  any  alleged
contract,  which  was  and  could  be  only  a  fiction.

Although  he  sought  out  their  Parisian  soap,  their  eau-de-
Cologne,  their  Holland  cambric,  their  Sheffield  knives  and  razors,
their  Perigord  truffles,  their  Strasburg  pates,  their  Champagne
wines,  their  Sedan  cloths,  and  their  Aubusson  carpets,  he  much
preferred  to  obtain  these  things  from  Polish  Jews  rather  than
direct  from  Frenchmen,  Englishmen,  Italians,  and  Germans.
He  would  willingly  have  employed  the  Jews  of  White  Russia
to  teach  his  daughters  the  languages  and  literatures  of  the  four
nations.  He  would  have  liked  an  Italian  opera  company,  en-
tirely composed  of  singers  from  the  Ukraina  ;  a  French  theatre,
with  actors  born  at  Simbirsk  and  Tobolsk ;  and  a  German
theatre,  where  the  performers  would  have  been  Kalmuks  and
Kirghiz-Kazaks.

One  of  the  most  characteristic  traits  of  our  hero's  lofty  per-
sonality was  patriotism,  the  most  exclusive  Great  Russian
patriotism.  He  was  perfectly  wilHng  to  admit  imitation  that  was
the  simple  mark  of  the  universal  adaptability  of  the  Muscovite
nature ;  he  did  not  admit  the  infusion  of  foreign  genius ;  he
repulsed  every  shadow  of  any  association  or  affiliation  what-
ever. The  introduction  of  a  Frenchman,  an  Englishman,  a
Swiss,  or  a  Belgian  into  the  councils  of  the  government  would,
in  his  eyes,  have  been  as  great  an  enormity  as  a  request  to  a
fox,  a  wolf,  a  hyena,  or  a  shark  to  take  care  of  an  aviary,  a
sheepfold,  a  menagerie,  or  a  great  national  lake,  like  those  of
Ladoga,  Onega,  and  Ilmen.  A  Jew,  however,  might  be  allowed
to  assume  office,  for  if  he  did  not  walk  straight,  one  would  have
no  hesitation  in  despatching  him,  without  any  noise,  to  those
vast  eastern  provinces  of  the  empire  where  the  need  of  men  to
work  the  mines  concealed  in  the  great  chain  of  mountains  border-
ing upon  the  Chinese  frontier  was  making  itself  more  and  more
felt,  and  where  the  Western  nations  had  absolutely  no  reason  to
interfere.

Politics,  diplomacy,  home  rule,  justice,  men,  things,  defects,
prejudices,  abuses, — numerous,  varied,  and  universal, — he  ac-
cepted, protected,  adored  them  all,  such  as  they  existed  in  Russia.


370  DEAD    SOULS.

/  He  delighted  in  everything  that  was  Russian,  because  it  was  Rus-
sian, because  it  existed  for  the  benefit  of  the  nobility  of  his
country  ;  because,  in  spite  of  all  restraints,  the  "  cute  "  Russian,
by  properly  guiding  the  bark  of  his  cupidity,  could,  even
without  any  special  talent,  without  the  least  genius,  without
having  rendered  any  distinguished  services,  attain  to  nobility,
fortune,  honours,  and  even  dream  of  the  highest  dignities.  And
he  delighted  in  the  vices,  wrongs,  crimes,  anomalies,  and  fre-
quent contradictions  of  a  system  which  led  everyone  to  believe
in  evil  and  no  one  in  the  law,  simply  because,  in  his  eyes,  all
these  defects  had  their  good  sides  for  the  ambitious.  Moreover,
he  did  not  see  that  there  was  any  inconvenience  to  the  country
in  the  fact  that  thirty  millions  of  serfs  and  low-class  families
remained  in  bondage,  called  upon  to  provide  for  the  question-
able pleasures,  to  the  life  of  barbarous  luxury,  and  the  often
savage  fancies  of  three  hundred  thousand  satraps,  upheld  by  a
million  of  corrupt  country  squires,  and  flanked  by  three  or  four
thousand  Jewish,  Greek,  and  Mongolian  nabobs.    ^

Tchitchikoff,  during  the  happy  days  of  his  journeyings,  had
dreamed  of  a  fortune,  of  a  pretty  wife,  an  elegant  retreat,  a
sumptuous  equipage,  a  numerous  progeny;  of  clearing  new  land,
of  cleverly  managing  far-stretching  forests,  of  agricultural  pros-
perity, and  of  the  happiness  of  his  vassals.  Everything,  except
the  happiness  of  his  vassals — except  this  last  point,  which  had,
in  fact,  merely  been  included  in  his  programme  like  the  set
dishes  which  always  remain  intact  in  the  refreshment-rooms  on
great  railway  lines — everything  had  prospered  with  him  accord-
ing to  his  wishes,  and  had  even  much  surpassed  his  expectations.
But  if  he  had  been  asked  how  far  his  wife  and  his  six  eldest
sons  shared  the  habitual  order  of  his  tholights  in  his  old  age,  he
would  have  been  greatly  embarrassed  to  give  any  reply ;  for,  if
he  had  moments  of  efiusion  with  the  nobility  who  were  invited
to  his  feasts  and  festivals,  he  never  indulged  in  any  in  the  bosom
of  his  happy  family.  "My  family,"  he  might  have  answered,
"  must  love  and  honour  me,  because  I  am  its  head,  just  as  I
love  my  country,  just  as  I  love  and  honour  the  Czar,  because
he  is  my  chief  and  my  master.  Neither  the  emperor  nor  I
demand  an  account  of  our  mutual  opinions  or  our  mutual  affec-

.  tion.  We  do  not  even  know  each  other.  It  is  the  same  with
my  sons  and  me  ;  they  have  the  honour  of  being  my  sons.  I
do  not  allow  them  to  want  for  anything,  as  is  my  duty  as  a
father  and  a  gentleman.  What  necessity  is  there,  after  that,  of
our  knowing  each  other  ?  "

A  heavy  wager  might  be  laid  to-day   that   Tchitchikoff  no


MISERY    AND   GRANDEUR   OF    TCHITCHIKOFF.  371

longer  belongs  to  this  lower  world.  Probably  he  is  dead.
But  who  knows  ?  Who  can  tell  what  became  of  Ninus,  Romu-
lus, Belisarius,  the  mother  of  the  Pious  /Eneas,  and  Andrei
Kurbsky,  Prince  of  Yaroslav,  of  the  blood  of  Rurik  ?
V  Nevertheless,  our  duty  as  an  impartial  historian  requires  that
we  should  report  what  has  come  down  to  us  in  relation  to  this
sad  subject ;  without,  however,  guaranteeing  anything,  and
without  attaching  more  importance  than  is  necessary  to  the  con-
jectures of  an  idolatrous  public.  However,  many  people
maintain  that  our  hero  is  still  living,  and  that,  octogenarian  and
decrepit  though  this  noble  personification  of  ancient  Russia  may
be,  he  appears  to  enjoy  marvellously  good  health  for  his  age.
Folks  whisper  in  covert  words  into  the  ears  which  care  to
listen  that  Tchitchikoff  is  in  his  province  the  secret  chief,  the
real  soul  of  that  venerable  faction  which  is  called  the  party  of
the  Immovables  :  men  who  gravely  protest  against  changing  the
old  system  of  a  government,  which  may  have  its  faults,*  but
which  has  in  its  favour  the  sanction  of  time.  They  argue
that  it  should  not  be  demolished  under  the  pretext  of  making
reparation  to  a  class  which  has  been  held  for  centuries  under
a  ban,  and  under  the  pretext  of  effecting  eclectic  progress  in
humanitarian,  social,  and  Christian  civilisation.  According  to
this  party,  people  must  neither  imitate  nor  tolerate  any  of  those
accursed  revolutions  which  do  violence  to  the  past,  upset  the
future,  and  deliver  it  over  to  adventurers.  Tchitchikoif  has
never  proflfered  one  word  of  recrimination  against  any  man,
or  any  part  of  the  legal  or  extra-legal  system  established  in  the
country.  That  must  be  said  for  him  in  justice  ;  in  that  respect
he  has  held  his  place  as  a  son,  a  nephew,  a  scholar,  a  parishioner,
a  scribe,  an  employe,  a  clerk,  a  custom-house  official,  and  a
partner  with  the  sons  of  Israel;  also  as  a  gentleman's  steward,
as  a  gentleman  traveller,  as  a  speculator,  as  a  prisoner,  as  a
lover — if  he  ever  was  one,  even  in  imagination — as  a  man
prosecuted  and  condemned,  as  a  land  and  serf-owner,  as  an
elector  of  magistrates,  and  as  a  candidate,  who,  after  being
scoti'ed  at,  was  finally  elected  from  necessity.

The  revenue  service,  the  finances,  the  church,  the  organisation
of  the  army,  the  navy,  the  courts  of  justice,  and  the  prisons  ;  the
salaries  of  the  functionaries  and  clerks,  the  educational  system,
the  police,  the  serfdom  of  the  masses,  the  general  simony — these
he   has  never   protested  against ;  he  has  accepted   them  all,

*  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  all  this  was  written  prior  to  the
freeing  of  the  serfs,  though  of  course  many  of  the  remarks  have  a
bearing  even  upon  present  times.


372  DEAD    SOULS.

approved  of  them  all,  by  his  silencd  and  his  submission.  And
yet,  as  the  reader  has  seen,  our  hero  suffered  horribly  until  his
marriage.  But  this  did  not  prevent  him  becoming  the  possessor
of  a  considerable  fortune,  an  orderly  man,  a  marshal  of  the
nobility  of  his  district,  and  of  enjoying  in  his  green  old  age
general  esteem  and  respect.

To  our  mind,  the  whole  secret  of  his  special  policy  (which
in  the  eyes  of  many  persons  will  possess  the  merit  of  being
eminently  practical)  consisted  in  turning  obstacles,  and  in  mak-
ing use  at  all  times  and  in  every  situation,  of  evil  to  further  his
especial  benefit.

Alas  !  generations  follow  each  other  like  days  ;  and,  like  days,
they  do  not  resemble  each  other.  All  Tchitchikoff's  youthful
family  is  now  notoriously  in  favour  of  liberal  and  sweeping
\  reforms.  And  their  mother,  in  the  privacy  of  the  family^
willingly  recognises,  in  company  with  her  children,  this  simple
moral  truth,  that  monstrous  abuses  do  not  gain  in  respectability
simply  because  they  are  old  and  remarkably  tenacious  of  life.
For  ourselves,  we  will  not  permit  our  admiration  for  the
exploits  of  the  father  to  blind  us  to  the  very  different  merits  of
the  sons,  who  vie  with  each  other  in  contending  and  proclaiming
that  for  the  general  good  all  private  interests  should  hold  their
peace,  and  that  the  happiness  of  a  great  people  can  only]  be  the
outcome  of  sacrifice  in  high  spheres.

The  Russian  is  not  only  Catholic  and  Christian  at  bottom,
but  he  also  possesses  all  the  instincts  of  the  genius  of  initiation.
What  likelihood,  then,  is  there  that  he  will  much  longer  put  up
with  a  semi-pagan  system  of  government,  which  is  the  sole
cause  of  his  physical  and  moral  discomfort,  and  which  impedes
the  fruitful  march  of  the  nation  in  its  career  of  progress  ?  "^


THE    END.


PBINTKD  BY  J.   8.  TTRTUB  AXU  00.,  LHQTED,  ClTy  BOAD,  TiONOON-


V


iC--'':i  Sitf /.;(.  wv  V . :  -^  ^:
