The Golden Bough (3rd ed.), Vol. 11: Balder the Beautiful, Part 2 (James George Frazer, 1913)
==========================================================
Vol. 11 of the Golden Bough 3rd edition. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

“8 €168€900 LOLI € 


gi 


sy 


i. 
s/ 


archive.c 


//\WWW 


http: 


ae 


psp 


A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION 


THIRD EDITION 


PART VII 
BALDER THE BEAUTIFUL 


VOL, Il 


a 
: BALDER 
THE BEAUTIFUL 


: THE FIRE-FESTIVALS OF EUROPE 
__ AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE EXTERNAL SOUL 


BY 


ey G. FRAZER, 1, LL.D, Lirr.D. 


“FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 
PROFESSOR OF SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. II 


eo 4 4 . 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON 
1913 


56 Base ase Poe 


CONTENTS 


_ CHAPTER VI.—FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER 
ee ae . Pp, 1-20 


§ 1. The Fire-walk, pp. 1-15.—Bonfires at the Pongol festival in Southern 
India, 1 sg.; bonfires at the Holi festival in Northern India, the priest ex- 
" pected to pass through the fire, 2 sg.; the fire-walk in China, 3-5 ; passage 
of inspired men over the fire in India, 5 sg.; the fire-walk at Hindoo 
festival in honour of Darma Rajah and Draupadi, 6-8; the fire-walk 
among the Badagas of Southern India, 8 sg.; the fire-walk in Japan, 
9 sg.; in Fiji, 10 sg.; in Tahiti, the Marquesas Islands, and Trinidad, 
11; Hottentot custom of driving sheep through fire and smoke, 
11-13; fire applied to sick cattle by the Nandi and Zulus, 13; the 
fire-walk among the Indians of Yucatan, 13 sg.; the fire-walk in 
antiquity at Castabala in Cappadocia and at Mount Soracte near Rome, 
14 sg. 


ee ee ee a ee, ee 


§ 2. The Meaning of the Fire-walk, pp. 15-20.—Little evidence that the fire- 
walk is a sun-charm, 15 sg. ; more probably the fire-walk is a purification 
designed to burn up or repel the powers of evil, 16 sg.; custom of 
stepping over fires to get rid of ghosts, 17 sg.; widow fumigated, probably 

es 2 to rid her of her husband’s ghost, 18 sg.; the chief use of fire at the 

European fire-festivals probably to burn or repel witches, to whose 

maleficent arts the people ascribed most of their troubles, 19 sg. 


CHAPTER VII.—THE BURNING OF HUMAN 
BEINGS IN THE FIRES. : ; . Pp. 21-44 


§ 1. The Burning of Effigies in the Fires, pp. 21-24.—The effigies burnt in the 
fires probably represent witches, 21 ; perhaps some of the effigies represent 
tree-spirits or spirits of vegetation, 21-23 ; the custom of passing images 
of gods or their human representatives through the fire need not be a 
substitute for burning them, it may be only a stringent form of purification, 
24. 


a en Se eS ee, a ee UTE NP idee,” 


¥: 


vi CONTENTS 


§ 2. Zhe Burning of Men and Animals in the Fires, pp. 24-44.—Traces of 
human sacrifices at the fire-festivals, 24-26; in pagan Europe water as 
well as fire seems to have claimed its human victims on Midsummer Day, 
26-28; hence Midsummer Day deemed unlucky and dangerous, 29 ; 
nevertheless water supposed to acquire wonderful medicinal virtues at 
Midsummer, 29 sg.; similar customs and beliefs as to water at Mid- 
summer in Morocco, 30 sg. ; human sacrifices by fire among the ancient 
Gauls, men and animals enclosed in great wicker-work images and burnt 
alive, 31-33; the victims interpreted by W. Mannhardt as representatives 
of tree-spirits or spirits of vegetation, 33 ; wicker-work giants at popular 
festivals in modern Europe, 33-38; the giants at Douay and Dunkirk, 
33-353; in Brabant and Flanders, 35 sg.; the Midsummer giants in 
England, 36-38 ; wicker-work giants burnt at or near Midsummer, 38 ; 
animals, particularly serpents and cats, burnt alive in the Midsummer 

_ fires, 38-40; thus the sacrificial rites of the ancient Gauls have their 
counterparts in the popular festivals of modern Europe, 40 sg.; the 
human beings and animals burnt in these fires were perhaps witches or 
embodiments of witches rather than representatives of vegetation spirits, 
41-44. 


CHAPTER VIII—THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF 
MIDSUMMER EVE. ; : . - Pp. 45-75 


Plants commonly supposed to acquire certain magical but transient virtues on 
Midsummer Eve, 45; magical plants culled on Midsummer Eve (St. 
John’s Eve) or Midsummer Day (St. John’s Day) in France, 45-47, in 
Germany, Austria, and Russia, 47-50; among the South Slavs, in 
Macedonia, and Bolivia, 50 sg. ; among the Mohammedans of Morocco, 
51 seven or nine different sorts of magical plants or flowers gathered at 
Midsummer, 51-54; St. John’s wort, 54-57; mouse-ear hawkweed, 57 ; 
mountain arnica, 57 sg.; mugwort, 58-61; orpine, 61; vervain, 62; 
four-leaved clover, 62 sg.; camomile, 63; mullein, 63 sg.; seeds of 
fir-cones, wild thyme, elder-flowers, and purple loosestrife, 64 sg. ; fern- 
seed, 65-67 ; hazel or mistletoe cut to serve as a divining-rod, 67-69; 
mythical springwort, 69-71; the magical virtues ascribed to plants and 
flowers at Midsummer may be deemed to flow from the sun, then at the 
height of his power and glory, 71 sg. ; the Midsummer bonfires may also, 
as Mannhardt thought, be supposed to stand in direct relation to the sun, 
72; miscellaneous examples of the baleful activity of witches at Mid- 
summer and the precautions then taken against them, 73-75. 


CHAPTER IX.—BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE Pp. 76-94 


Relation of the fire-festivals to the myth of Balder, 76; veneration of the Druids 
for mistletoe, 76 sg.; medical and magical virtues ascribed to mistletoe 
in ancient Italy, 78; agreement of the Italian with the Druidical beliefs, 
78; similar beliefs among the Ainos of Japan, the Torres Straits 


CONTENTS vii 


Islanders, and the Walos of Senegambia, 79 sg. ; these beliefs perhaps 
originate in a notion that mistletoe has fallen from heaven, 80; such a 
notion would explain the ritual observed in cutting mistletoe and other 
parasitic plants, 80 ; the ancient superstitions about mistletoe have their 
analogies in modern folk-lore, 81 sg.; medicinal virtues ascribed to 
mistletoe by ancients and moderns, 82 sg.; mistletoe as a cure for 
epilepsy, 83 sg. ; the marvellous virtues ascribed to mistletoe seem to be 
fanciful inferences from the parasitic nature of the plant or from the notion 
that it falls on the tree in a flash of lightning, 84 sg. ; mistletoe deemed 
a protection against witches and Trolls, 85 sg. ; a favourite time for 
gathering mistletoe is Midsummer Eve, 86 sg. ; the two main incidents 
in Balder’s myth are reproduced in the Midsummer festival of Scandinavia, 
87 sg. ; hence the Balder myth may have been the explanation given of a 
similar rite, 88 ; if a human representative of a tree-spirit was burnt in 
the fire, he probably represented the oak, the principal sacred tree of the 
Aryans in Europe, 88-92; if the human victims represented the oak, 
the reason for pulling the mistletoe may have been a belief that the 
life of the oak was in the mistletoe, and that the tree could not perish 
by fire or water so long as the mistletoe remained intact among its 
‘boughs, 92-94 ; conception of a being whose life is deposited outside of 
himself, 94. 


CHAPTER X.—THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN 
FOLK-TALES : ‘ ‘ : - Pp. 95-152 


| Belief that a man’s soul may be deposited for safety in a secure place outside of 
a his body, and that so long as it remains there intact he himself is in- 
vulnerable and immortal, 95 sg. ; the belief illustrated in the tales of 
many peoples, 96; the external soul in Hindoo stories, 97-100; in 
Cashmeer stories, 100-102 ; in other Eastern stories, 102 sg. ; in ancient 
and modern Greek stories, 103-105; in ancient and modern Italian 
Stories, 105-107; in Slavonic stories, 108-113; in a Lithuanian story, 
113-116; in German stories, 116-119; in Norse stories, 119 sg.; in 
Danish stories, 120-123 ; in Icelandic stories, 123-126 ; in Celtic stories, 
126-133; in an ancient Egyptian story, 134-136; in Arabian stories, 
137 sg. ; in Basque, Kabyle, and Magyar stories, 139 sg. ; in a Lapp 
story, 140 sg. ; in Samoyed and Kalmuck stories, 141 sg. ; in Tartar and 
Mongolian stories, 142-145; in a Chinese story, 145 sg.; in a Khasi 
story, 146 sg. ; in a Malay poem, 147 sg. ; in a story told in Nias, 148 ; 
in a Hausa story, 148-150; in a South Nigerian story, 150; in a Ronga 
story, 150 sg. ; in North American Indian stories, 151 sg. 


q CHAPTER XI.—THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN 
: FOLK-CUSTOM . : : : oe De 1539-278 


q § 1. The External Soul in Inanimate Things, pp. 153-159.—The soul removed 
q from the body in seasons of danger and temporarily deposited in a safe place, 


viii © 


CONTENTS 


such as a bag or a chopping-knife, 153 sg. ; children’s souls deposited in 
coco-nuts or bags, 154 sg. ; souls of persons in ornaments, horns, stones, 
a pillar, and so forth, 155-1575 strength of people in their hair, criminals 
and witches shorn in order to deprive them of their power, 158 sg. 


§ 2. The External Soul in Plants, pp. 159-195.—Life of a person supposed to be 


Vv 


bound up with that of a tree or plant, 159 sg. ; birth-trees in Africa, 160- 
163; birth-trees among the Papuans, Maoris, Fijians, Dyaks, and others, 
163-165; birth-trees in Europe, 165; trees with which the fate of 
families or individuals is thought to be bound up, 165-167; the life-tree 
of the Manchu dynasty, 167 sg. ; life-trees in ancient Rome, 168 ; life 
of persons supposed to be bound up with that of the cleft trees through 
which in their youth they were passed as a cure for rupture, 168 ; English 
custom of passing ruptured or rickety children through cleft ash-trees, 
168-170; European custom of passing ruptured or rickety children 
through cleft oaks, 170-172; sympathetic. relation between a child and 
the tree through which it has been passed, 172; the disease apparently 
thought to be left behind on the farther side of the cleft tree, 172 sg. ; 
creeping through cleft trees or sticks to get rid of spirits or ghosts, 173- 
176; the cleft tree or stick through which a person has passed is a 
barrier to part him from a dangerous pursuer, 176; combined with this 
in the case of ruptured patients seems to be the idea that the rupture 
heals sympathetically as the cleft in the tree closes, 176 sg. ; other cases 
of creeping through narrow openings after a death, probably in order to 
escape the ghost, 177-179 ; crawling through arches to escape demons or 
disease, 179-181; passing through cleft sticks to escape sickness or 
ghosts, 181-183; passing through cleft sticks in connexion with puberty 
and circumcision, 183 sg. ; crawling through a ring or hoop as a cure or 
preventive of disease, 184-186; crawling through holed stones as a cure 
in Scotland, Cornwall, France, Bavaria, Austria, Greece, and Asia Minor, 
186-190 ; passing through various narrow openings as a cure or preventive 
in India and Ireland, 190; passing through holes in the ground as a cure, 
190-1923 passing through the yoke of a chariot as a cure for skin disease, 
192; passing under a yoke or arch as a rite of initiation, 193 ; the ancient 
Roman rite of passing conquered enemies under a yoke was probably in 
origin a ceremony of purification, 193-195; similarly the passage of a 
victorious Roman army under a triumphal arch may have been intended 
to purify the men from the stain of bloodshed and protect them from the 
pursuit of the ghosts of the slain, 195. 


§ 3. Zhe External Soul in Animals, pp. 196-218. — Supposed sympathetic 3 


relation between a man and an animal such that the fate of the one 
depends on that of the other, 196; external souls of Yakut and Samoyed 
shamans in animals, 196 sg. ; witches and hares, 197 ; Malay conception 
of the external soul in an animal, 197; Melanesian conception of an 
external soul (¢amaniu) lodged in an animal or other object, 197-200; 
the conception of an external soul lodged in an animal very prevalent in 
West Africa, 200; the belief among the Fans, 202; among the natives 
of the Cross River, 202 sg.; among the Balong of the Cameroons, 203 ; 


CONTENTS ix 


among the Ibos, 203 sg. ; among the Calabar negroes, 204-206 ; among 
the Ekoi of the Oban district in Southern Nigeria, 206-208 ; among other 
_ Nigerian peoples, 209 sz. ; few or no traces of such a belief in South © 
Africa, 210-212; the conception of the external soul (naguat) lodged in 
an animal among the Indians of Central America, 212-214; in some 
tribes of South-Eastern Australia the lives of the two sexes are thought 
to be bound up with the lives of two different kinds of animals, as bats 
and owls, which may be called sex totems, 214-218. 


_ $4. A Suggested Theory of Totemism, pp. 218-225.—-Sex totems and clan totems 
may alike be based on the notion that men and women keep their external 
souls in their totems, whether these are animals, plants, or what not, 
219 sg.; the savage may imagine his life to be bound up with that of 
more animals than one, at the same time; for many savages think that 
every person has more souls than one, 220-222; the Battas of Sumatra, 
who have totemism, believe that every person has a soul which is always 
outside of his body, 222-224; if a totem is the receptacle in which a man 
keeps his soul, it is no wonder that savages should conceal the secret from 
strangers, 224 sg. 


The Ritual of Death and Resurrection, pp. 225-278.—This view of totemism 
may help to explain the ritual of death and resurrection at savage rites of 
initiation, 225 sg. ; the rite of death and resurrection among the Wonghi 
of New South Wales, 227 ; use of the bull-roarer at initiation in Australia, 
227 sg.; the sound of the bull-roarer compared to thunder, 228 sq. ; 
belief of the Dieri that the sound of the bull-roarer produces a supply of 
edible snakes and lizards, 230 sg. ; the bull-roarer sounded by the Indians 
of New Mexico and Arizona to procure rain, 231; bull-roarer sounded in 
Torres Straits Islands to produce wind and good crops, 232; original 
significance of the bull-roarer perhaps that of a magical instrument for 
causing thunder, wind, and rain, 233; in Australia the sound of the bull- 
roarer at initiation is thought by women and children to be the voice of 
a spirit who carries away the novices or kills and resuscitates them, 233- 
235; drama of death and resurrection exhibited to novices at initiation in 
some tribes of New South Wales, 235-237; in some Australian tribes a 
medicine-man at his initiation is thought to be killed and raised again 
from the dead, 237-239; at some rites of initiation in German New 
Guinea the novices are supposed to be swallowed and disgorged by a 
monster, whose voice is heard in the hum of bull-roarers, 239-242; 
drama of death and resurrection exhibited to novices at initiation in Fiji, 
243-246 ; novices supposed to be swallowed by the devil at initiation in 
the island of Rook, 246; novices thought to be killed and born again at 
initiation into the Duk-duk society of New Britain, 246 sg. ; pretence of 
begetting the novices anew at initiation in Halmahera, 248; pretence of 
killing the novices and bringing them to life at initiation into the Kakian 
association in Ceram, 249-251; pretence of death and resurrection at 
initiation into the mdeméo society on the Lower Congo, 251-255 ; Bastian’s 
account of the ritual of death and resurrection in West Africa, 256; 
acquisition of a patron animal or guardian spirit in a dream, 256 sg. ; 


x CONTENTS 


Dapper’s account of the ritual of death and resurrection at initiation into 
the Belli-Paaro society of West Africa, 257-259; Miss Kingsley on rites 
of initiation into secret societies in West Africa, 259; purra or foro 
society of Sierra Leone, novices supposed to be born again, 259-261 ; 
semo society of Senegambia, novices supposed to be killed and resuscitated, 
261 sg.; ritual of ‘the new birth among the Akikuyu of British East 
Africa, 262 sg. ; pretence of killing lads at initiation among the Bondeis 
of German East Africa, 263 sg. ; ordeals at initiation among the Bushongo 
of the Congo, 264-266 ; rites of initiation among the Indians of Virginia, 
pretence of the novices that they have forgotten their former life, 266 sg. ; 
ritual of death and resurrection at initiation into the secret societies of 
North America, 267 sgg. ; the medicine-bag the instrument of death and 
resurrection, 268 sg. ; ritual of death and resurrection at initiation among 
the Dacotas, 269; ritual of death and resurrection at initiation into the 
Wolf society among the Nootka Indians, 270 sg. ; novice brought back 
by an artificial totemic animal among the Niska Indians, 271 sg.; in 
these rites there seems to be a pretence of killing the novice as a man and 
restoring him to life as an animal, 272 sg. ; honorific totems among the 
Carrier Indians, 273-275; simulated transformation of a novice into a 
bear, 274; pretence of death and resurrection at initiation into the 
honorific totem of ‘‘the darding knife,” 274 sg. ; supposed invulnerability 
of Thompson Indians who have a knife, an arrow, or other weapon for 
their personal totem or guardian spirit, 275 sg.; traces of the rite of 
death and resurrection at initiation among more advanced peoples, 
276 sg.; the motive for depositing the soul in a safe place outside of the 
body at puberty may have been a fear of the dangers supposed to attend 
the union of the sexes, 277 sg. 


CHAPTER XII.—THE GOLDEN BouGH . Pp. 279-303 


Balder’s life or death in the mistletoe, 279 ; the view that the mistletoe con- 
tained the life of the oak may have been suggested by the position of the 
parasite among the boughs, 280; analogous superstitions attaching to a 
parasitic rowan, 281 sg. ; the fate of the Hays believed to be bound up 
with the mistletoe of Errol’s oak, 283 sg. ; the Golden Bough a glorified 
mistletoe, 284 sg. ; if the Golden Bough was the mistletoe, the King of 
the Wood at Nemi may have personated an oak spirit and perished in an 
oak fire, 285 sg.; a similar fate may have overtaken the human repre- 
sentative of Balder in Norway, 286; the mistletoe may have been called 
the Golden Bough because it turns a golden yellow in withering, 286 sg. ; 
the yellow hue of the withered mistletoe may partly explain why the plant 
is thought to disclose yellow gold in the earth, 287; similarly fern-seed 
is thought to bloom like gold or fire and to reveal buried treasures on 
Midsummer Eve, 287 sg. ; sometimes fern-seed is supposed to bloom and 
confer riches on Christmas night, 288 sg. ; the wicked weaver of Roten- 
burg, 289 sg.; the golden or fiery fern-seed appears to be deemed an 
emanation of the sun’s golden fire, 290 sg. ; like fern-seed the mistletoe is 
gathered at the solstices (Midsummer and Christmas) and is supposed to 


: CONTENTS xi 


reveal treasures in the earth, 291 ; perhaps, therefore, it too is held to be 
an emanation of the sun’s golden fire, 292 sg. ; Aeneas and the Golden 
4 Bough, 293 sg. ; Orpheus and the willow, 294 ; trees thought by the savage 
to be the seat of fire because he elicits it from their wood, 295 sg. ; trees 
; that have been struck by lightning are deemed by the savage to be charged 
: with a double portion of fire, 296-298 ; the sanctity of the oak and the 
relation of the tree to the sky-god were probably suggested by the 
frequency with which oaks are struck by lightning, 298-300; this theory 
: preferable to the one formerly adopted by the author, 300; the sacredness 
4 of the mistletoe may have been due to a belief that the plant fell on the 
; tree in a flash of lightning, 301 ; hence the stroke of mistletoe that killed 
’ Balder may have been a stroke of lightning, 302; the King of the Wood 
4 and the Golden Bough, 302 sg. 

4 


‘CHAPTER XIIL—FAREWELL TO NEMI. . Pp. 304-309 


Looking back at the end of the journey, 304; the movement of human thought 
apparently from magic through religion to science, 304 sg.; contrast 
between the views of natural order postulated by magic and science 
respectively, 305 sg. ; the scientific theory of the world not necessarily 
final, 306; the shadow across the path, 307; the web of thought, 
307 sg. ; Nemi at evening: the Ave Maria bell, 308 sg. 


Note I, Snake Stones. : Ae Fe 
II. The Transformation of Witches 


into Cats : : : . Pp. 311-312 
» Ill. African Balders . i ; ; ep S255 
» IV. The Mistletoe and the Golden 

Bough . ‘ ; ; . Pp. 315-320 


[NDEX ; ; . : ‘ : « Ep 321-389 


CHAPTER VI 
FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS. 


4 § 1. The Fire-walk 


AT first sight the interpretation of the European fire customs 
_ as charms for making sunshine is confirmed by a parallel 
custom observed by the Hindoos of Southern India at the 

_ Pongol or Feast of Ingathering. The festival is celebrated 
_ in the early part of January, when, according to Hindoo 
| astrologers, the sun enters the tropic of Capricorn, and the 
_ chief event of the festival coincides with the passage of the 
sun. For some days previously the boys gather heaps of 
_ sticks, straw, dead leaves, and everything that will burn. On 
_ the morning of the first day of the festival the heaps are 
_ fired. Every street and lane has its bonfire. The young 
folk leap over the flames or pile on fresh fuel. This fire is 
an offering to Siarya, the sun-god, or to Agni, the deity of 
fire ; it “wakes him from his sleep, calling on him again to 
gladden the earth with his light and heat.”* If this is 
indeed the explanation which the people themselves give of 
the festival, it seems decisive in favour of the solar explana- 
tion of the fires; for to say that the fires waken the sun- 
god from his sleep is only a metaphorical or mythical way 
of saying that they actually help to rekindle the sun’s light 
and heat. But the hesitation which the writer indicates 
“between the two distinct deities of sun and fire seems to 
‘prove that he is merely giving his own interpretation of 
‘the rite, not reporting the views of the celebrants. If 


S43 Ch. E. Gover, “The Pongol of the Royal Asiatic Society, N.S., v. 
> Festival in Southern India,” Journal (1870) pp. 96 sg. 
wee «PT. VIL VOL. I s B 


Bonfires at © 
the Pongol 
festival in 
Southern 
India. 


2 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS CHAP. 


Se a ee "i 


that is so, the expression of his opinion has no claim to 
authority. 

A festival of Northern India which presents points of 
resemblance to the popular European celebrations which we 
have been considering is the Holi. This is a village festival 
held in early spring at the full moon of the month Phalgun. 
Large bonfires are lit and young people dance round them. 
The people believe that the fires prevent blight, and that — 
The village the ashes cure disease. At Barsana the local village priest — 


Bonfires at 
the Holi 
festival in 
Northern 
India. 


ress eq is expected to pass through the Holi bonfire, which, in the ~ 
topass opinion of the faithful, cannot burn him. Indeed he holds 
throws his land rent-free simply on the score of his being fire-proof. 
On one occasion when the priest disappointed the expectant | 
crowd by merely jumping over the outermost verge of the 
smouldering ashes and then bolting into his cell, they — 
threatened to deprive him of his benefice if he did not dis- — 
charge his spiritual functions better when the next Holi 
season came round. Another feature of the festival which 
has, or once had, its counterpart in the corresponding 
European ceremonies is the unchecked profligacy which 
prevails among the Hindoos at this time.’ In Kumaon, a 
district of North-West India, at the foot of the Himalayas, 
each clan celebrates the Holi festival by cutting down a tree, — 
which is thereupon stripped of its leaves, decked with shreds of ~ 
cloth, and burnt at some convenient place in the quarter of — 
the town inhabited by the clan. Some of the songs sung — 
Leaping on this occasion are of a ribald character. The people leap — 
seyidign over the ashes of the fire, believing that they thus rid them- ~ 
the fireto selves of itch and other diseases of the skin. While the ~ 
Stee, trees are burning, each clan tries to carry off strips of cloth — 


from the tree of another clan, and success in the attempt is — 
thought to ensure good luck. In Gwalior large heaps of — 
cow-dung are burnt instead of trees. Among the Marwaris — 
the festival is celebrated by the women with obscene songs — 


1 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), ii. 314 sgg.; Captain 
G. R. Hearn, ‘‘ Passing through the 
Fire at Phalon,” J/an, v. (1905) pp. 
154 sg. On the custom of walking 
through fire, or rather over a furnace, 
see Andrew Lang, Modern Mythology 


(London, 1897), Ppp. 148-175 ; id., 3 
in Athenaeum, 26th August and 14th ~ 
October, 1899; za., in Folk-lore, xii. — 
(1901) pp. 452-455; 2., in Folk-lore, 
xiv. (1903) pp. 87-89. Mr. Lang was © 
the first to call attention to the wide — 
prevalence of the rite in many parts of — 
the world. : 


THE FIRE-WALK 3 


and gestures. A monstrous and disgusting image of a 
certain Nathuram, who is said to have been a notorious 
_ profligate, is set up in a bazaar and then smashed with blows 
_ of shoes and bludgeons while the bonfire of cow-dung is 
_ blazing. No household can be without an image of Nathuram, 
and on the night when the bride first visits her husband, the 
_ image of this disreputable personage is placed beside her 
couch. Barren women and mothers whose children have 
died look to Nathuram for deliverance from their troubles.’ 
_ Various stories are told to account for the origin of the Holi 
_ festival. According to one legend it was instituted in order 
F to get rid of a troublesome demon (rdkshas/). The people 
_ were directed to kindle a bonfire and circumambulate it, 
J singing and uttering’ fearlessly whatever might come into 
their minds. Appalled by these vociferations, by the 
oblations to fire, and by the laughter of the children, the 

_ demon was to be destroyed. 
In the Chinese province of Fo-Kien we also meet with 
a vernal festival of fire which may be compared to the fire- 
festivals of Europe. The ceremony, according to an eminent 
_ authority, is a solar festival in honour of the renewal of 
» vegetation and of the vernal warmth. It falls in April, on 
_ the thirteenth day of the third month in the Chinese calendar, 
' and is doubtless connected with the ancient custom of 
' renewing the fire, which, as we saw, used to be observed in 
_ China at this season® The chief performers in the cere- 
mony are labourers, who refrain from women for seven days, 
and fast for three days before the festival. During these 
days they are taught in the temple how to discharge the 
difficult and dangerous duty which is to be laid upon 
them. On the eve of the festival an enormous brazier 
f charcoal, sometimes twenty feet wide, is prepared in 
front of the temple of the Great God, the protector of life. 
At sunrise next morning the brazier is lighted and kept 


Re eee eee ee ee ee 


' ! Pandit Janardan Joshi, in North 
Indian Notes and Queries, iti. pp. 92 sg., 
'§ 199 (September, 1893); W. Crooke, 
| Popular 
Northern India (Westminster, 1896), 
i. 318 sg. 

| 2. T. Atkinson, “Notes on the 
History of Religion in the Himalayas of 


Religion and Folk-lore of 


the N.W. Provinces,” Journal of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, liii. Part i. 
(Calcutta, 1884) p. 60. Compare 
W. Crooke, Popular Religion and Folk- 
lore of Northern India (Westminster, 
1896), ii. 313 5g. 


3 See above, vol. i. pp. 136 sg. 


Vernal 
festival 
of fire in 
China. 


Ceremony 
to ensure 
an abun- 
dant year. 


Walking 
through 
the fire. 


Ashes of 
the fire 
mixed with 
the fodder 
of the 
cattle. 


4 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS CHAP. 


burning by fresh supplies of fuel. A Taoist priest throws a 
mixture of salt and rice on the fire to conjure the flames and 
ensure an abundant year. Further, two exorcists, barefooted 
and followed by two peasants, traverse the fire again and 
again till it is somewhat beaten down. Meantime the pro- 
cession is forming inthe temple. The image of the god of the 
temple is placed in a sedan-chair, resplendent with red paint 
and gilding, and is carried forth by a score or more of bare- 
footed peasants. On the shafts of the sedan-chair, behind the 
image,stands a magician with a daggerstuck through the upper 
parts of his arms and grasping in each hand a great sword, 
with which he essays to deal himself violent blows on the back ; 
however, the strokes as they descend are mostly parried by 
peasants, who walk behind him and interpose bamboo rods 
between his back and the swords. Wild music now strikes 
up, and under the excitement caused by its stirring strains 
the procession passes thrice across the furnace. At their 
third passage the performers are followed by other peasants 
carrying the utensils of the temple; and the rustic mob, 
electrified by the frenzied spectacle, falls in behind. Strange 
as it may seem, burns are comparatively rare. Inured from 
infancy to walking barefoot, the peasants can step with 
impunity over the glowing charcoal, provided they plant 
their feet squarely and do not stumble ; for usage has so 
hardened their soles that the skin is converted into a sort of 
leathery or horny substance which is almost callous to heat. 
But sometimes, when they slip and a hot coal touches the 
sides of their feet or ankles, they may be seen to pull a wry 
face and jump out of the furnace amid the laughter of the 
spectators. When this part of the ceremony is over, the 
procession defiles round the village, and the priests distribute 
to every family a leaf of yellow paper inscribed with a magic 
character, which is thereupon glued over the door of the 
house. The peasants carry off the charred embers from the 
furnace, pound them to ashes, and mix the ashes with the 
fodder of their cattle, believing that it fattens them. How- 
ever, the Chinese Government disapproves of these perform- 
ances, and next morning a number of the performers may 
generally be seen in the hands of the police, laid face down- 
wards on the ground and receiving a sound castigation on a 


: 
q 


q 
% 


| 
q 
: 
4 
: 


Re ee ae YT ee ee ee 


Uae ee ee ae oe ee Pe " 
. oil ie Pac 5 
Scales 


, 
i 
‘ 
. 
. 
a 


v1 THE FIRE-WALK 5 


part of their person which is probably more sensitive than 
the soles of their feet.’ 

In this last festival the essential feature of the ceremony 
appears to be the passage of the image of the deity across 
the fire; it may be compared to the passage of the straw 
effigy of Kupalo across the midsummer bonfire in Russia.” 
As we shall see presently, such customs may perhaps be 
interpreted as magical rites designed to produce light and 
warmth by subjecting the deity himself to the heat 
and glow of the furnace; and where, as at Barsana, 
priests or sorcerers have been accustomed in the discharge 
of their functions to walk through or over fire, they have 
sometimes done so as the living representatives or embodi- 
ments of deities, spirits, or other supernatural beings. Some 


Passage of 
the image 
of the deity 
through 
the fire. 


Passage 


confirmation of this view is furnished by the beliefs and ° ‘ospred 
practices of the Dosadhs, a low Indian caste in Behar and through 


Chota Nagpur. 
three months in the year, the priest walks over a narrow 
trench filled with smouldering wood ashes, and is supposed 
thus to be inspired by the tribal god Rahu, who becomes 
incarnate in him for a time. Full of the spirit and also, it 
is surmised, of drink, the man of god then mounts a bamboo 
platform, where he sings hymns and distributes to the crowd 
leaves of tudsz, which cure incurable diseases, and flowers 
which cause barren women to become happy mothers. The 
service winds up with a feast lasting far into the night, at 
which the line that divides religious fervour from drunken 


_ revelry cannot always be drawn with absolute precision.® 


Similarly the Bhuiyas,a Dravidian tribe of Mirzapur, worship 


4 Professor 


1 G. Schlegel, Uranographie Chinotse 
(The Hague and Leyden, 1875), pp. 143 
sg.; ta., ‘‘La féte de fouler le feu 
célébrée en Chine et par les Chinois 
a Java,” Internationales Archiv fiir 


4 Ethnographie, ix. (1896) pp. 193-195. 


Compare J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe 
Religious System of China, vi. (Leyden, 
1910) pp. 1292 sg. According to 
Schlegel, the connexion 
between this festival and the old custom 


q of solemnly extinguishing and relighting 


_ the fire in spring is unquestionable. 


2 The Dying God, p. 262. 


3 (Sir) H. H. Risley, Zribes and 
Castes of Bengal, Ethnographic Glossary 
(Calcutta, 1891-1892), i. 255 sg. 
Compare W, Crooke, Popular Religion 
and Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), i. 19; 7za@., Tribes and 
Castes of the North-Western Provinces 
and Oudh (Calcutta, 1896), ii. 355. 
According to Sir Herbert Risley, the 
trench filled with smouldering ashes is 
so narrow (only a span and a quarter 
wide) ‘that very little dexterity would 
enable a man to walk with his feet on 
either edge, so as not to touch the 
smouldering ashes at the bottom,” 


On the fifth, tenth, and full-moon days of ‘fe 


India. 


Hindoo 
fire- 
festival in 
honour of 
Darma 
Rajah and 
Draupadi. 


6 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS CHAP. 


their tribal hero Bir by walking over a short trench filled with 
fire, and they say that the man who is possessed by the hero 
does not feel any pain in the soles of his feet.’ Ceremonies 
of this sort used to be observed in most districts of the Madras 
Presidency, sometimes in discharge of vows made in time of 
sickness or distress, sometimes periodically in honour of a 
deity. Where the ceremony was observed periodically, it 
generally occurred in March or June, which are the months of 
the vernal equinox and the summer solstice respectively. A 
narrow trench, sometimes twenty yards long and half a foot 
deep, was filled with small sticks and twigs, mostly of tamarind, 
which were kindled and kept burning till they sank into a 
mass of glowing embers. Along this the devotees, often fifty 
or sixty in succession, walked, ran, or leaped barefoot. In 
1854 the Madras Government instituted an enquiry into 
the custom, but found that it was not attended by danger 
or instances of injury sufficient to call for governmental 


interference.” 


The French traveller Sonnerat has described how, in the 
eighteenth century, the Hindoos celebrated a fire-festival of 
this sort in honour of the god Darma Rajah and his wife 


1 W. Crooke, 7ribes and Castes of 
the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, 
ii. 82. 

2 M. J. Walhouse, ‘* Passing through 
the Fire,” Jndian <Antiquary, Vii. 
(1878) pp. 126 sg. Compare J. A. 
Dubois, Meurs, Lnustitutions et Céré- 
monies des Feuples de TInde (Paris, 
1825), ii. 373; E. Thurston, Z¢hno- 
graphic Notes in Southern India 
(Madras, 1906), pp. 471-486; G. F. 
D’Penha, in Judian Antiquary, xxxi. 
(1902) p. 3923; ‘*Fire-walking in 
Ganjam,” Madras Government Museum 
Bulletin, vol. iv. No. 3 (Madras, 1903), 
pp. 214-216. At Akka timanhully, 
one of the many villages which help to 
make up the town of Bangalore in 
Southern India, one woman at least 
from every house is expected to walk 
through the fire at the village festival. 
Captain J. S. F. Mackenzie witnessed 
the ceremony in 1873. A trench, four 
feet long by two feet wide, was filled 
with live embers. The priest walked 
through it thrice, and the women after- 


wards passed through it in batches, 
Capt. Mackenzie remarks: ‘‘ From the 
description one readsof walking through 
fire, I expected something sensational, 
Nothing could be more tame than the 
ceremony we saw performed ; in which 
there never was nor ever could be the 
slightest danger to life. Some young 
girl, whose soles were tender, might 
next morning find that she had a blister, 
but this would be the extent of harm 
she could receive.” See Captain J.S. F. 
Mackenzie, ‘‘ The Village Feast,” /n- 
dian Antiquary, iii.(1874) pp. 6-9. But 
to fall on the hot embers might result 
in injuries which would prove fatal, 
and such an accident is known to have 
occurred at a village in Bengal. See 
H. J. Stokes, ‘* Walking through Fire,” 
Indian Antiquary, ii, (1873) pp. 190 sg. 
At Afkanbour, five days’ march from 
Delhi, the Arab traveller Ibn Batutah 
saw a troop of fakirs dancing and even 
rolling on the glowing embers of a wood 
fire. See Voyages @lin Batoutah 
(Paris, 1853-1858), ii. 6 sg., iii. 439. 


vI THE FIRE-WALK 7 


Drobedé (Draupadi). The festival lasted eighteen days, during 
which all who had vowed to take part in it were bound to 
fast, to practise continence, to sleep on the ground without 
a mat, and to walk on a furnace. On the eighteenth day 
the images of Darma Rajah and. his spouse were carried in 
procession to the furnace, and the performers followed 
dancing, their heads crowned with flowers and their bodies 
smeared with saffron. The furnace consisted of a trench 
about forty feet long, filled with hot embers. When the 
images had been carried thrice round it, the worshippers 
walked over the embers, faster or slower, according to the 
degree of their religious fervour, some carrying their children 
in their arms, others brandishing spears, swords, and stand- 
ards. This part of the ceremony being over, the bystanders 
hastened to rub their foreheads with ashes from the furnace, 
and to beg from the performers the flowers which they had 
worn in their hair; and such as obtained them preserved 
the flowers carefully. The rite was performed in honour of 
the goddess Drobedé (Draupadi), the heroine of the great 
Indian epic, the Mahabharata. For she married five brothers 
all at once ; every year she left one of her husbands to betake 
herself to another, but before doing so she had to purify her- 
self by fire. There was no fixed date for the celebration of 
the rite, but it could only be held in one of the first three 
months of the year.’ In some villages the ceremony is per- 
‘formed annually ; in others, which cannot afford the expense 
every year, it is observed either at longer intervals, perhaps 
once in three, seven, ten, or twelve years, or only in special 
emergencies, such as the outbreak of smallpox, cholera, or 
plague. Anybody but a pariah or other person of very low 
degree may take part in the ceremony in fulfilment of a vow. 
For example, if a man suffers from some chronic malady, he 
_ may vow to Draupadi that, should he be healed of his disease, 
he will walk over the fire at her festival. As a preparation 
for the solemnity he sleeps in the temple and observes a fast. 
The celebration of the rite in any village is believed to protect 
_ the cattle and the crops and to guard the inhabitants from 
' dangers of all kinds. When it is over, many people carry 


4 1 Sonnerat, Voyage aux Indes orientales et & la Chine (Paris, 1782), i. 
_ 247 sq. 


Wor- 

shippers 
walking 
through 
the fire. 


Fire- 
festival 

of the 
Badagas in 
Southern 
India. 


Sacred fire 
made by 
friction. 


Walking 
through 
the fire. 


Cattle 
driven over 
the hot 
embers. 


8 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS CHAP. 


home the holy ashes of the fire as a talisman which will drive 
away devils and demons.’ 

The Badagas, an agricultural tribe of the Neilgmers Hills 
in Southern India, annually celebrate a festival of fire in vari- 
ous parts of their country. For example, at Nidugala the 
festival is held with much ceremony in the month of January. 
Omens are taken by boiling two pots of milk side by side 
on two hearths. If the milk overflows uniformly on all sides, 
the crops will be abundant for all the villages ; but if it flows 
over on one side only, the harvest will be good for villages 
on that side only. The sacred fire is made by friction, a 
vertical stick of Rhodomyrtus tomentosus being twirled by 
means of a cord in a socket let into a thick bough of Dedre- 
geasia velutina. With this holy flame a heap of wood of 
two sorts, the Eugenta Jambolana and Phyllanthus Emblica, is 
kindled, and the hot embers are spread over a fire-pit about 
five yards long and three yards broad. When all is ready, 
the priest ties bells on his legs and approaches the fire-pit, 
carrying milk freshly drawn from a cow which has calved 
for the first time, and also bearing flowers of Rhododendron 
arboreum, Leucas aspera, or jasmine. After doing obeisance, 
he throws the flowers on the embers and then pours some of 
the milk over them. If the omens are propitious, that is, if 
the flowers remain for a few seconds unscorched and the milk 
does not hiss when it falls on the embers, the priest walks 
boldly over the embers and is followed by a crowd of cele- 
brants, who before they submit to the ordeal count the hairs 
on their feet. If any of the hairs are found to be singed 
after the passage through the fire-pit, it is an ill omen. 
Sometimes the Badagas drive their cattle, which have re- 
covered from sickness, over the hot embers in performance 


of a vow.” At Melur, another place of the Badagas in the 

1 Madras Government Museum, the Dharmaraja Festival,” Zhe Quar- 
Bulletin, vol. iv. No. 1 (Madras, erly Journal of the Mythic Society, 
1901), pp. 55-593; E. Thurston, vol. ii. No. 1 (October, 1910), pp. 
Lthnographic Notes in Southern India 29-32. 


(Madras, 1906), pp. 471-474. One 
of the places where the fire-festival 
in honour of Draupadi takes place 
annually is the Allandur Temple, at 
St. Thomas’s Mount, near Madras, 
Compare ‘‘ Fire-walking Ceremony at 


2 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes 
of Southern India (Madras, 1909), i. 
98 sg.; ta., Ethnographic Notes in 
Southern India (Madras, 1906), pp. 
476 sg. 


oe eee 


THE FIRE-WALK 9 


Neilgherry Hills, three, five, or seven men are chosen to walk The fire- 
through the fire at the festival; and before they perform the beget pe aa 
ceremony they pour into an adece stream milk from cows libation of 
' which have calved for the first time during the year. A saoeet Ge 
general feast follows the performance of the rite, and next ——-* 
_ day the land is ploughed and sown for the first time that ‘Sowing 
' season. At Jakkaneri, another place of the Badagas in the 

' Neilgherry Hills, the passage through the fire at the festival 

' “seems to have originally had some connection with agri- 

| cultural prospects, as a young bull is made to go partly 

| across the fire-pit before the other devotees, and the owners 

_ of young cows which have had their first calves during the 

' year take precedence of others in the ceremony, and bring 

' offerings of milk, which are sprinkled over the burning 

| embers.”* According to another account the ceremony 

' among the Badagas was performed every second year at a 
harvest festival, and the performers were a set of degenerate 
Brahmans called Haruvarus, who “used to walk on burning 

_ coals with bare feet, pretending that the god they worshipped 

| could allay the heat and make fire like cold water to them. 

_ As they only remained a few seconds, however, on the coals, 

' it was impossible that they could receive much injury.” ° 

' In Japan the fire-walk is performed as a religious rite The fre- 
twice a year at a temple in the Kanda quarter of Tokio. japan. 

~ One of the performances takes place in September. It was 

" witnessed in the year 1903 by the wife of an American naval 

officer, who has described it. In a court of the temple a bed 

f charcoal about six yards long, two yards wide, and two 

eet deep was laid down and covered with a deep layer of 

straw. Being ignited, the straw blazed up, and when the 

ames had died down the bed of hot charcoal was fanned 

by attendants into a red glow. Priests dressed in robes of 
“white cotton then walked round the fire, striking sparks from 

‘flint and steel and carrying trays full of salt. When mats 

chad been laid down at the two ends of the fire and salt 
-poured on them, the priests rubbed their bare feet twice in 

‘the salt and then walked calmly down the middle of the fire. 


| 1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes 2 F. Metz, The Tribes inhabiting 
‘@ Southern India (Madras, 1909), i. the Netlgherry Hills, Second Edition 
~ Too sg. (Mangalore, 1864), p. 55. 


The fire- 
walk in 
Fiji. 


10 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS CHAP. 


They were followed by a number of people, including some 
boys and a woman with a baby in her arms. “The Shinto- 
ists claim that, having been perfectly purified by their prayers 
and ceremonies, no evil has any power over them. Fire they 
regard as the very spirit of evil; so twice a year, I believe, 
they go through this fire-walking as a kind of ‘outward and 
visible sign of inward spiritual grace.’”? 

In the island of Mbengga, one of the Fijian archipelago, 
once every year a dracaena, which grows in profusion on 
the grassy hillsides, becomes fit to yield the sugar of which 
its fibrous root is full. To render the roots edible it is 
necessary to bake them among hot stones for four days. A 
great pit is dug and filled with great stones and blazing — 
logs, and when the flames have died down and the stones 
are at white heat, the oven is ready to receive the roots. — 
At this moment the members of a certain clan called Na 
Ivilankata, favoured of the gods, leap into the oven and 
walk unharmed upon the hot stones, which would scorch ~ 
the feet of any other persons. On one occasion when the ~ 
ceremony was witnessed by Europeans fifteen men of the 
clan, dressed in garlands and fringes, walked unscathed 
through the furnace, where tongues of fire played among 
the hot stones. The pit was about nineteen feet wide and 
the men marched round it, planting their feet squarely and 
firmly on each stone. When they emerged from the pit, 


1 « A Japanese Fire-walk,” American 
Anthropologist, New Series, v. (1903) 
pp- 377-380. The ceremony has been 
described to me by two eye-witnesses, 
Mr. Ernest Foxwell. of St. John’s 
College, Cambridge, and Miss E. P. 
Hughes, formerly Principal of the 
Teachers’ Training College, Cam- 
bridge. Mr. Foxwell examined the 
feet of the performers both before 
and after their passage through the 
fire and found no hurt. The heat 
was so great that the sweat ran down 
him as he stood near the bed of glow- 
ing charcoal. He cannot explain the 
immunity of the performers. He in- 
forms me that the American writer 
Percival Lowell walked in the fire 
and was burned ‘so severely that he 
was laid up in bed for three weeks ; 


while on the other hand a Scotch 
engineer named Hillhouse passed over 
the hot charcoal unscathed. Several 
of Miss Hughes’s Japanese pupils also 
went through the ordeal with impunity, 
but one of them burned a toe. Both 
before and after walking through the — 
fire the people dipped their feet ina — 
white stuff which Miss Hughes was 
told was salt. Compare W. G. Aston, 
Shinto (London, 1905), p. 348: ‘At — 
the present day plunging the hand into — 
boiling water, walking barefoot over a 
bed of live coals, and climbing a ladder 
formed of sword-blades set edge up- — 
wards are practised, not by way of — 
ordeal, but to excite the awe and 
stimulate the piety of the ignorant 
spectators.” 


vi THE FIRE-WALK II 
the feet of several were examined and shewed no trace 
of scorching; even the anklets of dried tree-fern leaves 
which they wore on their legs were unburnt. The immunity 
thus enjoyed by members of the clan in the fiery furnace is 
explained by a legend that in former days a chief of the 
clan, named Tui Nkualita, received for himself and his 
descendants this remarkable privilege from a certain god, 
_ whom the chief had accidentally dragged out of a deep 
_ pool of water by the hair of his head.’ A similar cere- 
_ mony of walking through fire, or rather over a furnace 
_ of hot charcoal or hot stones, has also been observed in 
_ Tahiti,? the Marquesas Islands,* and by Hindoo coolies in 
_ the West Indian island of Trinidad ;* but the eye-witnesses 
who have described the rite, as it is observed in these islands, 
have said little or nothing as to its meaning and purpose, 
their whole attention having been apparently concentrated on 
the heat of the furnace and the state of the performers’ legs 
before and after passing through it. 


The fire- 
walk in 
Tahiti, 
the Mar- 
quesas 
Islands, 
and 
Trinidad. 


7 “ Another grand custom of the Hottentots, which they Hottentot 

likewise term andersmaken, is the driving their sheep at pre se 

certain times through the fire. Early in the day appointed their sheep 
by a kraal for the observance of this custom, the women pia 
smoke, 


1 Basil Thomson, South Sea Yarns 
_ (Edinburgh and London, 1894), pp. 
_ 195-207. Compare F. Arthur Jack- 
son, “A Fijian Legend of the Origin 
- of the Vilavilairevo or Fire Cere- 
mony,” Journal of the Polynesian 
Society, vol. iii. No. 2 (June, 1894), 
pp. 72-75; R. Fulton, ‘‘An Account 
_ of the Fiji Fire-walking Cere- 
' mony, or Vilavilairevo, with a prob- 
able explanation of the mystery,” 
_ Transactions and Proceedings of the 
New Zealand Institute, xxxv. (1902) 
_ pp. 187-201; Lieutenant Vernon H. 
Haggard, in Folk-lore, xiv. (1903) pp. 
88 sg. 

2S. P. Langley, *‘The Fire-walk 
_ Ceremony in Tahiti,” Report of the 
_ Smithsonian Institution for 1901 
_ (Washington, 1902), pp. 539-5443 
_ dd., in Folk-lore, xiv. (1901) pp. 446- 
- 452; ‘*More about Fire- walking,” 
_ Journal of the Polynesian Society, vol. 
_ x. No. 1 (March, 1901), pp. 53 59. 


In his Modern Mythology (pp. 162- 
165) Andrew Lang quotes from Zhe 
Polynesian Society's Journal, vol. ii. 
No. 2, pp. 105-108, an account of the 
fire-walk by Miss Tenira Henry, which 
seems to refer to Raiatea, one of the 
Tahitian group of islands. 


3 Annales de Tl Association de la 
Propagation de la Foi, \xix. (1897) 
pp. 130-133. But in the ceremony 
here described the chief performer 
was a native of Huahine, one of the 
Tahitian group of islands. The wood 
burned in the furnace was hibiscus 
and native chestnut (/nocarpus edulis). 
Before stepping on the hot stones the 
principal performer beat the edge of 
the furnace twice or thrice with 7 
leaves (dracaena). 

4 Les Missions Catholigues, x. (1878) 
pp- 141 sg.; A. Lang, Modern Mytho- 
logy, p. 167, quoting Mr. Henry R. 
St. Clair. 


12 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS CHAP. 


milk all their cows, and set the whole produce before their 
husbands. ’Tis a strict rule at those times that the women 
neither taste, nor suffer their children to touch, a drop of it. 
The whole quantity is sacred to the men, who drink it all up 
before they address themselves to the business of the fire. 
Having consumed the milk, some go and bring the sheep 
together to the place where the fire is to be lighted, while 
others repair to the place to light it. The fire is made of 
chips and dry twigs and thinly spread into a long square. 
Upon the coming up of the sheep, the fire, scattered into this 
figure, is covered with green twigs to raise a great smoak ; 
and a number of men range themselves closely on both sides 
of it, making a lane for the sheep to pass through, and ex- 
tending themselves to a good distance beyond the fire on the 
side where the sheep are to enter. Things being in this 
posture, the sheep are driven into the lane close up to the 
fire, which now smoaks in the thickest clouds. The foremost 
boggle, and being forced forward by the press behind, seek 
their escape by attempting breaches in the ranks. The men 
stand close and firm, and whoop and goad them forward ; 
when a few hands, planted at the front of the fire, catch three 
or four of the foremost sheep by the head, and drag them 
through, and bring them round into the sight of the rest ; 
which sometimes upon this, the whooping and goading 
continuing, follow with a tantivy, jumping and pouring 
themselves through the fire and smoak with a mighty 
clattering and fury. At other times they are not so tract- 
able, but put the Hottentots to the trouble of dragging 
numbers of them through ; and sometimes, in a great press 
and fright, sturdily attacking the ranks, they make a breach 
and escape. This is a very mortifying event at all times, 
the Hottentots, upon whatever account, looking upon it as a 
heavy disgrace and a very ill omen into the bargain. But — 
when their labours here are attended with such success, that — 
the sheep pass readily through or over the fire, ’tis hardly 
in the power of language to describe them in all the sallies 
of their joy.” The writer who thus describes the custom had 
great difficulty in extracting an explanation of it from the 
Hottentots. At last one of them informed him that their 
country was much infested by wild dogs, which made terrible 


THE FIRE-WALK 3 


_ havoc among the cattle, worrying the animals to death even 

__ when they did not devour them. “Now we have it,” he said, 
_ from our ancestors, that if sheep are driven through the fire, 

__as we say, that is, through a thick smoak, the wild dogs will 
_ not be fond of attacking them while the scent of the smoak 
_ remains upon their fleeces. We therefore from time to time, 
for the security of our flocks, perform this andersmaken.” 
4 When disease breaks out in a herd of the Nandi, a Fire 
_ pastoral tribe of British East Africa, a large bonfire is made *pplied to 
' with the wood of a certain tree (Olea chrysophilla), and by the 
_ brushwood of two sorts of shrubs is thrown on the top. Nand and 
_ Then the sick herd is driven to the fire, and while the 
' animals are standing near it, a sheep big with young is 
' brought to them and anointed with milk by an elder, after 
| which it is strangled by two men belonging to clans that 
may intermarry. The intestines are then inspected, and if 
_the omens prove favourable, the meat is roasted and eaten ; 
_ moreover rings are made out of the skin and worn by the 
| cattle-owners. After the meat has been eaten, the herd is 
_ driven round the fire, and milk is poured on each beast? 
_ When their cattle are sick, the Zulus of Natal will collect 
| their herds in a kraal, where a medicine-man kindles a fire, 
. burns medicine in it, and so fumigates the cattle with the 
_ medicated smoke. Afterwards he sprinkles the herd with a 
_ decoction, and, taking some melted fat of the dead oxen in 
his mouth, squirts it on a fire-brand and holds the brand to 
' each animal in succession. Such a custom is probably 
_ equivalent to the Hottentot and European practice of driving 
cattle through a fire. 
a Among the Indians of Yucatan the year which was Indians of 
|" marked in their calendar by the sign of Cauac was reputed Yustan 
| to be very unlucky ; they thought that in the course of it the hot embers 
_ death-rate would be high, the maize crops would be withered <r 
_ up by the extreme heat of the sun, and what remained of calamities. 
_ the harvest would be devoured by swarms of ants and birds. 

_ To avert these calamities they used to erect a great pyre of 


=  # Peter Kolben, Zhe Present State 1909), pp. 45 sg. 

© of the Cape of Good Hope, Second 

_ Edition (London, 1738), i. 129-133. 3 Rev. Joseph Shooter, Zhe Kafirs 
| # A.C. Hollis, 7he Nandi (Oxford, of Natal (London, 1857), p. 35. 


The fire- 
walk in 
antiquity, 
at Casta- 
bala in 
Cappa- 
docia and 
at Mount 
Soracte 
near Rome, 


14 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS 


wood, to which most persons contributed a faggot. Having 
danced about it during the day, they set fire to it at night- 
fall, and when the flames had died down, they spread out 
the red embers and walked or ran barefoot over them, some 
of them escaping unsmirched by the flames, but others 
burning themselves more or less severely. In this way they 
hoped to conjure away the evils that threatened them, and 
to undo the sinister omens of the year.’ 

Similar rites were performed at more than one place 
in classical antiquity. At Castabala, in Cappadocia, the 
priestesses of an Asiatic goddess, whom the Greeks called 
Artemis Perasia, used to walk barefoot through a furnace of 
hot charcoal and take no harm.? Again, at the foot of 
Mount Soracte, in Italy, there was a sanctuary of a goddess 
Feronia, where once a year the men of certain families 
walked barefoot, but unscathed, over the glowing embers 
and ashes of a great fire of pinewood in presence of a vast 
multitude, who had assembled from all the country round 
about to pay their devotions to the deity or to ply their 
business at the fair. The families from whom the performers 
of the rite were drawn went by the name of Hirpi Sorani, 
or “Soranian Wolves”; and in consideration of the services 
which they rendered the state by walking through the fire, 
they were exempted, by a special decree of the senate, from 
military service and all public burdens. In the discharge of 
their sacred function, if we can trust the testimony of Strabo, 
they were believed to be inspired by the goddess Feronia. 
The ceremony certainly took place in her sanctuary, which 


was held in the highest reverence alike by Latins and Sabines; — ; 


but according to Virgil and Pliny the rite was performed 


in honour of the god of the mountain, whom they call by g 
the Greek name of Apollo, but whose real name appears ~ 
If Soranus was a sun-god, as his ~ 


to have been Soranus.® 


CHAP, 


| 
: 


1 Diego de Landa, Relation des 
choses de Yucatan (Paris, 1864), pp. 
231, 233. 

2 Strabo, xii. 2. 7, p. 537. 
pare Adonis, Attis, Osiris, 
Edition, pp. 89, 134 sgq. 

3 Pliny, Vat, Hist. vii. 19; Virgil, 
Aen, xi. 784 sgg. with the comment 
of Servius ; Strabo, v. 2. 9, p. 226; 


Com- 
Second 


Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Amtiguit, — 
From a reference to the 
custom in Silius Italicus (v. 175 sgg.) 
it seems that the men passed thrice — 
through the furnace holding the en- ~ 
trails of the sacrificial victims in their 
The learned but sceptical 
Varro attributed their immunity in the 
fire to a drug with which they took 


Rom, iii. 32. 


hands. 


<=: 


VI THE FIRE-WALK 


15 


name has by some been thought to indicate,’ we might perhaps 
conclude that the passage of his priests through the fire was 
a magical ceremony designed to procure a due supply of 
light and warmth for the earth by mimicking the sun’s 
passage across the firmament. For so priceless a service, 
rendered at some personal risk, it would be natural that the 
magicians should be handsomely rewarded by a grateful 
country, and that they should be released from the common 
obligations of earth in order the better to devote themselves 
to their celestial mission. The neighbouring towns paid the 
first-fruits of their harvest as tribute to the shrine, and 
loaded it besides with offerings of gold and silver, of which, 
however, it was swept clean by Hannibal when he hung 
with his dusky army, like a storm-cloud about to break, 
within sight of the sentinels on the walls of Rome. 


a ai Cs a 
He Sa ee 


a 
q 


“ee Naa 
ae 


al ae ink Capers ts 


§ 2. The Meaning of the Fire-walk 


The foregoing customs, observed in many different parts 
_ of the world, present at least a superficial resemblance to the 
_ modern European practices of leaping over fires and driving 
_ cattle through them ; and we naturally ask whether it is not 
_ possible to discover a general explanation which will include 
them all. We have seen that two general theories have been 
_ proposed to account for the European practices ; according 
_to one theory the customs in question are sun-charms, 


_ care to anoint the soles of their feet 
_ before they planted them in the 
_ furnace. See Varro, cited by Servius, 
' on Virgil, den, xi. 787. The whole 
_ subject has been treated by W. Mann- 
_ hardt (Antike Wald- und Feldkulte, 
_ Berlin, 1877, pp. 327 sgg.), who com- 
_ pares the rites of these ‘‘Soranian 
| Wolves” with the ceremonies per- 
_ formed by the brotherhood of the 
_ Green Wolf at Jumiéges in Normandy. 
_ See above, vol. i. pp. 185 sg. 

_ IL, Preller (Rimische Mythologie3 
i. 268), following G. Curtius, would 
_ connect the first syllable of Soranus and 
Soracte with the Latin so/, ‘‘sun.” 
However, this etymology appears to 
be at the best very doubtful. My 
_ friend Prof. J. H. Moulton doubts 


whether Soranus can be connected 
with so/; he tells me that the inter- 
change of / andrisrare. He would 
rather connect Soracte with the Greek 
bpagt, ‘a shrew-mouse.” In that case 
Apollo Soranus might be the equivalent 
of the Greek Apollo Smintheus, ‘‘ the 
Mouse Apollo.” Professor R. S. Con- 
way also writes to me (11th November 
1902) that Soranus and Soracte ‘* have 
nothing to do with so/; rand / are 
not confused in Italic.” 

2 Livy, xxvi. 11. About this time 
the Carthaginian army encamped only 
three miles from Rome, and Hannibal 
in person, at the head of two thousand 
cavalry, rode close up to the walls and 
leisurely reconnoitered them. See 
Livy, xxvi. 10; Polybius, ix. 5-7. 


Little 
evidence 
to shew 
that the 
fire-walk 
is a sun- 
charm. 


On the 
other hand 
there is 
much to 
be said for 
the view 
that the 
fire-walk 
is a form 
of purifica- 
tion, the 
flames 
being 
thought 
either to 
burn up 
or repel 
the powers 
of evil. 


16 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS ‘cHAP. 


according to the other they are purifications. Let us see 
how the two rival theories fit the other facts which we have 
just passed in review. To take the solar theory first, it is 
supported, first, by a statement that the fires at the Pongol 
festival in Southern India are intended to wake the sun-god 
or the fire-god from his sleep ;* and, second, by the etymo- 
logy which connects Soranus, the god of Soracte, with the 
sun.” But for reasons which have already been given, 
neither of these arguments carries much weight ; and apart 
from them there appears to be nothing in the foregoing 
customs to suggest that they are sun-charms. Nay, some 
of the customs appear hardly reconcilable with such a view. 
For it is to be observed that the fire-walk is frequently 
practised in India and other tropical countries, where as a 
rule people would more naturally wish to abate than to 
increase the fierce heat of the sun. In Yucatan certainly 
the intention of kindling the bonfires cannot possibly have 
been to fan the solar flames, since one of the principal evils 
which the bonfires were designed to remedy was precisely 
the excessive heat of the sun, which had withered up the 
maize crops.’ Thus the solar theory is not strongly sup- 
ported by any of the facts which we are considering, and it 
is actually inconsistent with some of them. 

Not so with the purificatory theory. It is obviously 
applicable to some of the facts, and apparently consistent 
with them all. Thus we have seen that sick men make a 
vow to walk over the fire, and that sick cattle are driven 
over it. In such cases clearly the intention is to cleanse the 
suffering man or beast from the infection of disease, and 
thereby to restore him or it to health ; and the fire is supposed 
to effect this salutary end, either by burning up the powers 
of evil or by interposing an insurmountable barrier between 
them and the sufferer. For it is to be remembered that 
evils which civilized men regard as impersonal are often 
conceived by uncivilized man in the personal shape of 
witches and wizards, of ghosts and hobgoblins; so tnat 
measures which we should consider as simple disinfectants 
the savage looks upon as obstacles opportunely presented to 


1 Above, p. I. 2 Above, p. 15. 
3 Above, pp. 13 59. 


: 


: 
: 


vi THE MEANING OF THE FIRE-WALK 17 


_ the attacks of demons or other uncanny beings. Now of 
_ all such obstacles fire seems generally to be thought the 
_ most effective; hence in passing through or leaping over it 
_ our primitive philosopher often imagines that he is not so 
_ much annihilating his spiritual foe as merely giving him the 
_ slip; the ghostly pursuer shrinks back appalled at the flames 
through which his intended victim, driven to desperation by 
his fears, has safely passed before him. This interpretation 
_ of the ceremony is confirmed, first, by the observation that 
' in India the ashes of the bonfire are used as a talisman against 
_ devils and demons ;’ and, second, by the employment of 
_ the ceremony for the avowed purpose of escaping from 
_ the pursuit of a troublesome ghost. For example, in 
_,China “they believe that a beheaded man wanders about a 
| headless spectre in the World of Shades. Such spectres are 
| frequently to be seen in walled towns, especially in the 
- neighbourhood of places of execution. Here they often 
' visit the people with disease and disaster, causing a con- 
_ siderable depreciation in the value of the houses around such 
-scenes. Whenever an execution takes place, the people fire 
_ crackers to frighten the headless ghost away from the spot ; 
' and the mandarin who has superintended the bloody work, 
on entering the gate of his mansion, has himself carried in 
_ his sedan chair over a fire lighted on the pavement, lest the 
_ headless apparition should enter there along with him; for 
disembodied spirits are afraid of fire.”* For a like reason 
| Chinese mourners after a funeral, and persons who have paid 
a visit of condolence to a house of death, often purify them- 
selves by stepping over a fire of straw ;* the purification, we 
cannot doubt, consists simply in shaking off the ghost who 
‘is supposed to dog their steps. Similarly at a coroner’s 
‘inquest in China the mandarin and his subordinates hold 
_ pocket handkerchiefs or towels to their mouths and noses 
_ while they are inspecting the corpse, no doubt to hinder the 
ghost from insinuating himself into their bodies by these 
apertures ; and when they have discharged their dangerous 


' |} Above, p. 8, compare p. 3. 042. 
| ?J. J. M. de Groot, 7he Religious 3 Rev. J. H. Gray, China (London, 
| System of China, i. (Leyden, 1892), 1878), i. 287, 305; J. J. M. de Groot, 
P- 355; #4. vi. (Leyden, 1910) p. af. cit. i. 32, vi. 942. 
| PT. VII. VOL. 11 c 


Custom of 
stepping 
over fire 


18 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS CHAP, 


duty, they purify themselves by passing through a small fire 
of straw kindled on the pavement before they enter their 
sedan-chairs to return home, while at the same time the 
crowd of idlers, who have gathered about the door, assist in 
keeping the ghost at bay by a liberal discharge of crackers, 
The same double process of purification, or rather of repelling 
the ghost, by means of fire and crackers is repeated at the gate 
of the mandarin’s residence when the procession defiles into 
it.’ Among some of the Tartars it used to be customary 
for all persons returning from a burial to leap over a fire 
made for the purpose, “in order that the dead man might 
not follow them ; for apparently in their opinion he would 
be afraid of the fire.”* “The Yakuts bury their dead as a © 
rule on the day of the death, and in order not to take the 
demon of death home with them, they kindle fires on the 
way back from the burial and jump over them in the belief 
that the demon of death, who dreads fire, will not follow 
them, and that in this way they will be freed from the 
persecutions of the hated demon of death.”* In Sikkhim, 
when members of the Khambu caste have buried a corpse, 
all persons present at the burial “adjourn to a stream 
for a bath of purification, and, on re-entering the house, 
have to tread on a bit of burning cloth, to prevent the ~ 
evil spirits who attend at funerals from following them in.” 
Among the Fans of West Africa, “when the mourning © 
is over, the wives of the deceased must pass over a small — 
lighted brazier in the middle of the village, then they sit — 
down while some leaves are still burning under their a 
their heads are shaved, and from that moment they are — 
purified from the mourning—perhaps we should translate: — 
‘delivered from the ghost of their husband’—and may be — 
divided among the heirs.”®> At Agweh, on the Slave Coast — 
of West Africa, a widow used to remain shut up for six 


eee Ty a eee ee 


1 J. J. M. de Groot, of. cét. i. 137, 
vi. 942. 

2 J. G. Gmelin, Reise durch Sibi- 
rien (Gottingen, 1751-1752), i. 333- 

3 W. L. Priklonski, ‘‘ Ueber das 
Schamenthum bei den Jakuten,” in A. 
Bastian’s Allerlet aus Volks- und Men- 
schenkunde (Berlin, 1888), i. 219. 
Compare Vasilij Priklonski, ‘* Todten- 


gebrauche der Jakuten,” Globus, lix. 
(1891) p. 85. q 

4 J. A. H. Louis, Zhe Gates of 
Thibet (Calcutta, 1894), p. 116. 3 

5 E, Allegret, ‘Les Idées reli- 
gieuses des Fafi (Afrique Occidentale),” — 
Revue de 0? Histoire des Religions, 1, 
(1904) p. 220. = 


THE MEANING OF THE FIRE-WALK 19 


months in the room where her husband was buried ; at the 
end of the time a fire was lighted on the floor, and red 
peppers strewn in it, until in the pungent fumes the widow 
_ was nearly stifled! No doubt the intention was to rid her } 
_ of her husband’s ghost in order that she might mingle again 
‘in the world with safety to herself and others. 

4 On the analogy of these customs, in which the purpose 
_ of the passage through the fire appears to be unmistakable, 
" we may suppose that the motive of the rite is similar at the 
_ popular festivals of Europe and the like observances in 
other lands. In every case the ritual appears to be explained 
_in a simple and natural way by the supposition that the 
_ performers believe themselves to be freed from certain evils, 
' actual or threatened, through the beneficent agency of fire, 
which either burns up and destroys the noxious things or 


_ belief, ‘or at least this hope, is definitely expressed by 
some of the people who leap across the bonfires: they 


'flames, or that they leave their sins, or at all events their 
‘fleas, behind them on the far side of the fire? But we may 
‘conjecture that originally all the evils from which the people 
‘thus thought to deliver themselves were conceived by them 
“to be caused by personal beings, such as ghosts and demons 
or witches and warlocks, and that the fires were kindled 
‘for the sole purpose of burning or banning these noxious 
‘creatures. Of these evil powers witches and warlocks 
‘appear to have been the most dreaded by our European 

easantry ; and it is therefore significant that the fires kindled 
m these occasions are often expressly alleged to burn the 
| witches,’ that effigies of witches are not uncommonly con- 
‘sumed in them,‘ and that two of the great periodic fire- 
‘festivals of the year, namely May Day and Midsummer Eve, 
‘coincide with the seasons when witches are believed to be 
m ost active and mischievous, and when vonage 4 many 
othe sr precautions are taken against them.* Thus if witch- 
a A. B. Ellis, Zhe LEwe-speaking 3 See the references above, vol. i. 
of the Slave Coast of West pp. 342 note*. 

ica (London, 1890), p. 160. * See the references above, vol. i. 


; 4, Above, pp. 162, 163, 211, 212, p. 342 note®. 
214, 215, 217. 5 See The Magic Art and the Evolu- 
_ 


“at all events repels and keeps them at bay. Indeed this » 


Widows 
fumigated 
to free 
them from 
their 
husbands’ 
ghosts. 


Hence it 
seems 
probable 
that the 
chief use 
of the fire 
in the fire- 
festivals of 
Europe 
was to 
destroy or 
repel the 
witches, to 


most of 


imagine that all ills are burnt up and consumed in the prs 


troubles. 


20 FIRE-FESTIVALS IN OTHER LANDS CHAP, VI 


craft, as a great part of mankind has believed, is the fertile 
source of almost all the calamities that afflict our species, and 
if the surest means of frustrating witchcraft is fire, then it 
follows as clearly as day follows night that to jump over a 
fire must be a sovereign panacea for practically all the ills that 
flesh is heir to. We can now, perhaps, fully understand why 
festivals of fire played so prominent a part in the religion 
or superstition of our heathen forefathers ; the observance of 
such festivals flowed directly from their overmastering fear 
of witchcraft and from their theory as to the best way of 
combating that dreadful evil. ; 


tion of Kings, ii. 52 sgq., 127; The 
Scapegoat, pp. 157 sgg. Compare 
R. Kiihnau, Schlestsche Sagen (Berlin, 
I9I1O—1913), iii, p. 69, No. 1428: 
‘*In the county of Glatz the people 
believe that on Walpurgis Night 
(the Eve of May Day) the witches 
under cover of the darkness seek to 


23rd and 24th of June) the witches again 
busily bestir themselves to force their 


stalls of cattle. People stick small 


out the witches. 
neighbourhood of Patschkau and gener- 


way into the houses of men and the 3 


twigs of oak in the windows and doors © 
of the houses and cattle-stalls to keep © 
This is done in the — 


harm men in all sorts of ways. To 
guard themselves against them the 
people set small birch trees in front 
of the house-door on the previous day, 
and are of opinion that the witches 
must count all the leaves on these 
little trees before they can get into 
the house. While they are still at 
this laborious task, the day dawns and 
the dreaded guests must retire to their 
own realm”; 2d., iii. p. 39, No. 1394: 
**On St. John’s Night (between the 


ally in the districts of Frankenstein, — 
Miinsterberg, Grottkau, and Neisse. In — 
the same regions they hang garlands, — 
composed of oak leaves intertwined with — 
flowers, at the windows. The garland © 
must be woven in the house itself and — 
may not be carried over any threshold ; — 
it must be hung out of the window — 
on a nail, which is inserted there.” — 
Similar evidence might be multiplied 
almost indefinitely. 


CHAPTER VII 


THE BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES 


§ 1. The Burning of Effigies in the Fires 


| WE have still to ask, What is the meaning of burning Theefigies 
" effigies in the fire at these festivals? After the preceding Pu" ™ 

_ investigation the answer to the question seems obvious. As probabiy 

_ the fires are often alleged to be kindled for the purpose of {, 
_ burning the witches, and as the effigy burnt in them is 
_ sometimes called “the Witch,” we might naturally be dis- 
_ posed to conclude that all the effigies consumed in the flames 
-on these occasions represent witches or warlocks, and that 
the custom of burning them is merely a substitute for burn- 
ing the wicked men and women themselves, since on the 
principle of homoeopathic or imitative magic you practically 
destroy the witch herself in destroying her effigy. On the 
whole this explanation of the burning of straw figures in 
‘human shape at the festivals appears to be the most 
probable. 

' Yet it may be that this explanation does not apply to Possibly 
_ all the cases, and that certain of them may admit and even png 
require another interpretation, in favour of which I formerly burnt in 
argued as follows :—! cele 


Be ae 


represent 
: “It remains to ask, What is the meaning of burning an tree-spirits 
effigy in these bonfires? The effigies so burned, as I have ceeticn: : 
already remarked, can hardly be separated from the effigies 

of Death which are burned or otherwise destroyed in spring ; 

and grounds have been already given for regarding the so- 


called effigies of Death as really representatives of the tree- 


1 The Golden Bough, Second Edition (London, 1900), ii. 314-316. 
2i 


22 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cuar. 


spirit or spirit of vegetation.’ Are the other effigies, which 
are burned in the spring and midsummer bonfires, susceptible 
of the same explanation? It would seem so. For just as 
the fragments of the so-called Death are stuck in the fields 
to make the crops grow, so the charred embers of the figure 
burned in the spring bonfires are sometimes laid on the 
fields in the belief that they will keep vermin from the crop.” 
Again, the rule that the last married bride must leap over 
the fire in which the straw-man is burned on Shrove Tuesday, 
is probably intended to make her fruitful.2 But, as we have 
seen, the power of blessing women with offspring is a special 
attribute of tree-spirits ;* it is therefore a fair presumption 
that the burning effigy over which the bride must leap is a 
representative of the fertilizing tree-spirit or spirit of vegeta- 
tion. This character of the effigy, as representative of the 
spirit of vegetation, is almost unmistakable when the figure is 
composed of an unthreshed sheaf of corn or is covered from 
head to foot with flowers.” Again, it is to be noted that, 
instead of a puppet, trees, either living or felled, are some- 
times burned both in the spring and midsummer bonfires.® 
Now, considering the frequency with which the tree-spirit is 
represented in human shape, it is hardly rash to suppose that 
when sometimes a tree and sometimes an effigy is burned in 
these fires, the effigy and the tree are regarded as equivalent 
to each other, each being a representative of the tree-spirit. 
This, again, is confirmed by observing, first, that sometimes the 
effigy which is to be burned is carried about simultaneously 
with a May-tree, the former being carried by the boys, the 
latter by the girls ;’ and, second, that the effigy is sometimes 
tied to a living tree and burned with it.. In these cases, we 
can scarcely doubt, the tree-spirit is represented, as we have 
found it represented before, in duplicate, both by the tree and 
by the effigy. That the true character of the effigy as a 
representative of the beneficent spirit of vegetation should 
sometimes be forgotten, is natural. The custom of burning 


1 The Dying God, pp. 249 sqq. 5 Above, vol. i. pp. 120, 167. 

2 Above, vol. i. p. 117, compare 6 Above, vol. i. pp. 115 5g., 116, 
Pp. 143, 144. 142, 173 5g., 185, 191, 192, 193, 209. 

3 See above, vol. i. p. 120. ” Above, vol. i. p. 120. 

4 The Magic Art and the Evolution 8 Above, vol. i. p. 116. But the 
of Kings, ii. 56 sg. effigy is called the Witch. 


a a i ert i aN et i le til oe 


A a ae eae eS 


wi THE BURNING OF EFFIGIES IN THE FIRES 23 


_a beneficent god is too foreign to later modes of thought to 

_ escape misinterpretation. Naturally enough the people who 

' continued to burn his image came in time to identify it as 

_ the effigy of persons, whom, on various grounds, they regarded 

_ with aversion, such as Judas Iscariot, Luther, and a witch. 

4 “The general reasons for killing a god or his repre- Reasons 
_ sentative have been examined in the preceding chapter.’ precip 
' But when the god happens to be a deity of vegetation, the spirit of 
| there are special reasons why he should die by fire. For *S"s00" 
' light and heat are necessary to vegetable growth ; and, on passing 
_ the principle of sympathetic magic, by subjecting the pin 
' personal representative of vegetation to their influence, the fre. 
"you secure a supply of these necessaries for trees and crops. 

_ In other words, by burning the spirit of vegetation in a fire 

' which represents the sun, you make sure that, for a time 

| at least, vegetation shall have plenty of sun. It may be 

| objected that, if the intention is simply to secure enough 

_ sunshine for vegetation, this end would be better attained, on 

_ the principles of sympathetic magic, by merely passing the 

_ representative of vegetation through the fire instead of 
burning him. In point of fact this is sometimes done. In 

_ Russia, as we have seen, the straw figure of Kupalo is not 

_ burned in the midsummer fire, but merely carried backwards 

_ and forwards across it.*_But, for the reasons already given, 

_ it is necessary that the god should die; so next day Kupalo 

_ is stripped of her ornaments and thrown into a stream. In 

_ this Russian custom, therefore, the passage of the image 

_ through the fire is a sun-charm pure and simple; the killing 

_ of the god is a separate act, and the mode of killing him— 

__ by drowning—is probably a rain-charm. But usually people 

_ have not thought it necessary to draw this fine distinction ; 

_ for the various reasons already assigned, it is advantageous, 

' they think, to expose the god of vegetation to a considerable 

a degree of heat, and it is also advantageous to kill him, and 

_ they combine these advantages in a rough-and-ready way by 

_ burning him.” 

___ On the foregoing argument, which I do not now find very 

' cogent, I wotld remark that we must distinguish the cases in 


| 1! The chapter has since been ex- the Wild, and The Scapegoat. 
_ panded into the four volumes of Zhe 
| Dying God, Spirits of the Corn and of - * The Dying God, p. 262. 


The 
custom of 
passing 
images of 
gods or 
their living 
representa- 
tives 
through 
the fires 
may be 
simply a 
form of 
purifica- 
tion. 


24 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cuap. 


which an effigy or an image is burnt in the fire from the 
cases in which it is simply carried through or over it. We 
have seen that in the Chinese festival of fire the image of the 
god is carried thrice by bearers over the glowing furnace. 
Here the motive for subjecting a god to the heat of the 
furnace must surely be the same as the motive for subjecting 
his worshippers to the same ordeal; and if the motive 
in the case of the worshippers is purificatory, it is probably 
the same in the case of the deity. In other words we may 
suppose that the image of a god is periodically carried 
over a furnace in order to purify him from the taint of 
corruption, the spells of magicians, or any other evil in- 
fluences that might impair or impede his divine energies. 
The same theory would explain the custom of obliging the 
priest ceremonially to pass through the fire; the custom 
need not be a mitigation of an older practice of burning 
him in the flames, it may only be a purification designed to 
enable him the better to discharge his sacred duties as 
representative of the deity in the coming year. Similarly, 
when the rite is obligatory, not on the people as a whole, 
but only on certain persons chosen for the purpose,’ we may 
suppose that these persons act as representatives of the 
entire community, which thus passes through the fire by 
deputy and consequently participates in all the benefits 
which are believed to accrue from the purificatory character 
of the rite? In both cases, therefore, if my interpretation of 
them is correct, the passage over or through a fire is not a 
substitute for human sacrifice ; it is nothing but a stringent 
form of purification. 


§ 2. The Burning of Men and Animals in the Fires 


Yet in the popular customs connected with the fire- 
festivals of Europe there are certain features which appear to 


1 Above, pp. 9, 10, 14. describes the ceremony adds: ‘ As I 

2 Among the Klings of Southern understood it, they took on themselves 
India the ceremony of walking overa and expiated the sins of the Kling 
bed of red-hot ashes is performed bya community for the past year.” See 
few chosen individuals, who are pre- the letter of Stephen Ponder, quoted 
pared for the rite by a devil-doctor or by Andrew Lang, Modern Mythology 
medicine-man. The eye-witness who (London, 1897), p. 160. 


a dle! 


ee ae ey ey a 


VII BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 25 


point to a former practice of human sacrifice. We have Yetatsome 
_ seen reasons for believing that in Europe living persons redhat sa 
_ have often acted as representatives of the tree-spirit and pretence of 
_ corn-spirit and have suffered death as such! There is no rene 
_ reason, therefore, why they should not have been burned, if im the fires 
any special advantages were likely to be attained by putting —* : 
_ them todeathin that way. The consideration of human suffer- ce of 
_ ing is not one which enters into the calculations of primitive saccite: 
' man. Now, in the fire-festivals which we are discussing, the 
_ pretence of burning people is sometimes carried so far that it 
' seems reasonable to regard it as a mitigated survival of an 
_ older custom of actually burning them. Thus in Aachen, as 
_ we saw, the man clad in peas-straw acts so cleverly that the 
_ children really believe he is being burned? At Jumiéges in 
_ Normandy the man clad all in green, who bore the title of 
_ the Green Wolf, was pursued by his comrades, and when 
_ they caught him they feigned to fling him upon the mid- 
| summer bonfire.® Similarly at the Beltane fires in Scotland 
_ the pretended victim was seized, and a show made of throw- 
' ing him into the flames, and for some time afterwards 
_ people affected to speak of him as dead.* Again, in the 
q Hallowe'en bonfires of north-eastern Scotland we may 
_ perhaps detect a similar pretence in the custom observed by 
' a lad of lying down as close to the fire as pgssible and 
_ allowing the other lads to leap over him.® The titular king 
_ at Aix, who reigned for a year and danced the first dance 
_ round the midsummer bonfire,® may perhaps in days of old 
_ have discharged the less agreeable duty of serving as fuel 
' for that fire which in later times he only kindled. In the 
_ following customs Mannhardt is probably right in recognizing 
: 4 traces of an old custom of burning a leaf-clad representative 
“a of the spirit of vegetation. At Wolfeck, in Austria, on Mid- 
» summer Day, a boy completely clad in green fir branches 
_ goes from house to house, accompanied by a noisy crew, 
» collecting wood for the bonfire. As he gets the wood he 
> sings— 


| 1 The Dying God, pp. 205 sgg.; $ Above, vol. i. p. 186. 
| Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, i. # Above, vol. i. p. 148. 
| 216 sgq. 5 Above, vol. i. p. 233. 


> ® Above, vol. i. p. 120. ® Above, vol. i. p. 194. 


In pagan 
Europe the 
water as 
well as the 
fire seems 
to have 
claimed 
its human 
victim on 
Mid- 
summer 
Day. 


26 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cnav?. 


“ Forest trees I want, 
No sour milk for me, 
But beer and wine, 
So can the wood-man be jolly and gay.” } 


In some parts of Bavaria, also, the boys who go from house 
to house collecting fuel for the midsummer bonfire envelop 
one of their number from head to foot in green branches of 
firs, and lead him by a rope through the whole village.” At 
Moosheim, in Wurtemberg, the festival of St. John’s Fire 
usually lasted for fourteen days, ending on the second 


Sunday after Midsummer Day. On this last day the bon- 


fire was left in charge of the children, while the older people 
retired to a wood. Here they encased a young fellow in 
leaves and twigs, who, thus disguised, went to the fire, 
scattered it, and trod it out. All the people present fled at 
the sight of him.’ 

In this connexion it is worth while to note that in pagan 
Europe the water as well as the fire seems to have claimed 
its human victim on Midsummer Day. Some German rivers, 
such as the Saale and the Spree, are believed still to require 
their victim on that day; hence people are careful not to bathe 
at this perilous season. Where the beautiful Neckar flows, 
between vine-clad and wooded hills, under the majestic ruins 
of Heidelberg castle, the spirit of the river seeks to drown 
three persons, one on Midsummer Eve, one on Midsummer 
Day, and one on the day after. On these nights, if you hear 
a shriek as of a drowning man or woman from the water, 
beware of running to the rescue; for it is only the water- 
fairy shrieking to lure you to yourdoom. Many a fisherman 
of the Elbe knows better than to launch his boat and trust 
himself to the treacherous river on Midsummer Day. And 
Samland fishermen will not go to sea at this season, because 
they are aware that the sea is then hollow and demands 
a victim. In the neighbourhood of the Lake of Constance 


1 W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, p. 
524. 


a a a a ke a in! nc 


collects fuel at this season has his face 3 
blackened and is called ‘‘ the Charcoal 


2 Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde 
des Konigreichs Bayern (Munich, 1860-— 
1867), iii, 956; W. Mannhardt, 
Baumkultus, p. 524. In the neigh- 
bourhood of Breitenbrunn the lad who 


Man” (Savaria, etc., ii. 261). 


3A. Birlinger,. Volasthiimliches aus ™ 
Schwaben (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861—. 
1862), ii. 121 sg., § 146; W. Mann- © 


hardt, Baumkultus, pp. 524 Sg. 


| vu BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 27 


_ the Swabian peasants say that on St. John’s Day the Angel 
or St. John must have a swimmer and a climber; hence no 
one will climb a tree or bathe even in a brook on that day.* 
_ According to others, St. John will have three dead men on 
_ his day; one of them must die by water, one by a fall, and 
' one by lightning ; therefore old-fashioned people warn their 
_ children not to climb or bathe, and are very careful them- 
_ selves not to run into any kind of danger on Midsummer 
_ Day? So in some parts of Switzerland people are warned 
against bathing on St. John’s Night, because the saint’s day 
_ demands its victims. Thus in the Emmenthal they say, 
_ “This day will have three persons; one must perish in the 
air, one in the fire, and the third in the water.” At Schaff- 
' hausen the saying runs, “St. John the Baptist must have a 
q runner, must have a swimmer, must have a climber.” That 
_ is the reason why you should not climb cherry-trees on the 
' saint’s day, lest you should fall down and break your valuable 
neck? In Cologne the saint is more exacting ; on his day 
_ he requires no less than fourteen dead men; seven of them 
_ must be swimmers and seven climbers.* Accordingly when 
we find that, in one of the districts where a belief of this 
' sort prevails, it used to be customary to throw a person into 
_ the water on Midsummer Day, we can hardly help conclud- 


_ actually drowning a human being in the river at that time. 
_ In Voigtland it was formerly the practice to set up a fine 
| May tree, adorned with all kinds of things, on St. John’s 
' Day. The people danced round it, and when the lads had 
_ fetched down the things with which it was tricked out, 
the tree was thrown into the water. But before this was 


| 1E, Meier, Deutsche Sagen, Sitten preussens (Berlin, 1837), pp. 277 59-3 
) und Gebréuche aus Schwaben (Stutt- K. Haupt, Sagenduch der Lausitz 
) gart, 1852), pp. 428 sg., §§ 120, 122; (Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 48; R. Eisel, 
_ O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld, Sagenbuch des Voigtiandes (Gera, 1871), 
| Das festliche Jahr (Leipsic, 1863), p. p. 31, Nr. 62. 

194; J. A. E. Kohler, Volksbrauch, 2 Montanus, Die deutschen Volks- 
_ Abergiauben, Sagen und andre alte Jeste, Volksbrauche und deutscher Volks- 
| Ucberlieferungen im Voigtlande (Leip- “ giaube (Iserlohn, N.D.), Pp. 34- 

‘Sic, 1867), p. 176; J. V. Grohmann, . 

_ Aberglaubenund Gebriuche aus Bihmen _E. Hoffmann-Krayer, Feste und 
und Mihren (Prague and Leipsic, Brituche des Schweizervolkes (Zurich, 
1864), p. 49, § 311; W. J. A. Tettau 1913) P- 163. 

und J. D. H. Temme, Dze Volkssagen * E. H. Meyer, Badisches Volksleben 
st-preussens, Litthauens und West- (Strasburg, 1900), p. 507. 


Custom of 
throwing a 
man anda 
tree into 
the water 
on St. 


_ ing that this was only a modification of an older custom of John’sDay. 


28 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cnavp. 


done, they sought out somebody whom they treated in the 
same manner, and the victim of this horseplay was called 
“the John.” The brawls and disorders, which such a custom 
naturally provoked, led to the suppression of the whole 
ceremony. 
Loaves and At Rotenburg on the Neckar they throw a loaf of 
fowers bread into the water on St. John’s Day; were this offering 


thrown 
intothe not made, the river would grow angry and take away a man.” 


St. “John's Clearly, therefore, the loaf is regarded as a substitute which 

Day, per- the spirit of the river consents to accept instead of a human 

haps as rag . 2 F 

substitutes Victim. Elsewhere the water-sprite is content with flowers. 

for human Thus in Bohemia people sometimes cast garlands into water 

beings. j z . 
on Midsummer Eve; and if the water-sprite pulls one of 
them down, it is a sign that the person who threw the 
garland in will die. In the villages of Hesse the girl who 
first comes to the well early on the morning of Midsummer 
Day, places on the mouth of the well a gay garland com- 
posed of many sorts of flowers which she has culled from 
the fields and meadows. Sometimes a number of such 
garlands are twined together to form a crown, with which 
the well is decked. At Fulda, in addition to the flowery 
decoration of the wells, the neighbours choose a Lord of 
the Wells and announce his election by sending him a great 
nosegay of flowers; his house, too, is decorated with green 
boughs, and children walk in procession to it. He goes 
from house to house collecting materials for a feast, of 
which the neighbours partake on the following Sunday.* 
What the other duties of the Lord of the Wells may be, we 
are not told. We may conjecture that in old days he had 
to see to it that the spirits of the water received their dues 
from men and maidens on that important day. 


1 J. A. E. Kohler, oc. c#t. Tacitus Germans offered human sacrifices. 


tells us that the image of the goddess 2 E, Meier, Deutsche Sagen, Sitten ; 


Nerthus, her vestments, and ig und Gebriiuche aus Schwaben (Stutt- 
were washed in a certain lake, an gart, 1852), p. 429, § 121. 


that immediately afterwards the slaves 5 Mee : 
who niinistened the goddess were * O. Frh. von Reinsberg-Diirings- — 
swallowed by the lake (Germania, 40). feld, Kest- Kalender aus Bihmen (Prague, i 
The statement may perhaps be under- N.D.), Pp. 311. : 
stood to mean that the slaves were * Karl Lynker, Deutsche Sagen und 4 
drowned as a sacrifice to the deity.  Sitten in hessischen Gauen® (Cassel 
Certainly we know from Tacitus and Gottingen, 1860), pp. 253, 254, © 
(Germania, 9 and 39) that the ancient §§ 335, 336. : 


vit BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 29 


life on Midsummer Day may partly explain why tha 
_ burg, in Baden, Peer who meet on Midsummer Day ,, 


day warn their little sons not to go out of the house, 
or, if they do go out, not to stray far, not to walk on 
_ solitary unfrequented paths, to avoid horses and carriages 
_ and persons with firearms, and not to dare to swim; in 
_ short they bid them be on their guard at every turn. The 
_ Sicilian writer who tells us this adds: “This I know and 
_ sadly remember ever since the year 1848, when, not yet 
_ seven years old, I beheld in the dusk of the evening on St. 
_ John’s Day some women of my acquaintance bringing back 
_ in their arms my little brother, who had gone to play in a 
_ garden near our house, and there had found his death, my 
_ poor Francesco! In their simplicity the women who strove 
_ to console my inconsolable mother, driven distracted by the 
_ dreadful blow, kept repeating that St. John must have his 
_ due, that on that day he must be appeased. ‘Who knows,’ 
' said they, ‘how many other mothers are weeping now for 
_ other little sons forlorn!’ snd 

_ Yet curiously enough, though the water-spirits call for 
_ human victims on Midsummer Eve or Midsummer Day, 
_ water in general is supposed at that season to acquire 
' certain wonderful medicinal virtues, so that he who bathes 
"in it then or drinks of it is not only healed of all his in- 
 firmities but will be well and hearty throughout the year. 
' Hence in many parts of Europe, from Sweden in the north 
_ to Sicily in the south, and from Ireland and Spain in the 
» west to Esthonia in the east it used to be customary for 
_ men, women, and children to bathe in crowds in rivers, the 
" sea, or springs on Midsummer Eve or Midsummer Day, 
hoping thus to fortify themselves for the next twelve months. 
The usual time for taking the bath was the night which 
intervenes between Midsummer Eve and Midsummer Day = 
_ 1E.H. Meyer, Badisches Volksleben | * J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,! 
trasburg, 1900), p. 506. i. 489 5g., ii. 487; A. Wuttke, Der 
2 Giuseppe Pitre, Spettacoli e Feste deutsche  Volksaberglaube* (Berlin, 


Popolari Siciliane (Palermo, 1881), p. 1869), p. 77 § 92; O. Freiherr von 
2; Reinsberg - Diiringsfeld, Das festliche 


The belief that the spirits of the water exact a human Mid- 


Berean 


day is regarded by some people as unlucky. At Neu- ris 
: pargyA 


bid each other beware! Sicilian mothers on that ominous pact; 


In Europe 
people 
used to 
bathe on 
Mid- 
summer 
Eve or 
Mid- 
summer 
Day, 


water was 
thought to 
acquire 
wonderful 
medicinal 
virtues at 
that time. 


30 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cnap. 


but in Belgium the hour was noon on Midsummer Day. 
It was a curious sight, we are told, to see the banks of 
a river lined with naked children waiting for the first 


stroke of noon to plunge into the healing water. 


The dip 


was supposed to have a remarkable effect in strengthening 


the legs. 


People who were ashamed to bathe in public 


used to have cans of water brought to their houses from the 
river at midday, and then performed their ablutions in the 


privacy of their chambers. 


Nor did they throw away the 


precious fluid ; on the contrary they bottled it up and kept 


it as a sort of elixir for use throughout the year. 


It was 


thought never to grow foul and to be as blessed as holy water 


fetched from a church, which we may well believe. 


Hence 


it served to guard the house against a thunder-storm ; when 
the clouds were heavy and threatening, all you had to do 
was to take the palm branches (that is, the twigs of box- 
wood) which were blessed on Palm Sunday, dip them in 
the midsummer water, and burn them. That averted the 


tempest.’ 


In the Swiss canton of Lucerne a bath on Mid- 


summer Eve is thought to be especially wholesome, though 
in other parts of Switzerland, as we saw, bathing at that 
season is accounted dangerous.” 


Nor are such customs 


and beliefs confined to the 


oor ieiets Christian peoples of Europe; they are shared also by the 
aba Mohammedan peoples of Morocco. There, too, on Mid- 
at Mid- 


summer in SUMmer Day all water is thought to be endowed with such 
Morocco. 


marvellous virtue that it not only heals but prevents sick- 
ness for the rest of the year; hence men, women, and 
children bathe in the sea, in rivers, or in their houses at 


Jahr (Leipsic, 1863), p. 193; F. J. 
Vonbun, Beztrige sur deutschen Mytho- 
logie (Chur, 1862), p. 1333 P. Drechs- 
ler, Sttte, Brauch und Volksglaube in 
Schilesten (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 143 
§ 161; Karl Haupt, Sagenbuch der 
Lausttz (Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 248, 
No. 303; F. J. Wiedemann, Aus dem 
inneren und dusseren Leben der Ehsten 
(St. Petersburg, 1876), p. 415; L. 
Lloyd, Peasant Life in Sweden (London, 
1870), pp. 261 sg.; Paul Sébillot, Ze 
Folk-lore de France (Paris, 1904-1907), 
ii. 160 sg.; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, 


British Popular Customs (London, 
1876), pp. 322 sg., 329 5g. For more 
evidence, see above, vol. i. pp. 193, 194, 
205 sg., 208, 210, 216; Adonzs, Atzis, 
Osiris, Second Edition, pp. 204 sgg. 

1 Le Baron de Reinsberg-Diirings- 
feld, Calendrier Belge (Brussels, 1861- 
1862), i. 420 sg.; E. Monseur, Ze 
Folklore Wallon (Brussels, N.D.), p. 
130; P. Sébillot, Ze Folk-lore de 
France, ii. 374 5g. 

2 E. Hoffmann-Krayer, Feste und 
Briuche des Schweizervolkes (Zurich, 
1913), p. 163. See above, p. 27. 


ES eee Ta ee 


ES ee ee ae ee er es 


VII BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 31 


that time for the sake of their health. In Fez and other places 
on this day people pour or squirt water over each other in the 
streets or from the house-tops, so that the streets become 
_ almost as muddy as after a fall of rain. More than that, in 
the Andjra they bathe their animals also; horses, mules, 
_ donkeys, cattle, sheep, and goats, all must participate in the 
miraculous benefits of midsummer water.’ The rite forms 
_ part of that old heathen celebration of Midsummer which 
' appears to have been common to the peoples on both sides 
of the Mediterranean ;? and as the aim of bathing in the 
__ midsummer water is undoubtedly purification, it is reasonable 
_ to assign the same motive for the custom of leaping over 
_ the midsummer bonfire. On the other hand some people in 
_ Morocco, like some people in Europe, think that water on 
| Midsummer Day is unclean or dangerous. A Berber told 
' Dr. Westermarck that water is haunted on Midsummer 
_ Day, and that people therefore avoid bathing in it and keep 
' animals from drinking of it. And among the Beni Ahsen 
_ persons who swim in the river on that day are careful, before 
| plunging into the water, to throw burning straw into it as an 
_ offering, in order that the spirits may not harm them’ The 
' parallelism between the rites of water and fire at this season 
_ is certainly in favour of interpreting both in the same way ;* 
_ and the traces of human sacrifice which we have detected in 
_ the rite of water may therefore be allowed to strengthen the 
_ inference of a similar sacrifice in the rite of fire. 

4 But it seems possible to go farther than this. Of human 
sacrifices offered on these occasions the most unequivocal 
3 traces, as we have seen, are those which, about a hundred 
" years ago, still lingered at the Beltane fires in the High- 
' lands of Scotland, that is, among a Celtic people who, 
' situated in a remote corner of Europe and almost com- 


' 1. Westermarck, ‘*‘ Midsummer 
_ Customs in Morocco,” Folk-lore, xvi. 
_ (1905) pp. 3159. ; td., Ceremonies and 
| Beliefs connected with Agriculture, 
| certain Dates of the Solar Year, and 
_ the Weather in Morocco (Helsingfors, 
_ 1913), pp. 84-86; E. Doutté, Magie 
_ et Religion dans [Afrique du Nord 
_ (Algiers, 1908), pp. 567 sg. See also 
_ above, vol. i. p. 216. 


2 See above, vol. i. pp. 213-219. 

3 E. Westermarck, Ceremonies and 
Beliefs connected with Agriculture, 
certain Dates of the Solar Year, and 
the Weather in Morocco (Helsingfors, 
1913), Pp- 94 59- 

* This has been rightly pointed out 
by Dr. Edward Westermarck (‘* Mid- 
summer Customs in Morocco,” Fo/é- 
lore, xvi. (1905) p. 46). 


Human 
sacrifices 
by fire 
among the 
ancient 
Gauls. 


Men and 
animals 
enclosed 
in great 


32 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cuar. 


pletely isolated from foreign influence, had till then 
conserved their old heathenism better perhaps than any 
other people in the West of Europe. It is significant, there- 
fore, that human sacrifices by fire are known, on unquestion- 
able evidence, to have been systematically practised by the 
Celts. The earliest description of these sacrifices has been 
bequeathed to us by Julius Caesar. As conqueror of the 
hitherto independent Celts of Gaul, Caesar had ample 
opportunity of observing the national Celtic religion and 


manners, while these were still fresh and crisp from the 


native mint and had not yet been fused in the melting-pot 
of Roman civilization. With his own notes Caesar appears 
to have incorporated the observations of a Greek explorer, by 
name Posidonius, who travelled in Gaul about fifty years 
before Caesar carried the Roman arms to the English 
Channel. The Greek geographer Strabo and the historian 
Diodorus seem also to have derived their descriptions of 
the Celtic sacrifices from the work of Posidonius, but in- 
dependently of each other, and of Caesar, for each of the 
three derivative accounts contain some details which are not 
to be found in either of the others. By combining them, 
therefore, we can restore the original account of Posidonius 
with some probability, and thus obtain a picture of the 
sacrifices offered by the Celts of Gaul at the close of the 
second century before our era.| The following seem to have 
been the main outlines of the custom. Condemned criminals 
were reserved by the Celts in order to be sacrificed to the gods 
at a great festival which took place once in every five years, 
The more there were of such victims, the greater was believed 
to be the fertility of the land.” If there were not enough 
criminals to furnish victims, captives taken in war were 
immolated to supply the deficiency. When the time came the 
victims were sacrificed by the Druids or priests. Some they 
shot down with arrows, some they impaled, and some they 


burned alive in the following manner. Colossal images of © 


1 Caesar, Bell. Gall. vi. 153; Strabo,  ovixas dixas uddiora rovros [7.e. the 
iv. 4. 5, p. 198; Diodorus Siculus, v. Druids] éerérpamro dixdgev, bray re 


? 


32. See W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus,  popa rovrwv H, popay Kal rijs xwpas voul- — 


Pp. 525 sgq. fovow brdpxew. On this passage see 
p W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, pp. 529 
2 Strabo, iv. 4. 4, p. 197: Tas d€  sgg.; and below, pp. 42 sg. 


phvinaem. cee Oca 


i 


vir BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 33 


wicker-work or of wood and grass were constructed ; these 
were filled with live men, cattle, and animals of other kinds ; 
fire was then applied to the images, and they were burned 
with their living contents. 

. Such were the great festivals held once every five years. 
Sut besides these quinquennial festivals, celebrated on so 
grand a scale, and with, apparently, so large an expenditure 
_ of human life, it seems reasonable to suppose that festivals 
of the same sort, only on a lesser scale, were held annually, 
and that from these annual festivals are lineally descended 
+ some at least of the fire-festivals which, with their traces of 
‘human sacrifices, are still celebrated year by year in many 
parts of Europe. The gigantic images constructed of osiers 
or covered with grass in which the Druids enclosed their 
‘victims remind us of the leafy framework in which the human 
representative of the tree-spirit is still so often encased.) 
Hence, seeing that the fertility of the land was apparently 
Supposed to depend upon the due performance of these 
Sacrifices, Mannhardt interpreted the Celtic victims, cased in 
osiers and grass, as representatives of the tree-spirit or 
spirit of vegetation. 

_ These wicker giants of the Druids seem to have had 
till lately their representatives at the spring and mid- 


k place annually on the Sunday nearest to the seventh 
of July. The great feature of the procession was a 
“colossal figure, some twenty or thirty feet high, made of 
Osiers, and called “the giant,’ which was moved through 
‘the streets by means of rollers and ropes worked by 

nen who were enclosed within the effigy. The wooden 
mead of the giant is said to have been carved and 
painted by Rubens. The figure was armed as a knight 
with lance and sword, helmet and shield. Behind him 
marched his wife and his three children, all constructed of 
on the same principle, but on a smaller scale? At 


The Magic Art and the Evolution 
Kings, ii. 80 sq. 

* Madame Clément, Aistoire des 
ctviles et religieuses du départe- 


PT, VII. VOL. II 


ment du Nord? (Cambrai, 1836), pp. 

193-200; A. de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes 

et Traditions des Provinces de France, 

(Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 323 sg.;3 
D 


to the early part of the nineteenth century, a procession j; 


wicker- 
work 
images 
and burnt 
alive. 


As the 
fertility 
of the land 
was sup- 
to 
depend on 
these 
sacrifices, 
Mannhardt 
interpreted 
the victims 
as repre- 
sentatives 
of tree- 
spirits or 
spirits of 
vegetation. 


at Douay 
on July the 
seventh. 


The giants 
at Dunkirk 
on Mid- 
summer 
Day. 


34 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cuavr. 


Dunkirk the procession of the giants took place on Mid- 
summer Day, the twenty-fourth of June. The festival, 
which was known as the Follies of Dunkirk, attracted such 
multitudes of spectators, that the inns and private houses 
could not lodge them all, and many had to sleep in cellars 
or in the streets. In 1755 an eye-witness estimated that 
the number of onlookers was not less than forty thousand, 
without counting the inhabitants of the town. The streets 
through which the procession took its way were lined with 
double ranks of soldiers, and the houses crammed with 
spectators from top to bottom. High mass was celebrated in 
the principal church and then the procession got under weigh. 
First came the guilds or brotherhoods, the members walking 
two and two with great waxen tapers, lighted, in their hands. 
They were followed by the friars and the secular priests, and 
then came the Abbot, magnificently attired, with the Host 
borne before him by a venerable old man. When these 
were past, the real “ Follies of Dunkirk” began. They con- 
sisted of pageants of various sorts wheeled through the streets 
in cars. These appear to have varied somewhat from year 
to year; but if we may judge from the processions of 1755 
and 1757, both of which have been described by eye-witnesses, 
a standing show was a car decked with foliage and branches 
to imitate a wood, and carrying a number of men dressed in 
leaves or in green scaly skins, who squirted water on the 
people from pewter syringes. An English spectator has 
compared these maskers to the Green Men of our own country 
on May Day. Last of all came the giant and giantess. 
The giant was a huge figure of wicker-work, occasionally as 
much as forty-five feet high, dressed in a long blue robe with 
gold stripes, which reached to his feet, concealing the dozen 
or more men who made it dance and bob its head to the 
spectators. This colossal effigy went by the name of Papa 


F. W. Fairholt, Gog and Magog, the 
Giants in Guildhall, their real and 
legendary History (London, 1859), pp. 
78-87; W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, 
p. 523, note. Itissaid that the giantess 
made her first appearance in 1665, and 
that the children were not added to the 
show till the end of the seventeenth 


century. Inthe eighteenth century the 
procession took place on the third 
Sunday in June, which must always 
have been within about a week of 
Midsummer Day (H. Gaidoz, ‘* Le dieu 
gaulois du soleil et le symbolisme de 
la roue,” Revue Archéologique, iii, 
série iv. 32 sg.). ; 


_ vi BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 35 


‘Reuss, and carried in its pocket a bouncing infant of Brob- 
p dingnagian proportions, who kept bawling “Papa! papa!” 


in a voice of thunder, only pausing from time to time to 
4 devour the victuals which were handed out to him from the 


windows. 
at 


at all, inferior to him in size. 


The rear was brought up by the daughter of the 
ae constructed, like her sire, of wicker-work, and little, if 
She wore a rose-coloured robe, 


© with a gold watch as large as a warming pan at her side: 


_ has never been revived. 


the streets. 


Carnival. 


on Shrove Tuesday. 


| 1 The Gentleman’s Magazine, xxix. 
_ (1759), pp. 263-265 ; Madame Clément, 
| Histoire des fetes civiles et religieuses 
) du département du Nord,” pp. 169-1753 
A. de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes et Tradi- 
tions des Provinces de France, pp. 328- 

32. Compare John Milner, Zhe 
Hiistory, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and 
urvey of the Antiquities of Win- 
hester (Winchester, N.D.), i, 8 5g. 


_ her breast glittered with jewels: 
_ and her eyes and head turned with as easy a grace as the 
men inside could contrive to impart to their motions. 
procession came to an end with the revolution of 1789, and 
| The giant himself indeed, who had 
_ won the affections of the townspeople, survived his ancient 
glory for a little while and made shift to appear in public a 
' few times more at the Carnival and other festal occasions ; 
_ but his days were numbered, and within fifty years even his 
_ memory had seemingly perished.’ 

4 Most towns and even villages of Brabant and Flanders 
“have, or used to have, similar wicker giants which were 
annually led about to the delight of the populace, who 
loved these grotesque figures, spoke of them with patriotic 
4 enthusiasm, and never Weatied of gazing at them. The 
- name by which the giants went was Reuzes, and a special 
" song called the Reuze song was sung in the Flemish dialect 
while they were making their triumphal progress through 
The most celebrated of these monstrous effigies 
were those of Antwerp and Wetteren. 
family of giants contributed to the public hilarity at the 
At Cassel and Hazebrouch, 
artment of Nord, the giants made their annual appearance 
At Antwerp the giant was so big 


her complexion was high, 


The 


At Ypres a whole 


in the French de- 


note®; John Brand, Popular Anti- 
quities of Great Britain (London, 1882— 
1883), i. 325 sg.; James Logan, 7he 
Scottish Gael or Celtic Manners, edited 
by Rev. Alex. Stewart (Inverness, N.D.), 
ii. 358. According to the writer in Zhe 
Gentleman’s Magazine the name of the 
procession was the Cor-mass. 
2 Madame Clément, Aiéstotre des 
Sétes civiles et religieuses, etc., dela Bel- 


Wicker- 
work 
giants in 
Brabant 
and 
Flanders 


Mid- 
summer 
giants in 
England, 


36 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cnuapr. 


that no gate in the city was large enough to let him 
go through; hence he could not visit his brother giants 
in neighbouring towns, as the other Belgian giants used 
to do on solemn occasions. He was designed in 1534 
by: Peter van Aelst, painter to the Emperor Charles the 
Fifth, and is still preserved with other colossal figures 
in a large hall at Antwerp." At Ath, in the Belgian 
province of Hainaut, the popular procession of the giants 
took place annually in August down to the year 1869 at 
least. For three days the colossal effigies of Goliath and 
his wife, of Samson and an Archer (77ran?), together with 
a two-headed eagle, were led about the streets on the 
shoulders of twenty bearers concealed under the flowing 
drapery of the giants, to the great delight of the towns- 
people and a crowd of strangers who assembled to witness 
the pageant. The custom can be traced back by docu- 
mentary evidence to the middle of the fifteenth century ; 
but it appears that the practice of giving Goliath a wife 
dates only from the year 1715. Their nuptials were solem- 
nized every year on the eve of the festival in the church of 
St. Julien, whither the two huge figures were escorted by the 
magistrates in procession.” 

In England artificial giants seem to have been a 
standing feature of the midsummer festival. A writer of 
the sixteenth century speaks of “ Midsommer pageants in 
London, where to make the people wonder, are set forth 
great and uglie gyants marching as if they were alive, and 
armed at all points, but within they are stuffed full of 
browne paper and tow, which the shrewd boyes, underpeering, 


gique méridionale, etc. (Avesnes, 1846), 
p- 252; Le Baron de Reinsberg- 
Diiringsfeld, Calendrier Belge (Brussels, 
1861-1862), i. 123-126. We may 
conjecture that the Flemish ezze, like 
the Reuss of Dunkirk, is only another 
form of the German (ese, *‘ giant.” 

1 F, W. Fairholt, Gag and Magog, 
the Giants in Guildhall, their real and 
legendary History (London, 1859), pp. 
64-78. For the loan of this work and 
of the one cited in the next note I have 
to thank Mrs. Wherry, of St. Peter’s 
Terrace, Cambridge. 


2 E. Fourdin, ‘*La foire d’Ath,” 
Annales du Cercle Archéologigue de 
Mons, ix. (Mons, 1869) pp. 7, 8, 12, 
36 sg. The history of the festival has 
been carefully investigated, with the 
help of documents by M. Fourdin. 
According to him, the procession was — 
religious in its origin and took its rise 
from a_ pestilence which desolated 
Hainaut in 1215 (of. cit. pp. I sgg.). 
He thinks that the effigies of giants — 
were not introduced into the proces- 
sion till between 1450 and 1460 (of, — 
cit. p. 8). 


Ee se ee 


| in 1601. 


fos? 


figured beside the giant.® 


1 George Puttenham, Zhe Arte of 
English Poesie (London, 1811, reprint 
of the original edition of London, 
1589), book iii. chapter vi. p. 128. 
‘On the history of the English giants 
‘and their relation to those of the 
ntinent, see F. W. Fairholt, Gog 
and Magog, the Giants in Guildhall, 


do guilefully discover, and turne to a greate derision. 
At Chester the annual pageant on Midsummer Eve included 
the effigies of four giants, with animals, hobby-horses, and 
other figures. An officious mayor of the town suppressed 
the giants in 1599, but they were restored by another mayor 
Under the Commonwealth the pageant was dis- 
i ‘continued, and the giants and beasts were destroyed ; but 
3 after the restoration of Charles II. the old ceremony was 


vit BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 37 


»l 


_ revived on the old date, new effigies being constructed to 
a replace those which had fallen victims to Roundhead bigotry. 
' The accounts preserve a record not only of the hoops, buck- 
| ram, tinfoil, gold and silver leaf, paint, glue, and paste which 
| went to make up these gorgeous figures ; they also mention 
4 the arsenic which was mixed with the paste in order to pre- 
' serve the poor giants from being eaten alive by the rats.” 
4 At Coventry the accounts of the Cappers’ and Drapers’ 
_ Companies in the sixteenth century shed light on the giants 
_ which there also were carried about the town at Midsummer ; 
' from some of the entries it appears that the giant’s wife 
At Burford, in Oxfordshire, Mid- 
"summer Eve used to be celebrated with great jollity by the 
carrying of a giant and a dragon up and down the town. 
The last survivor of these perambulating English giants 
| dragged out a miserable existence at Salisbury, where an 
 antiquary found him mouldering to decay in the neglected 
" hall of the Tailors’ Company about the year 1844. His 
bodily framework was of lath and hoop like the one which 
used to be worn by Jack-in-the-Green on May Day. The 
_ drapery, which concealed the bearer, was of coloured chintz, 
bordered with red and purple, and trimmed with yellow 
fringe. His head was modelled in paste-board and adorned 
with a gold-laced cocked hat: 
w; and in his big right hand he brandished a branch of 


his flowing locks were of 


(London, 1859). 

2 Joseph Strutt, Zhe Sports and 
Pastimes of the People of England, 
New Edition, by W. Hone (London, 
1834), pp. xliii.-xlv.; F. W. Fairholt, 
Gog and Magog, the Giants in Guild- 
hail (London, 1859), pp- 52-59. 

3 F. W. Fairholt, of. az. pp. 59- 
61. 


Wicker- 
work giants 
burnt at or 
near Mid- 
summer. 


Animals 
burnt in 
the Mid- 
summer 
bonfires. 


38 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES Cuar. 


artificial laurel. In the days of his glory he promenaded 
about the streets, dancing clumsily and attended by two 
men grotesquely. attired, who kept a watchful eye on his 
movements and checked by the wooden sword and club 
which they carried any incipient tendency to lose his balance 
and topple over in an undignified manner, which would have 
exposed to the derision of the populace the mystery of his 
inner man. The learned called him St. Christopher, the 
vulgar simply the giant.’ 

In these cases the giants only figure in the proces- 
sions. But sometimes they were burned in the summer 
bonfires. Thus the people of the Rue aux Ours in Paris 
used annually to make a great wicker-work figure, dressed 
as a soldier, which they promenaded up and down the 
streets for several days, and solemnly burned on the third 
of July, the crowd of spectators singing Salve Regina. 
A personage who bore the title of king presided over the 
ceremony with a lighted torch in his hand. The burning 
fragments of the image were scattered among the people, 
who eagerly scrambled for them. The custom was abolished 
in 1743. In Brie, Isle de France, a wicker-work giant, 
eighteen feet high, was annually burned on Midsummer 
Eve.’ 

Again, the Druidical custom of burning live animals, 
enclosed in wicker-work, has its counterpart at the spring and 
midsummer festivals. At Luchon in the Pyrenees on Mid- 
summer Eve “a hollow column, composed of strong wicker- 
work, is raised to the height of about sixty feet in the centre 
of the principal suburb, and interlaced with green foliage up 
to the very top; while the most beautiful flowers and shrubs 


procurable are artistically arranged in groups below, so as to — 


form a sort of background to the scene. The column is 
then filled with combustible materials, ready for ignition. 


At an appointed hour—about 8 P.M.—a grand procession, — 
composed of the clergy, followed by young men and maidens ~ 
in holiday attire, pour forth from the town chanting hymns, — 


1 F, W. Fairholt, of. cét. pp. 61- Mythes, et Traditions des Provinces de 


63. France, pp. 354 5g. ; W. Mannhardt, 
2 Felix Liebrecht, Des Gervasius von  Baumkultus, p. 514. 
Tiloury Otia Imperialia (Hanover, 3 W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, pp. 


1856),pp.2125¢.;A.deNore, Coutumes, 514, 523. 


a pe a F 


a and take up their position around the column. Meanwhile, 


into the column, which is set on fire at the base by means mts: 


of torches, armed with which about fifty boys and men the Mic- 
_ dance around with frantic gestures. The serpents, to avoid ga; 
_ the flames, wriggle their way to the-top, whence they are Luchon. 
- seen lashing out laterally until finally obliged to drop, their 
struggles for life giving rise to enthusiastic delight among 
the surrounding spectators. This is a favourite annual cere- 
' mony for the inhabitants of Luchon and its neighbourhood, 

_and local tradition assigns it to a heathen origin.”* In the cats 
midsummer fires formerly kindled on the Place de Gréve at peat ge 
| Paris it was the custom to burn a basket, barrel, or sack full the Mid- 
_ of live cats, which was hung from a tall mast in the midst of S™™ 
' the bonfire; sometimes a fox was burned. The people Lenten 
' collected the embers and ashes of the fire and took them >" 
' home, believing that they brought good luck. The French 
| kings often witnessed these spectacles and even lit the bon- 

' fire with their own hands. In 1648 Louis the Fourteenth, 
_ crowned with a wreath of roses and carrying a bunch of 
| roses in his hand, kindled the fire, danced at it and partook 
_of the banquet afterwards in the town hall. But this was 
_the last occasion when a monarch presided at the midsummer 
bonfire in Paris.2 At Metz midsummer fires were lighted 
' with great pomp on the esplanade, and a dozen cats, en- 
* closed in wicker-cages, were burned alive in them, to the 
_ amusement of the people.* Similarly at Gap, in the depart- 


Easter, and 


| 1! Athenacum, 24th July 1869, p 
115; W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, 
pp. 515 sg. From a later account we 
learn that about the year 1890 the 
_ custom of lighting a bonfire and dancing 
' round it was still observed at Bagnéres 
’ de Luchon on Midsummer Eve, but the 
_ practice of burning live serpents in it 
had been discontinued. The fire was 
| kindled bya priest. See Fo/k-lore, xii. 
pfF907) Pp- 315-317- 
: A. Breuil, ‘‘ Du culte de St.-Jean 
Bapti. Mémoires de la Société des 
de Picardie, viii. (1845) 
a 187 sg.; Collin de Plancy, Diction- 
| naire Infernal (Paris, 1825-1826), iii. 


40; A.de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes 
et Traditions des Provinces de France, 
Pp- 355 s¢-3 J. W. Wolf, Bettrage sur 
deutschen Mythologie (Gottingen and 
Leipsic, 1852-1857), ii 388; E. 
Cortet, Essai sur les Fétes Religieuses 
(Paris, 1867), pp. 213 sg.; Laisnel de 
la Salle, Croyances et Légendes du 
Centre de la France (Paris, 1875), i. 
82; W. Mannhardt, Bauméultus, p. 
515. 

3 Tessier, in A/émotres et Disserta- 
tions publiés par la Société Royale des 
Antiquatres de France, v. (1823) p. 
388; W. Mannhardt, Baumékultus, 
p- 515. 


Thus the 
sacrificial 
rites of the 
ancient 
Gauls have 
their 
counter- 
parts in 
the popular 
festivals of 
modern 
Europe. 


40 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cnuapr. 


ment of the High Alps, cats used to be roasted over the 
midsummer bonfire.’ In Russia a white cock was some- 
times burned in the midsummer bonfire ;? in Meissen or 
Thuringia a horse’s head used to be thrown into it. Some- 
times animals are burned in the spring bonfires. In the 
Vosges cats were burned on Shrove Tuesday; in Alsace 
they were thrown into the Easter bonfires In the depart- 
ment of the Ardennes cats were flung into the bonfires 
kindled on the first Sunday in Lent; sometimes, by a 
refinement of cruelty, they were hung over the fire from 
the end of a pole and roasted alive. “The cat, which 
represented the devil, could never suffer enough.” While 
the creatures were perishing in the flames, the shepherds 
guarded their flocks and forced them to leap over the fire, 
esteeming this an infallible means of preserving them from 
disease and witchcraft.2 We have seen that squirrels were 
sometimes burned in the Easter fire.® 

Thus it appears that the sacrificial rites of the Celts of 
ancient Gaul can be traced in the popular festivals of modern 
Europe. Naturally it is in France, or rather in the wider 
area comprised within the limits of ancient Gaul, that these 
rites have left the clearest traces in the customs of burning 
giants of wicker-work and animals enclosed in wicker-work 
or baskets. These customs, it will have been remarked, are 
generally observed at or about midsummer. From this we 
may infer that the original rites of which these are the de- 
generate successors were solemnized at midsummer. This 
inference harmonizes with the conclusion suggested by a 
general survey of European folk-custom, that the midsummer 
festival must on the whole have been the most widely diffused 
and the most solemn of all the yearly festivals celebrated by 
the primitive Aryans in Europe. At the same time we 
must bear in mind that among the British Celts the chief 
fire-festivals of the year appear certainly to have been those 


1 Alexandre Bertrand, Za Religion  glaude (Iserlohn, N.D.), p. 34. 
des Gaulois (Paris, 1897), p. 407. 4 W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, p. 
2 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* 515. 


i. 519; W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, 5 A. Meyrac, Zvaditions, Coutumes, 


p- 515. % 
3 W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, p. aes . seen Beg ‘i ——— 
’ » Ps g 


515; Montanus, Die deutschen Volks- 
Jesten, Volksbrduche und deutscher Volks- 6 Above, vol. i. p. 142. 


vir BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 41 


of Beltane (May Day) and Hallowe’en (the last day of 
October) ; and this suggests a doubt whether the Celts of 

Gaul also may not have celebrated their principal rites of 

_ fire, including their burnt sacrifices of men and animals, at 

the beginning of May or the beginning of November rather 

than at Midsummer. 

_ We have still to ask, What is the meaning of such The men 
7 sacrifices? Why were men and animals burnt to death at 

_ these festivals? If we are right in interpreting the modern animals 
2 European fire-festivals as attempts to break the power of thes. 

| witchcraft by burning or banning the witches and warlocks, ®stivals 
_ it seems to follow that we must explain the human sacrifices seleapi 

_ of the Celts in the same manner; that is, we must suppose ‘ousht to 
_ that the men whom the Druids burnt in wicker-work images or wizards 
' were condemned to death on the ground that they were prbpige 
_ witches or wizards, and that the mode of execution by fire 

' was chosen because, as we have seen, burning alive is 

_ deemed the surest mode of getting rid of these noxious 

_ and dangerous beings. The same explanation would apply 

_ to the cattle and wild animals of many kinds which the 

_ Celts burned alohg with the men.’ They, too, we may 
conjecture, were supposed to be either under the spell 

_ of witchcraft or actually to be the witches and wizards, 

_who had transformed themselves into animals for the 

' purpose of prosecuting their infernal plots against the welfare 

_ of their fellow creatures. This conjecture is confirmed by 

' the observation that the victims most commonly burned 

in modern bonfires have been cats, and that cats are pre- 

cisely the animals into which, with the possible exception 

of hares, witches were most usually supposed to transform 
themselves. Again, we have seen that serpents and foxes 

-used sometimes to be burnt in the midsummer fires ;* 

and Welsh and German witches are reported to have 
assumed the form both of foxes and serpents.’ In short, 


_} Strabo, iv. 4. 5, p. 198, «ai da 3 Marie Trevelyan, Foli-lore and 
© 6 dvOpwrofveray clin déyerac* Kai Folk-stories of Wales (London, 1909), 
> yap xarerégevéy twas xal dvecraipow éy pp. 214, 301 sg. ; Ulrich Jahn, Hexen- 
) Tots iepots xal xaracxevdcarres Kohocciy wesen und Zauberei in Pommern 
xoprov xai Sido, éuBadévres eis tovroy (Breslau, 1886), p. 7; t@., Volkssagen 
 Bocxjjpara xal @npia wayroia kai dv@pd- aus Pommern und Rigen (Stettin, 


ous @doxavrouv. 1886), p. 353, No. 446. 
- # Above, p. 39. 


42 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cuar. 


when we remember the great variety of animals whose forms 


witches can assume at pleasure,’ it seems easy on this hypo- 


thesis to account for the variety of living creatures that have 
been burnt at festivals both in ancient Gaul and modern 
Europe; all these victims, we may surmise, were doomed to 
the flames, not because they were animals, but because they 
were believed to be witches who had taken the shape of 
animals for their nefarious purposes. 
explaining the ancient Celtic sacrifices in this way is that it 
introduces, as it were, a harmony and consistency into the 
treatment which Europe has meted out to witches from 
the earliest times down to about two centuries ago, when 
the growing influence of rationalism discredited the belief 
in witchcraft and put a stop to the custom of burning 
witches, 


One advantage of | 


On this view the Christian Church in its dealings 


with the black art merely carried out the traditional policy 


of Druidism, and it might be a nice question to decide 
which of the two, in pursuance of that policy, exterminated 
the larger number of innocent men and women.’ Be that 
as it may, we can now perhaps understand why the Druids 
believed that the more persons they sentenced to death, the 
greater would be the fertility of the land.® To a modern 
reader the connexion at first sight may not be obvious 
between the activity of the hangman and the productivity 
of the earth. But a little reflection may satisfy him that 
when the criminals who perish at the stake or on the 


1 See above, vol. i. p. 315 21. 

2 The treatment of magic and witch- 
craft by the Christian Church is de- 
scribed by W. E. H. Lecky, History 
of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit 
of Rationalism in Europe, New Edition 
(London, 1882), i. I sgg. Four hun- 
dred witches were burned at one time 
in the great square of Toulouse (W. E. 
H. Lecky, of. ctt. ii. 38). Writing at 
the beginning of the eighteenth century 
Addison observes: ‘* Before I leave 
Switzerland I cannot but observe, that 
the notion of witchcraft reigns very 
much in this country. I have often 
been tired with accounts of this nature 
from very sensible men, who are most 
of them furnished with matters of fact 
which have happened, as they pretend, 


within the compass of their own know- 
ledge. It is certain there have been 
many executions on this account, as in 
the canton of Berne there were some 
put to death during my stay at Geneva. 
The people are so universally infatu- 
ated with the notion, that if a cow 
falls sick, it is ten to one but an old 
woman is clapt up in prison for it, and 
if the poor creature chance to think 
herself a witch, the whole country is 
for hanging her up without mercy.” 
See Zhe Works of Joseph Addison, 
with notes by R. Hurd, D.D. (London, 
1811), vol. ii, ‘* Remarks on several 
Parts of Italy,” p. 196. 
3 Strabo, iv. 4. 4, p. 197. 

the passage quoted above, p. 
note *, 


See | 
32, 


ny fe a oe ee 


11 BURNING OF MEN AND ANIMALS IN THE FIRES 43 


gallows are witches, whose delight it is to blight the crops 
of the farmer or to lay them low under storms of hail, the 
4 execution of these wretches is really calculated to ensure 
-_ an abundant harvest by removing one of the principal 
- causes which paralyze the efforts and blast the hopes of the 
; husbandman. 

. The Druidical sacrifices which we are considering were 
explained in a different way by W. Mannhardt. He sup- 
posed that the men whom the Druids burned in wickerwork 
_ images represented the spirits of vegetation, and accordingly 
_ that the custom of burning them was a magical ceremony 
‘intended to secure the necessary sunshine for the crops. 
Similarly, he seems to have inclined to the view that the 
animals which used to be burnt in the bonfires represented 
the corn-spirit, which, as we saw in an earlier part of this 
‘work, is often supposed to assume the shape of an animal.” 
This theory is no doubt tenable, and the great authority of 
_W. Mannhardt entitles it to careful consideration. I adopted 
it in former editions of this book; but on reconsideration it 
_ seems to me on the whole to be less probable than the theory 
_ that the men and animals burnt in the fires perished in the 
_ character of witches. This latter view is strongly supported 
_ by the testimony of the people who celebrate the fire-festivals, 
' since a popular name for the custom of kindling the fires is 
“burning the witches,” effigies of witches are sometimes 
consumed in the flames, and the fires, their embers, or their 
ashes are supposed to furnish protection against witchcraft. 
On the other hand there is little to shew that the effigies 
or the animals burnt in the fires are regarded by the 
people as representatives of the vegetation-spirit, and that 
the bonfires are sun-charms. With regard to serpents in 
particular, which used to be burnt in the midsummer fire at 
_Luchon, I am not aware of any certain evidence that in 
Europe snakes have been regarded as embodiments of the 
_ tree-spirit or corn-spirit,?> though in other parts of the world 


t 


> 1W. Mannhardt, Baumékultus, pp. oaks, and as oaks were sacred among 
© 532-534- the Prussians, the serpents may possibly 
| 2 Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, have been regarded as genii of the 
i. 270-305. trees. See Simon Grunau, Preussischer 
" 3 Some of the serpents worshipped  Chronzk, herausgegeben von Dr. M. 
‘by the old Prussians lived in hollow Perlbach, i. (Leipsic, 1876) p. 89; 


Mannhardt 
thought 
that the 
men and 
animals 
whom the 
Druids 
burned in 
wickerwork 
images 
represented 
spirits of 
vegetation, 
and thatthe 
burning of 
them was a 
charm to 
secure a 
supply of 
sunshine 
for the 
crops. 


44 BURNING OF HUMAN BEINGS IN THE FIRES cuae. vit 


the conception appears to be not unknown.’ 


Whereas 


the popular faith in the transformation of witches into” 
animals is so general and deeply rooted, and the fear of 
these uncanny beings is so strong, that it seems safer to 
suppose that the cats and other animals which were burnt in 
the fire suffered death as embodiments of witches than that 
they perished as representatives of vegetation-spirits. 


Christophor Hartknoch, A/¢ und Neues 
Preussen (Frankfort and _ Leipsic, 
1684), pp. 143, 163. Serpents played 
an important part in the worship of 
Demeter, but we can hardly assume 
that they were regarded as embodi- 
ments of the goddess. See Spirits of 
the Corn and of the Wild, ii. 17 sg. 

1 For example, in China the spirits 
of plants are thought to assume the form 
of snakes oftener than that of any other 
animal. Chinese literature abounds with 
stories illustrative of such transforma- 
tions. See J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Re- 
ligious System of China, iv. (Leyden, 
1901) pp. 283-286. In Siam the spirit 
of the ¢akhien tree is said to appear 


sometimes in the shape of a serpent 
and sometimes in that of a woman. 
See Adolph Bastian, Die Voelker des 
Oestlichen Asien, iii. (Jena, 1867) p. 
251. The vipers that haunted the 
balsam trees in Arabia were regarded 
by the Arabs as sacred to the trees 
(Pausanias, ix. 28. 4); and once in 
Arabia, when a wood hitherto un- 
touched by man was burned down to — 
make room for the plough, certain 
white snakes flew out of it with loud 
lamentations. No doubt they were 
supposed to be the dispossessed spirits 
of the trees. . See J. Wellhausen, 
Reste Arabischen Heidentums? (Berlin, 


1897), pp. 108 sg. 


CHAPTER VIII 


THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 


_A FEATURE of the great midsummer festival remains to be Itisa 
considered, which may perhaps help to clear up the doubt om 
as to the meaning of the fire-ceremonies and their relation Europe 
to Drujdism. For in France and England, the countries pac cede 
where the sway of the Druids is known to have been most certain 
‘firmly established, Midsummer Eve is still the time for oe 
culling certain magic plants, whose evanescent virtue can transient, 
“be secured at this mystic season alone. Indeed all over yaa 
_ Europe antique fancies of the same sort have lingered about — 
Midsummer Eve, imparting to it a fragrance of the past, 

like withered rose leaves that, found by chance in the pages 

_ of an old volume, still smell of departed summers. Thus in Magical 
_Saintonge and Aunis, two of the ancient provinces of Western 
_ France, we read that “ of all the festivals for which the merry Mid- 

_ bells ring out there is not one which has given rise to a pye (sp 

_ greater number of superstitious practices than the festival of John’sEve} 
| St. John the Baptist. The Eve of St. John was the day of fiimer cra 
_all days for gathering the wonderful herbs by means of which Day Day (St 
_you could combat fever, cure a host of diseases, and guard Dats 

_ yourself against sorcerers and their spells. - But in order to France. 
attain these results two conditions had to be observed ; first, 
you must be fasting when you gathered the herbs, and 
_ second, you must cull them before the sun rose. If these 
_ conditions were not fulfilled, the plants had no special virtue.”* 
ic 1j. L. M. Nogués, Zes meurs ing of certain herbs between the Eve 
_ @autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis of St. John and the Eve of St. Peter 
| (Saintes, 1891), p. 71. Amongst the and keeping them in a bottle to heal 
superstitious practices denounced by certain maladies.” See J, B. Thiers, 
the French writer J. B. Thiers in the T,ratté des Superstitions (Paris, 1679), 
Seventeenth century was “the gather- op. 321. 


45 


St. John’s 
herb. 


46 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuar. 


In the neighbouring province of Perigord the person who 
gathered the magic herbs before sunrise at this season had 
to walk backwards, to mutter some mystic words, and to 
perform certain ceremonies. The plants thus collected were 
carefully kept as an infallible cure for fever; placed above 
beds and the doors of houses and of cattle-sheds they pro- 
tected man and beast from disease, witchcraft, and accident.’ 
In Normandy a belief in the marvellous properties of herbs 
and plants, of flowers and seeds and leaves gathered, with 
certain traditional rites, on the Eve or the Day of St. John 
has remained part of the peasant’s creed to this day. Thus 
he fancies that seeds of vegetables and plants, which have 
been collected on St. John’s Eve, will keep better than 
others, and that flowers plucked that day will never fade.’ 
Indeed so widespread in France used to be the faith in the 
magic virtue of herbs culled on that day that there is a 
French proverb “to employ all the herbs of St. John in an 
affair,’ meaning “to leave no stone unturned.”* In the 
early years of the nineteenth century a traveller reported 
that at Marseilles, “on the Eve of St. John, the Place de 
Noailles and the course are cleaned. From three o'clock 
in the morning the country-people flock thither, and by 
six o’clock the whole place is covered with a considerable 
quantity of flowers and herbs, aromatic or otherwise. The 
folk attribute superstitious virtues to these plants; they are 
persuaded that if they have been gathered the same day before 
sunrise they are fitted to heal many ailments. People buy 
them emulously to give away in presents and to fill the 
house with.”* On the Eve of St. John (Midsummer Eve), 
before sunset, the peasants of Perche still gather the herb 
called St. John’s herb. It is a creeping plant, very aromatic, 
with small flowers of a violet blue. Other scented flowers 


1 A. de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes et Siam (Amsterdam, 1691), i, 202. 


Traditions des Provinces de France 
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 150 sg. 


2 Jules Lecceur, Zsguisses du Bocage 
Normand (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-— 
1887), ii. 8, 244; Amélie Bosquet, 
La Normandie romanesque et mer- 
vetlleuse (Paris and Rouen, 1845), p. 
294. : 

3 De la Loubere, Du Royaume de 


The writer here mentions an Italian 
mode of divination practised on Mid- 
summer Eve, 
feet in wine and threw the wine out 
of the window. After that, the first 
words they heard spoken by passers- 
by were deemed oracular. 


People washed their | 


* Aubin-Louis Millin, Voyage dans — 
les Départemens du Midi de la France 


(Paris, 1807-1811), iii. 344 sg. 


a 
a 
E 
: 
a 
4 
‘a 
: 
‘a 


pr a ae aa ae eny ante ere PNT NRA ON 


VIII 


THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 47 


are added, and out of the posies they make floral crosses 
and crowns, which they hang up over the doors of houses 
and stables. Such floral decorations are sold like the box- 
wood on Palm Sunday, and the withered wreaths are kept 
from year to year. If an animal dies, it may be a cow, they 
carefully clean the byre or the stable, make a pile of these 
faded garlands, and set them on fire, having previously closed 
up all the openings and interstices, so that the whole place 
is thoroughly fumigated. This is thought to eradicate the 
germs of disease from the byre or stable. At Nellingen, 
near Saaralben, in Lorraine the hedge doctors collect their 
store of simples between eleven o’clock and noon on Mid- 
summer Day; and on that day nut-water is brewed from 
nuts that have been picked on the stroke of noon. Such 
water. is a panacea for all ailments?” In the Vosges 
Mountains they say that wizards have but one day in the 
year, and but one hour in that day, to find and cull the 
baleful herbs which they use in their black art. That day 
is the Eve of St. John, and that hour is the time when the 
church bells are ringing the noonday Angelus. Hence in 
many villages they say that the bells ought not to ring at 
noon on that day.’ 

In the Tyrol also they think that the witching hour 


is when the Ave Maria bell is ringing on Midsummer 


Eve, for then the witches go forth to gather the noxious 
plants whereby they raise thunderstorms. Therefore in 
many districts the bells ring for a shorter time than usual 
that evening ;* at Folgareit the sexton used to steal quietly 
into the church, and when the clock struck three he contented 
himself with giving a few pulls to the smallest of the bells.® 


1 Alexandre Bertrand, Za Religion 
des Gaulois (Paris, 1897), p. 124. In 
French the name of St. John’s herb 
(herbe de la Saint-Jean) is usually given 
to millepertius, that is, St. John’s wort, 
which is quite a different flower. See 
below, pp. 54 sgg. But ‘‘St. John’s 


4 herb” may well be a general term 
' which in different places is applied to 
_ different plants. 


2 Bruno Stehle, ‘‘ Aberglauben, 


Sitten und Gebrauche in Lothringen,” 


Globus, lix. (1891) p. 379. 


3 L. F. Sauvé, Ze Folk-lore des 
Hautes- Vosges (Paris, 1889), pp. 168 
Sg. 

4 I. V. Zingerle, ‘*Wald, Baume, 
Krauter,” Zeztschrift fiir deutsche My- 
thologie und Sittenkunde, i. (1853) 
PPp- 332 sg. ; id., Sitten, Brauche und 
Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes? (Inns- 
bruck, 1871), p. 158, $$ 1345, 1348. 

5 Christian Schneller, Marchen und 
Sagen aus Walschtirol (Innsbruck, 
1867), p. 237; § 24. 


Magical 
plants 
culled on 
Mid- 
summer 
Eve or 
Mid- 
summer 
Day in the 
Tyrol and 
Germany. 


48 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cunap. 


At Rengen, in the Eifel Mountains, the sexton rings the 
church bell for an hour on the afternoon of Midsummer Day. 
As soon as the bell begins to ring, the children run out into the 
meadows, gather flowers, and weave them into garlands which 
they throw on the roofs of the houses and buildings. There the 
garlands remain till the wind blows them away. It is believed 
that they protect the houses against fire and thunderstorms.’ 
At Niederehe, in the Eifel Mountains, on Midsummer Day 
little children used to make wreaths and posies out of “St. 
John’s flowers and Maiden-flax” and throw them on the 
roofs. Some time afterwards, when the wild gooseberries 
were ripe, all the children would gather round an old 
woman on a Sunday afternoon, and taking the now withered 
wreaths and posies with them march out of the village, 
praying while they walked. Wreaths and posies were then 
thrown in a heap and kindled, whereupon the children 
snatched them up, still burning, and ran and fumigated the 
wild gooseberry bushes with the smoke. Then they returned 
with the old woman to the village, knelt down before her, 
and received her blessing. From that time the children 
were free to pick and eat the wild gooseberries.” In the 
Mark of Brandenburg the peasants gather all sorts of 
simples on Midsummer Day, because they are of opinion 
that the drugs produce their medicinal effect only if they 
have been culled at that time. Many of these plants, 
especially roots, must be dug up at midnight and in silence.* 
In Mecklenburg not merely is a special healing virtue ascribed 
to simples collected on Midsummer Day ; the very smoke of 
such plants, if they are burned in the fire, is believed to pro- 
tect a house against thunder and lightning, and to still the 
raging of the storm.’ The Wends of the Spreewald twine 


wreaths of herbs and flowers at midsummer, and hang them — 


up in their rooms ; and when any one gets a fright he will 
lay some of the leaves and blossoms on hot coals and fumi- 
gate himself with the smoke.° In Eastern Prussia, some 


1 J. H. Schmitz, Sztten und Brauche, 
Lieder, Spriichworter und Rathsel des 
Eifler Volkes ('Treves, 1856-1858), i. 40. 

2 J. H. Schmitz, of. czt. i. 42. 

3 A. Kuhn, MWarkische Sagen und 
Marchen (Berlin, 1843), p. 330. 


4 K. Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen und 
Gebrauche aus Mecklenburg (Vienna, 
1879-1880), ii. p. 287, § 1436. ' 

5 W. von Schulenburg, Wendische 
Volkssagen und Gebriuche aus dem 
Spreewald (Leipsic, 1880), p. 254. 


a7 


q 
B 
1 


; 


THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 


49 


hundred years ago, it used to be customary on Mid- 
summer Day to make up a bunch of herbs of various sorts 
and fasten it to a pole, which was then put up over the gate 
door through which the corn would be brought in at 


harvest. Such’a pole was called Kaupole, and it remained 
ag place till the crops had been reaped and garnered. 
Then the bunch of herbs was taken down; part of it was 
put with. the corn in the barn to keep rats and mice from 
the grain, and part was kept as a remedy for diseases of all 
2 1 


4 The Germans of West Bohemia collect simples on St. Magical 
ohn’s Night, because they believe the healing virtue of the 


welve gardens or meadows. 


1M. Pratorius, Deliciae Prussicae 

Berlin, 1871), PP- 24 s9- Kaupole is 

probably identical in name with Kupole 

for Kupalo, as to whom see Zhe Dying 
god, pp. 261 sg. 

| 2 Alois John, Sitte, Brauch und 
‘olksglaube im deutschen Westbohmen 


; Die Huzulen 
Vienna, 1894), pp. 78, 90, 93, 1053 
& PT. Vil. VOL. II 


plants to be especially powerful at that time. 
and practice of the Huzuls in the Carpathian Mountains are },. 
‘Similar; they imagine that the plants gathered on that night Li? sEve) 


The theory 


The 


Everybody does 
some gather 


zd., ** Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,” 
Globus, \xxvi. (1899) p. 256. 

4 Dr. F. Tetzner, ‘‘ Die Tschechen 
und Mabhrer in Schlesien,” Gilodus, 
Ixxvili. (1900) p. 340. 

5 J. B. Holzmayer, ‘ Osiliana,” 
Verhandlungen der gelehrten Est- 
nischen Gesellschaft, vii. Heft 2 (Dor- 
pat, 1872), p. 62. 

E 


plants 


culled on 


Mid- 


mer 
(St. 


r Mid- 


are not only medicinal but possess the power of restraining 5 pe 
e witches ; some say that the herbs should be plucked in Day in 
Among the simples which the Russia. 
zechs and Moravians of Silesia cull at this season are 
landelions, ribwort, and the bloom of the lime-tree.* 
honians of the island of Oesel gather St. John’s herbs 
Jani rohhud) on St. John’s Day, tie them up in bunches, and 
ang them up about the houses to prevent evil spirits from 
ntering. A subsidiary use of the plants is to cure diseases ; 
athered at that time they have a greater medical value than 
f they were collected at any other season. 
jot choose exactly the same sorts of plants; 
nore and some less, but in the collection St. John’s wort 
Jani rohhi, Hypericum perforatum) should never be wanting.’ 
writer of the early part of the seventeenth century informs 
is that the Livonians, among whom he lived, were impressed 
vith a belief in the great and marvellous properties possessed 


and 


Magical 
plants 
culled on 
St. John's 
Eve or St. 
John’s Day 
among the 
South 
Slavs, in 
Mace- 
donia, and 
Bolivia. 


s0 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuat. 


by simples which had been culled on Midsummer Day. Such 
simples, they thought, were sure remedies for fever and for 
sickness and pestilence in man and beast; but if gathered 
one day too late they lost all their virtue.’ Among the 
Letts of the Baltic provinces of Russia girls and women go 
about on Midsummer Day crowned with wreaths of aromatic 
plants, which are afterwards hung up for good luck in the 
houses. The plants are also dried and given to cows to eat, 
because they are supposed to help the animals to calve.” 

In Bulgaria St. John’s Day is the special season for 
culling simples. On this day, too, Bulgarian girls gather 
nosegays of a certain white flower, throw them into a vessel 
of water, and place the vessel under a rose-tree in bloom. 
Here it remains all night. Next morning they set it in the 
courtyard and dance singing round it. An old woman then 
takes the flowers out of the vessel, and the girls wash them- 
selves with the water, praying that God would grant them 
health throughout the year. After that the old woman 
restores her nosegay to each girl and promises her a rich 
husband.? Among the South Slavs generally on St. John’s 
Eve it is the custom for girls to gather white flowers in the 
meadows and to place them in a sieve or behind the rafters, 
A flower is assigned to each member of the household: next 
morning the flowers are inspected; and he or she whose 
flower is fresh will be well the whole year, but he or she 
whose flower is faded will be sickly or die. Garlands are 
then woven out of the flowers and laid on roofs, folds, and 
beehives.* In some parts of Macedonia on St. John’s Eve 
the peasants are wont to festoon their cottages and gird their 
own waists with wreaths of what they call St. John’s flower ; 
it is the blossom of a creeping plant which resembles honey- 
suckle.” Similar notions as to the magical virtue which 
plants acquire at midsummer have been transported by 
Europeans to the New World. At La Paz in Bolivia people 


1 P. Einhorn, ‘‘ Wiederlegunge der 
Abgotterey: der ander (séc) Theil,” 
printed at Riga in 1627, and reprinted 
in Scriptores rerum Livonicarum, ii. 
(Riga and Leipsic, 1848) pp. 651 sg. 

2 J. G. Kohl, Die deutsch-russischen 
Ostseeprovinzen (Dresden and Leipsic, 
1841), ii. 26. 


3 A. Strausz, Die Bulgaren (Leip 
sic, 1898), pp. 348, 386. 

4¥, S. Krauss, Volksglaube u 
religiiser Brauch der Stidslaven (Min 
ster i. W., 1890), p. 34. 

5 G. F, Abbott, Macedonian Folk 
lore (Cambridge, 1903), pp. 54, 58. 


vin THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE | 51 


“believe that flowers of mint (Yerba buena) gathered before 
E sunrise on St. John’s Day foretell an endless felicity to such 
as are so lucky as to find them.’ 

Nor is the superstition confined to Europe and to people 
of European descent. In Morocco also the Mohammedans 
_are of opinion that certain plants, such as penny-royal, mar- 
_joram, and the oleander, acquire a special magic virtue 
: (Garaka) when they are gathered shortly before midsummer. 
‘ _ Hence the people collect these plants at this season and 
"preserve them for magical or medical purposes. For ex- 
: ample, branches of oleander are brought into the houses 
: before midsummer and kept under the roof as a charm 
_ against the evil eye; but while the branches are being 
brought in they may not touch the ground, else they 
would lose their marvellous properties. Cases of sick- 
ness caused by the evil eye are cured by fumigating the 
4 patients with the smoke of these boughs. The greatest 
efficacy is ascribed to “the sultan of the oleander,” which is 
a stalk with four pairs of leaves clustered round it. Such 
a stalk is always endowed with magical virtue, but that 
e is greatest when the stalk has been cut just before 
midsummer. Arab women in the Hiaina district of Morocco 
vather Daphne gnidium on Midsummer Day, dry it in the 
un, and make it into a powder which, mixed with water, 
they daub on the heads of their little children to protect 
hem from sunstroke and vermin and to make their hair 
prow well. Indeed such marvellous powers do these Arabs 
attribute to plants at this mystic season that a barren 
man will walk naked about a vegetable garden on Mid- 
summer Night in the hope of conceiving a child through the 
lizing influence of the vegetables.” 

Sometimes in order to produce the desired effect it is 
Jeemed necessary that seven or nine different sorts of plants 

ould be gathered at this mystic season. Norman peasants, 
o wish to fortify themselves for the toil of harvest, will 


» 1H. A. Weddell, Voyage dans Je Customs in Morocco,” Folk-lore, xvi. 
Word de la Bolivie et dans les parties (1905) p. 35; 22., Ceremonies and 
wisines du Pérou (Paris and London, Beliefs connected with Agriculture, 

1853), p- 181. certain Dates of the Solar Year, and 

ia the Weather in Morocco (Helsingfors, 
| 2 W. Westermarck, ‘‘Midsummer 1913), pp. 88 sg. 


Seven 
different 
sorts of 
magical 
plants 
gathered 
at Mid- 
summer. 


Nine 
different 
sorts of 
plants 
gathered 
at Mid- 
summer. 


Dreams 
of love on 
flowers 

at Mid- 
summer 
Eve. 


Love's 
watery 
mirror 
at Mid- 
summer 
Eve. 


52 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuar 


sometimes go out at dawn on St. John’s Day and pull seven 
kinds of plants, which they afterwards eat in their soup as a 
means of imparting strength and suppleness to their limbs in 
the harvest field. In Mecklenburg maidens are wont to 
gather seven sorts of flowers at noon on Midsummer Eve, © 
These they weave into garlands, and sleep with them under — 
their pillows. Then they are sure to dream of the men who ~ 
will marry them.? But the flowers on which youthful lovers — 
dream at Midsummer Eve are oftener nine in number. Thus — 
in Voigtland nine different kinds of flowers are twined into : 
. 


PPL re ae ee 


a garland at the hour of noon, but they may not enter the 
dwelling by the door in the usual way ; they must be passed — 
through the window, or, if they come in at the door, they — 
must be thrown, not carried, into the house. Sleeping on © 
them that night you will dream of your future wife or future — 
husband2 The Bohemian maid, who gathers nine kinds of | 
flowers on which to dream of love at Midsummer Eve, takes © 
care to wrap her hand in a white cloth, and afterwards to — 
wash it in dew; and when she brings her garland home she - 
must speak no word to any soul she meets by the way, for ~ 
then all the magic virtue of the flowers would be gone.‘ 
Other Bohemian girls look into the book of fate at this 
season after a different fashion. They twine their hair with — 
wreaths made of nine sorts of leaves, and go, when the stars 
of the summer night are twinkling in the sky, to a brook 
that flows beside a tree. There, gazing on the stream, the 
girl beholds, beside the broken reflections of the tree and the 
stars, the watery image of her future lord. So in Masuren — 
maidens gather nosegays of wild flowers in silence on Mid-— 
summer Eve. At the midnight hour each girl takes the 
nosegay and a glass of water, and when she has spoken” 
certain words she sees her lover mirrored in the water.° 

Sometimes Bohemian damsels make a different use of 
their midsummer garlands twined of nine sorts of flowers. 


1 J. Lecceur, Zsguisses du Bocage 
Normand (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883— 
1887), ii. 9. 

2 K. Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen und 
Gebriuche aus Mecklenburg (Vienna, 
1879-1890), ii. 285. 

3 J. A. E. Kohler, Volksbrauch, 
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte 


Ueber licferungen im Voigtlande (Leips 
sic, 1867), p. 376. s 
4 QO. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Diir- 
ingsfeld, Fest- Kalender aus Bihmen 
(Prague, N.D.), p. 312. 
5 Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld, /oc. czt. 
6 M. Téppen, Aderglauben aus Mas- 
uren® (Danzig, 1867), p. 72. } 


THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER-EVE 53 


They lie down with the garland laid as a pillow under their Garlands 


right ear, and a hollow voice, swooning from underground, °% Pow 
proclaims their destiny." Yet another mode of consulting the sorts 


oracle by means of these same garlands is to throw them *{* 


at Mid- 
backwards and in silence upon a tree at the hour of noon, umn gic" 
just when the flowers have been gathered. For every time jn divina- 
_ that the wreath is thrown without sticking to the branches paneer 
_ of the tree the girl will have a year to wait before she weds. 
B This mode of divination is practised in Voigtland,? East 
4  Prussia,* Silesia,* Belgiurh,> and Wales,® and the same thing 
_is done in Masuren, although we are not told that there the 
wreaths must be composed of nine sorts of flowers.’ However, 
in Masuren chaplets of nine kinds of herbs are gathered on 
St. John’s Eve and put to a more prosaic use than that of 
presaging the course of true love. They are carefully pre- 
served, and the people brew a sort of tea from them, which 
they administer as a remedy for many ailments ; or they keep 
the chaplets under their pillows till eal are dry, and there- 
upon dose their sick cattle with them.. In Esthonia the 
virtues popularly ascribed to wreaths of this sort are many 
d various. These wreaths, composed of nine kinds of 
bs culled on the Eve or the Day of St. John, are some- 
mes inserted in the roof or hung up on the walls of the 
house, and each of them receives the name of one of the 
inmates. If the plants which have been thus dedicated to 
girl happen to take root and grow in the chinks and 
annies, she will soon wed; if they have been dedicated to 
an older person and wither away, that person will die. The 
people also give them as medicine to cattle at the time when 
the animals are driven forth to pasture; or they fumigate 
the beasts with the smoke of the herbs, which are burnt 
a ong with shavings from the wooden threshold. Bunches 
of the plants are also hung about the house to keep off evil 


/ 1 Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld, Joc. cit. 

| 2 Jj. A E. Kohler, Volésbrauch, etc., 

im Voigtlande, p. 376. 

> *C. Lemke, Volksthiimliches in 
Jsipreussen (Mohrungen, 1884-1887), 

20. 

| 4 P. Drechsler, Sitte, Brauch und 
Volksglaube in Schilesien (Leipsic, 

1903-1906), i. 144 sg. 


5 Le Baron de Reinsberg-Diirings- 
feld, Calendrier Belge (Brussels, 1861— 
1862), i. 423. 

® Marie Trevelyan, Folk-lore and 
Folk-stories of Wales (London, 1909), 
p. 252. 

7 M. Toppen, Aderglauben aus Mas- 
uren,* p. 72. 

8 M. Téppen, of. cit. p. 71. 


4 


54 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuar. 


spirits, and maidens lay them under their pillows to dream 
on.! In Sweden the “ Midsummer Brooms,” made up of nine ~ 
sorts of flowers gathered on Midsummer Eve, are put to © 
nearly the same uses. Fathers of families hang up such 
“brooms” to the rafters, one for each inmate of the house; 
and he or she whose broom (qguasé) is the first to wither will — 
be the first to die. Girls also dream of their future husbands — 
with these bunches of flowers under their pillows. A 
decoction made from the flowers is, moreover, a panacea for © 
all disorders, and if a bunch of them be hung up in the 
cattle shed, the Troll cannot enter to bewitch the beasts.” 
The Germans of Moravia think that nine kinds of herbs 
gathered on St. John’s Night (Midsummer Eve) are a remedy 
for fever;* and some of the Wends attribute a curative 
virtue in general to such plants.* 
St John’s Of the flowers which it has been customary to gather for 
pueraieg purposes of magic or divination at midsummer none perhaps — 
perforae is so widely popular as St. John’s wort (Aypericum per- 
see foratum). The reason for associating this particular plant 


gathered 
for magical with the great summer festival is perhaps not far to seek, for 


pia. the flower blooms about Midsummer Day, and with its bright : 

summer. yellow petals and masses of golden stamens it might well 
pass for a tiny copy on earth of the great sun which reaches | 
its culminating point in heaven at this season. Gathered on 
Midsummer Eve, or on Midsummer Day before sunrise, the 
blossoms are hung on doorways and windows to preserve the 
house against thunder, witches, and evil spirits; and various” 
healing properties are attributed to the different species of : 
the plant. In the Tyrol they say that if you put St. John’ Ss. 
wort in your shoe before sunrise on Midsummer Day you 
may walk as far as you please without growing weary. In 
Scotland people carried it about their persons as an amulet 
against witchcraft. On the lower Rhine children twine 
chaplets of St. John’s wort on the morning of Midsummer 
Day, and throw them on the roofs of the houses. Here, too, 
the people who danced round the midsummer bonfires used 


a pe Ok 


er ye ae Le ae 


oe 


1 A, Wiedemann, Aus dem inneren 3 Willibald Miiller, Beztrage 
und dussern Leben der Ehsten (St.  Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mihren 
Petersburg, 1876), pp. 362 sg. (Vienna and Olmiitz, 1893), p. 264. — 

2 L. Lloyd, Peasant Life in Sweden *# W. von Schulenburg, Wendisches 
(London, 1870), pp. 267 sg. Volksthum (Berlin, 1882), p. 145. 


THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 55 


_to wear wreaths of these yellow flowers in their hair, and to 
deck - the images of the saints at wayside shrines with the 
"blossoms. Sometimes they flung the flowers into the 
bonfires. In Sicily they dip St. John’s wort in oil, and so 
pply it as a balm for every wound. During the Middle 
“Ages the power which the plant notoriously possesses of 
‘banning devils won for it the name of fuga daemonum ; and 
before witches and wizards were stretched on the rack or 
otherwise tortured, the flower used to be administered to 
| them as a means of wringing the truth from their lips.’ In 
North Wales people used to fix sprigs of St. John’s wort 
over their doors, and sometimes over their windows, “in 
order to purify their houses, and by that means drive away 

all fiends and evil spirits.” In Saintonge and Aunis the 
| flowers served to detect the presence of sorcerers, for if one 
of these pestilent fellows entered a house, the bunches of St. 
John’s wort, which had been gathered on Midsummer Eve 
nd hung on the walls, immediately dropped their yellow 


_ 1 Montanus, Die deutschen Volks- 
Jeste, Volksbrauche und deutscher Volks- 
glaute (Iserlohn, N.D.), p. 145; A. 
Wuttke, Der deutsche Volksaberglaube? 
(Berlin, 1869), p. 100, § 134; L V. 
le, **Wald, Baume, Krauter,” 
Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Mythologie und 
Sittenkunde, i. (1853) p. 329; A. 
Schlossar, ‘‘ Volksmeinung und Volks- 
aberglaube aus der deutschen Steier- 
_ mark,” Germania, N.R., xxiv. (1891) 
' p- 387; E. Meier, Deutsche Sagen, 
| Sitten und Gebrauche aus Schwaben 
) (Stuttgart, 1852), p. 428; J. Brand, 
| Popular Antiquities of Great Britain 
' (London, 1882-1883), i. 307, 312; 
| T. F. Thiselton Dyer, Folk-lore of 
Plants (London, 1889), pp. 62, 286; 
_. Rev. Hilderic Friend, Flowers and 
’ Flower Lore, Third Edition (London, 
| 1886), pp. 147, 149, 150, 540; G. 
_ Fimamore, Credense, Usi e Costumi 
| Abruszesit (Palermo, 1890), pp. 161 
| sq.; G. Pitre, Spettacoli e Feste Popolari 
_ Siciliane (Palermo, 1881), p. 309. One 
i authority lays down the rule that you 
_ Should gather the plant fasting and in 
silence (J. Brand, of. cit. p. 312). 
| According to Sowerby, the Hypericum 


heads as if they had suddenly faded.* 


However, the Germans 


perforatum flowers in England about 
July and August (Znglisk Botany, vol. 
v. London, 1796, p. 295). We should 
remember, however, that in the old 
calendar Midsummer Day fell twelve 
days later than at present. The reform 
of the calendar probably put many old 
floral superstitions out of joint. 


. Bingley, Zour round North Wales 
(1800), ii. 237, quoted by T. F. 
Thiselton Dyer, Bretish Popular Cus- 
toms (London, 1876), p. 320. Com- 
pare Marie Trevis ' Folk-lore and 
Folk-stories of Wales (London, 1909), 
p- 251: ‘*St. John’s, or Midsummer 
Day, was an important festival. St. 
John’s wort, gathered at noon on that 
day, was considered good for several 
complaints. The old saying went that 
if anybody dug the devil’s bit at mid- 
night on the eve of St. John, the roots 
were then good for driving the devil 
and witches away.” Apparently by ‘‘the 
devil’s bit” we are to understand St. 
John’s wort. 


3 J. L. M. Nogués, Les meurs 
@’autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis 
(Saintes, 1891), pp. 71 sg. 


St. John’s 
blood on 
St. John's 
Day. 


56 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cnuap. 


& 
¥ 


of Western Bohemia think that witches, far from dreading 


St. John’s wort, actually seek the plant on St. John’s Eve.’ 
Further, the edges of the calyx and petals of St. John’s wort, 


as well as their external surface, are marked with dark purple 
spots and lines, which, if squeezed, yield a red essential oil 


soluble in spirits.’ 
oil is the blood of St. John,® and this may be why the plant 
is supposed to heal all sorts of wounds.’ 
they say that if you pull up St. John’s wort at noon on 


German peasants believe that this red — 


In Mecklenburg | 


Midsummer Day you will find at the root a bead of red — 
juice called St. John’s blood; smear this blood on your shirt — 


just over your heart, and no mad dog will bite you.’ 
Mark of Brandenburg the same blood, procured in the same 
manner and rubbed on the barrel of a gun, will make every 
shot from that gun to hit the mark. According to others, 
St. John’s blood is found at noon on St. John’s Day, and 
only then, adhering in the form of beads to the root of a 
weed called knawel, which grows in sandy soil. But some 
people say that these beads of red juice are not really the 
blood of the martyred saint, but only insects resembling the 
cochineal or kermes-berry,’ “ About Hanover I have often 


observed devout Roman Catholics going on the morning of — 


St. John’s day to neighbouring sandhills, gathering on the 
roots of herbs a certain insect (Coccus Polonica) looking 
like drops of blood, and thought by them to be created 
on purpose to keep alive the remembrance of the foul 


In the © 


murder of St. John the Baptist, and only to be met with — 


on the morning of the day set apart for him by the 
Church. I believe the life of this insect is very ephemeral, 


1 Alois John, Sztte, Brauch und 
Volksglaube im deutschen Westbihmen 
(Prague, 1905), p. 84. They call the 
plant ‘‘ witch’s herb” (A/exenhkraut). 

2 James Sowerby, Znglish Botany, 
vol. v. (London, 1796), p. 295. 

3 Montanus, Dze deutschen Volks- 
Jeste, Volksbriuche und deutscher Volks- 
glaube (Iserlohn, N.D.), p. 35. 

4 T, F. Thiselton Dyer, Fo/k-lore of 
Plants (London, 1889), p. 286; K. 
Bartsch, Sagen, Mlarchen und Gebrauche 
aus Mecklenburg, ii. p. 291, § 1450a. 
The Germans of Bohemia ascribe 
wonderful virtues to the red juice ex- 


tracted from the yellow flowers of St. 
John’s wort (W. Miller, Bettrage sur 
Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mahren, 
Vienna and Olmiitz, 1893, p. 264). 

5 K. Bartsch, of. cif, ii. p. 286, § 
1433- The blood is also a preserva- 
tive against many diseases (of. cit. ii, 
p- 290, § 1444). 

6 A. Kuhn, Mérkische Sagen und 
Marchen (Berlin, 1843), p. 387, § 105. 

? Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie® 
(Chemnitz, 1759), pp. 246 sg. ; Mon- 
tanus, Die deutschen Volksfesten, Volks- 
briuche und deutscher Volksglaube, p. 


147. 


wit ZHE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE _ 57 


but by no means restricted to the twenty-fourth of 

June.”? 

ye Yet another plant whose root has been thought to Mouse-ear 
_ yield the blood of St. John is the mouse-ear hawkweed cee 
_ (Hieracium pilosella), which grows very commonly in dry acium 
exposed places, such as gravelly banks, sunny lawns, and PeReens 
the tops of park walls. “It blossoms from May to the for magical 
_ end of July, presenting its elegant sulphur-coioured flowers ghee 
_ tothe noontide sun, while the surrounding herbage, and even summer. 

_ its own foliage, is withered and burnt up” ;? and these round 
yellow flowers may be likened not inaptly to the disc of the 
great luininary whose light they love. At Hildesheim, in 
Germany, people used to dig up hawkweed, especially on the 
_ Gallows’ Hill, when the clocks were striking noon on 
_ Midsummer Day; and the blood of St. John, which they 
_ found at the roots, was carefully preserved in quills for good 
' luck. A little of it smeared secretly on the clothes was sure 
' to make the wearer fortunate in the market that day. 
' According to some the plant ought to be dug up with a gold 
| coin.* Near Gablonz, in Bohemia, it used to be customary 
_ to make a bed of St. John’s flowers, as they were called, on 
| St. John’s Eve, and in the night the saint himself came and 
_ laid his head on the bed; next morning you could see the 
print of his head on the flowers, which derived a healing 
_ virtue from his blessed touch, and were mixed with the 
_ fodder of sick cattle to make them whole. But whether 
_ these St. John’s flowers were the mouse-ear hawkweed or 
| not is doubtful.® 


a More commonly in Germany the name of St. John’s Mountain 
flowers (Johannisblumen) appears to be given to the Ute 


mountain arnica. In Voigtland the mountain arnica if for magical . 


a plucked on St. John’s Eve and stuck in the fields, laid under PY Ya. 


summer, 


1 Berthold Seeman, Viti, An Ac- 

_ count of a Government Mission to the 

| Vitian or Fijian Islands in the years 

_ 1860-61 (Cambridge, 1862), p. 63. 

_ #2 James Sowerby, English Botany, 

| _— vol. xvi. (London, 1803) p. 1093. 

72 3K. Seifart, Sagen, Marchen, 

| Schwanke und Gebrduche aus Stadt 
und Stift Hildesheim® (Hildesheim, 

_ 1889), p. 177, § 12. 


£4 C. L. Rochholz, Deutscher Glaube 
und Brauch (Berlin, 1867), i..9. 


5 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und 
Gebriuche aus Bihmen und Mahren 
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 98, § 
681. 

6 A, Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
aberglaube* (Berlin, 1869), p. 100, § 
134. 


Mugwort 
(Artemisia 
vulgaris) 
gathered 
for magical 
purposes 
at Mid- 
summer, 


58 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuapr. 


the roof, or hung on the wall, is believed to protect house 
and fields from lightning and hail." So in some parts of 
Bavaria they think that no thunderstorm can harm a house 
which has a blossom of mountain arnica in the window or 
the roof, and in the Tyrol the same flower fastened to the 
door will render the dwelling fire-proof. But it is needless 
to remark that the flower, which takes its popular name 
from St. John, will be no protection against either fire or 
thunder unless it has been culled on the saint’s own day.” 
Another plant which possesses wondrous virtues, if only 
it be gathered on the Eve or the Day of St. John, is 
mugwort (Artemista vulgaris). Hence in France it goes 
by the name of the herb of St. John.? Near Péronne, in the 
French department of Somme, people used to go out fasting 


before sunrise on St. John’s Day to cull the plant; put q 


among the wheat in the barn it protected the corn against 


1j. A. E. Kohler, Volksbrauch, 
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte 
Ueberlieferungenim V oigtlande (Leipsic, 
1867), p. 376. The belief and practice 
are similar at Griin, near Asch, in 
Western Bohemia. See Alois John, 
Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im 
deutschen Westbihmen (Prague, 1905), 
p. 84, 

2 F. Panzer, Beitrag sur deutschen 
Mythologie (Munich, 1848-1855), ii. 
299; Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde 
des Konigreichs Bayern, iii. (Munich, 
1865), p. 342; I. V. Zingerle, Szten, 
Briuche und Meinungen des Tiroler 
Volkes* (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 160, § 
1363. 

3 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* 
ii, 1013; A. de Gubernatis, Mythologie 
des Plantes (Paris, 1878-1882), i. 189 
sg.; Rev. Hilderic Friend, Plowers and 
flower Lore, Third Edition (London, 
1886), p. 75. In England mugwort is 
very common in waste ground, hedges, 
and the borders of fields. It flowers 
throughout August and later. The root 
is woody and perennial. The smooth 
stems, three or four feet high, are erect, 
branched, and leafy, and marked by 
many longitudinal purplish ribs. The 
pinnatified leaves alternate on the 
stalk ; they are smooth and dark green 


above, cottony and very white below. 
The flowers are in simple leafy spikes 
or clusters; the florets are purplish, 
furnished with five stamens and five 
awl-shaped female flowers, which con- 
stitute the radius. The whole plant 
has a weak aromatic scent and a slightly 
bitter flavour. Its medical virtues are 
of noimportance. See James Sowerby, 
English Botany, xiv. (London, 1802) 
p. 978. Altogether it is not easy to 
see why such an inconspicuous and in- 
significant flower should play so large 
a part in popular superstition. Mug- 
wort (Artemisia vulgaris) is not to be 
confounded with wormwood (Artemisia 
absinthium), which is quite a different 
flower in appearance, though it belongs 
to the same genus. Wormwood is 
common in England, flowering about 
August. The flowers are in clusters, 
each of them broad, hemispherical, and 
drooping, with a buff-coloured disc. 


The whole plant is of a pale whitish a 
green and clothed with a short silky — 


down. It is remarkable for its intense 


bitterness united to a peculiar strong q 
It is often used to — 


aromatic odour. 
keep insects from clothes and furniture, 


and as a medicine is one of the most _ 
active bitters. See James Sowerby, — 
English Botany, vol. xviii. (London, — 


1804) p. 1230. 


aye 


fall act 
™ 


Sed eee eee RE OE Cee ae gee 


vit THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 


59 


mice. In Artois people carried bunches of mugwort, or wore 
it round their body ;* in Poitou they still wear girdles of 
mugwort or hemp when they warm their backs at the mid- 
summer fire as a preservative against backache at harvest ;* 
and the custom of wearing girdles of mugwort on the Eve 
or Day of St. John has caused the plant to be popularly 
known in Germany and Bohemia as St. John’s girdle. In 
Bohemia such girdles are believed to protect the wearer for 
the whole year against ghosts, magic, misfortune, and sick- 
ness. People also weave garlands of the plant and look 
through them at the midsummer bonfire or put them on their 
heads; and by doing so they ensure that their heads will 
not ache nor their eyes smart all that year. Another 
Bohemian practice is to make a decoction of mugwort which 
has been gathered on St. John’s. Day ; then, when your cow 
is bewitched and will yield no milk, you have only to wash 
the animal thrice with the decoction and the spell will be 
broken. In Germany, people used to crown their heads or 
gird their bodies with mugwort, which they afterwards threw 
into the midsummer bonfire, pronouncing certain rhymes 
and believing that they thus rid themselves of all their ill- 
luck.* Sometimes wreaths or girdles of mugwort were kept 
in houses, cattle-sheds, and sheep-folds throughout the year.’ 
In Normandy such wreaths are a protection against thunder 
_and thieves ;° and stalks of mugwort hinder witches from 
laying their spells on the butter.” In the Isle of Man on 
Midsummer Eve people gathered darran fealoin or mugwort 
“as a preventive against the influence of witchcraft” ;* in 


1 Breuil, ‘‘Du culte de St.-Jean- 
Baptiste,” A/émoires de la Société des 


p- 42 (quoting a work of the seven- 
teenth century); F. J. Vonbun, Beztrage 


Antiguaires de Picardie, viii. (1845) 
p- 224, note!, quoting the curé of 
Manancourt, near Péronne. 

2 L. Pineau, Le folk-lore du Poitou 
gag 1892), p. 499. 

3 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und 
Gebrauche aus Bihmen und Mahren 
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), pp. 90 sg., 
§$ 635-637. 

4 F. Panzer, Beitrag sur deutschen 
Mythologie, i. p. 249, § 283; J. 
Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* ii. 1013; 
I. V. Zingerle, in Zeitschrift fir 
deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde, 
i. (1853) p. 331, and 28. iv. (1859) 


sur deutschen Mythologie (Chur, 1862), 
p- 133, note **. See also above, vol. i. 
pp. 162, 163, 165, 174, 177. 

5 A. de Gubernatis, Mythologie der 
flantes (Paris, 1878-1882), i. 190, 
quoting Du Cange. 

6 A. de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes et 
Traditions des Provinces de France 
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 262. 

7 Jules Lecceur, Esguisses du Bocage 
Normand (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883- 
1886), ii. 8. 

8 Joseph Train, Historical and Statis- 
tical Account of the Isleof Man(Douglas, 
Isle of Man, 1845), ii. 120. 


Mugwort 
in China 
and Japan. 


60 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuar. 


Belgium bunches of mugwort gathered on St. John’s Day or 
Eve and hung on the doors of stables and houses are believed 
to bring good luck and to furnish a protection against 
sorcery.’ It is curious to find that in China a similar use is, 
or was formerly, made of mugwort at the same season of the 
year. In an old Chinese calendar we read that “on the 
fifth day of the fifth month the four classes of the people 
gambol in the herbage, and have competitive games with 
plants of all kinds. They pluck mugwort and make dolls 
of it, which they suspend over their gates and doors, 
in order to expel poisonous airs or influences.”? On this 
custom Professor J. J. M. de Groot observes: “ Notice 
that the plant owed its efficacy to the time when it 
was plucked: a day denoting the midsummer festival, 
when light and fire of the universe are in their 
apogee.”® On account of this valuable property mugwort 
is used by Chinese surgeons in cautery.“ The Ainos of 
Japan employ bunches of mugwort in exorcisms, “ because 
it is thought that demons of disease dislike the smell and 
flavour of this herb.”’ It is an old German belief that he 
who carries mugwort in his shoes will not grow weary.® In 
Mecklenburg, they say that if you will dig up a plant of 
mugwort at noon on Midsummer Day, you will find under 
the root a burning coal, which vanishes away as soon as the 
church bells have ceased to ring. If you find the coal and 
carry it off in silence, it will prove a remedy for all sorts of 
maladies.’ According to another German superstition, such 
a coal will turn to gold.* English writers record the popular 
belief that a rare coal is to be found under the root of mug- 
wort at a single hour of a single day in the year, namely, at 
noon or midnight on Midsummer Eve, and that this coal will 


4 
3 


1 Le Baron de Reinsberg- Diirings- 
feld, Calendrier Belge (Brussels, 1861— 
1862), i. 422. 

2 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious 
System of China, vi. (Leyden, 1910) 
p- 1079, compare p. 947. 

3 J. J. M. de Groot, of, ct#. vi. 947. 

4 J. J. M. de Groot, of. cé?. vi. 946 sg. 

5 Rev. John Batchelor, 7he Ainu 
and their Folk-lore (London, 1901), p. 
318, compare pp. 315 sg., 329, 370, 
372. 


8 Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Mythologie 
und Sittenkunde, iv. (1859) p. 423 
Montanus, Die deutschen Volksfeste, 
p- 141. The German name of mug- 
wort (Bezfuss) is said to be derived 
from this superstition. 

7 K. Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen, und 
Gebriuche aus Mecklenburg (Vienna, 
1879-1880), ii. 290, § 1445. 

8 Montanus, Die deutschen 
Jeste, p. 141. 


Volks- 


Sheu eine gS ft 


ei 


eng A Ns i sah ata Sone ag 


ee 


vit THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 61 
protect him who carries it on his person from plague, car- 
buncle, lightning, fever, and ague.’ In Eastern Prussia, on 

St. John’s Eve, people can foretell a marriage by means of 

_ mugwort; they bend two stalks of the growing plant out- 

| ward, and then observe whether the stalks, after straighten- 

' ing themselves again, incline towards each other or not.” 

A similar mode of divination has been practised both in Orpine 

_ England and in Germany with the orpine (Sedum telephium), Pewee: 
a plant which grows on a gravelly or chalky soil about used in 
hedges, the borders of fields, and on bushy hills. It flowers uae 
_ in August, and the blossoms consist of dense clustered tufts summer. 
of crimson or purple petals; sometimes, but rarely, the 
flowers are white.® In England the plant is popularly 
known as Midsummer Men, because people used to plant 

slips of them in pairs on Midsummer Eve, one slip standing 

for a young man and the other for a young woman. If the 
plants, as they grew up, bent towards each other, the couple 

would marry ; if either of them withered, he or she whom it 

__ represented would die.*_ In Masuren, Westphalia, and Switzer- 

_ land the method of forecasting the future by means of the 


_ orpine is precisely the same.’ 


tJ. Brand, Popular Antiquities of 
_ Great Britain (London, 1882-1883), 
i. 334 sg-, quoting Lupton, Thomas 
_ Hill, and Paul Barbette. A precisely 
similar belief is recorded with regard 
_ to wormwood (armozse) by the French 
_ writer J. B. Thiers, who adds that 
only small children and virgins could 
find the wonderful coal. See J. B. 
Thiers, 7raité des Superstitions ® (Paris, 
1741), i. 300. In Annam people think 
_ that wormwood puts demons to flight ; 
_ hence they hang up bunches of its 
' leaves in their houses at the New Year. 
' See Paul Giran, Magie et Religion 
| <Annamites (Paris, 1912), p. 118, 
- compare pp. 185, 256. 
a 2 C. Lemke, Volksthiimliches in Ost- 
| preussen (Mohrungen, 1884-1887), i. 
- 21. As to mugwort (German Beifuss, 
' French armozise), see further A. de 
| Gubernatis, Mythologte des Plantes, ii. 
| 16 sgg.; J. Grimm, Deutsche Mytho- 
| ogie,* iii. 356 sg. 
| 4 James Sowerby, English Botany, 
; vol. xix. (London, 1804) p. 1319. 


“a 


4 John Aubrey, Remains of Gentil- 
isme and Judaisme (London, 1881), pp. 
25 sg.; J. Brand, Popular Antiquities 
of Great Britain (London, 1882-1883), 
i. 329 sgg.; Rev. Hilderic Friend, 
Flowers and Flower Lore, Third Edi- 
tion (London, 1886), p. 136; D. H. 
Moutray Read, ‘‘ Hampshire Folk- 
lore,” Folk-lore, xxii. (1911) p. 325. 
Compare J. Sowerby, English Botany, 
vol. xix. (London, 1804), p. 1319: 
** Like all succulent plants this is very 
tenacious of life, and will keep grow- 
ing long after it has been torn from its 
native spot. The country people in 
Norfolk sometimes hang it up in their 
cottages, judging by its vigour of the 
health of some absent friend.” It 
seems that in England the course of 
love has sometimes been divined by 
means of sprigs of red sage placed in a 
basin of rose-water on Midsummer Eve 
(J. Brand, of. ct. i. 333). 

5M. Toppen, <Adergiauben aus 
Masuren? (Danzig, 1867), pp. 71 sg.3 
A. Kuhn, Sagen, Gebriuche und 


Vervain 
gathered 
for magical 
purposes 

at Mid- 
summer, 


Magical 
virtue of 
four- 
leaved 
clover 
on Mid- 
summer 


Eve. 


62 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cnav. 


Another plant which popular superstition has often 
associated with the summer solstice is vervain.' In some 
parts of Spain people gather vervain after sunset on Mid- 
summer Eve, and wash their faces next morning in the 
water in which the plants have been allowed to steep over- 
night.? In Belgium vervain is gathered on St. John’s Day 
and worn as a safeguard against rupture. In Normandy 
the peasants cull vervain on the Day or the Eve of St. John, 
believing that, besides its medical properties, it possesses at 
this season the power of protecting the house from thunder 
and lightning, from sorcerers,demons,and thieves.* Bohemian 
poachers wash their guns with a decoction of vervain and 
southernwood, which they have gathered naked before sun- 
rise on Midsummer Day; guns which have been thus treated 
never miss the mark.> In our own country vervain used to 
be sought for its magical virtues on Midsummer Eve.’ In 
the Tyrol they think that he who finds a four-leaved clover 
while the vesper-bell is ringing on Midsummer Eve can work 


Miarchen aus Westfalen (Leipsic, 1859), 
ii. 176, § 487; E. Hoffmann-Krayer, 
Feste und Briuche des Schweizervolkes 
(Zurich, 1913), p. 163. In Switzerland 
the species employed for this purpose 
on Midsummer day is Sedum rejlexum. 
The custom is reported from the 
Emmenthal. In Germany a root of 
orpine, dug up on St. John’s morn- 
ing and hung between the shoulders, 
is sometimes thought to be a cure for 
hemorrhoids (Montanus, Die deutschen 
Volksfeste, p. 145). Perhaps the ‘‘ob- 
long, tapering, fleshy, white lumps ” of 
the roots (J. Sowerby, English Botany, 
vol. xix. London, 1804, p. 1319) are 
thought to bear some likeness to the 
hemorrhoids, and to heal them on 
the principle that the remedy should 
resemble the disease. 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 162, 163, 
165. In England vervain (Verbena 
officinalis) grows not uncommonly by 
road sides, in dry sunny pastures, and 
in waste places about villages. It 
flowers in July. The flowers are small 
and sessile, the corolla of a very pale 
lilac hue, its tube enclosing the four 
short curved stamens. The root of 


the plant, worn by a string round the 
neck, is an old superstitious medicine 
for scrofulous disorders. See James 
Sowerby, Znglish Botany, vol. xi. 
(London, 1800) p. 767. 

2 Dr. Otero Acevado, in Ze Temps, 
September 1898. See above, vol. i. 
p. 208, note}, 

3 Le Baron de Reinsberg-Diirings- 
feld, Calendrier Belge (Brussels, 1861— 
1862), i. 422. 

4 A. de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes et 
Traditions des Provinces de France, p. 
262; Amélie Bosquet, Za Normandie 
romanesque et mervetlleuse, p. 294; 
J. Lecceur, Esguisses du Bocage Nor- 
mand, i. 287, ii. 8. In Saintonge and 
Aunis the plant was gathered on Mid- 
summer Eve for the purpose of evoking 
or exorcising spirits (J. L. M. Nogués, 
Les meurs d’autrefois en Saintonge et 
en Aunts, p. 72). 

5 J. V. Grohmann, Aéderglauben und 
Gebrauche aus Bihmen und Miéhren, 
p- 207, § 1437- 

6 A. Kuhn, Sagen, Gebrduche und 
Méarchen aus Westfalen (Leipsic, 1859), 
ii. 177, citing Chambers, Zdindurgh 
Journal, 2nd July 1842. 


ii al ee Sethe a a i oe a Oe ak ie oles a Se eye 


vit THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 63 
magic from that time forth." People in Berry say that the 
_ four-leaved clover is endowed with all its marvellous virtues 
only when it has been plucked by a virgin on the night of 
Midsummer Eve.? In Saintonge and Aunis the four-leaved 
clover, if it be found on the Eve of St. John, brings good 
luck at play ;* in Belgium it brings a girl a husband.* 

At Kirchvers, in Hesse, people run out to the fields at Camomile 
noon on Midsummer Day to gather camomile; for the igsiher ee 
flowers, plucked at the moment when the sun is at the purposes 
highest point of his course, are supposed to possess the —. 
medicinal qualities of the plant in the highest degree. In 
heathen times the camomile flower, with its healing qualities, 
its yellow calix and white stamens, is said to have been 
sacred to the kindly and shining Balder and to have borne 
his name, being called Ba/ders-brd, that is, Balder’s eye- 
lashes.’ In Westphalia, also, the belief prevails that camo- 
mile is most potent as a drug when it has been gathered on 
Midsummer Day ;° in Masuren the plant must always be 
one of the nine different kinds of plants that are culled on 
Midsummer Eve to form wreaths, and tea brewed from the 
flower is a remedy for many sorts of maladies.’ 

Thuringian peasants hold that if the root of the yellow Mullin 
_ mullein ( Verbascum) has been dug up in silence with a ducat at pices 
midnight on Midsummer Eve, and is worn in a piece of linen Fapeneie 
next to the skin, it will preserve the wearer from epilepsy.® mac 
In Prussia girls go out into the fields on Midsummer Day, 2t Mid- 


_ gather mullein, and hang it up over their beds. The girl : 


11. V. Zingerle, Sttten, Brauche 
_ und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes? 
_ (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 107, § 919. 

- 2 Laisnel de la Salle, Croyances et 
Légendes du Centre de la France (Paris, 
1875), i. 288. 

3 J. L. M. Nogués, Les meurs 
@autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunts, 
pp. 71 sg. 

4 Le Baron de Reinsberg-Diirings- 
feld, Calendrier Belge, i. 423. 

5 W. Kolbe, Hessische Volks-Sitten 
und Gebraéuche® (Marburg, 1888), p. 
72; Sophus Bugge, Studien iber die 
Entstehung der nordischen Gotter- und 
Heldensagen (Munich, 1889), pp. 35; 
© 295sg.; Fr. Kauffmann, Bader (Stras- 

_ burg, 1902), pp. 45, 61.. The flowers 


of common camomile (Anthemzs nobilis) 
are white with a yellow disk, which in 
time becomes conical. The whole 
plant is intensely bitter, with a peculiar 
but agreeable smell. As a medicine 
it is useful for stomachic troubles. In 
England it does not generally grow 
wild. See James Sowerby, Zxgilish 
Botany, vol. xiv. (London, 1802) p. 
80. 


goo. 

6 A. Kuhn, Sagen, Gebriuche und 
Marchen aus Westfalen (Leipsic, 1859), 
ii. 177, § 488. 

7 M. Téppen, Aberglauben aus Mas- 
uren* (Danzig, 1867), p. 71. 

8 A. Witzschel, Sagen, Sitten und 
Gebrauche aus Thiiringen (Vienna, 
1878), p. 289, § 139. 


Seeds of 
fir-cones, 
wild 
thyme, 
elder- 
flowers, 
and purple 
loosestrife 
gathered 
for magical 
purposes 
at Mid- 
summer. 


64 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cnapr. 


whose flower is the first to wither will be the first to die. 
Perhaps the bright yellow flowers of mullein, clustering 
round the stem like lighted candles, may partly account for 
the association of the plant with the summer solstice. In 
Germany great mullein (Verbascum thapsus) is called the 
King’s Candle ; in England it is popularly known as High 
Taper. The yellow, hoary mullein (Verbascum pulverulentum) 
“forms a golden pyramid a yard high, of many hundreds of 
flowers, and is one of the most magnificent of British herb- 
aceous plants.”* We may trace a relation between mullein 
and the sun in the Prussian custom of bending the flower, 
after sunset, towards the point where the sun will rise, and 
praying at the same time that a sick person or a sick beast 
may be restored to health.’ 

In Bohemia poachers fancy that they can render them- 
selves invulnerable by swallowing the seed from a fir-cone 
which they have found growing upwards before sunrise on 
the morning of St. John’s Day.* Again, wild thyme 
gathered on Midsummer Day is used in Bohemia to 
fumigate the trees on Christmas Eve in order that they 
may grow well;° in Voigtland a tea brewed from wild 
thyme which has been pulled at noon on Midsummer 
Day is given to women in childbed.© The Germans of 
Western Bohemia brew a tea or wine from elder-flowers, 
but they say that the brew has no medicinal virtue unless 
the flowers have been gathered on Midsummer Eve. They 
do say, too, that whenever you see an elder-tree, you should 
take off your hat.’ In the Tyrol dwarf-elder serves to detect 
witchcraft in cattle, provided of course that the shrub has 
been pulled up or the branches broken on Midsummer Day.® 


1 W. J. A. von Tettau und J. D, 
H. Temme, Volkssagen Ostpreussens, 
Litthauens und Westpreussens (Berlin, 
1837), p. 283. 

2 James Sowerby, Zuglish Botany, 
vol. vii. (London, 1798), p. 487. As 
to great mullein or high taper, see 7d., 
vol. viii. (London, 1799) p. 549. 

3 Tettau und Temme, Joc. cz#. As 
to mullein at Midsummer, see also 
above, vol. i. pp. 190, I9I. 

4 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und 
Gebriuche aus Bihmen und Mahren, 


p- 205, § 1426, 

5 J. V. Grohmann, of. ct. p. 93, 
§ 648. 

6 J. A. E. Kohler, Volksbrauch, 
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte 
Ueberlicferungen im Voigtlande (Leip- 
sic, 1867), p. 377. 

7 Alois John, Sitte, Brauch und 
Volksglaube im deutschen Westbihmen 
(Prague, 1905), p. 84. 

Sf. Ritter" von Alpenburg, 
Mythen und Sagen Tirols (Zurich, 
1857), P- 397+ 


a Ce ae 


SuNrers- SE ee 


a 
, oom 


a 
a 
; 


a C. Russwurm, “ Aberglaube aus 
wssland,” Zeitschrift fiir deutsche 
fe und Sittenkunde, iv. (1859) 
, ey sg. The purple loosestrife is 
i of our most showy English wild 
ants. In July and August it may be 
een flowering on the banks of rivers, 
Ponds, and ditches. The separate 
flowers are in axillary whorls, which 
gether form a loose spike of a red- 
ish variable purple. See James 
owe by, Lnglish Botany, vol. xv. 
(London, 1802) p. 1061. 
2 j. Brand, Popular Antiquities, i. 
4 sgg.; Hilderic Friend, Flowers 
@d Flower Lore, Third Edition (Lon- 
on, 1886), pp. 60, 78, 150, 279-283 ; 
iss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F. 
ickson, Shropshire Folk-lore (London, 
83), p- 242; Marie Trevelyan, 
k-lore and Folk-stories of Wales 
don, 1909), pp. 89 sy.; J. B. 
. VU, VOL. II 


: THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 


65 


‘ussian peasants regard the plant known as purple loosestrife 
Lythrum salicaria) with respect and even fear. Wizards make 
auch use of it. They dig the root up on St. John’s morn- 
ig, at break of day, without the use of iron tools; and they 
elieve that by means of the root, as well as of the blossom, 
they can subdue evil spirits and make them serviceable, and 
so drive away witches and the demons that guard treasures.’ 
_ More famous, however, than these are the marvellous 
roperties which popular superstition in many parts of 
ope has attributed to the fern at this season. 
tidnight on Midsummer Eve the plant is supposed to 
and soon afterwards to seed; and whoever catches 
bloom or the seed is thereby endowed with supernatural 
eal and miraculous powers ; 
e treasures lie hidden in the ground, and he can render 
ir m self invisible at will by putting the seed in his shoe. 
‘But great precautions must be observed in procuring the 
wondrous bloom or seed, which else quickly vanishes like 
on sand or mist in the air. 
h it with his hand nor let it touch the ground; he 
preads a white cloth under the plant, and the blossom or 
ne seed falls into it. Beliefs of this sort concerning fern- 
et d have prevailed, with trifling variations of detail, in 
ingland, France, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Russia.” 


At 


above all, he knows 


The seeker must neither 


In 


Thiers, Zrazté des Superstitions (Paris, 
1679), p. 314; J. Lecceur, Esguisses 
du Bocage Normand, i. 290; P. 
Sébillot, Coutumes populaires de la 
Haute-Bretagne (Paris, 1886), p. 217 ; 
td., Traditions et Superstitions de la 
Haute- Bretagne (Paris, 1882), ii. 336; 
A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
aberglaube* (Berlin, 1869), pp. 94 
sg-5 § 123; F. J. Vonbun, Ba- 
trage sur deutschen Mythologie (Chur, 
1862), pp. 133 sgg-; Montanus, Die 
deutschen Volksfesten, p. 144; K. 
Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen und Ge- 
bréuche aus Mecklenburg, ii. 288, 
§ 1437; M. Toppen, <Adergiauben 
aus Masuren,? p.-72; A. Schlossar, 
**Volksmeinung und Volksaberglaube 
aus der deutschen Steiermark,” Ger- 
mania, N.R., xxiv. (1891) p. 387; 
Theodor Vernaleken, Mythen und 
Bréuche des Volkes in Oesterreich 


F 


66 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuar,. 


Bohemia the magic bloom is said to be golden, and to glow 
or sparkle like fire.’ In Russia, they say that at dead of} 
night on Midsummer Eve the plant puts forth buds like 
glowing coals, which on the stroke of twelve burst oper 
with a clap like thunder and light up everything near anc 
far. In the Azores they say that the fern only blooms at 
midnight on St. John’s Eve, and that no one ever sees the 
flower because the fairies instantly carry it off. But if any 
one, watching till it opens, throws a cloth over it, and then 
when the magic hour has passed, burns the blossoms care: 
fully, the ashes will serve as a mirror in which you can reac 
the fate of absent friends; if your friends are well anc 
happy, the ashes will resume the shape of a lovely flower 
but if they are unhappy or dead, the ashes will remain colc 
and lifeless? In Thuringia people think that he who ha: 
on his person or in his house the male fern (Aspidium ili: 
mas) cannot be bewitched. They call it St. John’s roo 
(Johanniswurzel), and say that it blooms thrice in the year 
on Christmas Eve, Easter Eve, and the day of St. John th 
Baptist ; it should be dug up when the sun enters the sigi 


(Vienna, 1859), p. 309; J. N. Ritter 
von Alpenburg, J%ythen und Sagen 
Tirols (Zurich, 1857), pp. 407 59.3 
I. V. Zingerle, Sztten, Brauche und 
Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes* (Inns- 
bruck, 1871), p. 103, § 882, p. 158, 
§ 1350; Christian Schneller, MWdarchen 
und Sagen aus Walschtirol (Innsbruck, 
1867), p. 2373 J. V. Grohmann, 
Aberglauben und Gebraiuche aus Boh- 
men und Mdhren, p. 97, §§ 673-677 ; 
Reinsberg - Diiringsfeld, Aest- Kalendar 
aus Bohmen (Prague, N.D.), pp. 311 
sg.3 W. Miiller, Beztrdge zur Volks- 
kunde der Deutschen in Miéhren 
(Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 265; 
R. F. Kaindl, Die Husulen (Vienna, 
1894), p. 106; zd., ‘* Zauberglaube 
bei den Huzulen,” Glodus, Ixxvi. 
(1899) p. 275; P. Drechsler, Sz¢ée, 
Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien 
(Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 142, § 159; 
G. Finamore, Credenze, Usit e Costumt 
Abruzzest (Palermo, 1890), p. 161; 
C. Russwurm, ‘** Aberglaube in Russ- 
land,” Zettschrift fiir deutsche Myth- 
ologie und Sittenkunde, iv. (1859) pp. 


152 sg.; A. de Gubernatis, Mytholog 
des Plantes (Paris, 1878-1882), ii. 14 
sgqg. The practice of gathering fern 
or fern seed on the Eve of St. John wa 
forbidden by the synod of Ferrara i 
1612. See J. B. Thiers, 7razté di 
Superstitions® (Paris, 1741), i. 29 
sg. In a South Slavonian story w 
read how a cowherd understood th 
language of animals, because fern-see 
accidentally fell into his shoe on Mic 
summer Day (F. S. Krauss, Sagen un 
Miarchen der Stidslaven, Leipsic, 1883 
1884, ii. 424 sgg., No. 159). O 
this subject I may refer to my artick 
“The Language of Animals,” 77 
Archaeological Review, i. (1888) Pl 
164 sqqg. es 

1 J. V. Grohmann, of. cit. p. 9 
§§ 673, 675. 

2 Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Mytho 
und Sittenkunde, iv. (1859) pp. 
sg.; A. de Gubernatis, AZythologie 
Plantes, ii. 146. b 

3 M. Longworth Dames and E. 
mann, ‘‘Folk-lore of the Azo 
Folk-lore, xiv. (1903) pp. 142 5g. 


= 


vir THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 


f the lion. 


67 


Armed with this powerful implement you can 
detect a sorcerer at any gathering, it may be a wedding 
“feast or what not. All you have to do is to put the root 
under the tablecloth unseen by the rest of the company, 
ind, if there should be a sorcerer among them, he will turn 
s pale as death and get up and go away. Fear and horror 
a me over him when the fern-root is under the tablecloth. 
And when oxen, horses, or other domestic cattle are be- 
witched by wicked people, you need only take the root 
at full moon, soak it in water, and sprinkle the cattle with 
‘the water, or rub them down with a cloth that has been 


steeped in it, and witchcraft will have no more power over 


a. 


animals.’ 


and? 


a 


a 


©? August Witzschel, Sagen, Sitten 
d Gebrauche aus Thiiringen (Vienna, 
8), p. 275, § 82. 
W. Miller, Bettrage zur Volks- 
nde der Deutschen in Mahren(Vienna 
| Olmutz, 1893), p. 265; K. Bartsch, 
Marchen und Gebrauche aus 
whlenburg, ii. p. 285, § 1431, P. 
‘died 14395 a Napier, Folk-lore, or 
pers Beliefs in the West of 
i (Paisley, 1879), p. 125. 


Kuhn, Markische Sagen und 


_ Once more, people have fancied that if they cut a branch 
of hazel on Midsummer Eve it would serve them as a divin- 
ng rod. to discover treasures and water. 
‘existed in Moravia, Mecklenburg, and apparently in Scot- 
In the Mark of Brandenburg, they say that if you 
yould procure the mystic wand you must go to the hazel 
yy night on Midsummer Eve, walking backwards, and when 
mou have come to the bush you must silently put your 
ands between your legs and cut a fork-shaped stick ; that 
tick will be the divining-rod, and, as such, will detect 
feasures buried in the ground. 
s to the quality of the wand, you have only to hold it in 
vater ; for in that case your true divining-rod will squeak 
ke a pig, but your spurious one will not. 
y that the divining-rod should be cut from a hazel bush 
ween eleven and twelve on St. John’s Night, and that by 
3 ns of it you can discover not only veins of metal and 


This belief has 


If you have any doubt 


In Bavaria they 


Marchen (Berlin, 1843), p. 330. As 
to the divining-rod in general, see A. 
Kuhn, Die Herabkunft des Feuers und 
des Géttertranks* (Giitersloh, 1886), 
pp. 181 sgg.; J. Grimm, Deutsche 
Mythologie,* ii. 813 sgg.; S. Baring- 
Gould, Curious Myths of the Middle 
Ages (London, 1884), pp. 55 599. 
Kuhn plausibly suggests that the forked 
shape of the divining-rod is a rude 
representation of the human form. He 
compares the shape and magic proper- 
ties of mandragora, 


68 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuav. 


underground springs, but also thieves and murderers and 
unknown ways. In cutting it you should say, “ God greet 
thee, thou noble twig! With God the Father I seek thee, 
with God the Son I find thee, with the might of God the 
Holy Ghost I break thee. I adjure thee, rod and sprig, by 
the power of the Highest that thou shew me what I order, 
and that as sure and clear as Mary the Mother of God was 
a pure virgin when she bare our Lord Jesus, in the name of 
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, 
Amen!”? In Berlin and the neighbourhood they say that 
every seventh year there grows a wonderful branch on a 
hazel bush, and that branch is the divining-rod. Only an 
innocent child, born on a Sunday and nursed in the true 
faith, can find it on St. John’s Night; to him then all the 
treasures of the earth lie open.2. In the Tyrol the divining- 
rod ought to be cut at new moon, but may be cut either on 
St. John’s Day or on Twelfth Night. Having got it you 
baptize it in the name of one of the Three Holy Kings 
according to the purpose for which you intend to use it: if 
the rod is to discover gold, you name it Caspar; if it is to 
reveal silver, you call it Balthasar ; and if it is to point out 
hidden springs of water, you dub it Melchior. In Lechrain 
the divining-rod is a yearling shoot of hazel with two 
branches ; a good time for cutting it is new moon, and if 
the sun is rising, so much the better. As for the day of 
the year, you may take your choice between St. John’s 
Day, Twelfth Night, and Shrove Tuesday. If cut with 
the proper form of words, the rod will as usual discover 
underground springs and hidden treasures.* 


1 F, Panzer, Bettrag sur deutschen 
Mythologie (Munich, 1848-1855), i. 
296 sq. 

2 FE. Krause,  ‘* Aberglaubische 
Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in 
Berlin und nachster Umgebung,” Zez?- 
schrift fiir Ethnologie, xv. (1883) p. 
89. 
3 J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, 
Mythen und Sagen Tirols (Zurich, 
1857), Pp. 393- 

4 Karl Freiherr von Leoprechting, 
Aus dem Lechrain (Munich, 1855), 
p- 98. Some people in Swabia say 


that the hazel branch which is te 
serve as a divining-rod should be cut 
at midnight on Good Friday, and 
that it should be laid on the alta 
and mass said over it. If that is 
done, we are told that a Protestant 
can use it to quite as good effect as ¢ 
Catholic. See E. Meier, Deutsche 
Sagen, Sitten und Gebriuche au, 
Schwaben (Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 242 
sq., No, 268. Some of the Wends 6 
the Spreewald agree that the di 
ing-rod should be made of h 
wood, and they say that it ought 


vu. THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 69 


Midsummer Eve is also the favourite time for procuring 
the divining-rod in Sweden. Some say that it should then 
be cut from a mistletoe bough.’ However, other people in 
weden are of opinion that the divining-rod (S/ag rufa) 
fhich is obtained on Midsummer Eve ought to be com- 
pounded out of four different kinds of wood, to wit, mistle- 
_ toe, mountain-ash, the aspen, and another; and they say 
that the mountain-ash which is employed for this purpose 
should, like the mistletoe, be a parasite growing from the 
hollow root of a fallen tree, whither the seed was carried by 
a bird or wafted by the wind. Armed with this fourfold 
implement of power the treasure-seeker proceeds at sundown 

‘to the spot where he expects to find hidden wealth; there 
he lays the rod on the ground in perfect silence, and when 
lies directly over treasure, it will begin to hop about as if 
were alive. 

A mystical plant which to some extent serves the same 
purpose as the divining-rod is the springwort, which is some- 
mes supposed to be caper-spurge (Euphorbia lathyris). In 
the Harz Mountains they say that many years ago there 
was a wondrous flower called springwort or Johnswort, which 
as rare as it was marvellous. It bloomed only on St. 
ohn’s Night (some say under a fern) between the hours of 
‘eleven and twelve; but when the last stroke of twelve was 
struck, the flower vanished away. Only in mountainous 
egions, where many noble metals reposed in the bosom of 
3 earth, was the flower seen now and then in lonely 
meadows among the hills. The spirits of the hills wished 
means of it to shew to men where their treasures were to 
e found. The flower itself was yellow and shone like a 
lamp in the darkness of night. It never stood still, but kept 


‘be wrapt in swaddling-bands, laid on munity it has enjoyed ever since the 
white plate, and baptized on Easter day when it protected the Mother of 
urday. Many of them, however, God against a thunderstorm on her 
ink that it should be made of ‘‘yel- _ flight into Egypt. See Bavaria, Landes- 
willow.” See Wilibald von und Volkskunde des Konigreichs Bayern, 
lenburg, Wendische Volkssagen i. (Munich, 1860) p. 371. 
Gebriuche aus dem Spreewald 1 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* 
pipsic, 1880), pp. 204 sg. A re-_ iii. 289, referring to Dybeck’s Runa, 
ble property of the hazel inthe 1844, p. 22, and 1845, p. 80. 
pinion of Bavarian peasants is that it 2 L. Lloyd, Peasant Life in Sweden 
“ever struck by lightning; thisim- (London, 1870), pp. 266 sg. 


The divin- 
ing-rod in 
Sweden 
obtained 
on Mid- 
summer 
Eve. 


The 
mythical 
springwort 
supposed 
to bloom 
on Mid- 
summer 
Eve. 


Another 
way of 
catching 
the spring- 
wort. 


70 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuar. 


hopping constantly to and fro. It was also afraid of men and 
fled before them, and no man ever yet plucked it unless he 
had been set apart by Providence for the task. To him 
who was lucky enough to cull it the flower revealed all 
the treasures of the earth, and it made him rich, oh so rich 
and so happy !? 

However, the usual account given of the springwort is 
somewhat different. They say that the way to procure it is 
this. You mark a hollow in a tree where a green or black 
woodpecker has built its nest and hatched its young; you 
plug up the hole with a wooden wedge; then you hide 
behind the tree and wait. The woodpecker meantime has 
flown away but very soon returns with the springwort in its 
bill. It flutters up to the tree-trunk holding the springwort 
to the wedge, which at once, as if struck by a hammer, jumps 
out with a bang. Now is your chance. You rush from 
your concealment, you raise a loud cry, and in its fright the 
bird opens its bill and drops the springwort. Quick as 
thought you reach out a red or white cloth, with which you 
have taken care to provide yourself, and catch the magic 
flower as it falls. The treasure is now yours. Before its 
marvellous power all doors and locks fly open; it can make 
the bearer of it invisible; and neither steel nor lead can 
wound the man who carries it in the right-hand pocket of 


his coat. 


1 Heinrich Prohle, Harzsagen (Leip- 
sic, 1859), i. 99, No. 23. 

2 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* 
ii. 812 sg., iii. 289; A. Kuhn, Deze 
Herabkunft des Feuers und des Gotter- 
tranks? (Giitersloh, 1886), pp. 188- 
193; Walter K. Kelly, Curzoszties of 
Indo-European Tradition and Folk- 
lore (London, 1863), pp. 174-178; J. 
F, L. Woeste, Volkstiberlieferungen in 
der Grafschaft Mark (Iserlohn, 1848), 
p. 44; A. Kuhn und W., Schwartz, 
Norddeutsche Sagen, Marchen und Ge- 
braiuche (Leipsic, 1848), p. 459, No. 
444; Ernst Meier, Deutsche Sagen, 
Sitten und Gebraiuche aus Schwaben 
(Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 240 sg., No. 
265; C. Russwurm, ‘* Aberglaube in 
Russland,” Zeztschrift fiir deutsche 


That is why people in Swabia say of a thief who 
cannot be caught, “He must surely have a springwort. 


09 


Mythologie und Sittenkunde, iv. (Gét- 
tingen, 1859) p. 153; J. V. Groh- 
mann, Aderglauben und Gebrauche aus 
Bihmen und Méhren (Prague and 
Leipsic, 1864), p. 88, No. 623; Paul 
Drechsler, Sztte, Brauch und Volks- 
glaube in Schilesten (Leipsic, 1903- 
1906), ii. 207 sg. In Swabia some 
people say that the bird which brings 
the springwort is not the woodpecker 
but the hoopoe (E. Meier, of. cét. 
p. 240). Others associate the spring- 
wort with other birds. See H. Préhle, 
Harzsagen (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 116, No. 
308; A. Kuhn, Die Herabhunft des 
Feuers,? p. 190. It is from its power 
of springing or bursting open all doors 
and locks that the springwort derives — 
its name (German Springwurzel). 


‘vt THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 71 


_ The superstition which associates the springwort with the 
_ woodpecker is very ancient, for it is recorded by Pliny. It 
_ was a vulgar belief, he tells us, that if a shepherd plugged 
' up a woodpecker’s nest in the hollow of a tree with a 
wedge, the bird would bring a herb which caused the wedge 
‘to slip out of the hole; Trebius indeed affirmed that the 
wedge leaped out with a bang, however hard and fast you 
might have driven it into the tree. Another flower which The white 
“possesses the same remarkable power of bursting open all peeps: 
‘doors and locks is chicory, provided always that you cut 
the flower with a piece of gold at noon or midnight on St. 
ames’s Day, the twenty-fifth of July. But in cutting it 
ou must be perfectly silent; if you utter a sound, it is all 
‘up with you. There was a man who was just about to cut 
the flower of the chicory, when he looked up and saw a 
millstone hovering over his head. He fled for his life and 
fortunately escaped ; but had he so much as opened his lips, 
: the millstone would have dropped on him and crushed him 
"as flat as a pancake. However, it is only a rare white 
"variety of the chicory flower which can act as a picklock ; 
-the common bright blue flower is perfectly useless for the 
purpose.” 
4 Many more examples might perhaps be cited of the The 
' marvellous virtues which certain plants have been supposed ™™ — 
to acquire at the summer solstice, but the foregoing instances pistes 
may suffice to prove that the superstition is widely spread, °° Sperige 
_deeply rooted, and therefore probably very ancient in Europe. summer 
‘Why should plants be thought to be endowed with these preci a 
wonderful properties on the longest day more than on any other be a 
'day of the year? It seems difficult or impossible to explain un, then 
such a belief except on the supposition that in some mystic #t nc ss 
way the plants catch from the sun, then at the full height of Pelagic 
his power and glory, some fleeting effluence of radiant light 24 s!°"v- 
' and heat, which invests them for a time with powers above 
” the ordinary for the healing of diseases and the unmasking 

_and baffling of all the evil things that threaten the life of man. 
’ That the supposition is not purely hypothetical will appear 
. from a folk-tale, to be noticed later on, in which the magic 


| ! Pliny, Wat. Hist. x. 40. ten und Gebréuche aus Scthwaben (Stutt- 
' 2 Ernst Meier, Deutsche Sagen, Sit-  gart, 1852), pp. 238 sg., No. 264. 


Hence it 
is possible 
that the 
Mid- 
summer 
bonfires 
stand in 
direct 
relation to 
the sun, 


This con- 
sideration 
tends to 
bring us 
back to 
an inter- 
mediate 
position 
between 
the rival 
theories of 
Mannhardt 
and 
Wester- 
marck, 


72 THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuav. 


bloom of the fern is directly derived from the sun at noon on — 
Midsummer Day. And if the magic flowers of Midsummer 
Eve thus stand-in direct relation to the sun, which many of 
them resemble in shape and colour, blooming in the meadows 
like little yellow suns fallen from the blue sky, does it 
not become probable that the bonfires kindled at the 
same time are the artificial, as the flowers are the natural, 
imitations of the great celestial fire then blazing in all its 
strength? At least analogy seems to favour the inference and 
so far to support Mannhardt’s theory, that the bonfires kindled 
at the popular festivals of Europe, especially at the summer 
solstice, are intended to reinforce the waning or waxing fires 
of the sun. Thus if in our enquiry into these fire-festivals 
the scales of judgment are loaded with the adverse theories of 
Mannhardt and Westermarck, we may say that the weight, 
light as it is, of the magic flowers of Midsummer Eve seems to 
incline the trembling balance back to the side of Mannhardt. 

Nor is it, perhaps, an argument against Mannhardt’s view 
that the midsummer flowers and plants are so often employed 
as talismans to break the spells of witchcraft.’ For granted 
that employment, which is undeniable, we have still to 
explain it, and that we can hardly do except by reference to 
the midsummer sun. And what is here said of the mid- 
summer flowers applies equally to the midsummer bonfires. 
They too are used to destroy the charms of witches and war- 
locks ; but if they can do so, may it not be in part because 
fires at midsummer are thought to burn with fiercer fury than 
at other times by sympathy with the fiercer fervour of the 
sun? This consideration would bring us back to an inter- 
mediate position between the opposing theories, namely, to 
the view that while the purely destructive aspect of fire is 
generally the most prominent and apparently the most im- 
portant at these festivals, we must not overlook the additional 
force which by virtue of homoeopathic or imitative magic the 
bonfires may be supposed both to derive from and to impart 
to the sun, especially at the moment of the summer solstice 
when his strength is greatest and begins to decline, and when 
accordingly he can at once give and receive help to the 
greatest advantage. 


1 See above, pp. 45, 46, 49, 54, 55, 59, 60, 62, 64, 65; 66, 67. 


"vm THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 73 


To conclude this part of our subject it may not be amiss miscel- 

_ to illustrate by a few more miscellaneous examples the belief !#7°¥s 
a : . . examples 
_ that Midsummer Eve is one of the great days of the year in of the 

| which witches and warlocks pursue their nefarious calling ; ee 

_ indeed in this respect Midsummer Eve perhaps stands second of witches 
_ only to the famous Walpurgis Night (the Eve of May Day). ea 
| For instance, in the neighbourhood of Lierre, in Belgium, the and of the 


ions 


| people think that on the night of Midsummer Eve all witches Pes" 
_ and warlocks must repair to a certain field which is indicated necessary 
_ to them beforehand. There they hold their infernal Sabbath pfs 
and are passed in review by a hellish magician, who bestows erage 
on them fresh powers. That is why old women are most : 
careful, before going to bed on that night, to stop up doors 
| and windows and every other opening in order to bar out the 
| witches and warlocks, who but for this sage precaution might 
steal into the house and make the first trial of their new 
powers on the unfortunate inmates. At Rottenburg, in 
Swabia, people thought that the devil and the witches could 
do much harm on Midsummer Eve; so they made fast 
_ their shutters and bunged up even the chinks and crannies, 
for wherever air can penetrate, there the devil and witches 
can worm their way in. All night long, too, from nine in 
_the evening till break of day, the church bells rang to disturb 
the dreadful beings at their evil work, since there is perhaps 
no better means of putting the whole devilish crew to flight 
than the sound of church bells.» Down to the second half witches 
of the nineteenth century the belief in witches was still rai 
widespread in Voigtland, a bleak mountainous region of 

entral Germany. It was especially on the Eve of May 
| Day (Walpurgis), St. Thomas’s Day, St. John’s Day, and 
hristmas Eve, as well as on Mondays, that they were 
dreaded. Then they would come into a neighbour’s house 
-to beg, borrow, or steal something, no matter what; but 
woe to the poor wretch who suffered them to carry away 
so much as a chip or splinter of wood; for they would 
certainly use it to his undoing. On these witching nights 
the witches rode to their Sabbath on baking-forks and the 


_ 1 Le Baron de Reinsberg-Diirings- 2 Anton Birlinger, Volksthumliches 
feld, Calendrier Belge (Brussels, 1861- aus Schwaben (Freiburg im Breisgau, 
+ 1862), i. 423 sg. (1861-1862), i. 278, § 437. 


The 
witches’ 
Sabbath in 
Prussia on 
Walpurgis 
Night and 
Mid- 
summer 
Eve. 


Mid- 
summer 
Eve a 
witching 
time 
among the 
South 
Slavs. 


74. THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE cuar. 


dashers of churns; but if when they were hurtling through 
the darkness any one standing below addressed one of 
the witches by name, she would die within the year. To 
counteract and undo the spells which witches cast on man 
and beast, people resorted to all kinds of measures. Thus 
on the before-mentioned days folk made three crosses on the 
doors of the byres or guarded them by hanging up St. John’s 
wort, marjoram, or other equally powerful talismans. Very 
often, too, the village youth would carry the war into the 
enemy’s quarters by marching out in a body, cracking whips, 
firing guns, waving burning besoms, shouting and making an 
uproar, all for the purpose of frightening and driving away 
the witches.' In Prussia witches and warlocks used regularly 
to assemble twice a year on Walpurgis Night and the Eve 
of St. John. The places where they held their infernal 
Sabbath were various ; for example, one was Pogdanzig, in 
the district of Schlochau. They generally rode on a baking- 
fork, but often on a black three-legged horse, and they took 
their departure up the chimney with the words, “Up and 
away and nowhere to stop!” When they were all gathered 
on the Blocksberg or Mount of the Witches, they held high 
revelry, feasting first and then dancing on a tight rope. 
lefthanded-wise to the inspiring strains which an old warlock 
drew from a drum and a pig’s head.” The South Slavs 
believe that on the night of Midsummer Eve a witch will 
slink up to the fence of the farmyard and say, “ The cheese 
to me, the lard to me, the butter to me, the milk to me, but 
the cowhide to thee!” After that the cow will perish 
miserably and you will be obliged to bury the flesh and sell 
the hide. To prevent this disaster the thing to do is to go” 
out into the meadows very early on Midsummer morning 
while the dew is on the grass, collect a quantity of dew in a 
waterproof mantle, carry it home, and having tethered your 
cow wash her down with the dew. After that you have 
only to place a milkpail under her udders and to milk away 
as hard as you can; the amount of milk that you will 
extract from that cow’s dugs is quite surprising. Again, the 


1 Robert Eisel, Sagenduch des Voigt- Temme, Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens, 
Jandes (Gera, 1871), p. 210, Nr. 551.  Litthauens und Wesipreussens (Berlin, 
2 W. J. A. von Tettau und J.D. H. 1837), pp. 263 sg. 


THE MAGIC FLOWERS OF MIDSUMMER EVE 75 


lovenians about Gérz and the Croats of Istria believe that 
n the same night the witches wage pitched battles with 
baptized folk, attacking them fiercely with broken stakes of 
-palings and stumps of trees. It is therefore a wise precau- 
| tion to grub up all the stumps in autumn and carry them 
_ home, so that the witches may be weaponless on St. John’s 
_ Night. If the stumps are too heavy to be grubbed up, it 
is well to ram them down tighter into the earth, for then 
the witches will not be able to pull them up.! 


1 F, S. Krauss, Volksglaube und religivser Brauch der Siidslaven (Minster 
W., 1890), p. 128, 


a 


pe . 
eet. 


CHAPTER IX 
BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 


Relation THE reader may remember that the preceding account of 
ete the popular fire-festivals of Europe was suggested by the 
the myth myth of the Norse god Balder, w n 
coe alain by a ‘branch of mistletoe and burnt in a great fire. We 
“Fave now to enquire how far the customs which have been 
passed in review help to shed light on the myth. In this 
enquiry it may be convenient to begin with the mistletoe, 
the instrument of Balder’s death. 
es From time immemorial the mistletoe has been the 
Druids object of superstitious veneration in Europe. It was 
forthe worshipped by the Druids, as we learn from a famous 
mistletoe. 
passage of Pliny. After enumerating the different kinds of 
mistletoe, he proceeds: “In treating of this subject, the 
admiration in which the mistletoe is held throughout Gaul 
ought not to pass unnoticed. The Druids, for so they call 
their wizards, esteem nothing more sacred than the mistletoe 
and the tree on which it grows, provided only that the tree is 
an oak. But apart from this they choose oak-woods for their 
sacred groves and perform no sacred rites without oak-leaves ; 
so that the very name of Druids may be regarded as a Greek 


appellation derived from their worship of the oak.’ For : 


1 Pliny derives the name Druid from Ztymologie® (Leipsic, 1879), pp. 238 . 
the Greek drus, “oak.” He did not sg.; A. Vanitek, Griechisch-Lateinisch — 
know that the Celtic word for oak was Etymologisches Worterbuch (Leipsic, ~ 
the same (daur), and that therefore 1877), pp. 368 sgg.; (Sir) John Rhys, ~ 
Druid, in the sense of priest of the oak, Celtic Heathendom (London and Edin- — 


might be genuine Celtic, not borrowed _ burgh, 1888), pp. 221 sgg. However, 


from the Greek. This etymology is this derivation is disputed by other — 
accepted by some modern scholars. See scholars, who prefer to derive the 
G. Curtius, Grundziige der Griechischen name from a word meaning know- © 


76 


"CHAP. 1x BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 77 
_ they believe that whatever grows on these trees is sent from 
_ heaven, and is a sign that the tree has been chosen by the 
' god himself. The mistletoe is very rarely to be met with ; 
_ but when it is found, they gather it with solemn ceremony. 
_ This they do above all on the sixth day of the moon, from 
_ whence they date the beginnings of their months, of their 
_ years, and of their thirty years’ cycle, because by the sixth 
_ day the moon has plenty of vigour and has not run half its 
course. After due preparations have been made for a 
sacrifice and a feast under the tree, they hail it as the 
| universal healer and bring to the spot two white bulls, 
4 whose horns have never been bound before. A priest clad 
| in a white robe climbs the tree and with a golden sickle 
' cuts the mistletoe, which is caught in a white cloth. Then 
| they sacrifice the victims, praying that God may make his 
_ own gift to prosper with those upon whom he has bestowed 
it. They believe that a potion prepared from mistletoe will 
_ make barren animals to bring forth, and that the plant is a 


: 7 remedy against all poison. So much of men’s religion is 
’ »1 


_ ledge or wisdom, so that Druid would 
mean ‘‘ wizard” or “‘ magician.” See 
Jj. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,‘ 
iii. 305; Otto Schrader, Reallexikon 
_ der Indogermanischen Altertumskunde 
(Strasburg, 1901), pp. 638 sg.; H. 
D’Arbois de Jubainville, Les Drutdes 
| et les Dieux Celtigques & forme Pant- 
maux (Paris, 1906), pp. 1, 11, 83 sgg. 
_ The last-mentioned scholar formerly 
_ held that the etymology of Dmid was 

unknown. See his Cours de Littérature 
_ Celtique, i. (Paris, 1883) pp. 117-127. 

1 Pliny, Nat. Hist. xvi. 249-251. 
In the first edition of this book I under- 
_ stood Pliny to say that the Druidical 
ceremony of cutting the mistletoe fell 
in the sixth month, that is, in June; 
and hence I argued that it probably 
_ formed part of the midsummer festival. 
But in accordance with Latin usage the 
words of Pliny (sex/a /una, literally 
| ‘sixth moon”) can only mean ‘the 
» sixth day of the month.” I have to 
' thank my friend Mr. W. Warde Fowler 
_ for courteously pointing out my mistake 
' to me. Compare my note in the 


_ commonly concerned with trifles. 


Athenaeum, November 21st, 1891, p. 
687. I also misunderstood Pliny’s 
words, ‘‘et saecult post tricesimum 
annum, guia jam virium abunde habeat 
nec sit sui dimidia,” applying them 
to the tree instead of to the moon, to 
which they really refer. After saecudi we 
must understand frincifium from the 
preceding princifia. With the thirty 
years’ cycle of the Druids we may 
compare the sixty years’ cycle of the 
Boeotian festival of the Great Daedala 
(Pausanias, ix. 3. 5; see Zhe Magic 
Art and the Evolution of Kings, ii. 
140 sg.), which, like the Druidical rite 
in question, was essentially a worship, 
or perhaps rather a conjuration, of the 
sacred oak. Whether any deeper 
affinity, based on common Aryan 
descent, may be traced between the 
Boeotian and the Drmidical ceremony, 
I do not pretend to determine. In 
India a cycle of sixty years, based on 
the sidereal revolution of Jupiter, has 
long been in use. The sidereal re- 
volution of Jupiter is accomplished in 
approximately twelve solar years (more 


Medical 
and 
magical 
virtues 
ascribed to 
mistletoe in 
ancient 
Italy. 


Agreement 
between 
the Druids 
and the 
ancient 
Italians as 
to the valu- 
able pro- 
perties of 
mistletoe. 


BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE CHAP, 


78 


In another passage Pliny tells us that in medicine the 
mistletoe which grows on an oak was esteemed the most 
efficacious, and that its efficacy was by some superstitious 
people supposed to be increased if the plant was gathered 
on the first day of the moon without the use of iron, and if 
when gathered it was not allowed to touch the earth; oak- 
mistletoe thus obtained was deemed a cure for epilepsy ; 
carried about by women it assisted them to conceive; and 
it healed ulcers most effectually, if only the sufferer chewed 
a piece of the plant and laid another piece on the sore.! 
Yet, again, he says that mistletoe was supposed, like 
vinegar and an egg, to be an excellent means of extinguish- 
ing a fire.” 

If in these latter passages Pliny refers, as he apparently 
does, to the beliefs current among his contemporaries in 
Italy, it will follow that the Druids and the Italians were to 
some extent agreed as to the valuable properties possessed 
by mistletoe which grows on an oak; both of them deemed 
it an effectual remedy for a number of ailments, and both of 
them ascribed to it a quickening virtue, the Druids believing 
that a potion prepared from mistletoe would fertilize barren 
cattle, and the Italians holding that a piece of mistletoe 
carried about by a woman would help her to conceive a 
child. Further, both peoples thought that if the plant were 
to exert its medicinal properties it must be gathered in a 
certain way and at a certain time. It might not be cut 
with iron, hence the Druids cut it with gold; and it might 
not touch the earth, hence the Druids caught it in a white 
cloth. In choosing the time for gathering the plant, both 
peoples were determined by observation of the moon; only 
they differed as to the particular day of the moon, the 
Italians preferring the first, and the Druids the sixth. 


(1889) pp. 193-209; J. F. Fleet, “*A 
New System of the Sixty-year Cycle of 
Jupiter,” zd¢d. pp. 221-224. In Tibet 


exactly 11 years and 315 days), so that 
five of its revolutions make a period of 
approximately sixty years. It seems, 


further, that in India a much older cycle 
of sixty lunar years was recognized. 
See Christian Lassen, /uzdische Alter- 
thumskunde, i.2 (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 
988 sgy.; Prof. F. Kielhorn (Géttin- 
gen), ‘*The Sixty - year Cycle of 
Jupiter,” Zhe /ndian Antiquary, xviii. 


the use of a sixty-years’ cycle has been 
borrowed from India. See W. Wood- 
ville Rockhill, ** Tibet,” Journal of the 
Royal Astatic Society Jor 1891 (London, 
1891), p. 207 note 4. 

1 Pliny, Mat. Hist. xxiv. 11 sg. 

2 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxxiii. 94. 


E Ix BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 79 


With these beliefs of the ancient Gauls and Italians as 
to the wonderful medicinal properties of mistletoe we may 
compare the similar beliefs of the modern Ainos of Japan. 
We read that they, “like many nations of the Northern 
origin, hold the mistletoe in peculiar veneration. They 
look upon it as a medicine, good in almost every disease, 
and it is sometimes taken in food and at others separately 
as a decoction. The leaves are used in preference to the 
berries, the latter being of too sticky a nature for general 
purposes. ... But many, too, suppose this plant to have 
the power of making the gardens bear plentifully. When 
used for this purpose, the leaves are cut up into fine pieces, 
and, after having been prayed over, are sown with the millet 
and other seeds, a little also being eaten with the food. 
Barren women have also been known to eat the mistletoe, 
in order to be made to bear children. That mistletoe 
which grows upon the willow is supposed to have the 
greatest efficacy. This is because the willow is looked upon 
by them as being an especially sacred tree.” * 

Thus the Ainos agree with the Druids in regarding 
_ mistletoe as a cure for almost every disease, and they agree 
_ with the ancient Italians that applied to women it helps 
them to bear children. A similar belief as to the fertilizing 
influence of mistletoe, or of similar plants, upon women is 
entertained by the natives of Mabuiag, an island in Torres 
Straits. These savages imagine that twins can be produced 
“by the pregnant woman touching or breaking a branch of 
_ a loranthaceous plant (Viscum sp., probably V. orientale) 
_ parasitic on a tree, mader. The wood of this tree is much 
_ esteemed for making digging sticks and as firewood, no 
twin-producing properties are inherent in it, nor is it re- 
_ garded as being infected with the properties of its twin- 
_ producing parasite.”* Again, the Druidical notion that the 
_ mistletoe was an “all-healer” or panacea may be compared 
with a notion entertained by the Walos of Senegambia. 
_ These people “ have much veneration for a sort of mistletoe, 
4 which they call ob ; they carry leaves of it on their persons 


1 Rey. John Batchelor, Zhe Ainu 2 Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 
and their Folk-lore (London, 1901), p. pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 
222, y. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 198 sg. 


Similar 
beliefs as 
to mistletoe 
among the 
Ainos of 
Japan. 


Similar 
beliefs as 
to mistletoe 
among the 
Torres 
Straits 
Islanders 
and the 
Walos of 
Sene- 
gambia. 


These 
beliefs 
perhaps 
originate 
in a notion 
that the 
mistletoe 
has fallen 
from 
heaven. 


Such a 
notion 
would 
explain 
the ritual 
used in 
cutting 
mistletoe 
and other 
parasites. 


80 BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 


CHAP, 


when they go to war as a preservative against wounds, just 
as if the leaves were real talismans (gris-gris).” The French 
writer who records this practice adds: “Is it not very 
curious that the mistletoe should be in this part of Africa 
what it was in the superstitions of the Gauls? This preju- 
dice, common to the two countries, may have the same 
origin; blacks and whites will doubtless have seen, each of 
them for themselves, something supernatural in a plant 
which grows and flourishes without having roots in the earth. 
May they not have believed, in fact, that it was a plant 
fallen from the sky, a gift of the divinity ?”? 

This suggestion as to the origin of the superstition is 
strongly confirmed by the Druidical belief, reported by Pliny, 
that whatever grew on an oak was sent from heaven and 
was a sign that the tree had been chosen by the god him- 
self? Such a belief explains why the Druids cut the 
mistletoe, not with a common knife, but with a golden sickle,’ 
and why, when cut, it was not suffered to touch the earth ; 


1 M. le baron Roger (ancien Gouver- 
neur de la Colonie francaise du Séné- 
gal), ‘* Notice sur le Gouvernement, 
les Mceurs, et les Superstitions des 
Négres du pays de Walo,” Bulletin de 
la Société de Géographie, viii. (Paris, 
1827) pp. 357 59. 

2 Above, p. 77. 

3 Compare Zhe Times, 2nd April, 
1901, p. 9: ‘*The Tunis correspondent 
of the Zemfs reports that in the course 
of certain operations in the Belvedere 
Park in Tunis the workmen discovered 
a huge circle of enormous stumps of 
trees ranged round an immense square 
stone showing signs of artistic chisel 
work. In the neighbourhood were 
found a sort of bronze trough contain- 
ing a gold sickle in perfect preserva- 
tion, and a sarcophagus containing a 
skeleton. About the forehead of the 
skeleton was a gold band, having in 
the centre the image of the sun, accom- 
panied by hieratic signs, which are pro- 
visionally interpreted as the monogram 
of Teutates. The discovery of such 
remains in North Africa has created a 
sensation.” As to the Celtic god Teu- 
tates and the human sacrifices offered 
to him, see Lucan, VPharsalia, i. 


444 59. 


“* Et guibus immitis placatur sanguine 


adiro 
Teutates horrensque feris altaribus 
fTesus.” 
Compare (Sir) John Rhys, Celtic 


Heathendom (London and Edinburgh, 
1888), pp. 44 sgg., 232. Branches of 
the sacred olive at Olympia, which 
were to form the victors’ crowns, had 
to be cut with a golden sickle by a boy 
whose parents were both alive. See 
the Scholiast on Pindar, Olymp. iii. 
60, p. 102, ed. Aug. Boeck (Leipsic, 
1819). In Assyrian ritual it was laid 
down that, before felling a sacred tama- 
risk to make magical images out of the 
wood, the magician should pray to the 
sun-god Shamash and touch the tree 
with a golden axe. See C. Fossey, 
La Magie Assyrienne (Paris, 1902), 
pp. 132 sg. Some of’ the ancients 
thought that the root of the marsh- 
mallow, which was used in medicine, 
should be dug up with gold and then 
preserved from contact with the ground 
(Pliny, at. Hist. xx. 29). At the 
great horse-sacrifice in ancient India it 
was prescribed by ritual that the horse 
should be slain by a golden knife, 
because ‘‘gold is light” and **by 


BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 


81 


probably they thought that the celestial plant would have 
been profaned and its marvellous virtue lost by contact with 
the ground. With the ritual observed by the Druids in 
cutting the mistletoe we may compare the ritual which in 
Cambodia is prescribed in a similar case. They say that 
when you see an orchid growing as a parasite on a tamarind 
tree, you should dress in white, take a new earthenware pot, 
then climb the tree at noon, break off the plant, put it in the 
pot, and let the pot fall to the ground. After that you 


make i in the pot a decoction which confers the gift of invul- 
i “nerability.1 Thus just as in Africa the leaves of one parasitic 
plant are supposed to render the wearer invulnerable, so in 
_ Cambodia a decoction made from another parasitic plant is 
: "considered to render the same service to such as make use of 


it, whether by drinking or washing. We may conjecture 
that in-both places the notion of invulnerability is suggested 
by the position of the plant, which, occupying a place of 
comparative security above the ground, appears to promise 
to its fortunate possessor a similar security from some of 


- the ills that beset the life of man on earthe We have 
already met with many examples of the store which the 
_ primitive mind sets on such vantage grounds.” 


European peasants. 


means of the golden light the sacrificer 
also goes to the heavenly world.” See 
The Satapatha-Bréhmana, translated 
by Julius Eggeling, Part v. (Oxford, 
1900) p. 303 (Sacred Books of the 
_ East, vol. xliv.). It has been a rule of 
_ Superstition both in ancient and modern 
_ times that certain plants, to which 
_ medical or magical virtues were attri- 
_ buted, should not be cut with iron. 
_ See the fragment of Sophocles’s Root- 
cutters, quoted by Macrobius, Saturn. 
Y. 19. 9 sg. 5 Virgil, Aen. iv. 513 sg. 
Ovid, Metamorph. vii. 227; Pliny, 
PT. VII. VOL. I 


Whatever may be the origin of these beliefs and 
practices concerning the mistletoe, certain it is that some 
of them have their analogies in the folk-lore of modern 
For example, it is laid down as a 
rule in various parts of Europe that mistletoe may not be 
cut in the ordinary way but must be shot or knocked down 
with stones from the tree on which it is growing. Thus, in 


Nat. Hist. xxiv. 68, 103, 176; and 
above, p. 65 (as to purple loosestrife 
in Russia). On the objection to the 
use of iron in such cases compare F. 
Liebrecht, Des Gervasius von Tilbury 
Otia Imperialia (Hanover, 1856), pp. 
102 sg.; Taboo and the Perils of the 
Soul, pp. 225 sgq.- 
tienne Aymonier, ‘‘ Notes sur les 
Coutumes et Croyances Superstitieuses 
des Cambodgiens,” Cochinchine Fran- 
gaise, Excursions et Reconnaissance 
No. 16 (Saigon, 1883), p. 136. 
2 See above, vol. i. pp. 2 s¢g. 


G 


The 
ancient 
beliefs and 
practices 
concerning 
mistletoe 
have their 
analogies 
in modern 
European 
folk-lore. 


The 
medicinal 
virtues 
ascribed 
to mistletoe 
seem to be 
mythical, 
being 
fanciful 
inferences 
from the 
parasitic 
nature of 
the plant. 


84 BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 


cms 
At Kirton-in-Lindsey, in Lincolnshire, it is thought thi 
St. Vitus’s dance may be cured by the water in whic 
mistletoe berries have been boiled! In the Scotch shir 
of Elgin and Moray, down to the second half of tl 
eighteenth century, at the full moon of March people use 
to cut withes of mistletoe or ivy, make circles of them, kee 
them all the year, and profess to cure hectics and othi 
troubles by means of them.2 In Sweden, apparently, fi 
other complaints a sprig of mistletoe is hung round 
patient’s neck or a ring of it is worn on his finger.® >| 

However, the opinion of the medical profession as 1 
the curative virtues of mistletoe has undergone a radic; 
alteration. Whereas the Druids thought that mistlete 
cured diane. modern doctors appear to think that 
cures nothing.* If they are right, we must conclude th 
the ancient and widespread faith in the medicinal virtue « 
mistletoe is a pure superstition based on nothing better thé 
the fanciful inferences which ignorance has drawn from t 
parasitic nature of the plant, its position high up on the branc 
of a tree seeming to protect it from the dangers to whic 
plants and animals are subject on the surface of the grouni 
From this point of view we can perhaps understand wh 
mistletoe has so long and so persistently been prescribed ¢ 
a cure for the falling sickness. As mistletoe cannot fall 1 
the ground because it is rooted on the branch of a tree hig 
above the earth, it seems to follow as a necessary 01 
sequence that an epileptic patient cannot possibly fall do 
in a fit so long as he carries a piéce of mistletoe in I 
pocket or a decoction of mistletoe in his stomach. Sue 
a train of reasoning would probably be regarded even ne 
as cogent by a large portion of the human species. : 

Again the ancient Italian opinion that mistletoe 4 


1 County Folk-lore, vol. v. Lincoln- 
shire, collected by Mrs. Gutch and 
Mabel Peacock (London, 1908), p, 
120. 

2 Rev. Mr. Shaw, Minister of Elgin, 
quoted by Thomas Pennant in his 
‘Tour in Scotland, 1769,” printed in 
J. Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, 
iii. (London, 1809) p. 136; J. Brand, 
Popular Antiquities of Great Britain 
(London, 1882-1883), iii. 151. 


3 Walter K. Kelly, Crriosities 
Indo-European Tradition and Folhk-lo 
(London, 1863), p. 186. s 


On this point Prof. P. J. V 
(‘*De Leer der Signatuur,” J#derm 
tionales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, * 
(1894) p. 112) quotes Cauvet, # 
ments @ Histoire naturelle medi 
ii. 290: ** La famille des Lorai 
ne nous offre aucun intéret.” 


BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 85 


ishes fire appears to be shared by Swedish peasants, The 


xc jones up bunches of oak-mistletoe on the ceilings of prensaenty 


rooms as a pos against harm in general and) extin- 


iiagration in particular.’ 


of lightning ;* 


thunder-bolt.* 


;* and it may be the 


A. Kuhn, Die Herabkunft des 
ers und des Gottertranks? (Giiters- 
, 1886), p. 205, referring to Dybeck, 
1845, p- 

Kuhn, of. cit. p. 204, referring 
nholz, oacaaemecae aus d. 


A hint as to the way in 


ich mistletoe comes to be possessed of this property | ome 
nished by the epithet “ thunder-besom,” which people of fet eS on 


; hence in Bohemia a thunder-besom 
rnt in the fire protects the house against being struck by 
Being itself a product of lightning it 
ally serves, on homoeopathic principles, as a protection 


nce the fire which mistletoe in Sweden is designed 
cially to avert from houses may be fire kindled by 
ing; though no doubt the plant is equally effective 
inst conflagration in general. 

_Again, mistletoe acts as a master-key as well as a 


reason. why in the north of 


des Konigreichs Bayern, i. (Munich, 
1860), p. 371. 

5 A. Kuhn, Die Herabkunft des 
Feuers und des Géttertranks,* p. 206, 
referring to Albertus Magnus, p. 155; 
Prof.” PB: . J. Veth, ““*De- Leer der 
Signatuur,” Jnternationales Archiv fiir 
are Vii. (1904) p. IIT. 


Jj. Grimm, 7 Mythologie,* 6 Jj. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, 
Mythen und Sagen Tirols (Zurich, 
J. V. Grohmann, 4 und 1857), p- 398. 


Guche aus Bohmen und Makren 
and Leipsic, 1864), p. 37, 
In Upper Bavaria the mistletoe 
ned for this purpose along with 
- called palm-branches which 
fere consecrated on Palm Sunday. 

Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde 


7 A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
aberglaube® (Berlin, 1869), p. 97, § 
128; Prof. P. J. Veth, ‘* De Leer der 
Signatuur,” Jnternationales Archiv fiir 
Ethnographie, vii. (1894) p. 111. 

8 A. Wuttke, of. cit. p. 267, § 
419. 


fire seems 
ona 


“a flash of 


h under-besom i is a shaggy, bushy excrescence on branches jightning. 


htning-conductor ; for it is said to open‘all locks. How- pc i 
r, in the Tyrol it can only exert this power “ under ascribed to 
in circumstances,” which are not specified.® But per- Rc! 
the most precious of all the virtues of mistletoe is that lar it is 
ords efficient protection against sorcery and witchcraft.” oust 
at, no doubt, is the reason why in Austria a twig of protection 
stletoe is laid on the threshold as a preventive of night- Scheran. 


88 BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE CHAP, 


old tradition that the summer solstice was the time when 
the good god came to his untimely end. | 
Hence the Thus it has been shewn that the leading incidents of 
“ttre the Balder myth have their counterparts in those fire-festivals 
probably of our European peasantry which undoubtedly date from a 
aioe time long prior to the introduction of Christianity. The 
given ofa pretence of throwing the victim chosen by lot into the 
Similarrite. Beltane fire? and the similar treatment of the man, the future 
Green Wolf, at the midsummer bonfire in Normandy,’ may 
naturally be interpreted as traces of an older custom of 
actually burning human beings on these occasions; and the 
green dress of the Green Wolf, coupled with the leafy 
envelope of the young fellow who trod out the midsummer 
fire at Moosheim,? seems to hint that the persons who 
perished at these festivals did so in the character of tree- 
spirits or deities of vegetation. From all this we may 
reasonably infer that in the Balder myth on the one hand, 
and the fire-festivals and custom of gathering mistletoe on 
the other hand, we have, as it were, the two broken and 
dissevered halves of an original whole. In other words, we 
may assume with some degree of probability that the myth 
of Balder’s death was not merely a myth, that is, a de- 
scription of physical phenomena in imagery borrowed from 
human life, but that it was at the same time the story 
which people told to explain why they annually burned a~ 
human representative of the god and cut the mistletoe 
with solemn ceremony. If I am right, the story of Balder’s 
tragic end formed, so to say, the text of the sacred drama 
which was acted year by year as a magical rite to cause the 
sun to shine, trees to grow, crops to thrive, and to guard 
man and beast from the baleful arts of fairies and trolls, of 
witches and warlocks. The tale belonged, in short, to that 
class of nature myths which are meant to be supplemented — 
by ritual; here, as so often, myth stood to magic in the 
relation of theory to practice. j 
If a human But if the victims—the human Balders—who died by 
hers fire, whether in spring or at midsummer, were put to death — 


tive ofa 


tree-spirit as living embodiments of tree-spirits or deities of vegetation, 
was bumed it would seem that Balder himself must have been a tree-— 


1 Above, vol. i. p. 148. 2 Above, vol, i. p. 186. 8 Above, p. 26. 


BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 89 


_ spirit or deity of vegetation. It becomes desirable, therefore, 
_ to determine, if we can, the particular kind of tree or trees, 


: festivals. For we may be quite sure that it was not as 
a representative of vegetation in general that the victim 
suffered death. The idea of vegetation in general is too 
abstract to be primitive. Most probably the victim at first 
represented a particular kind of sacred tree. Now of all 
European trees none has such claims as the oak to be 
_ considered as pre-eminently the sacred tree of the Aryans. 
Its worship is attested for all the great branches of the 4 
Aryan stock in Europe. We have seen that it was not only 
the sacred tree, but the principal object of worship of both 
_ Celts and Lithuanians.'_ The roving Celts appear to have 
' carried their worship of the oak with them even to Asia ; 
a for in the heart of Asia Minor the Galatian senate met in 
_ a place which bore the pure Celtic name of Drynemetum or 
“temple of the oak.”? Among the Slavs the oak seems to 
_ have been the sacred tree of the great god Perun.* Accord- 
_ ing to Grimm, the oak ranked first among the holy trees of 
the Germans. It is certainly known to have been adored 
_ by them in the age of heathendom, and traces of its worship 
_ have survived in various parts of Germany almost to the 
_ present day.* Among the ancient Italians the oak was 
_ sacred above all other trees.° The image of Jupiter on the 
i _ Capitol at Rome seems to have been originally nothing but 
a natural oak-tree.° At Dodona, perhaps the oldest of all 


2h 


_ Greek sanctuaries, Zeus was worshipped as immanent in the 


DY at a Lt ks ee ee 


‘sacred oak, and the rustling 


__} As to the worship of the oak in 
Europe, see Zhe Magic Art and the 
_ Evolution of Kings, ii. 349 sgg. Com- 
pare P. Wagler, Die Eiche in alter 
und neuer Zeit, in two parts (Wurzen, 
N.D., and Berlin, 1891). 
1 2 Strabo, xii. 5.1, p.567. The name 
is a compound of dryu, ‘‘ oak,” and 
. nemed, *‘temple” (H. F, Tozer, Seec- 
"tions from Strabo, Oxford, 1893, p. 
284). We know from Jerome (Com- 
_mentar. in Epist. ad Galat. book ii. 
_praef.) that the Galatians retained 
their native Celtic speech as late as 


of its leaves in the wind was 


the fourth century of our era. 

3 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, ii. 365. 

4 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* 
i. 55 5g-5 58 5g., ii. 542, iii. 187 sg. ; 
P. Wagler, Die Eiche in alter und 
neuer Zeit (Berlin, 1891), pp. 40 sg¢. ; 
The Magic Art and the Evolution of 
Kings, ii. 363 599., 371. 

5 L. Preller, Rimische Mythologie® 
(Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 108. 

6 Livy, i. to, Compare C. Batti- 
cher, Der Baumkultus der Hellenen 
(Berlin, 1856), pp. 133 59. 


fires, what 
kind of tree 
did he 


_ of which a personal representative was burned at the fire- represent? 


The 
oak the 


principal 
eens tree 


hepa, 


If the 
human 
victims 
burnt at 
the fire- 
festival re- 
presented 
the oak, 
the reason 


. 


92 BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE CHAP. 


up the cottage fire on Midsummer Day with a heavy block 
of oak-wood. The block is so arranged that it smoulders 
slowly and is not finally reduced to charcoal till the expiry 
of a year. Then upon next Midsummer Day the charred 
embers of the old log are removed to make room for the 
new one, and are mixed with the seed-corn or scattered 
about the garden. This is believed to guard the food 
cooked on the hearth from witchcraft, to preserve the luck 
of the house, to promote the growth of the crops, and to 
preserve them from blight and vermin.’ Thus the custom 
is almost exactly parallel to that of the Yule-log, which in 
parts of Germany, France, England, Servia, and other 
Slavonic lands was commonly of oak-wood.? At the Boeotian 
festival of the Daedala, the analogy of which to the spring 
and midsummer festivals of modern Europe has been already 
pointed out, the great feature was the felling and burning 
of an oak.’ The general conclusion is, that at those periodic 
or occasional ceremonies the ancient Aryans both kindled 
and fed the fire with the sacred oak-wood.* 

But if at these solemn rites the fire was’regularly made 
of oak-wood, it follows that any man who was burned in it 
as a personification of the tree-spirit could have represented 
no tree but the oak. The sacred oak was thus burned in 
duplicate ; the wood of the tree was consumed in the fire, 
and along with it was consumed a living man as a personi- 


1 Montanus, Die deutschen Volksfeste, 
Volksbriuche und deutscher Volksglaube 
(Iserlohn, N.D.), pp. 127, 159. The 
log is called in German Scharholz. 
The custom appears to have prevailed 
particularly in Westphalia, about Sieg 
and Lahn. Compare Montanus, of. 
cit. p. 12, as to the similar custom at 
Christmas. The use of the Scharholz 
is reported to be found also in Nieder- 
lausitz and among the neighbouring 
Saxons. See Paul Wagler, Die Ziche 
in alter und neuer Zett (Berlin, 1891), 


pp. 86 sg. 


2 Above, vol. i. pp. 248, 250, 251, 
257, 258, 260, 263. Elsewhere the 
Yule log has been made of fir, beech, 
holly, yew, crab-tree, or olive. See 
above, vol. i. pp. 249, 257, 263. 


8 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, ii. 140 sg. 

4 A curious use of an oak-wood fire 
to detect a criminal is reported from 
Germany. If a man has been found 
murdered and his murderer is unknown, 
you are recommended to proceed as 
follows. You kindle a fire of dry oak- 
wood, you pour some of the blood from 
the wounds on the fire, and you change 
the poor man’s shoes, putting the right 
shoe on the left foot, and vice versa, 
As soon as that is done, the murderer 
is struck blind and mad, so that he 
fancies he is riding up to the throat in 
water; labouring under this delusion 
he returns to the corpse, when you can 
apprehend him and deliver him up to 
the arm of justice with the greatest ease. 
See Montanus, of. ci#. pp. 159 5g. 


ET a ne Ee ee 


Ix BALDER AND THE MISTLETOE 93 


fication of the oak-spirit. The conclusion thus drawn for for pulling 
the European Aryans in general is confirmed in its special eu pine 


application to the Scandinavians by the relation in which have been 
amongst them the mistletoe appears to have stood to the etait 
burning of the victim in the midsummer fire. We have paki 
seen that among Scandinavians it has been customary to in the 
gather the mistletoe at midsummer. But so far as appears posers 
on the face of this custom, there is nothing to connect it the tree 
with the midsummer fires in which human victims or effigies pa at 
of them were burned. Even if the fire, as seems probable, either by 
was originally always made with oak-wood, why should it polos 
have been necessary to pull the mistletoe? The last link long as the 
between the midsummer customs of gathering the mistletoe MSttoe 
and lighting the bonfires is supplied by Balder’s myth, which intact _ 
can hardly be disjoined from the customs in question. The rem ls 
myth suggests that a vital connexion may once have been 
believed to subsist between the mistletoe and the human 
representative of the oak who was burned in the fire. Accord- 
ing to the myth, Balder could be killed by nothing in heaven 

__ or earth except the mistletoe ; and so long as the mistletoe 
remained on the oak, he was not only immortal but invulner- 
able. Now, if we suppose that Balder was the oak, the 
origin of the myth becomes intelligible. The mistletoe was — 
viewed as the seat of life of the oak, and so long as it was 
uninjured nothing could kill or even wound the oak. The 
conception of the mistletoe as the seat of life of the oak 
would naturally be suggested to primitive people by the 
observation that while the oak is deciduous, the mistletoe 
which grows on it is evergreen. In winter the sight of its 
fresh foliage among the bare branches must have been hailed 
by the worshippers of the tree as a sign that the divine life 
which had ceased to animate the branches yet survived in 
the mistletoe, as the heart of a sleeper still beats when his 
body is motionless. Hence when the god had to be killed— ° 
when the sacred tree had to be burnt—it was necessary to 
begin by breaking off the mistletoe. For so long as the 
mistletoe remained intact, the oak (so people might think) 
was invulnerable; all the blows of their knives and axes 
would glance harmless from its surface. But once tear from 


the oak its sacred heart—the mistletoe—and the tree nodded 


This belief 
is illus- 
trated by 
folk-tales 
told by 
many 
peoples. 


96 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cuar. 


be circumstances in which, if the life or soul remains in the 
man, it stands a greater chance of sustaining injury than if 
it were stowed away in some safe and secret place. Accord- 
ingly, in such circumstances, primitive man takes his soul 
out of his body and deposits it for security in some snug 
spot, intending to replace it in his body when the danger is 
past. Or if he should discover some place of absolute 
security, he may be content to leave his soul there per- 
manently. The advantage of this is that, so long as the 
soul remains unharmed in the place where he has deposited 
it, the man himself is immortal; nothing can kill his body, 
since his life is not in it. 

Evidence of this primitive beliet is furnished by a class 
of folk-tales of which the Norse story of “The giant who had 
no heart in his body” is perhaps the best-known example. 
Stories of this kind are widely diffused over the world, and 
from their number and the variety of incident and of details 
in which the leading idea is embodied, we may infer that 
the conception of an external soul is one which has had a 
powerful hold on the minds of men at an early stage of 
history. For folk-tales are a faithful reflection of the world 
as it appeared to the primitive mind; and we may be sure 
that any idea which commonly occurs in them, however 
absurd it may seem to us, must once have been an ordinary 
article of belief. This assurance, so far as it concerns the 
supposed power of disengaging the soul from the body for a 
longer or shorter time, is amply corroborated by a com- 
parison of the folk-tales in question with the actual beliefs 
and practices of savages. To this we shall return after some 
specimens of the tales have been given. The specimens will 
be selected with a view of illustrating both the characteristic 
features and the wide diffusion of this class of tales,’ 


1 A numberof the following examples 
were collected by Mr. E. Clodd in his 
paper, ‘‘ The Philosophy of Punchkin,” 
Folk-lore Journal, ii. (1884) pp. 288- 
303; and again in his Atyths and 
Dreams (London, 1885), pp. 188-198. 
The subject of the external soul, both in 
folk-tales and in custom, has been well 
handled by G. A. Wilken in his two 
papers, ‘‘ De betrekking tusschen men- 


schen- dieren- en plantenleven naar het 
volksgeloof,” De Jndische Gids, Nov- 
ember 1884, pp. 595-612, and ‘* De 
Simsonsage,” De Gids, 1888, No. 5. 
In **De Simsonsage” Wilken has 
reproduced, to a great extent in the 
same words, most of the evidence cited 
by him in ‘‘ De betrekking,” yet with- 
out referring to that paper. When I 
wrote this book in 1889-1890 I was 


t he Hebrides. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 


97 


In the first place, the story of the external soul is told, 
‘in various forms, by all Aryan peoples from Hindoostan to 
A very common form of it is this: A 
warlock, giant, or other fairyland being is invulnerable and 


immortal because he keeps his soul hidden far away in 
some secret place; but a fair princess, whom he holds 


thralled in his enchanted castle, wiles his secret from him 
nd reveals it to the hero, who seeks out the warlock’s soul, 
, life, or death (as it is variously called), and, by destroy- 
g it, simultaneously kills the warlock. Thus a Hindoo 


story tells how a magician called Punchkin held a queen 
captive for twelve years, and would fain marry her, but she 


ould not have him. 


At last the queen’s son came to 


Stories of 
an external 
soul 
common 
among 
Aryan 
peoples. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
Hindoo 
stories. 
Punchkin 
and the 


rescue her, and the two plotted together to kill Punchkin. parrot. 


never touch you? And are 


am not as others. 


nacquainted with ‘‘ De betrekking,” 
at used with advantage ‘‘ De Simson- 
ge,” a copy of it having been kindly 
‘sent " me _by the author, I am the 
‘More anxious to express my obligations 
**De Simsonsage,” because I have 
d little occasion to refer to it, most 
the original authorities cited by the 


easily accessible to me in Cambridge. 
t would be a convenience to anthro- 
logists if Wilken’s valuable papers, 
ersed as they are in various Dutch 
iodicals which are seldom to be met 
th in England, were collected and 
wublished together. After the appear- 
mce of my first anthropological -essay 
n 1885, Professor Wilken entered into 
espondence with me, and thence- 
ward sent me copies of his papers as 
hey appeared ; but of his papers pub- 
Shed before that date I have not a 
‘complete set. (Note to the Second 
dition.) The wish expressed in the 
eguing note has now been happily 
filled.  Wilken’s many scattered 


PT. VII. VOL. 11 


ever to feel human suffering ?” 
Far, far 


50 the queen spoke the magician fair, and pretended that 
e had at last made up her 
do tell me,” she said, “are you 


mind to marry him. “And 
quite immortal? Can death 
you too great an enchanter 

“Tt is true,” he said, “ that 
away, hundreds of thousands 


papers have been collected and pub- 
lished in a form which leaves nothing 
to be desired (De verspreide Geschrifien 
van Prof. Dr. G. A. Wilken, verzameld 
door Mr. F. D. E. van Ossenbruggen, 
in four volumes, The Hague, 1912). 
The two papers ‘‘ De betrekking” and 
** De Simsonsage” are reprinted in the 
third volume, pp. 289-309 and pp. 
551-579. The subject of the external 
soul in relation to Balder has been 
fully illustrated and discussed by Pro- 
fessor F. Kauffmann in his alder, 
Mythus und Sage (Strasburg, 1902), 
pp- 136 sgg. Amongst the first to 
collect examples of the external soul in 
folk-tales*was the learned Dr. Reinhold 
Kohler (in Orzent und Occident, ii., 
Gottingen, 1864, pp. 100-103 ; reprinted 
with additional references in the writer’s 
Kleinere Schriften, i., Weimar, 1898, 
pp- 158-161). Many versions of the 
tale were also cited by W. R. S. 
Ralston (Russzan Folk-tales, London, 
1873, pp. 109 sgg.). (Note to the 
Third Edition.) 
H 


98 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


of miles from this, there lies a desolate country covered 
with thick jungle. In the midst of the jungle grows a 
circle of palm trees, and in the centre of the circle stand 
six chattees full of water, piled one above another: below 
the sixth chattee is a small cage, which contains a little 
green parrot ;—on the life of the parrot depends my life ;— 
and if the parrot is killed: I must die. It is, however,” 
added, “impossible that the parrot should sustain any 
injury, both on account of the inaccessibility of the country, 
and because, by my appointment, many thousand genii 
surround the palm trees, and kill all who approach th 
place.” But the queen’s young son overcame all difficulti 
and got possession of the parrot. He brought it to the 
door of the magician’s palace, and began playing with it, 
Punchkin, the magician, saw him, and, coming out, tried to 
persuade the boy to give him the parrot. “Give me my 
parrot!” cried Punchkin. Then the boy took hold of the 
parrot and tore off one of his wings; and as he did so the 
magician’s right arm fell off. Punchkin then stretched out 
his left arm, crying, “Give me my parrot!” The prince 
pulled off the parrot’s second wing, and the magician’s left 
arm tumbled off. “Give me my parrot!” cried he, and fell 
on his knees. The prince pulled off the parrot’s right leg, 
the magician’s right leg fell off; the prince pulled off the 
parrot’s left leg, down fell the magician’s left. Nothing 
remained of him except the trunk and the head; but 
still he rolled his eyes, and cried, “Give me my parrot 
“Take your parrot, then,” cried the boy ; and with that he 
wrung the bird’s neck, and threw it at the magician ; and, 
as he did so, Punchkin’s head twisted round, and, with a 
The ogre fearful groan, he died!* In another Hindoo tale an ogre 
cag is asked by his daughter, “ Papa, where do you keep your 
bird. soul?” “Sixteen miles away from this place,” he said, “is 
a tree. Round the tree are tigers, and bears, and scorpions, 
and snakes; on the top of the tree is a very great fa 
snake; on his head is a little cage; in the cage is a bird. 
and my soul is in that bird.” The end of the ogre is lik 
that of the magician in the previous tale. As the bird’ 


1 Mary Frere, Old Deccan Days, Third Edition (London, 1881), 
12-16, 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 99 


wings and legs are torn off, the ogre’s arms and legs drop 
off; and when its neck is wrung he falls down dead.? 
In another Hindoo story a princess called Sodewa Bai 


astrologer told her parents, “ This is no common child; the 
necklace of gold about her neck contains your daughter's 
soul ; let it therefore be guarded with the utmost care; for 
if it were taken off, and worn by another person, she would 
die.” So her mother caused it to be firmly fastened round 
the child’s neck, and, as soon as the child was old enough to 
understand, she told her its value, and warned her never to 
let it be taken off. In course of time Sodewa Bai was 
married to a prince who had another wife living. The 
first wife, jealous of her young rival, persuaded a negress to 
steal from Sodewa Bai the golden necklace which contained 
her soul. The negress did so, and, as soon as she put the 
necklace round her own neck, Sodewa Bai died. All day 
long the negress used to wear the necklace; but late at 
night, on going to bed, she would take it off and put it by 
till morning; and whenever she took it off, Sodewa Bai’s 
soul returned to her and she lived. But when morning 
came, and the negress put on the necklace, Sodewa Bai 
died again. At last the prince discovered the treachery of 
his elder wife and restored the golden necklace to Sodewa 
Bai.” In another Hindoo story a holy mendicant tells a 
queen that she will bear a son, adding, “As enemies will 
try to take away the life of your son, I may as well tell you 
that the life of the boy will be bound up in the life of a big 
boal fish which is in your tank, in front of the palace. in 
‘the heart of the fish is a small box of wood, in the box is a 
Mecklace of gold, that necklace is the life of your son.” 
The boy was born and received the name of Dalim. His 
Mother was the Suo or younger queen. But the Duo or 
der queen hated the child, and learning the secret of his 
life, she caused the doa/ fish, with which his life was bound 
up, to be caught. Dalim was playing near the tank at the 


‘was born with a golden necklace about her neck, and the ? 


1 Maive Stokes, Zndian Fairy Tales 
(London, 1880), pp. 58-60. For 
similar Hindoo stories, see za., pp. 
157 sg. ; Lal Behari Day, Folk-tales of 
Bengal (London, 1883), pp. 121 sg. ; 


F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, Wide- 
awake Stories (Bombay and London, 
1884), pp. 58-60. 

2 Mary Frere, Old Deccan Days, 
PP- 239 599. 


The 
rincess 
whose soul 
was ina 
golden 
necklace, 


The prince 
whose soul 
was ina 


fish. 


Cashmeer 
stories of 
ogres 
whose lives 
were in 
cocks, a 
pigeon, 

a starling, 
a spinning- 
wheel, and 
a pillar. 


100 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


time, but “the moment the deal fish was caught in the net, 
that moment Dalim felt unwell; and when the fish was 
brought up to land, Dalim fell down on the ground, and 
made as if he was about to breathe his last. He was 
immediately taken into his mother’s room, and the king was 
astonished on hearing of the sudden illness of his son and 
heir. The fish was by the order of the physician taken into 
the room of the Duo queen, and as it lay on the floor 
striking its fins on the ground, Dalim in his mother’s room 
was given up for lost. When the fish was cut open, a 
casket was found in it; and in the casket lay a necklace of 
gold. The moment the necklace was worn by the queen, 
that very moment Dalim died in his mother’s room.” The 
queen used to put off the necklace every night, and when- 
ever she did so, the boy came to life again. But every 
morning when the queen put on the necklace, he died again.’ 

In a Cashmeer story a lad visits an old ogress, pretend- 
ing to be her grandson, the son of her daughter who had 
married a king. So the old ogress took him into her con- 
fidence and shewed him seven cocks, a spinning wheel, a 
pigeon, and a starling. “These seven cocks,” said she, 
“contain the lives of your seven uncles, who are away for a 
few days. Only as long as the cocks live can your uncles’ 
hope to live; no power can hurt them as long as the seven” 
cocks are at and sound. The spinning-wheel contains my 
life ; if it is broken, I too shall be broken, and must die ; but 
otherwing I shall live on for ever. The pigeon contains your 
grandfather’s life, and the starling your mother’s; as long as 
these live, nothing can harm your grandfather or your 
mother.” So the lad killed the seven cocks and the pigeon 
and the starling, and smashed the spinning-wheel ; and at 
the moment he did so the ogres and ogresses perished.? In: 
another story from Cashmeer an ogre cannot die unless a 
particular pillar in the verandah of his palace be broken. 
Learning the secret, a prince struck the pillar again and 
again till it was broken in pieces. And it was as if each 


1 Lal Behari Day, Fo/k-tales of Ben- pp. 83 sg. 
gal, pp. 1 sgg. For similar stories of F 
necklaces, see Mary Frere, Old Deccan 2 J. H. Knowles, Fo/k-tales of Kash 
Days, pp. 233 sg.; F. A. Steel and mr, Second Edition (London, 1893), 
R. C. Temple, Wide-awake Stories, pp. 49 sg. i 


x THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 101 


‘ stroke had fallen on the ogre, for he howled lamentably and 
shook like an aspen every time the prince hit the pillar, 
until at last, when the pillar fell down, the ogre also fell 
down and gave up the ghost.’ In another Cashmeer tale 
an ogre is represented as laughing very heartily at the idea 
that he might possibly die. He said that “he should never 
die. No power could oppose him; no years could age him ; 
he should remain ever strong ae ever young, for the thing 
wherein his life dwelt was most difficult to obtain.” It was 
in a queen bee, which was in a honeycomb on a tree. But 
_the bees in the honeycomb were many and fierce, and it was 
only at the greatest risk that any one could catch the queen. 
However, the hero achieved the enterprise and crushed the 
queen bee; and immediately the ogre fell stone dead to the 
ground, so that the whole land trembled with the shock.” 
In some Bengalee tales the life of a whole tribe of ogres is 
described as concentrated in two bees. The secret was thus 
‘revealed by an old ogress to a captive princess who pre- 
tended to fear lest the ogress should die. “ Know, foolish 
girl,” said the ogress, “that we ogres never die. We are not 
3 naturally immortal, but our life depends on a secret which 
‘no human being can unravel. Let me tell you what it is, 
that you may be comforted. You know yonder tank ; there 
_is in the middle of it a crystal pillar, on the top of which in 
_deep waters are two bees. If any human being can dive into 
_ the waters, and bring up to land the two bees from the pillar 
in one breath, and destroy them so that not a drop of their 
blood falls to the ground, then we ogres shall certainly die ; 
_ but if a single drop of blood falls to the ground, then from it 
_will start up a thousand ogres. But what human being will 
find out this secret, or, finding it, will be able to achieve the 
feat? You need not, therefore, darling, be sad; I am prac- 
tically immortal.” As usual, the princess reveals the secret 
to the hero, who kills the bees, and that same moment all 
: the ogres drop down dead, each on the spot where he 
happened to be standing. In another Bengalee story it is 
1 J. H. Knowles, of. cit. p. 134. 117. For an Indian story in which a 


- #2 J. H. Knowles, of. cit. pp. 382 s¢g. _giant’s life is in five black bees, see 
' 8 Lal Behari Day, Fo/k-tales of Ben- W. A. Clouston, Popular Tales and 


i 


_ gal, pp. 85 sg. ; compare id., pp. 253 Fictions (Edinburgh and_ London, 
_ sqq-; Indian ‘Antiguary, i. (1872) p- 1887), i. 350. 


4 
a 


Cashmeer 
and 
Bengalee 
stories of 


CONe 
» whose lives 
were in 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
a Siamese 
or Cam- 
bodian 
story. 


Indian 
stories of 
a tree and 
a barley 
plant that 
were life- 
tokens, 


102 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


said that all the ogres dwell in Ceylon, and that all their 
lives are in a single lemon. A boy cuts the lemon in pieces, 
and all the ogres die.’ 

In a Siamese or Cambodian story, probably derived from 
India, we are told that Thossakan or Ravana, the King of 
Ceylon, was able by magic art to take his soul out of his 
body and leave it in a box at home, while he went to the 
wars. Thus he was invulnerable in battle. When he was 
about to give battle to Rama, he deposited his soul with a 
hermit called Fire-eye, who was to keep it safe for him. So 
in the fight Rama was astounded to see that his arrows 
struck the king without wounding him. But one of Rama’s 
allies, knowing the secret of the king’s invulnerability, trans- 
formed himself by magic into the likeness of the king, and 
going to the hermit asked back his soul. On receiving it 
he soared up into the air and flew to Rama, brandishing the 
box and squeezing it so hard that all the breath left the 
King of Ceylon’s body, and he died.2 In a Bengalee story 
a prince going into a far country planted with his own hands 
a tree in the courtyard of his father’s palace, and said to his 
parents, “ This tree is my life. When you see the tree green 
and fresh, then know that it is well with me; when you see 
the tree fade in some parts, then know that I am in an ill 
case ; and when you see the whole tree fade, then know that 
I am dead and gone.”* In another Indian tale a prince, 
setting forth on his travels, left behind him a barley plant, 
with instructions that it should be carefully tended and 
watched ; for if it flourished, he would be alive and well, but 
if it drooped, then some mischance was about to happen to 
him. And so it fell out. For the prince was beheaded, 
and as his head rolled off, the barley plant snapped in two 
and the ear of barley fell to the ground.* In the legend of 


Jataka there is a tale (book ii. No. | 
208) which relates how Buddha in the — 


1 Indian Antiguary, i. (1872), p. 
171. 


2 A. Bastian, Die Voelker des oest- 
lichen Asien, iv. (Jena, 1868) pp. 
304 Sg. 

8 Lal Behari Day, Fo/k-tales of Ben- 
gal, p. 189. 

4 F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, 
Wide-awake Stories (Bombay and Lon- 
don, 1884), pp. 52, 64. In the Indian 


form of a monkey deceived a crocodile 
by pretending that monkeys kept their — 
hearts in figs growing on a tree. See 
The Jataka or Stories of the Buddha’s 
Jormer Births translated from the Pali 
by various hands, vol. ii. translated by — 
W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge, 1895), 


pp. III sg. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 103 


the origin of Gilgit there figures a fairy king whose soul is 

in the snows and who can only perish by fire.’ 

_ In Greek tales, ancient and modern, the idea of an The exter- 

"external soul is not uncommon. When Meleager was seven : 

days old, the Fates appeared to his mother ‘aad told her stories. 

that Meleager would die when the brand which was blazing Meleager 

on the hearth had burnt down. So his mother snatched the 272% 

_ brand from the fire and kept it in a box. But in after-years, 

_ being enraged at her son for slaying her brothers, she burnt 

the brand in the fire and Meleager expired in agonies, as if 
flames were preying on his vitals.” Again, Nisus King of Nisus ana 
Megara had a purple or golden hair on the middle of his pal 
_ head, and it was fated that whenever the hair was pulled out hair. 

the king should die. When Megara was besieged by the 

_Cretans, the king’s daughter Scylla fell in love with Minos, 

their king, and pulled out the fatal hair from her father’s 

head. So he died* Similarly Poseidon made Pterelaus Pterclaus 

immortal by giving him a golden hair on his head. But 45 

when Taphos, the home of Pterelaus, was besieged by hair. 

Amphitryo, the daughter of Pterelaus fell in love with 

_ Amphitryo and killed her father by plucking out the golden 

hair with which his life was bound up.* In a modern Greek Modern 

folk-tale a man’s strength lies in three golden hairs on his 

head. When his mother pulls them out, he grows weak and 

_ timid and is slain by his enemies.’ Another Greek story, in 

: which we may perhaps detect a reminiscence of Nisus and 


1G. W. Leitner, Zhe Languages isches Museum, N.F. xlix. (1894) pp. 
and Races of Dardistan, Third Edition 310-313. 


(Lahore, 1878), p. 9. 3 ane hes 
; 3 Apollodorus, Szbliotheca, i. 8; 8: Pecoratrilge aggre ye 5- 
4 Diodorus Siculus, iv. Paosanies, A peeenpiens been Pit SE 5 Se: 
ai ki ee ue 60, sanias, i. 19. 45 Ciris, 116 sgg.; 

: x 31. 43 ; Es - 
4 sqg. ; Antoninus Liberalis, 7ransform. Ovid: —— 2 ef Me. home — 
ib. ; Dio Chrysostom Or. \xvii. vol. ii. ae f AGM eae Peet rs 
gan cd Le Dindoe! (Leipeic, 1857); Gee be tee tae ee 
| Hyginus, Fad. 171, 1743 Ovid, Mefom. as pulled out, he became weak and 
: wil. 445 59g. In Figel werd eo was slain by ‘Minos. According to 
Bs denen oa an olive-leaf which _ 27EDaS (Fah 198) Nisus was destined 
“his either hed given birth to along bi a soe ly peigre er ne eee ae 
“with the babe. See J. Malalas, Chrono. PUP © O°* On NS NS : 
| graphia, vi. pp. 165 sg. ed. L.’ Dindorf Apollodorus, Bibliotheca, ii. 4. § 
x can, 1831); J. Tzetzes, Scholia on 3nd 7. 

weophron, 492 sq. (vol. ii. pp. 646 sg., 5 J. G. von Hahn, Griechische und 


PS ary G. Miller, Leipsic, 1811); G. albanesische Marchen (Leipsic, 1864), 
a » ‘*Zur Meleagersage,” Rhein- i. 217; a similar story, iid. ii. 282. 


ion 


4 


The ex- 
ternal soul 
in doves. 


104 


Scylla, relates how a certain king, who was the strongest man 
of his time, had three long hairs on his breast. But when 
he went to war with another king, and his own treacherous 


wife had cut off the three hairs, he became the weakest of . 


men.’ In another modern Greek story the life of an en- 


chanter is bound up with three doves which are in the belly 
of a wild boar. When the first dove is killed, the magician 
grows sick ; when the second is killed, he grows very sick ; 
and when the third is killed, he dies” In another Greek 
story of the same sort an ogre’s strength is in three singing 
birds which are in a wild boar. The hero kills two of the 
birds, and then coming to the ogre’s house finds him lying 
on the ground in great pain. He shews the third bird to 
the ogre, who begs that the hero will either let it fly away 
or give it to him to eat. But the hero wrings the bird’s 
neck, and the ogre dies on the spot.> In a variant of the 
latter story the monster’s strength is in two doves, and when 
the hero kills one of them, the monster cries out, “ Ah, woe 
is me! Half my life is gone. Something must have 
happened to one of the doves.” When the second dove is 
killed, he dies. In another Greek story the incidents of the 
three golden hairs and three doves are artificially combined. 
A monster has on his head three golden hairs which open 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cnar. | 


the door of a chamber in which are three doves: when the © 


first dove is killed, the monster grows sick ; when the second 
is killed, he grows worse ; and when the third is killed, he 
dies.° 


1 B. Schmidt, Griechische Marchen, 
Sagen und Volksheder (Leipsic, 1877), 
pp. 91 sg. The same writer found in 
the island of Zacynthus a belief that the 
whole strength of the ancient Greeks 
resided in three hairs on their breasts, 
and that it vanished whenever these 
hairs were cut; but if the hairs were 
allowed to grow again, their strength 
returned (B. Schmidt, Das Vol*sleben 
der Neugriechen, Leipsic, 1871, p. 
206). The Biblical story of Samson 
and Delilah (Judges xvi.) implies a 
belief of the same sort, as G. A. Wilken 
abundantly shewed in his paper, ‘* De 
Simsonsage,” De Gids, 1888, No. 5 
(reprinted in his Verspreide Geschrifien, 
The Hague, 1912, vol. iii, pp. 551- 


579). 

2 J. G. von Hahn, of. cét. ii. 215 
Sq. 

3 Jbid. ii. 275 sg. Similar stories, 
zbid. ii. 204, 294 sg. In an Albanian 
story a monster’s strength is in three 
pigeons, which are in a hare, which is 
in the silver tusk of a wild boar. When 
the boar is killed, the monster feels ill; 
when the hare is cut open, he can 
hardly stand on his feet; when the 
three pigeons are killed, he expires. 
See Aug. Dozon, Contes albanats (Paris, 
1881), pp. 132 sg. 

4 J. G. von Hahn, 
$qq. 

5 Jbid. i. 187. 


op. cit. ii, 260 — 


In another Greek tale an old man’s strength is in a — 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 105 


_ten-headed serpent. When the serpent’s heads are being 
_ cut off, he feels unwell ; and when the last head is struck off, 
he expires! In another Greek story a dervish tells a queen 
_ that she will have three sons, that at the birth of each she 
must plant a pumpkin in the garden, and that in the fruit 
borne by the pumpkins will reside the strength of the 
children. In due time the infants are born and the pump- 
kins planted. As the children grow up, the pumpkins grow 
with them. One morning the eldest son feels sick, and on 
- going into the garden they find that the largest pumpkin is 
gone. Next night the second son keeps watch in a summer- 
house in the garden. At midnight a negro appears and cuts 
the second pumpkin. At once the boy’s strength goes out 
of him, and he is unable to pursue the negro. The 
youngest son, however, succeeds in slaying the negro and 
recovering the lost pumpkins.” 
Ancient Italian legend furnishes a close parallel to the The exter- 
Greek story of Meleager. Silvia, the young wife of Sep- rege 
timius Marcellus, had a child by the god Mars. The god stories. 
_ gave her a spear, with which he said that the fate of the ashen 
child would be bound up. When the boy grew up he 
- quarrelled with his maternal uncles and slew them. So in 
revenge his mother burned the spear on which his life de- 
_pended.? In one of the stories of the Pentamerone a certain Thedragon 
queen has a twin brother, a dragon. The astrologers de- '™™ 
clared at her birth that she would live just as long as the 
_ dragon and no longer, the death of the one involving the death 
of the other. If the dragon were killed, the only way to 
4 restore the queen to life would be to smear her temples, breast, 
_ pulses, and nostrils with the blood of the dragon.* In a Thesoulin 
modern Roman version of “Aladdin and the Wonderful * 8° 
= pian,’ the magician tells the princess, whom he holds captive 
in a floating rock in mid-ocean, that he will never die. The 
princess reports this to the prince her husband, who has 
E come to rescue her. The prince replies, “It is impossible 


. es Ae gs ii, 23 sg. uncles is the skin of a boar, which the 
mile Legrand, Contes populaires nephew presented to his lady-love and 
? grecs (Paris, 1881), pp. 191 sgg. which his uncles took from her. 


3 Plutarch, Parallela, 26. In both 4 G. Basile, Pentamerone, iibertragen 
_ the Greek dad Italian stories the sub- von Felix Liebrecht (Breslau, 1846), ii. 
_ ject of quarrel between nephew and 60 sg. 


Italian 
story ofa 
wicked 
fairy whose 
death was 
in an egg. 


106 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


but that there should be some one thing or other that is 
fatal to him; ask him what that one fatal thing is.” So 
the princess asked the magician, and he told her that in 
the wood was a hydra with seven heads; in the middle 
head of the hydra was a leveret, in the head of the leveret 
was a bird, in the bird’s head was a precious stone, and if 
this stone were put under his pillow he would die. The 
prince procured the stone, and the princess laid it under 
the magician’s pillow. No sooner did the enchanter lay his 
head on the pillow than he gave three terrible yells, turned 
himself round and round three times, and died.’ © 

Another Italian tale sets forth how a great cloud, 
which was really a fairy, used to receive a young girl 
as tribute every year from a certain city; and the in- 
habitants had to give the girls up, for if they did not, 
the cloud would throw things at them and kill them all. — 
One year it fell to the lot of the king’s daughter to be ~ 
handed over to the cloud, and they took her in proces- 
sion, to the roll of muffled drums, and attended by her 
weeping father and mother, to the top of a mountain, and 
left her sitting in a chair there all alone. Then the fairy 
cloud came down on the top of the mountain, set the 
princess in her lap, and began to suck her blood out of her 
little finger ; for it was on the blood of girls that this wicked 
fairy lived. When the poor princess was faint with the loss 
of blood and lay like a log, the cloud carried her away 
up to her fairy palace in the sky. But a brave youth had 
seen all that happened from behind a bush, and no sooner 
did the fairy spirit away the princess to her palace than he 
turned himself into an eagle and flew after them. He 
lighted on a tree just outside the palace, and looking in 
at the window he beheld a room full of young girls all in 
bed ; for these were the victims of former years whom the 
fairy cloud had half killed by sucking their blood ; yet they 
called her mamma. When the fairy went away and left the © 
girls, the brave young man had food drawn up for them by ~ 
ropes, and he told them to ask the fairy how she might be — 


killed and what was to become of them when she died. It — 


was a delicate question, but the fairy answered it, saying, “I — 
1 R. H. Busk, Folk-lore of Rome (London, 1874), pp. 164 sgg. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 


‘shall never die.” However, when the girls pressed her, she 
_ took them out on a terrace and said, “Do you see that 
| mountain far off there? On that mountain is a tigress. 
| with seven heads. If you wish me to die, a lion must fight 
a that tigress and tear off all seven of her heads. In her body 
| is an egg, and if any one hits me with it in the middle of 
_ my forehead, I shall die; but if that egg falls into my 
. hands, the tigress will come to life again, resume her seven 
| heads, and I shall live.” When the young girls heard this 
| they pretended to be glad and said, “Good! certainly our 
| mamma can never die,” but naturally they were discouraged. 
| However, when she went away again, they told it all to the 
_ young man, and he bade them have no fear. Away he went 
_to the mountain, turned himself into a lion, and fought the 
| tigress. Meantime the fairy came home, saying, “Alas! I 
| feel ill!” For six days the fight went on, the young man 
| tearing off one of the tigress’s heads each day, and each day 
' the strength of the fairy kept ebbing away. Then after 
' allowing himself two days’ rest the hero tore off the seventh 
_ head and secured the egg, but not till it had rolled into the 
_ sea and been brought back to him by a friendly dog-fish. 
When he returned to the fairy with the egg in his hand, she 
begged and prayed him to give it her, but he made her first 
restore the young girls to health and send them away in 
_ handsome carriages. When she had done so, he struck her 
| on the forehead with the egg, and she fell down dead.’ 
_ Similarly in a story from the western Riviera a sorcerer 
- called Body-without-Soul can only be killed by means of an 
egg which is in an eagle, which is in a dog, which is in a 
| lion; and the egg must be broken on the sorcerer’s forehead. 
= The hero, who achieves the adventure, has received the 
| power of changing himself into a lion, a dog, an eagle, and an 
| ant from four creatures of these sorts among whom he had 
fairly divided the carcase of a dead ass.” 


107 


iT. F. Crane, “/talian Popular 
_ Tales (London, 1885), pp. 31-34. 
’ The hero had acquired the power of 
E ing himself into an eagle, a lion, 
and an ant from three creatures of 
_ these sorts whose quarrel about their 
_ Shares in a dead ass he had composed. 
_ This incident occurs in other tales of the 


same type. See below, note? and pp. 
120 with note,? 132, 133 with note.! 
2 J. B. Andrews, Contes Ligures 
(Paris, 1892), No. 46, pp. 213 sgg. 
In a parallel Sicilian story the hero 
Beppino slays a sorcerer in the same 
manner after he had received from an 
eagle, a lion, and an ant the same 


A sorcerer 
Body-with- 
out-Soul 
whose 
death was 
in an egg. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
Slavonic 
stories. 


Russian 
story of 
Koshchei 
the 
Deathless, 
whose 
death was 
in an egg. 


108 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP, | 


Stories of the same sort are current among Slavonic 
peoples. In some of them, as in the biblical story of 
Samson and Delilah, the warlock is questioned by a 
treacherous woman as to the place where his strength 
resides or his life or death is stowed away; and his. sus- 
picions being roused by her curiosity, he at first puts her off 
with false answers, but is at last beguiled into telling her 
the truth, thereby incurring his doom through her treachery. 
Thus a Russian story tells how a certain warlock called 
Kashtshei or Koshchei the Deathless carried off a princess 
and kept her prisoner in his golden castle. However, a 
prince made up to her one day as she was walking alone 
and disconsolate in the castle garden, and cheered by the 
prospect of escaping with him she went to the warlock and 
coaxed him with false and flattering words, saying, “My 
dearest friend, tell me, I pray you, will you never die?” 
“Certainly not,” says he. ‘“ Well,” says she, “and where is 
your death? is it in your dwelling?” “To be sure it is,” 
says he, “it is in the broom under the threshold.” There- 
upon the princess seized the broom and threw it on the fire, 
but although the broom burned, the deathless Koshchei re- 
mained alive; indeed not so much as a hair of him was singed. 
Balked in her first attempt, the artful hussy pouted and said, | 
“You do not love me true, for you have not told me where © 
your death is; yet I am not angry, but love you with all 
my heart.” With these fawning words she besought the — 
warlock to tell her truly where his death was. So he 
laughed and said, “Why do you wish to know? Well 
then, out of love I will tell you where it lies. In a certain — 
field there stand three green oaks, and under the roots of © 
the largest oak is a worm, and if ever this worm is found — 
and crushed, that instant I shall die.” When the princess } 
heard these words, she went straight to her lover and told — 
him all; and he searched till he found the oaks and dug up 
the worm and crushed it. Then he hurried to the warlock’s © 
castle, but only to learn from the princess that the warlock — 


gift of transformation in return for the another Sicilian parallel, Laura Gon- 
same service. See G. Pitre, ade, zenbach, Sicé/ianische Marchen(Leipsic, — 
Novelle e Racconti popolart Siciliant, 1870), No. 6, pp. 34-38. 4 
ii, (Palermo, 1875) p. 2153; and for 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 109 


was still alive. Then she fell to wheedling and coaxing 
_ Koshchei once more, and this time, overcome by her wiles, 
_he opened his heart to her and told her the truth. “My 
_ death,” said he, “is far from here and hard to find, on the 
_ wide ocean. In that sea is an island, and on the island there 
_ grows a green oak, and beneath the oak is an iron chest, and 
_ in the chest is a small basket, and in the’basket is a hare, 
and in the hare is a duck, and in the duck is an egg; and 
he who finds the egg and breaks it, kills me at the same 
time.” The prince naturally procured the fateful egg and 
_with it in his hands he confronted the deathless warlock. 
_ The monster would have killed him, but the prince began to 
_ squeeze the egg. At that the warlock shrieked with pain, 
and turning to the false princess, who stood by smirking 
and smiling, “Was it not out of love for you,” said he, 
_ “that I told you where my death was? And is this the 
return you make to me?” With that he grabbed at his 
Sword, which hung from a peg on the wall; but before he 
could reach it, the prince had crushed the egg, and sure 
_ enough the deathless warlock found his death at the same 
~ moment.) 

In another version of the same story, when the cunning 
warlock deceives the traitress by telling her that his 
death is in the broom, she gilds the broom, and at supper 
_ the warlock sees it’ shining under the threshold and asks her 
_ sharply, “ What’s that?” “Oh,” says she, “ you see how I 
_ honour you.” “Simpleton!” says he, “I was joking. My 
death is out there fastened to the oak fence.” So next day 
when the warlock was out, the prince came and gilded the 
whole fence ; and in the evening when the warlock was at 
supper he looked out of the window and saw the fence 
glittering like gold. “And pray what may that be?” said 
_ he to the princess. “You see,” said she, “how I respect 
_ you. If you are dear to me, dear too is your death. That 
i is why I have gilded the fence in which your death resides.” 
E The speech pleased the warlock, and in the fulness of his 
heart he revealed to her the fatal secret of the egg. When 
the prince, with the help of some friendly animals, obtained 
possession of the egg, he put it in his bosom and repaired to 

1 Anton Dietrich, Russian Popular Tales (London, 1857), pp. 21-24. 


Other 
versions of 
the story of 
Koshchei - 
the 
Deathless. 


110 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cuar. 


the warlock’s house. The warlock himself was sitting at the 
window in a very gloomy frame of mind; and when the 
prince appeared and shewed him the egg, the light grew 
dim in the warlock’s eyes and he became all of a sudden 
very meek and mild. But when the prince began to play 
with the egg and to throw it from one hand to the other, the 
deathless Koshchei staggered from one corner of the room 
to the other, and when the prince broke the egg, Koshchei 
the Deathless fell down and died.’ “ In one of the descrip- 
tions of Koshchei’s death, he is said to be killed by a blow 
on the forehead inflicted by the mysterious egg—that last 
link in the magic chain by which his life is darkly bound. 
In another version of the same story, but told of a snake, the 
fatal blow is struck by a small stone found in the yolk of an 
egg, which is inside a duck, which is inside a hare, which is 
Deathin inside a stone, which is on an island.” In another Russian 


the Bite story the death of an enchantress is in a blue rose-tree in a 
blue forest. Prince Ivan uproots the rose-tree, whereupon 
the enchantress straightway sickens. He brings the rose- 
tree to her house and finds her at the point of death. Then 
he throws it into the cellar, crying, “Behold her death!” 
and at once the whole building shakes, “and becomes an 
island, on which are people who had been sitting in Hell, 
and who offer up thanks to Prince Ivan.”* In another 
Russian story a prince is grievously tormented by a witch 
who has got hold of his heart, and keeps it seething in a — 
magic cauldron.* | 

The exter- In a Bohemian tale a warlock’s strength lies in an egg — 

sy heanda which is in a duck, which is in a stag, which is under a tree. 

and A seer finds the egg and sucks it. Then the warlock grows 

Servian as weak as a child, “for all his strength had passed into the 
seer.”® A Servian story relates how a certain warlock called 


True Steel, True Steel carried off a prince’s wife and kept her shut up 


Bech in his cave. But the prince contrived to get speech of her 


wasin and told her that she must persuade True Steel to reveal to 
a bird. ; 


1 Jeremiah Curtin, AZyths and Folk- 2 W. R. S. Ralston, of. cit. p. 109. - 


tales of the Russians, Western Slavs, 8 W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folke 
and Magyars (London, 1891), pp. tales, pp. 113 sg. 
119-122. Compare W. R. S, Ralston, 


Russian Folk-tales (London, 1873), * Td., p. 114. 
pp. 100-105. § Jd., p. 110. 


: 
| 
| 
. 


x THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES Int 


_her where his strength lay. So when True Steel came home. 
_ the prince’s wife said to him, “Tell me, now, where is your 
great strength?” He answered, “ My wife, my strength is 
in my sword.” Then she began to pray and turned to his 
sword. When True Steel saw that, he laughed and said, 
“O foolish woman! my strength is not in my sword, but in 
_ my bow and arrows.” Then she turned towards the bow and 
‘atrows and prayed. But True Steel said, “I see, my wife, 


where my strength lies. I could almost say that your 
_ husband is living, and it is he who teaches you.” But 
she assured him that nobody had taught her. When she 
found he had deceived her again, she waited for some days 
and then asked him again about the secret of his strength. 
_ He answered, “Since you think so much of my strength, I 
- will tell you truly where it is. Far away from here there 
_ is a very high mountain ; in the mountain there is a fox ; in 
_ the fox there is a heart ; in the heart there is a bird, and in 
this bird is my strength. It is no easy task, howéver, to 
_ catch the fox, for she can transform herself into a multitude 
_ of creatures.” So next day, when True Steel went forth 
_ from the cave, the prince came and learned from his wife 
_ the true secret of the warlock’s strength. So away he hied 
to the mountain, and there, though the fox, or rather the 
_ vixen, turned herself into various shapes, he managed with 
_ the help of certain friendly eagles, falcons, and dragons, 
' to catch and kill her. Then he took out the fox’s heart, and 
: out of the heart he took the bird and burned it in a great 
‘fire. At that very moment True Steel fell down dead? 
; In another Servian story we read how a dragon resided in 
a water-mill and ate up two king’s sons, one after the other. 
_ The third son went out to seek his brothers, and coming to 
_ the water-mill he found nobody in it but an old woman. 
: She revealed to him the dreadful character of the being = 
_ that kept the mill, and how he had devoured the prince’s 
1 two elder brothers, and she implored him to go away home 
’ before the same fate should overtake him. But he was both 


1 Madam Csedomille Mijatovies, 172; F. S. Krauss, Sagen und Mar- 
© Serbian Folk-lore, edited by the Rev. chen der Siidslaven (Leipsic, 1883- 
W. Denton (London, 1874), pp. 167- 1884), i. 164-169. 


: 
A 
: 


you have a clever teacher who has taught you to find out’ 


The fight 
with the 
dragon. 


112 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


brave and cunning, and he said to her, “ Listen well to what 
I am going to say to you. Ask the dragon whither he goes” 
and where his strength is; then kiss all that place where he 
tells you his strength is, as if from love, till you find it out, 
and afterwards tell me when I come.” So when the dragon 
came in, the old woman began to question him, “ Where in 
God’s name have you been? Whither do you go so far? 
You will -never tell me whither you go.” The dragon 
replied, “ Well, my dear old woman, I do go far.”- Then 
the old woman coaxed him, saying, “And why do you go — 
so far? Tell me where your strength is. If I knew where © 
your strength is, I don’t know what I should do for love; I 
would kiss all that place.” Thereupon the dragon smiled 
and said to her, “ Yonder is my strength, in that fireplace.” 
Then the old woman began to fondle and kiss the fireplace ; 
and the dragon on seeing it burst into a laugh. “Silly old 
woman,” he said, “my strength is not there. It is in the 
tree-fungus in front of the house.” Then the old woman 
began to fondle and kiss the tree; but the dragon laughed 
again and said to her, “ Away, old woman! my strength is 
not there.” “Then where is it?” asked the old woman. 
“ My strength,” said he, “is a long way off, and you cannot 
go thither. Far in another kingdom under the king’s city is 
a lake; in the lake is a dragon; in the dragon is a boar; in 
the boar is a pigeon, and in the pigeon is my strength.” The 
murder was now out ; so next morning when the dragon went ~ 
away from the mill to attend to his usual business of eating 
people up, the prince came to the old woman and she let him — 
into the secret of the dragon’s strength. The prince accord- — 
ingly set off to find the lake in the far country and the other — 
dragon that lived in it. He found them both at last; the lake — 
was a still and lonely water surrounded by green meadows, | 
where flocks of sheep nibbled the sweet lush grass. The — 
hero tucked up his hose and his sleeves, and wading out — 
into the lake called aloud on the dragon to come forth © 
and fight. Soon the monster emerged from the water, 
slimy and dripping, his scaly back glistening in the morn- — 
ing sun. The two grappled and wrestled from morning to- 
afternoon of a long summer day. What with the heat of 
the weather and the violence of his exertions the dragon — 


x THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 113 


‘was quite exhausted, and said, “Let me go, prince, that I 
‘may moisten my parched head in the lake and toss 
you to the sky.” But the prince sternly refused; so 
the dragon relaxed his grip and sank under the water, 
which bubbled and gurgled over the place where he 
plunged into the depths. When he had disappeared and 
‘the ripples had subsided on the surface, you would never 
have suspected that under that calm water, reflecting the 
green banks, the white, straying sheep, the blue sky, and the 
fleecy gold-flecked clouds of a summer evening, there lurked 
‘so ferocious and dangerous a monster. Next day the com- 
bat was renewed with the very same result. But on the 
‘third day the hero, fortified by a kiss from the fair daughter 
of the king of the land, tossed the dragon high in air, and 
when the monster fell with a most tremendous thud on the 
water he burst into little bits. Out of the pieces sprang a 
boar which ran away as fast as it could lay legs to the 
ground. But the prince sent sheep-dogs after it which 
‘caught it up and rent it in pieces. Out of the pieces sprang 
/a pigeon; but the prince let loose a falcon, which stooped 
0 the pigeon, seized it in its talons, and brought it to the 
prince. In the pigeon was the life of the dragon who kept 
the mill, so before inflicting on the monster the doom he 
‘so richly merited, the prince questioned him as to the fate 
of his two elder brothers who had perished at the hands, or 
rather under the claws and fangs, of the dragon. Having 
‘ascertained how to restore them to life and to release a 
multitude of other victims whom the dragon’kept precners 
in a vault under the water-mill, the prince wrung the pigeon’s 
‘ne k, and that of Sain was the end of the dragon and his 
unscrupulous career.’ 

_ A Lithuanian story relates how a prince married a princess The exter- 
and got with her a kingdom to boot. She gave him the keys ?@! su! 
Of the castle and told him he might enter every chamber Lithuanian 


es cept one smali room, . which the key had a bit of twine The Soul- 


=| A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-tales from exclusively Slavonic Sources (London, 
38 9), Pp- 224-231. 
_ PT. Vil. VOL. Il I 


The Soul- 
less King. 


The water 
of life. 


114 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


In it he found twelve heads and a man hanging on the 
hook of the door. The man said to the prince, “ Oblige me 
by fetching me a glass of beer.” The prince fetched it and 
the man drank it. Then the man said to the prince, “ Oblige 
me by releasing me from the hook.” The prince released 
him. Now the man was a king without a soul, and he at 
once availed himself of his liberty to come to an understand- 
ing with the coachman of the castle, and between them they 
put the prince’s wife in the coach and drove off with her. 
The prince rode after them and coming up with the coach 
called out, “Halt, Soulless King! Step out and fight!” 
The King stepped out and the fight began. In a trice the 
King had sliced the buttons off the prince’s coat and pinked 
him in the side. Then he stepped into the coach and drove off, 
The prince rode after him again, and when he came up with 
the coach he called out, “ Halt, Soulless King! Step out 
and fight!” The King stepped out and they fought again, 
and again the King sliced off the prince’s buttons and pinked 
him in the side. Then, after carefully wiping and sheathing 
his sword, he said to his discomfited adversary, “ Now look 
here. I let you off the first time for the sake of the glass of 
beer you gave me, and I let you off the second time because 
you let me down from that infernal hook; but if you fight 
me a third time, by Gad Ill make mince meat of you. ‘ 
Then he stepped into the coach, told the coachman to 
drive on, jerked up the coach window with a bang, an 
drove away like anything. But the prince galloped aftel - 
him and coming up with the coach for the third time he 
called out, “ Halt, Soulless King! Step out and fight!” 
The King did step out, and at it the two of them went, tooth 
and nail. But the prince had no chance. Before he knew 
where he was, the King ran him through the body, whisked 
off his head, and left him lying a heap of raw mince beside 
the road. His wife, or rather his widow, said a the King 
“Let me gather up the fragments that remain.” The Kin 
said, “Certainly.” So she made up the mince into a neal 
parcel, deposited it on the front seat of the coach, and awa 
they drove to the King’s castle. Well to cut a long story 
short, a brother-in-law of the deceased prince sent a hawk to 
fetch the water of life; the hawk brought it in his beak 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 115 


Ee the brother-in-law poured the water on the fragments of the 
_ prince, and the prince came to life again at once safe and 
sound. Then he went to the King’s castle and played on a 
_ little pipe, and his wife heard it in the castle and said, “ That 
is how my husband used to play, whom the King cut in bits.” 
So she went out to the gate and said to him, “ Are you my 
husband?” “That I am,” said he, and he told her to find 
_ out from the King where he kept his soul and then to come 
and tell him. So she went to the King and said to him, 
“Where my husband’s soul is, there must mine be too.” 
The King was touched by this artless expression of her love, 
_and he replied, “ My soul is in yonder lake. In that lake 
' lies a stone; in that stone is a hare; in the hare is a duck, 
‘in the duck is an egg, and in the egg is my soul.” So the 
_ queen went and told her former husband, the prince, and gave 
him plenty of money and food for the journey, and off he set 
for the lake. But when he came to the lake, he did not 
_know in which part of it the stone was; so he roamed about 
the banks, and he was hungry, for he had eaten up all the 
- food. Then he met a dog, and the dog said to him, “ Don’t 
shoot me dead. I will be a mighty helper to you in your 
time of need.” So he let the dog live and went on his way. 
Next he saw a tree with two hawks on it, an old one and a 
“young one, and he climbed up the tree to catch the young 
‘one. But the old hawk said to him, “ Don’t take my young 
‘one. He will be a mighty helper to you in your time of 
need.” So the prince climbed down the tree and went on 
‘his way. Then he saw a huge crab and wished to break off 
"one of his claws for something to eat, but the crab said to 
‘him, “ Don’t break off my claw. It will be a mighty helper 
to you in your time of need.” So he left the crab alone and 
“went on his way. And he came to people and got them to 
‘fish up the stone for him from the lake and to bring it to him 
on the bank. And there he broke the stone in two and out 
of the stone jumped a hare. But the dog seized the hare 
x tore him, and out of the hare flew a duck. The young 


wk pounced on the duck and rent it, and out of the duck 
tell an egg, and the egg rolled into the lake. But the crab 
fetched the egg out of the lake and brought it to the prince. 
- the King fell ill. So the prince went to the King and 


The soul 
in the 
duck’'s egg. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
Teutonic 
stories. 


Tran- 
sylvanian 
story of a 
witch 
whose life 
was ina 
light. 


German 
story of 
Soulless 
the 
cannibal, 
whose 
soul was 
in a box, 


a’ 


116 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cnar. 


said, “ You killed me. Now I will kill you.” “ Don’t,” said 
the King. “I will,” said the prince. With that he threw 
the egg on the ground, and the King fell out of the bed as 
dead as a stone. So the prince went home with his wife and 
very happy they were, you may take my word for it.’ 
Amongst peoples of the Teutonic stock stories of the 
external soul are not wanting. In a tale told by the Saxons 
of Transylvania it is said that a young man shot at a witch 
again and again. The bullets went clean through her but 
did her no harm, and she only laughed and mocked at him. 
“ Silly earthworm,” she cried, “shoot as much as you like. 
It does me no harm. For know that my life resides not in 
me but far, far away. In a mountain is a pond,on the pond 
swims a duck, in the duck is an egg, in the egg burns a 
light, that light is my life. If you could put out that light, 
my life would be at an end. But that can never, never be.” 
However, the young man got hold of the egg, smashed it, 
and put out the light, and with it the witch’s life went out 
also.” In this last story, as in many other stories of the same 
type, the hero achieves his adventure by the help of certain 
grateful animals whom he had met and done a service 
to on his travels. The same incident occurs in another 
German tale of this class which runs thus. Once upon a 
time there was a young fellow called Body-without-Soul, or, 
for short, Soulless, and he was a cannibal who would eat 
nothing but young girls. Now it was a custom in that 
country that the girls drew lots every year, and the one on — 
whom the lot fell was handed over to Soulless. In time it 
happened that the lot fell on the king’s daughter. The king 
was exceedingly sorry, but what could he do? Law was 
law, and had to be obeyed. So they took the princess to 
the castle where Soulless resided ; and he shut her up in the 
larder and fattened her for his dinner. But a brave soldier 
undertook to rescue her, and off he set for the cannibal’s 
castle. Well, as he trudged along, what should he see but 
a fly, an eagle, a bear, and a lion sitting in a field by th 
side of the road, and quarrelling about their shares in 


1 A. Leskien und K. Brugmann, 2 Josef Haltrich, Deutsche Volks. 
Litauische Volkslieder und Mérchen miérchen aus dem Sachsenlande @ 
(Strasburg, 1882), pp. 423-430; com-  Svebendiirgen* (Vienna, 1885), No. 3 
pare zd@., pp. 569-571. (No. 33 of the first edition), pp. 149 


x THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 117 


dead horse. So he divided the carcase fairly between them, The 

_ and as a reward the fly and the eagle bestowed on him the eae 
_ power of changing himself at will into either of their shapes. 

_ That evening he made himself into an eagle, and flew 

_upa high tree; there he looked about, but could see nothing 

_ but trees. Next morning he flew on till he came to a great 
castle, and at the gate was a big black board with these 

_ words chalked up on it: “ Mr. Soulless lives here.” When 

_ the soldier read that he was glad, and changed himself into 

a fly, and flew buzzing from window to window, looking in 

at every one till he came to the one where the fair princess 

sat a prisoner. He introduced himself at once and said, “I 

am come to free you, but first you must learn where the soul 

_ of Soulless really is.” “I don’t know,” replied the princess, 

_ “but I will ask.” So after much coaxing and entreaty she 

_ learned that the soul of Soulless was in a box, and that the 

_ box was on a rock in the middle of the Red Sea. When 

_ the soldier heard that, he turned himself into an eagle again, 

_ flew to the Red Sea, and came back with the soul of 

_ Soulless in the box. Arrived at the castle he knocked and 

_ banged at the door as if the house was on fire. Soulless 

_ did not know what was the matter, and he came down and 

_ opened the door himself. When he saw the soldier standing 

at it, I can assure you he was in a towering rage. “What 

_do you mean,” he roared, “by knocking at my door like 
that? I'll gobble you up on the spot, skin and hair and all.” 

- But the soldier laughed in his face. “You'd better not do 

_ that,” said he, “ for here I’ve got your soul in the box.” When 

_ the cannibal heard that, all his courage went down into the 
_calves of his legs, and he begged and entreated the soldier 

) to give him his soul. But the soldier would not hear of it ; 

he opened the box, took out the soul, and flung it over his 
head ; and that same instant down fell the cannibal, dead as 

a icxcnail: 4 

Another German story, which embodies the notion of German 
_ the external soul in a somewhat different form, tells how aS 
once upon a time a certain king had three sons and a were life- 
aughter, and for each of the king’s four children there ‘“** 
grew a flower in the king’s garden, which was a life-flower ; 

J. W. Wolf, Deutsche Marchen und Sagen (Leipsic, 1845), No. 20, pp. 87-93. 


118 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


for it bloomed and flourished so long as the child lived, but 
drooped and withered away when the child died. Now the 
time came when the king’s daughter married a rich man 
and went to live with him far away. But it was not long 
before her flower withered in the king’s garden. So the 
eldest brother went forth to visit his brother-in-law and com- 
fort him in his bereavement. But when he came to his 
brother-in-law’s castle he saw the corpse of his murdered 
sister weltering on the ramparts. And his wicked brother- 
in-law set before him boiled human hands and feet for his 
dinner. And when the king’s son refused to eat of them, 
his brother-in-law led him through many chambers to a 
murder-hole, where were all sorts of implements of murder, 
but especially a gallows, a wheel, and a pot of blood.. Here 
he said to the prince, “ You must die, but you may choose 
your kind of death.” The prince chose to die on the 
gallows; and die he did even as he had said. So the 
eldest son’s flower withered in the king’s garden, and the 
second son went forth to learn the fate of his brother 
and sister. But it fared with him no better than with his 
elder brother, for he too died on the gallows in the murder- 
hole of his wicked brother-in-law’s castle, and his flower also 
withered away in the king’s garden at home. Now when 
the youngest son was also come to his brother-in-law’s castle 
and saw the corpse of his murdered sister weltering on the 
ramparts, and the bodies of his two murdered brothers dang- 
ling from the gallows in the murder-hole, he said that for his 
part he had a fancy to die by the wheel, but he was not 
quite sure how the thing was done, and would his brother- 
in-law kindly shew him? “Oh, it’s quite easy,” said his 
brother-in-law, “you just put your head in, so,” and with 
that he popped his head through the middle of the wheel. 
“Just so,” said the king’s youngest son, and he gave the 
wheel a twirl, and as it spun round and round, the wicked 
brother-in-law died a painful death, which he richly deserved. 
And when he was quite dead, the murdered brothers and 
sister came to life again, and their withered flowers bloomed 
afresh in the king’s garden.’ 


1L, Strackerjan, <Aderglaube und burg (Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 306-308, 
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Olden-  § 622. In this story the flowers are 


_ floor. 


os 


e 


=. THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 119 


In another German story an old warlock lives with a 


damsel all alone in the midst of a vast and gloomy 


wood. She fears that being old he may die and leave 


her alone in the forest. But he reassures her. ‘“ Dear 


child,” he said, “I cannot die, and I have no heart in my 
breast.” But she importuned him to tell her where his 


heart was. So he said, “ Far, far from here in an unknown 
and lonesome land stands a great church. The church is 


well secured with iron doors, and round about it flows a 
broad deep moat. Inthe church flies a bird and in the bird 
is my heart. So long as the bird lives, I live. It cannot 
die of itself, and no one can catch it; therefore I cannot die, 


_and you need have no anxiety.” However the young man, 


whose bride the damsel was to have been before the warlock 


spirited her away, contrived to reach the church and catch 
the bird. He brought it to the damsel, who stowed him and 
it away under the warlock’s bed. Soon the old warlock 


came home. He was ailing, and said so. The girl wept 


and said, “ Alas, daddy is dying; he has a heart in his 
breast after all.” “Child,” replied the warlock, “hold your 
' tongue. I can't die. It will soon pass over.” At that the 
_ young man under the bed gave the bird a gentle squeeze ; 


and as he did so, the old warlock felt very unwell and sat 
down. Then the young man gripped the bird tighter, and 
the warlock fell senseless from his chair. “Now squeeze 
him dead,” cried the damsel. Her lover obeyed, and when 
the bird was dead, the old warlock also lay dead on the 
1 

In the Norse tale of “the giant who had no heart in his 
body,” the giant tells the captive princess, “ Far, far away in 
a lake lies an island, on that island stands a church, in that 
church is a well, in that well swims a duck, in that duck 
there is an egg, and in that egg there lies my heart.” The 


hero of the tale, with the help of some animals to whom 


he had been kind, obtains the egg and squeezes it, at which 


rather life-tokens than external souls. 1 K. Miillenhoff, Sagen, Marchen und 
The life-token has been carefully Lieder der Herzogthiimer Schleswig 
Studied by Mr. E. S. Hartland in the Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel, 1845), 
second volume of his learned work pp. 404 sgg. 

The Legend of Perseus (London, 1895). 


The war-_ 
lock in 
the wood, 
whose 
heart was 
in a bird. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
Danish 
stories. 
The war- 
lock whose 
heart was 
in a duck’s 
egg. 


The 
helpful 
animals, 


120 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP, 


the giant screams piteously and begs for his life. But the | 
hero breaks the egg in pieces and the giant at once bursts." | 
In another Norse story a hill-ogre tells the captive princess 
that she will never be able to return home unless she finds 
the grain of sand which lies under the ninth tongue of 
the ninth head of a certain dragon; but if that grain of 
sand were to come over the rock in which the ogres 
live, they would all burst “and the rock itself would 
become a gilded palace, and the lake green meadows.” 
The hero finds the grain of sand and takes it to the 
top of the high rock in which the ogres live. So all the 
ogres burst and the rest falls out as one of the ogres had — 
foretold.’ : 

In a Danish tale a warlock carries off a princess to 
his wondrous subterranean palace ; and when she anxiously 
enquires how long he is likely to live, he assures her 
that he will certainly survive her. ‘No man,” he says, 
“can rob me of my life, for it is in my heart, and my 
heart is not here; it is in safer keeping.” She urges 
him to tell her where it is, so he says: “Very far from 
here, in a land that is called Poland, there is a great lake, 
and in the lake is a dragon, and in the dragon is a hare, 
and in the hare is a duck, and in the duck is an egg, 
and in the egg is my heart. It is in good keeping, 
you may trust me. Nobody is likely to stumble upon it.” 
However, the hero of the tale, who is also the husband — 
of the kidnapped princess, has fortunately received the 
power of turning himself at will into a bear, a dog, an ant, — 
or a falcon as a reward for having divided the carcase of a 
deer impartially between four animals of these species; and 
availing himself of this useful art he not only makes his way — 
into the warlock’s enchanted palace but also secures the egg 
on which the enchanter’s life depends. No sooner has he 


1 P. Chr. Asbjérnsen og J. Moe, 1874), pp. 223-230 (*‘ Boots and the © 
Norske Folke- Eventyr (Christiania, Beasts”). As in other tales of this 
N.D.), No. 36, pp. 174-180; G. W. type, it is said that the hero found — 
Dasent, Popular Tales from the Norse three animals (a lion, a falcon, and an 
(Edinburgh, 1859), pp. 55 sg. ant) quarrelling over a dead horse, and 

2 P. Chr. Asbjérnsen, Vorske Folke- received from them the power of trans- : 
Eventyr, Ny Samling (Christiania, forming himself into animals of these — 
1871), No. 70, pp. 3540; G. W. _ species as a reward for dividing the ; 
Dasent, Zales from the Fjeld (London, _ carcase fairly among them. 


x THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 121 


_ smashed the egg on the enchanter’s ugly face than that 
-miscreant drops down as dead as a herring.’ 


Another Danish story tells how a lad went out into the 


world to look for service. He met a man, who hired him for 


three years and said he would give him a bushel of money for 
the first year, two bushels of money for the second, and three 
bushels of money for the third. The lad was well content, as 


you may believe, to get such good wages. But the man wasa 


magician, and it was not long before he turned the lad into 
a hare, by pronouncing over him some strange words. For 
a whole year the lad scoured the woods in the shape of a 
hare, and there was not a sportsman in all the country 
round about that had not a shot at him. But not one of 
them could hit him. At the end of the year the magician 


‘spoke some other words over him and turned him back 


into human form and gave him the bushel of money. But 
then the magician mumbled some other words, and the lad 


was turned into a raven and flew up into the sky. Again 


all the marksmen of the neighbourhood pointed their guns 


at him and banged away; but they only wasted powder and 


shot, for not one of them could hit him. At the end of the 
year the magician changed him back into a man and gave 
him two bushelfuls of money. But soon after he changed 
him into a fish, and in the form of a fish the young man 
jumped into the brook and swam down into the sea. There 


at the bottom of the ocean he saw a most beautiful 


castle all of glass and in it a lovely girl all alone. Round 
and round the castle he swam, looking into all the rooms 


and admiring everything. At last he remembered the 


words the magician had spoken when he turned him back 


into a man, and by repeating them he was at once trans- 
formed into a stripling again. He walked into the glass 
castle and introduced himself to the girl, and though at first 
‘she was nearly frightened to death, she was soon very glad 


to have him with her. From her he learned that she was 
no other than the daughter of the magician, who kept her 
there for safety at the bottom of the sea. The two now 
laid their heads together, and she told him what to do. 


PE ei 


- Svend Grundtvig, Danische Volks- Zweite Sammlung (Leipsic, 1879), 
marchen, iibersetzt von A, Strodtmann, pp. 194-218. 


Danish 
Story 

of the 
magician 
whose 
heart was 
in a fish. 


The 
magician’s 
heart. 


122 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


There was a certain king who owed her father money and 
had not the wherewithal to pay; and if he did not pay 
by such and such a day, his head was to be cut off. So the 
young man was to take service with the king, offer him the 
bushels of money which he had earned in the service of the 
magician, and go with him to the magician to pay his debt. 
But he was to dress up as the court Fool so that the 
magician would not know him, and in that character he was 
to indulge in horse-play, smashing windows and so on, till 
the magician would fall into such a rage that though the 
king had paid his debt to the last farthing he would never- 
theless be condemned to instant execution unless he could 
answer the magician’s questions. The questions would be 
these, “ Where is my daughter?” “Would you know her 
if you saw her?” Now the magician would cause a whole 
line of phantom women to pass by, so that the young 
man would not be able to tell which of them was the 
sorcerers daughter ; but when her turn came to pass by she 
would give him a nudge as a sign, and so he would know 
her. Then the magician would ask, “And where is my 
heart?” And the young man was to say, “In a fish.” 
And the magician would ask, “ Would you know the fish if — 
you saw it?” And he would cause all sorts of fishes to 
pass by, and the young man would have to say in which of © 
them was the heart of the magician. He would never be ~ 
able of himself to tell in which of them it was, but the girl — 
would stand beside him, and when the right fish passed by, 
she would nudge him and he was to catch it and rip it up, © 
and the magician would ask him no more questions. Every- 
thing turned out exactly as she had said. The king paid 
his debt to the last farthing ; but the young man disguised - 
as the court Fool cut such capers and smashed so many 
glass windows and doors that the heaps of broken glass 
were something frightful to contemplate. So there was 
nothing for it but that the king, who was of course re- 
sponsible for the pranks of his Fool, should either answer the’ 
magician’s questions or die the death. While they were: 
getting the axe and the block ready in the courtyard, the: 
trembling king was interrogated by the stern magician, 
“Where is my daughter?” asked the sorcerer. Here the 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 123 


jcourt Fool cut in and said, “ She is at the bottom of the sea.” 
“Would you know her if you saw her?” enquired the 
jmagician. “To be sure I would,” answered the Fool. So 
leh > magician caused a whole regiment of girls to defile 
before him, one after the other; but they were mere 
{phantoms and apparitions. Pinost the last of all came the 
magician’s daughter, and when she passed the young man 
she pinched his arm so hard that he almost shrieked with 
}pain. However, he dissembled his agony and putting his 
arm round her waist held her fast. The magician now 
played his last trump. ‘“ Where is my heart?” said he. 
In a fish,” said the Fool. “Would you know the fish if 
ou saw it?” asked the magician. ‘To be sure I would,” 
inswered the Fool. Then all the fishes of the sea swam 
past, and when the right one came last of all, the girl 
nudged her lover ; he seized the fish, and with one stroke of 
is knife slit it an end toend. Out tumbled the magician’s 
heart ; the young man seized it and cut it in two, and at the 
Same moment the magician fell dead.’ 
In Iceland they say that once a king’s son was out The exter- 
unting in a wood with the courtiers, when the mist came 72374." 
iown so thick that his companions lost sight of the prince, stories. 
and though they searched the woods till evening they could 
not find ‘him: At the news the king was inconsolable, and The king's 
taking to his bed caused proclamation to be made that he 7/3" 
wW ho could find and bring back his lost son should have half giantesses 
¢ kingdom. Now an old man and his old wife lived bese 
ogether in a wretched hut, and they had a daughter. She in an egg. 
‘resolved to seek the lost prince and get the promised reward. 
So her parents gave her food for the journey and a pair of 
lew shoes, and off she set. Well, she walked and better 
walked for days, and at last she came towards evening to a 
ave and going into it she saw two beds. One of them was 
jovered with a cloth of silver and the other with a cloth of 


Phen she noticed some runes carved on the bedsteads, but 
the could not read them. So she went back to the mouth 


1 Svend Grundtvig, Danische Volksmarchen, ibersetzt von Willibald Leo 
psic, 1878), pp. 29-45. 


The swans’ 
song. 


124 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP, 


of the cave and hid behind the door. Hardly had she time 
to conceal herself when she heard a loud noise and saw two 
giantesses, two great hulking louts they were, stride into the 
cave, No sooner were they in than one said to the other, 
“Ugh, what a smell of human flesh in our cave!” But the 
other thought the smell might come from the king’s son. 
They went up to the bed where he was sleeping, and calling 
two swans, which the girl had not pertene in the dim light 
of the cave, they said :— 


“ Sing, sing, my swans, 
That the king’s son may wake.” 


So the swans sang and the king’s son awoke. The younger 
of the two hags offered him food, but he refused it; then 
she asked him, if he would marry her, but he said “No, 
certainly not.” Then she shrieked and said to the swans :— 


“ Sing, sing, my swans, 
That the king’s son may sleep.” 


The swans sang and the king’s son fell fast asleep. Then 
the two giantesses lay down in the bed with the silver coverlet 
and slept till break of day. When they woke in the morn-— 
ing, they wakened the prince and offered him food again, but 
he again refused it; and the younger hag again asked him 
if he would have her to wife, but he would not hear of it 
So they put him to sleep again to the singing of the swans 

and left the cave. When they were gone a while, the girl i 
came forth from her hiding-place and waked the king’s son 4 
to the song of the swans, and he was glad to see her and to : 
get the news. She told him that, when the hag asked him — 
again to marry her, he must say, “ Yes, but you must first 
tell me what is written on the beds, and what you do by day.” 
So when it drew to evening, the girl hid herself again, and — 
soon the giantesses came, lit a fire in the cave, and cooked at © 
it the game they had brought with them. And the younger ~ 
hag wakened the king’s son and asked him if he would have © 
something to eat. This time he said “Yes.” And when he ~ 
had finished his supper, the giantess asked him if he would — 
have her to wife. “That I will,” said he, “but first you must ~ 
tell me what the runes mean that are carved on the bed.” : 
She said that they meant :— q 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 125 


“ Run, run, my little bed, 
ae Run whither I will.” 

| He said he was very glad to know it, but she must also tell 

im what they did all day long out there in the wood. The 
lag told him that they hunted beasts and birds, and that 
be ween whiles they sat down under an oak and threw 

their life-egg from one to the other, but they had to be The life. 
ful, for if the egg were to break, they would both die. “* 
| F he king’s son thanked her kindly, but next morning when 
the giantess asked him to go with them to the wood he said 
that he would rather stay at home. So away went the 
Giantesses by themselves, after they had lulled him to sleep 
to the singing of the swans. But hardly were their backs 
turned when out came the girl and wakened the prince and 
. told him to take his spear, and they would pursue the 
giantesses, and when they were throwing their life-egg to 
ez ch other he was to hurl his spear at it and smash it to bits. 
... if you miss,” said she, “it is as much as your life 

: is worth.” So they came to the oak in the wood, and there 
they heard a loud laugh, and the king’s son climbed up the 
tree, and there under the oak were the two giantesses, and 
one of them had a golden egg in her hand and threw it to 
the other. Just then the king’s son hurled his spear and hit 
> egg so that it burst. At the same time the two hags fell 
ead to the ground and the slaver dribbled out of their 
mouths.’ In an Icelandic parallel to the story of Meleager An Ice- 
the spae-wives or sibyls come and foretell the high destiny ea te 
the infant Gestr as he lies in his cradle. Two candles were Meleager. 
_ burning beside the child, and the youngest of the spae-wives, 
conceiving herself slighted, cried out, “I foretell that the 
‘child shall live no longer than this candle burns.” Where- 
pon the chief sibyl put out the candle and gave it to Gestr’s 


1 J. C. Poestion, Jslindische Mar- when the stone is caught and broken 
(Vienna, 1884), No. vii. pp. 49- by the heroine, the giant and giantess 
The same story is told with at once expire. The tale was told to 
inor variations by Konrad Maurer in Maurer when he was crossing an arm 
Islandische Volkssagen der Gegen- off the sea in a small boat; and the 
(Leipsic, 1860), pp. 277-280. waves ran so high and broke into the 
his version a giant and giantess, boat so that he could not write the 
her and sister, have their life in story down at the time but had to 
stone, which they throw back- trust to his memory in recording it 
wards and forwards to each other; afterwards. 


The exter- 
nal soul 

in Celtic 
stories. 
The giant 
whose soul 
was ina 
duck’s egg. 


126 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cuar.. 


mother to keep, charging her not to light it again until her 
son should wish to die. Gestr lived three hundred years ; 
then he kindled the candle and expired.’ q 
The conception of the external soul meets us also in 
Celtic stories. Thus a tale, told by a blind fiddler in the 
island of Islay, relates how a giant carried off a king’s wife 
and his two horses and kept them in his den. But the horses | 
attacked the giant and mauled him so that he could hardly 
crawl. He said to the queen, “If I myself had acd soul to. 
keep, those horses would have killed me long ago.” “ And_ 
where, my dear,” said she, “is thy soul? By the books I 
will take care of it.” “It is in the Bonnach stone,” said he. 
So on the morrow when the giant went out, the queen set. 
the Bonnach stone in order exceedingly. In the dusk of the | 
evening the giant came back, and he said to the queen, 
“What made thee set the Bonnach stone in order like that?” © 
“Because thy soul is in it,” quoth she. “I perceive,” said | 
he, “that if thou didst know where my soul is, thou wouldst 
give it much respect.” “That I would,” said she. “It is 
not there,” said he, “my soul is; it is in the threshold.” On 
the morrow she set the threshold in order finely, and when | 
the giant returned, he asked her, “ What brought thee to set 
the threshold in order like that?” “Because thy soul is in 
it,” said she. “I perceive,” said he, “that if thou knewest © 
where my soul is, thou wouldst take care of it.” “That I 
would,” said she. “It is not there that my soul is,” said he. 
“There is a great flagstone under the threshold. There is a 7 
wether under the flag. There is a duck in the wether’s belly, 
and an egg in the belly of the duck, and it is in the egg that | 
my soul is.” On the morrow when the giant was gone, they 
raised the flagstone and out came the wether. They opened 
the wether and out came the duck. They split the duck, — 
and out came the egg. And the queen took the egg and 
crushed it in her hands, and at that very moment the giant, 
who was coming home in the dusk, fell down dead In 7 
another Celtic tale, a sea beast has carried off a king’s ~ 
1 W. Mannhardt, Germanische My- Donaldson (Paisley, 1879-1882), i 
then (Berlin, 1858), p. 592; John 869, s.v. ** Yule.” 
Jamieson, Ztymological Dictionary of 2 J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of 


the Scottish Language, New Edition, the West Highlands, New Edition 
revised by J. Longmuir and D,. (Paisley and London, 1890), i. 7-1 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 127 


‘daughter, and an old smith declares that there is no way of 
‘i ing the beast but one. “In the island that is in the 
‘midst of the loch is Eillid Chaisthion—the white-footed 
ind, of the slenderest legs, and the swiftest step, and though 
should be caught, there would spring a hoodie out of 
er, and though the hoodie should be caught, there would 
ing a trout out of her, but there is an egg in the mouth 
the trout, and the soul of the beast is in the egg, and if 
e egg breaks, the beast is dead.” As usual the egg is 
oken and the beast dies." 

In these Celtic tales the helpful animals reappear and 
ist the hero in achieving the adventure, though for the 
ke of brevity I have omitted to describe the parts they 


hich seems however to be of Irish origin ; for the Cruachan 
which we hear in it is not the rugged and lofty mountain 
Ben Cruachan which towers above the beautiful Loch Awe, 
but Roscommon Cruachan near Belanagare, the ancient 
palace of the kings of Connaught, long famous in Irish 
tradition? The story relates how a big giant, King of 
orcha, stole away the wife and the shaggy dun filly of the 
herdsman or king of Cruachan. So the herdsman baked a 
_bannock to take with him by the way, and set off in quest 
‘of his wife and the filly. He went for a long, long time, 
till at last his soles were blackened and his cheeks were 
sunken, the yellow-headed birds were going to rest at the 
roots of the bushes and the tops of the thickets, and the 
ark clouds of night were coming and the clouds of day 
ere departing ; and he saw a house far from him, but 
ough it was far from him he did not take long to reach it. 
e went in, and sat in the upper end of the house, but there 
no one within; and the fire was newly kindled, the 
iouse newly swept, and the bed newly made; and who 
‘ame in but the hawk of Glencuaich, and she said to him, 
“ Are you here, young son of Cruachan?” “I am,” said 
‘he. The hawk said to him, “ Do you know who was here 
last night?” “I do not,” said he. “There were here,” 


1 j. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of 2 Compare Zaboo and the Perils of 
West Highlands, New Edition, (the Soul, p. 12. 
. 80 sgg. 


lay in the plot. They figure also in an Argyleshire story, animals. 


128 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP, — 


said she, “the big giant, King of Sorcha, your wife, and the 
shaggy dun filly; and the giant was threatening terribly © 
that if he could get hold of you he would take the head off — 
you.” “I well believe it,’ said he. Then she gave him 
food and drink, and sent him to bed. She rose in the — 
morning, made breakfast for him, and baked a bannock for 
him to take with him on his journey. And he went away 
and travelled all day, and in the evening he came to another ~ 
house and went in, and was entertained by the green-headed © 
duck, who told him that the giant had rested there the night ~ 
before with the wife and shaggy dun filly of the herdsman ~ 
of Cruachan. And next day the herdsman journeyed again, 
and at evening he came to another house and went in and 
was entertained by the fox of the scrubwood, who told him ~ 
just what the hawk of Glencuaich and the green-headed ~ 
duck had told him before. Next day the same thing 
happened, only it was the brown otter of the burn that © 
entertained him at evening in a house where the fire was © 
newly kindled, the floor newly swept, and the bed newly © 
made. And next morning when he awoke, the first 
thing he saw was the hawk of Glencuaich, the green-headed q 
duck, the fox of the scrubwood, and the brown otter of the 
burn all dancing together on the floor. They made break- 
fast for him, and partook of it all together, and said to him, ~ 
“Should you be at any time in straits, think of us, and we © 
will help you.” Well, that very evening he came to the 
cave where the giant lived, and who was there before him ~ 
but his own wife? She gave him food and hid him under | 
clothes at the upper end of the cave. And when the giant 
came home he sniffed about and said, “The smell of a 
The simple stranger is in the cave.” But she said no, it was only a” 
cogaiy little bird she had roasted. “And I wish you would tell — 
woman, me,” said she, “ where you keep your life, that I might take 
good care of it.” “It is in a grey stone over there,” said | 
he. So next day when he went away, she took the grey 
stone and dressed it well, and placed it in the upper end of — 
the cave. When the giant came home in the evening he 
said to her, “What is it that you have dressed there?” ~ 
“Your own life,” said she, “and we must be careful of it.” 
“TI perceive that you are very fond of me, but it is not 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 129 


th ere,” said he. “ Where is it?” said she. “It is in a grey 
Sheep on yonder hillside,” said he. On the morrow, when 
he went away, she got the grey sheep, dressed it well, and 
placed it in the upper end of the cave. When he came 
home in the evening he said, “What is it that you have 
dressed there?” “Your own life, my love,” said she. “It 
S not there as yet,” said he. “Well!” said she, “you are 
putting me to great trouble taking care of it, and you have 
not told me the truth these two times.” He then said, “I 
think that I may tell it to you now. My life is below the 
t of the big horse in the stable. There is a place down 
here in which there is a small lake. Over the lake are 
ven grey hides, and over the hides are seven sods from 
the heath, and under all these are seven oak planks. There 
is a trout in the lake, and a duck in the belly of the trout, 
an egg in the belly of the duck, and a thorn of blackthorn 
nside of the egg, and till that thorn is chewed small I 
annot be killed. Whenever the seven grey hides, the seven 
sods from the heath, and the seven oak planks are touched 
‘Tshall feel it wherever I shall be. I have an axe above 
= door, and unless all these are cut through with one blow 
it the lake will not be reached; and when it will be 
reached I shall feel it.” Next day, when the giant had 
‘g one out hunting on the hill, the herdsman of Cruachan 
contrived, with the help of the friendly animals—the hawk, 
duck, the fox, and the otter—to get possession of the 
ateful thorn and to chew it before the giant could reach 
him ; and no sooner _ he done so than the giant dropped 
stark and stiff, a corpse? 


it as they cut it off he put it on again and made after them 
if nothing had happened. So the champions fled away 
lore him as fast as they could lay legs to the ground, and 
more agile of them escaped, but the shorter-winded he 


1 Rey. D. MacInnes, Fol and Hero Tales (London, 1890), pp. 103-121. 
PT. VII. VOL. II K 


Another Argyleshire story relates how a certain giant, Argyle- 

who lived in the Black Corrie of Ben Breck, carried off three 2 °F 

daughters of a king, one after the other, at intervals of seven patel 

a The bereaved monarch sent champions to rescue his }yah cy 
it daughters, but though they surprised the giant in his ~— 

ep and cut off his head, it was all to no purpose; for as pratt 


Highland 
story of 
Headless 
Hugh 


-had announced his intention of coming to fetch away the 


130 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. | 


caught, bared them to the skin, and hanged them on hooks | 
against the turrets of his castle. So he went by the name 
of the Bare-Stripping Hangman. Now this amiable man — 


fourth and last of the king’s daughters, when another seven 
years should -be up. The time was drawing near, and the 
king, with the natural instincts of a father, was in great 
tribulation, when as good luck would have it a son of the © 
king of Ireland, by name Alastir, arrived in the king’s castle 
and undertook to find out where the Bare-Stripping Hang- 
man had hidden his soul. To cut a long story short, the’ 
artful Hangman had hidden his soul in an egg, which was 
in the belly of a duck, which was in the belly of a salmon, 
which was in the belly of a swift-footed hind of the cliffs. 
The prince wormed the secret from a little old man, and 
by the help of a dog, a brown otter, and a falcon he con-— 
trived to extract the egg from its various envelopes and 
crushed it to bits between his hands and knees. So when 
he came to the giant’s castle he found the Bare-Stripping” 
Hangman lying dead on the floor." 7 

Another Highland story sets forth how Hugh, prince of 
Lochlin, was long held captive by a giant who lived in a- 
cave overlooking the Sound of Mull. At last, after he had~ 
spent many years of captivity in that dismal cave, it came 


dispute, and Hugh overheard their talk, and learned that the” 
giant’s soul was in a precious gem which he always wore on 
his forehead. So the prince watched his opportunity, seized 
the gem, and having no means of escape or concealment, 
hastily swallowed it. Like lightning from the clouds, the 
giant’s sword flashed from its scabbard and flew between 
Hugh’s head and his body to intercept the gem before it 
could descend into the prince’s stomach. But it was too 
late; and the giant fell down, sword in hand, and expired 
without a gasp. Hugh had now lost his head, it is true, 
but having the giant’s soul in his body he felt none 
worse for the accident. So he buckled the giant’s sword ai 
his side, mounted the grey filly, swifter than the east wind 


1 Rev. J. Macdougall, Folk and (Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition 
Hero Tales (London, 1891), pp. 76sgg. No. iii.). 


is lida pes ‘= 
etna tte iedtinataen a eT NON ee ee 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 131 


‘that never had a bridle, and rode home. But the want of 

| his head made a painful impression on his friends; indeed 

_ they maintained that he was a ghost and shut the door 

in his face, so now he wanders for ever in shades of 

_ darkness, riding the grey filly fleeter than the wind. On 

_ stormy nights, when the wind howls about the gables and 
among the trees, you may see him galloping along the 
shore of the sea “between wave and sand.” Many a 
naughty little boy, who would not go quietly to bed, has 

: been carried off med Headless Hugh on his grey filly and 

_ never seen again.’ 

: In Sutherlandshire at the present day there is a sept of The Mac- 
_ Mackays known as’ “the descendants of the seal,’ who prin 
_ claim to be sprung from a mermaid, and the story they tell ne of 
in explanation of their claim involves the notion of the 
external soul. They say that the laird of Borgie used to go 

down to the rocks under his castle to bathe. One day he 
Sawa mermaid close in shore, combing her hair and swim- 

_ ming about, as if she were anxious to land. After watching 

_ her for a time, he noticed her cowl on the rocks beside him, 

and knowing that she could not go to sea without it, he 
carried the cowl up to the castle in the hope that she would 
follow him. She did so, but he refused to give up the cowl 
and detained the sea-maiden herself and made her his wife. 
To this she consented with great reluctance, and told him that 
her life was bound up with the cowl, and that if it rotted or was 
destroyed she would instantly die. So the cow! was placed 
for safety in the middle of a great hay-stack, and there it 
lay for years. One unhappy day, when the laird was from 
home, the servants were working among the hay and found 
the cowl. Not knowing what it was, they shewed it to the 
lady of the house. The sight revived memories of her old 
life in the depths of the sea, so she took the cowl, and 
leaving her child in its cot, plunged into the sea and never 


1 Rey. James Macdonald, Religion see J. G. Campbell, Witchcraft and 


“and Myth (London, 1893), p pp. 187 sg. 
_ The writer tells us that in his youth a 
certain old Betty Miles used to terrify 
him with this tale. For the tradition 
of Headless Hugh, who seems to have 
been the only son of Hector, first chief 
i? Lochbuy, in the fourteenth century, 


Seeas Sight in the Highlands and 
Islands of Scotland (Glasgow, 1902), 
pp- 111 sgg. India also has its stories 
of headless horsemen. See W. Crooke, 
Popular Religion and Folk-lore of 
Northern India (London, 1896), i. 256 


599. 


The exter- 
nal soul 

in Irish 
and Breton 
stories. 
The giant 
and the 
egg. 


The 
helpful 
animals. 


Body-with- 
out-Soul, 


132 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. — 


came home to Borgie any more. Only sometimes she q 


would swim close in shore to see her boy, and then she © 
wept because he was not of her own kind that she might ~ 
take him to sea with her. The boy grew to be a man, and 
his descendants are famous swimmers. They cannot drown, 
and to this day they are known in the neighbourhood as 
Sliochd an roin, that is, “the descendants of the seal.” ? 1 

In an Irish story we read how a giant kept a beautiful © 
damsel a prisoner in his castle on the top of a hill, which 
was white with the bones of the champions who had tried — 
in vain to rescue the fair captive. At last the hero, after 
hewing and slashing at the giant all to no purpose, dis- 
covered that the only way to kill him was to rub a mole on © 
the giant’s right breast with a certain egg, which was ina — 
duck, which was in a chest, which lay locked and bound at — 
the bottom of the sea. With the help of some obliging © 
salmon, rams, and eagles, the hero as usual made himself — 
master of the precious egg and slew the giant by merely — 
striking it against the mole on his right breast? Similarly — 
in a Breton story there figures a giant whom neither fire nor ~ 
water nor steel can harm. He tells his seventh wife, whom ~ 
he has just married after murdering all her predecessors, “I _ 
am immortal, and no one can hurt me unless he crushes on 
my breast an egg, which is in a pigeon, which is in the 
belly of a hare; this hare is in the belly of a wolf, and this 
wolf is in the belly of my brother, who dwells a thousand — 
leagues from here. So I am quite easy on that score.” A 
soldier, the hero of the tale, had been of service to an ant, 


power of turning himself into an ant, a wolf, or a sea-bird — 
at will. By means of this magical power the soldier con-— 
trived to obtain the egg and crush it on the breast of the 
giant, who immediately expired.2 Another Breton sto 
tells of a giant who was called Body-without-Soul because — 


1 Rev. James Macdonald, Religion Highlands and Islands of Scotland” 
and Myth, pp. 191 sg., from informa- (Glasgow, 1900), p. 284. s 
tion furnished by the Rev, A. Mackay. 2 Jeremiah Curtin, AZyths and Folk- 
In North Uist there is a sept known as = ¢a/es of /reland (London, N.D.), pp. 71 ~ 
**the MacCodrums of the seals,” and sg. ‘* 
a precisely similar legend is told to 3 P. Sébillot, Contes populaires a 
explain their descent from seals. See Ja Haute-Bretagne (Paris, 1885), pp. 
J. G. Campbell, Superstitions of the 63 sgq. 


expired.’ 


_ 4¥F. M. Luzel, Contes populaires de 
_Basse-Bretagne (Paris, 1887), i. 435- 
449. Compare zd., Veillées Bretonnes 
Morlaix, 1879), pp. 133 sg. For two 
other French stories of the same type, 
taken down in Lorraine, see E. Cosquin, 
Contes populaires de Lorraine (Paris, 
-D.), Nos. 15 and 50 (vol. i. pp. 166 
g-, vol. ii. pp. 128 sgg.). In both 
them there figures a miraculous beast 
which can only be slain by breaking a 
certain egg against its head ; but we are 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 


133 


his life did not reside in his body. He himself dwelt in 
a beautiful castle which hung between heaven and earth, 
suspended by four golden chains ; 
and the egg was in a dove, and the dove was in a hare, and 
the hare was in a wolf, and the wolf was in an iron chest at 
‘the bottom of the sea. In his castle in the air he kept 
prisoner a beauteous princess whom he had swooped down 
‘upon and carried off in a magic chariot. 
: turned himself into an ant and so climbed up one of the 
4 oa chains into the enchanted castle, for he had done a 


but his life was in an egg, 


But her lover 


When he had learned from the ae princess the secret “a 
the giant’s life, he procured the chest from the bottom of the 


the giant grew weaker and weaker as if he had lost a limb. 
‘In the stomach of the dove the hero found the egg on which 
the giant’s life depended, and when he came with it to the 
castle he found Body-without-Soul stretched on his bed at 
‘the point of death. So he dashed the egg against the 
- giant's forehead, the egg broke, and the giant straightway 
In another Breton tale the life of a giant resides 
_ in an old box-tree which grows in his castle garden; and to 
_ kill him it is necessary to sever the tap-root of the tree at a 
‘single blow of an axe without injuring any of the lesser 
‘roots. This task the hero, as usual, successfully accomplishes, 
and at the same moment the giant drops dead.” 

: The notion of an external soul has now been traced in 
folk-tales told by Aryan peoples from India to Brittany and 


not told that the life of the beast was 
in the egg. In both of them also the 
hero receives from three animals, whose 
dispute about the carcase of a dead 
beast he has settled, the power of 
changing himself into animals of the 
same sort. See the remarks and com- 
parisons of the learned editor, Monsieur 
E. Cosquin, of. cit. i. 170 sg. 


2 F. M. Luzel, Vezliées Bretonnes 
pp. 127 sgg. 


helpful 


The giant 
whose life 
was ina 
box-tree, 


The exter- 
\% nal soul 
' in stories 
| | of non- 
| Aryan 
ples. 
| Theancient 
| Egyptian 
story of 
the Two 
' Brothers. 


134 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


the Hebrides. We have still to shew that the same idea occurs j 


commonly in the popular stories of peoples who do not belong 


tothe Aryanstock. Inthe first place it appears in the ancient ' 
Egyptian story of “The Two Brothers.” This story was © 


written down in the reign of Rameses II., about 1300 B.C. 


It is therefore older than our present redaction of Homer, — 
and far older than the Bible. The outline of the story, — 
so far as it concerns us here, is as follows. Once upon — 
a time there were two brethren; the name of the elder was — 


Anpu and the name of the younger was Bata. Now Anpu 
had a house and a wife, and his younger brother dwelt with 
him as his servant. It was Anpu who made the garments, 


jin cs 


and every morning when it grew light he drove the kine — 


afield. As he walked behind them they used to say to © 
him, “ The grass is good in such and such a place,” and he © 
heard what they said and led them to the good pasture that — 
they desired. So his kine grew very sleek and multiplied 
greatly. One day when the two brothers were at work in © 
the field the elder brother said to the younger, “Run and © 
fetch seed from the village.” So the younger brother ran ~ 
and said to the wife of his elder brother, “Give me seed ~ 


that I may run to the field, for my brother sent me saying, 


Tarry not.” She said, “Go to the barn and take as muchas © 
thou wouldst.” He went and filled a jar full of wheat and © 
barley, and came forth bearing it on his shoulders. When — 
the woman saw him her heart went out to him, and she laid 


hold of him and said, “Come, let us rest an hour together.” 


But he said, “Thou art to me as a mother, and my brother © 
is to me as a father.” So he would not hearken to her, but — 
took the load on his back and went away to the field. In — 
the evening, when the elder brother was returning from the ~ 
field, his wife feared for what she had said. So she took © 


ic st 


soot and made herself as one who had been beaten. And ~ 


when her husband came home, she said, “ When thy younger ¢ 
brother came to fetch seed, he said to me, Come, let us rest 


an hour together. But I would not, and he beat me.” 


Then the elder brother became like a panther of the south; — 


he sharpened his knife and stood behind the door of the 
cow-house. And when the sun set and the younger brother 7 


came laden with all the herbs of the field, as was his wont 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 135 


' every day, the cow that walked in front of the herd said to 
q him, “ Behold, thine elder brother stands with a knife to kill 
| thee. Flee before him.” When he heard what the cow 
| said, he looked under the door of the cow-house and saw 
' the feet of his elder brother standing behind the door, his 
| «nife in his hand. So he fled and his brother pursued him 
| with the knife. But the younger brother cried for help to 
_ the Sun, and the Sun heard him and caused a great water 
' to spring up between him and his elder brother, and the 
4 water was full of crocodiles. The two brothers stood, the 
' one on the one side of the water and the other on the other, 
) and the younger brother told the elder brother all that had 
’ befallen. So the elder brother repented him of what he 
| had done and he lifted up his voice and wept. But he 
could not come at the farther bank by reason of the 
crocodiles. His younger brother called to him and said, 
Go home and tend the cattle thyself. For I will dwell no 
ore in the place where thou art. I will go to the Valley 
f the Acacia. But this is what thou shalt do for me. 
ou shalt come and care for me, if evil befalls me, for I 


the Acacia; and if they cut the Acacia and my heart 
falls to the ground, thou shalt come and seek it, and when 
thou hast found it thou shalt lay it in a vessel of fresh 
water. Then I shalt come to life again. But this is the 
ign that evil has befallen me; the pot of beer in thine hand 
‘shall bubble.” So he went away to the Valley of the 
Acacia, but his brother returned home with dust on his head 
and slew his wife and cast her to the dogs. 


alone in the Valley of the Acacia. By day he hunted the 
beasts of the field, but at evening he came and laid him 
wn under the Acacia, on the top of whose flower was his 


r him; and the Sun said to Khnumu, “ Make a wife for 
Bata, that he may not dwell alone.” So Khnumu made 
him a woman to dwell with him, who was perfect in her 
limbs more than any woman on earth, for all the gods were 


= . 


‘in her. So she dwelt with him. But one day a lock of 


For many days afterwards the younger brother dwelt, 


will enchant my heart and place it on the top of the flower ; 


How Bata 
died and 


was 
brought to 
life again. 


136 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 


CHAP, 


her hair fell into the river and floated down to the lan . 


of Egypt,:to the house of Pharaoh’s washerwomen. 


The | 


fragrance of the lock perfumed Pharaoh’s raiment, and the — 


washerwomen were blamed, for it was said, “An odour of © 
So the heart of — 


perfume in the garments of Pharaoh!” 
Pharaoh’s chief washerman was weary of the complaints 


that were made every day, and he went to the wharf, and © 


there in the water he spied the lock of hair. 


he took it to Pharaoh. 
sent for and they said, “This lock of hair belongs to a 
daughter of the Sun, who has in her the essence of all the 
gods. 
her.” 


her. 
Pharaoh, 
destroy it.” 
Acacia. 


hour. 


turbid. 


younger brother lying dead in his house. 
for the heart of his brother under the Acacia. 


in the berry of the Acacia. 
cup of fresh water. 


revived. 


Let messengers go forth to all foreign lands to seek — 
So the woman was brought from the Valley of the — 
Acacia with chariots and archers and much people, and all 
the land of Egypt rejoiced at her coming, and Pharaoh loved © 
But when they asked her of her husband, she said to — 
“Let them cut down the Acacia and let them E 
So men were sent with tools to cut down the . 
They came to it and cut the flower upon which ~ 
was the heart of Bata; and he fell down dead in that evil — 
But the next day, when the earth grew light and © 
the elder brother of Bata was entered into his house and ~ 
had sat down, they brought him a pot of beer and it © 
bubbled, and they gave him a jug of wine and it grew © 
Then he took his staff and his sandals and hied — 
him to the Valley of the Acacia, and there he found his © 
So he sought — 
For three 
years he sought in vain, but in the fourth year he found it © 
So he threw the heart into a — 
And when it was night and the heart © 
had sucked in much water, Bata shook in all his limbs and ~ 
Then he drank the cup of water in which his — 


He sent one — 
down into the river to fetch it, and, because it smelt sweetly, — 
Then Pharaoh’s magicians were 


eat ae} 


mig yl aia 


heart was, and his heart went into its place, and he lived as _ 


before. 


* 1 (Sir) Gaston Maspero, Contes Wiedemann, 


populaires de ? Egypte ancienne (Paris, 
N.D.), pp. I sgg.; W. M. Flinders 
Petrie, Zepptian Tales, Second Series 
(London, 1895), pp. 36 sgg.; Alfred 


Méarchen (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 58-77. 
Compare W. Mannhardt, ‘ Das 
alteste Miarchen,” Zeitschrift fie 


Altigyptische Sagen und i 


deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde, a 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 137 


In the Arabian Nights we read how Seyf el-Mulook, 
after wandering for four months over mountains and hills 
_ and deserts, came to a lofty palace in which he found the 
lovely daughter of the King of India sitting alone on a 
eo golden couch in a hall spread with silken carpets. She tells 
| him that she is held captive by a jinnee, who had swooped 
4 down on her and carried her off while she was disporting 


: tof her father the king. Seyf el-Mulook then offers to smite 
4 the j jinnee with the sword and slay him. “ But,” she replied, 
| “thou canst not slay him unless thou kill his soul.” “And 
ii in what place,” said he, “is his soul?” She answered, “ I 
“ asked him respecting it many times; but he would not 
5 confess to me its place. It happened, ‘however, that I urged 
' him, one day, and he was enraged against me, and said to 
_ me, ‘How often wilt thou ask me respecting my soul ? 
a What is the reason of thy question respecting my soul?’ 
_ So Ianswered him, ‘O Hatim, there remaineth to me no one 
| but thee, excepting God; and I, as long as I live, would 
not cease to hold thy soul in my embrace ; and if I do not 
_ take care of thy soul, and put it in the midst of my eye, 
how can I live after thee? If I knew thy soul, I would 
2 take care of it as of my right eye. And thereupon he said 
z to me, ‘When I was born, the astrologers declared that the 
- destruction of my soul seaakd be effected by the hand of one 
_ of the sons of the human kings. I therefore took my soul, 
: and put it into the crop of a sparrow, and I imprisoned the 
_ Sparrow in a little box, and put this into another small box, 
a and this I put within seven other small boxes, and I put 
_ these within seven chests, and the chests I put into a coffer 
_ of marble within the verge of this circumambient ocean ; for 
this part is remote from the countries of mankind, and none 
of mankind can gain access to it.” But Seyfel-Mulook got 
' possession of the sparrow and strangled it, and the jinnee 
fell upon the ground a heap of black ashes.’ In a modern 


(1859) pp. 232-259. The manu- and in almost perfect condition. 

script of the story, which is now in the 1 The Thousand and One Nights, 
British Museum, belonged to an Egyp- commonly called, in England, The 
prince, who was afterwards King Arabian Nights’ Entertainments, trans- 
Seti II. and reigned about the year lated by E. W. Lane (London, 1839— 
geo B.c. It is beautifully written 1841), iii. 339-345. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
Arabian 
stories. 
The jinnee 
and the 


sparrow. 


The ogress 
and the 
bottle. 


138 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 


Arabian tale a king marries an ogress, who puts out the 
eyes of the king’s forty wives. One of the blinded queens 
gives birth to a son whom she names Mohammed the Prudent. 
But the ogress queen hated him and compassed his death. 


So she sent him on an errand to the house of her kinsfolk — 


the ogres. In the house of the ogres he saw some things 
hanging from the roof, and on asking a female slave what 
they were, she said, “ That is the bottle which contains the 
life of my lady the queen, and the other bottle beside it 
contains the eyes of the queens whom my mistress blinded.” 
A little afterwards he spied a beetle and rose to kill it. 
“Don’t kill it,” cried the slave, “for that is my life.” But 
Mohammed the Prudent watched the beetle till it entered 
a chink in the wall; 
asleep, he killed the beetle in its hole, and so the slave died. 


‘Then Mohammed took down the two bottles and carried — 
There he presented him- — 
self before the ogress queen and said, “ See, I have your life — 
in my hand, but I will not kill you till you have replaced © 
The ogress © 


them home to his father’s palace. 


the eyes which you took from the forty queens.” 
did as she was bid, and then Mohammed the Prudent said, 
“ There, take your life.” 
died. 


1G, pitta - Bey, Contes arabes 


CHAP. | 


and when the female slave had fallen 3 


But the bottle slipped from his : 
hand and fell, the life of the ogress escaped from it, and she ~ 


by her as her son. The same incident 5 


modernes (Leyden and Paris, 1883), 

No. 2, pp. 12 sgg. The story in its 
main outlines is identical with the 
Cashmeer story of ** The Ogress Queen” 
(J. H. Knowles, Folk-tales of Kashmir, 
pp- 42 sgg.) and the Bengalee story of 
“The Boy whom Seven Mothers 
Suckled” (Lal Behari Day, Fo/k-tales 
of Bengal, pp. 117 sqq.; J/ndian Anti- 
guary, i. 170sgg.). Inanother Arabian 
story the life of a witch is bound up 
with a phial; when it is broken, she 
dies (W. A. Clouston, A Group of 
Eastern Romances and Stories, Privately 
printed, 1889, p. 30). A similar in- 
cident occurs in a Cashmeer story 
(J. H. Knowles, of. cz¢. p. 73). Inthe 
Arabian story mentioned in the text, 
the hero, by a genuine touch of local 
colour, is made to drink the milk of 
an ogress’s breasts and hence is regarded 


occurs in Kabyle and Berber tales. 
See J. Rivitre, Contes populaires de la 
Kabylie du Djurdjura (Paris, 1882), — 
p- 239; R. Basset, Mouveaux Contes 
Berberes (Paris, 1897), p. 128, with — 
Ina @ 
Mongolian story a king refuses to kill — 
a lad because he has unwittingly par- — 
taken of a cake kneaded with the milk — 
of the lad’s mother (B. Jiilg, A/ongol- 
ische Marchen-Sammlung, die neun — 
Mirchen des Siddhi-Kiir, Innsbruck, 
Compare W. Robert- 
son Smith, Atuship and Marriage in — 
Early Arabia, New Edition (London, — 
1903), p. 176; and for the same mode ~ 
of creating kinship among other races, — 
see A. d’Abbadie, Douse ans dans la 
Haute Ethiopie (Paris, 1868),pp.27259.5 — 
Circassians,” — 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, — 


the editor’s note, pp. 339 5¢¢. 


1868, p. 183). 


Tausch, ‘* Notices of the 


Vo is ts aha ae da lh a eas 


sae 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 139 
' A Basque story, which closely resembles some of the 
‘stories told among Aryan peoples, relates how a monster— 
‘a Body-without-Soul—detains a princess in captivity, and is 
uestioned by her as to how he might be slain. With some 
reluctance he tells her, “ You must kill a terrible wolf which 
in the forest, and inside him is a fox, in the fox is a 
pigeon ; this pigeon has an egg in his head, and whoever 
ould strike me on the forehead with this egg would kill 
me.” The hero of the story, by name Malbrouk, has learned, 
‘in the usual way, the art of turning himself at will into 
wolf, an ant, a hawk, or a dog, and on the strength of 
‘this accomplishment he kills the animals, one after the 
other, and extracts the precious egg from the pigeon’s 
' head. When the wolf is killed, the monster feels it and says 
_ despondently, “I do not know if anything is going to happen 
"tome. I am much afraid of it.” When the fox and the 
pigeon have been killed, he cries that it is all over with him, 
that they have taken the egg out of the pigeon, and that he 


a corpse! 


, knows not what is to become of him. Finally the princess 
strikes the monster on the forehead with the egg, and he falls 
In a Kabyle story an ogre declares that his fate 
far away in an egg, which is in a pigeon, which is ina 
camel, which is in the sea. The hero procures the egg and 
crushes it between his hands, and the ogre dies. 
Magyar folk-tale, an old witch detains a young prince called 
Ambrose in the bowels of the earth. At last she confided 


In a 


(1834) p. 104; J. Biddulph, 7rzdes 
of the Hindoo Koosh (London, 1880), 
pp- 77, 83 (compare G. W. Leitner, 
Languages and Races of Dardistan, 


$83), p. 101 ; J. Moura, Ze Royaume 
Cambodge (Paris, 1883), i. 427; F. S. 


Among Congo Cannibals (London, 


a Africa make peace with an enemy, 
each tribe brings a cow with a calf and 
woman witha baby. The two cows 

re exchanged, and the enemy’s child 


is suckled at the breast of the Masai 
woman, and the Masai baby is suckled 
at the breast of the woman belonging 
to the enemy. See A. C. Hollis, Zhe 
Masai (Oxford, 1905), pp. 321 s¢. 


1 W. Webster, Basgue Legends 
(London, 1877), pp. 80 sgg. ; J. Vinson, 
Le folk-lore du pays Basque (Paris, 
1883), pp. 84 sgg. As so often in tales 


The exter- 
nal soul 
in Basque, 
Kabyle, 


Magyar 
stories. 


of this type, the hero is said to have - 


received his wonderful powers of meta- 
morphosis from animals whom he found 
quarrelling about their shares in a dead 
beast. 


2 J. Rivitre, Contes populaires de la 


Kabylie du Djurdjura (Paris, 1882), 
p- 191. 


The exter- 
nal soul 
in a Lapp 
story. 

The giant 
whose life 
was ina 
hen’s egg. 


140 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cuar. — 


to him that she kept a wild boar in a silken meadow, and if — 
it were killed, they would find a hare inside, and inside the © 
hare a pigeon, and inside the pigeon a small box, and inside ~ 
the box one black and one shining beetle: the shining beetle © 
held her life, and the black one held her power ; if these two q 
beetles died, then her life would come to anend also. When — 
the old hag went out, Ambrose killed the wild boar, and took — 
out the hare; from the hare he took the pigeon, from the ~ 
pigeon the box, and from the box the two beetles; he killed — 
the black beetle, but kept the shining one alive. So the — 
witch’s power left her immediately, and when she came home, ~ 
she had to take to her bed. Having learned from her how 
to escape from his prison to the upper air, Ambrose killed. — 
the shining beetle, and the old hag’s spirit left her at once.' 5 
In another Hungarian story the safety of the Dwarf-king © 
resides in a golden cockchafer, inside a golden cock, inside — 
a golden sheep, inside a golden stag, in the ninety-ninth — 
island. The hero overcomes all these golden animals and ~ 
so recovers his bride, whom the Dwarf-king had carried off? — 

A Lapp story tells of a giant who slew a man and took ~ 
away his wife. When the man’s son grew up, he tried to © 
rescue his mother and kill the giant, but fire and sword were 
powerless to harm the monster ; it seemed as if he had no ~ 
life in his body. “Dear mother,” at last enquired the son, — 
“don’t you know where the giant has hidden away his life?” — 
The mother did not know, but promised to ask. Soone ~ 
day, when the giant chanced to be in a good humour, ~ 
she asked him where he kept his life. He said to her, ~ 
“ Out yonder on a burning sea is an island, in the island is 5 
a barrel, in the barrel is a sheep, in the sheep is a hen, in the — 
hen is an egg, and in the egg is my life.’ Whenthe woman’s 
son heard this, he hired a bear, a wolf, a hawk, and a diver-bird 
and set off in a boat to sail to the island in the burning sea. ~ 
He sat with the hawk and the.diver-bird under an iron tentin — 
the middle of the boat, and he set the bear and the wolf to — 
row. That is why to this day the bear’s hair is dark brown ~ 
and the wolf has dark-brown spots ; for as they sat at the © 


1 W. H. Jones and L, L. Kropf, 2 R. H. Busk, 7%e Folk-lore of Rome ~ 
The Folk-tales of the Magyar (London, (London, 1874), p. 168. 4 
1889), pp. 205 sg. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 14! 


a made their way over the fiery billows to the island, anil 
; there they found the barrel. Ina trice the bear had knocked The 
_ the bottom out of it with his claws, and forth sprang a sheep. **: pera n 
_ But the wolf soon pulled the sheep down and rent it in pieces. 
From out the sheep flew a hen, but the hawk stooped on it and 
- tore it with his talons. In the hen was an egg, which dropped 
_ into the sea and sank; but the diver-bird dived after it. 
_ Twice he dived after it in vain and came up to the surface 
gasping and spluttering ; but the third time he brought up 
| the egg and handed it to the young man. Great was the 
' young man’s joy. At once he kindled a great bonfire on 
| the shore, threw the egg into it, and rowed away back across 
| the sea. On landing he went away straight to the giant’s 
_ abode, and found the monster burning, just as he had left the 
_ egg burning on the island. “Fool that I was,” lamented 
' the dying giant, “to betray my life to a wicked old woman,” 
- and with that he snatched at an iron tube through which in 
| happier days he had been wont to suck the blood of his 
_ human victims. But the woman was too subtle for him, for 
_ she had taken the precaution of inserting one end of the 
tube in the glowing embers of the hearth ; and so, when the 
giant sucked hard at the other end, he imbibed only fire and 
ashes. Thus he burned inside as well as outside, and when 
the fire went out the giant’s life went out with it? 
A Samoyed story tells how seven warlocks killed a certain The exter- 
man’s mother and carried off his sister, whom they kept to or 
y 
_ servethem. Every night when they came home the seven and 
_ warlocks used to take out their hearts and place them in a — 
dish which the woman hung on the tent-poles. But the 
wife of the man whom they had wronged stole the hearts of 
_ the warlocks while they slept, and took them to her husband. 
_ By break of day he went with the hearts to the warlocks, 
_ and found them at the point of death. They all begged for 
_ their hearts; but he threw six of their hearts to the ground, 
and six of the warlocks died. The seventh and eldest war- 


; 1 F. Liebrecht, ‘‘ Lapplindische Jamdische Méarchen (Vienna, 1886), 
_ Marchen,” Germania, N.R., iii. (1870) No. 20, pp. 81 sgg. 
" pp. 174 sg.; F. C. Poestion, Lagf- 


The exter- 
nal soul 
in Tartar 
poems. 


142 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. 


lock begged hard for his heart and the man said, “You — 
killed my mother. Make her alive again, and I will give 
you back your heart.” The warlock said to his wife, “Go — 
to the place where the dead woman lies. You will find a 1 
bag there. Bring it to me. The woman’s spirit is in the — 
bag.” So his wife brought the bag; and the warlock said — 
to the man, “Go to your dead mother, shake the bag and — 
let the spirit breathe over her bones ; so she will come to life — 
again.” The man did as he was bid, and his mother was © 
restored to life. Then he hurled the seventh heart to the © 
ground, and the seventh warlock died.’ In a Kalmuck tale © 


-we read how a certain khan challenged a wise man to shew © 


his skill by stealing a precious stone on which the khan’s life — 
depended. The sage contrived to purloin the talisman ~ 
while the khan and his guards slept; but not content with — 


this he gave a further proof of his dexterity by bonneting ~ 


the slumbering potentate with a bladder. This was too — 
much for the khan. Next morning he informed the sage — 
that he could overlook everything else, but that the indignity — 
of being bonneted with a bladder was more than he could ~ 


stand ; and he ordered his facetious friend to instant execu- — 
tion. Pained at this exhibition of royal ingratitude, the ~ 
sage dashed to the ground the talisman which he still held — 
in his hand; and at the same instant blood flowed from the ~ 


nostrils of the khan, and he gave up the ghost.” 7 
In a Tartar poem two heroes named Ak Molot and © 


Bulat engage in mortal combat. Ak Molot pierces his foe — 


through and through with an arrow, grapples with him, and 
dashes him to the ground, but all in vain, Bulat could not ~ 


die. At last when the combat has lasted three years, a 


friend of Ak Molot sees a golden casket hanging by a white — 
thread from the sky, and bethinks him that perhaps this — 
casket contains Bulat’s soul. So he shot through the white — 
thread with an arrow, and down fell the casket. He opened ~ 
it, and in the casket sat ten white birds, and one of the birds 
was Bulat’s soul. Bulat wept when he saw that his soul was 
found in the casket. But one after the other the birds were ~ 


1 A. Castren, Ethnologische Vorlesun- 2 B. Jjiilg, Kalmiickische Mirchen 7 
gen tiber die altaischen Volker (St.  (Leipsic, 1866), No. 12, pp. 58 sgg. 
Petersburg, 1857), pp. 173 sg¢. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 


_ killed, and then Ak Molot easily slew his foe.’ 
_ Tartar poem, two brothers going to fight two other brothers 
& take out their souls and hide them in the form of a white 
herb with six stalks in a deep pit. But one of their foes 
sees them doing so and digs up their souls, which he puts 
into a golden ram’s horn, and then sticks the ram’s horn in 
his quiver. The two warriors whose souls have thus been 
tolen know that they have no chance of victory, and accord- 
‘ingly make peace with their enemies? In another Tartar 
"poem a terrible demon sets all the gods and heroes at defiance, 
_At last a valiant youth fights the demon, binds him hand 
4 and foot, and slices him with his sword. But still the demon 
' is not slain. So the youth asked him, “Tell me, where is 
| your soul hidden? For if your soul had been hidden in your 
_ body,-you must have been dead long ago.” The demon 
' replied, “On the saddle of my horse is a bag. In the bag 
4 is a serpent with twelve heads. In the serpent is my soul. 
| When you have killed the serpent, you have killed me also.” 
_ So the youth took the saddle-bag from the horse and killed 
' the twelve-headed serpent, whereupon the demon expired.® 
In another Tartar poem a hero called K6k Chan deposits 
_with a maiden a golden ring, in which is half his strength. 
_ Afterwards when K6k Chan is wrestling long with a hero 
and cannot kill him, a woman drops into his mouth the ring 
_which contains half his strength. Thus inspired with fresh 
_ force he slays his enemy.‘ 
In a Mongolian story the hero Joro gets the better of The exter- 
_ his enemy the lama Tschoridong in the following way. The cesar’ 
lama, who is an enchanter, sends out his soul in the form of story and 
a wasp to sting Joro’s eyes. But Joro catches the wasp in ee 
his hand, and by alternately shutting and opening his hand 


143 


In another 


1 Anton Schiefner, He/densagen der 
| Minussinschen Tataren (St. Peters- 
—, 1859), pp. 172-176. 

a A. Schiefner, of. ct. pp. 108- 
= 312. 
ae 3 A. Schiefner, of. cit. pp. 360-364 ; 
’ A. Castren, Vorlesungen iiber die 
) finnische Mythologie (St. Petersburg, 
| 1857), pp. 186 sg. 

' A. Schiefner, of. ct. pp. 189-193. 
- In another Tartar poem (Schiefner, 


op. cit. pp. 390 sg.) a boy’s soul is shut 
up by his enemies in a box. While 
the soul is in the box, the boy is dead ; 
when it is taken out, he is restored to 
life. In the same poem (p. 384) the 
soul of a horse is kept shut up in a 
box, because it is feared the owner of 
the horse will become the greatest 
hero on earth. But these cases are, 
to some extent, the converse of those 
in the text. 


144 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cuar. 


he causes the lama alternately to lose and recover conscious- — 
ness.'_ In a Tartar poem two youths cut open the body of © 
an old witch and tear out her bowels, but all to no pur- — 
pose, she still lives. On being asked where her soul is, she — 


answers that it is in the middle of her shoe-sole in the form — 


of a seven-headed speckled snake. So one of the youths 
slices her shoe-sole with his sword, takes out the speckled — 
snake, and cuts off its seven heads. Then the witch dies.? 
Another Tartar poem describes how the hero Kartaga 
grappled with the Swan-woman. Long they wrestled, 
Moons waxed and waned and still they wrestled; years 
came and went, and still the struggle went on. But the © 
piebald horse and the black horse knew that the Swan- — 
woman’s soul was not in her. Under the black earth flow — 
nine seas; where the seas meet and form one, the sea comes 
to the surface of the earth. At the mouth of the nine seas 
rises a rock of copper; it rises to the surface of the ground, 
it rises up between heaven and earth, this rock of copper. — 
At the foot of the copper rock is a black chest, in the black 
chest is a golden casket, and in the golden casket is the soul ~ 
of the Swan-woman. Seven little birds are the soul of the — 
Swan-woman ; if the birds are killed the Swan-woman will — 
die straightway. So the horses ran to the foot of the copper 
rock, opened the black chest, and brought back the golden 
casket. Then the piebald horse turned himself into a bald- 
headed man, opened the golden casket, and cut off the heads 
of the seven birds. So the Swan-woman died.* Ina Tartar 
story a chief called Tash Kan is asked where his soul is. 
He answers that there are seven great poplars, and under 
the poplars a golden well; seven Mara/en (?) come to drink 
the water of the well, and the belly of one of them trails on the — 
ground ; in this Maral is a golden box, in the golden box ~ 
is a silver box, in the silver box are seven quails, the head — 
of one of the quails is golden and its tail silver; that quail — 
is Tash Kan’s soul. The hero of the story gets possession 
of the seven quails and wrings the necks of six of them, © 

1 Schott, ‘*Ueber die Sage von Jitteratur der tiirkischen Stamme Siid- 4 
Geser-Chan,” Abhandlungen der kinig- Sibiriens, ii. (St. Petersburg, 1868), 
lichen Akademie der Wissenschaften 2u pp. 237 59. 


Berlin, 1851, p. 269. 
2W. Radloff, Proben der Volks- 3 W. Radloff, of. cét. ii. 531 sgg. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 145 


[hen Tash Kan comes running and begs the hero to let 

his soul go free. But the hero wrings the last quail’s neck, 

‘and Tash Kan drops dead.’ In another Tartar poem the hero, 

uirsuing his sister who has driven away his cattle, is warned 

© desist from the pursuit because his sister has carried away 

this soul in a golden sword and a golden arrow, and if he 

yursues her she will kill him by throwing the golden sword 

yr shooting the golden arrow at him.’ 

A modern Chinese story tells how an habitual criminal used The exter- 

nal soul in 

a a Chinese 

‘the righteous punishment of his crimes. This bad man lived story. 

‘in Khien (Kwei-cheu), and the sentences that had been passed 

‘on him formed a pile as high as a hill. The mandarins had 

logged him to death with sticks and flung his mangled 

sorpse into the river, but three days afterwards the scoundrel 

‘got his soul back again, and on the fifth day he resumed 

/his career of villainy as if nothing had happened. The thing 

‘occurred again and again, till at last it reached the ears of 

‘the Governor of the province, who flew into a violent passion 

‘and proposed to the Governor-General to have the rascal 

‘beheaded. And beheaded he was; but in three days the 
wretch was alive again with no trace of decapitation about 

him except a slender red thread round his neck. And now, 

like a giant refreshed, he began a fresh series of enormities. 

He even went so far as to beat his own mother. This was 

more than she could bear, and she brought the matter before 

magistrate. She produced in court a vase and said, 

n this vase my refractory son has hidden his soul. When- 

ever he was conscious of having committed a serious crime, 

or a misdeed of the most heinous kind, he remained at 

home, took his soul out of his body, purified it, and put it 

in the vase. Then the authorities only punished or executed 

his body of flesh and blood, and not his soul. With his 
oul, refined by a long process, he then cured his freshly 

utilated body, which thus became able in three days to 

commence in the old way. Now, however, his crimes 

ave reached a climax, for he has beaten me, an old woman, 

nd I cannot bear it. I pray you, smash this vase, and 


‘te take his soul out of his own body for the purpose of evading 


oF, 


1 W. Radloff, of. cit. iv. (St. Peters- 2, W. Radloff, of. cit. i. (St. Peters- 
g, 1872) pp. 88 sg. burg, 1866) pp. 345 5¢. 
PT. VII. VOL. II L 


146 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cuav. 


scatter his soul by fanning it away with a windwheel ; and if 
then you castigate his body anew, it is probable that bad 
son of mine will really die” The mandarin took the hint. 
He had the rogue cudgelled to death, and when they 
examined the corpse they found that decay had set in within 
ten days.’ ; 
The exter- The Khasis of Assam tell of a certain Kyllong, king of 
hal soul) Madur, who pursued his conquests on a remarkable principle, 


a story told : 
by the He needed few or no soldiers, because he himself was a very 


wpa strong man and nobody could kill him permanently ; they 
could, it is true, put him to death, but then he came to life. 
again immediately. The king of Synteng, who was much 
afraid of him, once chopped him in pieces and threw the 
severed hands and feet far away, thinking thus to get rid of 
him for good and all; but it was to no purpose, The very 
next morning Kylloae came to life again and stalked about 
as brisk as ever. So the king of Synteng was very anxious 
to learn how his rival contrived thus to rise from the dead ; 
and he hit on a plan for worming out the secret. He chose 
the fairest girl of the whole country, clad her in royal robes, 
put jewels of gold and silver upon her, and said, “ All these 
will I give thee and more besides, if thou canst obtain for me 
King Kyllong’s secret, and canst inform me how he brings. 
himself to life again after being killed.” So he sent the girl 
to the slave-market in King Kyllong’s country; and the 
king saw and loved her and took her to wife. So she 
caressed him and coaxed him to tell her his secret, and in 
a fatal hour he was beguiled into revealing it. He said, 
“My life depends upon these things. I must bathe every 
day and must wash my entrails. After that, I take my 
food, and there is no one on earth who can kill me unless 
he obtains possession of my entrails. Thus my life hangs 
only on my entrails.” His treacherous wife at once sent 
word to the king of Synteng, who caused men to lie in wait 
while Kyllong was bathing. As usual, Kyllong had laid his 
entrails on one side of the bathing-place, while he disported 
himself in the water, intending afterwards to wash them. 
and replace them in his body. But before he could do SO, 


1 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious System of China, iv. (Leyden, 1901) 
Pp. 105 sg. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 147 


‘one of the liers-in-wait had seized the entrails and killed 
m. The entrails he cut in pieces and gave to the dogs 
oeat. That was the end of King Kyllong. He was never 
ble to come to life again; his country was conquered, and 
= members of the royal family were scattered far and 
vide. Seven generations have passed since then.’ 

A Malay poem relates how once upon a time in the city 
‘of Indrapoora there was a certain merchant who was rich 
2 nd prosperous, but he had no children. One day as he 
‘walked with his wife by the river they found a baby girl, 
fair as an angel. So they adopted the child and called her 
Bidasari. The merchant caused a golden fish to be made, 
d into this fish he transferred the soul of his adopted 
aughter. Then he put the golden fish in a golden box full 
f water, and hid it in a pond in the midst of his garden. 
n time the girl grew to be a lovely woman. Now the 
ing of Indrapoora had a fair young queen, who lived in 
r that the king might take to himself a second wife. So, 
aring of the charms of Bidasari, the queen resolved to put 
her out of the way. She lured the girl to the palace and 
rtured her cruelly ; but Bidasari could not die, because her 
oul was notin her. At last she could stand the torture no 
onger and said to the queen, “If you wish me to die, you 
must bring the box which is in the pond in my father’s 
den.” So the box was brought and opened, and there 
as the golden fish in the water. The girl said, “My soul 
in that fish. In the morning you must take the fish out 
the water, and in the evening you must put it back into 
the water. Do not let the fish lie about, but bind it round 
our neck. If you do this, I shall soon die.” Sothe queen 
ok the fish out of the box and fastened it round her neck ; 
and no sooner had she done so, than Bidasari fell into a 
oon. But in the evening, when the fish was put back 
“into the water, Bidasari came to herself again. Seeing that 
e thus had the girl in her power, the queen sent her home 
to her adopted parents. To save her from further persecu- 
n her parents resolved to remove their daughter from the 
ty. So in a lonely and desolate spot they built a house 
and brought Bidasari thither. There she dwelt alone, under- 
1 Major P. R. T. Gurdon, Zhe Khasis (London, 1907), pp. 181-184. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 


and the 
golden fish. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
a story told 
in Nias. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
a Hausa 
story. 

The king 
whose life 
was ina 
box. 


148 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP. © 


going vicissitudes that corresponded with the vicissitudes’ 
of the golden fish in which was her soul. All day long, 
while the fish was out of the water, she remained un-— 
conscious ; but in the evening, when the fish was put into ~ 
the water, she revived. One day the king was out hunting, 
and coming to the house where Bidasari lay unconscious, — 
was smitten with her beauty. He tried to waken her, but — 
in vain. Next day, towards evening, he repeated his visit, 
but still found her unconscious. However, when darkness 
fell, she came to herself and told the king the secret of her 
life. So the king returned to the palace, took the fish from 
the queen, and put it in water. in Bidasari | 
revived, and the king took her to wife." 4 

Another story of an external soul comes from Nias, an 
island to the west of Sumatra. Once on a time a chief was" 
captured by his enemies, who tried to put him to death but 
failed. Water would not drown him nor fire burn him nor 
steel pierce him. At last his wife revealed the secret. On 
his head he had a hair as hard as a copper wire; and with 
this wire his life was bound up. So the hair was plucked 
out, and with it his spirit fled.? 3 

A Hausa story from Northern Nigeria closely resembles. 
some of the European tales which we have noticed; for it 
contains not only the incident of the external soul, but also” 
the incident of the helpful animals, by whose assistance the 
hero is able to slay the Soulless King and obtain possession” 
of the kingdom. The story runs thus. A certain man and 
his wife had four daughters born to them in succession, but 


1G, A. Wilken, ‘‘ De betrekking 
tusschen menschen- dieren- en planten- 
leven naar het volksgeloof,” De Jndische 
Gids, November 1884, pp. 600-602 ; 
zd., ** De Simsonsage,” De Gids, 1888, 
No. 5, pp. 6 sgg. (of the separate re- 
print); z@., Verspreide Geschriften (The 
Hague, 1912), iii. 296-298, 559-561. 
Compare L. de Backer, L’Archipel 
Indien (Paris, 1874), pp. 144-149. 
The Malay text of the long poem was 
published with a Dutch translation and 
notes by W. R. van Hoévell (‘* Sjair 
Bidasari, een oorspronkelijk Maleisch 
Gedicht, uitgegeven en van eene Verta- 
ling en Aanteekeningen voorzien,” 


Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasell 
Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten= 
schappen, xix. (Batavia, 1843) pp. I 
421). 

2 J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. Be 
von Rosenberg, ‘ Verslag omtrent het 
eiland Nias,” Verhandelingen van f 
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten 
en Wetenschappen, xxx. (Batavia, 1863) 
p- 111; H. Sundermann, “ Die Insel 
Nias,” Aligemeine Missions-Zeitschrift, 
xi. (1884) p- 453; #7, Die Insel Nias. 
und die Mission daselbst (Barmen, 
1905), p. 71. Compare E. Modigg 
liani, Un Viaggio a Nias (Milan, 1890), 


P- 339- 


rs 
i 


pie 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 149 


eve one of the baby girls mysteriously disappeared on the 
day when she was to be weaned ; so the parents fell under the 
Suspicion of having devoured Sem. Last of all there was 
‘born to them a son, who to avoid accidents was left to wean 
“himself. One day, as he grew up, the son received a magic 
‘lotion from an old woman, who told him to rub his eyes with 
t. He did so, and immediately he saw a large house and 
entering it he found his eldest sister married to a bull. She 

de him welcome and so did her husband the bull; and 
hen he went away, the bull very kindly presented him with 
lock of his hair as a keepsake. In like manner the lad 
scovered his other three sisters, who were living in wedlock 

th a ram, a dog, and a hawk respectively. All of them 
w poet him and from the ram, the dog, and the hawk he 
received tokens of regard in the shape of hair or feathers. 
Then he returned home and told his parents of his adventure 
d how he had found his sisters alive and married. Next 
day he went to a far city, where he made love to the Queen 
d persuaded her to plot with him against the life of the 
King her husband. So she coaxed the King to shew his 
3 affection for her by “taking his own life, and joining it to 
s.” The unsuspecting husband, as usual, fell into the 
ap set for him by his treacherous wife. He confided to 
the secret of his life. ‘“ My life,” said he, “is behind the 
, behind the city in a thicket. In this thicket there is a 
ke ; in the lake is a rock; in the rock is a gazelle; in the 
elle is a dove; and in the dove is a small box.” The 
ween divulged the secret to her lover, who kindled a fire 
hind the city and threw into it the hair and feathers which 
had received from the friendly animals, his brothers-in-law. 
mmediately the animals themselves appeared and readily 
ve their help in the enterprise. The bull drank up the 
e; the ram broke up the rock; the dog caught the 
zelle; the hawk captured the dove. So the youth 
tracted the precious box from the dove and repairéd to the 
e, where he found the King already dead. His Majesty 
d been ailing from the moment when the young man left 
= city, and he grew steadily worse with every fresh success 
the adventurer who was to supplant him. So the hero 
came King and married the false Queen ; and his sisters’ 


The helpful 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
a South 
Nigerian 
story. 


The exter- 
nal soul in 
a story 
told by the 
Ba-Ronga 
of South 
Africa. 
The Clan 
of the Cat. 


150 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES CHAP, 
i 


husbands were changed from animals into men and received | 
subordinate posts in the government. The hero’s parents, 
too, came to live in the city over which he reigned.’ 

A West African story from Southern Nigeria relates 
how a king kept his soul in a little brown bird, which perched 
on a tall tree beside the gate of the palace. The king’s life 
was so bound up with that of the bird that whoever should - 
kill the bird would simultaneously kill the king and succeed 
to the kingdom. The secret was betrayed by the queen to. 
her lover, who shot the bird with an arrow and thereby slew 
the king and ascended the vacant throne.” A tale told by j 
the Ba-Ronga of South Africa sets forth how the lives of a 
whole family were contained in one cat. When a girl of the - 
family, named Titishan, married a husband, she begged her 
parents to let her take the precious cat with her to her new 
home. But they refused, saying, “ You know that our life is- 
attached to it”; and they offered to give her an antelope or 
even an elephant instead of it. But nothing would satisfy 
her but the cat. So at last she carried it off with her and — 
shut it up in a place where nobody saw it; even her husband — ‘4 
knew nothing about it. One day, when she went to work — 
in the fields, the cat escaped from its place of concealment, — 
entered the hut, put on the warlike trappings of the husband, - ‘ 
and danced and sang. Some children, attracted by the noise, q 
discovered the cat at its antics, and when they expressed _ 
their astonishment, the animal only capered the more and 
insulted them besides. So they went to the owner and said 
“There is somebody dancing in your house, and he insulted 
us.” “Hold your tongues,” said he, “I’ll soon put a stop to— 
your lies.” So he went and hid behind the door and peeped — 
in, and there sure enough was the cat prancing about and — 
singing. He fired at it, and the animal dropped down dead. — 
At the same moment his wife fell to the ground in the field — 
where she was at work; said she, “I have been killed at 
home.” But she had strength enough left to ask her husband © 
to go with her to her parents’ village, taking with him the 


oe ee 


1 Major A. J. N. Tremearne, Hausa na Hausa (ii. 27), to which Major” 
Superstitions and Customs (London, Sherine refers (p. 9). = 
1913), pp. 131 sg. The original Hausa 2 Major A. G. Leonard, The Lower 
text of the story appears to be printed iger and its Tribes (London, 1906), 
in Major Edgar’s Lztafi na Tatsuntyoyt pp. 319-321. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES 151 


} dead cat wrapt up in a mat. All her relatives assembled, 

-and bitterly they reproached her for having insisted on taking - 

“the animal with her to her husband’s village. As soon as 

the mat was unrolled and they saw the dead cat, they all 

ell down lifeless one after the other. So the Clan of the 

Cat was destroyed ; and the bereaved husband closed the 

ate of the village with a branch, and returned home, and 

old his friends how in killing the cat he had killed the whole 

clan, because their lives depended on the life of the cat. In 
‘another Ronga story the lives of a whole clan are attached 

‘to a buffalo, which a girl of the clan in like manner insists 

on taking with her.’ 

_ Ideas of the same sort meet us in stories told by the The exter- 
North American Indians. Thus in one Indian tale the hero eee 
‘pounds his enemy to pieces, but cannot kill him because his by the 
heart is not in his body. At last the champion learns that Xo") 
is foe’s heart is in the sky, at the western side of the noon- Indians. 
ay sun; so he reaches up, seizes the heart, and crushes it, 

and straightway his enemy expires. In another Indian myth 

there figures a personage Winter whose song brings frost 

nd snow, but his heart is hidden away at a distance. 

_ However, his foe finds the heart and burns it, and so the 
Snow-maker perishes? A Pawnee story relates how a 
_ wounded warrior was carried off by bears, who healed him 
_of his hurts. When the Indian was about to return to his 
F Be illage, the old he-bear said to him, “I shall look after you. 
I shall give you a part of myself. If 1 am killed, you 
‘shall be killed. If I grow old, you shall be old.” And the 
_ bear gave him a cap of bearskin, and at parting he put his 
arms round the Indian and hugged him, and put his mouth 
Ma cainst the man’s mouth and held the man’s hands in his 
paws. The Indian who told the tale conjectured that when 
the man died, the old bear died also.’ The Navajoes tell of 
a certain mythical being called “the Maiden that becomes a 


1 Henri A. Junod, Zes Chants et les Magyars (London, 1891), p. 551. 
Contes des Ba-ronga (Lausanne, N.D.), The writer does not mention his 
pp. 253-256; zd., The Life of a South authorities. 

African Tribe (Neuchatel, 1912-1913), 

i. 338 sg. 3G. B. Grinnell, Pawnee Hero 
4a fs Gartin, Myths and Folk-tales of | Stories and Folk-tales (New York, 
the Russians, Western Slavs, and 1889), pp. 121 sgg., ‘‘ The Bear Man.” 


a a a 


The ogress 
whose life 
was ina 
hemlock 
branch, 


152 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-TALES  cnap.x 


Bear,” who learned the art of turning herself into a bear from ; 
the prairie wolf. She was a great warrior and quite 
invulnerable ; for when she went to war she took out her 
vital organs and hid them, so that no one could kill her; 
and when the battle was over she put the organs back in 
their places again. The Kwakiutl Indians of British 
Columbia tell of an ogress, who could not be killed because 
her life was in a hemlock branch. A brave boy met her in 
the woods, smashed her head with a stone, scattered her 
brains, broke her bones, and threw them into the water. 
Then, thinking he had disposed of the ogress, he went into 
her house. There he saw a woman rooted to the floor, who — 
warned him, saying, “Now do not stay long. I know that — 
you have tried to kill the ogress. It is the fourth time that 
somebody has tried to kill her. She never dies; she has 
nearly come to life. There in that covered hemlock branch — 
is her life. Go there, and as soon as you see her enter, — 
shoot her life. Then she will be dead.” Hardly had she © 
finished speaking when sure enough in came the ogress, 
singing as she walked :— 
“ I have the magical treasure, 


I have the supernatural power, 
I can return to life.” 


Such was her song. But the boy shot at her life, and she 
fell dead to the floor. 


1 Washington Matthews, ‘* The 2 Franz Boas, ‘The Social Organiza- — 
Mountain Chant: a NavajoCeremony,” tion and the Secret Societies of the — 
Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
Ethnology (Washington, 1887), pp. United States National Museum jot 


406 sg. 1895 (Washington, 1897), p. 373. 


CHAPTER XI 
THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM 


§ 1. The External Soul in Inanimate Things 


THUS the idea that the soul may be deposited for a longer The exter- 
_or shorter time in some place of security outside the body, Piso" 
or at all events in the hair, is found in the popular tales of custom. 
many races. It remains to shew that the idea is not a 
_ mere figment devised to adorn a tale, but is a real article of 
_ primitive faith, which has given rise to a corresponding set 
of customs. 

7 We have seen that in the tales the hero, as a prepara- The soul 
tion for battle, sometimes removes his soul from his body, in piesa 
order that his body may be invulnerable and immortal in body asa 
the combat. With a like intention the savage removes his Praure? 
_ soul from his body on various occasions of real or imaginary of danger. 
peril. Thus among the people of Minahassa in Celebes, pose! 
_when a family moves into a new house, a priest collects the collected 
souls of the whole family in a bag, and afterwards restores pepe, 
_ them to their owners, because the moment of entering a new Warming. 

_ house is supposed to be fraught with supernatural danger. 

_In Southern Celebes, when a woman is brought to bed, the 

4 messenger who fetches the doctor or the midwife always 

| Carries with him something made of iron, such as a chopping- 
_ knife, which he delivers to the doctor. The doctor must 
_ keep the thing in his house till the confinement is over, when 
_ he gives it back, receiving a fixed sum of money for doing so. 
_ The chopping-knife, or whatever it is, represents the woman’s 
_ soul, which at this critical time is believed to be safer out of 


a 
ay 

Bi 
Se 
st 


enchde 


- 


1 Taboo and the Perils of the Soul, pp. 63 sq. 
153 


Soul of a 
woman put 
in a chop- 
ping-knife 
at child- 
birth. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuar. 


154 


her body than in it. Hence the doctor must take great 
care of the object ; for were it lost, the woman’s soul would 
assuredly, they think, be lost with it.’ But in Celebes the 
convenience of occasionally depositing the soul in some 
external object is apparently not limited to human beings. 
The Alfoors, or Toradjas, who inhabit the central district of 
that island, and among whose industries the working of 
iron occupies a foremost place, attribute to the metal a soul 
which would be apt to desert its body under the blows of 
the hammer, if some means were not found to detain it. 
Accordingly in every smithy of Poso—for that is the name 
of the country of these people—you may see hanging up 
a bundle of wooden instruments, such as chopping-knives, 
swords, spear-heads, and so forth. This bundle goes by the 
name of /amoa, which is the general word for “ gods,” and in 
it the soul of the iron that is being wrought in the smithy 
is, according to one account, supposed to reside. “If we 
did not hang the /amoa over the anvil,” they say, “the iron 
would flow away and be unworkable,” on account of the 
absence of the soul.?, However, according to another inter- 
pretation these wooden models are substitutes offered to the 
gods in room of the iron, whose soul the covetous deities 
might otherwise abstract for their own use, thus making the 
metal unmalleable.* 

Among the Dyaks of Pinoeh, a district of South-Eastern 
Borneo, when a child is born, a medicine-man is sent for, 
who conjures the soul of the infant into half a coco-nut, 


1B. F. Matthes, Bijdragen tot de 
Ethnologie van LZuid-Celebes (The 
Hague, 1875), p. 54. 

2 A. C. Kruijt, ‘‘ Een en ander aan- 
gaande het geestelijk en maatschap- 


pelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” 


Mededeelingen van wege het Neder- 
landsche Zendelinggenootschap, xxxix. 
(1895) pp. 23 sg.; 7@., ** Van Paloppo 
naar Posso,” Mededeelingen van wege 
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenoot- 
schap, xiii. (1898) p. 72. As to the 
lamoa in general, see A. C. Kruijt, 
op. cit. xl. (1896) pp. 10 sg. 


3 A. C. Kruijt, ‘Het koppen- 
snellen der Toradja’s van Midden- 


Celebes, en zijne beteekenis,” Véer- 
slagen en Mededeelingen der koninklijke 
Akademie der Wetenschappen, Afdeel- 
ing Letterkunde, iv. Reeks, iii. (Am- 
sterdam, 1899) pp. 201 sg.; id., 
‘* Het ijzer in Midden-Celebes,” £77- 
dragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volken- 
hkunde van Nederlandsch-Indié, iii. 
(1901) pp. 156 sg. Both the inter- 
pretations in the text appear to be 
inferences drawn by Mr.. Kruijt from 
the statement of the natives, that, if 
they did not hang up these wooden 
models in the smithy, ‘‘ the iron would 
flow away and be unworkable” (* zoz 
het ijzer vervioeien en onbewerkbaar 
worden’). : : 


xr EXTERNAL SOUL IN INANIMATE THINGS 155 
which he thereupon covers with a cloth and places on a Soul ofa 
square platter or charger suspended by cords from the roof. cane 
_ This ceremony he repeats at every new moon for a year.’ inanempty 
_ The intention of the ceremony is not explained by the (72 ier 
writer who describes it, but we may conjecture that it is to 

_ place the soul of the child in a safer place than its own frail 

_ little body. This conjecture is confirmed by the reason 
assigned for a similar custom observed elsewhere in the 
Indian Archipelago. In the Kei Islands, when there is a 

' newly-born child in a house, an empty coco-nut, split and 
spliced together again, may sometimes be seen hanging 
beside a rough wooden image of an ancestor. The soul of 

the infant is believed to be temporarily deposited in the 
coco-nut in order that it may be safe from the attacks of 

evil spirits; but when the child grows bigger and stronger, 

the soul will take up its permanent abode in its own body. 
Similarly among the Esquimaux of Alaska, when a child is 
sick, the medicine-man will sometimes extract its soul from 

its body and place it for safe-keeping in an amulet, which 

_ for further security he deposits in his own medicine-bag.’ 

_ It seems probable that many amulets have been similarly 

} regarded as soul-boxes, that is, as safes in which the souls 

of the owners are kept for greater security. An old 


1A. H. B. Agerbeek, ‘‘ Enkele 
gebruiken van de Dajaksche bevolking 
der Pinoehlanden,” Zzjdschrift voor 


found plaques or palettes of schist 
bearing traces of paint ; some of them 
are decorated with engravings of ani- 


Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
li. (1909) pp. 447 sg. 

2 J. A. Jacobsen, Reisen in die 
Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres (Berlin, 
1896), p. 199. 


3 In a long list of female ornaments 
_ the prophet Isaiah mentions (iii. 20) 
_ **houses of the soul ” (#237 °2), which 
modern scholars suppose to have been 
__ perfume boxes, as the Revised English 
Version translates the phrase. The 
name, literally translated ‘‘ houses of 


a the soul,” suggests that these trinkets 
__were amulets of the kind mentioned in 


_ the text. See my article, ‘‘ Folk-lore 
_ in the Old Testament,” <Anthropo- 
| logical Essays presented to E. B. Tylor 
_ (Oxford, 1907), pp. 148 sgg. In 


/ ancient Egyptian tombs there are often 


mals or historical scenes, others are 
modelled in the shape of animals of 
various sorts, such as antelopes, hippo- 
potamuses, birds, tortoises, and fish. 
As a rule only one such plaque is 
found in a tomb, and it lies near the 
hands of the mummy. It has been 
conjectured by M. Jean Capart that 
these plaques are amulets or soul- 
boxes, in which the external souls of 
the dead were supposed to be pre- 
served. See Jean Capart, Les Pa/ettes 
en schiste de Egypte primitive (Brus- 
sels, 1908), pp. 5 599-5 19 sgg. 
(separate reprint from the Revue des 
Questions Scientifigues, avril, 1908). 
For a full description of these plaques 
or palettes, see Jean Capart, Les Débuts 
de PArt en Egypte (Brussels, 1904), 


pp 76 s9g., 221 sgq. 


Souls of 
people in 
ornaments, 
horns, a 
column, 
and so 
forth. 


156 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuat. 


Mang’anje woman in the West Shire district of British 
Central Africa used to wear round her neck an ivory orna- 
ment, hollow, and about three inches long, which she called 
her life or soul (soyo wanga). Naturally, she would not 
part with it; a planter tried to buy it of her, but in vain.’ 
When Mr. James Macdonald was one day sitting in the house 
of a Hlubi chief, awaiting the appearance of that great man, 
who was busy decorating his person, a native pointed to a 
pair of magnificent ox-horns, and said, “ Ntame has his soul 
in these horns.” The horns were those of an animal which 
had been sacrificed, and they were held sacred. A magician 
had fastened them to the roof to protect the house and its 
inmates from the thunder-bolt. “The idea,’ adds Mr. 
Macdonald, “is in no way foreign to South African thought. 
A man’s soul there may dwell in the roof of his house, in a 
tree, by a spring of water, or on some mountain scaur,”? 
Among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain 
there is a secret society which goes by the name of Ingnict 
or Ingiet. On his entrance into it every man receives a stone 
in the shape either of a human being or of an animal, and 
henceforth his soul is believed to be knit up in a manner 
with the stone. If it breaks, it is an evil omen for him; 
they say that the thunder has struck the stone and that he 
who owns it will soon die. If nevertheless the man survives 
the breaking of his soul-stone, they say that it was not a 
proper soul-stone and he gets a new one instead.» The 
emperor Romanus Lecapenus was once informed by an 
astronomer that the life of Simeon, prince of Bulgaria, was 


1 Miss Alice Werner, in a letter to 
the author, dated 25th September 
1899. Miss Werner knew the old 
woman. Compare Contemporary Re- 
view, \xx. (July-December 1896), p. 
389, where Miss Werner describes the 
ornament as a rounded peg, tapering 
to a point, with a neck or notch at 
the top. 

2 Rev. James Macdonald, Religion 
and Myth (London, 1893), p. 190. 
Compare Dudley Kidd, 7he Essential 
Kafir (London, 1904), p. 83: ‘* The 
natives occasionally fix ox-horns in 
their roofs and say that the spirit of 
the chief lives in these horns and pro- 


tects the hut ; these horns also protect 
the hut from lightning, though not in 
virtue of their spiritual connections. 
(They are also used simply as orna- 
ments.)” No doubt amulets often 
degenerate into ornaments, 

3 R. Thurnwald, ‘‘Im _ Bismarck- 
archipel und auf den Salomo-inseln,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, xiii. (1910) 
p- 136. As to the Ingniet, Ingiet, or 
Iniet Society see P. A. Kleintitschen, 
Die Kiistenbewohner der Gasellehalb- 
insel (Hiltrup bei Miinster, N.D.), 
pp. 354 sgg.; R. Parkinson, Dredssig 
Jahre in der Siidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), 
pp: 598 sgg. 


EXTERNAL SOUL IN INANIMATE THINGS 157 


_ bound up with a certain column in Constantinople, so that 


_ if the capital of the column were removed, Simeon would 


4 immediately die. The emperor took the hint and removed 
the capital, and at the same hour, as the emperor learned by 


_ enquiry, Simeon died of heart disease in Bulgaria.’ The 


deified kings of ancient Egypt appear to have enjoyed the |. 
_ privilege of depositing their spiritual doubles or souls (4a) 


| perly fourteen for each king, which stood in the chamber of 
_ adoration (fa douait) of the temple and were revered as the 
_ equivalents or representatives of the monarchs themselves.’ 


_ Among the Karens of Burma “the knife with which the 


q navel string is cut is carefully preserved for the child. The 


life of the child is supposed to be in some way connected 


4 with it, for, if lost or destroyed, it is said the child will not 
be long lived.”* Among the Shawnee Indians of North 


_ with a special revelation by the Great Spirit. Wisely refusing 
_ to hide the sacred light of revelation under a bushel, he 
_ generously communicated a few sparks of the illumination 
to John Tanner, a white man who lived for many years as an 
Indian among the Indians. “Henceforth,” said the inspired 
sage, “the fire must never be suffered to go out in your 
lodge. Summer and winter, day and night, in the storm, 
or when it is calm, you must remember that the life in your 
body, and the fire in your lodge, are the same, and of the 
same date. If you suffer your fire to be extinguished, at 
that moment your life will be at its end.” * 

Again, we have seen that in folk-tales a man’s soul or 


1 G. Cedrenus, Historiarum Com- 3 F. Mason, “‘ Physical Character of 


_ America it once happened that an eminent man was favoured 


3 pendium, p. 6258, vol. ii. p. 308, ed. 


4 Im. Bekker (Bonn, 1838-1839). 


_ # Alexandre Moret, Du caractére 
| religieux de la Royauté Pharaonique 
| (Paris, 1902), pp. 224 sgg. As to the 
» Egyptian doctrine of the spiritual 
double or soul (4a), see A. Wiede- 
mann, Zhe Ancient Egyptian Doctrine 
of the Immortality of the Soul (London, 
1895), pp. 10 sgg.; A. Erman, Die 
| Ggyptische Religion (Berlin, 1905), 
_ p. 88; A. Moret, Mystéres Egyftiens 
(Paris, 1913), pp. 199 599. 


the Karens,” Journal of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, 1866, Part ii. No. 1, 
P- 9- 


* A Narrative of the Captivity and 
Adventures of John Tanner, during 
Thirty Years Residence among the 
4ndians, prepared for the press by 
Edwin James, M.D. (London, 1830), 
Pp- 155 sg. The passage has been 
already quoted by Sir John Lubbock 
(Lord Avebury) in his Origin of Civil- 
tsation * (London, 1882), p. 241. 


The souls 
hg 2 


ta pore 


_ during their lifetime in a number of portrait statues, pro- * 


Strength 
of people 
supposed 
to reside in 
their hair, 


Witches 
and 
wizards 
shaved to 
deprive 
them of 
their 
power. 


158 THE EXTERNAL SOUL JN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnap. 


strength is sometimes represented as bound up with his hair, 
and that when his hair is cut off he dies or grows weak. 
So the natives of Amboyna used to think that their strength 
was in their hair and would desert them if it were shorn. 
A criminal under torture in a Dutch Court of that island 
persisted in denying his guilt till his hair was cut off, when 
he immediately confessed. One man, who was tried for 
murder, endured without flinching the utmost ingenuity of 
his torturers till he saw the surgeon standing with a pair of 
shears. On asking what this was for, and being told that 
it was to cut his hair, he begged they would not do it, and 
made a clean breast. In subsequent cases, when torture 
failed to wring a confession from a prisoner, the Dutch 
authorities made a practice of cutting off his hair.’ In 
Ceram it is still believed that if young people have their hair 
cut they will be weakened and enervated thereby.’ 

Here in Europe it used to be thought that the maleficent 
powers of witches and wizards resided in their hair, and that 
nothing could make any impression on these miscreants so 
long as they kept their hair on. Hence in France it was 
customary to shave the whole bodies of persons charged with 
sorcery before handing them over to the torturer. Millaeus 
witnessed the torture of some persons at Toulouse, from 
whom no confession could be wrung until they were stripped 
and completely shaven, when they readily acknowledged the 
truth of the charge. A woman also, who apparently led a 
pious life, was put to the torture on suspicion of witchcraft, 
and bore her agonies with incredible constancy, until com- 
plete depilation drove her to admit her guilt. The noted 
inquisitor Sprenger contented himself with shaving the head 
of the suspected witch or wizard; but his more thorough- 
going colleague Cumanus shaved the whole bodies of forty- 
one women before committing them all to the flames. He 
had high authority for this rigorous scrutiny, since Satan 
himself, in a sermon preached from the pulpit of North 
Berwick church, comforted his many servants by assuring 

1 Francois Valentyn, Oud en Nieuw reprint) ; id., Verspreide Geschriften 
Oost-Jndién (Dordrecht and Amster- (The Hague, 1912), iii. 569 sg. 
dam, 1724-1726), ii. 143 sg.; G. A. 2j. G. F. Riedel, De slutk- en 


Wilken, ‘‘De Simsonsage,” De Gids, kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 
1888, No. 5, pp. 15 sg. (of the separate Papua (The Hague, 1886), p. 137. 


xr EXTERNAL SOUL IN INANIMATE THINGS 159 


_ them that no harm could befall them “sa lang as their hair 
: wes on, and sould newir latt ane teir fall fra thair ene. 


»1 


_ Similarly in Bastar, a province of India, “if a man is ad- 
_ judged guilty of witchcraft, he is beaten by the crowd, his 
hair is shaved, the hair being supposed to constitute his 
power of mischief, his front teeth are knocked out, in order, 


7 it is said, to prevent him from muttering incantations... . 


Women suspected of sorcery have to undergo the same 
ordeal; if found guilty, the same punishment is awarded, 
and after being shaved, their hair is attached to a tree in 
some public place.”* So among the Bhils of India, when 
a woman was convicted of witchcraft and had been subjected 
to various forms of persuasion, such as hanging head down- 
wards from a tree and having pepper put into her eyes, a 
lock of hair was cut from her head and buried in the ground, 
“that the last link between her and her former powers of mis- 
chief might be broken.”* In like manner among the Aztecs 
of. Mexico, when wizards and witches “had done their evil 
deeds, and the time came to put an end to their detestable 
life, some-one laid hold of them and cropped the hair on the 
crown of their heads, which took from them all their power 
of sorcery and enchantment, and then it was that by death 
they put an end to their odious existence.” * 


§ 2. The External Soul in Plants 


Further it has been shewn that in folk-tales the life of Life ofa 


a person is sometimes so bound up with the life of a plant 
that the withering of the plant will immediately follow or be 
followed by the death of the person.> Similarly among the 
natives of the Pennefather River in Queensland, when a 
visiter has made himself very agreeable and taken his 
departure, an effigy of him about three or four feet long is 
cut on some soft tree, such as the Canarium australasicum, 
1 J. G. Dalyell, Zhe darker Suger- minster, 1896), ii. 281. 
stitions of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1834), 3 W. Crooke, of. cit. ii. 281 sg. 
pp. 637-639; C. de Mensignac, Xe- 4 B. de Sahagun, Histoire des choses 
_ ¢herches ethnographiques sur la Salive de la Nouvelle Espagne, traduite par 
_ ét ke Crachat (Bordeaux, 1892), p. 49 D. Journdanet et R. Siméon (Paris, 
note. 1880), p. 274. 
0 2 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 5 Above, pp. 102, II0, 117 59., 
_ Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 135, 136. 


person 
supposed 
to be bound 
up with 
that of a 


tree or 
plant. 


Birth-trees 
in Africa. 


160 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnap. 


so as to face in the direction taken by the popular stranger. 


Afterwards from observing the state of the tree the natives 
infer the corresponding state of their absent’ friend, whose 
illness or death are apparently supposed to be portended by 
the fall of the leaves or of the tree.' In Uganda, when a 
new royal enclosure with its numerous houses was built for 
a new king, barkcloth trees used to be planted at the main 
entrance by priests of each principal deity and offerings were 
laid under each tree for its particular god. Thenceforth 
“the trees were carefully guarded and tended, because it was 
believed that as they grew and flourished, so the king’s life 
and power would increase.”* Among the M’Bengas in 
Western Africa, about the Gaboon, when two children are 
born on the same day, the people plant two trees of the 
same kind and dance round them. The life of each of the 
children is believed to be bound up with the life of one of 
the trees; and if the tree dies or is thrown down, they are 
sure that the child will soon die.® In Sierra Leone also it is 
customary at the birth of a child to plant a shoot of a malep- 
tree, and they think that the tree will grow with the child 
and be its god. If a tree which has been thus planted withers 
away, the people consult a sorcerer on the subject.* Among 
the Wajagga of German East Africa, when a child is born, 
it is usual to plant a cultivated plant of some sort behind 
the house. The plant is thenceforth carefully tended, for 
they believe that were it to wither away the child would die. 
When the navel-string drops from the infant, it is buried 
under the plant. The species of birth-plant varies with the 
clan; members of one clan, for example, plant a particular 
sort of banana, members of another clan plant a sugar-cane, 
and so on.2 Among the Swahili of East Africa, when a 
child is born, the afterbirth and navel-string are buried in 


1 Walter E. Roth, Worth Queens- 
land Ethnography, Bulletin, No. 5, 
Superstition, Magic, and Medicine 
(Brisbane, 1903), p. 27. 

2 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda 
(London, I9I1), p. 202. 

3G. Duloup, *‘ Huit jours chez les 
M’Bengas,” Revue a’ Ethnographie, ii. 
(1883), p. 223; compare P. Barret, 
L’ Afrique Occidentale (Paris, 1888), 


VER ly Ze Pity 

4 Fr. Kunstmann, ‘ Valentin Fer- 
dinand’s Beschreibung der Serra Leoa,” 
Abhandlungen der histor. Classe der 
kinig. Bayer, Akad. der Wissenschaften, 
ix. (1866) pp. 131 sg. 

5 Bruno Gutmann, ‘‘ Feldbausitten 
und Wachstumsbrauche der Wad- 
schagga,” Zettschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
xlv. (1913), p. 496. 


ee 


rae A 


days afterwards, the 


same place. 


~ 


ee 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 161 


the courtyard and a mark is made on the spot. Seven 
hair of the child 
deposited, along with the -clippings of its nails, 
Then over all these relics of the infant’s 
person a coco-nut is planted. As the tree grows up from 


is shaved and 
in the 


the nut, the child likes to point it out to his playfellows 


2 d tell them, 


“This coco-nut palm is my navel.” In 


planting the coco-nut the parents say, “ May God cause our 
‘child to grow up, that he or she may one day enjoy the 
-coco-nut milk of the tree which we plant here.”* Though 


up with that of a tree.” 


manner of evil. 


orbidden to touch it. 


t is not expressly affirmed, we may perhaps assume that 
such a birth-tree is supposed to stand in a sympathetic 
‘relation with the life of the person. 
‘the life of a person is believed to be sympathetically bound 
The chief of Old Town in Calabar 
sept his soul in a sacred grove near a spring of water. 
hen some Europeans, in frolic or ignorance, cut down part 
of the grove, the spirit was most indignant and threatened 
the perpetrators of the deed, according to the king, with all 
Among the Fans of the French Congo, 
vhen a chief’s son is born, the remains of the navel-string 
= buried under a sacred fig-tree, and “thenceforth great 
mportance is attached to the growth of the tree ; it is strictly 
Any attempt on the tree would be 
considered as an attack on the human being himself.” * 
| Among the Boloki of the Upper Congo a family has a plant 
Ww ith red leaves (called mkungu) for its totem. 

woman of the family is with child for the first time, one of 
e totemic plants is planted near the hearth outside the 
louse and is never destroyed, otherwise it is believed that 


In the Cameroons, also, 


When a 


he child would be born thin and weak and would remain 


pt ny and sickly. 


oe C. Velten, Sitten und Gebrauche 
ler Suaheli (Gottingen, 1903), pp. 
In Java it is customary to plant 
@ tree, for example, a coco-nut palm, 
the birth of a child, and when he 
TOWS up he reckons his age by the 
of the tree. See Annales de la 

vation de la Fot, iii. (Lyons and 


PT. VII. VOL, II 


“The healthy life of the children and 
family is bound up with the healthiness and life of the totem 


Ply 1830) pp. 400 sg. 

2 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedi- 
tion an der Loango-Kiiste (Jena, 1874- 
1875), i. 165. 

3 Rev. J. Macdonald, Religion and 
Myth (London, 1893), p. 178. 

4H. Trilles, Ze Zotémisme chez les 
Fan (Minster i. W., 1912), p. 570. 


M 


162 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM 


CHAP. 
tree as respected and preserved by the family.”? Among 
the Baganda of Central Africa a child’s afterbirth was called 
the second child and was believed to be animated by a spirit, 
which at once became a ghost. The afterbirth was usually 
buried at the root of a banana tree, and afterwards the tree ‘ 
was carefully guarded by old women, who prevented any 
one from going near it; they tied ropes of fibre from tree 
to tree to isolate it, and all the child’s excretions were 


thrown into this enclosure. 


cut by the old woman in charge. 
the tree thus carefully was a belief that if any stranger were 
to eat of the fruit of the tree or to drink beer brewed from 
it, he would carry off with him the ghost of the child’s after- 
birth, which had been buried at the root of the banana-tree, 
and the living child would then die in order to follow its 
Whereas a grandparent of the child, by eating 
the fruit or drinking the beer, averted this catastrophe and 
ensured the health of the child.’ 


twin ghost. 


1 Rev. John H. Weeks, Among 
Congo Cannibals (London, 1913), p 
295. 

2 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda 
(London, 1911), pp. 52, 545g. Com- 
pare Zhe Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, i. 295 sg.; and for other 
examples of burying the afterbirth or 
navel-string at the foot of a tree or 
planting a young tree over these re- 
mains, see zd., pp. 182 sgg. In 
Kiziba, a district to the west of Lake 
Victoria Nyanza, the afterbirth is 
similarly regarded as a sort of human 
being. Hence when twins .are born 
the people speak of four children 
instead of two, reckoning the two 
afterbirths as two children. See H. 
Rehse, A7zztba, Land und Leute (Stutt- 
gart, I910), p. 117. The conception 
of the afterbirth and navel-string as 
spiritual doubles of the child with 
whom they are born is held very firmly 
by the Kooboos, a primitive tribe of 
Sumatra. We are told that among 
these people ‘*a great vital power is 
ascribed to the navel-string and after- 
birth ; because they are looked upon 
as brother or sister of the infant, and 
though their bodies have not come to 


When the fruit ripened, it was 


The reason for guarding 


: 


3 


At 


Among the Wakondyog 


perfection, yet their soul and spirit are 
just as normal as those of the child 
and indeed have even reached a much 
higher stage of development. The 
navel-string (oerz) and afterbirth (¢2 
doenz) visit the man who was born with 
them thrice a day and thrice by night 
till his death, or they hover near him 
(§ sweven voorby hem heen’), They 
are the good spirits, a sort of guardian 
angels of the man who came into the 
world with them and who lives on 
earth ; they are said to guard him fro 
all evil. Hence it is that the Koob 
always thinks of his navel-string and 
afterbirth (oevt-témboenz) before he goes 
to sleep or to work, or undertakes a 
journey, and so on. Merely to think 
of them is enough ; there is no need t 
invoke them, or to ask them anything, | 
or to entreat them. By not thinking) 
of them a man deprives himself of their, 
good care.” Immediately after 
birth the navel-string and afterbirth: 
are buried in the ground close by the) 
spot where the birth took place ; 
a ceremony is performed over it, for) 
were the ceremony omitted, the navel=| 
string and afterbirth, ‘‘ instead of being} 
a good spirit for the newly born child) 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 163 


it the north-western corner of Lake Albert Nyanza, it is 
tomary to bury the afterbirth at the foot of a young 
Manana-tree, and the fruit of this particular tree may be 

ten by no one but the woman who assisted at the birth.’ 
The reason for the custom is not mentioned, but probably, 
as among the Baganda, the life of the child is supposed to 
be bound up with the life of the tree, since the afterbirth, 
regarded as a spiritual double of the infant, has been buried 
the root of the tree. 

Some of the Papuans unite the life of a new-born child 
mpathetically with that of a tree by driving a pebble into 
e bark of the tree. This is supposed to give them com- 
‘plete mastery over the child’s life; if the tree is cut down, 
the child will die.? After a birth the Maoris used to bury 
e navel-string in a sacred place and plant a young sapling 
over it. As the tree grew, it was a tohu oranga or sign of 
ife for the child ; if it flourished, the child would prosper ; 


their child.* In the Chatham Islands, when the child of a 
eading man received its name, it was customary to plant 
a tree, “the growth of which was to be as the growth of the 
ild,” and during the planting priests chanted a spell. In 

me parts of Fiji the navel-string of a male child is planted 
together with a coco-nut or the slip of a breadfruit-tree, and 
he child’s life,is supposed to be intimately connected with 
th at of the tree.” With certain Malayo-Siamese families of 


night become an evil spirit for him Sa/vador(Bremen, 1859), pp. 103 sg. ; 
and visit him with all sorts of calami- ta, Der Mensch in der Geschichte 
ties out of spite for this neglect.” The (Leipsic, 1860), iii. 193. 

mature of the ceremony performed over 3 R. Taylor, Ze cka a Maui, or 
the spot is not described by our Mew Zealand and its Inhabitants? 
rity. The navel-string and after- (London, 1870), p. 184; Dumont 
are often regarded by the Koo- D’Urville, Voyage autour du monde et 
os as one; their names are always @/a recherche de La Pérouse sur la 
lentioned together. See G. J. van corvette Astrolabe, ii. 444. 

Dongen, ‘‘De Koeboe in de Onderaf- 4 W. T. L. Travers, ‘‘ Notes of the 
gs Koeboe-streken der Residentie traditions and manners and customs of 
nbang,” Sijdragen tot de Taal- the Mori-oris,” 7ransactions and Pro- 
d en Volkenkunde van Neder- ceedings of the New Zealand Institute, 

mdsch-Indié, \xiii. (1910) pp. 229 sg. _ ix. (1876) p. 22. 

| e {Franz Stuhlmann, At Emin 5 The late Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a 
ha ins Herz von Afrika (Berlin, letter to me dated May 2gth, 1901. 
), p- 653. Compare Zhe Magic Art and the 
A. Bastian, Zin Besuch in San LEvolution of Kings, i. 184. 


it withered and died, the parents augured the worst for . 


164 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnuar. 


the Patani States it is customary to bury the afterbirth 
under a banana-tree, and the condition of the tree is after- 
wards regarded as ominous of the child’s fate for good or 
evil. In Southern Celebes, when a child is born, a coco-nut 
is planted and watered with the water in which the after- 
birth and navel-string have been washed. As it grows up, 
the tree is called the “contemporary” of the child? So in 
Bali a coco-palm is planted at the birth of a child. It is 
believed to grow up equally with the child, and is called its 
“life-plant.”* On certain occasions the Dyaks of Borneo 
plant a palm-tree, which is believed to be a complete index 
of their fate. If it flourishes, they reckon on good fortune ; 
but if it withers or dies, they expect misfortune.* Amongst 
the Dyaks of Landak and Tajan, districts of Dutch: 
Borneo, it is customary to plant a fruit-tree for a child, 
and henceforth in the popular belief the fate of the child 
is bound up with that of the free. If the tree shoots up 
rapidly, it will go well with the child; but if the tree is 
dwarfed or shrivelled, nothing but misfortune can be ex- 
pected for its human counterpart.’ According to another 
account, at the naming of children and certain other festivals 
the Dyaks are wont to set a sawang-plant, roots and all, 
before a priestess ; and when the festival is over, the plant 
is replaced in the ground. Such a plant becomes thence- 
forth a sort of prophetic index for the person in whose 
honour the festival was held. If the plant thrives, the 
man will be fortunate; if it fades or perishes, some evi 
will befall him. The Dyaks also believe that at the birth 
of every person on earth a flower grows up in the spirit 


world and leads a life parallel to his. If the flower flourishes, 


1 N. Annandale, ‘* Customs of the 
Malayo - Siamese,” Fasciculi Malay- 
enses, Anthropology, part ii. (a) (May, 
1904), Pp. 5. 

2B. F. Matthes, Biydragen tot de 
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes (The 
Hague, 1875), p. 59. 

3 R, van Eck, ‘‘Schetsen van het 
eiland Bali,” Zijdschrift voor Neder- 
landsch Indié, N.S., ix. (1880) pp. 
417 sg. 

4 G. A. Wilken, ‘* De Simsonsage,” 


De Gids, 1888, No. 5, p. 26 (of the 
separate reprint); z@., Verspreide Gee 
schriften (The Hague, 1912), iii. 562, 
5 M. C. Schadee, ‘‘Het familie 
leven en familierecht der Dajaks van 
Landak en Tajan,” Bijdragen tot dé 
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde va 
Nederlandsch - Indié, \xiii, (1910) p. 
416. a 
6 F, Grabowsky, ‘‘Die Theogenié 
der Dajaken auf Borneo,” Znxternatioi 
ales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, Vv, 
(1892) p. 133. x 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 


165 


man enjoys good health, but if it droops, so does he. 


' Hence when he has dreamed bad dreams or has felt unwell 


ce more.) 


ij. Perham, ‘‘Manangism in 
Borneo,” Journal of the Straits Branch 
r. ‘a Royal Asiatic Society, No. 19 

ngapore, 1887), p. 97; #@., in H. 
ing Roth, Zhe Natives of Sarawak 
British North Borneo (London, 


2 Angelo de Gubernatis, Mythologie 
s Plantes (Paris, 1878-1882), i. pp. 


$q- 
3 W. Mannhardt, Baumékultus, 
0; H. Ploss, Das Kind? (Leipsic, 


several days, he infers that his flower in the other world 
neglected or sickly, and accordingly he employs a medicine- 
to tend the precious plant, weed the soil, and sweep it 
p, in order that the earthly and unearthly life may prosper 


It is said that there are still families in Russia, Germany, 
England, France, and Italy who are accustomed to plant a 
e at the birth of a child. The tree, it is hoped, will grow 
ith the child, and it is tended with special care? The 
stom is still pretty general in the canton of Aargau in 
Switzerland ; an apple-tree is planted for a boy and a pear- 
"tree for a girl, and the people think that the child will 
BAourish or dwindle with the tree.’ 
afterbirth is thrown out at the foot of a au tree, and the 
child is then believed to grow with the tree.* 
hen the children of a family have died one after the other, 

e hair of the next child is cut with some ceremony by a 
stranger, and the mother carries the shorn tresses into the 
den, where she ties them to a fine young tree, in order 
at her child may grow and flourish like the tree? 
uskau, in Lausitz, it used to be customary for bride and 
idegroom on the morning of their wedding-day to plant 
pair of young oaks side by side, and as each of the trees 
ourished or withered, so the good luck of the person who 
planted it was believed to wax or wane.° 
in Lake Keitele, in Finland, there used to stand an old fir- 
tree, which according to tradition had been planted by the ! 
colonists to serve as a symbol or token of their fortune. ; 
First-fruits of the harvest used to be offered to the tree 


In Mecklenburg the 


In Bosnia, 


At 


On a promontory 


1884), i. 79. 

4 K. Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen und 
Gebrauche aus Mecklenburg (Vienna, 
1879-1880), ii. p. 43, § 63. 

5 F. S. Krauss, ‘* Haarschurgod- 
schaft bei den Siidslaven,” /#ternat- 
tonales Archiv fir Ethnographie, vii. 
(1894) p. 193. 

6 Karl Haupt, Sagenduch der Lausits 
(Leipsic, 1862-1863), ii. 129, No. 
207. 


Birth-trees 
in Europe. 


Marriage 


_The Edge- 
well oak. 


The old 
tree at 
Howth 
Castle. 


The oak 
of the 
Guelphs, 


166 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM chap. 


before any one would taste of the new crop; and whenever 
a branch fell, it was deemed a sign that some one would die. 
More and more the crown of the tree withered away, and in 
the same proportion the family whose ancestors had planted 
the fir dwindled away, till only one old woman was left. 
At last the tree fell, and soon afterwards the old woman 
departed this life’ When Lord Byron first visited his 
ancestral estate of Newstead “he planted, it seems, a young 
oak in some part of the grounds, and had an idea that as z¢ 
flourished so should 4e.”* On a day when the cloud that 
settled on the later years of Sir Walter Scott lifted a little, 
and he heard that Woodstock had sold for over eight thousand 
pounds, he wrote in his journal: “I have a curious fancy ; 
I will go set two or three acorns, and judge by their success 
in growing whether I shall succeed in clearing my way or 
not.”* Near the Castle of Dalhousie, not far from Edin- 
burgh, there grows an oak-tree, called the Edgewell Tree, 
which is popularly believed to be linked to the fate of the 
family by a mysterious tie ; for they say that when one of the 
family dies, or is about to die, a branch falls from the Edge- 
well Tree. Thus, on seeing a great bough drop from the 
tree on a quiet, still day in July 1874, an old forester 
exclaimed, “ The laird’s deid noo!” and soon after news 
came that Fox Maule, eleventh Earl of Dalhousie, was 
dead.* At Howth Castle in Ireland there is an old tree 
with which the fortunes of the St. Lawrence family are 
supposed to be connected. The branches of the tree are 
propped on strong supports, for tradition runs that when the - 
tree falls the direct line of the Earls of Howth will become 
extinct.” On the old road from Hanover to Osnabriick, at 
the village of Oster-Kappeln, there used to stand an ancient 
oak, which put out its last green shoot in the year 1849. The 


1 «* Heilige Haine und Baume der 
Finnen,” Globus, lix. (1891) p. 350. 
Compare K. Rhamm, ‘‘ Der heiden- 
ische Gottesdienst des _finnischen 
Stammes,” Globus, Ixvii. (1891) p. 
344. 
2 Thomas Moore, Life of Lord 
Byron, i. 101 (i. 148, in the collected 
edition of Byron’s works, London, 
1832-1833). 


i 

8 J. G. Lockhart, Life of Sir Walter 4 
Scott (First Edition), vi. 283 (viii. 317, : 
Second Edition, Edinburgh, 1839). 


4 Sir Walter Scott’s Journal (First — 
Edition, Edinburgh, 1890), ii. 282, 
with the editor’s note. 

5 Letter of Miss A. H. Singleton to” 
me, dated Rathmagle House, Abbey 
Leix, Ireland, 24th February, 1904. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 167 


= was conjecturally supposed to be contemporary with 
e Guelphs ; and in the year 1866, so fatal for the house 
Hanover, on a calm summer afternoon, without any 
visible cause, the veteran suddenly fell with a crash and lay 
stretched across the highroad. The peasants regarded its 
fall as an ill omen for the reigning family, and when King 
George V. heard of it he gave orders that the giant trunk 
should be set up again, and it was done with much trouble 
and at great expense, the stump being supported in position 
by iron chains clamped to the neighbouring trees. But the 
king’s efforts to prop the falling fortunes of his house were 
vain; a few months after the fall of the oak Hanover 
| formed part of the Prussian monarchy.’ 

In the midst of the “ Forbidden City” at Peking there 
is a tiny private garden, where the emperors of the now 
4 themselves after the cares of state. In accordance with 
' Chinese taste the garden is a labyrinth of artificial rockeries, 
waterfalls, grottoes, and kiosks, in which everything is as 
unlike nature as art can make it. The trees in particular 
(Arbor vitae), the principal ornament of the garden, exhibit 
the last refinement of the gardener’s skill, being clipped and 
distorted into a variety of grotesque shapes. Only one of 
| the trees remained intact and had been spared these defor- 
' mations for centuries. Far from being stunted by the axe 
or the shears, the tree was carefully tended and encouraged 
: to shoot up to its full height. “It was the ‘ Life-tree of the 


: B death of the tree. Certainly, if we accept the fothion. the 
_ days of the present reigning house must be numbered, for 
' all the care and attention lavished on the tree have been 
_ for some years in vain. A glance at our illustration shews 
_the tree as it still surpasses all its fellows in height and size ; 
but it owes its pre-eminence only to the many ertiGcias 
_ props which hold it up. In reality the ‘Life-tree of the 
_ Dynasty’ is dying, and might fall over night, if one of its 
" artificial props were suddenly to give way. For the 
- 1 P. Wagler, Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit, ii. (Berlin, 1891) pp. 
5 54: 


The Life- 
tree of the 
Manchu 


' fallen Manchu dynasty used to take the air and refresh dynasty. 


The 
myrtle- 
trees of the 
patricians 
and 
plebeians 
at Rome. 


The oak 
of the 
Vespasian 
family. 


Life of 
persons 
supposed 
to 

bound up 
with that 
of the cleft 
trees 
through 
which in 
their youth 
they were 


168 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cunap. 


superstitious Chinese—and superstitious they certainly are— 
it is a very, very evil omen.”* Some twelve years have 
passed since this passage was written, and in the interval 
the omen has been fulfilled——the Manchu dynasty has 
fallen. We may conjecture that the old tree in the quaint 
old garden has fallen too. So vain are all human efforts to 
arrest the decay of royal houses by underpropping trees on 
which nature herself has passed a sentence of death. 

At Rome in the ancient sanctuary of Quirinus there 
grew two old myrtle-trees, one named the Patrician and 
the other the Plebeian. For many years, so long as the 
patricians were in the ascendant, their myrtle-tree flourished 
and spread its branches abroad, while the myrtle of the 
plebeians was shrivelled and shrunken ; but from the time 
of the Marsian war, when the power of the nobles de- 
clined, their myrtle in like manner drooped and withered, 
whereas that of the popular party held up its head and 
grew strong.” Thrice when Vespasia was with child, an 
old oak in the garden of the Flavian family near Rome 
suddenly put forth branches. The first branch was puny 
and soon withered away, and the girl who was born ac- 
cordingly died within the year; the second branch was 
long and sturdy ; and the third was like a tree. So on the 
third occasion the happy father reported to his mother that 
a future emperor was born to her as a grandchild. The old 
lady only laughed to think that at her age she should keep 
her wits about her, while her son had lost his ; yet the omen 
of the oak came true, for the grandson was afterwards the © 
emperor Vespasian.® 

In England children are sometimes passed through a — 
cleft ash-tree as a cure for rupture or rickets, and thence- © 
forward a sympathetic connexion is supposed to exist — 
between them and the tree. An ash-tree which had been — 
used for this purpose grew at the edge of Shirley Heath, © 
on the road from Hockly House to Birmingham. “Thomas — 
Chillingworth, son of the owner of: an adjoining farm, ~ 
now about thirty-four, was, when an infant of a year old, © 


1 Die Woche, Berlin, 31 August, 2 Pliny, Natur. Hist. xv. 120 sg. 
901, p. 3, with an illustration shew- : 
ing the garden and the tree. 3 Suetonius, Divus Vespasianus, 5. 


road in question.” 


' tree.”? 


hild would surely follow.” 


1 The Gentleman’s Magazine, 1804, 
909; John Brand, Popular Anti- 
quities of Great Britain (London, 1882- 
r 1883), iii. 289. 


2 Gilbert White, 7Ze Natural His- 
tory of Selborne, Part Il. Letter 28 

_ (Edinburgh, 1829), pp. 239 59.3 

_ Francis Grose, 4 sugpececeg Cleomry 


(London, 1881), pp. 415, 421; W.G. 
Black, Folk-medicine (London, 1883), 


County Foik-lore, Suffolk, cited by 
4 Lady E. C. Gurdon (London, 1893) 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 


169 


In the West of England it 
As 


Down to the second half of the nineteenth century 
the remedy was still in common use at Fittleworth and 
any other places in Sussex. 


The account of: the 


cellaneous Notes from Monmouth- 
shire,” Folk-lore, xvi. (1905) p. 65; 
Marie Trevelyan, Folk-lore and Folk- 
stories of Wales (London, 1909), p. 
320. Sometimes the tree was an oak 
instead of an ash (M. Trevelyan, /.c.). 
To ensure the success of the cure 
various additional precautions are some- 
times recommended, as that the ash 
should be a maiden, that is a tree that 
has never been topped or cut ; that the 
split should be made east and west; 
that the child should be passed into 
the tree by a maiden and taken out on 
the other side by a boy ; that the child 
should always be passed through head 
foremost (but according to others feet 
foremost), and so forth. In Surrey we 
hear of a holly-tree being used instead 
of an ash (Notes and Queries, Sixth 
Series, xi. Jan.-Jun. 1885, p. 46). 


passed through a similar tree, now perfectly sound, which he passed as 
preserves with so much care that he will not suffer a single 
branch to be touched, for it is believed the life of the In England 
patient depends on the life of the tree, and the moment that ph, HS, 
‘is cut down, be the patient ever so distant, the rupture are passed 
returns, and a mortification ensues, and terminates in death, paper 
‘as was the case in a man driving a waggon on the very tee. 
“Tt is not uncommon, however,” adds the 
writer, “for persons to survive for a time the felling of the 
The ordinary mode of effecting the cure is to split 
' a young ash-sapling longitudinally for a few feet and pass 
| the child, naked, either three times or three times three 
through the fissure at sunrise. 
is said that the passage should be “against the sun.” 
soon as the ceremony has been performed, the tree is bound 
ightly-up and the fissure plastered over with mud or clay. 
he belief is that just as the cleft in the tree closes up, so 
the rupture in the child’s body will be healed ; but that if 
the rift in the tree remains open, the rupture in the child 
ill remain too, and if the tree were to die, the death of the 


a cure for 
rupture. 


in Sussex. 


Sick 
children 
passed 
through 
cleft trees, 
especially 
oaks, asa 
cure in 
Germany, 
France, 
Denmark, 
Sweden, 
and Greece, 


170 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnap. 


Sussex practice and belief is notable because it brings 
out very clearly the sympathetic relation supposed to 
exist between the ruptured child and the tree through 
which it has been passed. We are told that the patient 
“must be passed nine times every morning on nine successive 
days at sunrise through a cleft in a sapling ash-tree, which 
has been so far given up by the owner of it to the parents 
of the child, as that there is an understanding it shall not 
be cut down during the life of the infant who is to be 
passed through it. The sapling must be sound at heart, 
and the cleft must be made with an axe. The child on 
being carried to the tree must be attended by nine persons, 
each of whom must pass it through the cleft from west to 
east. On the ninth morning the solemn ceremony is con- 
cluded by binding the tree lightly with a cord, and it is 
supposed that as the cleft closes the health of the child will 
improve. In the neighbourhood of Petworth some cleft 
ash-trees may be seen, through which children have very 
recently been passed. I may add, that only a few weeks 
since, a person who had lately purchased an ash-tree standing 
in this parish, intending to cut it down, was told by the 
father of a child, who had some time before been passed 
through it, that the infirmity would be sure to return upon 
his son if it were felled. Whereupon the good man said, he 
knew that such would be the case; and therefore he would 
not fell it for the world.” ? 

A similar cure for various diseases, but especially 
for rupture and rickets, has been commonly practised in 
other parts of Europe, as Germany, France, Denmark, and 
Sweden ; but in these countries the tree employed for the 
purpose is usually not an ash but an oak; sometimes a 
willow-tree is allowed or even prescribed instead. With 
these exceptions the practice and the belief are nearly the 
same on the Continent as in England: a young oak is split 
longitudinally and the two sides held forcibly apart while 


the sick child is passed through the cleft; then the ~ 


opening in the tree is closed, and bound up, and it is 
believed that as the cleft in the tree heals by the parts 


1 «*Some West Sussex superstitions Charlotte Latham, at Fittleworth,” 
lingering in 1868, collected by  Folk-lore Record, i. (1878) pp. 40 sg. 


Se ee 


4 


i 
é 


e 


|! For the custom in Germany and 
_ Austria, see J. Grimm, Deutsche 
| Mythologie,* ii. 975 sg.; A. Wuttke, 
Der deutsche Volksaberglaube* (Berlin, 
1869), p. 317, § 503; A. Kuhn und 
_ W. Schwartz, Nord-deutsche Sagen, 
Miarchen und Gebriuche (Leipsic, 
1848), pp. 443 sg.; J. F. L. Woeste, 
_Volksiiberlieferungen in der Grafschaft 
_ Mark (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 54; E. Meier, 
Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebriiuche 
aus Schwaben (Stuttgart, 1852), p. 
390, § 56; F. Panzer, Beitrag cur 
deutschen Mythologie (Munich, 1848- 
1855), ii. 301; Bavaria, Landes- und 
Volkskunde des Konigreichs Bayern, 
(Munich, 1863) p. 255; J. A. E. 
Kohler, Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, 
Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen 
im Voigtlande (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 415 
59-5 L. Strackerjan, Aberglaube und 
_ Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg 
5 (Oldenburg, 1867), i. 72 sg., § 88; 
'_K. Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen und Ge. 
_ briuche aus Mecklenburg (Vienna, 1879- 
a 1880), ii. 290 sg., § 1447 ; J. Haltrich, 
Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbiirger 
_ Sachsen (Vienna, 1885), p. 264; P. 
_Wagiler, Die Eiche in alter und neuer 
Zeit, i. (Wurzen, 1891) pp. 21-23. As 
_ to the custom in France, see Marcellus, 
_ De medicamentis, xxxiii. 26 (where the 
tree is a cherry); J. B. Thiers, 7razté 
| des Superstitions (Paris, 1679), pp. 333 
4 sqg.; A. de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes et 
| Traditions des Provinces de France 
af 


(Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 231; L.J.B. 
_Bérenger-Féraud, in Budlétins de la 
Société @’ Anthropologie de Paris, iv. 
_ Série, i. (1890) pp. 895-902 ; 2d. , Super- 
H stitions et Survivances (Paris, 1896), i 1. 
| §235gg. Astothe custom in Denmark 
and Sweden, see J. Grimm, Deztsche 
Mythologie,’ ii. 976; H. F. Feilberg, 
**Zwieselbdume nebst verwandtem 


| 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 


| will be simultaneously cured. 
the ceremony must be performed in the strictest silence ; 
| sometimes the time prescribed is before sunrise, and some- 
times the child must be passed thrice through the cleft.’ In 
Oldenburg and Mecklenburg they say that the cure should 
‘be performed on St. John’s Eve (Midsummer Eve) by three 
men named John, who assist each other in holding the split 


171 


growing together again, so the rupture in the child 


It is often laid down that 


Aberglauben in Skandinavien,” Zezt- 
schrift des Vereins fiir Volkskunde, 
vii. (1897) pp. 42 sgg- In Mecklen- 
burg it is sometimes required that the 
tree should have been split by lightning 
(K. Bartsch, Zc.). The whole subject 
of passing sick people through narrow 
apertures as a mode of cure has been 
well handled in an elegant little mono- 
graph (Un Vieux Rite médical, Paris, 
1892) by Monsieur H. Gaidoz, who 
rightly rejects the theory that all 
such passages are symbols of a new 
birth. But I cannot agree with 
him in thinking that the essence 
of the rite consists in the transfer- 
ence of the disease from the person to 
the tree; rather, it seems to me, the 
primary idea is that of interposing an 
impassable barrier between a fugitive 
and his pursuing foe, though no doubt 
the enemy thus left behind is apparently 
supposed to adhere to the further side 
of the obstacle (whether tree, stone, or 
what not) through which he cannot 
pass. However, the sympathetic rela- 
tion supposed to exist between the 
sufferer and the tree through which he 
has been passed certainly favours the 
view that he has left some portion of 
himself attached to the tree. But in 
this as in many similar cases, the ideas 
in the minds of the persons who 
practise the custom are probably vague, 
confused, and inconsistent ; and we need 
not attempt to define them precisely. 
Compare also R. Andree, Zthno- 
graphische Parallelen und Vergleiche 
(Stuttgart, 1878), pp. 31 sg.; E. S. 
Hartland, Zhe Legend of Perseus 
(London, 1894-1896), ii. 146 sg.3 
L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, Superstitions 
et Survivances (Paris, 1896), i. 523- 
549. 


Sym- 
pathetic 
relation 
thought 
to exist 
between 
the child 
and thetree 
through 
which it 
has been 
passed. 


Thedisease 
is appar- 
ently 
thought 

to be left 
behind on 
the farther 
side of the 
cleft tree. 


172 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnar. 


oak-sapling open and passing the child through it.’ Some 
people, however, prefer Good Friday or Christmas Eve as the 
season for the performance of the ceremony.?, In Denmark 
copper coins are laid as an offering at the foot of the tree 
through which sick persons have been passed ; and threads, 
ribbons, or bandages. which have been worn by the sufferers 
are tied to a branch of the tree.? In the Greek island of 
Ceos, when a child is sickly, the parents carry it out into the 
country “and the father selects a young oak ; this they split 
up from the root, then the father is assisted by another man 
in holding the-tree open whilst the mother passes the child 
three times through, and then they bind up the tree well, 
cover it all over with manure, and carefully water it for 
forty days. In the same fashion they bind up the child for 
a like period, and after the lapse of this time they expect 
that it will be quite well.” * 

In Mecklenburg, as in England, the sympathetic relation 
thus established between the tree and the child is so close 


that if the tree is cut down the child will die.® In the 


island of Riigen people believe that when a person who has 
been thus cured of rupture dies, his soul passes into the 
same oak-tree through which his body was passed in his 
youth. Thus it seems that in ridding himself of the 
disease the sufferer is supposed to transfer a certain vital 
part of his person to the tree so that it is impossible to injure 
the tree without at the same time injuring the man; and in 
Riigen this partial union is thought to be completed by the 
transmigration of the man’s soul at death into the tree. 
Apparently the disease is conceived as something physical, 
which clings to the patient but can be stripped off him and 
left behind on the farther side of the narrow aperture 
through which he has forced his way ; when the aperture is 
closed by the natural growth of the tree, the door is as it 


1 L. Strackerjan, 4c. ; K. Bartsch, 
AG; 

2 E. Meier, Zc. ;. Bavaria, Landes- 
und Volkskunde des Kdnigreichs Bayern, 
ii. 255; A. Wuttke, Zc. 

3-H. F. Feilberg, ‘‘ Zwieselbiume 
nebst verwandtem Aberglauben in 
Skandinavien,” Zet¢schrift des Vereins 
fiir Volkskunde, vii. (1897) p. 44. 


4 J. Theodore Bent, Zhe Cyclades 
(London, 1885), pp. 457 59. 

5 H. Ploss, Das Xind*® (Leipsic, 
1884), ii. 221. 

® R. Baier, ‘‘ Beitriige von der Insel — 
Riigen,” Zettschrift fiir deutsche My- — 
thologie und Sittenkunde, ii. (1855) 
p- 141. : 


x! THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 173 


| were shut against the disease, which is then unable to 
ursue and overtake the sufferer. Hence the idea at the 
root of the custom is not so much that the patient has 
| transferred his ailment to the tree, as that the tree forms an 
_ impervious barrier between him and the malady which had 
hitherto afflicted him. This interpretation is confirmed by 
_ the following parallels. 

In those parts of Armenia which are covered with 
_ forests, many great and ancient trees are revered as sacred 
and receive marks of homage. The people burn lights 
4 before them, fumigate them with incense, sacrifice cocks and 
_ wethers to them, and creep through holes in their trunks or 
_ push lean and sickly children through them “in order to put 
_ astop to the influence of evil spirits.”? Apparently, they 
_ think that evil spirits cannot creep through the cleft in the 
holy tree, and therefore that the sick who have effected the 
_ passage are safe from their demoniacal pursuers. The same 
_ conception of a fissure in a tree as an obstacle placed in the 
_ path of pursuing spirits meets us in a number of savage 
_ customs. Thus in the island of Nias, when a man is in 
_ training for the priesthood, he has to be introduced to the 
various spirits between whom and mankind it will be his 
office to mediate. A priest takes him to an open window, 
_ and while the drums are beating points out to him the great 
_ spirit in the sun who calls away men to himself through 
: death ; for it is needful that the future priest should know 
_ him from whose grasp he will often be expected to wrest the 
sick and dying. In the evening twilight he is led to the 
graves and shewn the envious spirits of the dead, who also 
are ever drawing away the living to their own shadowy 
world. Next day he is conducted to a river and shewn the 
spirit of the waters; and finally they take him up to a 
mountain and exhibit to him the spirits of the mountains, 
who have diverse shapes, some appearing like swine, others 
like buffaloes, others like goats, and others again like men 
with long hair on their bodies. When he has seen all this, 
his education is complete, but on his return from the 
mountain the new priest may not at once enter his own 
house. For the people think that, were he to do so, the 

» Manuk Abeghian, Der armenische Volksglaube (Leipsic, 1899), p. 58. 


i a ial 


Creeping 


to get rid 
of spirits 
in Armenia 
and Nias. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  ‘cnapr. 


174 


dangerous spirits by whom he is still environed would stay 
in the house and visit both the family and the pigs with 
sickness. Accordingly he betakes himself to other villages 
and passes several nights there, hoping that the spirits will 
leave him and settle on the friends who receive him into 
their houses ; but naturally he does not reveal the intention 
of his visits to his hosts. Lastly, before he enters his own 
dwelling, he looks out for some young tree by the way, 
splits it down the middle, and then creeps through the 
fissure, in the belief that any spirit which may still be 
clinging to him will thus be left sticking to the tree.’ Again, 
among the Bilqula or Bella Coola Indians of British Columbia 
“the bed of a mourner must be protected against the ghost 
of the deceased. His male relatives stick a thorn-bush into 
the ground at each corner of their beds. After four days 
these are thrown into the water. Mourners must rise early 
and go into the woods, where they stick four thorn-bushes 
into the ground, at the corners of a square, in which they 
cleanse themselves by rubbing their bodies with cedar 
branches. They also swim in ponds. After swimming 
they cleave four small trees and creep through the clefts, 
following the course of the sun. This they do on four sub- 
sequent mornings, cleaving new trees every day. Mourners 
cut their hair short. The hair that has been cut off is 
burnt. If they should not observe these regulations, it is 
believed that they would dream of the deceased.”* To the 
savage, who fails to distinguish the visions of sleep from the 


Among the 
Bella Coola 
Indians 
mourners 
creep 
through 
cleft trees 
to get rid of 
the ghost. 


1 Fr. Kramer, ‘‘ Der Gétzendienst 
der Niasser,” 7Zijdschrift voor Indische 
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxxiii. 
(1890) pp. 478-480; H. Sundermann, 
Die Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst 
(Barmen, 1905), pp. 81-83. According 
to the latter writer the intention of 
passing through the cleft stick is ‘‘to 
strip off from himself (von zich 
abzustreifen) the last spirit that may 
have followed him.” The notion that 
the sun causes death by drawing away 
the souls of the living is Indian. See 
The Satapatha Bréhmana, ii. 3. 3 
7-8, translated by Julius Eggeling, 
Part I. (Oxford, 1882) p. 343 (Sacred 
Books of the East, vol. xii.) : ** Now 
yonder burning (sun) doubtless is no 


other than Death; and because he is 
Death, therefore the creatures that are 
on this side of him die. But those 
that are on the other side of him are 
the gods, and they are therefore im- 
mortal. . . . And the breath of whom- 
soever he (the sun) wishes he takes and 
rises, and that one dies.” 


2 Fr. Boas, in Seventh Report on 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
p. 13 (separate reprint from the Report 
of the British Association, Cardiff meet- 
ing, 1891). The Shuswap Indians 
of the same region also fence their 
beds against ghosts with a hedge of 
thorn bushes, See Zaboo and the 
Perils of the Soul, p. 142. 


* THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 175 


appearances of waking life, the apparition of a dead man in 

a dream is equivalent to the actual presence of the ghost ; 

and accordingly he seeks to keep off the spiritual intruder, 

just as he might a creature of flesh and blood, by fencing 

his bed with thorn-bushes. Similarly the practice of creep- 

4 _ ing through four cleft trees is clearly an attempt to shake 

: | off the clinging ghost and leave it adhering to the trees, just 

‘ as in Nias the future priest hopes to rid himself in like 

_ manner of the dangerous spirits who have dogged his steps 

- from the mountains and the graves. 

3 This interpretation of the custom is strongly confirmed The 

_ by a funeral ceremony which Dr. Charles Hose witnessed S4s3P8 
: at the chief village of the Madangs, a tribe of Kayans creep 
who occupy a hitherto unexplored district in the heart Gen sick 
: of Borneo. “Just across the river from where we were penile = 
asic says Dr. Hose, “was the graveyard, and there I order to 
| witnessed a funeral procession as the day was drawing to a see 
_ close. The coffin, which was a wooden box made from a the ghost. 
| tree-trunk, was decorated with red and black patterns in 

' circles, with two small wooden figures of men placed at either 

end ; it was lashed with rattans to a long pole, and by this 

| means was lifted to the shoulders of the bearers, who 

' numbered thirteen in all, and who then carried it to the 

| burying-ground. After the mourners had all passed over 

' to the graveyard, a man quickly cut a couple of small sticks, 

| each five feet long and about an inch in diameter. One of 

_ these he split almost the whole way down, and forced the 
unsplit end into the ground, when the upper part opened 

like a V, leaving sufficient room for each person to pass 
through. He next split the top of the other stick, and, 

| placing another short stick in the cleft, made a cross, which 

a he also forced into the ground. The funeral procession 

_ climbed the mound on which the cemetery was situated, 

a _ passing through the V of the cleft stick in single file. As 
soon as the coffin had been placed on the stage erected for 
the purpose, the people commenced their return, following 
on one another’s heels as quickly as possible, each spitting 
out the words, ‘ Pzt balli krat balli jat tesip bertatip !’ (* Keep 
back, and close out all things evil, and sickness’) as they 
passed through the V-shaped stick. The whole party having 


The cleft 
stick or 
tree 
through 
which a 
person 
passes is a 
barrier to 
part him 
from a 
dangerous 
foe ; the 
closing of 
the cleft is 
like shut- 
ting the 
door in the 
face of a 
pursuer. 
But com- 
bined with 
this in the 
case of 
ruptured 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM char. 


176 


| 
. 


left the graveyard, the gate was closed by the simple process _ 
of tying the cleft ends of the stick together, and a few words ~ 


were then said to the cross-stick, whick they call mgring, or 
the wall that separates the living from the dead. All who 
had taken part in the ceremony then went and bathed before 
returning to their homes, rubbing their skins with rough 
pebbles, the old Mosaic idea of the uncleanness of the dead, 
as mentioned in Numbers (chap. xix.), evidently finding a 
place among their religious beliefs. It is apparently a great 
relief to their minds to think that they can shut out the 
spirit of the deceased. They believe that the spirit of the 
dead is not aware that life has left the body until a short 
time after the coffin has been taken to the graveyard, and 
then not until the spirit has had leisure to notice the clothes, 
weapons, and other articles belonging to its earthly estate, 
which are placed with the coffin, But before this takes 
place the gate has been closed.” * 

‘ Here the words uttered by the mourners in passing 
through the cloven stick shew clearly that they believe the 
stick to act as a barrier or fence, on the further side of 
which they leave behind the ghost or other dangerous spirit 
whose successful pursuit might entail sickness and death on 
the survivors. Thus the passage of these Madang mourners 
through the cleft stick is strictly analogous to the passage 
of ruptured English children through a cleft ash-tree. Both 


are simply ways of leaving an evil thing behind. Similarly — 


the subsequent binding up of the cloven stick in Borneo is 
analogous to the binding up of the cloven ash-tree in Eng- 
land. Both are ways of barricading the road against the 
evil which is dogging your steps; having passed through 
the doorway you slam the door in the face of your pursuer. 
Yet it seems probable that the intention of binding up the 
cleft in a tree through which a ruptured patient has been 


1 C, Hose, ‘‘In the heart of Borneo,” 
The Geographical Journal, xvi. (1900) 
pp. 45 sg- Compare C. Hose and W. 
McDougall, Zhe Pagan Tribes of 
Borneo (London, 1912), ii. 36 5g., 
where, after describing the ceremony 
of passing through the cloven stick, the 
writers add: ‘*In this way the Kayans 
symbolically prevent any of the un- 


canny influences of the graveyard 
following the party back to the house ; 
though they do not seem to be clear as 
to whether it is the ghosts of the dead, 
or the Zok of the neighbourhood, or 
those which may have contributed to 
his death, against whom these pre- 
cautions are taken.” 


aia SEN aT ico os 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 177 


assed is not merely that of shutting the door on the malady 
conceived as a personal being ; combined with this idea is 
| erhaps the notion that in virtue of the law of grec homoeo- 


patients 
seems to be 
the idea 
that the 
rupture 
heals sym- 


exactly in the same measure as the cleft in the tree closes up pathetic- 


rough the force of bandages and of natural growth. That 
ais shade of meaning attaches to the custom is rendered tree closes. 


ally as the 
cleft in the 


Analogous 


probable by a comparison of an ancient Roman cure for Roman 


at ny of the elder Cato. 


ater. 


>* Cato, De agri cultura, 159 (pp. 
06 sg. ed. H. Keil, Leipsic, 1884): 
Luxum siquod est, hac cantione sanum 
. Harundinem prende tibi viridem 
P. IIT, aut quingue longam, mediam 
finde, et duo homines teneant ad 
dices. Incipe cantare in alios. f. 
vaeta daries dardaries asia- 
udes una petes, usgue dum coeant. 

vaeta daries dardares astataries 
issunapiter, usgue dum cocant. Fer- 
rum insuter jactato. Ubi coterint et 
se alteram tetigerint, id manu pre- 
pare a dextera sinistra praecide, ad 
uxum aut ad fracturam alliga, sanum 


PT. VII. VOL. IJ 


location, which has been preserved for us by the grave 
He recommended that a green 
, four or five feet long, should be taken, split down the 
iddle, and held by two men to the dislocated bones while 
curious and now unintelligible spell was recited; then, 
hen the spell had been recited and the aperture in the reed 
d closed, the reed was to be tied to the dislocated limb, 
nd a perfect cure might be expected. Apparently it was 
supposed that just as the two sides of the split reed came 
ogether and coalesced after being held apart, so the dislocated 
ones would come together and fit into their proper places.! 

But the usual idea in passing through a narrow aper- 
re as a cure or preventive of evil would seem to be 
imply that of giving the slip to a dangerous pursuer. 
lis intention, doubtless, the savage Thays of Tonquin 
after a burial to the banks of a stream and there 
through a triangle formed by leaning two reeds 
inst each other, while the sorcerer souses them with dirty 
All the relations of the deceased must wash their 
arments in the stream before they return home, and they 
not set foot in the house till they have shorn their hair 


With 


fet.” The passage is obscure and per- 
haps corrupt. It is not clear whether 
“usque dum cocant” and ‘‘ubi coterint” 
refer to the drawing together of the 
bones or of the split portions of the 
reed, but apparently the reference is 
to the reed. The charm is referred to 
by Pliny, Nat. Aist., xvii. 267: 
“ Ouippe cum averti crandines carmine 
credant plerique, cujus verba inserere 
non equidem serio ausim, gquamguam a 
Catone proditis contra luxata membra 
jungenda harundinum fissurae.” Com- 
pare J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* 
i. 186, ii, 1031 sg. 
N 


cure for 
dislocation. 


Other 
examples 
of creeping 
through 
narrow 
openings 
after a 
death. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cwtar. 


178 


at the foot of the ladder. Afterwards the sorcerer comes 
and sprinkles the whole house with water for the purpose of 
expelling evil spirits." Here again we cannot doubt that 
the creeping through the triangle of reeds is intended to 
rid the mourners of the troublesome ghost. So when the 
Kamtchatkans had disposed of a corpse after their usual 
fashion by throwing it to the dogs to be devoured, they 
purified themselves as follows. They went into the forest 
and cut various roots which they bent into rings, and through 
these rings they crept twice. Afterwards they carried the 
rings back to the forest and flung them away westward. 
The Koryaks, a people of the same region, burn their dead 
and hold a festival in honour of the departed a year after 
the death. At this festival, which takes place on the spot 
where the corpse was burned, or, if that is too far off, on a 
neighbouring height, they sacrifice two young reindeer which 
have never been in harness, and the sorcerer sticks a great 
many reindeer horns in the earth, believing that thereby 
he is dispatching a whole herd of these animals to their 
deceased friend in the other world. Then they all hasten 
home, and purify themselves by passing between two poles 
planted in the ground, while the sorcerer strikes them with 
a stick and adjures death not to carry them off? The 
Tokoelawi in the interior of Central Celebes hold a great 
sacrificial festival on the eighth day after the death of a man 
or the ninth day after the death of a woman. When the 
guests return homewards after the festival they pass undet 
two poles placed in a slanting direction against each other 
and they may not look round at the house where the death 
occurred. “In this way they take a final leave of the sou 
of the deceased. Afterwards no more sacrifices are offere¢ 
to the soul.”* Among the Toboengkoe, another tribe in the 


1 Pinabel, ‘Notes sur quelques aes Landes Kamtschatha (Lemgo, 


peuplades dépendant du Tong-King,” 
Bulletin de la Société de Géographie, 
Septitme Série, v. (Paris, 1884) p. 
430; A. Bourlet, ‘* Funérailles chez 
les Thay,” Anthropos, viii. (1913) Pp. 


2 S. Krascheninnikow, Beschreibung 


1766), pp. 268, 282. 

3 N. Adriani en Alb. C. Krui 
‘Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi 
Lindoe,” Mededeelingen van wege 
Nederlandsche  Zendelinggenootscha 
xlii. (1898) p. 502. The poles are 
a certain plant or tree called doméa. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 179 


| the corpse is carried; and on certain days afterwards he 


|} bathes, and on returning from the bath must pass through 
|a A-shaped erection, which is formed by splitting a pole up 
‘the middle and separating the two split pieces except at the 


“This he must do in order that his second wife, if he 
‘has one, may not soon die.”* Here the notion probably is 

hat the jealous ghost of the dead wife seeks to avenge her- 
elf on her living rival by carrying off her soul with her to 
deadland. Hence to prevent this catastrophe the husband 
tries to evade the ghost, first by going to the grave along a 
ifferent path, and second by passing under a cleft stick, 


& LOp. 


a 


7 Alb. C. Kruijt, “‘ Eenige ethno- 
afische aanteekeningen omtrent de 
Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” Mededeel- 
rm. van wege het Nederlandsche 
Zendelinggenootschap, xliv. (1900) p. 
223. 

_® For examples of these ceremonies 
may refer to my article, ‘‘ On certain 


‘through which as usual the spirit cannot follow him. 
In the light of the foregoing customs, as well as of a multi- 
tude of ceremonies observed for a similar purpose in all parts 
of the world,’ we may safely assume that when people creep 
rough: rings after a death or pass between poles after a 
‘$2 crifice to the dead, their intention simply is to interpose 
‘a barrier between themselves and the ghost ; 
‘their way through a narrow pass or aperture through which 
hey hope that the ghost will not be able to follow them. 
put it otherwise, they conceive that the spirit of the dead 
sticking to them like a burr, and that like a burr it may 
Xe rubbed or scraped off and left adhering to the sides of 
the opening through which they have squeezed themselves. 
fe Similarly, when a pestilence is raging among the Koryaks, Passing 
ney kill a dog, wind its guts about two poles, and pass 
ween the poles,® doubtless for the sake of giving the slip in order 


they make 


to the demon of the plague in the same way that they give 
he slip to the ghost. When the Kayans of Borneo have demons. 
been dogged by an evil spirit on a journey and are nearing 

their destination, they fashion a small archway of boughs, 
light a fire under it, and pass in single file under the archway 
and over the fire, spitting into the fire as they pass. 
this ceremony, we are told, “they thoroughly exorcise the 


By 


burial customs as illustrative of the 
primitive theory of the soul,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xv. 
(1886) pp. 64 sgg. 


3 S. Krascheninnikow, Beschreibung 
des Landes Kamtschatka(Lemgo, 1766), 


PP- 277 59. 


The inten- 
tion of the 
custom 
probably is 
to escape 
from the 
ghost of 
the dead. 


through 
an archway 


to escape 
from 


Crawling 
under an 
arch of 
bramble 
as a cure 
for various 
maladies. 


Crawling 
under 
arches 

of various 
sorts as 

a cure or 
preventive 


of sickness, 


. 180 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuar. 


evil spirits and emerge on the other side free from all baleful 
influences.” Here, to make assurance doubly sure, a fire as 
well as an archway is interposed between the travellers and 
the dreadful beings who are walking unseen behind. To crawl 
under a bramble which has formed an arch by sending down 
a second root into the ground, is an English and Welsh cure 
for whooping-cough, rheumatism, boils, and other complaints. 
In some parts of the west of England they say that to get rid 
of boils the thing to do is to crawl through such a natural arch 
nine times against the sun; but in Devonshire the patient 
should creep through the arch thrice with the sun, that is 
from east to west. When a child is passed through it for 
whooping-cough, the operators ought to say: 


“In bramble, out cough, 
Flere I leave the whooping-cough.” 2 


In Perigord and other parts of France the same cure is 
employed for boils.? In Bulgaria, when a person suffers from 
a congenital malady such as scrofula, a popular cure is to 
take him to a neighbouring village and there make him creep 
naked thrice through an arch, which is formed by inserting 
the lower ends of two vine branches in the ground and joining 
their upper ends together. When he has done so, he hangs 
his clothes on a tree, and dons other garments. On his way 
home the patient must also crawl under a ploughshare, 
which is held high enough to let him pass.“ Further, when 

1 W. H. Furness, Folk-lore in stepped over the fire each one spat in 


Borneo, a Sketch, p. 28 (Walling- it vociferously and immediately took 
ford, Pennsylvania, 1899, privately his place in the boats.” 


printed). Compare z@., The Home- 2 T, F. Thiselton Dyer, English 


life of Borneo Head-hunters (Phila- 
delphia, 1902), p. 28: ‘‘ Here a halt 
for final purification was made. An 
arch of boughs about five feet high was 
erected on the beach, and beneath it a 
fire was kindled, and then Tama Bulan, 
holding a young chicken, which he 
waved and brushed over every portion 
of the arch, invoked all evil spirits 
which had been accompanying us, and 
forbade them to follow us further 
through the fire. The fowl was then 
killed, its blood smeared all over the 
archway and sprinkled in the fire; 
then, led by Tama Bulan, the whole 
party filed under the arch, and as they 


Folk-lore (London, 1884), pp. 171 sg. 
W. G. Black, Yolk-medicine (Londo 
1883), p. 703; R. Hunt, Popular 
Romances of the West of Engla: 
Third Edition (London, 1881), pp. 
412, 415; Marie Trevelyan, Folk-lore 
and Folk-stories of Wales (London, 
1909), p. 320. a 
3 A. de Nore, Coutumes, Mythes a 
Traditions des Provinces de Frana 
(Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 152; H 
Gaidoz, Un Vieux Rite médical (Paris 
1892), pp. 7 59 : 
4 A. Strausz, Die Bulgaren(Leipsic 
1898), p. 414. ; 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 181 


hooping-cough is prevalent in a Bulgarian village, an old 
woman will scrape the earth from under the root of a willow- 
tree. Then all the children of the village creep through the 
pening thus made, and a thread from the garment of each 
of them is hung on the willow. Adults sometimes go through 
the same ceremony after recovering from a dangerous illness.’ 
imilarly, when sickness is rife among some of the villages 
to the east of Lake Nyassa, the inhabitants crawl through 
‘an arch formed by bending a wand and inserting the two 
ends in the ground. By way of further precaution they 
“wash themselves on the spot with medicine and water, and 
hen bury the medicine and the evil influence together in 
‘the earth. The same ceremony is resorted to as a means of 
| keeping off evil spirits, wild beasts, and enemies.” 

In Uganda “sometimes a medicine-man directed a sick Custom in 
“man to provide an animal, promising that he would come and pha 
transfer the sickness to the animal. The medicine-man would sick man 
hen select a plantain-tree near the house, kill the animal by it, denach p 
ind anoint the sick man with its blood, on his forehead, on cleft stick 
ach side of his chest, and on his legs above the knees. The oioving in 
jlantain-tree selected had to be one that was about to bear the door- 
it, and the medicine-man would split the stem from near bat 
the top to near the bottom, leaving a few inches not split 
oth at the top and at the bottom ; the split stem would be 
ob d open so that the sick man could step through it, and in 
ae ping so he would leave his clothing at the plantain-tree, and 
would run into the house without looking back. When he 
sntered the house, new clothes would be given him to wear. 

The plantain, the clothing, and meat would be carried away 
the medicine-man, who would deposit the plantain-tree on 
te land, but would take the meat and clothing for himself. 
metimes the medicine-man would kill the animal near the 
hut, lay a stout stick across the threshold, and narrow the 
doorway by partially filling it with branches of trees; he 
uld then put some of the blood on either side of the narrow 
trance, and some on the stick across the threshold, and 


1 A. Strausz, of. cit. p. 404. As 2 Last Journals of David Living- 
© the Bulgarian custom of creeping stone in Central Africa(London, 1874), 

h a tunnel inatime of epidemic, i. 60. 

See above, vol. i. pp. 282-284. 


Similar 
custom 
practised 
by the Kai 
of New 
Guinea 
and the 
Looboos 
of Sumatra 
for the’ 
purpose 
of giving 
the slip to 
spiritual 
pursuers. 


182 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  ciuat 


would also anoint with it the sick man, who would be take: 
outside for the purpose. The patient would then re-ente 
the house, letting his clothing fall off, as he passed througt 
the doorway. The medicine-man would carry away the 
branches, the stick, the clothing, and the meat. The 
branches and the stick he would cast upon waste land 
but the meat and the clothing he would keep for himself.”’ 
Here the notion of transferring the sickness to the animal is 
plainly combined with, we may almost say overshadowed by 
the notion that the ailment is left behind adhering to th 
cleft plantain-stem or to the stick and branches of the narrow 
opening through which the patient has made his way. That 
obviously is why the plantain-stem or the stick and branches 
are thrown away on waste land, lest they should infect other 
people with the sickness which has been transferred to them. 

The Kai of German New Guinea attribute sickness to the 
agency either of ghosts or of sorcerers, but suspicion always 
falls at first on ghosts, who are deemed even worse than the 
sorcerers. To cure a sick man they will sometimes cleave a 
stick in the middle, leaving the two ends intact, and then oblige 
the sufferer to insert his head through the cleft. After that 
they stroke his whole body with the stick from head to foot. 
“The stick with the soul-stuff of the ghosts is then hurled 
away or otherwise destroyed, whereupon the sick man is 
supposed to recover.” Here the ghosts who cause the sick- 
ness are clearly supposed to be scraped from the patient’s 
body by means of the cleft stick, and to be thrown away or 
destroyed with the implement. The Looboos, a primitive 
tribe in the Mandailing district of Sumatra, stand in great 
fear of the wandering spirits of the dead (soemangots). But 
“they know all sorts of means of protecting themselves 
against the unwelcome visits of the spirits. For example, 
if a man has lost his way in the forest, he thinks that thi zi 
is the work of such a spirit (soemangot), who dogs the 


Baganda,” Journal of the <Anthro-~ 
pological Institute, xxxii. (1902) pp. 
42 5g. 


1 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda 
(London, I9I1), p. 343. Compare 
zd., ‘*Notes on the Manners and 


Customs of the Baganda,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xxxi. 
(1901) p. 126; zd., ‘* Further Notes 
on the Manners and Customs of the 


2 Ch. Keysser, ‘*Aus dem Leber 
der Kaileute,’ in R. Neuhauss’s 
Deutsch Neu-Guinea, iii. (Berlin, 1911 
pp- 141 sg. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 183 


fanderer and bedims his sight. So in order to throw the 
malignant spirit off the track he takes a rattan and splits it 
ithrough the middle. By bending the rattan an opening is 
made, through which he creeps. After that the rattan is 
quickly stretched and the opening closes. By this pro- 
jcedure the spirit (so they think) cannot find the opening 
again and so cannot further follow his victim.” Here 
therefore, the passage through a cleft stick is conceived in 
the clearest way as an escape from a spiritual pursuer, and 
the closing of the aperture when the fugitive has passed 
hrough it is nothing but the slamming of the door in the 
e of his invisible foe. 
A similar significance is probably to be attached to Passing 
other cases of ceremonially passing through a cleft stick ee 
even where the intention of the rite is not expressly alleged. in con- _ 
Thus among the Ovambo of German South-West Africa saan 
lyoung women who have become marriageable perform a and cir- 
variety of ceremonies; among other things they dance in “™°°™ 
large and the small cattle-kraal. On quitting the 
irge cattle-kraal after the dance, and on entering and 
uitting the small cattle-kraal, they are obliged to pass, one 
ter the other, through the fork of a cleft ani of which 
ithe two sides are held wide open by an old man.”, Among 
the Washamba of German East Africa, when a boy has 
been circumcised, two women bring a long sugar-cane, which 
still bears its leaves. The cane is split at some distance 
m its upper and lower ends and the two sides are held 

; apart so as to form a cleft or cpening; at the lower end 
‘of the cleft a danga ring is fastened. The father and mother 

° the circumcised youth now place the sugar-cane between 
them, touch the ring with their feet, and then slip through 
the cleft; and after them the lad’s aunt must also pass 
hrough the cleft sugar-cane.* In both these cases the 

ssage through the cleft stick is probably intended to give 


1 3: Kreemer, *“De Loeboes in 
ailing,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- 

d- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 

h- Indie, \xvi. (1912) p. 327. 

-2 Hermann Tonjes, Ovamboland, 

, Leute, Mission (Berlin, 1911), 
139 sg. The writer was unable to 


ascertain the meaning of the rite ; the 
natives would only say that it was their 
custom. 

3A. Karasek, ‘“ Beitrage zur 
Kenntnis der Waschambo,” Saessler- 
Archiv, i. (Leipsic and Berlin, 1911) 
p- 192. 


184 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM chap. 


the slip to certain dangerous spirits, which are apt to molest 
people at such critical seasons as puberty and circumcision. 
Again, the passage through a ring or hoop is resorted 
to for like reasons as a mode of curing or preventing disease. 
Thus in Sweden, when a natural ring has been found in a 
tree, it is carefully removed and treasured in the family ; for 
sick and especially rickety children are healed by merely 
passing through it. A young married woman in Sweden, 
who suffered from an infirmity, was advised by a wise 
woman to steal three branches of willow, make them into 
a hoop, and creep through it naked, taking care not to touch 
the hoop and to keep perfectly silent. The hoop was after- 
wards to be burnt. She carried out the prescription faithfully, 
and her faith was rewarded by a perfect cure? No doubt her 
infirmity was thought to adhere to the hoop and to be burnt 
with it. Similarly in Scotland children who suffered from 
hectic fever and consumptive patients used to be healed by 
passing thrice through a circular wreath of woodbine, which 
was cut during the increase of the March moon and was let 
down over the body of the sufferer from the head to the feet. 
Thus Jonet Stewart cured sundry women by “taking ane 
garland of grene woodbynd, and causing the patient pas 
thryis throw it, quhilk thairefter scho cut in nyne pieces, and 
cast in the fyre.” Another wise woman transmitted the siclel 
“throw ane girth of woodbind thryis thre times, saying, TL 
do this in name of the Father, the Sone, and the Halie 
Ghaist’?”* The Highlanders of Strathspey used to forced 
all their sheep and lambs to pass through a hoop of . 
rowan-tree on All Saints’ Day and, Beltane (the first of . 
November and the first of May),* probably as a means of. 


Crawling 
through a 
ring or 
hoop as a 
cure or 
preventive 
of disease. 


Passing 
sheep 
through 
a hoop 
of rowan. 


1H. F. Feilberg, ‘‘Zwieselbiume 
nebst verwandtem Aberglauben in 
Skandinavien,” Zeitschrift des Vereins 
jiir Volkskunde, vii. (1897) pp. 49 
Sq. 

2-H. F, Feilberg, of. cit. p. 44. 

3 J. G. Dalyell, Zhe Darker Super- 
stittons of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1834), 
p- 121; Ch. Rogers, Social Life in 
Scotland (Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii. 
239. 

* John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, Sco?- 
land and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth 


Century, edited by A. Allardyce, 
(Edinburgh and London, 1888), ii. 
454. Immediately after mentioning 
this custom the writer adds: **‘ And in 
Breadalbane it is the custom for the 
dairymaid to drive the cattle to the 
sheals with a wand of that tree [the 
rowan] cut upon the day of removal, 
which is laid above the door until the 
cattle be going back again to the winter- 
town. Thiswas reckoned a preservative 
against witchcraft.” As to the activity 
of witches and fairies on Hallowe’en and 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 185 


warding off the witches and fairies, who are especially 
dreaded at these seasons, and against whose malignant arts 

the rowan-tree affords an efficient protection. In Oldenburg mining 
a when a cow gives little or no milk, they milk her through a *°°* 
“hole in a branch. In Eversten they say that this should be a natural 
done through a ring which an oak-tree has formed round the ring or 3 
scar where a branch has been sawn off. Others say the ‘ =— 
beast should be milked through a “witch’s nest,” that Easier 
through the boughs of a birch-tree which have grown in a 
tangle. Such a “ witch’s nest” is also hung up in a pig’s stye 

to protect the pig against witchcraft. Hence the aim of 
milking a cow through a “ witch’s nest” or through a natural 
wooden ring is no doubt to deliver the poor creature from 

an artful witch who has-been draining away the milk into 

her own pail, as witches are too apt to do. Again, in Passing 
Oldenburg sick children, and also adults and animals, are = 
passed through a ring of rough unwashed yarn, just as it or animals 
_ comes from the reel. To complete the cure you should pape 
throw a hot coal thrice through the ring, then spit through of yam. 
it thrice, and finally bury the yarn under a stone, where you 

leave it to rot. The writer who reports these remedies ex- 

| plains them as intended to strip the witchcraft, as you might 

as ay, from the bodies of the victims, whether human or animal, 

on whom the witch has cast her spell? Among the Lushais Passing 
of Assam “five to ten days after the child is born its body “sesse4 
is said to be covered with small pimples, its lips become through 
black and its strength decreases. The family then obtain *” 
a particular kind of creeping plant called vawm, which they 

| make into a coil. In the evening everything in the house 

that has a lid or covering is uncovered, and the child is thrice 

H _ passed through this coil, which act is supposed to clear the 


; 
B 
he first of May, see above, vol. i. pp. 
9226 sgg., 295; The Magic Art and the 
wolution of Kings, ii. 52 sgg.; J. G. 
mpbell, Superstitions of the High- 
ds and Islands of Scotland (Glasgow, 
900), p. 183 id., Witch and 
Second Sight in the Highlands and 
is of Scotland (Glasgow, 1902), 
270. As to the power of the 
Towan-tree to counteract their spells, 
W. Gregor, Notes on the Folk-lore 


of the North-East of Scotland (London, 
1881), p. 188 ; J. C. Atkinson, Forty 
Years in a Moorland Parish (London, 
ree PP- 97 399. ; The Scapegoat, pp. 


1 ‘a Strackerjan, Aberglaube und 
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg 
(Oldenburg, 1867), i. p. 364, § 241. 

2 L. Strackerjan, of. cit. i. p. 364, 
§ 240. 


Passing 
through 

a hemlock 
ring during 
an epi- 
demic. 


Passing 
through a 
ring of red- 
hot iron to 
escape an 
evil spirit. 


Crawling 
through 
holed 
stones as 
a cure in 
Scotland 
and 
Cornwall. 


186 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuar 


child’s skin and restore its strength. After this is finished, 
the parents go to bed and the pots or other receptacles are 
covered again by any of the other members of the family. 
The parents themselves must not replace any of these lids 
for fear that they might shut up the spirit of the child in 
them.”' When the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia 
fear the outbreak of an epidemic, a medicine-man takes a 


large ring of hemlock branches and causes every member of 


the tribe to pass through it. Each person puts his head 


through the ring and then moves the ring downwards over — 


his body till it has almost reached his feet, when he steps 
out of it, right foot first. They think that this prevents the 
epidemic from breaking out.?, In Asia Minor, “if a person 
is believed to be possessed by an evil spirit, one form of 
treatment is to heat an iron-chain red-hot, form it into a ring 
and pass the afflicted person through the opening, on the 
theory that the evil spirit cannot pass the hot chain, and 
so is torn from his victim and left behind.”*® Here the 


intention of the passage through the aperture is avowedly — 


to shake off a spiritual pursuer, who is deterred from 
further pursuit not only by the narrowness of the opening 
but by the risk of burning himself in the attempt to make 
his way through it. 


But if the intention of these ceremonies is essentially to — 


rid the performer of some harmful thing, whether a disease 


or a ghost or a demon, which is supposed to be clinging to — 
him, we should expect to find that any narrow hole or — 


opening would serve the purpose as well as a cleft tree or 


stick, an arch or ring of boughs, or a couple of posts fixed 


in the ground. And this expectation is not disappointed. — 
On the coast of Morven and Mull thin ledges of rock may 
be seen pierced with large holes near the sea. Consumptive — 
people used to be brought thither, and after the tops of nine — 


1 Lieutenant-Colonel H. W. G. the Advancement of Science, Liverpool { 


Cole, ‘*The Lushais,” in Census of meeting, 1896). 


India, rgrr, vol. iii. Assam, Part i. 3 Rev. G. E. White, Dean of Ana- — 
Report (Shillong, 1912), p. 140. tolia College, Survivals of Primitive 
Religion among the People of Asia 

2 Franz Boas, in Eleventh Report Minor, p. 12 (paper read before the © 
on the North-Western Tribes of Canada, Victoria Institute or Philosophical 
pp. 3 sg. (separate reprint from the Society of Great Britain, 6 Adelphi: 


Report of the British Association for Terrace, Strand, London), 


Ot ly ee ee eee 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 187 


| waves had been caught in a dish and thrown on the patient's 
head, he was made to pass through one of the rifted rocks 
thrice in the direction of the sun.’ “On the farm of 
crossapol in Coll there is a stone called Clach Thuill, 
‘that is, the Hole Stone, through which persons suffering 
from consumption were made to pass three times in the 
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. They took 
meat with them each time, and left some on the stone. 
|The bird that took the food away had the consumption 
‘laid upon it. Similar stones, under which the patient can 
eep, were made use of in other islands.”? Here it is 
manifest that the patient left his disease behind him on the 
‘stone, since the bird which carried off the food from the 
| stone caught the disease. In the Aberdeenshire river Dee, 
‘at Cambus o’ May, near Ballater, there is a rock with a hole 


it large enough to let a person pass through. Legend 
runs that childless women used to wade out to the stone 


d squeeze themselves through the hole. It is said that a 
srtain noble lady tried the effect of the charm not very many 
ago with indifferent success.* In the parish of Madern 

Cornwall, near the village of Lanyon, there is a perforated 
one called the M/é-an-tol or “holed stone,” through which 
people formerly crept as a remedy for pains in the back and 
imbs ; and at certain times of the year parents drew their 
children through the hole to cure them of the rickets.* 
The passage through the stone was also deemed a cure for 
scrofula, provided it was made against the sun and repeated 
ee times or three times three.° 

Near the little town of Dourgne, not far from Castres, 
Southern France, there is a mountain, and on the top 
the mountain is a tableland, where a number of large 
ones may be seen planted in the ground about a cross 


d rising to a height of 


1 John Ramsay, Scotland and Scots- 

en in the Eighteenth Century, edited 

by Alex. Allardyce (Edinburgh, 1888), 
451 59. 

2 J. G. Campbell, Witchcraft and 

cond Sight in the Highlands and 

of Scotland (Glasgow, 1902), 


100. 
_ * Mr. James S. Greig, in a letter to 


two to five feet above the 


me dated Lindean, Perth Road, 
Dundee, 17th August, 1913. 


4 W. Borlase, Antiquities, historical 
and monumental, of the County of Corn- 
wall (London, 1769), pp. 177 sq- 

5 Robert Hunt, Popular Romances 
of the West of England, Third Edition 
(London, 1881), pp. 176, 415. 


Crawling 


188 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnar. 


ground. Almost all of them are pierced with holes of 
different sizes. From time immemorial people used to as- 
semble at Dourgne and the neighbourhood every year on 
the sixth of August, the festival of St. Estapin. The palsied, 
the lame, the blind, the sick of all sorts, flocked thither 
to seek and find a cure for their various infirmities. Very 
early in the morning they set out from the villages where 
they had lodged or from the meadows where for want of 
better accommodation they had been forced to pass the 
night, and went on pilgrimage to the chapel of St. Estapin, 
which stands in a gorge at the southern foot of the mountain. 
Having gone nine times in procession round the chapel, they 


hobbled, limped, or crawled to the tableland on the top of 


the mountain. There each of them chose a stone with a 
hole of the requisite size and thrust his ailing member 
through the hole. For there are holes to suit every com- 


plaint ; some for the head, some for the arm, some for the 


leg, and so on. 


Having performed this simple ceremony — 


they were cured ; the lame walked, the blind saw, the palsied © 


recovered the use of their limbs, and so on. 


The chapel of — 


So 


the saint is adorned with the crutches and other artificial — 
aids, now wholly superfluous, which the joyful pilgrims left — 


behind them in token of their gratitude and devotion.’ © 


About two miles from Gisors, in the French department of 


Oise, there is a dolmen called Trie or Trie- Chateau, consist- — 
ing of three upright stones with a fourth and larger stone — 


laid horizontally on their tops. The stone which forms the 


back wall of the dolmen is pierced about the middle by an — 
irregularly shaped hole, through which the people of the 
neighbourhood used from time immemorial to pass their 
sickly children in the firm belief that the passage through ~ 


the stone would restore them to health.” 


In the church of St. Corona at the village of Koppenwal, : 


in Lower Bavaria, there is a hole in the stone on which the © 


Société d’ Anthropologie de Paris, 7% 
série, ‘i. (1900) p. I11. Compare 
H. Gaidoz, Un Vieux Rite médical 
(Paris, 1892), pp. 26 sg.; G. Fouju, — 
“‘Légendes et Superstitions préhis- 


1 Thomas-de-Saint-Mars, ‘* Féte de 
Saint Estapin,” Mémoires de la Société 
Royale des Antiguaires de France, i. 


(1817) pp. 428-430. 


” 


Se ee ee 


eo pe 


2 J. Deniker, ‘*Dolmen et supersti- 
tions,” Bulletins et Mémoires de la 


toriques,” Revue des Traditions Popu-— 
laires, xiv. (1899) pp. 477 59. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS - 189 


altar rests. Through this hole, while service was going on, 
the peasants used to creep, believing that having done so 
they would not suffer from pains in their back at harvest.’ 
‘In the crypt of the old cathedral at Freising in Bavaria ; 
‘there is a tomb which is reputed to contain the relics of 
St. Nonnosius. Between a pillar of the tomb and the 
wall there is a narrow opening, through which persons 
‘afflicted with pains in the back creep in order to obtain 
thereby some mitigation of their pangs. In Upper Austria, 
above the Lake of Aber, which is a sheet of dark-green 
water nestling among wooded mountains, there stands 
the Falkenstein chapel of St. Wolfgang built close to the 
face of a cliff that rises from a little green dale. A 
staircase leads up from the chapel to a narrow, dark, 
dripping cleft in the rock, through which pilgrims creep 
in a stooping posture “in the belief that they can strip 
_ off their bodily sufferings or sins on the face of the rock.” * 
Women with child also crawl ene the hole, hoping 
thus to obtain an easy delivery. In the Greek island 
of Cythnos, when a child is sickly, the mother will take 
it to a hole in a rock about half an hour distant from 
“Messaria. There she strips the child naked and pushes it 
_ through the hole in the rock, afterwards taconng away the 
old garments and clothing the child in new ones. 
“3 Near Everek, on the site of the ancient Caesarea in Asia 
_ Minor, there is a rifted rock through which persons pass to rid 
themselves of a cough. A writer well acquainted with Asia 
_ Minor has described how he visited “a well-known pool of ; 
_ water tucked away in a beautiful nook high up among the 
_ Anatolian mountains, and with a wide reputation for sanctity 
2 and healing powers. We arrived just as the last of a flock 
_ of three hundred sheep were being passed through a peculiar 
hole in the thin ledge of a huge rock to deliver them 
i from a disease of the liver supposed to prevent the proper 
4 1 F. Panzer, Beitrag zur deutschen 4 F. Panzer, Beitrag sur deutschen 
4 ra (Munich, 1848-1855), ii. Mythologie, ii. 431. 

2 1 “px 5 J. Theodore Bent, Zhe Cyclades 
+ Mate Ande Bypn, Valktund, CLonton, 1885) paar 
liches aus dem bayrisch-dsterreichischen 6 E. H. Carnoy et J. Nicolaides, 


Alpengebiet (Brunswick, 1910), pp. 1, Traditions populaires de PAsie Min. 
9, with the illustrations on pp. 10, 11. eure (Paris, 1889), p. 338. 


a 


Crawling 
through 
holed 
stones 

as a cure 
in Bavaria, 
Austria, 
and 
Greece, 


Crawling 


holed 
stones 
as a cure 
in Asia 
Minor. 


Passing 
through 
various 
narrow 
openings 
as a cure or 
preventive 
in India 
and 
Ireland. 


Crawling 
through 
holes in the 
ground as 
a cure for 
disease. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuapr. 


190 


laying on of fat.”* Among the Kawars of the Central 


Provinces in India a man who suffers from intermittent 
fever will try to cure it by walking through a narrow 
passage between two houses.” In a ruined church of St. 
Brandon, about ten miles from Dingle, in the west of Ireland, 
there is a narrow window, through which sick women pass 
thrice in order to be cured.® The Hindoos of the Punjaub 
think that the birth of a son after three girls is unlucky for 
the parents, and in order to avert the ill-luck they resort to 
a number of devices. Amongst other things they break the 
centre of a bronze plate and remove all but the rim; then 
they pass the luckless child through the bronze rim. More- 
over, they make an opening in the roof of the room where 
the birth took place, and then pull the infant out through 


the opening ; and further they pass the child under the sill — 


of the door. By these passages through narrow apertures 
they apparently hope to rid the child of the ill-luck which is 
either pursuing it or sticking to it like a burr. For in this 
case, as in many similar ones, it might be hard to say whether 
the riddance is conceived as an escape from the pursuit of a 
maleficent spirit or as the abrasion of a dangerous sub- 
stance which adheres to the person of the sufferer. 

Another way of ridding man and beast of the clinging 
infection of disease is to pass them through a hole dug in 
the ground. This mode of cure was practised in Europe 
during the Middle Ages, and has survived in Denmark down 
to modern times. In a sermon preached by St. Eloi, Bishop 
of Noyon, in the sixth century, he forbade the faithful to 
practise lustrations and to drive their sheep through hollow 


trees and holes in the earth, “because by this they seem to 


consecrate them to the devil.”® 


Theodore, Archbishop of © 


Canterbury, who died in 690 A.D., decreed that “if any one 
for the health of his little son shall pass through a hole in ~ 
the ground and then close it behind him with thorns, let him — 


1 Rev. George E. White (of Mars- 
ovan, Turkey), Present Day Sacrifices 


3 So my friend Dr. G. W. Prothero 
informs me in a letter. 


% 


in Asia Minor, p. 3 (reprinted from 
The Hartford Seminary Record, Feb- 
ruary 1906). 

2 Central Provinces, Ethnographic 
Survey, vii. Draft Articles on Forest 
Tribes (Allahabad, 1911), p. 46. 


4 Census of India, rgrz, vol. xiv. 
Punjab, Part i. Report, by Pandit 
Harikishan Kaul (Lahore, 1912), p 
302. 

5 H. Gaidoz, Un Vieux Rite médical 4 
(Paris, 1892), p. 10, 


~~ ee a 


ee a eo a 


ox THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 191 


| do penance for eleven days on bread and water.”’ Here 


the closing of the hole with thorns after the patient or his 
& “representative has passed through is plainly intended to 
barricade the narrow way against the pursuit of sickness 
| personified as a demon; hence it confirms the general 
_ interpretation here given of these customs. Again, Burchard, 
_ Bishop of Worms, who died in A.D. 1025, repeated the same 
| condemnation: “Hast thou done what certain women are 
wont to do? I mean those who have squalling babes; 
_ they dig the earth and pierce it, and through that hole they 
_ drag the babe, and they say that thus the squalling babe 
a ceases to squall. If thou has done this or consented unto 
q it, thou shalt do penance for fifteen days on bread and 
_ water.”? At Fiinen in Denmark, as late as the latter part of 
Bthe nineteenth century, a cure for childish ailments was to 
_ dig up several sods, arrange them so as to form a hole, 
and then to pass the sick child through it A simplified 
a ' form of this cure is adopted in Jutland. At twelve o'clock 
: on a Thursday night you go to a churchyard, dig up a 
| circular piece of turf, and make a hole in it large enough 
' to permit the passage through it of your infant progeny. 
| Taking the sod with you, go home, salute nobody on the 
way, and speak to nobody. On getting to your house, 
| take the child and pass it thrice through the turf from right 
to left; then take the turf back to the churchyard and 
replace it in position. If the turf takes root and grows 
_ afresh, the child will recover ; but if the turf withers, there is 
| no hope. Elsewhere it is at the hour of sunset rather than 


_ though naturally in that case you must cut a much bigger 

turf and make a much bigger hole in it to let a horse or a 
_ cow through than is necessary for an infant.* Here, again, 
z the conception of a sympathetic relation, established between 


1 H. Gaidoz, of. cit. p. 21. nebst verwandtem Aberglaube in 

a ; . : ; Skandinavien,” Zeitschrift des Vereins 

.- 2 H. Gaidoz, Un Vieux Rite médical fiir Volkskunde, vii. (1897) p. 45. 

4 Cri 1892), Capek oe +" 4 AL Gaidos, Use Vieux Rite miiical 

=. EE EPO SIS Dit. 1892), pp. 22 sg., referring to 
Nyrop, in Dania, i. No. 1 (Copen- 

y 3H. F. Feilberg, “‘Zwieselbaume hagen, 1890), pp. 5 sgg. 


Passing 
through 
the yoke of 
a chariot 
as a cure 
for skin 
disease. 


192 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM 


the sufferer and the thing which has rid him of his ailment, 
comes out clearly in the belief, that if the turf through which 
the child has been passed thrives, the child will thrive also, 
but that if the turf withers, the child will die. Among the 
Corannas, a people of the Hottentot race on the Orange 
River, “when a child recovers from a dangerous illness, a 
trench is dug in the ground, across the middle of which an 
arch is thrown, and an ox made to stand upon it; the child 
is then dragged under the arch. After this ceremony the 
animal is killed, and eaten by married people who have 
children, none else being permitted to participate of the 
feast.” Here the attempt to leave the sickness behind in 
the hole, which is probably the essence of the ceremony, 
may perhaps be combined with an endeavour to impart to 
the child the strength and vigour of the animal. Ancient 
India seems also to have been familiar with the same 
primitive notion that sickness could, as it were, be stripped 
off the person of the sufferer by passing him through a 
narrow aperture; for in the Rigveda it is said that Indra 
cured Apala of a disease of the skin by drawing her through 


CHAP. © 


the yoke of the chariot ; “thus the god made her to have a ; 


golden skin, purifying her thrice.” ? 


1 Rev. John Campbell, Zravels in 
South Africa, Second Journey (London, 
1822), ii. 346. Among the same 
people ‘“‘when a person is ill, they 
bring an ox to the place where he is 
laid. Two cuts are then made in one 
of its legs, extending down the whole 
length of it. The skin in the middle 
of the leg being raised up, the operator 
thrusts in his hand, to make way for 
that of the sick person, whose whole 
body is afterwards rubbed over with 
the blood of the animal. The ox after 
enduring this torment is killed, and 
those who are married and have chil- 
dren, as in the other case, are the only 
partakers of the feast” (J. Campbell, 
op. cit. ii. 346 sg.) Here the in- 
tention seems to be not so much to 
transfer the disease to the ox, as to 
transfuse the healthy life of the beast 
into the veins of the sick man. The 
same is perhaps true of the Welsh and 
French cure for whooping-cough, which 
consists in passing the little sufferer 


several times under an ass. See J. 


Brand, Popular Antiquitees of Great — 


Britain (London, 1882-1883), iii. 288 ; 
L, J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, in Bulletins 
de la Société d’ Anthropologie de Paris, 
Quatriéme Série, i. (1890) p. 897; 
id., Superstitions et Survivances (Paris, 
1896), i. 526. The same cure for whoop- 
ing-cough ‘‘is also practised in Ireland ; 
only here the sufferer is passed round, 
that is, over and under, the body of 
an ass” (letter of Miss A. H. Singleton 
to me, dated Rathmagle House, Abbey- 
Leix, Ireland, 24th February 1904). 
But perhaps the intention rather is to 


give the whooping-cough to the animal ; ~ 
for it might reasonably be thought that — 
the feeble whoop of the sick child would — 


neither seriously impair the lungs, nor 


perceptibly augment the stentorian bray, — 


of the donkey. 
2 H. Oldenberg, Die Religion des 
Veda (Berlin, 1894), p. 495. Accord- 


ing to a fuller account, Indra drew — 
her through three holes, that of a war- — 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 


193 


a At the small village of Damun, on the Kabenau river, Passing 
German New Guinea, a traveller witnessed the natives 


under a 
yoke or 


De ‘orming a ceremony of initiation, of which the following arch as 
ite formed part. The candidates for initiation, six in 
number, were boys and lads of various ages from about 


es 


years of age to sixteen or seventeen. 


The company 


yetook themselves to the bed of a small stream, where at 
he end of a gully a hollow in the rocks formed a natural 


asin. 


At the entrance to the gully a sort of yoke, so the 


rf veller calls it, was erected by means of some poles, and 
rom the cross-piece plants were hung so as to make an arch. 
Dne of the men took up his station in front of the arch, and 
is each candidate came up, the man seized him, spat on his 

ast and back a clot of red spittle, and gave him several 


evere blows with the stock of a plant. 


After that the 


andidate, who had previously stripped himself naked, passed 
inder the leafy arch and bathed in the rocky pool at the 


€ ceremony.’ 


sly afterwards. 


ariot, that ie cart, and that of a 

: See W. Caland, Altindisches 
berritual (Amsterdam, 1900), p. 31 
5 


1 Dr. E. Werner, ‘‘Im westlichen 
erregebirge und an der Nordkiiste 
Deutsch-Neuginea,” Petermanns 
etlungen, lv. (1909) pp. 74 sg. 
mg some tribes of South-Eastern 
ia it was customary at the 


ther end of the gully. All the time that this solemnity 
s proceeding another man sat perched on a neighbouring 
k, beating a drum and singing. Only men took part in 
Though no explanation of the ceremony is 
ven by the observer who witnessed it, we may suppose 
lat by passing under the yoke or arch the novices were 
ipposed to rid themselves of certain evil influences, whether 
conceived as spiritual or not, which they left behind them 
the further side of the barrier. 
firmed by the bath which each candidate took immedi- 
In short the whole purpose of the rite 
ould seem to have been purificatory. 
_ With the preceding examples before us, it seems worth 
thile to ask whether the ancient Italian practice of making 
Onquered enemies to pass under a yoke may not in its 


This interpretation is 


ceremonies of initiation to bend grow- 
ing saplings into arches and compel 
the novices to pass under them; some- 
times the youths had to crawl on 
the ground to get through. See 
A. W. Howitt, ‘‘ On some Australian 
ceremonies of Initiation,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xiii.(1884) 
P- 445; 2@., Native Tribes of South- 
Last Australia (London, 1904), p. 536. 
8) 


a rite of 
initiation. 


The 

ancient 
Roman 
custom 


of passing 
enemies 
under a 
yoke was 
probably 
in origin a 
ceremony 
of puri- 
fication 
rather than 
of degrada- 
tion, 


194 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuar 


origin have been a purificatory ceremony, designed to ric 


- the foe of some uncanny powers before dismissing him tc 


his home. For apparently the ceremony was only observec 
with prisoners who were ‘about to be released ;' had it been 
a mere mark of ignominy, there seems to be no reason 
why it should not have been inflicted also on men whe 
were doomed to die. This conjectural explanation of the 
ceremony is confirmed by the tradition that the Roman 
Horatius was similarly obliged by his fellow-countrymen to 
pass under a yoke as a form of purification for the murder 
of his sister. The yoke by passing under which he cleansed 
himself from his sister’s blood was still to be seen in Rome 
when Livy was writing his history under the emperor 
Augustus. It was an ancient wooden beam spanning a 
narrow lane in an old quarter of the city, the two ends of 
the beam being built into the masonry of the walls on 
either side; it went by the name of the Sister’s Beam, and 
whenever the wood decayed and threatened: to fall, the 
venerable monument, which carried back the thoughts of 
passers-by to the kingly age of Rome, was repaired at the 
public expense.” If our interpretation of these customs is 
right, it was the ghost of his murdered sister whom the 
Roman hero gave the slip to by passing under the’ yoke; 
and it may have been the angry ghosts of slaughtered 

‘ 


a Livy © dil.)-28)). tt, 6) a aes 
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Amtiguit. 
Roman. iii. 22. 7. The so-called yoke 
in this case consisted of two spears or 
two beams set upright in the ground, 


_ with a third spear or beam laid trans- 


versely across them. See Livy iii. 28; 
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, Z.¢. 

2 Livy i. 26: ‘* Jtague, ut caedes 
manifesta aliguo tamen piaculo lueretur, 
zmperatum patri, ut filium expiaret 
pecunia publica, Is guibusdam piacul- 
aribus sacrificets factis, quae deinde 
gentt Horatiae tradita sunt, transmisso 
per viam tigillo capite adoperto velut 
sub jugum misit guvenem. Ld hodie 
guogue publice semper refectum manet ; 
sororium tigillum vocant,;” Festus, 5.v. 
**Sororium Tigillum,” pp. 297, 307, 
ed. C. O. Miiller (Leipsic, 1839) ; 
Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <Axzigudt. 


‘and a cross-piece, 


‘the custom of passing through 


Roman. iii. 22. The position of the 
beam is described exactly by the 

of these writers, who had eviden 
seen it. According to Festus, 
yoke under which Horatius passed 
composed of three beams, two upright: 
The similarity ¢ 
the ceremony to that which was 
acted from conquered foes is noted 
Dionysius Halicarnasensis as well ¢ 
by Livy. The tradition of the purifi 
tion has been rightly explained 

Dr. W. H. Roscher with reference 


trees, holed stones, and so on. 
W. H. Roscher, Ausfiihrliches Lexih 
der griecch, und rim. Mythologie, 

(Leipsic, 1890-1897) col. 21. C 
pare G, Wissowa, Xeligion und Ki 
der Rimer* (Munich, 1912), p. 1 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN PLANTS 


Romans from whom the enemy’s soldiers were believed to 
delivered when they marched under the yoke before 


being dismissed by their merciful conquerors to their homes. 


mphal arch? 


° spirits of the slain? 


ES 


ppears from the opinion of Masurius, mentioned by Pliny, 
at the laurel worn by soldiers in a triumphal procession 
as intended to purge them from the slaughter of the 
memy.” A special gate, the Porta Triumphalis, was reserved 


“+ Taboo and the Perils of the Soul, 
65 599. 

Pliny, Natur. Histor. xv. 135: 
iz, nn sit caedis hostium 


PGicer0, In Pisonem, xxiii. 55; 
P Bellum Judaicum, vii. 5. 4. 
It was not till after I had given 
S conjectural explanation of the 
FSister’s Beam” and the triumphal 
at Rome that I read the-article 
fr. W. Warde Fowler, ‘ Passing 
the Yoke” (Zhe Classical Re- 
March 1913, pp. 48-51), in 
he quite independently suggests 
ally the same explanation of 


_ Ina former part of this work we saw that homicides in 
sneral and victorious warriors in particular are often 
sliged to perform a variety of ceremonies for the purpose 
ridding them of the dangerous ghosts of their victims.’ 
the ceremony of passing under the yoke was primarily 
esigned, as I have suggested, to free the soldiers from the 
sry ghosts of the men whom they had slain, we should ? 
pect to find that the victorious Romans themselves 
ed a similar ceremony after a battle for a similar 
Was this the original meaning of passing under a 
In other words, may not the triumphal 
ch have been for the victors what the yoke was for the 
quished, a barrier to protect them against the pursuit of 
t That the Romans felt the need 

purification from the taint of bloodshed after a battle 


- the entrance of a victorious army into Rome ;* and it 
yuld be in accordance with ancient religious views if this 
stinction was originally not so much an honour conferred 
Renate enforced to prevent the ordinary gates from 
s polluted by the passage of thousands of ae 
4 


both these Roman structures. I have 
left my exposition, except for one or 
two trivial verbal changes, exactly as 
it stood before I was aware that my 
friend had anticipated me in beth con- 
jectures. The closeness of the coincid- 
ence between our views is a welcome 
confirmation of their truth. As to 
the Porta Triumphalis, the exact 
position of which is uncertain, Mr. 
Warde Fowler thinks that it was not a 
gate in the walls, but an archway 
standing by itself in the Campus 
Martius outside the city walls. He 
points out that in the oldest existing 
triumphal arch, that of Augustus at 


195 


the slayers 
and the 
angry 
ghosts of 
the slain. 


Belief in 
‘a sym- 

pathetic 
relation 
between a 
man and 
an animal 
such that 
the fate 
of the one 
depends 
on that of 
the other. 


The exter- 
nal souls 
of Yakut 
shamans 


in animals. 


196 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM citar. 


§ 3. The External Soul in Animals 


But in practice, as in folk-tales, it is not merely with 
inanimate objects and plants that a person is occasionally 
believed to be united by a bond of physical sympathy. 
The same bond, it is supposed, may exist between a man 
and an animal, so that the welfare of the one depends on 
the welfare of the other, and when the animal dies the man 
dies also. The analogy between the custom and the tales 
is all the closer because in both of them the power of thus 
removing the soul from the body and stowing it away in an 
animal is often a special privilege of wizards and witches. 
Thus the Yakuts of Siberia believe that every shaman or 
wizard keeps his soul, or one of his souls, incarnate in an 
animal which is carefully concealed from all the world. 
“ Nobody can find my external soul,” said one famous 
wizard, “it lies hidden far away in the stony mountains 
of Edzhigansk.” Only once a year, when the last snows 
melt and the earth turns black, do these external souls of 
wizards appear in the shape of animals among the dwellings 
of men, They wander everywhere, yet none but wizards 
can see them. The strong ones sweep roaring and noisily 
along, the weak steal about quietly and furtively. Often 
they fight, and then the wizard whose external soul is 
beaten, falls ill or dies. The weakest and most cowardly 
wizards are they whose souls are incarnate in the shape of 
dogs, for the dog gives his human double no peace, but 
enaws his heart and tears his body. The most powerful 
wizards are they whose external souls have the shape o 
stallions, elks, black beats, eagles, or boars. Again, the 
Samoyeds of the Turukhinsk region hold that every shamar 
has a familiar spirit in the shape of a boar, which he lead 
about by a magic belt. On the death of the boar th 
shaman himself dies ; and stories are told of battles betwee 


Ariminum, the most striking part of here a reminiscence of the two uprigh 
the structure consists of two upright and the cross-piece, which, if our theo! 
Corinthian pillars with an architrave is correct, was the original form bo 
laid horizontally across them; and he _ of the triumphal arch and of the yok 
ingeniously conjectures that we have 


> animals.® 


Es conl is alas. 


1 Professor V. M. Mikhailoviskij, 
«Shamanism in Siberia and European 
ia,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Anstitute, xxiv. (1895) pp. 133, 134- 
_ 2 Th. Parkinson, Yorkshire Legends 
Traditions, Second Series (Lon- 
1889), pp. 160 sg. 
See above, vol. i. pp. 315 sg¢. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 


197 


Ibody exactly corresponding to the wound in the hare. 
However, this fancy is probably a case of the general 
European belief that witches have the power of temporarily 
‘transforming themselves into certain animals, particularly 
hares and cats, and that any hurts inflicted on such trans- 
formed animals are felt by the witches who are concealed in 
But the notion that a person can temporarily 
ansform himself into an animal differs from the notion 
hat he can deposit his soul for a longer or shorter period in 
animal, while he himself retains the human form ; though 
in the cloudy mind of the peasant and the savage the two 
deas may not always be sharply distinguished. The 
falays believe that “the soul of a person may pass into 
nother person or into an animal, or rather that such a 
mysterious relation can arise between the two that the fate 
f the one is wholly dependent on that of the other. 

Among the Melanesians of Mota, one of the New 
ebrides islands, the conception of an external soul is 
ied out in the practice of daily life. 
b “The use of the word ataz in Mota seems 

roperly and originally to have been to signify something 
eculiarly and intimately connected with a person and 
acred to him, something that he has set his fancy upon 
hen he has seen it in what has seemed to him a wonderful 
Manner, or some one has shewn it to him as such. 
er the thing might be the man believed it to be the 
eflection of his own personality ; he and his a/az flourished, 
fered, lived, and died together. 
supposed to have been borrowed from this use and 


m4 


The Mota word 


What- 


But the word must not 


4B. F. Matthes, Makassaarsch- 
Hollandsch Woordenbock (Amsterdam, 
1859), s.v. soeméagd, p. 569; G. A. 
Wilken, “‘ Het animisme bij de volken 
van den Indischen Archipel,” De 
Indische Gids, June 1884, p. 9333 ia, 
Verspreide Geschrifien (The Hague, 
1912), iii. 12. 


Sym- 
pathetic 
relation 
between 
witches 
and hares. 


Sym- 
pathetic 
relation 
between 
a man 
and his 
tamaniu 
(external 
soul). 


198 THE EXTERNAL SOUL 1N FOLK-CUSTOM  cuar 


applied secondarily to describe the soul; the word carries ¢ 
sense with it which is applicable alike to that second self 
the visible object so mysteriously connected with the man 
and to this invisible second self which we call the soul 
There is another Mota word, tamanzu, which has almost il 
not quite the same meaning as afaz has when it describes 
something animate or inanimate which a man has come to 
believe to have an existence intimately connected with his 
own. The word tamaniu may be taken to be properly 
‘likeness, and the noun form of the adverb fama, as, like. 
It was not every one in Mota who had his ¢amaniu; only 
some men fancied that they had this relation to a lizard, a 
snake, or it might be a stone; sometimes the thing was 
sought for and found by drinking the infusion of certain 
leaves and heaping together the dregs; then whatever 
living thing was first seen in or upon the heap was the 
tamaniu. It was watched but not fed or worshipped ; the 
natives believed that it came at call, and that the life of the 
man was bound up with the life of his tamanzu, if a living 
thing, or with its safety ; should it die, or if not living get 
broken or be lost, the man would die. Hence in case of 
sickness they would send to see if the samanzu was safe and 
well. This word has never been used apparently for the 
soul in Mota; but in Aurora in the New Hebrides it is the 
accepted echivalent It is well worth observing that both 
the azaz and the zamaniu, and it may be added the Motlav 
talegz, is something which has a substantial existence of its 
own, as when a snake or stone is a man’s a@faz or tamaniu ; 
a soul then when called by these names is conceived of as 
something in a way substantial.” ? 
From this account, which we owe to the careful and 
accurate researches of the Rev. Dr. Codrington, we gather 
that while every person in Mota has a second self or external 
soul in a visible object called an afai, only some people 
have, it may be, a second external soul in another visibl 
object called a ¢amaniu. We may conjecture that pefsons 
who have a ¢amanzu in addition to an ataz are more tha 


> Te 


1 R. H. Codrington, D.D., Zhe Transactions and Proceedings of t 
Melanesians (Oxford, 1891), pp. 250 Royal Society of Victoria, xvi. (1880 
sg. Compare zd., ‘Notes on the p. 136. q 
Customs of Mota, Banks Islands,” 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 199 


sually anxious as to the state of their soul, and that they 
eek to put it in perfect security by what we may call a 
ystem of double insurance, calculating that if one of their 
xternal souls should die or be broken, they themselves may 
still survive by virtue of the survival of the other. Be that 
jas it may, the ¢amaniu discharges two functions, one of them 
jdefensive and the other offensive. On the one hand, so long 
S it lives or remains unbroken, it preserves its owner in life; 
ind on the other hand it helps him to injure his enemies. 
its offensive character, if the tamaniu happens to be an 
el, it will bite its owner’s enemy; if it is a shark, it will 
wallow him. In its defensive character, the state of the 
amaniu is a symptom or life-token of the state of the man; 
ence when he is ill he will visit and examine it, or if he 
not go himself he will send another to inspect it and 
port. In either case the man turns the animal, if animal 
it be, carefully over in order to see what is the matter with 
; should something be found sticking to its skin, it is 
femoved, and through the relief thus afforded to the creature 
a sick man recovers. But if the animal should be found 
dying, it is an omen of death for the man; for whenever it 
lies he dies also.’ 

In Melanesia a native doctor was once attending to a 
Sick man. Just then “a large eagle-hawk came soaring past 
ae house, and Kaplen, my hunter, was going to shoot it; 
the doctor jumped up in -evident alarm, and said, ‘Oh, 
lon’t shoot ; that is my spirit’ (szog, literally, my shadow) ; 
if you shoot that, I will die He then told the old man, 
If you see a rat to-night, don’t drive it away, ’tis my spirit 
og), or a snake which will come to-night, that also is my 
pirit’”? It does not appear whether the doctor in this 
ase, like the giant or warlock in the tales, kept his spirit 


1 W. H. R. Rivers, ‘‘Totemism in was deemed a sign that the lizard also 
olynesia and Melanesia,” Journal of was dead. ? 

@ Royal Anthropological Institute, 

ix. (1909) p. 177. Dr. Rivers -2 George Brown, D.D., Melanesians 
$a recent case ofa man whohada and Ffolynesians (London, 1910), p. 
lizard for his tamaniu. The 177. The case was known to Dr. 
‘imal lived in the roots of a big Brown, who made notes of it. The 
nyan-tree; when the man was ill, part of Melanesia where it happened 
lizard also seemed unwell; and was probably the Duke of York Island 
n the man died, the tree fell, which or New Britain. 


Soul of a 
Melanesian 
doctor in 
an eaglie- 
hawk and 
a rat. 


The theory 
of an ex- 
ternal soul 
lodged in 
an animal 
is very 
prevalent 
in West 
Africa, 


The soul of animal. 


a chief ina 
hippopota- 
mus or a 
black 
snake. 


200 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM citar 


permanently in the bird or in the animal, or whether he only 
transferred it temporarily to the creature for the purpose 
of enabling him the better to work the cure, perhaps by 
sending out his own soul in a bird or beast to find and bring 
back the lost soul of the patient. In either case he seems 
to have thought, like the giant or warlock in the stories, that 
the death of the bird or the animal would simultaneously 
entail his own. A family in Nauru, one of the Marshall 
Islands, apparently imagine that their lives are bound up 
with a species of large fish, which has a huge mouth and 
devours human beings ; for when one of these fish was killed, 
the members of the family cried, “Our guardian spirit is 
killed, now we must all die!”? 

The theory of an external soul deposited in an animal 
appears to be very prevalent in West Africa, particularly in 
Nigeria, the Cameroons, and the Gaboon.? In the latter pa 
of the nineteenth century two English missionaries, established 
at San Salvador, the capital of the King of Congo, asked the 
natives repeatedly whether any of them had seen the strange, 
big, East African goat which Stanley had given to a chief at 
Stanley Pool in 1877. But their enquiries were fruitless ; 
no native would admit that he had seen the goat. Some 
years afterwards the missionaries discovered why they could 
obtain no reply to their enquiry. All the people, it turned 
out, imagined that the missionaries believed the spirit of the 
King of Salvador to be contained in the goat, and that they 
wished to obtain possession of the animal in order to exercise 
an evil influence on his majesty.’ The belief from the stand- 
point of the Congo savages was natural enough, since in that 
region some chiefs regularly link their fate to that of an 
Thus the Chief Bankwa of Ndolo, on the Moek 
River, had conferred this honour on a certain hippopotamus o 
the neighbourhood, at which he would allow nobody to shoot. 
At the village of Ongek, in the Gaboon, a French missionary 
slept in the hut of an old Fan chief. Awakened about tw 


1 « Totemismus auf den Marshall- 
Inseln (Siidsee),” Anthropos, viii. (1913) 
p- 251. 

2 Much of the following evidence 
has already been cited by me in Zotem- 
ism and Exogamy, ii. 593 5¢¢- 


3 Herbert Ward, Five Vears wit, 
the Congo Cannibals (London, 1890 
Pp. 53: 

4 Notes Analytiques sur les Coli 
tions ethnographiques du Musée 
Congo, i. (Brussels, 1902—1906) p. 150 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 201 


in the morning by a rustling of dry leaves, he lit a torch, 
when to his horror he perceived a huge black serpent of the 
most dangerous sort, coiled in a corner, with head erect, 
‘shining eyes, and hissing jaws, ready to dart at him. In- 
‘stinctively he seized his gun and pointed it at the reptile, 
when suddenly his arm was struck up, the torch was 
extinguished, and the voice of the old chief said, “ Don’t 
fire! don’t fire! I beg of you. In killing the serpent, it is 
me that you would kill. Fear nothing. The serpent is my 
elangela.” So saying he flung himself on his knees beside 
the reptile, put his arms about it, and clasped it to his breast. 
_ The serpent received his caresses quietly, manifesting neither 
-anger nor fear, and the chief carried it off and laid it down 
beside him in another hut, exhorting the missionary to have 
no fear and never to speak of the subject.’ His curiosity 
being excited by this adventure, the missionary, Father 
| Trilles, pursued his enquiries and ascertained that among 
the Fans of the Gaboon every wizard is believed at initia- 
| tion to unite his life with that of some particular wild animal 
| by a rite of blood-brotherhood ; he draws blood from the ear 
the animal and from his own arm, and inoculates the 
imal with his own blood, and himself with the blood of the 
beast. Henceforth such an intimate union is established 
between the two that the death of the one entails the death 


or sorcerer a great accession of power, which he can turn to 


ie ~ 


his advantage in various ways. In the first place, like the 
warlock in the fairy tales who has deposited his life outside 
of himself in some safe place, the Fan wizard now deems 
himself invulnerable. Moreover, the animal with which he 
exchanged blood has become his familiar, and will obey 
‘any orders he may choose to give it; so he makes use of it 
to injure and kill his enemies. For that reason the creature 
with whom he establishes the relation of blood-brotherhood 
is never a tame or domestic animal, but always a ferocious 
and dangerous wild beast, such as a leopard, a black serpent, 
a crocodile, a hippopotamus, a wild boar, or a vulture. Of 


1 Father H. Trilles, *‘Chez les ches es Fan (Miinster i. W. 1912), 
_ Fangs,” Les Missions Catholiques, xxx. pp. 473 59. 
= ) p. 322; w., Le Totémisme 


Belief of 
the Fans 
that every 
wizard 
unites his 
life to that 
of a wild 
animal by 
a rite of 
blood 
brother- 
hood. 


of the other. The alliance is thought to bring to the wizard — 


Belief of 
the natives 
of the Cross 
River that 
they stand 
in a vital 
relation to 
certain wild 
animals, so 
that when 
the animal 
’ dies the 
man dies 
also, 


202 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnar. 


all these creatures the leopard is by far the commonest 
familiar of Fan wizards, and next to it comes the black 
serpent ; the vulture is the rarest. Witches as well as wizards 
have their familiars ; but the animals with which the lives of 
women are thus bound up generally differ from those to 
which men commit their external souls. A witch never has a 
panther for her familiar, but often a venomous species of 
serpent, sometimes a horned viper, sometimes a black serpent, 
sometimes a green one that lives in banana-trees; or it may 
be a vulture, an owl, or other bird of night. In every case 
the beast or bird with which the witch or wizard has con- 
tracted this mystic alliance is an individual, never a species ; 
and when the individual animal dies the alliance is naturally 
at an end, since the death of the animal is supposed to entail 
the death of the man.' | 
Similar beliefs are held by the natives of the Cross. River 
valley within the German provinces of the Cameroons. 
Groups of people, generally the inhabitants of a village, have 
chosen various. animals, with which they believe themselves 
to stand on a footing of intimate friendship or relationship. 
Amongst such animals are hippopotamuses, elephants, 
leopards, crocodiles, gorillas, fish, and serpents, all of them — 
creatures which are either very strong or can easily hide them- 
selves in the water or a thicket. This power of concealing 
themselves is said to be an indispensable condition of i i 
choice of animal familiars, since the animal friend or helper is” 
expected to injure his owner’s enemy by stealth ; for cane 
if he is a hippopotamus, he will bob up suddede out of the 
water and capsize the enemy’s canoe. Between the animals” 
and their human friends or kinsfolk such a sympathetic 
relation is supposed to exist that the moment the animal 
dies the man dies also, and similarly the instant the man_ 


ferent 


account given by Mgr. Buléon. But 
the story of an alliance contracted 
between a man or woman and a 
ferocious wild beast and cemented by 
the blood of the high contracting parties. 


1 Father H. Trilles, Ze Zotémisme 
chez. les Fan (Miinster i. W. 1912), 
pp. 167 sg., 438 sg., 484-489. The 
description of the rite of blood- 
brotherhood contracted with the animal 


is quoted by Father Trilles (pp. 486 
sq.) from a work by Mgr. Buléon, Sozs 
le ciel @ Afrique, Récits Cun Mission- 
naire, pp. 88 sgg. Father Trilles’s own 
observations and enquiries confirm the 


is no doubt a mere fable devised by 
wizards and witches in order to increase 
their reputation by imposing on the 
credulity of the simple. y 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 203 


erishes so does the beast. From this it follows that the 
nimal kinsfolk may never be shot at or molested for fear of 
juring or killing the persons whose lives are knit up with 
the lives of the brutes. This does not, however, prevent the 
ople of a village, who have elephants for their animal 
iends, from hunting elephants. For they do not respect 
the whole species but merely certain individuals of it, which 
stand in an intimate relation to certain individual men and 
women ; and they imagine that they can always distinguish 
these brother elephants from the common herd of elephants 
which are mere elephants and nothing more. The recogni- 
“tion indeed is said to be mutual. When a hunter, who has 
“an elephant for his friend, meets a human elephant, as we 
‘may call it, the noble animal lifts up a paw and holds it 
before his face, as much as to say, “ Don’t shoot.” Were the 
hunter so inhuman as to fire on and wound such an elephant, 
the person whose life was bound up with the elephant would 
fall ill. 
The Balong of the Cameroons think that every man has 
several souls, of which one is in his body and another in an 
animal, such as an elephant, a wild pig, a leopard, and so 
rth. When a man comes home, feeling ill, and says, “I 
all soon die,” and dies accordingly, the people aver that one 
“of his souls has been killed in a wild pig or a leopard, and that 
the death of the external soul has caused the death of the 
ul in his body. Hence the corpse is cut open, and a 
viner determines, from an inspection of the inwards, 
whether the popular surmise is correct or not.” 
_ A similar belief in the external souls of living people is 
‘entertained by the Ibos, an important tribe of the Niger 
delta, who inhabit a country west of the Cross River. They 
hink that a man’s spirit can quit his body for a time during 
“to turn animal.” A man who wishes to acquire this 
power procures a certain drug from a wise man and mixes 


4 


it with his food. After that his soul goes out and enters 


_ 1 Alfred Mansfeld, Urwald-Doku- das Land und Volk der Balong,” 

ente, vier Jahre unter den Crossfluss- Deutsches Kolonialblatt, 1 Oktober 
2 Kameruns (Berlin, 1908), pp. 1895, p. 484; H. Seidel, ‘‘ Ethno- 
20 Sg. phisches aus Nordost Kamerun,” 
2 Jj. Keller (missionary), ‘‘Ueber Globus, Ixix. (1896) p. 277. 


1 a and take up its abode in an animal. This is called zshz i 


Similar 
belief of 
the Balong 
in the 
Camer- 
oons. 


204 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap. 


into the animal. If it should happen that the animal is 
killed while the man’s soul is lodged in it, the man dies; 
and if the animal be wounded, the man’s body will presently 
be covered with boils. This belief instigates to many deeds 
of darkness ; for a sly rogue will sometimes surreptitiously 
administer the magical drug to his enemy in his food, and 
having thus smuggled the other’s soul into an animal will 
destroy the creature, and with it the man whose soul is 
lodged in it.’ A like belief is reported to prevail among the 
tribes of the Obubura Hill district on the Cross River in 
Southern Nigeria. Once when Mr. Partridge’s canoe-men 
wished to catch fish near a town of the Assiga tribe, the 
people objected, saying, “ Our souls live in those fish, and if 
. you kill them we shall die.” ? ) 
Belief of The negroes of Calabar, at the mouth of the Niger, 
rein ct believe that every person has four souls, one of which always 
that every lives outside of his or her body in the form of a wild beast 
oe in the forest. This external soul, or bush soul, as Miss 
or bush Kingsley calls it, may be almost any animal, for example, a 
soul ore" Jeopard, a fish, or a tortoise; but it is never a domestic 
beast. animal and never a plant. Unless he is gifted with second 
sight, a man cannot see his own bush soul, but a diviner will 
often tell him what sort of creature his bush soul is, and after — 
that the man will be careful not to kill any animal of that 
species, and will strongly object to any one else doing so. 
A man and his sons have usually the same sort of animals 
for their bush souls, and so with a mother and her daughters, - 
But sometimes all the children of a family take after the 
bush soul of their father; for example, if his external soul 
is a leopard, all his sons and daughters will have leopards - 
for their external souls. And on the other hand, sometimes 
they all take after their mother ; for instance, if her external 
soul is a tortoise, all the external souls of her sons and 
daughters will be tortoises too. So intimately bound up is 
the life of the man with that of the animal which he regards 
as his external or bush soul, that the death or injury of the 
animal necessarily entails the death or injury of the man. 


1 John Parkinson, ‘Note on the xxxvi. (1906) pp. 314 5g. ] 
Asaba People (Ibos) of the Niger,” 2 Charles Partridge, Cross River 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, Natives (London, 1905), pp. 225 sg. — 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 205 


nd, conversely, when the man dies, his bush soul can no 
nger find a place of rest, but goes mad and rushes into the 
e or charges people and is knocked on the head, and that 
an end of it. When a person is sick, the diviner will 
jometimes tell him that his bush soul is angry at being 
n eglected ; thereupon the patient will make an offering to 
et he iiidcd spirit and deposit it in a tiny hut in the forest 
} é at the. spot where the animal, which is his external soul, 
3 last seen. If the bush soul is appeased, the patient 
fecovers; but if it is not, he dies. Yet the foolish bush 
soul dues not understand that in injuring the man it injures 
itself, and that it cannot long survive his decease.’ 

i Such is the account which Miss Kingsley gives of the 
' bush souls of the Calabar negroes. Some fresh particulars 
)are furnished by Mr. Richard Henshaw, Agent for Native 
Affairs” at Calabar. He tells us that a man may only marry 
a woman who has the same sort of bush soul as himself; 
for example, if his bush soul is a leopard, his wife also must 
ave a leopard for her bush soul. Further, we learn from 
“Mr. Henshaw that a person’s bush soul need not be that 
| either of his father or of his mother. For example, a child 
with a hippopotamus for his bush soul may be born into a 
family, all the members of which have wild pigs for their 
Bosh souls; this happens when the child is a reincarnation 
of a man whose external soul was a hippopotamus. In such 
a case, if the parents object to the intrusion of an alien soul, 
they may call in a medicine-man to check its growth and 
finally abolish it altogether, after which they will give the 
child their own bush soul. Or they may leave the matter 
"over till the child comes of age, when he will choose a bush 
_ soul for himself with the help of a medicine-man, who will also 
select the piece of bush or water in which the chosen animal 
lives. When a man dies, then the animal which contains his 


1 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, 7ravels 
tn West Africa (London, 1897), pp 
459-461. The lamented authoress was 

kind enough to give me in conversa- 
ae (1st June 1897) some details which 

do not appear in her book; among 
these are the statements, which I have 
‘embodied in the text, that the bush 
Soul is never a domestic animal, and 


that when a man knows what kind of 
creature his bush soul is, he will not kill 
an animal of that species and will 
strongly object to any one else doing 
so. Miss Kingsley was not able to 
say whether persons who have the same 
sort of bush soul are allowed or for- 
bidden to marry each other. 


Belief of 
the Ekoi 
of Southern 
Nigeria in 
external 
souls 
lodged in 
animals. 


206 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap.. 


external soul “becomes insensible and quite unconscious of 
the approach of danger. Thus a hunter can capture or 
kill him. with perfect ease.” Sacrifices are often offered to 
prevent other people from killing the animal in which a 
man’s bush soul resides. The tribes of Calabar which hold 
these beliefs as to the bush soul are the Efik and Ekoi.’ 
The belief of the Calabar negroes in the external soul has 
been described as follows by a missionary: “ Ukpong is the 
native word we have taken to translate our word sou/. It 
primarily signifies the shadow of a person. It also signifies 
that which dwells within a man on which his life depends, 
but which may detach itself from the body, and visiting 
places and persons here and there, again return to its abode 
in the man... . Besides all this, the word is used to 
designate an animal possessed of an ukpong, so connected 
with a person’s ukpong, that they mutually act upon each © 
other. When the leopard, or crocodile, or whatever animal — 
may be a man’s ukgong, gets sick or dies, the like thing — 
happens to him. Many individuals, it is believed, have the © 
power of changing themselves into the animals which are — 
their ukpong.” * 

Among the Ekoi of .the Oban district, in Southern — 
Nigeria, it is usual to hear a person say of another that he © 
or she “ possesses” such and such an animal, meaning that — 
the person has the power to assume the shape of that par- — 
ticular creature. It is their belief that by constant practice — 
and by virtue of certain hereditary secrets a man can quit 
his human body and put on that of a wild beast. They say 
that in addition to the soul which animates his human body ~ 


1 John Parkinson, ‘* Notes on the 
Efik Belief in ‘ Bush-soul,’” AZam, vi. 
(1906) pp. 121 sg., No. 80. Mr. 
Henshaw is a member of the highest 
grade of the secret society of Egbo. 


2 Rev. Hugh Goldie, Calabar and its 
Mission, New Edition (Edinburgh and 
London, 1901), pp. 51 sg. Compare 
Major A. G. Leonard, Zhe Lower Niger 
and its Tribes (London, 1906), p. 217: 
** When Efik or waterside Ibo see a 
dead fish floating in the water of the 
kind called Zaidim by the former and 
Elili by the latter—a variety of the 


electric species—they believe it to bea — 
bad omen, generally signifying that — 
some one belonging to the house will — 
die, the man who first sees it becoming ~ 
the victim according to Ibo belief. The — 
only reason that is assigned for this — 
lugubrious forecast is the fact that one — 
of the souls of the departed is in the dead — 
fish—that, in fact, the relationship or — 
affinity existing between the soul ~ 
essence that had animated the fish — 
and that of one of the members of the — 
household was so intimate that the — 
death of the one was bound to effect — 
the death of the other.” 


‘THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 207 


verybody has a bush soul which at times he can send forth 
to animate the body of the creature which he “ possesses.” 
hen he wishes his bush soul to go out on its rambles, he 
inks a magic potion, the secret of which has been handed 
wn from time immemorial, and some of which is always 
pt ready for use in an ancient earthen pot set apart for the 
pose. No sooner has he drunk the mystic draught than 
bush soul escapes from him and floats away invisible 
ough the town into the forest. There it begins to swell 
and, safe in the shadow of the trees, takes on the shape of 
he man’s animal double, it may be an elephant, a leopard, a 
falo, a wild boar, or a crocodile. Naturally the potion 
differs according to the kind of animal into which a man is 
temporarily converted. It would be absurd, for example, to 
expect that the dose which turns you into an elephant should 
also be‘able to turn you into a crocodile ; the thing is mani- 
festly impossible. A great advantage of these temporary 
conversions of a man into a beast is that it enables the 
convert in his animal shape to pay out his enemy without 
being- suspected. If, for example, you have a grudge at a 
man who is a well-to-do farmer, all that you have to do is to 
turn yourself by night into a buffalo, an elephant, or a wild 
boar, and then, bursting into his fields, stamp about in them 
till you have laid the standing crops level with the ground. 
That is why in the neighbourhood of large well-tilled farms, 
_ people prefer to keep their bush souls in buffaloes, elephants, 
and wild boars, because these animals are the most convenient 
means of destroying a neighbours crops. Whereas where 
the farms are small and ill-kept, as they are round about 
Oban, it is hardly worth a man’s while to take the trouble 
of turning into a buffalo or an elephant for the paltry satis- 
faction of rooting up’a few miserable yams or such like trash. 
So the Oban people keep their bush souls in leopards and 
‘crocodiles, which, though of little use for the purpose of 
destroying a neighbour’s crops, are excellent for the purpose 
of killing the man himself first and eating him afterwards. 
But the power of turning into an animal has this serious dis- 
advantage that it lays you open to the chance of being 
wounded or even slain in your animal skin before you have 
time to put it off and scramble back into your human integu- 


Case of a 
chief whose 
external 
soul was in 
a buffalo. 


208 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuav. 


ment. A remarkable case of this sort happened only a few 
miles from Oban not long ago. To understand it you must 
know that the chiefs of the Ododop tribe, who live about ten 
miles from Oban, keep their bush souls, whenever they are 
out ona ramble, in the shape of buffaloes. Well, one day the 
District Commissioner at Oban saw a buffalo come down to 
drink at a stream which runs through his garden. He shot 
at the beast and hit it, and it ran away badly wounded, At 
the very same moment the head chief of the Ododop tribe, 
ten miles away, clapped his hand to his side and said, 
“They have killed me at Oban.” Death was not instant- 
aneous, for the buffalo lingered in pain for a couple of days 
in the forest, but an hour or two before its dead body was dis- 
covered by the trackers the chief expired. Just before he died, 
with touching solicitude he sent a message warning all 
people who kept their external souls in buffaloes to profit by 


his sad fate and beware of going near Oban, which was not — 
a safe place for them. Naturally, when a man keeps his — 


external soul from time to time in a beast, say in a wild 
cow, he is not so foolish as to shoot an animal of that 


particular sort, for in so doing he might perhaps be killing — 


himself. But he may kill animals in which other people 
keep their external souls. For example, a wild cow man 
may freely shoot an antelope or a wild boar; but should he 
do so and then have reason to suspect that the dead beast is 


the animal double of somebody with whom he is on friendly — 


terms, he must perform certain ceremonies over the carcase 
and then hurry home, running at the top of his speed, to 
administer a particular medicine to the man whom he has 
unintentionally injured. 


deplorable accident.’ 


In this way he may possibly be in — 
time to save the life of his friend from the effects of the — 


1 Pp, Amaury Talbot, Zz the Shadow 
of the Bush (London, 1912), pp. 80-87. 
The Ekoi name for a man who has the 
power of sending out his spirit into 
the form of some animal is efwm7 (zd., 
p. 71 note*). A certain chief named 
Agbashan, a great elephant hunter, is 
believed to have the power of trans- 
forming himself into an elephant ; and 
‘a man of considerable intelligence, 
educated in England, the brother of a 


member of the Legislative Council for — 
one of the West African Colonies, — 


offered to take oath that he had seen 
Agbashan not only in his elephant 


form, but while actually undergoing the — 
In 
this case, therefore, the man seems to 
have felt no scruples at hunting the — 
animals in one of which his own bush ~ 


metamorphosis ” (7@., pp. 82 sg.). 


soul might be lodged. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 209 


Near Eket in North Calabar there is a sacred lake, the fish Belief 

C which are carefully preserved because the people believe that nalieane 
their own souls are lodged in the fish, and that with every Nigeria in 
fish killed a human life would be simultaneously extinguished.’ a 
the Calabar River not very many years ago there used — in 
to be a huge old crocodile, popularly supposed to contain the 
sxternal soul of a chief who resided in the flesh at Duke 

Town. Sporting vice-consuls used from time to time to 

hunt the animal, and once a peculiarly energetic officer con- 

trived to hit it. Forthwith the chief was laid up with a 
wound in his leg. He gave out that a dog had bitten him, 

but no doubt the wise shook their heads and refused to be 

ut off with so flimsy a pretext.2 Again, among several 

tribes on the banks of the Niger between Lokoja and the 

delta there prevails “a belief in the possibility of ‘a man 
possessing an alter ego in the form of some animal such asa 
crocodile or a hippopotamus. It is believed that such a 
person’s life is bound up with that of the animal to such an 

ex tent that, whatever affects the one produces a corresponding 
mpression upon the other, and that if one dies the other 

must speedily doso too. It happened not very long ago that 

in Englishman shot a hippopotamus close to a native village; 

the friends of a woman who died the same night in the 
village demanded and eventually obtained five pounds as 
compensation for the murder of the woman.”* Among the 
Montols of Northern Nigeria, “in many of the compounds 

there will be found a species of snake, of a non-poisonous 

sort, which, when full grown, attains a length of about five 

feet and a girth of eight or nine inches. These snakes live 

: and about the compound. They are not specially fed by 

the people of the place, nor are places provided for them to 

mest in. They live generally in the roofs of the ‘small 
aries and huts that make up the compound. They feed 

pon small mammals, and no doubt serve a useful purpose 

n destroying vermin which might otherwise eat the stored 

rain. They are not kept for the purpose of destroying 
in, however. The Montols believe that at the birth of 


gi a Letter of Mr. P. Amaury Talbot i West Africa (London, 1897), pp. 
Fme, dated Eket, North Calabar, 538 sg. 

buthern Nigeria, April 3d, 1913. 3 C. H. Robinson, Hausaland (Lon- 
7 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, 7rave/s don, 1896), pp. 36 sg. 

_ PT. VIL. VOL. 11 P 


The con- 
ception of 
an external 
soul 
lodged in 
an animal 
appears to 
be absent 
in South 
Africa. 


210 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cwa 


every individual of their race, male and female, one of thes 
snakes, of the same sex, is also born. If the snake be killec 
his human partner in life dies also and at the same time. | 
the wife of a compound-owner gives birth to a son, shorth 
after the interesting event, the snake of the establishmen 
will be seen with a young one of corresponding sex. Fron 
the moment of birth, these two, the snake and the mar 
share a life of common duration, and the measure of the on 
is the measure of the other. Hence every care is taken t 
protect these animals from injury, and no Montol would i: 
any circumstances think of injuring or killing one. It is sai 
that a snake of this kind never attempts any injury to a mar 
There is only one type of snake thus regarded.”* Amon; 
the Angass, of the Kanna District in Northern Nigeria, “ whei 
a man is born, he is endowed with two distinct entities, lif 
and a kurua (Arabic rzz) . . . When the vz” enters a man 
its counterpart enters some beast or snake at the sam 
time, and if either dies, so also does the body containing th 
counterpart. This, however, in no wise prevents a mat 
from killing any game, etc., he may see, though he know 
full well that he is causing thereby the death of some mai 
or woman. When a man dies, his life and v2z both leav 
him, though the latter is asserted sometimes to linger nea 
the place of death for aday or two.”” Again, at the town o 
Paha, in the northern territory of the Gold Coast, there ar 
pools inhabited by crocodiles which are worshipped by th 
people. The natives believe that for every death or birth i 
the town a similar event takes place among the crocodiles.* 

In South Africa the conception of an external sou 
deposited in an animal, which is so common in West Africa 
appears to be almost unknown ; at least I have met with n 
clear traces of it in literature. The Bechuanas, indeed, com 
monly believe that if a man wounds a crocodile, the mai 
will be ill as long as the crocodile is ill of its wound, an 


1jJ. F. J. Fitzpatrick (Assistant 
Resident, Northern Nigeria), ‘‘ Some 
Notes on the Kwolla District and its 
Tribes,” Journal of the African Society, 
No. 37, October, 1910, p. 30. 

2 Extract from a Report by Captain 
Foulkes to the British Colonial Office. 


My thanks are due to Mr, N, 
Thomas for sending me the extract 
to the authorities of the Colonial Offic 
for their permission to publish it. 


3 The Daily Graphic, 
October 7th, 1902, p. 3. 


Tues 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 


2II 


aat if the crocodile dies, the man dies too. This belief is 
ot, apparently, confined to the Bechuana clan which has 
4 crocodile for its totem, but is shared by all the other 


ans ; all of them certainly hold the crocodile in respect It 
loes not appear whether the sympathetic relation between a 


na 


a 


round. 


JVDCad 


ance. 


Rev. W. C. Willoughby, ‘‘ Notes 
the Totemism of the Becwana,” 
al of the Anthropological Institute, 
. (1905) p. 300. The writer adds 
ha ‘he found a similar belief as to 
he sympathetic relation between a 
founded crocodile and the man who 
ounded it very general among the 
nyamwezi, who, in 1882, were 
vi under Mirambo about two 
d miles south of Lake Victoria 
za and a hundred miles east of 
wake Tanganyika. 
2 F, Speckmann, Die Hermanns- 
weer Mission in Africa (Hermanns- 
ig, 1876) p. 167. Compare David 
» Among the Zulus and Amaton- 
s, Second Edition (Edinburgh, 1875) 
47 sq.; ‘The Kaffirs believe that 
fer death their spirits turn into a 
which they call Z%/ose, and that 
living man has two of these 
spirits—a good and a bad. 
n everything they undertake goes 
¢ with them, such as hunting, 
- breeding, etc, they say they 
that it is their enemies who are 
ing them, and that they are only 


y€ appeased by sacrificing an animal; 


man and a crocodile is supposed by the.Bechuanas to be 
if Klong. or only to arise at the moment when the man 
ounds the animal; in the latter case the shedding of the 
: ero odile’s blood aright perhaps be thought to establish a 
relationship of affinity or sympathy between the two. 
plus believe that every man is attended by an ancestral 
pirit (zh/ozt, or rather zdhlozz7) in the form of a serpent, 
which specially guards and helps him, lives with him, wakes 
ith him, sleeps and travels with him, but always under 
If it ever makes its appearance, great is the joy, 
and the ~ man must seek to discover the meaning of its 
He who has no zh/ozz must die. 
one kills an zh/ozz serpent, the man whose zh/ozd it was 
, but the serpent comes to life again. 


The 


Therefore if 


”2 But the concep- 


but when everything prospers, they 
ascribe it to their good Zf/ose being in 
the ascendant ”; zd., of. cit. p. 148: 
** When in battle two men are fighting, 
their snakes (A/ak/oze) are poetically 
said to be twisting and biting each 
other overhead. One ‘softens’ and 
goes down, and the man, whose attend- 
ant it is, goes down with it. Every- 
thing is aseribed to Zhiose. If he 
fails in anything, his ZA/ose is bad ; if 
successful, it is good. . . . It is this 
thing which is the inducing cause of 
everything. In fact, nothing in Zulu 
is admitted to arise from natural 
causes; everything is ascribed to 
witchcraft or the ZA/ose.” 

It is not all serpents that are amad- 
hlozi (plural of idhlosz), that is, are the 
transformed spirits of the dead. Ser- 
pents which are dead men may easily 
be distinguished from common snakes, 
for they frequent huts; they do not 
eat mice, and they are not afraid of 
people. If a man in his life had a 
scar, his serpent after his death will 
also have a scar; if he had only one 
eye, his serpent will have only one 
eye; if he was lame, his serpent 


The con- 
ception of 
an external 
soul 
lodged in 
an animal 
occurs 
among the 
Indians of 
Central 
America, 
some of 
whom call 
such a soul 
a nagual, 


212 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnp. 


tion of a dead ancestor incarnate in a snake, on which if 
welfare or existence of one of his living descendants depen}; 
is rather that of a guardian spirit than of an exteri}) 
soul. 

Amongst the Zapotecs of Central America, hed 
woman was about to be confined, her relations assembled f! 
the hut, and began to draw on the floor figures of differef/ 
animals, rubbing each one out as soon as it was completd! 


This went on till the moment of birth, and the figure th 
then remained sketched upon the ground was called tf 


child’s zona or second self. 


enough, he procured the animal that represented him a 
took care’ of it, as it was believed that health and existen 
were bound up with that of the animal’s, in fact that t 
death of both would occur simultaneously,” or rather th 
when the animal died the man would die too.' 


will be lame too. That is how you 
can recognise So-and-So in his serpent 
form. Chiefs do not turn into the 
same kind of snakes as ordinary people. 
For common folk become harmless 
snakes with green and white bellies 
and very small heads; but kings 
become boa-constrictors or the large 
and deadly black mamba. See Rev. 
Henry Callaway, M.D., Zhe Religious 
System of the Amazulu, Part ii. 
(Capetown, London, etc., 1869) pp. 
134 sg., 140, 196-202, 205, 208-211, 
231. ‘*The Zhlose of Chaka and 
other dead kings is the Boa-constrictor, 
or the large and deadly black Mamba, 
whichever the doctors decide. That 
of dead Queens is: the tree Iguana” 
(David Leslie, of. cz. p. 213). Com- 
pare Rev. Joseph Shooter, Zhe Kajirs 
of Natal and the Zulu Country (Lon- 
don, - 1857), :pp« 161 ‘sg.4° W.R. 
Gordon, ‘‘ Words about Spirits,” 
(South African) Folk-lore Journal, ii. 
(Cape Town, 1880) pp. 1or-103 ; W. 
Grant, ‘‘ Magato and his Tribe,” /oz7- 
nal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxxv. (1905) p. 270. A word which is 
sometimes confounded with zdhlozi is 
ztongo (plural amatongo); but the natives 
themselves when closely questioned 
distinguish between the two. See 
Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood, a 


“When the child grew cf 


Among t 


Study of Kafir Children (Lond 
1906), pp. 14 sg.,+ 281-286. 
notion that the spirits of the de 
appear in the form of serpents is wic 
spread in Africa. See Adonis, At 
Osiris, Second Edition, pp. 73 s¢ 
Dr. F. B. Jevons has suggested th 
the Roman genius, the guardian-spi 
which accompanied a man from bir 
to death (Censorinus, De die natal, 
and was commonly represented in tl 
form of a snake, may have been : 
external soul. See F. B. Jevon 
Plutarch’s Romane Questions (Londo: 
1892) pp. xlvii. sg.; t@., Jntroducttc 
to the History of Religion (Londo) 
1896), pp. 186 sg.; L. Prelle 
Réimische Mythologie* (Berlin, 1881 
1883), ii. 195 sgg.; 
Religion und Kultus 
(Munich, 1912), pp. 176 sg. 
1 H. H. Bancroft, The Native Ra 
of the Pacific Coast (London, 1875) 
1876), i. 661, The words quote 
by Bancroft (p. 662, note), ‘& 
sérvase entre ellos la creencia de git 
su vida esté unida @ la de un aninii 
y que es forsoso que mueran @ 
cuando éste muere,” are not quite 
curately represented by the statem 
of Bancroft in the text. Elsewh 
(vol. ii. p. 277) the same writer ez 
the ‘‘second self” of the Zapotec 


a1 


fheir hearts pant ; 


gua’, or tutelary genius,” adding 
at the fate of the child was supposed 
© be so intimately bound up with the 
ortune of the animal that the death 
of the one involved the death of the 
her. Compare Daniel G. Brinton, 
agualism, a Study in American 
-lore and History,” Proceedings of 
@ American Philosophical - Society 
id at Philadelphia, vol. xxxiii. No. 
14 (Philadelphia, January, 1894), pp. 
'-73- According to Professor E. 
a r the word magual is akin to the 
fexican naualli, ‘a witch or wizard,” 
hi ich is derived from a word meaning 
hidden” with reference to the power 
tributed to sorcerers of transforming 
‘a selves into animals. See E. Seler, 
altmexikanische Studien, II.” Veréf- 
ithungen aus dem Ko Oniglichen 
" useum fiir Volkerkunde, vi. heft 2/4 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 


213 


dians of Guatemala and Honduras the magual or naual is 
t animate or inanimate object, 
which stands in a parallel relation to a particular man, so 
hat the weal and woe of the man depend on the fate of the 


generally an animal, 


al, According to an old writer, many Indians of 
emala “are deluded by the devil to believe that their 
fe dependeth upon the life of such and such a beast (which 
they take unto them as their familiar spirit), and think that 
when that beast dieth they must die; when he is chased, 
when he is faint, they are faint ; 
appeneth that by the devil’s delusion they appear in the 
lape of that beast (which commonly by their choice is a 
uck, or doe, a lion, or tigre, or dog, or eagle) and in that 
ape have been shot at and wounded.” ” 
f the way in which the Indians of Honduras acquired their 
aguals, runs thus: “The devil deluded them, appearing in 
shape of a lion or a tiger, or a coyte, a beast like a 
f, or in the shape of an alligator, a snake, or a bird, that 
vince abounding in creatures of prey, which they called 
ales, signifying keepers or guardians, and when the bird 
d the Indian that was in league with him died also, 
ich often happened and was looked upon as infallible. 
€ manner of contracting this alliance was thus, 
ndian repaired to the river, wood, hill, or most obscure 


nay, it 


Herrera’s account 


The 


(Berlin, 1899), pp. 52-57. 

1 Otto Stoll, Die LEthnologie der 
Indianerstamme von Guatemala (Ley- 
den, 1889), p. 57. 

2 Thomas Gage, A New Survey of 
the West Indies, Third Edition (London, 
1677), Pp. 334. The same writer 
relates how a certain Indian named 
Gonzalez was reported to have the 
power of turning himself into a lion or 
rathera puma. Once when a Spaniard 
had shot a puma in the nose, Gonzalez 
was found with a bruised face and 
accused the Spaniard of having shot 
him. Another Indian chief named 
Gomez was said to have transformed 
himself into a puma, and in that shape 
to have fought a terrific battle with a 
rival chief named Lopez, who had 
changed himself into a jaguar. See 
Gage, of. cit. pp. 383-389. 


In some 
tribes of 
South- 
Eastern 
Australia 
the lives of 


214 


place, where he called upon the devils by such names as 
thought fit, talked to the rivers, rocks, or woods, said 
went to weep that he might have the same his predecessfs’ 
had, carrying a cock or a dog to sacrifice. 
choly fit he fell asleep, and either in a dream or wakib# 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cip. 


In that mel}-! 


saw some one of the aforesaid birds or other creatur r 


whom he entreated to grant him profit in salt, cacao, or ay’ 
other commodity, drawing blood from his own tongue, ea})’ 
and other parts of his body, making his contract at te! 
same time with the said creature, the which either inp 
dream or waking told him, ‘Such a day you shall go abrof 
asporting, and I will be the first bird or other animal yp) 
shall meet, and will be your zagual and companion at i 
Whereupon such friendship was contracted betwe}j 
them, that when one of them died the other did not survi¥}) 
and they fancied that he who had no zagual could not } 
rich.” - The Indians were persuaded that the death of the 
nagual would entail their own. 
first battles with the Spaniards on the plateau of Quetzalt 
nango the xaguals of the Indian chiefs fought in the for 
The xagual of the highest chief was especial 
conspicuous, because it had the form of a great bird, r 
splendent in green plumage. 
de Alvarado killed the bird with his lance, and at the sar 
moment the Indian chief fell dead to the ground.’ 

In many tribes of South-Eastern Australia each sex use 
to regard a particular species of animals in the same way that 
Central American Indian regarded his agua/, but with th 
difference, that whereas the Indian apparently knew the ind: 


times.’ 


of serpents. 


1 Antonio de Herrera, General His- 
tory of the Vast Continent and Islands 
of America, translated by Capt. John 
Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iv. 
138 sg. The Spanish original of Her- 
rera’s history, a work based on ex- 
cellent authorities, was first published 
at Madrid in 1601-1615. The Indians 
of Santa Catalina Istlavacan still receive 
at birth the name of some animal, 
which is commonly regarded as their 
guardian spirit for the rest of their life. 
The name is bestowed by the heathen 
priest, who usually hears of a birth 


Legend affirms that in t! 


The Spanish general Ped 


in the village sooner than his Catholi 
colleague. See K. Scherzer, ‘‘ Di 
Indianer von Santa Catalina Istlava 
cana (Frauenfuss), ein Beitrag zu 
Culturgeschichte der Urbewohner Cen 
tral- Amerikas,” S¢¢sungsberichte dé 
philos. histor. Classe der kats. Ak 
der Wissenschaften (Vienna), xvii 
(1856) p. 235. 

2 Otto Stoll, Die Lthnologie 
Tndianerstimme von Guatemala ( 
den, 1889), pp. 57 59.3 2@., Sugeesti 
und Hypnotism (Leipsic, 1904), 
170. : 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL 1N ANIMALS 215 


: = animal with which his life was bound up,the Australians 
i} only knew that each of their lives was bound up with some 
4 One animal of the species, but they could not say with which. 
4 The result naturally was that every man spared and protected 
j all the animals of the species with which the lives of the men 
@ were bound up ; and every woman spared and protected all the 
j animals of the species with which the lives of the women were 
4 bound up; because no one knew but that the death of any 
animal of the respective species might entail his or her own ; 
| just as the killing of the green bird was immediately 
} followed by the death of the Indian chief, and the killing of 
gthe parrot by the death of Punchkin in the fairy tale. 
Thus, for example, the Wotjobaluk tribe of South-Eastern 
4 Australia “held that ‘the life of Ngiintingiiniit (the Bat) is 
| the life of a man, and the life of Yartatgirk (the Nightjar) 
is the life of a woman, and that when either of these 
creatures is killed the life of some man or of some woman 
jis shortened. In such a case every man or every woman 
in the camp feared that he or she might be the victim, and 
: from this cause great fights arose in this tribe. I learn that 
jin these fights, men on one side and women on the other, 
it was not at all certain which would be victorious, for 
j at times the women gave the men a severe drubbing with 
their PEETCKS, while often women were injured or killed 
| by spears.” The Wotjobaluk said that the bat was the 
j man’s “brother” and that the nightjar was his “ wife.”? 


; 
1! 1A. W. Howitt, ‘Further Notes 
| ‘on the Australian Class Systems,” 


went out and killed a superb warbler, 
which was the women’s “sister,” and 


| Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
“xviii. (1889) pp. 57 sg. Compare zd., 

fative Tribes of South-East Australia 
London, 1904), pp. 148, 150. It is 
-yery remarkable that among the Kurnai 
‘ fights had a special connexion 
with marriage. When young men were 
backward of taking wives, the women 
‘used to go out into the forest and kill 
an emu- -wren, which was the men’s 
“brother ” then returning to the 
‘Camp they shewed the dead bird to the 
men. The result was a fight between 
the young men and the young women, 
in which, however, lads who were not 
et marriageable might not take part. 
Next day the marriageable young men 


this led to a worse fight than before. 
Some days afterwards, when the wounds 
and bruises were healed, one of the 
marriageable young men met one of 
the marriageable young women, and 
said, ‘‘Superb warbler!” She an- 
swered, ‘* Emu-wren! What does the 
emu-wren eat?” To which the young 
man answered, ‘‘ He eats so-and-so,” 
naming kangaroo, opossum, emu, or 
some other game. Then they laughed, 
and she ran off with him without telling 
any one. See L. Fison and A. W. 
Howitt, Kamilarot and Kurnai (Mel- 
bourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Bris- 
bane, 1880), pp. 201 sg.; A. W. 
Howitt, Native Tribes of South-East 


the two 
sexes are 
thought to 
be bound 
up with the 
lives of two 
different 
kinds of 
animals, 

as bats 
and owls. 


216 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap. 


The particular species of animals with which the lives of 
the sexes were believed to be respectively bound up varied 
somewhat from tribe to tribe. Thus whereas among the 
Wotjobaluk the bat was the animal of the men, at Gunbower 
Creek on the Lower Murray the bat seems to have been 
the animal of the women, for the natives would not kill it 
for the reason that “if it was killed, one of their lubras 
[women] would be sure to die in consequence.”’ In the 
Kurnai tribe of Gippsland the emu-wren (S¢ipiturus mala- 
churus) was the “man’s brother” and the superb warbler 
(Malurus cyaneus) was the “ woman’s sister” ; at the initiation 
of young men into the tribal mysteries the name of the 
emu-wren was invoked over the novices for the purpose of 
infusing manly virtue into them.?, Among the Yuin on the 
south-eastern coast of Australia, the “woman’s sister” was 
the tree-creeper (C/macteris scandens), and the men had 
both the bat and the emu-wren for their “brothers.”* In 
the Kulin nation each sex had a pair of “brothers” and 
“sisters” ; the men had the bat and the emu-wren for their 
2 protons ” and the women had the superb warbler and the 
small nightjar for their “sisters.”* It is notable that in South- 
Eastern Australia the animals thus associated with the lives of 
men and women were generally flying creatures, either birds 
or bats. However, in the Port Lincoln tribe of South Australia 
the man’s “ brother” and the woman’s “ sister” seem to have 
been identified with the male and female respectively of a 
species of lizard; for we read that “a small kind of lizard, 
the male of which is called zbzrrz, and the female waka, is 
said to have divided the sexes in the human species; an 
event that would appear not to be much approved of by the 
natives, since either sex has a mortal hatred against the 


Australia, pp. 149, 273 sg. Perhaps 
this killing of the sex-totem before 
marriage may be related to the pre- 
tence of killing young men and bringing 
them to life again at puberty. See 
below, pp. 225 sgg. 

1 Gerard Krefft, ‘*‘Manners and 
Customs of the Aborigines of the Lower 
Murray and Darling,” Zransactions of 
the Philoscphical Society of New South 
Wales, 1862-65, pp. 359 59. 


2 A. W. Howitt, ‘* Further Notes on 
the Australian Class Systems,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xviii. 
Sera pp. 56 sg. 

. W. Howitt, of. cit. p. 57; 
zd., Heme Tribes of South-East 
Australia, p- 150. 

4 A. W. Howitt, ‘On the Migra- 
tions of the Kurnai Ancestors,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xv. 
(1886) p. 416. 


ee - 


: _ jealously protected by them. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN ANIMALS 


217 


opposite sex of these little animals, the men always destroy- 
‘ing the waka and the women the zézrrz. 
the particular sorts of creature with which the lives of men 
_and women were believed to be bound up, the belief itself 
d the fights to which it gave rise are known to have 
prevailed over a large part of South-Eastern Australia, and 
probably they extended much farther.” 
" serious one, and so consequently were the fights which sprang 
‘from it. Thus among some tribes of Victoria “ the common 
_ bat belongs to the men, who protect it against injury, even 
"to the half-killing of their wives for its sake. 
' or large goatsucker, belongs to the women, and, although a 
' bird of evil omen, creating terror at night by its cry, it is 
If a man kills one, they are 


»1l But whatever 


The belief was a very 


The fern owl, 


as much enraged as if it was one of their children, and will 


: 


as well as his own. 


strike him with their long poles. 

The jealous protection thus afforded by Australian men 
and women to bats and owls respectively (for bats and 
owls seem to be the creatures usually allotted to the two 
“sexes)* is not based upon purely selfish considerations. 
For each man believes that not only his own life but the 
' lives of his father, brothers, sons, and so on are bound up with 
_ the lives of particular bats, and that therefore in protecting the 
bat species he is protecting the lives of all his male relations 
Similarly, each woman believes that the 
lives of her mother, sisters, daughters, and so forth, equally 


»3 


| with her own, are bound up with the lives of particular owls, 


_ 1 C. W. Schiirmann, *‘ The Aboriginal 
| Tribes of Port Lincoln,” in Native 
| Tribes of South Australia (Adelaide, 
1879), p. 241. Compare G. F. Angas, 
| Savage Life and Scenes in Australia 
_ and New Zealand (London, 1847), i. 

© 100. 

5 2 A. W. Howitt, ‘‘ Further Notes on 
_ the Australian Class Systems,” Journal 
| of the Anthropological Institute, xviii. 
~ (1889) p. 58. Compare ia@., Native 
| Tribes of South-East Australia(London, 
1904), pp. 148-151. 

3 James Dawson, Australian Abor- 
_ igines (Melbourne, Sydney, and Ade- 
_ laide, 1881), p. 52. 

| 4 See TZotemism and Exogamy, i. 
47 sg. It is at least remarkable that 


both the creatures thus assigned to the 
two sexes should be nocturnal in their 
habits. Perhaps the choice of such 
creatures is connected with the belief 
that the soul is absent from the body 
in slumber. On this hypothesis bats 
and owls would be regarded by these 
savages as the wandering souls of 
sleepers. Such a belief would fully 
account for the reluctance of the natives 
to kill them. The Kiowa Indians of 
North America think that owls and 
other night birds are animated by the 
souls of the dead. See James Mooney, 
‘Calendar History of the Kiowa 
Indians,” Seventeenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Part i. (Washington, 1898) p. 237. 


owls as the 
sisters of 
women. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnapr. 


218 


and that in guarding the owl species she is guarding the lives — 


of all her female relations besides her own. Now, when 
men’s lives are thus supposed to be contained in certain 


animals, it is obvious that the animals can hardly be dis- 


tinguished from the men, or the men from the animals. If 
my brother John’s life is in a bat, then, on the one hand, the 
bat is my brother as well as John; and, on the other hand, 
John is in a’sense a bat, since his life is in a bat. Similarly, 
if my sister Mary’s life is in an owl, then the owl is my 
sister and Mary is an owl. This is a natural enough con- 
clusion, and the Australians have not failed to draw it. 
When the bat is the man’s animal, it is called his brother ; 
and when the owl is the woman’s animal, it is called her 
sister. And conversely a man addresses a woman as an owl, 
and she addresses him as a bat.’ So with the other animals 
allotted to the sexes respectively in other tribes. For 
example, among the Kurnai all emu-wrens were “ brothers ” 


of the men, and all the men were emu-wrens; all superb | 
warblers were “sisters” of the women, and all the women — 


were superb warblers.” 


§ 4. A Suggested Theory of Totemism 


But when a savage names himself after an animal, calls 


1 A. L. P. Cameron, ‘‘ Notes on 
some Tribes of New South Wales,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xiv. (1885) p. 350 note!; A. W. 
Howitt, ‘‘On the Migrations of the 
Kurnai Ancestors,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xv. (1886) 
p. 416; zd., ‘* Further Notes on the 
Australian Class Systems,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xviii. 
(1889) p. 57. 

.2 L, Fison and A. W. Howitt, 
Kamilaroi and Kurnai, pp. 194, 201, 
5g., 215; Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xv. 416, xviii. 56 sg. ; A. W. 
Howitt, Native Tribes of South-East 
Australia (London, 1904), pp. 148-151. 

3 The following suggestion as to the 
origin of totemism was made in the 
first edition of this book (published in 
1890) and is here reprinted without 
any substantial change. In the mean- 


time much additional evidence as to 
the nature and prevalence of totemism 
has come to light, and with the new 
evidence my opinions, or rather con- 
jectures, as to the origin of the institu- 
tion have repeatedly changed. If I 
here reprint my earliest conjecture, it 
is partly because I still think it may 
contain an element of truth, and partly 
because it serves as a convenient peg 
on which to hang a collection of facts 
which are much more valuable than 
any theories of mine. The reader who 
desires to acquaint himself more fully 
with the facts of totemism and with 
the theories that have been broached 
on the subject, will find them stated 
at length in my Zolemism and Exo- 
gamy (London, 1910). Here I will 
only call attention to the Arunta 
legend that the ancestors of the tribe 
kept their spirits in certain sacred sticks 


x1 


A SUGGESTED THEORY OF TOTEMISM 219 


q it his brother, and refuses to kill it, the animal is said to 
_ be his totem. 
_ Australia which we have been considering the bat and the 


Accordingly in the tribes of South-Eastern 


owl, the emu-wren and the superb warbler, may properly be 
described as totems of the sexes. But the assignation of a 


e totem to a sex is comparatively rare, and has hitherto been 
_ discovered nowhere but in Australia. 
_ the totem is appropriated not to a sex, but to a clan, and 


Far more commonly 


is hereditary either in the male or female line. The relation 
of an individual to the clan totem does not differ in kind 


_ from his relation to the sex totem; he will not kill it, he 


speaks of it as his brother, and he calls himself by its name. 
Now if the relations are similar, the explanation which holds 
good of the one ought eaually to hold good of the other. 
Therefore the reason why.a clan revere a particular species 
of animals or plants (for the clan totem may be a plant) and 
call themselves after it, would seem to be a belief that the 
life of each individual of the clan is bound up with some one 
animal or plant of the species, and that his or her death 
would be the consequence of killing that particular animal, 
or destroying that particular plant. This explanation of 
totemism squares very well with Sir George Grey’s definition 
of a totem or sobong in Western Australia. He says: “A 
certain mysterious connection exists between a family and 
its Lobong, so that a member of the family will never kill an 
animal of the species to which his kobong belongs, should he 
find it asleep ; indeed he always kills it reluctantly, and never 
without affording it a chance to escape. This arises from 
the family belief that some one individual of the species is 
their nearest friend, to kill whom would be a great crime, 
and to be carefully avoided. Similarly, a native who has 
a vegetable for his kobong may not gather it under certain 


and stones (churinga), which bear a 
close resemblance to the well-known 
bull-roarers, and that when they went 
out hunting they hung these sticks or 
stoneson certain sacred poles (zurfunjas) 
which represented their totems. See 
Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, 


_ Native Tribes of Central Australia 


(London, 1899), pp. 137 5sg-, 629. 


This tradition appears to point to a 
custom of transferring a man’s soul or 
spirit temporarily to his totem. Con- 
versely when an Arunta is sick he 
scrapes his churimga and swallows the 
scrapings, as if to restore to himself 
the spiritual substance deposited in the 
instrument. See Baldwin Spencer and 
F. J. Gillen, of. cét. p. 135 note!. 


Sex totems 
and clan 
totems may 
both be 

on 
the notion 
that men 
and women 
keep their 
external 

in 
their 
totems, 


these are 
animals, 
plants, or” 
what not. 


220 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap. 


circumstances, and at a particular period of the year.”* Here 
it will be observed that though each man spares all the 
animals or plants of the species, they are not all equally 
precious to him; far from it, out of the whole species there 
is only one which is specially dear to him; but as he does 
not know which the dear one is, he is obliges to spare them 
all from fear of injuring the one. Again, this explanation 
of the clan totem harmonizes with the supposed effect of 
killing one of the totem species. “One day one of the 
blacks killed a crow. Three or four days afterwards a 
Boortwa (crow) [ze a man of the Crow clan] named 
Larry died. He had been ailing for some days, but the 
killing of his zvémgong [totem] hastened his death.”? Here 
the killing of the crow caused the death of a man of the 
Crow clan, exactly as, in the case of the sex-totems, the 


' killing of a bat causes the death of a Bat-man or the killing 


The savage 
may im- 
agine his 
life to be 
bound up 
with that 
of more 
animals 
than one 
at the same 
time ; for 
many 
savages 
think that 


of an owl causes the death of an Owl-woman. Similarly, 
the killing of his xagual causes the death of a Central 
American Indian, the killing of his bush soul causes the 
death of a Calabar negro, the killing of his samaniu causes 
the death of a Banks Islander, and the killing of the animal 
in which his life is stowed away causes the death of the giant 
or warlock in the fairy tale. 

Thus it appears that the story of “ The giant who had no 
heart in his body ” may perhaps furnish the key to the relation 
which is supposed to subsist between a man and his totem. 
The totem, on this theory, is simply the receptacle in which 
a man keeps his life, as Punchkin kept his life in a parrot, 
and Bidasari kept her soul in a golden fish. It is no 
valid objection to this view that when a savage has both 
a sex totem and a clan totem his life must be bound up 
with two different animals, the death of either of which 


1 (Sir) George Grey, Journals of 
Two Expeditions of Discovery in North- 
West and Western Australia (London, 
1841), ii. 228 sg. 

2 L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, 
Kamilarot and Kurnai, p. 169. Ac- 
cording to Dr. Howitt, it is a serious 
offence to kill the totem of another 
person ‘with intent to injure him” 
(Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, xviii. (1889) p. 53). Such an 


intention seems to imply a belief in a 
sympathetic connexion between the man 
and the animal. Similarly the Siena 
of the Ivory Coast, in West Africa, 
who have totemism, believe that if a — 
man kills one of his totemic animals, — 
a member of his totemic clan dies 

instantaneously. See Maurice Dela- — 
fosse, “ Le peuple Siéna ou Sénoufo,” 
Revue des Etudes Ethnographiques et — 
Soctologigues, i. (1908) p. 452. 


me XY 


A SUGGESTED THEORY OF TOTEMISM 221 


would entail his own. If a man has more vital places 
than one in his body, why, the savage may think, should 
he not have more vital places than one outside it? Why, 
since he can put his life outside himself, should he not 
transfer one portion of it to one animal and another to 
another ? 
the plurality of souls, is an idea suggested by many familiar 
facts, and has commended itself to philosophers like Plato,’ 
as well as to savages. It finds favour also with the sages of 
China, who tell us that every human being is provided with 
what may be called a male soul (shez) and a female soul 
(Awez), which by their harmonious co-operation compose an 
organic unity. However, some Chinese philosophers will have 
it that each of the five viscera has its own separate male soul 
(shen); and a Taoist treatise written about the end of the 
tenth or beginning of the eleventh century has even enriched 
science with a list of about three dozen souls distributed over 
the various parts of the human frame ; indeed, not content 
with a bare catalogue of these souls, the learned author has 
annexed to the name and surname of each a brief descrip- 
tion of its size and stature, of the kind of dress in which it 
is clothed and the shape of hat it wears. It is only when 
the notion of a soul, from being a quasi-scientific hypothesis, 
becomes a theological dogma that its unity and indivisibility 
are insisted upon as essential. The savage, unshackled by 


_ dogma, is free to explain the facts of life by the assumption 


_ of as many souls as he thinks necessary. Hence, for ex- 
_ ample, the Caribs supposed that there was one soul in the 
_ head, another in the heart, and other souls at all the places 
where an artery is felt pulsating.* Some of the Hidatsa 
_ Indians explain the phenomena of gradual death, when the 
_ extremities appear dead first, by supposing that man has four 


_  ! According to Plato, the different 
_ parts of the soul were lodged in 
_ different parts of the body (7zmacus, 
_ pp. 69C-72D), and as only one part, on 
__ his theory, was immortal, Lucian seems 


= not unnaturally to have interpreted the 
_ Platonic doctrine to mean that every 


_ man had more than one soul (Demonax, 


33). 
2 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious 


System of China, iv. (Leyden, 1901) 
PP- 3 59-, 79-75- 


3 Le sieur de la Borde, ‘‘ Relation 
de VOrigine, Mceurs, Coustumes, Re- 
ligion, Guerres et Voyages des Caraibes 
sauvages des Isles Antilles de l’Ameri- 
que,” p. 15, in Recueil de divers Voyages 
Jaits en Afrique et en T Amerique (Paris, 
1684). 


every per- 
son has 
more souls 
than one. 


The divisibility of life, or, to put it otherwise, | 


The 
Battas of 
Sumatra, 
who have 
totemism, 
believe that 
every per- 
son has a 
soul which 
is always 
outside of 
his body. 


222 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  Cuap. 


souls, and that they quit the body, not simultaneously, but 
one after the other, dissolution being only complete when all 
four have departed.’ Some of the Dyaks of Borneo and the 
Malays of the Peninsula believe that every man has seven 
souls.” The Alfoors of Poso in Celebes are of opinion that 
he has three. The natives of Laos suppose that the body 
is the seat of thirty spirits, which reside in the hands, the feet, 
the mouth, the eyes, and so on.* Hence, from the primitive 
point of view, it is perfectly possible that a savage should 
have one soul in his sex totem and another in his clan 
totem. However, as I have observed, sex totems have been 
found nowhere but in Australia ; so that as a rule the savage 
who practises totemism need not have more than one soul 
out of his body at a time.° 

If this explanation of the totem as a receptacle in which 
a man keeps his soul or one of his souls is correct, we should 
expect to find some totemic people of whom it is expressly 
said that every man amongst them is believed to keep at 
least one soul permanently out of his body, and that the 
destruction of this external soul is supposed to entail the 
death of its owner. Such a people are the Battas of Sumatra. 
The Battas are divided into exogamous clans (margas) with 
descent in the male line; and each clan is forbidden to eat 


1 Washington Matthews, TZvhe 
Hidatsa Indians (Washington, 1877), 


p- 50. 

2 H. Ling Roth, ‘* Low’s Natives of 
Borneo,” Journal of the Anthropological 
/nstitute, xxi. (1892) p. 117; W. W. 
Skeat, Malay Magic (London, 1900), 
Pp. 50. 

3 A. C. Kruijt, “Een en ander 
aangaande het geestelijk en maatschap- 
pelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” 
Mededeelingen van wege het Neder- 
landsche Zendelinggenootschap, Xxxxix. 
(1895) pp. 3 5g. 

4 A, Bastian, Die Volker des dstlichen 
Asien, iii. (Jena, 1867) p. 248. 

5 In some tribes, chiefly of North 
American Indians, every man has an 
individual or personal totem in addition 
to the totem of his clan. This personal 
totem is usually the animal of which 
he dreamed during a long and solitary 
fast at puberty. See Zotemism and 


Exogamy, i. 49-52, iii. 370-456, where 
the relation of the individual or personal 
totem (if we may call it so) to the 
clan totem is discussed. It is quite 
possible that, as some good authorities 
incline to believe, the clan totem has 
been developed out of the personal 
totem by inheritance. See Miss Alice 
C. Fletcher, Zhe Jmport of the Totem, 
pp. 3 sgg. (paper read before the 
American Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Science, August 1887, 
separate reprint); Fr. Boas, ‘Fhe 
Social Organization and the Secret 
Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,” 
Report of the United States Nationat 
Museum for 1895 (Washington, 1897), 
pp. 323 59-5 336-338, 393. In the 
bush souls of the Calabar negroes (see 
above, pp. 204 sgg.) we seem to have 
something like the personal totem on 
its way to become hereditary and so to 
grow into the totem of a clan. 


ie 1 J. B. Neumann, ‘‘ Het Pane- en 
| Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland 
| Sumatra,” 7ijdschrift van het Neder- 
| landsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, 
| Tweede Serie, dl. iii. Afdeeling, meer 
_ uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2 (1886), pp. 
| 311 sg.; id., dl. iv. No. 1 (1887), pp. 
im 8 sg.; Van Hoévell, “Iets over ’t 
Py oorlogvoeren der Batta’s,” 7ijdschrift 
_ voor Nederlandsch Indiz, N.S., vii. 
_ (1878) p. 434; G. A. Wilken, Ver- 
“y _ Spreide Geschriften (The Hague, 1912), 
_ i 296, 306 sg., 309, 325 sg.; L. de 
| Backer, L’Archipel Indien (Paris, 
- 1874), p- 470; Col. Yule, in Journal 
; the Anthropological Institute, ix. 
_ (£880) p. 295; Joachim Freiherr von 
Brenner, Besuch bet den Kannibalen 
| Sumatras (Wirzburg, 1894), pp. 197 
> sgqg-; P. A. L. E. van Dijk, ‘‘Eenige 
_ aanteekeningen omtrent de verschillen- 
"den stammen (argas) en de stamver- 
| deling bij de Battaks,” Tijdschrift 
| woor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkén- 
_ kunde, xxxviii. (1895) pp. 296 sg. ; 
_ Mz. Joustra, ‘‘Naar het landschap 
_ Goenoeng,” Afededeelingen van wege 
| het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenoot- 
_ schap, xiv. (1901) pp. 80 sy.; id. 
_ **Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten 
_ der Bataks,” Mededeelingen van wege 
het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap, 
3 xlvi. (1902) pp. 387 sgg.; J. E. Neu- 


8 


A SUGGESTED THEORY OF TOTEMISM 


‘the flesh of a particular animal. 
tiger, another the ape, another the crocodile, another the dog, 
| another the cat, another the dove, another the white buffalo, 
_ and another the locust. The reason given by members of a 


223 


One clan may not eat the 


' and that their souls after death may transmigrate into the 
| animals, or that they or their forefathers have been under 
' certain obligations to the creatures. 
_ always, the clan bears the name of the animal.’ 
_Battas have totemism in full. 
believes that he has seven or, on a more moderate com- 
4 putation, three souls. One of these souls is always outside 
the body, but nevertheless whenever it dies, however far 
‘ tee it may be at the time, that same moment the man dies 
’ The writer who mentions this belief says nothing 


Sometimes, but not 
Thus the 
But, further, each Batta 


mann, ‘‘ Kemali, Pantang, en Réboe 
bij de Karo-Bataks,” 7iaschrift voor 
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xlviii. (1906) p. 512. See further 
Totemism and Exogamy, ti. 185 sq¢. 

2 B. Hagen, “ Beitrage zur Kennt- 
niss der Battareligion,” 7zjdschrift voor 
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xxviii. (1883) p. 514. J. B. Neumann 
(op. cit. di. iii. No. 2, pp. 299) is the 
authority forthe seven souls. According 
to another writer, six out of the seven 
souls reside outside of the body ; one of 
them dwells in heaven, the remaining 
five have no definite place of abode, 
but are so closely related to the man 
that were they to abandon him his 
health would suffer. See J. Freiherr 
von Brenner, Besuch bei den Kanni- 
balen Sumatras, pp. 239 sg. A different 
account of Batta psychology is given by 
Mr. Westenberg. According to him, 
each Batta has only one ‘edi (not three 
or seven of them); and the éenai is 
something between a soul and a guar- 
dian spirit. It always resides outside 
of the body, and on its position near, 
before, behind, above, or below, the 
welfare of its owner is supposed in 
great measure to depend. But in 
addition each man has two invisible 
guardian spirits (his 4a4a and agz) 
whose help he invokes in great danger ; 


If a totem 
is the re- 
ceptacle 

in which a 
man keeps 
his external 
soul, it is 
no wonder 
that 
savages 
should con- 
ceal the 
secret from 
strangers. 


_ McDougall, 


224 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap. 4 


about the Batta totems; but on the analogy of the Australian, — 
Central American, and African evidence we may conjecture — 
that the external soul, whose death entails the death of the 
man, is housed in the totemic animal or plant. 
Against this view it can hardly be thought to militate 
that the Batta does not in set terms affirm his external — 
soul to be in his totem, but alleges other grounds for 
respecting the sacred animal or plant of his clan. For 
if a savage seriously believes that his life is bound up 
with an external object, it is in the last degree unlikely 
that he will let any stranger into the secret. In all that 
touches his inmost life and beliefs the savage is exceed- 
ingly suspicious and reserved; Europeans have resided — 
among savages for years without discovering some of their — 
capital articles of faith, and in the end the discovery has 
often been the result of accident.’ Above all, the savage © 
lives in an intense and perpetual dread of assassination by — 
sorcery ; the most trifling relics of his person—the clippings ~ 
of his hair and nails, his spittle, the remnants of his food, his — 
very name *—all these may, he fancies, be turned by the ~ 


one is the seed by which he was 
begotten, the other is the afterbirth, 
and these he calls respectively his elder 
and his younger brother, Mr. Westen- 
berg’s account refers specially to the 
Karo-Battas. See C. J. Westenberg, 
*‘ Aanteekeningen omtrent de gods- 
dienstige begrippen der Karo-Bataks,” 
Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en 
Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indié, 
xli. (1892) pp. 228 sg. 

1 Compare Ch. Hose and W, 
The Pagan Tribes of 
Borneo (London, 1912), ii. 90 sgg. : 
‘«« An important institution among some 
of the Ibans, which occurs but in rare 
instances among the other peoples, is 
the mgarong or secret helper. The 
ngarong is one of the very few topics in 
regard to which the Ibans display any 
reluctance to speak freely. So great is 
their reserve in this connection that 
one of us lived for fourteen years on 
friendly terms with Ibans of various 
districts without ascertaining the mean- 
ing of the word mgarong, or suspecting 
the great importance of the part played 


by the notion in the lives of some of © 
these people. The mgarong seems to — 
be usually the spirit of some ancestor 
or dead relative, but not always so, and — 
it is not clear that it is always con- 
ceived as the spirit of a deceased — 
human being. This spirit becomes — 
the special protector of some indi- — 
vidual Iban, to whom in a dream he © 
manifests himself, in the first place in — 
human form, and announces that he © 
will be his secret helper. . . . When, — 


as is most commonly the case, the — 


secret helper takes on the form of — 
some animal, all individuals of that — 
species become objects of especial — 


regard to the fortunate Iban; he will 


not kill or eat any such animal, and ~ 
he will as far as possible restrain others 
from doing so.” Thus the ngarong — 
or secret helper of the Ibans closely — 
resembles what I have called the in- — 
dividual or personal totem, q 

2 It is not merely the personal name ~ 
which is often shrouded in mystery (see — 
Taboo and the Perils of the Soul, pp. — 
318 sgg.); the names of the clans and ~ 


A SUGGESTED THEORY OF TOTEM/ISM 


225 


sorcerer to his destruction, and he is therefore anxiously 
careful to conceal or destroy them. But if in matters such 
_ as these, which are but the outposts and outworks of his life, 
| he is so shy and secretive, how close must be the conceal- 
' ment, how impenetrable the reserve in which he enshrouds 
_ the inner keep and citadel of his being! 


When the princess 


in the fairy tale asks the giant where he keeps his soul, he 
| often gives false or evasive answers, and it is only after 
i much coaxing and wheedling that the secret is at last wrung 


from him. 
“timid and furtive savage ; 


eir subdivisions are objects of mysteri- 
iS reverence among many, if not all, 
the Siouan tribes of North America, 
and are never used in ordinary conver- 

See J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Osage 
Traditions,” Sixth Annual Report of 
: Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
B88), p. 396. Among the Yuin of 
th-Eastern Australia ‘‘the totem 
e was called Budjan, and it was 


_ PT. VII. VOL. I 


tion 
% 


In his jealous reticence the giant resembles the 
but whereas the exigencies of the 
tory demand that the giant should at last reveal his secret, 
o such obligation is laid on the savage ; and no inducement 
at can be offered is likely to tempt him to imperil his soul 
by revealing its hiding-place to a stranger. 
o matter for surprise that the central mystery of the savage’s 
life should so long have remained a secret, and that we should 
e left to piece it together from scattered hints and fragments 
and from the recollections of it which linger in fairy tales. 


It is therefore 


§ 5. Lhe Ritual of Death and Resurrection 


This view of totemism throws light on a class of religious 
tes of which no adequate explanation, so far as I am aware 
yet been offered. Amongst many savage tribes, especially 
Such as are known to practise totemism, it is customary 
for lads at puberty to undergo certain initiatory rites, of 
which one of the commonest is a pretence of killing the lad 
and bringing him to life again. 
f we suppose that their substance consists in extracting the 
youth’s soul in order to transfer it to his totem. 


Such rites become intelligible 


For the 


said to be more like /Jofa, or magic, 
than a name ; and it was in one sense 
a secret name, for with it an enemy 
might cause injury to its bearer by magic. 
Thus very few people knew the totem 
names of others, the name being told 
to a youth by his father at his initia- 
tion” (A. W. Howitt, Native Tribes of 
South-East Australia, London, 1904, 
Pp. 133). 
Q 


This 
view of 


» totemism 


may help 
to explain 
the rite of 
death and 
resurrec- 
tion which 
forms part 
of many 
initiatory 
ceremonies 
among 
savages. 


226 


extraction of his soul would naturally be supposed to kill the 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM ~ 


CHAP. | 


youth or at least to throw him into a death-like trance, which — 


the savage hardly distinguishes from death. 
would then be attributed either to the gradual recovery of his — 
system from the violent shock which it had received, or, more ~ 
probably, to the infusion into him of fresh life drawn from 
Thus the essence of these initiatory rites, so far 
as they consist in a simulation of death and resurrection, 


the totem. 


His recovery — 


would be an exchange of life or souls between the man and 


his totem. 


The primitive belief in the possibility of such an 


exchange of souls comes clearly out in the story of the 
Basque hunter who affirmed that he had been killed by a 
bear, but that the bear had, after killing him, breathed its” 
own soul into him, so that the bear’s body was now dead,” 


but he himself was a bear, being animated by the bear's” 
This revival of the dead hunter as a bear is exactly 
analogous to what, on the theory here suggested, is supposed 


soul.! 


to take place in the ceremony of killing a lad at puberty. 


and bringing him to life again. 
comes to life again as an animal ; 
in him, and his human soul is in the animal. 


The lad dies as a man and 
the animal’s soul is now q 
With good 


right, therefore, does he call himself a Bear or a Wolf, etc., 
according to his totem; and with good right does he treat 
the bears or the wolves, etc., as his brethren, since in these 


animals are lodged the souls of himself and his kindred. : 


5 


Examples of this supposed death and resurrection at 


1 Theodor Benfey, Pantschatantra 
(Leipsic, 1859), i. 128 sg. Similarly 
a man of the Kulin tribe in Victoria 
was called Kurburu, that is, ‘‘ native 
bear,” because the spirit of a native 
bear was supposed to have entered into 
him when he killed the animal, and 


to have endowed him with its wonder-’ 


ful cleverness. This I learn from Miss 
E. B. Howitt’s Folklore and Legends 
of some Victorian Tribes (chapter vi.), 
which I have been privileged to see 
in manuscript. Among the Chiquites 
Indians of Paraguay sickness was some- 
times accounted for by supposing that 
the soul of a deer or a turtle had entered 
into the patient. See Lettres Edt- 
fiantes et Curieuses, Nouvelle Edition, 
viii, (Paris, 1781) p. 339. We have 


seen (pp. 213 sg.) that the Indians of 
Honduras made an alliance with the 
animal that was to be their nagual . 
by offering some of their own blood — 
to it. Conversely the North American 
Indian kills the animal which is to be 
his personal totem, and thenceforth 
wears some part of the creature as 
an amulet (Zotemism and Exogamy, 
i. 50).. These facts seem to point 
to the establishment of a blood cove e 
nant, involving an interchange of life 
between a man and his personal totem 
or magual; and among the Fans of 
West Africa, as we saw (above, p.— 
201), such a covenant is actually sup J 
posed to exist between a sorcerer and — 
his e/angela. ! 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 227 


tiation are as follows. In the Wonghi or Wonghibon The rite 
ibe of New South Wales “the youths on approaching oo! 


_ > and resur- 
anhood attend a meeting of the tribe. The ceremonies rection 


initiation are secret, and at them none but the men of the wom 
ibe who have been initiated attend with the novices. At New South 
e spot where the ceremonies are to be performed, a large 
al space is cleared. The old men of the tribe conduct the 
emonies, and the ‘ medicine man’ of the tribe is the master 
them. Part of the proceedings consists in knocking out 
a tooth and giving a new designation to the novice, indicating 
the change from youth to manhood. When the tooth is 
“knocked out, a loud humming noise is heard, which is made 
with an instrument of the following description: a flat piece 
of wood is made with serrated edges, and having a hole at 
one end, to which a string is attached, and this swung round 
produces a humming noise. The uninitiated are not even 
lowed to see this instrument. Women are forbidden to be 
ent at these ceremonies, and should one, by accident or 
otherwise, witness them, the penalty is death. The penalty 
for revealing the secrets is probably the same. When every- 
ing is prepared the women and children are covered with 
oughs, and the men retire, with the young fellows who are 
to be initiated, to a little distance. It is said that the youths 
are sent away a short distance one by one, and that they are 
each met in turn by a Being, who, so far as I can understand, 
is believed to be something between a blackfellow and a spirit. 
his Being, called Thuremlin, it is said, takes the youth to a 
tance, kills him, and in ‘some instances cuts him up, after 
hich he restores him to life and knocks out a tooth. Their 
lief in the power of Thuremlin is undoubted.” ? 
The foregoing account, while it applies strictly to one Use of the 
tribe only, may be regarded as typical of the initiation cere- PY Tose 


at initia- 
monies performed on young men throughout the tribes of tory cere- 


outh-Eastern and Central Australia, except that among the paces 
( Central tribes the practice of knocking out a tooth on these 

casions is replaced by the equally mysterious and much 

erer bodily mutilations of circumcision and subincision, 

1 A. L. P. Cameron, “Notes on pare A. W. Howitt, Native Tribes of 

‘some Tribes of New South Wales,” South-East Australia (London, 1904), 
“Yournal of the Anthropological Insti- pp. 588 sq. 

tute, xiv. (1885) pp. 357 sg. Com 


The 
sound of 
the bull- 
roarer 
compared 


to thunder. 


228 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuar. 


which are not practised by the tribes of the South-East.’ 
The instrument whose humming or booming sound accom- 
panies the critical operation of knocking out the tooth of 
the novice, is the now well-known bull-roarer, which figures 
in many savage rites of initiation. Its true nature is con- 
cealed from the women and uninitiated lads, who are taught 
to believe that its sonorous and long-drawn notes are the 
voice of the mythical being, often called Daramulun, who 
lives in the sky, instituted the rites, and superintends se 
performance. The hollow roar of the slat of wood, as it is 
swung round and round, “ represents the muttering of thunder, 
and the thunder is the voice of Daramulun, and therefore its 
sound is of the most sacred character. Umbara once said tol 


me, ‘Thunder is the voice of him (pointing upward to the 
sky) calling on the rain to fall and make everything grow 


992 


up new. This supposed 


1 Baldwin Spencer and F, J. Gillen, 
Native Tribes of Central Australia 
(London, 1899), pp. 213, 453- 

2 A. W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of 
South-East Australia (London, 1904), 
p. 538. As to Daramulun (of whose 
name Thuremlin is no doubt only a 
dialectical variation) see z@., pp. 407, 
493, 494 59-5 497, 499, 500, 507, 
523 59-5 526, 528, 529 s9., 535, 540, 
541, 585 sg., 587; ¢d., ‘*On some 
Australian Ceremonies of Initiation,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tule, xiii. (1884) pp. 442, 443, 446, 
447, 448, 450, 451, 452, 455, 456, 
459. On the bull-roarer see Andrew 
Lang, Custom and Myth (London, 
1884), pp. 29-44; J. D. E. Schmeltz, 
Das Schwirrhols (Hamburg, 1896) ; 
A. C. Haddon, Zhe Study of Man 
(London and New York, 1898), pp. 
277-327; J. G. Frazer, ‘*On some 
Ceremonies of the Central Australian 
Aborigines,” Proceedings of the Austral- 
asian Association for the Advancement 
of Science for the Year rgoo (Melbourne, 
1901), pp. 317-322. The religious or 
magical use of the bull-roarer is best 
known in Australia. See, for example, 
L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, Xamzlaroé 
and Kurnai (Melbourne, Sydney, Ade- 
laide, and Brisbane, 1880), pp. 267- 
269; A. W. Howitt, ative Tribes 


resemblance of the sound to 


of South-East Australia, pp. 354, ool 
5-1 514, 515) 517, 569, 57%, 575) 
578, 579, 582, 583, 584, 589, 592, 
594, 595, 606, 659 sg., 670, 672, 

696, 715; Baldwin Spencer and F, J. © 

Gillen, Wative Tribes of Central Aus- 
tralia (London, 1899), pp. 246, 344, 
347; W. Baldwin Spencer, /ntroduc-— 
tion to the Study of Certain Native 
Tribes of the Northern Ti wrnitory 
(Bulletin of the Northern Territory, 

No. 2) (Melbourne, 1912), pp. 19 5g., 
23, 24, 31 sy-, 37 sgg.3 A. R. Brown, 
‘*Three Tribes of Western Australia,” 
Journal of the Royal mtd 
Institute, xiii. (1913) pp. 168, 174; R. 
Pettazzoni, ‘‘ Mythologie Australienne — 

du Rhombe,” Revue de 1’ Histoire des 
Religions, Ixv. (1912) pp. 149-170. 
But in the essay just referred to 
Mr. Andrew Lang shewed that the 
instrument has _ been similarly em- 

ployed not only by savages in vari- 

ous parts of the world, but also by the E 
ancient Greeks in their religious mys~_ 
teries. In the Torres Straits Islands 
it is used both at the initiation of 
young men and as a magical instru- 
ment. See Aeports of the Cambridge 
Anthropological Expedition to Torres 
Straits, v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 217, 
218, 219, 328, 330-333, 346, 352. 
In various parts of New Guinea it is 


sounded at the initiation of young men 
‘and is carefully concealed from women; 
the sound is thought to be the voice of a 
‘spirit. See Rev. J. Chalmers, Proneer- 
ing in New Guinea (London, 1887), 
p- 85; éd., ** Toaripi,” Journal of the 
“Anthropological Institute, xxvii. (1898) 
329; Rev. J. Holmes, “Initiation 
emonies of Natives of the Papuan 
ulf,” Journal of the Anthropological 
nstitute, xxxii. (1902) pp. 420, 424 
7.; O. Schellong, ‘* Das Barlum-fest 
er Gegend Finsch-hafens,” /nternat- 
tonales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, ii. 
1889) pp. 150 sg., 154 sg.3 F. 
Der 


feldthafen und seine Bewohner,” Peter- 
manns Mitteilungen, xii. (1895) p. 
89; B. Hagen, Unter den Papua’s 
(Wiesbaden, 1899), pp. 188 sg. ; Max 
_ Krieger, Meu-Guinea (Berlin, preface 
_ dated 1899), pp. 168 sgg. ; J. Vetter, 
in Mitteilungen der Geagraphischen 
_ Gesellschaft 2u Jena, xi. (1892) p. 
' 105; K. Vetter, in Nachrichten iiber 
Kaiser Withelms-Land und den Bis- 
marck-Archipel, 1897 (Berlin), p. 933 
-R. Neuhauss, Deutsch Neu- Guinea 
(Berlin, 1911), pp. 36, 297, 403, 406 
$9.5 410-412, 494 sgg.; Otto Reche, 
Der Katserin- Augusta- Flas (Ham- 
burg, 1913), pp. 349 sgg- (Ergebnisse 
der Siidsee-Expedition 1908-1910, her- 
ausgegeben von G. Thilenius). It is 
similarly used at the circumcision- 
festivals in the French Islands, to the 
west of New Britain (R. Parkinson, 
Dretssig Jahre in der Stidsee, Stuttgart, 
1907, pp. 640 sg.), and it is employed 
at mysteries or mourning’ ceremonies 
in Bougainville and other Melanesian 
Islands. See R. Parkinson, of. cit. 
pp. 658 sg.; id., Zur Ethnographie 
der Nordwestlichen Salomo Inseln (Ber- 
lin, 1899), p. 11; R. H. Codrington, 
The Melanesians (Oxford, 1891), pp. 
98 sg., 342. Among the Minangka- 
bauers of Sumatra the bull - roarer 
_ (gasiéng) is used by a rejected lover 
to induce the demons to carry off the 
soul of the jilt and so drive her mad. 
- It is made of the frontal bone of a 
brave or skilful man, and some of the 


fen oe 


_ THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 229 


hunder probably explains a certain use which the Dieri, a 
ribe of Central Australia, made of the instrument. When 


intended victim’s hair is attached to it. 
See J. L. van der Toorn, *‘ Het ani- 


‘misme bij den Minangkabauer in der 


Padangsche Bovenlanden,” Az 

tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch Indié, xxxix. (1890) pp. 
55 sg. Among the Yoruba-speaking 
negroes of the Slave Coast in West 
Africa, particularly at Abeokuta, the 
sound of the bull-roarer is supposed to 
be the voice of a great bogey named 
Oro, whose votaries compose a secret 
society under the name of Ogboni. 
When the sound of the bull-roarer is 
heard in the streets, every woman must 
shut herself up in her house and not 
look out of the window under pain of 
death. See R. F. Burton, Abcokuta 
and the Cameroons Mountains (London, 
1863), i. 197 sg.; Missionary Chautard, 
in Annales de la Propagation de la Foi, 
ly. (Lyons, 1883) pp. 192-198; Mis- 
sionary Baudin, “‘ Le Fétichisme,” Zes 
Missions Catholigues, xvi. (1884) p. 
257; P. Bouche, Za Cite des Esclaves 
et le Dahomey (Paris, 1885), p. 1243 
Mrs. R. B. Batty and Governor Mol- 
oney, ‘‘ Notes on the Yoruba Country,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xix. (1890) pp. 160-164; A. B. Ellis, 
The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the 
Slave Coast of West Africa (London, 
1894), pp. 110 sg.; R. H. Stone, /n 
Afric’ s Forest and Jungle (Edinburgh 
and London, 1900), p. 88; L. Fro- 
benius, Die Masken und Geheimbiinde 
Afrikas (Halle, 1898), pp. 95 sg¢- 
(Nova Acta, Abh. der Kaiserl. Leop.- 
Carol. Deutschen Akademie der Natur- 
Jorscher, vol. \xxiv. No. 1). Among 
the Nandi of British East Africa and 
the Bushongo of the Congo region bull- 
roarers are sounded by men to frighten 
novices at initiation. See A. C. Hollis, 
The Nandi (Oxford, 1909), pp. 40, 
56; E. Torday and T. A. Joyce, Les 
Bushongo (Brussels, 1910), p. 82. 
Among the Caffres of South Africa 
and the Boloki of the Upper Congo 
the bull-roarer is a child’s toy, but yet 
is thought to be endowed with magical 
virtue. See below, p. 232 note*. Among 
the Koskimo Indians of British Col- 


Belief of 
the Dieri 
that by 
sounding a 
bull-roarer 
a newly 
initiated 
young man 
produces a 
supply of. 
edible 
snakes and 
lizards, 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM 


230 CHAP. - 
a young man had passed through an initiatory rite, which 
consisted in cutting a row of gashes in his back, he was— 
given a bull-roarer, and when he went out in search of game, 
he used to twirl the implement in the belief that by doing © 
so, while his wounds were still unhealed, he created a good 
harvest of snakes, lizards, and other reptiles, which the 
natives employ as food; but on the contrary they imagined — 
that these supplies of food would be cut off for ever, if a 
woman were to see a bull-roarer which had been swung at 
the rites of initiation." No doubt these savages, living in a— 
parched wilderness where the existence of plants and animals 


depends on rare and irregular showers,’ have observed that ~ 


umbia the sound of the bull-roarers is 
supposed to be the voice of a spirit who 
comes to fetch away the novices. See 
Franz Boas, ‘‘ The Social Organization 
and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl 
Indians,” Report of the United States 
National Museum (Washington, 1897), 
p. 610, The bull-roarer is used as a 
sacred or magical instrument for the 
making of rain by the Zufii and other 
Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New 
Mexico, also by the Navajos and 
Apaches of the same region, and by 
the Utes of Nevada and Utah. See 
Dr. Washington Matthews, ‘‘ The 
Mountain Chant, a Navajo Ceremony,” 
Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1887), pp. 
435, 436; Captain J. G. Bourke, 
‘*The Medicine-men of the Apache,” 
Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1892), pp. 
476-479; Mrs. Matilda Coxe Steven- 
son, **The Zufi Indians,” 7Zzwerty- 
third Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology (Washington, 1904), pp. 
11S, II, 126) 80g 1 eos Lees a oe 
The Guatusos of Costa Rica ascertain 
the will of the deity by listening 
to the humming sound of the bull- 
roarer. See Dr. C. Sapper, ‘‘ Ein 
Besuch bei den Guatusos in Costarica,’’ 
Globus, \xxvi. (1899) p. 3523 2a., 
‘* Beitrage zur Ethnographie des siid- 
lichen  Mittelamerika,”  etermanns 
Mittetlungen, x\lvii. (1901) p. 36. 
The Caripunas Indians of the Madeira 
River, in Brazil, sound bull-roarers in 


lamentations for the dead. See Franz — 
Keller, Zhe Amazon and Madeira 
Rivers (London, 1874), p. 124. The — 
Bororo of Brazil also swing bull-roarers — 
at their festivals of the dead ; the sound — 
of them is the signal for the women to 
hide themselves; it is believed that 
women and children would die if they 
saw a bull-roarer. See K. von den — 
Steinen, Unter den Naturvilkern Zen- j 

x 

: 


tral-Brasiliens (Berlin, 1894), pp. 497-_ 
499. The Nahuqua and other Brazilian — 
tribes use bull-roarers in their masked — 
dances, but make no mystery of them. 
See K. von den Steinen, of. cz#. pp. 
327 sg. As to the magical use of the - 
bull-roarer, see pp. 230 sgq. 
: 


1 A, W. Howitt, ‘*The Dieri and 
other Kindred Tribes of Central Aus- 
tralia,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xx. (1891) p. 83 ; td., Native 
Tribes of South-East Australia, p. 660, — 
In the latter passage Dr. Howitt omits : 
the not unimportant particular that the : 
bull-roarer is swung for this purpose by — 
the young man Jdefore his wounds are 
healed, 


2 On the desert nature of Central 
Australia and the magical-like change - 
wrought in its fauna and flora by heavy 
rain, see Baldwin Spencer and F. J. 
Gillen, Vative Tribes of Central Aus- 
tralia (London, 1899), pp. 4 59.3 
Totemism and Exogamy, i. 170 sgq.,_ 
316 sog., 341 sg; J. G. Frazer, 
‘* Howitt and Fison,” Folk-lore, xX59 
(1909) pp. 160, 162 sg., 164. F 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 231 


_ the fall of rain is regularly followed by a great and sudden 

_ increase in the food supply, and that this increase is most 

' marked after violent thunder-storms. Hence by making a 

| noise like thunder with the help of bull-roarers they probably 

' hope, on the principle of imitative magic, to bring on a 

_ thunder-storm and with it a fertilizing deluge of rain. 

: For the same reason in the parched and torrid regions of The 

_ Arizona and New Mexico the Indians make great use of the pena 
_ bull-roarer in their ceremonies for procuring rain. For ex- Indians 
q ample, when Captain Bourke was at the Pueblo Indian village pekearstie 
_ of Walpi in the month of August, 1881, he saw the instrument Arizona 
4 in use at the snake dance. “The medicine-men twirled it niet 
| rapidly, and with a uniform motion, about the head and from 

_ front to rear, and succeeded in faithfully imitating the sound 

_ of a gust of rain-laden wind. As explained to me by one 

of the medicine-men, by making this sound they compelled 

the wind and rain to come to the aid of the crops. Ata later 

date I found it in use among the Apache, and for the same 
purpose.”* The Zufii Indians of New Mexico whirl bull- 
roarers “to create enthusiasm” among the mythical beings 

who are supposed to cause rain, or for the purpose of making 

them gather in the air over the village.” In a Zufi rain- 
making ceremony, while one medicine-man whirls a bull- 
roarer, another whips up a mixture of water and meal 

into frothy suds symbolic of clouds, and a third plays a flute. 

“All this is an invocation to the gods for rain—the one 

great and perpetual prayer of the people of this arid 
land.”* This supposed connexion of the instrument with 
thunder-storms explains why the Navajos of the same torrid 
country say that the bull-roarer should always be made of 
wood from a pine-tree that has been struck by lightning ;* 

and why the Bakairi of Brazil call the unpretentious 


1 Captain J. G. Bourke, ‘“ The 
Medicine-men of the Apache,” Winch 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Eth- 
nology (Washington, 1892), pp. 476 
5g: 
* Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
“The Zufii Indians,” Twenty-third 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ameri- 
can Ethnology (Washington, 1904), pp. 


TI5, 355- 


3 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, of. 
cit. p. 175 ; compare zd., pp. 128 sg., 
177. 

* Dr. Washington Matthews, ‘‘ The 
Navajo Chant,” 7ifth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1887), p. 436; compare z., p. 
435, where the sound of the bull- 
roarer is said to be “like that of a 
rain storm.” 


The bull- 
roarer used 
in Torres 
Straits 
Islands to 
produce 
wind 

and good 
crops. 


The 
whirling 

of bull- 
roarers by 
young men 
with bleed- 
ing backs 
in Aus- 
tralia 
seems to 
have been 
a rain- 
making 
ceremony. 


232 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cumap. 


instrument by a name that means “ thunder and lightning.” ! 
The resemblance of the sound of the bull-roarer to the 
roaring of the wind is doubtless the reason why in the Torres 
Straits Islands wizards whirled bull-roarers in order to make 
the wind to blow,? and why, when Caffres wish for calm 
weather, they forbid boys to play with bull-roarers, because 
they think that the booming noise attracts a gale of wind.® 
Hence, as an instrument whose sound resembles the rumbling 
of thunder, the roar of wind, and the patter of rain, the bull- 
roarer is naturally swung by agricultural savages as a power- 
ful means of promoting the growth of the crops. In the 
island of Kiwai, off the mouth of the Fly River in British 
New Guinea, bull-roarers are whirled in order to ensure a 
good crop of yams, sweet potatoes, and bananas.* — Similarly 
the Yabim of German New Guinea imagine that by twirling 
bull-roarers while they mention the names of the dead they 
produce a fine crop of taro.’ 

But why among the Dieri of Central Australia should 
the power of attracting rain and so ensuring a supply of 
food be specially attributed to a young man whose back has 
just been scored and whose wounds are still raw? Perhaps 
the reason may be that the blood dripping from the gashes 
is thought to resemble rain and therefore to be endowed with 
a magical potency of drawing showers from the clouds. The 
conjecture is confirmed by the observation that the Dieri 
actually do bleed themselves avowedly for the purpose of 
making rain, and they are not the only people in Australia 
and elsewhere who have resorted to this singular mode of 


1 Karl von den Steinen, Unter den 
Naturvitkern Zentral-Brasiliens (Ber- 


will attract these ferocious animals. 
See Rev. John H. Weeks, Among 


lin, 1894), p. 328. 

2 Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 
pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 
v. (Cambridge, 1904) p. 352. 

3G. McCall Theal, Aafir Folk-lore 
(London, 1886), pp. 222 sg.3; iad, 
Records of South-Eastern Africa, vii. 
(1901) p. 456; Dudley Kidd, Zhe 
Essential Kafir (London, 1904), p. 
333. For an analogous reason among 
the Boloki of the Upper Congo the 
elders do not like when boys play 
with bull-roarers, because the sound 
resembles the growl of a leopard and 


Congo Cannibals (London, 1913), p. 
157. 
# A.C. Haddon, Head-hunters, Black, 
White, and Brown (London, 1901), p. 
104; Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 
pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 
v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 218, 219; 
Rev. J. Chalmers, ‘* Notes on the 
Natives of Kiwai Island,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xxxiii. 
(1903) p. 119. 

5 H. Zahn, ‘‘ Die Jabim,” in R. 
Neuhauss’s Deutsch Neu-Guinea (Ber- 
lin, 1911), iii, 333. 


4 
4 
F 


—s \ 


/ as young men. 


| novices.° 


- initiated, man. 


1 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, i. 256-258. 

2 This a to be the view also of 
| Professor K. von den Steinen( Unter den 
| Naturvilkern Zentral-Brasiliens, pp. 
| 327 sg.), whois probably right in think- 
that the primary intention of the in- 


_ putting an end to a drought. 
_ evidence seems to hint that the whole virtue of the bull- 
_ roarer resides, as its English name implies, in its voice, and 
| that its original significance was simply that of a magical 
' instrument for causing thunder, wind, and rain.?7 When these 
' natural phenomena came to be personified as spirits, the 
4 sound of the bull-roarer was naturally interpreted as their 


‘x1 THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 233 


Altogether the foregoing 


2 Among the tribes on the Brisbane River in Queensland The 
' the weird sound of the bull-roarers swung at initiation was 
_ believed by the women and children to be made by the 
' wizards in swallowing the boys and bringing them up again 
The Ualaroi of the Upper Darling River 
| said that the boy met a ghost, who killed him and brought 
him to life again as a young man. 
_ the Lower Lachlan and Murray Rivers it was Thrumalun 
| (Daramulun) who was thought to slay and resuscitate the 
In the Arunta tribe of Central Australia, at the 
' moment when the lads are being circumcised, the bull-roarer 
| sounds in the darkness all round the ceremonial ground ; 
' and the awestruck women, listening in the distance, believe 
that it is the voice of a spirit called Twanyirika, who lives 
in wild and inaccessible regions and only comes out when a 
| youth is initiated. They think that the spirit enters the body 
of the lad after the operation of circumcision has been per- 
_ formed and carries him away into the bush, keeping him there 
i till his wound is healed. While the newly circumcised youth 


Among the natives on ° 


When he has recovered from the wound, the spirit leaves 
_him and he returns to camp an initiated, or rather partially 
He has learned, at all events, the secret of 
Twanyirika ; for no sooner is he circumcised than an elder 
brother comes up to him, and placing in his hands a bundle 


strument is to make thunder, and that 
the idea of making rain is secondary. 

3 A. W. Howitt, ‘On Australian 
Medicine Men,” Journal of the Anthro- 
pological Institute, xvi. (1887) pp. 47 
sg-; compare id., Native Tribes of 
South-East Australia, p. 596. 


sound of 
the bull- 
roarer at 
initiation is 
believed by 
a 


children 
to be the 


pare who 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap. 


234 


of sacred sticks or stones (churinga), says, “ Here is Twanyirika, 


- In some 


Australian 
tribes the 
women 
believe that 
lads at 
initiation 
are killed 
and 
brought to 
life again 
by a spirit, 
whose 
voice is 
heard in 
the sound 
of the bull- 
roarer. 


of whom you have heard so much. They are churinga and 
will help you to heal quickly ; guard them well, or else you 
and your mothers and sisters will be killed.” ? 

In this account nothing is said about killing the lad and 
bringing him to life again; but a belief in the death and 
resurrection of the novices at initiation is expressly affirmed 
to be part of the feminine creed in other tribes of Central — 
Australia. Thus in the Unmatjera tribe both women and — 


children believe that Twanyirika kills the youth and after- _ 
wards brings him to life again during the period of initiation. © 
The rites of initiation in this tribe, as in the other Central — 
tribes, comprise the operations of circumcision and sub- j 
incision ; and as soon as the second of these has been per- 
forméd on him, the young man receives from his father a 
sacred stick (churinga), with which, he is told, his spirit was 

associated in the remotest past. While he is out in the bush © 
recovering from his wounds, he must swing the bull-roarer, : 
or a being who lives up in the sky will swoop down and — 
carry him off? In the Urabunna tribe of Central Australia | 
a lad at initiation receives a bull-roarer, the very name of , 
which (chzmbalirz) is never heard by women and children, — 
They are taught to believe that the sound of it is the ee 
of a spirit called Witurna, who takes the boy away, cuts out — 
all his bowels, provides him with a new set, and brings him 
back an initiated youth. The lad is warned that on no 


account may he allow a woman or a child to see the sacred 
stick, else he and his mother and sisters will fall down as_ 
dead as stones.® In the Binbinga tribe, on the western coast. 
of the Gulf of Carpentaria, the women and children believe — 
that the noise of the bull-roarer at initiation is made by a 
spirit named Katajalina, who lives in an ant-hill and come 4 


1 Baldwin Spencer and F, J. Gillen, 
Native Tribes of Central Australia, p. 
246 note!; zd., Northern Tribes of 
Central Australia (London, 1904), p. 
497. According to the classificatory 
system of relationship, which prevails 
among all the aborigines of Australia, 
a man may have, and generally has, a 
number of women who stand to him in 
the relation of mother as well as of 


sister, though there need not.be a drop 
of blood in common between them, as 
we count kin. This explains the refer- 
ence in the text to a boy’s ‘‘ mothers,” 


2B, Spencer and F. J. Gillen, 
Northern Tribes of Central Australia 
pp. 342 sg., 498. . 

8 Spencer and Gillen, of. cét. 
498. 


| x1 THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 235 


_ out and eats up the boy, afterwards restoring him to life.’ 
- Similarly among their neighbours the Anula the women 
| imagine that the droning sound of the bull-roarer is pro- 
duced by a spirit called Gnabaia, who swallows the lads at 
initiation and afterwards disgorges them in the form of in- 
itiated men. In this tribe, after a lad has been subincised 
_ as well as circumcised, he is presented with a bull-roarer and 
_ informed that the instrument was originally made by the 
whirlwind, that it is sacred or tabooed, and that it may 
_ on no account be shewn to women or children.” 

Among the tribes settled on the southern coast of New 
South Wales, of which the Coast Murring tribe may be 
regarded as typical, the drama of resurrection from the dead 
was exhibited in a graphic form to the novices at initiation. 
_ Before they were privileged to witness this edifying spectacle 
_ they had been raised to the dignity of manhood by an old 
_ man, who promoted them to their new status by the simple 
| process of knocking a tooth out of the mouth of each with 
_ the help of a wooden chisel and hammer. The ceremony 
_ of the resurrection has been described for us in detail by an 
' eye-witness, the late Dr. A. W. Howitt, one of the best 
_ authorities on the customs of the Australian aborigines. 
| The scene selected for the sacred drama was the bottom 
_ of a deep valley, where a sluggish stream wound through a 
| bed of tall sharp-edged sedge. Though the hour was between 
_ ten and eleven o'clock in the morning, the sun had but just 
_ peeped over the mountains which enclosed the valley like a 
| wall on the east ; and while the upper slopes, clothed with 
a forest of tall rowan trees, looked warm and bright in 
' sunshine, which shot between the grey stems and under 
' the light feathery foliage of the trees, all the bottom of 
_ the dell was still ‘in deep shadow and dank with the 
4 moisture of the night’s rain. While the novices rested and 
_ warmed themselves at a crackling fire, the initiated men laid 
their heads together, prepared a stock of decorations made 


| cussion as to the shape of the grave, but the man who was 


| to be buried in it decided the question by declaring that he 
© 1 Spencer and Gillen, of. cé#. pp. 2 Spencer and Gillen, of. cit. pp. 
366 sg., Sor. 373, 501. 


A drama 
of resurrec- 
tion from 
the dead 
used to be 
shewn to 
novices at 
initiation 
in some 
tribes of 
New South 
Wales. 

Dr. 


Howitt's 
descrip- 
tion of the 
scene. — 


The seem- 
ing dead 
man in 
the grave. 


236 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuHap. 


would be laid in it on his back at full length. He was a 
man of the eagle-hawk totem and belonged to the tribal 
subdivision called Yibai. So while two men under his 
directions were digging the grave with sticks in the friable 
granitic soil, he superintended the costume of the other 
actors in the drama. Sheets of bark were beaten out into 
fleeces of stringy fibre, and in these garments six per- 
formers were clothed from head to foot so that not even 
a glimpse could be obtained of their faces. Four of them 
were tied together by a cord which was fastened to the back 
of their heads, and each of them carried two pieces of bark 
in his hands. The other two walked free, but hobbled along 
bent double and supporting their tottery steps on staves to 
mark the weight of years; for they played the part of two 
medicine-men of venerable age and great magical power. 
By this time the grave was ready, and the eagle-hawk man 
stretched himself in it at full length on a bed of leaves, his 


head resting on a rolled-up blanket, just as if he were a ; 


corpse. In his two hands, crossed on his chest, he held the 
stem of a young tree (Persoonia linearis), which had been 


pulled up by the roots and now stood planted on his chest, — 


so that the top of it rose several feet above the level of the 
ground. A light covering of dried sticks filled the grave, and 


dead leaves, tufts of grass, and small plants were artistically 


arranged over them so as to complete the illusion. All 


being now ready, the novices were led by their sisters’ 
husbands to the grave and placed in a row beside it, while — 
a singer, perched on the trunk of a fallen tree at the head of — 


the grave, crooned a melancholy ditty, the song of Yibai. 
Though the words of the song consisted merely of a monot- 
onous repetition of the words Burrin-burrin Yzbai, that is, 
Stringy-bark Yibai, they were understood to refer to the 
eagle-hawk totem, as well as to the tribal subdivision of the 
buried man. Then to the slow, plaintive but well-marked 


air of the song the actors began to move forward, winding © 
among the trees, logs, and rocks. On came the four disguised — 


men, stepping in time to the music, swaying from side to 


side, and clashing their bark clappers together at every step, — 
while beside them hobbled the two old men keeping a little — 


aloof to mark their superior dignity. They represented a 


(REDE LE a he Sita ba ge oe 


“x1 THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 237 


_ party of medicine-men, guided by two reverend seniors, 

' who had come on pilgrimage to the grave of a brother 

_ medicine-man, him of the eagle-hawk totem, who lay buried 

_ here in the lonely valley, now illumined by the warm rays 

_ of the sun; for by this time the morning was wearing on 

- to noon. When the little procession, chanting an invocation 

_-to Daramulun, had defiled from among the rocks and trees 

_ into the open, it drew up on the side of the grave opposite 

to the novices, the two old men taking up a position in the 

rear of the dancers. For some time the dance and song The resur- 
went on till the tree that seemed to grow from the grave Provence Ht 
began to quiver. “Look there!” cried the sisters’ hus- grave. 
bands to the novices, pointing to the trembling leaves. 

As they looked, the tree quivered more and more, then was 
violently agitated and fell to the ground, while amid 

the excited dancing of the dancers and the chanting of 

the tuneful choir the supposed dead man spurned from 
him the superincumbent mass of sticks and leaves, and 
springing to his feet danced his magic dance in the grave 
itself, and exhibited in his mouth the magic substances 
which he was supposed to have received from Daramulun 

in person.’ 

In some tribes of Central and Northern Australia the In some 
initiation of a medicine-man into the mysteries of his {3¢%** 
craft is supposed to be accomplished by certain spirits, medicine- 
_ who kill him, cut out his internal organs, and having pro- parse 
_ vided him with a new sct bring him to life again. Some- § thought 
_ times the spirits kindly replace the man’s human organs by or shew 
their own spiritual organs; sometimes along with the new — 
_ organs they insert magical stones in his body or even a 
serpent, and the stones or the serpents naturally endow the 
new wizards with marvellous powers. In some tribes the 
initiation takes place in a cave, where the spirits dwell. 

_ After the man has been restored to life with a new heart, 
_ anew pair of lungs, and so forth, he returns to his people 
_ in a more or less dazed condition, which his friends may at 
_ first mistake for insanity, though afterwards they recognize 


_ | A, W. Howitt, Native Tribes of Ceremonies of Initiation,” Journal of 
South-East Australia, pp. 554-556. the Anthropological Institute, xiii. 
Compare 7d., ‘‘On some Australian (1884) pp. 453 sg. 


238 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM chap, 


its true character as inspiration... One eminent medical 
practitioner in the Unmatjera tribe assured Messrs. Spencer 
and Gillen that when he came to himself after the operation, 
which in his case was performed by an aged doctor, he had 
completely forgotten who he was and all about his past life. 
After a time his venerable friend led him back to the camp 
and shewed it to him, and said, “ That woman there is your 
wife,” for she had gone clean out of his head.” We shall 
see presently that this temporary oblivion, a natural effect 
of the shock to the nervous system produced by resuscita- 
tion from the dead, is characteristic of novices under similar 
circumstances in other lands. Among the Arunta of Alice 
Springs the cave where the mystic initiation takes place is 
a limestone cavern in a range of hills which rises to the 
north of the wide level expanse known as the Emily plain. 
None of the ordinary natives would dare to set foot in the 
awful grotto, which they believe to extend for miles into the 
bowels of the earth and to be tenanted by certain ancestral 
spirits, who live there in perpetual sunshine and amid streams 
of running water, an earthly paradise by contrast with the 
arid sun-scorched steppes and barren mountains outside. 
White men have explored the cave, and if they perceived 
no spirits, they found bats in plenty. The man who aspires 
to the rank of a wizard lies down at the mouth of the 
cave and falls asleep; and as he sleeps one of the ancestral 
spirits steals up to him and drives an invisible spear through 
his neck from back to front. The point of the spear comes 
out through the man’s tongue, leaving a hole through which 
you could put your little finger, and this hole the man 
retains for the rest of his natural life, or at least so long as 
he retains his magical powers ; for if the hole should close 
up, these spiritual gifts and graces would depart from him. 
A second thrust from the invisible spear transfixes the man’s 
head from ear to ear; he drops down dead, and is immedi- 


ately transported into the depths of the cavern, where the 3 


spirits dissect his dead body, extract the old viscera, and 


1B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, 487, 488; z¢@., Across Australia (Lon- s 


Native Tribes of Central Australia, don, 1912), ii. 334 sgg. 


PP. 523-5253 z., Northern Tribes of 2 Spencer and Gillen, Morthern q 
Central Australia, 480 sg., 484, 485, Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 480 sg. ei 


ai i 
a ere 


ee ER, eh ee Oe Re Te as ee ee ey ee Te 


a et a a i al Li 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 239 


| replace them with a new sct in the manner already de- 
scribed.) 

In this account of the manner in which medicine-men 
' obtain their magical powers not only are the supposed death 
- and resurrection of the novice worthy of attention, but also 
the exchange of internal organs which in the Binbinga and 
_ Mara tribes is supposed to be effected between the man 
3 and the spirit ;* for this exchange resembles that which, on 
_ the theory I have suggested, may be thought to take place 
| between a lad and his totem at the ceremonies of initiation 
' which mark the momentous transition from boyhood to 
manhood. Further, the bodily mutilation which is the 
_ visible sign of the medicine-man’s initiation (for however 
_ the hole may be made it certainly exists in the tongues of 
_ regular Arunta practitioners) corresponds to the bodily 
_ mutilations of other sorts, which in many savage tribes 
| attest to the world that the mutilated persons are fullgrown 
/ men. What the precise meaning of such mutilations may 
| be, still remains very obscure ; but they seem in some cases 
_ to be directly associated with the conception of death and 
__ resurrection. 

This association certainly comes out plainly in the rites 
of initiation through which in some parts of New Guinea 
_ all lads must pass before they attain to the status of adults. 
| The rites are observed by a group of tribes who occupy 
| contiguous territories about Finsch Harbour and Huon 
2 Gulf in German New Guinea. The tribes in question are 
the Yabim, the Bukaua, the Kai, and the Tami. All of 
them except the Kai belong to the Melanesian stock and 
are therefore presumably immigrants from the adjoining 
islands; but the Kai, who inhabit the rugged, densely 
_ wooded, and rainy mountains inland from Finsch Harbour, 
belong to the aboriginal Papuan stock and differ from their 
neighbours in speech as well as in appearance. Yet the 


1F. J. Gillen, ‘‘ Notes on some 
Manners and Customs of the Abori- 


_ ing to the Arunta Tribe,” in Report on 
the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedi- 
tion to Central Australia, Part iv. 
E Anthropology (London and Melbourne, 
1896), pp. 180 sg.; B. Spencer and 


F, J. Gillen, Native Tribes of Central 
Australia (London, 1899), pp. 523 
5g.; t@., Across Australia (London, 
1912), ii. 335. 

2 B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, 
Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 
pp- 487, 488; id., Across Australia, 
ii. 481 sg. 


Notable 
features in 
the initia- 
tion of 
Australian 
medicine- 
men. 


Rites of 
initiation in 


The 
novices 
thought 
to be 
swallowed 
and dis- 
gorged by 
a monster, 
whose 
voice is 
heard in 
the hum 
of the bull- 
roarers, 


240 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cCHnap. 


rites of initiation which all these tribes celebrate and the 
beliefs which they associate with them are so similar that 
a single description will apply accurately enough to them all. — 
All of them, like many Australian tribes, require every male — 
member of the tribe to be circumcised before he ranks as 
a full-grown man ; and the tribal initiation, of which circum- 
cision is the central feature, is conceived by them, as by 
some Australian tribes, as a process of being swallowed and 
disgorged by a mythical monster, whose voice is heard in — 
the humming sound of the bull-roarer. Indeed the New ~ 
Guinea tribes not only impress this belief on the minds — 
of women and children, but enact it in a dramatic form 
at the actual rites of initiation, at which no woman or un- ~ 
initiated person may be present. For this purpose a hut — 
about a hundred feet long is erected either in the village or 
in a lonely part of the forest. It is modelled in the shape — 
of the mythical monster; at the end which represents his 
head it is high, and it tapers away at the other end. A ~ 
betel-palm, grubbed up with the roots, stands for the back- j 
bone of the great being and its clustering fibres for his — 
hair ; and to complete the resemblance the butt end of the — 
building is adorned by a native artist with a pair of goggle ~ 
eyes and a gaping mouth. When after a tearful parting — 
from their mothers and women folk, who believe or pretend — 
to believe in the monster that swallows their dear ones, the © 
awe-struck novices are brought face to face with this im- — 
posing structure, the huge creature emits a sullen growl, — 
which is in fact no other than the humming note of bull- | 
roarers swung by men concealed in the monster's belly. — 
The actual process of deglutition is variously enacted. 
Among the Tami it is represented by causing the candi-— 
dates to defile past a row of men who hold bull-roarers over — 
their heads ; among the Kai it is more graphically set forth» 
by making them pass under a scaffold on which stands a 
man, who makes a gesture of swallowing and takes in fact 
a gulp of water as each trembling novice passes beneath 
him. But the present of a pig, opportunely offered for the’ 
redemption of the youth, induces the monster to relent and 
disgorge his victim; the man who represents the monster 
accepts the gift vicariously, a gurgling sound is heard, and 


xt THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 241 


the water which had just been swallowed descends in a jet on 
the novice. This signifies that the young man has been 
released from the monster’s belly. However, he has now 
to undergo the more painful and dangerous operation of 
circumcision. It follows immediately, and the cut made by 
the knife of the operator is explained to be a bite or scratch 
which the monster inflicted on the novice in spewing him out 
of his capacious maw. While the operation is proceeding, a 
prodigious noise is made by the swinging of bull-roarers to 
represent the roar of the dreadful being who is in the act 
of swallowing the young men. 


in 


her son slipped into the wrong stomach, from which it was 
i impossible to extricate him. After they have been circum- 
‘cised the lads must remain for some months in seclusion, 
shunning all contact with women and even the sight of 
them. They live in the long hut which represents the 
“monster's belly ; among the Yabim they beguile the tedium 
‘of this enforced leisure by weaving baskets and playing on 
ertain sacred flutes, which are never used except on these 
ccasions. The instruments are of two patterns. One is 
Iled the male and the other the female; and they are 
believed to be married to each other. No woman may see 
these mysterious flutes; if she did, she would die. When 
‘the long seclusion is over, the lads, now ranking as initiated 
_me en, are brought back with great pomp and ceremony to 
“the village, where they are received with sobs and tears of 
“joy by the women, as if the grave had given up its dead. 
At first the young men keep their eyes rigidly closed or 
even sealed with-a plaster of chalk, and they appear not 
to understand the words of command which are given them 
by an elder. Gradually, however, they come to themselves 
s if awaking from a stupor, and next day they bathe and 
ash off the crust of white chalk with which their bodies 
had been coated.! 

1 As to the initiatory rites among richten tiber Kaiser Wilhelms- Land 
e Yabim, see K. Vetter, in Wach- und den Bismarck-Archipel, 1897, 
PT. VII. VOL. I R 


stomach as well as a human stomach, and that unfortunately ern 


_ When, as sometimes happens, a lad dies from the effect The 
of the operation, he is buried secretly in the forest, and his fae 
sorrowing mother is told that the monster has a pig’s novices 


er in- 


The 
monster 
who is 
supposed 
to swallow 
the novices 
is appar- 
ently con- 
ceived as a 
ghost or 
ancestral 
spirit. 


242 ' THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cHap, 


It is highly significant that all these tribes of New 
Guinea apply the same word to the bull-roarer and to the 
monster, who is supposed to swallow the novices at circum- 
cision, and whose fearful roar is represented by the hum of | 
the harmless wooden instruments. The word in the speech 
of the Yabim and Bukaua is dalum; in that of the Kai it 
is mgosa; and in that of the Tami it is Aamz Further, it 
deserves to be noted that in three languages out of the four 
the same word which is applied to the bull-roarer and to the 

monster means also a ghost or spirit of the dead, while in 
the fourth language (the Kai) it signifies “grandfather.” 
From this it seems to follow that the being who swallows 
and disgorges the novices at initiation is believed to be a 
powerful ghost or ancestral spirit, and that the bull-roarer, 
which bears his name, is his material representative. That 
would explain the jealous secrecy with which the sacred imple- 
ment is kept from the sight of women. While they are not 
in use, the bull-roarers are stowed away in the men’s club- 
houses, which no woman may enter; indeed no woman or 
uninitiated person may set eyes on a ‘hdl roarer under pain 


of death.’ 
large Papuan tribe on the 


pp. 92 sg.; wd., in Mitteilungen der 
Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena, 
xl, (1892) p. 105; za., Komm heriiber 
und hilf uns! ii. (Barmen, 1898) p. 
18; zd., cited by M. Krieger, JVez- 
Guinea (Berlin, preface dated 1899), 
pp. 167-170; O. Schellong, ‘Das 
Barlum - fest der Gegend  Finsch- 
hafens,” Jnternationales Archiv fur 
Ethnographie, ii. (1889) pp. 145-162 ; 
H. Zahn, ‘Die Jabim,” in R. Neu- 
hauss’s Deutsch Neu-Guinea (Berlin, 
IQII), iii. 296-298. As to the initi- 
atory rites among the Bukaua, see S. 
Lehner, ‘‘ Bukaua,” in R. Neuhauss’s 
Deutsch Neu-Guinea, iii. 402-4103 
among the Kai, see Ch. Keysser, 
**Aus dem Kai-Leute,” zdzd. pp. 34- 
40; among the Tami, see G. Bamler, 
“Tami,” zbéd. pp. 493-507. I have 
described the rites of the various tribes 
more in detail in The Belief in Immor- 
tality and the Worshipofthe Dead, i. 250- 
255, 260 sg., 290 sg., 301 sg. In the 


Similarly among the Tugeri or Kaya-Kaya, a 


south coast of Dutch New! 


Bukaua and Tami tribes the initiation 
ceremonies are performed not in the 
forest but in a special house built for 
the purpose in the village, which the 
women are obliged to vacate till the 
rites are over, 


Ai th et ae 


1 The Belief in Immortality and thal 
Worship of the Dead, i. 250, 251, 255, 
261, 290 sg., 301. Among theg 
Bukaua not only does the bull-roarer— 
bear the general name for a ghost — 
(dalum), but each particular bull oar 
bears in addition the name of a par- 
ticular dead man, and varies in ape 
and importance with the dignity a 
importance of the deceased person 
whom it represents. And besides the ~ 
big bull-roarers with gruff voices there. 
are little bull-roarers with shrill voices, 
which represent the shrill-voiced wives 
of the ancient heroes. See S. Lehner, — 
‘* Bukaua,” in R. Neuhauss’s Deutsch 
Neu-Guinea, iii. 410-412. 


: 
: 


he worship of ancestors ; 


cloth, or what not.® 


1 R. Péch, *‘ Vierter Bericht iiber 
eine Reise nach Neu-Guinea,” Sifz- 
wesberichte der  mathematischen- 


ilung i. pp. 901, 902. 

2 Rev. Lorimer Fison, ‘‘ The Vanga 
Sacred Stone Enclosure of Waini- 
ala, Fiji,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
gical Institute, xiv. (1885) p. 27. 
Nanga or sacred enclosure of 
ones, with its sacred rites, was known 
aly to certain tribes of Fiji (the Nuy- 
a, Vatusila, Mbatiwai, and Mdavu- 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 243 


“Guinea, the name of the bull-roarer, which they call sosom, 
is given to a mythical giant, who is supposed to appear 
very year with the south-east monsoon. 
‘a festival is held in his honour and bull-roarers are swung. 
Boys are presented to the giant, and he kills them, but 
considerately brings them to life again.’ 

_ In certain districts of Viti Levu, the largest of the Fijian 
j Islands, the drama of death and resurrection used to be 
“acted with much solemnity before the eyes of young men at 
jnitiation. The ceremonies were performed in certain sacred 
Rrecinicts of oblong shape, enclosed by low walls or rows of 
ones but open to the sky. Such a precinct was called a; 
anga, and it might be described as a temple dedicated to 
for in it sacrifices and prayers 
were offered to the ancestral spirits. For example, the first- 
fruits of the yam harvest were regularly presented with great 
emony to the souls of the dead in the temple before the 
k of the crop was dug for the people’s use, and no man 
might taste of the new yams until this solemn offering had 
been made. The yams so offered were piled up in the sacred 
enclosure and left to rot there ; 
to eat of these dedicated fruits, it was believed that he would 
: Any initiated man had the right of approaching 
e ancestral spirits at any time in their holy place, where 


When he comes, 


if any man were so bold as 


them by laying down his offering of a pig, or yams, or eels, 
Of these offerings perhaps the most 
rious was that of the foreskins of young men, who were 
cumcised as a sort of vicarious sacrifice or atonement for 


tukia), who inhabited a comparatively 
small area, barely a third, of the 
island of Viti Levu. As to the insti- 
tution in general, see Rev. Lorimer 
Fison, of. cit. pp. 14-31; A. B. 
Joske, ‘“‘The Nanga of Viti-levu,” 
Internationales Archiv fiir Ethno- 
graphie, ii. (1889) pp. 254-266; Basil 
Thomson, 7he Fijians (London, 1908), 
pp. 146-157. Compare The Belief in 
Immortality and the Worship of the 
Dead, i. 427-438. 


3 Rev. Lorimer Fison, of. a# p. 
26; Basil Thomson, of. cet, 147. 


Descrip- 
tion of the 
rite. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM 


244 CHAP. 


the recovery of a sick relative, it might be either their father 
or one of their father’s brothers. The bloody foreskins, stuck 
in the cleft of a split reed, were presented to the ancestral 
gods in the temple by the chief priest, who prayed for the 
sick man’s recovery.' The temple or sacred enclosure was 
divided into two or three compartments by cross walls of 
stones, and the inmost of these compartments was the Vanga- 
tambu-tambu, or Holy of Holies. 

In these open-air temples of the dead the ceremony of 
initiating young men was performed as a rule every year at 
the end of October or the beginning of November, which 
was the commencement of the Fijian New Year; hence the 
novices who were initiated at that season went by the name 
of Vzlavou or New Year’s Men. The exact time for cele- 
brating the rite was determined by the flowering of the 
ndrala tree (Erythrina) ; but it roughly coincided with the 
New Year of the Tahitians and Hawaiians, who dated the 
commencement of the year by observation of the Pleiades. 
The highlanders of Fiji, who alone celebrated these rites, did 


not trouble their heads about the stars.® 


1 Rev. Lorimer Fison, of. czt. pp. 27 
sg. The phrase ‘‘the ancestral gods” 
is used by Mr. Fison, one of our best 
authorities on Fijian religion. Mr. 
Basil Thomson (of. czt. p. 157) 
questions the accuracy of Mr. Fison’s 
account of this vicarious sacrifice on 
the ground that every youth was regu- 
larly circumcised as a matter of course. 
But there seems to be no inconsistency 
between the two statements. While 
custom required that every youth should 
be circumcised, the exact time for per- 
forming the ceremony need not have 
been rigidly prescribed ; and if a sav- 
ing or atoning virtue was attributed to 
the sacrifice of foreskins, it might be 
thought desirable in cases of emergency, 
such as serious illness, to anticipate it 
for the benefit of the sufferer. 

2 According to Mr. Fison, the en- 
closure was divided into three com- 
partments; Mr. Basil Thomson de- 
scribes only two, though by speaking 
of one of them as the ‘* Middle 
Nanga” he seems to imply that there 
were three. The structure was a rough 


As a preparation 


parallelogram lying east and west, 
about a hundred feet long by fifty feet 
broad, enclosed by walls or rows of 
stone slabs embedded endwise in the 
earth. See Basil Thomson, of. cites 
PP: 147 59. 

3 A. B. Joske, ‘* The Nanga of Viti- 
levu,” Internationales Archiv fiir Eth- 
nographie, ii. (1889) p. 259; Basil 
Thomson, Zhe Fijians, pp. 150 sg. 
According to Mr. Fison (of. cé#. p. 19) 
the initiatory ceremonies were held as 
a rule only every second year; but he 
adds: ‘* This period, however, is not 
necessarily restricted to two years. 
There are always a number of youths 
who are growing to the proper age, 
and the length of the interval depends. 
upon the decision of the elders.” Per- 
haps the seeming discrepancy between 
our authorities on this point may be ex- 
plained by Mr, Joske’s statement (p. 
259) that the rites are held in alternat 
years by two different sets of men, th 
Kai Vesina and the Kai Rukuruku 
both of whom claim to be descend 
from the original founders of the rites, 


} 


‘sacred ground, they beheld a sight which froze their souls 
‘with horror. Stretched on the ground was a row of dead or The mimic 
‘seemingly dead and murdered men, their bodies cut open %*™ 
and covered with blood, their entrails protruding. At the 
further end sat the High Priest, regarding them with a 
stony glare, and to reach him the trembling novices had 
_ to crawl on hands and knees over the ghastly blood- 
_ bedabbled corpses that lay between. Having done so they 
_ drew up in a line before him. Suddenly he blurted out a The mimic 
"piercing yell, at which the counterfeit dead men started to pire 
their feet and ran down to the river to cleanse themselves 
from the blood and guts of pigs with which they were 
beslobbered. The High Priest now unbent his starched 
dignity, and skipping from side to side cried in stridulous 
tones, “ Where are the people of my enclosure? Are they 
gone to Tonga Levu? Are they gone to the deep sea?” 
' He was soon answered by a deep-mouthed chant, and back 
from the river marched the dead men come to life, clean, 
fresh, and garlanded, swaying their bodies in time to the 
4 music of their solemn hymn. They took their places in 
front of the novices and a religious silence ensued. Such 
was the drama of death and resurrection. It was immedi- The sacra- 
Ss followed by a sacramental meal. Four old men of ™<@! 
_ the highest order of initiates now entered the Holy of 
_ Holies. The first bore a cooked yam carefully wrapt up in 
leaves so that no part of it should touch the hands of the 
bearer: the second carried a piece of baked pork similarly 
_ enveloped: the third held a drinking-cup full of water and 
- wrapt round with native cloth; and the fourth bore a 
4 napkin of the same stuff. The first elder passed along the 
_ row of novices putting the end of the yam into each of their 


The custom of dating the New Year  nesians. See The Spirits of the Corn 
_by observation of the Pleiades was and of the Wild, i. 312 sg. 
apparently universal among the Poly- 


The inten- 
tion of the 
rite, 


Initiatory 
rite in the 
island of 


* Rook: 


pretence 
that the 
novices are 
swallowed 
by the 
devil. 


Secret 
society of 
the Duk- 
duk in New 
Britain. 


246 


mouths, and as he did so each of them nibbled a morsel of 
the sacred food: the second elder did the same with the 
the third elder followed with the holy 
water, with which each novice merely wetted his lips; and ~ 
the fourth elder wiped all their mouths with his napkin. | 
Then the high priest or one of the elders addressed the 
young men, warning them solemnly against the sacrilege of 
betraying to the profane vulgar any of the high mysteries — 
which they had witnessed, and threatening all such traitors © 
The general intention of the — 


hallowed pork: 


with the vengeance of the gods. 
initiatory rites seems to have been to introduce the young 


men to the worshipful spirits of the dead at their temple, 
and to cement the bond between them by a sacramental © 


meal.! 


The people of Rook, an island between New Guinea and 7 


New Britain, hold festivals at which one or two disguised men, 


their heads covered with wooden masks, go dancing through © 


the village, followed by all the other men. They demand 


that the circumcised boys who have not yet been swallowed — 


by Marsaba (the devil) shall be given up to them. The 


boys, trembling and shrieking, are delivered to them, and — 


must creep between the legs of the disguised men. Then 


the procession moves 


not disgorge them till he receives a present of pigs, taro, 
and so forth. So all the villagers, according to their means, 
contribute provisions, which are then consumed in the name 
of Marsaba.” 
association called the Duk-duk. 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM car.” 


through the village again, and © 
announces that Marsaba has eaten up the boys, and will — 


aaa tM male 


In New Britain all males are members of an 
The boys are admitted to — 


it very young, but are not fully initiated till their fourteenth — 


year, when they receive from the Tubuvan or Tubuan a 


1 Rev. Lorimer Fison, of. cé¢. pp. 
20-23; A. B. Joske, of. cit. pp. 264 
sg. 3 Basil Thomson, Zhe Fijians, pp. 
150-153. The sacramental character 
of the meal is recognized by Mr. Fison, 
who says (p. 23) that after the per- 
formance of the rites the novices ‘‘ are 
now Vilavéu, accepted members of the 
Nanga, qualified to take their place 
among the men of the community, 
though still only on probation. As 
children—their childhood being indi- 


cated by their shaven heads—they 


were presented to the ancestors, and 


their acceptance was notified by what — 


(looking at the matter from the 
natives’ standpoint) we might, without 


irreverance, almost call the sacrament — 


of food and water, too sacred even for 
the elders’ hands to touch.” 

2 Paul: Reina, ‘* Ueber die Bewoh- 
ner der Insel Rook,” Zeitschrift fir 
alleemeine Erdkunde, N.F., iv. (1858) 


pp- 356 sg. 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 247 


| terrible blow with a cane, which is supposed to kill them. 
@ The Tubuan and the Duk-duk are two disguised men who 
— represent cassowaries. They dance with a short hopping 
“step in imitation of the cassowary. Each of them wears a 
huge hat like an extinguisher, woven of grass or palm- 
fibres; it is six feet high, and descends to the wearer's 
shoulders, completely concealing his head and face. From 
_ the neck to the knees the man’s body is hidden by a crino- 
_ line made of the leaves of a certain tree fastened on hoops, 
" one above the other. The Tubuan is regarded as a female, 
' the Duk-duk as a male. The former is supposed to breed 
and give birth to the novices, who are accordingly looked 
' upon as newly born. The female masks are very plain 
_ compared with the male masks. Two of them are regularly 
_ kept from year to year in order that they may annually 
_ breed new Duk-duks. When they are wanted for this purpose 
_ they are brought forth, decorated afresh, and provided with 
_ new leaf dresses to match. According to one account, women 
_ and children may not look upon one of these disguised men 
4 or they would die. So strong is this superstition among 
them that they will run away and hide as soon as they hear 
him coming, for they are aware of his approach through a 
_ peculiar shrieking noise he utters as he goes along. In the 
district of Berara, where red is the Duk-duk colour, the mere 
sight of a red cloth is enough to make the women take to 
_ their heels. The common herd are not allowed to know 
who the masker is. If he stumbles and his hat falls to the 
ground, disclosing his face, or his crinoline is torn to tatters 
by the bushes, his attendants immediately surround him to 
hide his person from the vulgar eye. According to one 
writer, indeed, the performer who drops his mask, or lets it 
fall so that the sharp point at the top sticks in the ground, 
is put to death. The institution of the Duk-duk is common 
to the neighbouring islands of New Ireland and the Duke 
of York.’ 


1 R. Parkinson, Jm Bismarck Ireland,” Journal of the Royal Geogra- 


Archipel (Leipsic, 1887), Pp- 129-134; 
td. Dreissig Jahre in der Siidsee 


(Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 567 sgg.; Rev. 


G. Brown, ** Notes on the Duke of 


York Group, New Britain, and New 


phical Society, x\vii. (1878) pp. 148 sq. ; 
H. H. Romilly, ‘‘ The Islands of the 
New Britain Group,” Proceedings of 
the Royal Geographical Society, N.S., 
ix. (1887) pp. I1sg.; Rev. G. Brown, 


Novices 
supposed 
to be killed. 


Initiatory 
rite in 
Halma- 
hera : pre- 
tence of 
begetting 
the novices 
anew. 


248 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap. 


Among the Galelareese and Tobelorese of Halmahera, | 
an island to the west of New Guinea, boys go through a form - 
of initiation, part of which seems to consist in a pretence of 
begetting them anew. When a number of boys have reached © 
the proper age, their parents agree to celebrate the ceremony — 
at their common expense, and they invite others to be present 
A shed is erected, and two long tables are placed in 
it, with benches to match, one for the men and one for the — 
When all the preparations have been made for a — 
feast, a great many skins of the rayfish, and some pieces of © 
a wood which imparts a red colour to water, are taken to the 


at it: 


women. 


shed. A priest or elder causes a vessel to be placed in the 


sight of all the people, and then begins, with significant 


gestures, to rub a piece of the wood with the ray-skin. The 
powder so produced is put in the vessel, and at the same 
time the name of one of the boys is called out. The same 
proceeding is repeated for each boy. Then the vessels are 
filled with water, after which the feast begins. At the third 
cock-crow the priest smears the faces and bodies of the boys 
with the red water, which represents the blood shed at the 
perforation of the hymen. Towards daybreak the boys are 
taken to the wood, and must hide behind the largest trees. 
The men, armed with sword and shield, accompany them, 
dancing and singing. The priest knocks thrice on each of 
the trees behind which a boy is hiding. All day the boys 
stay in the wood, exposing themselves to the heat of the sun 
as much as possible. In the evening they bathe and return 
to the shed, where the women supply them with food. 


<a op ie ae ae a 


ibid. p. 17; 7@., Melanesians and Poly- 
nestans (London, 1910), pp. 60 sgqg. ; 
W. Powell, Wanderings in a Wild 
Country (London, 1883), pp. 60-66; 
C. Hager, Kaiser Withelm’s Land und 
der Bismarck Archipel (Leipsic, N.D.), 
pp. 115-128; Hubner, quoted by W. 
H. Dall, ‘*On masks, labrets, and 
certain aboriginal customs,” Third 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Eth- 
nology (Washington, 1884), p. 100; 
P. A. Kleintitschen, Dze Ktistenbewoh- 
ner der Gazellehalbinsel (Hiltrup bei 
Miinster, N.D.), pp. 350 sgg.; H. 
Schurtz, Altersklassen und Méanner- 
biinde (Berlin, 1902), pp. 369-377. 


The inhabitants of these islands are 
divided into two exogamous classes, 
which in the Duke of York Island have 
two insects for their totems. One of 
the insects is the mantis religiosus ; the 
other is an insect that mimics the leaf 
of the horse-chestnut tree very closely. 
See Rev. B. Danks, *‘ Marriage Customs 
of the New Britain Group,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xviii. 
(1889) pp. 281 sg.3; Zotemism and 
Exogamy, ii. 118 sgg. 


1jJ. G. F. Riedel, “Galela und 
Tobeloresen,” Zeztschrift fiir Lthno- 


logie, xvii. (1885) pp. 81 sg. 


Kakian association. 


hed. 


_ 1 The Kakian association and its 
itiatory ceremonies have often been 
described. See Francois Valentyn, 
Oud en nieuw Oost-Indién (Dordrecht 
nd Amsterdam, 1724-1726), iii. 3 sg. ; 
on Schmid, ‘* Het Kakihansch Ver- 
' bond op het eiland Ceram,” 77jaschrift 
| voor Neérlands Indié (Batavia, 1843), 
ii. pp. 25-38; A. van Ekris, ‘‘ Het 
Ceramsche Kakianverbond,” Mededeel- 
ingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zen- 
linggenootschap, ix. (1865) pp. 205- 
26 (repeated with slight changes in 
waschrife voor Indische Taal- Land- 
en Volkenkunde, xvi. (1867) pp. 290- 
315); P. Fournier, ‘‘ De Zuidkust van 
Ceram,” Tijdschrift voor Indische 
‘Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xvi. 
(1867) pp. 154-156; W. A. van Rees, 
/Die FPionniers der Beschaving in 
Weérlands Indié (Arnheim, 1867), 
‘pp. 92-106; G. W. W. C. Baron 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 249 


In the west of Ceram boys at puberty are admitted to 
Modern writers have commonly 
ded this association as primarily a political league in- in Ceram. 
ted to resist foreign domination. 
ire purely religious and social, though it is possible that the 
‘priests may have occasionally used their powerful influence 
for political ends. The society is in fact merely one of those 
idely-diffused primitive institutions, of which a chief object 
the initiation of young men. 
ature of the association has been duly recognized by the 
distinguished Dutch ethnologist, J. G. F. Riedel. 
house is an oblong wooden shed, situated under the darkest 
trees in the depth of the forest, and is built to admit so little 
light that it is impossible to see what goes on in it. Every 
village thas such a house. Thither the boys who are to be 
itiated are conducted blindfold, followed by their parents 
nd relations. Each boy is led by the hand by two men, 
who act as his sponsors or guardians, looking after him 
during the period of initiation. 
| before the shed, the high priest calls aloud upon the devils. 
mmediately a hideous uproar is heard to proceed from the 
It is made by men with bamboo trumpets, who have 
been secretly introduced into the building by a back door, 
but the women and children think it is made by the devils, 


In reality its objects 


In recent years the true 


The Kakian 


When all are assembled 


van Hoévell, Ambon en meer tepaal- 
delijk de Oeliasers (Dordrecht, 1875), 
pp- 153 sgg- ; Schulze, ‘‘ Ueber Ceram 
und seine Bewohner,” Verhandlungen 
der Berliner Gesellschaft fir Anthro- 
pologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte 
(1877), p. 117; W. Joest, “ Beitrage 
zur Kenntniss der Eingebornen der 
Insel Formosa und Ceram,” zézd. 
(1882) p. 64; H. von Rosenberg, 
Der Mailayische Archipel (Leipsic, 
1878), p. 318; A. Bastian, Jndo- 
nesten, i. (Berlin, 1884) pp. 145-148; 
J. G. F. Riedel, De siuzk- en kroes- 
harige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua 
(The Hague, 1886), pp. 107-111; 
O. D. Tauern, ‘* Ceram,” Zeitschrift 
Sir Ethnologiz, xiv. (1913) pp. 167 sg. 
The best accounts are those of Valentyn, 
Von Schmid, Van Ekris, Van Rees, 
and Riedel, which are accordingly fol- 
lowed in the text. 


The 
Kakian 
association 


The rite of 
initiation : 
pretence of 
killing the 
novices. 


The resur- 
rection of 


the novices. 


250 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuav.) 


and are much terrified. Then the priests enter the shed, 
followed by the boys, one at a time. As soon as each boy 
has disappeared within the precincts, a dull chopping sound © 
is heard, a fearful cry rings out, and a sword or spear, dripping - 
with blood, is thrust through the roof of the shed. This is a~ 
token that the boy’s head has been cut off, and that the devil — 
has carried him away to the other world, there to regenerate 
and transform him. So at sight of the bloody sword the ~ 
mothers weep and wail, crying that the devil has murdered ~ 
their children. In some places, it would seem, the boys are 
pushed through an opening made in the shape of a crocodile’s” 
jaws or a cassowary’s beak, and it is then said that the devil | 
has swallowed them. The boys remain in the shed for five 
or nine days. Sitting in the dark, they hear the blast of the 
bamboo trumpets, and from time to time the sound of musket — 
shots and the clash of swords. Every day they bathe, and 

their faces and bodies are smeared with a yellow dye, to give { 
them the appearance of having been swallowed by the devil. 
During his stay in the Kakian house each boy has one — 
or two crosses tattooed with thorns on his breast or arm. 
When they are not sleeping, the lads must sit in a crouch-— 
ing posture without moving a muscle. As they sit in a row 
cross-legged, with their hands stretched out, the chief takes 
his trumpet, and placing the mouth of it on the hands of - 
each lad, speaks through it in strange tones, imitating the 
voice of the spirits. He warns the lads, under pain of death, 
to observe the rules of the Kakian society, and never to 
reveal what has passed in the Kakian house. The novices 
are also told by the priests to behave well to their blood 
relations, and are taught the traditions and secrets of the 
tribe. : 
Meantime the mothers and sisters of the lads have gone 
home to weep and mourn. But in a day or two the men 
who acted as guardians or sponsors to the novices return 
to the village with the glad tidings that the devil, at the 

intercession ‘of the priests, has restored the lads to life. The 

men who bring this news come in a fainting state and 
daubed with mud, like messengers freshly arrived from the 
nether world. Before leaving the Kakian house, each lad 

receives from the priest a stick adorned at both ends with 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 251 


“cock’s or cassowary’s feathers. The sticks are supposed to 
have been given to the lads by the devil at the time when he 
estored them to life, and they serve as a token that the youths 
have been in the spirit land. When they return to their 
jomes they totter in their walk, and enter the house back- 
ard, as if they had forgotten how to walk properly ; or they 
ter the house by the back door. If a plate of food is given 
‘to them, they hold it upside down. They remain dumb, 


acts of life, as if they were new-born children. Further, 
‘upon leaving the Kakian house the boys are strictly for- 
bidden to eat of certain fruits until the next celebration of 
the rites has taken place. And for twenty or thirty days 
their hair may not be combed by their mothers or sisters. 
| At the end of that time the high priest takes them to a 
lonely place in the forest, and cuts off a lock of hair from the 
_ crown of each of their heads. After these initiatory rites the 
_ lads are deemed men, and may marry; it would be a scandal 
f they married before. 

In the region of the Lower Congo a simulation of death The secret 
_and resurrection is, or rather used to be, practised by the papa 
members of a guild or secret society called ndembo. The in the 
| society had nothing to do with puberty or circumcision, pig flew 
| though the custom of circumcision is common in the country. Congo. 
Young people and adults of both sexes might join the 
guild; after initiation they were called “the Knowing 
| Ones” (mganga). To found a branch of the society it was 
_ fecessary to have an albino, who, whether a child, lad, or 
| adult, was the acknowledged head of the society.1 The 
_ ostensible reason for starting a branch of the guild in a 
_ district was commonly an epidemic of sickness, “and the 


1 No reason is assigned for this English traveller Andrew Battel ob- 
curious choice of a president. Can serves that ‘‘the children of this 
it have been that, because negro chil- country are born white, but change 
’ dren are born pale or nearly white, their colour in two days’ time to 
» an albino was deemed a proper presi- a perfect black” (*‘ Adventures of 
» dent for a society, all the initiated Andrew Battel,” in J. Pinkerton’s 
’ members of which claimed to have Voyages and Travels, xvi. London, 
» been born again? Speaking of the 1814, p. 331). 


s people of the Lower Congo the old 


Pretence of 
death asa 
preliminary 
to resurrec- 
tion, 


252 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM chap. — 


idea was to go into ndembo to die, and after an indefinite 
period, from a few months to two or three years, to be 
resurrected with a new body not liable to the sickness then — 
troubling the countryside. Another reason for starting a 
ndembo was a dearth of children in a district. It was 
believed that good luck in having children wouid attend — 
those who entered or died udembo. But the underlying ! 
idea was the same, ze. to get a ‘new body’ that would be 
healthy and perform its functions properly.” The quarters 3 
of the society were always a stockaded enclosure in a great ; 
thick forest ; a gate of planks painted yellow and red gave © 
access to it, and within there was an assemblage of huts. 
The place was fenced to keep intruders from prying into — 
the mysteries of the guild, and it was near water. Un- 
initiated persons might walk on the public roads through — 
the forest, but if they were caught in bye-paths or hunting — 
in the woods, they were flogged, fined, and sometimes killed. 
They might not even look upon the persons of those who 
had “died xdembo”; hence when these sanctified persons — 
were roving about the forest or going to the river, the boom- — 
ing notes of a drum warned the profane vulgar to keep out 
of their way. ; 

When the stockade and the huts in the forest were © 
ready to receive all who wished to put off the old man or © 
woman and to put on the new, one of the initiates gave — 
the sign and the aspirant after the higher life dropped down ~ 
like dead in some public place, it might be the market or © 
the centre of the town where there were plenty of people to — 
witness the edifying spectacle. The initiates immediately © 
spread a pall over him or her, beat the earth round about © 
the pretended corpse with plantain stalks, chanted incanta- | 
tions, fired guns, and cut capers. Then they carried the 
seemingly dead body away into the forest and disappeared 
with it into the stockade. The spectacle proved infectious ; 
one after another in the emotional, excitable crowd of negroes 
followed the example, dropped down like dead, and were 
carried off, sometimes in a real cataleptic state. In this 
way fifty to a hundred or more novices might feign death © 
and be transported into the sacred enclosure. There they — 
were supposed not only to die but to rot till only a single © 


ee eee are 


Ty ee ae 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 253 


a bone of their body remained, of which the initiated had to 
_ take the greatest care in expectation of the joyful resurrection 
_that was soon to follow. However, though they were both 
dead and rotten, they consumed a large quantity of food, 
_ which their credulous relatives brought to them in baskets, 
| toiling with the loads on their backs over the long paths 
‘through the forest in the sweltering heat of the tropical 
day. If the relations failed to discharge this pious and 
indispensable duty, their kinsman in the sacred enclosure ran 
-arisk of dying in good earnest, or rather of being spirited 
_ away to a distant town and sold as a slave. 

Shut up within the stockade for months or years, the men 
and women, boys and girls, dispensed with the superfluity of 
clothes, rubbed their naked bodies with red ochre or powdered 
j camwood instead, and gave themselves up to orgies of un- 
 bridled lust. Some feeble attempts were made to teach them 
_ the rudiments of a secret language, but the vocabulary was 
_ small and its principles lacking iningenuity. Thetime during 
| which this seclusion lasted might vary from three months 
| to three years. When the circumstances which had furnished 
_ the pretext for instituting the society had passed away, 
| whether it was that the epidemic had died out or that the 
' birth-rate had sensibly increased, murmurs would begin to 
_ be heard among friends and relatives in the town, who did 
' not see why they should be taxed any longer to support a 
set of idle and dissolute ruffians in the forest, and why they 
' should trudge day after day in the sweat of their brow to 
' carry provisions to them. So the supplies would begin to 
' run short, and whenever that happened the mystery of the 
| resurrection was sure to follow very soon after. 

4 Accordingly it would be announced that on a certain 
_ market-day the new initiates, now raised from the dead, would 
_ reveal themselves in-all their glory to the astonished gaze of the 
_ public. The glad tidings were received with enthusiasm, and 

_ crowds assembled from all the country round about to welcome 
those who had come back from the world beyond the grave. 
_ When all were gathered in eager expectancy in the market- 
"place, the sounds of distant music would be heard, and soon 
the gay procession would defile into the open square and 


Seclusion 
of the 
novices, 


Resurrec- 
tion of the 
novices, 


march round it, while the dusky skins, reddened with cam-. 


254 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuar. 


wood powder, glistened in the sunshine, the gay garments” 
fluttered in the wind, and the tassels of palm-leaf fibre 


dangled at every arm. In the crowd of spectators many — 


Pretence 
of the 
novices 
that they 
have for- 
gotten 
everything. 


parents would recognize their children in the marching 
figures of the procession, and girls and boys would point — 
out their brothers and sisters and eagerly call out their 
names. But in the stolid faces of the initiates not an eye 
would gleam with recognition, not a muscle would twitch © 


with an involuntary expression of delight; for having just © 


been raised from the dead they were supposed to know | 
nothing of their former life, of friends and relations, of home ~ 
and country. There might be in the crowd a mother ora © 
sister not seen for years; or, more moving still, the novice © 
might look in vain for loved and remembered faces that — 
would never be seen in the market-place again. But what- — 
ever his feelings might be, he must rigidly suppress them ~ 
under pain of a flogging, a fine, or even death. At last the © 
parade was over and the procession broke up. Then the © 
old hands introduced the new hands to their own parents — 
and brothers and sisters, to their old homes and haunts, — 
For still the novices kept up the pretence that everything © 
was new and strange to them, that they could not speak q 
their mother tongue, that they did not know their own — 
fathers and mothers, their own town and their own houses; ~ 
nay that they had forgotten even how to eat their food. So © 
everything and everybody had to be shewn to them and 3 
their names and meanings explained. Their guides would — 
lead them about the town, pointing out the various roads — 
and telling where they led to—this one to the watering- — 
place on the river, this to the forest, that to the farms, and E 
so on: they would take up the commonest domestic utensils — 
and shew what they were used for: they would even chew ~ 
the food and put it into the mouths of the novices, like — 
mother birds feeding their callow young. For some time ~ 
afterwards the resuscitated persons, attended by their mentors, ~ 
would go about the town and the neighbourhood acting ina ~ 
strange way like children or mad folk, seizing what they ~ 
wanted and trying to beat or even kill such as dared to © 
refuse them anything. Their guardian would generally — 
restrain these sallies ; but sometimes he would arrange with — 


1 Rev. J. H. Weeks, ‘Notes on 
ome Customs of the Lower Congo 
“People,” olk- lore, xx. (1909) pp. 
| 189-198; Rev. W. H. Bentley, Zife 
the Congo (London, 1887), pp. 
8 sg.; td., Pioneering on the Congo 
London, 1900), i. 284-287. Mr. 
eeks’s description of the institution 
s the fullest and I have followed it 
the text. The custom was in vogue 
‘down to recent years, but seems to 
have been suppressed chiefly by the 
xertions of the missionaries. Besides 
e ndembo guild there is, or was, in 
these regions another secret society 
_ known as the zkimba, which some 

writers have confused with the zdemdo. 
The nkimba was of a more harmless 
character than the other; indeed it 
seems even to have served some useful 
purposes, partly as a kind of free- 

“masonry which encouraged mutual 
_help among its members, partly as a 
e _ system of police for the repression of 
crime, its professed object being to put 
i _ down witchcraft and punish witches. 
_ Only males were admitted to it. Can- 
| didates for initiation were stupefied by 
a drug, but there was apparently no 
_ pretence of killing them and bringing 
_ them to life again. Members of the 
society had a home in the jungle away 
' from the town, where the novices lived 
together for a period varying from six 
months to two years. They learned a 
secret language, and received new 
names; it was afterwards an offence 
to call a man by the name of his child- 
hood. Instead of the red dye affected 
by members of the mndembo guild, 
_ members of the #&zméa guild whitened 
_ their bodies with pipe clay and wore 
q crinolines of palm frondlets. See 

Rev. W. H. Bentley, Zzfe on the 
_ Congo, pp. 80-83; id., Pioneering on 
. the Congo, i. 282- 284 ; Rev. J. H. 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 255 


is hopeful pupils to be out of sight when two or three of 
them clubbed together to assault and rob an honest man, 
and would only return in time to share the booty. After 
ea while, however, the excitement created by the resurrection 
‘would wear off; the dead folk come to life were expected 
© have learned their lessons, and if they forgot themselves, 
eir memory was promptly refreshed by the law.’ 


Weeks, of. cit. pp. 198-201; (Sir) 
H. H. Johnston, ‘‘A. Visit to Mr. 
Stanley’s Stations on the River Con- 
go,” Proccedings of the Royal Geo- 
graphical Society, N.S. v. (1883) pp. 
572 sg-; E. Delmar Morgan, ‘‘ Notes 
on the Lower Congo,” zd@., N.S. vi. 
(1884) p. 193. As to these two secret 
societies on the Lower Congo, see 
further (Sir) H. H. Johnston, ‘*On 
the Races of the Congo,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xiii. 
(1884) pp. 472 59.3 E. Dupont, Lettres 
sur le Congo (Paris, 1889), pp. 96- 
100; Herbert Ward, Five Years with 
the Congo Cannibals (London, 1890), 
pp- 54 sg.; zd. ‘‘ Ethnographical 
Notes relating to the Congo Tribes,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, xxiv. (1895) pp. 288 sg.; E. J. 
Glave, Six Years of Adventure in 
Congo Land (London, 1893), pp. 80- 
83; L. Frobenius, Die Masken und 
Geheimbiinde Afrikas (Halle, 1898), 
PP: 43-54 (Nova Acta, Abh. der 
Kaiserl. Leop. Carol. Deutschen Ak- 
ademie der Naturforscher, vol. \xxiv. 
No. 1); H. Schurtz, Altersklassen 
und Mannerbiinde (Berlin, 1902), pp. 
433-437 ; Notes Annalytiques sur les 
Collections Ethnographiques du Musée 
du Congo (Brussels, 1902-1906), pp. 
199-206 ; Ed. de Jonghe, Les Sociétés 
Secrétes au Bas-Congo (Brussels, 1907), 
pp. 15 sgg. (extract from the Revue 
des Questions Scientifigues, October 
1907). Some of these writers do not 
discriminate between the two societies, 
the ndembo and: the mkimba. Accord- 
ing to our best authorities (Messrs. 
Bentley and Weeks) the two societies 
are quite distinct and neither of them 
has anything to do with circumcision, 
which is, however, prevalent in the 
region. See Rev. J. H. Weeks, 
**Notes on some Customs of the 


Bastian's 
account of 
the ritual 
of death 
and resur- 
rection in 
West 
Africa, 


Acquisition 
of a patron 
animal or 
guardian 
spirit in a 
dream. 


256 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM CHAP. | 


The following account of the rites, as practised in this” 
part of Africa, was given to Adolf Bastian by an interpreter. 
“The great fetish lives in the interior of the forest-land, 
where nobody sees him and nobody can see him. When he 
dies, the fetish priests carefully collect his bones in order to” 
bring them to life again, and they nourish them, that he may 
be clothed anew in flesh and blood. But it is not good to’ 
speak of it. In the land of Ambamba every one must die 
once, and when the fetish priest shakes his calabash against 
a village, all the men and lads whose hour is come fall into 
a state of lifeless torpidity, from which they generally arise 
after three days. But if the fetish loves a man he carries © 
him away into the bush and buries him in the fetish house, — 
often for many years. When he comes to life again, he 
begins to eat and drink as before, but his understanding is — 
gone and the fetish man must teach him and direct him in — 
every motion, like the smallest child. At first this can only © 
be done with a stick, but gradually his senses return, so that — 
it is possible to talk with him, and when his education is — 
complete, the priest brings him back to his parents. They — 
would seldom recognize their son but for the express assur- — 
ances of the fetish priest, who moreover recalls previous — 
events to their memory. He who has not gone through the 
ceremony of the new birth in Ambamba is universally looked © 
down upon and is not admitted to the dances.” ? 3 

In the same part of Africa we hear of a fetish called — 
Malassi, the votaries of which form a secret order of the © 
usual sort with a variety of ranks to which the initiates are © 
promoted. “The candidate is plunged into a magic sleep 
within the temple-hut, and while he sleeps he beholds a bird — 


or other object with which 


Lower Congo People,” Folk-lore, xx. 
(1909) pp. 304 sgg. <A secret society 
of the Lower Congo which Adolf 
Bastian has described under _ the 
name of guimba is probably identical 
with the w#kimba. He speaks of a 
**Secret Order of those who have 
been born again,” and tells us that the 
candidates ‘‘are thrown into a death- 
like state and buried in the fetish 
house. When they are wakened to 
life again, they have (as in the Belli- 


his existence is henceforth 
paro) lost their memory of everything 
that is past, even of their father and 
mother, and they can no longer re- — 
member their own name. Hence new — 
names are given them according to ~ 
the titles or ranks to which they are © 
advanced.” See A. Bastian, Die ~ 
deutsche Expedition an der Loango- — 
Kiiste (Jena, 1874-1875), ii. 15 sgg. 


1 A, Bastian, Ein Besuch in San 4 
Salvador (Bremen, 1859), pp. 82 sg. 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 257 


“sympathetically bound up, just as the life of the young 
Indian is bound up with the animal which he sees in his 
at puberty. All who have been born again at 
initiation, after their return to a normal state, bear the name 
of Swamie (a sacred designation also in India) or, if they are 
omen, Sumbo (Tembo), and wear as a token the ring called 
ase, which consists of an iron hoop with a fruit attached to 
”1 Similarly among the Fans of the Gaboon a young 
warrior acquires his guardian spirit by dreaming. He is 
secluded in the forest, drinks a fermented and intoxicating 
liquor,and smokes hemp. Then he falls into a heavy sleep, 
and next morning he must describe exactly to the fetish 
riest the animal, tree, mineral, or whatever it may have 
been which he sawin his dream. This magical dream is 
epeated on three successive nights ; and after that the young 
man is sent forth by the priest to seek and bring back the 
beast, bird, reptile, or whatever it was of which he dreamed. 
The youth obeys, reduces the animal or thing to cinders or 
ashes, and preserves these calcined remains as a talisman 
which will protect him against many dangers.” However, 
n these rites there is no clear simulation of dying and coming 
to life again. 

| Rites of death and resurrection were formerly observed in 
_ Quoja, on the west coast of Africa, to the north of the Congo. 
They are thus described by an old writer :—“ They have 
nother ceremony which they call Belli-Paaro, but it is not for 
erybody. For it is an incorporation in the assembly of 
the spirits, and confers the right of entering their groves, 
that is to say, of going and eating the offerings which the 
‘simple folk bring thither. The initiation or admission to 
‘the Belli-Paaro is celebrated every twenty or twenty-five 
years. The initiated recount marvels of the ceremony, 
saying that they are roasted, that they entirely change their 


|6hdCCreal&ID 
ih 


- !A. Bastian, Die deutsche Expedi- 
| tion an der Loango-Kiiste, ii. 183. 
Elsewhere Bastian says that about San 
| Salvador lads at puberty are secluded 
5 the forest and circumcised, and 
uring their seclusion ‘‘ each of them is 
ystically united to the fetish by which 
~ his life is henceforth determined, as the 
_ Brahman whispers the secret charm in 


PT. VIL VOL. Il 


the car of him who has been born 
again.” See A. Bastian, Zin Besuch 
in San Salvador (Bremen, 1859), pp. 
85 sg. 

2-H. Trilles, Ze TVotémisme chez les 
Féin (Munster i. W., 1912), pp. 479 sg. 
The writer speaks of the guardian 
spirit as the individual totem of the 
young warrior. 

Ss 


Dapper’s 
account of 
the ritual 
of death 
and resur- 
rection in 
the Belli- 
Paaro 


society. 


258 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap. 


habits and life, and that they receive a spirit quite different 
from that of other people and quite new lights. The badge 
of membership consists in some lines traced on the neck ~ 
between the shoulders ; the lines seem to be pricked with a — 
needle. Those who have this mark pass for persons of — 
spirit, and when they have attained a certain age they are 
allowed a voice in all public assemblies; whereas the 
uninitiated are regarded as profane, impure, and ignorant — 
persons, who dare not express an opinion on any subject of © 
importance. When the time for the ceremony has come, it — 
is celebrated as follows. By order of the king a place is © 
appointed in the forest, whither they bring the youths who — 
have not been marked, not without much crying and weep- — 
ing; for it is impressed upon the youths that in order to — 
undergo this change it is necessary to suffer death. So they © 
dispose of their property, as if it were all over with them. 
There are always some of the initiated beside the novices to — 
instruct them. They teach them to dance a certain dance © 
called &7W/ing, and to sing verses in praise of Belli. Above — 
all, they are very careful not to let them die of hunger, — 
because if they did so, it is much to be feared that the — 
spiritual resurrection would profit them nothing. This — 
manner of life lasts five or six years, and is comfortable — 
enough, for there is a village in the forest, and they amuse — 
themselves with hunting and fishing. Other lads are brought — 
thither from time to time, so that the last comers have not — 
long to stay. No woman or uninitiated person is suffered — 
to pass within four or five leagues of the sacred wood. a 
When their instruction is completed, they are taken from the — 
wood and shut up in small huts made for the purpose. Here ~ 
they begin once more to hold communion with mankind and ~ 
to talk with the women who bring them their food. It is © 
amusing to see their affected simplicity. They pretend to 
know no one, and to be ignorant of all the customs of the 
country, such as the customs of washing themselves, rubbing 
themselves with oil, and so forth. When they enter these huts, 
their bodies are all covered with the feathers of birds, and 
they wear caps of bark which hang down before their faces. 
But after a time they are dressed in clothes and taken to a 
great open place, where all the people of the neighbourhood 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 259 


‘are assembled. Here the novices give the first proof of their 
“capacity by dancing a dance which is called the dance of Belli. 
_ After the dance is over, the novices are taken to the houses 
f their parents by their instructors.” * 
Miss Kingsley informs us that “the great point of 
“agreement between all these West African secret societies 
‘lies in the methods of initiation. The boy, if he belongs 
© a tribe that goes in for tattooing, is tattooed, and is 
handed over to instructors in the societies’ secrets and 
‘formulae. He lives, with the other boys of his tribe 
undergoing initiation, usually under the rule of several in- 
tructors, and for the space of one year. He lives always 
in the forest, and is naked and smeared with clay. The 
boys are exercised so as to become inured to hardship ; in 
/ some districts, they make raids so as to perfect themselves in 
this useful accomplishment. They always take a new name, 
and are supposed by the initiation process to become new 
ings in the magic wood, and on their return to their village 
t the end of their course, they pretend to have entirely 
forgotten their life before they entered the wood ; but this 
pretence is not kept up beyond the period of festivities given 
‘to welcome them home. They all learn, to a certain extent, 
a new language, a secret language only understood by the 
nitiated. The same removal from home and instruction 
rom initiated members is observed also with the girls. 
However, in their case, it is not always a forest-grove they 
re secluded in, sometimes it is done in huts. Among the 
rain Coast tribes, however, the girls go into a magic wood 
ntil they are married. Should they have to leave the wood 
or any temporary reason, they must smear themselves with 
hite clay. A similar custom holds good in Okyon, Calabar 
district, where, should a girl have to leave the fattening- 
house, she must be covered with white clay.”? 
_ Among the natives of the Sherbro, an island lying close 
a 1 O. Dapper, Description del Afrique may be intended to indicate that the 
- (Amsterdam, 1686), pp. 268 sg. novices have undergone the new birth ; 
Bo peers account has been abridged for the negro child, though born 
‘in the text. reddish-brown, soon turns slaty-grey 
: (E. B. Tylor, Anthropology, London, 
| 2 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, Zrave/s 1881, p. 67), which would answer well 


in West Africa (London, 1867), p. enough to the hue of the clay-bedaubed 
_* Perhaps the smearing with a novices. 


Miss 
Kingsley 
on the rites 
of initiation 
into secret 


The furra 
or Zoro, 

a secret 
society 

of Sierra 
Leone. 


- and absolute submission, both by the subordinate councils 


260 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuap. 4 


to the coast of Sierra Leone, there is a secret society called 
the purra or poro, “which is partly of a religious, but chiefly — 
ofa political nature. It resembles free-masonry in excluding ~ 
females, and in obliging every member by a solemn oath, ~ 
which I believe is seldom violated, not to divulge the sacred — 
mysteries, and to yield a prompt and implicit obedience to — 
every order of their superiors. Boys of seven or eight years © 
of age are admitted, or rather serve a novitiate until they — 
arrive at a proper age; for it is difficult to procure exact 
information, and even somewhat dangerous to make many 
inquiries. Every person on entering the society lays aside 
his former name and assumes a new one; to call him by his 
old name would produce a dispute. They have a superior 
or head purra man, assisted by a grand council, whose 
commands are received with the most profound reverence — 


aaa seh anit th es PES li iat Sa 


and by individuals. Their meetings are held in the most 
retired spots, amid the gloom of night, and carried on with 
inquisitorial secrecy. When the purra comes into a town, 
which is always at night, it is accompanied with the most 
dreadful howlings, screams, and other horrid noises. The 
inhabitants, who are not members of the society, are obliged 
to secure themselves within doors; should any one be 
discovered without, or attempting to peep at what is going 
forward, he would inevitably be put to death. To restrain © 


the curiosity of the females, they are ordered to continue 4 


mesbiitiaerate tenascin 


Atala. 


sg 


3 
within doors, clapping their hands incessantly, so long as the ; 
purra remains. Like the secret tribunal, which formerly — 
existed in Germany, it takes cognizance of offénces, — 
particularly of witchcraft and murder, but above all of 
contumacy and disobedience in any of its own members, and — 
punishes the guilty with death in so secret and sudden a — 
manner, that the perpetrators are never known: indeed, such ~ 
is the dread created by this institution, that they are never — 


even inquired after.”' When the members of the purra or c | 


1 Thomas Winterbottom, Anz <Ac- 
count of the Native Africans in the 
Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone (Lon- 
don, 1803), pp. 135 sg. Compare 
John Matthews, A Voyage to the River 
Sterra-Leone (London, 1791), pp. 82- 


85; J. B. L. Durand, Voyage au © 
Sénégal (Paris, 1802), pp. 183 sg. © 
(whose account is copied without — 
acknowledgment from Matthews). — 
The purra or foro society also exists — 
among the Timmes of Sierra Leone; — 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 261 


poro society visit a town, the leader of the troop, whom an 
English writer calls “the Poro devil,” draws discordant notes 
‘from a sort of reed flute, the holes of which are covered with 
‘spiders’ webs. The only time when this devil and his rout 
-make a prolonged stay in the town is on the evening before 
“the day on which the newly initiated lads are to be brought 
‘back from the forest. Then the leader and his satellites 
arade the streets for hours, while all the uninitiated men, 


o the doleful strains of the flute, which signify that the devil 
s suffering the pangs of childbirth before he brings forth the 
itiated lads; for he is supposed to have been pregnant 


entered into the forest. When they come forth from the 
vood, they wear four or five coils of twisted ferns round their 
aists in token of their being initiated members of the order.’ 
Among the Soosoos of Senegambia there is a similar secret 
jociety called semo: “the natives who speak English call it 
African masonry. As the whole ceremonies are kept very 
rivate, it is difficult to discover in what they consist: but 


‘old men, who cut marks on several parts of their bodies, 
‘but most commonly on the belly; they are also taught a 
‘language peculiar to the semo, and swear dreadful oaths 
“never to divulge the secrets revealed to them. The young 
-men are then made to live in the woods for twelve months, 
and are supposed to be at liberty to kill any one who 
‘approaches and does not understand the language of the 
‘semo. . . . It is said, when women are so unfortunate as to 
‘intrude upon the semo, they kill them, cut off their breasts, 
and hang them up by the side of the paths as a warning 


this tribe the novices are sometimes 1 T. J. Alldridge,*7he Sherbro and 
luded from their families for ten zs Hinterland(London, 1901), p. 130. 
ears in the wood, they are tattooed on This work contains a comparatively 
‘their backs and arms, and they learn _ full account of the purra or foro society 
‘a language which consists chiefly of (pp. 124-131) and of the other secret 
-names of plants and animals used in societies of the country (pp. 131-149, 
“special senses. Women are not ad- 153-159). Compare L. Frobenius, 
“mitted to the society. See Zweifel et Dze Masken und Geheimbiinde Afrikas 
Moustier, ‘‘ Voyage aux sources du (Halle, 1898), pp. 138-144 (Nova 
Niger,” Bulletin de la Société de Géo- Acta, Abh. der Kaiserl. Leop.-Carol. 
graphie (Paris), VI. Série, xv. (1878) Deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher, 
pp. 108 sg. vol. Ixxiv. No. 1), 


t is said that the novices are met in the woods by the. 


The new 
birth. 


The semo, 
a secret 
society 

of Sene- 
gambia. 


Death and 
resurrec- 
tion at 
initiation, 


Ritual 

of the 

new birth 
among the 
Akikuyu 
of British 
East 
Africa. 


262 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM CHAP. 
to others. This circumstance is perhaps less deserving of 
credit, because the Soosoos are fond of telling wonderful and 
horrid stories respecting this institution, They say, for 
instance, that when first initiated their throats are cut, and 
they continue dead for some time; at length they are” 
reanimated and initiated into the mysteries of the aoe 
than they possessed before.” } 7 

While the belief or the pretence of death and resurrection - 
at initiation is common among the negroes of West Africa, 
few traces of it appear to be found among the tribes in the 
southern, central, and eastern parts of that continent ; and | 
is notable that in these regions secret societies, which flourish! : 
in the West, are also conspicuously absent. However, the 
Akikuyu of British East Africa “have a curious custom 
which requires that every boy just before circumcision must | 
be born again. The mother stands up with the boy crouching 
at her feet ; she pretends to go through all the labour pains, 
and the boy on being reborn cries like a babe and is 
washed. He lives on milk for some days afterwards.” ? | 
A fuller description of the ceremony was given by a member 
of the Kikuyu tribe as follows: “A day is appointed, any 
time of year, by father and mother. If the father is dead 
another elder is called in to act as proxy in his stead, or if 
the mother is not living another woman to act in her place. 
Any woman thus acting as representative is looked upon in — 
future by the boy as his own mother. A goat or sheep is. 
killed in the afternoon by any one, usually not by the father, — 
and the stomach and intestines reserved. The ceremony 
begins in the evening. A piece of skin is cut ina circle, and — 
passed over one shoulder of the candidate and under the 
other arm. The stomach of the goat is similarly treated and — 
passed over the other shoulder and under the other arm. 
All the boy’s ornaments are removed, but not his clothes, ~ 
No men are allowed inside the hut, but women are present. © 
The mother sits on a hide on the floor with the boy between ~ 


1 Thomas Winterbcttom, An Ac- 
count of the Native Africans in the 
Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone (Lon- 
don, 1803), pp. 137-139. As to the 
semo or simo society see further L. 


Frobenius, of. cit. pp. 130-138. 

2 Extract from a letter of Mr. A. C, ~ 
Hollis to me. Mr. Hollis’s authority — 
is Dr. T. W. W. Crawford of the © 
Kenia Medical Mission. a 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 263 


her knees. The shcep’s gut is passed round the woman and 
brought in front of the boy. The woman groans as in labour, 
another woman cuts the gut, and the boy imitates the 
‘cry of a new-born infant. The women present all applaud, 


and afterwards the assistant and the mother wash the 


ig 


; m other.” ? 


Bt 


religious rites of the country.”? 


_ born again among the Akikuyu. 

of second birth as well as boys. 
‘tered to infants. At one time the new birth was com- 
bined with circumcision, and so the ceremony admitted 
- to the privileges and religious rites of the tribe. Afterwards 
' trouble took place on account of mere boys wishing to take 
_ their place alongside of the young men and maintaining 
» they were justified in doing so. The old men then settled 
the matter by separating the two. 
_been administered the individual is not in a position to be 
"admitted to circumcision, which is the outward sign of 
“admittance to the nation. Any who have not gone through 
the rite cannot inherit property, nor take any part in the 


‘boy. That night the boy sleeps in the same hut as the 
Here the cutting of the sheep’s gut, which 
unites the mother to the boy, is clearly an imitation of 
severing the navel string. Nor is it boys alone who are 


“ Girls go through the rite 
It is sometimes adminis- 


Unless the new birth has 


For example, a man who 


has not been born again is disqualified for carrying his dying 
_ father out into the wilds and for disposing of his body after 
death. The new birth seems to take place usually about the 
_ tenth year, but the age varies with the ability of the father 
to provide a goat, whose guts are necessary to enable the 
" boy or girl to be born again in due form’ 

_ Among the Bondeis, a tribe on the coast of German Rites 


_ East Africa, opposite to the island of Pemba, one of the ? 


; 4 rites of initiation into manhood consists in a pretence of Bonsets 
_ of 


' 14W.. Scoresby Routledge sind 
_ Katherine Routledge, With a Pre- 
| historic People, the Akikuyu of British 
| ast Africa (London, 1910), p. 152. 
Compare C. W. Hobley, “ Kikuyu 
_ Customs and Beliefs,” Journal of the 
_ Royal Anthropological Institute, x\. 
_ (1910) p. 441. 
| 2 Mr. A. W. McGregor, of the 
_ Church Missionary Society, quoted by 


W. S. Routledge and K. Routledge, “‘Ti*- 


With a Prehistoric People, p. 151, 
note. Mr. McGregor ‘‘has resided 
amongst the Akikuyu since 1901. He 
has by his tact and kindness won the 
confidence of the natives, and is the 
greatest authority on their language” 
(#@., p. xxi). 

3 W. S. Routledge and K. Rout- 
ledge, of. ct#. p. 151. 


Rites 

of initiation 
among the 
Bushongo 
of the 
Congo, 


The first 
ordeal. 


The second 
ordeal. 


264 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM cnar. — 


slaying one of the lads with a sword; the entrails of a — 
fowl are placed on the boy’s stomach to make the pretence ~ 
seem more real." Among the Bushongo, who inhabit a — 
district of the Belgian Congo bounded on the north and — 
east by the Sankuru River and on the west by the Kasai, — 
young boys had formerly to undergo certain rites of initia- — 
tion, amongst which a simulation of killing them would seem © 
to have had a place, though in recent times the youths have — 
been allowed to escape the ordeal by the payment of a fine. — 
The supreme chief of the tribe, who in old days bore the © 
title of God on Earth (Chembe Kunjt), used to assemble ~ 
all the lads who had just reached puberty and send them 4 
away into the forest, where they remained for several — 
months under the care of one of his sons. During their — 
seclusion they were deemed unclean and might see no one; — 
if they chanced to meet a woman, she had to flee before — 
them. By night the old men marched round the quarters — 
of the novices, raising hideous cries and whirling bull-roarers, — 
the noise of which the frightened lads took to be the © 
voices of ghosts. They wore nothing but a comb, and — 
passed their leisure hours in learning to make mats and — 
baskets. After about a month they had to submit to the first — 
ordeal. A trench about ten feet deep was dug in the ground © 
and roofed over with sticks and earth so as to form a dark © 
tunnel. In the sides of the tunnel were cut niches, and in — 
each niche a man took post, whose business it was to terrify — 
the novices. For this purpose one of them was disguised in — 
the skin of a leopard, a second was dressed as a warrior with © 
a knife in his hand, a third was a smith with his furnace and © 
red-hot irons, and a fourth was masked to look like an ugly © 
ape, while he too gripped a knife in his hand. The novices © 
generally recoiled in dismay from each of these apparitions, — 
and it was only by means of reiterated taunts and threats that — 
the elders forced them to traverse the whole length of the ~ 
tunnel. After the lapse of another month the youths had to © 
face another ordeal of a similar character. A low tunnel, about — 
three feet deep, was dug in the earth, and sticks were inserted _ 


1 Rev. G. Dale, ‘An Account of Country,” Journal of the Anthropo- — 
the principal Customs and Habits of  /ogical Institute, xxv. (1896) p. 189. 
the Natives inhabiting the Bondei Ze 


xt THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 265 
in it so that their tops projected from the surface of the ground. 
At the end of the tunnel a calabash was set full of goat’s blood. 
y way of encouraging the timid novices the master of the 
remonies himself crawled through the tunnel, his progress 
under ground being revealed to the novices above ground by 
he vibrations of the sticks with which he collided in the 
dark passage. Then having bedabbled his nose, his mouth, 
and all the rest of his body with the goat’s blood, he emerged 
from the tunnel on hands and knees, dripping with gore and 
to all appearance in the last stage of exhaustion. Then he 
lay prostrate on his stomach in a state of collapse ; the elders 
‘declared him to be dead and carried him off. The chief 
ge ow ordered the lads to imitate the example set them by 
‘the master of the ceremonies, but they begged and prayed 
to be excused. At first the chief was inexorable, but in time 
relented and agreed to accept a fine of so many cowries as 
ransom paid by the youths for exemption from the ordeal. 
A month later the last of the ordeals took place. A great 
“trunk of a tree was buried with its lower end in the earth 
a d surrounded for three-quarters of its circumference with 
arrows stuck in the ground so that the barbs were pointed 
“towards the tree. The chief and the leading men sat down 
at the gap in the circle of arrows, so as to conceal the gap 
from the eyes of the novices and other spectators, among whom 
e€ women were allowed to be present. To the eyes of the 
ninitiated it now seemed that the tree was surrounded by a 
bristling hedge of arrows, to fall upon which would be death. 
All being ready the master of the ceremonies climbed the 
e amid breathless silence, and having reached the top, 
Which was decorated with a bunch of leaves, he looked about 
im and asked the women, “Shall I come down?” “No! 
0!” they shrieked, “you will be killed by the arrows.” 
id hen, turning disdainfully from these craven souls, the 
gallant man addressed himself to the youths and repeated 
his question, “Shall I come down?” A shout of “Yes!” 
gave the answer that might have been expected from these 
heroic spirits. In response the master of the ceremonies at 
Once slid down the tree and, dropping neatly to the ground 
Just at the gap in the hedge of arrows, presented himself 
Unscathed to the gaze of the excited assembly. The chief 


Rites 

of initiation 
among the 
Indians 

of Virginia: 
pretence 
of the 
novices 
that they 
have for- 
gotten their 
former life. 


descent of the master of the ceremonies entirely forsook them 


266 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnar. 


now ordered the young men to go up and do likewise. But 
the dauntless courage with which they had contemplated the 


when it came to their turn to copy his shining example, 
Their mothers, too, raised a loud cry of protest, joining their 
prayers and entreaties to those of their hopeful sons. After 
some discussion the chief consented to accept a ransom, and 
the novices were dispensed from the ordeal. Then they 
bathed and were deemed to have rid themselves of thei 
uncleanness, but they had still to work for the chief for 
three months before they ranked as full-grown men and 
might return to their villages.’ q 

Among the Indians of Virginia, an initiatory ceremony, 
called Huskanaw, took place every sixteen or twenty years, 
or oftener, as the young men happened to grow up. The 
youths were kept in solitary confinement in the woods for 
several months, receiving no food but an infusion of some 
intoxicating roots, so that they went raving mad, and con- 
tinued in this state eighteen or twenty days. “ Upon this” 
occasion it is pretended that these poor creatures drink 
much of the water of Lethe that they perfectly lose the 
remembrance of all former things, even of their parents, their 
treasure, and their language. When the doctors find that 
they have drunk sufficiently of the Wysoccan (so they call 
this mad potion), they gradually restore them to their senses 
again by lessening the intoxication of their diet; but before | 
they are perfectly well they bring them back into their 
towns, while they are still wild and crazy through the violence 
of the medicine. After this they are very fearful of discover- 
ing anything of their former remembrance; for if such a 
thing should happen to any of them, they must immediately 
be Huskanaw'd again; and the second time the usage is so 
severe that seldom any one escapes with life. Thus they 
must pretend to have forgot the very use of their tongues, 
so as not to be able to speak, nor understand anything that~ 
is spoken, till they learn it again. Now, whether this be™ 
real or counterfeit, I don’t know ; but certain it is that they” 


1 E, Torday et T. A. Joyce, Zes applied to the principal chief or king 3 
Bushongo (Brussels, 1910), pp. 82-85. see 7@., p. 53. ; 
As for the title **God on Earth,” 


1 THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 267 


will not for some time take notice of anybody nor anything 

with which they were before acquainted, being still under 
th guard of their keepers, who constantly wait upon them 
everywhere till they have learnt all things perfectly over 
a ag ain. Thus they unlive their former lives, and commence 

en by forgetting that they ever have been boys.” * 
q Among some of the Indian tribes of North America Ritual 
| exist certain religious associations which are only open sal goons 
to candidates who have gone through a pretence of being rection 
killed and brought to life again. In 1766 or 1767 Captain 3inuato 
, Jonathan Carver witnessed the admission of a candidate to an — 
"association called “ the friendly society of the Spirit ” (Wakon- oN prpeee 
Kitchewah) among the Naudowessies, a Siouan or Dacotan America. 
i t ibe in the region of the great lakes. The candidate knelt 
"before the chief, who told him that “he himself was now 
‘agitated by the same spirit which he should in a few 
Moments communicate to him; that it would strike him 
dead, but that he would instantly be restored again to 
=>; to this he added, that the communication, however 
terrifying, was a necessary introduction to the advantages 
‘enjoyed by the community into which he was on the point 
| ¢ being admitted. . As he spoke this, he appeared to be 
' greatly agitated ; till at last his emotions became so violent, 
i hat his countenance was distorted, and his whole frame con- 
‘vulsed. At this juncture he threw something that appeared 
- both in shape and colour like a small bean, at the young 
pm. which seemed to enter his mouth, and he instantly 
fell as motionless as if he had been shot.” For a time the 
~ man lay like dead, but under a shower of blows he shewed 
of consciousness, and finally, discharging from his 
mouth the bean, or whatever it was that the chief had thrown 
it him, he came to life? In other tribes, for example, the 


. 
tb ca 


‘sign 


_ 1 (Beverley’s) History of Virginia 
ondon, 1722), pp. 177 sg- Compare 
J. Bricknell, 7he Natural History of 
North Carolina (Dublin, 1737), pp- 
405 59. 


23. Carver, Zravels through the 
Interior Parts of North America, 
‘Third Edition (London, 1781), pp. 
| 271-275. The thing thrown at the 
s “Man and afterwards vomited by him 


was probably not a bean but a small 
white sea-shell (Cypraca moneta). See 
H. R. Schoolcraft, Jndian Tribes of 
the United States (Philadelphia, 1853— 
1856), iii. 287; J. G. Kohl, Xitschi- 
Gami (Bremen, 1859), i. 71; Seventh 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Eth- 
nology (Washington, 1891), pp. 191, 
215; Fourteenth Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1896), p. IOI. 


The medi- 
cine-bag 
as an in- 
strument 
of death 
and resur- 
rection, 


268 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM CHAP, | 


Ojebways, Winnebagoes, and Dacotas or Sioux, the instru- 
ment by which the candidate is apparently slain is the 
medicine-bag. The bag is made of the skin of an animal” 
(such as the otter, wild cat, serpent, bear, raccoon, wolf, owl, 
weasel), of which it roughly preserves the shape. Each 
member of the society has one of these bags, in which he- 
keeps the odds and ends that make up his “ medicine” or | 
charms. “They believe that from the miscellaneous contents 


kill a man, but also to set him up and restore him to life.” 
The mode of killing a man with one of these medicine-bags © 
is to thrust it at him; he falls like dead, but a second thrust — 
of the bag restores him to life! Among the Dacotas the 
institution of the medicine-bag or mystery-sack was attributed — 
to Onktehi, the great spirit of the waters, who ordained that 
the bag should consist of the skin of the otter, raccoon, 
weasel, squirrel, or loon, or a species of fish and of serpents. — 
Further, he decreed that the bag should contain four sorts of © 
medicines of magical qualities, which should represent fowls, © 
quadrupeds, herbs, and trees. Accordingly, swan’s down, — 
buffalo hair, grass roots, and bark from the roots of trees are © 
kept by the Dacotas in their medicine-bags. From this — 
combination there proceeds a magical influence (¢omwan) — 
so powerful that no human being can of his own strength — 
withstand it. When the god of the waters had prepared the — 
first medicine-bag, he tested its powers on four candidates — 
for initiation, who all perished under the shock. So he — 
consulted with his wife, the goddess of the earth, and by 


1 J. Carver, of, cit. pp. 277 5.3 
H. R. Schoolcraft, Judian Tribes of 
the United States, iii. 287 (as to the 
Winnebagoes), v. 430 sgg. (as to the 
Chippeways and Sioux); J. G. Kohl, 
Kitschi-Gami, i. 64-70 (as to the 
Ojebways). For a_ very detailed 
account of the Ojebway ceremonies, 
see W. J. Hoffman, ‘‘ The Midewiwin 
or Grand Medicine Society of the 
Ojibwa,” Seventh Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1891), especially pp. 215 sy., 234 5g., 
248, 265. For similar ceremonies 
among the Menomini, see zd., ‘‘ The 


Menomini Indians,” Fourteenth Annual — 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology — 
(Washington, 1896), pp. 99-102; and 
among the Omahas, see J. Owen © 
Dorsey, ‘‘Omaha Sociology,” Zhérd — 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Eth- 
nology (Washington, 1884), pp. 342- 
346. I have dealt more fully with — 
the ritual in Zotemism and Exogamy, — 
iii. 462 sgg. Compare also P. Radin, ~ 
‘* Ritual and Significance of the Win- — 
nebago Medicine Dance,” /ournal of — 
American Folk-lore, xxiv. (1911) pp. 
149-208. 3 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 269 


olding up his left hand and pattering on the back of it 
vith the right, he produced myriads of little shells, whose 
e is to restore life to those who have been slain by the 
a icine-bag. Having taken this precaution, the god chose 
four other candidates and repeated the experiment of initia- 
‘tion with success, for after killing them with the bag he 
ir mmediately resuscitated them by throwiiy one of the shells 
into their vital parts, while he chanted certain words assur- 
‘ing them that it was only sport and bidding them rise to 
their feet. That is why to this day every initiated Dacota 
thas one of these shells in his body. Such was the divine 
origin of the medicine-dance of the Dacotas. The initiation 
takes place in a special tent. The candidate, after being 
‘steamed in a vapour-bath for four successive days, plants 
Ai nself on a pile of blankets, and behind him stands an aged 
member of the order. “Now the master of the ceremonies, 
with the joints of his knees and hips considerably bent, 
advances with an unsteady, uncouth hitching, sack in hand, 
“wearing an aspect of desperate energy, and uttering his 
‘Heen, heen, heen’ with frightful emphasis, while all around 
a enthusiastic demonstrations of all kinds of wild passions. 

At this point the sack is raised near a painted spot on the 
b ast of the candidate, at which the fonwan is discharged. 
t the instant the brother from behind gives him a push and 
falls dead, and is covered with blankets. Now the 
frenzied dancers gather around, and in the midst of bewilder- 
ng and indescribable noises, chant the words uttered by the 
god at the institution of the ceremony, as already recorded. 
Then the master throws off the covering, and chewing a 
piece of the bone of the Onktehi, spirts it over him, and he 
sins to show signs of returning life. Then as the master 
its energetically upon the breast of the initiated person, he, 
nvulsed, strangling, struggling, and agonizing, heaves up 
the shell which falls from his mouth on a sack placed in 
‘Teadiness to receive it. Life is restored and entrance effected 
‘into the awful mysteries. He belongs henceforth to the 


edicine-dance, and has a right to enjoy the medicine- 
nl 


1G. H. Pond, “Dakota super- Historical Society for the year 1867 
ns,” Collections of the Minnesota (Saint Paul, 1867), pp. 35, 37-40. <A 


Ritual 

of death 
and resur- 
rection 

at initiation 
among the 
Dacotas. 


Ritual 

of mimic 
death 
among the 
Indians 

of Nootka 
Sound. 


Rite of 
death and 
resurrec- 
tion at 


270 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM char. 


A ceremony witnessed by the castaway John R. Jewitt 
during his captivity among the Indians of Nootka Sound doubt- 
less belongs to this class of customs. The Indian king or chief 
“discharged a pistol close to his son’s ear, who immediately fell 
down as if killed, upon which all the women of the house set | 
up a most lamentable cry, tearing handfuls of hair from their 
heads, and exclaiming that the prince was dead; at the 
same time a great number of the inhabitants rushed into the 
house armed with their daggers, muskets, etc., enquiring the 
cause of their outcry. These were immediately followed by 
two others dressed in wolf skins, with masks over their faces’ 
representing the head of that animal. The latter came in 
on their hands and feet in the manner of a beast, and taking 
up the prince, carried him off upon their backs, retiring 
in the same manner they entered.”’ In another place 
Jewitt mentions that the young prince—a lad of abou 
eleven years of age—wore a mask in imitation of a wolf's 
head.2, Now, as the Indians of this part of America are 
divided into totem clans, of which the Wolf clan is one of 
the principal, and as the members of each clan are in the 
habit of wearing some portion of the totem animal about” 
their person,’ it is probable that the prince belonged to the 
Wolf clan, and that the ceremony described by Jewitt repre-_ 
sented the killing of the lad in order that he might be born 
anew as a wolf, much in the same way that the Basque” 
hunter supposed himself to have been killed and to have i 
come to life again as a bear. g 

This conjectural explanation of the ceremony has, sin a 
it was first put forward, been confirmed by the researches of 
Dr. Franz Boas among these Indians ; though it would seem 


similar but abridged account of the 
Dakota tradition and usage is given by 
S. R. Riggs in his Dakota Grammar, 
Texts, and Ethnography (Washington, 
1893), pp. 227-229 (Contributions to 
North American Ethnology, vol. ix.). 


1 Narrative of the Adventures and 
Sufferings of John R. Jewitt (Middle- 
town, 1820), p. II9. 


2 Jd,, p. 44. For the age of the 
prince, see z@., p. 35. 


3H. J. Holmberg, ‘* Ueber die 
Volker des russischen Amerika,” Acta 
Soctetatts Scientiarum Fennicae, Ww. 
(Helsingfors, 1856) pp. 292 sgg., 328 
Ivan Petroff, Report on the Popula 
Industries and Resources of Alashd 
pp. 165 sg.; A. Krause, Die 77z a 
Indianer (Jena, 1885), p. 112; R. ©. 
Mayne, our Years in British 
umbia and Vancouver Island (Londasl 
1862), pp. 257 59s 268 ; Totem. 
and Exogamy, iii. 264 sgg. 


: 
] 


i) THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 271 


that the community to which the chief’s son thus obtained initiation 
: dmission was not so much a totem clan as a secret society 4, 
alled Tlokoala, whose members imitated wolves. The society of 
name Tlokoala is a foreign word among the Nootka Indians, 
h aving been borrowed by them from the Kwakiutl Indians, 
whose language the word means the finding of a manztoo 
Or personal totem. The Nootka tradition runs that this 
sec! t society was instituted by wolvcs who took away a 
shief’s son and tried to kill him, but, failing to do so, became 
his friends, taught him the rites of the society, and ordered 
him to teach them to his friends on his return home. Then 
ey carried the young man back to his village. They also 
egged that whenever he moved from one place to another 
he would kindly leave behind him some red cedar-bark to be 
used by them in their own ceremonies ; and to this custom 
‘the Nootka tribes still adhere. Every new member of the 
‘society must be initiated by the wolves. At night a pack 
of wolves, personated by Indians dressed in wolf-skins and 
w earing wolf-masks, make their appearance, seize the novice, 
ind carry him into the woods. When the wolves are’ “heard 
putside the village, coming to fetch away the novice, all the 
: : embers of the society blacken their faces and sing, “ Among 
wall the tribes is great excitement, because I am Tlokoala.” 
"Next day the wolves bring back the novice dead, and the 
members of the society have to revive him. The wolves are 
Supposed to have put a magic stone into his body, which 
"must be removed before he can come to life. Till this is 
done the pretended corpse is left lying outside the house. 
Two wizards go and remove the stone, which appears to be 
c and then the novice is resuscitated. Among the Novice 
Niska Indians of British Columbia, who are divided into four me “> 
incipal clans with the raven, the wolf, the eagle, and the bear artificial 
for their respective totems, the novice at initiation is always BD 
ought back by an artificial totem animal. Thus when a oe ; 
1 Fr. Boas, in Sixth Report on the 1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 632 sg. Indians. 
orth-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. But while the initiation described in the 

5g. (separate reprint from the Xe- text was into a wolf society, not into a 

of the British Association, Leeds _ wolf clan, it is to be observed that the 

gy, 1890); za, **The Social wolf is one of the regular totems of the 

ization and the Secret Societies Nootka Indians. See Fr. Boas, in 


‘the Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the Sixth Report on the North-Western 
uted States National Museum for Tribes of Canada, p. 32. 


In these 
initiatory 
rites the 
novice 
seems to be 
killed as a 
man and 
restored to 
life as an 
animal, 


272 


‘man was about to be initiated into a secret society called 
Olala, his friends drew their knives and pretended to kill 
In reality they let him slip away, while they cut off the 
head of a dummy which had been adroitly substituted for him. 
Then they laid the decapitated dummy down and covered it 
over, and the women began to mourn and wail. His rela- 
tions gave a funeral banquet and solemnly burnt the effigy. 
In short, they held a regular funeral. 
novice remained absent and was seen by none but members 
of the secret society. But at the end of that time he came 
back alive, carried by an artificial animal which represented 


him. 


his totem.! 


In these ceremonies the essence of the rite appears 
to be the killing of the novice in his character of a man 
and his restoration to life in the form of the animal which” 
is thenceforward to be, if not his guardian spirit, at least” 
linked to him in a peculiarly intimate relation. 
be remembered that the Indians of Guatemala, whose life 
was bound up with an animal, were supposed to have the 
power of appearing in the shape of the particular creature” 
with which they were thus sympathetically united.’ 
it seems not unreasonable to conjecture that in like manner 
the Indians of British Columbia may imagine that their life 


which they assimilate themselves by their costume. 
if that is not an article of belief with the Columbian Indians 


of the present day, it may very well have been so with their 


the rites and ceremonies both of the totem clans and of the 


1 Fr. Boas, in Tenth Report on the 
North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 
49 sg., 58 sg. (separate reprint from 
the Report of the British Association, 
Ipswich meeting, 1895). It is remark- 
able, however, that in this tribe persons 
who are being initiated into the secret 
societies, of which there are six, are 
not always or even generally brought 
back by an artificial animal which repre- 
sents their own totem. Thus while men 
of the eagle totem are brought back by 
an eagle which rises from underground, 
men of the bear clan return on the 
back of an artificial killer-whale which 


THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM 


CHAP, — 


For a whole year the 


It is to 
Hence | 


At least 


is towed across the river by ropes. 
Again, members of the wolf clan are 
brought back by an artificial bear, and 
members of the raven clan by a frog. 
In former times the appearance of the 
artificial totem animal, or of the guar- 
dian spirit, was considered a matter © 
great importance, and any failure which 
disclosed the deception to the uniniti= 
ated was deemed a grave misfortun 
which could only be atoned for by the 
death of the persons concerned in tht 
disclosure. 


2 See above, p. 213. 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 273 


ecret societies. For though these two sorts of communities 
liffer in respect of the mode in which membership of them 
; obtained—a man being born into his totem clan but 
idmitted into a secret society later in life—we can hardly 
loubt that they are near akin and have their root in the 
ame mode of thought.’ That thought, if I am right, is 
he possibility of establishing a sympathetic relation with 
ir animal, a spirit, or other mighty being, with whom a 
man deposits for safe-keeping his soul or séme part of 
, and from whom he receives in return a gift of magical 


Jowers. 


yee r for their totems. 


~—CC) 


embers of another clan. 


'? This is the opinion of Dr. F. Boas, 
Who writes: ‘‘ The close similarity be- 
tween the clan legends and those of 

€ acquisition of spirits presiding over 
Secret societies, as well as the intimate 
felation between these and the social 
gz of the tribes, allow us to 

bly the same argument to the con- 
Sideration of the growth of the secret 
SOcieties, and lead us to the conclusion 
Hhat the same psychical factor that 
molded the clans into their present shape 
molded the secret societies” (‘‘ The 
tial Organization and the Secret 

ties of the Kwakiutl Indians,” 
of the United States National 
PT. VII. VOL. II 


- . 
nization 


The Carrier Indians, who dwell further inland than the 
bes we have just been considering, are divided into four 
with the grouse, the beaver, the toad, and the grizzly 
But in addition to these clan totems 
the tribe recognized a considerable number of what Father 
Morice calls honorific totems, which could be acquired, 

rough the performance of certain rites, by any person who 
fished to improve his social position. 
. ain number of honorific totems or crests, and these 
ight be assumed by any member of the clan who fulfilled 
1e required conditions ; but they could not be acquired by 
Thus the Grouse clan had for its 
onorific totems or crests the owl, the moose, the weasel, 
the crane, the wolf, the full moon, the wind, and so on ; 
Toad clan had the sturgeon, the porcupine, the wolverine, 
he red-headed woodpecker, the “darding knife,” 
nh; the Beaver clan had the mountain-goat for one of its 


Each totem clan had 


the 


and so 


Museum for 1895, p. 662). Dr. Boas 
would see in the acquisition of a mant- 
too or personal totem the origin both 
of the secret societies and of the totem 
clans ; for according to him the totem 
of the clan is merely the manitoo or 
personal totem of the ancestor trans- 
mitted by inheritance to his descend- 
ants. As to personal totems or guardian 
spirits (manifoos) among the North 
American Indians, see 7ofemism and 
Exogamy, iii. 370 sgg.; as to their 
secret societies, see i@., ill. 457 sgg. ; 
as to the theory that clan totems origin- 
ated in personal or individual totems, 
see zd., iv. 48 sgq. 
T 


Initiatory 
rites at the 
adoption of 
a honorific 
totem. 


Simulated 
transfor- 
mation ofa 
novice into 
a bear. 


‘spot where he had been heard, would find by a second cal 


274 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cnar. 


honorific totems; and the goose was a honorific totem of 
the Grizzly Bear clan. But the common bear, as a honorific 
totem or crest, might be assumed by anybody, whatever his 
clan. The common possession of a honorific totem appears 
to have constituted the same sort of bond among the Carrier 
Indians as the membership of a secret society does among 
the coast tribes of British Columbia ; certainly the rites of 
initiation were similar. This will be clear from Father 
Morice’s account of the performances, which I will subjoin in 
his own words. ‘The connection of the individual with his 
crest appeared more especially during ceremonial dances, 
when the former, attired, if possible, with the spoils of the 
latter, was wont to personate it in the gaze of an admiring 
assemblage. On all such occasions, man and totem were 
also called by the same name. The adoption of any such 
‘rite’ or crest was usually accompanied by initiatory cere- 
monies or observances corresponding to the nature of the 
crest, followed in all cases by a distribution of clothes to all 
present. Thus whenever anybody resolved upon getting 
received as Lulem or Bear, he would, regardless of the 
season, divest himself of all his wearing apparel and don a 
bear-skin, whereupon he would dash into the woods there 
to remain for the space of three or four days and nights in 
deference to the wonts of his intended totem animal. Every 
night a party of his fellow-villagers would sally out in search 
of the missing ‘bear.’ To their loud calls: Yz! Kelulem 
(Come on, Bear!) he would answer by angry growls ir 
imitation of the bear. The searching party making for the 


followed by a similar answer that he had dexterously shiftec 
to some opposite quarter in the forest. As a rule, he coulé 
not be found, but had to come back of himself, when he was 
speedily apprehended and conducted to the ceremonial lod e 
where he would commence his first bear-dance in conjunctior 
with all the other totem people, each of whom would then per 
sonate his own particular totem. Finally would take place 
the potlatch [distribution of property] of the newly initiate 
‘bear,’ who would not forget to present his captor with at le 
a whole dressed skin. The initiation to the ‘ Darding Knife 
was quite a theatrical performance. A lance was prepa 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 275 


vl hich had a very sharp point so arranged that the slightest 
ressure on its tip would cause the steel to gradually sink 
into the shaft. In the sight of the multitude crowding the 
Todge, this lance was pressed on the bare chest of the 
C didate and apparently sunk in his body to the shaft, 
when he would tumble down simulating death. At the 
s ame time a quantity of blood—previously kept in the 
mouth—would issue from the would-be corpse, making it 
quite clear to the uninitiated gazers-on that the terrible 
knife had had its effect, when lo! upon one of the actors 
striking up one of the chants specially made for the cir- 
c mstance and richly paid for, the candidate would gradually 
tise up a new man, the particular protégé of the ‘ Darding 
1 Knife. ”? 

In the former of these two initiatory rites of the Carrier 
Indians the prominent feature is the transformation of the 
man into his totem animal ; in the latter it is his death and 
i urrection. But in substance, probably, both are identical. 
both the novice dies as a man and revives as his totem, 
whether that be a bear, a “ darding” knife, or what not ; 

x her words, he has deposited his life or some portion of ii in 
his totem, with which accordingly for the future he is more 


conceive why a man should choose to identify himself with a 
; ife, whether “darding ” or otherwise, we have to remember 
‘that in Celebes it is to a chopping-knife or other iron tool 
‘that the soul of a woman in labour is transferred for safety ;* 
and the difference between a chopping-knife and a “ darding” 
k ife, considered as a receptacle for a human soul, is per- 


itish Columbia warriors who had a knife, an arrow, or 
y other weapon for their personal totem or guardian 
Dirit, enjoyed this signal advantage over their fellows that 
. . ey were for all practical purposes invulnerable. If an 
irrow did hit them, which seldom happened, they vomited 


4 i A. G. Morice, ‘‘ Notes, archaeo- correspond in some measure to the 
Togical, industrial, and sociological, on _sub-totems or multiplex totems of the 
he Western Dénés,” Transactions of Australians. As to these latter see 
the Canadian Institute, iv. (1892-93) Totemism and Exogamy, i. 78 sg@., 
; 203-206. The honorific totems 133 sgg. 

the Carrier Indians may perhaps 2 See above, pp. 153 sg. 


Pretence of 
death and 
resurrec- 
tion at 
initiation. 


initiatory 
rites. 


t less completely identified. Hard as it may be for us to. 


‘haps not very material. Among the Thompson Indians of Supposed 


invulner- 
ability of 
men who 
have 
weapons 
for their 
guardian 
spirits. 


Initiatory 
rite of the 
Toukaway 
Indians. 


Traces of 
the rite of 
death and 
resurrec- 
tion among 
more 
advanced 


peoples. 


276 THE EXTERNAL SOUL IN FOLK-CUSTOM  cuar. 
the blood up, and the hurt soon healed. Hence these 
arrow-proof warriors rarely wore armour,'which would in- 
deed have been superfluous, and they generally took the 
most dangerous posts in battle. So convinced were the 
Thompson Indians of the power of their personal totem 
or guardian spirit to bring them back to life, that some 
of them killed themselves in the sure hope that the spirit 
would immediately raise them up from the dead. Others, 
more prudently, experimented on their friends, shooting 
them dead and then awaiting more or less cheerfully their 
joyful resurrection. We are not told that success crowned 
these experimental demonstrations of the immortality of the 
soul.’ 
The Toukaway Indians of Texas, one of whose totems 

is the wolf, have a ceremony in which men, dressed in wolf- 
skins, run about on all fours, howling and mimicking wolves. 
At last they scratch up a living tribesman, who has been 
buried on purpose, and putting a bow and arrows in his 
hands, bid him do as the wolves do—rob, kill, and murder.* 
The ceremony probably forms part of an initiatory rite like 
the resurrection from the grave of the old man in the 
Australian rites. : 
The simulation of death and resurrection or of a new 
birth at initiation appears to have lingered on, or at least to 
have left traces of itself, among peoples who have advanced 
far beyond the stage of savagery. Thus, after his investiture 
with the sacred thread-—the symbol of his order—a Brah- 
man is called “twice born.” Manu says, “ According te 
the injunction of the revealed texts the first birth of a 


of the United States (Philadelphia, 
1853-1856), v. 683. Ina letter datec 


1 James Teit, Zhe Thompson Indians 
of British Columbia, p. 357 (The Jesup 


North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of 
the American Museum of Natural 
History, April, 1900). Among the 
Shuswap of British Columbia, when a 
young man has obtained his personal 
totem or guardian spirit, he is sup- 
posed to become proof against bullets 
and arrows (Fr. Boas, in Sixth Report 
of the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, p. 93, separate re- 
print from the Report of the British 
Association, Leeds meeting, 1890). 

2 H. R. Schooleraft, /rdian Tribes 


16th Dec. 1887, Mr. A. S. Gatschet, 
formerly of the Bureau of Ethnology, 
Washington, wrote to me: ‘‘ Among 
the Toukawe whom in 1884 I found at 
Fort Griffin [?], Texas, I noticed that 
they never kill the big or grey woll 
hatchukundn, which has a mythologic 
signification, ‘holding the earth’ 
(hatch). He forms one of their totem 
clans, and they have had a dance in his 
honor, danced by the males only, who 
carried sticks,” - 


THE RITUAL OF DEATH AND RESURRECTION 277 


Aryan is from his natural mother, the second happens on 
he tying of the girdle of Mu”ga grass, and the third on the 
Mitiation to the performance to a Srauta sacrifice.”’ A 
pretence of killing the candidate perhaps formed part of the 
Nitiation to the Mithraic mysteries. 

_ Thus, on the theory here suggested, wherever totemism is 
found, and wherever a pretence is made of killing and bring- 
ng to life again the novice at initiation, there may exist or 
have existed not only a belief in the possibility of permanently 
‘depositing the soul in some external object—animal, plant, 
9x what not—but an actual intention of so doing. If the 
question is put, why do men desire to deposit their life out- 
side their bodies? the answer can only be that, like the 
giant in the fairy tale, they think it safer to do so than to 
tarry it about with them, just as people deposit their money 
with a banker rather than carry it on their persons. We 
dave seen that at critical periods the life or soul is some- 
imes temporarily stowed away in a safe place till the 
langer is past. But institutions like totemism are not 
esorted to merely on special occasions of danger; they are 
ystems into which every one, or at least every male, is 
bliged to be initiated at a certain period of life. Now the 
geriod of life at which initiation takes place is regularly 
uberty ; and this fact suggests that the special danger 
vhich totemism and systems like it are intended to obviate 
S supposed not to arise till sexual maturity has been attained, 
r fact, that the danger apprehended is believed to attend 
the relation of the sexes to each other. It would be easy 
© prove by a long array of facts that the sexual relation is 
issociated in the primitive mind with many serious perils ; 
but the exact nature of the danger apprehended is still 


A 


) 1 The Laws of Manu, ii, 169, _ * Lampridius, Commodus, 9; C. W. 


ranslated by G. Biihler (Oxford, 1886), 
p. 61 (The Sacred Books of the East, 

ol. xxv.); J. A. Dubois, A/eurs, Zn- 
litutions et Cérémonies des Peuples de 
tinde (Paris, 1825), i. 125; Monier 
Williams, Religious Thought and Life 
a India (London, 1883), pp. 360 sg., 
396 sg.; H. Oldenberg, Dz Religion 
“@s Veda (Berlin, 1894), pp. 466 


‘Ge 
BA 


King, Zhe Gnostics and their Remains, 
Second Edition (London, 1887), pp. 
127, 129. Compare Fr. Cumont, 
Textes et Monuments figurés relatifs 
aux mystéres de Mithra, i. (Brusseis, 
1899) pp. 69 sg., 321 sy. ; E. Rohde, 
Psyche (Tubingen and Leipsic, 1903), 
ii. 400 2.1; A. Dieterich, Zine Mith- 
rasliturgie (Leipsic, 1903), pp. 91, 
157 599. 


The 
motive for 
attempting 
to deposit 
the soul 

in a safe 
place out- 
side of 


s of tl 


CHAPTER XII 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


Tuus the view that Balder’s life was in the mistletoe is 
 € entirely i in harmony with primitive modes of thought. It 
' may indeed sound like a contradiction that, if his life was in 
‘the mistletoe, he should nevertheless have been killed by a 
,blow from the plant. But when a person’s life is conceived 
‘as embodied in a particular object, with the existence of 
which his own existence is inseparably bound up, and the 
‘destruction of which involves his own, the object in question 
‘may be regarded and spoken of indifferently as his life 
‘or his death, as happens in the fairy tales. Hence if a 
‘man’s death is in an object, it is perfectly natural that he 
‘should be killed by a blow from it. In the fairy tales 
_ Koshchei the Deathless is killed by a blow from the egg or 
_ the stone in which his life or death is secreted ;* the ogres 
_burst when a certain grain of sand—doubtless containing their 
life or death—is carried over their heads ;? the magician 
_dies when the stone in which his life or death is contained 
_is put under his pillow ;* and the Tartar hero is warned 
_ that he may be killed by the golden arrow or golden sword 
in which his soul has been stowed away.* 


1 Above, p. 110; compare pp. 107, 
120 sg., 132, 133- 

_  # Above, p. 120. 

3 Above, p. 106. 

| # Above, p. 145. In the myth the 
_ throwing of the weapons and of the 
» mistletoe at Balder and the blindness 
_ of Hother who slew him remind us of 
_ the custom of the Irish reapers who 
_ kill the corn-spirit in the last sheaf by 
_ throwing their sickles blindfold at it. 


See Spirits of the Corn and of the 
Wild, i. 144. In Mecklenburg a cock 
is sometimes buried in the ground and 
a man who is blindfolded strikes at it 
with a flail. If he misses it, another 
tries, and so on till the cock is killed. 
See K. Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen und 
Gebréuche aus Mecklenburg (Vienna, 
1879-1880), ii. 280. In England on 
Shrove Tuesday a hen used to be tied 
upon a man’s back, and other men blind- 


279 


Balder’s 
life or 

death in the 
mistletoe. 


The view 
that the 
mistletoe 
contained 
the life of 
the oak 
may have 
been sug- 
gested by 
the posi- 
tion of the 
parasite 
among the 
boughs. 


Indian 
parallel to 
Balder 
and the 
mistletoe, 


280 THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


The idea that the life of the oak was in the mistletoe 
was probably suggested, as I have said, by the observation - 
that in winter the mistletoe growing on the oak remains 
green while the oak itself is leafless. But the position of — 
the plant—growing not from the ground but from the trunk — 
or branches of the tree—might confirm this idea. Primitive — 
man might think that, like himself, the oak-spirit had sought — 
to deposit his life in some safe place, and for this purpose © 
had pitched on the mistletoe, which, being in a sense neither — 
on earth nor in heaven, might be supposed to be fairly out — 
of harm’s way. In the first chapter we saw that primitive — 
man seeks to preserve the life of his human divinities by © 
keeping them poised between earth and heaven, as the — 
place where they are least likely to be assailed by the 
dangers that encompass the life of man on earth, We 
can therefore understand why it has been a rule both of — 
ancient and of modern folk-medicine that the mistletoe — 
should not be allowed to touch the ground; were it to — 
touch the ground, its healing virtue would be gone! This — 
may be a survival of the old superstition that the plant in — 
which the life of the sacred tree was concentrated should — 
not be exposed to the risk incurred by contact with the — 
earth. In an Indian legend, which offers a parallel to the — 
Balder myth, Indra swore to the demon Namuci that he — 
would slay him neither by day nor by night, neither with © 
staff nor with bow, neither with the palm of the hand nor | 
with the fist, neither with the wet nor with the dry. But © 
he killed him in the morning twilight by sprinkling over 


sae 


him the foam of the sea.? 


folded struck at it with branches till they 
killed it. See T. F. Thiselton Dyer, 
British Popular Customs (London, 
1876), p. 68. W. Mannhardt (Dze 
Korndimonen, Berlin, 1868, pp. 16 sg.) 
has made it probable that such sports are 
directly derived from the custom of kill- 
ing a cock upon the harvest-field as a 
representative of the corn-spirit. See 
Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, i. 
277 sg. These customs, therefore, com- 
bined with the blindness of Hother in the 
myth, suggest that the man who killed 
the human representative of the oak- 


The foam of the sea is just such 


spirit was blindfolded, and threw his 
weapon or the mistletoe from a little 
distance. After the Lapps had killed 
a bear—which was the occasion of 
many superstitious ceremonies — the 
bear’s skin was hung on a post, and 
the women, blindfolded, shot arrows at 
it. See J. Scheffer, Lapponia (Frank- 
fort, 1673), p. 240. 

1 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxiv, 12; J. 
Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,‘ ii. 1010. 
Compare below, p. 282. 

2 The Satapatha Brahmana, xii. 7. 
3. 1-3, translated by J. Eggeling, 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 281 


ar object as a savage might choose to put his life in, because 
it occupies that sort of intermediate or nondescript position 
stween earth and sky or sea and sky in which primitive 
sees safety. It is therefore not surprising that the 
am of the river should be the totem of a clan in India. 
Again, the view that the mistletoe owes its mystic char- 
er partly to its not growing on the ground is confirmed by 


of another tree is esteemed “exceedingly effective against 
‘witchcraft: since it does not grow on the ground witches 
' have no power over it; if it is to have its full effect it must 
be cut on Ascension Day.”? Hence it is placed over doors 
' to prevent the ingress of witches.» In Sweden and Norway, 
_ also, magical properties are ascribed to a “ flying-rowan” 
' (flégrénn), that is to a rowan which is found growing not in the 
' ordinary fashion on the ground but on another tree, or on a 
roof, or in a cleft of the rock, where it has sprouted from seed 
“scattered by birds. They say that a man who is out in the 
. dark should have a bit of “ flying-rowan ” with him to chew ; 
"else he runs a risk of being bewitched and of being unable 
“to stir from the spot. A Norwegian story relates how 
" once on a time a Troll so bewitched some men who were 
_ ploughing ina field that they could not drive a straight 
furrow ; only one of the ploughmen was able to resist the 
enchantment because by good luck his plough was made 
out of a “flying-rowan.”* In Sweden, too, the “ flying- 
rowan” is used to make the divining rod, which discovers 
hidden treasures. This useful art has nowadays unfor- 


* Part v. (Oxford, 1900) pp. 222 sg. 
| (The Sacred Books of the East, vol. 
» xliv.); Denham Rouse, in Folk - lore 
| Journal, vii. (1889) p. 61, quoting 
| Taitttrya Brihmana, I. vii. 1. 
=a 1 Col. E. T. Dalton, ‘‘ The Kols of 
| Chota-Nagpore,” Zransactions of the 
| EL£thnological Society, N.S. vi. (1868) 
Pp 36. 
fF? Jens Kamp, Danske Folkeminder 
| (Odense, 1877), pp. 172, 65 sg., re- 
_ ferred to in Feilberg’s Bidrag til en 
| Ordbog over Jyske Almuesmal, Fjerde 
_ hefte (Copenhagen, 1888), p. 320. 
" For a sight of Feilberg’s work I am 


indebted to the kindness of the late 
Rev. Walter Gregor, M.A., of Pitsligo, 
who pointed out the passage to me. 

3 E. T. Kristensen, Zydske Folke- 
minder, Vi. 3 referred to by 
Feilberg, Zc. According to Marcellus 
(De Medicamentis, xxvi. 115), ivy 
which springs from an oak is a remedy 
for stone, provided it be cut with a 
copper instrument. 

* A. Kuhn, Die Herabkunft des 
Feuers und des Géttertranks? (Giiters- 
loh, 1886), pp. 175 sg., quoting 
Dybeck’s Runa, 1845, pp. 62 sg. 

5 A. Kuhn, of. cit. p. 176. 


282 THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


tunately been almost forgotten, but three hundred years ago ~ 
it was in full bloom, as we gather from the following con- — 
“Tf in the woods or elsewhere, on old — 
walls or on high mountains or rocks you perceive a rowan- — 
tree (runn) which has sprung from a seed that a bird has 
dropped from its bill, you must either knock or break off — 
that rod or tree in the twilight between the third day and — 
the night after Ladyday. But you must take care that 


temporary account. 


neither iron nor steel touches it and that in carrying it 
home you do not let it fall on the ground. Then place it 


under the roof on a spot under which you have laid various — 


metals, and you will soon be surprised to see how that rod 
under the roof gradually bends in the direction of the metals. 
When your rod has sat there in the same spot for fourteen 
days or more, you take a knife or an awl, which has been 
stroked with a magnet, and with it you slit the bark on all 
sides, and pour or drop the blood of a cock (best of all the 
blood from the comb of a cock which is all of one colour) on 
the said slits in the bark ; and when the blood has dried, 
the rod is ready and will give public proof of the efficacy of 
its marvellous properties.”* Just as in Scandinavia the 
parasitic rowan is deemed a countercharm to sorcery, so in 


Germany the parasitic mistletoe is still commonly con- | 
sidered a protection against witchcraft, and in Sweden, as © 
we saw, the mistletoe which is gathered on Midsummer Eve 
is attached to the ceiling of the house, the horse’s stall or © 
the cow’s crib, in the belief that this renders the Troll power- — 


less to injure man or beast. 


CHAP. — 


1 Quoted by A. Kuhn, of. ct. pp. 
180 sg. In Zimbales, a province of the 
Philippine Islands, ‘‘a certain parasitic 
plant that much resembles yellow moss 
and grows high up on trees is regarded 
as a very powerful charm. It is called 
gay-u-ma, and a man who possesses 
it is called nanara gayuma. If his 
eyes rest on a person during the new 
moon he will become sick at the 
stomach, but he can cure the sickness 
by laying hands on the afflicted part.” 
See W. A. Reed, Wegritos of Zambales 
(Manilla, 1904), p. 67 (Department of 
the Interior, Ethnological Survey Pub- 
lications, vol. ii. part i.). Mr. Reed 


seemstomean that if aman who possesses _ 
this parasitic plant sees a person at the 


new moon, the person on whom his 


eye falls will be sick in his stomach, 
but that the owner of the parasite — 
can cure the sufferer by laying his (the — 
owner’s) hands on his (the patient’s) — 
It is interesting to observe — 
that the magical virtue of the parasitic 
plant appears to be especially effective — 


stomach. 


at the new moon. 


2 A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks. — 
aberglaube* (Berlin, 1869), p. 97 § © 
L. Lloyd, Peasant Life in 
Sweden (London, 1870), p. 269. See ~ 


128; 


above, p. 86. 


; 


a 


‘ 
| 
| 


. 
. 
| 


xn THE GOLDEN BOUGH 283 


a The view that the mistletoe was not merely the instru- The fate of 
4 ment of Balder’s death, but that it contained his life, is "3% | 
_ countenanced by the analogy of a Scottish superstition. be bound 

4 Tradition ran that the fate of the Hays of Errol, an estate ¥P wh ‘he 


7 in Perthshire, near the Firth of Tay, was bound up with the on Errol’s 


- the Hay family has recorded the old belief as follows: 

' “Among the low country families the badges are now 
: almost generally forgotten; but it appears by an ancient 
MS. and the tradition of a few old people in Perthshire, 

: that the badge of the Hays was the mistletoe. There was 
| formerly in the neighbourhood of Errol, and not far from 
_ the Falcon stone, a vast oak of an unknown age, and upon 
_ which grew a profusion of the plant: many charms and 
_ legends were considered to be connected with the tree, and 
| the duration of the family of Hay was said to be united with 
A its existence. It was believed that a sprig of the mistletoe cut 
| by a Hay on Allhallowmas eve, with a new dirk, and after 
_ surrounding the tree three times sunwise, and pronouncing 
a certain spell, was a sure charm against all glamour or 
_ witchery, and an infallible guard in the day of battle. A 
| spray gathered in the same manner was placed in the cradle 
' of infants, and thought to defend them from being changed 
for elf-bairns by the fairies. Finally, it was affirmed, that 
Ee when the root of the oak had perished, ‘the grass should 
& grow in the hearth of Errol, and a raven should sit in the 
_ falcon’s nest.’ The two most unlucky deeds which could be 
done by one of the name of Hay was, to kill a white falcon, 
_ and to cut down a limb from the oak of Errol. When the 
| old tree was destroyed I could never learn. The estate has 
_ been some time sold out of the family of Hay, and of course 
it is said that the fatal oak was cut down a short time 
_ before.” The old superstition is recorded in-verses which 


“ While the mistletoe bats on Errol’s atk, 
And that atk stands fast, 
The Hays shall flourish, and their good grey hawk 
Shall nocht flinch before the blast. 


* 1 John Hay Allan, 7ke Bridal of Cadlchairn (London, 1822), pp. 337 59. 


The 

life of the 
Lachlins 
and the 
deer of 
Finchra. 


284 THE GOLDEN BOUGH CHAP. — 


“ But when the root of the aik decays, 
And the mistletoe dwines on its withered ivease 
The grass shall grow on Errols hearthstane, 
And the corbie roup in the falcon’s nest.” 1 


The idea that the fate of a family, as distinct from the ~ 
lives of its members, is bound up with a particular plant or ~ 
tree, is no doubt comparatively modern. The older view — 
may have been that the lives of all the Hays were in this 
particular mistletoe, just as in the Indian story the lives of — 
all the ogres are ina lemon; to break a twig of the mistletoe — 
would then have been to kill one of the Hays. Similarly in 
the island of Rum, whose bold mountains the voyager from — 
Oban to Skye observes to seaward, it was thought that if one — 
of the family of Lachlin shot a deer on the mountain of — 
Finchra, he would die suddenly or contract a distemper which — 
would soon prove fatal. Probably the life of the Lachlins — 
was bound up with the deer on Finchra, as the life of the — 
Hays was bound up with the mistletoe on Errol’s oak, and — 


the life of the Dalhousie family with the Edgewell Tree. 
It is not a new opinion that the Golden Bough was the — 


mistletoe.’ 


1 Rev. John B. Pratt, Buchan, 
Second Edition (Aberdeen, Edinburgh, 
and London, 1859), p. 342. .‘* The 
corbie roup’’ means ‘‘ the raven croak.” 
In former editions of this work my 
only source of information as to the 
mistletoe and oak of the Hays was an 
extract from a newspaper which was 
kindly copied and sent to me, without 
the name of the newspaper, by the late 
Rev. Walter Gregor, M.A., of Pitsligo. 
For my acquaintance with the works of 
J. H. Allan and J. B. Pratt I am 
indebted to the researches of my 
learned friend Mr. A. B. Cook, who 
has already quoted them in his article 
‘*The European Sky-God,” /olk-lore, 
xvil. (1906) pp. 318 sg. 

2M. Martin, ‘‘ Description of the 
Western Islands of Scotland,” in J. 
Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels (Lon- 
don, 1808-1814), iii. 661. 


3 See James Sowerby, LZuglish 
Botany, xxi. (London, 1805), p. 1470: 
‘*The Misseltoe is celebrated in story 


True, Virgil does not identify but only compares 


as the sacred plant of the Druids, and 
the Golden Bough of Virgil, which — 
was Aeneas’s passport to the infernal — 
regions.” Again, the author of the 
Lextcon Mythologicum concludes, *‘ cum 
Jonghio nostro,” that the Golden Bough 
“‘was nothing but the mistletoe glori- 
fied by poetical license.” See Zdda 
Rhythmica seu Antiguior, vulgo Sae- — 
mundina dicta, iii. (Copenhagen, — 
1828) p. 513 note. C. L. Roch- 
holz expresses the same _ opinion 
(Deutscher Glaube und Brauch, Berlin, 
1867, i. 9). The subject is discussed 
at length by E. Norden, P. Vergilius 
Maro, Aenets Buch VI, (Leipsic, 1903) — 
pp. 161-171, who, however, does not — 
evenmention thegeneralorpopularview 
(publica opinio) current in the time of — 
Servius, that the Golden Bough was © 
the branch which a candidate for the — 
priesthood of Diana had to pluck in 
the sacred grove of Nemi. I confess 
I have more respect for the general — 
opinion of antiquity than to dismiss it 
thus cavalierly without a hearing. 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 285 


| it with mistletoe. But this may be only a poetical device to 
cast a mystic glamour over the humble plant. Or, more 
_ probably, his description was based on a popular superstition 
that at certain times the mistletoe blazed out into a super- 
natural golden glory. The poet tells how two doves, guiding 
Aeneas to the gloomy vale in whose depth grew the Golden 
Bough, alighted upon a tree, “whence shone a flickering 
gleam of gold. As in the woods in winter cold the mistletoe 
-—a plant not native to its tree—is green with fresh leaves 
and twines its yellow berries about the boles; such seemed 
| upon the shady holm-oak the leafy gold, so rustled in the 
' gentle breeze the golden leaf.”* Here Virgil definitely 
| describes the Golden Bough as growing on a holm-oak, 
| and compares it with the mistletoe. The inference is almost 
| inevitable that the Golden Bough was nothing but the 
| mistletoe seen through the haze of poetry or of popular 
_ superstition. 

a Now grounds have been shewn for believing that the 
' priest of the Arician grove—the King of the Wood—per- 
' sonified the tree on which grew the Golden Bough.* Hence 
if that tree was the oak, the King of the Wood must have 
_ been a personification of the oak-spirit. It is, therefore, 
" easy to understand why, before he could be slain, it was 
" necessary to break the Golden Bough. As an oak-spirit, his 
4 life or death was in the mistletoe on the oak, and so long 
as the mistletoe remained intact, he, like Balder, could not 
die. To slay him, therefore, it was necessary to break the 
_ mistletoe, and probably, as in the case of Balder, to throw it 
'athim. And to complete the parallel, it is only necessary 
_ to suppose that the King of the Wood was formerly burned, 
# dead or alive, at the midsummer fire festival which, as we 
' have seen, was annually celebrated in the Arician grove.* 
4 The perpetual fire which burned in the grove, like the per- 


|! Virgil, Aen. vi. 203 sgg., compare 
' 136sgg. See Note IV. “‘The Mistletoe 
_ and the Golden Bough” at the end of 
this volume. 

| ? The Magic Art and the Evolution 
| of Kings, i. 40 sqq., ii. 378 sgg. Virgil 
_ (4en. vi. 201 sgg.) places the Golden 
- Bough in the neighbourhood of Lake 
| Avernus. But this was probably a 


poetical liberty, adopted for the con- 
venience of Aeneas’s descent to the 
infernal world. Italian tradition, as 
we learn from Servius (on Virgil, Aez. 
vi. 136), placed the Golden Bough in 
the grove at Nemi. 


3 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, i. 12. 


The 
Golden 
Bough 
seems to 
have been 
a gloritied 
mistletoe, 


If the 
Golden 
Bough 
was the 
mistletoe, 
the King of 
the Wood 
at Nemi 
may have 
personated 
an oak 
spirit and 


A similar 
tragedy 
may have 
been 
enacted 
over the 
human 
representa- 
tive of 
Balder in 
Norway. 


The 

name of the 
Golden 
Bough may 
have been 
applied 

to the 
mistletoe 
on account 
of the 
golden 
tinge which 
the plant 
assumes in 
withering. 


286 - ‘THE GOLDEN BOUGH CHAP. 


petual fire which burned in the temple of Vesta at Rome 
and under the oak at Romove,' was probably fed with the 
sacred oak-wood ; and thus it would be in a great fire of oak 1 
that the King of the Wood formerly met his end. At a — 
later time, as I have suggested, his annual tenure of office 
was lengthened or shortened, as the case might be, by the © 
rule which allowed him to live so long as he could prove his — 
divine right by the strong hand. But he only escaped the 
fire to fall by the sword. : 

Thus it seems that at a remote age in the heart of Italy, — 
beside the sweet Lake of Nemi, the same fiery tragedy was — 
annually enacted which Italian merchants and soldiers were — 
afterwards to witness among their rude kindred, the Celts of — 
Gaul, and which, if the Roman eagles had ever swooped on — 
Norway, might have been found repeated with little differ- 
ence among the barbarous Aryans of the North. The rite 
was probably an essential feature in the ancient Aryan — 
worship of the oak. 

It only remains to ask, Why was the mistletoe called 
the Golden Bough?* The whitish-yellow of the mistletoe 
berries is hardly enough to account for the name, for — 
Virgil says that the bough was altogether golden, stem — 
as well as leaves. Perhaps the name may be derived © 
from the rich golden yellow which a bough of mistletoe — 
assumes when it has been cut and kept for some months; ~ 
the bright tint is not confined to the leaves, but spreads 
to the stalks as well, so that the whole branch appears 
to be indeed a Golden Bough. Breton peasants hang up 


1 The Magic Art and the Evolution 
of Kings, ii. 186, 366 note, 

2 A custom of annually burning or 
otherwise sacrificing a human repre- 
sentative of the corn-spirit has been 
noted among the Egyptians, Pawnees, 
and Khonds. See Spirzts of the Corn 
and of the Wild, i. 238 sq., 245 s99., 
259 sg. We have seen that in Western 
Asia there are strong traces of a practice 
of annually burning a human god. See 
Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Second Edition, 
pp. 84 sgg., 98 sg., 137 Sg) 139 S¢qey 
155 sg. The Druids appear to have 
eaten portions of the human victim 
(Pliny, Nat, Hist. xxx. 13). Perhaps 


portions of the flesh of the King of the 
Wood were eaten by his worshippers 
asasacrament. We have found traces 
of the use of sacramental bread at — 
Nemi. See Spirits of the Corn and of — 
the Weld, ii. 94 sqq. 

3 It has been said that in Welsh a 
name for mistletoe is ‘‘ the tree of pure 
gold” (pren puraur), See J. Grimm, — 
Deutsche Mythologie,* ii. 1009, re- — 
ferring to Davies. But my friend Sir 
John Rhys tells me that the statement 
is devoid of foundation. 

4 Virgil, den, vi. 137 57.:— 

‘* Latet arbore opaca 
Aureus et foliis et lento vimine ramus.” 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 287 


great bunches of mistletoe in front of their cottages, and 
in the month of June these bunches are conspicuous for 
the bright golden tinge of their foliage.’ In some parts of 
Brittany, especially about Morbihan, branches of mistletoe 
_ are hung over the doors of stables and byres to protect the 
‘horses and cattle,’ probably against witchcraft. 

a The yellow colour of the withered bough may partly 
_ explain why the mistletoe has been sometimes supposed to 
- possess the property of disclosing treasures in the earth ;* for 
'_on the principles of homoeopathic magic there is a natural 
| affinity between a yellow bough and yellow gold. This sugges- 
| tion is confirmed by the analogy of the marvellous properties 
' popularly ascribed to the mythical fern-seed or fern-bloom. 


_ like gold or fire on Midsummer Eve.* Thus in Bohemia it 
| is said-that “on St. John’s Day fern-seed blooms with golden 
' blossoms that gleam like fire.”® Now it is a property of 
| this mythical fern-seed that whoever has it, or will ascend a 
_ mountain holding it in his hand on Midsummer Eve, will 
_ discover a vein of gold or will see the treasures of the earth 


| We saw that fern-seed is popularly supposed to bloom ; 


' shining with a bluish flame.’ In Russia they say that if you 


great hollow oak of Saint-Denis-des- 
Puits, in the French province of Perche, 
is called *‘the gilded or golden oak” 
(Chéne- Doré) ‘*in memory of the 
Druidical tradition of the mistletoe cut 
with a golden sickle.” See Felix 
Chapiseau, Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et 
du Perche (Paris, 1902), 1.97. Perhaps 
the name may be derived from bunches 
of withered mistletoe shining like gold 
in the sunshine among the branches. 

2 H. Gaidoz, ‘‘ Bulletin critique de 
la Mythologie Gauloise,” Revue de 
PHistoire des Religions, ii. (Paris, 
1880) p. 76. 

3 See below, pp. 291 sg. 

* See above, pp. 65 sg. 

6 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und 
Gebriuche aus Bihmen und Mahren 
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 97, 
§ 673. 

6 J. V. Grohmann, of. cét. p. 97, § 
676; A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
aberglaube? (Berlin, 1869), p. 94, § 
123; I. V. Zingerle, Sztten, Brauche 
und Mei des Tiroler Volkes? 
(Innsbruck, 1871), p. 158, § 1350. 


_  !} This suggestion as to the origin of 
_ the name has been made to me by two 
_ correspondents independently. Miss 
| Florence Grove, writing to me from 
_ 10 Milton Chambers, Cheyne Walk, 
_ London, on May 13th, 1901, tells me 
' that she regularly hangs up a bough of 
| mistletoe every year and allows it to 
' remain till it is replaced by the new 
branch next year, and from her observa- 
| tion ‘ the mistletoe is actually a golden 
| bough when kept a sufficiently long 
_ time.” She was kind enough to send 
_ me some twigs of her old bough, which 
_ fully bore out her description. Again, 
Mrs. A. Stuart writes to me from 
Crear Cottage, Morningside Drive, 
Edinburgh, on June 26th, 1901: “* As 
to why the mistletoe might be called 
_ the Golden Bough, my sister Miss Haig 
_ wishes me to tell you that last June, 
_ when she was in Brittany, she saw 
great bunches of mistletoe hung up in 
front of the houses in the villages. 
‘The leaves were bright golden. You 
‘Should hang up a branch next Christ- 
mas and keep it till June!” The 


thought to 
bloom like 
gold or fire 
and to re- 
veal buried 
treasures 
on Mid- 
summer 
Eve. 


288 THE GOLDEN BOUGH nae 


succeed in catching the wondrous bloom of the fern at mid- — 
night on Midsummer Eve, you have only to throw it up into the ~ 
air, and it will fall like a star on the very spot where a treasure © 
lies hidden.’ In Brittany treasure-seekers gather fern-seed — 
at midnight on Midsummer Eve, and keep it till Palm 
Sunday of the following year; then they strew the seed on 
ground where they think a treasure is concealed.* Tyrolese | 
peasants imagine that hidden treasures can be seen glowing — 
like flame on Midsummer Eve, and that fern-seed, gathered — 
at this mystic season, with the usual precautions, will help to 
bring the buried gold to the surface.* In the Swiss canton 
of Freiburg people used to watch beside a fern on St. John’s — 
night in the hope of winning a treasure, which the devil — 
himself sometimes brought to them.’ In Bohemia they say — 
that he who procures the golden bloom of the fern at this — 
season has thereby the key to all hidden treasures ; and that — 
if maidens will spread a cloth under the fast-fading bloom, — 
red gold will drop into it. And in the Tyrol and Bohemia — 
if you place fern-seed among money, the money will never 


decrease, however much of it 


1 C. Russwurm, ‘‘Aberglaube in 
Russland,” Zettschrift ftir deutsche 
Mythologie und Sittenkunde, iv. (1859), 
pp. 152 sg.; Angelo de Gubernatis, 
Mythologie des Plantes (Paris, 1878- 
1882), ii. 146. 

2 P. Sébillot, Zraditions et Super- 
stitions de la Haute-Bretagne (Paris, 
1882), ii. 336; 2@., Coutumes populatres 
de la Haute-Bretagne (Paris, 1886), p. 
217. 

3 J. E. Waldfreund, ‘‘ Volksge- 
braiuche und Aberglauben in Tirol und 
dem Salzburger Gebirg,” Zeztschrift fiir 
deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde, 
iii, (1855), p. 339. 

4 H. Runge, ‘ Volksglaube in der 
Schweiz,” Zeitschrift ftir deutsche 
Mythologie und Sittenkunde, iv. (1859), 

me y 3.4 
: 6 ©, Frh. von Reinsberg-Diirings- 
feld, Fest-Kalendar aus Bohmen(Prague, 
N.D.), pp. 311 sg. Compare Theodor 
Vernaleken, JZythen und Briiuche des 
Volkes in Oe0sterretch (Vienna, 1859), 
pp- 309 sg.; M. Téppen, Adberglauben 
aus Masuren® (Danzig, 1867), pp. 72 
sg. Even without the use of fern-seed 


you spend.® 


Sometimes the | 


treasures are sometimes said to bloom — 
or burn in the earth, or to reveal their 
presence by a bluish flame, on Mid- | 
summer Eve; in Transylvania only — 
children born on a Sunday can see © 
them and fetch them up. See J. Halt- 7 
rich, Zur Volkskunde der Stebenbiirger 
Sachsen (Vienna, 1885), p. 287; I.V. — 
Zingerle, Sztten, Brauche und Mein- — 
ungen des Tiroler Volkes® (Innsbruck, — 
1871), p. 159, §§ 135%, 13523 K. 
Bartsch, Sagen, Marchen und Gebrauche — 
aus Mecklenburg (Vienna, 1879-1880), — 
ii. 285, § 1431; E. Monseur, Folklore — 
Wallon (Brussels, N.D.), p. 6, § 17893 — 
K. Haupt, Sagenbuch der Lausits © 
(Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 231 sg., No. © 
275; A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
aberglaube® (Berlin, 1869), p. 76, § 925 — 
F. J. Wiedemann, dus dem inneren — 
und dusseren Leben der Ehsten (St. — 
Petersburg, 1876), p. 363. 
6 I. V. Zingerle, of. ct. p. 103, § 
882; zd., in Zeitschrift fiir deutsche 
Mythologie und Sittenkunde, i. (1853), 
p. 330; W. Miiller, Beztrdge sur Volks- — 
hunde der Deutschen in Mahren(Vienna — 
and Olmiitz, 1893), p. 265. At Per- — 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 289 


fern-seed is supposed to bloom on Christmas night, and 
whoever catches it will become very rich.’ In Styria they 
‘say that by gathering fern-seed on Christmas a you can 
force the devil to bring you a bag of money.? In Swabia 
likewise you can, by taking the proper precautions, compel 
Satan himself to fetch you a packet of fern-seed on Christmas 
night. But for four weeks previously, and during the whole 
2 the Advent season, you must be very careful never to 
‘pray, never to go to church, and never to use holy water; 
you must busy yourself all day long with devilish thoughts, 
and cherish an ardent wish that the devil would help you to 
et money. Thus prepared you take your stand, between 
eleven and twelve on Christmas night, at the meeting of two 
roads, over both of which corpses have been carried to the 
‘churchyard. Here many people meet you, some of them 
lead and buried long ago, it may be your parents or grand- 
Pp arents, or old friends and acquaintances, and they stop and 
greet you, and ask, “ What are you doing here?” And tiny 
little goblins hop and dance about and try to make you laugh. 
But if you smile or utter a single word, the devil will tear you 
to shreds and tatters on the spot. If, however, you stand 
glum and silent and solemn, there will come, after all the 
@hostly train has passed by, a man dressed as a hunter, and 
that is the devil. He will hand you a paper cornet full of 
fern-seed, which you must keep and carry about with you as 
long as you live. It will give you the power of doing as 
much work at your trade in a day as twenty or thirty ordinary 
men could do in the same time. So you will grow very 
bs But few people have the courage to go through with 
the ordeal. The people of Rotenburg tell of a weaver of 
t heir town, who lived some two hundred and fifty years 
aso and performed prodigies of weaving by a simple applica- 
tion of fern-seed which he had been so fortunate as to obtain, 
nC doubt from the devil, though that is not expressly alleged 


zine, in the Tyrol, it was thought that 1]. V. Zingerle, Sitten, Brauche 
4 n-seed gathered with the dewon St. und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes,? pp. 
hn’s night had the power of trans- 190 sg., § 1573. 

fo ming metals (into gold?). See Ch. 2 A. Schlossar, ** Volksmeinung und 
Schneller, A/archen und Sagen aus  Volksaberglaube aus der deutschen 
'Walschtirol (Innsbruck, 1867), p. 237, | Steiermark,” Germania, N.R., xxiv. 
5 (1891) p. 387. 

» PT. Vil. VOL. IZ U 


Sometimes 
fern-seed is 
thought to 
bloom on 
Christmas 
night. 


The wicked 
weaver of 
Rotenburg. 


The golden 
or fiery 
fern-seed 
appears to 
be an 
emanation 
of the sun's 
fire. 


290 THE GOLDEN BOUGH ai 


by tradition. Rich in the possession of this treasure, the lazy, 
rascal worked only on Saturdays and spent all the rest of. 
the week playing and drinking; yet in one day he wove 
far more cloth than any other skilled weaver who sat at his 
loom from morning to night every day of the week. Natur- 
ally he kept his own counsel, and nobody might ever have 
known how he did it, if it had not been for what, humanly 
speaking, you might call an accident, though for my part I can- 
not but regard it as the manifest finger of Providence. One 
day—it was the octave of a festival—the fellow had woven 
a web no less than a hundred ells long, and his mistress 
resolved to deliver it to her customer the same evening. So 
she put the cloth in a basket and away she trudged with it. 
Her way led her past a church, and as she passed the 
sacred edifice, she heard the tinkle of the holy bell which 
announced the elevation of the Host. Being a good womar 
she put her basket down, knelt beside it, and there, with the 
shadows gathering round her, committed herself to the care. 
of God and his good angels and received, along with the 
kneeling congregation in the lighted church, the evening 
benediction, which kept her and them from all the perils and 
dangers of the night. Then rising refreshed she took up her 
basket. But what was her astonishment on looking into i 
to find the whole web reduced to a heap of yarn! The 
blessed words of the priest at the altar had undone the cursed 
spell of the Enemy of Mankind.’ 3 

Thus, on the principle of like by like, fern-seed 


failing supply of gold. But while the fern-seed is described 
as golden, it is equally described as glowing and fiery” 
Hence, when we consider that two great days for gathering 
the fabulous seed are Midsummer Eve and Christmas—that 
is, the two solstices (for Christmas is nothing but an old 
heathen celebration of the winter solstice)—we are led to 


1 Ernst Meier, Deutsche Sagen, Sitten p. 97, § 675; W. R. S. Ralsto 
und Gebriuche aus Schwaben(Stuttgart, Songs of the Russian People, Secon 
1852), pp. 242-244... Edition (London, 1872), p. 98; G 

Russwurm, ‘‘ Aberglaube in Russland,” 

2 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und Zettschrift fiir deutsche Mythologie una 

Gebrauche aus Bohmen und Méhren, Sittenkunde, iv. (1859) p. 152. 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


291 


‘regard the fiery aspect of the fern-seed as primary, and its 
golden aspect as secondary and derivative. Fern-seed, in fact, 
‘would seem to be an emanation of the sun’s fire at the two 
urning-points of its course, the summer and winter solstices. 


the fern-seed.' 


his view is confirmed by a German story in which a hunter 
is said to have procured fern-seed by shooting at the sun 
on Midsummer Day at noon ; three drops of blood fell down, 
which he caught in a white cloth, and these blood-drops were 
Here the blood is clearly the blood of the 
sun, from which the fern-seed is thus directly derived. Thus 
'it may be taken as probable that fern-seed is golden, because 
it is believed to be an emanation of the sun’s golden fire. 


Now, like fern-seed, the mistletoe is gathered either at Like fern- 
Midsummer or Christmas*—that is, at the summer and piece! 
winter solstices—-and, like fern-seed, it is supposed to gathered at 

ossess the power of revealing treasures in the earth. On (Mie pia 
idsummer Eve people in Sweden make divining-rods of summer 
mistletoe, or of four different kinds of wood one of which saee 
must be mistletoe. The treasure-seeker places the rod on —— 
the ground after sun-down, and when it rests directly over treasures in 
the earth ; 


1 L. Bechstein, Deutsches Sagenbuch 
{Leipsic, 1853), p. 430, No. 500; ia., 
ringer Sagenbuch (Leipsic, 1885), 
pp- 17 sg., No. 161. 

_ * For gathering it at midsummer, 
'see above, pp. 86 sg. The custom of 
gathering it at Christmas still commonly 
‘Survives in England. At York ‘on 
eve of Christmas-day they carry 
tletoe to the high altar of the 
hedral, and proclaim a public and 
ersal liberty, pardon and freedom 
all sorts of inferior and even wicked 
zople at the gates of the city, toward 
four quarters of heaven.” See W. 
tukeley, Zhe Medallic History of 
5: arcus Aurelius Valerius Carausius, 

eperor in Britain (London, 1757- 
1 U 59), ii. 164; J. Brand, Popular 
Antiquities of Great Britain (London, 
1882-1883), i. 525. This last custom, 
h is now doubtless obsolete, may 
ave been a relic of an annual period 
of license like the Saturnalia. The 
hg itional privilege accorded to men 
ne any woman found under 


reasure, the rod begins to move as if it were alive.® 


Now, 


mistletoe is probably another relic of 
the same sort. See Washington Irving, 
Sketch-Book, ** Christmas Eve,” p. 147 
(Bohn’s edition); Marie Trevelyan, 
Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales 
(London, 1909), p. 88. 


3 A. A. Afzelius, Volkssagen und 
Volkslieder aus Schwedens alterer und 
neuerer Zeit (Leipsic, 1842), i. 41 sq.; 
J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* iii. 
289 ; L. Lloyd, Peasant Life in Sweden 
(London, 1870), pp. 26657. See above, 
p- 69. In the Tyrol they say that if 
mistletoe grows on a hazel-tree, there 
must be a treasure under the tree. See 
J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, Mythen 
und Sagen Ttrols (Zurich, 1857), p. 398. 
In East Prussia a similar belief is held 
in regard to mistletoe that grows on a 
thorn. See C. Lemke, Volksthiim- 
liches in Ostpreussen (Mohrungen, 
1884-1887), ii. 283. We have seen 
that the divining-rod which reveals 
treasures is commonly cut from a hazel 
(above, pp. 67 sg.). 


perhaps, 
therefore, 
it too is 
deemed an 
emanation 
of the sun’s 
golden fire. 


The bloom 
of the oak 
on Mid- 
summer 
Eve. 


on Midsummer Eve and the blossom withers before day- 


292 THE GOLDEN BOUGH CHAP. 


if the mistletoe discovers gold, it must be in its character of 
the Golden Bough; and if it is gathered at the solstices, must _ 
not the Golden Bough, like the golden fern-seed, be an emana-| 
tion of the sun’s fire? The question cannot be answered with | 
a simple affirmative. We have seen that the old Aryans” 
perhaps kindled the solstitial and other ceremonial fires in 

part as sun-charms, that is, with the intention of supplying the : 
sun with fresh fire; and as these fires were usually made by — 
the friction or coentnaine of oak-wood,' it may have appeared 
to the ancient Aryan that the sun was periodically recruited 
from the fire which resided in the sacred oak. In other words, 
the oak may have seemed to him the original storehouse or 
reservoir of the fire which was from time to time drawn out 
to feed the sun. But if the life of the oak was conceived 
to be in the mistletoe, the mistletoe must on that view have | 
contained the seed or germ of the fire which was elicited by - 
friction from the wood of the oak. Thus, instead of saying” 
that the mistletoe was an emanation of the sun’s fire, it 
might be more correct to say that the sun’s fire was regarded _ 
as an emanation of the mistletoe. No wonder, then, that 
the mistletoe shone with a golden splendour, and was called 
the Golden Bough. Probably, however, like fern-seed, it was” 
thought to assume its golden aspect only at those stated ~ 
times, especially eeeeaeaes er 8 when fire was drawn from the 
oak to light up the sun.’ At Pulverbatch, in Shropshire, it 
was believed within living memory that the oak-tree blooms 


light. A maiden who wishes to know her lot in marriage 
should spread a white cloth under the tree at night, and in 
the morning she will find a little dust, which is all that 
remains of the flower. She should place the pinch of dust 
under her pillow, and then her future husband will appear 
to her in her dreams.2 This fleeting bloom of the oak, if I 
am right, was probably the mistletoe in its character of the 
Golden Bough. The conjecture is confirmed by the obser- 


1 Above, pp. 90-92. the times when fires are ceremonially 


2 Fern-seed is supposed to bloom at 
Easter as well as at Midsummer and 
Christmas (W. R. 5S. Ralston, Sovgs o7 
the Russian People, pp. 98 sg.) ; and 
Easter, as we have seen, is one of 


kindled, perhaps to recruit the fire 
the sun. q 

3 Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F, 
Jackson, Shropshire Folk-lore (London, ” 
1883), p. 242. z 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 293 


vation that in Wales a real sprig of mistletoe gathered on 
Midsummer Eve is similarly placed under the pillow to 
nduce prophetic dreams ;' and further the mode of catching 
the imaginary bloom of the oak in a white cloth is exactly 
that which was employed by the Druids to catch the real 
“mistletoe when it dropped from the bough of the oak, 
severed by the golden sickle.” As Shropshire borders on 
_ Wales, the belief that the oak blooms on Midsummer Eve 
' may be Welsh in its immediate origin, though probably the 
_ belief is a fragment of the primitive Aryan creed. In some 
parts of Italy, as we saw,* peasants still go out on Mid- 
' summer morning to search the oak-trees for the “oil of St. 
| John,” which, like the mistletoe, heals all wounds, and is, 
; perhaps, the mistletoe itself in its glorified aspect. Thus it 
is easy to understand how a title like the Golden Bough, so 
little descriptive of its usual appearance on the tree, should 
‘have been applied to the seemingly insignificant parasite. 
‘Further, we can perhaps see why in antiquity mistletoe was 
believed to possess the remarkable property of extinguishing 
re,‘ and why in Sweden it is still kept in houses as a safe- 
‘guard against conflagration.’ Its fiery nature marks it out, 
on homoeopathic principles, as the best possible cure or 
preventive of injury by fire. 

These considerations may partially explain why Virgil 
makes Aeneas carry a glorified bough of mistletoe with him 
on his descent into the gloomy subterranean world. The 
poet describes how at the very gates of hell there stretched 
a vast and gloomy wood, and how the hero, following the 
flight of two doves that lured him on, wandered into the 
. depths of the immemorial forest till he saw afar off through 
" the shadows of the trees the flickering light of the Golden 
_ Bough illuminating the matted boughs overhead.’ If the 
E mistletoe, as a yellow withered bough in the sad autumn 
_ woods, was conceived to contain the seed of fire, what better 


|} Marie Trevelyan, Folk-lore and ‘*Calx agua accenditur et Thracius 
_ Folk-stories of Wales (London, 1909), /apis, idem o/eo restinguitur, ignis autem 
| p. 88. aceto maxime et visco et ovo.” 
_ 2 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xvi. 251. Be : 

Bvhove: yak Ba so: See above, p. 85. 
* Pliny, Mat. Hist. xxxiii. 94: 6 Virgil, Aen. vi. 179-209. 


Aeneas and 
the Golden 
Bough. 


Orpheus 
and the 
willow. 


- Aeneas, emerging from the forest, comes to the banks of — 


204 THE GOLDEN BOUGH - cnar, 


take with him than a bough that would be a lamp to his - 
feet as well as a rod and staff to his hands? Armed with 
it he might boldly confront the dreadful spectres that would — 
cross his path on his adventurous journey. Hence when 


Styx, winding slow with sluggish stream through the infernal — 
marsh, and the surly ferryman refuses him passage in his 
boat, he has but to draw the Golden Bough from his bosom — 
and hold it up, and straightway the blusterer quails at the - 
sight and meekly receives the hero into his crazy bark, which 
sinks deep in the water under the unusual weight of the - 
living man.’ Even in recent times, as we have seen, 
mistletoe has been deemed a protection against witches and 
trolls,’ and the ancients may well have credited it with the 
same magical virtue. And if the parasite can, as some 
of our peasants believe, open all locks,’ why should it 
not have served as an “open Sesame” in the hands of 
Aeneas to unlock the gates of death? There is some reason © 
to suppose that when Orpheus in like manner descended ~ 
alive to hell to rescue the soul of his dead wife Eurydice 
from the shades, he carried with him a willow bough to 
serve as a passport on his journey to and from the land of 
the dead ; for in the great frescoes representing the nether 3 
world, with which the master hand of Polygnotus adorned © 
the walls of a loggia at Delphi, Orpheus was depicted sitting 
pensively under a willow, holding his lyre, now silent and — 
useless, in his left hand, while with his right he grasped the © 
drooping boughs of the tree.* If the willow in the picture — 
had indeed the significance which an ingenious scholar has 
attributed to it,’ the painter meant to represent the dead — 
musician dreaming wistfully of the time when the willow had — 
carried him safe back across the Stygian ferry to that bright ~ 
world of love and music which he was now to see no more, — 
Again, on an ancient sarcophagus, which exhibits in sculp- 
tured relief the parting of Adonis from Aphrodite, the 
hapless youth, reclining in the lap of his leman, holds a_ 


1 Virgil, Aen. vi. 384-416, not,” A/ittheilungen des haiserlich 
* Above, pp. 86, 282. deutschen Archaeologischen Instituts, 
3 Above, p. 85. Athenische Abtheilung, xix. (1894) © 
4 Pausanias, x. 30. 6. pp. 338 sg. Compare my commentary — 


6 J. Six, ‘‘Die Eriphyle des Polyg- on Pausanias, vol. v. p. 385. 


xn THE GOLDEN BOUGH 295 


branch, which has been taken to signify that he, too, by the 
help of the mystic bough, might yet be brought back from 
_ the gates of death to life and love.) 

4 Now, too, we can conjecture why Virbius at Nemi came 
_ to be confounded with the sun? If Virbius was, as I have 
| tried to shew, a tree-spirit, he must have been the spirit of 
_ the oak on which grew the Golden Bough ; for tradition 
_ represented him as the first of the Kings of the Wood. As 
' an oak-spirit he must have been supposed periodically to 
_ rekindle the sun’s fire, and might therefore easily be con- 
_ founded with the sun itself. Similarly we can explain why 
_ Balder, an oak-spirit, was described as “so fair of face and 
_ so shining that a light went forth from him,”* and why he 
_ should have been so often taken to be the sun. And in 
_ general we may say that in primitive society, when the only 
_ known way of making fire is by the friction of wood, the 
_ Savage must necessarily conceive of fire as a property stored 
_ away, like sap or juice, in trees, from which he has labori- 
_ ously to extract it. The Senal Indians of California “ profess 
_ to believe that the whole worid was once a globe of fire, 
_ whence that element passed up into the trees, and now 
' comes out whenever two pieces of wood are rubbed 
_ together.”* Similarly the Maidu Indians of California hold 
_ that “the earth was primarily a globe of molten matter, and 
_ from that the principle of fire ascended through the roots 
_ into the trunk and branches of trees, whence the Indians can 
_ extract it by means of their drill.”° In Namoluk, one of 
_ the Caroline Islands, they say that the art of making fire 
_ was taught men by the gods. Olofaet, the cunning master 
of flames, gave fire to the bird mw and bade him carry it to 
_ earth in his bill. So the bird flew from tree to tree and 
_ stored away the slumbering force of the fire in the wood, 
_ from which men can elicit it by friction. In the ancient 


1 The sarcophagus is in the Lateran 

- Museum at Rome. See W. Helbig, 

| Fiihrer durch die iffentlichen Samm- 

| lungen Klassischer Altertiimer in Rom? 
- (Leipsic, 1899), ii. 468. 

_ #® See The Magic Art and the Evolu- 

_ tion of Kings, i. 19 599. 


3 Die Edda, iibersetzt von K. 


Simrock § (Stuttgart, 1882), p. 264. 

*S. Powers, Zribes of California 
(Washington, 1877), p. 171. 

5 S. Powers, 7ribes of California, 
p- 287. 

6 Max Girschner, “ Die Karolinen- 
insel NamG6luk und ihre Bewohner,” 
Baessler-Archiv, ii. (1912) p. 141. 


Trees 
thought by 
the savage 
to be the 
seat of fire 
because he 
elicits it by 
friction 
from their 
wood. 


Trees that 
have been 
struck by 
lightning 
are deemed 
by the 
savage to 
be charged 
with a 
double 
portion of 
fire. 


296 THE GOLDEN BOUGH CHAP. | 


Vedic hymns of India the fire-god Agni “is spoken of as — 
born in wood, as the embryo of plants, or as distributed in 
plants. He is also said to have entered into all plants or 
to strive after them. When he is called the embryo of trees 
or of trees as well as plants, there may be a side-glance at 
the fire produced in forests by the friction of the boughs of — 
trees.”’ In some Australian languages the words for wood © 
and fire are said to be the same.” ' 

A tree which has been struck by lightning is naturally — 
regarded by the savage as charged with a double or — 
triple portion of fire; for has he not seen the mighty — 
flash enter into the trunk with his own eyes? Hence — 
perhaps we may explain some of the many superstitious 


beliefs concerning trees that have been struck by lightning. — 


Thus in the opinion of the Cherokee Indians “mysterious ~ 
properties attach to the wood of a tree which has been | 


struck by lightning, especially when the tree itself still — 
lives, and such wood enters largely into the secret com- ~ 


pounds of the conjurers. An ordinary person of the laity © 


will not touch it, for fear of having cracks come upon his ~ 


hands and feet, nor is it burned for fuel, for fear that lye — | 
made from the ashes will cause consumption. 


strike their opponents with all the force of a thunderbolt. — 
Bark or wood from a tree struck by lightning, but still — 
green, is beaten up and put into the water in which seeds ~ 
are soaked before planting, to insure a good crop, but, on — 
the other hand, any lightning-struck wood thrown into the ~ 
field will cause the crop to wither, and it is believed to have ~ 


a bad effect even to go into the field immediately after ~ 


having been near such a tree.”* Apparently the Cherokees q 
imagine that when wood struck by lightning is soaked in ~ 


In preparing — 
ballplayers for the contest, the medicine-man sometimes © 
burns splinters of it to coal, which he gives to the players to ~ 
paint themselves with, in order that they may be able to 7 


1 A, A. Macdonell, Vedic Mythology 
(Strasburg, 1897), pp. 91 sg., referring 
to Rigveda, vi. 3. 3, X 79. 7, il. I. 
Iq, ii. 1, 13, Xs dae Wie ee 
70. 4, ii. I. 1. _ Compare H. Olden- 
berg, Die Religion des Veda (Berlin, 
1894), pp. 120 sg. 

2 Edward M. Curr, 7he Australian 


Race (Melbourne and London, 1886- — 
1887), i. 9, 18. 


3 James Mooney, “Myths of the © 
Cherokee,” Nineteenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, — 
Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 422, © 
compare p. 435. 


ia 


~ 


been kindled with it; 
the wood we are not told.® 


_ to the chief, who prays over 


_ 1} James Teit, The Thompson Indians 
| of British Columbia, p. 346 (The Jesup 
North Pacific Expedit.on, Memoir of 
| the American Museum of Natural His- 
tory, April, 1900). 
2 J. Teit, of. cit. p. 374. 
* The Shuswap Tndians of British 
Columbia entertain a similar belief. 
| Ithas been suggested that the fancy may 
_ be based on the observation that cold 
follows a thunder-storm. See G. M. 
‘Dawson, ‘*Notes on the Shuswap 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


297 


_ water the fierce heat of the slumbering fire in its veins is 
' tempered to a genial warmth, which promotes the growth 
of the crops; but that when the force of the fire has not 
been thus diluted it blasts the growing corn. When the 
_ Thompson Indians of British Columbia wished to set fire to 
_the houses of their enemies, they shot at them arrows which 
_were either made from a tree that had been struck by light- 
“ning or had splinters of such wood attached to them.’ They 
seem to have thought that wood struck by lightning was so 
charged with fire that it would ignite whatever it struck, the 
' mere concussion sufficing to explode it like gunpowder. Yet 
' curiously enough these Indians supposed that if they burned 
_ the wood of trees that had been struck by lightning, the 
| weather would immediately turn cold.’ 
ceived such trees as reservoirs of heat, and imagined that by 
using them up they would exhaust the supply and thus 
lower the temperature of the atmosphere.* Wendish peasants 
of Saxony similarly refuse to burn in their stoves the wood 
of trees that have been struck by lightning ; but the reason 
| they give for their refusal is different. Dae ni say that with such 
fuel the house would be burnt down.* 
that the electric flash, inherent in the wood, would send such a 
roaring flame up the chimney that nothing could stand before 
In like manner the Thonga of South Africa will not use 
_ such wood as fuel nor warm themselves at a fire which has 
but what danger they apprehend from 
On the contrary, when lightning 
sets fire to a tree, the Winamwanga of Northern Rhodesia 
_ put out all the fires in the village and plaster the fireplaces 
_ afresh, while the head men convey the lightning-kindled fire 


Perhaps they con- 


No doubt they think 


it. The chief then sends out 


people of British Columbia,” Z7ams- 
actions of the Royal Society of Canada, 
ix. (1891) Section ii. p. 38. 

£ R. Wuttke, Sachsische Volkskunde? 
(Dresden, 1901), p. 369. 

5 Henri A. Junod, Zhe Life of a 
South African Tribe (Neuchatel, 1912- 
1913), ii. 291. The Thonga imagine 
that lightning is caused by a great bird, 
which sometimes buries itself in the 
ground to a depth of several feet. See 
H. A. Junod, of. cit. ii. 290 sg. 


Theory 
that the 
sanctity 

of the oak 
and the 
relation of 
the tree to 
the sky-god 
were sug- 
gested by 
the fre- 
quency 
with which 
oaks are 
struck by 
lightning. 


“Mr. W. Warde Fowler.’ 


298 THE GOLDEN BOUGH CHAP. | 
the new fire to all his villages, and the villagers reward his — 
messengers for the boon. This shews that they look upon ~ 
fire kindled by lightning with reverence, and the reverence is 
intelligible, for they speak of thunder and lightning as God ~ 
himself coming down to earth. Similarly the Maidu ~ 
Indians of California believe that a Great Man created the © 
world and all its inhabitants, and that lightning is nothing 3 
but the Great Man himself descending swiftly out of heaven — 
and rending the trees with his flaming arm.” ; 

It is a plausible theory that the reverence which the 
ancient peoples of Europe paid to the oak, and the con- — 
nexion which they traced between the tree and their sky- — 
god,® were derived from the much greater frequency with — 
which the oak appears to be struck by lightning than any ~ 
other tree of our European forests. Some remarkable © 
statistics have been adduced in support of this view by 
Observations, annually made in ~ 
the forests of Lippe-Detmold for seventeen years, yielded — 
the result that while the woods were mainly stocked with — 
beech and only to a small extent with oak and Scotch ~ 
pine, yet far more oaks and Scotch pines were struck by ~ 
lightning than beeches, the number of stricken Scotch pines — 
exceeding the number of stricken beeches in the proportion — 
of thirty-seven to one, and the number of stricken oaks ~ 
exceeding the number of stricken beeches in the proportion — 


1 Dr. James A. Chisholm (of the 
Livingstonia Mission, Mwenzo, N.E. 
Rhodesia), ‘* Notes on the Manners 
and Customs of the Winamwanga and 
Wiwa,” Journal of the African Society, 
No. 36 (July, 1910), p. 363. 

2S. Powers, Tribes of California 
(Washington, 1877), p. 287. The 
dread of lightning is prominent in some 
of the customs observed in Patiko, a 
district of the Uganda Protectorate. 
If a village has suffered from lightning, 
ropes made of twisted grass are strung 
from peak to peak of the houses to ward 
off further strokes. And if a person 
has been struck or badly shaken, ‘* an 
elaborate cure’ is performed upon him. 
A red cock is taken, his tongue torn 
out, and his body dashed upon the 
house where the stroke fell. Then the 
scene changes to the bank of a small 


running stream, where the patient is — 
made to kneel while the bird is sacri- 
ficed over the water. A raw egg is 
next given to the patient to swallow, — 
and he is laid on his stomach and — 
encouraged to vomit. The lightning © 
is supposed to be vomited along with — 
the egg, and all ill effects prevented.” ~ 
See Rev. A L. Kitching, On the © 
Backwaters of the Nile (London, 1912), — 
p. 263.. L 

3 See The Magic Art and the Evolu- — 
tion of Kings, li. 349 gg. q 

4 W. Warde Fowler, ‘‘The Oak — 
and the Thunder-god,” Archiv fiir 
Religionswissenschaft, xvi. (1913) Pp. — 
318 sg. My friend Mr. Warde Fowler — 
had previously called my attention to — 
the facts in a letter dated September — 
17th, 1912. 


forests. 


4 1 Dr. W. Schlich’s Manual of 

| Forestry, vol. iv. Forest Protection, by 
_ W-.R. Fisher, Second Edition (London, 
_ 1907), pp. 662 sg. Mr. W. Warde 
_ Fowler was the first to call the attention 
_ of mythologists to this work. 

2 Experiments on the conductivity 
_ of electricity in wood go to shew that 
_ Starchy trees (oak, poplar, maples, ash, 
elm, sordus) are good conductors, that 
_ oily trees (beech, walnut, birch, lime) 
are bad conductors, and that the coni- 
_ fers are intermediate, the Scotch pine in 
summer being as deficient in oil as the 
_ Starchy trees, but rich in oil during 
winter. It was found that a single 
turn of Holz’s electric machine sufficed 
| to send the spark throngh oakwood, 
_ - but that from twelve to twenty turns 
_ were required to send it through beech- 
wood. Five turns of the machine were 
' needed to send the spark through 


alee ae Dees a 
Sy eae : 


en 


snietrtiosnent nesta 
CE ets ai 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


fof no less than sixty to one. 
“obtained from observations made in French and Bavarian 
In short, it would seem from statistics compiled by 
' scientific observers, who have no mythological theories to 
maintain, that the oak suffers from the stroke of lightning 
far oftener than any other forest tree in Europe. However 
_ we may explain it, whether by the easier passage of electricity 
' through oakwood than through any other timber,” or in some 
_ other way, the fact itself may well have attracted the notice 
| of our rude forefathers, who dwelt in the vast forests which 
| then covered a large part of Europe; and they might 
' naturally account for it in their simple religious way by 
| supposing that the great sky-god, whom they worshipped “ 
' and whose awful voice they heard in the roll of thunder, 
_ loved the oak above all the trees of the wood and often 
descended into it from the murky cloud in a flash of lightning, 
eaving a token of his presence or of his passage in the riven 
and blackened trunk and the blasted foliage. 
' would thenceforth be encircled by a nimbus of glory as 
the visible seats of the thundering sky-god. Certain it is 
that, like some savages, both Greeks and Romans identified 
their great god of the sky and of the oak with the lightning 
flash which struck the ground; and they regularly enclosed 
such a stricken spot and treated it thereafter as sacred.* It 


299 
Similar results have begn 


Such trees — 


poplar and willow wood. See Dr. W. 
Schlich, Manual of Forestry, vol. iv. 
Forest Protection, Second Edition (Lon- 
don, 1907), p. 664. In the tropics 
lightning is said to be especially 
attracted to coco-nut palms. See 
P. Amaury Talbot, Jz the Shadow of 
the Bush (London, 1913), p- 73- 

3 As to the Greek belief and custom, 
see H. Usener, Aveine Schriften, iv. 
(Leipsic and Berlin, 1913), ‘‘ Kera- 
unos,” pp. 471 sgg.; The Magic Art 
and the Evolution of Kings, ii. 361. 
As to the Roman belief and custom, 
see Festus, sev. Fuleuritum and Pro- 
vorsum fulgur, pp. 92, 229, ed. C. O. 
Miiller (Leipsic, 1839); H. Dessau, 
Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae, vol. ii. 
pars i. (Berlin, 1902) pp. I0 sg., 
Nos. 3048-3056 ; L. Preller, Romische 
Mythologie? (Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 
190-193; G. Wissowa, Religzon und 


This ex- 
planation 
of the 


Aryan wor- 


ship of the 
oak is pre- 
ferable to 
the one 
formerly 
adopted by 
the author. 


300 THE GOLDEN BOUGH CHAP. | 


is not rash to suppose that the ancestors of the Celts and 4 
Germans in the forests of Central Europe paid a like respect — 
for like reasons to a blasted oak. q 

This explanation of the Aryan reverence for the oak — 
and of the association of the tree with the great god of — 
the thunder and the sky, was suggested or implied long © 
ago by Jacob Grimm,’ and has been of late powerfully — 
reinforced by Mr. W. Warde Fowler? It appears to be © 
simpler and more probable than the explanation which I © 
formerly adopted, namely, that the oak was worshipped ~ 
primarily for the many benefits which our rude forefathers — 
derived from the tree, particularly for the fire which they ~ 
drew by friction from its wood; and that the connexion of — 
the oak with the sky was an after-thought based on the — 
belief that the flash of lightning was nothing but the spark — 
which the sky-god up aloft elicited by rubbing two pieces ~ 
of oak wood against each other, just as his savage worshipper — 
kindled fire in the forest on earth.2 On that theory the god 
of the thunder and the sky was derived from the original — 
god of the oak; on the present theory, which I now prefer, — 
the god of the sky and the thunder was the great original — 
deity of our Aryan ancestors, and his association with the — 
oak was merely an inference based on the frequency with — 
which the oak was seen to be struck by lightning. If the © 
Aryans, as some think, roamed the wide steppes of Russia — 
or Central Asia with their flocks and herds before they ~ 
plunged into the gloom of the European forests, they — 
may have worshipped the god of the blue or cloudy — 
firmament and the flashing thunderbolt long before they — 
thought of associating him with the blasted oaks in their — 
new home.’ . 4 


Kultus der Rimer® (Munich, 1912), 
pp. 121 sg. By a curious refinement 
the Romans referred lightning which 
fell by day to Jupiter, but lightning 
which fell by night to a god called 
Summanus (Festus, p. 229). 

1 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* 
iii. 64, citing a statement that lightning 
strikes twenty oaks for one beech. 
The statistics adduced by Mr. W. 
Warde Fowler seem to shew that this 


statement is no exaggeration but rather — 
the contrary, 3 

2 W. Warde Fowler, ‘‘The Oak — 
and the Thunder-god,” <Archiv fiir ~ 
Religionswissenschaft, xvi. (1913) pp. — 
317-320. ; 

3 The Magic Art and the Evolution — 
of Kings, ii. 356 sgg. i 

4 The suggestion is Mr. W, Warde ~ 
Fowler’s (of czt. pp. 319 5g.) 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH | 301 


throwing light on the special sanctity ascribed to mistletoe 
which grows on an oak. The mere rarity of such a growth 
4 on an oak hardly suffices to explain the extent and the 
persistence of the superstition. A hint of its real origin is 
possibly furnished by the statement of Pliny that the Druids: 
worshipped the plant because they believed it to have fallen 
‘from heaven and to be a token that the tree on which it 
"grew was chosen by the god himself." Can they have thought 
F that the mistletoe dropped on the oak in a flash of lightning? 
_ The conjecture is confirmed by the name thunder-besom which 
| is applied to mistletoe in the Swiss canton of Aargau,’ for 
' the epithet clearly implies a close connexion between the 
_ parasite and the thunder; indeed “thunder-besom” is a 
~ popular name in Germany for any bushy nest-like excrescence 
_ growing on a branch, because such a parasitic growth is 
actually believed by the ignorant to be a product of lightning? 
If there is any truth in this conjecture, the real reason why 
the Druids worshipped a mistletoe-bearing oak above all 
' other trees of the forest was a belief that every such oak had 
| not only been struck by lightning but bore among its branches 
a visible emanation of the celestial fire ; so that in cutting 
| the mistletoe with mystic rites they were securing for them- 
_ selves all the magical properties of a thunderbolt. If that 
_ was so, we must apparently conclude that the mistletoe was 
_ deemed an emanation of the lightning rather than, as I have 
thus far argued, of the midsummer sun. Perhaps, indeed, we 
_ might combine the two seemingly divergent views by sup- 
_ posing that in the old Aryan creed the mistletoe descended 
_ from the sun on Midsummer Day ina flash of lightning. But 
' such a combination is artificial and unsupported, so far as I 
_ know, by any positive evidence. Whether on mythical prin- 
| ciples the two interpretations can really be reconciled with 
| each other or not, I will not presume to say ; but even should 
a they prove to be discrepant, the inconsistency need not have 
_ prevented our rude forefathers from embracing both of them 
a at the same time with an equal fervour of conviction ; for 
a like the great majority of mankind the savage is above being 


1 Pliny, Natur. Hist. xvi. 249 3 J. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie,* 
2 See above, p. 85. i. 153. See above, p. 85. 


Perhaps the new theory has the further advantage of Thesacred- 


ness of 
mistletoe 
was per- 
haps due to 
a belief that 
the plant 
fell on the 
tree ina 
flash of 


lightning, 


Hence the 
stroke of 
mistletoe 
that killed 
Balder may 
have been a 
stroke of 
lightning. 


The King 
of the 
Wood and 
the Golden 
Bough. 


302 THE GOLDEN BOUGH CHAP. — 
hidebound by the trammels of a pedantic logic. In at- © 
tempting to track his devious thought through the jungle — 
of crass ignorance and blind fear, we must always remember 
that we are treading enchanted ground, and must beware of 4 
taking for solid realities the cloudy shapes that cross our — 
path or hover and gibber at us through the gloom. We — 
can never completely replace ourselves at the standpoint of © 
primitive man, see things with his eyes, and feel our hearts j 
beat with the emotions that stirred his. All our theories © 
concerning him and his ways must therefore fall far short of 
certainty ; the utmost we can aspire to in such matters is a — 
reasonable degree of probability. 4 

To conclude these enquiries we may say that if Balder © 
was indeed, as I have conjectured, a personification of a — 
mistletoe-bearing oak, his death by a blow of the mistletoe ~ 
might on the new theory be explained as a death by a — 
stroke of lightning. So long as the mistletoe, in which the ~ 
flame of the lightning smouldered, was suffered to remain © 
among the boughs, so long no harm could befall the good — 
and kindly god of the oak, who kept his life stowed away for — 
safety between earth and heaven in the mysterious parasite ; 
but when once that seat of his life, or of his death, was ~ 
torn from the branch and hurled at the trunk, the tree 3 
fell—the god died—-smitten by a thunderbolt.’ q 

And what we have said of Balder in the oak forests of © 
Scandinavia may perhaps, with all due diffidence in a question ~ 
so obscure and uncertain, be applied to the priest of Diana, — 
the King of the Wood, at Aricia in the oak forests of Italy. — 
He may have personated in flesh and blood the great Italian © 
god of the sky, Jupiter,? who had kindly come down from — 
heaven in the lightning flash to dwell among men in the ~ 
mistletoe—the thunder-besom—the Golden Bough—growing : 


1 This interpretation of Balder’s 
death was anticipated by W. Schwartz 
(Der Ursprung der Mythologie, Berlin, 
1860, p. 176), who cut the whole 
knot by dubbing Balder ‘‘ the German 
thunder-and-lightning god” and mistle- 
toe ** the wonderful thunder-and-light- 
ning flower.” But as this learned writer 
nursed a fatal passion for thunder and 
lightning, which he detected lurking 


in the most unlikely places, we need © 
not wonder that he occasionally found — 
it in places where there were some — 
slight grounds for thinking that it 
really existed. 
2 On the relation of the priest to 
Jupiter, and the equivalence of Jupiter — 
and Juno to Janus (Dianus) and Diana, © 
see Zhe Magic Art and the Evolution 


of Kings, ii. 376 sgq. 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH ; 303 


on the sacred oak beside the still waters of the lake of Nemi. 
If that was so, we need not wonder that the priest guarded 
with drawn sword the mystic bough which contained the 
_god’s life and his own. The goddess whom he served and 
‘married was herself, if I am right, no other than the Queen 
_ of Heaven, the true wife of the sky-god. For she, too, loved 
_ the solitude of the woods and the lonely hills, and sailing 
_ overhead on clear nights in the likeness of the silver moon 
she looked down with pleasure on her own fair image 
' reflected on the calm, the burnished surface of the lake, 
_ Diana’s Mirror. 


CHAPTER XIII 
FAREWELL TO NEMI 


Looking WE are at the end of our enquiry, but as often happens © 
pack a 2° in the search after truth, if we have answered one question, — 
journey. we have raised many more; if we have followed one track © 
home, we have had to pass by others that opened off it and © 
led, or seemed to lead, to far other goals than the sacred © 
grove at Nemi. Some of these paths we have followed a — 
little way ; others, if fortune should be kind, the writer and F 
the reader may one day pursue together. For the present — 
we have journeyed far enough together, and it is time to ~ 
part. Yet before we do so, we may well ask ourselves — 
whether there is not some more general conclusion, some © 
lesson, if possible, of hope and encouragement, to be drawn ; 
from the melancholy record of human error and folly which ~ 
has engaged our attention in these volumes. 4 
The If then we consider, on the one hand, the essential ~ 
movement similarity of man’s chief wants everywhere and at all times, — 
thought and on the other hand, the wide difference between the — 
from nasic Means he has adopted to satisfy them in different ages, we — 
to religion. shall perhaps be disposed to conclude that the movement of — 
the higher thought, so far as we can trace it, has on the © 
whole been from magic through religion to science. In © 
magic man depends on his own strength to meet the ~ 
difficulties and dangers that beset him on every side. He ~ 
believes in a certain established order of nature on which he ~ 
can surely count, and which he can manipulate for his own ~ 
ends. When he discovers his mistake, when he recognizes — 
sadly that both the order of nature which he had assumed ~ 


and the control which he had believed himself to exercise ; 
304 


4 p. XII FAREWELL TO NEMI 305 


er it were purely imaginary, he ceases to rely on his own 

Ri icence and his own unaided efforts, and throws him- 

‘ f humbly on the mercy of certain great invisible beings 

behind the veil of nature, to whom he now ascribes all those 

far-reaching powers which he once arrogated to himself. 

Thus in the acuter minds magic is gradually superseded by 

religion, which explains the succession of natural phenomena 

as regulated by the will, the passion, or the caprice of 

S| piritual beings like man in kind, though vastly superior to 

him in power. 

_ But as time goes on this explanation in its turn proves The 

© be unsatisfactory. For it assumes that the succession of ere aes 

nz tural events is not determined by immutable laws, but is from 

tc some extent variable and irregular, and this assumption ee 
not borne out by closer observation. On the contrary, 

the more we scrutinize that succession the more we are 

: ck by the rigid uniformity, the punctual precision with 

vhich, wherever we can follow them, the operations of nature 

are carried on. Every great advance in knowledge has 

sxtended the sphere of order and correspondingly restricted 

he sphere of apparent disorder in the world, till now we 

ready to anticipate that even in regions where chance 

and confusion appear still to reign, a fuller knowledge 

ould everywhere reduce the seeming chaos to cosmos. 

Thus the keener minds, still pressing forward to a deeper 

solution of the mysteries of the universe, come to reject the 

sligious theory of nature as inadequate, and to revert in a 

ieee sure to the older standpoint of magic by postulating 

xplicitly, what in magic had only been implicitly assumed, 

o wit, an inflexible regularity in the order of natural events, 

which, if carefully observed, enables us to foresee their course 

Vith certainty and to act accordingly. In short, religion, 

arded as an explanation of nature, is displaced by science. 

~ But while science has this much in common with Contrast 

aagic that both rest on a faith in order as the underlying ("= , 

Or rinciple of all things, readers of this work will hardly of natural 

sed to be reminded that the order presupposed by costlied 

nz sic differs widely from that which forms the basis of by ei: 

science. The difference flows naturally from the different posse: 

modes in which the two orders have been reached. For respect 


a ively, 
EB PT. VII. VOL. 11 x 


‘7 


The scien- 
tific theory 
of the 
world not 
necessarily 
final. 


306 FAREWELL TO NEMI cH 


whereas the order on which magic reckons is merely ar 
extension, by false analogy, of the order in which ideas 
present themselves to our minds, the order laid down by 
science is derived from patient and exact observation of the 
phenomena themselves. The abundance, the solidity, and 
the splendour of the results already achieved by science are 
well fitted to inspire us with a cheerful confidence in the 
soundness of its method. Here at last, after groping about 
in the dark for countless ages, man has hit upon a clue to 
the labyrinth, a golden key that opens many locks in the 
treasury of nature. It is probably not too much to say the 
the hope of progress—moral and intellectual as well a: 
material—in the future is bound up with the fortunes of 
science, and that every obstacle placed in the way of scientific 
discovery is a wrong to humanity. q 

Yet the history of thought should warn us against 
concluding that because the scientific theory of the world 
is the best that has yet been formulated, it is necessarily 
complete and final. We must remember that at bottom 
the generalizations of science or, in common parlance 
the laws of nature are merely hypotheses devised te 
explain that ever- shifting phantasmagoria of thought 
which we dignify with the high-sounding names of tht 
world and the universe. In the last analysis magie¢ 
religion, and science are nothing but theories of thought 
and as science has supplanted its predecessors, so it may 
hereafter be itself superseded by some more perfect hypo 
thesis, perhaps by some totally different way of looking at 
the phenomena—of registering the shadows on the screen— 
of which we in this generation can form no idea. The 
advance of knowledge is an infinite progression towards a 
goal that for ever recedes. We need not murmur at the 
endless pursuit :— j 


“ Fattt non foste a viver come bruti 
Ma per seguir virtute e conoscenza.” 


Great things will come of that pursuit, though we may 
enjoy them. Brighter stars will rise on some voyager =) 
the future—some great Ulysses of the realms of thought— 
than shine on us. The dreams of magic may one day be 


FAREWELL TO NEMI 307 


fe waking realities of science. But a dark shadow lies 
thwart the far end of this fair prospect. For however vast 
he increase of knowledge and of power which the future 
1 ay have in store for man, he can scarcely hope to stay 
he sweep of those great forces which seem to be making 
ilently but relentlessly for the destruction of all this starry 
niverse in which our earth swims as a speck or mote. In 
he ages to come man may beable to predict, perhaps even 
C ) control, the wayward courses of the winds and clouds, 
mit hardly will his puny hands have strength to speed 
fresh our slackening Best in its orbit or rekindle the 
; ing fire of the sun.' Yet the philosopher who trembles 
t the idea of such distant catastrophes may console himself 
y reflecting that these gloomy apprehensions, like the 
arth and the sun themselves, are only parts of that un- 
ubstantial world which thought has conjured up out of the 
roid, and that the phantoms which the subtle enchantress 
das evoked to-day she may ban to-morrow. They too, like 
> much that to common eyes seems solid, may melt into 


r, into thin air.” 


1 “T quite agree how humiliating 
le slow progress of man is, but every 
le has his own pet horror, and this 
W progress or even personal anni- 
lation sinks in my mind into insig- 
cance compared with the idea or 
er I presume certainty of the sun 
ome day cooling and we all freezing. 
© think of the progress of millions of 
fears, with every continent swarming 
ith good and enlightened men, all 
g in this, and with probably no 
résh start until this our planetary 
stem has been again converted into 
a hot gas. Sic transit gloria mundi, 
th a vengeance” (More Letters of 
harles Darwin, edited by Francis 
vin, London, 1903, i. 260 sg.). 

Since this passage was written the 
= which it expresses has been to 
extent strengthened by the dis- 
y of radium, which appears to 
g indefinitely the prospect of the 
ation of the sun’s heat, and with it 
duration of life on its attendant 


_ Without dipping so far into the future, we may illustrate 
course which thought has hitherto run by likening it to 


planets. See (Sir) George Howard 
Darwin’s Presidential Address to the 
British Association, Report of the 75th 
Meeting of the British Association for 
the Advancement of Science (South 
Africa, 1905), pp. 28 sg.; F. Soddy, 
The Interpretation of Radium, Third 
Edition (London, 1912), pp. 240 sgg. ; 
E. Rutherford, Radio-active Substances 
and their Radiations (Cambridge, 
1913), pp. 653-656. At the same 
time it should be borne in mind that 
even if the atomic disintegration and 
accompanying liberation of energy, 
which characterize radium and kindred 
elements, should prove to be common 
in different degrees to all the other 
elements and to form a vast and till 
lately unsuspected store of heat to the 
sun, this enormous reserve of fuel 
would only defer but could not avert 
that final catastrophe with which the 
solar system and indeed the whole 
universe is remorselessly threatened by 
the law ofthe dissipation of energy. 


The 
shadow 
across the 


path. 


The web 
of thought. 


Nemi 


at evening : 


the Ave 


Mariabell. 


308 © FAREWELL TO NEMI CHAP 


a web woven of three different threads—the black thread ¢ 
magic, the red thread of religion, and the white thread 
science, if under science we may include those simple truths 
drawn from observation of nature, of which men in al 
ages have possessed a store. Could we then survey thy 
web of thought from the beginning, we should probably 
perceive it to be at first a chequer of black and white, | 
patchwork of true and false notions, hardly tinged as yet b 
the red thread of religion. But carry your eye furthe 
along the fabric and you will remark that, while the blacl 
and white chequer still runs through it, there rests on thi 
middle portion of the web, where religion has entered mos 
deeply into its texture, a dark crimson stain, which shade 
off insensibly into a lighter tint as the white thread o 
science is woven more and more into the tissue. To a wel 
thus chequered and stained, thus shot with threads o 
diverse hues, but gradually changing colour the farther it i 
unrolled, the state of modern thought, with all its divergen 
aims and conflicting tendencies, may be compared. i] 
the great movement which for centuries has been slowh 
altering the complexion of thought be continued in the nea 
future? or will a reaction set in which may arrest progreé 
and even undo much that has been done? To keep w 
our parable, what will be the colour of the web which 
Fates are now weaving on the humming loom of time? wi 
it be white or red? We cannot tell. A faint glimmerin, 
light illumines the backward portion of the web. Cloud 
and thick darkness hide the other end. j 


Our long voyage of discovery is over and our bark ha 
drooped her weary sails in port at last. Once more we tak 
the road to Nemi. It is evening, and as we climb the lon 
slope of the Appian Way up to the Alban Hills, we loc 
back and see the sky aflame with sunset, its golden glo 
resting like the aureole of a dying saint over Rome a 
touching with a crest of fire the dome of St. Peter’s. : 
sight once seen can never be forgotten, but we turn from | 
and pursue our way darkling along the mountain side, 
we come to Nemi and look down on the lake in its de 
hollow, now fast disappearing in the evening shadows. T 


FAREWELL TO NEMI 309 


ace has changed but little since Diana received the homage 
‘her worshippers in the sacred grove. The temple of the 
van goddess, indeed, has vanished and the King of the 
no longer stands sentinel over the Golden Bough. 
ut Nemi’s woods are still green, and as the sunset fades 
ove them in the west, there comes to us, borne on the 
well of the wind, the sound of the church bells of Ariccia 
nging the Angelus. Ave Maria! Sweet and solemn they 
ime out from the distant town and die lingeringly away 
ross the wide Campagnan marshes. Le roi est mort, vive 
ro! Ave Maria! 


ai 


NOTES 


I 


SNAKE STONES! 


Tue belief of the Scottish Highlanders as to the so-called Snake snake 
ones has been recorded as follows by a good authority at the end Stones 
f the nineteenth century :— Micha ac 
_ A product called clach-nathrach, serpent stone, is found on the 

‘oot of the long ling. It is of steel-grey colour, has the consistency 

, soft putty when new and of hard putty when old, and is as light 

is pumice-stone, which it resembles. It is of a globular form, and 

rom one to three inches in diameter. There is a circular hole, 

bout a quarter of an inch in width, through the centre. This 
ubstance is said to be produced by the serpent emitting spume 

found the root of a twig of heather. The clach-nathrach is greatly 

Srized by the people, who transmit it as a talisman to their 

: dants.” 2 


II 
THE TRANSFORMATION OF WITCHES INTO CATS 


THE European belief that witches can turn themselves into cats, Witches 

“and that any wounds inflicted on the witch-cat will afterwards be 4s cats 
found on the body of the witch herself, has its exact parallel peri. 

‘among the Oraons or Uraons, a primitive hill tribe of Bengal. 

The following is the account given of the Oraon belief by a Jesuit 

| Missionary, who laboured for years among these savages and was 

“intimately acquainted with their superstitions :— 


1 See above, vol. i. pp. 15 59. lete: orally collected in the Highlands 
2 Alexander Carmichael, Carmina and Islands of Scotland and translated 
ica, Hymns and Incantations into English (Edinburgh, 1900), ii 
ith Illustrative Notes on Words, 312. ‘ 

tes, and Customs, dying and obso- 3 Above, vol. i. pp. 315 sg. 


311 


African 
parallels 
to Balder. 


The 
worshipful 
ghost in 
the cave. 


312, TRANSFORMATION OF WITCHES INTO CATS wnores 


“Chordewa is a witch rather than a dhut [demon]. It i 
believed that some women have the power to change their so 
into a black cat, who then goes about in the houses where there 
are sick people. Such a cat has a peculiar way of mewing quite 
different from its brethren, and is easily recognised. It steals 


quietly into the house, licks the lips of the sick man and eats of 


the food that has been prepared for him. The sick man soon ge 
worse and dies. ‘They say it is very difficult to catch the cat, as it 
has all the nimbleness of its nature and the cleverness of a dhut, 
However, they sometimes succeed, and then something wonderfu 
happens. The woman out of whom the cat has come remains 
insensible, as it were in a state of temporary death, until the cat 
re-enters her body. Any wound inflicted on the cat will be inflicted 
on her; if they cut its ears or break its legs or put out its eyes 
the woman will suffer the same mutilation. The Uraons say that 
formerly they used to burn any woman that was suspected to be a 
Chordewa.” } 


III 
AFRICAN BALDERS 


IN various parts of Africa stories are told of men who could onl 
be killed, like Balder, by the stroke of an apparently insignificant 
weapon ; and some at least of these men were not mythical beings 
but real men of flesh and blood who lived not long ago and whose 
memory is still comparatively fresh among their people. The 


Wadoe of German East Africa tell such a story of a great sorcerer, 


whom they now worship as a dispenser of sunshine and rain. The 


legend and the worship are reported as follows by a native African 


traveller :— 
“If drought sets in, all the chiefs meet in council and resolve: 


‘This year we have had nothing but sunshine ; when we plant, the 


7 
SAS tities See) SS SS ee SS ee 


fruits will not ripen; therefore we must betake ourselves to our” 
spirits of the dead (mézimu).’ ‘Then they take some woollen stuff 


dyed blue and a red cloth, and set out together on the way and go 


to the district Nguu, where their principal ghost (mzimu) resides 

in order to lay the matter before him. The ghost dwells in a very 
spacious cave. On their coming the chiefs greet him. His answer 
consists in a humming noise, which sounds like the patter of rain 

If one among them is a bad man, the ghost says to them, ‘ There 
is come with you in the caravan a rascal who wears such and su 
clothes.’ If such a man there is, he is driven away. Now they 


1 The late Rev. P. Dehon, S.J., Society of Bengal, vol. i. No, 9 


‘*Religion and Customs of the . (Calcutta, 1906), p. 141. 
Uraons,” Memoirs of the Asiatic 


_ NOTES AFRICAN BALDERS 313 


' tell the ghost all that they wish to say, to wit: ‘This year thou 
hast given us much sunshine ; the fruits in the fields do not grow 
_ tall, everywhere there is sickness, therefore we beg thee, give us 
rain.’ Thereupon the ghost hums a second time, and all are glad, 
because he has answered them. But if the ghost is angry, he does 
a not answer but holds his peace. If he has made them glad and 


went in sunshine. 

4 “Originally this ghost was a man, a village elder (jumde) of 
_ Ukami. He was a great sorcerer. One day people wished to 
_ conquer him, but they could do him no harm, for neither lead nor 
- sword nor arrow could pierce his body. But he lived at strife with 
_ his wife. She said to his enemies, ‘If you would kill my husband, 
- I will tell you how it can be done.’ They asked her, ‘How can 
| it be done?’ She answered, ‘My husband is a great sorcerer ; 
4 you all know that.’ They answered, ‘That is true.’ Then she 
- said further, ‘If you would kill him so that he dies on the spot, 
' seek a stalk of a gourd and smite him with it; then he will 
die at once, for that has always been to him a forbidden thing.’? 
They sought the stalk of a gourd, and when they smote him with 
it, he died at once without so much as setting one foot from the 
spot. But of him and his departure there was nothing more to 
_ be seen, for suddenly a great storm blew, and no man knew 
_ whither he had gone. ‘The storm is said to have carried him to 
_ that cave which is still there to this day. After some days people 
w in the cave his weapons, clothes, and turban lying, and they 
brought word to the folk in the town, ‘ We have seen the clothes of 
he elder in the cave, but of himself we have perceived nothing.’ 
The folk went thither to look about, and they found that it was so. 
o the news of this ghost spread, all the more because people had 
‘seen the marvel that a man died and nobody knew where he 
_ had gone. The wonderful thing in this wood is that the spirits 
| dwell in the midst of the wood and that everywhere a bright white 
sand lies on the ground, as if people had gone thither for the 
urpose of keeping everything clean. On many days they hear 
a drumming and shouts of joy in this wood, as if a marriage 
feast were being held there. That is the report about the ghost of 
olelo.2 All village elders, who dwell in the interior, see in this 
host the greatest ghost of all. All the chiefs (#wene) and head- 
men (faz/) and the village elders (jwmden) of the clan Kingaru? 
espect that ghost.” ¢ 


1 «« Every clan (Familienstamm) has 2 «The place in Nguu, where the 
definite thing which is forbidden to ghost is said to dwell.” 
ll the members of the clan, whether 3 «Tn Ukami.” 

be a particular kind of meat, or a 4C. Velten, Schilderungen der 


ertain fish, or as here the stalk of a Swaheli (Gottingen, 1901), pp. 195- 
urd.” 197. 


a ats an answer, much rain will fall; otherwise they return as they ~ 


The man 
who could 
only be 
killed by 
the stalk 
of a gourd. 


The man 
who could 
only be. 
killed by a 
splinter of 
bamboo, 


The man 
who could 
‘only be 
killed by 
a copper 
needle. 


These 
stories 
confirm the 
view that 
Balder may 


314 


AFRICAN BALDERS 


_ NOTES 


Miss Alice Werner, who kindly called my attention to this 
and the following cases of African Balders, tells me that this 
worshipful ghost in the cave appears to have been in his time 


a real man. 


Again, she was assured by some natives that “ Chik- 


umbu, a Yao chief, who at one time gave the Administration 
some trouble, was invulnerable by shot or steel; the only thing 
that could kill him—since he had not been fortified against it 


by the proper medicine—was a sharp splinter of bamboo. 
reminds one of Balder and the mistletoe.” + 


This 
Again, a Nyanja chief 


named Chibisa, who was a great man in this part of Africa when 
Livingstone travelled in it,? ‘stood firm upon his ant-heap, while 
his men fell round him, shouting his war-song, until one who knew 
the secret of a sand-bullet brought him down,” 

Once more the Swahili tell a story of an African Samson 
named Liongo who lived in Shanga, while it was a flourishing city. 
By reason of his great strength he oppressed the people exceedingly, 


and they sought to kill him, but all in vain. 


At last they bribed — 


his nephew, saying, “Go and ask your father what it is that will 
kill him. When you know, come and tell us, and when he is dead 


we will give you the kingdom.” 


So the treacherous nephew went 


to his uncle and asked him; “ Father, what is it that can kill you?” 


And his uncle said, ‘A copper needle. 


navel, I die.” 


people, “It is a copper needle that will kill him.” 


And they gave 


him a needle, and he went back to. his uncle; and while his uncle i 
slept the wicked nephew stabbed him with the needle in the navel. — 
So he died, and they buried him, and his grave is to be seen 


at Ozi to this day. 


But they seized the nephew and killed him ;. ; 


they did not give the kingdom to that bad young man.‘ 4 

When we compare the story of Balder with these African stories, 
the heroes of which were probably all real men, and when further 
we remember the similar tale told of the Persian hero Isfendiyar, — 
who may well have been an historical personage,® we are confirmed — 


1 Miss Alice Werner, Zhe Watives 
of British Central Africa (London, 
1906), p. 82. In a letter Miss 
Werner tells me that she learned these 
particulars at Blantyre in 1893, and 
that the chief lived in the neighbour- 
hood of Mlanje. 

2 Rev. Henry Rowley, Zwenty 
Years in Central Africa (London, 
N.D.), pp. 36 sgg. For a reference to 
this and all the other works cited in 
this Note Iam indebted to the kindness 
of Miss Alice Werner. 

3 Rev. David Clement Scott, 4 
Cyclopaedic Dictionary of the Mang’anja 


Language spoken in British Central — 
Africa (Edinburgh, 1892), p. 315. 

4 Edward Steere, Swahili Tales — 
(London, 1870), pp. 441-453. The ~ 
young man in the story is spoken of — 
now as the nephew and now as the ~ 
son of the man he murdered. Prob- ~ 
ably he was what we should call a 
nephew or brother’s son of his victim; — 
for under the classificatory system of — 
relationship, which seems to prevail — 
among the Bantu stock, to whom the ~ 
Swahili belong, a man regularly calls — 
his paternal uncle his father, 4 

5 Above, vol. i. pp. 104 sg. 


If any one stabs me inthe 
So the nephew went to the town and said to the © 


-AFRICAN BALDERS 315 


' in the suspicion that Balder himself may have been a real man, 
_ admired and beloved in his lifetime and deified after his death, 
_ like the African sorcerer, who is now worshipped in a cave and 
bestows rain or sunshine on his votaries. On the whole I incline 
_ to regard this solution of the Balder problem as more probable than 
_ the one I have advocated in the text, namely that Balder was a 
_ mythical personification of a mistletoe-bearing oak. The facts 
_which seem to incline the balance to the side of Euhemerism 
' reached me as my book was going to press and too late to be 
' embodied in their proper place in the volumes. The acceptance 
_ of this hypothesis would not necessarily break the analogy which I 
have traced between Balder in his sacred grove on the Sogne fiord 
. of Norway and the priest of Diana in the sacred grove of Nemi; 
' indeed, it might even be thought rather to strengthen the 
_ resemblance between the two, since there is no doubt at all that 
| the priests of Diana at Nemi were men who lived real lives and 
_ died real deaths. 


IV 
THE MISTLETOE AND THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


_ Tuat Virgil compares the Golden Bough to the mistletoe? is 
_ certain and admitted on all hands. The only doubt that can arise 
is whether the plant to which he compares the mystic bough is the 
ordinary species of mistletoe ( Viscum album) or the species known 
_ to botanists as Loranthus europaeus. The common mistletoe ( Viscum 
album, 1.) “lives as a semi-parasite (obtaining carbon from the air, 
__ but water, nitrogen, and mineral matter from the sap of its host) on 
_ many conifers and broadleaved trees, and chiefly on their branches. 
\ The hosts, or trees on which it lives, are, most frequently, the apple 
_ tree, both wild and cultivated varieties; mex, the silver-fir ; fre- 
_ quently, birches, poplars (except aspen), limes, willows, Scots pine, 
' mountain-ash, and hawthorn; occasionally, robinia, maples, horse- 
_ chestnut, hornbeam, and aspen. It is very rarely found on oaks, 
_ but has been observed on pedunculate oak at Thornbury, Glouces- 
_ tershire, and elsewhere in Europe, also on Quercus coccinea, Moench., 
' and Q. palustris, Moench. The alders, beech and spruce appear 
’ to be always free from mistletoe, and it very rarely attacks pear- 
| trees. It is commoner in Southern Europe than in the North, 


> ? Virgil, den. vi. 205 sgg. :— Et croceo fetu teretis circumdare 
 “Quale solet silvis brumali frigore truncos : 
i viscum Talis erat species auri frondentis 
| Fronde virere nova, quod non sua opaca 

a seminat arbos, Tlice, sic lent crepitabat bractea vento.” 


have been 
a real man 
who was 
deified 
after death. 


Two 
species 

of mistle- 
toe, the 
Viscum 
album 
and the 
Loranthus 
europaeus, 
Common 
mistletoe 
( Viscum 
album). 


316 MISTLETOE AND THE GOLDEN BOUGH wots 
and 1s extremely abundant where cider is made. In the N.-W. 
Himalayan districts, it is frequently found on apricot-trees, which 
are the commonest fruit-trees there. Its white berries are eaten by 
birds, chiefly by the missel-thrush (Zurdus viscivorus, L.), and the 
seeds are either rubbed by the beak against branches of trees, or 
voided on to them; the seeds, owing to the viscous nature of the 
pulp surrounding them, then become attached to the branches.” ? 
The -large smooth pale-green tufts of the parasite, clinging to the 
boughs of trees, are most conspicuous in winter, when they assume 
a yellowish hue. In Greece at the present time mistletoe grows 
most commonly on firs, especially at a considerable elevation (three 
thousand feet or more) above the level of the sea.* Throughout 
Italy mistletoe now grows on fruit-trees, almond-trees, hawthorn, 
limes, willows, black poplars, and firs, but never, it is said, on oaks,* 
In England seven authentic cases of mistletoe growing on oaks are 
said to be reported.® In Gloucestershire mistletoe grows on the 
Badham Court oak, Sedbury Park, Chepstow, and on the Frampton- 
on-Severn oak.6 Branches of oak with mistletoe growing on them 
were exhibited to more than one learned society in France during 
the nineteenth century ; one of the branches was cut in the forest of 
Jeugny.” It is a popular French superstition that mandragora or 
‘the hand of glory,” as it is called by the people, may be found by 


digging at the root of a mistletoe-bearing oak.® 


1 W. Schlich, A/anual of Forestry, 
vol, iv. Forest Protection, by W. K. 
Fisher, M.A., Second Edition (London, 
1907), p. 412. French peasants about 
Coulommiers' think that mistletoe 
springs from birds’ dung. See H. 
Gaidoz, ‘‘ Bulletin critique de la Mytho- 
logie Gauloise,” Revue de 1’ Histoire 
des Religions, ii. (1880) p. 76. The 
ancients were well aware that mistletoe 
is propagated from tree to tree by seeds 
which have been voided by birds. See 
Theophrastus, De Causis Plantarum, 
ii, 17. 53 Pliny, Naturalis Historia, 
xvi. 247. Pliny tells us that the birds 
which most commonly deposited the 
seeds were pigeons and thrushes. Can 
this have been the reason why Virgil 
(Aen. vi. 190 sgg.) represents Aeneas led 
to the Golden Bough by a pair of doves? 

2 James Sowerby, Zuglish Botany, 
xxi. (London, 1805) p. 1470. 

3 C. Fraas, Synopsis Plantarum 
Florae Classicae (Munich, 1845), p. 
152. 

4H. O. Lenz, Botanik der alten 
Griechen und Rimer (Gotha, 1859), p. 
597, quoting Pollini. 


5 J. Lindley and T. Moore, Zhe — i 


Treasury of Botany, New Edition 
(London, 1874), ii, 1220. A good 
authority, however, observes that 
mistletoe is ‘* frequently to be observed 
on the branches of old apple-trees, 
hawthorns, lime-trees, oaks, etc., where 
it grows parasitically.” See J. Sowerby, 
English Botany, xxi. (London, 1805) 
p- 1470, 

8 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Ninth 
Edition, x. 689, s.v. ‘* Gloucester.” 

7 H. Gaidoz, ‘‘ Bulletin critique de 
la Mythologie Gauloise,” Revue de 
? Histoire des Religions, ii, (1880) pp. 


75 89: 

8 Angelo de Gubernatis, La Mytho- 
logie des Plantes (Paris, 1878-1882), ii. 
216sg. As to the many curious super- 
stitions that have clustered round 
mandragora, see P. J. Veth, “De — 
Mandragora,” Jnternationales Archiv 
fiir Ethnographie, vii. (1894) pp. 199- 
205; C. B. Randolph, *‘ The Mandra- 
gora of the Ancients in Folk-lore and 
Medicine,” Proceedings of the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences, vol. xl. 
No. 12 (January, 1905), pp. 487-537. 


NOTES MISTLETOE AND THE GOLDEN BOUGH 317 


as 


_ yellow instead of white. “This species attacks chiefly oaks, Quercus 
_ cerris, L., Q. sessiliflora, Salisb., less frequently, Q. pedunculata, Ehth., 
' and Castanea vulgaris, Lam.; also lime. It is found throughout 
_ Southern Europe and as far north as Saxony, not in Britain. It 
' grows chiefly on the branches of standards over coppice.” The 
_ injury which it inflicts on its hosts is even greater than that inflicted 
' by the ordinary mistletoe ; it often kills the branch on which it 
settles. The seeds are carried to the trees by birds, chiefly by 
_ the missel-thrush. In India many kinds of Loranthus grow on 
_ various species of forest trees, for example, on teak ;+ one variety 
_ (Loranthus vestitus) grows on two species of oak, the Quercus 
_ dilatata, Lindl., and the Quercus incana, Roxb.2 A marked distinc- 
' tion between the two sorts of mistletoe is that whereas ordinary 
_ mistletoe ( Viscum album) is evergreen, the Loranthus is deciduous.* 
__ In Greece the Loranthus has been observed on many old chestnut- 
| trees at Stheni, near Delphi.* In Italy it grows chiefly on the various 
__ species of oaks and also on chestnut-trees. So familiar is it on oaks 
"that it is known as “oak mistletoe” both in popular parlance (vésco 
_ quercino) and in druggists’ shops (viscum guernum). Bird-lime is 
_ made from it in Italy.® 
a Both sorts of mistletoe were known to the ancient Greeks and 
_ Romans, though the distinctive terms which they applied to each 
_ appear not to be quite certain. Theophrastus, and Pliny after him, 
"seem to distinguish three sorts of mistletoe, to which Theophrastus 
| gives the names of xia, hyphear, and stelis respectively. He says 
| that the Ayphear and the sfe/is grow on firs and pines, and that the 
| ixia grows on the oak (pis), the terebinth, and many other kinds 
_ oftrees. He also observes that both the zxa and the Ayphear grow 
on the ilex or holm-oak (zpivos), the same tree sometimes bearing 
_ both species at the same time, the zx7a on the north and the Ayphear 
' on the south. He expressly distinguishes the evergreen species of 
' xia from the deciduous, which seems to prove that he included 


1 W. Schlich, Manual of Forestry, 
- vol. iv. Forest Protection, Second 
_ Edition (London, 1907), pp. 415- 
417. 

2 E. B. Stebbing, ‘‘ The Loranthus 
' Parasite of the Moru and Ban Oaks,” 
| Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, New Series, v. 
(Calcutta, 1910) pp. 189-195. The 
Loranthus vestitus ‘* is a small branch- 
ing woody plant with dirty yellowish 
green leaves which are dark shining 
green above. It grows in great 
clumps and masses on the trees, re- 


sembling a giant mistletoe. The fruit 
is yellowish and fleshy, and is almost 
sessile on the stem, which it thickly 
studs” (i., p. 192). The writer 
shews that the parasite is very destruc- 
tive to oaks in India. 

3H. O. Lenz, Botantk der alten 
Griechen und Rémer (Gotha, 1859), p. 
598, notes 15! and 152. 

4C. Fraas, Synofsis Plantarum 
Florae Classicae (Munich, 1845), p. 152. 

5 H. O. Lenz, Botanik der alten 
Griechen und Rimer (Gotha, 1859), 


PP- 599 59. 


| __ The species of mistletoe known as Loranthus europaeus resembles Loranthus 
_ the ordinary mistletoe in general appearance, but its berries are bright ©”°#«“* 


Both sorts 
of mistle- 
toe known 
to the 
ancients 
and desig- 
nated by 
different 
words. 


Doubts 

as to the 
identifica- 
tion of the 
ancient 
names for 
mistletoe. 


Did Virgil 
compare 
the Golden 
Bough 

to common 
mistletoe 
or to Lor- 
anthus ? 
Some 
enquirers 
decide 

in favour 
of Loran- 
thus. 


MISTLETOE AND THE GOLDEN BOUGH _ nortks 


318 
both the ordinary mistletoe (Viscum album) and the Loranthus under 
the general name of zxia.1 © 

Modern writers are not agreed as to the identification of the 
various species of mistletoe designated by the names zxia, hyphear, 
and s/e/is. F, Wimmer, the editor of Theophrastus in the Didot 
edition, takes hyphear to be common mistletoe (Viscum album), 
stelis to be Loranthus europaeus, and ixia to be a general name 
which includes the two species.2 On the other hand F, Fraas, 
while he agrees as to the identification of Ayphear and stelis with 
common mistletoe and Loranthus respectively, inclines somewhat 
hesitatingly to regard zxéa or ixos (as Dioscorides has it) as a 
synonym for s¢edis (the Loranthus).® HH. O. Lenz, again, regards 
both yphear and stedis as synonyms for common mistletoe (Viscum 
album), while he would restrict zxéa to the Loranthus. But both 
these attempts to confine zx/a to the single deciduous species 
Loranthus seem incompatible with the statement of Theophrastus, 


that zxza includes an evergreen as well as a deciduous species.® 
We have now to ask, Did Virgil compare the Golden Bough to 
the common mistletoe (Viscum album) or to the Loranthus europaeus ? 


Some modern enquirers decide in favour of the Loranthus. 


Many 


years ago Sir Francis Darwin wrote to me:® “I wonder whether 


Loranthus europaeus would do for your Golden Bough. 
of mistletoe growing on oaks and chestnuts in S. Europe. 


It is a sort 
In 


the autumn it produces what are described as bunches of pretty 


yellow berries. 


It. is not evergreen like the mistletoe, but 


deciduous, and as its leaves appear at the same time as the oak 


1 Theophrastus, W7s/oria Plantarum, 
iii, 7. 5, iii, 16. 1, De Causts Plan- 
tarum, li. 173 Pliny, Mat. Hist. xvi. 
245-247. Compare Dioscorides, De 
materia medica, ii, 93 (103), vol. i. 
Pp. 442 sg., ed. C. Sprengel (Leipsic, 
1829-1830), who uses the form zxos 
instead of zxza. Both Dioscorides (/.¢.) 
and Plutarch (Coriolanus, 3) affirm that 
mistletoe (zxos) grows on the oak (dpis) ; 
and Hesychius quotes from Sophocles’s 
play A/eleager the expression * mistle- 
toe-bearing oaks” (lEogépous Spvas, 
Hesychius, s.v.). 

2 Theophrastus, Ofera guae super- 
sunt omnia, ed. Fr. Wimmer (Paris, 
1866), pp. 537; 545, 546, s.vv. léla, 
oreNls, dpéap. 

3 F. Fraas, Synopsis Plantarum 
Florae Classicae (Munich, 1845), p. 
152. 

4H. O. Lenz, Botantk der alten 
Griechen und Rimer (Gotha, 1859), p. 
597, notes 147 and 148. 


5 Theophrastus, De Causis Plan- 
tarum, ii. 17. 2, érel 76 Ye Thy pev 
deipudrdov elvar Tv ley (Thy Se pud- 
AoBdrov) obey drowov, Kav 4 perv 
(év) decpid\r\ors  5é vy PvdAd0BSAois 
éuBugn. 

6 His. letter is undated, but the 
postmark is April 28th, 1889. Sir 
Francis Darwin has since told me that 
his authority is Kerner von Marilaun, 
Phlanzenleben (1888), vol. i. pp. 195, 
196. See Anton Kerner von Marilaun, 
The Natural History of Plants, trans- 
lated and edited by F, W. Oliver 
(London, 1894-1895), i. 204 sgg. 
According to this writer “the mistle- 
toe’s favourite tree is certainly the 
Black Poplar (Populus nigra), It 
flourishes with astonishing luxuriance 
on the branches of that tree’... 
Mistletoe has also been found by way 
of exception upon the oak and the 
maple, and upon old vines” (of. cét. 
i, 205). 


MISTLETOE AND THE GOLDEN BOUGH 319 


leaves and drop at the same time in autumn, it must look like a 
_ branch of the oak, more especially as it has rough bark with lichens 
_ often growing on it. Loranthus is said to be a hundred years old 
' sometimes.” Professor P. J. Veth, after quoting the passage from 
Virgil, writes that “almost all translators (including Vondel) and 
' commentators of the Mantuan bard think that the mistletoe is here 
meant, probably for the simple reason that it was better known to 
_ them than Loranthus europaeus, 1 am convinced that Virgil can 
~ only have thought of the latter. On the other side of the Alps the 
| Loranthus is much commoner than the mistletoe ; on account of its 
_ splendid red blossoms, sometimes twenty centimetres long, it is a 
_ far larger and more conspicuous ornament of the trees; it bears 
' really golden yellow fruit (Croceus fetus), whereas the berries of the 
mistletoe are almost white; and it attaches itself by preference 
to the oak, whereas the mistletoe is very seldom found on the 
» oak.”! Again, Mr. W. R. Paton writes to me from Mount 
_ Athos:? “The oak is here called dendron, the tree. As for the 
_ mistletoe there are two varieties, both called axo (ancient iéés). 
' Both are used to make bird-lime. The real Golden Bough is the 
' variety with yellow berries and no leaves. It is the parasite of the 
_ oak and rarely grows on other trees. It is very abundant, and 
_ now in winter the oak-trees which have adopted it seem from a 
_ distance to be draped i in a golden tissue. The other variety is our 
' own mistletoe and is strictly a parasite of the fir(a spruce fir, I don’t 
_ know its scientific name). It is also very abundant.” 

_ Thus in favour of identifying Virgil’s mistletoe (ziscum) with 
_ Loranthus rather than with common mistletoe it has been urged, 
" first, that the berries of Zoranthus are bright yellow, whereas those 
' of the mistletoe are of a greenish white; and, second, that the 
| Loranthus commonly grows on oaks, whereas mistletoe seldom does 
" so, indeed in Italy mistletoe is said never to be found on an oak. 
' Both these circumstances certainly speak strongly in favour of 
| Loranthus; since Virgil definitely describes the berries as of a 
_ saffron-yellow (croceus) and says that the plant grew on a holm-oak. 
- Yet on the other hand Virgil tells us that the plant put forth fresh 
_ leaves in the depths of winter (4rumali frigore, strictly speaking, 
| “the cold of the winter solstice”); and this would best apply to 
_ the common mistletoe, which is evergreen, whereas Loranthus is 
_ deciduous.’ Accordingly, if we must decide between the two species, 
_ this single circumstance appears to incline the balance in favour of 


me «6s *:«*Prof. P. J. Veth, ‘‘ De leer der ? His letter is dated 18th February, 
 signatuur, III. De mistel en de 1908. 

" riembloem,” Jnzernationales Archiv 3 But Sir Francis Darwin writes to 
| JSiir Ethnographie, vii. (1894) p. 105. me:—‘‘I do not quite see why Lor- 
_ The Dutch language has separate anthus should not put out leaves in 
/ mames for the two species: mistletoe is winter as easily as Viscum, in both 
| mistel, and Loranthus is riembloem, cases it would be due to unfolding 


2 a 


Reason for 
preferring 
common 
mistletoe. 


Perhaps 
Virgil 
‘confused 
the two 


species. 


320 MISTLETOE AND THE GOLDEN BOUGH  wovts 


common mistletoe. But is it not possible that Virgil, whether con- 
sciously or unconsciously, confused the two plants and combined 
traits from both in his description? Both parasites are common 
in Italy and in appearance they are much alike except for the 
colour of the berries. As a loving observer of nature, Virgil was 
probably familiar by sight with both, but he may not have examined 
them closely; and he might be excused if he thought that the 
parasite which he saw growing, with its clusters of bright yellow 
berries, on oaks in winter, was identical with the similar parasite 
which he saw growing, with its bunches of greenish white 
berries and its pale green leaves, on many other trees of the 
forest. The confusion would be all the more natural if the Celts 
of northern Italy, in whose country the poet was born, resembled 
the modern Celts of Brittany in attaching bunches of the common 
mistletoe to their cottages and leaving them there till the revolving 
months had tinged the pale berries, leaves, and twigs with a golden _ 
yellow, thereby converting the branch of mistletoe into a true 
Golden Bough. | 


leaf buds; the fact that Viscum has winter the Loranthus growing on the ~ 
adult leaves at the time, while Zov- oaks of Mount Athos has no leaves, — 
anthus has not, does not really affect though its yellow berries are very 
the matter.” However, Mr. Paton conspicuous. : 
tells us, as we have just seen, that in 


achen, effigy burnt at, i. 120, ii. 25 
Aargau, Swiss canton, of, Lenten fire- 
_ custom in, i. 119; superstition as to 
_ oak-mistletoe in, ii. 82; mistletoe 
_ called ‘* thunder-besom” in, 85, 301 ; 
sab esgeetiong 165 

» Manuk, on creeping through 
cleft trees in Armenia, ii. 172 

\ber berg in Bavaria, burning the Easter 
_ Man at, i. 144 

ibeokuta, use of bull-roarers at, ii. 


nm. 
, the Lake of, in Upper Austria, ii. 


iberdeenshire, custom at reaping the 
last corn in, i. 12; need-fire in, 296; 
holed rock used by childless women 
“in, ii. 187 
feldy, Hallowe'en fires near, i. 
borigines of Victoria, their custom as 
to emu fat, i. 13 
ibougit, Father X., S.J., on the cere- 
“mony of the new ‘fre at Jerusalem, i. 
130 
ibruzzi, new Easter fire in the, i. r22; 
Water consecrated at Easter in the, 
122 sgg. ; Midsummer rites of fire and 
‘water in the, 209 s¢ 
caciz lise saat to the ower of ii. 
335 57- 
na n story of Prince Sunless, i. 
Por 
thern, St. John’s fires at, i. 168 
thterneed, in Ross-shire, Beltane cakes 
at, i 153 
ireale, in Sicily, Midsummer fires at, 
‘1. 210 
der stones, i. 15 
on, Joseph, on witchcraft in Switzer- 
land, ii. 42 7.? 

is and Aphrodite, ii. 294 5g. 
aces ven. painter, ii. 36 
s and the Golden Bough, ii. 285, 


. VII. VOL. II 321 


INDEX 


Africa, girls secluded at puberty in, i 
22 sgg.; dread and seclusion of women 
at menstruation in, 79 sgg.; birth- 
trees in, ii. 160 sgg.; use of bull- 
roarers in, 229 #., 232 

——, British Central, the Anyanja of, i. 81 

——, British East, i. 81; ceremony of 
new fire in, 135 sg. ; the Nandi of, ii. 
229 2. ; the Akikuyu of, 262 sg. 

, East, ceremony of the new fire in, 

i. 135; the Swahili of, ii. 160 

, German East, the Wajagga of, ii. 
160; the Washamba of, 183; the 
Bondeis of, 263; the Wadoe of, 312 

——, German South-West, the Ovambo 
of, ii. 183 

, North, Midsummer fires in, i. 213 


599- 

——, South, the Thonga of, ii. 297 

——, West, theory of an external soul 
embodied in an animal prevalent in, 
ii, 200 599-5 ritual of death and 
resurrection at initiation in, 251 sgg. 

African stories of the external soul, ii. 
148 sgg.; Balders, 312 sgq. 

Afterbirth buried under a tree, ii. 160 
sg., 162, 163, 164, 165; of child 
animated by a ghost and sympath- 
etically connected with a banana-tree, 
162; regarded as brother or sister of 
child, 162 7.2; regarded as a second 
child, 162 ~.* ; regarded as a guardian 
spirit, 223 n.2; and navel-string re- 
garded as guardian angels of the man, 
ii. 162 2.7 

Agaric growing on birch-trees, super- 
Stitions as to, i. 148 

Aglu, New year fires at, i. 217 

Air thought to be poisoned at eclipses, i. 
162 2. 

Aisne, Midsummer fires in the depart- 
ment of, i. 187 

Aix, squibs at Midsummer in, i. 193; 
Midsummer king at, i. 194, ii. 25; 
bathing at Midsummer in, 216 


ag 


322 


Agni, Hindoo deity, i. 99 1.2; the fire- 
god, ii. 1, 296 

Ague, Midsummer bonfires’ deemed a 
cure for, i. 162; leaps’ across the 
Midsummer bonfires thought to be a 
preventive of, 174 

Agweh, on the Slave Coast, custom of 
widows at, ii. 18 sg. 

Ahlen, in Munsterland, i. 247 

Ahriman, the devil of the Persians, i. 


95 

Aht or Nootka Indians of Vancouver 
Island, seclusion of girls at puberty 
among the, i. 43 sg. 

Ahura Mazda, the supreme being of the 
Persians, i. 95 

Ain, Lenten fires in the department of, 
i, 114 

Ainos of Japan, their mourning caps, i. 
20; their use of mugwort in exorcism, 
ii. 60; their veneration for mistletoe, 


79 

A-Kamba of British East Africa, seclu- 
sion of girls at puberty among the, 
1.23 

Akikuyu of British East Africa, their 
dread of menstruous women, i. 81; 
ritual of the new birth among the, ii. 
262 sq. 

Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp, 
Roman version of, ii, 105 

Alaska, seclusion of girls at puberty 
among the Indians of, i, 45 sg. ; the 
Esquimaux of, ii. 155 

Alastir and the Bare-Stripping Hangman, 
Argyleshire story of, ii. 129 sg. 

Albania, Midsummer fires in, i. 
the Yule log in, 264 

Albanian story of the external soul, ii. 
104 2.3 

Albert Nyanza, the Wakondyo of the, 
ii. 162 sg. 

Albino head of secret society on the 
Lower Congo, ii. 251 

Alders free from mistletoe, ii. 315 

Alfoors or Toradjas of Celebes, their 
custom at the smelting of iron, ii. 154 ; 
their doctrine of the plurality of souls, 
222 

Algeria, Midsummer fires in, i. 213 

Alice Springs in Central Australia, ii. 238 


212; 


Allan, John Hay, on the Hays of 
Errol, ii. 283 é 
Allandur temple, at St. Thomas's 


Mount, Madras, ii. 8 

All-healer, name applied to mistletoe, 
ii. 77, 79, 82 

All Saints’ Day, omens on, i. 240; the 
first of November, 225 ; bonfires on, 
246; sheep passed through a. hoop 
on, ii. 184 

All Souls, Feast of, i. 223 sg., 225 2.8 


INDEX | : | i 


Almond-trees, mistletoe on, ii. 316 

A-Louyi, seclusion of girls at poberty 
among the, i. 28 2. 

Alsace, Midsummer fires in, i. 169 | 
cats burnt in Easter bonfires in, ii. 40 a 

Althenneberg, in Bavaria, Easter fires 
at, i. 143 5g. 4 

Altmark, Easter bonfires in, i. 140, 142 | 

Alum burnt at Midsummer, i. 214 5 

Alungu, seclusion of girls at Puberty. 
among the, i. 24 sg. a 

Alur, a tribe of the Upper Nile, i. 64 r 

Alvarado, Pedro de, Spanish general, "4 
214 

Amadhlosi, ancestral spirits in serpent 
form, ii, 211 7. 

Amambwe, seclusion of girls at puberty 
among the, i. 24 sg. 4 

Amatongo, plural of itongo, ii. 302 n. 4 

Amazon, ordeals of young men among) 
the Indians of the, i. 62 sg. 

Ambamba, in West Africa, death, re 
surrection, and the new birth in, ii, 
256 a 

Amboyna, hair of criminals cut in, | 
158 

Ambras, Midsummer customs at, i. 173 a 

America, Central, the Moageve terion 
in, i. 86 

America, North, Indians of, not allowed] 
to sit on bare ground in war, i. 5; 
seclusion of girls at puberty eae ; 
the Indians of, 41 sgg.; dread and- 
seclusion of menstruous women among. 
the Indians of, 87 sgg. ; stories of the 
external soul among the Indians off 
li, 15r sg.; religious associations 
among the Indian tribes of, 267 sgg. 

, South, seclusion of girls at puberty 
among the Indians of, i. 56 sgg.;_ 
effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in, 
128 ; Midsummer fires in, 212 sg. F 

Ammerland, in Oldenburg, cart-wheel_ 
used as charm against witchcraft in.) 
i. 345 2° 

Amphitryo besieges Taphos, ii, 103 

Amulets, rings and bracelets as, i. 92 is 
as soul- boxes, ii. 155 ; degenerate int 
ornaments, 156 2.” 

Ancestor, wooden image of, ii. 155 


see ae 


Be, 


Ancestral spirits incarnate in serpents, 
ii, 211 
Anderson, 

17r 2.3 
Andes, the Peruvian, effigies of Judas_ 
burnt at Easter in the, i, 128 a: 
Andjra, a district of Morocco, i, 17 fe 
Midsummer fires in the, 213 59. 5 
Midsummer rites of water in, 216 ; 
animals bathed at Midsummer in, © 
ii, 31 


Miss, of Barskimming, | 


ndreas, parish of, in the Isle of Man, 
‘i. 224, 305, 307 7.1 
the, of Northern Nigeria, their 


el, need-fire revealed by an, i. 287 
-man, effigy of, burnt at Midsum- 
-F 167 

s bell, the, i. 110, ii. 47 

British Central Africa, cus- 
ie ata gts at puberty in, i. 25 
54.5 customs as to salt in, 27 


nana 


nimal, bewitched, or part of it, burnt to 
_ compel the witch to appear, i. 303, 
_ 395; 397 SY-, 321 5g. ; trans- 
' ferred to, ii. 181 ; and man, sympa- 
thetic relation between, 272 5g. 
nimal familiars of wizards and witches, 
pHi. 196 s7., 201 5g. 
imals burnt alive as a sacrifice in 
_ England, Wales, and Scotland, i. 300 
_ $9g.;_ witches transformed into, 315 
 sqq., ii. 321 59.; bewitched, buried alive, 
7 324 5gg.; live, burnt at Spring and 


cae external soul in, 196 syg.; 


i, 85; use of wormwood to avert 
demons in, ii. 6x z.! 

pu and Bata, ancient Egyptian story 
| of, ii. 134 s¢g. 

Anthemis nobilis, camomile, gathered at 
_ Midsummer, ii. 63 

Ant-hill, insane people buried in an, i. 
F 64 

Ants employed to sting girls at puberty, 
_ i.6r; to sting young men, i. 62 sg. 
ntoniu Mountain, in Thuringia, 
" Christmas bonfire on the, i 265 sg. 
ntwerp, wicker giants at, ii. 35.s¢. 

aula tribe of Northern Australia, 

_ fites of initiation, ii. 235 
anja of British Central Africa, their 
_ dread of menstruous women, i. 81 sg. 
Apaches, i. 21; use of bull-roarers 
' among the, ii. 230 2. 

Apala cured by Indra in the Rigveda, ii. 
- 192 
Ape, a Batta totem, ii. 223 
Aphrodite and Adonis, ii. 294 s¢. 


ee 


ez 


INDEX 


323 


Apollo, identified with the Celtic 
Grannus, i. 112 

—— Soranus, ii. 14, 15 2.3 

Apollo's temple at Cumae, i. 99 

Apple, divination by the sliced, i. 238 ; 
and candle, biting at, 241, 242, 243, 


245 : 

Apple-tree as life-index of boy, ii. 165 

—— -trees, torches thrown at, i. 108; 
mistletoe on, ii. 315, 316 2.5 

Apples, dipping for, at Hallowe'en, i. 
237; 239, 241, 242, 243, 245 

-trees, letoe on, ii. 316 

April, the twenty-seventh of, in popular 
superstitions of Morocco, i 17 sg. ; 
ceremony of the new fire in, 136 sg., 
ii. 3 ; Chinese festival of fire in, 3 

Arab women in Morocco, their super- 
Stitions as to plants at Midsummer, 
ii. 51 

Arabia, tree-spirits in snake form in, ii. 
4422 

Arabian, modern, story of the external 
soul, ii. 137 5g. 

Arabian Nights, story of the external 
soul in the, ii. 137 

Arabs of Morocco, 
customs, i. 214 

Aran, in the valley of the Garonne, Mid- 
summer fires at, i. 193 

Arch, child after an illness passed under 
an, ii. 192; young men at initiation 
passed under a leafy, 193 ; triumphal, 
suggested origin of the, 195 ; 

Archer ( 7irant), effigy of, ii. 36 

Arches, novices at initiation passed 
under arches in Australia, ii. 193 2.7 

Archways, passing under, as a means of 
escaping evil spirits or sickness, ii. 


their Midsummer 


first Sunday of Lent inthe. i 107 5g. ; 
the French, Lenten fires and customs 
in the, rog sg. ; Midsummer fires in 
the, 188; the Yule log in the, 253 ; 
cats burnt alive in Lenten bonfires, 


ii. 40 

Argo, tree of which the ship was made, 
ii. 94 2.1 

Argyleshire stories of the external soul, 
ii. 127 59g. 

Argyrus, temple of Hercules at, i. 99 2.* 

Aricia, the priest of, and the Golden 
Bough, i. 1; the priest of Diana at, 
perhaps a personified Jupiter, ii. 302 sg. 

Arician grove, the Midsummer festival of 
fire in the, ii. 285; the priest of the, a 
personification of an oak-spirit, 285 

Ariminum, triumphal arch of Augustus 
at, ii. 194 #.* 

Arizona and New Mexico, use of bull- 
roarers in, ii. 230 #., 231 


324 


Arks, sacred, of the Cherokees, i. rz sg. 

Armenia, were-wolves in, i. 316; sick 
people creep through cleft trees in, ii. 
173 

Armenian church, bonfires at Candlemas 
in the, i. 131 

idea of the sun as a wheel, i. 
334 7.1 

Arms of youths punctured to make them 
good hunters, i. 58 

Arnstadt, witches burnt at, i. 6 

Arran, the need-fire in, i. 293 

Arrows used as a love-charm, i. 14 

Artemis Perasia, at Castabala i in Cappa- 
docia, ii. 14 

Artemisia absinthium, 
58 7.°, 6x m.1 

vulgaris, mugwort, 
Midsummer, ii. 58 sg. 

Artois, mugwort at Midsummer in, ii. 59 

Arunta of Central Australia, their sacred 
pole, i. 7; their dread of women at 
menstruation, 77; legend that the 
ancestors kept their spirits in their 
churinga, ii. 218 n.*; rites of initia- 
tion among the, 233 sg. ; initiation of 
medicine-men among the, 238 

Aryan god of the thunder and the oak, 
i, 265 

peoples, stories of the external soul 
among, ii. 97 sgq. 

Aryans of Europe, importance of the 
Midsummer festival among the, ii. 40 ; 
the oak the chief sacred tree of the, 
89 sg. 

Ascension Day, parasitic rowan should 
be cut on, ii. 281 

Asceticism not primitive, i, 65 

Ash Wednesday, effigy burnt on, i. 120 

Ash-trees, children passed through cleft 
ash-trees as a cure for rupture or 
rickets, ii. 168 sgq. 

Ashes in divination, i. 243, 244, 245. 
See also Sticks, Charred 

of bonfires put in fowls’ nests, i. 

I12, 338; increase fertility of fields, 

I4I, 337; make cattle thrive, 141, 

338 ; placed in a person’s shoes, 156 ; 

administered to cattle to make them 

fat, ii. 4 

of dead, disposal of the, i. rz 

of Easter bonfire mixed with seed 

at sowing, i. 121 

of Hallowe'en fires scattered, i. 

233 

of holy fires a protection against 

demons, ii. 8, 17 

of Midsummer fires strewed on 

fields to fertilize them, i. 170, 190, 

203; a protection against conflagra- 

tion, 174, 196; a protection against 

lightning, 187, 188; a protection 


wormwood, ii. 


gathered at 


INDEX 


against thunder, 190; put by people 
in their shoes, 191 sg.; a cure for 
consumption, 194 sg.; rubbed by 
people on their hair or bodies, 213, 
214, 215; good for the eyes, 214 
Ashes of the need-fire strewn on fields te 
protect the crops against vermin, i, 
274; used as a medicine, 286 i 
of New Year's fire used to rub 
sore eyes, i. 218 E 
of Yule log strewed on fields, i, 
250; used to heal swollen glands, 


251 q 
Ashur, Arab New Year's Day, i. 217, 218 
Asia Minor, the Celts in, ii. 89; 7 

for possession by an evil spirit in, 186; 

creeping through rifted rocks in, 189 
Aspen, mistletoe on, ii. 315 4 
Aspidium filix mas, the male fern, 

superstitions as to, ii. 66 sg. 2 
Ass, child passed under an, as a cure for 

whooping-cough, ii. 192 7,1 “ 
the Khasis of, ii. 146; the 
Lushais of, 185 sg. a 
Assiga, tribe of South Nigeria, ii. 204 
Associations, religious, among the Indian 

tribes of North America, ii. 267 59q- 
Assyrian ritual, use of golden axe in, ii, 

80 2.3 q 
Aston, W. G., quoted, i. 137 sg.; on 

the fire-walk in Japan, ii. 10 7.1 ; 
Astral spirit of a witch, i. 317 i 
Afai, external soul in the Mota language, 

ii. 197 sg. i 
Ath, in Hainaut, procession of giants at, 

ii. 36 
Athboy, in County Meath, i. 139 ! 
Athena, priestess of, uses a white um- 

brella, i. 20 2.1 
Athenians offer cakes to Cronus, i, 

153 2.° A | 
Athens, ceremony of the new fire at 

Easter in, i. 130 f 
Athis, in Normandy, Christmas bonfires 

at, i. 266 = 
Athos, Mount, mistletoe at, ii. 319, a 

320 7. 

Atrae, city in Mesopotamia, i. 82 i 
Aubrey, John, on the Midsummer fires, 

i. 197 y 
Aufkirchen in Bavaria, burning the Easter 

Man at, i. 144 4 
August, procession of wicker giants in, 

ii. 36 4 
felt 27 of, Festival of the Cross on 

the, i. 220 
the eighteenth, feast of Florus and 
Laurus, i. 220 
the sixth, festival of St. Estapin, 

ii. 188 E 
Augustus, triumphal arch of Augustus 

Ariminum, ii. 195 ~.4 


Assam, 


is, wonderful herbs gathered on St. 
ohn’s Eve lsat ii, 45; St. John’s wort 
vervain gathered at Mid- 
ne! in, 62 2.*; oe 


and Saintonge, , er fires 
i. 192 
Au in the New Hebrides, samaniu 
woes = 
dread and seclusion of women 
Bes aienetruation in, iL 76 sqg. ; passing 
_ under an arch as a rite of initiation 
in, ii. 193 2.1; initiation of young 
men in, 227, 233 5sqg-; use of bull- 
_ roarers in, 228 x. 
——, Central, pointing sticks or bones 
in, i 14 2.5; its desert nature, ii. 
.:. 
, South-Eastern, sex totems among 
- the natives of, ii. 214 sgg.- 
ian languages, words for fire and 
- wood in, ii. 296 
ustria, Midsummer fires in, i. 172 sgg. ; 
ee Yee ME amor the Servians of, 
_ 262 sgg.; need-fire in Upper, 279; 
- fern- seed at Midsummer in, il. 65; 
_ mistletoe used to prevent nightmare 
in, 85 
tumn fires, i. 220 sgg. 
Lenten fires in, i. 111 5g. ; 
© story of a were-wolf in, 308 sg. 
dve Maria bell, ii. 47 
vel bus, Lake, and the Golden Bough, 
- ii, 285 2.7 
Awa-nkonde, seclusion of girls at puberty 
' among the, i. 28 
* Awasungu, the house of the,” i. 28 
Awka in South Nigeria, i. 4 
y , in Morocco, Midsummer fires 
- at, i. 214 
Azores, bonfires and divination on Mid- 
' summer Eve in the, i. 208 sg. ; fern- 
3 “here Midsummer in the, ii. 66 
‘Aztecs, their punishment of witches and 
q wizards, ii. 159 
‘Baal and Beltane, i. 149 2.1, 150 2.}, 
e 357 
B wid Lake in British Columbia, i. 
_ 47 


bBbackacnh 
iy 


ALIS! 


eren 


4zZemmu! 


| at reaping, leaps over the 
* Midsummer bonfire thought to be a 
_ preventive of, i. 165, 168, 189, 344 
_ Sg.; set down to witchcraft, 343 z., 
_ 345; at harvest, mugwort a protection 
_ against, ii. 59; creeping through a 

holed stone to prevent backache at 


INDEX 


325 


Baden, Lenten fire-custom in, i. 117; 
Easter bonfires in, 145; Midsummer 
fires in, 167 sgg. 

Badham Court oak, in Gloucestershire, 
ii. 316 

Badnyak, Yule log, i. 259, 263 

Badnyi Dan, Eve, i. 258, 263 

Bag, souls of persons deposited in a, ii. 
142, 153, 155 

Baganda, children live apart from their 
parents among the, i. 23 2.2; seclusion 
of girls at puberty among the, 23 sv. ; 
superstition as to women who do not 
menstruate, 24; abstain from salt in 
certain cases, 27 sg.; their dread of 
Menstruous women, 80 sg.; their 
beliefs and customs concerning the 
afterbirth, ii. 162. See also Uganda 

Bahaus or Kayans of Central Borneo, i. 


4 59- 

Bahima of Central Africa, their dread of 
Menstruous women, i. 80 

Bahr-el-Ghazal province, ceremony of 
the new fire in the, i. 134 sg. 

Bakairi, the, of Brazil, call bull-roarers 
** thunder and lightning,”’ ii. 231 5g. 
Baking-forks, witches ride on, ii. 73. 74 
Bakuba or Bushongo of the Congo, iL 4 
Balder, his body burnt, i. 102; wor- 
shipped in Norway, 104; camomile 
sacred to, ii. 63; burnt at Mid- 
summer, 87; Midsummer sacred to, 
87 ; a tree-spirit or deity of vegetation, 
88 sg. ; interpreted as a mistletoe-bear- 
ing oak, 93 sg. ; his invulnerability, 94; 
why Balder was thought to shine, 293 

—— and the mistletoe, i. 1roz SJos ii. 
76 sgg., 302; his life or death in the 
mistletoe, 279, 283; perhaps a real 
man deified, 314 sg. 

——, the myth of, i. ror sgg. ; repro- 
duced in the Midsummer festival of 
Scandinavia, ii. 87; perhaps drama- 
tized in ritual, 88 ; Indian parallel to, 
280 ; African parallels to, 312 sgg. 

Balder’s Balefires, name formerly given 
to Midsummer bonfires in Sweden, i. 
172, ii. 87 

—— Grove, i. 104, ii. 315 

Balders-bré, Balder’s eyelashes, a name 
for camomile, ii. 63 

Bale, Lenten fire-custom in the canton 
of, i. 119 

Balefires, Balder’s, at Midsummer in 
Sweden, i. 172 

Bali, filing of teeth in, i. 68 2.2; birth- 
trees in, ii. 164 

Balkan Peninsula, need-fire in the, i. 281 

Ball, ige% of, played to determine the 
King of Summer, i. 195 

Ballyvadlea, in Tipperary, woman burnt 
as a witch at, i. 323 sg. 


326 


Balnagown loch, in Lismore, i, 316 

Balong of the Cameroons, their external 
souls in animals, ii. 203 

Balquhidder, hill of the fires at, i. 149 ; 
Hallowe'en bonfires at, 232 

Balum, New Guinea word signifying 
bull-roarer, ghost, and mythical mon- 
ster, ii. 242 

Banana-tree, afterbirth of child buried 
under a, ii. 162, 163, 164 

Bancroft, H. H., on the external souls 
of the Zapotecs, ii. 212 

Banivas of the Orinoco, their scourging 
of girls at puberty, i. 66 sgg. 

Baraka, blessed or magical virtue, i. 
216, 218, ii. 51 

Barclay, Sheriff, on Hallowe'en fires, i, 
232 

Bardney bumpkin, on witch as hare, i, 


318 

Bare-Stripping Hangman, 
story of the, ii, 129 sg. 

Barker, W. G. M. Jones, on need-fire in 
Yorkshire, i. 286 sg. 

Barley plant, external soul of prince in 
a, ii. T02 

Ba-Ronga, the, of South Africa, their 
story of a clan whose external souls 
were in a cat, ii. 150 sg. 

Barotse or Marotse of the Zambesi, 
seclusion of girls at puberty among 
the, i. 28, 29 

Barren cattle driven through fire, i. 203, 
338 


Argyleshire 


women hope to conceive through 
fertilizing influence of vegetables, ii. 
51 

Barricading the road against a ghostly 
pursuer, ii. 176 

Barsana, in North India, Holi bonfires 
at, ti, 2,.5 

Bartle Bay, in British New Guinea, 
festival of the wild mango tree at, i. 
7 599- 

Basque hunter transformed into bear, ii. 
226, 270 

story of the external soul, ii. 139 

Bastar, province of India, treatment of 
witches in, ii. 159 

Bastian, Adolph, on rites of initiation in 
West Africa, ii. 256 sg. 

Basutos, seclusion of girls at puberty 
among the, i. 3r 

Bata and Anpu, ancient Egyptian story 
of” ii. 134 sgg. 

Bathing in the sea at Easter, i, 123; at 
Midsummer, 208, 210, 216, ii. 29 sg. ; 
thought to be dangerouson Midsummer 
Day, 26 sg. 

Bats, the lives of men in, ii. 215 sg., 
217; called men’s ‘‘ brothers,” 21s, 
216, 218 


INDEX ce 


_Beal-fires on Midsummer Eve in York- ; 


Battas, their doctrine of the plurality of © 
souls, ii. 223; their totemic system, — 
224 sqq. x 

Battel, Andrew, on the colour of negro — 
children at birth, ii. 251 7.1 ‘ 

Bavaria, Easter bonfires in, i, 143 5g. ; 
belief as to eclipses in, 162; Mid- 
summer fires in, 164 sgg.; leaf-clad — 
mummer at Midsummer in, ii. 26; the — 
divining-rod in, 67 sg.; creeping — 
through a holed stone or narrow open-— 
ing in, 188 sg. ¥ 

, Upper, use of mistletoe in, ii. 855 


ay 
Bavarian peasants, their belief as to — 
hazel, ii. 69 7. 4 
Bavili, seclusion of girls at puberty nial 3 
the; 43% : 


shire, i. 198 
Bean, King of the, i. 153 7.2 
Beans, divination by, i. 209 2 
Bear, external soul of warrior in a, ii, 
151; Basque hunter transformed into, — 
226, 270; simulated transformation of 
novice into a, 274 5g. ; 
—— clan, ii. 271, 272 2.1 q 
-dance of man who pretends to be 
a bear, ii. 274 5 
Bear’s skin, Lapp women shoot blindfold — 
at a, ii, 280 7. 
Bearers to carry royal personages, ig Sq. 
Beating girls at puberty, i. 61, 66 sg.; as 
a form of purification, 61, 64 59. 5 
Beauce, festival of torches in, i, 113; 
story of a were-wolf in, 309 

and Perche, Midsummer fires in, 
i, 188 

Beaver clan, ii. 272 i 

Bechuana belief as to sympathetic relation 
of man to wounded crocodile, ii. 21¢ 
5g. : 4 f 

Bee, external soul of an ogre in a, ii, 
101 

Beech or fir used to make the Yule log, 
i. 249 

-tree burnt in Lenten bonfire, i. 11 


5g. 
Beeches, struck by lightning, proportior on. 
of, ii. 298 sg.; free from mistletoe, 315 
Bees thought to be killed by menstruous 
women, i. 96 ; ashes of bonfires used | 
to cure ailments of, 142 4 
Beetle, external soul in a, ii. 138, 140 
Begetting novices anew at initiatio 
pretence of, ii. 248 
Behar, the fire-walk in, ii. 5 
Beifuss, German. name for mugwort, 
60 2.8 
Bel, the fires of, i. 147, 157, 158 5g. 
Beleth, John, his Rationale Divino 
Oficiorum quoted, i, 161 2.2 


z 


| summer Day in, ii. 30; divination by 
_ flowers on Midsummer Eve in, 53; 
a mugwort gathered on St. John’s Day 
_ or Eve in, 59 sg. ; vervain gathered 
_ onSt. John’s Day in, 62; four-leaved 
' clover at Midsummer in, 63; the 
_ witches’ Sabbath in, 7 

Bella Coola Indians of British Columbia, 
' seclusion of girls at puberty among 
- the,i. 46; COREE pomrnets seen 
q the, ii. 174 

Belli-Paaro society in West Africa, rites 
_ of initiation in the, ii. 257 sgg. 


Bellochroy, i. 290 
Bells worn by priest in exorcism, i. 5; 
_ on his legs, ii. 8 


- church, silenced in Holy Week, i. 
_ 123, 125 m.1; rung on Midsummer 
_ Eve, ii. 47 sg. ; rung to drive away 
> witches, 73 

Beltane, popularly derived from Baal, i. 
- 149 2.', 150 2.'; the need-fire at, 
| 293; the Yellow Day of, 293; sheep 
_ passed through a hoop at, ii. 184 
- and Hallowe'en the two chief fire 
_ festivals of the British Celts, ii. 40 sg. 
- cakes, i. 148 5g., 150, 152, 153, 
«154, 155 

ine, i. 148, 153 

- Eve (the Eve of May Day), a 
» witching time, i. 295 

: fire, pretence of throwing a man 
| into the, i. 148, ii. 25 ; kindled by the 
| friction of oak-wood, i. 148, 155, li. 9x 
- fires, i. 146 sgg.; in Wales, 155 
sq. ; in Ireland, 157 sg.; in Notting- 
i ere, 157 
a dh king of, in East Africa, 


Bengal, seclusion of girls at puberty in, 
© i. 68; the Oraons of, ii. 311 

Bengalee stories of the external soul, ii. 
TOL sg., 102 

Beni Ahsen, a tribe in Morocco, ii. 31; 
| their Midsummer fires, i. 215 sg. 
_—— Msgild, a Berber tribe of Morocco, 
* their Midsummer fires, i. 215 

'—— Snous, the, of Morocco, their Mid- 
_ summer rites, i. 216 

Bent, J. Theodore, on passing sick 
_ children through a cleft oak, ii. 172 
"Berber belief as to water at Midsummer, 
oe ii, 3x 
- tale, milk-tie in a, ii. 138 2.? 
ers of North Africa, their Midsummer 
= customs, i. 213 sgg., 219 

Bergen, Midsummer bonfires at, i. 171 


INDEX 


327 


Bering Strait, the Esquimaux of, i. 91 
Berleburg, in Westphalia, the Yule log 
“a3 


, lL 248 

Berlin, the divining-rod at, ii. 68 

Bern, Midsummer fires in the canton of, 
i. 172; the Yule log in the canton of, 
249; Witches put to death in the canton 
of, ii. 42 2.2 

Berry, Lenten fire custom in, i 115; 
Midsummer fires in, 189; the Yule 
log in, 251 sg. ; four-leaved clover at 
Midsummer in, ii. 63 

Besoms, blazing, flung aloft to make the 
* corn grow high, i. 340; used to drive 
away witches, ii. 74 

Bethlehem, new Easter fire carried to, 
i. 130 7. 

‘* Between the two Beltane fires,” i. 149 

Beul, fire of, need-fire, i. 293 

Bevan, Professor A. A., i. 83 2.1 

Beverley, on the initiatory rites of the 
Virginian Indians, ii. 266 sg. 

Bewitched animals burnt alive, i 300 
$9qg. ; buried alive, 324 sgg. 

—— cow, mugwort applied to, ii. 59 

—— things burnt to compel the witch 
to appear, i. 322 

Bhils of India, torture of witches among 
the, ii. 159 

Bhuiyars of Mirzapur, their dread of 
menstrual pollution, i. 84 

Bhuiyas, a Dravidian tribe, fire - walk 
among the, ii. 5 sg. 

Bhut, demon, ii. 312 

Bidasari and the golden fish, Malay 
story of, ii. 147 sg., 220 

Bilqula. See Bella Coola 

Binbinga tribe of Northern Australia, 
their rites of initiation, ii. 234 sg. ; 
initiation of medicine-man in the, 239 

Binding up a cleft stick or tree a mode 
of barricading the road against a 
ghostly pursuer, ii. 176 

Bir, a tribal hero, ii. 6 

Birch used to kindle need-fire, i. 291 

—— and plane, fire made by the friction 
of, i. 220 

——, branches of, on Midsummer Day, 
i. 177, 196; a protection against 
witchcraft, ii. 185 

—— trees set up at Midsummer, i. 177 ; 
used to keep off witches, ii. 20 2. ; 
mistletoe on, 315 

Bird, disease transferred to, ii. 187; 
brings first fire to earth, 295 

Bird-lime made from mistletoe, ii. 317 

Birds, external souls in, ii. 104, 111, 
II9Q, 142, 144, 150; carry seed of 
mistletoe, 316 

Birseck, Lenten fires at, i 119 

Birth, the new, of novices at initiation, 
ii. 247, 251, 256, 257, 261 


328 
Pirth-names of Central American Indians, 
ii, 214 2.1 
-trees in Africa, ii, 160 sgg.; in 
Europe, 165 


Birthday of the Sun at the winter solstice, 
i. 246 

Bisection of the year, Celtic, i. 223 

Black Corrie of Ben Breck, the giant of, 
in an Argyleshire tale, ii. r29 sq. 

Forest, Midsummer fires in the, i. 

168 

Isle, Ross-shire, i. 301 


poplars, mistletoe on, ii. 316, 
318 2.8 

spauld, a disease of cattle, cure for, 
i. 325 


—— three-legged horse ridden by witches, 
ii. 74 

Blackening girls at 
60 

Blemishes, physical, transferred to witches, 
i, 160 2,1 

Blindness of Hother, ii. 279 .4 

Block, the Yule, i. 247 

Blocksberg, the resort of witches, i. 171 ; 
the Mount of the Witches, ii. 74 

Blood, girls at puberty forbidden to see, 
i. 46; disastrous effect of seeing 
menstruous, 77; drawn from women 
who do not menstruate, 81 

-brotherhood between men and 

animals among the Fans, ii. 201, 

226 nm. 

-covenant between men and animals, 
ii. 201, 214, 226 2.1 

———, human, used in rain-making cere- 
monies, ii. 232 sq. 

,menstruous, dread of, i, 76; deemed 

fatal to cattle, 80; miraculous virtue 

attributed to, 82 sg. ; medicinal appli- 

cation of, 98 2.} 

of St. John found on St. John’s 
wort and other plants at Midsummer, 
ii. 56, 57 

—— of sheep poured on image of god 
as a sin-offering, i. 82 

Boa-constrictors, kings at death turn 
into, ii. 212 2. 

Boas, Dr. Franz, on seclusion of Shus- 
wap girls at puberty, i. 53; on 
customs observed by mourners among 
the Bella Coola Indians, ii. 174; on 
initiation into the wolf society of the 
Nootka Indians, 270 sg.; on the 
relation between clans and _ secret 
societies, 273 7.1 

Boar's skin, shoes of, worn by a king at 
inauguration, i. 4 

Boars, familiar spirits of wizards in, ii. 

_ 196 sg.; lives of persons bound up 
with those of, 201, 203, 205; external 
human souls in, 207 ; 


puberty, i. 41, 


INDEX 


Bocage of Normandy, Midsummer fires 
in the, i. 185; the Yule log in the, 
252; torchlight processions on Christ- 
mas Eve in the, 266 

Body- -without-soul in a Ligurian story, 
ii, 107; in a German story, 116 sg. 3 
in a Breton story, 132 sg. ; ina Basque 
story, 139 ; 

Boeotian festival of the Great Daedala, 
ii. 77 2.4 : 

Bogota, rigorous training of the heir to — 
the throne of, i. 19 3 

Bohemia, water and fire consecrated at 
Easter in, i, 123 sg.; bonfires on — 
May Day in, 159; Midsummer fires © 
in, 173 sgg.; -need-fire in, 278 sg. ;_ 
charm to make corn grow high in, ~ 
340; offering to water-spirits on 
Midsummer Eve in, ii. 28 ; simples — 
gathered on St. John’s Night in, 49; © 
divination by means of flowers on 
Midsummer Eve in, 52 sg. ; mugwort © 
at Midsummer in, 59; elder-flowers — 
gathered at Midsummer in, 64; wild — 
thyme gathered on Midsummer Day ~ 
in, 64; fern-seed at Midsummer in, — 
66; ‘‘thunder besoms”’ in, 85; fern- | 
seed on St. John’s Day in, 287, 288 

Bohemian poachers, their use of vervain, 

ii. 62; their use of seeds of fir-cones, ~ 

64 3 


story of the external soul, ii. 110 
Bohus, Midsummer fires in, i. 172 
Boideés, bonfires, i, 111 .1 
Boiling bewitched animal or part of itto — 
compel witch to appear, i, 321 sg., — 
323 
—— milk, omens drawn from, ii. 8 
resin, ordeal of, i. 311 
Boils, crawling under a bramble as a ~ 
cure for, ii. 180 4 
Bolivia, the Chiriguanos of, i. 56; the 
Yuracares of, 57 sg.; fires on St. ~ 
John’s Eve in, 213; La Paz in, ii, 


5° 4 
Boloki of the Upper Congo, birth-plants 
among the, ii. 161 sg. ; use of bull- — 
roarers among the, 229 2. 
Bondeis of German East Africa, rites of — 
initiation among the, ii. 263 sg. : 
Bone used to point with in sorcery, i. 
14; incident of, in folk-tales, 73 2.3; 
of bird (eagle or swan), women at 
menstruation obliged to drink out of, 
45, 48, 49, 50, 73 2%, 90, 92 
Bones burnt in the Easter bonfires, i, 
142; burnt in Midsummer fires, 203 
of dead husbands carried by their — 
widows, i. gt 7.4 
Bonfire Day in County Leitrim, i, 203 
Bonfires supposed to protect against 
conflagrations, i. 107, 108; protect 


| against lightning and confia- 
n, 344; lit by the persons last 
d, 107, 109; a protection against 


> and ~ aE influence of, 336 
. ; omens of marriage drawn from, 
338 sg. ; protect fields against hail, 
344; at festivals in India, ii. 1 sgg. 
r also Fires 

: Midsummer, intended to drive 
_ away dragons, ‘i. 161; protect cattle 
against witchcraft, 188; thought to 
3 eens E008 crops, 188, 336 

Boniface, Archbishop of Mainz, i. 270 
Bc nnach stone in a Celtic story, ii. 126 
des, bonfires, i. x11 2.1, 113 


POLIT CS 


¢ William, on Midsummer fires 
a i. 199 

B , festivals in, i: 13; seclusion of 
_shrig at puberty im, 35 5g. ; birth- 
_ custom.m, ii, 154 5g. 5 : trees and plants 
as life-indices in, 164 sg. ; creeping 
" through a cleft stick after a funeral in, 
175 5g-; giving the slip to an evil 
" spirit in, 179 sg. 

——, the Dyaks of, i. 5, ii. 222 

——, the Kayans of, i. 4 sg. 

ororo of Brazil, their use of bull-roarers, 


Bottesford, in Lincolnshire, mistletoe 
_ deemed a remedy for epilepsy at, ii 
E83 
tea Eepeesel soul of quece ia-e, ti 138 
4 nville, use of bull-roarers in, ii. 
n. 
‘Bough, the Golden, ii. 279 sgg. ; and the 
' priest of Aricia, i. 1; a branch of 
mistletoe, ii. 284 sgg., 315 sgg. See 
also Golden Bo’ 
ulia district of Queensland; i. 14 
' is, mistletoe a remedy for 

epilepsy in, ii. 83 
Bourdifaziles, bonfires, i. 111 2.* 

urke, Captain J. G., on the bull- 
_ roarer, ii. 231 
‘Bowels, novice at initiation supplied by 
' Spirits with a new set of, ii. 235 sgg. 
Bowes, in Yorkshire, need-fire at, i. 287 
Box, external soul of king in a, ii. 102, 
149; external soul of cannibal in a, 
117 
~ elt sacred, i. 11 sg. 
2 tree, external soul of giant in a, ii. 
a Sagi 


INDEX 


329 


Boxwood blessed on Palm Sunday, i, 
184, il. 47 

Boy and girl produce need-fire by friction 
of wood, i. 281 

Boys at initiation thought to be swallowed 
by wizards, ii. 233 

Brabant, Midsummer fires in, £ 194; 
St. Peter’s bonfires in, 195; wicker 
giants in, ii. 35 

Bracelets as amulets, i. 92 

Braemar Highlanders, their Hallowe'en 
fires, i. 233 sg. 

Brahman, the Hindoo creator, i. 95 

Brahman called ‘‘ twice born,” ii. 276 

—— boys forbidden to see the sun, i. 
68 2.” 

—— student, his observances at end of 
his studentship, i. 20 

Brahmanic ritual at inauguration of a 
king, i. 4 

Bramble, crawling under a, as a cure for 
whooping-cough, etc., ii. 180 — 

Brand, John, on the Yule log, iL 247, 
255 

Brandenburg, simples culled at Mid- 
summer in, ii. 48 

Brandons, the Sunday of the, i. 110; 
nerceen, carried about fields and streets, 
III 2”. 

Brands of Midsummer fires a protection 
against lightning, conflagration, and 
spells, i. 183; a protection against 
thunder, 191 ; lighted, carried round 
cattle, 341 

Braunrode in the Harz Mountains, 
Easter fires at, i. 142 

Brazier, walking through a lighted, ii. 


3 599- 

Brazil, the Guaranis of, i. 56 ; seclusion 
of girls at puberty among the Indians 
of, 56, 59 sg. ; the Uaupes of, 61 ; 
ordeals undergone by young men 
among the Indians of, 62 sg. ; effigies 
of Judas burnt at Easter in, 128; 
fires of St. John in, 213 ; the Caripunas 
of, ii. 230; the Bororo of, 230 x. ; 
the Nahuqua of, 230; the Bakairi of, 
231 

Bread, reverence for, i. 13 

Breadalbane, i. 149; treatment of mad 
cow in, 326 

Breadfruit-tree planted over navel-string 
of child, ii. 163 

*« Breath, scoring above the,’’ cutting a 
witch on the forehead, i. 315 7.” 

Breitenbrunn, the ‘‘ Charcoal Man” at, 
ii. 26 2. 

Brekinjska, in Slavonia, need-fire at, i. 
282 

Bresse, Midsummer bonfires in, i. 189 

Brest, Midsummer fire-custom at, i. 
184 


330 


Breteuil, canton of, Midsummer fires in 
the, i. 187 

Breton belief that women can be im- 
pregnated by the moon, i. 76 

stories of the external soul, ii, 132 sg. 

Brezina, in Slavonia, need-fire at, i, 282 

Briar-thorn, divination by, i. 242 

Bri-bri Indians of Costa Rica, seclusion 
of women at menstruation among the, 
i. 86 

Bride not allowed to tread the earth, 
i. 5; last married, made to leap over 
bonfire, ii. 22 

and bridegroom, mock, at bonfires, 
i, 109 5g. 

Bride, parish of, in the Isle of Man, i. 
306, 307 2.1 

Bridegroom not to touch the ground 
with his feet, i. 5 

Brie, Isle de France, effigy of giant 
burnt on Midsummer Eve at, ii. 38 

Brihaspati, Hindoo deity, i. 99 2. 

Briony, wreaths of, at Midsummer, i. 
210 

Brisbane River in Queensland, use of 
bull-roarers on the, ii. 233 s¢¢. 

British Columbia, seclusion of girls at 
puberty among the Indians of, i. 
46 sgg.; dread and_ seclusion of 
menstruous women among the Indians 
of, 89 sg. ; the Kwakiutl of, ii. 186 ; 
Koskimo Indians of, 229; rites of 
initiation among the Indians of, 270 
sqgq. ; the Thompson Indians of, 297 ; 
the Shuswap Indians of, 297 z.° 

Brittany, Midsummer fires in, i. 183 sgq.; 
stones thrown into the Midsummer 
fires in, 240; the Yule log in, 253; 
mistletoe hung over doors of stables 
and byres in, ii. 287 ; fern-seed used 
by treasure-seekers in, 288 

Brochs, prehistoric ruins, i. 291 

Brocken, in the Harz mountains, asso- 
ciated with witches, i. 160 #.1, 171 7. 

Broom, a protective against witchcraft, 
i. 210 

‘Brother ’’ and ‘‘sister,’’ titles given by 
men and women to their sex totems, 
ii, 215, 216, 218 

Brotherhood of the Green Wolfat Jumiéges 
in Normandy, i. 185 sg. 

Brothers, ancient Egyptian story of the 

- Two, ii. 134 5¢g. 

Brown, Dr. George, quoted, i. 32 sg. ; 
on external soul in Melanesia, ii. 199 
Brughe, John, his cure for bewitched 
cattle, i. 324 sg. 
Brund (or brand), 
Yule log, i. 257 
Brunswick, belief as to menstruous women 
in, i. 96; Easter bonfires in, 140; 

need-fire in, 277 sg. 


the Christmas, the 


INDEX 


Buchan, Hallowe'en fires in, i. 232 sg. 
Biche de Noél, the Yule log, i. 249 
Buddha and the crocodile, Indian story, — 
ii. 102 2.4 7 
Buffalo, external souls of a clan in a, ii. 
151; a Batta totem, 223 3 
—— clan in Uganda, i. 3 E 
Buffaloes, external human souls in, ii, — 
207, 208 
Biihl, St. John’s fires at, i. 168 4 
Bukaua, the, of New Guinea, girls at 
puberty secluded among the, i. 35; 
their rites of initiation, ii. 239 sgq. 
sasha io ceremonial uncleanness, i. 65 
n+, 86 
Buléon, Mgr., quoted by Father H. 
Trilles, ii. 202 2,1 
Bulgaria, the Yule log in, i. 264 2.1; _ 
need-fire in, 281, 285; simples and 
flowers culled on St. John’s Day in, ii. 
50; creeping through an arch of vines © 
as a cure in, 180; creeping under the” 
root ofa willow as a cure for whooping- } 
cough in, 180 Sq. 
, Simeon, prince of, ii, 156 sg. 
Bullet blessed by St. Hubert used to © 
shoot witches with, i. 315 sg. | 
Bullock, bewitched, burnt to cause 
witch to appear, i, 303 : 
Bull-roarers swung, i, 133; sounded at || 
initiation of lads, ii. 227, 228 SQ» / 
233 Sgg., 240, 241; used as magical || 
instruments to make rain, 230 sgg.; — 
sounded at festivals of the dead, 230° 
n.; made from trees struck by light- 
ning, 231 ; sounded to make the wind © 
blow, 232; called ‘* E | 
lightning,” 232; sounded to promote 
the growth of the crops, 232; origin- ~ 
ally magical instruments for making 
thunder, wind, and rain, 233; not te 
be.seen by women, 234, 235, 242; 
called by name which means a ghost 7 
or spirit of the dead, 242; called by |) 
the same name as the monster a) 
swallows lads at initiation, 242; kept 
in men’s club-house, 242; named after 
dead men, 242 2.4 4 
, sound of, thought to resemble 
thunder, ii. 228 sgg.; supposed to 
increase the food supply, 230; sup- 
posed to be the voice of a spirit, 233, 
234, 235 i 
Burchard, Bishop of Worms, his cot 
demnation of a heathen ipa i. 
I9gt : 
Bures, bonfires, i. 110 2.1, 111 Be 
Burford, in Oxfordshire, Midsummer 
giant and dragon at, ii. 37 a 
Burghead, the burning of the Clavie at 
i. 266 sg.; the old rampart at, 267 
Sq. 


urgundy, Firebrand Sunday in, i. 114; 
_ Yule log in, 254 
Burma, the Karens of, ii. 157 
Burne, Miss F. C., and Jackson, Miss 
aa F., on the fear of witchcraft in 
a _ Shropshire, i. 342 2.4 
Burning the witches on May Day, i. 157, 
] 159, 160; of effigies in the Midsummer 
' fires, 195; of the witches in the 
_ Hallowe'en fires, 232 sg.; of the Clavie 
' at Burghead, 266 sy.; of a bewitched 
_ animal or part of it to cause the witch 
_ to appear, 303, 305, 307 S9., 321 Sg.; 
_ of human beings in the fires, ii. 2 
' sgqg.; of live animals at spring and 
| Midsummer festivals, 38 sgg.; the 
animals perhaps deemed embodiments 
' of witches, 41 57., 43 59.3 of human 
‘i : victims annually, 286 7.* 
- discs thrown into the air, i. 116 sg., 
' 119, 143, 165, 166, 168 sg., 172 
i the Easter Man, i. 144 
me the Old Wife (Old Woman),” 
oe i. 116, 120 
4 —— the Witches,” i. 116, 118 sg., 
_ 154; a popular name for the fires of 
_ the festivals, ii. 43 
wheels rolled down hill, i. 116, 117 
5g., 119, 141, 143, 161, 162 sg., 163 
 Sq., 166, 173, 174, 20%, 328, 334, 
_ 337 sg.; rolled over fields at Mid- 
- summer to fertilize them, 191, 340 
_ Sg.; perhaps intended to burn witches, 
» 345 
Burns, Robert, i. 207; on Hallowe’en, 
_ 234 
nt sacrifices to stay cattle-plague in 
England, Wales, and Scotland, i. 300 
59q- 
, a preservative against witchcraft, i. 
177 
urying bewitched animals alive, i. 
5gq. 
girls at puberty in the ground, i. 
38 599. 
hmen, their dread of menstruous 
- women, i. 79; their way of warming 
up the star Sirius, 332 s¢. 
Bushongo, royal persons among the, not 
allowed to set foot on the ground, i, 
_ 4; use of bull-roarers among the, ii. 
| 229; rites of initiation among the, 
264 59g. 
_ Butter thought to be improved by the 
_ Midsummer fires, i. 180; bewitched, 
_ burnt at a cross-road, 322 
_ **___. -churning,”” Swiss expression for 
| kindling a need-fire, i. 279 
Byron, Lord, and the oak, ii. 166 


324 


bbages, divination by, at Hallowe'en, 
i. 242. See also Kail 


INDEX 


331 


_ Caesar on the fortification walls of the 


Gauls, i. 267; on human sacrifices 
among the Celts of Gaul, ii. 32 
Caesarea. See Everek 
Caffre villages, women’s tracks at, i. 80 
Caffres of South Africa, seclusion of girls 
at puberty among the, i. 30; use of 
bull-roarers among the, ii. 229 ”., 232 
Cages, girls at puberty confined in, i. 


32 599-, 44, 45 : 
Cailleach beal-tine, the Beltane carline, 
i. 148 
Cairnshee, in Kincardineshire, Mid- 


summer fires on, i. 206 

Caithness; need-fire in, i. 290 sgq. 

Cake, St. Michael's, i. 149, 154 2.3; 
salt, divination by, 238 sg. ; the Yule 
or Christmas, 257, 259, 261 

Cakes, Hallowe'en, i. 238, 241, 245; 
Beltane, 148 sy., 150, 152, 153. 154, 
155; divination by, 242, 243 

Calabar, soul of chief in sacred grove 
at, ii. 161; negroes of, their belief 
in external or bush souls lodged in 
animals, 204 sgg., 220, 222 ”.°; the 
fattening-house for girls in, 259 

Calabria, holy water at Easter in, i. 123 

Calamities, almost all, set down to witch- 
craft, ii. 19 sg. 

Calendar, change in the Chinese, i. 137; 
Mohammedan, 216 sg., 218 sg. ; the 
Julian, used by Mohammedans, 218 
sg.; the reform of, in relation to 
floral superstitions, ii. 55 7.1 

Calendars, conflict of, i. 218 

Calendeau, calignau, the Yule-log, i. 250 

Calf burnt alive to stop a murrain, i. 
300 sg. 

California, seclusion of girls at puberty 
among the Indians of, i. 41 sgg. ; 
ordeals among the Indians of, 64; 
the Senal Indians of, ii. 295; the 
Maidu Indians of, 295, 298 

Callander, the parish of, Beltane fires 
in, i, 150 sgg.; Hallowe'en fires in, 
231 

Calves burnt to stop disease in the herds, 
i. 301, 306 

Calymnos, a Greek island, superstition 
as to menstruous women in, i. 96 sg. ; 
Midsummer fires in, 212 

Cambodia, seclusion of girls at puberty 
in, i. 70; ritual at cutting a parasitic 
orchid in, ii, 81 

Cambodian or Siamese story of the 
external soul, ii. 102 

Cambridgeshire, witch as cat in, i. 317 

Cambus o’ May, near Ballater, holed 
stone at, ii. 187 

Cameroons, life of person bound up with 
tree in the, ii. 161; theory of the ex- 
ternal soul in, 200, 202 sg. 


332 


Camomile (Anthemis nobilis) burnt in 
Midsummer fire, i. 213; sacred to 
Balder, ii. 63; gathered at Midsummer, 
63 

Campbell, Rev. 
Ist 2. 

Campbell, Rev. John, on Coranna cus- 
toms, ii. 192, 192 ”.1 

Campo di Giove, in the Abruzzi, Easter 
candles at, i. 122 

Candle, the Easter or Paschal, i. rer, 
122, 125; divination by the flame of 
a, 229; the Yule or Christmas, 255, 
256, 260; external soul in a, ii, 125 
Sq. 


J. G., on deiseal, i. 


and apple, biting at, i. 
243, 245 

Candlemas in the Armenian church, bon- 
fires at, i. 131; the Yule log at, 256 
n. 


241, 242, 


candles, i. 264 2.4 
Candles used to keep off witches, i. 
245 


Canopus and Sirius in Bushman lore, i. 
333 
Capart, Jean, on palettes found in 


Egyptian tombs, ii. 155 2 

Cape York Peninsula in Queensland, i. 
37, 38 

Caper-spurge (Euphorbia lathyris) identi- 
fied with mythical springwort, ii. 69 

Capital of column, external soul in, ii. 
156 sq. 

Capitol at Rome, the oak of Jupiter on 
the, ii. 89 

Cappadocia, the fire-walk at Castabala 
in, ii. 14 

Capri, feast of the Nativity of the Virgin 
in, i, 220 sg. 

Capricorn, time when the sun enters the 
tropic of, ii. x 

Caps worn in mourning, i. 20 

Cardiganshire, Hallowe'en in, i. 226 

Caribs, their theory of the plurality of 
souls, ii. 221 

Carinthia, new fire at ‘Easter i in, i. 124 

Caripunas Indians of Brazil, use of bull- 
roarers among the, ii. 230 2. 

Carmichael, Alexander, on need-fire, i. 
293 sgg. ; on snake stones, ii. 311 

Carn Brea, in Cornwall, Midsummer 
fires on, i. 199 

Carnarvonshire, the cutty black sow in, 
i. 240 

Carnival, effigy burnt at end of, i. 120; 
wicker giants at the, ii. 35 

Carnmoor, in Mull, need-fire kindled on, 
i. 289 sg. 

Carnwarth, in Cornwall, 
fires at, i. 199 

Caroline Islands, traditionary origin of 
fire in the, ii. 295 


Midsummer 


INDEX 


Carpathian Mountains, Midsummer fires 
on the, i. 175; need-fire in the, 281; i 
the Huzuls of the, ii. 49 

Carrier Indians of North- Weste 1 
America, funeral custom of the, i, 11; 
their dread and seclusion of menstruous 
women, 91 sgqg.; their honorific totems, — 
ii. 273 599. 

Carver, Captain Jonathan, his description 
of the rite of death and resurrection, — 
ii. 267 sq. F 

Casablanca, Midsummer fires at, i. 214 — 

Cashmeer stories of the external soul, ii. 
100 sg., 138 2.1 ; 

Caspar, Balthasar, and Melchior, the 
Three Holy Kings, ii. 68 

Cassel, in France, wicker giants on 
Shrove Tuesday at, ii. 35 ’ 

Cassowaries, men disguised as, in Duk- 
duk ceremonies, ii. 247 § 

Castabala, in Cappadocia, the fire-walk 
at, ii, 14 4 

Castiglione a Casauria, 
customs at, i. 210 

Castle Ditches, i in the Vale of Guncal 
bonfires at, i. 156 

Castres, in Southern France, ii. 187 i 

Cat, a representative of the devil, ii. 40 ; 
story of a clan whose souls were all | 
in one, 150 sg. ; a Batta totem, 223. 
See also Cats 

Caterpillars, bonfires as a protection ~ 
against, i, 114 : 

Catholic Church, its consecration o 
the Midsummer festival to St, John- 
the Baptist, i. 181 

Cato on a Roman cure for dislocation, 
ii. 177 

Cats burnt in bonfires, i. 109, ii. 39° 
sg,; perhaps burnt as witches, 41; 
witches changed into, i. 315 ”.}, 3171 
318, 319 sg., ii, 311 sg. . 

Cattle sacrificed at holy oak, i. 181; | 
protected against sorcery by sprigs of © 
mullein, 190 ; fire carried round, 201, 
206 ; driven out to pasture in spring” . 
and back in autumn, 223; acq 
the gift of speech on Christmas Eve, 
254; driven through the need-fire, 
270 sgg.; killed by fairy darts, 303; 
lighted brands carried round, 341; 
thought to benefit by festivals of fire, 
ii. 4, 7; fumigated with smoke of 
Midsummer herbs, 53 

and sheep driven through, round 

or between bonfires, i. 108, 109, 141, 

154, 157; 158, 159, 165, 175, 176,) 

179, 185, 188, 192, 202, 203, 204, 

301, ii. 8, 9, 12 sg., 13 if 

disease, the Midsummer fires a 

protection against, i. 176; attributed 

to witchcraft, 302 sg., 343 


Midsummer | 


le-plague, need-fire kindled as a 
“remedy for, i. 270 sgg. ; sacrifice of 
an animal to stay a, 300 59g. 
—— -rearing tribes of South Africa, 
_ their dread of menstruous women, i. 
79 $4. 
Cave, initiation of medicine-men by 
_ Spirits in a, ii. 237 sgg. 
— of Cruachan, the ‘‘ Hell-gate of 
_ Ireland,”’ i. 226 

edar-bark, red, used in ceremonies of 
_ a secret society, ii. 271 
Macassar in, i. 14; souls of 
_ persons removed for safety from their 
bodies in, ii. 153 sg. 
——, Central, the Toradjas of, i. 312 


Ceilebdes 


, Southern, birth-trees in, ii. 164 
elibacy of the Vestal Virgins, i. 138 2.5 
tic bisection of the year, i. 223 
population, their superstition as to 
Snake Stones, i. 15 
- stories of the external soul, ii. 
_ 126 sqg: 
‘Celts, their two great fire-festivals on the 
_ Eve of May Day and Hallowe'en, i. 
_* 222, 224; the oak worshipped by the, 
li. 89 
—, the British, their chief fire-festivals, 
- Beltane and Hallowe'en, ii. 40 sg. 
- of Brittany, their use of mistletoe, 
- of Gaul, their human sacrifices, ii. 
_ 32 sg.; the victims perhaps witches 
' and wizards, 41 sg. ; W. Mannhardt’s 
_ theory, 43 
8 of Ireland, their new fire on 
_ Hallowe'en, i. 139 
- of northern Italy, ii. 320 
ts (prehistoric implements) called 
**« thunderbolts,”’ i, 14 sg. 
entral Provinces of India, cure for 
_ fever in the, ii. 190 
Coos, Greek island of, sick children 
| passed through a cleft oak in, ii. 172 
eram, seclusion of girls at puberty in, 
i. 36; belief that strength of young 
people is in their hair in, ii. 158; 
rites of initiation to the Kakian associa- 
tion in, 249 sqq. 
eremony, magical, to ensure fertility of 
_ women, i. 23 sg., 31 
_ Cetraro in Easter custom at, 
we i, 123 
Ceylon, the king of, and his external 
soul, ii. 102 
Chaco , the Gran, i. 58 ; marriage cus- 
tom of Indians of the, i. 75 ; Indians 
of the, i. 98 2.1 
——,, the Paraguayan, i. 56 
» Chadwick, Professor H. M., i. 103 2. 
_ Chaka, Zulu king, ii. 212 7. 


INDEX 


333 


Chalk, white, bodies of newly initiated 
lads coated with, ii. 241 

Chambers, E. K., on the Celtic bisec- 
tion of the year, i. 223 

‘*Charcoal Man” at Midsummer, ii. 
26 n.? 

Charente Inférieure, department of, 
St. John's fires in the, i. 192 

Chariot, patient drawn through the 
yoke of a, ii. 192 

Chariots used by sacred persons, i. 4 
n+ 

Charlemagne, i. 270 

Chaste young men kindle need-fire, i. 
273 

Chastity associated with abstinence from 
salt, i. 27 sg. 

Chateau-Tierry, Midsummer fires at, i. 
187 sg. 

Chatham Islands, birth-trees in the, ii. 
165 

Chavandes, bonfires, i. 109 2.? 

Cheadle, in Staffordshire, the Yule log 
at, i, 256 

Cheese, the Beltane, kept as a charm 
against the bewitching of milk-produce, 
i. 154 

Chéne-Doré, ‘*the gilded oak,’’in Perche, 
ii. 287 2.1 

Chepstow oak, in Gloucestershire, ii. 316 

Cheremiss of the Volga, their Midsummer 
festival, i. 181 

Cherokees, their sacred arks, i. 11 sg. ; 
their ideas as to trees struck by light- 
ning, ii. 296 sg. 

Cherry-tree wood used for Yule log, i. 
250 

—— -trees, torches thrown at, i. 108 

Chervil-seed burnt in Midsummer fire, 
1, 213 

Chesnitsa, Christmas cake, i. 261 

Chester, Midsummer giants at, ii. 37 

Chevannes, bonfires, i. 111 2.4 

Cheyenne Indians, seclusion of girls at 
puberty among the, i. 54 s¢. 

women secluded at menstruation, 
i. 89 

Chiaromonte, Midsummer custom at, i. 
210 

Chibisa, an African chief, ii. 314 

Chicha, a native intoxicant, i. 57, 58 

Chicory, the white flower of, opens all 
locks, ii. 71 

Chiefs daughter, ceremonies observed 
by her at puberty, i. 30, 43 

Chikumbu, a Yao chief, ii. 314 

Chilblains, the Yule log a preventive of, 
i. 250 

Childbirth, customs observed by women 
after, i. 20 

Childless couples leap over bonfires to 
procure offspring, i. 214, 338 


334 


Childless women creep through a holed 
stone, ii. 187 

Children live apart from their parents 
among the Baganda, i. 23 2.2; born 
feet foremost, curative power attributed 
to, 295; passed across the Midsummer 
fires, 182, 189 sg., 192, 203 ; passed 
through holes in’ ground. or turf to 
cure them, ii. 190 sg. 

Chillingworth, Thomas, passed through 
a cleft ash-tree for rupture, ii. 168 sg. 

Chimney, witches fly up the, ii. 74 

-piece, divination by names on, i. 
237 

China, were-wolves in, i. 310 sg. ; annual 
ceremony of the new fife in, 136 sg., 
ii. 3; use of fire to bar ghosts in, 
I7 sg.; spirits of plants in snake 
form in, 44 2.1; use of mugwort in, 60 

Chinese festival of fire, ii. 3 sgg. ; story of 
the external soul, 145 sg. ; theories as 
to the human soul, 221 

Chinook Indians, seclusion of girls at 
puberty among the, i. 43 

Chippeway Indians, their dread and 
seclusion of menstruous women, i. 


go sg. 

Chiquites Indians of Paraguay, their 
theory of sickness, ii. 226 7.4 

Chirbury, in Shropshire, the Yule log at, 
i. 257 

Chiriguanos of Bolivia, seclusion of girls 
at puberty among the, i. 56 

Choctaw women secluded at menstrua- 
tion, i. 88 

Chopping-knife, soul of woman in child- 
birth transferred for safety to a, ii. 
153 Sg. 

Chota Nagpur, the fire-walk in, ii. 5 

Chouquet, in Normandy, the Green Wolf 
at, i, 185 

Christbrand, the Yule log, i. 248 

Christenburg Crags, in Northumberland, 
Midsummer fires at, i. 198 

Christian Church, its treatment of witches, 
ii. 42 

Christklotz, the Yule log, i. 248 

Christmas, an old pagan festival of the 
sun, i. 246, 331 sg.; new fire made 
by the friction of wood at, 264; 
mistletoe gathered at, ii. 291 

cake, i. 257, 259, 261 

candle, the, i. 255, 256, 260 

Eve, cattle acquire the gift of 

speech on, i. 254; trees fumigated 

with wild thyme on, ii. 64; the fern 

blooms at, 66; witches dreaded on, 73 ; 

sick children passed through cleft trees 

on, 172 

night, fern-seed blooms on, ii. 289 

—- pig, i. 259 

visiter, the, i. 261 sg., 263, 264 


INDEX 


Church, the Christian, its treatment c 
witches, ii. 42 
bells on Midsummer Eve, custon 
as to ringing, ii. 47 sg. ; rung to driv 
away witches, 73 
Churches used as places of divination a 
Hallowe'en, i. 229 
Churinga, sacred sticks and stones o 
the Arunta, ii. 218 7.8, 234 
Chu-Tu-shi, a Chinese were-tiger, 
310 5g. 
Ciotat, Midsummer rites of fire and water 
at, i. 194 q 
Circumambulating fields with lighted 
torches, i. 233 sg. q 
Circumcision, custom at, among the 
Washamba, ii. 183; of lads at initia- 
tion in Australia, 227 sg., 233, 2340 
235; in New Guinea, 240 sg.; in 
Fiji, 243 sg. ; in Rook, 246; custom 
of, on the Lower Congo, 251, 255 2.) 
Clach-nathrach, serpent stone, ii. grr 
Clam shell, sacred, of the Omahas, i. 11 
Clan of the Cat, ii. 150 sg. 4 
Clappers, used instead of church bells in 
Holy Week, i. 125; wooden, used in | 
China, 137 Ei 
Classificatory system of relationship, ii. 
234 7.1, 314 2.4 j 
Claudius, the emperor, i. 15 
Clavie, the burning of the, at Burghead, _ 
i. 266 sg. { 
Clay plastered on girls at puberty, i. 31; 
white, bodies of novices at initiation © 
smeared with, ii. 255 2.1, 259 
Cleary, Bridget, burnt as a witch in | 
Tipperary, i. 323 sg. S| 
——, Michael, burns his wife as a witch, 4 
i, 323 Sg. _ 
Clee, in Lincolnshire, the Yule log at, 
1, 257 a 
—— Hills, in Shropshire, fear of witch- — 
craft in the, i. 342 2.4 
Cleft stick, passage through a, in con- 
nexion with puberty and circumcision, 
ii, 183 sg. a 
Climacteris scandens, women's ‘‘ sister” 
among the Kulin, ii. 216 : 
sig Edward, on the external soul, | 
i. 96 2.1} 
Clog, the Yule, i. 247 
Clonmel, trial for witch-burning at, i. 324 
Clover, four-leaved, a counter-charm for 
witchcraft, i. 316; found at Mid-~ 
summer, ii. 62 5g. 
Clue of yarn, divination by a, i. 235, © 
240, 241, 243 f 
Coal, magical, that turns to gold at — 
Midsummer, ii. 60 sg. i 
Coast Murring tribe of New South Wales, © 
the drama of resurrection exhibited to ~ 
novices at initiation in the, ii. 235 sgg. 


4 


, effigy burnt at, i. 120 
entz, i. 248 
s Polonica and St, John's blood, ii. 


“ook effigy of, in bonfire, i 111; a 
_ black, used as counter-charm to witch- 
craft, 321 ; white, burnt in Midsummer 
_ bonfire, ii. 40; external soul of ogre 
in a, 100; killed on harvest-field, 
- 280 2.; red, killed to cure person 
_ struck by lightning, 298 2.? 
—— or hen, striking blindfold at a, ii. 
Cock’s blood poured on divining-rod, ii. 
“eet 
; , external soul in a golden, 
: i. i 
Cockchafers, witches as, i. 322 
pco-nut, soul of child deposited in a, 
© i. 154 5g. 
2 palm planted over navel-string and 
' afterbirth of child, ii. 161, 163, com- 
B rere 164 ; attracts lightning, 299 2.” 
rington, Dr. R. H., on the Melanesian 
: i iecectics of the ‘external soul, ii. 
q 197 59g. 
Coel Coeth, Hallowe'en gages i. 239 
;S Si. 328-2. 
So sick children passed through a, ii. 
. 285 5g. 
Cold food, festival of the, in China, i. 137 
Cole, Lieut.-Colonel H. W.G., on a 
_ custom of the Lushais, ii, 185 sg. 
Colic, popular remedies for, i. 17; leap- 
' ing over bonfires as a preventive of, 
| 107, 1955g., 344; attributed to witch- 


Lo nen 


& » 344 

‘Coll, the Hole Stone in the island of, 
fii. 187 
Col an old Servian goddess, i. 259 
e, St. John’s fourteen Midsummer 


d@’Ain, i. 114 
‘Comminges, Midsummer fires in, i. 192 


= 5g. : 

mmunity, welfare of, bound up with 

the life of the divine king, i. x sg. ; 

ha purified in the persons of its repre- 

" sentatives, ii. 24 
‘Condé, in Normandy, i. 266 
Sonductivity, electric, of various kinds 

of wood, ii. 299 2.” 

ations, bonfires supposed to 

protect against, i. 107, 108, 140, 142, 
- 344; brands of Midsummer bonfires 
_ thought to be a protection against, 165, 
_ 174, 183, 188, 196; the Yule log a 

f protection against, 248 sg., 250, 255, 
_ 256, 258; Midsummer flowers a pro- 
_ tection against, ii. 48; mountain arnica 


ontiag 


INDEX 


335 


a protection against, 58; oak-mistletoe 
a protection against, 85 

Conflict of calendars, solar and lunar, 
i. 218 

Congo, seclusion of girls at puberty on 
the Lower, i. 31; birth-trees on the, 
161 sg.; theory of the external soul on 
the, ii. 200; use of bull-roarers on the, 
229 

, the French, the Fans of, ii. 161 

——., the Lower, rites of initiation on 
the, ii. 251 sgq. 

Connaught, Midsummer fires in, i. 203 ; 
cave of Cruachan in, 226; palace of 
the kings of, ii. 127 

Connemara, Midsummer fires in, i. 203 

Constance, the Lake of, ii. 26 

Constantinople, column at, ii. 157 

Consumption, ashes of the Midsummer 
fires a cure for, i 194 sg.; transferred 
to bird, ii. 187 

Consumptive patients passed through 
holes in stones or rocks, ii, 186 sg. 

Continence as preparation for walking 
through fire, ii. 3 

Conty, Lenten fires at, i. 113 

Conway, Professor R. S., on the ety- 
mology of Soranus, ii. 15 2.1 

Cook, A. B., on the oak of Errol, ii. 
284 n.} 

Cook, menstruous women not allowed to, 
i, 80, 82, 84, 90 

Copper needle, story of man who could 
only be killed by a, ii. 314 

Corannas, a Hottentot people, children 
after an illness passed under an arch 
among the, ii. 192 

Cords tied tightly round the bodies of 
girls at puberty, i. 92 2.1 

Corea, custom observed after childbirth 
by women in, i. 20; use of torches to 
ensure good crops in, 340 

Cormac, on Beltane fires, i. 157 

Cor-mass, procession of wicker giants at 
Dunkirk, ii. 34 

Corn, charm to make the corn grow 
tall, i. 18; thrown on the man who 
brings in the Yule log, 260, 262, 264 ; 
blazing besoms flung aloft to make 
the corn grow high, 340 

-spirit in last standing corn, i. 12; 
human representatives of, put to death, 
ii. 25; in animal shape, 43 

Cornel-tree wood used to kindle need- 
fire, i. 286 

Cornwall, Snake Stones in, i. 15, 16 2.1; 
Midsummer fires in, 199 sg.; burnt 
sacrifices to stay cattle-disease in, 300 
sq.; holed stone through which people 
used to creep in, li. 187 

Corpse, priest of Earth forbidden to see 
a, i. 4 


336 


Corpus Christi Day, processions on, i. 
165 

Corréze and Creuse, departments of, St. 
John’s fires in the, i. 190 

Corsica, Midsummer fires in, i. 209 

Cos, effigies of Judas burnt at Easter in, 
i. 130; Midsummer fires in, 212 

Cosquin, E., on helpful animals and 
external souls in folk-tales, ii. 133 2.1 

Cosse de Nau, the Yule log, i. 251 

Costa Rica, Indians of, their customs in 
fasts, i, 20; ceremonial uncleanness 
among the, 65 2.1; the Bri-bri Indians 
of, 86; the Guatusos of, ii. 230 7. 

Coudreau, H., quoted, i. 63 sg. 

Coulommiers, in France, notion as to 
mistletoe at, ii. 316 2.1 

Counter-charm for witchcraft, 
above the breath,” i, 316 7.? 

Couples married within the year obliged 
to dance by torchlight, i. 115, 339 

Coventry, Midsummer giants at, ii, 37 

Cows, witches steal milk from, i. 343; 
mistletoe given to, ii. 86; milked 
through a hole in a branch or a 
‘* witch’s nest,” 185 

Crackers burnt to frighten ghosts, ii. 17, 
18 

Cracow, Midsummer fires in the district 
of, i. 175 

Cream, ceremony for 
262 

Creek Indians, their dread of menstruous 
women, i. 88 

Creeping through a tunnel as a remedy 
for an epidemic, i. 283 sg.; through 
cleft trees as cure for various maladies, 
ii, 170 sgg.; through narrow openings 
in order to escape ghostly pursuers, 
177 599. 

Creuse and Corréze, departments of, St. 
John’s fires in the, i. 190 

Criminals shorn to make them confess, 
ii. 158 sg. 

Croatia, Midsummer fires in, i. 178 

Croats of Istria, their belief as to the 
activity of witches on Midsummer Eve, 
gs 

Crocodile, a Batta totem, ii. 223 

Crocodiles, fat of, i. 14; lives of persons 
bound up with those of, ii. 201, 202, 
206, 209; external human souls in, 
207, 209 

Cronus, cakes offered to, i. 153 2. 

Crops supposed to be spoiled by men- 
struous women, i. 79, 96; leaping over 
bonfires to ensure good, 107; Mid- 
summer fires thought to ensure good, 
188, 336; torches swung by eunuchs 
to ensure good, 340; bull-roarers 
sounded to promote the growth of the, 
ii, 232 


‘* scoring 


thickening, i. 


INDEX 


Cross River natives, their lives bound up 
with those of certain animals, ii. 202 
Sq. 204 

-roads, ceremonies at, i. 24; witches 
at, 160 z.1; Midsummer fires lighted 
at, 172, 191; ; divination at, 229; 
bewitched things burnt at, 322 

Crosses chalked up to protect houses 
and cattle-stalls against witches, i. 
160 7.}, ii. 74 : 

Crow, hooded, sacrifice to, i. 152 

Crowdie, a dish of milk and meal, i. 237 

Crown or garland of flowers in Mid- 
summer bonfire, i. 184, 185, 188, 
192; of Roses, festival of the, 195. 
See also Flowers 

Cruachan, the herdsman or king of, 
Argyleshire story of, ii, 127 sgg.; in 
Connaught, the cave of, i. 226 4 

Cryptocerus atratus, F., stinging ants, i. 
62 

Cuissard, Ch., on Midsummer fires, i. 
182 sg. ; 

Cumae, the Sibyl at, i. 99 

Cumanus, inquisitor, ii. 158 j 

Cumberland, Midsummer fires in, i. 197 © 

Cups, special, used by girls at puberty, 
i. 50, 53 

Curative powers ascribed to persons born 
feet foremost, i. 295 ' 

Cures, popular, prescribed by Marcellus” 
of Bordeaux, i. 17 

Cursing a mist in Switzerland, i. 280 

Cuzco, ceremony of the new fire in, i. 
132 | 

Cycle of thirty years (Druidical), ii. 77 

Cycles of sixty years (Borotian, Indian, 
and Tibetan), ii. 77 2.3 

Cythnos, Greek island, sickly children 
pushed through a hole in a rock in, 
ii. 189 4 

Czechs cull simples at Midsummer, ii, 


49 


Dacotas or Sioux, ritual of death and 
resurrection among the, ii. 268 sg. 
Daedala, Boeotian festival of the Great, 
ii. 77 2.4 
Dairy, mistletoe used to make the da 
thrive, ii. 86 
Daizan, king of Atrae, i. 83 4 
Dalhousie Castle, the Edgewell Tree at, 
ii. 166 4 
Dalmatia, the Yule log in, i. 263 
Dalyell, J. G., on Beltane, i. 149 7.7 
Damun, in German New Guinea, cere-— 
mony of initiation at, ii. 193 q 
Danae, the story of, i. 73 5g. a 
Dance at Sipi in Northern India, i, 12; : 
of young women at puberty, ii, 1837 
in the grave at initiation, 237; ie 
honour of the big or grey wolf, 276 2. 


rf. 
$3 


I, i. 8 sg. ; of Duk-duk society, 
of girls at puberty, 28, 29, 30, 
42, 50, 58, 59; round bonfires, 
08, 109, TIO, III, 114, 116, 120, 
431, 142, 145, 148, 153 sg., 159, 166, 
» 173, 175, 178, 182, 183, 185, 
, 188, 189, I9QI, 193, 194, 195, 
» 246, ii. 2, 39; masked, bull- 
used at, 230 . ; of novices at 


with the fairies at Hallowe'en, 
ions gathered at Midsummer, ii. 


aeons i 277 Sg. 
ngers thought to attend women at 


mish 


ee 59g. 

—— story of a girl who was forbidden 

‘to see the.sun, i. 70 sgg. 

imserosse OF danseresse, a stone, i. 110 
worship of Grannus on the, i. 


the immortal lady of, i. 100 
ne gnidium gathered at Midsummer, 


» O., om ritual of death and 

rection at initiation in the Belli- 
ro society, ii. 257 59g. 
mulun, a mythical being who insti- 
ed and superintends the initiation 
‘of lads in Australia, ii. 228, 233, 237 ; 
his voice heard in the sound of the 
-roarer, 228. See also Thrumalun 
Ss ieapenape 
g Knife,” pretence of death and 
- resurrection at initiation to the, ii. 274 


Pring River, the Ualaroi of the, ii. 


2 3 Rajah, Hindoo god, ii. 6 

owen, in Wales, Midsummer fires at, 
i. 201 
ya ¢ Charles, on the cooling of the 
"sun, a 307 
in, Sir Francis, on the Golden 
‘3 Bough i ii. 318, 319 2.3 


of churns, witches ride on, ii. 


73.59. 
at of Chinese festival changed, i. 137 
king of Ireland, and his Druid, 
“i 228 59. 

es, J. Ceredig, as to witches in 
Wales, i. 321 2.2 

awn of the Day, prayers to the, i 50 
‘8g-, 53; prayer of adolescent girl to 
4 98 x.) 


lawson, James, on sex totems in Victoria, 
ii. 216 


_ ‘PT. VIL VOL. 


INDEX 


of fasting men and women at | Dead, festival of the, i. 223 sg., 225 sg. ; 


337 


souls of the, sit round the Midsummer 
fire, 183, 184 ; sacrifice of reindeer to 
the, ii. 178; imcarnate in serpents, 
211 sg.; bull-roarers sounded at 
festivals of the, 230 z.; first-fruits 
offered to the souls of the, 243 

** Death, carrying out,” i. 119; ‘‘the 
De oe 119; effigies of, burnt in 
spring fires, ii. 21 sg. ; omens of, 54, 
64; customs observed by mourners 
after a death in order to escape from 
the ghost, 174 sgg.; identified with 
the sun, 174 n.} 

Death and resurrection, ritual of, ii, 225 
$gg.; in Australia, 227 sgg.; in New 
Guinea, 239 sgg.; in Fiji, 243 sg. ; 
in Rook, 246; in New Britain, 246 
SQ. 5 in Ceram, 249 599. ; in Africa, 


December, the last day of, Hogmanay, 
i. 266; the twenty-first, St. Thomas's 
Day, 266 

Decle, L., quoted, i. 4 2.3 

Dee, holed stone used by childless women 
in the Aberdeenshire, ii. 187 

Deer and the family of Lachlin, super- 
stition concerning, ii. 284 

Deffingin, in Swabia, Midsummer bon- 
fires at, i. 166 sg. 

Dehon, P., on witches as cats among the 
Oraons, ii. 312 

Deiseal, deisheal, dessil, the right-hand 
turn, in the Highlands of Scotland, i. 
150 2.1, 154 

Delagoa Bay, the Thonga of, i. 29 

Delaware Indians, seclusion of girls at 
puberty among the, i 54 

Delivery, charms to ensure women an - 
easy, i. 49, 50 57., 52; Women creep 
through a rifted rock to obtain an 
easy, li. 189 

Delmenhorst, in Oldenburg, Easter fires 
at, i. 142 

Delos, new fire brought from, i. 136 

Delphi, perpetual fire at, ii. 91 2.7; the 
picture of Orpheus at, 294; Stheni, 
near, 317 

Demeter, the torches of, i 340 2.'; 
serpents in the worship of, ii. 44 2. 

Demnat, in the Atlas, New Year rites 
at, i. 217, 218 

Demon supposed to attack girls at 
puberty, i. 67 sg.; festival of fire 
instituted to ban a, ii. 3 

Demons attack women at puberty and 
childbirth, i. 24 .2; expelled at the 
New Year, 134 sg. ; abroad on Mid- 
summer Eve, 172; ashes of holy 


Zz 


338 


fires a protection against, ii. 8, 17 ; 
vervain a protection against, 62 ; 
guard treasures, 65. See also Evil 
Spirits 

Déné or Tinneh Indians, their dread and 
seclusion of menstruous women, i. 
gt sgg.; the Western, tattooing among 
the, 98 2.1 See also Tinneh 

Denham Tracts, on need-fire in York- 
shire, i. 287 sg. 

Denmark, fires on St. John’s Eve in, i. 
171; passing sick children through 
a hole in the ground in, 190, 191 ; 
children passed through a cleft oak as 
a cure for rupture or rickets in, ii. 
170, 172 ; 

Dessil. See Deiseal 

Deux-Sévres, department of, Midsummer 
fires in the, i. r91; fires on All 
Saints’ Day in the, 245 sg. 

Devil, the, seen on Midsummer Eve, i. 
208 

Devil’s bit, St. John’s wort, ii. 55 7.? 

Devils, ghosts, and hobgoblins abroad 
on Midsummer Eve, i. 202 

Devonshire, need-fire in, i. 288; animals 
burnt alive as a sacrifice in, 302 ; 
belief in witchcraft in, 302; crawling 
under a bramble as a cure for whoop- 
ing-cough in, ii. 180 

Dew, rolling in the, at Midsummer, i. 
208, with 2.1; at Midsummer a 
protection against witchcraft, ii. 74 

Diana and Juno, ii. 302 2.” 

Diana, priest of, at Nemi, ii. 315 

Diana's Mirror, the Lake of Nemi, ii. 303 

Dieri of Central Australia, their dread of 
women at menstruation, i. 77; use of 
bull-roarers among the, ii. 229 sg., 
232; bleed themselves to make rain, 
232 

Dijon, Lenten fires at, i, 114 

Dingle, church of St. Brandon near, ii. 
190 

Diodorus Siculus, on the human sacrifices 
of the Celts, ii. 32 

Dioscorides on mistletoe, ii. 318 7.1 

Dipping for apples at Hallowe’en, i. 
237, 239, 241, 242, 245 

Discs, burning, thrown into the air, i. 
116 sg., 119, 143, 165, 166, 168 5g., 
172, 328, 334; burning, perhaps 
directed at witches, 345 

Disease, walking through fire as a remedy 
for, ii. 7; conceived as something 
physical that can be stripped off the 
patient and left behind, 172 

Diseases of cattle ascribed to witchcraft, 
i. 343 

Dish, external soul of warlock in a, ii. 141 

Dishes, special, used by girls at puberty, 
i. 47, 49 


INDEX 7 


Dislocation, Roman cure for, ii. 177. 
Divination on St. John’s Night (Mid. 
summer Eve), i. 173, ii. 46 7.3, 50, 
52 sgg., 61, 64, 67 sgg.; at Mid- 
summer in Spain and the Azores, i 
208 sg. ; at Hallowe'en, 225, 228 sgq. 
by stones at Hallowe'en fires, 230 
239, 240; by stolen kail, 234 » 
241; by clue of yarn, 235, 240, 2 
243; by hemp seed, 235, 241, 24 
by winnowing-basket, 236 ; by thro 
shoe, 236; by wet shirt, 236, 241 
by white of eggs, 236 sg., 238; by 
apples in water, 237; by aring, 237; 
by names on chimney-piece, 237 ; bj 
three plates or basins, 237 sg., 240 
244; by nuts in fire, 237, 239, 24f, 
242, 245; by salt cake, or salt her 
ring, 238 sg.; by the sliced apple | 
238; by eavesdropping, 238, 243 
244; by knife, 241; by briar-thorn, 
242; bymelted lead, 242; bycabbag 
242; by cake at Hallowe'en, 242, 24 ; 
by ashes, 243, 244, 245; by salt, 
244; by raking a rick, 247; 
dwindles into, 336. See aso Divini 
rod 
Divine personages not allowed to toucl 
the ground with their feet, i. 2 599. | 
not allowed to see the sun, 18 59Q. 
suspended for safety between heaven) 
and earth, 98 sq. a 
Divining-rod cut on Midsummer Eve, 
67 sgg. ; made of hazel, 67 5g., 29 
n.*; made of mistletoe in Sweden, 
69, 'a9r ; ; made of four sorts of wood, 
69; made of willow, 69 z. ; made o 
of a parasitic rowan, 281 sg. a 
Divisibility of life, doctrine of the, ii, 
221 
Dobischwald, in Silesia, need-fire at, i 
278 
Dedens. Zeus and his sacred oak at, i ; 
49 Sq. J 
Dog not allowed to enter priest's hous 
i. 4; beaten to ensure wo nan’ ; 
fertility, 69; charm against the bil 
of a mad, ii. 56; a Batta totem, 223 
Star, or Sirius, supposed by | 
ne to cause the heat of summ' : 
» 332 
Doiae, need-fire at, i. 286 
Dolmen, sick children passed throug 
hole in a, ii. 188 
Dommartin, Lenten fires at, i. 109 
spe preness for girls at puberty, | 


Bosca ‘hill of, at Burghead, i. 267 

Doors, separate, used by menstruot 
women, i. 84 

Doorway, creeping through narrow op nm 
ing in, as a cure, ii. 181 sg. a 


ey ot te Sr, 


x in, 
i. 104; Aeneas led by doves to the 
Golden Bough, 285, 316 .} 
agon at Midsummer, effigy of, ii. 37 ; 
ernal soul of a queen in a, 105; 
of the water-mill, Servian story of the, 
mat 
s driven away by smoke of Mid- 
bonfires, i. 161; St. Peter's 
es lighted to drive away, 195 
suignan, in the department of Var, 
Midsummer fires at, i. 193 
maupadi, the heroine of the Maha- 
3 oa ii. 7 
ead and seclusion of menstruous 

omen, i. 76 sgg.; dread of witch- 
craft in Europe, 342 
eam, guardian spirit or animal ac- 
uired in a, ii. 256 sq. 

aming on flowers on Midsummer 
Eve, i. 175 
ams, oracular, i. 238, 242; of love 
on Midsummer Eve, ii. 52, 54; pro- 
pheti on the bloom of the oak, 292; 
prophetic, on mistletoe, 293 
iving away the witches on Walpurgis 
Night, i. 160; at Midsummer, 170, 


# Aa 

fobede (Draupadi), the heroine of the 

Mahabharata, ii. 7 

romling district, in Hanover, need-fire 

in, i. 277 

pught attributed to misconduct of 

y ouns girls, i. 3r 

ruic erpeclogy of the word, i. 

76 n. 

widical custom of burning live animals, 

. 38; the animals perhaps deemed 

abodiments of witches, 41 5g., 43 

34.5 festivals, so-called, of the Scotch 

Hi i. 147, 206 

3 fnccifices. W. Mannhardt’s theory 
pte, 3 il. 43 

tidism, so-called, remains of, i. 233, 


a 


niancer;©rs, 


tion to witchcraft, ii. 42 
*s Glass, the, i. 16 ; prediction, the, 


Hill, the, i. 229 


INDEX 


339 


Druids, their superstition as to ‘‘ser- 
pents’ eggs,” i. 15; their human 
ii. 32 sg. ; in relation to the 
Midsummer festival, 33 sgg., 45 ; their 
worship of the mistletoe and the oak, 
76 sq., 301; their cycle of thirty years, 
77; catch the mistletoe in a white 
cloth, 293 

of Ireland, i. 157 

Drynemetum, ‘‘ the temple of the oak,” 
ii. 89 

Duck baked alive as a sacrifice in Suffolk, 
i. 304 

Duck's egg, external soul in a, ii. 109 sg., 
II5 sg., 116, 119 sg., 120, 126, 130, 
132 

Duk-duk, secret society of New Britain, 
i. 11, ii. 246 sg. 

Duke of York Island, ii. 199 2.7; Duk- 
duk society in, 247 ; exogamous classes 
in, 248 2. 

Duke Town, on the Calabar River, ii. 


209 
Dukkala, New Year customs in, i. 218 
Dumbartonshire, Hallowe'en in, i. 237 


“ae 
Dunbeath, in Caithness, i. 291 
Dunkeld, i. 232 


Dunkirk, procession of giants on Mid- 
summer Day at, ii. 34 sg. 

Durandus, G. (W. Durantis), his Ration- 
ale Divinorum Oficiorum, i. 161 

Durham, Easter candle in the cathedral 
of, i. 122 2, 

Durris, parish of, Kincardineshire, Mid- 
summer fires in the, i. 206 sg. 

Dusk of the Evening, prayers to the, 


1. 53 

Diisseldorf, Shrove Tuesday custom in 
the district of, i. 120 

Dutch names for mistletoe, ii. 319 2.1 

Dwarf-elder at Midsummer detects witch- 
craft, ii. 64 

Dyaks of Borneo, trees and plants as 
life indices among the, ii. 164 sg. ; 
their doctrine of the plurality of souls, 
222; of Landak and Tajan, marriage 
custom of the, i. 5 ; birth-trees among 
the, ii. 164; of Pinoeh, their custom 
at a birth, ii. 154 sg. 


Eagle, sacrifice to, i. 152 

—— bone, used to drink out of, i. 45 

—— clan, ii. 271, 272 2." 

—— -hawk, external soul of medicine- 
man in, li. 199 

—— -spirits and buried treasures, i. 218 

Earth, taboos observed by the priest of, 
in Southern Nigeria, i. 4; prayers to, 
50; and heaven, between, 1 sgg. 

Easter, fern-seed blooms at, ii. 292 .? 

—— candle, i. 121, 122, 125 


340 


Easter ceremonies in the New World, i. 
127 sq. 

eggs, i. 108, 143, 144 

Eve, new fire on, i, xr2z, 124, 

126, 158; the fern blooms at, ii. 66 

fires, i. 120 sgq. 

—— Man, burning the, i. 144 

—— Monday, fire-custom.on, i. 143 

—— Mountains, bonfires on, i. 140, 141 

Saturday, new fire on, i. 121, 122, 

124, 127, 128, 130; the divining-rod 

baptized on, ii. 69 

Sunday, red eggs on, i. 122 

Eavesdropping, divination by, i. 
243, 2 

Echternach in Luxemburg, Lenten fire- 
custom at, i. 116 

Eclipses attributed to monster biting the 
sun or moon, i. 70; air thought to be 
poisoned at, 162 2.; thought to be 
caused by a monster attacking the 
luminary, 162 2. 

Edda, the prose, story of Balder in, i. 
tor; the poetic, story of Balder in, 
102 

Eddesse, in Hanover, need-fire at,i. 275 sg. 

Edersleben, Midsummer fire-custom at, 
i. 169 

Edgewell Tree, oak at castle of Dalhousie, 
ii. 166, 284 

Effect, supposed, of killing a totem 
animal, ii. 220 

Effigies burnt in bonfires, i. 106, 107, 
116, 118 sg., IIg Sg., 121, 122, 159, 
167; of Judas burnt at Easter, 121, 
I27 sg., 130 sg.; burnt in the Mid- 
summer fires, 172 sy., 195; of witches 
burnt in the fires, 342, ii. 19, 43; of 
human beings burnt in the fires, 21 
sgg.; of giants burnt in the summer 
fires, 38 

Effigy of absent friend cut in a tree, ii. 
159 Sg. 

Efik, a tribe of Calabar, their belief in 
external or bush souls, ii. 206 

Egede, Hans, on impregnation by the 
moon, i. 76 

Egg broken in water, divination by means 
of, i. 208 sg. 

Eggs, charm to ensure plenty of, i. 112, 
338; begged for at Midsummer, 169; 
divination by white of, 236 sg., 238; 
external souls of fairy beings in, ii. 
106 sgg., IO, 125, 132 Sg., 140 5g. 

, Easter, i. 108, 122, 143, 144 

Egypt, the Flight into, ii. 69 ~.; deified 
kings of, their souls deposited during 
life in portrait statues, 157 


238, 


/ Egyptian, ancient, story of the external 


soul, ii. 134 sgg. 
doctrine of the 4a or external soul, 
li, 3 57.7:* 


INDEX 


¥gyptian tombs, plaques or palettes 


schist in, ii, 155 a 
Egyptians, human sacrifices among 
ii. 286 .? 
Eifel Mountains, Lenten fires in the, 
II5 5g., 336 sg.; Cobern in the, 120 
St. John’s fires in the, 169; the Yu 
log in the, 248; Midsummer flowe 
in the, ii. 48 4 
Eighty-one (nine times nine), men ma 
need-fire, i. 289, 294, 295 ; 
Eket, in North Calabar, ii. 209 : 
Ekoi, a tribe of Calabar, their belief 
external or bush souls, ii. 206 sgg. 
Elangela, external soul in Fan langua 
ii, 201, 226 2.1 5 
Elbe, the river, dangerous on Midsumme 
Day, ii. 26 a 
Elder-flowers gathered at Midsumme 
ii. 64 4 


Electric pe of various kinds 
wood, ii. 299 2. 

Elephant hunters, custom of, i. 5 = 

Elephants, lives of persons bound wu 
with those of, ii, 202, 203; extern 
human souls in, 207 

Elgin, medical use of mistletoe in, ii. 84 

Elk clan of the Omaha Indians, i, rr _ 

Elm wood used to kindle need-fire, © 


299 ; 
Embers of bonfires planted in fields, i 
117, 121; stuck in cabbage gardens 
174, 175; promote growth of crop: 
337. See also Ashes and Sticks 
charred g 
of Midsummer fires a prot 
against conflagration, i. 188; a pro) 
tection against lightning, 190 Bp: 
Emily plain of Central Australia, ii) 
238 ¥ 
Emmenthal, in Switzerland, superstitior 
as to Midsummer Day in the, ii. 27 
use of orpine at Midsummer in 
62 2. : 
Emu fat not allowed to touch the ground, 
i, 13 A 
-wren, called men’s 
among the Kurnai, ii. 215 7.1, of 
218 : 
Encounter Bay tribe in South Aus 
their dread of women at menstruation, 
i. 76 
Energy, sanctity and uncleanness, ¢ 
ferent forms of the same nye 


97 Sg- 

England, belief as to menstruous women 
in, i, 96 2.1; Midsummer fires it 
196 59g.; the Yule log in, 255 
the need-fire in, 286 sgg.; Midsummer 
giants in, ii. 36 sgg.; divination by) 
orpine at Midsummer in, 61; fer 


ed at Midsummer in, 65; the north 
, mistletoe used to make the dairy 
TT in, 85 sg.; birth-trees in, 165; 
hild en passed through cleft ash-trees 
S a cure for rupture or rickets in, 168 
g.; oak-mistletoe in, 316 
list h cure for whooping-cough, rheu- 
, and boils, ii. 180 
F Aoafices at, i. 108 é 
, external soul in, ii. 146 sg., 
i ic of Kings, Firdusi’s, i. 104 
jidemic, creeping through a tunnel as 
Eremody for an, i. 283 sg. 
ilepsy, yellow mullein a protection 
against, ii. 63; mistletoe a cure for, 
Zé , 83, 84 
, Lenten fires at, i. 109 
ay, fairies at Hallowe'en in, i. 
226; salt cake at Hallowe'en in, 
oa 5q. 
, the Hays of, their fate bound up 
h oak-mistletoe, ii. 283 sg. 
ion or Scouvion, the Great and 
Little, i. 108 
squimaux, their superstition as to various 
meats, i. 13 sg. ; seclusion of girls at 
puberty among the, 55; ceremony of 
new fire among the, 134; their 
ustom at eclipses, 162 7. 
—— of Alaska, child’s soul deposited in 
‘a bag among the, ii. 155 
— of Bering Strait, their belief as to 
‘menstruous women, i. 91 
sthonia, bathing at Midsummer in, ii. 
2935 flowers gathered for divination 
nd = at Midsummer in, 53 sg. 
s thonians, Midsummer fires among the, 
i. 579 5g. 3 of Oesel cull St. John’s 
_ herbs on St. John’s Day, ii. 49 
eobutads as umbrella-bearers at the 
EB testival of Scira, i. 20 2.1 
ton, Midsummer fires at, i. 197 
nuchs perform a ceremony for the 
3 ny of the fields, i. 340 
phorbia lathyris, caper-spurge, ii. 69 
ou pases, his play on Meleager, ii. 103 
n.? 
Europe, superstitions as to menstruous 
- women in, i. 96 sg. ; the fire-festivals 
of, 106 sgg.; great dread of witch- 
> craft in, 342; birth-trees in, ii. 165 ; 
belief in, that strength of witches and 
_ wizards is in their hair, 158 
Eurydice, Orpheus and, ii. 294 
ive of Samhain (Hallowe'en) in Ireland, 
__ i. 139 
Everek (Caesarea), in Asia Minor, creep- 
fing through a rifted rock at, ii. 189 
tvil eye, protection against, i. 17 
- spirit, mode of cure for possession 
_ by an, ii. 186 


INDEX 


snd 


Evil spirits driven away at the New 
Year, i. 134 sg. ; kept off by fire, 282, 
285 sg. ; St. John’s herbs a protection 
against, ii. 49; kept off by flowers 
gathered at Midsummer, 53 5g. ; creep- 
ing through cleft trees to escape the 
pursuit of, 173 sgg. See also Demons 

Ewe negroes, their dread of menstruous 
women, i. 82 

Exogamous classes in Duke of York 
island, ii. 248 z. 

Exorcizing vermin with torches, i. 340 

Exorcism of evil spirits, i 5; and 
ordeals, 66; at Easter, 123; use of 
St. John’s wort in, ii. 55; use of 
mugwort in, 60; by vervain, 62 z.4 

Expulsion of demons, annual, i. 135 

External soul in folk-tales, ii. 95 sg@. ; 
in folk-custom, 153 sgg. ; in inanimate 
things, 153 sgg. ; in plants, 159 sgg. ; 
in animals, 196 sgg.; kept in totem, 
220 sgg. See also Souls, External 

Extinction of common fires before the 
kindling of the need-fire, i. 271, 272, 
273, 274, 275, 276, 277 5g-, 279, 283, 
285, 288, 289, 289 sg., 291, 291 5g., 
292, 294, 297, 298 sg. ; ceremonial, 
of fires, ii. 297 sg. 

Eye, the evil, cast on cattle, i. 302, 303 ; 
oleander a protection against the, ii. 51 

Eyes, looking through flowers at the 
Midsummer fire, thought to be good 
for the, i. 162, 163, 165 sg., 171, 174 
Sq. 344; ashes or smoke of Mid- 
summer fire supposed to benefit the, 
214 sg. ; sore, attributed to witchcraft, 
344; mugwort a protection against 
sore, ii. 59; of newly initiated lads 
closed, 241 

Eyre, E. J., on menstruous women in 
Australia, i. 77 


‘«Faery dairts’’ thought to kill cattle, 
i. 303 

Failles, bonfires, i. 111 2.4 

Fair, great, at Uisnech in County Meath, 
i. 158 

Fairies let loose at Hallowe'en, i. 224 
sqgq.; carry off men’s wives, 227; at 
Hallowe'en, dancing with the, 227; 
thought to kill cattle by their darts, 
303; active on Hallowe’en and May 
Day, ii. 184 2.4, 185 

Fairy changelings, i. 151 2. ; mistletoe 
a protection against, ii. 283 

Falcon stone, at Errol, in Perthshire, ii. 
283 

Falkenstein chapel of St. Wolfgang, 
creeping through a rifted rock near 
the, ii. 189 

Falling sickness, mistletoe a remedy for, 
ii, 83, 84 


342 


Famenne in Namur, Lenten fires in, i. 
108 

Familiar spirits of wizards in boars, ii. 
196 sg. 

Fans of the French Congo, birth-trees 
among the, ii. 161 

of the Gaboon, their theory of the 

external soul, ii. 200 sgg., 226 n.!; 

guardian spirits acquired in dreams 

among the, 257 

of West Africa, custom at end of 
mourning among the, ii, 18 

Fast at puberty, ii. 222 7.5 

Fasting of girls at puberty, i. 56, 57, 58, 
59, 60, 61, 66; of women at men- 
struation, 93, 94; as preparation for 
gathering magical plants, ii. 45, 55 
23,58 

men and women at a dancing 
festival, i. 8 sg. 

Fasts imposed on heirs to thrones in 
South America, i. 19; rules observed 
in, 20 

Fat of emu not allowed to touch the 
ground, i. 13; of crocodiles and 
snakes as unguent, 14 

Fattening-house for girls in Calabar, ii. 
259 

Feast of Florus and Laurus on August 
18th, i. 220; of the Nativity of the 
Virgin, 220 sg. ; of All Souls, 223 sg., 
225 2.3 

Fechenots, fechenottes, Valentines, i. 110 

Feet foremost, children born, curative 
power attributed to, i, 295 

Fen-hall, i. to2 

Ferintosh district, in Scotland, i, 227 

Fern in a popular remedy, i. 17; the 
male (Aspidium jilix mas), supersti- 
tions as to, ii. 66 sg. 

owl or goatsucker, sex totem of 

women, li. 217 

-seed gathered on Midsummer Eve, 
magical properties ascribed to, ii. 65 
sgg. ; blooms on Midsummer Eve, 
287 ; blooms on Christmas Night, 288 
5g. ; reveals treasures in the earth, 287 
5sqgqg. ; brought by Satan on Christmas 
night, 289 ; gathered at the solstices, 
Midsummer Eve and Christmas, 290 
5g. ; procured by shooting at the sun 
on Midsummer Day, 291; blooms at 
Easter, 292 7.” 

Feronia, Italian goddess, ii. 14 

Ferrara, synod of, denounces practice of 
gathering fern-seed, ii. 66 7. 

Fertility of women, magical ceremony to 
ensure, i. 23 sg., 31; Of fields, pro- 
cessions with lighted torches to ensure 
the, 233 sg. ; of the land supposed to 
depend on the number of human 
beings sacrificed, ii. 32, 33, 42 sg. 


INDEX 


Fertilization of mango trees, ceremo’ 
for the, i. 10 
Fertilizing fields with ashes of Midsumm 
fires, i. 170 a 
Festival of the cold food in China, 
137; Chinese, shifted in the calendar| 
137; of the Cross on August H 
220; of the Dead, 223 sg., 225 sg. — 
Fetish, the great, in West Africa, ii, 25 
Fever, leaping over the Midsummer bon; 
fires as a preventive of, i. 166, 173, 
194; Midsummer fires a protection 
against, 190; need-fire kindled to pre 
vent, 297; cure for, in India, ii. 190 
Fey, devoted, i. 231 : 
Fez, Midsummer custom at, i. 216, ii. 31 
Field-mice, burning torches as a pro 
tection against, i. 114, I15 2 
and moles driven away by torches, 
ii. 340 5 
Fields, cultivated, menstruous wome 
not allowed to enter, i. 79; protecte 
against insects by menstruous women, 
98 2.1; processions with torches! 
through, 107 sg., I10 sgg., 113 Sgquy 
179, 339 5g.; protected against witches, 
121; made fruitful by bonfires, 140; 
fertilized by ashes of Midsummer fires, 
170; fertilized by burning wheel rolled’ 
over them, 191, 340 sg.; protected 
against hail by bonfires, 344 : 
Fig-trees, charm to benefit, i. 18; sa 
among the Fans, ii. 161 


their sex totems, ii. 215, 217 
Figo, bonfire, i. 111 
Fiji, brides tattooed in, i, 34 2.1; 
fire-walk in, ii. 10 sg. ; birth-trees i 
163; the drama of death and resur 
rection exhibited to novices at initia 
tion in, 243 sg. j 
Filey, in Yorkshire, the Yule log an 
candle at, i. 256 
Finchra, mountain in Rum, ii. 284 
Fingan Eve in the Isle of Man, i. 266 — 
Finistére, bonfires on St. John’s Day in, 
i, 183 q 
Finland, Midsummer fires in, i. 180 sg. ; 
fir-tree as life-index in, ii. 165. 5g. 
Finsch Harbour in German New Guinea, 
ii. 239 
Fir-branches, prayers to, i. 51; at Mid- 
summer, 177; Midsummer mummers 
clad in, ii. 25 sg. 
-cones, seeds of, gathered on 
John's Day, ii. 64 
-tree as life-index, ii, 165 sg. 7 
mistletoe on fir-trees, 315, 316 
-wood used to kindle need-fire, i. 
278, 282 7 
or beech used to make the Yule 
log, i. 249 


usi’s Epic of Kings, i. 104 
e, girls at puberty forbidden to see or 
go near, i. 29, 45, 46; menstruous 
women not allowed to touch or see, 
84, 85; extinguished at menstruation, 
; im fire-festivals, different possible 
lanations of its use, 112 sg. ; made 
by flints or by flint and steel, 121, 124, 
126, 127, 145, 146, 159; made bya 
burning-glass, 121, 127; made by a 
_ metal mirror, 132, 137, 138 2.5; made 
by the friction of wood, 132, 133, 135, 
' 136, 137, 138, 144 sg., 148, 155, 169 
$9.) 175, 177, 179, 220, 264, 270 599., 
335 59., li. 8, 90, 295 ; not to be blown 
_ up with breath, i. 133; year called a fire, 
1375 thought to grow weak with age, 
_ 137; pretence of throwing a man into, 
148, 186, ii. 25 ; carried round houses, 
corn, cattle, and women after child- 
_ bearing, I5r #.; used to drive away 
witches and demons at Midsummer, 
_ 170; as a protection against evil 
_ spirits, 282, 285 sg.; made by means 
_ of a wheel, 335 5¢., ii. 91 ; as a de- 
§ structive and purificatory agent, i. 
- 341; used as a charm to produce sun- 
_ shine, 341 sg. ; employed as a barrier 
_ against ghosts, ii. 17 sgg. ; as a puri- 
' ficatory agency, 19; used to burn or 
' ban witches, 19 sg. ; extinguished by 
mistletoe, 78, 84 sg., 293; of oak- 
_ wood used to detect a murderer, 92 
_ n.4; life of man bound up with a, 
q 157; perpetual, of oak-wood, 285 sg. ; 
_ conceived by savages as a property 
' stored like sap in trees, 295 ; primitive 
_ ideas as to the origin of, 295 sg. 
: living, made by friction of wood, i. 
220 
_——, new, kindled on Easter Saturday, 
' i. 121 sgg.; festivals of new, 131 599.; 
"made by the friction of wood at Christ- 
_ mas, 264 


” term applied to Mid- 
_ summer bonfire, i. 334, 335 
... used to kindle need-fire, 


_Fire-festvals of Europe, i. 106 $99: i in- 
terpretation of the, 328 sgg., ii. 15 
sqqg.; at the solstices, i. 331 sg.; solar 
theory of the, 331 sgg.; purificatory 
theory of the, 341 sgg.; regarded as 
a protection against witchcraft, 342; 
the purificatory theory of the, more 
probable than the solar theory, 346; 
elsewhere than in Europe, ii. i sgq. ; 

© in India, x sgg., 5 sgg.; in China, 3 

sqgg. ; in Japan, 9 sg.; in Fiji, 10 sg. ; 

in Tahiti, the Marquesas Islands, and 

Trinidad, 11; in Africa, 11 sgg.; in 

classical antiquity in Cappadocia and 


INDEX 


343 


Italy, 14 sg.; their relation to Druidism, 
33 599-» 45 

Fire-god, Armenian, i. 131 2.3; of the 
Iroquois, prayers to the, 299 sg. 

—— -walk, the, ii. 1 sgg.; a remedy for 
disease, 7; the meaning of the, 15 


599- 

Firebrand, external soul of Meleager in 
a, ii, 103 

Firebrands, the Sunday of the, i. 110, 
114 

Fires extinguished as preliminary to ob- 
taining new fire, i. 5; annually extin- 
guished and relit, 132 sgg.; to burn 
the witches on the Eve of May Day 
(Walpurgis Night), 159 sg. ; autumn, 
220 sgg.; the need-fire, 269 sgg. ; ex- 
tinguished before the lighting of the 
need-fire, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 
275, 276, 277 59., 279, 283, 285, 288, 
289 5g., 291, 291 5g., 292, 294, 297, 
298 sg. ; of the fire-festivals explained 
as sun-charms, 329, 331 5gg.; ex- 
plained as purificatory, 329 sg., 341 
sgg.; the burning of human beings in 
the, ii. 21 sgg.; perpetual, fed with 
oak-wood, 91; with pinewood, g1 2.7; 
the solstitial, perhaps sun-charms, 292; 
extinguished and relighted from a flame 
kindled by lightning, 297 sg. See also 
Fire, Bonfires 

——, the Beltane, i. 146 sgg. 

——, the Easter, i. 120 sgg. 

——, Hallowe'en, i. 222 sg., 230 sgg. 

——, the Lenten, i. 106 sgg. 

——, Midsummer, i. 160 sgg.; a pro- 
tection against witches, 180; supposed 
to stop rain, 188, 336; supposed to 
be a preventive of backache in reap- 
ing, 189, 344 sg. ; a protection against 
fever, 190 

, Midwinter, i. 246 sgq. 

—— of St. John in France, i. 183, 188, 
189, 190, 192, 193 

on the Eve of Twelfth Day,,i. 107 

First-born lamb, wool of, used as cure 
for colic, i. 17 

—— sons make need-fire, i. 294; special 
magical<virtue attributed to, 295 

First-fruits offered to the souls of the 
dead, ii. 243 

Fish frightened or killed by proximity of 
menstruous women, i. 77, 93; external 
soul in a, ii. 99 sg., 122 sg.; golden, 
external soul of girl in a, 147 5g. ; lives 
of people bound up with, 200, 202, 
204, 209 

Fisheries supposed to be spoiled by 
menstruous women, i. 77, 78, 90 sg., 


93 
Fison, Rev. Lorimer, on Fijian religion, 
ii. 244 2.433, 246 2.1 


344 


Fittleworth, in Sussex, cleft ash-trees 
used for the cure of rupture at, ii. 
169 sg. 

Flames of bonfires, omens drawn from, 
i.°159, 165, 336 

Flanders, Midsummer fires in, i. 194; 
the Yule log in, 249 ; wicker giants in, 
ii. 35 

Flax, leaping over bonfires to make the 
flax grow tall, i. 119; charms to make 
flax grow. tall, 165, 166, 173, 174, 
176, 180 

crop, omens of the, drawn from 

Midsummer bonfires, i. 165 

seed sown in direction of flames of 
bonfire, i. 140, 337 

Fleabane as a cure for headache, i. 17 

Fleas, leaping over Midsummer fires to 
get rid of, i. 211, 212, 217 

Flight into Egypt, the, ii. 69 . 

Flints, fire kindled by, i. 121, 124, 126, 
127, 145, 146, 159 

Floor, sitting on the, at Christmas, i. 
261 

Florence, ceremony of the new fire at 
Easter in, i. 126 sg. 

Florus and Laurus, feast of, on August 
18th, i. 220 

Flowers thrown on bonfire, ii. 
ternal souls in, 117 sg. 
Crown 

and herbs cast into the Midsummer 

bonfires, i. 162, 163, 172, 173 

at Midsummer thrown on roofs 

as a protection against lightning, i. 

169; festival of, 177 sg.; as talis- 

mans, 183; in fires, 184, 188, 190; 

wreaths of, hung over doors and 

windows, 201; placed on mouths of 

wells, ii. 28; divination from, 50 

on Midsummer Eve, blessed by St. 
John, i. 171; the magic flowers of 
Midsummer Eve, ii. 45 sgg.; used in 
divination, 52 sg.; used to dream 
upon, 52, 54 

Flutes, sacred, played at initiation, ii. 
241 

Fly River, in British New Guinea, ii. 232 

‘« Flying - rowan”’ (parasitic rowan), 
superstitions in regard to, ii. 281; 
used to make a divining-rod, 281 sg. 

Foam of the sea, the demon Namuci 
killed by the, ii. 280; the totem of a 
clan in India, 281 

Fo-Kien, province of China, festival of 
fire in, ii. 3 sgg. 

Folgareit, in the Tyrol, 
custom at, ii. 47 

Folk-custom, external soul in, ii. 
5gq. 

-tales, the external soul in, ii. 95 

Sqq. 


8; ex- 
See also 


Midsummer 


153 


INDEX 


Follies of Dunkirk, ii. 34 sg. 

Food, sacred, not allowed to touch the 
ground, i. 13 sg. ; girls at puberty no 
allowed to handle, 23, 28, 36, 40 sg., 


42 8 

Foods, forbidden, i. 4, 7, 19, 36 sg., 38, 
4°, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49) 
54, 56, 57, 58, 68, 77, 78, 94 

‘* Fool's Stone” in ashes of Midsummer 
fire, i. 195 g 

Forbidden thing of clan, ii, 313 q 

Forchheim, in Bavaria, the burning o 
Judas at Easter in, i. 143 4 

Foreskins of young men offered 

Forespeaking men and cattle, i. 303 

Forgetfulness of the past after initia- 
tion, ii, 238, 254, 256, 258, 259% 
266 sg. 

Forked shape of divining-rod, ii. 67 7. 33 

‘* Forlorn fire,’’ need-fire, i. 292 

Fouléres, bonfires, i. 111 2.4 

Foulkes, Captain, quoted, ii, 210 

Four kinds of wood used to make the 
divining-rod, ii. 69, 291 

Fourdin, E., on the procession of the 
giants at Ath, ii. 36 2.7 

Four-leaved clover, a counter-charm for 
witchcraft, i, 316; at Midsummer 
useful for magic, ii. 62 sg. . 2 

Fowler, W. Warde, on Midsummer 
custom, i. 206 2.2; on sexta luna, ii ii, 
77 2.1; on the ceremony of passi 
under the yoke, 195 2.4; on the . 
and the thunder-god, 298, 299 .” » ZOO 

Fowls’ nests, ashes of bonfires put in, i 
Ir2, 338 

Fox prayed to spare lambs, i. 152 

Foxes burnt in Midsummer fires, ii. 39y 
41; witches turn into, 41 

Foxwell, Ernest, on the fire-walk i 
Japan, ii. 10 2.1 

Fraas, F., on the various sorts of mistlal = 
toe known to the ancients, ii. 318 q 

Frampton-on-Severn in Gloucestershi of | 
ii. 316 

France, Lenten fires in, i. 109 sgg. ; 
Midsummer fires in, 181 sgg. ; fires 
on All Saints’ Day in, 245 sg.; the 
Yule log in, 249 sgg.; wonderful 
herbs gathered on St. John’s Eve 
(Midsummer Eve) in, ii. 45 sgg. 3 
mugwort (herb of St. John) at Mid- 
summer in, 58 sg. ; fern-seed at Mid- 
summer in, 65; judicial treatment of 
sorcerers in, 158; birth-trees in, 165; a 
children passed through a cleft oak as. 
a cure for rupture or rickets in, 170, 
See also French 

Franche-Comté, Lenten fires in, i. r1r0- 
sg.; fires of St. John in, 189; the 
Yule log in, 254 


; 


rranken, Middle, fire custom at Easter 
_in, i. 143 
Frankenstein, precautions against witches 
in, ii. 20 2. 

ser Lake in British Columbia, i. 47 
Freiburg, in Switzerland, Lenten fires in, 
_ i. 119; fern and treasure on St. John’s 
_ Night in, ii. 288 
4 eising, in Bavaria, creeping through a 
| Barrow opening in the cathedral of, ii. 


1922.1 

Islands, use of bull-roarers in, ii. 
229 2. 

- peasants, their superstition as toa 

_ virgin and a flame, i. 137 2. 

‘Friction of wood, fire made by the, i. 
132, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 144 

_ -59., 148, 155, 169 5g., 175, 177, 179, 

| 220, 264, 270 s99., 335 5g., ii. 8; the 

q most Asati mode of making fire, 

90, 29 

“: Briendly Society of the Spirit’ among 

_ the Naudowessies, ii. 267 

igg or Frigga, the goddess, and Balder, 

- i. I0I, 102 

3 inges worn over the eyes by girls at 

: puberty, i. 47, 48 

Fruit-trees threatened, i, 114; Midsum- 

mer fires lit under, 215; shaken at 

_ Christmas to make them bear fruit, 

_ 248; fumigated with smoke of need- 

_ fire, 280 ; fertilized by burning torches, 

340 

wa daemonum, St. John’s wort, ii. 

55 

‘Fulda, the Lord of the Wells at, ii. 28 

‘Fumigating crops with smoke of bonfires, 

i, 201, 337 

- sheep and cattle, ii. 12, 13 

migation of pastures at Midsummer 

to drive away witches and demons, i. 

170 ; of fruit-trees, nets, and cattle with 

smoke of need-fire, 280 ; of byres with 

juniper, 296 ; of trees with wild thyme 

__ on Christmas Eve, ii. 64 

-Fiinen, in Denmark, cure for childish 
ailments at, ii. 191 j 

_ Funeral, customs observed by mourners 

after a funeral in order to escape from 

the ghost, ii. 174 sgq. 

——— ceremony among the Michemis, i. 5 

‘Furnace, walking through a fiery, ii. 

_ 3 599. 

Furness, W. H., on passing under an 
archway, ii. 179 sg., 180 n.} 


Gabb, W. M., on ceremonial unclean- 
hess, i. 65 2. 3 

Gablonz, in Bohemia, Midsummer bed 
of flowers at, ii. 57 


INDEX 


French cure for whooping - cough, ii.’ 


345 


Gaboon, birth-trees in the, ii. 160; 
theory of the external soul in, 200 sg. 

Gacko, need-fire at, i. 286 

Gaidoz, H., on the custom of passing 
sick people through cleft trees, ii. 171 

Gage, Thomas, on zagua/s among the 
Indians of Guatemala, ii. 213 

Gaj, in Slavonia, need-fire at, i. 282 

Galatian senate met in metum, 
‘* the temple of the oak,” ii. 89 

Galatians kept their old Celtic speech, 
ii, 89 2.? 

Galela, dread of women at menstruation 
in, i. 79 

Galelareese of Halmahera, their rites of 
initiation, ii. 248 

Gallic Councils, their prohibition of 
carrying torches, i. 199 

Gallows Hill, magical plants gathered 
on the, ii. 57 

-rope used to kindle need-fire, i. 


277 
Gandersheim, 
at, i. 277 
Gap, in the High Alps, cats roasted alive 
in the Midsummer fire at, ii. 39 sg 

Gardner, Mrs. E. A., i. 131 2.1 

Garlands of flowers placed on wells at 
Midsummer, ii. 28; thrown on trees, 
a form of divination, 53 

Garlic roasted at Midsummer fires, i. 


in Brunswick, need-fire 


193 

Garonne, Midsummer fires in the valley 
of the, i. 193 - 

Gatschet, A. S., on the Toukawe 


Indians, ii. 276 .? 
Gaul, ‘* serpents’ eggs”’ in ancient, i. 15; 
human sacrifices in ancient, ii. 32 sg. 
Gauls, their fortification walls, i. 267 sg. 
Gazelle Peninsula, New Britain, the 
Ingniet society in the, ii. 156 

Gem, external soul of magician in a, ii. 
105 sg.; external soul of giant in a, 
130 

Geneva, Midsummer fires in the canton 
of, i. 172 

Genius, the Roman, ii. 212 . 

Geranium burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 


213 

Gerhausen, i. 166 

German stories of the external soul, ii. 
116 sgg. 


Germans, human sacrifices offered by 
the ancient, ii. 28 7.1; the oak sacred 
among the, 89 

Germany, Lenten fires in, i. 115 sg. ; 
Easter bonfires in, 140 sgg.; custom 
at eclipses in, 162”.; the Midsummer 
fires in, 163 sgg.; the Yule log in, 
247 sgg.; belief in the transformation 
of witches into animals in, 321 2.7; 
colic, sore eyes, and stiffness of the 


346 


back attributed to witchcraft in, 344 
sqg.; mugwort at Midsummer in, ii. 
59; orpine gathered at Midsummer 
in, 62 2.; fern-seed at Midsummer 
in, 65; mistletoe a remedy for epilepsy 
in, 83; the need-fire kindled by the 
friction of oak in, 91 ; oak-wood used 
to make up cottage fires on Mid- 
summer Day in, 91 sg.; birth-trees in, 
165; children passed through a cleft 
oak as a cure for rupture in, 170 sgq. 

Gestr and the spae-wives, Icelandic story 
of, ii, 125 5g. 

Gewar, King of Norway, i. 103 

Ghost, oracular, in a cave, ii. 312 sg. 

Ghosts extracted from wooden posts, i. 
8; fire used to get rid of, ii. 17 sgg. ; 
mugwort a protection against, 59; 
kept off by thorn bushes, 174 sg. ; 
creeping through cleft sticks to escape 
from, 174 sgq. 

Giant who had no heart in his body, 
stories of the, ii. 96 sgg., 119 5g.; 
mythical, supposed to kill and resus- 
citate lads at initiation, 243 

Giant-fennel burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 
213 

Giants of wicker-work at popular festivals 
in Europe, ii. 33 sgg.; burnt in the 
summer bonfires, 38 

Giggenhausen, in Bavaria, burning the 
Easter Man at, i. 144 

Gion shrine in Japan, i. 138 

Gippsland, the Kurnai of, ii. 216 

Giraldus Cambrensis on transformation 
of witches into. hares, i. 315 7.1 

Girdle of wolf’s hide worn by were- 
wolves, i. 310 .1; of St. John, mug- 
wort, ii. 59 

Girdles of mugwort worn on St. John’s 
Day or Eve as preservative against 
backache, sore eyes, ghosts, magic, 
and sickness, ii. 59 

Girkshausen, in Westphalia, the Yule 
log at, i. 248 

Girl at puberty said to be wounded by a 
snake, i. 56; to be swallowed by a 
serpent, 57 

and boy produce need-fire by fric- 
tion of wood, 281 

Girls at puberty, secluded, i. 22 sgqg. ; 
not allowed to touch the ground, 22, 
33, 35, 36, 60; not allowed to see the 
sun, 22, 35, 36, 37, 41, 44, 46, 47, 
68 ; not allowed to handle food, 23, 
28, 36, 40 sg., 42; half buried in 
ground, 38 sgg. ; not allowed to scratch 
themselves with their fingers, 38, 39, 
41, 42, 44, 47, 50, 53, 92; not allowed 
to lie down, 44; gashed on back, 
breast, and belly, 60; stung by ants, 
61; beaten severely, 61, 66 sg. ; sup- 


INDEX 


posed to be attacked by a demon, 67 — 
Sq. ; not to see the sky, 69; forbidden © 


to break bones of hares, 73 7. 


Gisors, crawling through a holed stone 4 


near, ii. 188 


Givoy agon, living fire, made by the 


friction of wood, i. 220 
Glamorgan, the Vale of, Beltane and 


Midsummer fires in the, i. 154; Mid- 


summer fires in, 201, 338 


Glands, ashes of Yule log used to cure — 


swollen, i. 251 


fps tan 


o. 


a i i 


Glanvil, Joseph, on a witch in the form 4 


of a cat, i. 317 ~ 
Glass, the Magician’s or Druid’s, i. 16 


Glatz, precautions against witches on 5 


Walpurgis Night in, ii. 20 . 


Glawi, in the Atlas, New Year fires at, _ 


i. 217 


Glencuaich, the hawk of, in a Celtic © 


tale, ii. 127 sgq. 
Glenorchy, the Beltane cake in, i. 149 


‘*Glory, the Hand of,’’ mandragora, ii. ‘ 


316 


Gloucestershire, mistletoe growing on — 


oaks in, ii. 316 


Gnabaia, a spirit who swallows and dis- _ 


gorges lads at initiation, ii. 235 
Gnid-eld, need-fire, i. 280 


Goajiras of Colombia, their seclusion of — 


girls at puberty, i. 34 7.1 

Goatsucker or fern owl, sex totem of 
women, ii. 217 

God, Aryan, of the thunder and the oak, 
i, 265 


the Bushongo, ii. 264 

Godolphin, in Cornwall, Midsummer 
fires on, i. 199 

Gold, the flower of chicory to be cut 
with, ii. 71 ; root of marsh mallow to be 
dug with, 80 ~,°; buried, revealed by 
mistletoe and fern-seed, 287 sgg., 291 


—— coin, magic plant to be dug up 5 


with a, ii. 57. See also Golden 

Golden axe, sacred tamarisk touched 
with, ii. 80 2.3 

Golden Bough, the, ii. 279 sgg.; and 
the priest of Aricia, i. 1; a branch 
of mistletoe, ii. 284 sgg., 315 sg@. ; 
Virgil’s account of the, 284 sg., 286, 
293 5g., 315 sgg.; origin of the name, 
286 sgq. 


147 5g., 220 


a, ii. 80 2.3 


ii, 143 


——— sickle, mistletoe cut by Druids 


on Earth, title of supreme chief of _ 


fish, girl's external soul in a, ii. : 
knife, horse slain in sacrifice with i 


ring, half a hero’s strength in a, 7 


with a, ii, 77, 88; sacred olive at ~ 


Olympia cut with a, 80 2.3 


Golden sword and golden arrow, external 
_ soul of a hero in a, ii. 145 

Goldie, Rev. Hugh, on the uéfong or 
_ external soul in Calabar, ii. 206 
peotath, effigy of, ii. 36 


4 Good Friday, Judas driven out of church 

_ on, i, 146; the divining-rod cut on, 

ii. 68 2.4 ; sick children passed through 

_ cleft trees on, 172 

4 ‘Goodrich-Freer, A., quoted, i. 154 7.2 
Barnabe, i. 124 


Gorillas, lives of persons bound up with 

_ those of, ii. 202 

_ Gorz, belief as to witches at Midsummer 

__ about, ii. 75 

_ Grain Coast, West Africa, initiation. of 

_ girls on the, ii. 259 

4 Prammont, in Belgium, festival of the 

_ **Crown of Roses” at, i. 195; 

_ _ Yule Jog at, 249 

_ Granada (South America), 

_ rulers secluded in, i. 19 

_ Grand Halleux, bonfires at, i. 107 

| Grannas-mias, torches, i, 111 

_ Granno, invocation of, i. 111 sg. 

_ Granno-mio, a torch, i. 111 

_ Grannus, a Celtic deity, identified with 

_ Apollo, i. rrz sg. 

_ Grant, the great laird of, not exempt 

_ from witchcraft, i. 342 2.4 

_ Grass, ceremony to make grass plentiful, 

mi. 136 

_ Gratz, puppet burned on St. John’s Eve 

at, i. 173 

_ Grave, dance at initiation in, ii. 237 

_ Great Man, who created the world and 

comes down in the form of lightning, 

: ii. 298 

_ Greece, Midsummer fires in, i. 211 sg. ; 

'_ _- mistletoe in, ii. 316, 317 

_ Greek Pan oe to menstruous women, i. 

4 n. 

_ -—— Church, ritual of the new fire at 

4 Easter in the, i. 128 sg. 

stories of girls who were forbidden 
to see the sun, i. 72 sgg. ; of the ex- 
ternal soul, ii. 103 sgg. 

Greeks deemed sacred the places which 

5 were struck by lightning, ii. 299 

_ Green Wolf, Brotherhood of the, ii. 
I5 ”.; at Jumiéges in Normandy, i. 
185 sg., ii. 25, 88 

Greenlanders, their notion that women 
can conceive by the moon, i. 75 sg. 

Gregor, Rev. Walter, ii. 284 2.1; on 
virtue of children born feet foremost, 
i. 295 2.2; on the ‘‘ quarter- ill,” 
296 2.1; on the bewitching of cattle, 
393 


youthful 


INDEX 


_ Googe, 
7 ee? bushes, wild, custom as to,’ 


347 | 


Greig, James S., ii. 187 2.3 

Greta, river in Yorkshire, i. 287 

Grey, Sir George, on the obong or 
totem, ii. 219 sg. 

Grimm, J., on need-fire, i. 270 z., 
272 sg.; on the relation of the Mid- 
summer fires to Balder, ii. 87 2.6; on 
the sanctity of the oak, 89; on the 
oak and lightning, 300 

Grisons, threatening a mist in the, i. 280 

Grizzly Bear clan, ii. 274 

Groot, -J. J. M. de, on mugwort in 
China, ii. 60 

Grottkau, precautions against witches 
in, ii. 20 2. 

Ground, sacred persons not allowed to 
set foot on, i. 2 sgg.; not to sit on 
bare, 4, 5, 12; girls at puberty not 
allowed to touch the, 22, 33, 35, 36, 
60; magical plants not to touch the, 
ii. 51; mistletoe not allowed to touch 
the, 280 

Grouse clan, ii. 273 

Grove, Miss Florence, 
mistletoe, ii. 287 2.+ 

Grove, Balder’s, i. 104, ii. 315; sacred 
grove of Nemi, 315; soul of chief in 
sacred, 161. See a/so Arician 

Grubb, Rev. W. B., i. 57 2.3 

Griin, in Bohemia, mountain arnica 
gathered at Midsummer at, ii. 58 2.1 

Guacheta in Colombia, i. 74 

Guaranis of Brazil, their seclusion of girls 
at puberty, i. 56 

Guaraunos of the Orinoco, uncleanness 
of menstruous women among the, i. 
85 sg. 

Guardian angels, afterbirth and navel- 
string regarded as a man’s, ii. 162 2.2 

—— spirit, afterbirth and seed regarded 
as, ii. 223 2.2; acquired in a dream, 
256 sg. 

Guatemala, the nagua/ or external soul 
among the Indians of, ii. 212 sg. 

Guatusos of Costa Rica, use of 
roarers among the, ii. 230 2 

Guayquiries of the Orinoco, their beliefs 
as to menstruous women, i. 85 

Guelphs, the oak of the, ii. 166 

Guiana, British, the Macusis of, i. 60; 
ordeals undergone by young men 
among the Indians of, 63 sg. 

——, French, the Wayanas of, i. 63 

Guizing at Christmas in Lerwick, i. 268 sg. 

Guleesh and the fairies at Hallowe'en, i. 
277 Sq- 

Gunn, David, kindles need-fire, i. 291 

Guns fired to drive away witches, ii. 74 

Gwalior, Holi fires in, ii. 2 


on withered 


bull- 


Hadji Mohammad shoots a were-wolf, i. 
312 sg. 


348 


Haida Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands, 
girls at puberty secluded among the, i. 
44 Sq. 

Hail, bonfires thought to protect fields 
against, i. 344; ceremonies to avert, 
144, 145; Midsummer fires a protec- 
tion against, 176; mountain arnica a 
protection against, ii. 57 sg. 

and thunderstorms caused by 
witches, i. 344 

Hainan, island, i. 137 

Hainaut, province of Belgium, fire cus- 
toms in, i, 108; procession of giants 
in, ii. 36 

Hair, unguent for, i. 14; prohibition to 
cut, 28 ; of girls at puberty shaved, 31, 
56, 57, 59; Hindoo ritual of cutting a 
child’s, 99 2.2; of the Virgin or St. 
John looked for in ashes of Midsummer 
fire, 182 sg., 190, 191; external soul 
in, ii. 103 sg., 148 ; strength of people 
bound up with their, 158 sg.; of 
criminals, witches, and wizards shorn 
to make them confess, 158 sg.; of 
children tied to trees, 165; of novices 
cut at initiation, 245, 251 

and nails of child buried under a 
tree, ii. 161 

Hairy Stone, the, at Midsummer, i. 212 

Halberstadt district, need-fire in the, i. 
273 

Hall, C. F., among the Esquimaux, i. 13, 
134 

Rev. G. R., quoted, i. 198 

Hallowe’en, new fire at, in Ireland, i. 
139; an old Celtic festival of New 
Year, 224 sgg.; divination at, 225, 228 
5gq.; witches, hobgoblins, and fairies 
let loose at, 226 sgy., 245; witches 
and fairies active on, ii. 184 2.4, 185 

and Beltane, the two chief fire 

festivals of the British Celts, ii. 40 sg. 

cakes, i, 238, 241, 245 

fires, i. 222 sg,, 230 sgg.; in Wales, 
156 

Halmahera, rites of initiation in, ii. 248 

Haltwhistle, in Northumberland, burnt 
sacrifice at, i. 30 

Hamilton, Gavin, quoted, i. 47 sq. 

Hammocks, girls at puberty hung up in, 
i. 56, 59, 60, 61, 66 

‘* Hand of Glory,”’ mandragora, ii. 316 

Hannibal despoils the shrine on Soracte, 
ii, 15 

Hanover, the need-fire in, i. 275; Easter 
bonfires in, 140; custom on St. John’s 
Day about, ii. 56 

Hare, pastern bone of a, in a popular 
remedy, i, 17 

Hares, witches in the form of, i. 157; 
witches changed into, 315 2.1, 316 
5qq., li. 4 


INDEX 


Hares and witches in Yorkshire, ii. 197 

Hareskin Tinneh, seclusion of girls at — 
puberty among the, i. 48 b: 

Harris, Slope of Big Stones in, i. 227 

Hartland, E. S., on the life-token, ii. 
IIg ”. 


Haruvarus, degenerate Brahmans, their — 


fire-walk, ii. 9 
Harz district, Easter bonfires in the, i. 
140; Midsummer fires in the, 169 
—— Mountains, Easter fires in the, i. 
142; need-fire in the, 276; springwort _ 
in the, ii. 69 sg. E 
Hats, special, worn by girls at puberty, 
i. 45, 46, 47, 92. See also Hoods 
Hausa story of the external soul, ii. 148 


5g. 

Hawaiians, the New Year of the, ii. 244 

Hawkweed gathered at Midsummer, ii. 57 

Hawthorn, mistletoe on, ii. 315, 316 e 

Haxthausen, A. von, i. 181 

Hays of Errol, their fate bound up with 
an oak-tree and the mistletoe growing 
on it, ii, 283 sg. 

Hazebrouch, in France, wicker giants on 
Shrove Tuesday at, ii. 35 

Hazel, the divining-rod made of, ii. 67 
$q.; never struck by lightning, 69 z. 

—— rods to drive cattle with, i. 204 

Headache, cure for, i. 17; mugwort a 
protection against, ii. 59 

Headdress, special, worn by girls at first 
menstruation, i. 92 

Headless Hugh, Highland story of, ii. 
130 sq. 

horsemen in India, ii. 131 #.1 

Heads or faces of menstruous women 
covered, i. 22, 24, 25, 29, 31, 44 Sg., 
48 sg., 55, 90 

Hearne, Samuel, quoted, i. 90 sg. 

Heart of bewitched animal burnt or 
boiled to compel the witch to appear, 
i. 321 sg. 

Hearts of diseased cattle cut out and 
hung up as a remedy, i. 269 2.1, 325 

Heaven, the Queen of, ii. 303 

and earth, between, i. 1 syg., 98 


SY. 
Hector, first chief of Lochbuy, ii. 131 7.1 
Heiberg, Sigurd K., i. 171 2.8 

Heifer sacrificed at kindling need-fire, i. 


290 

Helensburgh, in Dumbartonshire, Hal- 
lowe’en at, i, 237 2.5 

‘« Hell-gate of Ireland,” i. 226 

Helmsdale, in Sutherland, need-fire at, 


i. 295 

Helpful animals in fairy tales, ii. 107, 
117, 120, 127 °S99\, 230,198) tea, 
. 139 2.7, 140 Sg., 149 

Hemlock branch, external soul of ogress 
in a, ii, 152 


branches, g through a 
hia 0. cgenaggy faranenad ii. 186 
- stone in Nottinghamshire, i. 157 
root of orpine a cure for, 


co seed, divination by, i. 235, 241, 245 


and her children at Christmas, i. 260 
Henderson, William, on need-fire, i. 
288 sg.; on a remedy for cattle-dis- 
ease, 296 2.1; on burnt sacrifice of ox, 


30x 

_ Hen’s egg, external soul of giant in a, 
ii. 140 59. 

_ Henshaw, Richard, on external or bush 
_ souls in Calabar, ii. 205 sg. 

_ Hephaestus worshipped in Lemnos, i. 


‘i of St. John, mugwort, ii. 58 

_ Herbs thrown across the Midsummer 

fires, i. 182, 201; wonderful, gathered 

on St. John’s Eve or Day, ii. 45 599. ; 

of St. John, wonderful virtues ascribed 

' to, 46 

—— and flowers cast into the Mid- 
summer bonfires, i. 162, 163, 172, 
173 

Hercules at Argyrus, temple of, i. 99 2.3 

Herdsmen dread witches and wolves, i. 


e 3 

Herefordshire, Midsummer fires in, i. 

; 199; the Yule log in, 257 sg. 

Herndon, W. L., quoted, i. 62 2.3 

Hernia, cure for, i. 98 2.1 
_ Herodias, cursed by Slavonian peasants, 
1. 345 

favors A. de, on maguals among the 
Indians of Honduras, ii. 213 sg. 

Herrick, Robert, on the Yule log, i. 255 

Herring, salt, divination by, i. 239 

Herzegovina, the Yule log in, i. 263; 
need-fire in, 288 

Hesse, Lenten fire-custom in, i. 118; 
Easter fires in. 140; wells decked 
with flowers on Midsummer Day in, 
ii. 28 

Hewitt, J. N. B., on need-fire of the 
Troquois, i. 299 sg. 

Hiaina district of Morocco, ii. 51 

Hidatsa Indians, their theory of the 
plurality of souls, ii. 221 sg. 

sooner? ya ptlosella, mouse-ear hawk- 

weed, gathered at Midsummer, ii. 57 

Higgins, Rev. J. C., i. 207 2. 

High Alps, department of the, Mid- 
summer fires in the, ii. 39 sg. 


INDEX 


Hen and chickens imitated by a woman” 


349 


High Priest, the Fijian, ii. 245 
Highland story of Headless Hugh, ii. 


130 sg. 

Highlanders of Scotland, their medicinal 
applications of menstruous blood, i. 
98 2.1; their belief. in the power of 
witches to destroy cattle, 343 2.1; 
their belief concerning snake stones, ii. 


3IL 

Highlands of Scotland, snake stones in 
the, i. 16; Beltane fires in the, 146 
sq. ; divination at Hallowe'en in the, 
229, 234 sgg.; need-fire and Beltane 
fire kindled by the friction of oak in 
the, ii. 91 

Hildesheim, Easter rites of fire and 
water at, i. 124; Easter bonfires at, 
41; the need-fire at, 272 sg. ; hawk- 
weed gathered on Midsummer Day at, 
i. 57 

Hill of the Fires in the Highlands of 
Scotland, i. 149 

—— of Ward, in County Meath, i. 139 

Himalayan districts, mistletoe in the, 
ii. 316 

Hindoo maidens secluded at puberty, i. 68 

—— marriage custom, i. 75 

ritual, abstinence from salt in, iL 

27 ; as to cutting a child's hair, 99 2.2 

stories of the external soul, ii. 97 


$99. 

—— use of menstruous fluid, i. 98 z.1 

women, their restrictions at men- 
struation, i. 84 

Hindoos of Southern India, their Pongol 
festival, ii. 1; of the Punjaub, their 
custom of passing unlucky children 
through narrow openings, 190 

Hippopotamus, external soul of chief in, 
ii. 200; lives of persons bound up 
with those of hippopotamuses, 201, 
202, 205, 209 

Hirpi Sorani, their fire-walk, ii. 14 sg. 

Hlubi chief, his external soul in a pair of 
ox-horns, ii. 156 

Hoare, Sir Richard Colt, on Hallowe'en 
in Wales, i. 239 

Hogg, Alexander, i. 206 

Hogmanay, the last day of the year, 
i. 224, 266 

Hohenstaufen Mountains in Wurtem- 
berg, Midsummer fires in the, i. 166 

Hole in tongue of medicine-man, ii. 238, 


239 

Holed stones which people creep through 
as a cure, li. 187 sgg. 

Holes in rocks or stones, sick people 

through, ii. 186 sgg. 

Holi, a festival of Northern India, ii. 2 sg. 

Holiness or taboo conceived as a danger- 
ous physical substance which needs to 
be insulated, i. 6 sg. 


35° 


Holland, Easter fires in, i. 145 

Hollantide Eve (Hallowe'en) in the Isle 
of Man, i. 244 

Hollertau, Bavaria, Easter fires in the, 
i. 122 

Hollis, A. C., ii. 262 2.2 

Holly-tree, children passed through a 
cleft, ii, 169 7. 

Holm-oak, the Golden Bough growing 
on a, ii. 285 

Holy Apostles, church of the, at Florence, 
i. 126 

Land, fire flints brought from the, 

i, 126 

of Holies, the Fijian, ii. 244, 245 

Sepulchre, church of the, at Jeru- 
salem, ceremony of the new fire in 
the, i. 128 sg. 

Homesteads protected by bonfires against 
lightning and conflagration, i. 344 

Homoeopathic or imitative magic, i. 49, 
133, ii. 287 

Homoeopathy, magical, ii. 177 

Homolje mountains in Servia, i. 282 

Honduras, the zagual or external soul 
among the Indians of, ii. 213 s9., 
226 n.1 

Honorific totems of the Carrier Indians, 
ii. 273 Sgq. 

Hoods worn by women after childbirth, 
i. 20; worn by girls at puberty, 44 sg., 
48 sg., 55; worn by women at mens- 
truation, 90. See also Hats 

Hoop, crawling through a, as a cure 
or preventive of disease, ii. 184; of 
rowan-tree, sheep forced through a, 184 

Hoopoe brings the mythical springwort, 
ii. 70 2.2 

Horatius purified for the murder of his 
sister, ii. 194 

Hornbeam, mistletoe on, ii. 315 

Horse, the White, effigy carried through 
Midsummer fire, i. 203 sg. ; witch in 
the shape of a, 319 

sacrifice in ancient India, ii. 80 2.3 

Horse’s head thrown into Midsummer 
fire, li. 40 

Horse-chestnut, mistletoe on, ii. 315 

Horses used by sacred persons, i. 4 7.4; 
not to be touched or ridden by men- 
struous women, 88 sg., 96; driven 
through the need-fire, 276, 297 

Hos, the, of Togoland (West Africa), 
their dread of menstruous women, i. 82 

Hose, Dr. Charles, on creeping through 
a cleft stick after a funeral, ii. 175 sg. 

and W. McDougall, on the xgarong 
or secret helper of the Ibans, ii. 224 2.1 

Hother, Hodr, or Hod, the blind god, 
and Balder, i. rox sgg., ii. 279 2.4 

Hottentots drive their sheep through fire, 
ii. 12 sgg. 


INDEX 


House-communities of the Servians, © 
i. 259 2,4 5 

Houses protected by bonfires against — 
lightning and conflagration, i. 344; 
made fast against witches on Mid- — 
summer Eve, ii. 73 ¥ 

u of the soul” in Isaiah, ii, 155 2.3 

Housman, Professor A. E., on the feast 
of the Nativity of the Virgin, i. 220 sg. 

Houstry, in Caithness, need-fire at, i. 
291 sg. 

Howitt, A. W., on seclusion of men- — 


struous women, i. 78; on killing a — 


totem animal, ii. 220 ”.2; on secrecy 
of totem names, 225 ”. ; on the drama 
of resurrection at initiation, 235 sgg. 

Howitt, Miss E. B., ii. 226 2.4 

Howth, the western promontory of, Mid- 
summer fire on, i, 204 

Castle, life-tree of the St. Lawrence 
family at, ii. 166 

Huahine, one of the Tahitian islands, 
ii. rx 7.8 

Hudson Bay Territory, the Chippeways 
of, i. go 

Hughes, Miss E. P., on the fire-walk in 
Japan, ii. 10 2.1 

Human beings burnt in the fires, ii. 21 
59. 

divinities put to death, i. 1 sg. 

sacrifices at fire-festivals, i. 106; 

traces of, 146, 148, I50 sgg., 186, 

ii. 31 ; offered by the ancient Germans, 

ii, 28 2.1; among the Celts of Gaul, 

32 sg.; the victims perhaps witches 

and wizards, 41 sgg.; Mannhardt’s 

theory, 43 : 

victims annually burnt, ii. 286 2.2 

Hungarian story of the external soul, 
ii, 140 

Hungary, Midsummer fires in, i. 178 sg. 

Hunt, Holman, his picture of the new 
fire at Jerusalem, i. 130 7. 


‘Hunt, Robert, on burnt sacrifices, i. 303 


Hunters avoid girls at puberty, i. 44, 46; 
luck of, spoiled by menstruous women, 
87, 89, 90, 91, 94 

Huon Gulf in German New Guinea, ii. 239 

Hupa Indians of California, seclusion of 
girls among the, i. 42 

Hurons of Canada, custom of their 
women at menstruation, i. 88 2.1 

Huskanaw, initiatory ceremony of the 
Virginian Indians, ii. 266 

Hut burnt at Midsummer, i. 215 sg. 

Hutchinson, W., quoted, i. 197 2.4 

Huts, special, for menstruous women, 
i. 79, 82, 85 sgg. 


Huzuls of the Carpathians kindle new | j 


fire at Christmas, i. 264; gather 
simples on St. John’s Night, ii. 49 
Hyaenas, men turned into, i, 313 


‘m perforatum, St. John's wort, 
gathered at Midsummer, ii. 54 sgg. 
See also St. John’s Wort 

Hyphear, a kind ner ii. 317, 318 
oo a giantess, i. 


bans of Borneo, Ces puree fe aecet 
BS per, ii, 224 2.1 
Ibos of the Niger delta, their belief in 
external human souls lodged in ani- 
- mals, ii. 203 sg. 
Ib ahim Pasha, i. I29 
Teelandic stories of the external soul, 
ii. 123 sgg. 
imkill, the hill of the fires in, i. 149 
eler, L., on the Arab year before 
Mohammed, i, 217 7.1 

‘Tdhlosi, ancestral spirit.in serpent form, 
- ii, 2a 

‘Iglulik, Esquimaux of, i. 134 

~Iimenau, witches burnt at, i. 6 
- Iluvans of Malabar, marriage custom of, 


mye 5: 
' Image of god carried through fire, ii. 4 ; 
_ reason for carrying over a fire, 24 
_ Images, colossal, filled with human vic- 
tims and burnt, ii. 32 sg. 
_ Imitative magic, i. 329, ii. 231 
a Immortality, the burdensome gift of, 
' i. 99 sg.; of the soul, experimental 
demonstration of the, ii. 276 
_ Immortelles, wreaths of, on Midsummer 
& Day, i. 177 
Implements, magical, not allowed to 
_ touch the ground, i. 14 sg. 
Ss Impregnation of women by the sun, 
_ _ i. 74 5g.; by the moon, 75 sg. 
_ rite” at Hindoo marriages, i. 75 
_ Inauguration of a king in Brahmanic 
= ritual; i 4 
_ Inca, fast of the future, i. 19 
' Incas of Peru, their ceremony of the 
- new fire, i. 132 
_ Incantation recited at kindling need-fire, 
» _ i. 290 
_ Inconsistency and vagueness of primi- 
- tive thought, ii. 301 sg. 
' India, seclusion of girls at puberty in, 
i, 68 sgg.; fire-festivals in, ii. 1 sgg. ; 
sixty years’ cycle in, 77 #.1; the 
horse-sacrifice in ancient, 80 2.3; tor- 
ture of suspected witches in, 159; 
ancient, traditional cure of skin dis- 
ease in, 192; Loranthus in, 317 
| Indian Archipelago, birth-custom in the, 
4 ii. 155 
| —— legend parallel to Balder myth, 
ii. 280 
Indians of Costa Rica, their customs in 
— fasts, i. 20 
_ —— of Granada seclude their future 
3 rulers, i. 19 


INDEX 


351 


Indians of North America, not allowed 
to sit on bare ground in war, i. 5; se- 
clusion of girls among the, 41 sgg.; 
imitate lightning by torches, 340 2.1; 
rites of initiation into religious associa- 
tions among the, ii. 267 sg. 

‘Index of Superstitions,” i. 270 

Indra and Apala, in the Rigveda, ii. 192 

—— and the demon Namuci, Indian 
legend of, ii. 280 

Indrapoora, story of the daughter of a 
merchant of, ii. 147 

Infants tabooed, i. 5, 20 

Ingleborough in Yorkshire, i. 288 

Ingleton, in Yorkshire, need-fire at, 
i. 288 

Ingniet or Ingiet, a secret society of 
New Britain, ii. 156 

Initiation, rites in German New Guinea, 
ii. 193; at puberty, pretence of kill- 
ing the novice and bringing him to 
life again during, 225 599. ; in Aus- 
tralia, 227, 233 sgg.; in New Guinea, 
239 599.3 in Fiji, 243 sgg.; in Rook, 
246; in New Britain, 246 sg.; in 
Halmahera, 248; in Fiji apparently 
intended to introduce the novices to 
the worshipful spirits of the dead, 
246; in Ceram, 249 sgg.; in Africa, 
251 sgg.; in North America, 266 
599- 

of young men, bull-roarers sounded 
at the, ii. 227 sgg., 233 sgg.; of a 
medicine-man in Australia, 237 sgg. 

Inn, effigies burnt at Midsummer in the 
valley of the river, i. 172 sg. 

Innerste, river, i. 124 

Innuits (Esquimaux), i. 14 

Insanity, burying in an ant-hill as a cure 
for, i. 64 

Inspired men walk through fire un- 
harmed, ii. 5 sg. 

a of women at menstruation, 


inincpruestion of the fire-festivals, i. 328 
59qJ-, WU. 15 59g. 

Inverness-shire, Beltane cakes in, i. 153 

Invulnerability conferred by a species of 
mistletoe, ii. 79 sg.; conferred by 
decoction of a parasitic orchid, 81; of 
Balder, 94; attained through blood- 
brotherhood with animal, 201 ; thought 
to be attained through initiation, 275 
5q., 276 2.1 

Invulnerable warlock or giant, stories of 
the, ii. 97 sg. 

Ipswich witches, i. 304 sg. 

Iran, marriage custom in, i. 75 

Ireland, the Druid’s Glass in, i. 16; 
new fire at Hallowe'en in, 139, 225; 
Beltane fires in, 157 sg.; Midsummer 
fires in, 201 sgg.; fairies at Hallow- 


352 


e'en in, 226 sg. ; Hallowe’en customs 
in, 241 sg.; witches as hares in, 315 
n.1; bathing at Midsummer in, ii. 29; 
cure for whooping-cough in, 192 7. 

Irish story of the external soul, ii. 132 

Iron not to be used in digging fern root, 
ii. 65; mistletoe gathered without the 
use of, 78; not to be used in cutting 
certain plants, 8x #.; custom ob- 
served by the Toradjas at the working 
of, 154 

Iron-wort, bunches of, held in the 
smoke of the Midsummer fires, i. 179 

Iroquois, ceremony of the new fire 
among the, i. 133 sg.; need-fire 
among the, 299 sg. 

Tented: ‘houses of the soul”’ in, ii. 155 
n. 

Isfendiyar and Rustem, i. 104 sg., 314 


Island, need-fire kindled in an, i. 290 
SY., 291 Sq. 

Isle de France, Midsummer giant burnt 
in, ii. 38 


of Man, Beltane fires in the, i. 
157. See Man, Isle of 

Istria, the Croats of, ii. 75 

Italian stories of the external soul, ii. 
105, sgg.; ancient practice of passing 
conquered enemies under a yoke, 193 
Sq. 

Italians, the oak the chief sacred tree 
among the ancient, ii. 89 

Italy, birth-trees in, ii. 165; mistletoe 
in, 316, 317 

Itongo, plural amatongo, ii. 202 n. 

Ivory Coast, totemism among the Siena 
of the, ii. 220 2.2 

Ivy to dream on, i. 242 

‘xia, a kind of mistletoe, ii. 317, 318 


Jablanica, need-fire at, i. 286 

Jack-in-the-Green, ii. 37 

Jaffa, new Easter fire carried to, i, 
130 ”. 

Jakkaneri, in the Neilgherry Hills, the 
fire-walk at, ii. 9 

James, M. R., on the Sibyl’s Wish, 
i, 100 7, 

James and Philip, the Apostles, feast of, 
i, 158 

Jamieson, J., on the ‘‘ quarter-ill,” i. 
296 n.} 

January, the Holi festival in, ii. 
fire-walk in, 8 

the sixth, the nativity of Christ on, 
i, 246 

Janus and Jupiter, ii. 302 ».? 

Japan, the -Ainos of, i. 20, ii. 60; the 
fire-walk in, 9 sg. 

Japanese ceremony of new fire, i. 137 
SJ. 

Java, birth-trees in, ii. 161 7." 


1; the 


INDEX 


‘Jevons, Dr. F, B., onthe Roman geniz , 


Jebel Bela mountain, in the Sudan, | 
313 
Jerusalem, ceremony of the new fire, a 
Easter in, i. 128 sq. 
Jeugny, the forest of, ii. 316 


ii. 212 2. E 
Jewitt, John R., on ritual of mimic 
death among the Nootka Indians, ii. 
270 
Johanniswurzel, the male fern, ii. 66 
Johnstone, Rev. A., quoted, i, 233 
Jonee, joanne, jouanne, the Midsummer 
fire (the fire of St. John), i. 189 4 
Joyce, P. W., on driving cattle through © 
fires, i. 159 2.2; on the bisection of 
the Celtic year, 223 2.? ; 
Judas, effigies of, burnt in Easter fires, 4 
i, 121, 127 Sg., 130 Sg., 143, 146, ii. 
23; driven out of church on 
Friday, i. 146 
candle, i. 122 7. 
fire at Easter, i. 123, 144 
Julian calendar used by Mohammedans, | 
i, 218 sq. a 
July, procession of giants at Douayin, 
ii. 


3 
the twenty-fifth, St. James's Day, — 
flower of chicory cut on, ii. 71 4 
Jumiéges, in Normandy, Brotherhood — 
of the Green Wolf at, i. 185 sg., ii. 25 
Jumping over a wife, significance of, i. | 


23 q 
June, the fifteenth of, St. Vitus’s Day, 
i. 


335 
the fire-walk in, ii, 6 
Juniper burnt in need-fire, i. 288 ; used 
to fumigate byres, 296 
Juno and Diana, ii. 302 7.2 q 
Jupiter represented by an oak-tree onthe ~ 
Capitol, ii. 89; perhaps personified — 
by the King of the Wood, the priest — 
of Diana at Nemi, 302 53 Jupiter — 
and Janus, 302 2.? 
, cycle of sixty years based on the \ 
sidereal revolution of the planet, ii, — 
77 2.» ‘ 
Jura, fire-custom at Lent in the, i. 11g 
—— Mountains, Midsummer bonfires — 
in the, i. 188 sg. ; the Yule log in the, — 
249 F 
Jurby, parish of, in the Isle of Man, i. 


° 5 
Yoktand. sick children and cattle passed — 
through holes in turf in, ii, 191; 4 
superstitions about a parasitic rowan 
in, 281 " 


Ka, external soul rg double in ancient — 


Egypt, ii. 157 7.” a 
Kabadi, a district of British New — 


Guinea, i. 35 


wu river, in German New Guinea, 


le tale, milk-tie in a, ii. 138 2.1; 
external soul in a, 139 

in Burma, annual extinction of 
er tics 136 

ai of New Guinea, their seclusion of 
omen at menstruation, i. 79; their 
2 of a cleft stick as a cure, ii. 182; 
their rites of initiation, 239 599. 
divination by stolen, i. 234 5g. 

ir association _in eoiga rites of 
imuc! Pea OF the catcanel soul, ii. 


nenaLlo 


in Croatia, Midsummer 
ae i a 
2 their purification after a 
Edeath ii 178 
anna district, Northern Nigeria, ii. 
210 
‘appiliyans of Madura, their seclusion 
ee ext 3 puberty, ¢ Go 
of Burma, their custom at child- 
birth, ii. 157 
; i River, ii. 264 
tajalinz @ spirit who eats up boys at 
initiation and restores them to life, ii. 


ann, Professor F., i. 1o2 z.}, 
Rios =; on the external soul, ii. 97 7. 
a Midsummer pole in Eastern 


AUDOLE 
Z x 
7 SS id 


i. 49 

of India, their cure for fever, ii. 
Igo 
aya-Kaya or Tugeri of Dutch New 
» Guinea, their use of bull- ii, 
242 5g. 

tayans or Bahaus of Central Borneo, i. 
| 45g. ; custom observed by them after 
_ @ funeral, ii, 175 sg. ; their way of 


139; on the Beltane fires, 158 sg. 
eating, W. H., quoted, i. 89 
i Islands, birth-custom in the, ii. 155 
Keitel Lake, in Finland, ii. 165 
-emble, J. M., on need-fire, i. 288 
PITY, eeemnes Sees: Se, i. 203 

;2U0 » the Yule log, i. 249 
, the Yule log, i. 249 


__menstruous women, i. 84 
_of Assam, story of the external 
_ soul told by the i. 146 sg. 


Khnumu, Egyptian god, fashions a wife 
for Bata, ii 135 

Khonds, human sacrifices among the, ii. 
| 286 x.? 

_ PT. VIL VOL. 1 


INDEX 


353 


Kia blacks of Queensland, their treat- 
ment of girls at puberty, i. 39 

Kidd, Dudley, on external souls of 
chiefs, ii. 156 2.2 

Kildare, Midsummer fires in, i. 203 

Kilkenny, Midsummer fires in, i. 203 

Killin, the hill of the fires at, i. 149 

Killing a totem animal, ii. 220 

—— the novice and bringing him to life 
again at initiation, pretence of, ii. 225 
599. 

King, nominal, chosen at Midsummer, 
i. 194, li. 25; presides at summer 

» 38 

—— and Queen of Roses, i. 195 

—— of the Bean, i. 153 2.3 

—— of Summer chosen on St. Peter's 
Day, i. 195 

of the Wood at Nemi put to death, 
i. 2; in the Arician grove a personifi- 
cation of an oak-spirit, ii. 285; the 
priest of Diana at Aricia, perhaps per- 
sonified Jupiter, 302 sy. See also 
Kings 

Kingaru, clan of the Wadoe, ii. 313 

Kings, sacred or divine, put to death, 
i. x sg. ; subject to taboos, 2 

——— and priests, their sanctity analogous 
to the uncleanness of women at men- 
struation, i. 97 sg. 

—— of Uganda, their life bound up with 
barkcloth trees, ii. 160 

Kings, The Epic of, i. 104 

Kingsley, Miss Mary H., on external or 
bush souls, ii. 204 sg.; on rites of 
initiation in West Africa, 259 

Kingussie, in Inverness-shire, Beltane 
cakes at, i. 153 

tr created by the milk-tie, ii. 138 


Kirohenesee: Thomas, author of Regnum 


Papisticum, i. 124, 125 2.1; his 
account of Midsummer customs, 162 


5g. 

Kirghiz story of girl who might not see 
the sun, i 74 

Kirk Andreas, in the Isle of Man, i. 
306 : 

Kirkmichael, in Perthshire, Beltane fires 
and cakes at, i 153 

Kirton Lindsey, in Lincolnshire, i. 318; 
medical use of mistletoe at, ii. 84 

Kitching, Rev. A. L., on cure for light- 
ning stroke, ii. 298 7.? 

Kiwai, island off New Guinea, use of bull- 
roarers in, ii. 232 

Kiziba, to the west of Victoria Nyanza, 
theory of the afterbirth in, ii. 162 2.2 

Kloo, in the Queen Charlotte Islands, i. 


45 
Knawel, St. John’s blood on root of, ii. 
56 
2A 


354 


Knife, divination by, i. 241; soul of 
child bound up with, ii. 157; ‘‘ Dard- 
ing Knife,’’ honorific totem of the 
Carrier Indians, 273, 274 sg. 

Kobong, totem, in Western Australia, ii. 
219 Sq. 

Kohler, Joh., lights need-fire and burnt 
as a witch, i. 270 sg. 

Kohler, Reinhold, on the external soul in 
folk-tales, ii. 97 7. 

Kolelo, in East Africa, ii. 313 

Konz on the Moselle, custom of rolling 
a burning wheel down hill at, i. 118, 
163 S¢., 337 Sg. 

Kooboos of Sumatra, their theory of the 
afterbirth and navel-string, ii. 162 7. 

Koppenwal, church of St. Corona at, ii, 
188 sg. 

rs passage of, used as a charm, i. 


eon, their festivals of the dead and 
subsequent purification, ii. 178 ; their 
custom in time of pestilence, 179 

Koshchei the Deathless, Russian story 
of, ii. 108 sgg. 

Koskimo Indians of British Columbia, 
use of bull-roarers among the, ii. 229 
n. 

Kreemer, J., on the Looboos of Sumatra, 
ii. 182 sg. 

Kroeber, A. L., quoted, i. 41 sg. 

Kruijt, A. C., on Toradja custom as to 
the working of iron, ii. 154 7. 

Kuga, an evil spirit, i. 282 

Kuhn, Adalbert, on need-fire, i. 273 ; on 
Midsummer fire, 335 ; on the divining- 
rod, ii. 67 

Kiihnau, R., on precautions against 
witches in Silesia, ii. 20 7. 

Kukunjevac, in Slavonia, need-fire at, i. 
282 

Kulin nation of South-Eastern Australia, 
sex totems in the, ii, 216 

tribe of Victoria, ii. 226 7.1 

Kumaon, in North-West India, the Holi 
festival in, ii. 2 

Kupalo, image of, burnt or thrown into 
stream on St. John’s Night, i. 176; 
effigy of, carried across fire and thrown 
into water, li. 5, 23 

Kupalo’s Night, Midsummer Eve, i. 
175,:.176 

Kurnai, a tribe of Gippsland, sex totems 
and fights concerning them among 
the, ii. 215 2.', 216 

Kiistendil, in Bulgaria, need-fire at, i. 
281 

Kwakiutl, Indians of British Columbia, 
their story of an ogress whose life was 
in a hemlock branch, ii. 152; pass 
through a hemlock ring in time of 
epidemic, 186 


INDEX 


Kylenagranagh, the hill of, in Ireland, i 
324 


La Manche, in Normandy, Lenten fire - 
custom in, i. 115 

La Paz, in Bolivia, Midsummer fires at, 
i. 213; Midsummer flowers at, il 
50 Sq. 

Lacaune, belief as to mistletoe at, ii. 83 

Lachlan River, in Australia, ii. 233 

Lachlins of Rum and deer, superstition | 
concerning, ii. 284 

Ladyday, ii. 282 

Lahn, the Yule log in the valley of the, 
i. 248 E 

Lamb burnt alive to save the rest of ne ’ 
flock, i, 301 

Lammas, the first of August, superstitious 
practice at, i. 98 2. 

Lamoa, gods in Poso, ii. 154 


Lancashire, Hallowe'en customs in, 
244 Sg 
pee os ‘distriet of Dutch Borneo, i. 


ii, 164 

Lanercost, Chronicle of, i. 286 

Lang, ‘Anirew: on the fire- ra ped ii. 2 me . 
on the bull-roarer, 228 2.? 

Language of animals learned by means 
of fern-seed, ii, 66 7. E 

L ‘dnsira (El Ansarah), Midsummer: 
Day in North Africa, i. 213, 214 2. 4 

Lanyon, in Cornwall, holed stone near, 
ii, 187 

Laon, Midsummer fites near, 1. 187 

Laos, custom of elephant hunters in, i. Fl 
the natives of, their doctrine of the 
plurality of souls, ii. 222 | 

Lapps, their rule as to menstruous women 
i. gt; their story of the external soul | 
ii. 140 sg.; their custom of shooting 
arrows at skin of dead bear, 280-7. a 

Larkspur, looking at Midsummer bonfire S 
through bunches of, i. 163, 165 sg. _ 

Larrakeeyah tribe of South areas 
their treatment of girls at puberty, i. 38 | 

Laurus and Florus, feast of, on August 
18th, i. 220 ; 

Lausitz, Midsummer fires in, i. 17 
marriage oaks in, ii. 165 | 

Lawgivers, ancient, on the uncleannes 
of women at menstruation, i. 95 sg. j 

Lead, melted, divination by, i. 242 

Leaf-clad mummer on Midsummer Day 
ii. 25 sg. 

Leaping over bonfires to ensure goo Ol 
crops, i. 107 ; as a preventive of coli ‘ 
107, 195 5g., 344; to make the flax) 
grow tall, r19, 165, 166, 166 sg., 16 | 
173, 174, 337; to ensure a happ 
marriage, 107, 108; to ensure ; 4 
plentiful harvest, 155, 156; ; argh free | 

from backache at reaping, 165, 1 


a preventive of fever, 166, 173, 194; 
 apelig 189; in order to be free 
a ague, 174 ; eS 
many children, 204, 338 sg. ; 

aeons, 214; to sevice 


afte a burial to escape the ghost, 
48; a panacea for almost all ills, 20 ; 

eS Sete witchcraft, 40 
= of women over the Midsummer 


bonfires, i. 165, 166, 168, 174 

eather, Mrs. Ella Mary, on the Yule 
dog, i. 257 59. 

non, peasants of the, their dread of 
women, i. 83 sq. 

h, Midsummer fires in the valley of 
i, 166 

ain, the divining rod in, ii. 68 

, W. E. H., on the treatment of 
Magic and witchcraft by the Christian 
Church, ii. 42 2.? 

ee, the laird of, his ‘‘ cureing stane,"’ 
a. 325 

cling the witches, i. 245 

egends of persons who could not die, 


nenstruous 


99 5g. 
gs and thighs of diseased cattle cut off 
and hung up as a remedy, i. 296 x.}, 


20: S Aalaaticin ot Ealiows'en ta. 242; 
Soed-Gre in, 297; witch as hare in, 
8 


9s, worship of Hephaestus in, i. 


mon, external souls of ogres in a, ii. 
102 

ng ua Indians of the Paraguayan Chaco, 
i 75 2.7; seclusion of girls at puberty 
among the, 56; masquerade of boys 
ent, the first Sunday in, fire-festival on, 
i. 107 sgg. ; bonfires on, 107 sgg. 
enten fires, i. 106 sgg. 

enz, H. O., on ancient names for 
stletoe, ii. 318 

in Silesia, Midsummer fires 


chu 


at, i. 170 
onard, Major A. G., 08 souls of people 
in animals, ii, 206 7.2 

‘OP ee ee Conti of Fan 
s, li. 202 

; lives of persons bound up 
Fthase’ of i. aor, 202, 203, 204, 
a , 206; external human souls in, 


bes! 


INDEX 


355 


Lerwick, Christmas guésing at, i. 268 sg. ; 
procession with lighted tar-barrels on 
Christmas Eve at, ag celebration of 
Up-helly-a’ at, 269 7.1 

Lesachthal (Carinthia), 
Easter in the, i. 124 

Lesbos, fires on St. John’s Eve in, i. 
2II sg. - 

Leslie, David, on Caffre belief as to spirits - 
of the dead incarnate in serpents, ii. 
211 2.*, 212 2. 

L’Etoile, Lenten fires at, i. 113 

Lettermore Island, Midsummer fires in, 
i. 203 

Letts of Russia, Midsummer fires among 
the, i. 177 sg. ; gather aromatic plants 
on Midsummer Day, ii. 50 

Lewis, Professor W. J., i. 127 2.1 

Lewis, island of, custom of fiery circle in 
the, i. 151 #. ; need-fire in the, 293 

Lexicon Mythologicum, author of, on the 
Golden Bough, ii. 284 2.* 

Lhwyd, Edward, on snake stones, i. 
16 22 

License, annual period of, i. 135; at 
Midsummer festival, 180, 339 

Liége, Lenten fires near, i. 108 

Lierre, in Belgium, the witches’ Sabbath 
at, ii. 73 

Life of community bound up with life of 
divine king, i. 1 sg. ; the water of, ii. 
114 sg.; of woman bound up with 
ornament, 156; of a man bound up 
with the capital of a column, 156 sq. ; 
of a man bound up with fire in hut, 
157; of child bound up with knife, 
157; of children bound up with trees, 
160 sgg.; the divisibility of, 221. See 
also Soul 

-indices, trees and plants as, ii. 

160 599. 

-tokens in fairy tales, ii. 118 .* 

—— -tree of the Manchu dynasty at 
Peking, ii. 167 sg. 

—— -trees of kings of Uganda, ii. 160 

Ligho, a heathen deity of the Letts, i 
177, 178 2.4 

Light, girls at puberty not allowed to 
see the, i. 57; external soul of witch 
in a, ii. 116 

Lightning, charred sticks of Easter fire 
used as a talisman against, i. rar, 
124, 140 5g., 145, 146; the Easter 
candle a talisman against, 122 ; brands 
of the Midsummer bonfires a protec- 
tion against, 166 2.1, 183; flowers 
thrown on roofs at Midsummer as a 
protection against, 169 ; charred sticks 
of bonfires a protection against, 174, 
187, 188, 190; ashes of Midsummer 
fires a protection against, 187, 188, 
igo; torches interpreted as imitations 


new fire at 


356 


of, 340 2.1; bonfires a protection 
against, 344; a magical coal a pro- 
tection against, ii. 61; pine -tree 
struck by, used to make bull-roarer, 
231; superstitions about trees struck 
by, 296 sgg.; thought to be caused 
by a great bird, 297; strikes oaks 
oftener than any other tree of the 
European forests, 298 sg. ; regarded 
as a god descending out of heaven, 
298; mode of treating persons who 
have been struck by, 298 2.2; places 
struck by lightning enclosed and 
deemed sacred, 299. See also 
Thunder 

Lightning and thunder, the Yule log a 
protection against, i. 248, 249, 250, 
252, 253, 254, 258, 264; mountain 
arnica a protection against, ii. 57 sg. 

Lillooet Indians of British Columbia, 
seclusion of girls at puberty among 
the, i. 52 sg. 

Limburg, processions, with torches in, 
i. 107 sg. ; Midsummer fires in, 194; 
the Yule log in, 249 

Lime-kiln in divination, i. 235, 243 

-tree, the bloom of the, gathered 

at Midsummer, ii. 49; mistletoe on 

limes, 315, 316 

-wood used to kindle need-fire, i. 
281, 283, 286 

Lincolnshire, the Yule log in, i. 257; 
witches as cats and hares in, 318; 
calf buried to stop a murrain in, 326 ; 
mistletoe a remedy for epilepsy and 
St. Vitus’s dance in, ii, 83 sg. 

Lindenbrog, on need-fire, i. 335 2.1 

Lint seed, divination by, i. 235 

Liongo, an African Samson, ii. 314 

Lion, the sun in the sign of the, ii. 
66 sg. 

Lismore, witch as hare in, i. 316 sg. 

Lithuania, Midsummer fires in, i. 176; 
sanctuary at Romove in, ii. 91 

Lithuanians, their custom before first 
ploughing in spring, i. 18 ; their wor- 
ship of the oak, ii. 89, their story of 
the external soul, 113 sgg. 

Lives of a family bound up with a fish, 
ii. 200; with a cat, 150 sg. 

Living fire made by friction of wood, i. 
220 ; the need-fire, 281, 286 

Livonia, story of a were-wolf in, i. 308 

Livonians cull simples on Midsummer 
Day, ii. 49 sg. 

Lizard, external soul in, ii. r99 7.1; sex 
totem in the Port Lincoln tribe of 
South Australia, 216; said to have 
divided the sexes in the human species, 
216 

Loaf thrown into river Neckar on St. 
John’s Day, ii. 28 


INDEX 


Loango, rule as to infants in, i. 5; girl 
secluded at puberty in, 22 

Loch Katrine, i. 231 

Tay, i. 232 

Lock and key in a charm, i. 283 a 

Locks opened by springwort, ii. 70; a nt 
by the white flower of chicory, 71 
mistletoe a master-key to open all, 85 

Locust, a Batta totem, ii. 223 

Log, the Yule, i. 247 sgq. i 

Logierait, in Perthshire, Beltane festiva 
in, i. 152 sg.; Hallowe'en fires in, 
231 sq. E 

Loiret, Lenten fires in the department 
of, i. 114 

Loki and Balder, i. ror sg. 

Lokoja on the Niger, ii. 209 4 

Lombardy, belief as to the ‘‘oil of St. 
John”’ on St. John’s Morning in, ii 
82 sg. 

London, the immortal girl of, i. 
Midsummer fires in, 196 sg. 3 

Longridge Fell, /ee¢ing the witches at, i.| 


245 f 
Looboos of Sumatra creep through a 
cleft rattan to escape a demon, ii. 
182 sg. a 
Looking at bonfires through mugwort ¢ 
protection against headache and sor 
eyes, ii. 59 
Loranthus europaeus, a species of mistle- 
toe, ii. 315, 317 sgg.; called ‘‘ oak 
mistletoe” (vzsco guercino) in Italy, 
317 
vestitus, in India, ii. 317 3 
Lord of the Wells at Midsummer, ii. 28 
Lorne, the Beltane cake in, i. 149 r 
Lorraine, Midsummer fires in, i. 169 
the Yule log in, 253; Midsummel 
customs in, ii. 47 
Loudoun, in Ayrshire, i. 207 a 
Louis XIV. at Midsummer bonfire in 
Paris, ii. 39 ; 
Love-charm of arrows, i. 14 * 
Lovers leap over the Midsummer bon- 
fires, i. 165, 166, 168, 174 s 
Low Countries, the Yule log in the, i. 24¢ 
Lowell, Percival, his fire-walk, ii, 10 2+ 
Liibeck, church of St. Mary at, i. t00 
Lucerne, Lenten fire-custom in the can- 
ton of, i. 118 sg.; bathing at Mid- 
summer in, ii. 30 a 
Luchon, in the Pyrenees, serpents burn 
alive at the Midsummer festival in, iy) 
38 59. 43 
Lucian, on the Platonic doctrine of th 
soul, ii, 221 2. ig 
Luck, leaping over the Midsummer fire 
for good, i. 171, 189 
Luckiness of the right hand, i. r5r 
Lunar calendar of Mohammedans, — 
216 sg., 218 sg. e: 


or liver of bewitched animal 

burnt or boiled to compel the witch 

to appear, i. 321 sg. 

Shais of Assam, sick children 

ugh a coil among the, ii. 185 sg. 

u in Poitou, Midsummer fires at, 
Bet 

, Martin, burnt in effigy at Mid- 
mer, 1 167, 172 sq., ti. 23 

en ** Burning the the Witch” in, 


menstruation =, 78 sq.; 


Macdonald, Rev. James, on the story of 
ound ahh epee on exter- 
_ nal soul in South Africa, 156 

edonel A. A., on Agni, ii. 296 
Dougall, W., and C. Hose, on creep- 
"ing through a cleft stick after a funeral, 
ii. 176 2.4 

, Midsummer fires among the 
ghd ob. % axa; bonfires on August 
- Ist in, 220; need - fire among the 
E Serbs of Western, 281; St. John’s 
| flower at Midsummer in, ii. 50 
Macedonian peasantry burn effigies of 
_ Judas at Easter, i. 131 

McGregor, A. W., on the rite of new 
birth among the Akikuyu, ii. 263 
ackay, Alexander, on need- fire, i. 


5g- 
ckays, sept of the ‘‘descendants of 
"the seal,” i. I3I Sg. 

enzie, E., on need-fire, i. 288 
M , Sheriff David J., i. 268 2.1 
‘Macphz , John, on need-fire, i. 293 sg. 
lacusis of British Guiana, seclusion of 
eee ey Smnong te 56> 

of Borneo, custom observed by 

Sita alas funeral, li. 175 sg. 
ladern, parish of, Cornwall, holed stone 
in, ii. 187 
: Mountains, in Sicily, Midsum- 
__ mer fires on the, i. 210 
Presidency, the fire-walk in the, 


the Kappiliyans of, i. 69; the 
_ Parivarams of, 69 
eseyck, processions with torches at, i. 


i 
icKen rit 


Madoni 


107 Sg. 
4 homoeopathic or imitative, i. 49 
133, 329, ii. 231, 287; dwindles into 


INDEX 


357 


divination, i. 336; movement of 
thought from magic through religion 
to science, ii. 304 sg. 

Magic and ghosts, mugwort a protection 
against, ii. 59 

—— and science, different views of 
natural order postulated by the two, 
ii. 305 5g. 

—— flowers of Midsummer Eve, ii. 45 


599- 
Magical bone in sorcery, i. 14 
—— implements not allowed to touch 
the ground, i. 14 sg. 
—— influence of medicine-bag, ii. 268 
virtues of plants at Midsummer 
apparently derived from the sun, ii. 


i. 178 sg. ; stories of the external soul 
among the, ii. 139 5g. 

Mahabharata, Draupadi and her five 
husbands in the, ii. 7 

** Maiden-fiax"’ at Midsummer, ii. 48 

Maidu Indians of California, seclusion 
of girls at puberty among the, i. 42; 
their notion as to fire in trees, ii. 295 ; 
their idea of lightning, 298 _ 

Maimonides, on the seclusion of men- 
struous women, i. 83 

Makalanga, a Bantu tribe, i. 135 2.7 

Makral, ‘* the witch,” i. 107 

Malabar, the Iluvans of, i. 5; the Tiyans 
of, 68 

Malassi, a fetish in West Africa, ii. 256 

Malay belief as to sympathetic relation 
between man and animal, ii. 197 

—— story of the external soul, ii. 147 sg. 

Malayo-Siamese families of the Patani 
States, their custom as to the after- 
birth, ii. 163 sg. 

Malays of the Peninsula, their doctrine of 
the plurality of souls, ii. 222 

Male and female souls in Chinese philo- 
sophy, ii. 221 

Malkin Tower, witches at the, i 245 

Malta, fires on St. John’s Eve in, i. 
210 sg. 

Malurus cyaneus, superb warbler, women's 
** sister,’ among the Kurnai, ii. 216 
Man and animal, sympathetic relation 

between, ii. 272 sg. 

Man, the Isle of, Midsummer fires in, i. 
201, 337; old New Year’s Day in, 
224 sg. ; Hallowe’en customs in, 243 
sg. ; bonfires on St. Thomas's Day in, 
266 ; cattle burnt alive to stop a mur- 
rain in, 325 sgg.; mugwort gathered 
on Midsummer Eve in, ii. 59. See also 
Isle of Man 


358 


Manchu dynasty, the life-tree of the, ii. 
167 sq. 


Mandragora, ‘‘the hand of glory,” ii 
316 
Mang’anje woman, her external soul, ii. 


157 

ite Se tree, festival of wild, i. 7 sgq. ; 
ceremony for the fertilization of the, 
Io 

Manitoo, personal totem, ii. 273 2.1 

Mannhardt, W., on fire-customs, i. 1067.3; 
on burning leaf-clad representative of 
spirit of vegetation, 25 ; his theory that 
the fires of the fire-festivals are charms 
to secure sunshine, 329, 331 sgg. ; on 
torches as imitations of lightning, 340 
u.1; on the Hirpi Sorani, ii. 15 x. ; 
on the human victims sacrificed by 
the Celts, 33; his theory of the Druid- 
ical sacrifices, 43; his solar theory 
of the bonfires at the European fire- 
festivals, 72; on killing a cock on the 
harvest-field, 280 7. 

Mantis religiosus, a totem, ii. 248 2. 

Manu, Hindoo lawgiver, on the un- 
cleanness of women at menstruation, 
i. 95; the Laws of, on the three births 
of the Aryan, ii. 276 sg. 

Manx mummers at Hallowe'en, i. 224 

Maoris, birth-trees among the, ii. 163 

Mara tribe of Northern Australia, initia- 
tion of medicine-men in the, ii. 239 

Marake, an ordeal of being stung by 
ants and wasps, i. 63 sg. 

Marcellus of Bordeaux, 
treatise, i. 17 

March, the month of, the fire-walk in, 
ii. 6; mistletoe cut at the full moon 
of, 84, 86 

moon, woodbine cut in the increase 
of the, ii. 184 

Margas, exogamous totemic clans of the 
Battas of Sumatra, ii. 222 sg. 

Marilaun, A. Kerner von, on mistletoe, 
ii, 318 2.6 

Marjoram burnt at Midsummer, i. 214 ; 
gathered at Midsummer, ii. 51; a 
talisman against witchcraft, 74 

Mark of Brandenburg, need-fire in the, 
i. 273; simples culled at Midsummer 
in the, ii. 48; St. John’s blood in the, 
56; the divining-rod in the, 67 

Marotse. See Barotse 

Marquesas Islands, the fire-walk in the, 
eat 

Marriage, leaping over bantees to ensure 
a happy, i. 107, 108, 110; omens of, 
drawn from Midsummer bonkves: 168, 
174, 178, 185, 189; omens of, drawn 
from bonfires, 338 sg.; omens of, 
from flowers, ii. 52 sg., 61; oak-trees 
planted at, 165 


his medical 


INDEX 


Married, the person last, lights the bo 
fire, i, 107, 109, III, I19, 339; yout 
man last married provides wheel to be) 
burnt, 116; the person last marri 
officiates at Midsummer fire, 192; me 
married within the year collect fuel fe 
Midsummer fire, 192 sg. ; married me 
kindle need-fire, 289; last marri 
bride made to leap over bonfire, ii. 

Mars and Silvia, ii. 105 

Marsaba, a devil who swallows lads'g 
initiation, ii. 246 

Marseilles, drenching people with 
at Midsummer in, i. 193 ; Midsumme 
king of the double-axe at, 194; 
Yule log at, 250; Midsummer flow 
at, ii. 46 a 

Marshall Islands, belief in the externa 
soul in the, ii. 200 

Marsi, the ancient, i. 209 

Martin of Urzedow, i. 177. a 

Martin, M., on dessid (deiseal), i. 151 7. 
on need- firs, 289 

Marwaris, of India, Holi festival amon; 
the, ii. 2 sg. 

Marxberg, the, on the Moselle, i, 118 q 

Masai, peace-making ceremony amon 
the, ii. 139 2, 

Mask, not to wear a, i. 4 § 

Masked dances, bull-roarers used at, i 
230 7. & 

Masks worn by girls at puberty, i i. 31,5 2 
worn at Duk-duk ceremonies in Ne 
Britain, ii. 247; worn by members o 
a secret society, 270, 271 q 

Masquerade of boys among the gu: 
Indians, i. 57 2.4 F 

Masuren, a district of Eastern Prussia 
Midsummer fire kindled by the revolu 
tion of a wheel at, i. 177, 335 sg. 
divination by flowers on Midsumme 
Eve in, ii, 52, 53; divination b 
orpine at Midsummer in, 61 ; came 
mile gathered at Midsummer in, 63 
fire kindled by friction of oak at Mid- 
summer in, 91 i 

Matabeles fumigate their gardens, i. 337 

Matacos, Indian tribe of the Gran Chaco, 
their custom of secluding girls a 
puberty, i. 58 

Mataguayos, Indian tribe of the Grai 
Chaco, their custom of secluding gird 
at puberty, i. 58 A 

Matthes, B. F., on sympathetic relatiot 
between man and animal, ii. 197 2.4 

Mauhes, Indians of Brazil, seclusion ¢ 
girls at puberty among the, i. 59. 
ordeal of young men among the, 62 

Maundy Thursday, i. 125 2.1 

Maurer, Konrad, on Icelandic story 0 
the external soul, ii. 125 2,1 a 

May Day in the Isle of Man, i. 1 j 


sia ee eC RE ATL A OE AT 
ee . 


ea ee Ss So 


ee 


iin : 
a EAS aN A 


burnt as a sacrifice on, 306; 
ches active on, ii. 19, 184 2.4, 185 
Day, Eve of, Snake Stones thought 
be formed on, i. 15; a witching 
295; witches active on, ii. 73 
free carried about, i. 120, ii. 22 
o, County, story of Guleesh in, i. 228 
W@Bengas of the Gaboon, birth-trees 
_ among the, ii. 160 

in Fiji, the fire-walk in, ii. 


» Budgett, on Midsummer fires in 
_ Morocco, i. 214 7. 
; County, Hill of Ward in, i. 139; 
asec ‘i. 158 
aU Midsummer bonfires in the 
: - diocese of, i. 182 
Mecklenburg, need - fire in, i. 274 $9.5 
simples gathered at Midsummer in, ii. 
_ 48; mugwort at Midsummer in, 60; 
_ the divining-rod in, 67; treatment of 
_ the afterbirth in, 165; children passed 
_ through a cleft oak as a cure in, 171 
 $g.; custom of striking blindfold at a 
 half-buried cock in, 279 2.* 
‘Medicine-bag, instrument of pretended 
_ death and resurrection at initiation, ii. 
268 sq. 
'— -man in Australia, initiation of, ii. 
; 237 $99- 
fegz besieged by Minos, ii. 103 
ersen, in Hanover, i. 275 
Meissen or Thuringia, horse's head thrown 
_ into Midsummer fire in, ii. 40 
nesian conception of the external 
soul, ii. 197 sqq. 
and Papuan stocks in New Guinea, 
ii. 239 
eleager and the firebrand, story of, ii. 
103; and the olive-leaf, 103 ».? 
lelur, in the Neilgherry Hills, the fire- 
walk at, ii. 8 sg. 
“Men disguised as women, i. 107 
and women eat apart, i. 81 
-an-tol, ‘‘ holed stone” in Cornwall, 
Pi 387 
“Menomini Indians, ritual of death and 
resurrection among the, ii. 268 z.! 
Menstruation, seclusion of girls at the 
first, i. 22 syg.; the first, attributed to 
defloration by a spirit, 24 ; reasons for 
pacing women at, 97 
nst s blood, the dread of, i. 76. 
a as cis Blood 
“waged 0 beneficent applications of, 
i. 98 x. 


—— fluid, medicinal applications of the, 
i. 98 2.3 
enstruous women keep their heads or 
- faces covered, i. 22, 24, 25, 29, 31, 
_ 44: 59., 48 5g., 55, 90, 92; not allowed 
to cross or in rivers, 77; not 


INDEX 


359 


allowed to go near water, 77; supposed 
to spoil fisheries, 77, 78, 9° 5g., 93; 
painted red, or red and white, 78 ; not 
allowed to use the ordinary paths, 78, 
80, 84, 89, 90; not allowed to approach 
the sea, 79; not allowed to enter culti- 
vated fields, 79; obliged to occupy 
special huts, 79, 82, 85 sgg- ; 

to spoil crops, 79, 96; not allowed to 
cook, 80, 82, 84, 90; not allowed to 
drink milk, 8a, 84; not allowed to 
handle salt, 8x sg., 84; kept from 
wells, 81, 82, 97; obliged to use 
separate doors, 84; not allowed to 
lie on high beds, 84; not allowed to 
touch or see fire, 84, 85; not allowed 
to cross the tracks of animals, 84, 91, 
93; excluded from religious cere- 
monies, 85; not allowed to eat with 
men, 85, 90; thought to spoil the 
luck of hunters, 87, 89, 90, 91, 94; 
not allowed to ride horses, 88 sg., 96; 
not allowed to walk on ice of rivers 
and lakes, 90; dangers to which they 
are thought to be exposed, 94; not 
allowed to touch beer, wine or vinegar, 
96; not allowed to salt or pickle meat, 
96 2.7; not allowed to cross running 
not allowed to draw 


Menstruous women dreaded and secluded 
in Australia, i. 76 sgg., in the Torres 
Straits Islands, 78 sg., in New Guinea, 
79, in Galela, 79, in Sumatra, 79, in 
Africa, 79 sgg., among the Jews and 
in Syria, 83 sg., in India, 84 sg., in 
Annam, 85, in America, 85 sgg. 

Mequinez, Midsummer custom at, i. 216 

Merolla, J., on seclusion of girls at 
puberty, i. 31 2. 3 

Merrakech, in Morocco, Midsummer 
custom at, i. 216; New Year fires at, 
217 

Mesopotamia, Atrae in, i. 82 

Mespelaer, St. Peter’s fires at, i, 195 

Messaria, in Cythnos, ii. 189 

Metz, F., on the fire-walk, ii. 9 

Metz, cats burnt alive in Midsummer fire 
at, ii. 39 

Mexican ceremony of new fire, i. 132 

—— representation of the sun as a wheel, 
i. 334 2.* 

Mexico, effigies of Judas burnt at Easter 
in, i. 127 sg.; the Zapotecs of, ii. 212 

Michael, in the Isle of Man, i. 307 

Michaelmas, cakes baked at, i. 149. See_ 
also St. Michael 

Michemis, a Tibetan tribe, a funeral 
ceremony among the, i. 5 

Middle Ages, the Yule log in the, i. 252; 
the need-fire in the, 270 


360 


Midsummer, wells crowned with flowers 
at, ii. 28; bathing at, 29 sg.; sacred 
to Balder, 87. See also St. John’s Day 

bonfire called ‘‘ fire of heaven,” i. 
334; intended to drive away dragons, 
161 

af Brooms”’ in Sweden, ii. 54 

Day, charm for fig-trees on, i. 18 ; 

water claims human victims on, 26 sgqg. ; 

in ancient Rome, 178; regarded as 

unlucky, ii. 29 

Eve, Snake Stones thought to be 

formed on, i. 15; Trolls and evil 

spirits abroad on, 172; witches active 
on, ii. 19; the season for gathering 
wonderful herbs and flowers, 45 sgq.; 
the magic flowers of, 45 sgg.; divina- 
tion on, 46 2.,° 50, 52 sgg., 61, 64, 67 
5gqg.; dreams of love on, 52, 54; fern- 
seed blooms at, 65, 287; the divining- 
rod cut at, 67 sgg.; activity of witches 
and warlocks on, 73 sgg.; treasures 
bloom in the earth on, 288 2.°; the 

oak thought to bloom on, 292, 293 

festival common to peoples on 

both sides of the Mediterranean, i. 

219, ii. 31 ; the most important of the 

year among the primitive Aryans of 

Europe, 40; its relation to Druidism, 

45 


fires, i. 160 sgg.; in Wales, 156 

flowers and plants used as talismans 
against witchcraft, ii. 72 

—— Men, orpine, ii. 61 

—— mummers clad in green fir branches, 
ii, 25 sg. 

Midwinter fires, i. 246 sgq. 

Mijatovich, Chedo, on the Zadrooga or 
Servian house-community, i. 259 2.1 
Mikado not allowed to set foot on ground, 
i. 2 sg.; the sun not allowed to shine 

on him, 18 sg. 

Milk, girls at puberty forbidden to drink, 
i. 22, 30; libations of, 30; not to be 
drunk by menstruous women, 80, 84; 
stolen by witches from cows, 176, 
343, li. 74 ; omens drawn from boiling, 
8; libations of, poured on fire, 8, 9; 
libations of, poured into a stream, 9; 
poured on sick cattle, 13 

and butter thought to be improved 

by the Midsummer fires, i. 80; stolen 

by witches at Midsummer, 185 ; witch- 

craft fatal to, ii. 86 

-tie as a bond of kinship, ii. 138 7. 

vessels not to be touched by men- 
struous women, i. 80 

Milking cows through a hole in a branch 
or a ‘‘witch’s nest,” ii, 185 

Millaeus on judicial torture, ii. 158 

Miller’s wife a witch, story of the, i. 319 
5g. 


INDEX 


Miming, a satyr of the woods, i, 103 
Minahassa, in Celebes, ceremony at a 
house-warming in, ii. 153 i, 
Minangkabauers of Sumatra, their belief 
as to menstruous women, i. 79 ; use of 
bull-roarers among the, ii. 229 2. . 
Minos, king of Crete, besieges Megara, 
ii, 103 
Mint, flowers of, gathered on St. John’s — 
Day, ii. 51 : 
Mirzapur, the Bhuiyars of, i. 84 
Misfortune burnt in Midsummer fires, i. © 
215; got rid of by leaping over Mid- — 
summer fires, 215 x 
Missel-thrush and mistletoe, ii. 316 
‘* Mist - healing,’’ Swiss expression for — 
kindling a need-fire, i. 279 q 
Mistletoe, the divining-rod made of, ii. — 
69, 291; worshipped by the Druids, © 
76 sq., 301; cut on the sixth day of the | 
moon, 77; makes barren animals and _ 
women to bring forth, 77, 78, 79; cut — 
with a golden sickle, 77, 80; thought — 


to have fallen from the sky, 77; 805 


called the ‘‘all-healer,” 77, 79, 82; 
an antidote to all poison, 77, 83; 
gathered on the first day of the moon, — 
78; not to touch the earth, 78, 80; 
a cure for epilepsy, 78, 83, 84; extin- 
guishes fire, 78, 84.sg., 293; venerated 
by the Ainos of Japan, 79; growing — 
on willow specially efficacious, 79; 
confers invulnerability, 79 sg.; its — 
position as a parasite on a tree the 
source of superstitions about it, 80, — 
81, 84; not to be cut but shot or 
knocked down with stones, 81 sg.; in 
the folk-lore of modern European — 
peasants, 81 sgg.; medical virtues © 
ascribed to, 82 sgg.; these virtues a — 
pure superstition, 84; cut when the 
sun is in Sagittarius, 82, 86; growing © 
on oak a panacea for green wounds, — 
83; mystic qualities ascribed to mistle- — 


toe at Midsummer (St. John’s Day or — 


Eve), 83, 86; cut at the full moon of — 
March, 84, 86; called 
besom” in Aargau, 85, 301; a master- — 
key to open all locks, 85; a protection © 
against witchcraft, 85 sg.; given to 
first cow that calves after New Year, — 
86; gathered especially at Midsummer, 
86 sg.; grows on oaks in Sweden, — 
87; ancient Italian belief that mistle- — 
toe could be destroyed neither by — 
fire nor water, 94; 
death in the, 279, 283; life of oak in, — 
280; not allowed to touch the ground, — 
280; a protection against witchcraft — 
and Trolls, 282, 283, 294; a protec- — 
tion against fairy changelings, 283; — 
hung over doors of stables and byres — 


‘‘thunder- _ 


Balder's life or — 


‘ ee cy tees omaueey a 
q a germ or seed of fire, 292; aaa 
of mistletoe perhaps explained by the 
_ belief that the plant has fallen on the 
E ice is a flash of lightning, sor: two 
4 species of, Viscum album and Loran- 
thus europaeus, 315 sgg.; found most 
- commonly on apple-trees, 315, com 

pare 316 2.5; growing on oaks in 
_ England, 316 ; seeds of, deposited by 
- missel-thrush, 316; ancient names of, 
y 317 sg. ; Virgil on, 318 sgg. ; Dutch 
' names for, 319 2.1 

stletoe and Balder, i. rox sq., ii. 76 


a 


hell, Sir Arthur, on a barbarous 


mu, spirits of the dead, ii. 312 
‘Mianje, in British Central Africa, ii. 314 
“Mnasara tribe of Morocco, i. 214 
Professor Eugen, i. 330 

n calendar lunar, i. 216 sg., 


- New Year festival in North Africa, 
~ i. 217 5g. 

-—— peoples of North Africa, Mid- 
summer fires among the, i. 213 sgg. 
harram, first Mohammedan month, 


“Moles and field-mice driven away by 
' torches, i. 115, ii. 340 

iy Isheim in Baden, i, II7 

ian story, milk-tie in a, i. 138 2.1; 
_ the external soul in a, ii. 143 sg. 
“Monster supposed to swallow and dis- 
> Pei novices at initiation, ii. 240 sg., 


Fang des Fourches, in the Vosges, i. 
E318 


Ontaigon 


iL0n¢go 


on ceremonial extinction of 
fires, i. 135 2.? 

fontanus, on the Yule log, i. 248 
lontenegro, the Yule log in, i. 263 
ntezuma not allowed to set foot on 


(oon, impregnation of women by the 
i. 75 sg.; the sixth day of the, mistle- 


INDEX 


361 


toe cut on, 77; the first day of the, 
mistletoe gathered on, 78; the full, 


trees struck by lightning, ii. 296 

Moore, Manx Surnames, quoted by Sir 
John Rhys, i. 306 

Moors, their superstition as to the 
**sultan of the oleander,” i. 18 

Moosheim, in Wurtemberg, leaf-clad 
mummer at, ii. 26 

Moravia, fires to burn the witches in, 
L 160; Midsummer fires in, 175; the 
divining-rod in, ii. 67 

Moravians cull simples at Midsummer, 
ii, 49, 54 

Moray, remedy for a murrain in the 
county of, i. 326 

Morayshire, medical use of mistletoe in, 
ii. 84 

Morbihan in Brittany, ii. 287 

Moresin, Thomas, on St. Peter's fires in 
Scotland, i. 207 

Morice, Father A. G., on customs and 
beliefs of the Carrier Indians as to 
menstruous women, i. 91 sgg.; on the 
honorific totems of the Carrier Indians, 
li. 273 599. 

Morlaks, the Yule log among the, i. 264 

Morlanwelz, bonfires at, i. 107 

Morning star, the rising of the, i. 40, 
133 

Morocco, magical virtue ascribed to 

rain-water in, i. 17 sg.; Midsummer 

fires in, 213 sgg.; water thought to 
acquire marvellous virtue at Mid- 
summer in, ii. 30 5g.; magical plants 
gathered at Midsummer in, 5 

Morven, i. 290; consumptive people 
passed through rifted rocks in, ii. 
186 sg. 

Moscow, annual new fire in villages 
near, i. 139 

Moselle, bonfires on the, i. 109; Konz 
on the, 118, 163 59. : 

Moses on the uncleanness of women at 
menstruation, i. 95 sg. 

Mosquito territory, Central America, 
seclusion of menstruous women in the, 
i. 86 

Mota, in the New Hebrides, conception 
of the external soul in, ii. 197 sg. 

Motherwort, garlands of, at Midsummer, 
i. 162 

Moulin, parish of, in Perthshire, Hallow- 
e’en fires in, i. 230 

Moulton, Professor J. H., on the etymo- 
logy of Soranus, ii. 15 .} 

Mountain arnica gathered at Midsummer, 
li. 57 5g.; a protection against thunder, 
lightning, hail, and conflagration, 58 


362 


Mountain-ash, parasitic, used to make 
the divining rod, ii. 69 ; mistletoe on, 
315. See also Rowan 

scaur, external soul in, ii. 156 

Mourne Mountains, i. 159 

Mourners tabooed, i. 20; step over fire 
after funeral in China, ii. 17; purified 
by fire, 17, 18 sg.; customs observed 
by, among the Bella Coola Indians, 
174 

Mourning, the great, for Isfendiyar, i. 
105 

Mouse-ear hawkweed (Hieracium pilo- 
sella) gathered at Midsummer, ii. 57 

Movement of thought from magic 
through religion to science, ii, 304 
5g. 

Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris), wreaths 
of, at Midsummer, i. 163, 165, 174; 
a preventive of sore eyes, 174; a 
preservative against witchcraft, 177; 
a protection against thunder, ghosts, 
magic, and witchcraft, ii, 59 sg. ; 
gathered on Midsummer Day or Eve, 
ii. 58 sgg.; thrown into the Midsum- 
mer fires, 59 ; used in exorcism, 60 

Mull, the need-fire in, i. 148, 289 
sg.; the Beltane cake in, 149 } remedy 
for cattle-disease in, 325; consump- 
tive people passed through rifted 
rocks in, ii. 186 sg. 

Mullein, sprigs of, passed across Mid- 
summer fires protect cattle against 
sickness and sorcery, i. 190; bunches 
of, passed across Midsummer fires and 
fastened on cattle-shed, 191 ; yellow 
(Verbascum), gathered at Midsummer, 
ii. 63 59.; yellow hoary (Verbascum 
pulverulentum), its golden pyramid of 
blooms, 64; great ( Verdascum thapsus), 
called King’s Candle or High Taper, 
64 

Mummers at Hallowe'en in the Isle of 
Man, i. 224 

Munster, the King of, i. 139; Midsum- 
mer fires in, 203 

Miinsterberg, precautions against witches 
in, ii. 20 2. 

Miinsterland, Easter fires in, i. 141 ; the 
Yule log in, 247 

Muralug, dread of women at menstrua- 
tion in, i. 78 

Murderer, fire of oak-wood used to 
detect a, ii. 92 7.4 

Murrain, need-fire kindled as a remedy 
for, i. 278, 282, 290 sgg.; burnt 
sacrifices to stay a, in England, Wales, 
and Scotland, 300 sgg.; calf burnt 
alive to stop a, 300 sg.; cattle buried 
to stop a, 326. See also Cattle 
disease 

Murray, the country of, i. 154 2.1 


INDEX 


Murray River, in Australia, ii, 233; 
natives of, their dread of menstruous - 
women, i. 77 

Muskau, in Lausitz, marriage oaks at, : 
ii. 165 q 

Myrtle-trees of the Patricians and Ple- 
beians at Rome, ii, 168 

Myths dramatized in ritual, i. 105 


Na Ivilankata, a Fijian clan, ii. 10 
Nagas of North-Eastern India, their — 
ceremony of the new fire, i. 136 
Nagual, external soul, among the Indians 
of Guatemala and Honduras, ii. 212 
$9q., 220, 226 n.} 7 
Nahuqua Indians of Brazil, their use of © 
bull-roarers, ii. 230 
Names on chimney-piece, divination by, 
i. 237; of savages kept secret, ii. 
224 2.7; new, taken by novices after — 
initiation, 259 4 
Namoluk, one of the Caroline Islands, — 
traditionary origin of fire in, ii. 295 
Namuci and Indra, legend of, ii. 280 
Namur, Lenten fires in, i. 108 ; 
Nandi, the, of British East Africa, their 
custom of driving sick cattle round a 
fire, ii. 13 ; use of bull-roarers among — 
the, 229 2. 
244 
Nanna, the wife of Balder, i. 102, 103 
Nanny, a Yorkshire witch, i. 317 o | 
Naples, feast of the Nativity of the © 
Virgin at, i, 220 sg. 
Narrow openings, creeping through, in — 
order to escape ghostly pursuers, ii, 
177 59. 
Nathuram, image supposed to make | 
women fruitful, ii. 3 4 
Nativity of the Virgin, feast of the, i, 
220 Sq. 4 
Naudowessies, Indian tribe of North 
America, ritual of death and resurrec- 
tion among the, ii. 267 
Naueld, need-fire, i. 280 { 
Nauru, in the Marshall Islands, lives of q 
people bound up with a fish in, ii. 200 © 
Navajoes, their story of the external — 
soul, ii. 151 sg.; use of bull-roarers — 
among the, 230 ”., 231 q 
Navel-string buried under a plant or tree, 
ii. 160 sg., 161, 163; regarded as © 
brother or sister of child, 162 2.? 4 
Ndeméo, secret society on the Lower — 
Congo, ii. 251 sgg. 4 
Ndolo, on the Moeko River, West Attica 4 
ii, 200 q 
Neckar, the river, requires three human ~ 
victims at Midsummer, ii. 26; loaf 
thrown into the river, 28 . 
Necklace, girl's soul in a, ii. 99 sq. 


eed-fire, i. 269 sgg.; kindled as a 
remedy for cattle-plague, 270 sg. , 343; 
cattle driven through the, 270 sgg. ; 
derivation of the name, 270 2. ; kindled 
by the friction of a wheel, 270, 273, 
289 sg., 292; kindled with oak-wood, 
271, 272, 275, 276, 278, 281, 289 sg., 
294; called ‘‘wild-fire,” 272, 273, 
277; kindled by fir-wood, 278, 282; 
kindled as a remedy for witchcraft, 
280, 292 sg., 293, 295; called ‘living 
fire,” 281, 286 ; healing virtue ascribed 
to, 281, 286; kindled by lime-wood, 
281, 283, 286; kindled by poplar- 
wood, 282; regarded as a_ barrier 
interposed between cattle and an evil 
spirit, 282, 285 sg.; kindled by cornel- 
tree wood, 286; revealed by an angel 
from heaven, 287 ; used to heat water, 
289; kindled on an island, 290 sg., 
291 sg. ; kindled by birch-wood, 291; 
kindled between two running streams, 
292; kindled to prevent fever, 297; 
probable antiquity of the, 297 sy. ; 
kindled by elm-wood, 299 ; the parent 
__. Of the periodic fire-festivals, 299, 343; 
used by Slavonic peoples to combat 
vampyres, 344; sometimes kindled 
__ by the friction of fir, plane, birch, 
lime, poplar, cornel-wood, ii. 91 .? 
_ Need-fire, John Rameny’s accomnt | of, i. 
_ 447 sg. ; Lindenbrog on, 335 n2 
_ Negro children pale at birth, ii. 251 #.}, 
259 2.2 
' Neil, R. A., on Gaelic name for mistle- 
4 toe, ii. 82 7.5 
_ Neilgherry Hills, the Badagas of the, ii. 
_  8sg.; the Todas of the, i. 136 
_ Neisse, precautions against witches in, 
_ _ li. 202. 
_ Nellingen in Lorraine, simples gathered 
-_ on Midsummer Day at, ii. 47 
Nemi, the King of the Wood at, i. 2; 
the Lake of, annual tragedy enacted 
at, ii. 286; sacramental bread at, 
286 2.2; Virbius at, 295; at evening, 
308 sg. ; sacred grove of, 315; priests 
of Diana at, 315 


4 | Nestelkniipfen, i. 346 2.? 

_ Nets fumigated with smoke of need-fire, 
a i. 280 

| Nettles, Indians beaten with, as an 
ordeal, i. 64 ~ 

' Neuchatel, Midsummer fires in the 
- canton of, i. 172 

_ Neumann, J. B., on the Batta doctrine 
a of souls, ii. 223 2,” 

_ Neustadt, in Silesia, Midsummer fires 
__at, i. 170; near Marburg, the need-fire 
at, 270 


INDEX 


363 


New birth of novices at initiation, ii. 247, 
251, 256, 257, 261, 262 5g. | 
body obtained at initiation, ii. 


252 

Britain, the Duk-duk society of, 
i. Ir, ii. 246 sg. 

— fire kindled on Easter Saturday, 
i. 121 sgg.; made at the New Year, 
134 5g., 138, 140; made by the 
friction of wood at Christmas, 264 

—— Guinea, British, festival of wild 
mango in, i. 7; custom observed 
after childbirth in, 20; seclusion of 
girls at puberty in, 35; dread and 
seclusion of women at menstruation 
in, 79; the Toaripi of, 84; use of 
bull-roarers in, ii. 228 2.2 

Guinea, German, the Kai of, ii. 

182 ; ceremony of initiation in, 193; 

the Yabim of, 232; rites of initiation 

in, 239 59g. 

Hebrides, conception of the ex- 
ternal soul in the, ii. 197 sgq. 

—— Ireland, seclusion of girls at puberty 
in, i. 32 sgg.; Duk-duk society in, 
il, 247 

—— Mexico, the Zuni Indians of, i. 132; 
and Arizona, use of bull-roarers in, 
ii, 230 #., 231 

—— South Wales, dread of women at 
menstruation in, i. 78; the Wongh 
tribe of, ii. 227; the drama of resur- 
rection at initiation in, 235 sgg. 

—— water at Easter, i. 123 

World, Easter ceremonies in the, 
i. 127 sg. ; magical virtue of plants at 
Midsummer in the, ii. 50 sg. 

—— Year, new fire made at the, i 
134 Sg., 138, 140; festival of Moham- 
medans in North Africa, 217 sg. ; the 
Celtic, on November first, 224 sg. ; 
the Fijian, Tahitian, and Hawaiian, 
ii. 244 

Newstead, Byron's oak at, ii. 166 

Nganga, ‘‘ the Kowing Ones,” initiates, 
ii, 251 

Ngarong, secret helper, of the Ibans of 
Borneo, ii. 224 n.! 

Nguu, district of German East Africa, 
ii. 312 

Nias, story of the external soul told in 
the island of, ii. 148 ; ceremonies per- 
formed by candidates for the priesthood 
in, 173 sg. 

Niceros and the were-wolf, story of, i. 


313 5g. 

Nidugala, in the Neilgherry Hills, the 
fire-walk at, ii. 8 

Nieder-Lausitz, the Midsummer log in, 
ii. 92 2.3 

Niederehe, in the Eifel Mountains, Mid- 
summer flowers at, ii. 48 


364 


‘Niger, belief as to external human souls 
lodged in animals on the, ii. 209 

Nigeria, the Ibo of Southern, i. 4 ; theory 
of the external soul in, ii. 200, 203, 
Sqq. 

Nigerian, South, story of the external 
soul, ii. 150 

Night-jars, the lives of women in, ii. 215 ; 
called women’s ‘‘ sisters,” 216 

Nikclerith, Neane, buries cow alive, i. 


324 5g. 

Nile, the Alur of the Upper, i. 64 

Nine, ruptured child passed nine times 
on nine successive mornings through 
a cleft ash-tree and attended by nine 
persons, ii. 170 . 

bonfires on Midsummer Eve an 

omen of marriage, i. 174, 185, 189, 

339 

different kinds of wood burnt in the 
Beltane fires, i. 155; used for the 
Midsummer bonfires, 172, 201 ; burnt 
in the need-fire, 271, 278; used to 
kindle need-fire, 278, 280 

—— grains of oats in divination, i. 243 

leaps over Midsummer fire, i. 193 

men employed to make fire by the 

friction of wood, i. 148, 155 

ridges of ploughed land in divina- 

tion, i. 235 

sorts of flowers on Midsummer Eve, 

to dream on, i. 175; gathered, ii. 52 sg. 

times to crawl under a bramble as 

a cure, ii, 180 

times nine men make need-fire, i. 

289, 294, 295 

(thrice three) times passed through 

a girth of woodbine, ii. 184; passed 

through a holed stone, 187 

turns round a rick, i. 243 

Niska Indians of British Columbia, rites 
of initiation among the, ii. 271 sg. 

Nisus and his purple or golden hair, 
story of, ii, 103 

Nkimba, secret society on the Lower 
Congo, ii. 255 2.1 

Nocturnal creatures the sex totems of 
men and women, ii. 217 2.4 

Nograd-Ludany, in Hungary, 
summer fires at, i. 179 

Nogués, J. L. M., on the wonderful 
herbs of St. John’s Eve, ii. 45 

Nootka Indians of Vancouver Island, 
seclusion of girls at puberty among 
the, i. 43 sg.; ritual of death and 
resurrection among the, ii. 270 sg. 

Nord, the department of, giants at 
Shrove Tuesday in, ii. 35 

Norden, E., on the Golden Bough, ii. 
284 2.3 

Nore, A. de, on the Yule log, i. 250 sg., 
253 


Mid- 


INDEX 


Norfolk, use of orpine for divination in, 
ii. 61 2.4 


Norman peasants gather seven kinds of — 


plants on St. John’s Day, ii. 51 sg. 

Normandy, Midsummer ffires in, i. 
185 sy.; the Yule log in, 252; torch- 
light processions on Christmas Eve in, 
266 ; processions with torches on the 
Eve of Twelfth Day, in, 340 ; wonder- 
ful herbs and flowers gathered at 
Midsummer in, ii, 46; wreaths of 
mugwort in, 59; vervain gathered at 
Midsummer in, 62 

Norrland, Midsummer bonfires in, i. 
172 

Norse stories of the external soul, ii. 
IIQ sg. 

North American Indians, their personal 
totems, ii, 222 7.5, 226 m,} 

Berwick, Satan preaches at, ii. 
158 

Northamptonshire, sacrifice of a calf in, 
i. 300 

Northumberland, Midsummer fires in, i. 
197 sy.; divination at Hallowe'en in, 
245; the Yule log in, 256; need-fire 
in, 288 sg.; ox burnt alive in, to stop 
a murrain, 301 

Norway, bonfires on Midsummer Eve in, 
i. 171; the need-fire in, 280; super- 
stitions about a parasitic rowan in, ii. 
281 

Norwich, Easter candle in the cathedral 
of, i. 122 2. 

Nottinghamshire, the Hemlock Stone in, 
i. 157 

Nouer I’ aiguilette, i. 346 n.” 

Nouzon, in the Ardennes, the Yule log 
at Lega. 

November the first, old New Year’s Day 
in the Isle of Man, i. 224 sg.; the first 
of, All Saints’ Day, 225 

Novice at initiation killed as a man 
and brought to life as an animal, ii. 


272 

Novices (lads) at initiation supposed to 
be swallowed and disgorged by a 
spirit or monster, ii. 235, 240 sg., 242, 
246 ; supposed to be newly born, 247, 
251, 256, 257, 261, 262 sg.; begotten 
anew, 248 

Nurtunjas, sacred poles among the 
Arunta, ii. 219 

Nut-water brewed at Midsummer, ii. 


47 

Nuts passed across Midsummer fires, i. 
190; in fire, divination by, 237, 239, 
241, 242, 245 

Nyanja chief, ii. 314 

Nyanja-speaking tribes of Angoniland, 
their customs as to girls at puberty, i. 
25 Sg. 


lyassa, Lake, i. 28, 81; people to the 
east of, crawl through an arch as a 
precaution against sickness, evil spirits, 
ete., ii 181 


' Oak associated with thunder, i 145; 

worshipped by the Druids, ii. 76 sq., 
301 ; the principal sacred tree of the 

_ Aryans, 89 sg.; human representa- 
tives of the oak perhaps originally 
_ burnt at the fire-festivals, 90, 92 5g. ; 
children passed through a cleft oak as 
a cure for rupture or rickets, 170 
sqq. ; life of, in mistletoe, 280, 292; 
struck by lightning oftener than any 
other tree of the European forest, 298 
5qq.; supposed to bloom on Mid- 

- summer Eve, 292, 293 

_ —and thunder, Aryan god of the, i. 

2 265 

| —-leaves, ‘‘oil of St. John” found 

on St. John’s Morning upon, ii. 82 


a sg. 
| —— log a protection against witch- 


**all-healer’’ or 
panacea, ii. 77, 79, 82; a remedy for 
epilepsy, 78, 83; to be shot down 
with an arrow, 82; a panacea 
for green wounds, 83; a protection 
against jon, 85, 293 
_ ——of Errol, fate of the Hays bound 
__- up with the, ii. 283 sg. 
- —— of the Guelphs, ii. 166 sg. 
_ —— of Romove, ii. 286 
_ —— of the Vespasian family at Rome, 
B ii. 168 
oo 166 
_ —— -spirit, the priest of the Arician 
grove a personification of an, ii. 
28 
oe worshipped by the Cheremiss, 
i, 181 
_ ——\-trees planted at marriage, ii. 165 
'  —twigs and leaves used to keep off 
__witches, ii. 20 


_ —— -wood used to kindle the need- 


fire, i. 148, 271, -272, 275, 276, 278, 
281, 289 sg., ii. go sg.; used to kindle 
the Beltane fires, i. 148, 155 ; used to 
kindle Midsummer fire, 169, 177, ii. 
gt sg.; used for the Yule log, i. 248, 
250, 251, 257, 258, 259, 260, 263, 
264 sg., ii. 92; fire of, used to detect 
a murderer, 92 2.4; perpetual fires of, 
285 sg. 

Oaks pated by Sir Walter Scott, ii. 
166 ; mistletoe growing on, in Sweden, 
87; mistletoe growing on, in England 
and France, 316 


a Oath not to hurt Balder, i. ror 


Oats, nine grains of, in divination, i. 243 


INDEX 


365 


Oban district, Southern Nigeria, belief 
as to external human souls lodged in 
animals in the, ii. 206 sgq. 

Oberland, in Central Germany, the Yule 
log in the, i. 248 sq. 

Obermedlingen, in Swabia, fire kindled 
on St. Vitus’s Day at, i. 335 sg. 

Obubura district of S. Nigeria, ii. 204 

October, ceremony of the new fire in, 
i. 136; the last day of (Hallowe'en), 
139 

Odessa, New Easter fire carried to, 
i. 130 7. 

Odin, Othin, or Woden, the father of 
Balder, i. ror, 102, 103 2. 

Ododop tribe of Southern Nigeria, ii. 208 

Oels, in Silesia, Midsummer fires at, 
i. 170 

Oeniadae, the ancient, i. 21 

Oesel, Midsummer fires in the island of, 
i. 180; St. John’s herbs in the island 
of, ii. 49 

Offenburg, in the Black Forest, Mid- 
summer fires at, i. 168 

Ogboni, a secret society on the Slave 
Coast, ii. 229 n. 

Ogre whose soul was in a bird, story of 
the, ii. 98 sg. 

“*Oil of St. John” found on St. John’s 
morning, ii. 82 sg. ; on oaks at Mid- 
summer, 293 

Oise, French department of, dolmen in, 
ii. 188 

Ojebways, ritual of death and resurrec- 
tion among the, ii. 268 

Olala, secret society of the Niska Indians, 
ii. 271 sg. 

Olaus Magnus, on were-wolves, i. 308 

**Old Wife” (‘‘ Old Woman”’), burning 
the, i. 116, 120 

Oldenburg, the immortal dame of, i. 
too; Shrove Tuesday customs in, 
120; Easter bonfires in, 140; burn- 
ing or boiling portions of animals or 
things to force witch to appear in, 
321 sg.; witch as toad in, 323 ; chil- 
dren passed through a cleft oak as a 
cure in, ii. 17% sg.; custom as to 
milking cows in, 185; sick children 
passed through a ring of yarn in, 185 

Olea chrysophilla, used as fuel for bon- 
fire, ii. 11 

** Oleander, the Sultan of the,” i. 18, 
ii. 51; gathered at Midsummer, 51 

Olive, the sacred, at Olympia, ii. 80 2.% 

Olofaet, a fire-god, ii. 295 

Olympia, the sacred olive at, ii. 80 #.3; 
white poplar used for sacrifices to 
Zeus at, 90 2.1, ot 2.7 

Omaha tribe, Elk clan of the, i. 11 

—— women secluded at menstruation, 
i. 88 sg. 


366 


Omens from birds and beasts, i. 56; 
from the smoke of bonfires, 116, 131, 
337; from flames of bonfires, 140, 
142, 159, 165, 336, 337; from cakes 
rolled down hill, 153; from boiling 
milk, ii. 8; from intestines of sheep, 
13 


of death, ii. 54, 64 

of marriage drawn from Midsum- 
mer bonfires, i. 168, 174, 178, 185, 
189, 339; drawn from bonfires, 338 
sq. ; from flowers, ii. 52 sg., 61 

Onktehi, the great spirit of the waters 
among the Dacotas, ii. 268, 269 

Oran, bathing at Midsummer in, i. 
216 

Orange River, the Corannas of the, 
ii, 192 

Oraons or Uraons of Bengal, their belief 
as to the transformation of witches 
into cats, ii. 311 sg. 

Ordeal of stinging ants undergone by 
girls at puberty, i. 61, and by young 
men, 62 sgg.; of boiling resin, 
311 

Ordeals as an exorcism, i. 66; under- 
gone by novices at initiation among 
the Bushongo, ii. 264 sgg. 

Order of nature, different views of the, 
postulated by magic and _ science, 
ii. 305 sg. 

Organs, internal, of medicine-man re- 
placed by a new set at initiation, 
ii. 237, 238 sg. 

Origin of fire, primitive ideas as to the, 
ii, 295 sg. 

Orinoco, the Banivas of the, i. 66; the 
Guaraunos of the, 85; the Guay- 
quiries of the, 85; the Tamanaks of 
the, 61 2.3 

Ornament, external soul of woman in an 
ivory, ii. 156 

Ornaments, amulets degenerate into, 
ii. 156 72.2 

Orne, Midsummer fires in the valley of 
the, i, 185 

Oro, West African bogey, ii. 229 

Orpheus and the willow, ii. 294 

Orpine (Sedum telephium)at Midsummer, 
i. 196; used in divination at Mid- 
summer, ii. 61 

Orvieto, Midsummer fires at, i. 210 

Oster-Kappeln, in Hanover, the oak of 
the Guelphs at, ii. 166 sg. 

Osterode, Easter bonfires at, i. 142 

Ot Danoms of Borneo, seclusion of girls 
at puberty among the, i. 35 5g. 

Otati tribe of Queensland, their treat- 
ment of girls at puberty, i. 38 

Ovambo, of German South-West Africa, 
custom observed by young women at 
puberty among the, ii. 183 


INDEX 


Owls, lives of persons bound up with 
those of, ii. 202 ; sex totem of women, — 
217; called women’s ‘‘ sisters,”’ 218 

Ox burnt alive to stop a murrain, i. 
301 

-horns, external soul of chief in 
pair of, ii. 156 : 

Ozieri, in Sardinia, bonfires on St. John’s — 
Eve at, i. 209 p 


Padua, story of a were-wolf in, i. 309' 

Paha, on the Gold Coast, ii. 210 

Pale colour of negro children at birth, 
ii, 251 2.1, 259 2.2 

Palettes or plaques of schist in Egyptian 
‘tombs, ii, 155 7.3 

Palm-branches, consecrated, at Easter, 
i, 121 

Sunday, palm-branches conse- 

crated on, i. 144, ii, 30, 85 1.4; 

boxwood blessed on, i. 184, ii. 47; 

fern-seed used on, 288 

-trees as life-indices, ii. 161, 163, 


164 

Papuan and Melanesian stocks in New 
Guinea, ii. 239 

Papuans, life-trees among the, ii. 163 

Paraguay, the Chiquites Indians of, ii. 
226 n.1 

Parallelism between witches sad were- 
wolves, i. 315, 321 

Parasitic mountain-ash (rowan) used to 
make the divining-rod, ii. 69 

orchid growing on a tamarind, 

ritual at cutting, ii. 81 

rowan, superstitions about a, ii. 
281 sg. 

Paris, effigy of giant burnt in summer 
fire at, ii. 38; cats burnt alive at Mid- 
summer in, 39 

Parivarams of Madura, their seclusion 
of girls at puberty, i. 69 

Parrot, external soul of warlock in a, ii. 


7 Sq. 
and Punchkin, story of the, ii. 97 
SQ. 

Parsees, their customs as to menstruous 
women, i. 8 5 

Partridge, C., ii. 204 

Paschal candle, i. 121, 122 #., 125 

Mountains, i. 141 

Passage over or through fire a stringent 
form of purification, ii. 24; through 
a cleft stick in connexion with puberty 
and circumcision, 183 sg. 

Passes, Indians of Brazil, seclusion of 
girls at puberty among the, i. 59 

Passing over fire to get rid of ghosts, 
ii 17 sg.; through cleft trees and 
other narrow openings to get rid of 
ghosts, etc., 173 sgg. ; under a yoke 
as a purification, 193 sgq. 


Passing children through cleft trees, ii. 
168 sgg. ; children, sheep, and cattle 

through holes in the ground, ii. 190 

5Qe 

; stern-bone of a hare in a popular 
remedy, i. 17 

Pastures fumigated at Midsummer to 

_ drive away witches and demons, i. 170 

P3 Patani States, custom as to the after- 
_ birth in the, ii. 164 

Paths, separate, for men and women, i. 

_ 78, 80, 89 

'Patiko, in the Uganda Protectorate, 

_ dread of ne at, ii. 298 2.? 

" ‘Paton, W. R., on the Golden Bough, ii. 

319 

Patriarch of Jerusalem kindles the new 

fire at Easter, i. 129 

_ Patrician myrtle-tree at Rome, ii. 168 
Patschkau, precautions against witches 

‘hear, ii. 20 2. 

_ Paturages, processions with torches at, 

i x08, 

Pawnee story of the external soul, ii. 151 
-Pawnees, Soman sacrifices among the, 

__ ii, 286 2.2 

_ Pazzi family at Florence, i. 126 

_ Peace-making ceremony among the 

| Masai, ii. 139 2. 

_ Pear-tree as life-index of girl, ii. 165 

_ —— -trees, torches thrown at, i. 108 ; 
rarely attacked by mistletoe, ii. 315 

' Peas, boiled, distributed by young 

_ married couples, i. 111 #.1 

_ Pebbles thrown into Midsummer fires, i. 

E 683 

' Peguenches, seclusion of girls at puberty 
- among the, i. 59° 

_ Peking, life-tree of the Manchu dynasty 

' at, ii. 167 5g. 

_ Pelops at Olympia, ii. 90 2.? 

_ Pemba, island of, ii. 263 

_ Pendle, the forest of, i. 245 

_ Pennant, Thomas, on Beltane fires and 

_ cakes in Perthshire, i. 152; on Hal- 

_ lowe’en fires in Perthshire, 230 

- Pennefather River in Queensland, ii. 

159; treatment of girls at puberty on 

the, i. 38 

_ Penny-royal burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 

«213, 214; gathered at Midsummer, 

ii. 51 

_ Pentamerone, the, ii. 105 

_ Penzance, Midsummer fires at, i. 199 sg. 

_ Perche, Midsummer fires in, i. 188; St. 

John’s herb gathered on Midsummer 
Eve in, ii. 46; the Chéne-Doré in, 

j 287 2.1 

_ Perforating arms and legs of young men, 

_ girls, and dogs as a ceremony, i. 58 

- Pergine, in the Tyrol, fern-seed at, ii. 
~ 288 sg. 


INDEX 


367 


Perigord, the Yule log in, i. 250 sg., 253; 
magic herbs gathered at Midsummer 
in, ii. 46; crawling under a bramble 
as a cure for boils in, 180 

Perkunas, Lithuanian god, his perpetual 
fire, ii. gt 2.5 

Péronne, mugwort at Midsummer near, 
ii. 58 

Persians celebrate a festival of fire at the 
winter solstice, i. 269 

Perthshire, Beltane fires and cakes in, 
i. 152 sg.; traces of Midsummer fires 
in, 206 ; Hallowe’en bonfires in, 230 
5gq. ; need-fire in, 296 5g. 

Peru, ceremony of the new fire in, i, 
132 

Perun, the oak sacred to the god, ii. 89 

Petronius, his story of the were-wolf, i, 
313 Sq. 

Pett, Grace, a witch, i. 304 

Petworth, in Sussex, cleft ash-trees used 
for the cure of rupture at, ii. 170 

Phalgun, a Hindoo month, ii. 2 

Philip and James, the Apostles, feast of, 
i. 158 

Piazza del Limbo at Florence, i. 126 

Picardy, Lenten fire-customs in, i. 113; 
Midsummer fires in, 187 

Piedmont, belief as to the ‘‘oil of St. 
John’’ on St. John’s morning in, ii, 
82 sg. 

Pietro in Guarano (Calabria), Easter 
custom at, i. 123 

Pig, roast, at Christmas, i. 259; burnt 
sacrifice of a, 302 

Pigeon, external soul of ogre in a, ii. 
100; external soul of dragon in a, 
Ii2 sg. 

Pigeon’s egg, external soul of fairy 
being in, ii. 132 sg., 139 

Pigeons deposit seed of mistletoe, ii. 
316 2.1 

Pigs sacrificed, i. 9; driven through 
Midsummer fire, 179; driven through 
the need-fire, 272, 273, 274 Sy., 275 
$q., 276 sg., 277, 278, 279, 297; 
offered to monster whoswallows novices 
at initiation, ii. 240, 246 

Pilgrimages on Yule Night in Sweden, 
i. 20 sg. 

Pillar, external soul of ogre in a, ii. 
100 sg. 

Pima Indians, their purification for man- 
slaughter, i. 2r . 

Pines, Scotch, struck by lightning, pro- 
portion of, ii. 298 

Pinewood, fire of, at Soracte, ii. 14, 
gi 2.) 

Pinoeh, district of South-Eastern Borneo, 
ii. 154 5g. 

Pippin, king of the Franks, i. 270 

Pitlochrie, in Perthshire, i. 230 


368 


Pitré, Giuseppe, on St. John’s Day in 
Sicily, ii, 29 

Placci, Carlo, i. 127 2.1 

Place de Noailles at Marseilles, Mid- 
summer flowers in the, ii. 46 

Plane and birch, fire made by the friction 
of, i. 220 

Plantain-tree, creeping through a cleft, 
as a cure, ii. 181 

Plants, spirits of, in the form of snakes, 
ii. 44 2. ; external soul in, 159 sgq. ; 
and trees as life-indices, 160 sgq. 

Plaques or palettes of schist in Egyptian 
tombs, ii. 155 7.° 

Plates or basins, divination by three, 
i. 237 57., 240, 244 

Plato, on the distribution of the soul in 
the body, ii. 221 w.} 
Plebeian myrtle-tree at Rome, ii. 168 
Pleiades, beginning of year determined 
by observation of the, ii. 244, 245 2. 
Pliny on ‘‘serpents’ eggs,” i. 15; on 
medicinal plants, 17; on the touch of 
menstruous women, 96; on the fire- 
walk of the Hirpi Sorani, ii. 14; on 
the mythical springwort, 71; on the 
Druidical worship of mistletoe, 76 sg. ; 
on the virtues of mistletoe, 78; on the 
birds which deposit seeds of mistletoe, 
316 2.1; on the different kinds of 
mistletoe, 317 

Plough, piece of Yule log inserted in the, 
i. 251, 337 

Ploughing in spring, custom at the first, 
i. 18 

Ploughshare, crawling under a, as a 
cure, ii. 180 

Plum-tree wood used for Yule log, i. 250 

Plurality of souls, doctrine of the, ii. 
221 Sq. 

Plutarch, on oak-mistletoe, ii. 318 2.1 

Pogdanzig, witches’ Sabbath at, ii. 74 

Pointing sticks or bones in magic, i. 14 

Poitou, Midsummer fires in, i. 182, 190 
$q., 340 sg.; fires on All Saints’ Day 
in, 246; the Yule log in, 251 2,1; 
mugwort at Midsummer in, ii. 59 

Poix, Lenten fires at, i. 113 

Poland, need-fire in, i. 281 sq. 

Polaznik, polazenik, polataynik, Christ- 
mas visiter, i. 261, 263, 264 

Pole, sacred, of the Arunta, i. 7 

Poles, passing between two poles after a 
death, ii. 178 sg.; passing between 
two poles in order to escape sickness 
or evil spirit, ii. 179 sgq. 

Pollution, menstrual, widespread fear of, 
i. 76 sqq. 

Polygnotus, his picture of Orpheus under 
the willow, ii. 294 

Pomerania, hills called the Blocksberg 
in, i. 171 2.9 


INDEX 


Priest of Aricia and the Golden ‘Bough, 


Pommerol, Dr., i. 112 4 
Pond, G. H., on ritual of death and 
resurrection among the Dacotas, ii. 269 _ 
Pongol or Feast of Ingathering inSouthern— 
India, ii. r, 16 - 
Pontesbury, in Shropshire, the Yule ond 
at, i. 257 q 
Popinjay, shooting at a, i. 194 
Popish Kingdome, The, of Thomas — 
Kirchmeyer, i. 125 sg., 162 4 
Poplar, the white, used in sacrificing to 
Zeus at Olympia, ii. go 7.1, 91 2.7; — 
black, mistletoe on, 318 7,® 
-wood used to kindle need-fire, 
i. 282 q 
Porcupine as charm to ensure women an — 
easy delivery, i. 49 ; 
Port Lincoln tribe of South Australia, — 
their superstition as to lizards, ii. — 
216 sq. 
Porta Triumphalis at Rome, ii. 195 ’ 
Portrait statues, external souls of Egyp- E 
tian kings deposited in, ii. 157 
Portreach, sacrifice of a calf near, i. 301 
Poseidon makes Pterelaus immortal, 
ii. 103; priest of, uses a white um-— 
brella, i. 20 2.1 
Posidonius, Greek traveller in Gaul, ii. 32 — 
Poso in Central Celebes, custom at the ~~ 
working of iron in, ii, 154 ; the Alfoors — 
of, 222 i, 
Possession by an evil spirit cured by 3 
passing through a red-hot chain, ii, 
186 7 
Potawatomi women secluded at men- — 
struation, i. 89 7 
Potlatch, distribution of property, ii. 274 
Pots used by girls at puberty broken, 
i. 61, 69 i 
Powers, extraordinary, ascribed to fret j 
born children, i. 295 a 
Pofega district of Slavonia, need-fire in, — 
i, 282 4 
Prattigau in Switzerland, Lenten fire-— 
custom at, i. 119 4 
Prayers of adolescent girls to the Dawn 
of Day, i. 50 sg., 53, 98 ”.1; for rain, 
133 4 
Pretence of throwing a man into fire, 
i. 148, 186, ii. 25 E 
Priapus, image of, at need-fire, i. 286 


i. 1; of Earth, taboos observed by 
the, 4; of Diana at Aricia, the King 
of the Wood, perhaps personified — 
Jupiter, ii. 302 sg.; at Nemi, 315 
Sippy: not allowed to step on groans 3 


~ 5 “4 
Priests expected to pass through fire, ; 
ii, 2, 5, 8, 9, 14 (as 
Primitive thought, its vagueness ane 
inconsistency, ii. 30% sg. ; 


incess royal, ceremonies at the puberty 
of. a, i 29, 30 5g. 

“arene Desa lighted tar-barrels on 
Christmas Eve, i. 268 

- ssions 5 with lighted torches through 
field: gardens, orchards, etc., i. 107 
SJ-, TIO $9g-, IIZ3 SgY., 141, 179, 233 
266, 339 sg.; on Corpus Christi 
y, 165; to the Midsummer bon- 
184, 185, 187, 188, 191, 192, 
; across fiery furnaces, ii. 4 sgg. ; 
giants (effigies) at popular festivals 


33 599- 
y at Holi festival in India, ii. 2 
y, the Norse Sibyl’s, i. 102 sg. 
ine River in Queensland, i. 39 
C Midsummer fires in, i. 193 5g; 
ee ee Se Oh 249 o9y- 
ussia, Midsummer fires in, i. 176 sg. ; 
ein gathered at Midsummer in, ii. 
; Witches’ Sabbath in, 74 
Eastern, herbs gathered at Mid- 
mer in, ii. 48 sg. ; divination by 
on Midsummer Eve in, 53, 61 ; 
ief as to mistletoe growing on a 
n in, 291 2.3 


di. 43 2.5 
terelaus and his golden hair, ii. 103 
uberty, girls secluded at, i. 22 sgg. ; 
and dream at, ii. 222 2.5; pre- 
ce of killing the novice and bring- 
g him to life again during initiatory 
es at, 225 yg. 

o Indians of Arizona and New 
B. use of bull-roarers among 
‘the, ii. 230 2., 231 

ulayars of Travancore, their seclusion 
of girls at puberty, i. 69 

jiverbatch, in Shropshire, the Yule log 
i. 257; belief as the bloom of the 
on Midsummer Eve at, ii. 292 

mpkin, external soul in a, ii. 105 
mchkin and the parrot, story of, 


Mexico 


a death, 178; by passing under a 
193 59g. 
theory of the fires of the fire- 


fe » & 329 Sy., 341, i. 16 sgg.; 
PT. VII. VOL. I 


INDEX 


369 


more probable than the solar theory, 
i. 346 
Purple _loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) 
at Midsummer, ii. 65 

Purra or poro, secret society in Sierra 
Leone, ii. 260 sg. 

Puttenham, George, on the Midsummer 

_ giants, ii. 36 sg. 

Pyrenees, Midsummer fires in the French, 
1. 193 


Quarter-ill, a disease of cattle, i. 296 

Quedlinburg, in the Harz Mountains, 
need-fire at, i. 276 

Queen Charlotte Islands, the Haida 
Indians of, i. 44 

—— of Heaven, ii. 303 

—— of Summer, i. 195 

Queen’s County, Midsummer fires in, i. 
203; divination at Hallowe'en in, 


- 242 

Queensland, sorcery in, i. 14; seclusion 
of girls at puberty in, 37 sgg. ; dread 
of women at menstruation in, 785 
natives of, their mode of 
the fate of an absent friend, ii. 159 s¢.; 
use of bull-roarers in, 233 

Quimda, a secret society on the Lower 
Congo, ii, 256 2. 

Quimper, Midsummer fires at, i. 184 

Quirinus, sanctuary of, at Rome, ii. 168 


Races at fire-festivals, i. rr; to Easter 
bonfire, 122; at Easter fires, 144; 
with torches at Midsummer, 175. See 
also Torch-races 

Radium, bearing of its discovery on the 
probable duration of the sun, ii. 
307 2.7 

Rahu, a tribal god in India, ii. 5 

Rain, Midsummer bonfires supposed to 
stop, i. 188, 336; bull-roarers used as 
peta instruments to make, ii. 230 


— a lous, smoke made in imitation 
of, i. 133 

—— -makers (mythical), i. 133 

—— -water in Morocco, magical virtues 
ascribed to, i. 17 sg. 
Raking a rick in the devil's name, i. 243; 
the ashes, a mode of divination, 243 
Ralston, W. R. S., on sacred fire of 
Perkunas, ii. 91 2.3 

Rama, his battle with the King of 
Ceylon, ii. 102 

Rampart, old, of Burghead, i. 267 sg. 

Ramsay, John, of Ochtertyre, on Beltane 
fires, i. 146 sgg.; on Midsummer fires, 
206; on Hallowe'en fires, 230 sg. ; 
on burying cattle alive, 325 sg. 

Rarhi, Brahmans of Bengal, their seclu- 
sion of girls at puberty, i. 68 

2B 


370 


Rat, external soul of medicine-man in, 
ii. 199 

Rattan, creeping through a split, to 
escape a malignant spirit, ii. 183 

Rattle used at a festival, i. 28 

Rattles to frighten ghosts, i. 52 

Raven clan, ii. 271 

Ray-fish, cure for wound inflicted by a, 
i. 98 2.3 

Raymi, a festival of the summer solstice, 
i. 132 

Reapers throw sickles blindfold at last 
sheaf, ii. 279 2.4 

Reaping, girdle of rye a preventive of 
weariness in, i. 190 

Reay, in Sutherland, the need-fire at, i. 
294 Sg. 

Red earth or paint smeared on girls at 
puberty, i. 30, 31; girl’s face painted 
red at puberty, 49 sg., 54; women at 
menstruation painted, 78 

—— and white, girls at puberty painted, 
i. 35, 38, 39, 40; women at menstrua- 
tion painted, 78 

—— -hot iron chain, passing persons 
possessed by evil spirits through a, ii. 
186 

Island, i. 39 

ochre round a woman’s mouth, 
mark of menstruation, i. 77 

Redemption from the fire, i. r10 

Reed, W. A., on a superstition as to a 
parasitic plant, ii. 282 

Reed, split, used in cure for dislocation, 
ii. 177 

Reef, plain of, in Tiree, i. 316 

Regaby, in the Isle of Man, i. 224 

Reindeer sacrificed to the dead, ii. 178 

Reinsberg-Diiringsfeld, O. Frh. von, on 
the Yule log, i. 249 | 

Reiskius, Joh., on the need-fire, i. 271 
Sq. 

Religion, movement of thought from 
magic through religion to science, ii. 
304 sg. 

Religious associations among the Indians 
of North America, ii. 266 sgq. 

Remedies, magical, not allowed to touch 
the ground, i. 14 

Renewal of fire, annual, 
137. See also Fire 


in China, i. 


Rengen, in the Eifel Mountains, Mid- - 


summer flowers at, ii. 48 
Resoliss, parish of, in Ross-shire, burnt 
sacrifice of a pig in, i, 301 sg. 
Resurrection, ritual of death and, ii, 225 
59q. 
Reuzes, wicker giants in Brabant and 
Flanders, ii. 35 
Revin, Midsummer fires at, i. 188 
Rhenish Prussia, Lenten fires 


Irs 


in, i. 


_ INDEX 


Rheumatism, crawling under a bramb 
asa cure for, ii. 180 

Rhine, the Lower, need-fire on, i. 274 
St. John’s wort on, ii, 54 

Rhodesia, the Winamwanga of, ii. 297 

Rhodomyrtus tomentosus, used to kind! 
fire by friction, ii, 8 

Rh6én Mountains, Lenten custom in the 
i. 117 

Rhys, Sir John, on Beltane fires, i. 154 
on driving cattle through fires, 159 
on old New Year’s Day in the Isle ¢ 
Man, 224; on Hallowe'en bonf 
in Wales, 239 sg. ; on burnt sacrific 
in the Isle of Man, 305 sgg.; 0 
alleged Welsh name for mistletoe, | 
286 2.3 ‘| 

Ribble, the, i. 245 ; 

Ribwort gathered at Midsummer, i 


49 
Rickard, R. H., quoted, i. 34 . 
Rickets, children passed through clef 
ash-trees as a cure for, ii. 168; chil- 
dren passed through cleft oaks as a 
cure for, 170; children passed throug 
a holed stone as a cure for, 187 
Rickety children passed through 
natural wooden ring, ii, 184 
Riedel, J. G. F., on the Kakian associ: 
tion in Ceram, ii. 249 4 
Rif, province of Morocco, Midsumme 
fires in, i. 214 %., 2353 bathing a 
Midsummer in, 216 
Riga, Midsummer festival at, i. 177 
Right hand, luckiness of the, i. 151%. 
—— turn (deiseal, dessil) in the High 
lands of Scotland, i. 150 ”.1, 154 
Rigveda, how Indra cured Apala in the, 
ii. 193 
Ring, crawling through a, as a cure ¢ 
preventive of disease, ii, 184 s9 ‘ 
divination by a, i,237; worn by initiz 
as token of the new birth, ii, 257. 
also Rings 
Ringhorn, Balder’s ship, i. ro2 = 
Ringing church bells on Midsumme 
‘Eve, custom as to, ii. 47 sg. q 
Rings as amulets, i. 92; mourners cree 
through, ii. 178, 179. See also Ring 
Rio de Janeiro, i. 59 a 
Negro, ordeals of young men am 
the Indians of the, i. 63 a 
Risley, Sir Herbert H., on Indian fir 
walk, ii. 5 2.3 i. 
Ritual, myths dramatized in, i: Toss e ¢ 
death and resurrection, ii, 225 sgg. _ 
Rivers, te W.H. R., on tamanit, | 
199 7.1 4 
Rivers, menstruous women not Be ; 
to cross or bathe in, i. 77, 97; 
human victims at Midsummer, ii 
sqgg. ; bathing in, at Midsummer, 0 


izano, in Dalmatia, the Yule log at, i. 


9DETTSON 
" > 


$99. 

tobinson, C. H., on human life bound 
"up with that of an animal, ii. 209 

Cc. L., on need-fire, i. 


(270 2. 

ocks sick people passed through holes 
Ein, ii. 186 sg., 189 sg. 

oman belief as to menstrnous dee ae 
i, 98 m3 


eee Secation, i. 177 

s deemed sacred the places which 
bers strack by lightning, ii. 299 
Romanus Lecapenus, emperor, ii. 156 
Rome, the sacred fire of Vesta at, i. 
| 138, ii. 9x; Midsummer Day in 
_ ancient, e Bera, myrtle-trees of the 
z and Plebeians at, ii. 168 ; oak 
' of the Vespasian family at, 168 
tomove, sacred oak and perpetual fire 
“at, ii. of, 286 

‘oof of house, the external soul in, ii. 
156 

oi the island of, initiation of young 
egg a 

, Dr. W. H., on the Roman 
"ceremony of passing under a yoke, 
ii. 194 2.2 

pscoe, Rev. J., on life-trees of kings of 
" Uganda, ii. 160 ; on passing through 
a cleft stick or a narrow opening as a 
a *e 
toscommon, County, 
4 Hallowe'en in, i. 243 
e-tree, death in a blue, ii. rro 

Lose: festival of the Crown of, i. 195; 
eee me 6nd Queen of, 195 
Ross-shire, Beltane cakes in, i. 153; 
cient sacrifice of a pig in, 301 sg. 

: on the Neckar, offering to 
_ the river on St. John’s Day, ii. 28 ; 
_ the wicked weaver of, 289 sg. 
Rottenburg, in Swabia, burning the 
B Angel-man at, i. 167; precautions 
against witches on Midsummer Eve 


at, ii. 73 
oumManian of Transylvania, their be- 
' lief as to the sacredness of bread, 
: ‘iL 13 
pbwan, parasitic, esteemed effective 
; Pagiinst witchcraft, ii, 281; super- 
‘Stitions about a, 281 sg.; how it is 
z not to be 
_ touched with iron and not to fall on 
_ the ground, 282 
—— -tree a protection against witches, 
iL 154, 327 #.', ii. 184 2.4, 185 ; hoop 


Rev. James, quoted, i. 150 


tochho! 


divination at 


.Oten dure 


INDEX 


371 


Rucuyennes of Brazil, ordeal of young 
men among the, i. 63 

Rue aux Ours at Paris, effigy of giant 
burnt in the, ii. 38 

Rue burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213 

Riigen, sick persons passed through a 
cleft oak in, ii. 172 

Rum, island of, and the Lachlin family, 
ii. 284 

Rupert's Day, effigy burnt on, i. 119 

Rupt in the Vosges, Lenten fires at, i 
rog; the Yule log at, 254 

Rupture, children passed through cleft 
ash-trees or oaks as a cure for, ii. 168 
599-, 170 $9g. ; 

Russia, Midsummer fires in, i. 176, 
ii. 40; need-fire in, i. 281, ii. 91; 
treatment of the effigy of Kupalo in, 
23; the Letts of, 50; purple loose- 
strife gathered at Midsummer in, 65 ; 
fern-seed at Midsummer in, 65, 66 
287 sq. ; birth-trees in, 165 

Russian feast of Florus and Laurus, 
i. 220 

story of Koshchei the deathless, 
ii. 108 sg. 

Rustem and Isfendiyar, i. 104 sg. 

Ruthenia, Midsummer bonfires in, i. 176 

Rye, girdles of, a preventive of weari- 
ness in reaping, i. 190 


Sabbaths of witches on he Eve of May 
Day and Midsummer Eve, i. 171 2z.°, 
181, ii. 73, 74 

Sacramental bread at Nemi, ii. 286 2.2 

—— meal at initiation in Fiji, ii. 245 s¢. 

Sacred flutes played at initiation, ii. 241 

—— kings put to death, i. 1 sy. 

—— persons not allowed to set foot on 
the ground, i. 2 sgg. ; not to see the 
sun, i. 18 

—— stick (churinga), ii, 234 

Sacrifice of cattle at holy oak, i. 181; 
of heifer at kindling need-fire, 290 ; 
of an animal to stay a cattle-plague, 
300 sgg.; of reindeer to the dead, 
ii. 178 

Sacrifices, human, at fire-festivals, i. 
106 ; traces of, 146, 148, 150 s9g., 
186, ii. 31; offered by the ancient 

, 28 m.}; among the Celts of 
Gaul, 32 sg.; the victims perhaps 
witches and wizards, 41 sgg.; W. 
Mannhardt’s theory, 43 

** Sacrificial fonts”*’ in Sweden, i. 172 2.2 

Sada, Saza, Persian festival of fire at 
the winter solstice, i. 269 

Sage, divination by sprigs of red, on 
Midsummer Eve, ii. 61 2.* 


372 


Sagittarius, mistletoe cut when the sun 
is in the sign of, ii. 82 

Sahagun, B. de, on the treatment of 
witches and wizards among the 
Aztecs, ii. 159 

Saibai, island of Torres Strait, treatment 
of girls at puberty in, i. 40 sg. 

Sail Dharaich, Sollas, in North Uist, 
need-fire at, i. 294 

St. Antony, wood of, i. 110 

St. Brandon, church of, in Ireland, sick 
women pass through a window of the, 
ii, I90 

St. Christopher, name given to Mid- 
summer giant at Salisbury, ii. 38 

St. Columb Kill, festival of, i. 241 

St. Corona, church of, at Koppenwal, 
holed stone in the, ii. 188 sg. 

Saint-Denis-des-Puits, the oak of, ii. 
287 n.1 

St. Eloi, Bishop of Noyon, his de- 
nunciation of heathen practices, ii. 
190 

St. Estapin, festival of, on August the 
sixth, ii. 188 

St. George’s Day, i. 223 2. 

St. Hubert blesses bullets with which to 
shoot witches, i. 315 sg. 

St. James's Day (July the twenty-fifth), 
the flower of chicory cut on, ii. 71 

St. Jean, in the Jura, Midsummer fire- 
custom at, i. 189 

St. John blesses the flowers on Mid- 
summer Eve, i. 171; his hair looked 
for in ashes of Midsummer fire, 182 
sg., 190; fires of, in France, 183, 188, 
189, 190, 192, 193; prayers to, at 
Midsummer, 210; claims human 
victims on St. John’s Day (Mid- 
summer Day), ii. 27, 29; print of his 
head on St. John’s Eve, 57; oil of, 
found on oak leaves, 83 

, the Knights of, i. 194 

, Grand Master of the Order of, i. 

2Ir 


the Baptist associated by the 
Catholic Church with Midsummer 
Day, i. 160, 181 

St. John’s blood found on St. John’s 
wort and other plants at Midsummer, 
ii. 56, 57 

St. John’s College, Oxford, the Christ- 
mas candle at, i. 255 

Day, Midsummer fires on, i. 167 

59q., 171 sgg., 178, 179; fire kindled 

by friction of wood on, 281; fern- 

seed blooms on, ii. 287. See also 

Midsummer. 

Eve (Midsummer Eve) in Malta, i. 

210 sg.; wonderful herbs gathered on, 

ii. 45 sgg.; sick children passed through 

cleft trees on, 171 


INDEX 


St. John’s fires among the South Slavs, 
178; among the Esthonians, 180, 
See also Midsummer fires q 

—— flower at Midsummer, ii. 50: 
gathered on St. John’s Eve (Mid. 
summer Eve), 57 sg. 4 

—— girdle, mugwort, ii. 59 q 

— herbs gathered at Midsumme 
ii. 46 sg., 49; a protection agains 
evil spirits, 49 

Night (Midsummer Eve), precau- 
tions against witches on, ii. 20”. 

—— oil on oaks at Midsummer, ii. 293 3 

root (Johanniswurzel), the ma 

fern, ii. 66 

wort (Hypericum perforatum), gar: 
lands of, at Midsummer, i. 169 x.? 
196; gathered on St. John’s Day 
or Eve (Midsummer Day or Eve), 
ii. 49, 54 Sqg.; a protection again S| 
thunder, witches, and evil spirits, 54, 
55, 74; thrown into the nmin 
bonfires, 55 

St. Juan Capistrano, in California, ordeal 
of nettles and ants among the Indians 
of, i. 64 : 

St. Julien, church of, at Ath, ii. 36 

St. Just, in Cornwall, Midsummer fire- 
custom at, i. 200 

St. Lawrence family, their lives bound 
up with an old tree at Howth castle, 
ii, 166 

St. Martin invoked to disperse a mist, 
280 

St. Mary at Liibeck, church of, i. roo 

St. Michael’s cake, i. 149, 154 2. 

St. Nonnosius, relics of, in the cathed 
of Freising, Bavaria, ii, 188 sg. 

St. Patrick and the Beltane fires, i. 137 


Sq- 
St. Patrick’s Chair, i i, 205 
—— Mount, i, 205 4 
St. Peter, the Eve of, Midsummer fires 
in Ireland on, i. 202 4 
—— and St. Paul, celebration of their 
day in London, i. 196 Be 
St. Peter’s at Rome, new fire at Easte 
in, i. 125 B | 
Day, bonfires in Belgium on, i. 
194 Sg. ; bonfires at Eton on, 1973 
fires in Scotland on, 207 
Eve, bonfires on, i. 195, 198, 
199 Ea gathering herbs on, ii, 


45 % | 
St. Rochus’s day, need-fire kindled on 
i. 282 
St. Thomas's day (21st December), bo! < 
fires on, i. 266; witches dreaded on, 
ii. 73 
—— Mount, near Madras, the fire-walk 
at, ii, 8 2.4 , 
Saint-Valery in Picardy, i. 113 


Vitus's dance, mistletoe a cure for, 
ii. 84 
—— Day, ‘‘ fire of heaven” kindled on, 
1. 335 

t. Wolfgang, Falkenstein chapel of, ii. 


189 
aintes-Maries, Midsummer custom at, 
_ i. 194 
jaintonge, the Yule log in, i. 251 2.1; 
_ Wonderful herbs gathered on St. John’s 
_ Eve in, ii. 45; St. John’s wort in, 
4 55% vervain gathered at Midsummer 
in, 62 2.4; four-leaved clover at Mid- 
summer in, 63 
— congraallig Midsummer fires in, i. 
iS 192 
Salee, in Morocco, Midsummer fires at, 
i 214, 216 
Salisbury, Midsummer giants at, ii. 37 
BE Sg. 
Salop (Shropshire), fear of witchcraft in, 
oi. 342 2.* 
Salt, prohibition to eat, i. 19, 20; used 
_ in a ceremony after marriage, 25 sg. ; 
z from, associated with a rule 
_ of chastity, 26 sgg.; prohibition to 
taste, 60, 68, 69; not to be handled 
ia menstruous women, 81 sg., 84; 
_ divination by, 244 
—— cake, divination by, i. 238 sg. 
Samhain, Eve of, in Ireland, i. 139, 
_ 225, 226; All Saints’ Day in Ireland, 
225. 
Sa: Hallowe'en bogies, i. 227 
, Hallowe'en fires, i. 230 
S silaad fishermen will not go to sea on 
A eiienamer Day, ii. 26 
moan story of woman who was im- 
_ pregnated by the sun, i. 74 5g. 
moyed shamans, their familiar spirits 
in boars, ii. 196 sg. 
— ghd of the external soul, ii. 141 sg. 
mson, effigy of, ii. 36; an African, 314 
: Salvador in West Africa, ii. 200 
netity and uncleanness not clearly 
' differentiated in the primitive mind, 
’ 1.97 8g. 
Sanctuary of Balder, i. 104 . 
‘Sand, souls of ogres in a grain of, ii. 
R720 
‘Sandhill, in Northumberland, Midsum- 
mer fires at, i. 198 
ngerhausen, i. 169 
Sangro, river, i. 210 
~Sankuru River, ii. 264 
Santa Catalina Istlavacan, birth-names 
_ of the Indians of, ii. 214 2.1 
—— Maria Piedigrotta at Naples, i. 
221 
Sapor, king of Persia, i. 82 sg. 
Sarajevo, need-fire near, i. 286 
dinia, Midsummer fires in, i. 209 


INDEX 


373 


Satan preaches a sermonin the church of 
North Berwick, ii. 158; brings fern- 
seed on Christmas night, 289 

Satapatha Brakhmana, on the sun as 
Death, ii. 174 2.1 

Saturday, Easter, new fire on, i 121, 
122, 124, 127, 128, 130; second- 
sight of persons born on a, 285 

Saturnalia at puberty of a princess royal, 
i. 30 5g. ; license of the, ii. 291 2. 

Saucers, divination by seven, i. 209 

Savage, secretiveness of the, ii. 224 sg. ; 
dread of sorcery, 224 sg. 

Saxo Grammaticus, Danish historian, i. 
102 #.!; his account of Balder, 103 
Saxons of Transylvania, story of the ex- 

ternal soul among the, ii. 116 

Saxony, fires to burn the witches in, i. 
160; the Wends of, ii. 297 

. Lower, the need-fire in, i. 272 

Scania, Midsummer fires in, i. 172 

Schaffhausen, St. John’s three Midsum- 
mer victims at, ii. 27 

Schar mountains of Servia, need-fire in 
the, i. 281 

Scharholz, Midsummer log in Germany, 
ii. g2 2.3 

oe Easter bonfires in, i. 142 

Schlegel, G. , on Chinese festival of fire, 
ii. 5 22 

Schlich, W., on mistletoe, ii. 315 sg. ; 
on Loranthus europaeus, 317 

Schlochau, district of, witches’ Sabbath 


in, ii. 74 

Schéllbronn in Baden, ‘‘ thunder poles’’ 
at, i. 145 

Schoolcraft, Henry R., on renewal of 
fire, i. 134 2.3 

Schiirmann, C. W., on the Port Lincoln 
tribe of South Australia, ii. 216 sg. 

Schvannes, bonfires, i. 111 2.) 

Schweina, in Thuringia, Christmas bon- 
fire at, i. 265 sg. 

Schwenda, witches burnt at, i. 6 

Science, movement of thought from 
magic through religion to, ii. 304 5g.; 
and magic, different views of natural 
order postulated by the two, 305 w: 

Scira, an Athenian festival, i. 20 2.1 

‘*Scoring above the breath,” cutting a 
witch on the forehead, i. 315 2.7; 
counter-spell to witchcraft, 343 2. 

Scotch Highlanders, their belief in 
bogies at Hallowe’en, i. 227; their 
belief as to Snake Stones, ii. 311 

Scotland, sacred wells in, i. 12; Celts 
called ‘‘thunder-bolts” in, 14 59. ; 
Snake Stones in, 15 sg., ii. 311 ; wor- 
ship of Grannus in, i. 112; Beltane 
fires in, 146 sgg.; Midsummer fires in, 
206 sg. ; divination at Hallowe'en in, 
229, 234 Sgg. ; need-fire in, 289 sgg. ; 


374 


animals burnt alive as a sacrifice in, 
302; ‘‘scoring above the breath,” a 
counter-charm for witchcraft in, 315 
n.2; witches as hares in, 315 7.1; St. 
John’s wort in, ii. 54; the divining- 
rod in, 67. See also Highlands and 
Highlanders 

Scots pine, mistletoe on, ii. 315 

Scott, Sir Walter, on the fear of witch- 


craft, i. 343; oaks planted by, ii. 166 


Scourging girls at puberty, i. 66 sg. 

Scouvion, i, 108. See Escouvion 

Scratching the person with the fingers 
forbidden to girls at puberty, i. 38, 39, 
41, 42, 44, 47, 59, 53, 92 

Scrofula, vervain a cure for, ii. 62 2.1; 
creeping through an arch of vines as 
a cure for, 180; passage through a 
holed stone a cure for, 187 

Scylla, daughter of Nisus, the story of 
her treachery, ii. 103 

Scythes and bill-hooks set out to cut 
witches as they fall from the clouds, i. 
345 59. 

Sea, menstruous women not allowed to 
approach the, i. 79; bathing in the, 
at Easter, 123; bathing in the, at 
Midsummer, 208, 210, ii. 30; demands 
a human victim on Midsummer Day, 
26 

Seal, descendants of the, in Sutherland- 
shire, ii, 131 sg. 

Seats placed for souls of dead at the 
Midsummer fires, i. 183, 184 

Seclusion of girls at puberty, i. 22 sgg., ; 
in folk-tales, 70 sgg. ; reasons for the, 
76 sqq. 

of novices at initiation, ii. 233, 

241, 250, 253, 257 2.1, 258, 250, 261, 

264, 266 

of women at menstruation, i. 76 


59q. 

Secret language learnt at initiation, - ii. 
253, 255 2.1, 259, 261 7. 

societies and totem clans, related to 
each other, ii. 272 sg. 

Secretiveness of the savage, ii. 224 sg. 

Sedbury Park oak, in Gloucestershire, ii. 
316 

Sedum telephium, orpine, used in divina- 
tion at Midsummer, ii. 6x 

Seed-corn, charred remains of Mid- 
summer log mixed with the, ii. 92 

Seeman, Berthold, on St. John’s blood, 
ii. 56 

Seler, Professor E., on nagual, ii. 213 2. 

Semo, a secret society of Senegambia, 
ii, 261 

Senal Indians of California, their notion 
as to fire stored in trees, ii. 295 

Senegambia, the Walos of, ii. 79; secret 
society in, 261 sg. 


INDEX 


Sennar, a province of the Sudan, huma 
hyaenas in, i. 313 4 
Separation of children from their parent 
among the Baganda, i. 23 2.2 
September, eve of the first of, new fire) 
on the, i. 139; the eighth, feast of 
the Nativity of the Virgin, 220; the) 
fire-walk in, ii. 9 
Serpent, girls at puberty thought to b 
visited by a, i, gr; supposed 
swallow girl at puberty, 57; ten 
headed, external soul in a, ii. 104 sg. 
twelve-headed, external soul of demo 
in a, 143; external soul of chief in a, 
201. See also Snake 
Serpents burnt alive at the Midsumme 
festival in Luchon, ii. 38 sg., 43; 
witches turn into, 41; worshipped by 
the old Prussians, 43 2.%; in the 
worship of Demeter, 44 .; the 
familiars of witches, 202; spirits of 
the dead incarnate in, 211 sg. r, 
Serpents’ eggs (glass beads) in ancient 
Gaul, i. 15 : 
Servia, Midsummer fire custom in, i, 
178; the Yule log in, 258 sgg. ; need+ 
fire in, 281, 282 sgg. 
Servian stories of the external soul, 
IIo sgg. 4 
Servians, house - communities of the, 
i. 259 2.1 q 
Setonje, in Servia, need-fire at, i. 282 sgg._ 
Seven bonfires, lucky to see, i. 107, 108 
leaps over Midsummer fire, i. 213 — 
—— sorts of plants gathered at Mid- 
summer, ii. 51 sg. 
years, a were-wolf for, i. 310 2. 1, 
316 2.2 
Sex totems among the natives of South- 
Eastern Australia, ii. 214 599-5 called 
‘* brother’ and ‘‘sister’’ by men and > 
“women respectively, 215 a 
Sexes, danger apprehended from the 
relation of the, ii. 277 sg. % 
Seyf el-Mulook and the jinnee, the story 
of, ii. 137 2 
Sgealoir, the burying-ground of, i. 294 
Sgreball, three pence, i. 139 
Sham-fights at New Year, i. 135 
Shamans of the Yakuts and Samoyeds 
keep their external souls in animals, 
ii. 196 
Shanach the Assyrian sun-god, ii. 80 7.9 — 
Shanga, city in East Africa, ii, 314 
Shawnee prophet, ii. 157 q 
Sheaf, the last cut at harvest, the Yule 
log wrapt up in, i. 248; reapers sie'y, ; 
fold throw sickles at the, ii. 279 2.4 
Sheaves of wheat or barley burnt in 
Midsummer fires, i. 215 : 
Sheep made to tread embers of extinct — 
Midsummer fires, i. 182; driven over ~ 


‘stop disease in the flock, 301; 
rnt alive as a sacrifice in the Isle of 
Sea witch in shape of a black, 


33: Gikied through a hole in'a rock 

_to rid them of disease, 189 sg. 

slis used in ritual of death and resur- 

rection, ii. 267 2.2, 269 

herbro, Sierra Leone, secret society in 

_ the, ii. 259 sg¢. 

hirley Heath, cleft ash-tree at, ii. 168 

hirt, wet, divination by, i. 236, 241 

hoe, divination by thrown, i. 236 

hoe: of boar’s skin worn by king at 

_ inauguration, i. 4; magical plants at 

_ Midsummer put in, ii. 54, 60, 65 

hooting at the sun on Midsummer 

"Day, ii. 291 

at witches in the clouds, i. 345 
* Shot-a-dead” by fairies, i. 303 

Shropsh the Yule log in, i. 257 ; fear 

_ of witchcraft in, 342 2.4; the oak 

thought to bloom on Midsummer Eve 

_ in, ii. 292, 293 
hrove Tuesday, effigies burnt on, i. 

_ 120; straw-man burnt on, ii. 22; 
_ wicker giants on, 35; cats burnt alive 

3 on, 40; the divining-rod cut on, 68 ; 
_ custom of striking a hen dead on, 
_ 279 2. 

‘Shuswap Indians of British Columbia, 
ee oe St rote eos 
_ the, i. 53 sg.; girls at puberty for- 
__ bidden to eat anything that bleeds, 94; 
fence themselves with thorn bushes 
against ghosts, ii. 174 #.*; personal 
totems among the, 276 .!; their be- 
lief as to trees struck by lightning, 

| 297 2.8 
"Siam, king of, not allowed to set foot on 

_ ground, i. 3; teen epee. te. Serpent 


q form in, ii. 44 2.3 

Siamese, their explanation of a first 
' menstruation, i. 24; their story of the 
* external soul, ii. 102 
_ Siberia, marriage custom in, i. 75; ex- 
ternal souls of shamans in, ii. “es 


fst the Norse, ber prophecy, i 


| Sibyl's wish, the, i. 99 

| Sicily, Midsummer fires in, i. 210; 
St. John’s Day (Midsummer Day) 
rg as dangerous and unlucky 
in a ; bathing at Midsummer in, 


Bs 


wae St. John’s wort in, 55 

Sickness, a protection against, 
i. 108, 109; transferred to animal, 
ii, 181 


_ Sieg, the Yule log in the valley of the, 
i. 248 


en ot LS ae eee eee yaa ve? 4 


INDEX 


375 


Siena, the, of the Ivory Coast, their 
totemism, ii. 220 2,7 

Sierck, town on the Moselle, i. 164 

Sierra Leone, birth-trees in, ii. 160; 
secret society in, 260 sg. 

Sieve, divination by, i. 236 

wer ee custom after a funeral in, ii. 


ie compulsory on girls at puberty, 
i. 29, 57; in ritual, 123, 124, ii. 63, 
fe 171, 184 
Spachendorf i in, i. 119; fires to 
Slee the witches in, 160; Midsummer 
fires in, 170 sg., 175; ‘need -fire in, 
278; witches as cats in, 319 Sg.; 
divination by flowers on Midsummer 
Eve in, ii. 53 
Silius Italicus, on the fire-walk of the 
Hirpi Sorani, ii. 14 2.5 
Sill of door, unlucky children passed 
under the, ii. 190 
Silver sixpence or button used to shoot 
witches with, i. 316 
Silvia and Mars, story of, ii. ro2 
Simeon, prince of Bulgaria, his life bound 
up with the capital of a column, ii. 
156 sg. 
Simla, i. 12 
Simurgh and Rustem, i. 104 
Sin-offering, i. 82 
Singhalese, seclusion of girls at puberty 
among the, i 69 
Singleton, Miss A. H., ii. r92 2.4 
Siouan tribes of North America, names 
of clans not used in ordinary conver- 
sation among the, ii. 224 2.7 
Sioux or Dacotas, ritual of death and 
resurrection among the, ii. 268 sg. 
Sipi in Northern India, i. 12 
Sirius, how the Bushmen warm up the 
Star, i. 332 sg. 
Sister’s Beam (Sororium ftigillum) at 
Rome, ii. 194, 195 2.* 
Sisyphus, the stone of, i. 298 
Sixpence, silver, witches shot with a, i. 
316 
Sixth day of the moon, mistletoe cut on 
the, ii. 77 
nv years, cycles of, ii. 77 2.3 
Skin disease, traditional cure of, in India, 
ii. 192; leaping over ashes of fire as 
remedy for, 2 
Sky, girls at puberty not allowed to look 
at the, i. 43, 45, 46, 69 
Skye, island of, i. 289; the need-fire in, 
148 
Slane, the hill of, i. 158 
Slave Coast, custom of widows on the, 
ii. 18 sg. ; use of bull-roarers on the, 
229 2. 
Slavonia, the Yule log in, i. 262 sg. ; 
need-fire in, 282 


376 


Slavonian (South) peasants, the measures 
they take to bring down witches from 
the clouds, i. 345 

Slavonic peoples, need-fire among, i. 280 


599-1 344 i 
—— stories of the external soul, ii, 108 


5qq. 

Slavs, the oak a sacred tree among the, 
ii. 89 ; oak wood used to kindle sacred 
fires among the, 91 

——, the South, Midsummer fires among 
the, i. 178; the Yule log among the, 
247, 258 sgg. ; divination from flowers 
at Midsummer among the, ii. 50; their 
belief in the activity of witches at Mid- 
summer, 74 sg.; need-fire sometimes 
kindled by the friction of oak-wood 
among the, 91 

Sleep, magic, at initiation, ii. 256 sg. 

Sligo, the Druids’ Hill in County, i. 229 

Slope of Big Stones in Harris, i. 227 

Slovenians, their belief in the activity of 
witches on Midsummer Eve, ii. 75 

Smith, a spectral, i. 136 

Smoke made in imitation of rain-clouds, 
i. 133; used to stupefy witches; in the 
clouds, 345; used to fumigate sheep 
and cattle, ii. 12, 13 

of bonfires, omens drawn from the, 

i. 116, 131, 337; intended to drive away 

dragons, 161; allowed to pass over 

corn, 201, 337 

of Midsummer bonfires a preserv- 

ative against ills, i. 188; a protection 

against disease, 192; beneficial effects 
of, 214 sg. 

of Midsummer herbs a protection 

against thunder and lightning, ii. 48 ; 

used to fumigate cattle, 53 

of need-fire used to fumigate fruit- 
trees, nets, and cattle, i. 280 

Smyth, R. Brough, on menstruous 
women in Australia, i. 13 

Snake said to wound a girl at puberty, 
i. 56; seven-headed, external soul of 
witch in a, ii. 144; external soul of 
medicine-man in, 199. See also 
Serpent 

Stones, superstitions as to, i. 15 s¢.; 
belief of the Scottish Highlanders con- 
cerning, ii. 311 

Snakes, fat of, i. 14; thought to con- 
gregate on Midsummer Eve or the Eve 
of May Day, 15 sg. ; charm against, 
17; spirits of plants and trees in the 
form of, ii. 44 2. ; sympathetically 
related to human beings, 209 sg. 

Snow, external soul of a king in, ii. 102 

Societies, secret, and clans, totemic, 
related to each other, ii. 272 sg. 

Sodewa Bai and the golden necklace, 


story of, ii. 99 sg. 


INDEX 


Soemara, in Celebes, were-wolf at, : 


312 
Sofala in East Africa, i. 135 2.2 
Sogamoso, heir to the throne of, 
allowed to see the sun, i. 19 
Sogne Fiord in Norway, Balder’s 
on the, i. 104, ii. 315 
Solar festival in spring, ii. 3 
theory of the fires of the 
festivals, i. 329, 331 sgg., ii. 15 sg. 
a2 a 
Solstice, the summer, new fire kindled a 
the, i. 132, 133; its importance fo 
primitive man, 160 sg. a 
——, the winter, celebrated as the Birth: 
day of the Sun, i. 246; Persian festiva 
of fire at the, 269 ; 
Solstices, the old pagan festivals of th 
two, consecrated as the birthdays o} 
Christ and St. John the Baptist, i. 
181 sg. ; festivals of fire at the, 246 
247, 331 59.5 fern-seed gathered at 
the, ii. 290 sg. ; mistletoe gathered ai 
the, 291 sg. 
Solstitial fires perhaps sun-charms, 
292 
Soma, Hindoo deity, i. 99 2.? : 
Somme, the river, i, 113; the depart- 
ment of, mugwort at Midsummer in, | 
ii. 58 . | 
Somersetshire, Midsummer fires in, i. 7 
199 4 
Sonnerat, French traveller, on the f 
walk in India, ii. 6 sgg. 
Soosoos of Senegambia, 
society, ii. 261 sg. a 
Soracte, fire-walk of the Hirpi Sorani on 
Mount, ii. 14 sg. ; the Soranian Wolves 
at, 91 2.7 , 
‘‘Soranian Wolves” (Hirpi Soranz), ii. 
14; at Soracte, 91 2.1 . 
Soranus, Italian god, ii. 14, 15 #.1, 16 
Sorcerers, Midsummer herbs a protection? 
against, ii. 45; detected by St. John’s © 
wort, 55; detected by fern root, 67 — 
Sorcery, pointing sticks or bones in, i. — 
14; bonfires a protection against, 156; 
sprigs of mullein protect cattle against, — 
190; mistletoe a protection against, ii. — 
85; savage dread of, 224 sg. See also 
Witchcraft 
—— and witchcraft, Midsummer plants” 
and flowers a protection against, ii. 45, — 
46, 49, 54, 55, 59, 60, 62, 64, 65, 66, 


7 en la poe 
aie 


their 


67, 72 i 
Sorcha, the King of, in a Celtic tale, ii. — 
127 Sq. : 
Soul, the notion‘ of, a quasi-scientific — 


hypothesis, ii, 221; the unity and in- — 
divisibility of the, a theological dogma, — 
221 4 
of chief in sacred grove, ii. 161 


Soul of child deposited in a coco-nut, ii. 
_ 354 sg.; deposited in a bag, 155; 
bound up with knife, 157 
- of iron, ii. 154 
; of ruptured person passes into cleft 
_ oak-tree, ii. 172 
_ —— of woman at childbirth deposited in 
a chopping-knife, ii. 153 sg. 
p= —— the external, in folk-tales, ii. 95 
"  sgg.; in parrot, 97 sg.; in bird, 98 
sq. ; in necklace, 99 sg. ; in a fish, 99 
Bie 59.5 122 Sq. ; in cock, pigeon, starling, 
_ spinning-wheel, pillar, 100 sg. ; in 
) a: bee, rox ; in a lemon, 102; ina 
tree, 102; in a barley plant, ro2; in 
| a box, 102, 117, 143 2.*, 149; in 
a firebrand, 103 ; in hair, 103 sg.; in 
snow, 103 5g.; in two or three doves, 
104; in a ten-headed serpent, 104 
sg.; in a pumpkin, 105; in a spear, 
105; in a dragon, 105; in a gem, 
105 sg.; im an egg, 107, 125, 127, 
140 sg.; im a duck’s egg, 109 s¢., 
e155 sg., 116, X19. 3g., 120, 126, 
F: 130, 1325 in a blue rose-tree, 110; 
in a bird, 111, 119, 142, 150; ina 
_ pigeon, 112 sg.; in a light, 116; in 
a flower, 117 sg.; in grain of axed, 
_ x20; im a stone, 125 #.1, 156; ina 
- thorn, 129; in a gem, 130; ina 
pigeon’s egg, 132, 139; in a dove’s 
egg, 133; in a box-tree, 133; in the 
flower of the acacia, 135 sg.; in a 
spatrow, 137; in a beetle, 138, 140; 
in a bottle, 138; in a golden cock- 
chafer, 140; in a dish, I41I sg.; ina 
precious stone, 142 ; in a bag, 142; 
in a white herb, 143; in a wasp, 143 
< aes in a twelve-headed serpent, 143; 
in a golden ring, 143; in seven little 
birds, 144; in a seven-headed snake, 
144; in a quail, 144 sg.; in a vase, 
145 Sg.; in a golden sword and a 
golden arrow, 145; in entrails, 147 
5g.; in a golden fish, 147 sg., 220; in 
a hair as hard as copper, 148; ina 
cat, 150 sg.; in a bear, 151; ina 
buffalo, 151; in inaminate things, 153 
sgg.; in a hemlock branch, 152; in 
_ folk-custom, 153 sgg. ; in a mountain 
seaur, 156; in ox-horns, 156 ; in roof 
of house, 156; in a tree, 156; in a 
spring of water, 156; in capital of 
column, 156 sg. ; in a portrait statue, 
157; in plants, 159 sgg. ; in animals, 
196 sgg.; of shaman or medicine-man 
in animal, 196, 199; kept in totem, 
220 sqq. 
—— -boxes, amulets as, ii. 155 
+ —— -Stones, ii. 156 
_ — -stuff of ghosts, ii. 182 
_ Soulless King, whose soul was in a duck’s 


INDEX 


377 
egg, Lithuanian story of the, ii. 113 


5qq- 

Souls of dead sit round the Midsummer 
fire, i. 183, 184; of people at a house- 
warming collected in a bag, ii. 153; 
male and female, in Chinese philo- 
sophy, 221; the plurality of, 221 sg.; 
human, transmigrate into their totemic 
animals, 223 

Sow, the cropped black, at Hallowe'en, 
i. 239, 240 

Sower, the Wicked, driving away, i. 107, 
118 

Sowerby, James, on mouse-ear hawk- 
weed, ii. 57; on orpine, 61 2.*; on 
yellow hoary mullein, 64; on the 
Golden Bough, 284 2.7; on mistletoe, 
316 2.5 

Sowing hemp seed, divination by, i. 


235 

Spachendorf, in Silesia, effigy burnt at, 
i. 119 

Spae-wives and Gestr, Icelandic story of 
the, ii. 125 sg. 

Spain, Midsummer fires and customs in, 
i. 208 ; bathing at Midsummer in, ii 
29; vervain gathered at Midsummer 
in, 62 

Spark Sunday in Switzerland, i. 118 

Sparks of Yule log prognosticate chickens, © 
lambs, foals, calves, etc., i. 251, 262 
263, 264 

Sparrow, external soul of a jinnee in a, 
ii. 137 

Spear used to help women in hard 
labour, i. 14; external soul in a, ii. 


105 

Speicher, in the Eifel, St. John’s fires at, 
i. I 

Spell recited at kindling need-fire, i. 290; 
of witchcraft broken by suffering, 
304 

Spells cast on cattle, i. 301%, 302; cast 
by witches on union of man and wife, 


346 

Spencer (B.) and Gillen (F. J.) on 
initiation of medicine-man, ii. 238 

Spinning-wheel, external soul of ogress 
in a, ii. 100 

Spirit or god of vegetation, effigies of, 
burnt in spring, ii. 21 sg. ; reasons for 
burning, 23; leaf-clad representative 
of, burnt, 25 

Spirits of the hills, their treasures, ii. 69 

—— of plants and trees in the form of 
snakes, ii. 44 2.1 

—— of water propitiated at Midsummer, 
ii, 31 

Spree, the river, requires its human 
victim on Midsummer Day, ii. 26 

Spreewald, the Wends of the, ii. 48 

Sprenger, the inquisitor, ii. 158 


378 


Spring of water, external soul in a, ii. 
156 

Springs, underground, detected by divin- 
ing-rod, ii. 67 sg. 

Springwort, mythical plant, procured at 
Midsummer, ii. 69 sgg. ; reveals treas- 
ures, opens all locks, and makes the 
bearer invisible and invulnerable, 69 
5g. 

Sproat, G. M., on seclusion of girls at 
puberty, i. 43 sg. 

Spruce trees free from mistletoe, ii. 315 

Squeals of pigs necessary for fruitfulness 
of mangoes, i. 9 

Squirrels burnt in the Easter bonfires, i. 
142, li. 40 

Stabbing a transformed witch or were- 
wolf in order to compel him or her to 
reveal himself or herself, i. 315 

Staffordshire, the Yule log in, i. 256 

Stamfordham, in Northumberland, need- 
fire at, i. 288 sg. 

Starling, external soul of ogress in a, ii. 
100 

Stebbing, E. B., on Loranthus vestitus 
in India, ii. 317 2.? 

Steinen, Professor K. von den, on the 
bull-roarer, ii. 233 7.? 

Stelis, a kind of mistletoe, ii. 317, 318 

Sterile beasts passed through Midsummer 
fires, i. 203, 338 

Sternberg, in Mecklenburg, need-fire at, 
i, 274 

Stewart, Jonet, a wise woman, ii. 184 

Stewart, W. Grant, on witchcraft, i. 
342 2.4 

Stheni, near Delphi, ii. 317 

Sticks, charred, of bonfires, protect fields 
against hail, i. 144 

, charred, of Candlemas bonfires, 

superstitious uses of, i, 131 

, charred, of Easter” fire, super- 

stitious uses of, i. 121 ; preserve wheat 

from blight and mildew, 143 

, charred, of Midsummer bonfires, 

planted in the fields, i. 165, 166, 173, 

174; a charm against lightning and 

foul weather, 174; kept to make the 

cattle thrive, 180; thrown into wells 
to improve the water, 184; a pro- 

tection against thunder, 184, 192; a 

protection against lightning, 187, 188, 

190 

, sacred, whittled, i. 138 7.1 

Stiffness of back set down to witchcraft, 
i. 343 2., 345 

Stinging girls and young men with ants, 
i. 61, 62 5g. 

—— with ants as a form of purification, 
i, 61 sgg. 

Stipiturus malachurus, emu-wren, men’s 
‘brother ’’ among the Kurnai, ii. 216 


INDEX 


“Stolen kail, divination by, i. 234 sg. 


Stone, look of a girl at puberty thought 
to turn things to, i. 46; the Hairy, at 
Midsummer, 212; external soul.in a, — 
ii, 125 7.1, 1 56; precious, external — 
soul of khan in a, 142; magical, put — 
into body of novice at initiation, — 


271 
Stones thrown into Midsummer fire, i. 


183, 191, 212; placed round Mid. : 
summer fires, 190; carried by persons — 


on their heads at Midsummer, 205, 


212; at Hallowe'en fires, divination — 
by, 230 sg., 239, 240;: used for curing — 
cattle, 324, 325; sick people passed ~ 


through holes in, ii. 186 sgg. ; magical, 


inserted by spirits in the body of a new — 


medicine-man, 235 


Stoole, near Downpatrick, Midsummer 


ceremony at, i. 205 
Stow, 
London, i. 196 sg. 


Strabo, on the Hirpi Sorani, ii. 14; on — 


the human sacrifices of the Celts, 32 


John, on Midsummer fires in 


nen 
— — oe 


Strackerjan, L., on fear of witchcraft in a . 


Oldenburg, i. 343 2. 


Strap of wolf's hide used by were-wolves, q . 


i. 310 2,1 
Strathpeffer, in Ross-shire, i. 153 


Strathspey, sheep passed through a hoop a 


of rowan in, ii. 184 


Straw tied round trees to make them a 


fruitful, i. x15 


Streams, menstruous women not allowed — 
need - fire — 


to cross running, i. 97; 
kindled between two running, 292 


Strength of people bound up with their ; 


hair, ii. 158 sg. 
Striking or throwing blindfold, ii. 279 2.4 
Striped Petticoat Philosophy, The, i. 6. 


Stromberg Hill, burning wheel rolled 


down the, i. 163 


Strutt, Joseph, on Midsummer fires in 


England, i. 196 


Stseelis Indians of British Columbia, dread 
and seclusion of menstruous women 


among the, i. 89 


Stuart, Mrs. A., on withered mistletoe; q 


ii. 287 2,1 
Lake in British Columbia, i. 47 


Stukeley, W., on a Christmas custom at 


York, ii. 291 7. 


Styria, fern-seed on Christmas night i in, a 


ii, 289 


Styx, the passage of Aeneas across the, — 


ii. 294 

Subincision at initiation of lads in Aus: 
tralia, ii. 227 S., 234, 235 

Sub-totems in Australia, ii. 275 7. 1 

Sudan, ceremony of new fire in the, 17 
134; human hyaenas i in, 313 

Sudeten mountains in Silesia, i. 170 


_ Suffering, intensity of, a means to break 
_ the spell of witchcraft, i. 304 
belief as to menstruous women 
in, i. 96 2.2; duck baked alive as a 
' Sacrifice in, 303 sq. 

© Suk of British East Africa, their-dread of 
_ menstruous women, i. 81 

aS: ** Sultan of the Oleander,” i. 18 

_ Sumatra, the Minangkabauers of, i. 79; 
"+ the Kooboos of, ii. 162 2.7; the 
_ Looboos of, 182 sg.; totemism among 
the Battas of, 222 sgg.; use of bull- 
roarers in, 229 2. 


Day, i. 195 
Sun, rule not to see the, i. 18 sgg.; priest 
of the, uses a white umbrella, 20 z.1; 
not to shine on girls at puberty, 22, 35» 
36, 37: 41, 44, 46, 47, 68; not to be 
seen by Brahman boys for three days, 
68 2.7; impregnation of women by the, 
74 Ssqg.; made to shine on women at 
marriage, 75; sheep and lambs sacri- 
ficed.to the, 132; temple of the, at 
Cuzco, 132 ; the Birthday of the, at the 
winter solstice, 246 ; Christmas an old 
heathen festival of the birth of the, 331 
sq.; symbolized by a wheel, 334 2.1,335; 
in the sign of the lion, ii. 66 sg.; 
magical virtues of plants at Midsummer 
derived from the, 71 sg.; in the sign 
of Sagittarius, 82; calls men to him- 
self through death, 173, 174 m.1; fern- 
shootin 


- Sun-charms, i. 331; the solstitial and 
' _ other ceremonial fires perhaps sun- 
charms, ii. 292 

_ —-god, ii. x, 16 
_ Sundal, in Norway, need-fire in, i. 280 

_ Sunday, children born on a Sunday can 

___ See treasures in the earth, ii. 288 7.5 
_ —— of the Firebrands, i. 110 

_ —— in Lent, the first, fire-festival on the, 

| _ i. 107 gg. 

_ Sung-yang, were-tiger in, i. 310 
- Sunless, Prince, i. 21 

~ Sunshine, use of fire as a charm to pro- 

j duce, i. 341 sg. 

_ Superb warbler, called women’s ‘‘ sister’’ 

among the Kurnai, ii. 215 2.1, 216, 

a 2x8 
_ Superstitions, Index of, i. 270; about 
trees struck by lightning, ii. 296 sgg. 

Surenthal in Switzerland, new fire made 

by friction at Midsummer in the, i. 


of rupture in, ii. 169 sg. 


INDEX 


_ Summer, King of, chosen on St. Peter’s | 


379 


Sutherlandshire, sept of the Mackays, 
“*the descendants of the seal,”’ in, ii. 
131 5g. 

Swabia, ‘‘ burning the witch” in, i. 116; 
custom of throwing lighted discs in, 
116 sg. ; Easter fires in, 144 sg. ; cus- 
tom at eclipses in, 162 ”. ; the Mid- 
summer fires in, 166 sg. ; witches as 
hares and horses in, 318 sg.; the 
divining-rod in, ii. 68 2.4; fern-seed 
brought by Satan on Christmas night 


in, 289 

Swahili of East Africa, their ceremony 
of the new fire, i, 133, 140 ; birth- 
trees among the, ii. 160 sg.; their 
story of an African Samson, ii. 314 

Swallows, stones found in stomachs of, 
i 17 

Swan-woman, Tartar story of the, ii. 
144 

Swan's bone, used by menstruous women 
to drink out of, i. 48, 49, 50, 90, 92 

Swans’ song in a fairy , i. 124 

Swanton, J. R., quoted, i. 45 .1 

Sweden, customs observed on Yule Night 
in, i. 20 sg. ; Easter bonfires in, 146; 
bonfires on the Eve of May Day in, 
159, 336; Midsummer fires in, 172; 
the need-fire in, 280; bathing at Mid- 
summer in, ii. 29; ‘* Midsummer 
Brooms” in, 54; the divining-rod in, 
69, 291; mistletoe to be shot or 
knocked down with stones in, 82; 
mistletoe a remedy for epilepsy in, 83 ; 
medical use of mistletoe in, 84; 
mistletoe used as a protection against 
conflagration in, 85, 293; mistletoe 
cut at Midsummer in, 86; mystic 
properties ascribed to mistletoe on St. 
John’s Eve in, 86; Balder’s balefires 
in, 87; children passed through a 
cleft oak as a cure for rupture or 
rickets in, 170; crawling through a 
hoop as a cure in, 184; superstitions 
about a parasitic rowan in, 281 

Switzerland, Lenten fires in, i. 118 sg. ; 
new fire kindled by friction of wood in, 
169 sg.; Midsummer fires in, 172; 
the Yule log in, 249; need-fire in, 
279 5g-, 336; people warned against 
bathing at Midsummer i, ii. 27; the 
belief in witchcraft in, 42 #.?; divina- 
tion by orpine at Midsummer in, 61 

Sympathetic relation between cleft tree 
and person who has been passed 
through it, ii. 170, 171 2.1, 172; be- 
tween man and animal, 272 sq. 

Syria, restrictions on menstruous women 
in, i. 84 

Syrmia, the Yule log in, i. 262 sg. 


Tabari, Arab chronicler, i. 82 


380 


Taboo conceived as a dangerous physical 
substance which needs to be insulated, 
i. 6 5g. 
Tabooed men, i. 7 sg. 
persons kept from contact with the 
ground, i. 2 sgq. 
things kept from contact with the 
ground, i, 7 sgq. 
women, i. 8 
Taboos regulating the lives of divine 
kings, i. 2; observed by priest of 
Earth in Southern Nigeria, 4 
Tacitus, on human sacrifices offered by 
the ancient Germans, ii. 28 2.1 
the goddess Nerthus, 28 2.1 
Tahiti, king and queen of, not allowed 
to set foot on the ground, i. 3; the 
fire-walk in, ii. rz 
Tahitians, the New Year of the, ii. 244 
Tajan and Landak, districts of Dutch 
Borneo, i. 5, ii. 164 
Talbot, P. Amaury, on external human 
souls in animals, ii. 208 2.1, 209 2.1 
Talegi, Motlavy word for external soul, 
“ji, 198 
Tales of maidens forbidden to see the 
sun, i. 70 sgq. 
Talismans of cities, i. 83 7.1 
Talmud, the, on menstruous women, i. 83 
Tamanaks of the Orinoco, their treat- 
ment of girls at puberty, i. 61 7. 
Tamaniu, external soul in the Mota 
language, ii. 198 sg., 220 : 
Tamarisk, Isfendiyar slain with a branch 
of a, i. 105 
Tami, the, of German New Guinea, their 
rites of initiation, ii. 239 sgg. 
Tanganyika, Lake, tribes of, i. 24 
Tanner, John, and the Shawnee sage, ii. 


157 

’ Tantad, Midsummer bonfire, i. 183 

Taoist treatise on the soul, ii, 221 

Tapajos, tributary of the Amazon, i. 62 

Taphos besieged by Amphitryo, ii. 103 

Tara, new fire in the King's house at, 
i. 158 

Tar-barrels, burning, swung round pole 
at Midsummer, i. 169; burnt at Mid- 
summer, 180; procession with lighted, 
on Christmas Eve, 268 

Tarbolton, in Ayrshire, annual bonfire 
at, i. 207 

Tartar stories of the external soul, ii, 
I42 Sg., 144 Sg. 

Tartars after a funeral leap over fire, ii. 18 

Tattooing, medicinal use of, i. 98 2.1; 
at initiation, ii. 258, 259, 261 2. 

Tay, Loch, i. 232 

Tcheou, dynasty of China, i. 137 

Teak, Loranthus on, ii. 317 

Teanlas, Hallowe'en fires in Lancashire, 
i, 245 


INDEX 


mye 5 «Yel 


Teeth on as preliminary to 
i. 68 2,2 ; 
Tegner, Swedish poet, on the burning of 
Balder, ii. 87 a 
Tein Econuch, ‘‘ forlorn fire,”’ need-fire, 
i. 292 E 
Tein-eigin (teine-eigin, tin-egin), need- 
fire, i. 147, 148, 289, 291, 293 ; 
Teine Bheuil, fire of Beul, need-fines : 
i, 293 
Tent burnt at Midsummer, i. 215 a 
Termonde in Belgium, Midsummer fires — 
at, i. 194 
Tessier, on the burning wheel at Konz, . 
i. 164 2.4 _ 
Tests undergone by girls at puberty, i. 2s 
Teutates, Celtic god, ii. 80 2. 5 
Teutonic stories of the external soul, — 
ii. 116 sggq. 
Texas, the Toukaway Indians of, ii. 276 — 
Thahu, curse or pollution, i. 8x i 
Thays of Tonquin, their customs after a 
burial, ii. 177 sg. q 


Thebes, in Greece, effigies of Judas burnt ~ ) 


at Easter in, i. 130 sq. a 
Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, his — 
denunciation of a heathen practice, 

ii. 190 5g. F 
Theophrastus on the different kinds of y 
mistletoe, ii. 317 ; 
Therapia, effigies of Judas burnt at 4 
Easter in, i. 131 ‘a 
Thief wears a toad’s heart to escape — 
detection, i, 302 7. : 
Thiers, J.-B., on the Yule log, i. 250; — 
on gathering herbs at Midsummer, — 
ii. 45 2.1; on belief concerning worm- — 
wood, 61 2.1 
Thieves detected by divining-rod, ii, 68. 
Thighs of diseased cattle cut off and ~ 
hung up as a remedy, i. 296 2.1 a 
Thirty years’ cycle of the Druids, ii. 77 
Thlinkeet Indians. See Tlingit 
Thomas, N. W., ii. 210 2.? x 
Thomas the Rhymer, verses ascribed to, 
ii. 283 sg. a 
Thompson Indians of British Columbia, 
seclusion of girls at puberty among ~ 
the, i. 49 sgg.; their dread of men- 
struous women, 89 sy.; prayer bee - 
adolescent girl among the, 98 2.1; _ 
supposed invulnerability of initiated a 
men among the, ii. 275 sg. ; 
ideas as to wood of trees struck by 
lightning, 297 
Thomsdorf, in Germany, i. 99 
Thomson, Basil, ii. 244 2.) 4 
Thonga, the, of Delagoa Bay, seclusion — 
of girls at puberty among the, i. 29 5g.; 
will not use the wood of trees struck 
by lightning, ii. 297; hernias lightning — 
caused by a bird, 297 2.° 


—— 


thei om 


» a Norse god, i. 103 
external soul in a, ii. 129; 


(——: bushes used to keep off ghosts, 
| i 374 sg. 
Thought, the web of, ii. 307 sg. 


baptized in the name of the, ii. 68 
—— leaps over bonfire, i. 214, 215 
Threshold, shavings from the, burnt, 


ii. 53 

| Thrice to crawl under a bramble as a 
_ cure, ii. 180; to pass through a 
wreath of woodbine, wie 

_ Throwing or striking blindfold, ii. 279 2.* 
_ Thrumalun, a mythical being who kills 
_ and resuscitates novices at initiation, 
ii. 233. See also Daramulun and 
Thuremlin 


\eeslomsoneg oa angt seeds of mistletoe, ii. 
316 2. 
_ Thunder associated with the oak, i. 145; 
_ Midsummer fires a protection against, 
176; charred sticks of Midsummer 
' bonfire a protection against, 184, 192 ; 
ashes of Midsummer fires a protection 
against, 190; brands from the Mid- 
_ summer fires a protection against, 
_ ¥91; certain flowers at Midsummer a 
protection against, ii. 54, 58, 59; the 
sound of bull-roarers thought toimitate, 
_  228sgg. See also Lightning 
_ Thunder and lightning, the Yule log a 
4 protection against, i. 248, 249, 250, 
252, 253, 254, 258, 264; bonfires a 
protection against, 344; smoke of 
Midsummer herbs a protection against, 
ii. 48; vervain a protection against, 
_ 62; name given to bull-roarers, 231 sg. 
_ +——and the oak, the Aryan god of the, 
- i 265 
‘*___ _besom,”” name applied to mistle- 
toe and other bushy excrescences on 
trees, ii. 85, 301; a protection against 
thunderbolts, 85 
—— -bird, the mythical, i. 44 
ae -bolts,”” name given to celts, i. 
ac eS 
* -poles,”” oak sticks charred in 
_ Easter bonfires, i. 145 
Thunderstorms and hail caused by 
witches, i. 344; Midsummer flowers 
a protection against, ii. 48 
_ Thuremlin, a mythical being who kills 
lads at initiation and restores them to 
life, ti. 227. See also Daramulun 
Thuringia, custom at eclipses in, i. 
162 2. ; Midsummer fires in, 169, 
ii. 40; Schweina in, i. 265 ; belief as 
to magical properties of the fern in, 
ii. 66 sg. 


4 
g 


INDEX 


381 


Thursday, Maundy, i. 125 2.1 

Thurso, witches as cats at, i. 317 

Thurston, E., on the fire-walk, ii. 9 

Thyme burnt in Midsummer fire, i. 213 ; 
wild, gathered on Midsummer Day, 
li. 64 

Tibet, sixty years’ cycle in, ii. 78 2. 

Ticunas of the Amazon, ordeal of young 
men among the, i. 62 sg. 

Tiger, a Batta totem, ii. 223 

Tiger’s skin at inauguration of a king, 
i. 4 

Timmes of Sierra Leone, their secret 
society, ii. 260 2.1 

Tinneh Indians, seclusion of girls at 
puberty among the, i. 47 sgq.; their 
dread and seclusion of menstruous 
women, 9I sgg. 

Tinnevelly, the Kappiliyans of, i. 69 

Tipperary, county of, were-wolves in, 
i. 310 2.1; woman burnt as a witch 
in, 323 sg. 

Tiree, the need-fire in, i 148; the 
Beltane cake in, 149; witch as sheep 
in, 316 

Tivor, god or victim, i. 103 2. 

Tiyans of Malabar, their seclusion of 
girls at puberty, i. 68 sg. 

Tlactga or Tlachtga in Ireland, i. 139 

Tlingit (Thlinkeet) Indians of Alaska, 
seclusion of girls at puberty among 
the, 1.45 5g. 

Tlokoala, a secret society of the Nootka 
Indians, ii, 271 

Toad, witch in form of a, i. 323 

—— clan, ii. 273 

—-stools thrown into Midsummer 
bonfires as a charm, i. 172 

Toad’s heart worn by a thief to prevent 
detection, i. 302 2.2 

Toads burnt alive in Devonshire, i. 302 

Toaripi of New Guinea, their rule as to 
menstruous women, i. 84 

Tobas, Indian tribe of the Gran Chaco, 
their custom of secluding girls at 
puberty, i. 59 

Tobelorese of Halmahera, their rites of 
initiation, ii. 248 

Toboengkoe, the, of Central Celebes, 
custom observed by widower among 
the, ii. 178 sg. 

Tocandetra, native name for the Cryffo- 
cerus atratus, F., ant, i. 62 

Todas of the Neilgherry Hills, their 
ceremony of the new fire, i. 136 

Tokio, the fire-walk at, ii. 9 sg. 

Tokoelawi of Central Celebes, custom 
observed by mourners among the, 
ii, 178 

Tomori, the Gulf of, in Celebes, i. 312 

Tongue of medicine-man, hole in, ii. 
238, 239 


382 

Tonquin, the Thays of, their burial 
customs, ii. 177 sg. 

Tonwan, magical influence of medicine- 
bag, ii. 268, 269 

Tooth of novice knocked out at initia- 
tion, ii, 227, 235 

Toradjas of Central Celebes, were-wolves 
among the, i. 311 sg. ; their custom 
at the smelting of iron, ii. 154 

Torch-races at Easter, i. 142; at Mid- 
summer, 175 

Torches interpreted as imitations of 
lightning, i. 340 2.3 

, burning, carried round folds and 

lands at Midsummer, i. 206; applied 

to fruit-trees to fertilize them, 340 

of Demeter, i. 340 

, processions with lighted, i. 141, 
141 5g., 233 sg.; through fields, gar- 
dens, orchards, and streets, 107 sg., 
IIO Sgg., II3 Syg., 179, 339 Sg. ; at 
Midsummer, 179; on Christmas Eve, 
266 

Torres Straits Islands, seclusion of girls 
at puberty in the, i. 36 s7,, 39 sgg. ; 
dread and seclusion of women at 
menstruation in the, 78 sg.; use of 
bull-roarers in the, ii. 228 7.%, 232 

Tortoises, external human souls lodged 
in, ii. 204 

Torture, judicial, of criminals, witches, 
and wizards, ii. 158 sg. 

Totem, transference of man’s soul to 
his, ii. 219 ”., 225 sg.; supposed 
effect of killing a, 220; the receptacle 
in which a man keeps his external 
soul, 220 sgg. ; the individual or per- 
sonal, 222 2.5, 224 2.1, 226.1 See 
also Sex totem 

animal, artificial, novice at initia- 

tion brought back by, ii. 271 sg. ; 

transformation of man into his, 275 

clans and secret societies, related 

to each other, ii. 272 sg. 

names kept secret, ii. 225 7. 

plants among the Fans, ii. 161 

Totemism, suggested theory of, ii. 218 
5qq- 

Totems, honorific, of the Carrier Indians, 
li. 273 sgg.; personal, among the 
North American Indians, 273, 276 
m.1; multiplex, of the Australians, 
275 2.4 

Touch of menstruous women thought to 
convey pollution, i. 87, 90 

Toukaway Indians of Texas, ceremony 
of mimic wolves among the, ii. 276 

Toulouse, torture of sorcerers at, ii. 
158 

Touraine, Midsummer fires in, i. 182 

Train, Joseph, on Beltane fires in Isle of 
Man, i. 157 


INDEX 


Transference of a man’s soul to his” 


totem, ii. 219 ”,, 225 sg. 


Transformation of men into wolves at the © 
full moon, i. 314 2.1; of witches into 
animals, 315 sgq., ii. 311 sg.; of men 
into animals, 207; of man into his 


totem animal, 275 


Transmigration of soul of ruptured person _ 
into cleft oak-tree, ii. 172; of human — 


souls into totem animals, 223 


Transylvania, the Roumanians of, i. 13 ; 7 
story of the external soul among the — 
Saxons of, ii. 116 ; belief as to children — 


born on a Sunday in, 288 7. 


Travancore, women deemed liable to be — 
attacked by demons in, i. 24 #.2; the — 


Pulayars of, 69 


Travexin, in the Vosges, witch as hare j 


at, i. 318 


Treasures guarded by demons, ii. 65 ; 
found by means of fern-seed, 65, 287; — 


discovered by divining-rod, 68; re- 


vealed by springwort, 70; revealed by 
mistletoe, 287, 291; bloom in the © 


earth on Midsummer Eve, 288 7.5 
Trebius, on the springwort, ii. 71 


Tree burnt in the Midsummer bonfire, i. — 
173 sg., 180, 183; external soul ina, © 


ii, 102, 156 


ii. 216 


—— -spirit, effigies of, burnt in bonfires, — 
ii, 2m sgg.; human representatives — 
of, put to death, 25; human repre- — 
sentative of the, perhaps originally — 


burnt at the fire-festivals, go 


n+ 


Trees, men changed into, by look of 
menstruous women, i. 79; burnt in — 
spring fires, 115 sg., 116, 142; burnt — 
in Midsummer fires, 173 sg., 185, — 
192, 193, 209; burnt at Holi festival 


in India, ii. 2; burnt-in bonfires, 22; 


lives of people bound up with, 159 sgg.; 
hair of children tied to, 165 the fate — 
of families or individuals bound up — 
with, 165 sgg. ; creeping through cleft 
trees as cure for various maladies, 
170 sqg.; fire thought by savages to 
be stored like sap in, 295; struck by — 


lightning, superstitions about, 296 sgq. 


$9q- 
Tréfoir, the Yule log, i. 249 
Tréfouet, the Yule log, i. 252 2.7, 253 


Tregonan, in Cornwall, Midsummer fires a 


on, i. 199 


Trench cut in ground at Beltane, i. 150, — q 


152 


-creeper (Climacteris scandens), — 
women’s ‘‘sister’” among the Yuin, — 


spirits bless women with offspring, 4 
ii, 22; in the form of serpents, 44 — 


and plants as life-indices, ii, 160 


er 


, Marie, on Midsummer fires, 
_ i, 201; on Hallowe'en, 226 x.1; on 
‘St. John’s wort in Wales, ii. 55 2.7; 
on burnt sacrifices in Wales, 301 


: Trilles, Father H., on the theory of the 
‘Trinidad, the fire-walk in, ii. Ir 


__ and evil spirits abroad on Midsummer 
Eve, 172; Midsummer flowers a pro- 
tection against, ii. 54; rendered power- 
less by mistletoe, 86, 283, 294 


‘men, ii. 249 
_ —— penny, at the feast of the Nativity 
of the Virgin, i. 221, 222 


____ Foarers, 242 

_ Tui Nkualita, a Fijian chief, founder of 

the fire-walk, ii. xz 

Tulst plant, its miraculous virtue, ii. 5 

_ Tummel, the valley of the, i. 231 

Tunis, New Year fires at, i. 217; gold 
sickle and fillet said to be found in, ii. 

4 80 2.3 

_ Tunnel, creeping through a, as a remedy 
for an epidemic, i. 283 sg. 

Turf, sick children and cattle passed 

holes in, ii. 191 

Turks of Siberia, marriage custom of the, 
i. 75 

Turukhinsk region, Samoyeds of the, ii. 
196 

Tutu, island of Torres Strait, treatment 
of girls at puberty in, i. 41 

Twanyirika, a spirit whose voice is heard 

in the sound of the bull-roarer, ii. 233 
ae kills and resuscitates lads at 
initiation, 234 

Twelfth Day, Eve of, the bonfires of, i. 
107 ; processions with torches on, 340 

Night, the King of the Bean on, i. 

153 ”.* ; cake, 184; the Yule log on, 

248, 250, 251; the divining-rod cut 

on, ii. 638 


INDEX 


383 


Twelve Nights, remains of Yule log 
scattered on fields during the, i. 248 ; 
between Christmas and Epiphany, 
were-wolves abroad during the, 310 .! 

‘* Twice born” Brahman, ii. 276 

Twin brothers in ritual, i. 278 

—— -producing virtue ascribed to a kind 
of mistletoe, ii. 79 


‘Twins and their aferbirths counted as 


four children, ii. 162 2.? 

Twins, father of, i. 24 

Two Brothers, ancient Egyptian story of 
the, ii. 134 sg. 

Tyrol, ‘‘ burning the witch” in the, i 
116; fires to burn the witches in the, 
160 ; Midsummer fires in the, 172 59.; 
magical plants culled on Midsummer 
Eve in the, ii. 47; St. John’s wort in 
the, 54; mountain arnica gathered at 
Midsummer in the, 58; use of four- 
leaved clover in the, 62 sg. ; dwartf- 
elder gathered at Midsummer in the, 
64; the divining-rod in the, 68 ; mistle- 
toe used to open all locks in the, 85; 
belief as to mistletoe growing on a 
hazel in the, 291 2.3 

Tyrolese peasants use fern-seed to dis- 
cover buried gold and to prevent 
money from decreasing, ii. 288 

—— story of a girl who was forbidden 
to see the sun, i. 72 


Ualaroi, the, of the Darling River, their 
belief as to initiation, ii. 233 

Uaupes of Brazil, seclusion of girls at 

among the, i. 61 

Uganda, kings of, not allowed to set foot 
on ground, i. 3 sg.; life of the king 
of, bound up with barkcloth trees, ii. 
160; passage of sick man through a 
cleft stick or a narrow opening in, 181 
sg. ; cure for lightning-stroke in, 298 
n2 See also Baganda 

Uisnech, in County Meath, great fair at, 
i. 158 

Uist, Beltane cakes in, i. 154 

——_, North, need-fire in, i. 293 sy. 

——, South, fairies at Hallowe'en in, i. 
226; salt cake at Hallowe'en in, 
238 sg. 

Uiyumkwi tribe, their treatment of girls 
at puberty, i. 39 7. 

Ukami, in German East Africa, ii. 313 

Ukponss external soul in Calabar, ii. 


Una Bu Aziz, Arab tribe in Morocco, 
their Midsummer fires, i. 214 

Umbrellas in ritual, i. 20 2.1, 31 

Uncleanness, ceremonial, among the 
Indians of Costa Rica, i. 65 #.1; and 
sanctity not clearly differentiated in the 
primitive mind, 97 sg. 


384 


Uncleanness of women at menstruation, 
i. 76 sgg. See also Menstruous 

Unguent made from fat of crocodiles and 
snakes, i. 14 

Universal healer, name given to mistle- 
toe, ii. 77 

Unlucky, Midsummer Day regarded as, 
ii, 29 

children passed through. narrow 
openings, ii. 190 

Unmasking a were-wolf or witch by 
wounding him or her, i. 315, 321 

Unmatjera tribe of Central Australia, 
their rites of initiation, ii. 234; initia- 
tion of a medicine-man in the, 238 

Up-helly-a’, at Lerwick, i. 269 x. 

Uraons. See Oraons 

Urabunna tribe of Central Australia, 
their rites of initiation, ii. 234 

Ustrels, a species of vampyre in Bul- 
garia, i. 284 


Vagney, in the Vosges, Christmas custom 
at, i. 254 

Vagueness and inconsistency of primi- 
tive thought, ii. 301 sg. 

Val di Ledro, effigy burnt in the, at 
Carnival, i. 120 

Valais, the canton of, Midsummer fires 
in, i. 172; cursing a mist in, 280 

Valenciennes, Lenten fire-custom at, i. 
I14 2” 

Valentines at bonfires, i. 109 sg. 

Vallancey, General Charles, on Hal- 
lowe’en customs in Ireland, i. 241 sg. 

Vallée des Bagnes, cursing a mist in the, 
i. 280 

Vampyres, need-fire kindled as a safe- 
guard against, i. 284 sgg., 344 

Vapour bath, i. 40 

Var, Midsummer fires in the French 
department of, i. 193 

Varro, on the fire-walk of the Hirpi 
Sorani, ii. 14 2.3 

Vase, external soul of habitual criminal 
in a, ii. 145 sg. 

Vecoux, in the Vosges, i. 254 

Vedic hymns, the fire-god Agni in the, 
ii. 295 5g. 

Vegetables at Midsummer, their ferti- 
lizing influence on women, ii. 51 

Vegetation, spirit of, burnt in effigy, ii. 
21 sg. : reasons for burning, 23 ; leaf- 
clad representative of, burnt, 25 

-spirits, W. Mannhardt’s view that 
the victims burnt by the Druids repre- 
sented, ii. 43 

Velten, C., on an African Balder, ii. 
312 sy. 

Verbascum, mullein, gathered at Mid- 
summer, ii. 63 sg. ; its relation to the 
sun, 64 


INDEX 


‘Veth, P. J., on the Golden Bough, ii, — 


Verbena officinalis, vervain, gathered at 
Midsummer, ii. 62 
Verges, in the Jura, Lenten fire-custom 
at, i. 114 5g. i 
Vermin exorcized with torches, i. 340 
Versipellis, a were-wolf, i. 314 2.4 . 
Vervain, garlands or chaplets of, at Mid- — 
summer, i. 162, 163, 165; burnt in 
the Midsummer fires, 195; used in 
exorcism, ii. 62 2.4; a protection — 
against thunder and lightning, sor- — 
cerers, demons, and thieves, 62; _ 
gathered at Midsummer, 62 
Vespasian family, the oak of the, ii. — 
168 : 
Vesper-bell on Midsummer Eve, ii. 62 
Vessels, special, used by menstruous — 
women, i. 86, 90; used by girls at — 
puberty, 93 q 
Vesta, sacred fire in the temple of, 
annually kindled, i. 138 ; the fire of, — 
at Rome, fed with oak-woodl, 19s, 
286 
Vestal Virgins relit the sacred fire ot — 
Vesta, i. 138; their rule of celibacy, — 
138 2.5 La 
Vestini, the ancient, i. 209 


319 : 
Victims, human, claimed by St. John on 
St. John’s Day (Midsummer Day), i. — 
27, 29; claimed by water at Mid- — 
summer, ii. 26 sgq. a 
Victoria, aborigines of, their custom as — 
to emu fat, i. 13; their dread of © 
women at menstruation, 77 sg. a 
sex totems in, ii. 217 
Vidovec in Croatia, Midsummer fires at, 
i. 178 
Vienne, department of, Midsummer fires 
in the, i. 191; the Yule log in, 251 
Vilavou, New Year's Men, name given 
to newly initiated lads in Fiji, ii. 244 
Village surrounded with a ring of fire — 
as a protection against an evil spirit, 
_ 1, 282 f 
Vimeux, Lenten fires at, i. 113 
Vintage, omens of, i. 164 4 
Vipers sacred to balsam trees in Arabia, 
ii. 44 2.4 " 
Virbius at Nemi interpreted as an oak- — 
spirit, ii. 295 “i 
Virgil, on the fire-walk of the Hirpi 
Sorani, ii, 14; his account of the — 
Golden Bough, 284 sg., 286, 293 sg., 
315 5979- : a 
Virgin, the, blesses the fruits of the 
earth, i. 118; the hair of the Holy, 
found in ashes of Midsummer fire, 
182 sg., 191; feast of the Nativity of 
the, 220 sg.; and child supposed to 
sit on the Yule log, 253 sg 


Virginity, test of, by blowing up a flame, 
yi. 37 2” 
_ Virility supposed to be lost by contact 


with menstruous women, i. 81 


: BES *99- 3 Viscum quernum, 317 
Visiter, the Christmas, i. 261 sg., 263, 


_ Voigtland, bonfires on Walpurgis Night 
i in, i, 260; tree and person thrown 
into water on St. John’s Day in, ii. 
27 sg.; divination by flowers on Mid- 
summer Eve in, 53; mountain arnica 
' gathered at Midsummer in, 57 s¢.; 
_ wild thyme gathered at Midsummer 
_ in, 64; precautions against witches 
> in, 73 5g. 

~ Volga, the Cheremiss of the, i. 181 
a Easter fires at, 


a a 

—«- 02 sg. 

P Voralbery, in the Tyrol, ‘‘ burning the 

' witch” at, i. 116 

_ Vorges, near Laon, Midsummer fires at, 

s i. 187 

' Vosges, Midsummer fires in the, i. 188, 
_ 336; the Yule log in the, 254; cats 

burnt alive on Shrove Tuesday in the, 

> . ii. 40 

__ — Mountains, Lenten fires in the, i. 

' 409; witches as hares in the, 318; 
magic herbs culled on Eve of St. John 
in the, ii. 47 

Vrid-eld, need-fire, i. 280 

_ Vultures, lives of persons bound up with 

those of, ii. 201, 202 


a 


| Wadai, ceremony of the new fire in, i. 
p «6X34, 140 

. Wadoe, the, of German East Africa, ii. 
gee 

_ Wafiomi, seclusion of girls at puberty 


@ birth-plants among the, ii. 160 
Wakelbura tribe (Australia), dread and 
seclusion of women at menstruation in 
the, i. 78 
Wakondyo, their custom as to the after- 
birth, ii. 162 sg. 
PT. Vit. VOL. Il 


3 


INDEX 


385 


‘ sore pmagennbaep aly 132; the ; Wales, Snake Stones in, i. 15 sg.; Beltane 


fires and cakes in, 155 sg.; Mid- 
summer fires in, 200 sg. ; divination 
at Hallowe'en in, 229, 240 sg. ; Hal- 
lowe’en fires in, 239 sg.; the Yule log 
in, 258 ; burnt sacrifices to stop cattle- 
disease in, 301 ; witches as hares in, 
ae agi belief as to witches in, 321 
; bewitched things burnt in, 322; 

‘divination by flowers on Midsummer 
Eve in, ii. 53; St. John’s wort in, 55; 
mistletoe to be shot or knocked down 
with stones in, 82; mistletoe cut at 
Midsummer in, 86 ; mistletoe used to 
make the dairy thrive in, 86; Beltane 
fire kindled by the friction of oak-wood 
in, 91; mistletoe gathered at Mid- 
summer in, 293 

Walhalla, i. ror 

Walking over fire as a rite, ii. 3 sgg. 

Walls, fortified, of the ancient Gauls, i. 


5g. 

Walnut, branches of, passed across Mid- 
summer fires and fastened on cattle- 
sheds, i. 191 

Walos of Senegambia, their belief as to 
a sort of mistletoe, ii. 79 sg. 

Walpi, Pueblo Indian village, use of 
bull-roarers at, ii. 231 

Walpurgis Day, i. 143 

—— Night, witches abroad on, i. 159 
$g.; @ witching time, 295;  pre- 
cautions against witches on, il. 20 #. ; 
witches active on, 73, 74 

Wangen in Baden, Lenten fire-custom 
at, i. 117 

Wanyamwezi, their belief as to wounded 
crocodiles, ii. 210 2.1 

Warlock, the invulnerable, stories of, ii. 


Warwickshire, the Yule log in, i. 257 
Washamba, the, of German East Africa, 
their custom at circumcision, ii. 183 
Washington State, seclusion of girls at 
puberty among the Indians of, i. 43 
Wasmes, processions with torches at, i, 

108 
Wasp, external soul of enchanter in a, ii. 


143 

Wasps, young men stung with, as an 
ordeal, i, 63 

Wassgow mountains, the need-fire in 
the, i 271 


Water from sacred wells, i. 12; men- 
struous women not to go near, 773 
consecrated at Easter, 122 sgg., 125; 
turned to wine at Easter, 124; im- 
proved by charred sticks of Midsummer 
fires, 184; at Midsummer, people 
drenched with, 193 sg.; heated in 
need-fire and sprinkled on cattle, 289 ; 


2c 


386 


claims human victims at Midsummer, 
ii. 26 sgg.; supposed to acquire certain 
marvellous properties at Midsummer, 
29 sgg.; haunted and dangerous at 
Midsummer, 31 

Water of life, ii. 114 sg. 

of springs thought to acquire medi- 

cinal qualities on Midsummer Eve, i. 

172 

, rites of, at Midsummer festival 
in Morocco, i. 216; at New Year in 
Morocco, 218 

—— spirits, offerings to, at Midsummer, 
ii, 28 

Wayanas of French Guiana, 
among the, i. 63 sg. 

Weariness, magical plants placed in shoes 
a charm against, ii. 54, 60 

Weaver, the wicked, of Rotenburg, ii. 
289 sg. 

Weeks, Rev. John H., on rites of initia- 
tion on the Lower Congo, ii. 255 2.1 

Weeping of girl at puberty, i. 24, 29 


Weidenhausen, in Westphalia, the Yule 


log at, i. 248 

Wells, sacred, in Scotland, i. 12; men- 
struous women kept from, 81, 96 sg. ; 
charred sticks of Midsummer fires 
thrown into, 184; crowned with 
flowers at Midsummer, ii. 28 

, holy, resorted to on Midsummer 

Eve in Ireland, i. 205 sg. 

, the Lord of the, ii. 28 © 

Welsh cure for whooping-cough, ii. 180, 
r92 7,1 

name, alleged, for mistletoe, ii. 
286 2.3 See also Wales 

Wends, their faith in Midsummer herbs, 
ii, 54 

of Saxony, their idea as to wood of 

trees struck by lightning, ii. 297 

of the Spreewald gather herbs and 
flowers at Midsummer, ii. 48; their 
belief as to the divining-rod, 68 7.4 

Wensley-dale, the Yule log in, i. 256 

Were-tigers in China and the East Indies, 
i, 310 5g., 313 2.1 

—— -wolf, how a man becomes a, i, 
310 2.1; story in Petronius, 313 sg. 

-wolves compelled to resume their 
human shape by wounds inflicted on 
them, i. 308 sgg. ; put to death, 311 ; 
and the full moon, 314 2.1; and 
witches, parallelism between, 315, 321 

Werner, Miss Alice, on a soul-box, ii. 
156 2.1; on African Balders, 314 

Westenberg, J. C., on the Batta theory 
of souls, ii. 223 .? 

Westermarck, Dr. Edward, on New Year 
rites in Morocco, i, 218; on Mid- 
summer festival in North Africa, 219 ; 
his theory that the fires of the fire- 


INDEX 


ordeals’ 


festivals are purificatory, 329 sg. ; 
water at Midsummer, ii. 31 
Westphalia, Easter fires in, i, 140; the 
Yule log in, 248 ; divination by orpine 
at Midsummer in, ii. 61; camomile 
gathered at Midsummer in, 63; the 
Midsummer log of oak in, 92 7.4 
Wetteren, wicker giants at, ii. 35 
Wetterpféhle, oak sticks charred in 
bonfires, i. 145 
Wexford, Midsummer fires in, i, 203. 
Whalton, in Northumberland, Mid- 
summer fires at, i. 198 
Wheat thrown on the man who brings 
in the Christmas log, i i. 260, 262, 264 5 $3 
protected against mice by mugwort, ii. 
58 sg. : 
Wheel, fire kindled by the rotation of a, 
i. 177, 179, 270, 273, 289 Sg., 292, @ 
335 5g-, ii, 91; as a symbol of the 
sun, i. 334 #.1, 335; as a charm @ 
against witchcraft, 345 2.3 a | 
, burning, rolled down hill, i. 116, 4 
II7 Sg., I19, I41, 143, 161, 162 sg., 
163 sg., 166, 173, 174, 201, 328, 334, 
337 5g. 338; thrown into the air at © 
Midsummer, 179; rolled over fields — 
at Midsummer to fertilize them, rox, 
340 sg.; perhaps intended to burn © 
witches, 345 
Wherry, Mrs., i. 108 7.%, ii. 36 7.1 . 
Whips cracked to drive away witches, ii, — 


74 

Whitby, the Yule log at, i. 256 ; 

White, Rev. G. E., on passing through — 
a ring of red-hot iron, ii, 186; on — 
passing sheep through a rifted rock, 


189 sg. ; 
White birds, ten, external soul in, ii, ” 
142 


—— bulls sacrificed by Druids at cutting — 
the mistletoe, ii. 77 a 
chalk, bodies of newly initiated 
lads coated with, ii. 241 2 
clay, bodies of novices at initiation — 
smeared with, ii. 255 2.1, 257 % 
cloth, fern-seed caught in a, i. 65, 
ii, 291; Springwort caught in a, i, ~ 
70; mistletoe caught in a, ii. 77, 293; _ 
used to catch the Midsummer bloom 
of the oak, 292, 293 
cock burnt in Midsummer bonfire, 
ii. 40 
herb, external souls of two brothers 
in a, ii. 143 4 
horse, effigy of, carried — 
Midsummer fire, i. 203 
—— Sunday, i. 117 2.1 a 
Whiteborough, in Cornwall, Midsummer — 
fires on, i, 199 i 
Whooping -cough cured by crawling — 
under a bramble, ii. 180; Bulgarian a 


Wiesensteig, in Swabia, witch as horse 
4 Beds 319 
Wild fre,” the need-fire, i. 272, 273, 


- summer fires in Ireland, i. 204 sg. 
ieen, G. A, on the external soul, ii. 
Wilkes, pees 
__ puberty, i. 43 

_ Will-fire, or need-fire, i. 288, 297 

* Willow, mistletoe growing on, ii 79. 
315, 36; children passed 

cleft willow-tree as a cure, sate eek: 
ing through a hoop of willow branches 
as a cure, 184; crawling under the 
root of a willow as a cure, 181; 
f Orpheus and the, 294 

_ Wimmer, F., on the various sorts of 
a mistletoe known to the ancients, ii. 


_ Winamwanga, seclusion of girls at 

puberty among the, i. 24 sg. ; their 

custom as to lightning-kindled fire, ii. 

_ __ 297 5g- 

g - Wind, bull-roarers sounded to raise a, 

> iia 

' Window, magic flowers to be passed 

_ __ through the, ii. 52 
Wine thought to be spoiled by menstruous 
women, i. 

Winenthal in Switzerland, new fire made 
by friction at Midsummer in the, i. 
169 sg. 

Winnebagoes, ritual of death and resur- 


; ‘hor wing - basket, divination by, i. 
2 F 

. Winter solstice, Persian festival of fire 
at the, i 269 


**Winter’s Grandmother,” burning the, 
i, 116 


: 


ae ak te et 


Wintun Indians of California, seclusion 

of girls among the, i. 42 sg. 

Witch, burning the, i. 116, 118 sg. ; 
effigy of, burnt in bonfire, 159 ; com- 
pelled to appear by burning an animal 
or part of an animal which she has 
bewitched, 303, 305, 307 s9., 321 59. ; 
in form of a toad, 323. See also 
Witches 


INDEX 


387 


= 181; child passed under an Witchy; MacCualiadl. the greet arch, 1 


293 
« ___ -shot,”” a sudden stiffmess in the 


back, i. 343 #., 345 

Witch’s herb, St. John’s wort, ii. 56 2.1 

es nest,” a tangle of birch-branches, 
ii. 185 

Witchcraft, bonfires a protection against, 
i 108, 109; holy water a protection 


against, 177, i. 59 sg-; Midsummer 
fires a protection against, i. 185, 188 ; 
a broom a against, 210; 
need-fire kindled to counteract, 280, 
292 5g., 293, 295; in Devonshire, 
302; great dread of, in Europe, 340; 
the fire-festivals regarded as a pro- 
tection against, 342; stiffmess in the 
back attributed to, 343 #., 345; colic 
and sore eyes attributed to, 344; a 
wheel a charm against, 345 2.; 
thought to be the source of almost all 
calamities, ii. 19 59. ; leaping over 


66, 67, 72; St. John’s wort a ‘pro- 


against, 85 sg., 282, 283, 294; fatal 
to milk and butter, 86; oak log a pro- 
tection against, 92; the rowan a pro- 
tection against, i. 327 #.}, ii. 184 2.4, 
185, 281; children passed through a 
ring of yarn as a protection against, 
185; a ‘* witch’s nest ” (tangle of birch- 
branches) a protection against, 185. 
See also 

Witches not allowed to touch the bare 
ground, i. 5 sg.; burnt and beheaded, 
6; effigies of, burnt in bonfires, 107, 
116 59., 118 sg., 342, ii. 43; charm 
to protect fields against, i. 121; Bel- 
tane fires a protection against, 154; 
cast spells on cattle, 154; steal milk 
from cows, 154, 176, 343, ii. 74; in 
the form of hares and cats, i 157» 
315 #.1, 316 s9g., 317, 318, 319 59., ii. 
41, 311 sg. ; burnt on May Day, i. 157, 
159, 160; fires to burn the witches 
on the Eve of May Day peter 
Night), 159 sg., ii. 20 2. ; 

Walpurgis Night, be 59 5 hegt oat 

by crosses, 160 2.1 ; driving away the, 
160, 170, 171 ; resort to the Blocks- 
berg, 171; Midsummer fires a pro- 
tection against, 176, 180; steal milk 


388 


“and butter at "Midsummer, 185; on 
‘Midsummer Eve, 210, ii. 19; active 
on Hallowe'en and May Day, 19, 
73 sqq., 184.4, 185; burnt in Hal- 
lowe'en fires, i. 232 sg.; abroad at 
Hallowe'en, 226, 245; the Yule log a 


protection against, 258; thought to ° 


cause cattle disease, 302 sg.; trans- 
formed into animals, 315 sgg.; as 
cockchafers, 322; come to borrow, 
322, 323, ii. 73; cause hail and 
thunder-storms, i. 344; brought down 
from the clouds by shots and smoke, 
345 sg.; burning missiles hurled at, 
345; burnt or banned by fire, ii. 19 
sg.; gather noxious plants on Mid- 
summer Eve, 47; gather St. John’s 
wort on St. John’s Eve, 56; purple 
loosestrife a protection against, 65 ; 
tortured in India, 159; animal fam- 
iliars of, 202. See also ‘‘ Burning the 
Witches” 

Witches at Ipswich, i. 304 sg. 

and hares in Yorkshire, ii. 197 

—— and were-wolves, parallelism be- 
tween, i. 315, 321 

and wizards thought to keep their 

strength in their hair, ii. 158 sy. ; put 

to death by the Aztecs, 159 

and wolves the two great foes 
dreaded by herdsmen in Europe, i. 343 

oy , Burning the,’’ a popular name 
for the fires of the festivals, ii. 43 

Witches’ Sabbath on the Eve of May 
Day and Midsummer Eve, i. 171 .°, 
181, ii. 73, 74 

‘* Withershins,’’ against the sun, in curses 
and excommunication, i. 234 

Witurna, a spirit whose voice is heard in 
the sound of the bull-roarer, ii. 234 

Wizards gather baleful herbs on the Eve 
of St. John, ii. 47; gather purple 
loosestrife at Midsummer, 65 ; animal 
familiars of, 196 sg., 201 sg. 

Woden, Odin, or Othin, the father of 
Balder, i. ror, 102, 103 7.1 

Wolf, Brotherhood of the Green, at 
Jumiéges in Normandy, i. 185 s¢., 
li, 15 '.,°25 

clan in North-Western America, 

ii. 270, 271, 272 2.1 

masks worn by members of a Wolf 

secret society, ii. 270 sg. 

society among the Nootka Indians, 
rite of initiation into the, ii. 270 sg. 

Wolf's hide, strap of, used by were- 
wolves, i. 310 2.1 

Wolfeck, in Austria, leaf-clad mummer 
on Midsummer Day at, ii. 25 sg. 

Wolfenbiittel, need-fire near, i. 277 

Wolves and witches, the two great foes 
dreaded by herdsmen in Europe; i. 343 


INDEX 


Woman burnt alive as a witch in Ire! 
in 1895, i. 323 5g. ¥ 
Women in hard labour, charm to help 
i. 14; after childbirth tabooed, 20: 
who do not menstruate supposed te 
make gardens barren, 24; impregnated 
by the sun, 74 sg. ; impregnated by 
the moon, 75 sg.; at menstruation 
painted red, 78 ; leap over Midsummer 
bonfires to ensure an easy delivery, 
194, 339; fertilized by tree-spirits, ii, 
22; barren, hope to conceive through 
fertilizing influence of vegetables, 51 ; 
creep through a rifted rock to obtain 
an easy delivery, 189 ; not allowed to’ 
see bull-roarers, 234, 235, 242. See 
also Menstruous women 
Wonghi or Wonghibon tribe of New 
South Wales, ritual of death and 
resurrection at initiation among the, 
ii. 227 
Wood, the King of the, at Nemig i 
i. 2, 285, 286, 295, 302, 309 j 
Woodbine, sick ‘children passed throuigifl 
a wreath of, ii. 184 
Woodpecker brings the mythical spring- — 
wort, ii. 70 sg. 
Wootton-Wawen, in Warwickshire, the 
Yule log at, i. 257 : 
‘* Working for peers 
287 sq. 
Worms, popular cure for, i. 17 
Wormwood (Artemisia absinthium), ii. 
58 2.3; burnt to stupefy witches, i. — 
345 j superstitions concerning, ii, 61 — 


a proverb, i, — 


eee ose 


of the oak peas by the Trequeacell 
with which oaks are struck by light- — 
ning, 298 sqq. ‘ 
Worth, R. N., on burnt sacrifices in 
Devonshire, i. 302 4 
Worthen, in Shropshire, the Yule log at, 


i257. a 
Wotjobaluk, of South-Eastern Australia, — 
sex totems among the, ii, 215 sg. 2 
Wounding were-wolves in order to com- 
pel them to resume their human shape, — 
i. 308 sgg. 4 
Wounds, St. John’s wort a balm for, ii. — 


55 
Wreath of woodbine, sick children passed — 
through a, ii. 184 3 
Wreaths of flowers thrown across the — 
Midsummer fires, i. 174 ; superstitious 
uses made of the singed wreaths, 174; 
hung over doors and windows at Mie- E 
summer, 201 
Wurtemberg, Midsummer fires in, i. 166; 
leaf-clad mummer at Midsummer in, — 
ii. 26 a 
Wiirzburg, Midsummer fires at, i. 165 


SR 


_ Yabim, the, of New Guinea, girls at 


puberty secluded among the, i. 35; 

use of bull-roarers among the, ii. 232 ; 

rites of initiation among the, 239 sqq. 

Yaguas, Indians of the Amazon, girls at 
_ puberty secluded among the, i. 59 


_ Yakut shamans keep their external souls 


— inanimals, ii. 196 
Yakuts leap over fire after a burial, ii. 18 


_ Yam, island of Torres Strait, treatment 


of girls at puberty in, i. 41 


7 Yap, seclusion of girls at puberty in the 


island of, i. 36 


' Yaraikanna, the, of Northern Queens- 
_ land, seclusion of girls at puberty 


among the, i. 37 sg. 


_ Yarn, divination by, i. 235, 240, 241, 


243; sick children passed through a 
ring of, ii. 185 

Yarra river in Victoria, i. 92 2.1 

Year called a fire, i. 137 

Yellow Day of Beltane, i. 293 

snow, the year of the, i. 294 


q Yibai, tribal subdivision of the Coast 


Murring tribe, ii. 236 

Yoke, purification by passing under a, 
ii. 193 sgg.; ancient Italian practice 
of passing conquered enemies under a, 
193 Sq. 
York, custom formerly observed at Christ- 
mas in the cathedral at, ii. 291 ”.? 
Yorkshire, belief as to menstruous 
women in, i. 96 2.2; Beal-fires on 
Midsummer Eve in, 198; the Yule 
log in, 256 sg.; need-fire in, 286 sgq. ; 
witch as hare in, 317, ii, 197 

Yoruba-speaking negroes of the Slave 
Coast, use of bull-roarers among the, 
ii. 229 m. 

Young, Hugh W., on the rampart of 
Burghead, i. 268 7.1 

Young, Issobell, buries ox 
alive, i. 325 

Ypres, wicker giants at, ii. 35 

Yucatan, fire-walk among the Indians of, 
ii. 13 sg., 16 

Yuin, the, of South-Eastern Australia, 
their sex totems, ii. 216 ; totem names 
kept secret among, 225 2. 

Yukon, the Lower, i. 55 

Yule cake, i. 257, 259, 261 

—— candle, i. 255, 256, 260 

—— log, i. 247 sgg. ; in Germany, 247 
sgg.; made of oak-wood, 248, 250, 
251, 257, 258, 259, 260, 263, 264 59., 


and cat 


INDEX 


389 


ii. 92; a protection against conflagra- 
tion, i. 248 sg., 250, 255, 256, 258; 
a protection against thunder and 
lightning, 248, 249, 250, 252, 253, 
254, 258, 264; in Switzerland, 249 ; 
in Belgium, 249; in France, 249 sgq.; 
helps cows to calve, 250, 338; in 
England, 255 sg.; in Wales, 258; 
among the Servians, 258 sgg.; a 
protection against witches, 258; in 
Albania, 264; privacy of the cere- 
monial of the, 328 ; explained as a sun- 
charm, 332 ; made of fir, beech, holly, 
yew, crab-tree, or olive, ii. 92 2.7 

Yule Night in Sweden, customs observed 
on, i. 20 sg. 

Yuracares of Bolivia, seclusion of girls at 
puberty among the, i. 57 sg. 


Zadrooga, Servian house-community, i. 
259 

Zambesi, the Barotse of the, i. 28 

Zapotecs, supreme pontiff of the, not 
allowed to set foot on ground, i. 2; 
the sun not allowed to shine on him, 
i. 19; their belief that their lives were 
bound up with those of animals, ii. 
212 

Zemmur, the, of Morocco, their Mid- 
summer custom, i. 215 

Zerdusht and Isfendiyar, i. 104 

Zeus and his sacred oak at Dodona, ii. 
49 sg.; wood of white poplar used at 
Olympia in sacrificing to, go z.}, 
gi 2.7 

and Danae, i. 74 

and Hephaestus, i. 136 

Zimbales, a province of the Philippines, 
superstition as to a parasitic plant in, 
ii, 282 2.7 

Zoroaster, on the uncleanness of women 
at menstruation, i. 95 

Zoznegg, in Baden, Easter fires at, i. 145 

Zulus, seclusion of girls at puberty among 
the, i. 22, 30; fumigate their gardens 
with medicated smoke, 337; their 
custom of fumigating sick cattle, ii. 
13; their belief as to ancestral spirits 
incarnate in serpents, 211 

Ziilz, in Silesia, Midsummer fires at, i. 
170 

Zuni Indians of New Mexico, their new 
fires at the solstices, i. 132 sg.; use of 
bull-roarers among the, ii. 230 2., 231 

Zurich, effigies burnt at, i. 120 


THE END 


Printed by R. & R. Crarx, Limirep, Edinburgh. 


orks by J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D, 
THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION 


Third Edition, revised and enlarged. 8vo. 


‘Part I. THz Macic ART AND THE EvoLuTion oF Kincs. Two 
volumes. Second Impression. 2os. net. 


II. TABOO AND THE PERILS OF THE SOUL. One volume. Second 
Impression. tos. net. 


III. THe Dyinc Gop. Onevolume. Second Impression. ros. net. 
IV. Aponis, ATTIS, Ostr1s. One volume. Second Edition. ros. net. 
V. SprrITs OF THE CORN AND OF THE WILD. Two volumes. 20s. net. 
; VI. THE ScapecoaT. One volume. ros. net. 


VII. BALDER THE BeEautTirut. Two volumes. 20s. net. 


TIMES.—‘‘ The verdict of posterity will probably be that Zhe Golden Bough has 
_ influenced the attitude of the human mind towards supernatural beliefs and symbolical 
rituals more profoundly than any other books published in the nineteenth century 
_ except those of Darwin and Herbert Spencer.” 


‘TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY. A Treatise on 
: Certain Early Forms of Superstition and Society. With 
Maps. Four vols. $8vo. 50s. net. 
Mr. A. E. CRAWLEY in VA 7URZ.—“ That portion of the book which is con- 
- cerned with totemism (if we may express our own belief at the risk of offending Prof. 
_ Frazer’s characteristic modesty) is actually ‘The Complete History of Totemism, its 
_ Practice and its Theory, its Origin and its End.’ . . . Nearly two thousand pages are 
_ occupied with an ethnographical survey of totemism, an invaluable compilation. The 
maps, including that of the distribution of totemic peoples, are a new and useful 
feature.” 


LECTURES ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF 
THE KINGSHIP. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 


ATHENZUM.—“* It is the effect of a good book not only to teach, but also to 
stimulate and to suggest, and we think this the best and highest quality, and one that 
will recommend these lectures to all intelligent readers, as well as to the learned.” 


PSYCHE’S TASK. A Discourse concerning the Influence 
of Superstition on the Growth of Institutions. | Second Edition, 
revised and enlarged. To which is added “ The Scope of Social 
Anthropology.” 8vo. 5s. net. 


OUTLOOK.—* Whether we disagree or agree with Dr. Frazer’s general con- 
clusions, he has provided us with a veritable storehouse of correlated facts, for which, 
and for the learning that has gone to their collection, and for the intellectual 
brilliance that has gone to their arrangement, we can never be sufficiently grateful.” 


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON. 


Works by J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D 


THE BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY AND : 
WORSHIP OF THE DEAD. Vol. I. The Belie! 


among the Aborigines of Australia, the Torres Strait: 
Islands, New Guinea, and Melanesia. The Gifford Lectures, 

St. Andrews, Ig 11-1912. 8vo. Ios. net. | 

Mr. Epwarp Ciopp in the DAJL Y CHRONICLE,—“ ‘If a man die, shall he 
live again?’ is a question asked chiliads before Job put it, and the generations of man 
kind repeat it. In this profoundly interesting volume, Professor Frazer, out of the 


treasury of his knowledge, and with consummate art of attractive presentment, gives | 
the answers devised by the Lower Races.” 4 


PAUSANIAS’S DESCRIPTION OF GREECE, 7 
Translated with a Commentary, Illustrations, and Maps. 7 
Second Edition. Six vols. 8vo. 126s. net. 

ATHENA‘ UM.—“ All these writings in many languages Mr. Frazer has readl 
and digested with extraordinary care, so that his book will be for years the book of 


reference on such matters, not only in England, but in France and Germany. It is a 
perfect thesaurus of Greek topography, archzeology, and art.” 


PAUSANIAS AND OTHER GREEK SKETCHES, © 
Globe 8vo. 4s. net. j 


GUARDIAN.—“ Here we have material which every one who has visited Greece, © 
or purposes to visit it, most certainly should read and enjoy. . . . We cannot imagine © 
a more excellent book for the educated visitor to Greece.” 


LETTERS OF WILLIAM COWPER. Chosen and © 
Edited with a Memoir and a few Notes by J. G. FRAZER, ~ 
D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. Two vols. Globe 8vo. 8s. net. — 

[Eversley Series. 
Mr. CLEMENT SHORTER in the DAJLY CHRON/ICLE.—“‘To the task Dr. 4 

Frazer has given a scholarly care that will make the edition one that is a joy to 

possess. His introductory Memoir, of some eighty pages in length, is a valuable — 

addition to the many appraisements of Cowper that these later years have seen. Itis — 


no mere perfunctory ‘introduction,’ but a piece of sound biographical work. Pa 
Dr. Frazer has given us two volumes that are an unqualified joy.’ 


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON, 


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 


BL Frazer, (Sir) James George 
310 The golden bough. 3d dd. 
F7 
191la 
v.ll 

3) 


enw eas 
= mig 
Reece 


oo aes ever Pee Eat 
=* = > “ reas . 


ete 


ie 


7. 


Spee 


i 3
