The Golden Bough (3rd ed.), Vol. 8: Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, Part 2 (James George Frazer, 1912)
==========================================================
Vol. 8 of the Golden Bough 3rd edition. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

ge oe 
5 Seg i ee 


3 ‘ ie . i Pm E = its.” 2 Eos 53 Shes 
eT aS cera gee 


AG 09686900 LOLI € 


OLNOHOL 4O ALISHAAINN 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2009 with funding from 
Ontario Council of University Libraries 


http://www.archive.org/details/goldenboughstudy08fraz 


Y; 
+7 
a 
Ne 
: 

’ 

y 
i 
an 


’ 
i] 
e 
J 
od — 
s 
- 
; 
5 
2 
aa 

; | 
. j t 
a ' 

r 

Pia , P 
vi o D 


fae IGOLDEN BOUGH 
A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION 


THIRD EDITION 


PART V 


Selniis Oly Tne CORN 
AN DIOE. tite AWLED 


VOL. II 


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 


LONDON - BOMBAY + CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


NEW YORK + BOSTON + CHICAGO 
DALLAS +» SAN FRANCISCO 


THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, L7tp. 
TORONTO 


Seri lsS OF THE CORN 


NPT Or THE WILD 


BY 


Pec oh WAZ ER. D.C.E., LiL.b.,. Larr,D. 


FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 
PROFESSOR OF SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. II 


MAC WIEEAN AND CO: LIMITED 
Se MARTINS SLREET, LONDON 


TO12 


ee me 
ae ee 
Bi } Ns 3 a =<" 
oe rae 
ee ee 


\) ti yee but OLAS a SO Te 


GONTEN TS 


CHAPTER IX.—ANCIENT DEITIES OF VEGETA- 
TION AS ANIMALS. P ‘ ‘ 5) pe TH47 


§1. Dionysus, the Goat and the Bull, pp. 1-16.—Dionysus as a goat, his 
association with the Pans, Satyrs, and Silenuses, 1-3; wood-spirits 
in the form of goats, 3; the bull as an embodiment of Dionysus in 
his character of a deity of vegetation, 3 sg.; the ox sacrificed to Zeus 
Polieus at the Athenian douphonia an embodiment of the corn-spirit, 
4-7; the ox sacrificed to Zeus Sosipolis at Magnesia an embodiment of 
the corn-spirit, 7-9; Greek conception of the corn-spirit as both male 
and female, 9; the ox asa representative of the corn-spirit in Guinea, 
9 sg., in China, 10-12, in Kashgar and Annam, 13 sg.; annual 
inauguration of ploughing by the Chinese emperor, 14 sg. ; analogy of 
the Chinese custom to the agricultural rites at Eleusis and elsewhere, 15 ; 
the rending of live animals in the rites of Dionysus, 16. 


§ 2. Demeter, the Pig and the Horse, pp. 16-22.—Association of the pig with 
Demeter, 16 sg. ; pigs in the ritual of the Thesmophoria, 17-20; analogy 
of the Thesmophoria to the folk-customs of Northern Europe, 20 sg. 3 
the horse-headed Demeter of Phigalia, 21 sg. 


§ 3. Adtis, Adonis, and the Pig, pp. 22-24.—Attis and the pig, 22; Adonis 
and the boar, 22 sg.; ambiguous position of pigs at Hierapolis, 23 ; 
attitude of the Jews to the pig, 23 sg. 


§ 4. Osiris, the Pig and the Bull, pp. 24-39.—Attitude of the ancient Egyptians 
to the pig, 24; annual sacrifice of pigs to Osiris and the moon, 25; 
belief that eating of a sacred animal causes skin-disease, especially 
leprosy, 25-27 ; mere contact with a sacred object is deemed dangerous 
and requires purification, 27-29 ; the pig probably regarded at first as an 
embodiment of the corn-god Osiris, though afterwards it was looked on 
as an embodiment of his enemy Typhon, 29-31 ; the havoc wrought by 
wild boars in the corn a reason for regarding them as foes of the corn- 
god, 31-33; the annual killing of the pig represented the annual killing 
of Osiris, 33 sg. ; Egyptian sacrifices of red oxen and red-haired men, 34 3 

Vv 


vi CONTENTS 


Osiris identified with the sacred bulls Apis and Mnevis, 34 sg. ; stratifica- 
tion of three types of religion in ancient Egypt, 35 sg. ; the stratification 
of religions corresponding to certain social types, 36 sg. ; examples of the 
religion of pastoral peoples, reverence of the Dinka and Nuehr for their 
cattle, 37-39. 


§ 5. Virbius and the Horse, pp. 40-47.—Tradition that Virbius in the character 
of Hippolytus was killed by horses, custom of excluding horses from the 
Arician grove, 40; goats excluded from the Acropolis at Athens, but 
sacrificed on it once a year, 40 sg. ; a horse annually sacrificed at Rome 
in October, apparently as an embodiment of the corn-spirit, 42 sg. ; 
analogy of the sacrifice to harvest customs of Northern Europe, 43 sg. ; 
other examples of the exclusion of horses from sanctuaries, 45 5g. 3 
uncertainty as to the reason for excluding horses from the Arician grove, 
47. 


CHAPTER X.—EATING THE GOD ; . Pp. 48-108 


§ 1. Zhe Sacrament of First-fruits, pp. 48-86.—New corn eaten sacramentally 
as the body of the corn-spirit, 48; the custom in Wermland, 48 sg. ; 
old Lithuanian ritual at eating the new corn, 49 sg. ; modern European 
ceremonies at eating the new corn or potatoes, 50 sy. ; ceremony of the 
heathen Cheremiss at eating the new corn, 51; ceremony of the Aino 
at eating the new millet, 52; ceremonies of the Melanesians of Reef 
Island at eating the new bread-fruits and yams, 52 sg. ; ceremony of the 
New Caledonians at eating the first yams, 53 ; ceremonies at eating the 
new rice in Buru and Celebes, 54; ceremonies at eating the new rice in 
Ceram and Borneo, 54 sg. ; ceremonies at eating the new rice in India, 
55 sg.3 ceremonies observed by the Chams at ploughing, sowing, 
reaping, and eating the new rice, 56-58; ceremony at eating the new 
yams at Onitsha on the Niger, 58; ceremonies at eating the new yams 
among the Ewe negroes of Togoland, 58-62; festival of the new yams 
among the Ashantees, 62 sg. ; festival of the new yams at Coomassie 
and Benin, 63 sg. ; ceremonies observed by the Nandi at eating the new 
eleusine grain, 64; festival of the new fruits among the Caffres, 65 ; 
licentious character of the festival among the Zulus, 66-68; traces of an 
annual abdication of Zulu kings, perhaps of a custom of burning them, 
68 ; ceremonies observed by the Bechuanas before eating the new fruits, 
69 sg. ; ceremonies observed by the Matabele at eating the new fruits, 
70 sg. ; ceremony observed by the Ovambo at eating the new fruits, 71 ; 
ceremony observed by the Bororo Indians before eating the new maize, 
71 sg.; the dusk or festival of first-fruits among the Creek Indians of 
North America, 72-75; festival of the new fruits among the Yuchi 
Indians, 75 sg. ; Green Corn Dance among the Seminole Indians, 76 sg. ; 
festival of the new corn among the Natchez Indians, 77-80; ceremonies 
observed by the Salish, Tinneh, and Thompson Indians before they eat 
the first wild berries or roots of the season, 80-82; the ceremonies 
observed at eating the first-fruits seem based on an idea that the plant 


CONTENTS vii 


is animated by a spirit, who must be propitiated, 82 sg. ; sanctity of the 
new fruits, 83; care taken to prevent the contact of sacred and profane 
food in the stomach of the eater, 83-85; the sacrament of first-fruits 
sometimes combined with a sacrifice of them to gods or spirits, 86. 


§2. Lating the God among the Aztecs, pp. 86-94.—Dough image of the god 
Huitzilopochtli or Vitzilipuztli eaten sacramentally, 86-89 ; transubstantia- 
tion taught by the Brahmans, 89 sg. ; the god Huitzilopochtli killed in 
effigy and eaten, 90 sg. ; other dough images eaten sacramentally by the 
Mexicans, 91; man killed and eaten as an embodiment of the god 
Tetzcatlipoca, 92 sg. ; effigy of a god eaten sacramentally by the Huichol 
Indians of Mexico and the Malas of Southern India, 93 sg. ; effigies of 
the Madonna eaten in Europe, 94. 


§3. Many Maniz at Aricia, pp. 94-108.—Loaves called Manzae baked at 
Aricia, 94; woollen effigies dedicated to Mania, the Mother or Grand- 
mother of Ghosts, at the Roman festival of the Compitalia, 94 sg.; the 
loaves at Aricia perhaps sacramental bread made in the likeness of the 
King of the Wood, 95 sg.; practice of putting up dummies to divert the 
attention of ghosts or demons from the living, 96; Tibetan custom of 
putting effigies at the doors of houses to deceive demons, 96 sg. ; effigies 
buried with the dead in order to deceive their ghosts, 97 sg. ; fictitious 
burials to divert the attention of demons from the real burials, 98-100 ; 
effigies used to cure or prevent sickness by deluding the demons of 
disease or inducing them to accept the effigies instead of the persons, 
100-102 ; effigies used to divert the attention of demons in Nias and 
various parts of Asia, 102-104; effigies used to divert ghostly and other 
evil influence from people in China, 104 sg. ; effigies used as substitutes 
to save the lives of people among the Abchases of the Caucasus, the Ewe 
negroes of West Africa, and the Nishga Indians of British Columbia, 
105-107 ; hence the woollen effigies hung out at the Roman Compitalia 
were probably offered as substitutes for living persons to the Mother or 
Grandmother of Ghosts, 107 sg. 


CHAPTER XIJ.—THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST- 
BROITS  . : : 5 : - Pp Too-137 


The sacrifice of first-fruits to gods probably later than the custom of partaking 
of them sacramentally, 109; first-fruits sometimes presented to the king 
and very often to the dead, 109; sacrifice of first-fruits among the 
Ovambo of South-West Africa, 109 sg.; sacrifices of first-fruits in South 
Africa, 110 sg. 3; sacrifices of first-fruits in Central Africa, 111-113 ; 
sacrifices of first-fruits in East Africa, 113 sg. 3 sacrifices of first-fruits in 
West Africa, 115 sg. ; first-fruits offered to kings in Madagascar and 
Burma, 116; sacrifices of first-fruits in Assam and other parts of India, 
116-119; sacrifices of first-fruits among the ancient Hindoos, 119 sg. ; 
sacrifices of first-fruits in Burma and Corea, 120-122; sacrifices of first- 
fruits in the East Indies, 122-124 ; sacrifices of first-fruits in New Guinea, 


Vill CONTENTS 


124 sg. ; sacrifices of first-fruits in Fiji and the New Hebrides, 125 sq.; 
sacrifices of first-fruits in the Solomon Islands, 126 sg. ; sacrifices of first- 
fruits in the Kingsmill Islands, 127 sg.; sacrifices of first-fruits in the 
Tonga Islands, 128-132; significance of the presentation of first-fruits to 
the divine Tongan chief at the grave of his predecessor, 132; sacrifices of 
first-fruits in Samoa and other parts of Polynesia, 132 sg. ; sacrifices of 
first-fruits among the old Prussians, Greeks, and Romans, 133 ; sacrifices 
of first-fruits among the Indians of America, 133-135; Chateaubriand’s 
description of the harvest festival among the Natchez, 135-137. 


CHAPTER XII.—HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC 
OFA SE LESE iE T ¢ . . Pp. 1d-nGs 


Custom of killing and eating the corn-spirit sacramentally, 138; belief of the 
savage that by eating an animal or man he acquires the qualities of that 
animal or man, 138 sg.; beliefs of the American Indians as to the 
homoeopathic magic of the flesh of animals, 139 sg. ; Bushman and other 
African beliefs as to the homoeopathic magic of the flesh of animals, 140- 
1433 ancient beliefs as to the homoeopathic magic of the flesh of 
animals, 143; beliefs of the Dyaks and Aino as to the homoeopathic 
magic of the flesh of animals, 144 sg. ; beliefs as to the homoeopathic 
magic of the flesh of dogs, tigers, etc., 145 sg. 5 beliefs as to the homoeo- 
pathic magic of the flesh of wolves, bears, and serpents, 146 sg. ; various 
beliefs as to the homoeopathic magic of the flesh of animals, 147 sg. ; the 
flesh and blood, but especially the hearts, of dead men eaten or drunk 
for the sake of acquiring the good qualities of the dead, 148-151; other 
parts than the heart eaten for the same purpose, 151-153; moral virtues 
of the dead acquired through simple contact with their bones, 153 sg. ; 
covenant of friendship formed with dead foes by drinking their blood, 
154 sg. ; blood-covenant formed by manslayers with the ghosts of their 
victims, 155 sg. ; communion with the dead by swallowing their ashes, 
156-158; savages attempt to inoculate themselves with moral and other 
virtues, 155-160; the Zulus and other Caffres inoculate themselves 
against lightning, 160-162 ; some savages seek to acquire the qualities of 
the dead by anointing themselves with their remains, 162-164 ; the juices 
of animals sometimes similarly applied for the same purpose, 164 sg. ; 
magical ointment used by Mexican priests, 165 sg. ; qualities of a person, 
animal, or thing imparted by fumigation, 166 sg. ; the savage custom of 
eating a god, 167 ; Cicero on transubstantiation, 167 sg. 


CHAPTER XIII.—KILLING THE DIVINE 
ANIMAL . : : . : . Pp rog=2ge0 


§ 1. Avlling the Sacred Buzzard, pp. 169-172.—Hunting and pastoral tribes kill 
and eat the animals they worship, 169; Californian ceremony of killing 
the great buzzard, 169-172. 


§ 2. 


§ 3. 


§ 4. 


§ 5 


CONTENTS ix 


Killing the Sacred Ram, pp. 172-174.—Ancient Egyptian sacrifice of a 


ram at the festival of Ammon, 172 sg. ; use of the skin of the sacrificed 
animal, 173 sg. 


Killing the Sacred Serpent, pp. 174 sg.—The sacred serpent at Issapoo in 


Fernando Po, custom of annually suspending its skin, 174 sg. 


Killing the Sacred Turtles, pp. 175-179.—The killing of the sacred turtles 


by the Zuni Indians, 175-178; belief in the transmigration of human 
souls into turtles, 178 sg. ; the custom apparently a mode of interceding 
with the ancestral spirits for rain, 179. 


Killing the Sacred Bear, pp. 180-203.—Ambiguous attitude of the Aino 


towards the bear, 180-182; Aino custom of rearing a bear cub and 
killing it at a solemn festival, 182-184; Dr. Scheube’s account of the 
Aino festival of the bear, 185-187 ; early Japanese account of the Aino 
festival of the bear, 187 sg. ; custom of rearing and killing bears among 
the Aino of Saghalien, 188-190; bear-festivals of the Gilyaks, 190 sg: ; 
Schrenck’s description of a bear-festival among the Gilyaks, 191-195 ; 
Sternberg’s description of the bear-festivals of the Gilyaks, 196; bear- 
festivals of the Goldi and Orotchis, 197 ; respect shewn by all these tribes 
for the bears which they kill and eat, 197-199; similar respect shewn by 
the Aino for eagle-owls, eagles, and hawks, which they keep and kill, 
199 sg. ; advantages which the Aino hopes to reap from slaughtering the 
worshipful animals, 200 sg. ; the bear-festivals of these tribes probably 
nothing but an extension of similar rites performed by the hunter over 
any wild bear which he kills in the forest, 201 sg. ; the behaviour of 
these tribes to bears not so illogical and inconsistent as it seems to us, 
202 sq. 


CHAPTER XIV.—THE PROPITIATION OF 


WILD ANIMALS BY HUNTERS weeps 204-273 


Savage belief that animals, like men, are endowed with immortal souls, 204 ; 


American Indians draw no sharp distinction between men and animals, 
204-206 ; some savages fail to discriminate clearly between the bodies 
of animals and the bodies of men, 206-208 ; hence the savage propitiates 
the animals which he kills and other members of the same species, 208 ; 
scruples entertained and ceremonies observed at killing crocodiles, 208- 
2153 scruples entertained and ceremonies observed at killing tigers, 
215-217; snakes, especially rattle-snakes, respected by the North 
American Indians, 217-219; ceremonies observed in Kiziba (Central 
Africa) at killing a snake, 219 sg. ; ceremonies observed at the killing 
of a wolf, 220 sg. ; certain birds respected, 221; apologies offered by 
savages to the animals which they are obliged to kill, 221 sg. ; propitia- 
tion of slain bears by Kamtchatkans, Ostiaks, Koryak, Finns, and Lapps, 
222-2243 propitiation of slain bears by the North American Indians, 
224-227 ; propitiation of slain elephants in Africa, 227 sg. ; propitiation of 
lions in Africa, 228; propitiation of slain leopards in Africa, 228-231 ; 


x CONTENTS 


propitiation of slain buffaloes and sheep in Uganda, 231 sg. ; propitiation 
of dead whales among the Koryak, 232-235 ; propitiation of dead hippo- 
potamuses, ounces, and apes, 235 sg.; propitiation of dead eagles, 236; 
deceiving the ghosts of spiders, 236 sg. ; animals which, without being 
feared, are valued for their flesh or skin, are also treated with respect, 
237 sg. 3 respect shewn to dead sables, 238 ; bones of sables and beavers 
kept from dogs, lest the spirits of the dead animals should be offended, 
238-240; deer, elk, and elan treated by American Indians with cere- 
monious respect, 240-243}; porcupines, turtles, and mice treated by 
American Indians with ceremonious respect, 243 sg. ; dead foxes, turtles, 
deer, and pigs treated with ceremonious respect, 244 sg. ; ghost of 
ostrich outwitted, 245 ; Esquimau propitiation of the spirit who controls 
the reindeer, 245 sg.; ceremonious treatment of sea-beasts by the 
Esquimaux, 246 sg. ; annual Esquimau ceremony of returning the bladders 
of sea-beasts to the sea, in order that the animals may come to life again, 
247-249; fish treated with respect by fishing tribes, 249-253; ceremo- 
nious treatment of the first fish of the season, 253-256; the bones of 
animals preserved in order to facilitate their resurrection, 256-259; the 
bones of men preserved or destroyed in order to assist or prevent their 
resurrection, 259 sg. ; unquestioning belief of the savage in the immor- 
tality of animals, 260; the primitive theory of dreams hardly sufficient to 
account for this belief, 260 sg. ; apparently the savage conceives life as an 
indestructible form of energy, 261 sg. ; analogy of this conception to the 
modern scientific conception of the conservation of energy, 262 ; resurrec- 
tion of the body in tales and legends, 263 sg. ; the sinew of the thigh 
regularly cut out and thrown away by American Indians, 264 ; story told 
by the Indians to explain the custom, 265 ; the custom apparently based 
on sympathetic magic, 266 sg. ; hamstringing dead game or putting out 
their eyes in order to lame or blind the ghosts of the animals, 267 sg. ; 
the cutting out the tongues of dead animals perhaps sometimes intended 
to prevent their ghosts from telling tales, 269 ; tongues of animals cut 
out in order to confer special knowledge and power on their possessors, 
270 sg. ; Bechuana custom of mutilating an ox in order by sympathetic 
magic to inflict corresponding mutilations on the enemy, 271 ; mutilation 
of the corpses of enemies or other dangerous persons for the purpose of 
maiming their ghosts, 271-273. 


CHAPTER XV.—THE PROPITIATION OF 
VERMIN BY FARMERS 3 5 . Pp 274-284 


§ 1. The Enemies of the Crops, pp. 274-281.—Propitiation of the vermin which 
infest crops and cattle in Europe, 274 sg.; similar attempts made to 
propitiate vermin by savages, 275 sg.; the happy mean in dealing with 
rats and mice, 276-278; sometimes a few of the vermin are honoured, 
while the rest are exterminated, 278 sg. ; mock lamentations of women 
for the insects which destroy the crops, 279 sg. ; images of vermin made 
as a charm to get rid of them, 280 sg. 


CONTENTS x1 


§ 2. Mouse Apollo and Wolf Apollo, pp. 282-284.—Greek gods who took titles 
from vermin, 282 ; Mouse (Syzntheus) Apollo, 282 sg. ; Wolfish Apollo, 
283 sg. 


CHAPTER XVI.—THE TRANSMIGRATION 
OF HUMAN SOULS INTO ANIMALS . Pp. 285-309 


Many savages spare certain animals because they believe the souls of their dead 
to be lodged in them, 285 ; belief in the transmigration of human souls 
into animals among the American Indians, 285-287 ; the belief in Africa, 
287-289; the belief in Madagascar, 289 sg.; the belief in Assam, 
Burma, and Cochin China, 290-292; the belief in the Philippines, the 
Sandwich Islands, and the Pelew Islands, 292 sg. ; the belief in Sumatra 
and Borneo, 293-295 ; the belief in New Guinea, 295 sg. ; the belief in 
the Solomon Islands, 296-298 ; the belief in ancient India, 298 sg. ; the 
doctrine of transmigration in Buddhism, 299 ; the transmigration of souls 
taught in ancient Greece by Pythagoras and Empedocles, 300 sg. ; resem- 
blance of Empedocles’s teaching to that of Buddha, 301 sg. ; analogy of 
the physical speculations of Empedocles to those of Herbert Spencer, 
303-305 ; evolution or dissolution, 305 sg. ; Empedocles as a forerunner 
of Darwin, 306 ; Empedocles as a pretender to divinity, 307 ; the doctrine 
of the transmigration of souls in Plato, 308 sg. 


CHAPTER XVII.— TYPES OF ANIMAL 
SACRAMENT. ; -, Pp gio=345 


§ 1. The Egyptian and the Aino Types of Sacrament, pp. 310-316.—The 
ambiguous behaviour of the Aino and the Gilyaks towards bears explained, 
310 sg. ; two forms of the worship of animals, 311 sg. ; two types of animal 
sacrament, the Egyptian and the Aino type, 312 sg. ; examples of ‘animal 
sacraments among pastoral tribes, 313 ; Aino or expiatory type of animal 
sacrament among the Abchases and Kalmucks, 313 sg. ; Egyptian type of 
animal sacrament among the Todas and Madi, 314-316. 


§ 2. Processtons with Sacred Animals, pp. 316-325.—Form of communion with 
a sacred animal by taking it from house to house, 316; effigy of a snake 
carried from house to house by members of the Snake tribe, 316 sg. ; 
‘* Hunting the Wren” in Europe, 317; sacred character of the wren in 
popular superstition, 317 sg. ; ‘* Hunting the Wren” in the Isle of Man, 
318 sg.; ‘‘ Hunting the Wren” in Ireland and England, 319 sg. ; 
‘Hunting the Wren” in France, 320 sg. 3; religious processions with 
sacred animals, 322 ; ceremony of beating a man in a cow’s skin in the 
Highlands of Scotland, 323-325. 


§ 3. The Rites of Plough Monday, pp. 325-335.—Processions of men disguised 
as animals, in which the animal seems to represent the corn-spirit, 325 ; 
the Shrovetide Bear in Bohemia, 325 sg. ; the Oats-goat, the Pease-bear, 


xil CONTENTS 


etc., 327; the Yule-goat in Sweden, 327 sg. ; the Straw-bear at Whittle- 
sey, 328 sg. ; the ceremonies of Plough Monday in England, 329 sg. ; the 
object of the dances on Plough Monday probably to ensure the growth of 
the corn, 330 sg. ; the rites of Plough Monday like those of the Carnival 
in Thrace and Bulgaria, 331-334; in all these cases the ceremonial 
ploughing and sowing are probably charms to ensure the growth of the 
crops, 334 sg. 3 such rites date from a remote antiquity, 335. 


Note.—The Ceremony of the Horse at Rice- 
harvest among the Garos . : . Pp.337-348 


[INDEX : . : ; - Pp. 345-375 


CHAPTER TX 
ANCIENT DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS 


§ 1. Dionysus, the Goat and the Bull 


HOWEVER we may explain it, the fact remains that ancient 

in peasant folk-lore the corn-spirit is very commonly con- “tes of 
2 » H f vegetation 

ceived and represented in animal form. May not this fact as animals 

explain the relation in which certain animals stood to the 

ancient deities of vegetation, Dionysus, Demeter, Adonis, 

Attis, and Osiris ? 

To begin with Dionysus. We have seen that he was Dionysus 
represented sometimes as a goat and sometimes as a bull.’ °° 800: 
As a goat he can hardly be separated from the minor tion with 
divinities, the Pans, Satyrs, and Silenuses, all of whom are ae 
closely associated with him and are represented more or Silenuses, 

s who have 
less completely in the form of goats. Thus, Pan was been inter. 
regularly portrayed in sculpture and painting with the face preted as 

2 Sis : : semi-goat- 
and legs of a goat.” The Satyrs were depicted with pointed shaped 
goat-ears, and sometimes with sprouting horns and short ¢sites of 
tails.» They were sometimes spoken off simply as goats ; * 
and in the drama their parts were played by men dressed in 
goatskins.’ Silenus is represented in art clad in a goat- 
skin.© Further, the Fauns, the Italian counterpart of the 
Greek Pans and Satyrs, are described as being half goats, 


with goat-feet and goat-horns.’ Again, all these minor 


1 See above, vol. i. pp. 16 sgq. i. 600; W. Mannhardt, Anteke Wald- 
2 Herodotus, ii. 46; L. Preller,  wnd Feldkulte, p. 138. 
Griechische Mythologie,* i. (Berlin, 4 W. Mannhardt, of. cz. p. 139. 
1894), pp. 745 sg.; K. Wernicke, in ® Julius Pollux, iv. 118. 
W. H. Roscher’s Lexzkon der griech. 6 W. Mannhardt, of. cet. pp. 142 59. 
und rom. Mythologie, iii. 1407 sqq. WOvidGeHas77aic QOL miin eS 12 saive 


3 L. Preller, Griechische Mythologte,s 1013 td., Herotdes, iv. 49. 
PT. V. VOL. 11 é) B 


2 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


goat-formed divinities partake more or less clearly of the 
character of woodland deities. Thus, Pan was called by the 
Arcadians the Lord of the Wood.’ The Silenuses associated 
with the tree-nymphs.” The Fauns are expressly designated 
as woodland deities ;* and their character as such is still 
further brought out by their association, or even identifica- 
tion, with Silvanus and the Silvanuses, who, as their name 
of itself indicates, are spirits of the woods.* Lastly, the 
association of the Satyrs with the Silenuses, Fauns, and 
Silvanuses,” proves that the Satyrs also were woodland 
deities. These goat-formed spirits of the woods have their 
counterparts in the folk-lore of Northern Europe. Thus, 
the Russian wood-spirits, called Lyeschze (from Jes, “ wood”) 
are believed to appear partly in human shape, but with the 
horns, ears, and legs of goats. The Lyesch¢ can alter his 
stature at pleasure; when he walks in the wood he is as tall 
as the trees; when he walks in the meadows he is no higher 
than the grass. Some of the Lyeschze are spirits of the corn 
as well as of the wood; before harvest they are as tall as 
the corn-stalks, but after it they shrink to the height of 
the stubble.® This brings out—-what we have remarked 
before—the close connexion between tree-spirits and corn- 
spirits, and shews how easily the former may melt into the 
latter. Similarly the Fauns, though wood-spirits, were be- 
lieved to foster the growth of the crops.’ We have already 
seen how often the corn-spirit is represented in folk-custom 
as a goat.’ On the whole, then, as Mannhardt argues,’ 


1 Macrobius, Saz. i. 22. 3. 7 Servius on Virgil, Georg. i. 10. 


2 Homer, Hymn to Aphrodite, 262 
Sqq- 
3 Pliny, Wat. “st. xii. 3; Ovid; 
Metam. vi. 392; 7d., Fasti, iil. 303, 
309; Gloss. Isid. Mart. Cap. ii. 167, 
cited by W. Mannhardt, Antike Wala- 
und Feldkulte, p. 113. 

* Pliny, Wat. “ist. xii. 3; Martianus 
Capella, ii. 167; Augustine, De civitate 
Dei, xv. 23; Aurelius Victor, Origo 
gentis Romanae, iv. 6. 

5 Servius on Virgil, 4c/. vi. 14; 
Ovid, Metam. vi. 392 sg.; Martianus 
Capella, ii. 167. 

6 W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, pp. 
138 sg. 5 zd., Antzke Wald- und Feld- 
Rulte, p. 145. 


8 Above, vol. i. pp. 281 sgq. 

9 Antike Wald- und Feldkulte, ch. 
ili, pp. 113-211. In the text I have 
allowed my former exposition of Mann- 
hardt’s theory as to ancient semi-goat- 
shaped spirits of vegetation to stand as 
before, but I have done so with hesita- 
tion, because the evidence adduced in 
its favour appears to me insufficient to 
permit us to speak with any confidence 
on the subject. Pan may have been, 
as W. H. Roscher and L. R. Farnell 
think, nothing more than a herdsman’s 
god, the semi-human, semi-bestial repre- 
sentative of goats inparticular. See W. 
H. Roscher’s Lextkon der griech. una 
rim. Mythologie, iii. 1405 sg.: L. R. 


cs ee eee 


IX DIONVSUS, THE GOAT AND THE BULL 3 


the Pans, Satyrs, and Fauns perhaps belong to a widely 
diffused class of wood-spirits conceived in goat-form. The 
fondness of goats for straying in woods and nibbling the 
bark of trees, to which indeed they are most destructive, 
is an obvious and perhaps sufficient reason why wood- 
spirits should so often be supposed to take the form of 
goats. The inconsistency of a god of vegetation subsist- 
ing upon the vegetation which he personifies is not one to 
strike the primitive mind. Such inconsistencies arise when 
the deity, ceasing to be immanent in the vegetation, comes 
to be regarded as its owner or lord ; for the idea of owning 
the vegetation naturally leads to that of subsisting on it. 
We have already seen that the corn-spirit, originally con- 
ceived as immanent in the corn, afterwards comes to be 
regarded as its owner, who lives on it and is reduced to 
poverty and want by being deprived of it.’ 


Thus the representation of wood-spirits in the form of Wood- 


goats appears to be both widespread and, to the primitive 
mind, natural. Therefore when we find, as we have done, 
that Dionysus—a tree-god—is sometimes represented in 
goat-form,” we can hardly avoid concluding that this repre- 
sentation is simply a part of his proper character as a tree- 
god and is not to be explained by the fusion of two distinct 
and independent worships, in one of which he originally 
appeared as a tree-god and in the other as a goat. If such 
a fusion took place in the case of Dionysus, it must equally 
have taken place in the case of the Pans and Satyrs of 
Greece, the Fauns of Italy, and the Lyeschze of Russia. 
That such a fusion of two wholly disconnected worships 
should have occurred once is possible; that it should have 
occurred twice independently is improbable; that it should 
have occurred thrice independently is so unlikely as to be 
practically incredible. 

Dionysus was also figured, as we have seen,* in the shape 
ofa bull. After what has gone before we are naturally led 
to expect that his bull form must have been only another 


Farnell, The Cults of the Greek States, der griech. und rim. Mythologie, iv. 


v. (Oxford, 1909) pp. 431 sgg. And 444 599. 

the Satyrs and Silenuses seem to have 1 Above, vol. i. pp. 231 sg¢. 
more affinity with horses than with 2 Above, vol. i. pp. 17 sg. 
goats. See W. H. Roscher’s Lexzkon 3 Above, vol. i. pp. 16 sg. 


spirits in 
the form of 
goats. 


The bull as 
an embodi- 
ment of 
Dionysus 


seems to be 
another ex- 
pression of 
his charac- 
ter as a god 
of vegeta- 
tion. 


The dou- 
phonia, an 
Athenian 
sacrifice of 
an ox to 
Zeus 
Polieus. 


4 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


expression for his character as a deity of vegetation, especially 
as the bull is a common embodiment of the corn-spirit in 
Northern Europe;’ and the close association of Dionysus 
with Demeter and Persephone in the mysteries of Eleusis 
shews that he had at least strong agricultural affinities. 
The other possible explanation of the bull-shaped Dionysus 
would be that the conception of him as a bull was originally 
entirely distinct from the conception of him as a deity of 
vegetation, and that the fusion of the two conceptions was 
due to some such circumstance as the union of two tribes, 
one of which had previously worshipped a bull-god and the 
other a tree-god. This appears to be the view taken by 
Mr. Andrew Lang, who suggests that the bull-formed 
Dionysus “had either been developed out of, or had suc- 
ceeded to, the worship of a bull-totem.”? Of course this is 
possible. But it is not yet certain that the Aryans ever had 
totemism.? On the other hand, it is quite certain that many 
Aryan peoples have conceived deities of vegetation as 
embodied in animal forms. Therefore when we find 
amongst an Aryan people like the Greeks a deity of 
vegetation represented as an animal, the presumption must 
be in favour of explaining this by a principle which is 
certainly known to have influenced the Aryan race rather 
than by one which is not certainly known to have done so, 
In the present state of our knowledge, therefore, it is safer 
to regard the bull form of Dionysus as being, like his goat 
form, an expression of his proper character as a deity of 
vegetation. 

The probability of this view will be somewhat increased 
if it can be shewn that in other rites than those of Dionysus 
the ancients slew an ox as a representative of the spirit of 
vegetation. This they appear to have done in the Athenian 
sacrifice known as “the murder of the ox” (douphonia). It 
took place about the end of June or beginning of July, that 
is, about the time when the threshing is nearly over in 
Attica. According to tradition the sacrifice was instituted 
to procure a cessation of drought and dearth which had 


1 Above, vol. i. pp. 288 sgg. Religion,? ii. 252. 
3 Compare Zotemism and Exegamy, 
2A. Lang, Jjth, Ritual, and iv. 12 sgq. 


IX DIONVSUS, THE GOAT AND THE BULLE 5 


afflicted the land. The ritual was as follows. Barley mixed 
with wheat, or cakes made of them, were laid upon the bronze 
altar of Zeus Polieus on the Acropolis. Oxen were driven 
round the altar, and the ox which went up to the altar and 
ate the offering on it was sacrificed. The axe and knife 
with which the beast was slain had been previously wetted 
with water brought by maidens called “ water-carriers.” The 
weapons were then sharpened and handed to the butchers, 
one of whom felled the ox with the axe and another cut its 
throat with the knife. As soon as he had felled the ox, the 
former threw the axe from him and fled ; and the man who 
cut the beast’s throat apparently imitated his example. 
Meantime the ox was skinned and all present partook of 
its flesh, Then the hide was stuffed with straw and sewed 
up ; next the stuffed animal was set on its feet and yoked 
to a plough as if it were ploughing. A trial then took place 
in an ancient law-court presided over by the King (as he 
was called) to determine who had murdered the ox. The 
maidens who had brought the water accused the men who 
had sharpened the axe and knife; the men who had sharp- 
ened the axe and knife blamed the men who had handed 
these implements to the butchers ; the men who had handed 
the implements to the butchers blamed the butchers ; and the 
butchers laid the blame on the axe and knife, which were 
accordingly found guilty, condemned and cast into the sea.’ 
The name of this sacrifice.—“ the murder of the ox,” 7— 


1 Pausanias, i. 24. 43 zd., i. 28. 10; 
Porphyry, De abstinentia, ii. 29 sg. 5 
Aelian, Var. H7st. viii. 3; Scholia on 
Aristophanes, Peace, 419, and Clouds, 
985 ; Hesychius, Suidas, and Ztymologz- 
cum Magnum, s.v.Bovpovia; Suidas, s.v. 
Oatdwv ; Im. Bekker’s Anecdota Graeca 
(Berlin, 1814-1821), p. 238, s.v. 
Auméd\wa. The date ofthe sacrifice (14th 
Skirophorion) is given by the Scholiast 
on Aristophanes and the Z¢ymologicum 
Magnum ; and this date corresponds, 
according to W. Mannhardt (AZjtho- 
logische Forschungen, p. 68), with the 
close of the threshing in Attica. No 
writer mentions the trial of both the 
axe and the knife. Pausanias speaks 
of the trial of the axe, Porphyry and 
Aelian of the trial of the knife. But 


from Porphyry’s description it is clear 
that the slaughter was carried out by 
two men, one wielding an axe and the 
other a knife, and that the former laid 
the blame on the latter. Perhaps the 
knife alone was condemned. That the 
King (as to whom see Zhe Magic Art 
and the Evolution of Kings, i. 44 sq.) 
presided at the trial of all lifeless objects, 
is mentioned by Aristotle (Covstztution 
of Athens, 57) and Julius Pollux (viii. 
90, compare viii. 120). 

2 The real import of the name 
bouphonta was first perceived by W. 
Robertson Smith. See his Religion of 
the Semites,? pp. 304 sgg.- In Cos 
also an ox specially chosen was 
sacrificed to Zeus Polieus. See 
Dittenberger, Syl/oge Inscriptionum 


The ox 
sacrificed 
at the dou- 
phonia ap- 
pears to 
have em- 
bodied the 
corn-spirit. 


6 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS  Cuap, 


the pains taken by each person who had a hand in the 
slaughter to lay the blame on some one else, together with 
the formal trial and punishment of the axe or knife or both, 
prove that the ox was here regarded not merely as a victim 
offered to a god, but as itself asacred creature, the slaughter 
of which was sacrilege or murder. This is borne out by a 
statement of Varro that to kill an ox was formerly a capital 
crime in Attica." The mode of selecting the victim suggests 
that the ox which tasted the corn was viewed as the corn- 
deity taking possession of his own. This interpretation is 
supported by the following custom. In Beauce, in the district 
of Orleans, on the twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth of April they 
make a straw-man called “the great zondard.” For they say 
that the old szondard is now dead and it is necessary to make 
a new one. The straw-man is carried in solemn procession 
up and down the village and at last is placed upon the 
oldest apple-tree. There he remains till the apples are 
gathered, when he is taken down and thrown into the water, 
or he is burned and his ashes cast into water. But the 
person who plucks the first fruit from the tree succeeds to 
the title of “the great mondard.”” Here the straw figure, 
called “the great mondard” and placed on the oldest apple- 
tree in spring, represents the spirit of the tree, who, dead in 
winter, revives when the apple-blossoms appear on the boughs. 
Thus the person who plucks the first fruit from the tree 
and thereby receives the name of “the great smondard” 
must be regarded as a representative of the tree - spirit. 
Primitive peoples are usually reluctant to taste the annual 
first-fruits of any crop, until some ceremony has been per- 
formed which makes it safe and pious for them to do so, 


Graecarum,? No. 616; Ch. Michel, 
Recueil ad’Inscriptions Grecques, No. 
716; H. Collitz und F. Bechtel, 
Sammlung der sgyriechischen Dialekt- 
Inschriften, iii. pp. 357 sgg., No. 
3636; J. de Prott et L. Ziehen, Zeges 
Graecorum Sacrae e Titults collectae, 
Fasciculus i. (Leipsic, 1896) pp. 19 
sgq-, No. 5; M. P. Nilsson, G7ze- 
chische Feste (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 17-21. 
A month Bouphonion, corresponding 
to the Attic Boedromion (September), 
occurred in the calendars of Delos and 


Tenos. See E. Bischoff, ‘De fastis 
Graecorum antiquioribus,” in Lezpzzger 
Studien fiir classtsche Philologie, vii. 
(Leipsic, 1884) p. 414. 


1 Varro, De re rustica, ii. 5. 4. 
Compare Columella, De re rustica, vi. 
praef. § 7. Perhaps, however, Varro’s 
statement may be merely an inference 
drawn from the ritual of the bouphonia 
and the legend told to explain it. 


2 W..Mannhardt, Bawmkultus, p. 
409. 


Ix DIONYSUS, THE GOAT AND THE BULL 7 


The reason of this reluctance appears to be a belief that the 
first-fruits either belong to or actually contain a divinity. 
Therefore when a man or animal is seen boldly to appro- 
priate the sacred first-fruits, he or it is naturally regarded 
as the divinity himself in human or animal form taking 
possession of his own. The time of the Athenian sacrifice, 
which fell about the close of the threshing, suggests that the 
wheat and barley laid upon the altar were a harvest offer- 
ing ; and the sacramental character of the subsequent repast 
—all partaking of the flesh of the divine animal—would 
make it parallel to the harvest-suppers of modern Europe, 
in which, as we have seen, the flesh of the animal who stands 
for the corn-spirit is eaten by the harvesters. Again, the 
tradition that the sacrifice was instituted in order to put an 
end to drought and famine is in favour of taking it asa 
harvest festival. The resurrection of the corn-spirit, enacted 
by setting up the stuffed ox and yoking it to the plough, 
may be compared with the resurrection of the tree-spirit in 
the person of his representative, the Wild Man." 

Still more clearly, perhaps, does the identification of the 
corn-spirit with an ox come out in the sacrificial ritual which 
the Greeks of Magnesia on the Maeander observed in honour 
of Zeus Sosipolis, a god whose title of Sosipolis (“ Saviour 
of the City”) marks him as the equivalent of Zeus Polieus 
(“Zeus of the City”). The details of the ritual are happily 
preserved in an inscription, which records a decree of the 
council and of the people for the regulation of the whole 
proceedings. Every year at a festival in the month of 
Heraeon the magistrates bought the finest bull that could 
pe had for money, and at the new moon of the month of 
Cronion, at the time when the sowing was about to begin, 
they and the priests dedicated the animal to Zeus Sosipolis, 
while solemn prayers were offered by the voice of a sacred 
herald for the welfare of the city, of the land, and of the 
people, for peace and wealth, for the corn-crops and ll 
Other fruits, and for the cattle. Thereafter the sacred 
animal was kept throughout the winter, its keep being 
undertaken by a contractor, who was bound by law to drive 
the bull to the market and there collect contributions for its 

1 See The Dying God, p. 208. 


Sacrifice of 
an ox to 
Zeus Sosi- 
polis at 
Magnesia 
on the 
Maeander, 


The bull so 
sacrificed 
seems to 
have been 
regarded as 
an embodi- 
ment of the 
corn-spirit. 


8 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


maintenance from all the hucksters and in particular from 
the corn-chandlers ; and a prospect was held out to such as 
contributed that it would go well with them. Finally, after 
having been thus maintained atthe public cost for some months, 
the bull was led forth with great pomp and sacrificed in the 
market-place on the twelfth day of the month Artemision, 
which is believed to have been equivalent to the Attic 
month of Thargelion and to the English month of May, 
the season when the corn is reaped in the Greek lowlands. 
In the procession which attended the animal to the place of 
sacrifice the senators, the priests, the magistrates, the young 
people, and the victors in the games all bore a part, and at 
the head of the procession were borne the images of the 
Twelve Gods attired in festal array, while a fluteplayer, a 
piper, and a harper discoursed solemn music.1 Now in 
the bull, which was thus dedicated at the time of sowing 
and kept at the cost of the pious, and especially of corn- 
chandlers, to be finally sacrificed at harvest, it is reasonable 
to see an embodiment of the corn-spirit. Regarded as such 
the animal was consecrated when the seed was committed 
to the earth ; it was fed and kept all the time the corn was 
growing in order that by its beneficent energies it might 
foster that growth; and at last, to complete the parallel, 
when the corn was reaped the animal was slain, the cutting 
of the stalks being regarded as the death of the corn-spirit. 
Similarly we have seen that in the harvest-fields and on 
the threshing-floors of modern Europe the corn-spirit is 
often conceived in the form of a bull, an ox, or a calf, 
which is supposed to be killed at reaping or threshing ; and, 


1 Dittenberger,  Sylloge nscrif~- Attic Scirophorion, a month corre- 


tionum Graecarum? (Leipsic, 1898- 
1901), vol. ll. pp. 246-248, No. 553. 
As to the identification of the Mag- 
nesian month Artemision with the 
Attic month Thargelion (May), see 
Dittenberger, of. cz¢. ii. p. 242, No. 
552 note’. It is interesting to observe 
that at Magnesia the sowing took place 
in Cronion, the month of Cronus, a 
god whom the ancients regularly identi- 
fied with Saturn, the Italian god of 
sowing. In Samos, Perinthus, and 
Patmos, however, the month Cronion 
seems to have been equivalent to the 


sponding to June or July, which could 
never have been a season of sowing in 
the hot rainless summers of Greece. 
See E. Bischoff, ‘‘ De fastis Graecorum 
antiquioribus,” in Lez¢pztger Studien 
Sir classische Philologie, vii. (1884) p. 
400; Dittenberger, Syl/oge Jnscrép- 
téonum Graecarum,? No. 645 note!4, 
vol. li. p. 449. 

* In thus interpreting the sacrifice 
of the bull at Magnesia I follow the 
excellent exposition of Professor M. P. 
Nilsson, Grechtsche este (Leipsic, 
1906), pp. 23-27. 


1X DIONYSUS RAE GOAT AND THE BULL 9 


further, we saw that the conception is sometimes carried out 
in practice by slaughtering a real ox or a real calf on the 
harvest-field. Thus the parallelism between the ancient 
Greek and the modern European idea of the corn-spirit 
embodied in the form of a bull appears to be very close. 

On the interpretation which I have adopted of the 
sacrifices offered to Zeus Polieus and Zeus Sosipolis the 
corn-spirit is conceived as a male, not as a female, as Zeus, 
not as Demeter or Persephone. In this there is no incon- 
sistency. At the stage of thought which the Greeks had 
reached long before the dawn of history they supposed 
the processes of reproduction in nature to be carried on 
by a male and a female principle in conjunction ; they did 
not believe, like some backward savages, that the female 
principle alone suffices for that purpose, and that the aid of 
the male principle is superfluous. Hence, as we have seen, 
they imagined that the goddesses of the corn, the mother 
Demeter and the daughter Persephone, had each her male 
partner with whom she united for the production of the 
crops. The partner of Demeter was Zeus, the partner of 
Persephone was his brother Pluto, the Subterranean Zeus, 
as he was called ; and reasons have been shewn for thinking 
that the marriage of one or other of these divine pairs was 
solemnised at Eleusis as part of the Great Mysteries in 
order to promote the growth of the corn." 

The ox appears as a representative of the corn-spirit 
in other parts of the world. At Great Bassam, in Guinea, 
two oxen are slain annually to procure a good harvest. 
If the sacrifice is to be effectual, it is necessary that the 
oxen should weep. So all the women of the village sit in 
front of the beasts, chanting, “ The ox will weep; yes, he 
will weep!” From time to time one of the women walks 
round the beasts, throwing manioc meal or palm wine upon 
them, especially into their eyes. When tears roll down from 
the eyes of the oxen, the people dance, singing, “The ox 
weeps! the ox weeps!” Then two men seize the tails of 
the beasts and cut them off at one blow. It is believed that 
a great misfortune will happen in the course of the year if 
the tails are not severed at one blow. The oxen are after- 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 36 5g., 65 sgq. 


The Greek 
conception 
of the corn- 
spirit as 
both male 
and female. 


The ox asa 
representa- 
tive of the 
corn-spirit 
at Great 
Bassam in 
Guinea. 


The ox as 
a personi- 
fication of 
the corn- 
spirit in 
China. 


fe) DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


wards killed, and their flesh is eaten by the chiefs." Here 
the tears of the oxen, like those of the human victims 
amongst the Khonds and the Aztecs,” are probably a rain- 
charm. We have already seen that the virtue of the corn- 
spirit, embodied in animal form, is sometimes supposed to - 
reside in the tail, and that the last handful of corn is some- 
times, conceived as the tail of the corn spirit. In the 
Mithraic religion this conception is graphically set forth in 
some of the numerous sculptures which represent Mithras 
kneeling on the back of a bull and plunging a knife into its 
flank ; for on certain of these monuments the tail of the 
bull ends in three stalks of corn, and in one of them corn- 
stalks instead of blood are seen issuing from the wound 
inflicted by the knife Such representations certainly 
suggest that the bull, whose sacrifice appears to have 
formed a leading feature in the Mithraic ritual, was con- 
ceived, in one at least of its aspects, as an incarnation of 
the corn-spirit. 

Still more clearly does the ox appear as a personification 
of the corn-spirit in a ceremony which is observed in all the 
provinces and districts of China to welcome the approach of 
spring. On the first day of spring, usually on the third or 
fourth of February, which is also the beginning of the Chinese 
New Year, the governor or prefect of the city goes in proces- 
sion to the east gate of the city, and sacrifices to the Divine 
Husbandman, who is represented with a bull’s head on the 
body of aman. A large effigy of an ox, cow, or buffalo has 
been prepared for the occasion, and stands outside of the 
east gate, with agricultural implements beside it. The 
figure is made of differently-coloured pieces of paper pasted 
on a framework either by a blind man or according to the 
directions of a necromancer. The colours of the paper 
prognosticate the character of the coming year; if red 
prevails, there will be many fires; if white, there will be 
floods and rain; and so with the other colours. The 


1 H. Hecquard, Retse an die Kiiste ments figurés relatifs aux Mysteres de 
und im das Innere von West-Afrika Mithra (Brussels, 1896-1899), ii. 


(Leipsic, 1854), pp. 41-43. figures 18, 19, 20, 59 (p. 228, corn- 
F See above, vol. i. p. 248. stalks issuing from wound), 67, 70, 78, 
3 Above, vol. i. pp. 268, 272. 87, 105, 143, 168, 215, also plates v. 


+ Franz Cumont, Zextes et Monu- and vi. 


IX DIONYSUS, THE GOAT AND THE BULL II 


mandarins walk slowly round the ox, beating it severely at 
each step with rods of various hues. It is filled with five 
kinds of grain, which pour forth when the effigy is broken 
by the blows of the rods. The paper fragments are then 
set on fire, and a scramble takes place for the burning frag- 
ments, because the people believe that whoever gets one of 
them is sure to be fortunate throughout the year. A live 
buffalo is next killed, and its flesh is divided among the 
mandarins. According to one account, the effigy of the ox 
is made of clay, and, after being beaten by the governor, is 
stoned by the people till they break it in pieces, “from 
which they expect an abundant year.”' But the ceremony 
varies somewhat in the different provinces. According to 
another account the effigy of the cow, made of earthenware, 
with gilded horns, is borne in procession, and is of such 
colossal dimensions that forty or fifty men can hardly carry 
it. Behind this monstrous cow walks a boy with one foot 
shod and the other bare, personifying the Genius of Industry. 
He beats the effigy with a rod, as if to drive it forward. A 
great many little clay cows are afterwards taken out of the 
large one and distributed among the people. Both the big 
cow and the little ones are then broken in pieces, and the 
people take the sherds home with them in order to grind 
them to powder and strew the powder on their fields, for 
they think thus to secure a plentiful harvest.” In the cities 
nearest to Weihaiwei, in northern China, the ceremony of “ the 
Beginning of Spring” is a moveable feast, which falls usually 
in the first moon. The local magistrate and his attendants 
go in procession to the eastern suburbs of the city to “ meet 
the Spring.” A great pasteboard effigy of an ox is carried 
in the procession, together with another pasteboard image 
of a man called Mang-Shen, “who represents either the 


1 China Review, i. (July 1872 to June 
1873, Hongkong), pp. 62, 154, 162, 
203 sg. ; Rev. J. Doolittle, Soczal Lzje 
of the Chinese, ed. Paxton Hood (Lon- 
don, 1868), pp. 375 sg.; Rev. J. H. 
Gray, China (London, 1878), ii. 115 sg. 

2 Ostastatischer Lloyd, March 14, 
1890, quoted by J. D. E. Schmeltz, 
** Das Pflugfest in China,” Jyer- 
nationales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, 
xi. (1898) p. 79. With this account 


the one given by S. W. Williams (Zze 
Middle Kingdom (New York and 
London, 1848, ii. 109) substantially 
agrees. In many districts, according 
to the Ostastatischer Lloyd, the Genius 
of Spring is represented at this festival 
by a boy of blameless character, clad 
in green. As to the custom of going 
with one foot bare and the other shod, 
see Zaboo and the Perils of the Soul, 


Ppp. 311-313- 


12 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


typical ox-driver or ploughman or the god of Agriculture.” 
On the return of the procession to the magistrate’s court, 
that dignitary himself and his principal colleagues beat and 
prod the pasteboard ox with wands, after which the effigy 
is burned along with the image of its attendant. The 
colours and apparel of the two effigies correspond with the 
forecasts of the Chinese almanack. Thus if the head of the 
ox is yellow, the summer will be very hot; if it is green, 
the spring will be sickly; if it is red, there” willipese 
drought ; if it is black, there will be much rain; if it is 
white, there will be high winds. If Mang-Shen wears a hat, 
the year will be dry; if he is bareheaded, it will be rainy ; 
and so on with the other articles of his apparel. Besides 
the pasteboard ox a miniature ox made of clay is also 
supposed to be provided." In Chinese the ceremony is 
called indifferently “beating the ox” and “beating the 
spring,” which seems to prove that the ox is identified with 
the vernal energies of nature. We may suppose that origin- 
ally the ox which figures in the rite was a living animal, but 
ever since the beginning of our era, when the custom first 
appears in history, it has been an effigy of terra-cotta or 
pasteboard. To this day the Chinese calendar devotes a 
page to a picture of “the ox of spring” with Mang, the 
tutelary genius of spring, standing beside it and grasping a 
willow-bough, with which he is about to beat the animal for 
the purpose of stimulating its reproductive virtue.” In one 
form of this Chinese custom the corn-spirit appears to be 
plainly represented by the corn-filled ox, whose fragments 
may therefore be supposed to bring fertility with them. We 
may compare the Silesian custom of burning the effigy of 
Death, scrambling for the burning fragments, and burying 
them in the fields to secure a good crop, and the Florentine 
custom of sawing the Old Woman and scrambling for the 
dried fruits with which she was filled.* Both these customs, 
like their Chinese counterpart, are observed in spring. 
The practice of beating an earthenware or pasteboard 
1 R. F. Johnston, Lzon and Dragon Chinois (Paris, 1910), p. 500 (Azx- 
an Northern China (London, 1910), ales du Musée Guimet, Bibliotheque 
pp. 180-182. @ Etudes, vol. xxi.). 


2 Ed. Chavannes, Ze 7’az Chan, 3 See Zhe Dying God, pp. 240 sq., 
Essat de Monographie @un Culte 250. 


DIONYSUS, THE GOAT AND THE BULL 


IX 13 


image of an ox in spring is not confined to China proper, 
but seems to be widely spread in the east of Asia; for ex- 
ample, it has been recorded at Kashgar and in Annam. 
Thus a French traveller has described how at Kashgar, 
on the third of February 1892, a mandarin, clad in his 
finest robes and borne in a magnificent palanquin, conducted 
solemnly through the streets the pasteboard image of an ox, 
“a sacred animal devoted to the deity of spring who gives 
life to the fields. It is thus carried to some distance outside 
of the town on the eastern side. The official who acts as 
pontiff ceremoniously offers food and libations to it in order 
to obtain a fruitful year, and next day it is demolished by 
the lashes of a whip.”’ Again, in Annam, every year at 
the approach of spring the Department of Rites publishes 
instructions to the provincial governors as to the manner in 
which the festival of the inauguration of spring is to be cele- 
brated. Among the indispensable features of the festival 
are the figures of an ox and its warder made of terra-cotta. 
The attitudes of the two and the colours to be applied to 
them are carefully prescribed every year in the Chinese 
calendar. Popular opinion attributes to the colour of the ox 
and the accoutrement of its warder, who is called Mang 
Than, a certain influence on the crops of the year: a green, 
yellow, and black buffalo prognosticates an abundant harvest : 
a red or white buffalo foretells wretched crops and great 
droughts or hurricanes. If Mang Than is represented wear- 
ing a large hat, the year will be rainy ;_if on the other hand 


1 J. L. Dutreuil de Rhins, AZsszon 
Scientifique dans la Haute Asie, 1Sgo- 
1895, i. (Paris, 1897) pp. 95 sg. After 
describing the ceremony as he wit- 
nessed it at Kashgar, the writer adds: 
“* Probably the ox was at first a living 
animal which they sacrificed and dis- 
tributed the flesh to the bystanders. 
At the present day the official who 
acts as pontiff has a number of small 
pasteboard oxen made, which he sends 
to the notables in order that they may 
participate intimately in the sacrifice, 
which is more than symbolical. The 
reason for carrying the ox a long 
distance is that as much as possible of 
the territory may be sanctified by the 


passage of the sacred animal, and that 
as many people as possible may share 
in the sacrifice, at least with their eyes 
and good wishes. The procession, 
which begins very early in the morn- 
ing, moves eastward, that is, toward 
the quarter where, the winter being 
now over, the first sun of spring may 
be expected to appear, whose divinity 
the ceremony is intended to render 
propitious. It is needless to insist on 
the analogy between this Chinese fes- 
tival and our Carnival, at which, about 
the same season, a fat ox is led about. 
Both festivals have their origin in the 
same conceptions of ancient natural 
religion.” 


The ox as 
a personifi- 
cation of 
the corn- 
spirit in 
Kashgar 
and 
Annam. 


Annual in- 
auguration 
of plough- 
ing by the 
Chinese 
emperor. 


14 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


he is bareheaded, long barren droughts are to be feared. 
Nay, the public credulity goes so far as to draw good or evil 
omens from the cheerfulness or ill humour which may be 
detected on the features of the Warder of the Ox. Having 
been duly prepared in accordance with the directions of the 
almanack, the ox and its warder are carried in procession, 
followed by the mandarins and the people, to the altar of 
Spring, which is usually to be found in every provincial 
capital. There the provincial governor offers fruits, flowers, 
and incense to the Genius of Spring (Xuan Quan), and gold 
and silver paper money are burnt on the altar in profusion. 
Lastly the ox and his warder are buried in a spot which has 
been indicated by a geomancer.’ It is interesting to observe 
that the three colours of the ox which are taken to prog- 
nosticate good crops, to wit, green, yellow, and black, are 
precisely the colours which the ancients attributed to Demeter, 
the goddess of the corn.’ 

The great importance which the Chinese attach to the 
performance of rites for the fertility of the ground is proved 
by an ancient custom which is, or was till lately, observed 
every year in spring. On an appointed day the emperor 
himself, attended by the highest dignitaries of the state, 
guides with his own hand the ox-drawn plough down 
several furrows and scatters the seed in a sacred field, or 
“field of God,” as it is called, the produce of which is 
afterwards examined from time to time with anxious care 
by the Governor of Peking, who draws omens from the 
appearance of the ears; it is a very happy omen if he 
should chance to find thirteen ears growing on one stalk. 
To prepare himself for the celebration of this solemn rite 
the emperor is expected to fast and remain continent for 
three days previously, and the princes and mandarins who 
accompany him to the field are bound to observe similar 
restrictions. The corn grown on the holy field which has 
thus been ploughed by the imperial hands is collected in 
yellow sacks and stored in a special granary to be used by the 
emperor in certain solemn sacrifices which he offers to the god 


1 Colonel E. Diguet, Les Annamites, 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 41 sg., and 
Société, Coutumes, Religions (Paris, below, pp, 21 sg, 
1906), pp. 250-253. 


x DIONYSUS, THE GOAT AMD THE BULL 15 


Chan Ti and to his own ancestors. In the provinces of 
China the season of ploughing is similarly inaugurated by 
the provincial governors as representatives of the emperor.! 

The sacred field, or “ field of God,” in which the emperor 
of China thus ceremonially opens the ploughing for the year, 
and of which the produce is employed in sacrifice, reminds 
us of the Rarian plain at Eleusis, in which a sacred ploughing 
similarly took place every year, and of which the produce 
was in like manner devoted to sacrifice.? Further, it recalls 
the little sacred rice-fields on which the Kayans of central 
Borneo inaugurate the various operations of the agricultural 
year by performing them in miniature.* As I have already 
pointed out, all such consecrated enclosures were probably 
in origin what we may call spiritual preserves, that is, 
patches of ground which men set apart for the exclusive use 
of the corn-spirit to console him for the depredations they 
committed on all the rest of his domains. Again, the rule 
of fasting and continence observed by the Emperor of China 
and his august colleagues before they put their hands to the 
plough resembles the similar customs of abstinence practised 
by many savages as a preparation for engaging in the various 
labours of the field.* 


1 Du Halde, The General History of 
China, Third Edition (London, 1741), 
ii. 120-122; Huc, L’Empire Chinots® 
(Paris, 1879), ii. 338-343; Rev. J. H. 
Gray, China (London, 1878), ii. 116- 
118. Compare Zhe Sacred Books of 
China, translated by James Legge, 
Part ui., Zhe Li Ad (Sacred Books of 
the East, vol. xxvii., Oxford, 1885), 
pp. 254 sg. : ‘‘In this month [the first 
month of spring] the son of Heaven 
on the first day prays to God for a 
good year; and afterwards, the day of 
the first conjunction of the sun and 
moon having been chosen, with the 
handle and share of the plough in the 
carriage, placed between the man-at- 
arms who is its third occupant and the 
driver, he conducts his three ducal 
ministers, his nine high ministers, the 
feudal princes and his Great officers, all 
with their own hands to plough the 
field of God. The son of Heaven 
turns up three furrows, each of the 


ducal ministers five, and the other 
ministers and feudal princes nine. 
When they return, he takes in his 
hand a cup in the great chamber, all 
the others being in attendance on him 
and the Great officers, and says, ‘ Drink 
this cup of comfort after your toil.’ In 
this month the vapours of heaven 
descend and those of the earth ascend. 
Heaven and earth are in harmonious 
co-operation. All plants bud and 
grow.” Here the selection of a day 
in spring when sun and moon are in 
conjunction is significant. Such con- 
junctions are regarded as marriages of 
the great luminaries and therefore as 
the proper seasons for the celebration 
of rites designed to promote fertility. 
See Zhe Dying God, p. 73. 

2 See above, pp. 74, 108. 

3 See above, p. 93. 

4 See above, pp. 94, 109; The 
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings, 


li, 105 sgq. 


Analogy 
of the 
Chinese 
custom to 
the agricul- 
tural rites 
at Eleusis 
and else- 
where. ° 


The rend- 
ing of live 
animals in 
the rites of 
Dionysus. 


Association 
of the pig 
with 
Demeter. 


16 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS  CuHapP, 


On the whole we may perhaps conclude that both as a 
goat and as a bull Dionysus was essentially a god of vegeta- 
tion. The Chinese and European customs which I have 
cited’ may perhaps shed light on the custom of rending 
a live bull or goat at the rites of Dionysus. The animal 
was torn in fragments, as the Khond victim was cut in 
pieces, in: order that the worshippers might each secure a 
portion of the life-giving and fertilising influence of the god. 
The flesh was eaten raw as a sacrament, and we may con- 
jecture that some of it was taken home to be buried in the 
fields, or otherwise employed so as to convey to the fruits of 
the earth the quickening influence of the god of vegetation. 
The resurrection of Dionysus, related in his myth, may have 
been enacted in his rites by stuffing and setting up the slain 
ox, as was done at the Athenian douphonza. 


§ 2. Demeter, the Pig and the Horse 


Passing next to the corn-goddess Demeter, and remem- 
bering that in European folk-lore the pig is a common 
embodiment of the corn-spirit,”7 we may now ask whether 
the pig, which was so closely associated with Demeter, may 
not have been originally the goddess herself in animal form ? 
The pig was sacred to her ;* in art she was portrayed 
carrying or accompanied by a pig;* and the pig was 
regularly sacrificed in her mysteries, the reason assigned 
being that the pig injures the corn and is therefore an 
enemy of the goddess. But after an animal has been 
conceived as a god, or a god as an animal, it sometimes 
happens, as we have seen, that the god sloughs off his 
animal form and becomes purely anthropomorphic ; and 
that then the animal, which at first had been slain in the 
character of the god, comes to be viewed as a victim offered 


1 As to the European customs, see 
above, p. 12. 


2 See above, vol. i. pp. 298 sgq. 

3 Scholiast on Aristophanes, Achar. 
747- 

4 J. Overbeck, Griechische Kumnst- 
mythologie, Besonderer Theil, ii. (Leip- 
sic, 1873-1878), p. 493; Miiller- 


Wieseler, Denkmaler der alten Kunst, 
ii. pl. viii. 94. 

5 Hyginus, fad. 277; Cornutus, 
Theologiae Graecae Compendium, 28; 
Macrobius, Satzrn. i. 12. 23; Scholiast 
on Aristophanes, Acharn. 747; 2d., 
on frogs, 338; zd., on Peace, 374; 
Servius on Virgil, Georg. li. 380; 
Aelian, Vat. Anim. x. 16. 


IX DEMETER, THE PIG AND THE HORSE 


17 


to the god on the ground of its hostility to the deity; in 
short, the god is sacrificed to himself on the ground that 
he is his own enemy. This happened to Dionysus,! and 
it may have happened to Demeter also. And in fact the 
rites of one of her festivals, the Thesmophoria, bear out the 
view that originally the pig was an embodiment of the 
corn-goddess herself, either Demeter or her daughter and 
double Persephone. The Attic Thesmophoria was an 
autumn festival, celebrated by women alone in October,” 
and appears to have represented with mourning rites the 
descent of Persephone (or Demeter)’ into the lower world, 
and with joy her return from the dead.* Hence the name 
Descent or Ascent variously applied to the first, and the 
name Kadligeneza (fair-born) applied to the third day of the 
festival. Now from an old scholium on Lucian® ‘we learn 
some details about the mode of celebrating the Thes- 
mophoria, which shed important light on the part of the 
festival called the Descent or the Ascent. The scholiast 
tells us that it was customary at the Thesmophoria to throw 
pigs, cakes of dough, and branches of pine-trees into “the 
chasms of Demeter and Persephone,” which appear to have 


been sacred caverns or vaults.® 


1 See above, vol. i. pp. 22 5g. 

2 As to the Thesmophoria see my 
article ‘‘ Thesmophoria ” in the Zxcyclo- 
paedia Britannica, Ninth Edition, vol. 
xxiii, 295 sgg. ; August Mommsen, /este 
der Stadt Athen tm Altertum (Leipsic, 
1898), pp. 308 sgg. ; Miss J. E. Haris- 
son, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek 
Religion® (Cambridge, 1908), pp. 120 
sqq.; M. P. Nilsson, Griechische Feste 
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 313 sgg.; L. R. 
Farnell, Zhe Cults of the Greek States, 
iil. (Oxford, 1907) pp. 75 sgg. At 
Thebes and in Delos the Thesmophoria 
was held in summer, in the month of 
Metageitnion (August). See Xenophon, 
Flellenica, v. 2. 29; M. P. Nilsson, 
Griechische Feste, pp. 316 sq. 

3 Photius, Zexicon, s.v.cThvia, speaks 
of the ascent of Demezer from the lower 
world; and Clement of Alexandria 
speaks of both Demeter and Persephone 
as having been engulfed in the chasm 
(Protrept. ii. 17). The original equi- 
valence of Demeter and Persephone 

PE. V. VOL. II 


In these caverns or vaults 


must be borne steadily in mind. 

4 Plutarch, Jszs ef Osarts, 
Photius, Lexicon, s.v. oTjvia. 

5 E. Rohde, ‘‘ Unedirte Lucians- 
scholien, die attischen Thesmophorien 
und Haloen betreffend,” Ahezzzsches 
Museum, N.¥F., xxv. (1870) p. 548; 
Scholia tn Luctanum, ed. H. Rabe 
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 275 sg. Two pas- 
sages of classical writers (Clement 
of Alexandria, Protrepff. il. 17, and 
Pausanias, 1x. 8. 1) refer to the rites 
described by the scholiast on Lucian, 
and had been rightly interpreted by 
Chr. A. Lobeck (Aglaophamus, pp. 
827 sgg.) before the discovery of the 
scholia. 

6 The scholiast speaks of them as 
megara and adyta. The name megara 
is thought to be derived from a Phoe- 
nician word meaning ‘‘ cavern,” ‘‘ sub- 
terranean chasm,” the Hebrew myn. 
See F. C. Movers, Dze Phoendster 


69; 


(Bonn, 1841), i. 220. In Greek 
usage the #egara were properly sub- 
ce 


Pigs in the 
ritual of 
the Thes- 
mophoria. 


The sacred 
serpent at 
Lanuvium. 


18 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


there were said to be serpents, which guarded the caverns 
and consumed most of the flesh of the pigs and dough-cakes 
which were thrown in. Afterwards—apparently at the next 
annual festival '1—the decayed remains of the pigs, the cakes, 
and the pine-branches were fetched by women called 
“ drawers,” who, after observing rules of ceremonial purity 
for three days, descended into the caverns, and, frightening 
away the serpents by clapping their hands, brought up the 
remains and placed them on the altar. Whoever got a 
piece of the decayed flesh and cakes, and sowed it with the 
seed-corn in his field, was believed to be sure of a good crop. 
With the feeding of the serpents in the vaults by the 
women we may compare an ancient Italian ritual. At 
Lanuvium a serpent lived in a sacred cave within a grove 
of Juno. On certain appointed days a number of holy 
maidens, with their eyes bandaged, entered the grove 
carrying cakes of barley in their hands. Led, as it was 
believed, by the divine spirit, they walked straight to the 
serpent’s den and offered him the cakes. If they were 
chaste, the serpent ate the cakes, the parents of the girls 
rejoiced, and farmers prognosticated an abundant harvest. 
But if the girls were unchaste, the serpent left the cakes 
untasted, and ants came and crumbled the rejected viands 
and so removed them bit by bit from the sacred grove, 
thereby purifying the hallowed spot from the stain it had 
contracted by the presence of a defiled maiden.” 

To explain the rude and ancient ritual of the Thesmo- 


terranean vaults or chasms sacred to 
the gods. See Hesychius, quoted by 
Movers, 7/.c. (the passage does not 
appear in M. Schmidt’s minor edition 
of Hesychius); Porphyry, De antro 
nympharum, 6; and my note on 
Pausanias, ii. 2. I. 

1 We infer this from Pausanias, ix. 
8. I, though the passage is incomplete 
and apparently corrupt. For év Awdwyy 
Lobeck (Ag/aophamus, pp. 829 sq.) 
proposed to read avadivat or avadobjat. 
At the spring and autumn festivals of 
Isis at Tithorea geese and goats were 
thrown into the adyfonw and left there 
till the following festival, when the 
remains were removed and buried at a 


certain spot a little way from the temple. 
See Pausanias, x. 32.14. This analogy 
supports the view that the pigs thrown 
into the caverns at the Thesmophoria 
were left there till the next festival. 

2 Aelian, De natura animalium, xi. 
16 ; Propertius, v. 8. 3-14. The feed- 
ing of the serpent is represented on a 
Roman coin of about 64 B.c.; on the 
obverse of the coin appears the head 
of Juno Caprotina. See E. Babelon, 
Monnaies de la République Romaine 
(Paris, 1886), ii. 402. A common 
type of Greek art represents a woman 
feeding a serpent out of a saucer. See 
Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Second Edition, 


P- 75- 


IX DEMETER, THE PIG ANDPTHE HORSE 19 


phoria the following legend was told. At the moment when 
Pluto carried off Persephone, a swineherd called Eubuleus 
chanced to be herding his swine on the spot, and his herd 
was engulfed in the chasm down which Pluto vanished with 
Persephone. Accordingly at the Thesmophoria pigs were 
annually thrown into caverns to commemorate the dis- 
appearance of the swine of Eubuleus.' It follows from this 
that the casting of the pigs into the vaults at the Thes- 
mophoria formed part of the dramatic representation of 
Persephone’s descent into the lower world ; and as no image 
of Persephone appears to have been thrown in, we may infer 
that the descent of the pigs was not so much an accompani- 
ment of her descent as the descent itself, in short, that the 
pigs were Persephone. Afterwards when Persephone or 
Demeter (for the two are equivalent) took on human form, 
a reason had to be found for the custom of throwing pigs 
into caverns at her festival; and this was done by saying 
that when Pluto carried off Persephone, there happened to 
be some swine browsing near, which were swallowed up 
along with her. The story is obviously a forced and 
awkward attempt to bridge over the gulf between the old 
conception of the corn-spirit as a pig and the new conception 
of her as an anthropomorphic goddess. A trace of the older 
conception survived in the legend that when the sad mother 
was searching for traces of the vanished Persephone, the 
footprints of the lost one were obliterated by the footprints 
of a pig ;” originally, we may conjecture, the footprints of 
the pig were the footprints of Persephone and of Demeter 
herself. A consciousness of the intimate connexion of the 
pig with the corn lurks in the legend that the swineherd 
Eubuleus was a brother of Triptolemus, to whom Demeter 
first imparted the secret of the corn. Indeed, according to 
one version of the story, Eubuleus himself received, jointly 
with his brother Triptolemus, the gift of the corn from 
Demeter as a reward for revealing to her the fate of Perse- 
phone.*? Further, it is to be noted that at the Thesmophoria 


1 Scholia in Luctanum,ed.H. Rabe, poeta omisisset in hac narratione.” Such 
pp. 275 59. . ; is the wisdom of the commentator. 

2 Ovid, Fast?, iv. 461-466, upon 
which Gierig remarks, ‘‘ Sues melius 3 Pausanias, 1. 14. 3. 


Legend 
told to ex- 
plain the 
ritual of 
the Thes- 
mophoria, 


Analogy of 
the Thes- 
mophoria 
to the folk- 
customs of 
Northern 
Europe. 


20 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS  ‘CHAF: 


the women appear to have eaten swine’s flesh. The meal, 
if I am right, must have been a solemn sacrament or com- 
munion, the worshippers partaking of the body of the god. 
As thus explained, the Thesmophoria has its analogies 
in the folk-customs of Northern Europe which have been 
already described. Just as at the Thesmophoria—an autumn 
festival in honour of the corn-goddess—swine’s flesh was 
partly eaten, partly kept in caverns till the following year, 
when it was taken up to be sown with the seed-corn in the 
fields for the purpose of securing a good crop; so in the 
neighbourhood of Grenoble the goat killed on the harvest- 
field is partly eaten at the harvest-supper, partly pickled 
and kept till the next harvest ;” so at Pouilly the ox killed 
on the harvest-field is partly eaten by the harvesters, partly 
pickled and kept till the first day of sowing in spring,? 
probably to be then mixed with the seed, or eaten by the 
ploughmen, or both; so at Udvarhely the feathers of the 
cock which is killed in the last sheaf at harvest are kept 
till spring, and then sown with the seed on the field ;* so in 
Hesse and Meiningen the flesh of pigs is eaten on Ash 
Wednesday or Candlemas, and the bones are kept till 
sowing-time, when they are put into the field sown or mixed 
with the seed in the bag ;° so, lastly, the corn from the last 
sheaf is kept till Christmas, made into the Yule Boar, and 
afterwards broken and mixed with the seed-corn at sowing 
in spring.® Thus, to put it generally, the corn-spirit is 
killed in animal form in autumn; part of his flesh is eaten 
as a sacrament by his worshippers; and part of it is kept 
till next sowing-time or harvest as a pledge and security for 
the continuance or renewal of the corn-spirit’s energies. 
Whether in the interval between autumn and spring he is 
conceived as dead, or whether, like the ox in the douphonia, 
he is supposed to come to life again immediately after being 
killed, is not clear. At the Thesmophoria, according to 
Clement and Pausanias, as emended by Lobeck,’ the pigs 


1 Scholiast on Aristophanes, /7ogs, 6 Above, vol. i. pp. 300 sq. 
338. 7 In Clement of Alexandria, Pro- 
2 Above, vol. i. p. 285. trept. ii. 17, for weyaplfovres xolpous 
SD Nhare, aah © let €xBadovce Relbe (Aslacphamus, p- 
; ; : 831) would read peydpous (Ovras Xolpous 
Above, vol. i. p. 278. €uBdaddovor. For his emendation of 
5 Above, vol. i. p. 300. Pausanias, see above, p. 18 note!. 


IX DEMETER, THE PIG AND THE. HORSE 21 


were thrown in alive, and were supposed to reappear at the 
festival of the following year. Here, therefore, if we accept 
Lobeck’s emendations, the corn-spirit is conceived as alive 
throughout the year ; he lives and works under ground, but 
is brought up each autumn to be renewed and then replaced 
in his subterranean abode.’ 

If persons of fastidious taste should object that the Greeks 
never could have conceived Demeter and Persephone to be 
embodied in the form of pigs, it may be answered that in the 
cave of Phigalia in Arcadia the Black Demeter was portrayed 
with the head and mane of a horse on the body of a woman.” 
Between the portrait of a goddess as a pig, and the portrait of 
her as a woman with a horse’s head, there is little to choose 
in respect of barbarism. The legend told of the Phigalian 
Demeter indicates that the horse was one of the animal 
forms assumed in ancient Greece, as in modern Europe,’ by 
the corn-spirit. It was said that in her search for her 
daughter, Demeter assumed the form of a mare to escape 
the addresses of Poseidon, and that, offended at his impor- 
tunity, she withdrew in dudgeon to a cave not far from 
Phigalia in the highlands of Western Arcadia. The very 
cavern, now turned into a little Christian chapel with its 
holy pictures, is still shewn to the curious traveller far down 
the side of that profound ravine through which the brawling 
Neda winds under overhanging woods to the sea. There, 
robed in black, she tarried so long that the fruits of the earth 
were perishing, and mankind would have died of famine if 
Pan had not soothed the angry goddess and persuaded her to 
quit the cave. In memory of this event, the Phigalians set 
up an image of the Black Demeter in the cave ; it represented 
a woman dressed in a long robe, with the head and mane of 
a horse. The Black Demeter, in whose absence the fruits 


At 


1 It is worth nothing that in Crete, 
which was an ancient seat of Demeter 
worship (see above, vol. i. p. 131), the 
pig was esteemed very sacred and was 
not eaten (Athenaeus, ix. 18, pp. 375 
F-376 A). This would not exclude the 
possibility of its being eaten sacrament- 
ally, as at the Thesmophoria. 

2 Pausanias, viii. 42. 

3 Above, vol. i. pp. 292 sg. 


4 Pausanias, viii. 25 and 42. 
the sanctuary of the Mistress (that is, 
of Persephone) in Arcadia many terra- 
cotta statuettes have been found which 
represent draped women with the heads 
of cows or sheep. They are probably 
votiveimagesof Demeter or Persephone, 
for the ritual of the sanctuary prescribed 
the offering of images (Dittenberger, 
Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum,* No. 


The horse- 
headed 
Demeter of 
Phigalia. 


Attis and 
the pig. 


Adonis and 
the boar. 


22 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


of the earth perish, is plainly a mythical expression for the 
bare wintry earth stripped of its summer mantle of green. | 


§ 3. Attis, Adonis, and the Pig 


Passing now to Attis and Adonis, we may note a few 
facts which seem to shew that these deities of vegetation 
had also, like other deities of the same class, their animal 
embodiments. The worshippers of Attis abstained from 
eating the flesh of swine.’ This appears to indicate that the 
pig was regarded as an embodiment of Attis. And the 
legend that Attis was killed by a boar” points in the same . 
direction. For after the examples of the goat Dionysus and 
the pig Demeter it may almost be laid down as a rule that 
an animal which is said to have injured a god was originally 
the god himself. Perhaps the cry of “Hyes Attes! Hyes 
Attes!”°® which was raised by the worshippers of Attis, may 
be neither more nor less than “ Pig Attis! Pig Attis !”—yes 


being possibly a Phrygian form of the Greek “ys, “a pig. 


v4 


In regard to Adonis, his connexion with the boar was 
not always explained by the story that he had been killed by 


the animal.° 


According to another story, a boar rent with his 


tusk the bark of the tree in which the infant Adonis was 


born.® 


939, vol. iil. pp. 803 sg.). See P. 
Perdrizet, ‘“‘ Terres-cuites de Lycosoura, 
et mythologie arcadienne,” Bulletin de 
Correspondance Hellénigue, xxiii. (1899) 
p- 635; M. P. Nilsson, Gréechische Feste 
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 347 sg. On the 
Phigalian Demeter, see W. Mannhardt, 
Mythologische Forschungen, pp. 244 5qq. 
I well remember how on a summer 
afternoon I sat at the mouth of the 
shallow cave, watching the play of 
sunshine on the lofty wooded sides of 
the ravine and listening to the murmur 
of the stream. 

1 See Adonis, Attis, Ostris, Second 
Edition, p. 221. On the position of 
the pig in ancient Oriental and par- 
ticularly Semitic religion, see F. C. 
Movers, Dée Phoenizier,i. (Bonn, 1841), 
pp. 218 sgg. 

2 Adonis, Attis, 
Edition, p. 220. 

3 Demosthenes, De corona, p. 313. 


Ostris, Second 


According to yet another story, he perished at the 


* The suggestion was made to me in 
conversation by my lamented friend, the 
late R. A, Neil of Pembroke College, 
Cambridge. 

5 See Adonis, Attis, Ostris, Second 
Edition, p. 8; and to the authorities 
there cited add Athenaeus, ii. 80, p. 
69 B; Cornutus, Zheologiae Graecae 
Compendium, 28; Plutarch, Quzaest. 
Conviv. iv. 5. 3, § 8; Aristides, AZo- 
logia, 11, p. 107, ed. J. Rendel Harris 
(Cambridge, 1891); Joannes Lydus, 
De mensibus, iv. 443 Propertius, 
ili, 4° (5). 53 5g. ed. F. A. Paley s 
Lactantius, Dzvim. Jmstit. i. 17; 
Augustine, De czvitate Det, vi. 7; 
Firmicus Maternus, De errore pro- 
fanarum religionum, 93; Macrobius, 
Saturnal, i. 21. 4. See further W. W. 
Graf Baudissin, Adonis und Esmun 
(Leipsic, 1911), pp. 142 sgq. 

6 See Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Second 
Edition, p. 186. 


Ix ATTIS, ADONIS, AND*®THE PIG 23 


hands of Hephaestus on Mount Lebanon while he was hunting 
wild boars.’ These variations in the legend serve to shew 
that, while the connexion of the boar with Adonis was 
certain, the reason of the connexion was not understood, 
and that consequently different stories were devised to 
explain it. Certainly the pig ranked as a sacred animal 
among the Syrians. At the great religious metropolis of 
Hierapolis on the Euphrates pigs were neither sacrificed nor 
eaten, and if a man touched a pig he was unclean for the rest 
of the day. Some people said this was because the pigs were 
unclean ; others said it was because the pigs were sacred. 
This difference of opinion points to a hazy state of religious 
thought in which the ideas of sanctity and uncleanness are 
not yet sharply distinguished, both being blent in a sort of 
vaporous solution to which we give the name of taboo. It 
is quite consistent with this that the pig should have been 
held to be an embodiment of the divine Adonis, and the 
analogies of Dionysus and Demeter make it probable that 
the story of the hostility of the animal to the god was 
only a late misapprehension of the old view of the god as 
embodied in a pig. The rule that pigs were not sacrificed 
or eaten by worshippers of Attis and presumably of Adonis, 
does not exclude the possibility that in these rituals the 
pig was slain on solemn occasions as a representative of 
the god and consumed sacramentally by the worshippers. 
Indeed, the sacramental killing and eating of an animal 
implies that the animal is sacred, and that, as a general 
rule, it is spared.® 

The attitude of the Jews to the pig was as ambiguous as 
that of the heathen Syrians towards the same animal. The 
Greeks could not decide whether the Jews worshipped swine 
or abominated them.* On the one hand they might not eat 
swine; but on the other hand they might not kill them. 
And if the former rule speaks for the uncleanness, the latter 


1 W. Cureton, Spicélegim Syriacum Robertson Smith conjectured that the 
(London, 1855), p. 44. wild boars annually sacrificed in Cyprus 
2 Lucian, De dea Syria, 54. on 2nd April (Joannes Lydus, De me7- 
3 The heathen Harranians sacrificed sdbws, iv. 45) represented Adonis him- 
swine once a year and ate the flesh_ self. See his Religion of the Semites,? 
(En-Nedim, in D. Chwolsohn’s Dze pp. 290 sg., 411. 
Ssabier und der Ssabismus, St. Peters- 
burg, 1856, ii. 42). My friend W. 4 Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. iv. 5. 


Ambiguous 
position of 
pigs at Hi- 
erapolis. 


Attitude of 
the Jews to 
the pig. 


Attitude of 
the ancient 
Egyptians 
to the pig. 


24 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS  cuar. 


speaks still more strongly for the sanctity of the animal. 
For whereas both rules may, and one rule must, be explained 
on the supposition that the pig was sacred; neither rule 
must, and one rule cannot, be explained on the supposition 
that the pig was unclean. If, therefore, we prefer the 
former supposition, we must conclude that, originally at 
least, the pig was revered rather than abhorred by the 
Israelites. We are confirmed in this opinion by observing 
that down to the time of Isaiah some of the Jews used to 
meet secretly in gardens to eat the flesh of swine and mice 
as a religious rite.’ Doubtless this was a very ancient cere- 
mony, dating from a time when both the pig and the mouse 
were venerated as divine, and when their flesh was partaken 
of sacramentally on rare and solemn occasions as the body 
and blood of gods. And in general it may be said that all 
so-called unclean animals were originally sacred ; the reason 
for not eating them was that they were divine. 


§ 4. Ostris, the Pig and the Bull 


In ancient Egypt, within historical times, the pig 
occupied the same dubious position as in Syria and 
Palestine, though at first sight its uncleanness is more 
prominent than its sanctity. The Egyptians are generally 
said by Greek writers to have abhorred the pig as a foul and 
loathsome animal.” If a man so much as touched a pig in 
passing, he stepped into the river with all his clothes on, to 
wash off the taint.2 To drink pig’s milk was believed to 
cause leprosy to the drinker.* Swineherds, though natives 
of Egypt, were forbidden to enter any temple, and they were 
the only men who were thus excluded. No one would give 
his daughter in marriage to a swineherd, or marry a swine- 
herd’s daughter ; the swineherds married among themselves.” 


1 Tsaiah Ixv. 3, Ixvi. 3,17. Com- see below, pp. 282 sg. 


pare R. H. Kennett, Zhe Composztion 
of the Book of Lsatah in the Light 
of History and Archaeology (London, 
1910) p. 61, who suggests that the 
eating of the mouse as a sacrament 
may have been derived from the Greek 
worship of the Mouse Apollo (Apollo 
Sniintheus). As to the Mouse Apollo 


2 Herodotus, ii. 47; Plutarch, Zszs 
et Ostris, 8; Aelian, Wat. Anim. x. 
16. Josephus merely says that the 
Egyptian priests abstained from the 
flesh of swine (Contra Apionem, ii. 13). 

3 Herodotus, /.c. 

4 Plutarch and Aelian, Z/.cc. 

5 Herodotus, 7c. At Castabus in 


IX OSTRUIS, THE PIG ANDTHE BULL 25 


Yet once a year the Egyptians sacrificed pigs to the moon 
and to Osiris, and not only sacrificed them, but ate of their 
flesh, though on any other day of the year they would 
neither sacrifice them nor taste of their flesh. Those who 
were too poor to offer a pig on this day baked cakes of 
dough, and offered them instead" This can hardly be 
explained except by the supposition that the pig was a 
sacred animal which was eaten sacramentally by his 
worshippers once a year. 

The view that in Egypt the pig was sacred is borne 
out by the very facts which, to moderns, might seem to 
prove the contrary. Thus the Egyptians thought, as 
we have seen, that to drink pig’s milk produced leprosy. 
But exactly analogous views are held by savages about 
the animals and plants which they deem most sacred. 
Thus in the island of Wetar (between New Guinea and 
Celebes) people believe themselves to be variously descended 
from wild pigs, serpents, crocodiles, turtles, dogs, and eels ; a 
man may not eat an animal of the kind from which he is 
descended ; if he does so, he will become a leper, and go 
mad.” Amongst the Omaha Indians of North America men 
whose totem is the elk, believe that if they ate the flesh 
of the male elk they would break out in boils and white 
spots in different parts of their bodies.* In the same 
tribe men whose totem is the red maize, think that if 
they ate red maize they would have running sores all round 


Chersonese there was a sacred precinct cual 5 G. F. Riedel, De siuik- en 


of Hemithea, which no one might 
approach who had touched or eaten of 
a pig (Diodorus Siculus, v. 62. 5). 

1 Herodotus, ii. 47 sg. ; Aelian and 
Plutarch, //.cc. Herodotus distinguishes 
the sacrifice to the moon from that to 
Osiris. According to him, at the 
sacrifice to the moon, the extremity of 
the pig’s tail, together with the spleen 
and the caul, was covered with fat 
and burned ; the rest of the flesh was 
eaten. On the evening (not the eve, 
see H. Stein’s note on the passage) of 
the festival the sacrifice to Osiris took 
place. Each man slew a pig before 
his door, then gave it to the swineherd, 
from whom he had bought it, to take 
away. 


kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 
Papua (The Hague, 1886), pp. 432, 
452. 


3 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha 
Sociology,” Zhzrd Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1884), p. 225; Miss A. C. Fletcher 
and F. la Flesche, ‘‘The Omaha 
Tribe,” Zwenty-seventh Annual Re- 
port of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology (Washington, 1911), p. 144. 
According to the latter writers, any 
breach of a clan taboo among the 
Omahas was supposed to be punished 
either by the breaking out of sores 
or white spots on the body of the 
offender or by his hair turning white. 


Annual 
sacrifice of 
pigs to 
Osiris and 
the moon. 


Belief that 
the eating 
of a sacred 
animal 
causes skin- 
disease, 
especially 
leprosy. 


DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS  CHapP. 


26 


their mouths.’ The Bush negroes of Surinam, who practise 
totemism, believe that if they ate the cafzaz (an animal like 
a pig) it would give them leprosy ;* perhaps the capzai 
is one of their totems. The Syrians, in antiquity, who 
esteemed fish sacred, thought that if they ate fish their 
bodies would break out in ulcers, and their feet and 
stomach would swell up. The Nyanja-speaking tribes of 
Central Angoniland, in British Central Africa, believe that if 
a person eats his totemic animal, his body will break out in 
spots. The cure for this eruption of the skin is to bathe the 
body in a decoction made from the bone of the animal, the 
eating of which caused the malady. The Wagogo of 
German East Africa imagine that the sin of eating the 
totemic animal is visited not on the sinner himself but on 
his innocent kinsfolk. Thus when they see a child with a 
scald head, they say at once that its father has been eating 
his totem and that is why the poor child has scabs on its 
pate.” Among the Wahehe, another tribe of German East 
Africa, a man who suffers from scab or other skin disease 
will often set the trouble down to his having unwittingly 
partaken of his totemic animal.° Similarly among the 
Waheia, another tribe of the same region, if a man kills or 
eats the totemic animal of his clan, he is supposed to suffer 
from an eruption of the skin.” In like manner the Bantu 
tribes of Kavirondo, in Central Africa, hold that the eating 
of the totem produces a severe cutaneous eruption, which 
can however be cured by mixing an extract of certain 
herbs with the fat of a black ox and rubbing the body of the 
sufferer all over with the mixture.2 The Chasas of Orissa 
believe that if they were to injure their totemic animal, they 


1 Rey. J. Owen Dorsey, of. cét. 
p23t- 

2 J. Crevaux, Voyages dans [Amé- 
rigue du Sud (Paris, 1883), p. 59. 

3 Plutarch, De superstitione, 10; 
Porphyry, De adstinentia, iv. 15. As 
to the sanctity of fish among the 
Syrians, see also Ovid, Fastz, ii. 473 59.3 
Diodorus Siculus, ii. 4. 

4 R. Sutherland Rattray, Some Folk- 
lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja 
(London, 1907), pp. 174 sq. 

5 Rev. H. Cole, ‘‘ Notes on the 


Wagogo of German East Africa,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
Xxxil. (1902) p. 307, compare p. 317. 

6 E. Nigmann, Die Wahche (Berlin, 
1908), p. 42. 

7 J. Kohler, ‘‘Das Banturecht in 
Ostafrika,” Zedtschrift fir vergleichende 
Rechtswissenschaft, xv. (1902) pp. 2, 


3. 

8 C. W. Hobley, ‘‘ Anthropological 
Studies in Kavirondo and Nandi,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 


XXxill. (1903) p. 347. 


IX OSTRIS, THE PIG AND THE BULL 27 


would be attacked by leprosy and their line would die out.' 
These examples prove that the eating of a sacred animal 
is often believed to produce leprosy or other skin-diseases ; 
so far, therefore, they support the view that the pig must 
have been sacred in Egypt, since the effect of drinking its 
milk was believed to be leprosy. Such fancies may perhaps 
have been sometimes suggested by the observation that the 
eating of semi-putrid flesh, to which some savages are 
addicted, is apt to be followed by eruptions on the skin. 
Indeed, many modern authorities attribute leprosy to this 
cause, particularly to the eating of half rotten fish.” It 
seems not impossible that the abhorrence which the Hebrews 
entertained of leprosy, and the pains which they took to 
seclude lepers from the community, may have been based on 
religious as well as on purely sanitary grounds; they may 
have imagined that the disfigurement of the sufferers was a 
penalty which they had incurred by some infraction of 
taboo. Certainly we read in the Old Testament of cases of 
leprosy which the historian regarded as the direct conse- 
quence of sin.® 

Again, the rule that, after touching a pig, a man had to 
wash himself and his clothes, also favours the view of the 
sanctity of the pig. For it is a common belief that the 
effect of contact with a sacred object must be removed, by 
washing or otherwise, before a man is free to mingle with 
his fellows. Thus the Jews wash their hands after reading 
the sacred scriptures. Before coming forth from the taber- 
nacle after the sin-offering, the high priest had to wash 
himself, and put off the garments which he had worn in the 
holy place* It was a rule of Greek ritual that, in offering 
an expiatory sacrifice, the sacrificer should not touch the 
sacrifice, and that, after the offering was made, he must wash 
his body and his clothes in a river or spring before he could 


enter a city or his own house.° 


1 Central Provinces, Ethnographic 
Survey, Il. Draft Articles on Uriya 
Castes (Allahabad, 1907), p. 16. 

2C. Creighton, s.v. ‘* Leprosy,” 
Encyclopaedia Biblica, iii. col. 2766. 

32 Kings v. 27; 2 Chronicles 
XxVi. 16-21. 


The Parjas, a small tribe of 


4 Leviticus xvi. 23 sg. 


5 Porphyry, De adstinentia, il. 44. 
For thisand the Jewish examples I am 
indebted to my friend W. Robertson 
Smith. Compare his Religzon of the 
Semites,* pp. 351, 426, 450 sg. 


Mere con- 
tact with 
a sacred 
object is 
deemed 
dangerous 
and calls 
for purifica- 
tion asa 
sort of dis- 
infectant. 


28 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS  CuHap. 


the Central Provinces in India, are divided into clans which 
have for their respective totems the tiger, the tortoise, the 
goat, a big lizard, a dove, and so on. If a man accidentally 
kills his totemic animal, “the earthen cooking-pots of his 
household are thrown away, the clothes are washed, and the 
house is purified with water in which the bark of the mango 
or jamun tree (Eugenia jambolana) has been steeped. This 
is in sign of mourning, as it is thought that such an act 
will bring misfortune.”’ If a Chadwar of the Central 
Provinces who has the pig for his totem should even see a 
pig killed by somebody else, he will throw away the house- 
hold crockery and clean the house as if on the death of 
a member of his family.” The Polynesians felt strongly 
the need of ridding themselves of the sacred contagion, if it 
may be so called, which they caught by touching sacred 
objects. Various ceremonies were performed for the purpose 
of removing this contagion. We have seen, for example, 
how in Tonga a man who happened to touch a sacred chief, 
or anything personally belonging to him, had to perform a 
certain ceremony before he could feed himself with his 
hands; otherwise it was believed that he would swell up 
and die, or at least be afflicted with scrofula or some other 
disease. We have seen, too, what fatal effects are supposed 
to follow, and do actually follow, from contact with a sacred 
object in New Zealand.* In short, primitive man believes 
that what is sacred is dangerous; it is pervaded bya sort of 
electrical sanctity which communicates a shock to, even if it 
does not kill, whatever comes in contact with it. Hence 


the savage is unwilling to touch or even to see that which | 


he deems peculiarly holy. Thus Bechuanas, of the Croco- 
dile clan, think it “hateful and unlucky” to meet or see a 
crocodile; the sight is thought to cause inflammation of the 
eyes. Yet the crocodile is their most sacred object; they 
call it their father, swear by it, and celebrate it in their 
festivals. The goat is the sacred animal of the Madenassana 


1 Central Provinces, Ethnographic 3 See Zaboo and the Perils of the 
Survey, VII. Draft Articles on Forest Soul, pp. 133 sq. 
Tribes (Allahabad, 1911), p. 97. 4 Op. cét. pp. 134-136. 

2 Central Provinces, Ethnographic 5 E. Casalis, Ze Basutos (London, 


Survey, I. Draft Articles on Hindu- 1861), p. 211; D. Livingstone, J7/zs- 
stant Castes (Allahabad, 1907), p. 32.  stonary Travels and Researches in South 


: 
1 


IX OSIRIS, THE PIG: AND THE BULL 


29 


Bushmen ; yet “to look upon it would be to render the man 
for the time impure, as well as to cause him undefined un- 
easiness.” The Elk clan, among the Omaha Indians, 
believe that even to touch the male elk would be followed 
by an eruption of boils and white spots on the body.” 
Members of the Reptile clan in the same tribe think that if 
one of them touches or smells a snake, it will make his hair 
white.2 In Samoa people whose god was a butterfly be- 
lieved that if they caught a butterfly it would strike them 
dead.* Again, in Samoa the reddish-seared leaves of the 
banana-tree were commonly used as plates for handing food ; 
but if any member of the Wild Pigeon family had used 
banana leaves for this purpose, it was supposed that he would 
suffer from rheumatic swellings or an eruption all over the 
body like chicken-pox.’ The Mori clan of the Bhils in 
Central India worship the peacock as their totem and make 
offerings of grain to it; yet members of the clan believe that 
were they even to set foot on the tracks of a peacock they 
would afterwards suffer from some disease, and if a woman 
sees a peacock she must veil her face and look away. Thus 
the primitive mind seems to conceive of holiness as a sort of 
dangerous virus, which a prudent man will shun as far as 
possible, and of which, if he should chance to be infected 
by it, he will carefully disinfect himself by some form of 
ceremonial purification. 

In the light of these parallels the beliefs and customs of 
the Egyptians touching the pig are probably to be explained 
as based upon an opinion of the extreme sanctity rather 
than of the extreme uncleanness of the animal; or rather, to 
put it more correctly, they imply that the animal was looked 
on, not simply as a filthy and disgusting creature, but as a 
being endowed with high supernatural powers, and that as 


Africa (London, 1857), p. 255; John SB b7a. pa27,5s 

Mackenzie, Ze Years north of the 4 G. Turner, Samoa (London, 1884), 
Orange River (Edinburgh, 1871), p.  p. 76. 

135 note. See further Zofemzsm and D> MiTits {> F/O 


Exogamy, ii. 372. 

1 J. Mackenzie, /.c. 

2 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha 
Sociology,” Third Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1884), p. 225. 


6 Captain C. Eckford Luard,in Cezesus 
of India, rgor, vol. xix. Central India, 
Part 1. (Lucknow, 1902) pp. 299 sg. ; 
also Census of India, rgor, vol. i. 
Ethnographic Appendices (Calcutta, 
1903), p. 163. 


Thus the 
pig was 
probably 
at first a 
sacred ani- 
mal with 
the Egyp- 
tians, and 
may have 
been re- 


garded as 
an embodi- 
ment of the 
corn-god 
Osiris, 
though at 
a later time 
he was 
looked on 
as an em- 
bodiment 
of Typhon, 
the enemy 
of Osiris. 


30 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


such it was regarded with that primitive sentiment of 
religious awe and fear in which the feelings of reverence and 
abhorrence are almost equally blended. The ancients them- 
selves seem to have been aware that there was another side 
to the horror with which swine seemed to inspire the 
Egyptians. For the Greek astronomer and mathematician 
Eudoxus, who resided fourteen months in Egypt and con- 
versed with the priests,’ was of opinion that the Egyptians 
spared the pig, not out of abhorrence, but from a regard to 
its utility in agriculture; for, according to him, when the 
Nile had subsided, herds of swine were turned loose over the 
fields to tread the seed down into the moist earth. But 
when a being is thus the object of mixed and implicitly con- 
tradictory feelings, he may be said to occupy a position of 
unstable equilibrium. In course of time one of the con- 
tradictory feelings is likely to prevail over the other, and 
according as the feeling which finally predominates is that 
of reverence or abhorrence, the being who is the object of it 
will rise into a god or sink into a devil. The latter, on the 
whole, was the fate of the pig in Egypt. For in historical 
times the fear and horror of the pig seem certainly to have 
outweighed the reverence and worship of which he may 
once have been the object, and of which, even in his fallen 
state, he never quite lost trace. He came to be looked on 
as an embodiment of Set or Typhon, the Egyptian devil 
and enemy of Osiris. For it was in the shape of a black pig 
that Typhon injured the eye of the god Horus, who burned 
him and instituted the sacrifice of the pig, the sun-god Ra 
having declared the beast abominable. Again, the story 
that Typhon was hunting a boar when he discovered and 
mangled the body of Osiris, and that this was the reason why 
pigs were sacrificed once a year,’ is clearly a modernised version 
of an older story that Osiris, like Adonis and Attis, was slain 


1 Diogenes Laertius, Vztae Philoso- 
phorum, viii, 8. 

2 Aelian, Wat. Anim. x. 16. The 
story is repeated by Pliny, Wat. Ast. 
xvili. 168. 

3 E. Lefébure, Ze AZythe Osirien, 
Premiére Partie, Zes yeux ad Horus 
(Paris, 1874), p. 44; Zhe Book of the 
Dead, English translation by E. A. 


Wallis Budge (London, 1901), ii. 336 
sg., chapter cxii. ; E. A. Wallis Budge, 
The Gods of the Egyptians (London, 
1904), 1. 496 sg. 3 za., Ostrts and the 
Lgyptian Resurrection (London and 
New York, 1911), i. 62 sg. 

4 Plutarch, /szs e¢ Ostris, 8. E. Lefé- 
bure (of. cz¢. p. 46) recognises that in 
this story the boar is Typhon himself. 


IX OSIRIS, THE PIG AND PE BULL 31 


_or mangled by a boar, or by Typhon in the form of a boar. 
_ Thus, the annual sacrifice of a pig to Osiris might naturally 
| be interpreted as vengeance inflicted on the hostile animal that 
_had slain or mangled the god. But, in the first place, when 
an animal is thus killed as a solemn sacrifice once and once 
_ only in the year, it generally or always means that the animal 
is divine, that he isspared and respected the rest of the year 
as a god and slain, when he is slain, also in the character of 
a god.’ In the second place, the examples of Dionysus and 
Demeter, if not of Attis and Adonis, have taught us that the 
animal which is sacrificed to a god on the ground that he is 
the god’s enemy may have been, and probably was, originally 
the god himself. Therefore, the annual sacrifice of a pig to 
Osiris, coupled with the alleged hostility of the animal to the 
god, tends to shew, first, that originally the pig was a god, 
and, second, that he was Osiris. Ata later age, when Osiris 
became anthropomorphic and his original relation to the 
pig had been forgotten, the animal was first distinguished 
from him, and afterwards opposed as an enemy to him by 
mythologists who could think of no reason for killing a 
beast in connexion with the worship of a god except that 
the beast was the god’s enemy ; or, as Plutarch puts it, not 
that which is dear to the gods, but that which is the con- 
trary, is fit to be sacrificed.” At this later stage the havoc 
which a wild boar notoriously makes amongst the corn would 
supply a plausible reason for regarding him as the foe 
of the corn-spirit, though originally, if Iam right, the very 
freedom with which the boar ranged at will through the 
corn led people to identify him with the corn-spirit, to 
whom he was afterwards opposed as an enemy. 

As the depredations committed by wild swine on the 
growing crops in countries where these creatures abound are 
necessarily unfamiliar to most English readers, it may be 
well to illustrate them by examples. Thus, for instance, 
in Palestine the wild boar “is eagerly chased and destroyed 
on account of the frightful ravages it makes among the 


1 This important principle was first 137 sg. Compare his Religion of the 
recognised by W. Robertson Smith.  Semztes,? pp. 373, 410 sg. 
See his article, ‘‘ Sacrifice,” Aycyclo- 
paedia Britannica, Ninth Edition, xxi. 2 Plutarch, 7szs e¢ Oszvzs, 31. 


The havoc 
wrought by 
wild boars 
in the corn 
is a reason 
for regard- 
ing them as 
foes of the 
corn-god. 


Evidence of 
the depre- 
dations 
committed 
by wild 
boars on 
the crops. 


32 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. | 


crops. Not only does it devour any fruits within reach, | 
but in a single night a party of wild boars will uproot a | 
whole field, and destroy the husbandman’s hopes for the 


year. The places they love to frequent are the reedy 


marshes and thickets by rivers and lakes, and they swarm 


in the thickets all along the banks of the Jordan from 


Jericho to the Lake of Gennesaret. From these fastnesses, 
whence neither dog nor man can dislodge them, they make | 
nightly forays upon the corn-fields and root-crops of the | 


villagers, returning at daybreak to their coverts. About 
Jericho they are especially destructive, and when the barley 


crop is ripening, the husbandmen have to keep nightly watch | 
to drive them away. Their presence can always be detected | 
by the crashing noise they make in forcing their way through | 


the thickets, when the men fire, guided by the sound.” * 
Wild pigs are the special enemies of the crops in South 


Africa; the fences constructed by the Zulus round their | 


gardens are mainly designed to guard against the devastat- 


ing depredations of these brutes, though porcupines, baboons, | 


hippopotamuses, and elephants also make havoc of the ripe 
grain. Sometimes small huts are erected on platforms in 
the gardens, and in these huts watchers are set to scare away 
the nocturnal invaders.” Soin British Central Africa sentinels 
are posted day and night in huts raised on platforms to protect 
the maize fields from the inroads of baboons and of wild pigs, 
which are still more destructive than the baboons, for they 


erub up the plants as well as devour the grain; and the | 


watchers drum continually on any metal they have at hand 
to keep the marauders at bay.’ In the island of Nias whole 
fields are sometimes trampled down by these pests between 
sunset and sunrise. Often the stillness of the serene equa- 
torial night is broken by the strident cries of the watchers 
of the fields; the sound goes echoing through the wooded 
valleys for a long time, and here and there a dull grunting 
tells that the efforts of the sentinels have not been in vain.* 


1H. B. Tristram, Zhe Natural 3 Miss A. Werner, Zhe Watives of 
History of the Bible, Ninth Edition S72tish Central Africa (Londgn, 1906), 


(London, 1898), pp. 54 sg. pp. 182 sg. 
2 Rev. J. Shooter, Zhe Kajirs of 
Natal and the Zulu Country (London, 4 E. Modigliano, Uz Viaggio a Nias 


1857), pp. 18-20. (Milan, 1890), pp. 524 sg., 601. 


1x OSIFIS, THE PIG AND PHE BULL 33 


Je 


In Northern Luzon, of the Philippine Archipelago, the rice- 
fields are similarly exposed to the depredations of wild 
hogs, and watchers remain on guard day and night in out- 
looks, sometimes in commodious structures of stone erected 
for the purpose, who burn fires at night to frighten the 
animals away.’ At the beginning of their annual agricul- 
tural labours the Banars of Cambodia pray to Yang-Seri that 
he would be pleased to give them plenty of rice and to pre- 
vent the wild boars from eating it up.2. In Gayo-land, a 
district of Sumatra, the worst enemies of the rice crops are 
wild swine and field mice ; the whole of the harvest is some- 
times destroyed by their inroads.® Among the Kai of 
German New Guinea people who are engaged in the labour 
of the fields will on no account eat pork. The reason is 
that pigs, both wild and tame, are the most dangerous foes 
of the crops; therefore it seems clear to the mind of the 
Kai that if a field labourer were to eat pork, the flesh of the 
dead pig in his stomach would attract the living pigs into 
the field.‘ Perhaps this superstition, based on the principle 
of sympathetic magic, may explain the aversion to pork 
which was entertained by some of the agricultural peoples 
of the Eastern Mediterranean in antiquity. 

To people thus familiarised with the ravages of wild boars 
among the ripe crops the idea might naturally present itself 
| that the animal is either the enemy of the corn-god or per- 
_ haps the corn-god himself come in person to enjoy his own 
despite all the efforts of mankind to keep him out of his 

tights. Hence we can understand how an agricultural 
| people like the ancient Egyptians may have identified 
_ the wild boar either with their corn-god Osiris or with his 
enemy Typhon. The view which identifies the pig with 
; Osiris derives not a little support from the sacrifice of 
pigs to him on the very day on which, according to 
tradition, Osiris himself was killed;° for thus the killing 


1A. E. Jenks, Zhe Bontoc Leorot, 
(Manilla, 1905), pp. 100, 102. 

2 A. Bastian, ‘‘ Beitréige zur Kennt- 
niss der Gebirgs-stémme in Kambodia,” 
Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft fiir Erdkunde 
2u Berlin, i. (1866) p. 44. 

3 G. Snouck Hurgronje, Het Gajoland 
en zine Bewoners (Batavia, 1903), p. 


Biv. VOL. II 


348. 

4 Ch. Keysser, ‘‘Aus dem Leben 
der Kaileute,” in R. Neuhauss, Deztsch 
Neu-Guinea (Berlin, 1911), p. 125. 

5 —, Lefébure, Le ALythe Oszrien, 
Premiére Partie, Les yeux ad Horus 
(Paris, 1874), pp. 48 5¢. 

D 


The 
ravages of 
wild boars 
among the 
crops help 
us to under- 
stand the 
ambiguous 
attitude of 
the ancient 
Egyptians 
to swine. 


34 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


i 


of the pig was the annual representation of the killing of 
Osiris, just as the throwing of the pigs into the caverns at the | 
Thesmophoria was an annual representation of the descent of | 
Persephone into the lower world; and both customs are | 
parallel to the European practice of killing a goat, cock, and | 
so forth, at harvest as a representative of the corn-spirit. | 
Again, the theory that the pig, originally Osiris himself, | 
afterwards came to be regarded as an embodiment of his | 
enemy Typhon, is supported by the similar relation of red- | 
haired men and red oxen to Typhon. For in regard to the 
red-haired men who were burned and whose ashes were 
scattered with winnowing-fans, we have seen fair grounds for 
believing that originally, like the red-haired puppies killed 
at Kome in spring, they were representatives of the corn- 
spirit himself, that is, of Osiris, and were slain for the express 
purpose of making the corn turn red or golden.’ Yet at 
a later time these men were explained to be representatives, 
not of Osiris, but of his enemy Typhon,’ and the killing of | 
them was regarded as an act of vengeance inflicted on the — 
enemy of the god. Similarly, the red oxen sacrificed by the _ 
Egyptians were said to be offered on the ground of their 
resemblance to Typhon;* though it is more likely that | 
originally they were slain on the ground of their resemblance 
to the corn-spirit Osiris. We have seen that the ox is a _ 
common representative of the corn-spirit and is slain as such © 
on the harvest-field. | 


Egyptian 
sacrifices of 
red oxen 
and red- 
haired men, 


Osiris iden- Osiris was regularly identified with the bull Apis of | 
hed wit Memphis and the bull Mnevis of Heliopolis.‘ But it is hard | 
bulls Apis ; a : | 
and Mnevis. 1! See above, pp. 260 sg.; Adonis, Solinus, xxxii. 17-21; Cicero, De nma-— 


Attis, Ostris, Second Edition, pp. 331, 
338. 

2 Plutarch, Jszs et Oserts, 33, 733 
Diodorus Siculus, i. 88. 

3 Plutarch, Zszs e¢ Oszrts, 31; Dio- 
dorus Siculus, i. 88. Compare Hero- 
dotus, ii. 38. 

4 Plutarch, JZszs et Oszris, 20, 29, 
33, 433 Strabo, xvii. 1. 31; Diodorus 
Siculus, i. 21, 85 ; Duncker, Geschichte 
des Alterthums,® i. 55 sgg- On Apis 
and Mnevis, see also Herodotus, ii. 153, 
with A. Wiedemann’s comment, iil, 27 
sg. ; Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii. 14. 
7; Pliny, Mat. Hist. viii. 184 sgq. ; 


tura deorum, i. 29; Augustine, De czvi- 
tate Dei, xviil. 5; Aelian, Vat. Anim. 
xl. 10 sg.3 Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. 
viii. 1. 35 2d., Lszs et Osz77sueeeciae 
Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangeltz, iii. 
13. I sg. ; Pausanias, i. 18. 4, vil. 22. 
3 sg. ; W. Dittenberger, Orzendes Graect 
Lnscriptiones Selectae (Leipsic, 1903- 
1905), Nos. 56, 90 (vol. i. pp. 98, 106, 
159). Both Apis and Mnevis were 
black bulls, but Apis had certain white — 
spots. See A. Wiedemann, Dze Re- 
ligion der alten Aegypter (Minster i. 
W., 1890), pp. 95, 99-101. When 
Apis died, pious people used to put on 


a Al 


OSU S. LHe PIG ANDWHE BULTI, 


Ix 35 


to say whether these bulls were embodiments of him as the 
corn-spirit, as the red oxen appear to have been, or whether 
they were not in origin entirely distinct deities who came to 
be fused with Osiris at a later time. The universality of the 
worship of these two bulls’ seems to put them on a different 
footing from the ordinary sacred animals whose worships were 
purely local. Hence if the latter were evolved from totems, 
as they may have been, some other origin would have to be 
found for the worship of Apis and Mnevis. If these bulls 
were not originally embodiments of the corn-god Osiris, they 
may possibly be descendants of the sacred cattle worshipped 
by a pastoral people.” If this were so, ancient Egypt would 
exhibit a stratification of three great types of religion or 
superstition corresponding to three great stages of society. 
Totemism, which may be roughly described as a species of 
superstitious respect paid to wild animals and plants by many 
tribes in the hunting stage of society, would be represented by 
the worship of the local sacred animals ; the worship of cattle, 
which belongs to society in the pastoral stage, would be repre- 
sented by the cults of Apis and Mnevis; and the worship of 
cultivated plants, which is peculiar to society in the agricul- 
tural stage, would be represented by the religion of Osiris 
and Isis. The Egyptian reverence for cows, which were 
never killed,*? might belong either to the second or the third 
of these stages. The consecration of cows to Isis, who was 
portrayed with cow’s horns* and may have been supposed to 
be incarnate in the animals, would indicate that they, like 
the red oxen, were embodiments of the corn-spirit. How- 
ever, this identification of Isis with the cow, like that of Osiris 
with the bulls Apis and Mnevis, may be only an effect of 


mourning and to fast, drinking only 3 Herodotus, i. 41. 


water and eating only vegetables, for 
seventy days till the burial. See 
A. Erman, De dgyptische Religion 
(Berlin, 1905), pp. 170 sg. 

1 Diodorus Siculus, i. 21. 

2 On the religious reverence of pas- 
toral peoples for their cattle, and the 
possible derivation of the Apis and 
Isis-Hathor worship from the pastoral 
stage of society, see W. Robertson 
Smith, Religion of the Semites,? pp. 


296 sqq. 


4 Herodotus, ii. 41, with A. Wiede- 
mann’s commentary; Plutarch, /szs e¢ 
Osiris, 19; E. A. Wallis Budge, 
Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrec- 
tion (London and New York, 1911), 
i. 8. In his commentary on the 
passage of Herodotus Prof. Wiedemann 
observes (p. 188) that ‘*the Egyptian 
name of the Isis-cow is /es-¢ and is one 
of the few cases in which the name of 
the sacred animal coincides with that 
of the deity.” 


Stratifica- 
tion of three 
great types 
of religion 
or supersti- 
tion in 
ancient 
Egypt. 


On the 
stratifica- 
tion of re- 
ligions cor- 
responding 
to certain 
social 
types. 


36 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


syncretism. But whatever the original relation of Apis to 
Osiris may have been, there is one fact about the former 
which ought not to be passed over in a disquisition on the 
custom of killing a god. Although the bull Apis was 
worshipped as a god with much pomp and profound rever- 
ence, he was not suffered to live beyond a certain length of 
time which was prescribed by the sacred books, and on the 
expiry of which he was drowned in a holy spring.’ The 
limit, according to Plutarch, was twenty-five years ;* but it 
cannot always have been enforced, for the tombs of the Apis 
bulls have been discovered in modern times, and from the 
inscriptions on them it appears that in the twenty-second 
dynasty two of the holy steers lived more than twenty-six 
years.® 

To prevent misunderstandings it may be well to add 
that what I have just said as to the stratification of three 
great types of religion or superstition corresponding to three 
great types of society is not meant to sketch, even in outline, 
the evolution of religion as a whole. I by no means wish 
to suggest that the reverence for wild animals and plants, 


the reverence for domestic cattle, and the reverence for — 


cultivated plants are the only forms of religion or super- 
stition which prevail at the corresponding stages of social 
development ; all that I desire to convey is that they are 
characteristic of these stages respectively. The elements 
which make up any religious system are far too numerous 
and their interaction far too complex to be adequately 
summed up in a few simple formulas. To mention only 


a single factor of which I have taken no account in 


indicating roughly a certain correspondence between the 
strata of religion and of society, the fear of the spirits of the 
dead appears to have been one of the most powerful factors, 


1 Pliny, Vaz. Hest. vi. 184; Solinus, 
xxxil. 18 ; Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii. 
14. 7. The spring or well in which he 
was drowned was perhaps the one from 
which his drinking-water was procured ; 
he might not drink the water of the 
Nile (Plutarch, /szs e¢ Oszris, 5). 

2 Plutarch, Zszs et Oszris, 56. 

3G. Maspero, Hestoire ancienne' 
(Paris, 1886), p. 31. Compare Duncker, 
Geschichte des Alterthums,® i. 56. It 


has been conjectured that the period of 
twenty-five years was determined by 
astronomical considerations, that being 
a period which harmonises the phases of 
the moon with the days of the Egyptian 
year. See L. Ideler, Handbuch der 
mathematischen und technischen Chro- 


nologie (Berlin, 1825-1826), i. 182 sg.; | 


F. K. Ginzel, Handbuch der mathe- 
matischen und technischen Chronologte, 
i. (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 180 sg. 


IX OSS, HE PIG AND THE BULE ey) 


perhaps, indeed, the most powerful of all, in shaping the 
course of religious evolution at every stage of social develop- 
ment from the lowest. to the highest; and for that very 
reason it is not specially characteristic of any one form of 
society. And the three types of religion or superstition 
which I have selected as characteristic of three stages of 
society are far from being strictly limited each to its corre- 
sponding step in the social ladder. For example, although 
_totemism, or a particular species of reverence paid by 
) groups of men to wild animals and plants, probably always 


) originated in the hunting stage of society, it has by no 


means been confined to that primitive phase of human 
development but has often survived not only into the 
pastoral but into the agricultural stage, as we may see for 
example by the case of many tribes in Africa, India, and 
America ; and it seems likely that a similar overlapping of 
the various strata takes place in every instance. In short, 
we cannot really dissect the history of mankind as it were 
with a knife into a series of neat sections each sharply marked 
off from all the rest by a texture and colour of its own; we 
may indeed do so theoretically for the convenience of ex- 
position, but practically the textures interlace, the colours 
melt and run into each other by insensible gradations that 
defy the edge of the finest instrument of analysis which we 
can apply to them. It is a mere truism to say that the 
abstract generalisations of science can never adequately 
comprehend all the particulars of conerete reality. The 
facts of nature will always burst the narrow bonds of 
human theories. 

Before quitting this part of our subject it may be well 
to illustrate by one or two examples the reverence which 
primitive pastoral tribes pay to their cattle, since, as I have 
just indicated, the worship of sacred bulls by the ancient 
Egyptians, like the modern Hindoo worship of cows, may 
very well have been directly derived from a similar respect 
paid by their remote ancestors to their cattle. A good 
instance is supplied by the Dinka, a large cattle-breeding 
tribe, or rather nation, of the White Nile. “Every idea 
and thought of the Dinka,” says Schweinfurth, “is how to 
acquire and maintain cattle: a kind of reverence would 


Reverence 
of the 
Dinka for 
their cattle. 


38 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


seem to be paid to them; even their offal is considered of 
high importance; the dung, which is burnt to ashes for 
sleeping in and for smearing their persons, and the urine, 
which is used for washing and as a substitute for salt, are 
their daily requisites. It must be owned that it is hard 
to reconcile this latter usage with our ideas of cleanliness. 
A cow is never slaughtered, but when sick it is segregated 
from the rest, and carefully tended in the large huts built for 
the purpose. Only those that die naturally or by an accident 
are used as food. All this, which exists among most of the 
pastoral tribes of Africa, may perchance appear to be a 
lingering remnant of an exploded cattle-worship ; but I may 
draw attention to the fact that the Dinka are by no means 
disinclined to partake of any feast of their flesh, provided 
that the slaughtered animal was not their own property. It — 
is thus more the delight of actual possession, than any super- — 
stitious estimate, that makes the cow to them an object 
of reverence. Indescribable is the grief when either death 
or rapine has robbed a Dinka of his cattle. He is prepared 
to redeem their loss by the heaviest sacrifices, for they are 


dearer to him than wife or child. A dead cow is not, © 


however, wantonly buried; the negro is not sentimental 
enough for that ; such an occurrence is soon bruited abroad, 
and the neighbours institute a carousal, which is quite an 
epoch in their monotonous life. The bereaved owner himself 
is, however, too much afflicted at the loss to be able to — 
touch a morsel of the carcass of his departed beast. Not 
unfrequently in their sorrow the Dinka remain for days © 
silent and abstracted, as though their trouble were too heavy 
for them to bear.”’ A rich Dinka will sometimes keep a 
favourite ox and treat it with such marks of respect that an 


observer has compared the animal to the Apis of the © 


ancient Egyptians. “Here and there,” we are told, “ beside 
the hut of a wealthy negro is set up a great withered 
tree. From its boughs hang vessels containing food and 
perhaps trophies of war; to its trunk is fastened the © 


great drum (Vogara), which summons to war or to the | 


dance. To this tree, separated from the rest of the cattle, 


1G. Schweinfurth, Zhe Heart of Africa, Third Edition (London, 1878), 
i. 59 5g: 4 


Ix OSIRIS, THE PIG AND THE BULL 39 


is tethered a great fat ox. It is of a white colour passing 
‘into a slaty grey on the shoulders and legs: its long horns 
are artificially bent to opposite sides and adorned with 
bunches of hair: the tuft of the tail is cut off. This is the 
makwt, the Apis of the negro. His master, who has singled 
him out from his youth for his colour and certain marks, has 
cherished and reared him in order that he may one day be 
his pride in the eyes of the village. He has gelded him, 
adorned him, trained him to walk at the head of the herd, 
‘to dance, and to fight. His makw7 is always an object of 
his tenderest attention ; he never fails to bring him a bundle 
of the finest herbs; if he can procure a bell, he hangs it 
‘round the animal’s neck; and at evening, if he has milk or 
_merisa enough for guests, the drum is beaten to summon the 
youth to come and dance round the deified ox.” 

Again, speaking of the Nuehr, another pastoral tribe of 
the Upper Nile, a traveller tells us that “as among the Dinka, 
‘so among the Nuehr-negroes the cattle enjoy a respect, 
indeed we may say a veneration, which reminds us of the 
animal worship of the ancient Egyptians, especially of that 
of the holy steer Apis, though the respect may be grounded 
on the simple fact that cattle are the only possession of these 
negroes. The largest and handsomest bull is the leader of 
the herd ; he is decked with bunches of hair and small bells, 
marked out from the rest in every way, and regarded as the 
guardian genius of the herd as well as of the family. His 
loss is the greatest misfortune that can befall his owner. At 
night his master drives the animal round the herd, couched 
about the smoky fire, and sings of his beauty and courage, 
while the bull signifies his contentment by a complacent 
lowing. To him his master every morning commits the herd, 
in order that he may guide them to the best pastures and 
guard them from danger ; in him he reveres his ideal of all 
that is beautiful and strong; nay he designates him by the 
same name which he applies to his own dim conception of a 
Supreme Being, WVye/edit, and to the thunder.” ” 


1 KE. de Pruyssenaere, Retsen und 2 Ernst Marno, Rezsex zm Gebzete 
Forschungen im Gebiete des Weissenund des Blauen und Weissen Nil (Vienna, 
Blauen Nil (Gotha, 1877), pp. 22 sg. 1874), p. 343. The name Wyeledit is 
(Petermann’s Mittheilungen, Ergin- explained by the writer to mean ‘‘ very 
sunesheft, No. 50). great and mighty.” It is probably 


Reverence 
of the 

Nuehr for 
their cattle, 


The tradi- 
tion that 
Virbius 
had been 
killed in 
the char- 
acter of 
Hippolytus 
by horses, 
and the 
custom of 
excluding 
horses from 
the sacred 
Arician 
grove, may 
point to the 
conclusion 
that the 
horse was 
regarded as 
an embodi- 
ment of 
Virbius and 
was annu- 
ally sacri- 
ficed in the 
grove. 


Similarly 
at Athens 
the goat 
was usually 


DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS  CHap. 


40 


§ 5. Virbius and the Horse 


We are now in a position to hazard a conjecture as to 
the meaning of the tradition that Virbius, the first of the 
divine Kings of the Wood at Aricia, had been killed in the 
character of Hippolytus by horses." Having found, first, 
that spirits of the corn are not infrequently represented in the > 
form of horses ;” and, second, that the animal which in later 
legends is said to have injured the god was sometimes 
originally the god himself, we may conjecture that the 
horses by which Virbius or Hippolytus was said to have been 
slain were really embodiments of him as a deity of vegetation. 
The myth that he had been killed by horses was probably — 
invented to explain certain features in his worship, amongst 
others the custom of excluding horses from his sacred grove. 
For myth changes while custom remains constant; men ~ 
continue to do what their fathers did before them, though | 
the reasons on which their fathers acted have been long _ 
forgotten. The history of religion is a long attempt to 
reconcile old custom with new reason, to find a sound theory 
for an absurd practice. In the case before us we may be 
sure that the myth is more modern than the custom and by 
no means represents the original reason for excluding horses 
from the grove. From their exclusion it might be inferred 
that horses could not be the sacred animals or embodiments 
of the god of the grove. But the inference would be rash. 
The goat was at one time a sacred animal or embodiment 
of Athena, as may be inferred from the practice of represent- 
ing the goddess clad in a goat-skin (aegzs). Yet the goat was 
Be. On the death of the sacred bull 


equivalent to Wyalich, which Dr. C. G. 


Seligmann gives as a synonym for 
Dengdit, the high god of the Dinka. 
According to Dr, Seligmann, Wyadzch 
is the locative of a word meaning 
“above” and, literally translated, 
signifies, ‘*in the above.” SeeC. G. 
Seligmann, s.v. ‘‘ Dinka,” in 2zcyclo- 
paedia of Religion and Ethics, edited 
by J. Hastings, D.D., vol. iv. (Edin- 
burgh, 1911), p. 707. The Sakalava of 
Ampasimene, in Madagascar, are said to 
worship a black bull which is kept in a 
sacred enclosure in the island of Nosy 


another is substituted for it. See A. 
van Gennep, Zabou et Totémisme a 
Madagascar (Paris, 1904), pp. 247 sq., 
quoting J. Carol, Chez les Hova (Paris, 
1898), pp. 418 sg. But as the Saka- 
lava are not, so far as I know, mainly 
or exclusively a pastoral people, this 
example of bull-worship does not 
strictly belong to the class illustrated — 
in the text. 

1 See The Magic Art and the Evolw 
tion of Kings, i. 19 sgq. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 292-294. 


Ix VIRBIUS AND THE HORSE 4I 
neither sacrificed to her as a rule, nor allowed to enter her 
great sanctuary, the Acropolis at Athens. The reason 


alleged for this was that the goat injured the olive, the 
sacred tree of Athena. So far, therefore, the relation of 
the goat of Athena is parallel to the relation of the horse 
to Virbius, both animals being excluded from the sanctuary 
on the ground of injury done by them to the god. But 
from Varro we learn that there was an exception to the 
rule which excluded the goat from the Acropolis. Once a 
} year, he says, the goat was driven on to the Acropolis for a 
necessary sacrifice? Now, as has been remarked before, 
~when an animal is sacrificed once and once only in the year, 
it is probably slain, not as a victim offered to the god, but 
as a representative of the god himself. Therefore we may 
infer that if a goat was sacrificed on the Acropolis once a 
year, it was sacrificed in the character of Athena herself 28 
and it may be conjectured that the skin of the sacrificed 
| animal was placed on the statue of the goddess and formed 
the aegzs, which would thus be renewed annually. Similarly 
at Thebes in Egypt rams were sacred and were not sacri- 
ficed. But on one day in the year a ram was killed, and 
its skin was placed on the statue of the god Ammon.* Now, 
if we knew the ritual of the Arician grove better, we might 
find that the rule of excluding horses from it, like the rule 
of excluding goats from the Acropolis at Athens, was 
subject to an annual exception, a horse being once a year 
taken into the grove and sacrificed as an-embodiment of the 
god Virbius.° By the usual misunderstanding the horse 


® Athenaeus, xiii. 51, p. 587 A; 


: 5.v. Bpavpwviots ; compare Im. Bekker’s 
Pliny, az. 7st. viii. 204. Compare 


Anecdota Graeca, p. 445, lines 6 sg@.). 


W. Robertson Smith, in Zxcyclopaedia 
Britannica, Ninth Edition, article 
“Sacrifice,” vol. xxi. p. 135. 

2 Varro, De agri cultura, i. 2. 19 
5g. : ‘‘hoc nomine etiam Athents in 
arcem non inigi,. praeterquam semel ad 
mecessarium sacrifictum.” By semel 
Varro probably means once a year. 

3 The force of this inference is 
greatly weakened, if not destroyed, by 
a fact which I had overlooked when I 
wrote this book originally. A goat was 
sacrificed to Brauronian Artemis at her 
festival called the Brauronia (Hesychius, 


As the Brauronian Artemis had a sanctu- 
ary on the Acropolis of Athens (Pau- 
sanias, i. 23. 7), it seems probable that 
the goat sacrificed once a year on the 
Acropolis was sacrificed to her and not 
to Athena. (Note to Second Edition 
of The Golden Bough.) 


4 Herodotus, ii. 42. 


5 It is worth noting that Hippolytus, 
with whom Virbius was identified, is 
said to have dedicated horses to Aescu- 
lapius, who had raised him from the 
dead (Pausanias, li. 27. 4). 


excluded 
from the 
Acropolis 
but was ad- 
mitted once 
a year for 
a necessary 
sacrifice. 


Annual 
sacrifice of 
a horse at 
Rome in 
October. 


42 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


thus killed would come in time to be regarded as an enemy 
offered up in sacrifice to the god whom he had injured, like 
the pig which was sacrificed to Demeter and Osiris or the 
goat which was sacrificed to Dionysus, and possibly to 
Athena. It is so easy for a writer to record a rule without 
noticing an exception that we need not wonder at finding 
the rule of the Arician grove recorded without any mention 


of an exception such as I suppose. If we had had only the — 


statements of Athenaeus and Pliny, we should have known 
only the rule which forbade the sacrifice of goats to Athena 
and excluded them from the Acropolis, without being aware 
of the important exception which the fortunate preservation 
of Varro’s work has revealed to us. 

The conjecture that once a year a horse may have been 
sacrificed in the Arician grove as a representative of the 
deity of the grove derives some support from the similar 
sacrifice of a horse which took place once a year at Rome. 
On the fifteenth of October in each year a chariot-race was 
run on the Field of Mars. Stabbed with a spear, the right- 
hand horse of the victorious team was then sacrificed to 
Mars for the purpose of ensuring good crops, and its head 
was cut off and adorned with a string of loaves. Thereupon 
the inhabitants of two wards—the Sacred Way and the 
Subura—contended with each other who should get the 
head. If the people of the Sacred Way got it, they fastened 
it to a wall of the king’s house ; if the people of the Subura 
got it, they fastened it to the Mamilian tower. The 
horse’s tail was cut off and carried to the king’s house with 


such speed that the blood dripped on the hearth of the 


house.' Further, it appears that the blood of the horse was 
caught and preserved till the twenty-first of April, when the 
Vestal virgins mixed it with the blood of the unborn calves 
which had been sacrificed six days before. The mixture 
was then distributed to shepherds, and used by them for 
fumigating their flocks.” 


1 Festus, ed. C. O. Miiller, pp. 178, W. Mannhardt, whose conclusions I 
179, 220; Plutarch, Qwaestiones Ro- summarise in the text. See W. Mann- 
manae, 97; Polybius, xii. 4B. The hardt,  J%ythologische  Forschungen 
sacrifice is referred to by Julian, Ovat. (Strasburg, 1884), pp. 156-201. 

v. p. 176 D(p, 228 ed. F. C. Hertlein). 2 Ovid, Fast2, iv. 731 sgg., compare 
It is the subject of a valuable essay by 629 sgg. ; Propertius, v. I. 19 sg. 


need 


VIRBIUS AND THE HORSE 43 


In this ceremony the decoration of the horse’s head ! 
with a string of loaves, and the alleged object of the sacrifice, 
namely, to procure a good harvest, seem to indicate that 
the horse was killed as one of those animal representatives 
of the corn-spirit of which we have found so many examples. 
The custom of cutting off the horse’s tail is like the African 
custom of cutting off the tails of the oxen and sacrificing them 
to obtain a good crop.” In both the Roman and the African 
custom the animal apparently stands for the corn-spirit, and 
its fructifying power is supposed to reside especially in its 
tail. The latter idea occurs, as we have seen, in European 
folk-lore.? Again, the practice of fumigating the cattle in 
spring with the blood of the horse may be compared with 
the practice of giving the Old Wife, the Maiden, or the 
clyack sheaf as fodder to the horses in spring or the cattle 
at Christmas, and giving the Yule Boar to the ploughing 
oxen or horses to eat in spring.* All these usages aim at 
ensuring the blessing of the corn-spirit on the homestead 
and its inmates and storing it up for another year. 

The Roman sacrifice of the October horse, as it was 
called, carries us back to the early days when the Subura, 
afterwards a low and squalid quarter of the great metropolis, 
was still a separate village, whose inhabitants engaged in a 
friendly contest on the harvest-field with their neighbours 
of Rome, then a little rural town. The Field of Mars on 
which the ceremony took place lay beside the Tiber, and 
formed part of the king’s domain down to the abolition 
of the monarchy. For tradition ran that at the time 
when the last of the kings was driven from Rome, the 
corn stood ripe for the sickle on the crown lands beside the 
river ; but no one would eat the accursed grain and it was 
flung into the river in such heaps that, the water being low 
with the summer heat, it formed the nucleus of an island.’ 


1 The Huzuls of the Carpathians important part. When the festival is 


attribute a special virtue to a horse’s 
head. They think that fastened ona 
pole and set up in a garden it protects 
the cabbages from caterpillars. See R. 
F. Kaindl, Die Huzulen (Wienna, 1894), 
p- 1o2.- At the close of the rice-harvest 
the Garos of Assam celebrate a festival 
in which the effigy of a horse plays an 


over, the body of the horse is thrown 
into a stream, but the head is preserved 
for another year. See Note at the end 
of the volume. 

2 Above, pp. 9 sg. 

3 Above, vol. i. pp. 268, 272. 

4 Above, vol. i. pp. 141, 155, 156, 
158, 160 sg., 301. SS eiviys lio 5. 


The horse 
So sacri- 
ficed seems 
to have em- 
bodied the 
corn-spirit. 


Archaic 
character of 
the sacri- 
fice and its 
analogies 
in the 
harvest 
customs of 
Northern 
Europe. 


44 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP. 


The horse sacrifice was thus an old autumn custom observed 
upon the king’s corn-fields at the end of the harvest. The 
tail and blood of the horse, as the chief parts of the corn- 
spirit’s representative, were taken to the king’s house and 
kept there; just as in Germany the harvest-cock is nailed 
on the gable or over the door of the farmhouse ; and as the 
last sheaf, in the form of the Maiden, is carried home and 
kept over the fireplace in the Highlands of Scotland. Thus 
the blessing of the corn-spirit was brought to the king’s 
house and hearth and, through them, to the community of 
which he was the head. Similarly in the spring and 
autumn customs of Northern Europe the Maypole is some- 
times set up in front of the house of the mayor or burgo- 
master, and the last sheaf at harvest is brought to him as 
the head of the village. But while the tail and blood fell to 
the king, the neighbouring village of the Subura, which no 
doubt once had a similar ceremony of its own, was gratified 
by being allowed to compete for the prize of the horse’s 
head. The Mamilian tower, to which the Suburans nailed 
the horse’s head when they succeeded in carrying it off, 
appears to have been a peel-tower or keep of the old 
Mamilian family, the magnates of the village’ The 
ceremony thus performed on the king’s fields and at his 
house on behalf of the whole town and of the neighbouring 
village presupposes a time when each township performed a 
similar ceremony on its own fields. In the rural districts 
of Latium the villages may have continued to observe the 
custom, each on its own land, long after the Roman hamlets 
had merged their separate harvest-homes in the common 
celebration on the king’s lands, There is no _ intrinsic 
improbability in the supposition that the sacred grove of 
Aricia, like the Field of Mars at Rome, may have been the 
scene of a common harvest celebration, at which a horse was 
sacrificed with the same rude rites on behalf of the neigh- 
bouring villages. The horse would represent the fructifying 
spirit both of the tree and of the corn, for the two ideas melt 
into each other, as we see in customs like the Harvest-May. 

However, it should be borne in mind that the evidence 
for thus interpreting the relation of horses to Virbius is 

1 Festus, ed. C. O. Miiller, pp. 130, 131. 


> = 


IX VIRBIUS AND THE HORSE 45 


exceedingly slender, and that the custom of excluding 
horses from the sacred Arician grove may have _ been 
based on some other superstitious motive which entirely 
escapes us. At the city of lalysus in Rhodes there was a 
sanctuary of Alectrona, one of the daughters of the Sun, 
into which no horse, ass, mule, or beast of burden of any 
kind might enter. Any person who broke the law by intro- 
ducing one of these animals into the holy precinct, had to 
purify the place by a sacrifice ; and the same atonement had 
to be made by any man who brought shoes or any portion 
of a pig within the sacred boundaries. And whoever drove 
or suffered his sheep to stray into the precinct was obliged 
to pay a fine of one obol for every sheep that set foot 
in it.. The reasons for these prohibitions are quite un- 
known ; and the taboo on horses is particularly remarkable, 
since the Rhodians were in the habit of offering a chariot 
and horses every year to the Sun, the father of Alectrona,’ 
doubtless in order that he might ride on them through the sky. 
Did they think that it was not for the daughter of the Sun 
to meddle with horses, which were the peculiar property of 
her father? The conjecture may perhaps be supported by 
an analogy drawn from West Africa. The Ewe negroes of the 
Slave Coast conceive the Rain-god Nyikpla as a man who 
rides a horse, and who may be seen galloping on it through 
the sky in the form of a shooting star. Hence in the town 
of Angla, where he generally resides when he is at home, no 
person may appear on horseback in the streets, that being 
apparently regarded as an impious usurpation of the style of 
the deity. In former days even Europeans were forbidden 
to ride on horseback in Angla; and missionaries who 
attempted to set the local prejudice at defiance have been 
pelted with sticks and dirt by the outraged natives.® 
Another deity who suffered not horses to enter his sacred 


1 Dittenberger, Sy//oge [nscriptionum 
Graecarum,* No. 560 (vol. ii. pp. 259- 
261); Ch. Michel, Recuetl a? Lnuscrip- 
tions Grecgues (Brussels, 1900), No. 
434, pp. 323 sg.; P. Cauer, Delectus 
Luscriptionum Graecarum propter dia- 
lectum memorabilium * (Leipsic, 1883), 
No. 177, pp. 117 sg. As to Alectrona 
or Alectryona, daughter of the Sun, 


see Diodorus Siculus, v. 65. 5. 

2 Festus, s.v. ‘* October equus,” p. 
181 ed. C. O. Miiller. See Zhe Magic 
Art and the Evolution of Kings, 1. 
315, 

3G. Ziindel, ‘‘ Land und Volk der 
Eweer auf der Sclavenkiiste in West- 
afrika,” Zeztschrift fiir Erdkunde zu 
Berlin, xii. (1877) pp. 415 5g. 


Other ex- 
amples of 
the exclu- 
sion of 
horses from 
sanctu- 
aries, 


46 DEITIES OF VEGETATION AS ANIMALS CHAP 


place was Rakelimalaza, a Malagasy god whose name 
signifies “renowned, although diminutive.” His residence 
was a village situated on the top of a hill about seven miles 
east of Tananarivo. But horses were not the only animal 
or thing to which this fastidious being entertained a rooted 
aversion. “ Within the limits of the ground which is con- 
sidered sacred, and which embraces a wide circumference in 
the immediate vicinity of the idol’s residence, it is strictly 
forbidden to bring, or to suffer to come, certain animals and 
certain objects, which are carefully specified by the keepers 
of the idol. Things thus forbidden are called fady; a term 
of similar import with the well-known tabu of the South 
Sea Islands. Every idol has its own particular fady. The 
things prohibited by Rakelimalaza are, guns, gunpowder, 
pigs, onions, sifotra (a shell-fish resembling a snail), sitry (a 
small animal resembling the young crocodile), striped or 
spotted robes, anything of a black colour, goats, horses, meat 
distributed at funerals or at the zaxgena, and cats and owls. 
Its keepers are forbidden to enter any house where there is 
a corpse ; and in crossing a river they are not permitted to 
say, ‘Carry me, otherwise they place themselves in danger 
of being seized by the crocodiles ; and in war they must not 
talk, or they are in danger of being shot.”' To attempt to 
discover the particular reasons for all these numerous and 
varied taboos would obviously be futile; many of them may 
be based on accidental circumstances which for us are lost 
past recovery. But it may be worth while to observe that 


a variety of taboos was enforced at other ancient Greek | 


shrines besides the sanctuary of Alectrona at Ialysus. For 
example, no person was allowed to enter the sanctuary of 
the Mistress at Lycosura in Arcadia clad in black, purple, 
or flowered vestments, or wearing shoes or a ring, or with 
his or her hair plaited or covered, or carrying flowers in 
his hand ;* and no pomegranates might be brought into the 
sanctuary, though all other fruits of the orchard were free to 
enter. These instances may warn us against the danger of 


1 Rev. W. Ellis, Wzstory of Mada- tionum Graecarum,? No. 939 (vol. ii. 
gascar (London, preface dated 1838), p. 803). 
1. 402 Sq. 

2 Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscrip- 3 Pausanias, viii. 37. 7. 


\@ ! 


IX VIRBIUS AND THE HORSE 47 


arguing too confidently in favour of any one of the many Uncer- 
- : : tainty as to 
possible reasons which may have moved the old Latins to 77 


exclude horses from the sacred Arician grove. The domain for exclud- 
f primitiv erstition, in spite of the en h iSEoiee se 
of primitive superstition, in spi e encroachments of 40.5 the 
science, is indeed still to a great extent a trackless wilder- Arician 

5 “ grove. 
ness, a tangled maze, in the gloomy recesses of which the 
forlorn explorer may wander for ever without a light and 


without a clue. 


CHAP Titik 
EATING THE GOD 


§ 1. Zhe Sacrament of First-Frutts 


Custom of WE have now seen that the corn-spirit is represented some- 
ing tl 2 ° . . > O 

Se’ times in human, sometimes in animal form, and that in both 

sacrament- cases he is killed in the person of his representative and 


oe eaten sacramentally. To find examples of actually killing 
corn-spirit. the human representative of the corn-spirit we had naturally 
to go to savage races; but the harvest-suppers of our 
European peasants have furnished unmistakable examples 

of the sacramental eating of animals as representatives of 

the corn-spirit. But further, as might have been anticipated, 

the new corn is itself eaten sacramentally, that is, as the 

Loaves body of the corn-spirit. In Wermland, Sweden, the farmer’s 
baked of wife uses the grain of the last sheaf to bake a loaf in 
conin the shape of a little girl; this loaf is divided amongst the 
sae whole household and eaten by them.’ Here the loaf 
eaten. represents the corn-spirit conceived as a maiden ; just as in — 
. Scotland the corn-spirit is similarly conceived and repre- 
sented by the last sheaf made up in the form of a woman 

and bearing the name of the Maiden. As usual, the corn- 

spirit is believed to reside in the last sheaf; and to eat a 

loaf made from the last sheaf is, therefore, to eat the corn- 

spirit itself. Similarly at La Palisse, in France, a man made 

of dough is hung upon the fir-tree which is carried on the 

last harvest-waggon. The tree and the dough-man are 

taken to the mayor’s house and kept there till the vintage 


is over. Then the close of the harvest is celebrated by a 


1 W, Mannhardt, AZythologische Forschungen (Strasburg, 1884), p. 179. 
48 


x 


CHAP. X THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 49 


feast at which the mayor breaks the dough-man in pieces 
and gives the pieces to the people to eat.’ 

In these examples the corn-spirit is represented and 
eaten in human shape. In other cases, though the new 
corn is not baked in loaves of human shape, still the solemn 
ceremonies with which it is eaten suffice to indicate that it 
is partaken of sacramentally, that is, as the body of the 
corn-spirit. For example, the following ceremonies used 
to be observed by Lithuanian peasants at eating the 
new corn. About the time of the autumn sowing, when 
all the corn had been got in and the threshing had begun, 
each farmer held a festival called Sabarios, that is, 
“the mixing or throwing together.” He took nine good 
handfuls of each kind of crop—wheat, barley, oats, flax, 
beans, lentils, and the rest ; and each handful he divided into 
three parts. The twenty-seven portions of each grain were 
then thrown on a heap and all mixed up together. The grain 
used had to be that which was first threshed and winnowed 
and which had been set aside and kept for this purpose. A 
part of the grain thus mixed was employed to bake little 
loaves, one for each of the household; the rest was mixed 
with more barley or oats and made into beer. The first beer 
brewed from this mixture was for the drinking of the farmer, 
his wife, and children ; the second brew was for the servants. 
The beer being ready, the farmer chose an evening when 
no stranger was expected. Then he knelt down before the 
barrel of beer, drew a jugful of the liquor and poured it on 
the bung of the barrel, saying, “O fruitful earth, make rye 
and barley and all kinds of corn to flourish.” Next he took 


Old Lithu- 
anian ritual 
at eating 
the new 
corn. 


the jug to the parlour, where his wife and children awaited ~ 


him. On the floor of the parlour lay bound a black or white 
or speckled (not a red) cock and a hen of the same colour and 
of the same brood, which must have been hatched within the 
year. Then the farmer knelt down, with the jug in his hand, 
and thanked God for the harvest and prayed for a good crop 
next year. Next all lifted up their hands and said, “O 
God, and thou, O earth, we give you this cock and hen as 


1 W. Mannhardt, Der Baumkultus not said that the dough-man is made of 
der Germanen und threr Nachbar- the new corn; but’ probably this is, 
stimme (Berlin, 1875), p. 205. It is or once was, the case. 

Pie V. VOL. II E 


Modern 
European 
ceremonies 
at eating 
the new 
corn or new 
potatoes. 


50 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


a free-will offering.” With that the farmer killed the fowls 
with the blows of a wooden spoon, for he might not cut 
their heads off. After the first prayer and after killing each 
of the birds he poured out a third of the beer. Then his 
wife boiled the fowls in a new pot which had never been 
used before. After that, a bushel was set, bottom upwards, 
on the floor, and on it were placed the little loaves mentioned 
above and the boiled fowls. Next the new beer was fetched, 
together with a ladle and three mugs, none of which was 
used except on this occasion. When the farmer had ladled 
the beer into the mugs, the family knelt down round the 
bushel. The father then uttered a prayer and drank off the 
three mugs of beer. The rest followed his example. Then 
the loaves and the flesh of the fowls were eaten, after which 
the beer went round again, till every one had emptied each 
of the three mugs nine times. None of the food should 
remain over; but if anything did happen to be left, it was 
consumed next morning with the same ceremonies. The 
bones were given to the dog to eat; if he did not eat 
them all up, the remains were buried under the dung in the 
cattle-stall. This ceremony was observed at the beginning 
of December. On the day on which it took place no bad 
word might be spoken.! 

Such was the custom about two hundred years or more 
ago. At the present day in Lithuania, when new potatoes or 
loaves made from the new corn are being eaten, all the people 
at table pull each other’s hair.2, The meaning of this last 
custom is obscure, but a similar custom was certainly 
observed by the heathen Lithuanians at their solemn sacri- 


1M. Praetorius, De/zctae Prussicae 
oder Preussische Schaubuhne, im 
wortlichen Ausztige aus dem Manu- 
script herausgegeben von Dr. William 
Pierson (Berlin, 1871), pp. 60-64 ; W. 
Mannhardt, Antike Wald- und Feld- 
kulte (Berlin, 1877), pp. 249 sgq. 
Mathaeus Praetorius, the author to 
whom we owe the account in the text, 
compiled a detailed description of old 
Lithuanian manners and customs in 
the latter part of the seventeenth 
century at the village of Niebudzen, 
of which he was Protestant pastor. 


The work, which seems to have occu- 
pied him for many years and to have 
been finished about 1698, exists in 
manuscript but has never been pub- 
lished in full. Only excerpts from it 
have been printed by Dr. W. Pierson. 
Praetorius was born at Memel about 
1635 and died in 1707. In the later 
years of his life he incurred a good 
deal of odium by joining the Catholic 
Church. 


2 A. Bezzenberger, Litaudsche For- 
schungen (Gottingen, 1882), p. 89. 


s 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 51 


fices.. Many of the Esthonians of the island of Oesel will 
not eat bread baked of the new corn till they have first 
taken a bite at a piece of iron.” The iron is here plainly a 
charm, intended to render harmless the spirit that is in the 
corn.” In Sutherlandshire at the present day, when the 
new potatoes are dug all the family must taste them, other- 
wise “the spirits in them [the potatoes] take offence, and the 
potatoes would not keep.”* In one part of Yorkshire it is 
still customary for the clergyman to cut the first corn; and 
my informant believes that the corn so cut is used to make 
the communion bread.’ Ifthe latter part of the custom is 
correctly reported (and analogy is all in its favour), it shews 
how the Christian communion has absorbed within itself a 
sacrament which is doubtless far older than Christianity. 
Among the heathen Cheremiss on the left bank of the 
Volga, when the first bread baked from the new corn is to 
be eaten, the villagers assemble in the house of the oldest 
inhabitant, the eastern door is opened, and all pray with 
their faces towards it. Then the sorcerer or priest gives to 
each of them a mug of beer, which they drain ; next he cuts 
and hands to every person a morsel of the loaf, which they 
partake of. Finally, the young people go to the elders and 
bowing down to the earth before them say, “ We pray God 
that you may live, and that God may let us pray next year 
for new corn.” The rest of the day is passed in mirth and 
dancing. The whole ceremony, observes the writer who has 
described it, looks almost like a caricature of the Eucharist.® 
According to another account, each Cheremiss householder 
on this occasion, after bathing, places some of each kind of 
grain, together with malt, cakes, and drink, in a vessel, which 
he holds up to the sun, at the same time thanking the gods 
for the good things which they have bestowed upon him.’ 


p- 54- 

5 Communicated by the Rev. J. J. 
C. Yarborough, of Chislehurst, Kent. 
See Folk-lore Journal, vii. (1889) p.50. 


1 Simon Grunau, Preussischer 
Chronik, herausgegeben von Dr. M. 
Perlbach, 1. (Leipsic, 1876) p. 91. 

2 J. B. WHolzmayer, “ Osiliana,” 


Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen 
Gesellschaft zu Dorpat, vii. Heft 2 
(Dorpat, 1872), p. 108. 

On iron as a charm against spirits, 
see Taboo and the Perils of the Soul, pp. 
232 sqq. 


4 Folk - lore (1889) 


Journal, vii. 


6 Von Haxthausen, Stdzen riber die 
znnern Zustande, das Volksleben und 
insbesondere die Jlandliche LEinrich- 
tungen Russlands, i. 448 sq. 

7 J. G. Georgi, Beschretbung aller 
Nationen des Russtschen Reichs (St. 
Petersburg, 1776), p. 37. 


Ceremony 
of the 
heathen 
Cheremiss 
at eating 
the new 
corn. 


Ceremony 
of the Aino 
at eating 
the new 
millet. 


Ceremonies 
of the 
Melanes- 
ians of Reef 
Island at 
eating the 
new bread- 
fruits and 
yams. 


52 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


But this part of the ceremony is a sacrifice rather than a 
sacrament of the new corn. 

The Aino or Ainu of Japan are said to distinguish 
various kinds of millet as male and female respectively, and 
these kinds, taken together, are called “the divine husband and 
wife cereal ” (Umurek haru kamuz). “Therefore before millet 
is pounded and made into cakes for general eating, the old 
men have a few made for themselves first to worship. When 
they are ready they pray to them very earnestly and say :— 
‘O thou cereal deity, we worship thee. Thou hast grown 
very well this year, and thy flavour will be sweet. Thou 
art good. The goddess of fire will be glad, and we also 
shall rejoice greatly. O thou god, O thou divine cereal, 
do thou nourish the people. I now partake of thee. I 
worship thee and give thee thanks.” After having thus 
prayed, they, the worshippers, take a cake and eat it, and from 
this time the people may all partake of the new millet. 
And so with many gestures of homage and words of prayer 
this kind of food is dedicated to the well-being of the Ainu. 
No doubt the cereal offering is regarded as a tribute paid 
to god, but that god is no other than the seed itself; and it 
is only a god in so far as it is beneficial to the human body.” ? 

The natives of the Reef Islands in Melanesia describe as 
follows the ceremonies which they observe at eating new 
fruits: “When the fruit of trees that are eatable, such as 
bread-fruit, or zzzas (nuts) is nearly ripe, about a month 
before the time that people eat it, they all go together into 
the bush. They must all go together for this ‘holy eating, 
and when they return they all assemble in one place, and no 
one will be absent; they sit down and cook bread-fruit. 
While it is being cooked no one will eat beforehand, but 
they set it in order and cook it with reverence, and with the 
belief that the spirit has granted that food to them and they 
return thanks to him for it. When it is cooked a certain 
man takes a bread-fruit and climbs up a tree, and all the 
people stand on the ground and they all look up, and when 
he has reached the top they shout out, and when they have 
shouted they call out, ‘This is the bread-fruit of the whole 


* Rev. J. Batchelor, The Aznu and thetr Folk-lore (London, 1901), pp. 
204, 206. 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 53 


land’; then he throws down the bread-fruit and they pick 
it up and shout out again and give thanks, for they think 
that the spirit who protects the fruit will hear. Their 
thoughts are thus also with regard to the yam, there is no 
difference, it is all the same; they think that a spirit gives 
them food, and the people assemble together and thank the 
spirit. In every island they think that there is a spirit 
presiding over food.” ' 

At Bourail, in New Caledonia, the eating of the first 
yams of the season is a solemn ceremony. The women 
may take no partin it; indeed for five days previously they 
may not even shew themselves on any pretext, and must 
hide in the forest. But the men of other tribes are invited 
to share in the festivity. Onthe day of the ceremony seven 
or eight yams are dug up with the greatest precaution, wrapt 
in leaves, and carried before the great wooden images, ten 
or twelve feet high, rudely carved in human form and painted 
black, red, and white, which represent the ancestors of the 
tribe. Special pots, only used on these occasions, are then 
disinterred by boys, who cook the new yams in them, eat 
them, and afterwards bury the pots in the places where they 
found them. Thereupon the chief or the oldest man mounts 
a ladder and addresses the crowd in a long and voluble 
harangue, telling them how their forefathers always respected 
the feast of the first yams, and exhorting the young men of 
the tribe to do the same in the time to come. After that, 
turning towards the ancestral images, he prays them to give 
a good crop of yams every year to the people and their 
descendants, adjuring them to remember how, while they were 
still on earth, they always ate to their heart’s content, and 
beseeching them to reflect that their sons and grandsons 
naturally desire to do the same. When the orator has 
finished his discourse, and his hearers have signified their 
approval of his eloquence by a loud grunt, the new yams are 
dressed and eaten, each family cooking them in a pot of its 
own.” 


1 «* Native Stories from Santa Cruz 2 Glaumont, ‘‘La culture de 
and Reef Islands,” translated by the Jigname et du taro en Nouvelle- 
Rev. W. O’Ferrall, Journal of the Calédonie,” L’ Anthropologie, viii. 
Anthropological Institute, xxxiv.(1904) (1897) pp. 43-45. 

p. 230. 


Ceremony 
of the New 
Caledon- 
ians at eat- 
ing the first 
yams. 


Ceremonies 
observed at 
eating the 
new rice in 
Buru and 
Celebes. 


Ceremonies 
observed at 
eating the 
new rice in 
Ceram and 
Borneo, 


CHAP. 


54 EATING THE GOD 


At the close of the rice harvest in the East Indian island 
of Buru, each clan (fezva) meets at a common sacramental 
meal, to which every member of the clan is bound to contribute 
a little of the new rice. This meal is called “eating the soul 
of the rice,’ a name which clearly indicates the sacramental 
character of the repast. Some of the rice is also set apart 
and offered to the spirits." Amongst the Alfoors of Mina- 
hassa, in the north of Celebes, the priest sows the first 
rice-seed and plucks the first ripe rice in each field. This 
rice he roasts and grinds into meal, and gives some of 
it to each of the household.” Shortly before the rice- 
harvest in Bolang Mongondo, another district of Celebes, an 
offering is made of a small pig or a fowl. Then the priest 
plucks a little rice, first on his own field and next on those 
of his neighbours. All the rice thus plucked by him he 
dries along with his own, and then gives it back to the 
respective owners, who have it ground and boiled. When it 
is boiled the women take it back, with an egg, to the priest, 
who offers the egg in sacrifice and returns the rice to the 
women. Of this rice every member of the family, down to 
the youngest child, must partake. After this ceremony 
every one is free to get in his rice.* 

On the north coast of Ceram every owner of a rice-field 
begins planting by making six holes in the middle of the 
field and depositing rice-seed in them. When the crop is 
ripe, the rice which has sprouted from these six holes must 
be the first to be reaped and the first to be eaten by the 
owner at the common harvest-feast of the village. When all 
the owners of the fields have thus partaken of the rice that 
was first planted and first reaped in their fields, the other 
villagers may help themselves to rice out of the pot. Not 
till this feast has been held may the owners of rice-fields sell 
their rice.* Among the: Kayans of Central Borneo, who, as 


1G. A. Wilken, ‘‘Bijdragen tot de 


gen van wege het Nederlandsche Zen- 
kennis der Alfoeren van het eiland 


delinggenootschap, vii. (1863) p. 127. 


Boeroe,” p. 26 (Verhandelingen van 
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kun- 
Sten en Wetenschappen vol. xxxviii., 
Batavia, 1875). 

2 Pp. N. Wilken, ‘‘ Bijdragen tot de 
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der 
Alfoeren in de Minahassa,” AZededeelin- 


3-N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz, 
** Allerlei over het land en volk van 
Bolaang Mongondou,” Jededeelingen 
van were het Nederlandsche Zendeling- 
genootschap, x1. (1867) pp. 369 sg. 

4 J. Boot, ‘* Korte schets der noord- 
kust van Ceram,” 777dschréft van het 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 55 


we have seen, believe rice to be animated by a soul,’ before 
a family partakes of the new rice at harvest, a priestess must 
touch the face and breast of every person with a magical 
instrument (fake parez) consisting of the husk of a certain 
fruit adorned with strings of beads. After this ceremony has 
been performed on every member of the family, he or she 
eats a few grains of the new rice and drinks a little water. 
When all have complied with this ritual, the feast begins.” 
Amongst the Burghers or Badagas, a tribe of the 
Neilgherry Hills in Southern India, the first handful of seed 
is sown and the first sheaf reaped by a Curumbar—a man 
of a different tribe, the members of which the Burghers 
regard as sorcerers. The grain contained in the first 
sheaf “is that day reduced to meal, made into cakes, 
and, being offered as a first-fruit oblation, is, together 
with the remainder of the sacrificed animal, partaken of by 
the Burgher and the whole of his family, as the meat of a 
federal offering and sacrifice.’* Amongst the Coorgs of 
Southern India the man who is to cut the first sheaf of rice 
at harvest is chosen by an astrologer. At sunset the whole 
household takes a hot bath and then goes to the rice-field, 
where the chosen reaper cuts an armful of rice with a new 
sickle, and distributes two or more stalks to all present. 
Then all return to the threshing-floor. A bundle of leaves 
is adorned with a stalk of rice and fastened to the post in 
the centre of the threshing-floor. Enough of the new rice is 
now threshed, cleaned, and ground to provide flour for the 
dough-cakes which each member of the household is to eat. 
Then they go to the door of the house, where the mistress 
washes the feet of the sheaf-cutter, and presents to him, and 
after him to all the rest, a brass vessel full of milk, honey, 
and sugar, from which each person takes a draught. Next 


the man who cut the sheaf 
plantains, milk, honey, seven 


Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genoot- 
schap, Tweede Serie, x. (1893) pp. 
671 sg. 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 184 sgq. 

2 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Zz Centraal 
Borneo (Leyden, 1900), i. 156; 7a@., 
Quer durch Borneo (Leyden, 1904- 


kneads a cake of rice-meal, 
new rice corns, seven pieces 


1907),i. 117 sg. In the latter passage 
‘<< 7st jeder” is a misprint for ‘‘zss¢ 
jeder’; the Dutch original is ‘‘ eet zeder.” 

3H. Harkness, Descr¢ption of a 
Singular Aboriginal Race inhabiting 
the Summit of the Netigherry Hills 
(London, 1832), pp. 56 sg. 


Ceremonies 
observed at 
eating the 
new rice in 
India. 


Ceremonies 
observed 
by the 
Chams at 
ploughing, 
sowing, 
reaping, 
and eating 
the new 
rice. 


56 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


of coco-nut, and so on. Every one receives a little of 
this cake on an Ashvatha leaf, and eats it. The cere- 
mony is then over and the sheaf-cutter mixes with the 
company. When he was engaged in cutting the rice no 
one might touch him.’ Among the Hindoos of Southern 
India the eating of the new rice is the occasion of a family 
festival called Pongol. The new rice is boiled in a new 
pot on a fire which is kindled at noon on the day when, 
according to Hindoo astrologers, the sun enters the tropic 
of Capricorn. The boiling of the pot is watched with 
great anxiety by the whole family, for as the milk boils, so 
will the coming year be. If the milk boils rapidly, the 
year will be prosperous; but it will be the reverse if the 
milk boils slowly. Some of the new boiled rice is offered 
to the image of Ganesa; then every one partakes of it. 
In some parts of Northern India the festival of the new 
crop is known as JVavan, that is, “new grain.” When the 
crop is ripe, the owner takes the omens, goes to the field, 
plucks five or six ears of barley in the spring crop and one 
of the millets in the autumn harvest. This is brought home, 
parched, and mixed with coarse sugar, butter, and curds. 
Some of it is thrown on the fire in the name of the village 
gods and deceased ancestors; the rest is eaten by the 
family. At Gilgit, in the Hindoo Koosh, before wheat- 
harvest begins, a member of every household gathers a 
handful of ears of corn secretly at dusk. A few of the 
ears are hung up over the door of the house, and the rest 
are roasted next morning, and eaten steeped in milk. The 
day is spent in rejoicings, and next morning the harvest 
begins.* 

The Chams of Binh-Thuan, in Indo-China, may not reap 
the rice-harvest until they have offered the first-fruits to 
Po-Nagar, the goddess of agriculture, and have consumed 
them sacramentally. These first- fruits are gathered from 
certain sacred fields called Hamou-Klék-Laoa or “fields of 


1 Ch. E. Gover, Zhe Folk-songs of Asiatic Society, N.S., v. (1871) pp. 
Southern India (London, 1872), pp. 91 sgq. 


105 sgg. 3 ‘* Coorg Folklore,” Fo/k-lore 3 From notes sent to me by my 
Journal, vii. (1889) pp. 302 sqq. friend Mr. W. Crooke. 
* Gover, ‘*The Pongol Festival in 4 Major J. Biddulph, 77zbes of the 


Southern India,” /owsnal of the Royal Hindoo Koosh (Calcutta, 1880), p.103. 


me THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 57 


secret tillage,’ which are both sown and reaped with 
peculiar ceremonies. Apparently the tilling of the earth 
is considered a crime which must be perpetrated secretly 
and afterwards atoned for. On a lucky day in June, at 
the first cock-crow, two men lead the buffaloes and the 
plough to the sacred field, round which they draw three 
furrows in profound silence and then retire. Afterwards at 
dawn the owner of the land comes lounging by, as if by the 
merest chance. At sight of the furrows he stops, pretends 
to be much surprised, and cries out, “ Who has been secretly 
ploughing my field this night?” Hastening home, he kills 
a kid or some fowls, cooks the victuals, and prepares five 
quids of betel, some candles, a flask of oil, and lustral 
water of three different sorts. With these offerings and 
the plough drawn by the buffaloes, he returns to the field, 
where he lights the candles and spreading out the victuals 
worships Po-Nagar and the other deities, saying: “I know 
not who has secretly ploughed my field this night. Pardon, 
ye gods, those who have done this wrong. Accept these 
offerings. “ Bless us. Suffer us to proceed with this work.” 
Then, speaking in the name of the deities, he gives the 
reassuring answer, “All right. Plough away!” With 
the lustral water he washes or sprinkles the buffaloes, the 
yoke, and the plough. The oil serves to anoint the plough 
and to pour libations on the ground. The five quids of 
betel are buried in the field. Thereupon the owner sows a 
handful of rice on the three furrows that have been traced, 
and eats the victuals with his people. After all these rites 
have been duly performed, he may plough and sow his 
land as he likes. When the rice has grown high enough in 
this “field of secret tillage” to hide pigeons, offerings of 
ducks, eggs, and fowls are made to the deities; and fresh 
offerings, which generally consist of five plates of rice, two 
boiled fowls, a bottle of spirits, and five quids of betel, are 
made to Po-Nagar and the rest at the time when the rice 
is in bloom. Finally, when the rice in “the field of secret 
tillage” is ripe, it has to be reaped before any of the rest. 
Offerings of food, such as boiled fowls, plates of rice, cakes, 
and so forth, are spread out on the field; a candle is lit, 
and a priest or, in his absence, the owner prays to the 


Ceremony 
at eating 
the new 
yams at 
Onitsha on 
the Niger. 


Ceremonies 
at eating 
the new 
yams 
among 

the Ewe 
negroes of 
Togoland. 


58 EATING THE GOD ; CHAP. 


guardian deities to come and partake of the food set before 
them. After that the owner of the land cuts three stalks 
of rice with a sickle in the middle of the field, then he cuts 
three handfuls at the side, and places the whole in a napkin. 
These are the first-fruits offered to Po-Nagar, the goddess 
of agriculture. On being taken home the rice from the 
three handfuls is husked, pounded in a mortar, and presented 
to the goddess with these words: “Taste, O goddess, these 
first-fruits which have just been reaped.” This rice is 
afterwards eaten, while the straw and husks are burned. 
Having eaten the first-fruits of the rice, the owner takes the 
three stalks cut in the middle of the field, passes them 
through the smoke of the precious eagle-wood, and hangs 
them up in his house, where they remain till the next 
sowing-time comes round. The grain from these three 
stalks will form the seed of the three furrows in “the field 
of secret tillage.” Not till these ceremonies have been 
performed is the proprietor at liberty to reap the rest of 
that field and all the others.’ 

The ceremony of eating the new yams at Onitsha, on 
the Niger, is thus described: “Each headman brought out 
six yams, and cut down young branches of palm-leaves and 
placed them before his gate, roasted three of the yams, 
and got some kola-nuts and fish. After the yam is roasted, 
the Lzbza, or country doctor, takes the yam, scrapes it 
into a sort of meal, and divides it into halves; he then 
takes one piece, and places it on the lips of the person who 
is going to eat the new yam. The eater then blows up 
the steam from the hot yam, and afterwards pokes the 
whole into his mouth, and says, ‘I thank God for being 
permitted to eat the new yam’; he then begins to chew it 
heartily, with fish likewise.” ? 

Among the Ewe negroes of West Africa the eating of the 
new yams is the greatest festival of the year; it usually falls 
at the beginning of September, and its character is predomi- 
nantly religious. We possess a native account of the festival 

1 E. Aymonier, ‘‘Les Tchames et (London, 1859), pp. 287 sg. Mr. 
leurs religions,” Revue de Phistotre des Taylor's information is repeated in 
Religions, xxiv. (1891) pp. 272-274. West African Countries and Peoples, 


2S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor, by J. Africanus B. Horton (London, 
The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger 1868), pp. 180 sg. 


= THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 59 


as it is celebrated by the tribe of the Hos in Togoland. 
When the yams are ripe and ready to be dug up and brought 
home, two days are devoted to cleansing the town of all ills, 
whether spiritual or material, as a solemn preparation for the 
ensuing celebration. When these rites of purification, which 
will be described in a later part of this work, have been 
accomplished, then, in the words of the native account, “the 
people make ready to eat the new yams. And the manner 
of making ready consists in going to the fields and digging 
the yams. However, they do not bring them home but lay 
them down somewhere on the way. . The reason why they 
do not bring them home is that the people have not yet been 
on the place where they sacrifice to the deity. When they 
wish to go thither, the way to the sacrificial place of Agbasia 
must first be cleared of grass. Afterwards the people come 
with their drums, which they beat loudly. When they are 
come to the place of sacrifice, they first raise two great 
mounds of earth, and they bring to the place of sacrifice 
palm wine, uncooked and cooked yams, and meal mixed 
with oil. First of all the uncooked yams are cut in two 
through the middle, and then this prayer is offered : ‘ Agbasia, 
thou art he who has given the yams; therefore here is thine 
own! We thank thee sincerely. May the eating of the 
yams bea great joy, and may no quarrel intervene!’ There- 
upon they lay down on the ground yams mixed with oil and 
not mixed with oil. In doing so they say to Agbasia, ‘ He 
who eats not the white yams, to him belong the yams mixed 
with oil ; and he who eats not the yams mixed with oil, to 
him belong the white yams.’ They do the same with the 
meal that is mixed with oil and with the meal that is not 
mixed with oil. Thereby they say: ‘ Here we bring thee all 
that thou hast given us. Eat thereof what thou pleasest!’ 
After that they pour palm wine into one pot and water into 
another, and say, ‘ When one has eaten, one drinks water.’ 
Thereby the drums sound, songs are sung, and the priest says : 
“Our father Agbasia, we pray thee, let us hear no more evil 
but good only! When women are with child, let them bear 
twins and triplets, that we may increase and multiply! 
When the time for sowing the yams comes again, make it to 
rain upon them even more than hitherto, in order that we 


60 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


Ceremonies May come again and thank thee more sincerely than hitherto !’ 


at eating 
the new 
yams 
among 
the Ewe 
negroes of 
Togoland. 


Thereupon the priest pours water on one of the mounds, 
makes a paste with it, and calls the people thither. Then 
he dips his finger in the slime and smears it on their brows, 
temples, and breasts, saying, ‘This is the slime of Agbasia, 
wherewith I smear you, that ye may remain in life’ After 
that they disperse and go home.” Further, the prayers and 
offerings of the individual peasants on the occasion of the 
yam festival are described as follows. “Inthe evening, when 
the town is swept clean, the people go to the fields to fetch 
yams, which, however, they may not yet bring into the town 
and therefore they hide them in the forest. As soon as the 
high priest quits the town next morning to go to the 
sacrificial place of his god, the women set out to fetch the 
yams which they had deposited. Now they begin to cook. 
Many people kill fowls or goats, and others buy fish for the 
festival. When the yams are sodden, a little is broken off, 
mixed with oil, and laid, together with uncooked yams, on 
the ground at the entrance to the homestead. Thereby the 
house-father says: ‘That belongs to all those (gods) who 
abide at the fence. He does the same under the door of 
the house and says: ‘That belongs to all those (gods) who 
dwell with me.’ Then he goes to the loom, and brings it 
its offering, and says: ‘That belongs to all the “ Artificers ” 
who have helped me in weaving. After that he lays all 
his charms on a mat spread in the house, and brings them 
also their offering, and speaks with them. 

“ Another account describes the priestly functions of the 
house-father still more fully. Every house-father takes a 
raw piece of yam and goes with it to his loom (agéazz) and 
prays: ‘May the Artificers take this yam and eat! When 
they practise their art, may it prosper!’ Again he takes 
a raw yam and goes with it under the house-door and 
prays: ‘O my guardian-spirit (ak/ama) and all ye gods 
who pay heed to this house, come and eat yams! When I 
also eat of them, may I remain healthy and nowhere feel 
pain! May my housemates all remain healthy!’ After 
he has invoked their protection on his family, he takes a 
cooked yam, crumbles it on a stone, and mixes it with red 
oil. With this mixture he goes again to the loom and prays 


ire THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 61 


as before. But even that is not the end of the worship of 
the Artificers. He again crumbles a cooked yam, but this 
time he does not mix it with red oil; he goes to the entrance 
of the homestead and prays again to the loom: ‘He among 
the Artificers who does not relish yams mixed with oil, let 
him come and take the white yam and eat it!’ From 
there he goes again under the house-door and prays: ‘He 
of my guardian gods and he of the watchers of the house 
who likes not yams mixed with oil, let him come and take 
the white yam from my hand and eat!’ From the house- 
door he steps into the midst of the chamber and says: 
‘He who relishes not the yams mixed with oil, may eat the 
white ; he who relishes not the white may eat the red; and 
he who relishes not the red may eat the uncooked!’ With 
this prayer he has completed his duties as house-priest. 
Just as the weaver prays to his loom, so the hunter prays 
to his musket, the smith to his hammer and anvil, and the 
carpenter to his plane and saw. 

“ Now, while the free people begin to cook the yams so 
soon as the priest has left the town, the slaves of the Earth 
Gods, the 770#/uwo, must first as children perform their duties 
to the priest of their gods. Each of these children receives 
from his parents on the morning of the Yam Festival two 
pieces of yam, which he brings to the priest of his god. The 
priest cuts off a small piece of the yam and divides the piece 
again into four pieces. The child kneels before him and 
lolls out his tongue. Holding two of these pieces of yam 
in his hands, the priest utters a prayer over the child and 
touches his tongue five times with the pieces of yam. Then 
the child stretches his hands out, each of which the priest 
touches five times with the same pieces of yam and prays 
as before. Then he touches both feet of the child five times 
and prays for the third time. He takes half of the cowry- 
shells which the child has brought, fastens them on a string, 
and hangs it round the child’s neck. Thereby the child gets 
leave to eat new yams. 

“ After all these preparations the yams are pounded into 
a mash, and every one calls his brother, that he may eat 
with him. When the meal is over, the people are called 
together to amuse themselves and to drink palm wine. In 


Festival 

of the 

new yams 
among the 
Ashantees 
in Septem- 
ber. 


62 EATING THE GOD CHAP, 


the afternoon every one bathes, puts on a new garment, and 
girds himself with a new loin-cloth.” ! 

The Ashantees celebrate the festival of the new yams 
early in September ; until it is over none of the people may 
taste of the new yams. “The Yam Custom,” we are told, 
“is like the Saturnalia ; neither theft, intrigue, nor assault 
are punishable during the continuance, but the grossest 
liberty prevails, and each sex abandons itself to its passions.” 
An eye-witness has described the scene at Coomassie, the 
capital: “The next morning the King ordered a large 
quantity of rum to be poured into brass pans, in various 
parts of the town ; the crowd pressing around, and drinking 
like hogs ; freemen and slaves, women and children, striking, 
kicking, and trampling each other under foot, pushed head 
foremost into the pans, and spilling much more than they 
drank. In less than an hour, excepting the principal men, 
not a sober person was to be seen, parties of four, reeling 
and rolling under the weight of another, whom they affected 
to be carrying home; strings of women covered with red 
paint, hand in hand, falling down like rows of cards; the 
commonest mechanics and slaves furiously declaiming on 
state palavers ; the most discordant music, the most obscene 
songs, children of both sexes prostrate in insensibility. All 
wore their handsomest cloths, which they trailed after them 
to a great length, in a drunken emulation of extravagance 
and dirtiness.” About a hundred persons, mostly culprits 
reserved for the purpose, used to be sacrificed at this festival 
in Coomassie. All the chiefs killed several slaves that their 
blood might flow into the hole from which the new yam was 
taken. Such as could not afford to kill slaves took the head 
of a slave who had already been sacrificed and placed it in 


1 J. Spieth, Dze Hwe-Stimme the child is a girl, she is married to 
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 304-310, 340; the priest’s son; if it is a boy, he 
compare 7a. pp. 435, 480, 768. The — serves the priest until his mother has 


“¢ slaves of the Earth-gods ” are children 
whom women have obtained through 
prayers offered to Agbasia, the greatest 
of the Earth-gods. When such a child 
is born, it is regarded as the slave of 
Agbasia; and the mother dedicates it 
to the service of the god, as in simi- 
lar circumstances Hannah dedicated 
Samuel to the Lord (1 Samuel i.). If 


given birth to a girl whom she ex- 
changes for the boy. See J. Spieth, 
op. ctt. pp. 448-450. In all such 
cases the original idea probably was 
that the child has been begotten in the 
woman by the god and therefore be- 
longs to him as to his father, in the 
literal sense of the word. 


Xx THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 63 


the hole. About ten days after these ceremonies the whole 
of the royal household ate new yams for the first time in the 
market-place, the King himself being in attendance. Next 
day he and his captains set off before sunrise to perform their 
annual ablutions in the river Dah; almost all the inhabitants 
of the capital followed him, so that the streets appeared to 
be deserted. The following day the King, attended by his 
suite, washed in the marsh at the south-east end of the town 
and laved the water not only over himself but also over the 
chairs, stools, gold and silver plate, and the articles of furniture 
which were set aside for his special use." From another 
account it appears that the King of Ashantee must eat the 
new yams before any of his subjects was at liberty to do so. 
Similarly in the West African kingdom of Assinie, which 
forms part of the French possessions of Senegal, the king 
must eat the new yams eight full days before the people 
may taste them.® 

A second festival of yams used to be celebrated at 
Coomassie in December, when the king or a fetish priest 
consecrated the new yams before they could be eaten by 
common folk. On one of the days of this December 
celebration all the laws were suspended, and every man 
might do what seemed good in his own eyes: he might 
even, contrary to custom, look at the king’s wives, to 
the number of several hundreds, when they returned with 
the king and his suite from washing in the fetish water 
of Tana. All that day drinking went on, and the noise 
and uproar were prolonged far into the night. Early 
in the morning a human victim was sacrificed: the first 
man found near the gates of the palace was _ seized, 
butchered, and cut in pieces, and the executioners danced 
with the bleeding fragments of the victim in their hands or 
fastened round their necks. Before he ate of the new yams 
the king washed himself in fetish water brought from distant 
springs, and the chiefs performed similar ablutions.* In 


1T. E. Bowdich, Afssion from 3 J. C. Reichenbach, ‘‘ Etude sur 
Cape Coast Castie to Ashantee, New le royaume d’Assinie,” Bulletin de la 
Edition (London, 1873), pp. 226-229. Société de Géographie (Paris), vii.éme 
2 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Tshi-speaking Série, xi. (1890) p. 349. 
Peoples of the Gold Coast (London, 4 Ramseyer and Kiihne, Four 
1887), pp. 229 sq. Years in Ashantee (London, 1875), pp. 


Festival of 
the new 
yams at 
Coomassie 
and Benin 


Ceremonies 
observed 
by the 
Nandi at 
eating the 
new eleu- 
sine grain. 


64 EATING THE GOD CHAP: 


Benin the new yams might not be eaten until the king had 
performed certain ceremonies, among which one is said to 
have been a pretence of making a yam to grow in a pot. 
Dancing, merrymaking, and farces or plays formed part of 
the festival; the city was crowded with people, and they 
indulged in a regular orgie.’ 

Among the Nandi of British East Africa, when the 
eleusine grain is ripening in autumn, every woman who owns 
a cornfield goes out into it with her daughters, and they all 
pluck some of the ripe grain. Each of the women then 
fixes one grain in her necklace and chews another, which she 
rubs on her forehead, throat, and breast. No mark of joy 
escapes them ; sorrowfully they cut a basketful of the new 
corn, and carrying it home place it in the loft to dry. As 
the ceiling is of wickerwork, a good deal of the grain drops 


through the crevices and falls into the fire, where it explodes 


with a crackling noise. The people make no attempt to 
prevent this waste ; for they regard the crackling of the grain 


in the fire as a sign that the souls of the dead are partaking © 


of it. A few days later porridge is made from the new grain 
and served up with milk at the evening meal. All the 


members of the family take some of the porridge and dab it | 


on the walls and roofs of the huts; also they put a little in 
their mouths and spit it out towards the east and on the out- 
side of the huts. Then, holding up some of the grain in his 
hand, the head of the family prays to God for health and 


strength, and likewise for milk, and everybody present repeats | 


the words of the prayer after him.2 Amongst the Baganda, 
when the beans were ripe, a woman would call her eldest 
son to eat some of the first which she cooked; if she 
neglected to do so, it was believed that she would incur 


the displeasure of the gods and fall ill. After the meal her | 


husband jumped over her, and the beans might thereafter 
be eaten by all.° 


Amongst the Caffres of Natal and Zululand, no one | 
may eat of the new fruits till after a festival which marks 


147-151; E. Perregaux, Chez /es 2 A.C. Hollis, The Nandi (Oxford, 
Achanti (Neuchatel, 1906), pp. 1909), pp. 46 sg. 
158-160. 


1H. Ling Roth, Gveat Lenin 3 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda 


(Halifax, England, 1903), pp. 76 sg. (London, 1911), p. 428. 


the beginning of the Caffre year and falls at the end of Festival of 
December or the beginning of January. All the people ae, 
assemble at the king’s kraal, where they feast and dance. ace the 
Before they separate the “dedication of the people” takes eee he 
place. Various fruits of the earth, as corn, mealies, and Zululand, 
pumpkins, mixed with the flesh of a sacrificed animal and 

with “ medicine,” are boiled in great pots, and a little of 

this food is placed in each man’s mouth by the king 
himself. After thus partaking of the sanctified fruits, a 

man is himself sanctified for the whole year, and may 
immediately get in his crops.’ It is believed that if any 

man were to partake of the new fruits before the festival, 

he would die ;? if he were detected, he would be put to 

death, or at least all his cattle would be taken from him.® 

The holiness of the new fruits is well marked by the rule 

that they must be cooked in a special pot which is used 

only for this purpose, and on a new fire kindled by a 
magician through the friction of two sticks which are called 
“husband and wife.” These sticks are prepared by the 
sorcerers from the wood of the Uzwatz tree and belong 
exclusively to the chief. The “wife” is the shorter of the 

two. When the magician has kindled the new fire on 

which the new fruits are to be cooked, he hands the fire- 

sticks back to the chief, for no other hand may touch them ; 

and they are then put away till they are required next 
season. The sticks are regarded as in a measure sacred, 

and no one, except the chief’s personal servant, may go to 

the side of the hut where they are kept. No pot but the 

one used for the preparation of this feast may be set on a 

fire made by the friction of the “ husband and wife.” When 

the feast is over, the fire is carefully extinguished, and the 

pot is put away with the fire-sticks, where it remains un- 
touched for another year.* 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 65 
| A remarkable feature of the festival, as it is observed at 


1 F. Speckmann, Die Hermanns- Religious System of the Amazulu, Part 
burger Mission in Afrika (Hermanns- iii. p. 389 note. 
burg, 1876), pp. 150 sg. 4 Rev. J. Macdonald, Zzeht ix 
‘ ; Africa, Second Edition (London, 1890) 
2 2 > ’ 
L. sate Zulu-land (Philadelphia, pp. 216 sg. On the conception of the 
pep); p. 161. two fire-sticks as husband and wife, 
3 (South African) Folk-lore Journal, see The Magic Art and the Evolution 
i. (1879) p. 135; Rev. H. Callaway, of Kings, ii. 208 sgq. 
Biv. VOL. iI F 


Dance of 
the Zulu 
king at the 
festival. 


Licentious 
character 
of the 
festival. 


The festi- 


val as cele- 


brated by 
the Pondos, 


Bull-fights 
and games. 


66 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


the court of the Zulu king, is a dance performed by the 
king himself in a mantle of grass or, according to another 
account, of herbs and corn-leaves. This mantle is afterwards 
burnt and its ashes are scattered and trodden into the 
ground by cattle Further, it is worthy of notice that 
the festival is described as a saturnalia, and we are told 
that “a great deal of noise and dancing goes on, and people 
are not supposed to be responsible for what they say or 
do.”* Thus, for example, among the Pondos the festival 
includes a period of license, during the continuance of 
which the chief abdicates his functions and any crime may 
be committed with impunity. The description of the 
Pondo festival comprises so many interesting features that 
I will reproduce it entire. “When a Pondo chief is to 
hold the feast of first-fruits, some of his people procure a 
ripe plant of the gourd family, pumpkin or calabash, from 
another tribe. This is cooked; the inside cleaned out, 
and the rind made ready for use as a vessel. It is then 
presented to the chief with much ceremony. The first- 
fruits are now brought forward, and a sacrifice, generally a 
young bull, is offered, after which the feast commences. 
The chief issues certain orders for the conduct of the pro- 
ceedings, tastes the fruits which are served in the gourd- 
dish with which he has been presented, and then abdicates 
all his functions while the festival lasts. The cattle from 
all the neighbouring villages are collected in the vicinity, 
and now they are brought together, and the bulls incited to 
fight to determine which is to be king among them for the 
next year. The young people engage in games and dances, 
feats of strength and running. After these are over the 
whole community give themselves over to disorder, de- 
bauchery, and riot. In their bull-fights and games they 
but did honour to the powers of nature, and now, as they 
eat and drink, the same powers are honoured in another 
form and by other rites. There is no one in authority to 
keep order, and every man does what seems good in his 


1 J. Shooter, Zhe Kajfirs of Natal Dudley Kidd, Zhe Essential Kafir 
(London, 1857), p. 27; N. Isaacs, (London, 1904), pp. 270, 271. 
Travels and Adventures tn Eastern 
Africa (London, 1836), ii. 293; 2 J. Macdonald, of. czt. p. 189. 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 67 


own eyes. Should a man stab his neighbour he escapes 
all punishment, and so too with all other crimes against the 
person, property, and morality. People are even permitted 
to abuse the chief to his face, an offence which at any other 
time would meet with summary vengeance and an uncere- 
monious dispatch to join the ancestors. While the feast 
continues, a deafening noise is kept up by drumming, shout- 
ing, hand-clapping, and every kind of instrument that can be 
made to emit sound. Men advance to the chief and ex- 
plain their origin, and also the object they hold sacred, by 
imitating the sounds and movements of their most sacred 
animal. This is the person’s totem. Others imitate the 
gurgling made by an enemy when stabbed in the throat. 
Those who adopt this latter emblem are known as ‘ children 
of the spear. When the ceremonies, revels, and mummeries 
are ended, the chief repairs to his accustomed place, and 
sitting down there, by that act resumes his kingly functions. 
He calls the bravest of his braves before him, who is 
immediately clothed and decorated with skins of animals 
suggestive of courage and strategy. He performs a dance 
amid the frenzied shouting of the multitude, after which the 
chief declares the festival at an end and harvest com- 
menced.”* Another writer, speaking of the Zulu festival 
of first- fruits as it was celebrated in the time of the 
ferocious despot Chaka, says that “at this period the 
chiefs are allowed to converse unreservedly with the 
king, speaking with great freedom, and in some measure 
to be dictatorial.”* Again, another traveller, who visited 
the Zulus in the reign of King Panda, tells us that “in 
spite of the practice of the most absolute despotism there 
are three days in the year when the nation in its turn has 
the right to call the king to a severe account for his acts. 
It is at the general assembly of the warriors, when the 
maize is ripe, that the lively discussions take place and the 
questions are put to which the king must answer at once 
in a manner satisfactory to the people. I have then seen 
1 Rev. J. Macdonald, Religion his Light zu Africa, Second Edition 
and Myth (London, 1893), pp. 136- (London, 1890), p. 189. 
138, from manuscript notes furnished 2 N. Isaacs, Zvavels and Advent- 


by J. Sutton. Mr. Macdonald has «res zn Eastern Africa (London, 1836), 
described the custom more briefly in ii. 292. 


License ac- 
corded to 
chiefs and 
others at 
this festival 
among the 
Zulus. 


Traces of 
an annual 
abdication 
of Zulu 
kings, per- 
haps of a 
custom of 
burning 
them and 
scattering 
their ashes. 


68 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


simple warriors come leaping from the ranks, assume the 
style of fluent and excessively energetic orators, and not 
only confront the fiery glare of Panda, but even attack him 
before everybody, blame his acts, call them infamous and 
base, compel him to vindicate his conduct, and then refute 
his vindication by dissecting it and exposing its falsehood, 
finally proceeding to haughty threats and winding up the 
harangue with a gesture of contempt.”* Such liberties 
taken with the despotic Zulu kings seem to point to a time 
when they too, like the Pondo chiefs, abdicated or were 
deposed during the festival. Perhaps we may even go a 
step further. We have seen that on this occasion the Zulu 
king dances in a mantle of grass or of herbs and corn- 
leaves, which is afterwards burnt and the ashes scattered 
and trodden into the ground. This custom seems clearly 
intended to promote the fertility of the earth, and in earlier 
times the same end may have been compassed by burning 
the king himself and dispersing his ashes ; for we have seen 
that a Bechuana tribe, of the same Bantu stock as the 
Zulus, were wont to sacrifice a human victim for the good 
of the crops and to scatter his ashes over the ground.? In 
this connexion it should be borne in mind that we have 
found independent evidence of a custom of putting the 
Zulu king to death whenever his bodily strength began to 
fail.® 


1A. Delegorgue, Voyage dans 
l Afrique Australe (Paris, 1847), ii. 
237. 


27), L. Grout (Zzlu-land, p. 162), and 
Mr. Dudley Kidd (Zhe Zssential 
Kajfir, p. 271). According to this 


2 Above, vol. i. p. 240. 

3 See The Dying God, pp. 36 sg. 
On the Zulu festival of first-fruits see 
also T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, 
Voyage a’ Exploration au Nord-Est de 
la Colonie du Cap de Bonne Espé- 
vance (Paris, 1843), pp. 308 sg.3; G. 
Fritsch, Dze Ezngeborenen Stid-Afrikas 
(Breslau, 1872), p. 143. Fritsch 
mentions that after executing a grot- 
esque dance in the presence of the 
assembled multitude the king gives 
formal permission to eat of the new 
fruits by dashing a gourd or calabash 
to the ground. This ceremony of 
breaking the calabash is mentioned 
also by J. Shooter (Aajirs of Natal, p. 


last writer the calabash is filled with 
boiled specimens of the new fruits, and 
the king sprinkles the people with the 
cooked food, frequently spitting it out 
on them. Mr. Grout tells us (/c.) 
that at the ceremony a bull is killed 
and its gall drunk by the king and the 
people. In killing it the warriors 
must use nothing but their naked 
hands. The flesh of the bull is given 
to the boys to eat what they like and 
burn the rest; the men may not taste 
it. See L. Grout, op. cz#. p. 161. Ac- 
cording to Shooter, two bulls are 
killed ; the first is black, the second 
of another colour. The boys who eat 
the beef of the black bull may not 


THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 69 


Among the Bechuanas it is a rule that before they 
partake of the new crops they must purify themselves. 
The purification takes place at the commencement of the 
new year on a day in January which is fixed by the chief. 
It begins in the great kraal of the tribe, where all the adult 
males assemble. Each of them takes in his hand leaves of 
a gourd called by the natives /ervotse (described as something 
between a pumpkin and a vegetable marrow); and having 
crushed the leaves he anoints with the expressed juice his 
big toes and his navel; many people indeed apply the 
juice to all the joints of their body, but the better-informed 
say that this is a vulgar departure from ancient custom. 
After this ceremony in the great kraal every man goes 
home to his own kraal, assembles all the members of his 
family, men, women, and children, and smears them all 
with the juice of the /rvotse leaves. Some of the leaves are 
also pounded, mixed with milk in a large wooden dish, and 
given to the dogs to lap up. Then the porridge plate of 
each member of the family is rubbed with the /erotse leaves. 
When this purification has been completed, but not before, 
the people are free to eat of the new crops. On the night 
after the purification every man was bound, as a matter of 
ritual, to sleep with his chief wife. If she had been unfaith- 
ful to him during the past year, it was incumbent on her to 
confess her sin before she fulfilled her part of the ceremony. 
Having confessed she was purified by a. medicine-man, who 
fumigated her with the smoke produced by burning a bean 
plant. Thereupon husband and wife cut each other slightly 
under the navel, and each of them rubbed his or her blood, 
mixed with “medicine,” into the others wound. That 
completed the purification of the woman, and the pair might 
now proceed with the rest of the rite. Should a married 
man be from home at the time when the annual purification 


drink till the next morning, else the 
king would be defeated in war or 
visited with some personal misfortune. 
See Shooter, of. czt. pp. 26 sg. Ac- 
cording to another account the sacrifice 
of the bull, performed by the warriors 
of a particular regiment with their 
bare hands, takes place several weeks 
before the festival of first-fruits, and 


‘“the strength of the bull is supposed 
to enter into the king, thereby prolong- 
ing his health and strength.” See 
D. Leslie, Among the Zulus and 
Amatongas* (Edinburgh, 1875), p. 91. 
For a general account of the Caffre 
festival of first-fruits, see Dudley Kidd, 
The Essential Kafir (London, 1904), 


pp. 270-272. 


Ceremonies 
observed 
by the 
Bechuanas 
before eat- 
ing the new 
fruits. 


Ceremonies 
observed 
by the 
Matabele 
at eating 
the new 
fruits. 


EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


70 


ceremony is performed, he is thought to be in a very sad 
plight ; indeed his chances of surviving for another year are 
supposed to be small. On his return home, he dare not 
enter his own house, for he would pollute it, and if even 
his shadow were to fall on one of his children, the child 
would die. He must wait till his wife comes to him and 
brings him a calabash of water to drink, which is a sign 
that she has waited for his return to perform the rite of 
purification together. But if she does not bring the 
water, he knows that in his absence she has performed the 
rite with some other man, and it becomes necessary to 
purge her by means of fumigation and blood-letting, as 
described before. But even when that purgation is com- 
pleted, husband and wife may not indulge in connubial 
intercourse for the rest of the year, that is, until the 
next annual purification has taken place. The Bechuanas 
think that “any breach of this rule will be punished with 
supernatural penalties—the husband, wife, or child will die.” * 

Among the Matabele, another Bantu tribe of South 
Africa, no one might partake of the new fruits till the king 
had first tasted of them ; any one who was known to have 
broken the law was instantly put to death. On this 
occasion the regiments assembled at Bulawayo, the capital, 
and danced in a great semicircle before the king, who 
occasionally joined in the dance. When he did so, the 
medicine-men and their satellites, armed with thorn-bushes, 
rushed about among the dancers and incited them to fresh 


1 Rev. W. C. Willoughby, ‘‘ Notes 
on the Totemism of the Becwana,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
XXxV. (1905) pp. 311-313. It is very 


Sud-Africains et leurs tabous,” Revue 
a@Ethnographie et de Soctologie, i. 
(1910) p. 148; Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe 
Baganda (London, 1911), pp. 48, 144, 


remarkable that among several Bantu 
tribes the cohabitation of husband and 
wife is enjoined as a religious or magical 
rite on a variety of solemn occasions, 
such as after the death of a son or 
daughter, the circumcision of a child, 
the first menstruation of a daughter, 
the occupation of a new house or of a 
new village, etc. For examples see 
C. W. Hobley, Zthnology of A-Kamba 
and other East African Tribes (Cam- 
bridge, 1910), pp. 58, 59, 60, 65, 67, 
(HS) 7/28) al, AN, |fwimoel, COlLes Core 
ceptions physiologiques des Bantou 


357, 363, 378, 428, etc. ; zd@., ‘< Fur- 
ther Notes on the Manners and 
Customs of the Baganda,” /ournal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxil. 
(1902) pp. 59, 61. Among the 
Baganda the act of stepping or leaping 
over a woman is regarded as equiva- 
lent to cohabitation with her, and is 
accepted as a ritual substitute for it 
(J. Roscoe, 7he Baganda, p. 357 note). 
The ideas on which this custom of 
ceremonial cohabitation is based are 
by no means clear. 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 71 


efforts by a vigorous application ofsthe thorns to the bodies 
of such as seemed to flag. The king’s wives also sang and 
danced before him in long lines, holding the marriage ring in 
their right hands and green boughs in their left. On the 
third day of the festival hundreds of oxen were sacrificed : 
the flesh and blood of the black or sacred cattle were 
converted into charms; while the carcases of the rest were 
cut up and distributed among the people, who feasted upon 
them. The fourth day was specially set apart for the 
ceremony of the first-fruits. In the morning all the people 
went down to the river to wash, and on their return a witch- 
doctor or medicine-man took a dish of the new vegetables 
and corn, mixed with charms, and scattered the contents 
by handfuls among the crowd, who seized and ate them, 
After that the people were free to eat the mew crops. 
According to one account, this festival of first-fruits was 
held at the first full moon which followed the summer 
solstice (the twenty-first of December in the southern 
hemisphere) ; according to another account, it took place a 
few days after the full moon of February, which marked the 
beginning of the Matabele year.’ 

- The Ovambo or, as they call themselves, the Ovakuan- 
jama, of South-West Africa, may not partake of the new 
fruits of the omuongo tree, which ripen in February and from 
.which an intoxicating beverage is extracted, until certain 
ceremonies have been performed. Among other things 
husband and wife mutually offer each other one of the 
fruits, make white strokes with chalk each on the brow, 
cheeks, and nose of the other, and accompany the action 
with the formal expression of good wishes. If this ceremony, 
which seems to mark the beginning of the New Year, were 
omitted, they believe that they would be attacked by a 
painful disease of the knee-joints which would cripple them.” 

The Bororo Indians of Brazil think that it would be 
certain death to eat the new maize before it has been blessed 


1 Ch. Croonenberghs, S.J., ‘‘La 
féte de la Grande Danse dans le haut 
Zambeze,” Les Missions Catholigues, 
xiv. (1882) pp. 230-234; L. Decle, 
Three Years in Savage Africa (Lon- 
don, 1898), pp. 157 sg. The two 


accounts supplement each other. I 
have combined features from both in 
the text. 

2H. Tonjes, Ovamboland, Land, 
Leute, Mission (Berlin, 1911), pp. 200 
SG. 


Ceremony 
observed 
by the 
Ovambo 
at eating 
the new 
fruits. 


Ceremony 
observed 
by the 
Bororo 
Indians 
before eat- 
ing the new 
maize. 


The dusk or 
festival of 
first-fruits 
among the 
Creek 
Indians 

of North 
America. 


EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


72 


by the medicine-man. The ceremony of blessing it is as 
follows. The half-ripe husk is washed and placed before 
the medicine-man, who by dancing and singing for several 
hours, and by incessant smoking, works himself up into a 
state of ecstasy, whereupon he bites into the husk, trem- 
bling in every limb and uttering shrieks from time to 
time. A similar ceremony is performed whenever a large 
animal or a large fish is killed. The Bororo are firmly per- 
suaded that were any man to touch unconsecrated maize or 
meat, before the ceremony had been completed, he and his 
whole tribe would perish.’ 

Amongst the Creek Indians of North America, the dusk 
or festival of first-fruits was the chief ceremony of the year.’ 
It was held in July or August, when the corn was ripe, and 
marked the end of the old year and the beginning of the 
new one. Before it took place, none of the Indians would 
eat or even handle any part of the new harvest. Some- 
times each town had its own busk ; sometimes several towns 
united to hold one in common. Before celebrating the 
busk, the people provided themselves with new clothes and 
new household utensils and furniture ; they collected their 
old clothes and rubbish, together with all the remaining 
grain and other old provisions, cast them together in one 


1 VY. Fric and P. Radin, ‘‘Contribu- 
tions to the Study of the Bororo Indians,” 
Journal of the Anthropological [nstitute, 
XXXVi. (1906) p. 392. 

* The ceremony is described inde- 
pendently by James Adair, Azstory of 
the American Indians (London, 1775), 
pp. 96-111; W. Bartram, TZvavels 
through North and South Carolina, 
Georgia, East and West Florida (Lon- 
don, 1792), pp. 507 sg. ; A. Hodgson, 
Letters from North America (London, 
1824), i, 431 sg. 3 B. Hawkins, 
“Sketch of the Creek Country,” in 
Collections of the Georgia Historical 
Society, iii. (Savannah, 1848) pp. 75- 
783 A. A. M‘Gillivray, in H.R: 
Schoolcraft’s Zndian Tribes of the 
United States (Philadelphia, 1853- 
1356); v. 267 sgo;) B G: ‘Speck: 
Ethnology of the Yuchi Indians 
(Philadelphia, 1909), pp. 112-131. 
The fullest descriptions are those 


of Adair and Speck. In the text I 
have chiefly followed Adair, our oldest 
authority. A similar ceremony was 
observed by the Cherokees. See the 
description (from an unpublished MS. 
of J. H. Payne, author of Home, Sweet 
ffome) in ** Observations on the Creek 
and Cherokee Indians, by William 
Bartram, 1789, with prefatory and 
supplementary notes by E. G. Squier,” 
Transactions of the American Ethno- 
logical Soctety, vol. iii. Part i. (1853) 
p. 75. The Indians of Alabama also 
held a great festival at their harvest 
in July. They passed the day fast- 
ing, lit a new fire, purged them- 
selves, and offered the first-fruits to 
their JZanztoo: the ceremony ended 
with a religious dance. See Bossu, 
Nouveaux Voyages aux Indes occiden= 
tales (Paris, 1768), ii. 54. These 
Indians of Alabama were probably 
either the Creeks or the Cherokees. 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 


73 


common heap, and consumed them with fire." As a prepara- 
tion for the ceremony, all the fires in the village were extin- 
guished, and the ashes swept clean away. In particular, 
the hearth or altar of the temple was dug up and the ashes 
carried out. Then the chief priest put some roots of the 
button-snake plant, with some green tobacco leaves and a 
little of the new fruits, at the bottom of the fireplace, which 
he afterwards commanded to be covered up with white clay, 
and wetted over with clean water. A thick arbour of green 
branches of young trees was then made over the altar.” 
Meanwhile the women at home were cleaning out their 
houses, renewing the old hearths, and scouring all the cook- 
ing vessels that they might be ready to receive the new fire 
and the new fruits. The public or sacred square was care- 
fully swept of even the smallest crumbs of previous feasts, 
“for fear of polluting the first-fruit offerings.” Also every 
vessel that had contained or had been used about any food 
during the expiring year was removed from the temple 
before sunset. Then all the men who were not known to 
have violated the law of the first-fruit offering and that of 
marriage during the year were summoned by a crier to 
enter the holy square and observe a solemn fast. But the 
women (except six old ones), the children, and all who had 
not attained the rank of warriors were forbidden to enter 
the square. Sentinels were also posted at the corners of the 
square to keep out all persons deemed impure and all 
animals. A strict fast was then observed for two nights 
and a day, the devotees drinking a bitter decoction of 
button-snake root “in order to vomit and purge their sinful 
bodies.” That the people outside the square might also be 
purified, one of the old men laid down a quantity of green 
tobacco at a corner of the square; this was carried off by 
an old woman and distributed to the people without, who 
chewed and swallowed it “in order to afflict their souls.” 
During this general fast, the women, children, and men of 


1 W. Bartram, Zvavels, p. 507. 

2 So amongst the Cherokees, accord- 
ing to J. H. Payne, an arbour of green 
boughs was made in the sacred square ; 


sacred square. Every man then pro- 
vided himself with a green bough.” 


3 So Adair. Bartram, on the other 


then ‘‘a beautiful bushy-topped shade- 
tree was cut down close to the roots, 
and planted in the very centre of the 


hand, as we have seen, says that the 
people provided themselves with new 
household utensils. 


Fast and 
purgation 


New fire 
made by 
friction. 


74 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


weak constitution were allowed to eat after mid-day, but not 
before. On the morning when the fast ended, the women 
brought a quantity of the old year’s food to the outside of 
the sacred square. These provisions were then fetched in 
and set before the famished multitude, but all traces of them 
had to be removed before noon. When the sun was declin- 
ing from the meridian, all the people were commanded by 
the voice of a crier to stay within doors, to do no bad act, 
and to be sure to extinguish and throw away every spark 
of the old fire. Universal silence now reigned. Then the 
high priest made the new fire by the friction of two pieces 
of wood, and placed it on the altar under the green arbour. 
This new fire was believed to atone for all past crimes 
except murder. Next a basket of new fruits was brought ; 
the high priest took out a little of each sort of fruit, rubbed 
it with bear’s oil, and offered it, together with some flesh, 
“to the bountiful holy spirit of fire, as a first-fruit offering, 
and an annual oblation for sin.” He also consecrated the 
sacred emetics (the button-snake root and the cassina or 
black-drink) by pouring a little of them into the fire. The 
persons who had remained outside now approached, without 
entering, the sacred square; and the chief priest thereupon 
made a speech, exhorting the people to observe their old 
rites and customs, announcing that the new divine fire had 
purged away the sins of the past year, and earnestly warn- 
ing the women that, if any of them had not extinguished 
the old fire, or had contracted any impurity, they must 
forthwith depart, “lest the divine fire should spoil both them 
and the people.” Some of the new fire was then set down 
outside the holy square; the women carried it home joy- 
fully, and laid it on their unpolluted hearths. When several 
towns had united to celebrate the festival, the new fire 
might thus be carried for several miles. The new fruits 
were then dressed on the new fires and eaten with bear’s oil, 
which was deemed indispensable. At one point of the 
festival the men rubbed the new corn between their hands, 
then on their faces and breasts.’ During the festival which 
followed, the warriors, dressed in their wild martial array, 
their heads covered with white down and carrying white 
1 B. Hawkins, ‘‘ Sketch,” etc., p. 76. 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 75 


feathers in their hands, danced round the sacred arbour, 
under which burned the new fire. The ceremonies lasted 
eight days, during which the strictest continence was prac- 
tised. Towards the conclusion of the festival the warriors 
fought a mock battle; then the men and women together, 
in three circles, danced round the sacred fire. Lastly, all 
the people smeared themselves with white clay and bathed 
in running water. They came out of the water believing 
that no evil could now befall them for what they had done 
amiss in the past. So they departed in joy and peace. 
Ceremonies of the same general type are still annually 
observed by the Yuchi Indians of Oklahoma, who belong to 
the Creek nation but speak a different language. The rites 
are said to have been instituted by the Sun. They are 
solemnised in the public square, and are timed so as to 
coincide with the ripening of the corn, which usually takes 
place about the middle or early part of July. Continence and 
abstinence from salt are prescribed during their celebration, 
and all the men must fast for twelve hours before they 
take the emetic. A sacred new fire is kindled by striking 
two stones against each other, after which all the males are 
scarified or scratched by an official on the arm or breast, so 
as to let blood flow and drip on the ground of the public 
square. This bleeding of the men is said to be symbolical 
of the origin of the Yuchi people ; for the first Yuchi sprang 
from some drops of blood which the mother of the Sun let 
fall on earth at one of her monthly periods. Hence the Yuchi 
call themselves the Children of the Sun. The solemn rite 
of scratching is followed by the no less solemn rite of vomit- 
ing. This also was instituted by the Sun. He taught the 
Indians to steep the button-snake root and the red root in 
water and to drink the decoction, in order that they might 
vomit and so purify their bodies against sickness during the 
ensuing year. They think that if they did not thus purge 
themselves before eating the new corn, they would fall sick. 
The chief of the town is charged with the solemn duty of 
preparing the nauseous concoction, and he is assisted by four 
boys who have been initiated into the mysteries. The pots 
containing the stuff are decorated on the rim with a pattern 
representing the sun, and they stand east of the fire near 


Festival of 
the new 
fruits 
among the 
Yuchi 
Indians. 


Game of 
ball. 


Green Corn 
Dance 
among the 
Seminole 
Indians. 


76 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


the middle of the public square. The order of drinking is 
regulated by the rank of the drinkers. When the sun is 
about the zenith, the four noblest come forward, face east- 
ward, and gulp down the vile but salutary potion ; then they 
retire to their places and await the usual results. When 
they feel the inward workings of the draught, they step out 
of the square and discharge the contents of their stomachs 
in a place set apart for the purpose. They are followed 
by another party of four, and that by another, and so on, 
till all the men have thus purged themselves. The rite is 
repeated several times. When it is over, they all go to 
water and wash off the paint with which they were adorned ; 
then returning to their places in the square they feast on the 
new corn. After a rest of some hours the men engage in 
ball play, not as a mere recreation but as a matter of ritual. 
Sides are chosen ; every player is equipped with two rackets, 
and the aim of each side is to drive the ball through their 
opponents’ goal, which consists of two uprights and a cross- 
piece. The two goals stand east and west of each other. 
During the following night dancing is kept up, and a 
general laxity, degenerating into debauchery, prevails; but 
parents and elders wink at the excesses of the young folk. 
Among the dances are some in which the dancers mimick 
the motions and cries of their totemic animals, such as ducks, 
buzzards, rabbits, fish, buffaloes, chickens, and owls.' 

To this day, also, the remnant of the Seminole Indians 
of Florida, a people of the same stock as the Creeks,” hold 
an annual purification and festival called the Green Corn 
Dance, at which the new corn is eaten. On the evening of 
the first day of the festival they quaff a nauseous “ Black 
Drink,” as it is called, which acts both as an emetic and a 
purgative ; they believe that he who does not drink of this 
liquor cannot safely eat the new green corn, and besides that 
he will be sick at some time in the year. While the liquor is 
being drunk, the dancing begins, and the medicine-men join 
in it. Next day they eat of the green corn; the following 

1F, G. Speck, Ethnology of the  Naturvilker, iii. (Leipsic, 1862) p. 
Yucht Indians (Philadelphia, 1909), 42; A. S. Gatschet, A Jfgration 
pp. 86-89, 105-107, 112-131. Legend of the Creek Indians, i. (Phil- 


adelphia, 1884) pp. 66 sgg. 3 Totemism 
2-Th. Waitz, Anthropologie der and Exogamy, iii. 167. 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 77 


} day they fast, probably from fear of polluting the sacred food 
| in their stomachs by contact with common food; but the 
third day they hold a great feast." Further, the Natchez 
Indians, another tribe of the same stock, who used to inhabit 
a district on the lower course and eastern bank of the Mis- 
sissippi, ate the new corn sacramentally at a great festival 
which has been fully described by Du Pratz, the French 
historian of Louisiana. As his work is probably not easily 
accessible to many of my readers, I shall perhaps consult 
their convenience by extracting his description entire. The 
Natchez, he tells us, began their year in March and divided 
it into thirteen moons. Their sixth moon, which answered 
to our August, was the Mulberry Moon, and the seventh was 
the moon of Maize or Great Corn. “This feast is beyond 
dispute the most solemn of all. It principally consists in 
eating in common, and in a religious manner, of new corn, 
which had been sown expressly with that design, with suit- 
able ceremonies. This corn is sown upon a spot of ground 
never before cultivated ; which ground is dressed and pre- 
pared by the warriors alone, who also are the only persons 
that sow the corn, weed it, reap it, and gather it. When 
this corn is near ripe, the warriors fix on a place proper for 
the general feast, and close adjoining to that they form a 
round granary, the bottom and sides of which are of cane; 
this they fill with the corn, and when they have finished the 
harvest, and covered the granary, they acquaint the Great 
Sun,’ who appoints the day for the general feast. Some 
days before the feast, they build huts for the Great Sun, and 
for all the other families, round the granary, that of the 
Great Sun being raised upon a mound of earth about two 
feet high. On the feast-day the whole nation set out from 
their village at sun-rising, leaving behind only the aged and 
infirm that are not able to travel, and a few warriors, who 
are to carry the Great Sun on a litter upon their shoulders. 


1 C. MacCauley, ‘‘ Seminole Indians 
of Florida,” 77th Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 


1887), pp. 522 sq. 


2 That is, the grand chief of the 
nation. All the chiefs of the Natchez 


were called Suns and were connected 
with the head chief or Great Sun, who 
bore on his breast an image of the 
sun and claimed to be descended from 
the luminary. See Bossu, Mouveaux 
Voyages aux Indes occidentales (Paris, 
1768), i. 42. 


Festival 

of the 
new corn 
among the 
Natchez 
Indians. 


New fire 
made by 
friction. 


78 FATING BEE GOD Sa CHAP. 


The seat of this litter is covered with several deer-skins, and 
to its four sides are fastened four bars which cross each other, 
and are supported by eight men, who at every hundred paces 
transfer their burden to eight other men, and thus successively 
transport it to the place where the feast is celebrated, which 
may be near two miles from the village. About nine o’clock 
the Great Sun comes out of his hut dressed in the ornaments 
of his dignity, and being placed in his litter, which has a 
canopy at the head formed of flowers, he is carried in a few 
minutes to the sacred granary, shouts of joy re-echoing on 
all sides. Before he alights he makes the tour of the whole 
place deliberately, and when he comes before the corn, he 
salutes it thrice with the words hoo, hoo, hoo, lengthened and 
pronounced respectfully. The salutation is repeated by the 
whole nation, who pronounce the word foo nine times dis- 
tinctly, and at the ninth time he alights and places himself 
on his throne. 

“Immediately after they light a fire by rubbing two 
pieces of wood violently against each other, and when every- 
thing is prepared for dressing the corn, the chief of war, 
accompanied by the warriors belonging to each family, pre- 
sents himself before the throne, and addresses the Sun in 
these words, ‘Speak, for I hear thee. The sovereign then 
rises up, bows towards the four quarters of the world, and 
advancing to the granary, lifts his eyes and hands to heaven, 
and says, ‘Give us corn’: upon which the great chief of 
war, the princes and princesses, and all the men, thank him 
separately by pronouncing the word foo. The corn is then 
distributed, first to the female Suns, and then to all the 
women, who run with it to their huts, and dress it with the 
utmost dispatch. When the corn is dressed in all the huts, 
a plate of it is put into the hands of the Great Sun, who 
presents it to the four quarters of the world, and then says 
to the chief of war, ‘Eat’; upon this signal the warriors 
begin to eat in all the huts ; after them the boys of whatever 
age, excepting those who are on the breast ; and last of all 
the women. When the warriors have finished their repast, 
they form themselves into two choirs before the huts, and 
sing war songs for half an hour; after which the chief of 
war, and all the warriors in succession, recount their brave 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 79 


exploits, and mention, in a boasting manner, the number of 
enemies they have slain. The youths are next allowed 
to harangue, and each tells in the best manner he can, 
not what he has done, but what he intends to do; and 
if his discourse merits approbation, he is answered by a 
general foo; if not, the warriors hang down their heads 
and are silent. 

“This great solemnity is concluded with a general dance 
by torch-light. Upwards of two hundred torches of dried 
canes, each of the thickness of a child, are lighted round the 
place, where the men and women often continue dancing till 
daylight ; and the following is the disposition of their dance. 
A man places himself on the ground with a pot covered with 
a deer-skin, in the manner of a drum, to beat time to the 
dancers ; round him the women form themselves into a circle, 
not joining hands, but at some distance from each other ; 
and they are inclosed by the men in another circle, who 
have in each hand a chichicois, or calabash, with a stick 
thrust through it to serve for a handle. When the dance 
begins, the women move round the men in the centre, from 
left to right, and the men contrariwise from right to left, and 
they sometimes narrow and sometimes widen their circles. 
In this manner the dance continues without intermission the 
whole night, new performers successively taking the place of 
those who are wearied and fatigued. 

“Next morning no person is seen abroad before the 
Great Sun comes out of his hut, which is generally about 
nine o'clock, and then upon a signal made by the drum, the 
warriors make their appearance distinguished into two troops, 
by the feathers which they wear on their heads. One of 
these troops is headed by the Great Sun, and the other by 
the chief of war, who begin a new diversion by tossing a 
ball of deer-skin stuffed with Spanish beard from the one to 
the other. The warriors quickly take part in the sport, and 
a violent contest ensues which of the two parties shall drive 
the ball to the hut of the opposite chief. The diversion 
generally lasts two hours, and the victors are allowed to 
wear the feathers of superiority till the following year, or till 
the next time they play at the ball. After this the warriors 
perform the war dance; and last of all they go and bathe; 


Torchlight 
dance. 


Game of 
ball. 


Ceremonies 
observed 
by the 
Salish and 
Tinneh 
Indians 
before they 
eat the first 
wild berries 
or roots of 
the season. 


80 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


an exercise which they are very fond of when they are 
heated or fatigued. 

“The rest of that day is employed as the preceding ; for 
the feast holds as long as any of the corn remains. When 
it is all eat up, the Great Sun is carried back in his litter, 
and they all return to the village, after which he sends the 
warriors to hunt both for themselves and him.” ? 

Even tribes which do not till the ground sometimes 
observe analogous ceremonies when they gather the first 
wild fruits or dig the first roots of the season. Thus among 
the Salish and Tinneh Indians of North-West America, 
“before the young people eat the first berries or roots of the 
season, they always addressed the fruit or plant, and begged 
for its favour and aid. In some tribes regular First-fruit 
ceremonies were annually held at the time of picking the 
wild fruit or gathering the roots, and also among the salmon- 
eating tribes when the run of the ‘sockeye’ salmon began. 
These ceremonies were not so much thanksgivings, as per- 
formances to ensure a plentiful crop or supply of the 
particular object desired, for if they were not properly and 
reverently carried out there was danger of giving offence to 
the ‘spirits’ of the objects, and being deprived of them.” 
For example, these Indians are fond of the young shoots or 
suckers of the wild raspberry, and they observe the follow- 
ing ceremony at gathering the first of them in season. 
“When the shoots are ready to pick, that is, when they are 
about six or eight inches above the ground, the chief, or 
directing elder of the community, instructs his wife or his 


1 Le Page Du Pratz, Azstory of 
Louisiana, or of the western parts of 


tion, vil. (Paris, 1781) p. 19; Charle- 
voix, “istotre de la Nouvelle France 


Virginia and Carolina, translated from 
the French, New Edition (London, 
1774), pp- 338-341. See also J. R. 
Swanton, /ndian Tribes of the Lower 
Mississippi Valley (Washington, 1911), 
pp. 110 sgg., where the passage of Du 
Pratz is translated in full from the 
original French. From Mr. Swanton’s 
translation it appears that the English 
version of Du Pratz, which I have 
quoted in the text, is a good deal 
abridged. On the festival of first-fruits 
among the Natchez see also Lettres 
édifiantes et curteuses, Nouvelle Edi- 


(Paris, 1744), vi. 183; De Tonti, 
** Relation de la Louisiane et du 
Mississippi,” ecwezl de Voyages au 
Nord, v. (Amsterdam, 1734) p. 122; 
Le Petit, ‘* Relation des Natchez,” 
zbzd. ix. 13 sg. (reprint of the account 
in the Lettres édifiantes cited above) ; 
Bossu, WVouveaux Voyages aux Indes 
occidentales (Paris, 1768), i. 43. Ac- 
cording to Charlevoix, Le Petit, and 
Bossu the festival fell in July. For 
Chateaubriand’s description of the 
custom, see below, pp. 135 sgg. 


| 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 81 


daughters to pluck a small bundle of these and prepare 
them for eating. This they do, using a new pot or kettle 
for cooking them in. In the meantime all the settlement 
comes together to take part in the ceremony. They stand 
in a great circle, the presiding chief, elder, or medicine-man 
as the case may be, and his assistants being in their midst. 
Whoever is conducting the ceremony now silently invokes 
the spirit of the plants, the tenor of his prayer being that it 
will be propitious to them and grant them a good supply of 
the suckers. While the invocation is being made all in the 
circle must keep their eyes reverently closed, this being an 
essential part in all such ceremonies, the non-observance of 
which would anger the spirits and cause them to withhold 
the favours sought. To ensure this being strictly done, 
the assisting elders are armed with long wands with which 
they strike any person found opening his eyes during the 
prayer. After this part of the ceremony is over the cooked 
suckers are handed to the presiding officer in a newly 
carved dish, and a small portion is given to each person 
present, who reverently and decorously eats it. This 
brings the ceremony to a close. Later, when the berries 
of this plant are ripe, a second and similar ceremony takes 


place.” ? 

The Thompson Indians of British Columbia cook and Ceremonies 
eat the sunflower root (Ba/samorrhiza sagittata, Nutt.), but ane 
they used to regard it as a mysterious being, and observed a shemBeen 
number of taboos in connexion with it; for example, women eae 
who were engaged in digging or cooking the root must Se 
practise continence, and no man might come near the oven or roots of 
where the women were baking the root. When young th season. 
people ate the first berries, roots, or other products of the 
season, they addressed a prayer to the Sunflower-Root as 
follows: “I inform thee that I intend to eat thee. Mayest 
thou always help me to ascend, so that I may always be 
able to reach the tops of mountains, and may I never be 
clumsy! I ask this from thee, Sunflower-Root. Thou art 
the greatest of all in mystery.” To omit this prayer would 


make the eater lazy and cause him to sleep long in the 


1 C. Hill-Tout, Zhe Far West, the Home of the Salish and Déné (London, 
1907), pp. 168-170. 


Pinev. VOL. II G 


The cere- 
monies ob- 
served by 
savages at 
eating the 
first fruits 
of any crop 
seem to be 
based on 
the idea 
that the 
plant or 
tree is ani- 
mated by a 
spirit, who 
must be 
propitiated 
before it is 
safe to par- 
take of the 
fruit. 


82 EATING THE GOD Seon. 


morning. Again, when the first tobacco of the season was 
gathered and smoked for the first time, the inhabitants of each 
lodge among the Thompson Indians observed the following 
ceremony. An elderly man assembled all the inmates, often 
outside the lodge and generally after sunset, and caused all 
the adult men and women, who were in the habit of smok- 
ing, to sit down in a circle, while he stood in the middle. 
Sometimes he made a long speech to the people, but as a 
rule he simply said, “ Be it known to you that we will cut up 
the chief,’ meaning by the chief the tobacco. So saying he 
cut up some of the tobacco, and after mixing it with bear- 
berry leaves he filled a large pipe, lighted it, and handed it 
to each person, following the sun’s course. Everybody took 
one whiff, and holding up his or her hands, the palms close 
together, blew the smoke downwards between the fingers and 
over the breast ; and as the smoke descended, he crossed his 
hands on his breast, and rubbing his chest and shoulders 
with both hands, as if he were rubbing the smoke in, he 
prayed: “ Lengthen my breath, chief, so that I may never be 
sick, and so that I may not die for a long time to come.” 
By the chief he meant the tobacco. When every one had 
had his whiff, the tobacco was cut up small and a piece 
given to each person.’ 

These customs of the Thompson and other Indian tribes 
of North-West America are instructive, because they clearly 
indicate the motive, or at least one of the motives, which 
underlies the ceremonies observed at eating the first fruits of 
the season. That motive in the case of these Indians is 
simply a belief that the plant itself is animated by a 
conscious and more or less powerful spirit, who must be 
propitiated before the people can safely partake of the fruits 
or roots which are supposed to be part of his body. Now if 
this is true of wild fruits and roots, we may infer with some 
probability that it is also true of cultivated fruits and roots, 
such as yams, and in particular that it holds good of the 
cereals, such as wheat, barley, oats, rice, and maize. In all 
cases it seems reasonable to infer that the scruples which 


1 J. Teit, Zhe Thompson Indians of the American Museum of Natural 
British Columbia, p. 349 (The Jesup  Hestory, April, 1900). 
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of 


t 
r 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 83 


savages manifest at eating the first fruits of any crop, and 
the ceremonies which they observe before they overcome 
their scruples, are due at least in large measure to a notion 
that the plant or tree is animated bya spirit or even a deity, 
whose leave must be obtained, or whose favour must be 
sought before it is possible to partake with safety of the new 
crop. This indeed is plainly affirmed of the Aino: they call 
the millet “the divine cereal,” “the cereal deity,” and they 
pray to and worship him before they will eat of the cakes 
made from the new millet. And even where the indwelling 
divinity of the first fruits is not expressly affirmed, it 
appears to be implied both by the solemn preparations made 
for eating them and by the danger supposed to be incurred 
by persons who venture to partake of them without observ- 
ing the prescribed ritual. In all such cases, accordingly, we 
may not improperly describe the eating of the new fruits as a 
sacrament or communion with a deity, or at all events with 
a powerful spirit. 

Among the usages which point to this conclusion are 
the custom of employing either new or specially reserved 
vessels to hold the new fruits,> and the practice of 
purifying the persons of the communicants and even the 
houses and streets of the whole town, before it is lawful 
to engage in the solemn act of communion with the 
divinity.* Of all the modes of purification adopted on these 
occasions none perhaps brings out the sacramental virtue of 
the rite so clearly as the Creek and Seminole practice of 
taking a purgative before swallowing the new corn. The 
intention is thereby to prevent the sacred food from being 
polluted by contact with common food in the stomach of 
the eater. For the same reason Catholics partake of the 
Eucharist fasting ; and among the pastoral Masai of Eastern 
Africa the young warriors, who live on meat and milk 
exclusively, are obliged to eat nothing but milk for so many 
days and then nothing but meat for so many more, and 
before they pass from the one food to the other they must 
make sure that none of the old food remains in their 
stomachs ; this they do by swallowing a very powerful 


1 See above, p. 52. 2 See above, pp. 50, 53, 65, 66, 72, 81. 
3 See above, pp. 59, 60, 63, 69 57., 71, 73, 75 59-, 82, 


The sanc- 
tity of the 
new fruits 
indicated 
in various 
ways. 


Care taken 
to prevent 
the contact 
of sacred 
and profane 
food in the 
stomach of 
the eater. 


Contact 
between 
certain 
foods in the 
stomach of 
the eater 
forbidden. 


84 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


purgative and emetic.’ Similarly, among the Suk, a tribe of 
British East Africa, no one may partake of meat and milk 
on the same day, and if he has chewed raw millet he is 
forbidden to drink milk for seven days.2 Among the 
Wataturu, another people of Eastern Africa akin to the 
Masai, a warrior who had eaten antelope’s flesh might not 
drink of milk on the same day.® Similarly among the 
Central Esquimaux the rules prohibiting contact between 
venison and the flesh of marine animals are very strict. The 
Esquimaux themselves say that the goddess Sedna dislikes 
the deer, and therefore they may not bring that animal into 
contact with her favourites, the sea beasts. Hence the 
meat of the whale, the seal, or the walrus may not be eaten 
on the same day with venison. Both sorts of meat may not 
even lie on the floor of the hut or behind the lamps at the 
same time. If aman who has eaten venison in the morning 
happens to enter a hut in which the flesh of seal is being 
cooked, he is allowed to eat venison on the bed, but it must 
be wrapt up before being carried into the hut, and he 
must take care to keep clear of the floor. Before changing 
from one food to the other the Esquimaux must wash them- 


selves.* Again, just as the 


1 Joseph Thomson, 7hrough Masai 
Land (London, 1885), p. 430; P. 
Reichard, Deztsch-Ostafrika (Leipsic, 
1892), p. 288; O. Baumann, Durch 
Massailand zur Nilgquelle (Berlin, 
1894), p. 162 ; M. Merker, Dze AZasaz 
(Berlin, 1904), p. 33; M. Weiss, Dze 
Volkerstimme im Norden Deutsch- 
Ostafrikas (Berlin, 1910), p. 380. 
However, the motive which underlies 
the taboo appears to be a fear of injur- 
ing by sympathetic magic the cows from 
which the milk is drawn. See my 
essay ‘‘ Folk-lore in the Old Testa- 
ment,” in Anthropological Essays pre- 
sented to EL. B. Tylor (Oxford, 1907), 
pp- 164 sg. According to Reichard 
the warriors may partake of honey both 
with meat and with milk. Thomson 
does not mention honey and speaks of 
a purgative only. The periods during 
which meat and milk are alternately 
consumed vary, according to Reichard, 
from twelve to fifteen days. We may 
conjecture, therefore, that two of them, 


Esquimaux think that their 


making up a complete cycle, corre- 
spond to a lunar month, with reference 
to which the diet is perhaps determined. 

2M. W. H. Beech, Zhe Suk, their 
Language and Folklore (Oxford, 1911), 
p.- 9. In both cases the motive, as 
with the Masai, is probably a fear of 


injuring the cattle, and especially of © 


causing the cows to loose their milk. 
This is confirmed by other taboos of 
the same sort observed by the Suk. 
Thus they think that to eat the flesh of 
a certain forest pig would cause the 
cattle of the eater to run dry, and that 
if a rich man ate fish his cows would 
give no milk. See M. W. H. Beech, 
op. cit, p. 10. 

3 O. Baumann, Durch Massatland 
sur Nilquelle (Berlin, 1894), p. 171. 

4 Fr. Boas, ‘‘ The Central Eskimo,” 
Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1888), p. 
595; 7za., ‘*The Eskimo of Baffin 
Land and Hudson Bay,” Bulletin of 
the American Museum of Natural 


x THE SACRAMENT OF FIRST-FRUITS 85 


goddess would be offended if venison met seal or whale or 
walrus meat in the eater’s stomach, so the Melanesians of 
Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, believe that if a man 
who has eaten pork or fish or shell-fish or the flesh of a 
certain sort of cuscus were to enter a garden immediately 
afterwards, the ghosts who preside over the garden and 
cause the fruits to grow would be angry and the crop would 
consequently suffer; but three or four days after partaking 
of such victuals, when the food has quite left his stomach, he 
may enter the garden without offence to the ghosts or injury 
to the crop.’ In like manner the ancient Greeks, of whose 
intellectual kinship with savages like the Esquimaux and the 
Melanesians we have already met with many proofs, laid it 
down as a rule that a man who had partaken of the black 
ram offered to Pelops at Olympia might not enter into the 
temple of Zeus, and that persons who had sacrificed’ to 
Telephus at Pergamus might not go up to the temple of 
Aesculapius until they had washed themselves,” just as the 
Esquimaux who have eaten venison must wash before they 
may partake of seal or whale or walrus meat. Again, at 
Lindus in Rhodes there was a sanctuary of some god or hero 
unknown into which no one who had partaken of goat’s flesh 
or peas-pudding might enter for three days, and no one who 
had eaten cheese might enter for one day.’ The prescribed 
interval was probably calculated to allow the obnoxious food 
to pass out of the body of the eater before he entered into 
the presence of the deity, who for some reason or other 
cherished an antipathy to these particular viands. At 
Castabus in the Carian Chersonese there was a sanctuary of 
Hemithea, which no one might approach who had either 
eaten pork or touched a pig.* 


In some of the festivals 


Fiistory, vol. xv. part i. (New York, 
1901) pp. 122-124. For more details 
see Zaboo and the Perils of the Soul, 
pp. 208 sg. 

1 Rev. R. H. Codrington, Zhe 
Melanesians (Oxford, 1891), p. 134. 

2 Pausanias, v. 13. 3. We may 
assume, though Pausanias does- not 
expressly say so, that persons who 
sacrificed to Telephus partook of the 
sacrifice. 


which we have examined, as 


3 Dittenberger,  Sylloge ILnscrip- 
tionum Graecarum,? No. 576 (vol. i. 
p- 267); Ch. Michel, Recaez/ ad’ Lnscrip- 
tions Grecques, No. 723, p. 622. 
Further, no one who had suffered a 
domestic bereavement might enter the 
sanctuary for forty days. Hence the 
pollution of death was clearly deemed 
more virulent, or at all events more 
lasting, than the pollution of food. 

4 Diodorus Siculus, v. 62. 5. 


The sacra- 
ment of 
first-fruits 
sometimes 
combined 
with a 
sacrifice of 
them to 
gods or 
spirits. 


Aztec cus- 
tom of eat- 
ing sacra- 
mentally a 
dough 
image of 
the god 
Huitzilo- 
pochtli or 
Vitzilipuztli 
as a mode 
of com- 
munion 
with the 
deity. 


86 EATING THE GOD CHAE! 


in the Cheremiss, Buru, Cham, Ewe, and Creek ceremonies, 
the sacrament of first-fruits is combined with a sacrifice or 
presentation of them to gods or spirits,’ and in course of 
time the sacrifice of first-fruits tends to throw the sacrament 
into the shade, if not to supersede it. The mere fact of 
offering the first-fruits to the gods or spirits comes now to 
be thought a sufficient preparation for eating the new corn ; 
the higher powers having received their share, man is free to 
enjoy the rest. This mode of viewing the new fruits implies 
that they are regarded no longer as themselves instinct with 
divine life, but merely as a gift bestowed by the gods upon 
man, who is bound to express his gratitude and homage to 
his divine benefactors by returning to them a portion of 
their bounty. More examples of the sacrifice, as distinct 
from sacrament, of first-fruits will be given presently.” 


§ 2. Eating the God among the Aztecs 


The custom of eating bread sacramentally as the body of 
a god was practised by the Aztecs before the discovery and 
conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards. Twice a year, in 
May and December, an image of the great Mexican god 
Huitzilopochtli or Vitzilipuztli was made of dough, then 
broken in pieces, and solemnly eaten by his worshippers. The 
May ceremony is thus described by the historian Acosta: 
“ The Mexicans in the month of May made their principal 
feast to their god Vitzilipuztli, and two days before this 
feast, the virgins whereof I have spoken (the which were 
shut up and secluded in the same temple and were as it 
were religious women) did mingle a quantity of the seed of 
beets with roasted maize, and then they did mould it with 
honey, making an idol of that paste in bigness like to that 
of wood, putting instead of eyes grains of green glass, of blue 
or white ; and for teeth grains of maize set forth with all 
the ornament and furniture that I have said. This being 
finished, all the noblemen came and brought it an exquisite 
and rich garment, like unto that of the idol, wherewith they 
did attire it. Being thus clad and deckt, they did set it in 
an azured chair and in a litter to carry it on their shoulders. 


1 See above, pp. 51 sg., 54, 58, 60 sg., 64, 74. 7 See below, pp. 109 sgg. 


x EATING THE GOD AMONG THE AZTECS 87 


The morning of this feast being come, an hour before day 
all the maidens came forth attired in white, with new 
ornaments, the which that day were called the Sisters of 
their god Vitzilipuztli, they came crowned with garlands of 
maize roasted and parched, being like unto azahar or the 
flower of orange; and about their necks they had great 
chains of the same, which went bauldrickwise under their left 
arm. Their cheeks were dyed with vermilion, their arms 
from the elbow to the wrist were covered with red parrots’ 
feathers.” Young men, dressed in red robes and crowned 
like the virgins with maize, then carried the idol in its litter 
to the foot of the great pyramid-shaped temple, up the steep 
and narrow steps of which it was drawn to the music of 
flutes, trumpets, cornets, and drums. “ While they mounted 
up the idol all the people stood in the court with much 
reverence and fear. Being mounted to the top, and that 
they had placed it in a little lodge of roses which they held 
ready, presently came the young men, which strewed many 
flowers of sundry kinds, wherewith they filled the temple 
both within and without. This done, all the virgins came 
out of their convent, bringing pieces of paste compounded of 
beets and roasted maize, which was of the same paste 
whereof their idol was made and compounded, and they 
were of the fashion of great bones. They delivered them to 
the young men, who carried them up and laid them at the 
idol’s feet, wherewith they filled the whole place that it could 
receive no more. They called these morsels of paste the 
flesh and bones of Vitzilipuztli' Having laid abroad these 
bones, presently came all the ancients of the temple, priests, 
Levites, and all the rest of the ministers, according to their 
dignities and antiquities (for herein there was a strict order 
amongst them) one after another, with their veils of diverse 
colours and works, every one according to his dignity and 
office, having garlands upon their heads and chains of flowers 
about their necks ; after them came their gods and goddesses 
whom they worshipped, of diverse figures, attired in the same 
livery ; then putting themselves in order about those morsels 
and pieces of paste, they used certain ceremonies with singing 
and dancing. By means whereof they were blessed and 
consecrated for the flesh and bones of this idol. This 


Eating the 
flesh and 
bones of 
the god 
Vitzilipuztli 
sacra- 
mentally. 


88 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


ceremony and blessing (whereby they were taken for the 
flesh and bones of the idol) being ended, they honoured those 
pieces in the same sort as their god. 

“ Then come forth the sacrificers, who began the sacrifice 
of men in the manner as hath been spoken, and that day 
they did sacrifice a greater number than at any other time, 
for that it was the most solemn feast they observed. The 
sacrifices being ended, all the young men and maids came 
out of the temple attired as before, and being placed in 
order and rank, one directly against another, they danced 
by drums, the which sounded in praise of the feast, and of 
the idol which they did celebrate. To which song all the 
most ancient and greatest noblemen did answer dancing 
about them, making a great circle, as their use is, the young 
men and maids remaining always in the midst. All the 
city came to this goodly spectacle, and there was a com- 
mandment very strictly observed throughout all the land, that 
the day of the feast of the idol of Vitzilipuztli they should 
eat no other meat but this paste, with honey, whereof the 
idol was made. And this should be eaten at the point of 
day, and they should drink no water nor any other thing 
till after noon: they held it for an ill sign, yea, for sacrilege 
to do the contrary: but after the ceremonies ended, it was 
lawful for them to eat anything. During the time of this 
ceremony they hid the water from their little children, 
admonishing all such as had the use of reason not to drink 
any water; which, if they did, the anger of God would come 
upon them, and they should die, which they did observe 
very carefully and strictly. The ceremonies, dancing, 
and sacrifice ended, they went to unclothe themselves, and 
the priests and superiors of the temple took the idol of 
paste, which they spoiled of all the ornaments it had, and 
made many pieces, as well of the idol itself as of the 
truncheons which they consecrated, and then they gave 
them to the people in manner of a communion, beginning 
with the greater, and continuing unto the rest, both men, 
women, and little children, who received it with such 
tears, fear, and reverence as it was an admirable thing, say- 
ing that they did eat the flesh and bones of God, wherewith 
they were grieved. Such as had any sick folks demanded 


x EATING THE GOD AMONG THE AZTECS 89 


thereof for them, and carried it with great reverence and 
veneration.” * 

From this interesting passage we learn that the ancient The doc- 
Mexicans, even before the arrival of Christian missionaries, ("°° 
were fully acquainted with the theological doctrine of tran- stantiation 
substantiation and acted upon it in the solemn rites of es 
their religion. They believed that by consecrating bread conversion 
their priests could turn it into the very body of their god, ab ies 
so that all who thereupon partook of the consecrated bread recognised 


> ; S : 5 oe by the 

entered into a mystic communion with the deity by receiving ancient 
a portion of his divine substance into themselves. The ee oe 
doctrine of transubstantiation, or the magical conversion 
of bread into flesh, was also familiar to the Aryans of ancient 
India long before the spread and even the rise of Christianity. 

The Brahmans taught that the rice-cakes offered in sacrifice 

were substitutes for human beings, and that they were 
actually converted into the real bodies of men by the 
manipulation of the priest. We read that “when it (the 
rice-cake) still consists of rice-meal, it is the hair. When he 
pours water on it, it becomes skin. When he mixes it, it 
becomes flesh: for then it becomes consistent; and 
consistent also is the flesh. When it is baked, it becomes 
bone: for then it becomes somewhat hard ; and hard is the 
bone. And when he is about to take it off (the fire) and 
sprinkles it with butter, he changes it into marrow. This 

is the completeness which they call the fivefold animal 
sacrifice.” * These remarkable transformations, daily wrought 

by the priest, on the rice-wafer, were, however, nothing at 

all to those which the gods themselves accomplished when 


1 J. de Acosta, Watural and Moral 
fiistory of the Indies, bk. v. ch. 24, 
vol. il. pp. 356-360 (Hakluyt Society, 
London, 1880), I have modernised 
the old translator’s spelling. Acosta’s 


des Indiens gut habitent la Nouvelle- 
Espagne selon leurs traditions, publié 
par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903), pp. 
149-154. Acosta’s description is fol- 
lowed by A. de Herrera (General 


authority, which he followed without 
acknowledgment, was an anonymous 
writer of about the middle of the 
sixteenth century, whose manuscript, 
written in Spanish, was found in the 
library of the Franciscan monastery at 
Mexico in 1856. A French translation 
of it has been published. See A/anu- 
serit Ramirez, Histoire de 1’ Origine 


History of the vast Continent and 
Islands of America, translated by Capt. 
John Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iii. 
213-215). 


2 The Satapatha-Brahmana, trans- 
lated by J. Eggeling, Part i. (Oxford, 
1882) p. 51 (Sacred Books of the East, 
vol. xii.). 


The sacred 
food not to 
be defiled 
by contact 
with com- 
mon food. 


Aztec 
custom of 
killing the 
god Huit- 
zilopochtli 
in effigy 
and eating 
him after- 
wards. 


go EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


they first instituted the rite. For the horse and the ox 
which they sacrificed became a dos gaurus and a gayal 
respectively ; the sheep was turned into a camel ; and the goat 
was converted into a remarkable species of deer, enriched 
with eight legs, which slew lions and elephants.’ On the 
whole it would seem that neither the ancient Hindoos nor 
the ancient Mexicans had much to learn from the most 
refined mysteries of Catholic theology. 

Now, too, we can perfectly understand why on the day 
of their solemn communion with the deity the Mexicans 
refused to eat any other food than the consecrated bread 
which they revered as the very flesh and bones of their 
God, and why up till noon they might drink nothing at all, 
not even water. They feared no doubt to defile the portion 
of God in their stomachs by contact with common things. 
A similar pious fear led the Creek and Seminole Indians, as 
we saw, to adopt the more thoroughgoing expedient of 
rinsing out their insides by a strong purgative before they 
dared to partake of the sacrament of first-fruits.? We can 
now also conjecture the reason why Zulu boys, after eating 
the flesh of the black bull at the feast of first-fruits, are 
forbidden to drink anything till the next day.* 

At the festival of the winter solstice in December the 
Aztecs killed their god Huitzilopochtli in effigy first and 
ate him afterwards. As a preparation for this solemn 
ceremony an image of the deity in the likeness of aman was 
fashioned out of seeds of various sorts, which were kneaded 
into a dough with the blood of children. The bones of the 
god were represented by pieces of acacia wood. This image 
was placed on the chief altar of the temple, and on the day 
of the festival the king offered incense to it. Early next day 
it was taken down and set on its feet ina great hall. Then 
a priest, who bore the name and acted the part of the god 
Quetzalcoatl, took a flint-tipped dart and hurled it into the 
breast of the dough-image, piercing it through and through. 
This was called “ killing the god Huitzilopochtli so that his 
body might be eaten.” One of the priests cut out the heart 
of the image and gave it to the king to eat. The rest of 


SOL GH jy SR Gey SGiln (ne 2 See above, pp. 73 599. 
translator’s note. 3 Above, p. 68, note *. 


ng yp 


yx EATING THE GOD AMONG THE AZTECS gI 


, 


the image was divided into minute pieces, of which every man 
great and small, down to the male children in the cradle, 
received one to eat. But no woman might taste a morsel. 
The ceremony was called ‘eogua/o, that is, “ god is eaten.” ' 
At another festival the Mexicans made little images like 
men, which stood for the cloud-capped mountains. These 
images were moulded of a paste of various seeds and were 
dressed in paper ornaments. Some people fashioned five, 
others ten, others as many as fifteen of them. Having been 
made, they were placed in the oratory of each house and 
worshipped. Four times in the course of the night offerings 
of food were brought to them in tiny vessels; and people 
sang and played the flute before them through all the 
hours of darkness. At break of day the priests stabbed 
the images with a weaver’s instrument, cut off their heads, 
and tore out their hearts, which they presented to the 
master of the house on a green saucer. The bodies of the 
images were then eaten by all the family, especially by the 
servants, “in order that by eating them they might be pre- 
served from certain distempers, to which those persons who 
were negligent of worship to those deities conceived them- 
selves to be subject.”” In some cities of Mexico, as in 
Tlacopan and Coyohuacan, an idol was fashioned out of 
grains of various kinds, and the warriors ate it in the belief 
that the sacred food would increase their forces fourfold 
when they marched to the fight.’ At certain festivals held 
thrice a year in Nicaragua all the men, beginning with the 
priests and chiefs, drew blood from their tongues and genital 
organs with sharp knives of flint, allowed it to drip on some 
1H. H. Bancroft, Native Races iii. 531-534. 
of the Pacific States (London, 1875- 2. S. Clavigero, of. céz. 1. 311 5 
1876), ili. 297-300 (after Tor- 3B. de Sahagun, of. czt. pp. 74, 15659. 3 
qtuemada); F. S. Clavigero, History J.G. Miiller, of. zt. p. 606 ; H. H. Ban- 
of Mexico, translated by Ch. Cullen croft, of. cét. iii. 316; Brasseur de Bour- 
(London, 1807), i. 309 sgg.; B. de bourg, of. cit. iii. 535. This festival 
Sahagun, Héstoire générale des choses took place on the last day of 16th 
de la Nouvelle-Espagne, traduite et month (which extended from 23rd 


annotée par D. Jourdanet et R. Siméon December to 11th January). At 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 203 sg.; J.G. Miiller, | another festival the Mexicans made the 


Geschichte der amerikanischen Ur- semblance of a bone out of paste and 
religionen (Bale, 1867), p. 605; ate it sacramentally as the bone of the 
Brasseur de Bourbourg, Histoire des god. See Sahagun, of. cz. p. 33. 

Nations ctvilisées du Mextque et de 3 Brasseur de Bourbourg, of. céz. 


! Amérique Centrale (Paris,1857-1859), iil. 539. 


Mexican 
custom of 
eating 
images of 
dough. 


Mexican 
custom of 
eating a 
manasa 
human em- 
bodiment 
of the god 
Tetzcat- 
lipoca. 


92 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


sheaves of maize, and then ate the bloody grain as a blessed 
food." 

But the Mexicans did not always content themselves 
with eating their gods in the outward and visible shape of — 
bread or grain; it was not even enough that this material | 
vehicle of the divine life should be kneaded and fortified 
with human blood. They craved, as it seems, after a closer 
union with the living god, and attained it by devouring the 
flesh of a real man, who, after he had paraded for a time 
in the trappings and received the honours of a god, was 
slaughtered and eaten by his cannibal worshippers. The 
deity thus consumed in effigy was Tetzcatlipoca, and the 
man chosen to represent him and die in his stead was a 
young captive of handsome person and _ illustrious birth. 
During his captivity the youth thus doomed to play the 
fatal part of divinity was allowed to range the streets of 
Mexico freely, escorted by a distinguished train, who paid 
him as much respect as if he had been indeed the god him- 
self instead of only his living image. Twenty days before 
the festival at which the tragic mockery was to end, that he 
might taste all the joys of this transient world to which he 
must soon bid farewell, he received in marriage four women, 
from whom he parted only when he took his place in the last 
solemn procession. Arrived at the foot of the sacred pyramid 
on the top of which he was to die, the sacrificers saluted 
him and led him up the long staircase. On the summit 
five of them seized him and held him down on his back 
upon the sacrificial stone, while the high priest, after bowing 
to the god he was about to kill, cut open his breast and tore 
out the throbbing heart with the accustomed rites. But 
instead of being kicked down the staircase and sent rolling 
from step to step like the corpses of common victims, the 
body of the dead god was carried respectfully down, and his 
flesh, chopped up small, was distributed among the priests 
and nobles as a blessed food. The head, being severed from 
the trunk, was preserved in a sacred place along with the 


1G. F. de Oviedo, Histoire du Continent and Islands of America, 
Nicaragua (Paris, 1840), p. 219. translated by Capt. John Stevens, iii. 
Oviedo’s account is borrowed by A. de 301). 
Herrera (General History of the vast 


x EATING THE GOD AMONG THE AZTECS 93 


_white and grinning skulls of all the other victims who had 

lived and died in the character of the god Tetzcatlipoca.! 

| The custom of entering into communion with a god by 
eating of his effigy survived till lately among the Huichol 


Com- 
munion 
with a god 


Indians of Mexico. In a narrow valley, at the foot of by eating 


a beetling crag of red rock, they have a small thatched 
temple of the God of fire, and here down to recent years 
stood a small image of the deity in human form roughly 
carved out of solidified volcanic ash. The idol was very 
_ dirty and smeared with blood, and in his right side was a 
hole, which owed its existence to the piety and devotion of 
his worshippers. For they believed that the power of healing 
_ and a knowledge of mysteries could be acquired by eating 
a little of the god’s holy body, and accordingly shamans, or 
medicine-men, who desired to lay in a stock of these accom- 
plishments, so useful in the exercise of their profession, were 
wont to repair to the temple, where, having deposited an 
offering of food or a votive bowl, they scraped off with their 
finger-nails some particles of the god’s body and swallowed 
them. After engaging in this form of communion with the 
deity they had to abstain from salt and from all carnal con- 
verse with their wives for five months.” Again, the Malas, a 
caste of pariahs in Southern India, communicate with the god- 
dess Sunkalamma by eating her effigy. The communion takes 
place at marriage. An image of the goddess in the form of 
a truncated cone is made out of rice and green grain cooked 
together, and it is decorated with a nose jewel, garlands, 
and other religious symbols. Offerings of rice, frankincense, 
camphor, and a coco-nut are then made to the image, and a 
ram or he-goat is sacrificed. After the sacrifice has been 
presented, all the persons assembled prostrate themselves in 
silence before the image, then they break it in pieces, and 
distributing the pieces among themselves they swallow them. 
In this way they are, no doubt, believed to absorb the divine 


1 J. de Torquemada, Monarguia has probably been since replaced by 
Indiana, \ib. x. cap. 14, vol. ii. pp. another. The custom of abstaining 
259 sgqg. (Madrid, 1723); Brasseur de both from salt and from women as 
Bourbourg, of. cét. iii. 510-512. a mode of ceremonial purification is 

2-C. Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico common among savage and barbarous 
(London, 1903), ii. 166-171. When _ peoples. See above, p. 75 (as to the 
Mr. Lumholtz revisited the temple in Yuchi Indians), and 7Zotemzsm and 
1898, the idol had disappeared. It  xogamy, iv. 224 sqq. 


of his effigy 
among the 
Huichol 
Indians of 
Mexico 
and the 
Malas of 
Southern 
India, 


Catholic 
custom of 
eating 
effigies of 
the 
Madonna. 


Loaves 
called 
Maniaz 
baked at 
Aricia. 


Woollen 
effigies 
dedicated 
at Rome 
to Mania, 
the Mother 
or Grand- 
mother of 
Ghosts, at 
the Com- 
pitalia. 


94 EATING THE GOD CHAP, 


essence of the goddess whose broken body has just passed 
into their stomachs.’ In Europe the Catholic Church has 
resorted to similar means for enabling the pious to enjoy 
the ineffable privilege of eating the persons of the Infant 
God and his Mother. For this purpose images of the 
Madonna are printed on some soluble and harmless substance 
and sold in sheets like postage stamps. The worshipper 
buys as many of these sacred emblems as he has occasion 
for, and affixing one or more of them to his food swallows 
the bolus. The practice is not confined to the poor and 
ignorant. In his youth Count von Hoensbroech and his 
devout mother used thus to consume portions of God and 
his Mother with their meals. 


§ 3. Many Manzi at Aricia 


We are now able to suggest an explanation of the pro- 
verb “ There are many Manii at Aricia.”* Certain loaves 
made in the shape of men were called by the Romans 
mantae, and it appears that this kind of loaf was especially 
made at Aricia.* Now, Mania, the name of one of these 
loaves, was also the name of the Mother or Grandmother of 
Ghosts,’ to whom woollen effigies of men and women were 
dedicated at the festival of the Compitalia. These effigies 
were hung at the doors of all the houses in Rome; one 
effigy was hung up for every free person in the house, and 
one effigy, of a different kind, for every slave. The reason 
was that on this day the ghosts of the dead were believed 
to be going about, and it was hoped that, either out of 
good nature or through simple inadvertence, they would 
carry off the effigies at the door instead of the living people 


1 FE. Thurston, Castes and Tribes 128, 129, 145. The reading of the 


of Southern India (Madras, 1909), iv. 
357 59- 

2 Graf Paul von Hoensbroech, 74 
Jahre Jesuit (Leipsic, 1909-1910), 1. 
25 sg. The practice was officially 
sanctioned by a decree of the Inquisi- 
tion, 29th July 1903. 

3 See Zhe Magic Art and the 
Evolution of Kings, i. 22. 


4 Festus, ed. C. O. Miiller, 


Pps 


last passage is, however, uncertain (‘‘e¢ 
Ariciae genus panni fiert ; quod manict 
+ appelletur’’). 

5 Varro, De lingua latina, ix. 61; 
Arnobius, Adversus nationes, il. 41 ; 
Macrobius, Saturn. i. 7. 353; Festus, 
p- 128, ed. C. O. Miiller. Festus 
speaks of the mother or grandmother 
of the /avvae ; the other writers speak 
of the mother of the Zazes. 


ex MANY MANII AT ARICIA 95 


in the house. According to tradition, these woollen figures 
were substitutes for a former custom of sacrificing human 
beings. Upon data so fragmentary and uncertain, it is 
impossible to build with confidence; but it seems worth 
suggesting that the loaves in human form, which appear 
to have been baked at Aricia, were sacramental bread, 
-and that in the old days, when the divine King of the 
Wood was annually slain, loaves were made in his image, 
like the paste figures of the gods in Mexico, India, and 
Europe, and were eaten sacramentally by his worshippers.” 
The Mexican sacraments in honour of Huitzilopochtli were 
also accompanied by the sacrifice of human victims. The 
tradition that the founder of the sacred grove at Aricia was 
a man named Manius, from whom many Manii were 
descended, would thus be an etymological myth invented to 


1 Macrobius, Zc. ; Festus, pp. 121, 
239, ed. C. O. Miiller. The effigies 
hung up for the slaves were called 
pilae, not maniae. Pilae was also the 
name given to the straw-men which 
were thrown to the bulls to gore in the 
arena. See Martial, Zpzgr. il. 43. 5 59.3 
Asconius, 77 Cornel. p. 55, ed. Kiess- 
ling and Schoell. 

2 The ancients were at least familiar 
with the practice of sacrificing images 
made of dough or other materials as 
substitutes for the animals themselves. 
It was a recognised principle that 
when an animal could not be easily 
obtained for sacrifice, it was lawful 
to offer an image of it made of bread 
or wax. See Servius on Virgil, Aez. 
ii. 116; compare Pausanias, x. 18. 5. 
Poor people who could not afford to 
sacrifice real animals offered dough 
images of them (Suidas, s.v. Bois 
éBdou0s; compare Hesychius,  s.vv. 
Bots, &Bdouos Bots). Hence bakers 
made a regular business of baking 
cakes in the likeness of all the animals 
which were sacrificed to the gods (Pro- 
culus, quoted and emended by Chr. 
A. Lobeck, Aglaophamus, p. 1079). 
When Cyzicus was besieged by Mithri- 
dates and the people could not procure 
a black cow to sacrifice at the rites of 
Persephone, they made a cow of dough 
and placed it at the altar (Plutarch, 


Lucullus, 10). Ina Boeotian sacrifice 
to Hercules, in place of the ram which 
was the proper victim, an apple was 
regularly substituted, four chips being 
stuck in it to represent legs and two to 
represent horns (Julius Pollux, i. 30 5¢.). 
The Athenians are said to have once 
offered to Hercules a similar substitute 
for an ox (Zenobius, Cet. v.22). And 
the Locrians, being at a loss for an ox 
to sacrifice, made one out of figs and 
sticks, and offered it instead of the 
animal (Zenobius, Cent. v. 5). At 
the Athenian festival of the Diasia 
cakes shaped like animals were sacri- 
ficed (Schol. on Thucydides, i. 126, 
p- 36, ed. Didot). We have seen above 
(p. 25) that the poorer Egyptians 
offered cakes of dough instead of 
pigs. The Cheremiss of Russia some- 
times offer cakes in the shape of horses 
instead of the real animals. See 
P. v. Stenin, ‘‘ Ein neuer Beitrag 
zur Ethnographie der Tscheremissen,” 
Globus, \viii. (1890) pp. 203 sg. 
Similarly a North-American Indian 
dreamed that a sacrifice of twenty 
elans was necessary for the recovery 
of a sick girl; but the elans could not 
be procured, and the girl’s parents 
were allowed to sacrifice twenty loaves 
instead. See Relations des /Jésuttes, 
1636, p. 11 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 
1858). 


The loaves 
at Aricia 
perhaps 
sacra- 
mental 
bread 
made in 
the like- 
ness of the 
King of 
the Wood. 


96 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


explain the name sanzae as applied to these sacramental 
loaves. A dim recollection of the original connexion of the 
loaves with human sacrifices may perhaps be traced in the 
story that the effigies dedicated to Mania at the Compitalia 
Practice of Were substitutes for human victims. The story itself, how- 
eee "P ever, is probably devoid of foundation, since the practice of 
ummies to 
divert the putting up dummies to divert the attention of ghosts or © 
Eee demons from living people is not uncommon. As the 
or demons practice is both widely spread and very characteristic of the 
ote manner of thought of primitive man, who tries in a thousand 
ways to outwit the malice of spiritual beings, I may be 
pardoned for devoting a few pages to its illustration, even 
though in doing so I diverge somewhat from the strict line 
of argument. I would ask the reader to observe that the 
vicarious use of images, with which we are here concerned, | 
differs wholly in principle from the sympathetic use of them 
which we examined before ;' and that while the sympathetic 
use belongs purely to magic, the vicarious use falls within 
the domain of religion. 
Tibetan The Tibetans stand in fear of innumerable earth-demons, 
ried of all of whom are under the authority of Old Mother Khén-ma. 
effigies at_ This goddess, who may be compared to the Roman Mania, 
me Soors the Mother or Grandmother of Ghosts, is dressed in golden- 
to deceive yellow robes, holds a golden noose in her hand, and rides on 
demons. a ram. In order to bar the dwelling-house against the foul 
fiends, of whom Old Mother Khon-ma is mistress, an 
elaborate structure somewhat resembling a chandelier is 
fixed above the door on the outside of the house. It contains — 
a ram’s skull, a variety of precious objects such as gold-leaf, 
silver, and turquoise, also some dry food, such as rice, wheat, 
and pulse, and finally images or pictures of a man, a woman, 
and a house. “The object of these figures of a man, wife, 
and house is to deceive the demons should they still come 
in spite of this offering, and to mislead them into the belief 
that the foregoing pictures are the inmates of the house, so 
that they may wreak their wrath on these bits of wood and 
so save the real human occupants.” When all is ready, a 
priest prays to Old Mother Khon-ma that she would be 
pleased to accept these dainty offerings and to close the open 


1 See Zhe Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings, i. 55 sqq. 


Se 


x MANY MANII AT ARICIA 97 


doors of the earth, in order that the demons may not come 
forth to infest and injure the household.’ 

Further, it is often supposed that the spirits of persons 
who have recently departed this life are apt to carry 
off with them to the world of the dead the souls of their 
surviving relations. Hence the savage resorts to the 
device of making up of dummies or effigies which he 
puts in the way of the ghost, hoping that the dull- 
witted spirit will mistake them for real people and so 
leave the survivors in peace. Hence in Tahiti the priest 
who performed the funeral rites used to lay some slips 
of plantain leaf-stalk on the breast and under the arms of 
the corpse, saying, “There are your family, there is your 
child, there is your wife, there is your father, and there is 
your mother. Be satisfied yonder (that is, in the world of 
spirits). Look not towards those who are left in the world.” 
This ceremony, we are told, was designed “to impart con- 
tentment to the departed, and to prevent the spirit from 
repairing to the places of his former resort, and so distressing 
the survivors.” When the Galelareese bury a corpse, they 
bury with it the stem of a banana-tree for company, in order 
that the dead person may not seek a companion among the 
living. Just as the coffin is being lowered into the earth, 
one of the bystanders steps up and throws a young banana- 
tree into the grave, saying, “ Friend, you must miss your 
companions of this earth; here, take this as a comrade.” * 
In the Banks Islands, Melanesia, the ghost of a woman who 
has died in childbed cannot go away to Panoi or ghost-land 
if her child lives, for she cannot leave the baby behind. 
Hence to bilk her ghost they tie up a piece of banana- 
trunk loosely in leaves and lay it on her bosom in the grave. 
So away she goes, thinking she has her baby with her, and 
as she goes the banana-stalk keeps slipping about in the 
leaves, and she fancies it is the child stirring at her breast. 
_ Thus she is happy, till she comes to ghost-land and finds she 

has been deceived ; for a baby of banana-stalk cannot pass 


1. A. Waddell, Zhe Buddhism of 3M. J. van Baarda, ‘ Fabelen, 
Tzbet (London, 1895), pp. 484-486. Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galela- 

2.W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, reezen,” Bydragen tot de Taal- Lana- 
Second Edition (London, 1832-1836), e2 Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch- 
i, 402. Indié, xlv. (1895) p- 539: 

Eiev. VOL. Il H 


Effigies 
buried with 
the dead in 
order to de- 
ceive their 
ghosts. 


Fictitious 
burials to 
divert the 
attention 
of demons 
from the 


real burials. 


EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


98 


muster among the ghosts. So back she comes tearing in 
grief and rage to look for the child ; but meantime the infant 
has been artfully removed to another house, where the dead 
mother cannot find it, though she looks for it everywhere.' 
In the Pelew Islands, when a woman has died in child- 
bed, her spirit comes and cries, “Give me the child!” 
So to beguile her they bury the stem of a young banana-tree 
with her body, cutting it short and laying it between her 
right arm and her breast.” The same device is adopted for 
the same purpose in the island of Timor. In like circum- 
stances negroes of the Niger Delta force a piece of the stem 
of a plantain into the womb of the dead mother, in order to 
make her think that she has her babe with her and so to 
prevent her spirit from coming back to claim the living child.* 
Among the Yorubas of West Africa, when one of twins dies, 
the mother carries about, along with the surviving child, a 
small wooden figure roughly fashioned in human shape and of 
the sex of the dead twin. This figure is intended not merely 
to keep the live child from pining for its lost comrade, but 
also to give the spirit of the dead child something into which 
it can enter without disturbing its little brother or sister.° 
Among the Tschwi of West Africa a lady observed a sickly 
child with an image beside it which she took for a doll. 
But it was no doll, it was an effigy of the child’s dead twin 
which was being kept near the survivor as a habitation for 
the little ghost, lest it should wander homeless and, feel- 
ing lonely, call its companion away after it along the dark 
road of death.® 


At Onitsha, a town on the left bank of the Niger, | 


a missionary once met a funeral procession which he 
describes as very singular. The real body had already been 
buried in the house, but a piece of wood in the form of a 


1 Rey. R. H. Codrington, 7 he Melan- 
estans (Oxford, 1891), p. 275. 

2 J. Kubary, ‘‘ Die Religion der 
Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s Ad/erlez aus 
Volks- und Menschenkunde (Berlin, 
1888), i. 9. 

3 W. M. Donselaar, ‘‘ Aanteekenin- 
gen over het eiland Saleijer,” AZededee/- 
ingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zen- 
delinggenootschap, 1. (1857) p. 290. 


4 Le Comte C. N. de Cardi, ‘*Ju- 
ju laws and customs in the Niger 
Delta,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxix. (1899) p. 58. 

* A, B. Ellis, Zhe Yoruba-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast (London, 
1894), p. 80. 

6 Miss Mary H. Kingsley, Zxavels 
in West Africa (London, 1897), p. 
473: 


x MANY MANII AT ARICIA 99 


sofa and covered up was being borne by two persons on 
their heads, attended by a procession of six men and six 
women. The men carried cutlasses and the women clapped 
their hands as they passed along each street, crying, “ This 
is the dead body of him that is dead, and is gone into the 
world of spirits.” Meantime the rest of the villagers had to 
keep indoors." The sham corpse was probably intended as 
a lure to draw away prowling demons from the real body. 
So among the Angoni, who inhabit the western bank of 
Lake Nyassa, there is a common belief that demons hover 
about the dying and dead before burial in order to snatch 
away their souls to join their own evil order. Guns are 
fired and drums are beaten to repel these spiritual foes, 
but a surer way of baulking their machinations is to have a 
mock funeral and so mislead and confound them. A sham 
corpse is made up out of anything that comes to hand, and 
it is treated exactly as if it were what it pretends to be. 
This lay figure is then carried some distance to a grave, 
followed by a great crowd weeping and wailing as if their 
hearts would break, while the rub-a-dub of drums and the 
discharge of guns add to the uproar. Meantime the real 
corpse is being interred as quietly and stealthily as possible 
near the house. Thus the demons are baffled; for when 
the dummy corpse has been laid in the earth with every mark 
of respect, and the noisy crowd has dispersed, the fiends swoop 
down on the mock grave only to find a bundle of rushes or 
some such trash init; but the true grave they do not know 
and cannot find.” Similarly among the Bakundu of the 
Cameroons two graves are always made, one in the hut of 
the deceased and another somewhere else, and no one knows 
where the corpse is really buried. The custom is apparently 
intended to guard the knowledge of the real grave from 
demons, who might make an ill use of the body, if not of 
the soul, of the departed.* In like manner the Kamilaroi 
tribe of Australia are reported to make two graves, a real 


1S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor, 
The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger 


pp. 114 sg. 3 7., Myth and Religion 
(London, 1893), pp. 155 sg. (from 


(London, 1859), pp. 250 sg. 

2 J. Macdonald, ‘‘ East Central 
African Customs,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxii. (1893) 


MS. notes of Dr. Elmslie). 

3B. Schwarz, Kamerun (Leipsic, 
1886), pp. 256sg.; E. Reclus, Mouvelle 
Géographie Universelle, xiii. 68 sq. 


Effigies 
used to cure 
or prevent 
sickness by 
deluding 
the demons 
of disease 
or inducing 
them to 
accept the 
effigies in- 
stead of the 
persons. 


100 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


one and an empty one, for the purpose of cheating a malevo- 
lent spirit called Krooben.' So, too, some of the Nagas of 
Assam dig two graves, a sham grave made conspicuous on 
purpose to attract the notice of the evil spirits, and the real 
grave made inconspicuous to escape their attention: a figure 
is set up over the false grave.” Isis is said to have made 
many false graves of the dead Osiris in Egypt in order that 
his foe Typhon might not be able to find the true one? In 
Bombay, if a person dies on an unlucky day, a dough figure 
of a man is carried on the bier with him and burnt with his 
corpse. This is supposed to hinder a second death from 
occurring in the family,’ probably because the demons 
are thought to take the dough figure instead of a real 
person. 

Again, effigies are often employed as a means of prevent- 
ing or curing sickness ; the demons of disease either mistake 
the effigies for living people or are persuaded or compelled 
to enter them, leaving the real men and women well and 
whole.” Thus the Alfoors of Minahassa, in Celebes, will 
sometimes transport a sick man to another house, while they 
leave on his bed a dummy made up of a pillow and clothes. 
This dummy the demon is supposed to mistake for the sick 
man, who consequently recovers.© Cure or prevention of 
this sort seems to find especial favour with the Dyaks of 
Borneo. Thus, when an epidemic is raging among them, 
the Dyaks of the Katoengouw river set up wooden images 
at their doors in the hope that the demons of the plague 
may be deluded into carrying off the effigies instead of the 
people.’ Among the Oloh Ngadju of Borneo, when a sick 
man is supposed to be suffering from the assaults of a ghost, 
puppets of dough or rice-meal are made and thrown under 


1 J. Fraser, ‘‘ The Aborigines of New 
South Wales,” Journal and Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of New South Wales, 
xvi. (1882) p. 229; A. W. Howitt, 
Native Tribes of South-East Australia 
(London, 1904), p. 467. 

2 This I learned from. Dr. Burton 
Brown (formerly of 3 Via Venti Setem- 
bri, Rome), who lived for some time 
among the Nagas. 

3 Strabo, xvii. 1. 23, p.803 ; Plutarch, 
Tsis et Ostrts, 18, 


1 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. p. 
39, § 240 (December 1884). 

5 Some examples of this vicarious 
use of images as substitutes for the sick 
have been given in an earlier part of 
this work. See Zaboo and the Perils 
of the Soul, pp. 62 sq. 

6 N. Graafland, De 
(Rotterdam, 1869), 1. 326. 

7 Pp. J. Veth, Borneo’s Wester-A fieel- 
zg (Zaltbommel, 1854-56), ii. 309. 


Minahassa, 


x MANY MANII AT ARICIA 101 


the house as substitutes for the patient, who thus rids himself 
of the ghost. So if a man has been attacked by a crocodile 
and has contrived to escape, he makes a puppet of dough or 
meal and casts it into the water as a vicarious offering ; 
otherwise the water-god, who is conceived in the shape of a 
crocodile, might be angry.’ In certain of the western dis- 
tricts of Borneo if a man is taken suddenly and violently 
sick, the physician, who in this part of the world is generally 
an old woman, fashions a wooden image and brings it seven 
times into contact with the sufferer’s head, while she says: 
“This image serves to take the place of the sick man; sick- 
ness, pass over into the image.” Then, with some rice, salt, 
and tobacco in a little basket, the substitute is carried to the 
spot where the evil spirit is supposed to have entered into 
the man. There it is set upright on the ground, after the 
physician has invoked the spirit as follows: “O devil, here 
is an image which stands instead of the sick man. Release 
the soul of the sick man and .plague the image, for it is 
indeed prettier and better than he.” Similar substitutes are 
used almost daily by these Dyaks for the purpose of draw- 
ing off evil influences from anybody’s person. Thus, when 
an Ot Danom baby will not stop squalling, its maternal 
grandmother takes a large leaf, fashions it into a puppet to 
represent the child, and presses it against the infant’s body. 
Having thus decanted the spirit, so to speak, from the baby 
into the puppet, she pierces the effigy with little arrows from 
a blow-gun, thereby killing the spirit that had vexed her 
child.” Similarly in the island of Dama, between New 
Guinea and Celebes, where sickness is ascribed to the agency 
of demons, the doctor makes a doll of palm-leaf and lays it, 
together with some betel, rice, and half of an empty egg- 
shell, on the patient’s head. Lured by this bait the demon 
quits the sufferer’s body and enters the palm-leaf doll, which 
the wily doctor thereupon promptly decapitates. This may 


1 F. Grabowsky, ‘‘ Ueber verschie- | Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” Azdragen 
dene weniger bekannte Opfer bei den fo¢ de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde 
Oloh Ngadju in Borneo,” Jnter- van Nederlandsch-Indié, xlvil. (1897) 
nationales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, i. pp. 605g. For another mode in which 
(1888) pp. 132 sg. these same Dyaks seek to heal sickness 

by means of an image, see Zaboo and 

2, L. M. Kiihr, ‘‘Schetsen uit the Perils of the Soul, pp. 55 Sg. 


Effigies 
used to 
divert the 
attention of 
demons in 
Nias and 
various 
parts of 
Asia. 


102 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


reasonably be supposed to make an end of the demon andof the 
sickness together.’ A Dyak sorcerer, being called in to pre- 
scribe for a little boy who suffered from a disorder of the 
stomach, constructed two effigies of the boy and his mother 
out of bundles of clothes and offered them, together with some 
of the parents’ finery, to the devil who was plaguing the child ; 
it was hoped that the demon would take the effigies and 
leave the boy.” Batta magicians can conjure the demon of 
disease out of the patient’s body into an image made out of 
a banana-tree with a human face and wrapt up in magic 
herbs ; the image is then hurriedly removed and thrown 
away or buried beyond the boundaries of the village.® 
Sometimes the image, dressed as a man or a woman accord- 
ing to the sex of the patient, is deposited at a cross-road 
or other thoroughfare, in the hope that some passer-by, see- 
ing it, may start and cry out, “Ah! So-and-So is dead” ; 
for such an exclamation is supposed to delude the demon of 
disease into a belief that he has accomplished his fell purpose, 
so he takes himself off and leaves the sufferer to get well.* 
The Mai Darat, a Sakai tribe of the Malay Peninsula, 
attribute all kinds of diseases to the agency of spirits which 
they call xyani; fortunately, however, the magician can 
induce these maleficent beings to come out of the sick 
person and take up their abode in rude figures of grass, 
which are hung up outside the houses in little bell-shaped 
shrines decorated with peeled sticks.° 

In the island of Nias people fear that the spirits of 
murdered infants may come and cause women with child to 
miscarry. Todivert the unwelcome attention of these sprites 
from a pregnant woman an elaborate mechanism has been 
contrived. A potent idol called Fangola is set up beside her 
bed to guard her slumbers during the hours of darkness from 


1j. G. F. Riedel, De sluck- en 
hroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 
Papua (The Hague, 1886), p. 465. 

* H. Ling Roth, ‘‘ Low’s Natives of 
Borneo,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxi. (1892) p. 117. 

3 B. Hagen, ‘‘ Beitrage zur Kenntniss 
der Battareligion,” TZzjdschrzft voor 
Tndische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xxvili, (1883) p. 531. 


4 M. Joustra, ‘‘ Het leven, de zeden 
en gewoonten der Bataks,” JZededee/- 
zmgen van wege het Nederlandsche 
Zendelingsenootschap, x\vi. (1902) pp. 
413 Sg. 

5 N. Annandale and H.C. Robinson, 
‘¢ Some Preliminary Results of an Ex- 
pedition to the Malay Peninsula,” 
Journal of the Anthropological [nstitute, 
XXXil. (1902) p. 416. 


xe MANY MAWNII AT ARICIA 103 


the evil things that might harm her; another idol, connected 
with the first by a chain of palm-leaves, is erected in the large 
room of the house; and lastly a small banana-tree is planted 
in front of the second idol. The notion is that the sprites, 
scared away by the watchful Fangola from the sleeping 
woman, will scramble along the chain of palm-leaves to the 
other idol, and then, beholding the banana-tree, will mistake 
it for the woman they were looking for, and so pounce upon 
it instead of her." In Bhutan, when the Lamas make noisy 
music to drive away the demon who is causing disease, little 
models of animals are fashioned of flour and butter and the 
evil spirit is implored to enter these models, which are then 
burnt.2. So in Tibet, when a man is very ill and all other 
remedies have failed, his friends will sometimes, as a last 
resort, offer an image of him with some of his clothes to 
the Lord of Death, beseeching that august personage to 
accept the image and spare the man.2 A Burmese mode 
of curing a sick man is to bury a small effigy of him in a 
tiny coffin, after which he ought certainly to recover.* In 
Siam, when a person is dangerously ill, the magician 
models a small image of him in clay and carrying it 
away to a solitary place recites charms over it which 
compel the malady to pass from the sick man into the 
image. The sorcerer then buries the image, and the sufferer 
is made whole.’ So, too, in Cambodia the doctor fashions 
a rude effigy of his patient in clay and deposits it in some 
lonely spot, where the ghost or demon takes it instead of the 
man.° The same ideas and the same practices prevail much 
further to the north among the tribes on the lower course of 
the River Amoor. When a Goldi or a Gilyak shaman has 
cast out the devil that caused disease, an abode has to be 
provided for the homeless devil, and this is done by making 


1882), ii. 138. 
5 Pallegoix, Description du Royaume 


1 Fr. Kramer, ‘‘ Der Gotzendienst 
der Niasser,” 77jdschrift voor Indische 


Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxxiii. 
(1890) p. 489. 

2 A. Bastian, Dze Volkerstiimme am 
Brahmaputra (Berlin, 1883), p. 73. 

3 Sarat Chandra Das, Journey to 
Lhasa and Central Tibet (London, 
1902), p. 134. 

£ Shway Yoe, Ze Burman (London, 


Thai ou Stam (Paris, 1854), il. 48 sg. 
Compare A. Bastian, Dze Volker des 
Ostlichen Asten (Leipsic and Jena, 
1866-1871), iii. 293, 486 ; E. Young, 
The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe 
(Westminster, 1898), p. 121. 

6 J. Moura, Ze Royaume du Cam- 
bodge (Paris, 1883), 1. 176. 


Effigies 
used to 
divert 
ghostly 
and other 
evil in- 
fluence 
from 
people in 
China. 


104 EATING THE GOD CHAP 


a wooden idol in human form of which the ejected demon 
takes possession.' 

The Chinese of Amoy make great use of cheap effigies 
as means of diverting ghostly and other evil influence 
from people. These effigies are kept in stock and sold 
in the shops which purvey counterfeit paper money and 
other spurious wares for the use of simple-minded ghosts 
and gods, who accept them in all good faith instead of the 
genuine articles. Nothing could well be cruder than the 
puppets that are employed to relieve sufferers from the many 
ills which flesh is heir to. They are composed of two bamboo 
splinters fastened together crosswise with a piece of paper 
pasted on one side to represent a human body. Two other 
shreds of paper, supposed to stand for boots, distinguish the 
effigy of a man from the effigy of a woman. Armed with 
one of these “substitutes for a person,” as they are called, 
you may set fortune at defiance. If a member of your 
family, for example, is ailing, or has suffered any evil what- 
ever, or even is merely threatened by misfortune, all that 
you have to do is to send for one of these puppets, pass 
it all over his body while you recite an appropriate spell, 
and then burn the puppet. The maleficent influence is thus 
elicited from the person of the sufferer and destroyed once 
for all. If your child has tumbled into one of those open 
sewers which yawn for the unwary in the streets, you 
need only fish him out, pass the puppet over his filthy 
little body, and say: “ This contact (of the substitute) with 
the front of the body brings purity and prosperity, and the 
contact with the back gives power to eat till an old, old, old 
age ; the contact with the left side establishes well-being 
for years and years, and the contact with the right side 
bestows longevity; happy fate, come! ill fate, be trans- 
ferred to the substitute!” So saying you burn the 
substitute, by choice near the unsavoury spot where the 
accident happened; and if you are a careful man you will 
fetch a pail of water and wash the ashes away. Moreover, 
the child’s head should be shaven quite clean; but if the 
sufferer was an adult, it is enough to lay bare with the razor 


1 A. Woldt, ‘Die Kultus-Gegen-  Zrternationales Archiv fiir Ethno- 
stande der Golden und Giljaken,”  graphie, i. (1888) pp. 102 sg. 


ne MANY MANII AT ARICIA 105 


a small patch on his scalp to let out the evil influence.’ In 
Corea effigies are employed on much the same principle for 
the purpose of prolonging life. On the fourteenth and the 
fifteenth day of the first month all men and women born under 
the Jen or “ Man” star make certain straw images dressed 
in clothes and containing a number of the copper cash which 
form the currency of the country. Strictly speaking, there 
should be as many cash in the image as the person whom 
it represents has lived years; but the rule is not strictly 
observed. These images are placed on the path outside 
the house, and the poor people seize them and tear them 
up in order to get the cash which they contain. The 
destruction of the image is supposed to save the person 
represented from death for ten years. Accordingly the 
ceremony need only be performed once in ten years, 
though some people from excess of caution appear to 
observe it annually.” 

The Abchases of the Caucasus believe that sickness 
is sometimes caused by Mother Earth. So in order to 
appease her and redeem the life of the sick man, an 
innocent maiden will make a puppet in human form, 
richly clad, and bury it in the earth, saying, “ Instead of the 
sick man, play and delight yourself with this.”* The Ewe 


Effigies 
used as 
substitutes 
to save the 
lives of 
people 
among the 
Abchases 
of the Cau- 


negroes of Togoland, in West Africa, think that the spirits of casus and 


all living people come from heaven, where they live in the 
intervals between their incarnations. Life in Amedzowe, as 
they call that heavenly region, which lies a little to the east 
of the town of Ho, is very like life on earth. There are 
fields there and wildernesses and forests. Also there are 
all kinds of food, such as yams and maize and likewise stock- 
yams, not to speak of cotton; in fact, all these things came 
from heaven just as men themselves did. Moreover, every- 
body has his spiritual mother in heaven and his spiritual 
aunt, also his spiritual uncle, his spiritual grandfather, and 


1 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious 
System of China, vi. (Leyden, 1910) 
pp. 1103 sg. ; for a description of the 
effigies or ‘‘substitutes for a person” 
see zd., vol. v. (Leyden, 1907) p. 
g20. Can the monkish and clerical 
tonsure have been originally designed 


in like manner to let out the evil 
influence through the top of the head ? 
27. Watters, ‘‘Some  Corean 
Customs and Notions,” VFolk-lore, vi. 
(1895) pp. 82 sg. 
3. N. v. Seidlitz, ‘‘ Die Abchasen,”’ 
Globus, \xvi. (1894) p. 54. 


the Ewe 
negroes of 
West 
Africa. 


106 EATING THE GOD CHAP. 


so on, just as on earth. Now the spirits in heaven are 
apt to resent it when one of their number quits them to 
go and be born as a child on earth; and sometimes they 
will pursue the truant and carry him back to the celestial 
country, and that is what we call death. Little children are 
most commonly fetched away by their mother in heaven ; 
for she wearies for them and comes and lays an invisible 
hand on the child, and it sickens and dies. If you hear a 
child whimpering of nights, you may be sure that its mother 
from heaven has laid her hand on it and is drawing it away 
to herself. If the child grows very sick and its earthly 
mother fears that it will die, she will mould two figures of 
clay, a man and a woman, and offer them in exchange to 
the heavenly mother, saying, “O thou bearer and mother of 
children! instead of the child that has gone away from thee 
we bring thee here in exchange these clay men. Take them 
and withdraw thy hand from the child in this visible world.” 
Grown-up people also, when they fall sick, will sometimes 
make images of clay and offer them as substitutes to the 
messengers who have come from heaven to fetch them away. 
These images are deposited with other offerings, such as 
cowry-shells and a musket, by the roadside; and if the 
messengers accept them instead of the sick man, he re- 
covers.. During an epidemic of small-pox the Ewe negroes 
will sometimes clear a space outside of the town, where 
they erect a number of low mounds and cover them with as 
many little clay figures as there are people in the place. 
Pots of food and water are also set out for the refreshment 
of the spirit of small-pox who, it is hoped, will take the clay 
figures and spare the living folk ; and to make assurance 
doubly sure the road into the town is barricaded against 
him.” 

Among the Nishga Indians of British Columbia when 


1 J. Spieth, Dze we - Stimme 
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 502-506, 512, 513, 


one spiritual mother, and that she is 
the wife of God (A/awz) and gave 


838, 848, 910. It is a disputed point 
in Ewe theology whether there are 
many spiritual mothers in heaven or 
only one. Some say that there are as 
many spiritual mothers as there are 
individual men and women; others 
doubt this and say that there is only 


birth to all spirits that live in heaven, 
both men and women. 


2G. Binetsch,  ‘* Beantwortung 
mehrerer Fragen iiber unser Ewe-Volk 
und seine Anschauungen,” Zeztschrift 
fiir Ethnologie, xxxviii. (1906) p. 37- 


x MANY MANII AT ARICIA 107 


a medicine-man dreams a dream which portends death to 
somebody, he informs the person whose life is threatened, and 
together they concert measures to avert the evil omen. The 
man whose life is at stake has a small wooden figure called 
a shigigiadsqu made as like himself as the skill of the wood- 
carver will allow, and this he hangs round his neck by a string 
so that the figure lies exactly over his heart. In this position 
he wears it long enough to allow the heat of his body to be 
imparted to it, generally for about four days. On the fourth 
day the medicine-man comes to the house, arrayed in his 
bearskin and other insignia of office and bringing with him 
a wisp of teased bark and a toy canoe made of cedar-bark. 
Thus equipped, he sings a doleful ditty, the death-song of 
the tribe. Then he washes the man over the region of the 
heart with the wisp of bark dipped in water, places the wisp, 
together with the wooden image, in the canoe, and after again 
singing the death-chant, commits image, wisp, and canoe to 
the flames, where they are all consumed. The death-chant 
is now changed to a song of joy, and the man who was 
lately in fear of his life joins in. He may well be gay, for 
has he not given death the slip by devoting to destruction, 
not merely a wisp saturated with the dangerous defilement 
of his body, but also a substitute made in his own likeness 
and impregnated with his very heart’s warmth ?? 

With these examples before us we may fairly conclude 
that the woollen effigies, which at the festival of the 
Compitalia might be seen hanging at the doors of all the 
houses in ancient Rome, were not substitutes for human 
victims who had formerly been sacrificed at this season, but 
rather vicarious offerings presented to the Mother or Grand- 
mother of Ghosts, in the hope that on her rounds through 
the city she would accept or mistake the effigies for the 
inmates of the house and so spare the living for another 
year. It is possible that the puppets made of rushes, which 
in the month of May the pontiffs and Vestal Virgins annually 
threw into the Tiber from the old Sublician bridge at Rome,” 


1 The Illustrated Missionary News,  Antiquit. Roman. i. 383; Plutarch, 
April ist, 1891, pp. 59 5g. Quaestiones Romanae, 32 and 86. 
2 As to the custom see Varro, De For various explanations which have 
lingua latina, v. 453 Ovid, Fastz, vy. been proposed, see L. Preller, Xomdsche 
621 sgg.; Dionysius Halicarnasensis,  <AZythologie,® ii. 134 sgg.; W. Mann- 


Effigies 
used as 
substitutes 
to save the 
lives of 
people 
among the 
Nishga 
Indians. 


Hence the 
woollen 
effigies 
hung out at 
the Compi- 
talia in 
Rome were 
probably 
offered as 
substitutes 
for living 
persons to 
the Mother 
or Grand- 
mother of 
Ghosts. 


108 EATING THE GOD CHAP. X 


had originally the same significance ; that is, they may have | 
been designed to purge the city from demoniac influence by | 
diverting the attention of the demons from human beings to 
the puppets and then toppling the whole uncanny crew, neck 
and crop, into the river, which would soon sweep them far out 
to sea. In precisely the same way the natives of Old Cala- | 
bar used periodically to rid their town of the devils which | 
infested it by luring the unwary demons into a number of | 
lamentable scarecrows, which they afterwards flung into the 
river... This interpretation of the Roman custom is supported 
to some extent by the evidence of Plutarch, who speaks of 
the ceremony as “the greatest of purifications.”” However, | 
other explanations of the rite have been proposed : indeed | 
these puppets of rushes have been a standing puzzle to | 
Roman antiquaries in ancient and modern times. 


hardt, Antike Wald- und Feldkulte, 54 sq., 321 sgg. ; G. Wissowa, Gesam- 
pp. 265 sgg.; fJournal of Philology, melte Abhandlungen sur romischen | 
xiv. (1885) p. 156 note; R. von ARelzgzons- und Stadtgeschichte (Mu- 
Ihering, Vorgeschichte der Indoeuro- nich, 1904), pp. 211-229. The cere- | 
paer, pp.-430-434 ; W. Warde Fowler, | mony was observed on the fifteenth | 
The Roman Festivals of the Period of — of May. | 
the Republic (London, 1899), pp. III 1 See Zhe Golden Bough, Second } 
sqgq. ; td@., The Religious Experience of — Edition, i. 107. 
the Roman People (London, 1911), pp. 2 Plutarch, Quaest. Roman. 86. 


SE Ae dt Be OX 
THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 


IN the preceding chapter we saw that primitive peoples 
often partake of the new corn and the new fruits sacrament- 
ally, because they suppose them to be instinct with a divine 
spirit or life. At a later age, when the fruits of the earth 
are conceived as created rather than as animated by a 
divinity, the new fruits are no longer partaken of sacrament- 
ally as the body and blood of a god ; but a portion of them 
is offered to the divine beings who are believed to have pro- 
duced them. Originally, perhaps, offerings of first-fruits were 
supposed to be necessary for the subsistence of the divinities, 
who without them must have died of hunger ;' but in after 
times they seem to be looked on rather in the light of a tribute 
or mark of homage rendered by man to the gods for the good 
gifts they have bestowed on him. Sometimes the first-fruits 
are presented to the king, perhaps in his character of a god ; 
very often they are made over to the spirits of the human 
dead, who are sometimes thought to have it in their power 
to give or withhold the crops. Till the first-fruits have been 
offered to the deity, the dead, or the king, people are not 
at liberty to eat of the new crops. But, as it is not always 
possible to draw a sharp line between the sacrament and the 
sacrifice of first-fruits, it may be well to round off this part 
of the subject by giving some examples of the latter. 

The Ovambo or Ovakuanjama of South-West Africa 
stand in great fear of the spirits of the dead, who are 
believed to exercise a powerful influence over the living ; 
in particular the spirits of dead chiefs can give or withhold 
rain, a matter of vital importance in the parched region of 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 231 sgq. 
sole) 


The sacri- 
fice of first- 
fruits to 
gods is 
probably 
later than 
the custom 
of par- 
taking of 
them 
sacra- 
mentally. 


First-fruits 
sometimes 
presented 
to the king 
and often 
to the dead. 


Sacrifice of 
first-fruits 
among the 
Ovambo 
of South- 
West 
Africa, 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
South 
Africa, 


I10 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP, 


Ovamboland. Accordingly the people pay great respect to 
the spirits of the departed, and they hold a thanksgiving 
festival in their honour at the close of the harvest. When 
the new corn has been reaped and ground, a portion of it 
is made into porridge and carried to the quarters of the 
principal wife. Here all the inhabitants of the kraal 
assemble ; the head of the family takes some of the porridge, 
dips it in melted fat, and throws it to the east, saying, “ Take 
it, ye spirits of the East!” Then he does the same towards 
the west, saying, “Take it, ye spirits of the West!” This 
is regarded as a thank-offering presented to the spirits of the 
dead for not visiting the people with sickness while they were 
cultivating the fields, and especially for sending the rain.’ 
Among the Basutos, when the corn has been threshed 
and winnowed, it is left in a heap on the threshing-floor. 
Before it can be touched a religious ceremony must be per- 
formed. The persons to whom the corn belongs bring a 
new vessel to the spot, in which they boil some of the grain. 
When it is boiled they throw a few handfuls of it on the heap 
of corn, saying, “ Thank you, gods ; give us bread to-morrow 
also!” When this is done the rest is eaten, and the pro- 
vision for the year is considered pure and fit to eat.? Here 
the sacrifice of the first-fruits to the gods is the prominent 
idea, which comes out again in the custom of leaving in the 
threshing-floor a little hollow filled with grain, as a thank- 
offering to these powerful beings.? Still the Basutos retain 
a lively sense of the sanctity of the corn in itself ; for, so long 
as it is exposed to view, all defiled persons are carefully kept 
from it. If it is necessary to employ a defiled person in 
carrying home the harvest, he remains at some distance 
while the sacks are being filled, and only approaches to 
place them upon the draught oxen. As soon as the load is 
deposited at the dwelling he retires, and under no pretext 
may he help to pour the corn into the baskets in which it 
is kept The Makalaka worship a god called Shumpaoli, 


1H. Tonjes, Ovambaland, Land, province of Ceylon ‘‘the threshers be- 
Leute, Mission (Berlin, 1911), p. 195. have as if they were in a temple of the 
2 Rev E. Casalis, Ze Basutos(Lon- gods when they put the corn into the 
don, 186r), pp. 251 sg. bags.” See C. J. Ro Wey Mesunen 
3 bid. p. 252. **Customs and Superstitions connected 
4 Jétd. pp. 252 sg. Inthe southern with the Cultivation of Rice in the 


xI THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS LED 


whose image is to be found in the enclosure outside of their 
huts. The image consists of the head of an axe, a stone 
from the river, and a twig or long stalk of grass planted 
between them in the ground. About this god they scatter 
the first-fruits of their harvest, and when they brew beer they 
pour some of it on him.’ Of the Bantu tribes of South 
Africa in general we are told that they might not eat of 
the new crops till the chief gave them leave to do so. 
When the millet was ripe he appointed a general assembly 
of the people at his residence, which was known as the 
Great Place ; he then performed certain rites, and in par- 
ticular he offered a small quantity of the fresh grain to the 
spirits of his ancestors, either by laying it on their graves or 
by casting it into a stream. After that he granted the 
people permission to gather and eat the new corn.” 

Among the Maraves or Zimbas, a tribe of the Upper Zam- 
besi, bordering on the Portuguese territory, it is the custom 
that first-fruits of all produce must be offered to the spirits of 
the dead (suzzmos), to whom they attribute all the good and 
ill that befall them. Every year at harvest-time the offer- 
ings are brought to these mighty beings. Small portions 
of all kinds of fruits, together with cooked fowls and pomde 
(the native intoxicant), are carried in procession, with songs, 
dances, and the beating of drums, to the burial-ground, which 
is always situated in a grove or a wilderness and is esteemed 
a sacred place; no tree may be felled and no animal killed 
on the holy ground, for the natives believe that a spirit of 
the dead is present in everything within the precincts.° 
Among the Yaos of British Central Africa “offerings are 
made to the spirit world or to mulungu as the great agency 
in the affairs of human life. Outside the village, or beside 
the head-man’s hut, may often be seen a rough shed. In 
this are placed the first-fruits of the new crop, green maize, 
beans, pumpkins, peas, etc., as a thankoffering from the 
villagers for their harvest. This is described as kulomba 


Southern Province of Ceylon,” Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, N.S. xvii. 
(1885), p. 371. 

1 L. Decle, Three Years in Savage 
Africa (London, 1898), p. 173. 

2 G. McCall Theal, Records of South- 


Eastern Africa, vil. (1901) p. 397. 

3 <‘Der Muata Cazembe und die 
Volkerstamme der Maravis, Chevas, 
Muembas, Lundas und andere von Siid- 
Afrika,” Zeztschrift fiir allgemeine Evd- 
kunde (Berlin), vi. (1856) pp. 272, 273. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
Central 
Africa, 


112 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


mulungu, to worship mulungu.”’ By mulungu the Yaos 


mean primarily and strictly the soul of a dead person, which 
is believed to influence the lives and fortunes of the 
survivors, and therefore needs to be honoured and propi- 
tiated ; but they employ the word in an extended sense to 
signify the aggregate of the spirits of all the dead, and 
missionaries have adopted it as the nearest equivalent for the 
word God.?, Among the Winamwanga, a tribe of north-eastern 
Rhodesia, between Lake Nyassa and Lake Tanganyika, it 
is customary to offer the first beer and the first flour made 
from the new harvest of millet to the spirits of the dead. The 
head of the family pours out some beer and a small quantity 
of the new flour ina heap on the floor of his own house, after 
which he prays to the spirits of his forefathers, thanks them 
for the harvest, and invites them to come and partake of it 
with the family. The priest performs the same ceremony 
at the shrine for the whole village. The householder or the 
priest speaks to the spirits as if they were sitting around 
him. Thus he may say, “O ye great spirits, fathers in the 
spirit world, mothers in the spirit world, and all ye others, 
bless us now. Here is the food, and here is the offering, call 
ye all of you each other.” Then after summoning the 
dead by their names he may go on: “Come all of you and 
partake of this offering. Ye great spirits, all things of this 
earth were known to you while yet ye were here. Take 
care of this your family, and of all these your children. 
May we ever go in our ways in prosperity. Oh! ye great 
spirits, give to us food and all the produce of the land. 
Drive ye away all illnesses from your family, ye great 
spirits ; every evil spirit put far away from us, and what- 
ever might seek to hurt us may it fly away on the wind. 
Cause ye us to abide in peace.”* Among the Yombe of 
Northern Rhodesia, to the west of Lake Tanganyika, no one 
is allowed to partake of the new fruits until certain cere- 


1 Rev. A. Hetherwick, ‘Some 3 Dr. J. A. Chisholm, ‘‘ Notes on 


Animistic Beliefs among the Yaos of 
British Central Africa,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxii. (1902) 
Pp: 94 Sg. 


2 Rev. A. Hetherwick, of. czt. pp. 
91-94. 


the Manners and Customs of the Win- 
amwanga and Wiwa,” /ournal of the 
African Society, vol. ix. No. 36 (July 
1910), pp. 366sg. Among the Winam- 
wanga, as among the Yaos, the human 
soul or spirit is called mzzezzmu (op. cit. 


p. 363). 


XI TE SACKIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 113 


monies have been performed. Escorted by a band of 
drummers, his medicine-men, and the village elders, the 
chief ascends the Kalanga Mountain until he reaches the 
hollow fastness which in former days his forefathers held 
against the marauding Angoni. Here the grandfather of 
the present chief lies buried. Before his tomb a bull is 
slain, and pots of freshly-brewed beer and porridge made 
from the first-fruits are deposited before the shrine. The 
ground is then carefully cleaned of weeds, and the blood of 
the bull is sprinkled on the freshly-turned-up soil and on 
the rafters of the little hut. After offering the customary 
prayers in thanksgiving for the harvest, and beseeching the 
spirits to partake with them of the first-fruits, the procession 
retires. On their return to the village, the carcase of the bull 
is divided, all partake of the fresh porridge and beer awaiting 
them, and the day closes with beer-drinking and dancing." 
The A-Kamba of British East Africa offer first-fruits 
to the spirits of their dead before anybody may eat of 
the new crop. Sometimes these offerings are piled on 
the graves of chiefs and left there along with the meat of 
a goat which has been sacrificed. Sometimes the offer- 
ings are made in a cleared place under the sacred wild 
fig tree (sumbo) of the village ; for the A-Kamba think that 
the spirits of the dead (azz) dwell in wild fig trees, and 
they build miniature huts at the foot of the trees for the 
accommodation of the ghosts. The clearing under the wild 
fig tree of the village is called the Place of Prayer (zthembo). 
When any crop is ripe, all the inhabitants of the district 
assemble, and a very old man and woman, chosen for the 
purpose, leave the crowd and go to the Place of Prayer, 
where they call aloud to the spirits of the dead and ask 
leave to eat the crop. The people then dance, and during 
the dance one of the women is sure to be seized with a fit of 
shaking and to cry aloud, which is deemed the answer of 
the spirits to the people’s prayer.” Amongst the Baganda 
a man used to offer the first-fruits of a new garden to 
his god, imploring the blessing of the deity on the future 


1 C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, Zhe 2 C. W. Hobley, Z¢hnology of A- 
Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia Kamba and other East African Tribes 
(London, 1911), pp. 294 sg. (Cambridge, 1910), pp. 66, 85 sg. 

Pieev. VOL. IL I 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
East Africa 


114 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


crops. Among the Dinka of the White Nile no member 
of a family may eat the new fruits until the father 
or mother has scattered some of them over the court- 
yard of the house in order to ensure the blessing of 
God.2. When the millet is ripe, the Nubas of Jebel-Nuba, 
a range of mountains in the eastern Sudan, observe the 
following ceremony. Every group of villages is presided 
over by a sacred pontiff called a cogzour or codjour, who is 
believed to act under the inspiration of a spirit named Laro. 
So when it is known that the grain is ready to be cut, a 
drum is beaten, the pontiff mounts his horse and, attended 
by all the elderly men and women, repairs to his fields, 
while the rest of the people betake themselves to their own 
farms. There the people whose eldest child is a boy break 
five ears of corn, and those whose eldest child is a girl break 
four. But young unmarried people break five or four ears 
according as they desire to have a boy or a girl for their 
first-born. All then return to the village and place the 
ears they have gathered on the hedge which serves as an 
enclosure. When the beat of the drum and multitudinous 
cries of joy announce the return of the pontiff, the people 
take the gathered ears and advance to meet him. He rides 
at the head of a cavalcade composed of all the men who 
have horses. After that, attended by the elders, he retires 
to his house, while the rest of the people deposit the ears of 
corn in the cave of Laro, the being who inspires the holy 
pontiff. Feasting, drinking, and horse-races conclude the 
ceremony. At the races the young folk amuse themselves 
by flinging stalks of millet before the horses to make them 
shy and throw their riders.’ 


1 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda for rain being deng. See Dr. C. G. 
(London, 1911), p. 428. Seligmann, in Dr. J. Hastings’ £7- 

2 Annales de la Propagation de la  cyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 
Foz, |x. (1888) p. 57. The accountis s.v. ‘* Dinka,” vol. iv. (Edinburgh, 
extracted from the letter of a Catholic 1911) p. 707. 


priest, himself a Dinka. The name of 3 ** Coutumes étranges des indigénes 
God, according to him, is Den-dit, du Djebel-Nouba (Afrique centrale), 
meaning ‘‘ Great Rain.” The form of notes communiquées par les mission- 


the name agrees closely, and the naires de Vérone,” Les A/sstons Catho- 
interpretation of it agrees exactly, with gues, xiv. (1882) p. 459. As to the 
the results of Dr. C. G. Seligmann’s Nubas and their pontiff see further 
independent enquiries, according to Stanislas Carceri, ‘* Djebel- Nouba,” 
which the name of the Dinka God Les Missions Catholiques, xv. (1883) 
is Dengdit, ‘‘Great Rain,” the word pp. 448-452. 


sietadeia 


XI THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 115 


The Igbiras, a pagan tribe at the confluence of the Sacrifices 
Niger and the Benue, bury their dead in their houses cea 
and have great faith in the power of the ghosts, whose West 
guidance and protection they seek to ensure by peri- ““"* 
odical offerings of goats and cocks. Also they offer the 
first-fruits of their crops to the dead, hanging bunches of 
the new grain over the burial-places in their huts. The 
Igbiras also celebrate the festival of the new yams with 
great pomp. It is their New Year’s Day. Sacrifices of 
fowls and goats are offered, and wine and oil are freely 
poured out. The king takes a prominent part in the feast.! 
Among the Cross River natives, in the lower valley of the 
Niger, the eating of the new yams is an occasion of great 
rejoicing, but no one may partake of them until a portion 
has been ceremonially offered to the deities. The festival is 
not held simultaneously but separately for each village accord- 
ing to the state of the crops. High and low, old and young, 
men, women, and children dance to music on these joyful 
occasions.” The Matse tribe of Ewe negroes in Togoland 
worship the Earth at the times when they dig the ripe yams 
in September, when they reap the ripe maize in November, 
and when they burn the grass in February. The place where 
they offer sacrifices to the Earth goddess is called “the Wood 
of our Mother.” In the month of November the hunters, led 
by the Chief Huntsman and the High Priest, repair to the 
maize-fields, where they gather cobs of the ripe grain. Some 
of these they deposit, with prayers, in the sacrificial place in 
the wood, but they keep the finest cobs for themselves. After 
this sacrifice of the new corn to the Earth goddess every- 
body is free to get in his maize.2 Amongst the Hos, another 
Ewe tribe of Togoland, when a man is about to dig up his 
yam crop, he first of all digs up two yams which he had 
planted for the goddess Mawu Sodza. These he holds up to 
her and prays, saying, “O Mawu Sodza, thou ship full of 
yams, give to me, and I will give to you ; pass me over, and 
I will pass you over. Here are thy yams, which I have dug 
for thee. When I dig mine, grant that I may have plenty.” 


1 A, F. Mockler-Ferryman, Up the (London, 1905), pp. 266 sg. 

_ Niger (London, 1892), pp. 141 sg. 3 J. Spieth, Dze Zwe-Stimme (Ber- 
_ # Ch. Partridge, Cross River Natives lin, 1906), pp. 795 sg. 

| 


First-fruits 
offered to 
kings in 
Mada- 
gascar and 
Burma. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
Assam and 
other parts 
of India. 


THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 


116 CHAP. 


Thereupon he begins to dig the crop." Among the Bassari, 
another tribe of Togoland, no man may eat of the new yams 
until the people have paid a tribute of the first-fruits to the 
king. At such times long files of men, women, and children 
may be seen wending their way to the capital to render to 
the king his dues. But the king himself may not partake of 
the new yams until he has offered a portion of them, along 
with ten white fowls, to the fetish.2 Before the Adeli of the 
Slave Coast may eat of the new yams, the owner of each farm 
must bring the first yams of his field to the fetish priest, who 
offers them to the fetish, after which he declares that the har- 
vest may take place. The festival, accompanied by shooting 
and dancing, lasts several days; it generally falls in August.’ 

Among the Betsileo of Madagascar the king used to 
receive first- fruits of all the crops, such as rice, maize, 
manioc, beans, and sweet potatoes: indeed this tribute of 
first-fruits formed a large part of his revenue* The Hovas 
of Madagascar present the first sheaves of the new grain to 
the sovereign. The sheaves are carried in procession to the 
palace from time to time as the grain ripens.? So in Burma, 
when the fangatz fruits ripen, some of them used to be taken 
to the king’s palace that he might eat of them; no one 
might partake of them before the king.® It has been 
suggested that the modern system of taxation may be 
directly derived from the ancient obligation of paying first- 
fruits to a sacred pontiff or king.” 

Every year, when they gather their first crops, the Kochs 
of Assam offer some of the first-fruits to their ancestors, 
calling to them by name and clapping their hands.° Before 
they harvest any of their crops, the Garos, another people of 
Assam, deem it necessary to sacrifice the first-fruits of the 


1 J. Spieth, of. ct. p. 344. As to 5 J. Cameron, ‘On the Early In- 


the goddess Mawu Sodza, see zdid. 
Pp- 424 sg. 

2 H. Klose, 
Flagge (Berlin, 1899), p. 504. 

3 L. Conradt, “ Das Hinterland der 
deutschen Kolonie Togo,” Petermanns 
Mitthetlungen, xiii. (1896) p. 18. 

4G. A. Shaw, ‘The Betsileo,” 
Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar 
Magazine, Reprint of the First Four 
Numbers (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 346. 


Togo unter deutscher 


habitants of Madagascar,” Antana- 
narivo Annual and Madagascar Maga- 
sine, Reprint of the First Four Numbers 
(Antananarivo, 1885), p. 263. 

6 A. Bastian, Dze Volker des dstli- 
chen Asien, ii. (Leipsic, 1866), p. 105. 

7 A. van Gennep, Zabou et Toté- 
misme a Madagascar (Paris, 1904), p.97- 

8 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Eth- 
nology of Bengal (Calcutta, 1872), p. 
gl. 


XI THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 117 


crops to the gods. Thus, for example, they gather some ears 
of rice or millet, pound them between two stones, and offer 
them up on a piece of plantain stem." In August, when the 
rice ripens, the Hos of Bengal offer the first-fruits of the 
harvest to Sing Bonga, who dwells in the sun. Along with 
the new rice a white cock is sacrificed ; and till the sacrifice 
has been offered no one may eat the new rice.” Among the 
Oraons of Bengal no one will partake of the new rice until 
some of it has been offered to the ancestors. A handful of it 
is cooked and spread on the ground, and a pot of rice-beer is 
brewed and some of the beer also spilt on the ground. Before 
drinking every one dips his finger in his cup and lets fall some 
drops in honour of the ancestors. Further, a whity grey fowl 
is killed, and the eldest of the family, addressing the ancestral 
spirits, says, “O old mothers and fathers, you have always 
been so good to uson these days. Here we are rejoicing : we 
cannot forget you: come and rejoice with us.”* In Ladakh 
the peasants offer the first two or three handfuls of the wheat- 
crop to the spirit who presides over agriculture. These 
offerings they attach to the tops of the pillars which support 
the roofs of their houses ; and thus the bands of straw and 
ears of wheat form a primitive sort of capital. Rams’ horns 
are sometimes added to this decoration.* In the Himalayan 
districts of the North-Western provinces of India the fields 
and boundaries are under the protection of a beneficent 
local deity named Kshetrpal or Bhumiya. Every village 
possesses a small temple sacred to him. When a crop is 
sown, a handful of grain is sprinkled over a stone in the 
corner of the field nearest to the temple, in order that the 
god may protect the growing crop from hail, blight, and the 
ravages of wild beasts ; and at harvest he receives the first- 
fruits in order that he may save the garnered grain from 
the inroads of rats and insects.” Among the hill tribes near 


1 Major A. Playfair, Zhe Garos of Bengal, vol. i. No. 9). 


(London, 1909), p. 94. 

2 E. T. Dalton, of. czt. p. 198 ; (Sir) 
H. H. Risley, Z7ébes and Castes of 
Bengal, Ethnographic Glossary (Cal- 
cutta, 1891-1892), li. 104. 

3 Rev. P. Dehon, S.J., Relzgzon and 
Customs of the Uraons (Calcutta, 1906), 
p. 137 (Memotrs of the Asiatic Society 


4 North Indian Notes and Queries, 
i. 57, No. 428, quoting Moorcroft and 
Trebeck, Zvavels in the Himalayan 
Provinces, 1. 317 sq. 

5 EK. T. Atkinson, Zhe Himalayan 
Districts of the North-Western Prov- 
inces of India, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) 
p. 825. As to Bhumiya see further 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits 
among hill 
tribes of 
India. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in the 
Central 
Provinces 
of India. 


118 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


Rajamahall, in India, when the fosarvane grain is being 
reaped in November or early in December, a festival is held 
as a thanksgiving before the new grain is eaten. On a day 
appointed by the chief a goat is sacrificed by two men toa 
god called Chitariah Gossaih, after which the chief himself 
sacrifices a fowl. Then the vassals repair to their fields, offer 
thanksgiving, make an oblation to Kull Gossaih (who is 
described as the Ceres of these mountaineers), and then 
return to their houses to eat of the new osarane. As soon as 
the inhabitants have assembled at the chief’s house—the men 
sitting on one side and the women on the other—a hog, a 
measure of kosarane, and a pot of spirits are presented to the 
chief, who in return blesses his vassals, and exhorts them to 
industry and good behaviour ; “ after which, making a libation 
in the names of all their gods, and of their dead, he drinks, 
and also throws a little of the osarane away, repeating the 
same pious exclamations.” Drinking and festivity then 
begin, and are kept up for several days. The same tribes 
have another festival at reaping the Indian corn in August 
or September. Every man repairs to his fields with a hog, 
a goat, or a fowl, which he sacrifices to Kull Gossaih. Then, 
having feasted, he returns home, where another repast is pre- 
pared. On this day it is customary for every family in the 
village to distribute to every house a little of what they have 
prepared for their feast. Should any person eat of the new 
kosarane or the new Indian corn before the festival and 
public thanksgiving at the reaping of these crops, the chief 
fines him a white cock, which is sacrificed to Chitariah In 
the Central Provinces of India the first grain of the season is 
commonly offered to the god Bhimsen or Bhim Deo.” When 
the new rice crop is ripe, the Gadbas, a primitive tribe of the 
Central Provinces, cook the first-fruits and serve them to the 


cattle in new bamboo baskets ; 


W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), i. 105-107, who ob- 
serves (pp. 106 sg.): ‘To illustrate 
the close connection between _ this 
worship of Bhimiya as the soil godling 
with that of the sainted dead, it may 
be noted that in some places the shrine 
of Bhtimiya is identified with the 


after that the men themselves 


Jathera, which is the ancestral mound, 
sacred to the common ancestor of the 
village or tribe.” 

1 Thomas Shaw, ‘‘ The Inhabitants 
of the Hills near Rajamahall,” Aszatic 
Researches, iv. (London, 1807) pp. 56 
Sq. 

2 Panjab Notes and Queries, i. p. 60, 
§ 502 (February 1884). 


xI LHE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 


119 


partake of the new rice.! The Nahals, a forest tribe of the 
same region, worship the forest god Jharkhandi in the month 
of Chait, and until this rite has been performed they may 
not use the leaves or fruits of the Butea frondosa, Phyllanthus 
emblica, and mango trees. When the god is worshipped, 
they collect branches and leaves of these trees and offer 
cooked food to them: after that they begin to use the new 
leaves, fruit, and timber.” Again, when the Mannewars, 
another forest tribe of the Central Provinces, pick the flowers 
of the mahua tree (Bassia latifolta), they worship the tree and 
offer it some of the liquor distilled from the new flowers, 
along with a fowl and a goat.* The principal festivals of the 
Parjas, a small tribe of the Central Provinces, are the feast 
of new vegetation in July, the feast of the new rice in 
August or September, and the feast of the new mango crop 
in April or May. At these feasts the new season’s crop is 
eaten, and offerings of them are presented to the ancestors 
of the family, who are worshipped on these occasions.* In 
the Punjaub, when sugar-cane is planted, a woman puts on 
a necklace and walks round the field, winding thread on a 
spindle ;° and when the sugar-cane is cut the first-fruits are 
offered on an altar, which is built close to the press and is 
sacred to the sugar-cane god. Afterwards the first-fruits are 
given to Brahmans. Also, when the women begin to pick 
the cotton, they go round the field eating rice-milk, the first 
mouthful of which they spit upon the field toward the west ; 
and the first cotton picked is exchanged at the village shop 
for its weight in salt, which is prayed over and kept in the 
house till the picking is finished.° 

Among the ancient Hindoos the first-fruits were sacrificed 


1 Central Provinces, Ethnographic injure the crops (Pliny, Wat. Hist. 


Survey, iii. Draft Articles on Forest 
Tribes (Allahabad, 1907) p. 45. 

2) OP. cit. il.. 73. 

3 Op. cit. v. (Allahabad, 1911) p. 
66. 
4 Op. cit. vii. (Allahabad, 1911) p. 
102. 

5 The practice is curiously unlike the 
custom of ancient Italy, in most parts 
of which women were forbidden by law 
to walk on the highroads twirling a 
spindle, because this was supposed to 


xxvill. 28). The purpose of the Indian 
custom may be to ward off evil in- 
fluences from the field, as Mr. W. 
Crooke suggests (Popular Religion and 
folk-lore of Northern India, li. 305, 
‘*This forms a sacred circle which 
repels evil influence from the crop”). 
Compare Zhe Magic Art and Evolution 
of Kings, 1. 113 sg. 

6D. C. J. Ibbetson, Outlines of 
Panjab Ethnography (Calcutta, 1883), 
p. 119. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in the 
Punjaub. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits 
among the 
ancient 
Hindoos. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
Burma and 
Corea. 


120 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


to the gods at the beginning of harvest, generally at the 
new or the full moon. There were two harvests in the 
year; the barley was reaped in spring and the rice in 
autumn. From the new grain, whether barley or rice, a 
sacrificial cake was prepared and set forth on twelve 
potsherds for the two great gods Indra and Agni; a pap 
or gruel of boiled grain, sodden either in water or milk, was 
offered to the Visve Devah, that is, to the common mob of 
deities; and a cake on one potsherd was presented to 
Heaven and Earth. The origin of these sacrifices of first- 
fruits was explained by the following myth. They say that 
the gods and their powerful rivals the Asuras once strove 
with each other for the mastery. In this strife the Asuras 
defiled, both by magic and by poison, the plants on which 
men and beasts subsist ; for thus they hoped to get the better 
of the gods. Therefore neither man nor beast could eat 
food, and for lack of it they well nigh perished. When the 
gods heard of it, they said one to the other, “Come let 
us rid the plants of the defilement,” and they did so by 
means of the sacrifice. But they could not agree as to 
which of them should receive the sacrifices, so to decide this 
delicate question they ran a race, and Indra and Agni came 
in first ; that is why the cake is offered to them on twelve 
potsherds, while the common mob of the gods have to put up 
with a simple pap or gruel. To this day, therefore, he who 
offers the first-fruits to the gods does it either because no 
one will then be able to defile the plants, neither by magic 
nor yet by poison ; or perhaps he does it because the gods 
did so before him. Be that as it may, certain it is that 
he thereby renders both kinds of plants wholesome and 
innocuous, both the plants which men eat and the plants 
on which cattle graze; that indeed is the reason why the 
sacrificer sacrifices the first-fruits. And the priest’s fee for 
the sacrifice is the first-born calf of the season, which is, as 
it were, the first-fruit of the cattle. 

The Kachins of Upper Burma worship the spirit (za?) 
of the earth every year before they sow their crops. The 
worship is performed by the chief on behalf of all the 


1 The Satapatha Brahmana, trans- (Oxford, 1882), pp. 369-373 (Sacred 
lated by Julius Eggeling, Part i. Books of the East, vol. xii.). 


XI LHE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 121 


villagers, who contribute their offerings. The priest after- 
wards determines by exorcism which particular household 
shall start sowing first in order that the crop may be a good 
one. Then the household on which the lot has fallen goes 
out and sows its fields. When the crop is ripe, it may not 
be reaped until the household which was the first to sow its 
fields has gathered the first-fruits and offered them to its 
own domestic spirits (wa¢s). This is usually done before the 
crop is quite ripe, in order that the reaping of the other 
crops may not be delayed.’ The Chins, another people of 
Upper Burma, eat the first-fruits of their corn as a religious 
rite, but before doing so they offer some of the new corn or 
vegetables to their dead ancestors. They also offer the first- 
fruits to the goddess Pok Klai, a single glance of whose 
eyes is enough to give them a plentiful harvest of rice.” 
Among the Thay of Indo-China the first-fruits of the 
rice are offered at harvest to the guardian spirit of the 
family before the household may partake of the new crop. 
The guardian spirit of the family is the last ancestor who 
died ; he mounts guard until he is relieved by his successor ; 
his shrine is a corner of the house screened off by a low 
trellis of bamboo. But besides the first-fruits offered him 
at harvest this guardian spirit receives some of the parched 
grain in spring, at the time when the first thunder of the 
season is heard to mutter. The grain which is presented 
to him on this occasion was plucked from the crop before 
the rice was quite ripe, and it has been carefully kept to 
be offered to him when the first peal of thunder in spring 
announces the reviving energies of nature. When all is 
ready, the rice is served up together with fish, which have 
been caught for the purpose, on a table set in the corner 
which is sacred to the guardian spirit. A priest drones out 
a long invitation to the spirit to come and feast with his 
children ; then the family sits down to table and consumes 
the offerings. At the close of the banquet the daughter-in- 
law of the deceased ancestor hangs up a basket containing 


1 (Sir) J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardi- 2 Rev. G. Whitehead, ‘‘ Notes on 
man, Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Chins of Burma,” /xdian Anti- 
the Shan States, Part 1. vol. i. (Ran-  gzav-y, xxxvi. (1907) p. 207. 


goon, 1900), pp. 425 sg. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
the East 
Indies. 


122 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


rice and fish for his use in the corner, after which she closes 
the shrine for another year.' In Corea the first-fruits of all 
the crops used to be offered to the king with religious 
pomp, and he received almost divine honours from his 
subjects.” This suggests that, as I have already con- 
jectured, the common practice, of presenting the first-fruits 
to kings is founded on a belief in their divinity. 

In the island of Tjumba, East Indies, a festival is held 
after harvest. Vessels filled with rice are presented as a 
thankoffering to the gods. Then the sacred stone at the 
foot of a palm-tree is sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed 
animal; and rice, with some of the flesh, is laid on the 
stone for the gods. The palm-tree is hung with lances and 
shields.’ The Dyaks of Borneo hold a feast of first-fruits 
when the paddy or unhusked rice is ripe. The priestesses, 
accompanied by a gong and drum, go in procession to the 
farms and gather several bunches of the ripe paddy. These 
are brought back to the village, washed in coco-nut water, and 
laid round a bamboo altar, which at the harvest festivals is 
erected in the common room of the largest house. The 
altar is gaily decorated with white and red streamers, and is 
hung with the sweet-smelling blossom of the areca palm. 
The feast lasts two days, during which the village is tabooed ; 
no one may leave it. Only fowls are killed, and dancing 
and gong-beating go on day and night. When the festival 
is over the people are free to get in their crops. The 
pounding of the new paddy is the occasion of a harvest 
festival which is celebrated all over Celebes. The religious 
ceremonies which accompany the feast were witnessed by 
Dr. B. F. Matthes in July 1857. Two mats were spread on 
the ground, each with a pillow on it. On one of the pillows 
were placed a man’s clothes and a sword, on the other a 
woman’s clothes. These were seemingly intended to repre- 
sent the deceased ancestors. Rice and water were deposited 
before the two dummy figures, which were also sprinkled 
with the new paddy. Moreover, dishes of rice were set 

1 A. Bourlet, “Les Thay,” Ax- auf Sumatra (Berlin, 1847), ii. 312. 
thropos, ii. (1907) pp. 627-629. 
2 Ch. Dallet, Histoire de PE glise 4 Spenser St. John, Lzfe zm the 


de Corée (Paris, 1874), i. p. xxiv. Forests of the Far East® (London, 
8’ Fr. Junghuhn, Dze Battalinder 1863), i. 191. 


XI THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 123 


down for the rest of the family and the slaves of the 
deceased. This was the end of the ceremony.’ In Mina- 
hassa, a district of Celebes, the people have a festival of 
“eating the new rice.” Fowls or pigs are killed; some 
of the flesh, with rice and palm-wine, is set apart for the 
gods, and then the eating and drinking begin.” The 
people of Kobi and Sariputi, two villages on the north- 
east coast of Ceram, offer the first-fruits of the paddy, 
in the form of cooked rice, with tobacco and other things, 
to their ancestors as a token of gratitude. The cere- 
mony is called “feeding the dead.”* In the Tenimber 
and Timor-laut Islands, East Indies, the first-fruits of the 
paddy, along with live fowls and pigs, are offered to the 
matmate. The matmate are the spirits of their ancestors, 
which are worshipped as guardian-spirits or household gods. 
They are supposed to enter the house through an opening in 
the roof, and to take up their abode temporarily in their 
skulls, or in images of wood or ivory, in order to partake of 
the offerings and to help the family. They also assume the 
form of birds, pigs, crocodiles, turtles, sharks, and so forth.* 
In Amboyna, after the rice or other harvest has been 
gathered in, some of the new fruits are offered to the gods, 
and till this is done, the priests may by no means eat of 
them. A portion of the new rice, or whatever it may be, is 
boiled, and milk of the coco-nut is poured on it, mixed with 
Indian saffron. It is then taken to the place of sacrifice and 
offered to the god. Some people also pour out oil before 
the deity; and if any of the oil is left over, they take 
it home as a holy and priceless treasure, wherewith they 
smear the forehead and breast of sick people and whole 
people, in the firm conviction that the oil confers all kinds of 
blessings.° In the Kei Islands, to the south-west of New 
Guinea, the first-fruits are offered to Lir majoran, the god of 
husbandry, when the harvest is ripe® After the rice has 


1B. F. Matthes, Beknopt Verslag 
mijner reizen in de Binnenlanden van 
Celebes, in de jaren 1857 en 1S61, p. 5 
(Verzameling van Berigten betreffende 
de Lijbelverspreiding, Nos. 96-99). 

2 N. Graafland, De Minahassa (Rot- 
terdam, 1869), i. 165. 

3 J. G. F. Riedel, De sluzk- en 


kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 
Papua (The Hague, 1886), p. 107. 

4 Riedel, of. cet. pp. 281, 296 sg. 

5 Fr. Valentyn, Oud en nieuw Oost- 
/ndién (Dordrecht and Amsterdam, 
1724-1726), iii. 10. 

6 C. M. Pleyte, ‘‘ Ethnographische 
Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,” 77zd- 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
New 
Guinea 


124 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


been reaped, the people of Nias deck the images of their 
ancestors with wreaths, and offer to them the first dishful 
of boiled rice, while they thank them for the blessings they 
have bestowed on the family." The Irayas and Catalangans 
of Luzon, tribes of the Malay stock, but of mixed blood, 
worship chiefly the souls of their ancestors under the name 
of anztos, to whom they offer the first-fruits of the harvest. 
The anztos are household deities; some of them reside in 
pots in the corners of the houses; and miniature houses, 
standing near the family dwelling, are especially sacred to 
them.” When the Bagobos of the Philippines have got in 
their harvest of rice or maize, they will neither eat of it nor 
sell so much as a grain till they have made a pretence of 
feeding all their agricultural implements.® 

The Bukaua of German New Guinea think that the 
spirits of their dead have power to make the fruits of the 
earth to grow. Accordingly when they have cleared a 
patch in the forest for cultivation and are planting their 
crops, they take particular care to plant slips near the tree- 
stumps which have been left standing in the field, because 
the spirits of their long dead ancestors are supposed to 
perch on them. While they plant, they call out the names 
of the dead, praying them to guard the field, so that their 
children, the living, may have food to eat and not suffer 
hunger. And similarly, when they plant stones shaped like 
taro bulbs in the ground, which are supposed to produce 
a fine crop of taro, they pray to their forefathers to grant 
them an abundance of the fruits. When the crops are ripe, 
the people fetch bundles of taro, clusters of bananas, sugar- 
canes, and vegetables from the fields and bring them back 
solemnly to the village; a feast is prepared and a portion 
of the new fruits, along with tobacco, betel, and dog’s flesh, 
is put in a coco-nut shell and set on a scaffold in the house 
of the owner of the field, while he prays to the spirits of 


schrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijks- 
kundig Genootschap, Tweede Serie, x. 
(1893) p. Sor. 

1 Fr. Kramer, ‘* Der Gétzendienst 
der Niasser,” 77jdschrift voor Indische 
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxxiii. 
(1890) p. 482. 


2-C. Semper, Die Phzlippinen und 
thre Bewohner (Wiirzburg, 1869), p. 
56. 
3 F. Blumentritt, ‘‘ Das Stromgebiet 
des Rio Grande de Mindano,” /efer- 
manns Mitthetlungen, xxxvil. (1891) 
ja Tei 


xI THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 125 


his forefathers, saying, “Ye who have guarded our field as 
we asked you to do, there is something for you; now look 
on us favourably also for the time to come.” Afterwards, 
while the people are feasting, the owner privily stirs the 
contents of the coco-nut shell with his finger, and then calls 
the attention of the others to it as a proof that the spirits 
have partaken of the offering provided for them. Finally the 
food remaining in the shell is consumed by the banqueters.’ 

In certain tribes of Fiji “the first-fruits of the yam 
harvest are presented to the ancestors in the Nanga [sacred 
enclosure] with great ceremony before the bulk of the crop 
is dug for the people’s use, and no man may taste of the new 
yams until the presentation has been made. The yams thus 
offered are piled in the Great Nanga, and are allowed to rot 
there. If any one were impiously bold enough to appropriate 
them to his own use, he would be smitten with madness. 
The mission teacher before mentioned told me that, when he 
visited the Nanga he saw among the weeds with which 
it was overgrown, numerous yam vines which had sprung up 
out of the piles of decayed offerings. Great feasts are made 
at the presentations of the first-fruits, which are times of public 
rejoicing, and the Nanga itself is frequently spoken of as the 
Mbaki, or Harvest.”” In other parts of Fiji the practice 
with regard to the first-fruits seems to have been different, 
for we are told by another observer that “the first-fruits of 
the yams, which are always presented at the principal 
temple of the district, become the property of the priests, 
and form their revenue, although the pretence of their being 
required for the use of the god is generally kept up.”* In 
Tana, one of the New Hebrides, the general name for gods 
appeared to be arvemfha, which meant “a dead man.” The 
spirits of departed ancestors were among the gods of the 
people. Chiefs who reached an advanced age were deified 
after their death, addressed by name, and prayed to on 
various occasions. They were supposed to preside especially 
over the growth of the yams and fruit-trees. The first-fruits 


1 Stefan Lehner, ‘“‘ Bukaua,” in R. 
Neuhauss’s Deutsch Neu-Guzinea, iii. 
(Berlin, 1911) pp. 434-436. 

2 Rev. Lorimer Fison, ‘* The Nanga, 


or Sacred Stone Enclosure, of Waini- 


mala, Fiji,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xiv. (1885) p. 27. 

3 J. E. Erskine, Journal of a Crutse 
among the Islands of the Western 
Pacific (London, 1853), p. 252. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
Fiji and 
the New 
Hebrides. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in the 
Solomon 
Islands. 


126 UPEOR SMOG AMOTE (OV 1B IES ILS IIR ILS, CHAP, 


were presented to them. A little of the new fruit was laid 
on a stone, or on a shelving branch of the tree, or on a rude 
temporary altar, made of a few sticks lashed together with 
strips of bark, in the form of a table, with its four feet stuck 
in the ground. All being quiet, the chief acted as high 
priest, and prayed aloud as follows: “Compassionate father ! 
here is some food for you; eat it; be kind to us on account 
of it.” Then all the people shouted. This took place about 
noon, and afterwards the assembled people feasted and danced 
till midnight or morning.’ 

In Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, the canarium 
nut is much used in the native cookery, but formerly none 
might be eaten till the sacrifice of the first-fruits had been 
offered to the ghosts of the dead. This was done on behalf 
of a whole village by a man who inherited a knowledge 
of the way in which the sacrifice should be offered, and who 
accordingly had authority to open the season. When he 
saw that the time had come, he raised a shout early in the 
morning, then climbed a tree, cracked the nuts, ate some 
himself, and put some on the stones in his sacred place for 
the particular ghost whom he worshipped. Then all the people 
might gather the nuts for themselves. The chief offered 
food, in which the new nuts were mixed, on the stones 
of the village sanctuary; and every man who revered a 
ghost of his own did the same in his private sanctuary.” 
This sacrifice of first-fruits was witnessed by Mr. Woodford 
at the village of Aola, in the neighbouring island of Guadal- 
canar. ~The canarium nuts, or Solomon Island almonds, had 
been ripe for a week, and Mr. Woodford had expressed 
a wish to taste them, but he was told that this was quite 
impossible till the offering to the ghost had been made. As 
a native put it, “ Devil he eat first ; all man he eat behind.” 
All the inhabitants of the village adjourned to the sea-shore 
in groups of ten or twelve to perform the sacrifice. The 
party to which Mr. Woodford attached himself swept a space 
clean beneath the spreading branches of a Barringtonia, and 
there constructed half-a-dozen tiny altars, each about six 
inches square, out of dry sticks. On these altars they laid 


1 G. Turner, Samoa (London, 1884), 2 Rev. R. Hi. Codxingtony 77 
pp. 318 sg. Melanesians (Oxford, 1891), pp. 132 sg. 


XI THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 127 


offerings of yams, taros, bananas, and a little flesh; and a 
few of the nuts were skinned and set up on sticks round 
about the altars. Fire was then made by the friction of 
wood, for matches might not be used for this purpose, 
though probably every man had a box of them in his bag. 
With the sacred flame thus produced the altars were kindled 
and the offerings consumed. When this was done, the 
women produced large flat cakes baked of a paste of 
pounded nuts, and these were eaten by allt In Saa, 
another of the Solomon Islands, when the yams are ripe, 
the people fetch some from each garden to offer to the 
ghosts. Early in the morning all the male members of a 
family assemble at the sanctuary of the particular ancestral 
shosts whom they revere. One of them goes with a yam 
into the holy place and cries with a loud voice to the ghosts, 
“This is yours to eat,’ and with that he sets the yam 
beside the skull which is in the sanctuary. The others call 
quietly upon all the ancestors and present their yams, which 
are many in number, because one from each garden is given 
to each of the ghosts. Moreover, if any man has a relic of 
the dead at home, such as a head, or bones, or hair, he takes 
back a yam to his house and places it beside the head 
or whatever it may be. In the same island, as in Florida, 
the new canarium nuts may not be eaten until the first-fruits 
have been offered to the ghosts. Moreover, the first flying- 
fish of the season must be sacrificed to these spirits of the 
dead before the living are allowed to~ partake of the fish. 
The ghosts to whom the flying-fish are offered have the 
form of sharks. Some of them have sanctuaries ashore, 
where images of sharks are set up; and the flying-fish are laid 
before these images. Other shark-ghosts have no place on 
shore ; so the fish offered to them are taken out to sea and 
shredded into the water, while the names of the ghosts are 
called out.? 

In some of the Kingsmill Islands the god most commonly 
worshipped was called Tubuériki. He was represented by 
a flat coral stone, of irregular shape, about three feet 


1C. M. Woodford, 4A WMaturalist Islands (London, 1890), pp. 26-28. 
among the Head-hunters, being an 2 Rev. R. H. Codrington, Zhe 
Account of Three Visits to the Solomon Melanesians, p. 138. 


an 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in the 
Kingsmill 
Islands. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in the 
Tonga 
Islands. 


128 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


long by eighteen inches wide, set up on end in the open air. 
Leaves of the coco-nut palm were tied about it, considerably 
increasing its size and height. The leaves were changed 
every month, that they might be always fresh. The worship 
paid to the god consisted in repeating prayers before the 
stone, and laying beside it a portion of the food prepared by 
the people for their own use. This they did at their daily 
meals, at festivals, and whenever they specially wished 
to propitiate the deity. The first-fruits of the season were 
always offered to him. Every family of distinction had one 
of these stones which was considered rather in the light of 
a family altar than as an idol.’ 

In the Tonga Islands the first-fruits of the year were 
offered with solemn ceremony to the sacred chief Tooitonga, 
who was regarded as divine. The ceremony generally took 
place about October, and the people believed that if the rite 
were neglected the vengeance of the gods would fall in a 
signal manner upon them. The following is a description of 
the festival as it was celebrated in the days when a European 
flag rarely floated among the islands of the Pacific: “ /uachz. 
This word means, literally, a share or portion of anything 
that is to be or has been distributed out: but in the sense 
here mentioned it means that portion of the fruits of the 
earth, and other eatables, which is offered to the gods in the 
person of the divine chief Tooitonga, which allotment is 
made once a year, just before the yams in general are 
arrived at a state of maturity ; those which are used in this 
ceremony being of a kind which admit of being planted 
sooner than others, and, consequently, they are the first 
fruits of the yam season. The object of this offering is to 
insure the protection of the gods, that their favour may be 
extended to the welfare of the nation generally, and in 
particular to the productions of the earth, of which yams are 
the most important. 

“The time for planting most kinds of yams is about the 
latter end of July, but the species called caho-caho, which is 
always used in this ceremony, is put in the ground about a 
month before, when, on each plantation, there is a small 


1 Horatio Hale, Unzted States Exploring Expedition, Ethnology and 
Philology (Philadelphia, 1846), p. 97. 


2 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 129 


piece of land chosen and fenced in, for the purpose of 
growing a couple of yams of the above description. As 
soon as they have arrived at a state of maturity, the How 
[the King] sends a messenger to Tooitonga, stating that the 
yams for the zzachz are fit to be taken up, and requesting 
that he would appoint a day for the ceremony : he generally 
fixes on the tenth day afterwards, reckoning the following 
day for the first. There are no particular preparations made 
till the day before the ceremony: at night, however, the 
sound of the conch is heard occasionally in different parts of 
the islands, and as the day of the ceremony approaches it 
becomes more frequent, so that the people of almost every 
plantation sound the conch three or four times, which, 
breaking in upon the silence of the night, has a pleasing 
effect, particularly at Vavaoo, where the number of woods 
and hills send back repeated echoes, adding greatly to the 
effect. The day before the ceremony, the yams are dug up, 
and ornamented with a kind of ribbons prepared from the 
inner membrane of the leaf of a species of pandanus, and 
dyed red ; when thus prepared, it is called mellecoola and is 
wrapped round the yam, beginning at one end, and running 
round spirally to the other, when it is brought back in the 
opposite direction, the turns crossing each other in a very 
neat manner. As the ceremony is always performed at the 
island where Tooitonga chooses to reside, the distant islands 
must make these preparations two or three days beforehand, 
that the yams, etc., may be sent in time to Vavaoo, where 
we will suppose the affair is to take place. The ninth day 
then is employed in preparing and collecting the yams and 
other provisions, such as fish, cava root, and mafoa, and 
getting ready mats, gzatoo, and bundles of sellecoola: but the 
yams only are to be carried in the procession about to be 
lescribed. . . . 

“The sun has scarcely set when the sound of the conch 
begins again to echo through the island, increasing as the 
night advances. At the Mooa [capital], and all the planta- 
tions, the voices of men and women are heard singing 
Nofo do0a tegger gnaode, dooa gnaode, ‘Rest thou, doing no 
work ; thou shalt not work.’ This increases till midnight, 
men generally singing the first part of the sentence, and 

PT. V VOL. II K 


The first- 
fruits of 
the yams 
deposited 
on the 
grave of 
the last 
Tooitonga 
(divine 
chief). 


130 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


the women the last, to produce a more pleasing effect: it 
then subsides for three or four hours, and again increases 
as the sun rises. Nobody, however, is seen stirring out in 
the public roads till about eight o’clock, when the people 
from all quarters of the island are seen advancing towards 
the Mooa, and canoes from all the other islands are landing 
their men; so that all the inhabitants of Tonga seem 
approaching by sea and land, singing and sounding the 
conch. At the Mooa itself the universal bustle of prepara- 
tion is seen and heard ; and the different processions enter- 
ing from various quarters, of men and women, all dressed 
up in new gxatoos, ornamented with red ribbons and 
wreaths of flowers, and the men armed with spears and 
clubs, betoken the importance of the ceremony about to 
be performed. Each party brings in its yams in a basket, 


‘which is carried in the arms with great care, by the principal 


vassal of the chief to whom the plantation may belong. 
The baskets are deposited in the ma/dz' (in the Mooa), and 
some of them begin to employ themselves in slinging the 
yams, each upon the centre of a pole about eight or nine 
feet long, and four inches diameter. The proceedings are 
regulated by attending matabooles.” The yams being all 
slung, each pole is carried by two men upon their shoulders, 
one walking before the other, and the yam hanging between 
them, ornamented with red ribbons. The procession begins 
to move towards the grave of the last Tooitonga (which is 
generally in the neighbourhood, or the grave of one of 
his family will do), the men advancing in a single line, 


every two bearing a yam, with a slow and measured pace, | 


sinking at every step, as if their burden were of immense 
weight. In the meantime the chiefs and matabooles are 
seated in a semicircle before the grave, with their heads 
bowed down, and their hands clasped before them.” The 
procession then marched round the grave twice or thrice in 
a great circle, the conchs blowing and the men singing. 
Next the yams, still suspended from the poles, were de- 


1 The maldz is ‘‘a piece of ground, TZonga /slands, Vocabulary). 
generally before a large house, or 
chief's grave, where public ceremonies 2 The mataboole is ‘‘a rank next 


are principally held” (W. Mariner, below chiefs or nobles” (zéza.). 


XI | THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 131 


posited before the grave, and their bearers sat down beside 
them. One of the satabooles of Tooitonga, seating himself 
before the grave, a little in advance of the men, now 
addressed the gods generally, and afterwards particularly, 
mentioning the late Tooitonga, and the names of several 
others. He thanked them for their divine bounty in favour- 
ing the land with the prospect of so good a harvest, and 
prayed that their beneficence might be continued in future. 
When he had finished, the men rose and resumed their 
loads, and after parading two or three times before the 
_grave, marched back to the ma/dz the same way they 
came, singing and blowing the conchs as before. The 
chiefs and matabooles soon followed to the same place, where 
the yams had been again deposited and loosened from the 
poles, though they still retained their ornaments. Here the 
company sat down in a great circle, presided over by 
Tooitonga, while the king and other great chiefs retired 
into the background among the mass of the people. Then 
the other articles that formed part of the zuzachz were 
brought forward, consisting of dried fish, mats, etc., which, 
with the yams, were divided into shares by one of the mata- 
booles of Tooitonga. About a fourth was allotted to the 
gods, and appropriated by the priests; about a half fell 
to the king; and the remainder belonged to Tooitonga. 
The materials of the zzachz having been carried away, the 
company set themselves to drink cava. Some cava root 
was brought and prepared; a large quantity of provisions, 
perhaps a hundred and fifty baskets-full, was set forth, and 
a small part of it was distributed to be eaten with the cava. 
While the infusion was preparing, a mataboole made a 
speech to the people, saying that, as they had performed 
this important ceremony, the gods ‘would protect them and 
grant them long lives, if only they continued to observe the 
religious rites and to pay due respect to the chiefs. When 
the cava was all drunk, the circle separated, and the pro- 
visions were shared out to each chief according to his rank. 
The day concluded with wrestling, boxing, and so forth, 
and then the night dances began. When these were ended, 
the people went home perfectly assured of the protection of 
the gods. At this ceremony, we are informed, the quantity 


Signifi- 
cance of the 
presenta- 
tion of first- 
fruits to the 
divine chief 
at the grave 
of his pre- 
decessor. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits in 
Samoa and 
other parts 
of Poly- 
nesia. 


132 EFHE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUOITLS CHAP. 


of provisions distributed was incredible, and the people 
looked upon it as a very heavy tribute.’ 

In this Tongan festival the solemn presentation of the 
first-fruits to the divine chief at the grave of his predecessor 
is highly significant: it confirms the conclusion which we 
have already reached, that wherever the first-fruits are paid 
to the chief, it is rather in his religious than in his civil 
capacity that he receives them. It is true that the king of 
Tonga received a large share of the first-fruits, indeed a 
larger share than was allotted to the divine chief ; but it is 
very noticeable that while the division of the first-fruits was 
taking place under the presidency of the divine chief, the 
king and the other great chiefs retired from the scene and 
mingled with the mass of the people, as if to indicate that 
as mere laymen they had no right to participate in a 
religious rite of such deep solemnity. 

The Samoans used to present the first-fruits to the 
spirits (actus) and chiefs.” For example, a family whose 
god was in the form of an eel presented the first-fruits of 
their taro plantations to the eel.? In Tahiti “the first fish 
taken periodically on their shores, together with a number 
of kinds regarded as sacred, were conveyed to the altar. 
The first-fruits of their orchards and gardens were also 
taumaha, or offered, with a portion of their live stock, which 
consisted of pigs, dogs, and fowls, as it was supposed death 
would be inflicted on the owner or the occupant of the land, 
from which the god should not receive such acknowledg- 
ment.”* In Huahine, one of the Society Islands, the 
first-fruits were presented to the god Tani. A poor person 
was expected to bring two of the earliest fruits gathered, of | 
whatever kind; a vaatzra had to bring ten, and chiefs and 
princes had to bring more, according to their rank and 
riches. They carried the fruits to the temple, where they 
threw them down on the ground, with the words, “Here, 


1 W. Mariner, Account of the United States Exploring Expedition, 
Natives of the Tonga Islands, Second New Edition (New York, 1851), ii. 
Edition (London, 1818), ii. 78, 196- 133. 


203. As to the divine chief Tooitonga 3G. Turner, Savzoa, pp. 70 sg. 
see Taboo and the Pertls of the Soul, 4W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 
jab Due Second Edition (London, 1832-1836), 


2 Ch.  Wilkes,, Narrative of. the’ i. 350. 


XI THE-SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 133 


Tani, I have brought you something to eat. Whey chref 
gods of the Easter Islanders were Make-Make and Haua. 
To these they offered the first of all the produce of the 
ground.” Amongst the Maoris the offering of the first-fruits 
of the sweet potatoes to Pani, son of Rongo, the god of 
sweet potatoes, was a solemn religious ceremony. The crop 
of sweet potatoes (kLumara) was sacred, and all persons 
engaged in its cultivation were also sacred or tabooed ; 
they might not quit the place nor undertake any other work.* 

It has been affirmed that the old Prussians offered the 
first-fruits of their crops and of their fishing to the god 
Curcho, but doubt rests on the statement. We have seen 
that the Athenians and other Greek peoples offered the 
first-fruits of the wheat and barley harvests to Demeter and 
Persephone at Eleusis.° The Troezenians sacrificed the 
first-fruits to Poseidon, whom they worshipped as the 
guardian deity of their city.© In Attica the first-fruits of 
the vintage were presented to Icarius and Erigone.’ The 
Romans sacrificed the first ears of corn to Ceres, and the 
first of the new wine to Liber; and until the priests had 
offered these sacrifices, the people might not eat the new 
corn nor drink the new wine.® In various parts of ancient 
Italy the vintage was solemnly inaugurated by the priests. 
At Rome the duty devolved on the Flamen Dialis, who 
sacrificed a lamb to Jupiter and then gathered the first 
grapes over the entrails of the victim. _ Till this ceremony 
had been performed, the new wine might not be brought 
into the city.’ 

The Thompson River Indians of British Columbia used 


sey al 


1D. Tyerman and G. Bennet, 
Journal of Voyages and Travels (Lon- 
don, 1831), i. 284. 

2 Geiseler, Dze Oster-Znsel (Berlin, 
1883), p. 3I. 

3 E. Tregear, ‘‘The Maoris of New 
Zealand,” Journal of the Anthropologi- 
cal Institute, xix. (1890) p. 110; R. 
Taylor, Ze ka A Mazz, or New Zea- 
land and its Inhabitants, Second Edi- 
tion (London, 1870), pp. 165 sg.; 
Old New Zealand, by a Pakeha Maori 
(London, 1884), pp. 103 s@. 

* Chr. Hartknoch, Alt wnd neues 
Preussen (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1684), 


p. 1613; 7zd., Dissertationes historicae 
de varits rebus Prussicts, p. 163 (ap- 
pended to his edition of P. de Dus- 
burg’s Chronicon Prusstae, Frankfort 
and Leipsic, 1679). Compare W. 
Mannhardt, Dze Aorndamonen (Berlin, 
1868), p. 27. 

5 See above, vol. i. pp. 53 599. 

6 Plutarch, Zhesezs, 6. 

7 Hyginus, Fabulae, 130. 

ShHestusyes.0. sc Sacuima.canp-ngitO, 
ed. C. O. Miiller; Pliny, Wat, Ais7. 
xvill. 8. 

9 Varro, De lingua Latina, vi. 16, 
ed. C, O. Miiller. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits 
among 
the old 
Prussians, 
Greeks, 
and 
Romans. 


Sacrifices 
of first- 
fruits 
among the 
Indians of 
America. 


THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


134 


to offer the first berries of the season to the earth, or more 
generally to the mountains. The offering was made by an 
old grey-haired person, who danced and held out the fruit 
towards the mountain-tops. The rest of the people painted 
their faces red and danced for some time.’ The Okanaken 
Indians of British Columbia “ observed first-fruits ceremonies. 
When the first berries or roots were ripe, the chief would 
send out his wife or eldest daughter to gather a portion. 
The whole community would then come together, and 
prayers would be offered to those spirits of the sky who 
were supposed to preside over the operations of nature, 
portions of the fruit or roots would be distributed to all 
present, after which any one was free to gather all he or 
she desired; but no one would think of picking a berry 
or digging a root until after the feast had been held.” 
When the ears of maize were formed, the Quiches of Central 
America gathered the first-fruits and carried them to the 
priests ; moreover, they baked loaves or cakes, which they 
offered to the idol who guarded their fields, but afterwards 
these cakes were given to the poor or the infirm to eat.? It 
was the custom of the Arkansas Indians to offer the first-fruits 
of the ripe maize and melons to the Master of Life; even 
children would die of hunger rather than touch the new 
fruits before this offering had been made. Some of the 
new maize, melons, and other fruits were minced up with 
the carcase of a dog in the presence of the old men, who 
alone were privileged to assist at this solemn rite. Then, 
after performing certain ceremonies, the old men began to 
dance, and some young girls, wound up to a pitch of 
frenzy, threw themselves on the offering and bolted it 
in an instant. Thereupon the old men seized the damsels 
and ducked them in the river Arkansas, which had a 
sobering influence on the minds of the devotees.* From 


this account we may perhaps 


1 James Teit, Zhe Thompson In- 
dians of British Columbia, p. 345 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
Memoir of the American Museum of 
Natural History, May, 1900). 

2 C. Hill Tout, ‘‘Report on the 
Ethnology of the Okanaken of British 
Columbia,” Journal of the R. Anthropo- 


infer that in eating the new 


logical Institute, xli. (1911) p. 132. 

3 Brasseur de Bourbourg, Aestozre 
des Nations civilisées du Mexigue et 
de [ Amérique-Centrale (Paris, 1857- 
1859), li. 566. 

4 Annales de TAssoctation de la 
Propagation de la Fot, i. (Paris and 
Lyons, 1826) p. 386. 


XI THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS 135 


fruits the girls were believed to be inspired by the Master 
of Life, who thus consumed the offering by deputy. The 
chief solemnity of the Natchez, an Indian tribe on the Lower 
Mississippi, was the Harvest Festival or the Festival of New 
Fire. An early account of this ceremony has been already 
submitted to the reader,’ but it may not be amiss to add 
here for comparison the later description by Chateaubriand, 
which differs from the other in some particulars, and lays 
stress on the sacrifice rather than on the sacrament of first- 
fruits. According to Chateaubriand, then, when the time 
for the festival drew near, a crier went through the villages 
calling upon the people to prepare new vessels and new 
garments, to wash their houses, and to burn the old grain, 
the old garments, and the old utensils in a common fire. 
He also proclaimed an amnesty to criminals. Next day he 
appeared again, commanding the people to fast for three 
days, to abstain from all pleasures, and to make use of the 
medicine of purification. Thereupon all the people took 
some drops extracted from a root which they called the 
“root of blood.” It was a kind of plantain and distilled a 
red liquor which acted as a violent emetic. During their 
three days’ fast the people kept silence. At the end of it 
the crier proclaimed that the festival would begin on the 
following day. So next morning, as soon as it began to 
grow light in the sky, the people streamed from all quarters 
towards the temple of the Sun. The temple was a large 
building with two doors, one opening to the east, the other 
to the west. On this morning the eastern door of the 
temple stood open. Facing the eastern door was an altar, 
placed so as to catch the first beams of the rising sun. An 
image of a chouchouacha (a small marsupial) stood upon the 
altar ; on its right was an image of a rattlesnake, on its left 
an image of a marmoset. Before these images a fire of 
oak-bark burned perpetually. Once a year only, on the 
eve of the Harvest Festival, was the sacred flame suffered 
to die out. To the right of the altar, on the morning of 
this holy day, stood the great chief, who took his title and 
traced his descent from the Sun. To the left of the altar 
stood his wife. Round them were grouped, according to 


1 Above, pp. 77 s9¢9.- 


Chateau- 
briand’s 
description 
of the har- 
vest festival 
among the 
Natchez, 


136 THE SACRIFICE OF FIRST-FRUITS CHAP. 


their ranks, the war chiefs, the sachems, the heralds, and the 
young braves. In front of the altar were piled bundles of 
dry reeds, stacked in concentric rings. 

The high priest, standing on the threshold of the 
temple, kept his eyes fixed on the eastern horizon. Before 
presiding at the festival he had to plunge thrice into the 
Mississippi. In his hands he held two pieces of dry wood which 
he kept rubbing slowly against each other, muttering magic 
words. At his side two acolytes held two cups filled with 
a kind of black sherbet. All the women, their backs turned 
to the east, each leaning with one hand on her rude mattock 
and supporting her infant with the other, stood in a great 
semicircle at the gate of the temple. Profound silence 
reigned throughout the multitude while the priest watched 
attentively the growing light in the east. As soon as the 
diffused light of dawn began to be shot with beams of fire, 
he quickened the motion of the two pieces of wood which 
he held in his hands; and at the moment when the upper 
edge of the sun’s disc appeared above the horizon, fire 
flashed from the wood and was caught in tinder. At the 
same instant the women outside the temple faced round and 
held up their infants and their mattocks to the rising sun. 

The great chief and his wife now drank the black liquor. 
The priests kindled the circle of dried reeds; fire was set 
to the heap of oak-bark on the altar, and from this sacred 
flame all the hearths of the village were rekindled. No 
sooner were the circles of reeds consumed than the chief’s 
wife came from the temple and placing herself at the head 
of the women marched in procession to the harvest-fields, 
whither the men were not allowed to follow them. They 
went to gather the first sheaves of maize, and returned to 
the temple bearing them on their heads. Some of the 
sheaves they presented to the high priest, who laid them on 
the altar. Others they used to bake the unleavened bread 
which was to be eaten in the evening. The eastern door of 
the sanctuary was now closed, and the western door was 
opened. 

When day began to decline, the multitude assembled 
once more at the temple, this time at its western gate, where 
they formed a great crescent, with the horns turned towards 


XI pew SACKIFICE OF PLRSIAaPROLT S 137, 


the west. The unleavened bread was held up and presented 
to the setting sun, and a priest struck up a hymn in praise 
of his descending light. When darkness had fallen the 
whole plain twinkled with fires, round which the people 
feasted ; and the sounds of music and revelry broke the 
silence of night.’ 


1 Chateaubriand, Voyage ex Amérique, pp. 130-136 (Michel Lévy, Paris, 
1870). 


Custom 

of killing 
and eating 
the corn- 


spirit Sacra- 


mentally. 


3elief of 
the savage 
that by 
eating an 
animal or 
man he 
acquires 
the quali- 
ties of that 
animal or 
man. 


CHAP TiR cr 
HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 


THE practice of killing a god has now been traced amongst 
peoples who have reached the agricultural stage of society. 
We have seen that the spirit of the corn, or of other culti- 
vated plants, is commonly represented either in human or in 
animal form, and that in some places a custom has prevailed 
of killing annually either the human or the animal representa- 
tive of the god. One reason for thus killing the corn-spirit 
in the person of his representative has been given implicitly 
in an earlier part of this work: we may suppose that the 
intention was to guard him or her (for the corn-spirit is 
often feminine) from the enfeeblement of old age by trans- 
ferring the spirit, while still hale and hearty, to the person 
of a youthful and vigorous successor. Apart from the 
desirability of renewing his divine energies, the death of 
the corn-spirit may have been deemed inevitable under the 
sickles or the knives of the reapers, and his worshippers may 
accordingly have felt bound to acquiesce in the sad necessity.' 
But, further, we have found a widespread custom of eating 
the god sacramentally, either in the shape of the man or 
animal who represents the god, or in the shape of bread made 
in human or animal form. The reasons for thus partaking of 
the body of the god are, from the primitive standpoint, simple 
enough. The savage commonly believes that by eating the 
flesh of an animal or man he acquires not only the physical, 
but even the moral and intellectual qualities which were 
characteristic of that animal or man ; so when the creature 
is deemed divine, our simple savage naturally expects to 


1 See The Dying God, pp. 9 59q- 
138 


cH. x11 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 139 


absorb a portion of its divinity along with its material 
substance. It may be well to illustrate by instances this 
common faith in the acquisition of virtues or vices of many 
kinds through the medium of animal food, even when there is 
no pretence that the viands consist of the body or blood of a 
god. The doctrine forms part of the widely ramified system 
of sympathetic or homoeopathic magic. 

Thus, for example, the Creeks, Cherokee, and kindred Beliefs of 
tribes of North American Indians “believe that nature US }"c" 


can Indians 
is possest of such a property, as to transfuse into men 43s to the 


and animals the qualities, either of the food they use, Paes 
or of those objects that are presented to their senses ; Pee a 
he who feeds on venison is, according to their physical animals. 
system, swifter and more sagacious than the man who 

lives on the flesh of the clumsy bear, or helpless dunghill 

fowls, the slow-footed tame cattle, or the heavy wallowing 
swine. This is the reason that several of their old men 
recommend, and say, that formerly their greatest chieftains 
observed a constant rule in their diet, and seldom ate of any 
animal of a gross quality, or heavy motion of body, fancying 

it conveyed a dullness through the whole system, and disabled 

them from exerting themselves with proper vigour in their 
martial, civil, and religious duties.” The Zaparo Indians 

of Ecuador “will, unless from necessity, in most cases not 

eat any heavy meats, such as tapir and peccary, but confine 
themselves to birds, monkeys, deer, fish, etc., principally 
because they argue that the heavier meats make them 
unwieldy, like the animals who supply the flesh, impeding 

their agility, and unfitting them for the chase.”” Similarly 

some of the Brazilian Indians would eat no beast, bird, 

or fish that ran, flew, or swam slowly, lest by partaking of 

its flesh they should lose their agility and be unable to 
escape from their enemies.* The Caribs abstained from the 

flesh of pigs lest it should cause them to have small eyes 


1 James Adair, Aistory of the 3 A. Thevet, Les Singularites de la 
American Indians (London, 1775), France Antarctigue, autrement nommée 
p. 133. Amerique (Antwerp, 1558), p. 553 7a@., 


La Cosmographie Universelle (Paris, 

2 Alfred Simson, Zyvavels in the 1575), ii. pp. 929, [963], 940 [974]; 

Wilds of Ecuador (London, 1887), p. J. Lerius, Azstortza Navigationis m 

168 ; z@., in Journal of the Anthro- Brastliam, quae et America dicitur 
pological Institute, vii. (1878) p. 503- (1586), pp. 126 sg. 


Bushman 
beliefs as 
to the 
homoeo- 
pathic 
magic of 
the flesh of 
animals 


140 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET  CHiap. 


like pigs; and they refused to partake of tortoises from a 
fear that if they did so they would become heavy and stupid 
like the animal! Among the Fans of West Africa men in 
the prime of life never eat tortoises fora similar reason ; they 
imagine that if they did so, their vigour and fleetness of foot 
would be gone. But old men may eat tortoises freely, 
because having already lost the power of running they can 
take no harm from the flesh of the slow-footed creature.” 
Some of the Chiriguanos of eastern Bolivia would not touch 
the flesh of the vicufia, because they imagined that if they 
ate it they would become woolly like the vicufia.* On the 
other hand the Abipones of Paraguay ate the flesh of 
jaguars in order to acquire the courage of the beast ; * indeed 
the number of jaguars which they consumed for this 
object is said to have been very great, and with a like 
intent they eagerly devoured the flesh of bulls, stags, boars, 
and ant-bears, being persuaded that by frequently partaking 
of such food they increased their strength, activity, and 
courage. On the other hand they all abhorred the thought 
of eating hens, eggs, sheep, fish, and tortoises, because they 
believed that these tender viands begot sloth and listless- 
ness in their bodies and cowardice in their minds.? The 
Thompson Indians of British Columbia would not eat the 
heart of the fool-hen, nor would they allow their dogs to 
devour the bird, lest they should grow foolish like the bird.® 

While many savages thus fear to eat the flesh of slow- 
footed animals lest they should themselves become slow- 
footed, the Bushmen of South Africa purposely ate the flesh 
of such creatures, and the reason which they gave for doing 
so exhibits a curious refinement of savage philosophy. They 
imagined that the game which they pursued would be 
influenced sympathetically by the food in the body of the 


1 Rochefort, Hzstotre Naturelle et 


Morale des Illes Anttlles, Seconde 
Kdition (Rotterdam, 1665), p. 465. 
25 C3) Cunysee Dem luibrevallemsau 


Cameroun,” Aelletin de la Soctété de 
Géographie (Paris), vii. Série, xvii. 
(1896) p. 342. 

3 R. Southey, Aestory of Brazil, 
rie ((ULYoyatstoret, WS3I7/\) fon BWHS dehy wk 
(London, 1819) p. 164. 


4 P. Lozano, Descrépcion Choro- 
egraphica del Gran Chaco (Cordova, 
1733), Pp. 90. 

5 M. Dobrizhoffer,- Hzstoria de 
Abtponibus (Vienna, 1784), i. 289 sg. 

6 J. Teit, Zhe Thompson Indians 
of British Columbia, p. 348 (The Jesup 
North Pacific LExpedition, Memotr 
of the American Museum of Natural 
History, April, 1900). 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 141 


hunter, so that if he had eaten of swift-footed animals, the 
quarry would be swift-footed also and would escape him ; 
whereas if he had eaten of slow-footed animals, the quarry 
would also be slow-footed, and he would be able to overtake 
and kill it. For that reason hunters of gemsbok particularly 
avoided eating the flesh of the swift and agile springbok ; 
indeed they would not even touch it with their hands, because 
they believed the springbok to be a very lively creature 
which did not go to sleep at night, and they thought that if 
they ate springbok, the gemsbok which they hunted would 
likewise not be willing to go to sleep, even at night. How, 
then, could they catch it?’ 

Certain tribes on the Upper Zambesi believe in transmigra- 
tion, and every man in his lifetime chooses the kind of animal 
whose body he wishes at death to enter. He then performs 
an initiatory rite, which consists in swallowing the maggots 
bred in the putrid carcase of the animal of his choice ; 
thenceforth he partakes of that animal’s nature. And on 
the occasion of a calamity, while the women are giving them- 
selves up to lamentation, you will see one man writhing on 
the ground like a boa constrictor or a crocodile, another 
howling and leaping like a panther, a third baying like a 
jackal, roaring like a lion, or grunting like a hippopotamus, 
all of them imitating the characters of the various animals to 
perfection.” Clearly these people imagine that the soul or 
vital essence of the animal is manifested in the maggots bred 
in its decaying carcase; hence they imagine that by swallow- 
ing the maggots they imbue themselves with the very life 
and spirit of the creature which they desire to become. The 
Namaquas abstain from eating the flesh of hares, because 
they think it would make them faint-hearted as a_ hare. 
But they eat the flesh of the lion, or drink the blood of the 
leopard or lion, to get the courage and strength of these 
beasts. The Bushmen will not give their children a jackal’s 
heart to eat, lest it should make them timid like the jackal ; 


1 W. H. I. Bleek and C. L. Lloyd, given by the French missionary M. 
Specimens of Bushman Folklore  Coillard. 
(London, 1911), pp. 271-275. 

2 A. Bertrand, Zhe Kingdom of the 3 Theophilus Hahn, 7%sz77- || Goamz, 
Barotsi, Upper Zambezxia (London, ‘the Supreme Being of the Khot-Khot 
1899), p. 277, quoting the description (London, 1881), p. 106. 


Other 
African 
beliefs as 
to the 
homoeo- 
pathic 
magic of 
the flesh of 
animals. 


142 HOMOEOPATAIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET cuar. 


but they give them a leopard’s heart to eat to make them 
brave like the leopard... When a Wagogo man of German 
East Africa kills a lion, he eats the heart in order to become 
brave like a lion ; but he thinks that to eat the heart of a hen 
would make him timid.2,_ Among the Ja-luo, a tribe of Nilotic 
negroes, young men eat the flesh of leopards in order to 
make themselves fierce in war. The flesh of the lion and 
also that of the spotted leopard are sometimes cooked and 
eaten by native warriors in South-Eastern Africa, who hope 
thereby to become as brave as lions. When a Zulu army 
assembles to go forth to battle, the warriors eat slices of 
meat which is smeared with a powder made of the dried 
flesh of various animals, such as the leopard, lion, elephant, 
snakes, and so on; for thus it is thought that the soldiers 
will acquire the bravery and other warlike qualities of these 
animals. Sometimes if a Zulu has killed a wild beast, for 
instance a leopard, he will give his children the blood to 
drink, and will roast the heart for them to eat, expecting 
that they will thus grow up brave and daring men. But 
others say that this is dangerous, because it is apt to pro- 
duce courage without prudence, and to make a man rush 
heedlessly on his death. Among the Wabondei of Eastern 
Africa the heart of a lion or leopard is eaten with the 
intention of making the eater strong and brave.® In British 
Central Africa aspirants after courage consume the flesh and 
especially the hearts of lions, while lecherous persons eat the 
testicles of goats.’ -Among the Suk of British East Africa 
the fat and heart of a lion are sometimes given to children 
to eat in order that they may become strong ; but they are 
not allowed to know what they are eating. Arab women 


1 W. H. I. Bleek and L. C. Lloyd, 
Specimens of Bushman Folklore (Lon- 
don, 1911), p. 373. 

2 Rev. H. Cole, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Wagogo of German East Africa,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
Xxxii. (1902) p. 318. 

8 Sir Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda 
Protectorate, Second Edition (London, 
1904), ii. 787. 

4 Rev. J. Macdonald, Lzght im 
Africa, Second Edition (London, 
1890), p. 1743 2d., in Journal of the 


Anthropological Institute, xix. (1890) 
p. 282. 

5 Rev. H. Callaway, Relzgzous 
System of the Amazulu, p. 438, note 16. 

6 O. Baumann, Usambara und seine 
Nachbargebiete (Berlin, 1891), p. 128. 

7 Sir H. H. Johnston, Sretish 
Central Africa (London, 1897), p. 
438; J. Buchanan, Zhe Shire High- 
lands, p. 138. 

8 M. W. H. Beech, Zhe Suk, 
their Language and Folklore (Oxford, 


TOTO) apse 


1 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 143 


in North Africa give their male children a piece of a lion’s 
heart to eat to make them fearless.. The flesh of an 
elephant is thought by the Ewe-speaking peoples of West 
Africa to make the eater strong.” Before they go forth 
to fight, Wajagga warriors drink a magical potion, which 
often consists of shavings of the horn and hide of a rhinoceros 
mixed with beer; this is supposed to impart to them the 
strength and force of the animal.’ When a serious disease 
has attacked a Zulu kraal, the medicine-man takes the bone 
of a very old dog, or the bone of an old cow, bull, or other 
very old animal, and administers it to the healthy as well as 
to the sick people, in order that they may live to be as old 
as the animal of whose bone they have partaken.* So to 
restore the aged Aeson to youth, the witch Medea infused 
into his veins a decoction of the liver of the long-lived deer 
and the head of a crow that had outlived nine generations 
of men.’ In antiquity the flesh of deer and crows was 
eaten for other purposes than that of prolonging life. As 
deer were supposed not to suffer from fever, some women 
used to taste venison every morning, and it is said that in 
consequence they lived to a great age without ever being 
attacked by a fever; only the venison lost all its virtue if 
the animal had been killed by more blows than one. Again, 
ancient diviners sought to imbue themselves with the spirit 
of prophecy by swallowing vital portions of birds and beasts 
of omen; for example, they thought that by eating the hearts 
of crows or moles or hawks they took into their bodies, 
along with the flesh, the prophetic soul of the creature.’ 


1 J. Shooter, Zhe Kafirs of Natal Rendu de la Commission Archéologique 


and the Zulu Country (London, 1857), 
Pp. 399. 

2A. B. Ellis, Zhe Lwe-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast of West 
Africa (London, 1890), p. 99. 

3M. Merker, Rechtsverhdalintsse 
und Sitten der Wadschagga (Gotha, 
1902), p. 38 (Letermanns Mitteclungen, 
Erganzungsheft, No. 138). 

4 Rev. H. Callaway, Wursery Tales, 
Traditions, and Fiistories of the Zulus 
(Natal and London, 1868), p. 175 note. 

5 Ovid, Metam. vii. 271 syg. As 
to the supposed longevity of deer and 
crows, see L. Stephani, in Compte 


(St. Petersburg), 1863, pp. 140 sg., 
and my note on Pausanias, viii. 10. IO. 

6 Pliny, Mat. HZst. viii. 119. 

7 Porphyry, De Adstinentia, ii. 48: 
oi yoy (Hwy pavTiK@y Wuxas déEacbae 
BovAduevoe eis EavTo’s, TH KUpLaTaTa 
popia Katamdvres, olov Kapdlas Kopdxwy 
4 domahdkwy 7) iepaxwv, EXovot Taplovcay 
Thy Wuxnv Kal xpnuarifovcay ws Gedy 
kal elovovoay els adrov’s dua TH evOécer 
Ty TOU cwuatos. Pliny also mentions 
the custom of eating the heart of a 
mole, raw and palpitating, as a means 
of acquiring skill in divination (Vaz. 
Hist. xxx. 19). 


Ancient 
beliefs as 
to the 
homoeo- 
pathic 
magic of 
the flesh of 
animals, 


144 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET CHAP. iy 


Beliefs of Among the Dyaks of North-West Borneo young men 
ones and warriors may not eat venison, because it would make 
astothe them as timid as deer; but the women and very old men 
ee are free to eat it.' However, among the Kayans of the 
magic of _ same region, who share the same view as to the ill effect of 
ee °' eating venison, men will partake of the dangerous viand 
provided it is cooked in the open air, for then the timid 
spirit of the animal is supposed to escape at once into the 
jungle and not to enter into the eater? The Aino of Japan 
think that the otter is a very forgetful animal, and they often 
call a person with a bad memory an “ otter head.” There- 
fore it is a rule with them that “the otter’s head must not 
lightly be used as an article of food, for unless people are 
very careful they will, if they eat it, become as forgetful as 
that creature. And hence it happens that when an otter 
has been killed the people do not usually eat the head. But 
if they are seized with a very strong desire for a feast of 
otter’s head, they may partake thereof, providing proper 
precautions are taken. When eating it the people must 
take their swords, knives, axes, bows and arrows, tobacco- 
boxes and pipes, trays, cups, garden tools, and everything 
they possess, tie them up in bundles with carrying slings, 
and sit with them attached to their heads while in the act 
of eating. This feast may be partaken of in this way, and 
no other. If this method be carefully adhered to, there will 
be no danger of forgetting where a thing has been placed, 
otherwise loss of memory will be the result.”* On the other 
hand the Aino believe that the heart of the water-ousel is 
exceedingly wise, and that in speech the bird is most eloquent. 
Therefore whenever he is killed, he should be at once torn 
open and his heart wrenched out and swallowed before it 
has time to grow cold or suffer damage of any kind. If a 
man swallows it thus, he will become very fluent and wise, 
and will be able to argue down all his adversaries.* In 
Northern India people fancy that if you eat the eyeballs 


1 Spenser St. John, Lz/fe zx the 3 Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Azuu and 
Forests of the Far East, Second Edition ‘thety Folk-lore (London, 1901), pp. 


(London, 1863), i. 186, 206. [pe ep ee 
2W. H. Furness, Home-life of 
Borneo Head-hunters (Philadelphia, * Rev. J. Batchelor, ap. ieceas 


1902), p. 71 ; compare ?d., pp. 166 sg. 337. 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 145 


of an owl you will be able like an owl to see in the 
dark.’ 

When the Kansas Indians were going to war, a 
feast used to be held in the chief’s hut, and the prin- 
cipal dish was dog’s flesh, because, said the Indians, the 
animal who is so brave that he will let himself be cut in 
pieces in defence of his master, must needs inspire valour. 
On extraordinary occasions the bravest warriors of the 
Dacotas used to perform a dance at which they devoured 
the livers of dogs raw and warm in order thereby to acquire 
the sagacity and bravery of the dog. The animals were 
thrown to them alive, killed, and cut open; then the livers 
were extracted, cut into strips, and hung ona pole. Each 
dancer grabbed at a strip of liver with his teeth and chewed 
and swallowed it as he danced: he might not touch it with 
his hands, only the medicine-man enjoyed that privilege. 
Women did not join in the dance.* Men of the Buru and 
Aru Islands, East Indies, eat the flesh of dogs in order to 
be bold and nimble in war.* Amongst the Papuans of the 
Port Moresby and Motumotu districts, New Guinea, young 
lads eat strong pig, wallaby, and large fish, in order to 
acquire the strength of the animal or fish.2 Some of the 
natives of Northern Australia fancy that by eating the 
flesh of the kangaroo or emu they are enabled to jump 
or run faster than before.° The Miris of Assam prize 
tiger's flesh as food for men; it gives them strength and 
courage. But “it is not suited for women; it would make 
them too strong-minded.”’ In Corea the bones of tigers 
fetch a higher price than those of leopards as a means of 
inspiring courage. A Chinaman in Seoul bought and ate a 
whole tiger to make himself brave and fierce. The special 
seat of courage, according to the Chinese, is the gall-bladder ; 


1 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), i. 279. 

2 Bossu, Nouveaux Voyages aux 
Indes occidentales (Paris, 1768), i. 
E25 

3H. R. Schoolcraft, Zzdian Tribes 
of the United States, ii. (Philadelphia, 
1853) pp. 79 59. 

4j. G. F. Riedel, De sluik- en 
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 


EteiVv. VOL. II 


Papua (The Hague, 1886), pp. 10, 
262. 

5 James Chalmers, Proneering in 
New Guinea (London, i887), p. 166. 

6 Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxiv. (1895) p. 179. 

7 E. T. Dalton, Descripteve Ethnology 
of Bengal (Calcutta, 1872), p. 33- 

8 Proceedings of the Royal Geo- 
graphical Soctety, N.S., viii. (1886) 
p- 307. 

L 


Beliefs as 
to the 
homoeo- 
pathic 
magic of 
the flesh 
of dogs, 
tigers, ete. 


Beliefs as 
to the 
homoeo- 
pathic 
magic of 
the flesh of 
wolves, 
bears, and 
serpents. 


146 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET, cuar: 


so they sometimes procure the gall-bladders of tigers and bears, 
and eat the bile in the belief that it will give them courage.’ 
Again, the Similkameen Indians of British Columbia imagine 
that to eat the heart of a bear inspires courage.” 

In Norse legend, Ingiald, son of King Aunund, was timid 
in his youth, but after eating the heart of a wolf he became very 
bold; Hialto gained strength and courage by eating the heart 
of a bear and drinking its blood ;* and when Sigurd killed 
the dragon Fafnir and tasted his heart’s blood, he acquired 
thereby a knowledge of the language of birds.* The belief 
that the language of birds or of animals in general can be 
learned by eating some part of a serpent appears to be 
ancient and wide-spread. Democritus is reported to have 
said that serpents were generated from the mixed blood of 
certain birds, and that therefore whoever ate a serpent 
would understand the bird language.® The Arabs in anti- 
quity were supposed to be able to draw omens from birds 
because they had gained a knowledge of the bird language 
by eating either the heart or liver of a serpent; and the 
people of Paraka in India are said to have learned the lan- 
guage of animals in general by the same means.° Saxo 
Grammaticus relates how Rollo acquired all knowledge, 
including an understanding of the speech of animals, both 
wild and tame, by eating of a black serpent.’ In Norway, 
Sweden, and Jutland down to the nineteenth century the 
flesh of a white snake was thought to confer supernatural 
wisdom on the eater;® it is a German and Bohemian 
superstition that whoever eats serpent’s flesh understands 
the language of animals.? Notions of the same sort, based 


1 J. Henderson, ‘‘ The Medicine 
and Medical Practice of the Chinese,” 


Journal of the North China Branch of 


the Royal Asiatic Society, New Series, 
i. (Shanghai, 1865) pp. 35 sg. Com- 
pare Mrs. Bishop, Korea and her 
Neighbours (London, 1898), i. 79. 

2 Mrs. S. S. Allison, ‘* Account of 
the Similkameen Indians of British 
Columbia,” /ournal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxi. (1892) p. 313. 

3 P. E. Miiller on Saxo Grammaticus, 
Fistoria Danica (Copenhagen, 1839- 
1858), vol. ii. p. 60. 


4 Die Edda, iibersetzt von K. Sim- 
rock § (Stuttgart, 1882), pp. 180, 309. 

® Pliny, Azst. Natur. x. 137, xxix. 
72. 
® Philostratus, Vita Afolloniz, i. 20, 
iii. 9. 

T Saxo Grammaticus,  AAZstorda 
Danica, ed. P. E. Miiller (Copenhagen, 
1839-1858), i. 193 sq. 

8 P. E. Miiller, note in his edition 
of Saxo Grammaticus, vol. ii. p. 146. 

9 A. Wuttke, Der deutsche Volks- 
aberglaube* (Berlin, 1869), p. 110, 
§ 153; J. V. Grohmann, Aderg/lauben 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 


147 


no doubt on a belief in the extraordinary wisdom or subtlety 
of the serpent, often meet us in popular tales and traditions." 

In Morocco lethargic patients are given ants to swallow, 
and to eat lion’s flesh will make a coward brave ;” but people 
abstain from eating the hearts of fowls, lest thereby they should 
be rendered timid.2 When a child is late in learning to speak, 
the Turks of Central Asia will give it the tongues of certain 
birds to eat“. A North American Indian thought that 
brandy must be a decoction of hearts and tongues, “because,” 
said he, “after drinking it I fear nothing, and I talk wonder- 
fully.”° In Java there is a tiny earthworm which now and 
then utters a shrill sound like that of the alarum of a small 
clock. Hence when a public dancing girl has screamed 
herself hoarse in the exercise of her calling, the leader of 
the troop makes her eat some of these worms, in the belief 
that thus she will regain her voice and will, after swallowing 
them, be able to scream as shrilly as ever.© The people of 
Darfur, in Central Africa, think that the liver is the seat of 
the soul, and that a man may enlarge his soul by eating 


the liver of an animal. 


und Gebrauche aus Boihmen und 
Mahren (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), 
p- 230, § 1658. 

1 Grimm, A7zzder- und Hausmarchen, 
No. 17; za., Deutsche Sagen * (Berlin, 
1865-1866), No. 132 (vol. i. pp. 174- 
176); A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, 
Norddeutsche Sagen, Marchen und 
Gebrauche (Leipsic, 1848), p. 1543 
A. Waldau, Béhkmisches Marchenbuch 
(Prague, 1860), pp. 13 sgg.; Von 
Alpenburg, AZythen und Sagen Tirols 
(Zurich, 1857), pp. 302 sgg.; W. von 
Schulenburg, Wendische Volkssagen und 
Gebrauche aus dem Spreewald (Leipsic, 
1880), p. 96; P. Sébillot, 7xaditions 
et Superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne 
(Paris, 1882), ii. 224; W. Grant 
Stewart, Zhe Popular Superstitions 
and Festive Amusements of the High- 
landers of Scotland, New Edition 
weondon, 1851); pp. 53, 56; J. F. 
Campbell, Popular Tales of the West 
Highlands, New Edition (Paisley and 
London, 1890), No. 47, vol. ii. pp. 
377 sqg-; EE. Prym und A. Socin, 
Syrische Sagen und Maerchen (G6ttin- 


“ Whenever an animal is killed its 


gen, 1881), pp. 150sg. On the serpent 
in relation to the acquisition by men of 
the language of animals, see further my 
article, ‘The Language of Animals,” 
The Archaeological Review, i. (1888) 
pp- 166sgg. Sometimes serpents have 
been thought to impart a knowledge of 
the language of animals voluntarily by 
licking the ears of the seer. See 
Apollodorus, Azb/zotheca, i. 9. 11 sg. 5 
Porphyry, De abstinentza, iil. 4. 

2 A. Leared, Morocco and the Moors 
(London, 1876), p. 281. 

3M. Quedenfelt, ‘‘Aberglaube und 
halb-religidse Bruderschaft bei den 
Marokkanarn,” Verhandlungen der 
Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, 
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, 1886, p. 
682 (bound up with the Zeztschrift 
jtir Ethnologie, xviii. 1886). 

4H. Vambery, Das Tiirkenvolk 
(Leipsic, 1885), p. 218. 

® Charlevoix, W7stozre de la Nouvelle 
France (Paris, 1744), vi. 8. 

SPP Neth cWen leer dersaic 
natuur,” Jyternationales Archiv fiir 
Ethnographie, vil. (1894) pp. 140 sg. 


Various 
beliefs as 
to the 
homoeo- 
pathic 
magic of 
the flesh 
of animals. 


The flesh 
and blood, 
but 
especially 
the hearts, 
of dead 
men eaten 
or drunk 
for the sake 
ofacquiring 
the good 
qualities of 
the dead. 


148 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET Cuxe: 


liver is taken out and eaten, but the people are most careful 
not to touch it with their hands, as it is considered sacred ; 
it is cut up in small pieces and eaten raw, the bits being 
conveyed to the mouth on the point of a knife, or the sharp 
point of a stick. Any one who may accidentally touch the 
liver is strictly forbidden to partake of it, which prohibition 
is regarded as a great misfortune for him.” Women are not 
allowed to eat liver, because they have no soul.’ 

Again, the flesh and blood of dead men are commonly 
eaten and drunk to inspire bravery, wisdom, or other qualities 
for which the men themselves were remarkable, or which are 
supposed to have their special seat in the particular part 
eaten. Thus among the mountain tribes of South-Eastern 
Africa there are ceremonies by which the youths are formed 
into guilds or lodges, and among the rites of initiation there 
is one which is intended to infuse courage, intelligence, and 
other qualities into the novices. Whenever an enemy who 
has behaved with conspicuous bravery is killed, his liver, 
which is considered the seat of valour; his ears, which are 
supposed to be the seat of intelligence; the skin of his 
forehead, which is regarded as the seat of perseverance ; his 
testicles, which are held to be the seat of strength; and 
other members, which are viewed as the seat of other virtues, 
are cut from his body and baked to cinders. The ashes 
are carefully kept in the horn of a bull, and, during the 
ceremonies observed at circumcision, are mixed with other 
ingredients into a kind of paste, which is administered by 
the tribal priest to the youths. By this means the strength, 
valour, intelligence, and other virtues of the slain are believed 
to be imparted to the eaters.” When Basutos of the moun- 
tains have killed a very brave foe, they immediately cut out 
his heart and eat it, because this is supposed to give them his 
courage and strength in battle. At the close of the war the 
man who has slain such a foe is called before the chief and 


1 R. W. Felkin, ‘‘ Notesonthe For Tribes,” /owrnal of the Anthropological 
Tribe of Central Africa,” Proceedings of Institute, xx. (1891) p. 1163; 2a, 
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, xii. Light in Africa (London, 1890), p. 
(1884-1886) p. 218. 212. Compare Rev. E. Casalis, 7%é 

Lasutos (London, 1861), pp. 257 sg. ; 

2 Rev. J. Macdonald, ‘‘Manners, Dudley Kidd, Zhe Essential Kajir 

Customs, etc., of the South African (London, 1904), p. 309. 


XI HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 


149 


gets from the doctor a medicine which he chews with his 
food. The third day after this he must wash his body in 
running water, and at the expiry of ten days he may return 
to his wives and children." So an Ovambo warrior in battle 
will tear out the heart of his slain foe in the belief that by 
eating it he can acquire the bravery of the dead man.” A 
similar belief and practice prevail among some of the tribes 
of British Central Africa, notably among the Angoni. These 
tribes also mutilate the dead and reduce the severed parts to 
ashes. Afterwards the ashes are stirred into a broth or gruel, 
“which must be ‘lapped’ up with the hand and thrown into 
the mouth, but not eaten as ordinary food is taken, to give 
the soldiers courage, perseverance, fortitude, strategy, patience 
and wisdom.”*® In former times whenever a Nandi warrior 
killed an enemy he used to eat a morsel of the dead man’s 
heart to make himself brave* The Wagogo of German 
East Africa do the same thing for the same purpose.’ 
When Sir Charles M‘Carthy was killed by the Ashantees in 
1824, it is said that his heart was devoured by the chiefs of 
the Ashantee army, who hoped by this means to imbibe his 
courage. His flesh was dried and parcelled out among the 
lower officers for the same purpose, and his bones were 
long kept at Coomassie as national fetishes.° The Amazons 
of Dahomey used to eat the hearts of foes remarkable 
for their bravery, in order that some of the intrepidity 
which animated them might be transfused into the eaters. 
In former days, if report may be trusted, the hearts of 
enemies who enjoyed a reputation for sagacity were also 
eaten, for the Ewe-speaking negro of these regions holds that 
the heart is the seat of the intellect as well as of courage.’ 
Among the Yoruba-speaking negroes of the Slave Coast the 


1 Rev. J. Macdonald, in /owsnal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xx. (1891) 
p. 138; zd., Light in Africa, p. 220. 

2H. Schinz, Deutsch Stidwest- 
Afrika (Oldenburg and Leipsic, preface 
dated 1891), p. 320. 

3 J. Macdonald, ‘East Central 
African Customs,” /ournal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxii. (1893) 


p- 111. Compare J. Buchanan, 7he 
Shire Highlands, p. 138; Sir H. H. 
Johnston, Srztish Central Africa 


(London, 1897), p. 438. 

4 A.C. Hollis, Zhe Nandi (Oxford, 
1909), p. 27- 

5 Rev. H. Cole, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Wagogo of German East Africa,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
XXxii. (1902) p. 318. 

6 Rev. J. L. Wilson, Western Africa 
(London, 1856), pp. 167 sg. 

7A. B. Ellis, Zhe Lwe-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast (London, 
1890), pp. 99 5g. 


HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 


150 CHAP, 


priests of Ogun, the war-god, usually take out the hearts of 
human victims, which are then dried, crumbled to powder, 
mixed with rum, and sold to aspirants after courage, who 
swallow the mixture in the belief that they thereby absorb 
the manly virtue of which the heart is supposed to be the 
seat.' Similarly, Indians of the Orinoco region used to toast 
the hearts of their enemies, grind them to powder, and then 
drink the powder in a liquid in order to be brave and valiant 
the next time they went forth to fight.2, The Nauras Indians 
of New Granada ate the hearts of Spaniards when they had 
the opportunity, hoping thereby to make themselves as 
dauntless as the dreaded Castilian chivalry.2 The Sioux 
Indians of North America used to reduce to powder the 
heart of a valiant enemy and swallow the powder, hoping thus 
to appropriate the dead man’s valour.“ The Muskoghees 
also thought that to eat the heart of a foe would “com- 
municate and give greater heart against the enemy. They 
also think that the vigorous faculties of the mind are derived 
from the brain, on which account, I have seen some of their 
heroes drink out of a human skull; they imagine, they only 
imbibe the good qualities it formerly contained.”® For a 
similar reason in Uganda a priest used to drink beer out of 
the skull of a dead king in order that he might be possessed 
by the king’s spirit.® Among the Esquimaux of Bering 
Strait, when young men had slain an enemy for the first time 
in war, they were wont to drink some of the blood and to eat 
a small piece of the heart of their victim in order to increase 
their bravery.’ In some tribes of North-Western Australia, 
when a man dies who had been a great warrior or hunter, 


1 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Voruba-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast (London, 
1894), p. 69. 

2 A. Caulin, Wistoria Coro-graphica 
natural y evangelica dela Nueva Anda- 
lucia (1779), p. 98. 

3 A. de Herrera, General History 
of the vast Continent and Islands of 
lmerica, translated by Capt. J. Stevens 
(London, 1725-1726), vi. 187. 

4 F. de Castelnau, Expédition dans 
les parties centrales de ? Amérique du 
Sud (Paris, 1850-1851), iv. 382. 

6 James Adair, Aestory of the 


American Indians (London, 1775), p. 
135. 

6 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”’ 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
Xxx. (1901) pp. 129 sg.; zd@., ‘‘ Further 
Notes on the Manners and Customs of 
the Baganda,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxil. (1902) Pp. 45- 

7 E. W. Nelson, ‘‘The Eskimo about 
Bering Strait,” zghteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part i. (Washington, 1899) 
p- 328. 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET I5i 


his friends cut out the fat about his heart and eat it, because 
they believe that it imparts to them the courage and cunning 
of the deceased." 

But while the human heart is thus commonly eaten 
for the sake of imbuing the eater with the qualities of 
its original owner, it is not, as we have already seen, 
the only part of the body which is consumed for this 
purpose. Thus in New Caledonia the victors in a fight 
used to eat the bodies of the slain, “not, as might be 
supposed, from a taste for human flesh, but in order to 
assimilate part of the bravery which the deceased was 
supposed to possess.”” Among the tribes about Mary- 
borough in Queensland, when a man was killed in a cere- 
monial fight, it was customary for his friends to skin and 
eat him, in order that his warlike virtues might pass into 
the eaters.’ Warriors of the Theddora and Negarigo tribes 
in South-Eastern Australia used to eat the hands and feet 
of their slain enemies, believing that in this way they 
acquired some of the qualities and courage of the dead.* 
In the Dieri tribe of Central Australia, when a man had 
been condemned and killed by a properly constituted party 
of executioners, the weapons with which the deed was done 
were washed in a small wooden vessel, and the bloody 
mixture was administered to all the slayers in a prescribed 
manner, while they lay down on their backs and the elders 
poured it into their mouths. This was believed to give them 
double strength, courage, and great nerve for any future 
enterprise.” The Kamilaroi of New South Wales ate the 
liver as well as the heart of a brave man to get his courage.® 
In Tonquin also there is a popular superstition that the liver 
of a brave man makes brave any who partake of it. Hence 
when a Catholic missionary was beheaded in Tonquin in 1837, 
the executioner cut out the liver of his victim and ate part of 


1E. Clement, ‘‘Ethnographical  Sowth-East Australia (London, 1904), 
Notes on the Western Australian p. 753. 

Aborigines,” /zternationales Archiv fiir 4 A. W. Howitt, of. cet. p. 752. 
Ethnographie, xvi. (1904) p. 8. y . 

2 eee Oh eae sur la ° S. Gason, in Journal of the LG 
Nouvelle-Calédonie,” Azdletin de la thropological Institute, xxiv. (1895) p. 
Société de Géographie (Paris), vii. Série, 177 
Vii. (1886) p. 433. 6 Rev. W. Ridley, AKamzlaroz (Syd- 

3 A. W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of ney, 1875), p. 160. 


Other parts 
than the 
heart are 
eaten for 
the purpose 
ofacquiring 
the virtues 
of the 
deceased. 


1532 AOMOEOPATAIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET ‘eaar 


it, while a soldier attempted to devour another part of it raw.’ 
With a like intent the Chinese swallow the bile of notorious 
bandits who have been executed.” The Dyaks of Sarawak 
used to eat the palms of the hands and the flesh of the 
knees of the slain in order to steady their own hands and 
strengthen their own knees.* The Tolalaki, notorious head- 
hunters of Central Celebes, drink the blood and eat the 
brains of their victims that they may become brave.* The 
Italones of the Philippine Islands drink the blood of their 
slain enemies, and eat part of the back of their heads and of 
their entrails raw to acquire their courage. For the same 
reason the Efugaos, another tribe of the Philippines, suck 
the brains of their foes. In like manner the Kai of German 
New Guinea eat the brains of the enemies they kill in order 
to acquire their strength.© Among the Kimbunda of Western 
Africa, when a new king succeeds to the throne, a brave 
prisoner of war is killed in order that the king and nobles 
may eat his flesh, and so acquire his strength and courage." 
The notorious Zulu chief Matuana drank the gall of thirty 
chiefs, whose people he had destroyed, in the belief that it 
would make him strong.’ It is a Zulu fancy that by eating 
the centre of the forehead and the eyebrow of an enemy 
they acquire the power of looking steadfastly at a foe.® In 
Tud or Warrior Island, Torres Straits, men would drink the 
sweat of renowned warriors, and eat the scrapings from 


1 Annales de la Propagation de la 
Foz, xi. (Lyons, 1838-1839) p. 258. 

2 J. Henderson, ‘‘The Medicine 
and Medical Practice of the Chinese,” 
Journal of the North China Branch of 
the Royal Asiatic Society, New Series, (Gotha, 1882), p. 32 (Petermann’s 
i, (Shanghai, 1865) pp. 35 sg. Mitthetlungen, Erginzungsheft, No. 

3 A. C. Kruyt, ‘‘Het koppensnellen 67) 


und die religidsen Anschauungen der 
Malaien des Philippinen - Archipels,” 
Mitthetlungen der Wiener Geograph. 
Gesellschaft, 1882, p. 154; za., Versuch 
einer Ethnographie der Philippinen 


der Toradja’s van Midden - Celebes, 
en zijne Beteekenis,” Verslagen en 
Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie 
van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letter- 
kunde, Vierde Reeks, iii. (Amsterdam, 
1899) p. 201. 

* N. Adriani en A. C. Kruijt, 
“*Van Posso naar Mori,” A/ededeel- 
meen van het Nederlandsche 
Zendelingsenootschap, xliv. (1900) p. 
162. 

5 F. Blumentritt, ‘‘Der Ahnencultus 


=Ne0e 
WELE 


6 Ch. Keysser, ‘‘Aus dem Leben 
der Kaileute,” in R. Neuhauss’s Dezisch 
Neu-Gutnea, iii. (Berlin, 1911) p. 131. 

7 L. Magyar, Reesen in Stid-Afrika 
in den Jahren 1849-1857 (Buda-Pesth 
and Leipsic, 1859), pp. 273-276. 

8 Rev. J. Shooter, Zhe Kafirs of 
Natal (London, 1857), p. 216. 

® Rev. H. Callaway, Wursery Tales, 
Traditions and Histories of the Zulus 
(Natal and London, 1868), p. 163 
note. ; 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 


153 


their finger-nails which had become coated and sodden with 
human blood. This was done “to make strong and like 
stone; no afraid.”' In Nagir, another island of Torres 
Straits, in order to infuse courage into boys a warrior used 
to take the eye and tongue of a man whom he had 
killed, and after mincing them and mixing them with 
his urine he administered the compound to the boy, 
who received it with shut eyes and open mouth seated 
between the warrior’s legs.” Before every warlike ex- 
pedition the people of Minahassa in Celebes used to take 
the locks of hair of a slain foe and dabble them in boiling 
water to extract the courage; this infusion of bravery was 
then drunk by the warriors.* In New Zealand “the chief 
was an atua [god], but there were powerful and powerless 
gods; each naturally sought to make himself one of the 
former ; the plan therefore adopted was to incorporate the 
spirits of others with their own; thus, when a warrior slew 
a chief, he immediately gouged out his eyes and swallowed 
them, the atwa tonga, or divinity, being supposed to reside 
in that organ; thus he not only killed the body, but also 
possessed himself of the soul of his enemy, and con- 
sequently the more chiefs he slew the greater did his 
divinity become.” * 

Even without absorbing any part of a man’s bodily 
substance it is sometimes thought possible to acquire 
his moral virtues through simple contact with his bones. 
Thus among the Toradjas of Central Celebes, when a 
youth is being circumcised he is made to sit on the skull 
of a slain foe in order to make him brave in war;° and 


1 A. C. Haddon, ‘‘The Ethnography 
of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xix. (1890) p. 414, compare p. 312 ; 
Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 
pological Expedition to Torres Stratts, 
y. (Cambridge, 1904) p. 301. 

eyAS @. Haddon, of. cit. p. 420; 
Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 
pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 
v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 301 sg. 

3S. J. Hickson, A Naturalist in 
North Celebes (London, 1889), p. 216. 

4 R. Taylor, 


Te [ka a Maui, or 


New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 
Second Edition (London, 1870), p. 
Bie, (Coinjorie aes, Ye, yi B VN 
Ellis, Polynesian Researches, Second 
Edition (London, 1831-1836), i. 358; 
J. Dumont D’Urville, Voyage autour 
du Monde et 2 la recherche de la 
Pérouse sur la corvette Astrolabe (Paris, 
1532-1633) U. 547/53 Ba Wrerear 
‘©The Maoris of New Zealand,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xix. (1890) p. 108. 

5 A. C. Kruyt, ‘‘ Het koppensnel- 
len der Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes, 


Moral 
virtues of 
the dead 
acquired 
through 
simple con- 
tact with 
their bones. 


154 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET CHAP. 


when Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, was dead, the Turks, 
who had often felt the force of his arm in battle, are said to 
have imagined that by wearing a piece of his bones near 
their heart they should be animated with a strength and 
valour like his... A peculiar form of communion with the 
dead is practised by the Gallas of Eastern Africa. They 
think that food from the house of a dead man, especially 
food that he liked, or that he cooked for himself, contains 
a portion of his life or soul. If at the funeral feast a man 
eats some of that food, he fancies that he has thereby 
absorbed some of the life or soul of the departed, a portion 
of his spirit, intelligence, or courage.” 


Savages Strange as it may seem to us, one motive which induces 
tte a Savage warrior to eat the flesh or drink the blood of the foe 
form a whom he has slain appears to be a wish to form an indissoluble 
nei covenant of friendship and brotherhood with his victim. 
Powe For it is a widespread belief among savages that by trans- 


by drinking fusing a little of their blood into each other’s bodies two 
their blood. men become kinsmen and allies; the same blood now 
circulating in the veins of both, neither can injure the other 
without at the same time injuring himself ; the two have there- 
fore given each other the strongest bond, the best possible 
hostages, for their good behaviour.6 Acting on this theory, 
the primitive warrior seeks to convert his slain foe into the 
firmest of friends by imbibing the dead man’s blood or 
swallowing his flesh. That at all events appears to be the 
idea at the root of the following customs. When an Arawak 
Indian of British Guiana has murdered another, he repairs 
on the third night to the grave of his victim, and pressing 
a pointed stick through the corpse he licks off and swallows 
any blood that he finds adhering to the stick. For he 
believes that if he did not taste his victim’s blood, he would 
go mad and die; whereas by swallowing the blood he 
averts any ill consequences that might flow to him from the 


2 Ph. Paulitschke, Z¢thnographie 
Nordost-Afrikas: die getstige Cultur 


en zijne Beteekenis,” Verslagen en 
Mededeelingen der koninklijke Aka- 


demie van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling 
Letterkunde, Vierde Reeks, iii. 
(Amsterdam, 1899) p. 166. 

1 The Spectator, No. 316, March 
3, 1712; Gibbon, Decline and Fall, 


ch. xvii. 


der Danékil, Galla und Somél (Berlin, 
1896), p- 56. 

° For examples of the blood-cove- 
nant see H. C. Trumbull, Ze Blood 
Covenant (London, 1887). The custom 
is particularly common in Africa. 


XII HOMOROPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET' 


155 


murder... The belief and practice of the Nandi are similar : 
“To the present day, when a person of another tribe has been 
slain by a Nandi, the blood must be carefully washed off the 
spear or sword into a cup made of grass, and drunk by the 
slayer. If this is not done it is thought that the man will 
become frenzied.”* Soamong the tribes of the Lower Niger 
“it is customary and necessary for the executioner to lick the 
blood that is on the blade” ; moreover, “the custom of licking 
the blood off the blade of a sword by which a man has 
been killed in war is common to all these tribes, and the 
explanation given me by the Ibo, which is generally accepted, 
is, that if this was not done, the act of killing would so 
affect the strikers as to cause them to run amok among their 
own people; because the sight and smell of blood render 
them absolutely senseless as well as regardless of all conse- 
quences. And this licking the blood is the only sure remedy, 
and the only way in which they can recover themselves.” * 
Among the Shans executioners believe that they would soon 
fall ill and die if they did not taste the blood of their victims.’ 

The most probable explanation of these practices 
seems to be that a manslayer is thought to be driven mad 
by the ghost of his victim, who takes possession of his 
murderer’s body and causes him to demean himself in a 
frantic manner; whereas, as soon as the slayer has tasted 
the blood of the slain, he becomes a blood-brother of his 
victim, whose ghost accordingly will do himno harm.’ This 
hypothesis is strongly confirmed by the reason alleged for 


1 Rev. J. H. Bernau, AMsszonary 
Labours in British Guiana (London, 
1847), pp. 57 sg.; R. Schomburgk, 


a ceremony called az. For example,a 
man who has killed a tiger must dress 
himself up as a woman, put flints into 


Reisen in Britisch-Guiana (Leipsic, 
1847-1848), ii, 497. 

2 A. C. Hollis, The Nandi (Oxford, 
1909), p. 27. 

3 A. G. Leonard, The Lower Niges 
and its Tribes (London, 1906), pp. 
180, 181 sg. 

4 Mrs. Leslie Milne, Shans at Home 
(London, 1910), p. 192. 

® The Kukis of north-eastern India 
believe that the ghost of an animal as 
well as of a man will haunt its slayer 
and drive him mad unless he performs 


the tiger’s mouth, and eat eggs himself, 
after which he makes a speech to the 
tiger and gives it three cuts over the 
head with a sword. During this per- 
formance the principal performer must 
keep perfectly grave. Should he 
accidentally laugh, he says, ‘The 
porcupine laughed,” referring to a 
real porcupine which he carries in his 
arms for the purpose. See Lieut.- 
Colonel J. Shakespeare, ‘The Kuki- 
Lushai Clans,” Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute, xxxix. (1909) 
pp. 380 sg. 


Blood- 
covenant 
formed by 
manslayers 
with the 
ghosts of 
their 
victims, 


156 MOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET CHAP. 


a similar custom formerly observed by the Maoris. When 
a warrior had slain his foe in combat, he tasted his blood, 
believing that this preserved him from the avenging spirit 
of his victim ; for they imagined that “the moment a slayer 
had tasted the blood of the slain, the dead man became a 
part of his being and placed him under the protection of 
the atwa or guardian-spirit of the deceased.”* In the light 
of these facts we can now explain the opinion, still widely 
held in Calabria, that if a murderer is to escape, he must 
suck his victim’s blood from the reeking blade of the dagger 
with which he did the deed ;” and, further, we can see at 
least a glimmering of reason, however misapplied, in the 
confidence cherished by the Botocudos of Brazil, that if 
only they ate a morsel of the flesh of their enemies, the 
arrows of the fellow tribesmen of the slain would not be 
able to hit them.? Indeed the evidence which I have just 
adduced suggests that the intention of forming a blood- 
covenant with the dead may have been a common motive 
for the cannibalism which has been so often practised 
by savage victors on the bodies of their victims.* If 
that was so, it would to some extent mitigate the 
horror with which such a practice is naturally viewed by 
civilised observers; since it would reveal the cannibal 
feast, no longer in the lurid light of a brutal outburst 
of blind rage and hatred against the vanquished, but in 
the milder aspect of a solemn rite designed to wipe out 
the memory of past hostilities and to establish a_per- 
manent relation of friendship and good fellowship with the 
dead. 


Com- Another mode of entering into communion with the 
nie dead by means of their bodily relics is to grind their bones 
dead by to powder or to burn them to ashes, and then to swallow 


swallowing 


their ashes. “He powder or the ashes mixed with food or drink. This 


method of absorbing the virtues or appropriating the souls 


1 J. Dumont D’Urville, Voyage (Cosenza, 1884), p. 138. 


autour du Monde et a la recherche de 
la Férouse (Paris, 1832-1833), iii. 
305. 

2 Vincenzo Dorsa, La Tvadisione 
ereco-latina negli ust e nelle credenze 
popolart della Calabria  Cuteriore 


3 F. de Castelnau, Aaxpédition dans 
les parties centrales de Amérique du 
Sud (Paris, 1850-1851), iv. 382. 

4 Some of the evidence has already 
been cited by me in Psyche’s Task, pp. 
56-58. 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 157 


of deceased kinsfolk has been practised by a number of 
Indian tribes of South America. Thus the Tarianas, 
Tucanos, and other tribes in the valley of the Amazon, 
about a month after the funeral, disinter the corpse, which 
is then much decomposed, and put it in a great pan or oven 
over the fire till all the volatile parts are driven off with a 
most horrible stench, leaving only a black carbonaceous 
paste. This paste is then pounded into a fine powder, and 
being mixed in several large vats of the native beer, the 
liquor is drunk by the assembled company until all is 
consumed. They believe that thus the virtues of the de- 
ceased are transmitted to the drinkers.’ Similarly among 
the Xomanas and Passes of the Rio Negro and Japura 
River in Brazil, it was customary to burn the bones of the 
dead and mingle the ashes in their drink ; “ for they fancied, 
that by this means they received into their own bodies the 
spirits of their deceased friends.”” We may suppose that 
a similar motive underlies the custom wherever it has been 
observed by the Indians of South America, even when this 
particular motive is not expressly alleged by our authorities. 
For example, the Retorofios, Pechuyos, and Guarayos of 
eastern Bolivia “manifested their feeling for the dead by a 
remarkable custom: when the body had mouldered they 
dug up the bones, reduced them to powder, and mingling it 
with maize, composed a sort of cake, which they considered 
it the strongest mark of friendship to offer and partake. 
Some of the first missionaries were regaled with this family 
bread, before they knew what they were eating.”* Again, 
in the province of Coro, in north-western Venezuela, when 
a chief died, they lamented him in the night, celebrating his 
actions ; then they parched his body at the fire, and reduc- 
ing it to powder drank it up in their liquor, deeming this 
act the highest honour they could pay him.* The Tauaré 
Indians of the Rio Enivra burn their dead, keep their ashes 
in hollow reeds, and eat a portion of the ashes with every 


1A. R. Wallace, Zravels on the 3 R. Southey, of. cz. iii. 204. 
Amazon and Rio Negro, Second 4A. de Herrera, Zhe General 
Edition (London, 1889), ch. xvii. Aestory of the Vast Continent and 
pp. 346 sq. Lslands of America, translated by Capt. 


2 R. Southey, story of Brazil, John Stevens (London, 1725-1726), 
iii, (London, 1819) p. 722. iv. 45. 


Savages 
attempt to 
inoculate 
themselves 
with moral 
and other 
virtues by 


‘watched their tortures from a raised seat. 


158 MOMOEOPATHAIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET cuar. 


meal.’ So in antiquity Artemisia expressed her love and 
crief for her dead husband Mausolus by powdering his ashes 
and drinking them in water.” It is said that Mwamba, a 
recent king or chief of the Wemba in Northern Rhodesia, 
having detected one of his wives in an intrigue with another 
man, caused the guilty pair to be burned alive, while he 
“ Shortly after 
this, however, he would seem to have been stricken with 
remorse and the dread of Nemesis. The presiding witch- 
doctor was therefore ordered to collect the ashes of the 
twain, and decoct therefrom a potion, which was adminis- 
tered to the king to avert the avenging furies of evil 
spirits of the murdered pair, which might otherwise have 
hounded him into a fit of madness.”* By drinking the ashes 
of his victims the king sought to identify himself with them 
and so to protect himself against their angry ghosts, just as 
we have seen that manslayers seek to protect themselves 
against the ghosts of their victims by drinking their blood.* 

Just as the savage thinks that he can swallow the 
moral and other virtues in the shape of food, so he fondly 
imagines that he can inoculate himself with them. Here 
in Europe we as yet inoculate only against disease; in 
Basutoland they have learned the art of inoculating not 


1 A. Reich und F. Stegelmann, 
‘“‘Bei den Indianern des Urubamba 
und des Envira,” Globus, 1xxxii. 
(1903) p. 137. On similar custom 
practised by the American Indians see 
further De la Borde, Relation de 
? Origine, Meurs, Coustumes, Religion, 
Guerres et Voyages des Caraibes 
Sauvages, p. 37 (forming part of the 
Recueil de divers Voyages faits en 
Afrique et enl Amerigue, Paris, 1684) ; 
J. F. Lafitau, MWeurs des Sauvages 
Ameriquains (Paris, 1724), ll. 444-446; 
A. N. Cabeca de Vaca, Relation et 
Naufrages (Paris, 1837), p. 109 (in 
Ternaux Compans’ Voyages, Relations 
et Mémoires originaux pour servir a 
P Histoire de la Découverte de 7 Amé- 
rigue); R. Southey, Hzstory of Brazil, 
i. (Second Edition, London, 1822), 
Supplemental Notes, p. xxxvi.; F. de 
Castelnau, Lapédition dans les parties 
centrales de ? Amérique du Sud (Paris, 


1850-1851), iv. 380; J. G. Miiller, 
Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreli- 
gionen (Bale, 1867), pp. 289 59.3 
H. A. Coudreau, La France Equti- 
noxtale (Paris, 1887), ii. 173 ; Theodor 
Koch, ‘‘Die Anthropophagie der 
stidamerikanischen Indianer,” /7¢er- 
nationales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, 
xii. (1899) pp. 78-110; Th. Koch- 


Griinberg, Zwez Jahre unter den 
Indianern (Berlin, 1909-1910), ii. 
152. Some Indians of Guiana rubbed 


their limbs with water in which the 
ashes of their dead were mingled. See 
A. Biet, Voyage de la France Equt- 
noxtale en [Isle de Cayenne (Paris, 
1664), p. 392. 

2 Aulus Gellius, (Voctes Atticae, x. 
18; Valerius Maximus, iv. 6. 5. 

3 C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, 
The Great Plateau of Nerthern Rhodesia 
(London, I191TI), p. 55. 

4 See above, p. 154 sq. 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 


159 


merely against disease but against moral evil and public 
calamity, against wild beasts and winter cold. For example, 
if an epidemic is raging, if public affairs go ill, or war 
threatens to break out, the chief, with paternal solicitude, 
seeks to guard his people against the evils that menace 
them by inoculating them with his own hand. Armed 


making 
cuts in their 
bodies and 
inserting in 
the cuts the 
ashes of 
animals 
and plants 
which they 


with a lancet, he makes a slight incision in the temples of suppose to 


each one, and rubs into the wound a pinch of magic 
powder which has been carefully compounded of the ashes 
of certain plants and animals. The plants and animals 
whose ashes compose this sovereign medicine are always 
symbolical ; in other words, they are supposed to be imbued 
with the virtues which the chief desires to impart to his 
people. They consist, for example, of plants whose foliage 
withstands the rigours of winter; mimosas, whose thorns 
present an impenetrable barrier to all animals of the deer 
kind ; the claws or a few hairs from the mane of a lion, the 
bravest of beasts; the tuft of hair round the root of the 
horns of a bull, which is the emblem of strength and 
fecundity ; the skin of a serpent; the feathers of a kite or 
a hawk. So when the Barotsé wish to be swift of foot, 
to cripple the fleeing game, and to ensure an abundant 
catch, they scarify their arms and legs and rub into the 
wounds a powder made of the burnt bones of various 
beasts and birds.2, Among some tribes of South-Eastern 
Africa the same magic powder which is made from various 
parts of slain foes, and is eaten by boys at circumcision,” is 
used to inoculate the fighting-men in time of war. The 
medicine-man makes an incision in the forehead of each 
warrior, and puts the powder into the cut, thus infusing 
strength and courage for the battle* Among some Caffre 
tribes the powdered charcoal with which the warriors are 
thus inoculated in various parts of their bodies is procured 
by burning the flesh of a live ox with a certain kind of 


1 Rev. E. Casalis, Zhe Basutos, toms, etc., of South African Tribes,” 


(London, 1861), pp. 256 sg. 


2 E. Holub, Szeben Jahre in Stid 
Afrika (Vienna, 1881), ii. 361. 


3 See above, p. 148. 


4 J. Macdonald, ‘‘ Manners, Cus- 


Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 
tute, xx. (1891) p. 133. The Baro- 
long, a Bechuana tribe, observe a cus- 
tom of this sort. See W. Joest, ‘‘ Bei 
den Barolong,” Das Ausland, 16th 


June 1884, p. 464. 


be endowed 
with the 
virtues in 
question. 


The Zulus 
think they 
can inocu- 
late them- 
selves with 
celestial 
power. 


160 MOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET CHAP: 


wood or roots, to which magic virtue is attributed! The 
Basutos think that they can render themselves invulner- 
able by inoculation,” and the Zulus imagine that they can 
protect themselves against snake-bite by similar means. 
But the saving virtue of the inoculation is not permanent ; 
like vaccination, it has to be periodically renewed. Hence 
every year, about October, Zulu men, women, and children 
have a small piece of skin cut from the back of the left 
hand, and the poison of a snake, mixed with spittle, is 
rubbed into the wound. No snake will ever approach a 
man who has thus been inoculated ; and what is even more 
curious, if the shadow of an inoculated man should touch 
the shadow of a man who has not been inoculated, the 
latter will fall down as if he had been shot, overcome by 
the poison transmitted through the shadow: so exceedingly 
virulent is the virus.’ Among the Jukos, a tribe of the Benue 
River in Northern Nigeria, before a hunter goes forth to 
hunt elephants, he makes four cuts in his left arm and rubs 
in “medicine” ; this helps him to see the beast next day.* 
Again, the Zulus know how to inoculate themselves not 
merely with moral virtue, but even with celestial power. 
For you must know that the Zulus have heaven-herds or 
sky-herds, who drive away clouds big with hail and lightning, 
just as herdsmen drive cattle before them. These heaven- 
herds are in sympathy with the heaven. For when the 
heaven is about to be darkened, and before the clouds 
appear or the thunder mutters, the heart of the heaven-herd 
feels it coming, for it is hot within him and he is excited 
by anger. When the sky begins to be overcast, he too 
grows dark like it; when it thunders, he frowns, that his 
face may be black as the scowl of the angry heaven. Now 
the way in which he thus becomes sympathetic with all 
the changing moods of the inconstant heaven is this: he 
eats the heaven and scarifies himself with it. And the way 


1 Col. Maclean, 4A Compendium of (London, 70, compare p. 
Kafir Laws and Customs (Cape Town, 43 


1906), p. 


1866), p. 82. 

2 Father Porte, ‘‘ Les reminiscences 
dun missionnaire du Basutoland,” Les 
Missions Catholiques, xxviii. (1896) 
p. 149. 

3 Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood 


3. 

4 Lieut. H. Pope-Hennessy, ‘‘ Notes 
on the Jukos and other Tribes of 
the Middle Benue,” <Azcthropological 
Reviews and Miscellanea, p. (30) 3 ap- 
pended to /owrnal of the Anthropologi- 
cal [nstitule, Xxx. (1900). 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 161 


in which he eats the heaven and scarifies himself with it is 
as follows. When a bullock is struck by lightning, the 
wizard takes its flesh and puts it in a sherd and eats it while 
it is hot, mixed with medicine ; and thus he eats the heaven 
by eating the flesh, which came from the beast, which was 
struck by the lightning, which came down from the heaven. 
And in like manner he scarifies himself with the heaven, 
for he makes cuts in his body and rubs in medicine mixed 
with the flesh of a bullock that was struck by lightning." 
In some Caffre tribes, when an animai or a man has been 
struck by lightning, the priest comes straightway and 
vaccinates every person in the kraal, apparently as a sort 
of insurance against lightning. He sets to work by tying 
a number of charms round the neck of every man and 
woman in the village, in order that they may have power 
to dig the dead man’s grave; for in these tribes beasts 
and men alike that have been struck by lightning are always 
buried, and the flesh is never eaten. Next a sacrificial beast 
is killed and a fire kindled, in which certain magic woods 
or roots are burned to charcoal, and then ground to powder. 
The priest thereupon makes incisions in various parts of the 
bodies of each inmate of the kraal, and rubs a portion of the 
powdered charcoal into the cuts; the rest of the powder he 
mixes with sour milk, and gives to them all to drink. From 
the time the lightning strikes the kraal until this ceremony 
has been performed, the people are obliged to abstain 
entirely from the use of milk. Their heads are then shaved. 
Should a house have been struck by lightning it must be 
abandoned, with everything in it. Until all these rites 
have been performed, none of the people may leave the 
kraal or have any intercourse whatever with others; but 
when the ceremonies have been duly performed, the people are 
pronounced clean, and may again associate with their neigh- 
bours. However, for some months afterwards none of the live 
stock of the kraal and few other things belonging to it are 
allowed to pass into other hands, whether by way of sale 
or of gift? Hence it would appear that all persons in a 


1 Rev. H. Callaway, Religious  Kafir Laws and Customs (Cape Town, 
System of the Amazulu, pp. 380-382. 1866), pp. 83 sg. 
2 Col. Maclean, 4A Compendium of 


iV. VOL. IT M 


Some 
Caftres 
inoculate 
themselves 
against 
lightning. 


Some 
savages 
attempt to 
acquire the 
physical 
and mental 
qualities of 
the dead by 
anointing 
themselves 
with their 
remains, 


162 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET Cu&Ke: 


village which has been struck by lightning are supposed to 
be infected with a dangerous virus, which they might com- 
municate to their neighbours; and the vaccination is 
intended to disinfect them as well as to protect them 
against the recurrence of a like calamity. Young Carib 
warriors used to be inoculated for the purpose of making 
them brave and hardy. Some time before the ceremony 
the lad who was to be operated on caught a bird of prey 
of a particular sort and kept it in captivity till the day 
appointed. When the time was come and friends had 
assembled to witness the ceremony, the father of the boy 
seized the bird by its legs and crushed its head by beating 
it on the head of his son, who dared not wince under the 
rain of blows that nearly stunned him. Next the father 
bruised and pounded the bird’s flesh, and steeped it in water 
together with a certain spice; after which he scored and 
slashed his son’s body in all directions, washed his 
wounds with the decoction, and gave him the bird’s heart 
to eat, in order, as it was said, that he might be the 
braver for it.’ 

It is not always deemed necessary either that the 
mystical substance should be swallowed by the communi- 
cant, or that he should receive it by the more painful 
process of scarification and inoculation. Sometimes it is 
thought enough merely to smear or anoint him with it. 
Among some of the Australian blacks it used to be a 
common practice to kill a man, cut out his caul-fat, and 
rub themselves with it, in the belief that all the qualities, 
both physical and mental, which had distinguished the 
original owner of the fat, were thus communicated by its 
means to the person who greased himself with it.” The 
Kamilaroi tribe of New South Wales sometimes deposited 
their dead on the forks of trees, and lighting fires under- 
neath caught the fat as it dropped; for they hoped with 


1 Du Tertre, Aestotre generale des 
Isles de S. Christophe, de la Guade- 
loupe, de la Martinique et autres dans 
2? Amerique (Paris, 1654), pp. 417 Sg. 5 
zd., LHvtstotre generale des Antilles 
(Paris, 1667-1671), li. 37753 Roche- 
fort, AZistotre Naturelle et Morale des 


Iles Antilles? (Rotterdam, 1665), p. 
556. y 

2 R. Brough Smith, Aborigines of 
Victoria (Melbourne and _ London, 
1878), i. ps Xxix.,) digits) 
Howitt, Mative Tribes of South-East 
Australia (London, 1904), pp. 367 sgy. 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 


163 


the droppings to acquire the strength and courage of the 
deceased. The Wollaroi, another tribe of New South 
Wales, used to place the dead on a stage, and the mourners 
sat under it and rubbed their bodies with the juices of 
putrefaction which exuded from the rotten body, believing 
that this made them strong. Others collected these 
juices in vessels, and the young men rubbed the stinking 
liquid into their persons in order to acquire the good 
qualities of the departed.” Wherever a like custom has 
been practised, as it has been, for example, by some of the 
natives of New Guinea, Timor Laut, and Madagascar,’® we 
may conjecture that the motive has been similar. Again, 
the negroes of Southern Guinea regard the brain as the 
seat of wisdom, and think it a pity that, when a wise man 
dies, his brain and his wisdom should go to waste together. 
So they sever his head from his body and hang it up over 
amass of chalk, which, as the head decays, receives the 
drippings of brain and wisdom. Any one who applies the 
precious dripping to his forehead is supposed to absorb 
thereby the intelligence of the dead* Among the Beku, a 
tribe of dwarfs attached to the Fans in West Africa, the 
great charm for success in hunting is procured by killing a 
man and afterwards, when the corpse has begun to moulder 
in the grave, detaching the head from the body. The brain, 
heart, eyes and hairs of the body are then removed and 
mixed, according to a secret formula, with special incanta- 
tions. When the compound is dry, the-hunter rubs himself 


ENG VeeVWs Ridley, 
(Sydney, 1875), p. 160. 


Kamilarot pological Expedition to Torres Straits, 


vi. (Cambridge, 1906) p. 159; J. 


2 A. W. Howitt, WMative Tribes of 
South-East Australia (London, 1904), 
pp: 467, 468. 

3 J. Chalmers and W. W. Gill, 
Work and Adventure tn New Guinea 
(London, 1885), pp. 130, 265, 308; 
J. G. F. Riedel, De sluzk- en kroesharige 
vassen tusschen Selebes en Papua (The 


facie, 1500), p-. 308; Rev. J. 
Sibree, Zhe Great African Island 
(London, 1880), p. 241. Other or 


the same peoples sometimes drink the 
juices of the decaying bodies of their 
kinsfolk, doubtless for a similar reason. 
See Reports of the Cambridge Anthro- 


Chalmers and W. Gill, of. czt. pp. 27, 
265; Ch. Wilkes, Warratzve of the 
United States Exploring Expedition, 
New Edition (New York, 1851), ii. 
EGON Gab wiedely opaiczt-nps2O7n. 
A. Bastian, Jndoneszen, ii. (Berlin, 
1885) p. 95; za., Die Volker des 
Ostlichen Asien, v. (Jena, 1869) p. 91 ; 
P. J. Veth, 4orneo’s Westerafdeeling 
(Zaltbommel, 1854-1856), ii. 270; J. 
Jacobs, Henzgen Tijd onder de Baliers 
(Batavia, 1883), p. 53. 


4 Rey. J. L. Wilson, Western Africa 
(London, 1856), p. 394. 


The juices 
of animals 
are some- 
times 
similarly 
applied for 
the same 
purpose. 


1644 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET cHxe: 


with it “in order to acquire a dash of the higher power with 
which people are endowed in the other life, and in particular 
their invisibility.””' Among the Digger Indians of California, 
when a man died, it was customary to burn the body to 
ashes, mix the ashes with a thick resinous gum extracted 
from a pine-tree, and then smear the gum on the head of 
the mourner, where it was allowed to remain till it gradually 
wore away.” The motive for the custom is not mentioned, 
but it was probably, like the motive for the parallel custom 
of swallowing the ashes of the dead, a desire to participate 
in the powers and virtues of the departed. At a certain 
stage of the ceremonies by which, in the Andaman Islands, 
a boy is initiated into manhood, the chief takes the carcase 
of a boar and presses it heavily down on the shoulders, 
back, and limbs of the young man as he sits, silent and 
motionless, on the ground. This is done to make him 
brave and strong. Afterwards the animal is cut up, and its — 
melted fat is poured over the novice, and rubbed into his 
body.2 The Arabs of Eastern Africa believe that an 
unguent of lion’s fat inspires a man with boldness, and 
makes the wild beasts flee in terror before him.* In the 
forests of North-western Brazil there lives a small falcon 
with a red beak which is so sharp-sighted that it can detect 
even a worm on the ground from a considerable height. 
When a Kobeua Indian has killed one of these birds, he 
pokes out its eyes and allows the fluid to drip into 
his own, believing that in this way they will be 
sharp-sighted like those of the falcon.2 Most of the 
Baperis, or Malekootoos, a Bechuana tribe of South Africa, 
revere or, as they say, sing the porcupine, which seems 
to be their totem, as the sun is the totem of some 
members of the tribe, and a species of ape the totem of 
others. Those of them who have the porcupine for their 
totem swear by the animal, and lament if any one injures it. 


1 Mgr. Le Roy, “Les Pygmées,” 
Les Missions Catholiques, xxix. (1897) 
p- 210. 

2 “Mourning for the Dead among 
the Digger Indians,” /owrnal of the 
Anthropological Institute, ii. (1874) 
Pp. 530. 

3 E. H. Man, Adoriginal Inhabit- 


ants of the Andaman Islands, p. 66. 


4 Jerome Becker, La Vie en Af- 
rigue (Paris and Brussels, 1887), ii. 
366. 

5 Th. Koch-Griinberg, Zwez Jahre 
unter den Indianern (Berlin, 1909- 
IQ1O), il. 153. 


XI HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 165 


When a porcupine has been killed, they religiously gather 
up its bristles, spit on them, and rub their eyebrows with 
them, saying, “ They have slain our brother, our master, one 
of ourselves, him whom we sing.” They would fear to die 
if they ate of its flesh. Nevertheless they esteem it whole- 
some for an infant of the clan to rub into his joints certain 
portions of the paunch of the animal mixed with the sap 
of some plants to which they ascribe an occult virtue.’ So 
at the solemn ceremony which is observed by the Central 
Australian tribes for the purpose of multiplying kangaroos, 
men of the kangaroo totem not only eat a little kangaroo 
flesh as a sacrament, but also have their bodies anointed 
with kangaroo fat. Doubtless the intention alike of the 
eating and of the anointing is to impart to the man the 
qualities of his totem animal, and thus to enable him 
to perform the ceremonies for the multiplication of the 
breed.” 

In ancient Mexico the priests of the god Tezcatlipoca, 
before they engaged in religious rites which tried the nerve, 
used to smear their bodies with a magic ointment, which 
had the effect of banishing all fear, so that they would 
confront wild beasts in their dens or slaughter people in 
sacrifice with the utmost indifference. The ointment which 
had this marvellous property was compounded of the 
ashes of venomous reptiles and insects, such as spiders, 
scorpions, centipedes, and vipers, which were brayed up ina 
mortar along with living specimens of the same creatures, 
tobacco, soot, and the ashes of black caterpillars. This 
precious substance was then set before the god in little pots, 
because they said it was his victuals ; therefore they called it 
a divine food. And when the priests had besmeared them- 


1T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, Lvolution of Kings, i. 85 sgg. An- 


Voyage @ Exploration au Nord-est de 
la Colonie du Cap de Bonne-Espérance 
(Paris, 1842), pp. 349 sg. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, Wative Tribes 
of Central Australia (London, 1899), 
pp. 204 sg. Men of other totem clans 
also partake of their totems sacrament- 
ally at these Jutichiuma ceremonies 
(Spencer and Gillen, of. c’¢. pp. 202- 
206). As to the Jntichiuma cere- 
monies, see Zhe Magic Art and the 


other Central Australian mode of com- 
municating qualities by external appli- 
cation is seen in the custom of beating 
boys on the calves of their legs with 
the leg-bone of an eagle-hawk; strength 
is supposed to pass thereby from the 
bone into the boy’s leg. See Spencer 
and Gillen, of. cet. p. 472; Report on 
the Work of the Horn Scientific Ex- 
pedition to Central Australia, Part iv. 
(London and Melbourne, 1896), p. 180, 


Magical 
ointment 
used by 
Mexican 
priests. 


Qualities of 
a person, 
animal, or 
thing im- 
parted by 
fumigation. 


166 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET  cuar. 


selves with it, they were ready to discharge the duties of their 
holy office by butchering their fellow men in the human 
shambles without one qualm of fear or one visiting of com- 
passion. Moreover, an unction of this ointment was deemed 
a sovereign remedy for sickness and disease; hence they 
named it “the divine physic”; and sick people came from 
all quarters to the priests, as to their saviours, to have their 
ailing parts anointed with the divine physic and to be made 
whole.’ 

Sometimes the valuable qualities of an animal or of a 
person may be imparted to another by the more delicate and 
ethereal process of fumigation. This refined mode of culti- 
vating the moral virtues is or used to be practised by the 
Caffres of South Africa. Thus in former times as soon as a 
baby was born, some dirt was scraped from the forearm and 
other parts of the father’s body and mixed with special 
medicines. The mixture was then made to smoulder and 
the baby was fumigated or “ washed” in the smoke. This 
ceremony was deemed of great importance, being the estab- 
lished way of communicating to the child a portion of the 
ancestral spirit (z¢ozgo) through the physical medium of the 
father’s dirt, to which the spirit naturally adheres. But 
while the dirt was endowed with this spiritual potency, the 
moral character of the infant depended in a large measure 
on the nature of the medicines with which the dirt was 
compounded, and accordingly much thought and skill were 
devoted to their selection and preparation. Foremost among 
the ingredients was a meteorite, burnt to a cinder and ground 
to powder. The effect of this powder, well mixed with the 
dirt, and introduced into the orifices of the child’s body 
by means of smoke, is to close the anterior fontanelle of 
the baby’s skull, to strengthen the bones of that important 
part of his person, to communicate vigour to his mind and 
courage to his disposition, and in general to brace and harden 
his whole system with the strength and hardness of the 


1 Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire de  \uyt Society, London, 1880), ii. 364- 
l Origine des Indiens qui habitent la 367; E. Seler, Altmexthanische 
Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs traditions, Studien, ii. (Berlin, 1899), pp. 43 59. 
publié par D. Charnay (Paris, 1903), (Verdffentlichungen aus dem koniglichen 
pp. 171-173; J. de Acosta, Natural Museum fiir Volkeriunde). 
and Moral History of the Indies (Wak- 


XII HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET 167 


meteorite. Other ingredients which have a most beneficial 
effect are the powdered whiskers of a leopard, the claws of a 
lion, and the skin of a salamander. The mode of administer- 
ing the medicine is as follows. You set fire to the com- 
pound, and while it smoulders, you hold the infant, wrapt 
up in a blanket, over the burning mass so as to compel it to 
inhale the smoke. To make sure of producing the desired 
effect, some of the powdered medicine is mixed with the baby’s 
food. In like manner by holding the smouldering feather 
of a vulture under a baby’s nose you render the child valiant 
and brave like a vulture, and if you do the same with a 
peacock’s feather, your offspring will be, like a peacock, 
impavid and never dismayed by thunder or other terrible 
noises.” 

It is now easy to understand why a savage should desire 
to partake of the flesh of an animal or man whom he regards 
as divine. By eating the body of the god he shares in the 
god’s attributes and powers. And when the god is a corn- 
god, the corn is his proper body ; when he is a vine-god, the 
juice of the grape is his blood ; and so by eating the bread 
and drinking the wine the worshipper partakes of the real 
body and blood of his god. Thus the drinking of wine in 
the rites of a vine-god like Dionysus is not an act of revelry, 
it is a solemn sacrament.’ Yet a time comes when reasonable 
men find it hard to understand how any one in his senses 
can suppose that by eating bread or drinking wine he con- 
sumes the body or blood of a deity. ~ “ When we call corn 
Ceres and wine Bacchus,” says Cicero, “we use a common 
figure of speech; but do you imagine that anybody is so 
insane as to believe that the thing he feeds upon is a 
god?”* In writing thus the Roman philosopher little foresaw 
that in Rome itself, and in the countries which have derived 
their creed from her, the belief which he here stigmatises 
as insane was destined to persist for thousands of years, 


1 Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood 
(London, 1906), pp. 12 sg. 

2 Dudley Kidd, of. cit. pp. 20 sg. 

8 On the custom of eating a god, see 
also a paper by Felix Liebrecht, ‘* Der 
aufgegessene Gott,” Zs Volkskunde 
(Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 436-439; and 


especially W. R. Smith, article ‘‘ Sacri- 
fice,” Lncyclopaedia Britannica, Ninth 
Edition, vol. xxi. pp. 137 sg. On wine 
as the blood of a god, see Zaboo and 
the Perils of the Soul, pp. 248 sqq. 

* Cicero, De natura deorum, iii. 16. 
41. 


The savage 
custom of 
eating a 
god. 


Cicero on 
transub- 
stantiation. 


168 HOMOEOPATHIC MAGIC OF A FLESH DIET cy. xi 


as a cardinal doctrine of religion, among peoples who pride 
themselves on their religious enlightenment by comparison 
with the blind superstitions of pagan antiquity. So little 
can even the greatest minds of one generation foresee the 
devious track which the religious faith of mankind will 


pursue in after ages. 


CHAVEAE Re <r 
KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL 


§ 1. Killing the Sacred Buzzard 


IN the preceding chapters we saw that many communities 
which have progressed so far as to subsist mainly by 
agriculture have been in the habit of killing and eating 
their farinaceous deities either in their proper form of 
corn, rice, and so forth, or in the borrowed shapes of 
animals and men. It remains to shew that hunting and 
pastoral tribes, as well as agricultural peoples, have been 
in the habit of killing the beings whom they worship. 
Among the worshipful beings or gods, if indeed they 
deserve to be dignified by that name, whom hunters and 
shepherds adore and kill are animals pure and simple, not 
animals regarded as embodiments of other supernatural 
beings. Our first example is drawn from the Indians of 
California, who living in a fertile country ’ under a serene and 
temperate sky, nevertheless rank near the bottom of the 
savage scale. Where a stretch of iron-bound coast breaks 
the long line of level sands that receive the rollers of the 
Pacific, there stood in former days, not far from the brink of 
the great cliffs, the white mission-house of San Juan Capis- 
trano. Among the monks who here exercised over a hand- 
ful of wretched Indians the austere discipline of Catholic 
Spain, there was a certain Father Geronimo Boscana who 
has bequeathed to us a precious record of the customs and 
superstitions of his savage flock. Thus he tells us that the 


1 This does not refer to the Cali- and treeless wilderness of rock and 
fornian peninsula, which is an arid sand. 


169 


Hunting 
and pas- 
toral tribes, 
as well as 
agricul- 
tural 
peoples, 
have been 
in the habit 
of killing 
and eating 
the beings 
whom they 
worship. 


The Cali- 
fornian 
Indians 
used 
solemnly 
to kill the 
great 
buzzard 
which they 
adored ; 
but they 
believed 
that though 
they slew it 
annually, 

it always 
came to 
life again. 


170 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


Acagchemem tribe adored the great buzzard, and that once a 
year they celebrated a great festival called Panes or bird-feast 
in its honour. The day selected for the festival was made 
known to the public on the evening before its celebration and 
preparations were at once made for the erection of a special 
temple (vanquech), which seems to have been a circular or 
oval enclosure of stakes with the stuffed skin of a coyote 
or prairie-wolf set up on a hurdle to represent the god 
Chinigchinich. When the temple was ready, the bird was 
carried into it in solemn procession and laid on an altar 
erected for the purpose. Then all the young women, 
whether married or single, began to run to and fro, as if 
distracted, some in one direction and some in another, while 
the elders of both sexes remained silent spectators of the 
scene, and the captains, tricked out in paint and feathers, 
danced round their adored bird. These ceremonies being 
concluded, they seized upon the bird and carried it to the 
principal temple, all the assembly uniting in the grand dis- 
play, and the captains dancing and singing at the head of 
the procession. Arrived at the temple, they killed the bird 
without losing a drop of its blood. The skin was removed 
entire and preserved with the feathers as a relic or for 
the purpose of making the festal garment or fael/t. The 
carcase was buried in a hole in the temple, and the old 
women gathered round the grave weeping and moaning 
bitterly, while they threw various kinds of seeds or pieces of 
food on it, crying out, “Why did you run away? Would 
you not have been better with us? you would have made 
pinole (a kind of gruel) as we do, and if you had not run 
away, you would not have become a Panes,” and so on. 
When this ceremony was concluded, the dancing was 
resumed and kept up for three days and nights. They 
said that the Panes was a woman who had run off to 
the mountains and there been changed into a bird by 
the god Chinigchinich. They believed that though they 
sacrificed the bird annually, she came to life again and 
returned to her home in the mountains. Moreover they 
thought that “as often as the bird was killed, it became 
multiplied ; because every year all the different Capitanes 
celebrated the same feast of Panes, and were firm in the 


XII KILLING THE SACRED BUZZARD 


171 


opinion that the birds sacrificed were but one and the same 
female.” * 

The unity in multiplicity thus postulated by the Cali- 
fornians is very noticeable and helps to explain their motive 
for killing the divine bird. The notion of the life of a species 
as distinct from that of an individual, easy and obvious as it 
seems to us, appears to be one which the Californian savage 
cannot grasp. He is unable to conceive the life of the species 
otherwise than as an individual life, and therefore as exposed 
to the same dangers and calamities which menace and finally 
destroy the life of the individual. Apparently he imagines 
that a species left to itself will grow old and die like an 
individual, and that therefore some step must be taken to 


1 Father Geronimo Boscana, ‘‘ Chin- 
igchinich ; a historical account of the 
origin, customs, and traditions of the 
Indians at the missionary establishment 
of St. Juan Capistrano, Alta Cali- 
fornia,” appended to Alfred Robinson’s 
Life in California (New York, 1846), 
pp. 291 sg.; H. H. Bancroft, Matzve 
Races of the Pacific States, iii, 168. 
The mission station of San Juan Capis- 
trano is described by R. H. Dana 
(Zwo Years before the Mast, chaps. 
xviii. and xxiyv.). A favourable picture 
of the missions is drawn by H. von 
Langsdorf (Re7se wm adze Welt, Frank- 
fort, 1812, il. pp. 134 sgg.), by Duflos 
de Mofras (‘‘ Fragment dun Voyage 
en Californie,” Azlletin de la Soctété 
de Géographie (Paris), ii. Série, xix. 
(1843) pp. 9-13), and by a writer 
(H. H.) in Zhe Century Magazine, 
May, 1883, pp. 2-18. But the severe 
discipline of the Spanish monks is 
noticed by other travellers. We are 
told that the Indians laboured during 
the day in the fields to support their 
Spanish masters, were driven to church 
twice or thrice a day to hear service in 
a language which they did not under- 
stand, and at night were shut up in 
crowded and comfortless barracks, 
without windows and without beds. 
When the monks desired to make new 
proselytes, or rather to capture new 
slaves, they called in the aid of the 
soldiery, who attacked the Indian 
villages by night, lassoed the fugitives, 


and dragged them back at their horses’ 
tails to slavery in the missions. See 
O. von Kotzebue, Rezse wm adie Welt 
(Weimar, 1830), ii. 42 sgg.; F. W. 
Beechey, Warrative of a Voyage to the 
Pacific and LBeering’s Strat (London, 
1831), wu. chap. i1.; A. Schabelski, 
“Voyage aux colonies russes de 
Amérique,” Bulletin de la Société 
de Géographie (Paris), ii. Série, iv. 
(1835) pp. 216-218. <A poet has de- 
scribed with prosaicaccuracy the pastoral 
crook by which these good shepherds 
brought back their strayed lambs to the 
spiritual fold :— 
“* Stx horses sprang across the level 
ground 
six. dragoons 
dashed ; 
their heads the 
round, 

In every eye a pious fervour flashed ; 
They charged the camp, and im one 

moment more 
They lassoed six and reconverted four.” 
(Bret Harte, A772ax Pedro’s Ride.) 
In the verses inscribed Zhe Angelus, 
heard at the Misston Dolores, 1868, 
and beginning 
“Bells of the Past, whose long-forgotten 
Music 


Still fills the wide expanse,” 


As wm open order 


Above lassos ctrcled 


the same poet shews that he is not 
insensible to the poetical side of those 
old Spanish missions, which have long 
passed away. 


Perhaps 
they hoped 
by the 
sacrifice 

of the 
individual 
bird to 
preserve 
the species, 


Ancient 
Egyptian 
sacrifice of 
aram at 
the festival 
of Ammon. 


172 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


save from extinction the particular species which he regards 
as divine. The only means he can think of to avert the 
catastrophe is to kill a member of the species in whose veins 
the tide of life is still running strong, and has not yet stagnated 
among the fens of old age. The life thus diverted from one 
channel will flow, he fancies, more freshly and freely in a 
new one; in other words, the slain animal will revive and 
enter ona new term of life with all the spring and energy of 
youth. To us this reasoning is transparently absurd, but so 
too is the custom. If a better explanation, that is, one more 
consonant with the facts and with the principles of savage 
thought, can be given of the custom, I will willingly with- 
draw the one here proposed. A similar confusion, it may be 
noted, between the individual life and the life of the species 
was made by the Samoans. Each family had for its god a 
particular species of animal; yet the death of one of these 
animals, for example an owl, was not the death of the god, 
“he was supposed to be yet alive, and incarnate in all the 
owls in existence.” ' 


§ 2. Killing the Sacred Ram 


The rude Californian rite which we have just considered 
has a close parallel in the religion of ancient Egypt. The 
Thebans and all other Egyptians who worshipped the Theban 
god Ammon held rams to be sacred, and would not sacrifice 
them. But once a year at the festival of Ammon they killed 
a ram, skinned it, and clothed the image of the god in the 
skin. Then they mourned over the ram and buried it ina 
sacred tomb. The custom was explained by a story that 
Zeus had once exhibited himself to Hercules clad in the 
fleece and wearing the head of a ram.” Of course the ram 
in this case was simply the beast-god of Thebes, as the wolf 
was the beast-god of Lycopolis, and the goat was the beast- 
god of Mendes. In other words, the ram was Ammon him- 
self. On the monuments, it is true, Ammon appears in 
semi-human form with the body of a man and the head of a 


1 G. Turner, Saoa (London, 1884), 2 Herodotus, ii. 42. The custom has 
p- 21. Compare zd., pp. 26, 61. been already referred to above, p. 41. 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED RAM 173 


ram. But this only shews that he was in the usual chrysalis 
state through which beast-gods regularly pass before they 
emerge as full-blown anthropomorphic gods. The ram, 
therefore, was killed, not as a sacrifice to Ammon, but as the 
god himself, whose identity with the beast is plainly shewn 
by the custom of clothing his image in the skin of the slain 
ram. The reason for thus killing the ram-god annually may 
have been that which I have assigned for the general custom 
of killing a god and for the special Californian custom of 
killing the divine buzzard. As applied to Egypt, this 
explanation is supported by the analogy of the bull-god 
Apis, who was not suffered to outlive a certain term of 
years.” The intention of thus putting a limit to the life of 
the human god was, as I have argued, to secure him from 
the weakness and frailty of age. The same reasoning would 
explain the custom—probably an older one—of putting the 
beast-god to death annually, as was done with the ram of 
Thebes. 

One point in the Theban ritual—the application of the 
skin to the image of the god—deserves particular attention. 
If the god was at first the living ram, his representation by an 
image must have originated later. But how did it originate? 
One answer to this question is perhaps furnished by the 
practice of preserving the skin of the animal which is slain 
as divine. The Californians, as we have seen, preserved the 
skin of the buzzard ; and the skin of the goat, which is killed 
on the harvest-field as a representative of the corn-spirit, is 
kept for various superstitious purposes.* The skin in fact 
was kept as a token or memorial of the god, or rather as 
containing in it a part of the divine life, and it had only to 
be stuffed or stretched upon a frame to become a regular 
image of him. At first an image of this kind would be 
renewed annually,* the new image being provided by the 


1 Ed. Meyer, Geschichte des Alter- the close of the fishing season, used to 


thums,? i. 2 (Stuttgart and Berlin, 
1909), p. 73 § 180. Compare Sir J. 
G. Wilkinson, A/anmners and Customs 
of the Ancient Egyptians (London, 
1878), iii, 1 sgq. 

2 Above, p. 36. 

3 Above, p. 170; vol. i. p. 285. 

* The Italmens of Kamtchatka, at 


make the figure of a wolf out of grass. 
This figure they carefully kept the 
whole year, believing that it wedded 
with their maidens and prevented them 
from giving birth to twins ; for twins 
were esteemed a great misfortune. See 
G. W. Steller, Beschrezbung von dem 
Lande Kamitschatka (Frankfort and 


Use of the 
skin of the 
sacrificed 
animal. 


The sacred 
serpent of 
Issapoo in 
Fernando 

Po. 


KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


174 


skin of the slain animal. But from annual images to per- 
manent images the transition is easy. We have seen that 
the older custom of cutting a new May-tree every year was 
superseded by the practice of maintaining a permanent May- 
pole, which was, however, annually decked with fresh leaves 
and flowers, and even surmounted each year by a fresh young 
tree! Similarly when the stuffed skin, as a representative 
of the god, was replaced by a permanent image of him in 
wood, stone, or metal, the permanent image was annually 
clad in the fresh skin of the slain animal. When this stage 
had been reached, the custom of killing the ram came 
naturally to be interpreted as a sacrifice offered to the image, 
and was explained by a story like that of Ammon and 
Hercules. 


§ 3. Kelling the Sacred Serpent 


West Africa appears to furnish another example of the 
annual killing of a sacred animal and the preservation of its 
skin. The negroes of Issapoo, in the island of Fernando Po, 
regard the cobra-capella as their guardian deity, who can do 
them good or ill, bestow riches or inflict disease and death. 
The skin of one of these reptiles is hung tail downwards from 
a branch of the highest tree in the public square, and the 
placing of it on the tree is an annual ceremony. As soon 
as the ceremony is over, all children born within the past 
year are carried out and their hands made to touch the tail 
of the serpent’s skin.” The latter custom is clearly a way of 
placing the infants under the protection of the tribal god. 
Similarly in Senegambia a python is expected to visit every 
child of the Python clan within eight days after birth ;* and 
the Psylli, a Snake clan of ancient Africa, used to expose 


Leipsic, 1774), pp. 327 sg. According 2 T. J. Hutchinson, Jmpressions of 


to Chr. Hartknoch (Déssertat. histor. de 
varits rebus Prussictis, p. 163; Adlt- 
und neues Preussen, Frankfort and 
Leipsic, 1684, p. 161) the image of the 
old Prussian god Curcho was annually 
renewed, But see W. Mannhardt, Dze 
Korndamonen (Berlin, 1868), p. 27. 

1 See The Magic Art and the Evolu- 
tion of Kings, vol. il. pp. 70 5g. 


Western Africa (London, 1858), pp. 
196 sg. The writer does not expressly 
state that a serpent is killed annually, 
but his statement implies it. 

3 Dr. Tautain, ‘* Notes sur les croy- 
ances et pratiques religieuses des Ban- 
manas,” Revue a’Ethnographie, iii. 
(1885) p. 397. Compare TZotemism 
and Exogamy, il. 543 5g. 


XII LE EIMNG- THE SACKED SERPENT 


175 


their infants to snakes in the belief that the snakes would 
not harm true-born children of the clan.! 


§ 4. Kelling the Sacred Turtles 


In the Californian, Egyptian, and Fernando Po customs 
the animal slain may perhaps have been at some time or 
other a totem, but this is very doubtful.2 At all events, in 
all three cases the worship of the animal seems to have no 
relation to agriculture, and may therefore be presumed to date 
from the hunting or pastoral stage of society. The same 
may be said of the following custom, though the people who 
practise it—the Zuni Indians of New Mexico—are now 
settled in walled villages or towns of a peculiar type, and 
practise agriculture and the arts of pottery and weaving. 
But the Zuni custom is marked by certain features which 
appear to place it in a somewhat different class from the 
preceding cases. It may be well therefore to describe it at 
full length in the words of an eye-witness. 

“With midsummer the heat became intense. My brother 
[z.e. adopted Indian brother] and I sat, day after day, in the 
cool under-rooms of our house,—the latter [szc] busy with 
his quaint forge and crude appliances, working Mexican 
coins over into bangles, girdles, ear-rings, buttons, and what 
not, for savage ornament. Though his tools were wonder- 
fully rude, the work he turned out by dint of combined 
patience and ingenuity was remarkably beautiful. One day 
as I sat watching him, a procession of fifty men went hastily 


1 Varro in Priscian, x. 32, vol. i. ation, Ethnography and Philology 


p. 524, ed. Keil; Pliny, Wat. Hzst. 
vii. 14. Pliny’s statement is to be 
corrected by Varro’s. 

2 When I wrote Zhe Golden Bough 
originally I said that in these three cases 
**the animal slain probably is, or once 
was, a totem.” But this seems to me 
less probable now than it did then. In 
regard to the Californian custom in 
particular, there appears to be no good 
evidence that within the area now 
occupied by the United States totemism 
Was practised by any tribes to the west 
of the Rocky Mountains. See H. 
Hale, United States Exploring Expe- 


(Philadelphia, 1846), p. 199; George 


Gibbs, in Contributions to North 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1877), i. 184; S. Powers, Zrzbes of 


California (Washington, 1877), p. 5; 
A. S. Gatschet, Zhe Klamath Indians 
of South-western Oregon (Washington, 
1890), vol. i. p. cvi. ‘* California and 
Oregon seem never to have had any 
gentes or phratries” (A. S. Gatschet in 
a letter to me, dated November 5th, 
1888). Beyond the very doubtful case 
cited in the text, I know of no evi- 
dence that totemism exists in Fernando 
Po. 


The killing 
of sacred 
turtles by 
the Zuni 
Indians. 


The return 
of the pro- 
cession 
with the 
turtles. 


176 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


down the hill, and off westward over the plain. They were 
solemnly led by a painted and shell-bedecked priest, and 
followed by the torch-bearing Shu-lu-wit-si, or God of Fire. 
After they had vanished, I asked old brother what it all 
meant. 

“«They are going,’ said he, ‘to the city of the Ka-ka 
and the home of our others.’ 

“ Four days after, towards sunset, costumed and masked 
in the beautiful paraphernalia of the Ka-k’ok-shi, or ‘Good 
Dance, they returned in file up the same pathway, each 
bearing in his arms a basket filled with living, squirming 
turtles, which he regarded and carried as tenderly as a 
mother would her infant. Some of the wretched reptiles 
were carefully wrapped in soft blankets, their heads and fore- 
feet protruding,—and, mounted on the backs of the plume- 
bedecked pilgrims, made ludicrous but solemn caricatures of 
little children in the same position. While I was at supper 
upstairs that evening, the governor’s brother-in-law came in. 
He was welcomed by the family as if a messenger from 
heaven. He bore in his tremulous fingers one of the much 
abused and rebellious turtles. Paint still adhered to his 
hands and bare feet, which led me to infer that he had 
formed one of the sacred embassy. 

“ «So you went to Ka-thlu-el-lon, did you ?’ I asked. 

“ «Be, replied the weary man, in a voice husky with 
long chanting, as he sank, almost exhausted, on a roll of 
skins which had been placed for him, and tenderly laid the 
turtle on the floor. No sooner did the creature find itself at 
liberty than it made off as fast as its lame legs would take 
it. Of one accord, the family forsook dish, spoon, and 
drinking-cup, and grabbing from a sacred meal-bowl whole 
handfuls of the contents, hurriedly followed the turtle about 
the room, into dark corners, around water-jars, behind the 
grinding-troughs, and out into the middle of the floor again, 
praying and scattering meal on its back as they went. At 
last, strange to say, it approached the foot-sore man who 
had brought it. : 

“«“Ha!’ he exclaimed with emotion; ‘see it comes to 
me again ; ah, what great favours the fathers of all grant me 
this day, and, passing his hand gently over the sprawling 


XIII REELING THE SACRED TURTLES 177 


animal, he inhaled from his palm deeply and long, at the 
same time invoking the favour of the gods. Then he leaned 
his chin upon his hand, and with large, wistful eyes regarded 
his ugly captive as it sprawled about, blinking its meal- 
bedimmed eyes, and clawing the smooth floor in memory 
of its native element. At this juncture I ventured a 
question : 

“ ¢Why do you not let him go, or give him some water ?’ 

“Slowly the man turned his eyes toward me, an odd 
mixture of pain, indignation, and pity on his face, while the 
worshipful family stared at me with holy horror. 

“Poor younger brother!’ he said at last, ‘know you 
not how precious it is? It die? It will zo¢die; I tell you, 
it cannot die.’ 

“*But it will die if you don’t feed it and give it 
water.’ 

“<«T tell you it cannot die; it will only change houses 
to-morrow, and go back to the home of its brothers. Ah, 
well! How should you know ?’ he mused. Turning to the 
blinded turtle again: ‘Ah! my poor dear lost child or 
parent, my sister or brother to have been! Who knows 
which? Maybe my own great-grandfather or mother !’ 
And with this he fell to weeping most pathetically, and, 
tremulous with sobs, which were echoed by the women and 
children, he buried his face in his hands. Filled with 
sympathy for his grief, however mistaken, I raised the turtle 
to my lips and kissed its cold shell; then depositing it on 
the floor, hastily left the grief-stricken family to their 
sorrows. Next day, with prayers and tender beseechings, 
plumes, and offerings, the poor turtle was killed, and its flesh 
and bones were removed and deposited in the little river, 
that it might ‘return once more to eternal life among its 
comrades in the dark waters of the lake of the dead. The 
shell, carefully scraped and dried, was made into a dance- 
rattle, and, covered by a piece of buckskin, it still hangs 
from the smoke-stained rafters of my brother’s house. Once 
a Navajo tried to buy it for a ladle; loaded with indignant 
reproaches, he was turned out of the house. Were any one 
to venture the suggestion that the turtle no longer lived, 
his remark would cause a flood of tears, and he would be 

PT. V. VOL. I N 


The turtle 
addressed 
as a dead 
relative. 


The turtle 
killed. 


In this 
custom is 
expressed a 
belief in the 
transmigra- 
tion of 
human 
souls into 
turtles, 


178 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


reminded that it had only ‘changed houses and gone to live 
for ever in the home of “our lost others.”’”? 

In this custom we find expressed in the clearest way a 
belief in the transmigration of human souls into the bodies 
of turtles.” The theory of transmigration is held by the 
Moqui Indians, who belong to the same race as the Zunis. 
The Moquis are divided into totem clans—the Bear clan, 
Deer clan, Wolf clan, Hare clan, and so on; they believe that 
the ancestors of the clans were bears, deer, wolves, hares, and 
so forth ; and that at death the members of each clan become 
bears, deer, and so on according to the particular clan to 
which they belonged.*? The Zuni are also divided into clans, 
the totems of which agree closely with those of the Moquis, 
and one of their totems is the turtle.* Thus their belief in 
transmigration into the turtle is probably one of the regular 
articles of their totem faith.” What then is the meaning of 
killing a turtle in which the soul of a kinsman is believed to 
be present? Apparently the object is to keep up a com- 
munication with the other world in which the souls of the 
departed are believed to be assembled in the form of 
turtles. It is a common belief that the spirits of the dead 
return occasionally to their old homes ; and accordingly the 
unseen visitors are welcomed and feasted by the living, and 
then sent upon their way.° In the Zuni ceremony the dead 
are fetched home in the form of turtles, and the killing of tne 
turtles is the way of sending back the souls to the spirit- 


1 Frank H. Cushing, ‘‘ My Adven- 
tures in Zuni,’ Zhe Century Lllus- 
trated Monthly Magazine, May 1883, 
Pp. 45 52: 

2 Mr. Cushing, indeed, while he 
admits that the ancestors of the Zuni 
may have believed in transmigration, 
says, ‘* Their belief, to-day, however, 
relative to the future life is spiritual- 
istic.” But the expressions in the text 
seem to leave no room for doubting 
that the transmigration into turtles is a 
living article of Zuni faith. 

3 H. R. Schoolcraft, Zzdian Tribes 
of the United States (Philadelphia, 
1853-1856), iv. 86. On the totem 
clans of the Moquis, see J. G. Bourke, 
Snake-Dance of the Moguzs of Arizona 
(London, 1884), pp. 116 sg., 334 599. 


4 For this information I am indebted 
to the kindness of the late Captain J. 
G. Bourke, 3rd Cavalry, U.S. Army, 
author of the work mentioned in the 
preceding note. In his letter Captain 
Bourke gave a list of fourteen totem 
clans of Zuni, which he received on the 
20th of May 1881 from Pedro Dino (?), 
Governor of Zuni. 


5 Tt should be observed, however, 
that Mr. Cushing omits to say whether 
or not the persons who performed the 
ceremony described by him had the 
turtle for their totem. If they had not, 
the ceremony need not have had any- 
thing to do with totemism. 


8 See Adonis, Attis, Oszris, Second 
Edition, pp. 301-318. 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED TURTLES 179 


land. Thus the general explanation given above of the 
custom of killing a god seems inapplicable to the Zuni 
custom, the true meaning of which is somewhat obscure. 
Nor is the obscurity which hangs over the subject entirely 
dissipated by a later and fuller account which we possess 
of the ceremony. From it we learn that the ceremony forms 
part of the elaborate ritual which these Indians observe at the 
midsummer solstice for the purpose of ensuring an abundant 
supply of rain for the crops. Envoys are despatched to 
bring “their otherselves, the tortoises,” from the sacred lake 
Kothluwalawa, to which the souls of the dead are believed 
to repair. When the creatures have thus been solemnly 
brought to Zuni, they are placed in a bowl of water and 
dances are performed beside them by men in costume, 
who personate gods and goddesses. “After the ceremonial 
the tortoises are taken home by those who caught them and 
are hung by their necks to the rafters till morning, when 
_ they are thrown into pots of boiling water. The eggs are 
considered a great delicacy. The meat is seldom touched 
except as a medicine, which is curative for cutaneous 
diseases. Part of the meat is deposited in the river with 
kohakwa (white shell beads) and turquoise beads as offerings 
to Council of the Gods.”* This account at all events 
confirms the inference that the tortoises are supposed to be 
reincarnations of the human dead, for they are called the 
“otherselves” of the Zuni; indeed, what else should they be 
than the souls of the dead in the bodies of tortoises seeing that 
they come from the haunted lake? As the principal object 
of the prayers uttered and of the dances performed at these 
midsummer ceremonies appears to be to procure rain for the 
crops, it may be that the intention of bringing the tortoises 
to Zuni and dancing before them is to intercede with the 
ancestral spirits, incarnate in the animals, that they may be 
pleased to exert their power over the waters of heaven for 
the benefit of their living descendants. 


1 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, caz Ethnology (Washington, 1904), pp. 
‘The Zuni Indians,” Twenty-Third 148-162. 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ameri- 


From a 
later 
account it 
appears 
that the 
custom is 
a mode of 
interceding 
with the 
ancestral 
spirits for 
rain. 


Ambiguous 
attitude 

of the Aino 
towards the 
bear. 


180 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


§ 5. Kelling the Sacred Bear 


Doubt also hangs at first sight over the meaning of the 
bear-sacrifice offered by the Aino or Ainu, a primitive people 
who are found in the Japanese island of Yezo or Yesso, as 
well as in Saghalien and the southern of the Kurile Islands. 
It is not quite easy to define the attitude of the Aino 
towards the bear. On the one hand they give it the name 
of kamuz or “god”; but as they apply the same word to 
strangers,’ it may mean no more than a being supposed 
to be endowed with superhuman, or at all events extra- 
ordinary, powers.” Again, it is said that “the bear is their 
chief divinity”;* “in the religion of the Aino the bear 
plays a chief part” ;* “amongst the animals it is especially 
the bear which receives an idolatrous veneration” ;° “they 
worship it after their fashion”; “there is no doubt that this 
wild beast inspires more of the feeling which prompts 
worship than the inanimate forces of nature, and the Aino 


may be distinguished as bear-worshippers. 
other hand, they kill the bear whenever they can; 


»§ Yet onthe 
i in 


bygone years the Ainu considered bear-hunting the most 


1 B. Scheube, ‘‘ Der Baerencultus 
und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,” J7/2t- 
thetlungen der deutschen Gesellschaft 
6. S. und S. Ostastens (Yokohama), 
Heft xxii. p. 45. 

2 Weare told that the Aino have gods 
for almost every conceivable object, and 
that the word amuz ‘‘has various 
shades of meaning, which vary if used 
before or after another word, and 
according to the object to which it is 
applied.” ‘* When the term £amz2z is 
applied to good objects, it expresses the 
quality of usefulness, beneficence, or of 
being exalted or divine. When applied 
to supposed evil gods, it indicates that 
which is most to be feared and dreaded. 
When applied to devils, reptiles, and 
evil diseases, it signifies what is most 
hateful, abominable, and _ repulsive. 
When applied as a prefix to animals, 
fish or fowl, it represents the greatest 
or fiercest, or the most useful for food 
or clothing. When applied to persons, 


it is sometimes expressive of goodness, 
but more often is a mere title of respect 
and reverence.~ Seessthemeveumy- 
Batchelor, Zhe Aznu of Japan (Lon- 
don, 1892), pp. 245-251; za., The 
Ainu and their Folk-lore (London, 
I90I), pp. 581 sg. Thus the Aino 
kamut appears to mean nearly the same 
as the Dacotan wakam, as to which see 
Taboo and the Perils of the Soul, p. 225, 
note. 

3 W. Martin Wood, ‘The Hairy 
Men of Yesso,” Zyransactions of the § 
Ethnological Society of London, N.S., © 
iv. (1866) p. 36. 

4 J. J. Rein, Japan (Leipsic, 1881- 
1886), i. 446. 

5 H. von Siebold, E¢hnologésche Stu- 
dien 2iber die Aino auf der Insel Vesso 
(Berlin, 1881), p. 26. 


6 Miss Isabella L. Bird, Unbeaten — 


Tracks in Japan (new edition, 1885), 
Pp. 275- 
7 W. Martin Wood, Zc. 


XII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 18 


manly and useful way in which a person could possibly 
spend his time” ;' “the men spend the autumn, winter, and 
spring in hunting deer and bears. Part of their tribute or 
taxes is paid in skins, and they subsist on the dried meat” ;” 
bear’s flesh is indeed one of their staple foods; they eat it 
both fresh and salted ;* and the skins of bears furnish 
them with clothing.* In fact, the worship of which writers 
on this subject speak appears to be paid chiefly to the 
dead animal. Thus, although they kill a bear whenever 
they can, “in the process of dissecting the carcass they 
endeavour to conciliate the deity, whose representative they 
have slain, by making elaborate obeisances and deprecatory 
salutations” ;° “when a bear has been killed the Ainu sit 
down and admire it, make their salaams to it, worship it, 
and offer presents of zzao” ;° “when a bear is trapped or 
wounded by an arrow, the hunters go through an apologetic 
or propitiatory ceremony.”" The skulls of slain bears receive 
a place of honour in their huts, or are set up on sacred 
posts outside the huts, and are treated with much respect: 
libations of millet beer, and of sake, an intoxicating liquor, 
are offered to them; and they are addressed as “ divine 
preservers” (akoshiratki kamuz), or “precious divinities.” ® 
The skulls of foxes are also fastened to the sacred posts 
outside the huts; they are regarded as charms against 
evil spirits, and are consulted as oracles? Yet it is 
expressly said, “ The live fox is revered just as little as the 
bear ; rather they avoid it as much as possible, considering 
it a wily animal.”?° The bear can hardly, therefore, be 


1 Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Aznu and 
thetr Folk-lore, p. 471. 

2 Miss I. L. Bird, of. czt. p. 269. 

3B. Scheube, Dze Azzos, p. 4 (re- 
printed from Wettheclungen ad. deutsch. 
Gascii oS. und S. Ostaszens; 
Yokohama). 

4 B. Scheube, ‘:Baerencultus,”’ etc., 
p- 45; W. Joest, in Verhandlungen 
der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthro- 
polosie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, 
1882, p. 188. 

5 W. Martin Wood, Ze. 

6 Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Aznu and 
their Folk-lore (London, 1901), pp. 
476 sy. As to the zzao see below, 


p. 186, note. 

7 Miss I. L. Bird, of. cit. p. 277. 

8 B. Scheube, Dze Aznos, p. 15; H. 
von Siebold, of. cz¢. p. 26; W. Martin 
Wood, /.c.; J. J. Rein, Japan, i. 447 ; 
Von Brandt, ‘‘ The Ainos and Japanese,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
ii. (1874) p. 1343; Miss Bird, of. czz¢. 
pp. 275, 276; Rev. J. Batchelor, 
The Ainu and their Folk-lore, pp. 495 
Sq. 
9 B. Scheube, Dze Aznos, pp. 15, 
NO} ea Vonee Drandty oc ekevamen| 
Batchelor, Zhe Ainu and their Folk- 
lore, pp. 352-354, 504 sg. 

10 B. Scheube, Dze Aznos, p. 16. 


Aino 
custom of 
catching a 
bear cub, 
rearing it 
for several 
years, and 
killing it at 
a solemn 
festival. 


182 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


described as a sacred animal of the Aino, nor yet as a 
totem ; for they do not call themselves bears, and they kill 
and eat the animal freely. However, they have a legend of 
a woman who had a son by a bear; and many of them who 
dwell in the mountains pride themselves on being descended 
from a bear. Such people are called “ Descendants of the 
bear” (Kimun Kamut santkir¢), and in the pride of their 
heart they will say, “As for me, I am a child of the god of 
the mountains ; I am descended from the divine one who 
rules in the mountains,’ meaning by “the god of the 
mountains” no other than the bear. It is therefore 
possible that, as our principal authority, the Rev. J. 
Batchelor, believes, the bear may have been the totem of 
an Aino clan; but even if that were so it would not 
explain the respect shewn for the animal by the whole Aino 
people. 

But it is the bear-festival of the Aino which concerns 
us here. Towards the end of winter a bear cub is caught 
and brought into the village. If it is very small, it is suckled 
by an Aino woman, but should there be no woman able to 
suckle it, the little animal is fed from the hand or the mouth. 
If it cries loudly and long for its mother, as it is apt to do, its 
owner will take it to his bosom and let it sleep with him for 
a few nights, thus dispelling its fears and sense of loneliness. 
During the day it plays about in the hut with the children and 
is treated with great affection. But when the cub grows big 
enough to pain people by hugging or scratching them, he is 
shut up in a strong wooden cage, where he stays generally 
for two or three years, fed on fish and millet porridge, till 
it is time for him to be killed and eaten.? But “it is a 
peculiarly striking fact that the young bear is not kept 
merely to furnish a good meal; rather he is regarded and 


1 Rev. J. Batchelor, Ze Azzu and und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,” p. 45 ; 
their Folk-lore, pp. 8-10. E. Reclus Rev. j. Batchelor, Zhe Aznu and 
(Nouvelle Géographie Universelle, vii. their Folk-lore, pp. 483-485. Mr. 
755) mentions a (Japanese?) legend Batchelor formerly doubted or denied 
which attributes the hairiness of the ~ that the Aino women suckle the bear 
Ainos to the suckling of their first cubs (Zhe Aznu of Japan, p. 173); 
ancestor by a bear. But in the ab- but since then he has repeatedly seen 
sence of other evidence this is no preof them do it. Once, while he was 
of totemism. preaching, a cub was being passed 

round among all the young women 
2B. Scheube, ‘* Der Baerencultus  present,and suckled by each in turn. 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 183 


honoured as a fetish, or even as a sort of higher being.”? 
In Yezo the festival is generally celebrated in September or 
October. Before it takes place the Aino apologise to their 
gods, alleging that they have treated the bear kindly as long 
as they could, now they can feed him no longer, and are 
obliged to kill him. A man who gives a bear-feast invites 
his relations and friends ; in a small village nearly the whole 
community takes part in the feast; indeed, guests from 
distant villages are invited and generally come, allured 
by the prospect of getting drunk for nothing. The form of 
invitation runs somewhat as follows: “I, so and so, am 
about to sacrifice the dear little divine thing who resides 
among the mountains. My friends and masters, come ye to 
the feast ; we will then unite in the great pleasure of sending 
the god away. Come.”” When all the people are assembled 
in front of the cage, an orator chosen for the purpose 
addresses the bear and tells it that they are about to send it 
forth to its ancestors. He craves pardon for what they are 
about to do to it, hopes it will not be angry, and comforts it 
by assuring the animal that many of the sacred whittled 
sticks (zwao) and plenty of cakes and wine will be sent 
with it on the long journey. One speech of this sort 
which Mr, Batchelor heard ran as follows: “O thou 
divine one, thou wast sent into the world for us to hunt. 
O thou precious little divinity, we worship thee; pray hear 
our prayer. We have nourished thee and brought thee up 
with a deal of pains and trouble, all because we love thee so. 
Now, as thou hast grown big, we are about to send thee to 
thy father and mother. When thou comest to them please 
speak well of us, and tell them how kind we have been ; 
please come to us again and we will sacrifice thee.” Having 
been secured with ropes, the bear is then let out of the cage 
and assailed with a shower of blunt arrows in order to rouse 
it to fury. When it has spent itself in vain struggles, it is 
tied up to a stake, gagged and strangled, its neck being 
placed between two poles, which are then violently com- 
pressed, all the people eagerly helping to squeeze the 


1 J. J. Rein, Japan (Leipsic, 1881- und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,” p. 45; 
1886), i. 447. Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Aznu and their 
2 B. Scheube, ‘‘Der Baerencultus o/k-lore, pp. 485 sg. 


184 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


animal to death. An arrow is also discharged into the 
beast’s heart by a good marksman, but so as not to shed 
blood, for they think that it would be very unlucky if any of 
the blood were to drip on the ground. However, the men 
sometimes drink the warm blood of the bear “that the 
courage and other virtues it possesses may pass into them” ; 
and sometimes they besmear themselves and their clothes 
with the blood in order to ensure success in hunting. When 
the animal has been strangled to death, it is skinned and its 
head is cut off and set in the east window of the house, 
where a piece of its own flesh is placed under its snout, 
together with a cup of its own meat boiled, some millet 
dumplings, and dried fish. Prayers are then addressed to 
the dead animal; amongst other things it is sometimes 
invited, after going away to its father and mother, to return 
into the world in order that it may again be reared for sacri- 
fice. When the bear is supposed to have finished eating its 
own flesh, the man who presides at the feast takes the cup 
containing the boiled meat, salutes it, and divides the con- 
tents between all the company present: every person, young 
and old alike, must taste a little. The cup is called “the 
cup of offering” because it has just been offered to the dead 
bear. When the rest of the flesh has been cooked, it is 
shared out in like manner among all the people, everybody 
partaking of at least a morsel; not to partake of the feast 
would be equivalent to excommunication, it would be to 
place the recreant outside the pale of Aino fellowship. 
Formerly every particle of the bear, except the bones, had to 
be eaten up at the banquet, but this rule is now relaxed. 
The head, on being detached from the skin, is set up on 
a long pole beside the sacred wands (zzao) outside of the 
house, where it remains till nothing but the bare white skull 
is left. Skulls so set up are worshipped not only at the 
time of the festival, but very often as long as they last. 
The Aino assured Mr. Batchelor that they really do believe 
the spirits of the worshipful animals to reside in the skulls ; 
that is why they address them as “divine preservers” and 
“ precious divinities.” 


1 Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Ainu and killing of the bear is described some- 
their Folk-lore, pp. 486-496. The what differently by Miss I. L. Bird 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 185 


The ceremony of killing the bear was witnessed by Dr. 
Dr. B. Scheube on the tenth of August at Kunnui, Bie, 
which is a village on Volcano Bay in the island of of the Aino 
Yezo or Yesso. As his description of the rite contains ane ee 
some interesting particulars not mentioned in the fore- bear cere- 
going account, it may be worth while to summarise it.’ aa 

On entering the hut he found about thirty Aino present, 
men, women, and children, all dressed in their best. The 
master of the house first offered a libation on the fireplace to 
the god of the fire, and the guests followed his example. 
Then a libation was offered to the house-god in his sacred 
corner of the hut. Meanwhile the housewife, who had nursed 
the bear, sat by herself, silent and sad, bursting now and then 
into tears. Her grief was obviously unaffected, and it 
deepened as the festival went on. Next, the master of the 
house and some of the guests went out of the hut and 
offered libations before the bear’s cage. A few drops were 
presented to the bear in a saucer, which he at once upset. 
Then the women and girls danced round the cage, their 
faces turned towards it, their knees slightly bent, rising and 
hopping on their toes. As they danced they clapped their 
hands and sang a monotonous song. The housewife and a 
few old women, who might have nursed many bears, danced 
tearfully, stretching out their arms to the bear, and address- 
ing it in terms of endearment. The young folks were less 
affected ; they laughed as well as sang. Disturbed by the 
noise, the bear began to rush about his cage and howl 
lamentably. Next libations were offered at the zvao (<xadbos) 
or sacred wands which stand outside of an Aino hut. These 
wands are about a couple of feet high, and are whittled at 
the top into spiral shavings.” Five new wands with bamboo 


(Unbeaten Tracks in Japan, New der Insel Yesso, p. 26). This, however, 


Edition, 1885, pp. 276 sg.), but she 
did not witness the ceremony. She 
tells us that at Usu, on Volcano 
Bay, when the bear is being killed, the 
Aino shout, “We kill you, O bear! 
Come back soon into an Aino.” Ac- 
cording to Dr. Siebold, a very respect- 
able authority, the bear’s own heart is 
frequently offered to the dead beast to 
assure him that he is still in life (27¢h- 


nologische Studien tiber die Aino auf 


is denied by Dr. Scheube, who says that 
the heart is eaten (‘* Baerencultus,” p. 
50 note). The custom may vary in 
different places. 

1B. Scheube, ‘‘ Der Baerencultus 
und die Baerenfeste der Ainos,” JZZ¢- 
thetlungen der deutschen Gesellschaft b. 
S. und S, Ostastens (Yokohama), Heft 
Xxli. pp. 46 sgg. 

2 B. Scheube, ‘‘Baerencultus,” etc., 
p. 46; zd., Die Ainos, p. 153; Miss I, 


ep] 


186 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


leaves attached to them had been set up for the festival. 
This is regularly done when a bear is killed; the leaves 
mean that the animal may come to life again. Then the bear 
was let out of his cage, a rope was thrown round his neck, 
and he was led about in the neighbourhood of the hut. 
While this was being done the men, headed by a chief, shot 
at the beast with arrows tipped with wooden buttons. Dr. 
Scheube had to do soalso. Then the bear was taken before 
the sacred wands, a stick was put in his mouth, nine men 
knelt on him and pressed his neck against a beam. In 
five minutes the animal had expired without uttering a sound. 
Meantime the women and girls had taken post behind the 
men, where they danced, lamenting, and beating the men 
who were killing the bear. The bear’s carcase was next 
placed on the mat before the sacred wands ; and asword and 
quiver, taken from the wands, were hung round the beast’s 
neck. Being a she-bear, it was also adorned with a necklace 
and ear-rings. Then food and drink were offered to it, in 
the shape of millet-broth, millet-cakes, and a pot of sake. 
The men now sat down on mats before the dead bear, 
offered libations to it, and drank deep. Meanwhile the 
women and girls had laid aside all marks of sorrow, and 


Ie.) Bird’) op') ct. spp27/3) S720 ASO 
these whittled wands (z7zao), which are 
so conspicuous about the Aino huts, 
see the Rey. J. Batchelor, Zhe Aznu 
and their Folk-lore, pp. 89-95. He 
remarks (p. 92): ‘‘I have often in- 
sisted both in my lectures and also in 
my writings that the Ainu do not wor- 
ship their z7zao, but that they make them 
as offerings to the deities, and set them 
up as signs showing reverence towards 
them. This, I must now remark, is 
true but in part, for while some of the 
ordinary or less important kinds are 
not worshipped, there are several others 
which are. Those zo¢ worshipped may 
almost always be regarded as offerings 
and charms pure and simple, while 
those which ave worshipped must 
generally be regarded as messengers 
sent to the higher deities.” On the 
whole Mr. Batchelor would describe the 
zmao as fetishes of various degrees of 


power. See further P. Labbé, Uz 


bagne Russe, ’ Isle de Sakhaline (Paris, 
1903), pp. 194 5g., who compares the 
use of these whittled sticks to the use 
of holy candles among Roman Catholics. 
In Borneo the search for camphor is 
attended by many superstitions ; among 
other things, when the searchers have 
found a tree which promises to yield 
much camphor ‘‘they plant near their 
hut a stake, whereof the outer surface 
has been cut into curled shavings and 
tufts down the sides and at the top” 
(W. H. Furness, Home-life of Borneo 
Head- hunters, Philadelphia, 1902, p. 
168). According to some ancient 
authorities, the old Italians worshipped 
peeled sticks as gods or as the images 
of gods ; however, the statement seems 
no better than an etymological guess 
to explain the word delubrum. See 
Festus, s.v. ‘*Delubrum,” p. 73; ed. 
C. O. Miiller ; Servius on Virgil, dev. 
ii 225. 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 187 


danced merrily, none more merrily than the old women. 
When the mirth was at its height two young Aino, who 
had let the bear out of his cage, mounted the roof of the 
hut and threw cakes of millet among the company, who all 
scrambled for them without distinction of age orsex. The 
bear was next skinned and disembowelled, and the trunk 
severed from the head, to which the skin was left hanging. 
The blood, caught in cups, was eagerly swallowed by the 
men. None of the women or children appeared to drink the 
blood, though custom did not forbid them to do so. The 
liver was cut in small pieces and eaten raw, with salt, the 
women and children getting their share. The flesh and the 
rest of the vitals were taken into the house to be kept till 
the next day but one, and then to be divided among the 
persons who had been present at the feast. Blood and liver 
were offered to Dr. Scheube. While the bear was being dis- 
embowelled, the women and girls danced the same dance 
which they had danced at the beginning—not, however, 
round the cage, but in front of the sacred wands. At this 
dance the old women, who had been merry a moment before, 
again shed tears freely. After the brain had been extracted 
from the bear’s head and swallowed with salt, the skull, 
detached from the skin, was hung on a pole beside the 
sacred wands. The stick with which the bear had been 
gagged was also fastened to the pole, and so were the sword 
and quiver which had been hung on the carcase. The latter 
were removed in about an hour, but the rest remained stand- 
ing. The whole company, men and women, danced noisily 
before the pole; and another drinking-bout, in which the 
women joined, closed the festival. 


Perhaps the first published account of the bear-feast of Farly 


the Aino is one which was given to the world by a Japanese 
writer in 1652. It has been translated into French and runs 
thus: “When they find a young bear, they bring it home, 
and the wife suckles it. When it is grown they feed it with 
fish and fowl and kill it in winter for the sake of the liver, 
which they esteem an antidote to poison, the worms, colic, 
and disorders of the stomach. It is of a very bitter taste, 
and is good for nothing if the bear has been killed in 
summer. This butchery begins in the first Japanese month. 


Japanese 
account of 
the Aino 
festival of 
the bear. 


Thecustom 
of rearing 
and killing 
bears 
among the 
Aino of 
Saghalien. 


188 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


For this purpose they put the animal’s head between two 
long poles, which are squeezed together by fifty or sixty 
people, both men and women. When the bear is dead 
they eat his flesh, keep the liver as a medicine, and sell the 
skin, which is black and commonly six feet long, but the 
longest measure twelve feet. As soon as he is skinned, the 
persons who nourished the beast begin to bewail him ; 
afterwards they make little cakes to regale those who 
helped them.” ? 

The Aino of Saghalien rear bear cubs and kill them 
with similar ceremonies. We are told that they do not look 
upon the bear as a god but only as a messenger whom they 
despatch with various commissions to the god of the forest. 
The animal is kept for about two years in a cage, and then 
killed at a festival, which always takes place in winter and 
at night. The day before the sacrifice is devoted to 
lamentation, old women relieving each other in the duty of 
weeping and groaning in front of the bear’s cage. Then 
about the middle of the night or very early in the morning 
an orator makes a long speech to the beast, reminding him 
how they have taken care of him, and fed him well, and 
bathed him inthe river, and made him warm and comfortable. 
“ Now,” he proceeds, “we are holding a great festival in your 
honour. Be not afraid. We will not hurt you. We will 
only kill you and send you to the god of the forest who 
loves you. We are about to offer you a good dinner, the 
best you have ever eaten among us, and we will all weep 
for you together. The Aino who will kill you is the best 
shot among us. There he is, he weeps and asks your 
forgiveness ; you will feel almost nothing, it will be done so 
quickly. Wecannot feed you always, as you will understand. 
We have done enough for you; it is now your turn to 
sacrifice yourself for us. You will ask God to send us, for 
the winter, plenty of otters and sables, and for the summer, 
seals and fish in abundance. Do not forget our messages, 
we love you much, and our children will never forget you.” 
When the bear has partaken of his last meal amid the 


1 ««Teso-Ki, ou description de l’tle préte Kannemon,” printed in Malte- 
d’Iesso, avec une notice sur la révolte Brun’s Azsales des Voyages, xxiv. 
de Samsay-in, composée par Vinter- (Paris, 1814) p. 154. 


XIII TIPELEING THE SACKED BEAR 189 


general emotion of the spectators, the old women weeping 
afresh and the men uttering stifled cries, he is strapped, not 
without difficulty and danger, and being let out of the cage 
is led on leash or dragged, according to the state of his 
temper, thrice round his cage, then round his master’s house, 
and lastly round the house of the orator. Thereupon he is 
tied up to a tree, which is decked with sacred whittled sticks 
(zxao) of the usual sort ; and the orator again addresses him 
in a long harangue, which sometimes lasts till the day is 
beginning to break. “Remember,” he cries, ‘‘ remember ! 
I remind you of your whole life and of the services we have 
rendered you. It is now for you to do your duty. Do not 
forget what I have asked of you. You will tell the gods to 
give us riches, that our hunters may return from the forest 
laden with rare furs and animals good to eat; that our 
fishers may find troops of seals on the shore and in the sea, 
and that their nets may crack under the weight of the fish. 
We have no hope but in you. The evil spirits laugh at us, 
and too often they are unfavourable and malignant to us, 
but they will bow before you. We have given you food and 
joy and health ; now we kill you in order that you may 
in return send riches to us and to our children.” To this 
discourse the bear, more and more surly and agitated, listens 
without conviction ; round and round the tree he paces and 
howls lamentably, till, just as the first beams of the rising 
sun light up the scene, an archer speeds an arrow to his 
heart. No sooner has he done so, than the marksman 
throws away his bow and flings himself on the ground, and 
the old men and women do the same, weeping and sobbing. 
Then they offer the dead beast a repast of rice and wild 
potatoes, and having spoken to him in terms of pity and 
thanked him for what he has done and suffered, they cut off 
his head and paws and keep them as sacred things. A 
banquet on the flesh and blood of the bear follows. Women 
were formerly excluded from it, but now they share with the 
men. The blood is drunk warm by all present; the flesh 
is boiled, custom forbids it to be roasted. And as the relics 
of the bear may not enter the house by the door, and Aino 
houses in Saghalien have no windows, a man gets up on the 
roof and lets the flesh, the head, and the skin down through 


Bear- 
festivals of 
the Gilyaks. 


KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


190 


the smoke-hole. Rice and wild potatoes are then offered to 
the head, and a pipe, tobacco, and matches are considerately 
placed beside it. Custom requires that the guests should 
eat up the whole animal before they depart: the use of salt 
and pepper at the meal is forbidden ; and no morsel of the 
flesh may be given to the dogs. When the banquet is over, 
the head is carried away into the depth of the forest and 
deposited on a heap of bears’ skulls, the bleached and moulder- 
ing relics of similar festivals in the past.’ 

The Gilyaks, a Tunguzian people of Eastern Siberia,’ 
hold a bear-festival of the same sort once a year in January. 
“The bear is the object of the most refined solicitude of an 
entire village and plays the chief part in their religious 
ceremonies.” ® An old she-bear is shot and her cub is reared, 
but not suckled, in the village. When the bear is big enough 
he is taken from his cage and dragged through the village. 
But first they lead him to the bank of the river, for this is 
believed to ensure abundance of fish to each family. He is 
then taken into every house in the village, where fish, brandy, 
and so forth are offered to him. Some people prostrate 
themselves before the beast. His entrance into a house is 
supposed to bring a blessing ; and if he snuffs.at the food 
offered to him, this also is a blessing. Nevertheless they 
tease and worry, poke and tickle the animal continually, so 
that he is surly and snappish.* After being thus taken to 


1 P. Labbé, Un Bagne Russe, 0 Lsle 
de Sakhaline (Paris, 1903), pp. 227, 
232-258. The Gilyaks of Saghalien 
similarly keep and sacrifice bears ; but 
the ceremonies are simpler, and they 
treat the animals with less respect than 
the Aino. See P. Labbé, of. cz. pp. 
261-267. 

2 They inhabit the banks of the 
lower Amoor and the north of Sa- 
ghalien. See E, G. Ravenstein, Zhe 
Russians on the Amur (London, 1861), 
p-. 389. 

3 < Notes on the River Amur and 
the Adjacent Districts,” translated from 
the Russian, /ournal of the Royal 
Geographical Society, xxviii. (1858) p. 
396. 

* Compare the custom of pinching 
a frog before cutting off his head ; see 


The Magic Art and the Evolution of 
Kings, ii. 86. In Japan sorceresses 
bury a dog in the earth, tease him, 
then cut off his head and put it in a 
box to be used in magic. See A. 
Bastian, Dze Culturlinder des alten 
Amerika (Berlin, 1878), i. 475 note, 
who adds “‘ we zm ostindischen Archi- 
pelago die Schutzseele gereizt wird.” 
He probably refers to the Batta Pazg- 
hulu-balang. See H. von Rosenberg, 
Der Malayische Archipel (Leipsic, 
1878), pp. 59 sg. ; W. Kodding, ‘‘ Die 
Batakschen Gotter,” Allgemeine Mes- 
sions-Zettschrift, xii. (1885) pp. 478 
sg. ; J. B. Neumann, ‘‘ Het Pane-en 
Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland Sum- 
atra,” in Z7vjdschrift van het Neder- 
landsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, 
Tweede Serie, al. iii. (1886) Afdeeling, 


XIII FILLING THIS SACRED BEAR 19I 


every house, he is tied to a peg and shot dead with arrows. 
His head is then cut off, decked with shavings, and placed 
on the table where the feast is set out. Here they beg 
pardon of the beast and worship him. Then his flesh is 
roasted and eaten in special vessels of wood finely carved. 
They do not eat the flesh raw nor drink the blood, as the 
Aino do. The brain and entrails are eaten last; and the 
skull, still decked with shavings, is placed on a tree near the 
house. Then the people sing and both sexes dance in 
ranks, as bears.’ 

One of these bear-festivals was witnessed by the Russian 
traveller L. von Schrenck and his companions at the Gilyak 
village of Tebach in January 1856. From his detailed 
report of the ceremony we may gather some particulars 
which are not noticed in the briefer accounts which I have 
just summarised. The bear, he tells us, plays a great part 
in the life of all the peoples inhabiting the region of the 
Amoor and Siberia as far as Kamtchatka, but among none 
of them is his importance greater than among the Gilyaks. 
The immense size which the animal attains in the valley of 
the Amoor, his ferocity whetted by hunger, and the fre- 
quency of his appearance, all combine to make him the most 
dreaded beast of prey in the country. No wonder, therefore, 
that the fancy of the Gilyaks is busied with him and sur- 
rounds him, both in life and in death, with a sort of halo of 
superstitious fear. Thus, for example, it is thought that if 
a Gilyak falls in combat with a bear, his soul transmigrates 
into the body of the beast. Nevertheless his flesh has an 
irresistible attraction for the Gilyak palate, especially when 
the animal has been kept in captivity for some time and 
fattened on fish, which gives the flesh, in the opinion of the 
Gilyaks, a peculiarly delicious flavour. But in order to 


meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2, p. of Mr. Seeland); Jnternationales 
306; Van Dijk, in Zujdschrift voor Archiv fiir Ethnologie, i. (1888) p. 102 
Lndische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, (on the authority of Captain Jacobsen) ; 
XXxvill. (1895) pp. 307 sg. Archiv fiir Anthropologie, xxvi. (1900) 
p- 796 (abstract of a Russian work on 
1 W. Joest, in B. Scheube, Dze the Gilyaks by Dr. Seland or Seeland). 
Ainos, p. 173; J. Deniker, ‘‘Les What exactly is meant by “dancing as 
Ghiliaks d’aprés les derniers renseigne- bears” (‘‘ ¢aszen beide Geschlechter 
ments,” Revue wWEthnographie, ii. LReigentinze, wie Laren,” Joest, lc.) 
(1883) pp. 307 sg. (on the authority does not appear. 


L. von 
Schrenck’s 
description 
of a bear- 
festival 
among the 
Gilyaks of 
the Amoor. 


Bears led 

in proces- 
sion about 
the village. 


Slaughter 
of the 
bears. 


192 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


enjoy this dainty with impunity they deem it needful to 
perform a long series of ceremonies, of which the intention 
is to delude the living bear by a show of respect, and to 
appease the anger of the dead animal by the homage paid 
to his departed spirit. The marks of respect begin as soon 
as the beast is captured. He is brought home in triumph 
and kept in a cage, where all the villagers take it in turns 
to feed him. For although he may have been captured or 
purchased by one man, he belongs in a manner to the 
whole village. His flesh will furnish a common feast, and 
hence all must contribute to support him in his life. His 
diet consists exclusively of raw or dried fish, water, and a 
sort of porridge compounded of powdered fish-skins, train- 
oil, and whortle-berries. The length of time he is kept in 
captivity depends on his age. Old bears are kept only a 
few months; cubs are kept till they are full-grown. A 
thick layer of fat on the captive bear gives the signal for 
the festival, which is always held in winter, generally in 
December but sometimes in January or February. At the 
festival witnessed by the Russian travellers, which lasted a 
good many days, three bears were killed and eaten. More 
than once the animals were led about in procession and 
compelled to enter every house in the village, where they 
were fed as a mark of honour, and to shew that they were 
welcome guests. But before the beasts set out on this 
round of visits, the Gilyaks played at skipping-rope in 
presence, and perhaps, as L. von Schrenck inclined to 
believe, in honour of the animals. The night before they 
were killed, the three bears were led by moonlight a long 
way on the ice of the frozen river. That night no one in the 
village might sleep. Next day, after the animals had been 
again led down the steep bank to the river, and conducted 
thrice round the hole in the ice from which the women of 
the village drew their water, they were taken to an ap- 
pointed place not far from the village, and shot to death 
with arrows. The place of sacrifice or execution was 
marked as holy by being surrounded with whittled sticks, 
from the tops of which shavings hung in curls. Such sticks 
are with the Gilyaks, as with the Aino, the regular symbols 
that accompany all religious ceremonies. Before the bears 


XII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 193 


received the fatal shafts from two young men chosen for the 
purpose, the boys were allowed to discharge their small but 
not always harmless arrows at the beasts. As soon as the 
carcases had been cut up, the skins with the heads attached 
to them were set up in a wooden cage in such a way as to 
make it appear that the animals had entered the cage and 
were looking out of it. The blood which flowed from the 
bears on the spot where they were killed was immediately 
covered up with snow, to prevent any one from accidentally 
treading on it, a thing which was strictly tabooed. 

When the house has been arranged and decorated for Treatment 
their reception, the skins of the bears, with their heads ofhebeas 
attached to them, are brought into it, not however by the 
door, but through a window, and then hung on a sort of 
scaffold opposite the hearth on which the flesh is to be 
cooked. This ceremony of bringing the bears’ skins into 
the house by the window was not witnessed by the Russian 
travellers, who only learned of it at second hand. They 
were told that when the thin disc of fish-skin, which is the 
substitute for a pane of glass in the window, has been re- 
placed after the passage of the bear-skins, a figure of a 
toad made of birch bark is affixed to it on the outside, 
while inside the house a figure of a bear dressed in Gilyak 
costume is set on the bench of honour. The meaning of this 
part of the ceremony, as it is conjecturally interpreted by 
Von Schrenck, may be as follows. The toad is a creature 
that has a very evil reputation with the Gilyaks, and 
accordingly they attempt to lay upon it, as on a scapegoat, 
the guilt of the slaughter of the worshipful bear. Hence its 
effigy is excluded from the house and has to remain outside 
at the window, a witness of its own misdeeds ; whereas the 
bear is brought into the house and treated as an honoured 
guest, for fish and flesh are laid before it, and its effigy, 
dressed in Gilyak costume, is seated on the bench of honour. 

The boiling of the bears’ flesh among the Gilyaks is Treatment 
done only by the oldest men, whose high privilege it is; 9't7°P™* 
women and children, young men and boys have no part in 
it. The task is performed slowly and deliberately, with a 
certain solemnity. On the occasion described by the 
Russian travellers the kettle was first of all surrounded with 

PT. V. VOL. II fo) 


Banquet on 
the bears’ 
flesh, 


194 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


a thick wreath of shavings, and then filled with snow, for 
the use of water to cook bear’s flesh is forbidden. Mean- 
while a large wooden trough, richly adorned with arabesques 
and carvings of all sorts, was hung immediately under the 
snouts of the bears ; on one side of the trough was carved in 
relief a bear, on the other side a toad. When the carcases 
were being cut up, each leg was laid on the ground in front 
of the bears, as if to ask their leave, before being placed in 
the kettle ; and the boiled flesh was fished out of the kettle 
with an iron hook, and set in the trough before the bears, 
in order that they might be the first to taste of their own 
flesh. As fast, too, as the fat was cut in strips it was hung 
up in front of the bears, and afterwards laid in a small 
wooden trough on the ground before them. Last of all the 
inner organs of the beasts were cut up and placed in small 
vessels. At the same time the women made bandages out 
of parti-coloured rags, and after sunset these bandages were 
tied round the bears’ snouts just below the eyes “in order to 
dry the tears that flowed from them.” To each bandage, 
just below the eyes, was attached a figure of a toad cut out 
of birch bark. The meaning of this appears to be, as Von 
Schrenck conjectured, as follows. With the carving of his 
inner organs, the heart, liver, and so forth, the bear sees that 
his fate is sealed, and sheds some natural tears at his hard 
lot. These tears trickle down his snout over the figure of 
the toad, which the poor deluded bear accordingly regards as 
the author of all the mischief. For he cannot blame the 
Gilyaks, who have treated him so kindly. Have they not 
received him as a guest in their house, set him on the seat 
of honour, given him of their best, and done nothing but 
with his knowledge and permission? Finally, have not their 
women shewn him the last delicate mark of attention by 
drying the tears that flow from his eyes and trickle down 
his nose? Surely then he cannot think that these kindly 
folk have done him any harm; it was all the fault of the 
unprincipled toad. 

Whatever may be thought of this explanation, as soon 
as the ceremony of wiping away poor bruin’s tears had been 
performed, the assembled Gilyaks set to work in earnest to 
devour his flesh. The broth obtained by boiling the meat 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 195 


had already been partaken of. The wooden bowls, platters, 
and spoons out of which the Gilyaks eat the broth and flesh 
of the bears on these occasions are always made specially 
for the purpose at the festival and only then; they are 
elaborately ornamented with carved figures of bears and 
other devices that refer to the animal or the festival, and 
the people have a strong superstitious scruple against parting 
with them. While the festival lasts, no salt may be used in 
cooking the bear’s flesh or indeed any other food ; and no 
flesh of any kind may be roasted, for the bear would hear 
the hissing and sputtering of the roasting flesh, and would 
be very angry. After the bones had been picked clean they 
were put back in the kettle in which the flesh had been 
boiled. And when the festal meal was over, an old man 
took his stand at the door of the house with a branch of fir 
in his hand, with which, as the people passed out, he gave a 
light blow to every one who had eaten of the bear’s flesh 
or fat, perhaps as a punishment for their treatment of the 
worshipful animal. In the afternoon of the same day the 
women performed a strange dance. Only one woman 
danced at a time, throwing the upper part of her body into 
the oddest postures, while she held in her hands a branch of 
fir or a kind of wooden castanets. The other women mean- 
while played an accompaniment in a peculiar rhythm by 
drumming on the beams of the house with clubs. The 
dance reminded one of the Russian travellers of the bear- 
dance which he had seen danced by the women of Kamt- 
chatka. Von Schrenck believes, though he has not positive 
evidence, that after the fat and flesh of the bear have been 
consumed, his skull is cleft with an axe, and the brain taken 
out and eaten. Then the bones and the skull are solemnly 
carried out by the oldest people to a place in the forest 
not far from the village. There all the bones except the 
skull are buried. After that a young tree is felled a few 
inches above the ground, its stump cleft, and the skull 
wedged into the cleft. When the grass grows over the spot, 


the skull disappears from view, and that is the end of the 
bear.’ 


1 L. von Schrenck, Recsen und Forschungen im Amur-lande (St. Petersburg, 
1891), ili. 696-731. 


Dance of 
the women, 


Disposal of 
the skull 
and bones 
of the bear. 


Mr. L. 

Sternberg’s 
description 
of the bear- 
festivals of 
the Gilyaks. 


196 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


Another description of the bear-festivals of the Gilyaks 
has been given us by Mr. Leo Sternberg.’ It agrees sub- 
stantially with the foregoing accounts, but a few particulars 
in it may be noted. According to Mr. Sternberg, the festival 
is usually held in honour of a deceased relation: the next of 
kin either buys or catches a bear cub and nurtures it for two 
or three years till it is ready for the sacrifice. Only certain 
distinguished guests (JVarch-en) are privileged to partake of 
the bear’s flesh, but the host and members of his clan eat a 
broth made from the flesh ; great quantities of this broth are 
prepared and consumed on the occasion. The guests of 
honour (Varch-en) must belong to the clan into which the 
host’s daughters and the other women of his clan are 
married: one of these guests, usually the host’s son-in-law, 
is entrusted with the duty of shooting the bear dead with 
an arrow. The skin, head, and flesh of the slain bear are 
brought into the house not through the door but through 
the smoke-hole ; a quiver full of arrows is laid under the 
head and beside it are deposited tobacco, sugar, and other 
food. The soul of the bear is supposed to carry off the souls 
of these things with it on the far journey. A special vessel 
is used for cooking the bear’s flesh, and the fire must be 
kindled by a sacred apparatus of flint and steel, which 
belongs to the clan and is handed down from generation to 
generation, but which is never used to light fires except on 
these solemn occasions. Of all the many viands cooked for 
the consumption of the assembled people a portion is placed 
in a special vessel and set before the bear’s head: this is 
called “ feeding the head.” After the bear has been killed, 
dogs are sacrificed in couples of male and female. Before 
being throttled, they are fed and invited to go to their lord 
on the highest mountain, to change their skins, and to return 
next year in the form of bears. The soul of the dead bear 
departs to the same lord, who is also lord of the primaeval 
forest ; it goes away laden with the offerings that have been 
made to it, and attended by the souls of the dogs and also 
by the souls of the sacred whittled sticks, which figure 
prominently at the festival. 


1 L. Sternberg, ‘‘Die Religion der Giljaken,” Archiv fiir Religionswissen- 
schaft, viii. (1905) pp. 260-274. 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 197 


The Goldi, neighbours of the Gilyaks, treat the bear in 
much the same way. They hunt and kill it; but sometimes 
they capture a live bear and keep him in a cage, feeding him 
well and calling him their son and brother. Then at a great 
festival he is taken from his cage, paraded about with marked 
consideration, and afterwards killed and eaten. “ The skull, 
jaw-bones, and ears are then suspended on a tree, as an 
antidote against evil spirits ; but the flesh is eaten and much 
relished, for they believe that all who partake of it acquire a 
zest for the chase, and become courageous.” ! 


Bear- 
festivals of 
the Goldi. 


The Orotchis, another Tunguzian people of the region of Bear- 


the Amoor, hold bear-festivals of the same general character. 
Any one who catches a bear cub considers it his bounden 
duty to rear it in a cage for about three years, in order at 
the end of that time to kill it publicly and eat the flesh with 
his friends. The feasts being public, though organised by 
individuals, the people try to have one in each Orotchi village 
every year in turn. When the bear is taken out of his cage, 
he is led about by means of ropes to all the huts, accom- 
panied by people armed with lances, bows, and arrows. At 
each hut the bear and bear-leaders are treated to something 
good to eat and drink. This goes on for several days until 
all the huts, not only in that village but also in the next, 
have been visited. The days are given up to sport and 
noisy jollity. Then the bear is tied to a tree or wooden 
pillar and shot to death by the arrows of the crowd, after 
which its flesh is roasted and eaten. Among the Orotchis 
of the Tundja River women take part in the bear-feasts, 
while among the Orotchis of the River Vi the women will 
not even touch bear’s flesh. 

In the treatment of the captive bear by these tribes there 
are features which can hardly be distinguished from worship. 
Such, for example, are the prayers offered to it both alive 
and dead; the offerings of food, including portions of its 


1 FE. G. Ravenstein, Zhe Russians 
on the Amur (London, 1861), pp. 
379 sg.; T. W. Atkinson, Zravels 
in the Regions of the Upper and 
Lower Amoor (London, 1860), pp. 
482 sg. 

2. H. Fraser, ‘‘ The Fish-skin 
Tartars,” Journal of the China Branch 


of the Royal Asiatic Society for the year 
1891-1892, New Series, xxvi. 36-39. 
L. von Schrenck describes a bear-feast 
which he witnessed in 1855 among 
the Oltscha (Rezsex und Forschungen 
wm Amur-lande, i. 723-728). The 
Oltscha are probably the same as the 
Orotchis. 


festivals 
of the 
Orotchis. 


Respect 
shewn by 
all these 
tribes for 
the bears 
which they 
kill and eat. 


198 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


own flesh, laid before the animal’s skull; and the Gilyak 
custom of leading the living beast on to the ice of the river 
in order to ensure a supply of fish, and of conducting him 
from house to house in order that every family may receive 
his blessing, just as in Europe a May-tree or a personal 
representative of the tree-spirit used to be taken from door 
to door in spring for the sake of diffusing among all and 
sundry the fresh energies of reviving nature.’ Again, the 
solemn participation in his flesh and blood, and particularly 
the Aino custom of sharing the contents of the cup which 
had been consecrated by being set before the dead beast, are 
strongly suggestive of a sacrament, and the suggestion is 
confirmed by the Gilyak practice of reserving special vessels 
to hold the flesh and cooking it on a fire kindled by a sacred 
apparatus which is never employed except on these religious 
occasions. Indeed our principal authority on Aino religion, 
the Rev. John Batchelor, frankly describes as worship the 
ceremonious respect which the Aino pay to the bear,’ and 
he affirms that the animal is undoubtedly one of their gods.* 
Certainly the Aino appear to apply their name for god 
(kamuz) freely to the bear; but, as Mr. Batchelor himself 
points out,* that word is used with many different shades of 
meaning and is applied to a great variety of objects, so that 
from its application to the bear we cannot safely argue that 
the animal is actually regarded as a deity. Indeed we are 
expressly told that the Aino of Saghalien do not consider 
the bear to be a god but only a messenger to the gods, and 
the message with which they charge the animal at its death 
bears out the statement.? Apparently the Gilyaks also look 
on the bear in the light of an envoy despatched with 
presents to the Lord of the Mountain, on whom the welfare 
of the people depends. At the same time they treat the 
animal as a being of a higher order than man, in fact as a 
minor deity, whose presence in the village, so long as he is 
kept and fed, diffuses blessings, especially by keeping at bay 
the swarms of evil spirits who are constantly lying in wait for 

1 The Magic Art and the Evolution 3 Op. cit. p. 482. Mr. Batchelor 
of Kings, ii. 59 sqq. says ‘*‘ totem gods.” 

2 Rey. J. Batchelor, The Aznw and 
their Folk-lore, pp. 492, 493, 495, 
490. ® See above, pp. 188 sg. 


4 Op. ctt. pp. 580 599. 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 199 


people, stealing their goods and destroying their bodies by 
sickness and disease. Moreover, by partaking of the flesh, 
blood, or broth of the bear, the Gilyaks, the Aino, and the 
Goldi are all of opinion that they acquire some portion of 
the animal’s mighty powers, particularly his courage and 
strength. No wonder, therefore, that they should treat so 
great a benefactor with marks of the highest respect and 
affection.’ 

Some light may be thrown on the ambiguous attitude of 
the Aino to bears by comparing the similar treatment which 
they accord to other creatures. For example, they regard 
the eagle-owl as a good deity who by his hooting warns 
men of threatened evil and defends them against it ; hence 
he is loved, trusted, and devoutly worshipped as a divine 
mediator between men and the Creator. The various names 
applied to him are significant both of his divinity and of his 
mediatorship. Whenever an opportunity offers, one of these 
divine birds is captured and kept in a cage, where he is 
greeted with the endearing titles of “ Beloved god” and 
“Dear little divinity.” Nevertheless the time comes when 
the dear little divinity is throttled and sent away in his 
capacity of mediator to take a message to the superior gods 
or to the Creator himself. The following is the form of 
prayer addressed to the eagle-owl when it is about to be 
sacrificed : “ Beloved deity, we have brought you up because 
we loved you, and now we are about to send you to 
your father. We herewith offer you food, zzao, wine, and 
cakes; take them to your parent, and he will be very 
pleased. When you come to him say, ‘I have lived a long 
time among the Ainu, where an Ainu father and an Ainu 
mother reared me. I now come to thee. I have brought a 
variety of good things. I saw while living in Ainu-land a 


1 This account of the attitude of the Batchelor, two of the best-informed 


Gilyaks to the bear, and of their reasons 
for holding the festival, is the one given 
by Mr. Leo Sternberg. See his articles, 
"Die Religion der Giljaken,” Archzv 
fiir Religionswissenschaft, viii. (1905) 
PP. 273 sg., 456-458. He speaks of 
the bear as a minor deity (‘‘ Zr selbst 
ist ja eine Gotthett, wenn auch eine 
kleine”). Mr. Sternberg and Mr. 


writers on the subject, agree in denying 
that the slaughter of the bear at the 
festival is a sacrifice to the gods. See 
L. Sternberg, of. czt. p. 4573 Rev. 
J. Batchelor, Zhe Aznz and their Folk- 
lore, p. 482. As to the belief of the 
Gilyaks in evil spirits, which menace 
and destroy the life of man, see L, 
Sternberg, of. cet. pp. 460 sgq. 


Similar 
respect 
shewn by 
the Aino 
for the 
eagle-owls 
which they 
keep in 
cages and 
kill. 


Similar 
respect 
shewn by 
the Aino 
for the 
eagles and 
hawks 
which they 
keep in 
cages and 
lall. 


Advantages 
which the 
Aino hopes 
to reap 
from 
slaughter- 
ing the 
worshipful 
animals. 


200 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP. 


great deal of distress. I observed that some of the people 
were possessed by demons, some were wounded by wild 
animals, some were hurt by landslides, others suffered ship- 
wreck, and many were attacked by disease. The people are 
in great straits. My father, hear me, and hasten to look 
upon the Ainu and help them. If you do this, your father 
will help us.” ? 

Again, the Aino keep eagles in cages, worship them as 
divinities, and ask them to defend the people from evil. Yet 
they offer the bird in Sacrifice, and when they are about to 
do so they pray to him, saying: “O precious divinity, O 
thou divine bird, pray listen to my words. Thou dost not 
belong to this world, for thy home is with the Creator and 
his golden eagles. This being so, I present thee with these 
zwao and cakes and other precious things. Do thou ride 
upon the zzao and ascend to thy home in the glorious heavens. 
When thou arrivest, assemble the deities of thy own kind 
together and thank them for us for having governed the 
world. Do thou come again, I beseech thee, and rule over 
us. O my precious one, go thou quietly.”” Once more, the 
Aino revere hawks, keep them in cages, and offer them in 
sacrifice. At the time of killing one of them the following 
prayer should be addressed to the bird: “O divine hawk, 
thou art an expert hunter, please cause thy cleverness to 
descend on me.” If a hawk is well treated in captivity 
and prayed to after this fashion when he is about to be 
killed, he will surely send help to the hunter.® 

Thus the Aino hopes to profit in various ways by 
slaughtering the creatures, which, nevertheless, he treats as 
divine. He expects them to carry messages for him to their 
kindred or to the gods in the upper world ; he hopes to 
partake of their virtues by imbibing parts of their bodies or 
in other ways; and apparently he looks forward to their 
bodily resurrection in this world, which will enable him 
again to catch and kill them, and again to reap all the 
benefits which he has already derived from their slaughter. 
For in the prayers addressed to the worshipful bear and the 


! Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Aénu and 432 sg. 
their Folk-lore, pp. 410-415. 3 Rev. J. Batchelor, of. cz?. p. 
# Rev. J. Batchelor, \opf; ct. spp.) 438: 


XIII KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 201 


worshipful eagle before they are knocked on the head the 
creatures are invited to come again,’ which seems clearly to 
point to a faith in their future resurrection. If any doubt 
could exist on this head, it would be dispelled by the 
evidence of Mr. Batchelor, who tells us that the Aino “are 
firmly convinced that the spirits of birds and animals killed 
in hunting or offered in sacrifice come and live again upon the 
earth clothed with a body; and they believe, further, that 
they appear here for the special benefit of men, particularly 
- Ainu hunters.”? The Aino, Mr. Batchelor tells us, “con- 
fessedly slays and eats the beast that another may come in 
its place and be treated in like manner”; and at the time 
of sacrificing the creatures “ prayers are said to them which 
form a request that they will come again and furnish viands 
for another feast, as if it were an honour to them to be thus 
killed and eaten, and a pleasure as well. Indeed such is the 
people’s idea.”* These last observations, as the context 
shews, refer especially to the sacrifice of bears. 

Thus among the benefits which the Aino anticipates 
from the slaughter of the worshipful animals not the least 
substantial is that of gorging himself on their flesh and 
blood, both on the present and on many a similar occasion 
hereafter ; and that pleasing prospect again is derived from 
his firm faith in the spiritual immortality and bodily resur- 
rection of the dead animals. A like faith is shared by many 
savage hunters in many parts of the world and has given rise 
to a variety of quaint customs, some of which will be de- 
scribed presently. Meantime it is not unimportant to observe 
that the solemn festivals at which the Aino, the Gilyaks, and 
other tribes slaughter the tame caged bears with demon- 
strations of respect and sorrow, are probably nothing but an 
extension or glorification of similar rites which the hunter per- 
forms over any wild bear which he chances to kill in the forest. 
Indeed with regard to the Gilyaks we are expressly informed 
that this is the case. If we would understand the meaning 
of the Gilyak ritual, says Mr. Sternberg, “ we must above all 
remember that the bear-festivals are not, as is usually but 

1 See above, pp. 183, 184, 196. their Folk-lore, p. 479. 


3 Rev. J. Batchelor, of. cz#. pp. 
2 Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Aznu and 481, 482. 


The bear- 
festivals of 
these tribes 
are prob- 
ably no- 
thing but 
an exten- 
sion of the 
similar rites 
which the 
hunter per- 
forms over 
any wild 
bear which 
he kills in 
the forest. 


The 
apparent 
contradic- 
tion in the 
behaviour 
of these 
tribes to 
bears is not 
so great as 
it Seems to 
us at first 
sight. 
Savage 
logic. 


202 KILLING THE DIVINE ANIMAL CHAP, 


falsely assumed, celebrated only at the killing of a house- 
bear but are held on every occasion when a Gilyak succeeds 
in slaughtering a bear in the chase. It is true that in such 
cases the festival assumes less imposing dimensions, but in its 
essence it remains the same. When the head and skin of a 
bear killed in the forest are brought into the village, they are 
accorded a triumphal reception with music and solemn cere- 
monial. The head is laid on a consecrated scaffold, fed, and 
treated with offerings, just as at the killing of a house-bear ; 
and the guests of honour (Varch-en) are also assembled. So, 
too, dogs are sacrificed, and the bones of the bear are pre- 
served in the same place and with the same marks of respect 
as the bones of a house-bear. Hence the great winter 
festival is only an extension of the rite which is observed at 
the slaughter of every bear.” ? 

Thus the apparent contradiction in the practice of these 
tribes, who venerate and almost deify the animals which 
they habitually hunt, kill, and eat, is not so flagrant as at 
first sight it appears to us: the people have reasons, and 
some very practical reasons, for acting as they do. For the 
savage is by no means so illogical and unpractical as to 
superficial observers he is apt to seem; he has thought 
deeply on the questions which immediately concern him, he 
reasons about them, and though his conclusions often diverge 
very widely from ours, we ought not to deny him the credit 
of patient and prolonged meditation on some fundamental 
problems of human existence. In the present case, if he 
treats bears in general as creatures wholly subservient to 
human needs and yet singles out certain individuals of the 
species for homage which almost amounts to deification, 
we must not hastily set him down as irrational and in- 
consistent, but must endeavour to place ourselves at his 
point of view, to see things as he sees them, and to divest 
ourselves of the prepossessions which tinge so deeply our 
own views of the world. If we do so, we shall probably 
discover that, however absurd his conduct may appear 
to us, the savage nevertheless generally acts on a train 
of reasoning which seems to him in harmony with the 


1 L. Sternberg, ‘*Die Religion der Giljaken,” Archiv fiir Religionswissen- 
schaft, viii. (1905) p. 272. 


xu! KILLING THE SACRED BEAR 203 


facts of his limited experience. This I propose to illustrate 
in the following chapter, where I shall attempt to shew that 
the solemn ceremonial of the bear-festival among the Ainos 
and other tribes of north-eastern Asia is only a particularly 
striking example of the respect which on the principles 
of his rude philosophy the savage habitually pays to the 
animals which he kills and eats. 


The savage 
believes 
that 
animals, 
like men, 
are en- 
dowed 
with souls 
which sur- 
vive the 
death of 
their 
bodies. 


The Ameri- 
can Indians 
draw no 
sharp dis- 
tinction 
between 
animals 
and men. 


CHAP A Ei? ei 
THE PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS BY HUNTERS 


THE explanation of life by the theory of an indwelling 
and practically immortal soul is one which the savage 
does not confine to human beings but extends to the 
animate creation in general. In so doing he is more 
liberal and perhaps more logical than the civilised man, who 
commonly denies to animals that privilege of immortality 
which he claims for himself. The savage is not so proud ; he 
commonly believes that animals are endowed with feelings 
and intelligence like those of men, and that, like men, they 
possess souls which survive the death of their bodies either 
to wander about as disembodied spirits or to be born again 
in animal form. Thus, for example, we are told that the 
Indian of Guiana does not see “any sharp line of distinction, 
such as we see, between man and other animals, between 
one kind of animal and another, or between animals—man 
included—and inanimate objects. On the contrary, to the 
Indian, all objects, animate and inanimate, seem exactly of 
the same nature except that they differ in the accident of 
bodily form. Every object in the whole world is a being, 
consisting of a body and spirit, and differs from every other 
object in no respect except that of bodily form, and in the 
ereater or less degree of brute power and brute cunning 
consequent on the difference of bodily form and bodily 
habits.”* Similarly we read that “in Cherokee mythology, 
as in that of Indian tribes generally, there is no essential 
difference between men and animals. In the primal genesis 
period they seem to be completely undifferentiated, and we 


1 E, F. im Thurn, Among the Indians of Guiana (London, 1883), p. 350. 
204 


CHAP, XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 205 


find all creatures alike living and working together in har- 
mony and mutual helpfulness until man, by his aggressive- 
ness and disregard for the rights of the others, provokes their 
hostility, when insects, birds, fishes, reptiles, and fourfooted 
beasts join forces against him. Henceforth their lives are 
apart, but the difference is always one of degree only. The 
animals, like the people, are organized into tribes and have 
like them their chiefs and townhouses, their councils and 
ballplays, and the same hereafter in the Darkening land of 
Usunhiyi. Man is still the paramount power, and hunts 
and slaughters the others as his own necessities compel, but 
is obliged to satisfy the animal tribes in every instance, very 
much as a murder is compounded for, according to the 
Indian system, by ‘covering the bones of the dead’ with 
presents for the bereaved relatives.”' To the same effect 
another observer of the North American Indians writes: 
“T have often reflected on the curious connexion which 
appears to subsist in the mind of an Indian between man 
and the brute creation, and found much matter in it for 
curious observation. Although they consider themselves 
superior to all other animals and are very proud of that 
superiority ; although they believe that the beasts of the 
forest, the birds of the air, and the fishes of the waters, were 
created by the Almighty Being for the use of man; yet it 
seems as if they ascribe the difference between themselves 
and the brute kind, and the dominion which they have over 
them, more to their superior bodily strength and dexterity 
than to their immortal souls. All beings endowed by the 
Creator with the power of volition and self-motion, they 
view in a manner as a great society of which they are the 
head, whom they are appointed, indeed, to govern, but be- 
tween whom and themselves intimate ties of connexion and 
relationship may exist, or at least did exist in the beginning 
of time. They are, in fact, according to their opinions, only 
the first among equals, the legitimate hereditary sovereigns 
of the whole animated race, of which they are themselves a 
constituent part. Hence, in their languages, those inflections 
of their nouns which we call genders, are not, as with us, 


1 J. Mooney, ‘‘ Myths ofthe Chero- the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
kee,” Nineteenth Annual Report of Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 261. 


Some 
savages 
apparently 
fail to dis- 
tinguish 
clearly even 
the bodies 
of animals 
from the 
bodies of 
men. 


206 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


descriptive of the sasculine and feminine species, but of the 
animate and tnanimate kinds. Indeed, they go so far as to 
include trees and plants within the first of these descriptions. 
All animated nature, in whatever degree, is in their eyes a 
sreat whole, from which they have not yet ventured to 
separate themselves. They do not exclude other animals 
from their world of spirits, the place to which they expect 
to go after death.”* Even Chinese authors “have roundly 
avowed themselves altogether unable to discover any real 
difference between men and animals,” and they have drawn 
out the parallelism between the two in some detail. 

But it is not merely between the mental and spiritual 
nature of man and the animals that the savage traces a 
close resemblance ; even the distinction of their bodily form 
appears sometimes to elude his dull apprehension. An 
unusually intelligent Bushman questioned by a missionary 
“could not state any difference between a man and a brute 
—he did not know but a buffalo might shoot with bows 
and arrows as well as a man, if it had them.’? In the 
opinion of the Gilyak, “the form and size of an animal are 
merely a sort of appearance. Every animal is in point of 
fact a real being like man, nay a Gilyak such as himself, but 
endowed with reason and strength which often surpass those 
of mere men.”* Nor is it merely that in the mental fog the 
savage takes beasts for men; he seems to be nearly as 
ready to take himself and his fellows for beasts. When the 
Russians first landed on one of the Alaskan islands the 
people took them for cuttle-fish, “on account of the buttons 
on their clothes.”® We have seen how some savages identify 
themselves with animals of various sorts by eating the 
maggots bred in the rotting carcases of the beasts, and how 
thereafter, when occasion serves, they behave in their adopted 


1 Rev. John MHeckewelder, ‘‘ An 
Account of the History, Manners, and 
Customs of the Indian Nations who 
once inhabited Pennsylvania and the 
neighbouring States,” Zvamnsactions of 
the Historical and Literary Committee 
of the American Philosophical Society, 
vol. i. (Philadelphia, 1819) pp. 247 sg. 

2 J. J. M. de Groot, Zhe Religious 
System of China, iv. (Leyden, 1901) 
Pp: 157 Sg. 


3 John Campbell, Zvavels tx South 
Africa, being a Narrative of a Second 
Journey tn the Interior of that Country 
(London, 1822), ii. 34. 

4 L. Sternberg, ‘‘ Die Religion der 
Giljaken,” Archiv fiir Religionswissen- 
schaft, viii. (1905) p. 248. 

5 T. Petroff, Report on the Population, 
Industries, and Resources of Alaska, 
p- 145. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 207 


characters by wriggling, roaring, barking, or grunting, accord- 
ing as they happen to be boa-constrictors, lions, jackals, or 
hippopotamuses.' In the island of Mabuiag men of the 
Sam, that is, the Cassowary, totem think that cassowaries 
are men or nearly so. “Sam he all same as relation, he 
belong same family,” is the account they give of their kinship 
with the creature. Conversely they hold that they them- 
selves are cassowaries, or at all events that they possess 
some of the qualities of the long-legged bird. When a 
Cassowary man went forth to reap laurels on the field of 
battle, he used to reflect with satisfaction on the length of 
his lower limbs: “ My leg is long and thin, I can run and 
not feel tired; my legs will go quickly and the grass will 
not entangle them.”* Omaha Indians believe that between 
a man and the creature which is his guardian spirit there 
subsists so close a bond that the man acquires the powers 
and qualities, the virtues and defects of the animal. Thus 
if a man has seen a bear in that vision at puberty which 
determines an Indian’s guardian spirit, he will be apt to be 
wounded in battle, because the bear is a slow and clumsy 
animal and easily trapped. If he has dreamed of an eagle, 
he will be able to see into the future and foretell coming 
events, because the eagle’s vision is keen and _ piercing.® 
Similarly, the Thompson Indians of British Columbia 
imagined that every man partook of the nature of the 
animal which was his guardian spirit; for example, a man 
who had the grisly bear for his protector would prove a 
much fiercer warrior than one who had only a crow, a 
coyote, or a fox for his guardian spirit. And before they 
set out on the war-path these Indians used to perform a 
mimic battle, in which each man, tricked out with paint and 
feathers, imitated the sounds of the animal that was his 


guardian spirit, grunting and whooping in character.* 


1 Above, p. 141. 


2 A. C. Haddon, ‘‘The Ethno- 
graphy of the Western Tribe of Torres 
Straits,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xix. (1890) p. 3933; 2za., 
Flead-hunters (London, 1901), p. 1333 
Reports of the Cambridge Anthropologt- 
cal Expedition to Torres Straits, v. 


The 


(Cambridge, 1904) p. 166. 

3 Miss Alice C. Fletcher, Zhe Jmport 
of the Totem, a Study from the Omaha 
Tribe, p. 6 (paper read before the 
American Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science, August 1897). 

4 James Teit, ‘‘The Thompson 
Indians of British Columbia,” p. 356 
(Zhe Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 


Hence the 
savage 
attempts to 
propitiate 
the animals 
which he 
kills and 
the other 
members of 
the species. 


208 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


Bororos, a tribe of Indians in the heart of Brazil, will have it 
that they are parrots of a gorgeous red plumage which live 
in the Brazilian forest. It is not merely that their souls will 
pass into these birds at death, but they themselves are actually 
identical with them in their life, and accordingly they treat 
the parrots as they might treat their fellow-tribesmen, keep- 
ing them in captivity, refusing to eat their flesh, and mourn- 
ing for them when they die. However, they kill the wild 
birds for their feathers, and, though they will not kill, they 
pluck the tame ones to deck their own naked brown bodies” 
with the gaudy plumage of their feathered brethren.’ 

Thus to the savage, who regards all living creatures as 
practically on a footing of equality with man, the act of 
killing and eating an animal must wear a very different 
aspect from that which the same act presents to us, who 
regard the intelligence of animals as far inferior to our own 
and deny them the possession of immortal souls. Hence on 
the principles of his rude philosophy the primitive hunter 
who slays an animal believes himself exposed to the 
vengeance either of its disembodied spirit or of all the other 
animals of the same species, whom he considers as knit 
together, like men, by the ties of kin and the obligations of 
the blood feud, and therefore as bound to resent the injury 
done to one of their number. Accordingly the savage makes 
it a rule to spare the life of those animals which he has no 
pressing motive for killing, at least such fierce and dangerous 
animals as are likely to exact a bloody vengeance for the 
slaughter of one of their kind. Crocodiles are animals of 
this sort. They are only found in hot countries, where, as a 
rule, food is abundant and primitive man has therefore little 
reason to kill them for the sake of their tough and un- 
palatable flesh.2 Hence it is a custom with some savages 


Memoir of the American Museum of dances. The masks were guarded in 


Natural History, April 1900). 

1K. von den Steinen, Unter den 
Naturvolkern Zentral-Brasiliens (Ber- 
lin} 60894) ppas5 Zeige s enn 
Chambioa Indians of Central Brazil 
kept birds of the same species in cap- 
tivity and used their brilliant feathers 
to cover enormous head-dresses or 
masks, some six feet high, which were 
worn by dancers in certain mystic 


a special hut of each village, and no 
woman might see them under pain of 
death. See F. de Castelnau, 2xfédi- 
tion dans les parties centrales de [ Amé- 
vigue du Sud (Paris, 1850-1851), i. 
436 59-5 440, 449-451. 

2 However, many savages hunt the 
crocodile for the sake of its flesh, 
which some of them even regard as a 
delicacy. See H. von Wissmann, JZy 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 209 


to spare crocodiles, or rather only to kill them in obedience 
to the law of blood feud, that is, as a retaliation for the 
slaughter of men by crocodiles. 
Borneo will not kill a crocodile unless a crocodile has first 
killed a man. “For why, say they, should they commit an 
act of aggression, when he and his kindred can so easily 
repay them? But should the alligator take a human life, 
revenge becomes a sacred duty of the living relatives, who 
will trap the man-eater in the spirit of an officer of justice 
pursuing a criminal. Others, even then, hang back, reluctant 
to embroil themselves in a quarrel which does not concern 
them. The man-eating alligator is supposed to be pursued 
by a righteous Nemesis ; and whenever one is caught they 
have a profound conviction that it must be the guilty one, 
or his accomplice.” * 

When a Dyak has made up his mind to take vengeance 
on the crocodiles for the death of a kinsman, he calls in 
the help of a Pangareran, a man whose business it is to 
charm and catch crocodiles and to make them do his 


will, While he is engaged 


Second Jeurney through Equatorial 
Africa, from the Congo to the Zambest 
(London, 1891), p. 298; Ch. Part- 
ridge, Cross River Natzves (London, 
1905), p- 149; A. F. Mocler-Ferry- 
man, Up the Niger (London, 1892), 
p-. 222; Captain G. Burrows, 7he Land 
of the Pigmies (London, 1898), p. 247; 
R. E. Dennett, ‘‘ Bavili Notes,” Fo/k- 
lore, xvi. (1905) p. 399; J. Halkin, 
Quelques Peuplades du district de 1 Uelé, 
I. Les Ababua (Liége, 1907), p. 333 
H. Reynolds, ‘*‘ Notes on the Azandé 
Tribe of the Congo,” Journal of the 
African Soctety, No. xi. (April, 1904) 
p- 242; Brard, ‘‘ Der Victoria- Nyansa,” 
Peterman s Mitthetlungen, xiii. (1897) 
p- 78; A. van Gennep, Zabou et Toté- 
misme & Madagascar (Paris, 1904), p. 
209; G. Kurze, ‘‘Sitten und Gebrauche 
der Lengua-Indianer,” JAZc¢teclungen 
der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena, 
xxlll. (1905) p. 30; W. Barbrooke 
Grubb, Az unknown People in an un- 
known Land (London, 1911), pp. 82 
sq. ; Census of India, rgor, vol. xxvi., 
Travancore (Trivandrum, 1903), p. 


BEV. VOL. If 


in the discharge of his pro- 


353; Max Krieger, Wez-Guznea (Ber- 
lin, N.D.), p. 163; Spencer and Gillen, 
Northern Tribes of Central Australia 
(London, 1904), p. 770; W. E. Roth, 
Ethnological Studies among the North- 
West-Central Queensland Aborigines 
(Brisbane and London, 1897), p. 943 
N. W. Thomas, /Vatzves of Australia 
(London, 1906), p. 106. In antiquity 
some of the Egyptians worshipped 
crocodiles, but others killed and ate 
them. See Herodotus, ii. 69; Plut- 
arch, /szs et Ostr?s, 50; Aelian, De 
natura aninmialium, X. 21. 

1 Rey. J. Perham, ‘‘ Sea Dyak 
Religion,” Journal of the Straits Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Soctety, No. 10 
(Singapore, 1883), p. 221. Compare 
C. Hupe, ‘‘ Korte verhandeling over 
de godsdienst zeden, enz. der Dajak- 
kers,” Zajdschrift voor Neérlands Indie, 
1846, dl. iii. 160; S. Miiller, Rezzerz 
en onderzoekingen in den Indischen 
Archipel (Amsterdam, 1857), i. 238; 
M. T. H. Perelaer, L¢hnographische 
Beschrijving der Dajaks (Zalt-Bommel, 
1870), p. 7. 

P 


For example, the Dyaks of Scruples 


entertained 
by the 
Dyaks as 
to the 
killing of 
crocodiles. 


Ceremonies 
observed 
by the 
Dyaks at 
killing a 
crocodile. 


210 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


fessional duties the crocodile-catcher has to observe a 
number of odd rules. He may not go to anybody and may 
not even pass in front of a window, because he is unclean. 
He may not himself cook anything nor come near a fire. 
If he would eat fruit, he may not peel or husk it himself, 
but must get others to do it for him. He may not even 
chew his food, but is obliged to swallow it unchewed. A 
little hut is made for him on the bank of the river, where he 
uses divination by means of the figure of a crocodile drawn 
on a piece of bamboo for the purpose of determining whether 
his undertaking will prosper. The boat in which he em- 
barks to catch the wicked man-eating crocodile must be 
painted yellow and red, and in the middle of it lances are 
erected with the points upward. Then the man of skill 
casts lots to discover whether the hook is to be baited with 
pork, or venison, or the flesh of a dog or an ass. In throw- 
ing the baited hook into the water he calls out: “Ye 
crocodiles who are up stream, come down ; and ye crocodiles 
who are down stream, come up; for I will give you all good 
food, as sweet as sugar and as fat as coco-nut. I will give 
you a pretty and beautiful necklace. When you have got 
it, keep it in your neck and body, for this food is very 
pahuni,’ which means that it would be sinful not to eat it. 
If a crocodile bites at the hook, the crocodile-catcher 
bawls out, “ Choose a place for yourself where you will lie ; 
for many men are come to see you. They are come joy- 
fully and exultingly, and they give you a knife, a lance, and 
a shroud.” If the crocodile is a female, he addresses her as 
“Princess”; if it is a male, he calls it “ Prince” “2 hevens 
chanter, who is generally a cunning Malay, must continue his ~ 
operations till he catches a crocodile in which traces are to be 
found shewing that the animal has indeed devoured a human 
being. Then the death of the man is atoned for, and in order 
not to offend the water-spirits a cat is sacrificed to the croco- 
diles. The heads of the dead crocodiles are fastened on stakes 
beside the river, where in time they bleach white and stand out 
sharply against the green background of the forest.' While 
the captured crocodile is being hauled in to the bank, the 


1 F. Grabowsky, ‘‘Die Theogonie  xatzonales Archiv fiir Ethnographie, 
der Dajaken auf Borneo,” Jzter- ii. (1892) pp. 119 sg. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 211 


subtle Dyaks speak softly to him and beguile him into offering 
no resistance ; but once they have him fast, with arms and 
legs securely pinioned, they howl at him and deride him for 
his credulity, while they rip up the belly of the infuriated 
and struggling brute to find the evidence of his guilt in the 
shape of human remains. On one occasion Rajah Brooke 
of Sarawak was present at a discussion among a party of 
Dyaks as to how they ought to treat a captured crocodile. 
One side maintained that it was proper to bestow all praise 
and honour on the kingly beast, since he was himself a rajah 
among animals and was now brought there to meet the rajah ; 
in short, they held that praise and flattery were agreeable to 
him and would put him on his best behaviour. The other side 
fully admitted that on this occasion rajah met rajah ; yet with 
prudent foresight they pointed to the dangerous consequences 
which might flow from establishing a precedent such as 
their adversaries contended for. If once a captured crocodile, 
said they, were praised and honoured, the other crocodiles, 
on hearing of it, would be puffed up with pride and ambition, 
and being seized with a desire to emulate the glory of their 
fellow would enter on a career of man-eating as the road 
likely to lead them by the shortest cut to the temple of fame.’ 

The Minangkabauers of Sumatra have also a great Ceremonies 
respect for crocodiles. Their celebrated law-giver Katoe- eee 
Manggoengan was indeed born again in the form of a Minang- 
crocodile ; and thus his descendants, including the rajah of pene 
Indrapoera and his family, are more or less distant cousins killing a 
of the crocodiles, and enjoy the help and protection of the pis 
creatures in many ways, for example when they go on a jour- 
ney. The respect entertained for the animals is also attested 
by the ceremonies observed in some places when a crocodile 
has been caught. A crowd of women then performs certain 
cances which closely resemble the dances performed when, 
somebody has died. Moreover, it is a rule with the 


) 

. 1H. Ling Roth, Zhe Natives of for the death of one of their people. 
Sarawak and British North Borneo See C. Hose and W. MacDougall, 
(London, 1896), i.4475¢g. CompareE. ‘*The Relations between Men and 
H. Gomes, Seventeen years among the Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 
Sea Dyaks of Borneo(London,1911),pp.  <Axthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) 
56-60. Similarlythe Kenyahs,Kayans, pp. 186, 190, 199, compare 7d. pp. 
and Ibans, three tribes of Sarawak, will 193 sg. 
not kill crocodiles except in revenge 


Relief in 
the kinship 
of men with 
crocodiles 
among the 
Malays. 


212 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


Minangkabauers that no cooking-pot may be washed in a 
river; to do so would be like offering the crocodiles the 
leavings of your food, and they would very naturally resent 
it. For the same reason in washing up the dinner or 
supper plates you must be careful not to make a splashing, 
or the crocodiles would hear it and take umbrage.’ 

Among the Malays of Patani Bay, in Siam, there is a 
family whose members may not kill a crocodile nor even 
be present when one of these ferocious reptiles is captured. 
The reason alleged for this forbearance is that the family 
claim kindred with a woman named Betimor, who was 
drowned in the river and afterwards turned into a crocodile. 
After her transformation she appeared to her father in a 
dream and told him what had become of her; so he went 
down to the river and made offerings to her of rice and wax 
tapers. There is a shrine on the spot where the woman was 
transformed into a crocodile, and any one may dedicate 
offerings there and pray to Toh Sri Lam; for so she has 
been called ever since her metamorphosis. Members of the 
crocodile family call on her for help in sickness and other 
misfortunes, and they will do so on behalf of other people 
for a proper consideration. Rice and wax tapers are the 
usual offerings.” In many islands of the Indian Archipelago, 
including Java, Sumatra, Celebes, Timor, and Ceram, this 
belief in a kinship of men with crocodiles assumes a 
peculiar form. The people imagine that women are often 
delivered of a child and a crocodile at the same birth, and 
that when this happens, the midwife carries the crocodile 
twin carefully down to the river and places it in the water. 
The family in which such a birth is thought to have 
happened, constantly put victuals into the river for their 
amphibious relation; and in particular the human twin, 
so long as he lives, goes down to the river at stated 
seasons to do his duty by his crocodile brother or sister ; 
and if he were to fail to do so, it is the universal opinion 


ij. Ls van der loorn, <Hetrani- 2 Nelson Annandale, ‘“ Primitive 
misme bij den Minangkabauer der Beliefs and Customs of the Patani 
Padangsche Bovenlanden,” Azjdragen Fishermen,” fasciculé  Malayenses, 
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Anthropology, i. (April, 1903) pp. 
Nederlandsch - Indté, xxxix. (1890) 76-78. 
pp- 75 Sg. 


X1V PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 513 


that he would be visited with sickness or death for his 
unnatural conduct. Large parties of these crocodile people 
periodically go out in a boat furnished with great plenty of 
provisions and all kinds of music, and they row backwards 
and forwards, with the music playing, in places where croco- 
diles do most abound. As they do so they sing and weep 
by turns, each of them invoking his animal kinsfolk, till 
the snout of one of the brutes bobbs up from the water, 
whereupon the music stops, and food, betel, and tobacco 
are thrown into the river. By these delicate attentions 
they hope to recommend themselves to the formidable 
creatures.’ 

The crocodiles about the island of Damba in the 
Victoria Nyanza were sacred and might not be molested in 
any way. Hence they multiplied and became dangerous ; 
people made offerings to them in the hope of being spared 
by the monsters when they crossed in the ferries, From 
time to time batches of men were brought down to the 
beach and sacrificed to the crocodiles. Their arms and legs 
were broken so that they could not stir from the spot ; 
then they were laid out in a row on the shore, and the 
crocodiles came and dragged them into the water. On the 
island there was a temple dedicated to the crocodiles, and 
here an inspired medium resided who gave oracular responses. 
Under the influence of the spirit he wagged his head from 
side to side, opening his jaws and snapping them together, 
just as a crocodile does.” No doubt the spirit which 
possessed him in these moments of fine frenzy was sup- 
posed to be that of a crocodile. Similarly in other parts of 
Uganda men were inspired by the ghosts or spirits of lions, 
leopards, and serpents, and in that state of exaltation they 
uttered oracles, roaring like a lion, growling like a leopard, 
or grovelling and wriggling like a serpent, according to 
the nature of the spirit by which they were possessed.* 
Crocodiles abound in the Albert Nyanza Lake and its 
tributaries. In many places they are extremely dangerous, 


1 Voyages of Captain James Cook (London, 1911), p. 336. 

round the World (London, 1809), ii. 

316-319. 3 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. czt. pp. 318, 
4 Rey. J. Roscoe, The Baganda 322, 335. 


Crocodiles 
respected 
in Africa. 


214 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


but the Alur tribe of that region only hunt them when they 
have dragged away a man; and they think that any one 
who has taken away a crocodile’s eggs must be on his guard 
when he walks near the bank of the river, for the crocodiles 
will try to avenge the injury by seizing him.’ In general 
the Foulahs of Senegambia dare not kill a crocodile from 
fear of provoking the vengeance of the relations and friends 
of the murdered reptile ; but if the sorcerer gives his consent 
and passes his word that he will guarantee them against the 
vengeance of the family of the deceased, they will pluck up 
courage to attack one of the brutes.” 


Crocodiles Like the Dyaks, the natives of Madagascar never kill a 
ree crocodile “except in retaliation for one of their friends who 
car. has been destroyed by a crocodile. They believe that the 


wanton destruction of one of these reptiles will be followed 
by the loss of human life, in accordance with the principle of 
lex talionis.” The people who live near the lake Itasy in 
Madagascar make a yearly proclamation to the crocodiles, 
announcing that they will revenge the death of some of their 
friends by killing as many crocodiles in return, and warning 
all well-disposed crocodiles to keep out of the way, as they 
have no’quarrel with them, but only with their evil-minded 
relations who have taken human life.® Various tribes of 
Madagascar believe themselves to be descended from croco- 
diles, and accordingly they view the scaly reptile as, to all 
intents and purposes, a man and a brother. If one of the 
animals should so far forget himself as to devour one of his 
human kinsfolk, the chief of the tribe, or in his absence an 
old man familiar with the tribal customs, repairs at the head 
of the people to the edge of the water, and summons the 
family of the culprit to deliver him up to the arm of justice. 
A hook is then baited and cast into the river or lake. Next 
day the guilty brother, or one of his family, is dragged ashore, 
and after his crime has been clearly brought home to him by 
a strict interrogation, he is sentenced to death and executed. 
The claims of justice being thus satisfied and the majesty of 


1 Fr. Stuhlmann, J@¢ Emin Pascha occidentale (Paris, 1846), pp. 84 sg. © 
ins Herz von Afrika (Berlin, 1894), pp. 
510 sg. 3 J. Sibree, Zhe Great African 
2 A, Raffenel, Voyage dans 2 Afrique Island (London, 1880), p. 269. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 215 


the law fully vindicated, the deceased crocodile is lamented 
and buried like a kinsman ; a mound is raised over his relics 
and a stone marks the place of his head.’ The Malagasy, 
indeed, regard the crocodile with superstitious veneration as 
the king of the waters and supreme in his own element. 
When they are about to cross a river they pronounce a 
solemn oath, or enter into an engagement to acknowledge 
his sovereignty over the waters. An aged native has been 
known to covenant with the crocodiles for nearly half an 
hour before plunging into the stream. After that he lifted 
up his voice and addressed the animal, urging him to do 
him no harm, since he had never hurt the crocodile ; 
assuring him that he had never made war on any of his 
fellows, but on the contrary had always entertained the 
highest veneration for him ; and adding that if he wantonly 
attacked him, vengeance would follow sooner or later ; while 
if the crocodile devoured him, his relations and all his race 
would declare war against the beast. This harangue occupied 
another quarter of an hour, after which the orator dashed 
fearlessly into the stream.’ 

Again, the tiger is another of those dangerous beasts 
whom the savage prefers to leave alone, lest by killing one of 
the species he should excite the hostility of the rest. No 
consideration will induce a Sumatran to catch or wound 
a tiger except in self-defence or immediately after a tiger 
has destroyed a friend or relation. When a European has 
set traps for tigers, the people of the neighbourhood have 
been known to go by night to the place and explain to the 
animals that the traps are not set by them nor with their 
consent.? If it is necessary to kill a tiger which has wrought 
much harm in the village, the Minangkabauers of Sumatra 
try to catch him alive in order to beg for his forgiveness 
before despatching him, and in ordinary life they will not 
speak evil of him or do anything that might displease him. 
For example, they will not use a path that has been un- 
trodden for more than a year, because the tiger has chosen 

1 Father Abinal, ‘‘ Croyances fabu- 2W. Ellis, Wzstory of Madagascar 
leuses des Malgaches,” Les JZésstons (London, N.D.), i. 57 5g. 
Catholiques, xii. (1880) p. 5273; A. 


van Gennep, Zadou et Totémisme a 3 W. Marsden, Azstory of Sumatra 
Madagascar (Paris, 1904), pp. 283 sg. (London, 1811), p. 292. 


Tigers 
respected in 
Sumatra. 


Ceremonies 
at killing 
tigers in 
Sumatra 
and 

3engal. 


216 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 


CHAP. 


that path for himself, and would deem it a mark of dis- 
respect were any one else to use it. Again, persons journey- 
ing by night will not walk one behind the other, nor keep 
looking about them, for the tiger would think that this 
betrayed fear of him, and his feelings would be hurt by the 
suspicion. Neither will they travel bareheaded, for that also 
would be disrespectful to the tiger ; nor will they knock off 
the glowing end of a firebrand, for the flying sparks are like 
the tiger's glistering eyes, and he would treat this as an 
attempt to mimic him.' The population of Mandeling, 
a district on the west coast of Sumatra, is divided into clans, 
one of which claims to be descended from a tiger. It is 
believed that the animal will not attack or rend the members 
of this clan, because they are his kinsmen. When members 
of the clan come upon the tracks of a tiger, they enclose 
them with three little sticks asa mark of homage ; and when 
a tiger has been shot, the women of the clan are bound 
to offer betel to the dead beast.2, The Battas of Sumatra 
seldom kill a tiger except from motives of revenge, observing 
the rule an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, or, as 
they express it, “He who owes gold must pay in gold; 
he who owes breath (that is, life) must pay with breath.” 
Nor can the beast be attacked without some ceremony ; 
only weapons that have proved themselves able to kill may 
be used for the purpose. When the tiger has been killed, 
they bring the carcase to the village, set offerings before 
it, and burn incense over it, praying the spirit of the tiger to 
quit its material envelope and enter the incense pot. As 
soon as the soul may be supposed to have complied with 
this request, a speaker explains to the spirits in general 
the reasons for killing the tiger, and begs them to set forth 
these reasons to the departed soul of the beast, lest the latter 
should be angry and the people should suffer in consequence. 
Then they dance round the dead body of the tiger till they 
can dance no longer, after which they skin the carcase and 


1 J. L. van der Toorn, ‘‘ Het ani- 
misme bij den Minangkabauer der 
Padangsche Bovenlanden,” Bzjdragen 
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch Indié, xxxix. (1890) pp. 
74, 75 SQ. 


2 H. Ris, ‘‘ De onderafdeeling Man- 
dailing Oeloe en Pahantan en hare 
Bevolking,” zjdragen tot de Taal~ 
Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 
landsch Indi#, xlvi. (1896) pp. 472 
5g. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 217 


bury it. The inhabitants of the hills near Rajamahall, in 
Bengal, believe that if any man kills a tiger without divine 
orders, either he or one of his relations will be devoured by 
a tiger. Hence they are very averse to killing a tiger, 
unless one of their kinsfolk has been carried off by one of 
the beasts. In that case they go out for the purpose of 
hunting and slaying a tiger ; and when they have succeeded 
they lay their bows and arrows on the carcase and invoke 
God, declaring that they slew the animal in retaliation for 
the loss of a kinsman. Vengeance having been thus taken, 
they swear not to attack another tiger except under similar 
provocation.” The natives of Cochin China have a great 
respect for the tiger, whom they regard as a terrible divinity. 
Yet they set traps for him and leave no stone unturned to 
catch him. Once he is ensnared, they offer him their excuses 
and condolences for the painful position in which he finds 
himself. 

The Indians of Carolina would not molest snakes when 
they came upon them, but would pass by on the other side 
of the path, believing that if they were to kill a serpent, the 
reptile’s kindred would destroy some of their brethren, friends, 
or relations in return.* So the Seminole Indians spared 
the rattlesnake, because they feared that the soul of the 
dead rattlesnake would incite its kinsfolk to take vengeance. 
Once when a rattlesnake appeared in their camp they 
entreated an English traveller to rid them of the creature. 
When he had killed it, they were glad but tried to scratch 
him as a means of appeasing the spirit of the dead snake. 
Soon after the Iowas began to build their village near the 
mouth of Wolf River, a lad came into the village and 
reported that he had seen a rattlesnake on a hill not far off. 
A medicine-man immediately repaired to the spot, and find- 
ing the snake made it presents of tobacco and other things 
which he had brought with him for the purpose. He also 


1G. G. Batten, Glimpses of the 
Eastern Archipelago (Singapore, 1894), 
p. 86. 

2 Th. Shaw, ‘“‘On the Inhabitants 
of the Hills near Rajamahall,” Aszatzc 
Researches, Fourth Edition, iv. (Lon- 
don, 1807) p. 37. 


3 Annales de l’ Association de la Pro- 


pagation de la Foz, v. (1831) pp. 363 sg. 

4 J. Bricknell, Zhe Natural History 
of North Carolina (Dublin, 1737), p. 
368. 

5 W. Bartram, TZyvavels through 
North and South Carolina, Georgia, 
East and West Florida, etc. (London, 
1792) pp. 258-261. 


Snakes, 
especially 
rattle- 
snakes, 
respected 
by the 
North 
American 
Indians. 


218 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


had a long talk with the animal, and on returning to his 
people told them that now they might travel about in safety, 
for peace had been made with the snakes." The Delaware 
Indians also paid great respect to the rattlesnake, whom 
they called their grandfather, and they would on no account 
destroy one of the reptiles. They said that the rattlesnake 
suarded them and gave them notice of impending danger 
by his rattle, and that if they were to kill a rattlesnake, the 
rest of the species would soon hear of it and bite the Indians 
in revenge.” The Potawatomi Indians highly venerated the 
rattlesnake for a similar reason, being grateful to it for the 
timely warning which it often gave of the approach of an 
enemy. Yet a young man who desired to obtain a rattle 
would have no hesitation in killing one of the snakes for the 
purpose ; but he apologised profusely to the creature for the 
liberty he took with it, explaining that he required the rattle 
for the adornment of his person, and that no disrespect was 
intended to the snake; and in proof of his good will he 
would leave a piece of tobacco beside the carcase.* The 
Cherokee regard the rattlesnake as the chief of the snake 
tribe and fear and respect him accordingly. Few Cherokee 
will venture to kill a rattlesnake, unless they cannot help it, 
and even then they must atone for the crime by craving 
pardon of the snake’s ghost either in their own person or 
through the mediation of a priest, according to a set formula. 
If these precautions are neglected, the kinsfolk of the dead 
snake will send one of their number as an avenger of blood, 
who will track down the murderer and sting him to death. 
It is absolutely necessary to cut off the snake’s head and 
bury it deep in the earth and to hide the body in a hollow ~ 
log; for if the remains were exposed to the weather, the 
other snakes would be so angry that they would send 
torrents of rain and all the streams would overflow their 
banks. If a Cherokee dreams of being bitten by a snake, 


i H. R. Schoolcraft, Zxdian Tribes 
of the United States (Philadelphia, 
1853-1856), iii. 273. 

2 Rev. John MHeckewelder, ‘‘ An 
Account of the History, Manners, 
and Customs of the Indian Nations 
who once inhabited Pennsylvania and 


the neighbouring States,” Zramnsactions 
of the Historical and Literary Com- 
mittee of the American Philosophical 
Society, i. (Philadelphia, 1819) p. 245. 

3 W. Keating, arrative of an 
Expedition to the Source of St. Peters 
River (London, 1825), i. 127. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 219 


he must be treated in exactly the same way as if he had 
been really bitten ; for they think that he has actually been 
bitten by the ghost of a snake, and that if the proper 
remedies were not applied to the hurt, the place would swell 
and ulcerate, though possibly not for years afterwards.’ 
Once when an Englishman attempted to kill a rattlesnake, 
a party of Ojibway Indians, with whom he was travelling, 
begged him to desist, and endeavoured to appease the snake, 
addressing it in turns as grandfather, smoking over it, and 
beseeching it to take care of their families in their absence, 
and to open the heart of the British Agent so that he should 
fill their canoe with rum. A storm which overtook them 
next day on Lake Huron was attributed by them to the 
wrath of the insulted rattlesnake, and they sought to mollify 
him by throwing dogs as sacrifices to him into the waves.” 
The Kekchi Indians of Guatemala will not throw serpents 
or scorpions into the fire, lest the other creatures of the same 
species should punish them for the outrage. 

In Kiziba, a district of Central Africa, to the west of Lake 
Victoria Nyanza, if a woman accidentally kills a snake with 
her hoe while she is working in the field, she hastens in 
great agitation to the snake-priest and hands him over the 
hoe, together with two strings of cowries and an ox-hide, 
begging him to appease the angry spirit of the slain serpent. 
In this application she is accompanied and supported by all 
the villagers, who share her fears and anxiety. Accordingly 
the priest beats his drum as a sign that no woman of the 
village is to work in the fields till further notice. Next he 
wraps the dead serpent in a piece of the ox-hide and buries 
itsolemnly. On the following day he performs a ceremony of 
purification for the slaughter of the reptile. He compounds 
a medicine out of the guts of a leopard or hyaena and 
earth or mud dissolved in water, and with this mixture 
he disinfects all the houses in the village, beginning with 


1 J. Mooney, ‘‘Myths of the 2 Henry, TZvravels, pp. 176-179, 

Cherokee,” Wineteenth Annual Report quoted by J. Mooney, of. cit. pp. 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 457 sq. 
Part i. (Washington, 1900) pp. 294- 3 C, Sapper, ‘‘ Die Gebrauche und 
296. Compare zd., pp. 456-458; religidsen Anschauungen der Kekchi- 
J. Adair, story of the American Indianer,” Internationales Archiv ftir 
Lndians (London, 1775), pp. 237 sg- LEthnographie, vil. (1895) p. 204. 


Ceremonies 
observed in 
Kiziba at 
the killing 
of a snake. 


Ceremonies 
observed 
by the 
North 
American 
Indians 
and others 
at the 
killing of 

a wolf. 


PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


220 


the house of the woman who killed the serpent. Next he 
proceeds to the fields, where all the women of the village 
have collected their hoes. These he purifies by dipping 
them in the fluid and then twirling them about so as to 
make the drops of water fly off. From that moment the 
danger incurred by the slaughter of the reptile is averted. 
The spirit of the serpent is appeased, and the women may 
resume their usual labours in the fields.’ 

When the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia have 
slain a wolf they lay the carcase on a blanket and take out 
the heart, of which every person who helped to kill the beast 
must eat four morsels. Then they wail over the body, saying, 
“Woe! our great friend!” After that they cover the carcase 
with a blanket and bury it. A bow or gun that killed a wolf 
is regarded as unlucky, and the owner gives it away. These 
Indians believe that the slaying of a wolf produces a scarcity 
of game.” When the Tinneh Indians of Central Alaska have 
killed a wolf or a wolverine, the carcase is brought into the 
camp or village with great pomp. The people go forth to 
meet it, saying, “The chief is coming.” Then the body is 
carried into a hut and propped up in a sitting posture; and 
the medicine-man spreads before it a copious banquet, to 
which every family in the village has contributed of its best. 
When the dead animal is supposed to have satisfied his 
hunger, the men consume the remains of the feast, but no 
woman is allowed to participate in what has been thus offered 
to the wolf or the wolverine. No ordinary Cherokee dares 
to kill a wolf, if he can possibly help it ; for he believes that 
the kindred of the slain beast would surely avenge its death, 
and that the weapon with which the deed had been done 
would be quite useless for the future, unless it were cleaned 
and exorcised by a medicine-man. However, certain persons 
who know the proper rites of atonement for such a crime 
can kill wolves with impunity, and they are sometimes hired 
to do so by people who have suffered from the raids of the 


1H. Rehse, Azztba, Land und 
Leute (Stuttgart, 1910), pp. 130 sg. 


1896). 


4 Fr. Boas, in Eleventh Report on 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
pp: 9 sg. (separate reprint from the 
Report of the British Association for 


3 Rev. J. Jetté, ‘On the Medicine- 
men of the Ten’a,” /ournal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute, xxxvii. 


(1907) p. 158. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 221 


wolves on their cattle or fish-traps. The professional wolf- 
killer prays to the animal whom he has bereaved of life, and 
seeks to avert the vengeance of the other wolves by laying 
the blame of the slaughter on the people of another settle- 
ment. To purify the gun which has perpetrated the murder, 
he unscrews the barrel, inserts into it seven small sour-wood 
rods which have been heated in the fire, and then allows the 
barrel and its contents to lie in a running stream till morning." 
When the Chuckchees of north-eastern Siberia have killed a 
wolf, they hold a festival, at which they cry, “ Wolf, be not 
angry with us. It was not we who killed you, it was the 
Russians who destroyed you.”” In ancient Athens any man 
who killed a wolf had to bury it by subscription.’ 

In Jebel-Nuba, adistrict of the eastern Sudan, it is forbidden 
to touch the nests or remove the young of a species of black 
birds, resembling our blackbirds, because the people believe that 
the parent birds would avenge the wrong by causing a stormy 
wind to blow, which would destroy the harvest.* Some of 
the Sudanese negroes of Upper Egypt regard the great black 
raven (Corvus umbrinus) as their uncle and exact pecuniary 
compensation or blood-money from any one who has been 
so rash as to slay their sable relative. Having satisfied their 
scruples on that head, they give the bird a solemn burial, 
carrying the corpse to the graveyard on a bier with flags and 
shouts of Za zl Allah, just as if they were interring one ot 
their kinsfolk.2 The Palenques of South America are very 
careful to spare harmless animals which are not good for food ; 
because they believe that any injury inflicted on such creatures 
would entail the sickness or death of their own children.® 

But the savage clearly cannot afford to spare all animals. 
He must either eat some of them or starve, and when the 
question thus comes to be whether he or the animal must 


1 J. Mooney, ‘‘Myths of the du Djebel- Nouba,” Les ALissions 
Cherokee,” Weneteenth Annual Report Catholigues, xiv. (1882) p. 458. 


of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 5 C, B. Klunzinger, Upper Egypt 
4 i; eee for 


Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 265. 

27. de Pauly, Description Ethno- 
graphique des Peuples de la Russie 
(St. Petersburg, 1862), Peuples de la 
Sibérie Orzentale, p. 7. 

$ Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, 
Argonaut. ii. 124. 

4 «Coutumes étranges des indigenes 


(London, 1878), pp. 402 sg. 


6 Caulin, Astoria Coro- graphica 
natural y evangelica dela Nueva An- 
dalucia, p. 96: * Reusan mucho matar 
gualquier animal no comestrbile que no 
sea nocibo,” etc. Here reusan appears 
to be a misprint for vecesan. 


Certain 
birds 
respected. 


Apologies 
offered by 
savages to 
the animals 
which they 
are obliged 
to kill. 


222 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


perish, he is forced to overcome his superstitious scruples 
and take the life of the beast. At the same time he does 
all he can to appease his victims and their kinsfolk. Even 
in the act of killing them he testifies his respect for them, 
endeavours to excuse or even conceal his share in procuring 
their death, and promises that their remains will be honour- 
ably treated. By thus robbing death of its terrors he hopes 
to reconcile his victims to their fate and to induce their 
fellows to come and be killed also. For example, it was a 
principle with the Kamtchatkans never to kill a land or sea 
animal without first making excuses to it and begging that 
the animal would not take it ill. Also they offered it cedar- 


nuts and so forth, to make it think that it was not a victim 


Propitia- 
tion of 
slain bears 
by Kamt- 
chatkans, 
Ostiaks, 
Koryak, 
Finns, and 
Lapps. 


but a guest at a feast. They believed that this hindered 
other animals of the same species from growing shy. For 
instance, after they had killed a bear and feasted on its 
flesh, the host would bring the bear’s head before the com- 
pany, wrap it in grass, and present it with a variety of trifles. 
Then he would lay the blame of the bear’s death on the 
Russians, and bid the beast wreak his wrath upon them. 
Also he would ask the bear to inform the other bears how 
well he had been treated, that they too might come without 
fear. Seals, sea-lions, and other animals were treated by the 
Kamtchatkans with the same ceremonious respect. More- 
over, they used to insert sprigs of a plant resembling bear’s 
wort in the mouths of the animals they killed ; after which 
they would exhort the grinning skulls to have no fear but 
to go and tell it to their fellows, that they also might come 
and be caught and so partake of this splendid hospitality. 
When the Ostiaks have hunted and killed a bear, they cut 
off its head and hang it on atree. Then they gather round 
in a circle and pay it divine honours. Next they run 
towards the carcase uttering lamentations and saying, “ Who 
killed you? It was the Russians. Who cut off your head ? 
It was a Russian axe. Who skinned you? It was a knife 
made by a Russian.” They explain, too, that the feathers 
which sped the arrow on its flight came from the wing of a 
strange bird, and that they did nothing but let the arrow go, 


1G, W. Steller, Beschredbung von dem Lande Kamtschatka (Frankfort and 
Leipsic, 1774), pp. 85, 280, 331. 


“success in future bear-hunts.* 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 223 


They do all this because they believe that the wandering 
ghost of the slain bear would attack them on the first oppor- 
tunity, if they did not thus appease it.’ Or they stuff the 
skin of the slain bear with hay; and after celebrating their 
victory with songs of mockery and insult, after spitting on 
and kicking it, they set it up on its hind legs, “and then, for 
a considerable time, they bestow on it all the veneration due 
to a guardian god.” When a party of Koryak have killed 
a bear or a woif, they skin the beast and dress one of them- 
selves in the skin. Then they dance round the skin-clad 
man, saying that it was not they who killed the animal, but 
some one else, generally a Russian. When they kill a fox 
they skin it, wrap the body in grass, and bid him go tell his 
companions how hospitably he has been received, and how 
he has received a new cloak instead of his old one® <A 
fuller account of the Koryak ceremonies is given by a more 
recent writer. He tells us that when a dead bear is brought 
to the house, the women come out to meet it dancing with 
firebrands. The bear-skin is taken off along with the head ; 
and one of the women puts on the skin, dances in it, and 
entreats the bear not to be angry, but to be kind to the 
people. At the same time they offer meat on a wooden 
platter to the dead beast, saying, “ Eat, friend.” Afterwards 
a ceremony is performed for the purpose of sending the dead 
bear, or rather his spirit, away back to his home. He is 
provided with provisions for the journey in the shape of 
puddings or reindeer-flesh packed in a grass bag. His skin 
is stuffed with grass and carried round the house, after which 
he is supposed to depart towards the rising sun. The inten- 
tion of the ceremonies is to protect the people from the 
wrath of the slain bear and his kinsfolk, and so to ensure 
The Finns used to try to 


1 Voyages au Nord (Amsterdam, 
M27) wi. 40, 4016; BP. S. Pallas, 
Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des 


Samoyedes, who nevertheless kill and 
eat it, see zbzd. pp. 54 sg. 


3 A. Bastian, Der Mensch tn der 


russischen Reichs (St. Petersburg, 1771- 
m770),0i%. 64; J. G. Georgi, Ze- 
schretbung aller Nationen des russischen 
Reichs (St. Petersburg, 1776), p. 83. 
2 A. Erman, Zvavels in Sutberia 
(London, 1848), ii. 43. For the 
veneration of the polar bear by the 


Geschichte (Leipsic, 1860), ili. 26. 

4 W. Jochelson, Zhe Koryak (Ley- 
den and New York, 1908), pp. 88 sg. 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
vol. vi., MZemotr of the American 
Museum of Natural Hirstory). 


Propitia- 
tion of 
slain bears 
by the 
North 
American 
Indians. 


CHAP. 


224 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 


persuade a slain bear that he had not been killed by them, 
but had fallen from a tree, or met his death in some other 
way ;' moreover, they held a funeral festival in his honour, 
at the close of which bards expatiated on the homage that 
had been paid to him, urging him to report to the other 
bears the high consideration with which he had been treated, 
in order that they also, following his example, might come 
and be slain.” When the Lapps had succeeded in killing a 
bear with impunity, they thanked him for not hurting them 
and for not breaking the clubs and spears which had given 
him his death wounds; and they prayed that he would not 
visit his death upon them by sending storms or in any other 
way. His flesh then furnished a feast.® 

The reverence of hunters for the bear whom they 
regularly kill and eat may thus be traced all along the 
northern region of the Old World, from Bering’s Straits 
to Lappland. It reappears in similar forms in North 
America. With the American Indians a bear hunt was 
an important event for which they prepared by long fasts 
and purgations. Before setting out they offered expiatory 
sacrifices to the souls of bears slain in previous hunts, and 
besought them to be favourable to the hunters. When a 
bear was killed the hunter lit his pipe, and putting the 
mouth of it between the bear’s lips, blew into the bowl, 
filling the beast’s mouth with smoke. Then he begged the 
bear not to be angry at having been killed, and not to 
thwart him afterwards in the chase. The carcase was 
roasted whole and eaten; not a morsel of the flesh might 
be left over. The head, painted red and blue, was hung 
on a post and addressed by orators, who heaped praise on | 
the dead beast. When men of the Bear clan in the Otawa 
tribe killed a bear, they made him a feast of his own flesh, 
and addressed him thus: “ Cherish us no grudge because we 


the bear. 


1 Max Buch, Dze Wotjaken (Stutt- 
gart, 1882), p. 139. 


2 A. Featherman, Soctal History of 


the Races of Mankind, Fourth Division, 
Dravido -Turanians, etc. (London, 
1891) p. 422. 

3 J. Scheffer, Zapponza (Frankfort, 
1673), pp. 233 sg. The Lapps ‘‘ have 
still an elaborate ceremony in hunting 


They pray and chant to his 
carcase, and for several days worship 
before eating it” (E. Rae, Zhe White 
Sea Peninsula (London, 1881), p. 276). 

4 Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle 
France (Paris, 1744); Vv. 273) sgeum 
Chateaubriand, Voyage en Amérique, 
pp. 172-181 (Paris, Michel Lévy, 
1870). 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 225 


have killed you. You have sense; you see that our children 
are hungry. They love you and wish to take you into their 
bodies. Is it not glorious to be eaten by the children 
of a chief?”1 Amongst the Nootka Indians of British 
Columbia, when a bear had been killed, it was brought in 
and seated before the head chief in an upright posture, with 
a chief’s bonnet, wrought in figures, on its head, and its fur 
powdered over with white down. A tray of provisions was 
then set before it, and it was invited by words and gestures 
to eat. After that the animal was skinned, boiled, and 
eaten.” The Assiniboins pray to the bear and offer sacri- 
fices to it of tobacco, belts, and other valuable objects. More- 
over, they hold feasts in its honour, that they may win the 
beast’s favour and live safe and sound. The bear’s head is 
often kept in camp for several days mounted in some suit- 
able position and decked with scraps of scarlet cloth, neck- 
laces, collars, and coloured feathers. They offer the pipe to 
it, and pray that they may be able to kill all the bears they 
meet, without harm to themselves, for the purpose of anoint- 
ing themselves with his fine grease and banqueting on his 
tender flesh? The Ojibways will not suffer dogs to eat the 
flesh or gnaw the bones of a bear, and they throw all the 
waste portions into the fire. They think that if the flesh 
were desecrated, they would have no luck in hunting bears 
thereafter.* A trader of the eighteenth century has described 
the endearments which a party of Ojibways lavished on a 
she-bear which he had just killed. They took her head in 
their hands, stroked it and kissed it, and begged a thousand 
pardons for her violent death ; they called her their relation 
and grandmother, and begged her not to lay the fault at 
their door, for indeed it was an Englishman who had killed 


1 Lettres édifiantes et curieuses, The Academy, 27th September 1884, 


Nouvelle Edition, vi. (Paris, 1781) p. 
171. L. H. Morgan states that the 
names of the Otawa totem clans had 
not been obtained (Azcient Soctety, 
London, 1877, p. 167). From the 
Lettres édifiantes, vi. 168-171, he might 
have learned the names of the Hare, 
Carp, and Bear clans, to which may 
be added the Gull clan, as I learn from 
an extract from Zhe Canadian Journal 
(Toronto) for March 1858, quoted in 


Piave VOL. II 


p- 203. 

2 A Narrative of the Adventures 
and Sufferings of John R. Jewitt, p. 
117 (Middletown, 1820), p. 133 (Edin- 
burgh, 1824). 

3 De Smet, Western Missions and 
Missionaries (New York, 1863), p. 139. 

4 A. P. Reid, ‘‘ Religious Belief of 
the Ojibois Indians,” /ournal of the 
Anthropological Institute, il. (1874) 
jo UTNE 


Q 


PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


226 


her. Having severed the head from the body, they adorned 
it with all the trinkets they could muster and set it up on a 
scaffold in the lodge. Next day pipes were lit and tobacco 
smoke blown into the nostrils of the dead bear, and the 
trader was invited to pay this mark of respect to the animal 
as an atonement for having taken her life. Before they 
feasted on the bear’s flesh, an orator made a speech in which 
he deplored the sad necessity under which they laboured of 
destroying their friends the bears ; for how otherwise could 
they subsist?! Some of the Indians of the Queen Char- 
lotte Islands, off the north-western coast of America, used 
to mark the skins of bears, otters, and other animals with 
four red crosses in a line, by way of propitiating the spirit 
of the beast they had killed.2, When the Thompson Indians 
of British Columbia were about to hunt bears, they would 
sometimes address the animal and ask it to come and be 
shot. They prayed the grisly bear not to be angry with the 
hunter, nor to fight him, but rather to have pity on him and 
to deliver himself up to his mercies. The man who intended 
to hunt the grisly bear had to be chaste for some time before 
he set out on his dangerous adventure. When he had killed 
a bear, he and his companions painted their faces in alternate 
perpendicular stripes of black and red, and sang the bear | 
song. Sometimes the hunter also prayed, thanking the beast 
for letting itself be killed so easily, and begging that its 
mate might share the same fate. After they had eaten the | 
flesh of the bear’s head, they tied the skull to the top of a _ 
small tree, as high as they could reach, and left it there. 
Having done so, they painted their faces with alternate stripes | 
of red and black as before ; for if they failed to observe this 
ceremony, the bears would be offended, and the hunters @ 
would not be able to kill any more. To place the heads of ¥ 


bears or any large beasts on trees or stones was a mark of @ 


respect to the animals.? The Lillooet and Shuswap Indians — 


1 Henry’s Travels, pp. 143-145, on certain implements, weapons, etc., ~ 


quoted by J. Mooney, ‘‘ Myths of the 
Cherokee,” WVineteenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Part i. (Washington, 1900), pp. 446 


2 


A. Mackenzie, ‘‘ Descriptive notes 


from Graham Island, Queen Charlotte 
Islands, B.C.,” Zvansactions of the | 


Royal Society of Canada, ix. (1891) © | 


section ii. p. 58. 
3 James Teit, Zhe Thompson Indians | 
of British Columbia, p. 347 (The Jesup — 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 


227 


of the same region used to observe similar ceremonies at the 
killing of a bear.' 

A like respect is testified for other dangerous creatures 
by the hunters who regularly trap and kill them. When 
Caffre hunters are in the act of showering spears on an 
elephant, they call out, “ Don’t kill us, great captain ; don’t 
strike or tread upon us, mighty chief.”* When he is dead 
they make their excuses to him, pretending that his death 
was a pure accident. As a mark of respect they bury his 
trunk with much solemn ceremony; for they say that 
“the elephant is a great lord; his trunk is his hand.” ? 
Before the Amaxosa Caffres attack an elephant they shout 
to the animal and beg him to pardon them for the slaughter 
they are about to perpetrate, professing great submission to 
his person and explaining clearly the need they have of his 
tusks to enable them to procure beads and supply their 
wants. When they have killed him they bury in the ground, 
along with the end of his trunk, a few of the articles they 
have obtained for the ivory, thus hoping to avert some 
mishap that would otherwise befall them.4 Among the 
Wanyamwezi of Central Africa, when hunters have killed 
an elephant, they bury his legs on the spot where he fell 
and then cover the place with stones. The burial is sup- 
posed to appease the spirit of the dead elephant and to 
ensure the success of the hunters in future undertakings. 
When the Baganda have killed an elephant, they extract 
the nerve from the tusk and bury it, taking care to mark 
the place of the burial. For they think that the ghost of 
the dead elephant attaches itself to the nerve, and that if a 


North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the  p. 138. : 

American Museum of Natural History, 3-L. Alberti, De Kaffers aan az 
April 1900). The Thompson Indians Zuzdkust van Afrika (Amsterdam, 
used to be known as the Couteau or 1810), p. 95. Alberti’s information 


Knife Indians. 

1 J. Teit, The Lillooet Indians (Ley- 
den and New York, 1906), p. 279 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
Memoir of the American Museum of 
Natural History); ztd@., The Shuswap 
(Leyden and New York, 1909), pp. 
602 sg. (The Jesup North Pacific Ex- 
pedition). 

2 Stephen Kay, Zravels and Re- 
searches in Caffraria (London, 1833), 


is repeated by H. Lichtenstein (ezsezz 
im stidlichen Afrika, Berlin, 1811- 
1812, i. 412) and by Cowper Rose 
(Four Years in Southern Africa, Lon- 
don, 1829, p. 155). The burial of the 
trunk is also mentioned by Kay, /.c. 

4 J. Shooter, Zhe Kajfirs of Natal 
(London, 1857), p. 215. 

5 Fr. Stuhlmann, AZit Emin Pascha 
ims Herz von Afrika (Berlin, 1894), 
p. 87. 


Propitia- 
tion of slain 
elephants 
in Africa. 


Propitia- 
tion of lions 
in Africa. 


Propitia- 
tion of slain 
leopards in 
Africa. 


228 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


hunter were to step over the nerve, the elephant’s ghost 
would cause him to be killed by an elephant the next time 
he went forth to hunt the beasts." 

In Latuka, a district of the Upper Nile, lions are much 
respected, and are only killed when they prove very trouble- 
some and dangerous. There used to be in this region a 
Lion-chief, as he was called, who professed to have all lions 
under his control, and who actually kept several tame lions 
about his house. Whenever a lion was accidentally caught | 
in a trap near the station of the Egyptian Government, this _ 
man would regularly present himself and demand the release 
of the noble animal. The favour was always granted, and 
planks were let down into the pit to enable the imprisoned — 
lion to clamber up and escape.2 Amongst some tribes of | 
Eastern Africa, when a lion is killed, the carcase is brought 
before the king, who does homage to it by prostrating himself | 
on the ground and rubbing his face on the muzzle of the beast.* 

In some parts of Western Africa if a negro kills a_ 
leopard he is bound fast and brought before the chiefs for 
having killed one of their peers. The man defends himself 
on the plea that the leopard is chief of the forest and there- 
fore a stranger. He is then set at liberty and rewarded. 
But the dead leopard, adorned with a chief’s bonnet, is set 
up in the village, where nightly dances are held in its 
honour.* The leopard is held in great veneration by the 
Igaras of the Niger. They call it “father” (a¢fa), though 
they do not object to kill the animal in the chase. When a_ 
dead leopard is brought into Idah, the capital, it is dressed 
up in white and borne on the heads of four men from house 
to house, amidst singing and beating of drums. Each house- 
holder gives a present of cowries or cloth to the owner of 
the leopard, and at last the carcase is buried with great cere- 
mony and firing of guns. Should these rites be neglected, 
the people imagine that the spirit of the dead leopard will 
punish them. Among the Ewe negroes of Togoland § 


1 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Saganda and Brussels, 1887), ii. 298 sg., 305. 
(London, 1911), p. 447 4 A, Bastian, Die deutsche Ex- | 
2 Fr. Stuhlmann, At Emin Pascha pedition an der Loango-Kviste (Jena, 
?ns Herz von Afrika (Berlin, 1894), p. 1874-1875), li. 243. 
785. 5 A, F. Mockler-Ferryman, Up the 
3 J. Becker, Za Vie en Afrique (Paris Nzger (London, 1892), p. 309. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 229 


“hunters who had killed buffaloes, leopards, or wild black 
swine observed in Agome for nine days the same, or very 
similar, ceremonies as are customary at the death of a 
woman, in order to prevent the soul of the slain beasts 
from avenging itself on them, a custom which is the less 
surprising because the mourning customs themselves are 
based on the fear of spirits, namely the spirits of the dead, 
The natives ascribe to the souls of these dangerous animals 
the power of killing the man who shot them, or of so blind- 
ing and enchanting him that in the chase he confuses animals 
and men and so incurs serious mishaps.” The quaint cere- 
monies which these negroes observe for the purpose of 
avoiding the imaginary perils have been described by a 
German missionary. The leopard and the wild buffalo, 
he tells us, are believed to be animated by malignant 
souls which not only do the hunter a mischief while 
they still occupy the bodies of the living creatures, but 
even after death, in their disembodied state, continue to 
haunt and plague their slayer, sometimes egging on a 
serpent or a leopard to sting or bite him, sometimes blind- 
ing him so that he shoots a man for an animal, or cannot 
find his way home and goes groping about in the wilder- 
ness till he perishes miserably. If a man thus blinded 
and crazed should make his way back to the town, he is 
banished for life and sold into slavery ; his house and planta- 
tion are razed to the ground; and his nearest relations 
are often given as bail into the hands of strangers. It 
is therefore a very serious matter indeed for a hunter to 
incur the wrath of a leopard’s ghost, and it is quite natural 
that he should take all reasonable measures to guard him- 
self against so threatening a calamity. Hence as soon as 
he has killed a leopard, he hurries back to the town and 
brings word of it to the other men who have slain leopards 
on former occasions, and who now assist him with their 
advice and experience. The first thing they do is to put a 
stalk of grass in his mouth as a sign that he may not speak. 


1 Lieut. Herold, ‘‘ Bericht betreffend  Gelehrten aus den deutschen Schutz- 
religidse Anschauungen und Gebrauche —_gedzeten, v. Heft 4 (Berlin, 1892), p. 
der deutschen Ewe-Neger,” JZ/thetl- 156. 
ungen von Forschungsreisenden und 


230 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


Then they repair to the place where the leopard lies dead in 
the forest, and inform the animal of the reasons why he has 
been shot, namely, because he has stolen sheep, fowls, and 
pigs, and has killed men. Next the drums are beaten and 
the people assemble in the open square of the town. The 
dead leopard meanwhile has been fastened to a pole, and 
with his eyes bandaged and his face upturned to heaven, is 
solemnly carried about the town and set down before the 
houses of the principal folk, who reward the hero and his 
comrades with presents. After the procession has gone the 
round, the leopard is tied to a tree, and the hunters paint the 
slayer with red and white so as to make him look like a 
leopard, except that the leopard’s spots are only painted on 
the left side of his body; a basket painted in the same 
colours is clapped on his head, and magical strings of 
cowries are tied round his hands and feet. Thus attired, 
he and the other heroes who have killed leopards crawl 
about on all fours and roar like leopards when anybody 
comes near them. In his left hand every man grasps a bow | 
for the slaughter of innocent cocks and hens, and with his 
right he grabbles about in the earth like an animal seeking 
what it may devour. None of them may speak, they may 
only roar, but they do that in a masterly manner. At the 
head of this imposing procession go two men armed with 
a thick cudgel and a spear respectively; and the rear is — 
brought up by a third man, who is privileged to walk © 
upright on his hind legs. This favoured person is the cook, 
whose office it is to dress the fowls which the human leopards 
purloin in the course of their pilgrimage; indeed for nine- 
teen days they are privileged, no doubt in their character of 
leopards, to rob the hen-roosts with impunity. In the after- — 
noon the carcase of the leopard is taken down, skinned, and 
cut up. The titbits are sent to the chief and the other ~ 
dignitaries, who eat them ; and the remainder of the flesh is — 
consumed by the common folk. The skin, the teeth, the © 
head, and the claws belong to the hunter who killed the — 
beast. But for nineteen days thereafter the slayer of the — 
leopard must retain his peculiar costume: he may eat only” 
warm-blooded animals and food seasoned with salt: he may | 
not eat anything seasoned with pepper; and on no account i 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 231 


may he taste fish, because they are cold-blooded creatures. 
A general feast, of which all the male inhabitants of the 
town partake, winds up the proceedings at the close of the 
nineteen days. A feature of the festivities is a dramatic 
representation of a leopard-hunt, which is carried out in 
every detail amid great excitement. If only all these cere- 
monies are strictly observed, the hunter need have no fear 
at all of being plagued by the leopard’s ghost.’ 

The Baganda greatly fear the ghosts of buffaloes which 
they have killed, and they always appease these dangerous 
spirits. On no account will they bring the head of a slain 
buffalo into a village or into a garden of plantains: they 
always eat the flesh of the head in the open country. After- 
wards they place the skull in a small hut built for the pur- 
pose, where they pour out beer as an offering and pray to the 
ghost to stay where he is and not to harm them.” Oddly 
enough the Baganda also dread the ghosts of sheep, which 
they believe would haunt and kill the butcher if they saw 
him give the fatal stroke. Hence when a man is about 
to slaughter a sheep, he gets another man to divert its atten- 
tion, and coming up behind the unsuspecting animal he stuns 
it with the blow of an axe-handle ; then, before it can recover 
consciousness, he adroitly cuts its throat. In this way the 
ghost of the sheep is bamboozled and will not haunt the 
butcher. Moreover, when a sheep dies in a house, the house- 
wife may not say bluntly to her husband, “ The sheep is 
dead,” or its ghost, touched to the quick, would certainly 
make her fall ill and might even kill her. She must put 
a finer point on the painful truth by saying, “I am unable 
to untie such and such a sheep.” Her husband understands 
her, but the ghost of the animal does not, or at all events he 
does not resent so delicate an allusion to its melancholy 
decease. Even the ghost of a fowl may haunt a Muganda 


1H. Spieth, ‘‘Jagdgebrauche in 
Avatime,” JZittetlungen der geograph- 
ischen Gesellschaft 2u Jena, ix. (1890) 
pp: 18-20. Compare H. Klose, Zogo 
unter deutscher Flagge (Berlin, 1899), 
pp- 145-147. The ceremonies observed 
after the slaughter of a wild buffalo are 
of the same general character with varia- 
tions in detail. 


2 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Further Notes 
on the Manners and Customs of the 
Baganda,” /ournal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxii. (1902) p. 543 
td., The Baganda (London, 1911), pp. 
289, 448. 

3 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda 
(London, 1911), pp. 288 sg. Another 
curious notion which the Baganda have 


Propitia- 
tion of slain 
buffaloes 
and sheep 
in Uganda. 


Propitia- 
tion of dead 
whales 
among the 
Koryak. 


232 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS © CHAP. 


woman and make her ill, if she has accidentally killed it with 
her hoe and flung away the body in the long grass instead of 
carrying it to her husband and confessing her fault. 
Another formidable beast whose life the savage hunter 
takes with joy, yet with fear and trembling, is the whale. 
After the slaughter of a whale the maritime Koryak of 
north-eastern Siberia hold a communal festival, the essential 
part of which “is based on the conception that the whale 
killed has come on a visit to the village; that it is staying 
for some time, during which it is treated with great respect ; 
that it then returns to the sea to repeat its visit the following 
year ; that it will induce its relatives to come along, telling 
them of the hospitable reception that has been accorded to it. 
According to the Koryak ideas, the whales, like all other 
animals, constitute one tribe, or rather family, of related 
individuals, who live in villages like the Koryak. They 
avenge the murder of one of their number, and are grateful 
for kindnesses that they may have received.”? As large 
whales are now rarely seen in the bays of the Okhotsk Sea, 
the Koryak at the present time generally celebrate the 
festival for a white whale. One such festival was witnessed 
by Mr. W. Jochelson, at the village of Kuel, in October 1900. 
A white whale had been caught in the nets, and as the sea 
was partially frozen, the carcase had to be brought ashore in 
a sledge. When it was seen nearing the beach,a number of 
women, arrayed in their long embroidered dancing-coats, 
went forth to meet and welcome it, carrying lighted fire- 
brands in their hands. To carry burning fire-brands from 
the hearth is the ancient Koryak fashion of greeting an 
honoured guest. Strictly speaking, the women who go forth 
to welcome a whale to the house should wear masks of sedge- 
grass on their faces as well as dancing-coats on their bodies, 
and should carry sacrificial alder branches as well as fire- 


about sheep is that they give health to 
cattle and prevent them from being 
struck by lightning. Hence a sheep 
is often herded with cows to serve as 
a sort of lightning-conductor. See 
J. Roscoe, of. cet. p. 421. 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, of. ctt. pp. 423 
sg. Further, ‘if a man’s dog died in 
the house, his wife dared not touch it, 


because she feared its ghost ; she would 
call her husband to take it away” (of. 
czt. p. 425). 


2 W. Jochelson, Zhe Koryak (Ley- 
den and New York, 1908), p. 66 (Zhe 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. vi., 
Memotr of the American Museum of 
Natural History). 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 233 


brands in their hands, but on the present occasion the women 
dispensed with the use of masks. They danced, shaking 
their heads, moving their shoulders, and swinging their whole 
bodies with arms outstretched, now squatting, now rising and 
singing, “ Ah! a guest has come.” In spite of the cold and the 
wind the sweat dripped from them, so violently did they dance, 
and they sang and screamed till they were hoarse. When the 
sledge with its burden had reached the shore, one of the women 
pronounced an incantation over the whale’s head, and then 
thrust alder branches and sacrificial grass into its mouth. 
Next they muffled its head in a hood, apparently to prevent 
the creature from witnessing the painful spectacle of its own 
dissection. After that the men cut up the carcase, and the 
women collected the blood in pails. Two seals, which 
had also been killed, were included in the festivities which 
followed. The heads of all three animals were cut off and 
placed on the roof of the house. Next day the festival 
began. In the morning the women plaited travelling bags 
of grass for the use of the whale, and made grass masks. 
In the evening, the people having assembled in a large 
underground house, some boiled pieces of the white whale 
were placed in a grass bag and set before a wooden image 
of a white whale, so that the animal, or its departed spirit, 
was thus apparently supposed to be regaled with portions of 
its own body ; for the white whale and the seals were treated 
as honoured guests at the banquet. To keep up the pretence, 
the people were silent or spoke only in whispers for fear of 
wakening the guests before the time. At last the prepara- 
tions were complete: fresh faggots piled on the hearth sent 
up a blaze, illumining with an unsteady light the smoke- 
blackened walls of the vast underground dwelling, which a 
moment before had been shrouded in darkness; and the 
long silence was broken by the joyful cries of the women, 
“Here dear guests have come!” “Visit us often!” “When 
you go back to the sea, tell your friends to call on us also, 
we will prepare just as nice food for them as for you.” With 
these words they pointed to puddings set out temptingly on 
the boards. Next the host took a piece of the fat of the white 
whale and threw it into the fire, saying, “ We are burning it 
in the fire for thee!” Then he went to the domestic shrine, 


234 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


placed lumps of fat before the rude effigies of the guardian 
spirits, and smeared fat on their mouths. ‘The appetites of the 
higher powers having thus been satisfied, the people set to 
and partook of the good things provided for them, including 
the flesh of the white whale and the seals. Lastly, two old 
men practised divination by means of the shoulder-blade of 
a seal to discover whether the white whale would go back to 
the sea and call his fellows to come and be caught like him- 
self. In order to extract this information from the bone 
burning coals were piled on it, and the resulting cracks were 
carefully scrutinised. To the delight of all present the omens 
proved favourable: a long transverse crack indicated the sea 
to which the spirit of the white whale would soon depart. 
Four days later the departure actually took place. It was 
a bright sunshiny wintry morning: the frost was keen ; 
and for more than a mile seaward the beach was covered 
with blocks of ice. In the great underground dwelling, 
where the feast had been held, the hearth had been turned 
into something like an altar. On it lay the heads of 
the white whale and the seals, and beside them travelling- 
bags of grass filled with puddings, which the souls of the 
animals were to take with them on their long journey. 
Beside the hearth knelt two women, their faces covered with 
grass masks and their heads bent over the bags, mumbling 
an incantation. The sunlight streamed down on them 
through the smoke-hole overhead, but spread only a dim 
twilight through the remoter recesses of the vast subterranean 
chamber. The masks worn by the women were intended to 
guard them against the spirit of the white whale, which was 
supposed to be hovering invisible in the air. The incanta- 
tion over, the women rose from their knees and doffed their 
masks. A careful examination of a pudding, which had ~ 
been offered in sacrifice to the white whale, now revealed 
the joyful intelligence that the spirit of the whale had 
accepted the sacrifice and was about to return to the sea. 
All that remained, therefore, to do was to speed him on his 
way. For that purpose two men ascended the roof, let down 
thongs through the smoke-hole, and hauled up the heads of 
the white whale and of the seals together with the travelling- 
bags of provisions. That concluded the despatch of the 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 235 


souls of the dead animals to their home in the great 
waters." 

When the inhabitants of the Isle of St. Mary, to the 
north of Madagascar, go a-whaling, they single out the young 
whales for attack and “humbly beg the mother’s pardon, 
stating the necessity that drives them to kill her progeny, 
and requesting that she will be pleased to go below while 
the deed is doing, that her maternal feelings may not be 
outraged by witnessing what must cause her so much un- 
easiness.”* An Ajumba hunter having killed a female 
hippopotamus on Lake Azyingo in West Africa, the animal 
was decapitated and its quarters and bowels removed. Then 
the hunter, naked, stepped into the hollow of the ribs, and 
kneeling down in the bloody pool washed his whole body 
with the blood and excretions of the animal, while he 
prayed to the soul of the hippopotamus not to bear him a 
grudge for having killed her and so blighted her hopes of 
future maternity ; and he further entreated the ghost not to 
stir up other hippopotamuses to avenge her death by butting 
at and capsizing his canoe.* The ounce, a leopard-like 
creature, is dreaded for its depredations by the Indians of 
Brazil. When they have caught one of these animals in a 
snare, they kill it and carry the body home to the village. 
There the women deck the carcase with feathers of many 
colours, put bracelets on its legs, and weep over it, saying, 
“T pray thee not to take vengeance on our little ones for 
having been caught and killed through thine own ignorance. 
For it was not we who deceived thee, it was thyself. Our 
husbands only set the trap to catch animals that are good to 
eat: they never thought to take thee in it. Therefore, let 
not thy soul counsel thy fellows to avenge thy death on our 
little ones!” * When the Yuracares Indians of Bolivia have 
killed great apes in their tropical forests, they bring the bodies 
home, set them out in a row on palm leaves with their heads 


1 W. Jochelson, Zhe Koryak (Ley- Africa, Arabia, and Madagascar (Lon- 
den and New York, 1908), pp. 66-76 don, 1833), i. 170. 


(Zhe Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 3 Rev. R. H. Nassau, Fetzchism in 
vol. vi., Memoir of the American West Africa (London, 1904), p. 204. 
Museum of Natural History). 4 A. Thevet, La Cosmographie Uni- 


* Captain W. F. W. Owen, Warra-  verselle (Paris, 1575), ii. 936 [970] 
tive of Voyages to explore the Shores of sq. 


Propitia- 
tion of 
whales, 
hippo- 
potamuses, 
ounces, 
and apes. 


Propitia- 
tion of dead 
eagles. 


Deceiving 
the ghosts 
of spiders. 


236 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


all looking one way, sprinkle them with chicha, and say, 
“We love you, since we have brought you home.” They 
imagine that the performance of this ceremony is very grati- 
fying to the other apes in the woods.’ Before they leave a 
temporary camp in the forest, where they have killed a 
tapir and dried the meat on a babracot, the Indians of 
Guiana invariably destroy this babracot, saying that should 
a tapir passing that way find traces of the slaughter of one 
of his kind, he would come by night on the next occasion 
when Indians slept at that place, and, taking a man, would 
babracot him in revenge.” 

When a Blackfoot Indian has caught eagles in a trap 
and killed them, he takes them home to a special lodge, 
called the eagles’ lodge, which has been prepared for their 
reception outside of the camp. Here he sets the birds in 
a row on the ground, and propping up their heads on a 
stick, puts a piece of dried meat in each of their mouths 
in order that the spirits of the dead eagles may go and tell 
the other eagles how well they are being treated by the 
Indians.’ So when Indian hunters of the Orinoco region 
have killed an animal, they open its mouth and pour into 
it a few drops of the liquor they generally carry with them, 
in order that the soul of the dead beast may inform its 
fellows of the welcome it has met with, and that they too, 
cheered by the prospect of the same kind reception, may 
come with alacrity to be killed.* A Cherokee hunter who 
has killed an eagle stands over the dead bird and prays it 
not to avenge itself on his tribe, because it is not he but a 
Spaniard who has done the cruel deed.’ When a Teton 
Indian is on a journey and he meets a grey spider or a 
spider with yellow legs, he kills it, because some evil would 
befall him if he did not. But he is very careful not to let 
the spider know that he kills it, for if the spider knew, his 
soul would go and tell the other spiders, and one of them 


1 A. d’Orbigny, Voyage dans l’?Amé natural y evangelica dela Nueva Anda- 
rique Méridionale, iii. (Parisand Stras- dlucta Guayana y Vertientes del Rio 


burg, 1844) p. 202. Orinoco (1779), Pp. 97- 
2 E. F. im Thurn, Among the Indians 
of Guiana (London, 1883), p. 352. 5 J. Mooney, ‘‘ Myths of the Chero- 
3G. B. Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge kee,” Nineteenth Annual Report of the 
Tales (London, 1893), p. 240. Bureau of American Ethnology, Part i. 


4 A. Caulin, Wistoréa Coro-graphica (Washington, 1900) p. 282. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 237 


would be sure to avenge the death of his relation. So in 
crushing the insect, the Indian says, “O Grandfather Spider, 
the Thunder-beings kill you.” And the spider is crushed at 
once and believes what is told him. His soul probably runs 
and tells the other spiders that the Thunder-beings have 
killed him ; but no harm comes of that. For what can grey 
or yellow-legged spiders do to the Thunder-beings ?' 

But it is not merely dangerous creatures with whom the 
savage desires to keep on good terms. It is true that the 
respect which he pays to wild beasts is in some measure 
proportioned to their strength and ferocity. Thus the 
savage Stiens of Cambodia, believing that all animals have 
souls which roam about after their death, beg an animal’s 
pardon when they kill it, lest its soul should come and 
torment them. Also they offer it sacrifices, but these 
sacrifices are proportioned to the size and strength of the 
animal. The ceremonies observed at the death of an 
elephant are conducted with much pomp and last seven 
days.” Similar distinctions are drawn by North American 
Indians. “The bear, the buffalo, and the beaver are 
manidos [divinities] which furnish food. The bear is for- 
midable, and good to eat. They render ceremonies to him, 
begging him to allow himself to be eaten, although they 
know he has no fancy for it. We kill you, but you are not 
annihilated. His head and paws are objects of homage... . 
Other animals are treated similarly from similar reasons. 
... Many of the animal manidos, not being dangerous, 
are often treated with contempt—the terrapin, the weasel, 
polecat, etc.”* The distinction is instructive. Animals 
which are feared, or are good to eat, or both, are treated 
with ceremonious respect ; those which are neither formid- 
able nor good to eat are despised. We have had examples 
of reverence paid to animals which are both feared and 
eaten. It remains to prove that similar respect is shewn 


1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘Teton Folk- Parts of /ndo-China (London, 1864), 
lore Notes,” Journal of American Folk- i. 252; J. Moura, Le Royaume du 
lore, ii. (1889) p. 134; za@., ““A Study Camdbodge (Paris, 1883), i. 422. 
of Siouan Cults,” Aleventh Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 3-H. R. Schoolcraft, Zazan Tribes 
(Washington, 1894), p. 479. of the United States (Philadelphia, 

2 H. Mouhot, 7vavels in the Central 1853-1856), v. 420. 


The cere- 
monies of 
propitia- 
tion offered 
to slain 
animals 
vary with 
the more 
or less 
dangerous 
character 
of the 
creature. 


Animals 
which, 
without 
being 
feared, are 
valued for 
their flesh 
or their 
skin, are 
also treated 
with 
respect. 


Respect 
shewn to 
dead 
sables. 


Bones of 
sables and 
beavers 
kept out of 
reach of 
dogs, lest 
the spirits 
of the dead 
animals 
should be 
offended. 


238 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP, 


to animals which, without being feared, are either eaten or 
valued for their skins. 

When Siberian sable-hunters have caught a sable, no 
one is allowed to see it, and they think that if good or evil 
be spoken of the captured sable no more sables will be 
caught. A hunter has been known to express his belief 
that the sables could hear what was said of them as far off 
as Moscow. He said that the chief reason why the sable 
hunt was now so unproductive was that some live sables had 
been sent to Moscow. There they had been viewed with 
astonishment as strange animals, and the sables cannot abide 
that. Another, though minor, cause of the diminished take 
of sables was, he alleged, that the world is now much worse 
than it used to be, so that nowadays a hunter will sometimes 
hide the sable which he has got instead of putting it into 
the common stock. This also, said he, the sables cannot 
abide! A Russian traveller happening once to enter a 
Gilyak hut in the absence of the owner, observed a freshly 
killed sable hanging on the wall. Seeing him look at it, the 
housewife in consternation hastened to muffle the animal in 
a fur cap, after which it was taken down, wrapt in birch 
bark, and put away out of sight. Despite the high price he 
offered for it, the traveller’s efforts to buy the animal were 
unavailing. It was bad enough, they told him, that he, a 
stranger, had seen the dead sable in its skin, but far worse 
consequences for the future catch of sables would follow if 
they were to sell him the animal entire.” Alaskan hunters ° 
preserve the bones of sables and beavers out of reach of the 
dogs for a year and then bury them carefully, “lest the spirits 
who look after the beavers and sables should consider that 
they are regarded with contempt, and hence no more should 
be killed or trapped.”* The Shuswap Indians of British 
Columbia think that if they did not throw beaver-bones into 
the river, the beavers would not go into the traps any more, 
and that the same thing would happen were a dog to eat 
the flesh or gnaw the bone of a beaver.* Carrier Indians 


1 J. G. Gmelin, Reise durch Sibirien (London, 1870), p. 893; 7z@., in The 


(Gottingen, 1751-1752), ii. 278. Yukon Territory (London, 1898), 
2 L. von Schrenck, Reser und  p. 89. 
Forschungen im Amur-lande, ili. 564. 4 Fr. Boas, in Stxth Report on the 


3° W. Dall, Alaska and its Resources North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 239 


who have trapped martens or beavers take care to keep 
them from the dogs; for if a dog were to touch these 
animals the Indians believe that the other martens or 
beavers would not suffer themselves to be caught.' A 
missionary who fell in with an old Carrier Indian asked 
him what luck he had in the chase. “Oh, don’t speak to me 
about it,” replied the Indian ; “there are beavers in plenty. 
I caught one myself immediately after my arrival here, but 
unluckily a dog got hold of it. You know that after that 
it has been impossible for me to catch another.” “Non- 
sense,’ said the missionary; “set your traps as if nothing 
had happened, and you will see.” “That would be useless,” 
answered the Indian in a tone of despair, “quite useless. 
You don’t know the ways of the beaver. If a dog merely 
touches a beaver, all the other beavers are angry at the 
owner of the dog and always keep away from his traps.” 
It was in vain that the missionary tried to laugh or argue 
him out of his persuasion ; the man persisted in abandoning 
his snares and giving up the hunt, because, as he asserted, 
the beavers were angry with him.” A French traveller, 
observing that the Indians of Louisiana did not give the 
bones of beavers and otters to their dogs, enquired the 
reason. They told him there was a spirit in the woods who 
would tell the other beavers and otters, and that after that 
they would catch no more animals of these species.? The 
Canadian Indians were equally particular not to let their 
dogs gnaw the bones, or at least certain of the bones, of 
beavers. They took the greatest pains to collect and 
preserve these bones, and, when the beaver had been caught 
in a net, they threw them into the river. Toa Jesuit who 
argued that the beavers could not possibly know what 
became of their bones, the Indians replied, “You know 
nothing about catching beavers and yet you will be prat- 
ing about it. Before the beaver is stone dead, his soul 


92 (separate reprint from the Report of 
the British Association for 1890). 

1 A. G. Morice, ‘‘ Notes, archzo- 
logical, industrial, and sociological, on 
the Western Dénés,” Zvansactions of 
the Canadian Institute, iv. (1892-93) 
p- 108. 


2 A. G. Morice, Au pays de [Ours 
Noir, chez les sauvages de la Colombie 
Britannique (Paris and Lyons, 1897), 
pegts 


3-L. Hennepin, Description de la 
Louwéstane (Paris, 1683), pp. 97 sg. 


240 | PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


takes a turn in the hut of the man who is killing him and 
makes a careful note of what is done with his bones. If 
the bones are given to the dogs, the other beavers would 
get word of it and would not let themselves be caught. 
Whereas, if their bones are thrown into the fire or a 
river, they are quite satisfied ; and it is particularly grati- 
fying to the net which caught them.”’ Before hunting 
the beaver they offered a solemn prayer to the Great 
Beaver, and presented him with tobacco; and when the 
chase was over, an orator pronounced a funeral oration 
over the dead beavers. He praised their spirit and 
wisdom. “You will hear no more,’ said he, “the voice 
of the chieftains who commanded you and whom you 
chose from among all the warrior beavers to give you 
laws. Your language, which the medicine-men under- 
stand perfectly, will be heard no more at the bottom of 
the lake. You will fight no more battles with the otters, 
your cruel foes. No, beavers! But your skins shall serve 
to buy arms; we will carry your smoked hams to our 
children ; we will keep the dogs from eating your bones, 


which are so hard.” ? 


The elan, deer, and elk were treated by the American 
Indians with the same punctilious respect, and for the same 


1 Relations des Jésuttes, 1634, p. 24 
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). 
Nets are regarded by the Indians as 
living creatures who not only think and 
feel but also eat, speak, and marry 
wives. See F. Gabriel Sagard, Le 
Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons, p. 
256 (pp. 178 sg. of the reprint, Li- 
brairie Tross, Paris, 1865) ; S. Hearne, 
Journey to the Northern Ocean (Lon- 
don, 1795), pp- 329 sg. ; Relations des 
Jésuites, 1636, p. 109 3 zbzd. 1639, p. 
95; Charlevoix, Westoire de la Nouvelle 
Frrance (Paris, 1744), v. 225 ; Chateau- 
briand, Voyage en Amérique, pp. 140 
sqgq. The Hebrews sacrificed and 
burned incense to their nets (Habakkuk 
i. 16). Insome of the mountain villages 
of Annam the people, who are great 
hunters, sacrifice fowls, rice, incense, 
and gilt paper to their nets at the 
festival of the New Year. See Le R. P. 
Cadiére, “* Coutumes populaires de la 


vallée du Ngu6n-So’n,” Bulledin de 
?Ecole Francaise a@ Extréme- Orient, 
ii. (Hanoi, 1902) p. 381. When a 
net has caught little or nothing, the 
Ewe negroes think that it must be 
hungry ; so they call in the help of a 
priest, who commonly feeds the hungry 
net by sprinkling maize-flour and fish, 
moistened with palm oil, on its meshes. 
See G. Hiartter, ‘‘Der Fischfang im 
Evheland,” Zeztschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
XXXVili. (1906) p. 55. 


2 Chateaubriand, Voyage en Amé- 
vrigue, pp. 175, 178 (Paris, Michel 
Lévy Freres, 1870). They will not let 
the blood of beavers fall on the ground, 
or their luck in hunting them would be 
gone (elatzons des Jésuites, 1633, p. 
21). Compare the rule about not 
allowing the blood of kings to fall on 
the ground. See Zaboo and the Perils 
of the Soul, pp. 241 sgq. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS eT 2AT 


reason. Their bones might not be given to the dogs nor 
thrown into the fire, nor might their fat be dropped upon 
the fire, because the souls of the dead animals were believed 
to see what was done to their bodies and to tell it to the 
other beasts, living and dead. JHence, if their bodies were 
ill-used, the animals of that species would not allow them- 
selves to be taken, neither in this world nor in the world to 
come.. The houses of the Indians of Honduras were 
encumbered with the bones of deer, the Indians believing 
that if they threw the bones away, the other deer could not 
be taken.?, Among the Chiquites of Paraguay a sick man 
would be asked by the medicine-man whether he had not 
thrown away some of the flesh of the deer or turtle, and if 
he answered yes, the medicine-man would say, “That is 
what is killing you. The soul of the deer or turtle has 
entered into your body to avenge the wrong you did it.” ® 
Before the Tzentales of Southern Mexico and the Kekchis 
of Guatemala venture to skin a deer which they have killed, 
they lift up its head and burn copal before it as an offering ; 
otherwise a certain being named Tzultacca would be angry 
and send them no more game.* Cherokee hunters ask 
pardon of the deer they kill. If they failed to do so, they 
think that the Little Deer, the chief of the deer tribe, who 
can never die or be wounded, would track the hunter to his 
home by the blood-drops on the ground and would put the 
spirit of rheumatism into him. Sometimes the hunter, on 
starting for home, lights a fire in the trail behind him to 
prevent the Little Deer from pursuing him.’ Before they 


1 L. Hennepin, Mouwveau voyage Cun 
pats plus grand que l Europe (Utrecht, 
1698), pp. 14157.; Relationsdes Jésuztes, 
1636, p. 109; F. Gabriel Sagard, Ze 
Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons, p. 
255 (p- 178 of the reprint, Libraire 
Tross, Paris, 1865). Not quite con- 
sistently the Canadian Indians used to 
kill every elan they could overtake in 
the chase, lest any should escape to 
warn their fellows (Sagard, /.c.). 

2 A. de Herrera, General History of 
the vast Continent and Islands of 
America, translated by Capt. John 
Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iv. 142. 

3 Lettres édifiantes et curteuses, Nou- 

PRsv. VOL. IT 


velle Edition, viii. (Paris, 1781) p. 339. 

4 C. Sapper, ‘‘Die Gebrauche und 
religidsen Anschauungen der Kekchi- 
Indianer,” J/xternatzonales Archiv fur 
Ethnographie, viii. (1895) pp. 195 sg. 

5 J. Mooney, ‘‘Cherokee Theory 
and Practice of Medicine,” American 
Journal of Folk-lore, iii. (1890) pp. 
45 sqg.3 za., ‘‘Sacred Formulas of the 
Cherokees,” Seventh Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1891), pp. 320 sg., 347 ; 2d., ‘* Myths 
of the Cherokee,” WVzmeteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part i. (Washington, 1900) 
pp. 263 sg. 

R 


Deer, elk, 
and elan 
treated by 
the Ameri- 
can Indians 
with cere- 
monious 
respect. 


242 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


went out to hunt for deer, antelope, or elk the Apaches used 
to resort to sacred caves, where the medicine-men propitiated 
with prayer and sacrifice the animal gods whose progeny 
they intended to destroy... The Indians of Louisiana be- 
wailed bitterly the death of the buffaloes which they were | 
about to kill. More than two hundred of them at a time 
have been seen shedding crocodile tears over the approach- | 
ing slaughter of the animals, while they marched in solemn 
procession, headed by an old man who waved a pocket- — 
handkerchief at the end of a stick as an oriflamme, and by a 

woman who strutted proudly along, bearing on her back © 
a large kettle which had been recently abstracted from | 
the baggage of some French explorers.” The Thompson 
Indians of British Columbia cherished many superstitious 
beliefs and observed many superstitious practices in regard 
to deer. When a deer was killed, they said that the rest of 
the deer would be well pleased if the hunters butchered the 
animal nicely and cleanly. To waste venison displeased the 
animals, who after that would not allow themselves to be 
shot by the hunter. If a hunter was overburdened and had 

to leave some of the venison behind, the other deer were — 
better pleased if he hung it up on a tree than if he let it 
lie on the ground. The guts were gathered and put where 
the blood had been spilt in butchering the beast, and the | 
whole was covered up with a few fir-boughs. In laying the | 
boughs on the blood and guts the man told the deer not to 
grieve for the death of their friend and not to take it ill that 
he had left some of the body behind, for he had done his 
best to cover it. If he did not cover it, they thought the 
deer would be sorry or angry and would spoil his luck in the 
chase. When the head of a deer had to be left behind, they | 
commonly placed it on the branch of a tree, that it might 
not be contaminated by dogs and women. For the same ~ 
reason they burned the bones of the slain deer, lest they — 
should be touched by women or gnawed by dogs. And ~ 
venison was never brought into a hut by the common door, 
because that door was used by women; it was taken in 


1 J. G. Bourke, ‘‘ Religion of the 2 L. Hennepin, Description de « 
Apache Indians,” /o/k-lore, ii. (1891) la Loudsiane (Paris, 1683), pp. 80 | 
Pp. 438. Sg. 


as their elder brother. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 


243 


through a hole made in the back of the hut. No hunter 
would give a deer’s head to a man who was the first or 
second of a family, for that would make the rest of the deer 
very shy and hard to shoot. And in telling his friends of 
his bag he would generally call a buck a doe, and a doe he 
would call a fawn, and a fawn he would call a hare. This 
he did that he might not seem to the deer to brag.’ The 
Lillooet Indians of British Columbia threw the bones of 
animals, particularly those of the deer and the beaver, into 
the water, in order that the dogs should not defile or eat 
them and thereby offend the animals. When the hunter 
committed the bones to the water he generally prayed to 
the dead animal, saying, “See! I treat you respectfully. 
Nothing shall defile you. Have pity on me, so I may kill 
more of you! May I be successful in hunting and 
trapping!”* The Canadian Indians would not eat the 
embryos of the elk, unless at the close of the hunting 
season ; otherwise the mother-elks would be shy and refuse 
to be caught.’ 

Indians of the Lower Fraser River regard the porcupine 
Hence when a hunter kills one of these 
creatures he asks his elder brother’s pardon and does not eat 
of the flesh till the next day.6. The Sioux will not stick an 
awl or needle into a turtle, for they are sure that, if they were 
to do so, the turtle would punish them at some future time.° 
Some of the North American Indians believed that each sort 
of animal had its patron or genius who watched over and 
preserved it. An Indian girl having once picked up a dead 
mouse, her father snatched the little creature from her and 
tenderly caressed and fondled it. Being asked why he did 
so, he said that it was to appease the genius of mice, in 
order that he might not torment his daughter for eating the 


1 James Teit, Ze Thompson Indians 3 Relations des Jésuites, 1634, p. 


of British Columbia, pp. 346 sg. 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
Memoir of the American Museum of 


Natural History, April 1900). 


2 James Teit, Zhe Lellooet Indians 
(Leyden and New York, 1906), pp. 
281 sg. (The “Jesup North Pacific 
Expedition, Memotr of the American 
Museum of Natural History). 


26 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). 

4 Fr. Boas, in *‘ Ninth Report on 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada,” 
Report of the British Association for 
1594) PP. 459 S9- 

5 H. R. Schoolcraft, Zvzdian Tribes 
of the United States (Philadelphia, 
1853-1856), ili. 230. 


Porcu- 
pines, 
turtles, 
and mice 
treated by 
American 
Indians 
with cere- 
monious 
respect. 


Dead foxes, 
turtles, 
deer, and 
pigs treated 
with cere- 
monious 
respect. 


244 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 
mouse. With that he handed the mouse to the girl and she 
ate it.’ 


When the Koryak have killed a fox, they take the body 
home and lay it down near the fire, saying, “Let the guest 
warm himself. When he feels warm, we will free him from 
his overcoat.” So when the frozen carcase is thawed, they 
skin it and wrap long strips of grass round about it. Then 
the animal’s mouth is filled with fish-roe, and the mistress of 
the house gashes the flesh and puts more roe or dried meat 
into the gashes, making believe that the gashes are the fox’s 
pockets, which she thus fills with provisions. Then the 
carcase is carried out of the house, and the people say, “Go 
and tell your friends that it is good to visit yonder house. 
‘Instead of my old coat, they gave me a new one still warmer 
and with longer hair. I have eaten my fill, and had my 
pockets well stored. You, too, go and visit them.’” The 
natives think that if they neglected to observe this ceremonial 
they would have no luck in hunting foxes.” When a Ewe 
hunter of Togoland has killed an antelope of a particular 
kind (Azitzlope leucoryx), he erects an enclosure of branches, 
within which he places the lower jawbones of all the animals 
he has shot. Then he pours palm-wine and sprinkles meal 
on the bones, saying, “Ye lower jawbones of beasts, ye are 
now come home. Here is food, here is drink. Therefore 
lead your comrades (that is, the living beasts of the forest) 
hither also.”* In the Timor-laut islands of the Indian 
Archipelago the skulls of all the turtles which a fisherman 
has caught are hung up under his house. Before he goes 
out to catch another, he addresses himself to the skull of 
the last turtle that he killed, and having inserted betel 
between its jaws, he prays the spirit of the dead animal 
to entice its kinsfolk in the sea to come and be caught.* 
In the Poso district of central Celebes hunters keep the 
jawbones of deer and wild pigs which they have killed and 
hang them up in their houses near the fire. Then they say 


1 Charlevoix, A7stozre de la Nou- 
velle France (Paris, 1744), v. 443. 


American Museum of Natural History). 
3 J. Spieth, Die Ewe - Stamme 


2 W. Bogaras, Zhe  Chuckchee 
(Leyden and New York, 1904-1909), 
p- 409 (Zhe Jesup North Pacific 
Expedition, vol. vii., Memoir of the 


(Berlin, 1906), pp. 389 sg. 

4 J. A. Jacobsen, Resex zu die 
Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres (Berlin, 
1896), p. 234. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 245 


to the jawbones, “ Ye cry after your comrades, that your 
grandfathers, or nephews, or children may not go away.” 
Their notion is that the souls of the dead deer and pigs 
tarry near their jawbones and attract the souls of living 
deer and pigs, which are thus drawn into the toils of the 
hunter.’ Thus in all these cases the wily savage employs 
dead animals as decoys to lure living animals to their 
doom. 

The Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco love to hunt 
the ostrich, but when they have killed one of these 
_ birds and are bringing home the carcase to the village, 
they take steps to outwit the resentful ghost of their 
victim. They think that when the first natural shock of 
death is passed, the ghost of the ostrich pulls himself 
together and makes after his body. Acting on this sage 
calculation, the Indians pluck feathers from the breast of 
the bird and strew them at intervals along the track. At 
every bunch of feathers the ghost stops to consider, “ Is 
this the whole of my body or only a part of it?” The 
doubt gives him pause, and when at last he has made up 
his mind fully at all the bunches, and has further wasted 
valuable time by the zigzag course which he invariably 
pursues in going from one to another, the hunters are safe 
at home, and the bilked ghost may stalk in vain round 
about the village, which he is too timid to enter.” 

The Esquimaux of the Hudson Bay region believe that 
the reindeer are controlled by a great spirit who resides in a 
large cave near the end of Cape Chidley. The outward form 
of the spirit is that of a huge white bear. He obtains and 
controls the spirit of every reindeer that is slain or dies, and 
it depends on his good will whether the people shall have a 
supply of reindeer or not. The sorcerer intercedes with 
this great spirit and prevails on him to send the deer to the 
hungry Esquimaux. He informs the spirit that the people 
have in no way offended him, since he, the sorcerer, has 
taken great care that the whole of the meat was eaten up, 

AS Ca Kruyt, “Ken en ander (1897) pp. 4 s¢- 
aangaande het geestelijk en maat- 
schappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,”’ 2 W. Barbrooke Grubb, dz Un- 


Mededeelingen van wege het Neder- known People in an Unknown Land 
landsche  Zendelinggenootschap, x\i. (London, 1911), pp. 125 sg. 


Ghost of 
ostrich 
outwitted. 


Esquimau 
propitia- 
tion of the 
spirit who 
controls 
reindeer, 


Cere- 
monious 
treatment 
of sea- 
beasts by 


the Esqui- 


maux. 


246 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


and that last spring, when the does were returning to him to 
drop their young, none of the little or embryo fawns were 
devoured by the dogs. After long incantations the magician 
announces that the patron of the deer condescends to supply 
the Esquimaux with the spirits of the animals in a material 
form, and that soon there will be plenty in the land. He 
charges the people to fall on and slay and thereby win the 
approval of the spirit, who loves to see good folk enjoying 
themselves, knowing that so long as the Esquimaux refrain 
from feeding their dogs with the unborn young, the spirits of 
the dead reindeer will return again to his watchful care. The 
dogs are not allowed to taste the flesh, and until the supply 
is plentiful they may not gnaw the leg-bones, lest the 
guardian of the deer should take offence and send no more 
of the animals. If, unfortunately, a dog should get at the 
meat, a piece of his tail is cut off or his ear is cropped to 
let the blood flow.t. Again, the Central Esquimaux hold that 
sea-mammals, particularly whales, ground-seals, and common 
seals, sprang from the severed fingers of the goddess Sedna, 
and that therefore an Esquimau must make atonement for 
every such animal that he kills. When a seal is brought 
into the hut, the woman must stop working till it has been 
cut up. After the capture of a ground seal, walrus, or 
whale they must rest for three days. Not all sorts of 
work, however, are forbidden, for they may mend articles 
made of sealskin, but they may not make anything new. 
For example, an old tent cover may be enlarged in order to 
build a larger hut, but it is not allowed to make a new one. 
Working on new deerskins is strictly forbidden. No skins 
of this kind obtained in summer may be prepared before the 
ice has formed and the first seal has been caught with the 
harpoon. Later on, as soon as the first walrus has been 
taken, the work must again stop until autumn comes round. 
Hence all families are eager to finish the work on deerskins 
as fast as possible, for until that is done the walrus season 
may not begin.” The Greenlanders are careful not to 

1. M. Turer, ‘‘Ethnology of 2 Fr. Boas, ‘*‘The Central Eskimo,” 
the Ungava District, Hudson Bay Svxth Annual Report of the Bureau 
Territory,” Eleventh Annual Report of Ethnology (Washington, 1888), p. 


of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 5953 2za., ‘‘The Eskimo of Baffin 
ton, 1894), pp. 200 sg. Land and Hudson Bay,” Lzdlletin of 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 247 


fracture the heads of seals or throw them into the sea, but 
pile them in a heap before the door, that the souls of the 
seals may not be enraged and scare their brethren from the 
coast." 

The Esquimaux about Bering Strait believe that the 
souls of dead sea-beasts, such as seals, walrus, and whales, 
remain attached to their bladders, and that by returning the 
bladders to the sea they can cause the souls to be re- 
incarnated in fresh bodies and so multiply the game which 
the hunters pursue and kill. Acting on this belief every 
hunter carefully removes and preserves the bladders of all 
the sea-beasts that he kills; and at a solemn festival held 
once a year in winter these bladders, containing the souls of 
all the sea-beasts that have been killed throughout the 
year, are honoured with dances and offerings of food in the 
public assembly-room, after which they are taken out on the 
ice and thrust through holes into the water; for the simple 
Esquimaux imagine that the souls of the animals, in high 
good humour at the kind treatment they have experienced, 
will thereafter be born again as seals, walrus, and whales, 
and in that form will flock willingly to be again speared, 
harpooned, or otherwise done to death by the hunters. 
The ceremonies observed at these annual festivals of re- 
incarnation are elaborate. The assembly-room or dancing- 
house (Aashim, kassigim, or kasszgzt), in which the festival 
is held, consists of a spacious semi-subterranean chamber 
entered by a tunnel, which leads down-to a large round 
cellar under the floor of the house. From the cellar you 
ascend into the assembly-room through a hole in the floor. 
Wooden benches run round the apartment, which is lit by 
lamps. An opening in the roof serves at once as a window 
and a chimney. Unmarried men sleep in the assembly- 
room at all times; they have no other home. The festival 
is commonly held in December, but it may fall as late as 
January. It lasts several days. When the time is come 


the American Museum of Natural observed by these Esquimaux after the 
fiistory, xv. (1901) pp. 119 sgg. As _ slaughter of sea-beasts, see Zaboo and 
to the antagonism which these Esqui- ‘he Lerz/s of the Soul, pp. 205 sqq. 
maux suppose to exist between marine 

and terrestrial animals, see above, p. 1D. Crantz, History of Greenland 
$4; and with regard to the taboos (London, 1767), i. 216. 


Annual 
ceremony 
of return- 
ing the 
bladders 
of the sea- 
beasts to 
the sea in 
order that 
the animals 
may come 
to life 
again, 


248 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


to celebrate it, each hunter brings into the assembly-room 
the inflated bladders of all the seals, walrus, and whales 
that he has killed during the year. These are tied by the 
necks in bunches and hung up on seal spears, which are 
stuck in a row in the wall some six or eight feet above the 
floor. Here food and water are offered to them, or rather 
to the spirits of the animals which are supposed to be 
present in the bladders ; and the spirits signify their accept- 
ance of the offering by causing the bladders to swing 
to and fro, a movement which is really produced by a 
man sitting in a dark corner, who pulls a string attached 
to the bladders. Further, the bladders are fumigated with 
torches of wild parsnip stalks, the aromatic smoke and red 
flames of which are believed to be well-pleasing to the souls 
of the animals dangling in the bladders. Moreover to 
amuse the souls men execute curious dances before them to 
the music of drums. First the dancers move slowly with a 
jerky action from side to side; then they gallop obliquely 
with arms tossed up and down; and lastly they hop and 
jump, always keeping perfect time to the beat of the drums. 
The dance is supposed to imitate the movements of seals 
and walrus; and again the spirits signify their pleasure by 
making the bladders swing backwards and forwards. During 
the continuance of the festival no loud noises may be made 
in the assembly-room for fear of alarming the souls of the 
animals in the bladders; if any person makes a noise by 
accident, all the men present raise a chorus of cries in imita- 
tion of the notes of the eider duck to let the souls of the 
animals think that the unseemly disturbance proceeds from 
the birds and not from the people. Further, so long as 
the festival lasts, no wood may be cut with an iron axe in 
the village, the men must keep rigidly apart from the 
women, and no female above the age of puberty may come ~ 
near the bladders suspended in the assembly-room, the 
reason assigned being that such women are unclean and 
might offend the sensitive souls of the sea-beasts in the 
bladders. But immature girls, being untainted by the 
pollution which attaches to adult women, may go about the 
bladders freely. The last and crowning scene of the 
festival takes place at night or just at sunrise. The spears 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 249 


with the bladders attached to them are passed out by the 
shaman into the open air through the smoke-hole in the 
roof. When all are outside, a huge torch of wild parsnip 
stalks is lighted ; the chief shaman takes it on his shoulder, 
and runs with it as fast as he can across the snow and out 
on the ice. Behind him troop all the men carrying each 
his spear with the bladders of the sea-beasts dangling and 
flapping from it ; and in the rear race the women, children, 
and old men, howling, screaming and making a great uproar. 
In the darkness the lurid flame of the torch shoots high into 
the air, casting a red glare over the snowy landscape and 
lighting up the swarm of fantastic, fur-clad figures that 
stream along in wild excitement. Arrived at a hole, which 
had been cut on purpose in the sea-ice, the shaman plants 
his burning torch beside it in the snow, and every man as 
he comes up rips open his bladders and thrusts them, one 
after the other, into the water under the ice. This ends 
the ceremony. The souls of the dead seals, walrus, and 
whales, are now ready to be born again in the depths of 
the sea. So all the people return contented to the village. 
At St. Michael the men who have thrust the bladders 
under the ice are obliged on their return to leap through 
a fire of wild parsnip stalks, probably as a mode of cere- 
monial purification ; for after the dance and the offering of 
food at the festival the chief shaman passes a lighted torch 
of parsnip stalks round the assembly-room and the dancers, 
for the express purpose of purifying them and averting any 
evil influence that might bring sickness or ill luck on the 
hunters.’ 

For like reasons, a tribe which depends for its subsist- 
ence, chiefly or in part, upon fishing is careful to treat the 
fish with every mark of honour and respect. The Indians 
of Peru “ worshipped the whale for its monstrous greatness. 


Besides this ordinary system 


1E. W. Nelson, ‘‘The Eskimo 
about Bering Strait,”  LZighteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Parti. (Washing- 
ton, 1899), pp. 379-393, 437. Com- 
pare A. Woldt, Captazn /acobsen’s 
Reise an der Nordwestkiuste Americas 
1881-1883 (Leipsic, 1884), pp. 289- 


of worship, which prevailed 


291. In the text the ceremony has 
been described mainly as it was wit- 
nessed by Mr. E. W. Nelson at 
Kushunuk, near Cape Vancouver, in 
December, 1879. As might have been 
expected, the ritual varies in details 
at different places. 


Fish 
treated 
with re- 
spect by 
fishing 
tribes. 


The 
Peruvian 
Indians 
worshipped 
the various 
sorts of fish 
which they 
caught. 


Fish 
treated 
with re- 
spect by 
the North 
American 
Indians. 


250 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


throughout the coast, the people of different provinces 
adored the fish that they caught in greatest abundance; 
for they said that the first fish that was made in the world 
above (for so they named Heaven) gave birth to all other 
fish of that species, and took care to send them plenty of 
its children to sustain their tribe. For this reason they 
worshipped sardines in one region, where they killed more 
of them than of any other fish; in others, the skate; in 
others, the dogfish ; in others, the golden fish for its beauty ; 
in others, the crawfish ; in others, for want of larger gods, 
the crabs, where they had no other fish, or where they knew 
not how to catch and kill them. In short, they had what- 
ever fish was most serviceable to them as their gods.” The 
Kwakiutl Indiass of British Columbia think that when a 
salmon is killed its soul returns to the salmon country. 
Hence they take care to throw the bones and offal into the 
sea, in order that the soul may reanimate them at the 
resurrection of the salmon. Whereas if they burned the 
bones the soul would be lost, and so it would be quite 
impossible for that salmon to rise from the dead.?_ In like 
manner the Otawa Indians of Canada, believing that the 
souls of dead fish passed into other bodies of fish, never 
burned fish bones, for fear of displeasing the souls of the 
fish, who would come no more to the nets.2 The Hurons 
also refrained from throwing fish bones into the fire, lest 
the souls of the fish should go and warn the other fish not 
to let themselves be caught, since the Hurons would burn 
their bones. Moreover, they had men who preached to the 
fish and persuaded them to come and be caught. A good 
preacher was much sought after, for they thought that the 
exhortations of a clever man had a great effect in drawing 
the fish to the nets. In the Huron fishing village where 
the French missionary Sagard stayed, the preacher to the 


1 Garcilasso de la Vega, Royal of the British Association for 1890) ; 


Commentaries of the Yncas, translated 
by C. R. Markham, First Part, bk. i. 
ch. 10, vol. i. pp. 49 sg. (Hakluyt 
Society, London, 1869-1871). Com- 
pare zd., vol. ii. p. 148. 


9 


“ Fr. Boas, in Szxth Report on the 


North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 


61 sg. (separate reprint from the Report 


td., Kwakiutl Texts, ii. pp. 303 Sg., 
305 sg., 307, 317 (Jesup North Pacific 
Expedition, Memotr of the American 
Museum of Natural History, Decem- 
ber, 1902). 


3 Relations des Jésuites, 1667, Pp. 
12 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 251 


fish prided himself very much on his eloquence, which was 
of a florid order. Every evening after supper, having seen 
that all the people were in their places and that a strict 
silence was observed, he preached to the fish. His text 
was that the Hurons did not burn fish bones. “Then 
enlarging on this theme with extraordinary unction, he 
exhorted and conjured and invited and implored the fish 
to come and be caught and to be of good courage and to 
fear nothing, for it was all to serve their friends who 
honoured them and did not burn their bones.”' At 
Bogadjim in German New Guinea an enchanter is employed 
to lure the fish to their doom. He stands in a canoe on 
the beach with a decorated fish-basket beside him, and 
commands the fish to come from all quarters to Bogadjim.? 
When the Aino have killed a sword-fish, they thank the fish 
for allowing himself to be caught and invite him to come 
again.® Among the Nootka Indians of British Columbia it 
was formerly a rule that any person who had partaken of 
bear’s flesh must rigidly abstain from eating any kind of 
fish for a term of two months. The motive for the abstin- 
ence was not any consideration for the health of the eater, 
but “a superstitious belief, that should any of their people 
after tasting bear’s flesh, eat of fresh salmon, cod, etc., the 
fish, though at ever so great a distance off, would come to 
the knowledge of it, and be so much offended thereat, as 
not to allow themselves to be taken by any of the inhabit- 
ants.”* The disappearance of herring from the sea about 
Heligoland in 1530 was attributed by the fishermen to the 
misconduct of two lads who had whipped a freshly-caught 
herring and then flung it back into the sea.” A similar 
disappearance of the herrings from the Moray Firth, in the 
reign of Queen Anne, was set down by some people to a 
breach of the Sabbath which had been committed by the 
fishermen, while others opined that it was due to a quarrel 
1 F, Gabriel Sagard, Ze Grand 5209 sq. . 


Voyage du Pays des Hurons, pp. 255 4 A Narrative of the Adventures 
sqg. (pp. 178 sgg. of the reprint, and Sufferings of John Rk. Jewitt 
Libraire Tross, Paris, 1865). (Middletown, 1820), p. 116. 

2 B. Hagen, Unter den Papuas 5 M. J. Schleiden, Das Sa/z (Leipsic, 
(Wiesbaden, 1899), p. 270. 1875), p. 47. For this reference I am 


3 Rev. J. Batchelor, 7e Azuu and indebted to my late friend W. Robert- 
their Folk-love (London, 1901), pp. son Smith. 


Herring re- 
spected by 
European 
fishermen, 


Compensa- 
tion made 
to fish for 
catching 
them. 


PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


in which blood had been spilt in the sea.’ For Scotch 
fishermen are persuaded that if blood be drawn in a quarrel 
on the coast where herring are being caught, the shoal will 
at once take its departure and not return for that season at 
least. West Highland fishermen believe that every shoal of 
herring has its leader which it follows wherever he goes. 
This leader is twice as big as an ordinary herring, and the 
fishermen call it the king of herring. When they chance 
to catch it in their nets they put it back carefully into the 
sea; for they would esteem it petty treason to destroy the 
royal fish.” The natives of the Duke of York Island 
annually decorate a canoe with flowers and ferns, lade it, 
or are supposed to lade it, with shell-money, and set it 
adrift to compensate the fish for their fellows who have 
been caught and eaten.*? When the Tarahumares of Mexico 
are preparing to poison the waters of a river for the purpose 
of stupefying and catching the fish, they take the precaution 
of first making offerings to the Master of the Fish by way 
of payment for the fish of which they are about to bereave 
him. The offerings consist of axes, hats, blankets, girdles, 
pouches, and especially knives and strings of beads, which 
are hung to a cross or a horizontal bar set up in the middle 
of the river. However, the Master of the Fish, who is 
thought to be the oldest fish, dees not long enjoy these 
good things; for next morning the owners of the various 
articles remove them from the river and appropriate them to 
their usual secular purposes.* It is especially necessary to 
treat the first fish caught with consideration in order to 
conciliate the rest of the fish, whose conduct may be sup- 
posed to be influenced by the reception given to those of 
their kind which were the first to be taken. Accordingly 
the Maoris always put back into the sea the first fish caught, 
“with a prayer that it may tempt other fish to come and be 
caught.”° Among the Baganda “the first fish taken were 


252 


1 Hugh Miller, Scezes and Legends 
of the North of Scotland, ch. xvii. pp. 
256 sg. (Edinburgh, 1889). 

* M. Martin, ‘‘ Description of the 
Western Islands of Scotland,” in 
Pinkerton’s Voyages and Travels, iii. 
(London, 1809) p. 620. 


3°W. Powell, Wanderings in a Wild 
Country (London, 1883), pp. 66 sg. 

4 C. Lumholtz, Unknown Mexico 
(London, 1903), i. 403. 

5 R. Taylor, Ze lka a Maut, or 
New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 
Second Edition (London, 1870), p. 


{ 
| 
' 
{ 
} 
' 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 253 


treated ceremonially : some the fisherman took to the god 
Mukasa; the remainder his wife cooked, and he and she 
both partook of them, and he afterwards jumped over her.” ' 

Still more stringent are the precautions taken when the 
fish are the first of the season. On salmon rivers, when the 
fish begin to run up the stream in spring, they are received 
with much deference by tribes who, like the Indians of the 
Pacific Coast of North America, subsist largely upon a fish 
diet. To some of these tribes the salmon is what corn is to 
the European, rice to the Chinese, and seals to the Esquimaux. 
Plenty of salmon means abundance in the camp and joy at 
the domestic hearth ; failure of the salmon for a single season 
means famine and desolation, silence in the village, and sad 
hearts about the fire.” Accordingly in British Columbia the 
Indians used to go out to meet the first fish as they came 
up the river: “ They paid court to them, and would address 
them thus: ‘ You fish, you fish; you are all chiefs, you are ; 
you are all chiefs.’”* Amongst the Thlinkeet or Tlingit of 
Alaska the first halibut of the season is carefully handled and 
addressed as a chief, and a festival is given in his honour, 
after which the fishing goes on.* Among the tribes of the 
Lower Fraser River when the first sockeye-salmon of the 
season has been caught, the fisherman carries it to the chief 
of his tribe, who delivers it to his wife. She prays, saying 
to the salmon, “Who has brought you here to make us 
happy? We are thankful to your chief for sending you.” 
When she has cut and roasted the salmon according to 
certain prescribed rules, the whole tribe is invited and par- 
takes of the fish, after they have purified themselves by 
drinking a decoction of certain plants which is regarded as 
a medicine for cleansing the people. But widowers, widows, 
menstruous women, and youths may not eat of this particular 
salmon. Even later, when the fish have become plentiful 
and these ceremonies are dispensed with, the same classes of 


200; A. S. Thomson, Zhe Story of 2 A. G. Morice, Au pays de P Ours 


New Zealand (London, 1859), i. 202 ; 
E. Tregear, ‘‘The Maoris of New 
Zealand,” /ournal of the Anthropologi- 
cal Institute, xix. (1890) p. 100. 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, Zhe Baganda 
(London, rgIt), p. 395. 


Noir (Paris and Lyons, 1897), p. 28. 
3 Sir John Lubbock, Origin 
Civilisation * (London, 1882), p. 277, 
quoting MWetlahkatlah, p. 96. 
4 W. Dall, Alaska and tts Resources 
(London, 1870), p. 413. 


of 


Cere- 
monious 
treatment 
of the first 
fish of the 
season. 


254 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


persons are not allowed to eat fresh salmon, though they 
may partake of the dried fish. The sockeye-salmon must 
always be looked after carefully. Its bones have to be 
thrown into the river, after which the fish will revive and 
return to its chief in the west. Whereas if the fish are not 
treated with consideration, they will take their revenge, and 
the careless fisherman will be unlucky." Among the Songish 
or Lkungen tribe of Vancouver Island it is a rule that on 
the day when the first salmon have been caught, the children 
must stand on the beach waiting for the boats to return. 
They stretch out their little arms and the salmon are heaped on 
them, the heads of the fish being always kept in the direction 
in which the salmon are swimming, else they would cease to 
run up the river. So the children carry them and lay them 
on a grassy place, carefully keeping the heads of the salmon 
turned in the same direction. Round the fish are placed 
four flat stones, on which the plant hog’s wort (Peucedanum 
letocarpum, Nutt.), red paint, and bulrushes are burnt as an 
offering to the salmon. When the salmon have been roasted 
each of the children receives one, which he or she is obliged 
to eat, leaving nothing over. But grown people are not 
allowed to eat the fish for several days. The bones of the 
salmon that the children have eaten may not touch the 
ground. They are kept in dishes, and on the fourth day an 
old woman, who pretends to be lame, gathers them in a 
huge basket and throws them into the sea.” The Tsimshian 
Indians of British Columbia observe certain ceremonies when 
the first olachen fish of the season are caught. The fish are 
roasted on an instrument of elder-berry wood, and the man ~ 
who roasts them must wear his travelling dress, mittens, cape, 
and so forth. While this is being done the Indians pray 
that plenty of olachen may come to their fishing-ground. 
The fire may not be blown up, and in eating the fish they 


1 Fr. Boas, in ‘‘Ninth Report on fhe Anthropological Institute, xxxvy. 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada,” (1905) p. 140; za., The Far West, 
Report of the British Association for the Home of the Salish and Déné 
1894, p. 461. Compare J. Teit, Zze (London, 1907), pp. 170-172. 

Lillooet Indians (Leyden and New 


York, 1906), pp. 280 sg. (The Jesup 2 Fr. Boas, in Szxth Report on the 
North Pacific Expedition, Memotr of North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 16 
the American Museum of Natural sq. (separate reprint from the Report of 


FHlistory); C. Hill Tout, in Journal of the British Association for 1890). 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 255 


may not cool it by blowing nor break a single bone. Every- 
thing must be neat and clean, and the rakes used for catch- 
ing the fish must be kept hidden in the house.’ In spring, 
when the winds blow soft from the south and the salmon 
begin to run up the Klamath river, the Karoks of California 
dance for salmon, to ensure a good catch. One of the 
Indians, called the Kareya or God-man, retires to the 
mountains and fasts for ten days. On his return the people 
flee, while he goes to the river, takes the first salmon of the 
catch, eats some of it, and with the rest kindles the sacred 
fire in the sweating-house. “No Indian may take a salmon 
before this dance is held, nor for ten days after it, even if his 
family are starving.” The Karoks also believe that a fisher- 
man will take no salmon if the poles of which his spearing- 
booth is made were gathered on the river-side, where the 
salmon might have seen them. The poles must be brought 
from the top of the highest mountain. The fisherman will 
also labour in vain if he uses the same poles a second year 
in booths or weirs, “because the old salmon will have told 
the young ones about them.”” Among the Indians of the 
Columbia River, “when the salmon make their first appear- 
ance in the river, they are never allowed to be cut crosswise, 
nor boiled, but roasted; nor are they allowed to be sold 
without the heart being first taken out, nor to be kept over 
night, but must be all consumed or eaten the day they are 
taken out of the water. All these rules are observed for 
about ten days.”* They think that if the heart of a fish were 


.eaten by a stranger at the beginning of the season, they 


| 


| 

| 

] 
| 
| 
| 
} 


| fornia (Washington, 1877), pp. 31 sg. 


would catch no more fish. Hence, they roast and eat the 
hearts themselves.* There is a favourite fish of the Aino 
which appears in their rivers about May and June. They 
prepare for the fishing by observing rules of ceremonial 
purity, and when they have gone out to fish, the women at 


1 Yd., in Fifth Report on the North- River (London, 1849), p. 97. 
Western Tribes of Canada, p.51 (separate 4 Ch. Wilkes, Narrative of the United 
reprint from the Report of the British States Exploring Expedition, New Edi- 
Association for 1889). tion (New York, 1851), iv. 324, v. 119, 
= - where it is said, ‘‘a dog must never be 
eae os of Cale permitted to eat the ee: of a salmon; 
and in order to prevent this, they cut 
3 Alex. Ross, Adventures of the First the heart of the fish out before they 


| Settlers on the Oregon or Columbia sell it.” 


256 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 
home must keep strict silence or the fish would hear them 
and disappear. When the first fish is caught he is brought 
home and passed through a small opening at the end of the 
hut, but not through the door ; for if he were passed through 
the door, “the other fish would certainly see him and dis- 
appear.”' This may partly explain the custom observed by 
other savages of bringing game in certain cases into their 
huts, not by the door, but by the window, the smoke-hole, 


or by a special opening at the back of the hut.” 


Some With some savages a special reason for respecting the 
ice bones of game, and generally of the animals which they eat, 
the bones is a belief that, if the bones are preserved, they will in 
ees course of time be reclothed with flesh, and thus the animal 
they killin will come to life again. It is, therefore, clearly for the 


order that 
the animals 
may come 
to life 
again. 


interest of the hunter to leave the bones intact, since to 
destroy them would be to diminish the future supply of 
game. Many of the Minnetaree Indians “believe that the 
bones of those bisons which they have slain and divested of 
flesh rise again clothed with renewed flesh, and quickened 
with life, and become fat, and fit for slaughter the succeeding 
June.”® Hence on the western prairies of America, the 
skulls of buffaloes may be seen arranged in circles and sym- 
metrical piles, awaiting the resurrection.* After feasting on 
a dog, the Dacotas carefully collect the bones, scrape, wash, 
and bury them, “partly, as it is said, to testify to the dog- 
species, that in feasting upon one of their number no dis- 
respect was meant to the species itself, and partly also from 

TE Gan Stn oan cclheeAunosse7 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
ils, « ((1K557/3)) foe BRB Ah Wines craw 


Sketches from the Wald Coasts of 
Nipon, pp. 27 sg. Similarly it is a p. 


Pp. 5033 
(1883) pp. 308 sg.; Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, vii. (1878) 
207; Fr. Boas, ‘*The Central 


tina commentatio (Copenhagen, 1767), 
Revue a@Ethnographie, i. | 


rule with the Aino to bring the flesh of 
bears and other game into the house, 
not by the door, but by the window or 
the smoke-hole. See Rev. J. Batchelor, 
The Atnu and thetr Folk-lore (London, 
IQ0I), p. 123; P. Labbé, Ux Bagne 
Russe (Paris, 1903), pp. 255 5g. 

2 Archiv fiir Anthropologie, xxvi. 
(1900) p. 796 (as to the Gilyak of 
the Amoor); J. Scheffer, ZLapponza 
(Frankfort, 1673), pp. 242 sg.3 C. 
Leemius, De Lapponitbus Finmarchiae 
eorumgue lingua, vita, et religione pris- 


Eskimo,” in S%xth Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 


1888), p. 5953 a, ‘©The Eskimo of _ 


Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” zdletin 


of the American Museum of Natural 


History, xv. (1901) p. 148; A. G 
Morice, in 77vansactions of the Canadian 
Institute, iv. (1892-93) p. 108. 

3 E. James, Expedition from Pitts- 
burgh to the Rocky Mountains (London, 
1823), i. 257. 


4D. G. Brinton, Myths of the New 


World® (New York, 1876), p. 278. 


\ 
) 
{ 
{ 
i 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 


257 


a belief that the bones of the animal will rise and reproduce 
another.” Among the Esquimaux of Baffin Land and 
Hudson Bay, when a boy has killed his first seal, his mother 
gathers all the bones and throws them into a seal-hole. 
They think that these bones will become seals which the 
boy will catch in later life? The Yuracares Indians of 
Bolivia are at great pains to collect all the bones of the 
beasts, birds, and fishes which they eat, and to throw them 
into a stream, bury them in the depths of the forest, or burn 
them in the fire, “in order that the animals of the sort killed 
may not be angry and may allow themselves to be killed 
again.”* In sacrificing an animal the Lapps regularly 
put aside the bones, eyes, ears, heart, lungs, sexual parts (if 
the animal was a male), and a morsel of flesh from each limb. 
Then, after eating the remainder of the flesh, they laid the 
bones and the rest in anatomical order in a coffin and buried 
them with the usual rites, believing that the god to whom 
the animal was sacrificed would reclothe the bones with flesh 
and restore the animal to life in Jabme-Aimo, the sub- 
terranean world of the dead. Sometimes, as after feasting 
on a bear, they seem to have contented themselves with thus 
burying the bones.* Thus the Lapps expected the resurrec- 
tion of the slain animal to take place in another world, 
resembling in this respect the Kamtchatkans, who believed 
that every creature, down to the smallest fly, would rise from 
the dead and live underground.* On the other hand, the 
North American Indians looked for the resurrection of the 
animals in the present world. The habit, observed especially 
by Mongolian peoples, of stuffing the skin of a sacrificed 


1 W. H. Keating, Expedition to the 
Source of St. Peter’s River (London, 
1825), i. 452. 

2 Fr. Boas, ‘‘ The Eskimo of Baffin 
Land and Hudson Bay,” Bulletin of 
the American Museum of Natural 
History, xv. (1901) p. 161. 

3 A, @Orbigny, Voyage dans l’ Am- 
&rique Méridionale, iii. (Paris and 
Strasburg, 1844) p. 201. However, 
in this case a belief in the resurrection 
of the animals is not expressly affirmed, 
and the practice of burning the bones 
seems inconsistent with it. 

4 E. J. Jessen, De Finnorum Lap- 


PT. V. VOL. II 


ponumgque  Norwegicorum  religione 
pagana tractatus singularts, pp. 46 sg., 
52 sg., 65 (bound with C. Leem’s 
De Lapponibus Finmarchtae eorumqgue 
lingua, vita et religione pristina com- 
mentatio, Copenhagen, 1767). Com- 
pare Leem’s work, pp. 418-420, 428 
sqg.; J. Acerbi, Zravels through Sweden, 
finnland, and Lapland (London, 
1802), ii. 302. 

5 G. W. Steller, Beschreczbung von 
dem Lande Kamtschatka (Frankfort and 
Leipsic, 1774), p. 269; S. Kraschen- 
innikow, Leschretbung des Landes 
Kamtschatka (Lemgo, 1766), p. 246. 

Ss 


258 


PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 


CHAP. 


animal, or stretching it on a framework,’ points rather to a 


belief in a resurrection of the latter sort. 


The objection 


commonly entertained by primitive peoples to break the 
bones of the animals which they have eaten or sacrificed ” 


1 See A. Erman, referred to above, 
p- 223; J. G. Gmelin, Rese durch 
Stbivien (GOttingen, 1751-1752), i. 
274, li. 182 sg.. 214; H. Vambery, 
Das Tiirkenvolk (Leipsic, 1885), pp. 
118 sg. When a fox, the sacred animal 
of the Conchucos in Peru, had been 
killed, its skin was stuffed and set up 
(A. Bastian, Dze Culturlander des 
alten Amerika, 1. 443). Compare the 
bouphonia, above, pp. 4 sgq. 

2 At the annual sacrifice of the 
White Dog, the Iroquois were careful 
to strangle the animal without shedding 
its blood or breaking its bones; the 
dog was afterwards burned (L. H. 
Morgan, League of the Lroguots, Ro- 
chester, 1851, p. 210). It is a rule 
with some of the Australian blacks 
that in killing the native bear they 
may not break his bones. They say 
that the native bear once stole all the 
water of the river, and that if they were 
to break his bones or take off his skin 
before roasting him, he would do so 
again (R. Brough Smyth, Adorigines of 
Victoria, 1. 447 sqgg.). Some of the 
Queensland aborigines believe that if 
the bones or skulls of dugong were not 
put away in a heap or otherwise pre- 
served, no more dugong would be 
caught (W. E. Roth, Worth Queens- 
land Ethnography, Bulletin No. 5, 
Brisbane, 1903, p. 27). When the 
Tartars whom Carpini visited killed 
animals for eating, they might not break 
their bones but burned them with fire 
(Carpini, Hestoria Mongalorum (Paris, 
1838), cap. iii. § i. 2, p. 620). North 
American Indians might not break the 
bones of the animals which they ate at 
feasts (Charlevoix, Wistozve de la Nou- 
velle France, vi. 72). In the war feast 
held by Indian warriors after leaving 
home, a whole animal was cooked and 
had to be all eaten. No bone of it might 
be broken. After being stripped of the 
flesh the bones were hung on a tree 
(Narrative of the Captivity and Adven- 
tures of John Tanner, London, 1830, 


p- 287). On St. Olaf’s Day (29th 
July) the Karels of Finland kill a lamb, 
without using a knife, and roast it whole. 
None of its bones may be broken. The 
lamb has not been shorn since spring. 
Some of the flesh is placed in a corner 
of the room for the house-spirits, some 
is deposited on the field and beside the 
birch-trees which are destined to be 
used as May-trees next year (W. Mann- 
hardt, Anteke Wald- und Feldkulte, pp. 
160 sg., note). Some of the Esquimaux 
in skinning a deer are careful not to 
break a single bone, and they will not 
break the bones of deer while walrus 
are being hunted (Fr. Boas, ‘‘ The 
Central Eskimo,” Szxth Annual Report 
of the Bureauof Ethnology (Washington, 
1888), pp. 595 sg.). The Innuit (Esqui- 
maux) of Point Barrow, Alaska, care- 
fully preserve unbroken the bones of 
the seals which they have caught and 
return them to the sea, either leaving 
them in an ice-crack far out from the 
land or dropping them through a hole 
in the ice. By doing so they think 
they secure good fortune in the pursuit 
of seals (Report of the International 
Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska 
(Washington, 1885), p. 40). In this 
last custom the idea probably is that 
the bones will be reclothed with flesh 
and the seals come to life again. ‘The 
Mosquito Indians of Central America 
carefully preserved the bones of deer 
and the shells of eggs, lest the deer or 
chickens should die or disappear (H. H. 
Bancroft, Mateve Races of the Pacific 
States,i.741). In Syria at the present 
time people offer a sacrifice for a boy 
when he is seven days old, and they 
will not break a bone of the victim, 
“* because they fear that if a bone of the 
sacrifice should be broken, the child’s 
bones would be broken, too” (S. I. 
Curtiss, Primztive Semitic Religion 
To-day, Chicago, etc., 1902, p. 178). 
This last may be a later misinterpreta- 
tion of the old custom. For West 
African cases of refusal to break the 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 


259 


may be based either on a belief in the resurrection of the 
animals, or on a fear of intimidating other creatures of the 
same species and offending the ghosts of the slain animals. 
The reluctance of North American Indians and Esquimaux 
to let dogs gnaw the bones of animals‘ is perhaps only a 
precaution to prevent the bones from being broken. 

We have already seen that some rude races believe in 
a resurrection of men” as well as of beasts, and it is quite 
natural that people who entertain such a belief should take 
care of the bones of their dead in order that the original 
owners of the bones may have them to hand at the critical 
moment. Hence in the Mexican territories of Guazacualco 
and Yluta, where the Indians thought that the dead would 
rise again, the bones of the departed were deposited in 
baskets and hung up on trees, that their spirits might not 
be obliged to grub in the earth for them at the resurrection.’ 


bones of sacrificial victims, see J. Spieth, 
Die Ewe-Stimme (Berlin, 1906), pp. 
458, 466, 480, 527, 712, 796, 824. 
Amongst the Narrinyeri of South 
Australia, when an animal was being 
cut up, the bystanders used to leap and 
yell as often as a bone was broken, 
thinking that if they did not do so 
their own bones would rot within them 
(A. W. Howitt, ative Tribes of South- 
East Australia, p. 763). 

1 Relations des Jésuttes, 1634, p. 
25 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858); 
A. Mackenzie, Voyages through the 
Continent of America (London, 1801), 
p- civ. ; J. Dunn, Hestory of the Oregon 
Territory (London, 1844), p. 99; F. 
Whymper, in Journal of the Royal 
Geographical Soctety, xxxviii. (1868) 
p- 228; zd., in Transactions of the 
Ethnological Society, N.S., vii. (1869) 
Peetz74> A. EP. Reid, “Religious 
Belief of the Ojibois Indians,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, iii. 
Mo7ieps tit; Er: Boas, **The 
Central Eskimo,” Szxth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1888), p. 596 ; zd., ‘‘ The Eskimo 
of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, xv. (1901) p. 123; 
E. W. Nelson, ‘‘The Eskimo about 
Bering Strait,” Zighteenth Annual 


Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part i. (Washington, 1899) 
pp. 438 sg. For more examples’ see 
above, pp. 225, 238 sgg., 242 sgq., 
246. After a meal the Indians 
of Costa Rica gather all the bones 
carefully and either burn them or put 
them out of reach of the dogs. See 
W. M. Gabb, Ox the Indian Tribes 
and Languages of Costa Rica (read 
before the American Philosophical 
Society, 20th Aug. 1875), p. 520 
(Philadelphia, 1875). The custom of 
burning the-bones to prevent the dogs 
getting them does not necessarily contra- 
dict the view suggested in the text. It 
may be a way of transmitting the bones 
to the spirit-land. The aborigines of 
Australia burn the bones of the animals 
which they eat, but for a different 
reason; they think that if an enemy 
got hold of the bones and burned them 
with charms, it would cause the death 
of the person who had eaten the animal 
(Wative Tribes of South Australia, 
Adelaide, 1879, pp. 24, 196). 

2 See Taboo and the Perils of the 
Soul, pp. 279 sgq. 

3 A, de Herrera, General History 
of the vast Continent and Islands of 


America, translated by Capt. John 
Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iv. 
126. 


Some 
savages 
preserve or 
destroy the 
bones of 
men in 
order to 
assist or 
prevent 
their resur- 
rection. 


Unques- 
tioning 
faith of 
savages in 
the im- 
mortality 
of animals. 


The savage 
faith in 
human im- 
mortality is 
commonly 
supposed to 
be deduced 
from a 
primitive 
theory of 
dreams. 


260 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP 


On the other hand, the Luritcha tribe of Central Australia, 
who eat their enemies, take steps to prevent their coming to 
life again, which might prove very inconvenient, by destroy- 
ing the bones and especially the skulls of the bodies on 
which they have banqueted.’ 


The preceding review of customs observed by savages 
for the conciliation and multiplication of animals which they 
hunt and kill, is fitted to impress us with a lively sense of 
the unquestioning faith which primitive man reposes in the 
immortality of the lower creatures. He appears to assume 
as an axiom too obvious to be disputed that beasts, birds, 
and fishes have souls like his own, which survive the death 
of their bodies and can be reborn in other bodies to be 
again killed and eaten by the hunter. The whole series of 
customs described in the foregoing pages—customs which 
are apt to strike the civilised reader as quaint and absurd— 
rests on this fundamental assumption. A consideration of 
them suggests a doubt whether the current explanation of 
the savage belief in human immortality is adequate to 
account for all the facts. That belief is commonly deduced 
from a primitive theory of dreams. The savage, it is said, _ 
fails to distinguish the visions of sleep from the realities of 
waking life, and accordingly when he has dreamed of his dead 
friends he necessarily concludes that they have not wholly 
perished, but that their spirits continue to exist in some 
place and some form, though in the ordinary course of 
events they elude the perceptions of his senses. On this 
theory the conceptions, whether gross or refined, whether 
repulsive or beautiful, which savages and perhaps civilised 
men have formed of the state of the departed, would seem 
to be no more than elaborate hypotheses constructed to 
account for appearances in dreams; these towering struc- 
tures, for all their radiant or gloomy grandeur, for all 
the massy strength and solidity with which they present 
themselves to the imagination of many, may turn out on 
inspection to be mere visionary castles built of clouds and 
vapour, which a breath of reason suffices to melt into air. 


1 Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, Mative Trebes of Central Australia 
(London, 1899), p. 475. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 261 


But even if we grant for the sake of argument that this 
theory offers a ready explanation of the widespread belief 
in human immortality, it is less easy to see how the theory 
accounts for the corresponding belief of so many races in 
the immortality of the lower animals. In his dreams the 
savage recognises the images of his departed friends by those 
familiar traits of feature, voice, and gesture which char- 
acterised them in life. But can we suppose that he 
recognises dead beasts, birds, and fishes in like manner? 
that their images come before him in sleep with all the 
particular features, the minute individual differences, which 
distinguished them in life from their fellows, so that when 
he sees them he can say to himself, for example, “ This is 
the very tiger that I speared yesterday ; his carcase is dead, 
but his spirit must be still alive”; or, “That is the very salmon 
I caught and ate this morning; I certainly killed his body, 
but clearly I have not succeeded in destroying his soul”? 
No doubt it is possible that the savage has arrived at his 
theory of animal immortality by some such process of 
reasoning, but the supposition seems at least more far- 
fetched and improbable than in the case of human 
immortality. And if we admit the insufficiency of the 
explanation in the one case, we seem bound to admit it, 
though perhaps in a less degree, in the other case also. In 
short, we conclude that the theory of dreams appears to be 
hardly enough by itself to account for the widespread belief in 
the immortality of men and animals; dreams have probably 
done much to confirm that belief, but would they suffice to 
originate it? We may reasonably doubt it. 

Accordingly we are driven to cast about for some more 
adequate explanation of this prevalent and deeply rooted per- 
suasion. In search of such an explanation perhaps we need 
go no further than the sense of life which every man feels in 
his own breast.’ We have seen that to the savage death 
presents itself not as a natural necessity but as a lamentable 
accident or crime that cuts short an existence which, but for 
it, might have lasted for ever.?7, Thus arguing apparently from 
his own sensations he conceives of life as an indestructible 


1 For this suggestion I am indebted by my friend Professor G. F. Stout. 
to a hint thrown out in conversation 2 See Zhe Dying God, p. I. 


But can a 
theory of 
dreams 
account for 
the savage 
belief in 
the im- 
mortality of 
animals ? 


Apparently 
the savage 
conceives 
life as an 
indestruct- 
ible form of 
energy. 


Analogy of 
the con- 
ception to 
the modern 
scientific 
conception 
of the con- 
servation of 
energy. 


262 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


kind of energy, which when it disappears in one form must 
necessarily reappear in another, though in the new form it 
need not be immediately perceptible by us; in other words, 
he infers that death does not destroy the vital principle 
nor even the conscious personality, but that it merely 
transforms both of them into other shapes, which are not 
the less real because they commonly elude the evidence 
of our senses. If I am right in thus interpreting the 
thought of primitive man, the savage view of the nature 
of life singularly resembles the modern scientific doctrine 
of the conservation of energy. According to that doctrine, 
no material energy ever perishes or is even diminished ; 
when it seems to suffer diminution or extinction, all that 
happens is that a portion or the whole of it has been 
transmuted into other shapes which, though qualitatively 
different from, are quantitatively equivalent to, the energy in 
its original form. In short, if we listen to science, nothing 
in the physical world is ever lost, but all things are per- 
petually changing: the sum of energy in the universe is 
constant and invariable, though it undergoes ceaseless 
transformations.' A similar theory of the indestructibility 
of energy is implicitly applied by the savage to explain the 
phenomena of life and death, and logically enough he does 
not limit the application to human beings but extends it 
to the lower animals. Therein he shews himself a better 
reasoner than his civilised brother, who commonly embraces 


with avidity the doctrine of human immortality but rejects 7 


with scorn, as derogatory to human dignity, the idea that | 
animals have immortal souls. And when he attempts to — 
confirm his own cherished belief in a life after death by 
appealing to similar beliefs among savages and inferring 
from them a natural instinct of immortality, it is well to 


1 The principle of the conservation 
of energy is clearly stated and _ illus- 
trated by Balfour Stewart in his book 
The Conservation of Energy, Fourth 
Edition (London, 1877). The writer 
does not countenance the view that 
life is a form of energy distinct from 
and independent of physical and chemi- 
cal forces; he regards a living being 
simply as a very delicately constructed 


machine in which the natural forces — 
are in a state of unstable equilibrium, — 
To avoid misapprehension it may be 
well to add that I do not pretend to | 
argue either for or against the theory — 
of life which appears to be implicitly — 
adopted by the savage; my aim is 
simply to explain, not to justify or con- — 
demn, the mental attitude of primitive 

man towards these profound problems. — 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 263 


remind him that, if he stands by that appeal, he must, like 
the savage, consistently extend the privilege of immortality 
to the despised lower animals; for surely it is improper for 
him to pick and choose his evidence so as to suit his 
prepossessions, accepting those parts of the savage creed 
which tally with his own and rejecting those which do not. 
On logical and scientific grounds he seems bound to believe 
either more or less: he must hold that men and animals 
are alike immortal or that neither of them is so. 


We have seen that many savages look forward to a 
joyful resurrection of men and beasts, if only a proper 
care is taken of their skeletons; the same old bones, they 
imagine, will do duty over again in the next life, when 
they have been decently clad in a new garment of flesh. 
This quaint fancy is reflected in many popular tales; not 
uncommonly the animal or man in the story comes to life 
lame of a limb, because one of his bones has been eaten, 
broken, or lost." In a Magyar tale, the hero is cut in pieces, 
but the serpent-king lays the bones together in their proper 
order,and washes them with water, whereupon the hero revives. 
His shoulder-blade, however, has been lost, so the serpent- 
king supplies its place with one of gold and ivory.” Such 
stories, as Mannhardt has seen, explain why Pythagoras, 
who claimed to have lived many lives, one after the other, 
was said to have exhibited his golden leg as a proof of his 
supernatural pretensions.> Doubtless he explained that at 
one of his resurrections a leg had been broken or mislaid, 
and that he had replaced it, like Miss Kilmansegg, with 
one of gold. Similarly, when the murdered Pelops was 
restored to life, the shoulder which Demeter had eaten was 
made good with one of ivory,’ which was publicly exhibited 


1 W. Mannhardt, Germanzsche My- (1888) pp. 30 sg. In folk-tales, as in 


then (Berlin, 1858), pp. 57-743 2a., 
Baumkultus, p. 116; C. L. Rochholz, 
Deutscher Glaube und Brauch (Berlin, 
1867), i. 219 sgg.; J. Curtin, AZyths 
and Folk-lore of Lreland (London, N.D.), 
pp- 45 sg.; E. Cosquin, Contes popu- 
laires de Lorraine (Paris, N.D.), ii. 25 ; 
E. S. Hartland, ‘‘The Physicians of 
Myddfai,” Archaeological Review, i. 


primitive custom, the blood is sometimes 
not allowed to fall on the ground. See 
E. Cosquin, /.c. 

2 W. Mannhardt, Germanische My- 
then, p. 66. 

8 Jamblichus, Vzta Pythag. 92, 135, 
140; Porphyry, Veta Pythag. 28. 

4 Pindar, Olymp. 1. 37 sgg., with 
the Scholiast. 


The resur- 
rection of 
the body in 
tales and 
legends. 


The sinew 
of the thigh 
regularly 
cut out and 
thrown 
away by 
some 
American 
Indians. 


264 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


at Elis down to historical times.’ The story that one of the 
members of the mangled Osiris was eaten by fish, and that, 
when Isis collected his scattered limbs, she replaced the 
missing member with one of wood,” may perhaps belong to 
the same circle of beliefs. 

There is a certain rule observed by savage hunters and 
fishers which, enigmatical at first sight, may possibly be 
explained by this savage belief in resurrection. A traveller 
in America in the early part of the nineteenth century was 
told by a half-breed Choctaw that the Indians “had an obscure 
story, somewhat resembling that of Jacob wrestling with an 
angel ; and that the full-blooded Indians always separate the 
sinew which shrank, and that it is never seen in the venison ex- 
posed for sale; he did not know what they did with it. His 
elder brother, whom I afterwards met, told me that they eat it 
as a rarity ; but I have also heard, though on less respectable 
authority, that they refrain from it, like the ancient Jews. 
A gentleman, who had lived on the Indian frontier, or in the 
nation, for ten or fifteen years, told me that he had often 
been surprised that the Indians always detached this sinew ; 
but it had never occurred to him to inquire the reason.” * 
James Adair, who knew the Indians of the South-Eastern 
States intimately, and whose absurd theories appear not to 
have distorted his view of the facts, observes that “ when in 
the woods, the Indians cut a small piece out of the lower 
part of the thighs of the deer they kill, lengthways and pretty 
deep. Among the great number of venison-hams they bring 
to our trading-houses, I do not remember to have observed 


one without it. . . . And I have been assured by a gentle- | 


man of character, who is now an inhabitant of South 
Carolina, and well acquainted with the customs of the 
northern Indians, that they also cut a piece out of the thigh 
of every deer they kill, and throw it away; and reckon it 
such a dangerous pollution to eat it as to occasion sickness 
and other misfortunes of sundry kinds, especially by spoiling 
their guns from shooting with proper force and direction.” * 


1 Pliny, Wat. Hist. xxviii. 34. 3 Adam Hodgson, Letters frovt 
2 Plutarch, Zs¢zs e¢ Osévzs, 18. This orth America (London, 1824), i. 244. 
is one of the sacred stories which the 4 J. Adair, Azstory of the American 


pious Herodotus (ii. 48) concealed and /xdians (London, 1775), pp. 137 5¢- 
the pious Plutarch divulged. This writer, animated by a curious 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 265 


In more recent times the statement of Adair’s informant 
has been confirmed by a French missionary, who has also 
published the “obscure story ” to which the English traveller 
Hodgson refers. The Loucheux and Hare-skin Indians who 
roam the bleak steppes and forests that stretch from Hud- 
son’s Bay to the Rocky Mountains, and northward to the 
frozen sea, are forbidden by custom to eat the sinew of the 
legs of animals. To explain this custom they tell the fol- 
lowing “sacred story.” Once upon a time a man found a 
burrow of porcupines, and going down into it after the 
porcupines he lost his way in the darkness, till a kind giant 
called “He who sees before and behind” released him by 
cleaving open the earth. So the man, whose name was 
“Fireless and Homeless,” lived with the kind giant, and 
the giant hunted elans and beavers for him, and carried him 
about in the sheath of his flint knife. “But know, my son,” 
said the giant, “that he who uses the sky as his head is 
angry with me, and has sworn my destruction. If he slays 
me the clouds will be tinged with my blood; they will be 
red with it, probably.” Then he gave the man an axe made 
of the tooth of a gigantic beaver, and went forth to meet his 
foe. But from under the ice the man heard a dull muffled 
sound. It was a whale which was making this noise because 
it was naked and cold. Warned by the man, the giant went 
toward the whale, which took human shape, and rushed upon 
the giant. It was the wicked giant, the kind giant’s enemy. 
The two struggled together for a long time, till the kind 
giant cried, “Oh, my son! cut, cut the sinew of the leg.” 
The man cut the sinew, and the wicked giant fell down and 
was slain. That is why the Indians do not eat the sinew of 
the leg. Afterwards, one day the sky suddenly flushed a 
fiery red, so Fireless and Homeless knew that the kind giant 
-was no more, and he wept.’ 


though not uncommon passion for dis- 
covering the ten lost tribes of Israel, 
imagined that he detected the missing 
Hebrews disguised under the red skins 
and beardless faces of the American 
Indians. 


1 E. Petitot, Monographie des Dend- 
Dindjie (Paris, 1867), pp. 77, 81 sg. ; 


7a., Traditions indiennes du Canada 
Nord-ouest (Paris, 1886), pp. 132 s9¢., 
compare pp. 41, 76, 213, 264. he 
story is told in a briefer form, though 
without any reference to the custom, by 
another French missionary. See the 
letter of Mgr. Tache, in Azzales de la 
Propagation de la Fot, xxiv. (1852) pp. 
336 sg. 


Story told 
by the 
Indians to 
explain the 
custom, 


PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 


266 CHAP, 


The This myth, it is almost needless to observe, does not 
custom of really explain the custom. People do not usually ob- 
cutting out = . . 

the sinew of serve a custom because on a particular occasion a mythical 
the thigh : : : r ° ¢ 

inanimals Deing is said to have acted in a certain way. But, on 
seems tobe the contrary, they very often invent myths to explain 


pased on Why they practise certain customs. Dismissing, therefore 
the prin y ile s ( 
ciple of — the story of Fireless and Homeless as a myth invented to 
sympa- : : i i 
ate explain why the Indians abstain from eating a particular 
magic. sinew, it may be suggested! that the original reason for 


observing the custom was a belief that the sinew in question 
was necessary to reproduction, and that deprived of it the 
slain animals could not come to life again and stock the 


steppes and prairies either of the present world or of the’ 


spirit land. We have seen that the resurrection of animals 
is a common article of savage faith, and that when the Lapps 
bury the skeleton of the male bear in the hope of its resur- 
rection they are careful to bury the genital parts along with it. 
However, subsequent enquiries make it probablethat the Indian 
practice of cutting out the hamstring of deer has no other ob- 
ject than that of preventing eaters of venison from going lame. 
Among the Cherokee, we are told, “on killing a deer the 
hunter always makes an incision in the hind quarter and 
removes the hamstring, because this tendon, when severed, 
draws up into the flesh; ergo, any one who should un- 
fortunately partake of the hamstring would find his limbs 


drawn up in the same manner.” ? 


1 The first part of this suggestion is 
due to my friend W. Robertson Smith. 
See his Lectures on the Religion of the 
Semites* (London, 1894), p. 380, note 
I. The Faleshas, a Jewish sect of 
Abyssinia, after killing an animal for 
food, ‘‘ carefully remove the vein from 
the thighs with its surrounding flesh.” 
See Halévy, ‘‘Travels in Abyssinia,” 
in Publications of the Society of Hebrew 
Literature, Second Series, vol. ii. p. 
220. Caffre men will not eat the 
sinew of the thigh; ‘‘it is carefully 
cut out and sent to the principal boy at 
the kraal, who with his companions 
consider it as their right.” See Col. 
Maclean, Kafir Laws and Customs 
(Cape Town, 1866), p. 151. Gallas who 
pride themselves on their descent will 


Thus the superstition 


not eat the flesh of the biceps; the 
reasons assigned for the custom are 
inconsistent and unsatisfactory. 
Ph. Paulitschke, Zthnographie Nordost- 


Afrikas: die materielle Cultur der 
Danékil, Galla und Soméa/ (Berlin, 
1893), p. 154. When the Bushmen 


kill a hare, they cut out a sinew of 


the thigh and will not eat it, alleging 


as their reason that the hare was once 
a man, and that this particular sinew 
is still human flesh. See W. H. IL. 
Bleek and L. C. Lloyd. Specemens of 
Bushman Folklore (London, 
pp. XxXxix., 60 sg., 63. 

2 J. Mooney, ‘‘Sacred Formulas of 
the Cherokees,” Seventh Annual Re- 
port of the Bureau of Ethnology (Wash- 
ington, 1891), p. 323. Compare 7@., 


See= 


IQI1)5uy i 


; 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 267 


seems to rest on the common principle of homoeopathic 
or imitative magic, that an eater infects himself with the 
qualities of the animal of whose flesh he partakes. Many 
instances of the application of that principle have met us 
already." 

But some hunters hamstring the game for a different Some 
purpose ; they hope thereby to prevent the dead beast or its ee 
ghost from getting up and running away. This is the motive the dead 
alleged for the practice by Koui hunters in Laos; they See ee 


think that the spells which they utter in the chase may lose a 
af . A : hosts 
their magical virtue, and that the slaughtered animal may eee 


consequently come to life again and escape. To prevent that mls: 
catastrophe they therefore hamstring the beast as soon as 

they have butchered it.2, When an Esquimau of Alaska has 

killed a fox, he carefully cuts the tendons of all the animal’s 

legs in order to prevent the ghost from reanimating the body 

and walking about.’ But hamstringing the carcase is not the Some 


: s savages put 
only measure which the prudent savage adopts for the sake of "7" a 


disabling the ghost of his victim. In old days, when the Aino of dead 


went out hunting and killed a fox first, they took care to tie 3), a 


its mouth up tightly in order to prevent the ghost of the haps to 


A : - : E blind the 
animal from sallying forth and warning its fellows against ghosts 


the approach of the hunter.“ The Gilyaks of the Amoor °f the 
River put out the eyes of the seals they have killed, lest the gists: 
ghosts of the slain animals should know their slayers and 
avenge their death by spoiling the seal-hunt.2 The custom 

of putting out the eyes of slaughtered animals appears to be 

not uncommon among primitive peoples, and we may suspect 

that even where a different reason is alleged for it, the true 


‘Myths of the Cherokee,” (Vzzeteenth 2 #, Aymonier, (Votes sur le Laos 

Annual Report of the Bureau of (Saigon, 1885), p. 23. 

American Ethnology, Parti. (Washing- 3 E. W. Nelson, “The Eskimo 

ton, 1900) pp. 267, 447. In the last d 

of these passages the writer quotes 

Buttrick, Antiquities, p. 12, asfollows: _syprican Ethnology, Part i. (Wash- 

“The Indians never used to eat a ington 1899) p a3 

certain sinew in the thigh. . . . Some ial Ta Kes : 

say that if they eat of the sinew they * Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Aznu and 

will have cramp in it on attempting to “4¢?7 -Fo/k-ore (London, 1901), p. 

run. It is said that once a woman had = 54- 

cramp in that sinew, and therefore 5 L. von Schrenck, eesex und 

none must eat it.” Forschungen im Amur - Lande, iii. 
1 See above, pp. 138 sgg. 540. 


about Bering Strait,”  Lzghteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 


PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


268 


original motive was to blind the dangerous ghost of the 
injured creature, and so to incapacitate it for retaliating on 
the slayer. Thus, when a Samoyed has killed a wild rein- 
deer, one of the first things he does is to cut out the eyes 
and throw them away “in order to ensure a good bag in 
future”; and he buries the eyes in some place where no 
woman or adult girl is likely to step over them, since that 
also would spoil his luck in the chase." Among the tribes 
of South-east Africa hunters pluck out the right eye of any 
animal they have killed and pour a charmed medicine into 
the empty socket.” Among the Thompson Indians of 
British Columbia a man whose daughter has just arrived 
at puberty may not hunt or trap for a month, or he will 
have no luck. Moreover, he should cut off the head of the 
first grouse he snares, pluck out the eyes, and insert two 
small roots of the Zygadenus elegans Pursch. in the orbits and 
another in its mouth, and having done so he ought to 
hang up the bird’s head above his pillow. If he neglects 
these precautions, he will not be able to snare any more 
grouse or other small game.* No doubt the ceremonial 
pollution contracted by his daughter at this critical period 
of her life is supposed to infect the hunter and render 
him unacceptable to the game;* hence it seems a mere 
elementary dictate of prudence to hoodwink the grouse 
effectually by putting out their eyes. Sometimes, per- 
haps, the cutting out of the eyes of fierce and powerful 
animals may be a rational, not a superstitious, precaution. 
Thus the Kamtchatkans, who stab with knives the eyes 
of slain bears before they cut the carcases up, allege as 
their reason for doing so that bears which seem to be dead 


1 Pp. S. Pallas, Reise durch verschie- Bering Strait a girl at puberty is con- 


sidered unclean. 


dene Provinzen des Russischen Reichs 
(St. Petersburg, 1771-1776), iii. 70. 

2 Rev. J. Macdonald, Light in 
Africa, Second Edition (London, 
1890), p. I71. 

3 J. Teit, Zhe Thompson Indians 
of British Columbia, p. 317 (The 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir 
of the American Museum of Natural 
History, April, 1900). 

* So the 


among Esquimaux of 


“© A peculiar atmo- 
sphere is supposed to surround her at 
this time, and if a young man should 
come near enough for it to touch him 
it would render him visible to every 
animal he might hunt, so that his 
success as a hunter would be gone.” 
See E. W. Nelson, ‘‘The Eskimo 
about Bering Strait,”  Zzghteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Part i. (Wash- 
ington, 1899) p. 291. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 269 


of their wounds will sometimes revive and kill their would-be 
killers." 

It appears to be a common custom with savage hunters 
to cut out the tongues of the animals which they kill. On 
the analogy of the foregoing customs we may conjecture that 
the removal of the tongues is sometimes a precaution to 
prevent the ghosts of the creatures from telling their sad 
fate to their sympathising comrades, the living animals of 
the same sort, who would naturally be frightened, and 
so keep out of the hunters way. Thus, for example, 
Omaha hunters remove the tongue of a slain buffalo 
through an opening made in the animal’s throat. The 
tongues thus removed are sacred and may not touch any 
tool or metal except when they are boiling in the kettles at 
the sacred tent. They are eaten as sacred food.” Indian 
bear-hunters cut out what they call the bear’s little tongue (a 
fleshy mass under the real tongue) and keep it for good luck 
in hunting or burn it to determine, from its crackling and 
so on, whether the soul of the slain bear is angry with them 
or not.’ In folk-tales the hero commonly cuts out the tongue 
of the wild beast which he has slain and preserves it as a 
token. The incident serves to shew that the custom was a 
common one, since folk-tales reflect with accuracy the customs 
and beliefs of a primitive age.* On the other hand, the 


1 P. Dobell, Zvavels in Kamtchatha 

and Siberia (London, 1830), i. 19. 
_ 2 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha 
Sociology,” Zhzrd Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1884), pp. 
289 sq. 

3 J. G. Kohl, Azéschi-Gam7 (Bremen, 
1859), ii. 251 sg.; Charlevoix, Wzstozve 
de la Nouvelle France, v. 173 ; Chateau- 
briand, Voyage en Amérique, pp. 179 
Sg-5 184. 

+ For examples of the incident, see 
J. F. Bladé, Contes populaires recueillis 
en Agenais (Paris, 1874), pp. 12, 143 
G. W. Dasent, Popular Tales from 
the Norse (Edinburgh, 1859), pp. 133 
sq. (‘* Shortshanks” ) ; Aug. Schleicher, 
Litauische Mirchen (Weimar, 1857), 
p- 58; Sepp, <Altbayerischer Sagen- 
Schatz (Munich, 1876), p. 114; R. 
Kohler, on L.Gonzenbach’s Szccleanische 
Miarchen (Leipsic, 1870), ii. 230; 


Apollodorus, 4zbliotheca, iii. 13. 3; 
Schol. on Apollonius Rhodius, A7go- 


maut, i. 5173; W. Mannhardt, 
Antike Wald- und Feldkulte, p. 
53; J. C. Poestion, Lapplandische 


Marchen (Vienna, 1876), pp. 231 sg. ; 
A. F. Chamberlain, in Zighth Report 
on the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
p- 35 (separate reprint from the Reforé 
of the British Association for 1892); 
I. V. Zingerle, Aznder und Haus- 
marchen aus Tirol? (Gera, 1870), No. 
25, p- 127; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, 
Norddeutsche Sagen, Marchen und 
Gebriuche (Leipsic, 1848), p. 342; 
S. Grundtvig, Danzsche Volksmdrchen, 
iibersetzt von W. Leo (Leipsic, 1878), 
p. 289; A. Leskien und K. Brugmann, 
Litautsche Volksheder und Muarchen 
(Strasburg, 1882), pp. 405 sg., 409 sg. ; 
A. und A. Schott, Walachische Maer- 
chen (Stuttgart and Tiibingen), No. 10, 


The 
custom of 
cutting out 
the tongues 
of dead 
animals 
may some- 
times be 
intended to 
prevent 
their ghosts 
from telling 
tales, 


Tongues of 
animals cut 
out in order 
to confer 
super- 
human 
knowledge 
or power 
on their 
possessors. 


270 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP, 


tongues of certain animals, as the otter and the eagle, are 
torn out and sometimes worn round their necks by Thlinkeet 
and Haida shamans as a means of conferring superhuman 
knowledge and power on their possessors.' In particular, an 
otter’s tongue is supposed to convey a knowledge of “the 
language of all inanimate objects, of birds, animals, and other 
living creatures” to the shaman, who wears it in a little bag 
hung round his neck.” When a Galla priest sacrifices an 
animal and decides that the omens are favourable, he cuts 
out the tongue, sticks his thumb through it, and so flays the 
animal.® In certain cases Gallas cut out the tongues of oxen 
and wear them on their heads as tokens. In Bohemia a fox’s 
tongue is worn as an amulet to make a timid person bold ;° 
in Oldenburg and Belgium it is a remedy for erysipelas.® In 
Bohemia the tongue of a male snake, if cut from the living 
animal on St. George’s Eve and placed under a person’s 
tongue, will confer the gift of eloquence.’ The Homeric 
Greeks cut out the tongues of sacrificial victims and burned 
them. According to some accounts, the tongues of the 
victims were assigned by the Greeks to Hermes, as the | 
god of speech, or to his human representatives the heralds.’ 


p- 142; Chr. Schneller, A/archen und 
Sagen aus Walschtirol (Innsbruck, 
1867), No. 39, pp. 116 sg. ; G. Basile, 
Pentamerone, iibertragen von F. Lieb- 
recht (Breslau, 1846), i. 99; P. Sébillot, 
Contes Populaires de la Haute-Bretagne 
(Reais, HEISS))5 LING Fi, job SOR 1: 
Cosquin, Contes Populaires de Lorraine 
(eeA, Ig.) i jo OU Ilo Inteiliveleln, 
Deutsche Volksmarchen aus dem Sachsen- 
lande in Stebenbiirgen* (Vienna and 
Hermannstadt, 1885), No. 24, pp. 104 
sqgq. 3 Grimm, Household Tales, No. 60. 
The incident often occurs in the type 
of tale analysed by Mr. E. S. Hartland 
in his Legend of Perseus (vol. i. pp. 12, 
17, 18, etc. ; vol. ili. pp. 6, 7, 8, etc.). 

1 Fr. Boas, in 22fth Report on the 
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. 
58 (separate reprint from the Report of 
the British Association for 1889); zd., 
in Journal of American Folk-lore, 1. 
(1888) p. 218. 

2 See W. H.. Dall, ‘‘ Masks and 
Labrets,” Zherd Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 


1884), pp. 111 sg. Compare zd., Alaska 
and its Resources (London, 1870), p. | 
425; Ivan Petroff, Report on the | 
Population, Industries, and Resources q 
of Alaska, p. 176. 

3 Ph. Paulitschke, Z¢hnographie | 
Nordost - Afrikas: die Getstige Cultur — 
der Dandkil Galla und Somdl (Berlin, 
1896), p. 47. 

4 Ph. Paulitschke, of. ce¢. p. 1565 
td., Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die | 
matertelle Cultur, etc. (Berlin, 1893), 
p. 226. 

5 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und | 
Gebrauche aus Bohmen und Mahren — 
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p.54,§ 354. — 

6 L. Strackerjan, Aderglaube und | 
Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg \ 
(Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 94, § 3813 | 
E. Monseur, in Revue de Histoire des — 
Religions, xxxi. (1895) pp. 297 sg. 

7 J. V. Grohmann, of. czt. p. Sippy 
§ 576. 

8 Homer, Od. iii. 332, 341. 

9 Scholiast on Aristophanes, P/ztus, — 
1110; Athenaeus, i. 28, p. 16 B; | 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 271 


On the principles of sympathetic magic we might expect 
that heralds should taste the tongues of sacrificial vic- 
tims to strengthen their voices, or to acquire the gift of 
tongues.’ 

The conjecture that the practice of cutting out the tongues 
of dead animals may sometimes be a precaution to prevent 
their ghosts from telling tales, is to some extent confirmed 
by a ceremony which the Bechuanas used to observe after a 
battle. It was customary with them on these occasions to 
sacrifice a fine black ox, called the expiatory victim (fekou), 
cut off the tip of its tongue, and extract one of its eyes 
together with a piece of the hamstring and a piece of the 
principal tendon of the shoulder ; and the severed parts were 
afterwards carefully fried, along with some medicinal herbs, 
in a horn by a medicine-man. The reasons for thus mutilat- 
ing the animal were explained by a native to two French 
missionaries. “If we cut out and purify the victim’s tongue,” 
said he, “the motive is to induce the guardian deities to 
prevent the enemy from speaking ill of us. We ask also 
that the sinews of their feet and hands may fail them in the 
battle ; and that their eyes may not cast a covetous look on 
our herds.”? In this custom the sacrificial ox appears to be 
treated as the ceremonial equivalent of the enemy ; accord- 
ingly by cutting out its tongue you obviously prevent your 
enemy from cursing you, for how can he curse you if he has 
no tongue? Similarly, by hamstringing the beast you ensure 
that the legs and arms of your adversary will fail him in the 
battle, and by gouging out the ox’s eye you make perfectly 
certain that the foe will never be able to cast a longing eye 
on your fat beeves. Thus for all practical purposes the 
mutilation of the ox is quite as effective as the mutilation of 
the enemy’s dead, which is sometimes practised by savages 
from similar superstitious motives. Thus on the return from 
a field of battle the Baganda used to cut up one or two of 
the enemy’s dead, scoop out the eyes, cut off the ears, and 
lay the limbs on the road taken by the returning army “ to 
Paroemiographi Graect, ed. Leutsch et 2 T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, 7e- 
Schneidewin, i. 415, No. roo. lation dun Voyage a’Exploration au 

1 See further H. Gaidoz, ‘‘Les Lan- Nord-estde la Coloniedu Cap de Bonne- 


gues coupées,” M//usine, iii. (1886-87) Espérance (Paris, 1842), pp. 562- 
coll. 303-307 ; E. Monseur, Joc. cit. 564. 


Bechuana 
custom of 
mutilating 
a sacrificial 
ox In order 
to inflict 
corre- 
sponding 
mutilations 
on the 
enemy, 


Mutilation 
of the 
corpses 

of enemies 
or other 
dangerous 
persons for 
the purpose 
of maiming 
their 
ghosts. 


Disabling 
the ghost 
by mutilat- 
ing his 
dead body. 


272 PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS CHAP. 


prevent evil following them.”* The nature of the evil which 


the Baganda warriors feared to incur if they did not mutilate 

the dead in this fashion, is not mentioned, but we may con- | 
jecture that by gouging out the eyes and ears of their 1 
slain foes they hoped to make their angry ghosts blind 
and deaf; or perhaps, upon the principles of homoeopathic 
magic, they counted on maiming their living foes in like 
manner. Some of the aborigines of Australia cut off the 
thumbs of their dead enemies in order that their ghosts may 
not be able to throw spears.” Other Australian tribes burn 
off the thumb nails of their own dead to prevent the poor — 
shost from scratching a way for himself out of the grave.’ 
When the Tupi Indians of Brazil killed and ate a prisoner, | 
“the thumb was cut off because of its use in archery, an art 
concerning which they were singularly superstitious; what — 
was done with it does not appear, except that it was not 
eaten like the rest.”* Perhaps these Indians, like the © 
Australians, thought by this mutilation to disarm the 
dangerous ghost of their victim. When any bad man died, — 
the Esquimaux of Bering Strait used to cut the sinews of | 
his arms and legs, “in order to prevent the shade from _ 
returning to the body and causing it to walk at night asa | 
ghoul.”® In Travancore the ghosts of men who have been | 
hanged for murder are particularly dreaded ; so in order to 
incapacitate them from roaming about and attacking people, — 
it used to be customary to slice off a criminal’s heels with a 
sword or hamstring him at the moment when he swung free 
from the ladder. The Omaha Indians used to slit the soles 
of a man who had been killed by lightning in order to — 
prevent his ghost from walking.’ Among the Awemba of 


1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘‘ Further Notes 
on the Manners and Customs of the 
Baganda,” /ournal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxii. (1902) p. 60. 
This custom appears not to be men- 
tioned by the writer in his book Zhe 
Baganda (London, 1911). 

2 A. Oldfield, ‘‘On the Aborigines 
of Australia,” Zvransactions of the 
Ethnological Society of London, N.S. 
ili. (1865) p. 287. 

3K. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race 
(Melbourne and London, 1886), i. 348, 
381. 


4 R. Southey, estory of Brazil, 
vol. i. Second Edition (London, 1822), — 
peels 

5 E. W. Nelson, ‘‘The Eskimo * 
about Bering Strait,” Zzghteenth An- — 
nual Report of the Bureau of American — 
Ethnology, part i. (Washington, 1899) 
Pp. 423- 
6 Rev. S. Mateer, Zhe Land @ | 
Charity (London, 1871), pp. 203 sg. 

7 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘* A Study 
of Siouan Cults,” Zleventh Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1894), p. 420. 


XIV PROPITIATION OF WILD ANIMALS 273 


Northern Rhodesia murderers often inflicted shocking mutila- 
tions on the bodies of their victims. ‘“ This was done, it is 
said, to prevent the spirit of the murdered person from 
exacting vengeance, and even if only the joint of the first or 
the little finger were cut off, such mutilation would suffice 
for this purpose.” * These examples suggest that many other 
mutilations which savages practise on their dead enemies 
may spring, not from the blind fury of hatred, but from 
a cool calculation of the best mode of protecting them- 
selves against the very natural resentment of the ghosts ; 
by mutilating the corpse they apparently hope to maim the 
ghost and so to render him incapable of harming them. 
At all events it appears that in certain circumstances some 
savages treat the dead bodies of men and beasts much alike, 
by hamstringing them in order to prevent their ghosts from 
getting up and walking. So consistent and impartial is the 
primitive philosopher in his attitude to the spirit world. 


1 C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, Zhe Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia 
(London, 1911), p. 126. _ 


Bie v. VOL. IT T 


CELA PER aOvi 
THE PROPITIATION OF VERMIN BY FARMERS 


§ 1. The Enemies of the Crops 


Propitia- BESIDES the animals which primitive man dreads for their 
tion of the ‘strength and ferocity, and those which he reveres on account 
whichinfest of the benefits which he expects from them, there is another 
crops 22 class of creatures which he sometimes deems it necessary to 
Europe. conciliate by worship and sacrifice. These are the vermin 
that infest his crops and his cattle. To rid himself of these 

deadly foes the farmer has recourse to many superstitious 

devices, of which, though some are meant to destroy 

or intimidate the vermin, others aim at propitiating them 

and persuading them by fair means to spare the fruits of 

the earth and the herds. Thus Esthonian peasants, in the 

island of Oesel, stand in great awe of the weevil, an insect 

which is exceedingly destructive to the grain. They give it 

a fine name, and if a child is about to kill a weevil they say, 

“Don’t do it; the more we hurt him, the more he hurts us.” | 

If they find a weevil they bury it in the earth instead of |F 

killing it. Some even put the weevil under a stone in the 

field and offer corn to it. They think that thus it is appeased 

and does less harm.’ Amongst the Saxons of Transylvania, 

in order to keep sparrows from the corn, the sower begins by | 
throwing the first handful of seed backwards over his head, | 

saying, “That is for you, sparrows.” To guard the corn 

against the attacks of leaf-flies (Hvdflohe) he shuts his eyes 

and scatters three handfuls of oats in different directions. 

Having made this offering to the leaf-flies he feels sure that 

1 J. B. Holzmayer, ‘‘Osiliana,”  schen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat, vii. Heft 
Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estni- 2 (Dorpat, 1872), p. 105 note. 

274 


CHAP. XV THE ENEMIES OF THE CROPS’ e 275 


they will spare the corn. A Transylvanian way of securing 
the crops against all birds, beasts, and insects, is this: after 
he has finished sowing, the sower goes once more from end 
to end of the field imitating the gesture of sowing, but with 
an empty hand. As he does so he says, “I sow this for the 
animals; I sow it for everything that flies and creeps, that 
walks and stands, that sings and springs, in the name of 
God the Father, etc.”* The Huzuls of the Carpathians 
believe that the bite of the weasel is poisonous and that the 
animal commits ravages on the cattle. Yet they take care 
never to kill a weasel, lest the surviving kinsfolk of the 
deceased should avenge his death on the herds of his 
murderer. They even celebrate a festival of weasels either 
on St. Matthew’s day (9th August, old style, 21st August, 
new style), or on St. Catherine’s day (24th November, old 
style, 6th December, new style). On that day no work 
may be done, lest the weasels should harm the herds.” The 
following is a German way of freeing a garden from cater- 
pillars. After sunset or at midnight the mistress of the 
house, or another female member of the family, walks all 
round the garden dragging a broom after her. She must 
not look behind her, and must keep murmuring, “Good 
evening, Mother Caterpillar, you shall come with your 
husband to church.” The garden gate is left open till 
the following morning? 

The attempts thus made by European peasants to 
mollify the rage and avert the ravages of vermin have their 
counterpart in the similar observances of savages. When 
the Matabele find caterpillars in their fields they put an ear of 
corn in a calabash, fill the vessel up with caterpillars, and set it 
down on a path leading to another village, hoping thus to 
induce the insects to migrate thither.* The Yabim of German 
New Guinea imagine that the caterpillars and worms which 
infest their fields of taro are animated by the souls of 


1G. A. Heinrich, Agrarische Sitten Ostkarpaten,” Glodws, lxix. (1906) p. 
und Gebriuche unter den Sachsen 387. 
Stebenbiirgens (Hermannstadt, 1880), 3 E. Krause, ‘‘ Aberglaubische Kuren 
pp. 15 sg. und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,” 
Leitschrift fiir Ethnologie, xv. (1883) 
2R. F. Kaindl, Die Huzulen p. 93. 
(Vienna, 1894), pp. 79, 103; zd., 4 L. Decle, Three Years in Savage 
‘“Viehzucht und Viehzauber in den Africa (London, 1898), p. 160. 


Similar 
attempts 
made to 
propitiate 
vermin by 
savages. 


Sometimes 
in dealing 
with vermin 
the farmer 
aims ata 
judicious 
mean 
between 
undue 
severity 
and weak 
indulgence. 


PROPITIATION OF VERMIN BY FARMERS CHAP. 


276 


the human dead ; hence in order to rid the crops of these 
vermin they politely request the insects to leave the fields 
and repair to the village. “Ye locusts, worms, and cater- 
pillars,” they say, “who have died or hanged yourselves, 
or have been killed by a falling log or devoured by a shark, 
go into the village.”' There is a certain ant whose de- 
structive ravages are dreaded by the people of Nias. 
Generally they wage war on it by means of traps and other 
devices; but at the time of the rice-harvest they cease to 
call the insect by its common name, and refer to it under the 
title of Sibaia, a good spirit who is supposed to protect the 
crop from harm.” In South Mirzapur, when locusts threaten 
to eat up the fruits of the earth, the people catch one, 
decorate his head with a spot of red lead, salaam to him, 
and let him go. After these civilities he immediately | 
departs along with his fellows.» Among the Wajagga of — 
German East Africa sorcerers attempt to rid the fields } 
of locusts by catching one of the insects, tying its legs 
together, and letting it fly away, after charging the creature 
to lead the swarm to the lands of a neighbouring and hostile 
chief. The Wagogo, another tribe of German East Africa, 
catch one of the birds which infest their gardens, and, having 
drenched it with a charmed stuff, they release the bird in 
the hope that it may entice all its companions away into 
the forest.’ 

Sometimes in dealing with vermin the farmer aims at 
hitting a happy mean between excessive rigour on the one | 
hand and weak indulgence on the other; kind but firm, he 
tempers severity with mercy. An ancient Greek treatise on 
farming advises the husbandman who would rid his lands of 
mice to act thus: “Take a sheet of paper and write on it as 
follows: ‘I adjure you, ye mice here present, that ye neither 
injure me nor suffer another mouse to do so. I give you 


1 Vetter, ‘‘Aberglaube unter dem 
Jabim-Stamme in Kaiser-Wilhelms- 
land,” A@ttteclungen der Geographischen 
Gesellschaft zu Jena, xii. (1893) pp. 
95 Sg. 

2 E. Modigliani, Uz Viaggio a Nias 
(Milan, 1890), p. 626. 

3 W. Crooke, Popular Relicion and 

Folklore of Northern India (West- 


minster, 1896), ii. 303. : 

4M. Merker, ‘‘ Rechtsverhialtnisse — 
und Sitten der Wadschagga,” Peter- | 
manns Mittetlungen, Erginzungsheft 
No. 113 (Gotha, 1902), pp. 35 5g. 

5 Rev. H. Cole, ‘‘Notes on the | 
Wagogo of German East Africa,” | 


Journal of the Anthropological Insti- 


tute, XXXll. (1902) p. 320. 


XV THE ENEMIES OF THESCROPS Dig 


yonder field’ (here you specify the field); ‘but if ever I 
catch you here again, by the Mother of the Gods I will rend 
you in seven pieces.’ Write this, and stick the paper on an 
unhewn stone in the field before sunrise, taking care to keep 
the written side up.” In the Ardennes they say that to 
get rid of rats you should repeat the following words: “ Evraz 
verbum, apud Deum vestrum. Male rats and female rats, I 
conjure you, by the great God, to go out of my house, out of 
all my habitations, and to betake yourselves to such and such 
a place, there to end your days. Decretis, reversis et desem- 
barassis virgo potens, clemens, justitiae.’ Then write the 
same words on pieces of paper, fold them up, and place one 
of them under the door by which the rats are to go forth, 
and the other on the road which they are to take. This 
exorcism should be performed at sunrise.” Some years ago 
an American farmer was reported to have written a civil 
letter to the rats, telling them that his crops were short, that 
he could not afford to keep them through the winter, that he 
had been very kind to them, and that for their own good he 
thought they had better leave him and go to some of his 
neighbours who had more grain. This document he pinned 
to a post in his barn for the rats to read.* The mouse 
is one of the most dreaded enemies of the rice-crop in 
Celebes. Many therefore are the prayers and incantations 
which prudent farmers resort to for the purpose of keeping 
the vermin from their fields) Thus, for example, a man 
will run round his field, saying, “ Pruner is your name. 
Creep not through my rice. Be blind and deaf. Creep 
not through my rice. If you must creep through rice, 
go and creep through other rice.’ The following formula is 
equally effective: “Pruner is your real name. Mouse is 
your by-name. Down in the evening land is the’ stone 
on which you ought to sit; in the west, in Java, is your 
abode.” Or again: “O Longtail, Longtail, eat not my 


1 Geoponica, xiii. 5. According to Provznces de France, Paris and Lyons, 


the commentator, the field assigned to 
the mice is a neighbour’s, but it may 
be a patch of waste ground on the 
farmer’s own land. The charm is said 
to have been employed formerly in the 
neighbourhood of Paris (A. de Nore, 
Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des 


1846, p. 383). 

2 A. Meyrac, Traditions, Coutumes, 
Légendes et Contes des Ardennes 
(Charleville, 1890), p. 176. 

3 American Journal of Folk-lore, xi. 
(1898) p. 161. 


Sometimes 
a few of the 
vermin are 
treated 
with high 
distinction, 
while the 
rest are 
pursued 
with 
relentless 
rigour. 


278 PROPITIATION OF VERMIN BY FARMERS Chap. 


rice, 
is revered.” ! 


It is the rice of a prince. It is the field of one who 
The Aino of Japan believe that God first 


created rats and mice at Erum kotan, which means “rat }° 


place.” Indeed, there are a great many rats and mice 


there even now, and the people of the village worship mice | 


and offer them libations and sacred sticks whittled at the 
top into shavings. Grateful for these attentions, the mice 
spare the gardens: and will not nibble at the roots and the 
fruits. But if the people omit to worship the mice, or if 
they are rash enough to speak evil of them, the creatures 
are angry and eat up the garden produce. The havoc which 
rats and mice now work in the gardens of the Aino every 
year is attributed to the modern neglect of the people to 
worship the vermin.” 

Sometimes the desired object is supposed to be attained 
by treating with high distinction one or two chosen individuals 
of the obnoxious species, while the rest are pursued with 
relentless rigour. In the East Indian island of Bali, the 
mice which ravage the rice-fields are caught in great numbers, 
and burned in the same way that corpses are burned. But 
two of the captured mice are allowed to live, and receive a 
little packet of white linen. Then the people bow down 
before them, as before gods, and let them go.’ In the 
Kangean archipelago, East Indies, when the mice prove 
very destructful to the rice-crop, the people rid themselves 
of the pest in the following manner. On a Friday, when 
the usual service in the mosque is over, four pairs of mice 
are solemnly united in marriage by the priest. Each pair is 
then shut up in a miniature canoe about a foot long. These 
canoes are filled with rice and other fruits of the earth, and 
the four pairs of mice are then escorted to the sea-shore 
just as if it were a real wedding. Wherever the procession 
passes the people beat with all their might on their rice- 
blocks. On reaching the shore, the canoes, with their little 
inmates, are launched and left to the mercy of the winds and 


1 G. Maan, ‘“‘ Eenige mededeelingen 
omtrent de zeden en gewoonten der 
Toerateya ten opzichte van den rijst- 
bouw,” Z2%dschrift voor Indische Taal- 
Land- en Volkenkunde, xvi. (1903) 
Pp. 329 Sg. 


2 Rev. J. Batchelor, Zhe Aznu and 
their Folk-lore (London, 1901), p. 
500. 
3, R. van Eck, ‘‘Schetsen van het 
eiland Bali,” Z7jdschrift voor Neder- 
landsch-Indié, N.S., viii. (1879) p. 125. 


XV THE ENEMIES OF THEGCROPS 279 


waves.. When the farms of the Sea Dyaks or Ibans of Sarawak 
are much pestered by birds and insects, they catch a speci- 
men of each kind of vermin (one sparrow, one grasshopper, 
and so on), put them in a tiny boat of bark well-stocked with 
provisions, and then allow the little vessel with its obnoxious 
passengers to float down the river. If that does not drive 
the pests away, the Dyaks resort to what they deem a 
more effectual mode of accomplishing the same purpose. 
They make a clay crocodile as large as life and set it up in 
the fields, where they offer it food, rice-spirit, and cloth, and 
sacrifice a fowl and a pig before it. Mollified by these 
attentions, the ferocious animal very soon gobbles up all the 
creatures that devour the crops.” In some parts of Bohemia 
the peasant, though he kills field mice and grey mice without 
scruple, always spares white mice. If he finds a white mouse 
he takes it up carefully, and makes a comfortable bed for it 
in the window ; for if it died the luck of the house would be 
gone, and the grey mice would multiply fearfully in the 
dwelling? In Albania, if the fields or vineyards are ravaged 
by locusts or beetles, some of the women will assemble with 
dishevelled hair, catch a few of the insects, and march with 
them in a funeral procession to a spring or stream, in which 
they drown the creatures. Then one of the women sings, 
“© locusts and beetles who have left us bereaved,” and the 
dirge is taken up and repeated by all the women in chorus. 
Thus by celebrating the obsequies of a few locusts and 
beetles, they hope to bring about the death of them all.* 
When caterpillars invaded a vineyard or field in Syria, the 
virgins were gathered, and one of the caterpillars was taken 


and a girl made its mother. 
it. 


Thereafter they conducted the “ mother 


Then they bewailed and buried 


” 


to the place 


where the caterpillars were, consoling her, in order that all 


the caterpillars might leave the garden.’ 


1 J. L. van Gennep, ‘“‘ Bijdrage tot 
de kennis van den Kangean-Archipel,” 
Bydragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volken- 
kunde van Nederlandsch-Indié, x\vi. 
(1896) p. 101. 

2 C. Hose and W. McDougall, 
““The Relations between Men and 
Animals in Sarawak ‘‘ Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) 


On the first of 


pp. 198 sq. 

3 J. V. Grohmann, Aderglauben und 
Gebrauche aus Bohmen und Mahren 
(Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 60, 
§ 405. 

4 J. G. von Hahn, <Albanesische 
Studien (Jena, 1854), Heft i. p. 157. 

5 Lagarde, Religuiae jurisecclestastict 
antiguissimae, p.135. For this passage 


Mock 
lamenta- 
tions of 
women for 
insects 
which 
destroy 
the crops. 


Ceremony 
performed 
by Baronga 
women 

to drive 
insects 
from the 
crops. 


Images 
made of 
vermin as 
a charm to 
get rid of 
them. 


280 PROPITIATION OF VERMIN BY FARMERS  cuar. 


September, Russian girls “make small coffins of turnips and 
other vegetables, enclose flies and other insects in them, and 
then bury them with a great show of mourning.”* In 
South Africa a plague of caterpillars is removed by a 
number of small Caffre girls, who go singing through the 
fields. They wail as they pass through the languishing 
crops, and thus invoke the aid and pity of some ancestral 
spirits. The mournful rite ends with a dance on a plot of 
sround overlooking the fields.” 

On the shore of Delagoa Bay there thrives a small brown 
beetle which is very destructive to the beans and maize. 
The Baronga call it msoonoo. In December or January, 
when the insects begin to swarm, women are sent to collect 
them from the bean-stalks in shells. When they have done 
so, a twin girl is charged with the duty of throwing the 
insects into a neighbouring lake. Accompanied by a woman 
of mature years and carrying the beetles in a calabash, the 
girl goes on her mission without saying a word to any one. 
At her back marches the whole troop of women, their arms, 
waists, and heads covered with grass and holding in their 
hands branches of manioc with large leaves which they wave 
to and fro, while they chant the words, “ Voonoo, go away ! 
Leave our fields! Moonoo, go away! leave our fields!” 
The little girl throws her calabash with the beetles into the 
water without looking behind her, and thereupon the women 
bellow out obscene songs, which they never dare to utter 
except on this occasion and at the ceremony for making 
rain.® 

Another mode of getting rid of vermin and other noxious 
creatures without hurting their feelings or shewing them 
disrespect is to make images of them. Apollonius of Tyana 
is said to have cleared Antioch of scorpions by making a 


I am indebted to my late friend W. 
Robertson Smith, who kindly translated 
it for me from the Syriac. It occurs in 
the Canons of Jacob of Edessa, of which 
a German translation has been published 
by C. Kayser (Dze Canones Jacob’s von 
Edessa tibersetat und erlautert, Leipsic, 
1886; see pp. 25 sq.). 


Tees: 


Ralston, Songs of the 


Russian People (London, 1872), p. 
Dale 
2 Dudley Kidd, Savage Childhood, a 
Study of Kafir Children (London, 
1906), p. 292. 

3-H. A. Junod, Les Ba-vonga (Neu- 
chatel, 1898), pp. 419 sg. As to the 
rain-making ceremony among the Ba- 
ronga, see Zhe Magic Art and the 
Evolution of Kings, i. 267 sq. 


XV THE ENEMIES OF THE®EROPS 281 


bronze image of a scorpion and burying it under a small 
pillar in the middle of the city."| Further, it is reported that 
he freed Constantinople from flies by means of a bronze fly, 
and from gnats by means of a bronze gnat.?_ In the Middle 
Ages Virgil passed for an enchanter and is said to have rid 
Naples of flies and grasshoppers by bronze or copper images 
of these insects; and when the waters of the city were 
infested by leeches, he made a golden leech, which put a 
stop to the plague.* It is reported that a mosque at Fez 
used to be protected against scorpions by an image of a bird 
holding a scorpion in its beak.* An Arab writer tells of 
a golden locust which guarded a certain town from a plague 
of locusts; and he also mentions two brazen oxen which 
checked a murrain among cattle. Gregory of Tours tells us 
that the city of Paris used to be free of dormice and serpents, 
but that in his lifetime, while they were cleaning a sewer, 
they found a bronze serpent and a bronze dormouse and 
removed them. “Since then,’ adds the good bishop, “ dor- 
mice and serpents without number have been seen in Paris.” © 
When their land was overrun with mice, the Philistines made 
golden images of the vermin and sent them out of the 
country in a new cart drawn by two cows, hoping that the 
real mice would simultaneously depart.’ So when a swarm 
of serpents afflicted the Israelites in the desert, they made a 
serpent of brass and set it on a pole as a mode of staying 
the plague. 


M. Guizot; Nouvelle Edition (Paris, 
1874), viii. 33, vol. i. p. 514. For 


1j. Malalas, Chronographia, ed. 
L. Dindorf (Bonn, 1831), p. 264. 


2 D. Comparetti, Vergz/ in the Middle 
Ages (London, 1895), p. 265. Ihave to 
thank Mr. J. D. May of Merton College, 
Oxford, for this and the following 
references to Comparetti’s book. 

3D. Comparetti, of. cé¢. pp. 259, 
293, 341. 

4 E. Doutté, Magie et Religion dans 
P Afrique du Nord (Algiers, 1908), p. 
144. 

5 Encyclopaedia Biblica, iv. (London, 
1903) col. 4395. 

6 Grégoire de Tours, stozre 
Eccléstastigue des Francs, traduction de 


some stories of the same sort, see J. B. 
Thiers, Zrazté des Superstitions (Paris, 
1679), pp. 306-308. 


7 1 Samuel vi. 4-18. The passage 
in which the plague of mice is definitely 
described has been omitted in the 
existing Hebrew text, but is preserved 
in the Septuagint (I Samuel v. 6, kai 
pécov THs Xwpas alris avepinoay pves). 
See Dean Kirkpatrick’s note on I 
Samuel v. 6 (Cambridge Bible for 
Schools and Colleges). 


8 Numbers xxi. 6-9. 


Greek gods 
who took 
titles from 
vermin. 


Mouse 
(Smin- 
theus) 

Apollo. 


PROPITIATION OF VERMIN BY FARMERS  CHap. 


282 


§ 2. Mouse Apollo and Wolf Apollo 


Some of the Greek gods were worshipped under titles 
derived from the vermin or other pests which they were 
supposed to avert or exterminate. Thus we hear of Mouse 
Apollo,! Locust Apollo,” and Mildew Apollo ;* of Locust 
Hercules and Worm-killing Hercules ;* of Foxy Dionysus ;’ 
and of Zeus the Fly-catcher or Averter of Flies.© If we 
could trace all these and similar worships to their origin, 
we should probably find that they were at first addressed, not 
to the high gods as the protectors of mankind, but to the 
baleful things themselves, the mice, locusts, mildew, and so 
forth, with the intention of flattering and soothing them, of 
disarming their malignity, and of persuading them to spare 
their worshippers. We know that the Romans worshipped the 
mildew, the farmer’s plague, under its own proper name.’ 
The ravages committed by mice among the crops both in 
ancient and modern times are notorious,° and according to 


1 Homer, Jad, i. 39, with the 
Scholia and the comment of Eustathius ; 
Strabo, xiii. 1. 48 and 633 Aelian, 
Nat. Anim. xii. 5; Clement of 
Alexandria, Pyrotrepft. ii 39, p. 34, 
ed. Potter; Pausanias, x. 12. 5. 

2 Strabo, xiii. I. 64; Pausanias, i. 
24. 8. 

° Strabo, xiii. 1. 64; Eustathius, on 
Homer, J/éad, i. 39, p. 343 Ditten- 
berger, Sylloge Inscriptionum Graeca- 
zum,” No. 609 (vol. ii. p. 386). 

4 Strabo and Eustathius, Z/.cc. 

° Professor W. Ridgeway has pointed 
out that the epithet Bassareus applied 
to Dionysus (Cornutus, Zheologiae 
Graecae Compendium, 30) appears to 
be derived from dassara, ‘‘a fox.” See 
J. Tzetzes, Schol. on Lycophron, 771 ; 
W. Ridgeway, in Zhe Classzcal Review, 
x. (1896) pp. 21 sgg.; S. Reinach, 
Cultes, Mythes, et Religions, ii. (Paris, 
1906) pp. 106 sgg¢. 

Wii, Wee sey, 58 WBS 
EM EEhEIS, 4 Ti, i, ati Ao, ¥ 8 
Clement of Alexandria, Protrept. ii. 
Bie [Plo Sis els IPoition 

T Robigo or personified as Robzgus. 
See Varro, Rerum rusticarum, 1. 1. 6; 


z7d., De lingua latina, vi. 16; Ovid, 
Fastz, iv. 905 sgg.; Tertullian, De 
spectacul’s, 5; Augustine, De czvztate 
Dez, iv. 21; Lactantius, Devin. Lnstit. 
i. 20; L. Preller, Romische Mytho- 
Jogze* (Berlin, 1881-1883), ii. 43 sg¢.3 
W. Warde Fowler, Zhe Roman Festi- 
vals of the FPertod of the Republic 
(London, 1899), pp. 88 sgg¢. 

8 Aristotle, Azst. Anim. vi. 37, p. 
580 b15 sgg.; Aelian, Mat. Anzm. 
xvii. 41; W. Warde Fowler, in Zhe 
Classical Review vi. (1892) p. 413. 
In Laos, a province of Siam, the 
ravages committed by rats are terrible. 
From time to time whole armies of 
these destructive rodents appear and 
march across the country in dense 
columns and serried ranks, devouring 
everything as they go, and leaving 
famine, with all its horrors, in their 
train. See Lieut.-Col. Tournier, /Votice 
suv le Laos Francazs (Hanoi, 1900), 
pp. 104, 135. So in Burma, the 
rats multiply in some years to such 
an extent that they cause a famine by 
destroying whole crops and granaries. 
See Max and Bertha Ferrars, Burma 
(London, 1900), pp. 149 sg. 


XV MOUSE APOLLO AND WOLF APOLLO 


283 


a tradition which may be substantially correct the worship of 
the Mouse (Smintheus) Apollo was instituted to avert them.’ 
The image of a mouse which stood beside Apollo’s tripod in the 
sod’s temple in the Troad,” may be compared with the golden 
mice which the Philistines made for the purpose of ridding 
themselves of the vermin; and the tame mice kept in his 
sanctuary, together with the white mice which lived under the 
altar,® would on this hypothesis be parallel to the white mice 
which the Bohemian peasant still cherishes as the best way 
of keeping down the numbers of their grey-coated brethren.* 
An Oriental counterpart of the Mouse Apollo is the ancient 
pillar or rude idol which the Chams of Indo-China call 
yang-tikuh or “god rat,’ and to which they offer sacrifices 
whenever rats infest their fields in excessive numbers.° 
Another epithet applied to Apollo which probably admits 
of a similar explanation is Wolfish.° Various legends set 
forth how the god received the title of Wolfish because he 
exterminated wolves ;’ indeed this function was definitely 
attributed to him by the epithet Wolf-slayer.. Arguing 
from the analogy of the preceding cases, we may suppose that 
at first the wolves themselves were propitiated by fair words 
and sacrifices to induce them to spare man and beast; and that 
at a later time, when the Greeks, or rather the enlightened 
portion of them, had outgrown this rude form of worship, they 
transferred the duty of keeping off the wolves to a beneficent 
deity who discharged the same useful office for other pests, 
such as mice, locusts, and mildew. A reminiscence of the 
direct propitiation of the fierce and dangerous beasts them- 
selves is preserved in the legends told to explain the origin 
of the Lyceum or Place of Wolves at Athens and of the 
sanctuary of Wolfish Apollo at Sicyon. It is said that 
once, when Athens was infested by wolves, Apollo commanded 
sacrifices to be offered on the Place of Wolves and the smell 


1 Polemo, cited by a scholiast on 
Homer, //ad, i. 39 (ed. Im. Bekker). 
Compare Eustathius on Homer, //ad, 
i. 39. 

2 Aelian, Vat. Anim, xii. 5. 

3 Aelian, /.c. 

4 See above, p. 279. 

5 B®. Aymonier, ‘‘ Les Tchames et 
leurs religions,” Revue de ? Hestotre des 


Religions, xxiv. (1891) p. 236. 

8 Avxevos or Advxios, Pausanias, 1. 
19. 3 (with my note), il. 9. 7, li. 19. 3, 
vill. 40. 53 Lucian, <Azacharsis, 7; 
Im. Bekker, Anxecdota Graeca (Berlin, 
1814-1821), i. 277, lines 10 sg. 

7 Pausanias, ii. 9. 73; Scholiast on 
Demosthenes, xxiv. 114, p. 7306. 

8 Sophocles, vectra, 6. 


Wolfish 
Apollo. 


284 PROPITIATION OF VERMIN BY FARMERS CHu.xXv 


proved fatal to the animals.’ Similarly at Sicyon, when the 
flocks suffered heavily from the ravages of wolves, the same 
god directed the shepherds to set forth meat mixed with 
a certain bark, and the wolves devoured the tainted meat 
and perished.” These legends probably reflect in a distorted 
form an old custom of sacrificing to the wolves, in other 
words of feeding them to mollify their ferocity and win their 
favour. We know that such a custom prevailed among the 
Letts down to comparatively recent times. In the month of 
December, about Christmas time, they sacrificed a goat to 
the wolves, with strange idolatrous rites, at a cross-road, for 
the purpose of inducing the wolves to spare the flocks and 
herds. After offering the sacrifice they used to brag that 
no beast of theirs would fall a victim to the ravening maw 
of a wolf for all the rest of that year, no, not though the 
pack were to run right through the herd. Sacrifices of this 
sort are reported to have been secretly offered by the Letts 
as late as the seventeenth century ;* and if we knew more of 
peasant life in ancient Greece’ we might find that on winter 
days, while Aristotle was expounding his philosophy in the 
Lyceum or Place of Wolves at Athens, the Attic peasant 
was still carrying forth, in the crisp frosty air, his offering to 
the wolves, which all night long had been howling round his 
sheepfold in a snowy glen of Parnes or Pentelicus. 


1 Scholiast on Demosthenes, xxiv.  Lettécae in Ducatu Curlandiae, re- 
114, p. 736. printed in Scrzptores rerum Livontz- 
carum, Vol. ii. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848) 
p- 621. The preface of Einhorn’s work 
3 P. Einhorn, eformatio gentis is dated 17th July 1636. 


2 Pausanias, ii. 9. 7. 


CHAPTER XVI 


THE TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS INTO ANIMALS 
WITH many savages a reason for respecting and sparing 
certain species of animals is a belief that the souls of their dead 
kinsfolk are lodged in these creatures. Thus the Indians of 
Cayenne refuse to eat certain large fish, because they say 
that the soul of some one of their relations might be in the 
fish, and that hence in eating the fish they might swallow 
the soul. The Piaroas Indians of the Orinoco believe that 
the tapir is their ancestor and that the souls of the dying 
transmigrate into animals of that species. Hence they will 
never hunt the tapir nor eat its flesh. It may even ravage 
their crops with impunity ; they will not attempt to ward it 
off or scare it away.” The Canelos Indians of Ecuador also 
believe in the transmigration of souls; it is especially under 
the form of jaguars that they expect to be born again ; hence 
they refuse to attack a jaguar except by way of righteous 
retribution for some wrong he has done them.’ The doctrine 
of transmigration finds favour also with the Quixos Indians ; 
an old man told the Italian traveller Osculati that the soul 
is a breath which passes from the human body into an 
animal, and on the death of the animal shifts its quarters to 
another body.* The Caingua Indians of Paraguay think that 
the souls of the dead which are unable to depart this earth are 
born again in the shape of animals; for that reason many of 


1 A. Biet, Voyage de la France Builetin de la Soctété de Géographie 
Equinoxiale en 1 Isle de Cayenne (Paris, (Paris), Deuxieme Série, xi. (1839) 
1664), p. 361. Pp 75 


4G. Osculati, LZsplorazione delle 
vegiont eguatoralt lingo 271 Napo ed il 
fiume delle Amazzont (Milan, 1850), 
p- 114. 
285 


2 J. Chaffanjon, L’Orénogue et le 
Caura (Paris, 1889), p. 203. 

BmlevralisncRappoxt. jsut) les 
provinces de Canélos et du Napo,” 


Many 
savages 
spare 
certain 
animals 
because 
they believe 
the souls of 
their dead 
to be 
lodged 

in them. 
Examples 
of this , 
belief 
among the 
American 
Indians. 


286 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


them refuse to eat the flesh of the domestic pig, because they 
say, “Hewasa man.” Once when a Spaniard was out hunting 
with two Piros Indians of Peru, they passed a deserted house 
in which they saw a fine jaguar. The Indians drew the 
Spaniard away, and when he asked why they did not attack 
the animal, they said: “It was our sister. She died at the 
last rains. We abandoned the hut and on the second night 
she came back. It was the beautiful jaguar.”* Similarly 
a missionary remarked of the Chiriguanos Indians of Bolivia 
that they must have some idea of the transmigration of souls ; 
for one day, while he was talking with a woman of the tribe 
who had left her daughter in a neighbouring village, she 
started at sight of a fox passing near and exclaimed, “ May 
it not be the soul of my daughter who has died?”* The 
Colombian Indians in the district of Popayan will not kill 
the deer of their forests, and entertain such a respect for 
these animals that they view with horror and indignation 
any one who dares to eat venison in their presence. They 
say that the souls of persons who have led a good life are in 
the deer.* In like manner the Indians of California formerly 
refused to eat the flesh of large game, because they held 
that the bodies of all large animals contained the souls of 
past generations of men and women. However, the Indians 
who were maintained at the Spanish missions and received 
their rations in the form of beef, had to overcome their 
conscientious scruples in regard to cattle. Once a half-caste, 
wishing to amuse himself at the expense of the devout, 
cooked a dish of bear’s flesh for them and told them it was 
beef. They ate heartily of it, but when they learned the 
trick that had been played on them, they were seized with 
retchings, which only ended with the reappearance of the 
obnoxious meat. A reproach hurled by the wild tribes at their 
brethren who had fallen under European influence was “ They 
eat venison!” Californian Indians have been known to plead 
for the life of an old grizzly she-bear, because they thought 


1 J. B. Ambrosetti, “Los Indios Nouvelle Edition, viii. (Paris, 1781) 


Caingua del alto Parana (misiones),” pp. 335 579. 

Boletin del Instituto Geografico Argen- 4 Fr. Coreal, Voyages aux Indes 

tino, xv. (Buenos Ayres, 1895) p. 740. — occ¢dentales (Amsterdam, 1722), ii. 132. 
2 Ch. Wiener, Pérou et Bolivie 5 H. R. Schoolcraft, 7atan Tribes 

(Paris, 1880), p. 369. of the United States (Philadelphia, 


3 Lettres édifiantes et curteuses, 1853-1856), v. 215 sg. 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 287 


it housed the soul of a dead grandam, whose withered features 
had borne some likeness to the wrinkled face of the bear.’ 
The doctrine of the transmigration of human souls 
into animal bodies is viewed with great favour by 
the negroes of northern Guinea. In different parts of the 
coast different species of animals are accounted sacred, 
because they are supposed to be animated by the spirits 
of the dead. Hence monkeys near Fishtown, snakes 
at Whydah, and crocodiles near Dix Cove live in the odour 
of sanctity.” In the lagoon of Tendo, on the Ivory Coast 
of West Africa, there is a certain sacred islet covered with 
impenetrable scrub, on which no native dare set foot. It is 
peopled only by countless huge bats, which at evening quit 
the island by hundreds of thousands to fly towards the River 
Tanoe, which flows into the lagoon. The natives say that 
these bats are the souls of the dead, who retire during the day 
to the holy isle and are bound to present themselves every 
night at the abode of Tano, the great and good fetish who 
dwells by the river of his name. Paddling past the island 
the negroes will not look at it, but turn away their heads. A 
European in crossing the lagoon wished to shoot one of the 
bats, but his boatmen implored him to refrain, lest he should 
kill the soul of one of their kinsfolk.? In the Mopane country 
of South Africa there is, or used to be, no check on the 
increase of lions, because the natives, believing that the souls 
of their chiefs entered into the animals, never attempted to kill 
them ; on the contrary, whenever they met a lion they saluted 
him in the usual fashion by clapping their hands. Hence the 
country was so infested by lions that people, benighted in 
fields, often slept for safety in trees.* Similarly, the Makanga, 
who occupy the angle between the Zambesi and Shire rivers, 
refrain from killing lions because they believe that the spirits 
of dead chiefs enter into them.” The Amambwe universally 
suppose that their reigning chief turns at death into a lion.® 


1 H. R. Schoolcraft, of. céz. iii. 113. 

2 Rey. J. L. Wilson, Western Africa 
(London, 1856), p. 210. | 

3 J. C. Reichenbach, ‘‘ Etude sur le 
royaume d’Assinie,” Az/letin de la 
Soctété de Géographie (Paris), vii. Série, 
xi. (1890) pp. 322 sg. 

4D. Livingstone, Missionary Tra- 


vels and Researches in South Africa 
(London, 1857), p. 615. 

5 Miss A. Werner, Zhe Natives o 
British Central Africa(London, 1906), 
p- 64. 

6 C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane, 
The Great Plateau of Northern 
Rhodesta (London, 1911), p. 200. 


Belief of 
the trans- 
migration 
of human 
souls into 
animals in 
Africa. 


288 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP, 


The Bahima of Ankole, in Central Africa, also imagine that 
their dead kings are changed into lions. Their corpses are 
carried to a forest called Ensanzi, where they lie in state for 
several days. At the end of that time the body is supposed 
to burst and give forth a lion cub, which contains the spirit 
of the deceased king. The animal is nurtured by priests till 
it is grown up, when it is released and allowed to roam the 
forest with the other lions. It is the duty of the priests to 
feed and care for the lions and to hold communications with 
the dead kings when occasion arises. For that purpose the — 
priests always live in a temple in the forest, where they 
receive frequent offerings of cattle for the lions. In this 
forest the lions are sacred and may not be killed, but in 
other parts of the country they may be slaughtered, with 
impunity. Similarly, the Bahima think that at death the 
king’s wives are changed into leopards ; the transformation 
takes place in like manner through the bursting of the dead 
bodies in a belt of the same sacred forest. There the leopards 
are daily fed with offerings of meat by priests, whose office 
is hereditary. Further, the Bahima are of opinion that the 
spirits of dead princes and princesses come to life again in 
the form of snakes, which burst from their dead bodies in 
another belt of the same forest: there is a temple in the 
forest where priests feed and guard the holy serpents. When 
the little snakes have issued from the corpses of the princes, 
they are fed with milk till they are big enough to go alone.’ 
The El Kiboron clan of the Masai, in East Africa, imagine 
that when married men of the clan are buried, their bones 
turn into serpents. Hence the El] Kiboron do not, like the 
other Masai, kill snakes: on the contrary they are glad to- 
see the reptiles in the kraal and set out saucers of milk and 
honey for them on the ground. It is said that snakes never 
bite members of the clan.” The Ababu and other tribes of 
the Congo region believe that at death their souls trans- 


1 Rey. J. Roscoe, ‘‘The Bahima, 
Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute, xxxvll. (1907) pp. IOI sg. 
Compare Major J. A. Meldon, ‘‘ Notes 
on the Bahima of Ankole,” Journal of 
the African Society, No. 22 (January, 
1997), p. 151. 


2M. Merker, Dze Masaz (Berlin, 
1894), p. 202. The belief that the 
human dead are turned into  ser- 
pents is common in Africa; and 
the practice of offering milk to the 
reptiles appears to be not infrequent. 
See Adonis, Attis, Ostris,? pp. 71 sq. 


| XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 289 


“migrate into the bodies of various animals, such as the 
hippopotamus, the leopard, the gorilla, and the gazelle ; and 
on no account would a man eat the flesh of an animal of the 
particular kind which he expects to inhabit in the next life. 
Some of the Caffres of the Zambesi region, in Portuguese 
territory, who believe in the transmigration of human souls 
into the bodies of animals, judge of the species of animals 
into which a dead person has transmigrated by the resem- 
blance which he bore to it in his life. Thus, the soul of 
a big burly man with prominent teeth will pass into an 
elephant ; a strong man with a long beard will become a 
lion; an ugly man with a large mouth and thick lips will 
be a hyaena; and so on. Animals supposed to be tenanted 
by the spirits of the dead are treated as sacred and invulner- 
able. When a Portuguese lady, named Dona Maria, to 
whom the blacks were much attached, had departed this life, 
it chanced that a hyaena came repeatedly by night to the 
village and carried off pigs and kids. The lady’s old slaves 
would not do the creature the smallest hurt, saying, “It is 
Dona Maria, our good mistress. She is hungry and comes 
to her house seeking what she may devour.” ” 

The belief that the souls of the dead transmigrate into 
the bodies of animals appears to be widely diffused among 
the tribes of Madagascar. Thus, for example, the souls of 
the Betsileo are thought after death to be reborn in boa- 
constrictors, crocodiles, and eels of a particular sort according 
to their rank in life. It is the nobles, or at all events the 
most illustrious of them, who have the privilege of turning 
into boa-constrictors at death. To facilitate the transforma- 
tion the corpse of a dead noble is strapped to the central 
pillar of his house, and the products of decomposition are 
collected in a silver bowl. The largest of the worms which 
are bred in the putrid liquid is believed to contain the soul 


1 J. Halkin, Quelgues Peuplades du xv. (1883) p. 593. For more evidence 
district de Uelé (Liége, 1907), p. of similar beliefs in Africa, see Father 
102; Wotes Analytigues sur les Collec-  Courtois, ‘‘ A travers le haut Zambéze,” 
tions Ethnographiqgues du Musée du Les Missions Catholigues, xvi. (1884) 
Congo, La Religion (Brussels, 1906), p. 299 (souls of the dead in guinea- 
p. 162. fowl); Father Lejeune, ‘‘Dans la 

forét,” Les AZésstons Catholigues, xxvii. 

2 Father Courtois, ‘‘Scénes de la (1895) p. 248 (souls of the dead in 

vie Cafre,” Les Missions Catholigues, apes, owls, etc.). 


eiave YOL., II U 


Belief in 
the trans- 
migration 
of human 
souls into 
animals in 
Madagas- 
car. 


Belief in 
the trans- 
migration 
of human 
souls into 
animals in 
Assam, 
Burma, 
and Cochin 
China. 


290 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP, 


of the dead nobleman and to develop in due time into a boa- 
constrictor. Accordingly these huge serpents are regarded 
as sacred by the Betsileo ; nobody would dare to kill one of 
them. The people go down on their knees to them and | 
salute them, just as they would do toa real live nobleman. 
It is a happy day when a boa-constrictor deigns to visit the — 
village which he formerly inhabited in human form. He 
receives an ovation from his family. They go forth to meet 
him, spread silk for him to crawl upon, and carry him off to 
the public square, where he is allowed to gorge himself with 
the blood of a sacrificed ox. The souls of commoners of | 
good standing transmigrate into the bodies of crocodiles, 
and in their new form still serve their old masters, particularly 
by announcing to them the approach of the hour when they | 
must shuffle out of the human frame into the frame of 
boa-constrictors. Lastly, the scum of the population turn at — 
death into eels, and to render the change as easy for them 
as possible it is customary to remove the bowels from the 
corpse and throw them into a sacred lake. The eel that 
swallows the first mouthful becomes the domicile of the soul 
of the deceased. No Betsileo would eat such eels.’ Again, 
the Antankarana, a tribe in the extreme north of Madagascar, 
believe that the spirits of their dead chiefs pass into crocodiles, | 
while those of common folk are reborn in other animals.” 
Once more, the Tanala, a tribe of south-eastern Madagascar, 
suppose that the souls of their dead transmigrate into certain 
animals, such as scorpions and insects, which accordingly | 
they will not kill or eat, believing that the creatures will in 
like manner abstain from injuring them.® 

Some of the Nagas of Assam hold that the spirits of 
the departed, after undergoing a cycle of changes in a sub- 
terranean world, are reborn on earth in the form of butterflies 
or small house flies, only however in that shape to perish for | 


! Father Abinal, ‘‘ Croyances fabu- 
leuses des Malgaches,” Les JAZésszons 
Catholigues, xii. (1880) pp. 549-551. 
A somewhat different account of the 
3etsileo belief in the transmigration of 
souls is given by another authority. 
See G. A. Shaw, ‘‘ The Betsileo,” 
Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar 
Magazine, Reprint of the First Four 


Numbers (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 411. | 
Compare A. van Gennep, Zabou et — 
Totémisme &@ Madagascar (Paris, 1904), 


pp. 272 sg., 283, 291. 
2 Rev. J. Sibree, Zhe Great African 
/sland (London, 1880), p. 270. 


3 «Das Volk der Tanala,” Globus, 
Ixxxix. (1906) p. 362. 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 291 


ever. Hence, when these small flies light on the wine-cups 
of the living, the wassailers will not kill them for fear of 
destroying some one of their ancestors.’ For a like reason 
the Angamis, one of the Naga tribes, carefully abstain from 
injuring certain species of butterfly.” At Ang Teng, a large 
village of Upper Burma, the river at a point above a dila- 
pidated bridge swarms with fish, which the people hold 
sacred, because they imagine them to be their dead come 
to life again in a fishy form. In former days no one might 
kill one of these fish under pain of death. Once a Shan, 
caught fishing with some dead fish in his possession, was 
instantly haled away and killed.* The people of Kon- 
Meney in eastern Cochin China will not eat toads, because 
long ago the soul of one of their chiefs passed at death 
into a toad. In his new shape he appeared to his son 
in a dream, informed him of the transformation, and com- 
manded him to sacrifice a pig, a fowl, and millet wine 
to his deceased parent, assuring him that if he complied 
with the injunction the rice would grow well. The dutiful 
son obeyed the author of his being; the toad appeared in 
the rice-fields watching over the growth of the rice, and the 
crop was magnificent. For two generations the sacrifices 
were duly offered, the toad appeared at the time of sowing, 
and the granaries were full. Afterwards, however, the people 
neglected to sacrifice to the toad and were punished accord- 
ingly by failure of the crops and consequent famine.* Some 
of the Chams of Indo-China believe that the souls of the 
dead inhabit the bodies of certain animals, such as serpents, 
crocodiles, and so forth, the kind of animal varying with the 
family. The species of animals most commonly regarded as 
tenanted by the spirits of the departed are the rodents and 
active climbing creatures which abound in the country, such 
as squirrels. According to some people, these small animals 
are especially the abode of still-born infants or of children 


1 W. H. Furness, “The Ethno- Hardiman, Gazetteer of Upper Burma 


graphy of the Nagas of Eastern Assam,” 
Journal of the Anthropological IJn- 
stitute, Xxxli. (1902) p. 463. 

2 T. C. Hodson, The Naga Tribes 
of Manipur (London, 1911), p. 159. 

3 (Sir) J. George Scott and J. P. 


and the Shan States (Rangoon, 1900- 
Igo1), Part ii. vol. i. p. 26. 

4 Guerlach, ‘‘ Chez les sauvages de 
la Cochinchine Orientale, Bahnar, 
Reungao, Sédang,” Les MZsstons 
Catholigues, xxvi. (1894) pp. 143 59, 


Belief in 
the trans- 
migration 
of human 
souls into 
animals 
in the 
Philip- 
pines, the 
Sandwich 
Islands, 
and the 
Pelew 
Islands. 


292 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


who died young. The souls of these little ones appear in 
dreams to their mourning parents and say: “I inhabit the 
body of a squirrel. Honour me as such. Make me a present 
of a flower, a coco-nut, a cup of roasted rice,’ and so on. 
The parents discharge this pious duty, respect these familiar 
spirits, ascribe illnesses to their displeasure, pray to them for 
healing, and on their deathbed commend to their descendants 
the care of such and such a spirit, as a member of the 
family.’ 

The Igorrots of Cabugatan, in the Philippines, regard the 
eels in their stream as the souls of their forefathers. Hence 
instead of catching and eating them they feed them, till the 
eels become as tame as carp in a pond.” In the Sandwich 
Islands various people worshipped diverse kinds of animals, 
such as fowls, lizards, owls, rats, and so forth. If a man 
who adored sharks happened to have a child still-born, he 
would endeavour to lodge the soul of the dead infant in the 
body of a shark. For this purpose he laid the tiny body, 
together with a couple of roots of taro, some kava, and a 
piece of sugar-cane, on a mat, recited prayers over it, and 
then flung the whole into the sea, believing that by virtue of 
this offering the transmigration of the child’s soul into the 
shark’s body would be effected, and that henceforth the vora- 
cious monsters would spare all members of the family who 
might otherwise be exposed to their attacks. In the temples 
dedicated to sharks there were priests who, morning and 
evening, addressed prayers to the shark-idol, and rubbed 
their bodies with water and salt, which, drying on their skin, 
imparted to it an appearance of being covered with scales. 
They also wore red stuffs, uttered shrill cries, leaped over 
the sacred enclosure, and persuaded the credulous islanders 
that they knew the exact moment when the children thrown 


1 —. Aymonier, ‘‘ Les Tchames et 
leurs religions,” Revue de Vhistoire 
des Religions, xxiv. (1891) p. 267. 
Compare D. Grangeon, ‘‘ Les Cham 
et leurs superstitions,” Zes Messzons 
Catholiques, xxviii. (1896) p. 46. 
According to the latter writer, white 
horses are specially set apart to serve 
as domiciles for these domestic deities. 
After its dedication such a horse is care- 


fully tended and never mounted again. 

2 F. Blumentritt, ‘* Der Ahnencultus 
und die religidsen Anschauungen der 
Malaien des Philippinen - Archipels,” 
Mitthetlungen der Wiener Geogr. 
Gesellschaft, 1882, p. 1643 za., Ver- 
such einer Ethnographie der Philippinen 
(Gotha, 1882), p. 29 (fetermanns 
Mitthetlungen, Ergdanzungsheft, No. 
67). 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 293 


into the sea were turned into sharks. For this revela- 
tion they were rewarded by the happy parents with a 
plentiful supply of little pigs, coco-nuts, kava, and so 
on. The Pelew Islanders believed that the souls of their 
forefathers lived in certain species of animals, which accord- 
ingly they held sacred and would not injure. For this 
reason one man would not kill snakes, another would not 
harm pigeons, and so on; but every one was quite ready 
to kill and eat the sacred animals of his neighbours.” 

We have seen that the Battas of Sumatra seldom kill a Trans- 
tiger and never without performing an elaborate ceremony meta 
to appease the animal’s ghost. The reason alleged for treat- souls into 
ing tigers with this respect is that the souls of the dead 7s)". 
often transmigrate into these animals, and therefore in kill- 
ing a tiger a man never knows whether he is not killing a 
relative of his own. If members of the totemic clan of the 
Tiger should happen to be in a village when the carcase of a 
slain tiger is brought into it, they are bound to pay special 
marks of honour to its remains by putting betel in its 
mouth. A priest offers food and drink to the dead tiger, 
addresses him as Grandfather, prays him not to be angry or 
frightened, and explains to the gods the reasons for putting 
the animal to death.’ 

The Kayans of Borneo think that when the human soul Belief in 
departs from the body at death it may take the form of an ‘¢ "= 


migration 


animal or bird. For example, if a deer were seen browsing of human 
) : : souls into 
near a man’s grave, his relations would probably conclude jyimais in 


that his soul had assumed the shape of a deer, and the Borneo. 
whole family would abstain from eating venison lest they 
should annoy the deceased.* Most of the Kalamantans, 


1 L. de Freycinet, Voyage autour du voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volken- 
Monde, ii. (Paris, 1829) pp. 595 sg. kunde, xXxxiv. (1891) pp. 170-175. 

2 K. Semper, Dze Palau-Inseln im The account which this writer gives of 
Stillen Ocean (Leipsic, 1873), pp. 87 the reception of a dead tiger by the 
5q., 193. These sacred animals were  Battas agrees with, and is probably 
called afzds. A somewhat different the source of, Mr. Batten’s account 
account of the alids of the Pelew cited above (pp. 216 sg.). 
Islanders is given by J. Kubary (‘‘ Die + C. Hose, ‘‘ The Natives of Borneo,” 
Religion der Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s _/ournal of the Anthropological Institute, 
Allerlet aus Volks-und Menschenkunde, xxiii. (1894) p. 165. Compare A. W. 
Leipsic, 1888, i. 5 sgq.). Nieuwenhuis, /# Centraal Borneo (Ley- 

3 W. D. Helderman, ‘‘De tijger en den, 1900), i. 148; za@., Quer durch 
het bijgeloof der Bataks,” Zydschrift Borneo (Leyden, 1904-1907), i. 105. 


294 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


another tribe of Borneo, will kill and eat deer freely, but } 
there are exceptions to the rule. “Thus Damong, the chief } 
of a Malanau household, together with all his people, will © 
not kill or eat the deer Cervulus muntjac, alleging that an 
ancestor had become a deer of this kind, and that, since 
they cannot distinguish this incarnation of his ancestor from 
other deer, they must abstain from killing all deer of this 
species. We know of one instance in which one of these 
people refused to use again his cooking-pot which a Malay 
had borrowed and used for cooking the flesh of this deer. 
This superstition is still rigidly adhered to, although these 
people have been converted to Islam of recent years... . 
The people of Miri, who also are Mohammedan Malanaus, 
claim to be related to the large deer (Cervus equinus) and 
some of them to the muntjac deer also. Now these people 
live in a country in which deer of all kinds abound, and 
they always make a clearing in the jungle around a tomb. 
On such a clearing grass grows up rapidly, and so the spot 
becomes attractive to deer as a grazing ground; and it 
seems not improbable that it is through frequently seeing 
deer about the tombs that the people have come to enter- 
tain the belief that their dead relatives become deer or that 
they are in some other way closely related to the deer. The 
Bakongs, another group of Malanaus, hold a similar belief — 
with regard to the bear-cat (Artzctzs) and the various species 
of Paradoxurus, and in this case the origin of the belief is 
admitted by them to be the fact that on going to their | 
sraveyards they often see one of these beasts coming out of 

a tomb. These tombs are roughly constructed wooden 
coffins raised a few feet only from the ground, and it is 
probable that these carnivores make their way into them in 
the first place to devour the corpse, and that they then 
make use of them as lairs.”’ Among the Sea Dyaks, 
also, of Borneo the idea of metempsychosis is not un- 
known. One of them used to treat a snake with the 
greatest kindness, because he said it had been revealed to 
According to the latter writer the 1 Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, 
Kayans or Bahaus in general abstain ‘‘The Relations between Men and 
from the flesh both of deer and of grey Animals in Sarawak,” Journal of the 


apes, because they think that the souls <Azthropological Institute, xxxi. (1901) 
of the dead may be in them, eh ied, 


| XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 295 


him in a dream that the spirit of his grandfather dwelt in 
that snake.’ 

Some of the Papuans on the northern coast of New 
Guinea also believe in the transmigration of souls. They 
hold that at death the souls of human beings sometimes 
pass into animals, such as cassowaries, fish, or pigs, and they 
abstain from eating the animals of the sort in which the 
spirits of the dead are supposed to have taken up their 
abode.” For example, at Masur in Dutch New Guinea there 
are people who imagine that the spirits of their ancestors 
transmigrated into cassowaries, and accordingly they will 
‘ not partake of the flesh of the long-legged bird.? In Sim- 
bang, a village at the mouth of the Bubui river in German 
New Guinea, there is a family who will not harm crocodiles, 
not merely because they fear the vengeance of the creatures, 
but also because they reckon crocodiles their kinsfolk and 
expect that they themselves will turn into crocodiles at 
death. As head of the family they recognise a certain aged 
crocodile, everywhere known as “old Butong,” who is said 
to have been born of a woman at Simbang.* They think 
that while they are at work in the fields, and the houses 
stand empty, their ancestors come forth from the river and 
repair to the place in the roof where the mysterious bull- 
roarers are kept, which make a humming sound at the 
initiatory rites of young men. But when the people return 
from the fields they find the houses as empty and silent as 
when they left them: the spirits of their forefathers have 
plunged into the river again. Ifa crocodile carries off any- 
body, the natives are sure that the brute must be a stranger, 
not one of their own crocodile kinsfolk, who never would do 
such a thing; and if their neighbours at Yabim are so 
unfeeling as to kill a crocodile, the Bubui people protest 
against the outrage and demand satisfaction. Some Yabim 


3 Max Krieger, Vew-Guznea (Berlin, 
N.D.), p. 404. 


1 EF. H. Gomes, Seventeen Vears 
among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo (Lon- 


don, I19II), p. 143. 
4K. Vetter, Komm heriiber und hilf 


2 F. S. A. de Clercq, ‘* De West, en 
Noordkust van Nederlandsch Nieuw- 
Guinea,” Zijdschrift van het Kon- 
inkligk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundie 
Genootschap, Tweede Serie, x. (1893) 
p. 635. 


uns ! iii. (Barmen, 1898) p. 22. Com- 
pare z@., in Nachrichten tiber Kaiser 
Wilhelms-Land, 1897, pp. 87 sq. ; B. 
Hagen, Unter den Papuas (Wiesbaden, 
1899), p. 225. 


Belief in 
the trans- 
migration 
of human 
souls into 
animals 
in New 
Guinea, 


Belief in 
the trans- 
migration 
of human 
souls into 
animals 
in the 
Solomon 
Islands. 


296 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


people give out that after death their souls will be turned 


into certain fabulous cave-haunting swine, and accordingly — 


their relatives refuse to spear or to eat the real wild swine. 


If these animals break into and ravage the fields, their © 


human kinsfolk attempt to appease them with offerings of 
coco-nuts and other valuable articles." Similarly in Tamara, 
an island off the coast of German New Guinea, the people 
will not eat pork, because it is their conviction that the souls 
of the dead transmigrate into the bodies of pigs.” The Kai 
people, who inhabit the rugged and densely wooded moun- 
tains inland from Finsch Harbour in German New Guinea, 
imagine that the gloomy depths of some wild ravines are 
haunted by the souls of the dead in the form of cuscuses and 
other animals. None but the owner has the right to kill 
game in these dark and awful gullies, and even he must 
propitiate the soul of every animal that he slays in such a 
spot. For this purpose he spreads out offerings on the 
carcase and presents them to the injured spirit, saying, 
“Take the gifts and leave us the animal, that we may eat 
it.” After leaving the articles long enough to allow the 
soul of the beast to abstract and convey away the souls of 
the things, the hunter is free to cut up and consume the 
carcase. Some years ago, when heavy rains caused a land- 
slip in these wild mountains, and a house with its inmates 
was buried in the ruins, public opinion in the neighbourhood 
attributed the disaster to the misconduct of the deceased, 
who had failed to appease the soul of a boa-constrictor slain 
by them on haunted ground.’ 

In the Solomon Islands a man at the point of death 
would gather the members of his family about him and 
inform them of the particular sort of creature, say a 
bird or a butterfly, into which he proposed to trans- 
migrate. Henceforth the family would regard that species 
of animal as sacred and would neither kill nor injure it. 
If they fell in with a creature of the kind, it might be a 

1H. Zahn, ‘‘Die Jabim,” in R. ales Archiv fiir LEthnographie, xiii. 
Neuhauss, Deutsch Neu-Guinea, iil. (1900) p. 40. 
(Berlin, 1911) p. 310. 3 Ch. Keysser, ‘‘ Aus dem Leben 
2, R. Parkinson, *‘Die Berlinhafen der Kaileute,” in R. Neuhauss, Deutsch 


Section, ein Beitrag zur Ethnographie Meu-Guznea, iii. (Berlin, 1911) pp. 
der Neu-Guinea Kiiste,” /rternation- 150 sg. 


| 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 297 


bird or a butterfly, they would say, “That is papa,’ and 
offer him a coco-nut.' In these islands sharks are very 
often supposed to be ghosts, for dying people frequently 
announce their intention of being sharks when they have 
put off their human shape. After that, if any shark remark- 
able for its size or colour is seen to haunt a certain shore 
or rock, it is taken to be somebody’s ghost, and the name 
of the deceased is given to it. For example, at Ulawa 
a dreaded man-eating shark received the name of a dead 
man and was propitiated with offerings of porpoise teeth. 
At Saa, certain food, for example coco-nuts from particular 
trees, is reserved to feed such a ghost-shark, but men of 
whom it is positively known that after death they will be in 
sharks are allowed by anticipation to partake of the shark- 
food in the sacred place. Other men will sometimes join 
themselves to their company, and speaking with the voice of 
a shark-ghost will say, “Give me to eat of that food.” If 
such a man happens to be really possessed of supernatural 
power, he will in due time become a shark-ghost himself; but 
it is perfectly possible that he may fail. In Savo not very 
long ago a certain man had a shark that he used to feed and 
to which he offered sacrifice. He swam out to it with food, 
called it by name, and it came to him. Of course it was not 
a common shark, but a ghost, the knowledge of which had 
been handed down to him from his ancestors. Alligators 
also may lodge the souls of dead Solomon Islanders. In the 
island of Florida a story was told of an alligator that used to 
come up out of the sea and make itself quite at home in the 
village in which the man whose ghost it was had lived. It 
went by the name of the deceased, and though there was one 
man in particular who had special connexion with it and was 
said to own it, the animal was on friendly terms with every- 
body in the place and would even let children ride on its back. 
But the village where this happened has not yet been identi- 
fied.” In the same island the appearance of anything wonderful 
is taken as proof of a ghostly presence and stamps the place 
as sacred. For example,a man planted some coco-nut palms 


1 Mr. Sleigh of Lifu, quoted by Prof. 2, R. H. Codrington, Zhe JAZela- 
E. B. Tylor, in Journal of the Anthro- nesians (Oxford, 1891), pp. 179 sg. 
pological Institute, xxviii. (1898) p. 147. 


The 
doctrine of 
the trans- 
migration 
of human 
souls into 
animals in 
ancient 
India. 


298 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


and almond trees in the bush and died not long afterwards. 
After his death there appeared among the trees a great 
rarity in the shape of a white cuscus. The animal was 
accordingly assumed to be the ghost of the departed planter 
and went by his name. The place became sacred, and no 
one would gather the fruits of the trees there, until two 
young men, who had been trained in the principles of 
Christianity, boldly invaded the sanctuary and appropriated 
the almonds and coco-nuts.". It must not be supposed, 
however, that the choice of transmigration open to a 
Solomon Islander is restricted to the animal kingdom; he 
is free after death to become a vegetable, if he feels so 
disposed. When a mission-school was established in the 
island of Ulawa it was observed with surprise that the 
natives would not eat bananas and had ceased to plant the 
tree. Enquiry elicited the origin of the restriction, which 
was recent and well remembered. A man of great influence, 
dying not long before, had forbidden the eating of bananas 
after his death, saying that he would be in the banana. 
The older natives would still mention his name and say, 
“We cannot eat So-and-so.” ” 

The doctrine of the reincarnation of human souls in the 
bodies either of men or of animals, which meets us as an 
article of faith in so many savage tribes, has a special 
interest for the historian of thought, because it has been 
adopted more or less explicitly and employed, not merely as 
a philosophical theory, but as a means of enforcing moral 
lessons, by thinkers, teachers, and lawgivers among various 
civilised peoples, notably in ancient India and Greece, 
Thus in the most famous of old Indian law-books, The 
Laws of Manu, the penalties to be endured by evil-doers in 
future births are described with a precision which leaves 


1 R. H. Codrington, of. czt. p. 177. 

2 R. H. Codrington, of. ct. p. 33. 
East Indian evidence of the belief in 
transmigration into animals is collected 
by G. A. Wilken (‘‘ Het animisme bij 
de volken van den Indischen Archipel,” 
De Indische Gids, June 1884, pp. 
988 sgg.), who argues that this belief 
supplies the link between ancestor- 
worship and totemism. Compare the 


same writer’s article ‘‘Iets over de 
Papoewas van de Geelvinksbaai,” pp. 
24 sgq. (separate reprint from Szdragen 
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van 
Ned. Indié, 5e Volgreeksii.). Wilken’s 
view on this subject is favoured by 
Professor E. B. Tylor (Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxviii. (1898) 
pp- 146 sg.). See further, Zotemzsm 
and Exogamy, iv. 45 Sgg- 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 299 


nothing to be desired: the degradation of the birth is 
exactly proportioned to the degree of moral guilt of the 
transgressor. For example, if a man has the temerity to 
censure his teacher, even though the censure is richly 
deserved, that rash man in his next birth will be an ass; 
but if he defames his teacher falsely, he will be a dog; 
and if he is so lost to all sense of propriety as to live 
at the expense of his teacher, he will be a worm.’ A 
faithless wife in her next transmigration will be born a 
jackal.2 A Brahman who misappropriates money which 
he has received for a sacrifice will hereafter be either 
a vulture or a crow for the period of one hundred years.’ 
Men who delight in doing hurt will be born as carnivorous 
animals, and those who eat forbidden food will be degraded 
into worms. As for thieves, their lot is a hard one, and it is 
harder in proportion to the value of the article stolen. A 
man who steals gems will be born a goldsmith ; a man who 
steals grain will be born a rat; a man who steals honey will 
be born a stinging insect ; and a man who steals clarified 
butter will be born anichneumon, The penalty for stealing 
silk is to become a partridge, for stealing linen a frog, for 
stealing vegetables a peacock, for stealing cooked food a 
porcupine, for stealing uncooked food a hedgehog, and for 
stealing molasses a flying-fox. And so on for the various 
degrees of moral turpitude throughout the entire range of 
the animal kingdom. Buddha himself, who gave an 
immense extension to the doctrine of transmigration by 
incorporating it in his religious or rather philosophical 
system, is traditionally said to have undergone many animal 
births of various sorts before he attained to his supreme 
dignity. Thus it is reported that he was once a hare, once 
a dog, twice a pig, twice a frog, four times a_ serpent, 
six times a snipe, ten times a lion, eleven times a deer, and 
eighteen times a monkey; to say nothing of having been 
once a devil-dancer, twice a thief, eighty-three times an 
ascetic, and so on.” 


1 The Laws of Manu, ii. 201. Buddhism, Second Edition (London, 
2 Td., v. 164. 1890), pp. I11 sg. Full, if not 
DSi 598 ls always authentic, particulars of the 
4 7d., xii. 39-78. Buddha’s manifold transmigrations are 
5 Sir Monier Monier- Williams, contained in the /a/akas, a large col- 


The 
doctrine 
of trans- 
migration 
in Buddh- 
ism. 


The 
doctrine of 
the trans- 
migration 
of souls 
taught in 
ancient 
Greece by 
Pythagoras 
and Em- 
pedacles. 


300 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


In ancient Greece also the theory of the transmigration of 
souls found favour with the early philosophers Pythagoras 
and Empedocles, both of whom, if we may trust tradition, 
appealed to their own personal experience in support of the 
doctrine. According to ancient writers, Pythagoras affirmed 
that he had been Euphorbus the Trojan in one of his former 
lives, and in proof of the assertion he identified the shield 
of Euphorbus among the Trojan spoils at Mycenae.' He 
would seem to have held that human souls can transmigrate 
into animals or even into plants ;” and we may suppose that 
the possibility of such transmigrations was at least one of 
the reasons he alleged for enjoining the strictest of his 
disciples neither to kill nor to eat animals and to abstain 
from certain vegetables, such as beans and mallows.? Cer- 
tainly at a later time these principles were maintained and 
these precepts inculcated by Empedocles, who outdid the 
reminiscences of his predecessor by asserting that he him- 
self in former lives had been a boy, a girl, a bush, a bird, 
and a fish.* Hence he denounced as a crime the practice of 
killing and eating animals, since according to him a man 
could never know but that in slaughtering and eating an 
animal he might be murdering and devouring one of his 
dead kinsfolk, it might be his father or mother, his son 
or daughter.’ Thus from the doctrine of transmigration 
Empedocles logically drew the same practical conclusion 
as the savage, who abstains, for example, from killing and 
eating crocodiles or pigs because he believes the souls of his 
departed relations to be embodied in crocodiles or pigs: the 
only important difference between the savage and the 
lection of stories which has been /Psyche* (Leipsic and Tiibingen, 1903), 


completely translated into English by ll. 417 sgg. 
the late Professor E. B. Cowell, Dr. 2 Diogenes Laertius, Vit. Philosoph. 


W. H. D. Rouse, and other scholars 
(6 volumes, Cambridge, 1895-1907). 

1 Diodorus Siculus, x. 6. 1-3 ; Jam- 
blichus, De Pythagorica vita, xiv. 63 ; 
Porphyry, Vita Pythag. 26 sg. ; Ovid, 
Metamorph. xv. 160 sgg. According 
to Heraclides Ponticus, the philosopher 
remembered his personal identity in 
four different human lives before he 
was born into the world as Pythagoras 
(Diogenes Laertius, Vet. Phzlosoph. viii. 
I. 4 sg.). See further E. Rohde, 


viii. I. 4 and 36. 

3 Jamblichus, De Pythagorica vita, 
xxiv. 107-109; Sextus Empiricus, ix, 
127-130; Aulus Gellius, iv. 11. 

4 Diogenes Laertius, Vzt. Philosoph. 
vill. 2. 77; H. Diels, Die Hragmente 
der Vorsokratiker,? i. (Berlin, 1906) p. 
208, frag. 117. 

5 Sextus Empiricus, ix. 129; H. 
Diels, of. cz#. i. pp. 213° 5g., Mage 
Mais 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 301 


philosopher in this respect is that, whereas the savage 
venerates and spares only animals of one particular species 
on the ground of their possible affinity to himself, the 
philosopher on his own shewing was bound to abstain from 
all animals whatever, since according to him the spirits of his 
deceased relatives might be lurking in creatures of any 
species. Hence while a faith in transmigration imposes but 
few restrictions on the diet of a savage, since it leaves him 
free to partake of the flesh of every sort of animals but one, 
the creed of Empedocles logically cut him off from a flesh 
diet altogether and compelled him to live on vegetables 
alone ; indeed, if he had been rigidly logical, he must have 
denied himself the use of vegetables also and perished of 
hunger, since on his theory vegetables as well as animals 
may house the souls of the dead.’ However, like a wise 
man he sacrificed logic to life, and contented himself with 
forbidding his disciples the use of a few vegetables, such as 
beans and laurels,” while he suffered them to browse freely 
on all the rest. 

So far as we can gather the real opinions of Pythagoras 
and Empedocles from the traditional history of the one and 
the miserably mutilated writings of the other, they seem both, 
like Buddha, with whom they had much in common, to have 
used the old savage doctrine of the transmigration of souls 
mainly as a handle by which to impress on the minds of 
their followers the necessity of leading an innocent, pure, and 
even ascetic life in this world as the only means of ensuring 
a blissful or at all events an untroubled eternity in a world 
to come.* At least this is fairly certain for Empedocles, 
whose views are comparatively well known to us through the 
fragments of his philosophical writings. From these utter- 
ances of his, the genuineness of which seems to be beyond 
suspicion, we gather that the psychology of Empedocles was 
a curious blend of savagery and mysticism. He regarded 
the incarnation of the human soul in a body of any sort asa 
punishment for sin, a degradation, a fall from heaven, an 


1 Compare Sextus Empiricus, ix. of. ct. i. p. 214, fragments 140, 141. 
127-130. 3 As to Pythagoras in this respect, 

2 Plutarch, Quaest. Convzv. iii. 1.2. see E. Rohde, Psyche 3 (Tiibingen and 
7; Aulus Gellius, iv. 11.9; H. Diels, Leipsic, 1903), ii. 161 sgq. 


The 
doctrine 
of trans-: 
migration 
used by 
Pythagoras 
and Em- 
pedocles 
mainly to 
inculcate 
certain 
ethical 
precepts. 


The 
pessimism 
of Em- 
pedocles 
unlike the 
ordinary 
Greek view 
of life ; its 
similarity 
to Buddh- 
ism. 


302 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


exile from God, a banishment from a world of bliss to a 
world of woe. He describes the earth as a cavern,’ a joyless 
land, where men wander in darkness, a prey to murder and 
revenge, to swarms of foul fiends, to wasting sickness and 
decay. He speaks with pity and contempt of the life of 
mortals as a wretched and miserable existence, begotten of 
strife and sighs and prolonged as a punishment for their sins 
through a series of transmigrations, until, by the exercise 
of virtue, they have been born again as prophets, poets, 
physicians, and princes, and so return at last to communion 
with the gods to live thenceforth free from pain and sorrow, 
immortal, incorruptible, divine. This view of human destiny, 
this passionate scorn poured on the present world, this ecstatic 
aspiration after a blissful eternity, the reward of virtue in a 
world to come, are very alien from the cheerful serenity, the 
calm rationalism of the ordinary Greek attitude towards 
existence on earth.” In his profound conviction of the 
manifold sufferings inseparable from mortality, in his longing 
to put off the burden of the body or what he calls “the 
garment of flesh,” °® in his tenderness for the lower animals 
and his strong sense of kinship with them, Empedocles 
resembled Buddha, whose whole cast of thought, however, 
was tinged with a still deeper shade of melancholy, a more 
hopeless outlook on the future. Yet so close in some 
respects is the similarity between the two that we might 
incline to suppose a direct influence of Buddhism on Em- 
pedocles, were it not that the dates of the two great thinkers, 
so far as they can be ascertained, appear to exclude the 
supposition.’ 


1 Plutarch, De exzlio, 17; zd., De ‘¢iker,* i. (Berlin, 1906) pp. 207, 209, 


esu carnium, i. 7. 43 Clement of Alex- 
andria, Strom. iv. 4. 12, p. 569 ed. 
Potter ; Hippolytus, Re/tatio omnium 
Hlaeresium, vii. 29, p. 388 ed. L. 
Duncker and F. G. Schneidewin ; H. 
Diels, of. czt. i. pp. 207 sg., fragments 
iit, 30300), 

2 Porphyry, De antro nympharum, 8. 

3 Hi. Diels, of. czz. i. pp. 208 sg., 
frag. 121. 

4 Clement of Alexandria, Strom. iii. 
BLA Lvs ©2352 evan 4 m2 Sapp: 
Giule) Why 9225 22 Gel leiieg Jal. 
Diels, Die FHragmente der Vorsokra- 


215 sg., fragments 115, 124, 144-147. 

5 Empedocles is cited by Aristotle as 
an example of the melancholy which he 
believed to be characteristic of men of 
genius. See Aristotle, Problem. 30, 
p- 953 a 27 ed. Im. Bekker. 

8 Stobaeus, Zclogae, i. 41. 60 (vol. 
i, p. 331 ed. A. Meineke); Plutarch, 
De esu carnium ii. 4. 43; H. Diels, 
op. ctt. i. p. 210, frag. 126. 

7 It seems to be fairly certain that 
Buddha died and Empedocles was born 
somewhere about the year 480 B.C. 
Hence it is difficult to suppose that the 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 303 


But if on its ethical side the teaching of Empedocles 
may almost be described as Buddhism relieved of its 
deepest shadows, on its scientific side it curiously antici- 
pated some speculations which have deeply stirred the 
European mind in our own and our fathers’ days. For 
to his savage psychology and religious mysticism Empe- 
docles superadded a comprehensive and grandiose theory 
of the material universe, which presents a close analogy 
to that of Herbert Spencer. The scientific doctrine of the 
conservation of energy or, as he preferred to call it, the 
persistence of force, which Spencer made the corner-stone of 
his system, has its counterpart in the Empedoclean doctrine 
of the conservation or indestructibility of matter, the sum of 
which, according to him, remains always constant, never under- 
going either increase or diminution. Hence all the changes 
that take place in the physical world, according to Empe- 
docles, resolve themselves into the integration and disintegra- 
tion of matter, the composition and decomposition of bodies, 
brought about by the two antagonistic forces of attraction 
and repulsion, which in mythical language he called love and 
hate. And just as all particular things are evolved by the 
force of attraction and dissolved by the force of repulsion, 
a state of concentration or aggregation in the individual per- 
petually alternating with a state of diffusion or segregation, 
so it is also with the material universe as a whole. It, too, 
alternately contracts and expands according as the forces of 
attraction and repulsion alternately prevail. For it was the 
opinion of Empedocles that a long, perhaps immeasurable, 
period of time, during which the force of attraction prevails 
over the force of repulsion, is succeeded by an equally long 
period in which the force of repulsion prevails over the force 
of attraction, each period lasting till, the predominant force 
being spent, its action is first arrested and then reversed by 
the opposite force ; so that the material universe performs a 


ideas of the former should have per- (Leipsic, 1876) p. 678 note! 

colated from India to Greece, or rather 

to Sicily, in the lifetime of the latter. 1 Plutarch, Adverses Coloten, 10; 
As to their respective dates see H. Aristotle, De Xenophane, 2, p. 975 
Oldenberg, Buddha® (Stuttgart and a 39-b 4 ed. Im. Bekker; H. Diels, 
Berlin, 1906), pp. 115, 227; E. Zeller, of. cz¢. i. pp. 175, 176, fragments 8 
Die Philosophie der Griechen, i+ and 12. 


Analogy 
of the 
physical 
specula- 
tions of 
Empe- 
docles to 
those of 
Herbert 
Spencer, 


Herbert 
Spencer's 
theory of 
alternate 
periods of 
concentra- 
tion and 
dissipation 
of matter. 


TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


304 


periodic and rhythmic movement of alternate contraction 
and expansion, which never ceases except at the moments 
when, the two opposite forces exactly balancing each other, 
all things come to rest and equilibrium for a time, only 
however to return, with the backward sweep of the cosmic 
pendulum, to their former state either of consolidation or of 
dispersion. Thus under the influence of attraction and repul- 
sion matter is constantly oscillating to and fro: at the end 
of a period of contraction it is gathered up in a solid globe: 
at the end of a period of expansion it is diffused throughout 
space in a state of tenuity which nowadays we might describe 
as gaseous. And this gigantic see-saw motion of the universe 
as a whole has gone on and will go on for ever and ever.’ 

The imposing generalisation thus formulated by Empe- 
docles in the fifth century before our era was enunciated 
independently in the nineteenth century of our era by Herbert 
Spencer. Like his Greek predecessor, the modern English 
philosopher held that the material universe passes through 
alternate periods of concentration and dissipation, of evolu- 
tion and dissolution, according as the forces of attraction and 
repulsion alternately prevail. The terms in which he sums 
up his general conclusions might be used with hardly any 
change to describe the conclusions of Empedocles. For the 
sake of comparison it may be well to subjoin the passage. 
It runs as follows :— 

“Thus we are led to the conclusion that the entire 
process of things, as displayed in the aggregate of the 
visible Universe, is analogous to the entire process of things 
as displayed in the smallest aggregates. 

“Motion as well as matter being fixed in quantity, it 
would seem that the change in the distribution of Matter 
which Motion effects, coming to a limit in whichever direc- 
tion it is carried, the indestructible Motion thereupon neces- 


sitates a reverse distribution. 


1 The evidence, consisting of the 
testimonies of ancient authorities and 
the fragments of Empedocles’s own 
writings, is fully collected by H. Diels 
in his excellent work Dze Fragmente 
der Vorsokratiker, Zweite Auflage, i. 
(Berlin, 1906) pp. 158 sgq., 173 sqq. 
Compare fragmenta Philosophorum 


Apparently, the universally 


Graecorum, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, i. 
(Paris, 1875) pp. I sgg.; H. Ritter 
et L. Preller, Azstorta Philosophiae 
Graecae et Latinae ex fontium locis 
contexta, Editio Quinta (Gothae, 1875), 
pp. 91 sgg.; E. Zeller, Dee Philosophie 
der Griechen, i.* (Leipsic, 1876) pp. 
678 sqq. 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 


395 


coexistent forces of attraction and repulsion, which, as we 
have seen, necessitate rhythm in all minor changes through- 
out the Universe, also necessitate rhythm in the totality of 
its changes—produce now an immeasurable period during 
which the attractive forces predominating, cause universal 
concentration, and then an immeasurable period during which 
the repulsive forces predominating, cause universal diffusion 
—alternate eras of Evolution and Dissolution. And thus 
there is suggested the conception of a past during which 
there have been successive Evolutions analogous to that 
which is now going on; and a future during which successive 
other such Evolutions may go on—ever the same in principle 
but never the same in concrete result.” ! 

The most recent researches in physical science tend 
apparently rather to confirm than to invalidate these general 
views of the nature of the universe ; for if modern physicists 
are right in regarding the constitution of matter as essenti- 
ally electrical, the antagonistic forces of attraction and repul- 
sion postulated by Empedocles and Spencer would resolve 
themselves into positive and negative electricity. On the 
other hand the atomic disintegration which is now known to 
be proceeding in certain of the chemical elements, particu- 
larly in uranium and radium, and which is probably proceed- 
ing in all, suggests a doubt whether the universe is really, as 
Spencer supposed, in process of integration and evolution 
and not rather in process of disintegration and dissolution ; 
or whether perhaps the apparent evolution of the organic 
world is not attended by a simultaneous dissolution of the 
inorganic, so that the fabric of the universe would be a sort 


of Penelope’s web, which the great artificer 
With such a 


weaves at the same time? 


1 Herbert Spencer, 7irst Principles, 
Third Edition (London, 1875), pp. 
536 sg. 

2 On the discovery of the atomic 
disintegration of certain chemical ele- 
ments, and the general question (Evolu- 
tion or Dissolution ?) raised by that 
discovery, see W. C. D. Whetham, 
“©The Evolution of Matter,” in Dar- 
win and Modern Science (Cambridge, 
1909), pp. 565-582, particularly his 
concluding paragraph: ‘‘In the strict 

Pieve VOL. IT 


weaves and un- 
grave doubt to 


sense of the word, the process of atomic 
disintegration revealed to us by the 
new science of radio-activity can hardly 
be called evolution. In each case 
radio-active change involves the break- 
ing up of a heavier, more complex 
atom into lighter and simpler frag- 
ments. Are we to regard this process 
as characteristic of the tendencies in 
accord with which the universe has 
reached its present state, and is pass- 
ing to its unknown future? Or have 


x 


Evolution 
or dissolu- 
tion. 


Empe- 

docles as a 
forerunner 
of Darwin. 


306 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


trouble the outlook on the future, we may perhaps say that 
Empedocles was wiser than Herbert Spencer in leaving, as 
he apparently did, the question undecided, whether during 
the epoch open to human observation the force of attraction 
or that of repulsion has been and is predominant, and con- 
sequently whether matter as a whole is integrating or dis- 
integrating, whether all things are gradually evolving into 
more complex and concentrated forms, or are gradually dis- 
solving and wasting away, through simpler and simpler forms, 
into the diffused tenuity of their primordial constituents. 
Just as in his view of the constitution and history of the 
physical universe Empedocles anticipated to some extent 
the theories of Spencer, so in his view of the development of 
living beings he anticipated to some extent the theories of 


‘Darwin; for he held that the existing species of animals 


have been evolved out of inorganic matter through inter- 
mediate sorts of monstrous creatures, which, being ill fitted 
to survive, gradually succumbed and were exterminated in 
the struggle for existence. Whether Empedocles himself 
clearly enunciated the principle of the survival of the fittest 
as well as the doctrine of evolution, we cannot say with 
certainty ; but at all events it is significant that Aristotle, 
after stating for the first time the principle of the survival of 
the fittest, illustrates it by a reference to Empedocles’s theory 
of the extinction of monstrous forms in the past, as if he 
understood the theory to imply the principle.” 


we chanced upon an eddy in a back- 
water, opposed to the main stream of 
advance? In the chaos from which 
the present universe developed, was 
matter composed of large highly com- 
plex atoms, which have formed the 
simpler elements by radio-active or 
rayless disintegration? Or did the 
primaeval substance consist of isolated 
electrons, which have slowly come 
together to form the elements, and yet 
have left here and there an anomaly 
such as that illustrated by the unstable 
family of uranium and radium, or by 
some such course are returning to their 
state of primaeval simplicity?” 

1 H. Diels, Die Hragmente der Vor- 
sokratiker,? i. (Berlin, 1906) pp. 190 
sqqg.; Fragmenta Philosophorum Grae- 


corum, ed, F. G. A. Mullach, 1. (Paris, 
1875) pp. 8 sgg.; H. Ritter und L. 
Preller, Hestoria Philosophiae Graecae 
et Latinae ex fontium locis contexta® 
(Gothae, 1875), pp. 102 sg.; E. Zeller, 
Die Philosophie der Griechen, i.* (Leip- 
sic, 1876) pp. 718 sqq. 

2 Aristotle, Physic. Auscult. li. 8, 
p- 198b 29 sgg., ed. Im. Bekker ; 
étrov pev ov dmavTa cuvéBy Womep Kay 
el évexd Tov éylvero, TatTa pev éowbn 
amd Tod avroudrouv cuoTayTa émiTnoelus * 
doa 6é ph ows, dm@wdeTO Kai amwdd\dNUTAL, 
kabdmep Humedoxdijs héyer Ta Bovyevi) 
avopompwpa. This passage is quoted 
by Darwin in the ‘‘ Historical Sketch” 
prefixed to Zhe Orzgin of Speczes with 
the remark, ‘‘ We here see the prin- 
ciple of natural selection shadowed 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 307 


It is a remarkable instance of the strange complexities 
and seeming inconsistencies of human nature, that a man 
whose capacious mind revolved ideas so far-reaching and 
fruitful, should have posed among his contemporaries as a 
prophet or even as a god, parading the streets of his native city 
bedecked with garlands and ribbons and followed by obsequi- 
ous crowds of men and women, who worshipped him and 
prayed to him that he would reveal to them the better way, 
that he would give them oracles and heal their infirmities. 
In the character of Empedocles, as in that of another fore- 
runner of science, Paracelsus, the sterling qualities of the 
genuine student would seem to have been alloyed with a 
vein of ostentation and braggadocio; but the dash of the 
mountebank which we may detect in his composition probably 
helped rather than hindered him to win for a time the favour 
and catch the ear of the multitude, ever ready as they are to 
troop at the heels of any quack who advertises his wares by 
a loud blast on a brazen trumpet. With so many claims on 
the admiration of the wise and the adulation of the foolish, 
we may almost wonder that Empedocles did not become the 
founder, if not the god, of a new religion. Certainly other 
human deities have set up in business and prospered with 
an intellectual stock-in-trade much inferior to that of the 
Sicilian philosopher. Perhaps Empedocles lacked that per- 
fect sincerity of belief in his own pretensions without which 
it seems difficult or impossible permanently to impose on 
the credulity of mankind. To delude others successfully it 
is desirable, if not absolutely necessary, to begin by being 
one’s self deluded, and the Sicilian sage was probably too 
shrewd a man to feel perfectly at ease in the character of 
a god. : 
The old savage doctrine of the transmigration of souls, 
which Empedocles furbished up and passed off on his dis- 


forth, but how little Aristotle fully 
comprehended the principle, is shown 
by his remarks on the formation of 
the teeth.” Darwin omits Aristotle’s 
reference to Empedocles, apparently 
deeming it irrelevant or unimportant. 
Had he been fully acquainted with the 
philosophical speculations of Empe- 
docles, we can scarcely doubt that 


Darwin would have included him among 
the pioneers of evolution. 


1 Diogenes Laertius, V2. Phzlosoph. 
vill. 2. 62; H. Diels, Dze Fragmente 
der Vorsokratiker,? i. (Berlin, 1906) p. 
205, frag. 112. Compare 7he Magic 
Art and the Evolution of Kings, i. 


390. 


Empe- 
docles as a 
pretender 
to divinity. 


The 
doctrine of 
the trans- 
migration 
of souls in 
Plato. 


308 TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS CHAP. 


ciples as a philosophical tenet, was afterwards countenanced, 
if not expressly affirmed, by another Greek philosopher of a 
very different stamp, who united, as no one else has ever — 
done in the same degree, the highest capacity for abstract — 
thought with the most exquisite literary genius. But if he — 
borrowed the doctrine from savagery, Plato, like his two pre- 
decessors, detached it from its rude original setting and fitted 
it into an edifying moral scheme of retributive justice. For he 
held that the transmigration of human souls after death into 
the bodies of animals is a punishment or degradation en- 
tailed on the souls by the weaknesses to which they had 
been subject or the vices to which they had been addicted in 
life, and that the kind of animal into which a peccant soul 
transmigrates is appropriate to the degree and nature of its 
weakness or guilt. Thus, for example, the souls of gluttons, 
sots, and rakes pass into the bodies of asses; the souls of 
robbers and tyrants are born again in wolves and hawks ; 
the souls of sober quiet people, untinctured by philosophy, 
come to life as bees and ants; a bad poet may turn at death 
into a swan or a nightingale ; and a bad jester into an ape. 
Nothing but a rigid practice of the highest virtue and a 
single-minded devotion to abstract truth will avail to restore 
such degraded souls to their human dignity and finally raise 
them to communion with the gods.’ Though the passages 
in which these views are set forth have a mythical colouring 
and are, like all Plato’s writings, couched in dramatic form 
and put into the mouths of others, we need not seriously 
doubt that they represent the real opinion of the philosopher 
himself.” It is interesting and instructive to meet with the 
old savage theory of the transmigration of souls thus mas- 
querading under a flowing drapery of morality and sparkling 
with the gems of Attic eloquence in the philosophic system 
of a great Greek thinker. So curiously alike may be the 
solutions which the highest and the lowest intellects offer of 


1 Plato, Phaedo, pp. 81 B-84c; Re- E. Geddes (on Plato, Phaedo, p. 81), 
public, x. pp. 617 D-620D; Ztmaeus, and J. Adam (on Plato, Republic, x. 
pp. 41 D-42D; Phaedrus, p. 249 B. p- 618A). We have no right, with 

some interpreters ancient and modern, 

2 This is the view of E. Zeller to dissolve the theory into an allegory 
(Die Philosophie der Griechen, ii.8 because it does not square with our 
Leipsic, 1875, pp. 706 sgg.), Sir W. ideas. 


XVI TRANSMIGRATION OF HUMAN SOULS 309 


those profound problems which in all ages have engaged the 
curiosity and baffled the ingenuity of mankind.’ 


1 In our own time the theory of trans- 
migration is favoured by Dr. McTag- 
gart, who argues that human beings 
may have lived before birth and may 
live many, perhaps an infinite number 
of, lives after death. Like Plato he 
further suggests that the nature of the 
body into which a person transmigrates 
at death may be appropriate to and de- 


termined by his or her character in the 
preceding life. See J. McT. Ellis 
McTaggart, Some Dogmas of Religion 
(London, 1906), pp. 112-139. How- 
ever, Dr. McTaggart seems only to 
contemplate the transmigration of 
human souls into human bodies; he 
does not discuss the possibility of their 
transmigration into animals. 


The 
ambiguous 
behaviour 


CHAP TLE Raexyveil 
TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT 


§ 1. The Egyptian and the Aino Types of Sacrament 


WE are now perhaps in a position to understand the 
ambiguous behaviour of the Aino and Gilyaks towards the | 


of the Aino bear. It has been shewn that the sharp line of demarcation 


and the 
Gilyaks 
towards 
bears 
explained. 


which we draw between mankind and the lower animals 
does not exist for the savage. To him many of the other 
animals appear as his equals or even his superiors, not 
merely in brute force but in intelligence ; and if choice or 
necessity leads him to take their lives, he feels bound, out 
of regard to his own safety, to do it in a way which will be 
as inoffensive as possible not merely to the living animal, 
but to its departed spirit and to all the other animals of the 
same species, which would resent an affront put upon one 
of their kind much as a tribe of savages would revenge an 
injury or insult offered to a tribesman. We have seen 
that among the many devices by which the savage seeks 
to atone for the wrong done by him to his animal victims 
one is to shew marked deference to a few chosen individuals — 
of the species, for such behaviour is apparently regarded as 
entitling him to exterminate with impunity all the rest of 
the species upon which he can lay hands. This principle 
perhaps explains the attitude, at first sight puzzling and 
contradictory, of the Aino towards the bear. The flesh 
and skin of the bear regularly afford them food and clothing ; 
but since the bear is an intelligent and powerful animal, it 
is necessary to offer some satisfaction or atonement to the 
bear species for the loss which it sustains in the death of so 
many of its members. This satisfaction or atonement is 
310 


cH. xvil EGYPTIAN AND AINO TYPES QF SACRAMENT 311 


made by rearing young bears, treating them, so long as 
they live, with respect, and killing them with extraordinary 
marks of sorrow and devotion. So the other bears are 
appeased, and do not resent the slaughter of their kind by 
attacking the slayers or deserting the country, which would 
deprive the Aino of one of their means of subsistence. 

Thus the primitive worship of animals assumes two 
forms, which are in some respects the converse of each 
other. On the one hand, animals are worshipped, and are 
therefore neither killed nor eaten. On the other hand, 
animals are worshipped because they are habitually killed 
and eaten. In both forms of worship the animal is revered 
on account of some benefit, positive or negative, which the 
savage hopes to receive from it. In the former worship 
the benefit comes either in the positive form of protec- 
tion, advice, and help which the animal affords the man, or 
in the negative one of abstinence from injuries which it is 
in the power of the animal to inflict. In the latter worship 
the benefit takes the material form of the animal’s flesh and 
skin. The two forms of worship are in some measure anti- 
thetical: in the one, the animal is not eaten because it is 
revered ; in the other, it is revered because it is eaten. But 
both may be practised by the same people, as we see in the 
case of the North American Indians, who, while they appar- 
ently revere and spare their totem animals,’ also revere the 
animals and fish upon which they subsist. The aborigines of 
Australia have totemism in the most primitive form known to 
us ; but, so far as I am aware, there is no clear evidence that 
they attempt, like the North American Indians, to conciliate 
the animals which they kill and eat. The means which the 
Australians adopt to secure a plentiful supply of game 
appear to be primarily based, not on conciliation, but on 
sympathetic magic,” a principle to which the North American 


attention which has to 


1 This is known, for example, of the 
Yuchi Indians, for among them ‘‘ mem- 
bers of each clan will not do violence 
to wild animals having the form and 
name of their totem. For instance, 
the Bear clan people never molest 
bears.” See F. G. Speck, Z¢hnology 
of the Yucht Indians (Philadelphia, 
1909), p. 70. But in spite of the 


been paid 
American totemism, we possess very 
little information as to the vital point 
of the system, the relation between a 
man and his totemic animal. Compare 
Totemism and Exogamy, iii. 88 sg., 311. 

2 See Zhe Magic Art and the 
Evolution of Kings, i. 85 sgqg. How- 
ever, Collins reports that among the 


Two forms 
of the 
worship of 
animals. 


Two types 
of animal 

sacrament, 
the Egypt- 
ian and the 
Aino type. 


312 TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. 


Indians also resort for the same purpose.’ Hence, as the 
Australians undoubtedly represent a ruder and earlier stage 
of human progress than the American Indians, it would 
seem that before hunters think of worshipping the game as 
a means of ensuring an abundant supply of it, they seek to 
attain the same end by sympathetic magic. This, again, 
would shew—what there is good reason for believing—that 
sympathetic magic is one of the earliest means by which 
man endeavours to adapt the agencies of nature to his 
needs. 

Corresponding to the two distinct types of animal wor- 
ship, there are two distinct types of the custom of killing 
the animal god. On the one hand, when the revered animal 
is habitually spared, it is nevertheless killed—and sometimes 
eaten—on rare and solemn occasions. Examples of this 
custom have been already given and an explanation of them 
offered. On the other hand, when the revered animal is 
habitually killed, the slaughter of any one of the species 
involves the killing of the god, and is atoned for on the spot 
by apologies and sacrifices, especially when the animal is a 
powerful and dangerous one ; and, in addition to this ordinary 
and everyday atonement, there is a special annual atone- 
ment, at which a select individual of the species is slain with 
extraordinary marks of respect and devotion. Clearly the 
two types of sacramental killing—the Egyptian and the 
Aino types, as we may call them for distinction—are liable 
to be confounded by an observer; and, before we can say 
to which type any particular example belongs, it is necessary 
to ascertain whether the animal sacramentally slain belongs 


natives of New South Wales the 
women were ‘‘compelled to sit in 


attempt to appease the kangaroos 
which they have killed, assuring the 


their canoe, exposed to the fervour of 
the mid-day sun, hour after hour, 
chaunting their little song, and inviting 
the fish beneath them to take their 
bait” (D. Collins, Az Account of the 
English Colony in New South Wales, 
London, 1804, p. 387). This may 
have been a form of conciliation like 
that employed by the American Indians 
towards the fish and game. But the 
account is not precise enough to allow 
us to speak with confidence. It is 
sometimes reported that the Australians 


animals of their affection and begging 
them not to come back after death to 
torment them. But the writer who 
mentions the report disbelieves it. 
See Dom Théophile Bérengier, in Zes 
Missions Catholigues, x. (1878) p. 
197. 

1G. Catlin, O-Kee-pa, a Keligious 
Ceremony, and other Customs of the 
Mandans (London, 1867), Folium 
reservatum ; Lewis and Clarke, 7vavels 
to the Source of the Missouri River 
(London, 1815), i. 205 sg. 


ae ns eee ae 


xvii EGYPTIAN AND AINO TYPES QF SACRAMENT 313 


to a species which is habitually spared, or to one which is 
habitually killed by the tribe. In the former case the 
example belongs to the Egyptian type of sacrament, in the 
latter to the Aino type. 

The practice of pastoral tribes appears to furnish ex- 
amples of both types of sacrament. “Pastoral tribes,” says 
a learned ethnologist, “ being sometimes obliged to sell their 
herds to strangers who may handle the bones disrespectfully, 
seek to avert the danger which such a sacrilege would entail 
by consecrating one of the herd as an object of worship, 
eating it sacramentally in the family circle with closed 
doors, and afterwards treating the bones with all the 
ceremonious respect which, strictly speaking, should be 
accorded to every head of cattle, but which, being punctually 
paid to the representative animal, is deemed to be paid to all. 
Such family meals are found among various peoples, especi- 
ally those of the Caucasus. When amongst the Abchases 
the shepherds in spring eat their common meal with their 
loins girt and their staves in their hands, this may be looked 
upon both as a sacrament and as an oath of mutual help 
and support. For the strongest of all oaths is that which 
is accompanied with the eating of a sacred substance, since 
the perjured person cannot possibly escape the avenging 
god whom he has taken into his body and assimilated.” ’ 
This kind of sacrament is of the Aino or expiatory type, 
since it is meant to atone to the species for the possible 
ill-usage of individuals. An expiation, similar in principle 
but different in details, is offered by the Kalmucks to the 
sheep, whose flesh is one of their staple foods. Rich Kal- 
mucks are in the habit of consecrating a white ram under 
the title of “the ram of heaven” or “the ram of the spirit.” 
The animal is never shorn and never sold; but when it 


1 A, Bastian, in Verhandlungen der holy cave, which is also called Ogginn. 


Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologte, 
Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte, 1870-71, 
p- 59. J. Reinegg (Beschreibung des 
Kaukasus, Gotha, St. Petersburg, and 
Hildesheim, 1796-97, ii. 12 sg.) de- 
scribes what seems to be a sacrament 
of the Abghazses (Abchases). It takes 
place in the middle of autumn. 
white ox called Ogginn appears from a 


TX. 


It is caught and led about amongst the 
assembled men (women are excluded) 
amid joyful cries. Then it is killed 
and eaten. Any man who did not 
get at least a scrap of the sacred flesh 
would deem himself most unfortunate. 
The bones are then carefully collected, 
burned in a great hole, and the ashes 
buried there. 


Examples 
of animal 
sacraments 
among 
pastoral 
tribes, 


Aino or 
expiatory 
type of 
animal 
sacrament 
among the 
Abchases 
and 
Kalmucks. 


Egyptian 
type of 
animal 
sacrament 
among the 
Todas and 
Madi. 


CHAP. 


314 TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT 


grows old and its owner wishes to consecrate a new one, 
the old ram must be killed and eaten at a feast to which 
the neighbours are invited. On a lucky day, generally in 
autumn when the sheep are fat, a sorcerer kills the old ram, 
after sprinkling it with milk. Its flesh is eaten; the 
skeleton, with a portion of the fat, is burned on a turf altar ; 
and the skin, with the head and feet, is hung up.’ 

An example of a sacrament of the Egyptian type is 
furnished by the Todas, a pastoral people of Southern 
India, who subsist largely upon the milk of their buffaloes. 
Amongst them “the buffalo is to a certain degree held 
sacred” and “is treated with great kindness, even with a 
degree of adoration, by the people.”” They never eat the 
flesh of the cow buffalo, and as a rule abstain from the flesh 
of the male. But to the latter rule there is a single excep- 
tion. Once a year all the adult males of the village join in 
the ceremony of killing and eating a very young male calf, 
—seemingly under a month old. They take the animal 
into the dark recesses of the village wood, where it is killed 
with a club made from the sacred tree of the Todas (the 
tide or Millingtonza). A sacred fire having been made by 
the rubbing of sticks, the flesh of the calf is roasted on the 
embers of certain trees, and is eaten by the men alone, 
women being excluded from the assembly. This is the 
only occasion on which the Todas eat buffalo flesh.? The 
Madi or Moru tribe of Central Africa, whose chief wealth 
is their cattle, though they also practise agriculture, appear 
to kill a lamb sacramentally on certain solemn occasions. 
The custom is thus described by Dr. Felkin= ames 
markable custom is observed at stated times—once a year, 


1 A, Bastian, Dze Volker des 319, 325. According to Pallas, it is 


Ostlichen Asien, vi. (Jena, 1871) pp. 
632, note. On the Kalmucks as a 
people of shepherds and on their diet 
of mutton, see J. G. Georgi, Beschret- 
bung aller Nationen des russischen 
Reichs (St. Petersburg, 1776), pp. 406 
sg., compare p. 207; B. Bergmann, 
Nomadische Stretfereten unter den 
Kalmticken (Riga, 1804-5), il. 80 sgq., 
122; P. S. Pallas, Rezse durch ver- 
schiedene Provinzen des  russischen 
Reichs (St. Petersburg, 1771-1776), i. 


only rich Kalmucks who commonly 
kill their sheep or cattle for eating ; 
ordinary Kalmucks do not usually kill 
them except in case of necessity or at 
great merry-makings. It is, therefore, 
especially the rich who need to make 
expiation, 


2 W. E. Marshall, Zravels amongst 
the Todas (London, 1873), pp. 129 59. 


3 W. E. Marshall, of. cz. pp. 80 
Su, 130. 


i 


iexvil EGYPTIAN AND AINO TYPES OM SACRAMENT 315 


-I am led to believe. 1 have not been able to ascertain 
what exact meaning is attached to it. It appears, however, 

to relieve the people’s minds, for beforehand they evince 
much sadness, and seem very joyful when the ceremony 
is duly accomplished. The following is what takes place: 
A large concourse of people of all ages assemble, and sit 
down round a circle of stones, which is erected by the side 
of a road (really a narrow path). A very choice lamb is 
then fetched by a boy, who leads it four times round the 
assembled people. As it passes they pluck off little bits of 
its fleece and place them in their hair, or on to some other 
part of their body. The lamb is then led up to the stones, 
and there killed by a man belonging to a kind of priestly 
order, who takes some of the blood and sprinkles it four 
times over the people. He then applies it individually. 
On the children he makes a small ring of blood over the 
lower end of the breast bone, on women and girls he makes 
a mark above the breasts, and the men he touches on each 
shoulder. He then proceeds to explain the ceremony, and 
to exhort the people to show kindness. . . . When this 
discourse, which is at times of great length, is over, the 
people rise, each places a leaf on or by the circle of stones, 
and then they depart with signs of great joy. The lamb’s 
skull is hung on a tree near the stones, and its flesh is eaten 
by the poor. This ceremony is observed on a small scale 
at other times. Ifa family is in any great trouble, through 
illness or bereavement, their friends and neighbours come 
together and a lamb is killed; this is thought to avert 
further evil. The same custom prevails at the grave of 
departed friends, and also on joyful occasions, such as the 
return of a son home after a very prolonged absence.”* The 
sorrow thus manifested by the people at the annual slaughter 
of the lamb clearly indicates that the lamb slain is a sacred 
or divine animal, whose death is mourned by his worshippers,” 
just as the death of the sacred buzzard was mourned by the 
Californians and the death of the Theban ram by the 

tR. W. Felkin, ‘‘ Notes on the 2 Mutton appears to be now eaten 
Madi or Moru Tribe of Central Africa,” by the tribe as a regular article of food 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of (BR. W. Felkin, of. cet. p. 307), but 


Edinburgh, xii. (1882-84) pp. 336 this is not inconsistent with the original 
Sg, sanctity of the sheep. 


Form of 
commun- 
ion with 

a sacred 
animal by 
taking it 
from house 
to house. 


Effigy of 

a snake 
carried 
from house 
to house by 
members of 
the Snake 
tribe. 


316 TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. — 


Egyptians. The smearing each of the worshippers with the 
blood of the lamb is a form of communion with the divinity ;* 
the vehicle of the divine life is applied externally instead 


of being taken internally, as when the blood is drunk or the }' 


flesh eaten. 


§ 2. Pyrocesstons with Sacred Animals 


The form of communion in which the sacred animal is 
taken from house to house, that all may enjoy a share of 
its divine influence, has been exemplified by the Gilyak 
custom of promenading the bear through the village before 
it is slain.” A similar form of communion with the sacred 
snake is observed by a Snake tribe in the Punjaub. Once 
a year in the month of September the snake is worshipped 
by all castes and religions for nine days only. At the end 
of August the Mirasans, especially those of the Snake tribe, 
make a snake of dough which they paint black and red, and 
place on a winnowing basket. This basket they carry round 
the village, and on entering any house they say :— 


“God be with you all! 
May every tll be far! 
May our patron’s (Gugga’s) word thrive!” 


Then they present the basket with the snake, saying :— 


“A small cake of flour : 
A little bit of butter: 
Lf you obey the snake, 
You and yours shall thrive!” 


Strictly speaking, a cake and butter should be given, but it 
is seldom done. Every one, however, gives something, 
generally a handful of dough or some corn. In houses 
where there is a new bride or whence a bride has gone, or 
where a son has been born, it is usual to give a rupee and 
a quarter, or some cloth. Sometimes the bearers of the 
snake also sing :— 
“Give the snake a piece of cloth, 
And he will send a lively bride!” 


1 See W. R. Smith, RelzZezon of an external application, see above, pp. 
the Semites* (London, 1894), pp. 344 162 sgqg. 
sgg. As to communion by means of 2 See above, pp. 190, 192. 


XVII PROCESSIONS WITH SACRED ANIMALS 317 


When every house has been thus visited, the dough snake 
is buried and a small grave is ‘erected over it. Thither 
during the nine days of September the women come to 
worship. They bring a basin of curds, a small portion of 
which they offer at the snake’s grave, kneeling on the 
ground and touching the earth with their foreheads. Then 
they go home and divide the rest of the curds among the 
children. Here the dough snake is clearly a substitute for 
a real snake. Indeed, in districts where snakes abound the 
worship is offered, not at the grave of the dough snake, but 
in the jungles where snakes are known to be. Besides this 
yearly worship, performed by all the people, the members of 
the Snake tribe worship in the same way every morning 
after a new moon. The Snake tribe is not uncommon in 
the Punjaub. Members of it will not kill a snake, and they 
say that its bite does not hurt them. If they find a dead 
snake, they put clothes on it and give it a regular funeral.’ 
Ceremonies closely analogous to this Indian worship of 
the snake have survived in Europe into recent times, and 
doubtless date from a very primitive paganism. The best- 
known example is the “hunting of the wren.” By many 
European peoples—the ancient Greeks and Romans, the 
modern Italians, Spaniards, French, Germans, Dutch, Danes, 
Swedes, English, and Welsh—the wren has been designated 
the king, the little king, the king of birds, the hedge king, 
and so forth,” and has been reckoned amongst those birds 
which it is extremely unlucky to kill. In England it is 
supposed that if any one kills a wren or harries its nest, he 
will infallibly break a bone or meet with some dreadful mis- 
fortune within the year;* sometimes it is thought that 


1 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. p. des otseaux, Zaunkonzg, etc. On the 


91, § 555 (March 1885). 

2 See Ch. Vallancey, Collectanea de 
vebus Hibernicts, iv. (Dublin, 1786) 
p- 97; J. Brand, Popular Antiquities 
(London, 1882 - 1883), iii. 195 sg. 
(Bohn’s ed.) ; Rev. C. Swainson, Fodk- 
lore of British Birds (London, 1886), 
p- 36; E. Rolland, Fauze populatre de 
la France, ii. 288 sgg. Thenames for 
the bird are Baowioxos, regulus, rex 
avium (Pliny, Wat. Hist, viii. 90, x. 
203), 7€ di stepe, reyezuelo, rowtelet, ror 


custom of hunting the wren see further 
N. W. Thomas, ‘‘ The Scape-Goat in 
European Folklore,” o/k-lore, xvii. 
(1906) pp. 270 sgg., 280; Miss 
L. Eckstein, Comparative Studies 
in Nursery Rhymes (London, 1906), 
pp. 172 sgg. Miss Eckstein suggests 
that the killing of the bird called ‘ the 
king” may have been a mitigation of 
an older custom of killing the real king. 

3 J. Brand, Popular Antiquities, iii. 
194. 


“« Hunting 
the Wren"' 
in Europe. 


Sacred 
character 
of the wren 
in popular 
super- 
stition. 


318 TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. 


the cows will give bloody milk." In Scotland the wren is 
called “the Lady of Heaven’s hen,” and boys say :— 


“ Malisons, malisons, mair than ten, 
That harry the Ladye of Heaven’s hen!” ? 


At Saint Donan, in Brittany, people believe that if children 
touch the young wrens in the nest, they will suffer from the 
fire of St. Lawrence, that is, from pimples on the face, legs, 
and so on.* In other parts of France it is thought that if a 
person kills a wren or harries its nest, his house will be struck 
by lightning, or that the fingers with which he did the deed 
will shrivel up and drop off, or at least be maimed, or that 
his cattle will suffer in their feet.* 

Hunting Notwithstanding such beliefs, the custom of annually 

the Wirt, killing the wren has prevailed widely both in this country 

of Man. and in France. In the Isle of Man down to the eighteenth 
century the custom was observed on Christmas Eve or rather 
Christmas morning. On the twenty-fourth of December, 
towards evening, all the servants got a holiday; they did 
not go to bed all night, but rambled about till the bells rang 
in all the churches at midnight. When prayers were over, 
they went to hunt the wren, and having found one of these 
birds they killed it and fastened it to the top of a long pole 
with its wings extended. Thus they carried it in procession 
to every house chanting the following rhyme :— 


“ We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin, 
We hunted the wren for Jack of the Can, 
We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin, 
We hunted the wren for every one.” 


When they had gone from house to house and collected all 
the money they could, they laid the wren on a bier and 
carried it in procession to the parish churchyard, where they 
made a grave and buried it “with the utmost solemnity, 
singing dirges over her in the Manks language, which they 
call her knell; after which Christmas begins.” The burial 


1 R. Chambers, Popular Rhymes of 1882), il. 214. 


Scotland, New Edition (London and 4A. Bosquet, La Normandie 
Edinburgh, N.D.), p. 188. Romanesque et Merveilleuse (Paris and 
2 [bid. p. 186. Rouen, 1845), p. 221; E. Rolland, 


3 P. Sébillot, Zvaditions et Super- op. cit. ii. 294 sg.; P. Sebillot, 2c. ; 
stitions de la Haute- Bretagne (Paris, Rev. C. Swainson, of. czt. p. 42. 


XVII 


PROCESSIONS WITH SACRED ANIMALS 


319 


_over, the company outside the churchyard formed a circle 


and danced to music. 


About the middle of the nineteenth 


century the burial of the wren took place in the Isle of Man 
on St. Stephen’s Day (the twenty-sixth of December). 
Boys went from door to door with a wren suspended by the 
legs in the centre of two hoops, which crossed each other 
at right angles and were decorated with evergreens and 


ribbons. 


ence was made to boiling and eating the bird. 


The bearers sang certain lines in which refer- 


If at the 


close of the song they received a small coin, they gave in 
return a feather of the wren; so that before the end of the 


day the bird often hung almost featherless. 


The wren was 


then buried, no longer in the churchyard, but on the sea- 


shore or in some waste place. 


The feathers distributed 


were preserved with religious care, it being believed that 
every feather was an effectual preservative from shipwreck 
for a year, and a fisherman would have been thought very 


foolhardy who had not one of them.! 


Even to the present 


‘time, in the twentieth century, the custom is generally 
observed, at least in name, on St. Stephen’s Day, throughout 


the Isle of Man.” 


A writer of the eighteenth century says that in Ireland 
the wren “is still hunted and killed by the peasants on 
Christmas Day, and on the following (St. Stephen’s Day) he 
is carried about, hung by the leg, in the centre of two hoops, 
crossing each other at right angles, and a procession made in 
every village, of men, women, and children, singing an Irish 


catch, importing him to be the king of all birds. 


1G, Waldron, Description of the 
Isle of Man (reprinted for the Manx 
Society, Douglas, 1865), pp. 49 sgg. ; 
J. Train, Account of the Isle of Man 
(Douglas, 1845), ii. 124 sgg., 141. 

2 In The Morning Post of Wednes- 
day, 27th December 1911, we read 
that ‘‘the observance of the ancient 
and curious custom known as ‘ the hunt 
of the wren’ was general throughout 
the Isle of Man yesterday. Parties of 
boys bearing poles decked with ivy and 
streamers went from house to house 
singing to an indescribable tune a 
quaint ballad detailing the pursuit and 
death of the wren, subsequently de- 
manding recompense, which is rarely 


”8 Down to 
refused. Formerly boys actually en- 
gaged in the chase, stoning the bird 
to death with the object of distributing 
the feathers ‘for luck.’” From. this 
account we may gather that in the Isle 
of Man the hunting of the wren is now 
merely nominal and that the pretence 
of it is kept up only as an excuse for 
collecting gratuities. It is thus that 
the solemnity of ritual dwindles into 
the pastime of children. I have to 
thank Mrs. J. H. Deane, of 41 Iverna 
Court, Kensington, for kindly sending 
me the extract from Zhe Morning Post. 

3 Ch. Vallancey, Collectanea de rebus 
fTibernicts, iv. (Dublin, 1786) p. 97; 
J. Brand, Popular Antiquities, iii. 195. 


Hunting 
the Wren 
in Ireland 
and Eng- 
land. 


Hunting 
the Wren 
in France. 


320 TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP, 


the present time the “hunting of the wren” still takes place in 
parts of Leinster and Connaught. On Christmas Day or St. 
Stephen’s Day the boys hunt and kill the wren, fasten it in | 
the middle of a mass of holly and ivy on the top of a broom- 
stick, and on St. Stephen’s Day go about with it from house 
to house, singing :— 
““ The wren, the wren, the king of all birds, 
St. Stephen's Day was caught in the furze; 


Although he ts little, his family’s great, 
l pray you, good landlady, give us a treat.” 


Money or food (bread, butter, eggs, etc.) were given them, 
upon which they feasted in the evening. In Essex a 
similar custom used to be observed at Christmas, and 
the verses sung by the boys were almost identical with 
those sung in Ireland.”. In Pembrokeshire a wren, called 
the King, used to be carried about on Twelfth Day in a 
box with glass windows surmounted by a wheel, from 
which hung various coloured ribbons. The men and boys 
who carried it from house to house sang songs, in one of 
which they wished joy, health, love, and peace to the inmates 
of the house.” 

In the first half of the nineteenth century similar customs 
were still observed in various parts of the south of France. 
Thus at Carcassone, every year on the first Sunday of 
December the young people of the street Saint Jean used to 
go out of the town armed with sticks, with which they beat 
the bushes, looking for wrens. The first to strike down one 
of these birds was proclaimed King. Then they returned to 
the town in procession, headed by the King, who carried the — 

1 G. H. Kinahan, ‘‘ Notes on Irish text. Wrens are scarce in that part of 
Folk-lore,” Folk-lore Record, iv. (1881) the country, ‘* but as the boys go round 
p- 108; Rev. C. Swainson, /o/k-/ore more for the fun of dressing up and 
of British Birds, pp. 36 sg.; E. Roll- collecting money, the fact that there 
and, Faune popiulatre de la France, is no wren in their basket is quite im- 
ii. 297; Professor W. Ridgeway, in material.” These particulars I learn 
Academy, toth May 1884, p. 332; froma letter of Miss A. H. Singleton, 


T. F. Thiselton Dyer, Grztzsh Popular dated Appey-Leix, Ireland, 24th Feb- 
Customs (London, 1876), p. 497;  ruary 1904. 


eee Duncans her N fr . 
alee Oumean Further Notes from 2 W. Henderson, #a/e-27emgs aman 


County Leitrim,” /o/k-lore, v. (1894) Wax! : 
p- 197. The custom is still, or was Northern Counties (London, 1879); 


down to a few years ago, practised in P* coe 
County Meath, where the verses sung 3 Rev. C. Swainson, of. cét. pp. 
are practically the same as those in the 40 sg. 


XVII PROCESSIONS WITH SACRE ANIMALS 


321 


wren on a pole. On the evening of the last day of the year 
the King and all who had hunted the wren marched through 
the streets of the town to the light of torches, with drums 
beating and fifes playing in front of them. At the door 
of every house they stopped, and one of them wrote with 
chalk on the door weve le rot! with the number of the year 
which was about to begin. On the morning of Twelfth Day 
the King again marched in procession with great pomp, 
wearing a crown and a blue mantle and carrying a sceptre. 
In front of him was borne the wren fastened to the top of a 
pole, which was adorned with a verdant wreath of olive, of oak, 
and sometimes of mistletoe grown on an oak. After hearing 
high mass in the parish church of St. Vincent, surrounded by 
his officers and guards, the King visited the bishop, the mayor, 
the magistrates, and the chief inhabitants, collecting money to 
defray the expenses of the royal banquet which took place 
in the evening and wound up with a dance. At Entraigues 
men and boys used to hunt the wren on Christmas Eve. 
When they caught one alive they presented it to the priest, 
who, after the midnight mass, set the bird free in the church. 
At Mirabeau the priest blessed the bird. If the men failed 
to catch a wren and the women succeeded in doing so, the 
women had the right to mock and insult the men, and to 
blacken their faces with mud and soot, when they caught 
them.” At La Ciotat, near Marseilles, a large body of men 
armed with swords and pistols used to hunt the wren every 
year about the end of December. When a wren was caught 
it was hung on the middle of a pole, which two men carried, 
as if it were a heavy burden. Thus they paraded round the 
town ; the bird was weighed in a great pair of scales; and 
then the company sat down to table and made merry.’ 

The parallelism between this custom of “hunting the 


1 Madame Clément, Aistotre des lution of 1789, revived after the 


Fétes civiles et religteuses, etc., de la 
Belgique Méridionale (Avesnes, 1846), 
pp. 466-468 ; A. De Nore, Coutumies, 
Mythes et Traditions des provinces de 
France (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 
77 sqgg.; E. Rolland, Faune populaire 
de la France, ii. 295 sg.; J. W. Wolf, 
Bettrige zur deutschen Mythologie, ii. 
(Gottingen, 1857) pp. 437 sg. The 
ceremony was abolished at the revo- 
Biv. VOL. It 


restoration, and suppressed again after 
1830. 

2 E. Rolland, of. cz¢. ii. 296 sg. 

3 C. S. Sonnini, Zravels in Upper 
and Lower Egypt, translated from the 
French (London, 1800), pp. II sg. ; 
J. Brand, Popular Antiquities, iii. 198. 
The ‘‘hunting of the wren” may be 
compared with a Swedish custom. 
On the 1st of May children rob the 


Yi, 


Religious 
processions 
with sacred 
animals. 


Ceremony 
of beating 
a man clad 
in a cow's 
skin in the 
Highlands 
of Scot- 
land. 


22 


TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. 


wren” and some of those which we have considered, especially 
the Gilyak procession with the bear, and the Indian one with 
the snake, seems too close to allow us to doubt that they all 
belong to the same circle of ideas. The worshipful animal is — 
killed with special solemnity once a year; and before or 
immediately after death he is promenaded from door to door, 
that each of his worshippers may receive a portion of the 
divine virtues that are supposed to emanate from the dead or 
dying god. Keligious processions of this sort must have had 
a great place in the ritual of European peoples in prehistoric 
times, if we may judge from the numerous traces of them 
which have survived in folk-custom. A well-preserved speci- 
men is the following, which lasted in the Highlands of Scot- 
land and in St. Kilda down at least to the latter half of the 
eighteenth century. It was described to Dr. Samuel John- 
son in the island of Coll.’ Another description of it 
runs as follows: “On the evening before New Year's 
Day it is usual for the cowherd and the young people 
to meet together, and one of them is covered with a 


cow's hide. 


magpies’ nests of both eggs and young. 
These they carry in a basket from 
house to house in the village and 
shew to the housewives, while one of 
the children sings some doggerel lines 
containing a threat that, if a present is 
not given, the hens, chickens, and eggs 
will fall a prey to the magpie. They 
receive bacon, eggs, milk, etc., upon 
which they afterwards feast. See L. 
Lloyd, Peasant Life in Sweden (Lon- 
don, 1870), pp. 237 sg. The resem- 
blance of such customs to the ‘‘swal- 
low song” and ‘‘crow song” of the 
ancient Greeks (on which see Athen- 
aeus, Vill. 59 5g., pp. 359, 360) is obvious 
and has been remarked before now. 
Probably the Greek swallow-singers 
and crow-singers carried about dead 
swallows and crows or effigies of them. 
The ‘‘crow song” is referred to in a 
Greek inscription found in the south of 
Russia (€ dexadas A\uxdBas Kexopwvexa). 
See Compte Rendu of the Imperial 
Archaeological Commission, St. Peters- 
burg, 1877, pp. 276 sgg. In modern 
Greece and Macedonia it is still cus- 


The rest of the company are provided with 


tomary for children on Ist March to 
go about the streets singing spring 
songs and carrying a wooden swallow, 
which is kept turning on a cylinder. 
See J. Grimm, Deztsche Mythologie,* 
ii. 636; A. Witzschel, Sagen, Sztten 
und Gebrauche aus Thiiringen (Vienna, 
1878), p. 301; G. F. Abbott, MWace- 
donian Folk-lore (Cambridge, 1903), 
p- 18; J. C. Lawson, Modern Greek 
Folklore and ancient Greek Religion 
(Cambridge, 1910), p. 35. The 
custom of making the image of the 
swallow revolve on a pivot, which is 
practised in Macedonia as well as 
Greece, may be compared with the 
pirouetting of the girl in the Servian 
rain-making ceremony. The meaning 
of these revolutions is obscure. See 
The Magic Art and the Evolution of 
Kings, i. 273, 275. 


1S. Johnson, 4A /ourney to the 
Western Islands of Scotland, pp. 128 
sg. (The Works of Samuel Johnson, 
LL.D., edited by the Rev. R. Lynam, 
London, 1825, vol. vi.). 


XVII PROCESSIONS WITH SACRED ANIMALS 323 


staves, to the end of which bits of raw hide are tied. The 
person covered with the hide runs thrice round the dwelling- 
house, dezsez/—z.e. according to the course of the sun; the 
rest pursue, beating the hide with their staves, and crying 
[here follows the Gaelic], ‘Let us raise the noise louder and 
louder ; let us beat the hide. They then come to the door 
of each dwelling-house, and one of them repeats some verses 
composed for the purpose. When admission is granted, one 
of them pronounces within the threshold the deannachaa- 
thurlair, or verses by which he pretends to draw down a 
blessing upon the whole family [here follows the Gaelic], 
‘May God bless the house and all that belongs to it, cattle, 
stones, and timber! In plenty of meat, of bed and body- 
clothes, and health of men, may it ever abound!’ Then each 
burns in the fire a little of the bit of hide which is tied to the 
end of the staff. It is applied to the nose of every person 
and domestic animal that belongs to the house. This, they 
imagine, will tend much to secure them from diseases and 
other misfortunes during the ensuing year. The whole of 
the ceremony is called colluznn, from the great noise which 
the hide makes. It is the principal remnant of superstition 
among the inhabitants of St. Kilda.” ? 

A more recent writer has described the old Highland 
custom as follows. Towards evening on the last day of the 
year, or Hogmanay, as the day is called in Scotland, “ men 
began to gather and boys ran about shouting and laughing, 
playing shinty, and rolling ‘pigs of snow’ (mucan sneachda), 
ze. large snowballs. The hide of the mart or winter cow 
(secche a mhairt gheamhratdh) was wrapped round the head 
of one of the men, and he made off, followed by the rest, 
belabouring the hide, which made a noise like a drum, with 
switches. The disorderly procession went three times 
detseal, according to the course of the sun (ze. keeping the 
house on the right hand) round each house in the village, 
striking the walls and shouting on coming to a door : 


1 John Ramsay, Scotlandand Scotsmen Origins of English History (London, 
in the Eighteenth Century (Edinburgh 1882), p. 411: ‘‘ Sz guzs zn Kal. 
and London, 1888), ii.438sg. Thecus- /anuwar. in cervulo vel vitula vadit, 7d 
tom is clearly referred toin the ‘‘ Peni- — est tx ferarum habitus se communicant, 
tentialof Theodore,” quoted by Kemble, — e¢ vestewntur pellibus pecudum et assu- 
Saxons in England, i. 525; Ch. Elton,  mznt capita bestiarum,” etc. 


Another 
description 
of the 
Highland 
custom. 


324 TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. 


‘ The calluinn of the yellow bag of hide, 
Strike the skin (upon the wall) 
An old wife in the graveyard, 
An old wife in the corner, 
Another old wife beside the fire, 
A pointed stick tn her two eyes, 
A pointed stick in her stomach, 
Let me tn, open this. 


“Before this request was complied with, each of the 
revellers had to repeat a rhyme, called Rann Callucnn (ce. 
a Christmas rhyme), though, as might be expected when the 
door opened for one, several pushed their way in, till it was 
ultimately left open for all. On entering each of the party 
was offered refreshments, oatmeal bread, cheese, flesh, and 
a dram of whisky. Their leader gave to the goodman of 
the house that indispensable adjunct of the evening’s mum- 
meries, the Cazsezn-uchd, the breast-stripe of a sheep wrapped 
round the point of a shinty stick. This was then singed in 
the fire (¢eal/ach), put three times with the right-hand turn 
(decseal) round the family, and held to the noses of all. 
Not a drop of drink was given till this ceremony was per- 
formed. The Cazsezu-uchd was also made of the breast- 
stripe or tail of a deer, sheep, or goat, and as many as chose 
had one with them.’’ Another writer who gives a similar 
account of the ceremony and of the verses sung by the per- 
formers, tells us that the intention of putting the burnt 
sheep-skin to the noses of the people was to protect them 
against witchcraft and every infection.” The explanation, 
which is doubtless correct, reminds us of the extraordinarily 
persistent hold which the belief in sorcery and witchcraft 
has retained on the minds of the European peasantry. 
Formerly, perhaps, pieces of the cow-hide in which the 
man was clad were singed and put to the noses of the 
people, just as in the Isle of Man a feather of the wren 
used to be given to each household. Similarly, as we 
have seen, the human victim whom the Khonds slew as a 
divinity was taken from house to house, and every one 

1 J. G. Campbell, Witchcraft and with a ball and curved sticks or 
Second Sight in the Highlands and _ clubs. 
Islands of Scotland (Glasgow, 1902), 2 R. Chambers, Popular Rhymes of 


pp- 230-232. Shinty is the Scotch Scotland, New Edition (London and 
name for hockey: the game is played Edinburgh, N.D.), pp. 166 sg. 


XVII PROCESSIONS WITH SACRED ANIMALS 325 


strove to obtain a relic of his sacred person.' Such customs 
are only another form of that communion with the deity 
which is attained most completely by eating the body and 
drinking the blood of the god. 


§ 3. The Rites of Plough Monday 


In the “hunting of the wren,” and the procession with 
the man clad in a cow-skin, there is nothing to shew that 
the customs in question have any relation to agriculture. 
So far as appears, they may date from a time before the 
invention of husbandry when animals were revered as divine 
in themselves, not merely as, divine because they embodied 
the corn-spirit ; and the analogy of the Gilyak procession of 
the bear and the Indian procession of the snake is in favour 
of assigning the corresponding European customs to this 
very early date. On the other hand, there are certain 
European processions of animals, or of men disguised as 
animals, which may perhaps be purely agricultural in their 
origin ; in other words, the animals which figure in them 
may have been from the first nothing but representatives of 
the corn-spirit conceived in animal shape. Examples of 
such dramatic and at the same time religious rites have been 
collected by W. Mannhardt, who says of them in general : 
“Not only on the harvest field and on the threshing-floor 
but also quite apart from them people loved to represent the 
corn-spirit dramatically, especially in solemn processions in 
spring and about the winter solstice, whereby they meant to 
depict the return of the beneficent powers of summer to the 
desolate realm of nature.”’ Thus, for example, in country 
districts of Bohemia it is, or used to be, customary during 
the last days of the Carnival for young men to go about 
in procession from house to house collecting gratuities. 
Usually a man or boy is swathed from head to foot in pease- 
straw and wrapt round in straw-ropes: thus attired he goes 
by the name of the Shrovetide or Carnival Bear (Fas¢- 
nachtsbar) and is led from house to house to the accompani- 
ment of music and singing. In every house he dances with 


1 See above, vol. i. pp. 246 sg. 
2, W. Mannhardt, Anteke Wald- und Feldkulte (Berlin, 1877), p. 183. 


Proces- 
sions of 
men dis- 
guised as 
animals, in 
which the 
animal 
seems to 
represent 
the corn- 
spirit. 


The 
Shrovetide 
Bear in 
Bohemia, 


326 TVPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. 


the girls, the maids, and the housewife herself, and drinks to 
the health of the good man, the good wife, and the girls. 
For this performance the mummer is regaled with food by 
the good wife, while the good man puts money in his box. 
When the mummers have gone the round of the village, 
they betake themselves to the ale-house, whither also all 
the peasants repair with their wives; “for at Shrovetide, 
but especially on Shrove Tuesday, every one must dance, if 
the flax, the vegetables, and the corn are to thrive; and the 
more and the higher they dance, the greater the blessing 
which the people expect to crown their exertions.” In 
the Leitmeritz district the Shrovetide Bear, besides being 
wrapt in straw, sometimes wears a bear’s mask to emphasise 
his resemblance to the animal. In the Czech villages the 
housewives pluck the pease-straw and other straw from the 
Shrovetide Bear and put it in the nests of their geese, 
believing that the geese will lay more eggs and hatch 
their broods better for the addition of this straw to their 
nests. For a similar purpose in the Saaz district the women 
put the straw of the Shrovetide Bear in the nests of their 
hens.' In these customs the dancing for the express pur- 
pose of making the crops grow high,’ and the use of the 
straw to make the geese and hens lay more eggs, sufficiently 
prove that the Shrovetide Bear is conceived to represent the 
spirit of fertility both animal and vegetable; and we may 
reasonably conjecture that the dances of the mummer with 
the women and girls are especially intended to convey to 
them the fertilising powers of the spirit whom the mummer 
personates.* 


1 ©. Freiherr von Reinsberg- 
Diiringsfeld, est- Kalender aus 


1893), p- 431. This Jatter interpreta- 
tion may be due to a misunderstanding 


Bohmen (Prague, N.D., preface dated 
1861), pp. 49-52. Compare E. 
Cortet, Assaz sur les Fétes Religieuses 
(Paris, 1867), p. 83. Similar proces- 
sions with a Shrovetide Bear take 
place among some of the German 
peasantry of Moravia, though there 
the mummer is said to be wrapt in 
skins and furs rather than in straw and 
to personate Winter. See W. Miiller, 
Beitrdge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen 
wn Mahren (Vienna and Olmiitz, 


of the old custom. 

2 On this custom see Zhe Magic Art 
and the Evolution of Kings, i. 137 sqq. 

3 Real bears and other animals were 
formerly promenaded about both town 
and country with rags of coloured cloth 
attached to them. Scraps of these 
cloths and hairs of the animals were 
given, rather perhaps sold, to all who 
asked for them as preservatives against 
sickness and the evil eye. The practice 
was condemned by the Council of Con- 


XVII THE RITES OF PLOUGH MONDAY 327 


In some parts of Bohemia the straw-clad man in these 
Shrovetide processions is called, not the Bear, but the Oats- 
goat, and he wears horns on his head to give point to the 
name.’ These different names and disguises indicate that 
in some places the corn-spirit is conceived as a bear and in 


others as a goat. Many examples of the conception of the 


corn-spirit as a goat have already been cited ;” the concep- 


_tion of him as a bear seems to be less common. In the 


neighbourhood of Gniewkowo, in Prussian Lithuania, the 
two ideas are combined, for on Twelfth Day a man wrapt in 
pease-straw to represent a Bear and another wrapt in oats- 
straw to represent a Goat go together about the village ; 
they imitate the actions of the two animals and perform 
dances, for which they receive a present in every house.* At 
Marburg in Steiermark the corn-spirit figures now as a wolf 
and now asa bear. The man who gave the last stroke at 
threshing is called the Wolf. All the other men flee from 
the barn, and wait till the Wolf comes forth ; whereupon 
they pounce on him, wrap him in straw to resemble a wolf, 
and so lead him about the village. He keeps the name of 
Wolf till Christmas, when he is wrapt in a goat’s skin and 
led from house to house as a Pease-bear at the end of a 
rope.’ In this custom the dressing of the mummer in a 
goat’s skin seems to mark him out as the representative of a 
goat; so that here the mythical fancy of the people appar- 
ently hesitates between a goat, a bear, and a wolf as the 
proper embodiment of the corn-spirit. In Scandinavia the 
conception of the spirit as a goat who appears at Christmas 
( Julbuck) appears to be common. Thus, for example, in 
Bergslagsharad (Sweden) it used to be customary at Christ- 
mas to lead about a man completely wrapt in corn-straw 
and wearing a goat’s horns on his head: he personated the 
Yule goat.” In some parts of Sweden a regular feature of 
the little Christmas drama is a pretence of slaughtering the 
Yule-goat, who, however, comes to life again. The actor, 


stance. See J. B. Thiers, Z7azté des 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 281 sgg. 
Superstitions (Paris, p13) De 315 - 3 W. Mannhardt, of. czt. p. 190. 
We need not suppose that these animals 4 W. Mannhardt, of. cit. p. 188. 


represented the corn-spirit. 
1 W. Mannhardt, Anteke Wald- und 5 W. Mannhardt, of. cet. pp. 191- 
feldkulte, pp. 183 sg. 193. 


The Oats- 
goat, the 
Pease- 

bear, ete. 


The Yule- 
goat in 
Sweden, 


The Straw- 
bear at 
Whittlesey, 


328 TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. 


hidden by a coverlet made of skins and wearing a pair of 
formidable horns, is led into the room by two men, who make 
believe to slaughter him, while they sing verses referring to 
the mantles of various colours, red, blue, white, and yellow, 
which they laid on him, one after the other. At the con- 
clusion of the song, the Yule-goat, after feigning death, 
jumps up and skips about to the amusement of the 
spectators.’ In Willstad after supper on Christmas evening, 
while the people are dancing “the angel dance” for the sake 
of ensuring a good crop of flax, some long stalks of the 
Yule straw, either of wheat or rye, are made up into the 
likeness of a goat, which is thrown among the dancers with 
the cry, “Catch the Yule-goat!” The custom in Dalarne 
is similar, except that there the straw-animal goes by the 
name of the Yule-ram.” In these customs the identification 
of the Yule-goat or the Yule-ram with the corn-spirit seems 
unmistakable. As if to clinch the argument it is customary 
in Denmark and Sweden to bake cakes of fine meal at 
Christmas in the form of goats, rams, or boars. These are 
called Yule-goats, Yule-rams, or Yule-boars ; they are often 
made out of the last sheaf of corn at harvest and kept till 
sowing-time, when they are partly mixed with the seed-corn 
and partly eaten by the people and the plough-oxen in the 
hope thereby of securing a good harvest. It would seem 
scarcely possible to represent the identification of the corn- 
spirit with an animal, whether goat, ram, or boar, more 
graphically ; for the last corn cut at harvest is regularly 
supposed to house the corn-spirit, who is accordingly caught, 
kept through the winter in the shape of an animal, and then 
mixed with the seed in spring to quicken the grain before it 
is committed to the ground. Examples of the corn-spirit 
conceived as a wether and a boar have met us in a preceding 
part of this work.* The pretence of killing the Yule-goat 
and bringing him to life again was probably in origin a 
magical rite to ensure the rebirth of the corn-spirit in spring. 

In England a custom like some of the preceding still 
prevails at Whittlesey in Cambridgeshire on the Tuesday 


1 L. Lloyd, Peasant Life in Sweden 2 W. Mannhardt, of. czt. p. 196. 
(London, 1870), pp. 184 sg.; W. 3 W. Mannhardt, of. cz¢. pp. 197 sg. 
Mannhardt, of. cé¢. pp. 196 sg. 4 See above, vol. i. pp. 275, 298 sq. 


XVII THE RITES OF PLOUGH MONDAY 329 


after Plough Monday, as I learn from an obliging com- 
munication of Professor G. C. Moore Smith of Sheffield 
University. He writes: “When I was at Whittlesey 
yesterday I had the pleasure of meeting a ‘ Straw-bear,’ if 
not two, in the street. I had not been at Whittlesey on 
the day for nearly forty years, and feared the custom had 
died out. In my boyhood the Straw-bear was a man 
completely swathed in straw, led by a string by another and 
made to dance in front of people’s houses, in return for 
which money was expected. This always took place on the 
Tuesday following Plough-Monday. Yesterday the Straw- 
bear was a boy, and I saw no dancing. Otherwise there 
was no change.” ? 

A comparison of this English custom with the similar 
Continental customs which have been described above, raises 
a presumption that the Straw-bear, who is thus led about 
from house to house, represents the corn-spirit bestowing his 
blessing on every homestead in the village. This inter- 
pretation is strongly confirmed by the date at which the 
ceremony takes place. For the date is the day after Plough 
Monday, and it can hardly be doubted that the old popular 
celebration of Plough Monday has a direct reference to 
agriculture. Plough Monday is the first Monday of 
January after Twelfth Day. On that day it used to be 
the custom in various parts of England for a band of 
sturdy swains to drag a gaily decorated plough from house 
to house and village to village, collecting contributions 
which were afterwards spent in rustic revelry at a tavern. 
The men who drew the plough were called Plough Bullocks ; 
they wore their shirts over their coats, and bunches of ribbons 
flaunted from their hats and persons. Among them there 
was always one who personated a much bedizened old woman 
called Bessy ; under his gown he formerly had a _ bullock’s 
tail fastened to him behind, but this appendage was after- 
wards discarded. He skipped, danced and cut capers, 
and carried a money-box soliciting contributions from the 
onlookers. Some of the band, in addition to their ribbons, 
“also wore small bunches of corn in their hats, from which 


1 Letter of Professor G. C. Moore Smith, dated The University, Sheffield, 
13th January, 1909. 


The cere- 
monies of 
Plough 
Monday in 
England. 


The object 
of the 
dances on 
Plough 
Monday is 
probably 
to ensure 
the growth 
of the corn. 


TVPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. 


339 


the wheat was soon shaken out by the ungainly jumping 
which they called dancing. Occasionally, if the winter was 
severe, the procession was joined by threshers carrying their 
flails, reapers bearing their sickles, and carters with their long 
whips, which they were ever cracking to add to the noise, 
while even the smith and the miller were among the number, 
for the one sharpened the plough-shares and the other ground 
the corn; and Bessy rattled his box and danced so high 
that he shewed his worsted stockings and corduroy breeches ; 
and very often, if there was a thaw, tucked up his gown 
skirts under his waistcoat, and shook the bonnet off his head, 
and disarranged the long ringlets that ought to have con- 
cealed his whiskers.” Sometimes among the mummers there 
was a Fool, who wore the skin of a calf with the tail hanging 
down behind, and wielded a stick with an inflated bladder 
tied to it, which he applied with rude vigour to the heads and 
shoulders of the human team. Another mummer generally 
wore a fox’s skin in the form of a hood with the tail dang- 
ling on his back. If any churl refused to contribute to 
the money-box, the plough-bullocks put their shoulders to 
the plough and ploughed up the ground in front of his door.' 

The clue to the meaning of these curious rites is 
probably furnished by the dances or rather jumps of the 
men who wore bunches of corn in their hats. When we 
remember how often on the Continent about the same time 
of year the peasants dance and jump for the express purpose 


1 R. Chambers, Zhe Book of Days 
(London and Edinburgh, 1886), i. 94 
sg.; J. Brand, Popular Antiquities, 
New Edition (London, 1883), i. 506 
sgq.; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, Aritesh 
Popular Customs (London, 1876), pp. 
37 sgg.; O. Freiherr von Reinsberg- 
Diiringsfeld, Das festliche Jahr (Leipsic, 
1863), pp. 27 sg. Compare W. Mann- 
hardt, Bawmkultus (Berlin, 1875), pp. 
557 sg. ; T. Fairman Ordish, ‘‘ English 
Folk-drama,” /olk-lore, iv. (1893) pp. 
163 sgq.; Folk-lore, viii. (1897) p. 
184; E. K. Chambers, 7he AZediaeval 
Stage (Oxford, 1903), i. 208-210; H. 
Munro Chadwick, Zhe Origin of the 
English Nation (Cambridge, 1907), 
p- 238. Counties in which the custom 
of Plough Monday is reported to have 


been observed are Norfolk, Cambridge- 
shire, Huntingdonshire, Northampton- 
shire, Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, 
Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, Cheshire, 
and Yorkshire. Thus the custom 
would seem to have been characteristic 
of a group of counties in the centre of 
England. In January 1887, I witnessed 
the ceremony in the streets of Cam- 
bridge. Wooden ploughs of a primitive 
sort were dragged about by bands of 
young men who were profusely decked 
with scarves and ribbons. They ran 
at a good pace, and beside them ran 
a companion with a money-box collect- 
ing donations. Amongst them I did 
not observe any woman or man in 
female attire. Compare Zhe Fo/k-lore 
Journal, v. (1887) p. 161. 


xvil THE RITES OF PLOUGH MONDAY 331 


_of making the crops grow tall, we may conjecture with some 
_ probability that the intention of the dancers on Plough 
_ Monday was similar; the original notion, we may suppose, 
| was that the corn would grow that year just as high as the 
dancers leaped. If that was so, we need not wonder at 
the agility displayed on these occasions by the yokels in 
general and by Bessy in particular. What stronger incen- 
tive could they have to exert themselves than the belief 
that the higher they leaped into the air the higher would 
sprout the corn-stalks? In short, the whole ceremony was 
probably a magical rite intended to procure a good crop. 
The principle on which it rested was the familiar one of 
homoeopathic or imitative magic: by mimicking the act of 
ploughing and the growth of the corn the mummers hoped 
to ensure the success of the real ploughing, which was soon 
to take place. 

If such was the real meaning of the ritual of Plough The Straw. 
Monday, we may the more confidently assume that the eas 
Straw-bear who makes his appearance at Whittlesey in tive of the 
Cambridgeshire on the day after Plough Monday represents °""*P"™ 
indeed the corn-spirit. What could be more appropriate 
than for that beneficent being to manifest himself from 
house to house the very day after a magical ceremony had 
been performed to quicken the growth of the corn? 

The foregoing interpretation of the rites observed in The rites 
England on Plough Monday tallies well with the explanation ieee 
which I have given of the very similar rites annually resemble 
performed at the end of the Carnival in Thrace. The mock ae aad 
ploughing is probably practised for the same purpose in the Car- 
both cases, and what that purpose is may be safely inferred Bee 
from the act of sowing and the offering of prayers for 
abundant crops which accompany and explain the Thracian 
ceremony. It deserves to be noted that ceremonies of the Similar 
same sort and closely resembling those of Plough Monday Ra 
are not confined to the Greek villages of Thrace but are atthe same 
observed also by the Bulgarians of that province at the same eee 
time, namely, on the Monday of the last week in Carnival. eae of 
Thus at Malko-Tirnovsko, in the district of Adrianople, a 


procession of mummers goes through the streets on that day. 


1 See above, vol. i. pp. 25 sgq. 


332 TYPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP, 


The principal personages in it bear the names of the Kuker §) 
and Kukerica. The Kuker is a man clad ina goatskin. His § 
face is blackened with soot and he wears on his head a high 
shaggy hat made of an entire skin. Bells jingle at his girdle, 
and in his hand he carries a club. The Kukerica, who some- 
times goes by the name of Lada, that is, “Old Woman,” is 
a man disguised in petticoats with his face blackened. Other 
figures in the procession are young men dressed as girls, and 
girls dressed as men and wearing masks. Bears are repre- 
sented by dogs wrapt in bearskins. A king, a judge, and 
other officials are personated by other mummers; they 
hold a mock court and those whom they condemn receive 
a bastinado. Some of the maskers carry clubs; it is their 
duty to beat all who fall into their hands and to levy con- 
tributions from them. The play and gestures of the Kuker 
and Kukerica are wanton and lascivious: the songs and 
cries addressed to the Kwker are also very cynical. Towards 
evening two of the company are yoked to a plough, and the 
Kuker ploughs a few furrows, which he thereupon sows with 
corn. After sunset he puts off his disguise, is paid for his 
trouble, and carouses with his fellows. The people believe 
that the man who plays the part of Kwker commits a deadly 
sin, and the priests make vain efforts to abolish the custom. 
At the village of Kuria, in the district of Losengrad, the 
custom is in general the same, but there are some significant 
variations. The money collected by the mummers is used 
to buy wine, which is distributed among all the villagers at 
a banquet in the evening. On this occasion a cake in which 
an old coin has been baked is produced by the Kwker, broken 
into bits, and so divided among all present. If the bit with 
the coin in it falls to a farmer, then the crops will be good 
that year; but if it falls to a herdsman, then the cattle will 
thrive. Finally, the Kwker ploughs a small patch of ground, 
“bending his body to right and left in order to indicate 
symbolically the ears of corn bending under the weight of 
the grain.” The others lay hold of the man with whom the 
coin was found, bind him by the feet, and drag him over the- 
land that has just been ploughed.’ In these observances the 


1G. Kazarow, ‘* Karnevalbrauche in Bulgarien,” Archiv fiir Religions- 
wessenschaft, xi. (1908) pp. 407 sg. 


XVII THE RITES OF PLOUGH MONDAY 333 


intention of promoting the fertility of the ground is unmis- 
takable ; the ploughman’s imitation of the cornstalks bend- 


_ ing under their own weight is a simple case of homoeopathic 


or imitative magic, while the omens drawn from the occupa- 
tion of the person who obtains the piece of cake with the 
coin in it indicate that the ceremony is designed to quicken 
the herds as well as the crops. We can hardly doubt that 
the same serious motive underlies the seemingly wanton 
gestures of the principal actors and explains the loose 
character of the songs and words which accompany the 
ceremony. Nor is it hard to divine the reason for dragging 
over the fresh furrows the man who is lucky enough to get 
the coin in the cake. He is probably looked on as an 
embodiment of the corn-spirit, and in that character is com- 
pelled to fertilise the ground by bodily contact with the 
newly-ploughed earth. 

Similar customs are observed at the Carnival not only 
by Bulgarian peasants in Thrace but also here and there in 
Bulgaria itself. In that country the leading personage of the 
masquerade is the Bada, that is, the Old Woman or Mother. 
The part is played by a man in woman’s clothes; she, or 
rather he, wears no mask, but in many villages she carries a 
spindle with which she spins. The AKwker and the Kukerica 
also figure in the performance, but they are subordinate to 
the Old Woman or Mother. Their costume varies in 
different villages. Usually they are clad in skins with 
a girdle of lime-tree bark and five or six bells fastened to 
it; on their back they wear a hump made up of rags. But 
the principal feature in their attire consists of their masks, 
which represent the heads of animals and men in fantastic 
combinations, such as the horned head of a man or a bird, 
the head of a ram, a bull, and so on. Much labour is spent 
on the manufacture of these masks. Early in the morning 
of Cheese Monday (the Monday of the last week in Carnival) 
the mummers go about the village levying contributions. 
Towards noon they form a procession and go from house to 
house. In every house they dance a round dance, while 
the Old Woman spins. It is believed that if any house- 
holder contrives to carry off the Old Woman and secrete 
her, a blessing and prosperity will enter into his dwelling ; 


The inten- 
tion of the 
rites is 
clearly to 
fertilise the 
ground. 


Similar 
customs 
are ob- 
served at 
the Car- 
nival in 
Bulgaria. 


In all these 
cases the 
ceremonial 
ploughing 
and sowing 
are prob- 
ably 
charms 

to ensure 
the growth 
of the 
crops. 


334 TVPES OF ANIMAL SACRAMENT CHAP. 


but the maskers defend the Old Woman stoutly against all 
such attempts of individuals to appropriate her beneficent 
presence. After the dance the mummers receive gifts of — 
money, eggs, meal, and so on. Towards evening a round © 
dance is danced in the village square, and there the Old 
Woman yokes the AKuker and Kukerzca to a plough, ploughs 
with it a small piece of ground, and sows the ground with 
corn. Next day the performers reassemble, sell the presents 
they had collected, and with the produce hold a feast in the 
house of the Old Woman. It is supposed that if strange 
maskers make their way into a village, fertility will be drawn 
away to the village from which they have come; hence the 
villagers resist an inroad of strange maskers at any price. 
In general the people believe that the masquerade is per- 
formed for the purpose of increasing the luck and fertility of — 
the village.’ 

In these Bulgarian rites, accordingly, we are not left to 
form conjectures as to the intention with which they are 
practised ; that intention is plainly avowed, and it is no 
other than the one which we have inferred for the similar 
rites observed in Thrace at the same season and in England 
on Plough Monday. In all these cases it is reasonable to 
suppose that the real aim of the ceremonial ploughing and 
sowing of the ground is thereby, on the principles of 
homoeopathic or imitative magic, to ensure the growth 
of the corn on all the fields of the community. Perhaps we 
may go a step further and suggest that in the Bulgarian 
Old Woman or Mother, who guides the plough and sows 
the seed, and whose presence is believed to bring a blessing — 
to any household that can contrive to appropriate her, we 
have the rustic prototype of Demeter, the Corn-Mother, who 
in the likeness of an Old Woman brought a blessing to the 
house of Celeus, king of Eleusis, and restored their lost 
fertility to the fallow Eleusinian fields. And in the pair of 
mummers, man and woman, who draw the plough, may we 
not discern the rude originals of Pluto and Persephone? If 
that is so, the gods of Greece are not wholly dead; they 
still hide their diminished heads in the cottages of the 


1G. Kazarow, ‘‘Karnevalbriiuche in Bulgarien,” Archiv fir Religions- 
wissenschaft, x1. (1908) pp. 408 sg. 


| 
| 
| 
) 


XVII LEE KRILES OF PLOUGIUMONDA Y 335 


peasantry, to come forth on sunshine holidays and parade, 
with a simple but expressive pageantry, among a gazing 
crowd of rustics, at the very moment of the year when their 
help is most wanted by the husbandman. 

Be that as it may, these rites still practised by the 
peasantry at opposite ends of Europe, no doubt date from 
an extremely early age in the history of agriculture. They 
are probably far older than Christianity, older even than 
those highly developed forms of Greek religion with which 
ancient writers and artists have made us familiar, but which 
have been for so many centuries a thing of the past. Thus 
it happens that, while the fine flower of the religious 
consciousness in myth, ritual, and art is fleeting and 
evanescent, its simpler forms are comparatively stable 
and permanent, being rooted deep in those principles of 
common minds which bid fair to outlive all the splendid but 
transient creations of genius. It may be that the elaborate 
theologies, the solemn rites, the stately temples, which now 
attract the reverence or the wonder of mankind, are destined 
themselves to pass away like “all Olympus’ faded hierarchy,” 
and that simple folk will still cherish the simple faiths of 
their nameless and dateless forefathers, will still believe in 
witches and fairies, in ghosts and hobgoblins, will still 
mumble the old spells and make the old magic passes, when 
the muezzin shall have ceased to call the faithful to prayer 
from the minarets of St. Sophia, and when the worshippers 
shall gather no more in the long-drawn aisles of Ndtre 
Dame and under the dome of St. Peter’s. 


Such rites 
no doubt 
date from 
a remote 
antiquity. 


NOTE 


THE CEREMONY OF THE HORSE AT RICE-HARVEST AMONG 
THE GAROS 


Amonc the Garos, an agricultural tribe of Assam, the close of the Effigy ofa 

rice-harvest is celebrated by a festival in which the effigy of a horse horse ina 

figures prominently. The intention of the ceremony is not stated, Pan a 

but possibly it may be to ensure a good rice crop in the following the Garos. 

year. If so, the artificial horse of the Garos would be analogous to 

the October horse of the Romans, as that animal has been explained 

by W. Mannhardt. For the sake of comparison it may be well to 

subjoin Major A. Playfair’s account of the Garo ceremony :—! 

‘‘When the rice harvest has been fully gathered in, the great Major 

sacrifice and festival of the year, the Wangala or Guréwata, takes Playfair's 
Ae, : description 

place. This is the most festive observance of the year, and com- 6th. 

bines religious sacrifice with much conviviality. It is celebrated by festival. 

all sections of the tribe except the Duals and some Plains Garos. 

The cost of the entertainment falls principally on the zokma |head- 

man] of the village, who provides a pig to be eaten by his guests, 

and plenty of liquor. Among the Akawés and Chisaks of the north 

and north-eastern hills a curious feature of the ceremony is the 

manufacture of gwré or ‘horses’ out of pieces of plantain-stem for 

the body, and of bamboo for the head and legs. The image of the 

‘horse’ is laid on the floor of the zokma’s house, and the assembled 

guests dance and sing around it the whole night long, with the 

usual intervals for refreshments. Early the next morning, the 

‘horse’ is taken to the nearest river and launched on the water to 

find its way down stream on the current. For those who possess 

the necessary paraphernalia, the gwzvé takes the shape of a horse’s 

head of large size, made of straw, and covered with cloth. I once 

saw one in the village of Rongrong, which, when in use, was orna- 

mented with discs of brass on both sides of the face. Its eyes and 

ears were made of the same metal, and between the ears were fixed 

a pair of wild goat’s horns. To the head were attached a number 


1 Major A. Playfair, 7ze Garos (London, 1909), pp. 94 sg. 
Pav VOL, If 337 Zz 


Dance of a 
man wear- 
ing the 
mask of a 
horse’s 
head. 


The effigy 
of the horse 
at rice- 
harvest 
perhaps 
represents 
the spirit 
of the rice. 


338 CEREMONY OF HORSE AT RICE-HARVEST NOTE 


of bronze bells similar to those hawked about by Bhutia pedlars. — 
The owner, a Zaskar, was unable to tell me whence they came, but | 
said that they were inherited from. his wife’s mother, and were many 
generations old. 

“The manner in which this form of gw7zé is used is the follow- | 
ing. The head is mounted on a stick, which a man holds before 
him in such a way that the head comes up to the level of his chest. 
Two straps pass over his shoulders to relieve his hands of the 
weight. The body of the ‘horse’ is then built round his own body 
with cane and cloth. For a tail, yak’s tails are fastened in with his 
own hair, which, for the occasion, is allowed to hang down instead 
of being tied up. ‘The performer thus apparelled, commences to 
dance a shuffling step to the usual music. In front of him dances 
the priest, who goes through the pantomime of beckoning the 
animal to come to him. ‘The remaining guests of the xokma 
[headman] form a gwewe behind the ‘horse,’ and dance after it. 
When the first man gets tired, another takes his place, and the 
dancing goes on right through the night. A pleasant part of the 
performance is the pelting of the guré with eggs. A piece of 
egg-shell was still sticking to the horn of the gwzé which was shown 
to me. 

“Strictly speaking, this festival should last for three days and 
two nights. When it is over, the gu7é is taken to a stream and the 
body thrown into the water, the head being preserved for another 
year. The people who come to see it off, bring rice with them, and 
a meal by the water’s edge closes the proceedings. 

“At the Wangala, it is the custom to mix flour with water, and 
for the assembled people to dip their hands into the mixture and 
make white hand-marks on the posts and walls of the house and on 
the backs of the guests.” 

Can it be that the horse whose effigy is thus made at rice- 
harvest and thrown into the water, while the head is kept for 
another year, represents the spirit of the rice? If that were so, the 
pelting of the head with eggs would be a charm to ensure fertility 
and the throwing of it into water would be a rain-charm. And on 
the same theory the horse’s head would be comparable to the horse- 
headed Demeter of Phigalia+ as well as to the head of the October 
horse at Rome, which was nailed to a wall, probably to be kept 
there till next October. If we knew more about the rites of the 
horse-headed Demeter at Phigalia, we might find that amongst them 
was a dance of a man or woman who wore the mask of a horse’s 
head and personated the goddess herself, just as, if I am right, the 
man who dances disguised as a horse at the harvest festival of the 
Garos, represents the spirit of the rice dancing among the garnered 
sheaves. The conjecture is to some extent supported by the remains 


1 See above, p. 21. 


NoTE CEREMONY OF HORSE AT RICE-HARVEST 339 


of the magnificent marble drapery, which once adorned the colossal 
statue of Demeter or Persephone in the sanctuary of the two goddesses 
at Lycosura, in Arcadia ; for on that drapery are carved rows of semi- 
human, semi-bestial figures dancing and playing musical instruments ; 
the bodies of the figures are those of women, but their heads, paws, 
and feet are those of animals. Among the heads set on the figures 
are those of a horse, a pig, a cat or a hare, and apparently an ass.’ 
It is reasonable to suppose that these dancing figures represent a 
ritual dance which was actually performed in the rites of Demeter 
and Persephone by masked men or women, who personated the 
goddesses in their character of beasts. 


1 See my note on Pausanias, viii. 37. 3 (vol. iv. pp. 375 599-)- 


US Bs. 


Ab, a Jewish month, i. 259 .! 

Ababu, a tribe of the Congo, ii. 288 

Abchases of the Caucasus, ii. 105, 313 

Abdication, temporary, of chief, ii. 66, 
68 


Aberdeenshire, harvest customs in, i. 
158 sgqg. 

Abipones, the, of Paraguay, i. 308, ii. 
140 


Acagchemem tribe of California, ii. 170 

Achinese, the, i. 315 

Acosta, J. de, quoted, i. 171 sg., lil. 86 

* sqq. 

Acropolis of Athens, ii. 40 sg. 

Actium, games celebrated at, i. 80, 85 

Adair, James, ii. 264 

Adeli, the, of the Slave Coast, ii. 116 

Adonis, i. 214, 216, 258, 263; and the 
boar, ii. 22 5g. 

Aegis, il. 40 

Aesculapius at Pergamus, li. 85 

Aeson and Medea, ii. 143 

Agbasia, a Ewe god, ii. 59, 60 

Agni, Indian god, ii. 120 

Agnus castus, i. 116 n.? 

Agricultural year determined by observa- 
tion of the Pleiades, i. 313 sqq. 

Agriculture, magical significance of games 
in primitive, i. 92 sgg.; origin of, 128 
sg. ; woman’s part in primitive, 113 
5qq- 

Aino, the, ii. 144, 251 ; their ceremony 
at eating new millet, 52; their worship 
of eagle-owls, eagles, and hawks, 199 
sq. ; their propitiation of mice, 278 ; 
their ambiguous attitude towards the 
bear, 310 sg. ; type of animal sacra- 
ment, 312 sq. 

of Japan, their custom of killing 

bears ceremonially, ii. 180 sgq. 

of Saghalien, their bear-festivals, ii. 
188 sqq. 

Aisawa or Isowa, 
Morocco, i. 21 
Ajumba hunter, ii. 235 
A-Kamba, the, ii. 113 


order of saints in 


| Alaskan hunters, ii. 238 


Albania, custom as to locusts and beetles 
in, iil. 279 

Alcyonian Lake, the, i. 15 

Alder branches, sacrificial, ii. 232 

Alectrona, daughter of the Sun, ii. 45 

Alfoors of Minahassa, ii. too 

Alligators, souls of dead in, ii. 297 

All Souls, Feast of, i. 30 

Alur tribe, ii. 214 

Alus, custom at, i. 25 

Amambwe, the, ii. 287 

Amaxosa Caffres, ii. 227 

Amazons of Dahoniey, ii. 149 

Amazulu, the, i. 316 

Amboyna, ii. 123 

Amedzowe, the spirit land, ii. ros 

Amei Awi, i. 93 

American Indians, women’s agricultural 
work among the, i. 120 sgg.; their 
ceremonies at hunting bears, ii. 224 
sqq.; personification of maize, i. 171 
Sq. 

Ammon, ram sacrificed to, ii. 41; the 
Theban, 172 sg. 

Ancestors, prayers to, i. 105; images of, 
li. 53; Offerings to spirits of, 112, 117, 
IIQ, 121, 123, 124, 125 

Ancestral Contest at the Hadoa, i. 61 ; at 
the Eleusinian Games, 71, 74, 77; at 
the Festival of the Threshing-floor, 75 

Ancient deities of vegetation as animals, 
li. I sgq. 

Andaman Islanders, ii. 164 

Andree, Dr. Richard, i. 307 

Angamis (Angami), a Naga tribe of 
Assam, i. 244, ii. 291 

Angel dance, the, ii. 328 

Angoni, the, ii. 149; 
among the, 99 

Anhalt, harvest customs in, i. 226, 233, 
279 

Animal, corn-spirit as an, i. 270 sgq. ; 
killing the divine, ii. 169 sgy. ; wor- 
shipful, killed once a year and pro- 
menaded from door to door, 322 


burial custom 


341 


342 


Animal embodiments of the corn-spirit, 
on the, i. 303 sgq. 

form, god killed in, i. 22 sg. 

god, two types of the custom of 

killing the, ii. 312 sg. 

masks worn by Egyptian kings, i. 

260 sq. 

sacrament, types of, ii. 310 sgg. 

Animals torn to pieces and devoured raw 
in religious rites, 1. 20 sgg. ; language 
of, acquired by eating serpent’s flesh, 
ii. 146; resurrection of, 200 sg., 256 
sgg.; and men, savages fail to dis- 
tinguish accurately between, 204 sqgq. ; 
wild, propitiation of, by hunters, 204 
sgg.; bones of, not to be broken, 258 
sg.; bones of, not allowed to be 
gnawed by dogs, 259; savage faith 
in the immortality of, 260 sgg.; trans- 
migration of human souls into, 285 
sqgq.; two forms of the worship of, 311 ; 
processions with sacred, 316 sgq. 

Anitos, souls of ancestors, li, 124 

Anna Kuari, i. 244 

Anointing the body as a means of acquir- 
ing certain qualities, li. 162 sgq. 

Antankarana tribe of Madagascar, ii. 290 

Anthesteria, the, i. 30 sgq. 

Anthropomorphism, i. 212 

Antinous, games in honour of, i. 80, 85 

Antiquity of the cultivation of the cereals 
in Europe, i. 79 

Antrim, harvest customs in, 1.144, 154 5g. 

Ants, superstitious precaution against the 
ravages of, li. 276 

Apaches, the, li. 242 

Apes, ceremony after killing, ii. 235 sg. 

Apis, sacred bull, ii. 34 sgq. 

Apollo surnamed Locust and Mildew, 
li, 282; the Mouse, 282 sg. ; Wolfish, 
283 5g. 

Apollonius of Tyana, ii. 280 

Apologies offered by savages to the 
animals they kill, li. 215, 217, 218, 
221, 222 sgg., 235 59q., 243 

Apple-tree, straw-man placed on oldest, 
ii. 6 

Arabs, ii. 146, 164; of Moab, harvest 
custom of the, i. 138 

Arawak Indians, ii. 154 

Arcturus, i. 47 7.7, 51, 52 

Ardennes, precautions against rats in the, 
il. 277 

Argyleshire, harvest customs in, i. 155 5g. 

Ariadne, Cyprian worship of, i. 209 2.2 

Aricia, many Manii at, li. 94 sgg.; sacred 
grove at, 95 

Arician grove, horses excluded from, ii. 
40 59g. 

Aristides, the rhetorician, on first-fruit 
offerings, i. 56; on Eleusinian Games, 
ek: 


INDEX 


Aristotle, Constitution of Athens, i. 79 ; 
on men of genius, ii. 302 7.° 

Arkansas Indians, ii. 134 

Arriaga, J. de, i. 173 2. 

Art, Demeter and Persephone in, i. 43 
Sq. 

Artemis, Brauronian, ii. 41 7.3 

Artemisia and Mausolus, ii. 158 

Artemision, a Greek month, ii. 8 

Artificers, worship of the, ii. 60 sq. 

Aru Islands, ii. 145 

Aryans of Europe, agriculture among the 
early, i. 129 sg. ; totemism not proved 
for the, il. 4 

Ash Wednesday, i. 300 

Ashantees, the, ii. 149; their festivals of 
new yams, 62 sg. 

Ashes as manure, i. I17 

of dead swallowed, ii. 156 sgg. ; 
smeared on mourner, 164; of human 
victim scattered on earth to fertilise 
it, i. 240; scattered on fields, 249, 
250, 251 ; scattered with winnowing- 
fans, 260, 262 

Assam, ii. 116; agriculture in, i. 123; 
genna in, 109 2.7; head-hunting in, 
256 

Asses, transmigration of sinners into, ii, 
299, 308 

Assimilation of victims to gods, i. 261 
sq.; of men to their totems or guardian 
animals, ii. 207 sg. 

Assiniboins, the, li. 225 

Assinie, W. African kingdom, ii. 63 

Astronomy, origin of, i. 307 

Asuras, the, ii. 120 

Athamanes, the, of Epirus, i. 129 

Athamas, King, i. 24, 25 

Athena, sacrifices to, i. 
goat, ii. 40 sg. 

Athens, Queen of, married to Dionysus, 
1, 30 sg. ; called ‘‘the Metropolis of 
the Corn,” 58; ceremony at killing a 
wolf at, ii. 221; the Lyceum at, 283, 
284 

Athletic competitions among harvesters, 
Tee 7ousge 

Atonement to animals for wrong done to 
them, ii. 310 sg. 

Attic months lunar, i. 52 

Attica, vintage custom in, li. 133 

Attis, i. 2, 14, 214; his relation to 
Lityerses, 255 sg. ; and the pig, ii. 22 

Attraction and repulsion, forces of, ii. 
303 599. 

Augustine, i. 88 

Augustus celebrates games at Actium, i. 
80 

Australia, totemism in, ii. 311 

Northern, ii. 145 

Australian aborigines, i. 126, 307 sg., 
their mutilations of the dead, ii. 272 


56; and the 


Sr 


INDEX 


Australians, the Central, ii. 165 

Austria, harvest customs in, i. 
292 

Awe, Loch, i. 142 

Awemba, the, i. 115 ; 
Rhodesia, ii. 272 sg. 

Ayrshire, harvest customs in, i. 279 

Aztecs, their festival at end of fifty-two 
years, i. 310 sg.; eating the god 
among the, ii. 86 sgg. 


276, 


of Northern 


Baba or Boba, name given to last sheaf, 
1. 144 sg. ; ‘the Old Woman,” at the 
Carnival, ii. 332, 333 

Bacchanals of SUneace, a ty 

Badagas, the, il. 55 

Baden, harvest customs in, i. 283, 286, 
292, 298 

Baganda, the, i. 118, ii. 64, 70 2.1, 227, 
253, 271 sg.; their offerings of first- 
fruits, 113; their fear of the ghosts 
of animals, 231 sg. 

Bagobos, the, ii. 124 ; 
240 

Bahaus or Kayans of central Borneo, i. 
92 sgg. See Kayans 

Bahima, their belief in transmigration, 
ii. 288 

Bakongs, a tribe of Borneo, ii. 294 

Bakundu of the Cameroons, burial custom 


of Mindanao, i. 


of the, il. 99 
Bali; i: 384, ll. 278); rice spirit in, 1. 
201 5qq. 


Ball, game of, played as a rite, ii. 76, 79 

Balquhidder, cutting the Maiden at, i. 
157 

Balum, spirits of the dead, i. 104 

Ba-Mbala, the, i, 119 

Bananas, cultivated by women, i. 115, 
118 ; cultivated in South America, 120, 
t2r; cultivated in New Britain, 123 ; 
cultivated in New Guinea, 123; soul 
of dead man in, ii. 298 

Banars, the, of Cambodia, ii. 33 

Bangala, the, i. 119 

Banks’ islanders, i. 313 

—-— Islands, burial custom in the, ii. 
7 

Barley awarded as a prize in the Eleu- 
sinian games, i. 73, 74, 75; oldest 
cereal cultivated by the Aryans, 132 

Bride among the Berbers, i. 178 sg. 

——— -cow, i. 289, 290 

—— -mother, the, 1. 131, 135 

-sow, 1. 298 

-wolf, i. 271, 273 

Baronga, the, ii. 280; women’s part in 
agriculture among the, i. 114 sg. 

Barotsé, the, i. 115, li. 159 

Bassari, the, ii. 116 

Bassia latifolia, ii. 119 

Bastian, Adolph, quoted, ii. 313 


343 


Basutoland, i. 
158, 160 
Basutos, the, ii. 148 ; 
to the new corn, 110 

Batari Sri, a goddess, i. 202 

Batchelor, Rev. J., ii. 180 7.2, 182 7.2, 
183, 184, 186 7., 198, 201 

Bathing forbidden, i. 94 

Bats, souls of dead in, ii. 287 

Battas or Bataks of Sumatra, i. 196, 315, 
ii. 293; their ceremonies at catching 
tigers, 216 sg. 

Battle, mock, ii. 75 


116; inoculation in, ii. 


their customs as 


Bavaria, harvest customs in, i. 147, 221 
Win Ae BR, 2a, AA, ZO, eieloy, 
298, 299 


Bean-cock, i. 276 

-goat, 1. 282 

Beans, Spirit of, i. 177; cultivated in 
Burma, 242; forbidden as food by 
Empedocles, ii. 301 

Bear, importance of the, for people of 
Siberia, ii. I91; ambiguous attitude of 
the Aino towards the, 310 sg.; the 
corn-spirit as a, 325 sqq. 

-cats, souls of dead in, ii. 294 

—— -dances, ii. 191, 195 

-_— -festivals of the Aino, li. 182 sgq. ; 
of the Gilyaks, 190 sgg. ; of the Goldi, 
197 ; Of the Orotchis, 197 

-skin worn by woman dancer, ii. 

223 

the Great, constellation, i. 315 

Bear’s liver, i. 187 sg. ; heart eaten, ii. 
146 

‘« Beard of Volos,” i. 233 

Bears killed ceremonially by the Aino, 
ii. 180 sgg.; souls of dead in, 
286 sg. ; processions with, in Europe, 
326 2. 

slain, propitiated by Kamtchatkans, 
Ostiaks, Koryak, Finns, and Lapps, 
ll. 222 sgg.; by American Indians, 
224 Sqq. 

Beating a man clad in a cow’s hide, ii. 
322 Sqq. 

boys with leg-bone of eagle-hawk, 

Tie OR N72" 

effigy of ox with rods in China, ii. 
II sg. 

—— people for good luck, i. 309 

Beavers, their bones not allowed to be 
gnawed by dogs, ii. 238 sgq. 

Bechuanas, the, i. 316, ii. 28, 164 ; their 
ceremonies before eating the new fruits, 
69 sg.; ceremony observed after a 
battle by the, 271 

Beer in relation to Dionysus, i. 2 7.1 

Bees, transmigration of quiet people into, 
ll. 308 

Beetles, superstitious precautions against, 
Il 279) 280 


344 


Beggar, name given to last sheaf, i. 
231 Sg. 

Beku, the, of West Africa, ii, 163 

Bells worn by mummers, i. 26, 28, il. 
332, 333; attached to hobby-horse, 
337 59. 

Benin, ii. 64 ; human sacrifice at, i. 240 

Bera Pennu, the Earth Goddess, i. 245 

Berbers, the Barley Bride among the, i. 
178 sg. 

Berosus, Babylonian historian, i. 258 s¢. 

Berry, harvest customs in, i. 292, 294 

Berwickshire, harvest customs in, i. 153 5g. 

Bessy, one of the mummers on Plough 
Monday, ii. 329, 331 

Betsileo, the, of Madagascar, ii, 116; 
their belief in the transmigration of 
souls, 289 sg. 

Bhils, the, of Central India, ii. 29 

Bhimsen, an Indian deity, ii, 118 

Bhumiya, a Himalayan deity, ii. 117 

Bhutan, ii. 103 

Biennial cycle, i. 87 

festivals, i. 14, i. 86 

Binder of last sheaf represents the Corn- 
mother, i. 150, 253 

Binders of corn, contests between, i. 136, 
137, 138, 218 5sg., 220, 221, 222, 253 

Binding the corn, contests in, i. 218 sg. 

Binsenschneider, i. 230 2.° 

Bird, soul as a, i. 181, 182 7.1; corn- 
spirit as a, 295 sg. 

of prey, inoculation with a, ii. 162 

Birds, migratory, as representatives of a 
divinity, i. 204 sg. ; language of, ii. 
146; tongues of, eaten, 147 

Birth of child on harvest-field, pretended, 
i. 150 sg. 

Bisaltae, a Thracian tribe, i. 5 

Bizya in Thrace, i. 26, 30 

Black Drink, an emetic, ii. 76 

Goat-skin, in relation to Dionysus, 
1b Tes 

Blackened faces, i. 291, 299; of actors, 27 

Blackfeet Indians, i. 311, ii. 236 

Bladders of sea-beasts returned by the 
Esquimaux to the sea, ii. 247 sgq. 

Blindfolded, reapers, i. 144, 153 sg. 

Blood drawn from men as a religious 
Tite; li 5 Osan; elas) aemeansmok 
communion with a deity, 316 

of bear drunk, ii. 146 

of beavers not allowed to fall on 

ground, ii. 240 7,2 

of dragon, ii. 146 

of human victim sprinkled on seed, 

i, 239, 251; scattered on field, 244, 251 

of lamb sprinkled on people, ii. 315 

of’slain men tasted by their slayers, 
ll. 154 sgq. 

Blood-covenant, ii. 154 sgq. 

Boa-constrictor, soul of a, ii. 296 


INDEX 


Boa-constrictors, souls of dead in, ii. 
289 sq. 

Boar, corn-spirit as, i. 298 sgg.; the 
Yule, 300 sgg., 302 sg.; and Adonis, 
ii. 22 sg. 

Boars, wild, their ravages in the corn, ii. 
31 S99. 

Boba or Baba, name given to the last 
sheaf, i. 144 sg. 

Bock, C., quoted, i. 8 

Boedromion, an Attic month, i. 52, 77 

Bogadjim in German New Guinea, ii. 
251 

Bohemia, harvest customs in, i. 138, 
145, 149, I50, 225 sg., 232, 286, 
289; Carnival custom in, ii. 325; 
custom as to mice in, 279, 283 

Bohmer Wald Mountains, i. 284 

Bolivia, ii. 235, 286 

Bombay, burial custom in, ii. 100 

Bone of old animal eaten to make the 
eater old, ii. 143 

Bones and skulls of enemies destroyed, 
ll. 260 

of animals preserved in order that 

the animals may come to life again, 

ii. 256 sgg.; burned or thrown into 

water, 257; not to be broken, 258 

sg. ; not allowed to be gnawed by 

dogs, 225, 238 sqq., 243, 259 

of the dead, virtues acquired by 

contact with the, ii. 153 5g. ; preserved 

for the resurrection, 259 

of deer not given to the dogs, ii, 

241, 242, 243 

of fish not burned, ii. 250, 251; 
thrown into the sea or a river, 250, 
254; not to be broken, 255 

Bontoc, province of Luzon, i. 240 

Bordeaux, harvest custom at, i. 291 

Bormus or Borimus, i. 216, 257, 264 

Borneo, ll. 122; agricultural com- 
munities of central, i. 92 

Bororos, the, of Brazil, ii. 71 sg., 208 

Boscana, Father G., ii. 169 ; quoted, i. — 
125 

Botocudos, the, of Brazil, ii. 156 

Bougainville Straits, i. 313 

Bouphonia, ii. 4 sgq. 

Bouphonion, a Greek month, ii. 6. 

Bourbourg, Brasseur de, i. 237 

Bourke, Captain J. G., ii. 178 2.4 

Bouzygai, the, at Eleusis, i. 108 

Boxing, i. 71 7.6, ii. 131 

Brahman boys sacrificed, i. 244 

Brahmans, the, on transubstantiation, ii. 
89 

Brain, drippings of, used to acquire 
wisdom of dead, ii. 163 sg. 

Brains of enemies eaten, ii. 152 

Brand, John, quoted, i. 146 

Brazen serpent, the, ii. 281 


INDEX 345 


Brazil, Indians of, i. 111, ii. 235; their 
flesh diet, li. 139 

Bridal pair at rice-harvest in Java, i. 
200 Sq. 

Bride, name given to last sheaf, i. 162, 
163 

British Columbia, Indians of, ii. 253 

Brittany, harvest customs in, i. 135 

Bromios, epithet of Dionysus, i. 2 7.} 

Brooke, Rajah, li. 211 

Brown, Dr. Burton, ii. 100 x.” 

Bubui river, in New Guinea, ii. 295 

Buckwheat cultivated in Burma, i. 242 

Bucolium at Athens, i. 30 

Buddha, transmigrations of, il. 299, 301 

Budge, Dr. E. A. Wallis, i. 259 7.°, 
260 7.2 

Buffalo sacrificed for human victim, i. 
249 

Buffaloes, propitiation of dead, il. 229, 
231; their death bewailed, 242; 
revered by the Todas, 314 

Bukaua, the, of German New Guinea, i. 
TOs; 105, 313, li. 124 

Bulawayo, ii. 70 

Bulgarians, the Carnival among the, ii. 
331 599. 

Bull, corn-spirit as, i. 288 sgg., ii. 8; in 
relation to Dionysus, i. 16 sg., 31 

, live, torn to pieces in rites of 

Dionysus, 1. 15, 17, li. 16 

, sacrifice of, ii. 68 7.° ; at Magnesia, 

7 sq.; in Mithraic religion, 10; at 

tomb of dead chief, 113 


-fights, ii. 66 

eroarers;) 1. 19) 72.1, il. 295; as 
magical instruments, i. 104, 106 sg., 
IIo 


-shaped deities, i. 3 sgg. 

Bulls, sacred, of ancient Egypt, ii. 34 
59. 

Burghers or Badagas, the, il. 55 

Burial rites intended to deceive ghosts or 
demons, ii. 97 sgq. 

Burials, fictitious, to divert the attention 
of demons from the real burials, ii. 
98 599. 

Buring Une, a goddess, i. 93 

Burma, ii. 116 ; securing the rice-soul in, 
i. I90 sg.; custom at threshing rice 
in, 203 sg. ; head-hunting in, i. 256 

Burmese cure, li. 103 

Burne, Miss C. S., i. 266 

Burning last sheaf of corn, i. 146 

the Old Witch, i. 224 

Buru, island, il. 54, 145 

Bush negroes of Surinam, ii. 26 

Bushmen, ii. 29, 206, 266 7.1; their 
customs as to diet, r40 sg. 

Busiris, i. 259 sg. 

Busk, festival of first-fruits, ii. 72 

Butea frondosa, ii. 119 


Butterflies, souls of dead in, 11. 290, 291, 
296 sq. 

Butterfly of the rice, i. 190 

Button snake root, emetic made from, ii. 


73,75 
Buzzard, killing the sacred, ii. 169 sgq. 


Caffre elephant-hunters, il. 227 

Caffres, their festival of new fruits, ii. 
64 sgg.; their custom of fumigating 
infants, 166 sg.; of South Africa, their 
observation of the Pleiades, i. 315; of 
the Zambesi region, li. 289 

Cailleach (Old Wife), name given to last 
corn cut, i. 140 sgg., 164 sgqg. 

Caingua Indians of Paraguay, ii. 285 

Cakes in obscene shapes, i. 62 

Calabash, ceremony of breaking the, il. 
68 7.% 

Calabria, custom observed by murderers 
in, li. 156 

Calendar, regulation of, an affair of 
religion, i. 83; the Roman, 83 sq. ; 
primitive, 125 sg. 

Calendars, the Pleiades in primitive, i. 
397 599. 

Calf sacrificed to Dionysus, 1. 33 ; killed 
at harvest, 290; sacrifice of buffalo, ii. 
314 

California, Indians of, i. 
286 

Californian missions, the Spanish, ii. 
17r 2.1 

Callaway, Rev. H., i. 316 

Callias, the Eleusinian Torch-bearer, i. 
54, 73.2.9 

Cambodia, ii. 103 

Cameron, Hugh E., i. 162 .% 

Campbell, Major J., i. 248, 250 

Campbell, Rev. J. G., i. 140 

Cancer, Tropic of, i. 125 

Candlemas, i. 300 

Canelos Indians of Ecuador, li. 285 

Cannibal orgies, 1. 18 sq. 

Spirit, i. 21 

Cannibals, a secret society of the 
Kwakiutl Indians, i. 20 

Canopus, i. 308 

Capricorn, Tropic of, i. 125 

Carcassone, hunting the wren at, ii. 
320 sg. 

Carian Chersonese, il. 85 

Carib warriors, ii. 162 

Caribs, the, i. 120, il. 139 

Carinthia, harvest custom in, 1. 224 sg. 

Carley, the, i. 144 

Carlin or Carline, the, i. 140 

Carnival, modern Thracian drama at 
the, i. 26 sgq., ii. 331 

Bear, li. 325 

custom in Bohemia,ii. 325 

Carolina, Indians of, ii. 217 


1265, i. 169, 


346 


Carrier Indians, ii. 238 sg. 

Cassava (manioc) bread, i. 120 sg. 

Cassowaries, souls of dead in, ii. 295 

Cassowary totem, ii. 207 

Castabus, ii. 85 

Cat, corn-spirit as, i. 280 sg. ; killed at 
harvest, i. 281 

Cat's cradle, i. 101, 103 

tail, name given to last standing 
corn, i. 268 

Catalangans, the, ii. 124 

Caterpillars, superstitious precautions 
against, ii. 275 sg., 279, 280 

Catholic custom of eating effigies of the 
Madonna, ii. 94 

Cattle, last sheaf given to, i. 134, 155, 
158, 161, 170; (plough oxen) Yule or 
Christmas Boar given to the, 301, 302, 
303; worship of, il. 35,37 sqgg. ; first- 
fruits offered to, 118 

Caul-fat, human, rubbed on body, ii. 
162 

Cayenne, Indians of, 285 sgq. 

Gelebes, i: 343; il. 54, 122, £23); pre- 
cautions against mice in, 277 

Celeus, king of Eleusis, 1. 37 

Censorinus, i. 86, 87 

Central Provinces of India, ii, 118 sg. 

Ceram, ii. 54, 123 

Cereal deity, ii. 52, 83 

Cereals in Europe, antiquity of the 
cultivation of, i. 79 ; cultivated by the 
early Aryans, 132 

Ceremony of the Horse at rice-harvest 
among the Garos, il. 337 59. 

Ceres, i. 42; festival of, 297 z.°; the, 
in France, 135 ; Roman sacrifices to, 
E33 

Chadwars, the, ii. 28 

Chaka, Zulu despot, ii. 67 


Chambéry, harvest customs at, i. 275, 
288, 291 sg. 
Chams, the, of Indo-China, ii. 283; 


their agricultural ceremonies, 56 sqg. ; 
their belief in transmigration, 291 sg. 

Changes of shape, magical, i. 305 

Chasas, the, of Orissa, ii. 26 

‘*Chasms of Demeter and Persephone,”’ 
Tn oy 

Chastity required in sower of seed, i. 
115 sg.; of hunter before hunting 
bears, li. 226 

Chateaubriand, his description of the 
Natchez festival, ii. 135 sggq. 

Cheese Monday, i. 26, ii. 333 

Cheremiss, the, ii. 51 

Cherokee hunters, ii. 236, 241 

mythology, ii. 204 sq. 

Cherokees, the, ii. 72 72.2, 139, 220; 
their respect for rattlesnakes, 218 sg. ; 
their custom of removing the hamstring 
of deer, 266 


INDEX 


Chicome‘couatl, Mexican Maize-goddess 
i. 176 

Chief, sacred, ii. 28; acting as priest, 
126; sacrifices to dead, 113 

Chiefs, spirits of dead, give rain, ii. 109 ; 
deified after death, 125 ; souls of dead, 
in lions, 287 sg. 

Child born on harvest-field, pretence of, 
i. 150 sq. 

Childbed, deceiving the ghosts of women 
who have died in, ii. 97 sg. 

Children at birth placed in winnowing- 
fans, i. 6 sgg. ; guarded against evil 
spirits, 6 sgg. ; employed to sow seed, 
II5 sg. ; sacrified at harvest, 236 

China, ceremony at beginning of spring 
in, li. 10 sgqg. 

Chinese, their theory as to courage, ii. 
145 5q. 

of Amoy, their use of effigies, ii. 

104 

ceremony of ploughing, ii. 14 sg. 

use of sieve or winnowing-fan, i. 6, 
9 Sg. 

Chinigchinich, a Californian god, ii. 170 

Chinna Kimedy, i. 247, 249 

Chins, the, of Upper Burma, ii. 121 

Chiquites of Paraguay, ii. 241 

Chiriguanos, the, Indians of Bolivia, ii. 
140, 286 

Chota Nagpur, i. 244 

Christmas, i. 134; boar sacrificed at, 
302. See also Yule 

Day, ii. 319, 320 

drama, il. 327 sq. 

Eve, i. 302, ll. 318, 321 

Chuckchees, the, ii. 221 

Churn, last corn cut, i. 
Sq. 

Cicero, on the gift of the corn, i. 58; 
on transubstantiation, ii. 167 

Cinteotl, Mexican Maize-god, i. 176 

Circumcision, i. 316, ii. 153 

Clarke, E. D., at Eleusis, i. 64 ; quoted, 
146 

Clement of Alexandria on the Eleusinian 
mysteries, 1. 39 

Cleostratus of Tenedos, i. 81 

Clyack-kebback, 1. 160 

Clyack sheaf, i. 158 sgq., ii. 43 

Cnossus, i. 82, 85 

Cobra-capella, guardian-deity of Issapoo, 
ll. 174 

Cochin China, tigers respected in, il. 217 

Cock, corn-spirit as, i. 276 sgg. ; killed 
on harvest field, 277 sg.; white, 
sacrificed, ii. 117, 118 

-sheaf, i. 276 

Cogiour, a sacred pontiff, li. 114 

Cohabitation of husband and wife en- 
joined as a matter of ritual, ii. 69, 
qo n.+ 


T5T, 153, 154 


INDEX 


Colluinn, custom of beating a cow's hide, 
es23, 324 

Colombian Indians, ii. 286 

Communal taboos, i. 109 7.2 

Communion with deity, ii, 83, 325 

Compitalia, a Roman festival, ii. 94, 96, 
107 

Complexity of religious phenomena, ii. 
36 

Confession of sin, ii. 69 

Congo, the Lower, i. 115 ; the Upper, 
I19 

Conjunction of sun and moon, ii. 15 7.1 

Conservation of energy, ii. 262 

Constantinople protected against flies 
and gnats, ii. 281 

Contact with sacred things is deemed 
dangerous, ii. 27 sgq. 

between certain foods in stomach of 
eater forbidden, ii. 83 sgg., go 

Contest, Ancestral, at the Eleusinian 
Games, i. 71, 74, 77 

Contests for possession of the corn-spirit, 
i. 74 Sg., 180; between binders of 
com, £36, 137, 138, 218 sg., 220, 
221, 222, 253; between reapers, 74 
SeeLeOy E40, L4k, 42, 144, 152, 
I53 5Sg., 164 sg., 219, 253; between 
threshers, 147 sgg., 218, 219 sg., 221 
Nfs5) 223) 54.5, 253 

Continence, ceremonial, ii. 75, 81, 93; 
prescribed at festival, 248 

and fasting, ii. 14 

Coomassie, ii. 62, 63 

Coorgs, the, ii. 55 

Corea, ii. 122; use of effigies in, 105 

Corn, ear of, revealed to initiates at the 
rites of Eleusis, i. 38 ; personified as 
Demeter, 42 ; first-fruits of, offered to 
Demeter and Persephone at Eleusis, 
53 sgg.; first bestowed on the Ath- 
enians by Demeter, 54; personified as 
female, 130; wreath of, 134; double 
personification of, as mother and 
daughter, 207 sgg. ; the first corn cut, 
customs connected with, 214 sg. ; the 
new, eaten sacramentally, ii. 48 sgg. ; 
sanctity of the, 110 

and poppies as symbols of Demeter, 

i. 43 Sg. 

Baby, i. 152, 292 

—— -bull, i. 291 

-cow, i. 289 

-ears, Queen of the, i. 146; crown 

of, 163, 221, 283 


-fool, i. 148 
-goat, 1. 282, 283, 286, 287 
——-maiden, i. 150; in Northern 


Europe, 129 sq. 
—— -mallet at threshing, i. 148 
-man, i. 223 ; the goal of a women’s 
race at harvest, 76 sg. 


347 


Corn-mother, i. 150; in Northern 
Europe, 131 sgg. ; in last sheaf, 133 
sqgqg. ; in America, 171 sgg. ; in many 
lands, 171 sgq. 

-pug, 1. 273 

-reapers, songs of the, i. 214 sgq. 

-sow, i. 298 

Corn-spirit, contests for possession of 
the, i. 74 sg., 180; conceived as old, 
136 sgg. ; in last sheaf threshed, i. 139, 
147, 168, il. 48; represented in dupli- 
cate, i. 139; conceived as young, 150 
sgqg.; as Bride and Bridegroom, 162 
sgg. ; as male and female, 164, ii. 9g ; 
as female, both old and young, i. 164 
Sgqg. ; represented by person who cuts, 
binds, or threshes the last corn, 167 
5Sg., 220 S9g., 236, 253 sq. ; fertilising 
influence of, 168; its influence on 
women, 168 ; represented by human 
beings, 168, 204 sgq., ii. 333 ; inform 
of an old man, i. 206 sg. ; in first corn 
cut, 215; personal representative of, 
killed in mimicry, 216; killing the, 
216 sqg., 223 Sgg.; represented by a 
puppet, 224 ; represented bya stranger, 
225 sgg.; conceived as poor and 
robbed by the reapers, 231 sgy. ; slain 
in his human representatives, 251 5g@. ; 
the neck of the, 268; as animal, 270 
sqg. ; on the animal embodiments of 
the, 303 sgg. ; as wolf or dog, 271, 
5qq., li. 327; the tail of the, i. 268, 
272, 200) ll; LO} 495) as cock; 1, 276 
SQQ., 2977 Sq.; as hare, 279 5g. ;| as 
cat, 280 sg.; as goat, 281 sgq., ii. 
327; lame, i. 284; slain in the form 
of a goat, 284 sg., 287 ; as bull, cow, 
or ox, 288 sqgq., il. 8; killed in form 
of bull, i. 290, 291 sg.; killed at 
threshing, 291 sg. ; as horse or mare, 
292 sgg.; in form of calf, 292; asa 
bird, 295; as fox, 296 sg.; as pig 
(boar, sow), 298 sgg. ; represented by 
an ox, ll. g sgg.; killed in animal 
form and eaten sacramentally, 20; asa 
bear, 325 sgg. ; represented dramatic- 
ally, 325 ; asa boar, 328 ; represented 
by a man called the Straw-bear, 329 

-stalks, harvesters wrapt up in, 1. 

220 Sqq. 

-wolf, i. 272, 273, 275 

-woman, i. 230, 233; at threshing, 
149 

Corners of fields not to be reaped, i. 
234 Sg. 

Corpus Christi Day, i. 310 

Cos, harvest-home in, i. 47 

Cotton, treatment of first cotton picked, 
il. Ig 

Courage seated in gall-bladder, ii. 145 
Sq. 


348 


Cow, corn-spirit as, i. 288 sgq. 

Cow's hide, thresher of last corn wrapt 
in, i. 291 ; custom of beating the, ii. 
322 sqqg. 

Cows milked by women, i. 118; and 
their milk, superstitions as to, il. 84 
n.1 and 2 

Cranes, trumpeting of the, signal for 
ploughing, i. 45 

Creek Indians, ii. 72, 139 

Cretan festival of Dionysus, i. 14 sg. 

myth of Dionysus, i. 13 

Crete, ancient seat of worship of Demeter, 
i. 131; pig not eaten in, ii. 21 x.} 

Cries of reapers, i. 263 sgq. 

Cripple Goat, the, i. 284 

Crocodile, clay image of, ii. 279 

-catchers, rules observed by, il. 209 


Sq. 

Crocodiles hunted by savages for their 
flesh, ii. 208 2.2; often spared by 
savages out of respect, 208 sgg.; cere- 
monies observed at catching, 209 sgq.; 
kinship of men with, 212 sg., 214 sq. ; 
respected in Africa and Madagascar, 
213 sgg.; sacred at Dix Cove, 287; 
souls of dead in, 289, 290, 291, 295 

Cronion, a Greek month, ii. 7, 8 7.1 

@rooke; We, is) £18) 720) 23d GO 
Fae 

Crops, charms and spells for growth of, 
i. 100; rotation of, 117; human 
sacrifices for the, 236 sqgq. 

Cross River natives, ii. 115 

Crow, head of, eaten to prolong life, ii 
143; transmigration of sinner into, 
299 

Song, the Greek, ii. 322 2. 

Crown of corn-ears, i. 163, 221, 283; 
worn by Demeter and Persephone, 


43 
‘Crying the Mare” in Hertfordshire, i. 
292 sg. ; in Shropshire, 293 
‘« Crying the neck,” i. 264 sqq. 
Cultivation, shifting, i. 99; see Agricul- 
ture 
‘“Cup of offering,’’ ii. 184 
Curcho, old Prussian god, ii. 133 
Curetes, their war-dance, i. 13 
Curses uttered by Bouzygai, i. 108 
Cuscuses, souls of dead in, ii. 296, 298 


Cushing, Frank H., quoted, ii. 175 
Sq. 

Cuzco, i. 310 

Cycle, the octennial in Greece, i. 80 
5Gq- 


Cynaetha, i. 16 
Cyzicus, i. 16 


Dacotas, the, ii. 256 
Dama, island of, ii. ror 
Damatrius, a Boeotian month, i. 46 


INDEX 


Dance at harvest supper, i. 134, 135, \ | 
145; of harvesters with or round the 
last sheaf, 135, 141, 145, 160, 219, 
220 sg. ; of masked men before sowing, 
186; of Dyaks to secure soul of rice, — 
188 sg. ; of old women as representa- 
tives of the corn-goddess, 205; Pawnee, 
before human sacrifice, 238; before 
the king at ceremony of first-fruits, ii. 
70 sg.; of Zulu king, 66, 68 7.2; of 
medicine- man, 72; the Green Corn 
Dance, 76; war, 79; by torchlight, 
79; of Kansas Indians, 145; ‘‘the 
angel dance,” 328; of mummers at 
Carnival, 333, 334; of mummer wear- 
ing a horse-headed mask, 338 

Dances, i. 246, 247 ; at sowing festival, 
95; masked, 95 sg., 111, 186, ii. 
208 z.1; at the reappearance of the 
Pleiades, i. 307, 309, 311, 312, 317; 
in imitation of totemic animals, ii. 76; 
Mexican, 88 ; in connexion with offer- 
ings of first-fruits, 113, 116, 126, 131, | 
134; of men personifying deities, — 
179; of women at bear-festival, 185, 
186 sg., 191, 195; Of women at catch- — 
ing a crocodile, 211; round dead 
tigers, 216; of the Koryak at the 
slaughter of bears or wolves, 223 ; in — 
honour of slain leopards, 228; of © 
Koryak women at slaughter of whales, i 
232 sg.; to amuse the souls of dead 
sea-beasts, 248; of Shrovetide Bear, 
325 sg. ; to make the crops thrive, — 
326, 328, 330 sg.; of masked men — 
and women in ritual, 339 

Dancing for salmon, ii. 255 

Danger Island, i. 312 

Danzig, harvest customs at, i. 
218 sq. 

Darfur, ii. 147 

Darwin and Empedocles, ii. 306 

Daughter-in-law in ritual, ii. 121 sg. 

Dawkins, R. M., i. 25 2.4, 29 2.2 

Dead, rebirth of the, i. 84 ; fear of the, 
ii. 36 sg. ; souls of the, 64; festival in 
honour of, at end of harvest, 110 ; 
buried in the houses, 115; bones of 
the, 1535g. ; mourners rub themselves 
with the fat or putrefying juices of 
the, 162 sg.; souls of the human, 
supposed to be in caterpillars, 275 
sg., and in other animals, 285 sgq. 

—— men mutilated in order to disable | 
their ghosts, ii. 271 sgq. \ 

spirits of the, supposed to in- — 
fluence the crops, i. 104; give rain, il. 
109 sg. ; first-fruits offered to, 109 5g., 
III sgy., 115, 116, 119, 12%, T2ame 
124 sgg.; prayers to, 112, 113, 1249) 
sg. ; in trees, 113 on 

Deane, Mrs. J. H., ii. 319 7. 


133) 


INDEX 


Death and resurrection of the gods, i. 1, 
I2 sgg., 15 

pollution of, ii. 85 7.° 

Deer, flesh of, eaten to prolong life or 
to avoid fever, ii. 143; not eaten by 
warriors, 144; treated with respect 
by American Indians, 240 sgg. ; their 
bones not given to dogs, 241, 242, 
243 ; Indian custom of cutting out the 
sinew of the thighs of, 264 sgg. ; souls 
of dead in, 286, 293 sg. 

Deiseil or deiseal, according to the course 
of the sun, ii. 323, 324 

Deities of vegetation as animals, ii. 1 
59q. 

Deity, communion with, ii. 325 

Delagoa Bay, i. 114, ii. 280 

Delaware Indians, ii. 218 

Delphi, grave of Dionysus at, i. 14 

Delphic oracle, i. 55, 58 

Demeter, mother of Dionysus by Zeus, i. 
14, 66; Homeric Hymn to, 35 sg¢., 
70; a personification of the corn, 39, 
40 sg. ; distinguished from the Earth- 
goddess, 41, 43; at the threshing- 
floor, 41 sg., 47; inart, 43 5g., 885¢.; 
offering of first-fruits to, 46 sgg. ; sur- 
named Proerosia, 51 ; bestows corn on 
the Athenians, 54; worshipped in 
Sicily, 56 sgg. ; bestows corn on the 
Sicilians, 56 sg. ; sacrifices to her at 
sowing, 57; associated with seed- 
corn, 58; her epithets, 63 sg.; her 
image at Eleusis, 64; her intrigue 
with Zeus, 66; etymology of name, 
131; in relation to the pig, ii. 16 sgq.; 
horse-headed, of Phigalia, 21, 338; 
rustic prototype of, 334 

and Iasion, i. 208 

and Pelops, ii. 263 

and Persephone, 1. 35 sgg.; re- 

semblance of their artistic types, 67 

sg. ; their essential identity, 90; as- 

sociated with death and immortality, 

90 sg. ; double personification of the 

corn as, 208 sgq. 

and Zeus, ii. 9; marriage of, i. 65 


Sqq. 

Black, i. 263; of Phigalia, ii. 21 

Green, i. 42, 263 

Yellow, i. 41 sg. 

Demeter’s corn, i. 42 

Democritus, ii. 146 

Demons or ghosts deceived by dummies, 
ii. 96 sgg. ; repelled by gun-shots, 99 

Dendereh, sculptures at, i. 260 

Dengdit, high god of the Dinka, ii. 40 ., 
114 7. 


Denmark, harvest customs in, i. 139 Sq., 


231; the Yule Boar in, i. 300 sg. 


EDe Smet, J., i. 239 2.1 


Descent of Persephone, i. 46, ii. 17 


349 


Devonshire reapers, cries of, i. 264 sgq. 
Diasia, an Athenian sacrifice, ii. 95 7.” 


Dieri, the, of Central Australia, i. 106, 
is Bee 

Digger Indians, the, ii. 164 

Digging-sticks used by women, i. 118, 


I20, 122, 124, 126, 128 

Dijon, harvest custom near, i. 290 

Dinka, the, ii. 37 sgg., 114 

Diocles, i. 37 

Diodorus Siculus, on worship of Demeter 
and Persephone, i. 56 599. 

Dionysus, i. 1 sgg. ; god of the vine, 2 
sg.; god of trees, 3 sy.; a god of 
agriculture and corn, 5; and the 
winnowing-fan, 5 sgg.; as Zagreus, 
12; horned, 12; son of Zeus by 
Persephone, Demeter, or Semele, 12, 
14; death and resurrection of, 12 
Sgg., 32; ritual of, 14 sg. ; grave of, 
14; asa bull, 16 sg., 31; as a goat, 
17 sg.; torn to pieces at Thebes, 25 ; 
his marriage to the Queen of Athens, 30 
sg. ; son of Zeus and Demeter, 66 ; 
and the bull-roarer, 110 7.4; his rela- 
tion to Pan, Satyrs, and Silenuses, ii. 
I sgg.; as a bull, 3 sg. ; live animals 
rent in rites of, 16; the Foxy, 282 

Dittenberger, W., i. 77 2.4 

Dius, a Macedonian month, i. 46 7.? 


Divination, ii. 210; magic dwindles 
into, i. 110 ~.; by shoulder-blade, 
il. 234 


Diviners, ancient, their rules of diet, ti. 


143 

Dodwell, E., at Eleusis, i. 64 

Dog, corn-spirit as, i. 271 sgg. ; of the 
harvest, 273; feast on flesh of, ii. 256; 
sacrifice of the White, 258 2.2; trans- 
migration of sinner into, 299 

-eating Spirit, i. 21 

-star, 1. 261 

Dog's flesh or liver eaten to acquire 
bravery, ii. 145 

Dogs devoured in religious rites, i. 20, 
21, 22; sacrificed, li. 196, 202; not 
allowed to gnaw bones of slain ani- 
mals, 225, 238 syg., 243, 259; bones 
of deer not given to, 241, 242, 243 

Doll made of Jast corn at harvest, i. 140, 
EOL 053) 05500575 roe : 

D'Orbigny, A., quoted, i. 120 

Dormice, charm against, ll. 281 

Door of house protected against fiends, 
ii. 96 

Dough image of god eaten sacramentally, 
ii. 86 sgg., 90 Sg. 

images of animals sacrificed instead 

of the animals, ii. 95 7.? 

puppets as substitutes for 
human beings, ii. ror sg. 

Dragon's blood, ii. 146 


live 


350 


Drama, modern Thracian, at the Car- 
nival, i. 25 sgg. ; magical, 187 sg. 

Dramatic representations of the corn- 
spirit, il. 325 

rites practised with magical in- 
tention, i. I 

Dreams as a source of belief in immor- 
tality, ii. 260 sg. 

Drinking juices of dead kinsfolk, ii. 
163 2.° 

Dryas, son of Lycurgus, i. 24, 25 

Du Pratz, Le Page, il. 77 sgq. 

Duke of York Islands, ii. 252 

Dumbartonshire, harvest customs in, i. 
157 Sq. 

Dummies to avert attention of ghosts or 
demons, li. 96 sgqg. 

‘“‘Dumping”’ people on harvest field, i. 
226 sq. 

Dumplings in human form at threshing, 
i. 148: in form of pigs, 299 

Duplication of deities, i. 212 sg. 

Durham, harvest customs in, 1. 151 

Dyaks, the, i. 313, 314, li. Too, ror, 
102, 152; their ceremonies to secure 
the rice-soul, i. 188 sg. ; of Borneo, ii. 
122, 144, 209, 211; of Sarawak, 279 

Dying and Reviving God, i. 1, 33 


Eagle-owl worshipped by the Aino, ii. 199 

Eagles worshipped by the Aino, ii. 200 ; 
propitiation of dead, 236 

Ears regarded as the seat of intelligence, 
ii. 148 ; of dead enemies cut out, 271 sg. 

Earth, Mother, ii. 105 

the spirit of the, li. 120 

—— -God, i. 69 

-goddess, ii. 115; distinguished 

from Demeter, i. 41, 43, 89; in Greek 

art, 89; human sacrifices offered to, 

245, 246, 249, 250 

-gods, slaves of the, ii. 61, 62 2.1 

-mothers, i. 173 2. 

Easing nature, a charm used by robbers, 
1. 235 

East Indies, the Rice-mother in the, i. 
180 sq. 

Easter, i. 300 

Eve, i. 134 

Islanders, ii. 133 

Sunday, i. 33 

Eater of animals, as epithet of a god, i. 23 

Eating the god, ii. 48 sgg., 167 ; among 
the Aztecs, 86 sqgq. 

the soul of the rice, ii. 54 

Eckstein, Miss L., ii. 317 2.2 

Ecstasy induced by smoking, ii. 72 

Edonians, the, i. 24 

Eels, souls of dead in, ii. 289, 290, 292 

Effigies of men and women hung at doors 
of houses, ii. 94; buried with the 
dead to deceive their ghosts, 97 sg. ; 


INDEX 


used to cure or prevent sickness, 100 
sqq. See also Doll, Images, Puppet 
Effigy of an ox broken as a spring cere- 
mony in China, ii. 10 sgg. 
Eggs not eaten, iil. 140; charm to make © 
hens lay, 326 
Egypt, ancient, stratification of religion 
in, li. 35 
Egyptian kings, their animal masks, i. — 
260 
reapers, their cries, i. 263 
type of animal sacrament, ii. 31 
5G-, 314 
Egyptians, human sacrifices offered by 
the ancient, i. 259 sg. ; the ancient, | 
their religious attitude to pigs, ii. 24 
59q- 
El Kiboron clan of the Masai, ii. 288 | 
Elans treated with respect by American 
Indians, ii. 240 i 
Elephant’s flesh thought to make eate 
strong, ll. 143 
Elephants, ceremonies observed at the 
slaughter of, li. 227 sg., 237; souls of 
dead in, 289 
Eleusine grain, i. 117 
Eleusinian Games, i. 70 sgg., 110, 180; 
less ancient than the Eleusinian mys- — 
teries, 87 sg. 4 
inscription dealing with first-fruits, — 
ib BRO ee sj 
—— mysteries, 1. 35, 37 sgg., 65 sgg., — 
69 sg., 78 sg., 161 sg., 188; instituted { 
by Demeter, 70 be 
Eleusis, Demeter at, i. 36 sg. ; offerings © 
of first-fruits at, 53 sgg.; image of 
Demeter at, 64; prayer for rain at, § 
69; the Rarian plain at, 36, 70, 74, 
234, ll. I5 Si 
Eleutherian games at Plataea, i. 80 


Elijah, the prophet, i. 233 4 
Elis, Dionysus at, i. 17 4 
Elk treated with respect, ii. 240; 
embryos of, not eaten, 243 . 
- 


Ellis, William, quoted, i, 312 
Elopango, i. 237 
Embodiment, human, of the corn-spirit, — 
il, 333 4 
Embog Sri, rice-bride, i. 200 sg. } 
Embryos of elk not eaten, ii. 243 


Emetics used before eating new corn, ii, — 
73) 75 5g-, 76; sacred, 74 j 

Empedocles, his doctrine of transmigra- 
tion, li. 300 sgg.; his resemblance to- 
Buddha, 302; his theory of th 
material universe like that of Herbe 
Spencer, 303 sgg. ; as a forerunner of | 
Darwin, 306; his posing as a god, 
397 

Enchanters of crops, foods forbidden 
i. I00 

Encounter Bay tribe, i. 126 


to, 


INDEX 351 


Enemies, mutilation of dead, ii. 271 sg. 

Energy, the conservation of, ii. 226 

En-jemusi, the, of East Africa, i. 118 

Epiphany, i. 302 

Epithets applied to Demeter, i. 63 sg. 

Equinox, human sacrifice offered soon 
after the spring equinox, i. 239 

Erigone and Icarius, ii. 133 

Esquimaux, the Central, ii. 246; dietary 
rules of, 84 

of Baffin Land, ii. 257 

of Bering Strait, i. 150, il. 247, 

272 

of Hudson Bay, ii. 245 sg. 

Essex, hunting the wren in, li. 320 

Esthonia, i. 302 

Esthonian reapers, i. 285 ; peasants, their 
treatment of weevils, il. 274 

Esthonians, the, i. 298, 300, li. 51 

Etna, Mount, i. 57 

Etymology, its uncertainty as a base for 
mythological theories, i. 41 7. 

Eubuleus, ii. 19 

Eubulus, i. 56 

Eudoxus of Cnidus, i. 81, ii. 30 

Eumolpids, i. 56 

Eumolpus, i. 37, 70, 73 

Euphorbus the Trojan, ii. 300 

Europe, Corn-mother and Corn-maiden 
in Northern, i. 131 sg. 

Evolution and dissolution, il. 305 sg. 

Ewe hunters, ii. 244 

negroes, ii. 45, IIS, 143, 149; 
their festival of new yams, 58 sgq. ; 
their belief as to the spirit-land, ro5 sq. ; 
their ceremonies after killing leopards, 
228 sqq. 

Exclusion of strangers, i. 94, 111 

Eyes shut at prayer, ii. 81; of men 
eaten, 153; of slaughtered animals 
Clitprout,. 207 577., 272; of dead 
enemies gouged out, 271 sg. 


Faces of bear-hunters painted red and 
black, ii, 226; blackened, i. 291, 299 

frady, taboo, ii. 46 

Fafnir, the dragon, ii. 146 

Falcon’s eye used as charm, ii. 164 

Faleshas, a Jewish sect, ii. 266 7.1 

Fallow, thrice-ploughed, i. 66, 69 ; lands 
allowed to lie, 117, 123 

Fanning away ill luck, i. 10 

Fans, the, of West Africa, ii. 140 

Farmer's wife, pretence of threshing, i. 
149 5g. 

Farmers, propitiation of vermin by, ii. 
274 599. 

Bamell, Ors i, R., 1 3724, 15) 7., 6817.4, 
[Why ze 

Fast before eating new fruits, ii. 73 sg., 
76 sq. 

Fasting and continence, li. 14 


Fastnachtsbar, ii. 325 

Fat, anointing the body with, from 
superstitious motives, ii. 162 sg., 164, 
165 

Fatigue of the Horse, i. 294 

Fauns, li. I sg¢. 

Feathers of cock mixed with seed-corn, 
i. 278; of wren, virtue attributed to, 
ii. 319 

Feet of enemies eaten, ii. 151 

Felkin, Dr. R. W., li. 314 sg. 

Fernando Po, ii. 174 

Fertilising influence of the corn-spirit, i. 
168 

Festival before Ploughing (Proerosza), i. 
51 sgg., 60; of the Cornstalks at 
Eleusis, 63; of the Threshing-floor 
(Haloa) at Eleusis, 60 sgg., 75; of 
winter solstice, ii. go; of New Fire, 
135; of bladders among the Esqui- 
maux, 247 sqq. 

Festivals of new yams, ii. 58 sgq. 

Fewkes, J. Walter, quoted, i. 312 

Fez, orgiastic rites at, i. 2 

Fictitious burials to divert the attention 
of demons from the real burials, ii. 98 
SQ. 

“Wield of God,” il. 14, 15 

‘« Field of secret tillage,’’ ii. 57 

Fields, miniature, dedicated to spirits, i. 
233 Sg. 

Fife, harvest custom in, i. 227 

Fifty-two years, Aztec cycle of, i. 310 sq. 

Fig Dionysus, 1. 4 

trees, sacred wild, ii. 113 

Fiji, sacrifice of first-fruits in, ii. 125 

Finns, their propitiation of slain bears, ii. 
223 5g. 

Fire not given out, 1. 249; god of, ii. 
93; made by friction of wood, 127, 
136, 314; purification by, 249; not 
to be blown upon, 254; new, ii. 65, 
Ge, Gili Gh G Gekomscl, Te Sirin, Wh SRE, 
314; festival of, 1. 135 

‘«Fireless and Homeless,”’ 
giant, il. 265, 266 

Fire-sticks called ‘‘ husband and wife,” 
ii. 65 

Fires extinguished, ii. 73 

Firing guns to repel demons, li. 99 

Firmicus Maternus, i. 13 

First-fruits offered to Demeter, i. 46 sgq. ; 
offered to Demeter and Persephone at 
Eleusis, 53 sgg.; offered to the sun, 
237 ; primitive reluctance to taste, li. 
6; sacrament of, 48 sgg.; offered to 
goddess of agriculture, 56 ; why savages 
scruple to eat the, 82 sg. ; sacrifice of, 
109 sgg. ; presented to the king, rog, 
116, 122; offered to the spirits of the 
dead; 109) S72, Lit s77., LES) BLO, 
LIQ, I2I, 123, 124 sqq. 


a mythical 


352 


Fish, sacred, ii. 26; the first caught, 
sacrificed, 132 ; not eaten, 140; treated 
with respect by fishing tribes, 249 5g9. ; 
compensated by fishermen, 252; first 
of the season, treated ceremoniously, 
253 sgg. ; souls of dead in, 285, 291, 
295 

bones of, not burned, ii. 250, 251 ; 
not to be broken, 255 

Fison, Rey. Lorimer, quoted, il. 125 

Flail, pretence of throttling persons with 
flail at threshing, i. 149, 150 

Flamen Dialis, inaugurates the vintage, 
ii. 133 

Flax-mother, i. 133 : 

Flesh of human victim eaten, i. 240, 244, 
251; buried in field, 248, 250 

diet, homoeopathic magic of a, ii. 
138 sgq. 

Flies, charms against, ii. 281; souls of 
dead in, 290 sg. 

Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, ii. 
85, 126 

Flowery Dionysus, i. 4 

Fly-catcher Zeus, ii. 282 

Flying-fish, the first of the season, ii. 
127 


fox, transmigration of sinner into, 
ii. 299 

Folk-tales, tongues of wild beasts cut out 
in, ii. 269 

Foods forbidden to enchanters of crops, 
ij. 100; certain, forbidden to meet in 
stomach of eater, il. 83 sgq. 

Fool, one of the mummers on Plough 
Monday, ii. 330 

-hen, heart of, not eaten, il. 140 

Foot, limping on one, i. 232, 284 

Foucart, P., i. 32 7.® 

Foulahs of Senegambia, il. 214 

Fox, stuffed, i. 287, 297 ; corn-spirit as, 
296 sg. ; carried from house to house 
in spring, 297; Koryak ceremony at 
killing a, li. 223 ; Esquimau and Aino 
treatment of dead, 244, 267; soul of 
dead in a, 286 

Fox's tail, name given to last standing 
corn, i. 268 

tongue as amulet, li. 270 

Foxy Dionysus, li. 282 

France, harvest customs in, i. 135, 271, 
275, 280, 295, 296; hunting the wren 
in, iil. 320 5g. 

Franche-Comté, harvest customs in, 1. 
281, 286 sq. 

Franken (Franconia), harvest customs 
in, i. 148 

Friction of wood, fire made by, ii. 127, 
136; new fire made by, i. 311, ii. 74, 
78 ; sacred fire made by, 314 

Frog, transmigration of sinner into, i, 


299 


INDEX 


Fruit-trees bound with Yule straw, i. 
301; Dionysus a god of, i. 3 5g.; 
presided over by dead chiefs, ii. 125 

Fruits and roots, wild, ceremonies at 
gathering the first of the season, ii. 80 
59q. 

Fumigation as mode of cultivating moral 
virtues, ii. 166 sg. 

Funeral of caterpillars, ii. 279; of dead 
snake, 317 

Furnivall, J. S., i. 190 5g. 


Gadbas, the, ii. 118 

Galelareese, their burial custom, ii. 97 

Galicia, harvest customs in, i. 135, 277 

Gall-bladders, the seat of courage, ii, 
145 sq. 

Gallas, the, ii. 154, 266 2.2, 270 

Galloway, harvest customs in, i. 279 

Game of ball played as a rite, ii. 76, 79 

Games held by harvesters, i. 75 sgg. ; 
quadriennial period of Greek, 77 sgq. ; 
octennial period of Greek, 80; in 
primitive agriculture, magical signi-: 
ficance of, 92 sgg. ; played at the sow- 
ing festival among the Kayans, 94 sqq., 
97 sg.; played for the good of the 
crops, I01; magical, 102; athletic, 
li. 66 

the Eleusinian, i. 70 sgg., 110, 180 

Gander’s neck, name given to last stand- 
ing corn, i. 268 

Ganesa, ii. 56 

Gaolis, the, i. 7 

Gardner, Percy, quoted, i. 44 

Gareloch, harvest customs on the, i. 
157 5g., 218 7.%, 268 

Garos, the, of Assam, ii. 43 2.1, 116; 
ceremony of the Horse at rice-harvest 
among the, 337 s¢q. 

Gayo-land, ii. 33 

Gazelle Peninsula, i. 123 

Gazelles, souls of dead in, ii. 289 

Geminus, on the supposed influence of 
the stars, i. 318 sg. 

Generalisations of science inadequate to 
cover all particular facts, ii. 37 

Generation, male organ of, as emblem 
of Dionysus, i. 12; effigy of male 
organ of, in Thracian ceremony, 26, 29 

Genius, Aristotle on men of, ii. 302 2.° 

or patron of animals, li. 243 

Genna, taboo, in Assam, i. tog 2.” 

Germans, the ancient, i. 129 

Germany, the Corn-mother in, i. 132 599.; 
cries of reapers in, 269; the corn- 
spirit as an animal in, 271, 277, 279, 
296, 300 } 

Ghosts or demons deceived by dummies, 
ii. 96 syg. ; offerings to ancestral, 127 ; 
of animals feared, 216, 217, 218, 219, 
220, 223, 224, 227 Sg., 229, 231 Sg., 


Cea <a — 


INDEX 


235, 236, 237, 241, 245, 267 sg., 209, 
271; disabled by the mutilation of 
their bodies, 271 sq. 

Gilgit, li. 56 

Gill, W. W., quoted, i. 312 

Gilyak procession with bear, li, 322, 325 

shaman, li. 103 

Gilyaks, the, of Siberia, il. 206, 238, 267 ; 
their bear-festivals, 190 sqq. 

Ginger cultivated, i. 123 

Girls sacrificed for the crops, 1. 
239 

Gnats, charm against, ll. 281 

Goat in relation to Dionysus, i. 17 sq. ; 
sacrificed for human victim, 249; 
corn-spirit as, 281 sgq., li. 327; the 
Cripple or Lame, i. 284; killed on 
harvest-field, 285 ; stuffed, 287 ; killed 
at sowing, 288 

and Athena, il. 40 sg. 

-formed deities, ll. I sgg. 

live, torn to pieces in 

Dionysus, i. 18, ii. 16 

skin, mask of, i. 

farmer at harvest, 285 

skins, mummers clad in, i. 26 sgq. 

Goat's neck, name given to last standing 
corn, i. 268 

Goats torn to pieces by fanatics in 
Morocco, i. 21 sg.; sacrificed to 
wolves, ii. 284 

God, the Dying and Reviving, i. 1, 33; 
killed in animal form, 22 sg. ; eating 
the, li. 48 sgq. 

Gods, death and resurrection of, i. 1, 
I2 sgg.; distinguished from spirits, 
169; in the likeness of foreigners, 
236 

Goldi, bear-festivals of the, ii. 197 

shaman, ii. 103 

Goldsmith, transmigration of thief into, 
il. 299 

Gonds, 
i. 244 

Good Friday, i. 33 

Spirit, the, i. 206 

Goose, to lose the, i. 277 7. 

Gorillas, souls of dead in, iil. 289 

Grandmother, name given to last sheaf, 
i. 136 

Grapes, the last, not to be stript, i. 
234 Sg. 

Grasshoppers, charm against, ii. 281 

Grave of Dionysus, i. 14 

Graves, sacrifices at, ii. 113; false, to 
deceive demons, ii. 99 sg. 

Great Bassam, in Guinea, ii. 9 

——- Eleusinian Games, i. 71, 79 

Mother, the, name given to the 

last sheaf, i. 135 sg. 

Mysteries of Eleusis, their date, i. 


2373 


rites of 


26; worn by 


human sacrifices among the, 


51 
IPATS We AOS RII 


353 


Great Sun, title of head chief of the 
Natchez, ii. 77 sqqy. 

Vigil, i. 176 

Greece, theory of the transmigration of 
souls in ancient, ii. 300 

Greek divinities who died and rose again, 
i. 2; farmers, their seasons for sowing 
and reaping, i. 318 

months lunar, i. 52 

summer rainless, i. 69 

Green Corn Dance, ii. 76 

-—— Festival at Eleusis, i. 63 

Greenlanders, the, ii. 246 

Gregor, Rev. Walter, i. 158 sgq. 

Gregory of Tours, ii. 281 

Grey, Sir George, quoted, i. 127 

Ground, last sheaf not allowed to touch 
the, i. 158, 159, 161 

Guadalcanar, island of, ii. 127 

Guaranis, the, of Paraguay, i. 309 

‘* Guardian gods”’ of the Hos, i. 234 

Guardian-spirit, ii. 60; of family, i. 
121 

spirits of American Indians, ii. 207 

Guayaquil, in Ecuador, i. 236 

Guaycurus of the Gran Chaco, i. 309 

Guazacualco, ii. 259 

Guiana, Indians of British, i. 
236; their animism, 204 

Guinea-fowl gives signal for planting, 
iy tai 

Guns fired to repel demons, ii. 99 

Guré, a hobby-horse, ii. 337 sg. 


120, il. 


Haddon, Dr. A. C., i. 1062.1 

Hadrian institutes games at Mantinea, i. 
80 

Hag (wrach), name given to last corn 
cut in Wales, i. 142 sqq. 

Hahn, Theophilus, i. 317 

Haida Indians, i. 20 

Hair of slain foes, use made of, il. 153 

Halibut, the first of the season, treatment 
of, ii. 253 

Hallowmas, i. 140 

Halmahera, i. 183 

ffaloa, Attic festival, i. 60 sgg. 

Hamstring of deer, custom of removing, 
ii. 266 

Hamstringing dead animals, il. 267, 271, 
273 

men to disable their ghosts, i. 272, 
273 

Hand-marks, white, ii. 338 

Hands of enemies eaten, ll. 151, 152 

Hanover, harvest customs in, 1. 133, 135, 
283 

Hare, corn-spirit as, i. 279 sq. 

Hare-skin Indians, ii. 265 

Hare’s tail, name given to last standing 
corn, i. 268 

Hares not eaten, il. 141 


2A 


354 


Harran, sacrifices offered by the heathen 
of, i. 261 sg. 

legend of Tammuz, i. 258 

Harrison, Miss J. E., i. 5 2.4, 60 z.}, 
62 2.6 

Harte, Bret, ii. 171 7.1 

Hartland, B. S., 1. 143, 2.1, 224 2:4 

Harvest, festival of the dead at the close 
of, ii. 110 ; In Greece, date of, i. 48 

-child, i. 151 

-cock, i. 276, 277 

-crown, i. 221, 277 

-customs and spring customs com- 

pared, i. 167 sgq. 

-goat, 1. 282, 283 

——— -man, i, 221 

—— -mother, i. 135 

—— -Queen, i. 146 sg. 

-supper, i. 134, 138, 156, 157, 159 

sqg., 161 sg., 297; sacramental char- 

acter of, 303 

-woman, i. 145 

-wreath, i. 283 

Harvesters, athletic competitions among, 
i. 76 sg.; Wrapt up in corn-stalks, 220 
Sgq- 

Hawhkie, i. 146, 147 ”.} 

Hawks, revered by the Aino, ii. 200 

Hay, Sir John Drummond, 1. 179 

Head of horse, ii. 42, 43 2.1, 337 

-hunting, human, i. 240 sgg.; prac- 
tice of, 256 

Headlam, Walter, i. 2 7.! 

Heads shaved, il. 161 

Heart of Dionysus, the sacred, i. 13, 14, 
15; of human victim torn out, li. 92 ; 
of lion or leopard eaten to make the 
eater brave, 142 sg. ; of water-ousel 
eaten in order to acquire wisdom and 
eloquence, 144; of bear eaten to ac- 
quire courage, 146; of serpent eaten 
to acquire language of animals, 146 ; 
of wolf eaten to acquire courage, 146 ; 
regarded as the seat of intellect, 149 

Hearts of men sacrificed, i. 236; of 
crows, moles, or hawks eaten, li. 143; 
of men eaten to acquire their qualities, 
148 sgq. 

Heaven-herds among the Zulus, ii. 160 

Hebrews forbidden to reap corners of 


fields and glean last grapes, 1. 234 sg. . 


Heckewelder, Rev. J., quoted, ii. 205 sg. 

Hedgehog, transmigration of sinner into, 
li. 299 

Hemithea, sanctuary of, il, 85 

Hen, heart of, not eaten, ii. 142, 147; 
hens not eaten, ii. 140 

Henna, image of Demeter at, i. 65 

Hephaestius, a Greek month, i. 46 2.” 

Heraeon, a Greek month, ii. 7 

Heralds and tongues, ii. 271 

Hercules and Busiris, i. 259 


INDEX 


Hercules and Lityerses, i, 217 

and Syleus, i. 258 

and Zeus, ii. 172 

surnamed Locust, ii. 282 

Hermes, tongues of victims assigned to, 
ll. 270 

Herrick, i. 147 2.1 

Herring, superstitions as to, ii, 251 sg. 

Hertfordshire, ‘‘ crying the Mare,” in, i. 
292 Sq. 

Heryey Islands, i. 312 

Hesiod on time for ploughing, i. 45; 
on time of vintage, 47 7.2; on the 
farmer's calendar, 53 

Hierapolis on the Euphrates, ii. 23 

Hierophant at Eleusis, i. 55, 65 

Highlands of Scotland, beating the cow’s 
hide in the, ii. 322 599. 

Hill-Tout, C., ii. 8059., 134 

Himerius, on the gift of the corn, i. 58 

Hindoos, sacrifice of first-fruits among 
the ancient, ii. 119 sg. 

Hippolytus and Virbius, 1i. 40 

on mysteries of Eleusis, i. 38 

Hippopotamus, ceremony after killing a, 
ll. 235 

Hippopotamuses, souls of dead in, ii. 289 

Hockey cart, i. 147 22 

Elodson, le Gy eeroonze 

Hoeing, rites at, i. 96 ; done by women, 
I13 5g. 

Hoensbroech, Count von, ii. 94 

Hoes used by women in agriculture, i. 
114, 115, 116, 118, 119 

Hoggan, Frances, i. 267 

Hogmanay, the last day of the year, il. 
323 

Holiness conceived as a dangerous virus, 
il. 29 

Hollis, A. C., ii. 155 

Homer on Demeter, i. 41 sg. ; on loves 
of Zeus and Demeter, 66; on gods in 
likeness of foreigners, 236 

Homeric Greeks, li. 270 

Hymn to Demeter, i. 35 5qq. 

Homoeopathic or imitative magic, i. 62, 
262, ii. 267, 331, 333, 334; Of a flesh 
diet, ii. 138 sgq. 

Honduras, Indians of, ii. 241 

Hone, W., quoted, i. 264 sg. 

Hop-picking, custom at, i. 226 

Horned Dionysus, i. 12, 16 

Horse, ‘‘seeing the Horse,” i. 294; 
‘«Cross of the Horse,’’ 294; ‘‘ fatigue 
of the Horse,’’ 294; sacrificed to Mars 
at Rome, ii. 42 sgg.; ceremony of the, 
at rice-harvest among the Garos, 337 
59 


and Virbius, ii. 40 sgq. 

-headed Demeter of Phigalia, ii. 
21, 338 

or mare, corn-spirit as, i. 292 sgg. 


a 


INDEX 355 


Horse-races, i. 71, ii. 114; at harvest, 1. 
76 

Horse’s head, ii. 42, 43 2.1, 337 sg. 

Horses, Lycurgus torn to pieces by, i. 
24; excluded from Arician grove, ii. 
40 sgg. ; excluded from sanctuaries, 
45 Sg. 

Horus, eye of, ii. 30 

Hos of Togoland, the, i. 130, 234, ii. 
59; a tribe of Ewe negroes, i. 115, 
116; of Bengal, il. 117 

Hottentots, the, i. 316 sg. 

Huahine, island of, ii. 132 

Huichol Indians, the, il. 93 

Huitzilopochtli, a Mexican god, ii, 
99; 95 

Human beings torn to pieces in rites of 
Dionysus, i. 24 

Human sacrifices for crops, i. 236 sq. ; 
offered by ancient Egyptians, 259 sv. ; 
in Mexico, ii. 88 

victims, substitutes for, i, 
treated as divine, 250 

Hunters, propitiation of wild animals by, 
il. 204 sgy. ; of grisly bears, chastity 
observed by, 226 

Hunting the wren, ii. 317 sgq. 

Hurons, the, ii. 250 sg. 

Huts, miniature, for ghosts, ii. 113 

Huzuls, the, of the Carpathians, ii. 43 
n.1, 275 

Hyaenas, souls of dead in, ii. 289 

Hyes Attes, ii. 22 

Hymn to Demeter, Homeric, i. 35 sgg., 70 


86, 


249 ; 


Ialysus in Rhodes, li. 45 

Iasion and Demeter, i. 208 

Ibans (Sea Dyaks) of Sarawak, ii. 279 

Iberians, the, i. 129 

Icarius and Erigone, ii. 133 

Ichneumon, transmigration of sinner into, 
iil. 299 

Ida Batara, i. 

Idah, ii. 228 

Ideler, L., i. 86 

Igaras of the Niger, ii. 228 

Igbiras, the, il. 115 

Igorrots of the Philippines, ii. 292 

Image of god made of dough and eaten 
sacramentally, ii. 86 sgg., 90 sg.; of 
snake carried about, 316 sg. 

Images of ancestors, ii. 53; of animals 
sacrificed instead of the animals, 95 7.7; 
vicarious use of, 96sgg.; of gods, sug- 
gested origin of, 173 sg. ; of vermin 
made as a protection against them, 
280 sg. See also Effigies, Puppets 

Imitation of spirits, i. 186 

Immortality, hope of, associated with 
Eleusinian mysteries, i. 90 sg. 

of animals, savage faith in the, ii. 

260 sqgq. 


202 


Immortality of soul revealed in mysteries 
of Dionysus, i. 15 

‘nacht, an offering of first-fruits, ii. 128, 
beep 

/nao, sacred wands of the Aino, ii. 185, 
186 ”., 189 

Inari, Japanese rice-god, i. 297 

Incantations for growth of crops, i. 100 

Incas, the, i. 310 

India, the last sheaf of corn in, 222 sg. ; 
doctrine of the transmigration of souls 
in ancient, ii. 298 sg. 

Indian Archipelago, the, i. 124 

Indians of British Columbia, their can- 
nibal orgies, i. 18 sg.; of South 
America, women’s agricultural work 
among the, 119 sgq. 

Indonesian ideas of rice-soul, i. 181 sg. 

Indra, Indian god, ii. 120 

Ingiald, son of King Aunund, ii. 146 

Inoculation with moral and other virtues, 
lil, 158 sgq. 

Inscription, Eleusinian, 
first-fruits, i. 55 sg. 

Intercalation in Greek calendar, 1, 81 

Invulnerability, ii. 160 

Iowa Indians, ii. 217 

Irayas, the, of Luzon, ii. 124 

Ireland, hunting the wren in, ii. 319 sg. 

Tron axe, use of, forbidden, ii. 248 

Iroquois, their sacrifice of a white dog, 
ii. 258 7.1 

Tsilimela, the Pleiades, i. 316 

Isis, i. 262; dirge of, 215; at Tithorea, 
festivals of, ii. 18 2.1; in relation to 
COWS, 35 

Islay, harvest customs in, i. 141 sg. 

Isle de France, harvest customs in, i. 
221, 226 

Isle of Man, hunting the wren in the, ii. 
318 sq. 

Isocrates, om Demeter’s gift of the corn, 
i. 54 Sg. 

Isowa or Aisawa, order of saints in 
Morocco, i. 21 

Israelites, their brazen serpent, ii. 281 

Isthmian games, 1. 86 

Italy, vintage custom in, ii. 133 

Ivy Girl, i. 153 


dealing with 


Jabme-Aimo, the abode of the dead, i1.257 

Jackal, transmigration of sinner into, 
ii. 299 

Jackal’s heart not eaten, ll, 141 

Jacob, the wrestling of, ii. 264 

of Edessa, 280 z. 

Jaguars eaten to inspire courage, il. 140 ; 
souls of dead in, 285, 286 

Ja-luo, the, Nilotic negroes, ii. 142 

Jankari, a god, i. 244 

Japan, rice-god in, 1. 297 

Japanese deities of the Sun, i. 212 


356 


Jatakas, ii. 299 2.° 

Java, use of winnowing-basket in, 1. 6; 
ceremony at rice-harvest in, 199 sgq. 

Jawbones of slain beasts propitiated by 
hunters, ii. 244 sg. 

Jebel-Nuba, ii. 221 

Jewish high priest, ii. 27 

Jews, their attitude to the pig, li. 23 sg. ; 
their ablutions, 27 

Jochelson. W., iti. 232 

Johnson, Dr. Samuel, il. 322 

Jukos, the, of Nigeria, il. 160 

Julbuck in Scandinavia, ii. 327 

Jumping over a woman, ceremony of, 
ii, 64, 70 2.4, 253 

Jupiter, lamb sacrificed to, at vintage, i. 
133 


Kachins, the, of Upper Burma, ii. 120 

Kai, the, of German New Guinea, 1. 
Gor S77 SES see toelnm belief un 
transmigration, 296 

Kaimani Bay, i. 123 

Kalamantans of Borneo, iil. 293 sg. 

Kalmucks, their consecration of a white 
ram, il. 313 Sg. 

Kamilaroi, the, of New South Wales, ii. 
151, 162; burial custom of the, 99 sg. 

Kamtchatka, il. 195 

Kamtchatkans, the, i. 315, li. 257, 268 ; 
their propitiation of slain animals, 222 

Kamuzi, ii. 180, 198 

Kandhs or Khonds. See Khonds 

Kangean archipelago, il. 278 

Kansas Indians, ii. 149 

Karels of Finland, the, ii. 258 7.? 

Karens of Burma, 1. 10; their ceremonies 
to secure the rice-soul, 189 sg. 

Karo-Bataks of Sumatra, i. 196 

Karoks of California, ii. 255 

Kashim, ii. 247 

Kaua Indians, 1. 111 

Kavirondo, ii. 26 

Kayans or Bahaus, the, of central Borneo, 
i. 925g¢g., 107, LO9, III, 234, 314, il. 
54; their ceremonies in connexion 
with rice, 184 sgg. ; their custom as to 
eating deer, li. 144; their belief in 
transmigration, 293 

of the Mahakam river, i. 186 

of the Mendalam river, i. 97, 98 

Kei Islands, ii. 123 

Kekchis of Guatemala, il. 241 

Kelah, soul, i. 189 

Kemping, i. 152 

Kent, harvest custom in, i. 153 

Kenyahs, the, of Borneo, i. 314 

Key of the field, i. 226 

Khon-ma, a Tibetan goddess, ii. 96 

Khonds or Kandhs, human sacrifices for 
crops among the, i. 245 sgq. 

Kid, surname of Dionysus, i. 17 


INDEX 


Kikuyu; i. 317 

Killing a god in the form of an animal, 
i, 22 sg. ; two types of the custom of, 
lil. 312 sg. 

—— the corn-spirit, i. 216 sgq. 

the divine animal, ii. 169 sgg. 

Kimbunda, the, of West Africa, ii. 152 

King, title of Carnival mummer, i. 28 sg. ; 
eats of new fruits before his people, ii. 
63, 70; first-fruits presented to the, 
109, 116, 122); so calledjyatwcan- 
cassone, 320 sg. 

of the Calf, i. 290 

of the harvesters, i. 294 

-—— of the Rice, i. 197 

King’s son sacrificed for his father, i. 13, 
24 Sg. 

Kings, trace of custom of slaying them 
annually, i. 254 sg. ; turned at death 
into lions, ii. 288 

Kings’ wives turned at 
leopards, ii. 288 

Kingsmill Islands, ii. 127 

Kinross, harvest custom in, i. 227 

Kinship of men with crocodiles, ii. 212 
5g., 214 sg. ; of men with tigers, 216 

Kirn or kern, last corn cut, i. 151, 152 
sqgq. ; name of the harvest-supper, 158 

-baby, i. 151, 153 

—— -doll, i. 151, 153, 154 

-supper, i. 154 

Kiwaii, i. 106 

Kiziba, district of Central Africa, i. 118, 
ll, 219 

Klippel (mallet), at threshing, i. 148 

Kobeua Indians, the, i. 111, ii. 164 

Kochs of Assam, il. 116 

Kon-Meney, a tribe of Cochin China, ii. 
291 

Koragia at Mantinea, i. 46 2.? 

Kore, title of Persephone, i. 208 

Koryak, their ceremonies at killing bears 
and wolves, li. 223; their ceremonies 
at the slaughter of whales, 232 sgg. ; 
their treatment of a slain fox, 244 

Kothluwalawa, a sacred lake, ii. 179 

Krooben, a malevolent spirit, ii. 100 

Kruyt, A. Co iens2isy. 

Kshetrpal, a Himalayan deity, ii. 117 

Kudulu, a hill tribe of India, i. 244 

Kuker and Kukerica, ii. 332, 333, 334 

Kuxewy, i. 161 72.4 

Kukis, the, ii. 155 7.4 

Kull Gossaih, an Indian goddess, ii. 118 

Kwakiutl Indians, i. 20, ii. 220, 250 


death into 


La Ciotat, near Marseilles, hunting the 
wren at, ii. 321 

Ladakh, ii. 117 

Lagos, human sacrifice at, i. 239 

Lake-dwellers of Europe, i. 132 

Lamb killed sacramentally, ii. 314 sg. 


INDEX 


Lame, woman who pretends to be, ii. 


254 - 
Goat, the, 1. 284 
Lamentations, pretended, for insects 


which destroy the crops, iil. 279 sg. 

Lampsacus, coin of, i. 44 

Land cleared for cultivation by men, i. 
I13 5g., 117 sqq. 

Landowners, sacrifices offered to spirits 
of former, i. 228 

Lang, Andrew, ii. 4 

Language of animals acquired by eating 
serpent’s flesh, lil. 146; of birds, how 
learned, 146 

Lanuvium, sacred serpent at, ii. 18 

Laos, province of Siam, i. 8 

Laphystian Zeus, i. 25 

Lapps, the, il. 257; their treatment of 
slain bears, 224 

Latuka, ii. 228 

Laws of Manz, ii. 298 

Leaf-clad dancers, i. 95 

Leaps, high and long, i. 98; to make 
the crops grow tall, ii. 330 sg. 

Learchus, son of Athamas, i. 24 

Leeches, charm against, ll. 281 

Legends told as charms, i. r02 sg. 

Lenaeon, a Greek month, i. 66 

Lengua Indians of Paraguay, 1. 
of the Gran Chaco, il. 245 

Lenormant, Frangois, i. 40 2.° 

Leonard, Major A. G., ii. 155 

Leopard’s blood drunk, or its flesh or 
heart eaten to make the eater brave, 
ii. 141 sg. 

Leopards, men inspired by, ii. 213; re- 
vered, 228; ceremonies observed after 
the slaughter of, 228 sgg.; souls of 
dead in, 288, 289 

Lepers sacrificed, i. 261 

Leprosy caused by eating a sacred animal, 
ii. 25 sgq. 

Lesbos, harvest custom in, i. 280 

Letts, swinging among the, i. 107 ; their 
sacrifices to wolves, ii. 284 

Lhoosai, the, i. 122 

Lhota Naga, the, i. 243 

Libanius, on human life before Demeter, 

1. 43 

Libations of beer, ii. 181, 185, 186 

Liber, Father, i. r2; Roman sacrifice of 
new wine to, ii. 133 

License, periods of, ii. 
5qq. 

Lightning, eating flesh of bullock that 
has been struck by, ii. 161 ; treatment 
of men, animals, and houses that haye 
been struck by, 161 

Liknites, epithet of Dionysus, i. 5, 27 

Lillooet Indians, ii. 226, 243 

Limping on one foot, i. 232, 284 

Lindus in Rhodes, ii. 85 


399; 


62, 63, 66 


357 


Linus or Ailinus, i. 
264 

Lion-chief, ii. 228 

Lion's fat, unguent of, ii. 164 

flesh or heart eaten to make eater 
brave, li. 141, 142 sg., 147 

Lions, men inspired by, ii. 213; re- 
spected, 228; souls of dead chiefs in, 
287 sq. 

Lir majoran, god of husbandry, ii. 123 

Lithuania, ii. 327; harvest customs in, i. 
133, 145, 148 ; custom at threshing in, 
223 sg.; old Lithuanian ceremonies at 
eating the new corn, ii. 49 sg. 

Little Deer, chief of the deer tribe, ii. 
241 

Wood-woman, i. 232 

Lityerses, 1. 216 sgg.; his relation to 
Attis, 255 sg. 

Liver of deer eaten, ii. 143 ; of dog eaten 
to acquire bravery, 145; of serpent 
eaten to acquire language of animals, 
146 ; regarded as the seat of the soul, 
147 sg.; regarded as the seat of 
valour, 148; of brave men eaten, 151 
sq. ; of bear, used as medicine, 187 sg. 

Ljeschie, Russian wood-spirits, ii. 2 

Loaf made of corn of last sheaf, i. 148 
Sq. 

Loaves in shape of a boar, i. 300; in | 
human shape, ii. 48 sg., 94, 95 

Lobeck, Chr. A., ii. 17 7.5, 18 2.1, 20, 
21 

Lochaber, harvest customs in, i. 157 

Locust Apollo, ii. 282 

Hercules, ii. 282 

Locusts, superstitious precautions against, 
ii. 276, 279, 281 

Lombok, rice-spirit in, i. 201 

Lothringen (Lorraine), harvest customs 
in, 1, 223, 273, 288 

Loucheux-Indians, ii. 265 

Louisiana, festival of new corn in, ii. 77 
sqq. ; Indians of, 239, 242 

Lous, a Macedonian month, i. 258, 259 

Lucian, old scholium on, ii. 17 

Lumi lal, consecrated rice-field, i. 93, 
108 

Lunar calendar corrected by observation 
of the Pleiades, i. 314 sg., 315 Sg. 

months observed by savages, i. 117, 

125 

months of Greek calendar, i. 52 5g., 


216, 257 s7., 263; 


82 

and solar time, attempts to har- 
monise, i. 80 sg. 

Luritcha tribe of Australia, 11. 260 

Luzon, il. 124 

Lyceum or Place of Wolves at Athens, 
li. 283, 284 

Lycosura, in Arcadia, il. 46; sanctuary 
of the two goddesses at, 339 


358 


Lycurgus, a Thracian king, his death, i. 
24, 25 


Mabuaig, i. 106, li. 207 

M'‘Carthy, Sir Charles, ii. 149 

Macdonald, Rev. James, ii. 66 sg. 

Maclagan, Dr. R. C., i. 165, 166 

McClintock, Walter, i. 311 

Macpherson, Major S. C., i. 250 

McTaggart, Dr. J. McT, Ellis, ii. 309 7.1 

Madagascar, ii. 116; crocodiles re- 
spected in, 214 sg.; belief in trans- 
migration among the tribes of, 289 sg. 

Madder-harvest, Dutch custom at,i. 231, 
235 5g. 

Madi or Moru tribe of Central Africa, ii. 
314 

Madonna, effigies of, sold and eaten, ii. 
94 

Maggots eaten as an initiatory rite, ii. 
I41 

Magic dwindles into divination, i. 110 7.; 
sympathetic, I, II, 102, ii. 271; 
homoeopathic or imitative, i. 10, 62, 
AM, Hey, Shin Sih Bie Ol Gh vilesa 
diet, 138 sgg. 

Magical changes of shape, i. 305 

significance of games in primitive 
agriculture, i. 92 sgq. 

Magnesia on the Maeander, i. 3; sacri- 
fice of bull at, li. 7 sg. 

Magpies’ nests, custom of robbing the, 
ii. 321 2.% 

Magyar tale, ii. 263 

Mahakam River, i. 98, 99 2.1, 186, 187, 
314 

Mai Darat, the, ii. ro2 

Maiden, name given to last corn cut, i. 
150, 153, 155 59g. 164 5g. 

Feast at end of harvest, i. 156 

Maidenhead, name of last standing corn, 
i, 158 

Matidhdean-buain, \. 155 

Maize cultivated in Africa, i, 114, 115, 
11g, 130; cultivated in South America, 
122, 124; cultivated in Assam, 123; 
American personification of, 171 sgq. ; 
cultivated in Burma, 242; thought to 
be dependent on the Pleiades, 310 

-goddess, Mexican, i. 176 

-mother, 1. 172 sgq. 

Makalaka, the, ii. 110 

Makanga, the, ii. 287 

Malagasy, the, venerate crocodiles, ii, 
Bis 

Malas, the, a caste of pariahs, ii. 93 

Malay Peninsula, the Rice-mother in the, 
1. 197 Sqq. 

Malays of Patani Bay, ii. 212 

Male organ, effigy of, in rites of Diony- 
sus, 1 125 letiigy; ofan) Dhracian 
ceremony, 26, 29 


INDEX 


Malko-Tirnovsko, ii. 331 

Manuailian tower, ii. 42, 44 

Mandans, the, i. 204 

Mandeling, a district of Sumatra, i. 197, 
il, 216 

Maneros, i. 215, 258, 259, 261, 263, 
264 

Mang-Shen, god of agriculture, ii. 11, 12 

Mango tree, ii. 119 

Mania, the Mother or Grandmother of 
Ghosts, ii. 94, 96 

Maniae, a kind of loaf, ii. 94 

Manii at Aricia, many, ii. 94 sgq. 

Manioc cultivated in Africa, i. t19 ; cul- 
tivated in South America, 120 sgq. 

Mannewars, the, ii. 119 

Mannhardt, W., i. 11, 131, 132, 135, 
138, 204, 217 7.1, 218 2.1, 222, 258, 
292, 294, li. 2, 42 2.1, 263) 32551337 

Manslayers taste the blood of their 
victims, li. 154 sg. 

Mantinea, sanctuary of Demeter at, i. 
46 2.2; games in honour of Antinous 
at, 80, 85 

Manu, Laws of, ii. 298 

Manure, ashes used as, i. 117 

Many Manii at Aricia, ii. 94 sgq. 

Maoris, the, i. 313, ii. 133, 156, 252 

Maraves, the, ii. 111 

March, the first of, ii. 322 2. 

Mare in foal, last sheaf of corn given to, 
i. 160, 162, 168 

or horse, corn-spirit as, i. 292 sgq. 

Marimos, human sacrifices among the, 
i. 240, 251 , 

Mariner, W., quoted, ii. 128 sgv. 

Marno, E., ii. 39 

Marriage, mock, at Carnival masquerade, 
i. 27; of Queen of Athens to Dionysus, 
30 sg. ; sacred, of Zeus and Demeter 
in Eleusinian mysteries, 65 sgg.; of 
mice, li. 278 

Mars, red-haired men sacrificed to the 
planet, i. 261 sg, ; horse sacrificed to, 
at Rome, ii. 42 

Masai, the, i. 317, ii. 83, 288 

Masked dances, i. 95 sg., 111, 186, ii. 
208 2.1; in ritual, 339 

Masks worn by Egyptian kings, i. 260 
sg. ; worn by women, il. 232 sg., 234; 
worn by mummers at Carnival, 333 

Maskers in Thrace at Carnival, i. 26 sg. 

Maspero, Sir G., i. 260 2.” 

Masquerade at sowing festival, i. 95 sg., 
98, 186 sg. 

Master of the Fish, ii. 252 

of Life, ii. 134,.135 

Matabelé, the, i. 115, ii. 
festival of new fruits, 70 sg. 

Matse tribe of Ewe negroes, il. 115 

Matthes, Dr. B. F., ii. 122 

Mausolus, ii. 158 


275; their 


Ay 


INDEX 


Mawu Sodza, a Ewe goddess, ii. 115 

May, J. D., ii. 281 7.? 

May, the first of, ii. 321 7.° 

Maypole, ii. 44 

‘‘Meal and ale,”’ i. 160 

Meat and milk, dietary rules as to, ii. 
83 5g. 

Mecklenburg, harvest: customs in, i. 273, 
274, 283 

Medea and Aeson, ii. 143 

Medicine-man, ii. 217, 220; 
72 

Medium inspired by crocodile spirit, ii. 


dance of, 


213; mediums inspired by spirits 
of lions, leopards, and_ serpents, 
213 


Medontids, the, i. 86 

Megara, ii. 17 n.8 

Meilichios, epithet of Dionysus, i. 4 

Melancholy, characteristic of men of 
genius, ii. 302 7.° 

Melanesians, their observation of the 
Pleiades, i. 313 

Mell, last corn cut, i. 151 sg. 

-doll, i. 151 

—— -sheaf, i. 151 sg. 

-supper, i. 151 

Men, parts of, eaten to acquire their 
qualities, ii. 148 sgg.; disguised as 
animals, processions of, 325 sgq. 

Mendalam River, i. 97, 98, 187 

Menstruous women, disability of, ii. 253 
Sg. 

Meriah, the human victim among the 
Khonds, i. 245, 246, 249, 250 

Metageitnion, an Attic month, i. 77 

“* Metropolis of the Corn,” i. 58 

Mexican custom of eating a man as an 
embodiment of a god, li. g2 sg. 

customs at maize-harvest, i. 


174 
59g 


human sacrifices, i. 236 sgg. 

sacraments, ii. 86 sg. 

Meyer, Prof. E., i. 260 7.2 

Mhaighdean-Bhuana (or Maighdean- 
Buana), i. 156, 164 sg. 

Miamis, the, i. 206 

Mice, the genius of, ii. 243 ; superstitious 
precautions taken by farmers against, 
276 sqq., 281 ; superstition as to white, 
279, 283; their ravages on the crops, 
282 

Midas, King of Phrygia, i. 217 

Middleton, J. H., i. 14 7.,3 266 

Midsummer solstice, rainmaking cere- 
mony performed at the, ii. 179 

Mildew worshipped by the Romans, ii. 
282 


Apollo, ii. 282 

Milk, taboos referring to, ii. 
temporary abstinence from, 
offered to snakes, 288 


83 5g. ; 
161 ; 


659 


Milk and meat (flesh), dietary rules as 
to, ll. 83 sg. 

of pig, il. 24, 25 

Mill, Tammuz, ground in a, i, 258 

Millet cultivated in Africa, i. 115, 117; 
cultivated in Assam, 123; cultivated 
in New Guinea, 123 

Milton, quoted, i. 147 

Minahassa, ii. 54, 123 

Minangkabauers of Sumatra, i. rot, ii. 
211 

Miniature fields dedicated to 
233 5g. 

Minnetaree Indians, i. 204, ii. 256 

Minotaur, the, i. 31 

Miris of Assam, the, i. 123, ii, 145 

Mirzapur, remedy for locusts in, ii. 276 

Mistress, sanctuary of the, at Lycosura, 
li. 46 

Mithraic sacrifice of bull, ii. ro 

Mnevis, sacred bull, ii. 34 sg. 

Moab, Arabs of, i. 138 

Mock battle, il. 75. See Sham Fight 

Mocobis, the, i. 309 

Moffat, R., i. 316 

Monbuttoo, the, of Central Africa, i. 119 

Mondard, the great, ii. 6 

Mongolian peoples, il. 257 

Monkeys sacred at Fishtown, ii. 287 

Months, lunar, observed by savages, i. 
117, 125; of Greek calendar, 52 sq., 
82 

Moon, reckoning by the, i. 117 ; human 
victims sacrificed to, 261; pigs sacri- 
ficed to the, ii. 25 

Mooney, J., quoted, ii. 204 sg. 

Mopane country, South Africa, ii. 287 

Moravia, harvest custom in, i. 162 

Morgan, L. H., ii. 225 2.1 

Morning Star, the, i. 238, 315 

Morocco, order of saints in, i. 21; the 
Barley Bride in, 178 sy. 

Mosquito Indians, ii. 258 7.2 

Mother, the Great, name given to the 
last sheaf, i. 135 sg.; of the Maize, 
172 sqq. ; of the Rice, 191 sgq. 

-corn, name given to last sheaf 

threshed, i. 147 

-cotton, i. 178 

—— Earth, ii. 105 

-sheaf, i. 135 

Moulton, Professor J. H., i. 
1307." 

Mountains, offerings to the, ii. 134 

Mourning, pretended, for insects that 
destroy the crops, ll. 279 sg. 

Mouse Apollo, ii. 282 5g. See Mice 

Mouth of dead fox tied up, ii. 267 

Mpongwe, the, i. 119 

Muganda (singular of Baganda, plural), 
lil. 231 

Mukasa, god of the Baganda, ii. 253 


spirits, i. 


Mae hy, 


360 


Mull, harvest custom in, i. 155 
Mulungu, spirits of the dead, ii. 111 sg. 
Murray, Miss Margaret A., i. 260 sg. 
Murray, Sir James, i. 151 7.° 
Muskoghees, the, ii. 150 
Mutilation of dead men intended to dis- 
able their ghosts, li, 271 sgg. ; of ox, 
magical equivalent to mutilation of 
enemy, 271 
Muzimos, spirits of the dead, ii. 111 
Myconus, i. 66 
Myres, Professor J. L., i. 62 7.° 
Mysteries at Mantinea, i. 46 7.” 
Eleusinian, i. 35, 37 Sgy., 65 sqq., 
COS NTO FRLLL LOL 7s eloo tne 
Great, their date, 51; instituted by 
Eumolpus, 70; associated with belief 
in immortality, 90 sg. ; of Dionysus, 
Top GLeekyal et LO 


Nagas of Assam, their burial custom, ii. 
100; their belief in transmigration, 
290 Sg. 

Nahals, the, ii. 119 

Namaquas, the, ii. 141 

Nandi, the, i. 117, 317, ii. 64, 149, 155 

Nanga, sacred enclosure in Fiji, li. 125 

Naples protected against flies and grass- 
hoppers, ii. 281 

Narrative spells, i. 104 sgq. 

Natchez Indians, ii. 135 ; 
of new corn, 77 5qgq. 

Natural timekeepers, i. 53 

Nauras Indians, ii. 150 

Navel-string, term applied to last hand- 
ful of corn, i. 150 

Neck, crying the, i. 264 sgqg. 

of the corn-spirit, i. 268 

Neil, R. A., ii. 22 2.4 

Nemean games, i. 86 

Nets treated as living beings, ii. 240 7.1 

New corn, eaten sacramentally, ii. 48 
599 


their festival 


fire, il. 65, 74, 75, 78; festival of, 


135 
fruits, ceremonies at eating, ii. 52 


579: 


potatoes, how eaten, ii. 51 

rice, ceremonies at eating. the, ii. 
54 599. ane 
vessels used for new fruits, ii. 81, 


83 


yams, ceremonies at eating, li. 53, 

58 sqq. ; festival of the, 115 ; in Tonga, 

festival of the, 128 sqg. 

Britain, i. 123 

Caledonia, ii. 151; 
eating first yams in, 53 

—— Guinea, i. 313, ii. 124 ; German, i. 
99, 103, 104; Dutch, 123 

—— Hebrides, i. 313, ii. 125 

—— Zealand, ii. 28 


ceremony at 


INDEX 


New Year festival of the Kayans, i. 96 59., 
98, 99; dated by the Pleiades, 116, 
Bue}, GHW, Shel 

Year's Day, i. 302 ; eve of, ii. 322 

Niam-Niam, the, i. 119 

Nias, i. 315, ii 32), 202, n2nevor 
harvest custom in, i. 233 sg. 

Nicaragua, festivals in, ii. gt 

Nicolson, A., i. 164 sg. 

Nieuwenhuis, Dr. A. W., i. 93, 94 7.7, 
95, 96, 97 5g., 98, 107 

Niger Delta, burial custom in the, ii. 98 

Nilsson, Professor M. P., i. 58 z.}, 
62 2.8, ii. 8 7.2 

Nine, the number, in ritual, i. 195 

Nisan, a Jewish month, i. 259 7.1 

Nishga Indians, the, ii. 106 

Nonnus, on death of Dionysus, i. 12 sg. 

Nootka Indians, ii. 225, 251 

Normandy, harvest customs in, 1. 226, 
295 

North American Indians, ii. 237; their 
theory of the lower animals, 205 sg. 

Northumberland, harvest customs in, i. 
I51 

Norway, harvest customs in, i. 132, 223, 
225, 280, 282 

Nubas, the, of Jebel-Nuba, ii. 114 

Nuehr, the, ii. 39 

Nyanja-speaking tribes, ii. 26 

Nyanza, Lake Victoria, i. 118 

Nyikpla, a negro rain-god, ii. 45 


Oath of women by the Pleiades, i. 311 

Oaths accompanied by eating a sacred 
substance, ii. 313 

Oats-bride, i. 162, 163, 164 

-cow, i. 289, 290 

-fool, i. 148 

-goat, 1. 270, 282, 283, 286, 287; 
mummer called the, ii. 327 

—— -king, i. 164 

—— -man, i. 163, 223 

—— -mother, i. 135 

—— -queen, i. 164 

—— -sow, i. 298 


-Stallion, i. 292 

-wolf, i. 273, 274 

-woman, i. 163 

Obscene songs sung by women on special 
occasions, ii. 280 

Octennial cycle in Greek calendar, i. 80 sgg. 

period of Greek games, i. 80 

tenure of kingship, i. 82, 85 

October horse, at Rome, ii. 42 sgq. 

Oesel, island of, i. 298, 302, ii. 51 

Ogun, a war-god, li. 150 

Oil, human victim anointed with, i. 246, 
247; holy, il. 123 

Ointment, magical, li. 165 sg. 

Ojibway Indians, li. 219 ; their treatment 
of slain bears, il, 225 sg. 


INDEX 361 


Okanaken Indians, ii. 134 

Olachen fish, ceremonies at catching the 
first of the season, il. 254 sg. 

Old animal, bone of, eaten to make eater 
old, ii. 143 

Barley-woman, i. 139 

Calabar, ii. 108 

Corn-woman at threshing, i. 147 

—— Man, name given to the last sheaf, 
i. 136 sgg., 218 sgg.; at threshing, 
148 sg. 

Potato Woman, i. 145 

Rye-woman, i. 139, 140, 145, 223, 

224, 232 

Wheat-woman, i. 139 

Wife (Cazd/each), name given to last 

corn cut, i. 140 sgg., 164 sqq. 

Witch, burning the, i. 224 

Woman, name given to last sheaf, 

i. 136 sg., 147, 223; Cherokee per- 

sonification of corn, 177 

Woman who Never Dies, i. 204 sg. 

Women as representatives of the 
Corn-goddess, i. 125 

Oloh Ngadju, the, ii. 100 

Olympia, Pelops at, ii. 85 

Olympiads, beginning of reckoning by, 
i. 82 

Olympic games, i. 80, 86 

Omagua Indians of Brazil, i. 309 

Omaha Indians, il. 25, 29, 207, 269, 272 

Omambos, the, ii. 149 

Omen, beasts and birds of, ii. 143 

Omuongo tree, il. 71 

Onitsha, on the Niger, ii. 58; funeral 
custom at, 98 sg. 

Opium, i. 242 

Oraons, human sacrifices among the, 
i. 244 sg. ; of Bengal, ii. 117 

Organs of generation, male and female, 
cakes in shape of, i. 62; effigies of 
male, 12, 26, 29 

Origin of agriculture, i. 128 sg. ; of as- 
tronomy, 307 

Orinoco, Indians of the, i. 124, 310, ii. 
I50, 236 

Orion, the constellation, i. 315 

Orion's belt, i. 313, 315, 317 

sword, 1. 317 

Orotchis, bear-festivals of the, ii. 197 

Osculati, G., li. 285 

Osiris, i. 214, 215, 259 sgq. ; his relation 
to Dionysus, 3, 32; human sacrifices 
at grave of, 260; black and green, 
263; key to mysteries of, 263; and 
the pig, li. 24 sgg.; in relation to 
sacred bulls, 34 sgg. ; false graves of, 
roo ; his missing member, 264 

Ostiaks, their ceremonies at killing bears, 
li. 222 sg. 

Ostrich, ghost of, deceived, ii. 245 

Otawa Indians, ii. 224, 250 


Otawa totem clans, ii. 225 7.1! 
Otter’s head, Aino custom as to eating, 
li. 144 


Otters, their bones not allowed to be 
gnawed by dogs, ii. 239 

Ounce, ceremony at killing an, ii. 235 

Ovambo, the, ii. 71; their worship of 
the dead, 109 sy. 

Ox, corn-spirit as, i. 288 sgg. ; killed on 
harvest field, 290; slaughtered at 
threshing, 291 sg.; sacrificed at the 
Bouphonia, il. 5; as representative 
of the corn-spirit, 9 sgg.; effigy of, 
broken as a spring ceremony in China, 
10 sgg. ; Bechuana sacrifice of a black, 
271; sacrificed to boa-constrictor, 290 

-stall (Bucolium) at Athens, i. 30 


Sq. 


-yoked Ploughing at Athens, i. 31 
Oxen used in ploughing, i. 129 7.1 


Pains in back at reaping, i. 285 

Palenques, the, of South America, ii. 
221 

Palestine, wild boars in, ii. 31 sg. 

Panathenaic games at Athens, i. 80 

Panes, a bird-feast, ii. 170 

Panopeus, i. 48 

Pans in relation to goats, ii. 1 sgq. 

Papuans, the, i. 123, ii. 145; their 
belief in the transmigration of souls, 
2015) 

Paradoxurus, souls of dead in various 
species of, il. 294 

Pardon of animal asked before killing it, 
il. 183 

Parian chronicler, i. 70 

Paris protected against dormice and 
serpents, ii. 281 

Parjas, the, li. 27, 119 

Parrots, assimilation of men to, li. 208 

Partridge, transmigration of sinner into, 
ll. 299 

Pasiphae and the Minotaur, i. 31 

Pastoral stage of society, il. 35, 37 

tribes, animal sacraments among, 
rb, GH) 

Patani Bay, il. 212 

Pawnees, human sacrifices among the, i. 
238 sq. 

Peacock as a totem, li. 29 ; transmigra- 
tion of sinner into, 29g 

Pea-mother, i. 132, 135 

Peas-cow, i. 290 

-pug, 1. 272 

Pelew Islanders, ii. 293 

Islands, burial custom in the, ii. 98 

Pelops at Olympia, ii. 85; his restora- 
tion to life, 263 

Pembrokeshire, harvest customs in, i. 
142 sgq. ; cutting ‘‘the neck”’ in, 267 ; 
hunting the wren in, il. 320 


362 


Pentheus, death of, i. 24, 25 

Pergamus, ii. 85 

Permanence of simpler forms of religion, 
li. 335 

Persephone, mother of Zagreus by Zeus, 
i, 12; rape of, 36; a personification 
of the corn, 39 sg. ; inart, 43 sg. ; the 
descent of, 46, ii. 17; associated with 
the ripe ears of corn, 58; in Greek 
art, 88 sg. 

and Demeter, i. 35 sg. 

and Pluto, ii. 9 

Personification of corn as mother and 
daughter, i. 130, 207 sqqg. 
Perthshire, harvest customs in, i. 156 sq. 
Peru, Indians of, i. 120, 122, li, 249; 
their worship of the Pleiades, i. 310 
Peruvians, their customs as to Mother of 
Maize, etc., i. 171 sqq. 

Pessinus, i. 255 

Phigalia, horse-headed Demeter of, ii. 21, 
338 

Philippine Islands, i. 240 

Philistines, their charm against mice, il. 
281, 283 

Philochorus, on date of Hadoa, i. 62 

Phlius, i. 17 

Phoenicia, song of Linus in, i. 216 

Phrygia, Lityerses in, 1. 216 sg. 

Phyllanthus emblica, il. 119 

Piaroas Indians of the Orinoco, ii. 285 

Pig, corn-spirit as, 1. 298 sgg. ; in relation 
to Demeter, ii. 16 sgg.; not eaten in 
Crete, 21 2.1; inancient Egypt, 24 sgq. 

and Attis, ii. 22 

-meat forbidden 
sowing seed, i. 115 

Pig's flesh not eaten by field labourers, 
li. 33, 139 

Pigeons, souls of dead in, ii. 293 

Pigs, sacrifice of, i. 74, 97; not to be 
eaten by enchanters of crops, 100 sg. ; 
sacrificed to the moon, ii. 25; souls 
of dead in, 286, 295, 296 

Pilae, human effigies, ii. 95 7.1 

Pindar, old scholiast on, i. 71, 74, 77, 
78; on rebirth, 84 

Pine-tree, sacred to Dionysus, i. 4 

Piros Indians of Peru, ii. 286 

Pirua, granary of maize, i. 171 sqgq. 

Plaiting the last standing corn before 
cutting it, i. 142, 144, 153, 154, 157, 
158 

Plane-tree, Dionysus in, i. 3 

Planets, human victims sacrificed to, i. 
261 sq. 

Plants thought to be animated by spirits, 
li. 82 sg. 

Plataea, Eleutherian games at, i. 80, 85 

Plato and the doctrine of transmigration, 
ll. 308 

Playfair, Major A., ii. 337 


to women at 


INDEX 


Pleiades, autumnal setting of, i. 45; 
morning rising of, the signal for — 
reaping in Greece, 48 sg. ; in primitive 
calendars, 116, 307 sgg.; associated 
with the rainy season, 318 

Pliny, on the setting of the Pleiades, i. 
318 

Plough in relation to Dionysus, i. 5; in 
primitive agriculture, 113 

Monday, i. 33; rites of, ii. 325 
sqq. ; English celebration of, 329 sgg. 

Ploughing at Carnival, ceremony of, i. 
28, 29, 331, 332, 334; at Athens, 
sacred ceremony of, 31; in Greece, 
season of, 45; with oxen, 129 2.1; 7 
Chinese ceremony of, ii. 14 sg.; cere- 
monies at, 57 

Ploughings, three a year, i. 53 7.2; 
Sacred, in Attica, 108 

Ploughmen and plough-horses, the Yule 
Boar given to, i. 301, 303 

Plutarch, on a Roman rite, ii. 108; 
on immortality, i. 15; on mourning 
festival of Demeter, 46; on sacrifices, 
li. 31; on Apis, 36 

Pluto called Subterranean Zeus, i. 66 

and Persephone, ii. 9; rude 
originals of, 334 

Plutus, i. 208 

Poland, harvest customs in, 1, 144, 145, 
148, 150, 277 

Pollution of death, ii. 85 7.* ; ceremonial, 
of girl at puberty, 268 

Polynesia, observation of the Pleiades in, 
1 SiS} 

Polynesians, li. 28 

Pomegranates sprung from blood of 
Dionysus, i. 14 

Po-nagar, goddess of agriculture, ii. 56, 
57) 58 

Pondos, the, ii. 66 

Pongal feast, i. 244 

Pongol, a Hindoo festival, ii. 56 

Pontiffs regulate Roman calendar, i. 83 

Poor Old Woman, corn left on field for, 
1. 230 5G: 

Poppies as symbols of Demeter, i. 43 sg. 

Poppy, the, cultivated for opium, i. 242 

Porcupine, a Bechuana totem, ii. 164 
sg. ; respected by some Indians, 243; 
transmigration of sinner into, 299 

Pork forbidden to enchanters of crops, 1. 
100 sg. ; not eaten by field labourers, 
ii. 33; reason for not eating, 296 

Porphyry, on the Bouphonia, ii. 5 2.4 

Poseidon, first-fruits sacrificed to, il. 133 

Poso, in Celebes, i. 236, ii, 244 

Potato-dog, i. 272 sg. 

-mother, i. 172 

-wolf, i, 274 

Potawatomi Indians, ii. 218 

Prayer, the Place of, ii, 113 


} 


SRS Boy Rn rae oe 


INDEX 


Prayer and spell, i. 105 

Prayers to the spirits of the dead, ii. rr2, 
I13, 124 sg.; addressed to dead 
animals, 184, 197, 224, 225, 226, 235, 
236, 243, 253, 293; to shark-idol, 
292 

Preachers to fish, ii. 250 sg. 

Pretence made by reapers of mowing 
down visitors to the harvest-field, i. 
229 Sq. 

Priest, chief acting as, ii. 126 

Priests, first-fruits belong to, il. 125; of 
Tetzcatlipoca, ii. 165; of shark-idols, 
292 

Primitive ritual, marks of, i. 169 

Proarcturia, a Greek festival, i. 51 

Processions with sacred animals, ii. 316 
sgg.; of men disguised as animals, 
325 5977- 

Proclus on Dionysus, 1. 13 

Proerosta, a Greek festival of Demeter, 
i. 50 sgg., 60, 108 

Prophecy, spirit of, acquired by eating 
certain food, ii. 143 

Propitiation of wild animals by hunters, 
li. 204 sgg.; of vermin by farmers, 
274 599. 

Prussia, harvest customs in, 1. 136, 137, 
139, 150 Sg., 209, 219, 280, 281 sg., 
288, 292 

Prussians, the old, ii. 133; their custom 
at sowing, i. 288 

Pruyssenaere, E. de, ii. 38 sg. 

Psylli, a Snake clan, ii. 174 

Puberty, ceremonial pollution of girl at, 
li. 268 

Pueblo Indians, i. 312 

Pul, an astrologer, i. 125 sg. 

Pulse cultivated in Bengal, i. 123 

Puplem, general council, i. 125 

Puppet made out of last sheaf, i. 137, 
138, 231; at threshing, 148, 149; at 
harvest, 150; representing the corn- 
spirit, 224 

Puppets of rushes thrown into the Tiber, 
ii. 107 

Purest person cuts the last corn, i. 
158 

Purification, ceremonies of, i. g ; before 
partaking of new fruits, ii. 59, 60, 63, 
BOmigenm 7873) 75) SG o2, 83; for 
slaughter of a serpent, 219 sg.; by fire, 
249; before eating the first salmon, 
253 

Pyanepsia, an Attic festival, i. 52 

Pyanepsion, an Attic month, i. 46, 52, 
116 

Pythagoras, his reincarnations, ii. 263; 
his doctrine of transmigration, 300, 
301 

Pythian games, i. 80 

Python clan, ii. 174 


363 


Quadriennial period of Greek games, i. 
77 594- 

Quail, cry of, i. 
295 5g. 

Queen of Athens married to, Dionysus, i. 
30 sg. ; of the Corn-ears, 146 ; name 
given to last sheaf, 146 

Charlotte Islands, ii. 226 

Quetzalcoatl, a Mexican god, ii. go 

Quiches, the, of Central America, ii. 134 

Quinoa-mother, i. 172 

Quixos Indians, li. 285 


295; corn-spirit as, 


Race of reapers to last sheaf, i. 291; on 
harvest-field, 137 

Races at harvest, i. 76 sg. ; in connexion 
with agriculture, 98. See Horse-races 

Rain, prayer for, at Eleusis, 1. 69; sup- 
posed to be given by the spirits of 
dead chiefs, ii. 109 

-charm, i. 134, 170, 250, 252, 268 

Rainless Greek summer, i. 69 

Rains, autumnal, in Greece, i. 52 

Rajamahall, in Bengal, ii. 118, 217 

Rakelimalaza, a Malagasy god, li. 46 

Ram sacrificed to Ammon, ii. 41; killing 
the sacred, 172 sgg. ; consecration of 
a white, 313 

Ram's skull, ii. 96 

Rams’ horns, il. 117 

Rape of Persephone, i. 66 

Rarian Plain at Eleusis, i. 36, 70, 74, 
108, 234, lil. 15 

Raspberries, wild, ceremony at gather- 
ing the first, li. 80 sg. 

Rat, transmigration of sinner into, 11. 
299 

Rats, superstitious precautions of farmers 
against, li. 277, 278, 283 

Rattles in myth and ritual of Dionysus, 
i hy als} 

Rattlesnakes respected by the North 
American Indians, ii. 217 sg. 

Ravens respected by Sudanese negroes, 
il. 221 

Reapers, contests between, i. 136, I40, 
I4I, 142, 144, 152, 153 sgq-, 164 Sg., 
219, 253; blindfolded, 144, 153 sg. ; 
special words used by, 193; pretend 
to mow down visitors to harvest-field, 
229 sq. ; cries of, 263 sgg. ; race of, to 
last corn, 291 

Reaping, Indonesian mode of, i. 181 sg., 
184; contests in, 218 sgg.; pains in 
back at, 285 

Rebirth of the dead, i. 84 

Red and black, faces of bear-hunters 
‘painted, il. 226 

and white, leopard-hunters painted, 

li, 230 

and yellow, faces of human victims 

painted, i. 261 


304 


Red-haired men sacrificed, i. 260, 261, 
263, li. 34 

puppies sacrificed, i. 261, ii. 34 

Reef Islands, ii. 52 

Reincarnation of animals, ii. 
250 

Reindeer, dogs not allowed to gnaw the 
leg-bones of, il. 246 

Repulsion and attraction, forces of, ii. 
393)599- . 

Rest for three days, compulsory, ii. 246 

Resurrection of the gods, i. 1, 12, 14, 
15; of animals, ii. 200 sg., 256 sqq. ; 
of fish, 250, 254; bones of men pre- 
served for the, 259 ; in popular tales, 
263 sq. 

Revolving image, ll. 322 7. 

Ribald jests at mysteries, i. 38 

Rice cultivated in Assam, i. 123; cul- 
tivated in New Guinea, 123; soul of, 
180 sgg.; treated as a woman, 183 
sg.; King of the, 197; (paddy), 
Father and Mother of the, 203 sg. ; 
spirituous liquor distilled from, 242 ; 
the new, ceremonies at eating the, ii. 
54 599- 

-bride, 1. 199 sg. 

-bridegroom, i. 199 sq. 

-child, i. 197 sgq. 

-fields, sacred, among the Kayans, 
1. 93, 108 

—— -goddess, i. 202 

—— -harvest, ceremony of the Horse at, 
li. 337 59g. 

-mother, i. 183 2.1, 191 sgg., 197 

sqgg. ; in the East Indies, 180 sgq. 

-soul as bird, i. 182 7.1; caught or 
detained, 184 sgq. 

Riddles asked at harvest, i. 194 

Ridgeway, Professor W., i. 29 7.”, 65, 
ii. 282 7.5 

Ring, competition for, i. 160 

Rites of Plough Monday, ii. 325 sgq. 

Ritual, primitive, marks of, i. 169; 
magical or propitiatory, 169, 170 

of Dionysus, i. 14 sg. 

Robbers, charm used by, i. 235 

Rodents, souls of dead in, ii. 291 

Rohde, E., i. gt 7.2 

Rollo, ii. 146 

Roman calendar, i. 83 sg. 

deities of the corn, i. 210 7.° 

sacrifices to Ceres and Liber, ii. 133 

Romans worship mildew, ii. 282 

Roof, spirits enter through the, ii. 123 ; 
remains of slain bear let down through 
the, 189 sg., 196 

Roots and seeds, wild, 
women, i. 124 sqgq. 

Roscher, W. H., ii. 2 7.9 

Roscoe, Rev. John, i. 240 2.4 

Rotation of crops, i. 117 


247, 249, 


LT | 


collected by 


INDEX 


Rouse, Dr. W. H. D., i. 208 z.1 
Riigen, harvest customs in, i. 274 
Running, contests in, i. 98 
Rush-cutter, i. 230 2.° 

Russia, harvest customs in, i. 146, 233 
Russian wood-spirits, ii. 2 
Rye-beggar, i. 231 

-boar, i. 298, 300 

-bride, i. 163 

-goat, 1. 282, 283 

-mother, 1. 132, 135 

-pug, i. 273 

-SOW, 1. 270, 298 

-wolf, i. 270, 271, 272, 273, 274 
-woman, i. 223; the Old, 133 


Saa, island of, ii. 127 

Sabarios, a Lithuanian festival, ii. 49 

Sabazius, i. 2 7.1 

Sabbaths, agricultural, i. tog 

Sable - hunters, rules observed by, ii. 
238 

Sacaea, a Babylonian festival, i. 258 sg. 

Sacrament of eating a god, ii. 167 

of swine's flesh, ii. 20, 24 ; totemic, 
165; types of animal, 310 sgg.; of 
first-fruits, 48 sgg.; combined with a 
sacrifice of them, 86 

Sacramental bread, ii. 95 

character of harvest supper, i. 303 

eating of corn-spirit in animal 
form, ii. 20 

Sacraments among pastoral tribes, ii. 
313 

Sacred Marriage at Eleusis, i. 65 sg. 

ploughings in Attica, i. 108 

things deemed dangerous, ii. 


27 

Sqq: 

Women, i. 32 

Sacrifice not to be touched, ii. 27; of 
first-fruits, 109 sg. 

Sacrifices, human, for the crops, i. 236 
sgg.; human, in Mexico, ii. 88; 
offered to nets, 240 2.1; offered to 
wolves, 284; toa toad, 291 

Sadana, rice-bridegroom, i. 200 sg. 

Sahagun, B. de, i. 175 

St. Catherine’s Day, ii. 275 

. George's Eve, ii. 270 

. Kilda, ii. 322 

. Mary, Isle of, ii. 235 

. Matthew’s Day, ii. 275 

. Nicholas, i. 233 

. Paul on immortality, i. 9 

. Peter's Day, i. 300 

St. Stephen’s Day, ii. 319, 320 

Sakalava, the, of Madagascar, ii. 40 7. 

Sale, nominal, of children, i, 8 

Salish Indians, ii. 80 

Salmon, resurrection of, ii. 250; cere- 
monies at catching the first salmon 
of the season, 253 5g., 255 


INDEX 


Salt, abstinence from, il. 75, 93; use of, 
forbidden, 190, 195 

Salzburg, harvest custom in, i. 146 

Samoa, ii. 29 

Samoans, their sacrifices of first-fruits, ii. 
132 

Samoyed custom after killing a rein- 
deer, ii. 268 

San Juan Capistrano, ii. 169; Indians 
Oi th. 2S 

Sanctity of the corn, ii. 110 

Sandwich Islands, belief in transmigra- 
tion among natives of the, ii. 292 sg. 

Saning Sari, rice-goddess, i. 191, 192 

Sappho, i. 216 

Saturnalia, ii. 62, 66 

Satyrs in relation to goats, ii. 1 sgq. 

Savage, the, not illogical, ii. 202 

faith in the immortality of animals, 
li. 260 sgq. 

Saxo Grammaticus, li. 146 

Saxons of Transylvania, harvest custom 
of the, i. 295; their customs at sowing, 
li. 274 sq. 

Saxony, harvest customs in, i. 134, 137, 
149, 163, 164 

Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, ii. 154 

Scandinavian custom of the Yule Boar, i. 
300 sgq. 

Scarification as a religious rite, ii. 75; 
from superstitious motives, 159, 160 sg. 

Scheube, Dr. B., ii. 185, 186, 187 

Schleswig, harvest customs in, i. 230, 287 

Schrenck, L. von, ii. 191, 192, 193, 194, 


195 

Schweinfurth, G., ii. 37 sg. 

Science, generalisations of, inadequate 
to cover all particulars, ii. 37 

Scirophorion, a Greek month, ii. 8 7.1 

Scorpions, charm against, ii. 281 ; souls 
of dead in, 290 

Scotland, harvest customs in, i. 
Sq. 

Scratching as a religious rite, ii. 75 

Scurrilities exchanged between vine- 
dressers and passers-by, i. 258 7.1 

Scurrilous language at mysteries, i. 38 

Scythians, set store on heads of enemies, 
i. 256 7.1 

Sea beasts, Esquimau rules as to eating, 
li. 84 ; their bladders restored to the 
sea by the Esquimaux, 247 sqq. 

-mammals, their mythical origin, 
ii. 246 

Seals, care taken of the bladders and 
bones of, ii. 247 sgg., 257, 258 7.” 

Sedna, an Esquimau goddess, ii. 84, 
- 246 

Seed sown by women, i. 113 sgg. ; sown 
by children, i. 115 sg. 

Seed-corn, i. 135, 205, 278, 301, 304, 
il. 20 


140 


365 


Seed-rice, i. 189 

Seeds and roots, wild, 
women, i. 124 sg. 

Seler, Professor E., i. 175 

Seligmann, Dr. C. G., ii. 40 z. 

Sémangat, 1. 181, 183 

Semele, mother of Dionysus, i. 14, 15 

Seminole Indians, ii. 76, 217 

Senegambia, Python clan in, ii. 174 

Serpent, killing the sacred, ii. 174 sg. ; 
ceremonies performed after killing a, 
219 Sq. 

Serpent's flesh eaten to learn the language 
of animals, il. 146 

Serpents, offerings to, ii. 17 sg. ; men 
inspired by, 213 ; charms against, 281; 
souls of the dead in, 291. See also 
Snake, Snakes 

Set or Typhon, ii. 30. 

Seven, the number, 
198 


collected by 


See Typhon 


in ritual, i. 190, 


months’ child, i. 26, 29 

Sham fight, ii. 75 

fights in connexion with agricul- 

ture, i. 98; (mimic battles) before 

going forth to war, ii. 207 

graves and corpses 
demons, il. 98 sgq. 

Shans of Indo-China, i. 243 

Shape, magical changes of shape, i. 305 

Sharks, ghosts in, li. 127; souls of dead 
in, 292 sg., 297 

Sheaf, the last, the Corn-mother in, i. 133 
sqq.; thresher tied up in, 134, 147, 148; 
drenched with water, 134, 137, 145; 
given to cattle, 134, 155, 158, 161, 
170; stones fastened to, 135 sg., 138, 
139; called the Old Woman or Old 
Man, 136 sgg. ; corn-spirit caught in, 
139; harvester tied up in, 139, 145, 
221, 222; called the Cazlleach (Old 
Wife), 140 sgg. ; representative of the 
corn-spirit, 168, ii. 48; in Lower 
Burma, i. 190 sg. ; person identified 
with, 138 sg. ; in India, 222 sg., 234 


to deceive 


n.*; race of reapers to, 291. See also 
Clyack, Kirn, Mell, Maiden 
Sheep not eaten, ii, 140; ghosts of, 


dreaded, 231 
Sheep-skin, fumigation with, ii. 324 
Sheep-skins, candidates at initiation 
seated on, i. 38 
Shells of eggs preserved, ii. 258 7.? 
Shifting cultivation, i. 99 
Shoulder-blade, divination by, ii. 234 
Shropshire, ‘‘the neck” in, i. 268; 
‘crying the Mare” in, 293 sq. 
Shrove Tuesday, i. 300, li. 326 
Shrovetide Bear, ii. 325 5g. 
Shumpaoli, an African god, li, 110 
Shuswap Indians, ii. 226, 238 
Siam, il. 103 


366 


Sicilians, Demeter’s gift of corn to the, 
i. 56 sq. 

Sicily, worship of Demeter. and Perse- 
phone in, i. 56 

Sickles thrown at last standing corn, i. 
136, 142, 144, 153, 154, 165 : 

Sickness cured or prevented by effigies, 
ii, 180 sgq. 

Sicyon, wolves at, il. 283, 284 

Sierra Leone, i. 317 

Sieves, children at birth placed in, i. 
6 sgq. 

Sigurd and the dragon, iil. 146 

Silence enforced during absence of fisher, 
li. 256 

Silenuses, ii. I sg. 

Silesia, harvest customs in, 1. 136, 138, 
139, 148 sg., 163 5g., 231, 233, 273, 
277, 281, 289 

Silvanus, ii. 2 

Simbang, village in German New Guinea, 
il. 295 

Similkameen Indians, the, ii. 146 

Sinew of the thigh, customs and myths 
as to, li. 264 sgqg. 

Sinews of dead men cut to disable their 
ghosts, ii. 272 

Sing Bonga, a sun god, li, 117 

Singleton, Miss A. H., ii. 320 2.1 

Sioux girl, sacrifice of, i. 238 sg. 

Indians, li, 150, 243 

Skeat, W. W., 1. 197 sg. 

Skin of sacrificed animal, uses of, il. 173 
Sg. 


-disease caused by eating a sacred 
animal, ii. 25 sgq. 

Skins of sacrificed animals stuffed, 257 
Sq. 

Skipping-rope, il. 192 

Skull, drinking out of a human, ii. 150 

Skulls, human, as protection against 
powers of evil, i. 241; the Place of, 
243; spirits of ancestors in their, ii. 
123; of ancestors, offerings set beside, 
127; of bears worshipped, 184; of 
enemies destroyed, 260 

Sky God, the, i. 69 

-god Zeus, i. 65 

Skye, harvest custom in, i. 284 

Slaves of the Earth Gods, ii. 61, 62 2.1 

Slavonic peoples, harvest customs among, 
1. 144 sqgq. 

Slayers of leopards, rules of diet observed 
by, li. 230 sg. 

Slow-footed animals not eaten by some 
savage tribes, ii, 139 sg. ; eaten by 
preference by the Bushmen, 140 sg, 

Small-pox, cure for, i. 9 sg. 

Smearing the body as a means of 
imparting certain qualities, ii. 162 sgq. 

of blood on worshippers a mode of 

communion with the deity, ii. 316 


INDEX 


Smintheus Apollo, ii. 283 

Smith, Professor, G. C., ii. 329 

Smith, W. Robertson, i. 259 z.1, ii. 5 7.2, 
27 7.®, 31 2.1, 35 2.7, 251 7.°, 266 2.4, 
280 2. 

Smoking as a means of inducing state of 
ecstasy, ii. 72; in honour of slain 
bears, 224, 226 

first tobacco of season, ceremony 
at, il. 82 

Snake worshipped, ji. 316 sg. ; white, 
eaten to acquire supernatural know- 
ledge, 146. See Serpent 

-bite, inoculation against, ii. 160 

—— -priest, ii. 219 

tribe, ii. 316, 317 

Snake’s tongue as amulet, ii. 270 

Snakes respected by the North American 
Indians, il. 217 sgg.; sacred at 
Whydah, 287; souls of dead in, 293, 
294 sg. ; souls of dead princes in, 288 

Society, stratification of religion accord- 
ing to types of, il. 35 sgg. 

Islanders, i. 312 
Solar and lunar time, 
harmonise, 1. 80 sg. 
Solomon Islands, ii. 85, 126, 127 ;_ belief 
in the transmigration of souls in the, 

296 sqq. 

Solstice, the midsummer, rain-making 
ceremony at the, ii. 179 

the summer, i. 117 

the winter, ii. 325 ; festival of, 90 

Solstices observed, i. 125 

Somerville, Professor W., i. 193 2. 

Songish or Lkungen tribe of Vancouver 
Island, ii. 254 

Songs of the corn-reapers, i. 214 sqqg. 

Sophocles, his play Zrzptolemus, i. 54 

Soul thought to be seated in the liver, ii. 
147 Sq. 

of rice, i. 180 sgg. ; eating the, ii. 


attempts to 


54 


-stuff in the East Indies, i. 182 sg. 

Souls, immortal, attributed by savages, 
to animals, ii. 204; of the human 
dead in caterpillars, 275 sg.; trans- 
migration of human, into animals, 285 
59g. 

South American Indians, women’s agri- 
cultural work among the, i. 120 sgqg. 

Southey, R., quoted, i. 122, il. 157 

Sowing, festival of Demeter at, i. 46 7.2; 
sacrifice to Demeter at, 57; Festival 
of the, 111; time of, determined by 
observation of the sun, 187; goat 
killed at, 288 ; ceremonies at, ii. 57; 
customs observed by Saxons of Tran- 
sylvania at, 274 sg. 

and planting, time of, determined 

by the appearance of the Pleiades, i. 


313 57g. 


Sa 


INDEX 


a ae : : 
Sowing in Greece, time for, i. 45 


festival of the Kayans, i. 93 5gq@. 

seed to make children grow, i. 11 

Sowing the seed done by women, i. 113 
sgg. ; done by children, 115 sg. 

Spades and hoes, human victim killed 
with, i. 239, 251 

Sparrows, charm to keep them from the 
corn, il. 274 

Spearing taro stalks, as a charm, i. 102, 
103 

Spell and prayer, i. 105 

Spells for growth of crops, i. 100; 
narrative, 104 sgg. ; imperative, 105 

Spencer, Herbert, his theory of the 
material universe compared to that of 
Empedocles, ii. 303 sg. 

Spiders, ceremony at killing, ii. 236 sg. 

Spieth, J., ii. 59 sg. 

Spindle used in ritual, ii. 119 

Spinning acorns or figs, i. 102 

- tops, 1. 95, 97, 187 

Spirit of Beans, Iroquois, i. 177 

of the Corn, Iroquois, i. 177. 

Corn-spirit 

of Squashes, Iroquois, i. 177 

Spirits, evil, averted from children, i. 
6 sgg. ; of the dead supposed to in- 
fluence the crops, 104; distinguished 
from gods, 169; imitation of, 186 

Spittle, virtue of, i. 247, 250 

Sports, athletic, at harvest, i. 76 sg. See 
also Contests, Games 

Spring, ceremony at beginning of, in 
China, ii. 10 sgq. 

customs and harvest customs com- 

pared, 1. 167 sqq. 

festival of Dionysus, i. 15 

Springbok not eaten, ii. 141 

Squirrels, souls of dead in, ii. 291 sg. 

Sri, Hindoo goddess of crops, i. 182 

Star, the Morning, i. 238 

Stars, their supposed influence on the 
weather, i. 318 

Stepping or jumping over a woman, li. 
7O Nn. 

Sternberg, Leo, ii. 196, 199 z.1, 201 

Stettin, harvest customs near, i. 220 

Stevenson, Mrs. Matilda Coxe, quoted, 
il, 179 

Stewart, Balfour, ii. 262 7.} 

Sticks. See Digging-sticks 

Stiens of Cambodia, ii. 237 

Stomach of eater, certain foods forbidden 
to meet in, li. 83 sgg. 

Stone, magic of heavy, i. 100 

Age, agriculture in the, i. 79, 132 

Stones fastened to last sheaf, i. 135 sg., 
138, 139; the meeting of the, 237; 
worshipped, li. 127 sg. 

Stories told as charms, i. 102 sq. 

Stout, Professor G. F., 261 .} 


See 


367 


Stranger regarded as representative of 
the corn-spirit, 1. 225 sgq. 

Strangers excluded, i. 94, 111, 249; 
preferred as human victims, 242; as 
representatives of the corn-spirit, 253 

Strata of religion and society, ii. 36 sg. 

Stratification of religion according to 
types of society, li. 35 sgq. 

Straw, the Yule, i. 301 sg. ; of Shrove- 
tide Bear used to make geese and hens 
lay eggs, il. 326 

-bear at Whittlesey, ii. 329 

—— -bull, 1. 289 sg. 

-man placed on apple-tree, il. 6 

Stubble-cock, i. 277 

Styria, harvest customs in, i. 133, 134, 
283 

Sublician bridge at Rome, ii. 107 

Substitutes for animal sacrifices, ii. 94 2.” 

‘« Substitutes for a person”’ in China, ii. 
104 

Subterranean Zeus, i. 66 

Sudanese negroes respect 
221 

Sufferings and death of Dionysus, i. 17 

Sugar-cane cultivated, i. 121, 123 

Suk, the, of British East Africa, i. 118, 
il. 84, 142 

Sumatra, i. 315; tigers respected in, ii. 
215 Sgq. 

Summer in Greece rainless, i. 69 

Sun, time of sowing determined by ob- 
servation of the, i. 187; Japanese 
deities of the, 212; first-fruits offered 
to the, 237; savage observation of the, 
314; rites instituted by the, ii. 75; 
temple of the, 135 

and moon conjunction of, ii. 15 7.1 

father of Alectrona, il. 45 

—— -god, the, i. 86 

, moon, and planets, human victims 

sacrificed+to, i. 261 sg. 

, the Great, title of head chief of the 
Natchez, ii. 77 sgq. 

Sunflower root, ceremony at eating the, 
ii. 81 

Sunkalamma, a goddess, il. 93 

Superstitious practices to procure good 
crops, i. 100 

Supper, the harvest, i. 134, 138. 
Harvest-supper 

Survival of the fittest, doctrine of the, 11. 
306 

Sutherlandshire, ii. 51 

Swabia, harvest customs in, 1. 136, 282, 
289, 290, 298 sg. 

Swallow Song, the Greek, il. 322 . 

Swans, transmigration of bad poets into, 
ii. 308 

Sweat of famous warriors drunk, li. 152 

Sweden, harvest customs in, 1. 149, 230, 
280 


ravens, ii. 


See 


368 


Sweet potatoes cultivated in Africa, 1. 
117; cultivated in Assam, 123 ; 
cultivated in New Britain, 123; cul- 
tivated in South America, 121 ; sacred, 
li. 233 

Swine, wild, their ravages in the corn, ii. 
31 599. ; : 

Swine’s flesh sacramentally eaten, li. 20, 
24. See also Pork 


Swinging for good crops, i. 101, 103, 
107 

Switzerland, harvest customs in, i. 283, 
289, 291, 295 


Syleus, 1. 257 sg. 

Sympathetic magic, i. 
Sq. 

Syria, precaution against caterpillars in, 
ii. 279 

Syrians, their religious attitude to pigs, 
ii. 23; esteemed fish sacred, 26 

Szis, the, of Burma, i. 203 


LO2, il, 270, 3UL 


Tabooed village, ii. 122 

Taboos observed at the sowing festival 
among the Kayans, i. 94; observed by 
enchanters, 100; communal, 109 2.” ; 
agricultural, 187 ; relating to milk, i1. 
83 sg. ; observed after the capture of a 
ground seal, walrus, or whale, 246 

Tahiti, ii. 132; funeral rites in, 97 

Tail of corn-spirit, 268, 272, 300, il. 10, 


43 

Talaings, the, i. 190 

Tales told as charms, i. 102 sgg.; the 
resurrection of the body in popular, ii. 
263 599. 

Tamara, island of, li. 296 

Tammuz, his death ina mill, i. 258; a 
Babylonian month, 259 

Tana, one of the New Hebrides, ii. 125 

Tanala, the, of Madagascar, i. 9, ii. 
290 

Tanganyika plateau, the, i. 115 

Tani, a god, ii. 132 

Tano, a fetish, ii. 287 

Tapir, custom of Indians after killing a, 
li. 236 

Tapirs, souls of dead in, ii. 285 

Tapuiyas, the, of Brazil, i. 309 

Tarahumare Indians of Mexico, i. 227 
S72 52 

Tarianos Indians, ii. 157 

Taro, charms for growth of, i. 100, 102 

Tarri Pennu, a Khond goddess, i. 245 

Tauaré Indians, li. 157 

Taungthu, the, i. 190 

Tears of human victim signs of rain, i. 
248, 250; of oxen as rain-charm, ii. 
ate) 

Teasing animals before killing them, ii. 
190 

Telephus at Pergamus, il. 85 


INDEX 


Temples dedicated to sharks, iti. 292 

Tenimber, island, ii. 123 

Teton Indians, ii. 236 

Tetzcatlipoca, a Mexican god, ii. 92, 93, 
165 

Thargelion, an Attic month, ii. 8 

Thay, the, of Indo-China, ii. 121 

Thebes, grave of Dionysus at, i. 14; 
Dionysus torn to pieces at, 25 

Theocritus on the harvest-home, i. 46 sg. 

Thesmophoria, the, i. 14, ii. 17 sgg. ; 
chastity of women at the, i. 116 

Thigh, sinew of the, customs and myths 
as to, il. 264 sgg. 

Thlinkeet or Tlingit, the, ii. 253 

Thompson Indians, ii. 81, 82, 133, 140, 
207, 226, 268 

Thrace, worship of Dionysus in, i. 3; 
the Bacchanals of, 17; modern Car- 
nival customs in, 25 sgqg., ii. 331 sqq. 

Thresher tied up in last sheaf, i. 134, 
147, 148 

Threshers, contests between, i. 147 syq., 
218, 210) 57. 221 Squ,) 22Qu SG aeees 
pretend to throttle or thresh people on 
threshing-floor, 149 sg., 230; tied in 
straw and thrown into water, 224 sq. 

Threshing, customs at, i. 134, 147 sgq., 
203; contests in, 218 sgg.; corn- 
spirit killed at, 291 sg. 

-cOW, 1. 291 

—— -dog, i. 271 

—— -floor, Demeter at the, i. 41 sg., 
47; of Triptolemus at Eleusis, 61, 
72, 75; sanctity of the, ii. 110 7.4 

in Greece, date of, i. 62 

Throttling farmer’s wife at threshing, 
pretence of, i. 150 

Thumbs of dead enemies cut off, ii. 272 

Thiiringen, harvest customs in, 1. 147, 
222, 232, 276, 290, 291, 208 

Thurn, E. F. im, quoted, ii. 204 

Tibetans, the, ii. 96 

Tiger, ghost of, ii. 155 7.4 

Tiger's flesh eaten to make men brave, 
li. 145 ; 

Tigers, ceremonies at killing, ii. 215, 
216 sg. ; respected in Sumatra, 215 
sg. ; kinship of men with, 216; souls 
of dead in, 293 } 

Tilling of the earth treated as a crime, ii. 
57, 

Timekeepers, natural, i. 53 

Timor, island of, ii. 98 

Timor-laut, ii. 123, 244 

Tinneh Indians, ii. 80, 220 

Titans attack and kill Dionysus, i. 12 5g., 
17 

Tjumba, island of, ii. 122 

Tlaloc, Mexican god of thunder, i. 237 

Toad, figure of, ii. 193, 194; soul of 
dead man in a, 291 


INDEX 


Tobacco used as an emetic, ll. 73; 
first of season, ceremony at smoking, 
82 

Todas, their sacrament of buffalo’s flesh, 
ii. 314 

Toepffer, J., quoted, i. 73 

Toerateyas, the, i. 196 z. 

Tofoke, the, i, 119 

Togoland, i. 130, ii. 59, 105, 105 

Tolalaki, the, ii. 152 

Tomb, sacrifices at, ii. 113 

Tomori, the, of Central Celebes, i. 193 
5g., 288 

Tondi, soul-stuff, i. 182 

Tonga Islands, ii. 28 ; offerings of first- 
fruits in the, 128 sgq. 

Tongues of birds eaten, ii. 147 ; of slain 
men eaten, 153; of dead animals cut 
out, 269 sgg.; of animals worn as 
amulets, 270 

Tonsure, the clerical, ii. tos 7.1 

Tooitonga, the sacred chief of Tonga, ii. 
128, 129, 130, 131 

Tops, spinning, i. 95, 97, 187 

Toradjas, the, of Central Celebes, i. 183, 
193, 194, 228, il. 153 

Torch-bearer, the Eleusinian, i. 54, 

Torches in relation to Demeter and 
Persephone, i. 57 

Torchlight dance, ii. 79; procession at 
Eleusis, i. 38 

Torres Straits islands, i. 
153 

Tortoises not eaten, ii. 140 

Tossing successful reaper, i. 154 

Totem, skin-disease supposed 
caused by eating, il. 25 sg. 

sacrament, ii. 165 

Totemic animals, dances in imitation of, 


Orsli a2: 


to be 


ii. 76 
Totemism, li. 35, 37; not proved for 
the Aryans, 4; in Australia and 


America, 311 

Transformation of woman into crocodile, 
ii. 212 

Transmigration of human souls into 
animals, ii. 141, 285 sgg.; into turtles, 
178 sg. ; into bears, 191 

of souls, doctrine of, in ancient 
India, ii. 298 sg. ; in ancient Greece, 
300 sgg., 307 Sq. 

Transmigrations of Buddha, ii. 299 

Transubstantiation, ii. 89 sg. 

Transylvania, harvest customs in, i. 221, 
276, 278, 280, 285, 295 ; customs at 
sowing in, ii. 274 sg. 

Travancore, i. 8; custom at executions 
in, ii. 272 

Treasury Islanders, i. 313 

Trees in relation to Dionysus, i. 3 sg. ; 
spirits of the dead in, ii. 124 


Piva VOL. I 


369 


Triptolemus, i. 37, 38, li. 19; agent of 
Demeter, i. 54, 72 5g. ; sacrifices to, 
56; his Threshing-floor at Eleusis, 61, 
72, 75; in Greek art, 68 7.1; sows seed 
in Rarian plain, 70; the corn-hero, 
72 Sq. 

Tristram, H. B., ii. 31 sg. 

Troezenians, the, ii. 133 

Trumpets in rites of Dionysus, i. 15 

Tschwi, the, of West Africa, ii. 98 

Tsimshian Indians of British Columbia, 
ii. 254 

Tucanos Indians, ii. 157 

Tug of War, i. 103 2.1, 110 2. 

Tupi Indians of Brazil, ii. 272 

Tupinambas, the, i. 122 

Turmeric cultivated, 1. 245, 250 

Turtles, killing the sacred, ii. 175 sgq. ; 
transmigration of human souls into, 
178 Sq. 

Tusayan, an ancient province of Arizona, 
1 Bj 

Twelfth Day, li. 320, 321, 327, 329 

Twelve Gods, the, ii. 8 

Twin, ghost of a, ii. 98 

girl charged with special duty, iu, 
280 

Two Goddesses, the, i. 56, 59, 73, 90 

Types of animal sacrament, ii. 310 
59Q. 

Typhon, i. 262, 263; ii. 30, 31, 33, 34, 
100 

Tyrol, harvest customs in the, i. 
224, 273, 286 

Tzentales of Mexico, ii. 241 


163, 


Uaupes River, tribes of the, i. 121 

Uganda, ii. 213 

Underground Zeus, i. 45, 50 

Unleavened bread, ii. 137 

Usagara hills, German East Africa, 1. 
240) 0a 


Varro, on the rites of Eleusis, i. 88; 
on killing oxen in Attica, il. 6; on 
sacrifice of goat, ii. 41 

Vedijovis, i. 33 

Venison, Esquimau rules as to eating, 
ii. 84; not eaten, 144; not brought 
into hut by door, 242 sg. ; reason for 
not eating, 286, 293 

Vera Cruz, the tribes of, i. 310 

Vermin propitiated by farmers, li. 274 
sqgg. ; images of, made as a protection 
against them, 280 sg. 

Verres;@:, 1: 65 

Vessels, new or specially reserved, to 
hold new fruits, il. 50, 53, 65, 66, 72, 
81, 83; special, reserved ,for eating 
bear’s flesh, 196, 198 

Vestal virgins, il. 42 

Vicarious use of images, ii. 96 sqq. 


2B 


37° 


INDEX 


Victim, human, taken in procession from | Wheat-cow, i. 289 


door to door, i. 247 

Victims, human, treated as divine, i. 
250; assimilated to gods, 261 sg. 

Victoria, aborigines of, i. 127 

Vicufa not eaten, ii. 140 

Village tabooed, ii. 122 

Vine in relation to Dionysus, 1. 2 

Vintage, first-fruits of, ii. 133 ; inaugu- 
rated by priests, 133 

in Greece, time of, i. 47 

Vintagers and vine-diggers, i. 257 sq. 

Virbius and the horse, ii. 40 sgq. 

Virgil as an enchanter, ii. 281 

Virgins sacrificed, i. 237 

Vitzilipuztli, a Mexican god, ii. 86, 87, 
88 

Viza in Thrace, i. 26 

Vizyenos, G. M., i. 25 2.4, 26 

Volos, the beard of, i. 233 

Vomiting as a religious rite, ii. 73, 75 

Vosges Mountains, harvest customs in 
the, 1. 272, 279, 281 

Vulture, transmigration of sinner into, 
il. 299 


Wa, the Wild, i. 241 sgg. 

Wabondeéi, the, ii. 142 

Wadowe, the, i. 118 

Wagogo, the, ii. 26, 142, 149, 276 

Wahehe, the, ii. 26 

Waheia, the, ii. 26 

Wajagga, the, of East Africa, ii. 276 

warriors, lil. 143 

Wakan, ii. 180 2.” 

Wales, harvest customs in, i. 142 sggq. 

Wallace, A. R., quoted, i. rar sg. 

Wamegi, the, of German East Africa, i. 
240 

Wanyamwezi, the, i. 118, ii. 227 

War dance, ii. 79 

Washing as a ceremonial purification, ii. 
27 Sqy., 71, 84, 85 

Wataturu, the, ii. 84 

Weasels, superstition of farmers as to, 
ii. 275 

Weevils, spared by Esthonian peasants, 
li. 274 

Weihaiwel, ii. 11 

Welsh, Miss, i. 155 7.1 

Wemba, the, ii. 158 

Wends, harvest customs among the, i. 
138, 149, 276 

Wermland, harvest customs in, i. 230, 
li. 48 

Westphalia, harvest customs in, i. 135 
5g., 138, 277 sg., 296, 297 

Wetar, island, ii. 25 

Whales, ceremonies observed after the 
slaughter of, 1. 232 sgq. 

Wheat-bride, i. 162, 163 

-cock, i. 276 


-dog, i. 272 

-mallet at threshing, i. 148 

-man, i, 223 

-mother, i. 135 

-sow, 1. 298 

-wolf, i. 273, 274 

Whetham, W. C. D., ii. 305 7.2 

White Maize, Goddess of the, i. 261 

ram, ii. 313 

Whittlesey in Cambridgeshire, the Straw- 
bear at, ii. 328 sg. 

Whydah, snakes sacred at, ii. 287 

Widows and widowers, disability of, ii. 
253 Sq. 

Wiedemann, Prof. A., ii. 35 7.4 

Wild animals propitiated by hunters, ii. 
204 sqq. 

fig trees, sacred, ii. 113 

fruits and roots, ceremonies at 

gathering the first of the season, ii. 

80 sgg. 

seeds and roots collected by women, 

i, 124 sqgq. 

Wa, the, i. 241 sgq. 

Wilkinson, R. J., 1. 181 sg. 

Winamwanga, the, ii. 112 

Wine, new, offered to Liber, ii. 133 

Winnowing done by women, i, 117, 128 

-basket, image of snake in, lil. 316 

-fan, an emblem of Dionysus, i. 
5 sgg.; as cradle, 6 sgg.; used to 
scatter ashes of human victims, 2€0, 
262 

Winter, name given to man who cuts the 
last sheaf, i. 142; name of harvest- 
supper, 160 

—W— festival of Dionysus, i. 16 sg. 

solstice, il. 325; festival of, 90 

Witch, burning the Old, i. 224 

Witchcraft, protection against, i. 156, il. 
324 

Wolf, corn-spirit as, i. 271 sgq., ii. 327 ; 
stuffed, carried about, i. 275; cere- 
monies at killing a, ii. 220 sg., 223. 
See also Wolves 

Wolf's heart eaten, ii. 146 

skin, man clad in, i. 275 

Wolfish Apollo, ii. 283 sg. 

Wollaroi, the, of New South Wales, ii. 
163 

Wolves, sacrifices offered to, ii. 284; 
transmigration of sinners into, 308 

Woman's part in primitive agriculture, i. 
113 5gq. 

Women, influence of corn-spirit on, i. 
168; who have died in childbed, 
attempts to deceive their ghosts, ii. 
97 sg.; thought to have no soul, ii. 
148 

milk cows, i. 118 

——--: swear by the Pleiades, i, 311 


es 


INDEX 


Women’s race at harvest, i. 76 sg. 

Wood-spirits in goat form, ii. 2 sg. 

woman, i. 232 

Woodford, C. M., ii. 126 

Words, special, used by reapers, i. 193 

Worm, transmigration of sinner into, ii. 
299 

Worms, souls of dead in, ii. 289 

Worship of cattle, ii. 35 sgg. ; of animals, 
two forms of the, 311; of snake, 316 
5g. 

Worshipful animal killed once a year, ii. 
322 

Wrach (Hag), name given to last corn 
cut in Wales, i. 142 sgq. 

Wreath of corn, i. 134 

Wren, hunting the, ii. 317 sgg. ; called 
the king of birds, 317; superstitions 
as to the, 317 sg7., 319 

Wrestling, i. 98, ii. 131 

Wiirtemburg, harvest customs in, i. 286, 
287 


Xanthicus, a Macedonian month, i. 259 
iP 

Xenophon, on Triptolemus, i. 54 

Xochiquetzal, a Mexican goddess, i. 237 


Yabim, the, of German New Guinea, i. 
104 5sgq., 228, li. 275, 295 

Yams, charm for growth of, i. 100, 101 ; 

“cultivated in Africa, 119; cultivated 
in New Britain, 123; cultivated in 
South America, 120, 121; dug by 
Australian aborigines, 126 sg. ; cere- 
monies at eating the new, il. 53, 58 
599. 

festival of the new, ii. 
Tonga, 128 sgq. 

Yang-Seri, prayers to, li. 33 

Yaos, the, ij. 111 sg. 

Year, beginning of, marked by appear- 
ance of Pleiades, i. 309, 310, 312, 313, 
314, 315; divided into thirteen moons, 
a 77, 


EES 


THE 


371 


Yellow Demeter, i. 41 5g. 

Yezo or Yesso, il. 180, 185 

Yombe, the, il. 112 

Yorkshire, harvest customs in, i. 151 sg., 
224 

Yoruba negroes, ii. 149 

Youngest person cuts the last corn, i. 
158, 161 

Yuchi Indians, ii. 75, 311 7.1 

Yule Boar, i. 300 sgq., ii. 43, 328 

Goat, the, li. 327 sg. 

ram, the, il. 328 

straw, i. 301 sg. 

Yuracares Indians of Bolivia, ii. 235, 257 


Zabern in Alsace, harvest custom at, i. 
297 

Zagreus, i. 12 

Zambesi, tribes of the Upper, iil. 141 

region, Caffres of the, ii. 289 

Zanzibar, custom at sowing in, i. 233 

Zaparo Indians, the, ii. 139 

Zapotecs of Mexico, their harvest customs, 
i. 174 Sg. 

Zeus, his intrigue with Persephone, i. 12 ; 
father of Dionysus by Demeter, 12, 
14, 66; his intrigue with Demeter, 66 ; 
surnamed Underground, 45, 50 

and Demeter, ii. 9; marriage of, 

1. 65 sgq. 

and Hercules, ii. 172 

——., Laphystian, i. 25 

Polieus, li. 5, 7 

—— Sosipolis, ii. 7 

——., Subterranean, i. 66, ii. 9 

the Fly-catcher, ii. 282 

Zulu king, dance of the, ii. 66 

Zulus, the, ii. 32, 142, 143; women’s 
part in agriculture among the, i. 113 
sq. ; their festival of first-fruits, 11. 67 ; 
their inoculation, 160 sg. 

Zuni Indians, their custom of killing 
sacred turtles, ii. 175 599. 

Zurich, harvest customs in the canton of, 


i. 291, 297 


END 


Printed by R. & R. Crark, Limitep, Edinburgh. 


Works by J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. 


THE GOLDEN BOUGH 


A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION 


Third Edition, revised and enlarged. 8vo. 


Part I. THE Macic ART AND THE EVOLUTION oF KINGS. Two 
volumes. 20s. net. 

II. Tasoo AND THE PERILS OF THE SOUL. Onevolume. 1os. net. 
III. THE Dyinc Gop. One volume. Second Edition. tos. net. 
IV. Aponis, ATTIS, Osiris. One volume. Second Edition. ros. net. 
V. SPIRITS OF THE CORN AND OF THE WILD. Two volumes. 20s. net. 
VI. THE ScaPEGoaT. [Zn preparation. 
VII. BAaLDER THE BEAUTIFUL. [Ln preparation. 


TIMES.—‘‘ The verdict of posterity will probably be that 7e Golden Bough has 
influenced the attitude of the human mind towards supernatural beliefs and symbolical 
rituals more profoundly than any other books published in the nineteenth century 
except those of Darwin and Herbert Spencer.”’ 


LECTURES ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF 
THE KINGSHIP. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 


ATHENAZUM—“‘It is the effect of a good book not only to teach, but also to 
stimulate and to suggest, and we think this the best and highest quality, and one that 
will recommend these lectures to all intelligent readers, as well as to the learned.” 


PSYCHE’S TASK. A Discourse concerning the Influence 


of Superstition on the Growth of Institutions. 8vo. 2s. 6d. net. 


TIMES.—‘‘ Dr. Frazer has answered the question of how the moral law has been 
safeguarded, especially in its infancy, with a wealth of learning and a clearness of 
utterance that leave nothing to be desired. Perhaps the uses of superstition is not 
quite such a new theme as he seems to fancy. Even the most ignorant of us were 
aware that many false beliefs of a religious or superstitious character had had very 
useful moral or physical, or especially sanitary, results. But if the theme is fairly 
familiar, the curious facts which are adduced in support of it will be new to most 
people, and will make the book as interesting to read as the lectures must have been 
to hear.” 


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON. 


Works by J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. 


TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY. A Treatise on 
Certain Early Forms of Superstition and Society. With 


Maps. Four vols. 8vo. 50s. net. 


Mr. A. E. CrRAwLey in VA TURE.—“ Prof. Frazer is a great artist as well as a 
great anthropologist. He works ona big scale ; no one in any department of research, 
not even Darwin, has employed a wider induction of facts. No one, again, has dealt 
more conscientiously with each fact ; however seemingly trivial, it is prepared with 
minute pains and cautious tests for its destiny as a slip to be placed under the 
anthropological microscope. He combines, so to speak, the merits of Tintoretto and 
Meissonier. . . . That portion of the book which is concerned with totemism (if we 
may express our own belief at the risk of offending Prof. Frazer’s characteristic 
modesty), is actually ‘The Complete History of Totemism, its Practice and its Theory, 
its Origin and its End.’ . . . Nearly two thousand pages are occupied with an ethno- 
graphical survey of totemism, an invaluable compilation. The maps, including that 
of the distribution of totemic peoples, are a new and useful feature.” 


THE SCOPE OF SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY. 
8vo. Sewed. 6d. net. 


OXFORD MAGAZINE.—“‘In his inaugural lecture the new Professor of Social 
Anthropology in the University of Liverpool defines his Science, states its aims, and 
puts in a spirited plea for the scientific study of primitive man while there is still time, 
before the savage in his natural state becomes as extinct as the dodo.” 


PAUSANIAS’S DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. 


Translated with a Commentary, Illustrations, and Maps. 
Six vols. 8vo. 126s. net. 


ATHENZUM.—“ All these writings in many languages Mr. Frazer has read 
and digested with extraordinary care, so that his book will be for years zhe book of 
reference on such matters, not only in England, but in France and Germany. It isa 
perfect thesaurus of Greek topography, archzeology, and art. It is, moreover, far more 
interesting than any dictionary of the subject ; for it follows the natural guidance of 
the Greek traveller, examining every town or village which he describes; analysing 
and comparing with foreign parallels every myth or fairy tale which he records ; citing 
every information which can throw light on the works of art he admires.” 


PAUSANIAS AND OTHER GREEK SKETCHES. 
Globe 8vo. 4s. net. 


GUARDIAN.—<* Here we have material which every one who has visited Greece, 
or purposes to visit it, most certainly should read and enjoy. . . . We cannot imagine 
a more excellent book for the educated visitor to Greece.” 


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON. 


WORKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY 


ANCIENT HUNTERS AND THEIR MODERN REPRE- 
SENETATIVES. By Prof::W. J. Sottas, D.Sc. F.R.S.  Illus- 
trated. 8vo. 12s. net. 


THE BAGANDA. An Account of their Native Customs 
and Beliefs. By Rev. JoHn Roscor, M.A. Illustrated. 8vo. 
I5s. net. 


MAN AND BEAST IN EASTERN ETHIOPIA. By 
J. BLAND-SuTToNn, F.R.C.S. Illustrated. 8vo. 12s. net. 


ieee BACK OF THE BLACK MAN’S MIND, or 
NOTES ON THE KINGLY OFFICE IN WEsT ArFrica. By R. E. 
DENNETT. Illustrated. 8vo. ros. net. 


NIGERIAN STUDIES, OR THE RELIGIOUS AND POLITICAL 
SYSTEM OF THE YoRuUBA. ByR. E. DENNETT. Illustrated. 8vo. 
8s. 6d. net. 


Pie eeOWERR NIGER AND ITS TRIBES... By Major 
ARTHUR GLYN LEONARD. With Map. §8vo. 12s. 6d. net. 


PRAVELS IN WEST AFRICA. By Mary H. KINGSLEY. 
Abridged edition. Extra crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. 


WEST AFRICAN STUDIES. By Mary H. KINGSLEY. 
With an Appendix on the Niger Delta by the VicoMTE DE 
Carpi. Illustrated. 8vo. 21s. net. Cheaper Edition with 
additional chapters, but excluding DE Carpi’s appendix. Extra 
crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. 


MELANESIANS AND POLYNESIANS. Their Life- 
Histories Described and Compared. By GrorcE Brown, D.D. 
Illustrated. 8vo. 12s, net. 


NeeiVE - TRIBES OF SOUTH-EAST AUSTRALIA. 
By A. W. Howitt, D.Sc. Illustrated. 8vo. 21s, net. 


Pie NORTHERN TRIBES OF CENTRAL AUS- 
TRALIA. By Prof. Batpwin SpENcER, C.M.G., F.R.S., and 
F. J. GILLEN. Illustrated. 8vo. 21s. net. 


ACROSS AUSTRALIA. By Prof. BALDWIN SPENCER, 
C.M.G., F.R.S., and F. J. Gitten. With Coloured and other 
Illustrations. 2 Vols. 8vo. 21s. net. 


MACMILLAN AND CO.,, Lrp., LONDON. 


WORKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY 


THE MAFULU MOUNTAIN PEOPLE OF BRIDTa= 
NEW GUINEA. By Rosert W. WiL.iamMson. With an 
Introduction by A. C. Happon, F.R.S. Illustrated. 8vo. 14s. net. 


THE OLD NORTH TRAIL: oR LIFE, LEGENDS, AND 
RELIGION OF THE BLACKFEET INDIANS. By WaLTER McCLIn- 
Tock. Illustrated. 8vo. 15s. net. 


THE KACHARIS. By the Rev. SIDNEY ENDLE. With 
an Introduction by J. D. ANpDERSoN, I.C.S._ Illustrated. 8vo. 
8s. 6d. net. 


THE NAGA TRIBES OF MANIPUR. By T. C. Hopsom: 
Illustrated. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 


THE LUSHEI CLANS. By Lt-Col. J. SHAKESPEAR, | 
ClBe DS: Oreo.vo: 


THE TODAS. By W. H. R. Rivers. With Illustrations 7} 


and Map. 8vo. 21s. net. 


THE HISTORY ‘(OF , HUMAN - MARRIAGE By 
EDWARD WESTERMARCK, Ph.D. With Preface by Dr. A. R. 
Wattace, O.M. Third edition. 8vo. 14s. net. 


THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE MORAL 
IDEAS. By Epwarp WESTERMARCK, Ph.D. 2 Vols. 8vo. 
14S. net each. 


THE SOUL OF A PEOPLE. An Account, of thesia 
and Belief of the Burmese. By H. Fietpinc Hatt. Fourth 
edition. Extra crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 


THE INWARD LIGHT. By H. FIELDING HALL. " Svom 


Tos. net. 


THE SOUL OF THE FAR EAST: By PEReuae | 


LoweLL. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 7s. net. 


MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp., LONDON. 


aM ! 
{ 
5 = 
4 
J 
| 
i 
j 
¢ 
‘ 
= b 
at 
j 
{ 
fi 
rt ii 
! 
\ ! 
— 
t 7 
i] 
~ Mu 
i] - 
ay 
i it 
| ‘) it 
‘Vy ru 
} dl : 
‘ , } 
a] i af 
§ ; Leg i 


- Wis | Warn | 


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 


BL Frazer, (Sir) James George 
310 The golden bough. 3d ed. 
F7 

1911 

Ved 


STC Ere PS 


ae 


Seepraees 
Soeteent= 
= = 
br 

roe 

rants 

333 


Sites aa 


Lae rere 


SSS 
hemes e 


ee 
Yes pate. 
nS eee: 


pase seeees ie = eS: 


Sig aesetpsicerssse gtigistas tute aaiesietcbersseqieies 
Siteges : = cesses sss 
tates 


‘ 
Si 
QS a Tae ee elle, 7 s 
ee Th sete %. tee, gi win ae ee NSB ‘o 35 
ah Be & on” 6 Ve ae ae pee 9 Be A ; fA oe 


3 See: ees 


3 a * “ 
3. > 


Si ee aS 
ELT ee AGN Eee NS eee Ge SS) Ses 

See ke pa ot ee he rie ese ee Airs Bae oe Pca #* ae Ce" d is a wil es 
4 eg eee e SA A ae > Arty yt, = 

Ee res eee ia See Rego SS id ie AES i. ee 
a od Sed te HiT ty Fg Fe os weer. seks SETS Sees : 

Pag! ae eu ~ See 


: . Speen eats Se Fes woe —e aes See x ee F 
—* a Yn, Pah = 7: << * ; én . . a le 
Tk Dae ex: S23: a pats S323: var es 
‘a ce Tog Saar, ae Bo Sa 
Pel dt A ong ae . , 
oS ye Roe ee h ooers : pager ee tole ce or “a ated <a ol 
wre aoe XE 4. ry a i 


vd nS econ aes Sd 
# <3 ym, 2 iM fi ged 3 va nat ne it ect’ PNT BO: SSSRE ehice ~~ aig ps ‘Se teas & 
toy BPP PD mite Stele Sew ae ~ an ra = 

oe tee te oe a: ft ~ s ior zy ae : Se 


ge RRS Re Been re ss oy Se urs Sos : pe ae ee oe oe 
‘4 ® < we 2% 


a ae aa fog ggg woe et, re Pog the Cot ot o oP hie Bed oe. eee ee Cee ee vie , ‘ 
alt ta ae ee ae oo Te ee a ll wt % - : sa Py * ea roe fee Roce a 
4 a or gore A tte ie Se . we shies A On eee ste" % 


0 GEE GREE ES ry EE SSeSe gs EEE ET POSE AE +654 ht Sa See ee SEE Se a3 we 
eg Aine Sie he th og ean hid oa ta Sate See ch ath cdo. cd oc Ct Ea) eee Fee ae 2 _ p 
4 PS iiatya eee eens SRR Ree RS Gane ae See, as 
fete enikos ves a Aas Sats ob Peat ALAS te nnas pL an BL ORO Si SK 

; a py Pry dy E ”. ES! Ke cf #s a Po gt. ant My” te , Ag ~e ae A ae ae 
ER EA Bere PEO L ecOnaoeast haan ayaa Soe ae . ~ eS 


aS: ae ae 
a ~id Pot 


a, a eS Ken rs Mh Se ns J -_ “s cake A. ~ Te ge < na ah a ie — aM : a #, eS 
ae Ke — ra *: ee eae realieg S. Rime ge ot 4n4 ‘we pe Riga gh +> ae Me : py a re 2 ys a 

all 4 *: wee: Seeks Seek 2 aa? ~ ee aie Sie ye ae. oa yoo a ae ay ae: owe ~s 2 
i Se, , 4 » ye, 3 Sat Me, Fed ~h . i. 7 ~~ ~, a Mtn = ct a4 ~ “— Pe 
ead hy aaa aa SE teh Mie ee Oo ee Bh ad oat ae oo oo Saas abel. a 
“fl a ‘. ‘ ay” Neat t. DT a ee Be ie PE gh rere a Stet Xa roe Sete x Sa ria ee oF oc Ae ee pietees 
hers. ee ie Re ’ oo ‘ Cow an oO a a ae Py) ‘ 

ol eo Ca s o* o F id 5 ie 


y +s , ay eS a eS Pt Sm: =. Pe eS ‘wLF 


Fro - «at 8 x oe Or a 
- Hy. ere Bagot Race tan Os mea" hae 
pf ve ee me a“ - = et wi 
Be ey ¢ pa" a Sg Oe SE, 4, te ee 
Nee ee, Nae Men ee ee St a A Ot ei (i ee 
a Pe RP ‘ 
~~. = be » S Se 


PDO, 322 = ache. 


aN 


Litt 


— Ls
